KAIVALYA UPANISHAD - EXTRACTED VERSES (from sagesfromindia.com)

Verse 1:
Sanskrit: athaashvalaayano bhagavantam parameshtinamupasametyovaacha adhiihi bhagavan brahamavidyaam varishthaam sadaa sadbhihi sevyamaanaam nigoodhaam yayaachiraat sarvapaapam vyapohya paraatparam purusham yaati vidvaan
Transliteration: atha ashvalāyano bhagavantam parameṣṭinam upasametya uvāca adhīhi bhagavan brahmavidyām variṣṭhām sadā sadbhihi sevyamānām nigūdhām yaya chīrāt sarvapāpam vyapohya parātparam puruṣaṃ yāti vidvān
Translation: Then Asvalayana approached the highest Lord (the Creator Brahma) and said: Oh Bhagavan, teach me the highest Science of Reality, cultivated always by good people, which is ever a hidden secret for man, a knowledge by which a wise man, discarding all sins, can reach the Highest.

Verse 2:
Sanskrit: tasmai sa hovaacha pitaamahaascha shraddhaa bhakti dhyaana yogaadavaihi
Transliteration: tasmai sa hovāca pitāmāhāśca śraddhā bhakti dhyāna yogādavaihi
Translation: To him (Asvalayana), the Grandsire Brahma said: Know this supreme knowledge by Faith, Devotion and Meditation (Yoga).

Verse 3:
Sanskrit: na karmaNaa na prajayaa dhanena tyaagenaike amritatvamaanasuhu pareNa naakam nihitam guhaayaam vibhraajate yadyatayo vishanti
Transliteration: na karmāṇā na prajayā dhanena tyāgenaike amṛtatvam ānaṣuḥ pareṇa nākam nihitaṃ guhāyāṃ vibhrājate yadyatayo vishanti
Translation: Neither by work (actions), nor by offspring (progeny), nor by wealth, but by renunciation alone, Immortality (eternal life) is attained. Higher than the heaven, seated hidden in the cave of the intellect, it shines. Self-controlled seekers enter into it.

Verse 4:
Sanskrit: vedaantavignyaana sunischitaarthaahaa sanyaasayogaad yatayahaas shuddha sattvaahaa te brahamalokeshu paraantakaale paraamritaat parimuchyanti sarve
Transliteration: vedāntavijñāna suniścitārthāhā sanyāsayogād yatayāhāḥ śuddha sattvāhā te brahmalokeṣu parāntakāle parāmṛtāt parimucyanti sarve
Translation: Those who are pure in mind, striving through the path of renunciation, come to ascertain clearly the deeper imports of the Knowledge, which is the theme of the Upanishad (Vedanta). In the end, they gain the world of Brahma, and liberating themselves from everything, gain the Highest Immortality.

Verse 5:
Sanskrit: viviktadeshe cha sukhaasanasthahaa suchis samagreeva shirass shareerahaa atyaasramasthaha sakalenDriyaaNi nirudhya bhaktyaa svagurum praNamya hritpunDareekam virajam vishuddham vichintya madhye vishadam vishokam
Transliteration: viviktadeshe cha sukhāsanasthāhā śucis samagrīva śirass shareerahā atyāśramasthaha sakalendriyāṇi nirudhya bhaktyā svagurum praṇamya hṛtpuṇḍarīkaṃ virajaṃ viśuddhaṃ vichintya madhye viṣadaṃ viśokam
Translation: In an undisturbed place, resting in a comfortable posture, clean and pure, with neck, head and body held erect in one line, in a mental attitude of Sanyasa (renunciation), having controlled all the senses, saluting one's own Teacher mentally with reverence, meditate within the lotus of the Heart, the Untainted, the Pure, the Clear and the Griefless.

Verse 6:
Sanskrit: achintyam avyaktam anantaroopam shivam prashaantamam amritam brahamayonim tathaa aadimadhyaanta viheenam ekam vibhum chidaananDamaroopam adbhutam
Transliteration: achintyam avyaktam anantarūpaṃ śivaṃ praśāntamam amṛtam brahmayonim tathā ādimadhyaanta vihīnaṃ ekaṃ vibhūṃ chidānandarūpaṃ adbhutam
Translation: The Unthinkable, the Unmanifest, the One of endless forms, the Ever-auspicious, the Peaceful, the Immortal, the Origin of the very Creator, the One without a beginning, a middle or an end, the Only One, the All-pervading, the Knowledge-Bliss, the Formless, and the Wonderful.

Verse 7:
Sanskrit: umaasahaaayam parameshvaram prabhum trilochanam neelakanttam prashaantam dhyaatvaa munirgachchhati bhootayonim samastasaakshim tamasaha parastaat
Transliteration: umāsahāyam parameśvaram prabhuṃ trilocanaṃ nīlakaṇṭaṃ praśāntaṃ dhyātvā munirgacchhati bhūtayonim samastasākṣīṃ tamasahā parastāt
Translation: By meditating upon Lord Parameswara (Siva) with Goddess Uma as his consort — the Highest Lord, the All-powerful, the Three-eyed, the Blue-necked and the Ever-tranquil — a true man of reflection reaches Him who is the Source of all the manifested world, the Witness of all, and who is Beyond all darkness.

Verse 8:
Sanskrit: sa brahamaa sa shivahaa senDrahaa soksharahaa paramas svaraat sa eva vishNuhs sa praaNahaa sa kaalogni sa chanDramaahaaa
Transliteration: sa brahmā sa śivahā sendrahā sōkṣarahā paramas svarāt sa eva viṣṇuḥ sa prāṇahā sa kālōgni sa chandramāhā
Translation: He is Brahma, He is Siva, He is Indra. He is the Immutable, Imperishable, the Supreme, the Self-luminous. He alone is Vishnu, He is Prana, He is Time and Fire. He is the Moon.

Verse 9:
Sanskrit: a eva sarvam yadbhootam yachcha bhavyam sanaatanam gnyaatvaa tam mrityumatyeti naanyahaa panthaa vimuktaye
Transliteration: a eva sarvaṃ yadbhūtaṃ yaccha bhavyaṃ sanātanaṃ jñātvā taṃ mṛtyumatyeti na anyahā panthā vimuktaye
Translation: He alone is all that was, and all that will be, the Eternal. Knowing Him one goes behind the sting of death. There is no other way to attain complete Freedom.

Verse 10:
Sanskrit: sarvabhuutasthamaatmaanam sarvabhuutaani chaatmani sampashyan brahama paramam yaati naanyena hetunaa
Transliteration: sarvabhūtasthamātmānaṃ sarvabhūtāni chātmani saṃpaśyan brahmā paramaṃ yāti na anyena hetunā
Translation: Experiencing one's own Self in all beings and all beings in the Self, one attains the Highest Brahman, and not by any other means.

Verse 11:
Sanskrit: aatmaanamaraNim kritvaa praNavam chottaraaraNim gnyaananirmathanaabhyaasaat paasham dahaati panDitaha
Transliteration: ātmānāraṇīṃ kṛtvā praṇavaṃ chottarāraṇiṃ jñānanirmathanābhyāsāt pāśaṃ dahati paṇḍitaha
Translation: Making the ego the 'lower arani' and OM the 'upper arani', by repeated churning through the practice of the Path of Churning of Knowledge, a wise man burns up all the cords of his bondage.

Verse 12:
Sanskrit: sa eva maayaaparimohitaatmaa shareeramaasthaaya karoti sarvam striyannapaanaadivichitrabhogaihi sa eva jaagratparitriptimeti
Transliteration: sa eva māyāparimohitātmā shareeramāsthāya karoti sarvaṃ striyannapānādivichitrabhogaihi sa eva jāgratparitṛpameti
Translation: The Self deluded by Maya (Illusion) is he, who identifying with the body, does all actions (all perceptions, feelings and thoughts). In the waking state it is he (this Jiva) who engages in gratification through the varied objects of enjoyment, such as woman, food, wine, etc.

Verse 13:
Sanskrit: svapne sa jiivahaa sukhaduhkhabhoktaa svamaayayaa kalpitajevaloke sushhuptikaale sakale vileene tamobhibhuutahaa sukharuupameti
Transliteration: svapne sa jīvahā sukhaduhkhabhoktā svamāyayā kalpitajēvaloke suṣhuptikāle sakale vilīne tamobhibhūtahā sukhārūpameti
Translation: That very same individualized ego, in the dream state, experiences its pleasure and pain, in a field of existence created by its own Maya (misapprehension of Reality). During the state of profound sleep when everything is merged, it is overpowered by Tamas (ignorance or non-apprehension) and comes to exist as deep happiness or Bliss.

Verse 14:
Sanskrit: punashcha janmaantarakarmayogaat sa eva jiivahaa svapiti prabuddhahaa puratraye kreeDati yashcha jeevastatastu jaatam sakalam vichitram dhaaramaananDamakhanDabodham yasmimallayam yaati puratrayam cha
Transliteration: punaścha janmāntarakarmayogāt sa eva jīvahā svapiti prabuddhahā puratraye krīḍati yaścha jīvastatastu jātaṃ sakalaṃ vichitraṃ dhārāmānandaṃ khaṇḍabodhaṃ yasmiṃllayam yāti puratrayaṃ cha
Translation: Again, due to its connection with the deeds done in its previous births, that very same individuality (Jeeva) comes back to the dream or the waking-state. The being who sports thus in the 'three cities' (waking, dream and deep sleep), from Whom has sprung up all diversities, He is the substratum, the Indivisible Bliss-Consciousness, and in Him alone the 'three cities' go into dissolution.

Verse 15:
Sanskrit: etasmaajjaayate praaNo manahaa sarvenDriyaaNi cha kham vaayurjyotiraapahaa prithivii vishvasya dhaariNee
Transliteration: etasmājjāyate prāṇo manaḥ sarvendriyāṇi cha khaṃ vāyurjyotirāpahā pṛthivī viśvasya dhāriṇī
Translation: From 'This' is born Prana (Vital Force), mind, all organs, Space, Air, Fire, Water and Earth that supports all.

Verse 16:
Sanskrit: yatparam brahama sarvaatmaa vishvasyaayatanam mahaat sookshmaatsuukshmataram nityam tattvameva tvameva tat
Transliteration: yatparam brahmā sarvātmā viśvasyāyatanam mahāt sūkṣmatsūkṣmataram nityaṃ tattvameva tvameva tat
Translation: That which is the Supreme Brahman, the Self in all, the Support of the Universe, Subtler than the subtle and Eternal, That alone You are. You alone are That.

Verse 17:
Sanskrit: jaagnat svapna sushhuptyaadi prapancham yatprakaashate tadbrahamaahaamiti gnyaatvaa sarvabanDhaat pramuchyate
Transliteration: jāgnaṭ svapna suṣhuptyādi prapañchaṃ yatprakāśate tadbrahmāhamiti jñātvā sarvabanDhāt pramuchyate
Translation: "That which illumines the worlds of relative experiences lived in the waking, dream and deep sleep conditions, that Brahman am I" – realizing thus (by experience), one is liberated from all shackles.

Verse 18:
Sanskrit: trishhu dhaamasu yadbhognyam bhoktaa bhogashcha yadbhavet tebhyo vilakshaNas saakshii chinmaatroham sadaashivahaa
Transliteration: triṣhu dhāmasu yadbhognyam bhoktā bhogaścha yadbhavet tebhyo vilakṣaṇas sākṣī chinmātroham sadāśivahā
Translation: All that constitutes the enjoyable, the enjoyer and the enjoyment in the three realms, different from them all am I, the Witness, the Ever-Auspicious Pure Consciousness.

Verse 19:
Sanskrit: mayyeva sakalam jaatam mayi sarvam pratishhThitam mayi sarvam layam yaati tadbrahamaadvayamasmyahaam
Transliteration: mayyeva sakalaṃ jātaṃ mayi sarvaṃ pratiṣṭhitaṃ mayi sarvaṃ layaṃ yāti tadbrahmādvayamasyahām
Translation: In me alone everything is born, in me alone does everything exist, and in me is everything dissolved. I am that non-dual Brahman.

Verse 20:
Sanskrit: aNoraNiyaanahaameva tadvanmahaaanahaam vishvamahaam vichitram puraatanoahaam purushhoahaamiisho hiraNmayoahaam shivaruupamasmi
Transliteration: aṇorāṇiyānahāmeva tadvanmahānāhaṃ viśvamahāṃ vichitraṃ purātanoahāṃ puruṣhoahāmīśo hiraṇmayoahāṃ śivarūpamasmi
Translation: I am smaller than the atom (the smallest) and I am also vast, greater than the greatest. I am the manifold Universe and Amazing. I am the Ancient One, the Self, the Supreme Ruler am I, the Effulgent One, by nature Ever-Auspicious, the Siva of golden hue in manifestation.

Verse 21:
Sanskrit: apaaNipaadoahaamachintyashaktiH pashyaamyachakshuH sa shriNomyakarNaha ahaam vijaanaami viviktaruupo na chaasti vettaa mama chitsadaaahaam vedairanekairahaameva vedyo vedaantakridvedavideva chaahaam
Transliteration: apāṇipādohāmāchintyaśaktiḥ paśyāmyachakṣuḥ sa śṛṇomyakarṇaha ahaṃ vijānāmi viviktarūpo na chāsti vetā mama chitsadāhāṃ vedairanekairahāmeva vedyo vedāntakṛdvedavideva chāhām
Translation: I am without hands and legs, of incomprehensible Power. I see without eyes and hear without ears. Devoid of forms, I am 'Knowing' of everything, and there is none who knows me. I am ever Pure-Knowledge. I alone am, the theme taught in the different Vedas. I am the Revealer of the Upanishads, the Vedanta, and I alone am the real knower of the Vedas.

Verse 22:
Sanskrit: na puNyapaape mama naasti naasho na janma dehenDriyabuddhirasti na bhuumiraapo na cha vahanirasti na chaanilo measti na chaambaram cha
Transliteration: na puṇyapāpe mama nāsti nāśo na janma dehendriyabuddhirasti na bhūmirāpo na cha vahanirasti na chānilo mesti na chāmbaram cha
Translation: For me there is neither merit nor demerit. I do not suffer any destruction. I have neither birth nor body, sense organs nor the mind-intellect equipment. For me there is neither Earth nor Water nor Fire, nor Air, nor Space.

Verse 23:
Sanskrit: evam viditvaa paramaatmaruupam guhaashayam nishhkalamadvitiiyam samastasaakshim sadasadvihiinam prayaati shuddham paramaatmaruupam
Transliteration: evaṃ viditvā paramātmarūpaṃ guhāśayaṃ niṣhkalamadvitīyaṃ samastasākṣīṃ sadasadvihiṇaṃ prayāti śuddhaṃ paramātmarūpaṃ
Translation: Thus realizing the nature of the Paramatman – the Higher Self – the one who abides in the cavity of the Heart – who is without parts, without a second (non-dual), the witness of all, beyond both existence and non-existence – then one attains the very nature of the Paramatman, the Higher Self.

Total: 23 verses
