V  ft’ 

i  ra •  a  H i  «»*  <<'  ) 


o  £* :  # 


3'oKv^ 


ANCIENT  INDIAN  TRADITION 
AND  MYTHOLOGY 


Translated,  by 

A  Board  of  Scholars 


Edited  by 

Prof.  J.L.  Shastri 


VOLUME  27 


ANCIENT  INDIAN  TRADITION  AND 
MYTHOLOGY  SERIES 

[PURANAS  IN  TRANSLATION] 

Volumes  Released 

SIVA  1-4 
LINGA  5-6 
BHAGAVATA  7-1 1 
GARUDA  12-14 
NARAD  A  15-19 
KURMA  20-21 
BRAHMANDA  22-26 
AGNI  27-30 
VARAHA  31-32 
BRAHMA  33-36 
VAYU  37-38 
PADMA  39-48 

SKANDA,  PARTS  I-XXIII,  49-71 
VAMANA  72-73 

Volumes  Under  Preparation 
BHAVISYA 

.  BRAHMAVAIVARTA 

devibhAgavata 

kAlikA 

mArkandeya 

MATSYA 

VISNU 

VISNUDHARMOTTARA 


THE 

agni-purAna 


PART  I 


Translated  and  Annotated  by 

N.  Gangadharan 


MOTILAL  BANARSIDASS  PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE  LIMITED  •  DELHI 


2nd  Reprint:  Delhi,  2013 
First  Edition:  Delhi,  1984 


©  MOTIIAL  BANARSIDASS  PUBLISHERS  PVT.  LTD. 
All  Rights  Rkskrvkd 


ISBN:  978-81-208-0359-6 


MOTILAL  BANARSIDASS 

41  U.A.  Bungalow  Road,  Jawahar  Nagar,  Delhi  110  007 
8  Mahalaxmi  Chamber,  22  Bhulabhai  Dcsai  Road,  Mumbai  400  026 
120  Royapeuah  High  Road,  Mylapore,  Chennai  600  004 
236,  9ih  Main  III  Block,  Jayanagar,  Bangaluru  560  01 1 
Sanas  Plaza,  1302  Baji  Rao  Road,  Pune  411  002 
8  Camac  Street,  Kolkata  700  017 
Ashok  Rajpath,  Patna  800  004 
Chowk,  Varanasi  221  001 


UNESCO  COLLECTION  OF  REPRESENTATIVE  WORKS — Indian  Seim 
This  book  has  been  accepted  in  the  Indian  Translation  Series  of  the 
UNESCO  Collection  of  Representative  Works,  jointly  sponsored 
by  the  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural 
Organization  (UNESCO)  and  the  Government  of  India 


Printed  in  India 

by  RP  Jain  at  NAB  Printing  Unit, 

A-44,  Naraina  Industrial  Area,  Phase  I,  New  Delhi-110028 
and  published  by  JP  Jain  for  Motilal  Banarsidass  Publishers  (P)  Ltd, 
41  U.A.  Bungalow  Road,  Jawahar  Nagar,  Delhi-110007 


PUBLISHER’S  NOTE 


The  purest  gems  lie  hidden  in  the  bottom  of  the  ocean  or  in 
the  depth  of  rocks.  One  has  to  dive  into  the  ocean  or  delve 
into  the  rocks  to  find  them  out.  Similarly,  truth  lies  concealed 
in  the  language  which  with  the  passage  of  time  has  become 
obsolete.  Man  has  to  learn  that  language  before  he  discovers 
that  truth. 

But  he  has  neither  the  means  nor  the  leisure  to  embark  on 
that  course.  We  have,  therefore  planned  to  help  him  acquire 
knowledge  by  an  easier  course.  We  have  started  the  series  of 
Ancient  Indian  Tradition  and  Mythology  in  English  Trans¬ 
lation.  Our  goal  is  to  universalize  knowledge  through  the  most 
popular  international  medium  of  expression.  The  publication  of 
the  Puranas  in  English  Translation  is  a  step  towards  that  goal. 


\ 


PREFACE 


The  present  volume  contains  the  Agni  Purana  Part  I  (Chapters 
1-100)  in  English  Translation.  This  is  the  twenty-seventh 
Volume  in  the  Series  on  Ancient  Indian  Tradition  and  Mythology. 

The  project  of  the  Series  was  envisaged  and  planned  in  1970 
by  Lala  Sundar  Lai  Jain  of  Messrs  Motilal  Banarsidass.  Hither¬ 
to  twentysix  volumes  of  the  Series  (comprising  English  trans¬ 
lation  of  Siva,  Lir'iga,  Bhagavata,  Garuda,  Narada ,  Karma  and 
Brahmai}da  Puranas )  have  been  published  and  released  for  sale. 

The  present  Purana,  like  all  other  Puranas  is  of  encyclopaedic 
character.  The  early  chapters  which  open  this  Part  describe 
glories  of  lord  Visnu  in  his  different  forms.  There  are  legends 
of  Visnu  as  Fish  saving  Manu  from  drowning  in  the  Cosmic 
Flood,  as  Tortoise  supporting  Mount  Mandara  at  the  churning 
of  the  ocean,  as  Boar  slaying  Daitya  Hiranyaksa,  as  Man-lion 
killing  Hiranyakasipu,  as  Dwarf  cheating  Bah,  as  Parasurama 
destroying  Ksatriya  rulers,  as  Rama  assassinating  Ravana,  as 
Krsna  beheading  Kamsa,  as  Buddha  preaching  the  gospel  of 
meditation,  as  Kalki  to  slay  Mlecchas. 

Going  ahead,  we  find  that  a  considerable  portion  of  this 
Part  deals  with  the  Tantrika  ritual  for  the  installation  and  con¬ 
secration  of  images  of  Visnu,  Siva  and  other  deities  in  their  res¬ 
pective  temples.  A  number  of  chapters  relate  to  theimtiationo  a 
novice  to  the  cult  and  the  rites  of  initiation.  The  rites  are  des¬ 
cribed  in  detail.  They  are  interspersed  with  the  mystic  sy  a  es 
of  Tantras  which  impart  efficacy  to  the  ritual  concerne  . 
number  of  chapters  throw  light  on  the  characteristics  ofimages, 
mode  of  their  installation  and  worship.  Scattered  herc  * 
are  the  chapters  oncreation,  on  purification  of  oneself  ^there 
on  the  positions  of  fingers  (mudras)  in  worship  and  on  scores  of 

other  topics  with  details  not  found  in  ot  er  urah^-^ 

As  to  the  date  of  this  Purana,  nothing  can  be  said  with  cer 
tainty.  It  being  a  compilation  from  various  ^oAswritte^ 
different  periods,  no  single  date  can  be  afigne  b  of 

as  a  whole.  But,  wha,  is 

sections  were  written  long  before  the  Manommeu 


viii 


Preface 


For  instance,  chapters  on  archery  and  arms,  civil  administration 
and  military  discipline  are  purely  of  Hindu  character  and  can 
claim  antiquity.  Chapters  on  medicine  and  grammar  are  also 
old.  Summaries  of  the  Ramayana  and  Mahabharata  indicate 
that  the  sections  were  written  when  Hinduism  was  in  flourishing 
condition  and  the  epic  tradition  had  become  sacred.  Sections 
on  Avataras,  on  polity  and  judicature,  on  genealogy  and  his¬ 
tory  of  ancient  kings  and  distinguished  personages  also  belong 
to  pretty  olden  times.  Sections  on  religion  are  also  old  as  they 
seem  to  have  been  written  when  there  was  no  rift  among  various 
sects. 

But,  the  Purana  contains  sections  which  are  obviously  later 
in  date.  For  instance,  a  considerable  number  of  chapters 
which  deal  with  the  mystic  rules,  mantras  and  ceremonies 
cannot  claim  antiquity.  They  might  have  been  written  after 
the  tantric  form  of  worship  had  become  popular  in  India. 

Acknowledgement  of  Obligations 

It  is  our  pleasant  duty  to  put  on  record  our  sincere  thanks  to 
Dr.  R.  N.  Dandekar  and  the  UNESCO  authorities  for  their 
kind  encouragement  and  valuable  help  which  render  this  work 
more  useful  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been.  We  are  extre¬ 
mely  grateful  to  Dr.  N.  Gangadharan  of  Sanskrit  Department, 
University  of  Madras  for  his  critical  Introduction,  lucid  trans¬ 
lation  and  comprehensive  annotations.  We  also  thank  those 
persons  who  have  offered  suggestions  for  improving  the  same. 


— Editor . 


CONTENTS 

PART  I 

PREFACE 

ABBREVIATIONS 

INTRODUCTION  'xv 

CHAPTERS 

1.  Introductory  j 

2.  Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Fish  3. 

3.  Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Tortoise  5 

4..  Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Boar  7 

5.  Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Rama  9 

6.  Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Rama  1  j 

7.  Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Rama  15 

8.  Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Rama  17 

9.  Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Rama  19 

10.  Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Rama  21 

11.  Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Rama  24 

12.  Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Krsna  25 

13.  Origin  of  Kauravas  and  Pandavas  31 

14.  Story  of  the  Mahabharata  34 

15.  Ascendance  of  Pandavas  to  heaven  36 

16.  Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Buddha  and  Kalki  38 

1 7.  Creation  39 

18.  Genealogy  of  Svayambhuva  Manu  41 

19.  Secondary  Creation  :  the  progeny  of  Kasyapa  45 

20.  Primary  Creation  43 

21.  Method  of  worshipping  Visnu  and  other  gods  50 

22.  Bath  prior  to  a  religious  rite  53 

23.  Mode  of  performing  worship  54 

24.  Mode  of  constructing  the  sacrificial  pit  and  the 

oblations  unto  fire  56 

25.  Mode  of  worshipping  Vasudeva,  Sarikarsana 

Pradyumna  and  Aniruddha  62 

26.  Positions  of  fingers  in  Worship  66 

27.  Initiation  rite  67 

28.  Mode  of  anointment  for  the  preceptor  74 


Contents 


x 


29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

36. 

37. 
33. 

39. 

40. 

41. 

42. 

43. 

44. 

45. 


Mode  of  Worshipping  Hari  in  Sarvatobhadra 
Mode  of  worshipping  gods  m  lotus  figures 
Mode  of  cleansing  oneself  and  othei  s 


InvestituTe  of  the  sacred  thread  for  the  deity  and  the 
installation,  of  the  deity 

Mode  of  performing  oblation 

Mode  of  consecration  of  an  image 

Mode  of  performing  the  investiture  of  sac.cd  thread 

Mode  of  investiture  of  sacred  thread  for  all  gods 

Benefits  of  constructing  temples 

Preparations  onground  for  constructing  temples 

Mode  of  making  the  respectful  offering  to  the  god 

Mode  of  performing  Consecration 


Construction  of  a  temple 
Installation  of  deities  in  temples 
Characteristics  of  the  image  of  Vasudeva 
Characteristics  of  pedestals  and  details  relating  to 


images 

46.  Characteristics  of  different  Salagrama  stones 

47.  Mode  of  worshipping  Salagrama 

48.  Adoration  of  twentyfour  forms  of  Visnu 

49.  Characteristics  of  forms  of  Fish  etc  of  Visnu 

50.  Characteristics  of  an  image  of  the  goddess 

51.  Characteristics  of  images  of  Sun  and  other 
planets 

52.  Characteristics  of  images  of  different  fonm 
of  goddesses 

53.  Characteristics  of  Linga  (parabolic  repre¬ 
sentation  of  Siva) 

54.  The  dimensions  of  different  varieties  of  Linga 

55.  Characteristics  of  the  pedestal 

56.  Five  divisions  of  installation 

57.  Consecration  of  pitchers 

58.  Consecration  of  the  idol 

59.  Preliminary  consecration  of  an  image 

60 .  Mode  of  ins  tallation  of  image  of  V asudeva 

61.  Consecration  of  the  door  of  the  temple  and  the 
erection  of  banner 


75 

79 

82 

85 

87 

92 

96 

98 

100 

101 

106 

107 

110 

113 

116 

118 

123 

124 
126 
127 
129 
132 


136 

138 

139 
141 

146 

147 
149 
152 
155 
161 

164 


Contents  xj 

62.  Mode  of  installation  of  image  of  Goddess  LaksmI  169 

63.  Mode  of  installation  of  other  gods  and  Goddesses,  the 

Sudarsana  disc  and  the  writing  of  books  and  their 
installations  171 

64.  Mode  of  consecration  of  tanks  and  ponds  173 

65.  Building  pavilions  in  front  of  temples  178 

66.  Mode  of  consecration  of  other  gods  180 

67.  Renovation  of  decayed  images  184 

68.  Mode  of  taking  out  a  procession  and  celebration 

of  festivals  after  fixing  the  new  image  184 

69.  Mode  of  conducting  the  bathing  festival  186 

70.  Mode  of  planting  trees  188 

71.  Mode  of  Worshipping  Gancsa  186 

72.  Mode  of  bathing  and  daily  worship  190 

73.  Mode  of  worshipping  Sun  195 

74.  Mode  of  worshipping  Siva  197 

75.  Mode  of  installation  of  fire  205 

76.  Mode  of  Worshipping  Canda  (attendant  of  Siva)  211 

77.  Mode  of  Worshipping  Kapila  212 

78.  Mode  of  investiture  of  the  sacred  thread  for  the  deity  215 

79.  Investiture  of  the  Sacred  thread  221 

80.  Mode  of  investiture  with  the  fibres  of  Damanaka  225 

81.  Mode  of  spiritual  initiation  226 

82.  Mode  of  performing  purificatory  initiation  235 

83.  Mode  of  spiritual  Initiation  that  removes  one’s  bondage  238 

84.  Mode  of  Initiation  for  Emancipation  243 

85.  Mode  of  purifying  the  Beatific  principle  of  establish¬ 
ment  248 

86.  Mode  of  purification  of  Scriptural  knowledge  252 

87.  Mode  of  purification  of  the  principle  of  peace  254 

88.  Mode  of  initiation  for  attaining  liberation  257 

89.  Initiation  of  principles  262 

90.  Anointing  the  disciple  after  worshipping  Siva  263 

91.  Mantras  for  worshipping  gods  265 


Contents 


xu 

92.  Mode  of  installing  the  image  of  Siva 

93.  Mode  of  worshipping  the  presiding  deity  of  a 
ground 

94.  Mode  of  placing  the  stone  slabs 

95.  Mode  of  installation  of  Linga 

96.  Mode  of  initial  consecration  of  an  image 

97.  Mode  of  installation  of  lord  Siva 

98.  Mode  of  installation  of  the  image  of  goddess  Gaurl 

99.  Mode  of  installation  of  the  image  of  sun-god 

100.  Rites  of  Consecration  of  doors  of  a  temple 


266 

272 

276 

278 

283 

294 

302 

303 

304 


ABBREVIATIONS 


Common  and  self-evident  abbreviations  such  as  Ch(s)- 
Chapter(s),  p— page,  pp— pages,  V— Verse,  W— Verses, 
Ftn — footnote,  Hist.  Ind.  Philo— History  of  Indian  Philosophy 
are  not  included  in  this  list. 


Annals  of  the  Bhandarkar  Oriental  Research  Institute } 
Poona 

S.  M.  Ali’s  The  Geography  of  Puranas,  PPH,  New 
Delhi,  1973 

Ancient  Indian  Historical  Tradition,  F.  E.  Pargiter, 
Motilal  Banarsidass  (MLBD),  Delhi. 

Ancient  Indian  Tradition  and  Mythology  Series  MLBD, 
Delhi,  1972  onwards. 

Agni  Purana ,  Guru  Mandal  Edition  (GM),  Cal¬ 
cutta,  1957 

Archaeological  Survey  Report 
Atharva  Veda,  Svadhyaya  Mandal,  Aundh 
Brahmanda  Purana,  (MLBD),  Delhi  1973 
Bhagavadgita 

Bhagavata  Purana,  Bhagavat  Vidyapeeth,  Ahmeda- 
bad 

Brahmana  (preceded  by  name  such  as  Satapatha 
Bliavisya  Purana,  Vishnu  Shastri  Bapat,  Wai. 
Brahma  Vaioarta  Purana,  GM,  1955-57 
Caturvarga  Cintamani  by  Hemadri 
Carana  Vyuha  Sutra  bySaunaka;  Com.  by  Mahidasa 
Devi  Bhagavata,  GM,  1960-61 

De  or  GDAMI.  The  Geographical  dictionary  of  Ancient  and  Media¬ 
eval  India,  N.  L.  De,  Orienta  Reprint,  Delhi,  1971 
Dharma  Sutra  (preceded  by  the  author’s  name 
such  as  Gautama) 

Encyclopaedia  of  Religion  and  Ethics— Hastings. 
Garuda  Purana  Ed.  R.  S.  Bhattacharya  Chow- 
khamba,  Varanasi,  1964 


ABORI 

AGP 

AIHT 

AITM 

AP 

Arch.S.Rep 
AV 
Bd.  P. 

BG 
Bh.  P. 


P. 

P. 


Br. 

BS. 

BV 

CC. 

CVS 

DB 


Dh.  S. 

ERE 

GP 


xiv  Abbreviations 

GS  Grhya  Sidra  (Preceded  by  the  name  of  the  author 

such  as  Apastamba) 


HD 

IA 

IHQ, 

JP 

KA 

KP 

History  of  Dharma  Sastra,  P.  V.  Kane,  G.  O.  S. 

The  Indian  Antiquary . 

The  Indian  Historical  Qiiarterly 

Purdna  (Journal  of  the  Kashiraj  Trust)  Varanasi 
Kautilya  A rlhasdstra 

Karma  Purdna ,  Verikatesvara  Press  Edt.  Bom¬ 

LP 

Manu. 

Mbh. 

MkP 

MN 

bay,  also  Kashiraj  Trust  Edt.,  Varanasi  1971 

Lihga  Purdna ,  GM,  1960;  also  MLBD,  Delhi,  1981 
Manusmrti 

Mahdbhdrala ,  Gita  Press,  Gorakhpur,  VS  2014 
Mdrkandeya  Purdna 

Mahdbhdrala  Ndmanukramani ,  Gita  Press  Gorakh¬ 

MtP. 

MW 

pur,  VS  2016 

Matsya  Purdna ,  GM,  1954 

Monier  Williams  Sk .  English  Dictionary  MLBD, 
Delhi,  1976 

NP. 

JVdradiya  or  jVarada  Purdna ,  Venkatesvar  Press, 
Bombay 

PCK 

Bharatavarsiya  Prdcina  CaritrakoSa ,  Siddheshwar 
Shastri,  Poona,  1968 

Pd.  P. 

PE 

Padma  Purdna ,  GM,  1957-59 

Puranic  Encyclopaedia ,  V.  Mani,  English,  MLBD, 
Delhi,  1975 

PR  or 

PRHRC 

RV 

Puranic  Records  on  Hindu  Rites  and  Customs 

R.  C.  Hazra,  Calcutta,  1948 

Rg-Veda ,  Svadhyaya  Mandal,  Aundh 

Sat.  Br.  Satapatha  Brahmana 

SC  or  SMC  Smrti  Candrika — Devanna  Bhatta 


SEP 

Studies  in  Epics  and  Puranas ,  A.D.  Pusalkar  Bhara¬ 
tiya  Vidya  Bhavan  (BVB),  Bombay 

INTRODUCTION 


The  Term  Purana 

According  to  the  definition  of  the  grammarian  Panini,  the 
etymologist  Yaska  and  the  Puranas  themselves,  the  word  Purana 
is  that  which  is  existing  from  long  time  past.  Itihdsapurana  is  held 
as  the  fifth  Veda  in  the  Chandogyopanisad  (VII.i.4).  The  Vedas 
do  not  use  the  word  Purana  as  referring  to  the  class  of  literature 
now  known  as  the  Puranas .  The  Brdhmanas  refer  to  the  practice 
of  recitation  of  the  Puranas  at  the  sacrifices.  The  plural  usage 
Puranani  in  the  Taittiriya  dr  any  aka  leads  us  to  infer  that  during 
the  days  of  the  Aranyakas  the  idea  of  many  Puranas  had  come  into 
vogue.  The  Rdmdyana  of  Vdlmiki  refers  to  the  class  of  literature 
known  as  Puranas .  According  to  Nlahdbharala ,l  the  Itihdsapurana 
had  to  be  used  as  supplement  to  Vedas.  It  also  declares  that  the 
Veda  is  afraid  that  men  of  little  learning  would  misinterpret  it. 
The  Ar  that  as  Ira  of  Kautilya  names  the  Atharvaveda  and  Itihdsa 
as  Vedas  after  naming  the  three  Vedas — Rg,  Tajus  and  Saman . 

According  to  a  tradition  found  in  Skanda ,  Padma  and  Malsya 
puranas ,  the  Puranas  were  one  single  literary  piece  consisting  of  the 
three  topics  dharma,  arlha  and  karna . 

From  the  jVyayasiitrabhdsya  of  Vatsyayana  we  find  that  the 
following  three  broad  divisions  of  the  literature  existed — (1 )  the 
Vedas  consisting  of  the  formulae  for  sacrificial  rites  and  rules 
relating  to  them,  (2)  the  Itihdsa  and  Purana  dealing  with  the  his¬ 
tory  of  world  or  people  and  (3 )  the  DharmaSastra  for  the  deter¬ 
mination  of  puny  a  and  papa  in  the  world.  It  seems  the  last  section 
was  also  incorporated  in  the  Purdiias  in  C .  5  th  or  6th  century 
A.D. 


1.  yo  vidyac  caturo  vedan.  sangopanisado  dvijah  / 

na  cet  purfinam  samvidyau  naiva  sa  syad  vicak:?anah  // 
i tiliasapuraaabl ly am  vedam  samupabrmhayct  / 
bibhctyalpasruiad  vedo  mam  ayam  praharisyati  // 
Mbh.  1.2.  645;  1.1.260 


XVI 


Introduction 


The  Origin  of  the  Purdnas 

The  Purdnas  hold  identical  views  regarding  the  origin  of  the 
Purdnas  from  the  mouth  of  Brahma,  the  only  point  of  difference 
is  regarding  the  time  of  their  origin  either  before  or  later  to  the 
Vedas1.  While  the  Vedas  came  out  of  Brahma  in  order,  the  Purdnas 
came  out  at  the  same  time.2 

The  Purdnas  are  unanimous  in  their  view  that  Vyasa  made  the 
Pu rdnasamhi td  and  instructed  his  pupil  Lomaharsana  whom 
he  entrusted  the  work  of  spreading  it.  This  is  considered  to  have 
been  at  a  time  when  the  Vedas  were  divided  into  four.  Veda- 
vyasa  who  had  the  knowledge  of  the  Purdnas  is  said  to  have  com¬ 
posed  the  Puranasamhitd  based  on  the  dkhydna ,  updkhydna  and 
gdtha  etc.  While  the  dkhydna  is  the  narration  about  an  incident 
which  the  speaker  himself  has  witnessed,  the  updkhydna  is  that 
which  was  heard  from  somebody  and  retold.  Gdlhds  arc  the  metri¬ 
cal  quotations  found  in  the  Vedas ,  Drahmanas  etc. 

The  definition  of  the  term  Pur  ana : 

We  also  find  a  traditional  definition3  in  some  of  the  Purdnas 4 
according  to  which  a  Parana  should  comprise  the  five  topics, 
namely,  (1)  the  primary  creation;  (2)  the  secondary  creation; 
(3)  the  genealogy  of  gods  and  sages;  (4)  the  periods  of  Manu 
and  (5)  the  accounts  of  royal  genealogy.  While  some  of  the 
Purdnas  satisfy  this  definition,  most  of  them  do  not. 

Almost  all  the  Puraiias  contain  either  briefly  or  in  detail  these 
topics.  The  first  topic  Sarga  (creation)  concerns  with  the  crea¬ 
tion  of  the  categories  divided  into  three  groups — Prakrta ,  Vaikrta 


1.  puranam  sarvasastranam  prathamam  brahimana  kj-tam  / 
anantaram  ca  vaktrcbhyo  vedastasya  vinirgatali  // 

Mat.  P.  53.3 

rgyajus  sfimatharvakhyan  vedan  purvadibliirmukhaih  / 
sastramijyam  stutistomam  prayascittarii  vyadhat  kramat  // 

Bhdg.  P.  III.12.37 

2.  itihaspuranani  pancamam  vedamlsvarah  / 
sarvebhya  eva  vaktrcbhyali  sasrjc  sarvadarcanah  // 

Bhdg .  P.  III.  12.39 

3.  sargasca  pratisargasca  vamso  manvantarani  ca  / 
vamsanucaritam  caiva  puranam  pancalaksariam  // 

4.  viz.  Mat .  P.  53.  64. 


Introduction 


XVII 


and  Ubhayatmaka .  The  first  group  consists  of  the  following — 
(1)  mahat;  (2)  ahahkara\  (3)  bhulatanmalras ;  (4)  indriya  { jnana 
and  kriya);  (5)  7nanas;  (6)  tamas  ( tamisra ,  andhatamisra,  lamas, 
moha  and  mahamoha).  The  second  group  consists  of — (1)  urdhva - 
srotas  (higher  orders);  (2)  tiryaksrotas  (lower  orders)  and  (3) 
arvaksrotas  (middle  orders).  The  last  group  consists  of  Kaumara- 
sarga — creation  of  Sanaka,  Sanandana,  Sanatana  and  Sanat- 
kumara. 

The  second  topic,  namely,  the  Pratisarga,  describes  the  differ¬ 
ent  kinds  of  pralaya 1 — naimitlika  prakrtika ,  nitya  and  alyanlika . 
The  naimitlika  is  that  which  takes  place  at  the  end  of  Brahma’s 
one  day,  i.c.,  a  kalpa.  It  lasts  during  the  period  of  Brahma’s 
night.  The  prakrtika  is  that  in  which  the  seven  prakrlis  (mahat, 
ahankara  and  the  five  tanmatras)  merge  in  that  one  which  was 
the  cause  of  their  origin  at  the  end  of  parardha  (fifty  years)  of 
Brahma’s  life.  The  nitya  is  that  which  takes  place  every  day 
(nityah  sadaiva  bhutanam  yo  vinaso  divanisam)  during  the 
night  when  all  beings  go  to  sleep.  The  alyanlika  takes  place  at 
the  end  of  hundred  years  of  Brahma’s  life. 

The  third  one,  the  vaiiisa ,  is  that  which  gives  an  account  of 
the  genealogy  of  the  kings  and  sages  belonging  to  the  past,  pre¬ 
sent  and  future :  rajnain  brahmaprasu tanam  vamsastraikaliko’nva- 
yah.  (. Bhdg .  P .  XII.  vii.  16). 

The  fourth  one,  the  manvantara  gives  the  names  of  Manus, 
their  periods,  the  names  of  sages,  Indra  etc.  (manvantaram 
manurdeva  manuputrah  suresvarah  /  rsayo’  rhsavatarasca  hareh 
sadvidhamucyate  //  {Bhdg.  P.  XII.  vii.  15.) 

The  fifth  one,  the  vamldnucarita  describes  the  lives  of  great 
sages  and  kings  born  in  a  particular  lineage  (vamsanucaritam 
tesaiii  vrttarh  vamsadharasca  ye  {Bhdg.  P.  XII.  vii.  16.) 

Plowcver,  these  topics  are  very  meagrely  represented  in  most 
of  the  Purdnas.  The  above  subjects  are  dealt  with  in  a  compara¬ 
tively  abridged  form  in  Agni  P.  and  Gar .  P.  and  paraphrased  in 
Yu  P.  There  are  only  three  cases  of  complete  description  of 

1.  nilyo  naimittikascaiva  prakito1  tyantikastailia  / 
caturdhayam  puranesu  procyate  pratisancarah  // 
naimittikah  prakrtikastathaivatyantiko  dvija  / 
tiitvasca  sarvabhutanam  pralayo’yarii  caturvidhah  // 

Vi.  P.  VI.  iii.2 


xviii 


Introduction 


these  five  topics  in  the  Purdna  literature,  namely,  in  XhzBrahma.P., 
Brakmanda  P.,  Vay.  P.,  and  Mat .  P.  Pargiter1  opined  that  there 
was  one  complete  harmonious  account  from  which  outers  were 
reproduced. 

Almost  all  the  Puranas  have  a  sectarian  character  according  to 
the  cult  of  the  deity  they  adhere  to.  This  gave  rise  to  new  defini¬ 
tions  for  the  Puranas .  According  to  the  Brahmavaiuarta,2 3 4  the  five 
characteristics  are  applicable  to  the  Upapurdnas  and  the  Maha - 
purdna  must  have  ten  characteristics.  The  Bhagavatd?  also  pres¬ 
cribes  ten  characteristics  for  a  Purdna.  These  are  “creation, 
details  of  creation,  duties  of  sentient  beings,  protection  of  devo¬ 
tees,  ages  of  Manu,  dynasties  of  kings  and  sages,  career  of  indi¬ 
viduals,  dissolution  of  the  world,  cause  of  creation  and  Brahma”. 
The  Matsyapurdna 4  adds  in  addition  to  the  above  ten  character¬ 
istics,  the  following  characteristics  also — “The  glorification  of 
Brahma,  Visnu,  Surya  and  Rudra,  dissolution  and  preservation 
of  the  world  and  the  four  purusarthas ”.  The  Jayamangala ,  a  com¬ 
mentary  on  the  Arthaiastra  of  Kautilya  quotes  a  verse  from  some 
old  work  giving  a  new  set  of  five  topics  such  as  “the  creation, 
existence,  destruction,  the  pursuit  of  righteousness  and  libera¬ 
tion”  for  a  Purdna . 

Besides  the  five  topics  described  above,  the  Puranas  also  con¬ 
tain  topics  relating  to  these  and  flowing  legitimately  from  them. 
These  topics  which  we  generalise  as  the  dharmaSastra  teach  man 
about  his  duties  as  a  student,  householder  and  as  an  ascetic. 
Man’s  ultimate  aim  is  to  know  about  the  purpose  of  his  creation 
and  the  ultimate  goal  he  has  to  reach.  To  achieve  this  he  has  to 
traverse  the  three  purposes  of  life,  namely,  the  dharma ,  artha  and 
kama.  One  has  to  follow  the  path  of  righteous  living  and  earn 
wealth  for  his  existence  and  for  distribution  to  the  needy  and 
satisfy  his  just  desires.  All  these  ideals  are  explained  in  detail 
in  the  Puranas . 

The  eighteen  Puranas  : 

The  vidyds  are  counted  as  eighteen  consisting  of  the  four  Vedas y 

1.  Parg.  p.  36. 

2.  TV.  13.  6-9. 

3.  XII.  7.  9-10. 

4 .  53.  65-66. 


Introduction 


xix 


four  Upavedas— Ayurveda  (medicine) ,  Dhanurveda  (archery),  Gan - 
dharvavcda  (music)  and Sthdpatyaldstra  (mechanics,  architecture), 
six  Veddhgas  (auxiliary  texts  to  the  Vedas),  Purdna ,  Nyaya  (dia¬ 
lectics)  Mimamsa ,  and  DharmaSastra.  The  number  of  Pur  arias 
and  Upapuranas  are  given  as  eighteen.  The  number  of  sections 
in  the  Mahdbhdrata  is  eighteen.  The  Bhagavadgita  also  contains 
eighteen  chapters.  The  significance  for  counting  their  number 
as  eighteen  is  explained  as  follows:  The  functional  organs  of  the 
body  are  spoken  to  be  eighteen — the  five  sense-organs,  the  five 
organs  of  action,  the  mind,  the  five  vital  air,  intellect  and  ego. 
These  are  the  instruments  in  the  performance  of  good  and  bad 
acts.  That  is  why  the  branch  of  learning  concerning  the  rules 
governing  one’s  acts  are  reckoned  to  be  eighteen.  Moreover  the 
ancient  literature1  and  the  Puranas  divide  the  globe  into  eighteen 
sections  known  as  dvipas .  The  Puranas  describe  also  the  creation 
of  eighteen  principles  mahat ,  ahankara ,  five  sense-organs,  five 
organs  cf  action,  mind  and  five  elements. 

The  sequence  in  which  the  Puranas  are  enumerated  is  almost 
unanimous.  There  is  a  short  couplet  in  the  Devibhagavata 2  indi¬ 
cating  the  names  of  the  eighteen  Puranas  according  to  which  the 
eighteen  Puranas  are  Matsya ,  Markandeya ,  Bhdgavata ,  Bhavisyot - 
tara ,  Brahma ,  Brahmavaivarta ,  Brahmanda ,  Visnu,  Vayu,  Vamana , 
Varaha ,  Agni,  Narada ,  Padma ,  Lihga ,  Garuda ,  Kurma  and  Skanda . 
Although  some  enumerations  read  Sivapurana  instead  of  Vayu - 
pur  ana,  Vayupurana  is  the  genuine  mahapurana .  Similarly  the 
Bhdgavata  is  the  mahapurana  and  not  the  Devibhagavata .  The 
Ndrada-purana  (I.  92-109)  enumerates  their  names  and  also  gives 
an  index  of  their  contents,  in  18  chapters.  The  Matsyapurdna 
(53),  Agnipurana  (272)  and  Skandapurana  (Prabhasa,  2.28-76) 
also  have  similar  indices.  The  traditional  order  of  the  enumera¬ 
tion  of  the  Puranas  are  also  given  in  some  of  the  Puranas .  The 
Brahma  or  the  Matsyapurdna  is  given  as  the  first  purdna .  There  is 
no  speciality  in  the  uniformity  of  order  in  the  enumeration  of 
the  Puranas . 


1,  navadvayadvipa  in  Naifadhiya  1.5  and  affddaSadofpanikhdtay upah  in 
Raghuvamia  VI.  38. 

2.  madvayam  bhadvayam  caiva  bratrayaiii  vacatu?iayam  / 
anapalingakuskani  puranani  prthak  prtliak  //  I.iii.2 


XX 


Introduction 


The  number  of  verses  in  the  individual  Pur  anas  is  also  given 
in  some  of  the  Puranas .  On  the  whole  the  total  number  of  verses 
in  all  the  Puranas  together  comes  to  four  lakhs. 

The  classi  cation  of  the  Puranas  : 

The  Puranas  themselves  and  also  the  modern  scholars  have 
attempted  to  classify  these  Puranas  on  the  basis  of  the  subject 
matter  of  the  Pur  arias1. 

On  account  of  the  varied  subject  matter,  the  Agni,  Garuda 
and  Narada  puranas  are  classified  as  encyclopaedic. 

The  Date  of  composition  of  the  Puranas  : 

The  Puranas  are  believed  to  have  been  composed  during  the 
Gupta  rule.  The  earliest  of  the  Puranas  could  have  come  into 
existence  around  the  2nd  century,  while  the  latest  of  them  around 
the  12  th  century,  some  of  them  also  have  been  revised  subse¬ 
quently. 

Philosophy  in  the  Puranas  : 

Besides  the  five  topics,  the  Puranas  contain  many  other  topics 
useful  for  man’s  existence  and  to  elevate  his  thoughts.  The 
philosophical  discussions  of  the  different  schools  are  blended 
together  and  we  have  a  theistic  Sahkhya  and  Asfafigayoga. 

Asfdhgayoga  : 

It  is  well-known  that  the  Itihasapurana  literature  has  generally 
the  background  of  a  theistic  type  of  Sahkhya-yoga .  It  is  this  pre¬ 
vailing  terminology;  it  has  sometimes  oriented  towards  Visnu 
or  Siva  or  Devi  according  to  the  deity  to  which  the  Purana  is 
affiliated  more  specifically. 

The  Puranas  describe  the  Trinity  of  Gods  consisting  of  Siva, 
Visnu  and  Brahma  as  a  manifestation  of  one  of  these  three. 
That  God  is  held  as  the  cause  of  creation,  preservation  and  des¬ 
truction.  While  He  is  the  cause,  He  is  not  affected  by  these 
activities.  He  is  the  form  of  the  universe  (ViSvarupa),  the  im¬ 
manent  soul  of  the  universe  (ytivatman)  and  transcending  the 


1.  See  Dr.  N.  Gangadharan,  Lingapurd(ta—A  Study ,  pp.  49-50 


Introduction 


xxi 


universe  (viSvadhika) .  Following  Sankhya1,  avyakta,  mahal,  ahankara , 
pahcabhuta,  pahcatanmatra,  paiicakarmendriya,  pancajnanendriya  and 
mind  are  the  twcntyfour  tattoas.  The  twenty-fifth  tatlva  is  the 
worshipper  himself.  The  twenty-sixth  tattva  is  lord  Siva  or  Visnu 
as  the  case  may  be.  Then  we  find  in  the  Purana  a  good  deal  of 
Sankhya  terminology  in  the  course  of  the  description  of  the  pro- 
cess  of  creation. 

The  knowledge  of  the  utilisation  of  the  Bhagavadgita  by  the 
Puranas  goes  without  saying.  Dr.  Raghavan  has  made2  a  com¬ 
prehensive  survey  and  bibliography  of  Gita  thought  and  expres¬ 
sion  as  found  in  other  parts  of  the  Mahdbhdrata  and  the  Purana 
and  Upapurdna  literature. 

For  example,  the  Garufjiapurdna  has  the  following  verses : 

daivl  hycsa  gunamayl  harermaya  duratyaya  / 
tameva  ye  prapadyante  mayametam  taranti  te  //  1.219.  30 
nainarh  chindanti  sastrani  nainarh  dahati  pavakah  / 
na  cainam  kledayantyapo  na  Sosayati  Marutah  //  II.  1.4. 

and 

Vasamsi  jxrnani  yatha  vihaya 
navani  grhnati  naro’parani  / 
tatha  Sarirani  vihaya  jlrna- 

nyanyani  grhnati  navani  dehl  //  11.88.  42 

These  are  the  same  as  Bhagavadgita  verses  7.14;  2.23  and  2.22 
respectively.  The  Lingapurana  (ch.  58)  mentions  the  chief  of 
each  class  of  beings  which  is  a  patent  echo  of  the  vibhuliyoga 
chapter  (X)  of  the  Bhagavadgita. 


Puranas  of  Encyclopaedic  nature  \ 

As  already  mentioned  the  Agni,  Qaruda  and  Mradapuranas 
are  classified  as  encyclopaedic.  They  contain  varied  matter 
treating  of  different  subjects. 


1.  iha  sa<Jvimsako  dhyeyo  dhyata  vai  pancavimsakali  / 
caturvuhsakamavyaktarii  mahadadyastu  sapto  ca  // 
mahan  tatha  tvahankaram  tanmatram  pancakam  p  . 
karmendriyam  pancaiva  tatha  buddlundriya^i  ca  / 
manas'ea  pancabhutaoi  sivah  sadvimsakasta  .  //^  p  j  28  ?_ga 

Felicitation  Volume,  pp.  218-20. 


XXII 


Introduction 


The  Agnipurana  counted  as  the  eighth  in  the  traditional  list 
found  in  the  Visnupurdna ,  contains  383  chapters  in  the  Venkate- 
svara  Press  edition  and  382  chapters  in  the  other  editions.  This 
is  because  the  Venkatesvara  Press  text  contains  one  extra  chapter 
on  the  Sangramavijayavidya  numbered  as  the  135th  chapter. 
Dr.  R.  C.  Hazra  has  shown1  that  this  purana  is  spurious  one. 
This  spurious  one  has  been  composed  between  700  and  1000 
A.D.  In  spite  of  its  spurious  nature  it  serves  as  an  invaluable 
piece  of  document  throwing  light  on  the  culture  of  that  period. 

•  In  about  8000  verses  it  treats  of  varied  topics  such  as  dharma, 
mantra  and  tantra,  physiognomy,  political  expediency,  genea¬ 
logy  of  kings,  medicine,  equinology,  veterinary  science,  science 
relating  to  elephants,  metrics,  poetics,  grammar,  lexicography, 
philosophical  inquiries,  brief  accounts  of  the  epics  and  the  mani¬ 
festations  of  lord  Visnu,  archery  and  account  of  Vedic  litera¬ 
ture.  Although  the  treatment  of  topics  of  the  five  characteristics 
is  very  meagre,  there  is  no  second  thought  about  the  valuable 
nature  of  this  Purana . 

The  Agnipurana  follows  the  general  Puranic  scheme  and 
embodies  theistic  Sankhya  theory  of  evolution.  This  we  find  des¬ 
cribed  in  chapter  20.  It  follows  the  general  scheme  and  descri¬ 
bes  the  secondary  creation  in  chapters  18  and  19.  The  creation 
made  by  Daksa  is  also  narrated  herein.  So  also,  it  gives  an  ac¬ 
count  of  the  fourteen  Manu-periods  together  with  the  respective 
sons,  gods,,  seven  sages  and  Indras  in  one  chapter  (chapter  150). 
Genealogies  of  the  kings  of  the  solar  and  lunar  races  are  dealt 
with  in  six  chapters  (chapters  273-78).  This  portion  has  been 
pointed  out2  as  late  recompilation  of  the  material  in  early 
Purdnas  restating  the  genealogies  in  fresh  verses  in  a  condensed 
form.  We  find  here  bald  pedigrees  with  hardly  any  incidental 
allusions.  This  is  said  to  follow  the  Matsyapurana  tradition. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  there  are  many  interlocutors 
such  as  Agni,  Narada,  Hayagrlva,  Isvara,  Puskara,  Rama, 
Samudra,  Dhanvantari,  Palakapya,  Salihotra,  Skanda,  Kumara 
and  Yama. 

We  know  from  Dr.  Hazra’s  scholarly  work3  which  of  the  ver- 


1.  Pur .  Rec .  pp.  134-140. 

2.  Parg.  p.  80. 

3.  Pur.  Rec.  pp.  318-19  and  338. 


XX111 


Introduction 

ses  on  dharma  quoted  by  the  nibandha  writers  are  traceable  or 

untraceable  in  the  Agnipurdna. 

A  brief  account  of  some  of  the  important  topics  dealt  with  in 
this  Purana  would  show  its  utility.1  It  devotes  15  chapters  to 
the  description  of  the  manifestations  of  lord  Visnu  It 
makes  use  of  this  opportunity  to  introduce  a  summary  of  t  e 
epics  the  Rdmdyana  and  the  Mahdbhdrata.  As  m  other  Puranas, 
we  find  a  detailed  description  of  geographical  matters  in 
14 chapters  (chapters  107-120).  The  material  ondharma  mainly 
based  on  the  Manu,  Narada  and  Tdjnavalkya  sm7tis  is  spread 
over  24  chapters  (chapters  151-174).  This  Purana  describes  the 
various  religious  observances  in  chapters  175-200.  Politica 
expediency  consisting  of  coronation,  duties  of  the  king  an 
council  of  ministers,  law  and  order,  six  constituents  of  state  and 

the  like,  is  explained  in  chapters  218-242.  Medicine  based  on 
Susruta  is  dealt  with  in  chapters  278-97.  Moreover,  summary 
of  Pingalasutras  on  metrics  (chapters  323-35),  Papinis  i  sa 
(phonetics)  (chapter  336),  Poetics  (chapters  337-46),  Sum¬ 
mary  of  AmarakoSa  (chapters  359-366),  vyavahara  (chapters 
253-57)  are  some  of  the  other  important  topics  dealt  with  here. 


1  For  a  general  survey  of  its  contents  sec  S.  D.  Gyani,  Agnipurana  A 
Study  Varanasi,  1964  and  for  individual  topics  the  following  .  0)  ° 
vyavahara  portion  see  S.  C.  Banerji  Parana  XX.  No.  W  ^ 

(2)  On  the  mantras  sec  Andre  Padoux,  Purana  XX.  rso'  •>  pP‘  2 1  [july 
the  Temple  Architecture  see  Tahsildar  singh,_  '  p  'soe  ParaSnath 

1981 ),  pp-  188-200.  (4)  On  the  date  of  composition  of  *e  ^  ‘  *  \  (Jul 

Dvivedi,  ilgra  University  Journal  of  Research  (Letters)  Vol.  XIX.  Pt.  U 

1971),  PP-  75-86. 


CHAPTER  ONE 


Introductory 

1.  I  bow  to  (goddesses)  Sri  (LaksmI),  Sarasvatl,  Gaurl 
(Parvatl)  and  gods  Ganesa,  Skanda,  Isvara  (Siva),  Brahma, 
Vahni,  Indra  and  other  celestials  and  Vasudeva  (Krsna). 

2.  Saunaka  and  other  sages  (staying  at  the  sacred  forest) 
of  Naimisa,  conducting  a  sacrifice  devoted  to  Hari  (Visnu), 
welcomed  Suta  (the  reciter  of  ancient  lores)  on  his  arrival  there 
after  a  pilgrimage. 

The  sages  said  : 

3.  O  Suta  !  You  are  adored  by  us.  Tell  us  the  quintessence 
of  all  things,  by  knowing  which  alone  one  gets  omniscience. 

Suta  said  : 

4.  The  illustrious  Visnu  (who  is)  the  Supreme  Being  (and) 
the  Creator,  is  the  quintessence.  By  know  ng  that  T  am  Brahman9 > 
one  gets  omniscience. 

5.  Two  Brahmans  are  to  be  known,  the  Sabdabrahman  (the- 
Vedas)  and  Parabrahman  (the  Supreme  Spirit).  The  Atharvani 
Sruti  ( Mundakopanisad )  refers  to  this  as  the  two  (kinds  of)  knowl¬ 
edge  to  be  learnt. 

6.  Myself,  (sage)  Suka  (son  of  sage  Vyasa),  (sage)  Paila. 
(disciple  of  sage  Vyasa)  and  others  bowed  Vyasa  having  resort¬ 
ed  to  the  hermitage  at  (holy)  Badarikasrama.  He  imparted, 
to  us  the  quintessence  (of  all  things). 

Vyasa  said  : 

7.  O  suta,  listen  in  the  company  of  Suka  and  others  what 
Vasistha  has  said  to  me  about  the  excellent  quintessence  of  the 
Brahman ,  when  he  was  requested  by  the  sages. 

Vasistha  said  : 

8.  O  Vyasa,  Listen,  in  entirety,  to  the  two  (kinds  of)  knowl- 


2  Agni  Purina 

edge,  which  (god)  Agni  narrated  to  me  in  the  company  of  the 
sages  and  the  celestials. 

9.  The  excellent  Purana  (known  as)  the  Agneya  (or  Agni ) 
and  the  two  (kinds  of)  knowledge,  Para,  (the  superior)  and 
Apara  (the  inferior)  signifying  respectively  the  knowledge  about 
the  Brahman  and  the  knowledge  about  th eRgveda  and  so  on,  which 
satisfies  all  the  celestials  (will  be  narrated  to  you). 

10.  The  Pur  ana  spoken  by  Agni  and  designated  as  the  Agneya 
by  Brahma  and  which  gives  bhukti  (enjoyment)  and  mukti  (re¬ 
lease  from  mundane  existence)  for  those  who  read  it  or  hear  it 
(will  be  narrated  to  you). 

11.  Being  requested  by  the  sages  (I  will  also  describe)  (god) 
Visnu  in  the  form  of  the  destructive  Fire  at  the  end  of  the  world 
(who  is)  the  effulgent  Brahman  (and)  the  most  Supreme  Being 
(who  is)  worshipped  by  means  of  knowledge  and  action  (reli¬ 
gious  rites  and  so  on). 

Vasistha  said  : 

12.  O  Brahman  (Agni),  point  out  to  me  the  masterly  way 
of  crossing  the  ocean  of  mundane  existence,  by  knowing  the 
quintessence  of  which  knowledge  one  becomes  omniscient. 

Agni  said  : 

13.  Visnu  is  the  destructive  Fire  at  the  end  of  the  world  (in 
the  form  of)Rudra  (Siva).  I  shall  tell  you  the  essence  of  knowl¬ 
edge  (in  the  form  of)  this  Parana ,  which  represents  all  learning 
and  is  the  cause  of  all  things. 

14.  (Lord)  Visnu,  who  assumes  the  form  of  a  fish,  a  tortoise 
(and  other  beings),  is  the  cause  of  the  primary  creation,  the 
secondary  creation,  the  genealogy  of  the  sages,  the  cycles  of 
Manu-periods  and  the  genealogy  of  the  kings. 

15-17.  O  Twice-born  !  (Lord)  Visnu  (is  the  cause  of)  the 
two  kinds  of  knowledge  Para  (the  superior)  and  Apara  (the  in¬ 
ferior).  Here  the  Apara  is  represented  by  the  Rgveda ,  Yajurveda , 
Samaveda ,  Atharvaveda,  the  six  supplementary  texts,  (namely) — 
Siksa  (phonetics),  Kalpa  (rules  governing  rituals),  Vyakarana 
(grammar),  Nirukta  (etymological  science),  (the science  dealing 
with)  the  movement  of  the  luminary  bodies,  Chandovidhana 
(metrics),  Mimariisa  (investigation  of  the  interpretation  of  the 
ritual  of  the  Vedas ),  DharmaSastra  (law  -books),  Pur  anas  (18  in 


1.18—2.6 


3 


number),  JVyaya  (logical  philosophical  system),  Vaidya  (medical 
science),  Gandkarva  (science  of  music),  and  Arthasastra  (polity). 
The  Para-Vidya  (superior  knowledge)  is  that  through  which  the 
Brahman  is  known. 

18.  I  shall  narrate  to  you  (that  Purana)  which  was  told  to 
me  by  Visnu  and  the  celestials  by  Brahma  and  which  deals  with 
that  invisible,  incomprehensible,  not  having  a  cause  for  itself 
and  eternal  (form  of  Visnu)  which  is  the  cause  of  the  forms  such 
as  the  fish  and  others. 


CHAPTER  TWO 
Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Fish 

Vasistha  said  : 

1.  O  Brahma  !  Describe  unto  me  the  manifestations  of 
Visnu,  such  as  the  Fish  etc.,  which  are  the  cause  of  creation.  Also 
narrate  to  me  the  Agni  Purana  as  heard  from  Visnu  in  the  days  of 
yore. 

Agni  said  : 

2.  O  Vasistha  !  I  shall  describe  to  you  the  manifestation 
of  Hari  as  a  Fish.  Listen.  The  manifestations  are  for  the 
destruction  of  the  wicked  and  for  the  protection  of  the  pious. 

3.  At  the  end  of  the  past  kalpa  (of 432  million  years),  there 
was  a  periodical  dissolution.  Brahma  was  its  instrumental  cause. 
O  sage  !  the  earth  and  the  people  were  submerged  under  the  ris¬ 
ing  water. 

4-5.  Vaivasvata  Manu  was  practising  penance  for  gaining  . 
objects  of  enjoyment  and  for  release  from  mundane  existence. 

Once  when  he  was  offering  waters  of  libation  in  the  (river) 
Krtamala,  a  small  fish  came  in  the  waters  in  his  folded  palms. 
As  he  desired  to  throw  it  into  the  waters,  it  said  “O  excellent 
man  !  do  not  throw  me  away. 

6.  Now  I  have  fear  from  the  crocodiles  (and  others).5’ 
Having  heard  this  (Vaivasvata  Manu)  put  it  into  a  vessel.  When 


4 


Agni  Purdna 


it  had  grown  there  in  size,  it  requested  him,  “Get  me  a  bigger 
vessel”. 

7.  Having  heard  these  words,  the  king  put  the  fish  in  a. 
bigger  vessel.  Growing  there  again  in  size  it  requested  the 
king,  “O  Manu  !  Get  me  a  bigger  place”. 

8.  When  it  was  put  into  a  tank,  it  soon  grew  in  size  as  big 
as  it  (the  tank)  and  said,  “Get  me  to  a  bigger  place”.  Then. 
(Manu)  put  it  into  the  ocean. 

9.  In  a  moment,  it  grew  in  size  extending  to  a  lakh  of  yojanas 
(one yojana  8  or  9  miles).  Seeing  that  wonderful  fish,  Manu 
got  surprised  and  said  : 

10.  “Who  are  you,  but  Visnu?  O  Narayana  (Visnu)  I 
salute  you.  Why  do  you  stupefy  me  with  your  illusory  power,  O' 
Janardana  (Visnu)”. 

1 1 .  Having  heard  the  words  of  Manu,  the  Fish  replied  Manu 
who  had  been  engaged  in  the  protection  (of  the  world),  “I  have 
manifested  for  the  protection  of  this  universe  and  for  the  destruc¬ 
tion  of  the  wicked.” 


12-13.  On  the  seventh  day,  the  ocean  would  flood  the  earth. 
Having  put  the  seeds  (of  creation)  etc.  in  the  boat  that  would 
approach  you,  you  would  spend  the  night  (of  1 000  mortal  years ) 

of  Brahma  on  it  being  encircled  by  the  seven  sages.  (You)  bind 

this  boat  to  my  horn  with  the  big  serpent.”. 

14.  Saying  thus,  the  fish  disappeared.  Manu,  who  was 
waiting  for  the  appointed  hour,  boarded  the  boat  as  the  ocean 
commenced  to  swell. 


15.  The  fish  now  appeared  with  a  single  golden  horn  of  one 
million  yojanas  in  length.  He  tied  the  boat  to  its  horn. 

i6  u  7 l  AJtCr  haring  Praised  U  with  Oration,  he  heard  from 
the  fish  the  Parana  known  as  th eMalsya  which  is  capable  of  des¬ 
troying  the  sins.  Kesava  (Visnu)  killed  the  demon  Hayagriva  * 
the  destroyer  of  the  Vedas  of  Brahman  and  thus  protected  the 

ofdmeTsf '  W  m  n  ^  VaTdhakalP°  of  the  periods 

of  time)  set  in,  Han  (Visnu)  assumed  the  form  of  a  tortoise. 


1 .  Hayagriva  was  the  name  of  a  powerful  rlmm  v. 

Vedas  during  Deluge.  He  was  killed  by  Visnu  S  °  C"™d  away  ** 
Vedas  were  rescued.  BMg.  P.  VIII.  xxiy.  8  and  57  P  ^m.  * 


3.1-9  0 

CHAPTER  THREE 

Manifestation  of  Visriu  as  a  Tortoise 

Agni  said  : 

1.  I  shall  describe  unto  you  (now)  about  the  manifestation 
(of  Visnu)  as  a  tortoise,  by  hearing  which  one’s  sins  will  be 

•destroyed.  In  days  of  yore  the  celestial  gods  were  defeated  by  the 
•demons  in  a  battle  between  them. 

2.  On  account  of  the  curse  of  sage  Durvasas,1  the  celes¬ 
tials  were  deprived  of  all  their  prosperity.  Then  they  praised 
Visnu  who  was  (reclining)  in  the  milky  ocean  and  said, c  Protect 
*is  from  the  demons”. 

3.  Hari  said  to  Brahma  and  others,  “You  make  a  treaty  of 
peace  with  the  demons  for  churning  the  ocean  for  securing  amb¬ 
rosia. 

4.  In  the  interest  of  an  important  work  even  the  enemies 
should  be  sought  for  union.  I  will  make  you  get  the  ambrosia 
and  not  the  demons. 

5.  Making  the  (Mount)  Mandara  as  the  churning  rod  and 
(the  serpent)  Vasuki  as  the  rope,  you  vigilantly  churn  the  milky 

ocean  with  my  help”. 

6.  Concluding  an  agreement  with  the  demons  as  suggested 
by  Visnu,  (the  celestials)  came  to  the  milky  ocean.  The  celes¬ 
tials  began  to  churn  the  ocean  (from  that  side)  where  the  tail  of 
the  serpent  was. 

7.  The  celestials  who  were  afflicted  by  the  sighs  of  the  ser¬ 
pent,  were  comforted  by  Hari  (Visnu) .  As  the  ocean  was  being 
churned  the  mountain  being  unsupported  entered  into  the  water. 

8.  Then  Visnu  assumed  the  form  of  a  tortoise  and  supported 
the  (Mount)  Mandara.  From  the  milky  ocean  which  was  being 
churned,  first  came  out  the  poison  known  as  Halahala . 

9.  That  poison  being  retained  by  Hara  (Siva)  in  his  neck, 
Siva  became  (known  to  be)  Nilakantha  (blue-necked). 
Then  the  goddess  VarunI  (The  female  energy  of  the  celestial  god 

1 .  Name  of  an  irascible  sage,  son  of  Sage  Atri  and  Anasuya.  Once  he  met 
a,  Vidyadhara  maid  with  a  garland.  He  took  that  garland  and  presented  it  to 
Indra.  Indra  put  it  on  his  elephant,  which  in  turn  threw  it  on  the  ground  and 
trampled  upon  it.  Enraged  at  this  the  sage  cursed  him  that  he  would  lose  all 
his  fortune.  Sec  Vi.P,  I.  ix.  1  ff.;  P,  Index  II.  p.  106, 


6  Agni  Purana 

Varuna),  the  Parijata  (tree)  and  the KausLubha  (gem)  came  out 
of  the  ocean. 

10.  Then  came  out  the  (celestial)  kine  and  the  nymphs. 
Then  came  out  Laksmi,  who  became  the  consort  of  Hari  (Visnu) . 
Beholding  her  and  adoring  her  all  the  celestials  regained  their 
lost  prosperity. 

11.  Then  Dhanvantari,  (a  form  of  Visnu)  and  founder  of 
the  (science  of)  Ayurveda  rose  up  holding  a  water-pot  full  of 
ambrosia. 

1 2 .  Taking  the  ambrosia  from  his  hands  the  demons  Jambha 
and  others  having  given  half  of  it  to  the  celestials  went  away  with 
the  other  half.  Then  Visnu  assumed  the  form  of  beautiful 
damsel. 

13.  Having  seen  that  beautiful  form,  the  demons  became 
fascinated  and  said,  “O  fair-faced  one  !  Be  our  wife,  take  this 
ambrosia  and  make  us  drink  it.55 

14-15.  Hari  (Visnu)  said,  “Let  it  be  so”,  and  took  it  from 
them  and  made  the  celestials  drink  it.  As  Rahu  assumed  the 
form  of  the  Moon  and  drank  a  portion,  he  was  detected  by  the 
Sun  and  the  Moon  and  was  brought  to  the  notice  of  (Visnu). 
His  head  was  severed  by  his  enemy  Hari  (Visnu).  That  severed 
head  of  Rahu  then  said  to  Hari,  the  bestower  of  gifts  (by 
whose  grace)  it  had  attained  immortality. 

16.  “When  the  intoxicated  Rahu  would  seize  the  Sun  and 
the  Moon,  may  the  charities  made  on  that  occasion  be  imperi¬ 
shable.” 

17.  Visnu  in  the  company  of  all  the  immortals  said,  “Be 
it  so  and  cast  off  his  female  form.  He  was  then  requested  by 
Hara  to  show  that  form  (again). 

18.  (Lord)  Hari  (Visnu)  showed  the  feminine  form  to 
Rudra  (Siva).  Sambhu  (Siva)  being  captivated  by  the  illusory 
power,  renouncing  Gauri  (Parvatl)  sought  that  feminine  form. 

19.  Becoming  nude  and  behaving  like  a  mad  man,  he  held 
the  damsel  by  her  hair.  She  got  herself  freed  and  ran  away. 
He  too  followed  her. 

20.  Wherever  the  seminal  fluid  of  Hara  dropped,  there 
came  into  being  sacred  places  of  lingas  and  gold. 

21.  Then  knowing  her  as  illusory,  Hara  (Siva)  assumed  his 
original  form.  Then  Hari  (Visnu)  told  Siva,  “O  Rudra  (Siva) 
My  illusory  power  has  been  conquered  by  you. 


3.23 — 4.1-4 


7 


22-23.  There  is  no  other  male  on  the  earth  besides  you, 
who  is  capable  of  conquering  this  illusory  power  of  mine.”  Then 
the  demons,  who  had  not  got  the  ambrosia  were  defeated  by  the 
celestials  in  battle.  The  celestials  got  back  to  their  celestial  home. 
One  who  reads  this  account  goes  to  the  celestial  region. 


CHAPTER  FOUR 
Manifestations  of  Visnu  as  the  Boar 

1 .  I  describe  (unto  thee)  the  manifestation  as  a  Boar  (which) 
removes  (one’s)  sins.Hiranyaksa1  was  a  demon  chief.  He  con¬ 
quered  the  celestials  and  got  established  in  the  heavens. 

2.  Visnu  being  praised  by  the  celestials  (who  had)  gone 
(to  him),  (he)  assumed  the  form  as  Yajnavaraha  (boar).  Hav¬ 
ing  killed  that  demon  along  with  the  (other)  demons  (he  made 
the  earth)  devoid  of  thorns  (difficulties). 

3-4.  (That)  Hari,  the  protector  of  righteousness  and  the 
celestials  (then)  disappeared.  Then  (the  demon)  Hiranyaka¬ 
sipu,2  brother  of  Hiranyaksa  after  conquering  the  celestials  (was 
grabbing  a  share  of  the  offerings)  exercised  control  over  all  the 
celestials.  (Visnu)  assumed  the  form  of  Narasimha  (human 
body  with  lion’s  face)  (and)  killed  him  along  with  the  (other) 
demons. 

1.  Hirariyaksa,  a  demon,  was  one  of  the  sons  of  Kasyapa  and  Diti.  He 
waxed  eloquent  and  entered  the  underworld  in  search  of  Visnu.  Visnu 
assumed  the  form  of  a  boar  and  after  severe  combat  slew  the  demon.  See  P- 
Index  III.  C.  774. 

2.  Hiranyakasipu,  a  demon,  was  the  other  son  of  Kasyapa  and  Diti. 
He  had  got  a  boon  that  he  could  not  be  killed  cither  by  a  man  or  by  a  beast 
or  during  the  day  or  the  night  or  inside  or  outside  the  house.  He  conquered 
the  celestials.  His  son  Prahlada  was  a  devotee  of  Visnu.  All  the  attempts  of 
Hiranyakasipu  to  wean  Prahlada  from  his  devotion  to  Visriu  were  of  no  -  avail. 
Hiranyakasipu  subjected  Prahlada  to  many  ordeals.  Prahlada  emerged  uns¬ 
cathed.  The  desperate  Hirariyakas'ipu  challenged  Prahlada  whether  that 
Visnu  would  be  present  everywhere  and  Prahlada  could  show  him  in  the  pillar 
in  front  of  them  and  kicked  the  pillar.  Visnu  manifested  in  the  form  of  a  man 
with  lion’s  face  from  that  pillar  and  killed  Hiranyakasipu  placing  him  on  his. 
lap  and  at  the  thrcsh-hold  during  the  twilight.  Sec  P.  Index  III.  pp.  769-70. 


Agni  Purdna 


6 


5-7.  (He)  re-established  the  celestials  in  their  original  places 
and  was  praised  by  the  celestials.  Once  in  the  battle  between  the 
celestials  and  the  demons,  the  celestials  were  defeated  by  (demon) 
Bali1  and  other  demons  (and)  were  driven  away  from  the  heaven 
(and)  sought  refuge  in  Hari  (Visnu).  Having  given  refuge  to 
the  devas  he  being  praised  by  Aditi  (wife  of  the  latter)  (and 
mother  of  the  celestials)  and  Kasyapa  (a  sage)  became  a  Dwarf 
(as  a  son)  of  Aditi  (and)  went  to  the  sacrifice  (performed  by 
Bali)  (and)  recited  the  Vedas  at  the  royal  gates  of  Bali  the  sacri- 
ficer. 

8-9.  Having  heard  him  reciting  the  Vedas ,  the  bestower  of 
the  wanted  things  (Bali)  said  to  the  Dwarf  in  spite  of  being 
obstructed  by  Sukra  (the  preceptor  of  the  demons),  “Whatever 
(you)  desire  I  shall  give  (you)”.  The  Dwarf  asked  Bali, 
“Get  (me)  three  feet  of  space  for  the  sake  of  the  preceptor.  (Bali) 
said  to  him,  “I  shall  give  (you)”. 

10-11.  When  the  water  was  poured  on  the  hand  the  Dwarf 
became  a  Giant  (and)  measured  the  worlds  otBhiih,  Bhuvah  and 
Svar  with  the  three  strides  and  (sent)  Bali  to  Sutala  (a  nether 
-world)  and  (then)  Hari  (Visnu)gave  the  worlds  to  Sakra  (Indra). 
Sakra  (Indra)  praised  Hari  (Visnu)  along  with  the  celestials 
(and)  remained  happy  as  the  ruler  of  the  world. 

12-13.  “I  shall  describe  (unto  you)  the  manifestation  as 
Parasurama.”  “Hear,  O  twice-born”  !  Considering  the  ksatriyas 
(ruling  clan)  as  haughty,  Hari  (Visnu),  the  protector  of  the  cele¬ 
stials  and  the  brahmins  manifested  as  Bliargava,  son  of  Jamad- 
agni  and  Renuka  and  proficient  in  arms  for  removing  the  pre¬ 
ssure  on  the  earth  and  for  the  sake  of  peace.  [Manifestation  of 
Visnu  as  Parasurama] 

14.  Kartavlrya  became  a  king  by  the  grace  of  Dattatreya 
(considered  as  a  manifestation  of  the  Trinity  as  son  of  Atri  and 
Anasuya).  He  had  thousand  arms.  He  was  the  lord  of  the 
entire  world.  (Once)  he  went  for  hunting. 

1.  Bali  was  a  powerful  demon.  He  was  a  son  of  Virocana  and  grandson 
of  Prahlada.  Being  oppressed  by  him,  the  celestials  sought  refuge  in  Visi^u. 
In  deference  to  their  wishes,  Visnu  assumed  the  form  of  a  dwarf  and 
approached  Bali  and  requested  him  to  give  as  much  earth  as  he  could  cover  in 
three  steps.  Bali  readily  conceded  to  his  request.  The  dwarf  soon  grew  into  a 
mighty  form,  covered  the  earth  and  heaven  in  two  strides  and  as  the  third 
stride  placed  his  foot  on  the  head  of  Bali  and  subdued  him.  Sec  Ram.  I. 
xxvii.;  P.  Index  II.  pp.  469-70 


4.20-5.1-3 


9 


15.  (He)  being  tired,  was  invited  by  the  sage  Jamadagni. 
"The  king  was  fed  along  with  his  retinue  (by  the  sage)  by  the  grace 
•of  the  Kamadhenu  (divine  cow). 

16-20.  (The  king)  sought  for  the  Kamadhenu .  When  he 
(the  sage)  did  not  give  (the  cow)  the  king  took  it  away.  Then 
.Rama  (Parasurama)- cut  off  (the  king’s)  head  with  his  axe  in 
the  battle.  The  cow  returned  to  the  hermitage.  Jamadagni  was 
killed  by  the  sons  of  Kartavlrya  on  account  of  revenge,  when 
(Parasu)  Rama  had  gone  to  the  forest.  Seeing  his  father  slain 
(and)  getting  angry  on  account  of  the  loss  of  his  father  the  great 
.man  made  the  earth  devoid  of  the  warrior  clan  for  2 1  generations. 
Making  out  five  pits  (kunda)  at  Kuruksetra  and  satisfying  his 
manes,  having  given  the  earth  to  Kasyapa,  (he)  stationed  him¬ 
self  at  the  Mahendra  mountains.  (One)  who  hears  (the  story 
.of)  the  manifestations  as  a  Fish,  a  Boar,  a  Lion  and  Rama  (Para- 
iurama)  goes  to  the'  celestial  regions. 


CHAPTER  FIVE 
Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Rama  : 

.Agni  said  : 

1.  I  shall  describe  (unto  you)  the  (story  of)  Ramayana, 
.as  it  (was)  once  described  byNarada  to  Valiniki  (and  which) 
if  read  in  that  manner  yields  enjoyment  and  release  (from  mun¬ 
dane  existence). 

Marada  said  : 

2.  Brahma  (was  born)  from  the  lotus  in  the  navel  of  Visnu. 
(Sage)  Marici  (was)  the  son  of  Brahma.  (Sage)  Kasayapa 
(was)  then  (born)  from  Marici.  The  Sun  (god)  (and) 
Vaivasvata  Manu  (were  born  successively  in  the  line). 

3.  Then  from  him  (Vaivasvata  Manu),  Iksvaku  (was 
born).  Kakutstha  (was  born)  in  his  line.  Raghu  (was  the 
son)  ofKakutstha.  Aja  (was  born)  to  him.  Then  Dasaratha 
»(was  born). 


10 


Agni  Purdna 


4-7.  Hari  (Visnu)  manifested  himself  in  the  four  (forms) 
for  the  sake  of  the  annihilation  of  Ravana  and  others.  Rama 
was  born  from  Dasaratha  to  Kausalya,  Bharata  to  Kaikeyl  and 
Laksmana  and  Satrughna  to  Sumitra  simultaneously  from  parta¬ 
king  of  the  sweet  gruel  obtained  from  (the  performance)  of  the 
sacrifice  of  the  father.  The  king  being  requested  by  (the  sage) 
Visvamitra  for  the  annihilation  of  those  who  impede  (the 
performance)  of  the  sacrifices  sent  Rama  and  Laksmana 
along  with  the  sage.  Rama  who  had  gone  (with  the  sage)  (and) 
was  taught  in  the  use  of  the  weapons  ( astra 1  and  iastra) 2  (became) 
the  killer  of  (the  demoness)  Tataka.3 

8.  (Rama)  made  (demon)  Marica4  stupefied  by  the  missile 
(known  as)  Manava  and  led  him  far  away.  The  valiant  killed 
also  (the  demon)  Subahu,  the  destroyer  of  sacrifices  along  with 
his  army. 

9.  Residing  at  the  (place)  Siddhasrama5  along  with  (the 
sages)  Visvamitra  and  others,  (Rama)  went  along  with  his 
brother  to  see  the  sacrifice  (test  for  prowess)  of  Maithila  (King 
Janaka). 

10-12.  At  the  instance  of  (the  sage)  Satananda6  and  on  acco¬ 
unt  of  the  glory  of  Visvamitra,  that  sage  being  shown  due  res¬ 
pects  by  the  king  at  the  sacrifice  and  Rama  being  informed, 
sportively  pulled  the  bow  and  broke  it.  (King)  Janaka  gave 
Slta,  the  girl  not  born  of  the  womb,  and  associated  with  a  prize 
bid,  to  Rama.  And  when  the  parents  had  come,  Rama  also 

1  -2.  The  word  astra  denotes  a  wcapdn  discharged  along  with  the  repetition, 

of  the  mystic  syllables,  whereas  ‘ iastra *  is  any  ordinary  missile. 

3.  Tataka  was  a  female  fiend,  daughter  of  Sukctu.  She  was  the  wife  of 
Sunda  and  mother  of  Marica.  She  had  been  changed  into  a  fiend  by  the  sage 
Agastya  when  she  had  disturbed  his  austerities. 

Although  Rama  was  at  first  reluctant  to  raise  his  bow  against  a  woman, 
she  was  later  killed  by  him,  at  the  instance  of  Visvamitra,  when  she  disturbed 
the  sacrificial  performances  of  Visvamitra.  See  Ram.  I.xxv-xxvi. 

4.  Marica  was  a  demon,  son  of  Sunda  and  Tataka.  He  was  the  uncle  of' 
Ravana.  Ram.  I.xxiv.  26-27 

5.  Siddhasrama  was  the  place  where  Visnu  manifested  as  the  Dwarf  to 
subdue  the  demon  Bali,  and  also  where  the  aspirants  realized  their  ambitions. 
See  Ram.  I.  xxix. 

6.  Satananda  was  the  son  of  sage  Gautama  and  Ahalya  and  was  the  family 
priest  of  Janaka.  See  Ram.  I.li.l. 


5.13-6.1-8 


11 


married  that  Jan  aki  (Slta).  In  the  same  way  Laksmana  (also 
married)  Urmila. 

13-14.  Then  Satrughna  and  Bharata  married  Srutakirti 
and  Mandavl,  the  two  daughters  of  the  brother  of  Janaka. 
Rama  after  conquering  Jamadagni  (Parasurama,  son  of  Jama- 
dagni)  went  to  Ayodhya  with  (sage)  Vasistha  and  others  and 
Bharata  with  Satrughna  went  towards  (the  country  of)  Yudha- 
jit  (uncle  of  Bharata). 


CHAPTER  SIX 

Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Rama  (< continued )  : 

Narada  said  : 

1-2.  After  Bharata  had  gone,  Rama  saluted  the  parents  and 
others.  King  Dasaratha  said  to  Rama,  “Raghava  (Rama)  ! 
listen  to  me,  you  have  been  anointed  mentally  by  the  people  as 
ruler  on  account  of  (your)  qualities.  I  shall  make  you  the  heir- 
apparent  (next)  morning.” 

3-4.  “In  the  night  you  observe  (the  necessary)  rites  (vows) 
along  with  Slta.”  And  the  eight  ministers1  of  the  king — Srsti, 
Jayanta,  Vijaya,  Siddhartha,  Rastravardhana,  Asoka,  Dharma- 
pala  and  Sumantra  and  also  Vasistha  spoke. 

5.  After  hearing  the  words  of  the  father  and  others,  Raghava 
said  that  he  will  do  accordingly.  He  worshipped  the  gods  and 
informed  the  news  to  Kausalya. 

6.  The  king  told  Vasistha  and  others  to  gather  the  materials 
required  for  the  coronation  of  Rama  and  went  to  Kaikeyi. 

7.  After  seeing  the  decoration  of  the  city  of  Ayodhya  and 
knowing  that  the  coronation  of  Rama  is  to  take  place,  Manthara 
informed  her  friend  Kaikeyi  (accordingly). 

8.  Having  been  pulled  by  Rama  by  the  foot  by  mistake> 
on  account  of  that  enmity  she  desired  of  Rama’s  sojourn  to  the 
forest. 

1 .  Some  of  the  names  of  the  ministers  arc  little  different  from  those  found 
in  the  Ramayaoa.  Instead  of  the  name  Drsfi,  Arthasfidhaka  and  Mantrapala 
in  the  Rdmdya^a  we  have  Srsp,  Rastravardhana  and  Dharmapala  here.  See 
Raw.  I.  vii.3. 


.42 


Agni  Purana 


9.  “O  !  Kaikeyl  !  you  get  up  (and  see)  the  anointment  of 
Rama.  There  is  no  doubt  (that  it  is)  death  (itself)  for  your  son, 
to  me  and  to  you”  (said  Manthara). 

10-11.  She  (Kaikeyl)  heard  the  words  of  the  kubjd  (hunch¬ 
backed)  (Manthara)  and  gave  her  an  ornament.  She  said 
"‘Just  as  Rama  is  (my  son)  so  also  Bharata  is  my  son.  I  do  not 
find  any  plan,  by  which  Bharata  may  get  the  kingdom.”  The 
-angry  Manthara  after  rejecting  the  ornament  (given  by  Kaikeyi) 
said  to  Kaikeyl  : 

12.  “O  !  stupid  girl  you  protect  Bharata,  yourself  and  me 
from  Raghava.  Raghava  will  be  the  king  in  future  and  then 
his  son.” 

13-15.  O  Kaikeyi,  “The  royal  lineage  will  be  taken  away 
from  Bharata.  Once  when  the  people  were  persecuted  by  Sam- 
bara1  at  the  time  of  the  battle  between  the  gods  and  demons,  when 
the  king  went  there  for  (rendering  help),  you  protected  him  by 
your  art  and  skill.  Then  the  king  gave  you  two  boons.  (You) 
.ask  for  them  now  from  the  king.  (The  boons  are)  the  stay  of 
Rama  in  the  forest  for  fourteen  years  and  the  conferment  of  the 
heir-apparentship  on  Bharata.  These  (the  king)  will  give.” 

16.  She  (Kaikeyi)  being  encouraged  by  the  deformed  lady 
(Manthara),  who  saw  meaning  in  the  worthless  thing,  said  (to 
Tier),  “  (Tell)  me  a  good  plan  which  would  make  it  work.” 

17-18.  (Kaikeyi)  having  entered  the  anger  apartment 
(remained)  in  a  swoon  fallen  to  the  ground.  Then  the  king  Dasa- 
ratha  having  honoured  the  twice-borns  (came  there  and)  saw 
the  angry  Kaikeyi  (and)  said,  “How  (is)  she  such  ?  Is  she  sick 
or  agitated  by  fear,”  (and  said)  “I  shall  do  as  you  wish”. 

19.  “Without  which  Rama,  I  cannot  live  (even)  a  moment, 

I  swear  by  him  that  I  will  do  as  you  wish  O  beautiful  woman  !” 

20-22.  “Speak  the  truth”,  said  she  to  the  king  (and  added), 
“The  two  boons  (you)  granted  me  formerly,  you  give  me  (now) 
(as  you  swear)  by  truth,  O  King  !  Let  Rama  live  in  the  forest 
for  fourteen  years  being  self-controlled  (and)  with  these  prepa¬ 
rations  let  Bharata  be  installed  here  this  day  itself  (and)  if  you 

1 .  Sambara  was  a  demon  chief,  son  of  Kasyapa  and  Danu.  At  the  time 
of  the  battle  between  the  celestials  and  the  demons  Sambara  was  harassing  the 
people.  Indr  a  sought  help  from  Dasaratha,  Dasaratha  who  lost  his  conscious¬ 
ness  in  the  battle  was  safely  charioted  back  by  Kaikeyi.  See  JR  dm.  I.ix.U  ff. 


6.23-34 


do  not  grant  (these  boons)  O  King  !  I  shall  die  (after)  drink¬ 
ing  poison.”  Having  heard  these  (words)  the  (king)  fell  into  a 
swoon  on  the  earth  as  if  struck  by  a  mace. 

23-25.  After  a  moment  he  regained  his  consciousness  and 
said,  “What  (harm)  was  done  to  you  by  Rama  or  by  me,  O 
lady,  determined  to  do  sins  !  What  you  tell  me  in  this  manner 
is  unpleasant  to  all  the  people.  By  merely  doing  (something) 
pleasing  to  you,  I  will  be  censured.  What  a  kind  of  wife  (you 
are)  like  the  night  of  destruction1 2  at  the  end  of  the  world. 
Bharata  is  not  such  a  kind  of  son.  (You)  rule  the  kingdom  as 
a  widower  after  I  have  died  and  the  son  has  gone.” 

26-29.  Being  bound  by  the  noose  of  truth,  (he)  called  Rama 
and  said  (to  him),  "O  !  Rama,  I  have  been  cheated  by  Kai¬ 
keyi;  restraining  me  (you)  rule  the  kingdom.  You  have  to  live 
in  the  forest  and  Bharata,  (the  son  of)  Kaikeyi  (is  to  be)  the 
king.”  Having  saluted  his  father  and  Kaikeyi,  after  doing,  a  cir- 
cumambulation,  and  bowing  down  to  Kausalya  and  having 
consoled  her  and  with  Laksmana,  with  (his)  wife  Slta  and  with 
Sumantra  in  the  chariot  and  having  made  the  gifts  for  the 
brahmins,  poor  and  destitutes,  he  left  the  city  with  the 
mothers,  brahmins  and  others  stricken  with  grief. 

30.  Having  spent  the  night  on  the  banks  ofthe  (river) 
Tamasa  (he  went  away)  leaving  the  people.  Not  finding  him  in 
the  morning  they  all  returned  to  Ayodhya  again. 

31.  The  lamenting  king  also  went  to  the  apartments  of 
Kausalya  extremely  grief-stricken.  Being  separated  from  the 
king  all  the  citizens  and  women  wept. 

32.  Rama,  being  seated  in  the  chariot  and  wearing  the  bark- 
garments  went  to  Sfngabcrapura.  Being  entertained  by  Guha** 
there,  he  resorted  to  the  foot  of  the  IndgudI  (tree). 

33-34.  And  during  the  nights  Laksmana  and  Guha  kept 
awake.  Leaving  Sumantra  together  with  the  chariot  in  the  morn¬ 
ing,  Rama,  Laksmana  and  Slta  crossed  the  river  Jahnavl  (Ganges) 
by  boat  and  reached  Prayaga.  (They)  paid  their  obeisance  to 
(the  sage)  Bharadvaja  (and  then)  reached  the  Citrakuta  moun¬ 
tain. 

1.  Kalaratri,  tluTnight  of  destruction  at  the  end  of  the  world  is  identified 
with  the  Goddess  Durga. 

2.  Guha,  a  hunter  chief  was  reigning  at  Srngaberapura.  He  was  an  ad¬ 
mirer  of  Rama.  Sec  Rdm.  II.1.33. 


14 


Agni  Parana 


35.  Then  (they)  having  performed  the  Vaslupuja  (propitia¬ 
tory  rites  at  the  house  site),  stayed  on  the  banks  of  the  Manda- 
kinl  (Ganges).  And  (then)  Raghava  showed  the  Citrakuta 
(mountain)  to  Sita. 

36.  With  an  arrow  (Rama)  plucked  one  of  the  eyes  of  the 
crow  which  was  tearing  her  (Sita)  with  (its)  nails.  Then  the 
crow  sought  refuge  in  the  celestials. 

37-40.  On  the  sixth  day  after  Rama  had  gone  to  the  forest, 
the  king  told  Kausalya  in  the  night  the  past  story  of  how  in  (his) 
youth  he  had  killed  unknowingly  with  (his)  Sabdabheda 1  (wea¬ 
pon)  the  ascetic  youth  Yajnadatta  as  (he  was  filling)  the  pot 
raising  asound.  Lamenting  his  father  cursed  (Dasaratha). 
His  mother  felt  grief-stricken  and  wept  again  and  again  and 
the  (two)  said,  “We  will  die  without  the  son.  You  will  also  die 
of  grief.  O  Kausalya  !  without  the  son  and  remembering 
(the  past)  my  death  (will  come  off  now)  on  account  of  grief.” 
After  narrating  this  story  and  uttering  (the  words)  “Alas  ! 
Rama  !”,  the  king  passed  away. 

41-42.  Thinking  that  the  king  was  sleeping,  Kausalya  also 
slept  on  account  of  pangs  of  grief.  Early  in  the  morning  the  sin¬ 
gers  and  bards  such  as  the  sutas ,  magadhas,  the  awakeners  attempt 
ed  to  wake  him  up.  He  did  not  wake  up  and  was  dead.  Know- 
ing  him  as  dead,  Kausalya  said,  “O  I  have  been  ruined.” 

43.  The  men  and  women  then  wept.  Then  Bharata  along 
with  Satrughna  was  hurriedly  brought  to  the  city  from  the 
royal  palace  by  Vasistha  and  others. 

44.  Having  seen  the  grief-stricken  Kaikey!  he  reproached 
(her)  out  of  grief.  “  (You)  have  made  censure  fall  on  the  head” 
and  praised  Kausalya. 

45-46.  Having  done  the  funeral  rites  of  his  father  (whose 

body  was  kept  preserved)  in  oil  in  oval  vessel  on  the  banks  of  the 
river  Sarayu,  when  (he)  was  asked  by  Vasistha  and  others  to 
rule  the  kingdom,  he  said,  “I  go  now  to  bring  back  Rama. 
Rama  is  the  king  stronger  than  myself”.  (He  went)  to  Srngavera 
and  to  Prayaga  where  he  was  entertained  by  Bharadvaja° 

47-48.  Having  saluted  Bharadvaja,  (Bharata)  came  to 


1  Sabdabheda  was  a  missile  capable  of  reaching  a  mark  merely  by  the 

sound  associated  with  the  mark,  the  object  itself  not  being  perceived. 


6.49-7.1-6 


15 


Rama  and  Laksmana  (and  said),  “O  Rama  !  Our  father 
has  reached  the  heaven.  You  become  the  king  of  Ayodhya.  I 
will  go  to  the  forest  adhering  to  your  command.”  Having  heard 
this,  Rama  (after)  giving  him  water  asked  him  to  go  (back) 
taking  the  sandals. 

49.  (Bharata  said),  “I  will  not  go  to  the  city.  I  swear,  I 
will  be  remaining  with  matted  locks.”  On  being  urged  by  Rama, 
Bharata  returned  to  Nandigrama  and  stationed  there  with  his 
army,  leaving  the  sandal  at  Ayodhya  and  worshipping  it  ruled 
over  the  kingdom. 


CHAPTER  SEVEN 
Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Rama  ( continued )  : 


Narada  said  : 


1-2.  Rama  bowed  to  Vasistha,  the  mothers,  (sage)  Atri 
and  his  wife  Anasuya,  (sages)  Sarabhanga1  and  Sullksna,  the 
brother  of  Agastya  and  Agastya  and  reached  the  Dandaka  forest 
having  obtained  the  bow  and  sword  by  the  grace  of  (Agastya). 

3.  He  was  staying  at  Pancavatl  in  the  Janasthana  on  the 
banks  of  the  (river)  Godavari.  The  awful  (demoness)  Surpa- 
nakha2  came  there  to  devour  them  all. 

4-5.  Seeing  the  beautiful  form  of  Rama,  that  lustful  (wo¬ 
man)  said  to  him,  “Who  are  you?  Whence  have  you  come? 
You  become  my  husband  being  entreated  by  me.  I  shall  cat 
these  two.”  So  saying  to  him  she  approached  them.  On  the 
words  of  Rama,  Laksmana  cut  off  her  nose  and  ears. 

6-7.  She  returned  to  her  brother  Khara  with  blood  oozing 
out  (and)  said,  “I  shall  die  without  a  nose.  I  would  live,  O 

Khara!  only  when  you  would  make  me  drink  the  hot  blood  of 

Sita,  the  wife  of  Rama  and  Laksmana,  his  brother. 

8.  Khara  said  to  her  that  he  will  do  so  and  went  there  with 


- ; - was  a  saEe  who  entered  the  fire  in  the  presence  of  Rama 

}■  «  a  glowing  body  by  the  merits  of  his  austerities. 

the  ruler  of  janasthana. 


16  Agni  Pur  ana 

Dusana,  Trisiras  and  14000  demons  in  order  to  fight  (with 
Rama). 

9-10.  Rama  also  fought  well  and  killed  the  demons  with  his. 
arrows  and  led  the  army  consisting  of  the  elephants,  cavalry,, 
chariots  and  infantry  together  with  the  fighting  Trisiras,  Khara. 
and  Dusana1  to  death.  Surpanakha  went  to  Lanka  and  fell  down 
on  the  earth  in  front  of  Ravana. 

11-13.  (And)  said  to  Ravana  angrily,  “You  are  neither  a 
king,  nor  a  protector.  You  abduct  Slta,  the  wife  of  Rama,  the 
killer  of  Khara  and  others.  I  will  live  only  after  drinking  the  blood 
of  Rama  and  Laksmana  and  not  by  anything  else.”  Having 
heard  her  Ravana  also  said  yes  and  said  to  Marica,  “You  move 
in  front  of  Sita  in  the  form  of  a  golden  deer  drawing  Rama  and 
Laksmana  away.  I  will  carry  her  away.  Otherwise  you  will 
be  dead.” 

14-15.  Marlca2  said  to  Ravana,  “Rama  with  his  bow  is 
verily  the  god  of  death  himself.”  “Either  I  have  to  die  at  the 
hands  of  Ravana  or  at  the  hands  of  Raghava  (Rama).  If  I  have 
to  die,  it  is  better  (to  die  at  the  hands  of)  Rama  than  Ravana. 

Having  thought  so  (Marlca)  became  a  deer  and  roamed  in  front 
of  Slta  again  and  again. 

16.  Being  entreated  by  Sita,  Rama  (ran  after  that  deer  and) 
then  killed  that  with  an  arrow.  As  it  was  dying,  the  deer  said 
“O  Slta  and  O  Laksmana.”3 

17-20.  Then  Saumitri  (Laksmana)  being  told  inconsistent 
(words)  by  Slta  went  (in  search)  of  Rama.  Ravana  also  abduct¬ 
ed  Sita,  having  wounded  the  vulture  Jatayu,4  and  being  wounded 
by  Jatayu,  carrying  Sita  on  the  lap  reached  Lanka,  kept  (her) 
guarded  in  the  Atoka  (grove)  and  said  (to  her),  “You  become 
my  wife.  You  will  be  kept  as  the  foremost.”  Having  killed  Ma-  * 

rica,  Rama  saw  Laksmana  and  said  (to  him),  “O  Saumitri  ! 
this  is  a  phantom  deer.  By  the  time  you  had  come  here,  Sita 


1.  Dusaria  and  Trisiras  were  the  commanders  of  Khara. 

2.  Marica  remembered  his  past  miserable  experience  at  the  sacrificial 
site  of  Visvamitra.  Sec  V.  8  above. 

3.  Marica  imitated  the  voice  of  Rama  while  crying  aloud. 

4.  Jatayu,  the  vulture  was  an  intimate  friend  of  king  DaSaratha.  He 
obstructed  the  path  of  Ravana  on  hearing  the  wails  of  Sita,  and  was  fatally 
wounded  and  died  after  being  seen  by  Rama  and  Laksmana. 


7.21-8.1-4 


17 


would  have  been  taken  away  certainly.”  Then  he  did  not  find 
her  as  he  returned  (to  that  place). 

21.  He  lamented  with  grief  (and  said),  “Where  have  you 

(Slta)  gone  discarding  me  ?”  Being  comforted  by  Laksmana, 
Rama  began  to  search  for  JanakI  (Slta). 

22.  Having  seen  him,  Jatayu  told  that  Ravana  had  carried 
her  away.  He  (Jatayu)  then  died.  (Rama)  performed  his 
obsequies.  He  then  killed  (the  demon)  Kabandha.1  Getting 
free  from  a  curse,  he  (Kabandha)  said  to  Rama,  “You  go  to 
Sugriva.” 


CHAPTER  EIGHT 
Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Rama  {continued) 

Narada  said  : 

1 .  Having  gone  to  the  lake  of  Pampa,  Rama  stayed  there 
(that)  night  thinking  (of  what  to  do).  Then  he  was  (met  and) 
taken  to  Sugriva  by  Hanumat.  Rama  made  friendship  (with 
Sugriva). 

2.  After  having  pierced  the  seven  Tala  trees  with  a  single 
arrow  and  (even  as  others)  were  seeing,  threw  away  the  body 
of  Dundubhi2  by  his  foot  to  a  distance  of  ten yojanas. 

3-4.  Having  killed  Valin,3  his  (Sugrlva’s)  enemy,  who  had 
been  the  cause  of  enmity,  he  bestowed  on  him  the  monkey-king¬ 
dom  of  Kiskindha  (as  well  as)  Ruraa  and  Tara  on  the  Rsya- 


1 .  Kabandha  was  a  heavenly  being  at  first  and  was  later  cursed  by  the 
sage  Sdtulasiras  and  Indra  to  become  an  ugly-shaped  demon  as  he  tormented 
the  other  ascetics  and  was  told  that .  he  would  regain  his  original  form 
after  he  met  Rama  and  died  at  his  hands.  See  Ram,  III.  lxxi.  1-16. 

2.  Dundubhi  was  a  powerful  demon  slain  by  Valin,  the  brother  of  Sugriva. 
When  Sugriva  showed  to  Rfima  the  skeleton  of  this  demon  to  show  how 
powerful  Valin  was,  Rama  gently  kicked  it  and  threw  it  many  miles  away. 
Sec  Ram.  IV.  xi.  24  ff. 

3.  When  Mayavin,  the  eldest  son  of  Dundubhi,  a  demon,  challenged 
Valin,  Valin  chased  him.  Mayavin  entered  a  cave  and  Valin  also  followed 
suit.  *  Sugriva,  who  had  gone  with  his  brother  and  was  asked  by  his  brother  to 


I 


j  g  Agni  Purana 

muka  (mountains).  That  ruler  of  Kiskindha  (Sugriva)  told 
(Rama),  “I  will  do  in  such  a  way,  O  Rama  1  by  which 
you  will  be  getting  back  Sita”. 

5-7.  Having  heard  that,  he  (Rama)  spent  the  four  months 
on  the  Malyavat  (mountain).  As  Sugriva  had  not  come  to 
Kiskindha  to  see  (Rama),  Laksmana  (met  him  and)  spoke 
to  him  the  words  of  Rama,  “  (You)  go  to  Raghava.  The  way  in 
which  Valin  was  killed  is  not  yet  closed.  O  Sugriva  !  You 
stand  by  at  this  juncture.  Do  not  take  to  the  course  of  Valin.” 
Sugriva  said,  “I  did  not  realize  the  elapse  of  time  on  account  of 
my  preoccupation.” 

8-9.  Saying  so,  he  (Laksmana)  went  away.  The  lord  of 
the  monkeys  (Sugriva)  (approached)  Rama,  bowed  and  said, 
“All  the  monkeys  have  been  brought  in  order  to  search  for  Sita. 
As  desired  by  you,  I  shall  send  them.  Let  them  search  for  Janaki 
in  the  (direction  of)  east  etc.  Let  them  return  in  a  month.  (If 
they  come)  after  a  month  I  will  kill  them.” 

10.  So  saying  (he  sent  monkeys  in  all  directions). 
The  monkeys  sent  towards  the  eastern,  western  and  northern 
routes  came  (back)  to  Rama  and  Sugriva  not  finding  Janaki. 

1 1 .  Having  taken  the  signet  ring  of  Rama,  Hanumat  to¬ 
gether  with  other  monkeys  searched  in  the  south  in  the  caves 
of  Suprabha  (mountain). 

12-16.  And  being  engaged  for  more  than  a  month  and  not 
being  able  to  find  Janaki,  they  said,  “We  will  die  in  vain.  Jatayu 
is  fortunate.  For  the  sake  of  Sita,  he  gave  his  life  being  wounded 
by  Ravana  in  the  battle.”  Having  heard  this,  (the  eagle)  Sam- 
pati,  abandoning  (his  intention  of)  eating  the  monkeys  (said), 
“This  brother  of  mine,  Jatayu,  was  protected  by  me  from  the  heat 
of  the  Sun  as  he  was  flying  in  the  solar  region.  Hence,  I  had  my 
wings  burnt  as  I  was  flying  in  the  clouds.  On  account  of  hearing 
the  story  of  Rama,  the  wings  have  grown  again.  I  see  Janaki 


guard  at  the  entrance  to  the  cave,  took  Iiis  brother  to  have  been  slain  when  he 
had  not  returned  even  after  a  long  time.  Sugriva  closed  the  entrance  to  the 
cave  with  stones,  returned  to  Kiskindha  and  assumed  charge.  As  Valin  return¬ 
ed,  the  entreaties  of  Sugriva  were  of  no  avail  .  Sugriva  retreated  to  Rsya- 
muka  mountains  to  escape  the  wrath  of  Valin  as  Valin  dreaded  to  enter  that 
region  on  account  of  a  curse.  Tara,  the  wife  of  Sugriva,  was  also  taken  away 
by  Valin,  but  was  restored  to  her  husband  after  Valin  was  slain  by  Rama.  See 
Ram .  IV.  ix.x 


9.1-12 


19 


gone  to  Atoka  grove  in  Lanka  in  the  Trikutaka  (mountain)  in 
(the  middle  of)  the  salt  ocean  of  an  extent  of  hundred  yojanas. 
Knowing  this  let  the  monkeys  tell  Rama  and  Sugiiva.” 


CHAPTER  NINE 
The  Story  of  Rama  (< continued ) : 

JV drada  said  : 

1 .  Having  heard  the  words  of  Sampati,  Hanumat,  Angada, 
(son  of  Valin)  and  others  having  seen  the  ocean  said,  “Who 
may  cross  the  ocean  and  make  us  live  ?” 

2.  For  the  survival  of  monkeys  and  accomplishing  the 
task  of  Rama,  that  Maruti  (Hanumat)  crossed  the  ocean 
extending  to  hundred  yojanas, 

3-5.  Having  seen  the  rise  of  Mainaka  (mountain),  having 
killed  (the  demon)  Simhika  and  having  seen  Lanka  and  search¬ 
ing  the  houses  of  the  demons  and  those  of  the  women  and  the 
houses  of  the  tenheaded  (Ravana),  Kumbha,  Kumbhakarna, 
Vibhisana,  Indrajit,  and  other  demons,  he  did  not  find  (Sita) 
(also)  in  the  place  for  drinking  wine.  Becoming  anxious  and 
having  gone  to  the  Atoka  grove  he  found  Slta  at  the  foot  of  the 
Simsapa  tree. 

6.  Remaining  on  the  Simsapa  tree  he  saw  Slta  being 
guarded  by  the  demonesses,  (and)  Ravana  asking  her  to  become 
his  wife  and  Slta  replying  him  that  she  could  not. 

7-9.  The  monkey  (also  saw)  the  demonesses  asking  Slta  to 
become  the  wife  of  Ravana,  After  Ravana  had  gone  he  said, 
“Dasaratha  was  a  king.  His  sons  Rama  and  Laksmana,  the  two 
excellent  brothers  came  to  the  forest.  You,  JanakI,  the  wife  of 
Rama  were  forcibly  taken  away  by  Ravana.  Rama  became  a 
friend  of  Sugrlva,  sent  me  to  search  for  you,  (and) 
(you)  take  this  signet  ring  of  identification  given  by  Rama. 

10-12.  Sita  received  the  ring.  Having  seen  Maruti  seated 
on  the  tree  and  again  in  front  of  her,  (she)  asked  him,  If  (he) 
lives,  how  Rama  does-not  take  me  away  ?”  The  monkey  said  to 
her  who  was  doubtful,  “O  Sita  !  Rama  does  not  know.  Know- 


20 


Agni  Parana 


ing  now  he  will  take  you  away  after  killing  Ravana  along  with 
his  army.  O  Devi  (queen)  !  Do  not  worry.  You  get  me  an 
identity.”  Sita  gave  the  crest  jewel  to  the  monkey. 

13.  (And)  said,  “You  do  in  such  a  way  that  Raina  would 
take  me  away  quickly.  O  dispcller  of  grief  !  You  retell  him 
the  story  of  the  removal  of  the  eye  of  the  crow.” 

14-15.  Getting  the  jewel  and  (listening  to)  the  story,  Hanu- 
mat  said,  “The  Lord  will  be  talcing  you  away.  Otherwise,  if 
you  feel  some  hurry,  O  auspicious  one  !’  You  get  on  to  my 
back.  I  shall  show  you  Sugriva  and  Raghava  today.”  Slta  said 
to  Hanumat,  “Let  Raghava  take  me  away.” 

16-18.  Then  Hanumat  made  a  stratagem  in  order  to 
see  Dasagriva  (Ravana). He  destroyed  the  grove,  having  killed 
the  guards  (of  the  grove)  with  his  teeth  and  nails,  and  all  the 
attendants,  the  sons  of  seven  ministers,  prince  Aksa.  Sakrajit 
(Indrajit)  (son  of  Ravana)  bound  him  with  the  Nagapasa  and 
took  him  to  the  red-eyed  Ravana. 

19.  Ravana  asked  him,  “Who  you  are”.  Maruti  (Hanu¬ 
mat)  said  to  Ravana,  “I  am  the  messenger  of  Rama.  You  return 
Slta  to  him.  Otherwise  you  will  certainly  die  along  with 
the  other  demons  in  Lanka  being  hit  by  the  arrows  of  Rama.” 

20-25.  (Hearing  these  words)  Ravana  was  intent  on  killing 
(Hanumat)  but  was  prevented  by  Vibhisana.  He  (Ravana) 
made  his  (Hanumat’s)  tail  set  fire  to.  Having  burnt  Lanka 
and  the  demons  with  the  blazing  flames  Maruti,  met  Slta. 
again  and  saluted  her.  He  crossed  the  ocean  and  informed 
Ahgada  and  others  that  he  had  seen  Slta.  Having  drunk 
honey  in  the  honey-garden  along  with  Ahgada  and  others,  over¬ 
powering  Dadhimukha  and  other  guards,  they  met  Rama 
and  told  him  that  Sita  was  seen.  Rama  also  being  happy  asked 
Maruti,  “How  Sita  was  seen  by  you  ?  And  what  (message)  did 
she  send  for  me  ?  Sprinkle  me  who  am  tormented  by  the  fire  of 
passion,  with  the  nectar  of  the  story  of  Slta.  Hanumat  said  to- 
Rama  (how)  he  had  come  after  crossing  the  ocean  and  seeing 
Sita,  burning  the  city  (of  Lanka)  and  taking  jewel  from  Sita. 
“O  Rama  !  Do  not  worry.  You  will  get  back  Sita  after  having 
killed  Ravana.” 

26-28.  Receiving  that  jewel  Rama  being  grief-stricken  wept 
and  said,  “Having  seen  this  jewel  (I  feel)  I  have  seen  my  Janaki. 
(Sita)  !  (You)  take  me  (there).  I  cannot  live  without  her.’* 


<» 


21 


*9.29 — 10.1-6 

Being  consoled  by  Sugrlva  and  others  (Rama)  reached  the  banks 
•of  ocean.  Vibhisana  who  was  forsaken  by  his  wicked  bro¬ 
ther  Ravana  for  having  advised  him  to  return  Sita  to  Rama, 

•came  there  alone  to  Rama. 

29-31.  Rama  anointed  his  friend  Vibhisana  as  the  ruler 
•of  Lanka.  He  requested  ocean  for  (making)  a  way.  When 
he  had  not  come,  then  he  split  the  (ocean)  with  an 
.arrow.  And  the  (king  of  the)  ocean  who  had  appeared  before 
Rama,  said,  “by  building  a  bridge  in  the  ocean  by  Nala  you 
reach  Lanka.  I  have  been  made  great  by  you  in  the  past. 
Rama  also  reached  the  other  banks  of  the  mighty  ocean  by  means 
•of  the  bridge  constructed  by  Nala  with  trees  and  rocks.  Along 
with  the  monkeys  he  saw  Lanka,  himself  remaining  on  the 
Suvela  mountain. 


CHAPTER  TEN 

Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Rama  (< continued )  : 

Narada  said  : 

1.  Being  asked  by  Rama,  Angada  went  to  Ravana  (and) 
said,  “Let  JanakI  be  returned  to  Raghava  immediately, 
otherwise  you  will  die.” 

2.  Ravana  was  intent  on  killing  (Angada).  The  ten-head¬ 
ed  demon  who  was  ready  to  fight  sent  words  to  Rama  that  war 
was  the  only  way  thought  of. 

3-5.  After  hearing  these  words,  Rama  came  to  Lanka  with 
the  monkeys  for  the  sake  of  battle.  The  monkeys  were  Hanumat, 
Mainda,  Dvivida,  Jambavat,  Nala,  Nila,  Tara,  Angada,  Dhumra, 
Susena,  Kesarl,  Gaya,  Panasa,  Vinata,  Rambha,  Sarabha, 
Kratiiana  the  strong,  Gavaksa,  Dadhivaktra,  Gandhamadana 
and  others  and  Sugrlva.  With  these  and  other  innumerable 
monkeys  (Rama  came  to  Lanka). 

6  There  was  a  disorderly  battle  between  the  demons  and 
monkeys.  The  demons  killed  the  monkeys  with  arrows,  spears 
and  macc”. 


22 


Agni  Purdna 


7.  The  monkeys  killed  demons  with  nails,  teeth  and 
stones.  The  force  of  the  demons  consisting  of  elephants 
cavalry,  chariots  and  infantry  was  destroyed. 

8.  Hanumat  killed  the  enemy  Dhumraksa  with  a  big  rock. 
Nila  killed  the  fighting  Akampana  and  Prahasta. 

9.  Rama  and  Laksmana  fainted  on  account  of  the  arrow  dis¬ 
charged  by  Indrajit.  Regaining  their  consciousness  after  per¬ 
ceiving  Tarksya  (the  chief  of  the  eagles),  they  killed  the  forces 
of  demons. 

10.  Rama  made  Ravana  shattered  in  the  battle  by  means 
of  arrows.  And  the  grief-stricken  Ravana  woke  up  Kumbha¬ 
karna. 

11-12.  Then  being  awakened,  Kumbhakarna,  drinking 
thousands  of  pots  of  wine,  and  having  eaten  buffaloes  and  other 
(animals),  said  to  Ravana,  “You  have  done  the  sin  of  abducting 
Slta  and  because  (you  are)  my  master,  I  shall  go  now  for  the  war 
and  kill  Rama  along  with  the  monkeys.’ 5 

13.  So  saying,  Kumbhakarna  crushed  all  the  monkeys. 
Being  seized  by  him,  Sugriva  cut  off  his  cars  and  nose. 

14.  Having  lost  ears  and  nose  he  was  eating  the  monkeys, 
then  Rama  cut  off  the  arms  of  Kumbhakarna  with  the  arrows. 

15-17.  Then  having  cut  off  the  feet,  (Rama)  made  (his) 
head  fall  on  the  earth.  And  then  the  demons  Kumbha,  Nikum- 
bha,  Makaraksa,  Mahodara  and  Mahaparsva,  the  arrogant, 
Praghasa,  Bhasakarna,  Virupaksa,  Devantaka,  Narantaka,°Tri- 
siras,  Atikaya  (were  killed)  in  battle  by  Rama,  Laksmana  and 
the  monkeys  in  the  company  of  Vibhlsana. 

18-21 .  And  other  demons,  as  they  were  fighting  were  made 
to  fall  down.  Fighting  by  conceit,  Indrajit  bound  Rama  and 
others  with  the  Ndgdstra  got  as  a  gift.  After  they  were  made  secure 
and  free  from  wounds  when  Maruti  had  brought  the  mountain. 
Hanumat  bore  him  (Laksmana)  to  that  place  where  (Indrajit) 
was  doing  horn  a  and  offering  ahuti-s  unto  the  fire  at  Nikumbila- 
Laksmana  killed  the  valiant  Indrajit  in  battle.  Being  burnt  by 
grief,  Ravana  was  intent  on  killing  Slta. 

22.  The  king  although  obstructed  by  the  women,  went  (to 
fight)  seated  on  a  chariot  and  accompanied  by  the  army  Be¬ 
ing  directed  by  Indra,  Matali*  made  Rama  seated  on  a  chariot. 


1.  Matali  is  the  charioteer  of  Indra. 


10.23-34 


23 


23.  The  fight  between  Rama  and  Ravana  was  none  the 
second.  Ravana  attacked  monkeys  and  Maruti  and  others 
attacked  Ravana. 

24-26.  Just  as  a  cloud,  Rama  showered  on  him  (Ravana) 
arrows  and  weapons.  He  cut  off  his  flagstaff  along  with  his  cha¬ 
riot,  horses  and  charioteer  as  well  as  the  bow,  arms  and  heads. 
The  cut-off  heads  grew  again  (on  his  body) .  Ravana  was  made  to 
fall  down  to  the  ground  by  Rama  by  piercing  (his)  heart 
with  the  Brahmdstra  (weapon  of  the  Pitamaha).  The  ( raksasa ) 
women  wept  along  with  other  demons.  After  consoling  them, 
Vibhlsana  cremated  him  as  directed  by  Rama. 

27-28.  Rama  made  the  pure  Slta  to  be  brought  (to  him) 
by  Hanumat.  He  accepted  her  who  was  (declared)  pure  by  her 
entry  into  the  fire  and  (he)  was  praised  by  Indra,  Brahma, 
Dasaratha  and  others  as,  “You  are  Visnu,  the  killer  of  the  de¬ 
mon.”  Indra  being  propitiated,  revived  the  monkeys  by  a  shower 
of  nectar. 

29-30.  They  all  (Brahma  and  o  hers)  being  worshipped  by 
Rama  returned  to  heavens  after  witnessing  the  battle.  Rama 
entrusted  Lanka  to  Vibhlsana.  Having  honoured  the  monkeys, 
being  seated  in  the  (aerial  chariot)  Puspaka  in  the  company  of 
Slta,  Rama  returned  by  the  same  route  by  which  he  had  gone 
(to  Lanka)  showing  the  forests  and  mountains  to  Slta  and  having 
a  happy  mind. 

31.  Having  paid  obeisance  to  Bharadvaja,  he  reached 
Nandigrama.  Being  revered  by  Bharata  there,  he  reached 
Ayodhya  and  settled  there. 

32.  Having  saluted  Vasistha  and  other  sages,  Kausalya, 
Kaikeyi  and  Sumitra  and  having  obtained  the  kingdom  he 
honoured  the  twice-born. 

33.  He  worshipped  Vasudeva  (Visnu),  his  own  self,  with 
the  Afvamedha.  (sacrifice).  He  conferred  gifts  on  the  deserv¬ 
ing  men).  He  protected  (the  welfare)  of  his  subjects. 

34.  (He  protected)  dharma  (righteousness),  hama  (desire 
for  worldly  enjoyments)  etc.  just  as  his  sons.  (He)  was  bent 
on  subduing  the  wicked.  The  world  was  abound  with  all  righte¬ 
ous  activities.  The  earth  was  abound  with  all  grains.  As  Rama 
was  ruling,  there  was  no  premature  death. 


24 


Agni  Parana 


CHAPTER  ELEVEN 
Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Rama  (continued) : 

Jsfarada  said  : 

1.  The  well-honoured  sages  Agastya  and  others  went  to 
Raghava,  who  was  ruling  the  country  (and  said),  “You  are 
fortunate  and  are  victorious  because  you  have  killed  Indrajit. 

2.  Pulastya  was  the  son  of  Brahma.  Visravas  was  (the  son 
of  Pulastya).  Kaikasi  (was  his  wife).  (His  )  first  (wife)  was 
Puspotkata.1 * * * * * VII.  The  lord  of  wealth  (Kubera)  was  her  son. 

3.  Ravana  was  born  to  Kaikasi  (possessing)  20  arms  and 
10  faces.  By  means  of  (his)  penance  he  got  a  boon  from  Brahma 
and  conquered  celestials. 

4.  Kumbhakarna  was  always  sleeping,  Vibhlsana  became 
deep-rooted  in  dharma.  Their  sister  (was)  Surpanakha,  Megha- 
nada  (was  born)  from  Ravana. 

5.  Having  conquered  Indra,  he  became  Indrajit.  He 
was  stronger  than  Ravana.  Desirous  of  welfare  of  the  celes¬ 
tials,  (he)  was  killed  by  you  (and)  Laksmana”. 

6-7.  Having  told  (thus)  those  sages  Agastya  and  others  had 
gone  after  being  prostrated  by  (Rama).  Satrughna  directed  by 
Rama  as  per  desires  of  celestials,  became  the  killer  of 
Lavana  at  some  place  (known  as)  Mathura.  Being  directed  by 
Rama,  Bharata  killed  three  crores  of  sons  of  Sailusa  with 
sharp  arrows. 

8-9.  (Having  killed)  Sailusa,the  wicked  Gandharva,  a  resi¬ 
dent  on  the  banks  of  (the  river)  Sindhu  and  having  established 
his  sons  Taksa  and  Puskara  in  those  countries,  Bharata  went  to 
Raghava  along  with  Laksmana  and  remained  worshipping  him 
after  having  killed  the  wicked  in  the  battle  and  protected  the 
pious. 

10.  The  two  sons  Kusa  and  Lava,  the  excellent  brothers 
were  born  in  the  hermitage  of  Valmiki  to  Slta  abandoned  on 

1 .  The  name  of  the  first  wife  of  Visravas  is  given  as  DcvavarninI,  daughter 

of  Bharadvaja.  Sec  Ram ,  Vll.ii. 

Visravas  blessed  Kaikasi,  the  daughter  of  Sumalin,  when  she  had  come  to 

him  desirous  of  progeny.  But  the  progeny  would  be  dreadful  as  she  had  come 

to  him  at  twilight,  said  the  sage.  When  she  again  entreated  him,  he  blessed  her 

that  her  next  son  would  be  like  himself  pursuing  righteous  life.  See  Ram 

VII.  ix. 


11.11-12.1-3 


25 


account  of  rumour  among  the  people;  and  were  known  from  the 
hearing  of  (their)  good  episode. 

11.  After  having  been  anointed  in  the  kingdom  and  being 
bent  on  contemplation  with  (the  attitude  of)  “I  am  brahman”, 
(and  then)  the  son  of  Slta  after  having  ruled  for  11,000  years 
and  after  performing  sacrifices  went  to  heaven  along  with  the 
citizens  and  (his)  brother,  and  being  attended  to  by  the  people 
and  honoured  by  the  celestials. 

Agni  said  : 

12.  Valmlki  composed  the  Ramayana  in  elaborate  (form) 
after  hearing  from  Narada.  One  who  hears  this  will  go  to  heaven. 


CHAPTER  TWELVE 
Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Kjsna 

Agni  said  : 

1.  I  shall  describe  the  genealogy  of  Hari  (Krsna).  Brahma 
(was  born)  from  the  lotus  in  the  navel  of  Visnu.  (Sage)  Atri 
(was  born)  from  Brahma.  Then  Soma  (was  born).  Pururavas 
was  born  from  Soma. 

2.  Ayu  was  (born)  from  him  (Pururavas).  From  him  (was 
born)  Nahusa  and  then  Yayati.  From  whom  DevayanI1  gave 
birth  to  Yadu  and  Turvasu. 

3.  Sarmistha,  the  daughter  of  Vpsaparvan  (gave  birth  to) 
Druhyu,  Anu  and  Puru  (through  Yayati).  TheYadavas  (came) 
in  the  race  of  Yadu.  Vasudeva  was  the  foremost  among  these. 

1.  Dcvayani  was  the  daughter  of  Sukra,  the  preceptor  of  demons. 
When  her  love  for  Kaca,  the  pupil  of  her  father  was  not  reciprocated  by  him, 
she  cursed  him  and  he  in  turn  cursed  her  that  she  would  become  the  wife  of 
a  warrior.  Once  when  Dcvayani  and  her  companion  Sarmistha  were  bathing, 
their  dresses  got  exchanged,  and  the  irate  Sarmistha  slapped  DevayanI  and 
threw  her  into  the  well.  Dcvayani  was  later  rescued  from  the  well  by  Yayati, 
who  married  her  with  the  consent  of  her  father.  As  cursed  by  Devayam,  Sar- 
mistha  became  her  servant.  See  Aple  SD.  and  MBh.-Nam.  p. 


26 


Agni  Purana 


4-7.  From  Vasudeva  through  Devaki  (was  born  Krsna)  in 
order  to  remove  oppression  on  the  earth.  Once  the  sons  of 
Hiranyakasipu  (became)  the  six  embryos  in  the  womb  of  Devaki 
being  led  by  the  meditative-sleep  cast  by  Visnu.  The  seventh 
child  in  the  womb  of  Devaki  that  was  strong  was  transferred  to 
(the  womb  of)  Rohini  and  (was  born)  as  the  son  of  Rohini.1 
Then  Hari  the  four-armed  (manifested)  in  the  sky  on  the  eighth 
day  of  the  dark  fortnight  and  being  adored  by  Devaki  and  Vasu¬ 
deva  (was  born)  as  a  child  with  two  arms.  Vasudeva  took  (the 
child)  to  the  couch  of  Yasoda,  being  afraid  of  Kamsa. 

8-10.  Yasoda  carried  the  daughter  (born  to  her)  and  left 
it  at  the  couch  of  Devaki.  Having  heard  the  cries  of  the  child, 
Kamsa  (came  there  and  carried  the  child)  and  smashed  it  on  the 
stone  slab  in  spite  of  being  obstructed  by  Devaki.  Having  heard 
the  voice  in  the  heavens  that,  “My  eighth  birth  would  be  your 
death”,  and  being  infuriated  all  the  children  bom  were  killed 
(by  him)  after  they  were  left  with  him  by  Devaki  as  promised 
(by  Vasudeva)  at  the  time  of  their  marriage.  The  girl  who  was 
thrown  (on  the  slab)  (bounced)  to  the  sky  and  said: 

11.  “O  Kamsa  !  What  is  the  use  of  throwing  me  (to  kill 
me).  One  who  would  kill  you,  that  lord  of  all  the  celestials  had 
bom  (already)  for  the  removal  of  oppression  on  the  earth.” 

12-13.  Having  told  so  she  (disappeared).  And  she  having 
killed  Sumbha2  and  other  demons  and  being  praised  by  Indra 
(was  known  differently  as)  the  Arya,  Durga,  the  source  of  the 
Vedas ,  Ambika  (the  mother),  Bhadrakali  (beneficent  Kali), 
the  beneficent,  Ksemya  (bestower  of  peace),  propitious,  (and) 
multi-armed.  I  bow  unto  her.  Whoever  reads  these  names  at 
the  three  twilights  will  get  all  cherished  desires  fulfilled. 

1.  Vasudeva  had  two  wives — Devaki  and  Rohiru.  The  six  sons  born  of 
yogic  sleep  were  carried  off  by  Hiranyakasipu’s  yogic  power.  They  were  again 
born  to  Devaki  and  were  killed  by  Kamsa.  Tire  seventh  child  in  the  womb  of’ 
Devaki  was  transferred  to  the  womb  of  Rohini,  hence  was  known  as 
Sankarsana  ahTuBalarama.  SccBhag.  />,  X.lxxxv.  46-49;  Vi.P.  V.  i.  70;  P. 
Index  III.  p.769. 

2.  Sumbha  and  his  brother  Nisumbha,  the  two  demons,  propitiated 
Brahma  and  requested  him  that  they  should  have  no  death.  When  Brahma- 
declined  to  grant  their  request  as  impossible,  they  again  requested  that  they 
should  not  die  at  the  hands  of  mortals,  celestials,  animals  or  birds.  They  ex¬ 
cluded  women,  as  they  thought  that  women  are  not  so  much  powerful  to  fear 
death  at  their  hands.  When  they  oppressed  all  beings,  the  goddess  killed: 
them.  Sec  Devi  Bh .  P.  V.  xxi.  xxx.  xxxi. 


12.14-26 


27 


14-15.  Karhsa  also  sent  Putana  and  others  in  order  to  kill 
the  boy.  (Bala)  Rama  and  Krsna,  being  entrusted  by  Vasudeva 
to  the  custody  of  Nanda,  the  husband  of  Yasoda,  for  their  pro¬ 
tection  from  the  fear  of  Kamsa  and  others,  were  living  at  Gokula 
with  the  cows  and  shepherds. 

16.  They  (two),  the  protectors  of  the  entire  world  became 
the  protectors  of  cows.  (Once  the  boy)  Krsna  was  tied  to  the 
mortar  with  a  rope  by  the  bewildered  Yasoda  (to  contain  his 
sportive  mischiefs). 

17-20.  He  went  in  between  the  two  Arjuna-  trees1  and  up¬ 
rooted  them.  And  the  cart2  was  made  to  roll  away  by  a  kick  of 
the  foot.  Putana,  who  was  intent  on  killing  (him)  was  killed  by 
that  seeker  of  the  breast  (milk)  by  sucking  her  breast.  Krsna, 
who  had  gone  to  Vrndavana  (grove  of  holy  basil),  drew  out  the 
(serpent)  Kaliya,  resident  in  the  waters,  from  the  waters  of 
(the  river)  Yamuna  and  conquered  it  and  was  praised  by  (his 
brother)  Bala.  (He)  made  the  Talavana  (palymyra  grove) 
secure  after  killing  (the  demon)  Dhenuka  (in  the  form  of)  an 
ass  (and)  after  having  killed  (the  demons)  Arista  (in  the  form 
of)  a  bull  (and)  Kesi  in  the  form  of  a  horse.  Abandoning  the 
festivity  for  Sakra  (Indra),  the  ritual  of  protecting  the  cows  was 
made  to  be  observed. 

21.  The  mountain  was  borne  and  the  rain  (caused  to  fall) 
by  Indra,  was  warded  off.  (Then)  Govinda  (Krsna)  was  salut¬ 
ed  by  Inc1  "a  and  offered  with  the  peacock  (plumes). 

22.  Festivities  for  Indra  were  again  caused  to  be  done  by 
Krsna,  after  being  pleased.  Riding  a  chariot  he  went  to  Ma¬ 
thura  and  was  praised  by  Akrura,  as  directed  by  Kamsa. 

23.  Being  attended  to  by  the  devoted  and  sportive  shephe¬ 
rd  women,  he  having  killed  the  washerman  who  did  not  get 
(the  clothes),  seized  the  clothes. 

24-26.  Wearing  the  garland  along  with  Rama  (Balarama) 
he  blessed  the  garland-maker.  He  made  upright  the  hunch¬ 
backed  woman  who  had  given  him  unguent.  He  killed  the 
demon  Kuvalayaplda  (in  the  form  of)  an  intoxicated  elephant. 
Even  as  Kamsa  and  others  were  looking  on,  he  entered  the 
(wrestling)  court  and  fought  with  those  (wrestlers)  on  the  dais. 


1.  Arjuna  trees,  later  personified  as  two  demons. 

2.  The  name  of  a  demon,  who  assumed  the  form  of  a  cart. 


28 


Agni  Pur  ana 


Much  strength  was  shown  by  the  wrestler  Ganura  and  Mus?ika. 
The  wrestlers  Canura  and  Mustika  and  others  were  killed  by 

27-28.  Having  killed  Kamsa,  the  ruler  of  Mathura,  Hari 
(Krsna)  made  his  father  as  the  ruler  of  Yadavas.  Asti  and 
Prapti,  the  wives  of  Kamsa  were  the  two  daughters  of  Jara- 
sandha.  Being  entreated  by  them  Jarasandha  besieged  Mathura 
and  fought  with  the  Yadavas  with  arrows. 

29-31.  (Bala)  Rama  and  Krsna  came  to  Gomantaka  leav- 
ing  Mathura.  After  conquering  Jarasandha,  the  despiser  of 
Vasudeva  (Krsna)  and  of  Paundraka,1  he  made  Dvaraka  as 
his  capital  and  stayed  there  being  surrounded  by  Yadavas. 
Having  killed  (the  demon)  Naraka,  the  son  of  the  Earth,  he 
(Krsna)  brought  16000  daughters  of  the  celestials,  gandkar- 
vas  and yaksas  (kinds  of  semi-divine  beings)  and  married  them, 
as  well  as  the  eight  (girls)  RukminI  and  others. 

32-34.  (Then)  the  killer  of  Naraka,  (seated)  on  the  (bird) 
Garuda,  in  the  company  of  Satyabhama  and  with  the  jewel- 
store  and  other  jewels  after  having  conquered  Indra  in  the  hea¬ 
vens  and  brought  the  (divine  tree)  Parijata  planted  (it)  in  the 
house  of  Satyabhama.  Having  learnt  the  (science  of)  astra  and 
Jastra  (use  of  weapons)  from  Sandipani  (rescued)  his  son  and 
brought  him  (to  him)  after  conquering  the  demon  Pancajana 
and  was  well-worshipped  by  Yama  (the  god  of  death).  He  kill¬ 
ed  (the  demon)  Kalayavana2  (by  a  ruse)  and  was  worshipped 
by  (the  king)  Mucukunda.3 

35.  He  worshipped  Vasudeva  and  Devaki  the  devotees  and 


1 .  Paundraka  was  the  King  of  Kasi  and  the  son  of  V asudeva  and  Sutanu, 
the  daughter  of  Kasiraja.  When  he  became  the  king,  he  asserted  that  he  was 
the  real  Vasudeva.  Kr§na  invaded  Kasi  and  killed  him.  See  Vi.P.  V.  xxxiv. 
4-28  ;Bhdg.  P .  X  lxi.  1-23;  P.  Index.  II.  p.  393. 

2.  Kalayavana  was  a  king  of  the  Yavanas.  He  was  an  enemy  of  Kr§$a 
and  an  invincible  foe  of  the  Yadavas.  Krsi^a  found  it  impossible  to  vanquish 
him.  He  cunningly  decoyed  him  to  the  cave  where  Mucukunda  was  sleeping. 
Mucukunda’s  sleep  being  disturbed,  he  burnt  him  down. 

3.  King  Mucukunda,  son  of  Mandhatr,  assisted  celestials  in  their 
war  against  demons  and  got  as  a  boon  a  long  and  unbroken  sleep  and  that 
whoever  dared  to  disturb  his  sleep  would  be  burnt  to  ashes.  Accordingly  when 
Kalayavana  disturbed  his  sleep,  he  was  burnt  to  ashes.  Sec  note  2  above  and 
Apte  SD . 


12.36-44 


29 


brahmins.  Nisatha  and  Ulmuka  were  born  to  Revati  through 

M36ha  S?mb,  (was  bom)  through  Jambavatl  and  other  sons 

were  (born)  through  other  (wives)  to  Krsna. 

37  39  Pradyumna  was  born  through  Rukmipi  (to  Krsna) 
and  was  forcibly  taken  away  on  the  sixth  day  bySambara*  and 
thrown  into  the  ocean.  A  fish  seized  him.  A  fisherman  (caught) 

that  fish  and  brought  it  to  Sambara*  and  Sambara ^a«t ) 
Mavavati  (the  maid).  MayavaU  having  found  her  husband 
^side  the  fish,  nourished  him  with  respect.  She  also  said  to  him 
“I  am  Rati  You  are  my  husband.  You  are  Kama  (cupid) 
and  made  bodiless  by  Sambhu  (Siva).  I  was  forcibly  taken  a 
(captive).  I  am  not  his  wife.  You  (are)  knower  of  magic.  You 

klll40arnHaving  heard  that  Pradyumna  killed  Sambara  and  went 
to  Krsna  along  with  (his)  wife  Mayavatl.  Then  Rukmini  was 

^l^  From  Pradyumna  Aniruddha  was  born  who  was  the 
husband  of  Usa  and  was  highly  intelligent.  Bana  (was)  the  son 
ofBali  (and)  his  daughter  (was)  Usa.  (His  city  was  known) 

L  Sonitapura.  By  (his)  penance  (he)  was  (treated  -)  son  of 
Siva  “Bana  !  You  will  be  waging  a  war  (as  indicated)  by 
fall  of  flagstaff,”  said  Siva  to  Bana,  becoming  pleased. 

Having  toen  Gaur.  (Parva.1) porting 
,  •  a  husband.  Gaun  said  to  her,  in 

1“  onTem  by  you  in  your  dream  on  the  twelfth  day  in  the  month 
Tvaikha  ”he  second  month  in  the  Hindu  new  year)  wdl 
become  you  husband”.  Usa  becoming  happy  on  these  words  o 
GauTs-him  (that  person)  (in  dream)  whde  she  slept 

in  her  house. 

1.  Sambarawas  a  companion  of 

dyunma  a  couple  of  days  after  ^  ^  swallowed  it.  When 

his  slayer  and  threw  hun  into  Aambara,  the  fish  was  sent  to 

the  fishermen  caught  the  fish  an  ™ug  beautiful  child,  they 

the  kitchen.  When  the  cooks  cut  the  fish  and^founa  ad  ^ 

informed  Mayavati,  the  mistress  °f ,c°born  as  Pradyumna.  She 
that  she  was  none  other  than  Ran  an  ^  v  up  shc  revealed  the  trutli 

nourishedand brought^up  Pradyu^  j  killed  by  Pradyumna  after 

to  him.  The  two  got  married.  Atiantoa 

a  severe  battle.  See  Bhag.  P.  X.  xxxvi.  36  and  lv.  3-24. 


30  ,  .  n 

Agni  Purana 

r  ^t5A46-‘  KnowinS(that  person) united  with  herself,  she  (identi¬ 
fied)  Amruddha  from  the  drawn  portraits  (of  princes)  through 
(the  assistance  of)  her  friend  Citralekha  (and)  brought  that 
grandson  of  Rrsna  from  Dvaraka  (to  her  place)  by  the  daughter 

ot  Kumbhanda,  the  minister  of  Bana.  Aniruddha  went  and  made 
marry  with  Usa. 

»  47'J4J8-  (BfI?a  was)  ^formed  (of  this)  by  his  mobile  guards 
Amruddha  had  a  fierce  fight  with  Bana.i  Having  heard 
his  from  Narada,  Krsna  (went  along)  with  Pradyumna  (and) 
a  abhadra  (and)  remaining  on  the  Garuda  (vehicle  of  Visnu) 
conquered  the  fires  and  the  fever  related  to  Mahesvara  (Siva). 

49.  There  was  a  fight  between  Hari  and  Sankara  (Siva) 
wuh  arrows.  Nandi,  Vinayaka,  Skanda  and  others  were  con¬ 
quered  by  Tarksya  (Garuda)  and  others. 

7W^n  Sarikara  ($iva)  yawned,  Visnu  (employed)  the 
missile  Jrmbhana  and  cut  the  thousand  arms  (of  Sankara) 
Protection  was  sought  by  Rudra  (Siva).  ' 

.f*a  'vas  animated  by  Vi’snu.  The  two-armed 
(Visnu)  said  to  Siva,  “What  protection  was  offered  by  you  to 

ence  be^e  ^  that(offered)  b7  "ie.  There  is  no  differ- 
ence  between  us  and  one  who  (thinks  of)  any  difference  goes  to 

hell  Visnu  was  propitiated  by  Siva  and  others.  Aniruddh* 

m  the  company  of  Usa  and  others,  having  ^one  to  Dvnr^l  - 

amused  himself  along  with  Ugrasena  and  otfffr  Yadavas  Vajra 

d-boyer  of  the  monkey  DWvida»  and  thed^ye^p^ 

the  war.  See  verse  42  above.6  a$sist  him  in 

to  the  place  where  ^  ^  8uise  of  a  cowherd 

Being  admitted  to  the  games,  while  carrying  BalS^  C°mpanions- 

*rPf»"^:riads,,rsma' 

ssszssz  iitir  bnr  »  * . 

burnt  the  cities  and  villages  and  °f  his  fricnd>  he 

Balarama  after  a  hard  combat.  See  Bhag  p  yV°£  ,He  )vas  finally  killed  by 
and  P  Index  II.  p.  150.  h£Vuj  Vi.P.  V.  xxxvi.  1-23 


13.1-8 


31 


of  Kauravas,  Lord  Hari  amused  himself  in  many  forms  along 
with  RukminI  and  others.  He  produced  many  sons  and  innume¬ 
rable  Yadavas.  Whoever  reads  the  account  of  the  lineage  of 
Hari,  that  person  would  have  his  desires  fulfilled  and  attain 

Hari. 


CHAPTER  THIRTEEN 
Origin  of  the  Kauravas  and  Paridavas  : 


Agni  said  : 

1.  I  shall  narrate  the  (story  of)  Bharata  (which  has)  the 
description  of  the  greatness  of  Krsna.  Visnu  removed  heavy 
oppression  on  the  earth  having  Pan<Javas  as  the  instrumental 
cause. 

2.  Brahma  was  born  of  the  lotus  in  the  navel  of  Visnu. 
(Sage)  Atri  was  the  son  of  Brahma.  From  Atri  was  born 
Soma.  From  Soma,  Budha  was  born.  From  him  (Budha) 
was  born  Aila — Pururavas. 

3-4.  Ayu  (was  born)  from  him.  King  Nahusa  was  then 
(born).  Then  Yayati,  then  Puru  (were  born  successsively ) . 
In  his  race  (was  born)  Bharata.  Then  king  Kuru  (was  born). 
In  that  race  (was  born)  Santanu.  From  him  (was  born)  Bhisma 
(as)  the  son  of  the  Ganges.  (His)  brothers  Citrangada  and 
Vicitra  (virya)  were  born  to  Santanu  through  Satyavati. 

5-8.  After  Santanu’s  death,  Bhisma  who  had  no  wife, 
(governed  and)  protected  his  brother’s  kingdom.  The  young 
Citrangada  was  killed  by  the  Gandharva  Citrangada.  The 
two  daughters  of  Kasiraja,  Ambika  and  Ambalika  brought  (as 
captives)  by  Bhisma,  the  conqueror  of  the  foes,  (became)  the 
wives  of  Vicitravlrya,.  He  (Vicitravlrya)  died  on  account  of 
consumption.  With  the  consent  of  Satyavati,  from  Vvasa, 
King  Dhirtarastra  was  (born)  through  Ambika  and  Panqlu 
through  Ambalika  as  sons.  From  Dhjrtarastra  through  Gandharl 
hundred  sons  (were  born)  with  Duryodhana  as  the  first. 


32 


Agni  Parana 


9.  By  the  curse  of  a  sage1  then  he  (Pandu)  died  on  account 
of  union  with  his  wife  at  the  hermitage  of  Sataspnga,  then  Yudhis- 
thira  (was  born)  to  Pandu  through  KuntI  from  Dharma  (Yama). 

10.  (Similarly)  Bhima  from  Vata  (God  of  wind),  Arjuna 
from  Sakra  (were  born)  and  through  Madri,  Nakula  and  Saha- 
deva  from  the  AsvinI  kumara.  Pandu  died  when  (he  was) 
in  union  with  Madri.1 

1 1 .  Karna,  born  to  KuntI,  when  she  was  a  virgin,  became 
a  dependent  of  Duryodhana.  By  destiny  there  was  enmity  bet¬ 
ween  the  Kurus  (Kauravas)  and  Pandavas. 

12.  The  wicked  Duryodhana  burnt  the  Pandavas  in  the 
lac  house.  The  Pandavas  escaped  from  the  burnt  house  along 
with  their  mother  as  the  sixth. 

13.  Then  at  (the  place)  Ekacakra,  in  the  house  of  a  brah¬ 
min,  they  all  remained  in  the  attire  of  an  ascetic  after  killing  the 
demon  Baka.2 

14.  They  went  to  the  fair  at  Pancala  and  in  the  saayam- 
vara  (self-choice)  of  Draupadi.  The  well  adorned  Draupadi  was 
obtained  by  the  five  Pandavas. 

15.  Then  (they)  were  known  to  have  got  half  of  the  king¬ 
dom  by  Duryodhana  and  others.  The  divine  bow  Gandlva  and 
the  excellent  chariot  were  obtained  from  the  Fire  god. 

16.  And  in  the  battle,  Arjuna  got  Krsna  as  the  charioteer 
and  inexhaustible  arrows  and  similarly  the  missiles  (known  as) 
Brahma  and  other  weapons  (were  obtained)  from  Drona.  All 
were  proficient  in  (the  use  of)  arms. 

17-18.  (Acting  on  the  words  of)  Krsna,  Arjuna  put  out  the 
fire  at  the  Khandava  forest.  And  the  Pandava  (Arjuna)  having 
obstructed  rains  (caused  by  Indra)  with  the  shower  of  arrows 
conquered  the  countries  in  different)  directions.  Yudhisthira 
ruled  the  country  along  with  the  (other)  Pandavas.  (He  per- 


formofadeer^ ^ SP°rti,lg  with his  wife>  both  assuming  the 

gZ  there  for  hum-  S”*  “*  ^  by  thc  “  ^du,  who  had 

gone  there  for  hunting.  The  sage  cursed  Paridu  that  he  would  also  die  while 

copulating  with  his  wife.  See  M.  Bh.  I.  cxvii.  5-31. 

2.  Baka  was  a  demon  living  in  the  city  Ekacakra.  Under  an  agreement 
the  residents  were  supplying  his  daily  food  consisting  of  a  buffalo,  a  man  etc 
from  each  family  m  turn.  When  the  five  Paridavas  were  staying  in  th^t  place 
disguised  as  ascetics,  Bhlma  killed  the  demon  to  relieve  a  poor  Z^L  Z 

dent,  who  was  lamenting  his  fate  as  it  was  his  turn  that  day  M.miXiff 


13.19-29 


33 


formed)  the  Rajasuya  (sacrifice)  (spending)  plenty  of  gold. 
Suyodhana  (Duryodhana)  could  not  bear  that. 

1 9-20.  Being  directed  by  brother  Duhsasana  and  by  Karna. 
who  had  been  enriched  by  him,  he  won  over  Yudhisthira  in 
dice,  (being  assisted)  by  Sakuni  in  playing  the  dice.  His  king¬ 
dom  was  also  won  by  conceit.  Those  in  the  court  laughed  at 
him.  Yudhisthira  being  won,  went  to  the  forest  along  with  the 
brothers. 

21-24.  He  spent  twelve  years  in  the  forest  as  promised  (by 
him)  along  with  (the  sage)  Dhaumya  and  Draupadi  as  the  sixth, 
feeding  88000  twice-borns  as  before.  Then  (he)  went  to  the  King 
of  Virata,  with  the  other  names,  the  king  (Yudhisthira)  unre¬ 
cognised  as  the  brahmin  Kanka,  Bhima  as  the  cook,  Arjuna  as; 
Brhannala,  (their  )  wife  (Draupadi)  as  Sairandhrl  and  the  twins. 
And  Bhlmasena  killed  KIcaka1 2  in  the  night  as  he  was  desirous  of 
winning  over  Draupadi.  And  Arjuna  conquered  the  Kurus, 
who  were  engaged  in  seizing  and  lifting  the  cows.  (Hence) 
they  were  recognised  as  Pandavas  (by  the  Kurus). 

25-28.  (Then)  Subhadra,  the  sister  of  Krsna,  gave  birth  to- 
Abhimanyu,  from  Arjuna.  And  (King)  Virata  gave  his  daughter 
Uttara  to  him.  Dharmaraja  (Yudhisthira),  the  master  of seven 
aksaukini-,  was  (ready)  for  the  war.  That  Krsna,  the  messenger, 
having  gone  to  the  intolerant  Duryodhana  said  to  that  lord  of 
eleven  aksaukini ,  “Give  half  the  kingdom  or  five  villages  to  Yudhi¬ 
sthira.  Or  else  (you)  fight  (with  him).”  Hearing  (these)  words, 
Suyodhana  (Duryodhana)  said  to  Krsna,  “I  will  not  give  land 
(even  of  the  size)  of  a  needle  tip.  I  will  fight  engaged  in  seizing, 
it.” 

Agni  said  : 

29.  Having  shown  the  invincible  omnipresent  form  (and) 
being  honoured  by  Vidura,  (Krsna)  returned  to  Yudhisthira 
and  said  to  Yudhisthira,  “Fight  with  this  Suyodhana  (Duryo¬ 
dhana).” 


1.  Kicaka  was  the  commandcr-in-chief  and  brother-in-law  of  King  of 
Virata.  M.  Bh . — Nam.  pp.  68-69 

2.  The  army  consisted  of  21,870  chariots,  as  many  elephants,  65,610 
horses  and  109,350  foot-soldiers.  Aptc  SD . 


34 


CHAPTER  FOURTEEN 
Story  of  the  Mahabharata 


Agni  Purana 


Agni  said  : 

1-3  The  armies  of  Yudhisthira  and  Duryodhana  went  to 
Kuruksetra.  Having  seen  Bhlsma,  Drona  and  others  (Arjuna 
said)  that  he  would  not  fight  with  his  preceptors.  The  Lord 
(Krsna)  said  to  Partha  (Arjuna),  “You  need  not  worry  about 
Bhlsma  and  prominent  men.  The  bodies  are  perishable.  But 
the  soul  does  not  perish.  This  soul  is  the  supreme  Brahman.  You 
know  that  (by  realizing  that),  ‘I  am  Brahman:  Being  neutral 
towards  success  and  defeat  and  as  a  yogin  you  protect  the  duties 

of  a  king.”  .  ,  s 

4-6.  Being  told  thus  by  Krsna,  Arjuna  fought  (the  battle;. 

He  sounded  drums  remaining  in  the  chariot.  Bhlsma  was  the 
first  commander  for  the  army  of  Duryodhana.  And  Sikhandi 
(was  the  commander)  for  the  Pandavas.  There  was  a  fight  bet¬ 
ween  these  two  armies.  (The  armies)  of  the  son  of  Dhrta- 
rastra  along  with  Bhlsma  killed  the  armies  of  Pandavas. 
The  Pantjavas  in  the  company  of  Sikhandi1  and  others  killed  (the 
army)  of  the  sons  of  Dhrtarastra.  The  battle  between  the  armies 
of  Kurus  and  Pandavas  was  similar  (to  the  battle)  between 
devas  and  asuras . 

7-10.  It  was  (a  cause)  for  the  growth  of  delight  of  the  devas 
in  the  heavens  who  were  watching  it.  For  ten  days  Bhlsma  des¬ 
troyed  the  army  of  Pandavas  with  aslras.  On  the  tenth  day  Ar¬ 
juna  showered  arrows  on  the  valiant  Bhlsma.  On  the  words  of 
Drupada,  Sikhandi2  showered  aslras  just  as  a  cloud  would  do. 
The  elephants,  horses,  chariots  and  infantry  were  brought  down 
by  the  astras  (of  the  two  armies)  mutually.  Bhisma,  able  to 
die  at  his  own  will,  after  having  shown  the  mode  of  war  and 
being  told  by  the  Vasus  (a  class  of  deities),  was  remaining  in  the 
bed  of  arrows  awaiting  to  reach  Vasuloka,  and  for  the  (com- 

1.  Sikhandi,  son  of  Drupada,  was  at  first  a  woman  known  as  Sikh  an¬ 
ti  ini  and  was  later  transformed  into  a  man  and  was  known  as  Sikhandin.  M.Bh. 

V.  xci. 

2.  Bhisma  had  pledged  not  to  fight  against  eunuchs.  As  Arjuna  had 
Sikharidi  as  his  charioteer,  it  was  easy  for  him  to  kill  Bhisma  as  Bhisma  would 
not  fight  against  Sikhandi,  a  woman  transformed  into  a  man. 


14.11-22 


35 


mencement  of  the)  summer  solstice  all  the  while  remain' 
tempting  on  Visnu  and  praising  Him  °°* 

11.  As  Duryodhana  was  grief-stricken,  Drona  became  the 
Commander.  As  the  army  of  Pandavas  was  jubilant  Dhrsta 
dyumna  (was  made)  the  Commander.  J  ’  " 

,,  l2’  There™  a  fierCe  battle  be(rvveen  the  two  which  made 

the  domain  of  Yama  (the  god  of  death)  extensive.  Virata 

of^D^na  °  dr°Wned  in  the  ocean  of  (arrow! 

13  The  huge  army  of  Duryodhana  (consisted  of)  ele- 
borse,  chariot  and  infantry.  Drona  became  just  like  Kala 
(death  himself)  for  the  (army)  headed  by  Dhrstadyumna. 

I4-!5.  When  it  was  proclaimed  that  Asvatthaman  was  killed, 

Drona  abandoned  his  extras.  Overcome  by  the  arrow  of  Dhrsta¬ 
dyumna  he  fell  on  the  earth  on  the  fifth  day,  (himself  bein'?) 
unassailable  and  after  having  killed  many  warriors. 

As  Duryodhana  was  grief-stricken,  Karna  became  the 
commander. 

r  16'  (became  the  commander)  of  the  Pandava 

forces.  There  was  combat  between  them,  between  weapons 

and  weapons,  very  fierce  and  resembling  a  war  between 
aevas  and  asuras . 


1 7.  In  the  war  known  as  the  Karnarjuna,  Karna  killed  the 
enemies  with  his  arrows.  On  the  second  day,  Karna  was  killed 
by  Arjuna. 

18.  Salya  fought  for  a  day  and  Yudhisthira  killed  him. 
uyodhana  (Duryodhana),  whose  army  had  been  destroyed 

iought  with  Bhlmasena. 

19.  Having  killed  many  men  (in  their  army)  (he)  challeng¬ 
ed  Bhlmasena.  Bhimasena  killed  him,  who  was  attacking  with 
the  mace. 

20-21.  (Bhimasena)  killed  his  brothers  with  his  mace. 
On  that  eighteenth  day,  in  the  night,  the  very  strong  As'vattha- 
man  killed  the  sleeping  army  of  Pandavas  of  the  extent  of 
an  aksaukini,  the  Pancalas  and  the  sons  of  Draupadl.  He  also 
killed  Dhrstadyumna. 

22.  Then  Arjuna  seized  his  crest-jewel  with  an  arrow  (and 

gave  it)  to  that  Draupadl  who  had  lost  her  sons  and  was  lamen¬ 
ting. 


36 


Agni  Puraria 


93  Hari  (Kfsna)  revived  (all  of  them)  who  were  burnt 
by  It  arrows  if  Asvatthaman.  That  embryo  of  Uttara  became 

*1?  'Sv^^aandDrauni  (son  ofDroaa)  (Alvab- 
thaman)  survived  in  the  battle.  The  live  Pandavas,  Satyak. 

and  Krsna  survived  and  none  else. 

25-26  Then  that  Yudhisthira  having  pacified  the  g 
stricken  women,  in  the  company  of  Bhlma  and  others,  having 
done  the  obsequies  for  the  killed  warriors  and  having  offered 
waters  and  money  and  after  having  heard  the  peace-yielding 

dharmas,  the  royal  duties,  dharma  relating  to  final  emancipation, 
dharma  relating  to  charity,  became  a  king. 

27  The  destroyer  of  his  enemy  (Yudhisthira)  gave  away 

charities  to  the  brahmins  at  the  Aivamedha  (sacrifice).  Having 
heard  about  the  destruction  of  Yadavas*  caused  by  the  club 
and  having  installed  Pariksit  in  the  kingdom,  (  e)  reac  c 
heavens  along  with  the  brothers. 


CHAPTER  FIFTEEN 
Ascendance  of  Pandavas  to  heaven  : 


Agni  said  : 

1.  O  Brahmin  !  When  Yudhisthira  was  ruling  the  king- 
dom,  Dhrtarastra  went  to  the  forest  along  with  Gandharl  and 
Prtha  (KuntI)  and  passed  from  one  stage  of  life  to  another. 

2-5.  Vidura  was  burnt  by  the  forest  fire  and  ascended 
heavens.  Thus,  Visnu  removed  the  oppression  of  demons 
and  others  on  the  earth,  for  the  sake  of  dharma  and  for  the  destruc- 


1.  This  alludes  to  the  curse  of  sages  when  the  Yadava  boys  dressed 
up  Samba,  son  of  Jambavati,  as  a  woman  and  requested  sages  to  tell 
what  kind  of  child  would  be  born  to  her.  The  sages  cursed  that  an  iron  mace 
would  be  born.  When  it  happened  accordingly,  the  mace  was  powdered  and 
thrown  into  the  sea.  They  were  washed  ashore  and  later  grew  into  reeds. 
The  Yadavas  under  the  influence  of  liquor  quarrelled  with  each  other  and 
destroyed  themselves  by  beating  with  the  uprooted  reeds.  See  Fi.P.V.  xxvu. 
9-10;  M.Bh.  XVI.  i.  15-22. 


37 


15.6-13 

tion  of  adharma  and  having  the  Pandavas  as  an  apparent  cause. 
Having  the  curse  of  a  brahmin,  as  a  pretext,  he  destroyed  with 
the  dub,  the  race  of  Yadavas  who  were  oppressing  (the  world) 
Then  (he)  installed  Vajra  (son  of  Aniruddha)  in  the  kingdom. 
On  the  directive  of  celestials,  Hari  himself  having  discarded 
his  body  at  Prabhasa,  is  being  worshipped  by  ^he  residents  o 
heavens  at  the  worlds  of  Indra  and  Brahma.  Balabhadra, 
(who  was)  a  form  of  Ananta,  reached  heavens  in  the  nether 

6  Hari,  the  imperishable  lord,  is  always  to  be  contemplated 
upon  by  those  who  meditate  (on  him).  Without  him  (at  Dva- 

xaka) ,  the  ocean  flooded  the  city  of  Dvaraka. 

7-8  Partha  (Arjuna),  having  performed  the  obs  quits 

of  Yhdiavas,  and  having  offered  .he  «u« ,  rf 
money,  felt  grief-stricken  when  the  women,  who  were  the  waves 
of  Visnu  (Krsna),  were  carried  away  by  P 

(using)  the  clubs  as  weapons  and  defeating  Arjuna  on  account 

°f  M  r'Beh^consJed  by  Vyitsa,  he  thought,  “My  strength 

remainsoidy  inthe  presence^ofKr$.ga.”Having  comc^t.  Hasttna- 

pura,  Partha  then  informed  Yudh.sth.ra,  h.s  bmthem andtte 

grief-stricken. 

deep  water,  the  heavenly  nymp  s  %  iiushand  Being  pleased  he  blessed 

him and  sought  his  blessing,  to  get  a manifested  as 
them  that  they  w»M  be»mc  the  «*„,  hi.  .rooked  F.nn  a. 

Krn>a.  Later,  whoa  they  began  to  mo  that  they  would 

he  came  out  of  water.,  he  jot- enragrf  „.82. 

be  forcibly  taken  away  by  >hievcs'  Himalayan  peaks  as  the  moon  was  in 
2.  On  account  of  his  birth  on  the  Himahty  ^  ^ 

asterism  Uttara  Phalguni,  Arjuna  was  knot 


38 


Agni  Purana 

14.  Mounting  the  chariot  brought  by  Indra  he  reached 
heavens  along  with  his  brothers,  having  seen  Duryodhana 
and  others  and  Vasudeva  and  becoming  happy.  This  is  (the 
story  of)  Bharata  told  to  you.  Whoever  reads  this,  goes  to 
heaven. 


CHAPTER  SIXTEEN 
Manifestation  of  Visnu  as  Buddha  andICalki  : 

Agni  said  : 

1.  I  am  describing  the  manifestation  (of  Visnu)  as 
uddha,  by  reading  and  hearing  which  one  gets  wealth.  Once 

m  the  battle  between  deoas  and  asuras,  devas  were  defeated  by  the 
daityas  (demons,  sons  of  Dili). 

2.  They  sought  refuge  in  the  lord  saying,  “Protect  us  » 
Protect  us  !”  He  (Visnu),  who  is  of  the  form’of  illuso" deL 
sion  became  the  son  of  Suddhodana. 

then^h  ft  ?1UdCd  ^°Se  dem°nS-  Th°Se’  who  had  abandoned 

the  vedas- He  then  became 

the  beret-  ^  then  made  others  as  Arhats.  Thus 

the  heretics  came  into  being  devoid  of  vedic  dharmas. 

'  They  dld  such  a  work  deserving  hell  (as  reward )  Thev 

would  receive  even  from  the  vile.  All  of  them  became  wl 

8-9.  Kalki,  as  the  son  of  Visnuvas'as  u  •  s 
Continued  from  previous  page 

towtrttto  f^T  I 


16.10—17.2 


39 


aslra  and  having  a  weapon.  He  would  establish  moral  law  in 
four-fold  varnas  in  the  suitable  manner.  The  people  (would  be) 
in  the  path  of  righteousness  in  all  the  stages  of  life. 

10.  Hari,  after  discarding  the  form  of  Kalki,  would  go  to 
heaven.  Then  would  come  the  Krtayuga  as  before. 

11-13.  O  Most  virtuous  person  !  Men  would  remain 
devoted  to  their  respective  duties  of  castes  and  stages  of  life. 
Thus,  in  all  the  Kalpas1  and  Manvanlaras,2  the  manifestations  (of 
Visnu)  are  innumerable,  some  already  past  and  some  yet  to 
come  off.  Whoever  reads  or  hears  the  stories  of  the  manifesta¬ 
tions  of  Visnu  would  get  all  desired  things,  become 

pure,  and  attain  heaven  along  with  his  race.  In  this  way,  Han 
settles  the  righteousness  and  unrighteousness.  Hari  is  the  cause 
of  creation  etc.  and  after  manifesting  (in  different  forms)  he  has 
returned. 


CHAPTER  SEVENTEEN 
Description  of  Creation  : 

Agni  said  : 

1.  I  shall  describe  now  the  creation  of  the  universe, 

which  is  the  sport  of  Visnu.3  He  who  creates  heaven  etc.  is 
the  beginning  of  the  creation  and  is  endowed  with  qualities  and 
is  without  qualities.  . 

2.  Brahma,  the  unmanifest,  was  the  existent  being,  I  here 

was  no  sky,  neither  the  day  nor  the  night  etc.  Visnu  having 
entered  the  nature  (Prakrti)  and  the  soul  (. Purusa ),  then  agitated 

them. 


1  Kalba  is  a  day  of  Brahma  or  thousand  (catur  )  Tugas ^bcing  a  period  of 
32  million  years  of  mortals  and  measuring  the  duration  of  the  world 

2  Manvantara  is  the  age  or  the  period  of  Manu,  being  equivalent  to 

/14th  of  a  day  of  Brahma  or  71  catur  yugas. 

3  According  to  the  Sahkhya  system  of  philosophy  the  involuntary  union 
if  soul  andnature causes  creation,  while  others  hold  creation  as  due  to  the  sport 

)f  Brahma. 


40 


Agni  Parana 


3.  At  the  time  of  creation,  the  intellect  ( Mahat )  (emanated 
first).  The  ego  (Ahankara)  came  into  being  then,  and  then  the 
cvolutes  (Vaikarikas)  *  the  lustre  ( taijasa ),  the  elements  etc.  and 
the  darkness  ( tamasa ).1 2 

4.  Then  emanated  the  ether,  the  sound-principle  from  the 
ego.  Then  the  wind,  the  principle  of  feeling  and  the  fire,  the 
colour-principle  came  into  being  from  it. 

5.  The  water,  the  taste-principle  (came  into  being)  from 
this.  The  earth  is  known  as  the  smell-principle.  From  the  dark¬ 
ness  (born  of)  ego,  the  senses  (came  into  being)  (which) 
are  lustrous. 

6.  The  evolutes  are  the  ten  celestials  and  the  mind,  the  ele¬ 
venth  sense.  Then  the  lord  Svayambhu3  Brahma  became 
desirous  of  creating  different  types  of  beings. 

7.  He  created  waters  first.  The  waters  are  referred  to 
as  narah  because  they  are  the  creation  of  the  Supreme  spirit. 

8.  Since  his  motion  was  first  in  them,  he  is  known  as  Nara- 
yana.  That  egg  lying  in  the  water  was  golden  in  colour. 

9-10.  From  that,  Brahma  was  born  of  his  own  accord,  whom 
we  know  as  the  self-born  (Svayambhu).  Having  lived  (in  it) 
for  one  full  year,  the  Hiranyagarbha,4made  that  egg  into  two, 
the  heaven  and  the  earth.  Between  those  two  pieces,  the  lord 
created  the  sky. 

11-13.  The  ten  directions  supported  the  earth  floating  on 
the  waters.  Then  the  lord  of  the  beings  (Prajapati)  desirous  of 
creation,  created  time,  mind,  speech,  desire,  anger,  attach¬ 
ment  and  other  counter-parts.  From  the  lightning  he  created 
thunder  and  clouds,  the  rain-bow  and  birds.  He  first 
created  Parjanya  (Indra).  Then  he  created  the  Rk  hymns 
( Rcah ),  Yajur  hymns  {Taj uriisi)  and  the  Saman  hymns  {Samani) 
for  accomplishing  the  sacrifice. 

14-  Those  who  want  to  accomplish,  worship  devas  with 
these  (hymns).  The  higher  and  lower  beings  (were  created) 
from  the  arms.  He  created  Sanatkumara  and  Rudra,  born  of 
anger. 


1 .  Vaikdrikas  are  the  first  creation  from  the  natural  state. 

2.  Tamasa  is  the  creation  of  ignorance. 

3.  Brahma  is  known  as  Svayambhu,  as  he  was  self-bom.  Sec  verses  9-10 
below. 

4.  Hiranyagarbha  denotes  Brahma,  as  he  was  born  from  the  golden  egg. 


17.15—18.4 


41 


15.  He  then  created  the  sages  Marici,  Atri,  Arigirasa, 
Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  Vasistha,  who  are  regarded  as  the 
.seven  mind-born  sons  of  Brahma. 

16.  O  !  Excellent  one  !  these  seven  (sages)  procreated 
(many)  beings  and  ihe  Rudras.  Having  divided  his  body  into 
two,  he  became  a  male  with  one  half  and  a  female  with  another. 
Then  Brahma  procreated  children  through  her  (the  female  half). 


CHAPTER  EIGHTEEN 
Genealogy  oj  Svayambhuva  Manu  :l 


Agni  said  : 

1.  Satarupa  of  ascetic  disposition  (becoming)  desirous 
gave  birth  to  two  sons  Priyavrata  and  Uttanapada  and  a 
beautiful  daughter2  from  Svayambhuva  Manu. 

2-3  From  (Devahuti)  the  wife  ofKardama,  (were  born) 
(two  daughters)  Samrat  and  Kuksi. 

Uttama  was  born  as  the  son  of  Uttanapada  through  Suruci. 
And  Dhruva*  was  born  as  the  son  (of  Uttanapada)  through 
Sunlti.  O  Sage  !  Dhruva  did  penance  for  three  thousand 
celestial  years  for  gaining  fame. 

4.  Becoming  pleased  (with  him)  Hari  conferred  on  him  a 
firm'  position3  above  the  sages.  Having  seen  his  progress 
Usanas4  recited  the  (following)  verse  : 


1 .  An  epithet  of  the  first  Manu  was  Svayambhuva  Manu,  as  he  was  a  son 
of  Brahma. 

2.  The  Bhag.  P.  specifies  the  name  of  the  daughter  of  Svayambhuva  Manu 
as  Devahuti  and  describes  in  detail  her  marriage  with  Kardama.  See  ibid, 
III.  xxi-xxii. 

*  For  a  detailed  account  of  the  story  of  Dhruva  see  Vi.P .  I.  Ghs.  11-12. 

3.  The  young  boy  Dhruva  was  one  day  contemptuously  treated  by  his 
step-mother  as  he  tried  to  sit  on  his  father’s  lap.  On  the  advice  of  his  mother 
he  retired  to  the  forest  and  did  penance  steadfastly  devoted  to  Visriu.  At  last 
he  was  raised  to  the  status  of  a  pole-star.  Sec  Vi.  P.  I.  xi-xii. 

4.  Usanas  also  known  as  Sukracarya  or  Kavya  was  the  preceptor  of 

Asuras. 


42 


Agni  Purina 


5.  O  what  a  strength  his  penance  had  !  How  well-heard 
of!  What  a  wonderful  thing  that  the  seven  sages1  are  situated* 

placing  Dhruva  in  front  of  them. 

6-7.  Sambhu  gave  birth  to  Sisti  and  Bhavya  from  Dhruva. 
Succhaya  bore  five  blemishless  sons  from  Sisti,  (namely),  Ripu* 
Ripunjaya,  Ripra,  Vrkala,  Vrkatejasa.  Brhatl  bore  the  brilliant 
Caksusa  from  Ripu. 

8.  ’  Caksusa  begot  Manu  through  Puskarinl  (also  known  as 
Vlrim)  (daughter  ofVirana  Prajapati).Ten  excellent  sons  were 
born  to  Manu  through  Nadvala. 

9.  (They  were)  Oru,2  Puru,  Satadyumna,  Tapasvin,  Satya- 
vak,3  Kavi4 5,  Agnistu6,  Atiratra,  Sudyumna,  and  Abhimanyu. 

10.  Agneyi  bore  six  great  sons  to  Oru — Anga,  Sumanas,. 
Khyati,  Kratu,  Angiras,  (and)  Gaya6. 

11.  Sunltha  bore  only  Vena7  from  Anga.  He,  who  was  not 
a  protector,  and  was  delighted  in  doing  sins  was  killed  by  the 
sages  with  their  ku$a  grass. 

12.  Then  for  the  sake  of  progeny,  the  sages  churned  his 
right  hand.  When  the  hand  of  Vena  was  churned  King  Prthu 
came  into  being. 

13.  Having  seen  him,  the  sages  said,  '‘This  person  will  make 
the  subjects  happy  and  will  attain  great  valour  and  fame. 

14.  He  was  born  with  a  bow  and  an  armour  as  if  consuming 
(everything)  by  his  lustre.  Prthu,  the  son  of  Vena,  the  predeces¬ 
sor  of  the  ksairiyas ,  protected  the  subjects. 

15.  That  lord  of  the  earth  is  the  first  among  those  coronated 
after  the  Rajasuya  (sacrifice).  From  that  (ceremony)  were 
born  the  clever  (singers)  suta  and  magadha . 


1.  The  seven  sages  are  Marici,  Atri,  Angiras,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu. 
and  Vasistha. 

2.  Kuni,  see  Vi.  P.  I.  xiii.5. 

3.  Satyavat,  sec  ibid. 

4.  Suci,  see  ibid. 

5.  Agnisfoma,  see  ibid. 

6.  Sibi,  see  Vi.  P.  I.  xiii.7. 

7.  Vena  born  to  Sunltha,  the  daughter  of  Mrtyu  was  of  wicked  nature- 
since  childhood.  When  he  became  the  king  he  proclaimed  himself  as  the  lord 
of  sacrifices  and  did  not  allow  sages  to  propitiate  Visnu  by  doing  sacrifices^ 
Their  entreaties  being  of  no  avail  they  killed  him  by  employing  kuia  grass 
purified  by  the  chant  of  mystic  syllables.  Vi.P.  I.  xiii.  11  ff. 


18.16-30 


4S 

16-17.  The  two  heroes  praised  him.  He  became  a  king  by 
pleasing  the  people.  For  the  sake  of  (getting) grains  and  for  the 
existence  of  the  subjects,  the  cow  (earth)  was  milked  by  him 
along  with  the  celestials,  sages,  gandharvas ,  nymphs,  manes,, 
demons,  snakes,  plants,  mountains  and  people. 

18.  The  earth  being  milked  in  their  respective  vessels  gave 
milk  as  much  as  (they)  wished.  (All)  sustained  their  lives  with 
that. 

19.  Antardhana  and  Palita1,  the  two  righteous  sons  were 
born  to  Prthu.  From  Antardhana,  Sikhanqlinl  begot  Havir- 
dhana. 

20.  Dhisana,  of  the  family  of  Agni  gave  birth  to  the  six 
sons — Praclnabarhis,  Sukra,  Gaya,  Krsna,  Vraja  and  Ajina  from 
Havirdhana. 

21.  (He  was  known  as  Praclnabarhis)  because  the  ku§a 
grass  were  facing  the  east  as  he  was  praying  on  the  earth.2  The 
lord  Praclnabarhis  was  a  great  progenitor. 

22.  Savarna,  the  daughter  of  Samudra  (the  lord  of  the  ocean) 
bore  ten  Praclnabarhis.  All  of  them  were  known  as  Pracetas 
and  were  proficient  in  archery. 

23.  Practising  the  same  religious  austerities,  they  all  did 
severe  penance,  remaining  in  the  waters  of  the  ocean  for  ten 
thousand  years. 

24.  Having  got  the  status  of  a  progenitor  and  pleased  Visnu, 
they  came  out  (of  waters)  (and  found)  that  the  earth  and 
the  sky  were  overspread  with  trees.  They  burnt  them  down. 

25.  Beholding  the  destruction  of  trees  by  the  fire  and 
wind  produced  from  their  mouths,  Soma,  the  king  (of  plants) 
approached  these  progenitors  and  said  : 

26-27.  “Renounce  (your)  anger,  I  will  get  you  this  most 
excellent  maiden  Marisa,  (born  to)  (the  nymph)  Pramloca 
and  the  ascetic  sage  Kandu  (who  was  nourished)  by  me.  Hav¬ 
ing  known  the  future  (I  have)  created  (her).  Let  (she)  be 
your  wife,  capable  of  multiplying  the  family.  Daksa  will  be  born 
to  her  who  will  multiply  progeny.” 

28-30.  The  Pracetas  married  her  and  Daksa  was  born 
through  her.  That  Daksa,  having  mentally  created  the  immov- 


1.  Vadi,  sec  Vi.P.  I.  xiv.  1 

2.  i.e.,  the  sacrifices  were  peif  ormed  all  over  the  earth. 


44 


Agni  Purdna 


ables,  movables,  bi-footed  beings  and  the  quadrupeds,  then  crea¬ 
ted  the  (sixty)  daughters  (of  whom)  he  gave1  ten  to  Dharma, 
thirteen  to  Kasyapa,  twenty-seven  to  Soma,  four  to  Aristanemin, 
two  to  Bahuputra,  two  to  Angiras. 

31 .  By  mental  intercourse  the  celestials,  serpents  and  others 
(were  born)  to  them  in  the  past.  I  shall  describe  (you)  the  crea¬ 
tion  of  Dharma  through  his  ten  wives. 

32.  The  Visvedevas  (were  born)  to  Visva,  Sadhya  gave 
birth  to  the  Sadhyas.  The  Maruts  came  into  being  from  the 
Marut  and  the  Vasus  from  Vasu. 

33.  The  Bhanus  (were)  the  sons  of  Bhanu  and  the  Muhur- 
tas  (were  born)  to  Muhurta.  Ghosa  (was  born)  to  Dharma 
through  Lamba.  Nagavlthi  was  born  of  Yarn!. 

34.  All  that  belonged  to  the  earth  were  born  of  Arundhati. 
Sankalpa  (was  born)  from  Sankalpa.  The  stars  were  the  sons  of 
moon. 

35.  The  eight  Vasus2  are  known  by  the  names — Apa,  Dhruva 
Soma,  Dhara3,  Anila,  Anala,  Pratyusa  and  Prabhasa. 

36.  Vaitandya,  Srama,  Santa,  and  Muni4 5  (were)  the  sons 
of  Apa.  Kala,  the  destroyer  of  the  Universe  (was  the  son)  of 
Dhruva.  Varca  was  the  son  of  Soma. 

37.  Dhara  had  the  sons  Dravina,  Hutahavyavaha,  SiSira, 
Prana  and  Ramana  through  Manohara. 

38.  Purojava6  was  (the  son)  of  Anila  and  Avijiiata  of  Anala. 
Kumara,  the  son  of  Agni,  was  born  in  a  clump  of  reeds. 

39.  Sakha,  Visakha  and  Naigameya  were  his  younger  bro¬ 
thers.  (He  was  known  as)  Karttikeya  (as  he  was  the  son)  of 
Kjrttika.  (He  is  also  known  as)  the  ascetic  Sanatkumara. 

40.  Devala  was  born  from  Pratyusa.  Visvakarman  (was 
born)  from  Prabha,  and  was  the  architect  of  thousands  of 
sculptures  and  the  architect  of  celestials. 

41 .  Men  earn  their  livelihood  by  this  art  of  architecture  and 
of  (making)  ornaments.  Surabhi  begot  eleven  Rudras0  from 
Kasyapa. 


1.  For  a  detailed  account  see  Vi.P.  I.  xv.  103b  ff. 

2.  Vasus  arc  a  class  of  semi-divine  beings. 

3.  Dharma,  see  Vi.P.  I.xv.  111a. 

4.  Dhvani,  see  Vi.P.  I.  xv.  112a. 

5.  Manojava,  see  Vi.P.  I.  xv.  1 14b. 

6.  Following  the  Brahmanda  P.  narration,  Rudras  arc  given  here  as 
sons  of  Surabhi  and  Kasyapa. 


18.42—19.6 


45 


42.  O  Most  pious  man  !  By  the  favour  of  Mahadeva 
(Siva)  (who  was)  thought  of  (by  her)  in  her  ascetic  observances 
Sati  gave  birth  to  Ajaikapad,  Ahirbudhnya,  Tvastr  and  Rudra. 

43-44.  Visvarupa,  the  great  illustrious  and  fortunate  (was) 
the  son  of  Tvastr.  Hara,  Bahurupa,  Tryambaka,  Aparajita, 
Vrsakapi,  Sambhu,  Kapardin,  Raivata,  Mrgavyadha,  Sarpa 
and  Kapalin  were  the  eleven  forms  by  which  the  entire  world, 
both  movable  and  immovable  were  pervaded  by  hundreds  and 
thousands  of  Rudras.1 


CHAPTER  NINETEEN 


Description  of  secondary  creation  :  the  progeny  of  KaSyapa 


Agni  said  : 

1-3.  O  Sage  !  I  describe  the  creation  (made)  by  Kasyapa 
through  Aditi  and  others.  Those  devas  who  were  (known)  as 
Tusita  in  the  Caksusa  manvantara,  again  became  (the  sons) 
of  Kasyapa  through  Aditi  in  the  Vaivasvata  manvantara  as  the 
twelve  Adityas  (with  the  names)  Visnu,  Sakra,  Tvastr,  Dhatr, 
Aryaman,  Pusan,  Vivasvat,  Savitr,  Mitra,  Varuna,  Bhaga,  and 
Amsu.  The  progeny  of  the  wives  of  Aristanemi  were  sixteen. 

4.  The  four  lightnings  were  the  daughters  of  the  learned 
Bahuputra.  Those  born  of  Angiras  were  excellent.  (The  pro¬ 
geny)  of  Krsasva  were  the  celestial  weapons.2 

5.  Just  as  the  sun  rises  and  sets,  similarly  these  (do)  in  every 
yuga.  From  Kasyapa,  Hiranyakasipu  and  Hiranyaksa  (were 

born)  through  Diti.  . 

6.  Simhika  was  also  their  daughter,  who  was  married  by 
Vipracitti.  Rahu  and  others  born  to  her  were  known  as  Saim- 

hikeyas. 


1 .  The  names  of  Eleven  Rudras  are  not  the  same  in  the  enumerations  in 
different  Puranas.  On  the  Eleven  Rudras  sec  Annals  of  On.  Res.  XXI\  .  Pt-I 
“  2  According  to  the  science  of  Jyolifa,  these  four  lightnings  are  kapila, 

atilohiia,  pita  and  asila  indicating  respectively  wind,  heat,  rain  and  famine. 


46 


Agni  Purina 


7-8.  The  four  sons  of  Hiranyakasipu  (were)  very  effulgent. 
(They  were)  Anuhrada,  Hrada,  Prahrada  a  staunch  devotee  of 
Visnu;  and  Samhrada  was  the  fourth  (son).  Hrada  (was) 
the  son  of  Hrada.  Ayusmat,  Sibi,  and  Baskala  (were)  the  sons 
of  Hrada. 

9.  Virocana  (was)  the  son  of  Prahrada.  Bali  was  born  to 
Virocana.  Bali  had  hundred  sons.  Bana  was  the  foremost  among 
them,  O  great  sage  ! 

10.  Having  propitiated  the  consort  of  Uma  (Siva)  in  the 
past  kalpa,  a  boon  was  obtained  by  Bana  from  the  lord  that  he 
would  always  wander  by  the  side  (of  the  lord). 

11.  The  sons  of  Hiranyaksa  were  five.1  Sambara,  Sakuni2, 
Dvimurddhan,  Sankurarya3 *  were  (the  prominent  among) 
the  hundred  sons  of  Danu. 

12.  Suprabha  was  the  daughter  of  Svarbhanu  (a  son  of 
Danu).  Sac!  was  known  as  the  daughter  of  Puloman  (a  son  of 
Danu).  Upadanavi,  Hayas'ira,  and  Sarmistha  (were)  the  daugh¬ 
ters  of  Vrsaparvan  (a  son  of  Danu). 

13.  Puloma  and  Kalaka  were  the  two  daughters  of  Vais'va- 
nara.  They  both  married  Kasyapa  and  they  had  crores  of 
sons. 


14-16.  In  the  family  of  Prahrada  (were  bora)  four  crores 
(of  sons)  (known  as)  the  nivatakavaca  (protected  by  armour). 

amra  had  six  daughters— Kaki,  Syeni,  Bhasi,  Grdhrika,  Suci 
and  Sugriva.  The  crows  and  (other  birds)  were  born 
from  them.  The  horses  and  camels  (were  bora  in  the  line) 
o  Tamra.  Aruna  and  Garuda  (were  bom)  from  Vinata.  Thou- 

fsuch  °  ,S^rPen^/wieye)  k°rn  Surasa.  Thousands  of  serpents 
17  Vasukl>  Taksaka  and  others  were  born  of  Kadru. 

atic  bird  k  having  tusks,  other  earthly  beings  and  the  aqu- 

anll  Werehb°rVr°  Kr°dM-  The  cows>  haloes  and  other 
were  .he  pr'cSucZ  The  «"“*  and  oth"' 


■and  Kalanabhx  Mahanabha-  Mahabahu 

o'  ?T-aS-uhV0n  of  Hiranyaksa.  See  ibid. 

3.  Sankusirah.  See  ibid. 

f®ading  given  in  h«e  mixes  the 

that  of  Danu. 


progeny  of  Hiranyaksa  and 


19.18-28 


47 


18.  The  Yaksas  (semi-divine  beings)  and  the  demons  (were 
born)  of  Khasa.  The  nymphs  came  into  being  from  Muni.  The 
Gandharvas  (a  class  of  semi-divine  beings)  (were  born)  to 
Arista.  Thus  the  stationary  as  well  as  the  movable  are  born  of 
Kasyapa. 

19-21.  Innumerable  are  the  offspring  of  these.  The  Danavas 
(the  progeny  of  Danu)  (the  demons)  were  conquered  by  the 
celestials.  Diti,  who  had  lost  her  offspring,  propitiated  Kasyapa, 
desirous  of  (getting)  a  son  capable  of  destroying  Indra.  (She) 
achieved  (her  object)  from  Kasyapa.  Indra,  seeking  to  find  a 
fault  (found  out  that  she)  had  slept  without  washing  her  feet 
and  destroyed  (cut  off)  the  embryo.  They  became  celestials 
(known  as)  Maruts,  fifty  one  (in  number)  radiant  with  lustre 

and  the  allies  of  Sakra  (Indra).2 

22  All  these  (are)  forms  of  Han.  Having  installed 
Prthu  as  the  ruler,  Hari  duly  set  apart  kingdoms  for  others. 

23.  The  moon  (was  made  the  king)  of  the  twice-born  and 
the  plants,  Varuna  (as)  the  king  of  waters,  Vaisravana  (Kubera) 
(as  )  the  king  of  kings,  Visnu  (as)  the  lord  of  Suns 

24.  Pavaka  (fire)  as  the  king  of  Vasus;  Vasava  (Indra) 
(as)  the  lord  of  Maruts  and  then  Daksa  (as  the  King)  of 
Prajapatis  (patriarchs),  Prahlada  (as)  the  ruler  of  demons. 

25  Yama  (was  made)  the  king  of  manes,  Hara  (Siva) 
(as)  the  lord  of  goblins,  Himavat  (as  the  ruler)  of  moun¬ 
tains,  the  ocean  (as)  the  lord  of  rivers.  ,, 

26.  Citraratha  (was  made  the  ruler)  of  Gandharvas, 
mrd  then  Vasuki  (as  the  ruler)  of  Nagas,  Takfka  (as)  the 
kine  of  serpents,  and  then  Garuda,  among  the  birds. 

27.  The  Airavata  (was  made  the  ruler)  among  the  lords 

of  elephants,  bull  of  the  kine  and  the  tiger,  °f  an,mals> 

(and)  Plaksa  (the  Indian  fig-tree)  (as)  the  lor  o  _ 

98  And  Uccaihsravas  (was  made  the  ruler)  among  the 

horses.2  Sudhanvan  (son  of Vairaja 

of  the  east,  Sahkhapad  (the  son  of  Kardama  Piajapati)  (th 

1.  Failure  to  observe  the  necessary  ^ode^Ai.P.  I. 

var  quisher  of  Indra.  For  a  detailed  account  o  P 

30-41 ;  P.  Index  II.  pp.  87-88. 

2.  Cf.  Vi.  P.  I-  »ti.  I1*14' 


48 


Agni  Puranct 

regent)  of  the  south,  Ketumat  (son  of  Rajas)  as  the  protector 
of  the  waters  (on  the  west),  Hiranyaromaka  (son  of  Parjanya. 
Prajapati)  on  the  Saumya  (the  north). 


CHAPTER  TWENTY 
Primary  creation 

Agni  said  : 

1 .  The  intellect  (mahat)  is  the  first  creation  of  Brahma 
The  second  (creation)  is  that  of  the  subtle  principles  (tanmatras)' 
known  as  the  bkuiasarga  (creation  of  elements). 

,  2 *‘  The  third  is  the  creation  of  evolutes  ( vaikarikas ) 

known  as  the  sense-organs.  These  are  the  primary  creation 
( prakjlasarga )  produced  out  of  the  intellect. 

imlJhX  fOUTth'  ,i$  thC  ma'n  creation  (mukhyasarga).  The 

mmobile  things  are  known  as  the  main  (creation).  That  (crea- 

nlTt VS  SP°kCn  “  ^  Creati°n  °f>  the  Iow-  -der  Ul 
STL  ,  "  ^  °f  ,he  5ub-"“"’“  C-ni 

4.  Then  the  sixth  creation  is  that  of  the  higher  orders  (urdh- 
vasrotas),  known  as  the  creation  of  the  celestials/Then  the  seventh 

crea5r^ii*erdd1'  c— — >X 

passionate  divtSties)  'o^ed  (com- 

tamasa  These  flatted  fi  P°S.ed  of  the  qualities  {sattvika  and 
tionsubjectlo  <«* 

—  (tie  creation  tT™  “  'a'  ^ 

creations2  of  Brahma  which  arp  •  lese  are  the.  nine 

7-8.  Bhrcu  and  othf*  •  C  mam  cause  for  the  universe. 

of  Daksa.  Creation  has  been  des^lf  and  °ther  dau8hters 

They  are  usual  (nilya)  subject  to  s  “  by  the  people- 

1  ya),  subject  to  some  cause  (naimittika) ,  (and) 

2L  a"  rClat?d  -  sense-organs. 

(English  translation)  p.  248  note  214.  10ns  int0  nine  classes.  Sec  Siva  P. 


20.9-20 


49 


daily  (dainandini)*  (The  creation)  after  the  intermediate  dis¬ 
solution  is  known  as  the  daily  (dainandinl).  The  constant 
creation  that  takes  place  everyday  is  considered  as  nitya. 

9.  From  Bhrgu,  Khyati  gave  birth  to  the  celestials  Dhatr 
and  Vidhatr.  Sri  (LaksmI)  (was)  the  consort  of  Visnu,  and  was 
praised  by  Sakra  (Indra)  for  multiplying  the  progeny. 

10.  The  sons  of  Dhatr  and  Vidhatr  were  Prana  and  Mrkan- 
duka  successively.  Vedasira  gave  birth  to  Markandeya  from 
Mrkandu. 

11-12.  A  son  (by  name)  Paurnamasa  was  born  to  Marlci 
through  Sambhuti.  Sinivall,  Kuhu,  Raka  and  Anumati  were 
the  sons  of  Angiras  through  Smrti.  With  Atri,  Anasuya  gave 
birth  to  Soma,  Durvasas,  and  Dattatrcya^oj/zi. 

13.  A  son  (by  name)  Dattoli  was  born  to  Prlti,  the  wife  of 
Pulastya.  Sahisnu  and  Kramapadika1 2  were  born  to  Ksama 
from  Pul  aha. 

14.  The  highly  radiant  Balakhilyas  were  born  to  Sannati3 
from  Kratu.  They,  who  were  60000,  were  of  the  size  of  a  joint  of 
the  thumb. 

15.  To  Urja  from  Vasistha  (were  born)  Raja,  Gatra,  Urdh- 
vabahu,  Savana,  Alagliu4,  Sukra  and  Sutapah,  the  seven  sages. 

16.  Pavaka,  Pavamana  and  Suci  were  born  of  Agni  and 
Svaha.  The  manes  Agnisvattah,  devoid  of  fire  and  Barhi- 
sada,  with  fire  (were  born)  from  aja  (Brahma,  the  unborn). 

1 7.  Mena  and  DharinI  were  the  daughters  of  the  manes 
through  Svadha.  Plimsa  was  the  wife  of  Adharma.  Then 
Anrta  was  born  to  them. 

18.  Nikrti  (was  their)  daughter.  Bhaya  and  Naraka  (were 
born)  from  them,  who  had  Maya  and  Vedana  as  their  wives. 

19.  Of  those  two,  Maya  gave  birth  to  Mftyu,  the  destroyer 
of  living  beings.  And  also  Vedana  gave  birth  to  a  son  Duhkha 
from  Raurava  (Naraka). 

20.  Vyadhi,  Jara,  Soka,  Trsna  and  Krodha  were  born  from 
Mjrtyu.  (Rudra)  was  born  wailing  from  Brahma  and  (was 
known  as)  Rudra  by  name  on  account  of  the  wailing. 


1.  The  minor  dissolution  of  the  world  after  15  years  of  Brahma’s  life  is 
known  as  the  daxnandina  pralaya.  MW .  p.  497b. 

2.  Vt.P.  I.  x.  10  reads  Kardama  and  Urvarupa. 

3.  Santati.  Vi.P.  I.x.l  1. 

4.  Anagha.  Vi.P .  1.x.  14. 


50 


Agni  Ptirana 


21  O  twice-born  !  the  grandfather  (Brahma)  said  to 
(him)  (called  him  as)  Bhava,  Sarva,  Isana,  Pasupatt,  Bhima, 

'“mi  “"ave  up  her  life  on  account  of  the  wrath 

of  Daksa  and  having  become  the  daughter  of  Himavat  again 

became  the  wife  of  Sambhu  (Siva). 

23  (I  will  now  describe)  the  methods  of  worship  of  Visnu 

etc.,  preceded  by  bathing  and  other  (rites)  and 
merit  and  emancipation,  by  doing  which  Svayambhuva  (Manu) 
(had  the  benefit),  as  told  by  Narada  and  others  to  the  sages. 


CHAPTER  TWENTYONE 
Method  of  worshipping  Visnu  and  other  gods 
J\rarada  said  : 

1.  I  will  (now)  describe  the  general  method  of  wor¬ 
shipping  Visnu  and  others  as  well  as  the  mantras  (mystic  formulae) 
which  yield'  good  to  all.  One  has  to  worship  (him  by  saying) 
“Salutations  to  Acyuta  (Visnu)  and  to  (his)  entire  family 

^  2-4  ^  (Salutation  to)  Dhatr,  Vidhatf,1  Ganga,  Yamuna, 

the  two  nidhis  (treasures),  the  fortune  of  Dvara(ka)  theVastu- 
deity  (the  presiding  deity  of  the  houscsite),  Sakti  (female  divi- 
nity),  Kurma  (tortoise),  Ananta  (the  serpent),  the  Eaith, 
righteous  knowledge,  detachment  from  the  world,  the  omni¬ 
potence  (of  the  lord),  the  unrighteousness  etc.  the  root,  stalk, 
filament  and  pericarp  of  the  Iptus,  ligveda  and  other  {Vedas), 
Krta  and  other  (jugas),  satlva  and  other  (qualities),  the  solai 
and  other  regions,  the  pure  and  elevating  union  of  knowledge 
and  action.  One  has  to  worship  these. 

5  jQy}  truth,  the  goddess  benevolently  placed,  Durga 
(Parvatl),  speech,  goblins,  field  and  Vasudeva  and  others  are 
worshipped. 


1.  Dhatf  and  Vidhatr  are  the  two  sons  of  Brahma. 


21.6-16 


51 


®:  heart-  !lead’  “at  °r  mail,  eye  and  weapons, 

conch,  disc,  mace,  lotus,  Srivatsa  (sacred  mark  on  Lord 
Krsna  s  chest)  and  the  Kaustubha  gem  are  worshipped, 

7.  The  garland  of  wood-flowers  (worn  by  Krsna),  Sri 

(Laksmi),  Pusti  (nourishment),  Garuda  (vehicle  of  Visnu), 
and  the  preceptor  are  worshipped.  Indra,  Agni,  Yama,  Raksa 
(Nairrta),  water,  wind,  lord  of  wealth  (Kubera)  (are 
also  worshipped).  v 

8.  That  I  sana,  the  unborn,  and  weapons,  vehicles, 
Kumuda  and  others  (are  worshipped  next).  By  the  worship  of 
Visvaksena  (all-pervasive)  (Visnu)  in  a  circle  first,  one  gets 
his  desires  accomplished. 


9.  Then  the  general  worship  of  Siva  (is  described).  One  has 
to  worship  Nandi n  at  first.  (Then)  Mahakala  (Siva),  Ganga, 
Yamuna,  Ganas,  and  others  (are  worshipped), 

10-11.  (Then)  the  speech,  the  goddess  of  prosperity,  the 
preceptor,  the  Vastu  (deity),  the  different  female  energies  and 
Dharma  (the  lord  of  death)  and  other  gods  (are  worshipped). 
(The  female  energies)  Varna,  Jyestha,  Raudri,  Kali,  Kalavi- 
karini,  Balavikarini,  Balapramathini,  Sarvabhutadamaru,  Mano- 
mani  and  Siva  (are  worshipped)  in  the  due  order. 

12.  (Saying)  Ham,  Hum,  Ham  (salutation)  to  the  form  of 
Siva,  Siva  is  worshipped  along  with  his  limbs  and  mouth. 
Haum,  (salutation)  to  Siva,  Haum  and  Ham  (salutations) 
to  I sana  (one  of  the  Pancabrahman  forms  of  Siva)  and  other 
faced  (forms  of  Siva). 

13.  Hrim  (salutation)  to  Gaurl  (Parvati)  ,  Gam  (saluta¬ 
tion)  to  Gana,  face  of  Sakra  (Indra),  Canqla,  heart  and  others. 
The  mystic  syllables  in  the  worship  of  the  sun  (are  described 
now).  The  tawny-coloured  Dandin  is  to  be  worshipped. 

14.  One  should  adore  Uccaihsravas  (the  horse  of  Indra), 
the  very  much  pure  Aruna  (younger  brother  of  the  Sun-god), 
The  moon  and  the  twilight,  the  other  faces  and  Skanda  (progeny 
of  Siva)  in  the  middle  are  worshipped. 

15.  Then  (the  female  divinities)  Dipta,  Suksma,  Jaya, 
Bhadra,  Vibhuti,  Vimala,  Amogha,  Vidyuta  and  SarvatomukhI 
arc  worshipped. 

16.  Then  the  mantra  Ham,  Kham,  Rham  for  the  firebrand 
(is  used  for  the  worship)  of  the  seat  of  the  sun  and  (his)  form. 
Hram,  Hrim,  salutation  to  the  sun,  Am,  salutation  to  the  heart. 


52 


Agni  Purana 


17.  (Salutation)  to  the  (rays  of  the)  sun,  to  his  head,  and 
similarly  to  the  flames  reaching  up  the  regions  of  demons, 
wind,  earth,  ether,  and  heavens.  Hum  is  remembered 
as  the  mystic  amulet. 

18-19.  (Salutations  are  made)  to  the  lustre,  eye,  Hrah,. 
to  the  weapons  of  Sun,  Raji,  Sakti,  and  Niskubha.  Then  Soma 
(Moon),  Angaraka  (Mars), Budha  (Mercury),  Jiva  (Jupiter), 
Sukra  (Venus)  and  Sani  (Saturn)  as  well  as  Rahu,  Ketu, 
tejas,  Canda  are  worshipped  in  order  in  brief.  Then  the  worship¬ 
per  (should  worship)  the  seat  of  the  image  (of  the  deity )  and. 
the  heart  etc. 

20.  (The  mantra)  for  the  scat  of  Visnu  for  the  image  of  Visnu 
(is)  “Ram,  Srlm,  Srlm,  Srldhara,  Hari.”  Hrlm  (is)  the  mystic 
syllable  for  the  images  (of  all  deities)  which  is  capable  of  capti¬ 
vating  the  three  worlds. 

21.  Hrlm,  Hrslkesa  (master  of  the  senses)  (Visnu),  Klim, 
Visnu.  With  long  vowels  (one  should  adore)  the  heart  and  other 
things.  (The  performance) of  worship  on  the  fifth  day  (pancaml) 
with  all  these  (mystic  syllables)  yields  victory  in  battles. 

22-23.  Worship  of  the  disc,  mace,  conch,  pestle,  sword, 
Sarnga  (the  bow),  noose,  goad,  Srlvatsa  (mark  on  the 
chest  of  the  lord),  with  the  garland  of  wood-flowers  and  with  the 
mantra  Srlm,  worship  of  Sri,  MahalaksmI,  Tarksya  (vehicle  of 
Visnu),  the  preceptor,  Indra  etc.  (are  made)  in  order.  With 
the  (mystic)  syllable  Aum,  Hrlm,  Devi  (goddess)  Sarasvati 
(one  has  to  worship)  the  seat  of  (Goddess)  Sarasvati. 

24.  The  Hrt  etc.,  LaksmI,  Mcdha,  Kala,  Tusti,  Pustika, 
Gaurl,  Prabhavatl,  (and)  Durga  (the  different  female  divinities), 
goblins,  preceptor  and  the  presiding  deity  of  the  field  (are 
worshipped). 

25.  Then  (one  has  to  say)  Gam,  (salutation)  to  the  lord 
of  the  ganas ,  Hrlm  to  Gaurl,  Srim  to  Sri,  Hrlm  to  Tvarita,  Aim, 
Klim,  Saum  to  Tripura  using  the  fourth  declensional  endings 
and  ending  with  salutations. 

26.  All  the  mystic  syllables  are  pronounced  preceded  by  the 
Pranava  (syllable  Om),  adding  bindu  (the  nasal  sound  marked 
by  a  dot),  either  while  offering  adorations  or  the  performance 
of  repetition. 

27.  By  the  offer  of  a  homa  (offer  unto  the  fire)  with  sesamum 
and  ghee  and  other  things,  (these  mantras)  become  bestowers  of 


22.1-7 


53 


dharma ,  kama,  artha  and  moksa  (four  principal  objects  of  human 
life) .  Whoever  reads  these  syllables  of  adoration  reaches  heaven 
after  enjoying  pleasures. 


CHAPTER  TWENTYTWO 
Procedure  for  bathing  prior  to  a  religious  rite 
Jfarada  said  : 

1.  I  will  (now)  describe  the  (mode  of)  bathing  preceding 
(any  religious)  act.  Having  taken  a  clod  of  earth  accompanied 
by  (meditation  on)  the  man-lion  form  (of  Visnu),  and  making 
it  into  two  parts,  (one  has  to  do)  mental  bathing  with  one  part 
of  it. 

2.  Having  immersed  (one’s  body  in  waters)  and  having 
partaken  (three  drops  of)  water  and  assigning  (on  the  body) 
with  the  lion  (man-lion)  one  has  to  get  himself  protected.  Then 
one  has  to  do  bathing  as  laid  down,  being  preceded  by  the 
•control  of  the  breath. 

3.  Meditating  on  Lord  Hari  in  one’s  heart  with  the  eight- 
syllabled  mantra  (Orh  namo  Vasudevaya,  Oih  namo  Narayanaya 
or  Orii  namo  Narasimhaya),  the  clod  of  earth  (is  made) 
into  three  parts  on  the  palm  and  protection  in  (all)  the  quarters 
{is  achieved)  with  the  recitation  of  (the  mantra )  for  the  lion 
(man-lion). 

4-7.  With  the  recitation  (of  the  mantra)  of  Vasudeva,  having 
mentally  resolved  the  sacred  water  and  having  rubbed 
the  body  with  vedic  mantras  and  having  adored  the  image  of 
deity  and  having  remembered  the  aghamarsana  (sukta) 
which  destroys  sins)  and  putting  on  a  cloth,  perform  the 
(following)  rite.  Putting  water  on  the  palm,  accompanied 
by  mantras  and  wiping  off  waters  on  the  palm,  controlling 
with  the  Narayana  (mantra),  the  air  is  inhaled  and  water  is  let 
off.  Then  contemplating  on  Hari,  offering  waters  (of  oblation) 
and  reciting  the  twelve-syllabled  (mantra),  appeasing  all  others 
with  devotion  commencing  in  order  with  the  seat  of  meditation, 
the  mantras  upto  all  the  guardian  deities  of  the  quarters,  the 


54  Agtii  Purana 

sages,  clans  of  manes,  men,  all  beings  and  ending  with  the  mobile 
(beings)  are  placed. 

8.  Then  having  assigned  limbs  (for  the  different  deities), 
withdrawing  the  mantras  one  has  to  go  to  the  house  for  perform¬ 
ing  rites.  In  this  way,  one  has  to  bathe  with  the  mulamantra . 


CHAPTER  TWENTYTHREE 
Mode  of  performing  worship 

Narada  said  : 

1-2.  I  will  now  describe  the  mode  of  worship,  O  brahmins  ! 
by  doing  which  one  gets  all  (objects  of  life).  Having  washed 
feet,  sipping  waters,  and  controlling  his  speech  and  having 
guarded  (himself  like  this),  facing  the  east,  and  having  seated  in 
the  svastika  or  padmasana  or  other  posture  (one  has  to  meditate) 
on  (the  syllable)  yam  at  the  centre  of  the  navel,  having  tawny 
colour  and  of  the  form  of  terrible  wind. 

3.  Then  meditating  on  the  syllable  ksanm  of  abundant  lustre 
at  the  centre  of  the  heart,  burn  down  all  impurities  from  the 
body. 

4-5.  One  has  to  burn  the  impurities  with  the  flames  surging 
upwards  and  downwards.  One  has  to  meditate  on  the  {mantra) 
of  the  shape  of  the  moon  situated  in  the  sky.  An  intelligent  per¬ 
son  has  to  sprinkle  his  own  body  with  the  nectar-like  waters 
pervading  the  lotus  in  the  heart  through  (the  artery  )susumnd 
and  passing  through  the  nerves. 

6.  Having  purified  materials  (for  worship)  one  has  to 
assign  (them).  Then  (one  has)  to  purify  hands  as  well  as 
implements.  Commencing  with  the  thumb  of  the  right  hand, 
(the  fingers)  of  the  two  hands  are  made  to  rest  on  the  principal 
limbs. 

7-8.  (Then)  with  sixty  two  mantras  (sacred  syllables)  one 
has  to  assign  to  the  body  the  twelve  limbs — heart,  head,  tuft  of 
hair,  armour,  weapons,  eyes,  belly,  hinder  part,  arms,  thighs, 
knees  and  feet.  Having  offered  the  mudra  (special  posture  of  the 


1.  mulamantra  is  the  basic  subtle  mystic  syllabic. 


23.9-19 


55 


arms  and  body ) ,  one  has  to  meditate  on  Visnu,  and  having  repeat¬ 
ed  (his  name)  one  hundred  and  eight  times,  one  has  to  worship 
him. 

9.  Having  placed  the  water-jar  on  the  left  and  the  mate¬ 
rials  for  worship  on  the  right  and  having  washed  (them)  with  the 
implements  and  water  offerings,  they  are  placed  together  with 
flowers  and  scents. 

10-11.  Having  sprinkled  the  radiant  (form)  of  con¬ 
sciousness  and  omnipresence  with  waters  (purified)  by  the 
repetition  (of  the  mantra  of  the  lord)  eight  times  (and)  having 
sprinkled  the  hand  with  mantra  ending  with  pha\  and  then  having 
meditated  on  Hari,  with  his  face  directed  towards  the  (south¬ 
east)  direction  (presided  over  by)  Agni,  (one  has  to  pray)  for 
virtue,  knowledge,  detachment,  (and)  supremacy.  (Facing) 
the  east  (and  other  directions),  (one  has  to  get  rid)  of  his  sins 
and  physical  impurities  remaining  in  yogic  postures. 

12.  (Remaining)  in  Kurma  (tortoise)  posture,  one  should 
adore  Ananta,  Yama,  the  solar  and  other  luminous  regions  and 
other  planets  (occupying)  the  filament  and  pericarp  (of  the 
lotus). 

13-14.  Having  first  meditated  (on  them)  in  one’s  heart  and 
having  invoked  and  worshipped  in  a  circle,  (offerings)  of  waters 
of  respect,  waters  for  washing  feet,  waters  for  rinsing,  madhuparka 
(respectful  offering), bath,  cloth,  sacred  thread,  scents,  flowers, 
incense,  lamp  and  eatables  (are  made)  (along)  with  the  formula 
(known  as)  Pundarlkaksa. 

15.  First,  one  has  to  worship  the  limbs  and  then  Brahma 
at  the  doorway  in  the  eastern  (direction),  the  disc  and  the  club 
in  the  southern  (direction) ;  the  conch,  and  the  bow  have  to  be 
assigned  in  the  corner  (governed  by)  the  moon. 

16.  One  should  assign  the  quiver  and  sword  to  the  left  and 
right  side  of  the  deity,  the  armour  and  nourishment  on  the  left, 
and  the  prosperity  on  the  right  in  front. 

1 7.  One  has  to  worship  with  respective  sacred  syllables,  the 
garland  of  wild-flowers,  (the  mark)  Hrfsa,  (the  gem)  kaustubha 
and  the  presiding  deities  of  the  quarters  outside  and  all  (the 
attendant  gods)  of  Visnu  as  well  either  partially  or  wholly. 

18-19.  One  has  to  worship  with  the  limbs  with  the  sacred 


1.  It  consists  of  curd,  clarified  butter,  water,  honey  and  sandalpaste. 


56 


Agni  Purdna 


syllables  partially  or  wholly.  After  having  repeated  (the  sacred 
syllables),  doing  circumambulation  and  adoration  and  offering 
waters  of  adoration  and  the  offerings,  one  has  to  assign  in  the 
heart  and  after  having  meditated,  “I  am  the  brahman  and  Hari”, 
(one  has  to  repeat  the  words)  ‘come’  used  in  (the  ceremony  of) 
invocation  and  “forgive  me”  in  dismissal  (at  the  conclusion). 

20.  Having  worshipped  in  this  manner  with  the  mantra 
of  eight  letters  (one  becomes  eligible)  to  get  liberation.  The 
(mode  of)  worship  of  one  form  (of  a  deity)  has  been  described. 
Listen  to  the  (mode  of)  worship  in  the  structure  of  nine  (apart¬ 
ments). 

21-23.  Having  assigned  Vasudeva,  Balarama)  and  others 
to  the  two  thumbs  and  then  at  first  to  the  fingers,  then  to  the 
body,  head,  forehead,  face,  heart,  navel,  organ  of 
generation,  knees,  (and)  between  the  feet,  one  has  to 
worship  in  order,  single  seat  of  the  deity  consisting  of  nine  parts 
and  then  the  nine  seats  and  of  the  nine  forms  consisting  of  nine 
parts  in  nine  lotuses  as  before.  Then  in  the  midst  of  the  lotus  one 
has  to  worship  Vasudeva. 


CHAPTER  TWENTYFOUR 
Mode  of  constructing  the  sacrificial  pit  and  the  oblations  unto  fire 
Narada  said  : 

1-2.  I  shall  describe  the  mode  of  oblation  to  fire,  by 
which  (one)  gets  all  his  desires  fulfilled.  One  has  to  dig  a  square 
pit  after  having  measured  out  with  a  thread,  four  times,  twenty- 
four  thumbs  in  length.  Leaving  a  space  of  the  breadth  of  two 
thumbs  a  girdle  is  to  be  made  (around)  the  pit. 

3.  (One  seat)  of  twelve  thumbs  in  length,  and  eight,  two 
and  four  thumbs  respectively  in  extent  (should  be  made)  in  the 
east. 

4.  (One)  beautiful  (seat)  of  ten,  six  and  four  thumbs  in 
extent  and  with  a  mouth,  two  thumbs  in  width  and  tapering 
gradually  should  be  made  in  the  west. 

5.  It  should  be  of  the  form  of  a  leaf  of  the  holy  fig  tree  and 


.24.6-19 


57 


should  enter  a  little  into  the  pit.  A  drain,  quarter  of  a  thumb  in 
breadth  and  fifteen  thumbs  in  length  (should  then  be  dug). 

6.  The  base  (of  the  drain)  at  the  seat  (will  be)  three  thumbs 
•and  the  fore  part  six.  (This  is)  the  characteristic  (of  a  pit)  of 
one  cubit  (hand).  (The  characteristic  of  a  pit)  of  two  cubits  is 
twice  (this). 

7.  I  have  thus  described  to  you  (about)  the  pit  surrounded 
by  three  altars.  I  will  now  describe  (about)  the  circular  pit. 
A  thread  is  to  be  fixed  in  half  of  the  pit,  the  remaining  portion 
being  fixed  at  an  intermediate  point. 

8-9.  Having  placed  half  the  rope  in  the  pit,  if  (the  rope) 
is  moved  around  it  would  be  a  circle.  After  having  marked  out 
the  centre,  (if  one  makes)  a  crescent-shaped  pit  east-west,  and 
away  from  the  northern  direction,  half  (the  size)  of  the  pit  and 
half  the  angular  portion,  it  indicates  auspiciousness. 

10.  (In  pits  of)  circular  (shape)  the  girdles  would  be  of  the 
ishape  of  the  petals  of  a  lotus.  The  ladle  for  the  sake  of  oblation 
is  to  be  made  of  the  size  of  an  arm. 

1 1.  Then  one  has  to  make  (ready)  a  site  (of  the  length) 
of  thirteen  thumbs  and  four  (in  breadth).  A  pit  of  three-fourths 
(of  the  site)  is  dug  and  a  beautiful  circle  (is  made). 

12-13.  One  has  to  purify  (the  space)  outside  the  pit  evenly, 
horizontally  and  upwards  (to  the  extent  of)  half  a  thumb  (and) 
one-fourth  of  a  thumb.  A  beautiful  boundary  line  is  to  be  made 
with  the  remaining  (space)  (around)  the  pit. 

14-15.  Or  it  may  be  half  a  thumb  more.  The  mouth  would 
be  at  the  front  (having)  a  width  of  four  or  five  thumbs.  Its 
central  part  might  be  three  times  two  thumbs  and  beautiful. 
The  extent  (on  all  sides)  (might  be)  of  equal  (measurement) 
(and)  its  central  portion  is  lowered. 

16.  There  must  be  a  hole  at  the  neck  portion  (of  such  a  size) 
that  the  little  finger  would  enter.  The  other  pit  should  be  beauti¬ 
fully  made  according  to  one’s  liking. 

1 7  The  (sacrificial )  ladle  should  have  a  handle  of  the  length 
of  one  hand.  A  beautiful  spoon  (having)  circumference  of  two 
thumbs  has  to  be  made. 

18-19.  Just  as  the  cow’s  foot  (would)  sink  in  a  little  mud, 
so  also  after  having  drawn  a  line  (of  the  length)  of  a  . thumb 
(known  as)  vajrandsikd,  (one  has  to  draw)  first  a  line  with  a  fine 


58 


Agni  Purdna 


tip,  (then)  two  lines  between  it  and  the  east  (and)  then  three 
lines  in  the  middle  from  the  south  onwards  in  order. 

20.  Having  drawn  (the  lines),  (and)  consecrating,  with  the 
syllable  Om,  one  who  knows  the  mantras ,  has  to  make  a  seat  in 
which  the  energy  of  Visnu  rests. 

21-22.  Having  adorned  the  incarnate  form  (of  energy), 
one  has  to  throw  fire  after  having  remembered  Hari.  Having 
offered  twigs  of  the  size  of  a  span  (between  the  thumb  and  the 
fore-finger) and  having  sprinkled  water  and  having  spread  around 
on  the  three  sides  in  the  east  etc.  with  the  darbha  grass,  the  fire 
from  the  fuel  as  well  as  the  ladle  for  pouring  clarified  butter, 
{sruk)  and  sacrificial  ladle  {sruva)  are  to  be  placed  on  the  ground. 

23-26.  (One  should  then  place)  vessels  (for  keeping) 
clarified  butter,  (and)  {caru)  (oblation  of  rice,  barley  and  pulse 
boiled  together),  kuSa  grass  and  clarified  butter.  The  proksani 1 2 
vessel  being  sprinkled  with  water  with  the  pranita 2  vessel,  (and) 
taken  up  and  filled  with  water  (and)  that  water  being  enclosed 
in  the  hand  with  the  pavitra  {darbha  grass)  placed  in  between 
and  having  taken  the  proksani  vessel  towards  the  east  and  having 
placed  it  in  front  of  the  radiant  fire  (and)  having  sprinkled 
(all  the  vessels)  thrice  with  water  and  having  placed  the  fuel  in 
front,  (and)  having  meditated  on  Visnu  in  the  pranita  vessel 
containing  a  flower  and  having  then  filled  vessel  for  (keeping) 
clarified  butter  with  clarified  butter  and  having  placed  it 
in  front,  the  purification  of  the  clarified  butter  is  made  by  strain¬ 
ing  and  sprinkling  clarified  butter  on  the  fire. 

27.  One  should  take  up  two  ku§a  grass  with  unbroken  tips, 
not  being  filled  in,  and  of  the  measure  of  a  span  (between  the 
thumb  and  the  fore-finger)  with  the  thumb  and  the  nameless 
finger  (ring-finger)  of  the  palm  facing  upwards. 

28-30.  Having  taken  with  them  the  clarified  butter  twice 
and  having  carried  them,  (they)  must  be  cast  downwards  thrice. 
And  again  having  taken  the  ladles  {sruk  and  sruva)  (and)  having 
sprinkled  them  with  water  with  them  (the  kv$a  grass)  and  having 
heated  and  wiped  them  with  the  darbhas  and  again  having  sprink¬ 
led  (water)  and  burnt  and  having  placed  along  with  the  syllable 


1 .  Small  vessel  used  at  the  time  of  religious  rites. 

2.  Small  vessel  used  at  the  time  of  religious  rites. 


24.31-39 


59 


Om ,  the  aspirant  must  perform  fire  oblation  commencing 
with  the  syllable  Om  and  ending  with  salutation.  (One  has  to 
perform)  garbhadhana  and  other  rites  as  much  as  it  is  laid 
down. 

31.  One  has  to  do  up  to  the  naming  ceremony,  the  under¬ 
taking  of  a  vowed  observance,  observance  marking  the  conclusion 
of  study  of  the  student,  (and)  investiture  of  authority  in  due 
manner. 

32.  The  aspirant  must  everywhere  do  the  worship  with  the 
syllable  Om .  One  has  to  do  offering  unto  fire  with  the 
auxiliaries  befitting  one’s  means. 

33-34.  Garbhadhana 1  is  the  first  one.  Then  puriisavana 2  is  re¬ 
membered.  Then  the  simantonnayanaz,  jdtakarma*,  nama  (karana)1 2 3 4  5 , 
annaprafana 6,  cudakrli 7,  vratabandha 8,  and  many  more  are  the  vedic 
observances.  One  who  has  the  right  to  do  these  rites  should  per¬ 
form  these  in  the  company  of  his  wife. 

35.  Having  contemplated  (on  the  deity)  in  the  heart  and 
other  limbs  and  worshipping  him,  one  has  to  offer  sixty-four 
oblations  for  every  one  of  the  rites  again. 

36.  The  worshipper  has  to  offer  the  final  oblation  with  the 
sacrificial  ladle,  chanting  loudly  with  sweet  intonation  the  mystic 
formula  ending  with  the  word  vausa /. 

37.  After  having  purified  the  fire  of  Visnu,  the  food  intended, 
for  Visnu  has  to  be  boiled.  After  having  worshipped  Visnu  in 
the  altar  and  remembering  the  mystic  formulae  one  has  to 
seek  his  protection. 

38-39.  Having  worshipped  in  order  his  seat  and  other  things 
along  with  the  enclosures  with  fragrant  flowers  and  contemplat¬ 
ing  on  the  most  excellent  lord  of  all  deities,  and  placing  the 
fuel  and  then  the  support,  the  oblations  of  clarified  butter 


1.  One  of  the  purificatory  rites  performed  to  ensure  conception. 

2.  One  of  the  puiificatory  rites  performed  to  get  a  male  child  when  the 
embryo  has  not  yet  begun  to  move. 

3.  The  parting' of  hair,  another  purificatory  rite  performed  on  the 
eighth  month  after  conception. 

4.  rite  performed  soon  after  the  birth  of  a  child. 

5.  rite  performed  to  name  the  child. 

6.  first  partaking  of  food  by  a  child. 

7.  tonsure  at  the  age  of  three, 

8.  Undertaking  a  religious  observance. 


*60  Agni  Parana 

(should  be  poured)  in  order  (on  fires)  placed  in  the  south-east, 
north-east,  north-west  and  south-west. 

40.  Then  having  poured  portions  of  the  clarified  butter  in 
the  south  and  north,  one  has  to  offer  oblation  in  the  middle 
reciting  the  mystic  formulae  in  the  order  of  worship. 

41-42.  One  has  to  offer  oblation  with  clarified  butter  to  the 
deity  and  a  tenth  part  to  the  limbs.  (Having  offered)  oblations 
of  clarified  butter  and  other  things  hundred  times  or  thousand 
times,  or  of  the  twigs  or  of  the  sesamum,  and  concluding  the 
worship  ending  with  the  oblation  and  calling  the  disciples  who 
are  pure,  and  placing  the  fed  beasts  in  front,  (they  are)  sacri¬ 
ficed  by  means  of  weapons. 

43-45.  Having  united  the  disciples  with  one’s  own  self  with 
the  fetters  of  knowledge  and  action  and  the  consciousness  which 
follows  the  linga 1  and  which  is  protected  along  with  the  linga, 
having  been  consecrated  by  means  of  contemplation,  (they) 
have  to  be  purified  by  the  syllables  of  Vayu.  Then  the  creation 
of  the  whole  egg  (the  universe),  consumed  by  the  fire  (and) 
reduced  into  a  heap  of  fire  is  contemplated  upon  with  the  sylla¬ 
bles  of  the  Fire  god.  (Then  one  should  sprinkle  ashes  on  the 
water  and  meditate  on  the  world. 

46.  Then  one  has  to  assign  the  creative  power  which  is 
known  as  the  seed  of  the  earth  and  which  is  enveloped  by  all  the 
subtle  principles. 

47.  Then  one  has  to  rrfeditate  on  the  egg  produced  out 
of  it,  (which)  is  its  base  and  identical  with  the  self.  Then  one 
has  to  meditate  on  the  form  of  the  purusa  (the  Supreme  Being) 
identical  with  the  pranava  (the  syllable  Om)  at  its  centre  (centre 
of  the  egg). 

48.  The  linga,  situated  in  one’s  self,  (and)  (which)  has  been 
purified  earlier,  is  then  to  be  transferred.  Then  the  positions  of 
the  different  important  organs  are  to  be  thought  of. 

49.  Then,  having  remained  for  one  year,  the  egg  is  split. 
The  heaven  and  earth  (are  placed)  in  a  part.  Prajapati  (the 
creator)  (is  placed)  in  between  the  parts. 

50.  Having  meditated  on  his  form  and  again 
having  consecrated  that  child  with  the  pranava  (syllable 
Om)  and  having  made  his  body  made  up  of  the  mystic  for- 


1.  Situated  in  one’s  own  self,  representing  the  Supreme  Being 


24.51-59 


61 


mulae,  (one  has  to  do)  the  assignment  (of  limbs  to  different 
deities)  as  described  before. 

51-52.  Then  having  placed  the  hand  of  Visnu  on  the  head 
and  contemplated  on  one  or  many  (forms)  of  Visnu  in  this  way, 
(and)  having  muttered  mantras  (remaining)  in  meditative 
posture,  (and)  seizing  the  hands  with  the  basic  mystic  formula, 
one  who  knows  the  mystic  formula  having  covered  the  eyes  with, 
a  cloth  (has  to  sprinkle)  water  with  a  new  cloth. 

53.  After  having  performed  worship,  the  preceptor, 
who  knows  perfectly  well  the  nature  of  the  god  of  gods,  should 
make  his  disciples  sit  facing  the  east  and  with  folded  palms 
holding  flowers. 

54-55.  Having  been  instructed  by  the  preceptor  in  this  way, 
they  (the  disciples)  also  must  adore  Hari.  Having  offered  the 
handful  of  flowers  there  (and)  then  having  offered  worship  with 
flowers  without  (the  recitation  of)  any  mystic  formula  and 
saluted  the  feet  of  the  preceptor,  (the  disciples)  must  give  (him) 
the  fee,  either  all  his  possession  or  half  of  them. 

56.  The  preceptor  has  to  instruct  the  disciples  thoroughly. 
Hari  must  be  worshipped  by  them  by  (the  recitation  of  his) 
names.  The  Lord  Visvaksena1  (whose  powers  go  everywhere), 
who  bears  the  conch,  disc  and  mace  has  to  be  worshipped. 

57.  (Then  that  deity)  stationed  in  a  circular  altar,  (and 
who  is  frightening)  (is  worshipped)  with  the  fore-finger  and  is 
requested  to  leave. 

58-59.  The  entire  remnants  of  offerings  to  Visnu,  must 
be  offered  to  Visvaksena.  Then  having  bowed  down  and  sprink¬ 
led  (with  waters),  (their  own  persons),  (the  disciples)  having 
placed  the  fire  of  the  pit  on  their  own  person,  Visvaksena  is 
permitted  to  leave.  One  who  is  desirous  of  enjoyment  gets  all 
things.  One  who  is  desirous  of  release  from  mundane  existence 
gets  merged  in  Hari. 


1.  A  form  of  that  deity  to  whom  the  fragments  of  a  sacrifice  are  offered;, 
also  used  as  an  attribute  of  Vis$u.  MW .  p.  998.  col.  1 


€2 


Agni  Purfina 


CHAPTER  TWENTYFIVE 

The  formulae  and  mode  of  worship  relating  to  Vasudeva,  Sahkarsana, 
Pradyumna  and  Aniruddha 

Narada  said  : 

1 .  I  shall  now  describe  to  you  the  characteristics  of  the 
adorable  formulae  related  to  Vasudeva  and  others.  Vasudeva, 
Sahkarsana,  Pradyumna  and  Aniruddha  (are  the  four  forms). 

2.  (The  words)  salutations  to  the  lord  (are  said)  at  first 
along  with  the  mystical  letters  a,  a,  am,  ah.  (Then)  beginning 
with  the  syllable  ‘Om’  (and)  ending  with  (the  word)  salutations 
and  then  (the  words)  salutations  to  Narayana  (are  uttered). 

3.  Om,  salutations  to  the  eternal  Brahma,  Om,  salutations 
to  Visnu,  Om,  Ksaum,  Om,  salutations  to  the  Lord  Narasimha 
(are  uttered). 

4-6.  Om,  bhuh1,  salutations  to  lord  Varaha.  The  lords  of 
men  having  the  colour  of  japa  (flower)  (red),  brown,  yellow, 
blue,  black,  red,  the  colour  of  a  cloud,  fire,  honey,  (and) 
tawny,  (are)  the  nine  lords  of  vowels  (and)  mystical  letters. 
The  heart  and  the  different  limbs  are  resolved  in  order  along 
with  then  respective  names  being  well  divided  by  those  proficient 
in  the  tantras  (branch  of  literature  dealing  with  the  magical  and 
mystical  worship  of  different  deities).  The  characteristics  of 
those  mystical  letters  which  are  consonants  are  different. 

7.  They  are  divided  by  long  vowels  ending  with  (the  word) 
‘salutation’.  The  limbs  situated  in  between  "yoked  with  short 
(vowels)  are  described  as  minor  limbs. 

8.  The  mystic  syllable  situated  at  the  end  of  the  last  letter 
of  the  name  which  is  divided  is  excellent.  The  principal 
and  minor  limbs  (arc  composed)  of  long  and  short  vowels  inorder. 

-9=iQr  -This-  is  the  method  (of  use)  of  consonants  for 
arrangement  in  the  heart  (and)  other  (limbs). One  has  to  repeat 
according  to  his  accomplishment  (the  mystic  formula)  divided 
into  the  mystic  basic  syllable  and  their  ending  names  (along  with) 
the  names  of  limbs,  after  having  resolved  the  yoked  twelve 
(limbs)  beginning  with  the  heart  etc. 

11-  The  heart,  head,  tuft,  armour,  eye,  weapons  (are) 


1.  The  mystical  syllable  representing  the  earth. 


25.12-19 


63 


the  six  limbs  of  the  mystic  basic  syllables  of  the  basic  (mystic 
formula)  constituting  twelve  parts. 

12.  One  should  then  assign  in  order  to  (the  limbs) — the 
heart,  head,  tuft,  hands,  eyes,  belly,  back,  arms,  thighs,  knees, 
shank,  (and)  feet,  (the  following  syllables  and  gods). 

13.  (The  letters)  kam,  tarn,  pam,  sam  are  for  Vainateya1. 
(The  letters)  kham,  tham,  pham,  sam  (are)  for  the  brother  of 
mace-bearer  (Krsna).  (The  letters)  gam,  dam,  vam,  sam 
(form)  the  mystic  formula  for  the  nourishment.  Gham,  dham, 
bham,  ham  salutations  to  Sri  (Goddess  of  wealth). 

14.  (One  has  to  worship)  Pancajanya2,  (with  the  mystic 
letters)  vam,  sam,  mam,  ksam.  (The  mystic  letters)  cham,  tarn, 
pam  (are  for  the  worship  of)  Kaustubha  (gem  worn  by 
Visnu  on  his  head),  jam,  kham,  vam  for  the  Sudarsana  (the 
disc  in  the  hands  of  Visnu),  sam,  vam,  dam,  cam,  lam  for 
Srivatsa  (the  mark  on  the  chest  of  Visnu). 

15.  Om,  dham,  vam  salutations  to  the  garland  of  wild 
flowers  (worn  by  Visnu)  and  to  the  great  Ananta.3  The  limbs 
are  set  forth  with  the  words  of  the  mystic  formula  consisting  of 
words  without  the  mystic  letters. 

16.  Along  with  the  names  ending  with  the  caste  (names), 
the  heart  and  other  (limbs)  (are  set  forth).  The  pranava  (letter 
Om)  (is  repeated)  five  times.  Then  the  heart  and  other  (limbs) 
are  mentioned  five  times. 

17.  With  the  pranava  (one  should  adore)  the  heart  first. 
(With  the  word)  Tor  the  supreme5,  the  head  (and)  the  tuft  and 
with  one’s  name,  the  armour  (are  adored).  The  end  of  the  name 
would  be  (to  worship)  the  weapon. 

18.  Om,  the  supreme  weapon  is  the  first.  (Then)  one’s 
own  name  ending  in  the  fourth  case  (is  to  be  said).  Then  (the 
word)  ‘salutations’  (comes)  at  the  end.  This  consists  of  one  to 
twentysix  parts. 

19.  One  should  worship  prakrii  (nature)  at  the  tips  of 
the  little  and  other  fingers  of  the  arms  in  (one’s)  body.  (That 
one)  consisting  of  prakrii  (nature)  is  the  second  form  of  the 
supreme  being  consisting  of purusa  (soul). 

1 .  Garutfa,  the  eagle  vehicle  of  Visnu;  born  to  Vinata  and  sage  Kasyapa. 

2.  The  name  of  the  conch  of  Krsi.ia. 

3.  Without  end;  may  denote  Lord  Visriu  as  well* as  Se?a  Naga. 


64 


Agni  Purdy# 

20-21.  Om  (salutation)  to  the  supreme  being,  the  foremost 
or  the  first  soul.  The  air  and  the  sun  (are  his)  two  forms.  The 
fire  the  third  form  having  been  assigned  to  pervade  hands  and 
the  body,  wind  and  the  sun  in  the  fingers  of  hand,  this 
js  embodied  m  the  three  parts  in  the  two  arms,  left  and  the 
other  arm,  in  the  heart,  in  the  body  forming  the  fourth  state. 

22.  The  Rgveda  (is  made)  to  pervade  hand.  The  Tajus 
(Tajurvcda)  is  assigned  to  fingers.  The  form  of  Atharva  (is. 
assigned)  to  two  palms.  Thus  (assignments  are  made)  in 
(different  limbs)  head,  heart,  upto  the  feet. 

23.  As  before  having  assigned  the  extensive  sky  to  his  arm 
and  body,  wind  and  other  (elements),  to  fingers,  head,  heart 
generative  organ  and  the  feet. 

24.  The  wind,  fire,  water,  earth  (and  sky  or  ether) 
are  spoken  as  his  five  forms.  The  mind,  ear,  skin,  eye,  tongue 
land)  nose  are  said  to  be  the  six  forms. 

25-28.  The  extensive  mind  is  assigned  from  the  thumb 
onwards  to  the  head,  mouth,  generative  organ  and  the 
organ  of  excretion.  The  prime  form  is  said  to  be  consisting  of 
compassmn.  It  is  known  as  th cjiva  (life)  (which  is)  all  perva- 

Z'anH  TT  (W°-dS)’  Carth’  Cther’  Wen’  ««*". 

tapa  and  ^  are  assigned  duly  to  hands  and  the  body  begin- 
nmg  with  thumb.  The  Lord  of  the  world,  the  seventh  one 
nd  existing  in  the  palm  (is  taken)  gradually  to  the  body  head 

»£ *  T0Uth-  1Tr,>  gcn'ra,ivc  -*•»  “nd  Thfsissaid 
to  be  the  1^.2  (Next  follows  the  description  of)  the-Vaja- 

peya*  (and)  the  $oda&  rites.  '  J 

Th^  „r f 'f 'raS  a"d^f  f »«"  (rites  will  also  be  deserted). 
Sd le  Xo  ”iUCh  extending  Co  Che 

prehension)  shonld  be  assigned  duly  ,0  che  fingers ’and  bX 
ApC'  WnhaSto  “  “>  tire  teech,  palms?  head,  SJ 

1  otlicr successively. 

Jyotisfoma ,  a  soma  sacrifice.  severa  ays  m  spring  forming  part  of  the 

f.rhighe"'pl*'r*  P"fon”'d  ^  <***  ”  by  .  brahmin  aspirin, 

4.  A  rite  forming  part  of  ^  sma  ^ 

5  An  optional  part  of  the  Jjotiffoma  sacrifice. 

6.  A  particular  way  of  offering  the  sac  ffice 


25.33-46 


65 


face,  heart,  navel,  the  generative  organ  and  the  feet.  These  are 
remembered  as  the  eight  Vyuhas  (parts).  The  life  which  consists 
of  nine  parts — life,  intellect,  ego,  mind,  sound,  quality, 
wind,  colour,  and  taste,  is  assigned  to  two  thumbs.  They 
(are  placed)  in  order  on  the  left  hand  by  means  of  the  forefinger 
and  other  fingers. 

33.  Indra  remains  pervading  the  ten  (limbs)  consisting  of 
body,  head,  forehead,  mouth,  heart,  navel,  the  generative 
organ,  two  knees  and  feet. 

34-35.  The  fire  (is  assigned)  to  two  thumbs.  Mind 
consisting  of  eleven  parts — ear,  skin,  eye,  tongue,  smell, 
speech,  hand,  foot,  anus  is  assigned  to  head,  forehead,  face, 
heart,  navel,  the  generative  organ,  two  knees  and  feet  with 
the  forefinger. 

36.  The  mind  is  made  to  pervade  the  male  organ.  The 
two  thumbs  (are  made  to  pervade)  the  ear.  Commencing  with 
the  fore-finger  in  order,  the  eight  fingers  (are  assigned).  The 
(two  fingers)  left  over  are  assigned  to  palm. 

37.  The  head,  forehead,  month,  heart,  navel  (are  assigned) 
in  order  to  generative  organ,  two  thighs,  shanks,  ankles  and 
feet. 

38-39.  Visnu,  Madhuhara  (killer  of  the  demon  Madhu), 
Trivikrama,  Vamana,  Srldhara,  Hrslkesa,  Padmanabha,  Damo- 
dara,  Kesava,  Narayana,  Madhava,  Govinda  (are  the  names  of 
Visnu).  Visnu  is  made  to  pervade. 

40.  The  thumb  (and  other  fingers),  palms,  feet,  two 
knees,  waist  are  assigned  to  head,  crown  of  head,  waist,  knees, 
and  feet. 

41-43.  There  are  twelve,  twentyfive  or  twentysix  parts — 
the  supreme  being,  intellect,  ego,  mind,  thinking,  touch,  taste,, 
colour,  smell,  ears,  skin,  eyes,  tongue,  nose,  speech,  hand,  feet,, 
anus,  generative  organ,  earth,  water,  light,  wind  and  sky. 
The  pervasive  Supreme  Being  is  assigned  and  then  in  the  thumbs, 
and  other  fingers. 

44-46.  The  remnant  are  assigned  in  the  palm,  head,  or  fore¬ 
head  and  then  face,  heart,  navel,  generative  organ,  thigh,  knee, 
and  feet  are  assigned  to  feet,  knee,  thing,  generative  organ, 
heart  and  head  in  order.  A  wise  man  has  to  meditate  upon  the 
great  soul  of  the  Supreme  Being  in  these  twentysix  things* 


€6 


Agni  Purana 


as  before  and  then  the  nature  has  to  be  worshipped  in  a  circular 
(altar).  The  heart  and  other  (limbs)  have  to  be  worshipped  in 
the  east,  south,  west  and  north. 

47.  As  before  the  weapons  (of  Visnu,  Vainateya  (the 
vehicle  bird  of  Visnu)  (are  adored)  in  the  corners  of  south-east 
etc.  (One  should  adore)  the  guardian  deities  of  the  quarters 
also.  In  (the  worship  of)  three  parts,  the  fire  (will  be)  at  the 
centre. 

48.  The  directions  east  etc.  are  decorated  with  the  strength, 
abode  and  kingdom. 

49-50.  The  omnipresent  form  (of  Visnu),  endowed  with  all 
parts  and  the  five  constituents  Garuda  etc.  as  well  as  Indra 
and  others,  should  be  adored  (by  one)  for  conquering  kingdoms 
and  for  firmness  of  all  (objects).  One  may  get  all  desires 
(fulfilled).  Visvaksena  (an  epithet  of  Visnu)  is  worshipped  by 
(his)  name,  the  mystic  letter  being  placed  in  the  ether. 


CHAPTER  TWENTYSIX 
A  description  of  different  positions  of  fingers  in  worship 

1.  (I  now)  describe  the  characteristic  of  (the  different) 
positions  of  fingers  ( mudra )  (which)  bring  (the  worshipper) 
nearer  (to  the  object  of  worship).  Anjali  (folding  of  hands) 
is  the  first  mudra .  (The  second)  is  the  Vandani  (fingers  inter¬ 
locked)  to  be  placed  near  the  heart. 

2.  With  the  left  fist  folded  and  the  thumb  erect,  the  right 
thumb  interwoven  with  the  erect  left  thumb  is  said  to  be  (the 
third  one). 

3.  (These  are)  the  three  common  formations.  The  (follow¬ 
ing  are)  not  common.  By  the  unyoking  of  the  smallest  and  other 
fingers  eight  positions  (are  formed)  in  order. 

4.  The  first  eight  basic  syllables  are  repeated  in  order.  One 
has  to  bend  the  three  fingers  commencing  with  the  little  finger, 
with  the  thumb. 

5.  One  has  to  raise  up  the  hand  to  the  face  for  the  ninth 


26.6-27,1-5 


67 


mystic  syllable.  Then  the  left  hand  is  raised  up  and  bent  half 
slowly. 

6.  These  are  the  madras  of  the  limbs  of  Varahal  in  order. 
Then  the  left  fist  having  been  kept  closed,  the  fingers  arc  released 
one  by  one. 

7.  The  same  position  is  held  by  the  right  hand  also  and 
the  previous  position  is  bent  down.  The  left  fist  (is  held)  with 
the  thumb  erect.  This  results  in  the  accomplishment  of  the 
mudra . 


CHAPTER  TWENTYSEVEN 
Mode  of  performing  the  initiation  rite  : 

JVarada  said  : 

1-2.  I  shall  describe  the  initiation  rite,  which  yields  every¬ 
thing.  Hari  should  be  worshipped  in  the  lotus  in  a  circle.  Hav¬ 
ing  gathered  the  articles  (required)  for  the  sacrifice  on  the 
tenth  (lunar)  day,  assigning  and  consecrating  hundred  times 
with  the  (basic  syllables)  of  the  man-lion  (Narasiriiha)  (form), 
one  should  scatter  on  all  sides  the  mustard  seeds,  destructive  of 
demons,  ending  (the  act)  with  the  syllable  phat . 

3.  The  female  energy,  contained  in  every  being,  in  the  form 
of  grace  is  assigned  there.  Having  collected  all  the  herbs  and 
spread,  they  arc  consecrated. 

4.  A  worshipper  has  to  accomplish  the  five  products1 2  of  the 
cow  hundred  times  in  pure  vessels  by  means  of  the  five  basic 
forms. 

5.  Having  sprinkled  the  earth  (with  the  basic  syllable) 
ending  with  (the  word)  Narayana,  with  the  tips  of  kuia  (grass), 
those  scattered  (things)  are  thrown  with  the  raised  hand  with 
the  (basic  syllable  of)  Vasudeva. 

1 .  If  the  two  palms  are  placed  together  so  as  to  form  a  cavity  it  represents 
the  Varaha  Mudra . 

2.  Milk,  curd,  butter  and  the  solid  and  liquid  excreta. 


68 


Agni  Parana 


6.  Then  standing  with  the  face  facing  the  east  one  has  to 
meditate  on  Visnu  in  the  heart.  One  has  to  worship  Visnu  in  the 
waterpot  along  with  the  vardhani l. 

7.  Having  recited  hundred  times  the  sacred  syllables  for 
the  weapon  and  having  sprinkled  the  Vardhani  (vessel)  with  a 
continuous  shower  (of  water)  it  should  be  taken  to  the  north¬ 
east  quarter. 

8.  Taking  the  jar  on  his  back  one  has  to  place  it  on  the 
scattered  (mustard  seeds).  Then  having  gathered  them  by  means, 
of  the  KuSa  (grass)  one  has  to  adore  the  presiding  deity  of  the 
jar  and  the  karkari 2. 

9.  One  has  to  worship  Hari  adorned  with  clothes  (and) 
five  jewels,  on  a  piece  of  ground  (made  ready),  offering  oblations 
to  fire  (for  his  sake)  and  reciting  the  sacred  syllables,  as  before* 

10.  Sprinkling  with  a  lotus  and  anointing  with  unguents 
the  worshipper  has  to  fill  the  boiling  vessel  with  clarified  butter 
and  cow’s  milk. 

1 1 .  Having  looked  at  it  with  the  Vasudeva  and  the  Sanghar- 
sana  (basic  syllables),  rice  mixed  with  clarified  butter  should 
be  thrown  into  milk  well-cooked. 

12.  After  stirring  it  with  the  (basic  syllable  of)  Pradyumna 
the  worshipper  has  to  mix  it  slowly  with  the  ladle  and  then  the 
cooked  food  is  lifted  with  the  (basic  syllable  of)  Aniruddha. 

13.  Having  washed  him  and  besmearing  (with  sandals )> 
the  vertical  mark  is  made  on  the  forehead  with  the  ashes.  The 
food  thus  prepared  well  is  placed  by  the  side  with  the  (basic 
syllable  of)  Narayana. 

14.  A  part  of  it  has  to  be  offered  to  the  deity,  the  second  part 
to  the  jar,  and  with  the  third  part  he  should  offer  three  oblations. 

15-17.  The  preceptor  has  to  partake  of  the  fourth  part  in 
the  company  of  his  disciples  for  the  sake  of  purification.  Having 
consecrated  seven  times  (the  stick)  got  from  the  milky  tree,  the 
piece  of  wood  for  cleaning  the  tree  being  made  use  of  and  dis¬ 
carded  and  being  conscious  of  one’s  sins  and  having  offered  obla¬ 
tions  to  the  hundred  auspicious  and  most  excellent  lions  lying  in 


1.  A  water-jar  of  a  particular  shape. 

2.  A  watcr-jar  with  small  holes  at  the  bottom  as  in  a  sieve. 


27.18-27 


69 


the  north,  northeast,  east  and  southeast,  having  done  the  acamand 1 
and  having  entered  the  chamber  of  worship,  the  knower  of  the 
mystic  syllables  should  assign  Visnu  in  the  east  and  do  circum- 
ambulation. 

18.  You  are,  alone,  O  Lord  !  the  refuge  of  the  beings  immer¬ 
sed  in  the  ocean  of  mundane  existence,  for  the  release  from  the 
fetters.  You  are  always  kind  towards  your  worshippers. 

19.  “O  Lord  of  Lords  !  (you)  permit  (me).  (I  will)  free 
these  beings  by  your  grace  from  their  earlier  fetters  by  which  they 
are  bound5’. 

20-21.  Having  submitted  thus  to  the  lord  of  the  celestials 
and  having  made  the  animals  enter  (the  place),  (they)  have  to 
be  purified  then  by  holding  them  as  before  and  to  be  consecrated 
with  the  fire.  Having  yoked  them  with  the  deity  their  eyes  should 
be  closed.  Their  eyes  are  covered.  Handful  of  flowers  are  offered 
there  and  their  names  are  added. 

22.  Worship  is  made  duly  as  before  without  reciting  any 
basic  syllable  {mantra).  That  particular  name  of  the  idol  on 
which  the  flower  falls  that  is  pointed  out. 

23.  One  should  then  take  up  a  red  thread  spun  by  a  maiden 
and  measure  it  six  times  from  the  tuft  of  the  hair  to  the  toe  and 
again  multiply  it  three  times. 

24.  Then  one  should  meditate  on  the  Prakrli  in  which  the 
•universe  lies  and  from  which  the  universe  is  born,  as  being  pre¬ 
sent  there,. 

25.  Having  tied  the  nooses  of  Prakrli  proportional  to  the 
number  of  principles,  that  thread  is  placed  on  an  earthen  vessel 
near  the  pit. 

26.  Then  having  meditated  upon  the  principles  commen¬ 
cing  with  the  Prakrli  to  the  earth,  following  the  order  of  creation, 
the  spiritual  teacher  should  assign  them  to  the  body  of  the  dis¬ 
ciple. 

27.  Those  (principles),  one,  five,  ten  or  twelve2 * *  may  be 
tied  individually  and  given  by  those  who  devote  their  thought 
on  the  principles. 

1.  Acamana  consists  of  sipping  three  drops  of  water,  followed  by  touching 
of  different  parts  of  body  reciting  the  different  names  of  Vi?^u. 

2.  Prakfti  is  represented  by  one,  the  subtle  principles  by  five,  the  organs 

of  perception  and  action  by  ten,  and  these  ten  together  with  Prakrli  and  mind 

by  twelve. 


70 


Agni  Purana 


28-29.  With  the  five  organs  of  action  (one  has  to  create) 
the  entire  universe  in  the  order  of  evolution.  Having  drawn  the 
subtle  principles  into  one’s  self  and  (having  placed)  the  rope  of 
illusion  on  the  animal,  the  nature  is  taken  as  the  creative  power, 
the  intellect  or  the  mind  as  the  agent,  the  five  subtle  principles 
as  born  of  intellect  and  the  five  elements  from  the  organs  of 
action. 

30-31.  One  has  to  meditate  on  these  twelve  principles  in 
the  rope  as  well  as  in  the  body  according  to  his  desire.  Having 
made  oblations  with  the  residue  of  offerings  according  to  the 
order  of  creation,  and  hundred  oblations  to  each  and  every 
(principle)  and  then  the  final  oblation,  the  earthen  vessel  is 
covered  and  is  dedicated  to  the  presiding  deity  of  the  pot. 

32-33.  Having  duly  performed  the  initial  consecration,  the 
devoted  disciple  is  initiated.  Then  in  a  place  where  the  wind 
blows,  an  arrow  of  a  particular  shape  and  a  knife  made  either  of 
silver  or  iron  as  well  as  all  necessary  materials  are  placed;  and 
touched  with  the  principal  mystic  syllable  he  should  perform  the 
initial  consecration  ceremony. 

34.  He  should  then  say  “Salutations,.  (I  offer)  the  food  to 
the  goblins  on  the  ku§a  grass”.  Then  having  contemplated  upon 
Hari,  the  sacrificial  yard  is  adorned  with  multitudes  of  vessels 
of  sweet  meats. 

35.  Visnu  is  then  worshipped  in  a  circular  altar.  Then  after 
offering  oblations  to  the  fire,  the  pupils  who  are  seated  in  the 
Padmasana 1  posture  are  called  upon  and  are  initiated. 

36-37.  Having  sprinkled  water  on  Visnu,  and  touching  the 
head  gradually,  all  the  principles  from  the  primordial  down  to 
the  transformations  as  well  as  their  presiding  deities,  the  entire 
divine  creation  is  conceived  in  the  heart  and  all  the  subtle  princi¬ 
ples  which  have  become  one  with  the  soul  are  absorbed  gradually 

38-40.  Then  the  preceptor  has  to  pray  the  presiding  deity 
of  the  pitcher  and  draw  the  thread.  Then  having  come  near  the 
fire  and  placing  it  (the  thread)  by  the  side  of  the  fire,  he  (should 
offer)  hundred  oblations  to  the  passive  Lord  of  creation  with  the 
principal  mystic  syllable.  Then  the  preceptor  having  reached 

1.  Sitting  with  crossed  legs,  the  feet  placed  over  the  thigh  of  the  opposite 

leg. 


27.41-50 


71 


him,  and  having  offered  the  final  oblation,  has  to  collect  the  white 
dust  and  strike  the  heart  with  that  sanctified  by  the  basic  mystic 
syllable  and  ending  with  the  syllables  hum  and  phaf . 

41.  Then  oblations  are  separately  offered  in  order  to  the 
earth  and  other  principles  with  mystic  syllables  made  up  by 
subtracting  syllables. 

42.  When  Hari  has  been  uttered  unto  the  fire  which  is  the 
abode  of  all  principles,  the  wiseman  has  to  remember  the 
method  that  is  being  followed  there. 

43.  Separating  by  means  of  beating  and  collecting  (them) 
one  has  to  remain  quiet.  Then  after  collecting  by  the  Prim¬ 
ordial,  an  offering  is  made  into  the  fire  as  instructed. 

44.  After  offering  eight  oblations  each  (in  favour)  of  ( Garbd - 
dhana l,  Jatakarma 2,  enjoyment  and  dissolution,  he  should  offer 
them  for  purification. 

45.  The  preceptor  should  take  up  pure  materials  and  bring 
together  the  two  excellent  principles  in  order  in  such  a  way  they 
are  not  broken. 

46.  Then  the  soul,  freed  from  fetters  is  immersed  in  the 
supreme  soul  in  the  supreme  undecaying  position. 

47.  A  learned  person  has  to  think  of  the  peaceful,  supreme, 
blissful,  pure  intellect  and  offer  the  completing  oblation.  Thus 
ends  the  (rite  of)  initiation. 

48.  I  shall  describe  the  mystic  syllables  for  the  applica¬ 
tion  with  which  the  oblation  (relating  to)  the  initiation  is 
closely  associated: 

Om ,  Tam,  the  goblins,  the  pure  hum ,  phat.  By  this  one  should 
strike  and  separate  the  two. 

49.  Om,yam ,  I  destroy  the  goblins.  After  having  seized  this, 
(syllable)  (you)  hear  (the  mode  of)  yoking  it  with  the  nature. 
Om,  am,  the  goblins  and  the  males.  I  shall  describe  the  mystic 
syllable  for  the  oblation  as  well  as  the  final  oblation. 

50.  Om,  destroy  the  goblins ;  oblations.  Om,  am,  Om,  salu¬ 
tations  to  the  Lord  Vasudeva,  vaus'at .  After  the  final  oblation  the 
disciple  has  to  be  accomplished.  In  this  way  the  wiseman  has 
to  purify  the  principles. 


1.  The  rite  p^jformed  for  facilitating  conception. 

2.  The  ceremony  performed  at  the  birth  of  a  child. 


72 


Agni  Purdna 


51.  Ending  with  (the  word)  salutation  and  with  the  basic 
syllable  sva  and  preceded  by  beating  (one  has  to  say)  Om,  vain , 
the  organs  of  action,  Om ,  dem ,  the  organs  of  intellect  (sense). 
With  the  syllable  yam  similar  beating  etc.  are  done. 

52.  Om ,  sum ,  to  the  principle  of  smell,  separate,  hum,  phaf. 
Om,  protect,  ha.  Om,  svam ,  svam,  unite  with  the  primordial. 
Om,  sum,  hum,  to  the  principle  of  smell,  destroy  oblations.  Then 
the  final  oblation  is  to  be  applied  in  the  northern  direction  as 
follows:  Om,  ram,  to  the  principle  of  taste.  Om,  them,  to  the 
principle  of  colour.  Om,  ram ,  the  principle  of  touch.  Om,  em,  to  the 
principle  of  sound.  Om,  bham,  salutations.  Om,  som,  egoism . 
Om,  nam,  to  intellect.  Om,  Om,  to  the  primordial.  This  method 
of  initiation  has  been  described  in  brief  in  the  case  of  the  deity 
of  a  single  form.  The  procedure  for  the  nine-vyuhas  etc.  are  also 
remembered  to  be  of  the  same  kind. 

53.  A  person  after  having  consumed  (all  the  things)  should 
consign  the  primordial  thing  to  eternal  bliss.  Then  a  person  has 
to  consign  the  primordial  thing  to  the  Lord  devoid  of  transfor¬ 
mation. 

54.  Then  having  purified  the  elements,  one  has  to  purify 
the  instruments  of  action,  the  intellect,  the  principles,  mind, 
knowledge  and  egoism. 

55-56.  After  having  purified  the  soul  of  the  body,  he  should 
-again  purify  the  primordial  principle  at  the  end.  The  supreme 
being  and  the  pure  primordial  principle  stationed  in  the  Lord 
(which  is)  held  under  control  and  has  been  rendered  an  abode 
after  being  freed  from  bondage  is  contemplated  upon  and  the 
final  oblation  is  offered.  This  is  the  (mode  of)  initiation  for  a 
person  (who  is)  fit. 

57-58.  Having  worshipped  with  the  constituents  of  the 
mystic  syllables,  the  principles  are  uniformly  carried  and  gradu¬ 
ally  purified.  Having  meditated  (on  the  Lord)  endowed  with 
all  accomplishments,  the  final  oblation  is  made.  This  is  the  (mode 
of)  initiation  for  an  aspirant  in  case  if  there  is  no  abundance  of 
articles  and  no  capacity  for  a  person. 

59.  Having  worshipped  the  lord  as  before  endowed  with 
all  the  materials,  the  excellent  preceptor  has  to  initiate  (the 
disciple)  on  the  dvadatt  (the  12th  day)  from  the  beginning  of  the 
rite. 


27.60-73 


73 


60.  The  disciple  must  be  devoted,  humble,  endowed  with 
all  physical  qualities,  not  very  rich.  Such  a  person  is  initiated 
•after  the  worship  of  the  deity  iri  the  altar. 

61-62.  Having  contemplated  the  entire  path,  divine,  pertain¬ 
ing  to  the  elements  or  to  the  self,  in  the  order  of  their  creation  in 
the  body  of  the  disciple,  the  preceptor,  desirous  of  creation, 
having  offered  first  sixteen  oblations  to  Vasudeva  and  other 
(gods)  who  are  radiant,  with  their  respective  mystic  syllables, 
(they  are)  allowed  to  go. 

63-65.  Then  purification  is  made  by  oblation  in  the  order  of 
destruction.  Having  released  all  the  fetters  of  deeds,  the  precep¬ 
tor,  has  to  purify  the  principles,  having  drawn  them  in  order 
from  the  body  of  the  disciple.  Having  dissolved  in  the  fire,  the 
primordial  Visnu  and  the  Supreme  Spirit,  the  pure  principle 
is  accomplished  by  (offering)  final  oblation  with  impure  prin¬ 
ciple.  After  the  disciple  had  attained  his  natural  state,  he  has 
to  consume  all  the  qualities  of  the  primordial  being. 

66.  The  preceptor  has  to  release  or  bind  the  children.  Or 
the  preceptor  remaining  in  his  natural  state  has  to  perform  a 
different  kind  of  initiation  (called)  Saktidiksa 1. 

67-69.  Having  worshipped  Visnu  placed  nearby  with  the 
lad  in  an  altar  and  (who)  is  being  adored  with  the  devotion  of 
•  ascetics  and  mendicants,  the  pupil  remains  facing  the  deity,  the 
self  (preceptor)  facing  obliquely.  After  having  contemplated 
upon  the  entire  course  which  has  been  resolved  by  him  (the 
preceptor)  according  to  the  phases  of  the  moon,  (the  preceptor) 
has  to  think  deeply  with  contemplation  on  the  Lord,  the  supreme 
•spirit,  stationed  in  the  body  of  the  disciple. 

70.  As  before  all  the  principles  have  to  be  purified  gradually 
by  beating  etc.  on  the  altar  of  Hari.  Then  (he)  who  is  bent  on 
the  inquiry  of  the  self  has  to  set  them  aside  after  having  taken 
them,  and  beating. 

71.  He  should  purify  them  befitting  their  nature  and  unite 
them  with  the  deity.  They  arc  then  collected  with  pure  mental 
disposition  and  yoked  in  order. 

72-73.  By  means  of  contemplative  mood  and  the  pose  of 
knowledge  (jnanamudra)  (they)  are  all  purified.  When  all  the 


1.  Initiation  rite  relating  to  the  female  energy  or  goddess. 


Agni  Purana 

principles  have  been  thus  purified  and  the  Supreme  lord  remains 
as  the  main,  the  principles  have  to  be  burnt  and  (the  fire)  extin¬ 
guished  and  the  disciples  have  to  be  engaged  in  the  service  of  the 
Lord.  Then  the  excellent  preceptor  should  conduct  the  aspirant 
on  the  path  of  accomplishment. 

74.  In  the  same  manner,  a  householder  becomes  qualified 
by  remaining  vigilant  in  (the  performance  of)  the  rites.  One 
has  to  remain  purifying  his  self  until  there  is  dissipation  of  anger. 

75.  After  having  known  himself  as  shorn  of  anger  and  puri¬ 
fied  from  sins,  a  self-controlled  person  should  confer  the  right  on 
(his)  son  or  the  disciple. 

76.  After  having  burnt  the  noose  composed  of  illusion,  renou¬ 
ncing  and  remaining  in  (the  contemplation)  of  the  self,  he,  who 
possesses  the  unmanifest  form,  should  remain  waiting  for  the 
decay  of  his  body. 


CHAPTER  TWENTYEIGHT 
Mode  of  anointment  for  the  preceptor 

1_2.  I  shall  describe  the  anointment  of  the  preceptor  as 
the  son  would  do  and  by  which  an  aspirant  would  become  accom¬ 
plished  and  a  diseased  would  get  rid  of  the  disease,  the  king 
(would  get  his)  kingdom,  a  woman  would  get  a  child  and  also 
destruction  of  impurity.  Pictures  made  of  earth  and  endowed 
with  gems  ai  e  to  be  placed  in  the  middle,  the  east  etc. 

3.  Thousands  or  hundreds  (of  them  are  placed) in  a  circular 
foi  m  and  Visnu  in  the  east  and  north-east  at  an  elevated  place  in 
an  altar. 

4.  Having  placed  all  of  them  the  aspirant  (should  assign) 
his  son  in  parts.  After  having  worshipped  well  the  anointment 
should  be  performed  preceded  by  songs  etc. 

5.  Men  should  offer  yogic  seats  etc.  requesting  his  favour. 
The  preceptor  also  should  announce  the  terms  and  the  pupil 
(initiated)  into  the  secrets  then  becomes  the  recipient  of  all  (that 
he  wants). 


29.1-11 


75 


CHAPTER  TWENTY-NINE 

Mode  of  worshipping  Hari  in  the  figure  called  Sarvatobhadra 
Narada  said  : 

1 .  The  aspirant  has  to  accomplish  the  mystic  syllable  in  the 
temple  of  the  deity  after  having  worshipped  the  Lord  Hari  in  a 
circular  figure  in  a  purified  ground. 

2.  One  has  to  draw  circles  etc.  in  a  square  piece  of  ground, 
the  Sarvatobhadra 1  is  drawn  in  the  compartments  of  rasa ,  bana 
and  aksi . 

3.  A  lotus  seat  containing  thirty-six  apartments  should  be 
outside  in  a  row.  Among  these  two  (squares  are  set  apart)  for 
the  path-way  and  two  for  the  doors  in  the  quarters. 

4.  A  lotus  figure  is  drawn  in  front  outside  and  a  circle  is 
drawn  around  it.  Half  of  the  lotus  is  divided  into  twelve  compart¬ 
ments. 

5.  Having  thus  divided  it  one  should  draw  four  circles,  one 
around  the  other.  The  first  one  is  that  of  the  pericarp  and  the 
second,  that  of  the  filaments. 

6-7.  The  third  (is)  that  of  the  joints  of  the  petals  and  the 
fourth,  that  of  the  tips  of  the  petals.  The  joints  of  the  petals  axe 
marked  by  stretching  the  threads  from  the  angular  points  upto 
the  middle  of  the  side  facing  the  angle  and  placing  them  on  the 
tips  of  the  filaments.  Then  the  threads  are  made  to  lie  (fall)  and 
then  an  eight-petalled  lotus  is  drawn. 

8.  Having  allowed  a  measure  (equal  to)  the  space  between 
the  joints  of  the  petals,  the  tops  of  the  petals  are  drawn  in  front 
of  it  and  afterwards. 

9.  Having  allowed  in  the  middle  a  measure  of  space  (equal 
to  that)  of  the  interstices  between  the  petals,  two  filaments  are 
drawn  in  between  every  two  petals. 

10.  This  is  the  ordinary  lotus  circle  said  to  be  of  twelve  pe¬ 
tals.  Circles  are  drawn  in  order  in  the  east  of  the  measure  of  half 
the  pericarp. 

11.  By  this  drawing  there  will  be  six  circles  on  its  side.  In 
this  way  there  will  be  twelve  fish  and  twelve  petals. 


1.  It  is  so  called  because  it  brings  about  all  round  happiness. 


76 


Agni  Purana 

12.  Having  drawn  a  fish  with  five  petals  of  a  lotus  for  the 
sake  of  success,  the  skyline  (is  made)  outside  the  seat  (altar). 
The  compartments  are  (cleanly)  swept. 

13.  Four  other  places  for  the  feet  (are  made  ready)  in  the 
angular  points.  Besmeared  vessels  are  kept  in  the  four  quarters. 

14.  Two  rows  are  marked  in  the  quarters  for  the  sake  of 
pathway.  Doors  are  made  in  all  the  four  quarters. 

15.  A  wise  man  has  to  make  eight  ornaments  of  graceful 
•expressions  by  the  side  of  the  doors.  An  equal  number  of  orna¬ 
ments  are  also  to  be  made  by  their  side. 

16.  Then  corners  of  ornaments  should  be  made.  In  each 
one  of  the  middle  compartments  in  all  the  four  directions,  two 
figures  are  drawn. 

17.  The  four  outer  compartments  are  cleansed,  as  well  as 
one  on  each  side.  Three  figures  are  drawn  on  each  side  of  the 
petal  for  beautifying  it. 

18.  Similarly,  three  ornaments  are  to  be  drawn  on  the  oppo¬ 
site  direction  inside  the  angular  point  as  well  as  outside  without 
any  difference  between  the  two. 

19.  In  this  way,  sixteen  compartments  are  formed  and  in  the 
same  manner  another  circle  is  formed.  In  the  (figure  having) 
twelve  compartments  a  lotus  figure  with  thirtysix  petals  (is 
drawn). 

20.  As  before  one  line  is  drawn  at  each  door  for  beautifica¬ 
tion.  In  the  circular  altar  of  one  cubit  a  lotus  should  be  drawn 
(having)  twelve  finger-breadth. 

21.  A  door  should  be  drawn  of  the  measure  of  two  cubits 
by  one  cubit.  The  altar  should  be  a  square.  The  disc  of  the  lotus 
should  be  of  two  cubits. 

22.  Half  the  lotus  is  drawn  with  nine  (finger  breadth),  the 
navel  with  three,  the  radius  with  eight  (breadth),  the  circumfe¬ 
rence  with  four. 

23.  Having  divided  the  ground  into  three  parts,  an  inner 
figure  is  marked  with  two  (breadth).  For  the  sake  of  accompli¬ 
shing  (one’s  object)  one  has  to  mark  the  five  vowels  inside  and 
the  radii. 

24.  Then  according  to  his  desire,  one  has  to  draw  figures  of 
the  petals  of  lotus  or  citron  leaves  or  of  the  shape  of  lotus  leaves. 


29.25-38 


77 


25.  Having  fixed  at  the  junction  of  the  radius  and  having 
moved  around  the  outer  circumference  and  having  stationed  in 
the  middle  link  line  one  has  to  move  upto  the  root  of  the  radius. 

26.  The  middle  fire-producing  stick  is  moved  equally  station¬ 
ing  in  the  middle  of  the  radius.  Some  more  figures  resembling 
citron  leaves  are  drawn  in  this  way  for  the  sake  of  accomplish¬ 
ment. 

27-29.  Then  the  ground  should  be  divided  into  seven  parts 
each  of  them  measuring  equally  of  fourteen  cubits.  There  should 
be  two  hundred  and  ninety-six  apartments.  (The  word)  Bhadra 
(welfare  is  written  in  four  (compartments)  in  the  middle.  All 
around  that  (space)  is  set  apart  for  pathway.  Then  lotus  (figures) 
are  drawn  in  all  directions.  Having  swept  clean  around  the 
pathway,  four  central  quarters  in  all  directions  are  set  apart 
for  (providing)  the  neck. 

30.  ’Four  (apartments)  are  set  apart  outside  and  then  three 
in  each  row.  By  the  side  of  the  neck  there  should  be  (an  apart¬ 
ment)  outside  known  as  the  ornament. 

31-32.  Among  the  outer  angles  leaving  off  seven,  (the  rest) 
and  three  inside  are  sprinkled  (with  water).  An  altar  of  nine 
divisions  is  formed  in  this  way  consisting  of  nine  parts.  (This 
is)  the  circular  (altar)  of  twentyfive  compartments  (in  which) 
the  universal  form  of  Hari  is  worshipped.  Thirty-two  cubits  of 
ground  should  be  equally  divided  into  thirty-two  (compart¬ 
ments). 

33-34.  When  it  is  done  in  this  way,  there  would  be  one  thou¬ 
sand  and  twenty-four  compartments.  Having  written  the  (word) 
bhadraka  (welfare)  in  the  sixteen  middle  squares  and  having 
sprinkled  water  on  the  adjacent  rows  (of  compartments),  the 
eight  bhadrakas  are  written  in  sixteen  apartments  in  all  diiec- 
tions. 

35.  Then  having  sprinkled  the  rows  (of  compartments) 
and  writing  sixteen  bhadrakas  the  rows  all  around  are  sprinkled 
and  allotment  is  made. 

36-38.  Twelve  doors  (arc  drawn)  in  the  usual  order  in  each 
quarter.  Having  omitted  the  six  (compartments)  inside  and 
having  sprinkled  for  beautification  the  four  at  the  centre,  the  four 
on  the  sides  and  two  inside  and  outside,  and  having  cleanse 
three  inside  and  five  outside  for  accomplishing  additional  doors,. 


Agni  Purdni 

as  before  beautification  is  made.  Seven  of  the  corners  outside 
and  three  apartments  inside  are  cleansed. 


39.  The  supreme  brahman  is  to  be  worshipped  in  the  auspi¬ 
cious  twenty-five  (compartment)  formation.  Then  in  the  lotus 
(drawn)  in  the  middle  commencing  with  east,  Vasudeva  and 
other  deities  are  worshipped  in  order. 

40.  Having  worshipped  the  boar-form  in  the  lotus  in  the 
east  the  formation  is  worshipped  in  order  until  the  thirty-six 
(forms  are  finished). 

41.  With  the  effort  that  it  has  to  be  worshipped,  (one  has 
to  worship)  all  formations  in  the  order  in  the  single  lotus  as 
described.  The  progenitor  is  regarded  as  the  sacrifice. 

42.  Acyuta  divided  into  many  forms  is  regarded  as  ‘truth’. 
Forty  cubits  of  the  ground  in  the  north  has  to  be  divided  in  order.* 

43-44.  Each  one  (of  these  divisions)  are  again  (first)  divided 
into  seven  parts  and  then  into  two.  Then  of  one  thousand  seven 
hundred  and  sixty-four  apartments  we  will  have  a  bhadraka 
(figure)  (formed)  by  the  central  sixteen  apartments.  There  will 

be  a  pathway  on  the  side,  then  eight  bhadra  apartments  and  a 
pathway. 


45-46.  Then  sixteen  (figures)  of  lotuses  and  twenty-four 
lotuses  for  the  rows  and  thirty-two  for  the  pathway  and  forty 
rows  and  a  passage  with  the  remaining  three  rows  (are  drawn). 
The  doors  are  provided  with  ornaments  and  minor  beautifica- 
tions  in  the  directions,  omitting  the  centre. 


i  f  fC°mpllshinS’  two>  four  and  six  doors  (space)  is 
cut  off  in  the  four  directions  and  five,  three  and  one  outside  (are 
set  apart)  for  accomplishing  the  adornment  of  the  doors. 

omitLl  Int  mannCr’  Six  °r  f°ur  (compartments)  are 

— rde  four  insidc- There  wm  be  six  ™in°r 


fi  n  Sh°Uld  be  f°Ur  doors  on  one  side  or  three  doors 

specifically  m  each  direction.  One  has  to  draw  five  apartments 

at  the  angular  points  (as  well  as)  in  the  rows  in  order  An  auspi¬ 
cious  altar  dear  to  a  mortal  has  to  be  (drawn)  in  this  manner.^ 


30.1-13 


CHAPTER  THIRTY 

Mode  of  worship  of  different  gods  in  specially  drawn  lotus  figures 


79 


Pfarada  said  : 


1.  One  has  to  worship  Brahma  in  the  lotus  at  the  centre, 
the  lotus-navelled  (Visnu)  with  all  his  retinue  in  the  east,  the 
nature  (primordial  matter)  in  the  lotus  in  the  south-east  and 
the  supreme  spirit  in  the  lotus  in  the  south. 

2.  (One  has  to  worship)  the  fire-god  (in  the  lotus)  at  the 
south  of  the  supreme  spirit,  the  wind-god  in  the  south-west  and 
west,  the  sun  in  the  lotus  of  the  moon,  the  Rg-  (Veda)and  Yajur- 
(Veda)  in  the  lotus  of  the  lord. 

3-4.  Indra  and  other  gods  are  to  be  worshipped  in  the  six¬ 
teen  (lotuses)  in  the  second  (row)  then,  (along  with)  theSama- 
(veda),  Atharva  (veda),  sky,  wind,  lustre,  water,  earth, 
mind,  ear,  skin,  (and)  eye.  One  should  also  worship  the  tongue, 


nose,  (the  worlds)  Bhu,  (and)  Bhuva. 

5-7.  Having  worshipped  (the  worlds)  Mahas,  Janas,  Tapas 
(and)  Satya  and  (also  the  sacrifices)  Agnistoma,  Atyagnistoma, 
Uktha,  Sodasi,  Vajapeya,  Atiratra,  one  has  to  worship  Aptor- 
yama,  mind,  intellect,  ego,  sound,  touch,  colour,  taste,  (and) 
smell  in  order  in  twenty-four  lotuses.  (One  has  to  worship)  t  e 
soul,  ego,  the  lord  of  the  mind,  (and)  the  sound  principle  o  t  e 
primordial  matter. 

8-9.  (One  should  then  worship)  the  images  of  Vasudeva 
and  others,  having  worshipped  the  (following)  ten— *  ®  S°U  3 
mind,  ear,  skin,  eye,  tongue,  nose,  speech,  hand,  (and)  foot  in 
thirty-two  lotuses.  One  has  to  worship  these  in  the  fourth  enclo¬ 
sure  along  with  their  attendants  and  retinue. 

10.  Having  worshipped  the  anus  and  penis  one  as  t0  ' 
ship  the  lords  of  the  twelve  months  as  well  as  the  twenty.ee  forms 
commencing  with  Purusottama  in  the  external  enclosure 

1 1 .  Among  these  the  Lords  of  the  months  are  to  bewo^PPj 
ed  in  the  lotus  of  the  disc.  Then  the  eight  six,  five  m  four  (tot 
twentythree)  principles  of  the  primordial  matter  (are  to  be 
worshipped)  in  another  (lotus). 

12-13.  Then  one  has  to  dust  in  a  drawn  circular  altar.  (V  ) 

hear.  The  pericarp  should  be  of  yellow  colour,  and  all  the  lutes 


80 


■Agni  Purana 

equal  and  white.  (They)  should  be  two  cubits  long  and  one 
thumb  in  breadth.  Half  the  length  are  white.  The  joints  (should 
be  coloured)  white,  black  or  dark-blue. 

14.  The  filaments  should  be  red  and  yellow-coloured.  The 
corners  should  be  filled  with  red.  The  yogic  seat  should  be  bedec¬ 
ked  with  any  of  the  colours  according  to  one’s  own  desire. 

15.  The  pathway  is  decorated  with  canopy  of  creepers  and 

leaves.  The  entrance  to  the  altar  (should  be  painted)  white 
bright-red  and  yellow. 

16.  Ornamentation  of  all  the  white  corners  (is  done)  with 
blue  (colour).  It  has  been  said  that  the  altar  bhadraka  should  be 
filled  (with  the  colours)  and  in  this  way  the  other  (altars)  are 
filled. 

M.  The  three  corners  should  be  decorated  with  pale,  red 

and  black,  the  two  corners  with  red  and  yellow  (and)  the  centre 
of  the  circle  by  black. 

18.  The  black  (coloured)  radii  (should  be  decorated)  by 
yellow  and  red,  the  circumference  with  red,  the  lines  outside 
(being  drawn)  in  white,  brown,  red,  black  and  yellow. 

19  The  powder  of  rice  (is)  white.  The  dust  of  saffron  is 
red.  It  (becomes)  yellow  with  turmeric.  From  burnt  grains 
(we  get)  black  (colour). 

20.  (It  becomes)  black  with  Sami  leaves  and  other  (leaves), 
y  the  repetition  of  the  basic  mystic  letters  lakh  times  and  of  the 

kkh  “»■*  *-»*>«  <• 

^[■JrrTr*  *T*  °fthe  5Ci“Ce  intellect  and  thou- 

Sf  hvT  ?'  repcatcd>-  The  purification  of  the 

seif  by  meant  of  a  lakh  of  the  baric  syllables  is  done  prior  this. 

estabLS T!  T  “  ,hkh'  ,hc  basic  Stable  would  get 

mSXers  s  n""  T  adv°“"d  oblation  of  fhe 
mystic  letters  is  similar  to  the  prior  service 

with  a  Jth  oar^rT'"  haS  b'en  advoca"‘i  b'  Performed 

Smb:  perCel  ^  "™'hly 

24  ThP  Uft  f  :  .  ,  ,  PreParat0l7  mystic  syllabic. 

donation  should  noTbe  'accepted  ^th'  °*  ^  the 

twice  or  thrice  (one  getsTm  dt '  h“Way  by  the  repetition, 
merits.  '  cre  anc*  excellent  accomplish- 


30.25-35 


81 


I  shall  describe  the  (mode  o0  contemplation  of  the 

mysdc  sylable by  wh.eh  (one  gets)  ,hc  benefits  ?ot  fi.OIn  tb° 

basic  syllable.  The  gross  form  is  composed  of  sound  and  is  laid 
down  as  the  outward  deity. 


28.  The  subtle  form  composed  of  lustre  becomes  the  mental 
(figure)  made  up  of  thoughts  in  the  heart.  That  (form)  which  is 
beyond  thinking,  is  declared  as  the  supreme. 


27.  flie  potential  of  the  bear,  lion  and  other  forms  are 
principally  gross.  The  form  of  Vasudeva  is  declared  as  that  be¬ 
yond  the  reach  of  thought. 


_<>.  The  other  forms  are  remembered  always  as  existing  in 
the  thoughts  of  the  heart.  The  gross  (form)  is  said  to  be 
vairaja  (belonging  to  Brahman)  and  the  subtle  form  would  be 
marked. 

29-32.  The  Form  beyond  thought  is  declared  as  that  of 
Is  vara  (the  lord).  One  has  to  contemplate  on  the  lustrous, 
undccaying  consciousness  residing  in  the  lotus  of  the  heart', 
(namely)  the  basic  letter,  the  soul  of  the  basic  letter  of  the  shape 
of  a  kadamba  flower.  Just  a  lamp  lies  obstructed  inside  the  pitcher, 
so  also  the  lord  of  the  mystic  syllabic  lies  restrained  in  the  heart. 
There  arc  many  holes  in  the  pitcher.  The  beams  of  the  light  come 
out  through  them.  In  the  same  way  the  beams  of  the  mystic 
letters  come  out  through  the  tubular  organs.  Then  uniting 
themselves  with  the  power  of  the  deity  they  exist  in  the  body. 

33.  The  tubular  organs,  having  come  out  from  the  heart, 
come  within  the  ken  of  the  sense  of  sight.  Among  those  (tubular 
organs)  the  two  tubular  organs  Agni  and  Soma  are  (those  which) 
remain  at  the  tip  of  the  nose. 

34.  Then  having  conquered  the  wind  in  the  body  the  reci¬ 
ter  of  the  basic  syllable  engaged  in  the  repetition  and  contemp¬ 
lation  enjoys  the  benefits  of  the  basic  syllable. 

35.  With  the  gross  elements  and  subtle  principles  purified, 
contented  (and)  practisingj0£rt,  (one)  gets  anima1  etc.  (Remain¬ 
ing)  detached  and  depending  on  the  lord  of  the  soul  one  gets 
free  from  the  gross  elements  and  subtle  principles  and  seizure 
of  the  organs. 


1.  The  first  among  the  eight  kinds  of  superhuman  powcis  by  which  one- 
is  able  to  become  very  minute. 


82 


CHAPTER  THIRTYONE 
Mode  of  cleansing  oneself  and  others 


Agni  Purdna 


Agni  said  : 

1.  I  will  now  describe  (the  rite)  known  as  the  cleansing 
for  the  protection  of  one’s  self  and  others,  by  which  a  man  would 
become  freed  of  miseries  and  get  happiness. 

2-3.  Om,  salutations  to  the  greatest  object,  the  soul,  the 
great  soul,  the  formless  and  many-formed,  the  all-pei  vading, 
supreme  soul,  blemishless,  pure  and  (person)  engaged  in  medi¬ 
tative  contemplation.  Having  saluted  I  shall  expound.  May  my 
words  prove  true. 

4.  (Salutations)  to  the  Boar,  Man-lion  and  Dwarf  (forms  ot 
Visnu),  the  great  sage.  Having  saluted  I  shall  expound.  May 
my  words  prove  true. 

5.  (Salutations)  to  Trivikrama  (a  form  of  Visnu,  as  he 
measured  the  three  steps  and  removed  the  pride  of  the  demon 
Bali),  Rama,  Vaikuntha  (abode  of  Visnu),  the  (Supreme)  man. 
Having  saluted  I  shall  expound.  May  my  words  become  true. 

6.  O  Boar,  Lord  as  Man-lion,  Lord  as  Dwarf,  Trivikrama, 

Hayagrivcsa  (Lord  as  Horse-necked),  Lord  of  all  beings,  Hrsi- 
kesa  (Visnu)  (the  Lord  of  all  senses)  destroy  my  impurity. 

7.  With  these  four  most  excellent  weapons,  the  ever  victo¬ 
rious  disc  and  others  of  unbroken  power,  you  become  destroyer 
of  all  wicked  things. 

8.  You  remove  the  calamity  of  such  a  person  and  do  (him) 
all  good  and  also  (remove)  the  fear  of  distress  due  to  fetters 
of  death  which  is  the  fruit  of  sins. 

9.  (You)  destroy  the  magical  incantations  set  up  by  others 
with  meditation  for  working  evils,  causing  diseases  and  decrepi¬ 
tude. 

10.  Om,  salutations  to  Vasudeva,  Krsna,  bearer  of  sword. 
Salutations  to  lotus-eyed,  Kesava(and)  the  first  holder  of  the 
disc. 

1 1 .  Salutations  to  the  wearer  of  clean  dress  made  yellow  by 
the  filaments  of  lotuses  (and)  the  disc  (of  Visnu)  hurled  on  the 
shoulders  of  the  enemies  at  the  great  battle,  (and)  the  wielder 
of  the  same. 


31.12-25 


83 


•  12.  Salutations  to  the  one  who  lifted  the  earth  on  his  tusk* 
who  has  the  three  forms  embodied  in  him,  the  great  Yajna- 

varaha  and  the  one  who  reclines  on  the  hood  of  (the 
serpent)  Scsa.  v 


13.  Salutations  to  you,  the  divine  lion  having  manes  of  the 
hue  of  molten  gold,  eyes  bright  like  the  burning  fire,  (and)  claws 
(harder)  than  thunder-bolt  to  touch. 

14.  Salutations  again  and  again  to  you,  Kasyapa,  the  short¬ 
est  statured,  adorned  with  the  Rg,  Yajur  and  Sdma  \veda)  (and) 
the  Dwarf  form  which  covered  the  earth. 

15.  O  Boar,  One  with  huge  tusks,  you  crush  all  evils 
completely,  their  effects  and  also  the  effects  of  sins. 

16.  O  Man-lion,  having  a  dreadful  face  (and)  the  burning 

fire  in  between  the  teeth,  the  destroyer  of  distress,  you  break- 
down  all  evils  by  your  cry. 

1 7.  May  Janardana  (Visnu),  the  one  who  assumed  the  form 
of  a  Dwarf,  dispel  all  grief  of  this  person  by  words  embedded 
with  the  Rg,  Tajur  and  Sdma  (veda). 

18-19.  O  Govinda  !  (You)  destroy  quickly  this  person’s 
sufferings.  Destroy  fevers — quotidian  occurring  on  alternate 
days,  tertian,  quartan  and  also  the  terrible  satata ,  those  arising 
out  of  derangement  (of  humours),  the  sannipata  (caused  by  the 
derangement  of  three  humours),  as  well  as  accidental. 

20-24.  The  diseases  of  the  eye,  the  afflictions  of  the  head, 
diseases  pertaining  to  the  stomach,  (difficulty) -in  breathing  in, 
excessive  breathing,  burning  (sensation)  in  the  body  along  with 
trembling,  diseases  in  the  anus,  nose,  feet,  leprosy  as  well  as  con¬ 
sumption,  and  diseases  like  jaundice  and  very  dreadful  urinary 
disease,  fistula,  all  kinds  of  dysentry,  diseases  of  the  mouth, 
chest  (diseases),  stone  in  the  bladder,  strangury,  and  other  dread¬ 
ful  diseases,  diseases  caused  by  wind,  biles  and  phlegm  and 
others  like  sannipata ,  accidentally  afflicting  diseases,  (poison 
<lue  to)  spiders  and  boils  etc. 

25.  May  all  these  be  destroyed  by  the  recitation  of  (the 
name  of)  Visnu.  Being  struck  down  by  the  disc  of  Hari,  may  all 
these  (ailments)  be  completely  destroyed. 


1 .  Tliis  refers  to  the  lifting  of  eartli  from  waters  assuming  the  form  of  a 
boar  by  Visnu. 

2.  The  boar-form  of  Visnu. 


84 


Agni  Purana 


26.  I  am  uttering  verily  the  truth.  Being  scared  by  the  reci¬ 
tation  of  the  names  Acyuta  (undccaying),  Ananta  (unending), 
Govinda  (cowherd)  (all  are  synonyms  of  Visnu),  all  the 
diseases  are  destroyed. 

27-28.  On  his  (name)  being  recited,  may  Janardana  des¬ 
troy  the  poisons  of  animate  and  inanimate  objects,  as  well  as 
artificially  made,  those  caused  by  teeth,  by  nails  and  those  arising 
from  the  sky  as  well  as  those  caused  by  (insects  like)  spider  and 
others  which  cause  grief. 

29-31.  May  the  life  of  boyhood  of  Visnu  (Krsna)  des¬ 
troy  the  evil  forces  which  afflict  mothers  and  childien, 
such  as,  planets,  evil  spirits,  female  goblins,  vampires,  ghosts, 
gandharoas,  yaksas,  demons,  the  impeding  forces  such  as  Sakunt 
Putana  and  others,  (the  female  forces  such  as)  Mukhamantfl, 
Revatl  and  the  terrible  Vrddharevati,  and  the  fierce  forces  known 
as  Vrddhaka. 

32.  May  these  evil  forces  which  afflict  at  the  old  age,  and 
the  children  and  the  youth  be  scorched  by  the  looks  of  the  Man- 
lion. 

33.  May  the  dreadful  face  of  the  Man-lion  of  enormous  stren¬ 
gth  destroy  these  evil  forces  completely  for  the  welfare  of  the 
world, 

34.  O  Man-lion,  O  Great  lion,  possessor  of  garland  of 
flames,  Fiery-mouthed,  Possessor  of  fiery  eyes,  Lord  of  all,  devour 
the  evil  forces  completely. 

35-37.  May  the  Lord  of  all  (beings),  Supreme  Lord,  Janar¬ 
dana  destroy  diseases,  great  portents,  poisons,  great  evil 
forces,  the  fierce  beings,  the  afflictions  due  to  the  planets  which¬ 
ever  is  cruel,  the  injuries  caused  by  weapons,  and  jvalagarda- 
bhaka1  etc.,  assuming  any  one  of  the  forms  of  Vasudeva  and  hur¬ 
ling  the  Sudarsana  disc  which  is  dreadful  like  a  garland  of  fire. 
O  Acyuta,  the  foremost  among  gods  (you)  destroy  the  evil 
forces. 

38.  O  Sudarsana,  the  huge  fire  and  great  sound  (you) 
destroy  (all  evils).  O  Vibhlsana  (one  who  frightens)  1  may 
all  the  evil  demons  get  destroyed. 


1.  a  kind  of  disease  in  which  pimples  appear  on  die  body.  See  MW- 
p.  420a. 


31.39—32.1 


85 


39.  May  the  Man-lion  (deity),  the  soul  of  all  beings,  possess¬ 
ing  terrific  roars  protect  me  in  the  east,  west,  south  and  north. 

40.  May  Lord  Janardana  of  manifold  forms  protect  me 
in  heavens,  on  the  earth,  in  the  sky,  behind  me,  on  the  sides  and 
in  front  of  me. 

41.  As  Visnu  (protects)  the  entire  universe  (consisting  of) 
the  celestials,  demons  and  mortals,  may  the  evils  of  this  person 
be  put  down  by  that  truth. 

42.  As  the  sins  get  destroyed  atonce  by  the  remembrance  of 
Visnu,  may  all  evil  of  this  person  get  destroyed  by  that  truth. 

43.  As  the  Supreme  Lord  Visnu  has  been  extolled  in  the 
vedcinta  (the  philosophical  inquiry  is  known  as  it  forms  the  con¬ 
cluding  portion  of  the  Vedas)  may  all  the  evils  of  this  person  get 
destroyed  by  that  truth. 

44.  As  Visnu,  the  lord  of  sacrifices  is  exolled  among  the 
celestials,  may  what  all  has  been  uttered  by  me  become  so  by 
that  truth. 

45-46.  May  there  be  peace.  May  there  be  good.  May  the 
evil  of  this  man  get  destroyed,  being  agitated  by  me  with  the 
Jcufa  (grass)  originating  from  the  body  of  Vasudeva.  May  Go- 
vinda,  the  Nara-Narayana1  cleanse  me.  May  there  be  remo.  1 
of  all  miseries  by  the  chant  (of  the  names)  of  Hari  in  the  same 
manner. 

47.  This  is  the  weapon  which  cleans  and  which  wards 
off  all  diseases.  I  am  Hari.  The  ku$a  grass  is  Visnu,  Your 
diseases  have  been  destroyed  by  me. 


CHAPTER  THIRTYTWO 
Narration  about  the  purificatory  rites 

Agni  said  : 

1.  An  intelligent  man  has  to  do  forty-eight  purificatory 


1.  Form  of  Krsna;  originally  conceived  as  identical;  spoken  as  re¬ 
presenting  Krsna  and  Arjuna  in  later  epics  and  kclvyas.  See  Apte  SD .  p.  281. 


86  Agni  Purana 

rites1 2  among  the  initiatory  rites  for  attaining  liberation.  You 
hear  them,  by  which  one  may  become  a  celestial. 

2.  One  has  to  perform  garbhad/iana  as  soon  as  the  con¬ 
ception  takes  place,  then  the  pumsavana 2  rite,  the  simantonnayand 3, 
the  jalakarma 4,  and  the  naming  ceremony. 

3.  (One  has  to  perform  the  rites  of)  giving  food  (to  the  new 
born  child),  then  the  tonsure,  and  the  brahmacarya  (the  life  of 
celibacy  practised  by  a  boy  while  studying  the  Vedas).  (One  has 
to  perform)  the  four  (rites) — the  vaisnavi ,  part  hi,  b/iauiiki  and 
Srauti5 * *,  and  making  a  gift  of  cows,  entering  the  life  of  a  house¬ 
holder  after  completing  one’s  vedic  studies. 

4-7.  The  seven  kinds  of  Pakayajhas 6  are  as  taka ,  parvariaSraddha 
iravani,  agrayani ,  caitri  and  afvayuji.  The  Haviryajhas 7  are  seven. 
(You)  hear  them.  (They)  are  (agni)  adhana,  agnihotra,  darta- 
purnamasa,  caturmasya ,  patubandha,  and  sautramani.  (You)  hear 
the  seven  kinds  of  Somasainslhds 8  agnistoma  the  excellent  sacrifice 
atyagmstoma,  uklha ,  sodaPi,  vajapeya,  atiratra  and  aptoryama.  These 
are  of  thousand  kinds. 

8-9.  They  are  hiranyahghri ,  hiranyaksa,  hiranyamitra,  hiranya- 
paiii,  hemdksa ,  hcmdfiga ,  hemasutraka,  hiranyasya,  hiranyaiiga ,  hcma - 
jihva,  and  hiranyavat.  The  aivamedha  is  the  excellent  among  them. 
Now  you  hear  the  eight  virtues. 

10-11.  They  are— compassion  towards  all  beings,  forbear¬ 
ance,  sincerity,  purity,  ease,  wishing  the  welfare  of  all,  liberality 
and  freedom  from  avarice.  A  hundred  oblations  are  to  be  offered 
with  the  basic  mystic  syllable.  The  same  procedure  is  to  be 
followed  in  the  initiation  (ceremony)  related  to  Saura,  Sakti 
(the  female  deity)  and  Visnu. 


1.  The  purificatory  rites  are  referred  to  as  twelve.  See  Manu  2.27. 

2.  The  rite  performed  after  the  conception  of  a  child  to  ensure  the  birth 

of  a  son. 

3.  The  rite  of  parting  the  hair  performed  on  the  fourth,  sixth  anc 
eighth  month  of  pregnancy. 

4 .  The  rite  performed  soon  after  the  birth  of  a  cliild. 

5.  These  are  special  rites  performed  as  a  mark  of  respect  to  the  four 

sages  who  arc  like  the  guardian  deities  for  the  different  kdpdas  of  the  Vedas. 

ISa  aSimplc  0r  dornestic  sacrifice.  The  text  has  omitted  the 

sltialxpQKa  and  names  only  six. 


7.  Sacrifices  in  winch  oblations  of  clarified  butter  are  offered, 
o.  Sacrifices  in  which  soma  is  pressed  for  oblation. 


32.12— 33.1-10 


87 


12.  Being  purified  by  these  purificatory  rites,  one  may  get 
enjoyment,  release  (from  bondage).  Such  a  man  becoming  free 
fiom  diseases  remains  like  a  god.  By  the  recitation  (of  the  names 
of  god),  by  offering  oblations  and  by  worship  and  meditation  on 
the  deity  one  gets  his  cherished  desire. 


CHAPTER  THIRTYTHREE 

Mode  of  investiture  of  the  sacred  thread  for  the  deity  and  the  installa¬ 
tion  of  the  deity 

Agni  said  : 

1.  I  shall  describe  the  (mode  of)  installation  of  Hari  and 
the  benefits  of  worship  for  a  year.  The  first  day  (of  the  lunar 
fortnight)  at  the  commencement  of  (the  month  of)  asaiha  and  the 
concluding  part  (of  the  month)  ofKartlika  yields  riches. 

2-3.  Commencing  with  the  second  day  (of  the  lunar  fort¬ 
night)  (the  installation)  of  Sri,  Gaurl,  Ganesa,  Sarasvatl,  Guha 
(son  of  Siva),  Martanda  (Sun),  the  divine  mothers,  Durga, 
Siva  and  Brahma  are  performed  in  order.  To  which  deity  one  is 
devoted,  the  lunar  day  of  that  deity  is  sacred  to  him. 

4-5.  The  mode  of  installation  is  the  same  (for  ail  the  deities). 
Only  the  sacred  syllables  are  different.  A  thread  spun  by  a  brah¬ 
min  woman  (made  of  )  gold,  silver,  copper,  silk  or  cotton  etc. 
or  in  its  absence  a  purified  one  is  made  into  nine  folds.  The 
investiture  is  done  with  that. 

6-7.  It  is  excellent  if  it  is  longer  than  one  hundred  and  eight 
(finger-length)  or  half  of  it.  “Whatever  has  been  prescribed  by 
you,  O  Lord,  for  the  warding  off  of  the  discontinuance  of  the 
rite,  that  is  being  done  by  me  O  Lord.  May  there  be  no  impe¬ 
diment  here  in  the  pavitraka  rite.  O  Lord  of  undiminishing 
success  !  Grant  me  this”. 

8-10.  Having  prayed  (in  this  way),  one  has  to  tie  it  to  the 
circular  altar  at  first  with  the  Gayatrl1  Om  ndrdyandya  vidmahe 

h  The  Guyatri  is  a  vcdic  metre  consisting  or  24  letters.  Sacred  syllables 
consisting  of  24  letters  in  the  form  of  a  Gayatrl  and  addressed  to  a  particular 
deity  is  known  as  the  Gayatrl  of  that  deity  and  24  such  G  ay  a  tri  mantras  are 
reckoned. 


S8 


Agni  Parana 


vasudevaya  dhimahi  tanno  visnuh  pracodayat.  A  garland  made  of  one 
thousand  and  eight  wood-flowers  is  consecrated  to  the  Lord  of 
lords  extending  up  to  the  feet  and  the  pavitraka  (sacred  thread) 
upto  the  knees,  thighs,  and  navel  of  the  idol  befitting  him.  The 
garland  should  be  made  thirty-two  fingers  length. 

11.  In  the  circular  lotus  of  one  finger  (breadth)  the  peri¬ 
carp,  filament,  leaf,  the  first  basic  syllable  and  the  outer  circum¬ 
ference  of  the  circle  are  consecrated. 

12-13.  By  the  measure  of  one’s  fingers  the  threads  for  the 
preceptors  (are  consecrated)  on  the  models  of  the  parents  on 
the  ground.  Twelve  knots  made  fragrant  are  consecrated  to 
the  end  of  the  navel.  Then  two  garlands  arc  made  ready  at  first 
containing  one  hundred  and  eight  flowers. 

14.  O  twice  born  one  !  Otherwise  twenty-four  or  thirty-six 
garlands  should  be  consecrated  to  the  sun  with  the  ring  and 
middle  fingers  by  those  who  desire  for  a  daughter. 

15.  There  may  be  twelve  knots  in  the  sacred  thread  for  the 
pot  of  the  Sun,  and  the  fire  as  in  the  case  of  Visnu. 

1 6.  According  to  one’s  ability  the  knots  of  the  sacred  thread 
should  be  placed  in  the  midst  of  the  articles  for  the  worship 
of  Visnu  on  the  altar  in  the  pit  encircled  by  a  girdle. 

17-18.  One  who  has  bathed  and  performed  the  twilight 
worship  should  dye  the  seventeen  strings  divided  into  three 
parts,  with  rocana  (yellow  pigment),  agallochum,  camphor, 
turmeric,  saffron  or  sandal.  Then  one  has  to  worship  Hari  on 
the  eleventh  lunar  day  at  the  sacrificial  yard. 

19.  One  has  to  offer  food  to  all  the  subordinate  deities 
at  the  altar.  Ksaum,  to  the  guardian  deity  at  the  end  of  the  door. 
And  (one  should  then  worship)  Sri  on  the  garland. 

20.  (Adorations)  to  Dhata,  Vidhata  (names  of  Brahma), 
(the  rivers)  Ganges,  Yamuna.  And  after  having  worshipped  the 
two  nidhis 1 2  fankha  zmdpadma  at  the  middle,  the  vastu 2  is  removed. 
(Adorations)  to  Sdrriga  (the  bow  of  Visnu).  Then  one  has  to 

perfoim  the  purificatory  rites  for  the  elements  remaining 
standing. 


1 .  The  nine  treasures  of  Kubera,  the  lord  of  wealth. 

2.  Evidently  the  vdstupurusa  governing  the  site  of  a  dwelling  place. 


33.21-27 


89 


Om,  hrum,  hah,  phat,  hrum,  I  absorb  the  subtle  principle  of  smell 
Salutations.  Om,  hrum,  hah,  phat,  hrum.  I  absorb  the  subtle 
principle  of  taste.  Salutations.  Om,  hrum,  hah,  phat,  hrum  I 
absorb  the  subtle  principle  of  touch.  Salutations.  Om,  hrum, 
hah,  phat,  hrum  I  absorb  the  subtle  principle  of  sound.  Salu- 
tations . 

21-22.  With  the  five  incantations  (as  above)  one  has  to 
meditate  on  the  yellow-coloured,  hard  quadrangle  of  earth  of  the 
form  of  subtle  principle  of  smell  and  governed  by  Indra  with 
the  mark  of  holding  the  thunder-bolt  in  between  his  feet.  Then 
the  worshipper  has  to  spread  the  pure  subtle  principle  of  taste 
and  absorb  the  subtle  principles  of  taste  and  colour  in  this  way. 

0jn )  hrim ,  hah ,  phat ,  hr  urn,  I  absorb  the  subtle  principle  of 
taste.  Salutations. Om,  hrim,  hah,  phat,  hrum,  I  absorb  the  subtle 
principle  of  colour.  Salutations,  Om,  hrim ,  hah,  phat ,  hrum ,  I 
absorb  the  subtle  principle  of  touch.  Salutations.  Om,  hrim,  hah , 
phat,  hrim  I  absorb  the  subtle  principle  of  sound.  Salutations. 

23.  One  has  to  meditate  on  the  presiding  deity  Varuna 
placed  in  between  the  two  thighs,  holding  a  white  lotus  jar, 
white-hued  and  crescent-shaped. 

24.  With  the  four  incantations  (as  above)  one  has  to  absorb 
the  pure  subtle  principle  of  taste  in  the  subtle  principle  of  colour. 
The  subtle  principle  of  colour  is  absorbed. 

Om,  hrum,  hah,  phat,  hrum .  I  absorb  the  subtle  principle  of 
colour.  Salutations.  Om,  hrum,  hah,  phat,  hrum .  I  absorb  the 
subtle  principle  of  touch.  Salutations.  Om,  hrum,  hah,  phat, 
hrum  I  absorb  the  subtle  principle  of  sound.  Salutations. 

25.  Having  meditated  on  the  Fire,  the  presiding  deity 
which  is  red  triangular  fire-column  pervading  the  space  bet¬ 
ween  the  navel  and  neck  and  having  the  mark  of  a  svastika ,  that 
pure  (sound  principle)  is  absorbed  in  the  principle  of  touch 
with  these  three  incantations. 

Om,  hrim,  hah,  phat,  hrum  I  absorb  the  subtle  principle  of 
touch.  Salutations.  Oin,  hrim,  hah,  phat ,  hrum  I  absorb  the 
subtle  principle  of  sound.  Salutations. 

26-27.  One  has  to  meditate  on  the  grey-coloured  circular 
column  of  air  pervading  the  space  between  the  neck  and  nose, 
and  bearing  the  mark  of  the  pure  moon  with  the  two  incantations 


90  Agni  Pur  ana 

(as  above).  The  subtle  principle  of  touch  has  to  be  absorbed 
in  the  principle  of  sound  by  meditative  yuga . 

28.  Om,  hrim ,  hah ,  phat,  hrum  I  absorb  the  subtle  sound 
principle.  Salutations,  with  the  single  incantation  one  has  to 
absorb  the  etherial  space  of  the  colour  of  pure  crystal  and 
pervading  the  space  in  between  the  nose  and  tuft. 

29.  One  has  to  perform  purification  of  the  body  by 
desiccation  etc.  Then  the  dry  body  from  the  foot  to  the  tuft  has 
to  be  meditated  upon. 

30-31.  After  having  meditated  upon  the  drop  which  has 
come  out  of  the  cavity  of  brain  with  the  syllable  rain  and  on 
the  body  covered  by  a  garland  of  flames  with  the  syllables  yam 
and  vam ,  one  has  to  besmear  the  body  with  the  ambrosia  of  ashes. 
Then  with  the  syllable  lam ,  it  should  be  converted  into  a  sacred 
body. 

32.  Having  made  the  nyasa 1  on  the  hand  and  body  one  has 
to  do  mental  worship.  Visnu  is  adored  with  his  retinue 
in  the  heart-lotus  with  mental  flowers. 

33.  The  lord  of  lords  who  yields  enjoyment  and  liberation 
has  to  be  worshipped  with  the  principal  mystic  syllable.  “O 
lord  of  gods,  welcome  to  you.  O  Kesava  !  be  present  here.” 

34.  “Accept  my  excellent  mental  adoration  properly.” 
Then  the  Tortoise,  the  supporting  power,  then  Ananta  and  then 
the  earth  have  to  be  worshipped. 

35-36.  The  righteousness,  un-righteousness  etc.  (have  to  be 
worshipped)  in  the  middle  of  fire  etc.,  the  lotus  in  the  middle 
of  saliva  (goodness)  etc.,  the  principle  of  time,  the  solar  and  other 
regions  and  the  king  of  birds,  in  mayd  (illusion)  and  avidya 
(ignorance).  Then  (the  deities)  of  the  quarters  commencing 
with  north-west  and  ending  with  north-east  as  well  as  the  line  of 
preceptors. 

37.  The  attendant  gods,  Sarasvati,  Narada  (sage),  Nala- 
kubara  (son  of  Kubera),  the  preceptor,  the  sandals  of  the  pre¬ 
ceptor  s  preceptor  and  of  the  preceptor  have  to  be  worshipped. 

38-39.  The  perfections  already  accomplished  and  the  later 
perfections,  the  female  energies— Laksmi,  Sarasvati,  Priti,  Kirti 


1 .  The  assignment  of  fingers  on  the  different  parts  of  the  body  by 
ching  them. 


tou- 


33.40-49 


91 


Santi,  Kanti,  Pusti,  Tusti,  Mahendra  etc.  have  to  be  worshipped 
in  the  middle.  Hari,  Dhpti,  Sri,  Rati,  and  Kranti  etc.  have  to 
be  invoked  in  the  middle.  Acyuta  is  established  with  the  princi¬ 
pal  mystic  syllable. 

40.  Having  prayed  by  saying  “Om,  have  (your)  face  to¬ 
wards  me  and  come  near  me,”  and  having  placed  the  articles  of 
worship  and  offered  scents  etc .  one  has  to  worship  with  the  principal 
(mystic  syllable). 

41.  Om  (you)  frighten,  (you)  frighten.  Again  terrorise 
the  heart  and  head.  (You)  pound  the  tuft,  commencing  with 
the  flames  and  from  the  Sastra 1 2  to  the  astral 

42.  (You)  protect.  (You)  destroy.  Salutations  to  the  arm¬ 
our.  Oni}  hruniy  phat.  Salutations  to  the  missile.  (One  should 
worship)  the  parts  of  the  body  with  the  principal  mystic 
letter. 

43-44.  At  first  one  should  worship  different  forms  of 
idols  in  the  east,  south,  west  and  north.  Vasudeva,  Sankarsana, 
Pradyumna,  Aniruddha,  Agni,  Sri,  Dhrti,  Rati  and  Kanti  (are) 
the  forms  of  Hari.  The  conch,  disc,  mace,  lotus  and  Agni  (should 
be  worshipped)  in  the  east. 

45.  The  bow,  club,  sword,  and  garland  of  wild  flowers 
(should  be  worshipped)  outside  it.  Indra  and  others  as  well  as 
Ananta,  and  Varuna  (should  be  worshipped)  in  the’south-west. 

46-48.  Brahma  and  Indra  (should  be  worshipped)  in  the 
north-east  and  their  hosts  of  weapons  on  the  outside.  TheAira- 
vata  (the  elephant  of  Indra),  goat,  buffalo,  monkey,  fish,  deer, 
hare,  bull,  tortoise,  and  hamsa  (should  be  worshipped)  and 
Krsna  on  the  outside.  The  gate-keepers  Kumuda  and  others 
(should  be  worshipped)  in  pairs  from  the  east  to  the  north. 
After  saluting  Hari,  the  food  (is  offered)  outside.  Salutations  to 
the  attendants  of  Visnu.  The  offering  should  be  made  on  the 
altar. 

49.  One  should  worship  the  Universal  Being,  the  All-perva¬ 
ding  on  the  north-east.  The  protective  thread  should  be  tied  on 
the  right  arm  of  the  lord. 


1.  An  ordinary  missile. 

2.  Any  missile  discharged  after  the  repetition  of  appropriate  mystic 
syllables. 


•92 


Agni  Parana 


50.  (One  should  say),  “ Om  salutations  to  the  one  who  con¬ 
fers  full  benefits  of  worship  done  through  the  whole  year. 
You  wear  this  thread  for  the  purpose  of  installation.” 

51.  One  should  observe  the  vow  of  fasting  etc.  in  the  pre¬ 
sence  of  the  deity  (saying),  “I  am  pleasing  the  deity  by  observing 
fasting  etc.” 

52.  “May  not  lust,  anger,  and  all  other  (qualities)  reside 
in  me  ever,  O  lord  of  gods  from  this  day  onwards  it  is  the  last 
of  them.” 

53.  If  the  worshipper  is  unable  (to  do  as  described),  he 
should  observe  the  vow  eating  only  in  the  night.  Having  made 
oblations,  the  visarjana  (dismissal) is  done,  after  laudation.  This 
is  the  (mode  of)  daily  worship  which  yields  riches.  Om ,  hrim , 
Mm ,  salutations  to  Sridhara  the  enchanter  of  the  three  worlds. 


CHAPTER  THIRTYFOUR 
Mode  of  performing  oblation 


Agni  said  : 

1-2.  One  has  to  enter  the  sacrificial  ground  with  the  follow¬ 
ing  mystic  syllable  and  adorn  it.  “Salutations  to  the  brahman, 
the  lord,  Sridhara  (and)  undecaying  self,  the  form  of  Rg,  Tajur 
and  Sama  ( veda ),  (possessing)  a  body  (composed)  of  sound  (and) 
Visnu.  Having  drawn  the  circular  altar  in  the  evening,  one 
has  to  bring  materials  for  the  sacrifice. 

3.  Having  washed  hands  and  feet  and  made  assignment, 
and  taken  the  arghya  (respectful  offering)  in  the  hands  one 
should  sprinkle  the  arghya  on  the  head  and  the  gate-way. 

4.  He  should  then  begin  sacrifice  at  the  gateway.  He 
should  worship  the  presiding  deity  of  the  arch.  The  aivatiha1, 
udumbara 2 3 4,  vata 3  and  plakscA  are  the  trees  of  the  east. 

1.  Ficus  religiosa  (fig.  tree). 

2.  Ficus  glomerata. 

3.  Ficus  indica  (banyan  tree). 

4.  Ficus  infectoria  (a  large  tree  with  small  white  fruit). 


34.5-14 


93 


5.  The  Rg  ( veda )  is  the  ornament  of  Indra  on  the  west. 
The  Tajur  (veda)  is  auspicious  for  Yama.  The  Sama  ( vcda )  is  of 
the  water-god  and  is  known  as  Sudhanvan.  The  Alharva  (veda) 
is  of  Soma  (and  is  called)  Suhotraka. 

6.  The  edges  of  the  gate,  flags,  (gate-keepers) 

Kumuda  etc.  and  two  pitchers  should  be  adored  at  every  door 
by  their  respective  names,  as  well  as  a  pitcher  full  of  water  in 
the  east. 

7.  Then  one  should  worship  the  guards  of  the  doors  — 
Ananda,  Nandana,  Daksa,  Virasena,  Susenaka,  Sambhava  and. 
Prabhava  in  the  north  (Saumya)1 2. 

8.  One  should  enter  after  having  removed  obstacles  by 

throwing  flowers  and  the  repetition  of  names  of  weapons. 
Having  performed  purificatory  rites  of  the  elements  and  the 
assignment  (of  limbs)  one  should  show  the  posture  of 

hands. 


9-10.  Having  recited  the  mystic  syllable  ending  with  phat 
one  should  scatter  mustard  seeds  in  different  directions. 
(One  should  sanctify)  the  cow’s  urine  with Vasudeva,  cows 
dung  with  Sankarsana,  the  milk  with  Pradyumna  and  the  curd 
got  from  it  with  Narayana.  The  ghee  should  be  one  part  and 
the  others  respectively  one  part  more. 

1 1 .  When  these  are  mixed  in  a  vessel  of  ghee  it  is  known 
as  the pancagavyor  (the  five  products  got  from  a  cow).  A  part  of 
it  is  for  the  sprinkling  of  the  temple  building  and  the  other  for 
eating. 

12.  One  should  worship  Indra  and  other  guardian  deities 
of  the  world  in  ten  pitchers  which  have  been  brought.  Having 
worshipped  them  one  has  to  make  them  hear  command. 
They  must  be  installed  by  the  command  of  Haii. 

13.  Having  kept  the  articles  of  sacrifice  well-protected, 
one  must  scatter  those  which  must  be  scattered.  Having  recited 
the  basic  mystic  syllable  eight  hundred  times  one  shou  ta  e 
kiito  grass. 

14.  Then  one  should  place  there  a  pitcher  and  (the  vessel) 
vardhani  at  the  north-east.  Having  worshipped  Haii  along  ^ 


1 .  Soma  means  Kubcra,  the  regent  of  the  north. 

2.  These  arc — the  dung,  urine,  milk,  curd  and  ghee. 


94 


Agni  Parana 


the  attendant  gods  in  the  pitcher  one  should  worship  weapons  in 
the  (vessel)  vardhani. 

15.  (Having  made)  a  circumambulation  of  the  sacrificial 
place,  water  is  sprinkled  in  broken  streams  by  the  vardhani .  Then 
the  pitcher  should  be  taken  and  worshipped  at  a  fixed  place. 

16.  Hari  should  be  worshipped  with  perfumes  etc.  in  the 
pitcher  adorned  with  five  gems  and  cloth  and  the  weapons 
(should  be  worshipped)  at  the  left  in  the  Vardhani  in  which  gold 
has  been  placed. 

17.  One  should  worship  the  goddess  of  the  building  and  the 
presiding  deity  of  obstacles  near  it.  In  the  same  way,  one  should 
arrange  for  the  consecration  of  Visnu  on  the  days  of  movement 
(of  the  sun  from  one  stellar  place  to  another),  and  other  days 
(of  importance). 

18.  Nine  dentless  jars  full  of  water  should  be  placed  in  the 
nine  corners.  One  should  offer  water  for  washing  the  feet,  arghya 
for  rinsing  the  mouth  and  the  pahcagavya. 

19.  The  five  sweet  things,  water  etc.  (are  placed)  in  the  east, 
north-east  etc.  The  curd,  milk,  honey  and  hot  water  are  the  four 
constituents  for  the  worship  of  the  feet. 

20.  The  lotus,  Syamaka  (a  kind  of  grain),  durva  (grass)  and 
the  consort  of  Visnu  are  for  the  worship  of  the  feet.  Together 
with  barley  seeds,  perfumes,  fruits  and  unbroken  rice,  this  is 
spoken  as  constituting  the  eight  articles  for  the  worship  of  the 
feet. 

21.  The  kuia  (grass),  flowers  of  white  mustard,  sesamum 
(are)  the  articles  (used)  for  adoration.  One  should  offer  waters 

for  rinsing  the  mouth  together  with  cloves  and  kaiikola (berries). 

22.  One  should  bathe  the  deity  with  the  five  sweet  mate¬ 
rials  along  with  (the  recitation  of)  the  principal  mystic  syllable. 
One  should  pour  pure  water  on  the  head  of  the  deity  from  the 
•central  pot. 

23.  The  worshipper  should  touch  water  poured  from  the 
pitcher  and  the  tip  of  the  kurcha  (bunch  of  kusa  grass).  One 
should  offer  pure  water  for  washing  the  feet  and  arghya  for  sipping. 

24.  After  having  wiped  the  body  with  a  cloth,  the  deity 
(adorned)  with  a  cloth  should  be  taken  to  the  altar.  Having 
worshipped  him  there,  one  should  offer  oblations  in  the  sacri¬ 
ficial  pit  after  having  controlled  breath. 


34.25-35 


95 


25.  Having  washed  hands,  three  lines  running  towards 
the  east  from  the  south  to  the  north  and  three  running  towards 
the  north  are  drawn. 

26.  Having  sprinkled  them  with  the  waters  of  arghya ,  one 
has  to  show  yonimudra  .*  Having  meditated  on  the  fire  of  the 
form  of  the  self  in  th eyoni  one  should  throw  it  in  the  pit. 

27.  Then  one  should  place  vessels  together  with  darbha 
grass  and  wooden  ladles.  The  twigs  and  saw  (should  be)  at 
arm’s  distance. 

28.  (Then  one  must  bring)  vessels  pranita ,  proksani  and 
sthdli  for  (holding)  the  clarified  butter  (and  offering)  ghee  etc. 
Two  prasthas 2  of  rice  (are  spread)  evenly  with  face  downwards. 

29-30.  The  kufa  (grass)  with  its  tip  (facing)  eastwards  should 
be  placed  in  the  pranita  and  proksani  vessels.  Having  filled 
pranita  (vessel)  with  water  and  having  meditated  on  the  deity 
and  worshipping,  the  pranita  (vessel)  should  be  placed  in  the 
midst  of  materials  in  front.  Having  filled  the  proksani  (vessel) 
with  water  and  worshipping  it,  it  should  be  placed  on  the 
right  side. 

31.  The  oblation  should  be  consigned  to  the  fire.  Brahma 
should  be  assigned  to  the  south.  Having  spread  the  kufa  (grass) 
in  the  east  etc.  the  (line  of)  enclosure  should  be  drawn. 

32.  Rites  relating  to  Visnu  should  be  done  with  (the  rites) 
such  as  garbhadhana  etc.  The  garbhadhdnay  puriisavana ,  simanton - 
nayana ,  and  (the  rite  performed  after)  the  birth  (are  the  rites). 

33.  Eight  offerings  to  the  fire  are  made  commencing  with 
naming  (ceremony)  and  ending  with  samdvarta  (rite  performed 
on  the  completion  of  one’s  studies).  The  final  oblation  is  made 
with  the  sacrificial  ladles  for  each  act. 

34.  The  oblation  is  made  after  having  meditated  on  the 
lustrous  (goddess)  Laksmi  at  the  middle  of  the  pit.  (She)  is 
known  as  KundalaksmI  (Laksmi  of  the  sacrificial  pit),  the  soui  ce 
of  the  material  world  composed  of  the  three  qualities. 

35.  She  is  the  source  of  all  beings  as  well  as  mystic  learning 
and  collection  of  mystic  syllables.  The  fire  is  the  cause  of  libera 
tion.  The  supreme  soul  (Visnu)  is  the  conferer  of  emancipation. 

1.  On  this  mudra  and  other  mudras  see  Kali.  P.  70.36-56. 
ten  mudrds  in  the  worship  of  the  goddess.  Sec  Brahmapda  P.  I  •  •  > 

.  A  measure  equivalent  to  32  palas. 


96 


Agni  Purdna 


36.  (His)  head  is  spoken  as  at  the  east,  the  two  arms  are 
situated  at  the  corners  north-east  and  south-east,  the  two  thighs 
at  the  north-western  and  south-western  corners. 

37-38.  The  belly  is  called  (the  sacrificial)  pit.  The  organ 
of  generation  is  said  to  be  the  source.  The  three  qualities  are  the 
girdle.  Having  meditated  thus  fifteen  twigs  should  be  placed  in 
the  fire  (after  reciting)  Om  by  showing  musli  mudra .  Oblations 
should  be  made  again  to  the  vessels  and  worship  is  offered  (to 
the  vessels)  on  the  north-west  to  south-east. 

39.  Parts  of  oblations  are  offered  (for  the  directions)  upto 
the  north-east  with  the  basic  mystic  syllable.  (Oblations  are 
made)  in  the  north  with  (the  syllables)  (forming)  the  end  (of 
the)  twelve  syllables1 2  and  with  the  middle  (of  the  mystic  syllable) 
in  the  south. 

40.  The  consecrated  fire  of  Visnu,  possessing  seven  tongues 
and  having  the  radiance  of  crores  of  sums  and  having  the  moon 
as  its  face  and  sun  as  the  eye  and  situated  in  the  middle  of  the 
lotus  should  be  meditated  upon  with  the  vydhrtis .3  Then  one 
should  offer  one  hundred  and  eight  oblations  (to  this  form). 
Then  fiftyeight  oblations  (should  be  offered)  and  a  tenth  of  it 
for  the  limbs. 


CHAPTER  THIRTYFIVE 
Mode  of  consecration  of  an  image 

Agni  said  : 

1.  Having  sprinkled  with  the  residual  offering  one  should 
perform  consecration  of  the  sacred,  subtle,  and  chanted  mystic 
formulae  of  the  manlion  form. 

2-3.  Consecration  of  the  vessels  covered  by  the  clothes 
should  be  done  with  mystic  syllables.  The  vessels  on  which  water 
is  sprinkled  once  or  twice  with  bel  (leaves),  should  be  placed 


1.  This  is  formed  by  holding  a  clenched  fist. 

2.  Om  namo  bhagavate  Ndrdyapdya. 

3.  The  basic  syllables  forming  part  of  the  Gay  atri-m  antra. 


35.4-14 


97 


near  the  pitcher.  Having  pronounced  the  protective  spell  the 
priest  should  place  stick  for  (cleansing)  the  teeth  and  myrabolan 
on  the  east  with  (the  recitation  of  syllable  for)  Sankarsana. 

4.  The  ashes,  sesamum,  and  cowdung-mixcd  earth  (should 
be  consecrated) on  the  south  with  (syllable  for)  Pradyumna,  in 
the  west  with  (that  of)  Aniruddha  and  in  the  north  with  that  of 
Narayana. 

5.  Then  the  waters  along  with  the  ku$a  grass  (should  be 
assigned)  to  the  south-east  with  the  heart,  the  saffron  and  pig¬ 
ment  on  the  north-east  with  the  head,  the  incense  on  the  south¬ 
west  with  the  tuft. 

6.  Then  the  principal  beautiful  flowers  (should  be  assigned) 
to  the  north-west  with  the  armour.  The  sandal,  water,  unbroken 
rice,  curd,  and  durva  (grass)  are  placed  in  small  cups  (made  of 
leaves). 

7-8.  The  chamber  having  been  encircled  by  three  threads, 
the  articles  kept  ready  should  be  thrown  again.  Then  in  one’s 
own  order  of  adoration  one  should  offer  perfumes  and  (other) 
articles,  at  the  foot  of  the  gate  or  at  the  pitcher  of  Visnu  with 
sacred  syllables.  One  should  then  worship  the  radiant,  beautiful 
form  of  Visnu  capable  of  destroying  all  sins. 

9.  CT  conceive  on  thy  limbs,  the  deity  who  grants  alL 
coveted  things”.  After  having  worshipped  him  by  (showing) 
the  incense,  lamp  etc.,  one  should  approach  the  gate-way. 

10.  One  should  offer  pavitra 1 *  along  with  perfumes,  flowers 
and  unbroken  grains.  The  radiant  pavitra  of Visnu  (is  capable) 
of  destroying  all  sins, 

1 1.  I  hold  on  my  limbs  (the  pavitra )  for  the  accomplish¬ 
ment  of  virtue,  desire  and  worldly  benefits.  The  pavitra  is 
offered  to  the  other  attendant  deities  and  to  the  preceptor 
(seated)  on  a  seat. 

12.  After  having  worshipped  well  with  perfumes,  one  has 
to  offer  to  Hari  along  with  perfumes,  flowers  etc.  and  saying, 
"May  these  become  the  energy  of  Visnu”. 

13-14.  Having  offered  to  the  deity  stationed  in  the  fire  one 
should  pray  to  the  deity  (saying), 4 ‘O  lord  couched  on  the  great 


1.  It  means  the  sanctified  articles.  It  also  means  the  twining  of  the 

darbha  grass  in  a  particular  shape  so  that  it  could  be  worn  on  the  finger. 


•98 


Agni  Purana 


serpent  in  the  milky  ocean.  I  shall  worship  you  in  the  morning. 
You  (please)  be  present  here  O  Kesava.”  Then  having  offer¬ 
ed  offerings  to  Indra  and  others  one  should  dedicate  them 
to  the  attendants  of  Visnu. 

15.  Then  one  should  place  a  pitcher  covered  by  two  cloths 
and  filled  with  water  mixed  with  perfumes,  rocana,  camphor  and 
saffron  in  front  of  the  deity. 

16-18.  Having  adorned  the  deity  with  perfumes  and  fiow- 
wers,  one  should  worship  him  with  the  mystic  foimula.  Having 
come  out  of  the  hall  one  should  place  in  three  circular  enclosures 
the  five  products  obtained  from  the  cow,  the  sacrificial  offering 
(earn)  and  wood  for  cleansing  the  teeth.  One  should  read 
purcinas  and  recite  hymns  and  along  with  servants,  a  women 
and  children  remain  awake.  Then  the  consecration  rite  should  be 
performed  immediately  without  sacred  perfumes. 


CHAPTER  THIRTYSIX 
Mode  of  performing  the  investiture  of  sacred  thread 
Agni  said  : 

1 .  Having  bathed  in  the  morning  and  worshipping  the  guar¬ 
dian  deities,  (the  worshipper)  should  enter  the  secret  chamber 
and  gather  (articles)  and  place. 

2.  The  articles  (are)  the  dress,  ornaments  and  perfumes 
which  were  offered  in  the  consecration  ceremony  earlier.  Having 
discarded  the  remnants  (of  articles  for  worship),  the  deity  should 
be  well-installed  and  worshipped. 

3.  One  should  offer  the  paheamrta  (five  sweet  articles),  the 
unguents,  pure  and  perfumed  waters  as  well  as  dress,  perfumes 
and  flowers. 

4.  Having  offered  unto  the  fire  as  done  everyday  one  should 
pray  to  the  deity  and  bow  down.  Having  submitted  one’s  actions 
to  the  deity  one  should  perform  the  naimitlika  (periodical)  cere¬ 
mony. 


36.5-16 


99 


A.  0nA°Ul<!  WOtShip  the  §atc'^eePcr)  the  pitcher  of Visnu 
and  the  varddhani  (vessel)  and  Hari.  The  pitcher  (should  be  con¬ 
secrated)  with  the  sacred  syllable  * alo  deva’  (and  the  following). 

.  6'  _  °  f‘r?I?a  !  Salutations  to  you.  You  accept  this  sacred 
thread  for  the  sake  of  purifying  all  and  which  yields  fruits 
of  a  year’s  worship. 

7.  You  purify  sins  that  had  been  committed  by 
me.  O  God  !  the  lord  of  celestials  I  will  be  purified  by 
your  grace.” 

8.  Having  sprinkled  mentally  the  sacred  thread  and  the  self, 
and  having  sprinkled  the  pitcher  of  Visnu,  one  should  go  near 
the  deity. 


9-10.  One  should  offer  a  sacred  thread  to  the  self,  after 

having  discarded  the  protective  thread  (tied  Qn  the  hand).  O 

Lord  !  Accept  the  sacred  thread  that  has  been  made  ready  by 
me,  for  the  sake  of  accomplishing  rites  so  that  there  may 
not  be  any  fault  on  me.  The  sacred  thread  (should  be  offered) 
to  the  gate-keepers,  the  seat  and  to  the  chief  preceptors. 

11.  The  garlands  of  forest  flowers  (should  be  offered)  to 
the  gods  of  inferior  order  with  the  basic  formula.  The  articles 
should  be  offered  to  the  heart  etc.  and  ending  with  Visvaksena 
(an  epithet  of  Visnu). 

12.  Having  offered  to  the  fire  the  oblations  placed  near  the 
fire  for  Visnu  and  other  (gods),  and  having  worshipped,  the 
final  oblation  should  (then)  be  made  with  the  basic  formula 
for  the  expiation  (of  one’s  sins). 

13-16.  O  Lord  !  having  Garuda  as  your  emblem  !  Let 
this  be  your  annual  adoration  with  one  hundred  and  eight  or 
five  Upanisads 1  (and)  with  garlands  of  gems  and  corals,  the 
flowers  mandara  and  others. 


<cO  Lord  !  Just  as  the  garland  of  wild  flowers  and  the 
kaustubha  gem  (are)  (worn)  always  on  the  chest,  so  also  bear 
the  sacred  thread  and  the  worship  on  the  chest.  Whatever  has 
been  done  wantonly  or  unwantonly  in  the  regulations  of  the 
worship  let  it  become  complete  by  the  rite  shorn  of  impedi¬ 
ments.”  Having  worshipped,  bowing  down,  and  requesting 
them  the  purified  article  should  be  placed  on  one  s  own  head. 


1.  The  mystical  writings  ascertaining  the  meaning  of  the  Vedas . 


100 


Agni  Purana 


17.  Having  made  offering  to  Visnu  the  preceptor  should 
be  satisfied  by  (giving)  the  fees.  The  brahmins .should  be  satis¬ 
fied)  by  (giving)  food,  clothes  and  other  things  either  for  a 
day  or  for  a  fortnight. 

18.  At  the  time  of  bathing,  having  gone  down  into  the 
waters,  the  sacred  thread  should  be  offered.  Without  any  restric¬ 
tion,  food  and  other  things  should  be  given  (to  others)  and 
then  one  has  to  eat. 

19-22.  Having  worshipped  fire  at  the  (rite  of)  dismissal, 
the  threads  are  removed.  (One  should  then  say)  “Having  thus- 
duly  accomplished  my  annual  adoration  O  thread  !  you  now 

go  to  the  world  of  Visnu  having  been  permitted  by  me.  Hav¬ 
ing  worshipped  Somesa  and  Visvaksena  at  the  centre  and  having 
worshipped  the  sacred  threads  one  should  dedicate  them  to  the 
brahmins.  As  many  knots  as  there  are  in  that  thread  (one  will) 
live  gloriously  for  so  many  thousands  of  years  in  the  world  of 
Visnu.  One  will  get  release  (from  bondage)  after  having 
redeemed  hundreds  of  his  ancestors  the  ten  preceding  and  the 
ten  succeeding  and  having  established  them  in  the  world  of  Visnu. 


CHAPTER  THIRTYSEVEN 
The  investiture  of  sacred  thread  for  all  gods 
Agni  said  : 

1 .  Listen  to  (the  description  of  the  mode  of)  investiture 
for  all  deities.  The  thread  is  the  primary  characteristic  as 
well  as  its  yellow  orpiment. 

2.  O  the  cause  of  the  universe  !  come  here  along  with 
the  attendant  gods.  I  invite  you  in  the  morning  and  offer  this 
sacred  thread. 

3.  O  the  creator  of  the  universe.  Salutations  to  you  I 
Accept  this  sacred  thread  for  the  sake  of  purification  (and  which) 
conveys  the  fruits  of  the  annual  worship. 

4.  O  God  Siva  !  Salutations  to  you  !  Accept  this  sacred 


37.5—38.1 


101 


thread  along  with  garlands  of  gems  and  corals  and  mandara 
flowers. 

5-6.  O  lord  of  the  learned  in  the  Vedas  !  Let  this  be  your 
annual  worship.  After  having  accomplished  this  annual  worship 
of  mine  according  to  the  rules,  O  articles  of  worship  !  go  to 
heavens  after  being  discarded  by  me.  O  lord  Sun  !  Saluta¬ 
tions  to  you.  Accept  this  article  of  worship. 

7.  O  Lord  Siva  !  Salutations  to  you.  Accept  this  article 
of  worship  which  is  capable  of  yielding  fruits  of  annual  worship 
for  the  sake  of  purification. 

8.  O  lord  of  ganas  !  Salutations  to  you.  Accept  this 
article  of  worship  which  is  capable  of  yielding  fruits  of 
.annual  worship  for  the  sake  of  purification. 

9.  O  goddess  Sakti  !  Salutations  to  you.  Accept  this 
article  of  worship  which  is  capable  of  yielding  fruits  of 
annual  worship  for  the  sake  of  purification. 

10-14.  I  dedicate  unto  you  this  excellent  thread  verily  the 
same  as  (lord)  Narayana  and  (lord)  Aniruddha  and  which 
is  capable  of  yielding  fruits  of  annual  worship  for  the  sake 
of  purification  and  which  yields  wealth,  grains  and  health.  I 
dedicate  unto  you  this  excellent  thread  verily  the  same  as 
Kamadeva  and  Sankarsana,  which  yields  learning,  progeny 
-and  welfare.  I  dedicate  unto  you  this  thread  verily  the  same 
as  Vasudeva,  which  yields  dharma,  artha ,  kama,  and  moksa  and 
which  is  the  cause  for  transport  over  the  ocean  of  mundane 
existence.  This  thread  verily  the  universal  form  is  the  donor 
of  all  things,  the  destroyer  of  sins  and  elevates  past  an 
future  lineage.  I  offer  in  order  to  the  four  younger  deities 
with  the  mystic  syllables. 


CHAPTER  THIRTYEIGHT 
Benefits  of  constructing  temples 


Agni  said  : 

1  j  will  now  describe 


the  benefits  of  erecting  the 


1.  These  are 
pleasures,  desires 


the  four  objects  of  human  life,  namely,  righteousness, 
and  release  from  bondage. 


102 


Agni  Purana 


temples  of  Vasudeva  and  others.  One  who  is  desirous  of  construc¬ 
ting  the  temples  of  gods  gets  freed  from  sins  incurred  in  thou¬ 
sand  births. 

2-5.  Those  who  conceive  of  building  a  temple  get  the  sins 
accrued  in  hundreds  of  births  destroyed.  Those  who  approve 
the  building  of  a  temple  for  lord  Krsna,  also  become  free 
from  their  sins  and  go  to  the  world  of  Acyuta  (Visnu).  Having 
built  a  temple  for  Hari,  a  man  immediately  conveys  a  lakh  of 
his  ancestors  both  past  and  future  to-  the  world  of  Visnu.  The 
manes  of  a  person  v/ho  builds  a  temple  for  Visnu  having  seen  it 
remain  in  the  world  of  Visnu  well-honoured  and  relieved 
of  their  sufferings  in  hells.  The  erection  of  the  abode  for  the 
deity  destroys  sins  such  as  the  killing  of  a  brahmin. 

6.  Whichever  benefit  could  not  be  obtained  by  doing 
sacrificial  rites,  could  be  got  by  the  erection  of  an  abode  (for 
the  god).  He  who  erects  an  abode  for  the  god  reaps  fruits 
of  bathing  in  all  holy  waters. 

7.  Even  the  making  of  a  temple  by  perfidy  with  dust  one 
would  reach  heaven.  It  gets  more  benefits  than  those  (got)  be¬ 
ing  slain  in  the  battle. 

8.  One  who  builds  one  temple  goes  to  heaven.  One  who 
builds  three  temples  goes  to  the  world  of  Brahma.  The  builder 
of  five  abodes  reaches  the  world  of  Sambhu  (Siva).  By  build¬ 
ing  eight  abodes  one  remains  in  the  world  of  Hari. 

9-17.  One  who  builds  sixteen  abodes  gets  enjoyment  and 
emancipation.  Having  built  a  small,  medium  or  excellent  temple 
for  Hari  one  gets  heaven  or  the  world  of  Visnu  or  emancipation 
respectively  in  order.  Which  merits  a  rich  man  would  get  by 
erecting  an  excellent  temple  of  Visnu,  a  poor  man  would 
get  by  (erecting)  a  small  temple  itself.  Having  acquired  riches 
and  built  a  temple  for  Hari  even  with  a  small  portion  of  it  one 
would  get  excellent  and  enormous  merits.  By  erecting  a  temple 
of  Hari  with  a  lakh  or  thousand  or  hundred  or  fifty  (units  of 
money)  one  would  reach  the  place  of  that  person  who  has  the 
eagle  in  liis  banner.  Those  who  play  in  their  childhood  with 
(the  building  of)  abodes  of  Hari  with  earth  also  go  to  the  world 
of  Vasudeva.  The  building  of  temples  of  Visnu  at  holy  places, 
within  temples,  accomplished  place  or  hermitage  (yields)  three¬ 
fold  benefit  than  those  already  described.  Those  who  decorate 


38.18-31 


103 


(the  temple)  of  Visnu  with  the  bandhuka  flowers  and  an  oint  with 
fragrant  paste,  also  reach  the  place  of  the  lord.  (Having 
erected  the  temple  of  Hari),  a  person  obtains  two-fold  merits 
after  having  elevated  the  fallen,  the  falling  and  half-fallen.  He 
who  brings  about  the  fall  of  a  man  is  the  protector  of  one  fallen. 

18-19.  By  (erecting)  a  temple  of  Visnu  one  reaches  his 
region.  As  long  as  the  bricks  remain  in  the  temple  of  Hari,  the 
founder  of  that  family  is  honoured  in  the  world  of  Visnu.  He 
becomes  pious  and  adorable  in  this  world  as  well  as  the  next. 

20.  He  who  builds  a  temple  for  Krsna,  the  son  of  Vasudeva 
is  born  as  a  man  of  good  deeds  and  his  family  gets  purified. 

21 .  He  who  builds  an  abode  for  Visnu,  Rudra,  Sun  or  the 
goddess  etc.  acquires  fame.  What  is  the  use  of  the  hoarded 
riches  for  an  ignorant  person  ? 

22-23.  If  one  does  not  cause  an  abode  for  Krsna  to  be 
built  (with  wealth)  acquired  by  hard  (work)  (and)  if  one’s 
wealth  could  not  be  enjoyed  by  manes,  brahmins,  celestials 
and  relatives,  his  acquisition  of  wealth  is  useless.  As  death  is 
certain  for  a  man  so  also  the  destruction  of  wealth. 

24.  One  who  does  not  spend  his  riches  for  charities  or  for 
enjoyments  is  stupid  and  is  being  bound  even  while  alive,  while 
the  riches  are  flickery. 

25.  Is  there  any  merit  in  being  the  lord  of  wealth 
acquired  either  accidentally  or  by  one’s  effort,  if  it  is  not  spent 
for  acquiring  fame  or  for  philanthropy  ? 

26-3 1 .  One  may  give  to  the  foremost  brahmins  and  also  do 
(such  acts)  which  would  glorify  him.  More  than  the  charities 
and  more  than  the  acts  which  would  glorify  him,  one  has  to  build 


the  temples  of  Visnu  and  other  gods.  The  temple  of  Hari  being 
set  up  by  devoted  great  men,  the  three  worlds,  the  movable  and 
immovable  things  and  the  entire  objects  get  established.  All  the 
things  beginning  with  Brahma  to  the  Pillar,  that  has  already 
born,  that  is  being  bom,  that  is  to  be  born,  the  gross,  the 
minute  and  the  other  things  are 'born  of  Visnu.  Having  set  up 
an  abode  for  that  lord  of  lords,  the  omnipresent,  the  great  Visnu, 
one  is  not  born  again  in  this  world.  By  building  temples  for  the 
celestials  Siva,  Brahma,  Sun,  Vighnesa  (lord  ofimpediments), 
ctS  krvatl),  Laksmi  and  others  (a  man)  reaps  the  same 
benefit  as  he  would  get  for  building  an  abode  for  Visnu.  Greater 
merit  (is  acquired)  by  installing  images  of  gods. 


104 


Agni  Parana 

32.  In  the  rites  (relating  to)  installation  of  an  idol  there 
is  no  limit  for  the  fruits  (gained).  An  image  made  of  wood 
gives  greater  merit  than  that  made  of  clay.  One  made  of  bricks 
yields  greater  merit  than  that  made  of  wood. 

33.  One  made  of  stones  gives  (greater  merit)  than  that  made 
of  bricks.  (Images  made)  of  gold  and  other  metals  yield  more 
benefits.  Sins  committed  in  seven  births  get  destroyed  even  at 
the  very  commencement  of  installation. 

34.  One  who  builds  a  temple  goes  to  heaven  and  never  goes 
to  hell.  Having  elevated  a  hundred  of  his  ancestors  he  conveys 
them  to  the  world  of  Visnu. 

35.  Yama  (god  of  death)  said  to  his  emissaries  : 

Tama  said  : 

Those  men  who  build  temples  of  gods  and  adore  the  idols 
are  not  to  be  brought  to  hell. 

36.  Bring  them  to  my  view  who  have  not  built  temples  and 
other  things.  Move  around  in  the  befitting  way  and  execute  my 
directive. 

37.  Except  those  who  have  resorted  to  Ananta,  the  father 
of  the  universe,  no  other  beings  would  at  any  time  disregard 
the  command. 

38.  Those  who  are  devotees  of  Visnu  and  have  their  mind 
fixed  on  him  have  to  be  avoided  by  you.  They  are  not  to  live 
here. 

39-49.  Those  who  always  adore  Visnu  should  be  avoided 
by  you  from  a  distance.  Those  who  sing  the  glories  of  Govinda 
while  standing  or  sleeping  or  walking  or  standing  behind  or 
stumbling  or  remaining  (at  a  place)  are  to  be  avoided  by  you 
from  a  distance.  Those  who  worship  Janardana  with  obligatory 
and  occasional  rites  are  not  to  be  beheld  by  you.  Those  who 
follow  this  course  attain  good  position.  Those  who  wor¬ 
ship  (the  god)  with  flowers,  incense,  raiments,  favourite  orna¬ 
ments,  (and)  those  who  have  gone  to  the  abode  of  Krsna 
are  not  to  be  seized  by  you.  Those  who  besmear  with  unguents, 
and  those  who  are  engaged  in  sprinkling  his  body,  their  children 
and  their  descendants  should  be  left  in  the  temple  of  Krsna. 
Hundreds  of  men  born  in  the  family  of  one  who  has  built  the 
temple  of  Visnu  should  not  be  seen  by  you  with  evil  mind.  Who- 


39.1-5 


105 


ever  builds  a  temple  of  Visnu  with  wood  or  stone  or  earth  gets 
free  from  all  sins.  One  who  builds  the  temple  of  Visnu  gets  that 
great  benefit  which  (one  would  acquire)  by  doing'  sacrificial 
rites  everyday.  By  building  a  temple  for  Visnu  (one)  conveys 
hundreds  of  his  discendants  and  hundreds  of  his  ancestors  to 
the  world  of  Acyuta.  Visnu  is  identical  with  the  seven  worlds. 
One  who  builds  a  house  for  him  saves  the  endless  worlds  and  also 
obtains  endlessness.  One  who  builds  (a  temple)  for  him,  lives 
for  so  many  years  in  heaven  as  the  number  of  years  the  set 
up  bricks  would  remain.  The  maker  of  the  idol  (would  reach) 
the  world  of  Visnu. One  who  consecrates  it  would  get  absorbed 
in  Hari. 

One  who  builds  a  temple,  makes  an  idol  and  installs  it  goes 
within  his  range. 

Agni  said  : 

“I  have  not  brought  one  who  has  installed  Hari  as  told  by 
Yama”.  Hayasiras  told  Brahma  for  the  installation  of  gods. 


CHAPTER  THIRTYNINE 
Preparations  of  ground  for  constructing  temples 
Hayagriva  said  : 

1.  O  Brahman  !  Listen  to  me  speaking  about  the  installa¬ 
tion  of  (images  of)  Visnu  and  others.  (The  principles  of) 
Pancar  air  a1  and  Saplaratra  have  (already)  been  described  by  me. 

2-5.  They  have  been  divided  by  the  sages  into  twentyfive 
(books)  in  this  world.  HayaSirsa  lanlra  is  the  first  one.  Trailokya- 


H  The  word  Tatra  means  knowledge  and  the  Paitcaratra  means  the  collec¬ 
tive  knowledge  of  five  kinds  according  to  the  Nar.  Sam.  1.1. 

However  the  Ahir.  Sam.  the  earliest  text  of  this  class  of  literature  would 
take  it  to  mean  the  fivefold  manifestation  of  Lord  Vasudeva,  viz.  Para,  vyuha, 
vibhava,  area  and  anlaryamin. 


106 


Agni  Purana 


mokana ,  Vaibhava ,  Pauskara ,  Prahlada ,  Gdrgya ,  Galava,  Ndradiya> 
SrtpraSna,  Sanftlya,  Aifvara ,  spoken  by  Satya,  $ aunak a,  Vasislha , 
Jiidnasdgara ,  Svayambhuva,  Kdpila ,  Tarksya,  Narayaniyaka ,  Alreyay 
Ndrasimha,  Ananday  Arana ,  Baudhayana ,  and  the  one  spoken  by 
Visva  as  the  quintessence  of  that  (the  preceding),  having  eight 
parts  (or  the  other  books). 

6-7.  A  brahmin  born  in  the  middle  country  may  perform 
installation  (rite).  Those  who  were  born  in  Kaccha  (Cutch), 
(in  the  regions  of  the  river)  Kaveri,  Konkana,  Kamarupa, 
Kalinga,  KancI,  Kasrmra,  Kosala  should  not  (do  instal¬ 
lation).  The  sky,  wind,  radiance,  water,  and  earth  arc  the  j&an- 
caralra . 

8.  Those  other  than  the  pancardira  are  inanimate  and  engulf¬ 
ed  in  darkness.  He  is  the  preceptor  who  has  the  knowledge  “I 
am  brahman  and  stainless  Visnu”. 

9.  Even  though  deficient  in  all  characteristics  he  who  is  a 
master  of  the  tantras  is  (to  be  looked  upon  as)  the  preceptor. 
The  image  of  the  deity  should  be  placed  facing  the  city  and  never 
turned  backwards. 

10.  At  Kuruksetra,  Gaya  and  other  places  and  near  the 
rivers,  (the  image  of)  Brahma  at  the  centre  of  the  city  and  (the 
image  of)  Indra  on  the  east  arc  auspicious. 

11-12.  (The  images)  of  Agni,  mothers,  goblins,  and 
Yama  (should  be  placed)  in  the  south-east.  (The  images)  of 
Candika  (should  be  placed)  in  the  south  and  those  of  the  manes 
and  demons  in  the  south-west.  The  temples  of  Varuna  and  others 
should  be  built  in  the  west.  (The  images)  of  Vayu  and  Naga 
(serpent)  (should  be)  on  the  north-west  and  those  of  Yaksa 
and  Gulia  (Karttikeya)  on  the  north. 

13-15.  (Those)  of  Candlsa  (the  lord  of  Canqll),  the  great 
lord  and  Visnu  (are)  always  (placed)  in  the  north-east.  One 
should  not  knowingly  construct  a  temple  of  a  reduced  size  or 
equal  in  size  or  bigger  in  size  than  another  temple  already  cons¬ 
tructed  so  as  to  encroach  upon  it.  A  wise-man  would  leave 
between  them  a  space  measuring  twice  the  elevation  and  erect  a 
new  temple  without  affecting  both  the  temples.  After  having 
examined  the  ground  one  has  to  take  possession  of  it. 

16.  The  offerings  to  the  (presiding)  goblins  should  be  offer¬ 
ed  upto  the  outer  enclosing  wall  (with  a  mixture  of)  black. 


39.17-40.1-5 


107 


gram,  turmeric  powder,  fried  grains,  curd  and  flour. 

17-18.  Having  dropped  the  flour  in  all  directions  along 
with  (the  recitation  of)  eight  syllables:  (one  has  to  say), 
“The  demons  and  goblins  who  remain  on  this  ground  may 
go  away.  I  am  making  a  place  for  Hari.”  Having  cleav¬ 
ed  the  earth  with  the  plough  one  should  cleave  it  with  oxen. 

19.  Eight  Paramanus  make  one  rathdnu.  Eight  rathanus  are 
said  to  make  one  trasarenu .  Eight  times  that  (makes)  one  bdldgra 
and  eight  times  that  is  known  as  likkyd .  Eight  times  that  is  known 
as  yuka.  Eight  times  that  is  a  yavamadhyama.  Eight  times  yam 
(makes)  one  afigula .  Twenty- four  angulas  (make)  one  kara. 
Four  angulas  make  one  padmahastaka . 


CHAPTER  FORTY 

The  mod j  of  making  the  respectful  o  ffering  to  the  god 
The  Lord  said  : 

1.  In  days  of  yore  that  material  principle  was  dreadful 
among  all  principles.  It  being  placed  on  the  earth  it  was 
known  to  be  the  lord  of  that  place. 

2.  At  a  place  (divided)  into  sixty-four  compartments  Isa 
occupying  a  half  of  the  corner  square  is  worshipped  with  ghee 
and  unbroken  rice.  Then  the  (god) .  Parjanya  (the  rain  god) 
occupying  a  square  (is  worshipped). 

3.  The  god  Jayanta,  who  occupies  two  squares  (is  worshipp¬ 
ed)  with  lotus  (flowers)  and  water,  and  the  lord  Mahendra, 
who  remains  in  one  square  (is  worshipped)  with  a  banner.  The 
Sun  god  (is  worshipped)  in  a  square  with  all  red  things. 

4.  The  (god  of)  truth  occupying  half  a  square  at  the  bottom 
is  worshipped  with  canopy  and  profuse  offering  of  ghee. 
The  lord  of  the  sky  occupying  half  the  angular  square  (is  propi¬ 
tiated)  with  the  bird’s  flesh. 

5.  The  fire-god  in  half  a  square  (is  worshipped)  with  the 


1.  The  mantra  of  eight  syllables:  Om  namo  nnntyamya. 


108 


Agni  Purana 


sacrificial  ladle  and  the  god  Pusan  in  a  square  with  fried  grains, 
the  lord  of  untruth  in  two  squares  with  gold,  churning  rod  and 
unbroken  rice  in  the  house. 

6.  The  lord  Dharmesa  stationed  in  two  squares  is  worshipp¬ 
ed)  with  meat  and  cooked  food,  the  Gandharva  in  two  squares 
with  incense  and  the  tongue  of  a  bird. 

7.  Mrga  occupying  one  upper  (square)  (is)  then  (worshipp¬ 
ed)  with  blue  cloth.  The  manes  (are  worshipped)  with  a  dish 
composed  of  milk,  sesamum  and  rice  in  half  a  square  and  sticks 
of  tooth-brush  in  another  square. 

8.  The  (two)  door-keepers  Sugrlva  and  Puspadanta  occu¬ 
pying  two  squares. (are  worshipped)  with  barley  grains  and 
a  clump  of  grass  respectively,  and  Varuna  with  lotus  flowers  in 
a  square. 

9.  The  asura  (demon)  in  two  squares  (is  propitiated)  with 
wine,  (the  serpent)  Sesa  in  a  square  with  ghee  and  water,  the 
sin  in  half  a  square  with  barley  grains,  the  disease  in  half  a  square 
with  maniaka  (a  kind  of  baked  flour). 

10.  The  Naga  (serpent)  (is  worshipped)  in  a  square  with 
the  naga  flowers  and  the  chief  serpent  in  two  squares  with  edibles 
The  Bhallata  (a  kind  of  superhuman  being)  (is  worshipped) 
in  a  single  square  with  rice  mixed  with  kidney-bean,  and  the 
moon  (with  the  same  offering)  in  the  next  square. 

11.  The  sage  placed  in  two  squares  (is  worshipped) 
with  honey,  sweat  gruel  and  nutmeg,  Diti  in  a  square  with  anoint¬ 
ments  and  Aditi  in  one  and  a  half  squares. 

12.  Apas  (is  propitiated)  in  a  square  below  in  the  north¬ 
east  with  milk  and  cake  and  then  Apavatsa  remaining  in  a 
square  below  with  curd. 

13.  Marlci  (is  propitiated)  in  four  squares  in  the  east  with 
halls  of  sweet-meat  and  for  (the  god)  Savitr,  the  red  flowers  (are 
placed)  in  the  lower  angular  square. 

14.  In  the  square  below  that,  water  along  with  kufa  grass  is 
•offered  to  Savitr,  red  sandal  paste  is  offered  to  Aruna  in  four 
squares. 

15.  Respectful  offering  along  with  turmeric  (is  made)  to 
Indra  in  the  lower  square  in  the  south-west  and  rice  mixed  with 
ghee  (is  offered)  in  the  corner  square  below  Indrajaya. 

16.  Sweet  gruel  (mixed)  with  jaggery  (is  offered)  to  Indra 


' 


40.17-28 


109- 


in  four  squares  and  cooked  meat  (is  offered)  to  Rudra  in  the 
corner  square  in  the  north-west. 

17.  In  the  corner  square  below  that  wet  fruit  (is  offered) 
to  Yaksa,  rice  meat  and  black-gram  (are  offered)  to  Maliidhara 
in  four  squares. 

18.  Rice  and  sesamum  should  be  placed  in  the  central  square 
for  Brahma.  Caraki  (is  worshipped)  with  black-gram  and  clari¬ 
fied  butter  and  Skanda  with  a  dish  composed  of  milk,  sesamum 
and  rice  and  a  garland. 

19.  Vidarl  (a  demoness)  (is  worshipped)  with  red  lotuses, 
Kandarpa  (god  of  love)  with  cooked  rice  and  meat,  Putana 
(a  demoness)  with  meat  and  bile  and  Jambaka  (a  demon) 
with  meat  and  blood. 

20.  The  Isa  (is  appeased)  with  bile,  blood  and  bones, 
Pilipinja  (a  demon)  with  a  garland  and  blood.  Other  deities 
are  worshipped  with  blood  and  meat  and  in  their  absence  with 
unbroken  rice. 

21.  Sacrificial  offerings  are  made  to  demons,  divine 
mothers,  manes  and  guardian  deities  of  the  ground  in  due  order. 

22  One  should  not  build  temples  and  other  things 
without  offering  to  these  (deities)  or  appeasing  them.  Han, 
LaksmI,  Gana  (the  attendant  deity  of  Siva)  should  be  wor¬ 
shipped  at  the  place  (set  apart)  for  Brahma.  . 

23-94  The  final  offering  is  then  made  to  Brahma  m  the 
centraf pitcher  and  to  Brahma  and  other  deities  as  wellasMahe- 
svara,  the  presiding  deity  of  the  ground  with  a  pitcher  toget  er 
with  a  small  vessel.  After  having  made  benediction,  and  holding 
well  the  water-jar  with  small  holes  at  the  bottom  an  auspicious 

circumambulation  is  made.  ,  ft  p  in 

25  O  Brahman  !  the  drop  of  water  is  rota  ( 
in  a  line.  As  before  in  the  same  line  seven  kinds  of  seeds  are  sow  ^ 

26.  The  excavation  should  begin  in  the  same  way .  Then  a 
hole  of  the  measure  of  a  hand  should  be  dug  at  t  le  cen 

27.  Then  having  made  (the  pit)  smooth  to  a  depth  of  fou 

£££)  S5ESS  from  the  pitcher. 

28.  ^  Then  chc  hole  he  filled  (wide  .water)  from  *>“ 


110 


Agni  Purana 


right)  has  to  be  filled  with  seeds  and  earth. 

29.  After  having  performed  the  offering  of  water,  one  should 
present  the  preceptor  of  cows,  clothes  and  other  things  and 
honour  the  sculptor,  and  the  vaisnavas  who  know  the  proper  time. 

30.  One  should  then  dig  carefully  till  water  is  found.  The 
substance  lying  below  the  presiding  deity  under  the  buildincr 
would  not  have  any  beneful  influence. 

3 1 .  The  bone  or  substance  below  if  broken,  the  broken  thing 
forebodes  baneful  influence  for  the  inmate.  Whatever  kind  of 
sound  one  would  hear,  (it  is  to  be  known)  as  due  to  the  substance 
lying  below. 


CHAPTER  FORTYONE 
Mode  of  performing  consecration 


The  Lord  said  : 

LI  shall  narrate  the  mode  of  consecration  of  the  founda¬ 
tion  and  (the  rites  relating  to)  the  laying  down  of  the  founda- 

(arVmadef  “  ******  fim  and  four  (sacriScial)  pits 

tion'nf  ^hC  PIadn§  °f  Pitchers  K  water)  and  bricks,  the  erec- 
on  of  the  doors  and  pillars  (are  finished).  The  dug  up  pit  is 

filled  to  a  quarter  (of  its  depth)  and  the  presiding  deity  is  wor¬ 
shipped  at  the  same  time.  8  y 

,  3j  i_ThC  bncks  sbouId  be  °f  twelve  fingers  in  length  with  a 
breadth  and  width  of  four  fingers  respectively,  and  well-burnt. 

•  u  St°nes  measuring  a  cubit  (in  length)  would  be  best 

blSaceT  Th t0nC  fb%  NinC  C°PPer  Pitchers  and  bricks  should 

be  placed.  The  pitchers  (should  be  filled)  with  water,  (substance 
Inown  as  ArceeMX  waters  of  ,11  herbs  and  frag™, 


Ill 


41.9-16 

Then  with  the  pitchers  filled  well  with  waters  (and  containing 
old  and  rice  and  anointed  by  fragrant  sandal,  and  having  plac¬ 
ed  the  stones  along  with  (the  recitation  of)  the  mystic  syllables 
—the  three-footed  apo  hi  sthd1,  sanno  devi",  larat  sa  mandih  , 
pavamani\  udultamarii  varunaP,  kayd  naif,  varunasyd1 ,  hariisali  Sucisat , 

irisukla  Hari  $hould  be  worshipped  in  a  bed  in  the  shed  m  the 
eastern  part  of  the  (drawn)  diagram.  Then  having  kindled  the 

fire  twelve  twigs  should  be  offered  (as  oblation). 

10  The  primary  offering  and  the  offering  with  clarified 

butter  should  be  done  with  the  syllable  om.  Then  subsequently 

eight  offerings  and  again  eight  offerings  with  c  an  ie  u 

, 1  lrl  hr  offered')  with  the  syllables  (known  as)vyahrtis  du  y. 
(should^beoffercd )  ^  ^  firc)  t0  the  gods,  Agn,, 

Soma  and  Purusottama  separately  with  vyablis. 

^243  The  preceptor  (officiating  at  the  rite)  should  do  the 

Having  scattered  (sesamum)  m  th  following 

and  a  pitcher  should  be  placed  at  the  centre  ana 

divinities  (should  be  invoked)  m  order. 

14.  Padma'\  mah&padma,  makara  kacdiapa, 

padma,  Sankha  and  padmmi  (a^e  t^e  ™^d  Eight  bricks  should 

15.  The  pitchers  should,  not  be  mo\  ea.  S  r 

be  placed  in  them  duly  beginning  with  the  caster 

and  ending  with  the  north-east.  others  the  presiding 

,6.  The  female  energies Vimala  and  others ‘ 

deities  of  these  bricks,  should  be  invoked  m  rhcir  p  I 


RV.  10.9.1a. 

RV.  10.9.4a. 

RV.  9.58.1a. 

G.  Dh.  19.12. 

0.  RV.  1.24.15a. 

f  £  oflhc  many  .„«*  ***»  »»  «  «"*  «  ' 

10.  The  three  syllables  bh^r>  ^  afferent  treasures.  Sec  Purap 

1 1 .  Tills  and  the  following  are  die  repCats  padmat 

p  160.  The  text  here  omits  niia  a 


1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 


112 


Agni  Purana 


The  energy  Anugraha  should  be  invoked  at  the  central  pitcher. 

17.  <;0  perfect,  unbroken,  full-bodied  brick,  the  daughter 
of  the  sage  Ahgiras,  I  am  establishing  you.  You  grant  me 
the  desired  thing.” 

18-20.  The  preceptor,  having  placed  the  brick  with  this 
mystic  syllable  should  do  garbhadhana1 .  Having  invoked  the 
goddess  Padmin!  at  the  central  pitcher,  earth,  flowers,  minerals, 
gems,  and  iron  pieces  as  well  as  the  weapons  of  deities  of 
quarters  (should  be  placed)  in  the  hole  of  twelve  fingers’  width 
and  four  fingers’  depth. 

21-22.  The  goddess  earth  should  be  worshipped  in  a 
copper  vessel  of  the  shape  of  a  lotus.  “O  the  exclusive  mistress 
of  all  beings,  abound  with  the  summits  of  mountains  as  the 
seats,  one  surrounded  by  oceans,  O  goddess  !  You  resort  to  this 
hole.  O  rejoicer  !  born  of  sage  Vasistha  !  you  rejoice  with 
the  Vasus  and  the  progeny. 

23.  O  Victorious  !  related  to  Bhargava  (Parasurama) 
Maker  of  thine  subjects  victorious  !  the  perfect  !  the  relative  of 
Ahgiras  !  fulfil  all  my  desires. 

24.  O  Auspicious  one  !  related  to  sage  Kasyapa  !  Make 
my  intellect  good.  One  who  is  accomplished  with  all  seeds  ! 
One  who  possesses  all  gems  and  herbs  ! 

25.  May  you  be  victorious  !  O  beautiful  one  !  O  re¬ 
joicer  !  Related  to  Vasistha  !  The  daughter  of  the  creator  ! 
O  Goddess  !  O  handsome  one  !  Stay  on  here  in  bliss — O 
majestic  one  ! 

26.  Stay  thou  in  this  house  !  O  beautiful  and  brilliant 
one  !  the  daughter  of  Kasyapa  !  The  honoured,  most  wonder¬ 
ful  and  bedecked  with  scents  and  garlands  ! 

27.  O  Goddess  !  Stay  in  bliss  in  this  room  !  O  Bhar- 
gavi  (daughter  of  Sukra)  !  Bcstowcr  of  worldly  prosperities  ! 
Possessed  by  the  gods,  kings,  and  masters  of  the  house  ! 

28.  May  you  become  the  multiplier  of  animals  for  the 
happiness  of  men  and  others.  Having  said  in  this  way  one 
should  then  sprinkle  cow’s  urine  on  the  pit. 

29.  Having  done  so,  one  should  place  in  the  pit  (such  that) 
the  impregnation  would  take  place  in  the  night.  One  should 


1.  Impregnation  at  the  pit. 


41.30-42.1-2 


113 


give  away  cows  and  clothes  to  the  preceptor  (the  officiating 
priest),  and  food  to  other  people. 

30.  Having  filled  the  hole  and  placing  the  bricks  in  the  hole, 
the  hole  is  completely  filled.  Then  one  should  construct  the  base 
of  the  deity  proportionate  to  the  edifice  of  the  deity. 

31.  An  excellent  base  is  that  where  it  is  more  than  half  the 
breadth  of  the  edifice,  while  a  quarter  lesser  than  that  would  be 
mediocre  and  that  which  is  half  of  the  excellent  base  (aforesaid) 
would  be  the  lowest  (in  merit). 

32.  After  completing  the  base,  the  rite  for  the  presiding  deity 
(of  the  ground)  should  be  done  again.  One  who  performs  the 
consecration  of  the  base  would  enjoy  in  heavens  free  from  sin. 

33.  One  who  would  mentally  think  that  “I  am  going  to 
build  a  temple”,  the  sins  which  had  stuck  to  his  body  would  get 
destroyed  that  day  itself. 

34-35.  No  need  to  speak  (about  the  merits)  of  one  who  has 
built  a  temple  in  the  prescribed  manner.  It  is  impossible  for 
anyone  to  describe  the  merits  one  would  accrue  by  building  a 
temple  with  eight  bricks  alone.  One  should  indeed  infer  from 
this  the  (proportionate)  fruits  (accrued)  (from  the  building) 
of  temples  of  greater  dimensions. 

36.  The  door  of  the  temple  at  the  centre  of  the  village  or  on 
the  eastern  part  should  face  the  west,  while  in  other  directions 
the  door  should  be  facing  the  west  and  in  the  southern,  northern 
and  western  parts  (the  door)  should  face  the  cast. 


CHAPTER  FORTYTWO 
Construction  of  a  temple 


Hayagrwa  said  : 

1 .  Listen  to  me  describing  the  construction  of  a  temple  in 
general.  A  wise  man  should  divide  a  square  ground  into  sixteen 
parts. 

2.  One  should  make  the  four  central  squares  endowed  with. 
Wealth.  The  other  sixteen  parts  are  left  for  the  walls. 


114 


Agni  Puriina 


3  The  pedestal  should  extend  over  four  squares  The 
length  of  the  cornice  should  be  double  that  of  the  pedestal. 

4  The  path  of  circumambulation  should  be  a  quarter  of 
(the  "length)  of  the  cornice.  Two  equal  openings  having  the  same 
Sl^the  latter,  should  be  left  on  the  two  sides  for  projections 

5  The  extent  of  the  ground  should  be  made  at  first  equ  - 
to  the  length  of  the  tower  or  twice  that  such  as  it  may  be  bcauti- 

fUl  6-7.  One  should  construct  the  pavilion  in  front  of  the  sanc¬ 
tum  on  the  lines  running  parallel  through  the  sides  o 
chamber,  adorned  with  pillars  and  being  of  the  same  length  or 
longer  than  the  principal  temple  sanctorum  by  a  quarter  o 'i  s 
length.  The  anti-chamber  should  then  be  constructed  at  8  steps 
8  The  deities  at  the  end  of  the  base  should  be  wois  nppe 
before  placing  the  parrots  at  the  front  door.  In  the  san^  rnanner 
the  thirty-two  gods  at  the  end  should  be  worshipped  when  the 

outer  wall  is  raised.  .  . 

9.  This  is  the  characteristic  of  a  temple  in  general.  -Listen 

to  the  description  (of  raising)  a  temple  proportionate  to  t 
(size  of  the)  image. 

10.  The  base  (of  the  deity)  should  be  of  the  same  size  as  the 
image.  The  adytum  (of  the  temple)  should  be  half  the  size  o 
the  base  and  the  walls  proportionate  to  the  adytum. 

1 1 .  The  height  (of  the  walls)  should  be  equal  to  the  length 
of  the  walls.  The  pinnacle  should  be  made  equal  to  twice  the 
height  of  the  wall. 

12.  The  path  around  the  temple  should  be  a  quarter  of  the 
extent  of  the  pinnacle.  The  entrance  chamber  in  the  front  should 
be  a  quarter  of  the  extent  of  the  pinnacle. 

13.  The  projections  of  the  arches  should  be  one-eightli  of 
the  extent  of  the  adytum.  The  arches  should  be  made  propor¬ 
tionate  to  the  circumference. 

14.  The  projections  of  arches  should  otherwise  be  made 
as  one-third  of  it.  Always  there  should  be  three  projections  on 
the  left  on  the  three  arches. 

15-16.  Four  upward  lines  should  be  marked  for  (the  con¬ 
struction  of)  the  pinnacle.  A  downward  line  is  marked  to  fall 
above  the  key-stone  which  is  located  at  the  middle  part  of  the 


42.17-25 


115 


pinnacle.  A  lion  is  built  at  the  middle  part  of  the  pinnacle  in  a 
line  with  the  key-stone. 

17.  Two  such  lines  should  be  marked  on  the  sides.  There 
should  be  a  small  platform  above  that. 

18.  (The  lion)  should  not  be  in  a  dropping  posture  or  fiercc- 
looking.  The  conical  shaped  structure  is  placed  above,  propor¬ 
tional  to  the  small  platform. 

19.  A  beautiful  opening  should  be  made  twice  the  length 
of  the  platform.  Two  globes  should  be  placed  above  that  with 
beautiful  (ornamental)  branches. 

20-21.  (Forms  of)  Canda  and  Pracanda  should  be  carved 
on  the  door-frame  occupying  a  fourth  (of  its  space),  (possessing) 
a  staff  like  that  of  Visvaksena  (Visnu)  and  at  the  threshhold  of 
the  branch  beautiful  (Goddess)  Sri  (Laksmi)  (should  be  carved) 
as  being  bathed  by  the  elephants  of  the  quarters  with  (waters 
from)  the  pitchers  .  The  height  of  enclosing  wall  should  be  one- 
fourth  of  that  of  the  temple. 

22.  The  height  of  the  tower  should  be  a  quarter  lesser  than 
that  of  the  temple.  The  pedestal  (of  the  image)  of  the  deity  of 
five  cubits  should  be  of  a  cubit. 

23.  A  shed  known  as  the  Garudamandapa  and  shed  for 
Bhauma  (Mars)  and  other  (planets)  (should  be  made).  In 
the  eight  directions  above  (the  chamber  housing)  one  should 
make  (the  images  as  follows)  : 

24-25.  (The  images  of)  Vardha  (boar)  in  the  east,  jVrsiriika 
(man-lion)  in  the  south,  Sridhara  (  a  form  of  Visnu)  in  the  west, 
Hayagriva  (horse-necked  form  of  Visnu)  in  the  north,  Jamadagn - 
yaka  (Parasurama,  a  manifestation  of  Visnu)  in  the  south-east, 
Rama  in  the  south-west,  Vamana  (the  short-statured  manifesta¬ 
tion  of  Visnu)  in  the  north-west  (and)  Vasudeua  in  the  north-east. 

^  The  temple  should  be  decorated  with  gems  all  around.  Leaving 

out  one-eighth  of  the  door  if  that  is  done,  it  is  not  defective. 


xy 

i 


Agni  Purdna : 

CHAPTER  FORTYTHREE 

Installation  of  deities  in  the  temples 


The  Lord  said  : 

l.  O  Brahman  l  Listen  to  my  description  (of  the  mode) 
of  installation  (of  images)  of  deities  in  the  temples  (Ima§e  ° 
Vasudeva  should  be  placed  at  the  middle  of  the  five  div.  e) 

edifices,  ^  of)  the  dwarf.f0rm,  man-lion  form,  horse¬ 

headed  form,  (and)  boar  form  (of  Visnu)  should  be  placed  m 
the  south-east,  south-west,  north-west  and  north-east  (lespccti- 

3-5.  (The  image  of)  Narayana  should  be  placed  in  the  mid¬ 
dle.  (The  images  of)  the  goddess,  sun,  Brahma  and  the  hhga 
(symbolic  representation  of  Siva)  or  of  Rudra  (Siva)  should  be 
placed  in  the  south-east,  south-west,  north-west  and  north-east 
(respectively).  Otherwise,  (image  of)  Vasudeva  should  be 
placed  at  the  centre  of  the  nine  chambers  and  beautiful  (images 
of  Indra  and  the  guardian  deities  of  the  world  (should  be  place  ) 
in  the  east  and  other  directions.  Otherwise,  one  should  make 
five  chambers  and  worship  Purusottama  (Visnu)  in  the  centre. 

6.  (The  images  of)  Laksmi  and  Vaisravapi  (Kubcra; 
should  be  placed  in  the  east,  the  divine  mothers  in  the  south, 

Skanda,  Gancsa,  Xsana  (a  form  of  Siva)  and  the  sun  and  other 

planets  in  the  west. 

7-8.  Otherwise,  having  installed  (the  images  of)  the  mani¬ 
festations  (of  Visnu)  such  as  the  Fish  etc.,  in  the  north,  Candika 
(a  form  of  Goddess  Parvatl)  in  the  south-east,  Ambika  in  the 
south-west,  Sarasvatl  in  the  north-west,  Padma  (Laksmi)  in  the 
north-east  and  Vasudeva  or  also  Narayana  in  the  centre.  The 
omni-present  form  of  Hari  should  be  placed  in  the  centre  in 
(the  construction  of)  the  thirteen  chambers. 

9-11.  (Images  of)  Kesava  and  others  (should  be  placed) 
in  the  cast  and  other  directions  or  (the  images)  of  Han  himself 
in  ail  chambers.  The  images  are  of  seven  kinds— earthen, 
wooden,  metallic,  made  of  gems,  made  of  stones,  made  of  sandal 
and  made  of  flowers.  The  images  made  of  flowers,  sandal  and 
earth  yield  all  desired  fruits  when  they  arc  worshipped  at 


43.12-20 


117 


that  moment.  I  shall  describe  the  stone  image  (where  such  prac- 
tice)  prevails. 

12.  In  the  absence  of  hills,  the  stone  lying  buried  in  the  earth 
should  be  taken  out.  Among  the  colours,  white,  red,  yellow, 
and  black  are  extolled. 

13.  When  stones  of  the  above-mentioned  colours  arc  not 
available  (the  desired)  colour  is  brought  about  by  the  (cere¬ 
mony  known  as)  simhavidya.1 

14.  After  (the  performance  of)  the  siriihakoma  (a  piece  or) 
stone  (which  becomes)  tinged  with  white  colour  or  black  colour 
or  produces  sound  like  a  bell-metal  or  emits  sparks  of  fire  (is 
•deemed)  as  male. 

15  The  female  one  is  that  in  which  these  characteristics 
are  present  in  a  lesser  degree.  If  they  are  devoid  of  colours  they 
are  neuter.  (The  stones)  in  which  the  sign  of  a  circle  is  found 
are  to  be  taken  as  impregnated  and  should  be  rejected. 

16.  One  should  go  to  the  forest  and  perform  the  forest 
rites  for  the  sake  of  an  image.  After  having  bathed  and  plastering 
a  shed  Hari  should  be  worshipped  there. 

17.  After  having  made  the  offering  of  the  victim,  the  (stone¬ 
cutter’s)  chisel  used  for  the  work  should  be  worshipped.  Having 
offered  homa  (pouring  of  clarified  butter  into  the  fire),  watei 
mixed  with  rice  should  be  sprinkled  over  the  image  with  the 

imPjl^Having  made  the  protective  spell  it  should  be  worshipp¬ 
ed  with  basic  sacred  syllable  of  lord  Nrsimha.  After  having 
made  the  offering  to  fire  the  final  oblation  should  be  made.  Then 
offerings  to  the  goblins  should  be  given  by  the  preceptor. 

19  Having  worshipped  the  good  (spirits),  the  demons, 
guhyakas  (a  class  of  attendant-gods  of  Kubera)  and  aaomp  .- 
shed  souls  and  others  who  may  be  residing  there,  should  be 

request  d  ^  ghould  be  addressed  as  follows).  “This  journey 

(has  been  undertaken)  by  us  for  the  image  of  Visnu  bY  th« 
mand  of  Kesava.  Any  work  done  for  the  sake  of  Visnu, 

should  also  be  your  (concern). 


- 1.  Oaly~ HayaiinasamhilA  of  the  PancanUragama  texts  mentions  this. 

The  present  text  docs  not  explain  this.  See  Vaifpava  Iconograp  ly ,  p. 


T 18 


Agni  Purdna 


21.  “Being  always  pleased  with  this  offering  (you)  repair 
quickly  to  some  other  place  quitting  this  place  for  good55. 

22.  Being  informed  thus  (these  beings)  go  to  another  place 
in  good  cheer  and  satisfied.  Having  eaten  the  sacrificial 
porridge  along  with  the  sculptors,  he  should  repeat  in  the  night 
the  following  sacred  syllables  (inducing)  sleep. 

23.  “Om  !  salutations  to  (Lord)  Visnu,  the  omnipresent, 
Prabhavisnu  (Visnu)  (strong),  the  universe,  and  Salutations 
to  the  lord  of  dreams.55 

24.  “O  Lord  of  lords  !  I  have  slept  by  your  side.  (Ins¬ 
truct  me)  in  my  dreams  (how  to  execute)  all  the  works  I 
have  in  my  mind.55 

25.  “Om  Om  !  hr um phal  visnave  svdha  !  When  the  dream 
(is)  good,  everything  (will  also  be)  good.  If  it  is  bad,  it  becomes 
good  by  the  performance  of  the  simhahoma1.  Having  offered 
reverential  waters  to  the  stone  in  the  morning,  the  implements 
should  be  worshipped  with  (the  sacred  syllables)  (for  the  worship 
of)  implements. 

26.  The  spades  and  chisels  should  have  their  edges  be¬ 
smeared  with  honey  and  clarified  butter.  (The  priest)  should 
think  himself  as  Visnu  and  the  sculptor  as  Visvakarman  (the 
divine  architect) . 

27-28.  The  implement  which  is  of  the  form  of  Visnu  should 
be  given  (to  the  sculptor)  and  its  face  and  back  should  be  shown. 
Having  cut  a  square  block  of  the  stone  with  controlled  senses 
and  holding  a  chisel,  the  sculptor  should  make  a  smaller  one  for 
the  purpose  of  the  pedestal.  Having  placed  (them)  in  a  chariot 
and  brought  to  the  works  pot  together  with  the  cloth  (one  who) 
makes  the  image  after  having  worshipped  (the  form  conceived), 
is  a  sculptor. 


CHAPTER  FORTYFOUR 
Character  is  lies  of  the  image  ofVasuaeva 

The  Lord  said  : 

1-2.  I  shall  describe  to  you  the  characteristics  of  the  image 


1.  See  W.  13  and  17  above. 


44.3-14 


119 


of  Vasudeva  and  other  gods.  Having  placed  the  stone  to  the 
north  of  the  temple  facing  either  the  east  or  the  north  and 
worshipped  it,  the  sculptor  should  divide  the  stone  into  nine 
parts  along  the  central  line  after  making  the  offering. 

3.  In  the  twelve  divisions  (of  the  line)  a  division  is  said  to 
be  an  angula  (a  finger  breadth).  Two  angulas  are  known  to  be  a 
golaka.  It  is  also  said  to  be  a  kalanetra. 

4.  Having  divided  one  of  the  nine  divisions  into  three, 
(with  one  part)  the  region  of  the  calves  should  be  made.  In  the 
same  way  a  part  is  to  be  used  for  the  knees  and  part  for  the  neck. 

5.  The  crown  should  be  of  a  measure  of  a  tala  (12  angulas). 
In  the  same  way  the  face  (should  be)  of  the  measure  of  a  tala. 
The  neck  and  heart  should  also  be  a  tala  each. 

6.  The  navel  and  the  genital  part  should  be  a  tala  apart. 
(The  length)  of  the  thighs  should  be  two  talas.  (The  length) 
of  the  part  from  the  ankle  to  the  knee  should  be  two  talas.  Listen 
now  to  (the  description)  (of  the  drawing)  of  lines  (on  the  body). 

7  Two  lines  should  be  drawn  on  the  foot,  and  (two)  more 
in  between  the  calves  (and  knees).  Two  lines  about  the  knees 
and  two  more  in  between  the  thighs  and  the  knees  should  be 

di  awn.  ^  Une  should  bc  drawn  over  the  genital  part,  and  one 
more  about  the  waist.  Another  (line)  (should)  tnen  (be  drawn) 

above  the  navel  for  accomplishing  the  gir  e.  .. 

9  Then  (a  line)  should  be  drawn  on  the  heart  and  two  lines 

on  the  neck.  One  such  line  should  be  drawn  on  the  forehead  and 

°nei0  01One  morcTine  should  be  diawn  on  the  crown  by  the 
learned.  O  Brahman  !  seven  vertical  lines  snould  be  diaw  . 

1 1  Six  lines  should  be  laid  in  between  the  armpits  and  the 
lower  part*of  the  spine.  These  lines  alone  should  be  marked 

deariy  and  the  mouth  should  be  made 

(to  Lsum)  four  a,,s«to.  The  neck  and  the  two  ear,  should 

b°  S"o^heehta  should  be  made  (to  measure) 

1  »  £ rnnd  The  forehead  is  said  to  be  eight  angu.es 

two  angulas  bioacl.  J-i 

br0lt  Over  that  the  temples  (sides  of  the  forehead)  should 


120 


Agni  Puratia 


! 


, 


be  made  two  angulas  endowed  with  curbs.  The  intervening 
space  between  the  eyes  and  ears  is  said  to  be  four  angulas . 

15.  The  ears  should  be  two  angulas  wide.  (The  inter¬ 
space  between)  the  ears  and  the  ends  of  eye-lashes  (should 
be)  two  and  a  half  units.  The  cavity  in  the  ear  is  spoken  to  be 
in  the  same  line  as  the  eyebrows. 

16.  A  pierced  ear  (should  be)  six  angulas  and  an  unpierced 
(ear)  (should  be)  four  angulas  equal  to  the  chin.  (Or  it  should 
be)  six  angulas  whether  it  is  pierced  or  not  pierced. 

17.  Then  the  external  auditory  passage  with  its  membranes 
etc.  should  be  made.  The  lower  lip  should  be  of  two  angulas  and 
the  upper  lip  should  be  half  of  it. 

18.  Then  the  (breadth)  of  an  eye  (should  be)  half  an 
ahgula  and  the  mouth  (should  be)  four  angulas .  The  measure¬ 
ment  of  its  depth  is  spoken  to  be  one  and  a  half  angulas . 

19-20.  The  unopened  mouth  should  be  in  this  way.  The 
opened  mouth  should  be  three  angulas .  The  base  of  the  bridge 
of  the  nose  should  be  one  ahgula  high.  From  its  tip  it  should  be 
two  angulas  similar  to  the  karavira  (flower)  (oleander).  The 
intervening  space  between  the  two  eyes  should  be  made  to  mea¬ 
sure  four  angulas. 

21.  The  corners  of  the  eyes  (should  be)  two  angulas.  The 
space  between  them  (should  be)  two  angulas.  The  pupil  (should 
be)  one  third  of  the  eye  and  the  iris  (should  be)  one  fifth  (of  it). 

22.  The  breadth  of  the  eye  (should  be)  three  angulas.  The 
cavity  (of  the  eye)  is  considered  to  be  half  an  ahgula.  The  lengths 
of  the  eyebrows  are  considered  to  be  equal  and  are  proportional 
to  the  eye-brows. 

23.  The  middle  of  the  eye-brow  should  be  two  angulas  and 
its  length  (should  be)  four  angulas.  The  measure  round  the  head 
(should  be)  thirty-six  angulas. 

24.  The  measurement  around  the  heads  of  the  images  of 
Kesava  and  other  gods  should  be  thirty-six  {angulas).  The  head- 
measure  of  all  those  (images)  which  are  short-necked  (should 
be)  ten  {angulas). 

25.  The  inter-space  between  the  neck  and  the  chest  should 
be  tnree  times  the  length  of  the  neck  and  should  be  thrice  as 
much  broad  plus  eight  angulas. 

26.  The  shoulders  (should)  be  made  (to  measure)  eight 


44.27-36 


121 


angulas  and  the  two  beautiful  shoulder  regions  (should  be)  three 
times  those.  The  arms  should  measure  seven  times  (the  length 
of)  the  eyes.  The  fore  arms  (should  be)  sixteen  angulas. 

27.  The  arms  should  be  three  kalas 1  in  breadth  and  the  fore¬ 
arms  should  also  be  equal  to  that.  The  upper  arm  should  have 
a  circumference  of  nine  kalas . 

28.  It  should  be  seventeen  angulas  at  the  middle  and  sixteen 
angulas  above  the  elbow-joint.  O  Brahman  !  the  circumference 
of  elbow  should  be  three  times  that. 

29.  The  circumference  of  the  middle  of  tire  forearm  is  said 
to  be  sixteen  angulas.  The  circumference  of  the  fore-part  of  the 
arm  is  said  to  be  twelve  angulas. 

30.  The  palm  of  the  hand  is  said  to  be  six  angulas  in  breadth. 
The  length  should  be  seven  angulas.  The  middle  (finger)  should 
be  five  angulas  (long). 

31.  The  index  finger  and  the  ring  finger  (should  be)  nan 

an  angula  less  than  that.  The  little  finger  and  the  thumb  should 
be  made  to  measure  four  angulas  each.  , 

32 .  The  thumb  should  be  made  to  have  two  parvans  (joints ) . 

The  other  fingers  (should  have)  three  joints.  The  measure  o 
the  nail  is  laid  down  as  half  (the  size  of  the  joints)  on  the  res¬ 
pective  fingers.  ,  ,  .  rp.  _ 

33  The  extent  of  the  belly  is  same  as  that  of  the  chest. 

navel  should  be  an  angula  (in  breadth)  and  proportionally  deep 

34.  Then  the  inter-space  between  the  generative  organ  and 

the  intestines  should  be  made  to  measure  a  tala.  The  girth  around 
the  navel  (should  be)  forty-two  angulas. 

35  The  inter-space  between  the  breasts  should  be  made 

,  ■  hreaclth  The  nipples  should  be  of  the  mea- 
to  measure  a  tala  m  breadtn.  VF  j  thpm 

sure  of  a  jyawz® (barley  grain).  The  circular  space  around  them 

should  be  two  padas  (two  feet). 

36  The  circumference  of  the  chest  should  be  made  sixty- 
four^ angulas  clearly.  The  girth  ofthe  lower  portion  (ofthechest) 
is  said  to  be  four  mukhas *  (one  tala). 


Te^U  to  two  angulas.  Also  called  Cotaka. 

I  Scenw'to'be0!  corrc^tform  for  mukhya  equal  to  one  or  twelve 

afigulas. 


122 


Agni  Purana 


37.  The  circumference  of  the  waist  should  be  fifty-four 
angulas.  The  breadth  of  the  base  of  the  thigh  is  said  to  be  twelve 
a  rigid  as. 

38.  It  is  somewhat  greater  at  the  middle  (of  the  thigh) 
and  gradually  less  (broad)  below.  The  knee-joint  (should  be) 
eight  angulas  in  breadth  and  thrice  that  in  its  girth. 

39.  The  middle  of  the  leg  from  the  ankle  to  the  knee  is  said 
to  be  seven  aiigidas  broad.  The  girth  of  it  (should  be)  three  times 
that.  The  top  of  the  leg  (should  be)  five  angulas  broad. 

40.  The  girth  of  that  (the  leg)  (should  be)  thrice  its  breadth. 
The  feet  (should)  measure  a  tala .  The  extent  of  elevation 
of  the  feet  (should  be)  four  angulas . 

41.  The  front  (part)  of  the  ankles  should  be  four  angulas 
The  extent  of  the  feet  should  be  three  kalas .  The  generative  organ 
should  be  three  angulas . 

42.  Its  girth  (should  be)  five  angulas .  The  fore-finger 
(should  be)  of  same  length.  The  other  fingers  are  duly  lesser 
by  one  part  of  eighth. 

43.  The  height  of  the  toe  is  said  to  be  one  and  a  half  angulas. 
The  nail  of  the  two  should  be  made  twice  that. 

44.  (Those  of  other  fingers)  should  be  gradually  made  half 
ahgula  less  than  the  previous.  The  scrotum  should  be  three 
angulas  (long).  The  generative  organ  (should  be)  four  fingers 
(long). 

45.  The  girth  of  the  upper  part  of  the  pouch  should  be  made 
(to  be)  four  angulas.  The  girth  of  the  scrotum  is  said  to  be  six 
angulas. 

46.  The  image  should  be  adorned  with  ornaments.  This  is 
the  exact  description  of  details.  The  features  (of  the  deities) 
should  be  made  in  this  world,  as  described. 

47.  A  disc  on  the  (upper)  right  hand,  and  a  lotus  on  the 
lower  (right  hand) ,  the  conch  on  the  (upper)  left  hand,  the 
mace  on  the  lower  (left  hand)  are  to  be  placed  according  to 
the  characteristic  of  Vasudeva. 

48-49.  (The  images  of)  Sri  and  Pusti  should  be  made  carry¬ 
ing  a  lotus  and  a  harp  respectively  in  their  hands,  (their  images) 
reaching  upto  the  thighs  (of  that  of  Vasudeva).  Then  the  two 
Vidyadharas  (a  class  of  semi-divine  beings)  holding  the  gar¬ 
lands  (in  their  hands)  should  be  made  in  the  halo  of  the  prin- 


45.1-9 


123 


cipal  image).  The  halo  (should  also)  be  decked  with  the  (ima¬ 
ges)  of  (celestial)  elephants.  The  pedestal  should  be  radiant 
like  a  lotus  on  which  the.  images  (should  be  worshipped)  as 
follows. 


CHAPTER  FORTYFIVE 
Characteristics  of  pedestals  and  details  relating  to  images 
The  Lord  said  : 

1.  I  shall  describe  the  characteristics  of  the  pedestal.  The 
length  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  image.  The  height  (should 
be)  half  of  it.  It  should  have  sixty-four  folds. 

2.  Leaving  two  rows  at  the  bottom,  the  other  parts 
should  be  polished  on  either  side  as  also  inside. 

3.  Leaving  two  rows  at  the  top,  the  other  parts  are  polished 

evenly  on  either  side  and  inside. 

4.  The  rectangular  space  in  between  these  should  then  be 
polished.  The  first  two  rows  should  be  divided  into  four  parts 
by  a  wise  man. 

5-6.  The  girdle  should  be  equal  to  one  such  part.  The  in¬ 
dent  should  be  half  that.  Leaving  one  such  part  evenly  on  either 
side  a  wise  man  should  leave  on  the  exterior  a  breadth  of  a  foot. 
The  water  drains  should  be  at  the  top  of  each  one  of  the  three 

7  This  auspicious  and  excellent  pedestal  (has  been  des¬ 
cribed)  relating  to  its  manifold  ways  (of  construction)  The 
(images  of  the)goddess  LaksmI  and  other  feminine  forms  should 
be  made  (to  measure)  eight  ( talas  in  length. 

8.  The  eye  brows  should  be  more  than  a.  yava  (in  length). 
The  nose  (should  be)  less  than  a yava  (in  length).  The  mouth 
(should  measure)  more  than  a  small  ball  well  distributed  above 

and  below.  .  r 

9.  The  eye  should  be  made  long  (measuring)  three  parts  o 

a  yava  less  than  three  yavas.  The  breadth  of  the  eyes  should  be 
made  half  of  it. 


124 


Agni  PurSna 


10.  The  beautiful  ears  should  be  made  to  be  in  a  line  with  the 
corners  of  the  mouth.  Then  the  two  shoulders  should  be  made 
sloping  by  less  than  a  kala. 

11-12.  The  neck  should  be  one  and  a  half  kalas  long  and 
made  beautiful  by  a  proportionate  width.  The  thighs,  knee- 
joints,  the  pedestal,  should  be  broad.  The  feet,  the  hinder  part, 
the  bullocks  and  the  hips  should  be  made  as  prescribed.  The 
fingers  should  measure  less  than  the  seventh  part  of  the  above 
and  should  be  long  and  not  crooked. 

13.  The  shank,  thigh  and  the  hip  would  be  one  netra 1  less 
in  length.  The  middle  part  and  the  sides  should  have  the  same 
roundness.  The  two  breasts  (should  be)  fully  developed  and 
plump. 

14-15.  The  beasts  should  be  made  to  measure  a  tala.  The 
waist  should  be  one  and  a  half  kalas.  The  other  marks  should  be 
the  same  as  before.  A  lotus  (should  be  placed)  on  the  right  hand 
and  a  bilva  (fruit)  on  the  left  (hand).  (There  should  be)  two 
maidens  on  the  sides  holding  chowries  in  their  hands.  (The 
image  of)  Garuda  should  have  a  long  nose.  I  shall  then  describe 
those  which  bear  the  marks  of  a  disc. 


CHAPTER  FORTYSIX 
Characteristics  of  different  ialagrama  stones 
The  Lord  said  : 

1.  I  shall  describe  (the  characteristics  of)  the  ialagrama 
murti 2  (the  different  gods  represented  by  different  kinds  of 
ialagrama  stones)  which  yield  enjoyment  and  emancipation. 
(The  stone  called)  Vasudeva  is  black  (coloured)  around  its  mouth 
and  has  (marks)  of  two  discs  on  it. 

2.  The  Sankarsaira  (stone)  is  red  (in  colour)  and  has  marks 

1.  The  measurement  indicated  by  this  word  is  not  quite  clear.  Pro¬ 
bably  equal  to  two  angulas. 

2.  The  ialagrama  stones  obtained  from  the  beds  of  Gandaki  river  in 
Nepal  are  associated  with  the  worship  of  Visnu.  The  different  stones  bearing 
different  marks  are  taken  to  represent  different  forms  of  Visiju. 


46.3-12 


125 


of  two  discs  (and  is  considered  as)  excellent.  The  Pradyumna 
(stone)  has  many  holes,  elongated  and  is  blue  (coloured). 

3.  The  Aniruddha  (stone)  is  yellow  (in  colour)  and  has  the 
mark  of  a  lotus.  It  is  circular  (in  shape)  and  has  two  or  three 
rays.  The  Narayana  (stone)  is  black  (in  colour)  with  an  elevated 
and  deep  hole. 

4.  The  Paramesti  (stone)  (has  the  marks  of)  the  lotus  and 
disc.  It  is  perforated  at  the  back  and  has  dots  on  the  surface. 
The  Visnu  (stone)  has  a  big  disc  (mark).  It  is  black  (in  colour). 
It  has  a  line  in  the  middle  part.  It  is  of  the  shape  of  a  mace. 

5-6.  The  Nrsimha  (stone)  is  tawny.  It  has  (the  mark  of) 
a  big  disc  and  five  dots.  The  Varaha  (stone)  is  of  the  shape  of  the 
female  divinity.  It  has  unequal  discs.  It  is  of  the  colour  of  sap¬ 
phire.  It  is  large  with  the  marks  of  three  lines  and  is  good.  The 
Kiirma  stone  has  an  elevated  hinder  part  with  circular  lines 
and  is  black  (in  colour). 

7.  The  Hayagriva  (stone)  has  a  line  of  the  shape  of  a  good. 
It  is  blue  (coloured)  and  is  dotted.  The  Vaikunfha  (stone)  has 
(the  mark  of)  a  disc  and  lotus.  It  has  the  radiance  of  a  gem. 
It  has  tail-shaped  lines. 

8.  The  Matsya  stone  is  long  and  has  three  dots.  It  is  crystal¬ 
line-coloured  and  is  well  formed.  The  Sridhara  (stone)  has  a. 
garland  of  wild  flowers  and  five  lines  and  is  circular. 

9.  The  Vamana  (stone)  is  circular  and  is  very  short.  It  is 
blue  (coloured)  and  has  a  dot.  The  Trmkrama  (stone)  is  black, 
(coloured) .  It  has  a  line  on  the  right  and  a  dot  on  the  left  side. 

10.  The  Ananta  (stone)  has  the  mark  of  the  hood  of  a  ser¬ 
pent,  it  has  variegated  colours  and  manifold  forms.  The  Damo- 
data  (stone)  is  big  and  has  a  disc  in  the  middle  part  with  two- 


minute  dots. 

11.  The  SudarSana  (stone)  has  (the  mark  of)  a  disc.  The 

Laksmindrdyana  (stone)  (is  that  which  has  the  marks  of)  two  discs. 

The  Acyuta  (stone)  (has  the  marks  of)  three  discs.  Or  the  Tn~ 
oikrama  (stone)  may  have  (the  marks  of)  three  discs. 

12.  The  Janardana  (stone)  has  (the  marks  of)  four  discs. 
The  Vasudeva  (stone)  has  (the  marks  of)  five  discs.  The  Pra¬ 
dyumna  (stone)  has  (the  marks  of)  six  discs.  The  Sankarsana 
(stone)  has  (the  marks  of)  seven  discs. 


126 


Agni  Purana 

t 

13.  The  Purusottama  (stone)  has  (the  marks)  of  eight  discs. 
The  Navavyuha  form  has  the  marks  of  nine  discs.  (The  stone 
representing)  the  ten  manifestations  (of  Visnu)  (is  marked) 
with  ten  (discs).  The  Aniruddha  form  (is  marked)  with  eleven 
(discs).  The  DvadaSatman  (class  of  Salagrama)  (is  marked)  by 
twelve  (discs).  (One  is  deemed  to  be)  the  Ananla  (class  of 
Salagrama)  (if  it  has)  more  (discs)  than  these. 


CHAPTER  FORTYSEVEN 
Mode  of  worshipping  Salagrama 

The  Lord  said  : 


1.  I  shall  describe  the  mode  of  worshipping  the  Salagrama 
marked  with  discs  for  (the  sake  of)  accomplishment.  The  wor¬ 
ship  of  Hari  (in  the  Salagrama )  is  of  three  kinds — 

(i)  kamya  performed  for  gaining  particular  benefit 

(ii)  akamya  performed  with  disinterestedness  about  the  benefits 

(iii)  Subhayalmika,  that  is  of  the  nature  of  both  of  them. 

2.  (The  worship)  of  the  five  (manifestations  of  Visnu) 
(such  as)  the  Fish*  etc.,  is, either  kamya  or  ubhayatmika.  (The 
worship  of  the  manifestations)  of  the  Boar  Man-lion  and  Dwarf 
forms  (of  Visnu  is)  for  emancipation. 


.'  L.lsten  to  the  three-fold  worship  of  the  Salagrama  endow¬ 
ed  with  discs.  The  excellent  worship  is  that  performed  without 
desiring  for  the  fruits.  The  worship  with  desire  for  the  fruits  is 
the  last  (in  the  rank).  The  worship  of  an  image  is  mediocre. 
In  a  circular  lotus  placed  on  a  rectangular  seat,  having  assigned 
the  pranaoa  (the  syllable  Om)  to  the  heart  and  having  assigned 
(the  sacred  syllables)  to  the  parts  of  the  body  and  having  shown 
three  mudras  (positions  of  fingers  in  the  practice  of  worship), 
the  preceptor  should  be  worshipped  outside  the  circle.  The 
attendant  gods  (ga^as)  should  be  worshipped  on  the  west.  Dhatr 
on  the  north-west,Vidhatr  on  the  south-west, the  Karta  andHarta 
on  the  south  and  north,  Visvaksena(Visnu)should  be  worshipp- 


1 .  The  text  does  not  specify  the  names  of  other  manifestations. 


•47.7—48.1 


127 


ed  in  the  north-east,  and  Ksetrapalaka  (the  guardian  deity) 
on  the  south-east. 

7.  The  Vedas,  Rgveda  etc.  (should  be  worshipped)  in  the  east 
etc.  (The  serpent)  Ananta  (which  is)  the  support  of  the  earth, 
the  seat  of  worship,  the  lotus,  the  three  orbs — sun,  moon  and 
fires  (should  be  worshipped). 

8.  The  seat  (should  consist)  of  twelve  letters1  (forming  the 
mystic  formula  of  the  God).  Having  placed  (the  God)  there, 
the  stone  should  be  worshipped  with  the  individual  syllables 
and  the  whole  of  the  sacred  syllable  in  order. 

9-10.  Then  one  should  worship  with  the  vedic  sacred  sylla¬ 
bles  accomplished  by  the  syllables  such  as  the  gayatri,  etc.  and 
pranava  on  the  east  and  other  directions.  Then  the  three  mudras 
of  the  Visvaksena  (Visnu),  the  disc  and  the  Ksetrapala  should 
be  shown.  This  is  the  first  variety  of  the  worship  of  Magrdma. 
Then  I  shall  describe  the  one  with  no  merits. 

1 1 .  One  should  draw  a  circle  as  before  with  sixteen  radii  and 
with  a  lotus.  One  should  then  worship  the  preceptor  and  others 

with  a  conch,  disc,  mace  and  sword. 

12.  The  bow  and  the  arrows  (should  be  placed)  in  the  east 
and  the  north.  The  seat  should  be  placed  with  the  vedic  (syl¬ 
lables).  The  stone  should  be  placed  with  the  (sacred)  twelve 
syllables2 3  of  the  lord.  Listen  to  the  third  variety  of  worship. 

1 3 .  One  should  draw  a  lotus  having  eight  radii  and  worship 
the  preceptor  and  others  as  before.  Having  offered  the  seat  with 
the  eight  sacred  letters2  one  should  place  the  stone  with  the  same 
(formula).  One  should  worship  ten  times  with  that  (formu  a). 
It  is  then  accomplished  by  gayatri  etc. 


CHAPTER  FORTYEIGHT 
Adoration  of  twentyfour forms  of  Vifnu 

The  Lord  said  : 

1.  Kesava  of  the  form  of  (syllable)  Om  bears  the  lotus, 


1 .  Om  namo  bhagavate  vasudevaya . 

2.  See  the  previous  note. 

3.  Om  namo  vasudevaya. 


128 


Agni  Purana- 


conch,  disc  and  mace.  Narayana  (bears)  the  conch,  lotus,  mace- 
and  disc.  Gircumambulation  to  Him. 

2.  Then  I  salute  Madhava,  who  bears  the  mace,  disc,  conch, 
and  lotus.  Govinda  wields  the  disc,  the  Kaumodaki  (name  of  a. 
mace),  lotus  and  conch. 

3.  Visnu,  the  bearer  of  the  disc,  the  mace,  lotus  and  conch 
is  the  bestower  of  emancipation.  I  salute  Madhusudana,  who- 
bears  the  conch,  disc,  lotus  and  mace. 

4.  (I  prostrate)  with  devotion  (at  the  feet  of)  Trivikrama 
who  bears  the  lotus,  mace,  disc  and  conch.  May  Vamana,  the 
bearer  of  the  conch,  disc,  mace  and  lotus  protect  me  always. 

5.  Srldhara  who  holds  a  lotus,  disc,  bow  and  also  the  conch, 
yields  emancipation.  Hrsikes'a  wields  the  mace,  disc,  lotus  and 
conch.  May  He  protect  us. 

6.  And  Padmanabha  (is  one)  who  yields  boons  and  who- 
holds  the  conch,  lotus,  disc  and  mace,  (I  salute  him).  Damo- 

dara  (is  one)  who  holds  a  lotus,  conch,  mace  and  disc.  I  salute 
him. 


7.  May  Vasudeva,  who  wields  a  mace,  conch,  disc  and 
lotus  (protect)  the  universe.  May  Sankarsana,  who  holds  a 
mace,  conch,  lotus  and  disc  protect  us. 

8.  Lord  Pradyumna  is  one  who  holds  a  mace,  disc, 
conch  and  mace  as  well  as  a  lotus.  May  Aniruddha,  who  wields, 
the  disc,  mace,  conch  and  lotus  protect  us. 

9.  May  Purusottama,  the  Lord  of  celestials,  who  holds 
disc,  lotus,  conch  and  mace  (protect  you).  May  Adhoksaja 
who  wields  lotus,  mace,  conch  and  disc  protect  you. 

10.  I  salute  that  Lord  Nfsimha,  who  wields  disc,  lotus, 
mace  and  conch.  May  Acyuta,  who  holds  mace,  lotus,  disc 
and  conch,  protect  you  all. 

H.  So  also  (may)  Upendra,  who  is  of  the  form  of  a  child 
and  (who  holds)  the  disc  and  lotus,  (protect  you).  And  (may) 
Janardana,  who  wields  lotus,  disc,  conch  and  mace  (protect 


12  MayHari,  who  holds  conch,  lotus,  disc  as  well  as 
(mace)  kaumodaki  yield  me  enjoyment  and  emancipation. 
May  Krsna,  who  holds  conch,  mace,  lotus  and  disc  give  en¬ 
joyment  and  emancipation. 


48.13-49.1-7 


129 


13.  The  first  manifestation  was  that  of  Vasudeva.  Then 
Sankarsana  manifested.  Pradyumna  manifested  from  Sankar- 
sana.  Aniruddha  appeared  from  Pradyumna. 

14.  Each  one  of  the  (above)  forms  was  divided  into  three 
forms  such  as  Kesava  and  others..  One  who  reads  or  hears  this 
hymn  consisting  of  twelve  letters  on  the  twenty-four  forms  gets 
free  from  impurity  and  gets  all  things. 


CHAPTER  FORTY-NINE 
Characteristics  of  forms  of  'Fish'  etc .  of  Visnu 
The  Lord  said  : 

1.  I  shall  describe  to  you  the  characteristics  of  the  ten 
manifestations  (of  Visnu)  beginning  with  the  Fish.  The  Fish 
(form  of  Visnu)  should  resemble  a  fish.  The  Tortoise  (form) 
should  resemble  a  tortoise. 

2.  The  terrestrial  boar  (manifestation)  should  have  a  hu¬ 
man  body  and  as  carrying  a  mace  and  other  (weapons)  in  the 
right  hand,  and  the  conch,  (the  goddess)  LaksmI  or  a  lotus  in 
the  left. 

3.  Or  (the  goddess)  (is  represented)  as  resting  on  the  left 
elbow  and  the  earth  and  (the  serpent)  Ananta  at  the  feet.  The 
installation  of  the  figure  secures  for  a  person  a  kingdom  and 
(such  a  person)  gets  across  the  ocean  of  mundane  existence. 

4.  The  Man-lion  image  (should  be  represented)  os  having 
a  wide  open  mouth  and  having  the  killed  demon  (Hiranya- 
kasipu)  on  the  left  thigh.  His  chest  should  wear  a  garland  and 
(his  arms)  should  hold  disc  and  mace. 

5.  The  Dwarf-form  may  hold  an  umbrella  and  a  stick  or 
have  four  arms.  The  figure  of  Parasurama  may  hold  the  bow 
and  arrow,  a  sword  and  an  axe. 

6.  (The  figure  of)  Rama  should  have  the  bow,  arrow,  sword,, 
conch  or  two  hands  or  may  have  four  arms  holding  a  mace  and 
plough. 

7.  The  plough  may  be  provided  on  the  left  half  (upper  arm.) 
and  the  auspicious  conch  on  the  lower  arm.  The  mace  may  be 


130  Agni  Purana 

provided  on  the  right  half  (upper  arm)  and  the  auspicious  disc 
on  the  lower  arm. 

8.  The  figure  of  Buddha  (should  be  made)  as  calm,  hav¬ 
ing  long  ears,  white  complexion,  wearing  a  cloth,  and  seated  on 
.a  lotus  with  its  petals  upwards  and  as  conferring  favour  and 
protection. 

9.  (The  figure  of)  Kalki  is  (to  be  represented  as)  a  twice- 
born  endowed  with  a  bow  and  quiver  and  as  destroying  the 
foreigners.  Or  (he  should  be  represented  as)  seated  on  the  horse 
and  endowed  with  a  sword,  conch,  disc  and  arrow. 

10.  I  shall  describe  the  characteristics  of  nine  forms 
of  Visnu  commencing  with  Vasudeva.  The  mace  (is  placed) 
on  the  right  half  (upper  arm)  and  the  excellent  disc  on  the  left 
half  (upper  arm). 

1 1 .  The  image  of  Vasudeva  may  be  made  as  before  or  as 
having  four  hands  or  two  hands,  one  holding  a  conch  and  the 
other  as  conferring  boons  and  having  Brahma  and  Isa  (Siva) 
always  on  either  side. 

12.  (The  figure  of)  Balarama  (is  represented)  as  hold¬ 
ing  a  plough,  mace,  club  and  lotus.  (The  image  of)  Pradyumna 
{is  represented  as  having)  thunderbolt  and  conch  on  the 
right  arm  and  the  bow  in  the  left  arm. 

13.  Or  Pradyumna  (is  represented)  as  having  the  mace 
resting  on  the  navel  with  pleasure  or  holding  the  bow  and  arrow. 
Aniruddha  may  be  (represented  as)  having  four  arms.  In  the 
same  way  Lord  Narayana  (may  also  be  represented). 

14.  (The  image  of)  Brahma  is  (represented  as  having) 
four  faces,  four  hands,  big  belly,  long  beards,  matted  hair,  and 
(having)  swan  as  the  vehicle  in  front  (of  him). 

15.  (There  should  be)  a  rosary  and  a  ladle  on  the  right 
hand  and  a  water-pot  and  vessel  to  hold  the  sacrificial  clarified 
butter.  Sarasvati  and  Savitrl  (consorts  of  Brahma)  (should  be 
placed)  on  the  left  and  right  sides. 

16.  (The  image  of)  Visnu  (is  represented)  as  having  eight 
hands,  Garuda  (the  vehicle),  (holding)  a  sword,  mace,  and 
arrow  in  the  right  hand  and  as  conferring  gifts  and  (holding) 
the  bow  and  mace  in  the  left  hand. 

17.  (The  figure  of)  Narasirhha  (is  represented)  (as  having) 
four  hands  holding  the  conch  and  disc  and  piercing  (the  body) 
of  the  mighty  demon  (Hiranyakasipu). 


49.18-27 


131 


18-22.  (The  figure  of)  Varaha  (is  endowed  with)  four  arms 
holding  the  (serpent)  Sesa  in  (one  of)  the  hands  and  the  earth 
in  the  left  (hand)  and  (his  consort)  Kamala  (LaksmI).  The 
-earth  should  be  made  as  resting  at  the  feet  and  (goddess )LaksmI 
as  seated  at  the  feet.  Trailokyamohana  (one  who  stupefies  the 
three  worlds)  (should  be  represented  as  riding) the  Tarkhya  (the 
•eagle-vehicle)  and  possess  eight  hands,  holding  the  sword,  mace 
and  goad  in  the  right  hand  and  the  conch,  bow,  mace  and  the 
noose  in  the  left  hand.  (Images  of)Laksmi  and  Sarasvati  should 
be  endowed  with  lotus  and  lute  (respectively).  Then  (the  form 
of)  Visvarupa  (of  Visnu)  (should  be  endowed)  with  the  club, 
noose,  spear  and  arrow  in  the  right  hand  and  conch,  bow,  mace, 
noose,  tomara  (javelin),  plough,  axe,  staff,  sword  and  leather 
.sling  in  the  left  hand. 

23-24.  The  Harihara  (Siva  and  Visnu)  form  of  Visnu 
(should  be  placed)  on  the  right  or  left  (side),  (being  endowed 
with) twenty  hands,  four  faces  and  three  eyes.  He  should  either 
be  lying  on  his  left  or  reclining  on  the  water.  (He  should  further 
be  represented)  as  his  leg  being  held  by  the  goddess  Sri  (LaksmI) . 
He  should  also  be  shown  as  being  attended  to  by  (the  female 
divinities)  Vimala  and  others.  He  should  also  have  the  four¬ 
faced  (Brahma)  in  the  navel-lotus. 

25.  The  form  of  Visnu  bearing  the  marks  of  Rudra  and 
Kesava  should  hold  a  spear  and  sword  in  the  right  hand  and 
the  mace  and  disc  in  the  other  and  be  in  the  company  of  Gauri 
and  LaksmI  (the  consorts  of  Siva  and  Visnu). 

26.  The  Hayasiras  (horse-headed)  form  of  Visnu  (should 
be  represented)  as  holding  the  conch,  disc,  mace  and  the  Vedas . 
The  left  foot  should  rest  on  (the  serpent)  Sesa  and  the  right  on 
the  back  of  tortoise. 

27.  The  form  of  Dattatreya  may  have  two  arms,  the  goddess 
Sri  (LaksmI)  being  seated  on  the  left  lap.  The  Visvaksena  form 
of  Visnu  (may  hold)  a  disc,  mace,  plough  and  conch. 


132 


Agni  Purancc 


CHAPTER  FIFTY 
Characteristics  of  an  image  of  the  goddess 
The  Lord  said  : 

1  -5 .  (The  image  of)  Candl  may  have  twenty  hands  and  may 
hold  the  spear,  sword,  dart,  disc,  noose,  club,  (jamaru  (a 
small  drum)  and  spike  in  the  left  hands  and  also  (show)  protec¬ 
tive  posture  (and)  the  snake  as  the  noose,  club,  axe,  goad,  bow, 
bell,  banner,  mace,  mirror,  and  iron  mace  in  the  (right)  hands. 
Or  (the  figure  of)  Can<JI  is  made  to  have  ten  hands,  with  the 
buffalo  placed  below  with  its  head  fully  severed  and  the  demon 
as  issuing  forth  from  (its)  neck  with  rage  and  brandishing  his- 
weapon,  holding  spike  in  the  hand,  vomitting  blood,  his  hairs 
(stained)  with  blood  and  blood  dripping  out  from  the  eyes 
(forming)  a  garland  (on  the  chest),  being  devoured  by  the  lion 
and  well-bound  by  the  noose  in  the  neck.  (The  goddess  is  i  epre- 
sented  as)  resting  her  right  foot  on  the  lion  and  the  left  foot  on 
the  demon  underneath. 

6-12.  This  form  of  Candika,  the  destroyer  of  enemies 
(is  made  as)  having  three  eyes  and  endowed  with  weapons.. 
(This)  Durga  is  to  be  worshipped  with  the  nine  elements  in  order 
in  a  diagram  of  nine  lotuses  from  her  own  form  at  the  beginning, 
centre  and  the  eastern,  and  other  (directions).  (The  image 
should  be  made  as)  possessing  eighteen  arms  (carrying)  a  human, 
head,  club,  mirror,  tarjani  (a  kind  of  weapon),  bow,  banner  and 
a  little  drum  in  the  right  hand  and  the  noose,  spear,  mace> 
trident,  thunderbolt,  sword,  goad  and  dart  in  the  left  hand. 
The  others  (Rudracanda  and  other  goddesses)  should  be- 
endowed  with  the  same  weapons  in  their  sixteen  hands 
except  the  little  drum  and  tarjani  (a  kind  of  weapon). 

The  nine  (goddesses)  commencing  with  Rudracanda  are 
Rudracanda,  Pracanda,  Candogra,  Candanayika,  Canda, 
Candavatl,  Candarupa,  Aticandika  and  Ugracanda  stationed 
at  the  centre.  (They  are  made  to  be)  coloured  as  the  rocana 
(yellow  pigment),  red,  black,  blue,  white,  purple,  yellow  and. 
white  and  as  riding  the  lion.  Then  the  buffalo  as  a  human  (form) 
should  be  held  by  the  hair  by  the  nine  (forms)  of  Durga  holding, 
weapons. 


50.13-25 


133 


13.  They  are  in  the  alitfha1  posture.  They  have  to  be 
established  for  the  increase  of  progeny;  as  also  (the  forms) 
Gaurl,  Candika  and  others  (as  well  as  the  forms)  Kundi,  Aksara- 
rada  (and)  Agnidhrk. 

14-15.  She  is  the  same  as  Rambha.  (She  is)  accomplished 
and  devoid  of  fire.  (She  is)  also  Lalita.  (She)  holds  the 
severed  head  along  with  the  neck  in  the  left  (hand)  and  a 
mirror  in  the  second  hand. 

(The  image  of)  Saubhagya  (is  made)  as  holding  fruits  in 
the  folded  palms  on  the  right  side.  (The  image  of)  Laksml 
holds  the  lotus  in  the  right  hand  and  the  Sriphcila  (bilva  fruit) 
in  the  left. 

16.  (The  image  of)  Sarasvatl  (should  be  made  as  holding) 
a  book,  rosary  and  lute  in  the  hands.  (The  image  of)  Jahnavl 
(the  river  Ganges)  (is  represented)  as  holding  a  pot  and  flower 
in  the  hand  (and  standing)  on  the  crocodile  and  of  white  com¬ 
plexion. 

17.  (The  image  of  the  river)  Yamuna  is  worshipped  as 
mounted  on  the  tortoise  and  as  holding  a  pot  in  the  hand  and  of 
dark  complexion.  (The  image  of)  Tumburu  is  represented  as 
white  (in  colour),  holding  a  lute  and  trident  and  riding  a  bull. 

18-19.  The  four-faced  Brahmi  (the  female-energy  of  Brahma) 
(is  represented)  as  of  fair  complexion,  riding  a  swan  and  as 
carrying  a  rosary,  different  vessels  such  as  surd  and  kun4a  in  the 
left  hand.  Sankari  is  represented  as  white,  (seated)  on  a  bull 
holding  the  bow  and  arrow  in  the  right  hand  and  the  disc  and 
the  bow  in  the  left  hand.  Kaumarl  (is  represented)  as  red 
in  colour,  riding  the  peacock  and  having  two  arms,  holding  the 

^  20.  (The  form  of)  Laksmi  should  hold  the  disc,  and  conch 
in  the  right  (hand)  (and)  the  mace  and  lotus  in  the  left  (hand). 
(The  form  of)  Varahl  should  be  mounted  on  the  buffalo  an 

hold  the  stick,  conch,  sword  and  goad. 

21-25.  (The  image  of)  Aindri  conferring  success  should  be 
represented  as  having  thousand  eyes  and  holding  the  thunder¬ 
bolt  in  the  left  hand. 

!.  The  posture  in  shooting,  in  which  the  right  knee  is  advanced  and 
the  left  leg  is  held  back. 


134 


Agni  Purdna 


Camunda  may  have  three  eyes  deeply  sunken,  a  skeleton 
form  devoid  of  flesh,  erectly  standing  hair,  emaciated  belly,  clad 
in  tigerskin  and  holding  a  skull  and  spear  in  the  left  hand  and 
a  trident  and  scissor  in  the  right  standing  on  the  dead  body 
of  a  man  and  wearing  a  garland  of  bones.  (The  image  of)  Vinayaka 
should  have  a  human  body,  big  belly,  elephant  face,  big  trunk 
and  sacred  thread.  The  mouth  measuring  7  kalds  in  breadth 
while  the  trunk  should  measure  36  finger-breadths  in  length. 
The  neck  should  be  12  kalds  in  girth  and  1 0  kalds  in  height.  The 
throat-region  should  be  36  finger  (in  length).  The  space  about 
the  region  of  anus  should  have  the  breadth  of  half  a  finger. 

26.  (The  region  of)  the  navel  and  thigh  should  be  of  twelve 
(fingers)  as  also  the  leg  from  the  ankle  to  the  knee  and  the  feet. 
He  should  be  represented  as  holding  his  own  tusk  made  into  an 
axe  in  the  right  hand  and  the  la^iuka  (a  ball  of  sweet)  and 
lotus  flower  in  the  left. 

27.  (The  image  of)  Skanda,  the  lord  (of  the  universe)  also 
known  as  Sakha  and  Visakha,  (is  represented)  as  a  boy  possess¬ 
ing  two  arms  and  riding  a  peacock  (with  the  images  of)  Sumukhi 
and  Vidalaks!1. 

28-29.  The  god  may  be  represented  as  having  a  single  face 
or  six  faces,  six  hands  or  twelve  hands  carrying  the  spear  and  a 
cock  in  the  right  hand.  In  the  village  or  the  forest  (it  should 
have)  two  arms.  (He  should  bear)  the  spear,  arrow,  noose, 
nistr'nhSa  (sword),  goad  and  tarjani  (a  kind  of  weapon)  in 
the  six  right  hands  and  the  spear  in  the  left  hand. 

30-31.  (The  image  of)  Rudracarcika  (the  manifestation  of) 
the  goddess  may  have  a  bow  adorned  by  the  plume  of  peacock, 
club,  banner,  protective  posture,  cock,  skull,  scissors,  trident 
and  noose  in  the  right  and  left  hands.  (She  should  also  be) 
clad  in  the  elephant  hide,  with  her  leg  raised  up  and  the  little 
drum  placed  on  the  head. 

32.  Hence  she  (is  known  as)  Rudracamunda,  the  goddess 
of  dancing  and  one  who  is  dancing.  This  (goddess  herself), 
having  four  faces  and  in  the  sitting  posture  (is  known  as)  Maha- 
laksmi. 


1.  The  consorts  of  Skanda.  The  two  names  mean  good-faced  and 
cat-eyed  respectively. 


50.33-41 


135 


33-34.  (The  goddess)  having  ten  hands  and  three  eyes 
(holding)  (different)  weapons,  sword  and  iamaru  (little 
drum)  in  the  right  hand  and  the  bell,  club,  staff  with  a  skull  at 
one  end  and  trident  in  the  left  (hand)  and  eating  men,  horses, 
buffaloes  and  elephants  held  in  the  hand  is  called  Siddhaca- 
munda. 

35.  That  goddess  accomplishes  everything  and  is  (known 
(as)  Siddhayogesvari.  She  is  also  represented  in  another  form 
endowed  with  the  noose  and  goad  and  red  (in  complexion). 

36.  (The  goddess)  Bhairavi  who  has  an  embodiment  of 
beauty  is  endowed  with  twelve  arms.  These  are  (all)  (spoken 
as)  fierce  (forms)  arising  from  the  cremation  ground.  The 
above  are  remembered  as  the  eight  forms  of  the  goddess. 

37.  (The  goddess)  Ksama  (Forbearance)  (should  be) 
surrounded  by  jackals,  old,  having  two  arms,  and  widely  opened 
mouth.  (The  goddess)  Ksemankarl  (Benevolent)  may  have  pro¬ 
truding  teeth  and  be  resting  her  knees  on  the  ground. 

38.  The  wives  of  semi-gods  should  be  made  to  have  long 
and  motionless  eyes.  The  Sakinis  (female  attendants  on  God¬ 
dess  Durga)  should  be  made  to  have  oblique  vision.  The  Maha- 
ramyas  should  have  yellow  eyes.  The  (images  of)  nymphs  should 
always  be  made  beautiful. 

39.  (The  form  of)  Nandlsa  the  bull,  the  door-keeper  (of 
the  goddess ) ,  should  carry  a  rosary  and  a  trident.  (The  image  of) 
Mahakala  (a  form  of  Siva  as  the  destroyer)  may  have  a  sword> 
human  skull,  trident  and  club. 

40.  (The  form  of)  Bhpngin  (an  attendant  of  Siva)  should 
have  an  emaciated  body.  Kusmancja  (another  attendant  of 
Siva)  should  have  a  stout  and  dwarf  form  dancing.  Virabhadra 
and  other  attendants  (of  Siva)  should  have  ears  and  faces 
of  elephants,  cows,  etc. 

41.  Ghantakarna  (an  attendant  of  Siva)  form  should  have 
eighteen  hands  crushing  the  accrued  sin,  (holding  weapons) 
thunderbolt,  sword,  club,  disc,  arrow,  mace,  goad  and  hammer 
in  the  right  hand  and  tar  jam  (a  weapon),  club,  dart,  human 
skull,  noose,  bow,  bell  and  axe  on  the  left  and  a  trident  in  the 
(remaining)  two  hands  and  wearing  a  garland  of  bells  and  crush¬ 
ing  the  eruptive  diseases. 


136 


Agni  Purdna 


CHAPTER  FIFTYONE 
Characteristics  of  the  images  of  the  Sun  and  other  planets 
The  Lord  said  : 

1.  (The  image  of)  the  Sun  (should  be  made)  to  ride  a 
chariot  having  one  wheel  and  seven  horses.  (He  must)  hold  two 
lotuses,  ink-stand,  pen  and  a  staff  in  his  right  hand. 

2.  Pirigala,  an  attendant  and  gate-keeper  of  the  Sun  (should 
be  placed)  on  the  left  with  the  mace  in  his  hand.  (Sun-god) 
should  have  female  attendants  bearing  chowrics  (fly-flappers) 
and  the  pale-looking  consort  by  his  side. 

3.  Or  (the  image  of)  the  Sun  should  be  made  as  riding  a 
horse  alone.  The  guardian  deities  of  different  quarters 
should  duly  be  endowed  with  weapons,  holding  two  lotuses 
(in  hands)  and*  bestowing  boons. 

4.  (The  images  of)  Agni  and  other  gods  bearing  the  club, 
trident,  disc  and  lotus  should  be  placed  in  different  directions 
(around).  (The  images  of)  the  forms  of  Sun,  commencing 
with  Aryamaarc  rcpi'esentcd  as  possessing  four  arms  and  placed 
in  a  diagram  of  twelve  petals. 

5-6.  Varuna,  Surya,  Sahasramsu  (one  who  has  thousand 
rays),  Dhatr,  Tapana,  Savitr,  Gabhastika,  Ravi,  Parjanya, 
Tvastr,  Mitra(and)  Visnu  are  his  different  names  as  he  moves 
over  the  zodiacal  signs  commencing  with  theAries  in  the  course 
of  months  commencing  with  Margasirsa  and  ending  with 
Karttika.1 

7-9.  Their  female  energies  known  by  the  names — Ida, 
Susumna,  Visvarcis,  Indu,  Pramardinl,  Praharsani,  Maha- 
kall,  Kapila,  Prabodham,  Nxlambara,  Ghanantastha  and  Ampta, 
and  placed  at  the  ends  of  petals  are  of  black,  red,  pale  red, 
yellow,  pale  yellow,  white,  brown,  yellow,  green,  white,  grey 
and  blue. 

10.  Similar  colours  are  given  to  Varuna  and  others  placed 
at  the  tips  of  petals.  The  form  of  Tejas  (effulgence)  should 
be  represented  as  fierce,  extremely  crooked,  possessing  two  arms 
holding  a  lotus  and  sword. 


1 .  These  two  correspond  to  the  months  Dccembcr-J[ anuary  and  Novcm- 
Ibcr-Dcccmbcr. 


51.11-17 


137 


1 1 .  The  form  of  Moon  should  be  represented  as  holding 
a  sacrificial  pitcher  and  rosary.  (The  image  of)  Mars  should 
be)  holding  a  spear  and  rosary.  (The  figure  of)  Mercury  (should 
be)  holding  the  bow  and  rosary  in  his  hands.  (The  form  of) 
Jupiter  (should  be)  holding  the  sacrificial  pitcher  and  rosary. 

12.  (The  image  of)  Venus  may  be  holding  the  sacrificial 
pitcher  and  rosary.  (That  of)  Saturn  should  be  endowed  with 
a  girdle  of  bells.  (While  that  of)  Rahu  (the  ascending  node 
•of  the  moon  considered  as  a  planet)  (is  represented  as)  holding 
half  of  the  lunar  disc,  (that  of)  Ketu  (the  descending  node  of 
the  moon  considered  as  a  planet)  (is  represented  as)  holding  the 
sword  and  lamp. 

13.  (The  serpents)  Ananta,  Taksaka,  Karka,  Padma, 
Mahabja  and  Sankha  arc  all  (represented  as)  having  hooded 
heads  with  great  radiance. 

14.  (The  image  of)  Indra  is  endowed  with  thunder-bolt  and 
.as  seated  on  an  elephant,  (that  of)  Agni  as  riding  a  goat  and 
holding  a  spear,  (that  of)  Yama  as  on  a  buffalo  and  carrying  a 
club  and  (that  of)  Nirrti  as  holding  a  sword. 

15.  (The  image  of)  Varuna  (ocean  god)  is  made  as  seated) 
on  a  crocodile  and  as  holding  a  noose,  (that  of)  Vayu  (wind 
god)  (as  riding)  an  antelope  and  holding  a  banner,  (that  of) 
Kubera  (god  of  wealth)  as  seated  on  a  sheep  and  bearing  a 
mace,  and  (that  of)  Isana  (as  seated)  on  a  bull  and  having 
a  matted  hair. 

16.  (The  images)  of  the  guardian  deities  of  the  quarters  of 
the  world  are  endowed  with  two  arms.  (The  celestial  architect) 
Visvakarman  (should  be  represented)  as  holding  a  rosary. 
(The  figure  of)  Hanumat  (monkey,  devoted  to  Rama)  may  be 
holding  the  thunderbolt  in  his  hand  and  pounding  the  earth 
•with  his  feet. 

17.  (The  semi-divine  beings)  Kinnaras  may  be  (represent¬ 
ed)  as  holding  lutes  in  their  arms  and  the  Vidyadharas  (semi- 
divine  beings)  as  having  garlands  (and  moving)  in  the  sky. 
The  goblins  may  be  (represented)  as  having  emaciated  bodies 
and  the  vampires  as  deformed  faces,  the  Guardians  of  the  sites 
.as  having  the  tridents  and  the  spirits  of  the  dead  people  as  lean 
and  big-bellied. 


138 


Agni  Purana 


CHAPTER  rIFTYTWO 

Characteristics  of  images  of  different  forms  of  goddesses 
The  Lord  said : 

1.  I  shall  describe  (the  characteristics)  of  the  eight 
Yoginis  (female  attendants  on  Durga)  respectively  residents  of 
(the  eight  quarters)  east  to  north-east.  (The  Yoginis)  Aksobhya, 
Ruksakarm  ,  RaksasI,  Krpana  and  Aksaya  (reside  in  the  cast). 

2.  (The  Yoginis)  PirigaksI,  Ksaya,  Ksema,  Ila,  Lila,  Laya, 
Lakta,  Balakcsl,  Lalasa  and  Vimala  (dwell  in  the  south-east). 

3.  (The  Yoginis)  Hutasa,  VisalaksI,  Hunkara,  Vadava- 
mukhl,  Mahakrura,  Krodhana,  Bhayankarl  and  Mahanana 
(are  the  residents  of  the  south). 

4.  (The  Yoginis)  Sarvajna,  Tarala,  Tara,  Rgveda,  Haya- 
nana,  Sara(khya),  Rudrasarigrahl,  Sambara  and  Talajanghika 
(occupy  the  south  (-west). 

5.  RaktaksI,  Suprasiddha,  Vidyujjihva,  Karankinl,  Megha- 
nada,  Pracandogra,  KalakarnI  and  Varaprada  (are  the  inmates 
of  the^vest). 

6.  Candra,  Candravall,  Prapanca,  Pralayantika,  Sisu- 
vaktra,  PisacI,  Pisitasa  and  Lolupa  (dwell  in  the  north-west). 

7.  DhamanI,  Tapani,  RaginI,  Vikrtanana,  Vayuvega, 
Brhatkuksi,  Vikrta  and  Visvarupika  (govern  the  north). 

8.  Yamajihva,  JayantI,  Durjaya,  Jayantika,  Vidala,  Revatl, 
Putana  and  Vijayantika  (hold  sway  over  the  north-east). 

9.  (These  Yoginis  should  be  represented)  as  having  eight 
arms  (or)  four  arms,  wielding  weapons  of  their  choice  and  yicld- 
ing  all  benefits  (on  their  votaries).  (Lord)  Bhairava  may  hold 
the  arka  plant  (Calotropis  Gigantee)  in  the  hand  and  have 
the  face  like  the  knee  or  elbow  bearing  the  matted  hair  and  the 
Moon. 

10.  Krttivasas  (should  be  represented)  as  holding  on  one 
side  the  sword,  goad,  axe  and  arrow  and  offering  protection  to- 
the  universe  and  a  bow,  trident,  club  with  a  skull  at  the  top  and 
noose  on  the  other. 

1 1 .  Or  he  shall  be  having  five  faces  and  be  wearing  the 
elephant’s  hide  and  adorned  by  the  serpents.  He  shall  be  seated, 
on  the  dead  body.  He  must  be  worshipped  in  the  midst  of  the: 


52.12-53.1-2 


139 


mother  goddesses.1 2 

12.  One  has  to  worship  him  being  endowed  with  the 
letters  of  the  alphabet  upto  the  letter  ‘ra’  and  with  (his  mantra) 
having  six  constituents  and  the  eight  long  vowel  mantras. 

13.  (He  is  also  to  be  contemplated  upon)  as  established  in 
the  wicks  of  the  flame  in  the  house  as  endowed  with  golden  orna¬ 
ments  and  the  nada,  bindu  and  indvr  and  making  the  body  of  the 
divine  mother  and  the  lord  radiant. 

14.  Virabhadra  (attendant  of  Siva)  (is  represented)  as 
having  four  faces,  seated  on  a  bull  in  front  of  the  mother  (god¬ 
desses).  (Goddess)  Gaurl  (consort  of  Siva)  (is  represented)  as 
having  two  arms  and  three  eyes  as  endowed  with  a  spear  and 
mirror. 

15.  (Goddess)  Lalita  (a  form  of  Durga)  (should  be  re¬ 
presented)  as  having  lour  arms  (holding)  a  spear,  a  small  pit¬ 
cher,  (and  another)  pitcher  (in  the  hands)  and  showing  boon- 
conferring  hands.  (She  should)  be  seated  on  the  lotus.  (She 
should  also)  be  endowed  with  a  mirror,  a  small  stick  for  apply¬ 
ing  collyrium  and  Skanda  and  Gana  (Ganesa). 

16.  (Goddess)  Candika  may  (be  represented)  as  having 
ten  hands  having  a  sword,  spear,  disc  (and)  dart  in  the  right 
(hand)  and  the  magical  noose,  shield,  pike,  axe,  and  bow  in 
the  left  (hand).  (She  must)  be  riding  a  lion  with  the  buffalo 
(demon)  having  been  slain  with  (her)  spear  in  front  of  her. 


CHAPTER  FIFTYTHREE 

Characteristics  of  the  lihga  ( parabolic  representation  oj  Siva) 
The  Lord  said  : 

1-2.  O  Lotus-born  (Brahman)  I  shall  describe  to  you 
the  characteristics  of  the  lihga  and  other  things.  Listen.  Having 
marked  a  rectangular  (block  of  stone)  as  divided  into  two  parts 

1.  They  arc  Brahrai,  Mahesvarl,  Gandi,  Varalii,  Vaisriavi,  Kaumaru 
Gamunda  and  Carcika. 

2.  These  arc  the  sound,  dot  and  crescent,  making  up  the  Prayaua.  or  Om. 


140 


Agni  Purdna 


lengthwise,  the  lower  part  again  being  divided  into  eight  parts 
and  three  parts  of  these  divisions  being  left  out,  the  remaining 
(block)  formed  by  five  parts  should  be  divided  breadthwise 
into  three  parts  and  the  three  (gods)  should  be  assigned  therein. 

3.  This  is  spoken  as  representing  the  foims  of  Brahman, 
Visnu  and  Siva  (among)  which  (the  last  one)  is  larger  (than 
the  other  two  parts).  Half  of  the  figure  is  marked  at  the  angular 
points  in  the  square. 

4.  An  octagonal  (block)  known  as  the  part  of  Visnu  is 
•certainly  obtained  (thus).  Then  a  polygon  of  sixteen  sides  is 
made"  and  then  a  polygon  of  thirty-two  sides. 

5.  Having  made  a  polygon  of  sixty-four  sides,  the  cir¬ 
cular  shape  is  accomplished.  Then  the  excellent  spiritual  teacher 
should  chisel  the  head  portion  of  the  emblem. 

6.  The  breadth  of  the  lifiga  may  be  divided  into  eight  parts. 
An  umbrella-shaped  top  portion  (of  the  lifiga)  is  got  by  discard¬ 
ing  half  of  this  length. 

7.  A  lifiga  which  has  a  breadth  equal  to  three-fourth  of  its 
length  bestows  all  the  desired  benefits. 

8.  The  pillar  (part  of  the  emblem)  should  be  a  quarter  of 
the  length  (of  the  emblem)  in  the  case  of  those  worshipped  by 
the  celestials.  Listen  now  (the  narration)  of  the  characteristics 
of  all  lift  gas. 

9-  The  wiseman  should  divide  the  lifiga  measuring  16 
angulas  into  6  parts  through  the  central  line  upto  the  Brahman 
and  Rudra  parts. 

10.  The  spaces  in  between  two  such  lines  of  division  should 
measure  eight yavas  each  in  the  first  two  cases,  each  latter  measur¬ 
ing  a  yava  less  than  the  preceding  one. 

11.  Having  divided  the  lower  part  into  three  parts,  one 
part  should  be  left  out.  Having  divided  the  (remaining)  two 
parts  into  eight  parts,  the  three  upper  ones  (of  these  divisions) 
should  be  left  aside. 

12.  Those  (three  sections)  above  the  five  divisions  should 
be  rotated  and  the  markings  lengthened.  Having  left  out  one 
part  their  union  should  be  brought  about. 

13.  These  are  the  general  characteristics  of  the  lifiga  des¬ 
cribed  by  me.  I  shall  (now)  describe  the  most  general  (charac¬ 
teristics)  of  the  pedestals. 


53.14—54.1 


141 

14.  After  having  known  the  commencing  portion  of  the 
linga  and  height,  the  part  (belonging)  to  Brahman  should  be 
well  placed  by  the  learned  person  on  the  stone  (pedestal). 

15.  Then  having  known  the  height  (of  the  linga)  the  differ¬ 
ent  dimensions  of  the  pedestal  should  be  made.  The  base  (of 
the  liiiga)  should  be  twice  the  height  and  length  commensu¬ 
rate  with  that  of  the  linga. 

16.  The  central  part  of  the  pedestal  should  be  hewn  and 
divided  into  three  parts.  Its  breadth  should  be  one-sixth  part  of 
its  length. 

17.  The  girth  should  measure  one-third  part  of  its  breadth 
and  the  depth  (of  cavity)  should  be  equal  to  that  of  the  girth. 
It  should  be  sloping  gradually. 

18.  Or  the  depth  (of  the  cavity)  should  be  one  sixteenth 
part  of  that  of  the  girth.  The  height  of  the  base  should  be  deviated. 

19.  One  part  of  the  base  should  remain  imbedded  in  the 
ground.  One  part  of  it  will  be  (the  height  of)  the  stool  proper. 
Three  such  parts  (will  be  the  height)  of  the  neck  portion.  The 

first  step  should  be  one  such  part. 

20.  The  second  step  should  be  of  two  such  parts  in  height 
while  the  remaining  steps  should  have  a  height  of  such  a  single 
part  until  one  reaches  the  neck  portion  step  by  step. 

21  Outlets  to  the  breadth  of  such  a  part  should  be  set  apart 
on  each  one  of  the  steps  till  the  last  one.  They  should  be  cut  into 

three  parts  by  the  three  outlets.  i 

22.  It  should  measure  a  tip  of  the  finger  in  breadtn  at  the 
base  and  one-sixth  (of  a  finger)  at  their  ends.  Their  beds  should 
be  a  little  inclined  towards  the  eastern  side.  These  are  considere 
to  be  the  general  characteristics  of  the  linga  along  with  the 

pedstal. 


CHAPTER  FIFTYFOUR 
The  dimensions  of  different  varieties  of  the  linga 


la 


The  Lord  said  : 

1  I  shall  describe  the  measurement  of  the  linga 
a  different  way.  Listen.  I  shall  (now)  speak  about  the  fa*. 


142 


Agni  Purdna 

made  of  salt,  (and)  ghee  (which  when  worshipped)  increases 
(one’s)  intellect. 

2.  A  lihga  made  of  cloth  (is  worshipped)  for  the  sake  of 
wealth.  It  is  known  as  temporal.  The  one  made  of  earth  is  either 
burnt  or  half  burnt  of  which  the  former  is  better. 

3.  Then,  one  made  of  wood  is  meritorious.  One  made  of 
stone  is  more  meritorious  than  that  made  of  wood.  (The  lihga) 
made  of  pearl  is  more  meritorious  than  that  of  stone.  Then 
(relatively  merit-worthy)  are  the  lihgas  made  of  iron,  and  gold. 

4.  The  lihgas  made  of  silver,  copper  and  brass  yield  enjoy¬ 
ment  and  release  from  bondage.  The  lihgas  made  of  red  lead  and 
mercury  are  excellent  and  confer  enjoyment  and  release  from 
bondage. 

5.  The  installation  of  a  lihga  on  the  earth  made  of  mercury 
and  iron  etc  or  studded  with  gems  increases  one’s  glory  and 
•grants  success  as  desired. 

6.  If  desired  one  can  build  temples  and  bases  to  these 
(emblems)  on  the  left  side.  One  may  worship  the  image  of  the 
sun  cast  on  the  mirror. 

7.  Hara  should  be  worshipped  everywhere.  The  worship 
gets  completed  only  (by  the  worship)  of  the  lihga .  A  lihga  made 
of  stone  or  wood  should  be  of  a  cubit  length. 

8.  The  movable  lihga  should  be  of  the  size  of  a  finger  and 
encircled  by  the  adytum.  The  lihga  worshipped  in  the  house 
should  be  of  the  size  of  one  to  fifteen  fingers. 

9-  The  lihgas  are  classified  into  three  groups  according  to 
the  measure  of  the  doorway  or  into  nine  groups  according  to  the 
measure  of  the  adytum.  These  lihgas  should  be  worshipped  in 
one’s  residence. 

10.  Thus  there  are  thirty-six  lihgas  in  the  first  class,  thirty- 
six  in  the  second  class  and  thirty-six  in  the  third  class. 

1 1 .  Thus  totally  there  would  be  one  hundred  and  eight 
Hugos.  The  lihgas  (measuring)  one  to  five  fingers  (known  as) 
the  short  are  said  to  be  movable. 

12.  The  movable  lihgas  measuring  six  to  ten  fingers  are 
known  as  middle.  Those  measuring  eleven  to  fifteen  fingers  are 
known  as  the  best. 

13.  (Those  made)  of  excellent  gems  (should  measure) 
six  fingers.  (Those  made)  of  other  gems  (should  measure) 


143 


54.14-25 

nine  fingers.  The  golden  ones  (should  be)  twelve  (fingers). 
The  rest  of  the  lingas  (should  be)  fifteen  (fingers). 

14.  The  four  sets  of  corners  from  the  top  should  be  succes¬ 
sively  cut  into  four  or  sixteen  equal  sides,  and  those  again  into 
thirtytwo  and  sixty-four  (in  turn  so  as  to  make  it  a  polygon  of 
sixty-four  equal  sides). 

15.  The  two  sides  being  thus  lopped  off,  the  neck  of  a  solid 
liiiga  should  be  twentysix  parts  from  the  rectangular  space  at  its 
foot. 

16.  (The  face  of  the  linga)  should  gradually  be  decreasing 
by  four,  six  and  eight  parts  from  its  base  (and  similarly)  the 
middle  part  of  the  linga  should  be  gradually  less  than  the  height 
at  its  beginning  by  a  foot. 

17.  That  which  is  equal  to  half  (the  size  of)  the  adytum  is 
(said  to  be)  the  lowest  (variety  of)  linga.  That  which  is  fifteen 
(fingers  in  length)  is  the  excellent.  Seven  equal  lines  should 
be  drawn  in  the  central  portion  of  these  lingas. 

18.  In  this  way  there  would  be  nine  lines.  The  middle 
(variety  otlinga)  would  have  five  lines.  The  length  of  the  lingas 
should  be  nine  fingers.  The  opposite  side  (should  be)  separated 
by  two  intermediate  links. 

19.  The  linga  is  measured  out  cubit  by  cubit  till  it  wou 
be  nine  hands  (length).  The  linga  is  of  three  kinds— inferior, 

mediocre  and  superior.  r 

20-22.  A  wiseman  should  mark  three  lingas  at  the  centre  ol 

every  linga  foot  by  foot  at  fourteen  (places)  by  a  fixed  measure 
of  length  of  the  door  or  the  adytum.  Four  lingas  representing 
Siya,  Visnu,  Brhaspati  proportionately  should  be  mark  y 
breadth.  The  linga  should  be  (shaped)  long  to  represent 

thre2e3.f0The  should  have  a  circumference  of  four^eight, 

eight  (inches)  representing  the  three  qualities,  ne  s  o 
the  lingas  of  such  lengths  as  one  desii  es.  banners 

24  One  should  divide  .he  figure 
celestial  gods,  elements  or  cocks.  One  should  k  S 

bad  from  the  inches  left  over.  i^Uants  and  goats 

25.  The  banners  etc.,  the  crows,  Lons,  cleplumu t  and  go^ 

arc  excellent.  The  others  are  auspicious.  Am  3  P  y 
notes  or  Indian  gamut,  the  first  one,  second  one  and 

one  confer  good. 


144 


Agni  Pur  an  a 


26-27.  Among  the  elements,  the  earth  is  auspicious.  Among 
the  fires,  the  consecrated  fire  (from  the  household’s  perpetual 
fire)  is  auspicious.  Half  of  the  said  length  having  been  divided 
in  order  into  seven,  eight,  five,  nine  and  five  parts  there  would 
be  symmetrical  representation  of  Siva,  Visnu  and  Brahman. 

28.  The  fifth  one  is  known  as  the  Vardhamana.  There  would 
be  two  kinds  based  on  the  increase  of  breadth  and  length.  Many 
kinds  are  described  according  to  Visvakarma  (the  divine  archi¬ 
tect). 

29.  The  adhya  class  would  be  of  three  kinds  on  account  of 
the  size.  Measured  by  the  barley  grains  it  would  be  eight  parts, 
by  the  arm  it  would  be  three  parts.  The  last  one  endowed  equall  v 
is  known  as  jina. 

30-31.  (There  would  be)  twenty-five  lingas  in  the  first 
(variety)  which  are  worshipped  by  the  celestials.  Then  being 
divided  into  thirtyfivc  there  would  be  14000  and  1400  varieties. 

Thus  (we  have)  the  eight  ahgula's  extent  from  the  nine  cubit 
adytum. 


the 

the 


32  One  has  to  mark  the  angular  points  by  means  of  threads 
sed  at  the  angular  and  middle  of  angular  points.  Having  made 

expansmn  from  the  middle,  three  parts  should  be  fixed  from 
middle. 


Two  6  W°U^  eight  angular  parts  above  the  division, 

le  kn^f  ^anS/rPueSent  **  ^  ^  the  foot  to 

the  naveHs  Visnu  e  ^  (Fr°m  thc  knee) 

34.  (From  the  navel)  upto  the  head  is  the  part  of  Siva 
Similarly,  it  is  in  the  case  of  distinct  and  indistinct  forms  In  the 
hnga  of  five  parts,  the  head  part  is  said  to  be  circular.  ' 

35.  Thc  images  (may  be)  of  the  shape  of  an  umbrella  cock 

or  crescent  moon.  I  shall  describe  the  T  ’ 

in  each  fclass'i  meats  of  the  four  varieties 

in  each  (class)  differing  on  account  of  one’s  option. 

36.  The  head  portion  (bf  the  lihra)  should  hr.  a-  ,  • 

w of  1 ““  ion?i“d“i 

drr ia 

called  vifala  by  cutting  off,  the  srivatsa  •  °tUS’  tke  onc 

Mrukrl  by  elision  of  the  fourth  part  i/theT^  °Ut  ** 

1  n  the  sarvasama  class  the 


54.40-48 


145 


top  portion  is  the  excellent  and  the  cock-shaped  in  the  sura  class 
among  the  linga  of  four  parts.  The  top  portion  of  the  anadi  has 
been  described.  You  listen  to  (the  characteristics  of)  the 
crescent  of  the  top. 

40.  At  a  corner  of  a  part  (there  should  be)  the  charming 
axis  (represented)  by  four  parts  deficient  by  one  part.  By  the 
elision  of  two,  three  and  four  parts  in  order,  (one  gets)  the 
full,  crescent  moon  and  lotus  shape. 

41.  Listen  then  to  (the  description  of  forms  having)  four 
or  three  faces  or  one  face  and  mukhalinga .  The  part  to  be  wor¬ 
shipped  is  to  be  made  set  with  nine  parts. 

42-43.  Having  left  out  twelve  parts  for  the  arms  and  eyes,  as 
before,  the  head,  forehead,  nose,  face,  chin,  neck  are  then  to  be 
made.  Having  covered  by  the  hands,  the  arms  and  eyes  (are 
made)  with  four  parts  proportionate  to  the  measurement  of 
image. 

44.  The  face  should  be  made  equal  to  one-eighth  part  of 
the  breadth.  I  have  described  the  four-faced  form.  Listen  !. 
The  three-faced  form  is  described  now. 

45.  The  ear  and  feet  are  made.  One  has  to  mark  the  fore¬ 
head  etc.  for  that.  Then  the  arms  should  be  made  with  four  parts 
quite  strong. 

46.  The  projection  of  the  frontispiece  (should  be)  one- 
eighth  of  the  breadth.  One  face  has  to  be  made  such  as  to  have- 
beautiful  eye  on  the  eastern  side. 

47'.  It  should  be  made  round  at  the  forehead,  nose,  face 
and  neck.  By  one-fifth  from  the  arm  one  should  make  it  round 
less  by  one’s  arm  length. 

48.  It  is  good  to  have  the  projections  in  the  frontispiece  as 
one-sixth  of  the  breadth  for  all  the  mukhalingas  whether  it  is. 
trapusa  or  kukkufa  (?) 


146 


CHAPTER  FIFTYFIVE 
The  characteristics  of  the  pedestal 


Agni  Purdna 


The  Lord  said  : 

1.  I  shall  describe  (the  characteristics  of)  the  pedestal  of 
images.  They  have  the  same  length  as  (the  height)  of  the  image 
and  have  breadth  half  (the  height)  of  (the  image). 

2.  Or  the  breadth  should  be  half  or  one-third  of  the  measure 
of  the  height.  The  girdle  should  be  equal  to  one-third  of  its 
breadth. 

3.  The  cavity  should  be  of  the  same  measure  and  should  be 
inclined  towards  the  posterior  part.  A  quarter  of  the  breadth 
(should  be  left  out)  for  the  canal  as  outlet. 

4  (The  width)  of  the  forepart  (of  the  channel)  should 
be  half  of  the  breadth  of  the  base.  The  water-course  should  be 
one-third  of  the  breadth  (of  the  base). 

5.  Or  else  the  length  of  the  lihga  is  said  to  be  equal  to  half 
(the  length)  of  the  base  or  equal  to  the  length  (of  the  base). 

6.  The  height  (of  the  pedestal)  should  be  divided  into  six¬ 
teen  parts  as  before.  The  lower  six  divisions  should  be  made  to 
comprise  two  parts.  The  neck  should  be  three  parts. 

7.  The  foundation,  projections,  joint,  seat  and  other  remain¬ 
ing  parts  should  each  comprise  one  part.  This  will  hold  good  in 
the  case  of  ordinary  images. 

8.  The  door-way  (leading)  to  the  image  is  said  to  be  pro¬ 
portionate  to  the  door-way  of  the  temple.  The  canopy  over  the 
image  should  be  endowed  with  elephants  and  tigers. 

9.  The  pedestal  of  (the  image  of)  Hari  also  should  always 
be  made  beautiful.  The  measures  (laid  down)  for  the  images  of 
Visnu  shall  apply  to  (the  images  of)  all  gods.  Those  measures 
set  forth  for  the  image  of  Laksmi  shall  apply  to  all  (images 
of)  the  goddesses. 


56.1-10 


CHAPTER  FIFTYSIX 
Five  divisions  of  installation  : 

The  Lord  said  : 

1 .  I  shall  now  describe  the  five  divisions  of  an  installation. 
The  image  is  the  embodiment  of  the  supreme  being,  the  real 
principle,  the  pedestal  is  the  symbol  of  nature  or  the  Goddess 
Laksmi.  The  installation  is  the  union  of  the  two. 

2-3.  Hence,  the  installation  is  done  by  men  who  desire  to 
have  their  wishes  fulfilled.  The  officiating  priest  (has  to  ar¬ 
range)  sheds  (measuring)  eight,  sixteen  or  twenty  (cubits) 
in  front  of  the  temple  for  bathing,  the  pitchers,  and  things 
required  for  the  sacrifice  by  extending  the  side  lines  of  the  ady¬ 
tum. 

4.  The  auspicious  sacrificial  platform  should  be  made  ready 
with  one  third  (or)  half  (of  the  above  space).  It  should  be 
decked  with  pitchers  big  and  small  and  canopies  etc. 

5.  All  the  materials  (to  be  used  in  the  rite)  should  be  cleans¬ 
ed  with  paheagavya  (the  five  things  extracted  from  a  cow). 
The  priest  should  adorn  (himself  with  ornaments).  Having 
contemplated  his  own  self  as  (lord)  Visnu,  he  should  begin 
worship. 

6.  The  expert  idol- worshippers  should  be  established  in 
front  of  each  pit  (intended  for  the  rite).  (They  should  be 
endowed)  with  rings,  bracelets  and  other  things. 

7.  Logs  of  the  pippala ,  udumbara,  vata  trees  (should  be  plant¬ 
ed)  at  the  doorways  of  the  place  for  the  sake  of  arches.  The 
place  may  be  quadrangular,  semi-circular,  circular  or  lotus¬ 
shaped. 

8.  Log  of  the  fig  tree  should  adorn  the  east,  of  the  subhadra 
the  south,  of  the  sukarma  and  suhotra  the  northern  and  western 
doorways  respectively. 

9.  The  pitchers  having  young  sprouts  of  mango  trees  should 
be  placed  five  cubits  apart  at  the  foot  of  each  one  of  the  suppor¬ 
ting  columns  of  the  arches  and  be  worshipped  with  the  sacred 
syllables  syona  prthivi1 . 

10.  The  sudarfana  (disc  of  Visnu)  should  be  placed  at  the 
top.  A  wise  man  has  to  make  the  banner  five  cubits  long. 

i.  {tv.  1.22T5. 


148 


Agni  Purana 


11-12.  It  should  be  made  sixteen  fingers  broad.  O  excellent 
among  the  celestials  !  the  height  should  be  seventeen  cubits  in 
the  alternative.  The  pit  should  be  duly  reddish,  flame-coloured,, 
black,  white,  yellow,  deep  red,  white  and  (again)  white. 

13-15.  The  presiding  deities  of  the  banners  (hoisted)  in 
the  (quarters)  east  etc,,  such  as  Kumuda,  Kumudaksa,  Pun<Ja.- 
rika,  Vamana,  Sankarsana,  Sarvanetra,  Sumukha  and  Supra- 
tisthita,  who  are  endowed  with  countless  (divine)  qualities  should 
be  worshipped.  One  hundred  and  eight  pitchers  resembling  the 
ripe  bimba  fruit  (in  colour) ,  not  having  black  spots  and  having 
been  filled  with  water  and  gold  and  having  pieces  of  cloth  around 
their  necks  should  be  placed  outside  the  arches. 

16.  Pitchers  should  be  placed  at  the  east  and  other  direc¬ 
tions.  Four  pitchers  should  be  placed  at  the  corners  of  the  sacri¬ 
ficial  altar  with  the  sacred  syllable  ajighra . 

17.  After  having  invoked  Indra  and  others  in  the  pitchers 
in  the  east  etc.  one  should  worship  (Indra).'  O  Indra,  the 
lord  of  celestials,  the  wielder  of  thunderbolt,  seated  on  the 
elephant  you  come. 

18.  (You)  protect  the  eastern  door  in  the  company  of 
celestials.  May  salutations  be  to  you.  After  having  worshipped. 
(Indra)  with  the  sacred  syllable  tralaram  indra1.,  the  wise  man 
should  invoke  him. 

19.  O  Agni  !  endowed  with  a  trident,  seated  on  a  goat 
and  possessing  strength  (you)  come  and  accept  my  worship. 
You  protect  the  south-east  in  the  company  of  celestials.  Salu¬ 
tations  to  you. 

20-21.  One  should  worship  Agni  with  the  sacred  syllable 
agnir  miirddha 2 3.  Salutations  to  Agni.  O  Yama  I  seated  on 
the  buffalo,  wielding  the  mace,  and  possessing  great  strength 
(you)  come.  You  protect  the  southern  gate.  O  Yama  ! 
salutations  to  you.  Yama  should  be  propitiated  with  the  sacred, 
syllable  vaivasvatam  sahgamanam? 

22-24.  O  Nairrta  !  carrying  a  sword  accompanied  by 
an  army  and  riding  an  animal,  (you)  come.  Here  is  the  offering 
and  water  for;washing  the  feet.  You  guard  the  south-western 


1.  £V.  6.47.11. 

2.  £V.  8.44.16. 

3.  RV.  10.14.1. 


56.25—57.1 


149 


•direction.  Men  should  worship  with  the  sacred  syllable  esa  te 
nirrte 1  and  with  offerings.  O  Varuna  !  riding  the  crocodile, 
holding  the  noose  and  possessing  great  strength  (you)  come  and 
protect  the  western  doorway.  Salutations  to  you.  The  preceptor 
should  worship  with  (the  sacred  syllable)  ururii  hi  raja  varunam 
and  offerings. 

25-27.  O  Vayu  !  endowed  with  strength,  holding  the 
banner,  together  with  a  vehicle  you  come.  You  guard  the 
north-western  direction  in  the  company  of  celestials  and 
Maruts  (groups  of  celestial  gods).  Salutations  to  you.  He  should 
be  worshipped  with  (the  sacred  syllables)  valor  etc.  or  with 
‘Om  !  Salutations  to  Vayu5.  O  Soma  !  you  come  with 
strength,  wielding  the  mace  and  riding  the  vehicle.  You  protect 
the  northern  gate  along  with  Kubera.  Salutations  to  you.  One 
•should  worship  with  (the  sacred  syllable)  somarn  rajdnam  or 
‘Salutations  to  Soma*. 

28-30.  O  I sana  !  (you)  come  along  !  possesser  of 
strength,  riding  the  bull.  You  guard  the  north-eastern  direction 
•of  the  ritual  pavilion.  Salutations  to  you.  He  should  be  wor¬ 
shipped  with  (the  sacred  syllable),  iianamasya 3  or  ‘Salutations 
to  I  sana’.  O  Brahman  !  (you)  come.  Seated  on  a  swan  ! 
■Carrying  the  sacrificial  vessel  and  ladle  !  You  defend  the  direc¬ 
tion  above  the  sacrificial  place,  O  unborn  !  Salutations  to 
you.  (One)  should  worship  with  (the  sacred  syllable)  hiranya- 
garbha  or  ‘Salutations  to  Brahman’. 

31.  O  Ananta  !  you  come.  Endowed  with  the  disc  ! 
Seated  on  the  tortoise  !  Lord  ofthe^aww.  You  protect  the  bottom 
(of  the  sacrificial  place).  O  Lord  Ananta  !  Salutations  to 
you.  One  should  worship  with  (the  sacred  syllable)  ‘Saluta¬ 
tions  to  serpent’  or  ‘Salutations  to  Ananta  . 


CHAPTER  FIFTYSEVEN 
Consecration  of  pitchers 

The  Lord  said  : 

1.  One  should  do  (the  ceremony)  of  taking  possession  of 

1.  VS.  9^35. 

2.  RV-  10.186.1. 

3.  RV.  7.32.22. 


150 


Agni  Purana 


I 


the  ground.  One  should  scatter  grains  and  mustard  seeds  utter¬ 
ing  (the  sacred  syllable)  ‘Narasimha’  which  destroys  demons. 
One  should  sprinkle  pancagavya (the  five  things  got  from  a  cow). 

2.  Having  worshipped  the  earth  in  the  pitcher  containing 
gems  as  well  as  Hari  and  his  retinue,  worship  the  eighteen 
pitchers  therein  with  the  saGred  syllable  of  weapons. 

3.  The  rice  grains  should  be  purified  by  an  incessant  shower 
(of  water)  and  scattered  around.  The  pitcher  should  be  placed 
in  their  midst. 

4-5.  Lord  Acyuta  and  (his  consort)  Sri  should  again  be 
worshipped  in  the  pitcher  (provided  with)  a  cloth.  The  bed  as 
well  as  the  mattress  should  be  spread  on  the  kitfa  grass  on  a  drawn 
circle  with  (the  recitation  of)  the  sacred  syWabXz  yoge  yoge.1  Lord 
Visnu,  the  slayer  of  (the  demon)  Madhu  and  the  lord  of  the 
three  (divisions  of  the  universe)  and  also  the  different  lords  of 
learning  are  worshipped  on  the  bed. 

6-7.  Having  worshipped  Vamana,  Srldhara,  Hrslkesa, 
Padmanabha  (different  forms  of  Visnu)  in  the  north-west 
and  other  (corners)  of  the  bathing  place  and  the  Damodara 
(form  of  Visnu)  in  the  north-east  and  having  brought  all  the 
materials  to  the  bathing  pavilion  they  should  be  deposited  in  the 
four  pitchers  and  the  altar  in  the  north-east. 

8.  These  pitchers  should  be  consecrated  in  the  four  quarters 
with  the  pitchers  containing  water  for  the  consecration.  The 
pitchers  should  be  placed  with  due  regard  for  the  purpose  of 
consecration. 

9-11.  The  young  sprouts  from  the  vat  a  udumbara,  asvattha, 
campaka,  aJoka,  Minima,  paldsa,  arjuna,  plaksa,  kadamba,  bakula  and 
mango  trees  should  be  brought  and  put  in  the  eastern  pitcher. 
The  lotus,  rocana  (a  kind  of  yellow  pigment),  durva  grass, 
darbha  grass,  pinjala  (yellow  orpiment),  the  flowers  jati  and 
kunda,  (pieces  of)  sandal  wood,  red  sandal,  white  mustard,  lagara 
(a  kind  of  herb),  and  rice  should  be  put  on  the  southern  one. 

12-14.  Silver  and  gold  and  earth  from  the  two  banks  of 
rivers  flowing  into  the  ocean  especially  the  earth  from  the  (river) 
Jahnavl  (Ganges),  the  urine  of  a  cow,  barley  grains,  paddy  and 
sesamum  should  be  placed  in  another  pitcher.  The  visnuparrfi 
Syamalata,  bhriigardja, ,  iatdvarl,  sahadevi,  mahadevl,  bald  and  vyd- 


1.  £V.  1.30.7. 


57.15-26 


151 


ghni  (?),  the  auspicious  things  are  put  in  the  other  pitcher  in 
the  north-east. 

15.  The  earth  from  an  ant-hill  obtained  from  seven  (differ¬ 


ent  places  should  be  put  in  another  pitcher.  The  sand  from 
the  Ganges  and  its  water  should  be  put  in  another  pitcher. 

•16.  The  earth  loosened  by  the  boars,  bulls,  and  elephants 
with  their  horns  and  tusks  as  well  as  earth  from  the  root  of  the 
lotus  and  the  kuia  grass  should  be  placed  in  another  pitcher. 

1 7.  One  should  put  in  another  pitcher  earth  got  from  sacred 
places  and  hills.  The  flowers  of  ndgakesara  and  kasmira  should 
be  put  in  another  pitcher. 

18-19.  Flowers  together  with  the  sandal  wood,  agalloc'num 
and  camphor  should  be  placed  in  another  pitcher.  (The  gems) 
lapis  lazuli,  coral,  pearl,  crystal,  and  diamond  should  be  put 
earlier  in  one  pitcher  and  placed  firmly  by  the  holy  priests.  Another 
pitcher  should  be  filled  with  the  waters  of  the  rivers  and  tanks. 

20.  Another  (set  of)  pitchers  filled  with  perfumes  etc.  should 
be  placed  at  eightyone  places  and  consecrated  with  the  Srisilkta1 2. 

21.  Barley  grains,  white  mustard,  perfumes,  tips  of  kuia 
grass,  unbroken  rice,  sesamum,  fruits  and  flowers  should  be  first 

placed  for  the  sake  of  worship. 

22.  The  lotus,  (the  creeper  called)  iydmalata ,  diirva  grass, 
leaf  of  holy  basil  and  kuia  grass  (should  be  kept)  on  the  right- 
hand  side  for  being  offered  at  the  foot.  The  madhuparka-  is  also 


placed  on  the  right  side.  . 

23.  The  kahkola,  cloves  and  nutmeg  along  with  the  durva 
grass  and  unbroken  rice  (should  be  offered)  in  the  fire  on  the 
north  for  the  sake  of  rinsing  the  mouth. 

24.  A  vessel  for  offering  camphor  and  perfumes  to  be  applied 
on  the  body  should  be  placed  on  the  south-east.  A  vessel  con¬ 
taining  perfumes  and  flowers  should  be  placed  on  the  north-east. 

25.  The  inurd,  mdirisi,  myrabolan,  sahadeva  and  niSa  and  sixty 
lamps  should  be  placed.  Eight  lamps  should  be  kept  for  the  nira- 
jana  (showing  the  light  in  adoration). 

26.  The  conch,  disc,  irivatsa  (mark  on  the  breast  of  Visnu ) , 
thunderbolt,  lotus  etc.  should  be  placed  in  a  golden  vessel  along 


with  flowers  of  variegated  colours. 


1.  Hymn  commencing  with  hiranyavarjam  harinlm.RV.  Kh.  5-87.1. 

2.  A  respectful  offering  consisting  of  five  ingredients:  curd,  clari¬ 
fied  butter,  water,  honey,  and  candied  sugar. 


152 


Agni  Purana 


CHAPTER  FIFTYEIGHT 
Consecration  of  the  idol 

The  lord  said  : 

1-3.  The  priest  should  get  ready  a  pit  (for  sacrificial  fire) 
in  the  north-east.  The  fire  relating  to  Visnu  should  be  kindled 
with  (the  recitation)  of  gayatri1 2  one  hundred  and  eight  times. 
Having  cleansed  the  pitchers  thoroughly  and  established  (the 
priest)  he  should  go  to  the  shed  where  the  image  has  been  made 
ready  accompanied  by  the  sculptors  and  custodians  of  the  idol 
and  along  with  music  of  (the  instrument)  turya .  The  woollen 
thread  containing  mustard  seeds  should  be  tied  on  the  right  arm 
(of  the  idol)  with  the  syllables  Visnave  Sipivistdya 2  etc.  The 
priest  should  also  have  a  piece  of  silk  cloth  tied  (to  his  arm). 

4-5.  Having  placed  the  idol  in  the  pavilion  and  having 
adored  and  worshipped  the  dressed  idol  (one  has  to  say)  £T  bow 
to  you  the  sovereign  lady  of  celestials  who  has  been  made 
(ready)  by  Visvakarman  (the  divine  architect).”  I  make  obei¬ 
sance  to  you  who  is  resplendant  and  is  the  sustainer  of  the  entire 
universe.  I  worship  in  you  the  healthy  Lord  Narayana. 

6.  Be  thou  always  prosperous  (goddess)  devoid  of  defects 
due  to  the  sculptors.  Having  submitted  thus  that  idol  should 
be  carried  to  the  bathing  pavilion. 

7.  The  sculptor  should  be  satisfied  by  offering  articles  (of 
present).  A  cow  should  be  given  as  gift  to  the  priest.  Then  the 
eyes  of  the  idol  should  be  made  open  with  (the  recitation  of) 
the  syllable  cilram  deva .3 

8.  The  sight  should  be  endowed  with  (the  recitation  of  the 
syllable)  agnir  jyoti .4  Then  white  flowers,  ghee  and  mustard 
seeds  should  be  placed  on  the  pedestal. 

9.  The  priest  should  place  durva  grass  and  tips  of  kuSa  grass 
on  the  head  of  the  deity.  Then  the  priest  should  anoint  the  eyes 
(of  the  deity)  with  the  syllables  madhu  vatu .5 

10.  The  syllables  hiranyagarbha  and  imam  me  should  be 

1 .  The  mantra  beginning  with  ‘Om  bhur  bhuvah  svah  consisting  of  twenty- 
four  letters. 

2.  VS.  22.20. 

3.  RV.  1.115.1. 

4.  VS.  3.9. 

5.  £V.  1.90.6. 


58.11-17 


153 


recited.  Then  the  idol  should  be  anointed  with  ghee  reciting 
(the  hymn)  ghjtavati .x 

11.  The  flour  paste  of  masura  (a  variety  of  grain)  should  be 
rubbed  on  the  deity  reciting  (the  hymn)  ato  deva2  Then  the 
priest  should  wash  (the  deity)  with  hot  water  with  the  recitation 
of)  sapta  te  agne 3. 

12.  It  should  be  anointed  with  (the  syllables)  Urupada - 
diva .  (The  image)  should  be  bathed  with  (the  waters  of)  the 
rivers  and  sacred  places  with  (the  syllables)  apo  hi  ftha*  and  with 
the  (waters  containing)  gems  (with  the)  pavamana. 

13.  (The  image)  (should  be  bathed)  with  the  waters  of 
an  earthern  pot  with  (the  syllable)  samudrarii  gaccha 6. 
It  should  be  consecrated  with  Sanno  devi 5  and  bathed  with  hot 
water  (consecrated)  by  gayatri . 

14.  The  supreme  god  should  be  bathed  with  five  (kinds  of) 
earth  with  (the  syllable)  hiranya .  With  pot  made  of  earth  of  an 
anthill  and  sand  waters  and  (the  syllable)  imam  me 7  (it  should 
be  bathed). 

15.  (The  image  should  be  bathed)  with  herbal  waters  (with 
the  syllable)  tadvisnoh 8  and  yd  osadhi ,9  with  herbal  decoctions 
(with  the  syllable)  yajtld-yajiid10  and  then  with  the  panccagavya 
(the  five  things  got  from  a  cow). 

16.  (The  image  should  be  bathed)  with  the  waters  contain¬ 
ing  fruits  (with  the  syllables)  payah  prthivyani 11  and  ydhphalini12 
and  with  (the  contents  of)  the  pitchers  (kept  in)  the  north  and 
east  with  (the  syllables)  vUvatakaksuh ,13 

17.  The  cleansing  (of  the  image)  of  Hari  (Visnu)  should 
be  done  with  (the  recitation  of  the  syllables  somam  rajdnam , 
visno  raratamasi 14  from  the  right  and  with  hamsah  fuci1*  on  the  west 

1.  R.V.  6.70.1. 

2.  RV.  1.22.16. 

3.  VS.  17.79. 

4.  RV.  10  9.1. 

5.  RV.  kh.  5.49.2. 

6.  RV.  10.9.4. 

7.  RV.  1.25.19. 

8.  £V.  1.22.20. 

9.  RV.  10.97.1. 

10.  RV.  6.48.1. 

11.  VS.  18.36. 

12.  RV.  10.97.15. 

13.  RV.  10.81.3. 

14.  VS.  5.11. 

15.  RV.  4.40.5. 


154 


Agni  Purina 


18.  One  should  offer  the  dhatri  and  marhsi  (herbs)  on  the 
head  with  the  sacred  syllables  murdhanam  diva l.  (One  should 
bathe  the  image)  with  perfumes  with  the  syllables  gandhadvara 

and  7 na  nas  toka.2, 3 4 5 

19.  (One  has  to  pour  over  its  head  the  contents  of  the  pit- 
chers)  placed  in  the  eightyone  squares  (with  the  syllables)  idam 
apah.  OLordVisnu!  the  bestower  of  grace  on  the  universe  ! 
you  come. 

20.  (You)  accept  this  share  in  the  sacrificial  offerings.  O 
Vasudcva  !  Salutations  to  you  !  Having  invoked  the  lord  m 
this  way,  the  wrist  thread  (on  the  hand  of  the  image)  should  be 
unfastened. 

2 1 .  The  wrist  thread  on  (the  hand  of)  the  priest  should  also 
be  unfastened  with  the  hymn  miincami  tva?  The  water  for  wash¬ 
ing  the  feet  should  be  offered  with  (the  syllable)  hirammy * 
and  the  offering  with  ato  deva ,6 

22.  Th ojnadhuparka  (should  be  offered)  with  (the  syllables) 
madhuvalcP  and  the  acamana  (the  ceremonial  sipping  of  waters 
at  the  commencement  of  any  rite)  should  be  done  with  mayi 
grhndmi ,7  The  learned  (priest)  should  scatter  the  unbroken  rice 
with  (the  syllable)  aksannamimadanta .8 

23.  The  image  should  be  rubbed  part  by  part  and  perfumes 
(should  be  offered)  with  (the  syllable)  gandhavat 9,  garland  with 
(the  syllable)  unnaydmi  and  the  sacred  thread  with  (the  syllable) 
idam  visnu. 

24.  Pair  of  cloth  pieces  (should  be  offered)  (with  the  syl-  # 
lable)  brhaspate  (and)  the  upper  cloth  (with  the  syllable)  ^ 
vedaham.  The  herbs  and  the  flower  of  concluding  worship  should 
be  placed  with  the  mahavrata. 

25.  Incense  should  be  offered  with  dhurasi  and  the  colly- 
rium  (to  the  eyes  of  the  image)  with  the  hymn  (called)  vibhraf . 
The  mark  on  the  forehead  (should  be  made)  with  (the  syllable) 
yunjanti  and  the  garland  (should  be  offered)  with  dirghdyus}va .. 

1.  &v7  6.7.1. 

2.  RV.  1.114.8. 

3.  See  LXVII.  22.1. 

4.  RV.  10.161.1. 

5.  SB.  14.7.1.12. 

(}.  RV.  1.22.16. 

7.  RV.  1.90.6. 

8.  RV.  10.9. 


58.26 — 59.1-4 


155 


26.  (One  should  offer)  an  umbrella  with  (the  syllable) 
indra  cchatra,  mirror  with  virtija,  the  chowrie  with  vikarna  and 
the  ornaments  with  rathantara. 

27.  (One  should  offer)  the  fan  with  (the  syllabic)  vayu 
daivalya  and  flowers  with  muncdmi  Ivd .  One  should  sing  in 
praise  of  (Lord)  Hari(Visnu)  with  vedic  hymns  and  (the  hymn 
called )  purnsasukta. 

28.  All  these  rites  should  be  performed  similarly  relating  to 
pedestals  of  Hara  (Siva)  and  other  gods.  The  hymn  (called) 
sauparna  should  be  recited  at  the  time  of  raising  (the  image  of) 
the  deity. 

29.  (The  image)  having  been  raised  (by  reciting)  (the 
syllable)  ultistha ,  the  lord  should  be  led  to  the  bed  in  the  pavi¬ 
lion  with  (the  recitation  of)  the  hymn  fakutw1 2  and  with  (the 
syllable)  brahmaratha. 

30.  Then  the  image  and  the  pedestal  (should  be  laid)  in 
the  bed  with  the  hymn  a  to  devcir  With  the  (recitation  of)  in- 
sukta  the  rite  for  Visnu  is  completed. 

31.  The  eight  auspicious  things  arc:  the  lion,  bull,  serpent, 
fan,  pitcher,  banner,  trumpet  and  lamp. 

32-33.  (The  priest)  should  show  (these)  at  the  foot  with 
the  hymn  (called)  a§vasukta  and  the  tripod  (gdyatri).  One  should 
submit  a  cooking  vessel,  covering  pan,  ladle,  pestle,  crushing 
stone,  grinding  stone,  groomstick,  utensils  for  eating  and  other 
household  things  should  be  given  to  the  goddess. 

34.  A  pitcher  known  as  nidra  provided  with  clothes  and 
gems  and  filled  with  edibles  (should  be  placed)  at  the  head-side 
(of  the  image).  This  is  the  mode  of  bathing  (the  image). 


CHAPTER  FIFTYNINE 
Preliminary  consecration  oj  an  image 
The  Lord  said  : 

1-4.  The  act  of  causing  the  presence  of  God  Han  is  said  to 
be  the  adhivdsana  (preliminary  consecration).  Having  contem- 


1.  RV.  9.107. 

2.  fcV.  1.22,16. 


156 


Agni  Purana 


plated  on  the  self  as  the  omniscient,  all-pervasive  and  supreme 
spirit  and  having  united  one’s  self-conceited  conscious  energy 
with  (the  syllable)  om  and  after  having  drawn  it  out  and 
identifying  one’s  own  self  with  the  all-pervasive  lord,  (the  priest) 
•should  unite  the  earth  with  the  wind,  illuminate  it  with  the  fire 
particle  (mentally),  draw  the  fire  with  the  wind  (particle)  and 
lead  the  wind  into  the  ethereal  space.  The  wiseman  should  draw 
in  the  same  order  (the  other  gross  elements)  after  having  made 
them  the  receptacles  of  subtle  principles  along  with  the  gross 
principles,  the  supreme  being  and  the  secondary  forms  such  as 
the  sadhya-s1. 

5.  The  ethereal  space  should  be  drawn  into  the  mind  (prin¬ 
ciple),  the  mind  (in  its  turn)  should  be  (drawn)  into  (the  prin¬ 
ciple  of)  ego,  (the  principle)  of  ego  in  the  (principle  of)  mahat 
(first  principle).  The  mahat  should  be  led  into  the  avyakrta  (un¬ 
manifest). 

6-7.  The  unmanifest  (is  led)  into  the  absolute  knowledge 
known  as  Vasudeva.  Being  desirous  to  create  he,  the  Lord  of 
•sound  by  means  of  the  unmanifest  brought  into  being  Sankar- 
sana  (the  principle)  known  as  touch.  He  created  Pradyumna 
the  form  of  splendour  by  agitating  the  illusion. 

8.  He  created  Aniruddha,  (consisting  of)  taste  only  and 
Brahma  of  the  form  of  smell.  That  Aniruddha,  the  Brahma 
created  water  at  first. 

9.  He  also  laid  the  golden  egg  (of  the  five  principles) 
in  that  (water).  Impregnated  with  consciousness  (this  generated) 
a  peculiar  force  within. 

10.  The  breath  united  with  life  force  is  spoken  as  existence. 
The  inner  being  also  known  as  the  vyahrti 2  is  a  spiritual  entity 
amidst  the  five  winds  (prandh ). 

1 1 .  Then  intellect  came  into  being  associated  with  the  prana 
and  with  eight-fold  modifications.  Egoism  was  born  then  and 
the  mind  came  out  from  it. 

12.  Then  the  five  (abstract)  things  were  born  possessing 
determination.  They  are  known  as  sound,  touch,  sight,  taste  and 
smell. 

13.  The  sense-organs  possessing  consciousness  were  brought 

1.  They  are  refined  secondary  forms.  See  MW.  p.  1202a. 

2.  The  mystic  syllables  bhufi ,  bhuvah,  suvah. 


59.14-24 


157 


about  by  these.  The  skin,  ear,  nose,  eyes,  tongue  arc  the  sense- 


organs. 

14.  The  feet,  anus,  arms,  speech  (mouth) and  the  genitals  are 
the  five  organs  of  action.  Listen  (I  shall  describe )  the  five  elements.. 

15.  The  ether,  wind,  light,  water  and  earth  (are  the  five 
elements).  The  gross  body  is  composed  of  these  elements  and 
becomes  the  support  for  all. 

16.  (I  shall  presently)  describe  the  mystic  syllables  signi¬ 
fying  these  and  for  being  (mentally)  placed  on  (the  different 
parts  of)  the  body.  The  letter  ma  which  is  the  symbol  of  the 
inner  self  should  be  located  to  co-extcnd  with  (the  body  of) 
the  deity. 

17.  The  letter  bha  which  is  the  emblem  of  life  should  be 
lodged  in  the  differentiating  individuality  of  the  god.  The  letter 
ba  which  represents  the  intellect  should  be  located  in  the  region 


of  the  heart. 

18.  The  letter  pka  representing  the  sense  of  ego  should  also 
be  located  there  itself.  The  letter  pa  representing  the  mind 
should  be  located  in  the  mental  resolve. 

19.  The  letter  na  which  is  a  symbol  of  the  principle  of  sound 
should  be  placed  on  the  forehead.  The  letter  dha  which  is  the 
symbol  of  sense  of  touch  should  be  placed  in  the  region  of  the 
face  (of  image). 

20  The  letter  da  denoting  the  gradations  should  be  placed 
in  the  region  of  the  heart.  The  letter  tha  symbolising  the  sense  of 
taste  should  be  placed  in  the  region  of  pelvis. 

21.  The  letter  ta  signifying  the  sense  of  smell  should  be 
located  on  the  shanks.  After  having  located  the  letter  ria  in  the 
ears,  the  letter  dha  should  be  located  on  the  skin. 

22  The  letter  da  should  be  located  in  the  two  eyes,  the 
letter  tha  in  the  tongue,  the  letter  /a  in  the  nose  and  the  letter 


ha  in  the  speech.  .  ,  ,  . 

23  Having  placed  the  letter  jha  representing  the  hands  in 

the  hands,  a  wise  man  should  place  the  letter  m  the  feet, 

cha  in  the  anus  and  ca  in  the  genitals.  , 

24.  The  letter  ha  symbolising  thepnnciple  of  earth  should 
be  placed  on  the  feet.  The  letter  gha  (should  be  placed)  “  * 
pelvis.  (The  letter)**  representing  the  principle  of  lustre  should 

be  placed  in  the  heart. 


158 


Agni  Purana 


25.  The  letter  kha  which  represents  the  principle  of  wind 
should  be  placed  in  the  nose.  The  letter  ka  signifying  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  ether  should  be  assigned  to  the  forehead  by  the  wise. 

26-27.  The  letter  ja  denoting  lord  Sun  having  been  placed 
in  the  lotus  of  the  heart,  the  letter  sa  possessing  sixteen  digits 
should  be  placed  in  the  seventy-two  thousand  (rays)  emanating 
from  the  (lotus)  heart.  The  priest  fully  initiated  in  the  mystic 
syllables  should  contemplate  on  the  point  ( bindu )  representing 
the  region  of  fire  in  the  middle  of  it. 

28.  The  excellent  letter  ha  along  with  the  syllable  om 
( pranava )  should  be  placed  there.  Om,  am ,  salutations  to  the 
paramestyatman.1  Am ,  salutations  to  purusalmah 2. 

29.  Om,  Vam,  salutations  to  the  eternal  being  !  jVdm ,  salu¬ 
tations  to  the  soul  of  the  universe  !  Om,  vam,  salutations  to  the 
soul  of  all  beings  !  Thus  the  five  forms  of  energies  have  been 
described. 

30.  The  first  one  (of  the  above  five  syllables)  should  be  used 
for  the  place,  the  second  one  for  the  seat,  the  third  one  for  the 
bed,  and  the  fourth  one  for  the  drink. 

31.  The  fifth  one  is  used  at  every  worship.  These  (five 
mystic  syllables)  are  known  as  the  five  upanisads.  The  syllable 
hum  should  be  placed  in  the  middle  after  having  contemplated 
on  Hari,  composed  of  mystic  syllables. 

32.  Whichever  form  of  the  deity  is  being  installed  one  should 
assign  the  particular  principal  mystic  syllable  of  that  form 
afterwards.  The  principal  syllable  of  Vasudeva  is  Om,  salu¬ 
tations  to  Lord  Vasudeva  ! 

33.  ^  (The  different  forms  of  the  god)  should  be  (mentally) 
assigned  to  (the  different  parts  of  the  body  such  as)  the  head, 
nose,  forehead,  face,  neck,  heart,  arms,  shanks  and  feet  in  order. 
(The  manifestation  known  as)  Kesava  should  be  assigned  to  the 
head  (of  the  image). 

34.  Tsarayana  should  be  assigned  to  the  face,  Madhava  to 
the  neck,  Govinda  to  the  arms,  (and)  Visnu  to  the  heart. 

35.  Madhusudana  should  be  assigned  to  the  hinder  part, 
Vamana  to  the  belly,  Trivikrama  to  the  hip  (and)  Srldhara  to 
the  shank. 

of  Trinity.6  Parameflin  denotcs  *e  supreme  being  or  one  of  the  forms 

2.  This  means  a  supreme  being. 


59.36-48 


159 


36.  Hrsikesa  (should  be  assigned)  on  the  right  side,  Padma- 
nabha  on  the  ankle,  Damodara  on  the  feet. 

(This  is  assignment)  in  the  six  limbs  commencing  with  the 

heart.  .  .  ,  ,  - 

37-39.  O  most  virtuous  one  !  This  is  general  mode  ot 

assignment  of  Visnu.  In  the  alternative,  the  installation  of  which 
form  of  the  deity  has  been  begun,  one  should  infuse  life  into  the 
image  with  the  principal  mystic  syllable  of  that  form.  The  first 
letter  of  the  name  of  any  form  of  a  deity  should  be  used  along 
with  the  twelve  vowels  and  assigned  to  the  different  parts  of 
image  such  as  the  heart.  O  Lord  of  celestials  !  the  principal 
mystic  syllable  should  consist  of  ten  syllables. 

40  The  principles  should  be  placed  in  the  body  in  the  same 
order  as  they  are  found  in  the  god.  Lord  Visnu  should  be  wor¬ 
shipped  with  perfumes  etc.,  in  the  diagram  of  a  lotus  inscribed 


in  a  circle.  ,  „  - 

41  One  should  contemplate  on  the  seat  as  before  together 

with  the  limbs  and  cover.  Then  one  should  imagine  an  auspi¬ 
cious  disc  over  that  as  having  twelve  radii. 

42  The  circle  (should  be  imagined)  as  having  ucc  o 
centric  naves  and  two  outer  circles  and  filled  with  the  vowels. 
The  wise  man  should  then  place  the  firakrli  (the  nature,  the  source 
of  the  material  world)  and  other  principles. 

43-44  The  sun  god  should  again  be  worshipped  at  the  ups 
of  the  spokes  in  the  twelve-fold  way1  and  the  moon  possessing 
three-fold  armies  and  sixteen  phases  should  be  con  emp 
therein.  The  excellent  worshipper  should  contemplate  on  a  lotus 

flower  °|r^e^  PCetnfenc  of  thc  supreme  being  should  be 

^  TetvahLndaothed  1 ^houw'be  worshipped  well  with 
twelve  mystic  letters’  with  perfumes,  flowers  etc.  and  with  their 

auendants  the  guardian  deities 

47.48.  ine  iwia  Circular  diagram  of  twelve 

"ith  perfumes  and 

l  Consisting  of  twelve  names  of  Sun. 

2.  Orh  namo  bhagavale  v&sudevaya. 


160 


Agni  Purarta 


flowers  and  with  the  purusasukla.1  The  pedestal  should  be  wor¬ 
shipped  with  the  irisukta.2 3  The  sacrificial  fire  relating  to  Visnu 
should  be  kindled  in  the  prescribed  manner. 

49.  Having  made  oblation  unto  the  fire  with  the  sacred, 
syllables  the  wise  priest  should  sanctify  waters  and  consecrate 
the  image  (by  sprinkling  waters).  Then  he  should  kindle  fire. 

50.  The  wise  priest  should  kindle  fire  in  the  pit  on  the 
south  with  the  mystic  syllable  agnirii  hutam 3  and  in  the  pit  on  the 
east  with  the  syllable  agnim  agnim 4. 

51.  In  the  fire  pit  on  the  north,  the  fire  should  be  kindled, 
with  the  mystic  syllable  agnim  agnirii  havimabhih5 6  and  the  sacred  syl¬ 
lable  to  be  used  to  kindle  fire  in  general  is  tvam  agne hyagnirucyaseP- 

52.  One  should  place  one  thousand  and  eight  twigs  of  the  palaSa 
tree  in  each  one  of  the  fire  pits  and  offer  grains  withvedic  hymns. 

53.  Clarified  butter  and  sesamum  (should  be  offered  to- 
fire)  with  the  vyahrtis  ( Om  bhuh ,  bhuvah,  suvah)  and  ghee  with 
the  principal  mantra.  One  should  perform  the  appeasing  obla¬ 
tion  with  the  three  sweet  things.7 8 


54.  One  should  then  touch  the  feet,  navel,  heart  and  fore¬ 
head  with  (the  utterance  of)  twelve  mystic  sullables  (of  the 
god).  After  having  offered  ghee,  curd  and  milk,  the  head  of  the 
image  should  again  be  touched. 

55  After  having  touched  the  head,  navel,  and  feet,  (the 
priest)  should  make  four  rivers  Ganga,  Yamuna,  Godavari 
and  Sarasvatl  present  there  by  pronouncing  their  names 

56.  (The  rivers)  should  be  dried  up  by  (the  recitation  of  the 
msnugayatri*  and  the  sacrificial  gruel  should  be  boiled  with  (the 
recitation  of)  the  gdyatri.  One  should  offer  oblation,  offer 
the  victim  and  feed  the  twice-borns  afterwards. 

•  57 ' , ,F°r,the  satlsfaction  of  the  singer  of  samans  one  should 
give  gold  and  cows  to  the  spiritual  preceptor.  Having  made 

s^nTSn-  Z  dCitieS  of  the  quarters,  one  should 

P  f  g  fm,vlg1'  By  smSm§  the  Praise  of  the  brahman  one 
gets  iruits  of  the  consecration  rite. 


1.  RV.  10.  90. 

2.  RVkh.  5.87.1a. 

3.  Could  not  be  identified. 

4.  Cf.  RV.  1.12.2a. 

.5.  Cf.  RV.  1.12.2a. 

6.  Could  not  be  identified. 

7.  Sugar,  honey  and  clarified  butter 

8.  mrayapaya  vxdmahe  vasucUvaya  dhimahi  tanno  vi^uh  PracodaySt. 


60.1-10 


161 


CHAPTER  SIXTY 


Mode  of  installation  of  the  image  ofVasudeva 


The  Lord  said  : 

for  !h  °"f  ?°ljld  di.vide  ,h'  kns<h  of  adytum  into  seven  parts 
for  the  installation  of  the  pedestal.  The  wise  man  should  fbt 
he  image  on  the  part  of  Brahman. 

2-3.  (One  should)  never  (fix  it)  i„  ,he  parts  (presided 
over)  by  the  ce  estials,  mortals  and  goblins,  leaving  out  the  pan 

fixe'd  off  r  ^  ^  ^  P'deStid  ***  >*  careMy 

betibedd  h'- T°m  °r  »»<!  mortals.  Gems  should 

be  imbedded  m  the  case  of  a  hermaphrodite  stone 

tol4^Hargrf0rmed  oblationwith  (t he  mantra  sacred 
to)  Narasimha  (the  man-lion  form  of  Visnu),  the  gems 

should  be  placed  with  (the  repetition  of)  the  same  (mania) 
Rice  grams  gems,  three  (kinds  of)  minerals,  iron  and  other 
metallic  substances,  sandal  wood  etc.,  should  be  placed  in  the 
nine  holes  commencing  with  the  east  at  the  centre  as  one  likes. 

en  the  holes  should  be  filled  with  the  guggulu  (a  kind  of  frag¬ 
rant  gum  resm)  with  (the  recitation  of)  the  mantras— indra  etc  * 

6.  After  having  performed  the  insertion  of  gems  the 

preceptor  should  rub  the  image  with  sticks  o isahadeva  (tree)  and 
bunches  of  darbha  (grass).  ' 

7.  The  outer  and  inner  surface  (of  the  image)  should  be 
cleansed  and  then  purified  with  the  pancagavya  (the  five  things 
got  from  a  cow).  Water  should  be  sprinkled  with  the  darbha 
grass  as  well  as  with  the  waters  of  the  river. 

8.  The  ground  for  kindling  the  sacrificial  fire  should  be  made 
ready  with  sand.  An  excellent  site  should  be  of  the  measure  of  a 
cubit  and  a  half  on  all  sides. 

9.  The  pitchers  also  should  be  placed  in  the  eight  directions 
commencing  with  the  east.  The  consecrated  fire  should  be 
brought  in  uttering  the  eight  letters  (described  already)'. 

10.  The  twigs  should  be  offered  into  the  fire  with  (the 
mantras) — tvam  agne  dyubhih1  and  gayatri.  Clarified  butter  should 
be  offered  with  (the  recitation  of)  eight  letters,  eight  hund- 
red  times. 


1.  RV.  2.1.1. 


162 


Agni  Parana 


atpr  Snnctified  hundred  times  by  the 
1 1 .  The  appeasing  watei  sanct  t  P  the  image 

principal  mmlrc  should  be  sprinkled  on  lire 

wilh  (the  recitation  nflo/up  with  (the  mantra)  brahma- 

jajfifoa*  "and  shoultHic  led  to  the  temple  with  .he  *«, 

.  led,  the  divine  edifice  accompanied  by  songs  J 

h^n.  He  should  be  held  a^he  ^s  o  .he  «mpe^ 

14.  Lord  Han  should  be  ^  thc  ptics, 

auspicious  pitchers  by  women  ana  d  with  thc 

should  worship  the  image  with  pci  Rimes 

principal^  nuiiifm^  ^  ^  al  offers  Wnds 

:Si  £££  & — **  «* 

rif  The'.el3(prt.)  should  fla  .he  image  on  Ac  p£s- 

SUr^7Se<Tt^C i^age  stouw' be  bathed  with  the  Jancagavya 
.five  things  got  from  a  cow)  with  (the  recitation  of,  thc  ”ian 
dhruva  dyaulfi  and  viSoatascaksuhP  and  bathed  again  wit  i  pei  urn 

"  atf 8  Lord  Hari  should  be  worshipped  along  with  the  atten¬ 
dants  "and  paraphernalia.  The  heavens  should  be  contemp 

ed  as  his  form  and  the  earth  as  the  seat.  lustrous 

19  His  body  should  be  imagined  as  composed  of  lustrou 

minute  particles.  (One  should  say),  ‘Tam  invoking  his  spin 

pervading  the  twentyfive  principles.” 


1.  VS.  31.22. 

2.  TS.  4.2.8.2. 

3.  RV.  1.  40.  1. 

4.  RV.  1.22.20. 

5.  Om  namo  bhagavale  vasudevaya. 

6.  IjtV.  1.22.16. 

7.  VS.  1.24. 

8.  &V.  10.173.4. 

9.  p.V.  10.81.3. 


163 


•  i0'?1'  O  Supreme  Lord  !  you  become  firmly  established 

devofdTf;  mVOke  yOU,  the  Spirit  ofsuPrerae  happiness  one 
devoid  of  (three  states)  waking,  dreaming  and  deep  sic  " 

one  who  «  devoid  of  a  body,  sense-organs,  intellect,  life  and 

S°!S™’  a"d  °ne  who  resides  in  the  hearts  of  all  beings  beginning 
with  Brahman  and  ending  with  a  dump  of  grass.  * 

j22'  ,Y°U  ™*ke  [he  imaSc  “nbued  with  your  soul  both  inside 
and  outside  You  have  taken  your  abode  in  this  image  (of  the 
size  of)  a  thumb  with  attributes. 

23.  Having  invoked  (the  god  in  the  image),  the  supreme 
brahman  lustrous  form  of  knowledge  and  who  is  one  without  a 
SeCOnd’  tkat  IS  decmed  as  alive  by  the  use  of  (the  mantra)  Om. 

.  The  act  of  bringing  the  god  near  consists  in  uttering 
(the  mantra)  and  touching  the  heart  (of  the  image).  (The  priest) 
should  recite  the  purusasukta 1  and  should  recite  the  following 
{mantra)  in  secret.  ° 

25-27.  Salutations  to  the  Lord  of  celestials  who  is  of  the 
form  of  happiness  and  fortune,  of  the  form  of  knowledge  and 
wisdom  and  who  attends  on  the  lustre  of  the  supreme  brahman. 
(Salutations  to)  the  one  who  is  beyond  properties,  the  great 
being,  devoid  of  decay,  old  age.  O  Visnu,  you  be  present  here. 
Whichever  is  the  supreme  principle  in  you  and  that  which  is 
your  form  verily  (made  up)  of  knowledge,  all  that  be  present 
here  in  this  form.  May  you  awake  ! 


28.  Stationing  oneself  in  front  of  the  deity,  (the  priest) 
should  establish  Brahman  and  other  attendant  gods  as  well  as 
the  respective  weapons  (by  showing)  the  mudra  (different  pos¬ 
tures  shown  with  the  hand). 

29-30.  (The  priest)  should  infer  the  presence  of  the  god 
from  th eyatra2  and  varsd3.  Having  saluted  and  sung  the  glories 
and  recited  the  mantras  of  eight  syllables4  etc.,  the  priest  should 
come  out  and  worship  Cantfa  and  Pracanda  (the  two  guardians) 
at  the  gate.  (The  priest)  should  go  to  the.  place  of  sacrificial 
fire,  install  the  image  of  Garutfa  (the  vehicle  Bird  of  Lord  Visnu) 
and  worship. 


1.  RV.10.90. 

2.  Existence,  livelihood. 

3.  Rains. 

4.  Om  namo  ndrayapaya. 


164 


Agni  Purcina 


31.  Having  installed  and  worshipped  (the  images)  of 
different  presiding  deities  of  the  quarters  intheir^pcctivequar- 
ters,  the  priest  should  install  the  image  of  Lord  Visvaksena  and. 
worship  the  conch,  disc  etc. 

32.  Offerings  should  be  made  to  the  attendant  gods  and  to. 
the  goblins.  The  priest  should  be  given  the  fees—  (which  may  e 
of  the  form  of)  proprietary  right  over  a  village,  clothes  and  go  d. 

33  The  materials  required  for  (the  performance  of) 
sacrificial  ceremony  should  be  given  to  the  principal  priest.  The 
attendant  priests  should  be  paid  fees  half  of  what  was  paid  to  the 
principal  priest. 

34.  The  other  priests  should  be  paid  their  fees.  The  brah- 
mins  should  then  be  fed.  Without  any  restraint  the  benefits  .of 
sacrifice  should  be  extended  to  the  patron-employer  by  the  prin- 


cipal  priest.  .  ir 

35.  The  consecrator  of  the  image  of  Visnu  leads  the  sell, 

as  well  as  his  entire  family  (to  the  region  of  the  god).  This  is  the 
general  mode  of  performance  for  all  gods.  Only  the  principal 
mantra  would  be  different.  The  other  formalities  are  the  same. 


CHAPTER  SIXTYONE 

Consecration  of  doors  of  the  temple  and  the  erection  of  banner 
The  Lord  said  : 

1.  I  shall  describe  the  purificatory  bathing  of  Visnu.  The 
offering  to  the  fire  is  made  (with  the  mantra)  na  tva1 2.  Having' 
placed  eightyone  pitchers  (at  their  respective  places)  Lord  Hari 
should  be  invoked  and  installed. 

2.  He  should  be  worshipped  with  perfumes  and  flowers. 
Having  made  the  offering,  the  priest  should  be  worshipped.  I 
shall  describe  the  (mode  of)  consecrating  the  door.  (A  piece  of) 
gold  should  be  placed  beneath  the  door  (frame). 

3.  The  priest  should  place  shoots  of  udumbara  (fig  tree)  in 


1.  An  epithet  of  Vi$£u. 

2.  One  of  the  many  hymns  beginning  with  these  words. 


<61.4-15 


165 


the  (mouth  of  the)  eight  pitchers  and  worship  them  with  per¬ 
fumes  etc.  and  vedic  mantras . 

4.  Twigs,  fried  paddy  and  sesamum  should  be  offered  unto 
the  fire  in  the  pits.  Having  offered  the  bed  etc.,  the  supporting 
•energy  should  be  placed  underneath. 

5 .  Gods  Canda  and  Pracanda  should  be  located  at  the  bottom 
of  the  shoots,  Goddess  Laksmi  worshipped  by  the  celestials  should 
be  placed  above  (the  shoot  of)  the  fig  (tree). 

6.  Having  assigned  the  four-faced  (Brahman)  and  duly 
worshipping  (him)  (by  reciting)  the  hisukta1  the  fruits  of  the 
bilva  (tree)  should  be  offered  to  him  and  the  fees  should  be  paid 
to  the  priest. 

7.  (I  shall  describe)  the  consecration  of  the  divine  edifice 
the  doors  of  which  have  been  consecrated  and  wherein  the  image 
of  Hari  has  been  duly  installed.  It  is  in  the  consecration  of  the 
adytum.  Listen. 

8-9.  Pitcher  made  of  gold,  silver  or  bell-metal  filled  with 
eight  kinds  of  gems,  herbs,  minerals,  seeds  of  grains,  iron  and 
water  and  covered  with  a  cloth  should  be  placed  on  the  darbha 
(grass)  in  a  circle  to  the  east  of  the  altar  after  the  iukanasa  (the 
keystone)  has  been  got  ready. 

10.  Fallen  twigs  which  have  been  gathered  should  be  offer¬ 
ed  into  fire  with  (the  mantra  of)  Nrsirhha.  Then  (the  temple) 
should  be  enlivened  with  the  principle  known  as  narayanatattva . 

11.  (That  lord)  who  is  the  life  of  the  temple  should  be 
contemplated  (as)  “O  Lord  of  celestials”.  Then  a  wise  man 
has  to  imagine  the  temple  as  the  god  himself. 

12.  (A  piece  of)  gold  should  be  placed  below  the  golden 
pitcher.  The  priests  and  others  should  be  paid  their  fees  and  the 
brahmins  should  be  fed. 

13-14.  Threads  should  be  wound  round  the  altar,  neck, 
top  and  the  globe  of  the  temple  after  that.  Then  the  metallic 
ring  known  as  the  sudarSana  disc  should  be  placed.  It  should  be 
known  as  the  form  of  (Lord)  Vasudeva  offering  protection  from 
fear. 

15.  Alternatively  a  pitcher  should  be  placed  (in  the  place 
of  a  globe)  and  the  disc  above  that.  O  birthless  one  !  eight  lords 


1.  Sec  above,  p.  151  and  fn  1  thereon. 


166 


Agni  Purana 


of  obstacles  (Vighnesvara)  should  be  placed  around  the  altar 
in  the  temple. 

16.  Or  four  images  of  Garuda  (vehicle  of  Lord  Visnu) 
should  be  placed  in  the  four  quarters.  I  shall  describe  now  the 
erection  of  the  flagstaff  which  destroys  the  evil  spirits. 

17.  One  who  performs  this  remains  in  the  regions  of  Visnu 
for  so  many  thousands  of  years  as  the  number  of  atoms  in  the 
image  of  the  god  in  the  temple. 

18.  O  sinless  !  It  should  be  known  that  (a  man  gets)  a 
crorc  times  more  merit  by  erecting  the  flag-staff, since  it  surrounds 
the  neck  of  the  temple  and  it  wafts  the  wind  around  the  globe, 
altar  and  image. 

19.  The  flag  should  be  known  as  the  prakrli  and  the  staff 
as  the  purusa  and  you  know  that  the  temple  is  another  form  of 
image  of  Vasudeva  (Visnu). 

20.  (In  a  temple)  the  dharani  (earth)  is  so  called  from  its 
ability  to  hold,  its  internal  cavity  stands  for  the  sky,  the  illumi¬ 
nation  inside  represents  the  fire,  and  its  touch  represents  the  wind. 

21.  The  earthly  waters  found  in  the  stone  slabs  (of  the 
temple)  (represent)  the  earthly  attributes.  Its  echo  stands  for 
tne  principles  of  sound.  Its  touch  represents  roughness. 

22.  Its  colour  which  may  be  white  or  otherwise  stands  for 
the  subtle  principle  of  colour.  The  food  (and  other  eatables) 
offered  (to  the  deity)  stand  for  the  sense  of  taste.  The  perfumes 
represent  the  sense  of  smell.  The  sense  of  speech  lies  in  the  down 
(used  in  the  temple). 

23.  The  keystone  is  the  nose  (of  the  temple).  The  two 
apertures  (on  either  side)  represent  the  two  hands.  The  arched 
terrace  above  is  to  be  taken  for  its  head  and  the  pitcher  on  the 
head. 

24.  Its  neck  should  be  known  as  the  neck.  The  platform 
over  the  fault  is  spoken  as  the  shoulder.  The  outlets  for  water 
are  the  anus  and  genitals.  The  lime-plaster  is  spoken  as  the  skin. 

2o.  The  door  would  be  the  mouth.  The  image  (installed  in 
the  temple)  is  said  to  be  its  life.  The  pedestal  should  be  known 
as  its  energy.  Its  shape  should  likewise  be  known  as  its  animation. 

26.  Its  cavity  is  its  inertia.  Lord  Kesava  is  its  controller. 
In  this  way  Lord  Han  Himself  remains  in  the  form  of  the  temple. 

27.  God  Siva  should  be  known  as  the  shank.  God  Brahman 


61.28-38 


167 


is  located  in  the  shoulder.  Lord  Visnu  remains  in  the  upper 
portion  of  a  temple  as  it  is. 

28.  Listen  to  me.  I  shall  describe  the  consecration  of  a 
temple  by  means  of  a  banner.  The  demons  were  defeated  by  the 
celestial  gods  by  erecting  banners  impressed  with  the  signs 
of  divine  weapons. 

29.  The  pitcher  (shaped  part  of  the  temple)  should  be 
placed  over  the  top  and  the  flag  should  be  placed  over  the  same. 
The  post  should  be  made  to  measure  a  half  or  one  third  of  the 
height  of  the  image. 

30.  The  flag  should  have  a  mark  of  a  circle  of  eight  or  twelve 
radii.  (There  should  be  the  figure)  of  the  man-lion  (form  of 
Visnu)  or  the  Garuda  (Tarksya)  (inside  the  circle)  in  the  middle. 
The  staff  of  the  flag  should  not  have  any  cut. 

31.  The  length  of  the  staff  is  spoken  as  the  measure  of  the 
breadth  of  edifice.  It  should  be  made  cither  half  of  the  ter¬ 
race  or  a  third  part  of  it. 

32.  The  staff  should  otherwise  be  made  twice  the  length 
of  the  door.  The  flag  staffshould  be  planted  on  the  north-east  or 
the  north-west  of  the  divine  edifice. 

33.  The  flag  should  be  made  of  a  piece  of  silk  cloth,  of  a 
single  or  variegated  colours.  It  should  be  adorned  with  bells, 
chowrics  and  small  bells.  (It  is  said  to  be)  destioyci  of  sins. 

34.  A  flag  which  touches  the  ground  and  measures  a  cubit 
in  breadth  at  its  extremity  or  has  a  breadth  equal  to  one  fourth  ol 
its  length  at  its  base  is  called  a  mahddhvaja .  It  grants  all  things 
when  worshipped. 

35.  The  banner  should  measure  half  (the  dimension  of) 
the  staff.  The  breadth  should  measure  twenty  fingers. 

36.  All  the  rites  relating  to  the  consentration  of  an  image 
should  be  done  for  (the  consecration)  of  the  disc,  flag  and  the 
staff.  They  should  be  bathed  in  the  shed. 

37.  The  priest  should  duly  perform  all  rites  described 
earlier  except  that  of  opening  the  eyes.  The  consecration  should 
be  done  in  the  prescribed  manner  leaving  them  in  the  resting 

position.  . 

38.  Then  the  learned  priest  should  assign  (mentally)  the 
hymn  (called)  sahasraiirsa 1  in  the  disc.  Then  the  sudarSana  mantra 


1.  IjtV.  10.90. 


168 


Agni  Purdna 


and  the  principle  of  mind  should  be  assigned. 

39.  It  is  known  as  imbued  with  life  by  mental  formation. 
O  excellent  among  gods,  (the  different  forms  of  Visnu  such  as) 
Kesava  etc.  should  be  assigned  to  the  spokes. 

40.  The  priest  should  assign  twentyfive  principles  at 
the  navel,  and  each  of  the  arcs  of  the  lotus.  The  form  of  Nrsimha 
(the  man-lion  form  of  Visnu)  representing  the  universe  should 
be  assigned  to  the  middle  of  the  lotus. 

41.  The  sakala  (endowed  with  parts)  forms  should  be  assign¬ 
ed  to  the  staff  as  the  living  soul  of  it.  Lord  Hari,  the  supreme 
being  of  the  niskala  (undivided)  form  should  be  contemplated 
and  assigned  to  the  flag. 

42.  The  energies  Bala  and  Abala  which  manifest  in  the 
form  of  the  banner  should  be  contemplated.  Having  placed  it  in 
the  shed  and  worshipped  it,  oblation  should  be  made  in  the  pit. 

43.  Having  placed  the  golden  pitcher  over  the  pitcher  and 
putting  five  (kinds  of)  gems  (at  the  top  of  the  temple)  a  golden 
disc  should  be  placed  underneath  that  with  the  mantra  of  the  disc. 

•  S^0U^  ke  washed  with  mercury  and  covered 

vit  the  eye-cover.  The  disc  should  then  be  placed.  Lord  Nrhari 
(man-lion  form  of  Visnu)shouId  be  imagined  there  in  the  middle. 

45-46.  Om ,  ksaum ,  salutations  to  Lord  Nrsimha.  Lord  Hari 
should  be  invoked  and  worshipped.  Then  the  yajamana  (the 
person  w  o  as  ananged  for  the  consecration)  accompanied  by 
his  relatives  should  hold  banner  and  dip . the  tip  of  the  banner 
m  a  vessel  full  of  curd.  The  banner  should  be  worshipped  with 
the  mantra  commencing  with  dhruva'  and  ending  with  fihat. 

'  Holding  that  vessel  on  the  head  and  remembering  Lord 
Narayana  (thej yajamana)  should  go  around  the  temple  along 
with  auspicious  sounds  from  the  turi  (a  musical  instrument). 

48.  The  staff  should  then  be  placed  with  (the  recitation  of) 
the  eight-syllabled  mantra *.  Then  the  flag  should  be  (hoisted) 
and  unfurled  with  (the  recitation  of)  the  hymn  muncami  tva? 
by  the  learned  person. 

49.  The  twice-born  {yajamana)  should  give  the  priest  the 


1.  RV.  10. 173.4a. 

2.  Om  namo  narayapaya. 
2.  RV.10.161.1a. 


61.50-62.1-5 


169 


vessel,  banner  and  elephant  etc.  Mode  of  consecration  of  the 
flag  has  been  thus  described  in  general. 

50.  The  mark  which  represents  a  particular  god  should  be 
planted  with  the  respective  mantra .  By  the  offer  of  a  banner  one 
goes  to  heaven  and  becomes  a  strong  monarch  on  the  earth  (in 
the  next  birth). 


CHAPTER  SIXTYTWO 

Mode  of  installation  of  the  image  of  Goddess  Laksmi 
The  Lord  said  : 

1 .  I  shall  describe  to  you  the  mode  of  installation  of  all  divine 
images.  At  first  I  shall  describe  the  (mode  of)  installation 
(of  the  image)  of  Laksmi  and  her  attendant  goddesses. 

2.  As  before,  one  should  do  all  rites  such  as  bathing  (the 
image)  in  the  shed.  (The  image  of)  goddess  Laksmi  should 
be  placed  on  the  pedestal.  One  should  place  eight  pitchers. 

3.  The  image  should  be  anointed  with  ghee  with  the  prin¬ 
cipal  mantra  and  washed  with  the  five  things  got  from  a  cow. 
The  eyes  of  (the  goddess)  Laksmi  should  be  opened  with  (the 
recitation  of  the  mantra)  hiratiyavarnam  harinim1. 

4.  The  three  sweet  things2  should  be  offered  with  (the 
recitation  of  the  mantra)  tarn  ma  avaha 3.  She  (the  image)  should 
be  bathed  with  (the  waters  of)  the  pitcher  on  the  east  with  (the 
recitation  of)  the  (hymn)  aJvapurva 4. 

5.  The  image  should  then  be  bathed  with  (the  waters  of 
pitchers  on)  the  south,  west  and  north  with  the  recitation  of 
hymns  kamo’smi  ie 5,  candram prabhasdm 6 7,  adilya  varna 7  (respectively) 


1.  RV  Kh.  5.87.1. 

2.  P.  160.  fn  7. 

3.  RV.  Kh.  5.87.2a,  15a. 

4.  cf.  RV.  Kh.  5.87.3a. 

5.  Could  not  be  identified. 

6.  Could  not  be  identified. 

7.  VS.31.81b. 


170 


Agni  Purana- 


6-7.  (Waters)  from  (the  pitchers  placed  in)  the  south¬ 
east,  south-west,  north-west  and  north-east  should  be  poured 
on  the  image  accompanied  by  (the  recitation  of  the  mantras ) 
upaitu  ma\  ksut  pipasa1  2,  gandhadvara 3 4 5,  manasah  kamamakrti* .  The 
image  should  subsequently  be  bathed  with  (the  waters  of)  eighty- 
one  pitchers  (accompanied)  by  apah  srjan  ksitim .6 7 

8.  (The  priest  should  worship  the  image)  with  perfumes 
accompanied  by  ardram  puskarinim0 ,  with  flowers  accompanied 
by  tarn  ma  avahd 7  and  ya  ananda .8 9 

9.  The  goddess  should  be  worshipped  in  the  bed  with  (the 
mantra)  Sayanti0  yena  and  her  presence  is  accomplished  by  Sri - 
sukta10.  Her  consciousness  is  invoked  and  worshipped  again  with 
the  principal  mantra  of  the  goddess. 

10.  Thousand  or  hundred  lotus  flowers  or  karauira  flowers 
should  be  offered  in  the  fire  pit  at  the  shed  accompanied  by 
Srisukta.10 

11.  Household  furniture  should  be  offered  with  the  Srisukta10 
itself.  Then  the  consecration  of  edifice  should  be  performed 
as  described  earlier. 

12.  The  pedestal  should  be  made  with  (the  recitation  of) 
the  mantra .  The  installation  of  the  goddess  is  done  subsequently. 
Her  presence  is  accomplished  with  the  Srisukta.10  Everyone  of' 
the  hymns  (stated  earlier) )  should  be  recited  as  before. 

13.  Having  invoked  consciousness  in  the  image,  her 
presence  is  accomplished  by  the  principal  mantra.  The  priest  and 
the  brahmins  should  be  presented  with  land,  gold,  clothes, 
cow  and  food.  The  images  of  all  other  forms  of  goddesses  should, 
be  installed  in  the  same  way.  One  who  invokes  (and  consecrates) 
in  this  way  is  held  as  going  to  heaven. 


1.  RV.  Kh.  5.87.7a. 

2.  TB.3.4.1.1G. 

3.  RV.  Kh.  5.87.9a. 

4.  RV.  Kh.5.87.10a. 

5.  Gould  not  be  identified. 

6.  Gf.  RV.  Kh.  8.87.3a,  14a. 

7.  RV.  Kh.  5.87.2a,  15a. 

8.  Not  found. 

9.  Gould  not  be  identified. 

10.  RV.  Kh.  5.87.1. 


63.1-3 


171 


CHAPTER  SIXTYTHREE 

Mode  of  installation  of  other  gods  and  goddesses ,  the  Sudarsana  disc 
and  the  writing  of  books  and  their  installations 

The  god  said  : 

1.  The  installation  of  the  (images  of)  Garuda  (vehicle  of 
Visnu)  Brahman,  Nfhari  (man-lion  form  of  Visnu)  and  of  the 
(sudarSana)  disc  should  be  done  in  the  same  way  as  that  of  Visnu 
with  their  respective  mantras .  Listen  to  me. 

2.  O  Sudarsana  !  The  great  disc  that  is  tranquil  !  Dread¬ 
ful  to  the  wicked  !  Kill  kill,  pierce  pierce,  cut  through  and 
cut  through. 

3.  Devour  devour  the  incantations  of  others.  Eat  up, 
eat  up  the  evil  spirits.  Frighten  frighten,  hum  phat,  salutation  to 
sudarSana.  Having  worshipped  the  disc  with  this  mantra  one 
destroys  the  enemies  in  the  battle. 

Om  ksaum  Narasunha  (man-lion)  !  of  fierce  form  !  burn,  burn, 
blaze  up,  blaze  up,  svdhd.  Om  ksaum  salutations  to  lord  Nora- 
siiiiha  !  Effulgent  like  crores  of  radiant  suns  !  One  armed  with 
mace,  claws  and  teeth  !  One  who  manifests  with  a  sound  similar 
to  the  trumpet  while  the  dreadful  and  dishevelled  manes  wildly 
dance  in  the  storm  and  one  who  has  agitated  the  ocean  !  One 
who  rescues  from  all  incantations  !  O  Lord  Narasimha  (you) 
come  !  Manifest  with  the  divine  truth  as  the  universal  sub¬ 
jective  and  objective  !  Open  thy  mouth  !  Attack  !  Roar  and 
release  your  lion-like  voice  !  Cut  through  !  Drive  away  !  Pierce 
into  ail  sorts  of  incantations  !  Kill,  cut,  heap  together,  dislodge, 
cut  open,  break  up,  cause  to  be  burst  !  A  multitude  of  cluster 
of  flames  !  Destroy  all  nether  regions  with  your  disc  (shower¬ 
ing)  flames  and  thunderbolts  in  all  directions  !  Besiege  the 
liethcr  regions  with  your  arrows  of  thunderbolt  discharging  end¬ 
less  fire  !  Pull  out  the  hearts  of  all  demons  residing  in  the 
nether  worlds  !  Burn  quickly  !  Cook  !  Destroy  !  Dry  up  l 
Hack  them  to  pieces  till  they  have  not  been  subject  to  my  control  ! 
Phaf  to  the  nether  worlds  !  Phat  to  the  demons  !*  Phat  to  all  kinds 
of  incantations  !  O  Lord  of  the  form  of  Narasirhha  !  Protect 
me  from  all  doubts  !  Protect  me  from  all  calamities  and  ail  in¬ 
cantations  !  O  Visnu  !  Hum  Phat  !  Salutations  to  you  !  This 


172 


Agni  Purdna 


is  the  spell  of  Narasimha  representing  Hari  (Visnu)  which 
grants  all  desires. 

4.  The  captivator  of  the  three  worlds  ( trailokyamohano )  (the 
image  of  the  lord  )  should  be  installed  with  the  mantras  known  as 
trailokyamohana  (captivating  the  three  worlds)  (described  above). 
(The  image)  should  be  made  to  have  two  or  four  arms,  holding 
the  mace  in  the  right  hand  and  conferring  benediction. 

5.  The  disc  should  be  placed  in  the  upper  left  arm  and  the 
(conch-shell)  pdncajanya  on  the  lower  (arm).  (The  two  right 
hands)  should  be  provided  with  Sri  (riches)  and  pusfi  (nourish¬ 
ment)  along  with  strength  and  welfare. 

6.  The  images  of  Visnu,  Vamana  (dwarf  form  of  Visnu), 
Vaikuntha,  Hayasya  (horse-faced  form  of  Visnu)  andAniruddha 
should  be  installed  in  a  shed  or  house  or  edifice. 


7-9.  (The  images  of)  manifestations  (of  Visnu)  (such 
as)  the  fish  etc.  should  be  installed  in  waters.  (The  images 
of)  Sankarsana,  Visvarupa,  lihga ,  the  form  of  Rudra,  herma¬ 
phrodite  form  (of  Siva)  (Ardhanarisvara),  Hari  (Visnu), 
Sankara,  Siva,  the  divine  mothers,  Bhairava,  Surya,  the  planets, 
Vinayaka,  Gaurl  (consort  of  Siva)  worshipped  by  Indra  and 
others,  Bala  and  Abala  (should  also  be  installed  similarly). I 
shall  describe  the  (mode  of)  consecration  of  books  and  the 
mode  of  writing  them. 

10.  Having  worshipped  the  manuscript  and  the  written 
book  on  a  seat  made  of  kuSa  grass  placed  on  a  svastika  figure,  the 
preceptor  should  worship  the  spell  and  Lord  Hari  (Visnu). 

11-12.  The  yajamana  (the  person  at  whose  instance  a  rite 
is  performed)  should  face  the  east  and  contemplate  the  spiritual 
guide,  the  spell,  lord  Hari,  the  copyist  and  (the  goddess)  Pad- 
mini  after  having  written  five  verses  on  a  silver  plate  with  golden 
pen  and  devanagari  letters.  The  brahmins  should  be  fed  accord¬ 
ing  to  one  s  capacity  and  fees  should  be  paid  as  much  as  one 
could  give. 


13.  After  having  worshipped  the  preceptor,  the  spell  and 
Lord  Hari,  one  should  write  the  purdnas  etc.  as  before  in  a  figure 
m  an  auspicious  seat  in  the  north-east. 

14.  Having  seen  the  book  in  the  mirror  in  the  pitcher  it 
should  be  consecrated  as  (described)  earlier.  After  opening  up 
the  eyes  one  should  place  it  in  the  bed. 


! 

! 


) 


63.15 — 64.1-2 


173. 


15.  The  purusasukta 1  and  the  Vedas  etc.  should  be  (men¬ 
tally)  located  in  the  book.  After  having  infused  life  to  it,  it  should 
be  worshipped  and  the  porridge  offered. 

16.  Having  fed  the  preceptor  and  given  the  fees,  the  twice- 
borns  should  be  fed.  The  book  should  be  carried  by  men  in  a 
car,  or  on  the  elephant. 

17.  The  book  should  be  established  and  worshipped  (on 
its  return)  in  a  house  or  temple.  That  which  is  wrapped  up  in  a 
cloth  should  be  worshipped  at  the  commencement  and  end  of 
reading. 

18.  Having  resolved  to  have  universal  peace  a  chapter  of  the 
book  should  be  read  out.  The  yajamdna  and  others  should  be 
sprinkled  with  water  from  the  pitcher. 

19.  The  merit  of  presenting  a  book  to  the  twice-born  is 
unlimited.  Three  things  (are  said  to  be)  gifts  par  excellence. 
(They  are)  cows,  land  and  knowledge. 

20-21.  O  sinless  one  !  the  merits  of  imparting  knowledge 
(is  great).  One  who  presents  a  bundle  of  written  leaves,  remains 
and  enjoys  in  the  region  of  Visnu  for  so  many  years  as  the  num¬ 
ber  of  leaves  and  letters  (in  the  manuscript).  One  who  gives 
away  pancar  alra1  2,  pur  anas,  bluirata  (as  gift)  elevates  jtwentyone 
generations  of  his  family  and  gets  merged  in  the  supreme  being. 


CHAPTER  SIXTYFOUR 
Mode  of  consecration  of  tanks  and  ponds 
The  Lord  said  : 

1.  I  shall  describe  the  (mode  of)  consecration  of  wells, 
tanks  and  ponds.  Listen  !  Lord  Hari  (Visnu)  as  Soma  and  ex¬ 
cellent  Varuna  remains  in  the  form  of  water. 

2.  The  universe  is  permeated  by  fire  and  water.  Visnu  in 
the  form  of  water  is  its  cause.  The  image  of  Lord  Varuna  (the 
presiding  deity  of  waters)  should  be  made  of  gold,  silver  or  gems. 


1.  RV.  10.90. 

2.  The  religious  code  book  of  the  Vaitfiavas. 


174 


Agni  Purdna 


3.  (The  image  should  have)  two  hands,  the  right  conferring 
refuge  and  the  left  should  hold  the  snake-noose  and  as  seated  on 
the  hamsa  along  with  the  rivers  and  serpents. 

4.  There  should  be  an  altar  at  the  centre  of  sacrificial  shed 
having  a  fire-pit.  There  should  be  an  arch.  A  pitcher  made  of 
stone  for  Lord  Varuna  should  be  placed. 

5.  Pitchers  (should  be  placed)  at  the  entrance  to  the  fire 
receptacle  which  may  be  of  a  semi-circular  shape  or  a  svastika 
of  auspicious  nature.  Having  done  the  agnyadhana  (rite)  in  the 
pit  for  water  the  final  oblation  should  be  done. 

6.  (The  image  of)  Varuna  should  be  touched  in  the  bathing 
seat  with  (the  mantra)  ye  le  late1.  It  should  then  be  anointed  with 
ghee  by  the  priest  with  (the  recitation  of)  the  principal  mantra. 

7.  Having  washed  the  eight  pitchers  with  pure  water  with 
(the  recitation  of)  sam  no  devi 2  they  should  be  consecrated.  Sea 
water  (should  be  kept)  in  the  eastern  pitcher. 

8-9.  Having  kept  the  Ganges  water  in  the  (pitcher  on  the) 
south-east,  rain  water  in  the  (pitcher  on  the)  south,  water  from 
waterfalls  in  the  (pitcher  on  the  south-west,  river  water  in  the 
west,  water  from  a  masculine  river  in  the  north-west,  spring  water 
in  the  north,  waters  from  sacred  places  (should  be  kept)  in  the 
north-east.  In  the  absence  of  all  the  above,  river  water  (should 
be  poured  into  these  pitchers)  with  the  chanting  of  yasarfi 
raja3. 

10.  After  having  cleansed  and  anointed  the  eyes  with  the 
three  sweet  things  -(honey,  sugar  and  clarified  butter)  with  (the 
mantra)  durmilriya 4,  they  should  be  opened  with  Citram 5 6 7  and 
taccaksuh 8. 

1 1 .  Having  invoked  lustre  in  them  the  priest  should  be  offer¬ 
ed  a  golden  cow.  (The  image  of)  Varuna  should  be  consecrat¬ 
ed  with  the  (waters  of  the)  pitcher  on  the  east  with  (the  recita¬ 
tion  of)  samudrajyesfha.'1 


1.  Kat.  Sr.  Su.  25.1.11a. 

2.  YV.  10.9.4a. 

3.  not  identified. 

4.  VS.6.22  and  T.S.  1-4-45-2 

5.  fcV.l. 115.1a. 

6.  RV  7.66-1 6a. 

7.  RV.  7.49.1a. 


175 


•64.12-18 

12-13.  The  waters  of  the  Ganges  should  be  poured  with 
(the  mantra)  sarmdrarh  gaccha1,  rain  waters  with  somo  dhenum*, 
water  from  waterfalls  with  devirapa? ,  the  water  of  the  masculine 
rivers  with  panca  nadyah 4,  the  spring  water  with  udbhid 5,  the  waters 
from  sacred  places  with  pavamdni9,  the  pancagavya  (the  five 
things  from  a  cow)  with  apo  hi  sfha 7  and  from  the  golden  (pit¬ 
cher)  with  hiranyavamam9. 

14.  (The  image  should  be  bathed)  with  rain  water  with 
apo  asma9,  with  well  waters  with  the  vyahrlis  ( bhuh ,  bhuvah,  suvah) . 
(Image  of)  Varuna  should  be  consecrated  with  the  waters  of 
the  tank  with  varunadbhik10. 

15.  Waters  from  the  hills  (should  be  poured)  with  (the 
mantra) apo  devi11  and  then  with  the  waters  from  eig'ntyone  pitchers. 
Then  (the  image)  should  be  bathed  with  varunasya 12  and  waters 
for  sipping  (should  be  given)  with  Ivanno  varuna™. 

16-17.  The  madhuparka 14  should  be  given)  with  the  vyahrlis,™ 
clothes  with  br hasp  ate™,  pavilra  with  varuna 17,  the  upper  garment 
with  pranava  ( Om ). 

Flowers  etc.  chowriee,  mirror,  umbrella,  fan  and  banner 
should  be  offered  to  (the  image  of)  Varuna  with  (the  mantra) 

yadvarunya19.  ,  . 

18.  The  image  should  be  raised  up  with  the  principal 
mantra  (saying)  ‘Rise  up’  and  the  preliminary  consecration  is 
made  that  night.  The  presence  of  divinity  is  accomplished 
by  varunam  ca19.  It  should  be  worshipped  with  yadvarunya. 50 

1.  RV  Kh.  5-49-2. 

2.  RV.1.91-20a. 

3.  MS.  1.1.11. 

4.  VS.  34-1  la. 

5.  Could  not  be  identified. 

6.  Designation  of  the  hymn  svadisihaya  madisfhayd  RV.9.1.1, 

7.  RV.l0.9.1.a 

8.  RV  Kh.  5-87-la. 

9.  £V.  10.17-10a. 

10.  Could  not  be  found. 

11.  TS.  1 -3.8-2.  .  0  r  ,,  _ 

12.  One  of  the  many  hymns  beginning  so.  Sec  Bloomheld,  Vedic 

Concordance  C.  106. 

13.  Cf.  RV.  10.147.5a. 

14.  Curd,  clarified  butter,  water,  honey,  sugar. 

15.  Cf.  RV.  2.  23.15a. 

16.  Cf.  RV.9.  83- la. 

17.  Could  not  be  identified. 

18.  Could  not  be  identified. 

19.  RV.l  .2.7b, 

20.  Could  not  be  identified. 


176 


Agni  Purana 


19-20.  Life  should  be  infused  into  the  image  with  the  prin¬ 
cipal  mantra  and  should  again  be  worshipped  with  perfume  etc. 
Having  worshipped  it  well  in  the  shed  as  before  after  having 
offered  twigs  etc.  into  the  fire  pits  with  (the  recitation  of  the 
pranava)  the  first  word  of  the  Vedas ,  four  cows  should  be  milched. 
in  the  four  directions.  Then  gruel  of  barley  should  be  prepared 
and  offered  to  the  fire. 

21.  The  invocation  should  be  performed  with  the  vyahrtis, 
gayatri  and  the  principal  mantra .  Oblation  should  be  done  with 
the  mantra  suryaya  prajapataye  dyauh  svaha  cantariksakah. 

22.  (Ceremony  is  to  be  performed)  for  the  earth,  Deha- 
dhrti,  Svadhrti,  Rati,  Ugra,  Bhima,  Raudraka. 

23-24.  Visnu,  Varuna,  Dhatr,  Mahendra  the  furtherer 
of  riches,  Agni,  Yama,  Nairrta,  Varuna,  Vayu,  Kubera,  Isa 
Ananta,  Brahman  and  the  lord  of  waters  should  be  propitiated 
with  oblations  reciting  svaha  and  (the  mantras)  idarii  visnah1  and 
tad  viprasa 2 3. 

25.  Having  made  oblation  six  times  with  somo  dhemPy 
oblation  should  be  made  with  imam  me 4 5.  Again  oblation  should 
be  done  thrice  with  dpo  hi  sthd 5  (and  once)  with  imd  rudra 6. 

26.  Bali  (offering)  should  be  made  in  the  ten  directions. 
The  image  should  be  worshipped  with  perfumes  and  flowers 
The  image  should  be  lifted  and  placed  in  a  mystic  diagram  by  a. 
wise  man. 

27-28.  (The  image)  should  be  worshipped  with  perfumes 
and  flowers  as  well  as  golden  flowers  duly.  The  excellent  priest 
should  lay  eight  raised  platforms  filled  with  sand  after  having 
made  ready  the  water  tanks  measuring  two  feet.  Then  clarified 
butter  (should  be  given  as  oblation)  hundred  and  eight  times  with 
(the  mantra)  varunasya 7. 

29.  Then  the  barley  gruel  should  be  offered  in  the  fire  and 
purificatory  water  sprinkled  over  the  image.  The  rite  to  bring 
life  into  the  image  should  be  performed. 

1.  RV.  1.22. 17a. 

2.  RV.I.22.21a. 

3.  RV.I.91.20a. 

4.  RV.I.25.19a. 

5.  RV.I0.9.  la. 

6.  RV.10.1. 114.1a. 

7.  Gould  not  be  identified. 


64.30-40 


177 


30.  Lord  Varuna  should  be  contemplated  as  being  accom¬ 
panied  by  goddess  Gauri  and  the  host  of  masculine  and  feminine 
rivers.  Then  having  worshipped  with  the  mantra  " om  salutations 
to  Varuna”,  the  act  of  bringing  near  should  be  done. 

31.  (The  image)  should  be  lifted  and  carried  around  on 
the  back  of  elephant  etc.  and  along  with  the  eight  auspicious 
things  (a  brahmin,  cow,  fire,  gold,  clarified  butter,  sun,  water 
and  king).  With  the  recitation  of  afio  hisfha1 2,  it  should  be 
immersed  in  the  water  of  the  pitcher  into  which  the  three  sweet 
things  have  been  put. 

32.  The  image  should  be  placed  in  the  midst  of  the  tank 
unseen.  (The  priest) should  bathe  and  contemplate  on  Varuna, 
the  creation  known  as  the  primordial  egg. 

33.  Having  purified  it  with  the  principal  letter  (of  the 
mantra)  of  the  fire,  the  ashes  should  be  scattered  over  the  earth. 
The  entire  world  consists  of  water.  Hence,  the  lord  of  waters 
is  contemplated. 

34.  The  sacrificial  post  of  a  rectangular,  octagonal  or  cir¬ 
cular  shape  should  be  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  tank. 

35.  Having  worshipped  the  symbol  of  the  lord,  post  made 
of  the  tree  used  for  the  purpose  of  sacrifice  (should  be  driven) 
ten  cubits  into  the  ground  in  the  case  of  (consecration  of)  a  well. 
At  the  bottom  of  the  post  gold  and  fruit  should  be  placed. 

36.  It  should  be  driven  into  the  ground  in  the  middle  of 
water  fifteen  cubits  in  the  case  of  a  well,  twenty  (cubits)  in  the 
case  of  a  tank  ( piiskarini )  and  twentyfive  cubits  in  the  case  of  a 
pond. 

37.  In  the  alternative,  (the  post)  should  be  driven  in  the 
centre  of  the  sacrificial  bed  and  with  the  mantra  yupavraskar 
cloth  should  be  put  around.  The  banner  should  be  put  at  the 
top  of  the  post. 

38.  Having  worshipped  it  with  perfumes  etc.,  (the  rite 
for)  universal  peace  should  be  performed.  The  spiritual  preceptor 
should  be  given  the  fees  (in  the  form  of)  land,  cows,  gold  and 
water  vessel. 

39-40.  Fees  should  be  paid  to  twice-borns.  Those  who  are 
present  should  be  fed.  “From  Brahman  down  to  (inanimate 


1.  RV.10.9.1a. 

2.  RV.I.162.  6a. 


178 


Agni  Parana 


obiccts  like)  the  pillar  all  those  who  seek  water  may  get 
Sd  J,  the  waters  of  the  tank  !”  (With  the  utterance t  of 
thie  words)  the  water  should  be  given  as  chanty  The five 

«  ^wwTthe  r  *  \  th;icr 

and  herd  of  kine  should  be  given  to  brahmins. 

42-43  Food  and  other  things  should  be  given  to  all  the  p 
pie  without  any  restraint.  One  who  consecrates  a  reservoir  of 
water  (acquires)  in  a  single  day  a  merit  ten  crores  times  more 
than  one  who  performs  thousands  of  aSvamedha  (the  horse- 

sacrifice).  Such  a  person  goes  to  heaven  m  the  (ce  c 

vehicle  and  rejoices  (there).  He  never  goes  to  hell. 

44  The  consecrator  can  never  get  any  sin  as  the  ca 

other '(animals)  drink  water  from  it.  One  attains  all  merits 

by  the  endowment  of  water  (tank)  and  goes  to  heaven. 


CHAPTER  SIXTYF1VE 
The  building  of  pavilions  in  front  of  the  temples 
The  Lord  said  : 

1 .  I  shall  describe  the  mode  of  building  pavilions  (in  front 
of  temples)  and  their  maintenance.  The  vastuyaga  (rite  per¬ 
formed  to  please  the  spirits  dwelling  in  a  site)  should  be 
performed  after  having  tested  the  ground  (intended  for 
building  pavilion). 

2.  Having  constructed  pavilion  as  per  one’s  liking,  one 
should  install  (the  images  of)  gods  according  to  his  wish. 

(Such  buildings.)  should  not  be  constructed  at  the  junction  of 
four  roads  or  at  a  deserted  place  in  the  village. 

3.  Such  a  builder  being  free  from  sins  and  raising  his  ances¬ 
tors  (to  heaven),  enjoys  in  heaven.  One  should  build  a  seven- 
storeyed  building  for  Lord  Hari  (Visnu)  in  the  following 
way. 


1.  &V.10.9.U. 


65.4-23 


179 


4.  The  same  rule  holds  good  in  the  building  of  other  (tem¬ 
ples  of  gods),  as  in  the  case  of  erecting  the  mansions  of  kings. 
The  banner  should  be  placed  in  the  east.  The  edifice  should  be 
built  as  a  quadrilateral  without  (having  any  walls  on)  the  diago¬ 
nal  lines. 

5-7.  The  building  should  have  three  or  two  chambers  or 
one  chamber.  The  vyaya1  should  not  be  much.  Excessive  vyaya 
is  deemed  to  be  harmful.  Excessive  aycr  is  also  harmful.  Hence 
the  two  should  be  made  equal.  (The  priest)  well-versed  in  the 
science  of  Garga  ( vdslusaslra ),  should  sum  up  the  hand  measures 
of  building  and  multiply  it  by  eight.  It  should  be  multiplied 
by  three  and  the  resultant  product  should  be  divided  by  eight 
and  the  remainder  is  known  as  vyaya . 

8.  Alternatively,  having  divided  the  sum  of  the  hand  mea¬ 
sures  of  the  building  by  three  and  multiplying  it  by  eight  the 
resultant  is  known  as  the  dhvaja  (banner)  etc. 

9.  Banner,  camel,  lion,  dog,  bull,  donkey,  elephant  and 
crow  are  said  to  be  eight  dyas . 

10.  It  is  commended  if  we  have  three  after  leaving  the 
north  and  east  in  houses  having  three  storeys.  Together  with  the 
building  on  the  opposite  side  there  will  always  be  two  buildings 
in  the  south. 

1 1 .  One-storeyed  building  may  be  had  in  the  south  or  there 
may  be  two  one-storeyed  buildings  in  the  west.  The  other  kinds 
of  buildings  cause  fear. 

12-13.  A  four-storeyed  building  devoid  of  all  defects  is  always 
commended.  One  may  build  a  mansion  having  one- storey  or 
seven-storeys  without  the  door,  platform  and  moulding.  The 
mansions  of  the  images  of  gods  should  be  consecrated  in  the  pres¬ 
cribed  way  for  the  gods. 

14-23.  The  hall  should  be  consecrated  with  the  cere¬ 
monies  as  described  (for  the  installation  of  an  image).  The 
consecrator  should  bathe  in  the  herbal  waters  and  becoming 
pure  and  alert  should  feed  brahmins  with  sweets.  He  should 
then  enter  the  hall  decked  with  pitchers  and  arches,  with  his 


1-2.  One  of  the  formulae  for  ascertaining  the  right  proportion  of  measure¬ 
ment. 


180 


Agni  Purdna 


hand  placed  on  the  back  of  a  cow,  and  after  having  wished  pros¬ 
perity  to  the  brahmins.  The  householder  should  then  enter  the 
house  after  having  honoured  the  astrologers.  The  following  man¬ 
tra  of  prosperity  should  be  repeated. 

"Om,  O  Mother  Earth  I  related  to  Vasistha  !  you  rejoice 
with  the  Vasus  (semi-divine  beings)  and  people.  Glory  be  to  the 
daughter  of  Bhargava1  (Sukra  the  preceptor  of  demons), 
the  giver  of  success  to  her  offsprings.  The  accomplished  goddess  l 
relative  of  Ahgiras  !  You  grant  me  my  heart’s  desire.  O  auspi¬ 
cious  one  !  related  to  (sage)  Kasyapa  !  make  my  intellect  good. 
Endowed  with  all  herbs  !  Surrounded  by  all  gems  and  herbs  1 
Shining  one  '.Joyous  one  !  related  to  Vasistha  !  May  you  amuse 
here  !  Daughter  of  Prajapati  (Brahman)  !  O  Goddess  ! 
Handsome  in  all  parts  !  Noble-minded  !  Beautiful  one  !  The 
strict  observer  of  disciplines  !  One  who  is  related  to  Kasyapa  1 
May  you  enjoy  in  this  house  !  O  Adored  by  the  great  precep¬ 
tors  !  Adorned  with  perfumes  and  garlands  !  Bestower  of  pros¬ 
perity  !0  Goddess  !  Daughter  of  Bhargava  !  May  you  amuse 
in  this  house  !  The  primordial  element  !  The  inexplicable 
one  !  Accomplished  !  O  daughter  of  sage  Ahgiras  !  O 
Goddess  of  bricks  !  I  establish  you.  You  confer  on  me  my  desi¬ 
res  !  One  surrounded  by  the  lords  of  regions,  place  and  the 
house  !  You  be  furtherer  of  men,  wealth,  elephant,  horse  and 
cow. 


CHAPTER  SIXTYSIX 
Mode  of  consecration  of  other  gods 
The  Lord  said  : 

1-2.  I  shall  describe  the  mode  of  consecration  (of  ima¬ 
ges)  of  all  gods — the  Adityas  (the  suns,  twelve  in  number), 
Vasus  (eight),  Rudrah  (eleven),  Sadhyah,  Visvedevah,  Asvins 
and  the  sages  etc.  It  is  like  (the  consecration  of  the  image  of) 
Vasudeva.  I  shall  describe  special  features  (of  ceremonies). 
The  first  letter  of  the  name  of  particular  deity  should  be 
taken. 


1.  Denotes  Laksml. 


€6.3-1 1 


181 


3.  It  should  be  split  into  syllables.  The  longer  vowels  should 
be  split.  The  mystical  letter  (of  the  deity)  is  first  formed  by 
adding  a  nasal  and  the  pranava. 

4.  (The  images  of)  all  gods  as  well  as  those  who  had  led 
a  disciplined  life  and  had  observed  austerities  and  atonements 
and  those  who  had  lived  inthemonasteries  should  be  worshipp¬ 
ed  and  installed  with  their  respective  principal  mantra. 

5.  I  shall  describe  the  mode  of  fasting  for  a  month  and  that 
which  concludes  on  the  twelfth  day  (of  a  fortnight).  One  should 
place  a  stone  slab  and  pitchers  made  of  bell  metal  filled  with  the 
articles  (described  earlier). 

6.  After  having  collected  the  brahmakurca  (grass),  the  wor¬ 
shipper  should  prepare  the  gruel  made  of  barley  and  milk  of 
tawny  (coloured)  cow  with  (the  mantra )  tadvisnofr.1 

7.  It  should  be  stirred  with  the  ladle  holding  it  with  (the 
recitation  of)  pranava  ( om ) .  Having  got  it  ready  and  bringing  it 
down  lord  Visnu  should  be  worshipped  and  the  offering  made. 

8.  The  oblation  should  be  done  with  the  vyahrti  {bhuh, 
bhuvah,  svah ),  the  vedic  mantras  such  as  gdyatri 2  {mantra),  tad - 
uiprasa3 4 5 6,  vtivataScaksuh 4  and  bhuragnaye *. 

9.  Oblations  should  be  given  to  Surya,  Prajapati  (the 
creator),  (the  lord  of)  the  ethereal  region.  Oblation  to  sky  1 
Oblations  to  Brahman  !  (Oblations  should  be  given  upto)  the 
earth  and  the  great  king. 

10.  Oblations  should  be  done  with  (the  mantras)  tasmai, 
somatii  ca,  rajanamidam.  Having  offered  the  remaining  part  of  the 
gruel  as  oblation,  digbali  (offerings  to  the  quarters)  should  be 
done  with  due  respect. 

11.  Having  made  oblation  of  one  hundred  and  eight 
twigs  of  the  palaia  (tree)  along  with  clarified  butter,  oblations 
should  be  done  eight  times  with  sesamum  and  water  along  with 
the  purus as  uhtcP. 


2.  Om  bhur  bhuvaswah  tatsamturvawyam  bharSo  devasya  dhimahi  dhiyo  yo 
nah  pracodayat. 

3.  B-V.l. 22.21a. 

4.  B.V.10.81.3a. 

5.  TA.  10.2.1  or  10.4.1. 

6.  B.V.  10.90. 


182 


Agni  Parana 


12-13.  Having  offered  oblations  for  Brahman,  Visnu,  Isa 
(Siva),  the  attendant  gods,  the  planets  and  the  presiding  deities 
of  different  worlds,  oblations  should  be  offered  for  the  moun¬ 
tains,  rivers,  and  oceans.  Sacrificial  spoon  full  of  clarified  butter 
should  be  offered  thrice  as  the  final  oblation  with  the  (recitation 
of)  vyahrtis  ( bhuh ,  bhuvah,  svah). 

14-15.  O  Brahman  after  having  sipped  the  gruel  along 
with  the  pancagavya  (five  things  got  from  a  cow)  with  the 
vaisnava  mantra  and  the  syllable  vausat ,  the  priest  should  be  paid 
fees,  vessel  containing  sesamum  along  with  gold,  cloth  and  a 
cow  well-adorned.  The  wise  man  should  complete  the  austerity 
with  (the  utterance  of)  “May  lord  Visnu  be  pleased  !” 

16-17.  I  shall  describe  in  full  about  another  mode  of  conse¬ 
cration  other  than  that  of  fasting  for  a  month.  The  lord  of  the 
celestials  (Visnu)  should  be  worshipped  and  the  gruel  pertain¬ 
ing  to  Visnu  should  be  prepared  out  of  sesamum,  rice,  nivara 
grains  (rice  growing  unsown),  Syamaka  or  barley.  After  adding 
clarified  butter  and  lifting  it  up,  oblation  should  be  made  with 
that  with  the  mantras  relating  to  that  form  of  the  lord. 

18.  Oblation  should  be  made  to  Visnu  and  other  gods  who 
are  the  lords  of  different  months  then.  Om  !  oblations  for 
Visnu  !  Oblations  to  lord  Visnu,  the  ornament  !  Oblations  to 
Lord  Visnu,  the  tipivista  (pervaded  by  rays)  (an  epithet  of 
Visnu)  !  Om  !  oblations  to  Narasimha  (man-lion  form  of  Visnu). 
Om  !  oblations  to  Purusottama  (the  foremost)  (an  epithet  of 
Visnu)  !  Twelve  twigs  of  the  holy  fig  tree  dipped  in  the  clarified 
butter  should  be  given  as  oblation. 

19.  Twelve  oblations  (should  be  made)  with  the  mantra 
visno  rarata1.  Twelve  oblations  with  the  gruel  should  be  made 
with  (the  mantras )  idam  visnu ,2  iravati 3. 

20.  Similarly,  oblations  should  be  made  with  clarified  butter 
with  (the  mantra )  tadviprasa ,4  Having  done  the  remaining 
oblation,  three  concluding  oblations  should  be  made. 

21.  Having  repeated  the  hymn yunjate5  the  gruel  should  be 


1.  TS.  1.2.13.3. 

2.  RV.  1.22. 17a. 

3.  £V.  7.  99.3.a. 

4.  £V.  1.  22.21a. 

5.  £V.  5.  81.1a. 


66.22-30 


183 


s. 


partaken.  With  the  pranava  (syllable  om)  repeated  at  the  end  of 
the  respective  name  the  gruel  should  be  placed  in  a  vessel  made 
of  holy  fig  tree. 

22.  Then  twelve  brahmins  (representing)  the  twelve  pre¬ 
siding  deities  of  the  months  should  be  fed.  The  priest  (would  be) 
the  thirteenth.  The  thirteenth  place  should  be  offered  to  him. 

23.  Thirteen  pitchers  containing  sweet  water  along  with 
umbrellas,  shoes,  clothes,  gold  and  garlands  should  be  given  to 
them  for  the  sake  of  conclusion  of  the  rite. 

24.  A  path-way  should  be  laid  out  (for  the  cattle)  saying, 
“May  the  cows  get  pleased  !  May  they  move  happily  !”  Then 
the  sacrificial  post  should  be  planted  there. 

25-26.  A  water-shed  in  the  pleasure  grove,  monastery  and 
path-way  should  be  often  cubits.  Having  done  the  oblation  etc 
in  the  house  duly  in  the  prescribed  way,  the  householder  should 
enter  the  house  according  to  the  earlier  injunctions.  Offering 
of  food  etc.  without  any  restrictions  should  be  made  on  all  these 
(occasions). 

27.  Fees  should  be  paid  by  wise  men  to  the  brahmins  accord¬ 
ing  to  one’s  capacity.  Whoever  causes  toset  up  a  pleasure  grove 
stays  eternally  in  the  garden  of  Indra. 

28.  One  who  builds  a  monastery  goes  to  heaven  and  remains 
in  the  world  of  Indra.  One  who  sets  up  a  water-shed  (lives) 
with  Lord  Varuna.  By  (the  construction  of)  a  pathway  one  re- 


mains  in  the  heaven. 

29  One  who  builds  a  bridge  of  bricks  and  who  constructs 
a  pathway  for  cows  in  the  cattle  stall  and  one  who  observes  the 
austerities  in  the  prescribed  way  dwells  in  the  region  of  Visnu. 
One  who  performs  atonements  gets  rid  of  all  sins. 

30  Having  constructed  a  house  (for  the  god)  one  dwells  in 

heaven  so  long  as  the  universe  exists  The  “ 

consecration  of  Lord  Siva  etc.,  the  lords  of  their  edifices  (h 

been  described). 


184 


Agni  Purana 


CHAPTER  SIXTYSEVEN 


Renovation  of  decayed  images 

The  Lord  said  : 

1.  I  shall  describe  the  process  of  replacing  the  old  images. 
The  priest  should  bathe  the  images  with  their  ornaments  on  them. 
The  fixed  class  of  images  should  be  put  in  a  room  and  the  ex¬ 
tremely  time-worn  ones  should  be  rejected. 

2.  A  broken  or  mutilated  stone  (image)  (should  be  cast 
aside)  and  a  new  one  the  same  as  the  previous  one  should  be 
installed  (in  its  place)  by  the  priest  after  merging  the  principles 
according  to  the  process  of  merging  (described  earlier). 

3.  Having  made  one  thousand  oblations  with  the  Nara- 
simha  (mantra),  the  priest  should  lift  that  image.  The  old  image 
made  of  wood  should  be  put  into  fire  and  the  one  made  of 
stone  should  be  thrown  into  water. 

4.  The  old  image  made  of  a  mineral  or  gem  should  be  car¬ 
ried  on  a  vehicle  after  covering  it  with  cloth  etc.  and  be 
discarded  in  the  deep  waters  of  the  ocean. 

o.  It  should  be  thrown  into  waters  accompanied  by  the 
notes  of  music  instruments.  Fees  should  be  paid  to  the  priest. 

.  ^ew  ™aSes  of  the  same  size  and  made  of  the  same  mate- 
r  s  ould  be  installed  on  the  same  day.  One  accrues  great  merit 
by  the  renovation  of  wells,  tanks  and  ponds. 


CHAPTER  SIXTYEIGHT 

jJSt  ITSiT  *  ad  »/>“■“'*  ** 

The  Lord  said  : 

1.  I  shall  describe  the  celebration  of  festival  after  the 
image  has  been  installed  It  shall  r  •  ,  snval  altei  me 
nights.  hal1  be  for  a  night,  or  three  or  five 


68.2-13 


185 


2-3.  Without  the  festival  the  installation  would  become 
fruitless.  The  festival  for  the  deity  should  be  celebrated  when 
the  sun  enters  the  solstitial  or  the  equinoctial  points  in  the  bed¬ 
chamber  or  garden  or  it  may  be  done  in  favour  of  the  person  at 
whose  instance  the  ceremony  is  performed  with  the  sowing  of 
auspicious  seeds  and  the  notes  of  sacred  music. 

4-5.  An  earthen  vessel,  a  small  water  pot  or  an  embankment 
are  suitable  for  the  sowing  of  seeds.  Grains  of  barley,  uncultivat¬ 
ed  rice,  sesamum,  green  gram,  wheat,  white  mustard,  horse- 
gram,  and  black  gram  should  be  winnowed,  washed  and 
sown.  Offerings  should  be  made  in  the  east  and  other  dii  ections. 
Lighted  lamps  should  be  carried  round  the  edifice  in  the  night. 

6.  (Offering  should  be  made)  to  Indra,  Kumuda  and  other 
deities  and  spirits.  They  visit  the  place  assuming  shapes  of 
men. 

7.  (One  who  carries  such  lamps)  certainly  gets  the  merit 
of  (doing)  aivamedha  (horse  sacrifice)  for  every  step  he  places. 
The  priest  should  submit  to  the  lord  (as  follows)  after  his  return. 

8.  “O  Lord  !  best  among  the  Gods  !  you  have  to  be  taken 
in  a  procession  tomorrow.  By  all  means  you  deserve  to  permit 
us  O  Lord  !  to  commence  the  same. 

9.  Having  informed  the  lord  in  this  way  the  festivities 
should  be  undertaken.  The  platform  should  be  decorated  with 
young  shoots  of  plants  and  small  water-jar. 

10-11.  Four  pillars  (should  be  erected).  The  image  should 
be  placed  in  a  svastika  (figure)  (drawn)  in  their  midst.  Or  e 
sired  objects  should  be  painted  and  placed  there  and  the  *ct  ° 
making  the  deity  present  in  the  image  should  be  done  with  the 
vaisnava  mantra.  (The  image)  should  be  anointed  with  ghee 
with  (the  recitation  of)  the  principal  {mantra).  Or  the  wise  man 
should  arrange  an  incessant  flow  of  ghee  over  the  image  the 
whole  night. 

12.  Having  shown  the  mirror,  there  should  be  the  waving 
of  light,  auspicious  singing  and  instrumental  music,  fanning, 
worship,  and  present  of  light.  The  deity  should  be  worshipped 
with  incense  and  flowers. 

13  Turmeric,  green-gram,  saffron  and  w  ite  po\\  ers 
Should  be  put  on  the  head  of  image.  But  when  ghee  (^placed 
over  the  head)  it  gets  the  merit  of  all  sacred  places  for 
devotees. 


186 


Agni  Purana 


14.  Having  bathed  and  worshipped  the  image  that  is  placed 
in  the  car  for  being  taken  around,  the  officers  of  the  king  should 
take  it  to  the  river-side  accompanied  by  music,  umbrella  and 
other  things. 

15.  A  platform  should  be  got  ready  at  a  distance  of  a 
yojana  (eight  or  nine  miles)  before  the  river.  The  image  should 
be  brought  down  from  the  car  and  placed  on  the  platform. 

16.  Gruel  should  be  prepared  and  sweet  gruel  should  be 
offered  as  oblation.  The  sacred  waters  (of  the  sacred  spots) 
should  be  invoked  for  their  presence  with  (the  recitation  of) 
vedic  mantras  symbolising  the  waters. 

17.  The  image  should  again  be  worshipped  with  the  prin¬ 
cipal  oblations  uttering  the  mantra  apo  hi  stha\  The  image  should 
again  be  carried  to  the  waters  and  the  aghamarsana 2  hymn  repeated. 

18.  (The  priest)  should  bathe  with  the  assembly  of  brah¬ 
mins  and  then  the  image  should  be  lifted  and  placed  on  the 
platform.  Having  worshipped  it  there  that  day  it  should  then  be 
taken  to  the  temple.  The  priest  should  worship  it  as  in  the  fire 
which  gets  him  enjoyment  and  liberation. 


CHAPTER  SIXTYNINE 

Mode  of  conducting  the  bathing  festival 
The  Fire  {Lord)  said  : 

1.  O  Brahman  !  Listen  !  I  shall  describe  in  detail  (the 
mode  of  conducting)  the  bathing  festival.  The  pitchers  should 
be  placed  in  a  drawn  figure  in  the  shed  in  front  of  the  temple. 

2.  First  of  all,  God  Hari  (Visnu)  should  be  contemplated, 
propitiated  and  offered  oblations  before  doing  anything.  One 
should  offer  oblations  hundred  or  thousand  times  along  with  the 
final  one. 

3.  The  materials  for  bathing  should  then  be  brought  and  the 
pitchers  also  should  be  placed.  The  pitchers  to  the  necks  of  which. 

1.  RV.10.9.1a. 

2.  RV.10.190 — Tlam  ca  salyam  cabhidhat 


69.4-16 


187 


threads  have  been  tied  should  be  made  fragrant  and  they  should 
be  held  in  a  circle. 

4.  A  square  should  be  drawn  and  divided  into  eleven  com¬ 
partments.  The  gruel  should  be  placed  at  the  centre,  the  adja¬ 
cent  parts  having  been  cleaned. 

5.  The  nine  angular  points  commencing  with  east  should 
be  filled  with  powdered  rice  etc.,  and  the  pitcher  should  be  brou¬ 
ght  by  the  wise  man  after  having  formulated  the  kumbha  mudra1. 

6.  Darbha  grass  should  be  put  on  them  with  the  puntfarikaksa 
(an  epithet  of  Visnu)  (lotus-eyed)  mantra .  A  pitcher  filled  with 
water  and  containing  all  gems  should  be  placed  in  the  middle. 

7.  The  barley,  paddy,  sesamum,  uncultivated  rice,  syamaka 
(grains),  horse  gram,  green  gram  and  white  mustard  seeds 
(should  be  put)  in  the  eight  directions  in  order. 

8-9.  A  pitcher  filled  with  ghee  should  be  placed  in  the  mid¬ 
dle  of  the  eastern  side  in  the  midst  of  nine  pitchers.  The 
remaining  pitchers  should  be  filled  with  the  decoctions  of  the 
(barks  of)  paldia ,  aSvattha ,  nyagrodha ,  bilua,  udumbara ,  firisa, 
jambUy  iami  and  kapittha .  The  central  pitcher  in  the  nine  pitchers 
in  the  south-east  should  be  filled  with  honey. 

10.  The  remaining  eight  pitchers  should  be  filled  with  the 
earth  taken  from  loosening  by  cow’s  horn,  elephant’s  tusk,  horse 
hoofs,  mountains,  Ganges  bed,  sacred  spots,  rivers  and  fields. 

11-12.  In  the  nine  pitchers  on  the  south,  the  central  one 
should  be  filled  with  sesamum.  The  other  eight  pitchers  should 
be  filled  with  ndranga,  jambira,  kharjura ,  narikeia  (coconut),  puga 
(arecanut),  pomegranate,  panasa  fruits.  In  the  nine  pitchers  on 
the  south-west,  the  central  pitcher  should  be  filled  with  milk. 

13-15.  (The  remaining  eight  pitchers  should  be)  duly 
(filled  with)  saffron  ( kunkuma ),  naga,  campaka ,  mdlati,  jasmine, 
punnaga ,  karavira ,  and  mahotpala  flowers.  In  the  nine  pitchcis  on 
the  west,  the  central  pitcher  should  contain  the  coconut  water. 
(The  other  pitchers  should  contain)  waters  of  the  river, 
ocean,  tank,  well,  rain  water,  water  from  the  melted  ice, 
waters  of  the  falls,  and  of  the  Ganges.  In  the  nine  pitchers  on 
the  north-west  the  central  one  should  have  banana  fruits. 

16.  The  divine  herbs  sahadevi ,  kumdri,  siriihi ,  vydghri ,  amrtd> 


1 .  A  posture  made  with  the  hands  representing  a  pitcher. 


188  AgniPurdna 

: visnuparna ,  SataSiva  and  vaca  should  be  placed  in  the  other  eight 
pitchers. 

17-19.  In  the  east  and  the  northern  (directions)  among  the 
nine  pitchers  one  should  place  the  central  one  having  curd.  The 
other  pitchers  should  duly  be  filled  with  the  fragrant  substances— 
cardamom,  tvaca ,  kusfha ,  balaka ,  the  two  varieties  of  sandal,  the 
kasturika  creeper  and  the  black  agallochum.  (In  the  central 
pitcher  among  the  nine  pitchers  on  the  north  east)  one  should 
fill  waters  for  purification.  In  the  other  pitchers  we  should  have 
(the  materials)  candra ,  tara ,  fukla ,  girisara  (iron),  trapu  (tin), 
camphor,  Ursa  and  gems. 

20.  They  should  be  anointed  with  ghee  and  lifted  up  and 
bathed  with  the  principal  mantra  with  perfumes  and  worshipped. 
Having  offered  oblations  into  the  fire,  the  final  oblation  should 
be  offered. 

21.  Offering  should  be  made  to  all  spirits.  After  paying 
fees  to  (the  priest),  (the  priest  and  the  brahmins)  should  be 
fed  after  having  installed  the  images  of  deities,  sages  and  other 
divinities. 

22.  Having  installed  (the  image  of  the  god)  in  this  way 
one  should  conduct  the  bathing  festival.  One  who  bathes  (the 
image)  in  one  thousand  eight  pitchers  gets  all  fortune. 

23.  By  bathing  at  the  conclusion  of  the  rite,  the  bathing 
festival  concludes.  The  marriage  and  other  festivals  of  (the 
goddesses)  Gauri  (consort  of  Siva),  LaksmI  (consort  of  Visnu) 
should  be  celebrated  after  the  bathing  festival. 


CHAPTER  SEVENTY 
Mode  of  planting  trees 

The  Lord  said  : 

1-2.  I  shall  describe  the  mode  of  planting  trees  conferring 
enjoyment  and  emancipation.  The  trees  having  been  smeared 
with  all  the  herbs  and  adorned  with  fragrant  powders  should  be 
decorated  with  flower  garlands.  Cloth  should  be  put  around 


70.3-71.1-2 


189 


them.  (The  rite  known  as)  the  perforation  of  the  ear  should  be 
done  for  them  with  a  golden  needle. 

3-4.  Collyrium  should  be  applied  with  a  short  stick.  Seven, 
kinds  of  fruits  (should  be  placed)  on  the  platform.  The  pitchers 
should  be  consecrated.  The  offering  should  be  made  for  (the 
gods)  Indra  and  others  and  the  consecration  should  be  done. 
Oblations  to  the  fire  should  be  done  for  (the  sake  of)  plants. 
Remaining  in  the  midst  of  trees  a  cow  should  be  let  off  with 
the  (recitation  of)  abhisekamantra . 

5-6.  Brahmins  should  bathe  the  trees  as  well  as  the yajamana 
with  the  waters  of  pitchers  placed  in  the  platform  with  (the 
recitation  of)  the  rk,  yajus ,  sama  mantras  and  also  that  of  varuna 
accompanied  by  auspicious  music.  The  yajamana  should  adorn 
(himself)  and  should  present  the  fees  as  well  as  a  cow,  ornament 
and  cloth. 

7.  Food  should  be  given  along  with  milk  (to  brahmins) 
for  four  days  consecutively.  Oblation  should  be  made  with  sesa- 
mum  and  twigs  of paldsa  (tree).  The  sacrificial  priest  should  be 
paid  the  fees  double  (the  value  of  what  is  given  to  other  brah¬ 
mins). 

8.  The  construction  of  sheds  etc.  here  should  be  done  as 
laid  down  earlier.  The  consecration  of  trees  and  a  garden 
destroys  one’s  sins  and  gets  the  highest  merit. 

9.  Listen  to  the  (mode  of)  installation  (of  the  image)  of 
Surya  (sun),  Ganesa,  the  goddess  (Gaurl)  and  the  attendant 
deities  of  Lord  Hari  as  described  by  Isa  (Siva)  to  Skanda  (ear¬ 
lier). 


CHAPTER  SEVENTYONE 
Mode  of  worshipping  GaneSa 


The  God  said  : 

1-2.  I  shall  describe  the  (mode  of)  worship  of  Gana 

(Ganesa)  which  removes  obstacles  and  confers  1  e  ^‘re  ; 

objects.  (The  worship  of  six  kinds  should  be  done  as  <>  )• 

The  heart  with  “oblations  to  Ganesa”,  the  head  with  (obla 


190 


Agni  Purdna 


tions)  to  the  one-tusked”,  the  tuft  with  “  (oblations)  to  the  one 
who  has  the  ear  like  that  of  an  elephant”,  the  armour  with 
“ (oblations)  to  the  elephant-faced”,  the  eye  with  “(oblations) 
to  the  big-bellied,”  the  weapons  with  (oblations)  to  one  who 
has  his  own  tusk  in  his  hands”. 

3-5.  One  should  worship  th egana,  the  preceptor,  the  sandals, 
the  (divine)  energy,  Ananta,  the  dharma ,  and  the  collection  of 
bones  in  the  lower  part  of  the  pedestal,  the  cover,  the  petals  of 
the  lotus,  the  lotus  and  the  principal  letter,  (should  be  worshipp¬ 
ed)  in  the  upper  part.  (The  energies)  (are)  JvalinI,  Nanda, 
Suryesa,  Kamarupa,  Udaya,  KamavarttinI,  Satya,  and  Vighna- 
nasa.  The  seat  (should  be  worshipped)  with  perfumes  and  earth. 
(With  the  following  letters  the  appropriate  acts  should  be  per¬ 
formed)  :  the  drying  with  yam,  the  burning  with  ram,  the  agita¬ 
ting  with  lam  and  making  it  to  nectar  with  vam.  The  gdyatri - 
mantra  is  :  lambodaraya  vidmahe  mahodardya  dhimahi  tanno  dantih 
pracodayat.1 

6-7.  The  following  are  the  names  of  Ganesa  to  be  worshipp¬ 
ed  :  Ganapati  (Lord  of  ganas),  Ganadhipa  (chieftain  of  the 
ganas ),  Ganesa  (Lord  of  ganas),  Gananayaka  (the  lord  of 
ganas),  Ganakrlda  (one  who  sports  with  the  ganas),  Vakra- 
tunda  (having  a  bent  trunk),  Ekadamstra  (having  one  tusk), 
Mahodara  (big-bellied),  Gajavaktra  (elephant-faced),  Lamba- 
kuksi  (long-bellied),  Vikata  (dreadful),  Vighnanasana  (des¬ 
troyer  of  impediments),  Dhumravarna  (tawny-coloured)  and 
Mahcndra. 


CHAPTER  SEVENTY-TWO 
Mode  of  bathing  and  daily  worship 


The  God  said  : 


^  #  ^  Skanda  !  I  shall  describe  the  modes  of  bathing  and 
worship  after  the  installation  everyday.  Having  bathed  one 
should  dig  up  eight  fingers  of  earth  with  the  sword. 


1.  Mav  we  Itrmvu  _ _  _ 


“ w  w*'-  j  us  lowaras  it. 


72.2-12 


191 


2.  The  pit  should  be  filled  with  the  earth  thus  removed  and 
it  should  be  carried  to  the  river  bed  and  placed  there.  It  should 
then  be  purified  with  the  weapon. 

3-5.  The  grass  should  be  lifted  up  with  the  iikha  (tuft) 

( mantra )  and  divided  into  three  with  the  armour  {mantra). 
Having  washed  upto  the  navel  and  foot  with  one  part  of  them, 
the  other  part  should  be  burnt  with  the  aslra  mantra  and  sprinkled 
all  over  the  body.  Having  pressed  the  eyes  with  the  hands  one 
should  remain  immersed  in  the  water  for  some  time  after  con¬ 
trolling  the  breath.  One  should  contemplate  in  the  heart,  the 
weapon,  radiant  like  the  deadly  fire.  Having  finished  the  mud 
bath  in  this  way  one  should  rise  up  from  waters. 

6-7.  Having  worshipped  the  astrasandhya  (the  union  of 
weapon),  one  should  bathe  according  to  the  injunctions  laid 
down.  The  sacred  waters  of  the  rivers  Sarasvatl  and  others 
should  be  drawn  into  the  heart  with  the  (formation  of)  aiikusa - 
mudra  (a  formation  with  the  fingers  resembling  the  goad).  Having 
established  it  (there),  one  should  collect  the  remaining  mud 
formulating  the  saiiiharamudra  (posture  with  the  fingers  indicating 
destruction)  and  enter  the  navel-deep  water. 

8-9.  (The  remaining  mud)  should  be  made  into  three 
parts  on  the  left  palm  facing  the  north.  One  part  of  it 
on  the  south  once  with  the  anga  mantras ,  the  next  part  with 
the  (previous  mantra)  seven  times  and  the  one  on  the  north  with 
the  Siva  mantra  ten  times  and  duly  thus  the  parts  should  be  sancti¬ 
fied.  After  having  recited  the  mantra  for  the  weapon  ending  with 
hum phaf ,  the  first  part  (of  the  earth)  should  be  scattered  in  all 
directions. 

10.  Having  the  part  on  the  north  and  reciting  the  Siva- 
manlra  the  waters  of  Siva  should  be  accomplished.  The  part  on 
the  south  (sanctified  with  the  aiiga  mantra)  should  be  smeared  a 
over  the  body  from  head  to  foot. 

11-12.  After  having  recited  the  four  ahgamanlras  and  cover¬ 
ed  all  the  (nine)  apertures  (in  the  body)  with  the  lccitation  o 
the  sammukhikarana  mantra  {mantra  accomplishing  the  piesenccj, 
one  should  contemplate  Lord  Siva  or  Lord  Hari  oi  tic  anges 
and  plunge  into  the  waters.  Then  the  saiahga  mantra  {mantra 
for  assigning  to  the  limbs  of  the  body)  ending  with  vausat  s  ou 
be  recited  and  water  poured  (over  the  head)  . 


192 


Agni  Purana 


13-15.  One  should  place  water  in  the  pitchers  in  the  east 
(and  other  directions)  in  order  to  prevent  any  harm  during  ablu¬ 
tion.  Having  bathed  one  should  apply  sweet  perfumes  such  as 
emblic  myrabolans  which  are  (considered  as)  royal  honour. 
Having  bathed  and  come  out,  that  water  should  be  made  to- 
cease  to  exist  with  the  samhdrini  (mudra).  One  should  then 
bathe  from  head  to  foot  with  the  ashes  duly  purified  by  the  jem- 
hitd  (vedic)  mantras  or  concluding  rites  with  (the  recitation) 
of  the  mantra  hum  phal . 

16-17.  Having  performed  the  mala  snana ,  (bathing  with 
mud),  the  vid/iisnana  (bathing  with  the  recitation  of  mantras ), 
one  should  besmear  the  head,  face,  heart,  and  the  genital  organ 
with  the  {mantras  of  gods)  Is'a  (Isana),  Tatpurusa,  Aghora, 
Guhyaka  and  Jata  (Sadyojata)  in  the  three  twilights,  night,  and 
before  and  after  the  commencement  of  rainy  season. 

18-19.  If  a  person  happens  to  touch  a  woman,  an  eunuch, 
a  man  of  lower  caste,  a  cat,  hare  or  mouse  just  after  getting  up 
from  sleep,  or  eaten  food  or  drunk  water  one  should  do  the  agne- 
yaka  bathing,  standing  up  with  uplifted  arms,  the  face  having 
turned  towards  the  east,  being  cleansed  by  the  shower  of  sun’s 
rays. 

20.  The  mahendra  bathing  (consists  in  the  recitation  of  the) 
lia  mantra  and  walking  seven  steps  in  the  midst  of  herds  of  cows 
being  besmeared  with  the  dust  (arising)  from  the  hoofs. 

21-  The  pavana  (purifying)  bathing  (should  be  done) 
with  the  nine  mantras  or  the  constituent  mantra  and  the  pouring 
of  water  (should  be  done)  with  the  mantras  sadyojata ,  etc. 

22.  The  bathing  with  the  mantra  should  be  done  in  this  man¬ 
ner  in  honour  of  (the  gods)  Varuna,  Agni  and  others  with  (the 
recitation)  of  the  principal  mantra  being  preceded  by  the  regula¬ 
tion  of  the  breath. 

23.  The  mental  bathing  which  has  been  universally  enjoined 
should  be  performed  in  honour  of  Lord  Visnu,  by  uttering  the 
mantra  sacred  to  him. 

24.  O  Guha  (son  of  Lord  Siva)  !  I  shall  describe  the  rules 
(relating  to)  the  twilight  (worship)  (to  be  performed)  with 
different  mantras .  After  having  had  a  look  one  should  drink  the 
water,  the  Brahma  and  Sankara  tirthas  (from  the  root  of  diffe¬ 
rent  fingers). 

25.  (One  should  pronounce)  the  different  principles  consti- 


72.26-35 


193 


tuting  one’s  self  ending  with  the  term  svadha ,  touching  firmly  the 
(nine)  apertures  (in  the  body).  After  having  done  the  sakali - 
karana  (accomplishing  deed)  one  should  remain  composed  by 
(the  performance  of)  regulation  of  breath. 

26.  The  performer  should  mentally  repeat  thrice  the 
tivasamhitd .  After  having  sipped  water  and  performing  nyasa 
(assigning  gods  or  mantras  in  different  parts  of  the  body,  one 
should  meditate  upon  the  goddess  braluni  and  the  sandhya 
in  the  morning  as  follows : 

27.  (The  goddess)  having  red  complexion,  has  four  faces, 
four  arms  with  hanging  garlands  in  the  right  arms  and  a  stick 
and  kamanqlalu  (small  pitcher)  in  the  left  arms  and  seated  in  the 
crossed-lcg  posture  on  trie  swan. 

23.  The  midday  twilight  should  be  contemplated  as  Vais- 
navi,  white  (in  complexion),  seated  with  crosscd-legs  on  the 
Gambia,  holding  conch  and  disc  in  the  left  arm  and  the  mace 
and  abhaya  ( mudra )  (hand  showing  protection)  in  the  right  hand. 

29.  RaudrI  should  be  meditated  upon  as  seated  on  the  lotus 
and  as  riding  the  bull,  possessing  three  eyes,  decorated  by  the 
moon  and  holding  trident  and  rosary  in  the  right  arm  and  the 
protective  posture  ( abhaya )  and  mace  in  the  left  aim. 

30.  The  twilight  is  the  witness  of  deeds  of  men.  The 
soul  (should  be  known)  as  following  its  radiance.  The  fourth 
twilight  is  that  of  the  learned  and  it  is  meditated  upon  in  the 
night. 

31.  The  supreme  sandhya  is  declared  as  that  which  remains 
invisible  in  the  cavities  situated  at  the  heart,  and  the  upper  end 
of  the  nose  and  which  secures  the  realization  of  Siva. 

32.  The  root  of  the  fore-finger  (is  known  to  be)  the  pilr- 
tirtha  and  that  of  the  little  finger  as  that  of  Prajapati.  The  root 
of  the  thumb  (is  known  to  be)  that  of  Brahma,  while  the  fore¬ 
part  or  the  hand  is  held  sacred  for  all  gods. 

33  It  is  the  place  of  sacred  fire  on  the  palm  of  the  left 
hand,  and  the  soma  on  that  of  the  right  hand.  All  the  tips  and 
folds  on  the  fingers  (are  sacred)  for  the  sages. 

34.  After  having  got  ready  the  sacred  waters  for  Siva  with 
the  mantras  pertaining  to  Siva,  one  should  sprinkle  that  water 
with  the  samhita  mantras. 

35.  The  water  sprinkled  from  the  right  hand  should  drip 


194 


Agni  Purina 


down  through  the  left  hand  and  the  head  should  be  sprinkled 
(with  water)  with  the  (repetition  of)  mantras. 

36  The  water  remaining  in  the  right  palm  should  be  carried 
to  the' tip  of  the  nose  and  should  be  conceived  as  white  m  colour 
and  as  the  embodiment  of  knowledge.  The  water  should  then  be 
drawn  through  the  right  nostril  and  retained. 

37  That  water  should  then  be  ejected  into  the  right  palm 
after  having  conceived  it  as  black  in  colour  because  of  the  re¬ 
demption  of  one’s  sins.  It  should  be  thrown  on  a  stone  slab.  This 

is  known  to  be  the  aghamarsana  (redeeming  from  sin)  rite. 

38  Then  one  should  repeat  the  gayairi  mantra  as  many  times 
as  possible  after  having  offered  the  respectful  arghya  consisting 
of  kida,  flowers  and  unbroken  rice  to  Siva  with  the  mantras  of 
Siva  ending  with  (the  syllable)  svaha  (oblation). 

39.  I  shall  describe  the  offering  of  water  oblations  to  the  god. 
One  should  utter  the  mantra  Sivaya  svaha  (oblations  to  Siva) 
and  offer  water.  (The  syllable)  svaha  should  be  repeated  in 

all  cases.  _  ,  . 

40.  (The  nyasa  should  be  done  as)  hram,  to  the  heart;  hnm 

to  the  head;  hrum,  to  the  tuft  of  hair;  hraim,  to  the  armour  and 
the  weapons,  (or  in  the  alternative),  the  eight  gods  (can  be 
located)  in  the  heart  and  other  limbs). 

41-44.  (The  water  oblations  should  be  performed  for  the 
following  gods)  —hram,  to  the  Vasus,  Rudras,  Visve  (devas), 
(to  the  sages) — ham  to  Bhrgus,  Angiras,  Atri;  salutation  to  Va- 
sistha,  Pulastya,  Kratu,  Bharadvaja;  salutations  to  Visvamitra, 
to  Pracetas;  vasat  to  Sanaka;  ham  va;at  to  Sananda,  vasat  to 
Sanatana,  vasat  to  Sanatkumara;  vasat  to  Kapila,  to  Pancasikha, 
(the  ceremony  being  done)  with  the  fingers  of  the  light  han 
placed  at  the  elbow  joint  of  the  left. 

45.  Vausat  to  all  spirits.  One  should  (offer  water  of 
oblations)  to  the  spirits,  gods,  and  manes  with  the  sacred  thread 
placed  on  the  right  shoulder  and  with  the  tips  of  the  kusa  and 
sesamum. 

46.  (Oblation  should  be  offered)  to  the  fire,  the  convcyoi 
of  offerings,  to  Soma,  to  Yama,  to  Aryama,  (the  manes),  Agni- 
manes) ,  Agnisvatta  (and)  Barhisada  with  the  addition  of  svadha 
(food). 

47.  (Oblations  should  be  given)  to  (the  manes)  Ajyapa, 
Soma  and  to  all  manes  as  it  would  be  done  for  the  gods. 


72.48— 73.1-5 


195 


Om,  ham  to  Isana,  the  svadha  (food)  should  be  offered  to  the 
(manes)  (departed)  father  and  grand-father. 

48.  (Oblations  should  be  offered)  to  the  great-grand¬ 
father  and  the  manes  in  the  form  of  preta  (the  form  of  the 
manes  during  the  period  of  obsequies  after  one’s  death), 
the  fathers,  grandfathers,  and  great  grand-fathers. 

49-50.  Food  oblations  (should  be  given)  to  great-great- 
grand-fathers,  mother  side  relatives  such  as  the  maternal  grand¬ 
fathers,  great-grandfathers,  great-great-grandfathers  and  all 
manes.  Food  oblation  (should  be  offered)  to  all  departed 
paternal  relatives,  preceptors,  to  different  quarters  of  heaven, 
to  their  lords,  to  the  divine  mothers  and  to  demons. 


CHAPTER  SEVENTYTHREE 
Mode  oj  worshipping  the  Sun 


The  Lord  said : 

1.  O  Skanda  !  I  shall  describe  the  (mode  of)  worship 
of  Sun  preceded  by  the  assignment  (of  letters)  on  the  body. 
After  having  contemplated  as  “I  am  the  Sun”,  one  should  wor¬ 
ship  by  offering  waters  ( arghya ). 

2-4.  It  (should  be  conceived)  as  filled  with  red  colour  with 
the  drop  (of  water)  drawn  to  the  forehead.  After  having  wor¬ 
shipped  it  and  after  making  the  protective  covering  with  the  1  imbs 
of  the  sun-god,  that  water  should  be  sprinkled  on  the  materials 
of  worship  and  the  sun-god  should  be  worshipped  (remaining) 
facing  the  east.  (One  should  recite)  the  syllables  om  am  ( hfda - 
yaya  etc.  and  worship  Dandi  and  Pingala  (attendants  of  the  sun) 
respectively  at  the  right  and  left  sides  of  the  entrance.  (Saluta¬ 
tions  should  be  made  to  the  gam  saying)  am  gai}aya  on  the  north¬ 
east  The  preceptor  (should  be  worshipped)  in  the  south-east 
and  the  lofty  seat  (of  the  deity)  should  be  worshipped  in  the 
middle  of  the  altar. 

5  One  should  worship  vimala,  sara,  parama  and  sukha,  (the 
rays  of  the  sun),  which  are  to  be  worshipped  in  the  directions 


196 


Agni  Purano 


south-east  (and  should  be  conceived  as)  strong  as  the  lion  and 
of  the  colours  of  white,  red,  yellow  and  blue.  . 

6-8  One  should  worship  (the  essences  of  the  energies  of  the 
lord)  ra-dipia  (radiant),  ra-jaya  (victorious),  ru-bhadra  (auspi¬ 
cious)  re-vibhuti  (prosperity),  rai-vimald  (pure),  rai-amogha 
(profound),  rau-vidyut  (lightning),  in  the  (quarters)  east  etc 
inside  the  lotus  (shaped  diagram).  The  seat  of  the  sun  would 
be  at  the  centre  (established  by  the  syllable)  ram.  One  should 
invoke  the  sun  and  worship  his  form  with  the  six-syllabled 
imantra)  orh  ham  khakholkdya.  One  should  assign  the  sun-god 
after  having  meditated  upon  the  altar  with  the  folded  hands 
lifted  to  the  forehead. 

9.  One  should  invoke  the  god  (with  the  mantra)  liram  hrim 
sa  and  salutations  to  the  sun-god,  showing  the  mudra.  One  should 
offer  him  perfume  etc.  and  show  the  bimbamudra1 2. 

10.  One  should  show  the  padmamudra 2  and  the  bilvamudra 3 4 
(to  the  god)  in  all  directions  commencing  with  the  south¬ 
east.  Om  am  salutations  to  the  heart.  (Salutations)  to  sun  on  the 
head. 

1 1 .  Bhurbhuvah.  svah  !  Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  celestials 
in  the  tuft  of  hair  in  the  south-west,  hum  to  the  armour  in  the 
north-west,  ham  to  the  eyes  at  the  centre. 

12.  Va  !  (salutations)  to  the  weapons  in  the  east  etc.  Then 
one  should  show  mudras.  Dhenumudra  (fingers  folded  in  the 
shape  of  a  cow)  to  the  heart  etc.  The  Govisana  mudra 1  should  be 
shown  to  the  eyes. 

13-14.  The  trasanl  (the  dreadful)  should  be  added  to  the 
mantra  of  the  weapon  and  obeisance  should  be  made  to  the  pla¬ 
nets  (as  follows)— som  salutations  to  the  Moon,  bum  salutations 
to  Mercury,  brm  to  Jupiter,  bham  to  Venus,  am  to  Mars,  sam  to 
Saturn,  ram  to  Rahu  and  kem  to  Kctu(to  be  done)  in  the  petals 
(of  the  lotus)  commencing  with  the  east.  The  perfumes  etc. 
(should  be  offered)  with  the  khakholka  mantra. 

15.  Having  recited  the  principal  mantra,  water  of  oblation 
from  the  water-vessel  should  be  offered  to  the  sun-god.  Then 


1.  Intertwining  of  fingers  representing  a  form. 

2.  Intertwining  of  fingers  representing  a  lotus. 

3.  Intertwining  of  fingers  in  a  particular  way. 

4.  Formation  of  fingers  representing  the  horn  of  a  cow. 


197 


73.16—74.1-6 

the  worshipper  should  sing  the  glory  of  the  lord,  pay  obeisance 
to  him  with  his  face  turned  away  and  say  “Pardon  me,  (taking 
•leave  of  thee)  . 

16-17.  One  should  mentally  merge  the  five  component 
principles  in  the  fundamental  one  with  the  syllable  pha[.  The 
sun-god  should  be  conceived  as  identical  with  lord  Siva  in  the 
lotus  of  the  heart.  One  should  offer  light  to  the  lord  as  a 
garland  made  of  the  solar  rays.  One  gets  everything  by  thus 
worshipping  and  contemplating  the  sun-god  or  by  oblation  unto 
•fire  in  his  honour. 


CHAPTER  SEVENTYFOUR 
Mode  of  worshipping  Siva 


The  Lord  said  : 

1  I  shall  describe  the  (mode  of)  worshipping  Siva. 
After  having  sipped  water,  and  repeated  the  syllable  Om, 
one  should  wash  the  entrance  of  the  temple  with  water  (^e- 
crated  by  the)  mantra  of  the  weapon  and  worship  th  gu 
deities  of  the  door-ways  and  of  the  oblations  etc. 

2-3.  One  should  worship  goddess  Sarasvati  (<«t  0 
Lord  Brahma),  LaksmI  (consort  of  Lord  Vis*u)  and  Ga*a  at 
the  threshold,  Nandin  (attendant  of  Lord  Siva)  a  h  G  ^ 
on  the  right  and  Mahakala  (form  of  Siva) 

(river)  on  .he  left  imaging  htaclfas  the 

after  having  driven  the  spirits  and  impediments  pres 

sky  by  throwing  a  consecrated  flowei.  •  ht  heels 

4.  One  should  kick  the  earth  thrice  w  h i  h  g  ^ 
and  enter  the  place  of  worship  after  leaping  across 

holding  the  left  door  frame.  lacing  the  right 

5.  Having  entered  (the  temple)  t^ytJeshoid,  one  should 

foot  (first)  and  placing  the  weaP°"  foii0VVing) :  om,  ham,  (obei- 
worship  at  its  centre  (repeating  the  dwelling  place, 

sance)  to  Brahma,  the  presi  g  e  silently  carrying 

6.  Then  he  should  goto -hr  »v'rGa»S«’ 


198  Agni  Purdna 

pure  golden  pitchers  by  means  of  searching  instruments,  after 
having  obtained  permission  from  Siva. 

7.  One  should  fill  them  with  waters  of  the  river  filtered  with 
the  cloth  after  the  repetition  of  gayatri  or  the  hrdayamantra , 
and  purifying  one’s  body. 

8.  The  materials  for  worship  such  as  the  perfumes,  un¬ 
broken  rice  and  flowers  etc.  should  be  placed  in  front  of  the  place 
and  the  purification  of  five  material  components  (of  the 
earth)  should  be  ~  done. 

9.  Having  placed  (these  materials)  on  the  right  side  of  the 
deity  with  a  pleasing  face  and  having  lifted  these  showing  saiii- 
hara  mudra  (posture  of  the  fingers  representing  destruction), 
one  should  place  them  on  the  head  with  (the  repetition  of) 
the  mantra . 

10-11.  One  who  is  desirous  of  enjoying  the  fruits  of  action 
should  meditate  upon  his  soul  in  the  twelve-petalled  lotus  in  the 
heart  by  means  of  showing  pamkacchapikd  (a  particular  way  of 
showing  the  fingers)1.  As  an  alternative  one  should  purify  the 
five  elements  by  meditating  upon  the  apertures  in  the  body  from 
the  toes  of  the  feet  upwards  both  inside  and  outside. 

12.  One  who  meditates  should  control  his  breath  and  medi¬ 
tate  on  the  energy  which  pervades  the  region  of  the  heart,  in  the 
letter  hum  which  resembles  the  fire  and  which  is  situated  at  the 
centre  of  the  aperture. 

13.  The  breath  should  then  be  let  out  and  the  fiery  image 
should  be  led  through  the  heart,  neck,  palate,  the  intervening 
space  between  the  two  eye-brows  and  the  seat  of  the  soul  in  the 
head  {brahmarandhra) ,  with  the  ending  (syllable)  phaf . 

14.  Having  broken  the  knots,  the  life  syllable  hum  should 
be  located  on  the  head  and  the  consciousness  should  be  reflected 
back  in  the  heart  by  means  of  the  pur  aka  (filling  with  air  drawn 
through  the  nostril). 

15.  Having  placed  (the  syllable)  hum  on  the  tuft,  one  should 
meditate  upon  the  absolute  soul  of  the  form  of  a  speck.  Having 
withheld  the  breath  at  a  single  stretch,  one  should  unite  the 
consciousness  with  Sambhu  (Siva). 

16.  After  having  merged  himself  with  Siva,  by  means  of 
drawing  his  consciousness  with  the  aid  of  bijamantras  and  the 


1.  Representing  the  tortoise. 


74.17-27 


199 


recaka  (exhalation  of  the  breath),  (the  worshipper)  should 
purify  by  carrying  in  the  reverse  order  the  luminous  point  (in 
the  brain)  to  the  point  in  (the  nerve-complex). 

17.  One  should  merge  the  earth,  wind,  water,  fire  and  sky, 
one  into  the  other  without  any  deviation  in  the  order.  You  hear 
about  it  now  ! 

18.  The  principle  of  earth  is  hard,  of  yellowish  colour  and 
bears  the  mark  of  thunderbolt.  Then  its  destruction  is  wrought 
by  the  subtle  mantra  of  the  soul  (namely)  haum. 

19.  The  entire  body  from  foot  to  head  should  be  contemplat¬ 
ed  as  a  four-sided  figure,  and  the  principle  of  wind  should  be 
meditated  therein  by  five  stretches  of  retention  of  breath. 

20.  This  principle  which  has  been  established  with  the 
principal  syllable  hrim  should  be  contemplated  as  of  half-cres¬ 
cent-shaped  in  a  liquid  state,  white  in  colour,  beautiful  and 
impressed  with  (the  figure  of)  the  lotus. 

21.  The  reverential  principle  of  fire  which  is  causeless  and 
which  is  the  end  of  men,  should  be  purified  by  four  stretches  of 
retention  of  breath  along  with  the  Rama  mantra. 

22.  The  orb  of  fire  should  be  conceived  as  three-sided,  red 
(in  colour),  marked  with  (the  sign  of)  svastika  and  as  the  form  of 
knowledge  and  endowed  with  the  principal  syllabic  hum. 

23.  The  principle  of  water  should  be  purified  by  means  of 
three  stretches  of  awful  minuteness.  The  orb  of  wind  (principle) 
(should  be  conceived)  as  marked  with  six  dots. 

24.  It  should  be  meditated  as  composed  of  tranquility, 
black  in  colour  and  endowed  with  the  principal  syllable  of  hrim 
(and  purified)  by  two  stretches  (of  retention  of  breath).  The 
principle  of  earth  should  be  purified. 

25.  (It  should  be  contemplated)  as  filled  in  with  ether,  as 
of  the  form  of  the  speck  of  ether,  uniformly  circular,  spotless  like 
the  pure  crystal  and  adorned  by  the  energy  of  bindu. 

26.  After  having  contemplated  on  the  form  of  the  digit  that 
is  beyond  tranquility  by  means  of  the  {mantra)  haum  ending 
with  phat,  one  should  contemplate  the  pure  (thing)  by  one 

stretch  (of  retention  of  breath). 

27  One  should  then  permeate  the  lotus  or  circles  such 
as  adhara  (base),  ananla  (endless),  dharma  (righteousness) 
and  jnana  (knowledge)  with  the  shower  of  ambrosia  with  the 
principal  mantra. 


1200 


Agni  Purdna 


28  After  having  contemplated  this  scat  of  the  heart,  one 
should  then  invoke  the  form  of  essence  of  Siva  placed  inside 

that  (lotus)  with  twelve  petals. 

29.  Then  that  form  should  be  permeated  everywhere  with 
the  divine  ambrosia  with  the  mantra  of  the  energy  ending  with 
Vausat  and  the  sakalikarana  (accomplishing)  rite  should  be  per¬ 
formed. 

30.  The  sakalikarana  is  that  by  which  the  mantras  for  the  heart 
etc.  are  placed  in  the  different  parts  of  the  body  such  as  the 
heart,  arms,  and  the  little  fingers  of  the  hand. 

31.  Having  protected  the  enclosure  with  the  weapon  and 
the  outer  place  with  its  mantra  the  mahamndra  consisting  of  the 
energy  should  be  shown  below  and  above  that. 

32-33.  One  should  worship  Siva  in  the  lotus  in  the  heart 
from  head  to  foot  with  the  retention  of  breath  and  with  the  flow¬ 
ers  of  one’s  own  feeling.  One  should  then  offer  the  clarified  butter 
of  ambrosia  to  the  fire  of  Siva  in  the  sacred  pit  of  the  navel  with 
the  mantras  of  Siva.  One  should  contemplate  the  white  figure  of 
the  form  of  bindu  on  the  forehead. 

34.  One  of  the  vessels  among  the  golden  pitchers,  should 
be  purified  by  water  of  nectar  got  from  the  speck  and  by  unbro¬ 
ken  rice. 

35.  Having  filled  the  vessel  with  the  six  constituents  and  after 
having  worshipped  it,  it  should  be  consecrated.  After  having  protec¬ 
ted  it  with  the  mantra  ha  one  should  cover  it  with  the  armour. 

36.  After  having  made  ready  the  water  of  offering,  one 
should  sprinkle  the  eight  constituents  (with  water)  by  (showing) 
the  dhenumudra  (a  particular  form  of  intertwining  the  fingers 
representing  the  cow).  One  should  then  sprinkle  one’s  own  self 
on  the  head  with  the  particles  of  that  water. 

37.  One  should  sprinkle  water  of  the  weapon  on  the  mate¬ 
rials  of  worship  kept  there.  One  should  then  encircle  them  with 
the  armour  of pinda  with  the  hrt  [mantra). 

38-39.  After  having  shown  the  amrla  mudrd  (formation  with 
fingers  denoting  non-decay)  and  putting  flower  on  its  scat  and 
a  mark  on  the  forehead  consecrated  by  the  principal  mantra  (of 
the  god)  a  bold  man  should  remain  perfectly  silent  at  the  time  of 
bathing,  worship  of  the  god,  (offering)  oblation  unto  fire, 
eating,  practising  yoga  and  repetition  of  necessary  [mantras). 


201 


74.40-51 

40.  The  rdanlra  should  be  purified  by  pronouncing  the  nada 
(om)  at  the  end.  That  purified  mantra  should  then  be  used  in  the 
worship  along  with  the  gdyalri  ( mantra )  and  the  general  water 

of  oblation  should  be  offered. 

41..  After  having  repeated  the  brahmapaficaka1,  (the  wor¬ 
shipper)  should  collect  the  garland  from  the  lifigd  and  offer  it  to 
Canda  in  the  north-eastern  direction. 

42.  The  purification  of  the  lifiga  consists  in  the  washing  of 
the  pedestal  and  the  liiiga  with  the  water  (consecrated)  by  the 
mantra  of  weapon  and  hrdmanlra  and  sprinkle  with  the  water 
(for  washing)  from  the  vessel  of  arghya. 

43.  All  the  celestials  should  be  worshipped  for  the  purifica¬ 
tion  of  the  self,  the  materials,  the  mantra  and  the  lifiga.  Ham, 
salutations  to  God  Ganapati  in  the  north-western  direction.  One 
should  pay  obeisance  to  the  preceptor  in  the  north-east. 

44-45.  One  should  worship  the  goddess  of  the  seat  (of  the 
god)  in  the  kurmaSila  (the  tortoise  form  on  the  stone)  as  possess¬ 
ing  complexion  of  the  tender  shoots  and  the  seat  of  Siva  known 
as°ananta  (endless)  should  be  worshipped  as  seated  on  the 
brahma  Slid  along  with  the  attendants  of  the  god  such  as  Vicitra- 
kesa,  Kfta  and  Trcta  who  form  the  seat  and  shoes  as  they  were 
of  divinity. 

46.  Then  the  worshipper  should  worship  righteousness, 
knowledge,  detachment  and  prosperity,  towards  the  south-east 
as  possessing  the  hues  of  camphor,  saffron,  gold  and  collyrium 

respectively.  .  . 

47-48.  At  the  centre  of  the  lotus-shaped  diagram  and  m  its 
petals  in  the  east  etc.  one  should  worship  the  energy  goddesses— 
Vama,  Jyestha,  RaudrI,  Kali,  Kalavikarini,  Balavikaram  and 
Balapramathani  in  order  as  holding  the  chownes  and  as  confer¬ 
ring  boons  and  offering  protection. 

49.  One  should  worship  (the  goddesses)- Ham,  (saluta¬ 
tions)  to  SarvabhutadamanI,  (salutations)  to  Manonmarn, 
to  Ksiti,  to  Suddhavidya  at  the  extremities  of  the  petals  (of  t  e 
lotus  diagram)  as  also  the  seat  as  spread  over  the  component 

parts  of  the  universe.  . 

50-51.  The  lord  of  white  complexion,  possessing  five  faces 

and  ten  arms,  all-pervasive,  bearing  the  crescent  moon  an 


I .  The  five  mantras  of  the  five  brahman  forms  of  Siva. 


202 


Agni  Pur&na 


carrying  weapons — spear,  sword,  lance,  and  staff  in  the  right 
hands  and  a  drum,  citron,  blue  lotus,  a  string  and  a  waterlily 
in  the  left  hands  should  be  located  on  the  lion-seat. 

52-54.  The  image  of  Siva  possessing  thirty-two  characteris¬ 
tics  (should  be  installed)  at  the  centre.  Ham,  ham ,  ham  (saluta¬ 
tions)  to  the  image  of  Siva.  After  having  meditated  upon  the 
self-luminant  Siva,  the  mantra  should  be  led  to  the  spot  sacred  to 
Siva  after  leaving  below  the  place  sacred  to  Brahma.  Then  (the 
worshipper)  having  meditated  upon  that  Supreme  form  of  Siva, 
effulgent  with  the  splendour  of  the  moon,  as  a  luminous  point 
at  the  middle  of  the  forehead  and  being  invested  with  the  six 
constituents,  with  flowers  in  folded  palms,  should  deposit  (those 
flowers)  on  the  form  of  (Goddess)  LaksmI. 

55-57.  Om ,  ham ,  haum  salutations  to  Siva.  (The  deity) 
should  be  invoked  with  the  invoking  hrd  (mantra).  Having  estab¬ 
lished  Siva  with  the  sthapani  (mudra)1,  and  placed  near  (that  ) 
should  be  checked  with  Nisthura  and  Kalakanti  concluding 
with  phat.  After  having  removed  obstructions  by  sending 
them  away  and  making  obeisance  by  (showing)  the  lihga - 
mudra ,  it  should  be  covered  with  the  hrd  (mantra).  The  invoca¬ 
tion  should  follow  it.  Then  standing  in  front  of  the  image  he 
should  repeat.  “Let  you  be  located  and  firmly  established.  O 
lord  !  I  am  in  your  presence.” 

58.  The  (rite  of)  avagunthana  signifies  the  presence  and  super 
vision  of  the  God  and  the  exhibition  of  one’s  devotion  (to  the 
God)  from  the  commencement  to  the  end  of  the  act. 

59.  After  having  done  the  accomplishing  act  with  the  six 
mantras ,  the  (rite  of)  amrtikarana  should  be  performed  by  men¬ 
tioning  different  parts  of  the  body  along  with  the  body. 

60-61.  The  worshipper  should  permeate  his  heart  with  the 
energy  of  consciousness  of  Sambhu  (Siva).  Similarly,  (he  should 
contemplate)  the  tuft  of  hair  of  Siva  as  formed  of  the  eight- 
fold  glories.  The  worshipper  should  contemplate  the  invincible 
energy  of  God  as  forming  his  armour,  the  unbearable  prowess 
of  God  which  removes  all  impediments  (and  the  words) 
salutations,  svadhd,  svdhd  and  vausaf  (should  be  appended)  in 
order. 

62-65.  The  water  for  washing  the  feet  should  be  offered 


1.  Formation  with  the  fingers  denoting  firm  establishment. 


203 


74.66-73 

preceded  by  the  recitation  of  the  hrd  {mantra).  The  water  (should 
be  offered)  at  the  lotus  feet  and  the  water  for  the  rinsing  of  the 
mouth  at  the  face  of  the  image,  the  respectful  offering  at  the  head 
of  the  lord  along  with  the  durva  (grass),  flowers  and  unbroken 
rice.  Having  purified  the  supreme  lord  with  the  ten  purifica¬ 
tions  thus,  one  should  worship  with  the  five  kinds  of  services 
such  as  the  flowers  etc.  as  laid  down  (in  the  code  books). 
Having  sprinkled  and  rubbed  (the  image)  with  salt,  mustard 
seed  etc.,  it  should  be  slowly  bathed  with  drops  of  water,  flowers, 
perfumes,  milk,  curd,  ghee,  honey  and  sugar  successively. 

66.  The  defects  in  the  above  materials  should  be  rectified 
by  worshipping  with  materials  along  with  the  recitation  of  Isa 
mantras.  Lord  Siva  should  be  bathed  with  water  and  fragrance 
with  the  principal  mantra. 

67-68.  Having  applied  the  paste  of  barley,  it  should  be  ba¬ 
thed  copiously  with  cold  water  and  also  with  fragiant  water 
according  to  one’s  ability.  Having  wiped  it  dry  with  a  clean 
cloth,  the  preliminary  offering  of  water  should  be  given.  The 
hand  should  not  be  moved  over  the  head  (of  the  image).  The 
linga  should  never  be  left  without  any  flower  on  its  head. 

69.  Having  smeared  it  with  sandal  etc.  and  worshipped  with 
flowers  with  the  mantras  of  Siva,  the  vessel  for  holding  the  pei  - 
fumes  should  be  consecrated  with  the  weapons  (i mantra )  and 
worshipped  with  the  mantras  of  Siva. 

70.  The  bell  consecrated  by  the  weapon  {mantra)  should  be 
taken  and  the  incense  should  be  offered.  The  water  for  rinsing 
should  be  given  then  (with  the  repetition  of)  svadha  at  the  end 
and  with  the  hrd  mantra. 

71.  Having  shown  light  for  the  idol  in  the  night,  then 
water  for  rinsing  should  be  offered.  After  having  made  obeisance 
to  god  and  taking  his  permission,  eatables  and  other  articles  of 
enjoyment  should  be  offered. 

72.  The  heart  should  be  worshipped  in  the  south-east,  the 
moon  on  the  north-east,  the  golden-coloured  Siva  together  with 
the  tuft  and  blood  on  the  south-west,  Krsna  and  armour  on  the 
north-west. 

73.  These  gods  having  four  faces  and  four  arms  should  be 
worshipped  in  the  petals  in  the  cast  etc.  along  with  the  divine 
weapon  similar  to  thunder  and  fierce  teeth. 


•204 


Agni  PurSna 


74.  Hawn  salutations  to  Siva  at  the  base,  Om  ham  hum  him 
horn  in  the  head,  hrm  to  the  tuft,  haim  to  the  armour,  hah  to  the 
weapons  and  to  one  with  the  attendants. 

75-76.  Waters  for  washing  the  feet,  for  rinsing  the  moutn 
and  respectful  offering,  perfumes,  flowers,  incense,  lamp,  food 
offerings  and  water  for  rinsing  again,  should  be  given  to  lord 
Siva.  Intertwined  blades  of  kuSa  and  unbroken  rice  should  be 
placed  on  the  head  (of  the  image)  of  the  lord.  Perfumes,  betel, 
piece  of  cloth  for  wiping  the  face  and  a  mirror  (should  also  be 
offered  to  the  deity). 

77-78.  After  having  repeated  the  principal  ( mantra )  eight 
hundred  times,  the  sword  of  the  lord  covered  by  the  sheath,  pro¬ 
tected  by  the  kuta  and  flowers  and  consecrated  by  hrd  (mantra) 
along  with  the  unbroken  rice  and  with  the  udbhava  mudra  (a 
formation  made  with  the  fingers  indicating  generation).  O 
most  mysterious  !  Accept  this  repetition  (of  mantra)  for  our 
welfare. 

79-81.  “May  there  be  success  for  me  by  this  by  your  pre¬ 
sence  here”.  Having  recited  this  verse  at  first,  the  worshipper 
should  offer  to  Sambhu  (Siva)  the  waters  of  respect  with  the 
right  hand  with  (the  repetition  of)  the  principal  mantra .  What¬ 
ever  good  or  bad  that  I  may  do  O  lord  !  let  it  be  cast  off  from 
me  who  am  in  the  region  of  Siva.  Hum  ksah  O  Sankara,  Siva 
is  the  giver,  Siva  is  the  enjoyer,  Siva  is  all  this  universe. 

82.  Siva  is  victorious  everywhere.  I  am  identical  with  Siva. 
After  having  repeated  these  two  verses,  the  japa  should  be  dedi¬ 
cated  to  the  lord. 

83.  One-tehtli  (should  be  dedicated)  to  the  limbs  of  Siva. 
Having  offered  the  waters^of  respect,  one  should  adore  (the  deity). 
After  circumambulating  (the  deity),  one  should  bow  to  the 
eight-formed  (representing  the  five  elements,  sun,  moon  and 
yajamana)'  deity  by  prostrating  (the  eight  limbs  touching  the 
ground).  After  salutation  (the  deity)  should  be  worshipped  in 
a  picture  or  in  the  fire  by  meditation  etc. 


75.1-10 


CHAPTER  SEVENTY-FIVE 
Mode  of  installation  of  the  fire 


205-  * 


The  God  said  : 


j  (The  worshipper)  should  enter  another  room  unseen 
with  the  vessel  containing  water  for  offering  in  his  hand  and 
should  look  to  the  arrangements  of  the  materials  essential  in  the 
performance  of  a  sacrifice,  as  it  were,  with  a  divine  eyesight. 

2.  He  should  look  at  the  sacrificial  pit  with  his  face  turned 
towards  the  north.  The  sprinkling  and  beating  the  water  with 
the  ktda  should  be  done  by  (repeating)  the  mantra  of  the  weapon 
and  the  consecration  should  be  done  with  tlie  mantra  ol  the  aim- 

3.  The  digging  out  (a  piece  of  earth),  filling  and  levelling 
with  the  sword  should  be  done  with  (the  mantra  of)  the  armour 
and  bathing  and  division  into  parts  (should  be  done)  with  the 


mantra  of  the  arrow. 

4.  The  (rites  of)  cleansing,  anointing,  fixing  the  crescent 
form,  investiture  of  the  sacred  thread  and  worship  (should  be 
done)  always  bv  the  mantra  of  the  armour. 

5.  Three  lines  should  be  drawn  in  the  north  and  one  below 
them  (should  be  drawn)  so  as  to  face  the  cast.  Whatever  delects 
in  them  may  be  made  good  by  touching  them  with  the  kusa  and 

the  astramantra  of  Siva..  ... 

6.  A  quadrilateral  figure  should  be  drawn  with  the  kusa 
by  the  mantras  of  vajrikarana  (cstaulishing  fii  mh  )  and  hrd.  1  he 
vessel  for.  the  rosaries  should  be  laid  with  (the  mantra  of)  the  arm¬ 
our.  The  seat  should  be  laid  with  the  hrd  mantra. 

7-8.  The  Goddess  of  speech  along  with  the  God  snould  be 
invoked  therein  and  worshipped.  The  consecrated  lire  broug.n 
from  a  holy  place  and  placed  in  a  pure  receptacle,  after  leaving 
aside  its  parts  presided  over  by  the  demons  and  purified  by  the 
divine  look  etc.,  the  three  fires  auddrya,  aiudava  and  bL.uta  should 

be  made  into  one.  ,  .  v 

9-10.  Om  hum  (salutations)  to  god  ol  fire.  (Ihe  dot  ) 

should  be  established  with  the  principal  mantra  of  the  fne.  T  ic 
fire  which  has  been  invoked  with  the  vedic  hymns  and  made 
immortal  by  showing  the  dhenumudra  (formation  with  the  fingers 
representing  a  cow),  and  protected  by  mantras  of  weapons  should 


206 


Agni  Purana 

be  covered  by  the  armour.  It  should  be  worshipped  by  waving 
over  the  pit  thrice  and  circumambulation. 

11.  Having  meditated  upon  (the  fire)  as  an  element  of 
Lord  Siva,  (the  worshipper)  should  contemplate  it  as  lying 
dormant  in  the  womb  of  Goddess  of  speech  and  cast  by  the 
Lord  of  speech. 

12.  The  worshipper  should  have  his  knees  resting  on  the 
ground  and  put  the  fire  in  his  front  with  the  hrd  mantra .  Then 
the  seeds  of  fire  in  the  vicinity  should  be  gathered  a.t  the  centre.  s 

13.  The  collection  of  clothes,  purification  and  offering 
of  water  for  rinsing  the  mouth  (should  be  done)  with  the  hrd 
(mantra).  Having  worshipped  the  dormant  fire,  it  should  be 
protected  by  (the  recitation  of)  the  mantra  of  the  shaft. 

14.  The  embryo  fire  should  be  contemplated  as  tied  around 
the  wrist  of  the  goddess  as  a  bracelet.  The  fire  should  be 
worshipped  with  the  sadyojala  (mantra)  for  the  impregnation. 

15.  Three  oblations  to  the  fire  should  then  be  offered  with 
(i hrdayamantra .  For  the  pumsavana  (rite)  (for  the  determination 
of  the  sex  of  the  foetus)  (generally  performed)  in  the  third  month 
it  should  be  worshipped  on  the  left  side. 

16.  Three  oblations  containing  drops  of  water  should  be 
offered  with  the  head.  The  simantonnayana  (rite)  (parting  of 
the  hair  on  the  head)  (performed)  in  the  sixth  month  should  be 
done  after  having  worshipped  the  fire. 

17.  Three  oblations  should  be  offered  into  the  fire,  after 
having  determined  the  formation  of  its  face  and  body  by  one  who 
wants  to  restore  or  open  up  the  face. 

18.  As  before  the  jatakarma  (the  purificatory  rite  on  the 
birth  of  a  child)  and  rtukarma  (the  rite  after  the  first  menses) 
(usually  performed)  in  the  tenth  month  should  be  performed  by 
kindling  the  fire  with  darbha  etc.  (Mental)  bathing  (should  be 
done)  to  remove  the  impurities  of* the  pregnancy. 

19.  After  having  mentally  contemplated  the  golden  bracelet 
of  the  goddess  one  should  worship  with  the  hrd  (mantra).  He 
should  sprinkle  with  water  consecrated  by  the  mantra  of  the  wea¬ 
pon  for  the  immediate  removal  of  impurities  after  the  birth 
of  a  child. 

20.  The  pitcher  outside  the  receptacle  for  the  sacred  fire 
should  be  touched  with  the  weapon  (mantra)  and  (water)  should 
be  sprinkled  over  with  the  (mantra)  of  the  armour.  The  ends  of 


75.21-32 


207 


the  kuSa  which  form  the  boundary  (of  the  sacrificial  pit)  and 
placed  on  the  north  and  east  (should  be  washed  with  water) 

with  (the  mantra  of)  the  weapon. 

21.  The  periphery  of  a  circle  around  (the  fire)  should  be 
determined  with  the  kuSa,  previously  consecrated  with  the  wea¬ 
pon  and  hrd  mantra  and  then  the  cushions  inscribed  within  it 
should  be  spread  out  by  (reciting)  the  weapon  mantra. 

22  Five  sacrificial  sticks  dipped  in  clarified  butter  should 
be  offered  into  the  fire  with  the  repetition  of  the  principal  mantra 
Brahma,  Sankara,  Visnu  and  Ananta  should  be  worshipped 

with  the  hrd.  (mantra).  .  .  ,  , ;  , 

23.  The  gods  located  in  the  periphery  (of  that  circle)  should 

be  worshipped  in  turn  with  unbroken  rice.  The  gods  Indra  to 
Isana  who  are  directly  facing  the  fire  and  are  having  their  places 
inside  the  circle  should  be  worshipped  in  their  own  regions  wit 
the  hrd  (mantra)  “Protect  this  child  (fire)  by  removing  a 

obstacles,  that  might  befall  it.” 

24-28.  One  should  then  make  them  hear  this  command  o 
Siva.  He  should  then  take  the  sacrificial  spoon  and  the  ladle 
heat  them  on  the  fire  and  touch  them  with  the  base,  middle  and 
tips  of  the  darbha  with  face  downwards.  In  the  place  touched  by 
the  kuia  the  three  principles  relating  to  the  soul,  knowledge  and 
Siva  should  be  located  duly  with  the  sounds  ham,  hnm,  hum  and 
sam.  Having  located  the  goddess  in  the  sacrificial  spoon  and 
Sambhu  (Siva)  in  the  sacrificial  ladle  with  the  hrdaya  mantra 
their  necks  being  girdled  with  three  strings  (of  thread)  and 
worshipped  with  flowers  etc.,  kuSas  should  be  placed  on 
and  they  should  be  placed  on  the  right  side. 

29-39.  Having  gathered  the  clarified  butter  of  the  cow  that 
has  been  purified  by  looking  at  it  and  after  having  contemplate 
one’s  own  Brahma  form  and  carrying  that  ^nfied  butte 
should  wave  it  over  the  pit  and  move  ,t  round  and  ound  i n  the 
south-east.  Again  having  contemplated  the  Visnu  nn 
should  hold  the  clarified  butter  and  carry  it  towards .the ^  nor  h- 
east  it  should  be  offered  to  Visnu  (into  the  fire  with  the  tips 
of  die  fa*  and  with  the  ^  of  the  head  ending  with  Wi. 
Similarly,  one  should  conceive  «he  form  •£££££ 
point  in  one  s  own  navel  a  and  hdd 

water  over  that  with  two  kuias  of  the  lengtn  F 
with  the  ring  finger  and  thumb. 


Agni  Purana 


2(18 

33.  Water  should  be  sprinkled  over  the  fire  in  front  (of  the 
worshipper)  (with  the  two  kudos')  held  (as  above)  accompanied 
by  the  mantra  of  the  weapon.  Similarly,  the  worshipper  should 
again  sprinkle  water  (over  the  fire)  in  front  of  him  with  the  hrd 
( mantra ) . 

34.  The  burnt,  ashes  of  darbha  collected  with  the  hrd 
[mantra)  should  be  purified  by  striking  with  the  implements  and 
with  the  other  lighted  darbha  it  should  be  taken  out  and  lighted. 

3o-36.  The  darbha  burnt  by  the  mantra  of  the  weapon  should 
again  be  thrown  into  the  fire.  Having  put  the  knotted  darbha 
'of  the  length  of  a  span  in  the  clarified  butter,  one  should  contem¬ 
plate  the  two  for  nights,  the  three  arteries  ida  etc.  in  the  clari¬ 
fied  butter  and  offer  the  clarified  butter  divided  into  three  parts 
as  oblation  unto  fire  with  the  sacrificial  ladle  in  order  with  (the 
syllable)  sva  and  ha.  The  remaining  part  of  the  clarified  butter 
should  also  be  offered  to  the  fire  successively. 

37.  Om  ham  oblation  to  god  Agni.  Om  ham  oblation  to  god 
Soma.  Orh  ham  oblation  to  the  gods  Agni  and  Soma.  (The 
above  oblations  should  be  offered  into  the  fire)  for  the  purpose  of 
opening  (as  it  were)  the  three  eyes  of  the  fire  god  in  his  face. 

38.  The  fourth  oblation  should  be  offered  with  the  sacri¬ 
ficial  ladle  filled  with  clarified  butter.  Om  ham  oblation  to  fire- 
god  for  the  offering  of  a  right  sacrifice.  After  having  consecrated 
in  the  six  parts  of  one’s  body,  (the  fire  god)  should  be  invoked 
with  the  dhenumudra  (posture  with  the  fingers  representing  a 
cow). 

39.  Having  covered  it  with  the  armour,  the  clarified  butter 
should  be  protected  by  the  mantra  of  the  shaft.  The  clarified 
butter  should  be  purified  by  sprinkling  water  and  offering  a  drop 
of  it  into  the  fire  along  with  the  hrd  [mantra), 

40.  The  rites  of  uniting  the  mouths  of  the  fire  should  be 
performed  as  follows.  Orh  ham  oblations  to  Sadyojata.  Om  ham 
oblations  to  Vamadeva.  Om  ham  oblations  to  Aghora.  Om  ham 
oblations  to  Tatpurusa.  Orh  ham  oblations  to  Udna,  Thus  with 
oblations  to  one  by  one,  one  should  do  the  union  of  the  (diffe¬ 
rent)  faces. 

4L-42.  Om  ham  oblations  to  Sadyojata  and  Vamadeva. 
ham  oblations,  to  Vamadeva  and  Aghora.  Orh  ham  oblations  to 
Aghora  and  Tatpurusa.  Orh  ham  oblations  to  Tatpurusa  and 
Isana.  Thus  the  union  is  done  in  order  with  the  recitation  of 


75.43-51 


209 


these  mantras .  With  the  flow  of  ghee  from  the  sacrificial  ladle 
taking  it  from  the  fire  through  the  angular  points  such  as  north¬ 
west,  south-west,  and  ending  with  north-cast,  one  should  unite  the 
faces.  Om  ham  oblations  to  Sadyojata,  Vamadeva,  Aghora, 
Tatpurusa  and  Isana.  Thus  its  form  and  other  faces  should  be 
contemplated  in  the  face  of  one’s  liking. 

43.  Having  worshipped  the  fire  in  the  north-east  and  offer-, 
ing  three  oblations  with  the  mantra  of  the  weapon,  (the  worship¬ 
per)  with  his  entire  soul  should  contemplate—' “O  Fire-God  ! 
you  arc  the  divine  essence  of  Siva.” 

44.  Having  worshipped  the  parents  with  the  hrd  (i mantra ) 
and  left  them  aside,  the  final  oblation  which  concludes  the  rite 
should  be  oflered  as  laid  down  with  the  principal  mantra  ending 
with  vausat. 

45.  Then  one  should  worship  the  resplendent,  Supreme  God 
attended  upon  by  the  attendants  and  retinue,  after  having  in¬ 
voked  him  in  the  lotus  of  his  heart  as  before.  He  should  offer 
waters  of  oblation  to  Siva  after  having  requested  his  permission. 

46.  Having  established  a  union  among  the  god  of  the  sacri-  - 
ficial  fire,  god  Siva  and  his  soul  situated  in  his  arteries,  .(the 
worshipper)  should  offer  oblations  with  the  principal  mantra 
befitting  one’s  capacity  and  using  one-tenth  of  mantras  as  a 
supplement. 

47.  A  kdrsika  (a  particular  weight)  of  the  clarified  butter, 
milk  and  honey  and  a  Sukti  (twice  that  of  kdrsika)  of  the  curd  and 
a  handful  of  sweet  porridge  (should  be)  offered. 

48-49.  The  worshipper  should  offer  as  deemed  fit  the  obla¬ 
tion  with  all  the  eatables,  a  handful  of  fried  grains,  three 
pieces  of  roots  and  an  equal  number  of  fruits.  Five  half- 
mouthfuls  of  cooked  rice,  bits  of  sugarcane  of  the  length  of  a 
span  and  stems  of  sacrificial  creepers  measuring  two  fingers  in 
length  should  be  offered  into  the  fire. 

59.  The  oblations  of  flowers  and  leaves  should  be  according 
to  their  own  measure.  The  sacrificial  twigs  should  measure  ten 
fingers  in  length.  The  camphor,  sandal,  saffron,  musk  and  an 
ointment  made  of  camphor,  aggallochum  and  kakkola  in  equal 
parts  (should  also  be  oflered). 

51 .  (The*  worshipper)  should  make  an  oblation  of  the  kalaya 
(a  leguminous  seed)  and  guggulu  (a  fragrant  gum-resin)  of  the 


210 


Agni  Purana 


Size  of  the  kernel  of  the  jujube  fruit  and  eight  parts  of  the 

roots  as  laid 1  should  thus  be  completed  with  the  (prin- 

cipa mantra)  brahmabija  («*)  with  sacrificial  ladles  filled  with 
clarified  butter  holding  the  ladle  in  such  a  way  as  to  have  ns  cup 

Part53d-56  nV Having  placed  a  flower  at  the  head  of  the  spoon  and 
then  holding  it  firftwith  the  left  hand  and  then  with  the  right 
hand  and  (showing)  the  mudra  denoting  the  conch  he  should 
stand  up  half  erect  with  feet  evenly  placed  and  eyes  fixed  upon 
the  end  of  the  ladle  and  holding  the  base  of  ladle  pressed  agains 

his  navel.  Then  one  should  rouse  up  the  stream  of  his  pure  con¬ 
sciousness  through  the  susumna  (nerve  centre  below  the  spira 
chord)  and  carry  it  to  the  base  of  his  left  breast  vigilantly  and  tell 
the  principal  mantra  ending  with  the  vausat  in  a  low  tone,  ihe 
clarified  butter  should  be  offered  having  a  flow  of  the  measure 

of  the  barley.  ,, 

57.  Water  for  rinsing  the  mouth,  sandal,  betals  etc.  should 

be  offered.  (The  worshipper)  should  meditate  in  his  greatness 
with  devotion  and  then  offer  salutation. 

58-59.  After  having  worshipped  the  fire  well  with  (the 
mantra  of)  the  weapon  ending  with  phat  and  showing  the  samhara 
mudra  (the  posture  of  the  fingers  conveying  destruction)  and 
uttering  “Pardon  me”,  the  gods  who  reside  in  the  periphery 
(of  the  mystic  circle)  should  be  placed  in  the  lotus  of  the  heart 
with  extreme  devotion  with  the  hrd mantra  after  taking  a  breath. 

60.  All  the  edibles  (got  ready  for  the  worship)  should  be 
taken  and  kept  in  two  circular  diagrams.  Offerings  should  be 
done  both  inside  and  outside  in  the  vicinity  of  sacrificial  pit  in 
the  south-east. 


61 .  Om  ham  oblations  to  Rudras  in  the  east  and  in  the  same 
way  to  the  mothers  in  the  south.  Ham ,  oblations  to  the  ganas 
on  the  west.  This  offering  is  for  them. 

62.  And  ham  to  th zyaksas  on  the  north,  ham  to  the  planets 
on  the  north-east,  ham  to  the  asuras  on  the  south-east,  ham  obla¬ 
tions  to  the  raksasas  in  the  south-west. 

63.  And  ham  to  the  nagas  on  the  north-west,  and  to  the  stars 
at  the  centre.  Ham  oblations  to  the  constellations  in  the  south¬ 
east,  and  then  to  the  Viive  ( devas )  in  the  south-west. 


211 


75.64 — 76.1-6 

64-65.  It  is  said  that  the  offering  for  the  guardian  of  the 
ground  is  inside  and  outside  in  the  west.  (Oblations  should 
be  made)  to  Indra,  Agni,  Yama,  Nirrti,  Varuna,  Vayu,  Kubera 
and  Isana  in  the  cast  etc.  outside  in  the  second  mandala.  Salu¬ 
tations  to  Brahma  on  the  north-east. 

66.  Oblations  to  Visnu  in  the  south-west.  The  offerings  for 
the  crows  etc.  (should  be)  outside.  The  mantras  for  the  two  offer¬ 
ings  in  one’s  soul  should  be  by  the  sariiharamudra  (posture  with 
fingers  indicating  destruction). 


CHAPTER  SEVENTYSIX 
Mode  of  worshipping  Carina  ( attendant  of  Siva) 

Lord  said  : 

1 .  (The  worshipper)  should  approach  (the  image  of  Lord) 

Siva  and  address  as  follows:  “O  Lord  !  accept  the  merits  of  the 
worship  and  the  oblations  offered  by  me.  _ 

2.  We  should  convey  these  to  the  lord  with  a  firm  mind 

along  with  the  respectful  offering  of  water  and  uttering  the  Prin 
cipal  mantra  preceded  by  the  hrdbija  ( om )  and  the  exhibition  of 
the  udbhava  mudra  (a  posture  of  fingers  representing  genera¬ 
tion).  .  . 

3.  Then  having  worshipped  as  before  and  praismg  with 
hymns  and  saluting,  (the  worshipper)  should  offer  the  respectful 
offering  of  water  with  his  face  turned  away  (from  the  image) 

and  should  say  "Pardon  me”.  . 

4.  The  lihga  should  be  discharged  by  uttering  the  man  ra 
of  the  weapon  ending  with  phat  coupled  with  the  divine  nard 
camudra  (formation  with  fingers  representing  an  non  arrow), 
it  should  be  merged  with  the  mantra  of  the  image. 

5.  After  having  worshipped  god  on  the  platform  an 
having  merged  in  himself  the  collection  of  mantras  as  laid  down, 
the  worship  of  Cancja  should  be  made. 

6.  Om  salutations  to  Candesana.  Salutations  to  the  image 
of  Canda  at  the  centre.  Om,  hum  phat  oblations  to  Dhulicande- 
svara.  Thus  he  should  be  invoked. 


212 


Agni  Purina 


7  Hum  phat  to  Canda  at  the  heart.  Then  cm  to  Ca^a  on 
the  head.  Om  hum  phat  to  Can (l a  on  the  tuft,  to  Canda,  the  pro- 

tC7  7  ahT  to 'canda  as  the  weapon  hum  phat.  One  should 
meditate  on  Canda,  born  of  the  fire  of  Rudra  and  as  carrying 
die  mace,  axe,  rosaries  and  the  anchorite’s  pitcher  and  as  having 

a  dark  complexion.  .  .  . 

9  The  four-faced  deity  should  be  worshipped  in  the  half¬ 
crescent  shaped  axe  weapon  (of  Canda).  One  should  repeat  (the 

mantra)  befitting  one’s  capacity,  being  one-tenth  of  the  principal 

worship.  ^  thc  offer;ngs  such  as  the  cow,  earth,  gold,  clothes, 
gems  and  ornaments,  the  remains  of  offerings  should  be  offered, 
to  Candcsa. 

11.  Being  ordered  by  Siva,  I  have  offered  to  you  these 
articles  of  food  and  drink,  betels,  garlands  and  scented  pastes, 


the  ramnants  of  offering.  . 

12.  O  Canda  !  may  all  these  acts  of  service  (undertaken) 
by  me  by  your  order  (be  agreeable  to  you).  Any  shortcoming  oi 
redundancy  out  of  my  ignorance  may  be  made  complete  always. 

13.  Having  submitted  to  thc  lord  thus  and  offered  the 
respectful  water  and  contemplated  his  form,  the  mantras  should 
be  merged  with  the  self  with  thc  mantra  of  the  destructive  deit} 
and  showing  slowly  the  samhara  mudra  (formation  with  the  fingers 
(representing  destruction)  along  with  the  principal  mantra  and 
taking  a  breath.  The  offering  such  as  flowers  etc.  should  then  be 
removed  and  that  place  cleansed  with  cowdung  dissolved  in 
waters.  After  offering  water  respectfully  one  should  conclude  by 
rinsing  one’s  mouth  and  do  any  other  worship. 


CHAPTER  SEVENTYSEVEN 
Mode  of  worshipping  Kapila  ( the  Cow ) 

The  Lord  said  : 

1 .  I  shall  describe  to  you  thc  mode  of  worship  oi  Kapila  (the 
cow).  The  cow  should  be  worshipped  with  these  mantras .  Om 


77.2-13 


213 


salutations  to  you  O  Kapila,  one  makes  us  rejoice,  the  abode 
of  bliss.  Salutations  to  you. 

2.  Om  salutations  to  you  O  Kapila  of  good  disposition. 
O  Kapila,  as  effulgent  as  Surabhi  (the  divine  cow,  daughter 
of  Daksa  and  wife  of  Kasyapa).  Om  Kapila,  the  good-minded, 
salutations.  Om  salutations  to  the  bestower  of  enjoyment  and 
emancipation. 

3.  O  Daughter  of  Surabhi  !  the  Mother  of  the  universe  ! 
Giver  of  ambrosia  to  the  celestials  !  Granter  of  boons  !  Accept 
this  morsel  of  food  and  grant  me  all  my  desires. 

4.  You  had  been  worshipped  by  Vasistha  and  the  learned 
Visvamitra.  O  Kapila  !  Take  away  my  sins  and  the  bad  acts 
of  mine. 

5.  (Let  there  be)  cows  always  in  front  of  me.  (Let  there  be) 
cows  behind  me.  (Let  there  be)  cows  in  my  heart  also.  I  am 
dwelling  in  the  midst  of  cows. 

6.  May  you. accept  the  morsel  of  food  offered  by  me.  After 
repetition  (of  the  mantra')  let  me  be  pure  like  Lord  Siva.  After 
having  worshipped  the  books  of  learning  one  should  bow  at  the 
feet  of  the  preceptor. 

7.  One  should  bathe  (again)  at  noon  and  worship  (Lord) 
Siva  with  astapuspika.  The  asfapuspika  is  the  worship  of  the 
image,  seat  and  the  limbs  of  (the  image  of)  Siva. 

8-9.  The  cooked  food  should  be  brought  into  the  well- 
cleansed  kitchen  at  mid-day.  Then  after  the  recitation  of  the 
mrtyunjaya  mantra  (that  which  conquers  death)  seven  times  and 
ending  with  the  vausat,  the  food  should  be  sprinkled  with  drops 
of  water  with  the  darbha  and  conch.  The  entire  food  should  fiist 
he  dedicated  to  Siva  after  lifting  them  up. 

1 0.  Then  half  of  the  above  should  be  set  apart  for  oblation 
at  the  fire-place.  After  having  purified  the  fire-place  as  per  rules, 

the  oblation  (should  be  done). 

11-12.  Having  made  the  oblation  once  in  the  fire  around 
one’s  navel  one  should  gather  the  seed  of  fire  with  the  breath 
drawn  in  and  after  taking  it  through  the  places  of  the  letters, 
one  should  meditate  on  it  as  "You  are  the  fire  of  Lord  Siva 
and  it  should  be  put  at  the  fire-place.  Om  ham  obeisance  to  fire- 
god — as  also  ham  obeisance  to  Soma. 

13.  Obeisance  to  Sun-god,  to  Jupiter,  the  lord  of  people. 
(Obeisance)  to  all  gods  and  to  all  Visvedevas. 


214- 


Agni  Purdna 


14.  Ham  obeisance  to  fire-god,  for  offering  a  right  sacrifice. 
One  should  worship  these  in  the  east  and  other  directions.  After 
having  made  oblations  ending  with  the  word  svaha  one 
should  bid  farewell  after  seeking  forbearance. 

15.  One  should  worship  (the  god  of  righteousness)  on  the 
right-hand  side  of  the  fire-place.  1 ‘Salutations  to  the  god  of  right¬ 
eousness.  The  lord  of  unrighteousness  (should  be  worshipped) 
on  the  left-handside  in  a  vessel  containing  sour  gruel. 

16.  Lord  Varuna  (should  be  worshipped)  as  the  trans¬ 
former  of  the  sap  and  as  the  lord  of  fire  in  the  waters.  Lord  of 
obstacles  (Vinayaka)  (should  be  worshipped)  at  the  entrance. 
Obeisance  to  Subhaga  at  the  grinding  stone. 

17.  Om  obeisance  to  Raudrika  and  Girika.  Obeisance; 
one  should  worship  in  the  mortar.  Obeisance  to  the  pestle,  the 
weapon  dear  to  Bala  (rama) .  It  should  be  worshipped. 

18-19.  The  two  gods  mentioned  (should  be  worshipped) 
in  the  broomstick  and  the  god  of  love  in  the  bed.  Having  offer¬ 
ed  oblation  to  the  trunk  for  the  presiding  deity  of  the  ground 
at  the  middle  stump  one  should  eat  from  a  golden  vessel 
or  in  the  petals  of  the  lotus  etc.  The  preceptor,  the  worshipper 
and  the  son  should  maintain  silence  at  the  time  of  this  vow. 

20-22.  (The  leaves)  of  the  vata ,  aivattha ,  arka ,  vdtari ,  sala 
and  bhalldtaka  should  be  discarded.  After  having  rinsed  the 
mouth  with  water,  five  oblations  should  be  offered  with  the  five 
pranas  (winds  in  the  body)  together  with  the pranava  (om)  ending 
with  svaha  (oblations).  The  fire  in  the  belly  should  be  kindled. 
With  the  secondary  winds  (in  one’s  body)  viz.,  naga ,  kiirma , 
krkara ,  devadatla  and  dhanahjaya ,  oblations  (should  be  made). 
Having  offered  food  with  the  waters  of  apotana  (prayer  re¬ 
peated  before  and  after  eating),  one  should  drink  the  rest 
of  the  water. 

23.  You  are  an  ambrosial  seat.  Oblations  for  the  vital  winds 
should  be  made  as  before.  Oblations  to  ihc  prana,  apana ,  samanay 
udanay  and  vyana.  Having  eaten  food,  water  should  be  sipped. 
(The  mantra  for  that)  is  “you  are  the  ambrosial  'covering.” 
Thus  the  food  and  the  winds  in  the  body  (are  worshipped). 


78.1-11 


215 


CHAPTER  SEVENTYEIGHT 
Mode  of  investiture  of  the  sacred  thread  for  the  deity 
The  Lord  said  : 

1.  I  shall  describe  the  (mode  of)  investiture  of  the  sacred 
thread  (for  the  deity)  which  completes  the  acts  of  worship  etc. 
(It  is  of  two  kinds),  the  daily  routine  (without  any  motive)  and 
the  other  being  undertaken  to  be  done  with  a  motive. 

2.  It  should  be  done  on  the  eighth  or  fourteenth  day  of  the 
bright  or  dark  fortnights  in  the  months  of  asadha  (July-August) 
or  iravana  (August-September)  or  bhadrapada  (Scptember- 
October) . 

3-4.  Or  it  should  be  done  on  the  first  day  of  either  fort¬ 
nights  during  the  (above)  months  upto  kdrtlika  (October- 
November),  for  (the  images  of)  the  fire  god,  Brahma,  Ambika, 
Ibhasya  (Ganesa),  Naga  (lord  of  serpents),  Skanda,  Arka 
(Sun),  Sulin,  Durga,  Yama,  Indra,  Govinda  (manifestation  of 
Visnu),- Smara  (God  of  love),  Sambhu  (Siva)  and  other  gods. 
(The  threads  should  be)  made  of  gold,  silver  and  copper  in  the 
krta  (first  one  among  the  four  eras)  and  other yugas  (eras). 

5-6.  A  cotton  (thread)  or  silk  thread  or  the  one  made  of 
(fibres  of)  lotus  should  be  used  in  the  Mi  {yuga)  (the  last).  The 
pranava  {pm),  moon,  fire-god,  Brahma,  serpent-god,  Guha  (son 
of  Siva),  Hari  (Visnu),  Sarvesa  and  other  gods  would  reside  in 
the  nine  component  strings  (of  the  thread).  The  utlama 
(excellent)  and  other  classes  {madhyama  and  adharna)  would  be 
those  which  contain  one  hundred  and  eight  (strings)  or  half  of 
that  or  a  quarter  of  that. 

7.  Or  it  should  be  made  to  contain  eighty-one  or  thirty- 
eight  or  fifty  strings  having  binding  knots  at  equal  intervals. 

8.  The  breadth  of  the  thread  should  be  twelve  or  eight  or 
four  finger  lengths  or  else  it  should  be  equal  to  the  breadth  of  the 
lihga. 

9.  (In  length)  it  should  be  touching  the  pedestal  (of  the 
image)  or  (should  be  equal)  to  a  quarter  of  thq  length  of  the 
deity  as  a  whole.  The  descent  of  the  Ganges  should  be  accomp¬ 
lished  by  washing  with  pure  (water). 

10-11.  The  knots  should  be  made  with  (the  mantra  of) 
Varna  (deva),  purified  with  that  of  Aghora,  dyed  with  the  paste 


216 


Agni  Purana 


of  saffron,  sandal,  musk,  yellow  pigment,  camphor,  turmeric 
and  red  chalk  etc.  with  that  of  (Tat)  purusa.  There  should  be 
ten  knots  or  equal  to  the  number  of-strings. 

12-13.  The  inter-space  between  the  knots  (should  be) 
one,  two  or  four  finger  lengths  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  it  ele¬ 
gant.  The  knots  are  known  as  sadasiva,  manonmani,  piakrti 
(nature),  paurusi  (relatihg  to  the  purusa ),  vira  (valovous)^ 
apardjitd  (invincible),  jaya  (victorious),  vijaya  (victorious), 
ajitd  (unconquered),  sadasiva  (always  auspicious),  manonmani 
(expanding  intellect),  and  sarvamukhi  (omniscient)  which 
confer  good. 

1 4.  The  sacred  thread  for  the  moon,  fire-god  and  sun  should 
be  done  similar  to  that  for  Siva,  in  the  heart,  or  in  their  own 
image  or  in  a  book  or  in  that  of  the  preceptor  or  the  ganas . 

15.  In  the  same  way  there  should  be  one  in  each  one  of  the 
pitchers  of  the  door-keeper  and  the  presiding  deity  of  the  direc¬ 
tions  etc.  The  sacred  thread  for  the  linga  should  measure  from 
one  to  nine  cubits  in  length. 

16-18.  The  number  of  knots  (in  a  thread)  of  the  vrddha 
(class)  should  be  twenty-eight,  the  number  for  other  classes 
being  eighteen  and  eight  respectively,  their  breadth  in  all  being 
proportionate  with  the  breadth  of  the  linga.  On  the  seventh  or 
thirteenth  day  of  a  fortnight  (one  should)  become  clean  and  do 
his  daily  rites.  Then  (he)  should  adorn  the  place  of  worship  with 
flowers,  cloth  etc.  in  the  evening  and  should  perform  the  naimit- 
tika  (rites  done  with  some  motive),  especially  the  waters  of  ob¬ 
lation. 

19.  After  having  taken  possession  of  the  sacred  ground,  the 
sun-god  should  be  worshipped.  After  rinsing  his  mouth,  the  pre¬ 
ceptor  should  do  the  rite  of  accomplishment  (mentioning  the 
names  of  the  parts  of  the  body  along  with  the  mantras).  Water 
should  be  offered  with  respect  with  the  pranava  (the  syllable 
om). 

20.  The  threshold  should  be  sprinkled  with  water  with  the 
mantra  of  the  weapon  (and)  the  worship  should  be  duly  commen¬ 
ced  from  the  east.  Ham  (obeisance)  to  the  entrance  to  the  Sanli- 
kala  (digit  of  peace);  (obeisance)  to  the  vidyakala  (digit  of  know¬ 
ledge). 

21.  (Obeisance)  to  the  digit  of  non-action,  to  the  one  digit 


79.22-35 


217 


known  as  existence.  The  warden  of  the  god  should  be  worship¬ 
ped  at  the  top  sides  of  those  doors,  two  at  each  (as  follows) . 

22.  (Obeisance)  to  Nandin,  to  Mahakala,  to  Bhrngm,  to 
Gana,'  to  Vrsabha,  to  Skanda,  to  Devi  and  to  Canda  in  order. 

23  In  the  case  of  worship  being  undertaken  without 
any  motive,  the  preceptor,  having  entered  and  worshipped  the 
guardian  deities  at  the  western  entrance,  and  after  punfica 
of  materials,  should  offer  water  of  respect. 

24.  After  having  done  the  sprinkling  (of  water)  etc.,  a 
collected  the  materials  for  the  rite,  consecration  with carbha 
durva  and  flowers  should  be  made  with  the  mantras  like  hTd  etc. 

25  After  having  permeated  thus  with  the  essence  o  , 
one  should  place  it  on  his  head.  I  am  Siva,  the  first  being,  omni¬ 
scient  and  I  have  the  importance  in  the  rites. 

26.  The  preceptor  (holding)  the  sword  of  knowledge  in 

his  hand  should  deeply  contemplate  the  lord,  ^bsequent  y  e 
•should  go  to  the  south-western  direction  and  pour  (the  w 
ings  etc.)  with  his  face  turned  towards  the  north).^ 

27-28  The  respectful  water  offering,  the  pancagavya  ( 
five  things  got  from  a  cow)  and  all  other  (articles  of  worship) 
which  have  been  purified  by  means  of  rites  at  the  end  - 
roads  and  by  divine  look  etc.  and  put  in  the  sacrifice  pav  on^ 
•one  should  collect  the  bunch  of  kuia  lying  scattered,  place 
over  the  little  jar  in  the  north-eastern  direction.  , 

29.  The  presiding  deities  of  the  place  should  be  wors  ipp 
in  the  south-west  and  (Goddess)  Laksmi  at  the  entrance.  The 
pitcher  is  placed  on  all  kinds  of  grains  facing  the  west. 

30.  Then  the  bull-riding  God  and  the  pitcher  (oat 

placed  on  the  lion  (should  be  worshipped)  with  the  pramwa  ( m )• 

Lord  Siva  should  be  worshipped  in  the  jar  with  his  attendant 

gods  and  the  weapons  in  the  vardhani. 

31-32.  Indra  and  other  guardian  deities  of  daections, 
Brahma,  Visnu  and  Siva  (should  be  worshipped)  in  the  (differ¬ 
ent)  directions.  Having  taken  the  vardhani  (in  the  hand)  b  - 
hind  the  pitcher,  the  preceptor  should  read  out  the  mandate  oT 
Lord  Siva  in  all  directions  commencing  with  east  a 

ending  with  the  north-east.  (The  entire  ground)  (should  be 
made  wet)  by  an  unbroken  flow  of  water  (along)  wit  t  ic  rcci 
tation  of  principal  mantra . 

33-35.  This  should  be  moved  around  in  all  directions 


218 


Agni  Purdna 


for  the  sake  of  protection  as  if  it  were  the  weapons.  Having 
placed  the  pitcher  in  the  east,  the  lord  should  be  worshipped  in 
the  pitcher  placed  foremost  at  the  front  firmly,  while  there  should 
be  one  for  the  weapons  to  the  left  of  it.  The  weapons  located 
with  the  prenava  (< om )  (should  be  worshipped  with  the  vardliani. 
Then  the  union  of  the  two,  the  base  and  the  lifiga  should  be 
accomplished  by  (showing)  the  lifiga  mudra  (posture  of  the  fingers 
representing  the  lifiga).  Then  the  sword  of  knowledge  should  be 
dedicated  to  the  (consecrated)  pitcher.  The  principal  mantra 
should  then  be  repeated. 

36-37.  Protection  should  be  spelled  out  with  a  tenth  (of  the 
mantra)  in  the  vardhani .  After  having  worshipped  Lord  Ganesa 
(lord  of  the  ganas)  in  the  north-west  and  Lord  Kara  (Visnu) 
with  the  five  sweet  things  (milk,  sugar,  ghee,  curd  and  honey), 
the  fire  sacred  to  Siva  should  be  worshipped  in  the  sacrificial 
pit  as  before  and  bathed  after  having  made  the  sacrificial  gruel 
duly  purified  by  the  sampdta  (residual)  oblation. 

38.  It  should  be  divided  with  the  ku$a  into  three  parts  res¬ 
pectively  consecrated  to  the  god,  the  fire-god,  and  the  soul,  of 
which  the  former  two  should  be  offered  to  Lord  Siva  and  the 
fire-god  and  the  part  consecrated  to  the  soul  should  be  kept  apart. 

39.  (The  stick  for)  cleansing  the  teeth  should  be  offered 
on  the  east  by  (repeating  the  mantras  of)  the  weapon  and  arrow, 
and  (a  piece  of)  earth  on  the  west  or  south  with  the  (a)  ghora 
and  iikha  [mantras). 

40 .  Water  reduced  in  quantity  (should  be  offered )  on  the  north 
with  the  sadyojata  and  the  hrd [mantras) .  Perfumed  water  (should  be 
offcred)on  the  north-cast  with  the  vama[deva) and Siras  [mantras). 

41.  The  five  things  got  from  a  cow  and  flowers  like  palaSa 
and  lotus  (should  be  cast)  all  around.  Flowers  should  be  offered 
on  the  north-east  and  the  yellow  pigment  on  the  south-east. 

42.  The  agallochum  (should  be  offered)  on  the  south-western 
dii  ection  and  all  the  articles  for  oblation  in  four  equal  proportions 
on  the  north-west  with  the  sadyojata  [inantra)  and  with  the  kuSa. 

43-44.  (An  anchorite’s)  stick,  rosary,  loin-cloth,  alms  bowl, 
collyrium,  saffron,  oil,  a  small  stick  (for  applying  the  collyrium), 
comb,  betel  (leaf),  and  mirror  should  be  offered  to  the  image  of 
the  god.  The  yellow  pigment  (should  be  offered)  on  the  north. 

45.  He  should  offer  a  seat,  a  pair  of  sandals,  a  vessel,  an 
upper  c  ot  i  and  an  umbrella  on  the  north-east  with  the  mantra 
of  the  lord  for  the  satisfaction  of  Isana  (one  of  the  five  forms  of 


79.46-57 


219 


Siva).  The  sacrificial  porridge  together  with  the  clarified  butter 
and  perfumes  etc.  should  be  offered  on  the  east. 

46.  Having  gathered  the  sacred  threads  and  sprinkled  them 
with  the  waters  offered  as  respect,  they  should  be  led  to  the  pre¬ 
sence  of  fire  after  purifying  them  with  the  samhita  mantras . 

47-48.  After  having  covered  them  with  the  hide  of  the  black 
antelope  and  remembering  the  eternal  blissful  one,  the  witness 
of  all  deeds,  the  protector,  the  one  without  any  change,  that 
Siva,  with  the  application  of  sva  and  ha  {mantras)  and  samhita 
mantras ,  the  sacred  threads  should  be  purified.  Twenty-one  water 
vessels  (should  be  got  ready). 

49.  The  room  (for  worship)  etc.  should  be  girdled  by 
threads.  Perfumes  etc.  should  be  offered  to  the  sun-god,  (who  had 
already  been)  worshipped.  After  having  rinsed  the  mouth,  and 
doing  the  assigning,  the  water  should  be  offered  with  respect. 

50.  Then  (the  worshipper  should  worship)  the  vastu  god 
along  with  the  weapons,  the  guardians  of  the  world,  Nandin 
and  others  by  (mentioning)  the  name  of  each  in  the  pitcher  of 
(lord)  Siva  after  adding  perfumes. 

51-52.  Vardham,  lord  of  obstacles,  the  preceptor  should 
be  worshipped.  Then  the  sacred  thread  smeared  with  (the 
paste  of)  all  herbs  and  perfumed  with  the  flowers  and  d fin'd 
and  purified  with  the  mantras  should  be  held  between  the 
folded  palms.  Om  !  (salutation  to  you)  the  regulation  for 
rectifying  any  omission  in  regulations. 

53.  O  lord  !  I  invoke  you  and  that  which  yields  the  desired 
boon.  O  lord  of  entity  and  non-entity  !  You  bless  me, 
one  who  worships,  with  that  success. 

54-55.  O  Sambhu  (Siva)  !  Obeisance  to  you  at  all  times 
and  by  all  means.  Be  pleased  with  me.  O  lord  of  celestials  ! 
You  have  been  invoked  along  with  the  goddess,  lords  of  gagas. , 
lords  of  mantras ,  guardians  of  the  world  and  attendant  gods. 
I  invoke  you.  This  sacred  thread  is  for  you  in  the  early  morning. 

56.  O  supreme  lord  !  By  your  command  I  shall  do  the 
prescribed  routine.  Thus  one  should  invoke  the  lord  and  do  the 
amrtikarana 1  rite  by  drawing  in  the  breath. 

57.  Having  recited  the  principal  mantra  for  Siva,  it  should 
be  dedicated  to  (lord)  Siva.  After  completing  the  recitation 


1 .  Mental  identification  of  the  parts  of  one’s  body  with  those  of  the  lord. 


220  ^-gni  Parana 

{oi mantra),  praises,  and  obeisance,  (lord)  Sambhu  (Siva)  should 
be  bid  adieu. 

58-59.  Having  made  oblation  with  the  third  part  of  the 
gruel  in  the  fire  (permeated  with  the  essence)  of  Siva,  (oblation 
should  be  made)  for  the  residents  in  the  quarters,  the  lords  of 
the  quarters,  the  spirits,  the  mothers,  ganas,  Rudras,  guardians 
of  the  region.  Obeisance.  This  oblation  is  given.  The  oblation 
is  made  for  the  (guardian)  elephants  of  the  quarters  east  etc. 
and  to  the  regions. 

60.  After  having  rinsed  the  mouth,  the  oblation  should  be 
done  for  the  rectification  of  omissions  in  the  observances.  After 
doing  the  final  oblation,  the  fire  should  be  put  out. 

61-62.  Then  om  oblations  to  fire  (god),  to  Soma,  om  obla¬ 
tions  to  fire  and  Soma.  So  also  to  fire-god,  the  accomplisher. 
After  having  made  four  oblations,  the  union  of  the  gods  respecti¬ 
vely  worshipped  in  the  sacrificial  pit  and  the  mystic  circle  of 
lord  Siva  should  be  brought  about. 

63-64.  Then  the  union  should  be  made  by  the  method  of 
assigning  in  the  different  parts  of  the  body.  Then  the  sacred 
threads  should  be  placed  in  a  vessel  made  of  bamboo  along  with 
(the  mantras  of)  weapons  and  armour  and  consecrated  with  the 
{mantras)  of  the  digits.  The  six  articles  of  worship  should  be 
consecrated  with  the  principal  brahma  {mantra)  ( Om ).  (The 
mantras  of)  the  heart,  armour  and  weapon  should  also  be  united. 

65.  Having  girdled  the  vessel  with  threads  and  worshipped 
it  with  the  {mantras  of)  the  parts  of  the  body  it  should  be  offered 
to  the  lord  of  the  universe  with  extreme  devotion  for  the  sake  of 
protection. 

66.  After  it  has  been  worshipped  with  flowers,  incense  etc. 
and  two  theological  books  have  been  submitted,  one  should 
go  near  the  feet  of  the  preceptor  and  offer  the  sacred  thread  with 
devotion. 

67.  Having  come  out  of  the  place  and  rinsed  the  mouth, 
one  should  worship  five  things  got  from  a  cow,  the  gruel 
and  the  stick  for  cleansing  the  teeth  on  three  circles  made  with 
the  cow-dung. 

68.  After  rinsing  the  mouth  again,  one  should  remain 
awake  singing  songs  and  repeating  hymns  and  should 
sleep  at  the  end  after  fasting  on  a  bed  of  darbha  all  the  while 
contemplating  on  the  lord. 


78.69-79.1-9 


221 


69.  Even  one,  who  is  desirous  of  cessation  of  births  and 
deaths,  should  undertake  in  this  way  lying  only  on  a  bed  of 
ashes,  fasting  and  self-controlled. 


CHAPTER  SEVENTYNINE 
Investiture  of  the  sacred  thread 

The  Lord  said  : 

1  Having  got  up  early  in  the  morning ,  and  finishing  bath¬ 
ing  the  worshipper  should  enter  the  sacrificial  shed  after  com¬ 
pleting  the  twilight  worship  and  remaining  composed. 

2  Having  collected  the  sacred  thread,  and  the  deity  not 

being  given  farewell,  the  sacred  thread  should  be  placed  in  a 

spotless  vessel  within  a  mystic  diagram  in  the  north-east. 

3  Then  the  lord  of  celestials  should  be  bid  faiewell 
and  the  materials  of  worship  should  be  removed  (from  the  body 

of  the  deity).  He  should  again  perform  the  two  rites  as  before  on 

the  cleaned  ground. 

4.  Then  the  gods— sun,  the  guardian  deities  of  the  entrance 
and  of  the  directions  the  pitcher,  Isana,  Siva  and  the  fire-go 
should  specially  be  worshipped,  as  usually  done  m  the  nawnttiki 
(done  with  some  motives)  rites,  elaborately. 

5  (Having  done)  the  tarpana  (appeasing)  rite  with  the 
mantras  and  the  oblation  of  expiation  one  hundred  and  eight 
times  with  (the  mantras  of)  the  arrows,  the  final  oblation  should 

be  made  slowly.  ,  , 

6  Having  offered  the  sacred  thread  to  the  sun  god  and  rins¬ 
ing  the  mouth,  (the  wo, -shipper)  should  offe  r  it  to  the  guautat 
deities  of  the  entrance  and  of  the  directions,  the  sacrificial  pitcher 

and-"tvingsatinhiso„nsea.in.l,ep,-e,enceoflord 

Sambhu  (Siva),  (the  worshipper)  should  offer  the  sacred  tlucad 
to  one’s  own  self,  the  gana,  the  priest  and  fire-god. 

8-9  Om  O  lord  !  soul  of  the  time,  whatever  has  been 
ordained  by  you  in  my  observances  that  which  has  been  done, 
contradictorily,  and  omitted,  and  that  which  has  been  done 


222 


Agni  Purana 


secretly  O  Sambhu  let  the  contradictory  thing  become  normal, 
the  contradictory  deed  become  refined,  by/  this  omniscient 
sacred  thread  and  by  your  wish. 

10.  Om  !  Complete  this  sacrificial  observance  !  Oblations 
to  the  lord  of  regulations,  the  principle  of  the  soul,  that  which 
underlines  the  natural  principle  that  is  protected  by  the  lotus- 
born  Brahma. 

11-15.  Having  recited  the  principal  mantra  upto  the  end, 
lord  Siva  should  be  worshipped  with  the  sacred  thread.  Again 
in  the  principle  of  knowledge  which  is  the  end  of  all  the  learning 
and  which  is  governed  by  Visnu,  one  should  invest  the  sacred 
thread  having  recited  the  mantras  of  Visnu.  Similarly,  in  the 
principle  relating  to  Siva,  he  should  recite  the  mantras  of  Siva 
and  invest  that  deity  with  the  sacred  thread.  O  man  of  good 
practices  !  In  the  case  of  those  governed  by  all  the  deities  one 
should  recite  the  principal  mantra  upto  the  end  after  having 
recited  the  mantras  of  Siva  and  the  descent  of  the  Ganges  should 
be  accomplished.  In  the  case  of  those  who  desire  to  get  release 
(from  the  cycle  of  births)  it  is  said  that  the  sacred  thread  should 
be  invested  with  the  mantras  of  Siva  relating  to  the  knowledge 
of  the  soul.  For  those  who  desire  to  get  enjoyment  it  has  been 
pointed  out  (that  the  sacred  thread  should  be  invested)  duly 
with  [thzmantrasot)  the  principles  of  Siva.  The  mantras  should  be 
uttered  ending  with  ‘oblation5  or  ‘obeisance5. 

16.  Om  ham  oblations  to  lord  Siva,  the  lord  of  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  soul.  Om  ham  oblations  to  (lord)  Siva,  the  lord  of  the 
principle  of  learning.  Om  ham  oblations  to  (lord)  Siva,  lord  of 
the  principle  of  Siva.  Om  ham  oblations  to  lord  Siva,  the  lord 
of  all  principles  (of  the  universe).  Having  made  obeisance  to 
the  descent  of  the  Ganges,  he  should  pray  to  it  with  folded  palms. 
“You  are  the  refuge  for  all  beings.  You  reside  in  the  movable 
and  immovable  beings.55 


17.  “O  Supreme  lord  !  You  are  the  witness  (of  the  acts) 
of  beings  by  pervading  inside  the  beings.  By  deed  or  thought 
or  words  I  have  no  other  being  to  resort  to  except  you.” 

18-19.  “O  Great  lord  !  Whatever  has  been  done  defec¬ 
tive  in  the  mantra  or  deeds  or  in  the  materials  (of  worship)  or 
m  the  repetition  and  worship  in  the  daily  (observances):  may 
you  complete  them.  O  Supreme  lord  !  You  are  weltpuri- 
fied.  You  are  pure  and  destroyer  of  sins.  Every  being  in  the 


79.20-32 


223 


universe,  the  immovable  and  movable  have  been  purified  by 

^20  ?2  “Olord  !  Whatever  has  been  made  defectively  by  me 
in  my  observances  (let  it  be  free)  from  becoming  useless.  By 
vour  mandate  let  all  of  them  become  united,  being  tied  in  a 
string.”  Having  conveyed  the  recitation  (of  the  mantras)  to  the 
lord  and  praising  him  devotedly,  one  should  take  UP  the  v0™ 
after  saluting  the  preceptor  and  as  directed  by  him.  (It  shou 
be)  for  four  months,  (or)  three  months,  (or)  three  days  or  one 

^23-24.  After  having  saluted  the  lord  and  seeking  excuse, 
the  votary  should  go  near  the  sacrificial  pit  and  cast  four  sacred 
threads  for  Siva  located  in  the  fire,  and  worship  with  flowers 
incense,  unbroken  rice  etc.  The  oblation  and  holy  thread  should 

be  presented  to  the  Rudras.  . 

25-26.  Having  entered  inside  and  praising  Siva  (the  lord) 
should  be  bid  adieu  with  salutations.  After  having  made  the 
expiatory  oblation  and  oblation  of  sweet  porridge,  the  final 
oblation  should  be  offered  and  (lord)  Siva  located  in  the  fire 
should  be  bid  farewell.  Having  performed  oblations  with 
i&izvyahrtis  (the  syllables  ombhuh,om  bhuva h  etc.),  the  re  s  ou 
be  obstructed  with  nisfhura  (scornful  goddess). 

27-31 .  Then  four  oblations  should  be  offered  to  the  fire-god 

and  others.  Oblation  should  be  given  outside  along  with  a  sacred 

thread  to  the  guardian  deities  of  all  directions.  Two  theo  ogiczi 
books  and  a  sacred  thread  should  be  offered.  Om,  ham,  bhuh 
oblations.  Om,  ham,  bhuvali  oblations.  Om,  ham  svafi  oblations. 
Om,  ham,  bhurbhuvah  svah  oblations.  After  having  done  theobla- 
tions  with  the  vyahrlis ,  four  oblations  should  be  made  (as  o  ows 
Om,  ham  oblations  to  the  fire-god.  Om,  ham  oblations  to  the  fire- 
god,  one  who  accomplishes  all  desires.  The  pieccptor  s  ou 
be  worshipped  as  lord  Siva  with  clothes,  ornaments  a.- 
All  annual  rites  etc.  of  the  performer  (become)  ruit  u  1 
preceptor  gets  satisfied.  The  Supreme  lord  ha  sai  so.  “* 
having  placed  the  thread  on  the  body  of  the  prcceptoi  t  , 
the  brahmins  should  be  fed  and  offered  clothes  etc.  vuti  z\o 
tion.  “O  lord  of  celestials  !  May  lord  Siva  get  pleased  y 

this  gift  of  mine.”  .  .  % 

32.  After  having  bathed  in  the  morning  (t  e  mves  or) 
should  perform  his  daily  rites  of  prayer  and  worship  an  ta  e 


224 


Agni  Puranct 


leave  of  (god)  Siva  after  having  worshipped  him  and  the  sacred 
threads  with  eight  flowers. 

33.  After  having  performed  the  nitya  and  naimittika  rites 
as  before  in  full,  the  sacred  threads  should  be  placed  and  lord 
Siva  should  be  worshipped  in  the  fire  after  obeisance. 

34.  The  expiatory  oblation  should  then  be  done  with  the 
mantras  of  the  weapons.  The  final  oblation  should  then  be  given. 
One  who  is  desirous  of  enjoyment  should  then  submit  the  fruits 
of  his  acts  to  lord  Siva. 

35.  “May  this  rite  of  mine  become  fruitful  by  your  grace  !” 
One  who  is  desirous  of  release  (from  the  cycle  of  births)  should 
do  this  act  (as  follows) :  “O  lord  !  May  there  be  no  bondage 
for  me.” 

36.  (Lord)  Siva  located  in  the  fire  should  be  united  with 
lord  Siva  (in  the  solar  plexus  of  the  investor)  by  nadiyoga  (assign¬ 
ment  on  limbs).  The 'essence  of  fire  should  be  drawn  in  one’s 
heart  and  the  fire  should  be  discharged. 

37.  After  having  rinsed  the  mouth  well,  (he)  should  enter 
inside  (the  shed)  and  permeate  the  water  of  the  pitcher  with 
the  essence  of  Siva  and  bid  farewell  (after  saying)  “Pardon 
(me)”. 

38.  After  having  taken  leave  of  the  guardian  deities  of  the 
world,  the  sacred  thread  should  be  taken  from  the  lord  and  plac¬ 
ed  on  the  Candesvara  (form  of  the  lord)  after  worship. 

^9.  The  materials  of  worship  along  with  the  sacred  thread 
should  be  submitted  to  him.  In  the  alternative  lord  Ganda 
should  be  worshipped  on  the  sacrificial  ground  in  the  prescribed 
manner  as  before. 


40.  Whatever  annual  rite  has  been  done  by  me  defectively, 
may  that  become  perfect  by  your  mandate,  O  lord  !  Cantfa  ! 
my  master  !” 


^ .  j"  Having  thus  submitted  to  the  lord  of  celestials,  he 
should  be  given  farewell  after  obeisance  and  praise.  After 
haymg  removed  the  materials  of  worship  (from  the  images) 
and  becoming  pure,  the  votary  should  bathe  (the  image)  and 
worship  (lord)  Siva.  A  man  who  remains  even  at  a  distance  of 
Zvzyojanas  (a yojana  is  equal  to  about  eight  miles)  from  the  pre- 
ceptor  (is  deemed  to  be)  pure. 


80.1-12 


225 


CHAPTER  EIGHTY 
Mode  of  investiture  with  the  fibres  of  Damanaka 
The  Lord  said: 

1 .  I  shall  describe  the  mode  of  investiture  with  damanaka 
fibres  for  the  lord.  It  has  to  be  performed  as  before.  Once,  the 
celestials  were  harassed  by  Bhairava,  a  form  born  of  the  anger 
of  lord  Hara  (Siva). 

2-5.  Hence,  he  was  cursed  by  the  foe  of  Tripura  (Siva) 
(saying),  “Become  a  stum”.  Being  pleased  (after  propitiation) 
the  lord  said,  “Whoever  propitiates  you  would  get  full  benefits 
and  not  otherwise. ”  The  votary  should  address  the  tree  by  the 
(following)  words  of  Bhava  (Siva)  after  having  worshipped  it 
with  the  vedic  hymns  on  the  seventh  or  thirteenth  day  (of  a 
fortnight).  “O  (tree)  born  of  the  grace  of  (lord)  Hara  (Siva)  ! 
You  be  present  here.  For  the  sake  of  work  of  Siva  you  have 
to  be  carried  (home)  as  per  the  mandate  of  lord  Siva.  (The 
tree)  should  be  invited  home  and  the  consecration  should  be  done 
in  the  evening. 

6.  Having  worshipped  the  sun-god,  Sankara  (Siva)  and 
fire-god  as  prescribed,  the  root  (of  the  tree)  should  be  placed  on 
the  west  of  the  lord  alongwith  the  (clump  of)  earth. 

7.  The  stump  (may  be  placed)  on  the  left  or  on  the  head 
(of  the  image),  the  dhatri  (myrabolan)  on  the  north,  the  bioken 
leaves  on  the  south  and  its  flower  on  the  east. 

8.  The  fruits  and  roots  should  be  placed  in  a  cup.  Lord 
Siva  should  be  worshipped  in  the  north-east.  The  lord  should 
be  invoked  after  having  placed  the  five  articles  of  worship- 
in  the  folded  palms  and  (later)  placing  them  on  one’s  head. 

9.  “O  lord  of  celestials  !  You  have  been  invoked  by 
me  in  the  early  morning  !  O  lord  !  the  merit  of  this  penance 
has  to  become  fully  fruitful  by  your  mandate.” 

10.  After  having  kept  the  sacred  remnants  in  the  vessel 
covered,  (the  votary)  should  worship  the  lord  of  the  universe 
with  flowers  etc.,  after  having  bathed  early  in  the  morning. 

11-12.  After  having  performed  the  nitya  and  naimittika 
rites  he  should  then  worship  with  the  damana.  After  having  kept 
the  ’remnants  in  the  folded  palms,  lord  Siva,  fire-god  and  the 


226 


Agni  Purana 


preceptor  should  be  worshipped  with  (the  mantras)  of  the  lord 
of  the  principle  of  knowledge  of  soul,  the  principal  °f  *e 

lord  ending  with  (the  names  of)  Isvara,  with  four  handfuls  (of 
offering).  “CM  haum  (obeisance)  to  the  lord  of  sacrifice.  Com¬ 
plete  the  sacrifice.  Obeisance  to  the  holder  of  the  spear. 

13.  “O  lord  !  Whatever  has  been  m  excess  or  m  short  m 
my  acts  let  all  that  be  complete  by  this  investiture  of  the  dama- 

naka  by  me”.  (Whoever  performs  this)  would  go  to  heaven  after 

having  obtained  the  benefits  of  all  that  is  got  m  the  month  o 
Caitra  (April-May ) . 


CHAPTER  EIGHTYONE 

Mode  of  spiritual  initiation 


Lord  said  : 

1-3.  I  shall  describe  the  spiritual  initiation  for  the  sake 
of  enjoyment  and  release  from  bondage,  destroying  one’s  sins  and 
shattering  bondages  of  impurities  and  illusion;  by  which,  know¬ 
ledge  is  gained  by  the  disciple,  that  initiation  (is  considered) 
as  yielding  enjoyment  and  release.  It  is  considered  to  be  of  three 
kinds.  The  first  one  is  vijnatakala  (cognisant  of  the  beatitudes). 
The  second  one  is  pralayakala  (a  psychic  state  from  which  one  can 
be  cognisant  of  those  attributes).  The  third  one  is  sakala  (cloud¬ 
ed  by  worldly  impurity) .  These  deserve  initiation  in  scriptures. 
The  first  (category)  among  these  is  free  from  all  mental  impuri¬ 
ties,  while  the  second  is  free  from  sinful  acts. 

4.  The  third  variety  can  (hold  communion)  by  prayer 
with  the  region  from  kala  to  the  earth.  The  initiation  is  also 
considered  to  be  of  two  kinds — devoid  of  any  hold  and  possessing 
a  hold. 

5.  (The  initiation)  independent  of  any  (external)  aid  is  for 
the  first  two  categories  (among  the  three)  and  that  which  is 
dependent  on  any  (external)  aid  is  for  (the  third  category) 
sakala  (endowed  with  a  form).  (The  initiation  in  the  first  sort) 
is  done  by  the  worship  of  Sambhu  (Siva)  alone  without  any 
dependence. 


81.6-17 


227 


6.  That  which  is  remembered  as  independent  (is  achieved) 
by  an  impact  of  strong  piercing  force  by  resorting  to  the  image  in 
the  form  of  the  preceptor  and  by  rending  asunder  the  (veil  of) 
illusion. 

7-8.  That  (initiation)  in  which  Lord  Sambhu  (Siva) 
does  it,  is  spoken  as  dependant.  The  spiritual  initiation  is  said 
to  be  of  four  kinds — sabija  (together  with  imparting  of  some 
mantra ),  bijavarjita  (without  any  mantra) ,  sadhikara  (with  some 
governance),  anadhikdra  (without  any  governance).  They  are 
described  (now).  A  sabija  (type)  is  that  in  which  the  disciple 
is  subject  to  the  control  of  code  of  conduct  laid  down  in  the  scrip¬ 
tures. 

9-10.  The  nirbija  (variety)  is  intended  for  the  incapable 
which  is  devoid  of  any  code  of  conduct  of  the  scriptures.  The 
sadhikara  type  of  initiation  shall  be  in  the  case  of  rites  of  daily 
nature  and  those  done  with  a  motive  for  the  disciple  and  the  pre¬ 
ceptor.  The  nirbija  type  of  initiation  is  in  those  cases  (where  the 
disciples)  possess  characteristics  as  my  two  sons. 

1 1 .  The  niradhikarikd  type  of  initiation  allows  one  to  under¬ 
take  rites  in  which  the  disciple  does  not  aspire  for  the  fruits. 
This  (initiation)  may  be  of  two  kinds  marked  by  the  individual 
characteristics. 

12.  One  consists  of  performance  of  acts  preceded  by  (pre¬ 
parations  of)  sacrificial  pits  and  mystical  diagrams.  The  other 
one  is  composed  of  knowledge  which  is  achieved  by  the  operation 
of  the  mind. 

13.  In  this  way  an  initiation  may  be  made  by  a  preceptor 
who  has  the  right  (to  administer).  The  skandadiksa  may  be  done 
by  the  preceptor  after  doing  daily  rites. 

14-17.  (The  preceptor)  should  purify  the  place  from  the 
spirits  remaining  in  his  own  seat,  having  the  arghya  (waters  of 
respect)  in  the  lotus  palm  and  worshipping  the  guardian  deities 
of  the  threshold  with  pranava  {mantra)  and  after  removing  the 
obstacles  and  placing  the  weapons  at  the  threshold.  The  special 
arghya  offering  should  consist  of  sesamum,  rice,  white  mustard, 
kuSa,  diirva ,  unbroken  rice,  mixed  with  water,  barley,  milk  and 
water.  Then  the  materials  (for  worship)  (should  be  done)  pure 
with  that  water.  (After  putting)  the  mark  and  the  worship  of 
the  self  and  of  the  seat,  the  materials  (of  worship)  such  as  the  five 


228 


Agni  Parana 


c  o  mu;  fried  paddy,  sandal,  white  mustard, 
fal"S  unbroken  rice  and  tula  should  be  purified  as 

"J* ‘fried  paddy  which  has  been  scattered  should 
1 8'  A  -tVi  mantras  of  weapons  along  with  incense  and 

conse^Kd  with  Waters  with  the  amtraa  of  implements  and 

C°VmibHaWing  made  W.  into  different  shapes  of  missiles 
so  asto  number  ^hirtysix  bunches,  each  measuring  (the  length 
Of)  a  palm,  which  are  capable  of  warding  off  multitudes  of  obs¬ 
tacles  and  after  having  repeated  the  mantra  of  the  weapon  of 
Steven  times  on  the  sword  of  knowledge  continuously  mid 
having  located  in  one’s  self,  lord  Siva,  the  basis  of  all  ciea- 
tion  die  most  sought  after,  and  devoid  of  any  form,  one  should 
deem  himself  as  »I  am  (lord)  Siva”.  After  having  placed 
turban  on  the  head  one  should  adorn  his  body  (in  the  following 

WaY22  He  should  besmear  his  right  arm.  with  the  sandal  paste. 
The  lord  should  be  worshipped  in  the  prescribed  way.  This  is 
how  the  head  of  Siva  is  got  ready.  , 

23-95  Having  located  the  luminous  lord  on  ones  own 

head  with  the  mantras  of  Siva,  the  doer  should  conceive  himself 
as  not  different  from  (lord)  Siva  as  follows:  (He  is)  fie  witness 
of  all  deeds  in  the  mystic  diagram,  the  protector  of  sacrifice 
in  the  pitcher,  the  recipient  of  oblations  in  the  fire  an  t  ie 
liberator  or  the  disciple  from  the  bonds  and  the  benefactor  m 
one’s  own  self,”  such  that  the  lord  is  of  six  kinds  of  basis.  One 
should  consider  (himself)  as  “I  am  he”.  (Lord)  Bhava  (Siva) 
should  again  be  made  firmly  established  (in  one). 

26.  (Then)  that  person  should  remain  facing  the  south¬ 
west  holding  the  sword  of  knowledge  and  sprinkle  the  sacrificial 
shed  with  the  waters  of  respectful  offering  and  the  five  things  got 


from  the  cow. 

27.  By  purification  at  the  crossroads  and  by  (divine)  look, 
(darbhas)  should  be  purified.  Having  tlirown  the  scattered 
darbhas  there,  ( darbhas )  should  be  gathered. 

28.  A  seat  should  be  made  ready  with  them  in  the  north¬ 
east  (direction)  for  the  pitcher.  The  presiding  deity  of  the  place 
and  the  celestials  should  be  worshipped  in  the  south-west  and 
(Goddess)  Laksmi  at  the  entrance  (of  the  sacrificial  shed). 


229 


SI. 29-37 

29-30.  (Goddess)  Purayanti  of  the  form  of  sacrificial 
shed  should  be  worshipped  in  the  west  with  gems  and  with  t  e 
hrd  (mantra).  Lord  Sambhu  (Siva)  should  be  worshipped  m  a 
pitcher  placed  in  the  north-east  over  the  grams  and 
water,  gems  and  a  piece  of  doth  (over  the  mouth)  w«h  *e  &ce 
of  the  worshipper  turned  towards  the  west..  (Goddes 
(should  be  worshipped)  in  the  south  of  the  pitcher.  (  o  ess) 
Vardhani,  in  the  form  of  a  sword  and  riding  a  ion  s  ou 
worshipped  in  the  west.  .  j 

31-32  Having  worshipped  (with  their  respective  name 

the  hrd  (mantra)  the  (gods)  Indra  and  the  guardian  deities  of 
the  directions  ending  with  Visnu  placed  on  the  prana™  (om) 
Sing  their  respectfve  vehicles  and  holding  their  respective 
weapons,  that  (the  sacrificial  jar)  should  be  carried  round  n 
front  of  pitchers  and  an  uninterrupted  flow  of  water  (should 
be  made)  after  making  a  circumambulation.  , 

33  After  having  recited  the  principal  mantra ,  *e  mandate 
of  (Lord)  Siva  should  be  conveyed  to  the  guardian deities.  Th 

iar  should  be  duly  consecrated  and  it  should  be  he  . 

J  34  After  having  worshipped  lord  Sankara  (Siva)  in  the 

pitcher  ptced  on  a  L  sea,  a.ong  with  the  -***•»-*? 
should  be  worshipped  in  the  vardhani  after  being  placed  to  purity 

^  Om^hak  to  the  seat  of  the  weapon  hum  phaf.  Om  Om  Saluta- 
tion  to  the  embodiment  of  weapon.  Om  hm  phot ^ 
thePafupata  weapon.  OmOtn  obeisance  to  t  e  ' '  h  ft 
phat  obeisance  to  thehead.  O^mf. obeisance  o  the  tuft. 
omgm  1mm  pha,  obeisance  to  the  armour.  Om  pha,  hum  pha, 

obeisance  to  the  weapons. 

35.  The  weapon  should  be  meditated  upon 

four  faces  and  having  teeth  in  the  company  of  the  Godde 
Sakti,  effulgent  like  crores  of  suns  and  wielding  a  mace,  spear 

36.  By  (showing)  lihgamudra  (a  posture  of  fingers 

denoting  Uhga),  the  union  of  the  bhaga  (base)  and  [jj 

is  accomplished.  The  pitcher  should  be  touched  with  the  htt 
finger,  the  weapon  with  the  heart  and  vardhani  wi 

che^7fiStThe  vardhani  should  first  be  touched  with  the  clenched 
fist  for  the  sake  of  enjoyment  and  release  (from  worldly  existence). 


230  Agni  Purana 

The  sword  of  knowledge  should  be  offered  for  protecting  the 
mouth  of  the  pitcher. 

38.  After  the  repetition  of  the  principal  (mantra)  hund¬ 
red  times,  the  weapon  should  be  placed  in  the  pitcher.  A  tenth 
part  of  it  should  then  be  conveyed  to  the  vardhani  for  the  sake  of 
protection. 

39.  “O  lord  of  the  universe  !  This  sacrificial  shed  has 
been  raised  with  great  effort.  O  lord  !  the  sustain er  of  all 
sacrifices  !  This  has  to  be  protected  by  you.” 

40.  The  lord  Gana  placed  on  the  pranava  {om)  and  having 
four  arms  should  be  worshipped  in  the  north-west  by  offering 
water.  Having  worshipped  lord  Siva  on  the  ground,  the 
worshipper  should  proceed  near  the  pit. 

41-42.  Remaining  in  contemplation  for  the  sake  of  pleasing 
the  mantras^  and  having  placed  the  water  of  respectful  offering, 
perfumes,  ghee  etc.  on  the  left  and  the  twigs,  darbha ,  sesamum 
etc.  on  the  right,  and  having  purified  the  pit,  fire,  ladle  etc. 
as  before,  (the  worshipper)  should  think  of  the  greatness  of  the 
elevated-faced  (god)  in  the  heart  and  worship  lord  Siva  in 
the  sacrificial  fire. 

43.  After  having  performed  srstinyasa  (assignment  re¬ 
presenting  creation)  in  one’s  body,  in  the  pitcher  of  lord 
Siva,  on  the  sacrificial  ground,  in  the  hid  and  (the  body  of)  the 
disciple,  purification  and  meditation  (should  be  done)  in  the 
prescribed  way. 

44.  Having  contemplated  the  face  of  the  (same)  measure 
of  the  pit, the  hrd  bija  {mantras)  are  repeated  and  oblations  made 
for  the  seven  tongues  of  the  fire. 

45-46.  The  principal  mantras  for  the  tongue  (should  have) 
the  last  letters  without  (the  letter)  cra’,  and  should  have  the  sound 
of  six  ra  s  and  the  moon,  a  point  and  the  tuft.  Hiranya,  Kanaka, 
Rakta,  Krsna,  Suprabha,  Atirikta  and  Bahurupa  should  in 
order  (be  placed)  in  the  directions  north-east,  east,  south-east 
and  west. 

47.  Oblations  should  be  done  with  the  sweet  things  such  as 
milk  etc.  in  the  rites  to  appease  (god)  or  seeking  welfare  and  with 
oil-cakes,  floui ,  one  s  dress  and  sour-gruel  in  the  rites  performed 
for  harming  some  one. 

48.  An  angry  man  should  offer  oblations  of  salt,  goat’s 


81.49-58 


231 


curd,  pungent  oil,  thorns  and  crooked  twigs  along  with  vedic 
syllables. 

49.  YaksinI  (a  goddess)  becomes  certainly  favourable  by 
doing  oblations  with  the  buds  of  kadamba .  One  should  offer  obla¬ 
tions  with  bandhuka ,  kimiuka  and  other  (flowers)  for  attracting 
and  subjugating  another  person. 

50.  The  bilva  leaves  (sacred  in  the  worship  of  Siva)  are 
offered  for  getting  kingdom,  the  patala  and  campaka  (flowers) 
for  the  sake  of  wealth,  lotus  flowers  for  the  sake  of  (becoming) 
a  sovereign  (and)  eatables  for  wealth. 

51.  Durvd  (is  offered)  for  the  cure  of  diseases,  flowers 
priyafigu  and  patali  for  exercising  sway  over  all  beings,  and  the 
Amra  flower  for  arresting  fever. 

52.  (An  oblation  made  with)  the  mrlyuhjaya1  mantra  would 
conquer  death.  By  the  oblation  of  sesamum  there  would  be  pros¬ 
perity.  Propitiation  of  Rudra  (Siva)  (should  be  made)  for 
all  sorts  of  appeasement.  Then  the  subject  of  (present)  discussion 
is  narrated. 

53.  Eight  hundred  oblations  with  the  principal  mantra 
and  a  tenth  of  it  with  the  subordinate  ones  should  be  made. 
Appeasement  should  be  made  with  the  principal  mantra .  The 
final  oblation  should  be  offered  as  before. 

54.  Then  the  repetition  (of  mantra)  should  be  made  hund¬ 
red  times  for  each  disciple  for  the  entry  of  the  disciple  and 
for  the  sake  of  good  omens  after  the  removal  of  bad  omens. 

55.  As  before  oblation  should  be  made  two  hundred  times 
with  the  principal  mantra.  One  oblation  should  be  made  with 
the  principal  {mantra)  and  the  mantras  of  eight  weapons  con¬ 
cluding  with  (the  syllable)  svaha  (oblation). 

56.  The  illumination  (rite)  should  be  done  with  the  repe¬ 
tition  of  mantras  of  the  tuft  ending  with  (the  syllable)  phat . 
Oblation  should  be  done  with  the  mantras  like  Om ,  hrim ,  oblations 
to  Siva. 

57-58.  Then  the  illumination  should  be  done  with  (the 
mantras)  like  Om ,  hr  urn,  hraum ,  hrim,  to  Siva,  hriim,  phat .  Then  the 
vessel  for  preparing  the  gruel  should  be  washed  with  watei  s  (made 
sacred  by  the  mantras)  of  Siva  and  covered  by  an  aimoui.  It 


1.  Beginning  with  Tryambakarii  yajamahe  etc. 


232 


Agni  Purana 


should  be  besmeared  with  sandal  paste  and  a  girdle  of  darbha 
consecrated  with  the  (mantra)  of  armour  and  weapon. 

59.  After  having  placed  the  seat  with  (the  mantra  of  the) 
armour,  in  a  semi-circular  mystic  diagram,  Siva,  whose  presence 
is  accomplished  in  the  form  of  an  image,  should  be  worshipped 
with  flowers  of  sentiment. 

60-62.  (Worship  should  be  made)  alternatively  in  the  vessel 
whose  mouth  has  been  covered  with  a  cloth  with  flowers  got  from 
outside.  Over  the  oven  placed  to  the  right  of  the  pit  and  having 
its  mouth  facing  the  west  and  previously  consecrated  with  the 
syllables  of  ahankara  (egoism)  and  (the  two  sides  of  the  oven) 
having  been  contemplated  as  made  up  of  righteousness  and 
unrighteousness  over  which  (the  mantra)  of  the  soul  of  man  has 
been  repeated,  the  vessel  should  be  placed  after  having  repeated 
(the  mantra)  of  the  weapon  and  sprinkled  with  the  urine  of  cow. 
The  vessel  (should  have  been)  cleaned  with  the  milk  of  cow  and 
(the  mantra)  of  the  weapon  and  repetition  of  the  prasada  (mantra) 
hundred  times. 

63.  Rice  and  grains  such  as  the  fyamaka  etc.  should  be  cast 
into  it.  If  (the  initiation)  is  to  be  given  for  a  single  disciple  five 
handfuls  (of  grains)  (should  be  thrown). 

64.  A  handful  of  grains  should  be  added.  The  above 
grains  should  be  protected  with  the  mantras  of  the  fire  or  that  of 
the  armour. 

65-66.  The  gruel  should  be  cooked  in  the  flame  of  Siva  on 
the  eastern  face  with  (the  recitation  of  the)  principal  (mantra). 
Then  having  filled  the  ladle  with  the  clarified  butter  and  heat¬ 
ed  in  the  oven,  it  should  be  offered  (to  the  fire)  with  the  sam - 
hita  mantras  ending  with  (the  expression)  “oblations  for  the  sake 
of  satisfaction”.  The  vessel  should  be  placed  in  the  mystic  circles 
after  having  consecrated  with  the  darbha . 

67.  Having  covered  it  by  the  (uttering  of)  pranava 
(syllable  om),  it  should  be  besmeared  with  the  hrd  (mantra). 
Thus  it  would  become  cool  after  having  received  a  cool  plastering. 

68-69.  (Oblations)  should  be  offered  with  the  recitation  of 
samhita  mantra  once  towards  the  disciple.  After  having  made 
oblation  for  the  sake  of  seats  etc.  on  the  west  of  the  sacri¬ 
ficial  pit  and  the  mystic  diagram,  the  residual  offering  should 
be  made  with  the  ladle  and  purification  should  be  performed  by 
(the  recitation  of)  samhita  (mantras).  The  gruel  should  be 


233 


-*81.70-78 

taken  out  from  the  vessel  with  (the  recitation  of)  the  (syllable) 
vausat . 

70.  The  act  of  making  the  gruel  into  ambrosia  should  be 
done  by  showing  dhenu-mudra  (formation  made  by  fingers 
resembling  the  cow)  and  it  must  be  allowed  to  cool  on  the  ground. 
A  part  of  the  gruel  consisting  of  clarified  butter  (should  be  set 
apart)  for  the  disciples  and  a  part  for  the  lord  Fire. 

71.  A  part  containing  honey  and  clarified  butter  should  be 
made  over  to  the  guardian  deities  of  the  worlds.  These  are  three 
parts.  These  should  be  offered  to  them  with  the  fod  ( mantra ) 
ending  with  obeisance.  The  water  for  rinsing  the  mouth  (should 
also  be  given)  with  the  same  (mantra). 

72-73.  The  final  oblation  should  be  offered  as  laid  down 
after  having  made  hundred  offerings  with  clarified  butter  along 
with  the  recitation  of  mantra .  Having  drawn  a  mystic  diagram 
on  the  east  of  the  sacrificial  pit  or  in  the  midst  of  pitchers  of 
Lord  Sambhu  (Siva),  Rudra,  the  divine  mothers  and  the  ganas 
(attendant  gods  of  Siva)  and  after  having  made  offerings 
with  the  hrd  (mantra),  the  worshipper  should  identify  himself 
with  God  Siva  in  the  pitcher  sacred  to  Siva  even  though  he  has 
not  received  a  command. 

74-76.  He  should  think  himself  as  the  omniscient  who  stands 
above  all  things  around.  (He  should  also  think)  “The  place 
of  union  is  a  part  of  mine  and  I  am  the  presiding  deity  at  the 
sacrifice.  I  am  lord  Siva”.  Thus  the  performer  should  come  out 
of  the  sacrificial  shed  with  the  sense  of  I-ness.  Having  made 
the  disciple  to  be  seated  on  the  seat  of  darbha  already  placed 
on  a  mystic  diagram  with  the  mantra  of  the  weapon  and  duly 
consecrated  with  the  pranava  (syllable  om),  and  (providing  him) 
with  white  upper  garment  after  the  bath,  (the  disciple)  should 
be  made  to  face  north  for  emancipation  and  the  cast  for 
•  enjoyment. 

77.  Having  made  (the  disciple)  to  sit  erect  and  face  the  cast, 

(the  preceptor)  should  look  at  him  from  foot  to  tuft  if  (the 
initiation)  is  for  emancipation  and  in  the  reverse  direction  if  it  is 

for  enjoyment  he  should  j  k  (at  the  disciple) 

graciously  extending  the  splendour  of  Siva.  Having  spnnk  c 
water  with  (the  mantra  of)  the  weapon  in  order  to  accomplish 
purification  by  (means  of)  consecrated  water,  the  disciple  should 


234 


Agni  Purdna 


be  struck  with  the  ashes  (accompanied)  by  (the  mantra  of)  the 
weapon  for  the  purpose  of  bathing  with  the  ashes  and  for  the 
destruction  of  obstacles  and  sins  by  the  union  of  creation  and 
destruction. 

80-81.  Having  sprinkled  him  again  with  the  water  of  the 
weapon  for  the  sake  of  consummation  and  having  repeated  the 
bathing  (; mantra )  of  the  weapon  above  the  navel  with  the  tip  of 
kufa,  one  should  touch  thrice  under  the  navel  with  the 
(recitation  of  the)  principal  (mantra)  fo:  the  destroyal  of  sin  and 
with  the  mantra  of  the  arrow  for  the  breaking  of  bonds. 

82.  Then  (the  preceptor)  should  locate  lord  Siva  in  the 
body  (of  the  disciple)  along  with  his  seat  and  attendants  by 
offering  worship  with  flowers  and  by  looking  into  his  eyes  or 
by  the  heart. 

83-84.  Having  tied  the  seat  with  a  white  cloth  with  (the 
recitation  of)  mantra ,  (and)  having  made  him  enter  by  means 
of  circumambulation  of  Siva,  the  seat  along  with  the  cloth 
should  be  given.  (The  preceptor)  should  exhibit  the  samlidra 
mudra  (posture  with  fingers  indicating  gathering)  and  communi¬ 
cate  his  own  self  with  that  form  in  the  lotus  of  the  heart  (of  the 
disciple). 

85.  Having  retained  that  (form  of  Siva)  in  the  purified 
body  and  having  located  (it  there),  it  should  be  worshipped  in 
the  east  facing  the  forehead  of  the  disciple  with  the  principal 
mantra. 

86.  The  hand  of  the  disciple  should  be  converted  into  a 
hand  sacred  to  (lord  Siva)  and  permeated  with  the  essence  of 
(lord) Siva  by  telling  the  Siva  mantra ,  such  a  hand  being  known 
to  convey  (the  worshipper)  to  the  region  of  (lord)  Siva,  and  to 
supply  him  with  the  only  means  of  worshipping  (lord)  Siva. 

87.  Then  after  having  removed  all  other  materials  of 
worship,  one  should  cast  flowers  on  lord  Siva  in  the  company 
of  attendant  gods  of  lord  Siva  invoking  his  presence  with 
mantras. 

88-89.  The  preceptor  should  name  brahmins  in  the 
usual  order  or  as  desired.  After  having  made  (the  disciple) 
to  bow  to  the  pitcher  and  the  vardhani  (a  kind  of  vessel),  (the 
preceptor)  should  make  (the  disciple)  seated  on  the  right  near 
the  sacred  fire  facing  the  north.  He  should  then  meditate  on 


81.90-82.1-3 


235 


the  susumna  (an  artery  in  the  body)  as  emerging  out  of  the  body 
of  disciple. 

90-93.  Having  placed  the  tip  of  darbha  on  the  right  hand 
duly  consecrated  by  the  base  of  darbha  and  resting  on  the 
symbol  of  one’s  own  self,  that  base  (of  ku§a)  should  rest  on 
one’s  own  knee  while  the  tip  (should  rest)  on  the  cock-banner. 
Having  entered  the  heart  of  the  disciple  by  breathing  out  the 
wind  while  repeating  the  mantra  of  the  tuft  and  re-entered  his 
own  heart  by  breathing  in  and  having  thus  established  commu¬ 
nion  again  with  the  fire  of  lord  Siva,  the  preceptor)  should  offer 
three  oblations  with  the  hrd  {mantra)  for  the  accomplishment  of 
that  communion.  One  should  make  hundred  oblations  with  the 
principal  mantra  for  the  sake  of  making  the  hand  (of  the  disciple) 
permeated  with  the  essence  of  Siva.  Being  thus  initiated  in  reli¬ 
gious  practices  one  would  become  eligible  to  perform  the  worship 
of  lord  Siva. 


CHAPTER  EIGHTYTWO 
Mode  of  performing  the  purificatory  initiation  : 

The  Lord  said  : 

1.  "O  §anmukha  (six-faced  one)1  !  Listen  to  me  !  I 
shall  describe  the  mode  of  performing  the  purificatory  initiation. 
The  great  god  Siva  situated  in  the  heart  and  in  the  fire  should 
be  invoked. 

2.  Having  worshipped  those  two  (God  Siva  situated  in  the 
heart  and  the  sacrificial  fire)  and  having  appeased  them  with 
the  hrd  mantra ,  one  should  offer  five  oblations  in  their  presence 
with  the  same  mantra . 

3.  That  babe  (of  fire)  should  be  struck  with  a  flower  conse¬ 
crated  by  (the  mantra  of)  the  weapon  with  (the  repetition  of) 
the  hrd  {mantra).  One  should  contemplate  the  starry-like  efful¬ 
gent  form  therein. 


1.  Son  of  the  divine  pair  Siva  and  Parvati. 


236 


Agni  Purana 


4.  Having  placed  the  syllable  hum  in  it  by  exhalation  of 
breath  and  having  drawn  it  by  means  of  sarhharini  ( mudra. ) 
(formation  with  fingers  representing  gathering),  it  should  be 
placed  in  the  heart  by  the  inhalation  of  breath. 

5.  Then  (the  above-mentioned  essence  of  fire)  should  be 
cast  in  the  generative  organ  of  goddess  Vagttvari  (goddess  of 
speech)  with  the  mudra  known  as  udbhava 1  and  the  repetition  of 
hrd  mantra. 

Om  ham,  him,  ham  obeisance  to  the  soul. 

6.  Oblation  should  be  offered  in  the  smokeless  sacrificial 
fire  fully  ablaze  (with  the  above  mantra)  for  the  fulfilment  of 
desires.  Oblation  made  in  undeveloped  and  smoky  fire  does  not 
•get  the  desire  fulfilled. 

7.  A  fire  which  is  pleasing,  circling  upwards  and  sweet 
smelling  is  commended.  So  also  is  the  fire  which  touches  the 
ground  and  which  emits  sparks  in  the  contrary  direction. 

8.  Having  offered  oblations  in  this  way,  the  impurities  of 
the  disciple  should  be  destroyed  by  doing  the  sin-consuming 
oblation  or  it  may  be  burnt  with  the  syllables  of  Siva. 

9-10.  Five  hundred  oblations  should  be  made  with  the 
principal  mantra  and  vausaf  etc.  in  one- tenth  of  proportion  for 
the  sake  of  getting  the  characteristics  of  a  twice-born  (for  the 
disciple)  and  to  permeate  him  with  the  essence  of  Lord  Rudra 
(Siva)  as  well  as  for  the  purification  of  the  food  etc.  and  for  the 
(rites  of)  garbhadhana,  simanta,  and  namakarana.1 2 

11.  The  garbhadhana  is  spoken  as  that  which  elevates  the 
soul  of  the  disciple  by  breaking  the  bonds  and  making  him 
■gain  the  sonship  of  Lord  Rudra  (Siva). 

12.  The  purfisavana  is  considered  as  the  manifestation  of 
independant  attributes  of  the  soul  in  the  initiated.  The  dawn  of 
knowledge  by  means  of  discrimination  in  the  disciple  clouded 
by  illusion  is  the  simantavardhana  (growth  of  simanta). 

13.  One’s  birth  is  considered  to  be  the  evolution  out  of  the 
principle  of  absolute  bliss  etc.  The  wakening  (of  conscious¬ 
ness)  is  by  means  of  the  principle  of  supreme  bliss  in  the  initiated 
which  has  become  equal  to  the  Supreme  Being  in  the  spiritual 
perfection. 

1.  Posture  of  finger  indicating  evolution. 

2.  Sec  Ch.  75  Verses  13-17. 


237 


82.14-24 

,4  (Then  .he  preceptor)  should  carry  into  the  lotus  of  his 
,  ‘this  own  soul  resembling  a  spark  of  fire  by  (exhibiting) 

*e  ra  mint  (formation  with  the  fingers  denotmg  gather- 

ing>15  Then  the  prineipal  mantra  should  be  uttered  along  with 
the  retention  of  breath  and  the  union  of  God  Siva  and  hts  own 
,1  cViould  be  brought  about  in.  his  heart. 

16  17  (Then  the  preceptor)  well-versed  in  the  proce  ure 

(relating  to  the  performance  of  sacrifices)  should  carry  his  pure 
(relating  V  f  §iya  from  the  sacrificial  perform- 

Tsh°s 

the  fire-god  The  disciple  (should  be  made)  to  bow  down  to 
S  (pre^ptor).  (Hef  shU  then  make  the  dtseiple  hear 

“T’one  should  no,  blaspheme  scripture  or  God.  One 

should  not  leap  across  the  materials  of  wors  ip. 
propitiate  Lord  Siva,  the  fire-god  and  the  preceptor  as  g 

“  2o'  One  has  to  impart  these  instructions  to  children,  old 
people,  women,  people  addicted  to  pleasures,  and  Peop 
according  to  their  capacity  (to  preserve  them)  and  in  enm 

“  ‘o^After  having5  consecrated  in  a  vessel  the  symbols 

th'  S’  Having  kept  S  a  while  under  the  pitcher  tor  the 
sake  of  pmm  tfon,  die  preceptor  should  give  them  to  ,h.  pernon 
who  takes  the  vow  after  having  obtained  pemi.ss.on  of  Lo.d 

SlV  24.  Thus  in  this  special  spiritual  initiation  a  child 
becomes  ft,  to  have  a  scriptural  knowledge  about  the  fi.e  and 

oblation  unto  the  fire. 


238 


Agni  Purarta 

CHAPTER  EIGHTYTPIREE 


Mode  of  spiritual  initiation  that  removes  one's  bondage : 
The  Lord  said  : 


1 .  The  principal  mantra  should  be  stimulated  in  the  spiritual 
initiation.  In  order  to  gain  strength  (to  break)  the  bonds  (of 
worldly  existence)  one  may  do  it  by  the  rites  oi  tadana  (striking 
gently). 

2.  (Oblations  should  be  offered)  with  each  one  of  the 
(principal)  mantras  or  thrice  with  (them).  The  principal  mantra 
together  with  half  the  tuft  mantra  (should  be  repeated)  along  with 
(the  syllables)  hum,  phat,  etc. 

3.  The  principal  mantra  should  be  stimulated  by  (the  sylla¬ 
bles)  Om,  hrum,  hraum,  haum,  hrum.  (assigning)  to  the 
heart  as  well  as  the  tuft  and  face  with  (the  syllables)  Om,  hrum, 
hraum,  hrum,  phaf. 

4.  One  should  do  the  rite  of  stimulation  for  each  part  of 
the  principal  mantra  in  all  ceremonies  performed  to  cause 
injury  (to  one’s  enemy)  while  the  (syllable)  vasat  is  appended  to 
the  principal  mantra  in  ceremonies  intended  to  bring  peace  and 
prosperity. 

5.  In  all  instances  of  annual  rites,  oblations  should  be 
done  with  religious  acts  for  all  desired  results  along  with  (the 
syllables)  vasat  (and)  vausat. 

6.  Then  after  having  worshipped  the  disciple  having  a  pure 

body  and  seated  on  a  circle  on  the  right  side  of  one’s  self,  (the 

preceptor)  should  contemplate  upon  a  thread  as  the  susumnd  (an 
artery  of  human  body). 

7.  The  tuft  of  hair  (of  the  disciple)  should  be  tied  with  the 
principal  (j mantra )  and  (one  end  of  the  string)  should  be  led  to 
(touch)  the  toe.  In  the  case  of  (the  disciple)  yearning  for  sal¬ 
vation  (t  *e  string)  should  be  tied  on  the  body  of  the  disciple 

ing)Wing  ^  |||ji  % mUdr ^  (Posture  of  fingers  denoting  gather- 


r  (^e  String)  should  be  attached  on  the  right  side  in  the 

female  dTileSr  ,7k  the  *  the  case  of  females.  The 

on  the  headS  ^  °  wors^*PPe^  with  the  mantra  of  the  deity 


thread  should  be  collected  with  the  sarhhara  mudra 


239 


-83.10-1 8 

placed  with  the  tame  (muim).  The  Mdi  (artery)  should 
(be  mentally)  collected  with  the  principal  (mantra)  and  placed 
on  the  string  and  worshipped  with  the  mantra  of  the  heart. 

10.  Having  covered  it  with  the  Rudra  {mantra),  oblations 
should  be  offered  thrice  with  the  mantra  of  the  heart  for  accomp¬ 
lishing  the  presence.  It  is  the  same  way  in  the  case  of  female 

U-13.  Om,  ham  obeisance  to  the  path  ofletters,  ham  obei¬ 
sance  to  the  path  of  residence  (i bhavana ),  Om,  ham  obeisance  to 
the  path  of  phases.  Having  located  the  path  of  purification  on 
the  thread  and  sprinkled  water  on  the  disciple  with  the  weapon 
and  beaten  gently  the  heart  (of  the  disciple)  with  flower  conse¬ 
crated  by  (the  mantra  of)  the  weapon,  the  preceptor  should  men¬ 
tally)  enter  the  body  ofthe  disciple  (by  pronouncing)  the  syllable 
hum  and  exhaling  the  breath.  The  spirit  situated  m  the  hamsa- 
bija  should  be  separated  by  (the  mantra  of)  the  weapon.  Om, 

haUT\\  ^Having  covered  the  same  with  the  Saklisulra  (the  thread 
of  energy)  by  (uttering)  the  mantra  ham  ham  oblations,  it  should 
be  joined  with  the  thread  which  has  become  artery,  y  ( 
ing)  the  samharamudra  (posture  made  with  the  fingers  indicati  g 
gathering)  Om  ham  ham  ham  salutations  to  the  soul. 

15  It  should  thus  be  conceived  as  pervasive.  It  shou  d 
then  be  covered  by  the  mantra  of  the  armour.  Oblations  should 
be  made  thrice  with  (the  mantra  of)  the  heart  for  the  sake  oi  in- 
voking  the  presence. 

16.  Having  located  the  principle  of  knowledge  (in  the 
thread),  one  should  look  at  it  as  beyond  the  state  of  bliss.  Ollici 
principles  which  have  become  mantras  as  they  were  should .  oc 
located  in  that.  One  should  look  at  it  with  (the  mantra)  Om 
ham,  haum  obeisance  to  the  kalafiaSa  (the  bondage  of  phases) 
beyond  absolute  bliss55. 

17-18.  Two  principles  (out  of  the  twentyfivc),  mantra  of 
single  word,  sixteen  letters,  eight  worlds,  two  (principal) 
arteries  {itjla  and  pihgala) ,  (letters)  ka  and  lha,  tie  one  oijcc. 
(of  sense-perception,  the  one  fundamental  attribute,  the  one 
fundamental  cause  and  the  eternal  blissful  one  {Sadaswa)  shou 
be  contemplated  as  having  been  located  :n  the  (phase  o  )  w  nte 
colour  beyond  the  absolute  bliss. 


240 


Agni  Purdue* 


19.  Om  haurii  hurii  pha}  to  the  katapata  beyond  the  region 
of  absolute  bliss.  Having  collected  the  latter  by  (showing)  the 
samharamudra  (posture  of  fingers  denoting  gathering),  it  should 
be  placed  over  the  thread.  It  should  then  be  worshipped  and 
three  oblations  (of  clarified  butter)  should  be  made  for  its 
presence  (in  the  thread). 

20-21.  Two  principles  (out  of  twenty-five),  two  letters 
ka  and  tha ,  two  principal  arteries  (i</«  and  pihgald ),  two 
qualities,  two  mantras  and  one  supreme  lord  situated  in  the 
lotus  (of  the  heart),  twelve  terms  (denoting  god),  seventeen 
worlds,  one  of  the  objects  (of  sense-perception)  should  be  con¬ 
ceived  as  merged  in  the  dark  phase  which  is  beyond  the  region  of 
bliss.  (Lord)  Acyuta  should  be  meditated  upon  therein. 

22.  Having  gathered  it  after  a  gentle  stroking,  it  should 
be  placed  at  the  mouths  of  the  nerve.  Oblations  should  be  made 
thrice  with  the  respective  mantras  for  the  sake  of  its  presence. 

23-24.  The  seven  (fundamental)  principles,  twentyone 
words,  six  letters,  one  path-way,  twentyfive  worlds,  three  qualities 
and  an  object  for  which  Rudra  is  the  cause  should  be  located 
in  the  principle  of  knowledge  and  the  mantras ,  artery,  (the  latters) 
ka  and  tha  higher  above. 

25-26.  Having  taken  the  weapon,  twenty-two  words,  six 
worlds,  six  kalas  (phases),  four  qualities,  three  mantras  and  an 
object  for  which  (Lord)  Visnu  is  the  cause  should  be  meditated 
at  the  base.  The  (rites  of)  beating  should  be  done  in  the  white 
(phase) . 

27-29.  Then  having  placed  (the  same)  in  the  nerve  in  the  navel 
(region),  one  should  offer  oblations  for  the  sake  of  its  presence. 
(The  preceptor)  should  then  locate  (the  syllable)  hrim ,  hundred 
worlds,  twentyeight  words,  twice  each  of  the  mantras ,  artery,  the 
winds  as  well  as  senses,  the  principle  of  the  letter,  the  five  objects 
of  sense-perception  and  the  (first)  cause  governed  by  the  brah¬ 
man  da-mantra,  four  times  the  Sambaras  (a  religious  observance) 
in  the  principle  of  non-action  of  yellow  colour.  It  should  then 
be  beaten. 

30.  The  principles  which  were  left  out  at  the  outset  should 
•  be  located  on  the  thread  and  worshipped.  Three  oblations  should 

be  offered  unto  the  fire  for  the  sake  of  its  presence. 

31.  Thus  having  gathered  the  principles  from  the  body  of 
the  disciple,  they  should  be  located  in  the  thread.  In  the  initia- 


241 


83.32-42 


tion  with  the  mantras ,  it  should  be  done  accompanied  by  religious- 
sacrificial  performances. 

32.  Other  rites  (should  be  undertaken)  for  the  sake  of  ini¬ 
tial  protection  of  the  body  (of  the  disciple)  until  the  mantra 
accomplishes  the  desired  fruits. 

33-34.  The  subtle  soul  awakening  (mantra)  should  be  medi¬ 
tated  in  the  principles  of  beatific  knowledge.  (The  rites  of) 
arpana  (pleasing)  and  dipana  (stimulation)  should  be  performed 
in  the  same  way  with  three  oblations  with  their  respective  man¬ 
tras  (such  as)  “Om,  haum  oblations  to  the  phase  of  beatitude 
beyond  that  of  absolute  bliss”  which  is  (the  mantra  for)  the 
rite  of  pleasing;  “Om,  ham,  ham,  ham,  hum,  phat  to  the  phase  of 
beatitude  beyond  that  of  absolute  bliss”  which  is  (the  mantra 
for)  stimulation.  Then  that  thread  should  be  considered  as 
pervading  the  five  nerve  centres. 

35.  (The  thread)  should  be  smeared  with  saffron  and  clari¬ 
fied  butter  and  (Lord)  Siva  should  be  worshipped  therein  along 
with  his  attendants  with  the  kald-manlras  ending  with  hum  phat 
after  having  pierced  the  bondage  through  the  occult  neive. 

36.  Having  (mentally)  entered  inside  (with  syllables) 
ending  with  obeisance,  (the  preceptor)  should  take  hold  of 
(the  thread)  and  tie  it.  Om,  hum,  ham,  haum,  ham,  hum,  phat, 
I  take  hold  of  the  phase  exceeding  that  of  pure  bliss. 

37.  (The  preceptor)  should  place  that  thread  on  the  shoul¬ 
der  of  the  disciple  after  having  made  him  seated  for  the  sake  of 


successful  completion. 

38.  One  hundred  oblations  should  be  made  with  the  prin¬ 
cipal  mantra  for  the  expiation  of  all  the  sins  (of  the  disciple). 
(The  oblation  should  be  made)  in  a  covered  shallow  saucer 
(if  the  disciple)  is  a  male  and  in  a  saucer  of  enlarged  belly  (m 
the  case  of  a)  female  (disciple). 

39-42.  The  thread  which  has  been  covered  with  the  mantra 
of  the  heart  should  be  placed  and  worshipped  with  (the  mantra 
of)  the  heart.  After  having  been  made  pure  by  the  worship  of 
Siva  and  his  attendants  the  thread  should  be  placed  under  the 
pitcher  (saying),  “let  protection  be  announced  .  After  having 
placed  a  flower  in  the  hands  (of  the  d.sciple)  and  having 
worshipped  the  pitcher  and  other  things,  the  d.sciplc  should  be 
made  to  bow  down  and  led  outside  the  sacrificial  shed.  Aftci 


242 


Agni  Puraijta 


having  drawn  three  circles,  the  disciple should  be  made ;«o  alt 

S  ,  ria  In  the  case  of  aspiration  for  emancipation 
— the  case  of  aspiration  (for 

enjoyment).  Three  handfuls  of  pmc«„a  (the  five  things  got 
from  a  cow)  should  be  sipped  at  the  outset. 

43-44  After  that,  three  or  eight  morsels  of  gruel  unpolluted 

by  the  touch  of  the  teeth  should  be  offered  with  the  hand 
ZZ«  a  A«ia  with  the  leaf  of  jtofife,  if  desirous  of  emancipation 
and  whh  the  leaf  of  pippala,  if  desirous  of  enjoyment. 

45  47  Having  offered  profuse  feeding  with  (the  mantra  of) 
the  heart,  the  pure  water  should  be  given  for  rinsing  the  mouth. 
After  having  given  the  teeth  stick  (for  cleansing  the  teeth) 
with  (the  repetition  of  the  mantra  of)  the  heart,  one  hundred 
and  eight  oblations  should  be  offered  with  the  principal  (mantra) 
for  the  removal  of  defects  such  as  deficiency  etc.  After  having 
dedicated  all  acts  to  the  lord  of  the  ground,  the  deity  should 
be  given  adieu  after  worship  and  Lord  Cantfesa  should  be  wor¬ 
shipped.  Then  the  materials  of  worship  should  be  removed  and 
the  remnants  of  the  gruel  should  be  offered  to  the  fire. 

48  After  having  worshipped  the  pitcher  and  the  protectors 
of  the  world  and  bidding  them  adieu,  one  should  bid  adieu  to 
the  attendant  God  and  fire  if  they  have  been  retained  on  the 
periphery  of  the  mystic  circle. 

49.  Then  having  offered  oblations  in  a  condensed  way  to 
the  protector  of  the  world  at  the  periphery,  one  should  enter  the 
sacrificial  shed  after  bathing  with  ashes  or  pure  oil. 

50.  (If  the  disciples  are)  householders,  (they)  should  be 
seated)  on  a  bed  of  darbhas  with  their  heads  facing  the  east  and 
protected  well  (and  if  the  disciples  are)  monks,  (they  should  be 
seated)  on  a  bed  of  ashes  with  their  heads  facing  the  south  with 
(the  repetition  of  the  mantra  ol)  the  heart. 

51.  (Then  the  preceptor)  should  bathe  the  disciples  who 
had  tied-up  their  tufts  into  knots  along  with  the  mantras  of  the 
weapon  and  sapta  manavaka  and  walk  out  of  the  place  again. 


Om,  hili ,  hili ,  oblations  to  the  trident-bearer. 

52.  After  having  sipped  five  things  got  from  a  cow  and 
the  gruel  and  having  collected  sticks  for  cleansing  the  teeth, 
and  having  rinsed  the  mouth  (with  water),  and  contemplated 
on  (Lord)  Siva  and  having  reached  the  pure  bed,  the  preceptor 


84.1-8 


243 


should  enter  (ajain)  remembering  the  rites  performed  in 
connection  with  initiation.  Thus,  the  mode  of  preliminary 
consecration  relating  to  initiation  has  been  described  briefly. 


CHAPTER  EIGHTYFOUR 
Mode  of  Initiation  for  Emancipation 


The  Lord  said  :  . 

1.  Then  the  preceptor  having  got-up  early  in  the  morning 

should  bathe  and  finish  worship.  (Seeing  in  the  dream) 
curd,  ginger,  meat  and  wine  as  being  consumed  is  commended. 

2.  So  also  riding  on  an  elephant  or  horse  as  well  as  seeing 
a  white  cloth  in  the  dream  is  auspicious.  (Seeing  in  the  dream) 
as  smearing  the  body  with  oil  is  inauspicious.  Oblation  (should 
be  done)  with  the  aghora  mantra  for  the  sake  of  appeasement. 

3.  After  having  performed  two  daily  rites  (the  two  twilight 
worships)  and  entering  the  sacrificial  shed,  (the  preceptor) 
should  rinse  (his  mouth)  and  perform  duties  as  in  the  daily 
routines  as  laid  down  for  the  incidental  rites. 

4-5.  After  having  purified  his  self  and  (the  part  of  the  fore¬ 
arm  known  as)  the  livahasta  and  having  located  in  his  inner  being 
the  Gods  Indra  and  others  in  order  and  worshipped  the  pitcher, 
Siva  worship  should  be  done  at  the  shed  or  on  the  ground. 
Worship  of  fire  and  the  (rite  of)  mantratarpana  (offering 
oblations  along  with  the  recitation  of  mantras )  (should  be  done) 

until  the  final  oblation  is  done.  _  . 

6.  After  having  offered  one  hundred  and  eight  oblations 

with  the  mantra  of  the  weapon,  for  the  removal  of  defects  due 

to  bad  dreams,  one  should  activate  the  mantra  with  the  subtle 

syllable  hum.  „  . 

7.  Having  made  the  aniarbali  (the  rite  of  middle  offering) 

in  between  the  (sacrificial)  pitcher  and  the  ground  for  the 
entry  of  the  disciple,  and  having  obtained  permission,  the 

preceptor  should  walk  out  of  the  shed. 

8.  One  should  do  (the  acts  of)  placing  on  a  mystical  diagram 
(and  other  acts)  in  the  religious  initiation.  The  preparatory 


244 


Agni  Purana 


oblation  (should  be  done)  with  the  ->  o(  « 
should  be  looked  upon  as  the  umbilical  choi  d  of  the  latlei . 

9  Having  offered  three  oblations  with  the  principal  mantra 

for  accomplishing  its  presence, 

lord  Siva  in  the  pitcher  and  take  hold  of  the  thr ead. 

10  It  should  be  tied  on  the  tuft  of  the  disciple  who  would 
remain  standing  on  the  right-hand-side  (of  the  preceptor)  in 
the  manner  that  the  thread  hangs  downupto  the  toe  of  the 

f°0ti  1 .  Having  placed  it  and  looked  at  it  mentally  as  pervading 
the  non-action,  one  should  know  that  more  than  one  hund- 

red  and  eight  worlds  are  in  it. 

12-25.  Kapala,  Aja,  Buddha,  Vajradeha,  Pramardana, 

Vibhuti,  Avyaya,  Sasta,  PinakI,  Tridasadhipa  Agni  Rud.a, 
Hutas!,  Pingala,  Khadaka,  Hara,  Jvalana,  Dahana,  Babhiu, 
Bhasmantaka,  Ksapantaka,  Yamya,  Mytyuhara,  Dhata,  Vidhata, 
Karyaranjaka,  Kala,  Dharma,  Adharma,  Samyokta,  Viyogaka, 
Nairrta,  Marana,  Hanta,  ICruradrsti,  Bhayanaka  -Ordhvam- 
saka'  Virupaksa,  Dhumralohita,  Damstravan,  Atibala,_  Pasa- 
hasta,  Mahabala,  Sveta,  Jayabhadra,  Dirghabahu,  Jalantaka, 
Vadavasya  and  Bhima  are  known  as  (the  manifestations  oi) 
Varuna.  Sighra,  Laghu,  Vayuvega,  Suksma,  Tlksna,  Ksapan¬ 
taka,  Paiicantaka,  Paiicasikha,  Kapardi,  Meghavahana,  Jata- 
mukutadhari,  Nanaratnadhara,  Nidhlsa,  Rupavan,  Dhanya, 
Saumyadeha,  Prasadakrt,  Prakasa,  Laksmivan  and  Kamarupa, 
the  latter  ten;  Vidyadhara,  Jnanadhara,  Sarvajiia,  Vedaparaga, 
Matrvrtta,  Pingaksa,  Bhutapala,  Balipriya,  Sarvavidyavidhata, 
Sukliaduhkhaliara  are  the  ten.  Ananta,  Palaka,  Dhira,  Patala- 
dhipati,  Visa,  Vrsadhara,  VIrya,  Grasana,  Sarvatomukha  and 
Lohita  known  as  the  ten  (manifestations  of)  Rudra  seated  on  the 
hoods  of  snakes;  Sambhu,  Vibhu,  Ganadhyaksa,  Tryaksa, 
Tridasavandita,  Samhara,  Vihara,  Labha,  Lipsu  (and)  Vicak- 
sana;  (and)  Atta,  Kuliakakalagnirudra,  Hataka,  Kiismanda, 
Satya,  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Rudra  are  the  eight  Rudras  who  all 
remain  in  the  interior  of  hemisphere  (of  the  universe).  The 
names  of  these  (Gods)  as  well  as  the  names  of  worlds  should 
be  remembered. 

26.  Bhavodbhava,  Sarvabhuta,  Sarvabhutasukhaprada 
(Grantcr  of  felicity  to  all),  Sarvasannidhyakft,  (all  pervasive) 
arc  worshipped  by  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Rudra. 


84.27-35 


245 


27  O  Adored  one  !  Existing  prior  to  all  beings  !  Om  1 
The  "Witness  !  Om  .  '.  The  Destroyer  of  Rudra  !  Om  !  Sun  ! 

Om  <  The  Sound  !  Om  -  The  Subtle  !0m  !  Siva  !  The  Granter 
of  all  things  to  all  beings  !  The  pervading  life-force  of  all  things  . 
The  Creator  of  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Rudra  1  Om  1  Salutations 

to  Siva.  , 

O  Guha  (son  of  Lord  Siva  and  Parvali)  1  (in  the  thread 

described  above)  the  principle  of  non-action  should  ^  contem¬ 
plated  as  impregnated  with  the  twenty-eight  beatific  states 
together  with  the  eight  letters  of  which  the  sadya,  hyd,  astra,  and 
nelra  mantras  are  composed. 

28  The  letter  ma  is  the  emblem  of  the  mystic  seed,  the  two 
occult  nerves  known  as  ida  and  pingala,  the  two  vital  winds 
prana  and  apana  and  the  organs  of  smell  and  generation. 

29  Among  the  five  qualities  smell  etc.,  the  qua  i  y  o 

is  spoken  as  the  matter.  The  principle  of  matter  is  yellow  (in 
colour)  symbolises  thunderbolt  and  is  square-shaped. 

30  Its  extension  is  one  hundred  crores  otyojanas  (a  yojana 
is  equivalent  to  eight  miles,.  It  should  be  known 

teen  creative  principles  are  lying  concealed  in  this  (zone). 

3  l  it  is  the  first  being  and  the  source  of  the  four-fold 
tcnce  of  all  celestial  beings,  Mann,  etc.  antmals  and  buds 

craw.i„!  insects.  the  source  of  things  born^ 

‘h'T-l'suclTr^ ’"d-ons,  and 

human  (such  asj  go  ,  (Yama)  and  the  eighth, 

““tr0mn8  th,! 

^35.  Having 

priate  mantras.  _  tfae  thread  standing  for  the  beatitude 

Om,  ham,  'rum’  han  ham,  ham  oblations  to  the  thread 

of  non-action  hum,  pm,  of  non-action.  Having  drawn  m 

standing  for  the  e  above  mantra )  and  shown  the  ahkuSa- 
breath  along  with  l  fi  rs  denoting  a  goad),  and  having 
mudra  (posture  made  wit 


246 


Agni  Purana 


withheld  the  breath  and  carrying  it  up  by  showing  the  sariihara- 
mudra  (formation  with  fingers  representing  gathering) and  with 
(the  manira)  Om ,  hrum,  hram ,  hram  to  the  thread  of  beatitude  of 
non-action  hum.  phat  and  having  placed  it  in  the  pitcher  by 
showing  the  udbhavamudra  (formation  with  fingers  denoting 
generation)  and  discharging  the  breath  and  repetition  of  (the 
mantra )  Om ,  Om,  hram ,  ham  obeisance  to  the  thread  of  beatitude 
of  non-action  and  having  offered  the  respectful  offering  with 
(the  mantra)  Om,  ham,  obeisance  to  the  thread  of  beatitude 
of  non-action  and  worshipped,  (the  preceptor)  should  offer 
three  oblations  with  face  turned  away  ending  with  (the  word) 
“Oblation55  for  the  sake  of  accomplishing  its  presence  and  then 
offer  the  concluding  three  oblations.  (Lord)  Brahma  should 
be  invoked  with  (the  mantra)  Om,  ham,  obeisance  to  Brahma 
and  worshipped.  (He)  should  be  appeased  (with  oblations) 
with  (the  word)  “Oblations55.  (The  preceptor  should  say), 
“O  Brahman  !  I  initiate  (this  disciple)  in  this  (world)  over 
which  you  hold  sway55. 

36-37.  One  should  submit  (to  the  lord)  “you  should  be 
propitious  to  him55.  Goddess  Vaglsvarl,  the  deity  of  protection, 
who  is  of  the  form  of  desire,  knowledge  and  action  and  is  of  six 
kinds  and  is  the  sole  cause  (of  the  universe)  should  be  invoked 
with  (the  mantra  of)  the  heart.  One  should  worship  and  satisfy 
the  Goddess  as  follows  : — 

38-40.  (Goddess)  Vaglsvarl,  the  cause  of  agitating  the 
receptacles  should  gently  be  struck  (against)  the  chest  (of  the 
disciple)  with  the  repetition  of  the  hr l  ( mantra )  and  the  principal 
mantra  concluding  with  hum  phat  and  the  mantra  of  the  arrow. 
(The  preceptor)  who  knows  the  procedure  (of  these  rites) 
should  then  enter  into  the  inner  self  of  the  disciple  and  then 
divide  the  effulgent  consciousness  (of  the  disciple)  in  the  heart 
endowed  with  the  thread  located  in  the  beatitude  of  non-action 
and  resembling  a  spark  of  fire,  with  jyestha  ( mantra )  as  follows: — 
Om,  ham,  hum ,  hah,  hum,  phat  and  with  ( the  mantra)  Om,  ham, 
oblations  and  then  with  the  afikusamudra  (posture  with  fingers 
denoting  the  goad). 

41-43.  Having  diawn  it  with  its  appropriate  ( mantra )  and 
seized  it,  it  should  be  united  with  his  soul.  Om,  ham,  hrSm,  ham 
obeisance  to  the  soul.  Having  imagined  the  union  of  his  own 
soul  with  discharge  of  the  breath,  it  should  be  led  to  the  abode  of 


247 


84.44-53 


Siva  after  having  gradually  discarded  with  discrimination .the 
cause  such  as  Brahma,  etc.  One  should  cast  it  in  the  womb  of 
(Goddess)  Vigisvarl  with  the  (exhibition  of)  udbhava-mudra 
(posture  with  fingers  denoting  generation)  after  having  earned 
it  for  impregnation  in  all  the  principles  simultaneously.  Om , 
ham,  ham,  ham,  obeisance  to  the  soul.  One  should  worship  with 
this  ( mantra )  and  after  oblations'  five-  times. 

44.  One  should  do  the  purification  of  the  body  with _the 
mantra  of  the  heart  in  the  case  of  all  other  principles.  The 
puriisavana  (the  rite  of  determining  the  sex)  is  not  done,  as  there 
can  be  a  feminine  form  also. 

45.  The  simantonnayana  (parting  of  the  hair)  and  the  divine 
limbs  (should  be  treated)  as  the  body.  (The  purificatory  rite) 
at  the  birth  for  all  human  beings  should  be  done  with  the  mantra 
of  the  head  with  aversion. 


46  (The  preceptor)  should  similarly  contemplate  upon 
the  regions  over  which  they  have  control,  with  the  mantra 
of  Siva.  The  objects  of  sense  pleasure  (should  be  contemplated) 
with  the  mantra  of  the  armour  and  the  worldly  objects  wit  (t  e 
mantra  of)  the  weapons. 

47-48  One  should  contemplate  on  that  one  which  is  known 
as  dissolution,  as  the  form  of  delusion  and  unbreakable.  Streams 
should  be  purified  by  (contemplating)  the  mantra .of  Siva  and  the 
purification  of  the  principles  should  be  done  with  (the  mantra 
of)  the  heart.  Five  times  five  oblations  should  be  made  in  respect 
of  the  rites  of  garbhadhana  and  others  in  order  for  the  sake  of 
cessation  of  the  bonds  due  to  sinful  acts. 

49  One  hundred  oblations  should  be  made  with  (t  e 
mantra  of)  the  heart  after  having  accomphshed  exp.at.on. 

By  rrzxizz  zn^ti*  t 

“  MS5r"Lp.Uhment  by  the  Wpa  »f  the 

weapon  is  like  cutting  with  a  g  accomplished 

the  beatitude  of  not^achon  «  S  * 

andiaidina  eircuiar 


*248 


Agni  Purana 


form  on  the  sacrificial  ladle  filled  with  clarified  butter.  One 
should  then  burn  it  with  the  mantra  of  the  weapon  and  reduce  it 
into  ashes  with  the  weapon  after  having  offered  five  oblations  for 
the  removal  of  the  goad  of  bondage.  Om,  hah ,  to  the  weapons 
hum,  phat .  Expiation  should  then  be  made  with  eight  oblations 
made  with  (the  mantra  of)  the  weapon. 

54-56.  After  having  invoked  (Lord)  Brahma,  he 
should  be  worshipped  and  appeased.  Then  Om,  ham,  O 
Brahman,  whom  soul  and  touch  cannot  perceive,  you  take 
•  (these  oblations).  Oblations.  He  should  be  informed  of  the 
authority  invested  in  him  by  offering  three  oblations.  “O 
Brahman  !  you  should  not  again  bind  this  being  whose  sins 
have  all  been  burnt.  You  listen  to  the  mandate  of  Lord  Siva.” 
After  having  bid  farewell  to  Lord  Brahma,  (the  preceptor) 
should  slowly  fill  ir  the  soul  of  the  disciple  by  his  own  soul  with 
retention  of  breath  and  exhibiting  samharamudra  (posture  with 
fingers  representing  collection).  (That  soul)  would  then  look 
like  the  disc  of  the  moon  at  the  beginning  of  the  eclipses  at  a 
particular  spot. 

57.  After  having  taken  it  out,  it  should  be  located  in  the 
thread  with  the  discharge  of  breath  and  with  udb/iavamudra  (posture 
with  fingers  denoting  generation).  After  having  worshipped  it, 
the  preceptor  should  place  the  drop  of  water  in  the  offering 
vessel  resembling  the  nectar,  on  the  head  of  the  disciple  for  the 
purpose  of  completion. 

58.  After  having  bid  farewell  to  the  (divine)  parents,  the 
final  oblation  should  be  made  with  th t  mantra  of  Siva  ending  with 
vausat.  Thus  the  mode  of  completion  has  ended.  The  non¬ 
action  principle  is  thus  purified. 


CHAPTER  EIGHTYFIVE 
Mode  of  purifying  the  Beatific  principle  of  establishment 
The  lord  said  : 

1-2.  The  union  of  the  two  principles  good  and  bad  should 
be  brought  about  by  the  application  of  short  and  long 


85.3-22 


249 


(vowels)  associated  with  sound.  Om,  ham ,  hr  urn,  ham,  water,  efful¬ 
gence,  wind,  sky,  the  subtle  principles,  organs,  intellect,  the 
three  qualities  and  ego  (arc)  the  twenty-four  principles  (and) 
the  purusa  (the  soul)  (is  the  twenty-fifth). 

3.  (The  preceptor)  should  imagine  the  letters  beginning 
with  kha  and  ending  with  j iya  as  merged  in  the  above  twenty- 
five  principles. 

4.  The  number  of  Rudras  is  equivalent  to  the  bhuvanas 
(Worlds),  which  are  known  to  be  fifty-six.  They  are  as  follows: 

5-12.  Amaresa,  Prabhava,  Naimisa,  Puskara,  Padi,  Dandi, 
Bhavabhuti,  Nakulisa  the  eighth,  Hariscandra,  Srisaila  the 
tenth,  Anvisa,  Abhratikesa,  Mahakala,  Madhyama,  Kcdara, 
Bhairava,  spoken  as  the  second  (group  of)  eight.  Then  Gaya- 
kuruksetra-khalanadikanadika,  Vimala,  Attahasa,  Mahendra, 
Bhima,  Vasvapada,  Rudrakoti,  Aviyukta,  Mahabala,  Gokarna, 
Bhadrakarna,  Svarnaksa,  Sthanu  Ajcya,  Sarvajna,  Bhasvara, 
Sudanantara,  Subahu,  Mattarupi,  Visala,  Jatila,  Raudra, 
Pingalaksa,  Kaladamstii,  Vidura,  Ghora,  Prajapatya,  Huta- 
sana,  Kamarupi,  Kala,  Karna,  Bhayanaka,  Matanga,  Pingala, 
Hara,  Datr(samjnaka),  Sankukarna,  Vidhana,  Srikantha  and 
Candrasckhara. 

13.  Their  attributes  (to  be  used)  along  with  their  names 
are  also  described  then.  O  (All)  pervasive  !  Om ,  Formless  ! 
Om,  Conqueror  !  Om,  Lustre  !  Om,  Light  !  Om,  (Supreme) 
Being  !  Om,  Fire  !  Om,  Smokeless  !  Om,  Not  reduced  to  ashes  ! 
Om,  One  without  a  beginning  !  Om,  Of  manifold  forms  !  Om, 
The  Agitator  !  Om,  The  Earth  !  Om,  the  Atmosphere  !  Om, 
Heavens  !  Om,  Deathless  !  Born  from  dissolution  !  Auspi¬ 
cious  !  Killer  !  Absolute  Soul  !  Supreme  Deity  !  Lord  of 
celestials  !  Lord  of  Good  will  !  Supreme  lustre  !  Presiding  deity 
of  yoga  !  (Your)  release  !  The  first  soul  !  All  in  all  !  Lord  of  all 
beings  !  arc  the  thirty- two1  attributes.  Vamadeva,  Siya,  and 
Sikha  are  the  three  mantras  in  the  subtle  form. 

14.  The  two  occult  sychic  nerves  gandhari  and  susfimna, 
then  the  winds  samajia  and  udana ,  the  organs  of  taste  and  repro¬ 
duction  (are  also  worshipped). 

15-22.  The  sentiments  are  the  material  objects.  The  quali- 


1.  But,  actually  only  twentynine  have  been  given. 


250 


Agni  Purdna 


ties  are  perception,  hearing,  touch  and  taste.  The  mystic  diagram 
should  be  circular  and  bear  the  mark  of  a  white  lotus. 

After  having  contemplated  on  the  worlds  as  well  as  those  estab¬ 
lished  along  with  the  eagle-bannered  god  who  is  the  cause  for 
the  establishment  in  the  dreamy  state,  the  thread  should  be  plac¬ 
ed  on  the  body  with  (the  recitation)  of  the  appropriate  mantra 
and  retained  (by  the  preceptor).  “Om,  ham ,  khum ,  ham,  to  the 
thread  of  the  beatitude  of  consecration  Om ,  phaf\  With  this 
( mantra )  and  ending  with  ‘oblations’  it  should  be  drawn  while 
drawing  in  breath  and  exhibiting  ankusa-mudra  (formation  with 
fingers  denoting  a  goad).  Then  “Om,  ham,  hr  um ,  hrdm ,  hr  Tun 
to  the  thread  of  the  beatitude  of  consecration  hrum ,  pha /”.  With 
this  and  retention  of  breath  and  showing  samliaramudrd  (forma¬ 
tion  with  fingers  denoting  gathering)  it  should  be  taken  from  the 
occult  nerve  below  the  heart.  Om,  ham ,  hr  am,  hrdm ,  ham ,  obei¬ 
sance  to  the  thread  of  the  beatitude  of  consecration.  With  this 
( mantra )  and  showing  the  udbhavamudrd  (formation  with  fingers 
denoting  generation)  and  discharge  of  breath,  it  should  be  placed 
on  the  pitcher.  Having  worshipped  with  the  mantra  " Om ,  ham , 
hrim  obeisance  to  the  thread  of  the  beatitude  of  consecration” 
ending  with  ‘oblations’,  and  offered  three  oblations  for  ensuring 
its  continuance  (lord)  Visnu  should  be  invoked  (with  the 
mantra )  Om ,  ham,  obeisance  to  Visnu”,  worshipped  and  offered 
oblations  O  Visnu  !  I  initiate  the  disciple  who  is  desirous 
to  get  liberation  herein  under  your  authority”.  You  should  be 
propitious.  Thus  Lord  Visnu  should  be  informed.  Then  the 
(Goddess)  Vaglsvari  and  Lord  Vaglsa  should  be  invoked  as 
before,  worshipped  and  offered  oblations  and  the  disciple  should 
be  gently  struck  on  the  chest.  Om,  ham,  ham ,  ham,  phat.  (The 
preceptor)  should  enter  with  the  same  ( mantra )  and  severe  the 
consciousness  in  the  above-said  thread  with  the  ( mantra )  of 
weapon  and  (showing)  the  atikuSamudra  (formation  with  fingers 
denoting  a  goad)  and  jyeslha  {mantra)  Om,  ham,  ham ,  horn,  hrum , 
pha}.  Having  drawn  it  with  (the  mantra  of)  the  heart  ending 
with  oblations  ,  it  should  be  lodged  in  one’s  own  soul  repeating 
the  same  {mantra)  and  ending  with  “obeisance”.  Om,  ham,  ham, 
horn  obeisance  to  the  soul.  The  union  of  divine  parents 
should  be  imagined  as  before  with  the  udbhavamudrd  (posture  with 
ftngeis  denoting  generation)  and  (the  seed  of  the  soul)  should 
be  cast  into  the  womb  of  the  goddess  by  exhibiting  the  same 


85.23-28 


251 


( mudra )  from  the  left.  Om ,  ham,  ham ,  ham  obeisance  to  the  soul, 
the  birth  of  the  body  should  be  (accomplished)  by  (the  mantra 
of)  the  heart,  the  postnatal  (ceremony)  by  (the  mantra  of) 
the  head. 

23.  Otherwise  its  possession  (could  be  accomplished)  by 
(the  mantra  of)  the  tuft.  For  the  sake  of  enjoyment  of  pleasures 
it  should  be  done  by  the  mantra  of  the  armour.  In  regard  to 
the  purity  of  principles  (it  should  be  done)  with  (the  mantra 
of)  the  heart  and  in  the  case  of  impregnation  it  is  in  the  same  way 
as  before. 

24-25.  For  cutting  bonds  (it  should  be)  accomplished  by 
(the  mantra  of)  the  head.  Having  cut  the  bonds  thus,  the 
preceptor  should  repeat  (the  mantra) hundred  times.  Even  after 
having  cut  the  bonds  thus,  (the  preceptor)  should  cut  it  with 
the  repetition  of  the  mantra  of  the  weapon  and  with  a  scissor 
over  which  the  mantra  of  the  beatific  principles  has  been 
repeated.  Om,  hrim,  to  the  thread  of  the  beatitude  of 
consecration  hah  phat .  The  thread  should  be  removed  and 
kept  in  a  circular  shape  as  before  (described  in  the  previous 
chapter)  with  (the  repetition  of  the  mantra  of  the  weapon. 

26.  Having  placed  it  over  the  sacrificial  ladle  filled  with 
clarified  butter,  oblations  should  be  done  with  the  mantra  of  the 
beatific  principles  and  weapons.  Five  oblations  should  be  made 
with  (the  mantra  of)  the  weapon  for  the  cessation  of  shoots  of 
bondage. 

27.  Eight  oblations  should  be  made  for  the  sake  of  expia¬ 
tion.  Om,  hah  to  the  weapons  hrilrn,  phaf  .  Lord  Hrslkesa  should 
be  invoked  and  worshipped  and  offered  oblations. 

28.  As  laid  down  earlier  investiture  of  authority  should 
be  made  “om,  ham  accept  this  fees  of  sentiment,  oblations” 
(is  the  mantra  which  should  be  repeated).  O  Hara  !  (you) 
should  not  remain  as  a  bond  of  this  being  (the  disciple)  whose 
bondage  has  completely  been  burnt  away.  Listen  to  this 
mandate  of  Lord  Siva.  Having  bid  farewell  to  Lord  Go- 
vinda  (Visnu)  and  united  the  soul  of  knowledge  which  resembles 
the  moon’s  disc  half  uncovered  by  the  band  by  exhibiting  the 
samharamudra  (posture  with  fingers  denoting  gathering)  and 
having  bid  farewell  by  showing  the  udbhavamudra  (formation  with 
fingers  denoting  generation),  the  drop  of  water  should  be  placed 
on  the  thread  as  before.  Having  bid  farewell  to  the  (divine) 


252 


Agiii  Purana 


parents  and  having  worshipped  the  fire  with  flowers,  etc.  the 
final  oblation  should  be  made  as  laid  down.  Thus  the  conse¬ 
cration  also  gets  purified. 


CHAPTER  EIGHTYSIX 
Mode  of  Purification  of  scriptural  knowledge 
The  Lord  said  : 

!•  The  union  of  the  beatific  principle  of  knowledge  and 
that  of  ancient  one  should  be  done  as  before,  after  having  located 
the  principles.  The  union  should  be  done  with  (the  mantra) 
Om ,  horn,  brim, 

2.  Attachment,  pure  knowledge,  fate,  time,  illusion  and 
ignorance  together  with  beatific  principle  are  (known  as)  the 
seven  unions. 

3.  The  six  letters,  ra,  la,  va,  sa,  sa,  and  sa  are  said  (to  re¬ 
present)  .'the  branches  of  learning.  The  terms  beginning  with 
pranava  {Om)  are  twenty-one  (in  number)  (as  below)— Om 
obeisance  to  Siva,  who  is  the  Lord  of  all  (created)  things.  Ham> 
to  (Lord)  Siva,  to  Isana  at  my  head,  to  Tatpurusa  at  my  face, 
to  Aghora  at  the  heart,  to  Vamadeva  at  the  anus,  to  the  form  of 
Sadyojata.  Om  obeisance  again  and  again  to  the  extremely 
secret  form,  to  the  protector,  to  the  deathless  one,  to  the  Lord 
of  all  beings,  to  the  form  of  effulgence,  to  the  Supreme  Lord 
(one  who  pervades)  the  sky  by  thoughts  Om . 

4-8.  Om  the  forms  of  Rudras  and  the  bhuvanas  (worlds)  are 
described  now.  The  first  one  is  Vamadeva  (Lord  of  irascible 
nature),  next  Sarvabhavodbhava  (the  source  of  all  beings), 
Vajradcha  (possessing  a  strong  body),  Prabhu  (lord),  Dhata 
(tie  supporter),  Krama  (order),  Vikrama  (conquest),  Su- 
prabha  (resplendent),  Vatu  (youth),  Prasanta  (tranquil), 
aiama  ?ara.  (supreme  knowledge),  Siva  (auspicious),  Sasiva 
(endowed  with  auspiciousness),  Babhru  (tawny-coloured), 
saya  ^  (unperishable),  Sambhu  (one.  who  begets  peace), 
rstarupa  (having  an  invisible  form),  Adrstanama  (having 
an  unseen  name),  Rupavardhana  (promoter  of  beatuty), 


86.9-17 


253 


Manonmana  (one  who  agitates  the  mind),  Mahavlrya  (the 
mighty  one),  Citranga  (one  who  is  variegated)  (and)  Kalyana 
(the  blessed  one).  Thus  (theRudras)  are  known  by  the  twenty- 
five  names  (together  with)  Mantra  (the  controller  of  mind), 
Ghora  (the  dreadful  one)  and  Amara  (the  immortal  one). 
Pusa  and  hastijihva  are  the  two  occult  nerves  in  that  (above- 
said)  beatific  phase.  Vyana,  naga  and  prabhanjana  (are  the 
vital  winds). 

9.  The  only  object  is  that  of  the  form.  The  feet  and  the 
eyes  are  the  organs.  Sound,  touch  and  sight  are  known  as  the 
three  qualities. 

10.  Here  the  state  is  that  of  deep  sleep.  Lord  Rudra  is  the 
cause.  All  the  worlds  should  be  looked  upon  as  located  in  this 
(beatific  principle  of)  knowledge. 

1 1 .  Gentle  beating,  cutting  and  entry  into  it  should  also  be 
done.  Having  pulled  it  from  the  region  of  the  heart  by  means  of 
knowledge,  it  should  be  seized. 

12.  It  should  be  super-imposed  on  one’s  own  soul.  The 
beatific  principle  should  be  firmly  held  and  then  placed  in  the 
fire-pit,  after  having  invoked  (lord)  Rudra,  the  cause,  and  sub¬ 
mitted  (to  him)  the  (new  born)  child. 

13.  Having  invoked  the  divine  parents,  (the  preceptor) 
should  gently  strike  the  (new-born)  child  in  the  heart  (of  the 
disciple).  After  having  entered  it  with  the  mantra  spoken  earlier, 
one  should  unite  it  with  his  own  soul. 

14.  After  having  drawn  it  out  and  taking  it,  it  should  be 
united  with  his  own  soul  by  the  method  described  already.  It 
should  be  united  in  the  womb  from  the  left  side.  After  (the 
repetition  of)  the  dvadaSa  (twelve )  letters  of  mantra  it  should  be 
taken  out. 

15.  The  rites  relating  to  the  birth  and  post-natal  purification 
of  the  body,  enjoyment,  deep  absorption,  purification  of  the 
stream  and  of  the  principles  should  be  performed. 

16  One  hundred  oblations  should  be  made  as  expiation 
as  laid  down  for  the  removal  of  all  bondages  due  to  impurities. 

17  The  severance  of  bondage  (should  be  done)  with  (the 
mantra  of)  the  weapon.  The  vanishing  force  of  impurities 


254  Agni  Purana 

should  be  cut  and  pounded.  Then  the  thread  should  be 
placed  in  a  circular  form1. 

18.  Its  burning  and  the  absence  of  those  letters  as  well  as 
expiation  should  then  be  done.  The  invocation  of  (god)  Rudra, 
(and  his)  worship  and  the  submission  of  sensibles  of  sight 
and  smell  (should  be  done). 

19.  Om,  krirn  O  Rudra  !  take  this  fee  of  the  sensibles  of 
sight  and  smell.  Oblations.  After  having  conveyed  the  mandate 
of  lord  Sambhu  (Siva)  and  bidding  farewell  to  (lord) 
Rudra,  the  cause,  the  pure  spirit  should  be  located  (first)  in 
himself  and  then  located  in  the  thread  of  bondage. 

20.  The  subtle  speck  (of  the  soul)  should  be  placed  on  his 
head  and  the  divine)  parents  should  be  bid  farewell.  Then  the 
final  oblation  should  be  made,  as  laid  down,  which  completes 
all  formalities. 

21.  The  act  of  gently  beating  and  other  acts  should  be 
done  in  the  beatific  knowledge  as  described  earlier.  Here  the 
speciality  is  the  location  of  (the  soul  as  a)  speck.  Thus  the 
beatific  knowledge  is  purified. 


CHAPTER  EIGHTYSEVEN 
Mode  of  purification  of  the  principle  of  peace 
The  Lord  said  : 

1-2.  The  beatific  knowledge  should  be  united  now  with 
the  (principle  of)  peace  as  laid  down.  The  two  principles  lie 
in  the  (principle  of)  peace.  Bhavesvara  and  Sadasiva  are  spoken 
as  the  two  letters  ha  and  lzsa .  The  Rudras  are  equal  in  number 
to  the  worlds.  They  are  as  follows  : 

3.  Prabhava  (valiant),  Samaya  (time),  Ksudra  (little), 
Vimala  (free  from  impurity),  Siva  (auspicious),  Ghana  (heavy), 
Niranjanakara  (unstained  form),  Svasiva  (auspicious  to  him¬ 
self),  Diptikarana  (cause  of  brilliance),  Tridasesvara  (lord  of 

previous^  chErater.nd  SUCCecding  ones  are  sarae  »  those  described  in  the 


255 


87.4-11 

tllP  thirty  (gods),  Tridasa  (representing  the  thirty),  Kalasaih- 
inaka  (known  as  the  time),  Suksma  (minute),  Ambujcsvara 
(lord  of  the  lotus).  These  are  the  Rudras  firmly  established  in 
the  principle  of  peace. 

4.  (Obeisance)  to  the  one  who  pervades  the  ether,  to  the 
form  which  manifests  as  the  ether,  to  the  all-pervasive,  to  the 
auspicious  one,  to  the  endless,  to  one  who  has  no  master  to  one 
who  is  not  having  any  hold,  to  the  firm  one,  to  the  eternal  to  the 
one  firmly  established  in  the  seat  of  yoga ,  to  the  eternal  yogrn, 
and  one  who  partakes  of  such  meditation  (of  votaries)  are 
the  twelve  terms  (used  in  their  invocation). 

5.  The  preceptor  should  meditate  with  the  two  protective 

mantras  (known  as)  bindu  and  ufiakaraka,  the  two  occult  nerves 
alambusa  and  syasa  and  the  two  vital  winds  krkara  and  kurmaka 
in  the  subtle  phase. 

6  The  organs  of  skin  and  hand  are  considered  as  the  two 
senses  or  perception  for  this  beatific  principle.  ™-e  “ttrAutes 
of  touch  and  sound  arc  the  only  two  attributes,  lord  (Siva)  is 
the  only  cause  of  these. 

7  Having  contemplated  upon  the  different  worlds  which  are 
located  in  the  beatific  principle  of  peace  as  the  fourth  s  ate  (of 

consciousness)  (in  which  the  soul  gets  umted  w  th  the 

Supreme  being),  (the  preceptor)  should  do  the  (acts  of)  gent 
beating,  division,  entry  and  union. 

8  Having  drawn  the  (beatific  principle  of)  peace  from  the 
string  of  the  face,  it  should  be  held  (by  the  preceptor  Having 
merged  it  in  one’s  own  self,  the  beatific  principle  should  be  held 

and  projected  in  the  receptacle.  ,  .  ,  .  r 

qP  <<o  Lord  !  I  am  initiating  this  disciple  desirous  of 

release  (from  bondage)  subject  to  your  control  You  have  to 

be  beneficial  to  him.”  The  appeal  should  thus  be  m  . 

10  After  having  invoked  the  divine  paren  s  a 

the  gentle  beating  of  the  disciple  etc.  and  collecting  the  soul- 
force,  it  should  be  united  with  his  preceptor  s  own  souk 

11  Having  invoked  the  divine  parents  as  before  by 
(showing)  mudra  known  as  udbhava  (formation  withgmg£S 
denoting  generation),  it  should  be  located  in  the  womb  of  the 
goddess  by  repeating  the  principal  mantra  of  the  go  p 

by  the  mantra  of  the  heart. 


256 


Agni  Parana 


12.  A  corporeal  frame  for  the  beatitude  should  be  done 
with  the  (repetition  of  the  mantra  of  the)  heart  five  times.  (The 
mantra  of)  the  head  (should  be  repeated)  for  bringing  it  into 
being.  Its  authority  (is  accomplished)  by  (the  mantra  of)  the 
tuft  and  the  enjoyment  by  (the  mantra  of)  the  armour. 

13.  Its  repose  (is  accomplished)  by  (the  repetition  of) 
the  mantra  of  weapons.  The  purification  of  the  currents  (is 
achieved)  by  (that  of  lord)  Siva.  In  (the  case  of)  purifica¬ 
tion  of  the  principle,  (the  rites  of)  garbhadhana  etc.  (should  be 
done)  in  the  same  manner  as  before. 

14.  The  thread  is  untied  with  that  of  the  armour.  Having 
completed  the  purification  thus,  one  should  repeat  the  mantras 
hundred  times.  In  order  to  compensate  the  mitigation  of  the 
powei  of  mantras  five  oblations  should  be  made  with  (the  mantra 
of)  the  weapon. 

15.  After  having  untied  the  thread,  it  should  be  severed 


with  a  knife  by  the  repetition  (of  the  mantra)  of  the  weapon  seven 
times  just  as  the  bondage  is  cut  off  with  the  principal  mantra. 

16.  (The  mantra  is) :  “Om,  haum ,  to  the  thread  of  the  beati¬ 
fic  principle  of  peace  hah,  hum,  pkaf.  After  having  untied  and 
made  into  a  circle,  the  chord  should  be  placed  as  before  in  the 
sacrificial  ladle  filled  with  clarified  butter  with  (the  repetition 
of  the  mantra  of)  the  weapon.  Oblation  should  h*  d™,> 


18offpHrg  'nvuoked  S°d  with  (the  mantra  of)  the  heart, 


87.21-88.1-5 


257 


21 .  The  same  should  be  united  with  the  thread  by  showing 
pure  udbhavamudra  (formation  with  fingers  denoting  gene¬ 
ration).  The  drop  of  nectar  should  be  put  on  the  head  of  the 
disciple  with  (the  repetition  of)  the  principal  (mantra). 

_  Having  taken  leave  of  the  (divine)  parents  after  wor¬ 
shipping  them  with  flowers  etc.,  (the  preceptor)  should  offer 
the  final  oblation  to  the  fire  as  a  concluding  rite. 

23 .  Even  here  the  acts  of  gentle  beating  etc.  should  be  done 
as  before.  The  distinctive  feature  is  (the  use  of)  its  principal 
mantra.  Thus  the  purification  (of  the  beatific  principle)  of  peace 
is  done  without  any  impediment. 


CHAPTER  EIGHTYEIGHT 

Mode  of  initiation  which  secures  nirvana  {liberation  from  existence) 
The  Lord  said  : 

1.  (The  preceptor)  should  blend  the  beatific  principle 
surpassing  peace  with  the  pure  beatific  principle  of  peace  and 
write  the  principles  of  letters  with  that  as  before.  Om,  hrim , 
ksaum ,  haum,  ham  (are  the  syllables  used  for)  the  union. 

2-5.  (Goddess)  Sakti  and  (God)  Siva  which  arc  the  two 
principles  (of  the  universe),  the  eight  perfections  of  the  universe 
(known  as)  dipaka  (illuminating),  roeika  (brightening),  mocaka 
(delivering  from  bonds),  urdhvagami  (ascending  up),  vyomarupa 
(of  the  form  of  ether),  andtha  (not  having  any  master),  andJrita 
(not  being  dependent)  and  the  eighth  the  syllable  of  om,  the 
mantra  of  (lord)  Isana,  the  sixteen  letters  beginning  with  the 
letter  V  and  ending  with  visarga  (aspirated  sound),  the 
principal  mantra ,  the  two  (occult  nerves)  kuhu  and  sahkhini 
which  are  the  cause  for  the  body  and  the  two  winds  devadatta 
and  dhanahjaya  (should  be  contemplated  as  pervading  the 
above).  The  senses  of  touch  and  hearing  are  considered  as  the 
materials  of  sense  perception. '  The  principle  of  sound  is  the 
predominating  attribute.  Its  state  is  the  fifth  state  exceeding 
that  of  the  fourth  state  (the  state  in  which  the  soul  becomes 
one  with  the  supreme  soul). 


258 


Agni  Purana 


6  Lord  Sadasiva  should  be  known  as  the  sole  cause. 
Having  meditated  upon  the  collective  beatific  principles 
known  as  beyond  (the  beatific  principle)  of  peace,  (the  rites 
of)  stroking  gently  etc.  should  be  performe  . 

7  Having  gently  beaten  the  beatific  principle  of  the  thread 
and  dividing  it  (mentally)  with  (the  recitation  of  the  principal 
mantra)  ending  with  phat,  (the  preceptor  should  penetiatc  inside 
the  noose  (with  the  recitation  of  the  above  mantra)  ending  with 
(the  pronunciation  of)  salutations  and  loosen  (the  beatific 
principle  with  the  recitation  of  the  above  mantra )  ending  wit 


8.  Then  (the  beatific  principle  of)  the  thread  should  be 
consecrated  with  (the  recitation  of)  the  mantras  of  the  tuft  (and) 
heart  ending  with  “oblations”  and  should  be  drawn  out  of  the 
head  of  the  thread  with  the  inhalation  of  breath  and  showing 
the  srnimudra  (posture  with  fingers  denoting  a  goad). 

9.  Having  gathered  it  with  the  retention  of  breath,  it  should 
be  projected  into  the  fire-receptacle  with  the  exhalation  of  breath 
(and  showing  the  mudra  known  as)  udbhava  (posture  with  fingers 
denoting  generation)  ,  after  having  consecrated  with  (the  mantra 
of)  the  heart  ending  with  “obeisance”. 

10.  All  the  worship  etc.  of  this  should  be  accomplished  as 
(it  would  be  done)  for  the  beatitude  of  non-action  after  having 
invoked  lord  Sadasiva  and  worshipping  him  and  making 


offerings. 

11.  (The  lord  should  be  addressed  by  the  preceptor  as 
follows)  : 

“I  initiate  this  person  (disciple)  desirous  of  emancipation 
in  this  well-known  mode  of  life.  You  should  be  beneficial  (to 
him)”.  I  am  submitting  to  you  with  devotion. 

12.  After  having  invoked  the  (divine)  parents  and  having 
made  offerings  and  achieving  their  presence,  the  disciple 
should  gently  be  struck  on  the  chest  with  the  syllable  consecrat¬ 
ed  by  (the  mantra  of)  the  heart. 

13.  Om ,  ham ,  hum ,  ham ,  phat .  Having  entered  (the  heart) 
with  (the  repetition  of)  this  (mantra),  the  psychic  energy  should 
be  divided  by  showing  the  ahku^a  mudra  (formation  with 
the  fingers  denoting  a  goad)  and  with  the  weapon  along  with 
the  noose. 


88.14-24 


259 


14.  Om ,  ham ,  hah ,  An7m,  phat.  Having  drawn  it  (with  this 
mantra )  duly  consecrated  and  ending  with  “oblations55,  it  should 
be  united  with  his  own  soul  by  concluding  with  “obeisance55, 
after  having  seized  it. 

15.  Om,  ham ,  ham,  him ,  obeisance  to  the  soul.  After  having 
meditated  on  the  union  of  the  (divine)  parents  as  before  by 
(showing)  the  udbhava  mudra  (posture  with  the  fingers  denoting 
generation),  (the  preceptor)  should  place  (the  psychic  princi¬ 
ple)  in  the  womb  of  the  goddess  with  the  same  {mantra)  and  by 
the  left. 

16.  The  (rites  of)  garbhadhana  etc.  should  be  done  as  laid 
down  earlier.  One  should  repeat  (the  mantra  of)  release  and  the 
bondage  is  cut  off  with  that  of  the  principal  {mantra). 

17.  As  before  five  times  five  oblations  should  be  done  with 
(the  mantra  of)  weapons  for  the  sake  of  cutting  the  bonds 
and  to  destroy  the  evil  forces  in  the  disciple. 

18.  With  the  repetition  of  the  mantra  of  weapons  seven 
times  the  principal  mantra  of  beatitude  the  bonds  should  be  cut, 
with  the  scissor. 

19.  Om ,  ham,  to  the  noose  of  beatitude  beyond  that  of  peace 
hah,  hum,  phat .  (Then  the  preceptor)  should  bid  farewell  to  the 
noose  as  described  earlier,  make  it  into  a  circle,  place  it  in  the 
ladle  filled  with  clarified  butter  and  cast  it  into  fire  with  the 
{mantra  of)  weapons  and  of  beatitude. 

20.  Five  oblations  should  be  made  with  (the  mantra  of) 
the  weapon  for  the  removal  of  the  goad  of  bonds.  Eight  oblations 
should  be  made  for  compensating  atonements. 

21.  Having  invoked  lord  Sadasiva  with  (the  mantra  of) 
the  weapon  and  done  appeasement,  one  should  submit  suzerainty 
as  laid  down  before. 

22.  “ Om ,  ham,  Sadasiva,  accept  fees  (in  the  form  of) 
the  principle  of  mind.  Oblations.  O  (lord)  Sadasiva  !  You 
should  never  remain  as  a  bond  for  this  being  whose  all  shackles 
have  been  destroyed.  You  hear  the  mandate  of  lord  Siva.55 

23-24.  The  final  oblation  should  be  made  with  the  princi¬ 
pal  {mantra).  (Lord)  Sadasiva  should  be  bid  adieu.  Then  the 
preceptor  should  unite  in  his  soul,  the  pure  soul  in  the  body  of 
the  pupil  just  risen  like  the  autumnal  moon  by  showing  the 
samharamudra  (posture  made  with  the  fingers  denoting  gathering). 


260 


Agtii  Ptiratia 


after  having  collected  the  same  by  (showing)  the  udbhava- 
mudra  (posture  made  with  fingers  denoting  generation). 

25.  Then  (the  preceptor)  should  place  drops .  of  water 
of  arghya  (offered  for  washing)  on  the  head  of  the  disciple  as 
completion.  Having  requested  the  divine  parents  with  great 
devotion  to  forgive  they  should  be  bid  adieu. 

26.  “O  Parents  !  You  have  been  put  to  trouble  for  the 
sake  of  initiating  this  disciple.  Having  discarded  that  gracefully 
depart  with  pleasure  to  your  own  place.” 

27.  (The  preceptor)  should  then  cut  off  the  tuft  (of  the 
disciple)  of  the  form  of  knowledge  to  a  length  of  four  finger- 
breadths  with  the  scissors,  the  weapon  of  lord  Siva,  (duly) 
consecrated  with  the  mantra  of  the  tuft. 

28.  “ Om ,  klim ;  to  the  tuft,  hum,  phaf,  om,  hah,  to  the  weapon, 
hum,  phaf."  Then  those  (cuttings)  should  be  set  in  a  ladle  full 
of  clarified  butter  in  which  a  ball  of  cow-dung  is  kept  in  the  mid¬ 
dle  and  cast  into  fire  with  (the  recitation  of)  the  mantra  of  weapon 


ending  with  phaf. 

29.  After  having  washed  the  two  kinds  of  ladles  and  after 
bathing  the  disciple,  the  self  (preceptor)  should  sip  waters  and 
gently  beat  the  soul  thus  blended  with  the  mantra  of  the  weapon. 

30.  It  should  be  disjoined,  drawn  and  worshipped  as  before 
to  the  end  of  twelve  (kinds  of  worship)  and  placed  in  the  petals 
of  the  lotus  of  his  own  heart. 

3 1 .  The  ladle  is  filled  with  clarified  butter.  The  ladle  should 
be  held  (in  such  a  way  that  the  cup  of  the  ladle)  faces  down¬ 
wards  according  to  the  rules  of  daily  rites  of  worship  and  by  show¬ 
ing  the  iankhamudra  (posture  made  with  fingers  denoting  a  conch ) . 

32.  He  should  have  his  head  and  neck  expanded  in  unison 
with  the  pronunciation  of  the  nasal  sound  (om),  having  his 
sight  fixed  and  (the  heart)  filled  with  contemplation  of  the 
Supreme  Being. 

33.  Having  gathered  the  six  paths1  in  the  form  of  nerves 
from  the  pitcher,  the  sacrificial  pit,  the  pupil  and  from  one’s 
own  soul,  (the  preceptor)  should  place  them  at  the  head  of  the 
sacrificial  ladle. 


tho  nrst^lhrccS^reircHii'v|Cf”!?{!,ra’^a  jfl’  va,,-,a'  bhuvana,  tatlva  and  kata  of  which 
t  Jarakrnma  and  SOund  and  the  rcst  to  the  objects  according  to 

"79  80  93  "'ay  accoid'n8  to  srf,ikrama.  Sec  Saradatilaka 


$8.34-45 


261 


34-35.  Having  contemplated  the  soul-energy  as  a  point 
it  should  be  united  with  the  (following)  seven  (principles)  in 
turn.  The  first  one  is  the  union  of  the  soul.  Then  follows  the 
next  one  consisting  of  repetition  ofthe  mantras  of  the  heart 
etc.  after  having  done  the  inhalation  and  the  retention  of  the 
breath  with  the  mouth  open  a  little. 

36.  The  form  of  the  sound  {om) ,  which  has  permeated 
the  susumna  (an  artery  of  human  body),  is  the  third  one. 
There  would  be  calm  absorption  of  the  mind  in  the  seventh 


cause  by  one’s  renunciation. 

37-38.  The  movements  above  the  energy  and  the  sound 
known  as  the  discordant  (are  the  fifth  one).  (The  sound  emitt¬ 
ed)  by  the  universal  life,  which  cannot  be  measured  by  energy 
and  which  is  the  discordant  of  time  is  the  sixth  one.  The  seventh 
one  is  that  beyond  the  (region  of)  energy.  This  is  the  proper 
place  for  union  and  is  known  as  the  discordant  principle. 

39.  After  having  inhaled  the  breath  and  retaining  it  while 
keeping  the  mouth  little  open,  (the  preceptor)  should  utter  the 
principal  (mantra)  and  (accomplish)  the  repose  of  the  soul  of 

the  disciple.  .  .  .  ... 

40.  The  letter  ha  (should  be  deemed  as  resting)  in 

lightning  stream  which  is  the  life  force  of  six  Pat  s- 
letter  u  remains  pervading  above  the  navel  for  a  length  of  twelv 
afignlas  (an  ahgula  is  equal  to  four  finger  biea  tis). 

41.  Then  above  that  the  letter  ma  (should  be  made  to 
occupy)  four  finger  breadths  over  the  heart.  The  syllable  om 

expressive  of  lord  Visnu,  occupies  the  region  ofthe  heart 

eight  aiigulas  still  above. 

42.  The  letter  ma,  expressive  of  (lord)  Rudra,  occupy 
the  region  of  the  palate  for  four  aiigulas.  imi  ar  Y> 
phonetic  sign,  expressive  of  lord  Isvara  should  occupy  the 

middle  of  the  forehead.  ,  .  ■ 

43.  The  syllable  om,  (the  essence  of)  Lord  ^^‘^ould^be 

rest  in  the  aperture  on  the  head.  The  female  eneigy  ^ 

located  in  the  aperture  on  the  head.  lh 

rejected  one  by  one.  . 

44-45.  After  having  experienced  the  divine  minute  con 

therein,  the  preceptor  should  contemplate  t  e  sou  happi- 

in  that  supreme  twelfth  principle,  characterising  extreme  happi 


h 


262  Agni  Pur  ana 

ness,  devoid  of  feelings,  beyond  the  >'each  of  mind,  auspi¬ 
cious  and  giving  rise  to  eternal  qualities. 

46.  After  having  offered  an  oblation  of  clarified  butter  into 
the  fire  for  lord  Siva  with  the  mantra  of  lord  Siva  ending  with 
vausaf  for  the  sake  of  stability  of  the  union. 

47-52.  Having  offered  final  oblation  as  laid  down, 
(the  preceptor)  should  do  for  the  attainment  of  qualities.  “ Om , 
ham,  oblations  to  the  soul  !  Be  omniscient  !  Om,  ham,  oblations 
to  the  soul  !  Be  satisfied  !  Om,  hrum,  oblations  to  the  soul  ! 
Ee  cognizant  of  originless  existence  !  Om,  haum,  oblations  to 
the  soul  !  Be  self-dependent  !  Om,  haum,  soul  !  Oblations  ! 
Be  undiminished  in  energy  !  Om,  hah,  oblations  to  the  soul  ! 
Be  of  endless  energy  !”  The  self,  possessing  six  qualities,  should 
thus  be  taken  out  of  Supreme  Being  and  with  contemplation 
united  in  the  body  of  the  disciple  as  laid  down.  Drops  of  ambro¬ 
sia  from  the  water-offering  should  be  placed  on  the  head  of  the 
disciple  to  alleviate  sufferings  due  to  the  projection  of  powerful 
soul  force  (into  the  disciple).  Having  made  obeisance  to  the 
sacrificial  pitcher  relating  to  lord  Siva,  situated  to  the  right  of 
(lord)  Siva,  and  placing  the  disciple  to  the  right  of  his  self 
with  a  pleasing  face,  (the  preceptor)  should  submit  to  the  lord 
(as  follows)  :  This  (disciple)  has  been  favoured  by  you  only  ! 
Being  present  in  this  form  of  mine,  increase  his  devotion  to  the 
lord,  fire-god,  and  preceptor.”  Having  paid  obeisance  to  the 
lord,  the  preceptor  should  himself  bless  the  disciple  affectiona¬ 
tely  by  saying,  “May  you  have  bliss”.  The  sacrifice  should 
be  concluded  after  having  offered  eight  flowers  to  the  lord  with 
extreme  devotion  and  bathing  the  disciple  with  (the  waters  of) 
the  pitcher  of  lord  Siva. 


CHAPTER  EIGHTYNINE 
Initiation  of  principles 

The  Lord  said  : 

1.'  “  im|iation  in  lhe  Principles  is  imparted  as  it  is 

concise.  Binding  with  the  thread  should  be  done  suitably  with 
one  s  soul.  J 


265 


89.2—90.1-6 

2.  The  fundamental  principles  should  be  contemplated  as 
pervading  time,  fire  etc.  concluding  with  pure  bliss.  They 
should  be  like  the  bead  of  rosaries,  the  principles  distributed 
evenly  on  the  whole  thread. 

3.  After  having  invoked  the  principle  of  bliss  etc.,  the  rites 
of  garbhadhana  etc.  (should  be  done)  as  before.  But  the  offer 
of  all  fees  should  be  done  with  the  principal  ( manlras ). 

4  Then  the  final  oblation  endowed  with  the  sound- 
essence  of  all  principles  should  be  offered  by  which  alone 
the  disciple  gets  emancipation. 

5.  After  having  offered  another  such  final  oblation  to  lord 
Siva  for  the  sake  of  union  and  for  securing  firmness,  (the  disciple) 
should  be  bathed  with  the  waters  of  the  pitcher  (consecrated) 
for  Siva. 


CHAPTER  NINETY 
Anointing  the  disciple  after  worshipping  Siva 


The  Lord  said  : 

1.  Having  worshipped  lord  Siva,  the  (rite  of)  bathing 
should  be  done  for  the  welfare  of  the  disciple.  Nine  pitchers 
should  duly  be  placed  in  the  directions  of  north-east  etc. 

2.  The  preceptor  should  invoke  the  eight  oceans  of 

alkali,  milk,  curd,  ghee,  molasses,  wine,  sweet  water  and  sour 

water  in  those  pitchers.  . 

3-4.  The  following  eight  Rudras.should  be  duly  J°cate  in 
them  : —  (1)  Sikhandin,  (2)  Srlkantha,  (  )  ’ 

(4)  Ekarudraksa,  (5)  Ekanetra,  (6)  Sivottama,  (  )  u 
and  (8)  Ananta.  ., 

5.  Lord  Siva,  the  ocean  and  the  mantra  of  lord  Siva  si lou 
be  located  in  (the  pitcher  at)  the  middle.  Sacn  cia  s 
erected)  for  the  deities  of  the  quarters  within  tie  pav 

6.  A  platform  measuring  eight  inches  in  height jM 
cubits  in  length  should  be  erected  wherein  an  endless  . 
be  made  as  also  a  seat  of  bel  leaves . 


264 


Agni  Purana 


7-14.  Having  made  the  disciple  face  eastwards,  and  doing 
the  sakalikarana \  (the  preceptor)  should  worship  (the  pupil). 
His  body  should  then  be  rubbed  with  sour  gruel,  earth,  ashes, 
durva  (a  kind  of  grass),  cowdung  balls,  white  mustard  and  curd 
mixed  with  water.  Then  the  pupil  should  duly  be  bathed  with 
the  waters  of  the  pitchers  starting  ’with  that  of  alkali  with 
the  repetition  of  (the  mantras  of)  the  heart,  vidyeSa  and  iambara 
with  pleasure  and  devotion.  Having  clad  him  in  white  dress 
r.nd  placed  him  to  the  right  of  lord  Siva,  the  disciple  should 
again  be  worshipped  as  before  in  the  cushion  mentioned  already. 
(The  preceptor  should  address  him  as  follows) :  ‘‘From  this  day 
onwards  you  shall  test  well  the  recipient  of  the  dress  of  an  ancho¬ 
rite  such  as  the  turban,  cloth  on  the  body  while  in  meditation, 
crown,  knife,  pot,  rosary,  book  etc.,  initiation,  exposition  and 
installation  before  you  favour  him.  You  hear  the  command.” 
After  having  saluted  the  disciple  and  prostrating  (in  front  of 
lord)  Mahesvara,  the  following  submission  should  be  made  for 
the  removal  of  all  impediments.  “I  have  been  commanded  by 
you  in  the  form  of  a  preceptor  for  doing  abhiseka  (anointing) 
ceremony.  This  (disciple)  who  is  well-versed  in  the  scriptural 
lore  has  been  anointed  by  me  O  (Lord)  Siva.”  Five  times 
five  oblations  should  be  made  for  the  propitiation  of  the  chain 
of  mantras . 

15-16.  Then  the  final  oblation  should  be  made.  The  dis¬ 
ciple  should  then  be  made  to  sit  on  the  right  side  of  one’s  self 
(preceptor).  Then  (the  preceptor)  should  mark  the  fingers  of 
the  right  hand  of  the  disciple  beginning  with  the  thumb  with  the 
burnt  edge  of  darbha  with  the  Sambara  (mantra)  for  the  sake  of 
establishing  contact.  After  having  placed  flowers  on  the  hand, 
he  should  be  made  to  bow  down. 

17-18.  The  merits  of  performance  of  this  rite  should  be 
assigned  to  (lord)  Siva,  the  fire,  the  pitcher  and  his  own  self. 
(The  preceptor  should  address  him  as  follows)  :  The  disciples 
who  have  been  well  examined  in  the  scriptures  should  be  blessed 
by  you.  Like  a  monarch  the  desired  objects  are  gained  by 
men  by  this  anointing  (with  the  mantra  of)  the  weapons — Om , 
ham,  him ,  pedum,  hum ,  phat. 


L  Thc  act  °f  assigning  the  different  parts  of  the  body  to  the 
different  deities  with  the  different  mantras . 


•91.1-10 


265 


CHAPTER  NINETYONE 
Different  kinds  of  mantras  for  the  worship  of  God  : 

^l^One  should  worship  lord  Siva,  (lord)  Visnu  and  other 
gods  such  as  Bhaskara  (Sun)  after  being  anointed,  accompanied 
bv  the  sounding  of  the  conch,  Mni  (a  kind  of  kettle-drum)  and 
bathe  (the  images)  with  five  things  got  from  a  cow. 

2-3  Whoever  (worships)  gods  (in  this  manner)  goes 
to  heaven  and  elevates  his  departed  manes.  Whatever  sin  has 
acciued  to  him  in  the  course  of  millions  ol  years  gets  re |uce 

to  ashes  in  the  fire  by  anointing  gods  with  ghee.  Whoever  bathes 

gods  with  an  adhaka  (two  maunds)  of  ghee  etc.  becomes 
4-6.  After  having  applied  sandal  paste,  (the  lord)  should 

be  worshipped  with  perfumes  etc.  The  gods  praised 
hymns  with  little  effort  always  confer  ability  to  know  P^t  and 
future  events,  proficiency  in  mantra ,  enjoyment  and  emancipa- 

7  Having  taken  principal  letters  of  the  mantras,  rt  they 
are  divisibk  by  two,  (one  should  know)  (whether  they  are 
auspicious  or  inauspicious.  (If  divisible)  by  three  (they  denote) 

JL'mala  and  dhl,  (and  if  divisible)  by  our  (they  d  - 

the  four  castes)  brahmin  etc.  (Divisible)  by  five 
the  five  principles  (elements)  (earth  etc.)*  0 

mg  (the  mmlras)  etc.  (one  should  find  whether 

clous  or  inauspicious).  Ifthe  cons'stmg  of  poups  ofjh 

duee-l..«eruni,,o«h«eh.Jgto>«««tm  ^  ^  ^ 

gomutra  (a  particular  form  ol  writ  g 

crated  stylus.  ,  H  knowl  the  auspiciousness 

etc.^^^rrifauonorconmc, 
-of  the  dice  with  the  odd  place. 


266 


Agni  Purdna 


11.  Commencing  with  one  unit  of  three-lettered  ( mantras ) 
to  eight  units  of  three-lettered  {mantras),  denoting  the  dhvaja 
(flagstaff)  etc.  even  ones  are  inauspicious  and  odd  ones  are 
auspicious. 

12.  The  mantra  known  as  tripur  a  is  composed  of  the  letter 
‘AV  amplified  by  a ,  i  etc.,  and  preceded  by  the  sixteen  letters 
along  with  their  vowel  sounds. 

13.  The  mantras  having  for  its  principal  part  (the  syllable) 
hrlm,  preceded  by  pranava  (< om )  and  concluding  with  “obeisance” 
used  in  worship  are  twenty-thousand  one  hundred  and  sixty. 

14.  The  mantras  6 dm,  hrim 9  are  for  (goddess)  Sarasvatl 
(goddess  of  learning),  Gandika,  Gauri  and  Durga  (different 
forms  of  consort  of  Siva).  So  also  dm,  him  are  the  mantras  for 
Sri  (goddess  Laksm  I). 

15.  Then  ksaum,  kraum  are  the  mantras  for  Sun,  and  dm,  haum 
for  god  Siva.  Am,  gam  are  the  mantras  for  lord  Ganesa  and  dmy 
for  lord  Harl  (Visnu). 

16-17.  The  preceptor  should  after  anointing  repeat 
one  hundred  and  fifty  times  the  letters  * ka *  etc.  as  well  as  the 
sixteen  vowels.  With  three  *. ka 5  at  the  beginning  along  with  the 
vowels  and  ending  with  ‘Ac’  all  the  mantras  are  formed.  After 
contemplation  (the  preceptor)  should  initiate  the  disciples. 


CHAPTER  NINETYTWO 
Mode  of  installation  of  the  image  of  lord  Siva 
The  Lord  said  : 

1.  O  Guha  (a  name  of  the  son  of  lord  Siva  and  Parvati)  ! 
I  shall  briefly  describe  the  (mode  of)  installation  of  the  linga 
(representing)  Siva  and  the  pedestal  (representing)  the  female 
energy.  Their  union  (is  accomplished)  by  (the  repetition  of) 
the  mantras  of  Siva. 

2.  There  are  five  different  ways  of  installation.  I  shall 
describe  to  you  their  characteristics.  Where  there  is  union  of 
the  brahmatild,  that  installation  is  worth  that  name. 


267 


92.3-13 


3.  The  sthdpana  (fixing)  is  the  proper  manner  in  which  (the 
Uiiga)  is  placed  in  the  pedestal.  The  installation  in  which  (the 
liiiga)  is  placed  in  pedestal  with  a  cleave  it  is  called  sthitasthapana 
(installation  on  a  pedestal  already  existing).  _ 

4-5.  It  is  (known  as)  ulthdpana  (re-installation)  in  which 
the  removal  (of  the  old  liiiga)  precedes.  It  is  known  as  asthdpana 
in  which  the  new  liiiga  is  placed  and  consecration  is  done  by  wise 
men.  (The  installation  of  the  images)  of  (lord)  Visnu  etc.  are  of 
two  kinds.  In  all  these  cases  supreme  lord  Siva  should  be  made 


the  soul-energy. 

6  There  arc  five  divisions  in  the  case  of  the  temples  a 
on  the  basis  of  the  above  differences.  The  ground  should  be 
examined  according  to  the  requirements  for  the  respective 

7.  The  earth  is  white  (coloured)  having  the  smell  of  clari¬ 
fied  butter,  blood-coloured,  possessing  the  smell  of  blood,  the 
yellow  one  having  sweet  smell  and  black  one  having  the  sme 
of  wine,  which  are  respectively  known  as  the  brahmin  etc. 

8.  Among  these  the  earlier  ones  are  commendable  than  the 
later  ones.  If  the  ground  of  this  type  is  dug  upto  a  cubit  an 

filled  again  it  would  be  in  excess  of  the  pi  t. 

9.  The  kind  of  earth  which  is  moist  with  water  is  also  to  be 
known  as  excellent.  The  preceptor  should  purify  well  (the 
ground)  which  is  impure  because  (of  the  presence)  of  bones, 

charcoal  etc.  ,  .  , 

10  The  ground  where  a  city,  village,  fort,  house  or  temple 

is  to  be  constructed  (should  be  purified)  repeatedly  by  digging 
or  by  erecting  cattle  sheds  or  by  ploughing. 

11.  The  worship  of  the  (sacrificial)  shed  (should  be  “°ne) 
as  also  the  concluding  (rite)  for  the  satisfaction  through  the 
mantras.  Having  concluded  the  rites,  (the  preceptor)  should 
offer  one  thousand  oblations  with  the  aghorastra  (i mantra )  in  the 

prescribed  manner.  . 

12.  After  having  levelled  the  ground  and  plastering  the 
ground,  the  preceptor  should  purify  it.  Encircling  lines  should 
be  drawn  with  gold,  curd  and  unbroken  rice. 

13.  (Lord)  Siva  should  be  worshipped  in  the  filled  up 
pitcher  at  the  north-east  corner  from  the  centre.  After  bayinS 
worshipped  the  presiding  spirit,  those  waters  should  be  sprinkled 

on  the  spades  etc. 


268 


Agni  Puratta 


14.  Having  offered  oblations  to  the  groups  ol  demons  in  the 
prescribed  manner,  they  should  be  scattered  in  (different) 
directions.  Having  sprinkled  (water)  over  the  ground,  the  spades 
(and  other  implements)  should  be  washed  and  worshipped. 

15-16.  Having  placed  a  pitcher  (filled  with  water)  and 
covered  by  a  pair  of  clothes  on  the  shoulder  of  a  brahmin,  being 
accompanied  by  the  sounding  of  musical  instruments,  it  should 
be  placed  at  the  south-east  corner  (of  the  shed )  and  worshipped 
at  the  auspicious  moment.  The  ground  should  be  excavated  with 
the  spade  duly  consecrated  and  sprinkled  with  honey. 

17.  The  earth  dug  out  should  be  deposited  on  the  south¬ 
west  corner  and  water  from  the  pitcher  should  be  put  into  the 
pit.  The  eastern  boundary  of  the  edifice  should  be  extended  as 
far  as  desired. 


18.  Then  having  stood  there  for  a  while,  the  preceptor 
should  make  the  excavations  carried  around  and  sprinkle  water 
over  the  same  until  the  north-eastern  corner  of  the  ground  is 
reached. 


19-20.  This  is  spoken  as  the  arghyadana  (offering  of  waters) 
(accomphshed)  by  taking  round  the  pitcher.  The  ground  should 
thus  be  taken  possession  of.  After  that,  (the  preceptor)  should 
cause  the  ground  to  be  excavated,  if  it  is  a  virgin  one,  until  the 
stone  or  water  (is  reached),  in  order  to  ward  off  evils  due  to  the 
extraneous  matter.  The  extraneous  matter  should  be  dug  out 
in  the  prescribed  manner. 

21.  If  (the  extraneous  matter)  relates  to  a  human  being, 
the  (presence  of)  extraneous  matter  could  be  known  by  writing 

tti  tr  ,a,  a’ca’-  a,ta,Pa>.ya’  and  ha  for  query  and  casting 
the  die.  If  it  falls  on  the  flagstaff  etc.  at  the  south-east  corner, 
it  indicates  the  presence  of  extraneous  matter. 

'  “e  CXlstence  of  that  (matter)  could  be  validly  known 

the  wait  C  ai^eS  ?0t*cef  *n  tbe  body  of  the  questioner  or  from 

entrv  (Ta  °  ammals  in  (different)  directions  or  from  their 
entij  (and  movement)  into  the  ground. 

could  he  t*  t^G  ^ternftive,  the  presence  of  extraneous  matter 

OT  on  AllPf the  l6tters  of  the  aIPhabet  on  a  Plank 

presence  of  the^  thCm  ^t0  eight  grouPs  and  from  the 

east  in  order  group(of  letters)  in  the  directions  east  to  north- 


92.24-35 


269 


24-25.  One  should  declare  the  presence  of  (a  piece  of) 
iron  in  the  eastern  part  if  the  letter  of  the  V  group  is  met. 
Similarly,  the  presence  of  charcoal  in  the  south-eastern  part 
from  ‘ka’  group,  of  ash  in  the  southern  part  from  ‘ca’  group,  of 
bones  in  the  south-western  part  from  a ’  group,  of  bricks  in  the 
western  part  from  Ua’  group,  of  skull  (in  the  north-western  part) 
from  ‘ pa ’  group,  of  a  corpse  from  cya'  group  and  of  (a  piece  of) 
iron  from  * fa ’  group  (could  be  declared). 

26-28.  So  also,  (the  presence  of)  silver,  from  ‘ ha ’  group  and 
(the  presence  of)  something  causing  harm  (could  be  known) 
from  V  group.  (After  removal  of  these  extraneous  matters)  and 
after  taking  eight  inches  of  earth  and  sprinkling  water  with  (the 
mantra  of)  the  soul,  three-quarters  of  the  pit  should  be  filled  with 
water  and  earth  broken  by  a  club.  Having  made  the  ground 
levelled,  the  preceptor  should  go  to  the  sacrificial  shed  with  the 
general  argha  offering  in  the  hand.  After  having  worshipped  the 
two  guardian  deities  of  the  entrance,  the  preceptor  should  enter 
the  temple  through  the  western  door. 

29-30.  (Then  the  preceptor)  should  purify  his  self  as  well 
as  the  sacrificial  shed  and  sacrificial  pit.  The  sacrificial  pitcher 
along  with  the  small  sacrificial  pitcher  (should  be  placed)  there. 
The  worship  of  (lord)  Siva  and  the  guardian  deities  of  the  world 
and  the  generation  of  the  fire  and  its  worship  and  other  acts 
should  all  be  done  as  before.  (The  preceptor)  should  go  to  the 
bathing  shed  of  the  stones  along  with  the  yajamana  (at  whose 
instance  the  sacrifice  is  performed). 

31-32.  The  stone  slabs  of  a  temple  for  the  ling  a  are  known 
as  the  pada  or  dharma  etc.  They  are  commended  if  they  are  square 
shaped,  eight  inches  in  height  and  one  cubit  in  breadth.  Those 
made  of  bricks  should  be  half  (the  size)  of  those  made  of  stones. 
If  the  temple  (is  built  of)  stones  the  images  (should  be  made  of) 
stones  and  if  (it  is)  of  bricks  the  images  (should  be  of)  bricks. 

33.  (These  statues)  (should  be)  marked  with  nine  faces 
and  lotus  flowers  known  as  nanda,  bhadra,jaya,  rikta,  and  the  fifth 
(punja). 

34.  Padma,  mahapadma,  iankha ,  makara  and  samudra  the  five 
treasures;  the  presiding  deities  of  these  should  be  located  in 
pitchers. 

35.  The  names  of  stones  are  nanda,  bhadra, jay  a,  purna,  ajita, 
aparajita,  vijaya,  mahgala  and  dharani,  the  ninth. 


\ 


•270 


A&ni  Purana 


36-37.  Subhadra,  vibhadra,  sunanda,  puspanandaka ,  jay  a,  vijqya 
kumbha,  puna  and  uttara  are  the  nine  pitchers  of  treasures5 
Having  offered  the  cushion  to  them,  (the  preceptor)  should 
(gently)  beat  and  write  on  them  with  the  mantra  of  the  weapon. 

38-39.  All  the  stone  slabs  should  be  covered  without  excep¬ 
tion  with  the  mantra  of  armour.  They  should  be  bathed  with 
perfumed  waters  mixed  with  earth,  cow-dung  and  cow’s  urine 
with  the  recitation  of  mantra  of  weapon  ending  with  hum  phaf. 
Then  they  should  be  bathed  with  the  five  things  got  from  a  cow 
and  also  the  five  sweet  things  (milk,  sugar,  ghee,  curd  and  honey) 
as  laid  down. 

40.  Then  they  should  be  immersed  in  perfumed  water  with 
the  repetition  of  mantra  containing  their  own  names.  Then  (they 
should  be  bathed)  with  water  containing  fruits,  gems,  gold  and 
cow’s  horn. 


41-48.  After  having  applied  sandal  paste,  the  slabs  should 
be  wrapped  up  with  clothes.  After  having  provided  a  seat  made 
of  gold  and  led  them  to  the  sacrificial  shed  circumambulating, 
they  should  be  laid  on  a  bed  or  on  a  mattress  of  kuSa  with  (the 
recitation  of  the  mantra  of)  the  heart.  After  having  worshipped, 
the  principles  commencing  with  the  intellect  and  ending  with  the 
earth  should  be  located  therein.  The  three  principles  permeating 
the  three  divisions  should  be  located  in  order.  (The  first  group 
consists  of)  principles  beginning  with  intellect  and  concluding 
W^mrd’  secon<^  S,ouP  consists  of  principles  beginning 
)^h°usht  and  conehiding  with  the  subtle  principles  and 
r  group)  begins  with  the  subtle  principles  and  conclu- 
es  wit  e  earth.  These  principles  should  be  taken  as  loca- 
ion  of  pure  bhss  knowledge  and  soul.  The  principles  should 
e  worshipped  with  their  respective  mantras  and  their  lords  with 
£ ^heW  in  their  respective  places  marked  with 
the  nrin  °  i  °W*?rs  *n  °rc*er  (as  follows) :  “Om,  hum,  obeisance  to 
!?  .  ?  H  f r  e  bIiSS  !  0m’  hGm  obeisance  to  (lord) 
°.f  the  frincile  of  absolute  bliss  !  Om,  ham  obei- 

fiord  1  V’  6  e  of  knowledge  !  Om,  ham  obeisance  to 

(lord)  Visnu  lord  of  the  principle  of  knowledge  !  Om  ham 

te^Cr°d^rCiple0fS0111  !°m’  obeisance  to  ”(lord) 

Pfos-ear^fth6  ^  !”  Each  °f  the  princi¬ 

ples  earth,  fire,  the  sacrifice^  sun,  water,  wind,  moon  and  ether 


92.49-56 


271 


of  the  eight  forms  (of  the  lord)  should  be  located  in  each  one  of 
the  slabs  along  with  their  presiding  deities  Sarva,  Pasupati, 
Ugra,  Rudra,  Bhava,  Mahesvara,  Mahadeva  and  Bhima  in 
order.  “Om  obeisance  to  the  image  of  the  earth  !  Om  obeisance 
to  the  presiding  deity  of  the  earth  !”  are  the  mantras  for  duly 
locating  the  guardian  deities. The  pitchers  should  be  worshipp¬ 
ed  with  their  own  mantras  or  with  these  mantras .  The  principal 
mantra  for  (lord)  Indra  etc.  are  as  narrated  below  :  lum ,  rum, 
Sum,  sum ,  vum,yum ,  mum ,  hum,  ksum. 

49.  (The  procedure  for  the  installation)  in  the  case  of  nine 
images  has  been  told.  (The  procedure  for  installation)  in  the 
case  of  five  images  is  being  told  now.  Each  one  of  the  five 
principles  of  creation  such  as  the  earth  etc.  of  the  images  should 
be  located  (in  the  slabs). 

50.  As  before  the  five  presiding  deities  of  these,  Brahma, 
Visnu,  Rudra,  ISvara  and  Sadasiva  should  also  be  worshipped 
in  them. 

51-54.  “Om  obeisance  to  the  image  (of  the  principle)  of 
earth  !  Om  obeisance  to  Brahma  the  presiding  deity  (of  the/prin¬ 
ciple)  of  earth”  !  are  the  mantras .  Having  worshipped  the  five 
pitchers  in  order  with  their  own  names,  the  rite  of  location  should 
be  done  as  laid  down,  duly  commencing  with  the  central  image 
with  the  prakara  mantra  as  well  as  auspicious  darbhas  and  sesamum. 
After  having  located  the  supporting  carika  (energy)  in  the  sacri¬ 
ficial  pit  and  worshipping  it,  the  principles,  the  presiding  deities 
of  the  principles,  the  images  and  the  presiding  deities  of  the  images 
should  be  pleased  with  ghee  etc.  Then  the  slabs  should  be  sprin¬ 
kled  with  waters  of  propitiation  after  having  offered  hundred 
oblations  upto  the  final  one  for  the  purification  of  the  part  (of 
the  slab  known  as)  Brahma,  after  having  touched  each  one  of 
the  principles  with  kuSas  in  order  and  worshipped. 

55.  Having  done  the  rites  of  invoking  the  presence  and 
union,  (the  principles)  should  be  located  again  (in  the  slabs) 
after  purification,  in  the  same  way  one  should  do  these  rites 
for  the  three  groups  (of  principles). 

56.  “ Om,  dm  and  im  obeisance  to  the  principles  of  soul  and 
knowledge.”  (Reciting  this  mantra,  the  preceptor)  should  duly 
touch  the  three  parts  (of  the  stone),  Brahma  etc  with  the 
base  of  the  kuia  etc.  The  union  of  the  fundamental  principles 


272 


Agni  Purana 


should  be  done  by  the  applications  of  short  and  long  {mantras). 

57-59.  “Om,  ham,  um  obeisance  to  the  principles  of  know¬ 
ledge  and  absolute  bliss.”  Oblation  should  be  made  in  the  pre¬ 
sence  of  pitchers  filled  with  clarified  butter  and  honey  and  into 
which  gems  have  been  put  and  on  which  the  five  things  got 
from  a  cow  have  been  sprinkled,  after  having  worshipped  them 
with  theirrespective  mantras  being  presided  over  by  the  guardian 
deities  of  the  world.  The  presiding  deities  of  all  the  slabs  should 
then  be  contemplated  as  of  the  form  of  knowledge,  as  having 
bathed,  gold-coloured,  and  wearing  the  dress  in  the  form  of 
knowledge.  Hundred  oblations  should  be  offered  with  the  mantra 
of  the  weapon  and  the  mantra  of  the  head  for  the  purification  of 
the  sacrificial  site  and  for  the  removal  of  defects  of  deficiency  etc. 


CHAPTER  NINETYTHREE 


Mode  of  worshipping  the  presiding  deity  of  a  ground 
The  Lord  said  : 


1 .  Strings  should  be  laid  in  the  sacrificial  shed  so  as  to  en¬ 
close  it.  The  ground  should  be  divided  into  sixty-four  squares 
of  equal  measurements. 


2.  Two  bamboo  poles  should  be  fixed  at  each  one  of  the  four 

corners.  Strings  (should  be  laid  down)  across  the  eight  angular 
points.  They  should  enclose  two  squares  and  six  squares.  The 
presiding  deity  of  the  ground  should  be  worshipped  therein. 

3.  At  the  time  of  worship,  one  should  meditate  on  the  pre¬ 
siding  deity  of  the  ground  in  the  fire-pit,  as  the  form  of  a  demon 
with  curled  locks  and  head  held  raised  up  from  the  ground  and 
facing  north. 


, 2 3  4 5’  The,knees!  knee-joints  and  thighs  (of  the  deity)  should 

a$.  lym„g  in  the  directions  of  north-west  and  south-east, 

two  foWpH°  CS1  °  -eet  i!n  ?e  SOUth’ the  head  in  the  north  and  the 
two  folded  palms  in  the  heart. 

5.  The  auspicious  gods  located  in  the  body  of  this  person 
are  worshipped.  The  presiding  deities  of  die  eight  angular  points. 


93.6-16 


273 


situated  in  the  eight  half  chambers  of  the  angular  points  (should 
also  be  worshipped.)  . 

6.  The  sages  Marlci  etc.  should  be  located  in  the  six  squares 
commencing  with  the  east,  Brahma  in  the  four  squares  at  the 
centre.  The  rest  of  the  gods  are  known  to  occupy  one  square 
each. 

7-8.  The  twelve  joints  such  as  the  trident,-  svastika  (a  kind 
of  figure),  thunderbolt,  mahasvaslika ,  samputa ,  trikatu,  manibandha 
and  the  pure  square  among  all  the  joints  of  the  presiding  deity 
of  the  ground  should  be  left  in  the  walls  etc. 

9.  Oblations  of  unbroken  rice  along  with  clarified  butter, 
for  (lord)  Isa,  offering  of  water  with  lotus  flowers  for  lord 
Parjanya  (god  of  rain),  and  a  bright  saffron-coloured  banner 
should  be  offered  for  Jayanta  (son  of  Indra). 

10.  Gems  (should  be  offered)  to  Mahendra  (lord  of  the 
celestials),  smoke-coloured  canopy  for  the  Sun,  wheat  and  ghee 
for  (the  god  of)  truth  and  clarified  butter  alone  for  (lord) 
Bhrsa. 

11.  Unclean  meat  (should  be  offered)  to  (the  lord  of  the  sky) 
and  the  flour  of  barley  (first  fried  and  then  ground)  for  all  those 
gods  commencing  with  the  east.  A  ladleful  of  honey,  milk  and 
clarified  butter  should  be  given  to  the  fire-god. 

12.  Fried  paddy  put  in  golden  waters  should  be  offered  to 
(god  of)  untruth.  Honey  should  be  offered  to  the  destroyer  of 
the  house  and  palaudana  for  Yamaraja  (god  of  death). 

1 3.  Perfumes  (should  be  given)  for  the  lord  of  the  gandhar- 
vas  (semi-divine  beings),  a  bird’s  tongue  for  Bhrriga  (one  who 
wards)  and  lotus  leaves  for  the  beast  on  the  south.  Thus  the 
eight  deities  (should  be  offered  offerings). 

14.  Sesamum  mixed  water  and  milk  (should  be  given)  for 
the  manes.  Sticks  from  the  trees  for  cleansing  the  teeth  should 
be  given  to  the  lord  of  the  entrance  by  showing  the  d/ienumudra 
(posture  with  fingers  indicating  a  cow). 

15.  Cakes  should  be  offered  to  Sugrlva,  darbha  to 
Puspadanta  (a  yaksa ),  red  lotus  flowers  to  Pracetas  (lord  of 
waters)  (and)  wines  to  demon. 

16.  Ghee  and  rice  mixed  with  jaggery  (should  be  given) 
to  Scsa  (serpent-god),  ghee  mixed  with  baked  flour  or  fried 
paddy  to  disease.  Thus  the  mode  of  offering  for  gods  in  the 
western  direction  has  been  told. 


274 


Agni  Purana 


17.  A  yellow  banner  (should  be  offered)  to  Maruta(wind 
■god),  nagakesara  (a  kind  of  fragrant  flower)  to  serpent-god  and 
eatables  and  well-cooked  gruel  of  green  gram  to  Mukhya. 

18.  Sweet  gruel  mixed  with  clarified  butter  should  De  given 
to  Soma,  root  of  lily  flower  to  (goddess)  Dawn,  lopi  to  Aditi, 
and  puri  to  Diti.  These  are  the  gods  placed  in  the  northern  direc¬ 
tion. 

19.  Sweet  meats  (should  be  offered)  to  Brahma  on  the  east 
and  to  (sage)  Marici  in  the  six  squares.  Red  flowers  (should  be 
offered)  to  (god)  Savitra  situated  below  the  angular  square 
(assigned  to)  the  fire-god. 

20.  Waters  along  with  the  kuSa  should  be  presented  to  god¬ 
dess  Savitrl  below  that  square.  Red  sandal  should  be  offered  to 
(god)  Vivasvan  occupying  six  squares  on  the  south. 

21.  Turmeric  mixed  rice  (should  be  offered)  to  lord 
Indra  in  the  corner  square  below  that  of  the  demon.  Mixed  rice 
should  be  presented  to  Indra-jaya  below  that  of  Indra. 

22.  Rice  mixed  with  jaggery  (should  be  offered)  to  (lord) 
Mitra  occupying  six  squares  on  the  west.  Rice  cooked  with  ghee 
should  be  offered  to  (lord)  Rudra  at  the  square  below  the  angu¬ 
lar  point  in  the  north-west. 

23.  Meat  (should  be  offered)  to  the  servant  of  Rudra  below 
that.  An  offering  of  black-gram  should  be  offered  to  the  moun¬ 
tain  (god)  occupying  the  six  squares  on  the  north. 

24.  One  should  duly  offer  curd  and  milk  to  apas  and  its 
progeny  below  the  angular  point  (dedicated  to  lord)  Siva  after 
worshipping  in  the  proper  way. 

25.  Brahma  located  at  the  four  squares  in  the  middle  of  the 
place  should  be  presented  gruel  along  with  clarified  butter  and 
the  five  things  got  from  a  cow. 

26.  Outside  the  sacrificial  ground  the  four  demonesses 
CarakI  etc.  should  be  worshipped  in  the  angular  points  com¬ 
mencing  with  the  north-east  and  ending  with  the  north-west  in 
order. 

27.  Meat  with  ghee  should  be  offered  to  Caraki,  curd  with 
lotus  flowers  to  (demoness)  Vidarl  and  meat,  bile  and  blood  to 
(demoness )  Putana . 

28.  Bones,  blood,  biles  and  meat  (should  be  offered)  to 
demoness  sin.  Lord  Skanda  should  be  offered  rice  mixed  with 
black  gram  on  the  east. 


93.29-38 


275 


29.  Sweet  cakes  along  with.  ktsorcL  (rice  and  peas  boiled 
together)  (should  be  offered)  to  (lord)Aryaman  in  the  southern 
direction),  meat  along  with  blood  to  Jambhaka  in  the  western 
•direction. 

30.  Rice  mixed  with  blood  and  flowers  (should  be  present¬ 
ed)  to  Pilipinja  (monster-maiden)  on  the  north.  Otherwise  all 
the  presiding  deities  of  the  ground  should  be  worshipped  with 
water  along  with  unbroken  rice  and  ku§a. 

31.  In  the  case  of  a  residential  building  or  town,  worship 
should  be  done  in  eighty-one  squares.  The  lines  (drawn  across 
the  cardinal  points  of  the  diagram)  should  be  made  to  occupy 
(the  breadth  of)  three  squares  and  comprise  (the  breadth  of) 
six  such  squares  at  the  other  angular  points. 

32.  The  gods  Isa  and  others  should  occupy  one  square  each 
in  that  (diagram),  the  serpents  and  others  two  squares  each, 
(sages)  Marici  and  others  six  squares  each,  Brahma  is  known  to 
occupy  nine  squares. 

33.  The  above  diagram  may  comprise  hundred  squares  in 
the  case  of  a  city,  village  or  hamlet.  Two  bamboo  poles  (are 
known)  as  ‘invincible5  and  irresistible  always. 

34.  The  location  (of  the  deities)  in  the  hundred  squares  is 
commended  if  the  rite  is  done  as  in  the  case  of  a  divine  edifice. 
The  planets  and  gods  such  as  (lord)  Skanda  are  known  to  occupy 
six J squares  in  that  (diagram). 

35.  Demoness  Caraki  and  others  should  be  located  in  five 
squares.  The  lines  and  bamboo  should  occupy  spaces  as  des¬ 
cribed  earlier.  In  the  case  of  a  sacrificial  ground  relating  to  the 
founding  of  a  country,  it  should  comprise  one  hundred  and 
thirty-four  squares. 

36.  (In  that  diagram)  Brahma  occupies  sixty-four  squares, 
as  also  (sages)  Marici  and  others.  The  eight  gods,  apas  etc. 
should  occupy  fiftyfour  squares. 

37.  (Gods)  Isana  and  others  should  occupy  nine  squares. 
(The  gods)  Skanda  and  others  should  occupy  eight  squares. 
(Demonesses)  Carak!  and  others,  lines,  bamboo  should  also  be 
located  as  before. 

38.  In  a  sacrificial  ground  comprising  twenty-thousand 
squares,  the  location  of  the  deities  should  be  such  that  they 
occupy  nine  times  more  than  what  has  been  enjoined  in  the 
founding  o  country. 


276 


Agni  Purdna 


39.  The  diagram  which  is  divided  into  twentyfive  squares 
is  known  as  the  vaitala  .  The  other  diagrams  are  known  to  have 
nine  squares  and  sixteen  sub-divisions. 

40.  There  may  be  a  square  figure  inscribed  in  a  sexagon  or 
triangle.  The  location  (of  the  gods)  in  the  case  of  excavation 
around  should  be  done  as  in  the  case  of  (the  stone  slab  known  as) 
brahmatild . 

41 .  An  offering  of  sweet  gruel  to  all  gods  should  be  made  at 
the  installation  of  the  image  of  a  deity  or  the  burial  of  a  dead 
body. 

42.  In  the  absence  of  any  specified  measurement,  the  sacri¬ 
ficial  ground  should  measure  five  cubits.  The  sacrificial  ground 
proportional  to  the  measure  of  the  house  or  divine  edifice  is  al¬ 
ways  held  as  excellent. 


CHAPTER  NINETYFOUR 


Mode  of  placing  the  stone  slabs 


The  lord  said  : 


1.  (Demonesses)  CarakI  and  others  should  be  worshipped 
in  the  angular  points  of  north-east  etc.  and  outside  as  before. 
Three  oblations  should  be  done  to  each  one  of  the  gods  in  suc¬ 
cession. 


2.  After  having  offered  oblation  to  the  presiding  spirit,  the 
placing  of  stone  slab  (is  done)  thereafter.  (Goddess  of)  energy 
and  the  excellent  pitcher  known  as  ananta  should  be  located  in 
the  middle  line. 


3-5.  The  stone  slab  should  be  held  in  this  pitcher  with  (the 
recitation  of)  the  principal  (i mantra )  coupled  with  the  letter  W. 
Having  placed  the  eight  pitchers  known  as  Subhadra  etc.  in 
order  in  the  directions  east  etc.  with  the  recitation  of  the  mantra 
of  the  guardian  deities  of  the  world  and  having  located  the  god¬ 
desses  in  each  one  of  the  holes,  the  stone  slabs  such  as  Nanda 
etc.  should  be  duly  placed  in  them  by  repeating  the  Sambara 
(mantra)  sacred  to  the  presiding  deities  of  the  different  images, 


94.6-17 


277 


in  such  a  way  that  they  are  in  order  from  the  middle  of  the  gro¬ 
und.  The  eight  (deities)  such  as  the  guardian  deities  of  virtue 
etc.  should  be  located  in  the  different  angular  points  in  order. 

6.  The  four  pitchers  Nanda  etc.  out  of  Subhadra  etc.  are 
placed  in  the  south-eastern  corner.  Ajita  etc.  out  of  the  group 
commencing  with  Jaya  should  be  located  in  the  east  etc. 

7.  (Lord)  Brahma  should  be  invoked  in  them  and  (lord) 
Mahesvara  (Siva)  should  be  contemplated  as  pervading  the 
internal  space  (of  the  shed)  which  would  serve  as  a  receptacle 
of  these. 

8.  After  having  offered  oblation  one  should  repeat  (the 
mantra  of)  the  weapon  for  warding  off  impediments.  The  pro¬ 
cedure  in  the  case  of  five  stone  slabs  is  now  described  a  little. 

9.  (The  preceptor)  should  locate  the  stone  slab  Purna  in 
the  pitcher  (known  as) Subhadra  half-immersed.  The  stone  slabs 
respectively  known  as  Nanda  etc.  should  be  placed  in  the  pitchers 
Padma  etc.  at  the  different  angular  points  south-east  etc. 

10-17.  Four  slabs  should  be  contemplated  as  located  in 
the  middle  with  the  exuberance  of  mother’s  affection.  “Om 
Purna  !  You  are  the  great  learning  !  Possessor  of  all  divine 
attributes  !  O  Daughter  of  Arigiras  !  You  make  all  (this  under¬ 
taking  of  mine)  here  as  complete.  Om  !  Nanda  !  you  make 
men  rejoice  !  I  establish  you  here.  You  remain  in  this  temple  as 
fully  satisfied  as  long  as  the  moon,  sun  and  stars  shine. 
O  Nanda  !  Daughter  of  Vasistha  !  You  grant  long  life,  fulfil¬ 
ment  of)  desires,  prosperity  to  men.  You  have  to  strive  to  pro¬ 
tect  in  this  temple  always.  Om  Bhadra  !  Daughter  of  Kasyapa  ! 
You  always  do  good  to  the  people.  O  Goddess  !  You  be 
grantcroflong  life,  of  desired  (objects)  (and)  prosperity  always. 
Om  !  Jaya  !  O  Goddesss  !  You  be  granter  of  prosperity 
(and)  long  life  always.  Om  !  Jaya  !  Being  established  by  me 
you  remain  here  for  ever.  O  Daughter  ofBhrgu  !  You  become 
the  governess  of  prosperity  and  success.  Om  !  Rikta  !  Des- 
trover  of  excessive  defects  !  O  Auspicious  one  !  Granter  of 
accomplishment  and  emancipation  !  One  who  is  of  the  form  o 
the  universe  and  one  who  underlies  all  the  world,  you  remain 
here  always.”  After  having  contemplated  upon  the  ethereal 
mansion,  (the  preceptor)  should  locate  the  three  pnncip  es 
therein.  Then  the  sacrifice  should  be  completed  in  the  prescribed 
manner  after  having  offered  the  expiatory  oblation. 


278 


Agni  Parana 


CHAPTER  NINETYFIVE 
Mode  of  installation  of  the  lihga 

The  Lord  said  : 

1.  .  I  shall  describe  the  mode  of  installation  of  a  liriga  in. 
temple  which  yields  enjoyment  and  emancipation.  One  should 
always  do  it  for  the  purpose  of  enjoyment  and  emancipation  on 
the  day  of  the  god. 

2.  The  installation  ceremony  should  be  performed  in  the 
five  months  commencing  with  magha  (February-March)  except 
(the  month  of)  caitra  (April-May)  and  in  the  first  three  karanas 
(one  of  the  eleven  divisions  of  the  day)  at  the  rising  of  the 

Jupiter  and  Venus. 

3.  (The  ceremony  should  be  undertaken)  especially  in  the 
bright  fortnight  or  in  the  dark  fortnight  omitting  the  fifth,  fourth, 
ninth,  eighth  and  fourteenth  days  (of  the  fortnight). 

4-5.  (All)  the  other  days  are  auspicious  except  those  falling 
on  the  days  of  inauspicious  planets.  Commencement  during 
(the  rule  of)  the  stable  stars  of  Satabhisak,  dhanisfa,  ardra,  anuradha, 
the  three  utlara  ( uttara ,  uttar aphalguni  and  uilarabhadrapada ), 
rohini  and  sravana  yield  good  results.  (The  days  fixed  for  the  rite 
should  possess)  the  rising  points  of  aquarius,  leo,  scorpion,  libra, 
virgo,  taurus  and  Sagittarius. 

6-  Jupiter  is  always  commendable  in  the  above  nine  stars 
and  seven  constellations.  Mercury  (is  commendable)  in  the 
sbeth,  eighth,  tenth,  seventh  and  fourth,  from  the  lagna  (rising 
point  in  the  east), while  Venus  (is  commendable)  in  all  the  places 
except  the  fourth. 

7.  The  Moon  is  always  strengthening  if  located  in  seventh, 
ourth,  third  or  tenth,  the  sun  in  the  tenth,  third,  and  sixth  places 

and  Rahu  (ascending  node  of  the  Moon)  in  the  third,  tenth  and 
sixth  places. 

8.  The  Saturn,  Mars,  Sun  and  Ketu  (the  descending  node 
o  t  e  Moon)  are  commendable  in  the  sixth,  and  third  places. 
Both  the  good  and  bad  (planets)  in  the  eleventh  place  are  cruel. 

*r  asPect  seventh  place,  half  in  the  ninth 

an  1  P  aces,  one  fourth  in  the  first  and  tenth  places  and  one 
fourth  less  in  the  fourth  and  eighth  places. 


95.10-20 


27$ 


10.  (The  two  constellations)  pisces  and  aries  have  a  dura¬ 
tion  of  three  and  three-fourth  nadis  (two  and  a  half  nadis  are 
equal  to  one  hour).  The  (constellations)  taurus  and  acquarious 
have  a  duration  of  three  and  three-fourth  nadis. 

11.  Capricorn  and  gemini  have  a  duration  of  five  (nadis), 
Sagittarius,  scorpion,  leo  and  cancer  have  a  duration  of  five  and 
three-fourth  (nadis)  and  libra  and  virgo  have  a  duration  of  five 
and  a  half  ghatikas  (synonym  of  nadi)- 

12.  (The  constellations)  leo,  taurus  and  acquarius  are  statio¬ 
nary  and  yield  success.  (The  constellations)  Sagittarius,  libra 
and  aries  are  movables..  The  third  (constellations)  have  both 
the  characteristics. 

13-14.  The  constellations  aspected  by  auspicious  planets 
or  associated  with  them  are  auspicious  and  are  commendable. 
Jupiter,  Venus  and  Mercury  in  the  lagna  confers  abundant 
strength,  long  life,  sovereignty,  valour,  strength,  progeny, 
fame  and  virtue.  The  first,  fourth,  seventh  and  tenth  (places 
from  lagna)  are  known  as  the  kendras . 

15.  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Mercury  in  these  (houses)  yield 
all  perfections.  The  presence  of  wicked  planets  in  the  third,  fourth 
and  eleventh  houses  from  the  lagna  are  beneficial. 


16-17.  The  learned  should  combine  these  with  the  tithis 
(the  days  reckoned  by  the  phases  of  the  Moon)  for  good  per¬ 
formances.  (The  preceptor)  should  raise  a  square  shed  m  front 
of  (the  temple)  leaving  a  space  equal  to  or  five  times  that(o 
its  measurement)  at  twelve  cubits  from  the  flight  o  steps  wit 
four  entrances.  (The  shed)  for  (sacrificial  bathing)  should  be 
half  the  size  of  that  shed) . 


18  The  shed  should  be  constructed)  in  the  north-east, 
east  or  north,  (measuring)  one  or  ten  or  twelve  cubits  respecti¬ 
vely  and  having  a  single  entrance  or  four  entrances. 

19  The  remaining  eight  sheds  should  be  measuring  two 
cubits  more  than  that  (shed).  The  sacrificial  altar  (should 
measure)  four  to.  lengths  in  the  middle  and  should  have  pillars 
at  the  angular  points. 

20.  Leaving  apart  a  quarter  of  the  platform  nine  or  five 
fire  pits  or  a  single  pit  (should  be  dug  up)  in  the  north-east  or 
east  (The  digging  of  one  pit)  is  done  only  m  the  case  of  the  wor¬ 
ship  of  the  preceptor. 


28C 


Agni  Parana 


21-24.  (The  fire  pits)  should  be  a  span,  an  aratni  (a  cubit 
of  the  middle  length,  from  the  elbow  to  the  tip  of  the  little  fino-er) 
a  cubit,  a  yard,  four  cubits  and  eight  cubits  respectively  depend¬ 
ing  on  fifty,  hundred,  thousand,  hundred  thousand,  lakh  or  a 
crore  oblations  (are  offered  in  the  pits).  (The  pit)  in  the  south¬ 
east  (should  be  of)  the  shape  of  the  female  generative  organ,  in 
the  south  (of  the  shape  of)  the  crescent  moon,  in  the  south-west 
(of  the  shape  of)  a  triangle,  in  the  north-west  (of  the  shape  of) 
a  hexagon,  in  the  north  (of  the  shape  of)  a  lotus,  in  the  north¬ 
east  (of  the  shape  of)  an  octagon.  The  pit  made  at  an  inclined 
angle  with  a  border  above  is  auspicious.  There  should  be  three 
borders  around  that  respectively  measuring  four,  three  and 
two  fingers  in  breadth.  Alternatively  there  should  be  a  single 
border  measuring  six  fingers  in  breadth  or  the  borders  (should 
be)  of  the  shape  of  sacrificial  pit.  ‘ 

25.  The  aperture  should  be  above  that.  It  should  resemble 
the  leaf  of  the  holy  fig  tree  in  its  shape.  (The  aperture  should 
be)  an  angula  in  height  and  eight  angulas  in  breadth. 

26.  Its  length  (should  be)  half  the  length  of  the  pit  and 
(should  be)  in  the  same  level  as  the  neck.  The  apertures  of  the 
fire  pits  on  the  east,  south-east  and  south  should  face  the  north. 

27.  It  should  face  the  east  (if  the  fire  pits  have  been  located) 
in  other  directions,  while  those  situated  at  the  other  points  of 
compass  should  have  their  outlets  turned  towards  the  north¬ 
east.  The  twenty-fourth  of  the  fire  receptacles  is  called  the 
angula  (finger  breadth). 

28.  The  four  entrances  (to  the  sacrificial  shed)  on  the  east 
etc.  should  be  made  of  (woods  of)  plaksa,  udumbara,  aivattha  and 
vafa  (trees)  which  duly  (stand  for)  peace,  prosperity,  strength 
and  health. 


29.  (The  sheds)  should  be  eighteen  cubits  in  length,  one 
cubit  high  and  half  (the  length)  in  breadth  and  should  be  decorat¬ 
ed  with  mango  leaves. 


30.  The  banners  should  have  (colours)  resembling  (the 
co  ours)  of  a  rainbow  (or  be)  red,  black,  tawny,  (or)  of  the 

co  our  o  tie  moon,  (or  be)  white,  golden  coloured  or  resembling 
that  of  a  crystal. 


•  l1'  (T/h?  banner)  dedicated  to  the  lotus-born  (Bralima) 

m  the  east  (should  be)  red  (and  that)  which  belongs  to  Ananta 


281 


95.32-42 

(lord  of  the  serpents)  in  the  south-west  (should  be)  blue.  The 
banners  (should  be)  five  cubits  long  and  half  as  much  broad. 

32-33.  The  rods  should  be  commensurate  with  the  five 
cubits  of  banners  being  a  cubit  for  every'  cubit.  Twelve 
kinds  of  earth  from  (the  places  such  as)  the  ant-hill,  the  tips  of 
the  tusk  of  elephant,  horns  of  the  bull,  bunch  of  lotuses,  pastures 
of  boars  and  cows  and  the  cross-ways  of  roads  should  be  taken  in 
the  case  (of  installation  of  an  image)  of  Vaikuntha  (Visnu) 
and  eight  (kinds)  in  the  case  (of  installation  of  an  image) 
of  Pinakin  (Siva). 

34.  The  decoctions  made  up  from  the  barks  of  nyagrodha, 
udumbara,  aivaltha,  cuta  and  jamb  u  and  eight  palas  (a  measure  of 
weight)  of  the  essence  of  flowers  should  be  taken. 

35-36.  The  waters  of  the  sacred  pools,  fragrant  waters  and 
the  waters  mixed  with  the  herbs  (should  be  taken).  I  shall  des¬ 
cribe  the  (names  of)  auspicious  flowers  (and)  fruits  (after¬ 
wards).  Waters  mixed  with  five  kinds  of  gems,  cow  s  horn  and 
also  five  things  got  from  a  cow  should  be  taken  for  bat  mg. 
piece  of  cloth  in  which  the  paste  has  been  put  should  be  taken 

for  rubbing. 

37.  A  pitcher  having  thousand  holes  should  be  use  or 
bathing  and  the  yellow  pigment  for  decoration.  Ro°ts  0  _  an  ' 
reds  of  herbs  (are  needed).  Therein  (the  roots  of)  vijaya,  laks- 
mana,  bald,  gu<fuci,  atibald,  fidthd,  sahadeva,  Satdvari  rddhi,  suvarcala 
and  vrddhi  have  been  prescribed  separately  for  bathing. 

38-41.  (Either)  an  incessant  pouring  of  waters  toget  er 
with  the  sesamum  and  darbha  (or)  merely  the  bathing  wit  l  t  e 
sacred  ash  (has  been  prescribed)  for  protection. 
should  prepare  a  paste  of  powders  of  barley,  whea  , 
(fruit),  along  with  camphor.  (He  should  also  make  ready) 
the  pitcher  and  gan<fa  (a  small  vessel  with  a  J? 

outlet  for  pouring).  The  bed-stead  along  with  nvomattresse 

pillow  bed  and  cloth  should  be  made  ready  suited  to  one  s  a 
and  in  accordance  with  his  means.  The  vessel  filled  with  g 
and  honey  and  a  golden  brush  should  be  made  rea  y. 

42.  The  sacrificial  small  pitcher,  the  pitcher 

Lord) Siva,  and  the  pitchers  for  the  guardian  deiUes  of  t he  dnec- 

tions,  (should  be  made  ready) .  One  pitcher  for  eac 
.ficial  fire-pits, should  be  set  apart  for  inducing  sleep  and  f  p 


282  Agni  Parana 

43-44.  The  pitchers  for  the  attendant  deities  at  the  door, 
god  of  virtue,  for  Prasanta  (a  deity),  vastu  (presiding  deity  of  the 
ground),  (goddess)  LaksmI  (consort  of  Visnu),  (Lord)  Ganesa 
(son  of  the  divine  pair  Siva  and  Parvatl)  and  pitchers  for  others 
should  be  placed  on  heaps  of  grain  along  with  the  cloth  and 
garland  and  gold  should  be  put  and  they  should  be  filled  with 
fragrant  waters. 

45-51.  They  should  be  supported  by  vessels  filled  with 
(rice), fruits  and  decorated  by  tender  leaves  and  should  be  cover¬ 
ed  by  cloths.  White  mustard  seeds  and  fried  paddy  should  be 
brought  for  scattering.  As  before  the  sword  of  knowledge  should 
be  made  ready.  Sacrificial  twigs,  the  vessel  (for  cooking)  por¬ 
ridge,  the  sacrificial  ladle  made  of  copper  and  the  vessel  filled 
with  ghee  and  honey  for  anointing  the  feet,  four  seats  made  of 
three  hundred  darbhas  and  of  the  measure  of  two  cubits  long, 
palafa  twigs  for  enclosure,  and  vessel  for  sesamum,  vessel  for 
havis  (food  offering),  vessel  for  water  which  can  respectively  hold 
one,  twenty  and  eight  palas  and  the  sacred  thread  (should  be 
made  ready).  A  pitcher,  an  incense-burner,  srak  and  sruva  (the 
two  kinds  of  sacrificial  ladle),  a  box,  a  seat,  a  chowrie,  dry  fire¬ 
wood,  flowers,  leaves,  scented  gum  resin,  lamps  with  ghee, 
incense,  unbroken  rice,  sacred  thread,  clarified  butter  from  the 
cow’s  milk,  barley  and  sesamum  stems  of  hu§a>  the  three  sweet 
things  (honey,  sugar  and  clarified  butter),  sacrificial  twigs  of 
the  length  of  ten  parva  (the  interspace  between  the  folds  on  the 
fingers)  are  all  needed  for  appeasement.  The  sacrificial  ladle 
(sruva)  of  a  length  of  one  cubit  is  required  for  the  appeasement  of 
the  sun  and  other  planets. 

52.  There  should  be  one  hundred  and  eight  sticks  of  arka , 
palate ,  khadira ,  amarga ,  pippala ,  udumbara ,  fami,  darva  as  also  green 
kuia . 

53-54.  In  their  absence  barley  and  sesamum  (are  used). 
So  also  the  household  articles,  a  sthali  (a  kind  of  vessel),  a  sacri¬ 
ficial  ladle,  lid  etc.  and  two  pieces  of  cloth  for  the  gods,  coins, 
crown,  apparels,  necklaces,  earrings  and  bracelets  should  be  made 
ready  for  the  worship  of  the  preceptor.  One  should  avoid 
making  them  costly. 

55.  Worship  of  the  custodians  of  images  should  be  a 
quarter  less  than  that  stated  before  and  that  of  those  who  repeat 
(the  mantra  of)  the  weapon  is  still  a  fourth  less  than  that.  Worships- 


95.56—96.1-5 


283 


of  brahmins,  astrologers  and  sculptors  are  as  done  for  those  who- 
repeat  (the  mantras). 

56.  The  diamond,  sun-stone,  sapphire,  atinila,  pearl,  topaz, 
ruby,  lapis  lazuli  are  the  eight  gems. 

57.  USira  (the  fragrant  root  of  a  plant),  madhavakranta,  red 
sandal,  agallochum,  sandalwood,  sarika,  kustha,  and  iankhmi 
are  the  (eight)  kinds  of  herbs. 

58-60.  The  metals  (are)  gold,  copper,  silver,  bell-metal, 
lead  and  iron.  Yellow  orpiment,  red  arsenic,  red  chalk,  suvama 
maksika  (honey-like  mineral),  mercury,  vahnigairika,  sulphur, 
and  mica  are  the  eight  kinds  of  minerals.  The  eight  kinds  of 
grains  are  stated  to  be  wheat,  sesamum,  black-gram,  green- 
gram,  barley,  short  term  paddy,  syamaka.  All  these  things  should 
be  gathered. 


CHAPTER  NINETYSIX 
'  Mode  of  initial  consecration  of  an  image  : 

The  Lord  said  : 

1 .  After  having  bathed  and  performed  the  two  daily  (wor¬ 
ships),  the  preceptor  should  enter  the  sacrificial  shed  with  the 
argha  offering  in  his  hand  and  accompanied  by  the  brahmins 
who  are  the  protectors  of  the  idols. 

2.  The  doors  (of  the  sacrificial  shed)  (known  as  the  doors) 
of  peace  should  be  worshipped  duly  as  before  and  also  the  warder- 
gods  (located)  in  the  branches  (of  the  sacrificial  trees)  by  the 
(performance  of)  circumambulation. 

3.  (The  warder-gods)  Nandi  and  Mahakala  (should  be 
worshipped)  at  the  east,  Bhj-hgi  and  Vinayaka  at  the  south, 
Vrsabha  and  Skanda  at  the  west,  (the  warder)  goddess  and 
Canda  at  the  north  (of  the  sacrificial  shed). 

4-5.  Then  the  preceptor  should  worship  two  pitchers  each 
at  the  base  of  the  branches  (of  the  sacrificial  trees)— praianta 
(tranquil)  and  HSira  (cool),  parjanya  (rain-cloud  )  and  aioka 
(griefless),  sanjivana  (reviving)  and  amrta  (ambrosia),  dhanada 
(bestower  of  wealth)  and  iriprada  (bestower  of  prosperity )  one 


*284 


Agni  Purana 


after  another  with  (the  repetition  of)  their  names  ending  in  the 
fourth  case  preceded  by  (the  syllable)  om  and  ending  with 
‘obeisance5. 

6-7.  The  worlds,  planets,  warder  gods  and  rivers,  two  in 
each  one  of  them,  three  suns,  two  Vedas ,  (goddess)  LaksmI  and 
(lord)  Ganapati  are  the  gods  who  stay  in  the  sacrificial  shed 
at  each  one  of  the  doors  for  warding  impediments  and  guarding 
the  sacrifice. 

8.  The  thunder-bolt,  spear,  club,  sword,  noose,  banner, 
mace,  trident,  disc  and  lotus  should  be  duly  worshipped  in 
the  banner  with  the  mantras  Om  hrim  pha f  obeisance.  Om  hrum 
phat  to  the  spear  at  the  door,  hrum  phat  obeisance. 

9-10.  The  eight  presiding  deities  of  the  banner  such  as 
Kumuda,  Kumudaksa,  Pundarika,  Vamana,  Sankukarna,  Sarva- 
netra,  Sumukha  and  Supratisthita  should  be  worshipped  in 
the  east  etc.  with  (the  offering  of)  oblation  to  all  beings  and 
with  the  mantras  om  kaum  obeisance  to  Kumuda  etc. 

11-12.  In  the  same  manner  the  eight  guardian  deities 
Hetuka,  Tripuraghna,  Sakti,  Yamajihva,  Kala,  Karalin,  Ekan- 
ghri  and  Bhlma  should  be  worshipped  in  the  (different)  direc¬ 
tions  with  offerings,  flowers  and  incense.  (The  preceptor) 
should  contemplate  them  as  satisfied. 

13.  The  five  fundamental  principles  earth  etc.  should  be 
worshipped  in  kaksitrna  (a  kind  of  fragrant  grass),  bamboos, 
pillars  and  other  things  in  order  with  the  mantras  sadyojata 1  etc. 

14.  The  preceptor  should  look  at  the  sacrificial  shed  as  per¬ 
meated  by  the  essence  of  (god)  Sadasiva,  hallowed  by  his  pre¬ 
sence  and  endowed  with  the  banners  and  spears  in  the  form  of 
fundamental  principles. 

15.  After  having  warded  off  the  divine  ethereal  and  earthly 
•obstacles  as  (laid  down)  before,  (the  preceptor)  should  enter 
(the  shed)  through  the  western  door  and  look  at  the  other 
remaining  doors. 


16.  After  having  walked  around  (reverentially)  and  seated 
on  the  southern  side  of  the  altar  and  remaining  facing  the  north, 
one  should  perform  the  purification  of  elements  as  before. 


1.  Sadyo  jatam  prapadyani,  Vamadevaya  namo  jyesthaya  namah, 
*atpurn§aya  Vidmahe,  aghorebhyo,  the  ghorcbhyah  and  isanah  sarvavidyanam. 


96.17-27 


285 


17.  Then  the  internal  sacrifice,  the  purification  of  the  man¬ 
tras  and  the  materials,  and  the  worship  of  one’s  own  self  (should 
be  done).  The  five  things  got  from  a  cow  (should  be  applied) 
as  before. 

18.  Then  the  sacrificial  pitcher  should  be  placed  therein 
along  with  the  receptacle,  especially  for  the  principle1  of  Siva  and 
the  three  fundamental  principles  (soul,  body  and  matter) 
in  order. 

19.  The  preceptor  should  locate  by  means  of  his  psychic 
force,  the  supreme  principle  of  Siva  along  with  the  presiding 
deities  Rudra,  Narayana  and  Brahma  in  his  body  from  the  fore¬ 
head  and  trunk  to  the  foot. 

20.  Om,  ham ,  ham ,  The  images  of  the  god  and  their  presid¬ 
ing  deities  should  be  located  therein  as  before  (and  contemplate 
himself)  as  covered  by  the  essence  of  Siva  along  with  his  consti¬ 
tuent  members  and  forearm  of  Siva  on  his  head. 

21.  (The  preceptor)  should  then  contemplate  the  efful¬ 
gence  (of  Siva)  (which  has  permeated  his  body  and)  which  has 
entered  the  cavity  of  the  brain  as  coming  out  dispelling  darkness 
and  illuminating  the  inter-space  between  directions. 

22.  Having  decked  himself  with  flowers,  garlands  and 
cloth  along  with  the  custodians  of  deities  (the  preceptor) 
should  contemplate  as  “I  am  Siva”  and  draw  out  the  sword  of 
knowledge, 

23.  The  sacrificial  shed  should  be  purified  with  the  four¬ 
fold  rites  of  purification.  After  having  scattered  the  ku§a  all 
around,  they  should  again  be  gathered. 

24.  After  having  seated  the  guardian  deity  of  the  ground 
etc.  in  the  big  pitcher  (vardhanl)  as  before,  (the  preceptor) 
should  worship  them.  The  pitcher  sacred  to  god  Siva  and  the 
weapons  and  the  vardhani  (pitcher)  should  be  worshipped  in  the 
fixed  seat. 

25.  Then  the  guardian  deities  of  the  worlds  along  with  their 
weapons  and  vehicles  should  be  worshipped  in  order  in  the  pit¬ 
chers  situated  at  the  different  directions  as  laid  down. 

26.  (The  preceptor)  should  contemplate  (god)  Indra  as 
having  a  golden  complexion,  thousand  eyes,  wearing  the  crown, 

and  wielding  the  thunderbolt. 

27.  (God)  Saptarcis  (Fire  god)  (should  be  contemplated) 
as  holding  a  rosary,  kamandalu  (a  small  water  pitcher),  an  a 


286  AgniPurarta 

spear  in  the  hand,  red  (in  complexion),  engulfed  by  garland  of 
flames  and  as  riding  the  goat. 

28.  (God)  Yama  (god  of  death)  should  be  remembered  as 
riding  a  buffalo,  carrying  a  club  in  his  hand  and  of  the  form  of 
destructive  fire  and  (lord)  Nirj-ti  as  riding  an  ass,  carrying  a 
sword  in  the  hand  and  having  red  eyes. 

29.  (The  preceptor)  should  then  meditate  (lord)  Varuna 
as  seated  on  a  crocodile  and  having  white  complexion  holding 
a  noose  of  serpent  in  his  hand  and  (lord)  Vayu  (wind  god) 
as  riding  an  antelope  and  having  blue  complexion  and  Kubera 
(god  of  wealth)  as  seated  on  a  sheep. 

30.  (Lord)  Isa  (Siva),  the  trident-bearer  should  be  contem¬ 
plated  (as  seated)  on  a  bull,  (god)  Ananta,  the  disc-bearer  (as 
seated)  on  a  tortoise,  and  (lord)  Brahma,  the  four-faced  and 
four-armed  as  riding  a  gander. 

31.  (Lord)  Dharma  (god  of  virtue)  and  others  should  be 
worshipped  in  the  pitchers  located  at  the  base  of  the  pillars  at  the 
corners.  Some  also  worship  (the  gods)  Ananta  and  others  in  the 
pitchers  placed  at  the  corners  of  different  directions. 

32.  The  injunction  of  (lord)  Siva  should  be  made  to  be 
heard.  The  pitcher  placed  behind  one’s  own  self  should  be  gently 
turned  around.  Then  as  before  the  pitcher  should  be  firmly 
put  first  and  then  the  pitcher  vardhani. 

33.  After  having  worshipped  (lord)  Siva  (seated  in)  a 
firm  seat  and  (again  in)  a  firm  seat  for  the  sake  of  weapons, 
(the  preceptor)  should  as  before  touch  with  the  udbhavamudra 
(posture  made  with  the  fingers  denoting  generation). 

34.  O  lord  of  the  universe  you  protect  this  sacrifice  of  thy 
own  self  out  of  compassion  for  the  devotee”.  After  having  add¬ 
ressed  these  words,  (the  preceptor)  should  place  the  sword  in  the 
pitcher. 

35.  After  having  worshipped  the  lord  in  the  pitcher  or  on 
the  ground  or  in  the  shed  relating  to  initiation  and  establishment, 
(the  preceptor)  should  go  in  front  of  the  fire-receptacle. 

36.  The  custodians  of  images  who  are  seated  in  front  of 
the  centre  of  the  pit  should  purify  the  respective  pits  as  directed 
by  the  preceptor. 

37.  The  reciters  (of  mantras)  should  recite  (the  mantras) 
as  many  times  (as  laid  down).  Others  (should  recite  the  sarii- 


•96.38-51 


287 


hita  mantra.  The  brahmins,  well-versed  in  their  respective  bran¬ 
ches  should  read  the  appeasing  mantras. 

38.  A  follower  of  the  Rgveda  should  recite  the  hymns  Srisukta , 
pavamani,  maitraka  and  vrsakapi  on  the  east. 

39.  A  follower  of  Samaveda  should  recite  the  hymns— 
devavrata ,  bharunda,  jyestha  and  ralhanlara  on  the  south. 

40.  A  follower  of  Tajurveda  should  recite  the  hymns  rudra, 
purusasukta,  ilokadhyaya  especially  and  the  brahmanas  in  the  west. 

41.  An  Atharvavedin  should  repeat  the  hymns  nilarudra, 
s  uksmas  uksma  and  the  alharvaUrsa  in  the  north. 

42.  After  having  ignited  the  (sacrificial)  fire,  the  preceptor 
should  fill  the  eastern  part  of  each  one  of  the  pit  from  the  east  in 


43.  Incense,  lamps  and  sacrificial  porridge  should  be  offer¬ 
ed  to  them.  Then  the  fire  should  be  offered.  After  having 
worshipped  Siva  as  before,  offering  unto  fire  should  be  made 
(accompanied  by  the  chanting  of)  mantra. 

44.  After  having  made  the  oblation  for  making  the  place 
and  time  of  the  sacrifice  as  auspicious  and  to  ward  off  omens 
portending  evil,  the  knower  of  mantras  should  offer  the  final 

oblation  which  brings  forth  good.  ,  r 

45.  After  having  prepared  the  sacrificial  porridge  as  before 

it  should  be  offered  to  each  one  of  the 

(persons  at  whose  instance  a  ceremony  is  performe  )  g 

the  bathing  shed  well-adorned. 

46.  (The  image  of)  the  god  should  be  placed  on  the  auspi¬ 
cious  scat  and  covered  with  the  essence  o  t  e 

stroking  it.  After  having  worshipped,  it  should  be  bathed 

mud  and  herbal  waters.  .  :ne 

47.  The  image  should  be  bathed  in  beUveenwi  ^ 

of  a  cow  and  cowdung,  sacrC  ^he  we apon  ending  with  (the 
(the  recitation  of  the  mantra  ) 

£52?  b? Z  > in  ““ 

pany  of  the  protectors  of  the  image)  with  white 

««!•  u’^cirkd.o  .ho  sacrificial  platform  at  the 

flowers  it  should  be  earned 


288 


Agni  Purana 


north.  After  having  laid  (the  image)  on  a  seat  placed  over  the 
bed,  the  preceptor  should  mark  (on  the  image)  with  lines  of 
saffron-smeared  strings  and  mark  (the  position  of)  the  eyes  with 
a  golden  stick.  The  collyrium  should  be  put  on  (the  eyelids) 
and  then  the  sculptor  should  carve  out  the  eyes  with  an  imple¬ 
ment  at  the  spot  as  laid  down  in  the  technical  works. 

52.  The  eyes  should  be  carved  into  a  spot  just  at  half  of  one 
third  or  half  of  one  fourth  or  half  of  half  the  length,  for  accompli¬ 
shing  all  desires  and  it  is  auspicious. 

53.  Taking  one- fourth  part  of  the  length  of  the  liiiga  and 
having  divided  it  into  three  parts,  one  such  part  should  always 
be  the  breadth  of  the  body. 

54.  In  the  liiiga  of  a  cubit  length,  the  cavity  of  the  eyes 
should  be  a  ninth  part  of  one  eighth  of  a yaua  (measure)  both  in 
depth  and  breadth. 

55.  In  the  liiiga  of  one  and  a  half  cubit  length,  the  sockets  of 
the  eyes  would  measure  an  eighth  part  of  a yava  (measure)  more 
(than  that  of  the  preceding).  In  that  (the  lihga)  of  a  cubit  len¬ 
gth  (the  cayity  of  the  eyes)  would  be  eight  yava  (measure)  in 
depth  and  breadth. 

56.  In  all  the  liiigas  of  Sambhu  (lord  Siva)  where  the  length 
would  increase  by  the  pada  (measure),  the  measures  of  the  cavi¬ 
ties  of  the  eyes  would  also  correspondingly  increase  by  a  yava 
(measure) . 

57.  The  lines  (on  the  top  of  the  lingo)  would  also  increase 
by  three  parts  both  in  depth  and  breadth.  In  all  the  cases  the  top 
of  the  lihga  would  be  narrow  and  tapering. 

58-59.  The  region  of  the  eyes  should  be  divided  into  eight 
parts  and  the  lower  part  of  the  head  into  two.  The  two  lower 
parts  (of  the  region  of  the  eyes)  should  be  left  out.  The  remain¬ 
ing  six  parts  should  be  carved  into  three  lines  taken  round  and 
joined  at  the  back  (of  the  emblem).  The  line  at  the  top  should 
be  made  to  measure  a  yava  (measure)  in  the  case  of  (a  lihga) 
made  of  gem  as  well  as  of  gold. 

60.  The  form  and  characteristic  features  of  these  are  that 
the  radiance  of  th°Se  made  of  gem  is  spotless.  (The  emblem) 
should  be  endowed  with  the  eyesight  by  carving  the  above  mark 
(into  the  part  indicated  above). 

^  ,^}er  ^av^n§  worshipped  the  lines  bringing  out  the  cha- 

racteristic  features  of  the  emblem  with  ghee  and  honey  with  '(the 


96.62-73 


289 


repetition  of)  the  mrtyuhjayamantra 1  in  order  to  remove  the  defects 
due  to  the  sculptor,  the  lifiga  should  then  be  worshipped  after 
having  bathed  it  with  mud  and  other  things.  After  having  grati¬ 
fied  the  sculptor,  a  cow  should  be  given  to  the  preceptor. 

62-64.  After  having  worshipped  the  lifiga  with  incense  and 
other  things,  married  women  should  sing  (in  praise  of  the  lord). 
After  having  touched  the  ( lifiga )  on  the  left  and  right  with  the 
string  or  with  the  kufa ,  and  rubbing  with  rocana (pigment),  the 
women  should  be  sent  away  after  giving  gifts  of  molasses,  salt 
and  brains. 

65-67.  The  preceptor  along  with  the  custodians  of  idols 
should  bathe  (the  lifiga )  with  mud,  cow-dung,  cow’s  urine, 
ashes  and  water  with  the  (recitation  of)  hrdayamantra  or  pranava . 
Then  (it  should  be  bathed)  with  the  five  things  got  from  a  cow 
preceded  by  (bathing  with)  the  five  sweet  things.  After  the 
smearing  (of  decoctions)  of  herbs  (it  should  be  bathed)  with 
all  herbal  waters.  (Then  it  should  be  bathed)  with  waters  mixed 
with  white  flowers,  fruits,  gold,  gems,  horn  and  barley.  Then 
(it  should  be  bathed)  with  thousand  pourings  of  divine  herbal 
waters. 


68.  Subsequently,  the  lifiga  should  be  bathed  with  sacred 
waters,  waters  of  (river)  Ganges,  waters  mixed  with  sandal  and 
from  the  pitcher  representing  milky  ocean  and  that  pitcher  of 
water  sacred  to  lord  Siva. 

69-71.  Rubbing  and  besmearing  should  be  done  with  fra¬ 
grant  sandal  and  other  things.  After  having  worshipped  (the 
lifiga)  with  flowers  with  the  recitation  of  brahma  (j mantra )  and  with 
red  garments  with  (the  mantras  of)  armour  and  after  having 
shown  a  red  flower  preceded  by  the  offer  of  piotective  mark,  the 
lifiga  should  be  worshipped  with  the  mantra  of puritsa,  after  having 
appeased  it  with  jets  of  ghee,  water,  milk,  kuia ,  other  articles  of 
worship  and  praises.  After  having  rinsed  the  mouth  with  (the 
mantra  of)  the  heart  (the  preceptor)  should  say,  "O  lord  !  May 

you  rise  up  !”  ,  _  ,  ,  . 

72.  Then  the  lord  should  quickly  be  led  to  the  shed  along 

with  the  articles  (of  worship)  in  a  divine  chariot  and  placed  in 
the  bed  (made  ready)  at  the  western  door  (of  the  shed). 

73.  At  the  western  door  itself  a  pedestal  should  be  placed  on 

i  Ti  r*  trk  Inrrl  Aiva  praying  for  deliverance  from  death. 
1.  addressed  to  lord  biva  y  nustivardhanam  urvarukamiva 

Tryambakarh  yajamahe  sugandhim  pustivaronan 

bandhanan  mrtyor  muksiya  mamrta  . 


■290 


Agni  Pur  an  a 


an  auspicious  seat  permeated  with  the  goddesses  beginning  with 
Sakti  and  ending  with  Mati.  The  brahmatila  should  also  be 
bestowed  therein. 

74-75.  The  sacrificial  pitcher  in  which  the  psychic  sleep  had 
been  induced  should  be  converted  into  the  fixed  seat.  After 
having  placed  it  in  the  north-east  corner  of  the  shed  and  offered 
waters  for  washing  with  (the  mantra  of)  the  heart,  the  linga 
should  be  lifted  (from  the  bed)  and  deposited  on  the  seat  with 
the  head  turned  towards  the  east  and  obeisance  to  Dharma 
(god  of  virtue)  and  others  (should  be  done)  with  (the  mantra 
of)  creation. 

76.  Incense  should  be  offered.  After  having  worshipped 
the  linga,  garments  and  household  articles  should  be  offered  with 
.(the  mantra  of)  the  heart  befitting  one’s  capacity. 

77-78.  A  vessel  filled  with  ghee  and  honey  should  be  placed 
•near  the  foot  as  unguent.  The  officiating  priest  who  is  present 
therein  should  locate  the  thirtysix  principles  beginning  with 
energy  and  ending  with  the  earth  along  with  their  respective 
presiding  deities  and  divide  (the  above  body)  into  three  parts 
with  garlands  of  flowers. 

79-83.  After  having  located  the  fundamental  principles 
beginning  with  the  principle  of  illusion  and  ending  with  that  of 
the  absolute  energy,  together  with  the  principles  of  soul,  know¬ 
ledge  and  pure  bliss,  in  the  order  in  which  they  were  created, 
in  the  different  parts  of  the  body  such  as  the  square,  octagon  or 
circle  and  the  presiding  deities  of  the  above  three  principles  such 
as  the  gods  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Siva  having  been  pro¬ 
jected  into  each  of  the  above  said  divisions  and  also  the  different 
embodiments  of  gods  such  as  the  earth,  fire,  the  person  for 
whom  the  sacrifice  is  done,  sun,  water,  air,  moon,  sun, 
sky  together  with  their  respective  deities  such  as  Sarva,  Pasu- 
pati,  Ugra,  Rudra,  Bhava,  Mahesvara,  Mahadeva  and  Bhima 
and  these  letters  respectively  sacred  to  them  such  as  la,  va, 
ia,  sa,  ca,  ya,  sa  and  ha  should  be  located  therein.  The  pranava 
of  three  parts  or  the  mantra  of  the  heart  or  some  other  principal 
mantra  (are  also  located). 

84-85.  (The  preceptor)  who  knows  the  mantra  should  locate 
five  deities  of  (the  five  fundamental  principles  earth,  water, 
lustre,  wind  and  ether  along  with  their  five  presiding  deities,  and 


291 


96.86-92 


Brahma,  Dharanidhara,  Rudra,  Isa  and  Sadasivain  the  order 
of  creation  in  the  case  of  a  sacrifice  having  five  fire-pits. 

86.  (The  principles  of)  non-action,  and  other  things,  and 
their  presiding  deities  Ajata  and  others  or  the  three  principles 
should  be  located  as  the  cause  of  pervading  in  the  case  of  a  seeker 
of  release  (from  bondage). 

g7.  Gods  known  as  Vidyesas  (lords  of  learning)  should  be 
meditated  upon  in  the  case  of  one’s  own  soul  being  pure  and  the 
Lokanayakas  (lords  of  the  world)  in  the  case  of  one’s  own  and 
being  impure  and  also  the  protectors  of  images,  enjoyers  and  lords 


of  the  mantras.  . 

88.  (The  fundamental  principles  numbering)  twenty-hve  , 
eight2,  five3  and  three4  and  their  lords  such  as  Indra  and  others 

(should  be  worshipped)  in  order  as  follows: 

Om  ham  obeisance  to  the  principle  of  energy  etc.  CM  ham 
obeisance  to  the  presiding  deity  of  the  principle  of  energy  etc. 
CM  ham  obeisance  to  the  image  of  ksma  (earth).  CM  ham .obeisance 
to  (lord)  Siva,  presiding  deity  of  the  image  of  earth  etc.  Om 
ham  obeisance  to  the  image  oCfirthivi  (earth).  Om  ham  obeisamce 
to  Brahma,  the  presiding  deity  of  the  image  etc.  CM  Mm  obe  - 
sance  to  (lord)  Rudra,  the  presiding  deity  of  the  principle 
Siva  (auspiciousness)  etc. 

89-91.  (The  preceptor)  should  recite  (the  abo'^  n“”™ 
from  the  region  of  the  navel,  spreading  like  the  sounds  of  bell, 
rejecting  the  causes  such  as  Brahma  and  ot  ers  an  ,  j, 

the  maiura  resting  in  (the  lotus  of)  nveive  peak  a«d^uch  « 
different  from  the  mind  and  which  resembles  the tse^  . 

bliss  obtained.  Having  collected  filaiTienurom  is 

ed  lotuses)  (lord  Siva),  who  P'™ J  '"Tjldiing  r„ 
devoid  of  kales,  should  be :  oo" |  e  Pff  tPwith  thousand  rays, 
splendent  with  thirtyeight  ha  ,  attendant 

consisting  of  all  energies  and  accompamed 

gods;  (he)  should  be  then  Pr^tC  ju  be  accomplished  in  this 

“  Z  ^  ^ 

1.  The  avyakta,  mahat,  ahankw 

mendriyas,  pailcajilancndnyas,  ma  ^ yajamina. 

2.  The  five  elements,  sun,  moo 

3.  The  five  elements.  and  tamas . 

4.  The  three  qualities  sattva,  raj 

5.  The  projection  of  vital  energy. 


292  Agni  Purana 

manner.  It  yields  all  fruits.  The  location  in  the  pedestal  etc. 
will  be  described  now. 

93-94.  After  having  been  washed  and  besmeared  with  sandal 
paste  etc.,  the  pedestal  should  be  covered  by  a  good  cloth. 
Then  the  stone  set  ready  just  like  the  lifiga  and  placed  at  the  north 
of  the  lifiga  should  be  endowed  with  the  five  gems  in  its  aperture 
resembling  the  female  organ  of  generation  and  should  be  wor¬ 
shipped  as  laid  down. 

95.  The  (pedestal)  stone  which  has  been  bathed  again 
should  be  deposited  at  the  foot  of  the  lifiga .  So  also  the  bull  and 
(others  such  as  the  goddess  of)  energy  should  be  located  after 
doing  the  rites  of  bathing  etc.  (to  them). 

96-97.  It  should  be  done  being  preceded  by  the  pranava 
(syllable  om)  and  (followed  by)  any  one  of  (the  mystic  letters) 
hum,  pum  and  hrim .  The  pedestal  stone  which  is  of  the  form  of  the 
base  and  which  is  endowed  with  the  energy  of  action  (should  be 
worshipped)  with  sacred  ashes,  darbha  and  sesamum.  Then  the 
three  outer  walls  should  be  set  up.  The  guardian  deities  with 
their  weapons  should  be  worshipped  outside  for  the  sake  of  pro¬ 
tection. 

Om  hum ,  hrdm  obeisance  to  the  energy  of  action.  Om  hum , 
hram,  hah  oblation  to  Mahagauri,  the  consort  of  Rudra — this 
(being  performed)  on  the  pedestal.  Om ,  ham  obeisance  to  the 
energy  of  support.  Om ,  ham  obeisance  to  the  bull. 

98-101.  The  (female  deities)  Dharika,  Diptimati,  Ugra 
Jyotsna,  Balotkata,  Dhatrl  and  Vidhatri  or  the  five  goddesses 
Varna,  Jvestha,  Kriya,  Jnana,  Vedha  or  the  three  Kriya,  Jnana 
and  Iccha  should  be  located  as  before.  So  also  the  female  god¬ 
desses  should  be  located  in  the  benefic  forms  of  gods.  The  five 
energies  Tami,  Moha,  KsamI,  Nistha,  Mftyu,  Maya,  or  Bhava 
Jvara,  Mahamoha,  Ghora,  Tritayajvara  or  the  three  presiding 
female  deities  Kriya,  Jnana  and  Badha  should  be  located  in  the 
three  indomitable  principles  of  soul  etc. 

102.  Even  in  this  case  the  pedestal  (should  be  worshipped) 
in  the  Brahma— part  (of  the  lifiga)  in  the  order.  All  routines 
should  be  performed  as  before  with  (the  goddess)  Gauri  and 
others. 

103-105.  Having  located  in  this  manner,  (the  preceptor) 
should  go  near  the  (fire)  pit  and  invoke  (lord)  MaheSvara  at  the 
centre  of  the  pit  and  on  the  borders,  the  goddess  of  action  in  the 


293 


•96.106-1 14 


other  border  and  the  sound  {om)  at  the  lip.  Then  the  union  of 
the  occult  psychic  force  with  the  sacrificial  pitcher,  the  ground, 
fire  and  (lord)  Isa  (should  be  brought  about). 

106-107.  The  preceptor  should  contemplate  his  psychic  energy 
resembling  the  fire  of  a  lotus  rejected  upwards  by  the  rising  wind, 
entering  by  the  path  of  the  sun,  emerging  out  and  again  enter¬ 
ing  by  the  path  of  void.  In  this  manner  mutual  union  with  (the 
psychic  forces  of)  the  protectors  of  guardians  should  be  brought 
about  everywhere. 

108.  After  having  worshipped  the  energy  (known  as) 
Dharika  (ability  to  hold),  duly  the  fundamental  principles 
along  with  their  presiding  deities,  and  the  images  (of  gods)  along 
with  their  presiding  deities  with  ghee  etc.  and  offered  oblation 
duly  in  the  fire-pit  in  their  presence  with  the  samhita  mantras , 
oblation  should  again  be  made  hundred  or  thousand  or  five 
hundred  times  (concluding)  with  the  final  oblation. 

109.  Similarly,  the  guardians  of  deities  should  also  satisfy 
the  fundamental  principles  along  with  their  presiding  deities 
and  the  images  (of  gods)  along  with  their  presiding  deities  and 
offer  oblation. 

110-111.  After  having  satisfied  the  (goddess  of)  energy 
with  Brahma  mantras  befitting  one’s  capacity  and  time  and  sprink¬ 
led  the  waters  of  the  pitcher  with  the  ends  of  the  kuSa  and  touched 
the  base  of  the  linga,  one  should  repeat  (the  mantras)  as !  many 
times  as  (the  number  of)  oblations.  The  presence  of  the  god 
should  be  accomplished  by  (repeating)  the  mantra  of  the  heart 
The  act  of  covering  (the  image)  should  be  done  by  (repeating) 
the  mantra  of  the  armour. 

112-13.  After  having  performed  (the  rites)  thus  or  t  e 
purification  of  (the  parts  of  the  linga  presided  over  by)  the  go  s 
Brahma  to  Visnu,  (the  preceptor)  should  complete  e  0 
and  repetition  of  the  mantras  as  many  times  (as  mentioned  )■ 

The  middle  and  tip  of  the  linga  should  be  touched  with  the  middle 
and  tip  of  the  kuSa.  The  mode  of  achieving  the  union  is  described 


now: 


vv  •  f 

Om,  ham,  ham,  om,  om,  om,  em,  om,  bhum,  bhum  obeisance  tot 
image  outside.  Om,  ham,  oam,  om,  om,  om,  sam,  om,  bhum,  bhum, 

vam  obeisance  to  the  image  of  fire-god. 

1 14  Similarly,  the  images  of  the  yajamana  and  others  should 
be  contemplated  (in  the  linga).  So  also  in  the  case  of  the  five 


294  Purana 

manifestations  of  the  god,  union  must  be  brought  about  with 
(the  repetition  of  the  mantra  of)  the  heart  etc. 

115.  It  should  be  known  that  (the  union)  in  the  case  of  the 
three  fundamental  principles  (soul,  knowledge  and  bliss)  with 
the  linga,  pedestal  and  bull  is  brought  about  by  the  principal 
(i mantra )  or  with  their  own  fundamental  (letters)  completely 
and  without  any  omission. 

116-19.  Hundred  oblations  should  be  made  for  the  puri¬ 
fication  of  the  different  parts  (of  the  liiiga)  and  hundred  and 
eight  (oblations)  with  the  mantra  of  (lord)  Siva  for  the  removal 
of  any  deficiency  (in  performing  the  sacrifice).  After  having 
made  oblation,  whatever  act  has  been  done  that  should  be 
uttered  in  the  ear  of  (lord)  Siva:  “This  act  has  been  completed 
by  me  by  your  grace  !  O  lord  !  Om ,  obeisance  to  lord  Rudra  ! 
Obeisance  to  (lord)  Rudradeva  !  Whether  this  act  is  complete 
as  laid  down  or  incomplete,  you  complete  it  by  your  power  and 
accept  it.  Then  the  learned  (preceptor)  should  locate  in  the 
lihga  and  the  act  in  the  pedestal  of  the  image. 

120-121.  The  energy  of  the  form  of  support  should  be  locat¬ 
ed  in  the  Brahma  (part  of  the)  stone.  The  (rite  of)  adhivasana 
(staying  together)  should  extend  over  seven  nights  or  five  nights 
or  three  nights  or  a  single  night  or  be  done  immediately.  The 
sacrifice  performed  without  (the  performance  of)  adhivasana 
does  not  yield  any  benefit  even  if  performed. 

122.  Hundreds  of  oblations  should  be  offered  everyday 
with  the  respective  mantras .  Worship  of  the  pitcher  of  (lord) 
Siva  and  offering  to  the  quarters  should  be  conveyed. 

123.  The  adhivasa  is  so  called  because  the  disciple  stays  with 
the  preceptor  practising  vows.  It  is  said  to  be  the  attitude  till 
the  end  of  the  stay. 


CHAPTER  NINETYSEVEN 

Mode  of  installation  of  the  image  of  {lord)  Siva 
The  lord  said  : 

1.  After  having  performed  the  daily  rites  in  the  morning 
and  worshipped  the  guardian  deities,  the  preceptor  should  enter 
(the  temple)  as  described  already  and  purify  his  body. 


295 


97.2-16 

2_3  After  having  worshipped  the  lords  of  the  quarters,  the 
sacrificial  pitcher  of  (lord)  Siva  and  the  small  pitcher  and  hav¬ 
ing  satisfied  the  linga  and  the  fire  duly  with  eight  handfuls  (of 
oblation),  (the  preceptor)  should  enter  the  temple  5“*“* 
(the  mantra  of)  the  weapon  by  the  command  of  (lord)  Siva. 
The  obstacles  therein  should  be  removed  by  (the  repetition  of) 
the  mantra  of  the  arrow  ending  with  (the  syllables)  hum,  phat. 

4-7.  The  linga  should  not  be  established  at  the  middle  (of 
the  temple)  to  avoid  the  defect  of  injury.  Hence  the  stone  s  a 
should  be  established  having  left  half  of  a  yava  (a  measure)  or  a 
yam  from  the  centre  a  little  towards  the  north-east. 

Thatslab  (knownas)  ananta  (literally  without  end)  andwhich 
is  of  the  form  of  support  of  all  (should  be  established)  with  the 
principal  (mantra).  The  stone  slab  known  as  Acala  (without 
movement)  which  is  all-pervading  and  is  of  the  form  of  the  seat 
of  (lord)  Siva  should  be  placed  by  the  use  of  (the  mantra  of) 
creation  or  by  (the  repetition  of)  the  following  mantra  :-0m  . 
All  pervading  goddess  !  Firm  and  unmovable  (goddess)  Ac  . 
obeisance.  Hram,  lam,  /trim,  oblations. ,  You  must  always  rem 
here  by  the  command  of  (lord)  Siva.” 

8-16.  After  having  spoken  thus  and  having  worshipped  (the 
Uiiga)  (the  preceptor)  should  arrest  its  movement  by  showing 
*?£*-**  (a  posture  made  with  the  I*. >•«-**■ 
(the  preceptor)  should  place  the  diamond  and  the ^  other rg  , 
fraerant  root,  metals  like  gold  and  bronze  yellow  orpiment  etc., 
cereals  and  grains  described  already  and  respectively  representing 

be  located).  Otherwise  a  go '  ^  ofaU  the  mantras  and  gold, 

should  be  located  along  y  Qr  all  metals  together 

Then  a  lotus  stalk  made  of  go  should  be  located, 

with  a  dish  consisting  o  sesamu  ^  repreSenting  the  energy 

^ulu  (a~ 


296  Agni  Pur  ana 

tic)  and  covered  with  a  cloth  protected  by  (the  recitation  of) 
the  ( mantra )  of  the  armour  and  weapon. 

17-21.  After  having  offered  oblations  to  the  presiding  deities 
of  the  quarters  and  rinsing  the  mouth,  the  preceptor  should  offer 
hundred  oblations  either  with  (the  repetition  of)  (the  mantra  of 
lord)  Siva  or  with  (the  mantra  of)  the  weapon  along  with  the 
final  (oblation)  for  the  removal  of  defects  in  the  cavity  of  the 
stone  slab  on  account  of  contamination.  After  having  appeased 
the  presiding  deities  of  the  ground  by  offering  an  oblation,  the 
preceptor  should  lift  the  deity  along  with  the  seat  with  (the  reci¬ 
tation  of  the  mantra  of)  the  heart  and  the  sounding  of  auspicious 
notes.  Then  the  preceptor  should  walk  ahead  of  the  deity  and 
behind  the  sacrificial  ground  of  the  lord  along  with  the  four 
■custodians  of  the  image  standing  in  the  (different)  directions  and 
the  person  at  whose  bidding  the  rite  is  performed.  After  having 
done  the  circumambulation,  the  liiiga  should  be  established  in 
front  of  the  door  known  as  bhadra  (welfare).  After  having  offered 
waters  for  washing,  (the  linga)  should  be  taken  to  the  temple 
through  the  door,  the  door  frame  and  the  region  of  the  door. 

22.  The  great  lord  should  be  taken  only  through  the  door 
without  contacting  the  door  (in  the  case  of  an  unfinished  temple) 

if  the  door  frame  has  unfinished  edges  or  incomplete  or  is  half 
done. 

23-24.  In  the  case  of  the  construction  of  a  temple  being 
begun,  (the  linga)  should  be  taken  in  through  the  corner  also. 
This  is  the  general  rule  even  in  the  case  of  a  manifested  linga  as 
the  worldly  practice  for  entry  into  the  temple  through  the  door. 
It  is  known  that  if  the  entry  into  the  temple  is  made  through 
the  side  door  it  causes  destruction  of  the  race. 

25-33.  After  having  placed  the  linga  in  the  seat  facing  the 
door  with  the  sounding  of  auspicious  turya  (a  kind  of  musical 
instrument)  and  (offerings  of)  durva  (a  kind  of  grass)  and  un¬ 
broken  rice,  (the  preceptor)  should  recite  the  great  paSupata 
(mantra)  after  uttering  ‘Rise,  O  lord’  with  (the  recitation  of  the 
mantra  of)  the  heart.  After  having  removed  the  sacrificial  pit¬ 
chers  from  the  holes,  the  preceptor  in  the  company  of  the  guar¬ 
dians  of  the  image  should  mentally  repeat  the  mantra  and  con¬ 
template  (the  linga)  besmeared  with  saffron  and  other  things 
and  the  union  of  the  god  and  goddess  as  protected.  After  having 
recited  the  principal  (mantra)  till  deep  concentration  (is  gained). 


97.34-39 


297 


(the  preceptor)  should  touch  (the  lingo)  and  place  it  in  the  hole. 
Either  a  portion  of  the  Brahma-part  (of  the  lingo )  or  two  parts 
(of  the  same)  or  half  of  it  or  one-eighth  of  the  whole  (lingo) 
should  be  under  (the  earth).  After  having  covered  (the  lingo) 
with  lead  upto  the  waist  with  concentration,  (the  preceptor) 
should  fill  the  cavity  with  sand  and  say,  “  (You)  be  firm5’.  Then 
after  the  lingo  has  become  firm,  (the  preceptor)  should  contem¬ 
plate  him  who  is  of  all  the  forms  (of  beings),  recite  the  principal 
(mantra)  and  locate  the  niskala  (devoid  of  attributes)  upto  the 
energy  by  the  (order  of)  creation.  If  the  lingo  that  is  being  estab¬ 
lished  leans  towards  the  south,  the  preceptor  should  offer  obla¬ 
tions  with  the  mantras  of  the  respective  presiding  deities  of  the 
directions  until  the  final  (oblation)  along  with  the  fees.  (The 
preceptor)  should  offer  hundred  oblations  either  with  the  prin¬ 
cipal  mantra  or  (the  mantra)  of  manifold  forms  if  (the  lihga  leans) 
to  the  left  or  slips  down  or  cracks.  Even  in  the  case  of  other 
defects  (the  preceptor)  should  similarly  perform  the  blissful 
appeasing  rite. 

34.  A  lihga  associated  with  the  rites  of  location  etc.  in  this 
manner  does  not  bring  any  harm.  The  pedestal  should  be  con¬ 
secrated  as  possessing  a  part  of  the  characteristic  (mentioned 
already  for  the  lihga). 

35.  After  having  projected  the  mantra  of  (the  goddess) 
Gaurl  (consort  of  lord  Siva)  in  the  pedestal,  the  pedestal  should 
be  consecrated  with  (the  mantra)  of  creation.  The  sides  (of  the 
lihga)  should  be  smoothened  and  binding  cement  and  sand 
should  be  put. 

36-37.  Then  the  preceptor  in  the  company  of  the  custo¬ 
dians  of  the  image  should  bathe  the  images  (with  the  waters) 
from  the  pitcher  of  peace  and  other  pitchers  placed  there  as  well 
as  the  paheamrta  (a  composition  of  the  milk,  sugar,  curd,  ghee 
and  honey)  and  other  things.  It  should  then  be  besmeared  with 
sandal  paste  and  other  things.  After  having  worshipped  the  lord 
of  the  universe  (Siva),  (the  preceptor)  should  touch  the  parts 
(represented  by  lord  Siva  and  his  consort  Uma)  with  the  reci¬ 
tation  of  the  mantras  of  (goddess)  Uma  and  (lord)  Mahesa 
(Siva)  and  showing  the  lihgamudra  (a  posture  made  with  the 

fingers). 

38-39.  Then  (the  preceptor)  should  (mentally)  project 


298 


Agni  Parana 


the  three  (fundamental)  principles1  in  that  preceded  by  the  six 
kinds  of  worship.  After  having  located  the  image  along  with  the 
presiding  divinities  of  the  (different)  parts  as  also  (lord)  Brahma 
in  the  seat  of  action,  the  learned  person  should  bathe  it.  After 
having  besmeared  it  with  fragrant  (pastes)  and  showing  frag¬ 
rant  fumes,  it  should  be  located  as  the  sole  pervading  principle 
of  (lord)  Siva. 

40-44.  After  having  offered  to  (lord)  Siva  the  garlands  of 
flowers,  incense  sticks,  lamps,  edible  offerings  and  fruits  with 
(the  recitation  of  the  mantra  of)  the  heart  befitting  one’s  capacity 
and  sipping  waters  (thrice),  water  should  be  offered  to  the  lord 
for  cleansing.  After  the  recitation  (of  the  mantras  sacred  to  the 
lord)  and  assigning  the  merits  of  the  same  on  his  right  hand 
(the  preceptor)  should  address  the  lord  in  the  company  of  the 
custodians  of  (the  image  of  lord)  Siva  as  follows:  “O  lord  ! 
You  should  stay  in  this  temple  by  your  own  wish  as  long 
as  the  sun,  moon  and  stars  (would  shine  in  the  sky).” 
After  having  made  obeisance  thus,  (the  preceptor)  should 
go  outside  (the  temple  reciting)  either  (the  mantra )  of  the  heart 
or  the  pranava  (syllable  om ).  After  having  established  (the  image 
oQ  the  bull,  (the  preceptor)  should  make  the  offering  as 
before.  One  hundred  oblations  should  be  made  with  the 
mrtyunjaya  {mantra)  (that  which  conquers  death)  for  the  removal 
of  defects  like  omission  etc.  In  order  to  appease  the  lord  obla¬ 
tions  with  sweet  porridge  should  be  done  with  (the  recitation  of 
the  mantra  of)  the  heart.  “O  great  lord  !  Whatever  thing  has 
been  done  by  me  through  ignorance  or  inadvertance  you  make 
it  good.” 

45.  One  should  dedicate  all  things  to  the  lord  of  the  goddess 
who  is  the  cause  of  gold,  animals,  earth,  songs  and  musical  instru¬ 
ments  with  devotion  and  within  one’s  means. 

46.  Gifts  (should  be  given)  and  then  festivities  should  be 
celebrated  for  four  days.  The  preceptor  should  offer  oblations 
for  three  days  at  the  three  conjunctions  (of  time)  (the  morning, 
midday  and  evening)  in  the  company  of  the  custodians  of  the 
image. 

47-48.  And  the  final  oblation  composed  of  sacrificial 
porridge  should  be  offered  in  all  pits  purified  with  the  obla- 


1.  Soul,  knowledge  and  bliss. 


97.49-59 


299 


tion  (known  as)  samp  ala  (fulfilling  oblation)  on  the  fourth  day 
with  (the  recitation  of)  the  bahurupi  {mantra).  The  flowers  used 
should  be  kept  for  four  days  after  that  and  removed  afterwards. 
After  having  bathed  the  image,  it  should  be  worshipped. 

49-52.  Worship  in  the  case  of  ordinary  lingas  should  be  done 
by  (the  repetition  of)  the  general  mantras .  Except  conscious¬ 
ness  of  the  linga,  the  lord  should  be  bid  adieu.  In  the  case  of 
lingas  of  extraordinary  nature  (lord)  should  be  bid  adieu  (with 
the  repetition  of  words),  “Pardon  (us  O  lord  !  )”  In 
vocation,  manifestation  and  dismissal  (are  done)  befitting  one’s 
ability.  According  to  some  it  has  been  stated  that  seven  obla¬ 
tions  for  the  steadiness  etc.  (should  be  cast) at  the  end  of  instal¬ 
lation.  Steadiness,  immeasurableness,  cognisance  of  the  origin- 
less  existence,  eternity,  all-pervasiveness,  deathlessness,  seen 
as  manifested  are  spoken  as  the  characteristics  of  (lord)  Siva 
for  the  manifestation. 

53-54.  “ Om  !  obeisance  to  (lord)  Siva.  Be  thou  steady.” 

This  is  the  order  offering  oblations.  After  having  accom¬ 
plished  this  in  this  manner  and  having  permeated  the  two  pit¬ 
chers  with  the  essence  of  lord  Siva,  the  (lord)  Bhava  (Siva) 
should  be  bathed  with  (the  waters  of)  the  one  and  the  other 
should  be  borne  for  bathing  the  performer. 

55-57.  After  having  made  the  offering,  (the  preceptor) 
should  do  the  acamana  (sipping  of  waters  thrice)  and  go  outside 
with  the  permission  of  lord  Siva.  (The  god)  Canda  should 
be  located  on  a  seat  over  a  good  pedestal  in  the  north-eastern 
direction  outside  the  sacrificial  ground  and  worshipped  with 
the  brahma  mantras  preceded  by  contemplation,  and  rites  of  loca¬ 
tion  and  offering  of  oblations.  The  worship  using  the  brahma 
mantras  is  that  in  which  the  components  are  mentioned  at  first. 

Om ,  hum ,  phat  obeisance  to  Sadyojata.  Om ,  hum ,  phat  obei¬ 
sance  to  Vamadeva.  Om,  Vum ,  phat  obeisance  to  Aghora.  Om , 
vaum ,  phat  obeisance  to  Tatpurusa.  Om,  hum ,  phat  obeisance  to 
Isana. 

58-59.  After  having  conveyed  the  (merits  of)  repetition 
(to  the  lord)  and  appeased  him,  (the  lord)  should  be  addressed 
as  follows  preceded  by  bowing.  O  (lord  Canda)  !  Stay  (in  this 
temple)  as  long  as  the  lord  (Siva)  stays  here.  O(lord)  Candesa  ! 
Whatever  has  been  omitted  or  made  in  excess  by  me  out  of' 
ignorance,  make  it  complete  by  your  grace. 


300 


Agni  Puraiia 


60.  Lord  Canda  should  not  be  invoked  in  cases  where  a 
banalinga  (a  kind  of  stone  representing  lord  Siva)  or  a  linga  placed 
on  the  bana  stone  or  an  accomplished  linga  or  self-originated 
linga  or  images  of  all  gods  (are  established). 

61-66.  Even  in  the  case  of  rites  relating  to  the  presiding 
deity  of  the  sacrificial  ground  in  which  there  is  the  mental  atti¬ 
tude  of  union  with  the  lord,  the  preceptor  should  worship  (lord) 
Candesa,  and  the  yajamana  (the  person  for  whom  the  work  is 
done)  along  with  his  son  and  wife  and  should  bathe  himself 
with  (the  waters  of)  the  pitcher  already  placed.  The  yajamana 
should  also  worship  the  preceptor  as  (the  lord)  Mahesa  (Siva) 
and  make  gifts  of  ^arth,  gold  and  other  things  without  any  distinc¬ 
tion  whatever.  After  having  satisfied  befittingly  the  protectors 
of  images,  those  who  repeat  (the  mantras),  the  brahmins,  astro¬ 
logers  and  sculptors,  the  destitutes,  forlorns  and  others  should 
be  fed.  “O  lord  !  Ocean  of  compassion  !  Forgive  me  for  all 
the  sufferings  you  had  in  being  present  here.”  To  th z  yajamana 
who  has  spoken  thus,  the  preceptor  should  offer  with  his  own 
hands  the  merits  of  consecration  resplendent  like  the 
glowing  star  along  with  the  kuia ,  flowers  and  unbroken  rice. 

67.  After  having  then  saluted  (lord)  Paramesvara  (Siva) 
endowed  with  the  paSupata  {mantra),  (the  preceptor)  should 
address  the  attendant  gods  (of  the  lord)  with  offerings  for  their 
presence. 

68-71.  “You  should  stay  here  in  as  long  as  (the  lord)  Hara 
(Siva)  is  present  here.  Then  the  preceptor  should  take  posses¬ 
sion  of  the  sacrificial  shed  along  with  the  cloth  etc.  Then  the 
sculptor  (should  take  possession  of)  the  bathing  shed  along  with 
the  articles  (found  therein).  All  other  gods  should  be  estab¬ 
lished  with  the  repetition  of  the  mantras  as  given  in  the  agamas 1. 
(In  these  establishments  of  other  gods)  the  splitting  of  the  first 
letter  of  the  (respective)  names  (of  the  gods)  and  the  location 
of  fundamental  principles  pervading  these  (should  be  made). 
The  gods  commencing  with  Sadhya,  the  rivers,  herbs,  the  guar¬ 
dian  deities  of  the  ground,  kinnaras  (semi-divine  beings)  and 
others  should  lie  in  the  principle  of  earth.  In  some  places  the 
location  of  the  (goddesses)  Sarasvatl  and  Laksmi  (are)  in  the 
waters. 


1.  Texts  relating  to  worship  of  deities  in  the  temples. 


97.72-83 


301 


72.  The  presiding  deities  of  the  world  (should  be  estab¬ 
lished)  in  those  places  where  they  remain  firm.  The  place  of 
Brahma  is  the  three  fundamental  principles  which  extends  to 
the  important  cause  of  expansion  of  the  (primordial)  egg. 

73.  The  place  of  Hari  (Visnu)  is  the  triad  (of  worlds) 
which  has  the  subtle  principles  as  the  main.  The  places  for  the 
lord  of  dancing  (Natyesa,  a  form  of  Siva) ,  ganas  (attendant  gods), 
mothers  (goddesses),  Yaksesas  (semi-divine  beings)  and  (lord) 
Subrahmanya  (are  as  described  above). 

74.  The  place  of  Ganapati  is  that  upto  the  principle  of  pure 
knowledge.  (The  place)  of  splendours  emitted  by  (lord)  Siva 
and  (his  consort)  Siva  (Parvati)  extends  to  the  energy  in  the 
region  of  a  part  of  the  illusion. 

75-77.  In  the  case  of  manifested  images,  the  place  is  spoken 
as  upto  the  lord  (Siva).  Some  forms  like  the  tortoise  as  well  as 
the  five  things  such  as  the  gem  etc.  should  be  put  in  the  hole  of  the 
pedestal  except  in  the  case  of  (the  image  of)  the  five  brahman 
forms  (of  lord  Siva).  In  the  hole  divided  into  six  parts  one  part 
from  the  end  is  left  out  and  fixing  is  made  in  the  fifth  part.  If 
it  is  divided  into  eight  parts,  the  fixing  is  done  in  the  seventh 
part.  This  fixing  in  the  case  of  images  brings  forth  happiness. 

78-79.  Purification  is  done  by  meditation  when  the  images 
are  fixed.  In  the  case  of  plastered  and  painted  images  bathing, 
placing  on  a  pedestal,  placing  gems  (underneath),  opening  of 
the  eyes,  the  (placing  of)  mantras,  and  the  offer  of  seats  etc. 
(should  be  done)  mentally.  Worship  should  be  done  with  flow¬ 
ers  without  water  in  them  so  that  the  picture  may  not  get  spoilt. 

80-82.  “The  mode  (of  fixing)  the  movable  variety  of  linga 
is  described  now.”  (The  linga )  should  be  divided  into  five  or 
three  parts  separately  and  three  or  two  parts  (should  be  set 
apart  for  fixing).  On  account  of  the  different  fundamental  prin¬ 
ciples,  the  purification  of  the  pedestals  as  well  as  the  liiigas  made 
of  crystals  (should  be  done)  with  the  mantra  of  creation  as  laid 
down.  In  those  cases  there  is  no  need  to  place  the  brahmaiila 
and  the  gems  etc. 

83.  The  placing  of  the  image  on  the  pedestal  should  be  done 
mentally.  There  is  no  special  procedure  for  purification  in  the 
case  of  self-originated  lihgas  and  bdnaliiigas  {liiigas  made  of  a 
kind  of  stone). 


‘302 


Agni  Parana 


84.  (The  movable  lihgas)  should  be  bathed  with  (the 
recitation  of)  the  vedic  mantras .  So  also  the  (rite  of)  assigning 
an  oblation  should  be  done  (with  the  same  mantras ).  The 
(sacred)  rivers,  oceans  and  mountains  are  installed  as  before. 

85-86.  The  lifigas  made  of  earth  and  flours  are  known  as 
aihika  (relating  to  this  world)  and  ksata  (perishable).  After 
having  made  such  a  linga  pure,  one  should  worship  as  laid  down 
with  the  rites  of  initiation  etc.  Then  after  having  withdrawn  the 
mantras  into  himself  in  its  presence,  the  preceptor  should  cast 
that  linga  in  the  waters.  It  yields  one’s  desires  within  a  year.  The 
installation  of  (the  images  of)  Visnu  etc.  should  be  done  with 
separate  mantras . 


CHAPTER  NINETYEIGHT 
Mode  of  installation  of  the  image  of  goddess  Gauri 
The  Lord  said  : 

1.  Listen  !  I  shall  describe  the  mode  of  installation  together 
with  the  worship  (of  the  image)  of  (goddess)  Gauri  (consort  of 
lord  Siva).  The  sacrificial  shed  etc.  should  be  erected  and  (the 
image  of  the  goddess)  should  be  placed  therein. 

2.  O  Guha  (son  of  lord  Siva  and  Parvatl )!  After  having 

placed  the  goddess  on  the  bed,  the  mantras  of  the  images  (should 
be  located  therein),  and  the  principles  commencing  with  the 
knowledge  of  the  soul  and  ending  with  Siva  as  also  lord  Isana 
(Siva)  should  be  located. 

3.  After  having  located  the  goddess  of  absolute  energy, 
offered  oblations  and  recited  (the  mantras )  as  before,  the  pedestal 
of  the  form  of  the  energy  of  action  should  be  placed. 

4-5.  After  having  contemplated  it  as  pervading  the  same 
place  and  having  put  the  gems  etc.,  the  goddess  of  the  form  of 
supreme  energy  should  be  fixed  therein  with  her  own  mantras . 
The  energy  of  action  should  be  located  in  the  pedestal  and  the 
energy  of  knowledge  in  the  image  (of  the  goddess). 

6.  Then  the  pervading  energy  should  be  invoked  and  locat¬ 
ed  therein.  Then  the  mother  goddess  known  also  as  Siva  should 


99.1-2 


303 

also  be  invoked  and  worshipped.  Om,  obeisance  to  the  sustain¬ 
ing  energy.  Om ,  obeisance  to  the  tortoise  (supporting  the  uni¬ 
verse).  Om,  obeisance  to  (lord)  Skanda  (son  of  lord  Siva  and 
Parvatl ) .  Om,  hrim  obeisance  to  (lord)  Narayana  (Visnu). 
Om,  obeisance  to  sovereignty.  Om,  am  obeisance  to  the  under¬ 
cover.  Om,  obeisance  to  the  lotus  seat.  Then  (the  gods)  Kes'ava 
(Visnu)  and  others  should  be  worshipped.  Om,  hrim  obeisance  to 
the  pericarp.  One  should  worship  here  with  (the  mantras )  “Om, 
ksam  obeisance  to  the  lotus  eyes”.  Om,  ham  obeisance  to  nourish¬ 
ment,  hrim  (obeisance)  to  knowledge,  hrim  (obeisance)  to  action. 
Om,  obeisance  to  the  stalk  of  lotus.  Rum,  obeisance  to  virtue. 
Rum,  obeisance  to  knowledge.  Om,  obeisance  to  indifference  to 
the  world.  Om  obeisance  to  impiety.  Om,  Rum  obeisance  to  igno¬ 
rance.  Om  obeisance  to  attachment  to  the  world.  Om  obeisance 
to  indigence.  Hum,  obeisance  to  speech,  to  the  passionate,  kraim 
to  the  fiery.  Om,  hraum  obeisance  to  tranquility.  Then  hrum 
obeisance  to  the  elder  (goddess).  Om,  hrum,  raum,  kraum  (obei¬ 
sance)  to  (goddess)  of  fresh  energy,  gaum  to  the  seat  of  Gauri. 
Gaum  obeisance  to  the  form  of  Gauri.  Then  the  principal  mantra 
of  (goddess)Gaurl  is  told.  Om,  hrim,  sah,  maha  Gauri,  consort 
of  Rudra  (Siva),  oblations  !  Obeisance  to  (goddess)  Gauri. 
Gam,  hrum ,  hrim ,  Sivah,  gum ,  to  tuft,  to  armour.  Gom  to  eye  and 
gom  to  the  weapon,  om,  gaum  to  the  energy  of  wisdom,  om  Gum 
obeisance  to  the  energy  of  action.  (Gods)  Indra  and  others  (are 
worshipped)  in  the  east  and  other  directions.  Om,  sum  obeisance 
to  Subhaga  (favourite  wife).  Hrim  blja  lalita  then.  And  om, 
hrim  obeisance  to  KaminI  (an  affectionate  woman).  Om  hrum 
Kamasalim.  After  having  established  (goddess)  Gauri  with 
the  mantras ,  worshipping  (her)  and  repeating  (the  mantras ), 
one  may  get  everything. 


CHAPTER  NINETYNINE 
Mode  of  installation  of  the  image  of  the  sun-god. 

The  lord  said  : 

1-2.  I  shall  describe  (the  mode  of)  installation  of  the  sun- 
god.  The  sacrificial  shed  (and  other  things)  should  be  (made 


304 


Agni  Purana 

ready)  as  before.  Then  after  having  completed  the  rites  of  ablu¬ 
tion  etc.,  as  prescribed  before,  and  having  located  the  sun-god 
with  his  attendants  and  (goddess)  Vidya  in  the  seat  and  bed, 
(the  preceptor)  should  locate  the  three  (fundamental)  princi¬ 
ples  (of  soul,  knowledgc-and  bliss)  and  the  five  (principles  of) 
sky  etc.  along  with  chants. 

3.  After  having  done  the  purification  etc.  as  before  and  hav¬ 
ing  purified  the  pedestal  as  before,  (the  preceptor  should  locate 
the  five  principles  upto  their  own  place. 

4-5.  After  having  established  (the  pedestal)  then  along  with 
the  (goddess  of)  energy  (called)  SarvatomukhI  as  laid  down, 
the  preceptor  should  establish  (the  image  of)  the  sun  (god) 
as  laid  down  with  the  (utterance  of)  its  mantras  as  permeated 
with  the  energy  or  the  master.  The  name  should  be  borne  upto 
the  end  of  the  foot.  The  mantras  which  have  been  described 
already  should  be  seen  at  (the  time  of)  establishment  also. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED 


Riles  of  consecration  of  doors  of  a  temple 
The  Lord  said  : 


1 .  Then  I  shall  describe  the  mode  of  consecrating  the  doors 
(of  a  temple).  After  having  washed  the  door  frames  with  decoc¬ 
tions  of  herbs,  they  should  be  laid  on  the  bed. 


2-3.  The  three  fundamental  principles — the  soul  etc.  to¬ 
gether  with  their  lords  should  be  located  in  the  lower,  middle 
and  upper  parts.  After  having  offered  oblations,  and  repeated 
the  rupa  mantras,  the  vaslu  (the  presiding  spirit  of  the  place)  should 
be  woi  shipped  there  itself  with  the  mantra  of  Ananta  (an  impor¬ 
tant  serpent  chief).  After  having  placed  the  five  things  gem  etc., 
the  rite  of  appeasement  should  be  done. 


4  5.  Barley,  white  mustard,  kranta,  rddhi,  vrddhi,  mahatila, 
gomrt,  muslai  ,  rajendra,  mohani,  laksmand,  amrla,  rocana,  rug,  vaca, 
durva  and  patali  should  be  placed  on  the  threshold  under  the 
temple  in  their  natural  form  for  the  sake  of  protection  after  the 
recitation  of  (the  syllable)  om. 


100.6-9 


305 


6.  The  northern  door  should  be  consecrated  after  sprinkl¬ 
ing  water.  The  fundamental  principle  of  the  soul  should  be 
located  under  that  and  the  principle  of  knowledge  on  the  sides. 

7.  The  principle  of  bliss  (should  be  located)  in  the  region 
of  the  sky  as  permeating  the  entire  region.  Then  (lord)  Mahe- 
sanatha  (Siva)  should  be  installed  with  (the  recitation  of)  the 
principal  mantra. 

8.  The  turrets  etc.  resting  on  the  door  (should  be  located) 
with  their  respective  names  appended.  Oblation  to  fire  should 
be  made  hundred  times  or  half  the  number  of  times  or  twice  that 
or  according  to  one’s  ability. 

9.  One  hundred  oblations  should  be  made  with  the  mantra 
of  the  weapons  to  ward  off  defects  of  omission  etc.  After 
having  offered  oblations  for  the  quarters,  the  fees  etc.  should 
be  paid. 


?! 


f. 


r 


i 


i  .  -  - 


\1 


