




BRAHMA PURANA 

PART III 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS • DELHI 



FifU Ed^Uon: DtUu, 19^6 
RgfmnlDfihi, J9S7, !994, 2003 

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
Bungalow Road» Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 

Branches 

Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 
Ashok Rajpath» Pa(na 800 004 
h ApparSwamy Koil Slreet» Mylaporc, Madras 600 004 


PRINTED IN INDIA 

BY JA1NCNDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRIMINENDRA PRESS, A-45 NARAINA 
INDUSTRIAL AREA, PHASE 1, NEW DELHI 110028 AND PUBUSHED BY 
NARENDRA PRAKASH JAlN FOR HOTILAL BANARSIDASS, DELHI 110 007. 



CONTENTS 


PART III 


CHAPTERS 

106. Tortures in Hell 

107. The Goal of the Virtuous 

108. The Cycle of Worldly Existence 

109. Gift of food the best of all charitable acts 

110. On the performance of Sr&ddha and the 
associated legend 

111. The details of the Sraddha ritual 

112. The details of Sapindikarana Rite 

113. Conduct of the Good 

114. Assignment of duties to different castes and 
stages of life 

115. Characteristics of mixed castes 

116. Review of Virtue 

117. „ 

118. Dialogue between Maheivaia and the sages 

119. Goal of the devotees of Vi$9U 

120. The benefits of singing devotional songs of 
Vis^u while keeping awake at n^ht 

121. Manifestation of Maya 

122. Foretelling future 

123. 

124. Description of Annihilation 

125. The Natural Re^absm^tion 


547 

559 

566 

573 

575 

584 

588 

597 

612 

617 

622 

627 

632 

637 

641 

654 

662 

669 

677 

681 



CottUnts 


I2S. TheUtimate Re-absorption 

127. Practice of Yoga 

128. Review of Samkhya and Yoga 


129. 

ISO. 


tf 

If 


ft 

ff 


ft 

ft 


131. Review of injunctions regarding Yogic practice 

132. Review of the principles of Samkhya 

133. The perishable and the Imperishable 

134. A dialogue between Vasi^tha & Janaka 


135. 

136. 

137. 


ft 

ff 

ff 


ff 


»» 


138. In praise of the Purapa 


685 

691 

695 

701 

709 

714 

719 

729 

733 

737 

745 

749 

754 



CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIX* 


TtMiures in Hell 

The sages said : 

I. O ascetic, how do the sinners go to that city by the 
southern path? We wish to hear. Recount it in detail. 

Vydsa said : 

2-3. I shall recount that extremely terrible and awful door¬ 
way which is infested with many beasts of prey. It is resonant 
with the sounds of hundreds of vixens. It abounds in shrieking 
and howling sounds. It is impassable. It makes the hairs stand 
on their ends. It is surrounded by goblins, ghosts, evil spirits 
and other Rdkiasas. 

4. On seeing such a terrible doorway, those who have 
committed sins faint and lose consciousness suddenly. They 
begin to babble and prattle due to fear. 

5. Then the servants of Yama bind them with chains and 
nooses and drag them ruthlessly. They beat them with sticks 
and threaten them again and again. 

6. After regaining consciousness they go towards the 
southern door faltering at every step. They arc smeared with 
blood. 

*Thc chapter open3 with the account of tortures inflicted on titmen 
or pumshment for their sins. Q^itea terrible picture is drawn by the narra¬ 
tor to create horror with a view to check the growth of crime. The descrip^ 
tions of helb and the torments sufTered by the sinners arc motivated by this 
purpose. The PurSnas refer to a number of hells by their names which differ 
from Purina to Purina. The Brahma Purina mentions as many as forty«two 
hells while generally most of the Purlpas mention twenty-eight hells in all. 

See Devi Bhlgavata, Skanda and Vis^u Purina Part 2, ch.€. The Purlnas 
refer to twenty-eight hells. They are : (1) Tlnusra, (2) Andhatlmisra, (3) 
Raurava, (4) Mah&raurava, (5) Kumbhlplka, (6) KAlasutra, (7) Asipatra, 
^8} Sekaramukha, (9) Andhaklpa, (10) Krmibhojana, (11) TaptatnQrti, 
(12) SllxnaU, (13) Vajrakaotaka^, (14) VaitaraQl (15) POyodaka^ (16) 
Prlnarodha, (17) Viiasanam, (18) UlAbhakia, (19) ^rameyliana, (20) 
Avict, (21) Ayabpftnai (22) Kflraklrdama, (23) Raktobhak^at^a, (24) 
Scdaprota, (25) Dao^aiOka, (26) Vatarodba» (27) Parylvartanaka, & (28) 
Sadmukha. 



546 


Brahma Pur&^a 


7-9. The miserable ones move ahead along the path where 
there are sharp thorns. It is fiill of gravel. There are pebbles 
with keen edges resembling those of razors* In some places the 
path is full of mud. There arc unfathomable moats too. In 
some places there are tooth-like edges with sharp points like 
those of iron needles. In some places big trees have fallen down 
from the mountain ridges and blocked the path. In some places 
there are burning coals. 

10-16. In some places there are dangerous ditches and pits. 
In some places there are slippery lumps of clay; in some places 
there are red hot sand particles; there are sharp pointed pikes 
in some places. The cross-roads are covered with iron plates 
which are red-hot. In some places there are forest fires. Some 
places are covered with hot rocks. Some places are covered 
with snow* In some places there are sands so loose that the 
pedestrians slip down therein upto the neck. In some places 
there is defiled water. Other places are filled with the fire of 
burning husk. 

The pedestrians are tortured by the following, viz. lions, 
wolves, tigers, terrible biting insects, big leeches, huge pythons, 
awful flies and bees, massive poisonous snakes, wicked elephants 
that are intoxicated by their strength and kill, great bulls with 
sharp-pointed horns digging up the path, infuriated buffaloes 
with huge horns, that are mad and that devour persons, hideous 
and terrible Dakini witches, R^$asas and very terrible ail¬ 
ments. Harassed by these pedestrians, the dead go ahead along 
that path. 

17-21. They are struck by fierce gusts of wind mixed with 
huge columns of dust and striking by a great shower of pebbles. 
They find no place of shelter. As they go along, they are tom 
and shattered by the fall of thunderbolt. Everywhere they are 
cut and split by huge showers of arrows. 

They are burned by thunderbolts and terrific meteors fall¬ 
ing in multitudes as well as burning coal. A great shower of 
dust particles covers them up and they cry in agony. They are 
frightened by the repeated terrible sounds of clouds. They are 
pounded and smashed by showers of arrows. They are sprinkled 
and sprayed with solutions of acid as they go ahead. 



106.22-38 


549 


22. When the extremely roughs coarse and chill wind 
blows against them they shrink» shrivel and become frozen. 

23-24. Thus those men are led along the path without 
repast and rest. They do not get water to drink. The path is 
impassable. Thus the embodied souls, the deluded perpetrators 
of sinful crimes are forcibly 1^ along that path by the terrible 
emissaries of Varna whose behests they carry out. 

25*32. They are lonely and without friends or kinsmen. 
They are subject to other’s will and helpless. They bewail their 
lot and lament continuously. 

Those forbidden persons (?) turned into ghosts 6nd their 
throat, lips and palates parched up. They are emaciated and 
terribly afraid. They are burnt by the fire of hunger. Some are 
bound with fetters with their legs raised up. Even as they are 
parched up thus, they are dragged and pulled by the emissaries 
of Yama of manifest strength. 

These men with their faces down and others are also drag¬ 
ged by the servants of Yama. They are extremely miserable. 
Deprived of food and drink they beg for it saying ‘^Give, please 
give*’ in a voice choked with tears. 

On seeing various foodstuffs and beverages in plenty, these 
wretched persons afflicted by hunger and thirst request for the 
same with palms Joined in reverence. They see coined rice mixed 
with curds, milk and ghee; they observe various articles with 
sweet odour, they notice various kinds of fragrant and cool 
beverages. On seeing these, they begin to request for the same. 
Thereupon, the servants of Yama rebuke them with harsh words. 
Those terrible fellows with the tips of their eyes red with anger 
threaten the pedestrians and say 

Tama's servants said : 

33-38. You have not performed sacrifices at the proper 
time. You have not offered gifts to the brahmins. Moreover, 
when something was offered to brahmins you had actively pre¬ 
vented it. The time for the reaping of the fruits of that sin has 
arrived, O base men, your assets were not burnt by fire nor did 
they perish in water. They had not been seized by kings or rob¬ 
bers. Where are they now? Why were they not handed over to 
brahmins? These mountain-like heaps of cooked rice that are 



550 


Brahma 


seen here have been kept ready for those good men by whom 
charitable gifts of Saltvika type have been made. There are 
various good stuffs afid beverages—those that should be chewed 
and masticated) those that should be swallowed, those that should 
be licked and those that should be squeezed of their juice. You 
will not get these since nothing has been given by you before. 
Cooked rice is always brought and kept here for the sake of 
those persons by whom gifts are given in charity, Homas are 
performed, sacrificial ceremonies are celebrated and brahmins 
are worshipped. O hellish beings^ how can others* fruits of piety 
be given away by us to you? 

Vjfdsa said : 

39. On hearing the words ofYama’s servants they lose their 
taste therein. They are afflicted by hunger and thirst (all the 
more). Thereafter they are tortured by the servants of Yama 
with terrible weapons. 

40-41. The ruthless emissaries af Yama attack them from 
the rear with iron clubs, iron*rods, javelins, tomaras, pa^tiias, 
bhindipalas and parighas. They are bit and pierced by arrows, 
axes and maces. The sinners are attacked from the front by lions, 
tigers etc. and are eaten up by them. 

42. They do not get the opportunity of either getting in or 
coming out. They are in a highly wretched state. Those sinners 
are overwhelmed by their own actions. They lament piteously. 

43. After restraining and afflicting them much the sinners 
are taken by the servants of Yama to that place where Yama 
himself is present. 

44-45. Lord Yama is a virtuous soul. He causes piety. He 
restrains evil. The deceased persons who reach the city of the 
dead through the very difficult path are brought in front of 
Yama after duly informing hinL Then those evil doers see that 
terrible person. 

46-56. The eyes of the sinners are obstructed by sins. They 
had a wrong notion and idea of the soul before. Such sinners 
see Yama face to frice. His face appears terrible due to the 
curved fangs. His eyebrows are coorked as he sees furiously. His 
hain are lifted up. He has great moustache. His lower lip throbs. 
He has eighteen arms. He is infuriated. He resembles the blue 



106.57-62 


551 


mass of collyrium. All types of weapons shine in his hands. He 
is equipped with a dreadful rod. He rides on a great buffalo. 
His eyes resemble the blazing fire. He wears red garlands and 
garments. He is as lofly as the great cloud. His voice is as loud 
as the rumbling sound of the cloud at the time of dissolution. 
He appears to drink the great ocean» swallow the three worlds 
and vomit fire. Near him the sinners see Death whose lustre 
is like that of black fire. They see the Annihilator too who is 
terrible and who resembles the fire at the time of dissolution. 
Then there is the fierce Maham^I (great smallpox) and the 
terrible Kilaratri (Nightmare). There are also different ail¬ 
ments terrible and of different forms. They hold javelins, tri¬ 
dents, goads, nooses, discuses and swords. They are terrible 
with thunderbolt and rod of chastisement. They hold daggers, 
quivers and bow. The emissaries of Yama are innumerable. 
They are ruthless and they resemble collyrium in lustre. They 
have great prowess. They have all types of weapons lifted up in 
their hands. Yama is surrounded by these excessively terrible 
attendants. The worst sinners see Yama and the terrible Citra- 
gupta. Yama rebukes those sinners severely. Lord Citragupta 
enlightens them by words of virtue. 

Citragupta said : 

57-58. O perpetrators of evil deeds, O misappropriators of 
other men’s wealtht O outragers of other men’s wives, O sinners, 
arrogant due to beauty or prowess! What is done by you must 
be endured and experienced by yourselves. Then why were evil 
deeds committed by you all only to ruin your own souls? 

59. Now, when you are being afflicted by your own ac¬ 
tions, why do you repent and bewail? Experience your own 
miseries. It is not the fault of anyone else. 

60-61. O ye rulers of Earth who have come near me 1 You 
are of evil intentions, arrogant due to your strength you have 
come here for your own terrible deeds. O kings, of evil conduct, 
you are the causes of destruction of your subjects. Why was 
sinful action committed by you for your kingdom lasting for a 
short time? 

62. Due to your greed for the kingdom, due to delusion 



552 Br<tkmo Purina 

the subjects were unjustly and forcibly punished by you. O 
kings, now experience the result thereof. 

63. Where is your kingdom? Where is your wife, for whose 
sake sins have been committed by you? Leaving all that you 
are now stationed here in isolation ! 

64. We do not see all that strength of yours whereby the 
subjects have been destroyed. You are beii^ hit and pierced by 
the emissaries of Yama now. Now see, what have you gained? 

l^&sa said ; 

65-70. Thus they are rebuked by Yama too by means of 
various words. Repenting over their sinful deeds, the kings stay 
there silently. After telling them the activities of the kings 
Dharmaraja himself spoke thus in order to rectify their sins. 

Tama said: 

OCanda, O Mahicand^, take away these kings. Purify them 
of their sins gradually in the fires of hell. 

Vyisa said : 

Then the emissaries of Yama rise up quickly, catch hold of 
those kings by their feet and whirl them with force. They throw 
them up and seize them again. In accordance with the m^nitude 
of their sins they strike them against the rocky slab in the manner 
of the thunderbolt hitting a great tree. Shattered thus the 
embodied one discharges blood through the blood vessels. Then 
he becomes senseless and motionless too. 

71. Touched by the wind he slowly regains life. Then they 
throw the man into the ocean of hellish life. 

72. O leading brahmins, the emissaries intimate to Yama 
about the people engaged in sinful activities who are now 
extremely miserable. 

Tama's missariis said : 

73. O lord, at your behest, this man who is averse to 
virtue, who is much deluded and who is interested in sinful 
activities has been brought by us. 

74. This man is greedy. He if of evil conduct. He commits 



106.75-89 


553 


sins of various types, big and small. He is impure and he is 
engaged in violence. 

75. This man has had sexual intercourse with forbidden 
women. He is a wicked man. He is a person who stole away 
other men’s wealth. He has sold his daughter. He is a perjuror. 
He is ungrateful. He has deceived friends. 

76. Virtue and piety has always been censured by this 
proud follow. A sinful deed has been committed by this wicked 
man in the mortal world. 

77. Now, O lord of Devas, mention the modes of restrain¬ 
ing or blessing this fellow. Our lord must be competent to lay 
down action against him. We will be only hindering if we do 
anything ourselves. 

lydsa said : 

78-83. Af^er intimating this to the lord of Devas and plac¬ 
ing the sinner in front of him, the servants go to fetch other 
men from among hundreds and lakhs and crores of hellish 
beings. 

When the crime committed has been accepted, Yama gives 
instructions to his deadful servants to punish the sinners in 
accordance with the injunctions of Vasiftha and other law 
givers in regard to their restraints and punishment. 

The infuriated servants of Yama destroy sins. The sinners 
arc hit and pierced with goads, iron clubs, batons, hatchets, 
javelins, tomaras, swords and tridents also. 

The sinners, thousands, hundred, hundred thousands and 
crores of them, are afflicted by the servants of Yama through 
the faults and sins acquired by their actions. Now listen to the 
nature and forms of hells. They arc terrible. 

84-89. Listen to the names and extent of these hells as well 
as to the cause whereby men fall into them. 

The hell, well known as Mahavici, is flooded with blood. 
It is strewn over with adamantine thorns. It extends to ten 
thousand Yojanas. The man who kills cows is immersed into 
that bloody river. He is split and torn against the adamantine 
thorns. This terrible ordeal lasts for hundred thousand years. 

The terrible hell Kumbhipika extends to ten million Yoja¬ 
nas. It contains blazing sand full of copper jars and burning 



554 


Brahma 


coal. It is here that the slayer of a brahmin, one who illegally 
takes possession of lands and one who misappropriates amounts 
kept in trust—are hurled and burnt until the dissolution of all 
living beings. 

The hell Raurava is strewn with adamantine darts and shafts 
that blaze. It is sixty thousand Yojanas in length and extent. In 
that hell, men are pierced and tom by these blazing darts and 
shafts. 

90-97. Those who commit peijury are crushed and pounded 
in that hell like cane stumps in the machine. 

The hell named Maftju^a is known as one which consists of 
a blazing iron box. Men brought as prisoners are placed in it 
and burnt. 

The hell named Apratisfha is full of pus, urine and ordure. 
One who harasses a brahmin falls into it copsy turvy. 

Lakfaprajvalita is a terrible lubricous and slippery 
hell. O excellent brahmins, those who are addicted to wine are 
put into it and burnt. The hell Mahaprabha is a lofty one with 
blazing tridents. Those who create split between husbands and 
wives arc pierced with tridents in Aat hell. There is the hell 
Mah^ghora. There is an iron block there resembling a rocky slab. 
It is named Jayanti. The sinner who habitually approaches other 
men’s wives is struck with this iron block. 

The hell named Salmala contains blazing sturdy thorny sh¬ 
rubs. The woman who lives with many men has to embrace 
these thorny shrubs. She becomes wiserable thereby. 

The tongues of those who lie always, wounding the sensitive 
feelings of others are plucked by the servants of Yama, who are 
entrusted with this task. The eyes of those who view other men’s 
wives with lustful glances are pierced with darts by the servants 
of Yama. 

98-105 Those who outrage the modesty of their own moth¬ 
ers, sisters, daughters, anddaughters-in-Iaw, and those who kill 
women, children and old men undergo tortures in hell for the 
duration of the reign of fourteen Indras. 

The hell named Maharaurava is very terrible. Clusters of 
fiery flames spread everywhere. This hell extends to fourteen 
thousand Yojanas. 



106,106-113 


555 


The deluded man who commits arson on cities, fields, houses 
and villages is burnt in that hell for the period of a Kalpa, 

The hell that is well known as Tamisra extends to a hundred 
thousand Yojanas. It is very terrible. Swords and iron clubs 
named Patti las and Mudgaras always fall therein. Men who 
steal arc put therein and beaten by the servants of Yama. They 
are tortured with tridents, javelins, maces and swords for the 
period of three hundred Kalpas. 

The hell named Mah^tdmisra is twice as large as Tamisra. 
It is full of leeches and serpents. It is devoid of light and it yields 
great misery. Men guilty of matricide and fratricide and those 
who kill friends who have trusted them remain in this hell as 
long as the Earth lasts. They are pared and pierced. 

The hell named Asipatravana yields much misery. 

106-113. It extends to ten thousand Yojanas. It is infested 
with blazing swords. With these swords falling in hundreds, the 
person who is guilty of treachery to friends is cut, struck and 
pierced until the dissolution of all living beings. 

There is a hell named Karambhavaluka. It is in the shape 
of a well and it extends to ten thousand Yojanas. It is covered 
with blazing sands and coals and thorns. The person by whom 
people are continuously burnt with terrible means under false 
pretext is burnt or pierced for a hundred and ten thousand three 
hundred years in this hell. 

'rhe hell named Kakola is flooded with putrescent fluid in¬ 
fested with germs. Those wicked persons who partake of sweet 
food alone (without sharing it with others) are hurled into that 
hell. 

The hell named Kudmala is filled with faeces, urine and blood. 
Men, who do not perform the five Yajfias and other holy rites 
are cast into that hell. 

The hell Mahabhima (exceedingly terrible) is full of foul 
smell and is contanunated by flesh and blood. Base men who 
are interested in eating forbidden food fall into that hell. 

The hell Mahavaja (the great cavernous pit) is infested with 
worms and germs. It is filled with corpses too. The man who 
sells his daughter falls into it with face downwards. 

There is an exceedingly terrible hell named Tilapika where 



Brahma PurA^a 

persons who arc engaged in afflicting others are crushed and 
powdered like sesamum seeds. 

114-119. There is a hell named Tailapaka where boiling 
oil floods the ground. He who kills friends or those who seek 
refuge in him, is cooked there. 

There is a hell named Vajrakapota. It contains an admantine 
chain. Those who sell milk arc ruthlessly tortured‘there, 

There is a hell called Ninicchvasa. It is blindingly dark and 
devoid of wind. He who prevents a charitable gift from being 
given to a brahmin is rendered motionless and hurled into it. 

The hell named Aiigiropacaya is dazzling with burning coal. 
He who promises a gift to a brahmin but does not give it to him 
is burnt there. 

The hell named Mahipiiyi extends to a hundred thousand 
Yojanas. Those who always utter lies are hurled into it with 
faces downwards. 

The hell named Mahijv&la is very terrible and is very bright 
due to flames. A man who is intellectually inclined towards 
sins is burnt there for a long time. 

120-125. There is ahell named Krakaca. Men who indulge 
in sexual intercourse with forbidden women arc tortured there 
with saws and hatchets the edges of which are keen and adaman¬ 
tine. 

There is a hell named Gud^p^ka. It is full of boiling eddies 
of treacle and molasses. A man responsible for mixture in castes 
is thrown into it. He is burnt therein. 

The hell Ksuradhara is full of keen-edged razors. Men who 
illegally seize the lands of brahmins are cut off and pared there 
for the duration of a Kalpa. 

The hell called Ambarisa is kindled with the fire of dissolu¬ 
tion. He who steals gold is burnt there for a period of a hund¬ 
red crores of Kalpas. 

The hell known by the name Vajrakuthara is ^itated by 
thunderbolts. Sinners who cut off the umbrellas (upper bran¬ 
ches and leaves) of trees are tortured there. 

The hell called Parit&pa is rendered blazing by the fire of 
dissolution. A sinner who administers poison or steals honey 
and wine is cooked there. 



106.126-138 


557 


126-131. The hell Kalasutra is made of adamnatiae wires. 
Those who cut off and plunder the vegetable products of others 
wander there. They are cut, pierced and tortured therein. 

The hell named Ka$mala is full of phlegm and nasal mucus. 
The man who takes interest in wine and flesh is cast into that 
hell and kept there for the period of a Kalpa. 

The hell Ugragandha ts full of saliva» urine and faeces. 
Those who do not offer balls of rice unto the Pitfs are thrown 
into it. 

The hell named Durdhara is infested with leeches and scor¬ 
pions. A man who swallows bribes stays there for ten thousand 
years. 

There is the hell named V^ramahaplda. It is made of 
adamant. Those who take away other people’s wealthy food- 
grains or gold are thrown into this hell, burnt and tortured by 
the servants of Yama. 

132-136. Those thieves are cut off into bits by razors by 
the emissaries of Yama. 

Those deluded persons who kill living beings and eat them 
like crows and vultures are compelled to eat their own flesh by 
the servants of Yama. Those who take away the seat, bed and 
garments belonging to others and those who commit perjury are 
crushed like sugarcane. 

The hell Ayasa is remembered as constituted by iron. It 
blazes. Those who are ei^aged in imprisoning persons are 
thrown into it and are burnt. 

There is a hell named Atratistha. It contains putrescent 
urine and faeces. Those who censure Smrtis and the Vedas fall 
into it with faces downwards. 

There is a hell named Parilumpa. It is infested with vul¬ 
tures, dogs and wolves. Those who kill children and old people 
are scorched in this terrible hell. 

137. There is a hell named Karala. It is terrible and in¬ 
fested with dead bodies and ghosts. He who inflicts pain on a 
brahmin is eaten by Rak^asas in this hell 

138. The hell Vilepana is terrible with boiling melted lac. 
O excellent brahmins, those who imbibe wine and liquor are 
immersed therein and btunt. 



558 


Brahma Par/l^a 


139. There is a hell named.Mahapreta. It contains a blaz¬ 
ing trident of great height. Those who create split between hus¬ 
bands and wives are pierced with that trident. 

140. There is a hell Mahaghora where there is an iron 
block like a rocky slab. It blazes. A sinner who hovers round 
other men's wives is dragged with that iron block. 

141. There is a hell named ^mali where there is a blaz¬ 
ing sturdy thorny bush. A man engaged in the attack of vulne¬ 
rable points in others is compelled to embrace this thorny bush. 
He becomes miserable thereby. 

142. The tongues of those who take false pledges and speak 
words that wound the sensitive spots in others are plucked by 
the servants of Yama, who are the members of the assembly. 

143. Those who carnally approach the daughters-in-law 
are hurled over the heaps of burning coal and burnt by the ser¬ 
vants of Yama. 

144-147. Those deluded persons who spoil the holy rites^ 
or take away the abode and gold belonging to othersi are split 
and crushed by the emissaries of Yama by means of javelins and 
iron clubs. 

The evil-minded persons who steal even fruits and leaves of 
other men are burnt by the infuriated emissaries of Yama 
through grass fires. A blazing trident is fixed into the heart of 
that evil-minded man who is enamoured of other men’s wives 
and properties. The emissaries of Yama torture such men thus. 

Those who are averse to virtue mentally, verbally and physi- 
caUy undergo excessively terrible tortures in the world of Yama. 

Thus there are hundreds, thousands, millions and crores of 
hells. Men who commit sins go to them. 

148-132. By committing even the smallest act of inauspi¬ 
cious nature here a man utxdergoes tortures in the terrible hells 
in the world of Yama. Deluded men do not pay heed to the 
excellent speech made by Dharma. As a retort that say thus— 
^^Who has seen this with his own eyes ?*' 

Those who assiduously perform sinful deeds every day 
and night do not perform virtuous deeds e\’en orringly. They are 
deluded. Those who enjoy the fruits here itself and are averse 
to the other world are base men. They fall into terrible hells. 



107.1-9 


559 


A life in hell is very terrible. A residence in heaven yields 
happiness. It is by doing virtuous or vicious deeds that heaven 
or hell is attained by men. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVEN 

The Goal of the Virtuous 

The sagis said : 

1-2. Alas t the great and terrible misery in the path of 
Yama has been recounted by you. O excellent one, the terri¬ 
ble hells and the entrances to the abode of Yama have also 
been recounted. 

O brahman, is there any means whereby men can traverse 
the terrible path of Yama comfortably and go to Yama’s abode ? 
Please tell us. 

Vjdsa said : 

3-4. I shall recomit to you how righteous men travene 
that path along with their wives and sons. Men of righteous¬ 
ness, who are engaged in non-violence, who are interested in 
serving the preceptors and elders, and who worship Devas and 
brahmins travene that path from the mortal world. 

5. Served by heavenly damsels they go the city of Dharma- 
raja travelling by different divine aerial chariots rendered 
splendid by diamonds and gold. 

6. Those who devoutly give the brahmins gifts of various 
forms go comfortably along that great path. 

7-8. Those who offer with great devotion to the brahmins 
well consecrated cooked rice, particularly to the brahmins well 
versed in the Vedas, go to the city of Dhaimaraja by means of 
well adorned aerial chariots. They are assiduously served by 
excellent young women. 

9. Those who speak truth, those who are devoid of impuri¬ 
ties inwardly and outwardly, go to the abode of Yama by serial 
chariots. They resemble the immortal beings in lustre. 


560 


Brahma Pur& 




10*11. Those persons who are conversant with what is 
virtue and who make over sacred gifts of cows to good men 
who are poor and whose activities arc befitting the poor go to 
the glorious city of Dharmaraja by means of aerial chariots 
having divine lustre and col our» and embellished with jewels. 
The gifts must be made to them with the idea that they are 
representatives of Visnu. Such devotees are seized by groups 
of celestials. 

12*13. Those who give away a pair of sandals, an umb¬ 
rella, bed, seat, garments and ornaments, go to the divine city 
of Dharmaraja embellished and equipped with horses, chariots, 
elephants and golden or silver umbrellas. 

14-15. Those who with devotion and pure mind, give the 
worthy brahmins water, sweetened with treacle as well as cook¬ 
ed rice, go to the abode of Yama, on golden vehicles of various 
kinds. In accordance with their desire they are again and again 
served by excellent women. 

16-17. Those who give the brahmins well consecrated 
milk, ghee, curds, jaggery and honey assiduously and with 
purity, go to the abode of Yama by means of golden aerial 
chariots drawn by ruddy geese. They will be attended upon by 
Gandharvas with their instrumental music. 

18. Those who give fruits and fragrant flowers go to the 
city of Dharma sitting on aerial chariots drawn by swans. 

19-20. Those who are endowed with faith and give to the 
brahmins, well-versed in the Vedas, gingelly seeds, tiladhenu 
or ghftadhenu go by spotless vehicles resembling the lunar 
disc. Gandharvas sing songs in their praise in the city of Yama. 

21-22. Those who build tanks, wells, lakes, ponds, big 
oblong tanks, lotus ponds and cold water reservoirs (for the 
general public) go by means of vehicles that have the lustre of 
golden moon and that are resonant with divine bells. They 
have great lustre and they are fanned with handmade palmleaf 
fans. 

23-26. Those people who have temples and shrines 
wonderful features dazzling with jewels, charming and splendid 
go to the beautiful city of Dharmaraja full of various people 
by means of aerial chariots that have the speed of the wind. 
They are accompanied by the guardians of quarters. 



107 . 27-37 


561 


Those who give water that constitutes the main sustenance 
of all living beings go to the city of Yama comfortably without 
the (inconvenience of) thirstiness by means of aerial chariots of 
great velocity. 

Those who give charitable gifts of wooden sandals, vehicles, 
stools and seats to brahmins go along the path very comfort¬ 
ably. 

27. Keeping their feet on exccUeni golden pedestals embe¬ 
llished with jewels they travel in aerial chariots beautified by 
the presence of heavenly nymphs. 

28-29. Those men who grow wonderful parks with flowers 
and fruits thereby helping men go (along that great path) (after 
duly resting) in beautiful and cool shades of trees. They are 
well bedecked and attended upon by excellent women to the 
accompaniment of songs and instrumental music. 

30. Those who make gifts of gold, silver, corals or pearls, 
travel in aerial chariots shining like furnished gold. 

31-35. The donors of land gifts become brilliant. All their 
desires are fulfilled. They travel by means of extremely resonant 
aerial chariots shining like the rising sun. 

Those who give an embellished virgin as gift, as worthy of 
being given to a brahmin, go to the abode of Yama in aerial 
chariots and surrounded by celestial virgins. 

O excellent brahmins, those who are endowed with great 
devotion and give to the brahmins sweet scents, agallochum, 
camphor. Rowers and incense go to the abode of Dharma by 
means of wonderful vehicles. They arc well adorned. They emit 
sweet odour. The arc well dressed and they are lustrous. 

Those who make gifts of lamps go along the path by means 
of vehicles. They brighten the ten quarters. They arc brilliant 
with vehicles resembling the sun. They shine like fires. 

36. Those who make gifts of houses and residences go to 
the abode of Dharmaraja (making use of) rest houses embel¬ 
lished in gold and resemblii^ the risii^ sun. 

37, Those who make gifts of water pots, different types of 
vessels such as Ku 9 dll(^> Karaka etc. go (along the path) by 
means of lordly elephants. They are honoured by celestial 
damsels loo/ 



562 


Brahma Purh^a 


38. Those who give to brahmins oil for applying over the 
feet or on the head, those who give water for bath and drink 
unto the brahmins, go to the abode of Yama by riding on 
horses. 

39. Those who accord rest to brahmins who are travel- 
worn and emaciated go comfortably along the path in a vehicle 
drawn by ruddy geese. 

40. He who greets and honours a brahmin offering him 
welcome and befitting seat goes along that path comfortably. 
He becomes excessively delighted. 

41. He who salutes Hari saying ^^obeisance, O lord, favour¬ 
ably disposed to the brahmins’* and he who salutes a cow saying 

dispeller of sins*’, goes along that path comfortably. 

42. Those who take meals after the guests have taken and 
those who are devoid of arrogance and untruthfulness, go along 
that path by means of vehicles drawn by Sirasas (waterfowls). 

43. Those who take onlya morsel of food (each day) and 
are devoid of obstinacy and arrogance go to the abode of Yama 
comfortably by means of aerial chariots drawn by swans. 

44. Those who have conquered the sense-organs and 
sustain themselves on a single morsel of food once in four days, 
go to the city of Dharma in vehicles drawn by peacock. 

45. Those who regularly do virtuous deeds and take food 
once in three days go to that region by means of vehicles and 
divine chariots fitted with elephants. 

46. He who takes cooked rice once in six days, has conquer¬ 
ed the sense-organs, and always maintaim cleanliness, goes like 
the consort of SacI seated on an elephant. 

47. (He goes to) the beautiful city of Dharmaraja em¬ 
bellished with jewels, resonant with different notes and voices 
as well as the shouts of victory. 

48. Those who observe fasts for a forthnight go to the 
city of Dharmaraja in vehicles drawn by tigers and attended by 
Devas and Asuras. 

49. Those who have conquered their sense-organs and 
observe fasts for a month go to the abode of Yama in veiiicle^ 
as refulgent as the sun. 

50. He who is steadfast in the observances of religious vows 
and undertakes the long journey of death with concentration 



J07.5U62 


563 


goes to the abode of Yama in vehicles as lustrous as the sun. He 
is attended upon by Gandharvas. 

51. He who sanctifies the body with the inner sou! devoted 
to Vifnugoes to heaven in a chariot as refulgent as fire. 

52. He who is devoted to Narayana and enters fire goes 
to the abode of Yama in an aerial chariot refulgent like fire. 

53. He who remembers Vi$t>u and casts off his vital airs 
without resorting to destructive weapons goes to the city of 
Dharma by means of a vehicle that has the refulgence of the 
sun. 

54. He who enters water and casts off his vital airs, goes 
comfortably in a vehicle resembling the lunar disc. 

55. The devotee of VijQu who gives up his body to the 
vultures, goes to the abode of Yama in a splendid chariot made 
of gold. 

56. He who meets death in a battle ensuing upon his at* 
tempt to resist the abduction of a woman or capture of cows goes 
along shining like the sun and attended upon by celestial 
girls. 

57. Those devotees of Vi^ii who have conquered their 
sense-organs and undertake pilgrimages to holy centres go along 
that terrible path by comfortable vehicles. 

58. The excellent brahmins who worship, performing sacri¬ 
fices wherein monetary gifts are generously distributed go com¬ 
fortably by means of aerial chariots resembling molten gold. 

59. Those who refrmn from inflicting pain on others and 
those who sustain their servants, go comfortably in aerial 
chariots shining like gold. 

60-61. Those who forgive all living beings, those who 
enstirc freedom from fear to all living beings, those who arc 
devoid of anger and delusion, those who have restrained their 
sense-organs and those who have no pride, go to the city of 
Yama by means of an aerial chariot as refulgent as the full 
moon. They have great lustre and are served by Devas and 
Gandharvas. 

62, Those who worship Vi^iu, Brahma, the three-eyed 
lord Siva and the sun with the same emotional fervour go there 
immediately with a pure mind. 



564 


Brahma Purdi^a 


63. Those who are devoted to truths cleanliness and mercy 
and do not eat flesh go to the city of Dhannaraja comfortably. 

64. There is nothing sweeter than meat among the food- 
stuffs^ edibles etc. Hence no one shall eat meat» for happiness 
does not come from sweet things. 

65. Formerly, Brahma, the most excellent one among the 
knowers of the Vedas, said thus He who makes a gift of a 
thousand cows and he who abstains from eating meat—these 
two are on a par with each other* 

66. O brahmins, the benefit resulting from the avoidance 
of meat-eating is the same as that of the pilgrimage to all 
holy centres and of the performance of all Yajflas. 

67. Thus the virtuous ones engaged in charitable gifts and 
religious vows go comfortably in vehicles to the world of Yam a, 
the lord who is the son of the sun. 

68. On seeing those virtuous persons lord Yama will hon¬ 
our them by offering them greetings of welcome, seats and 
pleasing water for washing feet and materials of worship. 

69-71. “O great souls, you arc blessed. You have done 
what is conducive to the welfare of your souls; meritorious deeds 
have been done by you for the achievement of divine happiness. 
Get into this aerial chariot and go to heaven that is unparalleled 
and equipped with all desirable things. Rejoice with the divine 
ladies there. Enjoy all great pleasures there. At the end when 
merit gets exhausted and there stU! remain some evil deeds to be 
recompensed experience the result thereof herc’\ 

72 f Men who have magnificence of meritorious deeds find 
Dharmaraja very gentle, as though he is their father himself. 

73. Hence virtue should be resorted to always. It yields 
the benefit of salvation. From virtue result wealth, love and 
liberation. 

74. Virtue is our mother, father, and brother, Virtue is our 
lord and friend. Virtue is our master, friend, saviour, creator 
and nourtsher. 

75. From virtue one gets wealth; from wealth one realizes 
one’s desire and gets all sensual enjoyments. Virtue gives pros¬ 
perity, and the greatest goal ofheavenly pleasures results from 
virtue, 



107.76-88 


565 


76. O brahmins, if one resorts to it, virtue saves one from 
great dangers. One shall undoubtedly attain divinity and 
brahminhood by means of virtue. 

77. O excellent brahmins, when the previously accumulated 
demerit of men dwindles, their mind turns to virtue. 

78. If, after thousands of births in the other species one 
attains the rare birth as a human being, but still one does not 
practice virtue, he is a deceived persons indeed. 

79. The following should be known as persons devoid of 
virtue—Despicable persons, ugly ones, impoverished men, sick 
men, foolish ones and those who serve others. 

80. Virtue has been practised previously by the following 
persons :—those who live long, the heroic ones, scholars, those 
who have wealth, those who are free from ailments and those 
wtko are beautiful and handsome. 

81. O brahmins, those who are engaged in righteous acti¬ 
vities attain the highest state. Those who resort to sin and evil 
are bom as animals and low creatures. 

82. Yamaisnot competent to harm those men who arc 
devoted to lord Krs^a, the slayer of Naraka. He does not see 
them even in dreams. 

83. Those who always bow to the lord who has neither 
birth nor death and who slays Daityas and Danavas, do not see 
Yama. 

84. Those who have sought refine in Vif^u in their thoughts, 
words and deeds get the benefit of salvation. Yama is not able to 
harm them. 

85. O brahmins, those people who continuously bow to 
Nariyana, the lord of worlds, do not go anywhere else other 
than the abode of Vi^nu. 

86. By bowing to Vifnu, (the devotees) do not see 
those emissaries, Yama, that city or that path. They never see 
hells. 

87. Although those who are deluded may commit sins, still 
if they are devoted to Hari, the destroyer of sins, they do not go 
to hell. 

88. Those who remember the lord even roguishly^ go to the 
world of Vifnu, free from ailments, after casting off this mortal 
body. 



566 


Brahna Purfyia 


89. He who is excessively angry with Hari but sometimes 
does mention or recite his name shall obtain liberation after his 
defects perish just as the king of Cedi (Siiupala) did. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHT 
Thi ty€U of worldly existence 

Lomakarfona said : 

1. After hearing about the path of Yama and the tortures 
in the hells the excellent sages asked Vyasa again to clear their 
doubts. 

The sages said : 

2«3. Who is the ally of a man? (Can it be)his father, mother, 
son, preceptor, kinsmen and relatives or friends? People leave 
off their houses and the bodies like a log of wood or a lump of 
clay. They go to the other world. Who follows them ? 

\ygsa said : 

4-6. O brahmins, man is bom alone and alone he dies. 
Alone he surmounts difficulties and alone he faces adversities 
with no one to assist him. 

Father, mother, brother, son, preceptor, kinsmen, relatives 
and friends—all appear to cry for a short while. Then they 
leave off the dead body like a 1<^ of wood or a lump of clay. 
They turn their faces away. 

7. The body is left off by them. ButDharma alone follows 
him. Hence Dharma is the ally. It should always be resorted 
to by men. 

8. A creature equipped with Dhaima will attain the greatest 
heavenly goal. Similarly, one defiled by sins attains hell. 

9. Hence, the wise one should not be delighted by riches 
acquired through sins. Dharma alone has been described as the 
sole ally of men. 



loa 10*21 


567 


10. Even a well-read man commit^ unworthy acts on being 
deluded by covetousness for wealth of others. He may commit 
sins due to greed, delusion, sympathy or fear. 

11. Virtue, wealth and sensual pleasure are the three ob¬ 
jectives that a living man strives after. These three should be 
acquired after avoid ix^ sins. 

The sages said : 

12. The virtuous words of Your Holiness have been listened 
to. They are greatly conducive to our welfare. Now we are 
inclined to know about this assemblage (of parts) called body. 

13. The dead body of men becomes subtle. It passes into 
an unmanifest state. It reaches a state where it cannot be seen. 
How does Dharma follow it ? 

Vy&SQ said : 

14. The earth, wind, ether, water, fire, mind, intellect, 
soul—all these collectively see Dharma always. 

15. They are the witnesses unto all living beings by day or 
by night. AIoi^ with these, Dharma follows the individual 
soul. 

16. O excellent brahmins, the skin, bone, flesh, semen and 
blood all these leave off the body bereft of living soul. 

17. Then the individual soul equipped with Dharma attains 
happiness, both in this world and in the other world. What else 
shall I tell you ? 

The sages said : 

18. How Dharma follows (the soul) has been indicated by 
Your Holiness. We wish to know how semen begins to function. 

Vy&sasaid : 

19-21. The divine beings who are stationed in the body, 
(the elements) earth, wind, ether, water, fire, and mind, partake 
of the cooked rice (the food intake). O brahmins, when they 
are satiated, when the five elements with the mind as the sixth 
are contented, the great energy, the semen, is generated. It is 
the pure Atman. 



568 


Brahma Purity 


Thereafterj O brahmins, by the union of woman and man 
the foetus develops. Thus everything has been recounted to you« 
Wliat else do you wish to hear? 

Thi sages said : 

22. O revered one, you have told how an embryo is form¬ 
ed. Please let us know how a person comes into being. 

Vydsa said : 

23. When the soul is enveloped by the elements he comes 
into being. When the elements separate he dies. 

24. When he is enveloped by the elements, he comes to 
life again. Then the presiding deities of the elements watch his 
good and evil deeds. What else do you desire to hear ? 

The sages said : 

25. Bereft of skin, bones, fiesh and devoid of the elements 
too where does the being station himself and experience joys 
and sorrows ? 

Vydsa said : 

26. The being enveloped by his Karmic Samsk^as enters 
the womb of the mother when he is bom in course of time. 

27. (After death) the being undergoes suffering and tor¬ 
ture at the hands of the attendants of Yama. He enters the 
cycle of births and deaths, attended by misery and distress. 

28. O Brahmaoas, the jiva enjoys the fruits of action 
which he performed during his worldly existence. 

29. If his actions are pious throughout his existence, he will 
enjoy pleasures as a man during the course of his life. 

30. But, if while doing acts of piety, he takes recourse to 
impious deeds, he gets joys and sorrows succeeding each other. 

31. If his activities are absolutely unholy, he goes to 
Yama’s region (Hell) where he suffers misery and distress and 
therefore, is bom in lower species as a beast etc. 

32. Now, listen, in which particular life or existence, a 
deluded person is bom and for what action of his. 

33. It is recorded in the holy treatises^Sastras and Vedas 



108.34-50 


569 


—that the dreadful world ofYamais interlinked with the world 
of mortals. 

34. O Brahmatias, there are spots as holy as celestial 
regions. These are progressive and specially designed for the 
mortals. 

35. O Brahmanas, in the world of Yama which equals the 
world of Brahma, the jiva, bound by the fast chains of his 
actions reaps the fruits thereof. 

36. I shall, now, tell you about those actions which cause 
a person to assume an ugly form. 

37. A Brahmana though well versed in the Vedas is born 
as an ass if he receives charity from a fallen penon. 

38. O Brahmanas, he is bom and lives as an ass for full 
fiAeen years. Dying as an ass he becomes a bull and in the 
form of a bull he lives for seven yean. 

39. Dying as a bull, he is born a Brahma-R&ksasa and in 
the form of a Brahma^Rak^asa he lives for three months. Then 
he is bom a Brahmana. 

40. If he officiates at a sacrifice performed by alow perion, 
he is born a worm and in the form of a worm he lives for fifteen 
years. 

41-43. Released from the form ofworm he is born an ass 
and in the form of an ass he lives for five years; in the form of 
a cock for five years; in the form of a jackal for five years; then 
he is born in the form of man; then a jealous person; then an 
animal. On betraying confidence he is born a fish. 

44. He remains in that form for eight years. Then he is 
born a fawn, O Brahmanas. He remains in that form for four 
months. Then he is born a goat* 

45. He remains in that form for one year. Then he is born 
as an insect, then a man. 

46-47. He who steals unwittingly rice, sesamum seeds, 
bean» gram, linseed, chick-pea, Icgumimus seed, kidney bean, 
wheat, lamp or other corns, is born a rat, O noble sages. 

48-50. Afterwards, he is bom as a boar. As soon as born, 
he dies of some disease. Then, afterwards, he becomes a dog, 
then a dumb person, then again a dog for five years. Then in 
the form of man he copulates with another man^s wife and is 



570 Brahma Purdj^ 

born as a wolf, then a dog, a jackal, a vulture, a snake or a 
tiger, a heron, a crane. 

51. He who out of delusion, with a guilty mind, seduces 
the wife of his brother is born a male cuckoo and remains in 
that form for a year. 

52-54. Overpowered by the sac-instinct, if he seduces the 
wife of his friend or preceptor or the ruling monarch he is born 
as a boar and remains in that form for five years, as a crane for 
ten years, as an ant for three months, as a worm for a month. 
Having passed through these births he is born as a worm. He 
lives in that form for fourteen years. 

55*57. When his sins are exhausted be is born as aman. If 
a person consents to wed his daughter to a youth but then 
changes his mind and intends to give her to another person, if 
a person, being stupid, acts contrarily to the wishes of his pre¬ 
ceptor, he enters three wombs. O Brahmanas, first of all, he is 
born as a dog, then a carnivorous demon, then an ass. Passing 
through these forms, he is born a Brkhmana. 

58*60. If a pupil, prone to sinful deeds, sexually approaches 
the wife of his preceptor, not actually but mentally, he is born, 
by the perversity of his sinful mind, a dog. He lives in that 
form for full one year. Then after death be is born in the form 
of a Brahmapa. 

61. If a preceptor kills his pupil who is no less than his 
son without any rhyme or reason, but just at hi's own sweet 
will, he is born in the form of a ferocious animal. 

62-63. Being a son if he disregards his parents, O Brahma¬ 
nas, he is bora an ass. As an ass he lives for ten years. Then he 
is born a thief and lives as a thief for a year. 

64. He with whom his parents are angry or he who is not 
attentive to the instructions of his teacher is born an ass. 

65. As an ass he lives for two years. As a cat he lives for 
seven months, then be is bom as a man. 

66-67. If he reproaches his parents he is born as a female 
parrot. If he strikes his parents he is born as a porcupine. He 
lives in that form for three years. Then he is bom as a snake. 
He lives in that form for six months. Then be is born as a man. 

68. If he joins the king's sertice but is in league, he, the 



108.69-93 


571 


deluded one is bom a monkey. He remains a monkey for ten 
years, as a rat for seven years, as a dog for six months. Then 
he is born a man. 

69-70. He who mis-appropriates a deposit goes to hell. 
Then passing through a scries of births and deaths he is born 
a worm. 

71-72. O Brahmanas, he remains for fifteen years in that 
form. When the consequences of his evil deeds arc exhausted 
he is born a man. If otherwise he is born a worm. O best of 
brahmanas, he lives in that form for thirteen years. 

73. W'hcn he is released from the results of his unrighteous 

deeds he is born a man. 

74-77. If he fails to perform rites due to manes or deities, 
if he does not offer libations of water or balls of rice to the 
deities, he is born a crow. He remains in that form for one 
hundred years, then he becomes a cock. He is born as a snake 
and remains in that form for a month. He is born a man. He 
\/ho disregards his elderly brother, who is no less respectable 
than his own father, is bom a heron. He lives in that form for 
ten years. Then he is bom a cakora bird, then a man, If a Sudra 
approaches a Brahmin woman he is born a worm. 

78-80. Then he is bom a boar. As soon as bom he dies of 
a disease, O Brahmins. As a result of his sinful acts he becomes 
a dog. When the fruits of his acts arc exhausted he becomes a 
man. He generates progcncy from the womb of a woman. 
Then he is born a rat. O Brahmanas, as an ungrateful wretch 

he goes to the region of Yama. 

81. He is bound by the cruel agents of Yama who beat 
him with canes, clubs, tridents, fire-sticks. 

82. He suffers from various sorts of pains in hell, coming 
in contact with leaves as sharp as swords, or in hell full of hot 
sands, or in hell where the wicked are tortured with sharp 

swords. 

83-84. He undergoes sufferings and is born as a worm. He 
remains in that form for fifteen years. He then enters the womb 
but dies there. 

85-93. He then undergoes a series of births and deaths. He 
then becomes an animal. Then he undergoes suffering for a 
number of years. Then he is born as a tortoise. By stealing curd 



572 


Brahma Puribta 


he is born a crane or a frog; by stealing unroasted fish he is 
bom a honey-bee. By stealing fruits, radish or sweet bread he 
is bom an ant« By stealing corn he becomes a rat. By stealing 
rice boiled in milk he is bom a partridge; by stealing powdered 
bread he is bom an owl. By stealing water he is born a crow; by 
stealing copper he is born a pigeon. By stealing silver vessel he 
is bom a dove. By stealing gold vessel he is bom a worm. By 
stealing silk garment he is bom an osprey. By stealing a silken 
upper garment he is born a parrot. By stealing a lower silken 
garment he is born a swan. 

94-98. By stealing a cotton cloth he is born a heron. By 
stealing a woollen or a silken cloth he becomes a hare or a pea¬ 
cock. By stealing red cloth he is born a cakora. By stealing 
paints and perfumes, a greedy person is bom a musk-deer. He 
lives in that form for fifteen years. After exhausting the fruits 
of his wicked actions he is bom a man. By stealing milk he is 
born a crane. By stealing oil he is born a tail^payl (?) (the 
drinker of oil). 

99-104. If a person with weapon kills one with no weapons 
for monetary gains or out of enmity he is born an ass. He lives 
in that form for two years; he is then killed by weapons. He is 
bom in the form of a deer and suffers from grief. He lives in 
that form for a year and is then killed. He then becomes a fish 
and is caught in the net. He is then born a tiger. In the form 
of a tiger he lives for ten years. Then after death, when the 
fruits of his karmas are exhausted and he is awakened intellec ¬ 
tually he is bom as a man. 

105-114. By stealing musical instruments he is born hairy. 
By stealing food inclusive of oil-cake he is born a brown hairy 
rat biting people. By stealing butter he is bom a crow or a low- 
class person. By stealing the flesh of a fish, he is bom a crow. 
By stealing salt he is born a cricket. By denying or misappro¬ 
priating deposit he is born a fish. Born a man, he commits sin 
after sin. Then after his death he is born an animal. He does 
not know what Dharma is nor about the right means of know- 
le<^e. He who commits sin after sin and discards vows is 
struck by grief and suffers from disease or is reduced to a naked 
state or degraded to a low caste. This is said of those who are of 
sinful character, greedy and passionate. 



108.115-109.6 


573 


Those who do not commit sins since their very birth remain 
free from disease and are possessed of beauty and wealth. 

115. Even women in association with the sinful men incur 
sins. 

116-118. O best of Brahmins, this in brief I have narrated to 
you. In another context, you will hear more. O revered ones, 
thus I have heard from the mouth of Brahma when he was 
addressing the assembly of gods and sages. I put questions too, 
now and then. I too have narrated to you in entirety. O best of 
sages, you hear the same and be interested in Dharma. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINE 

Gift of food the btst of dl charitable acts 
The sages said : 

1. O lord, you have addressed us on the course of adharxna. 
now let us know about the course of dharma too. 

2. Having done sinful deeds, how do people meet with 
disaster ? By what righteous activities do the people attain 
prosperity ? 

Vjtdsa said : 

3. Having performed evil actions, having come under the 
control of adharma, with his mind averse to dharma, man goes 
to hell. 

4. He who out of ignorance performs acts of impiety but 
repents afterwards with his mind concentrated on his self never 
comes to grief. 

5. Inasmuch as his mind dislikes performing evil deeds, in 
the same proportion is his body released from the control of 
adharma. 

6. O Brahmat^as, if he confesses his guilt before the pious 
Br&hmanas, he is soon released from the guilt accruing from 
adharma.* 



374 Brahma 

7. Inasmuch as he confesses his guilt with his mind concen* 
trated on himself he is released from that guilt. 

8. As a snake casts off his slough, so he casts off guilt in* 
cur red previously. By giving charitable gifts of all sorts and with 
his mind concentrated on his self he attains heaven. 

9-10. O best of Brahmins, I shall let you know about the 
gift by which a man attains piety, though he may have done 
evil deeds. 

11. Of all the gifts, the gift of food is the best. The upright 
honest person who is eager to follow the path of piety should 
give all sorts of food in gift. Food is the breath of people. A 
person is born of food. 

12. People abide in food. Food is praised therefore. Gods, 
sages and manes praise food itself. 

13-17. By gifting food man goes to heaven. The best sort 
of food earned by just means should be given as gift to the 
educated Brahmanas with mind full of joy. 

If he invites ten Brahmanas to eat at his house, though he 
feeds them once, with his joyous mind, he is never born as an 
animal. If he feeds ten thousand Brahma^, even a hard 
sinner, ever engaged in sinful acts is released from impiety. If a 
person proficient in the Vedas collects food by begging and 
gives it to a Brahma^ who is engaged in studies, he obtains 
happiness. 

18-27. If a K;atriya spares the wealth of Brahmanas, 
guards the same as the rules of law permit, if he gives his 
surplus money and food to the people of three castes who have 
learnt Vedas, he is purified and released from the fruits of his 
evil deeds. 

By giving to the twice-bom a portion of the produce of 
cultivated field, after it has been taxed at the rate of produc¬ 
tion, a Vaijya is released from sins. 

By giving to the twice-bom, the food earned at the risk of 
life, by emaciating his body, a Sudra is released from sin. 

He who earns food by the sweat of his brow, and that too 
without violating the right of others, never succumbs to trou¬ 
ble. If a person joyously gives food earned by him lawfully to 
a person welNversed in the Vedas, he is released from sin. By 



109.28-110.1 


575 


giving food which invigorates men, the person becomes invigo¬ 
rated. If he follows the path of the good he is released from 
sins. 

The path is made by those who know the benefits of gifts. 
The wise go by that path. There too, those who gift food. There 
too those who follow tradition. 

In all circumstances, the food that is earned by right means 
has eternal value. By giving such food a man attains the high¬ 
est position. He is blessed with the fulfilment of all desires. 
Thus the person attended by merit is released from all sorts of 
sins. 

28. Thus the food not attained by unlawful activities 
should be gifted. He should, first of all, pour oflerings of food 
into the fire with the formula Pranaya Svahi and then eat 
food. 

29-30. A man should not render the day unproductive but 
should make gift of food. If a person feeds a hundred of top¬ 
most knowers of Veda, Nyaya, Dharma and Itih&sa, he does 
not go to a dreadful hell nor does he enter transmigration. 

31. He attains the fulfilment of all desires and then after 
death he gets happiness. Thus performing good actions and 
devoid of fever he enjoys life. He is blessed with beauty, fame 
and wealth. 

I have thus told you the fruit of gifting food as well as the 
basis of all these dhaimas and donations. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TEN 

On the performance of SrSddha and ike associated legend 
The sages said: 

1 • How should sons and relatives perform Sraddha for the 
manes who have departed to the other world and who are 
abiding in Che region assigned to them according to their 
actions 7 



576 


Brahma Purdna 


Vydsa said : 

2. I bow to Varahaj lord of the universe, creator of the 
people. Listen, I shall tell you all about Sraddha, as was 
recorded afore. 

3. In days of yore, the lord uplifted the manes who were 
drowned in the waters ofKoka river, by performing Sraddha 
for their sake, O best ofBrahmarias. 

The sages said : 

4^5. Why were the fathers drowned in the waters of the 
Koki river ? How were they uplifted by Varaha, O best of 
Br&hmins in that holy place of pilgrimage that grants fruits in 
the form of worldly enjoyment as well as release ? 

We wish to hear about it. Tell us all in detail. It is a matter 
of great curiosity to us all. 

Vydsa said : 

6. In the Intervening period ofTreti and Dv&para Yugas, 
the diverse human beings—the manes, stood in the company of 
Viivedevas at the top of Meru mountain. 

7. Once, they were sitting (as usual) there (at the top of 
Meru). A beautiful divine girl bom of Soma appeared before 
them with hands joined in reverence. Among the manes who 
had assembled there, those shining with refulgence spoke to 
her. 

The piirs said\ 

8. O auspicious lady ! Who arc You? Who is your lord ? 
Please tell us. 

Vy&sa said: 

9. She said to the refulgent manes. I am Kali, born of 
the Moon, You are my lords whom I can choose, if you so 
desire. 

10. My first name is Crja; second is Svadba; third is 
Koki. This latter name you have given me this very day. 

11. The manes, the divine beings heard her speak this. 
They fixed their eyes on her face but wem not satisfied. 



110.12-26 


577 


12. When Vilvedevas saw that they were gazing at the 
face of the girl and had fallen off Yoga^ they left their oxnpany 
and went to heaven. 

13. When the holy god Moon did not see his daughter 
Crja, he was upset. Where she may have gone ? He thought to 
himself. 

14. The Soma came to know the facts. He knew that 
manes were after her» that they were sexually inclined to her 
and had accepted her by the virtue of their penance. 

15. The Moon was overcome with anger. He cursed the 
manes, ^Tall off from your Yoga, be confounded*’. 

16-17. Since you passionately desired my daughter, with¬ 
out my permission ; since, she of her own accord accepted you 
as her husbands, disregardful of me, her father; since she trans¬ 
gressed the dictates of Dharma and acted independently, let 
her become a river by name Koka and resort to Mount 
Himalaya. 

18. Thus cursed by the Moon, the manes, the divine men 
were deprived of yoga and fell off at Mount Himavat. 

19-20. Orja fell off at the top of Himavat mountain, at the 
confluence of seven rivers. She was called Koka. By flowing 
along with hundreds of rivers over the peak of the mountain 
she came to be known as Sarit. 

21-23. Then those manes fallen off yoga assumed the forms 
of Brahmins. They saw the river Koka of cool water but they 
could not recognize her as the beautiful-eyed girl they once 
loved. Then the mount Himalaya observed that the manes who 
were cursed to assume the form of human belies were very 
hungry. 

He arranged for their sustenance, the cow ‘Badari’ yield¬ 
ing sweet honey, milk, the sweet waters of Koka river and the 
berry fruit. 

24. O best of sages, the manes living on chat sustenance 
passed ten thousand years as it were a single day. 

25. Thus, when the world was deprived of the services of 
manes and of Svadha, the asuras, yitudhinas and r^^asas be¬ 
came powerful. 

26. Then the asuras, yitudhinas and rik^asas found that 
the manes were estranged from Devas and they fell upon them. 



578 


Brahma Purd^a 


27. The Brahmins stationed on the bank ofKoka (who were 
formerly manes] saw asuras and yatudhinas pouncing upon them. 
The infuriated brahmins caught hold of a lofVy slab. 

28. The fast^flowing Koki saw them holding the slab. She 
concealed the manes in her waters which overflowed Himalaya. 

29*30. The asuras, yatudhanas and raksasas found that they 
were concealed. They ascended the peak Vibhitaka and disap* 
peared. Meanwhile the manes felt hungry and thirsty. Distressed 
by hunger and thirst, the manes sang songs of praise in favour 
ofVi?nu. 

Thi manes said : 

31. Victory to Govinda : O the abode of the universe, O 
Ke^ava, be pleased to favour us with Victory. O Janardana of 
pure and spotless impression, uplift us from the cavity of waters. 

32. O lord, VifQu, O Boar, Vaiku^fha, Nir&yana, lord of 
lords, lotus-navelled, worthy of prabe, we are afraid of asuras, of 
dreadful sight; protect us, O lord, and grant us victory. 

33. O Vi^u, the younger brother of lord Indra, O Yogin, 
the slayer of Madhu and Kad$abha demons, O Endless, of steady 
disposition, Vasudeva, holdii^ bow, discus, lotus and conch in 
your hands, O lord of Devas, protect us from r&k^sas. 

34. O Sambhu, you are the father of universe, the dreadful 
asuras are unable to assail you. Hence, we come to your sheU 
ter. 

35. As soon as your name b uttered, the asuras fly away, 
the evil-doers dbappear, the enemies are destroyed. Dharma, 
Truth etc. attain eminence. 

Vjfdsa said: 

36. Thus prabed by the manes, the lord in the divine form 
of a boar, the sustainer of thb Earth saw the manes, merged in 
the waters ofKoka carrying slabs over their head. 

37. Lord Viwu, in the form of a boar, saw the manes hid¬ 
den in the waters ofKoka out of fear fit>m the asuras and thou¬ 
ght of uptifring them to the Earth. 

38. The boar cast away the slab with the tip of his tusks 
and brought up the manes to the Earth. 



110 . 39-54 


579 


39-40. The manes, when they came into contact with the 
boar (incarnate of Vi^u) looked splendid. Made fearless by 
Vi^riu, they stood at Kokamukha. Having uplifted them thus 
the lord poured libation of water for the manes at Lohargala. 

41-46. Then, with a handful of Kuia grass produced from 
his hair and the Sesamum seed grown up from his sweat, Keiava 
made a fire-brand. He made a torch as bright as the Ughc of the 
sun and a vessel. He stood under a wish-fuliilling, holy, tall, 
banyan tree. He took up the sacred waters of Gahga and the 
juices of sacrificial herbs from the lofty peak of the mountain. 
He brought honey and milk and fragrant substances such as odor¬ 
ous flowers, perfumes and sweet-smelling unguents; he brought 
forth a cow from the lake and the gems from the ocean; he scrat¬ 
ched the earth with his tusk and sprinkled and smeared the same 
with drops of perspiration, scratching it up again, encircling 
it with the fire-brand and sprinkling it up again and again. He 
took up a handful of Kuia grass, with their tips pointed to the 
east while their ends were stuck into the pores of hair. He then 
invited the sages and asked their permission, saying shall like 
to pour libations of water to the manes**. 

47. They said; ^*You may” The Lord then invoked allgods 
and on their arrival gave them seats. 

48. Adorned with discus and mace, he planned out their 
protection with the unbroken rice. 

49. The unbroken rice and the barley seeds are born of 
parts of all-gods. These ward off calamities from all sites; they 
are produced for the sake of protection. 

50. In this mobile and immobile world, none among Devas, 
Danavas, Daityas, Yak|as and Raksasas is able to effect their 
destruction. 

51-52. As they are not broken by any, they are called ak^- 
tas. Of yore, they were appointed by Visnu to guard the people. 
The Boar incarnate of Vifnu, propitiated all of them with the 
holy Kuia grass, incense and barley seeds. He poured libation 
of water to all go^s and then said : 

53. invoke the manes, both divine and mortals.’* When 
they agreed to be invoked, he invoked them. 

54. He held a handful of sacred grass together with the 



580 Brahma Purd^ 

sesamum. He put his left hand on the left knee and gave each 
of them a seat. 

33. Similarly, he put his right hand on the right knee and 
the sacred thread on the right side and invited them with the 
mantra 'ayantu nah’. 

56. Varaha recited the mantra ‘apahata* and warded off 
the asuras from the site. He then transferred his sacred thread 
to the right. Uttering the names and gotras he invoked the pitfS 
by the personal and gotra names. 

37. Varaha then uttered the mantras ^apyayayantu’ and 
'samvatsaraih’ and poured arghya to the Pitfs who as a result of 
the curse had assumed the form of Brahmins. 

58-59. He uttered the mantra *yas ti^thatyamrti vaco yanmi* 
and poured water mixed with Kuia, incense, sesamum seed and 
flovk^rs to the Pitfs while he wore the sacred thread on the right 
tide. He repeated the mantra *yanm&' and p>oured water for the 
grand-father. Again, he repeated the mantra Myanma* and pour¬ 
ed water for the great-grandfather. 

60. Varaha (incarnate of Vi$ou) rq>eated the same proce¬ 
dure for the maternal grandfather. He propitiated them again 
with incense etc. and offered them perfume with devotion. 

€1-63. The lord of the universe uttered the mantra ^Aditya 
Vasavo Kudrah’ He then held food and butter mixed with sesa¬ 
mum seeds and Kusa grass and put the same in the vessels as 
previously. He then asked the permission of the sages, ‘^shall I 
make offering in the fire’’. Permitted by them he made three 
offerings to the fire. One to Soma, one to Fire and one to Yama. 
He repeated the seven mantras of the Yajurveda beginning with 
*‘Yc mamaka'^ 

64. The residue of the sacrificial material he offered thrice 
to each of the Pitrs, by their personal and gotra names. 

65. The residue of the material such as he put into 

the vessel wherein the rice-ball was kept. Then, he gave the tasty 
food together with the rice boiled in milk. 

66-70. He served Brahmanas with ftesh and tasty meals, 
with less vagetables, abundance of fruits, with six flavours, nectar¬ 
like. He put the same anointed with butter and sprinkled with 
honey in the rice-ball vessel meant for Pitf s, preceded by Devas, 



110.71-82 


581 


by reciting the mantra b^inning with Prthm and the three 
rcas iMadhuvata rtayate etc. When the Brahmanas started eatings 
he recited the five mantras beginning with the mantra *yat te\ 
He also recited the three Madhu and three Suparna portions 
from the Bfhadaranyaka, the mantra of solar deity and Purufa 
Siikta. When the Brahmins had finished meals he asked them> 
‘*arc you satiated”. 

71. On their reply, ”we are satiated”, he gave them water 
for breaking silence. He gave the rice-ball vessel to Chayi. 

72. He divided food into two parts. Then each into three 
parts. Variha scratched the Earth and covered the same with 
the particles ofKufa grass. 

73-74. He turned the tips of Kuia grass to the South, put 
the seat (^ana) on theKuia grass, for, the Pitfs like to sit upon 
Ku fa grass uprooted from the very root and on which the sesa- 
mum seeds have been spread. He placed incense, Bowers etc. 
over the rice-ball and recited (he formula ^Prthiv! dadhi* and 
gave the rice-balls to grandfather, great-grandfather, maternal 
grandfather. 

75-76. The residue of the rice-ball material was offered to 
the paternal ancestor tn the fourth, fifth and sixth degree. He 
repeated the formula ‘Etad Vali Pitar’ with the mind full of 
devotion and offered fresh white pieces of cloth to the Brahmins. 
He gave them incense and Bowers and circumambulated them. 

77-79. He should sip water from the palm of his hand, also 
make the Brahmin pitrs sip at first and then Devas too. He should 
sprinkle the place with water mixed with flowers and rice. He 
should give water mixed with the sesamiun seeds to the Pitn at 
first, then to Devas mixed with rice. He should recite ‘ak^yyam 
nab,* fr>r the pitrs and ‘Priyatam’ to Devas. 

80. Having pleased them thus, he should move aside, repeat 
aghamarfana thrice. Withdrawii^ himself, he should repeat 
‘yan me*. 

81-82. O Pitrs, give us residence abounding in grains and 
riches. Repeating the formula *Urjam ^^ahanti•, he put the rice 
ball, the ring of Kuia grass and rest of the material consisting 
of cold milk, honey ar^ sesamum seeds into the Arghya vessel* 
Then he bflfered libation of water to the Pitfs. 



582 


Brahma Pur^a 


83*84. When the officiating Brahmanas had said: ^^Welfare 
to you’^ and they felt gratified on the Amavasya day, Varaha 
incarnate of Vifnu gave silver-fec {rajata^dakfii^) to each of the 
Brahmaiias. When he asked the rite completed*’, they said, 
**Yes'\ When he asked “may you be pleased”, they said: “We 
are already pleased”. When he asked them about the remaining 
food, they said, “You may partake of it together with your 
people”. 

85«86. He caught hold of the Brahmanas by lus hand and 
led them outside the ritual altar repeating the formula ‘Vaje* 
Vaje’. 

87. Then sprinkling the massive heap of hair with the 
collected waters of holy rivers he begged blessings ofBrahmatias. 

88«91. The Brahmanas blessed him, saying, “May our pat¬ 
rons prosper in riches”. Varaha circumambulated them; touch¬ 
ing their feet with reverence; he offered them seats to take rest. 
He held the middle ball of rice and gave the same to Chaya. 
That beautiful lady took hold of the rice-ball and said : “May 
the Pitps enter the womb”. She then bowed at the feet of 
the Brahmanas. Then the boar-incarnate Vifnu thought of lett¬ 
ing the Pitrs go. 

92-94. Then Koka and Pitrs spoke out their self-interest. 
We were formerly stationed in heaven when we were cursed by 
the Moon, “You fall off from Yoga and descend to the nether 
region”, We were falling to the nether regions but arc saved by 
you. Being fallen off from Yoga, we were deserted by the guar¬ 
dians. Now, may all-gods protect us ^ain. 

95. O lord Boar, by your favour, we shall go to heaven. 
Let Soma (the Moon-god), the observer of Yoga be our guar¬ 
dian. 

96-99. May Soma, the source of Yoga, protect us, Through 
Yoga may we live in heaven as well as on earth. May some of 
us attain prosperity within a month, in the firmament. This 
*Oija known by her popular name Svadha endowed with Yoga, 
be the mother of Yoga (roaming) in the middle region. 

Thus requested by the manes lord Vaiiha addressed the 
river Koki and the manes : Whatever you have asked will in¬ 
deed be accomplished. 



llOaOO-115 583 

100. Let Yama be your deity; Moon the preceptor; Fire the 
priest. 

101. Let Fire, wind and Sun be your abodes; Brahma, 
Vi^u and Rudra be your guardians. 

102. Let Aditiyas, Vasus and Rudras be your forms. Let 
Yo^$, embodying Yoga make yoga as your basis and observe 
vows. 

103-105. Let you move at will bestowing fruits of actions 
upon the people at large. Let you elevate by the strength of 
your Yoga both the mobile and immobile stationed in heaven, 
hell and earth. 

This Orjk, daughter of the Moon, fashioned by flesh and 
wine will be bom as the daughter of Dak^a, Svadha by name. 
This good-faced lady will be your wife. 

106. Known as Koka, she will resort to Himilaya. She will 
be as efficacious as the crores of holy places all together. 

107. I shall stay in Koka from this very day, smashing sins 
of all mankind. The sight of lord Boar is holy. His worship 
grants worldly pleasures and salvation. 

108. Drinking the water of Koka destroys sins. The plunge 
yields merit. The fast leads to heaven. 

109. Charity gives imperishable fruit; it destroys sins of 
birth, death and old age. 

110-111. In the dark fortnight of the month of Magha, on 
the Amavasa night, when there is no moon, one should come to 
Kokamukha and stay there for five nights. During the time, the 
person who offers libation of water to the pitfs will reap the 
fruit of the same. There is no doubt in this. I shall be staying 
here on the eleventh and twelfth tithi always. 

112. He who fasts here reaps the fruit thereof as mentioned 
previously. O blessed ones, you arc now free to go to your places 
at your will. 

113, “I too shall rest here”, saying this lord Boar disappear¬ 
ed. When lord Boar had gone, the pitrs took leave of Koka and 
went away. 

114-115. Koki took up her abode on that mountain. Ch&yi, 
the Earth conceived by lord Boar generated asura Naraka known 
also hy the name Bhauma. Lord him Prkgjyotifa, 

the capital city ofK&marupa. 



584 


Brahma Purh^ 


116. Thus have I described at Kokimukha the Boar incar¬ 
nate ofVi^nu who confen boons to the people. On hearing this 
description^ a man is purified from dirt, becomes devoid of sins^ 
and obtains the merit of performing Aivamedha Sacrifice. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND ELEVEN 
The details of the irtlddha ritual 

The sages said : 

1-2. O sage, tell us further in detail about the ritual of 
Sraddha. O ascetic, let us know how it was performed, at what 
place, when and by whom ? 

Vydsa said : 

O great sages, hear in detail about the ritual of Sr&ddha, 
how it was performed, where, when, in which nak^atras or tithis, 
in what region and by whom ? 

3. Brahmapas and Vailyas should perform Sraddha each 
following one’s own dharma and reciting mantras. 

4. Women and Madras too should perform the same under 
the direction of Br^mapas. But there should be no recitation 
of mantras or ritual of sacrifice. 

5-13. Sraddha should be performed in holy places as Pu|* 
kara, or meritorious spots, peaks ofmount^s or sacred regions, 
in streams of holy waters, rivers or lakes, in the confluence of 
rivers or in any one of seven oceans or in one’s own home puri¬ 
fied or smeared with cowdung or spots enjoined by the Sastras, 
at the root of holy trees or in lakes wOTthy of sacrifice. One 
should hold Sraddha at such places. Sraddha is prohibited 
among Kiratas, Kalingas, Konkapas, Ki^mis, Da&arpas, Kumar- 
yas, Tangalas, Krathas, on the northern bank ofSindhu, on the 
southern bank of Narmadi, to the east of KLaratoyi. 6raddha 
should be performed every month on the Amavasa day. In 
Rk^agocarya (?) Sr4ddha should be performed on Purpam&d 
for the manes as well as Devas, Nitya Sraddha is performed for 



111 . 14-42 


585 


gods. There are other Sraddhas performed for the attainment 
of desired objects. O Brahmins, they should be done every year. 
Vrddhi Sr^dha should be performed on such occasions. 

14. When the sun enters zodiac Kanya, there are fifteen 
days exclusively meant for Sraddha. 

15-33. Pratipat is for riches, Dvitlyafor progeny, Tftlya for 
sons, Caturthi for destroying foes, PaAcamI for obtaining wealth, 
SaptamI for lordship, A^faini for intcUigence, Navami for con¬ 
jugal relations, Daiaml for fulfilling desire, Ekadaii for acquiring 
Vedic knowledge, Dvadaii for victory, Trayodafi for increase 
in progeny, animals, intellect, independence, prosperity, longe¬ 
vity and supremacy, Caturdaii for those who died in youth or 
who were killed by weapons and Amavasya for fulfilling all 
desires including the attainment of heaven as an abode for 
eternity. O best of sages, I shall now tel) you the material for 
food which pleases the pitrs and the period of propitiation. 

If in the 8raddha, the sacrificial food is offered to the Brah¬ 
mins, the PitfS are fed for a month. If the flesh of a fish is offer¬ 
ed, the Grandfathers are fed for two months. If a goat's flesh is 
offered, the Pitfs are fed for three months. If a hare’s fiesh is 
offered, the Pitfs are fed for four months. If a bird's flesh is 
offered, the Pitr^ are fed for five months. If a hog's flesh is 
offered, the Pitfs are fed for six months. If a ram's flesh is offered 
the Pitrs are fed for seven months. If black deer's fiesh is offered 
the Pitfs arc fed for eight months. If niru deer's nine months; 
if cow’s for ten months; if ram’s for eleven months. If cow’s 
milk or rice cooked in cow’s milk for one year; if of rhinoceros 
or of rohita fish for endless period of time. So also food for pro¬ 
geny. He who offers Sraddha at Gaya with sesamum seeds mixed 
with sugar, honey or honey-mixture obtains endless stock of 
corn. The Pitfs say : “May there be bom one in our hneage 
who may give us oblation of water, rice cooked in milk and 
mixed with honey, during the rainy season, in Maghanak^atra.'’ 
One should wish for many sons. If even one of them goes to 
Gaya or marries a girl of eight years or releases a blue-coloured 
bull or worships Pitrs in Krttikiu he obtains heaven. 

34-42. One who performs Sraddha in RohinI gets progeny, 
in Saumya splendour, in Ardra valour, in Punarvasu fields for 
cultivation, in Pu^ya eternal wealth, in Aile^ longevity, in 


586 


Brahma Purina 


M^ha progeny and prosperity, in Phalgunl, good fortune, in 
Uttara-s progeny and benevolence, in Hasta proficiency in Sas- 
tras, in Citra beauty, splendour and progeny. Sraddha performed 
in Svati bestows gains in merchandise, in Viiakha gives sons, in 
Anuradha sovereignty, injyesfha Lordship, in Mula good health, 
in A^dha attainment of fame, especially in Uttaras, in Sravai>a 
fulfilment of auspicious desires, in Dhani^tha abundant riches, 
in Abhijit the knowledge of the Vedas, in Varu^a efficiency in 
medicine, in Prauf (hapadi skill in goats and sheep, in Uttara 
Bhadrapada cows, in Revati a vessel of brass, in Alvin! horses, 
in Bharani longevity. The performer of Sraddha obtains the 
result in these nak^atras. O Brahmins, thus are the Sriddhas 
performed for the attainment of particular desire. 

43. When the sun has entered the Kanya Zodiac, the per¬ 
former of Sraddha in that period obtains whatever desire he 
has in his mind. Nandimukha should be performed during the 
same period. It should be done in Purnima as stated in Varaha 
Purina. 

44-47. When the sun entered the Kanya zodiac, the Pitn 
mobile or immobile, living in heaven^ earth or firmament, wish 
for the rice-ball. The first sixteen days of the month, when the 
sun has entered Kanya, one should propitiate Pitts with the 
libation of water, vegetable and roots. He gets the rare fruit 
desirable from the performance of Rajasuya and Asvamedha 
sacrifices. 

48-56. If a person propitiates PitfSi when the sun has enter¬ 
ed Uttari or Hasta, he goes to heaven. 

When the sun enters Hasta aster ism, Pitrs leave home at 
the command of Yama. They remain out till the sun enters the 
sign Scorpion of the Zodiac. 

When the sun has passed through Scorpion, Pit^s return to 
their abode, together with Devas, sobbing and cursing their 
progeny. 

In ffie ages of Manu, the Sraddha should be performed in 
A^fakas and Anva^fakas. It should start serially beginning with 
the Mother. During the period of eclipse, in Vyatlpata at the 
confluence of the Sun and the Moon, on the day of natal star, 
during the oppression caused by the planet, he should perform 
Parva^a Sr&ddha. 



111 . 57-65 


587 


During the interval between the solstices, on the day of 
equinox or at the sun's equinoctial passage, Sraddha should be 
performed without offering the rice-ball. On the third of Vaiia- 
kha, on the ninth of Karttika, on the Purnima day, the Sraddha 
should be performed as at the equinoctial passage. 

On the thirteenth day of the Bhadrapada month, on the 
amavasya day of the month of Magha, one should do Sraddha 
by means of rice cooked with milk in the manner it is performed 
at the winter solstice. 

57. When a Brahmin versed in the Vedas and the fire- 
rituals comes to the house, he alone should be considered as 
worthy of Sr&ddha. 

58. When the material for Sraddha approved by the experts 
is available, he should perform Parvaoa Sraddha with the help 
of Brahmins well versed in the Sraddha. 

59. One should celebrate the annivenary of one’s departed 
parents, also of the uncle and elder brother if they died sonless. 

60-62. In Parvana offerings should begin with Devas. In 
Ekoddisfa no offerings should be made to Devas. In Sraddha 
pertaining to Devas, he should offer two Piii<fas, in tliat pertain¬ 
ing toPitrs three or a single pin^a should be offered to each. 
Similarly, in regard to maternal grandfather. 

When a person is dead his son should offer rice-ball with 
libation of water with Kusa grass and sesamum seeds outside 
the village on the bank of a river or a pond. On the third day, 
they should collect the bones. 

63. If the deceased is a Brahman, the purification of re¬ 
latives of the same gotra is effected after ten days, if Kfatriya, 
after twelve days, if Vaisya after fifteen days, if Sudra after a 
month. 

64. After purification, they enjoin Ekoddi^ta, on the twelfth 
day, or after the expiry of a month or at the end uf three fort¬ 
nights. 

65. O Brahmins, Sr^dha should be performed every month, 
for a year. Then he should perform sapiodtbar^^ rite ^ter a 
year. When that is done, he should perform Pirvana. The de¬ 
ceased then change their states as Preta to thatofPitrt* 



588 


Brafma Purd^ 


66. PitfS are twofold : murta and amurta. Nudimukhas are 
amurta and Parvanas arc murta. Pretas receive Ekoddifta^ Pitfs 
receive Parva^a Sraddha. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWELVE 
The detaiU of Sapiniikarat^a Rite 

The sages said : 

1-3. How should the rite of Sapindlkara^a for the dead be 
performed, O best of Brahmins, according to theSastras? O best 
of speakers, let us know all. 

Vydsa said : 

O Brahmins, listen, I shall tell you how the rite of Sapindi* 
karana should be j>crfonned. Herein no offering is made toDcvas. 
A single libation of water is enjoined. One ring ofKula grass is 
sanctioned. No offering in the fire. No invocation. A single 
brahmin is fed in that rite. 

4. This rite is to be performed, every month, for a year, 
Listen attentively. I shall tell you what is additional to this rite. 

5. There should be four vessels, three for the Pitrs, mixed 
with sesamum seeds, incense and water and one for the Preta. 

6. In each of the three vessels some water from the Preta 
patra should be poured. In each case, he should recite the mantra 
*‘Ye sarnana^*. 

7. In regard to women also, the same procedure should be 
adopted. But sapindikarana need not be performed if the deceas¬ 
ed woman had no sons. 

8. In case of wcunen sapindikarana should be done every 
year by men. The rite should be performed on their death anni¬ 
versary, as enjoined by the sastras. 

9. If there be no son, this should be performed by the rela¬ 
tives connected by the offering of rice balls. If there be no such 
relatives, brothers should do the same. If there be no brothers, 
grandsons or great-grandsons should perform the sacrifice. 



112.10*32 


589 


10. The dai^hter's son should perfonn the rite for his 
maternal grand-father. They arc named dvyamu$yayai>a (for 
they are linked to both : the maternal grandfather and the 
paternal grandfather). 

11. They should propitiate both, by Nitya and Naimittika 
Sraddhas. If none of the aforesaid is there, the women should 
perform the rite but without mantras. 

12-13. If there are no women too, the king should get the 
funeral rite done by his distant relatives or in their absence, he 
should do the same by himself, because the king himself is the 
relative of all. O Brahmins, thus 1 have told you Nitya and 
Naimittika rites. 

14. I shall now tell you other sorts of Nitya and Naimittika 
rites. Daria Sriddha, performed on the Amavasa day is Naimit* 
tika, for it is linked with the diminution of the moon. 

15-32. Nitya is the fixed period of time, when one should 
do this rite as prescribed by Dharma. 

Af^er the rite of Sapindlkararia has been performed, the 
great-grandfather of the father forfeits the right of receiving 
pi^d^* He can receive only the residue of the pind&* This 
fourth one loses importance in relationship. Hence his share in 
the rice-ball is reduced to residue. 

The trio, father, grandfather, great-grandfather, are the 
rightful recepients of the rice-ball. Further, the three beginning 
from the graridfather of the grandfather are the sharers in the 
residue of the rice-ball. The seventh is the performer of sacrifice 
himself. Thus the relationship link is sevenfold as told by the 
sages. 

After yajamana (the performer of the ritual) the Pitfs cease 
to have the right of partaking piod^^ Even distant relatives 
whether placed in hell or born in low species or transformed 
into evil spirits, imps, devils and the like become well fed with 
the leavings of food scattered on the groimd. O Brahmins, the 
water dropped from the edge of bathing costume quenches the 
thirst and allays the hunger of those who arc transformed into 
trees. Those who have reached divinity receive nourishment 
from the fr^rant drops of water fallen from the rice-ball. Simi¬ 
larly, those who are bom into animal creation receive nourish¬ 
ment by drinking drops of water &llen from the rice-balls. 



590 


Brahma Purd^ 


The infants who are dead before teethings the youths who arc 
forbidden to perform ritual and have died without any rite get 
their hunger and thirst allayed by the water used in wiping 
floors or used in cleansing the feet of brahmanas. 

Whatever particles of water or leavings of food, pure or im¬ 
pure, arc dropped by yajam^a or the brahmins, by that the 
departed spirits, whatever form of existence they have attained, 
get nourishment, fly the Sraddha performed with the riches ac¬ 
quired through unfair means, the low class of people—candelas 
etc. get nourishment. Thus, one should perform Sraddha for 
the departed in the family, even by means of vegetables (in the 
absence of other materials) as prescribed in the i^&stras. By the 
drops of water and bits of food, dropped from the rice-ball, 
he alleviates thirst and hunger, not only of his close relatives 
but also of distant kins born in diflerent species of existence. 

33-35. By performing Sraddha no one comes to grief in the 
family. Only those of the Brahmins should be invited at Sr add ha 
who possess self-control, who arc accustomed to agnihotra, who 
are pure in deeds, who are learned in Sastras as well as in the 
Vedas. The invitee should be the one who thrice kindles the 
Naciketa Are, who knows the three verses beginning with Madhu 
or Suparna, who knows six ancillaries of the Veda, who is 
devoted to his parents, who has sisters, knows Saman. The per¬ 
former ofSraddha should feed the priest who officiates at the 
sacrifice, the family priest, the spiritual guide or a teacher. 

36-37. The following should be invited to dine at Sraddha 
—the maicmal uncle, father-in-law, brother-in-law, a relative, 
the family teacher or the teacher in society, one who is expert 
in interpreting the Puranas, not greedy or with a little greed, 
not accustomed to charity. Brahmins with these qualities should 
be invited at Sriddha. They are purifiers of society. 

38. The list of Brahmins as mentioned above should be 
invited a day before Sr&ddha. Whether the rite pertains to gods 
or manes, he should appoint them accordingly. 

39-41. The invitees to the Sraddha should control their 
sense-oceans. If the person performs Sriddha and then after 
taking meals copulates with woman, his deceased ancestors 
sleep in that semen for a month. Again, if a person copulates 
with the woman, then partakes Sriddha, hU deceased ances- 



112.42-68 


591 


ters live upon semen and urine for that month. Hence, the 
performer of Sraddha should invite the Brahma^as on the day 
of Sraddha or a day before. Those who are addicted to women 
should be excluded. 

42*43. If, on the day of Sraddha, the yatis of controlled 
mind come for alms, he of controlled mind should propitiate 
them with respectful homage and then feed them liberally. 

44-68. The pitrs have yoga as their base. The yogis should 
always be honoured therefore. 

If among a thousand brahmanas, there be a single yogi, he 
alone can take Yajamana and the invitees across the ocean of 
existence, as a boat in the river. 

Those versed in the Vedic lore recite a verse in the context, 
which was formerly sung in the assembly of king Aila. 

‘‘When in our family will there be bom a son to one of the 
members who will give us rice-balls, when the yo^s have taken 
meals? We desire in Gaya, a rice-ball, flesh of rhinoceros, obla¬ 
tion, K&la-iaka (?) butter mixed with sesamum seed or Kfsara 
(?) pertaining to Viivadcva and Samya. We desire the flesh of 
rhinoceros from the feet to the head.*’ 

One should give Sraddha on Trayodail in Magha according 
to the prescription of the ^astras in the winter solstice. He 
should offer rice cooked in milk as also honey and butter. There¬ 
fore, the performer should propitiate the Pitn, out of devotion. 
Satiated with Sraddha, the Pitrs wiil fulfil all desires of the per¬ 
former, bring freedom from sins and set Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, 
constellations, planets and stars to favourable desposition. 

Propitiated with Sraddha, the Pitrs confer longevity, pro¬ 
geny, riches, knowledge, happiness, sovereignty, heaven and 
Moksa. 

Pitfs prefer uoon to forenoon. When the brahma^ reach 
the house, he should welcome them, honour them. While he is 
wearing kuia-ring, he should give them water to sip and ask 
them to sit comfortably on the seat. He should perform Sraddha 
accordingly to iSastraic injunctions and let the best of Brahma- 
^as feed on sweet dishes and then dismiss them with sweet 
words and obeisance devotedly. He should follow them to the 
gate and return with their permission. Then he should perform 
his daily routine and then let his guests take meals. Some pandits 



592 


Brahma Pmftiia 


hold that the rites to the Pitfs should be performed everyday* 
'Not so to the pitrs’, say others. Other rites should be performed 
as usual. He should take meals in the company of his family. 
Thus he should perform iraddha attentivelyi as prescribed in 
the Dharmaiastra, in the manner as it pleases the learned 
Brahmins. 

Now I shall tell you the sort of people who are forbidden to 
receive Sr^ddha: one who deceives friend, one who has diseased 
nails, one who is impotent, one who is suffering from tuberculo* 
sis, one who is suffering from jaundice, one who lives by trade, 
one who has dark'^brown teeth, bald*headed, one-eyed, blind, 
deaf, dull, dumb, lame, cripple, eunuch, of bad skin, deformed, 
leper, red-eved, hump-backed, pigmy, ugly, indolent, friendU 
enemy, of bad family, a herdsman, despised, one who has 
married before his elder brother, an unmarried elder brother 
whose younger brother is married, the son of Parivedanik^, 
son of a woman whose husband has married before his elder 
brother, the husband of a iudra woman and their son too, one 
who has ofHciated at the religious ceremony of the Sudra^s son, 
one who has not married, one who has married the widow of his 
brother, one who is salaried teacher or one who is taught by a 
salaried teacher, one who partakes of food from the family in 
pollution, one who is a hunter, one who trades in soma, one 
who is under curse, a thief, a fallen one, a usurer, a rogue, back¬ 
biter, one who has abandoned the injunctions of Veda, one dis¬ 
inclined to charity, sacrifice, the king’s priest, the king’s ser¬ 
vant, devoid of knowledge, jealous, ill-disposed to the elderly 
people, one who is short-tempered, harsh, stupid, an attendant 
upon an idol, an astronomer, maker of an arrow or the wearer 
of a foreign dress, one who officiates as a priest at the sacrifice 
of a person who is not worthy of bolding sacrifice. Those of low 
class should not be invited to Sr^dha since they defile the 
social circle. 

69* Where the wicked are honoured and the good are dis¬ 
honoured, the terrible divine punishment befalls the people 
immediately. 

70* Contrary to the ^traic injunction and in violation of 
the customary laws, if the performer of Sriddha feeds a stu¬ 
pid penon, he comes to grief* 



112-7N84 


593 


If the holder ofSr&ddha excludes the family brahmin and 
feeds another he is consumed by the fire of his grief. 

71. If the holder of $raddha does not gift clothes, his per* 
formance of Yajfia and penance, and his knowledge of Veda are 
of no avail. Therefore, he should give clothes especially on the 
occasion of Sraddha. 

72. He who gives fresh garments, made of silk or cotton, 
obtains the fulfilment of his desire. 

73*74. Just as a calf finds out its mother from among 
several cows, similarly, the PitfS obtain food from the bellies of 
the brahmins who have partaken of ^raddha meals. 

75. The Pitrs receive food offered to the brahmins who 
utter the Pitf’s name, gotra and mantras. Although they are not 
present in physical forms they get satiated thereby. 

76. Homage to Deities, Pitn ^nd Yogins. Homage to 
Svaha, Svadhi for ever and for ever. 

77. At the beginning and the end of Sraddha, he should 
repeat the same thrice. At the offering of the rice*ball as well, 
he should recite this attentively. 

78. Pitrs come very soon. Rak$asas fly away. They get 
propitiated in the three worlds. This mantra, indeed uplifts 
them. 

79. He should gift a fresh thread, silken, hempen, cotton, 
one made of patrorpa, patka or kauieya. Variety should be 
avoided. 

80. The wise man should avoid that piece of cloth which 
in spite of its being full has no fringe. The aforesaid variety 
does not propitiate the Pitrs and the donor too comes to grief. 

81. Pinda is not to be given to one who is alive. He should 
be fed with the meals of his taste according to S&straic in¬ 
junctions. 

82. With faith and devotion he should offer ball into the 
fire. If he is in need of progeny, he should give it to his wife, 
reciting the mantras. 

83. If he wishes for brilliant splendour, he should offer it 
to the cows. If he wishes for wisdom, fame and renown he 
should offer the same into waters. 

84. If he wishes for longevity be should give it to the 



Brahma Puritia 

crows. If he wishes for cWldrcn, or a house, he should give it to 
the cocks. 

85. Again, some brahmins opine that Pinda should be lifted 
by the front. He should do so when the Brahmins have said: 
‘^Now, lift it up please’’. 

86. Therefore, Sraddha should be performed as the sages 
of yore have stated. Otherwise, he incurs sin, and the Pitrs do 
not receive the essence thereof. 

87-88. The following should be given in Sraddha: barley, 
rice, sesamum seeds, beans, wheat, chick pea, kidney bean, 
iyamaka variety of com, mustard, wild rice, hasti-lyamaka, 
priyahgu, pras&tika (a kind of rice) along with the grains. 

89-91 The mango-fruit, hog plum, bilva, pomegranate, bij- 
apuraka, old myrobalan, milk, fruits of coconut, parusaka, vats- 
aka trees, dates, grape, wood apple of blue colour, a fruit of patola 
tree, vine, fruit of jujube tree, berry, vaikahkata, orange, 
bljapQra—these fruits should necessarily be given in Sraddha. 

92-99. Treacle, sugar, juice of the sugar-cane, juice of other 
plants, murmuras, cow’s milk, curd, butter, oil squeezed from 
sesamum seeds, salt produced from ocean or lake should be offe¬ 
red in Sr&ddha. He should offer essence of fragrant substances, 
sandal paste, aloe, suffron, Kalai^a, Tanduliya, Vastuka, Mu- 
laka, wild vegetables, and the following flowers: jasmine, Cam- 
paka, Lodhra, Mallika Bana (Blue flower), Barbari, Vrntakaso- 
ka, Tulasi, Tilaka, Pavanff, Satapatri, fragrant Sephalika, Kub- 
jaka, Tagara, Mrga, wild KetakI, Yuthika, Atimukta. O Brah¬ 
mins, these flowers are worth offerii^ in Sr^dha. Moreover, 
day-lotus, night-ictus, white lotus, blue lotus, red water-lily, 
white water-lily, Kostus (Ku^ta)Manisi, Balaka, Kukkuti,Jatipa- 
traka,Nalika Uilra, Musta and Granthiparnt—these and other 
fragrant substances are worthy of ^raddha. 

100. Guggulu, sandal paste, l8iivasa, Aguru, and such other 
instances as are available. 

101. Beans, Ca^akas, Masuras, Koradusakas, Viprusas, 
Markafas, Kodravas should be avoided. 

102. He should avoid milk, curd, ghee produced from Ma¬ 
laga, Camara, Mrga, Avika,Ekaiaphi (an animal whose hoof 
is not cloven) (as ahorse, ass etc.), the breasts of women, camel. 



I12.]03*131 


595 

103. Tala, Varuu, Kakola, Bahupatra, Arjuniphala, Ja* 
mbira, red Bilva, and the fruit of Sila should be avoided, 

104-110 He should avoid Bsh, boar, tortoise and cows esp¬ 
ecially. Putika, musk, Gorocana, lotus-paste, Kaleyaka, Ugraga- 
ndha, Tuniska, Palahka, Kumarl, Kirata, Pindamulaka, GfAja- 
na, Cukrika, Gukra, Varuma, Canapatrika, JWa, Satapu^pa, 
Nalika, Gandha-Sukara,Halabhrtya, Sarsapa, Palandu, Laiuna, 
Manaskanda, Visaskanda, Vajrakanda, Gadasthika, Puruialva, 
Sapindalu—these should not be used. 

He should also leave Alabu, Tiktaparni, Ku^manda, three 
sorts of Katukas, Vartaka, Sivajata and the hairy Vafas, Kallya, 
Crane of red colour. 

Similarly, the fruit of Vibhftaka, Aranala, partially broken 
conch shell and stale food. 

111-131. Things of bad odour should not be given in Srad- 
dha. Similarly, Kovidara, Sigruka, that which is sour, picchila, 
ruksa, vatayama should not be given. Similarly, that which is 
devoid of taste or emits smell of wine should be cast off. Hihgu 
of bitter smell, Fhani^a, Bhunimba, Nimba and Rajika, Kustum- 
buru growing in Kalihga, sour Vetasa, pomegranate, MagadhI, 
Nagara, Ardraka, Tittidl» Amrataka, JIvaka,Tumburu—these are 
not prohibited. Similarly, rice cooked in milk, Salmall, Mudga 
and sweet balls should be included. Drinks made of mango juice 
and cow’s milk should be included. So also those which are in 
common use, sweet and oily, though a little sour and bitter. 
Those which are extremely sour, bitter and tasteful to Devas 
should be used in Sraddha. The meat of goat, quail, partridge, 
hare, jackal, Lavaka or Rijiva fish should be used. 

Besides, the flesh of rhinoceros, red jackal, a fish having scale, 
a fish named Simhatunda, osprey should be used in Sraddha. 
Though Manu has allowed the flesh of Rohita, it should not be 
used. This is my considered opinion which is supported by 
Var^a. If he feeds on things prohibited in Sraddha, he will 
go to Raurava hell. O ascetics, Varaha has prohibited the follow¬ 
ing which are forbidden to the twice-bom. They should not be 
offered to the Pitrs : 

Rohita fish, pig, tortoise, iguava, swan, the Cakra bird, 
Madgu (diver bird), fish without scale, osprey, snakes, Vasahari, 
Kukkufa, Kalaviiika, Mayura, Bharadvaja, Sarhgaka, Nakula, 



596 


Brahma Purina 


Uluka, Marjara^ Lopas^ others which are not easily available^ 
Tiftibha bird, jackals, tiger, bear, hyena—if a stupid person 
eats the flesh of these and other prohibited animals or birds, he 
having incurred a great sin goes to the Raurava hell. If that 
sinner includes the prohibited ilesh in Sr^dha, he will let his 
Pitrs, though stationed in heaven, fall into hell. 

If he catsKusumbha*iaka (vegetable mixed with safflower), 
Jambira, Sigruka, Kovidara, Pinyaka, Viprusa, Masura, Grfi- 
jana, Sana, Kodrava, Kokilaksa, Cukra, Kambuka, Padmaka, 
Cakora, flesh of Syena, Vartula, Alabu, Tat in! and the fruit of 
tall trees, he goes to hell. If he gives these to the Pitrs, he falls 
along with them in Puyavaha. Therefore by all means, a wise 
person should not partake of them. 

132-135. Varaha has said that they should not be offered 
to the Pitrs. Better feed upon one’s own fl«h ratlier than par¬ 
take of the forbidden meat. 

If out of ignorance or negligence, one has eaten the forbid¬ 
den things, he should perform the rite of expiation or atonement. 

If he eats what is prohibited he should, for the atonement 
thereof, feed upon fruits, roots, curd, milk, buttermilk mixed 
with water, cows’ urine, yavaka—one each day for a week. 

136-143. Thus should transgression be corrected, especially 
by the devotees of Vi^nu. O ascetics, the forbidden things as 
mentioned above should be excluded. The material necessary 
for Sraddha should be collected according to the capacity of the 
performer. Thus, if the person performs Sraddha according to 
the prescribed rules and hb resou ces, he will remain happy so 
long as he lives upon this earth. 

The sages said : 

If the father is alive, grandfather and great-grandfather are 
dead, how will he perform Sraddha ? Please tell vs in detail. 

Vyisa said : 

The son should offer Sraddha to the departed who could 
duly receive the same from his father. There is no infringement 
of duty—secular or Vedic in regard to that. 



112.144—113.5 


597 


The sages said : 

If the father is dead but the grandfather is alive, how will 
he perform Sraddha? You will kindly explain. 

Vydsa said : 

He should offer Pinda to the father and feed the grand¬ 
father who is alive. This is the Judgement of Sutras. 

The Pinda should be given to the dead, food should be given 
to the alive. He should not perform Sapindikarana or Parvana 
in that case. If the son performs Pitrmedha, he is blessed with 
sons, riches and longevity. 

144. He who recites this section on Pitrmedha at the time 
of Sraddha, O Brahmins, his Pitrs feed upon his food for a 
number of years lasting for three yugas. 

145. Thus I have told you the section on Pitrmedha which 
destroys sins and increases merit. Men with controlled mind 
should hear it attentively and recite the same during the period 
when the Sraddha is being performed. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTEEN 

Conduct of the Good 

Vydsa said: 

1. Thus the Deities and Manes are to be duly worshipped 
by the householder by means of the Havya and Kavya offer¬ 
ings. The guests and kinsmen should be honoured with cooked 
rice. 

2. The living beings, the servants, animals, birds and even 
ants; the mendicants who beg for alms and all other travellers 
who come to the house are to be received hospitably, 

3. Brahmins observing the disciplined conduct of life of 
the good should be honoured by the good householder. 

Tht sages said \ 

4^. O brahmin, the Nitya and Naimittika rites have been 



598 


Brahma Purd^a 


recounted by you. Human activities arc three*fold: Nitya, Nai- 
mittlka and Kamya. O sage, even as you recount we wish to 
hear the rules of good conduct by pursuing which a man attains 
happiness here and hereafter. 

Vjfdsa said: 

6. Good conduct should always be preserved by a house¬ 
holder. There is no welfare here or hereafter to one who is 
devoid of good conduct. 

7. Sacrifices, charitable gifts and austerities are not condu¬ 
cive to the prosperity of the person who transgresses the rules 

of good conduct. 

8. A person who maintains good conduct attains the longe¬ 
vity of Brahma (?) Virtue and good conduct should always be 
maintained. Virtue is the symbol of good conduct. 

9*10. O brahmins, I shall recount the form and general 
outline of good conduct. One shall maintain it with great con¬ 
centration. Endeavour should be made by a householder in 
achieving the three-fold aim of life. The achievement of the 
householder here and hereafter depends on the realisation thereof. 

11-12. With one-fourth of one^s wealth the self-possessed 
man shall achieve the other-worldly welfare. With half of his 
wealth he shall sustain himself as well as perform the Nitya and 
Naimittika rites. With the remaining one-fourth one shall in¬ 
crease one’s original capital. O brahmins, if one pursues thus, 
one’s wealth becomes fruitful. 

13-16. Similarly, for the sake of dispelling sins, virtuous 
rites should be performed by a learned man. Thus the other 
Dharma which has the fruit of welfare in the next world should 
be made fruitful here itself. The three (Dharma, Artha and 
Kama) are of two types each. One type causes sinful offence; 
the other type is not antagonistic. One shall think about these 
as mutually complementary. O excellant brahmins, know them 
to be conducive to the contrary result. (For example) the 
wealth that is conducive to virtue is intrinsically virtuous. That 
which does not afflict the soul is virtue. Kima (Desire) is split 
into two (?) by the other two : Dharma and Artha; and the 
other two are split into two by it (i.e. Kama). 



113.17-27 


599 


17AS, One shall get up in the Brahma Muhurta and think 
about virtue and wealth. After getting up» one shall perform the 
Acamana rite. AAer taking both and making himself pure one 
shall worship the Sandhy^. The early Sandhya (i.e. dawn) he 
shall worship even when the stars are seen. He shall worship 
the late Sandhya (i.e. dusk) even when the sun is visible. He 
shall perform Sandhya prayers duly. Unless in extreme case of 
emergency he shall not forsake it. 

19. O brahminsj one shall avoid evil utterances, falsehoods 
and harsh words. He shall eschew ignoble scriptures, evil argu* 
ments and service of ignoble persons. 

20. One shall perform Homa both in the evening and in 
the morning, with perfect restraint over the self. He shall not 
see sunrise and sunset directly. 

21. The following activities should be performed in the 
forenoon :—Washing the teeth, applying collyrium, embellish¬ 
ing the hair, looking into the mirror and the Tarpana rite to 
the deities. 

22. Faeces should not be discharged on the path leading 
to the rural residences, holy centres and fields, nor in a ploughed 
held, nor in a cowpen. 

23. One shall not look at the naked wife of another man; 
one shall not look at one’s own ordure. (One shall avoid) see¬ 
ing, touching and talking to a women in her menses. 

24. One shall not discharge urine or faeces into the waters 
(of a tank etc.). Nor should one indulge in sexual intercourse 
under water. One shall not stand on faeces and urine nor on 
hairs or ashes. One shall not stand over the sharp edge of any 
cutting instrument 

25. An intelligent man shall not stand on scattered husk, 
burning coal, bits of ropes, clothes etc. on the road or in a 
ground. 

26. After performing the rite of worship of the Pitfs, 
Devas, human beii^ and other living beings, the householder 
deserves to take food in accordance with his affluence. 

27. After performing the Acamana rite, after restricting 
unnecessary talk, the man shall remain pure. He shall sit fac¬ 
ing the East or the North and take food with the mind therein. 
He shall keep the hands between the knees. 



600 


Brahnc Purina 


28. Except in the case of utter destruction of food^ the 
wise man shall not complain about the defects of food at 
the time of taking it. One shall avoid taking salt directly 
(i.e. salt should be mixed with food and then taken in). He 
shall avoid the leavings of food also. 

29*31. The self-possessed man shall not discharge urine or 
faeces, while standing or walking. He shall not eat anything 
defiled by the leavings of food. If one is defiled by the leavings 
of food, one shall not speak anything. He shall avoid reciting 
the Vedas too. One shall not look at the sun, moon or the 
stars as one pleases. One should avoid using a seat, bed or a 
vessel if it is broken. One should honour and greet elderly 
persons by standing up and offering them seats. 

32. An intelligent man shall talk in a way favourable to 
them (i.e. elderly persons). He shall follow them. He shall not 
act against them. 

33-34. No intelligent man shall take food, worship the 
deities or invoke them with a single cloth on. O brahmins, 
no intelligent man shall perform a sacrifice, if there is no fire. 
No man shall take bath or lie down completely naked. One 
shall not scratch head simultaneously with both hands. 

35. Head-bath should not be repeatedly undertaken by 
the intelligent men without cause. One who has already had 
head-bath should not touch any limb with oil. 

36. One shall avoid studyir^ the Vedas during the holi* 
days. One shall never disregard or insult brahmins, fires, cows 
and the sun. 

37. One shall discharge faeces and urine facing the north 
during the day and facing the south during the night. During 
distress he shall dischai^e them as he pleases. 

38. One shall not speak out the misdeeds of the precep¬ 
tor. If he is angry, one shall propitiate him. One shall not 
listen to others who slajidcr him. 

39-41. Priority in access to the path shall be given to the 
brahmins, to the king, to one who is miserable, to one of supe¬ 
rior learning, to a pregnant woman, to one who is afSicted by 
sickness, to a greater person, to the deaf, mute or blind, to one 
who is elated and to one who has become mad. 



113.42-53 


601 


A learned man shall circumambulate a temple^ a tree iu a 
monastery, cross-roads, and the preceptor who is of superior 
learning. One shall never wear shoes, clothes, garlarids etc. 
worn by others, 

42. One shall avoid taking oil bath or indulging in sexual 
intercourse with women on the eighth, fourteenth and fifteenth 
lunations as well as on Parvan days. 

43. No wise man shall ever stand with arms and upper leg 
(?) raised up. One shall not throw up the feet. One shall not 
keep one leg over another. 

44. One shall avoid reviling, wounding the sensitive spots 
of and slandering an unchaste woman or a boy who has indulg¬ 
ed in an unworthy act (?) or a fallen fellow. 

45-46. A clever man shall never be arrogant, proud and 
harsh. One shall not laugh at or find fault with a fool, a mad 
fellow, a person in distress, ugly persons, penons with deficient 
limbs or poor people. One shall not lift up another man*s stick 
to chastise a disciple ora son. 

47. A wise man should not dr^ a seat with his leg and sit 
thereon. One shall not prepare a cake of wheat flour or a dish 
of rice and peas mixed together or meat solely for oneself. 

48-52, Food should be taken in the evening and in the 
morning after worshipping the guests. 

O brahmins, one shall always clean the teeth sitting silently 
facing the east or the north. One shall avoid the forbidden 
creeper. No man shall ever sleep with his head placed towards 
the north or the west. One shall place one’s head towards the 
south or the east. 

One should never take one’s bath in scented water, espe¬ 
cially in the morning. If at all, one has to take one’s bath at 
other times during the day it should be only during the eclipse. 
The limbs should not be wiped off with the edges of cloths or 
with one’s bands. 

One shall never shake tresses or the clothes. No learned 
man shall ever apply unguents before taking bath. 

53. One shall never wear a red, or a black cloth nor one 
of variegated colour. No one shall exchange clothes or orna¬ 
ments (with others). 



602 


Brahma Pur&^a 


54. A cloth should be abandoned if it is excessively worn 
out and the threads come ofT, if it is deflied by worms and hairs 
or if it is touched by dogs. 

53. One shall avoid the following types of meat : if it is 
licked by a dog; if it is dehled after the essence has been taken 
away; the meat of the back; or the forbidden meat. 

56. A man shall never take in salt directly. O brahmins, 
a foodstuff that has been left over for a long time, that has be* 
come dry or that has become stale should be eschewed. 

57. O excellent brahmins, the resultant products of sugar¬ 
cane juice, milk, vegetable and flour as well as the products 
of gravy need not be abandoned even if they arc left over for 
a long time. 

58-59. One shall avoid lying down at the times of sunrise 
and sunset. A man shall never cake food : if he has not taken 
his bath; if he is sleeping; if his mind dwells on other things; if 
he is seated on the bed or on the bare ground or if he has not 
given a part of it to his servants. While taking food he shall not 
make sounds. 

60-63. One shall take food only after taking bath in the 
morning as well as in the evening. 

Other men’s wives should not be carnally approached by a 
learned man. Sexual intercourse with other men’s wives destroys 
tlie merits of I$(apurta and also longevity. A thing so des¬ 
tructive of the span of life of a man does not exist in the world, 
so destructive as the outraging of the modesty of other men’s 
wives. 

It is only after duly performing the rite of Acamana that 
one should perform the holy rites of Devas, Pitrs and fire-god. 
The obeisance to the preceptor as well as the routine of taking 
food shall be performed only after the Acamana rite. The 
water used for the Acamana rite should be clear. It should 
be devoid of smell and foam. No sound should be made at that 
time. It should be eagerly performed. 

64-68. One shall sit facing the east or the north aaU 
then perform the rite of Acamana. Before that rite one 
shall wash his hands and feet after applying clay. The clay 
taken for this purpose shall not be any of these five : Clay 



113.69-76 


603 


taken from under the water; that taken from residential 
localities; that taken from the ant-hill; the clay from the 
rats’ den and the clay that remains after performing the puri¬ 
ficatory rices. One shall avoid these five types of clay. With great 
concentration and keeping die Iiands between knees^ one shall 
perform the Acamana rite three or four times. After wiping off 
the limbs and whirlii^ the water round the head, and after per¬ 
forming the Acamana rite perfectly, the pure man shall perform 
the other holy rites. One shall perform the Acamana rite after 
sneezing, licking, breaking the wind, spitting etc. After touching 
what should not be touched, (and as an expiation thereof) 
one sliall look at the sun or touch the right ear. 

69. These rites are in accordance with their availability. If 
the previous one is not available the later one is sought; when 
the previous is present the later ts not used. 

70. One shall not grind one’s teeth, nor beat one’s own 
body. While sleeping, meditating or taking food, cue shall eschew 
the self-study of the Vedas. 

71-72. One shall avoid sexual intercourse and journey dur¬ 
ing Sandhya (Dusk). One shall perform Tarpai>a rite unto the 
Piers with full faith, in the esurly alternoon. The head bath and 
the holy rites unto Devas and Pitjs also sliall be done in the 
afternoon. One shall get the shaving done facing the east or the 
north. 

73. For matrimony one shall avoid a girl with crippled 
limbs or one wanting a limb even if she is free from ailments 
or born of a noble family. One shall marry a girl removed by 
(not less than) seven generations on his father’s side and (not 
less than) five generations on his mother’s side. 

74. One shall protect one’s wife. One shall avoid jealousy 
as well as sleeping and indulgence in sexual intercourse during 
the day. One shall eschew infliction of pain on animals, and all 
other activities that cause distress and sorrow to others. 

75. In the case of the people of all castes, a woman in 
her monthly course should be avoided for the first four nights. 
To prevent the birth of a female child, one shall avoid the fifth 
night also. 

76. Thereafter he shall carnally approach her on the sixth 
night or other excellent nights even in number. Boys will be 


604 


Brahma Purd^a 


born (if intercourse is carried out) on even nights and girls on 
nights odd in niunber. 

77. Unrighteous persons indulge in sexual intercourse on 
Parvan and other days and impotent persons during dusk time. 
A clever man shall avoid Rikta days. 

78. Even if rude people speak a lot, one shall never Hsen to 
them. 

An honourable scat should not be oflFcred to a person who is 
not magniiicent. 

79. After shaving, vomitting or sexual intercourse with a 
woman an intelligent person shall take bath along with the clothe 
worn. He shall take bath also after going to the cremation 
ground. 

80-84. O brahmins, one shall not make slanderous remarks 
about the following nor laugh at them: Devas, Vedas, brahmins, 
noble and truthful persons, preceptor, chaste women, Brahman, 
Yajfias and ascetics. 

One shall be in perfectly auspicious dress, clad in white gar¬ 
ments and embellished with white flowers. One shall never be 
inauspicious in dress and features. He shall not be in friendly 
terms with arrogant persons, mad fellows, the foolish and impolite, 
persons of no good conduct, those who are defiled by the defects 
of age and caste, those who habitually spend much, those who 
are enemies, those who are censured, those who arc inefficient 
in their work, those who are in contact with lecherous persons, 
those who have no money, chose who arc solely interested in 
arguing and other base men. 

85. One shall stand up while meeting friends, persons who 
are initiated, kings, religious students who have finished studies 
and become householders and the father-in-law. When they 
come to one^s house one shall greet them in accordance with 
one’s affluences. 

86. O brahmins, after honourir^ and worshipping them in 
accordance with his capacity he shall bid them farewell to 
their respective places, aRer they had stayed for a year. 

87-94. One shall then offer worship. He shall offer oblations 
into the fire in due order. The first oblation shall be offered to 



113.95-100 


605 


Brahma; then to Prajapati; the third to the Gfhyas; next Co 
Ka^yapa. After offering oblation to Anumati he shall offer the 
(domestic oblation). 

The holy rite that had been recounted by me before at the 
time of laying down the rules regarding the Nitya rites, sliall 
be performed then. The Vaiivadcva rite shall be done 
thereafter. O brahmins, even as I recount it, listen. After allott¬ 
ing the different divisions in the abodes (and places) in regard 
to Devas the devotee shall offer three oblations in the water jar 
to Parjanya, Apah (waters) and Dharitri (Earth) (?). To Vayu 
he shall offer oblation in every quarter; he shall offer to the 
quarters beginning with the east and in due order. Then he shall 
offer to Brahma, to the firmament and to the sun in due order. 
Subsequently, with purity he shall offer oblations to the Viive- 
devas, to all living beings, to U$a$ (dawn) and to the Bhutapati 
(the lord of living beings). In the south he shall offer oblation 
to the Pitrs after saying ^‘Svadhacanamab** making it anticlock¬ 
wise. He shall duly offer the water mixed with the remnant of 
cooked rice in the south-east, uttering Yak?ma etat tc*'. There¬ 
after he shall perform the rite of obeisance to Devas and to Brah¬ 
mins. 

95-98. The line at the root of the thumb of the right hand 
is known as the Brahma Urtha for the rite of Acamana. 

The spot between the index finger and the thumb is cited as 
the Pitr Tirtha. Except in the case of N^dimukha type of Pitrs, 
water libation shall be offered by means of this spot to the Pitrs. 
The Tirtha pertaining to Devas is at the tip of fingers. The holy 
rite unto Devas is by means of Pitrtirtha. The Tirtha of Praja¬ 
pati should be assigned at the root of the little finger. Thus by 
means of these Tirthas alone should all the rites be performed 
to the respective deities along with the Pitrs. They should never 
be performed through the Itrthas of others. 

99-100. The rite of Acamana by means of Brahma Tirtha 
is excellent. The rites of Pitrs shall always be perfonned 
by means of Pitr Tirtha; the rites of Devas by means of Deva 
Tirtha and the rite of Prajapati by meani of the Tirtha of Praja¬ 
pati. With the same one shall perform the rites of water libation 
and offering the ball of rice unto the Nandimukha variety of 



606 Brahma Pur^ 

Pitrs. Everything connected with Prajapati shall be performed 
by means ofPrajapatya Tlrtha. 

101. No shrewd man shall hold water and fire together. 
One shall not stretch one^s legs in front of one*s preceptors, 
Devas, Pitrs and brahmins. 

102. One should not look at a cow suckling her calf; one 
should not drink water with the palms joined tc^ethcr to form a 
cup; an intelligent man shall not cause delay in the short and 
long periods of cleaning. One shall not blow fire with the mouth. 

103. O brahmins, one should not stay in a place where 
the following four are not present, viz. one who offers debt; a 
physician, a brahmin welUversed in the Vedas and a river abound¬ 
ing in water. 

104. An intelligent man shall always stay there where the 
king is strong, interested in virtue and has conquered his ser¬ 
vants. Whence can one have happiness if the king is bad. 

105. It is conducive to happiness to stay at a place where 
the citizens are united, where they abide by justice, where they 
are peaceful and where they rival with one another (to work for 
the welfare ofall), 

106. A shrewd man shall live in that country where the 
husbandmen are generally not very arrogant and where all medi¬ 
cines are available. 

107. O brahmins, one shall not stay in that place where 
the following three exist together : one who is eager to conquer; 
a previous enemy and people who continuously celebrate the 
festivals. 

108. A learned man shall stay among his fellow travellers 
of very good conduct. One shall always stay at a place where 
the king cannot be thwarted and where the earth yields plenty 
of vegetables. 

109. Thus, O brahmins, everything has been mentioned by 
me for the welfare of you all. Henceforth I shall state the 
rules of procedure regarding the food-intake. 

110. Cooked rice, though stale, can be taken in if it is soak* 
ed in oil. It can be kept thus for a long time. Wheat products, 
barley products and milk products, kept for a long time can be 
«sten even if they are devoid of oiliness. 



113.11M23 


607 


UK The following can be eaten : hare, tortoise, alliga¬ 
tor, porcupine and the fish with darts (?) The village boar and 
the cock should be avoided. 

112. In the following circumstances, even if one eats meat, 
one is not defiled : if it is the remnant of offerings unto the 
Pitrs, Devas etc. or if it is cooked in Sraddlu at the request of 
the brahmins and is sprinkled with holy water or if it is taken 
as a medicine. 

113-114. The following articles can be cleaned with water: 
conch, rock, gold, silver, rope, garments, vegetables, roots, fruits, 
baskets of split bamboos, hides, jewel-studded cloth, coral pearl, 
(ordinary) vessels and vessels used for drinking Soma juice. 

115. The cleansing of stony vessels may be with water 
or by scrubbing with a stone. The cleansing of oily vessels is by 
means of hot water. 

116-117. The sieves, deer skins, mortars and pestles, or 
clothes in a bundle are cleaned by just sprinkling (water over 
the bundle). The cleansing of all types of bark-garments is by 
means of clay and water. The cleasir^ of wool and all types of 
hairs is done in this manner 

118-119. It shall be cleansed with the Kalka (paste) after 
being boiled well of white mustard or sesamum seeds. The puri¬ 
fication of all articles likely to get destroyed is always thus. The 
cleasing of cotton dress shall be with water and ash; that of 
wood, ivory, bones and horns is through paring. 

120-122. The purity of pots made of clay is effected by baking 
it again. What is received by way of alms, the hand of an artisan 
and the mouth of the harlot—these are pure. The following are 
pure : the perfect knowledge and passage through the street, 
that which is consecrated by the servants, that which, is praised 
at the outset, that which is past after a long time, that which is 
hidden by many, that which is light, that which has many boys 
within, that in which old people arc active, the chambers of 
barn and storage for st^arcane, grain etc. and the two breasts 
of a woman. 

123. The flowing waters devoid of odour are pure. A plot 
of land becomes pure by the efflux of time, by being burnt, by 
being sw^t or when herds of cows pass over it. 



608 


Brahma Purdf^a 


124-136. (The ground becomes purified) by smearing (with 
cowduag), by scraping, by sprinkling (with water), by sweeping. 
Clay, water and ash must be put over cooked rice in the follow* 
ing circumstances for the sake of purity: if it is defiled by hairs 
or worms, if it is sniffed at by a cow or if Hies settle on it. 

The purity of (a vessel) made of Udumbara tree, tin or lead 
is effected by means of alkaline water ( T ). The purity of bell, metal 
vessels is effected by means of water mixed with Bhasman (ashes). 
If a liquid is defiled by contact with impurities, it is to be filter¬ 
ed or its foul smell is to be dispelled by means of clay and water. 
One shall remove the colour and the (bad) odour of other mate¬ 
rials too (similarly). The (piece of) meat dropped down by a 
Cand&l^> beasts and birds of prey etc. is pure (intrinsically). 
Oil etc. that is spilt on the street is pure. The water that gives 
satisfaction to a cow is pure. Oust particles, fire, the shadow of 
horses and cows, rays (of the sun), wind, earth, sprays (of water) 
Hies etc. are not defiled by means of their contact with (other) 
defiled things. Goats and horses are pure in their mouths but 
not the mouths of cows and calves. The fiowof milk of the mother 
is pure. A bird felled down by an arrow is pure. Seats, beds, 
vehicles, river banks, grasses etc. are purified by the rays of the 
sun and the moon, and by the wind like the articles of trade. 

One shall duly perform the rite of Acaoiana after traversing 
through streets, after a bath and during the activities of hunger 
and drinking. One shall perform Acamana afier wearing a cloth. 

The purity of those who are touched by the foul marshy 
water of the street is effected by contact with wind. So 
also the purity of platform built of baked bricks. 

One shall take away the upper part of the cooked food defiled 
much, and leave it off and sprinkle the remaining part with 
water along with clay (?). The means of purity of the person 
who partakes of a defiled food is fasting for three nights and 
performing the rite of Acamana by means of water. This atone¬ 
ment is prescribed when the partakir^ is due to ignorance. If it 
were to be with full knowledge that defect does not subside. 

After touching a woman in her monthly course or a woman 
who has come into contact with her or a woman who has given 
birth to a child and persons belonging to the meanest caste, one 
shall take bath for purity. So also one shall take bath after 



113.137 147 


609 


touching persons who have borne a dead body. If a brahmin 
touches a human bone he can become pure by taking an oil 
bath. 

137-138. If he does not take oil bath he shall perform the 
Acamana rite^ touch a cow and look at the sun. (He shall then 
become pure.) 

One shall not tread on spittle or vomitted matter. 

The leavings after food^ faeces^ urine, and water used for 
washing the feet shall be cast out of the house. 

Without concluding the rite pf offering five Piodas one shall 
not take bath in the water belonging to others. 

139. One shall take bath in natural water reservoirs (lite¬ 
rally, those dug by gods), in eddies and Gahga (and other) 
rivers. 

An intelligent man shall never remain in gardens and other 
places at wrong times. 

140-147. One shall never converse with those persons who 
are hated by the people as well as women bereft of sons. 

One becomes purified by looking at the sun if one touches 
or converses with the persons who speak in contempt of deities, 
manes, scriptures, performance of sacrifice and saintly persons. 

This set&ame purificatory riteshould be performed by intelli¬ 
gent persons after looking at the following persons etc. : a 
woman in her monthly course, a dead body that has been left 
abandoned and lying (unattended), penons devoid of righte* 
ousness or persons of other religions, a woman who has given 
birth to a child, a eunuch, a naked man, a man of the lowest 
caste, persons who have carried a dead body and those who arc 
enamoured of other men’s wives. 

A person who is conversant with righteousness becomes 
purified by taking a bath if he touche these : a medicant who 
is not worthy of being fed (?), a heretic, a cat, an ass, a cook, 
a fallen man, an outcaste(aperson ostracised), a Cand^aand 
those who bear dead bodies, a country pig and a woman in 
her monthly course. Similarly one has to take bath for purifica¬ 
tion if one touches any one of these : persons defiled by a 
woman who has given birth to a child or a person who has the 
pollution due to child birth or a person who fails to perform his 
daily round of duties at home or he who is abandoned by 



610 Brahma Pur&r^a 

brahmins or the meanest man who commits sins by his (indis¬ 
criminate) eating. 

One shall never fail to perform the daily duty of observing 
rituals. I shall mention the occasions when they need not be 
performed. On the occurrence of a death or a birth (in his 
family) a brahmin shall refrain from the rites of performing 
sacrifice, offering sacrificial fee, etc. 

148. (In similar circumstances) a K^triya shall remain 
without performing the Nitya rites for twelve days, a Vaisyafor 
half a month and a Sudra for a month. 

149-150. Thereafter all these shall perform their duties 
duly. 

Water (libation) should be offered to the dead man by the 
members of his Gotra after going out of the house. The bones 
of a dead person shall be collected on the first, fourth, seventh 
or the ninth day. They should be gathered by the members of 
his Gotra on the fourth day. 

151. After the rite ofSaAcayana (collection of bones after 
cremation) the touch of their limbs is laid down in the Sastras. 
The rites should be performed by the members of the Gotra, 
after the rite of Saficayana. 

152^156. (Defective) On the day of death two Sapi^d^ 
can touch each other, for they are related to each other. If 
death takes place due to weapons, hanging, fire or enemy the 
prescription is the same as mentioned afore. If death takes place 
due to protest fasts or starvation, men are purified immediately. 
But the Sapindas will have pollution for three days. When a 
Sapinda dies after the death of another (i.e. immediately there¬ 
after), a single purificatory rite is sufficient. The routine daily 
rites should be performed there. The same is the procedure 
when a birth takes place during the postnatal pollution due to 
a person’s birth in the case Sapindas and Sodakas. 

According to injunctions the father shall take bath at the 
birth of a son. He shall take bath along with clothes he is wear«> 
ing at the time of the birth. 

157-158. Even in the case of (post-natal pollution) if an¬ 
other birth taken place while a pollution is current, the purity 
is mentioned as having been effected in the course of days of 



113.159-170 


611 


the previous birth. The castes shall duly perform their duties 
and rituals after ten^ twelve, fifteen or thirty days have passed. 

159. Thereafter the rite of Ekoddift^ Sriddha should be 
performed by learned men in regard to the dead man and 
gifts should be given to the brahmins. 

160. Whatever waspleasing unto, whatever was liked by 
him in the house, should be given to a worthy Brahmin by the 
person who wishes that the same should be inexhaustible. 

161. When the days are completed the people shall touch 
water by their vehicles and weapons. After giving water liba¬ 
tions and Pindas to the dead men people of all castes would 
have fulfilled all their due rites. 

162. They shall perform all rites maintaining purity for 
prosperity here and hereafter. The Vedas should be studied 
everyday. One should try to be a learned scholar. 

163-167. One should earn and amass wealth righteously. 
One should assiduously perform sacrifices whereby the Atman 
will not be infuriated. O brahmins, it shall not be treated with 
contempt. Without hesitation one shall perform that rite which 
need not be concealed by great men. 

O brahmins, if a householder practises the foregoing conduct 
of life thus, he attains virtue, wealth and love. It is splendid 
for him here and hereafter. 

This is an esoteric secret. It is conducive to longevity 
and affluence. It increases intellect. It dispels sins. It is 
meritorious. It bestows glory, health and nourishment. It is 
auspicious. It confers fame and renown. It increases splendour 
and strength. It is a means of attainment of heaven. It should 
always be practised by men, O excellent sages. It should be 
practised by Brahmins, K^atriyas, Vai^yas and Sudras. 

168-170. This should be known carefully by those who 
desire prosperity. He who understands and practises it on all 
occasions shall be rid of sins. He is honoured in the heavenly 
world. O excellent brahmins, this is the essence of all essences 
that has been related. It is the virtuous path mentioned in gratis 
and Smftis. This secret should not be imparted to anyone, 
least to an atheist, a defiled mind. Nor should it be imparted 
to an arrogant fellow, a foolish person or a prattler of unsound 
arguments. 



612 


Brahma 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTEEN 

Assigrment oj duties to different 
casks and stages of life 

The sages said : 

1. O holy one, we wish to hear about the special duties 
ofdiiierent castes. O excellent brahmin, recount the duties of 
four Airamas also. 

2. Listen with restraint to the duties of different castes, 
Brahmins, K^triyas, Vaiiyas and Sudras in due order as they 
are being recounted by me. 

3. A Brahmin shall be devoted to (the practice of) 
sympathy, charitable gift, austerities, sacrifice unto the gods 
and study of his own branch of the Vedas. He shall regularly 
perform water libations. He shall maintain sacrificial fires. 

4. For his livelihood he shall perform sacrifices on behalf 
of others. He shall teach Vedic lore to the twice*bom. O 
brahmins, for performing sacrifices he shall accept monetary 
gifts with discretion. 

5. O brahmins, he shall do everything beneficial to the 
world. He shall not perform what is detrimental to anyone. 
Friendliness to all living beings is the excellent asset of a 
Brahmin. 

6. O brahmins, he shall view a cow and another man’s 
precious gem as equal. O brahmins, his carnal approach to 
his wife during the permissible period after the days of mens¬ 
truation, is commended. 

7. A K^atriya shall give charitable gifts to the brahmins 
as much as they wish. O brahmins, he should perform different 
sacrifices and read the Vedas. 

8. He shall maintain himself through his weapons. Protec¬ 
tion of Earth is his excellent means of livelihood. Sustenance 
of Earth is his primary duty. 

9. Rulers of men (kings) are content only by due sus¬ 
tenance of the Earth, since the protection of the king himself 1$ 
accomplished by such holy rites as sacrifice. 

10. By chastising the wicked and protecting the good, the 
king attains desired worldr. He is one who establishes and 
stabilises different castes. 



114.11-21 


613 


11. O excellent sages, Brahma, the grandfather of the 
worlds, granted breedii^ of cattle, trading activities and agri¬ 
culture as means of livelihood unto a Vaiiya* 

12. For him the following activities too are recommended: 
Reading of the Vedas, sacrifice, charitable gifts, practice of 
piety and the performance of compnlsory and optional rites. 

13-14. The holy rites of a Sudra depend upon the collabor¬ 
ation of the twice-born. For that purpose he supports and 
nourishes them through riches earned by purchase and sale of 
articles or by practising arts and crafts. A Sudra shall offer 
charitable gifts. He shall worship by means of Pakayajftas 
(offering cooked food unto gods) • He shall perform rites unto 
the PitfS. 

15-18. There are certain virtuous observances common 
to the four Varnas. All of them can accept gift for sustaining 
their dependents. O excellent brahmins, they should carnally 
approach their own respective wives during the permissible 
period after the days of menstruation. The following are re¬ 
counted as the noble characteristics of all the Varnas, O excellent 
brahmins: Kindness and sympathy towards all living beings, 
forbearance, absence of over«cxertion(?), auspiciousness, loving 
gentle speech, friendliness, absence of desire, abstention from 
miserliness and being devoid of jealousy. O brahmins, these 
alone are the characteristics common to all stages of life. There 
are special qualities and subsidiary duties of the Brahmins 
and others. 

19. In times of adversity the vocation of a Ksatriya or a 
Vaisya is recommended for a Brahmin; the vocation of a Vaisya 
to a Kfatriya and the jobs of a Sudra to both Ksatriyas and 
Vaisyas. 

20. O brahmins, in case of incompetence that shall be 
avoided. That alone shall be pursued during adversity, but 
chaotic mixing up of jobs shall not be effected. 

21. Thus, O brahmins, the duties of a Brahmin have been 
mentioaed by me. Understand now the respective duties of 
the people of various stages of life even as I explain them well. 



614 


Brahma Purd^ 


22*23. A boy who has been invested with the sacred 
thread shall be devoted to the acquiring of Vedas. Residing in 
the abode of his preceptor, O brahmins, a religious student 
shall be mentally pure. He should be devotedly eng^ed in the 
practice of cleanliness. Service should a rendered to the pre¬ 
ceptor. He shall maintain devotional observances and grasp the 
Vedas intelligently. 

24. O brahmins, with concentration and purity of mind he 
shall make obeisance to the sun-god and fire-god at dawn as 
well as at dusk. He shall salute the preceptor too. 

25. O excellent brahmins, he shall stand when the pre¬ 
ceptor remains standing. He shall follow when the preceptor 
goes ahead. When the teacher is seated he shall be seated on a 
lower level. He shall avoid what is contrary to the preceptor. 

26. He shall sit in front of him. Without his mind dwelling 
on anything else he shall repeat the Vedic text recited by the 
preceptor. Thereafter, on being permitted by him, he shall 
partake of the cooked food received as alms. 

27. He shall take bath in the water wherein the preceptor 
has taken bath. Early in the morning everyday he shall fetch 
water for libation and sacrificial twigs for the preceptor. 

28. Having learnt the requisite Vedic texts he shall pay 
fees to his preceptor. On getting his permission he shall enter 
the stage of a householder. 

29. He shall duly acquire a wife. O brahmins, after earning 
wealth by his own work he shall perform the duties of a 
householder. 


30-31. The householder propitiates the Manes by means of 
oblations, Devas by sacrifices, guests by cooked food, sages 
by regular recitation of Vedic texts, the spirits and other 
living beings by oblations etc., and the entire world by the 
truthfulness of words. Thus he attains celestial r^ions by his 
own actions. 


$2. The recluses and religious students who sustain them¬ 
selves by cooked food received as alma depend on the 
householder. Hence the stage of householder is the noblest. 

33-34. O brahmins, some brahmins are engaged in dis¬ 
seminating the Vedic knowledge. Some wander over the Earth 



114.33-44 


615 


for pilgrimage, taking holy dips in sacred waters. Some wander 
visiting different countries of the world. These have no abode of 
their own. They do not prepare their own food. To these people 
the householder offers a home and rest in the evening. Hence 
it is said that the householder sustains and supports them. 

35. The householder should welcome them. He should speak 
sweet words always. He shall give them gifts. He shall offer 
scats, food and beds to those who come to his house. 

36. A guest returning disappointed from a person’s house 
goes, after taking his merits and handing over his own sins. 

37. For a householder the following are despicable : 
Dishonouring (others), egotism, arrogance, slandering, attacking 
and speaking harsh words to others. 

38. The householder who duly adheres to what is thus 
enjoined becomes liberated from bondage and attains the 
most excellent worlds. 

39. At a ripe old age, O brahmins, the householder who 
has duly fulfilled his duties shall entrust his sons with the duty 
of looking after his wife and himself retire and go to the forest. 
Or he can allow his wife to accompany him. 

40. O brahmins, there he shall stay as a sage sustaining 
himself with leaves, roots and fruits. He shall let the beard 
and facial hairs grow. He shall have matted hairs on his head. 
He shall sleep on the bare ground. He can be the guest of 
anyone. 

41. O excellent brahmins, his wearing apparel and upper 
garment shall consist of leather, Darbha grass or Kaia plants. 
Taking head bath thrice a day (in rivers or lakes) is recommen¬ 
ded for him. 

42. The following are highly recommended in his case: 
Worship of the deities, ofFerii^ ghee into the fire, greeting 
and honouring visitors and guests, begging alms and offering 
oblations. 

43. Massaging his limbs by means of oil obtained from 
forest products is also commended. O leading brahmins, ability 
to bear the extremes of chillineas and heat is a form of penance 
unto him. 

44. The forest-dwelling recluse who regularly preforms 



616 Brahma Putdna 

duties fixed for him shall bum off his defects like fire. He shall 
attain the eternal worlds. 

45. O excellent ones^ fellow me even as ! relate the 
nature and general characteristics of the stage of a mendicant 
sage, that is called the fourth stage by the wise. 

46. O excellent brahmins, a mendicant shall eschew 
affection and attachment unto his sons, wife and assets. He 
shall enter the fourth stage of life after eschewing competitive 
spirit and rivalr>% 

47. O excellent brahmins, he shall leave oif the enterprises 
of the three Varnas. He shall behave alike unto the friends and 
others. He shall be friendly to all creatures. 

48. He shall maintain Yogic practice. He shall never injure 
the oviparous, viviparous and other creatures mentally, verbally 
or physically. He shall refrain from all attachments. 

49. He shall never stay in a single place permanently. In 
a village he shall stay for a single night. In a city he shall 
stay for five successive nights. He has neither pleasurable attach¬ 
ment nor hatred unto the lower creatures and birds. 

50. For sustaining himself he shall visit, begging for alms, 
the houses of men of noble caste where coal has ceased to burn 
but the inmates have not yet taken food. 

51. He shall not be dejected when nothing is obtained. He 
shall not be overjoyous when sometliing is obtained. He shall 
have that much which is necessary to maintain his life. He shall 
be out of all attachment to quantities. 

52. He shall have absolute contempt for over-cherished 
acquisitions. Even the liberated sage is bound (again) by 
overcherished acquisitions. 

53. Eschewing such defects as passion, anger, arr<^ance, 
greed, delusion etc., the full-fledged saint shall be free from all 
possessions. 

54. After offering freedom from fear to all living beings 
he shall wander over the Earth. Liberated from his physical 
body he shall have no cause of fear anywhere. 

55. By means of sacrificial offerings such as ghee acquired 
through begging the brahmiiiical sage shall perform the sym* 
bolic Agniimtra in his own body. He shall perform Homa unto 



114 . 56 - 115.11 


617 


the bodily fire through his mouth. He attains the other worlds 
through the funeral pyre. 

56, He who is pure and endowed with good conceptions 
and intellect and passes through the stage of life pertaining to 
salvation in the manner mentioned above becomes calm like 
thehre wherein no fuel is put. That twice-born attains Brahma 
world. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTEEN 
Characteristics o/mixed castes 

The sages said : 

1-3. O highly blessed one, you are omniscient. You are 
engaged in activities benedcial to all. O sage^ there is nothing 
past, present or future that is not known to you. O highly intel¬ 
ligent one, by what activities does the downward fall of the 
Varnas take place? By what activities does their upward pro¬ 
gress take place? Tell us. We wish to hear how and by what 
means does a Sudra attain the status of a Brahmin and a 
Brahmin that of a Sudra. 

Vjfdsa said : 

4-6. The beautiful peak of the Himalayas is embellished by 
different minerals. It is covered by various trees and creepers. 
It is endowed with wonderful features. The three-eyed lord of 
Devas, that Supreme god, the destroyer of the three cities, was 
seated thereon. The goddess of charming eyes, the daughter of 
the king of mountains, bowed down to the lord, O brahmins, 
and put this question formerly unto him. O excellent sages, I 
shall describe that. Listen. 

Umd said : 

7-11. O thrcc-cycd lord, O destroyer of the eyes of Bhaga, 
teeth of Pu^an and the sacrifice of Daksa, I have this great 
doubt (to be cleared). The arrangement (of the people) into 



618 


Brahma Purdna 


four castes had been formerly brought about by the self-born 
lord. What are those activities, as a result of which a Vaiiya 
attains the status of a Sudra? By what means does a K^atriya or 
a Vaiiya become a Brahmin or a Ksatriya ? O lord, how can 
Dharma be made to recede in such a reverse activity? By what 
activity is a Brahmin bom in the womb of a Sudra lady? O lord, 
by what activity does a Ksatriya attain the status of a Sudra? 
O lord, O lord of gohliiis, please clarify this doubt of mine. How 
do the persons of the three Varnas attain Brahminhood natur* 
ally ? 

Mahahara said : 

12. O goddess, brahminhood is very difficult to attain. The 
Brahmins are naturally auspicious, the K$atriyas, Vaiiyas and 
SQdras are not auspicious. 

IS. The Brahmins fall off from their status by performing 
evil deeds. For the same reason one is forced down again even 
after attaining the most excellent of castes. 

14. One who adheres to the characteristics of a Brahmin, 
whether a Ksatriya or a Vaiiya, attains Brahminhood. 

15. He who forsakes brahminhood and resorts to the acti¬ 
vities and features of a Ksatriya incurs a downfall from the 
status of a Brahmin and is bom of a K^triya womb. 

16-17. Even after attaining the rare distinction of being a 
brahmin, if he becomes greedy and deluded with deficient in¬ 
tellect and resorts to the activities of a Vaiiya, that Brahmin 
attains Vaiiya caste. A Vaiiya (in similar circumstances) attains 
Sudra caste. A Brahmin deviating from his duties shall thereafter 
attain Sudra caste. 

18. That person who has fallen off from his Varu attains 
hell. He who &11& from the world of Brahma is bom of the womb 
of a Sudra lady. 

19-20. O highly blessed lady of sacred adtivities, if a K|a- 
triya or a Vaiiya eschews his own duties and resorts to the 
occupation of a Sudra, he falls off from his original status and 
becomes one of mix^ castes. A Brahmin or a Kfatriya or a 
Vaiiya on becoming one of mixed castes, attains Sudra caste. 

21. A l^udra who maintains his own duties, who is en¬ 
dowed with wisdom and perfect knowledge, who as conversant 



115.22-31 


619 


with piety and who is engaged in holy activities attains the 
fruit of those holy activities. 

22. O goddess^ this too> another thing pertainii^ to the 
Atman has been cited by Brahma. Eternal achievement is re¬ 
sorted to by those who are desirous of righteous activities. 

23. O goddess^ the food cooked by the mixed caste Ugra is 
despicable. The food collectively cooked^ the food pertaining to 
Sraddha, the food defiled by pollution due to the birth or death 
of someone in the family and the food that is loudly proclaim* 
ed should not be eaten. The food cooked by a Sudra should 
never be eaten. 

24. The food cooked by a Sudra is despised by gods and 
noble men, O goddess. That which is uttered by Brahmi is 
authoritative. 

25. A Brahmin, a person who maintains sacrificial fires and 
one who performs sacrifice attain the goal of 9udras if they 
were to die with the remnants of the food cooked by a Sudra 
within the stomach. 

26. A Brahmin, who has been ousted from Brahma’s abode 
by the remnants of food cooked by a §udra attains the state of 
a $udra. This is certain. 

27. A Brahmin takes birth in the womb of a lady of the 
same caste as the person whose food he uses for sustenance or 
the remnants of whose food remain undigested in bis stomach 
at the time of his death. 

28. After happily attainiI^t the rare privilege of being bom 
as a Brahmin, if anyone slights it or if he partakes of forbidden 
food, he falls oif from the status of a Brahmin. 

29-30. A Brahmin falls off from his status if he is a wine* 
addict, a brahmin-slayer, a thief, a robber, one who has 
violated the vow of holy observances, an unclean one who 
refrains from regular study of the Vedas, is a sinner, a greedy 
person, one who indulges in misdemeanour, is a knave, one 
who does not observe religious vows, is the husband of a Sudra 
woman, one who has taken food for sustenance from a bastard, 
one who selb Soma juice and one who serves a mean person. 

31. A Brahmin who defiles the bed of his preceptor, who 
hates his preceptor, who delights in despising his preceptor or 
who is hostile to Brahmins, falls from Brahminical birth. 



620 


Brahma Purd^ 


32. O goddess, by preforming these splendid holy rites a 
$udra attains Brahminhood and a Vaisya the status of a 
K^triya. 

33-36. A Sudra attains the status of a Vaisya in the follow¬ 
ing circumstances : He performs his duties justly and in 
accordance with his injunctions. He is hospitable to all and he 
partakes of the food lefV by them. He assiduously renders service 
to and attends upon the persons of superior castes. He is not 
dejected or disheartened in his attempt. He remains an excellent 
man. He clings to the path of the good. He honours and wor¬ 
ships the twice-born and the gods. He observes hospitality to 
all as a holy rite. He approaches his wife only on the permis¬ 
sive nights af^r the period of menstruation, He is regular in 
habits and taking food. He is an expert. He seeks good persons 
for companionship. He partakes of the food left by others. He 
daes not partake of meat without consecrating it. 

37-40. A VaUya becomes a Brahmin in the following 
circumstances: He is truthful in speech and an expert in 
the employment of peaceful means. He is not affected by 
mutually opposed extremes. He does not boast about himself. 
He performs daily sacrifices. He is devoted to the study of the 
Vedas. He maintains purity. He controls his sense organs. He 
honours Brahmins. He is not envious of any of the four 
Varnas. Taking meals twice a day he observes the duties of a 
householder. He does not hesitate to eat remnants of food. He 
controls his diet. He is devoid of passionate desire. He is not 
arrogant. He performs Agnihotra carrying out Homas in 
accordance with injunctions. He entertains everyone as his 
guest and partakes of their learning. He duly maintains the 
riiree sacrificial fires. 

41-42. That Vailya who is pure is reborn in a noble 
family of K^atriyas. That Vaiiya who is reborn as a K^atriya 
shall be purified by performing theconsecratory rites beginning 
with his maturity. After the investiture with the sacred thread 
he shall be devoted to all holy observances. Thus consecrated 
he becomes a Brahmin. He gives charitable gifts and performs 
sacrifices with rich monetary gifts. Always seeking refuge in 



115 . 43-65 


621 


the three sacrificial fires and continuing the study of the 
Veda8> he shall hope to achieve heaven. 

43-51. A K^atriya shall study the Vedas with a desire for 
the attainment of heaven. He shall seek refuge in the three 
sacrificial fires. He shall always make gifts so that his 
handi remain wet. He shall protect the subjects righteously. He 
shall be truthful. He shall perform truthful deeds, with his 
vision on purity for ever. By self-imposed righteous punish¬ 
ments he shall bum off his sins. He shall acquire virtue, love 
and wealth. He shall be self-controlled by his organs of action. 
He shall partake of only a sixth of the produce of his subjects. 
He shall be shrewd in monetary dealings. He shall not indulge 
freely in licentious activities. He shall be virtuous. He shall 
carnally approach hb wife only during the prescribed periods 
after the days of menstruation. He shall be strict in the 
observance of fasts and other holy rites. He shall be engaged 
in the study of the Vedas. He shall be pure. Even in his house 
he shall always sleep in the well protected apartments free 
from strangers. He shall be hospitable to all in regard to three 
aims of life: virtue, love and wealth. He shall be pure in mind. 
To the Sudras who are desirous of food he shall say, ^^Well, 
it is ready’'. He shall not look at anything with selfishness or 
passionate love. He shall gather all the things necessary for 
the manes, gods and guests. He sliall duly perform worship, 
in his abode, even by resorting to alms (?). He shall duly 
perform Agnihotra twice everyday. He shall face even death 
in battle for the welfare of cows and brahmins. Such a K^- 
triya shall become a Brahmin. He shall purify himself by recit¬ 
ing Mantres for the maintenance of three sacrificial fires. He 
shall become richly equipped with perfect knowledge and wis¬ 
dom. He shall consecrate himself. He shall master the Vedas. 

52. O gentle lady, a virtuous Vaisya shall become a K^- 
triya by performing his own duties. By the fruits of these acti¬ 
vities of a low^ birth he can become so. 

53-65. Even a Sudra who b richly endowed with the 
knowledge of the Vedas shall become a Brahmin and cultured. 
Even a Brahmin shall forfeit bis Brahmlnhood and become a 
^udra if his conduct is base and if his diet and culture is base. 
Brahm& himself has said that even a Sudra should be resorted 



622 


Brahma PurA^ 


to like a Brahmin, O gentle lady, if he is virtuous, purified by 
holy rites or if he has conquered his sense-organs* A Sudra who 
clii^s to his duties, should be considered purer than the twice- 
born ones. Neither the womb of birth, nor the consecratory 
rites, neither the Vedic knowledge nor the lineage can be the 
causcof Brahmin hood. Conduct is the real cause. All men are 
Brahmins if their conduct is pure. Even a Sudra who strictly 
adheres to good conduct attains Brahminhood. O lady of splen¬ 
did hips, the inherent quality of a Brahmin is the same every¬ 
where. He is a Brahmin, in whom the attributeless, faultless, pure 
Brahman resides. O gentle lady, those persons who are free 
from impurities are the exponents and guides of good conduct. 
These are mentioned by Brahma himself, the bestower of boons, 
as he was creating the subjects. The Brahmin is, as it were, a 
great mobile field that has feet. If any one sows seeds therein 
it fructifies after death. A person who desires prosperity shall 
always be contented. He shall always cling to the path of the 
good. He shall abide by the Brahminical path. He shall be a 
householder regularly studying the Sarhhitis at home. He 
shall regularly study the Vedas but should not have the 
same as his means of livelihood. A Brahmin who is like this, 
who abides by the path of the good, who maintains the sacri¬ 
ficial fire and who studies the Vedas regularly becomes compe¬ 
tent to attain liberation. O gentle lady, after attaining Brahmin¬ 
hood the man of controlled self shall protect it by holy rites 
such as acceptance of monetary gifts from worthy persons. O 
lady of pure smiles thus the secret doctrine has been recounted 
to you as to how a Sudra becomes a Brahmin or how a Brahmin, 
falling off from virtue, attains the status of a Sudra. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTEEN 

Review of Virtui 

Umd saidi 

1. O lord of all living beings, O lord saluted by Devas and 
Aiuras, O powerful lord, please clear my doubts in r^ard to 
the notions of piety and sin among men. 



116 . 2-13 


623 


2. All embodied beings are bound by three kinds of bonds, 
viz. thought, speech and physical action. How are they released 
therefrom ? 

3. O lord, by what habitual practice, by what holy rite, 
by what sort of conduct and good quality do men go to heaven? 
Maheivara said: 

4. O goddess Umi of perfect knowledge of the principles 
of piety, O gintle lady of permanent adherence to virtue, your 
question is conducive to welfare and wisdom of all living beings. 

5. Persons of tranquillity, engaged in truth and piety and 
devoid of all external symbols are free from doubts. They are 
fettered neither by piety nor by blasphemy. 

6. Those persons who are omniscient, who are conversant 
with the principles of creation and annihilation, who see every¬ 
thing and who are devoid of passionate attachment are released 
from the bonds of Karmans. 

7. Those who do not injure anything whatsoever, men¬ 
tally, verbally or physically, those who are not involved in any¬ 
thing, are not bound by Karmans. 

8. Those who refrain from violence to lives, who possess 
good conduct and mercifulness, and who are equally amiable 
to others’ hatred and love are released from the bondage of 
Karmans. They have self-control. 

9. Those who are merciful toliving beings, who are worthy 
of being trusted by living creatures and who have eschewed 
violent activities go to heaven. 

10. Those who are indifTcrent to others’ assets, who always 
avoid other men’s wives and who enjoy the riches virtuously 
acquired by themselves go to heaven. 

11. Those men who always associate with other men’s 
wives as though they were their own mothers, sisters and 
daughters, go to heaven. 

12. Those who cling to their own wives, who carnally 
approach them only during the prescribed period after the days 
of menstruation and who never indulge themselves in vulgar 
lechery, go to heaven. 

13. Those who desist from stealth, who are content with 
their own wealth and who enjoy their own good luck go to 
heaven. 



624 


Brahma PurS^ 


14. Those who view other men’s wives with eyes enveloped 
by chastity, who have conquered their sense organs and who 
value good conduct very much, go to heaven. 

15-16. This divinely evolved path should be resorted to by 
men. Only a path untarnished by sins should always be resorted 
to by wise men. Only a path that never needlessly harms others 
should be resorted to by wise men. A path of such holy rites as 
charitable gifb and austerities, a path of good conduct, cleanliness 
and mercy should be resorted to by those who wish to attain 
heaven. No other path shall be resorted to. 

Umd saidx 

17. O sinless lord of living beings, recount to me those 
activities wherein a man is fettered verbally but is again re¬ 
leased therefrom. 

Maheivara said: 

18. Those who never utter a sin-based lie either for their 
own sake or for others* sake go to heaven. 

19. Those who never utter falsehood either for livelihood, 
or for virtue or out of desire for the same go to heaven. 

20. Those who welcome others speaking sweet, sinless and 
polished words with clearly pronounced syllables, go to heaven. 

21. Those who never speak harsh, incisive and cruel words 
and who never indulge in slanderous gossip are good men who 
go to heaven. 

22. Those who do not speak calumnious words or words 
that antagonise their friends or inflict pain on others, go to 
heaven. 

23. Those who eschew harshness and malice to others and 
those who are calm and who mete out equal treatment to 
all living beings go to heaven. 

24. Those who desist from knavish blabber, those who 
avoid antagonistic activities and those who speak gently go to 
heaven. 

25. Those, who, out of anger do not utter words that 
wound the heart, those who attain peace in not being angry, 
go to heaven. 



116.26-38 


623 


26. O gentle lady, this act of piety relating to speech, should 
be resorted to by men. False (speech) should be eschewed by 
wise men who possess the auspicious quality of truthfulness. 

Umd said : 

27. O highly blessed lord of gods, O Pinaka-wielding lord, 
tell me those mental-acts whereby a man is held in bondage. 

Maheivara said : 

28. O lady of weal, those who possess virtues of thought 
do always go to heaven. Listen, even as I narrate them. 

29. O lady of splendid countenance, man is held in bondage 
by the mind led asray. Listen how his inner working binds him. 

30. When another man’s property is seen kept in a forest 
or a lonely place (good men) do not even think of appropriat* 
ing it. They go to heaven. 

31. Good men do not become overjoyed on seeing other 
men’s property left in a lonely place whether in the village or 
in the house (nor do they think of appropriating it). They go 
to heaven. 

32. Similarly, good men do not even think of molesting 
lecherously the wives of others (on meetthem) in lonely 
spots. They go to heaven. 

33. Good men mentally view friends and enemies alike. 
They have a friendly attitude towards them. They go to heaven. 

34. Good men are learned, merciful, pure and truthful; 
they are contented with their own riches. They go to heaven. 

35. Good men are devoid of enmity. They do not over¬ 
strain themselves (?) They always maintain a friendly attitude. 
They are merciful towards all living beings. They go to heaven. 

36. They possess knowledge. They perform holy rites. They 
are fond of their friends. They understand piety and sin. They 
go to heaven. 

37. Good men, O gentle lady, are indifferent to the accumu¬ 
lating fruits of auspicious and inauspicious deeds. They go to 
heaven. 

38. After attaining prosperity good men are devoted to gods 
and learned^ brahmins. They shun the sinful. They go to heaven. 



626 


Brahma Purdi^ 


3d. They go to heaven due to the splendid results of holy 
rites. O gentle lady, those who tread the path of heaven have 
been enumerated by me. What more do you wish to hear ? 

Umd said : 

40. O great lord, I have a certain doubt concerning mortals 
Hence it behoves you to explain it fully. 

41. O lord, by means of what holy rite does a man attain 
a long life ? By what type of penance, O lord of gods, does he 
obtain a great span of life ? 

42. By means of what activity does man on Earth get long¬ 
evity reduced ? O uncensured lord, it beloves you to narrate 
the consequences of actions. 

43. Differences are observed in men. Some are highly for¬ 
tunate. Others are less fortunate. Some are bom noble and 
others are ignoble. 

44. Some are very odious in appearance as if they are 
made of wood. Others are very pleasing to behold. 

45. Some appear to be evil-minded. Some appear to be 
highly learned. Others have highly developed intellect with 
pure wisdom and prescience. 

46. O lord, some are men of few words. Others are highly 
eloquent. Hence it behoves you to explain this diversity. 

Mohiivora said : 

47-50. O gentle lady, I shall explain upto you the 
outcome of the fruits of actions whereby all men in the 
mortal world deservedly experience their respective benefit. If 
a man raises weapon and kills host of living beings be is sure 
to fall into hell. Even a leader of Yogins(?) goes to hell if he 
injures living beings. A man ruthless to all living beings, one 
who causes heartburn even unto germs and worms, one who is 
extremely merciless and one who never affords refi^ (unto 
others) falls into bell. One who is not like this is a pious soul 
and he is reborn in human form (?) 

51. A man of violent nature goes to hell. A nonviolent 
man goes to heaven* The man who goes to bell undergoes terri¬ 
ble and unbearable torture in hell. 



116.52—117.5 


627 


32. If anyone, by any means, survives and comes out of 
hell and attains human birth, he becomes short-lived. 

53. O gentle lady, one who commits sinful actions, 
violence etc. is inimical to all living beings and becomes short¬ 
lived. 

54-57. On account of his splendid activity, O gentle lady, 
a good man eschews slaughter of living beings. He lays aside 
his weapons. He does not mete out punishment (to others). 
He never injures others. He neither kills nor abets slaughter. 
He does not encourage killing. He does not make anyone kill 
anyone. He is friendly to all living beings. He views others as 
himself. A man of this type, O gentle lady, attains divinity. He 
enjoys pleasures and happiness deservedly. He rejoices, if ever 
he happens to be born in the mortal world. This is the path of 
men of good conduct and activity. As a result of their avoidance 
of injury to living beings they are destined to live long. This 
has been declared by Brahma. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN 
Umd said : 

1. What are those things which a man should regularly 
do in order to attain heaven? What should be his conduct and 
what holy rites should he perform ? What should he give in 
charity ? 

Mahefvara said ; 

2-5. Any man coming under this category, O gentle lady, 
goes over to the world of gods : He should be a donor. He 
should honour Brahmins. The highly intelligent one should 
distribute edibles and foodstuffs, cooked food and drinks, clothes 
etc. among the poor, the distressed and the wretched. He should 
build places ofrest and assembly chambers, sheds for giving water 
to travellers etc. He should dig lotus ponds. He should be pure 
in mind body. He should perform daily routine of duties 



628 


Brahma Purina 


enjoined. He should make charitable gifts of seats, beds, vehicles, 
houses, jeweb, money, plants, fertile fields, young women etc. 
always with a tranquil mind. 

6*7. He spends a long time in heaven enjoying unsurpassed 
pleasures. He sports about in Nandana and other gardens re* 
joicing in the company of celestial damsels. O great goddess, 
O gentle lady, after coming down from heaven he is born among 
men in a highly blessed family endowed with wealth and grain. 

8. There, he will be possessed of desirable qualities. He 
will be joyous. The man becomes rich. He enjoys great plea* 
sures and accomplishes great deeds. 

9. These highly blessed living beings of charitable disposi* 
tion are those spoken of formerly by Brahma as men of pleas¬ 
ing appearance liked by all. 

10. Other men, O gentle lady, are the twice-born ones of 
miserly nature who do not give anything to anyone. Those tho¬ 
ughtless ones do not give foodstuffs even when they have them. 

11. Even after seeing the poor, the blind and the wretched 
mendicants, even on being requested by them, they turn away 
because they are gluttonous and so covetous of palatable things. 

12. They never give away money, garments, means of 
enjoyment, gold, cows or items of cooked food. 

13. They are highly greedy and covetous, atheists, devoid 
of liberal-mindedncss. Men of this nature, O gentle lady, are 
the thoughtless ones who go to hell. 

14. After the lapse of some time when they take human 
birth those men of deficient intellect are born in some family 
devoid of wealth. 

15. They are tormented by hunger and thirst. They arc 
boycotted by the world. Devoid of any hope for the enjoyment 
of pleasure they keep on living their evil lives. 

16. They arc born of families of inferior worldly pleasures. 
Those men are engrossed in spmious pleasures. O gentle lady, 
it is by these activities that men become devoid of wealth. 

17-22. There are other types of haughty people who are 
arrogant and engrossed in other activities (?)* These narrow¬ 
minded people do not offer seat unto those who deserve one. 
These thoughtless people do not yield way unto those who 
deserve one. They do not honour those worthy of honour due 



117.23-33 


629 


to consecrated rites. Being thoughtless^ they do not offer water 
for washing feet or drinking. They do not lovingly address 
their splendid and desirable eldm in view of the fact that they 
are overwhelmed by greed that has increased due to their 
arrogance. They insult those who are worthy of honour. They 
slight elders. All men of this sort, O gentle lady, invariably 
&11 into hell. If somehow those men come out of hell after 
many years, they take birth in the despicable family of 
Svapakas, Pulkasas of thoughtless despicable nature. It is in 
these families that those pe<^le are born who slight and insult 
preceptors and elders. 

23*27. A man of the following nature, O gentle lady, attains 
heaven; He is neither arrogant nor overwhelmed by false pride 
or prestige. He worships deities and guests. He is worthy of 
worship by the whole world. He performs obeisance. He speaks 
sweet words. He is pleasing to all due to his activities. He is fond 
of all living beings. He does not hate anyone. He has pleasing 
countenance. He speaks polished sweet words full of love. He 
offers words of welcome unto all living beings. He does not 
violently hit or injure anybody. He honours everyone as one 
deserves by good actions. He stands aside after offering the 
path unto one who deserves it. He worships his preceptor 
always. He takes pleasure in receivii^ guests. He worships 
honourable visitors. 

28*30. After his sojourn in heaven he takes birth in the 
mortal world in an excellent family. There he enjoys all sorts 
of pleasures and possesses all jewels. He gives to the deserving 
ones charitable gifts in accordance with their merits. He is 
devoted to pious rites. He is honoured by all living beings. He 
is bowed to by all the world. He obtains the fruits of his 
actions. This is the means of virtue declared by the creator him* 
self and I have described it. 

31*33. A man of the following mode of habits and conduct 
falls into hell : He has a horrible habit. He is terrifying unto 
all animals. O splendid lady, he tortures and harasses living 
creatures with his hands and feet, with a rope or a stick and 
with clods of earth, columns or other means. His mind is 
bent on violence. He makes creatures suffer. He approaches 
living creatures making them tremble with fear. 



630 


Brahma Purdt^ 


34*35. After the lapse of some time, if he attains human 
form or birth he is born in a base family ovenvhelmed by many 
kinds of sufferings. He is hated by the world. He is the lowliest 
among men as a result of hb actions. This, O gentle lady, 
should be understood in regard to human beings in the midst 
of their kith and kin. 

36*41. The other sort of man looks at all living beings 
with kindness. He is like a father to them. His eyes are full of 
fondness and friendship. He is devoid of inimical feelings. He 
has perfect control over bis sense-organs. Beii^ merciful he 
does not cause fear in the living beings. He does not kill 
them. He earns the confidence of all living creatures. He does 
not injure any living being with his perfectly controlled hands 
and feet. He does not cause them any harm or frighten them by 
means of a rope, a stick, clods of earth or weapon. The actions 
of the man are always splendid* A man of such habits and con* 
duct goes to heaven. There in a divine mansion where he lives 
joyously like gods. If after the end of his tenure in heaven he 
returns to the mortal world he enjoys increasing happiness. He 
has less stress and strain. He is devoid of terrifying grief. He 
enjoys pleasures. He has no strenuous labour to undertake. He 
is always free from mental agony. This, O gentle lady, is the 
path of the good where there is no afBiction. 

Utnd said : 

42-45* Some of these men arc observed to be clever and 
mightily enthusiastic. They are richly endowed with wisdom 
and prescience. They are intelligent and experts on the subject 
ofwealth.Others,OIord, are evihminded and devoid of wisdom 
and prescience. What is that action as a result of which a man 
becomes intelligent ? How does a man become deficient in 
wisdom ? O Siva, clear this doubt of mine, O lord, the most ex¬ 
cellent one among the virtuous. Others are blind by birth. 
Still others, O lord, are distressed by sickness. Some men are 
observed to be impotent. Please tell me the reason thereof. 

Matuiaara said : 

46-48* Men of the following type attain heaven: They 
enquire afrer the welfare or otherwise of the brahmins well- 



117 , 49-58 


631 


versed in the Vedas, of the penoxu of accomplishment coversant 
with virtue. They avoid inauspicious activities and resort to 
splendid ones. In this world they attain happiness and they go 
to heaven later. If anyone among them takes human birth he 
is born with an extraordinary intellect. His learning is befitting 
the performance of sacrifices and is auspicious. 

49. Those who cast their evil eye on other men’s wives are 
born blind due to that evil conduct. 

50. Men ofsinfiil actions who look at a naked woman with 
a defiled mind become distressed due to sickness. 

51. Foolish men of evil conduct who indulge in the sexual 
act with beasts become deficient and defiled in wisdom as well 
as impotent. They become eunuchs. 

52. Men who bind animals or embrace them closely, men 
who defile their preceptor’s bed and men who scatter their 
seminal discharge are born as eunuchs. 

U7nd said : 

53. O the most excellent one among the gods, what is a 
despicable action ? What is it that is not despicable, by doing 
which a man attains prosperity and renown ? 

MakeSvara said : 

54. He who seeks the path of prosperity and asks brah¬ 
mins about it, he who seeks virtue and he who yearns for good 
qualities attains heaven. 

55. If at any time he takes up human birth, O gentle lady, 
he is bom highly intelligent, wise and endowed with memory. 

56. This, O gentle lady, is the path of virtue of the good. 
It should be followed. It is conducive to prosperity- This has 
been described by me for the perpetual benefit of men in the 
world. 

Umdsaid : 

57. There are other men of deficient wisdom who hate 
virtue. They do not wish to approach brahmins well-versed 
in the Vedas. 

58. Some men observe holy rites. They have faith and they 



632 


Brahma Purina 


closely adhere to the path of self-control (subjugation of sense- 
oigans). Others are devoid of holy observances. They swerve 
from the path of discipline. They can be compared to the 
Rak^asas. 

59. Still others are regular performers of holy sacrifices. 
There are others devoid of delusion. Tell me how they become 
so. What is that action as a result of which they become so. 

Mahsiocra said ; 

60-63. The holy scriptures^ composed formerly, prescribe 
the limits of pious activities of the world. There are holy men 
who obey them as their authority. They are seen to be 
men of steadfast holy rites. Those who are deluded call sin by 
the name of virtue. They do not observe holy rites. They do 
not observe rules of decorum and morality. They are said to be 
Brahmarakfasas. If, due to the lapse of time or due to their 
endeavour (?) they are born as men ^ey do become base men 
devoid of homas and vafafkaras. In order to clear your doubts, 
O gentle lady, the ocean of virtue has been expounded by me. 
Men may be efficient or inefficient in its observance. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTEEN 
Dialagtu between Mahehara and the Sages 

Vydsa said : 

1-S. On hearing these words of her lord from the begin¬ 
ning, O brahmins, that holy mother of the universe became 
pleased, delighted and suq>rised. Near the lord, the destroyer of 
the three cities, there were certain excellent sages who had been 
to that mountain in the course of their pilgrimage. They wor* 
shipped the trident-bearing lord, bowed to him and asked him 
to clear their doubt, with desire for the welfare of the world. 

TTte sages said x 

4-6. Obeisance to thee, O Three-eyed one, O destroyer of 



118 . 7-15 


633 


Dak^'s sacrifice. O Lord of the universe, we shall ask you some 
questions to clear the doubts lurking in our hearts. In this ex¬ 
tremely terrible world that causes hairs to stand on end and 
strikes terror, men of deficient intellect aimlessly wander for a 
time. Tell us that means whereby they are released from 
the bondage of births and worldly existence. We wish to hear it. 
Our eagerness is great. 

Maheivara said : 

7. O Brahmins, I do not see any means other than the son 
of Vasudcva for the liberation of men bound by the noose of 
action (and reactions) who undergo misery. 

8. Those who worship well that lord who wields conch, 
discus and club, by word, deeds and thoughts attain the highest 

region. 

9. Of what avail is their life and the beast-like activity of 
tliose people whose mind is not directed towards Vasudeva who 
pervades the entire universe? 

The sages said : 

10. O Pinika-bearing Sankara, O destroyer of the eyes of 
Bhaga, O lord adored by Che worlds, we wish to hear the great¬ 
ness of Vasudeva. 

Mahiivara said : 

11. Hari the eternal Puru^ is more excellent than Brahma. 
He is Krs^a with golden splendour like the sun shining in a 
cloudless sky. 

12. He has ten arms. He has great splendour. He is the 
destroyer of the enemies of gods. He is Hrsikesa marked by the 
scar Srlvatsa. He is the leader of gods. 

13. Brahma is bom of his belly. I am born of his head. 
The luminaries are bom of hb hair. Devas and Asuras are born 
of his bodily hairs. 

14. The sages and the eternal worlds are born of his body. 
He is the abode of Brahma himself and of Devas too. 

15. That lord of the three worlds is the creator of the uni¬ 
verse. He is also the annihilator of all living beings, mobile and 
immobile. 



634 


Brahma 


16. He is the most excellent among gods. He is the lord of 
Devas. He overcomes enemies. He is omniscient. He is the creator 
of all beings. He goes everywhere. He has faces all round. 

17. In the three worlds there is no other living being greater 
than he. He is eternal. He is blessed. He is known as Govinda. 

18. For the fulfilment of the task of gods he takes up 
human form. He bestows honour on others. He will be killing 
all kings in battle. 

19. Without the help of Triv]kratna> the hosts of Devas 
will be leaderless and they will be incapable of performing their 
divine functions. 

20-21. He is the leader of all living beings. He is the leader 
of Devas. He is identical with the slightest created thing and the 
greatest as well. He is the supreme Brahman. He is the perpet¬ 
ual refuge of the brahminical sages. Brahma is stationed in his 
umbilicus. I am stationed in his body. 

22. The gods are comfortably stationed in his body. That 
lotus-eyed lord has goddess Laksmi in his belly. He stays in 
the company of 3r!. 

23-25. His weapons are 6irhga (bow), discus and sword. 
He has (Garuda) the enemy, of all Nagas for his emblem in the 
flag. He is possessed of excellent good conduct, purity, self-con¬ 
trol, valour, virility pleasing body, ever-increasing power, of 
straightforwardness, kindness, beauty of form and strength. 
He wields all kinds of divine miraculous weapons very wonder¬ 
ful to behold. 

26. He is thousand-eyed and he operates the Yogic Maya. 
He is Virupakfa. He is noble-minded. By gentle speech he praises 
friendly folk. He is fond of his kith and kin. 

27. That lord has ample forbearance. He does not boast of 
himself. He bestows (the power to realise) Brahman. He removes 
the fear of those who are distressed by fear. He increases the 
delight of his friends. 

28. He is the seat of refuge of all living beings. He is eng¬ 
aged in the protection of the poor. He is ridily endowed with 
learning and wealth. He is honoured by all living beings. 

29. He helps those who resort to him. He causes fear in the 
minds of his enemies. He is conversant with polity. He is richly 



118.30-47 


635 


endowed with the quality of justice. He is the expounder of 
Brahman. He has conquered his sense-organs. 

30-41. For the sustenance of Devas the lord who is possessed 
of the greatest intellect will be born in the family of Manu, in 
the splendid path of Manu, descended from Praj&pati and con¬ 
secrated by piety. There is a son of Manu named Am§a. Antar- 
dhiman is his successor. (The son of) Autardhaman is the Praja- 
pati, Havirdhaman the uncensured. O brahmins, Praclnabarhi$ 
will be born as the son of Havirdhaman. Ten sons will be born 
to him with Pracetas as the eldest. Dak$a the Prajapati will be 
born as the son of Pracetas. Adit>'a will be the son of Dak^a and 
(Vaivasvata) Manu wUi be born of Aditya. Ila and Sudyumna 
will be born in the family of Manu. Pururavas will be born of 
Budha and Ayus will be born thereof. Nahu^a will be born of 
him and his son will be Yayati. Yadu of great prowess will be 
born of him and his son will be Kro^^r* The great son of Kro$K 
will be called Vrjinlvan. The unvanquished U^ahgu will be born 
of Vrjinivan. The heroic Citraratha will be born as the son of 
U^ahgu. His younger (brother, the younger son of U^ahgu) 
will be famous by the name of Sura. O excellent brahmins, in 
the family of these kings of well-known prowess, possessed of 
good qualities and conduct and of purity and readiness to per¬ 
form sacrifices, the well-known excellent Ksatriya, Sura of great 
vigour and prowess, will beget bis famous sonVasudeva, Anaka- 
dundubhi, ^^ho will expand his race and who will bestow honour 
on all. Vasudeva of four arms will be bom as his son. He will 
be liberal in gifts. He will honour brahmins. He will be fond 
of the twice-born. He will realise Brahman. 

42-43. After killing king Jarasandha, this scion of the family 
of Yadu will release the imprisoned kings. That powerful king 
will possess all earthly jewels of kings. He will be unhindered 
in the whole of the Earth due to his vigour and prowess. 

44-47. He will be richly endowed with valour. He will be¬ 
come the Emperor of all kings. He will be staying in Dvaraka 
after he has slain the enemies. After conquering the wicked he 
will protect goddess Earth: Approaching him in the company of 
excellent deserving brahmins, all of you shall duly worship him 
like the eternal Brahma. The powerful lord V&sudeva of great 
prowess ahould be seen by anyone who wishes to see me and 



636 Brahma Purdt^a 

Brahma the grandfather. If he is seen I too am seen. I do not 
entertain any doubtful thought in this regard. 

48-50. O ascetics, know that (Brahma) is Vasudeva. The 
hosts of Devas beginning with Brahma will become pleased with 
that person of whom the lotus-eyed lord is fond. If any man in 
the world seeks refuge inKeiava he will attain fame and renown 
and go to heaven. He will become righteous and also the instru¬ 
ctor in virtuous activities. 

51. Acyuta> that lord of Devas, should be worshipped by 
a person conversant with virtue. When this lord is worshipped 
he Will always possess virtue. 

52. With a desire to do whatever is conducive to the benefit 
of all subjects, that lord of great splendour, the tiger among 
men created crores of sages for spreading Dharma (virtue). 

53. They, beginning with Sanatkumira, duly created by 
him, stay on the Gandhamadana mountain, performing austeri¬ 
ties. 

54. Hence, O leading twice-bom, that eloquent lord con¬ 
versant with Dharma should be bowed to. He shall salute on 
being saluted; he shall honour, on being honoured. 

55. O excellent brahmins, that lord shall see on being seen; 
he shall offer refuge everyday, on being sought refuge in; On 
being worshipped regularly he shall accept worship. 

56. Such is the great vow of the great primordial lord Vi^nu 
the undespicable. It is always followed by good people. 

57. The eternal lord is always worshipped by Devas in 
the universe. They follow him by resorting to a befitting fear¬ 
lessness. 

58. That son of DevakI should always be bowed to, by 
thought, by speech and by deeds by brahmins exerting them¬ 
selves. He should necessarily be seen. 

59. O excellent sages, this is the pathway laid down by me. 
If that lord of Devas is seen, the excellent Devas shall be seen. 

60. I too always worship and bow to that lord, the grand¬ 
father of the worlds, the great Boar, lord of the universe. 

61. All the three deities will undoubtedly be seen in him. 
All of us, all the gods, stay in his body. 

62. The ploughshare-wielding lord, well-known as Bala, 



118.63—119.5 


637 


having the lustre of a number of white mountains put together 
will be bom as his elder brother. He will hold the Earth aloft. 

63-67. He has a three-hooded head. He is one whose end 
is not seen. Supar^, the powerful son of Kaiyapa, was not capa¬ 
ble of seeing the end of that noble lord> in spite of his prowess. 
He is Sefa who joyously moves about. He stays within embracing 
the Earth by means of his body. Visnu is the lord who bears the 
earth. He who is Rama is Hr$ike^> Acyuta, the lord who bears 
aloft the entire Earth. Both of them are divine» tigers among 
men with divine exploits. They wield discus and ploughshare. 
They arc worthy of honour. They should be seen, O ascetics, 
this is a favour shown to you. Hence, all of you shall stren¬ 
uously worship the most excellent one among the descen- 
dents ofYadu. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETEEN 

Gcal of the devotees ofVip^u 

The sages said : 

1. Oh, the wonderful greatness of Kr^na lias been heard by 
us. It is holy. It dispels sins. It is conducive to wealth. It des¬ 
troys the round of births and deaths. 

2. O great sage, after worshipping Vasudeva, duly and with 
devotion what goal do the men who are engaged in the worship 
of Vasudeva attain ? 

3. Do they attain liberation or heaven, O great sage ? Or, 
O excellent sage, do they obtain both the fruits ? 

4. O omniscient one, it behoves you to dispel this doubt 
lurking in our hearts. O excellent sage, excepting you there is 
noone else in this world who can dispel it. 

Vydsa said : 

5. Well done, well-done, O excellent sages! What has been 
uttered by.»you is quite pertinent. Now listen to all those things 



Brahma Put&ffa 

in order which bring about the happiness the devotees of 
Vi^nu. 

6. By the mere initiation (into the fold) of Kr$na» men 
attain salvation. What then, in regard to those who devotedly 
worship Vi^tm always 1 

7. O excellent sages, neither heaven nor salvation is inac* 
cessible to them. Devotees of Vifi^u obtain even the rarest 
things, would they desire them. 

8. Just as after climbing the mountain of jewels one can 
take away any number as one pleases, so also O leading sages, 
one can obtain the cherished things from Kx^nsi. 

9. Just as, after reaching the wish-yielding Kalpa tree, O 
brahmins, a person plucks the fruits as he pleases, so also one 
can take one's cherished things from Kf |na. 

10. By duly and faithfully worshipping Vasudeva, the pre¬ 
ceptor of the universe, men attain the fruit of virtue, wealth, 
love and salvation. 

11. By propitiating that lord of the universe with a puri¬ 
fied inner soul men obtain desirable things difficult of access 
even unto Devas. 

12. To those who devotedly worship the Imperishable lord 
Vasudeva there is nothing inaccessible in the three worlds. 

13. Blessed are those persons in the world who worship 
Lord Hari who dispels all sins and who bestows the desired 
benefits. 

14. By worshipping the most excellent lord of Devas, 
brahmins, Kfatriyas, Vaiiyas, women, Sudras and men of low 
castes attain the greatest goal. 

15. Hence, O sinless sages, listen. I shall expound what 
you ask. I shall succinctly narrate the goal of those noble souls. 

16-19. They eschew this human body which is the abode 
of ailments, which is unsteady, which is transient as the bubbles 
of water and which is subject to old age and death. They 
eschew the body which emits the foul smell of flesh and blood, 
which is full of urine and faeces and other foul substances, 
which has the bones as the supporting pole, which is impure 
and which has sinews, vessels and skin. They go to the several 
abodes of the guardians of quarten of the worlds by means of 
an aerial chariot that can go to any place as desired, that 



119.20-31 


639 


reverberates due to the divine Gandharva music> that has the 
colour (and lustre] of the mid-day sun and that is bedecked 
with series of stringed tinklir^ bells. 

The Gandharvas will be singing songs of praise. They will 
be embellished by the celestial damsels. 

20-28. They enjoy the pleasures of chose several worlds for 
a period equal to a Manvantara. They enjoy all kinds of 
pleasures. 

Thereafter, they go to the heavenly abode that bestows 
happiness. O brahmins, there they enjoy excellent pleasures for 
a period equal to ten Manvantaras. 

O Brahmins, from there the devotees of Vifnu go to the 
Gandharvaloka. There they enjoy pleasures delightful to the 
mind for a period equal to twenty Manvantaras. 

They are well honoured there and from there they go to the 
Solar region where they enjoys super-divine pleasures for a 
period equal to thirty Manvantaras. 

From there, O Brahmins, they go to the Lunar region that 
bestows all pleasures. For a period equal to forty Manvantaras 
they enjoy splendid pleasures there. They are devoid of old age 
and death. 

From there, O excellent sages, they go to the Stellar region 
bedecked with lofty mansions. They are embellished by all 
good qualities. For a period equal to ftfty Manvantaras they 
enjoy all pleasures as they please. 

From there, O Brahmins, they go to the region of Devas 
which is very difficult of access. 

O Brahmins, for a period equal to sixty Manvantaras they 
enjoy rare pleasures along with the eightfold Siddhis. They arc 
worshipped by Devas and from there they proceed to the 
region of Indra. 

29-31. For a period equal to seventy Manvantaras they 
enjoy higher and nobler divine pleasures that heighten their 
mental happiness. From there they proceed to the excellent 
region of Prajapati. 

For a period equal to eighty Manvantaras they enjoy there 
all types of pleasures. From there, O brahmins, the devotees of 
Vifou proceed to the region of Brahma. 



640 


Brahma Pur/t$a 


32-37. For a period equal to ninety Manvantaras they 
joyously sport there. Thereafter they return to the Earth and 
are born as brahmins of Y<^ic power in the excellent families 
of brahmins. They master the Vedas and scriptures and com¬ 
prehend their meanings. 

Thus they enjoy pleasures of all the worlds, come back to 
this Earth and go higher and higher. 

In the course of every birth, O excellent brahmins, they 
enjoy all desired pleasures for a hundred years and thereafter 
proceed to the next world. 

When a set of ten births is thus completed duly they pro¬ 
ceed to the divine world ofHari from the region of Brahma. 
After going there and enjoying mexhaustible pleasures full of 
good qualities for a period equal to a hundr^ Manvantaras, 
O excellent brahmins, they proceed to the World of Brahmi. 
They are devoid of births and deaths. 

38. They take up divine bodies of great strength bedecked 
by earrings. Huge bodies, O excellent brahmins, they assume 
with a four-armed form, and sport there. 

39. O excellent brahmins, in their eternal state they re¬ 
main for ten thousand crores of years and are bowed to by all 
Devas. 

40. Thereafter, O brahmins, those magnificent self-posses¬ 
sed men go to the abode of Narasiihha. There they rgoice and 
sport for about ten thousand citM'es of years. 

41. At the end of that period they go to the abode of 
Vi^u, resorted to by the Siddhas. There they play happily for 
ten thousand years. 

42-44. Then O brahmins, those excellent aspirants go to 
the region of Brahma. They stay there for a long time, for 
many hundred crores of years and then go to the city of Nara- 
yai?a. The lordly aspirants enjoy the pleasures for millions of 
crores of years. Thereafter the excellent aspirants of divine form 
and great strength go to the city of Aniruddha. They are eulo¬ 
gised by Devas and Asuras. 

45i Devoid of death and old age those devotees of Viyiiu 
stay there for fourteen thousand crores of yean. 

46. Thereafter thcygo to the city of Pradyumna. Free of 



119 . 47 — 120.5 


641 


ailmentS) O brahmins, they stay there for three hundred lakhs 
of crores of years. 

47. They arc delighted. They arc endowed with strength 
and power. They can go anywhere as they please. Thereafter 
those Yoglns go to the place where lord Sahkar$ana rules. 

48«50. After stayii^ there for a long time and enjoying 
thousands of pleasures they enter the unsullied Vasudeva devoid 
of form and name. In that supreme entity devoid of death and 
old age they become free. There is no doubt that after going 
there they become liberated. 

Thus, O excellent sages, the intelligent men engaged in the 
worship of Vasudeva attain worldly pleasures and salvation. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY 

Thi benefits of singing devotional songs of Vi^t^u 
while keeping awake at night 

Vydsa said : 

1«5. There is no doubt about this that a man who fasts on 
the eleventh day of either fortnight and carries out the follow* 
ing observances, goes to the greatest region of Vi?nu. With 
mental and physical purity he should duly take bath and wear a 
neatly washed cloth. He should conquer his sense organs. With 
faith and mental purity he should worship Visnu by fr^rant 
flowers, scents, lamps, incense, cooked foods, different offerings, 
repetition of holy names and mantras, homas, circumambula- 
tions, hymns of various kinds, divine and pleasing vocal and 
instrumental music, prostration and excellent utterances of 
Jaya (Be victorious). ARer duly worshipping thus he should 
keep awake for the whole of the night narrating the stories of 
or singing his songs of prayer. He should be devoted to 

Vi|nu. 

The sages said : 

6. O great sage, describe to us the benefit of the chorus song 
of Vif^u while keeping awake. Great is our eagerness to hear 
the same*. 



642 


Brahma Purd^ 


Vydsa said : 

7. Lhitn, O «cellcnt sages, I shall describe duly the benefit 
of the chorus song of Vi^nu while keeping awake, as mentioned 
before* 

8* The city of Avanti is well-known in the world. Lord 
Vis^u wielding conch, discus and iron club occupies it. 

9. At the outskirts of that city there was a Candala who 
was an expert in singing. He earned much wealth by legitimate 
means. He duly maintained his servants. 

10. That was a devotee of Vi$ou and he strictly 

adhered to the observances of holy rites. On the EkHdai! day be 
used to come (to the temple), observe fast and sing songs of 
prayer. 

11. His songs in praise of Vi^^u were sung in various notes 
such as Gindhara, $adja, Niyida, Paficama, Dbaivata etc. 

12*13. He used to keep awake at night and to sing songs in 
praise of VifQU. At dawn on the Dvadafi day he used to wor¬ 
ship the lord and return home. O excellent brahmins, after 
feeding his daughter’s sons-in-law and nephews he used to take 
food along with his attendants. 

14. Many years of his life were thus spent by him in 
propitiating Vif^u by means of different types of soi^s (of 
prayer). 

15. Once, on the eleventh day in the dark half of the 
month of Caitrahe went to the excellent forest for the purpose 
of serving Vispu. 

16. Engrossed in devotion, he wanted to gather flowers 
fnim the forest. He reached the foot of a Vibhitaka tree in the 
great forest on the banks of K^ipra. 

17. There he was seized by a Rak^a in order* to devour 
him. The Candala then said to him— should not be devou¬ 
red by you today. 

18. good Sir, you shall devour me (tomorrow) in the 
morning. In truth I will come back again. O Rikfasa, I have a 
great task to be performed today. So release me. 

19. truth, I will come tomorrow* You will then eat me. 
For the purpose of serving Vif 9 U I have to keep awake in the 



120 . 20-38 


643 


night. It does not behove you» O Raksasa^ to cause any obs¬ 
tacle in the observance of the holy rite by me.’* 

tydsa said : 

20. The Raksasa said in reply : Capd^a, I liave not 

taken food for the last ten days and today you have come 
across me. 

21. I shall not set you free. I shall devour you. I am over¬ 
whelmed by hunger”. 

On hearing the words of the Rak^a, the C&i;idAla said to 
him, consoling him by uttering gentle words which were firm 
and truthful: 

77ie Cdndd/a said: 

22. O Brahmaraksasa, the entire world has its root in 
truth. Hence, listen, on truth I promise my return. 

23. All these know each and every action of men, viz. 
the sun, moon, fire, wind, earth, firmament, water, mind, day, 
night, the two junctions (i.c. dawn and dusk) and Yama. 

24-38. O Rak^a, I promise you that if I do not come 
again to you let me be infested by the sins which the following 
persons acquire in the circumstances mentioned, viz. the sin of 
one who indulges in dalliance with other men’s wives; the sin 
of those who take wealth of othen; the sin of a brahmin 
murderer; of one who drinks liquor; of one who defiles the pre¬ 
ceptor’s bed; the sin of the husband of a barren woman; the 
sin of the husband of a Sudra woman; the sin of a temple 
priest who misappropriates temple funds; the sin of one who 
takes fish and meat; the sin of one who habitually eats the flesh 
of pig and tortoise; the sin of one who r^ularly takes the 
flesh of the backbone; the sin of one who takes meat without 
offering the same to gods; the sin of one who kills his friend; the 
sin of an ungrateful fellow and the paramour of a widow (who 
marries again); the sin of a pollution due to death of a relative; 
the sin of a man of ruthless actions; the sin of a miser; the sin 
of one who sends away guests without entertaining them; the 
sin that ^falls one who induces in sexual intercoune on the 


644 


Brahma Purdryi 


new moon day or the sixth, eighth or fourteenth day of a lunar 
fortnight whether dark or bright; the sin of a brahmin who 
cohabits with a woman in her monthly course; the sinofaperson 
who indulges in sexual intercourse after performing Sraddha; 
the sin of those who take food on Parvan days without taking 
bath; the sin that befalls one on eating filthy matter; the sin of 
those who cohabit with the wife of a friend; the sin of a back¬ 
biter; the sin of one who is fond of arrogance and deception; 
the sin of one who destroys honey; the sin that befalls one who 
promises to give something to a brahmin but does not give it; 
the sin due to a fabehood in regard to a virgin; the sin due to 
a falsehood in regard to cows and mules; the sin of a man who 
kills women and children; the sin of one who utters a He; the 
sin of those who are disrespectful to Devas, Vedas, brahmins, 
kings, sons and friends and to chaste ladies; the sin of those 
who go to sleep after uttering a lie to or aAer being disrespect¬ 
ful to the teacher(?); the sin of those who commit arson; the 
sin of those who bum down forests; the sin due to the non¬ 
performance of domestic sacrifice of a householder; the sin of a 
slayer of cows; the sin of a base brahmin; the sin of a Parivitta 
and a Parivedin (i.e. the elder and the younger brothers of 
whom the younger marries before the elder); the sin of those 
who contract matrimonial alliance with them; the sin of a 
person who destorys a foetus* (Let all these sins befall me.) O 
Kak^asa, of what avail are these different kinds of vows and 
pledges? Let a terrific vow be heard. It is being uttered though 
it is vey difficult to utter it. Let these sins befall me if I do not 
approach you, via. the sin of one who sustains himself through 
the sinful activities of hb own virgin daughter; the sin of a 
pexjuror and that of a false witness; the sin of one who performs 
a sacrifice on behalf of a person unworthy of it; the sin of a 
$andha (eunuch?); the sin of a Srama^; the sin of one who 
returns to a householder’s life after having renounced the world 
once; and the sin of a lecherous religious student. 

Vyisa said : 

39* On hearing the words of the Cip^ia the Brahmarikfasa 
became surprised* He said : ‘*Oh, go, keep your promise”. 



120,40-51 


645 


40. On being told thus by the R&ksasa, the 
gathered flowers and went to the temple of Vijiju, 

41. He handed over flowers to a brahmin who washed 
them with water, worshipped Vifnu and went to his abode, O 
ascetics. 

42. The Clind^a observed fast and kept awake during the 
night staying in the outer ground and singing songs of prayer. 

43. As the night dawned into day he eulogised and made 
obeisance to the lord and set off to the place where the demon 
was waiting in order to keep his promise. 

44. As he was going along the path a certain man asked 

hira: gentle Sir, where are you going’7 He told every¬ 

thing and the man said again : 

45« Since the body is the means of acquiring virtue, 
wealth, love and liberation, an intelligent nun should maintain 
his body with great care. 

46-48. It is the man who remains alive that obtains virtue, 
wealth, happiness and salvation. The living man obtains renown« 
A dead man has no place in the world. No one speaks about 
him.” 

On hearing these words, the Candala replied indicating the 
reason : 

”0 gentle sir, it is because of my promise that I am going. 
I have taken vows.*’ 

yjidsa said : 

49. The man said again unto him: *^Don’t be a fool. O my 
good man, haven’t you heard what has been uttered by Manu? 

50. (Learned men) say that the following five untruths are 
not sinful, viz. the lie that has been uttered for affording 
protection to cows, women and brahmins; the lie uttered while 
celebratii^ a marriage; the lie that has been uttered for the sake 
of friends; the lie uttered when one is faced with death; and the 
lie uttered when one is being robbed of all riches. 

51. (?) Injunctions regarding righteousness are not applic¬ 
able in the case of untrue statements to women, and enemies or 
those uttered when one is faced with death or destruction of 
wealth or ^hen one is being deceived”. 



Brahma Puf4^ 




On hearing his words thus, the Candila replied : 

The Clbii&la said : 

52. Do not say thus. Welfare unto you. Truth is honoured 
in the worlds. Whatever happiness is in the world is acquired 
by truth. 

53. It is due to truth that the sun blazes; it is due to truth 
that waters are juicy; it is due to truth that fire bums; and it is 
due to truth that the wind blows. 

54. The achievement of virtue, wealth and love and the 
rare acquisition of liberation becomes possible due to the truth 
of men. Hence one shall never forsake truth. 

55. Truth is the supreme Brahman in the world. Truth is 
the most excellent amoi^ sacrifices. Truth descends from heaven. 
Hence one shall never forsake Truth. 

Vy^a said : 

56. Saying this, the C&nd^la ignored that excellent man 
and went to the place where the Brahmarak^a, the slayer of 
living beii^, was waiting. 

57. On seeing that the Candala had come, his eyes beamed 
with wonder. Shaking his head (approvingly) he told him: 

The Brakmardkfosa said : 

58. Well done, well done, O highly blessed one. You have 
kept your promise. I do not consider you a mere Candala since 
you have distinguished yourself due to your truthfulness. 

59. Due to this action I thinkthat you are a brahmin pure 
and not fit to be disposed of. I shall tell you, gentle sir, something 
based on righteousness. Tell me what was done by you there 
m the abode of Visnu on that night? 

Thi said: 

60. Listen. I shall tell you exactly what has been per<- 
formed by me on that night in that abode of Vif QU. 

61. I knelt down beneath that shrine of I kept 

awake for the whole of the night tinging songs of praise of 
VifQU. 



120.62-71 


647 


Tki Brahnar^Afasa said : 

62. Tell me. How long have you been observing this rite 
of keeping awake devotedly in the abode of Visnu? 

63. He replied smilingly, Raksasa, 1 have been observ¬ 
ing this rite of keeping awake every month on Ekada^ day, for 
twenty years’* On hearing the words of the Candala, theBrahma- 
rak$asa said: 

Thi Brahmardksasa said: 

64. It behoves you to carry out what I am going to tell 
you. O good man, give unto me the bench! orkeepii^ awake 
for one single night. 

65. In that case I shall set you free. I shall not leave you 
otherwise, O highly blessed one. I have vowed thrice. 

After saying this he stopped. 

lyisa said : 

66. The Candela said to him : night-prowler, my own 

seif has been surrendered to you. What is the use of talking 
much? Eat me up as you please*^ 

67. The Raksasa said to him again: ‘^Give me (the benefit 
of) keeping awake for two yamas (six hours) along with the 
songs sung by you. It behoves you to take pity on me.** 

The Cdiiddla said : 

68. Why this irrelevant talk? Eat me up as you please. I 
will not give you the benefit of keeping awake. 

On hearing the words of the the Brahmar&k^a 

said to him: 

The Brahmardkfosa said : 

69-71. Who is foolish and evil-minded enough to dare to 
look at you in order to harass you and inflict pain on you 
since you have been guarded by your own righteous activities? 

Good men should be merciful towards a wretched fellow 
who has been overwhelmed by siu, who has been deluded by 
worldly pleasures and who has been distressed by the throes of 
hcU. 



648 


Brahma Purd^a 


Hence, O highly blessed one, take pity on me. Give me the 
benefit of keeping awake for a single yima (three hours) 
and go back to your own abode. 

Vy^asaid : 

72-73. The Capd^la said to him again : will not go 

home nor will I give the benefit of keeping awake even for a 
single yima*’. The Brahmaraksasa then smilingly said to the 
G&pd^a: 

The Brahnardkfasa said : 

Give unto me the benefit of the song enthusiastically sung 
by you at the end of the night. Save me. Lift me up from (the 
mire of) sin. 

Vydsa said : 

74-75. When this was uttered by him, the Cat^d&hi said to 
him : 

TTu Cd^d^la said : 

What evil action has been committed by you formerly due to 
the fault of which you have become a Brahmaraksasa? 

Vy&sa said : 

76. On hearing his words the Brahmaraksasa remembered 
the evil actions committed by himself and became extremely 
distressed. He then said to the Candala : 

Thi Brahmatdkfasa said : 

77. Who was I before, what had I committed as a result 
of which 1 had to be bom in an evil womb as a Rak;asa—let it 

be heard. 

78. Formerly, I was a brahmin well-known as Somaiarma. 
1 was the son of Devaiarman who used to perform sacrifices and 
regularly study the Vedas. 

79. (faulty text) There was a certain king on whose be¬ 
half I performed sacrifice though he had been ostracised and 
forbidden to use the mantras. Since I was interested in the holy 
rite I was engaged in the rites near the sacrificial post. 



120 . 80-93 


649 


80. Afflicted by greed and delusion I performed the duty of 
Agnidhra in the sacrifice. When it was concluded I performed 
an arrogant rite due to my folly. 

81. (In my arrogance) I began to perform a sacrifice 
intended to last for twelve days. As it was being performed I 
had a stomach pain. 

82-84. Ten days elapsed in full. But the sacrifice had not 
been concluded. As the offering was being offered to Siva in a 
moment pertaining to Rak$asa I died and due to that fault I 
became a Brahmaraksasa. I was not conversant with the techni- 
que of sacrifice and I performed the sacrifice reciting the taxts 
without proper accents and notes. Due to this faulty per¬ 
formance I became a Brahmaraksasa. 

83. I am therefore immersed in the great ocean of sin. 
Lift me up therefrom. It behoves you to give me the benefit of 
the last song of prayer at the holy rite of keeping awake. 

pydsa said : 

86. The Gaod^l^ s^td to him: ^Tf you desist from killing 
living beings I shall ofiter unto you the benefit of the last song 
of prayer’*. 

87. '‘Yes, of course”, said he and the Ca^d^l^ invoked by 
means of Mantras the holy rite of keeping awake for half of a 
Muhurta and offered the benefit of the last song of prayer. 

88. After the benefit of the song of prayer had been given 
the Brahmaraksasa became delighted. He bowed down to the 
C&pdala and went to the holiest of pilgrim-spots named Pfthu- 
daka. 

89-90. He decided on a fast unto death there, O brahmins, 
and died. Invigorated by the benefit of song of prayer he be¬ 
came &eed of his Raksasahood. As a result of the great 
power of the holy centre he attained the region of Brahma 
which is difficult of access. Freed of all agony he stayed there 
for ten thousand years. 

91. At the end of that period he was bom as a brahmin 
endowed with the foculty of memory and a)ntroI over his sense- 
organs. O brahmins, I shall tell you his story later on. 

92-93. Even as I narrate listen to the rest of the story of 
the Canola. When the Riksasa departed that self-possessed 



650 


Brahma Purdj^ 


(Ca^^ala) of good control over himself returned to his house. 
Remembering the incidents in the story of that brahmin this 
pure man became disinterested in worldly pleasures. He entrus¬ 
ted his wife to the care of his sons and began the circximambu- 
lation of the Earth. 

94. Beginning with Kokamukha (holy centre) he went up 
to the holy shrine of Skanda. After visiting Skanda he performed 
the rite of circumambulation in Dharacakra. 

93. O brahmins, he then came to the lofty rocky top of 
the excellent mountain Vindhya and reached the holy spot 
Papap ramocana. 

96. That scion of a CaQd&l^ family performed the holy dip 
that dispelled his sins. Freed from sins he remembered many of 
his previous births. 

97. In a previous birth he had been a mendicant who had 
restrained his body and controlled his speech and mind. He 
was intelligent and he mastered the Vedas. 

98. Once while cows were being taken away by thieves 
the alms became defiled by dust and they were discarded by the 
mendicant. 

99-102. Cue to that fault and sin he was born as a C&ndala. 
He took his holy dip in the Papapramocana and passed away on 
the banks of the Narmada river. O brahmins^ he was reborn as 
an excellent brahmin though foolish. After he had com¬ 
pleted his stay there for thirty years, a man of great spiritual 
attainment who was endowed with Yogic Maya and Sakti was 
wandering here and there assuming an ugly form. On seeing 
him the foolish brahmin mockingly saluted him and said: 
“Welfare O Siddha^ whence are you coming ?*• 

Vjfdsa said : 

103. On being addressed thus, the venerable one thoi^ht 

that he had been recognized and replied: have come from 

heavenly region.” 

104. The foolish one said to the Sddha : the heaven Uu 

you know Urvafi the most excellent celestial damsel bom of the 
thighs of Naraya^a 

105. TheSiddha said: know that Urvafi who is the 



120 . 106-119 


651 


chief ornament of heaven, whose birth and parentage is very 
noble and who bears the G&mara for Indra.*’ 

106-106. The brahmin bereft of straightforward ways said 
to the Siddha:‘^0 my friend, my message should be conveyed to 
Urvaii by you, with great respect. You will please tell me 
what she says in reply’’. TbeSiddha said: “Of course”. The 
brahmin was pleased at that. The Siddha went to heaven at 
the top of Meru and met Urvail. He told her what had been 
said by the brahmin. 

109. She said to that excellent Siddha: “1 do not know the 
brahmin who is the ruler of K^sl. The truth has been mention¬ 
ed to you. The fact is not reuined in my mind.” 

no. On being told thus the Siddha returned. After some 
time he went to Varanasi and was again met by the foolish 
brahmin. 

111. On seeing him he asked again: “What did the 
lady born of the thighs, say to you ?” The Siddha said: “Urvafl 
spoke to me thus, do not know* **. 

112. On hearing the words of the Siddha he said again with 
a gentle smile separating his lips: “Urvasi should be told thus by 
you—‘How will you know ?* ” 

113. “Of course I will do thb.’* After saying this the Siddha 
went to heaven and saw Urvasi coming out of Indra’s abode. 

II4-119. The excellent Siddha said (everything) to her. 
She replied : “Let the excellent brahmin perform some holy rite 
whereby Siddha, I can know him. Not otherwise”. Approaching 
the foolish brahmin again, the Siddha told what was said 
by Urvafi. The brahmin thereupon pledged the following holy 
rite: “O Siddha man, thb holy observance has been taken up 
by me in front of you. From today onwards I will not eat 
mixture. The truth has been uttered by me.” 

On being told thus, the Siddha went to heaven, met Urva^ 
and said: “The man has said thus : ‘From today onwards I 
will not eat Saktu at all* 

Urvail spoke to him again : “Now 1 have come to know him. 
The manner of taking up such a vow indicates he is foolish and 
ridiculous* After saying thb Urvafi went to her abode. 



652 


Brahma Pur 


120-122. The Siddha roamed over the Earth as he pleased. 
The excellent lady Urvail went to Varies! and took her bath in 
the waters of Matsyodarl assuming her divine form. This foolish 
brahmin too had gone to the river Matsyodari. On seeing 
Uivafi bathing there he was overwhelmed by passionate love 
that agitated him too much. 

123. He showed many gestures and pranks befitting a 
foolish person. UrvaH understood him. Coming to know that 
he was the selfsame fool as mentioned by Siddha she smilingly 
spoke: 

Vrvaii said : 

124. O highly blessed one, what do you desire from me ? 
Let it be mentioned quickly. I shall carry out your injunctions. 
Rest assured. 

Thi foolish brahmin said: 

125. O lady of pure smiles> save my life by surrendering 
yourself. 

Vydsa said : 

126. Then Urvail said to the brahmin: am now in the 

midst of a holy observance. Stay here for a while. Await my 
arrivar*. 

127-130. The brahmin said: am staying (here). She 

then went to heaven. The celestial damsel returned after a 
month and saw that brahmin lean and emaciated as he had been 
staying on the banks observing the fast. Seeing him steadfast in 
his decision she assumed the body of an old woman. She then 
went to Matsyodari and prepared a mixture of sugar, honey 
and ghee. After taking her bath the lady of nice eyes stood 
on the bank with a meaningful intention. She then called the 
brahmin and said : 

UrvaSi said : 

131. For the purpose of prosperity and well-being, O brah¬ 
min, a holy vow has been undertaken by me. At the conclusion 
of observance I am making this charitable offering. O brahmin, 
please accept it 



120.132*145 


633 


Vydsa said : 

132« He said : *‘What is this that is being offered ? It is 
sugar-coated. O gentle lady, my throat is being parched due 
to hunger. Hence I am asking. Please tell me”. 

133. She said: brahmin, it is a mixture prepared from 

flour mixed with sugar. Take this and please yourself. Do not 
delay’’. 

134*135. On hearing that the brahmin remembered what 
had happened before. Although he was afflicted by hunger he 
said: ‘‘O gentle lady, I cannot accept this. In front of the ex¬ 
cellent Siddha, the holy vow that I will not eat the mixture had 
been undertaken by me in order that Urvali might recollect 
me. Give this to someone else.” 

136. She said : ”0 gentle Sir, the observance undertaken 
by you refers to the wooden one. This is not made of wood. 
You have been extremely afflicted by hunger. Eat this”. 

137. The brahmin replied to her: ”0 gentle lady, the 
statement had not been qualified by me. A general vow had 
been undertaken by me.” 

138. That lady then said again: ”0 brahmin, if you do 
not want to eat take this home. Your family shall partake of it.” 

139-141. He said to her: lady of bright teeth, I am 

not going home. The excellent lady who surpasses everyone in 
the three worlds (Urva^i) by her qualities had been here. 
Afflicted by love 1 had requested her and I had been consoled 
by her saying: ^Stay here for a while’ and I had said: *1 
shall stay’. O gentle lady, a month has elapsed after she had 
gone and I have been staying here. O one who has undertaken 
a vow, I have been steadfast in my love for truth and I am 
eager to have a union (with her) 

142. On hearing his words, UrvaS resumed her excellent 
form. Smilix^ with a majestic grandeur she said to the brahmin: 

Urvafi said : 

143-145. Well done, O brahmin. Desirous of seeing me you 
have observed the holy rite with fully concentrated mind. 

I am Urvaii, O brahmin, and I have come here with a desire 
to kiiowi^ou. You have been tested (and found to be) firm in 



654 


Bfnkma 


your decision. You are saintly and trudiiul in your austerity. 
Go to the place Sukarava well known as Rupatirtha. 

O great brahmin, you will achieve a great Siddhi. Then 
you will attain me. 

Vy^a said : 

146. O brahmins, after saying this Urvail flew up to heaven. 
That brahmin of truthful austerity went to Rupatirtha. 

147. There he was devoted to peaceful enterprises. He was 
pure and he undertook holy observances. After casting off his 
physical body he went to the excellent Gandharvaloka. 

148. For a period of one hundred Manvantaras he ex* 
perienced all pleasures and then was bom as a king in an ex¬ 
cellent dynasty. He was eager in delighting and encouraging 
his subjects. 

149. He performed various sacrifices, concluding them with 
excellent monetary gifts. After entrusting his sons with the 
work of ruling the realm he went again to Saukarava. 

150. He died in the holy spot Rupatirtha and again went 
to the region of Indra. After enjoying pleasures there for a 
period of hundred Manvantaras he came off. 

151-152. O sages, for the union with Urvail he became 
Pururavas» the son of Budha in the excellent city Prati^thana. 
Thus any brahmin of truthful austerity can attain salvation 
after enjoying pleasures if he propitiates Vispu in the holy spot 
Rupatirtha in this birth. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYONE 


Manifestation of Mdyd 

The sages said : 

1-2. The benefit of the song of prayer at the time of keep¬ 
ing awake in propitiation of Viy^u has been listened to by us. 
By virtue of it the attained the greatest goal. O ex¬ 

tremely intelligent one, tell us bow devotion to VifQU can be 



121.3-14 


655 


efTected. Now we wish to hear about the holy rite or penance 
whereby that becomes possible. 

fydsa said: 

3. Listen^ O leading sages. I shall mention in due order 
how a person shall attain devotion to Visou with great benefit. 

4^5. The worldly existence is extremely terrible. It strikes 
terror into all living beings. It causes sorrows to men. Hundreds 
of miseries abound in it. A soul is bom again and again in 
thousands of species of lower living organ isms» O brahmins, and 
with great difficulty it attains human birth. 

6. After human birth he attains brahminhood, power of 
discrimination, sense of piety and happiness in successive births. 

7. Until the ultimate destruction of all sins of men accumu¬ 
lated in different births, devotion to Vasudeva identical with 
the universe, is not possible. 

8-9. Hence, O brahmins, I shall tell you how devotion to 
Vifnu is effected. 

A person may be devoted to other Devas mentally, verbally 
and physically. His soul is directed to those gods. Thereby, O 
excellent sages, he may become inclined to perform sacriiices. 

10. Then, O brahmins, with great concentration and purity 
of mind be begins to love the fire-god. When the fire-god is pro¬ 
pitiated bo becomes a devotee of sun. 

11. O brahmins, he worships sun-god regularly. When 
that god is pleased he becomes devoted to Sankara. 

12. He performs the worship of Sambhu duly and strenuo¬ 
usly. When the three-eyed god is satisfied he becomes devoted 
to Kesava. 

13. By worshipping the imperishable lord of the universe 
named Vasudeva, O excellent brahmins, he attains worldly 
pleasures and salvation. 


77ts sages said : 

14. O great s^, some men are avene to devotion of Vif qu. 
O brah©in, tell us why they do not worship Vi?pu, 



656 


Brahma Pur^ 


Vydsa said: 

15. In this world, O excellent sages, two types of created be¬ 
ings arc well-known, viz. Asura (demonic) and Daiva (di¬ 
vine). They are created formerly by the self-born lord. 

16. By attaining the divine nature men worship 
Acyuta. Those who have attained the demonic nature slander 
Hari. 

17. The wisdom of those base men is obliterated by Mayft 
of Vi;nu. Without attaining Hari, O brahmins, they attain 
lowest states. 

18. His Maya is deep and incomprehensible to Devas and 
Asuras. It causes great delusion to men. It cannot be surmounted 
by penons who are not self-possessed. 

The sagis said : 

19. We all wish to comprehend that insurmountable Mayi 
ofVi$nu. Osage conversant with details of virtue, it behoves 
you to narrate. Our eagerness is great. 

Vydsasaid : 

20. That Maya is like a dream or the jugglery of a conjuror. 
It pulls and stretches the world, excepting the lord himself who 
is competent to comprehend Hari*s M&ya. 

21* Even as I narrate, O brahmins, listen to the confounded 
states of a brahmin and Narada due to this Maya. 

22. Formerly, in a city there was a glorious king well known 
as Agnidhra. His son was a pure soul named Kamadamana, 

23. He was Dhannartoia (who sported in piety). He pra¬ 
ctised forbearance. He was engaged in devotedly serving his 
parents. He was skilful in delighting his subjects. He exerted 
himself much in the Vedas and scriptures. 

24. The father endeavoured to celebrate his marriage but 
he did not like it. So the father asked him: *^Why don’t you 
like to take a wife unto you ?• 

25. Indeed all men desire it for pleasure. A wife is the 
root of all happiness. Hence take one unto you”. 

26* Even after hearing the words of his father he main* 
tained silence with solemnity. O brahmins, the father urged 
him frequently. 



121 . 27-38 


657 


27» Then he said to his father : dear father, 1 have 

resorted to an attitude befitting my name (i.e. Kamadamana). 
This is clearly a devoted service to Visnu and it protects us'*. 

28-29. Approaching him, the father said: my son, this 

is not a righteous thing. This should not be adopted by a learn¬ 
ed man. Do as I direct you, my son. I am your father and 
hence your lord. Do not immene my family in the slough of 
hell due to the (impending) extinction of the family.**. 

30* On hearing the behest of his father the son of perfect 
self-control was reminded of the old strange ways of the world. 
He said : 

Thi son said: 

31. Listen to my words, dear father. It is a statement of 
truth with cogent reasoning. O king, one should act in con¬ 
formity with one*s name. It is very truthful. 

32. I have acquired thousands of births, hundreds of 
deaths and old age and acquisitions of and separation from 
wives in all of them. 

33. Hundreds of different stales have been attained by me 
—like those of grass, shrubs, creepers, winding plants, reptiles, 
animals, birds, beasts, women, men etc. 

34-35. I have been by toms a Ga^, a Kinnara, a Gan- 
dharva, a Vidyadhara, a great serpent, a Yak^, a Guhyaka, a 
Rak$asa, a Danava, an Apsaras, a divine being etc. Again and 
again I have attained a thousand oceans (?). I have been created 
many times during creation. I have been killed many times 
during armihilation. 

36. In view of my being tmited with [a wife I had been 
the victim of deception. Listen to what happened in the third 
preceding birth. I shall briefly mention it together with the 
grep tness of a holy spot. 

37. After passing through many births as man, god, Gan- 
dharva, Naga, Vidyadhara, birds and Kinnaras, dear father, 1 
was born in a family where I became a sage given to penance* 

38. Then my devotion to Vi$ 9 U, the slayer of Madhu and 
the lord of worlds, was very steady. By means of devotion and 
different holy rites and fasts, the wielder of discus, club and 
other micaculous weapons was propitiated by me. 



658 


Brahma Purdf)a 


39. The delighted noble Vi^Qu came there riding on the 

lord of birds (Garuda) (with the intention of) granting me 
boons. He said in a loud voice: twice-bom one^ let any 

boon be prayed for. I shall give you whatever you desire.** 

40. Then I said to lord Hari: Kelava, if you are 

pleased I shall choose a boon. O Janardana, I wish to know 
that great Maya belonging to you**. 

41. Tlie enemy of Madhu and Kaipibha then said to me: 

brahmin, of what avail U that Maya to you ? I shall give 

unto you virtue, wealth and love, prominent sons and freedom 
from sickness. 

42. Then I said again to the enemy of Mura: ‘*This is my 
desire to conquer wealth and virtue. I wish to know your 
Maya, O Pu^karakfa (Lotus*eyed one). Show that unto me**. 

43. Then lord Vijnu, the prominent Man*Lion, the lord 
of goddess of wealth said these words to me : *‘No one knows 
my Maya nor will any one ever know it. 

44-45. O brahmin, formerly the celestial sage Narada, son 
of Brahma, was a great devotee of mine. With great devotion, 
like you, he propitiated me formerly. I went unto him in 
order to grant him a boon. He too chose this very boon. Al¬ 
though he was prevented by me, he chose the same boon like 
you now, due to his excessive foolishness. 

46. Then I said : Narada, sink unto the water and you 

will know my Mayii*’« Thereupon Narada dipped himself under 
water. He was transformed into the daughter of the king of 
jam named SulIIa. 

47. When she reached the prime of youth (the king of 
Kail) gave her in marriage to Sudharma of fine virtue, the 
son of the king of Vidarbha. O great sage, in her company he 
indulged in unsurpassed pleasures. 

48. When his father passed away, the kiz^om duly passed 
on to him. Sudharma of great valour became delighted and 
ruled over the Vidarbha kingdom. He was surrounded by sons 
and grandsons. 

49. Then a great battle ensued between king Sudharma 
and the king of K&i!. In that battle were both the king of 
Vidarbha and the kir^ of Kait together with their sons and 
grandsons. 



12K50-60 


659 


50. (Defective text) SullUcame to know that her father 
and her husband were killed along with sons and grandsons. She 
set off from the city and went to the battlefield. On seeing her 
dead father and husband along with their sons and grandsons 
Suiila grieved much. 

51-54. The distressed lady lamented for along time in the 
midst of the armies of her husband and father. Grief-stricken 
she rushed to her mother. She then took the dead bodies of her 
husband, father, brothers, sons and grandsons to the great cre¬ 
mation ground and prepared the funeral pyre. She herself lit 
the fire. When the fire blazed forth, Suflla rushed into it crying 
loudly‘‘Alas I my son, Alas! my son‘\ She was then transformed 
again into the sage Narada. The fire too assumed the pure 
lustre of cool crystal. The full lake appeared and he came out 
of it. Lord Kelava stood in front of him with conch, iron club, 
sword (etc.) in his four hands. Laughingly he said to Narada 
the celestial sage: 

55. “Who is your son ? Tell me, O great sage. With 
your senses gone whom do you bevail ?” 

Thereupon, Narada was ashamed. Then I said to him; 

56. O Nirada, such is my Maya. It is full of pain and 
misery. It cannot be understood by the lotus-seated lord, Indra, 
Rudra, and others. How will you comprehend this incompre¬ 
hensible MSya ? 

57. On hearing my words the great sage said : “O Lord 
Vi;pu, grant me (the boon of) devotion to you. Whenever 
opportunity arrives let me remember you. Let me have your 
perpetual vision. 

58. O Acyuta, let the place where, in my grief, I had 
stepped on to the funeral pyre become a holy spot. Let it be 
presided over by you, O Kelava, together with the lotus-bom 
lord Brahma.’’ 

59. Then, O brahmin, Narada was told by me thus “Let 
your funeral pyre be in the holy spot Sitoda. I, as Vi$nu, shall 
stay here always. Mahelvara will stay on the northern side. 

60. After cutting off that head of Brahmi which uttered 
harsh words, the thrcc-cyed lord will come to this holy spot of 
thine for casting off the skull. 



660 


Brahma Purd^ 


61. When the destroyer of the three cities, Siva, takes his 
holy dip in this Tirtha, the skull will drop down on the ground. 
Thereafter, this holy spot will become well known all over the 
Earth as Kapalamocana.** 

62. Ever since then the cloud^vehicled Loid Indra has 
never forsaken this holy spot. O brahmin, say that the sin of 
the slaughter of a brahmin ceased to become fierce in him 
(defective verse). 

63. As long as the slayer of the enemies of Indra does not 
forsake that holy spot it will continue to be great and sacred. 
This secret holy spot has been eulogised by Devas as Avimukta. 
It is called Imperishable. It bestows merit. 

64. Even after committing sins, if a man enters that Tirtha 
he becomes pure and free from lapses. When he meditates on 
me he becomes pure and attains salvation due to the grace of 
the Lord. 

65. In another birth he is born as one called Rudrapi^&ca 
and experiences some misery. After many years he is freed from 
sins and he takes birth in the abode of a brahmin. 

66. He will be pure and one having self'Cootro}. At the time 
of his death Rudra will repeat the beneficial T&raka Mantra to 
him. After saying this to Narada, an excellent brahmin, I went 
to the ocean of milk, my abode. 

67-68. That brahmin (i.e. Narada) went to heaven and is 
being honoured by the king of Gandharvas. 

Thus everything has been told to you to enlighten you. 
My Maya cannot be understood. If you wish to know enter 
this water and you will come to know.*’ 

That brahmin, thus enlightened by Hari merged himself 
under water by the *brcc of the inevitable future. 

69-70. O father, that brahmin merged himself under the 
water in the Tirtha Kokamukha and then he was trans¬ 
formed into a girl in the abode of a Gtod^a. She was en¬ 
dowed with beauty, good conduct and excellent qualities. She 
attained youthful ^e. She was married to Subahu, son of a 
C&nd^la, who was devoid of handsome features. She did not 
like her husband but he liked her much. 

71. She gave birth to two sons bereft of eyes^ht and a 



121 . 72-82 


661 


daughter who was deaf. The husband was very poor and so the 
helpless girl used to go to the river bank everyday and cry. 

72. Once she went to the river taking the water pot with 
her. In order to take her bath she entered the water but was 
immediately transformed into her original form of a brahmin 
of good conduct engaged in holy rites and yogic practice. 

73. As a long time passed by after her dq^arture^ her 
husband came to the holy river in search of her. He saw the 
water pot but not her on the bank. Thereupon in his excess of 
grief he lamented loudly. 

74. Then the two blind sons and the deaf daughter came 
there. They too were distressed and on perceiving their crying 
father they wept bitterly. 

75-76. Then he asked some brahmins who were on the 
river bank : ^‘Tell me. Was a woman seen by you coming 
this way for water ?** 

They said i “She entered the river but never came up. 
Only this much are we aware of.’* 

On hearing their terrible words he began to cry again. 
Tears flooded hb eyes. 

77. On seeing him cry along with his daughter and sons I 
too became distressed. Grief reminded me» O Klng^ that I was 
myself the Can<^ila maiden. 

78. Then^ O King^ I said to that Candala : “Why do you 
cry in dbtress ? You are not going to get her back by your 
foolish cries. It is in vain. Of what avail to you is this lamen¬ 
tation ?’* 

79. He said to me : “Both these sons are blind. The only 
girl is deaf. How can I, O brahmin, console these and bi ing 
them up ?” 

80. After saying thb he cried all the more loudly along 
with hb children. The longer I watched the Candala crying 
the more I pitied him. 

81. Preventing him frc«n crying further in his grief, I 
narrated to him the incidents of my life. Thereupon the dis¬ 
tressed man entered the waters of Kokamukha. 

82. Immediately after hb entr>^ into the water the Cap- 
d&la became free from sins by the efiBcacy of the Tirtha. Even 



662 Brahma Purina 

as 1 stood watching, he entered an aerial chariot bright as the 
moon, O father, and went to heaven. 

83. After his entering the water and passing away my 
grief increased causing me great delusion. Then, O excellent 
king, I dived into the sacred waters of the Koka and went to 
heaven. 

84* Again I was born, this time in the family of a Vaiiya. 
Here also I was distressed due to pain. I was endowed with the 
faculty of remembering my previous births due to the grace 
of the excellent Tirtha. With a dejected mind I went to Koka* 
mukha putting sufficient restraint on my mind and utterances. 

85. I observed holy rites and made my body emaciated* 
Then I went to heaven. Coming down therefrom I am now 
bom in your abode. O father, I can remember my previous 
births by the grace of Hari. 

86*87* I propitiated the lord in Kokamukha. I have dis¬ 
carded my desire for both auspicious and inauspicious things. 

After saying this he bowed to his father and went to Koka¬ 
mukha. He propitiated Visnu in the form of Boar. The excel¬ 
lent man attained Siddhi. 

Thus Kamadamana forsook his defective physical body in 
the Kokamukha, the extremely sacred and excellent Tirtha. 
He went to heaven by aerial chariots resembling the sun, 
along with his sons and grandsons. 

88. Thus O brahmins, the M&yi of the great lord, has 
been described by me. Even Devas are not able to think about 
it. It is like a dream or the jugglery of a conjuror. The whole 
universe is deluded by it. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYTWO 

ForiUlling Juiure 

Tkesagis said: 

1. What has been narrated by you, O Vyasa, regarding the 
inscrutable Miy& of Viypu, has been heard by us* 



122.242 


663 


2. From you, O great ss^, we wish to hear the precise 
process of annihilation at the end of a Kalpa, called Mahi- 
pralaya. 

fyjsa said : 

3. Let it be heard precisely, O excellent sages, how the 
process of annihilation takes place at the end of a Kalpa as well 
as at the time of Prak^ta Pralaya* 

4. O excellent brahmins, the human month is a day unto 
the Pitrs (Manes), the human year is a day unto the heaven- 
dwellers and a thousand sets of four Yugas constitute a day of 
Brahma. 

5. Krta, Treti, Dvipara and Kali constitute a set of four 
Yugas containing twelve thousand Divine years. 

6. The four Yugas are similar in form. Krta is the Yuga 
first. O sages, Kaliyuga is the last 

7. That is because creation is carried out by Brahma in the 
first Krta yuga and similarly annihilation is carried out in the 
end in the Kaliyuga. 

T/u sages said: 

8. Oholy Sir, it beloves you to describe in detail the 
nature of Kaliyuga when the four-footed sacred Dharma 
undergoes deficiency. 

lyosa said: 

9. Understand the form of Kali, O sinless brahmins, about 
which you have asked me. It is extensive but understand it 
briefly. 

10. In the age of Kali the actions of men are not based 
on the conduct prescribed for Varnas and A^ramas. Nor do 
they follow the specific injunctions of the Ssuna, Rk and Yajus 
Vedas as their guide. 

11. In K^iyi^a marriages are not sacred ties, students 
are not under the control of preceptors, sons are not righte¬ 
ous, there are no orderly holy rites in the sacred fire. 

12. In Kaliyuga the strongest man, whoever he may 
be and in whichever family he is bom, becomes the lord of all. 
Man maintains himself through girls taken from all the castes. 



Brahma Puribyi 


664 

13. A brahmin is initiated in the Kali age by any expe¬ 
dient andf O leading brahmins} anything can be considered a 
mode of atonement. 

14. Everything is considered a sacred text in the Kali age, 
O brahmins. Whoever utters whatever thing is taken to be a 
holy scripture. Deities are on the same footing in the Kali age. 
Everything is everyone’s Airama (stage in life). 

15. Fast, exertion and charity constitute pious activities 
in Kali age and rites are performed as one pleases. 

16. In Kali age men become haughty and arrogant even 
with a little wealth. Pride of beauty in women will be on the 
basis of their tresses of hair. 

17. As gold, jewels, diamonds as well as garments dwindle 
in the Kali age, women will be embellished by their tresses. 

16. Women will forsake their husbands having no wealth. 
In Kali age it is the moneyed man who becomes the lord of 
damsels. 

19. Whoever gives the maximum amount is considered their 
lord. Nobility in men is based on thb lordship. 

20. Hoarded wealth is exhausted in the maintenance of a 
home; intellect has the one end of hoarding wealth; riches 
come to an end in the enjoyment of pleasures in Kali age. 

21. Women in Kali age will be harlots desirous of luxury. 
They covet men who have earned much by illegal means, 

22. At that time^ O brahmins, no man will brook a loss to 
his vested interest even to the extent of a fourth of a Pa^ (the 
smallest coin) even when he is entreated by his own friend. 

23. O brahmins, in the Kali age, the mind will always be 
manly and courageous. Ck>ws will be solemnly honoured as long 
as they yield milk. 

24. Fearing a drought the subjects will be afraid of hunger. 
They will then have their eyes riveted to the sky. 

25* Like the sages of yore men will have roots, leaves and 
fruits for their food. They will think of killing themselves in 
their misery due to the absence of rain. 

26« They will have perpetual famine and pain. They will 
be incapable of mastering things. By virtue of their lapses their 
happiness will be spoiled. 



J 22.27-39 


663 


27. At the advent of Kali age people will take food without 
taking bath. They will not honour and worship fire, gods, and 
guests. They will not oflTcr libations and oblations with water 
and balls of rice. 

28. In Kali age women will be greedy and lecherous. They 
will have puny bodies but they will be gluttonous. They will 
have little good fortune but plenty of offsprings. 

29. Scratching their heads with hands, women will disobey 
their elders and husbands. They will be unrestrained. 

30. Women will be furious. They will be more interested 
in sustaining themselves; they will be wanting in the purity of 
bodies. They will habitually speak harsh and untruthful words. 

31. Even the women of noble families will be ill-behaved. 
They will yearn for men of bad conduct. They will be unchaste 
and disloyal to their husbands. 

32. Men of no holy rites will study the Vedas. Householders 
will not perform homas nor will they give appropriate things in 
charity. 

33. Forest-dwellers will take to the diet pertaining to the 
villagers. Mendicants will be influenced by filial affection and 
other contacts towards scmis. 

34. At the advent of Kali age kings will no longer protect 
their subjects. They will take the wealth of common man under 
the pretext of taxes and fees. 

35. Whoever happens to possess horses, chariots and ele¬ 
phants will become the king. In the Kali age, those who happen 
to be weak will be servants. 

36. Vailyas will forsake their traditional duty such as agri¬ 
culture, trade etc., and take to the Sudra activities. They will 
sustain themselves by means of crafts etc. 

37. Sudras will take up the holy rite of begging for alms. 
Base men will display their signs ofrenunciation. Unconsecrated 
men will resort to heretic activities. 

38. Harassed by the burden of taxes and famine, people 
w41 become miserable. They will migrate to those lands where 
wheat and barley abound. 

39. As the Vedic path falls into disuse, as the people become 
more and more heretic, sins will increase and the span of life of 
the people will shrink. 



666 


Brakma Pwrii^a 


40. When men begin to undertake austerities notprescribed 
by sacred texts there will be infantile mortalily due to the fault 
of kings. 

41. Girls will give birth to children at the ages of five, six 
and seven years begotten by men of the ^es of eight, nine and 
ten. 

42. Hairs will begin to turn grey at the twelfth year. No 
one will live upto the twentieth year. 

43. Men will be destroyed in a short time because their 
wisdom and intelligence will be mediocre and their kings will be 
wicked. They will wear fabe marks. 

44. The increase in the severity of the Kali age should be 
inferred by wbe persons as the heretic activities are observed 
more and more. 

45. Whenever there is destruction and loss of good people 
following the Vedic path the increase in the severity of Kali 
age should be inferred by wbe persons. 

46. When the undertakings of men of virtuous activities do 
not flourish, O brahmins, the prominence of Kali age should be 
inferred by wise persons. 

47. When persons cease to perform sacrifices in the worship 
of Purufottama, lord of sacrifices, the influence of Kali age 
should be inferred. 

48. The increase in the severity of Kali should be inferred 
by wise and intelligent persons when there is no interest in 
Vedic discussions and heretical doctrines are entertained. 

49. In the Kali age, O brahmins, men overpowered by 
heresy will never worship Visuu, the lord of the Universe, the 
Supreme lord, the Creator of everything. 

50. Men influenced by heresy will prattle thus : of what 
avail are Devas ? Of what use are the brahmins and the Vedas ? 
Of what avail is the purificatory wash with water 

51. At the advent of Kali age, O brahmins, clouds will 
shower less rain, plants will produce less, and fruits will have 
less nutritional value. 

52. In Kali age clothes will come down only upto the knees, 
Ac trees will be like the Sami tree, the castes will exhibit the 
characterbtics of Sudras. 



122.53-63 


667 

53. When the Kali^e approaches and advances foodgrains 
will turn into atoms; cow milk will be mostly that got from 
goats and the unguent will be Uiita grass. 

54. In the Kali age, O excellent sages> mothers- and fathers- 
in-law will be mainly considered elders. Men and women shall 
take food in open buildings (Eating Houses) along with their 
friends (?), 

55. Men following their fathers-in-law will say : Whose 
mother ? Whose father ? A man is the product of his own 
Karman.’’ 

56. Men of insignificant intellect will be afflicted again 
and again by verbalj mental and physical faults and they will 
commit sins everyday. 

57. O brahmins, everything that is conducive to misery in 
respect of persons without truth, cleanliness and honourable 
shyness will take place in the Kali age. 

58. At that time when there is no self-study of the Vedas, 
when there is no utterance of the Mantra Va^at, when there 
is no utterance of Svadha and Svaha, there will rarely be a 
brahmin in the world. 

59. In a short time he will perform an excellent meritorious 
rite which in the Krta yuga is done by hard penance. 

The sages said : 

60. At what time does a simple act of piety yield a great 
benefit? It behoves you to mention it entirely. Wc have a keen 
desire to hear. 

Vydsa said : 

61. In the blessed Kali O brahmins, there shall be a 
great benefit through less strain. Women and Sudras shall be¬ 
come blessed. Understand one thing more. 

62-63. In regard to penance, practice of celibacy, performance 
of Japa, O brahmins, what is achieved in the Kftayuga in ten 
years is achieved in a year in the Tretayuga. It is achieved in a 
month in the Dv&parayuga and in a day and night in the Kali- 
yuga. Hence we can say a person achieves good things in the 
Kali agf easily. 



Brahma PurSna 




64. By singing songs in praise of Keiava in the Kali age 
one obtains what one obtains in the Kfta yuga by meditation^ 
in the Trcta yuga by performing sacrifices and in the Dvipara 
by conducting worship. 

65. In the Kali age, a person attains increased virtue by 
means of a simple effort. People become well-vcrscd in piety 
with a little strain. Hence I am pleased with Kali age. 

66^69. Formerly, the twice-born grasped the Vedas by obser¬ 
ving the holy rites. Thereafter, they performed sacrifices by 
means of wealth acquired by pious means. Meaningless talk, 
eating unconsccratcd food (VrataBhojana) and aimless squan¬ 
dering of money (Vrata Svam) shall lead to the downfall of the 
twice-born along with their attendants. Improper performance 
of everything leads to faults. O brahmins, the twice-born cannot 
take in food and drink as they wish because they are bound by 
certain conventions in every activity. They arc endowed with 
humility and they attain other worlds with great stress and 
strain. 

70. But a Sudra achieves salvation merely by serving the 
twice-born. He is authorized in Pakayajfia (mere ccx>king of his 
food is no less than a Yajfia). Hence a Sudra is more blessed. 

71. In the Kaliyuga, there is no restriction on what should 
be eaten or what should not be eaten. Thei^e is no restraining 
law in regard to sins. O leading s^es, hence this has been men¬ 
tioned as something good. 

72. Wealth should be acquired by men without a conflict 
with their duties; wealth should be distributed among deserving 
persons; sacrifices should be duly performed. 

73. In its acquisition and maintenance there is great strain 
and pain, O excellent brahmins. Similarly, in the matter of 
utilising it properly too there is great effort; wealth should be 
known as something very diflicult to deal with. 

74. By means of these and other strenuous efforts, O excel¬ 
lent brahmins, people attain Priijapatya and other worlds in due 
order. 

75. A women attains other worlds by duly serving her hus¬ 
band by thoughts, words and deeds. That is because, O 
brahmins, she attains the same world as he. 



122.76-123-3 


669 


76. Thus she attains those worlds without much effort like 
the man. 

For the third time it has been mentioned by me that women 
are good. 

77. Thus has been mentionedi O brahmins^ what you have 
come here for. Hence, ask as you please. I shall explain every¬ 
thing clearly to you. 

78-80. In the Kali age, virtue is achieved wiih very little 
effort by men who wash off their sins by means of water in the 
form of qualities of the soul. O excellent sages, the same is achi¬ 
eved by Sudras devoted to the service of the twice-born. Simi¬ 
larly, it is achieved by women without strain merely by serving 
their husbands. Hence, all these three are considered by me 
highly blessed. 

In the Kftaand other yugas the twice-born have to undergo 
great strain in accomplishing piety. 

81-82. But O excellent sages, in Kaliyuga, men attain 
Siddhi (spiritual achievement) by means of simple austerities. 
Blessed people act virtually. O sages, conversant with virtue, 
what has been desired by you has been described by me even 
without being asked. What else shall be done, O brahmins? 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYTHREE 

ForettUing Future {contd.) 

The sages said : 

1-3. We do not know whether the advent of Kali is immi¬ 
nent or far off. Therefore, we wbh for 6nal Yuga and the end of 
Dv&para age. For the present we have come here for the acqui¬ 
sition of Dharma. We shall take up the greatest virtue and 
happiness with the smallest effort. The final Yuga that causes 
terror and heartburn has approached. It has destroyed Dharma. 
O sage, conversant with Dharma ! it beloves you to describe it 
along ^th the symptoms in detail. 



670 


Brahma PurdM 


Vydsa said : 

4. In the 6nal Yuga will come up those kings who will 
cease to be protectors and take away the portion of oblations. 
They will be interested only in saving themselves. 

5. In the final Yuga, non-K^atriyas will become kings» 
brahmins will resort to Sudras for sustenance and Sudras will 
maintain the conduct and way of life of the brahmins. 

6. In the final Yuga^ O excellent sages, brahmins well-versed 
in the Vedas as well as fallen evil ones will take food sitting 
in the same row. Havis offerings will be devoid of usual holy 
rites. 

7. Men will become ill-mannered. They will be devoted to 
the hoarding of wealth. They will be fond of liquor and meat. 
Base men will carnally approach the wives of their friends. 

8. In the final Yuga, thieves will carry out the activities 
of kings. Kings will practise thieving, servants will take food and 
enjoy without taking permission first. 

9. In the final Yuga, wealth and assets will become impor¬ 
tant. The conduct and activities of the good will not be honoured. 
The fallen ones will not be rebuked and treated with contempt. 

10. Men will be ugly with the noses missing and the hairs 
in disarray. Girls less than sixteen in age will give birth to 
children. 

11. In the final yuga, cooked food will be sold in the open 
places; brahmins will sell the Vedas; women will sell their 
honour. 

12. Everyone will discuss and expound the supreme Brah¬ 
man and the Vedas. Brahmins will follow the V&jasaneya texts. 
The propounders will resemble the 6udras and the brahmins 
will become the disciples (ofSudras). 

13. 6udras will begin to expound Dharma. Their teeth 
will be white. They will conquer their sense-organs. They will 
wear ocher robes. They will sustain themselves with knavishness 
and crooked intellect. 

14. In the final Yuga beasts of prey will increase in 
number and cows will dwindle in number. Good men will 
decrease. 



123«15-26 


671 


15. The base ones will stay in the end. The subjects will 
lose bashfulness. They are doomed in that final age. 

16. Even the excellent brahmins sell fruits of their austeri¬ 
ties and sacrifices. The seasons will become adverse during that 
ultimate age. 

17. Similarly, steers under training will be yoked to the 
plough even when they arc two years old. When the yuga comes 
to a close, the clouds will begin to shower in a quaint way. 

18. Those who are bom in the family ofheroes will become 
kings as the lower subjects become baser and baser at the close 
of the age. 

19. Charitable gifts will be obligatory on the parts of 
parents while the sons will never perform sacred rites as the age 
comes to a close. 

20. When the age comes to a close, the Earth will be mostly 
barren arid soil; the highways will be infested with robbers; 
almost all the people will become merchants. 

21. Sons will e^erly share the hereditary assets and 
charitable gifts. Urged by greed and other bad qualities they 
will be antagonistic to one another and will even attempt to 
take away other*s shares. 

22. At the close of the Yuga when tenderness, beauty and 
jewellery cease to exist women will be decked by means of their 
tresses. 

23. A householder devoid of stamina and virility will 
attempt to have sexual pleasure. When the Yuga comes to a 
close no sexual indulgence will be on a par with that with one^s 
own wife. 

24. The following is the characteristic feature of the close 
of the Yi^a. Most of the men will be base in character and 
ignoble; their handsomeness will be futile; men will be in a 
minority; there will be more women. 

25* Population will consist mostly of beggars; people will 
never give anything to one another. They will perish on being 
harassed by kings and robbers or destroyed by fire or fighting. 

26. When the Yuga comes to a close, plants will cease to 
bear fruits; youi^ men will exhibit the characteristics of old 
men and men of no good conduct will be happy in the world. 



672 


Brahma Purdr^a 


27. When the Yuga comes to a close rough and low winds 
showering hailstone will begin to blow in the rainy seasons; the 
other world will become of doubtful existence. 

28. Kings like the Vaisyas will maintain themselves with 
wealth and foodgrains. When the Yuga passes oiT, no one will 
behave like kinsman to anyone. 

29. Agreements and promises will cease to function. When 
the Yuga comes to a close a debt will lose itself along with a 
sense of propriety and decorum. 

30. Delight of men will be fruitless and the anger of men 
will be fruitful. When the Yuga comes to a close people will 
begin to rear goats for getting milk. 

31. Similarly, sacrifices will be performed not in accordance 
with the sacred texts. Men who profess to be scholars will be 
acting in an unauthorized manner. 

32*36. There is no doubt that there will not be anyone to 
expound what is mentioned in the scriptures. Without resorting 
to elderly persons everyone will come to know everything; when 
the close of the Yuga is imminent there will be no one who is not a 
poet; all the stan will be devoid of Yogas; the twice*born people 
will not abide by their holy rites. When the close of the Yuga is 
imminent, the kings will be robbers. Bastards, dishonest men 
and liquor addicts will begin to expound Brahman. At the 
close of the Yuga, excellent brahmins will perform horse sacri« 
fice. Brahmins will eat forbidden food. They will perform 
sacrifices on behalf of those who do not deserve them. When the 
close of the Yuga is imminent brahmins will become greedy of 
wealth. They will utter the word ‘‘BhoV’- No one will learn 
(the Vedas). 

37. Women will have a sii^le conch shell (tied round their 
necks) which they will tie up with a rope. Stars will be devoid 
of lustre. The ten quarters will become adverse. 

38. At the close of the Yuga the red lustre of twilight will 
be of a burnt hue. Sons will employ their fathers in their own 
jobs and the daughter$-in*law their mother8*in*law. 

39. In the ultimate Yugas women as well as men will live 
like this. They will take food and enjoy without conducting 
holy rites. Brahmins will not perform sacrifices in the sacred 
fires. 



123.40-50 


673 


40. Without offering alms and oblations men will partake 
of their meals. Deceiving their husbands who are asleep women 
will go elsewhere. 

41. The husbands may not be sick, nor devoid of hand¬ 
someness; they may not be weak, they may not be jealous too. 
(Still the women are disloyal to them.) When the Yuga comes 
to a close no one will be grateful for helps rendered. 

The sagis said : 

42-43. When virtue is held in abeyance and suspense thus, 
in which country will those men who are harassed by taxes 
reside? What will be their diet? What will be their pastimes? 
What will be their rites? What will be their likes? What will be 
their magnitude? What will be their span of life? What quarter 
will they resort to before they reach once again the Kfta Age? 

Vyisasaid : 

44. After this, when the virtue falls down the subjects will 
become devoid of good qualities. After attaining loss of good 
conduct they will attain deficiency in their longevity. 

45. They will incur decline in strength due to defi¬ 
ciency in longevity; pallor and discolouration due to decline in 
strength, sickness and pain due to pallor; and despondency due 
to pain of sickness. 

46. Due to despondency self-knowledge will be aroused in 
them; due to self-knowledge inclination towards piety (will be 
acquired by them). By attaining the highest point thus they will 
reach the K;*ta Yuga. 

47. Some will be practising piety to a certain extent; some 
will attain a neutral state; some will follow misconceived piety; 
some will attain jolly temperament. 

48. Some will come to the conclusion that only perception 
and inference constitute true testimony; others will say that no¬ 
thing can be true testimony. 

49. Some will be addicted to atheism and ruin piety; some 
will become deluded. Brahmins will profess to be great scholars. 

50. People will be excluded from the knowledge of scrip¬ 
tures. They will retain faith only in what is current for the 
nonce. Men devoid of knowledge will become arrogant. 



674 


Brahma 


5L When piety becomes unsteady and disarranged^ there 
will still be people honoured by the noble ones who will prac¬ 
tise auspicious rites and resort to charitable deeds. 

52. When people begin to eat indiscriminately, when 
they think that they are protected by themselves, when 
they conceal themselves, when they become devoid of 
TMTCYf when they are shamelessin their character, these are the 
signs of Kali age. 

53» During the period of the onslai^ht of Kali that des¬ 
troys strict adherence to wisdom, even unprepared persons will 
attain Siddhi in a short while. 

54. O brahmins, if the people of lower castes resort to the 
perpetual course of conduct of the brahmins, it is a feature of 
Kali. 

55. When the Yuga comes to a close there will be great 
wars, heavy downpour, strong gusts of wind and scorching 
heat. It is the characteristic feature of Kali. 

56. When the close of Yuga is imminent, R&k^asas and 
beings who know through the spies enjoy the Earth in the 
guise of brahmins. 

57-60. The following types of evil men will abound in the 
world : Persons devoid of self-study of the Vedas; persons 
who do not utter Vasaf mantras; evil leaders; arrogant ones; 
those who eat flesh; those who eat indiscriminately; those with 
futile holy rites; foolish ones greedy of wealth; petty ones;those 
with insignificant paraphernalia; those who are surrounded by 
diverse dealings (?); those who have fallen down from per¬ 
petual piety; those who take away other's jeweb; those who 
harass other men^s wives; passionate men; wicked men; deceit¬ 
ful persons; and men fond of rbky adventures. When these 
persons abound there will be sages of many forms. They will 
be men of want and privation (?) 

61. Men will tumour and worship by means of discourse 
all those important persons who are bom in the Kali Age. 

62. There will be persons stealing v^etables, garments, 
foodstuffs and small baskets and boxes. 

63. There will be thieves outwitting odier thieves, there 
will be slayers of murderers* When tbe thieves are destroyed by 
other, thieves, there will be peace everywhere. 



J 23,64-76 


675 


64. When a time characterized by worthlessness and full 
of disturbances comes and there are no holy rites, men who 
are afflicted by the burden of taxes, will resort to the forest. 

65. When the holy rites of sacrifices cease to be performed, 
demons, beasts of prey, worms, mice and serpents will 
attack men. 

66. At the close of the Age some excellent men in certain 
places will enjoy prosperity, abundance of food, of good hcalt 
and self-sufficiency in the kinsmen. 

67. In the different regions there will be separate groups 
of persons equipped with rafts and requisites. They will be 
protected by themselves as well as robbed by themselves. 

68. As time passes on, men will be dislodged from their 
countries; they will lose valuable things along with their 
kinsmen. 

69. They will be afflicted by starvation and they will run 
away in great fright taking their children with them. They 
will cross the river Kauiikl. 

70. They will resort to the lands of Ahga, Vanga, Kalihga, 
Kaimira and Kolala. They will occupy valleys and chasms 
between the mountains abounding in sages. 

71-72. They will occupy the entire ridge of the Himalayas 
and the coasts of the briny sea. They will use rotting leaves, 
barks of trees and skins of deer and stay there when the Age 
comes to a close. The men will stay in the forests along with the 
alien barbarous groups of Mlecchas. 

73. The Earth will be neither void nor full of forests. Kings 
will be both protectors and non-protcctors. 

74. Men will sustain themselves by means of deer, fish, 
birds, beasts of prey, serpents, insects, worms, honey, vegetables, 
green fruits and roots. 

75. Like sages men will use barks of trees, skins of deer and 
will have for their food the rotting and dccayii^ leaves and 
fruits. 

76. The people will not be able to extract oil from seeds. 
They will be assailed and struck by darts fixed to wooden 
pieces. They will always rear goats, sheep, asses, mules and 
camels. 



676 


Brahma Pur4^ 


77. They will resort to the banks of rivers and for the 
sake of diverting the course of water they will restrain the 6ow 
of currents. They will be engaged in mutual petty trade and 
deal in cooked food. 

78-79. The hairs growing from their bodies will remain so 
and dirt will get accumulated in between. Some of them will 
have many children, and others will be devoid of progeny. 
They will be devoid of nobility of birth and good conduct. 
Some will sustain themselves by evil means. The base and vile 
subjects will follow a base moral code. 

80-82. The maximum expectation of life of those men will 
be thirty. The people will be weak and emaciated due to the 
enjoyment of worldly pleasures. They will be overwhelmed by 
the sadness of old age. Due to sickness their virility becomes 
reduced. Since the reliance on life expectation is restrained 
people desist from indulgence. They are desirous of meeting 
and serving pious men. As business dealings become rarer, they 
will resort to truthfulness. 

83. Due to the non-fulfilment of their desires they will be 
pious in their conduct. Themselves afflicted by destruction 
they will perform consccratory rites. 

84. Thus the people, desirous of serving, will adhere to the 
good practice of charitable gifis, truthfulness and protection 
of living beings. Then Dharma (virtue) will function to the 
extent of one-fourth and the people will attain welfare. 

85. As people gradually change for the better and their 
capacity to infer improves they will enquire, ^^What is the tasty 
thing?’* They will see that it is Dharma (virtue). 

86. The people, who had incurred loss and damage once, 
will attain prosperity when they take to virtue. They will then 
see theKrtaYuga. 

87-88. People are of good conduct in the Krta Yuga and 
it is said that there is loss in the Kali Age. The time ‘*is 
but one even as the moon is but one. When the moon is envelo* 
ped in darkness it does not shine. It is then like the Kali Age. 
When the mom is released by darkness, it shines. It is then 
like the Krta Yuga. 

89»93. This classification of Ages is mere secondary 
assertion. But the supreme Brahman is the real meaning of the 



123-93^ 124.4 


677 


Vedas. It it non-disjointed,it is not realized;it is held as here¬ 
ditary legacy. 

Penance is assertion of what is desired. It is made fixed and 
steady. Holy rites are achieved by means of good qualities 
and good qualities are purified by means of holy rites. 

Benediction is in consonance with place and time on 
viewing the person (who is the recipient of the same). In every 
Age it has been cited by sages at the proper time. 

The auspicious and meritorious benedictions are but the 
reaction of virtue, wealth, love, salvation and gods. So also is 
longevity in the difTerent ages. 

The changes of the Ages have begun to function long since 
due to the nature of the creator. The world of living beings is 
always undergoing change by fall and rise. It does not remain 
still even for a moment. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYFOUR 

DeseripHon of Amihilatim 

Vy&sa said : 

1. The reabsorption of all living beings is of three kinds. 
(I) Naimittika (conditional) (2) Prakrtika (natural) and 
Atyantika (the ultimate one). 

2. The conditional re-absorption is Brahma (pertaining to 
Brahma). It is the re-absorption at the end of a Kalpa (set 
of four Yugas). The ultimate one is salvation and the 
Prakrta (natural one) is (delimited) by the Parardhas. 

Th$ sages said : 

3. O holy sage, explain the number of Parardha as it has 
been mentioned before, and by doubling which the natural re- 
abscM^ion has to be realized. 

Vydsa said : 

4. O brahmins, each one of the digits is considered ten 



678 


Brahma Purd^ 


times as much in value as the previous one on the right. There¬ 
fore at the eighteenth place it is called Parardha (i.e* one 
followed by seventeen zeros). 

5. Double the Parardha is considered^ O brahmins, as 
Praktta Laya (natural reabsorption). At that time every¬ 
thing manifest merges and dissolves into the unmanifest which 
is the cause of all. 

6. Human Nimeya (i.e. winkii^ time) is called a Matra 
and it is the basic unit of time. Fifteen M&tr&s constitute one 

and thirty Ka^^as one Kata. 

7. Fifteen Kalis make a Nadika. In the calculation of time 
by means of the measurement of water it is equivalent to half 
of thirteen Palas (6^ Palas of water trickling down through a 
hole may take a Nadiki of time i.e. 24 minutes to flow out 
completely), 

8. According to Magadha calculation it is time for the full 
trickling down of a Prastha of water through four holes four 
Ahgulas from one another, pricked by means of golden pul¬ 
ses (?) (? Each bole is of the size of a pulse grain). 

9. O excellent brahmins, two Nadikas make one Muhurta 
(48 minutes). A day of twentyfour houn consists of thirty 
Muhurtas and thirty days make a month. 

10. Twelve months make a year and this constitutes a 
period of a day and a night in the heaven. Three hundred and 
sixty human years make one divine year. 

11« Twelve thousand divine years make a set of four Yugas. 
A thousand sets of four Yugas are considered to be one day of 
Brahma. 

12. It is called a Kalpa. O excellent brahmins, fourteen 
Manus reign over that period of time. At the end of that period 
is the Naimittika Laya (conditional re-absorption) of Brahma. 

13. O leading brahmins^ its nature is very terrible. Listen 
to it even as I narrate. I shall aq>lain the Prakrta I^ya 
(natural re-absorption) afterwards. 

14. At the end of a set of four Yugas when the surface of 
the Earth is almost worn off there will be a very severe drought 
extending over a period of a hundred years. 

15. Then^ O excellent sages, almost all of those earthly 



124J6-28 


679 


things that are of poor strength are destroyed due to the 
excessive pressure. 

16. Then the imperishable lord Kr^^a assumes the form of 
Rudra and endeavours to keep the subjects within himself for 
the purpose of annihilation. 

17. Then, O excellent sages, lord Vi^nu is stationed in the 
seven rays of the sun and sucks up the water. 

18. After drinking up the water present in the elements and 
living beings, O brahmins, he makes the entire surface of the 
Earth dried up and withered. 

19. He dries up oceans, riven, mountains and mountain 
springs. He sucks up the water that is present in the nether 
worlds too. 

20. As every particle of water vanishes there will be seven 
suns, each of a thousand rays and they become increased in 
size due to their watery diet. 

21. Blazing from beneath and above, O brahmins, those 
seven suns bum up the three worlds along with the nether 
worlds. 

22. On being burnt by those blazing suns, the three worlds, 
along with the extensive area of mountains, trees and oceans, 
become devoid of viscidity. 

23. Then the entire area of the three worlds, O brahmins, 
has all the trees and watery parts dried up. The Earth attains 
the shape of the back of a tortoise. 

24. I'hereafter lord Kara, the annihilator of all created be* 
ings, terrible like black fire, bums the nether worlds from below 
by means of the hot breath of the serpent Scfa. 

25-26. After burning the nether worlds that huge fire 
reaches the Earth. It bums the entire surface of the Earth. 
Then the terrible fire bums the Bhuvah world and the Svarga 
world. With the clusters of flames whirlii^ and curling the fire 
revolves there itself. 

27-28. At that time the entire area of the three worlds 
appears like a frying pan. It is surrounded by whirling clusters 
of flames. At that time, O brahmins, the residents of the two 
worlds lose their strength. They are enveloped by the scorching 
heat. When their abodes are taken away (i.e. consumed by 
fire), they go to the Maharloka. 



680 


Barkma PurS^ 


29. From there also people proceed ahead to Janaloka 
on being scorched by the great sunshine ten times more power* 
fill. They are desirous of a supreme abode. 

30. Afier burning the entire universe, O excellent sages, 
the lord in the guise of Rudra, produces clouds by means of 
breath expelled from his mouth. 

31. Thereafier, rise up in the sky the Saipvartaka clouds 
that are terribly destructive. They are as huge as big herds of 
elephants. They contain fierce lightning streaks and they 
rumble. 

32. Some of these clouds are like a collyrium mountain; 
some are like the elephant Kumuda. Some are smoky in colour. 
Some are yellow. 

33. Some are turmeric; some resemble the exudation of lac 
juice; some appear like lapis lazuli; and some are like sapphire. 

34. Some resemble a conch shell and others the turner’s 
lathe; some are like Jati flower (white jasmine) and some are 
like Kunda. Some are scarlet coloured like the tiny insect 
Indragopa (glow-wcwm) and some arc like ManahSita (?) 

35. Some of the terrible clouds rise up like the petals of a 
lotus; some have the shape of an excellent city; some are like 
big mountains. 

36. Others resemble the apartments on the tops of houses; 
some are like the dry tracts of ground. They are huge in body 
and loud in their sound; they cover the sky completely. 

37. Making heavy downpours, O brahmins, they subdue 
the extremely terrible fire that has spread over the entire area 
of the three worlds. 

38. Even after the fire has been extinguished, O excellent 
sages, those clouds shower down water for more than a hundred 
years flooding the entire Universe. 

39. After flooding the entire Earth by means of heavy down* 
pours with the torrents, O brahmins, they flood the Bhuvarloka 
and the heaven above. 

40. With die whole universe enveloped in darkness, with 
all beiz^ mobile and immobile destroyed, those great clouds 
shower for more than a hundred years. 



125.1-10 


681 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYFIVE 

Thd natural u^absorption 

Vydsa said : 

1. O excellent brahmins, when the water encroadies 
upon the abode of seven s^es (Great Bear) the entire area of 
the three worlds becomes a vast sheet of water. 

2. Then, O brahmins, the wind arising out of the expiration 
of Vi^u destroys those clouds in the course of hundred years 
and more. 

3-4. Lord Hari, identical with all living beings, the creator 
of all living beings, the lord without beginning, the primordial 
cause of the univese who cannot even be conten^lated upon, 
drinks up the whole of the wind. The lord then assumes the form 
of Brahman, Hari the cause of (everything) lies on the bed of 
the body of Se$a in that vast sheet of water. 

5. He is (then) eulogised by Sanaka and other Siddhas 
abiding in the Janaloka. He is meditated upon by the aspirants 
of liberation abiding in Brahmaloka. 

6. He then employs the divine Yoganidra (yogic slumber) 
consisting of Maya of the Atman (soul). He is tlie Supreme 
lord pondering over himself with the appellation of V^udeva. 

7. O excellent brahmins, this is called the Naimittika (condi* 
tional) PratisaAcara (re-absorption). The Nimitta or condi¬ 
tion there is the {act that Hari lies down there after assuming 
the form of Brahma. 

8. When Sarvatman (the soul of all) is awake, the universe 
is active. When Acyutalies down on the bed of Maya (Illusion) 
this visible universe vanishes. 

9. A thousand sets of four Yugas constitute a day of 
the lotus-born Brahma. When the whole universe becomes a 
vast sheet of water, a period of as much duration is said to be 
his night. 

10. Waking up at the close of the night, Brahma continues 
the work of creatitKi. As mentioned to you before, it is Vifou 
who assumes this form of Brahmi and continues the work of 
creation. ^ 



682 


Brahma PuT&rm 


11» This is annihilation at the end of a Kalpa (or) Inters 
vening annihilation, brahmins. The Naimittika (conditional) 
annihilation has been described to you. Listen to the other 
one, thePrak^ta (natural) annihilation. 

12-14. O brahmins^ a series of annihilations is achieved by 
means of fire, absence of rain etc. in upper and lower regions. 
The created ones, Mahat etc. are particularly dissolved. 
When the process of reabsorption is thus brought about by 
Kfsna’s will, the waters at the outset, grasp and destroy 
smell and other characteristic features of the Earth element. The 
Earth thus deprived of its smell is then ready for its reabsorption. 

15*16. When the Gandhatanmatra (the suble primary ele¬ 
ment of smell) is destroyed the Earth dissolves into the Water. 
The waters fill everything. They move about everywhere with 
great velocity and loud report. The Lok&loka (? the mountain 
of that name) is surrounded by water alone, the water with 
surging waves. 

17. The (special) quality of the waters (i.e. taste) is drunk 
(consumed and destroyed) by the Fire element. When the 
Rasatanmatra (the subtle primary element of taste) is destroyed, 
the heated waters perish. 

18*19. Then the waters with their taste element dead and 
destroyed attain the state of fiery element. When the water 
element has attained the state of fiery element and is enveloped 
by the fiery element all round, that fire spreads everywhere and 
takes up the water. Then the fire gradually fills the entire 
universe. 

20. It spreads everywhere, at the sides, above and below 
along with its rays. The fire-element has its great quality, rupa 
(colour), that causes lustre, that is destroyed by Vayu. 

21-23. When the fire element is dissolved, when everything 
has assumed the form of the wind element, then the rupatan* 
matra (the subtle primary element of colour) is destroyed. 
The fiery element, bereft of its colour subsides and the great 
wind element begins to blow. When splendour is dissolved in 
the wind element and the whole world is deprived of light since 
it has been dissolved in the wind, the wind logins to blow in the 
ten directions, upwards and sideways. 



125.24-36 


683 

24-26. Then Ether consumes and destroys the quality of 
touch, the quality of the wind element. Then the wind-element 
subsides. The Ether remains uncovered. It is devoid of colour^ 
taste^ touch and smell. It has no tangible form. It fills every¬ 
thing. Characterised by the quality of sound it stands envelop¬ 
ing everything. 

27-28. Then the Supreme spirit of Aharpkara (Ego) con¬ 
sumes and destroys its quality of sound. The elements and the 
Indriyas (sense organs) get simultaneously merged in Bhutadi, 
This Bhutadi (Ego) is of the nature of Abhimana (referring all 
objects to self). It is Tamasa (constituted of darkness). The 
Great Principle^ the Cosmic Intellect consumes and destroys 
Bhutadi. 

29-30. The earth element and the Great Principle are at 
the extremities of the universe within and without. Thus there 
are seven Prakftis (causes) beginning with the supreme princi¬ 
ple, the Cosmic Intellect. All of them get merged among them¬ 
selves in the reverse order. Similarly this cosmic egg gets merg¬ 
ed in water by which it has been enveloped. 

31. (The cosmic egg) consisting of seven worlds along with 
the mountains, the seven continents and oceans is enveloped by 
water and it is drunk (i.e. destroyed) by the Bery element. 

32-34. The Jyoli or fiery layer merges into the gaseous 
layer; the gaseous layer mei^es into the Ether; the Bhutadi or 
Ego consumes the Ether and the Great Principle or Cosmic 
Intellect consumes it. O brahmins, the Prakfti (Nature) con¬ 
sumes the Cosmic Intellect accompanied by all these. O exce¬ 
llent brahmins, that entity wherein there is the equilibrium of 
all the attributes (gunas), none of them being enlarged or ren¬ 
dered deficient is called Prak|ti (Nature), Hetu (cause), Pra- 
dhana (the Chief) and Param Karai^am (greatest cause). This 
is the Prakfti, the whole of which is of the nature of (partly) 
manifest and (partly) unmanifest. 

35-36. The form that is manifest merges, O brahmins, into 
the unmanifest. That imperishable one is pure and single, eter¬ 
nal and omnipresent. And that is the part, O excellent brahmins, 
of the supreme soul identical with living beings. It is here that 
the conceptions of names, classes etc. perish. 



Brahma Purdf^ 


684 

37. It is worth knowing* It is of the pure form of existence* 
It is of the nature of knowledge. It is greater than (the embo¬ 
died) soul. It is Brahman. It is the greatest abode. It is the 
greatest soul. It is the greatest lord. 

38-39. That V4ou is identical with this (visible world)j 
from whom no one returns. Prakrti has already been men¬ 
tioned by me as one of manifest and unmanifest forms. 
Prakrti and Puru^ (i*c* Individual Soul) merge into the 
supreme Atman; and the supreme Atman is the support of all. 
He is the great Lord. 

40-42. He is sung about in the Vedas and the Vedantas 
by the name of Vifnu. 

The Vedic rites are twofold : 1 the Pravftta (the active), 2 
the Nivftta (the refraining one). By means of both of these 
the lord is worshipped in the form of sacrifice. This lord of 
sacrifices, the best amoi^ Purusaa, is worshiped by persons by 
means of (active paths) in ^k, Yajus and Saman. 

The lord, with (knowledge) as his soul and form, is wor¬ 
shipped by means of Jftanayc^a as well as Nivrtti M&rgas. 
Visnu who is worshipped thus bestows the fruit of liberation. 

43-45. Whatever thing exists and is mentioned by short, 
long and prolated vowels, and what is beyond the pale of 
words—all these are identical with Vifnu the unchanging. He 
is both manifest and unmanifest. He is the unchanging Purusa. 
He is the supreme Atman. He is the universal soul. He is Hari 
who assumes the univenal form. 

Prakfti which is of manifest and unmanifest forms merges 
into him. 

46-49. Purufa, O brahmins, merges into the undistor¬ 
ted soul. 

O brahmins, the time unit in the form of two parardhas has 
been mentioned by me. O great brahmins, it is the day time 
of Vi^^u the lord. 

When Prakrti merges into the manifest and when Prakrti 
and Purusa remain firm therein—it is his night of an equal 
duration. 

Really there is neither day nor night in regard to the 
eternal supreme soul. It is only figuratively mentioned thm in 
regard to that lord. 



126.1-9 


685 


Thud O great aages, the Prakrta Lay a (re-absorption) 
has been mentioned to you. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYSIX 

Thi UliimaU Ri^sorption 

Vyasa said: 

1. After undcrstandii^ the three types of suffering, O 
brahmins, beginning with the Adhyatmika (i.e. the organic), 
a learned man realises perfect knowledge and has Vairagya 
(detachment). He then attains the ultimate re-absorption. 

2. The organic (suffering) is of two types, viz. the physical 
and the mental. The physical suffering is of various types. Let 
it be heard. 

3-4. The physical suffering and ailment is of various types 
such as headache, cold, fever, fistula, enlargement of the 
spleen, piles, intumescence, asthma, nausea, ailment of the 
eyes, diarrhoea, leprosy, ailment of the limbs and many 
others. It behoves you to listen to the mental (suffering). 

5-6. The suffering arising from love, anger, fear, hatred, 
greed, delusion and despondency, the attack of misery, jeal¬ 
ousy, insult, envious Impatience and spiteful malice—these 
are mental sufferings. O excellent bralunins, the mental 
suffering too is of various kinds. O excellent sages, they are 
different in these ways. 

7. The Adhibhautika (extraneous and material} suffering 
occurs to men from animals, birds, men, evil spirits, serpents, 
ogres, reptiles and other beings. 

8. O excellent brahmins, the suffering arising from cold¬ 
ness, heat, winds, rains, water, lightning etc. is called Adhi- 
daivika. 

9. O excellent s^es, misery is of thousands of varieties 
arising from birth in the wc«nb, old age, ignorance, death and 
(falling into) hell. 



686 


Braknta Purdtfa 


10. The creature in the womb is enveloped by faeces in 
plenty. Its back, neck and clusters of bones are broken. 

11. It is excessively tormented by the scorching foodstuffs 
of its mother, of extremely pui^ent, sour, hot, bitter and saline 
taste. It suffers excessive pain. 

12. It is unable to stretch or bend its limbs. It lies in 
the slough of faeces and urine. It is afflicted everywhere. 

13. It gets suffocated. It is conscious. It remembers hun* 
dreds of births it has had. It stays in the womb in great misery 
as a result of its own actions. 

14*15. At the time of delivery the child in the womb 
whose face is defiled by faeces, blood, urine and semen is ex¬ 
cessively tormented by the wind Prajapatya. His bones and 
joints are crushed. He is made to face down the powerful 
organic winds at the time of delivery. The child that is haras¬ 
sed thus manages to come out with difficulty from the womb 
of the mother. 

16. On being touched by the external wind he attains an 
extremely senseless state. On beu^ bom, O excellent sages, 
he attains the loss of special knowledge (of the previous births). 

17. His limbs are afflicted as it were by thorns. He is 
pierced and split as it were by saws. He is just like a worm 
that has fallen on the groimd from a pus-discharging foul ulcer. 

18. He is unable even to scratch himself. He is unable to 
turn on his sides. It is at the desire of others that he gets his 
food such as the milk from the mother’s breasts. 

19. He is dirty. While he sleeps on his bed he is bitten by 
flies and worms, still he is unable to remove them. 

20. (Thus) the miseries at the time of birth are many. 
Similarly those Adhibhautika (extraneous and materid) mise¬ 
ries too that he undergoes after his birth in the course of his 
childhood, are many. 

21. As a man be is enveloped by the darkness of ignorance. 
His mind is deluded. He does not know: '^Where have I come 
from ?” ^‘Whoam I ?” ‘‘Where will I go?” “Of what nature 
am I ?” 

22. “By what bonds am I fettered ?” “What is its cause ?“ 
“Is it without any cause “What should be done ?” “What 



126.23-33 


687 


should not be done?** ‘‘What should be spoken ?•* *‘What 
should not be spoken 

23. ‘‘What is good V* “What is evil ?“ “In what does it 
consist and how ?“ “What is our duty ?“ “What is it that we 
should refrain from 7‘* “What is it that is meritorious ?“ 
“What is it that is faulty ?“ 

24. Thus foolish men who like animals are given to sex 
and eating suHer great pain resulting from ignorance. 

25. Ignorance is a Tamasika trait. In the case of ignorant 
persons, although there is a predilection for the commencement 
of what should be done, yet there is the omission of duty, O 
brahmins. 

26. S^es say that the result of omission of duty is (fall¬ 
ing into) hell. Hence ignorant people experience excessive 
misery both here and hereafter. 

27. Then, during old age man undergoes many miseries as 
follows : His body is shattered by old age. His limbs are en¬ 
feebled and flaccid. His teeth are broken and loose. He is 
covered by wrinkles and protruding sinews and neves and veins. 

28. His eyes are incapable of seeing far off. His pupils are 
fixed to the sky. Clusters of hair come out of his nostrils. The 
whole of his body shakes and shivers. 


29. His bones are laid bare. The bones at his back are 
bent. Since his gastric fire does not function, he takes but little 
food. He Is capable of only a few movements. 

30. He experiences difficulties in rising up, in moving 
about, in lying down, in sitting and in his movements. His eyes 
and ears become less keen. Saliva exudes from his mouth and 
defiles his face. 

31. With his sense oigans intractable he looks up to his 
early death. He is not capable of remembering anything 
experienced at the very same moment. 


m 


32. In uttering a sentence even once he has to put 
great effort. He spends sleepless nights due to the strain of ail¬ 
ments such as asthma, bronchitis (cough) etc. 


33. The old man has to be lifted up or laid to rest with the 
help of another man. He is disdained and insulted by his ser¬ 
vants, 8 <As and wife. 



668 


Brahma Pur^ 


34. He is slack in maintaining cleanliness. He cantinaea 
to have a great zeal in eating and sporting to the great derisive 
merriment of even servants. All his relatives are disgusted with 
him. 

35. Remembering the activities of his own youth as though 
they were experienced in another birth he is all the more dis¬ 
tressed. He then heaves deep sighs. 

36. These and similar ones are the miseries he experiences 
in the old age. Now listen to those miseries which he experiences 
at the time of death. 

37. His neck, legs and hands become loose. He is over¬ 
whelmed by (physical) trembling. Again and again he becomes 
despondent. Again and again he gains the support of his know¬ 
ledge. 

38. He is distressed due to his excessive fondness for gold, 
grain, sons, wife, servants, house etc. He becomes worried with 
the thought ‘^What will befall to these 7*^ 

39. His bones and joints are tom and shorn as it were by 
great and terrible ailments like the saws that appear to be the 
arrows of the god of death. They pierce the vulnerable spots of 
his body. 

40. The puplis of his eyes roll. He b^ins to beat and kick 
with his hands and feet. His palate, lips and throat become 
parched and he begins to snort and grumble. 

41. The organic Udana wind afflicts him by choking his 
throat. An excessive heat spreads over him. He becomes dis* 
tressed due to thirst and hunger. 

42. It is with great distress that the soul leaves the body. 
He is then afflicted by the servants of Yama. Thereafter with 
great distress and pain be adopts a Yatanideha (the body for 
suffering the torture). 

43. These and other similar ones are the miseries of men 
at the time of death. Now listen to those miseries wUch are 
experienced in hell by the penons who die. 

44. The dead undergoes tortures in vairious ways. The 
servants of Yama catch him by means of ouoie etc. They strike 
him with sticks. The very sight of Yama is terrible. It is terrible 
to behold even the path (leading to Yama*s place). 



126.45-58 


689 


45. O exellecnt brahmins, the tortures in different hells 
are different. They are terrible and the means employed are 
mud, sand, fire, mechanical devices, weapons etc. 

46-49. The tortures of men in hell arc as follows: They are 
tormented by saws. They are flown in the crucible. They are 
split by daggers. They are buried under the ground. They are 
impaled on pikes. They are cast into the jaws of a tiger. They 
are devoured by vultures and eaten by panthers. They arc 
boiled in oil. They arc drenched in slushy corrosive acid. They 
are cast down from a great height. They are thrown obliquely 
by mechanical discharging devices. The tortures experienced 
by sinners in hell are numerous, O brahmins. 

50. It is not in hell alone, O excellent brahmins, that there 
is range of miseries. Even in heaven one has no peace of mind 
because one is afraid of a fall therefrom due to the decrease of 
meritorious deeds. 

51. Again he becomes a foetus in the womb. The man is 
born again. Again he gets merged into the womb on being born. 
He then perishes. 

52-53. Sometimes the child is still-bom, sometimes the 
child dies (later) in childhood (or) in youth. 

Whatever is pleasing to men, O brahmins, that alone be¬ 
comes the seed of the tree of misery. 

The pleasure brought about by wives, sons, friends etc., 
house, Helds, wealth etc. is not so much as the unhappiness that 
they bring unto men. 

54-57. Thus, men are mentally distressed by the fiery heat 
of the sun of worldly miseries. Excepting the shade of the tree of 
liberation where else can those men get happiness ? The mass 
of misery is thus threefold and they afflict one in the womb, 
during conception, birth, old age etc. Learned men consider the 
ultimate attainment of the lord alone as the cure for these ills. 
This at tainm ent pf the lord is characterised by the feeling of 
happiness. There is no other source of del^hc higher than this. 

Hence effort to attain it should be made by learned men. 

58. O excellent brahmins, the means of attaining the same 
is said to be knowledge as well as holy rites. Knowledge is 
mentioned as twofold : 1) arising from scriptural texts and 2) 
mmg frMi discrimination. 



690 


Brahma Purdfi^a 


39-61. The Sabda Brahman (Brahman exemplified in words) 
is that arising from scriptural text. The Para Brahman (supreme 
Brahman) is that arising from discrimination. 

Ignorance is like the pitch darkness. Knowledge arising from 
sense organs is like a lamp. Knowledge arising from discrimi- 
Qation» O brahmins, is like the sun. 

O excellent sages, what Manu too has said after remember¬ 
ing the meaning of the Vedic Texts, let that be heard even as I 
say in this context. 

**Two Brahmans are to be comprehended i.e. Sabda Brahman 
and Para Brahman. 

62. One who is well-conversant with theSabda Brahman 
attaim the Para Brahman. Tlie Atharva Veda says: ^Two 
types of learning are to be undrstood’*. 

63-64. The attainment of the Ak^ara (Imperishable) is by 
means of Para Vidyi (the superior knowledge). The Apara 
Vidya (the subsidiary type of learning) is the mastery of Rgveda 
etc. 

Know ye all that omnipresent eternal material cause of all 
beings, which is unmanifest, which has no old age, which is 
difficult to ponder over, which is unborn, which is devoid of 
change, which cannot be pointed out, which has no form, which 
docs not possess hands, legs etc. and which has no other cause. 

65. Everything worthy of being pervaded is pervaded by 
it and poets see it. That is Brahman. That is the greatest abode. 
That should be meditated upon by those who desire liberation. 

66-66. It is mentioned in the statements of the Vedas. It is 
subtle. It is the greatest region of Vis^m. He is called Bhagavan 
(Lord), who knows the origin and dbsolution of living beings, 
the advent and departure of living beings as well as the Vidya 
(Learning) andAvidya (Ignorance). 

The following are denoted by the word Bhagavan: knowledge, 
power, potentiality, ability to rule, vigour and all types of 
splendour except those qualities etc. that are to be despised and 
discarded. 

All the living beings reside in the supreme soul. 

69-70. Hence Visudeva is named Sarvatman, the soul of 
all. Prajapati (Brahma) mentioned this formerly, to the sages 



126 . 71 — 127.1 


691 


when he was asked to comment upon the names of Vasudeva, 
the endless, truthfully. Since the lord abides in the living 
beings and the living beings abide in him, he, Vasudeva, is the 
creator and dispenser of the worlds. He is the supreme lord. 

71. He is Saguna (having attributes) and transcends all 
beings, Prakfti, Gunas and Do^ (merits and demerits). Since 
the entire inside of the universe is enveloped by him, he is 
Akhilatman (soul of all). He transcends all other coverings. 

72. He is possessed of all splendid qualities. With a small 
portion of his power be maintains the creation of all living be*^ 
ings. Voluntarily he assumes a largephysical body of his choice. 
He accomplishes everything that is conducive to the welfare 
of the world. 

73. He is the sole receptacle of his power, vigour and 
other qualities. He is greater than the greatest. There is no 
great obstacle unto his splendour, power and ability to rule. In 
the great lord than whom there is no greater lord there are no 
pains etc.' 

74. He is the lord named Parameivara. He has both the 
individual and cosmic collective forms. His form is both mani¬ 
fest and unmanifest. He is the lord of all. He is the eye of all. 
He knows everything. He has all powers. 

75. That whereby this pure, supreme single form (that is 
free from impurity and devoid of all defects) is comprehended, 
perceived or attained is JAana (knowledge). Thai which is other 
than this is Ajflana (ignorance). 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYSEVEN 

PracHee of loga 

The sages said : 

1. Now tell us the Yoga which is an antidote for the contact 
with miseries. On undentanding it we shall come in unison with 
the unchanging Purujottama. 



692 


Brahma 


Sata said : 

2. On hearing their words, the highly^ delighted Kr$na* 
Dvaipayana, the Yogin, the most excellent among those who 
understand Yoga, said thus: 

Vydsa said : 

3. O brahmins, listen. I shall recount Yoga that destroys 
worldly existence. By practisir^ it, a Yogin shall attain 
liberation which is extremely difficult of access. 

4*»5. At the outset the devotee shall propitiate the preceptor 
devoutly and listen to the Yogic scriptural texts. He must then 
eifficiently master Itihasa, Parana and Vedas. The intelligent 
one shall fully understand the diet (of a Yogin)> the pitfalls 
during the practice of Yoga, and the proper time and place for 
the same. He shall be free from the mutually opposed pairs. He 
shall desist from hoarding possessions and then practise Yoga. 

6-9. The following diet is conducive to the steady practice 
of Yoga : flour of fried grains, rice gruel, butter milk, roots, 
fruits, milk, barley food, ears of corn and oil cakes. 

One shall never practise Yc^a when the mind is unhappy, 
when one is (excited) weary or hungry, when the mutually 
conflicting pairs are present, when it is very chilly, when it is 
too hot, when there is too much of wind. 

One shall not practise Yoga in a place which is too noisy, 

% 

too close to water or too near Arc. One shall not practise it in 
a dilapidated cowpen, in a cross-road, in a place infested by 
reptiles, in a cremation ground, nor on the banks of a river. 
Yoga shall not be practised in a monastery, in an anthill, in 
a dangerous place or near a well. One should not practise it on 
a heap of dry leaves. 

10. If out of foolishness, anyone were to practise Yoga 
without taking into consideration these lestrictions as to places, 
certain defects are produced and they cause obstacles. I shall 
describe them. 

11. Deafness, sluggishness, loss of memory, dumbness, 
blindness and fever are produced immediately. Similarly ignor* 
ance is caused. 



127.12-21 


693 


12. Hence (arrangement for) safety should always be made 
by every means by a person conversant with Yoga, since the 
physical body is the means of achievement of virtue, wealth, 
love and liberation. 

13-20. Places for die practice of Yoga shall be as follows : 
a lonely hermitage, a secret (one with privacy) place, a place 
free from noise, fear and (unnecessary) movements, a clean 
vacant house and a beautiful secluded temple. 

The time for practice of Yoga shall be as follows : the first 
or last Yama (a period of three hours) of the night or in the 
forenoon or at midday. 

A devotee shall keep his mind pure and well-concentra¬ 
ted. His diet shall be proper. He shall control his sense-organs. 

He shall be seated facing east on a beautiful seat that is 
comfortable and steady. It shall be neither too raised up nor 
too much depressed. 

The devotee shall be pure, truthful in speech and devoid of 
desire. He shall observe moderate periods of sleep. He shall 
subdue anger. He shall be engaged in what is conducive to the 
welfare of living beings. He shall put up with the inconveni¬ 
ence of suffering the mutually opposed pairs (i.e. excessive heat 
and chill etc.). He shall be self-possessed. He shall keep his 

head in a steady posture. 

He shall place both the hands on the navel. He shall be 
calm. He shall be seated in the lotus posture. The eyes should 
be fixed on the tip of the nose. He shall control his vital airs 
and i speech. All the sense organs with the mind shall be with¬ 
drawn into the heart. Otherwise silent, he shall utter the 
Pranava (Orhk^a), continuously with the mouth well-covered. 
He shall be steady. 

He shall subdue the activities of Tamas by means of Rajas 
and those of Rajas by means of Sattva. He shall maintain a 
pure and quiet posture with the eyes closed. (Thus) the Yc^in 
shall always be in unison with Pumsottama who is the bestower 
of salvation, who dwells in the cavity of his lotus-like 
heart, who is omnipresent and who is unsullied. 

21. At the outset he shall fix the sense organs, the organs 
of action and the elements in hb soul. He should unite his soul 



694 


Brahma Purdna 


with the supreme soul. It is then that the devotee performs 
Yoga. 

22. The supreme region is characterized by the hundredth 
part of the tip of a hair (i.e. it is very subtle). The Yogins 
who are devoted to meditation see it by the lamp of their mind. 
The devotee conversant with Yoga is capable of withdrawing 
the sense organs like a turtle that withdraws its limbs. 

23. If the mind of a person is able to find its ultimate end 
in the supreme soul after abandoning all sensuous objects, his 
success in Yoga is assured. 

24. When the mind is free from sensuous objects as the 
Yogin is in communion with the supreme Brahman in the 
course of his ecstatic experience and the mind gets dissolved in 
the supreme Brahman, he attains the highest place. 

25. When the mind of the Yogin is disengaged from every 
sort of activity after attaining the highest bliss, he attains sal¬ 
vation. 

26. By the power of Yoga the Yogin attains the pure 
Purusottama who is termed the ‘Tourth** and who transcends 
the three states (viz. wakeful, dreaming and slumbering). There 
is no doubt in this that he is liberated. 

27. A Yc^in who is free from desires for any object of lust, 
who is pleasing to look at in any posture whatsoever (or who 
sees pleasant things everywhere), and who is aware of trans« 
ience of everything, shall be liberated and not otherwise. 

28. He who is conversant with Yoga shall not indulge in 
the objects of sense. He shall undoubtedly be liberated by 
absence of attachment and regular practice of Yoga. 

29. Yoga is not achieved merely by resorting to the Lotus 
posture, nor by concentrating on the dp of the nose. The unison 
of the mind and the sense organs with the soul is called Yoga. 

30. Thus, O excellent sages, the Yoga that bestows liber¬ 
ation, that is the cause of release from worldly bondage, has 
been recounted by me. What else do you wish to hear? 

Lomakar^a^a said : 

31. On hearing his words they said: *^WeIl done, Well 
done’*. After praising and honouring Vyisa they began to ask 
him once again. 



128.N9 


695 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYEIGHT 

Review of Sarhkkya and Toga 

The sages said : 

1. O $^e, O excellent brahmin, no satiety is observed by 
us in imbibing the verbal nectar coming out of the ocean of 
your mouth. 

2. Hence, O sage, describe in detail the Yoga that bestows 
salvation. O most excellent one among the bipeds, we wish to 
hear about Sarhkhya too. 

3. O brahmin, how does an intelligent brahmin, well 
versed in the Vedas, one who is the performer of sacrifices, an 
intelligent devotee devoid of jealousy, one whose mind dwells 
on truth and virtue, attain Brahman? 

4. Does he attain it by performing austerities, or by living 
a celibate life, or by renouncing everything, or by means of his 
intellect, or by resorting to thought propounded by Saihkhya or 
Yoga? On being asked this, please tell us. 

5. By what means does a man attain concentration of 
mind and control over senses? It behoves you to explain this. 

Vydsa said : 

6. No one achieves (spiritual attainment) without know* 
ledge and austerity, without subduing the sense organs or with* 
out renouncing everything. 

7. All the major elements arc the earlier creation of the 
self-bom lord. They arc fixed into the bodies of all living 
beings. 

8. The physical body is from the Earth element. The 
viscidity is due to the Water element. The eyes arc from the 
Fiery element. The Air element is the support of Prana and 
Apana (i.e. the oz^axuc gases). The Ether clement is the inner 
cavity of the embodied beings such as die bowels etc. 

9. The deities presiding over the various parts of the body 
are: Vijnu at the time of departure, Indra over the physical 
strength, the Fire-god in the bowels, the intcnticcs of quarters 
over the cars, Sarasvati, goddess of speech, over the ears and 
the tongue. 



696 


Brahma PurSffa 


10-11. Ears, skin, eyes, tongue, nose together with the 
6ve organs of action are the ten indriyas. They are the means 
of getting food and apprehending sound, touch, colour, taste 
and smell. One shall always know these sense-objects as sepa¬ 
rate from the sense-organs. 

12. The mind is in unison with the sense organs just as the 
non-poisonous snake is in conjuncttou with (animals) beyond 
its control. The individual soul stationed in the heart is always 
in unison with the mind. 

13. The mind is competent to rule over the sense organs. 
The individual soul is competent to control and discharge the 
mind. 

14. The following are eternally present in the physical 
bodies of the embodied beings : sense-organs, objects of senses, 
intrinsic nature, consciousness, mind, vital airs namely Pr&o^ 
and Apina and Jlva (the individual soul). 

15. (?) There is no support unto the Sattva; what is term¬ 
ed by the word Guna is not the conscious ones. The splendour 
creates Sattva and by no means the Gunas. 

16. Thus the physical body consists of seventeen entities 
and it is enveloped by sixteen qualities. O brahmins, the wise 
sage sees by means of his mind the soul within the soul. 

17. It cannot be perceived by the eye nor by the sense- 
organs. It is by means of the illuminated mind that the higher 
soul is revealed. 

18. The Atman is devoid of sound, touch, and colour; it is 
free from taste and smell; it has neither body nor the sense- 
organs. One shall see it in one’s own body. 

19. He who sees that which is unmanifest in all the physi¬ 
cal bodies and that which is excessively honoured among 
mortals is capable of becoming Brahman after his demise. 

20. Wise sages view the Atman equally in a Brahmin richly 
endowed with learning and humility, in cow, in elephant, dog 
or in an outcaste. 

21. The single soul abides in all living beings, mobile and 
immobile. The visible worlds arc pervaded by it. 

22. When one secs the soul in aJt living beings and all liv¬ 
ing beings in the soul, the individual soul becomes identical 
with Brahman. 



128 . 23-35 


697 


23. The soul is in the supreme soul to the extent to which 
the soul sees and understands in the soul. He who knows this is 
capable of immortality. 

24. The soul has no region. Even Devas seeking the region 
of the soul that is the inner soul of all living beings and is 
devoted to the welfare of all living beings, become deluded on 
the way, 

25. Just as the movement of birds in the sky or that of the 
fishes in the water is impercepdble, so also the movement of 
those who have achieved knowledge. 

26. Kila (Time, God of Death) cooks all living beings in 
the soul by means of the soul. But nobody knows that wherein 
Kala itself is cooked. 

27. It is neither above, nor at the sides, neither below, 
nor in front, nor in the middle. No one seizes it. 

28-29. The worlds arc stationed in it. There is nothing 
extraneous to these. Even if one has the speed of the wind aud 
one goes forth ahead like an arrow discharged from the bow¬ 
string one shall never reach the end of the ultimate cause. 

There is nothii^ that is subtler than it; there is nothing that 
is grosser than it. 

30. It has hands and feet all around; it has eyes, head and 
face ail around; it has ears all around; it stands up enveloping 
everything in the world. 

31. It is minuter than tlie minutest atom; it is greater than 
all great things; though it abides steadfastly within all living 
beings yet it is not perceived. 

32. There arc two states of the Atman, viz, the im¬ 
perishable and the perishable. The perishable one is in all liv¬ 
ing beings; the imperishable is divine and immortal. 

33. The Harhsa(5wan, here the soul) builds for itself a city 
with nine gates (i.e. the body with nine doors, viz. eyes etc.). 
He controls it invariably. He is like this in regard to all living 
beings, whether mobile or immobile. 

34. Super-seers say that the swan-like property of tht un¬ 
born soul comes from the fact that it discards doubtful alter¬ 
natives and gathen bodies (?) 

35. What is termed by the word Hamsa is perishable indi¬ 
vidual. What is Imperishable is the unchangeable one. He 



698 


Brahma Purd^a 


who knows this attains the Imperishable and discards vital airs 
and with that his very birth. 

Vydsa said : 

36. You had asked me, O brahmins, and so Sarhkhya 
which is combined with perfect knowledge has been duly and 
truthfully recounted by me. 

37-39. Henceforth, O brahmins, I shall recount Yoga. 
The unity of intellect and mind as well as of all the sense-organs 
(should be understood). This knowledge is the highest one. It 
is the knowledge of the all-pervading soul. 

It should be understood after eradicating the defects of 
Yoga, which (seers) know to be five in number. It can be 
understood (only) by one who is tranquil, one who has con¬ 
trolled his senses, one who practises spiritual exercises, one who 
takes delight in the soul, one who is enlightened and one whose 
activities are pure. 

40-43. The five defects are : lust, anger, greed, fear, and 
slumber. 

One conquers anger by practising mental tranquillity, and 
lust by avoiding lustful thoughts. 

A self-possessed man is fit to eradicate slumber by resorting 
to Sattva (activities). 

By the practice of mental fortitude one shall guard oneself 
against sexual lust and gluttony. 

One shall guard hands and feet by means of the eye. 

One shall guard eyes and ears by means of the mind. 

One shall guard one’s mind and speech by means of good 
activity. 

One shall eschew fear by means of vigilance and attention. 
One shall eradicate arrogance by resorting to intelligent men. 

One shall be watchfully alert and conquer these defects of 
Yoga. 

He shall bow down to the sacred fires, Brahmins and deities. 

44-46. One shall avoid arrogant speech coupled with 
violence. One shall speak words pleasing and favourable to the 
mind. He who has splendour consisting of brahmanical brilli¬ 
ance perceives the entire universe consisting of mobile and im¬ 
mobile beings. He has become identical with the living beings. 



128 . 47-59 


699 


By means of the followix^ one's splendour increases and sin 
decreases : meditation, self-study of the Vedas, charitable gifts, 
truthfulness, shyness, straightforwardness, forgiveness, cleanli¬ 
ness, purity of the soul, and the control of senses. 

47-48. The devotee practisii^ Yoga shall be impartial to 
all living beings. He shall sustain himself with things available; 
he shall shed his sins; he shall conquer the sense-organs; he 
shall take limited diet. He shall then become brilliant. After 
subduing lust and anger he shall resort to the region of Brah¬ 
man. He shall maintain purity of the body and mind. He shall 
concentrate his sense-organs and the mind. Early in the night 
as well as early in the morning he shall hx the mind in the soul. 

49-51. A creature has five sense organs. Even if one of them 
is moistened, his intellect begins to flow out like water from 
the foot of a mountain. 

Just as the killer of fishes takes turtles, so he shall take the 
essence of the mind at the outset. The devotee who is conver¬ 
sant with Yoga shall then control ear, eye, tongue and nose. 
Thereafter if he controls them and fixes them in the mind he 
shall discharge all conceptions (mental fancies) and retain the 
mind in the soul. 

52-54. If and when he fixes the five sense organs in the 
mind and the heart, when these sense-organs with the mind 
as the sixth abide in the Atman and arc pleased in that 
situation—he attains the Brahman then. They see Atman 
in the Atman. It is like the flame that shines free from smoke; 
it is like the brilliant sun; it is like the fire of lighming in the 
sky. 

55-56. Everything is seen there. Since it is all-pervading 
it is seen everywhere. Noble-souled brahmins, who are wise, 
who are bold, who have great intelligence and who are engaged 
in the welfare of all living beings see it. 

The devotee shall practise thus for a limited period. Keen 
in the practice of the holy rites he shall seat himself in a seclu¬ 
ded spot and attain similarity with the Imperishable one. 

57-59. (Defective) There are some pit&lls in the achievement 
of Yogic power, The devotee shall avoid them. They are delusion, 
error, deliberation; miraculous results in regard to smelling 
hearing, seeing and touching; abilaity to bear chilliness and 



700 


Brahma Purdv^ 


heat> gaseous shape; presence of mind and obstacles (?) By 
Yogic practice he should control all these. The devotee who 
understands reality shall ignore them. By means of his equani¬ 
mity he shall cause them to recede. The devotee like a sage 
practising silence, shall practice Yoga with perfect mental 
purity in all the three worlds. 

60-64. He shall practise on the top of a mountain, in a 
monastery or under a tree. 

Just as a merchant who is worried over his articles of trade 
puts them into a safe, so the aspirant after Yoga shall restrain 
his sense-organs and concentrate his mind. His mind shall 
never get fed up with the Yogic practice. 

He shall adopt means whereby the unsteady mind can be 
put under control. He shall never swerve therefrom. He shall 
steadily resort to the Yogic practice. He shall take up vacant 
rooms for residence and maintain concentration. Neither men¬ 
tally nor verbally nor physically should he proceed out of 
bounds. He shall be indifferent to everything worldly. He shall 
maintain restrictions on his diet. He shall be impartial to 
everything whether obtained or not obtained. 

Whether anyone congratulates him and wishes him or not 
he shall be impartial to them. He shall not wish for either wel¬ 
fare or disaster. 

65. He shall not be too delighted for a gain nor be 
worried for a loss. He shall be impartial to all living beings. 
He shall thus be one having properties similar to those of the 
wind. 

66. Within six months, Brahman approaches that devotee 
whose soul has become healthy and normal, who views every¬ 
thing impartially, who has become virtuous and perfect and 
who is perpetually engaged in Yogic practice. 

67. (Thus) the Yogin is in a position to view a clod of 
earth, a piece of rock and an ingot of gold impartially. On 
seeing others distressed due to pain he shall not be deluded nor 
shall he swerve from his path. 

68. Even a man of very low caste or a woman desirous of 
virtue shall attain the supreme goal through this path. 

69. On seeing this unborn, ancient, unageing, eternal 



129 . 1 ^ 


701 


(Lord) who is imperceptible and who is beyond the ken of 
sense organs, O Brahmins, intelligent men attain equality with 
Brahman, a goal from which there is no return. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYNINE 

Review of SdJitkhya and Toga 

The sages said ; 

1. Should the Vedic injunction be “Perform rites and 
renounce them”? Whither do they go by means of Vidya(learn* 
ing), and what do they attain by means of holy rites ? 

2. We wish to hear this. Your Holiness may be pleased 
to explain it to us. There is a mutual inconsistency in this (in* 
junction) because both are opposed to each other. 

Vy&sa said : 

3. Listen, O leading sages, I shall briefly explain the 
Ksara (perishable) and Ak^ara (imperishable) in the form of 
holy rites and (knowledge) about which you have asked me. 

4. Listen now, O brahmins, to the quarter whither they 
go by means of learning and what they attain by means of holy 
rites. The reply to this (question) is intricate and complex. 

5. It is but proper to say that Dharma (virtue) exists. In 
the same context if anyone were to say that it does not exist, 
then this shall be tantamount to saying that this resembles a 

Yaksa and that there is no Yaksa. 

% % 

6. There are the two paths wherein the Vedas arc well- 
founded. Dharma is characterised by Pravttti (Activity, taking 
active part in worldly life). The other alternative is Nivftti 
(cessation of active participation). 

7. A creature is bound by activity. He is liberated by 
means ofVidyii. Hence ascetics, the wise ones, do not engage 
themselves in activity. 

8. On accotint of activity (i.e. by performing various 
rites) on^is reborn after death into an embodied form consist- 



702 


Brahma Pur^ 


ing of sixteen constituents, i.e. sense-organs etc. On account of 
learning one is transformed into the eternal unmanifest Brah¬ 
man, the Ak^ra or Imperishable one. 

9. Those possessed of inferior intellect praise Karznan 
(performance of holy rites). Thereby they attain a series of 
bodies to indulge themselves in. They then perform worship. 

10. Those who have acquired the highest intellect, those 
who perceive the efficiency of Dharma do not praise Karman, 
like one who drinks the river water and so does not praise the 
well. 

11. One attains happiness and misery, birth and non-birth 
as a result of Karmans. By learning one attains that after 
reaching which one never feels sorry. 

12. AAer going there one does not die; after going there 
one is not reborn, after going there one does not become old; 
after going there one does not increase. 

13. It IS the (place) where the supreme Brahman is. It is 
unmanifest, immoving and fixed. It is not split and analysed. It 
has no extension. It is immortal. The devotee who understands 
the esoteric doctrine the Yoga, (attains it). 

14. Those who are impartial to all, those who are friendly 
to all, those who are engaged in everything conducive to the 
welfare of all living beings arc not affected by mutually opposed 
pairs nor by mental activities. 

15. The Puru^ possessed of learning is different, Brah¬ 
mins, from the Puru^t possessed of Karman. O brahmins, the 
moon that stands with its full complement of subtle digits is 
different from the sense of touch it has. 

16. This has been mentioned by the sage and it is sung in 
detail. It cannot be seen or recounted like a piece of thread in 
a wheel in the sky. 

17. The embodied form has the full complcmcat of all 
digits. It has eleven created things within itself. O brahmins, 
understand it to be of the nature of Karmans and Gupas. 

18. The splendid atman that has resorted to the body like 
the moon in the sky should be known as K$etrajfia. It is eternal. 
It has realized Brahman by means of Yoga. 



129 . 19-29 


703 


19. Tamas, Rajas and Sattva should ht known as the qua¬ 
lities ofjiva (Individual Soul). The Jiva has all the qualities of 
the supreme soul. 

20. They say that consciousness is a quality of the JIva. It 
activates the qualities of the Jiva. Thereafter those who allow 
importance to the physical body say they can create seven 
worlds. 

Vydsa said : 

21. The creatures of Prakrti arc known as (individual 
soul). They do not comprehend him nor does he know them. 

22. The individual soul performs his activities through the 
sense organs, with the mind as the sixth among them, just as the 
sober charioteer manages his chariot by means of superb well- 
controlled horses. 

23-24. The sense-objects are greater than the sense-organs; 
the mind is greater than the sense-objects; the intellect is 
greater than the mind; the Great principle known as Atman is 
greater than intellect; the unmanifest one is greater than all 
these. The Immortal one is greater than the unmanifest. There 
is nothing greater than the Immortal. That is the climax. 
That is the supreme goal. 

25. Thus the Atman that is hidden in all living beings is 
not easily revealed. It is perceived by persons of subtle vision 
by means of perfect, subtle intellect. 

26-27. (Defective) The Yc^in shall cause his sense-organs 
including the mind to dissolve in the inner soul by means of 
his intellect. He shall not ponder o\er the sense-objects through 
(the activities of) the sense-organs. He shall not think much 
by means of his mind. He shall train it by means of Vidya and 
make it perfect in meditation. He shall attain tranquility of 
the soul. He shall not have anyone else to rule over him. He 
shall go to the supreme region. 

28-29. One who slavishly submits to his sense organs, one 
whose faculty of memory is shaken, becomes a victim of death 
by yielding himself. But one should subdue all (wishful) tho¬ 
ughts and direct the mind towards Sattva. After stabilising the 
mind in the Sattva one shall become victorious over death. 



704 


Brahma Purd^ 


30. By means of clearness of his mind the ascetic eschews 
the auspicious and inauspicious. One whose soul is pleased 
abides in the Atman and attains everlasting bliss. 

31-32. The clearness of the mind has the followii^ charac¬ 
teristics : It is like happiness during slumber. It is like the lamp 
that shines unflickeringly in a windless place. Similarly one who 
practises Yoga early in the night or early in the morning by 
uniting the Atman (Individual Soul) with the Atman (Supreme 
Soul) secs the Atman in the Atman. He shall limit his diet and 
purify his senses. 

33-35. This is the secret of the Vedas : itis unparalleled^ 
it is free from ailments : it convinces one about the existence of 
the Atman. This sacred doctrine shall be imparted to oneU son. 
The wealth of all virtuous discourses and truthful narratives 
has been churned for ten thousand years and this nectar has 
been taken out. 

Jusr as butter is produced out of the curds or fire is produc¬ 
ed from the sacrificial twig, so also this knowledge has been 
acquired for the salvation of wise scholars. 

36-39. This knowledge should be imparted to souls who 
have concluded their religious student-stage. This should never 
be mentioned to one who is not tranquil, who has no control 
over his sense-organs, who does not perform austerities, who 
has not mastered the Vedas, who is not obedient, who is not 
straightforward, who is jealous, who does not act according to 
directions, who is given to argumentadon or who is a backbiter. 

This secret knowledge should be imparted of one who is 
praiseworthy, who is tranquil, who is austere and who is obe¬ 
dient. It should by no means be imparted to anyone else. 

40. Even if the whole of the earth filled with all jewels 
were offered against this, a man who knows reality shall con¬ 
sider this (knowledge) better than that. 

41-42. The Adhyatma (spiritual) doctrine that is super¬ 
human contains greater setrets than the Yogic knowledge. It 
has been perceived by great sages. It is sung about in the 
Vedantas. 

O good and noble ones, 1 shall give unto you what you ask 
me, whatever is in my mind. Whatever doubt you have in your 



129.43-51 


705 


heart has been cleared by what has been heard by you all. 
What else shall I tell you ? 

The sages said : 

43. Describe once again to us the Adhyatma doctrine in 
detail) O holy one, the most excellent of all sages, so that we 
can fully understand it. 

Vydsa said : 

44. What is recounted as Adhyatma in regard to a person 
I shall explain to you all. Let its explanation be understood 
properly. 

45. The great elements are the Earth, Water, Fire (light) 
Air and Etiicr. He who is the creator of these elements is with¬ 
in all the living beings. 

The sages said : 

46-47. The Ether etc. have no shape. No one sees anybody 
in them. How can one then explain their presence in the phy¬ 
sical bodies ? There are certain qualities in the sense-organs. 
How can one comprehend them ? 

Vydsa said : 

I shall explain this precisely in accordance with what is seen 
(in the scriptures). Listen attentively and comprehend them 
according to reality. 

48. Sound, car, void space—these there are the traits of 
Ether. Vital airs, movement and touch are the qualities of 
Vayu (Air). 

49. Colour, eye and gastric action (digestion)—the fiery 
clement is threefold thus. Taste, tongue, sweet—are the quali¬ 
ties of Water. 

50. What is smelt, nose and the physical body—are the 
qualities of Earth. This is the group of sense organs evolved 

out of the five elements. 

51. The quality of touch belongs to the Wind ; the quality 
of taste to Water ; the quality of colour to Fiery element; the 
quality of sound to Ether and the quality of smell is that of the 
Earth. 



706 


Brahma PurAj^a 


52. The mind, intellect and intrinsic nature—are bom of 
their origins. They transcend Gu^as ; they are greater than 
Gu^as. 

53. Just as the turtle stretches and withdraws the limbs, so 
also he who has excellent intellect controls his set of sense-organs. 

54. The fact that one sees upwards, sideways as well as 
below the soles of feet indicates UiaC the excellent intellect abides 
by this duty alone. 

55. The intellect is led by the Gu^as. It is the intellect 
that leads the sense-organs. Should the intellect be absent whence 
can there be the Gu^as ? 

56. There are five sense-organs in man ; the sixth is mind; 
the seventh is intellect; the soul is tbe eighth. 

57. The eye perceives; the mind entertains doubt; the in¬ 
tellect determines; the soul is the witness. 

58. Rajas, Tamas and Sattva are born of their respective 
causes. They are common to all beings. They are Gu^as. 

59- That which one sees within the soul—something which 
is pleasant and delightful is Sattva. It is something quiescent 
and calm. 

60. That predilection, which is attended by distress either 
in the body or in the mind is Rajas. One shall see that Rajas 
has become active. 

61. That predilection which is attended by delusion is 
Tamas. It is vague, incomprehen^ble and incapable of being 
explained. 

62. They call the followingSattvika qualities: Extreme de¬ 
light, pleasure, bliss, mastery over oneself, and normal restful 
nature of the mind, with or without reasons thereof. 

63. Tbe following are the symptoms of Rajas : conceit, un¬ 
truthfulness, covetousness, delusion and impatience. 

64. Similarly, the following are Tamasa qualities : Deluded 
state, blunders, languor, slumber, inability to be awake. (The 
people under their influence) live somehow. They do not live a 
full useful life. 

65. The external prompting for action is threefold. The 
mind indulges in fanciful creati^Hts of conceptions. The intellect 
is the factor of energetic determination. The heart dwells only 
on what is endearing. 



129.66-78 


707 


66. The objects are indeed greater than the sense-organs; 
the mind is greater than the objects; the intellect is greater than 
the mind; and the soul is greater than the intellect. 

67. The intellect is indeed the soul; the intellect is the 
leader of the soul. When the intellect undergoes aberration and 
change in regard to emotion it becomes tlie mind. 

68. Inasmuch as the sense-organs are separate it is the in¬ 
tellect that undei^oes aberration. In the act of hearing it be¬ 
comes the ear and as the organ that touches it is called the 
sense of touch. 

69. In the act of seeing it shall be the eye and in the act of 
tasting, the tongue; in the act of smelling the nose; the intellect 
undergoes changes. 

70. They call them the sense-organs. The intellect becomes 
diffused in those forms. Remaining steady in the state of intellect 
in a man it is called intellect. 

71-72. (?) Sometimes it gets pleasure : sometimes it bewails; 
sometimes it loses sense. (But really it is) not affected by pleasure 
and pain. Just as the ocean, lord of the rivers, surges towards 
the great shore with its billows, so also the intellect that is in¬ 
trinsically emotional surges towards tlie three emotions (viz. 
pleasure, pain and delusitm). 

73. When the intellect yearns for and seeks something it 
becomes the mind. One shall see them intellectually as separate 
in their basis. 

74. The sense-organs are based on the intellect. They must 
be collected entirely (?) in the order in which each is evolved. 

75. When the mind is undivided it is the intellect. Emo¬ 
tion exists in the mind. When Rajas begins to function it trans¬ 
cends Sattva also. 

76. Those that abide emotionally in all these three, func¬ 
tion after the objects like the spokes in regard to the rim. 

77. (?)One shall make use of the mind for the purpose of 
illumination even as the sense-organs are perfected by the 
intellect (either) moving bcfittingly or remaining indiffernt. 

78. If only one understands this as natural one does not 
become deluded. He does not bewail and he is delighted. He 
is always free from hostility. 



708 


Brahma Puf(h}a 


79. Indeed the soul cannot be perceived by the sense-oi^ans 
that are subject to lust, that function in diverse ways, that 
cannot be controlled and that are ignorant and foolish. 

80. When one holds their reins firmly by means of the 
mind and controls them, the soul reveals itself like a figure 
illuminated by a lamp. 

81. When darkness is repelled the living beit^ are brought 
to light. This should also be considered in the same manner. 

82. Just as an aquatic bird is not affected by the water 
even as it moves through water, so also the Yogin of liberated 
soul is not affected by the faults of Gunas. 

83. Similarly one who has realized the soul is not affected 
by the defects (of worldly existence) even when he continues to 
live in the world. He does not cling to anything. He Is by no 
means contaminated. 

84-85. Since he abandons the Karmans done previously he 
is not affected by them. One who has love towards the great 
Atman, one who has become the soul of all living beings 
but one who gets stuck up due to the contact of Gu^ias—in re¬ 
gard to such a one, the soul takes up birth. He gets entangled 
in the Gunas. The Gunas do not undentand the soul. But the 
soul knows the Gunas. 

86. He shall contemplate the Gunas. He is the seer of 
everything in the manner it exists. A man shall perceive the 
difference between Sattva (Guna) and the Kfetrajfta (Indivi¬ 
dual Soul). 

87-89. One of them creates the Gu^s and the other does 
not create. The two are naturally separated and joined toge¬ 
ther. Just as gold and pebbles are found existing together 
(though separate), just as the mosquito and Udumbara are 
found together though separate, just as the Isika (shoot of a 
grass) exists together with the Muiija grass and is also separate, 
so also the two remain together and are separate from each 
other. 



I30.M1 


709 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY 
Review of SMkhya and Toga 

Vy^a said : 

L Sattva creates Guoas and the K^etrajfia presides over 
them. As though indifferent, the lord presides over them. 

2. It is all but natural, that it creates these Gunas. Just 
as the spider weaves its web so also it creates Guoas. 

3. Some are of this firm opinion : Those who have 
started functioning do not stop the same; (the fact is) the 
functioning is not perceptible. But others accept cessation of 
activity. 

4. One should ponder over these two and come to a deci¬ 
sion in accordance with one's intellect. Of course, in this 
manner a great doubt may occur. 

5. Indeed the Atman has neither birth nor death. A 
roan shall sport about after realizing it. He should never be 
angry nor too delighted. He shall be free from enmity and 
jealousy. 

6-9. (Defective) Thus everyone should reflect on (the sup¬ 
reme Being) by means of intellect and heart. He should consi¬ 
der that the worldly pleasures are evanescent. He should be 
free firom doubts. He shall cross the earth that has fallen down 
in the same manner as scholarly men cross the swollen river 
by diving and swimming in it. 

O brahmins, this (earthly existence) is fickle and unsteady. 
A scholar does not feel distressed. Knowing the reality he walks 
on firm ground after pondering over the Atman and the know¬ 
ledge of Atman. 

After understanding the creation of living beings, their ad¬ 
vent as well as departure, and observing (everything) well, a 
man obtains excellent quiescence and tranquillity. 

10-11. This is the entire (aim) of the twice-bom and 
especially of the Brahmin. It is the knowledge of Atman, it is 
the ultimate resort. It is confined to impartiality and love to¬ 
wards all. One shall become enlightened after understanding 
the reality. What else is the characteristic of an enlightened 



710 Brahma Purdma 

one ? After comprehending this, learned men become Iibe« 
rated and contented. 

12. The enlightened ones do not have to face the great 
fear that the unenlightened ones have to after death in the 
other world. No one has a greater status than the eternal one 
which the enlightened one has. 

13. Man is detracted from the inner world. On not seeing 
the lord there, he bewails. If there is efficiency in that respect, 
those who comprehend both—the done as well as the undone— 
do not bewail. 

14. If one performs Karmans without yearning for benefit, 
it bums away sins. If actions are performed with pleasure or 
hatred as motives the same is the result of his actions. 

Th sages said : 

15. May Your Holiness be pleased to tell us that most 
excellent virtue than which there is no greater virtue and that 
which is greater than all valuable things. 

Vydsa said : 

16. I shall recount the ancient virtue eulogised by the 
sages, which is the most excellent of all virtues. Listen to it, O 
excellent sages. 

17*18. The sense-organs agitate us. One shall intelligently 
control them like a father who controls his sons during their 
formative childhood years. The concentration of the mind and 
that of sense-organs is the greatest austerity. That is the most 
excellent of all virtues. It is mentioned as the greatest virtue. 

19. By means of perfect knowledge one shall control those 
(sense-organs) including the mind as the sixth and shall be 
self-contented. He shall not ponder over the multifarious 
objects of thought. 

20. When these (sense-o^ans) refrain from their respective 
objects and remain in their abodes, you will all see the supreme 
Atman, the eternal one, by means of the self. 

21. The intelligent Brahmins see the great Atman, the soul 
of all like the smokeless fire. 

22*23. Just as great tree with many branches having 
flowers and fruits does not know specifically ^^Where is my 



130^4-35 


711 


flower? Where is my fhiit?’% so also the (individual) soul does 
not know “Whence have I come? Whither will I go?” It has 
another inner soul that sees everything. 

24. One sees Atman by Atman through the mind that is 
illuminated by perfect knowledge. O brahmins» you all shall be 
free from passionate attachment on seeing Atman. 

25. Even in this world you will attain great intellect and 
become liberated from all sins like serpents that shed off their 
slough. You will be devoid of anxieties and free from ailments. 

26-30. The river of worldly existence is terrible. It has cur¬ 
rents everywhere. The five sense organs are its crocodiles. The 
conceptions of the mind are its banks. Greed and delusion are the 
grasses that cover them up. Lust and anger are the reptiles that 
are there. Truthfulness constitutes holy waters and falsehood the 
turbulent eddies. That excellent river of worldly existence has 
anger for its marshy bed. Its source is the Unmanifest one. It is 
a rapid river agitated by lust and anger. Those who are not 
self-possessed cannot cross it. O brahmins^ cross that river by 
means of your intellect. If flows into the ocean of worldly 
existence. It is impassable as it falls into the nether regions 
of the vaginal passage. It starts with <me's own birth. It is 
difHcult of access due to the whirlpool of tongues. Intelligent 
persons of great courage and steadfast intellect cross it. One 
who has crossed it is liberated from everywhere. His soul is 
purified. He is pure and self-possessed. 

31-32. He is capable of beccmiing Brahman by adopting 
excellent intellect. He crosses great distresses. He is devoid of 
sins and his soul is clean and pleasant. From all places he sees 
all living beings (?) He becomes neither angry nor elated. He is 
also not wicked in his mind. 

33. Thereafter, you will see the birth and annihilation of 
all living beings. Wise men have considered this as the most 
excellent of all virtues. 

34. O most excellent ones, among personsupholding virtue, 
the wise sages of truthful speech consider this as the most ex¬ 
cellent virtue. O Brahmins, the souls arc all-pervading. This 
principle ghould be imparted to one^s sons. 

35. This great secret doctrine of the soul is the highest 



712 Brahma Purlb^a 

of all esoteric doctrines. This should be imparted to a pure and 
devoted follower. 

36«37. What I have recounted is a highly secret doctrine 
with the soul as witness thereof. The Atman is neither a fe¬ 
male nor a male, nor is it a neuter one. Brahman is devoid of 
misery and happiness. It is identical with the past, present 
and future. After realizing this, no man or woman shall have 
to undergo rebirth. 

38. All these facts have been described, O brahmins, by 

me. 

39. (Defective) A person of delighted mind, whose son 
possesses good qualities and who is compassionate towards 
good sons will think about the welfare of those sons. 

The sages said : 

40. It has been said by Brahm^ that liberation is to be 
acquired through a certain means and not without means. 
O sage, we wish to hear that means. 

Vydsa said : 

41. In regard to this, O extremely intelligent ones, a close 
scrutiny is proper. O sinless ones, always seek all objects 
through that means. 

42. The intellect is the means of finding a pot. But 
it is not the cause of the pot. The same formula applies to the 
means of virtue. It is not the cause of other Dharmas. 

43. The path that leads to the eastern sea does not go to 
the western sea. Indeed there is only one path unto liberation. 
O sinless ones, listen to that. 

44. One shall dispel ai^er by patience and forbearance; 
lust by avoiding mental conceptions. A bold man (a self-pos¬ 
sessed one) deserves to dispel slumber by resorting to Sattva 
quality. 

45. One shall guard against fear by avoiding errors. One 
sh^ protect (one’s soul) and its knowledge. One shall coura¬ 
geously cause Mrish, hatred and lust to recede. 

46. He who knows rddity shall win over slumber and 
intellect by means of knowledge. The Yogin shall subdue 



130.47-57 


713 


ailments by taking wholesome food in limited quantities after 
the previous intake has been digested. 

47. One shall conquer greed and delusion by content¬ 
ment; sensual object by means of the vision of reality; the evil 
by tenderness and compassion; and virtue by indifference (?) 

48. The learned man shall conquer hope and ambition 
by restraining bis mind; competence (?) by avoiding close 
contact. He shall conquer affection by the thought of (?) non- 
eternity and hunger by Yogic practice. 

49. One shall conquer self by me 2 ms of self by merciful 
compassion; excessive greed by means of contentment; languor 
by early rise. One shall conquer fanciful doubt by means of 
decision. 

50. One shall conquer variety of languages by means of 
silence, fear by heroism. One shall control speech and mind by 
his intellect. One shall ccmquer intellect by the eye of 
knowledge. 

51. The great Atman shall control knowledge. The tran¬ 
quillity of the Atman shall control the Atman. These things 
shall be understood by a tranquil penon of pure activities. 

52-54. The seers know that the defects of Yogic 
practice are five, viz. lust, at^er, greed, fear and slumber. 
The devotee shall dispel these defects and resort to the 
Yogic means duly. (They arc) meditation, self-study of the 
Vedas, charitable gifts, truthfulness, shyness, straight-forward¬ 
ness. forbearance, clealiness, pious conduct and control over 
the sense-organs. One’s splendour increases by means of these. 
One dispels sin by means of these. 

55-57. Everything that he wishes for is achieved. His 
perfect knowledge begins to function. He shakes off his sins and 
becomes brilliant. He shall have limited diet. He shall conquer 
sense-organs. He shall keep lust and anger under his control. 
He shall thus enter the region of Brahman. 

This is the clean, pure and vivid path of liberation : The 
state of being not deluded, the state of being unattached, 
avoidance of lust and anger, the state of not being puffed up, 
absence of excited anxiety and the state of being steady. Simi¬ 
larly the gpntrol of speech, body and mind can become im¬ 
perishable: (in their consequence) as one pleases. 



714 


Brahma PurSijA 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYONE 

Review of injunctions regardir^Togic practice 
The sages said: 

1. O brahmin, O excellent s^c, it behoves you to relate 
to us the respective peculiarity of Sarhkhya and Yoga, O sage, 
conversant with virtue, everything is known to you- 

Vydsa said: 

2. The followers of Samkhya praise Sarhkhya. The followers 
of Yoga praise Yoga. In order to exalt one’s side they give 
cogent reasons. 

3. O excellent sages, ‘^How can one who is not competent 
be liberated?” Thus, saying with good reasons, learned men 
mention Yoga to be more excellent. 

4-5. The brahmins give reasons to justify Samkhya. 
*^He who is unattached to the sensual objects shall be 
liberated from his body after understanding all movements and 
goals and not otherwise. Thus men of great intellect state that 
Sarhkhya is a philosophy of liberation. 

6. A reason competent to justify one’s own side, words con* 
ducive to one’s welfare, should be accepted. The opinion of ex¬ 
cellent persons should be accepted by you all who are honoured 
by good men. 

7-8. Yogic austerities are causes of spiritual attainment. 
The Sarhkhyas adhere to the decision of scriptural texts. O 
excellent brahmins, Saxnkhya and Yoga are based on reality. 
Both these systems are known to the sages as systems approved 
by good men. If they are practised in accordance with the 
scriptural texts they are sure to lead to the supreme goal. 

9. O sinless ones, proper means of clealiness has been 
mentioned in both of them equally. Compassionate mercy 
to all living beii^ is also mentioned. The observance of 
holy rites is also similar, but spiritual vision is not the same in 
both (?) 

The sages said : 

10. If the observance of holy rites, purity, and merciful- 



131 . 11-22 


715 


ness are similar, O great sage, how is the spiritual vision not 
equal. Tell us kindly, O excellent brahmin. 

Vydsa said : 

11. Defaulters in Yogic practice attain the following five 
defects mentioned in the Yogic path : passion, delusion, 
affection, lust and anger. 

12. Just as the big fish cut off the net and escape into the 
water once again, so also the persons devoid of sins attain that 
region by taking recourse to Yoga. 

13-14. Similarly, just as the strong deer break loose, cut 
the net and attain freedom being liberated from all bondages, 
so also the brahmins equipped with strength break their bonds 
of covetousness. After cutting them off by means of Yoga they 
attain auspicious path devoid of impurities. 

15-16. The persons equipped with strength are firm and 
steadfast. On the other hand, those without the strength of Yoga 
perish, just as the birds devoid of strength, O leading brahmins, 
fall into net. Sinless ones do not get involved in bondage. Such 
are the powers of Yoga. 

17-18. Just as on getting entangled in a fine net weaker 
birds fall into misfortune while stronger ones free themselves, 
so those who axe possessed of strength are liberated, while the 
feeble ones perish. Similarly, the brahmins who are devoted to 
Yoga are bound by the fetters arisingout of their past Karmans. 
The weaker ones perish and the strong ones get free. 

19. O brahmins, the fire of very little magnitude is very 
weak and it calms down on being overwhelmed by huge 
(quantities of) fuel. The Yogic power too is similar. 

20. The same fire, O brahmins, becomes stronger once 
again on being accompanied by the wind. It may then bum 
the entire earth instantly. 

21. The extremely powerful Yogin whose strength is the 
perfect knowledge of reality and whose splendour is illuminated, 
is capable of drying up the entire universe like the sun at the 
time of dissolution. 

22. Just as a weak man, O brahmins, is taken away by the 
force of a current, so also the Yogin, devoid of strength is 
carried away by the force of sensuous objects. 



716 


Brahma PurSfia 


23. A powerful elephant is capable of obstructing the 
same water current. Similarly after attaining the Yogic strength 
no man is led astray by sensuous objects. 

24. Those who arc endowed with the power of Yoga, be¬ 
come masters of everything and enter the region of Prajapatis, 
Manus and BhQtas. 

25. Neither Yama, nor the infuriated Antaka (The annihi- 
lator), nor Mftyu (i.c. god of Death) of terrible exploits enter, 
O brahmins, the path of Y<^a of unlimited splendour. 

26. O excellent brahmins, there are thousands of Atmans 
(souls). By means of them one shall practice Yoga and after 
attaining the Yogic power, wander over the earth. 

27. One may indulge in enjoyit^ worldly pleasures and do 
severe penance thereafter. Again, O brahmins, he shall subdue 
them like the sun that subdues the qualities of brilliance. 

28. O excellent sages, for infusing more strength into the 
Yoga that is based on strength, one shall undoubtedly resort to 
Vi?nu, the source or origin of liberation. 

29. These powers of Yoga have b'en mentioned by me, O 
excellent brahmins, by way of illustration. Again, O brahmins, 
I shall mention the subtle ones. 

30. Listen to the illustration, O excellent sages, in regard 
to meditation upon the soul or in r^ard to concentration of 
mind. 

31. Just as an archer who does not err and who has full 
concentration, hits his target so also the Yogin of perfect unison, 
attains salvation undoubtedly. 

32-33. A person of good concentration can steadily fix up 
his mind to a pot tilled with oil and climb a flight of stairs. In 
the same manner the liberated soul can make use of steady 
Yoga. He makes the soul free from impurities like a mirror in 
which the sun reflects. 

34-35. Just as^ O leading brahmins, the helmsmen who 
have perfect concentration row the ships in the high seas and 
take ihem to the port, so abo, O brahmins, the knower of 
Yoga who has concentration on the soul attains the inacces¬ 
sible region of bliss after leavii^ off this body. 

36-37. Just as the charioteer, O brahmins, who has good 
concentration and capable hones takes the excellent man 



131.38-45 


717 


wielding the bow to the desired place immediately, so abo, O 
brahmins, the Yogin with full concentration and Dharana, 
quickly attains the greatest region, like an arrow discharged at 
the target. 

38. He who is engrossed and embedded in the soul is 
steady. He attains the unageing region as though by breaking 
the noose of the fish. 

39-41. The following are the spots in the body where the 
Yogin should concentrate and meditate: navel, head, 
stomach, heart, chest, sides, eye, car and nose. The Yogin of 
unlimited exploits, who practises great sacred rites with mental 
purity and concentration, meditates on these spots. O excellent 
brahmins, he unites his soul to the subtle Atman (soul supreme). 
Adopting the excellent Yoga he bums, in a trice, all the 
Karmans both auspicious and inauspicious and, should he wish 
so, he is liberated. 

The sages said : 

42. It behoves you, O excellent one, to explain this. What 
is the diet of the Yogin ? What things does he conquer and 
subdue ? How does he gain in strength ? 

Vydsa said : 

43. The Yogin who consumes coarse barley for a long 
time, O excellent brahmins, becomes a purified soul. With this 
single diet the Yogin attains great strength. 

Extra verse 

(43a.) O brahmins, the Yogin who is accustomed to eat 
bits of grain as well as Pinyaka (oil cake), and who avoids 
oily substances shall att^ great strength. 

44. Wandering through (and residing) ^ in the caves for 
many fortnights, months and seasons of diverse incidents, and 
drinking water with milk added (now and then), the Yogin 
shall attain great strength. 

45. After fasting incessantly for an unbroken period of a 
month, the Yogin becomes purified in soul and attains great 
strength. 



718 


Brahma Puril^a 


4Q-48. Yogins of great intellect and devoid of passions 
illuminate the great and subtle soul by themselves, O excellent 
sages, by conquering and subduing lust, anger, chilliness, heat, 
rain, fear, sorrow, slumber, objecu of sensuous pleasures, terri¬ 
ble allergies very difficult to be conquered, the sense of touch, 
drowsiness and the unconquerable lethargy. Meditation and 
studious habits are their assets. 

49. This path of learned brahmins is very difficult to tread. 
Only a few pass happily through this path and quickly as well, 
O excellent sages. 

50-52. Only a very few persons can comfortably pass 
through such a forest path as is terrible and abounds 
in serpents and reptiles. It contains many deep fissures and 
crevasses. It is devoid of water. It is impassable. It is full of 
thorns. It is dense and unbroken with thickly grown jungle 
trees. (In some places) the trees arc burnt down by the forest 
fire. The whole path is infested by thieves and robbers. (Only 
a very few can pass through such a path.) In the same manner 
only a few brahmins can pass through the path of Yoga. It is 
admitted that a person of many faults shall desist from that 
path. 

53. One should closely adhere to the path of Yoga as 
though that were as keen as the edge of a razor. This close 
adherence is the Dharaiia. It is difficult for persons devoid of 
self-possession to tread this path. 

54. Dharana, O brahmins, is complex and complicated. 
Just as the boats of men devoid of helmsmen do not reach the 
auspicious goal, so also men devoid of Dh^aM do not attain 
their ends. 

55. He who practises Yoga by adhering to Dharana duly, 
conquers death and the misery of fiwjucnt births. He excels 
others in happiness. 

56. This great path of Yoga has been resorted to by a 
number of sages. This has been precisely (explained) in various 
scriptures. This is decisively (nurtured) by the twice-bom 
people. 

57-60. The path of Yoga, O leading sages, u in conso¬ 
nance with the path of the Vedas. It is approvedof by Brahma, 
Siva and Vijpu, the bestower of boons. Bhava and Dharma 



131.61—132.4 


719 


(god of death) have attained dignity (due to the path of Yoga). 
The sons ofBrahzna (i.e. Sanaka» Sanandana etc.) have also 
attained dignity (due to the path of Yoga). The Yogin passes 
through the various stages of Prakrti, namely, the pure Sattva, 
the grand Rajas and Tamas full of pain. He attains divine 
power, and the goddess who is Vanina’s consort. He achieves 
entire splendour and great courage. He attains the status of or 
identity with the moon in the sky who is pure by nature, Visve- 
devas, serpents, Pitrs (Manes), mountains, terrible oceans, 
rivers, elephants, along with the mountains, Sadhyas, Yak^as, 
quarters, Gandharvas, Siddhas, men & women. The noble« 
souled Yogin then becomes liberated before long. 

61. After attaining Yogas and experiencing them, those 
men attain Narayana quickly. The story thereof, O excellent 
brahmins, is relevant in regard to divine beings as well as a 
splendid person of great virility and intellect. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYTWO 
Revitw of the principles of S&mkhya 

The sag€S said : 

1. This practice of Yoga, the path of Yoga, that has been 
approved of by dignified persons, O leading brahmin, has been 
well narrated to the pupil by you who wish his welfare. 

2. Now please expound in essence the practice of virtue 
according to Samkhya, for whatever is known in the three 
worlds has been understood by you. 

Vyasasaid : 

3. Listen ye, O sages, to the principles of Samkhya, who 
have realised the souls. These principles have been laid down 
by the old men of yore, Kapila and others, who were not in- 
ferior to lords. 

4. In that system, O excellent sages, a few complexities 
are seen. In it there are many good qualities and no defects. 



720 


Brahma Africa 


5. That is achieved bypractbing the rites mentioned as 
under. By means of knowledge^ O brahmins, all things are rea« 
Used. All unconquerable human objects of pleasure and the 
entire objects of evil are also realized. 

6. The objects of pleasure of Nagas, Gandharvas, Pitfs 
and lower creatures are known. 

7. The objects of pleasure of Suparjria (Garuda), Maruts, 
sages and royal sages are known. 

8. The objects of pleasure of Asuras, Viivedevas and 
divine sages are known. The great objects of Yogas are also 
understood. 

9. The objects of pleasure of whatever is being eaten as 
well as the object of pleasure of Brahmi are known. The maxi¬ 
mum period of life is understood in essence by the people. 

10. The maximum duration of happiness is clearly under¬ 
stood, O excellent sages. The misery of persons indulging in 
worldly pleasures, coming at the due time, is understood. 

11. The misery, O brahmins, of those souls that take 
birth among low creatures or fall into hell, is understood. The 
merits and demerits of heaven, O brahmins, are entirely under¬ 
stood. 

12-14. The merits and demerits of the Vedic system are 
to be understood. The defects and merits of the path of know¬ 
ledge should be understood. The merits and the demerits, 
brahmins, of the Samkbya knowledge should be understood. 
The devotee shall understand Sattva of ten qualities and Rajas 
of nine qualities, Tamas of eight qualities, Buddhi of seven 
qualities, Tamas of three qualities, Nabhas of six qualities. 

15-16. Rajas that has two qualities and Sattva of a single 
quality are also be understood. By knowir^ the path in 
essence and by seeing azmihilation the devotees, richly endowed 
with perfect knowledge and wisdom, attain splendid salvation 
even as the subtle ones attain great Etiier. Salvation is attained 
by purified soub. 

17-23. The organ of vbioQ b to be understood as com* 
bined with the quality of colour; the organ of smell b to be 
understood as combined with the quality of smell; the organ of 



132«24.28 


721 


hearing is to be understood through the quality of sound; the 
tongue is combined with the quality of taste. The quality of 
touch pertains to the skin. The wind that is dependent upon it 
can be touched and known. (Delusion) is to be understood as 
combined with tamas and covetousness is to be understood as 
combined with delusion. is to be understood as combined 

with Kranta (that has taken three steps). Indra is to be under^* 
stood as combined with power. Fire god is to be understood as 
attached to the belly. The goddess is to be understood as com¬ 
bined with water. Waters are to be understood as dependent on 
fiery element. The fiery element is combined with gaseous ele* 
ment. The gaseous element b to be understood as dependent on 
Ether. The Ether is combined with the principle of Mahat. The 
Tamas is stationed in Mahas (splendour); Rajas is attached to 
Sattva and Sactva is attached to the Atman (soul); the Atman 
is attached to lia as well as lord Naraya^a. Lord is attached 
to liberation and liberation is not attached to any. The physical 
body with Sattva quality should be known as surrounded by 
sixteen qualities; the nature and imagination should be known 
as dependent on the physical body; the soul is as though 
stationed in the middle; there is no sin therein. 

24. The Karman of the persons indulging in worldly 
pleasures, O leading brahmins, should be known as sinful; 
sense-organs and the objects of senses should be known as 
stationed in the Atman. 

25. The rarity of salvation should be known by means of 
the Vedic literature. The (vita! airs such as) Prana, Apana, 
Samana, Vyana and Udana should be known duly. 

26. The primordial wind element should be known and 
theti the resultant wind also should be known. They should be 
known as divided into seven. The remaining ones should also 
be known as sevenfold. 

27-28. The following persons should be thought upon : 
Prajapatis, sages, excellent creations, seven sages, royal sages 
who scorch the enemies, divine sages, Maruts, brahminical 
sages resplendent like the sun and persons who have slipped 
down from Chrir gorgeous splendour in the course of a long 
period of time. 



722 


Brahma Purdf^a 


29. The destruction of the groups of elements^ O brah¬ 
mins, should be heard. The splendid movement of the words 
should be known. Those who deserve the worship of persons of 
sinful actions should be seen. 

30. The misery of those who have fallen into the abode of 
Yama (in the river) Vaitara^! should be realised. The inauspi¬ 
cious movements of creatures in the variegated wombs should 
be observed. 

31-32. Their residence in the inauspicious belly should be 
seen and understood, the belly in the city of nine entrances 
(i.e. the body with nine orifices, viz. two eyes, two ears, two 
nostrils, mouth, urethra and anus), which is the receptacle 
of blood and water, which is filled with phlegm, urine and fae¬ 
cal matter, which has a strong obnoxious odour, which is amass 
of semen and blood, which is fixed up by means of marrow and 
sinews and which has a tangled web and woof of hundreds of 
nerves. 

33-38. One shall thoroughly understand that the Atman is 
conducive to one’s own welfare. O brahmins, one shall com¬ 
pletely comprehend the different sorts of Yogas. O excellent 
sages, one shall observe the despicable activities of creatures of 
Tamasa quality and those of the creatures of Sattvika quality 
with handsome but false Atmans. (In the same manner) one 
shall observe the despicable activities of the Samkhyas for the 
sake of great men despite the fact that the Sarhkhyas are persons 
who have comprehended the soul. One shall observe the terri¬ 
ble harassments of the moon (and other) luminaries, the fall of 
stars and revolutions of other heavenly bodies. One shall observe 
the miserable separation of couples, O brahmins. One shall 
observe also the inauspicious tendency of various livii^ beings 
to devour one another. One shall also realise (people’s) delu¬ 
sion during childhood and the inauspicious nature of the wing 
body (?)• In some places, even the Sattva quality depends on 
passion and delusion. By all these means one man among thou¬ 
sands resorts to salvation-consciousness. The rarity of libera¬ 
tion should be realised. The realisation is only through (Vedic 
Literature). 

39. Respect for things not yet received, neutrality in regard 



132 . 40-51 


723 


to what has been acquired and the viciousness of objects of 
worldly pleasures, shall be fully comprehended again, O brahmins. 

40. One shall comprehend residence in the families of 
creatures intending death as well as the emergence of creatures 
that are dead after breaking the splendid bodies (?) 

41. The misery of even the Sattvika creatures, O brahmins, 
must be comprehended. The fate of the persons who had killed 
brahmins and hence had a downfall, must be comprehended. 

42. The evil fate of vicious brahmins addicted to the drink¬ 
ing of liquor, as well as those who indulge in illegitimate union 
with the Wife of the preceptor shall be comprehended. 

43-44. By means of perfect knowledge, O excellent brah¬ 
mins, men behave well towards their mothers. They behave 
in the same manner towards the people of the world includ¬ 
ing gods. With the same knowledge one shall comprehend the 
fate of persons of inauspicious activities. The fates of those be¬ 
ings that are born in the wombs of lower creatures should be 
comprehended separately. 

45-49. One shall comprehend the following: the glorious 
arguments in the Vedas, the successive orderly changes of the 
seasons, the passing off of the years, months, fortnights and days. 
The waxing and waning of the moon shall be observed directly. 
The ebbing and the flowing of the tides in the seas shall be per¬ 
ceived. Riches are observed to decline and increase. Unions are 
observed to come to an end and an era too is replaced by an¬ 
other era. The feebleness and bewilderment that one experiences 
due to egotism shall be duly comprehended. All the defects sta¬ 
tioned in the soul and all the inauspicious defects arising out 
of one^s own body shall be perfectly understood. 

The sages said : 

50. What defects arising out of Utpatas (dangerous por¬ 
tents) do you see, O most excellent one among the knowers of 
Brahman ? It behoves you to clarify this doubt of ours comp¬ 
letely. 

Vydsa said : 

51. O brahmins, intelligent scholars speak of five defects 
in the body, the scholars who are the followers of Kapila and 



724 Brahma Purdiia 

his Saitikhya system. They are conversant with the path. Listen, 
O excellent sages. 

52. Lust, anger, fear, slumber and breath—these defects 
are seen in the bodies of all embodied beings. 

53. By means of patience they cut off anger; by avoiding 
close intimacy they remove lust; by resorting to Sattvika sub¬ 
stances they remove slumber; and they remove fear by means of 
avoidance of errors. 

54. They cut off and remove breath, O brahmins, by 
means of reduced diet. Good qualities are known by means of 
hundreds of good qualities and defects by means of hundreds of 
defects. 

55. Reasons must be known by means of hundreds of 
reasons; wonderful things should be known by means of wonder- 
iul things. 

The world is like the foam of waters. It is created by means 
of hundreds of mayas by Vifnu. 

36. It resembles the wall painted in a picture. It has as 
much strength as grass (i.e. it is flimsy and feeble). It is con¬ 
ducive to great harm. It wanden about in darkness. It must 
be seen as one resembling bubbles (of water) during rain. 

57. It is almost ruinous though it appears to be pleasant. 
It instils fear even after its destruction. Just as an elephant that 
has got stuck up in mud becomes helpless, so also the world 
gets stuck up in the slough of Rajas and Tamas. 

58-61. The Samkhyas. O brahmins, are highly intelligent. 
They abandon all attachment towards their progeny by means 
of knowledge and the object of knowledge that is all-pervasive 
and great, O brahmins. With the weapon of knowledge of the 
Atman, O excellent ones, and with the rod of penance, they 
sever off the inauspicious Rajasa odours, Tamasa odours, meri¬ 
torious Sattvika odours and those odours based on the body 
arising due to the physical touch. Thereafter they cross the 
terrible watery expanse of misery wherein anxiety and grief 
are great eddies; it is extremely terrible due to sickness and 
death; great fear acts like great serpents. Tamas is like a tor¬ 
toise. Rajas is like flsh. They cross this terrible expanse by 
means of their intellect. 



132.62-73 


725 


62-68. By the path of knowledge^ the sinless persons, the 
sages of great achievement cross the ocean of worldly existence 
wherein affectionate attachment is mud; old age is the fort, 
and the sensation of touch is like an island, O excellent brah¬ 
mins; Karman is the great depth; truth is the bank; holy rites 
are the places to stand by, O intelligent ones; violence is the 
quickness and rapidity of the current; it is turbid due to diffe¬ 
rent Rasas; different gestures of love are great jewels; misery 
and fever are the winds; grief and thirst are the great whirl¬ 
pools; it has great pain due to sickness; O excellent brahmins, 
the set of bones is the flight of steps with phlegm for joining 
them; liberal charity is the mine of pearls; the terrible out¬ 
pourings of blood are the coral beads; laughter and lamentation 
are the loud reports; it is very diflUcult to cross on account of 
various acts of ignorance; the dirt accummulated by the tears 
of lamentation is the brine; contact and union are the goals; 
this world of birth is one that deceives with sons and relatives 
for their towns; ibU (ocean of worldly existence) is an ocean 
unto all living beings with nonviolence and truthfulness for its 
line of boundary; it is full of surging waves due to the (in¬ 
cessant) contacts of vital airs; milk flows in successive waves 
(?); the territory here is the rare salvation; it is an ocean with 
the submarine Are at its mouth. Sinless ascetics cross this ocean 
(of existence). 

69. After crossing (the ocean of) births which is difficult 
to cross they enter the pure sky and thereafter on seeing them 
come, the sun carries them with its rays. 

70. The rays enter them like fibres of lotus, O brahmins, 
as it blows over the territories. O sinless ones, the wind Pravaha 
takes them up there. 

71. O brahmins, the subtle, sweet smelling, cool wind Pra¬ 
vaha with gentle touch receives those ascetics who are devoid 
of passion and the Siddhas whose asset is penance and who are 
endowed with virility. 

72. That wind which is the most excellent of all the seven 
winds, and which goes to the splendid worlds leads them, O 
great brahmins, to the most excellent goal from the firmamenu 

73. The firmament carries the lords of the worlds to the 



726 Brahma Purd^a 

greatest goal from the Rajas. The Rajas carries^ O great 
brahmins, to the greatest goal of Sattva. 

74. The pure soul carries the Sattva to the great and spU 
endid lord Naraya^. The lord of pure soul carries them to the 
supreme soul by himself. 

7 . After attaining the supreme soul they become rid of 
all defects. They are always free from dirt, They become cap¬ 
able of immortality. O brahmins, they do not come back. 

76. That is the greatest goal, O brahmins, cl those noble 
souls who are free from the mutually clashing pairs, who are 
devotedly engaged in truthfulness and straight-forwardness 
and who have kindness and sympathy for all living beings. 

The sages said: 

77. After attaining the most excellent region of the lord, 
do those persons of steady holy rites sport about there, till their 
death and rebirth ? 

78. It behoves you to describe accurately what exactly is 
the reality therein. Excepting you we cannot, O excellent one, 
afford to ask any other mortal. 

79-80. This wou]d be a great defect in salvation if other 
ascetics would also stay in the same place, perfect knowledge 
leading them to salvation, along with the sages who have attain¬ 
ed spiritual achievement. Hence O brahmin, we consider Dharma 
characterised by Pravrtti (i.e. life of pious activities as opposed 
to life of pursuit of knowledge) as the most supreme one. But 
on the other hand, there is likelihood of another misery in regard 
to a person completely engaged in the great knowledge. 

lySsa said: 

81. The question has been put most relevantly, O excellent 
sages. Your dilemma has been enunciated. O excellent sages, 
there is confusion and deltision even amongst scholars in regard 
to this problem. 

82. Even here listen to my words in regard to the perfect 
truth where the great intellect of those noble soub, the followers 
ofKapila, finds a place. 

83. The sense-organs too of the embodied beings, O brah¬ 
mins, are aware of their body. They are Atman’s Karanas (organs 



132.84-98 


727 


of activity and knowledge); the soul perceives all types of 
subtle entities through them. 

84. (The sense-organs) devoid of Atman as a result of sin¬ 
ful actions, perish like the waves in a great ocean. 

85. While the embodied soul is asleep or agitated the 
subtle soul wanders about along with the sense-organs like the 
wind that blows everywhere. 

86. It sees duly. O sinless ones, it touches after remember¬ 
ing (?). It becomes aware of all as before, O brahmins. 

87. Since they are not masters, the sense-oi^ans merge into 
their respective places like serpents which are killed. 

88. The subtle soul encompasses the movements of sense- 
organs in their respective places and moves about. 

89-91. The individual soul pervades diflerent qualities of 
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, the qualities of intellect, O excellent 
ones, the qualities of mind, the qualities of firmament, the qua* 
lities of wind, O omniscient ones, the qualities arising from 
affection, the qualities of waten, O brahmins, and all the qua¬ 
lities of earth. The K^trajfla pervades, O excellent brahmins, 
the qualities in these individual souls and moves about due to 
auspicious and inauspicious Karmans. 

92-97. Sense-organs move along with the soul just as disci¬ 
ples go along with a great saint (preceptor). After going be¬ 
yond Prakrti they attain the subtle, Nar&yana of great soul, the 
great ultimate resort, greater than the greatest and devoid of 
all aberrations. He is free from all sins. He has entered a state 
of freedom from all ailments. That supreme soul is devoid of 
all qualities. He is blissful, excellent ones. There, O brahmins^ 
the excellent mind and the sense-organs come at the proper 
time taking up the message of the preceptor. It is possible to 
attain tranquility and good qualities in the course of a brief 
period by means of the above mentioned Samkhya and Yoga. 
The highly intelligent Samkbyas attain the highest goal. O 
great brahmins, there is no other knowledge equal to this one 
that brings about salvation. 

98. May you be in no doubt in this matter. It is know¬ 
ledge that is the great S&mkhya. The primordial and the eter¬ 
nal Brahman is imperishable and Dhruva (everlasting). 



728 


Brahma Purina 


99, Persons of tranquility and calmness speak of it as that 
which has no beginning, middle or end; that which is free 
from mutually opposed pairs; the Agent, the eternal one and 
the Kutastha {firm and steady like the peak of a mountain). 

100» It is from this that all the processes of creation and 
annihilation issue forth. So say the eloquent great sages in the 
sacred scriptures. 

101 •103. The brahmins, Vedas and persons who are con¬ 
versant with the S^man verses call him the greatest lord, the 
endless one, the greatest Acyuta (one who docs not slip or 
swerve) and Brahmanya (favourable to the Brahman). Brah¬ 
mins with their intellect turned towards Gut;ias, the followers of 
Yoga who are united with the great one and the Saihkhyas with 
their vision directed towards the tmmeasured one (praise him). 
He has no manifest form, O great brahmins. The Veda says 
that knowledge is (his form). O excellent sages, they speak 
about many means of recognizing it. 

104. There arc two types of living beings on the earth, 
O excellent brahmins, the stationary and the Gamya (the 
mobile ones). Of these two the mobile ones are better. 

105. Jfiana (knowledge) is greater than all great things, O 
brahmins. O great sages, whatever is seen in the Vedas, in 
S&mkhya, in Yoga and in Puraija—everything has come from 
S&mkhya. 

106. What is seen in the great Idhasas (epics), what 
is particularly seen in truthful scriptures and whatever 
knowledge is there in the world, O great sages, has come from 
Samkhya. 

107. Everything that is seen in the world, the great 
strei^th, knowledge, salvation, penance—all these subtle thu^ 
have been duly laid down in Sarhkhya, O brahmins. 

t 108. Samkhyas attain their wclferc easily even from the 
things opposed to it. After realising them they become content. 
They fall in the abodes of brahmins again. 

109. After breaking their bodies they enter salvation. 
The followers of Y<^ and SWikhya reside in heaven. Hence 
they are more interested in Saihkhya, that is very valuable and 
resorted to by dignified persons, O br ahm i n s. 



132.110—133.6 


729 


IlO. O sages, in the case of those brahmins who are 
not devoted to this knowledge their oblique movement (i.e. 
their birth among lower creatures) is seen but not downfall 
into the abode of those who commit sins. Those brahmins are 
not important at all. 

11). The Samkhya system is vast, great, ancient and free 
from impurities. It is as vast as the great ocean. It is dignified 
and splendid. The followers of Samkhya dedicate everything 
unto Narayana. 

112. This great truth that the ancient universe originates 
from N^r&yana has been spoken by me. At the time of creation 
he creates and at the time of annihilation he annihilates them 
again. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYTHREE 

The perishable and the Imperishable 

Sages said : 

1-4. What is it that is called Imperishable from which 
one does not return again. O great sage, we ask you about the 
distinction between the perishable and the Imperishable in 
order to understand it correctly, O excellent sage, O leader of 
sages. Indeed, you are mentioned as the most excellent among 
those who are endowed with knowledge by sages of great for¬ 
tune and ascetics of noble souls who have mastered the Vedas. 
We wish to hear everything regarding this, from you, O sage 
of great intellect. We are never satiated by hearing the excel¬ 
lent nectar-like speech of yours. 

Vydsa said : 

5. In this connection I shall recount unto you the legend 
of yore, the dialogue between Vasiftha and Karala-Janaka. 

6. Vasis^ha, the roost excellent one among the sages, 
having the features of the stm, was sitting in his hermitage 
when king Janaka asked him about the perfect knowledge 
leadir^ ^ salvation. 



730 


Brahma Purdna 


7-8. Formerly king Kar^a^Janaka asked the excellent sage 
Vasistha who was seated, after payiz^ him obeisance with 
joined palms. He asked him about those topics with particular 
relevance to the supreme souT, determining the ways and 
means of spiritual pursuit. He asked that sage who moved 
about as he pleased, who performed excellent deeds, who was 
sweet-tempered and who was never puffed up. 

Janaka said : 

9-10. O holy one, I wish to hear about the great eternal 
Brahman from whom men of intellect never return. What is 
it that is called Ksara since this universe dissolves therein (i.e* 
in the Brahman)? What is it that is spoken of as Ak^ara which 
is auspicious, conducive to happiness and free from ailment? 

Vasiffka said : 

11. Let it be heard, O ruler of the Earth, how this universe 
dissolves and perishes, where it dissolves at first, and how long 
does it take. 

12. A Yuga consists of twelve thousand years. Know that a 
Kalpa is made up of four Yugas. A cycle of four hundred 
Kalpas is called a day of Brahma. 

13-14. O king, the night is also of the same duration at 
the end of which he wakes up and creates the great element 
firmament and other creations without end. The self-bom lord, 
devoid of form and benefactor of the world creates the uni¬ 
verse that has form. It is in the lord that the universe is rooted 
and has its origin, O excellent king. 

15-16. (The supreme soul) is l^ana, the never-diminishing 
flame, with the powers of Anima (minuteness), Laghima (light¬ 
ness) and Prapti (accessibility). It has legs and hands all 
around. It has eyes, heads and mouths all around. It has cars 
all around. It stands enveloping everything in the world. He 
is Lord HiraQyagarbha and is known as Buddhi (Cosmic Intel¬ 
lect) . 

17. It is called by various names in Samkhya* In the Yoga 
system it is called Mahat and Virifici. 



133.1803 


731 


18. It has various forms. It is the soul of the universe. 
It is known as single and Imperishable. All the three worlds 
have been held by it as though they formed one unit. 

19. In the same manner it is known as omniformed because 
of its multifarious forms undergoing some physical change it 
creates in itself. 

20. Pradh^a is a very great city called so because it is 
the abode of elements etc. Ahariikara (Great £go) has great 
splendour and it is bowed to by Prajapati. 

21. They call the manifestation from the Unmanifest 
Vidydsarga. Mahat and Ahamkara constitute Avitfydsarga. 

22«28. So also from the Eka (single one) the Acara (im¬ 
mobile) and the Cara (mobile) are born. They are known as 
Vidyd and Avid^d and proclaimed so by persons who ponder 
over Vedic passages and scriptures. Know that there is a third 
type of creation, O king, from Abaihkkra i.e. the creation of 
elements {BhQtasarga), viz. wind, Are, firmament, water and 
earth. In Ahaihk^a itself, O king, know the fourth creation 
as VaikTla{Le, diverse manifestation).The five elements and their 
five particular qualities, viz. sound, touch, colour, taste and 
smell, are produced simultaneously. Know the fifth type of 
creation, O great king, to be Bhauiika Sarga (the creation of 
the evolutes of the five elements). They are the organs of sense 
and action as well as the mind. Ear, skin, eye, tongue and 
nose—these five are sense organs. Speech, hands, feet, anus and 
penis—these five are Karmendriyas (organs of action). These 
organs arose simultaneously along with the mind. Thus there 
are twenty-four principles in action in the creation. By knowing 
this set of twenty-four principles the brahmins cease to be 
worried. They see the reality. 

29-33. Thus the excellent set of the three worlds is pro¬ 
duced. It should be known, O excellent one, among men. In 
the whole world in all the creations the Aunan that pervades 
is the same whether it is the ocean of hell, the abode of Yak^as, 
Bhutas and Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Nagas, Caracas, Pi^acas, 
Oevas, sages and demons; whether it is the creation of flies, 
worms, mosquitoes, worms in the putrid matter, mice, d^, 
low c4sie«people who cook dogs, CaQ^ilas, Pulkasas, Epeyas, 



732 ‘ 


Brahma PurSjja 


hunters of deer, horses, elephants, donkeys, tigers, wolves and 
cows. We have already hea^ that th^eis the abode of embodied 
beings in water, land and air. Certainly nowhere else. 

34*36. It is the soul of all living beings that is known as 
Imperishable (Akfara) . Everyday the entire universe drops off 
and perishes. It moves off from the Avyakta (the unmanifest 
one). Since the universe perishes it is called (Perishable). 
They say that the imiverse is conducive to delusion. It is called 
vyakta (manifest) and it arises from Aiyakta. The Akfara is great 
and eternal. It avoids K^ara (the perishable). From this no one 
returns. Thus, O great king, the Akfara has been explained 
unto you. 

37. The twenty«iifth-prtnciple is formless. It is eternal and 
it is real. Intelligent scholars call it Tattva because it depends 
on Sattva. 

38. That which is devoid of form creates the (manifest) 
and presides thereupon. The manifest is the twenty-fourth 
principle and the formless is the twenty*Bfth one. 

39. It alone abides in the heart of all forms. It is equipped 
with soul (?). It is conscious and it instils consciousness in all 
objects. It has no form but it identifies itself with all forms. 

40. It assumes forms of creation and annihilation through 
the peculiar characteristics of creation and annihilation. Al* 
though it is devoid of attributes it remains within the view. 

41. Although this great soul undergoes certain changes due 
to millions of creations and annihilations it does not absolutely 
identify itself with them all (?) 

42. Not being enlightened itself and due to the resorting 
of unenlightened persons it becomes enveloped with Tamas, 
Sattva and Rajas and is bom in different wombs. 

43. Due to the residence together it thinla like this—am 
not the other one*^ am this one and hence not the other 
one’^ Thus it follows the attributes. 

44. Due to Tamas it takes up beif^ of Tamasika nature; 
due to Rajas it takes up beings of R&jasika nature and by devot¬ 
ing to Sattva it takes up S&ttvika beings. 

45. The colours are three, via. white, red and black. Know 
that all these colours belong to IVakrti* 



133.46—134.7 


733 


46. The persotts of Tamasa nature fall into hell; persons 

ofRajasa nature become human beings. Persons of Sattvika 
nature go to the heavenly world and enjoy happiness. 

47« Due to the sins committed in this world one falls into 
the womb of the lower animals; if sins and merits both are 
practised one takes birth among men; and if merits alone are 
practised one takes birth among gods. 

48. Thus the wise persons say that salvation is based on 
Avyakta. It is the twenty^fifth principle which functions due to 
knowledge. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYFOUR 
A Jia/ogue hitmen Vcsi^fhc and Janaka 

Vasisfha said : 

1« Thus due to the state ofbeii^ unenlightened; the soul 
devoid of knowledge and enlightenment proceeds from one 
physical body to thousands of bodies. Therefore it does not 
differ in the course of its transmigration. 

2. On account of its acquisition of penance or decrease of 
good qualities the soul sometimes takes up bodies among gods 
or among lower creatures. 

3. From human birth it proceeds to heaven and from god 
it becomes a human being. From the state of man it proceeds to 
hell. 

4. Just as the silk worm wraps itself by its threadlike 
fibres so also this soul though devoid of Gu^ias wraps itself by 
means of Gu^. 

5-8a. Though the soul is devoid of mutually opposed pairs 
it is affected by them in different births. At the time when a 
person suffers from ailments such as headache, eye-pain, tooth¬ 
ache, sore throat, dropsy, diarrhoea, Gandamila, Vicareika, 
leukoderma, burns, scalds, epileptic fits etc., the characteristic 
symptoms of diverse types appear in the bodies of these souls. 
The soul identifies itself wth the bodies. As in the case of 
identificsition so also in r^ard to meritorious deeds. 



734 


Brahma Purds^ 


8b*12. The persons perform meritorious deeds of various 
kinds with a desire for welfare. The various kinds of meritorious 
rites are as follows: some wear four clothes; some lie down on 
the ground; some are seated in the Virasana. After V^rasana 
some take up the posture of Akaia Sayana (lying in the firma¬ 
ment); some lie on bricks and rocks; some on spherical rocks; 
some lie on ash rocks; some have the ground for their bed as 
well as unguent. Drinking and cooking are conducted in heroic 
abodes (?) Lying down is on planks or on beds equipped with 
fruits and articles of domestic use. A man lies down in gardens 
attached to barns (?) He wears leather pieces or silken clothes 
along with the hide of black deer. He may wear fur garments 
studded with jewels or wear tiger skin garment. 

13. He may wear lion hide or silken garment. Plank may 
be his robe or he may be wearing a mat. 

14. Mat alone may be his garment or he may be wearing 
bark garment. We may take pride in wearing other types of 
clothes. 

15. He may have diverse types of food and different kinds 
of jewels. He may take food once a day or on different nights 
with intervals of a night in between. 

16. The time for taking meals may be the fourth, sixth or 
eighth one (i.e. calculating at the rate of two meals per day 
he may take meals once in two, three or four days). 

17. Some men may fast for a month; their diet may be 
confined to roots; a person may eat fruits or air alone or oil 
cake, curd and cowdung. 

18. Some may cake in cow’s urine; some the Kaia flower. 
Some may take in only water moss. Some may sustain them¬ 
selves by other things. 

19. Some may live upon scattered old leaves or scattered 
fruits. A devotee resorts to different kinds of very difficult 
austerities with a desire for spiritual achievement. 

20. He may perform different kinds of Candrayana rites. 
There may be symbols pertaining to the four stages of life or 
to virtue and evil. 

21. Qe resorts to various ibelten. He may indulge in 
different heresies. He may resort to isolated shadows of rocky 
chiffs or to mountain streams. 



134 . 22-40 


735 


22. He may resort to lonely river banks, different forests, 
or lonely mountain caves. 

23. He may adopt different types of holy rites and obser¬ 
vances and various kinds of austerities, sacrifices of various 
types and different kinds of scholarly arcs. 

24-25. He may resort to the path of merchants or to the 
four castes viz. brahmins, K^triyas, Vaisyas and Sudras. He 
may distribute charitable gifts of various kinds among the 
wretched, the blind, the miserable ones- He may identify him¬ 
self with different attributes, viz. Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, 
Dharma, Artha and Kima. 

26-28. After honouring the Atman, the Atman divides it¬ 
self into various types of persons. The various items in the 
holy rites are Sviihikira, Va^atkira, Svadh^k&ra and Namas- 
kara (obeisance), sacrifice, study, presiding over sacrifices, 
teaching of Vedas and Sastras. They say that this is both aus¬ 
picious and inauspicious due to birth and death or destruction. 

29. Divine Prakrti causes fear and annihilation. At the 
end of the day, he passes beyond Gunas and remains single. 

30. Just as the sun controls at the proper time the cluster 
of his rays, so also the soul controls all these and identifies 
itself with them for the sake of sport. 

31-32. It identifies itself with these various features and 
qualities of the soul pleasing to the heart. Carrying out the 
function of creation and acmihilation it identifies itself with 
those activities. It is the master of attributes and it possesses 
the Gunas. It is interested in the path of activities. It is equip¬ 
ped with the paths of activity as well as inactivity. 

33. O great King, this entire universe is blinded by Pra¬ 
krti. Everything is pervaded in many ways by Rajas and 
Tamas. 

34-40. The soul thinks like this: ‘TTic Dvandvas afflict me 
continually and pass beyond. They are born of me and they 
resort to me at the time of annihilation. All these are to be 
crossed*\ So thinks the soul, O king, since the intellect is par¬ 
tial (?). Similarly it thinks as follows : have to enjoy 

these merits when I go to the heavenly world. Here too I shall 
enjoy it even as it gives rise to auspiciousness or inauspicious¬ 
ness. After I have performed this once it must yield happiness 



736 


Brahma Purht^a 


to me 80 that there shall be pleasure and happiness in every 
birth. Let there not be misery at any time. Human birth is 
miserable unto all and so also is the fall into the hell. From the 
hell I shall ^ain go to the mortal world. From human birth I 
shall attain the status of gods and from godliness I shall attain 
human status again.*’ And in due succession he attains hell 
from the status of human beings. This is the soul of the twice* 
bom. It is surrounded by Gunas. 

41. Therefore the attainment of hell by gods and human 
beings is relevant. Being overwhelmed by the sense of *^My* 
ness” it always moves there round and round. 

42*53. There are thousands of crores of creations in these 
forms that end in death. 

He who performs the actions the fruit whereof is either 
auspicious or inauspicious^ attains the particular fruit, taking 
up forms in all the three worlds. 

It is Praktti that performs actions, the fruit whereof is 
either auspicious or inaxispicious. And it is Prakrti that can 
go as it pleases anywhere in all the three worlds and attains 
results. 

One shall know of all these three regions as pertaining to 
Prakrti, viz. I) the birth as one of the low creatures, 2) the 
birth as a human being, 3) the birth in the heavenly world of 
gods. 

Since it is xmmanifest it can be inferred by means of symbols 
too. 

In the same manner he considers the manly symbol only 
due to inference. Mingling with other symbols it becomes the 
unerring symbol of Prakfti. 

After presiding over the pores of vital airs the soul considers 
the actions to be in the Atman itself. 

All the sense organs such as the ear etc. and the five organs 
of action initiate passion etc. in the Guests along with the 
Gunas. 

The Atman which is devoid of sense organs and organs of 
action thinks like this : am doing this. These are my 

organs”. 

One who is devoid of wouztds thinks am wounded”. One 
who is without a symbol thinks that ii has a symbol. The 



134.54—135,1 


737 


Atman has no Kila (Time) bat be thinks it has a Kala. Atman 
is devoid of Sattva but thinks that it has Sattva. The Atman is 
immortal but he thinks that it dies. He thinks that the Atman 
is mobile while in reality it is immobile. 

Atman is really devoid of action but he thinks that it has 
action. 

Atman has no attachment but he thinks it has attachment. 
Atman is different from a principle but he thinks it has prin¬ 
ciples. Atman is devoid of birth but he thinks that it has birth. 

Since he is not enlightened he considers the Atman that is 
imperishable to be perishable. 

Thus due to the state of not being enlightened and because 
unenlightened persons arc resorted to» the soul attains thousands 
of crores of births ending with its downfall. It takes up thou¬ 
sands of births ending with its deaths among the lower species 
of creatures or in the region of gods. 

54-58. Due to the state of not being enlightened, the 
pcnon of evil intellect is being taken away in a thousand ways 
like the moon in the current of water. Do also know that the 
moon is eternally possessed of sixteen parts but the ignorant one 
thinks it growing constantly. He is bom again and again for 
ever. 

The sixteenth digit is subtle. Let it be considered the real 
Moon. This digit is not consumed by Devas (gods). It remains 
for ever. 

After destroying my-ness, O excellent king, he is born and 
joins Devas too. Since Praki^ti has three Gupas, he is also 
Triguna (with three Gu^as). 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYFIVE 

A dialogue between Vasiffha and Janaka {eontd.) 

Janaka said: 

1. The relationship between the two viz., the Imperishable 
and (Perishable) is to be wished for. It is essential that there 



738 


Brahma Pur&r^a 


should be a relatioiiship between the two. The relationship 
between a woman and a man (is described here) • 

2. Without a man no woman conceives. Without a woman 
no man is able to evolve a form. 

3. In all types of livLi^ beir^the couple (i.e. male and 
female) evolve a new form by means of mutual contact. The new 
form evolved will have the features of both—the male and 
female. 

4-6. For the sake of pleasure^ the two will have intimate 
contact during the prescribed period after menstruation and a 
new form having the characteristics of those two will be evolv¬ 
ed. I shall explain what constitute the characteristic features 
of the man and what of the woman who becomes the mother. 
O brahmin, we know that the bone, sinews and the marrow are 
derived from the father. We have heard that the skin, flesh and 
blood are acquired from the mother. O excellent brahmin, it is 
thus that the matter is explained in the Vedas and scriptures. 

7. What is mentioned in the Vedas is authoritative, so also 
what is mentioned in the scriptures. The Vedas and scriptures 
are the two eternal authorities. 

8-10. In the same manner (i.e. as in regard to a man and 
a woman) Prakrti and Purusa have perpetual contact and 
hence, O holy Sir, the function of salvation does not exist. Or, 
should salvation be explained as something that is performed 
later on 7 Do mention this to me. You are always sought after 
by me directly. Desirous of salvation we wish for the soul that is 
ftee from ailment, that cannot be conquered, that is free irom 
old age, that is eternal, that is beyond the purview of sense- 
organs and that has no other overlord. 

Vasiftha said : 

11. What Your Highness said, quoting the example from 
the Vedas and scriptures is quite apt. I shall add that you are a 
person who imderstands the real principle. 

12. The texts of both, vis. the Vedas and other scriptures 
are held by you, O king. Be the person who understands Hit 
essence of the texts correctly. 

13. If a person is interested only in holding the texts of 
the Vedas and other scriptures and he is not conversant with 



135.14-24 


739 


the real meaning and principles it is in vain that he holds those 
texts. 

14. He who does not understand the meaning of those texts 
is merely a carrier of a burden. The acquisition of the texts is 
not in vain in regard to a person who is conversant with the 
meaning and principles of the texts. 

15. On being asked, only a man like me is competent to 
state the meaning of a text. Due to a true understanding, he 

alone grasps the correct meaning. 

16. If a person of imperfect intellect is not eager to under¬ 
stand the meaning of the texts, how can that person of im¬ 
perfect knowledge explain the texts with cohndence ? 

17. If a person who has not understood the basic prin¬ 
ciples of a scriptural text begins to explain it out of greed or 
arrogance, he is a sinner and he will fall into hell. 

18. A person of loopholes (i.e. imperfect knowledge) 
will never explain the text truthfully and confidently since he is 
neither self-possessed nor conversant with the meaning and 
basic principles of the text. 

19. Hence listen, O great king, how this is being viewed 
actually by the noble-soul ed followers of Sathkhya and Yoga 
systems. 

20. Whatever the followers of the Yoga system see (and 
understand), the Samkhyas too follow. He who sees the iden¬ 
tity of the Sariikhya and Yoga systems is wise. 

21. Skin, flesh, blood, bile, marrow, bone and sinew— 
O dear one, these can be perceived by the sense-organs, as 
Your Highness has already told me. 

22. A substance is evolved out of another substance and a 
sense organ is produced from another sense organ* One attains a 
body from another body and a seed from another seed. 

23. How will there be Gunas in the great Atman because 
it is devoid of Gupas ? How can this embodied soul devoid of 
sense-organs have the Gunas ? How can there be Guna in a 
seed that is not solid ? 

24. Gunas are produced from Gu^as and they cease to 
exist there itself. In the same manner the Gunas arising out of 
Prakrti are produced from Prakrci but they end therein itself. 



740 


Brahma Purd^ 


25*28. Skm, fleshy blood, fat, bile, bone-marrow and 
sinew—know them to be eight along with semen that is natural. 
The symbol of a woman is Prakfti. It is male as well as female. 
This is called Vayu (Wind), Puman (Man) and Rasa (Juice). 
Prakrti is devoid of symbol. It is perceived through the 
symbols born of itself in the same way at through flowers and 
fruits; the formless things are perceived among things with 
form. In the same manner the s)*mbul is perceived through in¬ 
ference. Among the principles the twenty-fifth principle, O 
dear one, is of fixed nature. 

29. It has neither beginning nor end; it is infinite; it 
observes everything; but it is isolated. It is due to the identi¬ 
fication through the gunas that it is called Gu^a. 

30. The GuQas exist in one with Gutia. How can there 
be Gu^as in one without Gu^as? Hence those people who look 
at Guijias know thus. 

31. When this soul identifies itself with the Gu^as belong¬ 
ing to Prakrti it is one with Gu^as and it observes the different 
Gupas. 

32-33. The fact that they call Saihkhya and Yoga as 
existing beyond Intellect explains that it is highly intelligent 
while knowing: and it is unenlightened while avoiding the 
enlightened. They call livara when it is manifest through its 
GuQas. They call Ijvara without Gu^, the perpetual presiding 
deity, 

34. Scholars who are experts in Saihkhya and Yoga and 
who seek the Supreme Soul understand the twenty-five princi¬ 
ples consituted by Prakrti and Gunas. 

35. The persons who are unenlightened, do not understand 
the enlightened and umnanifest one. They understand the 
manifest identical with the unmanifest. 

36. This principle is perfect but their vision is imperfect. 
They do not understand the known as separate from the un¬ 
known. 

37. This principle of perishable and Imperishable has 
been mentioned to you. They call Ekatva (imity) Ak^a 
(Imperishable) and Ninatva (diversity) is called Kfara. 

38* This is stationed in the twenty-five principles* They say 
that it is perfect. Its unity is perceived. So also its diversity. 



135.39-49 


741 


39. There is a separate citation of the principle and one 
who is conversant with the principle. Learned scholars say that 
the principles are twenty*iive in number. 

40* The learned men state that the twenty-fifth principle is 
devoid of Tattva (? principle). It is the practice that what 
should be discarded should be discarded. A twenty-fifth 
is eternal because of its reality. 

Janaka said : 

41. What has been stated byyou^ O excellent brahmini 
viz. diversity and unity (is not undentood by me) even as I 
observe it. Their example is in doubt* 

42. Undoubtedly) with the gross intellect I do not see the 
reality) O sinless one, of that which is being known through 
Buddha (that which is undentood) and Prabuddha (the 
enlightened). 

43. The explanation too of the perishable and the im¬ 
perishable) given by you, O sinless one, has been missed by 
me due to the unsteadiness of intellect. 

44. Therefore, I wish to hear this* viz. the philosophy of 
diversity and unity as well as the mutually opposite pairs that 
are to be understood essentially and unobitructedly. 

45. O holy one, I wish to know separately the distinction 
between knowledge and ignorance, the Imperishable and the 
perishable, Sarhkhya and Yoga entirely, as well as the enlight¬ 
ened and the unenlightened. 

Vasi^fka said : 

46. Oh, I shall narrate unto you what you ask me. O great 
king, listen separately from me the function of Yoga. 

47. To the followers of Yoga, meditation is a great power. 
The learned ones say that meditation is of two types. 

48. (1) The concentration of mind, and (2) the control 
of breath. Pranayama b of two types, viz. Sagui>a and Nirguna. 
The Nirguna is mental. 

49. One should not practise Prapayima for two units of 
tiinc,0 ruler of men, after passing urine, evacuating bowels and 
taking food. After that he shall do so with cagcmcis. 



742 


Brahma PurS^ia 


50*53. The devotee observing silence shall mentally turn 
the sense-organs away from the objects. (The control of breath) 
may last for ten or twelve (Matras). The intelligent devotee 
shall not induce himself to retain breath for more than twenty- 
four Matras. It is mentioned by scholars that breath control 
should not be practised while standing. We have heard that the 
Atman of the universe should be known always. Indeed yoga 
can be practised by a person whose mind is not shaky. The 
person who meditates should be free from all attachments. His 
diet should be light. He shall control and conquer his senses. 
He shall fix the mind to the heart either early in the n^ht or 
in the later half of the night. 

54*55. O kii^ of Mithili> he shall steady the sense*organs 
by his mind. He shall steady his mind by his intellect. He shall 
be still like a stone. He should not tremble. He shall be steady 
like a post and still like a tree. He shall control himself by 
means of intellect. He shall be conversant with the mode and 
process of breath control. They call him yukta i.e. one who is in 
the state of Yoga. 

56-57. He does not hear. He does not smell. He does not 
see anything. He is not aware of touch. His mind does not 
think or imagine anything. Like a log he does not know anything. 
The learned scholars call him Yukta and one who has attained 
Prakrti or the primordial state. 

58. Just as even when the lamp is not seen the light is 
seen, so also the soul without Lihga shall have the movements 
below, above and sideways. 

59. Being equipped with that the soul is stationed in the 
heart. When it is seen thus, O dear one, it is called by people 
like me Immanent soul, that which should be known, the knower. 

60. Like lire without smoke, like sun with all its rays, 
like lightning in the sky, he sees the Atman in the Atman. 

61. It has nu source of origin and it is immortal. Only 
the learned scholars possessing courage and Brahmins adhering 
to their dharma can see it. 

62. They call it minuter than the atom, and greater than 
the greatest. Though it stands firm everywheie in all living 
beings it is not perceived. 



135.63-73 


743 


63. It IS the creator of universe by means of intellect that 
could be observed by the light of the mind. Standing beyond 
the great Tama$> O dear one, it is (Non-Timasa). 

64. Persons who are conversant with truth and who 
are masters of the Vedic lore declare that it is far off from 
darkness. It has various appellations, viz. Vimala (Devoid of 
impurities), Vimata (One who is particularly honoured), 
Nirlihga (That which ’s beyond symbols) and Atihga (That 
which has no symbols) • 

65. Yoga alone is the substance of the worlds. What 
else can be the characteristic feature of Yoga? One who sees 
thus perceives the unageic^ great Atman. 

66. So far the Yogic school of philosophy has been re¬ 
counted in essence to you by me. I shall now recount the 
Simkhya school which is an example of Parisamkhya (Enu¬ 
meration). 

67. They call the great Prakrti of the soul Avyakta (Un¬ 
manifest) and Prakhyina (Proclamation). Prom it originated 
the second principle Mahat, O most excellent king. 

68. The Principle originating from Mahat is Aharhkara 
(Ego). The 6ve elements originated from Ahaihkara. 

69. These eight are Prakrtis. The Vikaras (products) are 
sixteen in number. Five of them are Vi^ew and iive are the 
sense-organs. 

70. Those who are conversant with the arrangement of the 
followers of the Samkhya school, those who perpetually abide 
by the path of the Sarokhyas, those who are learned scholars 
in the Samkhya school say that the number of principles is only 
this much. 

71. Everything gets dissolved in its respective source of 
origin wherefrom it has been produced. These principles get 
dissolved in the reverse order and they are apprehended by the 
immanent soul. 

72. The Gunas (i.e. all evolved things) get dissolved in 
Gu^ias like the waves of ocean. They are produced in the or¬ 
dinary order and get dissolved in the reverse order. 

73. The creation and annihilation of Prakrti, O ex¬ 
cellent king, is (his much. In the process of creation ic has 
divenity and unity at the time of annihilation. 



744 


Brahma Pttr/ttta 


74. This is what, O great kii^, should be understood by 
the experts. The presiding deity is the unmanifest. 

75. It has unity and diversity in the same manner as in the 
case of Prakfti. It has unity at the time of annihilation and 
multiplicity due to acd^ty. 

76. The Atman shall evolve Prakrti at the time of creation 
in various ways. The great Atman, the twenty-fifth principle 
presides over that group. 

77. It is called the presiding deity by ascetics. It is that 

because it presides over the group. 

78. It knows the K^etra or the Avyakta. Hence it is called 
Ksetrajfia. It lies down in the Pura (city) of Avyakta. There¬ 
fore it is called Puru^a. 

79. The K^etra is separate from Ksetrajfia. The Kjetra is 
called Avyakta and Jftitr (knower) is Puruja. 

80. Jftana (knowledge) is separate from Jfleya (that which 
should be known). JftSna is Avy^ta; Jftcya isPurusa. 

81. The Avyakta is K?etra, Sattva etc. Puru?a is Aniivara 
(having no other master) and Atattva (devoid ofTattva). 

82. In the school of Samkhya there is no fixed number. 
The Samkhya creates and explains Praktti only. 

83. The number can be forty or twenty-four. After enu¬ 
merating factually (the principles arc to be understood). The 

S&ihkhya has a thousand processes. The twenty-fifth principle is 
beyond the other principles. 

84. The twenty-fifth principle is mentioned in the Vedas 
as the Enlightened soul and knowing one. When he realbes 
Atman he becomes Kevala (The single one). 

85. Thus the Samkhya school of philosophy has been 
described to you briefly. Those who know thus attain liber¬ 
ation. 

86. What is called perfect knowledge is the perception of 
Prakrd. It has been already explained how that which possesses 
Gu^ could be produced from Nii^na (that which is devoid 

ofGupas). 

87-90. There is no return to this world to those who realize 
this. Nor do they turn to the state of raortaUty. Those who arc 
non-intelligcnt do not perceive the distinction between the 



136.N8 


74S 


changeable and the unchat^eable. In regard to them the vision is 
not perfect. O king, they are bom again and again. The Avyakta 
is called “Sarva’* (the whole). The twenty-fifth principle is the 
part thereof. People comprehend Sarva not by Sarva. They com¬ 
prehend Sarva by following Asarva. Those who know thus have 
no fear. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYSIX 

Dialogue bitwtsn Vasiffha Janaka [eonid.) 

Vasiffka said : 

1. The Saihkhya school of philosophy has so far been 
recounted unto you, O excellent king. Now Ibten to me and 
understand Vidya and Avidyk in the proper order. 

2. They say that Avyakta is non-differendated during 
creation and annihilation. Twenty principles are called Vidyk 
and A vidya and they are characterized by creation and annihi¬ 
lation. 

3. Some principles are Vidyas and some are Avidy^s; 
understand them in their proper order. O dear one, understand 
the recapitulation of the school of Samkhya, as mentioned by 
the sages. 

4. The sense-organs are Vidya of the organs of action. 
Similarly (Tanmatras?) are the Vidya of the sense-organs. 

5. Learned men say that the mind is Vidya of the objects 
of pleasure. They say that the five elements are the Vidya of 
the mind. 

6. Aharhkara is the Vidya of five elements. So, O lord of 
men, Ahamkara is Vidya and Buddhi is also Vidya. 

7. Prakfti is the Vidya of Buddhi. Avyakta, the Unmani¬ 
fest, is the Vidya of principles. O excellent one among men, 
Vidhi is also Vidyi. 

8. They say that Avyakta is Apara (having nothing greater 
chan it), n is the twenty-fifth principle and it is Vidyk* Every- 



746 Brahma Purina 

thing is mentioned as the Vidya of Jftcya (which sliould be 
known) and jAana (knowledge). 

9. Avyakta is mentioned by the word JAana while the JAeya 
is the twenty-fifth principle. Similarly, JAana is Avyakta and 
the twenty-fifth principle is VijAatf (knower). 

10. Vidya and Avidya have been briefly mentioned 
by me. What is known as Ak$ara and Ksara, understand that 
from me. 

11. Both of these are called Ksara. Both of these are 
Anaksara. I shall mention the reason thereof in relation to 
knowledge. 

12. Both of them are without beginning and without end. 
Both of them are supreme. Both of them are known as Tattva 
by persons who think about JAana. 

13. Due to the function of creation and annihilation they 
call Avyakta as unchanging. For the creation of Gunas it 
undergoes change again and again. 

14. The origin of Gunas and Mahat etc. is mutual. They 
call Adhi$(h&na (basis) the K^etra (field). This is the twenty- 
fifth principle. 

15. One shall reduce the cluster of Gunas within, into the 
manifest Atman. Therefore the ego gets dissolved in the twenty- 
fifth principle along with its Gunas. 

16. Gupas get dissolved in Gunas. Therefore, Prakrti 
shall be one. Even the KsetrajAa is made K^etrajAa (i.e. the 
individual soul). 

17. When Prakrti characterised by Gu^as gets into the 
Ak^ra there is Nirgucatva (state of being devoid of Gu^) 
in the body because of alteration in Gu^as. 

18. It is in this very same way that K^trajAa (gets dis- 
olvcd) by the decrease of the knowledge of Ksetra. We have 
heard that it is naturally devoid of Gu^ias. 

19. When this becomes K^ara it knows Prakrti possessed 
of Gu^as, among Gui^as and also Prakrti devoid of Gunas of 
the Atman. 

20. Morever, he becomes pure avoiding Prakrti and rea¬ 
lising am different from Pra^i*^ 

21. Then he attains freedom from pain. It does not get 



136.22-36 


747 


mixed with Prakfti, O great king. It is quite a diflTerent one 
that is mixed and that is seen by others. 

22. When he treats with contempt the Gunas, pertaining 
to Prakrti, he sees the great one. 

23*25, “What has been done by me so far ? I have been 
immersed in the ocean of time. Just as the hsh in the sea 
identifies itself with the water and adapts itself to it, so also I 
identify myself with the different persons due to delusion. The 
fish does not understand its difference from water due to igno* 
ranee. Since I slight the Atman I do not understand it or any¬ 
thing else. 

26. Fie upon me whose inteUect has become vitiated and 
who have become immersed in this. Due to delusion I have 
followed it up, I have followed different persons (?) 

27-30. This fellow is my relative. He may experience my 
decline in strength. I have attained similarity and identity 
with this fellow, I am of the same type as this fellow. I per¬ 
ceive equality here. I am like him. Indeed this fellow is free 
from impurities. It is clear. I am also like this then. Due to 
ignorance and delusion I have acted like this along with the 
ignorant Prakrti. I have remained all this due to this contact. 
So I have been captivated by it and I did not become en¬ 
lightened so far with regard to persons of noble nature, middl¬ 
ings or lowly ones. How can I associate with it ? 

31. Due to the state of not being enlightened I had asso¬ 
ciated with Maya. Now 1 have become free. 

32-33. Now I shall not associate with it. The fact that I 
who am free from aberrations have been deceived by Maya 
which is an aberration, is not its fault. It is my fault for I had 
been attached to it and I had been approached by it with face 
turned away. 

34. Therefore, I have been stationed in this in multifarious 
forms. Though, really I am devoid of form I assume forms. 
Though devoid of form, though actually unembodied, I have 
been overwhelmed by my-ncss. 

35-36. Therefore aberrations have been created by that 
Prakrti in the course of different births. Though I am devoid 
ofmy-ness (actually) aberrations have been created by the 
same my-ness. I have been bom in various wombs and while 



748 


Brahma Purdna 


remain!there, my mind had been devoid of consciousness. 
Equality has not been achieved by me due toAharhkara(^o). 

37. After splitting itself into many he joins me once again. 
Now I am enlightened. I am devoid of my-ness. I am devoid of 
egoism. 

38. The evil quality of my*ness is always generated in the 
mind and caused by Ego. After abandoning this which has 
clung to me I shall resort to the state free from ailment. 

39. I shall identify myself with this (i.e. the soul) and not 
with Prakrti which often misleads. My welfare is with the soul 
and not with Prakfti.** 

40. Thus by addressing the greatest, the twenty*fifth prin* 
ciple is awakened. After abandoning the K^ra he attains the 
state of Aksara devoid of ailment. 

41. (He attains the state Akyara that is Avyakta (unmani* 
fest) and Nii^^a (devoid of Gu^as) after abandoning the 
K^ara that is Vyaktadharma (whose attributes are manifest) 
and Saguna (possessed of Gunas). After seeing the Nirguna 
first, O king of Mithila, he becomes similar to it. 

42. Thus the example of Ak^ara and K^ara has been ex¬ 
plained to you by me as it has been expounded in the Vedas. 
It is richly endowed with knowledge. 

43. It is free from doubts. It is subtle, pure and free from 
impurities. I shall explain it once again in the manner heard by 
me. Understand it. 

44. The philosophy of the schools of Samkhya and Yoga 
has been recounted by me with examples from the two systems. 
What is stated in the Samkhya is the same which is stated in 
the Yoga system. 

45-48. The Jfiina of the Samkhyas, O ruler of the Earth, is 
conducive to the awakening (of the soul). It is clearly explain¬ 
ed with a desire for the welfare of disciples. 

Moreover, scholars say that this system is very comprehen¬ 
sive. In this system, O lord of men, a principle other than the 
twenty-five, vix. Rebirth is included. 

The greatest principle of the Samkhyas has been duly des¬ 
cribed. That is Buddha (enlightened), Apratibuddha (un¬ 
enlightened), and Budhyamina (that is being enlightened). 



IS7.1-12 


749 


They say that Budhyamana Buddhatva (the state of being 
enlightened that is being understood) is the Yogic principle. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYSEVEN 

Dialogue between VasUtha and Kar&la Janaka concluded 
VasUtha said : 

1. Prakrti creates and seizes the unenlightened unmanifest 
storehouse of Gunas even as Gupas hold the Tattvas. 

2. In a playful manner^ O king, Aja the unborn attains 
the state of modification; splitting itself into many it is per* 
ceived as though it is really multifarious. 

3. Budhyam&na that dbturbs and stirs this up like this, is 
not comprehended. It creates, seizes and practice.^ Gutias. 

4« They call this Budhyamana because it enlightens 
Avyakta. Avyakta is not comprehended in any other manner 
whether it is Saguna or Nii^na. 

5. It is only sometimes that it is so, so they call it Prati* 
buddhaka (Enlightened). If the Avyakta is comprehended it is 
the iwenty-fifth principle. 

6. The Budhyam&na certainly becomes one with myness 
for its characteristic feature—so says the Veda. By becoming 
enlightened due to mutual endeavour it becomes Avyakta that 
never swerves—^They say thus. 

7*8. They call this Budhyamana because it enlightens 
Avyakta. It is the twenty*fifth principle. It is the great Atman. 
It does not comprehend the twenty-sixth principle, the Buddha 
(enlightened), devoid of impurities, the eternal, one that cannot 
be perceived. It comprehends the twenty-fourth and twenty- 
fifth principles always. 

9. The perceptible and the imperceptible, O king of 
great lustre, follow its nature. The Av^^akta, O dear one, com¬ 
prehends that Brahman which is non*dual. 

10-12. It comprehends the Atman, the twenty-fifth and 
the twen^-fourth principle. At the time of comprehending the 



750 


Brahma Pur^ 


Atxoan, when he considers am another** he becomes one 
with the Avyakta as his eyes and so endowed with Prakrti. 
When he comprehends the pure Buddhi without impurities^ O 
mighty king, he comprehends the twenty-sixth principle. Con* 
tented, he proceeds (ahead). Thereafter he abandons Avyakta 
with creation and annihilation as the characteristic features. 

13. It comprehends IVakrti which is devoid of conscious¬ 
ness and which is endowed with Gu^. It becomes one with 
the features of lonely Atman by virtue of realizing of the 
Avyakta. 

14. After coming into contact with the Kevala it shall 
attain the liberated soul. They call this Tattva (principle) and 
(the soul) that is without old age and death, Nistattva (one 
that is beyond the principles). 

15. Only by duly listenir^to the description of the Tat- 
tvas does the soul, O king, become conversant with the prin¬ 
ciples. Learned scholars speak about twenty-five principles. 

16. Never docs a person conversant with the Tattvas get 
immersed in the ocean of worldly existence, O dear one. The 
Tattvas approach these persons quickly. Now understand their 
characteristics. 

17. Prajfia free from old age and death is understood as the 
twenty-sixth principle. Undoubtedly it attains equality with 
Sakti, it itself being J^akta. 

18. Abuddbiman (that which has no intellect) is being 
awakened by the Buddha (the enlightened one) that is the 
twenty-sixth principle. This is called diversity, N&natva, as 
explained in the Sazhkhya scriptures. 

19. When it is comprehended by the intellect the twenty- 
fifth principle, accompanied by conscious one^ Cetana, shall 
have unity. 

20. It attains equality, O king of Mithila, with (the 
enlightened one) that is being comprehended. Although the 
Atman is devoid of attachment, O ruler of men, it has the 
features and characteristics of what is being attached. 

21. They understand that the twenty-sixth principle is 
evolved out of Karman, after attaining the Atman that is free 
from attachment. When this is enlightened the omnipresent 
soul abandons the Avyakta. 



137.22-33 


751 


22-24. The twenty-fourth principle is very subtle due to 
the enlightenment of the twenty-sixthprinciple.ThustheAprati- 
buddha (non-enlightened), Buddha (the enlightened) and the 
Budhyamana have been briefly described to yon, O sinless 
one, in the manner explained in the lastras. The difference 
between these two is the same as between Masaka (mosquito) 
and Udumbara (the fruint of a particular tree). The difference 
obtained between the two is the same as between fish and water. 
The unity and diversity of the two should be thought of in this 
manner. 

25-26. What is mentioned as salvation is this much. It is 
termed Jftana and Vijflana. The desire, viz. ‘Tills person 
should be liberated*’ is suddenly originated in the body of the 
twenty-fifth principle, they say, within the view of the Avyakta. 
It is certain that he will be liberted thus and not otherwise. 

27-30. The soul acquires the characteristics of another 
object by associating with it. It becomes pure when associating 
with the pure one and not with the impure one. It becomes 
free from attributes while associating with the enlightened, O bull 
among men. While associating with one with the feeling of 
detachment the soul becomes liberated. While associating with 
the liberated it becomes Liberated. One with unlimited intel¬ 
lect becomes pure and of pure activities while associating 
with one of pure activities. While associating with the soul free 
from impurities it becomes pure; while associating with the 
single it becomes single soul. White associating with the 
independent it becomes independent. 

31. O great king, the truth and the truthful reality have 
been recounted so far. By grasping with your intellect the 
eternal Brahman, the first pure one, you have become Amat- 
sara, devoid of jealousy. 

32. O king, this great truth should not be imparted to a 
person not abiding by the Vedas. It imparts enl^htenment in 
regard to a person who is desirous of acting according to it. It 
admonishes one who bows down for enlightenment. 

33. This truth should not be imparted to a liar nor to a 
rogue, nor to an impotent person nor to a person of crooked 
intellect. It should not be imparted to a person who harasses 
scholars devoted to knowledge. It should be imparted for the 
enlightenment of the disciples. 



752 


Brahma P»f dpa 


34. This should be imparted to a disciple who is equipped 
with faith and good qualities^ who refrains from slandering 
others, who possesses pure Yoga and who is a learned one 
equipped with forbearance and sympathy. 

35. This secret should be imparted to a person who has 
discrimination, who is fond of injunctions, who is devoid of 
quarrelsome dispute, who has learned much, who has humble 
dress and demeanour and who has no selfish motive. 

36. They say that knowledge of this great Brahman 
should not be imparted to a person who is devoid of these 
qualities. The narration of virtue in regard to such person is 
not conducive to welfare, because it is like charity accorded 
to a person who does not deserve it. 

37. This should not be given to a person who has no 
sacred rites even if the entire earth full of jewels were given away. 
O leader of men, this great thing should be imparted to a per* 
son who has conquered his sense orgaiu, who observes pure 
rites and who knows reality. 

38. O Karala, let there be no fear at all in you. This great 
Brahman has been heard by you today. It has been duly re* 
counted. It is extremely sacred. It is fully free from grief. It 
has neither beginning nor middle nor end. 

39*40. It is unfathomable. It is free f^m old age and 
death. It is free from ailment. It is auspicious. It is free from 
fear. In view of the erroneousness of the argument of others, 
the eternal Brahma had been propitiated with great effort. That 
eternal Brahma of brilliant splendour had been propitiated and 
this had been acquired in *the same manner as this has been 
acquired by you. 

41. 1 have been asked by you, deader of men. So this 
has been recounted to you exclusively as it had been obtained 
from Brahma. It is the great knowledge, the utmost resort of 
those who are conversant with salvation. 


Vydsa said : 

42. This great Brahman, the twenty-fifth principle, from 
which one does not return has now been recounted in the same 
manner as it had been recounted, O excellent sages, by Vasif- 
tha formerly. 



137.43-53 


733 


43-44. He who does not completely and accurately under¬ 
stand the great unchanging knowledge^ free from death and old 
age, even after strivir^ for comprehension, returns. 

O brahmins, this Jhana that is conducive to salvation, has 
been truthfually described by me after listening to it (and under 
standing it) from the divine sage. 

45. This was derived by sage Vasi^^ha from Brahmi. 
Narada the greatest among s^es obtained this from Vasi^{ha» 

45. This eternal doctrine has been recounted to me and it 
has been obtained by me from Nirada. After hearing about this 
great doctrine, O excellent sages, you will not feel sorry. 

47. He has no fear who has understood that K$ara and 
Ak^ra are different. He has fear certainly who does not know 
this accurately. 

48. Due to the absence of perfect knowledge a person of 
confounded soul undergoes hardships again and again and 
attains thousands of births ending with death. 

49. Or he may go to the heavenly world or to the realm of 
low creatures or to the human world. Or perhaps he is released 
from that ocean of ignorance. 

50. In the terrible ocean of ignorance the unmanifest is 
called the unfathomable one. O brahmins, it is here that the 
living beings become immersed day by day. 

51. Hence due to the destruction of the unfathomable 
Avyakta, the eternal one, all of you, O brahmins, have become 
free from Rajas and Tamas. 

52. Thus, O excellent sages, the great Liberation, the es¬ 
sence of essences, has been recounted by me. On realising it one 
does not return. 

53. It should not be imparted to an atheist or to a person 
who is not a devotee. O brahmins, it should not be imparted to 
an evil-minded person nor to a person who has no iaith and 
who is averse to everything good. 



754 


Brahma Purdna 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYEIGHT 

In praise of the Purina 

Lomakarfana said : 

!*3. Thus, O brahmins, sage Vyasa recounted the Purwa 
to the sages formerly in smooth voice. His words were pregnant 
with meaning. His statements were free from eighteen defects. 
They were free from impurities. They were pure. The Parana 
is full of the gist of different scriptures. It is fully endowed with 
pure words of good quality embellished with the principles of 
the systems of Saihkhya and Yoga. It contains the prima facie 
views of the opponent and the finally established doctrines. 
The highly intelligent s^e Vyasa stopped aftre recounting 
this duly. 

4*5. After hearing the first Pura^a named Brahma which 
is on a par with the Vedas and which bestows the desired fruits, 
they became delighted and pleased as well as surprised again 
and again. Then they praised sage Vyasa, Kfinadvaipayana 
Vyasa. 

The sages said : 

6-12. O excellent sage, the Parana that is on a par with the 
Vedas, which bestows all wished-for fhiits, which dispels all sins 
and which contains wonderful words and letters has been re¬ 
counted by you and heard by us. O holy lord, there is ziothing 
unknown to you in the three worlds. O extremely fortunate one, 
you are omniscient like Brbaspati among Devas. We shall bow 
down to you, the great sage of excessive intelligence, closely 
adhering to Brahman. O great sage, who can recount good 
qualities since the meanings of the Vedic passages have been 
explained in the Mahabharata. After learning the four Vedas 
with ancillary subjects including Grammar you have composed 
the sacred book Bh^ata. Obeisance to you who have the charac¬ 
teristics of perfect knowledge. Obeisance to you, O Vyasa, of 
vast knowledge, of eyes resembling the wide petals of a full¬ 
blown lotus. It is by you that the light of knowledge has been 
made to burn filling it with the oil of BhArata. By the collyrium- 
rod of perfect knowledge the eyes of penons blinded by the 



138.13-25 


755 


darkness of ignorance^ going astray due to evil viiioni^ have 
opened up. 

Lomakar^ana said : 

13. After saying this they honoured and worshipped Vyasa 
and went back in the manner they had come to their respec¬ 
tive hermitages. They were contented. 

14. In the same manner, O excellent sages, the eternal 
Pura^a that is highly meritorious and which destroys all sins 
has been recounted by me. 

15. O excellent brahmins, whatever has been asked by 
you all, has been expounded by me by the grace of Vyasa. 

16. This should be listened to by householders, ascetics 
and religious students. It bestows wealth and happiness to 
men. It destroys all sins. 

17. Moreover this must be attentively listened to by brah¬ 
mins devoted to Brahman as well as brahmins and others who 
are well-disciplined and who desire welfare. 

18. (By doing so) a brahmin acquires learning; a K^triya 
victory in battle; a Vaiiya everlasting wealth; and a Sudra 
happiness. 

19. If a person of great purity listens to it meditating upon 
a particular desire he acquires the same whatever be the desire. 

20. This is a Purapa belonging to Vis^u. It destroys sins. 
It is more excellent than all other scriptural texts. It is condu¬ 
cive to the fulfilment of all aims of life. 

21. This Purai^ut that is on a par with the Vedas has been 
explained by me to you. When this is listened to the heap of 
sins arising from all defects, is destroyed. 

22. What a man obtains after lasting at Prayaga, Pu^kara, 
Kuruk;etra and Arbuda, be obtains the same by listening to 
this. 

23. The great merit that a man obtains by performing 
Agnihotra extremely well for a whole year, O brahminsi is 
obtained by listening to this once. 

24-25. The benefit that a man derives by taking bath in 
the waten of Yamuni on the Dvidail day in the month of Pro- 
S(hapada, or by visiting Hari at Mathurft is obtained if the 



756 Brahma Purdsya 

devotee dedicates his mind to Kelava and recites this Purana 
with great concentration, O brahmins. 

26. He who reads or listens to this Purana obtains that 
benefit which a person derives by visiting SRI. 

27. The man who reads and listens faithfully to this Purana 
which is on a par with the Vedas goes to the abode of Hari. 

28. A brahmin with mental control who recounts this 
on holy Parvan days and on eleventh and twelfth days of the 
lunar fortnight goes to the world of V4nu. 

29. This is conducive to fame and long life. It bestows 
happiness. It increases fame. O brahmins, it bestows strength 
and nourishment. It is conducive to wealth. It destroys bad 
dreams. 

30. A scholar who reads this excellent narrative during 
the three joints (i.e. dawn, noon and sunset) with faith and great 
concentration shall obtain all desired things. 

31. He who is distressed due to sickness is liberated from 
sickness. He who is in bondage is liberated from bondage. He 
who is frightened is released from fear and he who is caught in 
adversity is liberated from adversity. 

32. He obtains ability to remember births, learning, sons, 
intelligencei animals, courage, virtue, wealth, love and salva¬ 
tion. 

33. If a man reads this with pure mind he obtains all 
those desired things which he must have kept in his mind. 

34. He who listens to this Purana which bestows heavenly 
pleasures and salvation after bowing to Visnu the preceptor 
of the worlds, with great devotion in the mind and purity in 
mind and body, becomes free from sins. After enjoying happi¬ 
ness here and divine happiness in heaven he goes to Hari’s 
region without impurity afterwards. He is freed from the Gu^as 
of Prakrti. 

S5. This excellent Purana that yields much benefit and 
bestows virtue, wealth and salvation should be listened to every¬ 
day by excellent bradimins who are devoutly eog^ed in their 
own pious activity and who are desirous di attainii^ die sole 
path of salvation, by Itnding K 9 atriyas of self-control and db- 
cipline who always seek welfare, by Vaiiyas born of pure 
family, and by virtuous Sfidras. 



138.36*40 


757 


36. You are all excellent men. Let your mind be diverted 
to virtue, that alone is favourable to one who has gone to the 
other world, like a relative. Riches and women though resorted 
to by clever persons do not attain power and stability. 

37. A man acquires a kingdom through virtue. A man 
acquires longevity, renown, austerity, piety and salvation thro« 
ugh virtue. 

38. Dharma is both mother and father. Dharma u friend 
and companion to a man both in this world and in the other. 
Dharma is a saviour here. It is the bestower of salvation. There 
is nothing (of consequence) except Dharma. 

39. This secret and excellent Puriina that is on a par with 
the Vedas should not be imparted to an evil mind, and parti* 
cularly to an atheists 

40. This excellent Parana has been narrated by me and 
listened to by you. It dispeb sins and increasses virtue. It is 
extremely secret. O sages, permit me 1 shall go. 









