THE 

brahmAnda  purAna 


PART  III 


MOTILAL  BANARSIDASS  PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE  LIMITED  • DELHI 


First  Edition:  Delhi,  1958 
tirfirinl  Delhi,  1974 . 1978,  1982,  1988,  1992 


Also  axHulabh*  at 

} MOTILAL  BANARSIDASS 

23fi,  Olh  Main  III  Block,  Jayanagar,  Bangalore  560  Oil 
41  U A Bungalow  Road,  Jawaliar  Najjar,  Delhi  110  007 
8 Malialaxmi  Chamber,  Warden  Road,  Mumbai  400  026 
120  Royapettah  High  Road,  Mylapoie,  Chennai  600  004 
Sanas  Plaza,  1*102  Baji  Rao  Road,  Pune  411  002 
8 Camac  Sired,  Calcutta  700  017 
Ashok  Raj  path,  Patna  800  004 
Chowk,  Varanasi  221  001 


Printed  in  India 

BY  JAINENDRA  PRAKASH  JAIN  AT  SHRI  JAINENDRA  PRESS, 
A-45  NARAINA,  PHASE  I,  NEW  DELHI  110  028 
AND  PUBLISHED  BY  NARENDRA  PRAKASH  JAIN  FOR 
■ MOTILAL  BANARSIDASS  PUBLISHERS  PRIVATE  LIMITED, 
BUNGALOW  ROAD,  DELHI  110  007 


CONTENTS 


PART  m 

Section  III  UPODGIlATAPADA  (< Continued ) 

CHAPTERS 

Pages 

44.  Story  of  Parasurama  721 

45.  Story  of  Parasurama  ( Continued  ) 724 

46.  Story  of  Parasurama  (Continued)  726 

47.  Story  of  Parasurama  (Continued) 

48.  Sagara  keeps  his  vow  738 

49.  Conquest  of  the  world  by  Sagara  744 

50.  Sagara’s  Visit  to  Aurva’s  Hermitage  750 

51.  Banishment  of  Asamanjasa  756 

52.  The  Sacrificial  Horse  is  let  loose  762 

53.  Destruction  of  the  sons  of  Sagara  766 

54.  Recovery  of  the  Sacrificial  Horse  770 

55.  Aiiisuman  installed  as  Crown  Prince  775 

56.  Descent  of  Gang  a 778 

57.  Varuna  visits  Bhargava  784 

58.  Rama  reclaims  land  from  the  sea  790 

59.  Birth  of  Vaivasvata  793 

60.  Progeny  of  Vaivasvata  Manu  801 

61.  A Dissertation  on  Music  803 

62.  Science  of  Music  811 

63.  The  Iksvaku  Dynasty  816 

64.  Description  of  Nimi  Dynasty  835 

65.  Nativity  of  Soma  and  Saumya  838 

66.  Description  of  Amavasu  Dynasty  842 

67.  Origin  of  Dhanvantari  850 


68.  Story  of  Yayati  859 

69.  Birth  of  Karttavlrya  869 

70.  Dynasties  ofjyamagha  and  Vrsni  874 

71.  Vrsni  Dynasty  879 

72.  Praise  of  the  Lord  : Conclusion  901 

73.  Description  of  the  Glory  ofVisnu  920 

74.  Royal  Dynasties  931 


CHAPTER  FORTYFOUR 


The  Story  of  ParaSurama 

Vasistha  said  : 

1 . Thus  the  scholarly  scion  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu,  of 
righteous  Soul,  proceeded  (homeward)  accompanied  by 
Akitavrana,  seeing  on  the  way  many  lands  and  territories,  O 
king. 

2.  Seeing  Bhargava  on  the  way,  everywhere  all  the 
Ksatrivas  hid  themselves  in  their  eagerness  and  anxiety  to 
save  their  lives. 

3.  Then,  O leading  king,  Rama  reached  the  hermitage 
of  his  father,  that  echoed  with  the  sound  of  the  Vedic  Mantras 
and  that  was  abounding  in  animals  of  tranquil  nature. 

4.  It  was  a place  where  the  animals  (though  mutually 
inimical  by  nature,  like  lions,  deer,  cows,  elephants,  cats  and 
mice,  roamed  about  in  joy  simultaneously,  leaving  off  their  fear. 

f>.  On  seeing  the  smoke  arising  from  the  Agnihotrn  rites, 
O ruler  of  the  Earth,  the  peacocks  cry  aloud  and  dance 
delightedly  (as  if  they  have  seen  a cloud). 

6.  In  the  evening  hours,  the  ground  there  was  rendered 
slushy  (?)  with  water  by  Brahmanas  who  used  to  offer  water 
libations  facing  the  setting  Sun. 

7.  The  Vedas,  Scriptures  and  Sainhitas  were  joyously 
recited  there,  by  the  resident  disciples  strictly  adhering  to  the 
vow  of  celibacy. 

8.  Surveying  the  luxurious  wealth  of  the  hermitage 
with  great  delight  in  his  mind,  O king,  Rama  entered  it  ac- 
companied by  Akitavrana. 

9.  On  being  welcomed  and  honoured  by  the  Brahmanas 
and  their  sons  who  uttered  such  words  as  “Be  victorious”, 
‘‘Obeisance  to  you”,  Rama  became  greatly  delighted. 

10.  Entering  the  inner  precincts  of  the  hermitage,  his 
own  house,  Rama  saw  his  father,  Jumadagni,  the  very  store- 
house of  Penance. 

1 1.  The  sage  was  one  capable  of  chastising  or  blessing. 
He  was  seated  there  like  Bhrgu  himself.  Rama  prostrated  him- 


722  Brahmdnifa  Purdna 

self  at  his  feet  touching  the  ground  with  eight  parts  (of  his 
body) . 

12.  “I  am  Rama,  your  slave”— Uttering  this,  O lord  of 
the  Earth,  Raina,  the  leader  of  good  people,  duly  touched  his 
feet. 

13.  Then  he  made  obeisance  to  the  feet  of  his  mother. 
With  palms  joined  in  reverence,  he  made  the  following  state- 
ment which  made  them  delighted. 

Rama  said  : 

14.  Due  to  the  potentiality  of  your  penance,  O father, 
Karttavirya  who  was  extremely  inassailable  (to  his  enemies)  was 
killed  in  battle  along  with  his  sons,  armies  and  vehicles. 

15.  Punishment  was  sternly  meted  out  by  me  to  (that 
king)  who  committed  an  offence  against  you,  on  being  urged 
by  his  wicked  minister,  O leading  sage. 

16.  After  bowing  down  to  you,  I approached  Brahma. 
After  duly  bowing  down  to  him  I intimated  to  him  my  purpose 
of  seeing  him. 

17.  On  hearing  the  report  from  the  beginning,  that  lord 
advised  me.  “Go  to  the  eternal  region  of  God  Siva  for  the 
realization  of  your  object”. 

18.  After  hearing  his  words,  O father,  I bowed  down  to 
Pitamaha  (god  Brahma)  and  went  to  Sivaloka  with  a desire  to 
see  Hara. 

19.  On  entering  it,  O holy  Sir,  Lord  Siva  accompanied 
by  his  consort  Uma,  Siva  who  bestows  the  objects  desired  by 
us,  was  duly  saluted  by  me. 

20.  In  his  presence  the  whole  of  my  history  was  report- 
ed by  me.  With  great  concentration  of  mind,  he  heard 
everything. 

21.  Hearing  it  and  pondering  over  everything,  the 
merciful  lord  gave  me  a Kavaca  (an  esoteric  mantra  as  a coat  of 
mail)  named  Trailokyavijaya  (conqueror  of  the  three  worlds).  It 
is  the  bestower  of  success  in  everything. 

22-23.  On  obtaining  it,  I bowed  down  to  him  and  went 
to  Puskara.  There  I practised  the  Kavaca  and  became  delighted 
in  my  mind.  After  killing  Karttavirya  in  the  battle,  I went  to 


2.3.44.24-34 


723 


Sivalokaoncc  again.  There  Skanda  and  Vinayaka  were  seen  by 
me  at  the  entrance. 

24-25.  O sage  conversant  with  Dharma,  I attempted 
to  enter  after  bowing  down  to  them. 

On  seeing  me  entering  hurriedly,  Ganesa  suddenly  pre- 
vented me  saying — “This  is  not  the  proper  time”.  Therefore, 

0 father,  a wordy  warfare  took  place  between  me  and  him. 
Then  the  seizure  of  each  other’s  hands  and  tugging  at  them 
followed.  Thereafter,  the  hurling  of  the  axe  took  place,  O deligh- 
tcir^f  the  family  of  ‘Bhrgu’. 

26-29.  Coming  to  know  of  it,  he  (Vinayaka)  seized  me 
with  his  hand  and  whirled  me  upwards  and  downwards.  Then 

1 was  brought  back  (to  my  original  place).  On  seeing  him,  the 
axe  was  hurled  by  me  with  great  anger.  His  tusk  was  felled  down 
when  the  lord  came  .th^rc.  Parvatl  became  angry.  Then 
K|  sna  came  there  - accompanied  by  Raiha.  She  (Parvatl)  was 
appeased  by  him  and  she  granted  me  a boon.  Krsna  went  away 
after  making  me  friendly  with  him  (GaneSa) . 

30.  Thereafter,  I bowed  down  to  Parvatl  and  the  Supreme 
Lord  Siva,  the  sovereign  of  the  Devas  and  have  now  come  to 
your  presence  accompanied  by  Akptavrana.” 

Vasistha  said  : 

31.  After  saying  this,  O lord  of  the  Earth,  Rama,  the 
scion  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu,  stopped.  Jamadagni  then  said  to 
Rama,  the  slayer  of  enemies. 

Jamadagni  said  : 

32.  You  have  been  affected  by  the  sin  of  slaughtering 
Ksatriyas.  In  order  to  remove  the  sin  thereof,  it  behoves  you 
to  perform  expiation  duly”. 

33.  On  being  told  thus,  Rama,  the  most  excellent  one 
among  intelligent  persons,  requested  his  father — “It  behoves  you 
to  point  out  to  me  the  proper  expiation  thereof”. 

Jamadagni  said  : 

34.  “Perform  a penance  for  twelve  years  making  your 
body  emaciated  by  means  of  holy  rites  and  observances  and 
subsisting  only  on  greens,  roots  and  fruits  for  your  diet”. 


724 


Brahm&nfa  Parana 


Vasiffha  said  : 

35.  On  being  told  thus,  the  leading  member  of  the 
family  of  Blirgu,  bowed  down  to  him  as  well  as  to  his  mother, 
O king,  and  went  for  performing  penance  accompanied  by 
Akrtavrana. 

36-37.  He,  the  destroyer  of  enemies,  went  to  the  excel- 
lent mountain  Mahendra.1  He  built  a hermitage  there  and 
performed  a penance  very  difficult  to  be  performed  by  others. 

Rama  of  noble  mind  spent  some  years  there  performing 
holy  rites  and  observances  and  the  worship  of  the  deities. 


CHAPTER  FORTYFIVE 

Tie  Story  of  Paraiurdma  (continued) 

Vasifiha  said : — 

1.  Then  once  Sura  (i.e.  Karttavirya’s  son)  who  had 
escaped  to  the  Himalayan  forests — went  to  the  forest  lor 
hunting  along  with  Surasena  and  others  and  accompanied  by 
the  armies  of  four  different  units. 

2.  After  entering  the  great  forest,  they  killed  different 
kinds  of  animals.  Overwhelmed  by  thirst  at  midday,  they  went 
to  the  river  Narmada. 

3.  Taking  their  bath  there  and  drinking  the  waters  of 
the  river,  they  got  rid  of  their  fatigue.  While  going  away  they 
saw  the  hermitage  of  Jamadagni  on  the  way. 

4.  On  seeing  the  charming  hermitage,  they  asked  sages 
coming  that  way — “whose  hermitage  is  this  ?”  In  that  they 
were  urged  by  the  inevitable  future  result  of  their  actions. 

5.  They  replied  : “Jamadagni  of  great  penance  lives  in 
this  hermitage.  He  is  a sage  of  quiescent  soul  and  his  son 
Rama  is  the  most  excellent  one  among  the  wielders  of  weapons.” 

6.  On  hearing  it  and  because  Rama’s  name  was  men- 
tioned, they  were  overcome  with  fear  at  the  outset. 

1.  The  range  of  hills  extending  from  Orissa  to  Madurai  district.  It 
includes  the  Eastern  Ghat  and  the  range  extending  from  Northern  Gircars  to 
Gondwana — De,  p.  119. 


2.3.45.7-17 


725 


Remembering  their  previous  ruthless  enmity,  they  were 
exceedingly  enraged. 

7.  Then  they  conferred  with  one  another — “Since  our 
father  has  been  killed  by  Parasurama,  why  should  we  not 
take  revenge  by  killing  the  father  of  the  slayer  of  our  father? 
Direct  us  now.” 

8.  After  saying  this,  they  entered  the  hermitage  with 
swords  in  their  hands,  as  the  heroic  sages  had  gone  to  different 
places.  They  killed  Jamadagni. 

9.  ‘After  killing  him,  they  took  away  his  head  like 
the  ruthless  Nisadas  (hunters).  Those  wicked  ones  then  returned 
to  their  capital  along  with  their  armies. 

10.  On  seeing  their  father  killed,  the  sons  of  that  noble- 
soulcd  sage  lamented,  O great  king.  Afflicted  by  grief  they 
stood  surrounding  him, 

1 1 . On  seeing  her  husband  fallen  on  the  ground  after 
being  killed,  Renuka  immediately  fell  down  senseless  like  a 
creeper  struck  down  by  the  thunderbolt. 

12.  After  falling  unconscious,  she  was  burnt  by  the  fire 
of  grief  in  her  mind.  Like  one  whose  consciousness  is  lost,  she 
became  separated  from  her  vital  airs.  She  died  instantaneously. 

13.  The  sons  who  had  regained  consciousness  saw  that 
she  did  not  utter  any  word.  They  became  immersed  in  the  ocean 
of  grief  and  fell  down  senseless  on  the  ground. 

14.  Other  sages  who  were  living  in  that  penance-grove, 
came  there.  They  too  were  equally  grieved  but  they  consoled 
the  sons  of  the  sage. 

15.  After  being  consoled  by  the  groups  of  sages  the  sons 
of  Jamadagni  duly  cremated  # the  bodies  of  their  parents 
at  their  instance. 

16"  They  performed  all  the  obsequies  that  should  be  per- 
formed later  on  after  the  death  of  parents.  They  were 
afflicted  day  and  night  by  the  sorrow,  due  to  the  death  of 
their  parents. 

1 7.  In  due  course  of  time,  at  the  end  of  the  period  of 
twelve  years,  Rama  returned  from  his  penance.  Accompanied 
by  his  friend,  he  went  to  the  hermitage  of  his  father. 


726 


Brahmin$a  Purina 


CHAPTER  FORTYSIX 

The  Story  of  ParaSurSma  ( Continued ) 

0 

Vasiffha  said  : — 

1-3.  While  coming  along  the  path,  Rama  heard  the 
details  (of  his  father’s  murder)  from  the  beginning,  from  the 
sages  such  as  the  attempt  (on  his  father’s  life)  by  the  princes, 
the  passing  away  of  his  parents,  the  murder  of  his  father  and 
the  removal  of  the  head  of  his  father  by  them. 

On  hearing  of  the  death  of  his  mother  due  to  his 
father’s  death,  Rama  of  powerful  arms,  became  miserable  and 
grieved  and  he  lamented.  Akrtavrana  who  had  been  equally 
grieved  consoled  him. 

4.  Through  reasons  pointed  out  in  the  scriptures,  through 
hints  of  his  heroism  and  capacity  and  through  cogent  argu- 
ments and  popular  examples  he  alleviated  Rama’s  grief. 

5.  On  being  consoled,  the  highly  intelligent  scion  of 
the  family  ofBhrgu,  regained  his  courage.  He  proceeded  ahead, 
desirous  of  seeing  his  brothers.  He  was  accompanied  by  his 
friend. 

6.  Himself,  reduced  in  physical  strength  due  to  misery 
he  saw  them  (his  brothers) . He  bowed  down  to  them  who  too 
were  equally  miserable.  Continuously  experiencing  grief  and 
anger,  he  stayed  with  them  for  three  days. 

7.  His  fierce  wrath  (due  to  the  recurring)  recollection  of 
the  death  of  his  father  developed  soon  so  much  that  it  became 
capable  of  annihilating  the  worlds. 

8.  Being  truthful  to  his  vow,  he  reaffirmed  in  his  heart 
the  pledge  taken  by  him  formerly  for  the  sake  of  his  mother* 
He  prepared  himself  for  the  massacre  of  all  Ksatriyas. 

9-10.  Bhargava  resolved  thus — “After  killing  all  those 
born  of  K$atriya  race,  I will  perform  the  libatipn  offerings  to 
my  parents  with  the  blood  from  their  bodies’ VHe  indicated  his 
desire  to  all  his  brothers.  Being  permitted  by  them  and  having 
concluded  all  the  obsequies,  he  started  from  his  house. 


2.3.46.11-22 


727 


11.  Accompanied  by  Akftavrana,  he  went  to  Mahi§- 
mati.  Standing  in  a park  at  the  outskirts  of  that  city,  he 
remembered  Mahodara. 

12.  He  sent  to  Rama  a chariot,  bow  etc.  and  all  the 
necessary  requisites  for  fighting  along  with  Sahasaha. 

13.  Rama,  the  conqueror  of  enemies,  became  ready  (for 
the  battle)  well-accoutred.  He  got  into  the  chariot.  He  took 
up  his  bow  along  with  the  arrows  and  blew  his  conch  presented 
by  Rudra. 

14.  He  made  a twanging  sound  with  the  bowstring, 
making  heaven  and  Earth  tremble  as  it  were.  Sahasaha, 
the  most  excellent  one  among  the  charioteers,  drove  the 
chariot. 

15.  On  account  of  the  sounds  of  the  chariot  as  well  as 
the  bow-string  of  (Rama)  who  was  furious  due  to  the  slaughter 
of  his  parents,  the  entire  city,  the  people  and  elephants  became 
agitated. 

16.  On  coming  to  know  that  Rama,  the  destroyer  of  all 
Ksatriyas,  had  come,  the  sons  of  the  king  became  deeply  agitat- 
ed and  they  made  full  preparations  for  fighting  with  him. 

17.  Then,  O king,  the  heroic  princes  Surasena  and 
others  (seated)  in  five  chariots,  made  their  endeavour  to  fight 
with  Raina.  They  were  accompanied  by  other  kings  as  well. 

18.  Equipped  with  armies  consisting  of  four  different 
units,  those  leading  Ksatriyas  confronted  Rama  like  the  locusts 
approching  fire. 

19.  With  his  single  chariot,  Bhargava  restrained  them 
as  they  rushed  on.  Being  a hero  of  boundless  valour,  he 
fought  with  all  the  kings  in  the  battle. 

20.  A battle  took  place  once  again  between  Rama  and 
the  kings,  wherein  the  infuriated  sage  of  high  intellect,  killed  a 
hundred  kings. 

21.  After  killing  Surasena  and  others  along  with  their 
armies  and  vehicles,  he  made  the  entire  group  of  Ksatriyas  fall 
on  the  ground  in  a moment. 

22.  The  kings  who  survived,  whose  wishes  had  been 
frustrated  and  whose  vehicles  and  armies  had  been  killed  fled 
in  all  directions. 


728 


Brahm&nia  Pur  Una 


23.  After  routing  the  armies,  killing  the  enemies  and 
winning  the  battle,  Rama  killed  hundreds  of  kings  and  heroes 
by  means  of  the  fire  from  his  excellent  arrows. 

24.  Overwhelmed  with  fury  and  desirous  of  burnfng  the 
entire  city,  Bhargava  discharged  a missile  that  had  a lustre 
similar  to  that  ofKalagni  (the  fire  of  world-destruction). 

25.  The  fire  from  that  missile  burned  the  city  along  with 
elephants,  horses  and  men.  The  flames  enveloped  the  clusters 
of  the  entire  rampart-wall  of  the  city. 

26.  On  seeing  the  city  being  burned  and  desirous  of  sav- 
ing his  own  life,  Prince  Vllihotra  became  frightened  and  fled 
quickly  for  the  sake  of  life. 

27.  After  burning  the  entire  city  by  means  of  fire 
from  the  missile,  and  after  killing  the  enemies  Rama  appeared 
like  the  god  of  Death,  the  destroyer  who  devours  all  the 
worlds. 

28.  Accompanied  by  Akrtavrana  and  Sahasaha  he  went 
ahead  making  the  Earth  tremble,  as  it  were,  by  means  of  the 
(rumbling)  sound  of  the  chariot. 

29.  After  killing  all  the  Ksatriyas  on  the  surface  of  the 
Earth,  Rama  became  calm.  Then  he  went  to  the  mountain 
Mahendra  determining  in  his  inind  that  he  should  perform 
penance. 

30.  In  the  meantime,  in  thirtytwo  years  (?)  Ksatriyas 
rose  into  prominence.  'Therefore,  he  returned  (from  penance) 
and  took  the  vow  ofkilling  them. 

31.  Ksatriya  kings  were  begotten  of  the  widowed  wives 
of  those  Ksatriyas  by  Brahmanas.  Again  he  (Rama)  killed 
hundreds  and  thousands  of  such  kings. 

32.  In  two  years,  Rama  made  the  Earth  devoid  of  Ksatri- 
yas once  again.  At  the  end  of  it  he  performed  penance  of 
twenty- four  years  duration  once  again. 

33.  Again,  O king,  enlightened  Ksatriyas  were  procreat- 
ed by  the  Brahmanas.  Raina  killed  them  entirely  like  the  god 
of  death,  the  destroyer  on  the  Earth. 

34.  In  the  course  of  so  many  years  some  kings  were 
bom.  Killing  them  Rama  roamed  over  the  Earth  continuously 
for  two  years. 


2.3.46.35—47.8 


729 


35.  Enough  (of  this  repetition  of  incidents)  O leading 
king.  The  Earth  was  rendered  Ksattriya-less  by  Rama  who 
remembered  the  death  of  his  father.  He  cleared  the  earth  of 
Ksattriyas  for  all  twentyonc  times. 

36.  Since  his  mother  beat  her  own  breast  twentyone 
times,  Ksatriyas  on  the  Earth  were  exterminated  by  Rarna  as 
manv  times.1 


CHAPTER  FORTYSEVEN 

The  Story  of  Parasurdma  (Continued) 

Vashfha  said  : — 

1 . “Thereafter,  Rama  captured  alive  twelve  thousand 
kings  who  had  unmeasured  splendour  and  who  were  duly 
coronated. 

2.  That  sage  of  great  splendour  took  these  thousands 
of  kings  along  with  the  sages  to  the  pilgrimage  centre  Kuru- 
ksetra  which  is  full  of  penance  (i.e.  sages  performing  penance). 

3.  The  leading  member  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu  caused 
five  lakes  to  be  dug  there.  All  around  them,  he  got  built  holy 
bathing  ghats  of  comfortable  access. 

4.  Bhargava  killed  the  kings  there.  With  the  blood 
flowing  out  of  their  bodies  he  filled  those  five  lakes. 

5.  The  valorous  son  of  Jamadagni  duly  bathed  in  them 
and  performed  the  rite  of  offering  libations  to  the  manes  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  scriptures  carefully. 

6.  He  performed  Sraddha  and  other  rites.  O leading 
king,  of  his  departed  father  and  mother  as  mentioned  in  the 
scriptures  in  the  company  of  Brahmanas. 

7.  Surmounting  all  unfavourable  circumstances  thus,  he 
stayed  in  the  holy  centre  ofKuruksetra  abounding  in  austerities. 
He  was  alertly  engaged  in  the  worship  of  Pit? s. 

8.  Thenceforward,  the  holy  spot  created  by  the  son  of 
Jamadagni  in  the  penance  grove  of  Kuruksetra  became  the 
most  excellent  of  all  excellent  sacred  places. 


1 . This  seems  to  be  the  refrain  of  the  traditional  ballad  of  Parasurama. 


730 


Brahm&n<Ja  Purdna 


9.  The  place  where  the  most  excellent  one  among  the 
members  of  the  family  of  Bhfgu  caused  the  everlasting  satisfac- 
tion to  the  manes  has  come  to  be  known  as  Syamantapancaka  or 
Samantapancaka.  It  is  well  known  in  all  the  three  worlds. 

10.  It  is  the  place  where  all  his  Pitrs  were  fully  propi- 
tiated by  him  by  means  of  holy  baths,  charitable  gifts,  penance 
Homas , feeding  of  the  Brahmanas  and  offerings  of  libations. 

11 -13a.  The  Pit; s obtained  everlasting  satisfaction  and 
the  eternal  world  of  the  Pitrs.  The  holy  centre  named  Saman- 
tapancaka is  well  known  in  the  world  as  destructive  of  all  sins 
and  developed  by  means  of  great  merit.  All  the  sins  of  men 
who  go  there  are  removed  even  from  a great  distance  like  a dry 
leaf  in  a strong  wind. 

13b-l5a.  The  opportunity  to  go  to  that  pilgrim  centre 
is  never  obtained  by  bad  men,  O great  king,  even  after  hundreds 
of  births. 

The  sacred  spot  Samantapancaka  in  Kuruksetra  is  extremely 
sanctifying.  A man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  is  (on  a par 
with)  a man  who  bathes  in  all  holy  rivers  and  tanks. 

15b-17a.  Having  fulfilled  all  his  religious  acts  very 
well,  Rama  felt  completely  satisfied  in  regard  to  his  desires.  The 
highly  intelligent  sage  stayed  there  for  some  time  with  great 
self-restraint. 

Then,  at  the  end  of  a year,  the  son  of  Jamadagni  of  great 
self  control,  went  to  Gaya  accompanied  by  the  Brahmanas  in 
order  to  offer  the  balls  of  rice  to  the  Pitrs. 

17b-20a.  After  going  there,  the  suppressor  of  enemies 
propitiated  the  Brahmanas,  greeted  and  honoured  on  behalf  of 
the  Pitrs  in  the  Srdddha  in  accordance  with  the  scriptures. 

There  is  another  holy  spot  there  pertaining  to  Siva,  rem- 
embered as  Candrapada.  A pilgrim  centre  that  causes  the 
satisfaction  of  the  Pitrs  like  that,  does  not  exist  in  the  world. 

The  Pitrs  who  are  worshipped  there  by  persons  belonging 
to  their  families,  even  to  the  slightest  extent  in  accordance  with 
their  capacity,  will  attain  everlasting  access  to  their  goal 

through  the  offerings  of  balls  of  rice  and  similar  objects. 


2.3.47,20-31 


731 


20b-23a.  When  the  Brahmanas  had  been  fully  propitiated 
on  behalf  of  the  Pitrs  Rama  who  had  devotion  into  the  Pitrs 
duly  offered  the  ball  of  rice. 

Thereupon,  all  the  Pitrs  beginning  with  Jamadagni  came 
from  the  Pitrioka  and  accepted  the  reverent  worship  performed 
by  him. 

Delighted  in  their  minds  they  approached  the'  delighter 
of  the  members  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu  (i.e.  Parasurama).  All 
those  Pitrs  remained  invisible  in  the  sky  and  addressed  him  : 

The  Pitrs  said  : 

23b-26a.  “O  heroic  one,  a great  deed  has  been  accom- 
plished by  you  which  is  difficult  for  others  to  do.  You  have 
duly  and  very  well  propitiated  us.  But  still  you  have  not  given 
us  everlasting  pleasure;  since  it  was  after  massacred  Ksatriyas 
that  you  have  achieved  your  aim. 

Due  to  the  potentiality  of  this  holy  centre  as  well  as  to 
your  own  devotion,  wc  have  been  met  by  you  and  worshipped. 
But  wc  have  not  enjoyed  everlasting  benefits. 

26b-28.  Hence,  for  the  sake  of  destroying  the  sin  of 
slaughter  of  heroes  as  well  as  other  sins  you  should  perform  the 
due  expiatory  rites  and  perpetual  Dharrna.  Henceforth,  desist 
from  killing  the  Ksatriyas. 

They  are  not  directly  responsible  for  the  offence  against 
your  father  since  the  universe  is  not  uncontrolled.  It  was  on 
account  of  that,  that  the  murder  of  your  father  was  committed 
fbrmerly. 

29.  Who  is  competent  to  kill  whom  ? Who  is  competent 
to  save  whom  in  this  world  ? In  these  two  affairs  everyone  can 
at  best  be  the  instrumental  cause  alone  in  regard  to  everyone 
else. 

30-31.  Certainly  every  one  acts  in  accordance  with  his 
previous  Karman.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this  regard  that  the 
people  became  powerful  befitting  the  proper  time. 

Without  (the  intercession)  of  the  fate,  no  living  being  on 
the  Earth  is  capable  of  oppressing  other  living  beings,  dear  one, 
because  every  one  does  his  own  action  in  accordance  with  his 
ability. 


732 


Brahmtot$a  Purdna 


32.  Hence,  give  up  your  furious  anger  towards  the 
Ksatriyas.  With  a desire  to  do  what  is  pleasing  to  us,  regain 
quietism  (restraint  of  passions) . That  indeed  is  our  great 
strength.  Welfare  unto  you”. 

Vasi$(ha  said : — 

33.  After  telling  this  to  Bhargava  all  the  Pitrs  vanished. 
He  too  respectfully  accepted  their  proposals. 

34.  Accompanied  by  Akrtavrana,  Rama  joyfully  went 
from  that  pface  to  Siddhavanasrama. 

35.  After  staying  there  along  with  the  Brahmanas,  O 
king,  the  noble-minded  most  excellent  scion  of  the  family  of 
Bhrgu,  resolved  to  perform  penance. 

36.  He  sent  off  Sahasaha  along  with  his  chariot,  the  bows 
and  other  necessary  requisites  after  making  him  agree  to  come 
again  (if  and  when  necessary) . 

37-30.  Going  all  over  the  world,  he  took  holy  plunges  in 
all  pilgrim-spots  and  performed  the  worship  of  Pitrs,  Devas 
and  others. 

In  this  manner,  O leading  king,  the  delightcr  of  the 
family  of  Bhrgu  went  round  the  Earth  three  times,  following  the 
popular  convention. 

39.  Then  once  again,  O king,  he  went  to  Mahendra, 
the  excellent  mountain  in  order  to  perform  penance.  He  was 
surrounded  by  the  Brahmanas  then. 

40.  Conversant  with  Dharma,  he  made  there  a perma- 
nent abode  for  himself,  O king,  as  it  was  a place  inhabited 
by  Sages  and  Siddhas. 

41.  Sages  living  in  all  the  holy  centres,  the  expounders 
of  the  Brahman  with  perfect  Self-Control,  came  there  desirous 
of  seeing  him  as  he  performed  penance. 

42.  Those  groups  of  sages  saw  him  with  his  mind  attach- 
ed to  austerities  like  a fire  that  had  become  calm  after  burning 
down  a forest  of  dead  trees  in  the  form  ofKsatriya  completely. 

43.  On  seeing  those  divine  sages  full  of  the  power  of 
penance  come,  Bhargava  honoured  and  welcomed  them  by 
means  of  conventional  requisites  such  as  Arghya  etc. 


2.3.47.44-54 


733 


44.  After  enquiries  about  their  mutual  welfare  (they 
themselves)  engaged  in  fascinating  stories  and  anecdotes  that 
were  meritorious  and  leading  to  great  advancement  and 
prosperity. 

45.  Then,  with  the  approval  of  these  sages  of  purified 
souls,  he  began  preparations  for  performing  a horse-sacrifice,1 
the  greatest  of  all  sacrifices. 

46-47.  He  collected  the  necessary  requisites  (for  the 
sacrifice) . He  was  accompanied  by  (sages  like)  Aurva,  Vilva- 
mitra,  Bharadvaja,  Markandeya  and  others.  With  their  appro- 
val, he  made  Kasyapa  as  his  preceptor  and  performed  the  great 
sacrifice  called  horse- sacrifice,  Oking. 

48.  In  that  sacrifice  of  Rama  who  had  realized  the 
Atman,  the  Adhvaryu  was  Kasyapa,  the  Udgatr  was  the  sage 
Gautama  and  the  Hotr  was  Visvamitra. 

49-52a.  The  great  sage  Markandeya  did  the  work  of 
Brahma.  Bharadvaja,  Agnivesya  and  other  sages  who  had 
thoroughly  mastered  the  Vedas  and  the  Vedangas  performed 
other  rites  in  their  due  order. 

Accompanied  by  his  sons,  disciples  and  disciples  of  his 
disciples  and  assisted  by  other  sages,  O king,  the  holy  Bhrgu 
performed  the  work  of  Sadasya  (i.e.  Sadasaspati 9 the  President 
of  the  sacrificial  assembly) . 

The  leading  scion  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu  (i.e.  Parasurama) 
concluded  all  rites  along  with  these  sages  and  duly  worshipped 
Brahma  along  with  his  preceptor. 

52b-34.  A beautiful  girl  was  duly  adorned  with  orna- 
ments to  represent  the  Earth.  The  leading  member  of  the 


1.  One  is  surprised  to  find  how  Parasurama  who  was  never  anointed 
as  a king  nor  was  married  at  any  time  became  eligible  to  perform  Asvamedha. 
For  Apastamba  (XX.  1.1)  and  Latyayana  (IX.  10. 17)  Srauta  Sutras  have 
specifically  prescribed  this  for  a crowned  king.  Out  of  the  iTour  queens 
required  of  a king,  one  must  be  a crowned  queen  ( Latyayana  &rauta  Sutra 
1X.10.1-2) . 

The  wives  of  the  kings  are  to  go  round  the  horse  when  killed.  The 
crowned  queen  is  to  unite  with  the  dead  horse  under  the  cover  of  a mantle 
(Apastmba  XXII.  11.3-4).  Was  this  Aivamedha  episode  introduced  to  explain 
why  Parasurama  gave  all  the  conquered  Land  to  Kasyapa  ? 


734 


Brahmdntfa  Pur  ana 


family  of  Bhrgu  invoked  the  Earth  consisting  of  hundreds  of 
cities  and  villages,  having  oceans  for  its  garments  and  gar- 
lands, and  including  mountains,  forests  and  parks  and  granted 
the  same  to  Kasyapa  except  the  excellent  mountain  ( Mahendra). 
Rama  reserved  it  for  his  own  residence  thereafter,  O leading 
king. 

55-56.  He  worshipped  Kasyapa  in  accordance  with  the 
injunctions  of  the  sacred  texts,  by  means  of  gold,  gems,  jewels, 
garments,  horses,  elephants,  food  and  other  things.  He  conclud- 
ed the  sacrifice  ( Tajfia ) . At  the  end  of  the  ITajna  he  had  his 
ceremonial  bath  called  Avabhrtha . Then  with  the  sage’s  per- 
mission, he  performed  the  rite  of  Abandonment  of  wealth  (by 
distribution  of  monetary  gifts) . 

57.  After  giving  the  promise  of  freedom  from  fear  to  all 
living  beings,  the  delighter  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu  began  to 
perform  penance  there  itself  on  the  excellent  mountain. 

58.  All  the  sages  of  praiseworthy  holy  rites  who  had 
acted  as  Sadasyas  ( members  of  the  sacrificial  assembly)  and 
sacrificial  priests  (Rtviks)  took  leave  of  him  and  returned  the 
way  they  had  come. 

59.  After  they  had  gone,  the  holy  lord  (Rama)  began 
the  performance  of  a great  penance  and  lived  happily  there 
itself  in  the  company  of  Akrtavrana. 

60-61.  The  Earth  belonging  to  Kasyapa  and  having 
many  rulers  over  it  performed  the  holy  observance  called 
Dlpaprati$th&  (Establishment  of  lamps).,  with  the  permission  of 
Marlca  (i.e.  Kasyapa)  for  the  suppression  of  all  miseries.  The 
rite  had  been  recounted  by  Visnu  himself.  Dharani  (The  Earth- 
goddess)  became  perfectly  rid  of  all  miseries. 

62.  Thus  the  appearance  of  the  son  of  Jamadagni  has 
been  narrated.  On  hearing  this  story,  a man  is  rid  of  all  sins. 

63.  In  the  course  of  the  story,  the  prowess  of  Karttavfrya 
whose  splendour  had  become  renowned  in  the  world,  had  been 
duly  narrated  without  being  too  brief  or  too  prolix. 

64.  That  king  Karttavlrya  had  such  great  potentiality 
and  influence  on  the  Earth  that  there  will  never  be  a man  like 
him  in  future.  A man  like  him  has  never  been  heard  of  in 
the  past. 


2.3.47.65-75 


735 


65.  Since  he  had  formerly  solicited  from  Dattatreya  the 
boon  of  death  ai  the  hands  of  Utlamapuru$a  (Lord  Visnu  or  an 
excellent  person),  he  attained  salvation  on  being  killed  in  battle 
by  Rama. 

66.  His  fifth  son  who  had  been  well-known  by  the  name 
Jayadhvaja,  O king,  had  a powerful  son  named  Talajangha. 

67.  He  had  a hundred  sons  who  were  excellent  archers. 
They  were  known  as  ‘Talajanghas’.  The  eldest  among  them 
was  vltihotra. 

68.  The  senior  Talajangha  lived  for  a long  time  in  the 
middle  of  Himalayan  forests  along  with  his  sons  Vltihotra  and 
others  as  well  as  Haihaya  and  other  kings. 

69.  Formerly,  when  he  was  fleeing,  Talajangha  was  hit 
on  his  back  by  an  arrow  of  Rama.  With  an  excruciating  pain 
he  fell  senseless  on  the  ground. 

70  By  chance,  Vltihotra  who  was  also  fleeing  saw  him. 
Taking  him  in  his  chariot,  he  fled  speedily. 

71.  All  of  them  lived  on  the  Himalayas,  afflicted  by 
great  fear.  They  had  a lot  of  sufferings  and  they  had  only 
greens,  roots  and  fruits  for  food. 

72.  Thereafter,  when  Rama  calmed  down  with  his  mind 
engrossed  in  penances,  Talajangha  along  with  his  sons  regained 
his  kingdom.1 

73.  The  excellent  king,  the  suppressor  of  his  enemies, 
established  the  city  once  again  as  before,  stayed  there  and  pro- 
tected his  own  kingdom. 

74.  Recollecting  the  previous  enmity,  O great  king, 
Talajangha  attacked  your  city  along  with  his  sons,  followers 
and  armies. 

75.  Accompanied  by  his  army  consisting  of  four  units, 
that  king  approached  the  city  of  Ayodhya,  making  the  Earth 
tremble  as  it  were  and  yelled  loudly. 


1.  The  rise  of  the  power  of  Haihayas  (Talajanghas)  after  the 
retirement  of  paraiurama  from  active  life,  shows  the  temporary  effect  of 
Paras'ur&ma*s  conquests.  T&lajarighas  not  only  recovered  their  kingdom  but 
establishing  their  dominance  on  the  Indo-gangetic  plain,  they  drove  out  the 
ruler  of  Ayodhya  who,  due  to  blood  relation  with  Jamadagni,  was  an  ally  of 
Parajurama. 


736 


Brahm&iiia  Purdna 


76.  Your  father,  even  though  of  futile  authority,  came 
out  of  the  city.  Although  he  was  very  old,  he  fought  like  a 
young  man  with  all  those  kings. 

77-78.  Though  the  old  king  killed  many  elephants,  horses 
and  soldiers,  and  destroyed  many  chariots,  he  was  defeated  by 
his  enemies.  Hence  he  decided  to  flee. 

Abandoning  his  city  and  kingdom  along  with  the  treasury, 
army  and  vehicles,  he  entered  the  forest  accompanied  by  your 
mother  who  was  pregnant. 

79-80.  He  was  staying  on  the  outskirts  of  the  hermitage 
of  Aurva.  He  had  been  weighed  down  by  old  age  and  was  over- 
whelmed with  grief  and  fury.  He  was  looked  at  helplessly  by 
your  mother  with  her  throat  choked  with  tears.  Thus  like  a 
helpless  person,  O leading  king,  he  passed  away  to  the  heavenly 
world  from  this  world. 

81.  Your  mother,  O king,  was  full  of  misery  and  grief. 
Weeping  and  crying  she  placed  the  corpse  of  her  husband  on 
the  funeral  pyre. 

82.  She  had  become  emaciated  due  to  starvation  and 
other  miseries,  over  and  above  it,  she  was  now  agitated  over 
the  demise  of  her  husband.  Hence,  she  firmly  resolved  to 
immolate  herself  and  to  enter  into  t lie  funeral. 

83.  On  hearing  about  all  these,  Aurva,  the  great  sage, 
himself  came  out  of  the  hermitage.  Restraining  her  from  self- 
immolation  he  said  thus  : — 

84.  “You  must  not  die  now,  O queen.  There  lies  in  your 
womb  a son  who  will  be  the  most  excellent  one  among  all 
Emperors”. 

85-86.  On  hearing  these  words  of  his,  your  mother  of 
great  fortitude,  abstained  from  death.  The  sage  took  her  to  his 
hermitage.  Desirous  of  seeing  your  lotus-like  face,  she  curbed 
her  miseries  and  stayed  comfortably  within  the  bounds  of 
his  hermitage.  At  the  proper  time,  she  gave  birth  to  you  in  the 
hermitage  of  Aurva. 

87.  That  sage  performed  all  the  post-natal  holy  rites  for 
you.  You  have  been  brought  up  in  the  hermitage  of  Aurva.  He 
took  pity  on  you. 

88-89.  The  story  beyond  this  is  already  known  to  you. 
O suppressor  of  enemies. 


2.3.47.90-100 


737 


King  Karttavlrya  of  such  potentiality  and  power  ruled 
over  this  Earth.  Due  to  the  power  of  observance  of  this  holy 
vow,  he  became  famous  in  all  the  worlds.  Your  father  was 
defeated  by  his  descendants  and  he  fled  to  the  forest. 

90.  All  details  connected  with  him  have  been  recounted 
to  you  by  me. 

This  holy  rite  too  which  is  the  most  excellent  one  among 
all  holy  rites,  has  been  fully  recounted  to  you. 

91-92.  This  holy  rite  has  been  recounted  along  with 
its  Mantras  and  Tantras.  It  yields  the  benefit  of  all  the  worlds. 
To  a person  who  performs  this  holy  rite,  O king,  there  is  no 
desire  among  the  fourfold  aims  of  a man  that  is  difficult  of 
accomplishment  in  all  the  three  worlds. 

The  holy  rite  of  king  Haihaya  and  the  story  of  sage 
Jamadagnya  has  been  succinctly  recounted  by  me.  What  else 
shall  I tell  you  ?** 

Jaimini  said  : 

93-94.  “Thereupon,  king  Sagara  said  to  the  sage  with 
palms  joined  in  reverence — “O  holy  lord,  I wish  to  perform 
this  holy  rite.  Instruct  me  well  in  this  connection  and  grant  me 
permission  for  undertaking  the  same. 

95-97a.  By  means  of  this  holy  rite,  O Brahmanical  sage, 
I shall  undoubtedly  be  blessed.” 

On  being  requested  thus  by  the  king,  the  great  sage  said 
“So  be  it”.  He  initiated  the  king  along  the  path  mentioned  in 
scriptural  texts. 

On  being  initiated  by  Vasistha,  Sagara,  the  excellent  king, 
gathered  together  all  the  materials  and  duly  performed  the 
splendid  holy  rite. 

97b-100.  Following  those  injunctions,  the  king  worship- 
ped the  lord  of  the  Universe.  Getting  the  permission  of  the 
preceptor,  he  concluded  the  same  in  a befitting  manner. 

The  king  of  great  intellect  then  took  the  vow — “I  shall 
perform  this  excellent  holy  rite  strenuously  for  the  whole  of 
my  life.” 


738 


Brahm&nia  Purdna 


After  taking  leave  of  the  king  and  making  him  return 
-when  he  followed,  the  holy  sage  Vasistha  went  back  to  his 
hermitage. 


CHAPTER  FORTYEIGHT 

Sagara.  keeps  his  vow 


Jaimini  said  : 

1.  After  the  departure  of  that  excellent  sage,  Sagara 
the  best  of  the  kings,  resided  in  Ayodhya  and  ruled  over  the 
earth. 

2.  He  was  equipped  with  all  types  of  wealth  and  assets. 
He  was  conversant  with  the  principles  of  Dharma  and 
Artful  (politics  and  economics).  He  was  a boy  only  in  years  but 
in  his  activities  he  earned  the  appreciation  of  all  elderly 
persons. 

3.  But  he  was  always  dejected  in  his  heart.  He  neither 
took  food  during  the  day  nor  did  he  sleep  during  the  night. 
Recollecting  something,  he  used  to  heave  deep  hot  sighs. 

4.  On  hearing  that  his  kingdom  had  been  annexed  by 
the  enemies  after  vanquishing  his  father,  that  he  had  fled  to 
the  dense  forest  along  with  his  (king  Sagara's)  mother  and  that 
he  had  passed  away  in  the  same  forest,  the  king  became  grief- 
stricken.  Habitually,  true  to  his  promise,  he  angrily  took  the 
vow  of  exterminating  the  entire  race  of  his  enemies.  A king 
belonging  to  the  family  of  Iksvaku  is  unable  to  bear  the  fire 
of  discomfiture. 

5.  Once,  the  king,  having  celebrated  a solemn  ceremony, 
resolved  to  defeat  his  enemy  and  to  conquer  all  the  quarters  in 
due  order. 

6.  Surrounded  on  all  sides  by  many  thousands  of  chariots 
and  elephants,  horses,  chariots,*  and  foot-soldiers,  the  king  set 
out  from  his  excellent  city. 


♦Repeated  in  the  SK.  Text. 


2.3.48.7-13 


739 


7.  In  order  to  destroy  his  enemies  he  started  with  his 
combined  force  consisting  of  six  Aftgas 1 (Parts,  Units),  which 
appeared  like  the  ocean  that  is  agitated  due  to  different  kinds 
of  animals  and  series  of  waves,  on  account  of  the  galloping 
horses;  he  appeared  to  be  moving  along  with  the  entire  world 
consisting  of  the  groups  of  Kulagiris 2 on  account  of  the  herds  of 
elephants  in  rut;  he  appeared  to  be  moving  along  with  the 
firmament  brightened  by  the  good  (i.e.  white)  rays  of  the  moon, 
on  account  of  the  stream  of  white  umbrellas  and  banners  (of 
the  army  on  march). 

8.  As  the  king  proceeded  ahead  in  his  campaign,  the 
low  lying  areas  (depressions)  of  the  earth  were  filled  up  with 
the  dust  particles  of  the  mountain  ranges  pounded  by  the  feet 
of  the  armies  of  the  front  ranks.  The  ground  thus  raised  there, 
always  became  a fence  like  hedge,  due  to  the  dust  particles 
raised  severally  by  the  armies  consisting  of  the  four  units. 

9.  He  killed  many  haughty  warriors  confronting  the 
arrays  of  elephants,  horses,  and  chariots.  He  wore  the  splend- 
our of  the  moon-crested  lord  (Siva)  who  killed  the  armies  of 
the  hordes  of  Asuras;  during  the  periods  of  encircling  and 
attacking  the  cities  of  the  enemies,  he  used  to  proclaim  from  a 
distance,  the  duties  (of  the  enemy  soldiers)  in  the  case  of  defeat 
and  mortification;  he  used  to  give  them  sufficient  time  to  move 
away  quickly  and  he  used  to  assure  them  of  no  harm  or  loss 
to  their  lives  (he  made  them  confident  of  the  safety  to  their 
lives). 

10- 1 3a.  The  king  was  desirous  of  conquering  the  quarters 
(the  entire  world) . That  king  whose  realm  he  attacked,  immedi- 
ately bowed  down  to  him.  After  defeating  all  the  kings  he  made 
them  followers  of  his  footsteps.  He  let  some  go  on  some- condi- 
tions indicated  and  returned  their  kingdom  to  them. 


1 . The  six  units  of  the  army  are  : four  usual  units  of  elephants, 
chariots,  cavalry  and  infantry  as  well  as  the  unit  in  charge  of  food  for 
animals  and  human  beings  and  the  unit  in  charge  of  entertainment  such 
as  dancing  girls,  musicians,  those  who  play  on  instruments  etc.) 

2.  Seven  principal  mountains  such  as  Mahendra,  Malaya,  Sahyadri 
an<i  others. 


740 


Brahmdntfa  Purdna 


Thus,  he  went  to  various  directions.  When  he  went  to  the 
South,  he  remembered  the  previous  enmity  and  marched 
against  the  Haihayas. 

13b-  14a.  A great  battle  causing  hairs  to  stand  t>n  ends* 
took  place  between  him  and  the  Haihaya  kings  who  had  full 
complement  of  chariots  and  elephants  and  who  were  great 
warriors. 

14b-17a.  In  that  great  battle,  the  powerful  and  infuri- 
ated lord  of  the  Kosalas  killed  thousands  of  kings  and  their 
armies. 

The  king  who  wanted  to  put  an  end  to  the  enmity  (by 
taking  revenge)  defeated  the  Haihaya  kings,  shattered  and  burnt 
their  city  and  entirely  reduced  it  to  ruins. 

Sweeping  the  whole  of  the  land  and  crushing  it  down 
with  his  entire  army,  he  reduced  the  kingdom  of  the  Haihayas 
to  dust. 

17b-18a.  Leaving  off  the  city  and  the  kingdom  those 
kings  who  survived  fled  everywhere  with  all  their  riches  and 
glory  gone,  and  their  lustre  faded. 

18b- 19a.  The  king  rushed  against  those  fleeing  kings  and 
killed  them  along  with  their  followers  like  the  frantic,  infuri- 
ated god  of  death  killing  the  subjects. 

19b.  Sagara  whose  anger  had  been  roused  and  who  slew  his 
enemies  in  battle  discharged  against  them  the  extremely  terrible 
Bhargava1  missile  that  struck  terror  among  the  enemies. 

20.  The  kings  were  rendered  helpless  with  their  bodies 
being  burned  by  the  flames  of  the  Bhirgava  missile  which  was 
discharged  by  him.  The  missile  which  was  extremely  terrific  and 
which  made  the  three  worlds  frightened  shone  brilliantly. 
Immediately  they  were  rendered  blind  by  the  darkness  due  to 
the  columns  of  smoke  made  to  whirl  round  by  the  Vayu  missile 
(one  whose  deity  is  the  wind  god).  They  wandered  here  and 


1*  As  Sagara  received  his  military  training  under  Aurva  and  had  no 
contact  with  Paraiur&ma,  this  Bh&igava  missile  might  be  the  fire-missile 
developed  by  Aurva  who  was  advised  by  his  pit?*  not  to  finalise  it. 


2.3.48.21-25 


741 


there  and  rolled  about  on  the  ground  where  for  a short  while 
their  limbs  were  hidden  beneath  a great  deal  of  dust  particles. 

21.  The  movement  of  the  kings  was  hindered  by  the 
brilliant  glow  of  the  Agneya  missile.  They  could  not  see  their 
way  around.  They  became  separated  from  one  another  belong- 
ing to  their  group.  They  became  helpless  in  their  bodies.  Their 
minds  became  agitated  and  confused.  They  were  frightened. 
They  abandoned  their  clothes,  weapons,  coats  of  mail,  ornaments 
etc.  With  their  hairs  let  loose  and  dishevelled,  they  exhibited 
various  caprices  of  insane  persons  in  front  of  their  enemies. 

22.  After  defeating  all  the  Haihayas  in  battle,  Sagara 
the  powerful  King,  had  the  features  of  an  agitated  ocean.  He 
moved  against  the  Kambojas. 

23.  Kambojas,1  Talajanghas,  Sakas,  Yavanas,  Kiratas 
and  others — his  enemies  who  had  offended  him  formerly,  be- 
came utterly  confounded  as  they  lost  courage  on  hearing  the 
sounds  of  the  wardrums  and  various  other  musical  instruments 
(of  Sagara’s  army).  They  immediately  abandoned  their  king- 
doms, armies,  cities  and  ladies  of  their  harems.  They  wandered 
here  and  there  to  various  directions  due  to  their  fear  (of  a 
fresh  discharge)  of  his  arrows  and  missiles. 

24.  The  enemies  of  that  king  were  frightened.  Their 
vision  became  blinded  by  the  flames  of  the  fire  of  his  valour. 
T!rhey  abandoned  their  homes,  realms  etc.  along  with  their  sons 
and  others.  Being  attacked  and  chased  by  the  armies  of  their 
enemies,  they  fled  to  the  forest  region  where  also  they  were 
stunned  and  stupefied  by  another  enemy  who  got  up  from  his 
sleep  in  the  caves  of  the  mountain. 

25.  After  exterminating  the  Talajanghas  along  with 
their  armies  and  vehicles,  that  king,  the  suppressor  of  Enemies, 
gradually  destroyed  their  kingdom. 


1.  Kambojas  were  a people  in  northern  Afghanistan.  The  Shiaposh 
tribe  which  now  resides  on  the  Hindukush  is  said  to  have  been  descendants 
of  ancient  Kambojas — (De  87).  K&mbojas,  Sakas,  Yavanas  were  people  in 
the  north-west  Frontier.  But  they  are  blubbed  together  with  Kiratas  (tribe 
from  North-eastern  India,  Tip&rfi,  Sikkim  (West)  and  Eastern  Nepal  and 
Talajanghas  from  the  Narmada  valley. 


742 


Brakm&nfa  Purdna 


26.  Extremely  infuriated  he  slew  many  of  the  Yavanas, 
Kambojas,  Kira t as  and  others  as  well  as  Palhavas1  and  Paradas. 

27.  On  being  struck  down  by  him  in  battle,  those  kings 
became  frightened.  Those  who  survived  the  slaughter  fled  all 
round  in  groups. 

28.  “I  am  the  son  of  that  king  whose  kingdom  was 
taken  away  by  many  of  you.  I am  desirous  of  wreaking  revenge. 
I have  come  here  purposely  as  I have  taken  a vow  of  killing 
you  all  forcibly.”  Thus  the  king  Sagara  who  had  the  virility  of 
elephants  and  the  splendour  destructive  of  Ksatriya  heroes, 
made  his  enemy  kings  hear  his  life  story.  He  thus  reminded 
the  other  kings  (of  his  previous  history) . 

29-30.  On  seeing  that  the  excellent  king  had  taken  the  vow 
of  annihilating  the  races  of  all  his  enemies,  seven  of  the  enemies 
of  the  excellent  king,  viz.  Paradas,  Palhavas  and  others  who 
were  born  of  royal  families  and  who  were  very  famous,  became 
frightened.  In  order  to  save  their  own  lives  they  sought  refuge 
in  Vasistha  the  family  preceptor  of  the  Iksvakus  along  with 
their  w omenfolk  and  children. 

31.  ‘‘Be  our  refuge,  O Brahmana.  Wc  are  distressed  and 
we  desire  freedom  from  fear.  Our  bodies  are  being  burnt  by 
the  fire  ofSagara’s  missiles.  We  arc  about  to  die. 

32.  Determined  in  wreaking  vengeance,  he  kills  all  of  us 
without  exception.  We  are  desirous  of  preserving  our  lives  by 
coming  out  of  that  danger. 

33.  Our  kingdoms  have  been  split.  Our  pleasures  and 
prosperity  have  been  ruined.  Our  wives,  children  and  relatives 
have  been  separated  from  us.  It  is  only  for  saving  our  life  that 
we  are  seeking  refuge  in  you. 

34.  There  is  no  other  person  in  the  world  who,  by  friend- 
ly persuasion  or  by  the  application  of  force,  can  turn  him  back 
and  protect  us  from  this  great  danger. 

1.  The  Pur&ga  distinguishes  between  Palhavas  and  Paradas.  Paradas 
were  Parthians (probably  Pf thus  in  RVJ.But  Dc  opines  that  Paradas  dwelt  in 
northern  Beluchistan  (Ds  148)  Palhavas  were  a tribe  in  Media  (Mada) — a 
part  of  the  Parthian  (ancient  Persian)  empire.  Their  country  was  famous 
for  horses  (De.  143) 


2.3.48.35-43 


743 


35.  You  had  been  chosen  as  the  family  preceptor  of  the 
kings  born  of  the  solar  race  by  the  kings,  his  predecessors  in  the 
family.  Your  power  and  influence  is  such. 

36.  Therefore,  restrained  by  the  respect  for  the  greatness 
of  his  preceptor,  he  shall  not  transgress  your  behest  like  the 
great  ocean  that  does  not  trespass  the  boundary  of  the  sea- 
shore. 

37.  O holy  lord,  you  are  our  friend,  father  and  mother* 
You  are  preceptor  of  all  the  people.  Hence,  O highly  fortunate 
one,  it  behoves  you  to  save  us  from  this  difficult  situation”. 

Jaimini  said  : 

38.  On  hearing  these  words  of  theirs,  the  holy  lordly 
saint  Vasistha  slowly  surveyed  those  who  sought  refuge  in 
him. 


39.  On  seeing  t those  persons  who  were  born  of  royal 
families,  who  had  survived  the  general  massacre  and  most  of 
whom  were  old  men,  women  and  children  the  holy  lord  who 
was  merciful  towards  all  living  beings,  became  distressed. 

40.  After  looking  at  them  with  due  honour,  and  ment- 
ally pondering  for  a long  time,  the  highly  intelligent  sage 
revived  their  lives  with  the  slowly  uttered  words — ‘‘Do  not  be 
afraid”. 

41.  The  highly  fortunate  one,  indued  with  great 
sympathy,  spoke  to  them  kindly  and  made  those  persons  who 
sought  their  lives  to  agree  to  the  conditions  of  the  king. 

42.  In  order  to  fulfil  the  vow  of  the  king,  Vasistha  stipu- 
lated the  condition  that  those  persons  who  had  been  burned  by 
the  anger  of  the  king  should  be  denied  all  those  holy  rites  laid 
down  for  persons  of  royal  families.  He  went  to  the  excellent 
king  himself.  He  pacified  him  slowly  in  fitting  manner.  He  then 
requested  him  for  permission  to  the  surviving  enemies  to  go 
away  for  good. 

43.  Though  the  king  was  still  angry*  he  respected  the 
words  of  his  preceptor.  Those  enemies  were  compelled  to  eschew 
the  holy  rites  laid  down  for  their  families  as  well  as  their  mode 
of  dress.  He  made  them  accept  rites  different  from  what  are  laid 
down  in  Srutis  and  Smftis.  They  were  forsaken  b t 


7 44  Brahman  $a  Puratia 

manas.  He  let  off  each  and  everyone  of  those  kings  alive  but 
no  better  than  dead. 

44.  He  made  the  Sakas  shave  off  half  of  their  heads,  he 
made  the  Palhavas  grow  moustache  (and  beard).  He  made  the 
Yavanas  devoid  of  the  moustache.  He  made  the  Kambojas  to 
retain  the  chin  (i.e.  the  beard).1 

45.  In  this  manner  he  made  others  also  born  of  royal 

families,  very  ugly.  They  were  denied  the  right  of  performing 
the  holy  rites  mentioned  in  the  Vedas.  They  were  forsaken  by 
the  Brahmanas.  .* 

46-48.  After  forcing  them  to  accept  these  stipulations,  he 
left  them  alive.  Those  enemies  abandoned  their  characteristic 
features  and  mode  of  conduct.  They  became  outcastes.  They 
were  censured  by  the  people  of  all  castes.  All  of  them  were 
slighted  and  insulted.  They  became  ruthless,  shameless  Mleccha 
barbarian  tribes.  They  loamed  about  in  the  world  in 
groups. 

49.  Released  by  that  king  these  Sakas,  Yavanas, 
Kiratas  and  others,  immediately  abandoned  their  modes  of 
dress  and  conduct  of  life.  Their  only  resorts  were  mountains, 
forests,  caves  and  such  other  places.  Even  today  they  are  cen- 
sured by  good  people.  These  tribes  maintain  themselves  by  evil 
activities  and  wicked  pursuits.  But  they  keep  up  the  vow  of  the 
king  and  prevent  it  from  being  broken.” 


CHAPTER  FORTYNINE 

Conquest  of  the  World  by  Sagara 


Jaimini  said : 

1 . “Then  taking  permission  of  Vasistha,  the  excellent 
sage,  Sagara  accompanied  by  a great  army,  marched  against 
the  Vidarbhas. 

1.  These  were  probably  the  fashions  of  hairstyles  among  those  tribes 
which  are  attributed  to  king  Sagara’s  orders  of  punishment. 


2.3.49.2-16 


745 


2.  Then  with  great  pleasure  the  king  of  the  Vidarbhas 
offered  to  him  his  daughter  whose  name  was  KeSinl.  She  was 
unparalleled  in  beauty  etc.,  and  therefore  was  suitable  to  him 
in  every  respect. 

3.  In  an  auspicious  hour,  that  ruler  of  the  earth,  a tiger 
among  kings  duly  took  the  hand  of  Kcsini,  in  marriage,  with 
the  fire  god  as  witness. 

4.  Honoured  extremely  well  by  the  king  of  Vidarbhas, 
he  stayed  in  his  palace  for  a few  days  and  taking  leave  of  him, 
he  set  off  from  that  place. 

5.  (He  set  off  from  that  place)  on  being  permitted  by 
him.  Then  he  was  welcomed  by  the  Paribarhas.  Coming  out  of 
their  city,  the  king  approached  the  Surasenas. 

6.  Then  he  was  honoured  by  the  Yadavas,  his  maternal 
uncles.  After  being  propitiated  by  them  with  plenty  of  wealth, 
he  started  from  Madhura  (Pkt.  form  of  Mathura) . 

7.  Thus  by  conquering  the  whole  of  the  earth  he  made 
all  the  kings  his  vassals  (literally,  “moving  at  his  hint”)  paying 
revenues  and  tributes. 

8.  Thereafter,  lie  permitted  the  kings  to  go  back  to  their 
kingdoms  along  with  their  armies.  The  king  then  allowed  his 
followers  to  return. 

9.  Accompanied  by  a great  army  and  his  royal  retinue 
and  camp-followers,  he  reached  his  kingdom  slowly  without 
afflicting  the  realms  in  between. 

10.  He  was  honoured  by  the  people  of  the  villages  and 
outlying  districts  with  many  gifts  and  presents.  Then,  he  quickly 
reached  Ayodhya. 

11.  On  coming  to  know  about  his  arrival,  the  citizens 
became  enthusiastic  over  the  great  festivities  and  therefore 
adorned  the  city. 

12-16.  The  entire  city  prepared  itself  for  a great  festival. 
The  surface  of  the  ground  was  sprinkled  with  water  and  swept 
clean.  It  had  hundreds  of  pots  filled  with  water  (signifying 
auspiciousness).  Hundreds  of  tali  flagstaffs  were  raised.  The 
city  was  decorated  with  banners  and  emblems,  fumes  of  agal- 
lochum  spread  everywhere.  The  city  became  bright  and  res- 
plendent with  many  flowers  of  different  colours.  It  was  embel- 


746 


Brahmdntfa  Purdna 


lished  with  gem-studded  ornamental  gateways,  lofty  towngates, 
tall  minarets  and  palaces.  Its  highways  were  beautified  by 
means  of  showers  of  flowers  and  fried  rice.  Every  house  in  the 
city  was  prepared  for  the  great  festivity.  The  city  had*  rows  of 
houses  where  all  the  deities  presiding  over  the  sites  of  buildings 
had  been  worshipped.  It  was  rendered  beautiful  all  round 
by  the  delighted  citizens  and  villagers  eager  to  see  the  king 
who  had  conquered  all  the  quarters. 

17-20.  Then  the  ministers,  counsellors  as  well  as  the 
residents  of  the  harem  came  there,  surrounded  by  groups  of 
courtezans  and  ladies  of  the  city.  All  the  citizens  assembled 
there.  The  king  met  them  and  receive  d honour,  welcome  and 
blessings  from  them.  There  were  a lot  of  deafening  cheers  of 
‘Victory’  reverberating  in  all  the  quarters.  The  sweet  sounds 
of  different  kinds  of  musical  instruments  got  mixed  with  them. 
The  king  loudly  greeted  them.  Accompanied  by  those 
joyous  people  and  delighting  his  subjects,  he  entered  the 
excellent  city. 

21-24.  He  was  greeted  and  lovingly  honoured  by  the 
Brahmanas  through  sweet  chants  of  the  Vedic  Mantras.  He 
was  warmly  and  highly  eulogised  by  heralds,  bards  and 
panegyrists. 

The  residents  of  the  outlying  districts  and  countries  uttered 
cries  of  Victory  all  round.  The  songsters  and  musicians  began 
singing  to  the  accompaniment  of  the  sweet  notes  of  the  Vinds 
(lutes)  and  Venus  (flutes)  as  well  as  the  sound  produced  by 
beating  the  time.  The  harlots  followed  hirn  dancing.  A 
graceful  white  umbrella  was  spread  over  him.  Showers  of 
fried  rice  and  flowers  greeted  him  allround.  Thus  he  entered 
the  city  of  Ayodhya  like  Indra  entering  his  city. 

25.  Through  a path  that  was  Dr^fifiUta  (i.c.  protected 
from  impurity  by  sight  by  disallowing  people  of  wicked 
vision  and  keeping  it  spotlessly  clean),  that  was  rendered  frag- 
rant through  scents  and  that  was  traversed  first  by  the 
Brahmanas,  he  walked  upto  a magnificently  decorated  mansion 
in  the  middle  of  the  city. 

26.  Accompanied  by  both  of  his  wives,  he  got  down 
from  the  vehicle  and  joyously  entered  the  house  of  his  mother* 
where  the  people  were  delighted  and  well  nourished. 


2.3.49.27-40 


747 


27.  With  humility,  he  approached  his  mother  who  was 
seated  in  a couch.  Touching  her  feet  with  his  head,  he  made . 
obeisance  to  her. 

28.  After  congratulating  him  with  blessings  in  words 
choked  with  delight,  she  got  up  with  great  excitement  and 
embraced  her  son. 

29.  With  great  pleasure,  she  blessed  and  congratulated 
both  the  daughters-in-law.  The  king  honoured  her  with  many  a 
narrative  and  stayed  there  for  a long  time. 

30-32.  Then,  after  being  permitted  by  her,  he  set  out 
irom  her  abode.  Thereafter,  accompanied  by  his  followers,  and 
fanned  with  white  chowries,  the  glorious  king  slowly  entered 
the  assembly-hall  like  the  king  of  the  Suras.  After  entering  the 
highly  splendid  assembly-hall  resorted  to  by  many  kings,  he 
bowed  down  to  all  elderly  persons.  He  was  blessed  by  them. 
Then  the  lord  of  men  sat  on  a magnificent  and  splendid 
throne. 

33-34a.  He  was  attended  upon  by  his  vassal  kings,  the 
rulers  of  the  various  outlying  territories.  Recounting  various 
tales  the  excellent  king  stayed  there  delightedly  along  with 
his  kinsmen. 

34b-35a.  By  conquering  the  territories  of  the  various 
quarters,  he  kept  up  his  vow.  Thereupon,  the  liberal-minded 
king  duly  maintained  the  three  Arthas  (the  three  aims  of 
worldly  life  viz.  wealth,  love  and  righteousness) . 

35b-38a.  He  conquered  his  enemies  by  means  of  his 
own  prowess.  He  became  the  overlord  of  all  the  quarters.  Like 
Visnu,  he  ruled  over  the  earth  under  his  single  Royal  umbrella. 
He  fulfilled  duly  the  vow  that  he  had  made  on  being  infuriated 
by  the  discomfiture  of  his  deceased  father.  After  vanquishing 
all  his  enemies,  he  protected  the  earth  consisting  of  seven 
continents,  seven  oceans,  many  cities  and  villages  and  rows 
and  rows  of  houses. 

38b-39a.  As  time  passed  on  thus,  Vasi$tha,  the  lordly 
sage  came  there  desirous  of  seeing  the  king  once  again. 

39b-40a.  On  seeing  the  excellent  sage  come,  the  king  got 
up  excited.  Accompanied  by  those  vassal  kings  and  with  the 
materials  of  worship  in  his  hands,  he  greeted  the  sage. 


748 


Brakmtoi$a  Purdna 


40b-41a.  The  highly  intelligent  king,  fully  endued  with 
devotion  to  his  preceptor,  worshipped  the  sage  duly  with 
articles  of  worship,  water  for  washing  feet  ( Arghya , Pddya)  and 
other  things  and  bowed  down  to  him.  * 

41b-44a.  After  blessing  Sagara,  Vasistha  said — “Be 
seated”.  The  king  sat  in  his  excellent  golden  seat  alongwith  all 
those  vassal  kings  and  his  wives,  after  being  permitted  by  the 
sage.  Apava  Vasistha  slowly  uttered  these  gentle  words 
to  the  excellent  king  who  seated  near  him,  even  as  the  other 
kings  were  listening. 

Vasistha  said  : 

44b-49a.  — “O  king,  I hope  that  your  kingdom  is 

well-secured  internally  and  externally;  that  your  ministers  and 
groups  of  counsellors  and  the  people  in  the  entire  kingdom  are 
quite  well.  Fortunately  all  the  enemies  along  with  their  entire 
armies  and  vehicles  have  been  conquered  by  you  without  much 
effort,  in  your  battles.  Having  taken  a pledge  but  respecting 
my  words,  you  made  the  enemies  cast  off  their  old  rites  and  let 
them  go  alive.  I heard  that  after  defeating  them  you  went, 
alongwith  your  vehicles  and  armies  with  a desire  for  the 
conquest  of  the  quarters,  in  order  to  vanquish  others.  Having 
heard  now  that  you  have  once  again  conquered  the  quarters 
and  come  back  to  the  city,  O excellent  king,  I have  now  come 
to  see  you  out  of  love.” 

Jaimini  said  : 

49b-50a.  On  being  told  thus  by  Vasistha,  Sagara,  the 
conqueror  of  Talajarigha,  replied  to  the  great  sage  with  palms 
joined  in  reverence. 

Sagara  said  : 

50b-56a.  “Indeed  we  are  quite  well  in  every  respect,  O 
great  sage.  There  is  no  doubt  about  it.  All  the  deities  are  always 
favourable  to  us,  O sage.  How  can  miseries  and  calamities  befall 
me  since  your  holiness  always  mentally  wishes  for  my  welfare. 

I have  been  blessed  by  your  holiness.  I have  been  made 
delighted  with  all  my  task  fulfilled  since , O preceptor,  you 


2.3.49.56-64 


749 


yourself  have  come  here  to  see  me.  Since  you  have  mentioned 
my  conquest  over  the  enemies  and  similar  things,  let  me  say 
that  it  has  been  carried  out  entirely  due  to  your  blessings. 

I think  that  everything  is  obtained  by  the  kings  due  to 
your  favour.  Otherwise,  what  power  do  I have  to  kill  enemies 
of  such  types. 

Even  my  little  effort  and  endeavour  is  rendered  big  by 

you. 

Even  a small  quantity  of  fruits  gives  pleasure  to  the  person 
who  planted  the  tree.” 

Jaimini  said  : 

56b-57a.  Honoured  thus  very  well  by  Sagara,  Vasistha, 
the  great  sage,  took  leave  of  him  once  again  and  went  to  his 
hermitage. 

57b-58a.  After  Vasistha,  had  gone  back,  king  Sagara, 
lived  in  Ayodhya  with  great  delight  in  his  mind  and  ruled  over 
the  entire  world. 

58b-59a.  He  had  two  wives  endowed  with  beauty,  nice 
behaviour  and  good  qualities.  With  them  he  enjoyed  worldly 
pleasures  conducive  to  his  happiness,  in  a manner  befitting  his 
desire. 

59b-61a.  The  two  wives  named  Sumati  and  Kesini  were 
equally  beautiful  with  blooming  lotus-like  faces.  They  were 
endowed  with  beauty,  liberal-mindedncss  and  various  other  good 
qualities.  Their  breasts  were  plump  and  round.  They  had  bluish 
curly  tresses  and  they  were  adorned  with  all  types  of  ornaments. 
They  were  richly  endowed  with  all  good  characteristic  features. 
They  were  in  their  prime  of  youth.  They  were  very  dear  to  him. 
They  were  always  near  him.  They  were  always  engaged  in 
what  is  pleasing  to  him«and  what  is  conducive  to  his  jvelfare. 

61b-64a.  They  always  captivated  his  mind  by  means  of 
their  good  conduct  and  graceful  activities. 

Delighted  in  his  mind  as  the  administration  reached  the 
pinnacle  of  perfection,  the  king  sported  with  them  as  he  desired 
and  lived  in  the  city. 


750 


BrahmSa^ia  Ptirdna 


The  appellation  * RAja * (one  who  delights  and  pleases) 
did  not  suit  other  kings  based  on  their  qualities  but  it  fitted 
well  with  the  noble-minded  Sagara. 

64b-66.  Even  a small  quantity  of  Dharma  becomes  large, 
but  to  that  king  wealth  and  love  did  not  become  large  in  that 
manner  (?) . He  was  not  greedy  in  his  mind.  Hence,  he  enjoyed 
wealth  without  affecting  Dharma  adversely.  For  the  same 
purpose,  O leading  king,  he  enjoyed  love  without  affecting 
the  other  two  (i.e.  wealth  and  Dharma). 


CHAPTER  FIFTY 

Sagara' s Visit  to  Aurva's  Hermitage 
Jaimini  continued  : 

1.  ‘‘Thus  that  king  duly  protected  the  earth  consisting 
of  seven  continents  very  well,  like  another  Dharma  (God  of 
Righteousness) . 

2.  He  duly  established  the  Brahmanas  and  other  castes 
in  their  respective  duties  separately.  He  protected  them  without 
getting  his  sense-organs  affected  adversely. 

3.  The  subjects  belonging  to  all  the  different  castes 
behaved  with  due  deference  to  the  most  excellent  among  them 
( the  less  distinguished  among  them  followed  and  obeyed  the 
more  distinguished  ones).  The  castes  followed  the  due  order  of 
seniority  and  excellence.  They  enjoyed  the  objects  of  pleasures 
in  due  order. 

4.  When  that  king  was  ruling,  death  never  approached 
a young  child  while  an  old  man  was  alive.  This  was  true  of 
all  castes. 

5.  Then  the  entire  nation  flourished  with  all  hindrances 
removed.  There  were  many  outlying  countries  and  districts 
fully  inhabited  by  the  people  of  the  four  castes. 


2.3.50.6-16 


751 


6.  While  that  king  reigned,  the  whole  realm  consisted  of 
many  hundreds  of  houses  and  villages  divided  into  various  zones 
and  had  many  residential  apartments. 

7.  At  that  time  no  Brahmana  on  the  earth  was  An&f- 
ramin  (one  who  does  not  follow  the  rigorous  disciplines  of  the 
four  stages  in  life) . All  the  enterprises  of  all  the  subjects  became 
fruitful. 

8.  Men  began  only  those  activities  which  befitted  them. 
Then  the  activities  of  the  men  were  in  consonance  with  the 
four  aims  of  men  in  life  (i.c.  virtue,  wealth,  love  and 
salvation). 

9.  People  inhabiting  the  groups  of  cities  and  villages 
were  always  engaged  in  great  festivities.  They  were  endowed 
with  devotion  and  loyalty  to  the  king  as  well  as  were  desirous 
of  the  welfare  of  one  another. 

10.  No  one  among  the  subjects  was  despicable,  accursed, 
impoverished,  sickly,  greedy  or  miserly. 

11.  People  were  delighted  with  other’s  merits.  They 
were  eager  to  have  contacts  with  good  people.  They  bowed 
down  to  elderly  people  and  always  indulged  in  learning  good 
things. 

12.  They  were  afraid  of  slanderous  remarks  of  others. 
They  were  always  delighted  in  the  amorous  sports  with  only  their 
own  wives.  By  nature  they  desisted  from  associating  with  wicked 
people.  They  adhered  to  righteous  activities. 

13.  When  that  Ksatriya  king  was  governing  the  subjects 
and  the  earth  acquired  by  his  own  valour,  the  people  every- 
where were  theists  (or  believers  in  Vedas). 

14-15.  When  that  mighty  king  was  ruling  over  the 
realms,  O highly  fortunate  one,  the  seasons  had  the  regular 
normal  timings.  The  whole  of  the  earth  yielded  plenty  of  paddy 
and  other  plants. 

16.  His  assembly-hall  brilliantly  illuminated  by  plenty 
of  gems  and  jewels  shone  like  that  of  Sakra  (Indra)  in  heaven. 
As  Indra’s  assembly  was  occupied  by  the  Devas  on  seats 
decorated  with  precious  stones,  so  his  hall  was  occupied  by 
hundreds  of  kings  and  the  overlords  of  eighteen  Masalas 
(zones  or  political  divisions).  They  used  to  visit  him  in  order 


752 


BrahmUnia  Purdna 


to  serve  him.  They  were  well-renowned  on  account  of  their 
excessive  valour  and  exploits.  Those  coronated  kings  were  seated 
separately  in  seats  studded  with  gems. 

1 7.  His  vassal  kings  occupying  different  territories  used 
to  visit  him  with  presents.  During  those  occasions,  tjiey  used  to 
keep  the  camps  of  their  armies  all  round  the  city  separately. 
They  were  desirous  of  seeing  the  king  along  with  their  sons. 
But  frequently  they  had  to  send  the  information  through  the 
gatekeepers  to  the  king,  as  lie  tarried  in  the  harem  for  a long 
time. 

10.  Due  to  excessive  friction  of  the  scries  of  crowns  of 
kings  who  were  bowing  at  his  feet,  the  feet  of  that  king  appeared 
to  have  got  scarred  thereby. 

19.  His  assembly  hall  shone  like  the  cave  of  Sumeru, 
due  to  the  precious  gems  and  jewels  scattered  all  round,  by 
the  groups  of  leading  kings  who  had  to  attend  on  him. 

20.  Thus  righteously  ruled  that  king,  the  crest-jewel  of 
the  solar  race,  the  suppressor  of  his  enemies.  He  ruled  over 
the  earth  with  no  one  else  to  rule  it  (except  king  Sagara) . 

21.  Though  king  Sagara  protected  the  earth  thus,  he 
never  had  the  pleasure  that  usually  results  on  looking  at  one’s 
own  son. 

22-25.  Without  that  pleasure  he  was  extremely  distressed 
and  many  times  he  began  to  ponder.  ‘'Alas,  I am  devoid  of  a 
son.  Certainly,  on  account  of  this,  our  forefathers  in  this  family 
will  face  the  los*  of  their  balls  of  rice.  When  a good  son  is 
born,  it  is  said,  the  forefathers  delightedly  hasten  to  his  house 
even  from  the  hell,  because  they  are  enthusiastic  over  the  post- 
natal holy  ntos. 

A man  may  reach  heaven,  due  to  a great  deal  of 
religious  merits.  Even  then,  if  he  has  no  son,  the  immortal 
beings  in  the  heaven,  do  not  keep  the  gates  of  heaven  open 
to  him. 

When  a good  son  is  born,  the  father  wins  both  the  worlds 
(i.e.  attains  pleasure  in  this  world  and  in  the  next)  and  his 
grandfathers  in  both  the  families  attain  heavenly  woild. 

26-29.  I will  not  attain  that  good  which  belongs  to 
those  blessed  with  sons.  Due  to  the  fact  that  I am  issueless, 
certainly  that  goal  is  extremely  inaccessible  to  me. 


2.3.50.30-38 


753 


My  prosperous  and  undivided  kingdom  is,  it  is  said,  not 
at  all  different  from  Indra’s  realm.  Since  I have  no  religious 
merit  even  that  kingdom  is  of  no  benefit  to  me. 

This  throne  occupied  by  my  ancestors  as  well  as  this 
kingdom  will  become  subservient  to  others  on  account  of  the 
fact  that  I am  issueless. 

30a.  Hence,  I shall  go  to  the  hermitage  of  Aurva 
accompanied  by  both  of  my  wives.  I shall  propitiate  that 
leading  sage  for  obtaining  a son. 

30b-33a.  I shall  go  there  and  intimate  to  that  noble- 
souled  sage  the  fact  that  I have  no  issue.  Undoubtedly,  I will 
carry  out  whatever  he  says.’* 

After  thinking  like  this,  O king,  the  excellent  king  Sagara, 
who  was  aware  of  his  duties,  decided  to  go  to  the  hermitage 
of  Aurva. 

After  entrusting  the  excellent  minister  with  the  charge  of 
administration  of  the  kingdom,  he  joyously  went  to  the 
forest  riding  his  chariot,  accompanied  by  both  of  his  wives. 

33b-35.  He  proceeded  ahead  and  due  to  the  rumbling- 
sound  of  the  chariot  he  was  observed  with  motionless  eyes  by 
the  peacocks  on  either  side  of  the  pathway  (i.e.  the  peacocks 
thought,  on  hearing  the  rumbling  sound  of  the  chariot,  that  it 
was  the  rumbling  sound  of  the  cloud) . O king,  he  pointed 
out  to  his  wives  the  deer  that  stood  motionless  for  a moment, 
lifted  up  their  faces,  and  then  got  ready  to  run  away.  He 
became  delighted  on  seeing  the  trees  richly  laden  with  flowers 
and  fruits. 

36.  The  king  entered  the  penance-grove.  All  around 
it  consisted  of  many  trees  where  the  blossoms  had  not  faded, 
the  fruits  of  which  were  tasty,  that  had  a grassy  grounds 
all  round  and  which  had  plenty  of  tender  sprouts  and  cool 
shades. 

37.  All  around,  in  every  quarter,  the  cuckoos  cooed 
loudly  and  sweetly,  as  their  throats  became  clear  due  to  their 
having  tasted  the  tender  sprouts  at  the  tips  of  the  mango  trees. 

38.  It  was  endowed  with  the  flowers  of  all  the  seasons. 
It  was  embellished  by  the  hovering  bees.  It  contained  many 


754  Brahm&nia  Purfaa 

trees  round  which  turned  the  creepers,  stooping  down  with 
bunches  of  flowers. 

39.  It  was  covered  with  hundreds  of  trees  occupied  by 
herds  of  monkeys.  It  contained  multitudes  of  chirping  birds 
such  as  the  extremely  delighted  peacocks,  Sdranga  birds  and 
others. 

40.  It  was  very  fascinating,  due  to  the  songs  of 
singing  Vidyadhara  maidens.  It  had  many  sylvan  caves  where 
couples  of  Kinnaras  used  to  wander  about,  making  them  shine 
brilliantly. 

41.  It  was  surrounded  by  lakes,  the  banks  of  which  were 
occupied  by  many  birds  of  sweet  notes,  such  as  the  swan,  the 
ruddy  goose,  the  parrots,  the  Karantjlavas  (a  sort  of  duck)  and 
the  Sdrasas  (a  variety  of  crane) . 

42.  The  quarters  were  filled  with  gentle  breezes  wafting 
slowly  over  the  lakes  abounding  in  lotuses  and  lilies  of  various 
sorts. 

43.  Proceeding  ahead  thus  in  his  chariot  along  the 
penance  grove  that  had  the  qualities  described  above,  the  king 
attained  the  greatest  delight. 

44.  Having  reached  the  precincts  of  the  hermitage,  his 
mind  attained  calmness.  The  glorious  king  then  got  down 
accompanied  by  his  wives. 

45.  “Let  the  horses  rest” — so  said  the  king  to  the 
charioteer.  Then  he  came  to  the  outskirts  of  the  hermitage  of 
•the  great  sage  of  sanctified  soul. 

46.  From  the  disciples  of  the  sage,  he  heard  that  the 
sage  had  concluded  his  daily  routine  of  holy  rites.  In  order  to 
see  the  sage,  he  then  entered  the  hermitage  with  an  humble 
attitude. 

47.  Accompanied  by  his  wives,  the  king  delightfully 
bowed  down  his  head  to  the  great  sage  seated  in  the  middle  of 
the  sages  and  accompanied  by  groups  of  ascetics. 

48.  Sage  Aurva  of  great  power  and  potentiality,  directed 
the  king  who  bowed  down  to  him  along  with  them  (i.e.  the 
two  queens)  to  take  his  seat  saying  lovingly — “Sit  down”. 

49.  After  honouring  him  very  well  by  means  of  Arghya , 
Pddya  etc.  the  great  sage  pleased  him  along  with  his  wives  by 


2.3.50.50-58 


755 


according  him  a hospitable  reception  befitting  the  sylvan  envi- 
ronment [i.e.  with  the  products  of  the  forest  such  as  roots, 
fruits  and  the  like]. 

50.  After  the  hospitable  reception,  the  king  took  rest 
for  a while.  Thereupon,  he  bowed  to  him  and  sat  in  front  of 
him.  Aurva  then  addressed  the  following  gentle  words  to  the 
king. 

51.  “I  hope  that  your  kingdom  is  all  right  externally 
and  internally.  I hope  that  you  protect  all  your  subjects 
righteously. 

52.  I hope  that  you  yearn  properly  to  win  over  the 
trivarga  (three  aims  in  life  viz.  Dharma , Artha  and  Kdma)  by  means 
of  proper  expedients.  I hope  ail  the  expedients  in  politic  (such 
as  alliance,  war,  diplomacy  and  others)  are  well  practised  by 
you  and  they  yield  proper  results  to  you. 

53.  Fortunately,  O excellent  king,  all  the  enemies  have 
been  conquered  by  you.  How  glad  I am  that  the  entire  kingdom 
is  righteously  protected  by  you. 

54.  There  is  no  loss  or  destruction  to  those  who  strictly 
abide  by  Dharma.  Does  not  Dharma  save  that  person  by  whom 
it  has  been  kept  up  and  sustained  ? 

55.  I have  already  heard  that  you  have  arrived  at  your 
capital  along  with  your  army  after  conquering  the  whole  of  the 
earth  and  that  you  have  married. 

56-58.  The  proper  protection  of  the  subjects  is  the  most 
excellent  duty  of  kings.  They  become  happy  here  and  hereafter 
only  on  that  account. 

Then  why,  O king,  have  you  abandoned  the  duty  of 
administration  of  the  kingdom  and  approached  me  along 
with  your  wives  ? Tell  me”. 

Jaimini  said  : 

On  being  asked  thus  by  the  sage,  the  excellent  king 
Sagara  joined  his  palms  in  reverence  and  spoke  these  sweet 
words. 


756 


Brahm&ntfa  Purdna. 


CHAPTER  FEFTYONE 

The  Banishment  of  Asamahjasa 

Sagara  said  : 

1 . O great  sage,  there  is  no  doubt  in  this  that  I am 

quite  well  in  every  respect,  since  your  holiness,  the  most  excel- 
lent among  the  descendants  of  Bhfgu,  has  solicitude  for  my 
peace.  ^ 

2.  How  can  I,  who  have  been  formerly  trained  in  such 
a manner  in  wielding  missiles  and  weapons  by  you,  be  incap- 
able of  restraining  all  the  enemies  now  ? 

3.  You  arc  my  preceptor,  friend,  and  well-wisher,  deity 
and  kinsman.  Nor  do  I know  anyone  else  as  my  father  except 
you. 

4.  All  the  kings  were  defeated  by  me  through  the  mis- 
siles, the  use  of  which  has  been  taught  by  you.  It  is  the  power 
of  your  penance,  remembering  which,  all  of  them  had  been 
defeated  by  me. 

5.  By  means  of  your  penance,  you  sanctify  and  protect 
the  entire  universe.  Undoubtedly  you  are  capable  of  creating 
and  annihilating  it  also. 

6.  The  potentiality  of  your  penance  is  great.  It  is  not 
common  to  anyone  else.  Here,  even  a part  of  it,  if  seen,  causes 
wonder. 

7.  O holy  lord,  in  your  penance-grove,  ever  since  its 
infancy  the  fawn,  slowly  but  unhesitatingly  approaches  the  seat 
of  the  lion  and  drinks  water. 

8.  Here,  due  to  full  confidence,  even  a slim  delicate  hind 
offers  her  udder  to  her  young  one.  The  Ruru  deer  removes 
the  itching  sensation  of  its  cheek  at  the  tip  of  the  horns  of  the 
black  deer. 

9.  In  order  to  sustain  itself,  a tigress  killed  a hind  which 
had  recently  given  birth  to  its  fawn,  in  another  forest.  But  the 
same  tigress  nurtures  the  young  ones  of  that  hind  in  your  pen- 
ance grove. 

10.  It  is  because  of  your  penance  that  in  the  outer 
jungle  a lion  was  chasing  a fleeing  elephant.  But  as  soon  as. 


2.3.51.11-22 


757 


they  entered  this  penance  grove,  they  had  stopped  running. 
They  stand  in  the  same  place,  afraid  of  you. 

11-12.  The  mongoose,  rats,  cats,  peacocks,  rabbits, 
serpents,  wolves,  boars,  tigers,  the  fabulous  eight-footed  Sarabh- 
as,  bears,  monkeys,  jackals,  Gamy  as  (mountain-ox),  the  cows, 
the  deer  and  the  buffaloes  abandon  their  natural  enmity  and 
become  friendly. 

13.  A power  of  penance  like  this,  striking  the  world  with 
surprise,  is  not  seen  anywhere.  O Brahmana,  excepting  in  your 
case,  it  is  difficult  to  be  found  elsewhere  in  the  world. 

14.  Due  to  your  blessings,  I have  conquered  this 
earth,  O Brahmana  sage,  and  have  come  back  to  my  own  realm 
alongwith  my  captive  enemies. 

15.  I have  all  ministers  under  my  control.  I have 
shown  sufficient  and  suitable  care  and  application  to  the  three 
Vargas  (viz.  virtue,  wealth  and  love).  I have  protected  the 
kingdom  very  well  along  the  path  advised  by  you. 

16.  As  I continued  my  activities  thus  and  stayed  on  the 
kingdom,  O leading  scion  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu,  there  arose 
in  me  a desire  to  see  your  holiness  and  that  too  with  a purpose. 

17.  Will  the  protection  of  the  Earth  alongwith  the 
offerings  of  balls  of  rice  be  restricted  to  me  ? (Will  it  stop  with 
me  ?)  Will  it  be  so  due  to  the  fact  that  I have  no  issue  ? 

18.  This  is  the  excessive  misery  in  my  mind  and  it  can- 
not be  remedied.  I have  approached  you,  thinking  that,  in  this 
world  there  cannot  be  anyone  else  who  will  be  able  to  remove 
it.” 

19.  On  being  told  thus  by  Sagara,  the  holy  lord  Aurva 
remained  silent  for  a moment  thinking  within  himself,  and 
spoke  these  words  alongwith  his  directions. 

20.  “Observing  restraints,  you  stay  on  here  for  some- 
time along  with  your  wives;  thereby  you  will  obtain  your 
desire.  No  doubt  need  be  entertained  about  this”. 

21.  The  righteous-souled  king  stayed  there  along  with 
his  wives.  He  was  delighted  and  endowed  with  devotion.  He 
was  eagerly  engaged  in  serving  him  (Aurva)  for  a long  time. 

22.  By  means  of  their  humility,  good  conduct  and  devo- 
tion, the  wives  of  the  king  accorded  great  satisfaction  to  the 
sage.  They  were  always  alert. 


758 


Brakm&ntfa  Pur&na 


23.  The  great  sage  was  satisfied  with  their  devotion 
and  sincere  service.  He  called  the  queens  and  said  these 
words  : 

24.  “O  gentle  ladies,  let  any  boon  be  chosen  from  us; 
whatever  you  desire.  I shall  grant  it  even  if  it  is  very  difficult  to 
get.  There  is  no  doubt  about  it”. 

25.  Then  both  of  them  bowed  down  their  heads  and 
respectfully  spoke  to  the  great  sage — “O  holy  Lord,  we  desire 
sons”. 

26.  Then  the  saint  said  to  them  : • ‘Desirous  of  doing 
what  is  pleasing  to  you  both  and  to  the  king,  this  desired  boon 
has  been  given  by  me. 

27.  Due  to  my  blessings,  both  of  you  shall  be  fortunate 
enough  to  have  sons,  certainly.  Let  these  further  words  of  mine 
also  be  heard. 

28.  One  of  you  will  bear  a single  son.  He  will  not  be 
very  virtuous.  Still  he  will  be  alive  till  the  end  of  Kalpa. 

29.  The  other  will  give  birth  to  sixty  thousand  sons.  Ere 
long,  all  of  them  will  meet  with  destruction  without  fulfilling 
their  assigned  work. 

30.  These  two  boons  with  such  characteristic  features 
have  been  given  to  you  both.  Whatever  is  desired  by  either  of 
you,  may  voluntarily  be  recounted.” 

31.  When  this  was  spoken  by  the  sage,  the  daughter  of 
the  Vidarbha  king  chose  a son  who  would  perpetuate  the  line. 
The  other  queen  chose  the  other  boon  of  begetting  many  sons. 

32.  After  granting  this  boon  to  king  Sagara  and  honour- 
ing him  along  with  his  wives  in  a suitable  manner,  the  great 
sage  sent  him  off  towards  the  city. 

33.  Permitted  by  the  sage,  the  ruler  of  the  Earth  who 
was  satisfied  because  his  desire  had  been  fulfilled,  got  into  the 
chariot  along  with  his  beloved  ones  and  went  to  the  city 
quickly. 

34.  After  entering  the  beautiful  city  fully  inhabited  by 
delighted  and  well-nourished  people,  he  stayed  there  with 
great  joy  alongwith  the  people  of  the  city. 


2.3.51.35-46 


759 


35.  At  the  same  time,  O king,  the  two  queens  intimated 
to  the  king  with  great  joy  the  fact  that  they  had  conceived. 

36.  The  foetus  of  the  queens  developed  day  by  day 
like  the  moon  in  the  bright  half  of  the  lunar  month,  along  with 
the  wealth  of  pleasure  and  contentment  of  the  parents  and  the 
citizens. 

37.  When  the  time  was  complete,  Kcsini  gave  birth,  in  an 
auspicious  hour,  to  a son  of  unmeasured  lustre  and  resplendent 
like  the  fiery  sun-stone. 

38.  After  the  due  performance  ofjatakarman  (post-natal 
holy  rite)  etc.,  the  king  named  him  Asamafijasa. 

39.  At  that  time,  Sumati  too  gave  birth  to  a pot-gourd- 
like  foetus.  On  seeing  it  being  given  birth  to,  the  king  wished 
to  throw  it  away. 

40.  On  coming  to  know  of  it,  the  holy  sage  Aurva  came 
there  as  though  by  chance.  Welcomed  and  honoured  perfect- 
ly by  the  king,  he  hurriedly  spoke  to  him  thus. 

41.  ‘‘This  foetus  in  the  form  of  a pot-gourd,  O king* 
should  not  be  thrown  away.  It  does  not  desrve  to  be  abandon- 
ed because  it  contains  the  nucleus  of  your  sixty  thousand 
sons. 

42.  Hence,  let  it  be  cut  into  small  pieces  and  be  preserv- 
ed carefully  in  pots  of  ghee  covered  with  lids.  The  pieces 
should  be  kept  in  separate  pots. 

43.  If  this  is  done  properly,  O king,  you  will  have  sons 
as  are  mentioned  before,  due  to  my  grace.  There  is  no  doubt 
about  it. 

44.  When  the  time  is  complete,  they  will  break  open  the 
pots  and  come  out  separately.  Thus,  O king,  sixty  thousand 
sons  will  be  born  unto  you”. 

45.  After  saying  thus,  the  saintly  lord  Aurva  vanished 

there. 

The  King  carried  out  everything  in  the  manner  mention- 
ed by  Aurva. 

46.  After  a year  was  completed,  children  were  bom  every 
day  out  of  the  pots  of  ghee,  after  breaking  them  open  one  by 
one. 


760 


Brahmdntfa  Purdria 


47.  In  this  manner  the  sons  of  the  king  were  born  and 
brought  up  in  groups,  O king,  making  up  the  total  of  sixty 
thousand. 

48.  They  had  great  strength  and  valour.  They  did  not 
perform  any  rite  separately.  (They  worked  collectively* in  every 
respect) . They  were  unassailable  and  ruthless  in  particular. 

49.  The  king,  the  most  excellent  among  the  intelligent 
ones,  was  not  very  much  pleased  with  them.  But  he  considered 
the  holy  son  of  Kesini  as  his  beloved  son.  He  honoured  him 
much. 

50.  The  king  duly  celebrated  his  marriage.  He  too  de- 
lighted his  friends  by  means  of  his  good  qualities. 

51.  A glorious  son  well-known  by  the  name  of  Amsuman 
was  born  to  that  son  of  Kesini. 

52.  Even  in  his  infancy,  he  was  extremely  intelligent.  By 
means  of  his  exalted  and  noble  qualities,  he  extremely  delighted 
his  friends  and  grand-father. 

53.  In  the  meantime  that  son  of  the  king,  Asamafijasa, 
was  possessed  by  a certain  PUaca  (ghost).  He  became  devoid  of 
all  good  pursuits  and  activities. 

54.  In  his  former  birth,  he  was  a Vaisya  in  the  realm  of 
ascertain  king.  He  was  conversant  with  Dharina.  He  possessed 
plenty  of  wealth  and  food-grains. 

55.  Once,  as  he  was  wandering  about  in  the  forest,  he 
saw  an  excellent  treasure-trove.  Overwhelmed  bv  the  habitual 

0 

greed  of  a Vanik  (merchant) , he  bagan  to  take  possession  of  the 
same. 

56.  Then  the  pisaca  who  was  keeping  watch  over  that 
treasure-trove  approached  him  and  said  : — 

“I  have  been  hungry  for  a long  time  staying  here  and 
keeping  watch  over  this  treasure-trove. 

57.  Hence,  in  order  to  alleviate  it,  give  me  beef  and  at 
my  behest  take  away  this  treasure  as  you  please”. 

58.  He  promised  the  same  to  him  saying — “I  shall  give 
you  beef”.  Encouraged  by  the  Pisaca,  he  took  possession  of  the 
treasure-trove. 

59.  On  account  of  his  foolishness,  he  did  not  give  the 
ghost  what  had  been  promised.  He  did  not  take  note  of  the 


2.3.51.60-69 


761 


anger  of  the  ghost  arising  from  his  failure  to  give  what  had 
been  promised,  O king. 

60.  After  waiting  for  a long  time  with  a desire  for  food, 
the  ghost  from  whom  the  wealth  had  been  taken  away  became 
distressed  due  to  hunger  and  died. 

61.  The  Vaisya  attained  death  at  the  proper  time  and 
was  born  again  as  the  son  and  perpetuator  of  the  line  of  Sagara 
and  Kcsinl. 

62.  Recollecting  the  previous  enmity,  the  bodiless  one 
assumed  the  form  of  wind,  O King,  and  entered  the  body  of  the 
prince. 

63-65a.  On  being  possessed  by  the  ghost  the  prince 
became  cruel-hearted.  His  mental  balance  was  upset  on  being 
forcibly  attacked  by  the  ghost.  Like  a merciless  fellow,  he 
began  to  work  havoc  in  the  city  without  any  propriety  or  justice. 
The  wicked  fellow  began  to  kill  boys,  young  men,  old  men  and 
women.  After  killing  them,  the  merciless  one  threw  their  bodies 
in  the  Sarayu.1 

65b-69.  On  being  harassed  by  him  many  times  and 
observing  his  ignoble  activities,  the  citizens  went  to  the  king 
and  appealed  to  him. 

On  hearing  it,  the  king  was  overwhelmed  with  grief.  He 
called  the  prince  to  him  and  conscientiously  forbade  him  on 
various  occasions.  Although  he  was  prevented  by  that  noble- 
souled  father  many  times,  there  was  no  positive  result.  (All 
his  advices ) became  like  burnt  barley  grains  put  in  hot  water 
(i.e.  became  fruitless).  When  he  was  not  able  to  make  him  desist 
from  his  sinful  activity,  the  king  banished  him  from  his  realm 
because  he  was  afraid  of  the  public  outcry”. 


1 . The  Pi£aca  motif  is  adopted  by  the  author  of  Bd.P.  to  justify  the 
changed  attitude  of  prince  Asamaftjasa.  According  to  Bh.P.  IX.8.15.19, 
prince  Asamaftjasa  was  a Yog!  who  outwardly  behaved  in  a censurable 
manner  (probably  as  prescribed  for  Pasupatas).  When  banished,  he  returned 
all  the  children  hale  and  hearty  to  their  parents  who  believed  that 
Asamaftjasa  killed  them. 


762 


Brahmty4a  Purdna 


CHAPTER  FIFTYTWO 

The  Sacrificial  Horse  is  let  loose 

Jaimini  Said  : 

1.  “After  banishing  his  son,  *he  virtuous-souled  Lord 
Sagara  transferred  his  love  for  him  to  the  child  Aiiuhiman  whose 
conduct  was  righteous. 

2.  At  the  very  same  time,  O king,  the  sons  of  Sumati 
grew  up  collectively.  All  of  them  were  amiable,  devoted  and 
faithful  to  one  another. 

3.  They  had  adamantine  bodies.  They  were  cruel,  merci- 
less and  shameless.  They  were  habitually  evil  in  their  activities. 
They  had  the  same  nature  and  characteristics. 

4.  They  co-operated  in  doing  simultaneously  the  same 
work.  They  were  deluded  in  their  minds.  They  were  easily 
irritable.  They  could  not  be  easily  assailed  by  any  living  being. 
They  regularly  harassed  the  people. 

5.  They  had  no  concern  for  humility,  good  conduct  or 
the  path  of  virtue.  They  harassed  the  entire  world  around  as 
they  pleased,  like  Asuras. 

6.  Attacked  and  tormented  by  them,  the  whole  world 
became  distressed  and  unhappy  in  particular  with  Yajnas  and 
paths  of  virtue  destroyed.  The  people  could  not  have  their 
regular  self-study  of  the  Vedas  nor  could  they  perform  holy 
rites  by  uttering  the  Va^kdra  mantra . 

7.  When  everything  was  being  completely  destroyed  by 
the  sons  of  Sagara  who  were  haughty  on  account  of  the  boons 
they  had  been  granted,  the  Devas,  Asuras  and  the  great  serpents 
became  extremely  agitated. 

8.  The  earth  overwhelmed  by  the  ocean  began  to  quake 
though  its  name  is  Acald  (immovable).  There  was  a break  and 
hindrance  in  the  penance  and  abstract  meditation  of  the  ascetics. 

9.  Depr  ved  of  the  Havya  and  Kavya  offerings,  the  Devas 
and  the  Pitrs  became  oppressed  by  great  sorrow.  They  went  to 
the  abode  of  Brahma. 

10.  After  going  there,  the  Devas  with  Sarva*  (prob.  Sakra) 
at  their  head,  duly  reported  to  him  the  entire  activities  of  the 
sons  of  Sagara. 

♦misprint  for  Sakra.  Vide  V.  34  below  where  V&sava  is  mentioned. 


2.3.52.11-21 


763 


1 1 . On  hearing  their  words,  Brahma,  the  grandfather  of 
the  worlds,  became  engrossed  in  thought  for  a short  while.  The 
most  excellent  one  among  the  Suras  then  said  : 

12.  — “O  Devas,  listen,  attentively  to  my  words.  Welfare 
unto  you.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  sons  of  Sagara  will  be 
destroyed  ere  long. 

13.  Wait  for  a short  time.  Everything  is  being  control- 
led by  time.  Everything  else  is  but  an  instrumental.  That 
time  alone  is  the  master  of  all. 

14.  Hence,  O excellent  Suras,  what  lam  going  to  say 
for  your  welfare  should  now  be  carried  out  by  all  of  you 
without  any  slackness. 

15.  The  holy  lord  Kapila,  the  most  excellent  among 
victorious  ones,  the  most  exalted  among  the  leading  Yogins,  is 
born  on  the  earth  with  a partial  power  of  Visnu,  for  the 
welfare  of  the  universe. 

16.  He  is  now  sitting,  meditating  in  a lonely  place  some- 
where in  the  ocean,  the  water  of  which  had  been  sucked  up  by 
Agastya.  This  meditation  has  been  going  on  for  the  last 
hundred  years  according  to  the  reckoning  of  heaven-dwellers. 

17.  At  my  behest,  all  of  you  go  to  the  leading  sage 
Kapila.  Stand  near  him  wishing  for  the  conclusion  of  his 
meditation. 

18.  At  the  close  of  his  abstract  meditation,  you  will  bow 
down  to  him  and  tell  him  your  purpose  in  full.  He  will  do  what 
is  conducive  to  your  welfare. 

19.  O excellent  Devas,  do  something  whereby  a break  in 
the  abstract  meditation  cf  the  sage  can  be  caused  through  the 
sons  of  Sagara* \ 

Jaimini  Said  : 

20.  On  being  told  thus  by  him,  the  Devas  bowed  down 
to  Brahma  and  went  to  Kapila,  the  most  excellent  among  the 
Brahmanas;  with  palms  joined  in  reverence,  they  spoke  to 
him  : — 

The  Devas  said  : 

21.  “Be  pleased  with  us,  O excellent  sage.  We  have 


764  Brahmdnia  Purdna 

sought  refuge  in  you.  The  whole  of  the  universe,  harassed  by 
the  sons  of  Sagara,  is  perishing. 

22.  It  is  well-known  that  you  are  the  cause  ofthe  suste- 
nance and  annihilation  of  the  worlds.  With  the  partial  power 
of  Vi?nu,  you  have  incarnated  on  the  earth  and  you  stay  here 
as  the  leading  Yogin. 

23.  A physical  body  has  been  voluntarily  assumed  by 
you,  only  for  the  destruction  of  the  great  distress  of  men 
afflicted  by  the  three  types  of  agony.  Indeed,  you  are  the  most 
excellent  among  those  who  perform  austerities. 

24.  Undoubtedly,  O Brahmana,  you  are  capable,  at 
your  will,  to  mentally,  create  the  entire  universe,  sustain  it  and 
annihilate  it. 

25.  You  are  our  creator  and  dispenser  of  our  destiny. 
You  are  our  preceptor.  You  arc  our  greatest  resort.  You  are  our 
protector.  Put  an  end  to  our  adversity. 

26.  O leading  Brahmana,  be  the  resort  and  refuge  of  the 
leading  Brahmanas  in  particular,  who  reside  in  the  three  worlds 
and  who  are  being  persecuted  by  the  sons  of  Sagara. 

27.  Indeed,  the  activities  of  people  like  you  will  be  of 
Saliva  (very  good)  nature.  Hence,  O sage  of  good  holy  rites,  it 
behoves  you  to  save  us  and  all  the  world. 

28-3 la.  If  not,  O holy  saint,  the  entire  universe  will  be 
destroyed  prematurely.” 

Jaimini  Said : 

“On  being  told  thus  by  all  the  Devas,  Kapila  slowly 
opened  his  eyes.  Glancing  at  them,  he  spoke  these  pleasing  words 
— “Utterly  burned  by  their  own  actions,  the  sons  of  Sagara 
will  surely  perish  when  the  proper  time  arrives.  Let  that  time 
be  awaited  by  you  all.  For  the  achievement  of  your  purpose, 
O excellent  Suras,  I shall  become  the  cause  of  destruction 
of  those  evil-minded  ones. 

3 lb-33.  Ere  long,  the  sons  of  Sagara,  whose  minds  are 
inclined  towards  sinful  activities  and  whose  intellects  have  been 
adversely  affected  by  Kala  (Time,  God  of  Death)  will  be 
burned  bv  the  fire  of  my  anger.  Hence,  O Devas  all  the  worlds 


2.3.52.34-43 


765 


shall  be  rid  of  distress.  They  will  have  fear  from  nowhere.  Let 
them  (sons  of  Sagara)  be  wicked  in  their  actions.  They  will 
quickly  meet  with  their  annihilation.  So  be  free  from  fear  and 
go  back  to  your  own  city.  Wait  for  some  time.  Thereafter,  you 
will  realise  what  you  desire.” 

34-38.  On  being  told  thus  by  Kapila,  all  those  Devas 
including  Indra,  became  delighted.  After  bowing  down,  to  him 
they  went  towards  heaven. 

In  the  meantime,  king  Sagara,  the  Lord  of  the  Earth 
desired  to  perform  Vdjimedha  (Horse-Sacrifice),  the  great 
Yajna.  With  the  permission  of  Vasisjha,  he  gathered  together 
all  the  necessary  requisites.  Accompanied  by  Auitya  and  other 
Brahmanas  he  duly  took  the  initiation  for  the  performance  of 
sacrifice. 

For  the  purpose  of  letting  the  horse  roam  about,  the 
king  of  great  renown  called  all  his  sons  and  commanded  them 
thus  : 

“O  my  sons,  make  the  horse  roam  about  all  round  the 
earth.  It  behoves  you  to  do  this  immediately  and  bring  it  back 
to  me.” 

Jaimini  Said  : 

39-43.  “At  the  behest  of  their  father  they  took  the  horse 
and  made  it  wander  over  the  entire  earth. 

It  was  only  because  of  the  directive  of  the  Vedic  injunc- 
tion that  the  horse  was  made  to  go  round  the  earth  and  not  for 
the  conquest  of  the  quarters  nor  for  levying  taxes  and  tributes 
as  the  whole  of  the  earth  had  already  been  conquered  by  that 
king. 

Kings  had  already  been  made  payers  of  tributes  by  that 
king  of  exalted  heroism  in  the  battle-field. 

Then  those  princes  reached  the  lower  ground  surface  of 
the  salt  ocean  wherein  there  was  no  water.  With  great  delight 
they  encircled  the  horse  and  entered  the  interior  of  the  earth. 


766 


Brahm&nia  Purdna 


CHAPTER  FIFTYTHREE 

The  destruction  of  the  sons  of  Sagara 


Jaimini  Said  : ^ 

1 . When  they  reached  there,  the  wind-god  who  had 
been  directed  by  Indra,  carried  away  the  horse  to  the  nether- 
worlds  within  a moment. 

2.  Stealing  the  horse  without  being  seen  by  any  of  them, 
O king,  the  windgod  carried  it  away  along  that  path  to  the 
vicinity  of  sage  Kapila. 

3-4.  When  the  horse  disappeared,  all  those  princes 
became  perplexed.  Searching  for  the  horse,  they  went  round  and 
round  the  earth.  After  searching  the  entire  earth  including 
the  cities,  mountains  and  forests,  they  attained  great  sorrow, 
because  they  were  still  unable  to  see  the  sacrificial  animal. 

5.  Then  they  went  back  to  Ayodhya,  surrounded  by  the 
sagts,  met  their  father,  bowed  down  to  him  and  intimated  to 
him  everything. 

6.  “The  moment  we  entered  the  ocean  after  wandering 
over  the  whole  of  the  earth,  the  horse  was  taken  away  by  some 
one  though  it  was  being  vigilantly  guarded  by  us  who  were 
on  the  watch.” 

7-3.  On  being  told  thus  by  them  the  excellent  king 
became  infuriated  and  told  them— “Go  away  hence,  unright- 
eous ones,  never  to  return  again.  How  was  it  lost  by  you,  while 
you  were  alive.  You  were  indeed  evil-minded  ones.  There  is 
no  question  of  your  returning  without  the  horse  here”. 

9.  Then  all  of  them  together  set-off  from  that  place 
and  said  to  one  another:  “Even  now  the  horse  is  not  to  be  seen, 
what  shall  we  do  ?” 

10.  The  whole  of  the  earth  was  searched  by  us,  including 
the  mountains,  forests  and  parks.  The  horse  is  not  seen  anywhere 
nor  its  news  is  heard. 

1 1 . Hence,  starting  with  the  ocean  and  extending  as  far 
as  the  nether-worlds,  we  shall  split  the  earth  and  dig  it.  We 
shall  enter  the  netherworlds  and  search  for  the  horse* . 


2.3.53.12-27 


767 


12.  Having  decided  thus,  all  those  sons  of  Sagara,  of 
cruel  resolve,  dug  the  earth  everywhere  beginning  with  the  sea- 
shore. 

1 3.  Being  dug  by  them,  the  earth  became  greatly  excited 
and  cried  aloud.  On  seeing  their  activity,  all  living  beings  cried 
in  distress. 

14.  After  digging  the  Bharata  sub-continent  and  casting 
it  off  on  the  ground,  they  united  a thousand  Yojanas  of  the 
earth  to  the  ocean. 

15.  Digging  the  earth  upto  the  netherworlds,  the  sons  of 
the  king  saw  the  horse  grazing  in  the  netherworlds. 

16.  Delighted  very  much  they  gathered  together  and 
laughed  out  of  contentment.  Some  of  them  danced  with  great 

joy- 

1 7-2 1 . They  saw  the  noble-souled  Kalpa  of  brilliant  lustre 
who  was  very  old;  who  was  seated  in  the  lotus-posture,  with  his 
eyes  fixed  at  the  tip  of  his  nose,  who  had  kept  the  head  and 
neck  straight  and  long;  who  had  kept  the  chest  projecting  for- 
ward, who  was  shining  with  his  own  splendour  radiating  all 
round  in  full  like  a lamp  placed  in  a windless  spot;  whose  body 
was  full  of  perfect  knowledge  shining  within  himself;  whose 
mind  was  engaged  in  abstract  meditation;  who  appeared  like 
the  motionless  ocean ; who  was  duly  engaged  in  the  yogic  exer- 
cise; whose  mind  was  engrossed  in  what  should  be  meditated 
upon ; who  was  the  most  excellent  among  leading  Yogins  and 
who  looked  like  the  fire  with  its  clusters  of  flames  extinguished. 

On  seeing  him  staying  there,  they  consulted  one  another 
about  him  for  a short  while.  For  a short  while,  they  underwent 
excessive  agitation. 

22-23.  Thinking  that  it  was  he  who  stole  the  horse,  the 
evil-minded  sons  of  Sagara,  induced  by  the  God  of  death, 
surrounded  Kapila,  the  excellent  sage.  Encircling  him  they 
said,  “This  is  the  thief.  There  is  no  doubt  about  it.  This 
evil-minded  robber  of  the  horse  deserves  to  be  killed  by  us”. 

Jamini  said  : 

24-2 7a.  “All  those  Sagaras  whose  intellect  had  become 


768 


Brahmdntfa  Pur&na 


deluded  and  whose  death  was  imminent,  suddenly  molested 
the  sage  who  was  sitting  like  an  ordinary  person. 

Then  sage  Kapila  who  had  never  been  dejected  in  mind, 
was  overwhelmed  with  wrath,  because  he  had  been  upset  due 
to  the  break  in  his  abstract  meditation.  He  was  agitated. 
Assailed  by  those  evil-minded  ones,  the  unassailable  sage  Kapila 
became  agitated.  He  assumed  a huge  size  like  the  fire  that 
increases  in  size  at  the  end  of  the  Kalpa  on  account  of  the  gusts 
of  wind. 

27b-30a.  The  fire  of  anger  arising  out  of  his  body  as 
vast  and  majestic  as  the  ocean,  burst  forth  like  the  Samkarsana 
fire  issuing  from  the  poison  of  Sesa  out  to  burn  down  the  nether- 
worlds.  His  anger  was  further  kindled  by  the  recollection  of 
attack.  The  sage  who  had  a lustre  similar  to  that  of  a wheel 
of  fire  (i.e.  whirling  fire)  opened  his  eyes.  Then  for  a moment, 
O king,  his  eyes  became  extremely  red  and  shone  like  the  Sun 
and  the  Moon  simultaneously  appearing  in  the  sky  at  dawn. 

30b-35.  He  looked  at  the  princes  with  rolling  eyes  grave- 
ly, like  the  God  of  annihilation  at  the  dose  of  (Kalpa)  period. 
Sparks  and  flames  of  fire  suddenly  emerged  from  the  eyes  of 
that  infuriated  sage  and  spread  all  round  in  various  directions 
continuously,  like  the  sparks  of  Kal&gni  (destructive  fire  at 
the  time  of  final  annihilation) . The  sparks  of  fire  of  the 
Sage’s  anger  pervaded  the  quarters  all  round,  with  columns  of 
smoke  projecting  forward  and  emitting  floods  of  sparks  fre- 
quently. 

The  sparks  emanating  from  his  eyes  like  the  poisonous 
flames  with  the  cavity  of  the  belly  of  a python,  shone  like  the 
flames  of  the  Va^ava-fire  (submarine  fire)  of  the  violent  ocean. 

The  fire  of  anger,  O great  king,  that  pervaded  the 
spaces  in  the  quarters  by  means  of  its  flames,  enveloped  the 
firmament  and  burned  the  sons  of  Sagara. 

36.  The  world  became  enveloped  by  the  clusters  of  flames 
of  fire  and  smoke  whirling  round  and  round  on  account  of  the 
angry  (i.e.  violent)  blasts  of  wind  that  blew  with  a loud  report. 
It  became  filled  with  the  dusts  of  the  earth  too,  that  were  blown 
up  excessively.  Hence,  the  world  became  too  much  afflicted. 

37.  All  round,  the  fire  appeared  to  be  scraping  the  firma- 
ment by  means  of  its  flames  struck  by  the  velocity  of  wind. 


*2.3.53.38-48 


769 


It  immediately  burned  down  completely  the  sons  of  the  king 
who  were  the  enemies  of  the  Suras. 

38.  Even  as  all  the  worlds  were  watching,  the  fire  of 
Kapila’s  anger  reduced  the  Sagaras  to  ashes  completely, 
sparing  only  the  horse. 

39.  Thus  the  sons  of  Sagara,  of  sinful  mind,  were  burned 
suddenly  on  account  of  that  fire  of  anger  like  the  dry  trees  that 
get  consumed  in  the  forest  conflagration. 

40.  On  seeing  the  annihilation  of  those  evil-minded 
Sagaras,  the  Devas  spoke  to  one  another  in  wonder,  along  with 
the  Sages. 

41-42.  ‘‘O  the  ultimate  bad  result  of  those  persons 

who  have  committed  terrible  sins  has  not  been  delayed.  In- 
deed, in  this  world,  men  of  wicked  souls  have  to  meet  with 
a bad  cud.  These  wicked  and  cruel-minded  persons,  huge  in 
size  like  mountains,  have  suddenly  and  forcibly  perished  like 
dry  grass  in  fire. 

43.  They  had  caused  anxiety  and  torture  to  all  living 
beings.  They  were  extremely  censured  by  good  men  throughout 
their  lives.  Fortunately,  they  have  met  with  their  destruction. 

44.  Which  man  can  attain  happiness  in  this  world  after 
committing  an  inauspicious  action  that  is  censured  by  the 
worlds  and  that  causes  harassment  to  others? 

45.  These  sinners  had  made  all  living  beings  cry  aloud. 
They  have  now  been  struck  dead  by  means  of  Brahmadanda 
(the  punishing  rod  of  a Biahmana) . Hence,  on  account  of  their 
own  evil  actions,  they  have  gone  to  hell  where  they  will  be 
spending  many  many  years. 

46.  Hence,  only  good  actions  should  be  performed  by 
intelligent  persons.  The  other  type  of  actions  censured  by  the 
world  should  be  cast  off  far  away  (i.e.  completely  avoided). 

47.  As  long  as  one  is  alive,  one  should  strive  for  the 
attainment  of  final  beatitude.  This  should  be  done  by  one  who- 
knows  what  is  good  for  him.  One  should  not  harm  or  injure 
any  one,  as  life  is  transitory. 

48.  This  body  is  non-permanent.  Riches  are  extremely 
fickle.  The  entire  worldly  existence  is  utterly  worthless.  How* 
may  the  learned  one  believe  it  (otherwise)  T9 


770 


Brahm/tytfa  Purdna 


49.  Even  as  the  leading  Suras  and  sages  were  telling 
one  another  thus,  the  sons  of  Sagara  perished  after  becoming 
the  fuel  to  the  fire  of  the  anger  of  the  sage. 

50.  The  sons  of  Sagara  whose  bodies  were  burnt  down 
suddenly,  (as  if)  paralysed  the  earth  with  their  ashTes  and 
instantaneously  fell  into  hell  due  to  their  sinful  deeds. 

51.  Afterburning  those  sons  of  Sagara  entirely,  the  fire 
arising  from  his  anger  was  on  the  point  of  burning  all  the  worlds 
suddenly  in  a moment. 

52.  The  Devas  who  became  frightened  gathered  together 
and  stood  by  in  the  firmament.  Being  desirous  of  suppressing 
the  fire  of  anger,  they  eulogised  the  noble-soulcd  sage.” 


CHAPTER  FIFTYFOUR 

Recovery  of  the  Sacrificial  Horse 
Jaimini  Reported*  : 

1.  “It  behoves  .you,  O Leading  Brahmana  to  restrain 
immediately  this  fire  of  anger.  If  not,  the  entire  universe  is 
likely  to  be  burnt  by  it  untimely. 

2.  Your  greatness  has  been  seen.  The  whole  world 
including  the  mobile  and  the  immobile  beings  has  been  per- 
vaded by  this  fire  of  your  anger.  Forbear,  please  restrain  this 
anger,  O leading  Brahmana.  Obeisance  to  you.” 

3.  On  being  eulogised  thus,  the  saintly  lord  Kapila, 
immediately  controlled  the  extremely  terrible  fire  of  anger. 

4.  Thereupon,  the  entire  universe  including  the  mobile 
and  the  immobile  beings  became  calm.  Devas  and  the 
ascetics  became  free  from  distress. 

♦This  is  not  correct.  It  is  the  gods  who  are  praying  Kapila.  Hence  it 
should  be  : Gods  prayed  : — 


2.3.54.5-16 


771 


5.  In  the  meantime,  the  saintly  lord  Narada,  O King, 
casually  went  to  Ayodhya  from  the  Devaloka  (the  world  of  the 
Dcvas). 

6.  On  seeing  that  Narada  had  arrived,  Sagara  worship- 
ped him  perfectly  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions  of  the 
scriptures,  with  Arghya , Padya  and  other  materials  of  worship. 

7.  Accepting  that  honour  and  worship,  Narada  sat  on 
the  exalted  seat  and  spoke  these  words,  O King,  to  Sagara 
the  tiger  among  kings. 

Narada  said  : 

8.  “Your  sons  who  had  gone  to  take  horse  around 
the  world,  O excellent  king,  have  been  struck  down  by  the 
curse  of  a Brahrnana.  All  of  them  have  perished. 

9.  Your  sacrificial  horse,  O King,  that  was  being  guarded 
by  all  of  them  was  taken  somewhere  in  the  heaven  without 
being  noticed  by  anyone,  as  ordained  by  fate. 

10.  They  began  to  search  for  the  lost  horse  all  over  the 
earth.  For  a long  time,  O king,  they  did  not  get  any  information 
of  its  whereabouts. 

11.  Thereupon,  they  decided  to  search  for  the  horse 
underneath  the  earth.  Beginning  earnestly,  those  Sagaras 
dug  up  the  surface  of  the  earth. 

12.  While  digging  the  earth,  O King,  they  saw  the  horse 
in  Patala  (Nethcrworlds)  and  near  it  they  saw  the  great  sage 
Kapila,  the  leading  Yogin. 

13.  On  seeing  him,  they  committed  a sinful  deed.  All  of 
them  being  urged  by  Kala  (God*  of  death),  saying — “This  is 
the  robber  of  the  horse”,  they  made  Kapila  sufficiently 
infuriated. 

14.  Thereupon,  your  sons  perished  with  their  bodies 
as  fuel  to  the  fire  emanating  from  his  eyes  and  caused  by  his 
anger,  the  fire  that  burned  the  quarters. 

15.  You  need  not  grieve  over  them.  It  does  not  behove 
you  to  grieve  over  them,  O leading  King,  because  they  were 
cruel,  of  sinful  conduct  and  were  creating  troubles  and  impedi- 
ments to  all  people. 

16.  Retain  your  courage  as  your  asset,  as  the  occurrence 


772 


Brahmdn$a  Purana 


of  everything  concerning  you  was  inevitable.  Learned  men  do 
not  bewail  over  what  is  lost,  what  is  dead  and  what  has  passed 

by. 

17.  Hence,  O excellent  king,  entrust  this  boy  Amsuman, 
your  grandson  of  great  intellect,  with  the  mission  of  fetching 
the  horse  back.” 

18.  After  saying  this  to  Sagara,  the  tiger  among  kings 
who  was  accompanied  by  the  members  of  the  holy  assembly 
and  the  sacrificial  priests,  sage  Narad  a vanished  in  a trice  even 
as  they  were  watching. 

19.  On  hearing  those  words  of  Narada,  the  excellent  king 
of  exalted  intellect  became  afflicted  with  misery  and  grief.  He 
remained  engrossed  in  thought  for  a long  time. 

20.  As  he  sat  in  the  assembly,  pondering  over  his  fate, 
with  his  head  bent  down,  Vasistha  who  was  conversant  with 
what  should  be  done  at  the  proper  time  and  place,  said  to  the 
king  consoling  him. 

21.  “What  is  this  ? If  grief  were  to  find  place  in  the 
heart  of  courageous  people  like  you,  its  benefit  has  not  been 
attained  by  courage  (i.e.  courage  has  become  futile). 

22.  Give  up  dejection  in  your  mind.  Consider  that 
every  thing  follows  the  dictates  of  destiny.  Thus  it  undoubtedly 
behoves  you  to  carry  out  the  subsequent  duties.” 

23.  On  being  advised  thus  by  Vasistha,  the  king  who 
knew  the  true  essential  nature  of  objectives  and  duties  on 
hand,  regained  his  inherent  vitality  and  fortitude.  And  he 
replied — “So  be  it”. 

24.  He  called  his  grandson  Amsuman  who  had  been 
habitually  modest  and  slowly  spoke  to  him  thus,  in  the  assem- 
bly of  Brahmanas  and  Ksattriyas. 

25.  ‘‘Dear  child,  all  of  your  uncles  have  been  struck 
down  by  the  curse  of  a Brahmana.  Having  committed  sinful 
deeds j they  have  fallen  into  hell  to  remain  there  for  many 
many  years. 

26.  You  alone  are  the  child,  a perpetuator  of  my  line. 
You  alone  are  the  protector  of  this  kingdom.  My  welfare  both, 
here  and  hereafter  is  solely  and  wholly  dependent  upon  you. 


2.3.54.27-39 


773 


27.  Hence,  you  go,  at  my  behest,  to  the  proximity  of 
Kapila  at  Patala.  Take  up  the  great  responsibility  of  fetching 
back  the  sacrificial  horse.  Try  strenuously  for  the  same. 

28.  Request  him  duly.  Particularly,  take  great  care  to 
make  him  pleased.  It  behoves  you,  dear  one,  to  return  quickly, 
taking  the  horse  with  you”. 

Jaitnini  said  : 

29.  “On  being  instructed  thus  by  him,  Amsuman  bowed 
down  to  the  father  of  his  father  and  said — “So  be  it.”  The 
highly  intelligent  boy  set  off  to  the  proximity  of  Kapila. 

30.  He  approached  the  sage  duly.  He  bowed  down  to 
him  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions  of  the  Sastras  as 
well  as  his  own  mind.  Bending  down  in  humility,  he  spoke 
thus  slowly  : 

31.  “Be  pleased,  O great  among  Brahmanas.  I seek 
refuge  in  you.  Restrain  immediately  your  anger  that  has  caused 
destruction  of  the  worlds. 

32.  If  you  are  furious,  the  entire  universe  will  meet  with 
destruction.  Be  pleased  to  calm  down  quickly.  Let  all  the 
worlds  be  rid  of  pain  and  misery. 

33.  Be  pleased  with  us,  O highly  fortunate  and  exalted 
one.  Look  at  us  witli  gentle  eyes.  Know  me  to  be  the  child  in 
the  family  of  those  who  have  been  completely  burned  down 
by  the  fire  of  your  anger. 

34-35a.  My  name  is  Amsuman  and  I am  the  grandson  of 
king  Sagara.  I have  come  here  at  his  behest  as  well  as  with  a 
desire  to  gain  your  favour,  and* also  to  take  back  the  horse  if 
you  are  pleased  to  return  it.” 

35b-36a.  On  hearing  these  words  of  his,  the  sage,  the 
leading  Yogin,  became  pleased.  Glancing  at  Amsuman  he  spoke 
thus — 

36b-39.  “Welcome  to  you,  O dear  one.  How  glad  am 
I that  you  have  come.  Hurry  up.  This  horse  may  be  taken 
back  to  Sagara.  Let  his  sacrifice  that  had  been  held  up  in  the 
middle,  function  well.  Any  boon  that  you  may  have  in  your 
mind  can  be  chosen  from  me.  Satisfied  with  your  devotion,  I 
shall  grant  it  to  you  even  if  it  be  very  difficult  to  obtain.  Go 


774 


Brahmdnda  Purdna 


and  tell  your  grand-father  about  the  destruction  of  these 
Sagaras  and  that  it  does  not  behove  him  to  lament  over  the 
death  of  these  sinners”. 

40-41  a.  Then,  bowing  down  to  the  leading  Yogin, 
Amsuman  spoke  thus.  ‘‘If  you  wish  to  grant  me  a boon,  O great 
Sage,  I shall  request  you  thus.  If  I deserve  a boon  from  you,  be 
pleased  to  grant  this  one. 

4 lb-42.  All  of  my  uncles  have  been  burned  down  by  the 
fire  of  your  anger.  They  are  sure  to  fall  into  hell,  O Brah- 
mana,  and  remain  there  for  many  long  years.  No  offering  of  the 
balls  of  rice  or  water  libations  can  save  those  who  are  struck 
down  by  the  curse  of  a Brahmana. 

43-44-  Those  who  are  devoid  of  balls  of  rice  and  water 
libation  in  this  world,  O great  sage,  cannot  expect  the  attain- 
ment of  the  world  of  ancestors  (. Pitrs ) as  laid  down  in  the 
Srutis.  But  due  to  your  blessings  let  them  have  an  everlasting 
stay  in  heaven.  O holy  Lord,  I shall  be  contented  with 
this  boon. 

45.  Hence,  be  pleased  to  tell  me  the  means  of  getting 
them  a place  in  heaven.  Please  tell  me  the  ways  and  means 
whereby  they  can  be  redeemed  from  the  adverse  effects  of 
the  fire  of  your  anger.” 

46-47.  Thereupon,  the  leading  Yogin  told  him  with  great 
delight  in  his  mind — “Their  redemption  from  hell,  O dear 
one,  cannot  be  carried  out  by  you.  Those  persons  of  sinful  acti- 
vities must  necessarily  stay  in  hell.  Let  proper  time  be  waited 
for,  when  a grandson  will  be  born  to  you. 

48.  At  the  end  of  that  period,  O dear  one,  a highly 
intelligent  grandson  will  be  born  to  you.  He  will  be  known  by 
the  name  of  king  Bhagiratha.  He  will  be  conversant  with  the 
principles  of  Dharma  and  Artha. 

49.  Prompted  by  his  reverence  to  his  ancestors,  he  will 
put  forth  great  efforts.  He  will  perform  a great  steady  penance 
and  bring  Ganga  from  heaven. 

50.  All  your  ancestors  will  attain  heavenly  goal,  when 
the  ashes  of  their  limbs  and  bones  are  sanctified  by  its  waters. 

51.  Such  is  the  greatness  of  Ganga,  O prince,  she  will 
becoftie  well-known  in  this  world  as  ‘Bhaglrathl’. 


2.3.54.52—55.3 


775 


52.  If  the  ashes  of  bones,  hairs  and  nails  ofany  embodied 
being  are  flooded  with  its  waters,  it  will  go  to  the  heavenly 
world  from  even  hell  and  remain  there  permanently. 

53.  Hence,  you  go.  Welfare  unto  you.  You  do  not 
deserve  to  grieve  over  any  thing.  Give  this  horse  to  your 
grand-father”. 

Jaimini  said  : 

54-56.  “The  highly  intelligent  Am£uman  said,  “So  be 
it”,  and  bowed  down  to  him  devoutly.  Permitted  by  the  sage, 
he  went  back  to  the  city  of  Saketa  (Ayodhya). 

He  approached  Sagara  and  bowed  down  to  him  duly. 
He  then  reported  the  details  about  himself,  the  sage  and  those 
uncles. 

He  gave  him  the  horse  that  he  had  brought  back  with 
great  effort.  Finally  he  said  to  him — “What  is  to  be  done  by 
me  hereafter  ?” 


CHAPTER  FIFTYFIVE 

Amfuman  installed  as  Crown  Prince 


Jaimini  said  : 

1.  Then  Sagara  was  beside  himself  with  excessive 
affection.  He  embraced  his  grandson,  blessed  him,  fondled  him 
very  much  and  praised  him. 

2.  Then  accompanied  by  the  Jjltviks  (sacrificial  priests) 
and  the  sadasyas  (members  of  the  holy  assembly)  who  had 
mastered  the  Vedas,  the  excellent  king  resumed  the  Yajfia  in 
accordance  with  the  prescribed  injunctions. 

3.  Then  the  sacrifice  endowed  with  the  equipments  and 
articles  of  good  quality,  and  conducted  very  well  by  Vasi^tha, 
Aurva  and  other  sages,  began  to  be  celebrated. 


776 


Brahmdntfa  Pur&na 


4.  The  altar  was  made  of  gold.  There  were  big  and  small 
vessels  in  full  complement.  In  that  sacrifice  everything  was 
luxuriously  plentiful  and  in  accordance  with  the  dictates  of  the 
scriptures. 

5.  All  the  Rtviks  with  the  Yajamana  ( the  performer  of 
sacrifice)  at  the  head,  in  due  order  of  procedure,  concluded 
sacrifice  that  began  thus. 

6.  After  concluding  the  sacrifice,  the  king,  who  was  the 
most  excellent  among  those  who  were  conversant  with  the 
injunctions  of  scriptures,  offered  due  Daksinas  (monetary 
gifts)  to  the  Rtviks. 

7.  Then  he  distributed  money  to  every  one  of  them 
more  than  what  he  (the  receiver  of  Daksina)  expected,  to  the 
Rtviks,  to  the  sadasyas  and  to  the  Brahmanas  who  came  as 
suppliants. 

8.  After  propitiating  the  Brahmanas  and  others  thus, 
in  due  order,  by  means  of  monetary  gifts,  lie  fell  at  the  feet  of 
preceptors  and  Sadasyas  and  sought  their  forgiveness  ( tor  his 
acts  of  omissions  and  commissions)  . 

9-12a.  Then,  accompanied  by  his  followers  and  kinsmen, 
he  went  to  Sarayu  and  performed  the  concluding  holy  bath 
called  Avabhrtha.  He  was  accompanied  by  the  Brahmanas  and 
people  of  other  castes  and  Rtviks.  He  was  followed  by 
groups  of  courtesans,  heralds,  bards  and  panegyrists.  The  ladies 
(of  the  harem)  were*  with  him.  He  had  all  the  royal  para- 
phernalia like  the  white  umbrella,  chowries  and  furry 
fans  shaken  to  and  fro.  He  shone  well  with  all  these  accompani- 
ments. The  sounds  of  the  different  kinds  of  musical  instruments 
deafened  (as  it  were)  the  various  quarters.  He  joyously 
performed  the  holy  valedictory  ablution  (i.e.  Avabhrtha)  in 
accordance  with  the  injunction  in  the  scriptures  as  well  as 
conventional  practice. 

12b- 14.  After  the  holy  bath,  accompanied  by  his  wives, 
friends  and  the  Biahmanas,  he  re-entered  the  beautiful  city, 
where  there  were  thousands  of  delighted  and  well -nourished 
persons.  There  were  the  sweet  notes  of  Vind  (Lute),  Venu 
(Flute),  Mrdahga  (a  kind  of  tabor)  and  different  kinds  of 
other  musical  instruments.  There  were  loud  sounds  of 
auspicious  chanting  of  the  Vedic  Mantras  sung  by  the  Brahmana 


2.3.55.15-24 


777 


folk.  He  was  being  panegyrised  by  the  heralds,  Sutas,  bards 
and  other  panegyrists  standing  all  round  him. 

15.  There  were  white  fans,  good  umbrellas  and 
colourful  banners,  flags  and  festoons  displayed  in  the  city. 
The  grounds,  bazaars  and  other  places  had  been  swept 
and  sprinkled  clean  with  water  and  they  appeared  very 
splendid. 

16.  The  city  shone  splendidly  on  account  of  the  rows  of 
mansions,  lofty  and  brilliant  like  the  Kailasa  mountain.  The 
quarters  were  rendered  fragrant  by  means  of  the  sweet  scent 
arising  from  fumes  of  Aguru. 

17-18.  Heaps  of  fried  rice  were  showered  on  him 
frequently  by  the  womenfolk  of  the  city  all  round.  He  was 
delightedly  viewed  by  the  citizens.  He  was  honoured  at  various 
places  by  the  merchant  community  with  many  kinds  of  presents. 
Thus  he  went  into  the  city  slowly. 

1(J.  After  entering  his  beautiful  abode  that  had  been 
embellished  with  all  kinds  of  ornamental  fittings,  he  honoured 
well,  all  his  friends  and  Brahmanas  too. 

20.  Being  served  and  attended  upon  by  the  kings,  the 
rulers  of  different  countries,  Sagara  the  tiger  among  kings 
stayed  in  there  like  another  Indra. 

21.  Having  fulfilled  his  desire  thus  in  the  company  of  his 
friends  and  allies,  Sagara  the  most  excellent  among  kings 
rejoiced  there  accompanied  by  his  two  wives. 

22.  With  approval  of  Vasistha,  the  king  gladly  crowned 
Arhsuman,  his  grandson,  who  wras  humble  and  modest,  by 
disposition  as  the  heir-apparent. 

23.  On  account  of  his  exalted  liberal  qualities,  he  became 
a great  favourite  witli  friends,  kinsmen  and  the  residents  of  the 
city  as  well  as  the  outlying  districts  and  rural  territories,  O 
king. 

24.  The  subjects  were  delighted  with  him  and  they 
loved  him  because,  though  he  was  a boy,  he  had  unmeasured 
valour  and  prowess,  just  as  one  loves  the  fresh  crescent  of  the 
moon  that  has  risen  just  at  the  beginning  of  the  bright  half  of 
the  lunar  month. 


778 


Brahmdn(fa  Purdna 


25.  Accompanied  by  him,  his  friends  and  allies  as  well  as 
the  two  wives  who  suited  him  in  every  respect,  the  glorious  king 
rejoiced  and  lived  for  a long  time. 

26.  The  mighty  king,  Sagara,  who  was  like  another 
Dharma  himself,  protected  the  earth  including  the  mountains, 
forests  and  parks,  as  though  he  was  young. 

27.  Thus  the  great  lord  of  the  Northern  Kosalas  whose 
person  shone  like  a precious  gem  in  the  crown  of  kings 
of  the  solar  race,  delighted  the  minds  of  all  the  worlds  like  the 
full  moon.  Along  with  all  his  subjects  he  rejoiced  very  well. 


CHAPTER  FIFTY  SIX 

The  Descent  of  Gahgd 


Jaimini  Said  : 

1.  “The  life  story  of  the  noble-souled  Sagara  has  been 
recounted  to  you  in  full,  elaborately  as  well  as  succinctly.  This 
story  is  conducive  to  the  destruction  of  sin. 

2.  This  subcontinent  named  Bharata  lies  extensively 
from  South  to  North.  Its  expanse  is  nine  thousand  Yojanas  (?) . 

3.  A thousand  Yojanas  were  dug  up  by  the  sons  of  the 
king  Sagara  who  were  in  search  of  the  horse.  The  remaining 
eight  thousand  Yojanas  were  made  to  fall(?) 

4.  Since  the  abode  of  sharks  (i.e.  ocean)  was  dug  up  and 
developed  by  the  sons  of  Sagara,  it  obtained  the  name  Sagara 
in  the  worlds  since  then. 

5.  The  ocean  splashed  its  waters  all  round  and  flooded 
the  earth  including  the  holy  centres,  fields  and  forests  upto 
Brahmapada  (the  foot  of  Brahma). 

6.  Then,  all  the  Devas,  Asuras  and  human  beings 
living  there  were  scattered  here  and  there.  They  became  afflicted 
with  great  sorrow. 


2.3.56.7-15 


779 

7.  There  is  a well-known  holy  place  named  Gokarna1 
which  is  worshipped  by  all  the  Suras.  It  is  situated  on  the 
shore  of  the  Western  ocean.  It  extends  to  one  and  a half 
Yojanas. 

8.  There  are  innumerable  holy  spots  there.  There  are 
abodes  of  sages  and  Devas.  Many  groups  of  siddhas  have  been 
living  in  that  holy  centre  from  the  earliest  times,  O king. 

9.  That  holy  spot  is  famous  throughout  the  world.  It  is 
splendid  and  it  destroys  sins.  That  holy  spot  lay  in  the  South- 
Western  portion  of  the  sea. 

10.  It  is  the  place  where  the  sages  of  well  praised  holy 
rites  performed  penance  and  attained  the  highest:  liberation  from 
which  there  is  no  coming  back  again  (in  samsara ) . 

1 1 . Due  to  the  potentiality  of  that  holy  place,  god 
Sankara  stays  there  forever  with  great  delight  along  with  the 
goddess,  the  groups  of  goblins  and  Devas. 

12.  If  people  decide  to  go  on  pilgrimage  to  that  holy 
spot,  and  make  the  proposed  journey,  their  sins  perish  like  a 
dry  leaf  in  a stormy  wind. 

13.  A desire  to  resort  to  that  holy  spot  never  occurs  to 
the  evil-minded  ones  who  may  even  reside  very  near  it. 

14.  Only,  through  great  religious  merit  can  men  have 
the  desire  and  pleasure  of  making  a holy  pilgrimage  to  that 
sacred  holy  spot.  Never  otherwise,  O king. 

15.  If,  out  of  compulsion,  the  mobile  and  the  immobile 
living  beings  die  there,  O king,  they  attain  permanent  abode  in 
heaven  immediately. 


1 . Gokarna — a holy  place  in  north  Kanara,  Karwar  Dist.  of  Kamatak. 
It  is  30  miles  from  Goa  between  Karwar  and  Kumta.  It  contains  the  temple 
of  Mahadeva  called  Mah3bale£vara,  established  by  Ravana.  The  legend  goes 
that  R&va$a  was  taking  god  Siva's  Atma-linga  to  Lank&.  Due  to  urgency  of 
easing,  he  had  to  entrust  it  to  a bystander  who  was  god  Ganesa  in  disguise. 
He  did  not  want  that  the  Atmalinga  should  be  with  a demon.  He  placed  it 
on  the  ground.  When  R&vana  returned,  he  tried  to  wring  it  out  of  the 
earth.  But  in  vain.  He  went  away  disappointed.  But  due  to  physical  wring- 
ing by  R&va^a,  it  got  the  shape  somewhat  resembling  a cow's  ear.  The  legend 
tries  to  explain  the  peculiar  shape  of  this  Siva-liftga. 


780 


Brahm&nifa  Purdna 


16.  It  is  the  most  excellent  holy  spot  among  all  sacred 
centres;  by  recalling  it  (mentally)  a man  becomes  rid  of  all 
sins.  It  is  the  abode  of  all  sacred  Tirthas  (holy  waters). 

1 7.  Some  sages  desirous  of  spiritual  achievement  used 
to  live  there,  taking  their  holy  bath  in  all  these  Tifthas  and 
always  worshipping  Siva. 

18.  Those  who  are  devoid  of  lust  and  anger,  who  live 
in  them  without  rivalry,  attain  that  Siddhi  ere  long. 

19.  Those  who  stay  there  engaged  injapa,  and  Iloina 
will  attain  the  desired  Siddhi.  They  must  be  quiescent,  self- 
restrained  and  observe  the  vow  of  celibacy- 

20.  If  holy  rites  such  as  the  worship  of  the  Pitrs, 
Devas  and  Brahmanas,  charitable  gifts,  Homas,  Japas  etc.  are 
performed  in  this  holy  spot,  O King,  the  fruit  thcrc-of  will  be 
ten  million  times  more  than  that  (performance  of  these  acts)  in 
the  other  holy  spots. 

21 -23a.  When  that  extremely  sacred  holy  spot  became 
submerged  in  the  waters  of  the  sea,  the  sages  endowed  with  great 
penance,  who  lived  there  climbed  on  to  the  Sahya,  the 
excellent  mountain,  for  the  sake  of  a residing  place.  Staying 
there,  all  of  them  consulted  one  another  and  got  ready  to  go 
to  Raina  who  was  performing  penance  on  the  mountain 
Mahmdra. 

The  King  enquired  : 

23b-26.  After  the  waters  of  the  ocean  had  been  drunk  by 
Agastya,  when  the  holy  spot  including  holy  sacred  waters, 
hermitage*  and  forests  had  been  made  to  fall  down,  when  the 
king's  sons  (i.e.  Sagaras)  dug  up  all  round,  when  the  other 
parts  of  the  earth  such  as  cities,  villages,  mines  etc.  and  the 
countries  lying  near  the  ocean  were  destroyed,  O excellent  sage, 
what  the  persons  with  their  abodes  there,  do  ? Did  they  reside 
there  alone  with  every  great  difficulty  or  did  they  go  elsewhere? 
What  was  the  duration  of  the  period  in  which  the  ocean  be- 
came filled  with  water  once  again?  By  what  means  (did  it 
become  full)?  OBrahmana,  mention  this  to  me.” 

Jaimini  leplied  : 

27-29.  When  the  marshy  places  lying  near  the  ocean 


2.3.56.30-39 


781 


were  destroyed  by  those  evil-minded  ones,  persons  having  their 
abode  therein  went  here  and  there.  Some  of  the  persons 
residing  in  the  holy  spots  continued  to  live  there  with  great 
difficulty. 

At  the  same  time,  O king,  a son  was  born  to  Amsuman 
who  became  wellknown  on  the  earth  as  Dillpa.  He  was  a 
righteous  soul. 

30.  The  highly  intelligent  king  Amsuman  had  perfectly 
enjoyed  the  worldly  pleasures,  crowned  Dillpa  (as  the  ruler) 
of  the  kingdom  and  went  to  the  forest  witli  a decision  in  his 
mind  to  perform  penance. 

31.  Then  the  glorious  Dillpa  protected  the  entire  earth 
righteously  after  defeating  all  the  enemies. 

32.  His  son  named  Bhaglratha  became  very  famous 
throughout  the  world.  He  was  clever  in  comprehending  all 
the  topics  concerning  holy  rites  and  virtue.  He  was  resplendent 
and  liis  valour  and  exploits  were  unmeasured. 

33-33.  After  celebrating  his  (Bhaglratha’s)  coronation 
in  the  re«ilm,  King  Dilipa  too  went  to  the  forest.  Bhaglratha 
protected  the  earth  very  well  after  exterminating  all  thorns 
(i.c.  enemies  within  and  without).  He  rejoiced  enjoying 
different  kinds  of  worldly  pleasures  like  the  lord  of  Dcvas  in 
heaven.  That  king  heard  about  the  fact  that  formerly  his 
ancestors  had  to  fall  into  terrible  hell  as  a result  of  the  fury 
of  a Brahmana.  On  hearing  that  all  his  ancestors  were  struck 
down  by  the  curse  of  a Brahmana,  he  became  extremely  sad 
and  dejected. 

36-38a.  He  became  frustrated  and  extremely  disinterest- 
ed in  the  kingdom,  his  kinsmen  and  the  enjoyments  of  all 
worldly  pleasures.  He  entrusted  the  kingdom  to  the  care  of  his 
excellent  minister.  The  excellent  king  was  desirous  of  taking 
his  ancestors  to  heaven  and  so  went  to  the  forest  for  per- 
forming penance.  At  the  outset  he  propitiated  the  lotus-born 
lord  Brahma  by  means  of  great  penance  for  securing  longevity. 
From  him  he  got  as  long  a life  as  he  desired. 

38b-39.  Thereafter,  O great  king,  he  propitiated 
Ganga  and  made  her  pleased.  From  her  he  got  the  boon  that 
she  would  come  down  to  the  earth  from  heaven.  Afterwards 


782  Brahm&n&a  Purdna 

he  propitiated  Siva  by  means  of  penance  in  order  to  hold  her 
by  means  of  his  head. 

40-45a.  The  lord  who  favours  his  devotees  granted 
that  boon  to  him.  As  Ganga  fell  down  from  the  top  of 
Meru  along  with  crocodiles,  alligators  and  sharks,  the  lord  of 
the  worlds  (i.e.  Siva)  caught  her  by  means  of  his  head.  Al- 
though she  was  flowing  with  great  rapidity,  she  got  merged 
deep  into  his  resplendent  matted  hair  after  reaching  his  head. 
By  seeing  her  disappear  in  the  head  of  the  lord  Sambhu  like 
water  within  the  cupped  palm  of  the  hand,  he  once  again 
propitiated  Hara  to  get  her  released. 

45b-46a.  By  the  favour  of  Sarva,  he  got  back  Ganga 
once  again.  As  she  reached  the  earth,  Bhaglratha  took  her 
towards  that  spot  where  the  sons  of  Sagara  had  been  burned. 
Following  the  king  she  flooded  the  entire  sacrificial  premises  of 
a saintly  king  (Jahnu)  who  was  performing  sacrifice  on 
the  way.  When  the  entire  sacrificial  chamber  and  installation 
got  submerged,  the  saintly  king  became  angry.  He  drank  the 
entire  river,  as  though  it  had  been  mouthful  of  water.1 

46b-48a.  With  great  efforts  Bhaglratha  rendered  service 
to  that  noble-souled  saintly  king  for  a hundred  years.  When 
he  became  pleased,  the  king  got  back  Ganga  once  again. 

Since  Ganga  remained  within  the  belly  (of  Jahnu) 
for  a long  time  and  emerged  thereafter  from  it,  her  other  name 
Jahnavi  became  famous  on  the  earth. 

48b-51a.  The  celestial  river  followed  Bhaglratha  and 
with  her  own  waters  she  splashed  the  ashes  of  the  bones  of  all 


1 . Two  places  claim  to  be  the  spots  of  jahnu's  sacrificial  place  where 
Ganga  was  ‘drunk*  up  by  Jahnu  ( 1 ) Bhairava  ghafi  below  Gangotri  in 
Garhwal  (U.P.)  at  the  junction  of  Bhagirathi  and  Jahnavi. 

(2)  Sultanganj,  to  the  west  of  Bhagalpur  (Bihar);  the  temple  of 
Gaibinath  Mahadeva  there  which  is  supposed  to  be  on  the  site  of  Jahnu’s 
hermitage  is  on  rock  which  comes  out  of  the  bed  of  Ganga  in  front  of 
Sultanganj. 

If  the  legend  of  the  Ganga  being  brought  by  efforts  of  3-4  generations  of 
the  kings  of  the  solar  race  be  correct,  it  must  have  been  a sort  of  an  ancient 
canal  constructed  by  those  kings  to  bring  waters  from  the  Himalayas  to  the 
parched  plains  of  north  India.  In  that  case  obstruction  to  the  canal  at 
Bhairavagh&ti  by  Jahnu  is  feasible  and  not  at  Sultanganj. 


2.3.56.51-57 


783 


his  ancestors.  When  the  ashes  of  the  bones  were  splashed  with 
its  waters,  the  sons  of  Sagara  became  rid  of  their  sins  at  the 
very  same  moment.  They  went  to  heaven  from  hell. 

51b.  After  having  led  all  the  Sagaras  to  the  heaven, 
thus,  the  great  river  went  to  the  Eastern  ocean  by  the  same 
path.  The  celestial  river  had  flowed  towards  the  four  quarters 
from  the  top  of  Meru  after  being  split  into  four  channels. 

52.  Ganga  received  four  names  due  to  these  four 
different  channels  viz.  Sita,  Alakananda,  Sucaksus  and 
Bhadravatl.1 

53.  Though  their  waters  had  been  dried  up  when  Agastya 
drank  up  the  waters,  the  four  oceans  became  full  with  the  waters 
of  Ganga,  once  again. 

54.  When  the  ocean  extended  by  the  sons  of  Sagara 
became  filled  up,  many  countries  lying  nearby  became  sub- 
merged. 

55-57.  The  holy  spots  too  lying  at  the  outskirts  of  the 
ocean  all  round  became  sub-merged.  The  people  who  had  their 
abodes  therein  went  here  and  there.  The  holy  spot  Gokarna 
about  which  I have  told  you,  became  submerged  in  the  ocean, 
as  it  was  near  the  ocean.  Therefore,  all  those  persons  who  had 
their  abodes  therein  desired  to  uplift  itj  O King.  They  were 
desirous  of  meeting  the  mighty  scion  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu 
and  so  started  from  the  Sahya  mountain. 


1.  M.Ali  identifies  the  rivers  as  follows: 

Sit& = Yarkand-Tarim-Hwang-Ho 
Alakananda = Gang& 

Su-Cakjus=The  Oxus 

Bhadravatl  or  Bhadrasom& — Syrdaria  (Giog.  of  Purdtuu,  p.  201) 


784 


Brahmdntfa  Purana 


CHAPTER  EEFTYSEVEN 

Vanina  visits  Bhargava 


Jaimini  continued  : 

1.  “Thereafter,  Suska,  Sumitra,  and  other  sages  of 
praiseworthy  holy  vows  and  rites,  went  towards  the  mountain 
Mahendra  with  a desire  to  see  Bhargava  Rama. 

2.  Passing  through  very  many  countries,  forests,  rivers 
etc.,  those  leading  sages  gradually  icachcd  the  excellent 
mountain. 

3-5.  After  climbing  it  slowly,  they  reached  his  well- 
renowned  hermitage  and  its  precincts.  All  the  cruel  beasts  of 
prey  therein  had  become  quiescent.  The  splendid  penance  grove 
the  middle,  was  very  fascinating  on  account  of  groves  of  trees 
laden  with  the  fruits  and  flowers  of  all  seasons.  The  shade  was 
lovingly  cool  and  pleasing.  It  was  one  without  anything  to  be 
compared  with.  The  wind  was  very  fragrant  and  pleasant.  It  was 
echoing  with  the  sounds  of  the  chanting  of  the  Vedic  Mantras. 
With  their  faces  very  much  delighted,  they  entered  the 
hermitage  with  the  elderly  ones  at  the  head,  in  the  order  of 
seniority  in  age. 

6.  Those  ascetics  saw  Rama  who  was  comfortably 
seated  on  a Brahmasana  (mat  made  of  the  Darbhagrass)  with 
a soft  deerskin  placed  over  it.  He  was  very  calm  and  was 
surrounded  by  his  disciples. 

7.  He  appeared  like  a person  engaged  in  penance  for 
the  extenuation  of  the  defect  (sin ) of  burning  the  three  worlds 
deliberately  at  the  outset,  like  the  Kdlagni  (fire  at  end  of  a 
Kalpa). 

8.  After  approaching  the  excellent  scion  of  the  family  of 
Bhrgu  who  was  engaged  in  the  great  vow  of  sagehood,  those 
sages  who  were  by  nature  humble  in  their  conduct,  saluted 
him  with  their  heads  bowing  down,  due  to  devotion. 

9.  On  seeing  those  sages  come,  the  leading  member  of 
the  family  of  Bhrgu,  respectfully  worshipped  them  very  well* 
with  the  materials  of  worship  such  as  Argha , Pddya  etc. 


2.3.57.10-19 


785 


10.  When  the  hospitable  reception  was  over  and  the 
sages  who  had  come  from  other  countries  were  seated  com- 
fortably, Rama  the  bravest  among  the  members  of  the  family 
of  Bhi  gu,  spoke  to  them  these  words  smilingly. 

11.  “Welcome  unto  you  all,  O highly  exalted  ones  of 
great  fortune,  you  have  come  here.  Tell  me  without  hesitation 
what  should  be  done  by  us.” 

12.  After  bowing  down  to  Rama,  those  sages  said  thus: — 
“O  excellent  sage,  understand  that  we  are  the  sages  who  had 
our  homes  in  Gokarna. 

13.  That  great  holy  place  along  with  the  sacred  ponds 
etc.  was  caused  to  fall  into  the  waters  of  the  ocean  by  the  sons 
of  Sagara  who  were  digging  up  Earth  for  some  other 
reason. 

14.  Undoubtedly,  we  desire  and  expect  from  you  to 
regain  that  holy  spot  that  sanctifies  everyone,  after  causing  the 
waters  of  the  ocean  to  recede. 

15.  It  is  well  known  that  you  were  born  in  the  family 
of  Bhrgu,  with  the  potentiality  of  a part  of  Visnu.  Therefore, 
there  is  nothing  in  the  three  worlds  which  cannot  be  carried 
out  by  you. 

1 6.  We  have  heard  that  you  alone  are  the  person  capable 
of  presenting  this  desired  object  in  the  whole  world.  It  was  to 
request  you  for  this,  O Rama,  that  we  have  all  come  here. 

17.  It  behoves  you,  O leading  Brahmana,  to  grant  that 
excellent  holy  spot  now,  after  causing  the  waters  of  the  ocean 
to  recede,  by  your  own  prowess”. 

Rama  said  : 

18.  “All  these  things  are  completely  known  to  me,  O 
ascetics.  The  task  that  you  all  have  set  could . also  be  carried 
out  by  me.  No  doubt  need  be  entertained  about  this. 

19.  But  this  task  desired  and  expected  by  you  is  exces- 
sively terrible  in  the  world.  Even  by  me,  it  can  be  carried  out 
only  by  taking  up  arms  and  not  otherwise. 


786 


Brahmtiuiia  Purdna 


20.  I have  granted  the  boon  of  freedom  from  fear  to 
everyone.  I have  laid  down  my  weapons.  I am  quiescent  now. 
According  to  an  earlier  behest  of  my  father,  I have  taken  up 
the  vow  to  perform  penance. 

21-22.  Formerly,  I had  taken  this  vow  in  the  midst  of 
good  men — “I  will  never  take  up  arms”.  After  that,  I have 
come  here  to  perform  a penance. 

Since  the  object  of  your  desire  can  be  achieved  only 
by  taking  up  arms,  my  mind  is  in  a dilemma.  It  is  vacillating 
like  a moving  swing.” 

Su$ka  said  : 

23.  “The  taking  up  of  arms  for  the  protection  of  the 
good  does  not  make  any  one  go  astray  from  truthfulness  (to  his 
vows)  as  mentioned  by  Brahma  formerly. 

24.  Hence,  for  the  sake  of  our  welfare,  weapons  should 
be  taken  up  by  you.  Thereby  a great  righteous  action  shall  be 
carried  out  by  you.” 

Jaimini  said  : 

25-26.  On  being  earnestly  requested  by  the  sages  thus, 
the  intelligent  scion  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu  acceded  to  it,  for 
the  sake  of  Dharma*  only  in  his  view.  Alongwith  them,  the 
excellent  sage  proceeded  towards  the  South-Western  direction, 
O king,  with  a desire  to  see  the  lord  of  rivers  (Varuna) . 

27.  The  leading  scion  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu,  the  noble- 
minded  sage  Rama  descended  from  Sahya,  the  excellent 
mountain  and  reached  the  western  shore  of  the  lord  of  rivers. 

28-30.  Everywhere  round  him  the  highly  fortunate  sage 
saw  the  ocean  that  was  agitated  by  the  wind ; that  was  a mine 
of  all  precious  gems;  that  was  being  filled  with  water  con- 
tinuously; the  majesty,  depth  and  vastness  of  which  could  never 
be  understood,  like  that  of  the  minds  of  great  men;  that  was 
very  difficult  to  be  crossed  by  everyone;  that  contained  different 
kinds  of  crocodiles;  that  could  never  be  assailed  in  the  world 
like  Dhatf  (the  creator  and  dispenser  of  destiny) . 


2.3.57.31-44 


787 


31-34.  That  was  like  the  soul  in  pervading  everything; 
that  had  slighted  everything  and  become  haughty;  that  was  a 
support  to  all  living  beings;  that  was  the  king  of  rivers;  that 
had  a chain  of  hundreds  of  extremely  unsteady  and  lofty  billows, 
that  was  rendered  splendid  and  beautiful  by  the  mass  of  foams 
of  hundreds  of  waves  which  split  and  dispersed,  due  to  their 
having  dashed  into  the  cavities  within  heaps  of  rocks  at  the 
sides,  and  that  had  a deep  rumbling  sound.  He  saw  the  ocean 
along  with  the  groups  of  sages.  It  was  as  though  he  was  served 
by  the  cool  sparkling  sprays  from  the  waves.  For  a short  while, 
O leading  king,  the  powerful  sage  took  rest  on  the  shores  of 
the  lord  of  rivers.  He  was  desirous  of  meeting  Pracetas 
(Varuna) . 

35.  Then  Rama  got  up  and  stood  facing  the  south.  He 
spoke  these  words  to  Varuna  in  deep  resonant  tone  like  the 
sound  of  rumbling  cloud. 

36.  £< I have  come  here  along  with  the  groups  of  sages 
with  a desire  to  see  you.  Hence,  take  up  your  own  form  O 
Pracetas,  and  grant  me  your  vision.’* 

37.  Even  after  hearing  these  words  Varuna,  the  lord  of 
aquatic  beings,  O king,  did  not  move  from  his  place.  He 
became  bolder. 

38.  Although  he  was  repeatedly  called  by  Rama,  the 
king  of  waters  did  not  grant  his  vision  nor  did  he  give  any 
reply. 

39.  His  (Rama’s)  intransgressable  request  was  disregard- 
ed by  Varuna.  He  treated  it  with  indifference  because  he 
knew  that  Rama  was  very  much  a suppliant. 

40.  Thinking  that  his  request  had  been  disregarded  by 
Varuna,  Rama,  the  most  excellent  one  among  the  wielders  of 
weapons,  looked  at  him  angrily. 

41.  Being  much  infuriated,  he  assumed  a form  similar 
to  that  of  agitated  ocean  and  wished  to  make  the  ocean 
devoid  of  waters  by  resorting  to  his  own  inherent  power. 

42-44.  Then  he  sat  near  his  bow  4 Vijaya*  and  sipped 
the  water  ceremoniously.  Rama  bowed  down  mentally  to  Sarva 
and  took  up  the  great  bow.  With  eyes  turned  red  due  to  anger. 


788 


Brahmdn$a  Purdna 


he  drew  the  bow.  Stroking  the  excellent  bow  along  with  its 
string,  the  excellent  member  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu  made  a 
twanging  sound  with  the  string,  even  as  all  the  living  beings 
were  watching.  The  loud  report  of  the  bow  string  was  heard 
touching  the  vaults  of  heaven  with  great  harshness. 

45-47.  The  entire  Earth  consisting  of  seven  continents 
and  oceans  shook  thereby. 

Then  with  great  force,  Rama  fixed  to  the  bow  an  arrow 
with  golden  feather  heads,  an  excellent  arrow  comparable  to 
the  Kdldnala  (fire  at  the  end  of  the  world).  He  joined  to  it  a 
very  terrible  missile,  belonging  to  Bhrgu  and  having  the  fire- 
god  for  its  deity.  The  bravest  among  the  descendants  of  Bhrgu 
joined  a missile  for  the  charging  of  which  and  to  discharge 
which  he  chanted  the  requisite  Mantra.  Thereupon,  the  Earth 
including  the  mountains,  forests  and  parks  quaked  and  trembled. 

48-50.  Devas,  Asuras  and  the  great  serpents  became 
extremely  agitated.  On  seeing  the  excellent  scion  of  the 
family  of  Bhrgu  who  had  joined  the  missile  (to  the  bow)  and 
whose  eyes  were  extremely  red  due  to  anger,  the  mobile  and  the 
immobile  beings  became  bewildered  and  perplexed  in  their 
minds.  The  quarters  became  covered  up  with  layers  and  layers 
of  clouds  along  with  the  burning  of  quarters.  Rough  gusts 
of  winds  blew,  making  loud  reports  and  spreading  dust  particles. 
The  sun’s  rays  became  dim  and  its  disc  became  red. 

51-53.  There  was  a heavy  down -pour  of  bloody-coloured 
rain  water  along  with  thunderbolt  and  the  fall  of  meteors. 
Everyone  became  bewildered  saying  “What  is  this  ?” 

Rama  pulled  out  a great  arrow  that  was  terribly  emitting 
smokes  and  fumes,  and  on  which  the  divine  missile  was 
charged. 

As  Rama  was  drawing  the  bow  with  an  arrow  at  the  tip 
of  which  there  were  shooting  flames,  the  sages  saw  him  resem- 
bling the  final  fire  at  the  close  of  Kalpa. 

54.  His  terrifying  body  seen  standing  within  the 
circle  made  by  the  bow  the  string  of  which  was  drawn  upto  his 
ears,  became  unapproachable  to  all. 

55.  His  terrible  form  as  he  drew  the  bow  was  like 
the  halo-encircled  disc  of  the  sun,  rising  at  the  close  of 
Kalpa. 


2.3.57.56-67 


789 


56.  As  he  shook  with  anger,  his  body,  which  was 
terrible  with  its  flames  like  the  fire  at  the  end  of  Kalpa, 
appeared  like  the  circular  face  of  Visnu’s  discus. 

Rama  attained  the  excessively  terrific  form  of  Vi$nu  in 
the  guise  of  Man-lion,  when  he  was  surrounded  (as  it  were) 
by  the  brilliant  flame  of  the  fire  of  anger. 

57-58.  As  he  drew  the  bow,  Rama’s  body  with  the  face 
with  the  eye-brows  knitted,  became  like  that  of  Siva  desirous 
of  burning  the  Tripuras  formerly. 

On  -seeing  him  with  blazing  body,  all  the  sages  began  to 
eulogise  him  suddenly  due  to  fright  saying — “O  Rama,  be 
pleased  : be  victorious.” 

59-60.  The  entire  harem  of  the  ocean-god  became  (as 
if)  engulfed  as  it  was  hidden  under  the  layers  of  smoke  emerg- 
ing from  the  fire  of  the  missile. 

Struck  by  the  heat  of  blazing  fire  of  the  missile,  the 
waters  of  the  ocean  became  stirred  up  and  the  tide  began  to 
flow. 

61-62.  The  living  beings  in  the  deep  waters  such  as  big 
whales,  small  whales,  alligators,  crocodiles,  fishes,  snakes  and 
tortoises  became  extremely  distressed. 

When  the  waves  were  tossed  up  as  the  various  living  be- 
ings jumped  up,  fell  down  and  lay  exhausted  in  it,  the  ocean 
became  suddenly  and  extremely  agitated. 

63-64.  Along  with  the  water  that  flowed,  the  living 
beings  moving  about  within  the  waters  made  a great  up-roar 
due  to  fright.  They  were  distressed  and  rendered  exhausted  due 
to  the  high  tide. 

Then  flames  and  sparks  emerged  from  that  arrow  terrify- 
ing to  everyone  with  their  hissing  sound.  This  was  observed  that 
they  spread  in  all  directions. 

65-67.  Violent  gusts  of  wind  whirled  all  round.  Since  it 
was  full  of  flames  of  fire,  it  appeared  like  a red  canopy. 

As  the  waters  of  the  ocean  agitated  by  the  fire  of  the  mis- 
sile increased  in  quantity  like  those  of  the  ocean  at  the  time  of 
deluge,  the  waves  moved  towards  the  shore. 

The  ocean  appeared  to  deafen  the  quarters  through  the 
excessive  rumbling  sound  of  the  waters  hit  and  stirred  up  by 
the  fire  of  missile. 


790 


Brahmanfa  Purina 


68-69.  The  mountain  Sahya  was  rendered  obscure  and 
darkish  by  the  waters  encircled  by  the  flames  of  fire  of  the 
missile  all  round,  as  they  resorted  to  the  mountain  suddenly. 

On  seeing  Rama  with  the  bowstring  drawn  as  far  as  his 
ears,  the  ocean  became  very  sad  and  gloomy  like  a # sinner  at 
the  sight  ofYama,  the  god  of  Death. 

70a.  With  all  his  limbs  quaking  with  fear  the  lord  of 
rivers  gave  up  his  natural  courage  and  became  a coward. 

70b-73a.  He  assumed  his  real  form.  He  was  bedecked 
in  his  ornaments.  Varuna  waded  through  his  own  waters. 
Pracetas  (i.e.  Varuna)  appeared  near  Bhargava  with  palms  of 
his  hands  joined  in  reverence.  He  came  hurriedly  near  Bhargava 
as  though  he  was  extremely  afraid  of  the  swift  arrow. 

73b-75.  Having  fallen  at  the  lotus-like  feet  (of  Rama) 
who  had  drawn  the  bow,  the  extremely  frightened  (Varuna) 
spoke  with  words  faltering  due  to  excitement. 

“Protect  me,  O bravest  among  the  members  of  the  family 
of  Blipgu,  protect  me  with  sympathy.  I have  sought  refuge  in 
you.  Forgive  this  offence  of  mine,  O Rama,  committed  by 
me  in  ignorance.  I stand  by  biding  your  directive.  Command 
me — What  shall  I do  ?*’ 


CHAPTER  FIFTYEIGHT 

Rdma  reclaims  land  from  the  sea 


Jaimini  continued  : 

1.  On  seeing  Varuna  who  said  this  and  fell  on  the 
ground  at  his  feet,  the  intelligent  leading  member  of  the 
family  of  Bhrgu,  withdrew  the  missile. 

2.  After  withdrawing  the  missile,  Rama  looked  at 
Varuna  standing  in  front  of  him.  Anger  having  subsided,  he 
said  to  him  smilingly. 

3.  ‘‘These  leading  sages  who  had  their  homes  in  Gokarna 
had  come  to  me  before,  O lord  of  rivers,  while  I was  staying 
on  the  mountain  Mahendra. 


2.3.58.4-18 


791 


4.  The  holy  spot  Gokarna  inhabited  by  the  sages  was 
caused  to  fall  down  into  your  waters  formerly,  by  the  sons  of 
Sagara  who  were  digging  the  Earth. 

5.  After  having  approached  me,  those  sages,  the  resi- 
dents of  that  holy  place  have  rushed  down  here  to  regain 
once  again  that  holy  spot  which  is  very  dear  to  Siva. 

6.  It  was  for  the  sake  of  these  sages  that  I have  come 
down  from  the  excellent  mountain  Mahendra  along  with  these 
leading  sages,  to  see  you. 

7.  Hence,  for  my  sake,  it  behoves  you  to  make  your  waters 
recede  and  restore  to  them  that  holy  spot  in  the  water  as 
before.” 

Jaimini  said  : 

8.  On  hearing  these  words  of  Rama,  Varuna  the  lord 
of  aquatic  beings  considered  everything  in  his  mind  and  spoke 
these  words  to  Rama  once  again. 

Varuna  said  : 

9.  “My  waters  cannot  be  made  to  recede  by  anyone. 
Such  is  the  boon  granted  to  me  formerly  by  Virifici  ( i.e.  god 
Brahma). 

10.  But  on  account  of  your  brilliant  splendour  I have 
given  up  all  my  natural  courage.  I have  become  afraid,  Q 
Bhargava,  and  have  fallen  under  your  control. 

11.  How  can  I fail  to  perform  this  task,  O annihilator  of 
the  families  of  Ksatriyas,  after  having  been  especially  urged 
by  you  for  the  sake  of  these  sages  ? 

12.  Hence,  I shall  hold  back  on  the  ground  as  much  of 
my  water  as  you  may  have  intended  in  your  mind.” 

13.  On  hearing  his  words,  Bhargava  said  “so  be  it”.  He 
broke  his  bow  and  threw  away  his  arrow. 

14.  Then  he  mentally  decided  the  boundary.  Wishing  to* 
point  it  out,  O king,  he  took  up  his  Sruod  (the  sacrificial  ladle)  * 
The  intelligent  sage  was  desirous  of  throwing  it  in  the  ocean. 

15-18.  After  making  him  (Rama)  delighted  in  his  mind 
and  devoid  of  anger  towards  himself  (i.e.  Varuiia),  the  lord  of 
rivers  disappeared.  When  he  had  gone,  Rama  stood  facing 


792 


Brakmdntfa  Purdna 


Che  north.  He  whirled  his  Sruvd  with  great  speed  and  hurled  it 
into  the  briny  sea.  When  it  was  hurled  into  the  ocean,  the  Sruvd 
went  two  hundred  Yojanas  in  the  direction  of  the  north-west, 
O king,  and  fell  down.  That  place  is  the  holy  spot  named 
&urparaka  (Sopara,  in  Dist.  Thana,  Maharashtra) . It; is  con- 
ducive to  rid  oneself  of  all  sins.  It  is  on  the  shore  of  the  lord  of 
rivers  and  well  known  in  the  three  worlds.  The  Sruvd  (sacri- 
ficial ladle)  slipping  down  from  Rama’s  hands  fell,  O great  king 
between  that  holy  spot  (and  the  shore  of  the  ocean),  thereby 
indicating  Rama’s  exploit. 

19-22.  The  place,  O king,  where  the  ground  created  by 
Rama  was  established  is  the  holy  place  Surparaka,  glorious  and 
renowned  in  all  the  worlds.  The  ocean  withdrew  its  waters 
so  far.  After  granting  the  Earth  to  Rama,  O king,  he  stood  aside. 

Rama  (the  leading  member  of  Bhrgu’s  family)  who  never 
transgressed  the  bounds  of  decency  made  him  stand  by  this 
agreement  accepted  by  himself  (i.e.  Varuna),  knowing  that  it 
is  the  eastern  (?)  boundary  on  the  Earth,  the  ocean  yielded 
the  ground. 

23-25.  All  the  gods  were  surprised  to  sec  the  exploit  of 
Rama.  (Defective  Text)  When  the  water  of  the  ocean  receded 
there  on  the  Sahya  mountain,  there  were  here  and  there  ( at 
some  places)  some  markings  of  boundaries  of  towns  and  villages 
as  before  (their submerging  in  the  sea).  These  he  observed  there 
by  chance,  due  to  their  lower  level.  Thereafter,  the  most  excel- 
lent member  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu,  lovingly  gave  their  res- 
pective places  as  desired  by  them  to  the  sages  of  purified  souls. 

26.  Then  all  those  sages  became  delighted  very  much 
Fully  contented,  they  worshipped  Rama  aud  expressed  their 
good  wishes  for  him. 

27-30.  Then,  being  permitted  by  them,  Rama  who 
accomplished  for  them  all  desires,  went  away. 

When  the  excellent  sage  Rama  had  gone  to  his  hermitage 
from  that  country,  all  those  sages  collected  together  and  went 
to  the  shore  of  the  sea.  After  circumambulating  that  place  with 
great  effort,  O king,  they  saw  the  Earth  situated  within  the 
ocean,  since  it  was  eternal  and  the  place  of  abode  of  all  the 
Devas,  (the  holy  spot)  did  not  become  ruined  utterly  although 
the  earth  was  dug  up  and  it  was  caused  to  fall  into  the  ocean, 


2.3.58.31—59.5 


793 


and  although  it  was  lost  in  the  water  under  which  it  remained 
for  a long  time.  This  happened  due  to  the  power  of  Rudra. 

31.  The  holy  spot  emerging  from  the  waters  regained 
its  original  state,  O excellent  king.  This  is  the  capacity  of 
lord  Siva  which  cannot  be  adequately  thought  of. 

32.  Thus  the  Earth  was  reclaimed  (lit.  created)  once 
again  out  of  the  ocean.  From  the  south  to  the  north,  O king,  it 
extends  to  four  hundred  Yojanas. 

33.  Even  today  the  ocean  does  not  transgress  the  bound- 
ary. His  great  bow  was  never  drawn  and  kept  ready  by  Rama 
the  great  sage. 

34-37.  Such  is  the  potential  power  of  Rama  and  the 
king  Sagara  whose  sons  caused  the  sub-continent  of  Bharata  to 
fall  into  the  ocean  extending  it  more  by  a thousand  Yojanas 
and  developed  the  great  ocean.  The  land  extending  to  six 
hundred  Yojanas  was  created  once  again. 

Since  the  abode  of  alligators  ( i.e.  the  sea)  was  extended 
by  the  sons  of  Sagara,  it  got  the  name  Sagara  well-known  in 
all  the  worlds  ever  since  then. 

38.  Thus  the  story  of  great  men  viz.  Rama,  Karttavirya 
and  king  Sagara  has  been  well  recounted  to  you  by  me. 


CHAPTER  FIFTYNINE 

The  Birth  of  Vaivasvata 


Brhaspati  said  : 

1 . The  sages  who  were  told  thus  attained  great  delight. 
Thereafter,  they  further  asked  with  a desire  to  hear  more. 

The  Sages  requested  : 

2.  “Please  narrate  the  details  of  the  races  of  kings  of 
unmeasured  prowess,  their  life  and  their  powers  and  majesty, 
to  us  as  we  ask  in  the  proper  order.” 

3-5.  On  being  requested  thus  by  them,  Lomaharsapa,  an 
expert  in  narration  of  stories,  well  conversant  with  statements, 


794  Brahmdnda  Purdna 

spoke  these  words  even  as  the  sages  were  desirous  of  listening 
to  the  later  narratives. 

Suta  said : 

“Just  as  the  sage  of  great  wisdom  (viz.  Vyasa)  narrated 
to  me  when  I asked  him,  I too  shall  narrate  in  due  order  the 
details  of  the  races  of  kings  of  unmeasured  prowess,  their 
lives,  grandeur  and  efficacy.  Understand  them  from  me. 

6.  It  is  related  that  Varuna’s  wife,  goddess  Stuta 
(Suna  in  Vdyu  84-6-8),  was  a celestial  damsel  of  great  beauty. 
Her  sons  were  Kali  and  Vaidya. 

7.  Jaya  and  Vijaya  were  the  sons  of  Kali.  They  were 
extremely  valorous.  Gh;ni  and  Muni  were  the  sons  of  Vaidya. 
They  were  very  powerful. 

8.  They  used  to  devour  girls  given  in  marriage  to 
them  or  those  who  loved  them.  They  devoured  one  another. 
After  devouring  one  another,  they  met  with  destruction. 

9.  Kali  ( this  is  evidently  another  one  not  the  one  men- 
tioned in  7)  should  be  known  as  Sura’s  (?)  son.  His  son  is 
remembered  as  Mada.  Himsa  was  the  eldest  wife  of  Kali.  She 
is  remembered  as  wicked  and  dishonest. 

1 0.  Four  other  sons  were  born  to  Kali.  They  were  can- 
nibals. They  were  Naka,  and  Vighna  who  were  very  famous,  as 
well  as  Bhadrama  and  Vidhama. 

11.  Vighna  was  so  called  because  he  had  no  head. 
Naka  had  no  body.  Bhadrama  had  only  one  hand.  Vidhama  is 
remembered  as  single-legged. 

12.  TamasI  and  Putana  were  the  wives  of  Bhadrama  (or 
Putana  of  dark  and  foul  nature  was  the  wife  of  Bhadrama) . 
Revati  was  the  wife  of  Vidhama.  The  sons  of  these  two  were 
thousands  in  number. 

13.  &akuni  was  the  wife  of  Naka  and  Ayomukhi  the  wife 
of  Vighna.  Their  sons  were  Raksasas  of  great  vigour  and 
vitality.  They  used  to  roam  about  during  the  twilight  at  dusk 
and  dawn. 

14.  The  sons  of  Revati  and  Putana  are  remembered  as 
Nairrtas  by  name.  All  those  Raksasas  are  Grahas  (Evil  demons 
attacking  children  and  making  them  suffer  from  convulsions) 
particularly  in  regard  to  children. 


2.3.59.15-26 


795 


15-16.  Lord  Skanda  is  the  overlord  of  all  those  Nairrtas 
as  allowed  by  Brahma. 

Bphaspati  had  a sister  named  Varastri.  She  observed 
the  vow  of  celibacy.  She  had  achieved  yogic  powers.  She  then 
used  to  wander  over  the  entire  universe  without  any  attach- 
ment. She  ultimately  became  the  wife  of  Prabhasa  who  was 
the  eighth  among  the  Vasus. 

17-20.  (Partially  defective  text).  Visvakarrnan,  a Deva 
was  born  of  her.  He  is  the  Prajapati  (Creator)  of  artisans  and 
craftsmen.  He  had  evolved  the  forms  ofViraf  (the  supreme 
being) . Another  name  of  this  liberal-minded  grandson  of 
Dharma  is  Tvastr. 

By  means  of  his  Yogic  power,  he  had  created  thousands 
of  artistic  works  for  the  Devas.  It  was  he  who  created  the  aerial 
chariots  of  the  Devas. 

Human  beings  depend  upon  the  artistic  creations  of  this 
noble-souled  one.  (They  imitate  them) . 

Virocana,  famous  as  the  daughter  of  Prahrada  was  the 
wife  of  Tvastr.  She  was  the  sister  of  Virocana  and  the  mother 
of  Trisiras,  the  great  and  intelligent  Visvarupa  who  was  the 
preceptor  of  the  Devas. 

21.  Maya  is  remembered  as  the  son  of  Visvakarrnan.  He 
was  himself  Visvakarrnan  (capable  of  all  creative  work) . His 
younger  sister  was  well  known  as  Surenu. 

22-24.  The  daughter  of  Tvastr  who  became  well-known 
as  Sarhjfta  and  the  wife  of  Savitr  ( the  Sun)  gave  birth  to  Manu, 
the  eldest  son  of  great  fortune  and  exalted  dignity,  of  Vivasvaa 
(the  sun). 

Then  she  gave  birth  to  the  twins  viz.  Yama  and  Yamuna 
(See  vv  31-32  where  Yama  and  Yami  are  the  names  mentioned) . 
She  assumed  the  form  of  a mare  and  went  to  the  Kurus. 

That  lady  of  great  fortune  gave  birth  to  two  sons,  the 
A£vins.  They  were  the  sons  of  the  sun-god  who  had'  assumed 
the  form  of  a horse.  She  gave  birth  to  the  sons  through  the 
nostrils  in  the  atmosphere  itself.  The  two  sons  Martanda  were 
Nasatya  arid  Dasra.” 

The  sages  enquired : 

25-26.  “Why  was  Vivasvan  called  Martantfa  by  scholars? 


796 


Brahmdnia  Purdna 


Why  should  that  fair  lady  deliver  through  her  nostrils  ? We 
wish  to  understand  this.  Narrate  it  to  us  who  ask  you.” 

SUta  replied  : 

27-29.  “Even  for  a long  time  after  it  had  been  produced, 
the  egg  (the  foetus)  remained  unbroken.  That  egg  was  broken 
by  Tvastr.  Bewildered  by  the  destruction  of  the  egg  (foetus) 
a3  he  mistook  it,  Kasyapa  fled  from  there. 

When  the  egg  was  split  into  two,  Tvastr  looked  at  it  and 
said  thus. 

“This  egg  cannot  be  deficient,  O sinless  one,  you  be 
Martanda.” 

The  father  affectionately  said — “Indeed  he  is  not  dead 
(JVa  Mrta)  though  he  is  within  the  Antjla  (egg).”  On  hearing 
these  words  of  his,  they  said  that  the  name  was  true  to  its 
meaning. 

30.  When  the  egg  was  split  into  two,  he  was  told — “Be 
Martanda”  even  as  he  was  within  the  egg.  So  the  sun  is  con- 
sidered Martanda  by  those  conversant  with  the  Puranas. 

31-32.  Henceforth,  I shall  mention  the  progeny  of 
Vivas  van  known  as  Martanda.  Samjfla,  the  wife  of  Savitr,  gave 
birth  to  three  sons  (children)  viz.  Manu,  Yami  and  Yama. 
Chaya  (the  shadow)  gave  birth  to  Tapati  and  Sanaiscara  (the 
Planet  Saturn).  These  are  remembered  as  the  sons  of  Martanda. 

33-34.  Vivasvan  (the  sun-god)  of  great  fame  was  born 
of  DaksayanI  (i.e.  daughter  of  Daksa)  and  Kasyapa. 

The  gentle  lady  Samjfla,  the  daughter  of  Tvastr,  became 
the  wife  of  Vivasvan.  Originally  she  was  well-known  as 
Surenu  but  later  on  she  became  famous  as  Samjfla.  It  was 
she  who  became  the  wife  of  lord  Martanda  of  excessive 
biilliance. 

35.  “Indeed,  he  did  not  die  inside  the  egg”  said  Kagyapa 
fondly  but  unwittingly.  Hence  the  sun  is  called  Martanda. 

36.  The  brilliance  and  splendour  of  Vivasvan  is  always 
very  excessive.  It  is  with  that,  that  the  son  of  Kagyapa  scorched 
the  three  worlds. 

37-38.  Ravi,  the  sun  god,  begot  of  Samjfla  three 
children,  two  sons  of  great  power  and  vigour  and  one  daughter. 
It  is  known  Manu  was  the  eldest  of  the  sons  of  Sun-god. 


2.3.59.39-52 


797 


Thereafter  (was  born)  Yama  (otherwise  known  as)  Sraddha- 
deva.  Manu  was  a Prajapati.  Then  Yama  and  Yami  were  bom 
as  twins. 

39.  On  seeing  that  form  of  unbearable  splendour  of 
Vivasvan  Samjfia  could  not  brook  it.  She  created  her  own 
Chaya  (shadow)  of  the  same  colour  and  complexion  ( Savaryd) 
as  hers. 

40.  That  lady  of  great  fortune,  born  out  of  her  shadow, 
joined  her  palms  in  great  reverence  and  purity  of  mind  and 
spoke  to  Samjfia. 

41-44.  ‘‘Tell  me.  What  work  has  to  be  carried  out  by 
me  ?”. 

Samjfia  said  to  her — “Welfare  unto  you.  I am  going  to 
the  abode  of  my  own  father.  You  alone  must  remain  in  my 
house  without  any  hesitation.  These  two  sons  of  mine  and  this 
daughter  of  excellent  complexion  should  be  brought  up  by 
you.  This  arrangement  should  not  be  disclosed  to  the  lord 
(and  my  two  sons)  by  you.  Samjfia  was  then  told  (by 
Chaya) . These  two  are  my  sons  too.  So  be  it.  (I  shall  do  as 
you  say).” 

On  being  told  thus,  that  lady  of  pitiable  plight  went  near 
Tvastr  as  if  greatly  ashamed.  On  seeing  her  come  back,  the 
father  became  angry  and  spoke  to  Samjfia. 

45-49.  “Go  to  your  husband”.  On  being  directed  thus 
again  and  again,  she  assumed  the  form  of  a mare  and  concealed 
her  real  form.  That  praiseworthy,  uncensured  lady  went  to 
the  Northern  Kurus  and  grazed  the  grass. 

Thinking  the  second  Samjfia  to  be  the  real  Samjfia,  the 
sun  procreated  two  sons  having  the  same  lustre  as  his. 
Those  two  lords  were  equal  in  comparison  to  Manu  the  eldest 
son.  Of  these  two,  Srutasravas  will  become  Savarril  Manu. 
&rutakarman  (the  second  one)  should  be  known  as  the  planet 
Sanaiscara  (the  Saturn).  He  who  became  Manu  is  called 
Savarni  also. 

50.  Samjfia  of  earthly  nature  (i.e.  the  shadow)  loved 
her  own  sons  more  than  the  elder  sons. 

51-52.  Manu  forgave  all  that  but  Yama  did  not.  Highly 
distressed  at  her  enmity  because  she  was  a co-wife  (for  his. 
mother),  he  began  to  grumble  much  and  on  many  occasions. 


798 


Brahmdnia  Pur  aria 


Due  to  his  anger  as  well  as  the  force  of  inevitable  future, 
Yama,  the  son  of  Vivasvan,  threatened  Chaya  with  his  foot 
(i.e.  kick). 

Then  out  of  anger  that  mother  of  Savarni  cursed  Yama. 

53-57.  “You  are  threatening  with  your  foot,  "all  on  a 
sudden,  the  wife  of  great  renown  of  your  own  father.  Hence, 
this  foot  of  yours  will  undoubtedly  drop  down.  Yama  became 
highly  afflicted  in  his  mind  on  account  of  that  curse.  Accom- 
panied by  Manu,  the  virtuous-souled  one  (Yama)  intimated 
everything  to  his  father  : 

“I  have  been  vanquished  (humiliated)  by  the  statements 
of  Samjna.  I have  become  distressed  due  to  the  fear  of  the 
curse.  Of  course,  the  foot  was  raised  by  me  against  her,  but  it 
was  not  allowed  to  fall  on  her  body.  Whether  this  was  due  to 
my  childishness  or  out  of  delusion,  it  behoves  you  to  forgive  me. 

O lord  of  the  worlds,  O most  excellent  one  among  those 
who  blaze  and  scorch,  I have  been  cursed  by  my  step-mother. 

I have  your  blessing  to  protect  us  from  this  great  danger. 

58-61.  On  being  told  thus,  lord  Vivasvan  said  to  Yama  : 
“Undoubtedly,  my  son,  there  must  be  a great  reason  for  this, 
since  you  became  infuriated  despite  being  conversant  with 
Dharma  and  remaining  truthful  in  speech.  Nor  can  the  words 
of  your  mothe  r be  falsified. 

Worms  will  take  your  flesh  and  go  to  the  Earth.  Then,  O 
highly  intelligent  one,  your  foot  will  attain  happiness.  Thus 
your  mother’s  words  will  be  made  true.  By  the  avoidance  of 
the  effects  of  the  curse,  you  will  also  be  saved.” 

62.  The  sun  then  spoke  to  Samjna  (i.e.  to  Chaya 
mistaken  by  him  to  be  Samjfta)  “When  all  the  sons  are  equal 
to  us,  how  is  it  that  one  is  loved  by  you  more  than  the  others.” 

63.  Parrying  that  question,  she  did  not  mention  the  real 
situation  to  Vivasvan.  Then  he  entered  into  meditation  himself 
and  found  out  the  truth  by  means  of  his  yogic  power. 

64.  The  lord  became  angry  and  wished  to  curse  her  with 
utter  annihilation.  Then  she  mentioned  all  the  facts  to  Vivasvan. 

65-70.  On  hearing  it,  Vivasvan  became  so  furious  that 
he  rushed  toTvastr. 

Tvastf  duly  honoured  Vibhavasu  (Sun-god).  As  he  was 
desirous  of  burning  him  furiously,  Tvasjr  pacified  him  slowly — 


2.3.59.71-79 


799 


“This  form  of  yours  endowed  with  excessive  refulgence 
does  net  appear  splendid.  Unable  to  bear  it,  Samjfia  is  grazing 
the  grass  in  the  meadows  in  the  forest.  You  shall  see  your  wife 
of  auspicious  conduct  today.  You  shall  see  her  richly  endowed 
with  praiseworthy  prime  of  youth,  O lord  of  rays,  by  resorting 
to  your  yogic  power.  It  shall  be  favourable  to  everyone  if 
the  following  agreement  is  assented  to.  O suppressor  of  enemies, 
I shall  change  this  excellent  (excessively  refulgent)  form  of 
yours  that  you  are  having  from  the  beginning. 

Originally  the  form  of  Vivasvan  was  so  refulgent  that  the 
rays  spread  sideways  as  well  as  upwards  and  downwards.  The 
gentle  lady  Samjfia  was  afflicted  by  that  form  of  the  lord  of 
Firmament  (i.e.  the  sun).  Thereby  your  wonderful  form 
shall  have  rays  spreading  even  in  circular  direction. 

71.  Tvastr  was  allowed  to  change  the  form.  There- 
upon Tvastr  undertook  to  change  the  form  of  Marta n<Ja 
Vivasvan  (the  sun-god). 

72.  He  placed  him  on  the  (circular  moving) 
wheel  (i.e.  a lathe)  and  pruned  (the  slices  of  the  irregular 
superfluous  part  of)  his  brilliance — when  his  refulgence  was 
taken  away,  the  sun  had  his  brilliance  uprooted  (i.e.  reduced) . 

73.  Prabhakara  (the  sun)  of  splendid  appearance  wished 
to  see  his  wife.  By  resorting  to  his  yogic  power,  he  saw  his  wife 
in  the  form  of  a mare. 

74.  Thpugh  she  was  invisible  to  all  living  beings  on 
account  of  her  holy  observance,  and  brilliance  he  saw  her  by 
means  of  his  yogic  power.  In  the  form  of  a horse,  Martan^a 
had  sexual  intercourse  with  her  through  the  mouth. 

75.  Relaxing  at  the  end  of  the  intercourse  she  had  a 
suspicion  that  it  was  another  person  (not  her  husband). 
Hence,  she  expelled  the  Semen  Virile  of  Vivasvan  through  her 
nostrils. 

76-79.  From  it  were  born  the  Devas,  the  twin  A£vins, 
the  most  excellent  physicians.  Born  of  Dvddaiamilrti  (the  sun 
god)  they  are  remembered  as  Nasatya  and  Dasra.  These 
were  the  sons  of  Martantfa,  the  eight  prajapatis.  Bhaskara  (the 
sun)  showed  himself  to  her  with  his  more  pleasing  form.  On 
seeing  his  wife,  he  became  delighted  and  contented.  He  told 


800 


Brahm&ntfa  Purdna 


her  thus — "Yama  had  become  very  much  afflicted  in  his  mind 
on  account  of  that  curse.  He  delighted  others  through  his 
Dharma.  Hence,  he  is  called  Dharmaraja.  On  account  of 
that  auspicious  action,  he  obtained  the  greatest  splendour — 
the  overlordship  of  the  Pitrs  (Manes)  and  Lokapdlatva  (the 
state  of  being  the  guardian  of  a quarter  i.e.  south)”. 

80-81.  The  eldest  Manu  was  a Prajapati.  The  other 
one  Savarni  of  great  renown  shall  become  Manu  in  the  future 
Manvantara  called  Savarnika. 

The  holy  lord  is  performing  a severe  penance  even  today 
on  the  top  of  Meru. 

82-84a.  His  brother  Sanaiscara  attained  the  state  of  a 
planet. 

With  that  form  (the  prunings  of  the  sun)  Tvastr  evolved 
the  discus  of  Visnu.1  It  had  great  splendour.  It  was  never 
obstructed  anywhere.  It  was  a great  defending  weapon  against 
Danavas. 

The  younger  sister  of  those  two,  Yamuna  of  great  fame, 
became  the  excellent  river  Yamuna,  the  sanctifier  of  the 
worlds. 

84b-86.  The  eldest  among  them  was  Manu  of  great 
splendour.  It  is  his  creation  that  we  are  having  now.2  I shall 
recount  in  detail  the  creation  of  Manu  Vaivasvata  (son  of 
Sungod) . If  any  one  listens  to  or  reads  about  this  nativity  of 
the  Devas,  the  seven  children  of  great  prowess  of  Vaivasvata, 
he  shall  get  released  from  the  mishap  in  which  he  may  find 
himself.  He  will  attain  great  fame. 

1.  This  creation  ofSudarsana,  the  discus  of  Vi?riu,  from  the  pruned 
part  of  the  sun-god  is  given  in  Vp.III.2.1 1. 

2.  The  description  of  dynasties  of  kings  is  an  integral  part  of  a Purana. 
Though  here  the  accounts  are  scattered  at  different  places,  they  are  given 
here  from  the  beginning  of  the  birth  of  Vaivasvata  Manu  to  the  future 
Savarnika  Manus.  The  story  of  the  sun-god  and  his  wives  Saiftjna  and 
Ch£y&  and  his  progeny  from  them , the  pruning  of  the  sungod  and  his 
approach  to  his  mareformed  wife  and  birth  of  Asvin  gods — these  are  tradi- 
tional accounts  found  in  the  Mbh.  Adi  76,  Anuidsana  150,  Vp.  III. 2 and  other 
Purapas  with  slight  variations. 

The  progeny  of  Vaivasvata  Manu  and  other  legendary  dynastic 
accounts  are  probably  a part  of  the  ur-Pur&na.  Hence  we  find  them 
common  in  all  Purinas. 


2.3.60.1-14 


801 


CHAPTER  SIXTY 

The  Progeny  of  Vaivasvata  Manu 


Suta  continued  : 

1.  Thereafter,  when  the  Caksusa  Manvantara  elapsed 
alongwith  the  gods,  he  (Brahma  ?)  allotted  the  overlordship  of 
the  Earth  to  Vaivasvata,  the  great  one. 

2-3.  Ten  sons  were  born  of  Vaivasvata  Manu.  They 
were  equal  to  him.  They  were  : — Iksvaku,  Nrga,  Dhrsta, 
Saryati,  Narisyanta,  Pramsu,  Nabhaga,  Disfa,  Karusa  and 
Prsadhra.  These  ten  are  remembered  as  Manavas. 

4.  Urged  and  instructed  formerly  by  Brahma,  the  king 
began  to  perform  a horse-sacrifice  according  to  his  wish. 

5-6.  Desirous  of  getting  a son,  the  Prajapati  performed  a 
sacrifice.  He  dropped  Ahuti  (ghee-offering)  in  the  fire  at 
the  spot  allotted  to  Mitra  and  Varuna.  It  is  mentioned 
in  the  Sruti  that  Ila  was  born  at  that  spot  wearing  divine 
robes,  bedecked  in  divine  ornaments  and  having  divine 
physical  body. 

7-9.  Manu,  Dantfadhara  (wielder  of  the  sceptre)  spoke 
to  her — uO  Ila,  follow  me,  welfare  unto  you”  Ila  replied  to 
him  who  was  desirous  of  a son,  these  words  consistent  with  and 
conveying  Dharma — “O  most  excellent  one  among  the  eloquent 
ones,  I am  born  in  the  spot  allotted  to  Mitra  and  Varuna.  I am 
going  near  them.  Hence,  let  not  Dharma  kill  after  being  itself 
destroyed”.  After  saying  this,  the  gentle  lady  went  near  them. 

10-14.  After  going  near  them,  the  excellent  lady  spoke 

these  words  with  palms  joined  in  reverence — “O  Devas,  I am 
born  in  the  part  pertaining  to  you.  What  shall  I do  for  you  ? 
I have  been  told  by  Manu — ‘Follow  me’.  When  the  chaste 
lady  Ila  spoke  thus,  the  two  Devas,  Mitra  and  Varuna  said 
these  words — “O  lady  of  excellent  hips  and  very  fair  complexion, 
O lady  conversant  with  Dharma,  we  are  very  much  delighted  with 
your  modesty  and  control  over  your  sense-organs  as  well  as 
truthfulness.  O daughter  of  exalted  fortune,  you  will  attain  our 
fame  and  reputation.  You  will  become  a man  well-renowned 
and  honoured  in  the  three  worlds  as  Sudyumna.  You  wilL 


302  Brahmdn^a  Purdna 

become  a favourite  of  the  whole  universe,  righteous  by  nature, 
and  the  perpetuator  of  the  line  of  Manu”. 

15.  That  gentle  lady  went  back  towards  her  father  (i.e. 
Manu)  after  obtaining  the  boon  from  Mitra  and  Varuna. 
Manu’s  son,  lord  Sudyuinna  again  attained  the  form  of  a 
lady.* 

16-17.  Budha  approached  her  later  on  and  she  was 
secretly  entreated  for  a sexual  intercourse  by  Budha.  Pururavas, 
the  son  of  Ua,  was  thus  born  of  Budha,  the  son  of  Soma, 
( Moon) . 

After  giving  birth  to  a son  through  Budha,  she  resumed 
the  form  of  Sudyumna. 

Sudyumna  had  three  heirs  and  successors  who  were 
extremely  virtuous. 

18-20.  They  were  Utkala,  Vinata  and  Gaya.  Utkala 
acquired  the  realm  Utkala  and  Vmata  got  the  western 
territory.  Gaya,  royal  saint,  acquired  the  city  Gaya  in  the 
eastern  direction.  After  creating  the  progeny,  when  Manu 
entered  the  sun  (i.c.  passed  away) , he  divided  the  Earth  into 
ten  parts  each  under  a Ksatriya.  (?)  The  heir  Iksvaku  got  the 
tenth  portion. 

21-23.  Since  he  had  the  state  of  a girl,  Sudyumna  did 
not  get  any  share  in  the  realm.  At  the  instance  of  Vasistha, 
the  highly  lustrous  prince  was  in  Pratisthana**.  The  establish- 
ment of  the  noblc-sotUed  virtuous  king  Sudyumna  was  in 
Pratisthana.  On  hearing  this,  the  sages  asked  Suta  : — 

“How  did  Sudyumna,  the  son  of  Manu,  attain  the  state  of 


SUta  said : 

24-26a.  “Formerly,  the  eternal  bachelors  Sanaka  and 
others  came  to  Ilavrta  in  order  to  see  Malic  s vara.  They  saw  the 


♦The  former  half  of  the  printed  verse  must  be  really  the  latter  half 
and  vice  veisa.  . 

♦♦Jhusi  (near  Allahabad). 

1.  The  strange  story  of  bisexual  Ila-Sudyumna,  child  of  Vaivasvata 
Manu,  is  found  in  Mbh.  Adi  75,  AnuSdsana  147,  Bh.P.IX.l 


2.3.60.26—61.5 


803 


bull-emblemed  lord  indulging  in  amorous  sports  with  Uma  in 
a secluded  spot.  All  of  them  turned  back.  Siva  then  became 
ashamed.  The  beloved  then  said  to  her  lover  these  words  for  the 
sake  of  her  own  pleasure  : — 

"O  lord,  the  man  who  enters  my  hermitage  will  become 
a woman.  That  woman  will  be  splendid  and  equal  to  celestial 
damsels.” 

26b-27a.  All  the  living  beings  there,  the  PiiSacas  and  the 
animals  became  females.  They  began  to  sport  along  with  Rudra 
like  the  Apsaras  (celestial  damsels). 

27b-28.  That  king  Sudyumna,  who  had  been  out  for 
hunting  entered  Umavana  (the  park  of  Uma).  When  Rudra 
had  assumed  the  state  of  a woman  along  with  the  Pisacas  and 
Bh utas  (goblin-)),  that  king  Sudyumna  too  acquired  the 
form  of  a woman  once  again.  Due  to  the  favour  of  Mahadcva 
lie  regained  manhood,  (the  state  of  being  the  son  of  Manu).” 


CHAPTER  SIXTYONE 

A dissertation  on  Music 

Suta  said  : 

1-3.  Understand  the  genealogy  of  the  sons  of  Manu  in 
detail.  Pi  sadhra  injured  the  cow  of  his  preceptor  at  night.  At 
the  close  of  it,  he  incurred  the  curse  of  the  noble-soulcd  Cya- 
vana  and  became  a Sudra. 

The  descendants  of  Karusa  were  (Karusas)  Ksatriyas  who 
could  not  be  suppressed  in  battle  (who  were  haughty  due  to 
their  capacity  for  warfare) . 

The  successors  of  Nabhaga  were  a thousand  groups  of 
Ksatriyas  who  were  valorous. 

Bhalandana  the  son  of  Dista  was  a great  scholar. 

4.  Bhalandana’s  son  named  Pramsu  was  very  powerful. 
Pramsu  had  an  only  son  who  became  equal  to  a Prajapati. 

5.  He  was  taken  to  heaven  by  Samvarta  along  with 
friends  and  kinsmen.  In  this  connection  a great  dispute  arose 
between  Samvarta  and  Brhaspati. 


804 


Brahmdn$a  Purdna 


6-7.  On  seeing  the  magnificence  of  Yajfla,  Brhaspati 
became  angry  with  him.  During  the  Yajfla,  performed  by 
Samvarta,  he  became  extremely  furious  for  the  destruction  of 
all  the  worlds.  But  he  was  pacified  by  the  gods  : Marutta 
the  emperor  obtained  Narisyanta  as  his  heir. 

8.  Narisyanta’s  successor  was  king  Dama  who  held  the 
sceptre  (rod  of  chastisement) . His  son  Rastravardhana  was  a 
well-known  king. 

9.  Sudhfti  was  his  son  and  Nara  was  born  of  Sudhrti. 
Kevala  was  his  son.  Bandhuman  was  the  son  of  Kevala. 

10-11.  The  son  of  Bandhuman  was  the  righteous-souled 
king  Vegavan.  Budha  was  the  son  of  Vegavan  and  Trnabindu 
was  the  son  of  Budha.  He  became  a king  at  the  beginning  of 
third  Trctayuga.  Idavitfa  was  his  daughter  who  became  the 
mother  of  Visravas. 

12.  ViSala,  the  son  who  was  born  to  him  became  a king 
extremely  virtuous,  liberal  in  gifts  and  well  renowned  for  heroism 
and  great  power.  The  city  of  Visala  (Vaisall)  was  built  by 
him. 

13.  The  son  of  Visala  was  Hemacandra,  a king  of  great 
strength.  The  successor  of  Hemacandra  became  famous  by  the 
name  Sucandra. 

1 4.  Sucandra’s  son  was  a renowned  king  named  Dhu- 
mrasva.  The  learned  Srfljaya  was  born  as  the  son  of  Dhu- 
mra£va. 

15.  The  glorious  Sahadeva  of  great  exploits  was  the  son 
of  Srfljaya.  Kfiasva,  the  son  of  Sahadeva,  was  extremely 
righteous. 

16.  The  son  of  Kf£a£va,  viz.  Somadatta  was  excessively 
brilliant  and  valorous.  The  son  of  the  saintly  king  Somadatta 
was  Janamejaya. 

. 17-20.  Janamejaya ’s  son  named  Pramati  was  well-renown- 
ed. On  account  of  potentiality  of  Trnabindu  all  the  Vai$- 
alaka  kings  with  ViSala  as  their  capital  were  long-lived, 
noble-souled,  heroic  and  very  virtuous.  Saryati  begot  twins. 
The  son  was  well-renowned  by  the  name  of  Anarta.  His  daugh- 
ter was'  Sukanya  who  became  the  wife  of  Cyavana.  Anarta’s. 


2.3.61.21-28 


805 


heir  named  Reva  was  very  powerful.  His  realm  was  called 
Anarta  and  the  capital  city  was  Kusasthali  (later  Dvaraka) . 

Raivata  was  the  son  of  Reva.  Another  name  of  his  was 
Kakudmin.  He  was  virtuous. 

21-22.  He  was  the  eldest  of  a hundred  brothers.  After 
obtaining  the  kingdom  and  the  capital  Kusasthali,  he  went 
near  Brahma  accompanied  by  his  daughter.  In  the  presence  of 
Brahma,  he  listened  to  Gandharva  Music  for  a short  while 
(A  Muhurta  i.e.  48  minutes)  as  reckoned  by  the  lord  of  the 
Devas,  but  many  Yugas  according  to  human  calculation.  He 
returned  to  his  city  still  a young  man.  The  city  then  was  inha- 
bited by  the  Yadavas. 

23.  It  had  been  renamed  Dvaravatl.  It  was  protected  by 
the  Bhojas,  Vr?nis  and  Andhakas,  the  chief  of  whom  was 
Vasudeva. 

24.  On  hearing  the  story  with  all  facts,  Revata  (Rai- 
vata) the  suppressor  of  foes  gave  his  daughter  of  good  holy  rites 
named  Revatl  to  Baladcva  in  marriage.  Thereafter,  he  went  to 
the  peak  of  Mcru  and  became  engaged  in  penance. 

25.  Rama,  the  noble  one,  sported  with  Revati. 

On  hearing  that  story  the  sages  asked  him  subsequently. 

The  sages  asked  : 

26-28.  How  was  it  that  old  age  did  not  affect  Revati  or 
Kakudmin,  O highly  intelligent  one,  even  after  the  lapse  of  a 
long  time  viz.  many  Yugas  ? 

We  are  desirous  of  listening  to  this.  Tell  us  Gandharva 
(the  science  of  Music)  too. 

SUta  said  : 

To  a person  who  goes  to  the  world  of  Brahma  there  is 
neither  old  age  nor  hunger  nor  thirst  not  even  the  fear  from 
death.  No  ailments  afflict  him.  Since  I have  been  asked 
about  Gandharva  (the  science  of  Music).  O great  and  excel- 
lent sages  of  good  holy  rites,  I shall  explain  it  accurately  in 
details. 


806 


Brahm&nia  Purdna 


29.  The  Svara-mantfala 1 (the  whole  group  in  regard  to 
notes)  consists  of  seven  notes  ( Svaras ),  three  Gramas 2 (Basic 
scales),  twentyonc  Murcchands*  and  forty-nine  Tanas  A 

1.  The  word  mapdala  suggests  the  ascent  and  descent  of  seven  notes 
(known  as  svara-saptaka)  (sec  V.  30) 

2.  Grama  : Grama  means  the  group  of  seven  notes.  In  the  Puranas 
three  Gramas  are  mentioned.  They  are,  the  Sadjagrdma , the  Madhyama grama 
and  the  Gdndhdragrdma.  These  three  were  the  basic  scales.  The  *£a-scale,  the 
Ma-scale  and  the  GVscale  had  the  notes  Sd , Ma  and  Ga  as  the  starting 
notes  respectively.  The  .SVi-scale  would  have  notes,  Sd,  Hi,  Ga,  Ma , Pa , Dha, 
Ni ; the  A/fl-scalc  would  have  the  notes  Ma , Pa,  Dha,  Ni,  Sa , Ri,  Ga  and  the 
Ga-scale  would  have  the  notes  Ga,  Ma,  Pa,  Dha,  Ni,  Sd,  Ri.  Out  of  these 
three  basic  scales,  the  GVt-scalc  fell  into  disuse  afterwards.  The  ancient  scholar 
Dattila  states  that  it  is  not  found  in  this  world.  The  later  scholars  say  that 
it  went  into  heaven.  The  reason  of  its  disappearance  is  given  as  it  had 
extremely  high  and  low  notes.  But  from  its  description  given  by  the  later 
authors  like  Sarngadcva,  it  seems  that  it  was  not  perfect  in  the  aspect  of 
consonance,  which  was  vitally  essential  for  the  melodic  music  of  India. 
Bharata  in  his  Nafya-sdstra  describes  the  Sa-scalc  and  the  A/a-scalc  on  the 
bash  oi  the  consonance  of  the  fourth  ( Sa-Ma  Samvdda)  and  the  consonance 
of  the  fifth  ( Sa-Pa  Samvdda ).  In  the  Sfl-sralc  the  consonance  of  the  fifth 
was  more  prominent  {Sa-Pa,  Ri-Dha  and  Ga-Ni)  while  that  of  the  fourth  in 
the  A/fl-Scale  {Sa-Ma,  and  Ri-Pa) . The  number  of  srutis  (the  rnicrotoncs) 
in  the  Saptaka  fixed  by  Bharata  is  22.  The  .^ru/t-intervals  were  distributed  in 
the  notes  as  follows  : 

Sa  scale  4&z  %Ri  2Ga  4 Ma  4 Pa  $Dha  ^Ni—22 

Ma- scale  AMa  %Pa  ADha  %Ni  ASa  3Ri  2Ga~ 22 

The  Sa-Ma  consonance  has  the  interval  of  9 Srutis  and  the  Sa-Pa 
consonance  that  of  1 3 srutis. 

3.  M ucchand : 

The  Murcchand  was  the  gradual  ascent  and  descent  of  the  seven  notes  of 
the  basic  scale.  The  word  is  derived  from  the  root — M urcch- meaning  to  increase 
or  to  pervade.  As  the  Murcchands  started  from  each  note  of  the  scale,  there 
were  seven  Murcchands  of  each  scale.  Thus  the  Murcchands  of  the  three 
Grdmas  numbered  twentyone. 

E.g.  The  &i-scale  Murcchands  would  be  : 

• ( 1 ) Sd  Ri  Ga  Ma  Pa  Dha  Ni  . . . 

(2)  Ni  Sd  Ri  Ga  Ma  Pa  Dha... 

(3)  Dha  Ni  Sd  Ri  Ga  Ma  Pa  . . . etc. 

The  Sdman-scsde  was  descending  having  the  notes  Ma  Ga  Ri  Sd  Dha 
Ni  Pa  as  per  the  Ndradiya-iikfd  (1.5.  1 and  2).  Due  to  the  influence  of  the 


2.3.61.30-32 


807 


30.  [The  names  of  the  notes  :]  Satfja  ( Sd ) , faabha  (Ri), 
G&ndhara  ( Ga ),  Madhyama  (Ma) , Paiicama  (Pa) , Dhaivata  ( Dha ) 
and  also  Ni$&da  ( Ni ) should  be  (carefully)  known  (as  the 
notes). 

31-32.  (and  part  of  33)  : [The  Text  is  corrupt  and 
obscure.  As  emended  from  Va  P.  and  other  Puranas,  it  gives 
the  names  of  Murchhanas  of  the  Ma-scale  as  follow  *] 

The  Murcchanas  of  the  Ma-scale  are  known  as  Sauvira, 
Madhyama-grama,  Harinasva  (HarindSca  in  Bd.  P.  is  wrong) , 
Kalopabalopeta  (also  known  as  ‘Kalopanata’),  Suddha-madh- 
yama,  Sarngl  and  Pa  van!  (nagnim  ca  pausd  vai  in  the  text  is  not 
correct)  and  Hrtyaka  Drstva  kam’  in  the  text),  in  order. 

Contd.  from  p.  806 

Saman-u calc,  there  was  the  descending  order  followed  in  the  case  of 
starting  notes  of  the  Murcchanas.  The  AI  Urcchands  served  as  the  basis  of 
diflcrcnt  types. of  songs.  They  also  brought  in,  the  notes  of  the  low  (Mandra) 
and  high  {Tara)  registers  {Sthanas) . 

If  the  first  Murcchana  of  the  A/a-scale  is  rendered  taking  Ma  as  the 
Sadja  and  the  remaining  notes  accordingly,  then  it  would  be  indicated  as — 

#Sa  %Ri  AGa  , Ma  2Pa  3 Dha  2 'Vi— 22  s'rutis. 

This  gives  the  Gandhara  of  4 Srutis  called  Antara  Ga.  Its  consonant 
note  would  be  Ni  of  4 Srutis  called  Kakali  Ni.  These  two  were  called  the 
Sddhdrana  notes.  Their  use  was  restricted.  Their  employment  was  allowed 
when  the  songs  had  the  two  Smti  Ga  and  the  two  sruti  Ni  notes  in  small 
measure.  The  Murcchanas  with  these  two  Sddhdrana  notes  were  called  as 
Sddharamkrta  M urcchands. 

4.  Tdna  is  like  Murcchand  in  which  one  or  two  specific  notes  arc 
dropped.  When  one  specific  Svara  (note)  is  dropped,  it  is  called  §ddava  Tdna 
(one  consisting  of  six  notes)  and  when  two  specific  notes  are  dropped,  it  is 
called  Auduva  Tdna  (one  consisting  of  five  notes).  According  to  Puranas,. 
there  were  twenty  Tanas  of  Madhyamagrama,  fourteen  of  Sadjagrama  and 
fifteen  of  Gandharagrama.  Thus  the  number  of  Tdnas  of  the  three  gramas  is 
given  as  forty-nine. 

According  to  Bharata  ( NdfyaSdstra  (Baroda  edition  Vol.  P.  27),  when 
the  single  note  Sa , Ri  Pa  or  Ni  is  dropped  from  the  Murcchanas  of  the 
§adjagrama,  there  would  take  place  twentyeight  Sddava  Tdnas  (7x4=28). 
Similarly  when  the  note  Sa  Ri  or  Ga  is  dropped  from  the  Murcchanas  of  the 
Madhyamagrama,  twenty-one  Sddava  Tdnas  would  be  effected  (7x3—21). 
By  dropping  SafPat  GaJVi  or  RitDha  from  the  M urcchands  of  the  &z-scalc 
twenty-one  Auduva  Tdnas  would  be  effected  (7x3=21).  When  RitDha  or 
Gat  Ni  are  dropped  from  the  Murcckands  of  the  Afa-Scale,  there  would  take 
place  fourteen  Auduva  Tanas  (7X2=14).  Thus  the  total  number  of  the  Tdnas 
of  two  grdmas  is  eighty-four  according  to  Bharata.  These  are  given  as  Suddha 
Tdnas  by  later  Acaryas. 


808 


Brahmdnia  PurSna 


33-34a.  Now  understand  the  Murcchanas  of  Sa-Scale 
{Sa4ja-gr&ma)  : (1)  Uttara — mandra,  (2)  RajanI  and  also  as 
(3)  Uttarayata  (for  Unnar&yatd  of  Bd.  P.),  (4)  Madhya- $a<Jja 
(but  Va.  P.  Buddha  Sa4ja)  and  also  the  other  one  is  (5)  Abhi- 
rudgata  (for  Abhi-mudgana  in  the  Bd.  P.*) 

34b.  Know  the  Murcchanas  of  the  Ga-scale  ( Gdndhara - 
grama)**  viz.  Syama  as  are  described. 

35-37.  (The  names  of  the  Tanas  are  as  follows  :) 

(1)  Agnistomika,  (2)  Vajapcyika,  [Va.  P.  adds  (3)Paund- 
raka,  (4)  Asvamedhika  ],  (5)  Rajas uy aka  (conjectural  emenda- 
tion for  ‘yava-rdtasuyastu ’ in  the  text).  The  sixth  is  ‘Suvarnaka,’ 
the  Seventh  is  ‘Gosava’,  the  eighth  is  Mahavrstika,  the  ninth  is 
‘Brahmadana,’  the  next  (10)  is  Prajapatya,  (11)  Nagayaksa- 
sraya,  ( 12)  Gottara,  (13)  Padakranta  (Va.  P.  ‘Haya-Kranta’) , 
(14)  Mrgakranta,  (15)  the  charming  Visnukranta,  (16)  the 
most  desirable  ( varenya ) Suryakanta  (Va.  P.  reading  for  the 
obscure  SUryak&nta-dharenya  in  Bd.  P.  is  accepted),  ( 17)  the  well- 
known  Mattakokila  ( Matta-kokila ) of  Va.  P.  is  accepted  for 
Santakokila  in  the  text). 

38a.***:  Obscure  and  untraced  in  Va  P.  and  elsewhere. 

38b.  (The  names  of  Tanas  continued  :) 

(18)  Savitra,  (19)  Ardha-savitra  (20)  Sarvatobhadra  [After 
38-b.  here-of  Va.  P.  adds  the  following  Tdnas  : Suvarna, 
Sutandra,  Visnu,  Vaisnuvara,  Sagara  and  Vijaya  which  is 
charming  to  all]. 

39.  (21)  The  charming  Adhatrya,  (22)  Gandharvanu- 

pata  (23)  Alambusesta,  (24)  Visnu  (25)  Vainavara. 


♦Note — The  Purana  does  not  mention  the  remaining  two  viz. 
Matsarikrtd  and  Aloakrdntd. 

* ’Strangely  enough,  this  Text  and  Va.  P.  are  silent  about  other 
Murcchanas  of  this  scale.  The  NP.  II.  50.3ob.36a  records  them  as  follows  : 

Nadi,  visdld  Sumukhi,  Citra,  Citravati , Mukhd  and  Bald.  Leaving 
Ga-scale  with  mention  of  one  Murcchana,  the  text  now  enumerates  Tdnas . 
The  omissions  in  the  Bd.P.  are  made  good  by  reference  to  Va.  P. 

The  Puranic  concept  of  a Tana  is  different  from  that  of  the  present  day 

one. 

♦ * *The  line  is  as  follows  : 
tcnav&nityapavafapiSAcdtivanahyap  i. 


2.3.61.40-46 


809 


40a.  (26)  ‘Sagaravijaya*  which  is  charming  to  all 

beings  (Va.  P.  gives  cSagara*  and  ‘Vijaya’) . 

40b.  (27)  Hatosrsta  and  (28)  know  the  likable  ‘Skan- 

dha’* 

41.  (Repeats  mostly  the  above  verse  39  and  adds) 
Alambusesta  and  also  (29)  Narada-priya. 

42a.  As  recounted  by  Blnmasena  (30)  Nagarapriya 
(dear  to  citizens),  (ndgaranarh yathd  priyah  in  Va.  P.  It  is  more 
clear  than  the  obscure  c ndgaratdnayapriyali  in  the  text) . 

42b.  **(The  Tdna)  called  (31)  Vikalopanita-vinata 
Srlh  (32)  Bhargavapriya. 

43a***  The  fourteen;  similarly  they  desire  here  fifteen 
(according  to)  Narada. 

43b.  (Obscure  but  from  Va.  P.  it  appears  that  the  pre- 
siding deities  of  the  Murcchands  are  now  enumerated.  The  Bd. 
P.  text  may  tentatively  be  interpreted— on  the  basis  of  Va.  P. 
as  follows) 

(Murchana  Gandhari ) along  with  Sauvira  is  hence  sung 
by  god  Brahma. 

44a.  And  also  of  the  Uttaradi-Svara,  god  Brahma  is 
the  presiding  deity  here.  [devatastrayafC  of  theBd.  P.  is  probably 
‘ devatatra  ca\  as  in  Va.  P.] 

44b.  Haritidsyd  is  originated  in  the  region  of  Hari. 

45a.  The  Murcchana  Hariqdsyd  has  the  Moon-god  as  the 
presiding  deity  (but  Indra  as  per  Va.  P.) 

45b.  The  Murcchana  Karopanitavitatd  is  sung  by 
Maruts  in  the  svara-maniala  (group  of  notes) . 

46a.  That  is  Kalopanitd  and  hence  its  presiding  Deity  is 
Maruta  emended  as  : Mdrutakdtra  daivatam , as  in  Va.  P.). 

46b.  Suddha-madhyama  (emended  as  per  Va.  P.  for  Suddha - 
mdtmand)  murcchana  is  originated  in  Manu  (Maru)  deia 
(After  46  b Va.  P.  adds  :) 

*For  40b  here  of,  Va.  P reads  : Hariisa,  Jycsfhaand  Tumburii- 

priya. 

**For  this  Va.  P.  adds  : Abhiramya,  Sukra,  Punya,  Punyaraka. 
There  are  twenty  ( Tdnas)  in  Affl-scale  and  fourteen  in  »S*z-scaIe. 

***For  this  Va.  P.  states:  They  desire  similarly  fifteen  belonging  to 
{?<2-gr&ma. 


810 


Brahmdnda  Purdna 


Suddha  Madhyamd  is  the  note  here  and  the  deity  is  Gandh- 
arva.  It  moves  along  with  the  deer  for  the  guidance  of 
Siddhas. 

47a.  Hence,  on  account  of  Mrgas  (deer)  it  (the  Murc- 
chana  is  called  Mdrgi  and  the  Lion  is  its  deity.  * 

47b  : Obscure  : 

(Tentative  meaning  : ‘That  is  associated  with  hermitages 
and  various  human  voices’  (?)] 

48a.  As  the  Murcchand  is  associated  with  rajas  (a  linos - 
plierc/mist) , it  is  called  Rajatiu 

48b.  Obscure  ( If  allied  with  Va.  P.  ;) 

Ullaramandrd  is  known  as  having  Sadja  as  its  deity. 

49.  Obscure  (If  allied  wiih  Va.  P.)  : 

Hence  Ultara-ldla  is  known  first  as  well  extended. 

Hence,  it  is  Uttara-mamird  whose  deity  indeed  is  Dhruva. 

50.  Obscure  (emended  from  Va.  P.) 

Because  of  its  extendon  and  being  later  (in  the  order) 
Utlaidyata  having  Dha  ( DUiivata ) as  the  starting  point,  is  the 
A luicchand,  the  deity  of  which  i*  the  manes,  the  deities  of 
Sraddha. 

51a.  The  great  sages  worship  the  Fire-god  with  the  Suddha 
Sadja  (Pure  Sa-)  note.  Hence,  one  should  know  it  as  Suddha- 
Sadjika  ( Va.  P.  : This  Murcchand  starts  from  the  Pancama  note) . 

5 lb.  is  obscure,  hence  the  reading  in  Va.  P.  is  followed. 

52a.  In  this  manner  employing  these  Murcchanas  in  which 
lie  has  got  such  Bhavana  (particular  faith) . 

52b.  The  murcchanas  belong  to  Yaksls  (female  Yaksas) 
are  called  Yakfikd  murcchanas  (Ya  in  the  Ms  seems  to  have 
been  read  as  Pa,  as  in  writing  in  Devanagari  script  Pa  & Ya 
look  similar) . 

33a  (Obscure  but  if  allied  with  Va.  P.) 

The  Murcchanas  do  not  approach  the  songs  affected  by 
the  poisonous  sight  of  the  serpents  (Nagas) . 

53b  (Corrupt  and  obscure  but  with  the  help  of  Va.  P.) 

And  there  are  many  Sadhdrana  murcchanas * (and  also  six 

* Murcchanas  with  Sadhdrana  Svaras  arc  called  so.  The  Sadhararia  Svaras. 

are  : 

(I)  Antara  G&ndh&ra  i.e.  Modern  Suddha  G&ndhdra. 

(II)  K a kali  Ni$ada=Mod.  Tivra  Nif&da. 


2.3.62.1-5 


811 


only  ( ?)  are  known  thoroughly,  ( The  reading  Vatfavatrividas 
tatha  in  the  text  is  obscure.  Va.  P.  gives  Safcvdnuvidastathd) . 


CHAPTER  SIXTYTWO 

The  Science  of  Music 

1.  After  knowing  the  views  of  earlier  teachers,  I shall 
expound  the  well-known  embellishments  in  music  in  due  order. 
Please  listen  to  them,  while  I am  explaining. 

2.  The  embellishments  are  to  be  spoken  of  along  with 
their  Varnas  (movements  of  notes  such  as ‘steady’,  ‘ascending  and 
others)  as  their  specific  basis  and  also  alongwith  their  associat- 
ed configuration  (samrthana),  always  in  regard  to  dramatic1 
performance  etc. 

3a.  The  fulfilment  of  embellishment2 3  is  achieved  by 
the  implications  of  sentences  and  connotations  of  the  word- 
combinations. 

3b.  The  words  of  the  song  are  said  to  be  either  preced- 
ing or  following  the  embellishment. 

4a  : (Bd.  P.  text  corrupt  & obscure  but  Va.  P.  reads) 

One  should  know  that  the  following  three  are  the  places  of 
Utterances  viz.  the  chest,  throat  and  head.* 

4b.  In  these  three  places,  the  best  procedure  (of  produc- 
ing notes)  functions. 

5a.  In  the  original  stage  (. Prakrtau ) , there  are  four  Varnas 
(tone-patterns)  having  fourfold  movements. 

1.  Vide  N&tya&astra  (Baroda)  Vol.  IV.  pp.79-92- 

2.  Va.P.  reading  : alahkdrasya  accepted. 

3.  Bd.  P.  reads  Sthatonitiraro  niddimanah.  V&.  P.  reads  : sth&n&ni  trioi 
j&niydt  urdh  etc. 

As  the  whole  chapter  is  full  of  corrupt  readings  and  obscurities  the 
reading  from  the  Va.P.  are  accepted.  But  the  readings  are  not  quoted  as  is 
done  above  in  ch.61  but  simply  translated  indicating  the  source  viz.  Va.P. 


812  BrahmdQia  Purdna 

5b.  The  alternative  movements  are  eightfold1;  and 
gods  know  them  as  sixteenfold. 

6.  (The  names  of  Varnas:) 

The  first  Varna  is  Sthayin , the  second  is  Prasahcdrin , the 
third  is  Avarohana  ( = Avarohin ) and  the  fourth  Varna  is  known 
by  the  experts  in  the  knowledge  of  Varnas  to  be  Arohana 2 
( = Arohin) . 

7a.  There  is  one  ( Varna  i.e.  Sthayin ) which  has  steady 
employment.  The  Saiicdra  is  the  mixed  movement. 

7b.  One  should  indicate  the  descent  of  Varnas  ( i.e.  Svaras ) 
as  Avarohana . 

8a.  (Va.  P. ) And  the  experts  in  the  knowledge  of  Varnas 
know  (that  varna)  as  the  Aroha-Varna  by  the  ascent  of  notes. 

8b.  Now  know  then  the  embellishments  of  these  specific 
Varnas.  * 

9.  There  are  four  embellishments  viz.  Sthdpaniy  Krama - 
rejana , Pramada  and  Apramada.  I shall  explain  the  characteristics 
of  these.3 4 

10.  (Names  of  Alahkdras  continue  as  follows:) 
Visvaray  Asfakala  which  has  an  interval  of  one  place  (from  its 
original  place?);  Avarta  and  Kramotpatli — These  two  should  be 
effected  according  to  their  proportion. 

1 1 a.  One  should  know  the  other  one  to  be  Kumdra  and 
also  VistaraA 

lib.  And  this  indeed  is  the  Apahga  ( alankdra ) and 
Kutareka  (?)  possesses  one  more  Kald  (Time-measure) 

12a.  ( Va.  P.)  Syena  is  originated  as  having  one  interval 

and  situated  in  the  midst  of  Mdtrds  of  a Kald. 

1.  These  are  referred  to  only  in  the  Puragas.  Later  writers  do  not 
mention  them. 

2.  The  exigencies  of  metre  have  led  to  the  change  in  the  order.  The 
order  should  have  been  ( 1 ) Sthayin  (i.e.  Sd  Sd  Sd) , (2 ) Arohin  (e.g.  Sd  ri  ga 
etc.),  Avarohin  (e.g.  ni  dha  pa  etc.)  and  (4)  Saiiearin  (e.g.  Sa  ri  sa  ri  ga  ri  sa 
etc. 

* Although  the  Section  on  Alankdras  (I.  Vi.)  in  the  Sangfta  Ratndkara  is 
referred  to,  to  interpret  these  alankdras  only  a few  like  Syena( p.  133  of  S.  R.) 
throw  some  light.  Though  S.  R.  is  much  later  than  Bd.  P.  or  Va.  P.  he  has 
preserved  some  of  the  Pur&Qa  traditions. 

3.  But  the  anthor  has  not  given  them  anywhere. 

4.  The  texts  of  Bd.  P.  and  Va.  P.  are  obscure  here. 


2.3.62.12-22 


813- 


12b.  (Va.  P.)Init  there  abides  the  increase  in  the 
order  of  the  note  different  from  it  (e.g.  Sd — Pd, — Ri — Dha,  Ga — 
ni). 

13a.  (Va.  P.)  The  descent  of  the  Syena  Alaftkdra  is  called 
Uttara. 

13b.  (Va.  P. ) The  Alankdra  called  Bindu  is  originated  due 
to  the  measure  of  Kalas. 

14a.  One  Kala  (a  measure  of  time)  should  be  employed 
of  the  Vanias . Then  it  would  be  Sthdpita  (established  ?). 

14b.  Durghafita  is  that  which  has  the  note  even  in  the 
reverse  order. 

15a.  Ekottara  Svara  has  the  highest  note  from  Sadja. 

15b.  Ak$tpdskandana  should  be  effected  as  having  high 
amplitude  like  the  (harsh)  crowing  of  the  crow. 

1 6a.  The  two  Santdras  belong  to  Sahcarin  Varna  either  as 
the  cause  or  the  effect. 

16b.  Akfipta  belongs  to  the  category  of  the  descending 
( Avarohin ) Varna . 

17.  The  Alankdra  called  Prenkholita  has  the  twelfth 
place  of  Kala  having  one  interval.  Thus  it  is  endowed  with  the 
notes  (?) 

18a.  (Va.  P.)  Pufkala  is  said  to  be  due  to  the  transfer  of 

notes. 

18b.  Prakfipta  is  due  to  Kala ...  (?) 

19a.  It  is  called  Bhdfita  in  which  there  is  the  use  of  two 
Kalas  as  before. 

19b.  Visvardrudha  ( Visararddhd ) has  got  eight  notes  in 
ascendance. 

20a.  Vdpa  (?)  certainly  is  due  to  the  descent  from  the 
high  or  low  register  (?). 

20b.  These  are  placed  verily  with  one  interval  and  have 
the  same  note  at  the  end. 

21.  Makfi-praccheda  (?)  is  declared  to  have  a group  of 
four  Raids . Thus,  these  are  the  thirty  Alankaras  explained. 

22.  Due  to  employment  of  Varna  and  Sthdna  having  the 
measure  of  Raid  and  Mdtrd  are  the  configuration,  proportion,, 
modification  and  characteristics. 


814 


Brahm&ntfa  Purina 


23-24a.  This  should  be  known  as  the  purpose  of  embel- 
lishment which  is  fourfold1.  Just  as  in  the  case  of  embellishment 
if  it  is  used  at  the  wrong  place  it  is  censured,  similarly  to 
beautify  even  the  Varnas  unfavourably,  the  prociucer  by 
oneself  (?)  would  be  blamed. 

24b-25a.  Just  as  due  to  the  use  of  various  ornaments,  a 
woman  gets  herself  beautified,  the  embellishment  is  the  decora- 
tion of  Varna  born  of  itself  (?). 

231).  The  ear-ring  is  not  seen  (worn)  on  the  feet,  nor 
the  girdle  round  the  neck. 

26.  Thus  the  embellishment  if  used  in  a wrong  place  is 
censured.  When  the  embellishment  is  effected,  it  should  indi- 
cate the  Rdga  (melody) . 

27a.  Just  as  the  characterisation  of  the  path  intended  to 
be  undertaken  is  enjoined  by  indicating  it  with  a brush. 

27b.  (?) 

28a.  I shall  describe  realistically  (as  it  is).  ...  ? 

28b.  Obscure. 

29a.  Obscure  (both  in  the  Bd.  P.  and  Va.  P.) 

29b.  The  division  of  these  two  (viz.  Sadja  and  Madhyama) 
as  the  dominant  notes  brings  about  the  Charm  of  the  songs. 

30a.  Obscure. 

30b.  ( Va.  P.)  The  reverse  would  take  place  in  the  case 

of  the  order  of  seven  notes. 

31a.  (Va.  P.)  The  four  Madraka  Gitas  are  sung  with 
Gdndhdra  as  the  keynote. 

31b-32a.  In  Madraka  Gitas  we  know  the  notes  Pahcama 
(Pa),  Madhyama  (Ma) , Dhaivata  ( Dha ),  Ni$ada  ( Ni ),  §a<jja  (Sd) 
and  fcabha  (Ri)  as  the  remaining  notes. 

32b.  One  should  know  two  Apardntika  Songs  (?)  (The 
Rest  is  obscure) . 

33a.  In  the  Apardntika  songs  Gdndhdra  (Ga)  is  employed 
in  the  original  (Suddha)  form  and  its  modified  form. 

33b.  (Va.  P. ) The  Pada  has  got  thiee  forms  (?).  The 
Katiiki  song  has  seven  forms. 


1.  vide  Sangtta-ratn&kara  1.6.64  which  enumerates  Rakti-l&bha.  etc. 


2.3.62.34-41 


815 


34a.  With  the  entire  use  of  Gdndhdra  as  the  keynote  pro- 
cedure of  which  is  declared. 

34b.  This  is  also  the  order  intended  for  its  Madhyama  as 
the  keynote. 

35.  The  songs  which  have  been  mentioned  and  parti- 
cularly those  of  fourfold  form  (?)  should  be  effected  with  seven 
notes  and  the  Kaitiki  of  sevenfold  form. 

36a.  This  is  called  as  the  pointing  out  of  the  components 
(of  songs  ?). 

(The  Topic  of  Tala  :)  There  are  two  even  measures 
Caturasra  (of  four  beats  and  eight  Matras)  and  Tryasra  (four 
beats  and  six  Matras) . 

36b.  Obscure  (in  Bd.  P.  & Va.  P.) 

37.  (Va.  P)  In  Uttara  songs  in  the  original  form,  the 
Matra  is  thus  deleted  (the  rest  is  obscure) . 

38.  With  one  foot  in  the  Matra  and  deficiency  in  one 
foot...  when  there  is  the  Upahanana  (error  ?)  of  numbers  in  it, 
it  is  called  Y&na. 

39.  The  second  break  in  the  foot  is  well-established  with 
Graha  (the  starting  point  of  the  song)  and  in  the  Apardntika  the 
first,  eighth,  third  and  second  are  established  with  Graha ? 

40.  In  the  Uttara  and  in  Mandraka  songs  in  their  original 
form,  the  Pada-bhdga1  and  also  along  with  one  and  a quarter  (of 
a Pada)  ( ?)  is  in  Uttara  and  Mandraka . 

4!a.  In  Mandraka  songs  the  Kala  exists  as  explained  of 
the  Dakfina  mdrga 2 also. 

1 . Pddabhdga  means  the  fourth  part.  Three  forms  of  the  Tala  were 
Ekakala , Dvikala  and  Catuskala. 

e.g.  Ekakala  Tdla  was  indicated  as  : 

S S S S;  Dvikala  as  : SS  SS  SS  SS,  and  Catuskala  as  : SSSS  SSSS  SSSS 
SSSS. 

1 — Laghu— one  mdtrd ; S=  Guru—  2 mdtrds;  S — Pluta  **  3 matras.  Matra 
was  the  time  required  for  the  utterance  of  five  short  syllables.  In  Dvikala 
form  there  were  Pdda-bhdgas  of  two  Gurus  each,  and  in  Catuskala  form,  of 
four  Gurus  each. 

2.  There  were  three  Mdrgas  (ways  of  the  7a/a-procedure)  namely  Citra, 

Vdrttika  and  Dakfipa  having  the  Kald  of  two  mdtrds , four  mdtrds  and  eight 
mdtrds  respectively.  The  forms  Ekakala , Dvikala  and  Catufkala  were 

associated  with  Mdrgas. 


816 


Brahmdnda  Purina 


41b.  Obscure  (in  both  the  Puranas) . 

42a.  Obscure  (in  both  the  Puranas) . 

42b-43a.  When  there  is  the  use  of  one  and  the  use  of 
two,  O best  of  Brahmanas,  and  when  there  is  the  gombination 
of  many,  Pataka1  etc.  are  declared. 

43b.  There  are  three  Vrttis— Citrd,  Vrtti  and  Dak$ind 2 

44a.  (Va.  P. ) The  samavdyas  (combinations  of  (?)  are 
eight  and  similarly,  the  Murcchaua  is  Sauvirl. 

44b.  Obscure  : Last  foot.  Thus  the  Svara-manfala  (the 
whole  group  of  notes  in  music)  is  explained. 


CHAPTER  SIXTYTHREE 

The  Iksvdku  Dynasty  * 


SUta  said  : — 

1 . When  Raivata,  otherwise  known  as  Kakudmin,  went 
to  that  world  (of  Brahma) , his  city,  Kusasthali,  was  completely 
over-run  and  captured  by  Punyajanas  (Yaksas)  and  Raksasas. 

2.  The  hundred  brothers  of  that  virtuous  and  noble- 
souled  king  were  afflicted  by  arrows.  Therefore,  they  fled  in 
every  direction  due  to  fear. 


1 . Patdkd  was  one  of  the  eight  mdtrds , which  was  indicated  by  moving 
the  hand  upwadrs.  These  mdtrds  were  to  be  employed  in  the  Mdrgas  as. 
specifically  directed. 

2.  The  Vrttis  (styles  of  rendering  songs  with  accompaniment)  were 
three  namely  Citrd,  Vrtti  and  Dakfiyd.  They  were  associated  with  the  three 
Mdrgas  : Citra,  Vdrtika  and  Dakfipa,  the  three  Lay  as  (tempi),  and  Grahas  etc. 

In  Citrd  the  music  of  stringed  instrument  was  prominent  and  song 
subservient,  in  Dakfigd,  the  song  was  prominent  and  instrumentation 
subservient;  and  in  Vrtti  both  were  employed  equally. 

♦i/idr  Va.P.Ch.88. 


2.3.63.3-1 1 


817 


3.  O excellent  Brahm&nas,  the  dynasty  of  these  Ksatriyas 
who  fled  due  to  excessive  fright,  is  very  great.  They  are  present 
in  different  places.1 

4.  They  are  well-known  in  all  the  quarters  as  Saryatas. 
They  arc  righteous.  The  line  of  Dhfsta  is  called  Dharstika.  All 
the  members  were  bold  and  aggressive  in  battle. 

5-6.  That  clan  of  those  noble-souled  Ksatriyas  consisted 
of  three  thousand  (families).  Nabhaga’s  heir  was  the  hero 
named  Nabhaga.  Ambarlsa  was  the  son  of  Nabhaga.  His  son 
was  Virupa.  Prsadasva  was  ihe  son  of  Virupa  and  his  son  was 
Rathitara. 

7.  These  were  born  of  Ksatriyas  but  are  remembered  as 
having  become  Arigiras.  The  excellent  members  of  Rathitara 
family  were  Brahmanas  as  well  as  Ksatriyas. 

8.  Formerly,  when  Manu  sneezed,  Iksvaku  was  born. 
Iksvaku2  had  a hundred  sons  who  distributed  much  wealth  as 
religious  gifts. 

9.  Vikuksi,  Nimi  and  Dantja,  these  three  were  the  most 
excellent  among  them.  He  had  fifty  sons,  the  chief  of  whom 
was  Sakuni. 

10-11.  They  were  the  kings  protecting  Uttarapatha 
Northern  territory.  Forty-eight  of  them,  the  father  of  whom 
was  Virata  were  the  defenders  of  Daksinapatha  (Southern 
territory),  in  the  Southern  quarter. 


1.  VV.  3-7.  Though  the  present  chapter  deals  mainly  with  the 
Iksvaku  dynasty,  these  verses  mention  the  dynastic  list  in  the  pre-Yayati 
period  i.r.  before  Circa  3000  B.C.  as  per  Vedic  Age  p.  276  (BVB— Bharatiya 
Vidya  B ha  van,  Bombay). 

Thus  Saryatas  ruled  in  Anarta  (Gujarat  and  part  of  Malwa)  with 
its  capital  at  Kusasthali  or  Dwarka  (De,  7),  Dharspkas  ruled  over  Vahika 
(between  the  Bias  and  Sutlej)  in  Panjab  (De,  15).  The  descendants  of 
Nabhaga  were  probably  in  the  midlands  of  the  Gangetic  doab,  but  their 
special  feature  was  the  attainment  of  Brahminhood  as  Angirasas,  indicating 
the  fluidity  of  caste  system  of  that  period. 

2.  From  V.  8,  the  author  describes  the  dynasty  of  Ik?v&ku.  His  three 
sons  Vikuksi,  Nimi  and  Dap^a  founded  dynasties  at  Ayodhya  (U.P.)„ 
Videha  (Bihar)  and  Dan^aka  (North  Deccan). 


818  Brahm&nia  Purina 

Once,  at  the  performance  of  the  Ast&ka1  (a  kind  of 
Sr&ddha) , Iksvaku  commanded  Vikuksi  thus. 

The  King  said  : — 

12.  “Fetch  flesh  for  the  sake  of  Sr&ddha , O highly  power- 
ful one,  after  killing  animals.  The  Sr&ddha  of  As  (aka  has  to  be 
performed  by  me  surely.” 

13.  At  the  instance  of  the  intelligent  one,  he  went  for 
hunting.  After  killing  thousands  of  animals,  the  powerful 
prince  became  tired. 

14-15.  Vikuksi  who  had  gone  for  hunting,  ate  a rabbit. 
When  Vikuksi  returned  with  the  meat  and  his  army,  the  king 
urged  Vasistha  saying  “Let  the  meat  be  sprinkled  (with  holy 
water)”.  Vasistha  said  “So be  it”.  On  being  urged  thus  the 
meat  was  duly  presented  by  the  king.  On  seeing  the  meat 
polluted,  Vasistha  became  angry  and  spoke  to  him  : — 

16-13.  “This  meat  has  been  defiled  by  your  son,  O king. 
By  eating  the  rabbit,  O king  of  great  splendour,  the  meat 
cannot  remain  unpolluted.  O sinless  one,  rabbit  has  been  eaten 
earlier  by  this  wicked  fellow.  Therefore,  O excellent  king,  this 
meat  intended  to  be  offered  to  the  Pitis  is  defiled”. 

Thereupon,  Iksvaku  became  furious  and  spoke  this  to 
Vikuksi  : 

19-21.  “Directed  by  me  in  connection  with  the  holy 
rite  of  the  Manes,  yoA  went  for  hunting.  But  you  ate  the  flesh 
of  the  rabbit  in  the  forest  earlier  to-day.  You  have  been  unkind 
(in  this  context) , Hence,  I am  banishing  you.  Go  anywhere 
else  alongwith  your  own  fate”. 

Thus  he  was  abandoned  by  Iksvaku.  He  came  to  be 
known  by  the  name  Sasada  (one  who  cats  rabbit) . Later,  the 
son  became  extremely  virtuous.  When  Iksvaku  passed  away  he 
got  the  entire  Earth  at  the  instance  of  Vasistha.  He  became  the 
ruler  of  Ayodhya. 

1 . Astaka  is  a §raddha  performed  on  the  8th  day  of  the  dark  halves 
of  the  months  of  Margasirsa,  Pausa,  Magha,  Phalguna  ( Aivaldyana  Gr.S. 
II .4.1),  but  most  other  Grhya  sutras  regard  the  first  three  as  the  A^aka  days. 
Flesh  is  to  be  offered  to  Pitrs  in  this  Sraddha  (Gobhila  Gr.S.III.  10.48) . 
Hence,  Ik?vaku’s  order  to  Vikuksi  to  bring  flesh  vide  v.12.  Now,  no  flesh  is 
served -in  Sraddha. 


2.3.63.22-29 


819 


22-23.  Urged  and  guided  by  Vasistha,  he  ruled  over  the 
kingdom  for  some  time.  Even  when  he  was  ruling  over  the 
kingdom,  the  king  was  fully  afflicted  by  this  sin.  After  some 
time,  he  fell  into  the  hell,  having  waves  of  urine  and  faeces. 
After  reading  this  anecdote,  a learned  man  should  understand 
(its  implications).  He  should  not  eat  anything  against  the 
Vedic  injunction. 

24.  Learned  men  explain  the  etymological  meaning  of 
Aldmsa1  (ilesh)  thus  : — 

(The  being)  whose  flesh  I am  eating  here  shall  eat  me 
( Mam — me,  sa — he  bhakfayita.  -shall  eat)  in  the  next  birth. 
This  is  the  Mdmsatva  (state  of  being  flesh)  of  meat. 

25-26.  Masada’s  heir  was  a heroic  king  named 
Kakutstha.  Formerly,  there  was  the  .1  dibaka*  fight.  In  it  Indra 
took  the  form  of  a bull.  'This  king  seated  himself  on  the  hump 
of  the  bull  (Indra).  (Kakut — hump,  tsthd— occupant)  and  won 
the  war.  Hence,  he  is  remembered  as  Kakutstha.2 

Kakut'.tha’s  son  was  Anenas  and  Pithu  was  the  son  of 
Anenas. 

27-28.  Lhsada’-'va  was  the  son  of  Prthu.  The  powerful 
(king)  Andhra  (came)  aft*  r him.  Yuvanasva  was  the  successor 
of  Andhra.  Sravasta  was  born  as  his  son.  Sravasta  became  a 
king  by  whom  the  city  of  Sravasti  [Mod.  Sahel- Mahet  on  the 
Rapti  River  in  Oudh  U.PJ  was  founded.  Sravasta’s  heir  was 
By  had as va  of  great  renown. 

29.  Bi  hadasva’s  son  was  renowned  as  Kuvalasva.  This 
king  later  on  came  to  be  known  as  Dhundhumara  since  he  slew 
the  demon  Dhundhu. 


1 . A popular  etymology — a special  feature  of  this  Purana.  But  this  is 
a quotation  from  Manu  V.jj. 

*Adibaka — The  deadly  combat  fought  by  Vasistha  and  Visvarnitra 
after  assuming  the  form  of  Adi  and  Baku  ( two  aquatic  birds).  Devas  and 
Asuras  fought  with  each  other  after  taking  sides  of  Vasistha  and  Visvarnitra. 

2.  Kalidasa,  however,  explains  the  epithet  Kakutstha  (as  ‘one  who 
occupies  a prominent  place  among  kings*,  vide  Raghuvamia  VI. 71  lkfvdku - 
vamiyah  kakudam  nrp&nam  kakutstha.  itydhitalakfapobhut . 


820 


Brahm&nda  Purina 


The  sages  requested  : — 

30.  We  wish  to  hear  in  detail,  O sage  of  great  intelli- 
gence, how  Dhundhu  was  killed,  on  account  of  which 
Kuvalasva  came  to  be  called  Dhundhumara.  # 


Suta  replied  : — 

31-33.  Kuvalasva  had  twenty-one  thousand  sons.  All  of 
them  were  experts  in  different  lores.  They  were  strong  and 
unassailable.  All  of  them  were  righteous.  They  performed 
sacrifices  and  distributed  plenty  of  monetary  gifts.  Brhadasva 
the  elderly  ruler  e nthroned  Kuvalasva  in  that  realm.  Kuvalasva 
was  very  powerful,  excellent  and  virtuous.  After  transferring 
the  royal  position  and  splendour  to  his  son,  the  king  entered 
the  forest. 

34.  Uttarika  the  Brahminical  sage,  prevented  the  great 
king  Brhadasva  who  was  brave,  excellent  and  virtuous,  from 
going  to  the  forest. 


Uttanka  said  : — 

35.  “The  duty  of  protecting  people  should  be  carried 
out  by  you.  It  behoves  you  to  do  it.  O king,  I am  unable  to 
perform  penance  unperturbed. 

36.  Near  the  precincts  of  my  hermitage,  on  the  other 
side  of  Meru,  the  ocean  is  filled  with  sand,  O king. 

37-38.  A great  Asura  named  Dhundhu  is  lying  under- 
ground there  hidden  by  the  sands.  He  cannot  be  killed  by 
the  Devas.  He  has  a huge  body  and  is  very  powerful.  He  is 
the  son  of  Raksasa  Madhu.  After  performing  terrible  penance* 
he  stays  there  for  the  destruction  of  the  people. 

39.  When  he  exhales  at  the  end  of  a year,  the  ground 
there  quakes  and  shakes  along  with  the  forests. 

40-41.  A great  column  of  dust  is  raised  by  the  air 
exhaled  by  him  It  envelops  the  path  of  the  sun.  The  Earth- 
quake continues  for  a week.  It  is  extremely  terrifying,  as  it  is 


2.3.63.42-51 


821 


accompanied  by  sparks,  flames  and  fumes.  Hence,  O king,  I am 
unable  to  stay  within  my  hermitage.1 

42.  Resist  him,  O king  of  great  powerful  arms,  with  a 
desire  for  the  welfare  of  the  worlds.  Your  brilliant  splendour  is 
already  great.  Visnu  will  develop  it  further  by  contribution  of 
his  own  splendour. 

43.  Indeed,  you  alone  are  capable  of  slaying  him,  O 
lord  of  the  Earth.  Let  the  worlds  become  happy  and  relieved 
with  that  Asura  slain. 

44-45.  O sinless  one,  formerly,  a boon  had  been  granted 
to  me  (that  you  would  help  me  by  killing  him ) . Indeed,  Dhundhu 
of  excessive  virility  and  power,  cannot  be  over-powered 
completely  by  any  one  of  insignificant  brilliance  or  even  by 
rulers  of  the  Earth,  though  they  may  fight  with  him  for 
hundreds  of  years.  His  prowess  and  strength  is  very  great, 
difficult  to  be  approached  even  by  the  Devas”. 

46.  On  being  told  thus  by  the  noble-soulcd  Ut tanka, 
that  saintly  king  gave  him  Kuvala$va  for  the  task  of  warding 
off  Dhundhu. 

47.  “O  holy  lord,  I have  laid  down  my  arms.  This  is 
my  son,  O excellent  Brahmana.  He  will  undoubtedly  become 
the  slayer  of  Dhundhu”. 

48.  He  ordered  his  son  to  carry  out  the  task  of  slaying 
Dhundhu  with  any  step.  The  king  of  praiseworthy  holy  rites, 
went  to  the  forest  itself  for  the  sake  of  penance. 

49-5 1 . Abiding  by  the  order  of  his  father,  Kuvalasva 
accompanied  by  his  twenty-one  thousand  sons  and  Ut  tanka 
proceeded  ahead  for  resisting  Dhundhu.  Lord  Visriu  entered 
him  with  his  own  divine  splendour.  When,  being  urged  by 
Uttanka  and  with  a desire  for  the  welfare  of  the  world,  the 
unassailable  king  marched  out,  there  arose  a great  din  and 
commotion  in  the  sky. 


1.  B.G.  Law  regards  this  legend  as  a natural  phenomenon.  He  con- 
jectures that  this  volcanic  pit  near  the  western  sea  was  sub-merged  with  sea 
water  and  the  volcanic  action  ceased  by  the  efforts  of  Kuval&iva  ( Tribes  in 
Ancient  India,  p.  126),  while  Pargiter  regards  this  as  a shallow  sand-filled  sea 
in  Rajasthan  which  prevented  Aryan  expansion  (AIHT.  pp.  260-61). 


822 


Brahmdn^a  Purdna 


52.  “This  king  shall  become  Dhundhumara  (slayer  of 
Dhundhu)  with  effect  from  today”.  The  Devas  showered  him 
all  round  with  divine  flowers. 

53-55.  Then  the  divine  Dundubhis  (war-drums)  were 
sounded  loudly. 

The  heroic  lion  among  men  went  along  with  his  sons  and 
dug  up  the  vast  inexhaustible  ocean  filled  with  sands. 
Dhundhu  who  had  concealed  himself  beneath  the  sands,  was 
found  out  by  his  sons  who  were  digging  the  sands  on  the 
Western  side. 

That  infuriated  Asura  appeared  to  upset  the  worlds 
by  means  of  fire  coming  out  of  his  mouth. 

56.  By  means  of  his  Yogic  power  that  great  and  excellent 
Asura  let  flow  water  like  the  great  ocean  blending  its  currents 
and  waves  together  at  the  time  of  moon-rise. 

57-60a.  All  his  sons  were  burnt  down  completely ; only 
three  survived  that  battle. 

Then  that  king  of  enormous  strength  and  great  splendour 
approached  that  immensely  mighty  Raksasa  Dhundhu  who  killed 
his  kinsmen.  The  king,  O dear  one,  who  was  a Yogin,  sup- 
pressed his  forceful  flood  of  water  let  loose  by  him  my  means 
of  his  Yogic  power  and  subdued  fire  by  means  of  water.  In 
the  end  the  king  killed  that  aquatic  demon  of  huge  body,  by 
means  of  his  prowess.  After  accomplishing  his  task  the  king 
pointed  the  Raksasa  to  Uttanka. 

60b-63.  Uttanka  granted  boon  to  that  noble-souled 
king  that  the  more  he  gave  as  gifts  the  more  would  be  his 
wealth  ever  lasting.  The  other  boons  he  granted  were  the 
invincibility  (in  battle)  by  the  enemies,  perpetual  interest  in 
Dharma  and  never-ending  residence  in  the  heaven.  He  granted 
the  everlasting  worlds  in  heaven  to  his  sons  who  were  killed 
by  the  demon. 

Out  of  the  three  of  his  sons  who  survived,  the  eldest  is 
called  Dr<Jha£va.  Bhadrasva  and  Kapilasva  are  remembered  as 
the  younger  ones.  Drdhasva  is  known  as  Dhaundhumari  (i.e. 
son  of  Dhundhumara)  and  Harya£va  was  his  son. 

64.  Haryajva’s  son  was  Nikumbha  who  was  always 
devoted  to  the  duties  of  a K$atriya.  Samhat&s'va,  who  was  an 
expert  in  battle,  was  the  son  of  Nikumbha. 


2:3.63.65-79 


82J 


65-66.  KrsaSva  and  Akrtasva  were  the  two  sons  of  Sam- 
hatasva.  His  wife  was  the  chaste'  Haimavati  and  his  mother 
Drsadvati  was  well-known  in  the  three  worlds.  His  (?)  son  was 
Prasenajit.  Yuvanasva,  his  son,  was  famous  in  the  three 
worlds. 

67.  His  wife  Gaurl  was  an  extremely  virtuous  and  chaste 
lady.  But  she  was  cursed  by  her  husband  and  was  converted 
into  the  river  Bahuda*. 

68.  Her  son  Gaurika  (i.e.  son  of  Gaurl)  became  an 
emperor.  Mandhatr,  the  son  of  Yuvanasva,  was  a king  who 
conquered  the  three  worlds. 

69-72.  In  this  context  the  Brahmanas  well-versed  in  the 
Puranas  cite  the  following  stanza  : — 

The  entire  space  where  the  sun  rises  and  establishes  itself 
is  called  the  territory  of  Mandhata,  son  of  Yuvanasva. 

His  wife  was  the  daughter  of  Citraratha  (?)  and  Sasa- 
bindu.  She  was  a chaste  lady  named  Bindumatl.  In  beauty  she 
was  unrivalled  on  the  Earth.  This  chaste  lady  was  the  eldest 
sister  of  ten  thousand  brothers*  Lord  Mandhata  begot  of  her 
three  sons  viz.  Purukutsa,  Atnbarlsa  and  Mucukunda  who  was 
well-known. 

73.  Another  Yuvanasva  is  remembered  as  the  heir  of 
Ambarisa.  He  was  born  of  Narmada.  Sambhuta  was  his  son. 

74.  The  valorous  Anar.inya  was  the  bosom-born  son  of 
Sambhuta.  He  was  killed  by  Ravana  by  whom  all  the  three 
worlds  had  been  conquered  before. 

75.  (Defective  text) Tcnadrsya  (?)  (prob.  Trasadasyu) 
was  the  son  of  Anaranya**.  Harya£va  was  Trasadasyu’s  son. 
King  Sumati  was  born  of  Drsadvati  and  Haryasva.) 

76.  His  son  was  a virtuous  king  named  Tridhanva. 
The  son  of  Tridhanva  was  the  scholarly  lord  Trayyarurii. 

77-79.  A son  of  great  strength  named  Satyavrata*  was 
born  to  him.  After  killing  the  heaven-dwellers  (?),  Vidrabha’s 

♦mod.  Burha-R&pti,  a feeder  of  R&ptI  river  in  Oudb. 

**  The  Text  Unadxiyonara^yaya  is  wrong.  Identical  verse  V&.P. 
88.75  reads  Trasadasyonaraqyasya ' — Trasadasyu  was  the  son  of  Anarapya’. 


824 


Brahm&nfa  Purdna 


wife  was  abducted  by  him.  This  sin  was  committed  by  that 
intelligent  one  out  of  lust,  strength  and  great  delight,  forcibly 
out  of  delusion  and  due  to  the  power  of  the  inevitable  future. 
This  was  done  by  him  when  the  Mantras  of  the  wedding  cere- 
mony had  not  been  concluded.*  His  father  Trayyaruna 
banished  him  because  he  had  been  sinful. 

80-81 . Becoming  infuriated  with  him,  he  exclaimed  many 
times  “This  is  disgrace  and  degradation”. 

He  asked  his  father  again  and  again,  “I  am  alone.  Where 
shall  I go 

The  father  told  him,  “Go  and  live  along  with  Can<Ja- 
las,  O defiler  of  the  family.  With  you  as  my  son,  I am  not  a 
seeker  of  a son  now.  Although  I seek  sons,  they  should  not 
be  like  you”. 

82.  On  being  told  thus,  he  went  out  of  the  city  at  the 
instance  of  the  lord,  the  king.  Vasistha,  the  exalted  sage,  did 
not  prevent  him  from  going. 

83.  Satyavrata  who  was  intelligent  and  bold,  lived 
near  the  abodes  of  Candalas  on  being  abandoned  by  his 
father.  His  father  went  to  the  forest. 

84.  On  account  of  this  sin,  Indra  did  not  shower  rain  in 
that  country  for  full  twelve  years. 

85.  Visvamitra,  a sage  of  great  penance,  left  his  wife 
in  the  territory  of  that  king  and  performed  extensive*  penance 
in  the  marshy  shores  ©f  the  Sea. 

86.  His  wife  tied  her  own  bosom-born  middle  son  with 
a rope  round  his  neck  and  offered  him  for  sale  in  exchange 
for  a hundred  cows.  She  wanted  to  sell  him  in  order  to  sustain 
and  bring  up  the  remaining  sons. 

87-88.  The  excellent  king  of  holy  rites  and  virtuous  soul 
saw  the  son  of  the  great  sage  tied  round  the  neck  and  offered 
for  sale.  Thereupon,  he  released  him. 

For  the  sake  of  satisfying  Visvamitra  and  arousing  his 
sympathy,  Satyavrata,  of  great  intellect,  sustained  him  and 
brought  him  up  too. 

89.  That  boy  who  had  been  tied  round  the  neck 
became  a sage  of  great  penance  named  Galava.  That  Kausika 

* .Vide  verse  No.  96  below. 


2.3.63.90-101 


825 


(one  belonging  to  the  family  of  Kusika)  was  redeemed  by  that 
heroic  king. 

90.  On  account  of  his  (?)  holy  vow,  devotion,  mercy 
and  solemn  declaration,  the  king  who  adhered  to  rules  of 
discipline,  sustained  Visvamitra’s  wife  also. 

91.  He  used  to  kill  deer,  boars,  buffaloes  and  aquatic 
beings  and  bring  their  meat  near  the  hermitage  of  Visvamitra. 

92-93.  At  the  instance  of  sage  Vasistha  Satyavrata’s 
father  undertook  IJpamSuvrata  (a  secret  vow)  and  for  that 
purpose  took  initiation  extending  to  twelve  years.  When  the 
king  went  to  the  forest,  Vasistha  protected  Ayodhya,  the  harem 
and  the  whole  realm  from  the  evil  contact  and  injustice 
arising  from  Satya-vrata. 

94.  On  account  of  his  childishness  as  well  as  due  to  the 
force  of  inevitable  future,  Satyavrata  bore  a grudge  against 
Vasistha  due  to  grief. 

95.  When  Satyavrata  was  banished  from  the  realm  by 
the  father,  Sage  Vasistha  did  not  prevent  this,  due  to  a specific 
reason. 

96.  The  conclusion  of  the  wedding  Mantras  shall  be 
only  at  the  seventh  step  ( Saptapadi ) . Thinking  thus  Satya- 
vrata abducted  her  (?)  at  the  seventh  step. 

97.  “Despite  being  conversant  with  Dharmas,  Vasistha 
wishes  for  fresh  chanting  of  the  Mantras”, — saying  thus 
Satyavrata  became  angry  with  Vasistha,  in  his  mind. 

98.  The  Saintly  lord  Vasistha  performed  penance  for 
their  welfare.  But  Satyavratra  did  not  understand  his  secret 
vow. 

99.  The  fury  of  his  noble-souled  father  was  excessively 
directed  to  his  son.  Therefore,  Indra  did  not  shower  rain 
for  twelve  years. 

100-101.  “Atonement  can  be  made  in  the  family  by  me 
if  I take  up  initiation  which  is  very  difficult  to  undertake 
on  the  earth  now”.  So  thought  Vasistha.  He  did  not  prevent 
the  banishment  of  the  son  by  the  father  thinking  thus — “when 
he  passes  away,  I shall  crown  him”.  In  the  meantime  that  king 
of  potentiality  undertook  initiation  extending  to  twelve  years. 


826 


Drahmanda  Pur  ana 


102-105.  When  there  was  no  meat  readily  available, 
the  son  of  the  king  espied  the  divine  cow  of  the  noblc-souled 
Vasistha  that  milked  every  one  of  desires  of  devotees. 

The  most  excellent  one  among  powerful  ones,  nvho  was 
hungry  due  to  fatigue,  adopted  the  policy  of  thieves  and  killed 
the  cow  on  account  of  his  anger  (towards  Vasistha)  and  delu- 
sion too.  He  himself  made  ih»*  sons  of  Visvamilra  eat  the  meat. 
On  hearing  about  it,  Vasistha  cast  him  ofT.  The  holv  lord 
Vasi^ha  said  thus  to  the  prince. 

106-108.  “If  yon  had  not  already  had  three  sins,  O base 
one  among  men,  I would  have  made  you  fall  down,  O cruel 
one,  after  inflicting  another  sin. 

You  have  committed  sins  in  three  ways  viz.  — “You 
made  your  father  dissatisfied,  you  killed  the  cow  of  your 
preceptor,  you  made  use  of  what  had  not  been  sacrificed  by 
the  sprinkling  of  holy  water.” 

Thus  the  sage  of  great  power  of  penance  saw  the  three 
sins  (Saiikus)  and  called  him  Trisanku.  Therefore,  the  king  is 
remembered  as  Trisanku. 

108-112.  Visvamitra  who  returned  (from  his  penance) 
became  delighted  with  Trisanku  because  he  had  sustained  his 
wife  (during  the  absence  of  the  sage).  He  granted  him  a boon. 
When  he  was  pressed  to  choose  a boon  the  prince  chose  him 
as  his  preceptor  and  requested  for  this  boon—  “I  shall  go  to 
heaven  along  with  this  physical  body.”  When  there  was  a 
danger  of  draught  extending  to  twelve  years,  the  sage  crowned 
him  in  his  hereditary  kingdom.  Even  as  the  Devas  as  well  as 
Vasistha  were  watching,  the  lordly  saint  ViSvamitra  made  him 
ascend  heaven. 

113-114.  It  was  all  the  more  surprising  because  it  hap- 
pened even  as  Vasistha  was  watching.  In  this  context  persons 
well-versed  in  the  Puranas  cite  this  stanza  : 

“Due  to  Visvamitra’s  favour  and  on  account  of  the 
blessing  of  that  intelligent  sage,  Trisanku  of  great  splendour 
shines  in  heaven  alone  with  the  Devas. 

115.  His  wife  named  Satyavrata,  born  of  the  family  of 
Kaikeyas,  gave  birth  to  Hari£candra,  a sinless  son. 

116.  King  HariScandra  is  well  known  as  Traifankava. 


2.3.63.117-126 


827 


(son  of  Tri$anku).  As  a performer  of  Rajasuya  sacrifice,  he 
became  famous  as  an  Emperor. 

1 1 7.  Hariscandra  had  a heroic  and  powerful  son  named 
Rohita.  Harita  was  the  son  of  Rohita  and  Caficu  is  mentioned 
as  the  son  of  Harita. 

118.  Vinaya  and  Sudeva  were  the  two  sons  of  Caficu. 
Sudeva  was  the  conqueror  of  all  K$atriyas.  Hence,  he  is 
remembered  as  Vijaya. 

1 19.  Ruruka  was  his  son.  He  was  a king  proficient  in 
details  regarding  Dharma  and  Wealth  ( Artha ).  Vrka  was 
the  son  of  Ruruka  and  Bahu  was  born  of  him. 

120.  Since  that  king  indulged  in  vice,  he  was  dethroned 
by  the  Haihayas,  Talajanghas,  Sakas,  Yavanas,  Kambojas, 
Paradas  and  Pahlavas. 

121.  Even  when  the  Yuga  was  conducive  to  the  deve- 
lopment of  virtue,  that  king  was  not  much  of  a righteous 
person.  Sagara  was  the  son  of  Bahu.  He  was  born  along  with 
poison.1 

122-123.  It  was  at  the  hermitage  of  Bhrgu  that  he  was 
born.  He  was  protected  by  Aurva.  After  acquiring  the  Agneya 
Astra  (a  missile  the  deity  of  which  is  fire  -god ) from  the  grand- 
son of  Bhrgu  (viz.  Aurva)  king  Sagara  went  over  the  whole 
of  the  Earth  and  killed  Talajanghas  and  Haihayas.  The  un- 
erring king  repudiated  the  Dharma  (code  of  conduct  etc.)  of 
the  Sakas  and  Pahlavas. 

124-125.  (Sagara)  who  was  conversant  with  the  real 
Dharma  cast  out  the  Dharma  of  the  Ksatriyas  called  (Paradas) 
i.e.  excommunicated  them  from  K$atriya-hood. 

The  sages  enquired  : — 

How  was  the  king  Sagara  born  along  with  poison  ? What 
for  did  the  infuriated  king  who  never  committed  a fault  banish 
them  from  the  hereditary  and  traditional  codes  of  conduct  of 
Sakas  and  others  who  were  Ksatriyas  of  great  prowess  ? 

SUta  explained : — 

126.  It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  the  kingdom 
1.  Sa-gara  (with  poison)  : The  etymology  of  the  King's  name. 


828 


Brahm&nda  Purdna 


of  Bahu  who  indulged  in  vice,  had  been  formerly  seized  by  the 
Haihayas  and  Talajanghas  who  came  along  with  the  Sakas. 

127.  The  Yavanas,  Paradas,  Kambojas.  Pahlavas(and 
Sakas) , these  five  clans  (of  kings)  attacked  for  and  on  behalf 
of  the  Haihayas. 

128.  When  he  had  been  deprived  of  his  kingdom,  Bahu 
renounced  his  abode  and  entered  the  forest.  Accompanied  by 
his  wife,  the  noblc-souled  king  performed  a penance. 

129.  Once  that  king,  though  disabled,  went  to  fetch 
water.  On  account  of  old  age  and  weakness,  he  passed  away  in 
the  middle. 

130.  His  wife,  a member  of  the  family  of  Yadu,  was 
pregnant  and  she  had  gone  after  him.  Poison  had  been  adminis- 
tered to  her  by  her  co-wife  with  a desire  to  kill  the  child  in 
the  womb. 

131.  She  lit  the  funeral  pyre  of  her  husband  and  got  on 
to  it.  On  seeing  her,  Aurva,  the  grand-son  of  Bhrgu,  made  her 
desist  from  it  out  of  mercy. 

132.  She  gave  birth  to  the  child  developed  in  her 
womb  along  with  the  poison.  She  gave  birth  to  a righteous  son 
named  Sagara  who  became  very  powerful. 

133.  Aurva  performed  Jalakarman  and  other  post-natal 
holy  rites  of  the  noble-soulcd  prince.  He  taught  him  Vedas 
and  Sacred  scriptures.  Thereafter,  he  taught  him  how  to  dis- 
charge missiles  and  miraculous  weapons. 

1 34.  After  that  the  king  determined  to  exterminate  the 
Sakas,  Yavanas,  Kambojas,  Paradas,  and  Pahlavas. 

135.  On  being  hit,  hurt  and  killed  by  the  noble-souled, 
heroic  Sagara,  all  of  them  sought  refuge  in  Vasistha,  desirous 
of  shelter. 

136.  On  seeing  them  filled  with  humility,  the  great  sage 
granted  them  freedom  from  fear  and  restrained  Sagara. 

137.  Remembering  his  own  vow  and  on  hearing  the 
prescriptive  words  of  i his  preceptor,  Sagara  struck  off  their 
customary  observances  of  caste  and  other  characteristics,  and 
made  them  change  their  guise  and  garments. 


2.3.63.138-150 


829 


138-139.1  He  shaved  half  of  the  heads  of  Sakas  and 
discharged  them.  He  shaved  off  the  heads  of  Yavanas  and 
Kambojas  completely.  The  Paradas  were  compelled  to  keep 
their  hairs  dishevelled  and  the  Pahlavas  were  made  to  grow 
their  moustache  and  beard.  All  of  them  were  deprived  of  the 
study  of  the  Vedas  and  the  utterance  of  theVasatkara  Mantras, 
by  that  noblc-soulcd  king. 

140-141.  The  Sakas,  Yavanas,  Kambojas,  Pahlavas, 
Paradas,  Kalisparsas,  Maliisikas,  Darvas,  Colas  and  Khasas 
— the  customary  observations  of  their  castes  and  conventions 
of  all  these  groups  of  Ksatriyas  were  prohibited  formerly  by 
the  noble-souled  Sagara  at  the  instance  of  Vasistha. 

142.  After  conquering  the  whole  of  the  Earth  by  means 
of  righteous  victory,  the  king  took  initiation  for  the  horse 
sacrifice  and  made  the  sacrificial  horse  go  round  the  world. 

143.  As  he  made  it  go  round,  the  horse  was  stolen 
away  near  the  shore  of  the  South-Eastern  Ocean  and  made 
to  enter  beneath  the  earth. 

144-145.  The  king  got  that  place  completely  dug  up 
by  his  sons.  Digging  up  the  bed  of  the  great  ocean,  they  met 
with  the  primordial  being,  Lord  Visnu  in  the  form  of  Kapila, 
the  lord  Hari,  Krsna,  the  lord  of  subjects,  lord  Hamsa, 
lord  Narayana. 

146.  After  coming  within  the  path  of  his  vision  and 
being  alflicted  by  its  fiery  splendour,  all  those  princes  were 
burned;  only  four  sons  survived. 

147.  They  were  Barhiketu,  Suketu,  Dharmaratha  and 
the  heroic  Paficajana.  They  perpetuated  the  line  of  the  lord. 

148-150.  Hari,  Narayana  granted  him  boons  viz — ever- 
lasting status  to  his  race,  ability  to  perform  hundred  horse 
sacrifices,  the  all  pervading  ocean  as  a son,  and  the  eternal 
residence  in  heaven. 

Fetching  the  horse  with  him,  the  ocean,  the  lord  of 
rivers,  saluted  him.  By  that  activity  of  his,  he  got  the  name 
Sagara. 


1.  V V.  138- 139  describe  the  ways  of  hair-dressing  etc.  of  these  tribes. 


830 


Brahmdnia  Purdna 


After  getting  back  the  sacrificial  horse  from  the  ocean, 
the  king  performed  horse-sacrifices  again  and  again  making  up 
the  total  of  one  hundred. 

151-152.  His  sixty  thousand  sons  were  burned  by 
the  anger  of  the  lord  Kapila.  We  have  heard  that  the 
noble-souled  sixty  thousand  sons  entered  the  brilliant  lustre  of 
Narayana. 

The  Sages  asked  : — 

153.  Tell  us  by  what  procedure  were  the  numerous, 
highly  mighty  and  valorous  sons  of  Sagar.i,  sixty  thousand  in 
number  were  born. 

Siita  replied  : — 

154.  Sagara  had  two  wives  who  had  dispelled  their  sins 
by  means  of  their  penance.  The  elder  of  the  two  was  the 
daughter  of  Vidarbha  named  Kesinl. 

155.  His  younger  wife  was  the  daughter  of  AristancmI. 
She  was  extremely  virtuous  and  unparalleled  in  beauty 
throughout  the  world. 

1 56- 159a.  On  being  propitiated  by  means  of  austerities, 
the  lordly  sage  Aurva  granted  them  these  boons  viz. — One  of 
them  would  give  birth  to  a desired  son  who  would  perpetuate 
the  line  and  the  second  would  give  birth  to  sixty 
thousand  sons. 

On  hearing  the  words  of  the  sage,  Kesinl  chose  the  single 
excellent  son  who  would  perpetuate  the  line,  O king,  in  the 
assembly.  Sumati,  the  sister  of  Suparna,  of  exalted  good  for- 
tune, delightedly  chose  the  sixty  thousand  sons. 

159b- 160.  As  time  passed  on,  the  elder  queen  gave 
birth  to  the  eldest  son  of  Sagara  well  known  by  the  name  of 
Asamanja,  the  scion  of  the  family  of  Kakutstha.  Sumati  of 
great  renown  gave  birth  to  a pot-gourd  like  the  lump  of  foetus. 

161.  The  sixty  thousand  sons  emerged  from  the  gourd- 
like lump  of  foetus.  He  then  placed  them  (the  pieces  of  the 
foetus)  in  the  pot  filled  with  ghee. 

162-163.  The  king  engaged  as  many  nurses  (as  there 
were  pieces)  in  order  to  nurture  them  individually.  Thereafter, 


2.3.63,164-176 


831 


in  nine  months,  all  those  sons  of  exalted  fortune  fully 
developed  comfortably  increasing  the  pleasure  of  Sagara.  After 
a long  time,  they  entered  the  prime  of  youth. 

164-165.  The  other  son  of  Sagara  born  of  Kc^ini  was 
Barhiketu  of  great  strength  well  known  as  Asamanja.  Since  he 
was  engaged  against  the  interests  of  citizens,  he  was 
banished  from  the  city  by  his  father.  The  heroic  son  of  Asamanja 
was  named  Amsuman. 

166.  His  noble-soulcd  son  was  well  known  as  Dilipa. 
Bhagiratha,  a hero  of  great  splendour,  was  born  of  Dilipa. 

167.  It  was  by  him  that  Ganga,  the  most  excellent 
of  all  rivers,  rendered  splendid  by  aerial  chariots,  was  brought 
here  (in  this  world)  and  assigned  the  status  of  his  daughter  by 
the  lord  of  Suras  (Brahma) . 

168-169.  In  this  context,  persons  well-versed  in  the 
Puranas  cite  this  verse.  “By  means  of  his  active  endeavour 
Bhagiratha  brought  Ganga  to  the  Earth.  Hence  Ganga 
is  called  Bhagirathi  by  those  excellent  persons  who  are 
conversant  with  genealogy.”  Bhagiratha’s  son  was  named 
Sruta. 

170.  Nabhaga  was  his  heir.  He  was  always  engaged  in 
virtuous  activities.  Ambarisa  was  his  son. and  Sindhudvipa  was 
the  next  king. 

171-172.  It  is  well  known  that  persons  ot  yore  conversant 
with  the  Puranas  and  genealogy  sing  thus  : — ‘The  Earth  pro- 
tected by  the  arms  of  Ambarisa,  son  of  Nabhaga  became 
perfectly  free  from  the  three  distresses”.  Ayutayu  was  the 
heroic  son  of  Sindhudvipa. 

173.  Rtuparna  of  great  renown  was  the  heir  of  Ayutayu. 
This  strong  king  who  was  conversant  with  the  divine  Mantra 
Akfahrdqya  (the  heart  of  dice)  was  a friend  of  Nala. 

1 74.  Two  Nalas  of  steadfast  holy  vows  are  well  known 
in  the  Puranas  : the  one,  the  son  of  Virasena  and  the  other 
the  prominent  member  of  the  family  of  Iksvaku. 

1 75.  Sarvakama,  the  lord  of  the  people,  was  the  son  of 
Rtuparna.  King  Sudasa,  his  son,  became  a friend  of  Indra. 

1 76.  Sudasa’s  son,  the  king  named  Saudasa  became  well- 
known  as  Kalmasapada.  He  is  known  by  the  name  Mitra- 
saha  also. 


832 


Brahman  fa  Purana 


177.  For  the  perpetuation  of  the  line  of  Iksvaku,  Vasi- 
stha  of  great  brilliance,  begot  Asmaka  of  the  wife  of  Kalma- 
sapada. 

178-179.  Mulaka  was  the  bosom-born  son  o£  Asmaka. 
In  this  context  too  they  cite  this,  concerning  king  Mulaka  : — 

“Indeed,  because  he  was  afraid  of  Parasurama,  that 
king  remained  surrounded  by  women.  Desirous  of  protection, 
the  lord  who  was  devoid  of  robes  had  women  for  his  coat  of 
mail. 

180.  The  righteous-sou  led  king  Sataratha  is  remembered 
as  the  son  of  Mulaka.  Idavida,  the  powerful  king,  was  born 
of  Sataratha. 

181.  The  valorous  Krtavarma  was  the  glorious  son  of 
Idavida.  His  son  Visvasaha  was  born  ofPutrlkasI  (?). 

182-183.  Dillpa1  was  his  son.  He  became  well  known  as 
Khatvanga.  Having  attained  a span  of  life  extending  to  a 
Muhurta,  he  returned  from  Heaven  and  combined  the 
three  worlds  on  account  of  his  intelligence  and  truthfulness. 
DIrghabahu  was  his  son.  Raghu  was  born  of  him. 

184.  Aja  was  the  son  of  Raghu.  The  heroic  king  named 
Das'aratha  was  born  of  him.  He  was  the  delighter  of  the  mem- 
bers of  the  family  of  Iksvaku. 

183.  Rama,  Bharata,  Satrughna  and  Laksmana  of  great 
strength  were  the  sons  of  Dasaratha.  Rama  was  heroic,  con- 
versant with  Dharma  and  well-known  in  the  worlds. 

186.  Satrughna  went  to  Madhuvana  and  killed  Lavana, 
son  of  Madhu.  There  the  city  of  Mathura  was  founded  by 
Satrughna. 

187.  Subahu  and  Surasena  were  the  sons  of  Satrughna. 
They  were  born  of  the  princess  of  Vidcha.  They  ruled  over  the 
city  of  Mathura. 

188.  Angada  and  Candraketu  were  the  two  sons  of 
Laksmana.  Their  territories  at  the  border  of  the  Himalaya 
mountain  were  very  prosperous  and  flourishing. 

189.  In  the  territory  of  Karapatha  (?)  the  city  of  An- 
gada  was  called  Angada.  Candracakra,  the  splendid  city  of 
Candraketu  is  well  known. 

1.  This  is  Dilipa  II.  Dilipa  I was  the  father  of  Bhagiratha(see  v.166). 


2.3.63.190-200 


833 


190.  The  heroic  Taksa  and  Puskara  were  the  sons  of 
Bharata.  The  cities  of  those  two  noble  souls  were  situated  in 
the  realm  of  the  Gandharvas. 

191.  The  city  of  Tak?a  was  well  known  in  all  the 
quarters  by  the  name  of  Taksasila.  The  city  of  the  heroic 
Puskara  was  well  known  as  Pu?karavatl. 

192.  Those  people  who  are  conversant  with  the  Purai^as 
sing  this  Gatha  (lyrical  verse).  It  concerns  Rama.  It  consists 
of  facts  due  to  the  greatness  of  that  intelligent  one. 

193-195.  “Rama  was  dark-complexioned  and  youthful. 
He  had  red  eyes  and  bright  face.  He  was  a person  of  few 
words.  His  arms  extended  as  far  as  his  knees.  He  had  splendid 
face,  leonine  shoulders  and  long  brawny  arms.  He  ruled  over 
the  kingdom  for  ten  thousand  years. 

In  his  kingdom  the  sound  of  the  chanting  of  Mantras 
of  Rk,  Saman  and  Yajus  as  well  as  that  of — “Let  it  be  given, 
let  it  be  enjoyed* * was  incessant  and  unbroken. 

While  living  in  Janasthana  (Nasik  in  Maharashtra) 
Rama  accomplished  a task  of  the  Devas. 

196.  Earlier,  proceeding  in  search  of  Sita’s  whereabouts, 
Rama  the  bull  among  men  (the  powerful  leader) , the  king  of 
great  fame  slew  (Ravana)  the  descendant  of  Pulastya,  the 
demon  who  had  committed  sins. 

197.  He  had  Sattva  (purest)  qualities  (or  he  had  great 
inherent  strength) . He  was  richly  endowed  with  good  qualities. 
He  shone  with  his  own  brilliance.  Thus  Rama,  the  son  of 
Dasaratha,  shone  surpassing  the  sun  and  fire. 

198.  The  two  sons  of  that  powerful  king  were  like  him. 
They  are  well  known  as  Kusa  and  Lava.  Understand  their 
territories. 

199.  Kosala  was  the  kingdom  of  Kufa  and  his  city  was 
Kusasthali.1  This  beautiful  city  was  built  by  him  on  the  sides 
and  ridges  of  the  Vindhya  mountain. 

200.  UttarakoSala  was  the  kingdom  of  the  noble-souled 
Lava.  His  city  Sr&vasti  is  well  known  in  all  the  worlds. 

Understand  the  line  of  Ku£a. 

1.  De  identifies  it  with  Ujjain  but  our  text  locates  it  on  the  ridges, 
of  the  Vindhya  mountain. 


834 


Brahm&iia  Pur&na 


201.  Atithi,  the  virtuous-soulcd  son  of  Kusa  was  fond 
of  entertaining  guests.  The  famous  king  named  Ni$adha  was 
the  son  of  Atithi. 

202.  Nala  was  the  son  of  Nisadha.  Nabhas  was  the  son 
of  Nala.  Pundarika  was  the  son  of  Nabhas  and  K$emadfianvan 
is  remembered  as  the  king  after  him. 

203.  The  valorous  king  Dcvanika  was  the  son  of 
Ksemadhanvan.  Lord  Ahinagu  was  the  son  of  Devanlka. 

204.  Ahinagu’s  heir  was  Pariyatra  of  great  fame.  Dala 
was  his  son.  King  Bala  was  born  of  him. 

203.  The  noble-soulcd  son  of  Bala  was  Uluka.1  Vajranabha 
was  his  son  and  his  son  was  Sankhana. 

206.  Sarikhana’s  son  was  a scholar  well  known  as  Vyusi- 
tasva.  It  is  said  that  king  Visvasaha  was  the  son  of  Vyusitasva. 

207.  Hiranya-nabha  alias  Kausalya  (belonging  to 
Kosala)  was  his  most  excellent  son.  In  the  Pracya  Saman 
Mantras,  he  is  remembered  as  the  disciple  of  Pausyanji.2 

208.  He  learned  five  hundred  Samhitas  fiom  Pausyanji. 
Yoga  was  learnt  from  him  by  the  intelligent  Yajfiavalkya. 

209.  Puspa  (Pusya),  his  son,  was  a scholar.  His  son  was 
Dhruvasandhi.  Sudarsana  was  his  son.  Agnivarna  was  born  of 
Sudarsana. 

210-211.  Sighra  was  the  son  of  Agnivarna,  Maru  is  rem- 
embered as  the  soi>  of  Sfghra.  Maru  practised  Yogic  ex- 
ercises and  stayed  in  Kalapagrama. 

This  lord  was  the  person  who  made  the  Ksatriyas  function 
in  the  twentyfirst  Prayuga  (?  subsidiary  Yuga). 

Prabhusuta  (Prasusruta-Va.P.)  was  the  son  of  Maru 
and  Susandhi  was  his  son. 


1.  Va.P.88.205  calls  him  Aunkha  while  in  the  AIHT  list  of  Ayodhya 
kings  (p.  149)  he  is  recorded  as  Uktha. 

2.  Paugyafiji — a teacher  of  Sama-veda.  He  was  a disciple  of  Sukarman 
Jaimini.  He  taught  500  branches  of  Samaveda  (PCK. — Prdcina  carita  kola 
1.9.624). 

It  is  seen  that  most  of  the  kings  in  this  chapter  are  listed  in  Pargiter's 
AIHT,  pp.  145- 149. 


2.3.63.212—64.5 


835 


212.  Susandhi’s  son  was  Mar$a  (Amarsa  ?)  otherwise 
known  by  the  name  of  Sahasvan.  The  son  of  Sahasvan  was  a 
king  named  Visrutavan. 

213-216.  King  Bfhadbala  was  the  son  of  Visrutavan. 

These  are  the  sons  and  heirs  of  Iksvaku.  They  are  rem- 
embered to  be  hundreds  in  number.  Those  who  were  very 
important  have  been  recounted  on  account  of  their  importance. 

If  a person  reads  this  creation  of  Aditya  Vivasvan 
{ the  sun)  he  becomes  endowed  with  children.  He  attains  Sayujya 
merging  with  Mann,  the  son  of  Vivasvan,  who  is  known 
as  Lord  Sraddhadeva  and  who  grants  nourishment  to  the 
subjects. 

He  shall  be  rid  of  his  sins  and  Rajas  qualities.  He  shall 
become  long-lived.  He  shall  never  swerve  from  the  righteous 
path. 


CHAPTER  SIXTYFOUR 

The  Description  of  Nimi  Dynasty  .* 


Suta  said  : — 

1-2.  Understand  (the  details  of)  the  line  of  Nimi  who 
was  the  younger  brother  of  Vikuksi.  He  built  a city  well-known 
by  the  name  Jayanta,  comparable  to  the  city  of  the  Devas.  (It 
was)  near  the  hermitage  of  "Gautama.  It  was  in  his  family 
that  there  was  born  the  excellent  king  Janaka. 

3.  Iksvaku  of  profound  brilliance  had  a son  named  Nimi, 
a highly  pious  soul  who  was  saluted  by  all  living  beings  and 
who  became  a great  king. 

4-5.  On  account  of  the  curse  of  Vasis£ha,  he  became 
Videha  (devoid  of  physical  body).  His  son  named  Mithi  was 
produced  in  the  course  of  three  Parvans.  This  king  of  great 
fame  was  bom  of  Arani  (the  wood  from  which  fire  is  kindled  for 
sacrificial  purpose)  while  it  was  being  churned.  He  is  well- 

♦This  chapter  corresponds  to  chapter  89  of  Va.P. 


836  BrahmdQ&a  Purtya 

known  by  the  name  Mithi.  He  became  Janaka  due  to  the  act  of 
Janana  (procreation  in  such  a way). 

6.  Mithi  was  indeed  a king  of  great  prowess.  It  is  from 
his  name  that  this  capital  city  became  known  as  Mithila1 
Another  name  of  this  king  was  Janaka  and  Janaka’s  Successor 
was  Udavasu. 

7.  The  virtuous-souled  son  Nandivardhana  was  born 
of  Udavasu.  The  valorous  and  virtuous  son  named  Suketu 
was  born  of  Nandivardhana. 

8.  The  noble-souled  son  of  great  strength,  Devarata  was 
born  of  Suketu.  The  pious-souled  son  well  known  as  Brha- 
duktha  was  born  of  Devarata. 

9.  Mahavira  was  the  valorous  son  of  Brhaduktha. 
Dhftiman  was  the  son  of  Mahavirya  and  Sudhrti  was  his  .son. 

10.  Dhr stake tu,  the  suppressor  of  his  enemies,  was  the 
noble-souled  son  of  Sudhrti.  The  son  of  Dhrstaketu  was  well- 
known  by  the  name  Haryasva. 

11.  Maru  was  the  son  of  Haryasva.  Pratimbaka2  was  the 
son  of  Maru.  It  is  remembered  that  the  righteous-souled  king 
Kirtiratha  was  the  son  of  Pratimbaka. 

1 2.  The  son  of  K^Irti-ratha  is  also  known  by  the 
name  Devamidha.  Vibudha  was  the  son  of  Devamldha. 
Mahadhrtiwas  the  son  of  Vibudha. 

13.  The  son  of  Mahadhrti  was  the  valorous  king  Kirti- 
rata.  The  learned  son  of  Kirtirata  was  well-known  by  the  name 
Maharoman. 

14.  The  famous  king  Svarr^aroma  was  born  of  Maha- 
roma.  The  son  of  Svarnaroma  named  Hrasvaroma  became 
a king. 

15.  The  learned  son  of  Hrasvaroma  was  wellknown  as 
Siradhvaja.  Sita  of  great  reputation,  rose  out  of  the  ground 
when  that  king  ploughed  it. 

16-18.  She  was  the  chaste  queen  of  Rama.  She  was  a 
lady  of  good  holy  rites  and  vow  of  self-restraint. 

1.  Modem  Tirhut,  also  called  Janakpur,  in  Darbhaftgft  Dist* 
Bihar. 

2.  Pargiter  records  Pratindhaka  for  this  (AIHT.  p.  147) 


2.3.64.19-24 


837 


VaiSampdyana  enquired  : — 

How  was  Sita  of  great  reputation  raised  up  from  the 
ground  on  being  ploughed.  What  for  did  the  king  plough  ? 
Where  was  the  field  ? 

SUta  replied  : 

The  site  of  the  sacrificial  fire  in  the  horse-sacrifice 
of  the  noble-souled  king  was  being  ploughed  energetically  in 
accordance  with  the  injunction.  She  rose  up  from  it.  The 
Prince  of  Mithila  named  Bhanuman  was  the  younger  son  of 
Slradhvaja. 

19.  His  brother  was  Ku£adhvaja.  He  was  the  king  and 
overlord  ofKasi.  (Samkagya  Pradyumna  was  the  valorous  son 
of  Bhanuman. 

20.  Muni  was  his  son.  It  is  remembered  that  Orjavaha 
was  born  of  him.  Sanadvajawas  born  of  Orjavaha  and  Sakuni 
was  his  son. 

21.  Svagata  was  the  son  of  Sakuni.1  It  is  proclaimed 
that  Suvarcas  was  his  son.  His  heir  was  Sutoya2  and  his  son 
was  Susruta. 

22.  Jaya  was  the  son  of  Su£ruta.  Vijaya  was  the  son  of 
Jaya.  Kratu3  was  the  son  of  Vijaya.  Sunaya  is  remembered  as 
the  son  of  Kratu. 

23.  Vltahavya  was  born  of  Sunaya.  Dhpti  was  the  son  of 
Vltahavya.  Bahulasva  was  born  of  Dhrti.  Krti4  was  the  son  of 
Bahulagva. 

24.  The  line  of  the  noble-souled  scions  of  the  family  of 
Janaka  came  to  a close  with  him.  Thus  the  Maithilas  have  been 
recounted.  Understand  the  line  of  Soma  now. 


1.  It  appears  our  text  jumped  twelve  generations  downwards  and 
declared  Sv&gata  as  the  son  of  Sakuni.  AIHT,  p.  144. 

2.  Pargiter  records  the  name  Sruta  for  Sutoya  of  our  text. 

3.  Rta  according  to  Pargiter — ibid. 

4.  Kftak?  aga  in  AIHTV  p.  149. 


838 


Brahmtytfa  Purdna 


CHAPTER  SIXTYUVE 

The  Nativity  of  Soma  and  Saumya 


Sfit a said  : — 

I- 3.  The  lordly  sage  Atri  became  the  father  of'  the 
moon,  O Brahmanas.  He  stayed  steady  surrounded  by  his 
own  brilliance.  He  performed  only  auspicious  things,  mentally, 
verbally  and  physically.  He  stood  steady  like  wood,  a wall  or 
a piece  of  rock  with  his  arms  raised.  He  possessed  excessive 
refulgence.  We  have  heard  that  formerly  for  a period  of 
three  thousand  years  according  to  the  reckoning  of  gods,  he 
performed  a penance  that  was  very  difficult  to  be  performed 
by  the  worlds. 

4.  That  Brahmana  was  highly  intelligent.  He  had 
sublimated  his  sexual  urge.  He  stood  without  even  winking  his 
eyes.  His  body  attained  the  status  of  Soma. 

5.  The  sage  of  sanctified  soul  in  the  state  of  Soma  rose 
up  to  the  sky. 

6.  Ten  delighted  divine  ladies  (i.e.  ten  quariers)  gathered 
there  together  and  duly  bore  that  foetus  in  their  wombs.  But 
they  were  unable  to  hold  it. 

7.  The  foetus  held  up  by  those  ten  ladies,  the  ten  quar- 
ters, fell  down  illuminating  the  worlds.  It  was  the  cool-rayed 
moon,  the  sanctifier  of  all. 

8.  When  the  ten  ladies  were  unable  to  hold  that 
foetus,  the  moon  fell  down  to  the  Earth  along  with  them. 

9.  Seeing  him  falling  down,  Brahma,  the  grand-father  of 
the  worlds,  placed  him  in  a chariot,  with  a desire  for  the  welfare 
of  the  worlds. 

10.  O Brahmanas,  we  have  heard  that  he  was  a 
righteous-souled  one,  truthful  to  his  promise  and  identical 
with  the  Vedas.  He  seated  himself  in  a chariot  yoked  with  a 
thousand  horses. 

I I- 13.  When  that  son  of  Atri  of  great  soul  had  fallen,  the 
Devas,  the  seven  famous  mental  sons  of  Brahma,  the  Angirasas 
and  the  sons  of  Bhrgu,  eulogised  him  by  means  of  many  Rks, 
Yajus,  Atharvan  and  Angirasa  Mantras. 


2.3.65.14-24 


839 


The  satisfying,  nourishing  and  developing  refulgence  of 
the  lustrous  moon  who  was  being  eulogised,  extended  to  all  the 
worlds  around. 

14.  By  means  of  that  prominent  chariot,  he  circumam- 
bulated the  ocean-encircled  Earth  twentyone  times  (and 
became)  excessively  famous. 

15.  The  increased  and  developed  refulgence  (of  the 
moon)  that  reached  the  Earth,  created  the  medicinal  herbs. 
The  firmament  is  ablaze  with  that  brilliance. 

1 6.  This  moon  nourishes  the  worlds  and  the  four  types 
of  living  beings.  O excellent  Brahmanas,  lord  Soma  is  indeed 
the  nourisher  of  the  Universe. 

1 7.  The  highly  fortunate  one  performed  penance  for 
nine  hundred  years.  By  means  of  penance,  by  means  of 
his  own  Karmans  and  on  account  of  those  eulogies  he.  acquired 
more  brilliance. 

18.  By  means  of  his  own  Karman  as  well  as  through  the 
joy  of  those  gold-complexioned  goddesses  who  sustain  the 
Universe,  lord  Soma  became  famous. 

19.  Then,  O excellent  Brahmanas,  god  Brahma,  the  most 
excellent  one  among  those  who  know  Brahman,  granted  him 
the  kingdom  of  seeds,  medicinal  herbs,  Brahmanas  and  waters. 

20.  On  being  crowned  the  exceedingly  brilliant  king  of 
kings  who  was  endowed  with  great  refulgence  and  who  was  the 
most  excellent  one  among  those  who  blazed,  sanctified  the 
worlds  through  his  great  kingdom. 

21.  Daksa,  the  son  of  Pracetas,  gave  in  marriage  to  the 
Moon  the  twentyseven  Daksayanis  (daughters  of  Dak§a)  of 
great  holy  rites,  whom  they  know  as  the  stars. 

22.  After  getting  that  big  kingdom,  Soma  the  lord  of 
those  who  possess  Soma  (juice),  began  a Rajasuya  sacrifice 
where  a hundred  thousand  gold  coins  were  distributed  as 
monetary  gifts. 

23-24.  Hiranyagarbha  acted  as  Udgatr  ( the  chanter  of 
Mantras),  god  Brahma  took  up  the  post  of  Brahma  (in  sacrifice 
the  presiding  dignitary).  The  member  of  the  sacrificial  council 
consisted  of  lord  Hari  Naraya^ut,  surrounded  by  the  ancient 
Brahminical  sages  with  Sanat-kum&ra  as  their  leader. 


840 


Brahmdn<jla  Pur&na 


25.  Wc  have  heard,  O Brahmanas,  that  Soma  gave 
three  worlds  as  monetary  gifts  to  Sadasyas  (members  of  the 
sacrificial  assembly)  consisting  of  important  Brahmanical 
sages. 

26.  Nine  goddesses  served  him  viz.  SinI,  Kuhu,*  Vapsu, 
Pusti,  Prabha,  Vasu,  Kirti,  Dhfti  and  Lakshmi. 

27.  After  undergoing  the  holy  valedictory  bath  called 
Avabhrtha , the  leading  Rajan  (i.e.  the  moon)  who  was  devoid 
of  agitation  and  who  was  worshipped  by  the  Devas  and  sages, 

excelled  in  his  lustre  illuminating  the  ten  quarters. 

28.  When  he  acquired  that  luxurious  glory  which  was 
difficult  to  get  and  which  was  praised  by  the  sages,  O Brah- 
manas, his  mind  became  involved  in  unrighteousness  and  hence 
went  astray  from  the  path  of  moral  discipline. 

29.  He  disregarded  the  sons  of  Angiras  and  suddenly 
abducted  the  renowned  wife  of  Brhaspati  named  Tara. 

30.  Even  after  being  requested  by  the  Devas  and 
divine  sages,  he  never  let-off  Tara  to  Brhaspati,  the  son  of 
Angiras. 

31-33.  U£anas  took  up  his  (Soma’s)  side  and  Bhava 
(Siva)  that  of  Angiras  (i.e.  Brhaspati) , for  that  person  of  great 
brilliance  was  the  disciple  of  the  father  of  Brhaspati  formerly. 
It  was  out  of  this  affection  that  lord  Rudra  became  the  ally  of 
Brhaspati  and  took  the  bow  Ajagava. 

A great  miraculous  missile  named  Brahma  giras  was  dis- 
charged by  that  noble-souled  one  after  aiming  at  the  Devas, 
whereby  their  reputation  was  destroyed. 

34.  There  a well-known  battle  between  the  Devas  and 
Danavas  took  place.  It  was  known  as  Tarakamaya1 2  (concerning 
Tara) . It  was  destructive  of  the  worlds. 

35.  The  Devas  who  survived  this  battle  are  remembered 


1.  The  first  two  viz.:  Sini  and  Kuhu  are  deities  presiding  over  the 
day  preceding  the  new  moon  day  on  which  the  moon  rises  with  scarcely 
visible  crescent  (Sini vail)  and  the  new  moon  day  when  the  moon  Is 
invisible  (KuhQ). 

2.  Out  of  the  twelve  wars  between  Devas  and  Asuras,  this  was  the  5th 
war.  For  other  wars  see  Introduction  : Vaippavism,  last  footnote. 


2.3.65.36-47 


841 


as  Tusitas.  They  sought  refuge  in  god  Brahma,  the  primordial 
lord,  the  grandfather  of  the  world. 

36.  Then  the  grandfather  (i.e.  Brahm&)  himself  came 
there  and  prevented  Usanas  and  Rudra,  from  fighting.  He 
restored  T&ra  to  Angiras  ( Brhaspati) . 

37.  On  seeing  Tara,  the  lady  of  moon-like  face, 
pregnant,  the  Brahmana  Brhaspati  said — “You  cast  off  the 
foetus  immediately. 

38.  Your  womb  belongs  to  me  and  therefore  no  other 
child  should  ever  be  born  there”.  So  Tara  discharged  the 
child  in  the  womb  that  was  blazing  like  fire. 

39.  . The  moment  he  was  born  that  lord  assumed 
the  body  of  the  Devas.  Therefore  the  Suras  became  suspicious 
and  told  Tara. 

40-41.  ‘Tell  the  truth  whose  is  the  son  ? Of  the  moon  or 
of  Brhaspati  ?’ 

Out  of  shyness  she  did  not  say  anything  to  the  Devas 
good  or  bad.  Then  the  boy  Dasyuhantama  (the  greatest  destroyer 
of  demons)  was  about  (lit.  began)  to  curse  her.  Preventing  him, 
Brahma  asked  Tara  regarding  his  suspicion. 

42-44.  “O  Tara  speak  out  what  is  the  truth  here  ? 
Whose  son  is  this?”  With  palms  joined  in  reverence  she  said 
to  lord  Brahma,  the  bestower  of  boons. 

“Of  the  Moon”.  She  said  this  regarding  the  noble-souled 
son  named  Dasyuhantama. 

Thereafter,  sniffing  at  the  head  of  his  son,  the  lord  Soma, 
the  Prajapati,  named  his  intelligent  son  ‘Budha\ 

Every  day  Budha  (Mercury)  rises  in  the  sky. 

45.  The  daughter  of  the  king  (i.e.  Ili)  gave  birth  to  his 
son.  Therefore  Pururavas,  the  son  of  Ila,  became  his  son  of 
great  splendour. 

46-47.  Six  sons  of  very  great  powers  were  born  to  him  by 
Urvafi. 

At  that  time,  violently  attacked  by  pulmonary  consump- 
tion, he  (Soma)  became  helpless.  Then  over-whelmed  by  con- 
sumption, the  moon’s  disc  became  pale  and  weak.  He  there- 
fore, sought  refuge  in  his  own  father  Atri. 


842 


Brahm&ntfa  Purdxyx 


48-50.  Atri  of  great  fame  subdued  his  disease.  He  was 
freed  from  pulmonary  consumption.  He  shone  with  splen- 
dour all  round. 

This  is  the  nativity  of  Soma  recounted  unto  you  O 
excellent  Brahmanas.  Understand  his  race  which  is  being 
recounted  by  me,  O excellent  Brahmanas. 

The  nativity  of  Saumya  (Mercury)  is  conducive  to 
wealth,  health  and  longevity.  It  is  holy  and  it  dispels  sins.  On 
hearing  this,  one  gets  rid  of  all  sins. 


CHAPTER  SIXTYSIX 

Description  of  Amdvasu  Dynasty 


Suta  said  : — 

1 -3.  Budha  was  the  son  of  the  Moon  and  Budha’s  son 
was  Pururavas.  He  was  brilliant  and  liberal  in  charitable  gifts. 
He  used  to  perform  sacrifices  distributing  much  wealth  as  mone- 
tary gifts.  He  was  an  expounder  of  Brahman.  Possessing 
valorous  exploits,  he  was  invincible  to  the  enemies  in  battle. 
This  king  regularly  performed  Agnihotra  and  many  (other) 
Yajnas.  He  was  truthful  in  speed  and  righteous  in  mind.  He 
was  very  lustrous.  His  sexual  indulgence  was  only  in  secret.  In 
handsomeness  he  was  perfectly  unrivalled  in  all  the  three 
worlds. 

4.  Setting  aside  her  personal  prestige,  Urva£I,  the  reput- 
ed (celestial  damsel),  chose  as  her  husband  that  expounder  of 
Brahman  who  had  complete  control  of  his  sense  organs,  was 
conversant  with  dharma , and  truthful  in  speech. 

5-7.  That  vigorous  king  stayed  with  her  for  a period  of 
ten  years,  eight  years,  seven  years,  six  years,  seven  years,  eight 
years,  ten  years  and  eight  years  at  the  Caitraratha  forest,  the 
beautiful  bank  of  the  Mandakini,  Alaka  (Capital  city  of 
Kubera),  ViSala,  Nandana,  the  excellent  park,  the  feet 
(foothills)  of  mount  Gandhamadana,  the  peak  of  the 


2.3.66.8-15 


843 


cxcellentmost  mount  Meru,  Northern  Kurus  and  the  village 
Kalapi  ( respectively). 

8.  The  king  of  great  vigour  accompanied  by  Urvagi 
sported  with  excessive  joy  in  these  important  parks  and  forests 
frequented  by  the  Suras. 

The  sages  enquired  : — 

9.  Tell  us  the  misdemeanour  of  the  king  for  whicli  the 
Gandharva  divine  lady  UrvasI  left  off  the  king  of  human  birth 
and  came  back  to  heaven. 

Suta  said  : — 

10.  Overwhelmed  with  the  curse  of  a Brahmana  (or  of 
Brahma),  she  came  to  the  world  of  human  beings.  For  the  sake 
of  getting  herself  released  from  the  curse,  she  stipulated  certain 
conditions. 

11-13.  (Defective  text).  “Not  seeing  him  naked,  sexual 
intercourse  without  passion  (?)  and  she  would  keep  two  goats 
near  her  bed.1  (She  then  said) — “My  sole  diet  shall  be  ghee 
and  that  too  once  a day,  O king.  If  these  conditions  are 
agreed  to,  O king,  and  as  long  as  you  closely  adhere  to  this 
stipulation,  I shall  continue  to  stay  with  you.  This  is  our 
mutual  agreement.”  The  king  strictly  adhered  to  her  stipulation. 

14-15.  Thus  she  stayed  with  the  son  of  Ila  and  had  inter- 
course with  him.  Deluded  by  the  curse  and  on  account  of  her 
devotion  to  him,  she  stayed  for  sixtyfour  years. 

Urva$I  came  to  the  mortal  world.  Hence  the  Gandharvas 
became  worried. 


1 . UrvasI  as  her  name  implies  was  a resident  of  Ur,  an  ancient  town 
in  the  middle  east.  It  appears  that  fashionable  ladies  of  B.G.  3300  of  Ur 
used  to  keep  a pair  of  rams  as  pets  : A.J.  Karandikar  in  his  (marathi) 
Background  of  the  Mah&bh&rata  ( Mahdbh&rat&cf  P&riuabhuml,  Poona  1980. 
quotes  from  sir  Leonard  Wooley's  excavations  at  Ur.  Among  the  finds  in  a 
queen’s  tomb  of  3300  B.G.  deposited  therein  for  the  entertainment  of  the 
queen,  ‘The  strangest  perhaps  was  a pair  of  rams.  They  were  beautifully  and 
intricately  made.  Their  bodies  were  covered  with  fleece  of  shell.  . . . their 
heads  and  legs  were  of  gold*'  (Intro,  to  Karandikar’s  book  p.  8) . This  may 
be  the  cause  of  importance  attached  to  this  term  of  contract-marriage 
between  Pururavas  and  UrvasI. 


844 


BrahmSO^ia  Purdna 


The  Gandharvas  said  : — 

O fortunate  ones,  think  about  the  ways  and  means  where- 
by that  excellent  lady  UrvasI,  the  ornament  of  Heaven,  may 
come  back  once  again  to  the  Devas. 

16-19.  Then  a Gandharva  of  very  great  intellect  named 
Vigvavasu  removed  the  two  young  kids  belonging  to  her.  After 
that,  she  left  for  heaven.  The  king  began  to  wander  (here 
and  there)  on  account  of  separation  from  her  and  saw  her 
at  Kuruksetra.  He  had  a talk  with  her.  She  told  him. ..“Rush 
up  to  the  Gandharvas”.  He  did  so.  Then  they  gave  him  a pot  of 
fire.  The  king  of  great  martial  competency  (literally — of  great 
chariot)  went  to  Heaven  with  it.  Originally  there  was  only 
one  fire.  But  the  son  of  Ila  made  it  three. 

20-21.  The  son  of  Ila,  O excellent  Brahmanas,  was  a 
king  of  such  ability  and  potentiality.  The  king  of  great  fame 
established  his  kingdom  at  Prayaga  on  the  northen  bank  of 
Yamuna  in  the  city  of  Pratisthana  (modem  Jhusi,  near  Allaha- 
bad ) in  a holy  realm  adorned  by  great  sages. 

22-23.  Six  sons  were  born  to  him.  They  had  their  splen- 
dour comparable  to  that  of  Indra.  They  are  well-known  in  the 
world  of  Gandharvas  viz. — Ayus,  Dhiman,  Amavasu,  Visvavasu, 
Srutayus  and  Ghrtayus.  These  were  the  sons  of  UrvaSL 

The  formidable  king  Bhlma,  the  conqueror  of  the  Uni- 
verse, was  born  of  Amavasu.1 

24.  The  glorious  king  Kancanaprabha  was  the  heir  of 
Bhlma.  The  learned  Suhotra  of  great  strength  was  the  son  of 
Kaftcana  (i.e.  Kancanaprabha) . 

25-2 7a.  Jahnu,  born  of  the  womb  of  Kesini  was  the  son 
of  Suhotra. 

While  his  elaborate  sacrificial  rite  was  going  on,  the 
river  Ganga  turned  her  course  and  flooded  that  territory  on 
account  of  the  vision  of  inevitable  future. 

On  seeing  the  sacrificial  chamber  entirely  flooded  with 
(the  waters  of)  the  Ganga,  the  infuriated  son  of  Suhotra,  the 
king,  drank  up  the  Ganga. 

1 . As  noted  by  Pargiter,  Am&vasu  was  the  founder  of  K&nyakubja 
kingdom  (AIHT.  p.  144). 


2.3.66.27-42 


845 


27b-28.  On  seeing  the  Ganga  drunk  up  by  the  saintly  king, 
the  celestial  sages  brought  out  the  highly  fortunate  river 
(Ganga)  as  his  daughter  (and  known  as)  Jahnavi.  Jahnu 
married  Kaverl  the  grand-daughter  of  Yauvanasva. 

29.  Through  the  curse  of  Yuvana$va,  Ganga  gave  birth 
from  half  of  her  part  to  Kaverl  the  praise-worthy  wife  of 
Jahnu,  the  most  excellent  of  all  rivers. 

30.  Jahnu  begot  of  Kaverl  a beloved  son  of  great  virtue 
named  Sunaha.  His  son  was  Ajaka. 

31.  Ajaka’s  heir  Balakasva  of  great  fame,  became  a 
habitual  hunter.  Kusa  is  remembered  as  his  son. 

32.  Ku$a  had  four  sons  of  divine  lustre  and  refulgence 
viz.  Kusamba,  Kusa-nabha,  Amurtarayasa  and  Vasu. 

33.  Kusika  (?  Kusaniibha)  the  excellent  king  performed 
a penance  seeking  a son.  When  a hundred  years  were  complet- 
ed, Indra  noticed  him. 

34-35.  On  seeing  him  performing  severe  penance,  the 
thousand -eyed  lord  Indra,  the  eternal  one  who  was  himself 
capable  of  causing  a son  to  be  born  unto  him  became  his  son 
himself.  The  chastiser  of  Paka  (i.e.  Indra)  became  the  son 
of  Kusika  under  the  name  Gadhi. 

36.  Paurukutsi  (daughter  ofPurukutsa)  became  the  wife 
of  Gadhi.  At  first  a splendid  girl  of  exalted  fortune  was  born 
of  her  known  by  the  name  of  Satyavatl.1 

37-38.  King  Gadhi  gave  her  (in  marriage)  to  Rcika  who 
was  desirous  of  a son.  Being  pleased  with  her,  her  husband,  the 
delighter  of  the  members  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu,  himself  a 
descendant  of  Bhrgu,  prepared  Garu  (consecrated  cooked  rice) 
for  the  sake  of  a son  to  himself  as  well  as  to  Gadhi. 

Then  Rcika,  the  descendant  of  Bhrgu,  spoke  to  his  wife. 

39-42a.  This  Caru  should  be  eaten  by  you,  O splendid 
lady  and  that  Caru  by  your  mother.  To  her  will  be  born  a 
lustrous  son.  a bull  among  K$atriyas,  who  can  never  be  con- 
quered by  Ksatriyas  in  battle  and  who  will  be  able  to  slay 
even  prominent  K$atriya  warriors.  So  you  also,  O lady  of 

1.  Pargiter  gives  Kuiasva  as  the  name  of  Kusa’s  son  and  Kuiika  was. 
Kusasva’s  son  (AIHT,  p.144). 


846 


BrahmUnia  PurSna 


good  weal,  this  Caru  will  cause  the  birth  of  a son  of  great 
courage,  a great  ascetic  of  quiescent  nature,  an  excellent 
Brahmana. 

After  saying  this  to  his  wife,  Rcika,  the  delighter  of  the 
members  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu  who  was  always  engaged  in 
penance,  entered  the  forest  for  penance. 

42b-45a.  At  that  time,  in  the  course  of  his  pilgrimage, 
Gadhi,  the  king,  accompanied  by  his  wife  came  to  the  hermi- 
tage of  Rcika  in  order  to  see  his  daughter.  Taking  up  the  two 
vessels  of  consecrated  Caru  of  the  sage,  the  delighted  Satya- 
vati  intimated  to  her  mother  the  words  of  her  husband  quietly, 
without  any  excitement. 

As  fate  would  have  it,  the  mother  gave  her  own  Caru  to 
her  daughter.  Due  to  ignorance  she  swallowed  her  daughter’s 
Caru  herself.1 

45b-50.  Then  with  her  bright  and  lustrous  body  Satya- 
vati  conceived  in  her  womb  a splendid  son,  the  future 
annihilator  of  Ksatriyas.  She  became  terrible  to  behold.  On 
seeing  her  and  reflecting  by  means  of  his  Yogic  power,  Rcika 
the  excellent  Brahmana  spoke  to  his  wife,  the  lady  of  excellent 
complexion  : — 

“O  gentle  lady,  you  have  been  deceived  by  your  mother 
by  the  inter-change  of  the  Carus.  An  extremely  terrible  son  of 
cruel  activities  will  be  born  to  you.  Your  mother  will  give  birth 
to  an  ascetic  of  such  a nature  as  I have  mentioned  before. 
The  entire  Brahminical  splendour  had  been  instilled  into  the 
the  Caru  by  me  through  my  power  of  penance”. 

On  being  told  thus  by  her  husband,  Satyavati  of  exalted 
fortune  and  dignity  sought  the  favour  of  her  husband  saying — 
“A  base  Brahmana  like  this  should  not  be  born  as  my  son 
through  you”. 

51.  On  being  told  thus,  the  sage  said  “O  excellent  lady, 
this  has  never  been  thought  of  by  me  or  by  you.  This  has  never 


1 . This  exchange  of  caru  seems  an  explanatory  device  to  justify  the 
militant  hature  of  the  Brahmin  Parasurama  and  the  Brahmanical  transform- 
ation in  the  Ksatriya  Visvamitra. 


2.3.66.52-64 


847 


been  wished  for  by  me  or  by  you.  A son  shall  become  ruthless 
in  his  activities  usually  on  account  of  his  mother  or  father”. 

52-55.  On  being  told  thus,  Satyavatl  spoke  again  like 
this — “if  you  wish,  O sage,  you  can  create  even  worlds,  why 
not  a son  ? It  behoves  you,  O husband  to  give  me  a son  of 
quiescent  nature.  If  it  cannot  be  altered,  O excellent  Brah- 
mana,  of  good  holy  rites,  let  our  grandson  be  like  this  (i.e. 
terrible  and  ruthless)”. 

Thereupon,  by  means  of  the  power  of  his  penance,  he 
made  her  pleased  and  contented  saying — “Whether  it  is 
my  son  or  my  grandson,  O lady  of  excellent  complexion,  I 
do  not  see  any  difference.  It  shall  be  as  you  have  said,  O gentle 
lady”. 

56.  Therefore,  Satyavati  gave  birth  to  Jamadagni,  a 
son  of  the  Bhrgu  family,  of  quiescent  nature,  having  perfect 
control  over  his  sense-organs  and  devoted  to  the  performance 
of  penance. 

57.  Formerly,  there  had  been  an  interchange  of  the  Carus 
belonging  to  Rudra  and  Visnu.  Since  he  ate  (i.e.  since  he  was 
born  as  a result  of  his  mother  eating)  the  fire  (Caru)  belong- 
ing to  Visnu,  lie  became  Jamadagni 

58.  After  getting  Visvamitra  as  his  heir,  Gadhi  the  son 
of  Kusika  (or  descendant  of  Kusika)  attained  the  status  equal 
to  that  of  a Brahminical  sage.  He  was  chosen  by  Brahma  (as 
such ) . 

59-60a.  Satyavati  of  great  sanctity  and  devoted  to  truth- 
ful vows  and  observances  flowed  as  the  great  river  named 
Kausiki.  Kausiki  the  most  excellent  and  distinguished  river 
began  to  flow. 

60b-64.  There  was  a king  named  Renuka  born  in  the 
family  of  Iksvaku.  His  daughter  of  great  fortune  Reriuka  was 
otherwise  known  by  the  name  of  Kama];.  By  means  of  his  power 
of  penance,  fortitude  and  concentration  of  mind,  Jamadagni, 
the  son  of  Rcfka,  begot  of  Renuka  alias  Kamali  a son  of  great 
terrific  nature  (named)  Rama  who  was  very  excellent,  who 
(later)  mastered  all  lores  and  the  science  of  archery,  who 
was  to  kill  the  Kgatriyas  who  resembled  well-kindled  blazing 
fire. 


848 


Brahm&ntfa  Purdna 


Thus  Jamadagni  of  lofty  (noble)  mind,  the  most  excel- 
lent one  among  the  knowers  of  Brahman,  was  born  of  Satyavatl* 
due  to  the  vigour  of  the  penance  of  Rcika,  son  of  Aurva. 
Sunahsepha  was  the  middle  and  Sunahpuccha  was  the  youngest 
son* 

65.  Visvamitra  of  noble  soul  was  otherwise  known  by 
the  name  ViSvaratha.  It  was  through  the  grace  of  (the  scion  of 
the  family  of)  Bhrgu  that  he  was  born  as  the  perpetuator  of 
the  line  of  Kau£ikas. 

66-67.  Visvamitra’s  son  Sunahsepha  was  a sage.1  He 
was  intended  (appointed)  as  the  sacrificial  animal  in  the 
Tajha  of  HariScandra.  He  was  given  back  to  Visvamitra  by 
the  Devas.  Since  Sunah£epha  was  given  back  by  the  Devas  he 
became  Devarata. 

68-69.  Among  the  sons  of  Visvamitra,2  SunahSepha  is 
regarded  as  the  eldest.  Madhucchanda  and  others,  Krtadeva, 
Dhruva,  Asiaka,  and  Purana  also  were  the  sons  of  Visvamitra. 
The  spiritual  lines  (Gotras)  of  those  noble-souled  Kausikas 
are  numerous. 

70-73.  They  are  as  follows  : — 

Parthivas,  Devaratas,  Yajfiavalkyas,  Samarpanas,  Udum- 
baras,  Vatadyas,  Talakayanas,  Candravas,  Lohinls,  Renus, 
Karisus,  Babhrus,  Panins,  Dhyana-Japyas,  Syamayanas,  Hiran- 
yaksas,  Sankrtas,  Galavas,  Devalas,  Yamadutas,  Salankayanas, 
Baskalas,  Lalatyas,  Badaras  and  others  belonged  to  the  Gotras 
of  the  intelligent  Visvamitra. 

Many  descendants  of  Kausikas  (i.e.  those  of  the  spiritual 
lines  of  Visvamitra)  who  have  to  enter  into  marriage  alliance 
with  other  sages  are  also  proclaimed. 


•In  V&.  P.  91.92  also  §unal?scpa  and  Sunafrpuccha  are  the  names  of 
Jamadagni's  brothers. 

1.  As  Aitareya  Br&kmapa  notes  Sunahscpa  was  adopted  as  a son  by 
Visvamitra. 

2.  A comparison  of  this  list  with  that  given  in  Mt.P.,  Baudh&yana, 
Aival&yana,  Apastamba  and  Katyayana  shows  that  our  author  is  not  exhaus- 
tive in  giving  the  Gotras  of  the  Kuiika  clan,  (vide  *Mt.P. — a Study*  pp. 
406-409) 


2.3.66.74-85 


849 


74-75.  They  are  Kau£ikas,  SauSrutas,  Saindhavayanas 
and  others.  They  belong  to  the  Gotra  of  the  holy  Brahminical 
sage  KauSika,  the  lord  of  Yogic  practice. 

Among  the  sons  of  ViSvamitra,  SunahSepha  is  remember- 
ed as  the  eldest.  Astaka  was  the  son  of  Drsadvatl  and  ViSva- 
mitra.  Lauhi  was  the  son  of  Astaka.  Thus  the  group  of  Jahnu 
has  been  recounted  by  me. 

The  sages  enquired  : — 

76-78.  The  status  of  Brahmanas  has  been  acquired  by 
Visvamitra  and  other  kings.  What  is  the  nature  of  Dharma 
(virtue,  piety ),  penance  or  learning  through  which  they  acquired 
this  ? Under  what  names  did  the  Ksatriyas  attain  the  status 
of  a Brahmana  ? We  wish  to  know  the  difference  through 
penance  or  charitable  gifts. 

On  being  asked  thus,  he  spoke  these  meaningful  words. 

79.  A rich  man  desirous  of  religious  merit  and  virtue 
may  invite  excellent  Brahmanas  and  perform  Yajftas  with 
wealth  acquired  by  unjust  means.  But  he  does  not  attain  the 
benefit  of  the  righteous  act. 

80-82.  A person  overwhelmed  by  passion  and  delusion, 
who  had  been  always  without  any  check  or  restraint  due  to 
covetousness  for  wealth,  may  in  the  end  desire  to  sanctify 
himself  and  for  this  purpose  he  may  perform  Japa  (chanting 
of  Mantras  etc.)  intensely  and  distribute  gifts  also.  But  the 
charitable  gifts  made  by  him  may  become  fruitless.  That  wicked' 
man  prone  to  violence  may  be  inclined  to  perform  meritorious 
deeds.  After  acquiring  wealth  thus  (by  unjust  means) , he 
may  distribute  charitable  gifts  and  perform  Tajrlas  out  of 
delusion.  The  tarnished  gift  of  that  wicked  soul  does  not  stand 
in  good  stead. 

83-85a.  If  a man  gives  to  the  deserving  persons  wealth 
accumulated  through  just  means,  if  a person  worships  and 
distributes  gifts  without  cherishing  desires  in  his  mind,  he 
acquires  the  fruit  of  those  charitable  gifts.  That  gift  results  in 
pleasure  and  happiness.  One  attains  worldly  pleasures  through 


850 


Brahm&nfa  Purdqa 


charitable  gifts.  One  goes  to  heaven  through  truthfulness. 
One  pervades  the  worlds  and  stands  eternally  by  means  of 
penance  performed  duly. 

85b.  Truthfulness  is  more  conducive  to  welfare  than 
penance.  Knowledge  is  remembered  weightier,  more  efficacious 
than  that. 

86a- 90.  It  is  reported  that  the  twice-born  castes  who 
were  born  as  Ksattriyas  achieved  (Brahminhood)  through 
penance.  (For  example)  king  Visvamitra,  Mandhatr,  Sank;  ti, 
Kapi,  Kasya,  Purukutsa,  Sala,  lord  Grtsamada,  Arstiscna, 
Ajamidha,  Bhargavyoma,  Kaksivan,  Au£ija  king  Sisira, 
Rathantara,  Saunaka,  Visnuvrddha  and  other  kings  had  been 
Ksatriyas,  but  these  are  remembered  to  have  attained  the  status 
of  sages  by  means  of  penance.1  All  these  saintly  kings  had 
attained  great  Siddhis  (spiritual  accomplishments) . 

Henceforth,  I shall  recount  the  line  of  the  noble-souled 

Ayus. 


CHAPTER  SIXTYSEVEN 

The  Origin  of  Dhanvantari * 

1.  Ayus  had  five  noble-souled  sons  of  great  strength. 
Those  kings  were  born  of  Prabha,  the  daughter  ofSvarbhanu. 

2.  Nahusa  was  the  eldest  among  them.  Ksatra- 
vrddha  is  remembered  as  the  son  next  to  him.  Rambha,  Raji 
and  Ancnas  are  well-known  in  the  three  worlds. 

3.  Ksatravrddha’s  son  was  Sunahotra  of  great  reputa- 
tion. Sunahotra  had  three  sons  who  were  very  much  righteous. 

1 . This  is  an  evidence  of  social  mobility  in  ancient  India. 

♦This  chapter  describes  the  line  of  Ayu  that  ruled  at  Kail.  In  this 
dynasty  was  bom  Dhanvantari,  the  famous  physician-king,  the  founder  of 
Ayurveda.  He  learnt  the  science  from  Bharadvaja  but  due  to  his  systematic 
presentation  of  that  science,  due  credit  is  given  to  him.  Hence,  the  title  of 
this  chapter  specially  refers  to  Dhanvantari.  His  period  viz. : ‘‘second  Dvapara 
Yuga’*  is  merely  a PurSnic  way  of  stating  time. 


2.3.67.4-19 


851 


4.  They  were  K&sa,  Sala  and  lord  Grtsamada.  The 
son  of  Grtsamada  was  Sunaka  from  whom  Saunaka  was  born. 

5.  Brahmanas,  Ksatriyas,  Vaifyas  and  Sudras  were 
born  in  his  family,  O Brahmanas,  on  account  of  their  diverse 
Karmans. 

6.  Arstisena  was  Sala’s  son.  His  son  was  Sisira.  The 
Saunakas  and  the  Arstisenas  were  Brahmanas  mixed  with 
Ksatriyas. 

7-8.  King  Dirghatapas  was  the  ruler  of  Kail  and  son  of 
Kasya.  Dhanva  was  the  son  of  Dirghatapas  and  the  scholar. 
Dhanvantari  was  born  of  him.  This  brilliant  son  was  born  to 
the  intelligent  king  in  his  old  age,  at  the  close  of  his  penance. 

Thereupon,  the  sages  spoke  these  words  to  Suta. 

The  sages  said  : — 

9.  Who  is  Dhanvantari,  the  lord  who  was  born  among 
human  beings  ? We  wish  to  know  this.  Recount  that  unto  us, 
O scorcher  of  enemics(?) 

Suta  replied  : — 

10- 13a.  Let  the  origin  of  Dhanvantari  be  heard,  O 
Brahmanas.  He  was  born  formerly  when  the  ocean  was  being 
churned,  for  the  sake  of  nectar.  At  the  outset,  he  was  born 
before  the  Kalasa  (pot) . He  was  encircled  by  a halo  of  glory 
all  round.  On  seeing  him  having  accomplished  his  task  suddenly, 
Visnu  who  was  standing  by  said — “You  are  bom  of  water”. 
Hence,  he  is  remembered  as  Abja  (water-born).  Abja  said  to 
Visnu — “O  lord,  I am  your  son.  Allot  me  my  share  and  place 
in  the  world,  O excellent  god.” 

13b- 19.  On  being  told  thus,  the  lord  said  after  review 
in  the  factual  position,  “The  division  of  the  Yajfia  has  already 
been  made  by  the  sons  of  Diti  as  well  as  the  Suras.  The  due 
performance  of  Homas  etc.  has  been  laid  down  in  the  Vedas  by 
the  great  sages.  It  is  not  possible  to  get  Homa  performed  unto 
you  at  any  time.  As  you  are  born  subsequent  to  Vedas  O 
god,  you  have  no  Mantra  (assignable  to  you) . O lojd,  in 
your  second  incarnation  you  will  earn  reputation  in  the 
world.  Then  you  will  attain  the  super-natural  powers  like 
Animd  (minuteness)  and  others.  O lord,  you  will  attain  Deva- 


852 


Brahm&nia  Pur&na 


hood  with  this  selfsame  body.  Brahmanas  (and  other  twice-born 
ones)  shall  worship  you  with  Caturmanlras  (i.e.  Mantras  from 
the  four  Vedas) , ghee  offerings  and  Gavyas  (materials  of  worship 
obtained  from  milk,  milk  products).  You  will  once  again 
reproduce  the  Ayurveda  (the  Science  of  Medicine). 
These  incidents  and  events  are  inevitable  and  have 
already  been  visualised  by  the  lotus-born  lord  (Brahma) 
earlier.  Undoubtedly  you  will  be  born  in  the  second  Dvapara 
Yuga”.  Therefore,  after  granting  the  boon,  Visnu  disappeared. 

20.  When  the  second  Dvapara  arrived,  king  Dlrgba- 
tapas,  the  ruler  of  Ka£i,  a descendant  of  Sunahotra  being 
desirous  of  a son,  performed  a penance. 

21.  The  king  desired  to  propitiate  lord  Dhanvantari  for 
the  sake  of  a son.  Thereupon,  Dhanvantari  urged  the  king  to 
choose  a boon  as  he  pleased. 

The  king  said  : — 

22.  “O  lord,  if  you  are  pleased  with . me,  be  my  son,, 
bestowerof  my  goal”.  After  saying  “So  be  it”,  the  lord  vanished 
there  itself. 

23-24.  Lord  Dhanvantari  was  then  bom  in  his  abode. 
He  was  a great  king,  the  ruler  of  Kasi,  the  dispeller  of  all 
ailments.  He  learned  the  science  of  Medicine — Ayurveda  along 
with  its  therapeutics  from  Bharadvaja.  He  classified  it  into 
eight  sections  and  taught  them  to  different  disciples. 

25.  The  son  of  Dhanvantari  became  well  known  as 
Ketuman.  The  son  bom  to  Ketuman  became  king  Bhfmaratha. 

26.  The  son  of  Bhimaratha  became  an  intelligent  lord  of 
the  subjects.  Well-renowned  as  Divod&sa,1  he  became  the  lord 
of  Varanasi. 

27.  At  this  time,  a Raksasa  named  Ksemaka,  colonised 
the  city  of  Var&nasi  which  had  been  a desolate  and  tenantless 
place. 

1.  He  is  regarded  as  a contemporary  of  Daiaratha  of  Ayodhya. 
During  his  reign,  V&r&pad  was  made  desolate  by  a demon-like  Gaga  of 
god  Siva — the  whole  episode  (described  later  in  this  chapter)  is  not. 
creditable  to  the  great  God  Mah&deva. 


2.3.67.28-38 


853 


28.  Earlier,  the  city  had  been  cursed  by  the  noble-souled 
Nikumbha,  again  and  again — “This  city  will  be  void  of 
people  and  a deserted  place  for  a thousand  years". 

29.  When  this  city  was  cursed,  Divod&sa,  the  lord  of  the 
subjects,  colonized  another  beautiful  city  at  the  border  of  his 
realm,  on  the  banks  of  Gomatl. 

The  sages  said 

30.  What  for  did  Nikumbha  curse  Varanasi  formerly  ? 
Why  did  Nikumbha  the  noble-souled  one  curse  the  holy  place 
of  the  Siddhas  ? 

SUta  said : — 

31.  The  saintly  king  Divod&sa  lived  in  that  flourishing 
city  after  obtaining  it.  The  ruler  of  men  of  great  brilliance 
lived  there  in  that  prosperous  city. 

32.  It  was  at  this  very  same  time  that  Mahe£vara  took 
a wife  unto  him.  Desirous  of  doing  some  thing  pleasing  to  the 
Goddess  Uma,  the  lord  lived  near  his  father-in-law. 

33.  At  the  behest  of  the  lord,  theParisadas  (attendants) 
of  various  kinds  of  forms,  the  ascetics  began  to  delight 
goddess  Umi  (MaheSvarl)  by  adopting  the  forms  and  guise  as 
mentioned  before. 

34.  Mahadeva  was  delighted  on  account  of  them.  But 
Mena  was  not  delighted.  She  treated  the  lord  and  the  goddess 
with  contempt. 

35.  She  said — “Your  husband  MaheSvara  has  no 
manners  or  good  conduct  even  in  my  presence.  He  is  always 
ifidigent  in  every  respect.  Alas,  he  is  not  ashamed". 

36.  On  being  told  thus  by  her  mother  in  so  many 
words,  Parvati  did  not  brook  it,  that  being  the  natural 
characteristic  of  women.  Smilingly,  the  goddess  who  bestowed 
boons,  went  near  Hara. 

37.  With  a sorrowful  face,  the  goddess  spoke  to 
Mahadeva — “O  lord,  I will  not  stay  here,  Take  me  to  your 
abode". 

38.  On  being  told  thus,  Mah&deva  examined  all  the 
worlds,  O excellent  Br&hmanas  and  desired  to  take  up  residence 
on  the  Earth. 


854 


Brahmdnfa  Purdna 


39-41  a.  The  great  lord  Bhava  of  great  lustre,  came  to 
know  that  the  city  of  Varanasi,  the  spot  of  spiritual  masters, 
was  occupied  by  Divodasa.  He  called  the  lord  of  Ganas  stand- 
ing at  his  side  and  said  thus — “O  lord  of  Ganas,  go  tq  the  city 
of  Varanasi  and  make  it  evacuated  by  using  gentle  means. 
That  king  possesses  excessive  heroism  and  strength”. 

41b-44a.  Then  Nikumbha  went  to  the  city  of  Varanasi 
at  outset.  He  appeared  before  a Brahmana  named  Mankana  in 
dream  and  said — “I  shall  do  something  for  your  welfare,  O 
sinless  one,  find  out  a suitable  place  for  me.  Make  an  idol  of 
mine  and  instal  it  at  the  outskirts  of  the  city”. 

After  getting  permission  of  the  king,  the  Brahmana 
did  everything  duly  as  he  was  instructed  in  dream.  He  installed 
the  idol,  at  the  gate  of  the  city. 

44b-47a.  Worship  was  carried  on  every  day  on  a grand 
scale,  with  fragrant  garlands,  sweet  scents,  incense,  offerings  of 
cooked  food  and  many  other  beautiful  things  worthy  of  being 
seen.  That  was  really  a wonderful  thing.  Thus  the  lord  of 
Ganas  was  worshipped  there  every  day.  Therefore,  he  granted 
thousands  of  boons  to  the  citizens  such  as  sons,  gold,  land,  etc, 
— nay  all  that  they  wished  for. 

47b-50.  The  excellent  queen  of  the  king,  named  Suyasa, 
who  was  chaste  and  renowned,  and  who  was  urged  by  the 
king,  came  there  for  the  sake  of  a son.  After  performing  the 
worship  elaborately,  the  gentle  lady  begged  for  sons,  visiting 
(the  temple)  again  and  again  for  many  times  for  the  sake  of 
sons.  Nikumbha  did  not  grant  her  sons  with  a reason  behind 
it.  His  idea  was  to  do  something  destructive,  if  the  king 
were  to  get  furious. 

Then  after  a long  time,  the  king  was  overwhelmed 
with  anger. 

51-55.  He  thought  thus: — “This  great  BhUta  (Goblin, 
Spirit)  at  the  gateway  grants  hundreds  of  boons  with  great 
pleasure,  to  the  citizens.  But  he  does  not  give  us  anything.  He 
is  always  being  worshipped  by  my  own  people  in  my  own  city. 
He  has  been  requested  by  the  queen  many  times  for  sons,  but 
he  has.  not  granted  a son.  Really  he  is  ungrateful  despite 


2.3.67.56-67 


855 


eating  a lot.  Hence,  he  does  not  deserve  at  all  any  worship  from 
me.  Therefore,  I shall  destroy  the  abode  of  that  wicked  being”. 

After  resolving  thus,  the  evil-minded  sinful  king  destroyed 
the  abode  of  that  lord  of  the  Ganas.  On  seeing  his  shrine  shat- 
tered, the  lord  cursed  the  king. 

56.  “Since,  without  any  fault  on  my  side,  my  abode 
has  been  destroyed  by  you,  O king,  your  city  shall  become  a 
deserted  wasteland  suddenly”. 

57.  Thereupon,  on  account  of  that  curse,  Varanasi  be- 
came a void  then.  After  cursing  the  city,  Nikumbha  brought 
Mahadeva  there. 

58.  Mahadeva  of  great  and  noble  mind  made  that 
deserted  vacant  city  equal  to  the  city  of  the  Devas  by  means 
of  its  wealth  and  luxury,  and  made  it  his  abode  as  well  as  that 
of  the  goddess. 

59.  The  goddess  sported  and  diverted  her  mind  there 
itself.  She  was  wonder-struck  at  the  affluence.  For  the  sake  of 
sports  and  pastime  of  the  goddess,  lord  Isana  spoke  these 
words  : — 

60.  “I  will  not  leave  off  my  abode.  Indeed  my  abode  is 
Avimukta ”.  Laughingly  he  said  to  her — “My  abode  is  Avimukta . 
I will  not  go  elsewhere,  O gentle  lady,  after  leaving  thus. 

61.  Sport  along  with  me  in  this  holy  spot,  O resplendent 
lady  who  has  no  one  superior  to  you”.  Hence  that  (holy  place) 
was  called  Avimukta  by  the  lord  himself. 

62-63.  Thus  Varanasi  was  cursed  and  glorified  as  Avimukta . 
It  was  here  that  the  noble-souled  Mahesvara  lived  in  the  three 
Yugas  along  with  the  goddess.  That  city  of  that  great  Soul 
vanishes  in  the  Kali  age. 

64.  When  that  city  vanished,  it  was  built  once  again 
and  colonized.  Thus  Varanasi  was  cursed  and  colonized  once 
again. 

65.  King  Divodasa  colonized  it  after  killing  a hundred 
sons  of  Bhadrasena,  who  were  excellent  wielders  of  bows. 

66-67.  The  kingdom  of  Bhadrasena  was  destroyed  by 
that  powerful  king.  There  was  a son  of  Bhadrasena  named 
Durmada  who  was  let  off  with  contempt  and  mercifulness  that 
he  was  only  a boy.  The  heroic  son  Pratardana  was  bom  of 
Dr$advati  and  Divodasa  (Divod&sa  II). 


856 


Brakmdnfa  Pur&na 


68.  He  was  attacked  by  that  boy,  the  son  (of  Bhadrasena) 
O great  king,  who  was  desirous  of  wreaking  vengeance. 

69.  Pratardana  had  two  sons,  Vatsa  and  Garga  who  be- 
came very  famous.  Alarka  was  the  son  of  Vatsa  anfl  Sannati 
was  his  son. 

70-71.  This  verse  has  been  sung  by  persons  of  yore  about 
the  saintly  king  Alarka 

‘The  young  and  excellent  king  of  Kasi,  Alarka,  was 
richly  endowed  with  beauty  for  sixty  thousand  and  six  hundred 
years.  By  the  grace  of  Lopamudra  he  attained  the  greatest  span 
of  life.’ 

72.  At  the  end  of  the  period  of  curse,  the  king  of 
powerful  and  great  arms  killed  the  demon  Ksemaka  and  got 
rehabilitated  the  city  of  Varanasi. 

73.  The  heir  of  Sannati  was  a pious  person  named 
Sunitha.  The  heir  of  Sunitha  was  a righteous  person  named 
Ksaima  (Ksema  ?). 

74.  Ketuman  was  the  son  of  Ksema.  Suketu  was  his  son. 
The  son  of  Suketu  was  known  as  Dharmaketu. 

75.  The  heroic  warrior  Satyaketu  was  the  heir  of 
Dharmaketu.  The  lord  of  subjects  named  Vibhu  was  the  son 
of  Satyaketu. 

76.  Suvibhu  was  the  son  of  Vibhu.  It  is  remembered 
that  Sukumara  came  thereafter.  Dhf$taketu  was  the  extremely 
virtuous  son  of  Sukumara. 

77.  The  heir  of  Dhr§{aketu  was  the  lord  of  subjects 
Venuhotra.  Venuhotra’s  son  named  Gargya1  was  very  famous. 

78-79.  Gargabhumi  was  the  son  of  Gargya.  This  is 
the  line  of  Vatsa,  the  intelligent  one.  Their  sons  were  Brah- 
manas  and  K?atriyas.  They  were  exceedingly  righteous.They 
were  valorous  and  powerful  and  had  leonine  exploits.  Thus  the 
Kajyapas  have  been  recounted.  Understand  the  descendants 
of  Raji  too. 

1.  Recorded  as  Bhatga  in  AIHT,  p.  149.  The  line  is  shown  to  have 
dosed  there,  but  our  text  records  GargabhOmi  as  the  son  of  G&rgya 
(W.  78-79). 


2.3.67.80-89 


857 


80.  The  heroic  Raji  had  five  hundred  sons.  This  group 
of  Ksatriyas  is  well  known  as  Rajeya  on  the  Earth.  Indra 
was  afraid  of  them. 

81.  At  that  time  a very  terrible  battle  between  the 
Devas  and  the  Asuras  took  place,  when  the  Devas  and  the 
Asuras  asked  Brahma. 

82.  “Who  will  be  victorious,  O holy  lord  in  the  battle 
between  us  ? Tell  us,  O lord  of  all  worlds.  We  wish  to 
hear.*’ 

Brahmd  said  : — 

83.  “There  is  no  doubt  that  those,  on  whose  behalf 
Lord  Raji  will  take  up  his  arms  and  fight,  will  conquer  the 
three  worlds.1 

84.  Where  there  is  Raji,  there  will  be  Lak$mi  (fortune, 
wealth),  where  there  is  Laksmi  there  is  fortitude.  Where  there 
is  fortitude  there  is  Dharma  ( virtue)  and  where  there  is  Dharma 
there  is  victory.” 

85-86.  On  hearing  about  Raji’s  success  in  battles,  all 
the  Devas  and  the  Danavas,  desirous  of  their  own  victories, 
approached  the  excellent  king  and  eulogised  him. 

Delighted  in  their  minds,  all  those  Devas  and  Danavas 
said— -“You,  please  take  up  your  excellent  bow  for  the  sake  of 
our  victory”. 

Raji  said  : — 

87.  “I  shall  defeat,  O Daityas,  the  Devas  with  Indra  at 
their  head  I shall  become  Indra  with  a virtuous  soul.  Therefore, 
I shall  fight  in  the  battle-field. 

88.  Our  Indra  is  Prahlada.  We  shall  win  the  battle 
for  his  sake.  Abide  by  this  agreement  urged  by  our  lord.” 

89.  Even  as  he  was  about  to  say  “So  be  it**,  he  was 
urged  by  the  Devas  too — “After  winning  the  war,  you  will 
become  Indra”.  He  was  thus  invited  by  the  Devas  too. 


1.  This  is  the  twelfth  war  between  Devas  and  Asuras  (sidr-Intro. — 
Vaiwavism — last  footnote)  • 


858 


Brahmfaiia  Purdna 


90-91.  He  killed  all  the  Danavas  who  had  been  armed 
with  thunderbolts  and  who  could  not  be  killed.  That  king  of 
great  splendour  and  perfect  control  over  his  sense-organs  redeem- 
ed the  lost  glory  of  the  Devas  after  killing  all  #Danavas. 
Lord  Raji  redeemed  it.  Accompanied  by  the  Devas,  Indra  spoke 
to  Raji.  “I  am  the  son  of  Raji”.  After  saying  like  this,  he  spoke 
these  words  once  again. 

92-93.  “You  are  Indra  of  all  Devas.  There  is  no 
doubt  in  this.  I shall,  O king,  O slayer  of  foes,  attain  reputa- 
tion since  I am  your  son”.  On  hearing  these  words  of  Indra 
he  was  deceived  by  his  illusion. 

94-95.  “So  it  shall  be”,  said  the  delighted  king  to 
Indra. 

When  the  king  who  was  on  a par  with  the  Devas  went  to 
heaven,  the  sons  of  the  preceptor  of  Raji,  seized  their  share 
in  the  legacy  from  Indra  (?).  The  hundreds  of  sons  attacked 
the  heavenly  world  Trivistapa,  the  abode  of  Indra,  several 
times. 

96-98.  Then,  after  the  lapse  of  a great  deal  of  time, 
Indra  of  great  strength  whose  kingdom  had  been  taken  away 
and  whose  fortune  had  been  spoilt  spoke  to  Brhaspati — “Make 
my  Puroddfa(  sacrificial  offering)  at  last  as  big  as  the  jujube  fruit, 
O Brahmana  sage,  whereby  I can  remain  alive  after  being 
revived  by  means  of  splendour.  O Brahmana,  I am  emaciated 
and  dejected  in  mind  because  my  kingdom  has  been  taken 
away  and  my  seat  removed.  I have  been  rendered  weak  and 
devoid  of  prowess  in  the  battle  by  the  sons  of  Raji.  Be  pleased 
with  me.” 

Brhaspati  said  : — 

99-101.  “If  only  you  had  urged  me  earlier  in  this  matter, 
O Indra,  O sinless  one,  there  would  have  been  no  work  on  my 
part  that  should  not  have  been  done,  for  the  sake  of  your 
pleasure. 

I shall  endeavour,  O lord  of  Devas  of  great  splendour> 
for  the  sake  of  what  is  conducive  to  your  welfare. 

Ere  long,  you  will  attain  your  kingdom  and  share  in  the 
Yajiia  offerings. 


2.3.67.102—68.3 


85$ 


So  Indra  I shall  go.  Let  not  your  mind  be  dejected.” 

102-104.  Thereafter,  he  performed  great  holy  rites  that 
caused  the  development  of  his  splendour.  The  preceptor  of 
excellent  intellect  caused  delusion  to  sonsofRaji. 

When  they  became  extremely  deluded,  intoxicated  due  to 
passion,  haters  of  Brahmanas,  followers  of  heretic  yiews  and 
deprived  of  heroism  and  exploits,  he  regained  the  excellent 
abode  of  Indra  and  the  affluence  of  Asuras  after  killing 
the  sons  of  Raj  i who  were  engrossed  in  activities  of  lust  and 
fury. 

105.  If  anyone  were  to  listen  and  narrate  the  details  of 
dethronement  and  re-establishment  of  Indra,  he  shall  never 
attain  the  state  of  wretchedness. 


CHAPTER  SIXTYEIGHT 

The  Story  of  Taydti 


The  sages  asked  : — 

1 . How  was  his  daughter  given  to  a king  by  the  noble- 
souled  Maruta  (rather  Marutta)1?.  Of  what  heroic  ability  were 
the  noble-soulcd  persons  born  of  the  daughter  of  Maruta  ? 

SUta  replied  : — 

2.  That  lord  of  subjects  desirous  of  cooked  food,  per- 
formed the  sacrifice  Marutsoma.  That  king  of  great  splendour 
performed  it  every  month  for  sixty  years. 

3.  The  gods,  Maruts,  were  pleased  by  the  sacrifice  Marut- 
soma of  that  king.  Delighted  in  their  heart,  they  give  never- 
failing  cooked  food  with  all  the  other  articles  he  should  desire. 


1.  VV.  1-6  speak  of  Maruta  and  Mitra-Jyoti.  But  these  have  no 
connection  with  any  dynasty  in  this  chapter. 


860 


BrahmtiQfa  Purdna 


4.  His  food  taken  in  once  did  not  get  wasted  for  a day 

and  a night*  (i.e.  people  eating  it  will  not  be  hungry  for  twenty- 
four  hours).  Starting  at  sunrise,  he  used  to  give  food  to  crores 
of  people  (?)  • 

5.  To  the  daughter  of  Mitra-jyoti  and  the  intelligent 
Maruta  were  bom  many  sons  who  were  conversant  with 
dharma , could  realize  salvation  and  who  were  endowed  with 
great  intrinsic  strength. 

6.  They  renounced  the  rites  and  vows  pertaining  to 
the  householder  and  adopted  Vairdgya  (non-attachment  to 
worldly  desires  or  objects).  After  taking  up  the  duties  of  recluses 
they  attained  salvation. 

7.  Ksatra -Dharma  was  the  valorous  son  of  Anenas.1 
Pratipaksa  of  great  penance  was  born  as  the  son  of  K$atra- 
dharma. 

8.  Sffijaya,  the  son  of  Pratipaksa,  became  well-known. 
Jaya  was  the  son  of  Srfijaya.  Vijaya  was  born  to  him. 

9.  Jaya  the  second,  was  the  son  of  Vijaya.  Harya£vaka 
is  remembered  as  his  son.  The  valorous  king  Sahadeva  was  the 
son  of  HaryaSva. 

10.  The  righteous-souled  son  of  Sahadeva  was  famous 
by  the  name  of  Ahina.  Jayatsena  was  the  son  of  Ahlna.  His 
son  was  Sankrti. 

1 1.  The  righteous-souled  Krtadharman  of  great  fame  was 
the  son  of  Sankrti.  These  are  the  descendants  of  Ayus  of 
Ksatriya  qualities.  Now  understand  the  line  of  Nahusa. 

12.  Nahusa  had  six  sons  whose  splendour  was  compa- 
rable to  that  of  Indra.  They  were  Yati,  Yayati,  Samyati,  Ayati 
Viyati  and  Krti. 

13.  Yati  was  the  eldest  among  them.  Yayati  was  his 
younger  brother.  Yati  got  as  his  wife  the  daughter  of 
Kakutstha,  named  Gau. 

*Va.  P.  93  reads  pakvam  for  bhuktam  hereof.  It  means  ‘food  once 
cooked  for  twenty  four  hours  does  not  get  exhausted  even  if  served  to 
millions  of  people  from  sunrise.9 

1.  This  dynasty  of  Anenas  (also  given  in  V&.P.93.  7-11  and  Brahma 
P.11.27-31)  was  limited  and  could  not  be  properly  located.  Bh.P.IX.  17 
gives  a different  line  of  Anenas. 


2.3.68,14-26 


861 


14.  Yati  adopted  the  path  of  salvation.  He  became  a 
sage  and  became  one  with  Brahman.  Among  the  other  five*, 
it  was  Yayati  who  became  king. 

15.  He  got  Devayani,  the  daughter  of  U£anas,  and 
Sarmistha  the  Asura  lady  and  daughter  of  Vr$aparvan,  as  his 
wives. 

16-18.  Devayani  gave  birth  to  Yadu  and  Turvasu. 
Sarmistha,  the  daughter  of  Vrsaparvan,  gave  birth  to  Druhyu,. 
Anu  and  Puru,  sons  of  great  prowess  and  comparable  to  the 
sons  of  the  Devas. 

Indra  who  was  delighted  gave  him  an  extremely  refulgent 
chariot.  It  would  not  get  stuck  up  anywhere.  It  was  divine 
and  golden.  It  was  fitted  with  horses  having  the  speed  of 
the  mind.  It  was  in  this  chariot  that  he  brought  the  virgin 
for  marriage  (?).  Indra  gave  him  two  great  quivers  too 
wherein  the  arrows  would  be  inexhaustible. 

19.  With  that  pre-eminent  chariot*  he  constantly  con- 
quered the  different  kingdoms  on  the  earth.  Yayati  was  invin- 
cible in  battle  to  the  Devas*  Danavas  and  human  beings. 

20-21.  That  chariot  continued  to  be  with  all  the  kings 
of  Puru’s  line  upto  Janamejaya,  the  son  of  Kaurava  dynasty. 
That  chariot  disappeared  when  it  reached  Pariksita,  the  king 
who  was  the  grandson  of  Kuru.  It  disappeared  due  to  the  curse 
of  the  intelligent  Gargya. 

22.  That  king  Janamejaya  who  was  evil-minded  and 
who  was  known  as  LohagandhI  (Having  the  odour  of  iron)  also, 
killed  a boy,  the  son  of  Gargya. 

23.  Abandoned  (Banished)  by  the  citizens  and  people 
of  the  outlying  districts*  that  king  Lohagandhi  ran  about  here 
and  there.  He  did  not  get  happiness  or  mental  peace  anywhere. 

24.  Distressed  with  sorrow  and  misery  as  he  was,  he  did 
not  get  sympathetic  understanding  from  anyone  anywhere. 
Utterly  dejected  he  sought  refuge  in  the  sage  Saunaka. 

25-26.  This  sage  of  liberal  and  exalted  intellect  was 
famous  under  the  name  Indrota.  For  the  sake  of  sanctity, 
Indrota  Saunaka  made  king  Janamejaya  perform  a horse- 
sacrifice,  O excellent  Brahma^as.  After  reaching  the  stage  of 
Avabhrtha  (valedictory  bath  after  horse-sacrifice)  the  king 
Lohagandhi  died. 


862 


Brakmdntfa  Pur&na 


27-28.  That  divine  chariot  was  taken  away  from  him 
and  given  to  (Uparicara)  Vasu,  the  king  of  Cedi,  by  Indra  who 
was  pleased  with  him.  Brhadratha  got  it  from  him. 

Bhlma,  the  scion  of  the  family  of  Kuru,  killed  Jarasandha 
and  gladly  gifted  that  excellent  chariot  to  Vasudeva. 

29.  That  saintly  king  Yayaii,  the  son  of  Nahusa,  attain- 
ed old  age.  He  then  spoke  these  words  to  Yadu,  his  eldest  and 
the  most  excellent  son. 

30.  “Dear  son,  wrinkles,  grey  hair  and  other  infirmities 
of  old  age  have  overpowered  (lit.  encircled)  me  on  account  of 

the  curse  of  Usanas.  But  I am  not  content  with  the  pleasures 
of  youth. 

31.  O Yadu,  accept  my  sin  along  with  my  old  age. 
Accept  my  old  age.” 

Yadu  replied  to  him. 

32-36.  “A  request  for  alms  (of  an  unspecified  nature) 
by  a Brahmana  has  been  promised  but  not  fulfilled  by  me.  It 
can  be  accomplished  only  through  physical  exertions.  I will  not 
take  up  your  old  age.  There  are  many  deficiencies  and  ailments 
in  old  age  caused  by  food  and  beverage.  Hence,  O king,  I 
dare  not  take  up  your  old  age.  I do  not  wish  to  be  afflicted 
by  old  age,  while  in  youth,  along  with  the  people  with  sacred 
threads  (i.e.  aged  Brahmanas)(I  do  not  want  to  be)  a wretch- 
ed fellow  having  a white  beard  and  moustaches,  rendered  infirm 
by  old  age  aud  having  wrinkles  covering  up  the  whole  body. 

( And  old  man)  is  desperate,  weak  in  physique  and  incapable 
of  doing  his  daily  work  (I  do  not  wish  to  be  so  in  my  youth). 
I do  not  like  old  age  at  all.  You  have  many  sons,  O king, 
dearer  to  you  than  I.  Let  them  accept  (the  old  age),  O king 
conversant  with  Dharma  (piety  and  virtue),  choose  some  other 
son”. 

37.  On  being  told  thus  by  Yadu,  he  became  extremely 
furious.  (The  king)  who  was  the  most  excellent  among  the  elo- 
quent ones  spoke  to  the  eldest  son  after  censuring  him. 

38.  “O  evil-minded  one,  what  other  devout  rite  do  you 
have  for  which  you  disregard  me,  your  preceptor  (and  father)  ? 
What  other  Asrama  (stage  of  life)  can  you  have  ?’* 


2.3.68.39-48 


863 


39-40.  After  saying  this  to  Yadu,  the  angry  father  cursed 
him — “In  spite  of  your  being  born  of  my  bosom,  you  are  not 
passing  on  your  youthful  age  unto  me.  Hence,  O foolishly 
deluded  one,  your  progeny  will  not  be  entitled  to  the  kingdom. 

O Turvasu,  accept  my  sin  along  with  my  old  age”. 
Turvasu  said:  — 

41-44.  “I  do  not  desire  to  accept  old  age,  O father. 
It  is  destructive  of  all  worldly  pleasures  of  love.  There  are  many 
defects  in  old  age  caused  by  food  and  beverage.  Hence,  O king, 
I am  not  eager  to  take  up  your  old  age.” 

Yay&ti  cursed  : — 

“In  spite  of  your  being  born  of  my  bosom,  you  arc  not 
exchanging  your  youthful  age  with  me.  Hence,  O Turvasu 
your  progeny  will  be  cut  off  from  (all  rights  to  the  kingdom). 
O deluded  one,  you  will  be  the  ruler  among  men  of  mixed 
religious  rites  aud  practice  opposed  to  ours,  among  people  of 
mixed  castes,  meat-eaters  and  others.  Undoubtedly,  your 
residence,  O sinner,  will  be  among  barbarians  and  outcastes — 
men  engaged  in  outraging  the  modesty  of  their  preceptors’ 
wives,  men  (destined  to  be  born)  amopg  animals  of  lower 
strata.” 

Suta  said  : — 

45-47.  After  cursing  Turvasu,  his  own  son,  thus,  Yayati 
spoke  these  words  toDruhyu,  the  son  of  Sarmistha  : — 

“O  Druhyu,  you  take  up  my  old  age  that  destroys  hand- 
some features  and  complexion.  Give  me  in  exchange  your  prime 
of  youth  for  the  period  of  a thousand  years.  When  the  period 
of  a thousand  years  is  complete  I shall  give  you  back  your 
youth.  I shall  also  take  back  my  sin  once  again  along  with  the 
old  age.” 

Druhyu  said  : 

48.  “An  old  man  cannot  drive  a chariot  or  ride  a horse. 
He  cannot  enjoy  women.  He  has  no  pleasure.  Therefore,  I do 
not  desire  old  age”. 


864 


BrahmdJi$a  Purtina 


Yqy&ti  said  : 

49-51.  * ‘Since  you,  bom  of  my  own  bosom,  do  not  give  me 
your  own  youthful  age,  O Druhyu,  none  of  your  desires  will  be 
realised  anywhere.  You  will  always  be  compelled  to  move  about 
in  boats,  rafts,  canoes  etc.  Though  born  in  the  family  of  kings, 
you  will  stay  there  as  a non-king. 

O Anu,  you  accept  my  sin  along  with  the  old  age.  I 
shall  move  about  with  your  youthful  age  for  the  period  of  a 
thousand  years.” 

Anu  said  : 

52.  “An  old  man  is  as  weak  and  feeble  as  a child.  He  is 
always  unclean.  He  does  not  perform  Homa  in  the  sacred  fire 
at  the  proper  time.  I do  not  like  that  type  of  old  age.” 

Yaydti  said  : 

53-57.  “Since  you,  born  of  my  own  bosom,  do  not  give 
me  your  youthful  age  and  since  the  defects  of  old  age  have 
been  recounted  by  you,  you  will  have  to  meet  with  the  (infir- 
mities of)  age.  You  will  be  prematurely  old  O Anu,  your 
progeny  will  die  after  attaining  youth.  You  will  have  to  devote 
to  the  scattering  of  fire  like  this  (i.e.  you  will  have  to  cremate 
your  own  children) . 

O Puru,  accept  my  sin  along  with  my  old  age.  Defects 
of  old  age,  wrinkles  and  grey  hairs  have  encircled  me,  O dear 
one,  due  to  the  curse  of  Kavya  U£anas.  I am  not  satisfied  with 
the  enjoyment  of  pleasures  of  youth.  With  your  youthful 
age,  I shall  enjoy  worldly  pleasures  for  some  time.  When  the 
period  of  a thousand  years  is  complete,  I shall  give  back  to 
you  your  youth.  I shall  also  take  back  my  own  sin  along  with 
my  old  age.” 

SUta  said 

58-6 la.  On  being  told  thus  the  son  replied  to  his  father 
immediately  : 

“I  shall  do  as  you  wish,  O dear  father.  I shall  accept, 
O king,  your  sin  along  with  your  old  age.  Take  from  me  my 
youthful  age  and  enjoy  worldly  pleasures  as  much  as  you  wish. 


2.3.68.61-67 


865 


I shall  be  disguised  by  your  old  age,  wearing  your  form  and 
age.  After  giving  you  my  youthful  age,  I shall  move  about  (as 
naturally  as)  I have  become  old  in  reality.” 

Yaydti  said  : — 

61b-62a.  “O  Puru,  welfare  unto  you.  I am  pleased  with 
you.  Being  delighted  I am  granting  you  this.  Your  progeny 
shall  be  rich.  They  will  realize  their  desires.  They  will  rule 
over  the  kingdom.” 

SUta  said  : — 

62b-64.  With  the  assent  of  Puru,  king  Yayati  then  trans- 
ferred his  old  age  to  him.  With  the  blessings  of  Bhargava, 
with  the  grandeur  and  with  youthful  age,  Yayati  son  of 
Nahusa,  the  excellent  one  among  men,  became  delighted  and 
enjoyed  all  worldly  pleasures,  according  to  his  desire,  in 
conformity  with  his  eagerness,  at  the  proper  time  and  occasion 
and  attained  happiness. 

65.  The  king  was  his  own  real  self  as  before  (in  the 
performance  of  religious  rites) . He  enjoyed  pleasures  without 
any  prejudice  to  Dharma  and  according  to  his  capacity.  He 
propitiated  the  Devas  by  means  of  sacrifices  and  the  Pitrs  by 
means  of  Sraddha  rites. 

66.  He  delighted  his  wives  by  means  of  all  favours 
desired  by  them.  He  made  excellent  Brahmanas  pleased  by 
granting  them  everything  they  desired.  He  pleased  guests  by 
means  of  foodstuffs  and  beverages  and  the  Vaisyas  (the 
merchant  class)  by  according  them  benign  administration. 

67.  He  delighted  Sudras  by  avoiding  cruelty  and  pre- 
venting their  harassment  by  others.  He  controlled  decoits  by 
giving  punishments  and  restraining  them  otherwise.  He 
delighted  all  subjects  duly  according  to  the  injunctions  of 
dharma . 

68-70a.  Yayati  protected  the  kingdom  like  another 
Indra. 

That  king  of  leonine  exploits  and  youthful  in  age  enjoyed 
worldly  pleasures  without  Coming  into  conflict  with  Dharma 
(Righteousness,  piety).  He  attained  excellent  happiness.  Seek- 


866 


Brahm&nia  Purina 


ing  excellent  happiness  in  the  passionate  indulgence  because 
he  failed  to  notice  the  defects  thereof,  he  sported  about  in  the 
company  of  ViSvaci  in  the  Nandana  park  as  well  as  Vaibhraja 
park. 

70b-73a.  When  the  king  saw  that  his  desires  for 
pleasures  were  increasing(  despite  his  indulgence)  ,*  he  approached 
Puru  and  took  back  his  old  age.  After  attaining  his  desired 
pleasures,  the  king  was  satiated  as  well  as  dejected.  The  king 
remembered  the  stipulated  period  of  a thousand  years.  He 
counted  even  the  Kalas  and  Kasthas  (small  units  of  time)  and 
thinking  that  the  stipulated  period  of  time  was  complete,  said 
to  his  son  Puru. 

73b-74.  “With  your  youthful  age,  O son,  O suppressor 
of  foes,  worldly  pleasures  have  been  enjoyed  by  me  at  the 
proper  time,  in  accordance  with  my  eagerness  and  in  a way 
conducive  to  happiness.  I am  pleased  with  you,  O Puru.  Wel- 
fare unto  you.  Take  back  your  youthful  age. 

75-76a.  You  may  take  up  the  administration  of  the 
realm.  Indeed,  you  alone  among  all  the  sons  carried  out  my 
wish  in  order  to  please  me.”  King  Yayati,  the  son  of  Nahusa 
took  back  his  old  age.  Puru  regained  his  youthful  age. 

76b-77a.  When  the  king  was  desirous  of  crowning  his 
youngest  son  Puru,  the  people  of  all  castes  with  the  Brahmanas 
being  the  chief  of  them,  spoke  to  him  these  words. 

77b-79.1 2  “Why ‘do  you  set  aside  the  claim  of  the  eldest 
son  Yadu,  the  son  of  Devayani,  the  grandson  of  &ukra,  and 
hand  over  the  kingdom  to  Puru.  Yadu  is  your  eldest  son. 
Turvasu  was  born  after  him.  Druhyu  is  the  son  of  Sarmi§tha. 
Anu  was  born  after  him  and  only  then  Puru.  How  does  the 
youngest  son  deserve  kingdom  superseding  the  claims  of 
the  elder  brothers? We  are  reminding  you.  Abide  by  Dharma” 


1.  The  story  of  Yay&ti  requesting  his  sons  to  exchange  their  youth  for 
a period  of  1000  years  for  his  old  age  is  given  in  details  in  Mbh.Adi . Chs  81 
and  85.  The  immortal  verse  : 

najdtu  k&mah  kdm&nam  upabhogena  S&myati • 
is  quoted  by  other  Pur&nas  as  well. 

2.  VV.77-90  show  that  kings  in  ancient  India  had  to  seek  some  sort  of 
public  sanction,  before  appointing  a heir  apparent  to  the  throne. 


2.3.68.80-90 


867 


Yay&ti  said  : — 

80-86.  “O  people  of  all  castes  with  the  Brahmanas  as 
chief  ones,  all  of  you  listen  to  my  words.  Understand  why  the 
kingdom  should  not  be  given  at  all  to  the  elder  ones  by  me. 
The  bold  son  who  carries  out  the  words  of  his  parents  is  praise- 
worthy. My  behest  was  not  obeyed  by  my  eldest  son  Yadu.  The 
son  who  is  antagonistic  to  his  father  is  not  honoured  or  approved 
of  by  good  men.  He  is  the  real  son  who  behaves  like  a son  unto 
his  father  and  mother.  I have  been  slighted  and  insulted  by 
Yadu,  Turvasu.  I have  been  treated  with  great  contempt  by 
Druhyu  and  Anu.  My  words  have  been  carried  out  by  Puru 
and  I have  been  particularly  honoured.  This  youngest  son 
shall  he  my  heir,  because  my  old  age  was  taken  over  by  him. 
All  my  desires  have  been  fulfilled  by  Puru  of  meritorious 
activities. 

A boon  has  been  granted  by  Sukra  Kavya  U£anas.  “O 
king  of  great  intellect  the  son  who  obeys  you  shall  be  the 
king”. 

The  Subjects  said 

87-90.  “Let  Puru  approved  of  by  your  majesty  be 
crowned  as  a ruler  of  the  kingdom. 

Even  if  he  be  the  youngest,  the  son  who  is  richly  endowed 
with  good  qualities,  and  who  docs  everything  for  the  welfare 
of  his  parents,  deserves  all  good  things.  He  deserves  to  be  the 
lord. 

Puru  who  is  your  favourite  son,  and  who  has  done  every 
thing  to  please  you,  deserves  this  kingdom.  Due  to  the  boon 
granted  by  Sukra,  nothing  more  can  be  said  contradicting  it”. 

When  this  was  declared  by  the  satisfied  citizens  and 
people  of  the  outlying  districts,  the  son  of  Nahu§a  (Yayati) 
crowned  his  son  Puru  in  his  own  kingdom  (i.e,  the  hereditary 
kingdom).  He  established  Turvasu  in  the  South-eastern 
quarter.1 


1.  VV.90-94  show  that  despite  the  disobedience  of  his  sons  Yayati 
gave  parts  of  his  kingdom  to  his  sons,  thougn  the  hereditary  throne  was 
given  to  the  youngest  son  Puru. 


868 


Brahm&ntfa  Purina 


91.  The  king  established  the  eldest  son  Yadu  in  the 
South-Western  quarter.  He  assigned  the  Western  quarter  ta 
Druhyu  and  the  northern  quarter  to  Anu. 

92.  After  conquering  the  Earth  consisting  "of  seven 
oceans  and  continents,  King  Yayati,  the  son  of  Nahusa, 
divided  it  into  five  divisions  and  distributed  them  among  his 
sons. 

93.  The  entire  Earth  consisting  of  towns  and  seven 
continents  is  being  protected  by  them  righteously  without 
encroaching  on  other  territories  as  they  were  conversant  with 
Dharma . 

94.  After  dividing  the  Earth  among  his  sons  and  after 
transferring  the  royal  glory  to  his  sons,  the  king,  the  son  of 
Nahu$a,  became  delighted. 

95.  After  laying  aside  the  bow  and  the  arrows,  after 
entrusting  the  kingdom  to  his  sons  and  after  allotting  the 
duties  and  responsibilities  to  his  kinsmen,  the  king  became 
pleased. 

96.  In  this  context  the  following  verses  have  been 
formerly  sung  by  Yayati,  the  great  king.  By  following  the 
advice  therein  one  should  restrain  and  withdraw  lustful 
desires  like  a tortoise  that  withdraws  his  limbs.1 

97.  “Never  can  lust  subside  by  enjoying  the 
pleasures.  Just  as  the  fire  is  ablaze  all  the  more  by  ghee  offer- 
ings so  also  the  desires  get  increased  by  indulgence. 

98.  All  the  food-grains  and  barleys,  all  the  gold,  all  the 
animals  and  all  the  women  in  the  world — all  these  are  not 
sufficient  even  for  one.  One  who  realizes  this  docs  not  become 
deluded. 

99.  If  one  has  no  inauspicious  feelings  towards  all  living 
beings,  if  one  is  not  ill-disposed  towards  anyone  mentally* 
verbally  or  physically,  one  realizes  the  Brahman  then. 

100.  If  one  does  not  terrify  others,  if  one  is  not  afraid  of 
others,  if  one  neither  desires  nor  hates,  one  realizes  the  Brahman 
then. 

1.  VV.97-103  are  often  quoted  and  have  become  in  a way,  immortal' 
verses. 


2.3.68.101—69.1 


869 


101.  Happiness  befalls  one  who  eschews  Tr$n&  (thirst, 
covetousness)  which  cannot  be  got  rid  of  by  evil-minded 
persons,  which  does  not  subside  even  when  one  becomes  old 
and  infirm  and  which  can  be  considered  an  ailment  that  lasts 
till  our  vital  airs  last  (or  that  causes  death). 

102.  When  one  becomes  old,  one’s  hair  become  rotten 
and  decayed;  when  one  becomes  old,  one’s  teeth  decay,  but  the 
desire  to  live  and  the  greediness  to  earn  wealth  do  not  subside 
even  when  one  becomes  old. 

103.  The  pleasure  of  love  in  the  world,  the  great  pleasure 
of  heaven,  do  not  deserve  to  be  on  a par  with  a sixteenth 
part  of  the  pleasure  of  destruction  of  covetousness.” 

104-107.  After  saying  thus  that  saintly  king  went  to  the 
forest  along  with  his  wives.*  After  performing  a penance  on  the 
peak  Bhrgutunga,1  and  after  observing  the  holy  vow  of  sages, 
that  king  of  great  fame  attained  heaven.  These  five  lines  of 
kings  belonging  to  his  family  are  meritorious.  They  are  honour- 
ed by  the  Devas  and  sages.  The  entire  Earth  is  pervaded 
by  them  as  with  the  rays  of  the  sun.  The  man  who  reads  or 
listens  to  Yayati’s  life  story  in  full  shall  become  blessed  and  is 
blest  with  progeny,  long  life  and  fame,  O excellent  Brahmanas. 


CHAPTER  SIXTYNINE 

The  Birth  of  JCdrttavirya * 

SUta  continued : — 

1.  I shall  recount  the  line  of  Yadu,  the  eldest  (son  of 
Yayati)  of  excellent  splendour  in  detail  and  in  the  proper  order. 
Even  as  I recount  it,  listen  and  understand. 


1.  A mountain  in  Nepal  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Gandak.  Here  was 
the  hermitage  of  sage  Bhrgu  (De.  34) . 

•This  chapter  describes  the  Haihaya  line  of  Yadu.  in  which  the 
great  king  Kirttavirya  Arjuna  was  born.  The  chapter  is  named  after  that 
great  emperor. 


870 


Brahmdpda  Purana 


2.  Yadu  had  five  sons  comparable  to  the  sons  of  the 
Devas  viz. — Sahasrajit  the  excellent  one  (or  the  eldest), 
Krosfu,  Nila,  Aftjika  and  Laghu. 

3.  The  son  of  Sahasrajit  was  the  glorious  king  named 
Satajit.  The  three  sons  of  Satajit  became  well-known  as 
extremely  virtuous. 

4.  They  were  Haihaya,  and  the  king  Venuhaya.  Haihaya’s 
heir  was  well-known  as  Dharmanetra. 

5-6.  Kunti  was  the  son  of  Dharmanetra,  Samjfieya  was 
his  son.  Samjfteya’s  heir  was  the  king  named  Mahism^n.  Bhadra- 
sena  was  the  valorous  son  of  Mahisman.  He  was  the  king  and 
ruler  of  Varanasi  and  he  has  already  been  mentioned. 

7.  Bhadrascna’s  heir  was  the  king  named  Durmada. 
Durmada’s  intelligent  son  named  Kanaka  was  well  known. 

8-9.  Kanaka’s  heirs  were  four  and  they  were  very  famous 
in  all  the  worlds.  They  were  Krtavirya,  Krtagni,  Krtavarman 
and  Krtaujas  who  was  the  fourth.  Arjuna  was  the  son  of 
Krtavirya.  This  king  became  the  overlord  of  seven  conti- 
nents with  a thousand  hands. 

10.  Karttavirya  performed  penance  for  ten  thousand 
years.  His  penance  was  extremely  difficult  to  be  performed. 
By  means  of  this  penance,  he  propitiated  Datta,  born  of  Atri. 

11.  Datta  granted  him  four  excellently  glorious  boons. 
He  chose  at  the  out-set  the  first  boon  viz.  a thousand  arms. 

12-13.  (His  second  boon  was)  the  ability  to  prevent 
one  from  evil  the  moment  he  plans  (lit.  meditates  upon)  it. 
His  third  boon  was  protection  of  the  Earth  virtuously  after 
conquering  it  righteously.  His  last  boon  was  “I  must  be 
able  to  conquer  in  many  battles.  I must  kill  thousands  of 
enemies.  My  death  should  be  in  a battle  while  fighting.” 

14.  This  entire  Earth  consisting  of  seven  continents  and 
many  towns,  and  encircled  by  seven  oceans  was  conquered 
by  him  in  a manner  befitting  the  K$atriyas. 

15.  He  possessed  a thousand  arms  by  means  of  his 
Yogic  power  and  that  too  while  fighting.  Just  as  the  Yoga 
manifests  in  the  case  of  the  lord  of  Yogas,  so  also  the  thousand 
arms  appear  by  means  of  Maya. 


2.3.69.16-27 


871 


16.  O excellent  sages,  it  is  heard  that  seven  hundred 
sacrifices  were  duly  performe  t by  that  king  in  the  seven 
continents. 

17-18.  All  the  Yajhas  of  that  powerful  king  had  plenty  of 
splendour  and  grandeur.  Gold  altars  were  used  in  all  of  them. 
All  of  them  were  performed  with  sacrificial  posts  made 
of  gold.  All  the  Yajhas  were  graced  by  their  presence  by  the 
Devas  of  exalted  fortune  seated  in  aerial  chariots.  They  were 
always  rendered  splendid  and  attractive  by  the  Gandharvas 
and  Apsaras. 

19.  After  observing  the  greatness  and  conduct  of 
life  of  that  saintly  king,  Narada,  aGandharva,  sang  the  follow- 
ing verse  about  that  king  : 

20-22.  “Definitely  human  beings  will  not  be  able  to 
attain  the  goal  achieved  by  Karttavlrya  by  means  of  sacrifices 
charitable  gifts,  austerities,  exploits  and  learning.” 

That  king  is  seen  everywhere  in  the  seven  continents 
moving  about  by  means  of  his  Yogic  power.  He  is  armed  with 
bow,  sword  or  with  bows  and  arrows.  He  moves  about  in  his 
chariot  along  with  his  followers. 

On  account  of  the  prowess  of  that  great  king  the  subjects 
were  protected  virtuously.  They  did  not  have  any  misery  or 
perturbation.  They  suffered  no  less  in  their  assets  and 
properties. 

23.  He  was  the  overlord  of  the  people  for  eighty-five 
thousand  years.  He  was  an  Emperor,  the  suzerain  over  many 
kings.  He  was  the  enjoyer  of  all  gems. 

24.  He  was  the  protector  of  animals.  He  was  the  defender 
of  the  fields.  On  account  of  his  Yogic  power,  he  was  the 
Parjanya  (lord  of  clouds  and  rain)  through  rain. 

25.  On  account  of  his  thousand  arms  rendered  tough 
and  rough  by  the  frequent  contact  with  the  bow-string,  he 
shone  like  the  autumnal  Sun  with  his  thousand  rays. 

26.  With  a thousand  elephants,  that  king  attacked  and 
conquered  the  Royal  assembly  of  Karkofaka  in  Mahi?madt 
and  built  his  city  there. 

27.  (Defective  verse)  That  lotus-eyed  king  used  to 
check  the  speedy  waves  of  the  ocean  during  the  rainy  season. 


872  Brahmdntfa  Pur&tia 

Sportingly  he  used  to  spew  out  its  waters  and  make  an 
artificial  rainy  season. 

28.  Shaken  and  tossed  about  by  him  while  playing,  the 
Narmada,  having  garlands  with  golden  fillets  approached  him 
in  an  apprehensive  manner  and  produced  a loud  cry  of 
distress  released  through  the  waves. 

29.  Once  he  waded  through  the  great  sea  and  tossed  up 
the  waves  and  tides  by  means  of  his  thousand  arms,  creating  an 
untimely  high  tide  as  though  blown  up  by  the  wind. 

30.  When  the  great  ocean  was  being  agitated  by  his 
thousand  arms,  the  great  Asuras  in  the  Patala  (nether- worlds) 
remained  hidden  and  motionless. 

31-32.  With  his  thousand  arms,  the  king  stirred  up  the 
ocean  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Devas  and  the  Asuras  churned 
up  the  ocean  of  milk.  A great  number  of  fishes  concealed 
under  the  great  waves  were  crushed  down  to  pieces.  The  foams 
were  tossed  up  and  down.  The  sea  became  rough  and  unbear- 
able when  so  many  whirlpools  and  eddies  were  caused,  when  it 
was  stirred  up  by  Karttavlrya. 

33-34.  The  agitation  of  the  sea  by  the  king  was  like  that 
of  the  ocean  of  milk  churned  with  the  Mandara  mountain,  for 
the  sake  of  producing  nectar. 

On  seeing  the  excellent  king  of  terrifying  appearance,  the 
great  serpents  became  frightened.  They  hung  down  their  heads 
and  fled  immediately.  \Vhen  they  hung  down  their  heads  they 
appeared  like  the  stumps  of  plantain  trees  in  the  evening  that 
remain  motionless  in  a place  devoid  of  wind. 

35-36.  In  strong  and  steady  bows,  he  tied  the  string 
firmly  and  fitted  five  hundred  arrows.  With  his  prowess  he 
rendered  Ravana,  the  king  of  Lanka,  senseless  along  with  his 
army.  He  defeated  him  in  the  battle  and  subjugated  him.  After 
gaining  control  over  him,  he  brought  him  to  Mahismati  and 
tied  him  there.  Pulastya,  thereupon,  approached  Arjuna, 
propitiated  him  and  pacified  him. 

37-38.  On  being  requested  by  Pulastya,  the  king  set 
Paulastya  (i.e.  Ravana,  the  grandson  of  Pulastya)  free. 

The  twanging  sound  of  the  bowstring  produced  by  his 
thousand  arms,  resembled  the  thundering  sound  of  the  groups 
of  bursting  clouds  at  the  end  ofYuga. 


2.3.69.39-50 


873 


Indeed,  Bhargava  was  a warrior  of  great  prowess  and 
heroism,  because  in  the  battlefield,  he  cut  off  his  thousand  arms 
as  though  they  were  a forest  of  golden  palmyras. 

39-41.  Once,  he  was  earnestly  requested  by  the  fire-god 
who  was  thirsty  and  hungry.  The  lord  of  subjects  granted  seven 
continents  as  alms  unto  the  firegod.  Fire  blazed  at  the  tips 
of  his  arrows  with  a desire  to  consume  the  cities,  villages, 
towns  and  cowherd  colonies. 

With  the  help  of  valorous  exploits  of  Karttavlrya  the 
leading  man  firegod  of  great  fame  burned  mountains  and 
forests. 

42-44.  The  firegod  accompanied  by  Haihaya  (i.e. 
Karttavlrya)  arrogantly  burned  down  the  vacant  hermitage  of 
Varuna’s  son  entirely.  Vasistha  was  the  name  of  that  son  whom 
Varuna  obtained.  He  was  excellent  and  brilliant.  He  became  a 
famous  sage  by  the  name  Apava.  The  saintly  lord  Apava  then 
cursed  Arjuna  out  of  anger.1 

45-47.  “Since  this  forest  of  mine  has  not  been  spared  by 
you,  O Haihaya,  another  king  named  Arjuna,  son  of  Kunti 
who  will  become  a king  will  supersede  the  difficult  task 
achieved  by  you.*  Rama  the  most  excellent  one  among 
those  who  strike  (with  weapons)  will  cut  off  thousand  arms 
(of  Sahasrarjuna) . Rama  a sage,  a Brahmana  of  great  strength 
and  prowess  will  crush  Arjuna  and  kill  him.” 

48.  On  account  of  the  curse  of  that  intelligent  sage, 
Rama  became  the  cause  of  his  death.  In  fact  this  boon  had 
been  chosen  by  that  king  himself  formerly. 

49-50.  He  had  a hundred  sons.  Five  of  them  were  very 
great  warriors.  They  were  very  strong,  heroic,  well- versed  in 
wielding  weapons,  famous  and  virtuous-souled  viz.  §fira,§urasena 
Vr$asya,  Vrsa  and  Jayadhvaja.  It  was  Jayadhvaja  who  perpetu- 
ated his  line.  He  was  the  ruler  of  Avanti. 


1.  The  curse  motif  was  very  popular  with  Puraijta-writers  to  explain 
any  miraculous  or  unlikely  event,  here  the  killing  of  a great  hero  like  Kartta- 
virya.  The  explanation  of  Karttavlrya ’s  anti-sage  action  is  given  in  the  next 
chapter  VV.1-14. 

* Probably  the  idea  is  that  Arjuna  wil  j gain  a better  reputation  in 
this  task  in  the  context  of  Khagdavad&ha. 


874 


Brahmdnfa  Purdna 


51 -53a.  Talajangha  was  the  valorous  son  of  Jayadhvaja. 
He  had  a hundred  sons.  It  is  reported  that  they  were  well-known 
by  the  name  of  Talajanghas.  Thus  five  groups  of  jhe  noble- 
souled  Haihayas  have  become  famous  viz.  Vitihotras,  Bhojas, 
Avantijs,  the  valorous  Tundikeras  and  the  Talajanghas. 

53b-57.  The  son  of  Vitihotra  was  the  king  named 
Ananta.  Durjaya,  his  son,  became  a destroyer  of  his  enemies. 
That  king  had  received  the  boon  of  never  losing  his  wealth. 
With  his  great  power,  the  great  king  protected  his  subjects.  He 
never  lost  his  wealth.  He  regained  whatever  was  lost. 

If  a person  were  to  recount  the  birth  story  of  Karttavirya* 
the  intelligent  one,  his  riches  will  increase.  His  piety  will 
develop  further.  He  will  be  honoured  in  heaven  like  a person 
who  performs  sacrifices  and  like  a donor. 


CHAPTER  SEVENTY 

Dynasties  of  Jydmagha  and  Vr$ni 
The  sages  enquired  : — 

1 . Why  was  the  forest  of  Apava,  the  noble-souled  one* 
burnt  by  Karttavirya  forcibly  ? Tell  us  this  in  details  even  as 
we  ask. 

2.  We  have  heard  that  saintly  king  was  the  protector  of 
the  subjects.  Protector  of  subjects  as  he  was,  how  could  he 
destroy  the  penance-grove  ? 

SUta  replied  : — 

3.  Aditya  (the  Sun-god)  approached  Karttavirya  in  the 
guise  of  a Brahmana  and  said,  “Give  me  food  till  I am  satis- 
fied. Because  I am  undoubtedly  the  Sun-god.” 

The  king  said  : — 

4.  O lord,  tell  me,  with  what  will  you  be  satisfied,  O Sun- 
god  ? What  type  of  food  should  I serve  you  ? I shall  do  so  after 
hearing  from  you. 


2.3.70.5-15 


875 


The  Sun  said  : — 

5.  “Give  unto  me  as  food  all  immovable  beings,  O most 
excellent  one  among  donors.  I shall  be  satisfied  with  it,  O king, 
and  not  with  anything  else.” 

The  king  submitted  : — 

6.  “All  the  immovable  beings  cannot  be  burnt  by  the 
fiery  splendour  of  a human  being,  O most  excellent  one  among 
those  who  blaze,  I make  my  obeisance  unto  you.” 

The  Sun  said  : — 

7-8.  “Pleased  with  you  I shall  give  you  inexhaustible 
quiver  of  arrows  that  can  face  in  all  directions  (i.e.  that 
can  be  discharged  in  every  direction).  On  being  discharged, 
they  will  blaze,  charged  with  my  refulgence.  Assailed  by  my 
brilliance,  all  immovable  beings  shall  become  parched  up.  O 
king,  I shall  reduce  everything  to  ashes  in  a moment.” 

9-11.  Then  the  sun-god  gave  many  arrows  toArjuna. 
After  receiving  those  arrows  from  him,  the  volleys  of  arrows 
thus  discharged  from  his  bow,  O king,  burned  all  the 
immovables  such  as  hermitages,  villages,  colonies  of  cowherds, 
cities,  penance-groves,  beautiful  forests,  parks  and  gardens  etc. 
The  Earth  was  burned  and  rendered  devoid  of  trees  and  grass 
by  the  fiery  splendour  of  the  Sun. 

12-13.  In  the  meantime,  Apava,  the  great  sage  of  highest 
splendour,  who  had  already  performed  holy  rites  in  fire  and 
had  undertaken  a Vrata  (holy  vow)  of  staying  under  water  for 
ten  thousand  years,  had  come  out  from  water  after  completing 
his  Vrata.  The  great  sage  then  saw  his  hermitage  burned  down 
by  Aijuna. 

14.  Out  of  anger,  he  cursed  the  saintly  king  in  the 
manner  already  recounted  to  you  by  me. 

Now  listen  to  the  line  of  the  saintly  king  Krojtu, 
consisting  of  many  excellent  persons. 

15.  He  was  the  king  in  whose  family  was  bom  VfHM  the 
leading  member  of  the  Vn$i  dynasty. 

Kro9tu  had  only  one  son,  Vrjinlv&n  of  great  fame. 


876 


BrahmSOsia  Purina 


16.  Svahi,  the  most  excellent  one  among  Svahavans  (i.e. 
those  who  perform  Tajnas  where  the  Mantra  ‘Svaha'  is  repeat- 
ed) was  the  son  ofVrjinlvan.  Svahi’s  son  Ruseku*  became  a 
king  and  the  most  excellent  one  among  donors.  * 

1 7.  Desirous  of  the  birth  of  sons,  Ru£eku  of  sanctified 
soul,  performed  great  sacrifices  of  different  types  with  plenty  of 
requisite  monetary  gifts. 

18-19.  Citraratha  was  born  as  his  son  who  performed 
many  holy  rites.  Sasabindu  was  the  son  of  Citraratha.  He  was 
a great  warrior.  He  performed  sacrifices,  distributing  large 
sums  of  money.  He  practised  the  highest  (most  excellent) 
activities  of  saintly  kings.  He  had  the  most  exalted  character 
and  great  prowess.  He  was  an  emperor  and  had  many  children. 

The  following  verse  has  been  sung  by  men  of  yore 
regarding  his  line  : — 

20-22.  “Sasabindu  had  ten  thousand  sons.  They  were 
glorious  with  plenty  of  wealth  and  brilliance.  They  were 
in  all  respects  worthy  as  his  successors”. 

Among  them  six  were  the  most  important.  All  these  were 
very  strong  and  powerful.  They  performed  many  sacrifices. 

They  were  Prthusravas,  Prthuyasas  Prthukarman,  Prthun- 
jaya,  Prthuklrti  and  Prthudanta.  They  were  kings  born  of 
Sasabindu. 

23.  Persons  conversant  with  Puragas  praise  Aksara^*  as 
the  son  of  Prthusravas.  Suyajfia  was  the  son  of  Aksara  and 
Usanas  was  his  son. 

24.  Usanas  was  virtuous  and  pious.  After  getting  the 
Earth  (i.e.  after  coming  to  the  throne),  he  performed  a 
hundred  horse-sacrifices  conferring  the  most  excellent  monetary 
gifts  (asDaksina). 

25.  Marutta1  was  his  son.  He  followed  the  footsteps  of 
saintly  kings.  Virakambala-Barhi?  is  remembered  as  the  son  of 
Marutta. 


*Ruiadgu  in  AIHT,  p.  144. 

♦•Antara  in  AIHT,  p.  144. 

1.  Our  text  dropped  Sineyu  as  the  son  of  Usanas  and  named  his 
grandson  Marutta  as  the  son  of  Usanas  vide  AIHT,  p.  144. 


2.3.70.26.-36 


877 


26-27.  Rukmakavaca  was  the  learned  son  of  Kambala- 
barhis.  With  his  sharp  arrows,  Rukmakavaca,  at  the  very  outset, 
killed  many  warriors  with  coats  of  mail  and  bows,  in  battle 
and  attained  the  most  excellent  glory.  That  king  of  great  fame 
distributed  much  wealth  to  Br^hmanas  in  his  horse-sacrifice. 

28.  Five  sons  of  great  strength  and  prowess  were  born  to 
Rukmakavaca.  They  could  pierce  the  enemies  and  kill  inimical 
warriors. 

29.  They  were  Rukmesu,  Prthurukma,  Jyamagha, 
Parigha  and  Hari.  The  father  established  Parigha  and  Hari  in 
the  land  of  Videha. 

30.  Rukmesu  became  king  (as  successor  to  his  father,1) 
and  Prthurukma  became  his  dependant.  Thus  cheated  (and 
defeated)  by  them,  Jyamagha2  lived  in  a hermitage  though  (he 
was  entitled  to  be)  a king. 

31-32.  He  was  calm  (by  temperament).  In  a great  forest, 
he  incurred  the  antagonism  of  a Brahmana.  He  took  up  his  bow. 
Seated  in  a chariot  and  flying  his  own  banner,  he  went  to 
another  country.  Alone,  the  king  went  to  the  Narmada,  then 
to  the  land  of  Mekala  (?),  the  Mirika  forest,  the  mountain 
Rksavan  and  ultimately  reached  Muktiman. 

33.  The  wife  of  J yamagha  named  Saibya  was  a very 
powerful  woman.  Though  he  had  no  son,  he  did  not  marry 
another  woman. 

34.  In  a battle  he  was  victorious  and  brought  a girl  as 
his  prize.  Afraid  of  his  wife  that  he  was,  the  king  told  his  wife 
“This  is  your  daughter-in-law.’* 

35.  On  being  told  thus,  she  replied  “To  which  son  docs 
she  belong  to  be  called  my  daughter-in-law  ? 

(The  king  replied) — “She  will  be  the  wife  of  the  son  who 
will  be  bom  to  you*’. 

36.  By  means  of  her  severe  and  terrible  penance,  the 
exalted  noble  lady  Saibya,  in  her  old  age,  gave  birth  to  her 
son  Vidarbha. 

1.  AlHT.p.146  names  Par&vft  instead  of  Rukmesu  as  the  successor  to 
Rukmakavaca. 

2.  Jyamagha  is  noted  as  a hen-pecked  husband  in  Pur&Qas.  vide 
w.33-36  below. 


878 


Brahmdnfa  Purdna 


37-38.  The  prince  Vidarbha  begot  of  that  girl  two 
learned  sons  Kratha  and  Kai£ika.  They  were  heroic  experts  in 
battle.  Afterwards  he  begot  Lomap&da,  the  third  Son.  Babhru 
was  the  son  of  Lomapada  and  Akfti  was  his  son. 

39.  Cidi  was  the  son  of  Kai£ika.  The  sons  and  descen- 
dants born  of  him  were  kings  and  are  remembered  as  Caidyas. 
Kunti  was  the  son  of  Kratha  who  (as  had  been  already 
mentioned)  was  Vidarbha’s  son. 

40.  Dhrsja  was  born  as  the  son  of  Kunti.  He  was 
courageous  and  valorous  in  battle.  Nirvrti  was  the  virtuous  son 
of  Dhrsta.  He  was  a slayer  of  inimical  warriors. 

41.  His  son  was  Da£arha  who  had  great  strength  and 
exploits.  Vyoma  was  the  son  of  Da£arha.  Jimuta  is  mentioned 
as  coming  after  him. 

42.  Vikrti  was  the  son  of  Jimuta.  His  son  was  Bhimaratha. 
Rathavara,  it  is  said,  was  the  son  of  Bhimaratha. 

43.  He  was  always  engaged  in  making  charitable  gifts, 
acquiring  learning  and  practising  good  conduct. 

His  son  was  Navaratha  and  it  is  remembered  that 
Dasaratha  came  thereafter. 

44.  His  son  was  Ekada£aratha  and  Sakuni  was  his  son. 
The  archer  Karambhaka  came  thereafter,  and  Devarata 
succeeded  him. 

45.  King  Devak$atra  of  great  fame  was  son  of  Devarata. 
Devana,  the  delighter  of  all  Ksatriyas,  was  born  as  the  son  of 
Devaksatra. 

46.  Madhu  was  born  of  Devana.  Puruvasu  was  the 
extremely  brilliant  son  of  Madhu  whose  intellect  was  the 
source  of  his  wealth. 

47-49.  Purudvan,  the  excellent  man,  was  the  son  of 
Puruvasu.  Purudvaha  was  the  son  of  Bhadravati  and  Purudvan. 
His  wife  was  Aiksvaki  and  Sattva  was  his  son  born  of  her. 
Satvata,  the  increaser  of  fame  and  endowed  with  Sattva 
quality,  was  born  of  him.  After  perfectly  understanding  this 
creation  of  Jyamagha  of  noble-soul,  one  shall  attain  progeny 
and  identity  with  the  intelligent  ‘King*  Soma. 


2.3.71.1-12 


CHAFFER  SEVENTYONE 

The  Vr^ni  Dynasty 


879 


SUta  said  : — 

1-2.  Sons  of  great  strength  were  born  to  S&tvata  and 
KauSalya.  They  were  Bhajamana,  Bliaji,  Divya,  Vrsni, 
Devavrdha,  Andhaka  and  Mahabhoja  who  was  well-known, 
truthful  of  speech  and  a patron  of  Brahmanas.  Their  creations 
(descendants)  are  fourfold.  Listen  to  them  in  detail. 

3-6.  ( Defective  text)  Syfijaya  was  the  son  of  Bhajamana* 

(?)  Spftjaya  had  two  daughters.  He  gave  them  in  marriage  to 
Bahyaka.  Those  two  sisters  his  wives,  gave  birth  to  many  sons 
namely  Nimloci,  Kimkana,  Dhrs{i  and  Parapurafijaya**  They 
were  born  (as  the  great  grandsons)  of  Bhajamana  and  the  sons 
of  the  daughter  of  Srfijaya.  The  sister  of  Bahyaka ’s  first  wife 
gave  birth  to  Ayutajit,  Sahasrajit  and  Satajit.  Among  the  sons 
of  Satvata,  Devavrdha  performed  a severe  penance  with  the 
intention  “A  son  endowed  with  all  good  qualities  should  be 
born  to  me”. 

7-3.  After  engaging  himself  thus  in  the  Yogic  practice, 
he  touched  the  waters  of  the  river  Parnasa.1  Since  the  king  was 
endowed  with  auspicious  qualities,  the  excellent  river  became 
delighted  at  his  touch  when  the  king  ceremoniously  sipped  the 
waters. 

9-10.  She  (the  river)  became  engrossed  in  thought  and 
finally  resolved  thus — 

“I  shall  not  come  in  the  way  of  that  lady  of  whom  a son 
endowed  with  all  good  qualities  can  be  born  to  king  Devavrdha. 
Hence,  I shall  myself  become  his  wife”. 

11-12.  As  her  emotional  attachment  to  him,  as  mentioned 
before  welled  up  in  her  heart,  she  (assumed  the  form  of) 


*Acc.  to  V&.  P.  71.3  King  Bhajamana  had  from  Srhjaya  two  son* 
Bahya  and  Bahyaka. 

* *The  list  in  V&.  P.  is  Nimi,  Panava,  Vr?ni,  Para-Puraiijaya. 

1.  The  river  Banas  in  Rajasthan,  is  tributary  to  the  Chambal — De 


146. 


880 


Brahmdnia  Pur&na 


a girl  and  wooed  the  king  who  was  in  a thoughtful  mood. 
The  king  too  liked  her.  The  liberal-minded  king  begot  a 
brilliant  child  of  her. 

1 3.  In  the  ninth  month,  the  most  excellent*  river  gave 
birth  to  Babhru,  the  son  of  Devavrdha.  That  son  was  endowed 
with  all  good  qualities. 

14.  In  regard  to  that  race  of  kings,  Brahmanas  conver- 
sant with  the  Puranas  sing  the  following  verses.  They  glorify 
the  good  qualities  of  the  noble-souled  Devavrdha. 

15-16.  ‘Inasmuch  as  we  hear  from  a distance  and  see  at 
close  quarters,  Babhru  is  the  most  excellent  one  among 
human  beings  and  Devavrdha  is  on  a par  with  the  Devas. 

The  number  of  men  who  gained  immortality  (?  absolu- 
tion) from  Babhru  and  also  from  Devavrdha  is  seventy  thou- 
sand and  sixtyfive. 

17-18.  Mahabhoja,  a scion  of  the  family  of  Satvatas, 
was  a great  warrior.  He  was  a performer  of  sacrifices,  the  chief 
of  the  most  prominent  ones  among  the  donors  of  liberal  gifts, 
firm  of  resolve,  truthful  in  speech,  a patron  of  Brahmanas  and 
the  most  famous  among  kings. 

His  line  is  very  great.  The  kings  of  his  line  are  well 
renowned  on  the  Earth  as  “Bhojas”. 

Dhr§ti  (Prob.  Vrsni*)  had  two  wives  viz.  Gandhari  and 
Madri. 

19-21.  Gandhari  give  birth  to  Sumitra  who  delighted 
his  friends.  Madri  gave  birth  to  Yudhajit,  Mldhvan,  and 
Anamitra  and  Sina — both  excellent  among  men. 

Nighna  was  the  son  of  Anamitra.  Nighna  had  two  sons  viz. 
Prasena  and  Satrajit  of  great  fortune.  The  Sun-god  was  a 
friend  of  Satrajit  as  dear  to  him  as  his  own  life. 

22.  Once,  at  the  close  of  night,  that  excellent  person 
among  riders  in  the  chariot  (a  great  warrior)  viz.  Satrajit  went 
in  his  chariot  to  the  banks  (of  the  river)  in  order  to  take  water 
for  offering  libations  to  the  sun. 

23.  Even  as  he  was  going  on  with  his  worship  of  the 
sun,  Vivasvan  (The  Sun  god)  stood  in  front  of  him.  The  form 


♦AIHT  p.  107 — The  genealogy. 


2.3.71.24-35  881 

of  the  lord  was  very  vivid  and  clear.  The  disc  of  the  Sun-god 
with  a circular  effulgence  was  very  brilliant. 

24-25.  Then  the  king  addressed  to  Vivasvan  (the  Sun- 
god)  who  stood  in  front  of  him.  “O  lord  of  luminaries,  I 
see  you  alike  both  in  the  sky  as  well  as  in  front  of  me.  You 
have  the  same  circular  effulgence.  O Vivasvan,  what  is  the 
difference  in  you  when  you  have  approached  me  as  a friend?* * 

26.  On  hearing  this,  the  Sun-god  removed  the  excellent 
jewel  Syamantaka1  from  his  own  neck  and  tied  it  round  the 
neck  of  the  king. 

27.  Thereupon,  the  king  saw  him  in  his  physical  form. 
On  seeing  him,  he  was  delighted  and  he  carried  on  a pleasant 
talk  with  him  for  a short  while. 

28-29.  When  Vivasvan  started  once  again,  Satrajit  said 
to  him — “It  behoves  you,  O lord,  to  give  me  this  excellent 
jewel  whereby  the  people  may  see  you  in  it  having  the 
splendour  of  fire. 

The  Sun-god  gave  him  the  jewel  named  Syamantaka . 

30.  The  king  wore  that  jewel  when  he  entered  the  city. 
He  made  the  entire  city  wonder-struck  and  entered  his  harem. 

31.  With  great  love,  that  king  Satrajit  gave  that  divine 
excellent  jewel  Syamantaka  to  his  brother  Prasena. 

32.  Parjanya  (god  of  clouds  and  rain)  would  shower 
plenty  of  rain  in  that  country  where  this  jewel  named  Syaman- 
taka happened  to  exist.  There  would  be  no  danger  from  ailments 
or  epidemics  in  that  country. 

33.  Govinda  (Krsi^a)  expressed  his  desire  to  have 
that  excellent  jewel  Syamantaka  from  Prasena,  but  did  not 
get  it.  Although  he  was  powerful  enough,  he  did  not  take  it 
by  force. 

34.  Once  Prasena  bedecked  himself  with  that  jewel  and 
went  for  hunting.  For  the  sake  of  Syamantaka  (i.e.  on 
account  of  it)  he  met  with  a terrible  death  from  a lion. 

35.  Jambavan,  the  king  of  bears,  killed  that  lion.  He 
took  the  divine  jewel  and  entered  his  cave. 


1.  Compare  the  story  of  Syamantaka  in  Bh.P.X.Chs  56  and  57. 


882 


BrahmUntfa  Purdna 


36.  Elderly  persons  among  the  Vrsnis  and  Andhakas 
considered  that  murder  of  Prasena  an  act  of  Krsna  who  was 
covetous  of  the  jewel.  They  suspected  him  alone. 

37.  The  lord,  the  destroyer  of  enemies,  who  jvas  more 
powerful  than  they  did  not  brook  that  false  accusation.  So  he 
roamed  about  in  the  forest  to  trace  Prasena. 

38-41.  Accompanied  by  a few  citizens  who  were  trust- 
worthy and  obedient  to  him,  the  lord  roamed  about  in  the 
forest  where  Prasena  had  been  hunting  and  where  Prasena’s 
footprints  could  be  traced.  He  searched  the  excellent  moun- 
tains Rksavan  and  Vindhya  and  became  tired.  In  the  end 
the  noble-minded  lord  saw  Prasena  who  had  been  killed  along 
with  his  horse.  But  he  did  not  get  the  jewel  there  (on  his  person). 
Thereafter,  the  lion  was  seen  killed  by  a bear  not  far  from  the 
body  of  Prasena.  This  had  been  indicated  by  the  footprints  of 
the  bear.  The  Scion  of  the  family  of  Yadu  (i.e.  lord  Krsna) 
traced  the  foot-prints  to  the  cave  of  a bear. 

42-44.  In  that  large  cave,  he  heard  the  words  uttered 
by  a young  woman.  The  nurse  had  been  playing  with  the 
infant  son  of  Jambavan,  O Brahmanas,  along  with  the  jewel. 
The  words  Md  rodih  (Do  not  cry)  were  uttered  by  her. 

The  nurse  said  : — 

“The  lion  killed  Prasena.  It  was  killed  by  Jambavan.  O 
my  excellent  child,  dq  not  cry.  This  jewel  is  for  you”. 

The  words  were  very  clear.  He  went  into  the  cave 
immediately. 

45-47.  Near  the  cave  (also)  he  saw  (a  few)  torn  (pieces 
of)  Prasena. 

Entering  the  cave  of  the  bear  suddenly,  the  liberal-minded 
lord  saw  Jambavan,  the  king  of  bears.  For  twentyone  days, 
Govinda,  the  son  of  Vasudeva,  had  a hand-to-hand  fight 
with  Jambavan  inside  that  cave.  After  Krsna  had  entered  the 
cave  (those  who  had  followed  Krsna)  with  Vasudeva  at  their 
head,  returned  to  Dvaravati  and  announced  that  Kr$na  had 
been  killed. 

48-50.  After  defeating  Jambavan  of  great  strength, 
Vasudeva  won  Jambavati,  the  honoured  daughter  of  the  king  of 
bears. 


2.3.71.51-63 


883 


Overwhelmed  by  the  splendour  of  the  lord,  Jamba  van 
gave  the  jewel  and  Jamba vatl  immediately  to  Visvaksena  (i.e. 
Krsna) . He  accepted  the  jewel  Syamantaka  in  order  to  clear 
himself  of  scandalous  accusation. 

51 -54a.  After  pacifying  the  king  of  bears,  the  lord  came 
out  of  the  cave.  After  redeeming  the  jewel  thus  and  clearing 
himself  of  all  scandals  by  his  own  efforts,  the  lord  gave  the 
jewel  to  Satrajit  in  the  presence  of  Satvatas.  The  slayer  of 
Madhu  married  Jambavatl. 

Thus  Madhusudana  cleared  himself  of  false  accusation. 
If  anyone  understands  this  false  accusation  and  its  removal 
by  Krsna,  he  will  never  be  a victim  of  false  accusation  and 
slanderous  gossip. 

54b-56.  Satrajit  had  ten  wives  and  ten  thousand  sons. 
Among  them  three  were  very  famous.  Bhangakara  was  the 
eldest.  Vatapati  was  a great  warrior  and  TapasvT  was  a favou- 
rite of  many  people.  Bhangakara’s  mother  was  Viramati  by 
name.  She  gave  birth  to  three  daughters  endowed  with  beauty 
and  good  qualities. 

57.  Satyabhama  was  the  most  excellent  among  women. 
She  used  to  be  steadfast  in  her  holy  rites  and  observances.  She 
was  a saintly  woman.  Her  father  gave  her  in  marriage  to 
Krsna. 

58-60.  (Defective  Text).  On  hearing  that  Krsna  did  not 
take  away  the  jewel  from  Satrajit,  Akrura,  desirous  of  wealth 
coveted  the  jewel  Syamantaka.  Through  Satadhanvan  of  the 
Bhoja  family,  he  requested  for  Satyabhama  of  unblatned 
beauty.  Satadhanvan  of  great  strength  then  killed  Satrajit  at 
night,  took  away  the  jewel  and  .gave  it  to  Akrura. 

61-62.  Akrura,  the  most  excellent  among  men,  took  the 
jewel  and  entered  into  an  agreement  (with  Satadhanvan) . 
“This  should  not  be  known  to  anyone  else.  We  shall  make  use 
of  the  wealth  received  from  it.  In  case  you  are  assailed  by 
Krsna,  the  entire  city  of  Dvaraka  will  undoubtedly  remain 
under  my  control. 

63.  When  her  father  was  killed,  Satyabhama  of  great 
reputation  became  distressed  with  grief.  She  got  into  a chariot 
and  went  to  the  city  of  Varan&vata. 


884 


Brahm&nia  Purdna. 


64.  After  reporting  to  her  husband  (i.e.  Krsna)  the 

activities  of  Satadhanvan  of  the  Bhoja  family,  the  excessively 
distressed  Satyabhama  stood  at  the  side  of  her  husband  and 
shed  tears.  * 

65.  Hari  (Krsna)  performed  the  obsequies  of  Pantfavas 
who  were  supposed  to  have  been  burnt  in  the  lac  palace  at 
Varanavata.  He  engaged  Satyaki  in  activities  of  welfare*  (?). 
for  the  brothers. 

66a.  Madhusudana  (Krsna)  came  to  Dvaraka  in  a hurry,. 
The  glorious  lord  then  spoke  these  words  to  his  elder  brother 
Hall  (Balarama) . 

66b-68.  “Prasena  was  killed  by  a lion.  Satrajit  was 
killed  by  Satadhanvan.  Syamantaka  should  be  searched  for. 
O lord,  I am  the  legal  master  of  that  gem.  So  get  into  your 
chariot  quickly.  After  killing  the  very  powerful  scion  of  the 
family  of  Bhoja,  O mighty  one,  bring  the  Syamantaka  jewel. 
It  should  be  common  to  you  all.** 

69.  Then  a fierce  battle  ensued  between  Bhoja  and 
Krsna.  Satadhanva  looked  for  Akrura  in  every  direction. 

70.  Akrura  left  Bhoja  and  Srikrsna  without  bringing 
about  any  truce  between  them.  Though  he  was  able  to 
fight,  he  did  not  own  loyalty,  due  to  perfidy. 

71.  Then  Satadhanvan  became  frightened.  He  decided  to 
go  away  from  that  place.  Hrdaya  (the  mare  of  Satadhanvan) 
ran  more  than  a hundred  Yojanas. 

72.  The  mare  named  Hrdaya  belonged  to  Bhoja.  It  was 
reputed  as  one  capable  of  going  a hundred  Yojanas.  It  was  a 
divine  mare  with  which  he  fought  with  Krsna. 

73.  On  seeing  Hrdaya  exhausted  due  to  the  fast  running 
at  the  close  of  the  hundredth  Yojana  of  the  journey  and  on 
observing  the  misfortune  (?)  of  the  chariot,  Satadhanvan 
began  to  run  on  foot. 

74.  Then,  due  to  fatigue  and  affliction,  O Brahmanas, 
that  vital  breath  of  that  mare  went  up  in  the  sky.  Then  Krsna 
said  to  Rama. 


*Kalyfatha  is  obscure.  Vk.  P.  96.63  reads  tufydrtha  ‘for  equivalence’  ia 
performance  of  rites. 

**  *us  air  as  per  Vk.  P.  96.66: 


2.3.71.75-88 


885 


75.  “O  mighty  one,  wait  here.  I have  found  out  that 
there  is  a defect  in  the  mare.  I shall  go  on  foot  and  take 
away  the  excellent  jewel  Syamantaka”. 

76.  Then  Acyuta  who  was  conversant  with  the  use  of 
the  greatest  missile  went  on  foot  and  killed  Satadhanvan  in  a 
park  in  the  city  of  Mithila. 

77.  He  did  not  see  Syamantaka  (with  him).  When 
Krsna  returned  after  killing  Bhoja  of  great  strength,  the  wielder 
of  plough  (i.e.  Bala-Rama)  said  to  him  “Give  me  the  jewel*’. 

78.  Krsna  said — “It  is  not  with  me”.  Then  Rama 
became  angry  and  replied  to  Krsna  using  the  word  “Fie  on 
you”  many  times. 

79.  “I  tolerate  this  since  you  are  my  brother.  Welfare 
unto  you.  I am  going  away.  I have  nothing  to  do  with  Dvaraka, 
you  and  the  Vrsnis.” 

80.  Thereafter,  Rama,  the  suppressor  of  foes  entered 
Mithila.  With  the  offering  of  all  desirable  objects  he  was 
honoured  by  the  king  of  Mithila  himself. 

81.  It  was  at  this  time  itself  that  Babhru  ( = Akrura) 
the  most  excellent  one  among  the  intellectuals  performed 
without  any  obstacle  different  kinds  of  Yajnas. 

82.  This  intelligent  noble-minded  son  of  Gandini 
(Akrura)  adopted  initiation  along  with  Kavaca  (coat  of 
mail)  as  protection,  for  keeping  Syamantaka. 

83.  Those  sacrifices  of  that  noble-souled  one  are  famous 
as  AkrUrayajhas.  In  all  of  them,  food  and  monetary  gifts  were 
in  plenty.  All  of  them  yielded  everything  one  desired. 

84.  Then  king  Duryodhana  went  to  Mithila.  The  lord 
had  a training  in  mace-fighting  under  Balabhadra.  The 
training  was  usually  of  a divine  nature. 

85.  Thereafter,  Rama  was  pacified  and  brought  to 
Dvaraka  by  the  noble-souled  Kr?na  and  the  leading  warriors 
belonging  to  the  families  of  Vrsnis  and  Andhakas. 

86.  Akrura,  a powerful  leader  of  men,  came  back  along 
with  the  Andhakas  after  killing  Satrughna  along  with 
Bandhuman. 

87-88.  Two  well-renowned  and  very  mighty  sons  named 
Satrughna  and  Bandhuman  were  bom  to  Bhangakara  and 


886 


Brahmdnia  Purfina 


Nara,  the  daughter  of  Suyajfta.  They  were  the  most  excellent 
among  men.  Krsria  was  not  happy  over  this  murder,  because 
fihangakara  was  a prominent  member  of  Andhaka  family. 

89.  Since  he  was  afraid  of  a split  amongst  his  kinsmen, 
he  (Krsna)  ignored  him  (AkrQra) . When  Akrura  went  away, 
Indra  did  not  shower  rain  ( as  Akrura  took  with  him  the 
Syamantaka  gem) . 

90.  Since  the  whole  realm  was  ruined  by  the  draught 
in  various  ways,  the  Kukuras  and  Andhakas  pacified  and 
consoled  Akrura. 

91.  When  Danapati  (i.e.  Akrura)  returned  to  Dvaraka 
once  again,  the  thousand-eyed  lord  (Indra)  rained  every- 
where (even)  within  the  ocean. 

92.  In  order  to  gain  the  love  (of Krsna),  O leading 
sages,  Akrura,  the  glorious  one  gave  his  sister  ( in  marriage ) 
to  Vasudeva,  a girl  honoured  by  everyone  for  her  good 
conduct. 

93.  By  means  of  his  Yogic  power,  Krsna  understood 
that  the  jewel  Syamantaka  was  with  Babhru  (i.e.  Akrura). 
Hence,  he  spoke  thus  to  Akrura  in  the  open  Assembly  hall. 

94-95.  “O  lord,  you  are  worthy  of  honour.  Do  not  do 
anything  mean  or  ignoble  towards  me.  Hand  over  to  me  that 
jewel  which  is  in  your  possession.  Sixty  years  have  passed.  The 
anger  that  I had  at  that  time  has  become  firmly  rooted  (on 
account  of)  repeated  (offences) . A long  time  has  elapsed 
now”. 

96.  Then,  at  the  instance  of  Krsna,  the  highly  intelli- 
gent Babhru  handed  over,  without  hesitation  and  mental 
strain,  the  jewel  (to  Krsna)  in  the  Assembly  of  all  Satvatas. 

97.  Then  Krsna,  the  suppressor  of  enemies,  became 
delighted  in  his  mind.  He  returned  to  Babhru  the  jewel  he  had 
obtained  from  Babhru,  by  a straightforward  deal. 

98.  After  obtaining  from  Kf§na  the  excellent  jewel 
Syamantaka,  the  son  of  Gandini  wore  it  and  shone  like  the 
Sun. 

99.  He  who  understands  this  false  accusation  of  the 
lord  and  the  excellent  way  in  which  the  lord  cleared  himself, 
will  not  at  all  be  a victim  of  false  accusation. 


2.3.71.100-112 


887 


100.  Sini  was  born  of  Anamitra  who  was  the  youngest 
son  of  Vrsni.  His  son  was  Satyaka  who  was  truthful  in  speech 
and  richly  endowed  with  truthful  habits. 

101.  Yuyudhana  was  the  son  of  Satyaka  and  Bhuti* 
was  his  son.  Yugandhara  was  the  son  of  Bhuti.  Hence,  he  was 
famous  as  Bhautya. 

102.  Vrsni  was  born  as  the  son  of  Yudhajit  who  was  the 
son  of  Madrl.  Svaphalka  and  Citraka  were  the  two  sons  of 
Prsni. 

103.  There  was  no  fear  from  ailments  or  drought  in  the 
place  where  the  nobie-souled  great  king  Svaphalka  was 
present. 

1 04.  Once  upon  a time,  O excellent  Brahmanas,  Indra 
did  not  shower  rain  for  three  years  in  the  realm  of  the  king  of 
Kasi  a powerful  lord. 

105.  That  king  of  Ka£i  greatly  honoured  Svaphalka 
and  made  him  stay  there.  The  chastiser  of  Paka  (i.e.  Indra) 
showered  rain  on  account  of  the  stay  of  Svaphalka. 

106.  Svaphalka  obtained  as  his  wife  the  daughter  of  the 
king  of  Kasi,  named  Gandini.  Every  day  she  gave  a cow  as  a 
gift  to  a Brahmana.1 

107.  It  is  said  that  she  was  in  the  womb  of  her  mother 
for  many  hundreds  of  years.  She  did  not  come  out.  The  father 
then  spoke  to  her  even  as  she  was  in  the  womb. 

108-109.  cc Welfare  unto  you.  Be  born  quickly.  Why  do 
you  stay  behind  ?”.  The  girl  in  the  womb  said  to  him — “If  you 
give  as  a religious  gift  a cow  every  day,  I shall  come  out  of 
the  womb  in  three  years”.  The  father  said  “So  be  it”  and 
fulfilled  her  desire. 

110.  Akrura  her  son  from  Svaphalka,  was  remem- 
bered as  a liberal  donor,  a performer  of  sacrifices,  heroic, 
learned,  fond  of  guests  and  a person  who  distributed  much 
wealth  as  monetary  gifts. 

1 1 1-1 12.  (She  had  other  children  also  viz.)  Upamangu, 
Mangu,  Mrduras,  Arimejaya,  Girirak^a,  Yak?a,  Satrughna, 

♦Asanga  according  to  AIHT,  p.  107. 

1.  A popular  etymology  of  GSxhdini. 


888 


Brahmdnia  Purdna 


Arimardana,  Dharmavrddha,  Sukarman,  Gandhamada,  Avaha 
and  Prativaha  were  the  sons.  The  excellent  lady  Vasudeva 
was  her  daughter. 

1 13.  Two  sons  who  were  the  delighters  of  the  family  and 
who  resembled  Devas  were  born  to  the  daughter  of  Ugra- 
sena  and  Akrura.  They  were  Devavan  and  Upadeva. 

114-115.  Citraka  begot  three  sons.  Prthu,  Viprthu, 
As'vagriva,  Asvaviiha,  Suparsvaka,  Gavesana,  Aristanemi, 
Asvasya,  Suvarma,  Varmabhrt,  Abhumi  and  Bahubhumi. 
Sravistha  and  Sravana  were  his  daughters. 

116.  The  daughter  of  the  king  of  KasI  bore  four  sons  to 
Satyaka  viz. — Kukura,  Bhajamana,  Suci  and  Kambalabarhis. 

1 17.  Vrsni  was  the  son  of  Kukura;  Kapotaroman  was 
the  son  of  Vrsni  and  Viloman  was  his  son. 

118.  Andhaka  was  his  son.  It  is  well-known  that  he  was 
a scholar  and  friend  of  Tumburu.  Another  name  of  his  viz. 
Candanodakadundubhi  * is  also  famous. 

119-120.  Abhijit  was  his  son  and  from  him  was  born 
Punarvasu.  The  excellent  king  performed  a horse -sacrifice  for 
obtaining  a son.  In  the  course  of  the  holy  rite  of  Atiratra, 
Punarvasu  was  born  from  the  midst  of  assembly.  Therefore,  he 
became  later  on  a great  scholar,  a liberal  donor,  a performer 
of  sacrifices  and  one  .conversant  with  piety  and  virtue. 

121.  Thereafter,  it  is  said,  two  more  children  were 
bom  to  Abhijit  viz.  Ahuka  and  Ahuki.**  They  were  the  most 
excellent  ones  among  intelligent  persons  and  they  were  well- 
renowned. 

122-124.  They  cite  these  verses  in  regard  to  Ahuka  : — 
“He  had  ten  thousand  chariots  having  the  rumbling  sound  of 
the  cloud.  They  were  fully  equipped  with  Updsangas  (quivers) 
Anukarf as  (axle-trees),  banners  and  Var  Gthas(  protecting  ledges). 

*AIHT,  p.  150  records  Nandanodakadundubhi  as  the  name.  His  another 
name  Andhaka  given  in  our  text  is  not  given  by  Pargiter. 

** According  to  the  genealogy  on  p.  105  of  AIHT  Ahuka  was  the  son  of 
Punarvasu. 


2,3.71.125-136 


889 


( In  his  land ) there  was  no  one  uttering  a lie,  refraining 
from  the  performance  of  sacrifices  or  not  giving  thousands  of 
coins.  No  one  was  unclean.  No  one  was  unrighteous,  lean  or 
devoid  of  scholarship.” 

We  have  heard  that  Dhrti  was  the  son  of  Ardraka  (?) 
(rather  Ahuka— Va.  P.  96.  123). 

125-1 28.  (Defective  partially ) . With  this  retinue  Ahuka, 
the  unrivalled,  marched  towards  the  eastern  quarter  displaying 
eighty  lakhs  of  horses  very  young  in  age.  Thereby  he  surpassed 
king  Bhoja  (although  he  had  as  many)  elephants.  (In  this  com- 
paign  he  gained)  twentyone  thousand  ropes  made  of  silver 
and  gold  for  binding  elephants. 

An  equal  number  of  thousand  (of  bells  of  elephants)  of 
king  Bhoja  in  the  northern  quarter  made  tinkling  sound  on 
his  conquest. 

Ahuka  gave  his  sister  AhukI  in  marriage  in  the  land  of 
Avanti  (i.e.  to  a Prince  of  Avanti) . 

Two  sons  were  born  to  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  Ka£i 
and  Ahuka. 

129.  They  were  Devaka  and  Ugrasena.  Both  of  them 
were  on  a par  with  those  born  of  divine  womb.  Heroic  sons 
comparable  to  the  Devas  were  born  to  Devaka. 

130.  They  were  Devavan,  Upadeva,  Sudeva,  and  Deva- 
raksita.  They  had  seven  sisters.  He  gave  them  to  Vasudeva 
in  marriage. 

131-132.  They  were  Dhrtadeva,  Upadeva,  Devarak$ita, 
Srldeva,  Santideva,  Sahadeva  and  the  youngest  of  all  of  them 
viz.  Devaki.  She  had  a charming  appearance. 

Ugrasena  had  nine  sons.  Kamsa  was  the  eldest  among 

them. 

133-136.  They  were  Nyagrodha,  Sunaman,  Kanka, 
Sanku,  Subhumi,  Sutanu,  Ras(rapala,  Yuddhatu$$a  and 
Tu$timan. 

They  had  five  sisters  viz.  Karhsa,  Kamsavati,  Sutanu, 
Ra$prapall  and  Kanka. 

Ugrasena  liad  a large  number  of  children.  Thus  the  scions ‘ 
of  the  race  of  Kukura  have  been  recounted. 


890 


Brahm&nia  Purdna 


A man  who  remembers  this  race  of  Kukura  having  many 
members  of  unlimited  strength  and  prowess,  makes  his  own 
family  extensive  with  many  children. 

Viduratha  was  the  son  of  Bhajamana.  He  was  the  most 
important  among  chariot- warriors. 

137-138.  Sura  was  the  son  of  Viduratha.  He  became  the 
king  of  kings.  Very  powerful  sons  were  born  to  Sura  viz.  Vata. 
Nivata,  Sonita,  Svetavahana,  Sami,  Gadavarman  and  Nidanta. 
Indeed,  he  was  a conqueror  of  his  foes. 

1 39.  Pratiksatra  was  the  son  of  Sami.  Svayambhoja  was 
the  son  of  Pratiksatra.  Hrdika  was  the  son  of  Svayambhoja. 

140-141.  Hrdika  had  ten  sons  of  terrible  exploits, 
Krtavarman  was  the  eldest  among  them.  Satadhanvan  was  a 
son  in  the  middle.  (The  others  were)  Devabahu,  Subahu, 
Bhisak,  Svetaratha,  Sudanta,  Adhidanta,  Kanaka  and  Kanako- 
dbhava. 

142.  A scholarly  son  named  Kambalabarhis  was 
born  to  Devabahu.  Asamaujas  was  his  son.  (Another  son) 
Susamaujas  was  very  famous. 

143.  Krsna  gave  Sucandra  and  Vasurupa  (as  sons  in 
adoption)  to  Asamaujas  of  whom  no  son  was  born. 

Thus  the  Andhakas  are  remembered  (have  been 
recounted) . 

144.  He  who  repeats  the  names  of  and  glorifies  this 
race  of  Andhakas  every  day,  attains  an  extensive  family  of 
himself.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this  matter. 

145.  Sura  begot  Devamldhvan  (Dcvaml<jhusa)  of 
Asmaki.  Ten  persons  were  bom  of  Mari  si  from  Sura.  Maris! 
belonged  to  the  Bhoja  family. 

146-148.  Vasudeva  of  mighty  arms  was  bom  at  the 
outset.  He  is  known  as  Anakadundubhi  because  when  he  was 
bom  a loud  report  of  Dundubhi  ( War  drum)  was  heard  in 
the  sky. 

There  was  the  loud  sound  of  Anakas  (a  type  of 
war-drum)  too  in  the  sky.  There  was  no  one  on  a par  with 
Vasudeva  in  the  entire  world  of  men  in  regard  to  the 
handsomeness  of  features.1  He  was  the  foremost  among  all 

1.  Vasudeva**  unparalleled  handsomeness  is  recorded  not  only  in. 
Brahmanical  Purapas  but  in  Jaina  works  also.  According  to  Jaina  records. 


2.3.71.149-160 


891 


men  of  the  Earth.  His  splendour  was  like  that  of  the  Moon. 

149-152.  The  following  were  born  after  him  viz.  Deva- 
bhaga,  Devasravas,  Anadhrsji,  Vrka,  Nandana,  Sr-ftjaya, 
Syama,  Samlka  and  Gandu?a.  They  had  five  excellent  ladies 
as  their  sisters.  They  were  Prtha,  Srutadeva,  Srutaklrti,  Sruta- 
sravas  and  Rajadhidevl.  These  five  were  mothers  of  heroic 
sons.  Sura  gave  his  daughter  Prtha  to  Kuntibhoja  by  way  of 
adoption.  Hence,  Prtha  became  the  daughter  of  Kuntibhoja. 
She  is  remembered  by  the  name  Kuntl.  Pantju,  an  important 
heroic  scion  of  the  family  of  Kurus,  took  her  as  his  wife  from 
him. 

153-154.  Thereafter,  Prtha  gave  birth  to  three  sons 
whose  splendour  was  on  a par  with  that  of  the  three  fires. 
They  were  heroes  without  compeers  in  the  world.  They  had  the 
prowess  and  exploit  comparable  to  that  of  Indr  a. 

Prtha  gave  birth  to  the  son  Yudhis{hira  from  Dharma,. 
Vrkodara  (i.e.  Bhima)  from  the  wind  god  Marutaand  Dhanafi- 
jaya  from  Indra. 

155.  This  is  well  known  that  the  Asvins  were  born  of 
Madravati.  Nakula  and  Sahadeva  were  endowed  with  beauty 
of  form,  inherent  strength  and  other  good  qualities. 

1 56.  The  heroic  son  Dantavakra  of  great  strength  was 
born  to  Srutadeva  from  Vrddha$arman  the  king  of  Karusa. 

157.  Santardana,  the  powerful  one,  was  born  to  Sruta- 
kirti  from  the  prince  of  Kekaya.  Similarly,  another  pair  of 
very  powerful  princes  named  Gekitana  and  Brhatk$atra 
were  also  bom. 

158-160.  The  brothers  Vinda  and  Anuvinda  who  were 
very  powerful  were  bom  of  the  prince  of  Avanti  (?  as  sons  of 
Rajadhidevi).  Sisupala,  the  prince  of  Cedi,  .was  born  of 
$ruta£rav&  as  the  son  of  saintly  king  Damaghosa.  His 
manliness  is  well-known.  Formerly,  he  had  been  the  tenheaded 


Vasudcva  was  banished  by  his  father,  as  complaints  were  lodged  by  the 
citizens  about  the  seductive  effect  of  his  beauty  on  their  women.  A work 
called  Vasudeva  Hk ifi  (600  A.D)  an  authentic  version  of  the  (Paii&ci) 
Bfbatkath&  of  Gug&dhya — makes  Vasudeva  (instead  of  Narav&hanadatta)  a 
hero  whose  wondering!  were  a marriage-campaign. 


892 


Brahmdnfa  Purdna 


(R&vana),  the  suppressor  of  foes.  He  was  the  younger  brother 
of  Vaisravana  and  Kumbhakarna  had  been  his  younger 
brother. 

Thirteen  excellent  ladies  were  the  wives  of  Vasudeva. 

161-163.  They  were  Pauravi,  Rohinl,  Madira,  Bhadra- 
vaisakhl  and  the  fifth  one  SunamnT.  (These  were  perhaps  the 
earlier  wives).  Then  Sahadeva,  San  tide  va  Srideva,  Devara- 
ksita,  Dhrtadeva,  Upadeva  and  Devaki  the  seventh  one — these 
too  were  his  wives.  The  thirteenth  one  was  Sugandha.  (Be- 
sides these)  VanarajI  and  two  other  attandant  ladies  became  his 
wives. 

Rohinl  and  Pauravi  were  the  younger  sisters  of  BahlTka. 

164-165.  Rohinl  of  excessive  magnificence  and  fortune 
was  the  eldest  and  the  most  beloved  wife  of  Anakadundubhi. 
She  gave  birth  to  eight  sons  out  of  whom  Rama  (Balarama) 
was  the  eldest.  (The  other  sons  were)  Sarana,  Satha,  Durdama, 
D'unana,  Subhra,  Pindaraka,  Kusltaka.  A daughter  called 
Citra  was  also  born  to  her. 

166-168.  Nisatha  and  Ulmuka  were  very  famous.  They 
were  bom  as  the  sons*  of  Rama.  Similarly,  Parsvx,  Parsvamardi, 
Sisu,  Satyadhrti  and  Mandabahya  were  also  the  sons  of  Rama. 

Girika,  Giri,  Sulkagulma,  Atigulma  and  Daridrantaka 
were  the  sons  of  Sarana.  He  had  five  daughters  too.  Under- 
stand them  by  their  names.  They  were  Arcismatl,  Sunanda 
Surasa,  Suvaca  and  Satabala.  These  were  the  daughters  of 
Sarana. 

169-170.  Bhadrasva,  Bhadragupti,  Bhadravista  Bhadra- 
bahu,  Bhadraratha.  Bhadrakalpa,  Suparsvaka,  Klrtiman  and 
Rohitaiva  were  the  sons  of  Satha. 

171-172.  Abhibhuta  was  the  son  of  Durmada  (?  Dur- 
dama) . The  above  are  remembered  as  the  persons  bom  of 
the  family  of  Rohinl. 

Nanda,  Upananda,  Mitra,  Kuksimitra,  Bala,  Citra, 
Upacitra,  Krtaka,  Tu^ti  and  Pusti — these  were  the  sons  of 
Madira.  They  were  born  to  Vasudeva  of  Madira. 

^grandsons  according  to  V&.  P.  96. 164. 

There  appears  to  be  some  confusion  in  the  text. 


2.3.71.173-186 


893 


173.  Bimba,  Upabimba,  Sattvadanta  and  Mahaujas — 
these  four  persons  of  great  strength  are  well  known  as  the  sons 
ofBhadra  (?) 

174-175.  &auri  (i.e.  Vasudeva)  begot  of  VaiSall  (?) 
(Vaisakhi)  the  excellent  son  Kausika.  The  following  six  sons 
were  bom  of  Devaki  toSauri  viz.  Susena,  Kirtiman,  Udar?i, 
Bhadrasena,  the  fifth  one  Rjudaya  or  Bhadradeva,  the  sixth 
one  Kamsa. 

176.  In  these  circumstances,  Visnu,  the  lord  of 
worlds,  became  Prajapati  once  again  (being  bom)  as  the  long- 
lived  Krsna. 

177.  Subhadra,  who  used  to  speak  pleasantly  well 
(Bhadrabhasini)  was  bom  subsequent  to  Krsna.  This  lady 
who  delighted  the  family  of  Vr$ni  became  well  renowned  later 
as  Krsna  and  Subhadra. 

178-179.  The  great  warrior  Abhimanyu  was  bom  of 
Subhadra  to  Partha  (i.e.  Arjuna) . Understand  by  their 
(individual  names,  those  sons  of  great  heroism,  who  were  born 
of  those  seven  highly  fortunate  wives  of  Vasudeva. 

Purva  and  others  were  born  of  Vasudeva  as  the  sons  of 
Sahadeva. 

180.  Santideva  gave  birth  to  Janastambha  the  illustrious 
scion  of  the  family  of  Sauri. 

Agavaha  the  noble-souled  one  was  bom  of  VrkadevI  (?) 

181-1 82a.  A son  named  Mandaka  was  bom  to  Srideva. 

Devaraksita  gave  birth  to  two  sons  viz.  Upasanga  and 

Vasu. 

Thus  there  were  ten  sons  of  his.  Kamsa  got  them  also 
killed. 

182b- 183.  SiSiravatl  (?)  gave  birth  to  these  noble- 
souled  sons  viz. — Vijaya,  Rocana,  Vardhamana  and  Devala. 

The  seventh  wife,  the  daughter  of  Devaka  gave  birth 
to  the  highly  prosperous  son  Gavesana  of  good  name,  who 
fought  in  a wonderful  manner  during  the  battle. 

184-186.  O Brahmana,  formerly  while  moving  about  in 
the  urban  parks  and  forests,  Vasudeva  begot  of  the  Vaifya 
lady  Sraddhidevi  the  son  Kausika  who  was  economical. 

Sugandhi  and  Vanaraji  were  (see  V.  163)  also  the  wives 
of  Sauri. 


894 


Brakmdnfa  Purdna 


Pun^ra  and  Kapila  were  the  sons  of  Sugandhl.  Of  these 
two  Purujra  became  a king  and  Kapila  went  to  the  forest. 

187.  To  the  other  lady,  a powerful  heroic  son  of 
Vasudeva  was  born.  He  was  the  Nisada  (forester)  n£med  Jara 
(?).  He  was  the  foremost  archer. 

188.  Mahabhaga  was  the  famous  son  of  Devabhagya 
(in  V.  149  Devabhaga). 

They  call  the  son  born  of  Devasravas  as  one  honoured  by 
scholars. 

189.  Anadhrsti  begot  of  Asmaki,  a powerful  son  Srad- 
dhadeva.  He  was  a destroyer  of  enemies.  All  his  enemies  had 
receded  from  him. 

190.  Ekalavya,  the  highly  lucky  son,  was  born  to  Srad- 
dhadeva.  He  was  brought  up  by  Nisadas  (foresters)  and  so  he 
was  well-known  as  Naisadi. 

191.  With  pleasure  Krsna  gave  his  sons  Carudesna  and 
Samba  for  adoption  to  Garujusa  who  had  no  children.  These 
two  sons  were  well  up  in  the  use  of  arms.  They  were  endowed 
with  highly  laudable  characteristics. 

192-194.  Ranti  and  Rantipala  were  the  two  sons  of 
Nandana. 

Vasudeva,  the  son  of  Sura,  who  was  valorous  gave  his 
heroic  sons  Saumi  and  Kausika  to  Vrka  who  had  no  sons. 

Dhanus  and  Virajas  were  the  two  sons  of  Srnjaya. 

Syama  had  no  children.  Samlka  went  to  the  forest 
treating  his  status  of  being  born  of  the  family  of  Bhoja  with 
contempt.  He  secured  the  status  of  a Rajarsi  (a  royal 
sage). 

195.  He  who  duly  observes  holy  rites  and  reads  this 
story  of  the  birth  of  Krsna  or  narrates  it  to  a Brahmana,  shall 
obtain  great  happiness. 

106.  Krsna,  the  lord  of  the  Devas,  the  Prajapati  (lord 
or  procreator  of  subjects)  who  was  originally  Lord  Narayana, 
was  born  among  human  beings  for  the  sake  of  sport. 

197.  The  lotus-eyed  lord  was  born  to  Devaki  and 
Vasudeva  on  account  of  their  previous  austerities.  The  lord 
had  four  arms  and  was  endowed  with  divine  beauty,  charm  and 
splendour. 


2.3.71.198-211 


895 


198.  The  lord  who  was  originally  Avyakta  (Unmanifest) 
exhibited  his  characteristics  clearly.  The  holy  lord  of  Yogic 
powers  came  to  light  as  Krsna  in  a human  form. 

199.  It  was  Narayana  who  turned  what  is  Avyaya  (the 
imperishable)  into  Vyaya  (the  perishable  one  i.e.  the  body  of 
Krsna) . After  becoming  Hari  (i.e.  Krsna) , Narayana  resumed 
his  original  San&tana  (eternal)  status. 

200-203a.  ( Partially  defective  text).  The  lord  had  created 
Prajapati  (god  Brahma)  the  primordial  Being  from  a lotus. 
The  lord  well-known  as  Visnu  became  the  younger  brother  of 
Indra  after  being  born  as  the  son  of  Aditi.  Devas  propitiated  the 
omnipresent  Lord  for  being  born  as  the  son  of  Aditi. 

The  family  of  intelligent  Vasudeva  born  in  the  race 
of  Yayati  became  sacred  and  holy,  because  lord  Narayana 
took  his  birth  therein  for  the  sake  of  killing  Daityas,  Danavas 
and  Rak?asas. 

2031>-206.  While  Janardana  incarnated,  the  oceans 
trembled  and  agitated,  the  mountains  shook,  and  the  sacrificial 
fires  of  Agnihotra  blazed.  Auspicious  and  lucky  winds  blew.  Dust 
particles  became  settled  down.  The  luminaries  shone  all  the 
more  brightly. 

The  astcrism  on  the  day  when  Janardana  was  born  was 
Abhijit  by  name.  The  night  is  called  JayantI  (the  8th  of  the 
dark  half  of  Sravana,  the  asterism  RohinI  rising  at  mid-night). 
The  Muhurta  (auspicious  period  of  48  minutes)  was  Vijaya 
by  name. 

Hari  the  eternal,  unmanifest  lord  Narayana  became 
Krsna. 

207.  Causing  delusion  to  the  subjects  through  his  Maya 
(illusive  Powerj , the  lord  incarnated  and  the  lord  of  the  Devas 
(i.e.  Indra)  caused  shower  of  flowers  from  the  sky. 

208.  With  words  full  of  auspicious  purport  and  signi- 
ficance, thousands  of  great  sages,  along  with  the  Gandharvas 
eulogised  and  prayed  to  Madhusudana. 

209-211.  On  seeing  his  son  born  at  the  night  and  on 
observing  the  characterisic  curl  of  hair  on  the  chest  called 
Srivatsa,  Vasudeva  thought  in  his  mind  that  it  was  Adhoksaja 


896  Brahm&ntjla  Purdna 

(Visnu)  himself  on  account  of  the  divine  characteristic 
marks. 

Vasudeva  said  to  him — “O  lord  withdraw  this  divine 
form.  O beloved  one,  I am  afraid  of  Kamsa.  Hence,  I say  like 
this. 

My  sons  of  wonderful  appearance,  your  elder  brothers 
have  been  killed  by  him”. 

On  hearing  the  words  of  Vasudeva,  the  lord  withdrew 
his  divine  form. 

212.  Being  permitted  by  the  lord,  the  father  took  him 
to  the  abode  of  Nanda  the  cowherd  (who  was  staying)  in  the 
house  of  Ugrasena  and  handed  him  to  Yasoda. 

213.  Yasoda  and  Devaki  had  become  pregnant  at  the 
same  time.  Yasoda  was  the  wife  of  Nandagopa,  the  head  of 
cowherds.  * 

214.  A girl  was  bom  to  Yasoda  in  the  very  night  when 
the  lord  was  born  as  Krsna  in  the  family  of  Vrsnis. 

215.  Guarding  the  son  bom  to  him,  Vasudeva  of  great 
fame,  handed  over  his  son  to  Yasoda  and  took  the  girl  with 
him. 

216-218.  After  giving  the  child  to  Nandagopa,  he 
requested  “Protect  this  (child).  This  is  your  son.  Everything 
will  be  auspicious  unto  the  Yadavas.  This  is  the  child  of 
Devaki.  He  will  remove  all  my  distresses.” 

Anakadundubhi  (Vasudeva)  then  intimated  to  the  son 
of  Ugrasena  (i.e.  Kamsa) — “This  is  a daughter  of  very 
auspicious  and  splendid  characteristics.” 

Kamsa  was  not  at  all  aware,  that  a son  had  been  bom 
to  his  sister. 

219.  The  evil-minded  (Kamsa)  handed  the  girl  back 
(to  Vasudeva)  and  said  with  pleasure — “She  is  my  daughter 
in  the  same  way  as  yours.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this.  O heroic 
one,  I will  not  kill  her.  Let  her  go  wherever  she  pleases”. 

* Syntactically  sd  NandagopaUh  is  tautologous.  Sd  should  stand  for  Devaki 
but  then  Nandagopatth  needs  emendation  like  Anakadundubkefi.  The  emended 
text  will  be  s&'nakadundubheh . ‘she  (Devaki)  was  the  wife  of  Vasudeva.' 

1.  Contrast  Bh.P.X.5.5-8  where  Kamsa  is  said  to  have  snatched  away 
the  girl  from  Devaki  and  tried  to  dash  her  on  a slab  of  stone. 


2.3.71.220-231 


897 


220-222.  Honoured  in  the  ancestral  abode  of  the  Vrsnis 
that  girl  grew  up  very  well.  The  gentle  lady  (DevakI)  joyously 
brought  up  the  goddess  like  her  own  son.  Thus  the  people 
say  that  Prajapati  himself  was  bom  as  Krsna  in  this  manner. 
It  is  for  the  protection  of  Kesava  that  she  was  born. 

The  Yadavas  will  respect  and  honour  her  with  concen- 
tration of  mind.  The  lord  of  the  Devas  with  divine  body,  Knsna 
himself  had  been  protected  by  her. 

The  sages  enquired  : — 

223.  Wherefor  did  the  Bhoja  king  Kariisa  kill  the  infant 
sons  of  Vasudcva?  It  behoves  you  to  clarify  this. 

SUt a said  : 

224-225.  Listen  why  the  foolish-minded  Kamsa  killed 
the  sons  of  Vasudeva  when  they  were  born  due  to  fear  of  the 
powerful  Lord — why  Krsna  was  taken  away  elsewhere  as 
soon  as  he  was  horn  and  how  Govinda,  the  supreme  person, 
was  brought  up  along  with  the  cows. 

226.  At  the  marriage  of  Dcvaki  and  Vasudeva  the 
intelligent  Kamsa  acted  as  the  charioteer.  At  that  time  he 
was  the  crown-Prince. 

227.  Then  in  the  sky  rose  the  speech  of  some  incompre- 
hensible person.  It  was  a divine  speech.  It  was  very  loud  and 
witnessed  by  the  people  of  the  world  merely  because  the  name 
of  Kamsa  was  uttered  by  it. 

228.  “O  Kamsa,  out  of  afTection,  you  are  taking  your 
sister  by  means  of  a chariot.  The  eighth  child  of  that  lady 
shall  be  your  killer”. 

229.  On  hearing  that  aerial  voice,  Kamsa,  the 
foolish  one,  became  distressed.  He  drew  his  sword  and  became 
intent  on  killing  her. 

230.  The  Valorous  Vasudeva  of  great  power  said  to 
Kamsa  the  son  of  Ugrasena,  out  of  friendship  or  love. 

231.  — “O  scion  of  the  family  of  Yadavas,  you  are 
a K$atriya  and  it  does  not  behove  you  to  kill  a woman.  In  this 
matter  (under  reference)  a certain  remedy  has  been  found  out 
by  me. 


898 


Brahm&n$a  Purdna 


232.  O lord  of  the  Earth,  I shall  hand  over  to  you  the 
eighth  son  that  will  be  born  of  her.  With  him,  you  can  do 
what  you  deem  proper. 

233.  O munificent  one,  do  not  behave  now  in  .the  way 
you  wish. 

Or,  as  another  alternative,  I shall  bring  unto  you  all  the 
children  (born  of  her)  severally  (i.e.  as  and  when  they  are 
born) . 

234.  In  this  manner,  O excellent  one  among  men,  this 
aerial  voice  too  will  not  be  erroneous”. 

On  being  told  thus  and  consoled,  he  accepted  the 
suggestion  then. 

235.  On  regaining  his  wife,  Vasudeva  became  delighted. 
The  foolish-minded  Karhsa  of  evil  deeds  killed  his  sons. 

The  sages  enquired  : — 

236-337.  Who  is  this  Vasudeva  who  begot  Visnu  whom 
he  addressed  as  “O  dear  one”  ? Who  is  this  renowned  DevakI 
who  bore  Visnu  in  her  womb  ? Who  is  Yasoda  of  great  repu- 
tation who  brought  him  up  ? Who  is  this  Nandagopa  ? 

SUta  said  : — 

238.  Purusa  became  Kasyapa  and  Aditi  was  his  beloved 
Prakrti.  KaSyapa  was  a part  of  Brahma  and  Aditi  that  of 
Prthivi  (the  Earth) . * 

239-240.  Nanda  is  reputed  as  Drona  and  Yasoda  was 
Dhara*. 

The  mighty  lord  made  the  desires  of  DevakI  flourish  and 
entered  a human  body.  The  lord  thus  walked  over  the  earth. 
The  lord  of  Yogic  soul  caused  delusion  unto  all  living  beings 
by  means  of  his  Yogic  Maya. 

241.  WhenDharma  (Virtue)  became  lost,  Visnu  himself 
was  bom  in  the  family  of  Vrsni  in  order  to  re-establish  Dharma 
and  annihilate  Asuras. 

* According  to  Bh.p.X. 8.48-51  Nanda  was  a Senior  Vasu  called  Drona 
in  his  previous  birth  and  Dhara  was  his  wife.  God  Brahm&  gave  them  a boon 
whereby  they  became  the  foster-parents  of  Lord  Ktfna  and  were  devoted  to 
him. 


2.3.71.242-254 


899 


242-244.  (Defective  text)  RukminI  was  the  daughter 
of  the  king  of  Vidarbhas.  Satya  was  the  daughter  of  Nagnajit. 
Satyabhama  was  the  daughter  of  Satrajit.  (These  were  the 
wives  of  Kr?na) . Jambavati,  Rohini  (?  prob.  Lak$mana) 
Saibya  and  sixteen  thousand  other  gentle  ladies  were  also  the 
blessed  wives  of  Kfsna. 

Fourteen  groups  of  Apsaras  (celestial  women)  have 
already  been  mentioned  before.  Indra  held  council  with  the 
Devas  and  the  important  ones  were  sent  here  for  the  sake  of 
becoming  the  wives  of  Vasudeva.  They  were  born  in  palaces 
(rich  families). 

245-246.  These  prosperous  and  lucky  ones  are  well 
known  as  the  wives  of  Visvaksena. 

The  sons  of  RukminI  were  : — 

Pradyumna,  Carudesna,  Sudeva.  Sarabha,  Caru,  C&ru- 
bhadra,  Bhadracaru  and  Caruvidya.  There  was  a daughter 
named  Gamma  tl. 

247-248.  The  sons  of  Satyabhama  were  Sanu,  Bhanu, 
Aksa,  Rohita,  Mantravid, Jara,  Andhaka,  Tamracakra,  Saubhari 
and  Jarandhara.  Four  sisters  were  born  of  the  Garuda-emblem- 
ed  lord  (i.e.  Krsna)  viz.  Bhanu,  Saubharika,  Tamraparnl 
and  Jarandhara.  Listen  to  the  childern  of  Jambavati. 

249-250.  Bhadra,  Bhadragupta,  Bhadracitra  and 
Bhadrabahu  were  the  sons  of  Jambavati*.  The  daughters 
were  famous  by  the  names  ofBhadravati  and  Sambodhanl. 
These  should  be  known  as  the  children  of  Jambavati. 

251.  Sahgramajit,  Satajit  and  Sahasrajit — these  were 
glorified  as  the  sons  of  Visvaksena  born  of  Sudevl. 

252.  The  children  of  the  daughter  of  Nagnajit  were 
these — viz.  Vrka,  VrkaSva,  Vrkajit,  Mitrabahu  and  Sunltha 
were  sons.  Vrjini,  the  excellent  lady,  was  her  daughter. 

253.  These  and  others  constitute  thousands  of  sons. 
Understand  that  it  is  mentioned  that  Vasudeva’s  sons  were 
about  a million. 

254.  Eighty  thousand  among  them  were- great  heroes 
and  experts  in  war. 


900  Brahm&nfa  Pwrdna 

Thus  the  race  of  Janardana  has  been  duly  recounted  to 
you  all. 

255.  Brhati  was  the  wife  of  Puru.  So  also  Sumadhya 
and  Sugati.  She  (?  Brhati)  was  the  daughter  of  the  noble- 
sou  led  Brhaduktha,  son  of  Sini. 

256.  Thereof  her  sons  viz.  Ananda,  Kanaka  and  Sveta 
were  well-known.  They  shone  splendidly  in  battles.  She  had  a 
daughter  also  named  Sveta. 

257.  Gitra,  Sura  and  Gitraratha  were  the  sons  of 
Agavaha.  Gitrasena  was  his  son.  He  had  a daughter 
Citravati 

258.  Tumba  had  two  sons  viz.  Tumba  (?)  and 
Tumbavarcas. 

Vajrara  and  Ksipra  were  the  sons  of  Upasanga. 

259.  Bhurindrasena  and  Bhuri  were  the  sons  of 
Gavesana. 

Sudhanus  was  his  (?)  son  born  of  the  daughter  of 
Yudhisthira. 

260.  Kasya  ( Princess  of  Kasi)  bore  five  courageous  and 
strong  sons  to  Samba.  They  are  glorified  as  five  shining  heroes 
beginning  with  Satya. 

261-262.  The  grandsons  of  the  noble-souled  Yadavas 
were  three  crorcs  in  number.  The  entire  family  and  those  who 
stay  in  the  family  are  under  the  protection  and  the  lordly 
authority  of  Visnu.  Suras  and  human  beings  are  bound  by  those 
who  abide  by  his  behests. 

263.  Those  powerful  Asuras  who  were  killed  in  the 
battles  between  the  Devas  and  Asuras  are  born  here  among 
human  beings.  They  harass  human  beings. 

264.  It  is  for  annihilating  them  that  they  are  born  in 
the  family  of  Yadavas.  A hundred  branches  of  the  family  of 
the  noble-souled  Yadavas  were  born. 

265.  Thus  the  progeny  of  Vfsnis  has  been  glorified 
succinctly  and  in  detail.  That  must  be  glorified  by  one  who  is 
desirous  of  achievement  of  fame. 


2.3.72.1-11 


901 


CHAPTER  SEVENTYTWO 

Praise  of  the  Lord  : Conclusion 


SUta  said  : — 


1-3.  Understand  the  Devas  with  human  appearance  and 
descent  who  are  being  glorified. 

Sankarsana,  Vasudeva,  Pradyumna,  Samba  and  Aniruddha 
— these  five  are  glorified  as  the  five  heroes  of  the  race  (of 
Vrsnis). 

The  seven  sages,  Kubera,  Yajfta,  Manivara,  Saluki, 
Narada,  the  learned  Dhanvantari,  Nandins,  Mahadeva, 
Salarikayana  and  Visnu,  the  primordial  God,  along  with  these 
gods  (Sankarsana  etc.)  (?  are^  the  Devas  with  human 
descent) . 

The  sages  said  : — 

4.  What  for  was  Visnu  born  ? How  many  SambhUtis 
(births  or  incarnations  of  Visnu)  are  remembered  ? How  many 
of  them  are  to  occur  in  future  ? How  many  are  the  manifesta- 
tions of  the  noble-souled  one  ? 

5.  What  for  is  he  bom  again  and  again  in  excellent 
families  of  Brahmanas  and  Ksatriyas  among  beings.  Recount 
it  to  us  who  (being  inquisitive)  enquire  about  it. 

6-7.  We  wish  to  hear  in  detail  about  the  activities  of 
intelligent  Krsna,  the  destroyer  of  enemies.  Kindly  narrate 
duly  the  activities  in  the  proper  order.  So  also  mention 
what  are  the  manifestations  of  the  lord. 

8-1  la.  It  behoves  you 'to  recount  to  us,  O beloved  one, 
his  descent  and  source  of  origin.  Why  did  Lord  Visnu, 
the  annihilator  of  enemies,  who  was  among  gods  (and  had 
the  status  of  God)  was  bom  in  the  family  of  Vasudeva  ? How 
did  the  intelligent  one  attain  the  status  of  the  son  of  Vasudeva? 
Why  did  he  leave  the  holy  Devaloka  (world  of  the  gods)  inha- 
bited by  the  meritorious  immortal  ones  and  come  down  here 
to  the  mortal  worlds  ? 

Hari  who  is  the  leader  of  the  Devas  as  well  as  human 
beings,  is  the  source  of  origin  of  god  Brahma  (the  creator  of 


902  Brahmantfa  Purdna 

the  world) . Why  did  he  make  his  divine  self  permeate  a human 
form? 

lib- 13a.  It  is  he  alone  who  makes  the  mental  cycle- 
( manomayarh  cakram ) of  human  beings  revolve  and  function. 
How  is  it  that  he,  the  most  excellent  among  the  wielders  of 
discus,  decided  to  be  born  among  human  beings. 

It  is  he  who  accords  protection  all  times  to  the  Universe. 
How  did  that  lord  Visnu  come  to  the  £arth  and  functioned 
as  a protector  of  Cows  ? 

13b-l4a.  He  is  Bhutatma  (the  immanent  Soul  of  all 
living  beings) . It  is  he  who  created  and  sustained  the  Mahdr 
bhtitas  (the  great  elements) . He  is  Srigarbha  (having  glory  and 
splendour  within) . How  was  he  accommodated  in  the  womb 
by  a woman  walking  over  the  Earth  (i.e.  ordinary  human 
being)  ? 

14b- 16.  It  is  he  by  whom  the  Devas  had  been  made 
glorious  and  prosperous  after  conquering  the  worlds)  one  after 
another)  in  due  order.  The  paths  (i.e.  diverse  forms  of  activity 
worldly  as  well  as  spiritual)  of  the  world  have  been  established 
by  him.  A body  that  took  three  steps  (traversing  the  three 
worlds  within  them)  was  assumed  by  him  (in  the  Vamana 
incarnation) . This  most  excellent  god  handed  over  the  earth 
conquered  by  him  (from  Bali)  to  gods  again. 

Hiranyakasipu  the  demon  of  yore,  possessing  great 
prowess  had  been  killed  by  him  after  adopting  a leonine  body 
and  dividing  it  into  two  (as  half-man-half-lion) . 

1 7.  It  is  that  all-pervading  lord  became  the  submarine 
fire  called  Aurva  and  Samvartaka.  Stationed  in  the  nether- 
worlds  and  within  the  ocean,  he  drank  the  Havis  offerings  in 
the  form  of  water. 

18.  In  the  different  Yugas,  they  (the  learned  sages)  call 
him  the  lord  with  a thousand  feet,  a thousand  rays,  a thousand 
forms)  and  a thousand  heads. 

19.  It  is  from  his  navel  as  holy  as  the  sacred  Arani  (the 
piece  of  wood  used  for  kindling  sacred  fire  by  attrition  that  the 
abode  of  Pitdmaha  (the  creator  Brahma)  took  its  origin  when 
the  whole  world  was  a vast  ocean.  It  was  a Pankaja  (lotus)  but 
not  born  of  any  Paftka  (mud). 


2.3.72.20-29 


903 


20-2 la.  It  is  he  by  whom  all  those  Daityas  were  killed  in 
the  battle  called  Tarakamaya  ( the  war  caused  by  the  abduc- 
tion of  Tara  by  Candra)  after  adopting  a body  consisting  of 
(the  essential  spirit  of)  all  Devas  and  holding  all  sorts  of 
weapons.  Kalanemi  who  was  arrogant  on  account  of  his  great 
prowess,  was  killed  by  him. 

2 1 b-c.  It  is  he  who  after  resorting  to  his  eternal  Yoga, 
and  enveloping  everything  in  the  dense  darkness  (after  deluge) 
lies  down  (in  his  Yogic  slumber)  in  the  northern  areas  of  the 
milky  ocean,  the  veritable  ocean  of  nectar  (or  from  which 
nectar  was  churned  out) . 

22.  Formerly,  on  account  of  the  intensity  of  her  austeri- 
ties, Aditi,  who  is  an  Arani  (i.e.  source  of  origin)  of  the  Suras 
(gods)  accommodated  in  her  womb  the  lord  as  well  as  Indra. 
It  was  the  lord  who  kept  the  group  of  Daityas  very  much 
under  check  and  restraint  by  the  miscarriage  of  pregnancy 
(i.e.  Daitya  women  became  afraid  of  the  lord  so  much  so  that 
they  had  abortions). 

23.  It  was  the  lord  who  made  Daityas  lie  down  in 
water  after  making  the  regions  (and  worlds)  the  abodes  of 
people,  and  after  making  Devas  the  shining  residents  of 
Heaven,  he  made  Indra  the  lord  of  Suras. 

24-29n.  It  was  the  lord  who  created  all  types  of  sacri- 
fices and  the  necessary  adjuncts  thereof.  He  duly  created  the 
sacred  fires  of  Garhapatya  and  Ahavanlya  and  the  monthly 
Srftddha  rite  of  Anvaharya.  He  created  the  various  adjuncts  of 
sacrifice  such  as  the  Vedi  (Altar),  the  KuSa  grass,  the  Sruvd 
(holy  ladle),  water  for  consecrating  (Proksaniya  etc.),  the 
Sruta  (holy  texts  and  Mantras)  and  the  Avabkrtkya  (holy  water 
for  purificatory  bath  at  the  conclusion  of  a sacrifice. 

Then  he  created  sages  who  offered  shares  in  the  obla- 
tions in  the  fire  for  gods  in  the  sacrifice  (shares  in  the  obla- 
tions) . He  made  the  Suras  the  partakers  of  Havya , and  the 
Pitrs  the  partakers  of  Kavya.  He  made  persons  deserving 
enjoyment  through  the  holy  rite  of  Yajfia.  It  is  the  lord  himself 
who  is  termed  Yajfia  in  the  course  of  the  holy  performance  of 
Yajfia- 


904 


Brahm&nia  Purdna 


He  created  the  requisite  materials  of  Yajna  such  as 
the  YUpas  (sacrificial  posts),  Samits  (holy  twigs)  Sruva  (sacred 
ladle) , the  Soma  (the  creeper  as  well  as  juice) , the  Pavitra  (the 
sacred  ring  of  Kusa  grass  with  a projecting  tail)  and  Paridhis 
(the  holy  twigs  of PalaSa  etc.  laid  around  the  sacrificial  fire). 
He  created  the  sacrificial  fires,  the  Sadasyas  ( the  members  of 
the  holy  assembly)  , the  Yajamanas  ( performers  of  sacrifices) , 
the  Udg&trs  (those  who  sing  Sdman  Mantras  and  hymns)  and 
others.  He  created  excellent  sacrifices  such  as  Asvamedha  (horse 
sacrifices)  and  Rajasuya  (imperial  consecration)  etc.  of  diverse 
kinds.  By  means  of  the  Paramefthya,  (concerning  Brahma)  holy 
rite  he  sustained  the  worlds  and  Yajfias. 

29b-33.  Many  things  have  been  created  by  the  lord  who 
is  the  immanent  soul  of  all  the  groups  of  living  beings 
Kfanas , Nime$as , K&fthas  and  Kalas  (all  units  of  time) , the 
three  periods  of  time  (past,  present  and  future) , Muhurtas 
(periods  of  48  minutes),  Tithis  (lunar  days),  months,  days, 
years,  seasons,  the  auspicious  Yogas  of  time,  the  three 
kinds  of  Pramana  (means  of  valid  knowledge) , the  span  of 
life,  fields,  strength,  the  beauty  of  form,  the  intellect,  hero- 
ism, the  ability  to  comprehend  holy  texts  and  three  Vidyas 
(lyres),  the  three  holy  fires,  the  three  units  of  time  (past, 
present  and  future) , the  three  holy  rites,  the  three  Matras 
(measures  of  times)  the  three  Gunas  (i.e.  Sattva,  Rajas 
and  Tamas)  and  the  lords  of  the  world  have  been  created 
by  some  means  or  other.  All  the  groups  of  Bliutas  (living 
Beings,  Elements)  have  been  created. 

34.  It  is  the  lord  who  unifies  moments,  and  sports  by 
means  of  his  age-old  Yogic  power.  He  is  the  leader  of  arrivals 
and  departures  (all  sorts  of  movements  and  transits)#  He  is 
the  lord  present  everywhere  in  diverse  ways. 

35.  He  is  the  goal  unto  those  who  are  endowed  with 
piety.  He  is  inaccessible  to  those  of  evil  rites.  He  is  the  origin 
of  the  system  of  four  castes  and  the  protector  of  the  same. 

36-38.  He  is  conversant  with  the  four  types  of 
Vidyas  (viz.  Anvlksiki,  Trayl,  Varta  and  Dandanlti). 
He  is  the  support  of  the  four  Aframas  (stages  of  life) . He 
is  the  interstice  of  the  quarters,  Ether,  Earth,  waters, 
wind,  fire,  the  two  luminaries  viz.  moon  and  sun,  he  is 


2.3.72.39-46 


905 


identical  with  the  lords  of  Yugas  as  well  as  the  night- 
wanderers  (demons?).  He  is  reported  as  the  greatest  lord  in  the 
Vedas.  He  is  spoken  of  as  the  greatest  austerity.  It  is  he  whom 
they  call  the  greatest  one  beyond  darkness.  He  is  the 
greatest  one  possessed  of  the  Supreme  Soul.  He  is  the  lord  who 
is  the  foremost  among  Adityas.  He  is  the  lord  who  is  the  cause 
of  destruction  of  the  Daityas. 

He  is  the  god  of  death  during  the  closing  periods  of  the 
Yugas  and  he  is  the  annihilator  of  the  destroyers  of  the 
worlds. 

39-41.  He  is  the  bridge  (or  boundary)  among  bounds 
of  the  worlds  (?);  he  is  the  holy  sacrifice  among  those  of 
middling  holy  rites.  He  is  the  Vedya  (one  who  is  to  be  known) 
to  the  scholars  in  Vedic  lore.  He  is  the  lord  of  those  who  are 
of  powerful  souls.  To  the  living  beings,  he  is  like  the  Soma 
(Moon).  To  those  of  fiery  splendour  he  is  like  fire.  Among 
human  beings  he  is  the  Manu.He  is  the  penance  of  sages,  per- 
formers of  penance.  To  those  who  are  contented  with  good 
behaviour  he  is  modesty,  he  is  the  splendid  grandeur  of  those 
possessing  glorious  splendour. 

42-44.  He  is  the  Vigraha  (Body)  of  all  the  embodied 
beings.  He  is  the  velocity  of  those  who  axe  in  speed  (?) 

Vayu  and  AkaSa  (Ether)  function  as  its  source  of  origin. 
HutaSana  (fire)  has  Vayu  as  its  vital  essence.  Devas  have  their 
vital  essence  in  fire.  Madhusudana  is  the  vital  essence  of  fire. 

Blood  takes  its  origin  from  Rasa 1 (a  vital  fluid  constituent 
of  the  body)  and  it  is  said  that  the  flesh  originates  from 
blood. 

The  source  of  fat  is  from  the  flesh.  It  is  defined  that  the 
bone  originates  from  the  fat.  From  the  bone  the  pith  and 
marrow  take  their  origin  and  the  origin  of  Semen  is  from  the 
marrow. 

45-46.  (?)  Foetus  originated  from  semen  virile  through 

its  assimilative  rasa—  bodily  fluid.  It  is  there  that  water  is 
mixed  initially  (?).  This  is  called  the  Saumya  RdJi.  The  foetus 


1.  VV.  42-51  contain  ancient  ideas  about  embryology. 


906 


Brahm&ritfa  Purdna 


that  is  solidified  [lit.  born  , of  Atman , stone-solid]  is  called  the 
second  Ragi.  One  should  know  that  semen  is  of  the  nature  of 
Soma  and  Menstrual  blood  is  of  the  nature  of  fire. 

47.  These  two  Evolutes  follow  Rasa . In  *the  Semen 
the  moon  and  the  fire  are  present.  Semen  belongs  to  the 
category  of  Kapha  (a  humour  in  the  body)  and  Menstrual 
blood  shall  be  in  the  category  of  Pitta  (Bile,  a humour  in  the 
body) . 

48.  The  place  of  Kapha  is  the  heart.  Pitta  settles  in  the 
navel.  The  heart  is  in  the  middle  of  the  body.  It  is  remembered 
as  the  abode  of  the  mind. 

49.  The  navel  is  fixed  in  the  belly  and  it  is  there  that 
the  shining  gastric  fire  is  present.  Mind  should  be  known  as 
Prajapati  and  Kapha  is  considered  to  be  Soma. 

50-51.  Pitta  is  remembered  as  Agni  (fire).  Thus  Uni- 
verse is  here  of  the  nature  of  fire  and  the  Moon. 

Vdyu  enters  this  foetus  which  is  similar  in  size  to  jujube 
fruit  and  which  begins  to  function.  The  Vayu  that  enters,  gets 
merged  with  the  great  Soul.  It  exists  in  the  body  in  five  forms 
and  it  makes  the  foetus  grow. 

52.  The  five  vital  airs  are  Prana,  Apana,  Samana,  Udana 
and  Vyana.  The  vital  air  Prana  moves  round  developing  the 
great  soul. 

53.  Apana  develops  the  lower  body.  Udana  develops 
•half  of  the  soul,  Vydna  is  so  called  because  it  is  scattered  (i.e. 
spreads  all  over  the  body) . Samdna  is  present  in  every 
Joint. 

54-57.  It  then  gets  access  to  the  element  through  the 
sense  organs. 

The  five  elements  are  Prthivi  (earth),  Vdyu  (wind),  Akdia 
(either),  Apah  (water)  and  the  fifth  one  fire.  These  elements 
permeate  the  sense  organs  and  begin  their  respective  activity. 

They  call  the  physical  body  Pdrthiva  (having  the  charac- 
teristics of  the  element  Prthivi) . 

The  vital  airs  have  the  characteristics  of  wind.  The 
pores  of  sense-organs  have  Ether  as  their  source  of  origin* 


2.3.72.58-65 


907 


It  is  from  water  element  that  there  is  liquid  formation  in 
the  body.  The  fiery  element  is  present  in  the  eyes.  Hence, 
these  apertures  are  remembered  after  the  names  of  elements. 

It  is  to  the  virility  of  the  supreme  lord  that  these  sense- 
organs  function  gathering  their  own  respective  objects. 

Thus  the  eternal  single  Puru$a  creates  all  these. 

58.  How  did  Visnu  attain  the  state  of  being  a man  in 
this  mortal  world  ? O intelligent  one,  this  is  our  doubt.  This  is  a 
great  wonder,  a miracle. 

59.  He  is  the  ultimate  goal  of  all  who  attain  their  goal. 
How  did  he  assume  a human  body  ? We  wish  to  hear  about 
the  activities  of  Visnu  in  due  order. 

60-61.  Visnu  is  the  greatest  miracle.  He  is  mentioned 
so  by  even  the  lords  of  Devas. 

O highly  intelligent  one,  recount  to  us  the  origin  (i.e. 
incarnation)  of  Visnu  which  is  very  wonderful. 

Let  this  wonderful  and  pleasing  episode  be  narrated. 
Kindly  recount  the  manifestations  of  the  noble -souled  one 
whose  strength  and  prowess  is  well-known.  The  inherent  power 
of  Visnu  who  has  become  miraculous  on  account  of  his  activi- 
ties is  to  be  described  here. 

Siita  said  : — 

62-64.  I shall  recount  unto  you  the  manifestation  of  the 
noble-souled  lord.  I shall  tell  you.  how  the  lord  of  great 
penance  incarnated  among  human  beings  on  account  of  the 
course  of  Bhrgu,  due  to  his  fault  of  killing  the  wife  of  Bhrgu. 
During  the  final  periods  of  Yugas,  he  takes  birth  for  the 
accomplishment  of  the  task  of  the  Devas.  Understand  the 
details  of  the  divine  person  of  Vi$iiu  even  as  I recount. 

65.  When  the  yuga-dharma  (the  devout  activities 
peculiar  to  a Yuga)  becomes  reversed,  when  the  time  becomes 
slack  and  ineffective,  the  lord  is  born  among  human  beings 
in  order  to  establish  Dharma  (Virtue).  (These  incarnations 
are)  due  to  the  curse  of  Bhrgu  brought  about  by  the  Devas  and 
Asuras. 


908 


Brakm&nfa  Purdna 


The  sages  enquired  : 

66.  How  did  the  lord  become  subject  to  this  utterance — 
“brought  about  by  the  Devas  and  Asuras”.  This  we  wish 
to  understand.  What  for  and  how  did  this  incident  of  the 
Devas  and  Asuras  take  p lace. 

Suta  explained  : — 

67-71.  Understand  all  of  you  how  this  incident  (of 
tussle  between  Devas  and  Asuras  came  about,  even  as 
I narrate  the  same. 

Formerly,  the  Daitya  (named)  Hiranyakasipu  used  to  rule 
over  the  three  worlds.  Later  on,  the  kingdom  in  the  three 
worlds  was  presided  over  by  Bali  in  due  order. 

There  was  great  friendship  between  the  Devas  and 
Asuras.  Fora  full  period  of  ten  Yugas,  the  universe  was 
uninterrupted. 

The  Devas  and  Asuras  used  to  abide  by  the  behests 
of  those  two.  But  when  Bali  was  bound  over,  a very  terrible 
tussel  arose.  This  caused  horrible  devastation  to  both  Devas 
and  Asuras.  For  the  Dvipas,  many  battles  took  place  between 
them. 

72.  In  this  Varaha  Kalpa,  twelve  ending  with  Saruja- 
marka  are  remembered.1  Even  as  I recount  them  listen  to 
them  succinctly  by  their  names. 

73.  The  first  battle  was  fought  by  Narasimha  (originat- 
ing from  the  Man-lion  incarnation  of  Visnu) . The  second  one 
(by)  Vamana  (originating  from  the  incarnation  as  a Dwarf). 
The  third  one  is  Varaha  (originating  from  the  Boar-incarna- 
tion of  Visnu)  and  the  fourth  battle  (took  place  at  the  time  of 
churning  of  the  ocean  of  milk  for  the  sake  of  nectar. 

74.  The  fifth  battle  was  a terrible  one  named  Taraka- 
maya  caused  by  the  abduction  of  Tara  by  Candra.  The 
sixth  of  those  battles  was  (known  as)  the  Adibakaand  Traipura 
war  is  remembered  as  the  seventh. 


1.  VV.72- 126  describe  the  incarnations  of  Vi $nu.  The  list  of  these  is 
different  in  this  Pur&na.  vide — Introduction — Vaisnavism. 


2.3.72.75-88 


909 


75.  Andhakara  is  the  eighth  one  among  them.  Dhvaja 
is  remembered  as  the  ninth.  Vdrtra  (pertaining  to  Vrtra)  is  the 
tenth  horrible  battle.  Halahala  is  remembered  as  the  battle 
thereafter  (i.e.  the  eleventh) . 

76.  Kolahala,  another  terrible  battle  is  remembered  as 
the  twelfth  among  them. 

Hiranyaka£ipu,  the  Daitya,  was  killed  by  Narasimha. 

77-78.  When  the  three  worlds  were  measured  up  (by 
Vamana’s  three  steps)  Bali  was  bound  over  by  Vamana.  When 
the  groups  of  the  Devas  were  rejected,  Hiranyak§a  was  killed 
in  a dual  combat.  That  Daitya  who  had  great  strength  and 
virility  and  who  had  never  been  defeated,  was  split  into  two 
by  Varaha  (Boar)  with  his  curved  teeth. 

79-80.  Prahlada  was  defeated  by  Indra  in  the  battle 
that  followed  the  churning  of  the  ocean  for  the  sake  of  nectar 
Virocanawho  was  the  son  of  Prahlada  and  who  always  attempt- 
ed to  slay  Indra  was  killed  by  Indra  himself  by  means  of  his 
exploits  in  the  Tarakamaya  battle. 

That  Jambha  who  secured  the  boon  of  Avadhyata  (state 
of  not  beingkilled)  from  god  Siva  along  with  special  miracu- 
lous weapons  was  killed  in  the  sixth  battle  by  Visnu  in  whom 
Indra  had  permeated. 

81-83.  When  the  Devas  became  incapable  of  enduring 
the  great  power  of  the  Asuras,  the  demons  were  killed  by 
Siva  in  the  course  of  Tripura  battle. 

Then  Daityas,  Asuras  and  Raksasas  were  conquered  in 
the  Andhakarika  battle  by  the  Devas  and  human  beings.  They 
merged  with  the  manes. 

With  the  help  of  Visnu  and  magnified  by  him,  Mahendra 
killed  Danavas  along  with  Vrtra,  as  they  had  joined  together. 

84*88a.  In  the  battle  called  Dhv&ja , Vipracitti  who  was 
accompanied  by  his  younger  brother,  who  was  conversant  with 
the  Yogic  practice  and  who  had  concealed  himself  by  means 
of  Maya,  was  killed  by  Mahendra  after  penetrating  a hundred 
thousand  Dhvajas  (banners). 

In  the  battle  Halahala,  Vfsa  (i.e.  Indra)  surrounded  by 
the  Devas  conquered  the  Daityas  and  Danavas  who  had 
gathered  together. 


9 1 0 Brahmdntfa  Pur&na 

In  the  battle  called  Kolahala  Raji  surrounded  by  the 
Devas  conquered  the  Daityas. 

In  the  course  of  Avabhrtha  (valedictory  bath  after  a 
sacrifice)  §an^a  and  Marka  were  conquered  by  t^e  Devas 
(and  therefore  the  Daityas  too  were  conquered). 

88b.  Thus,  the  twelve  great  battles  between  the  Devas 
and  Asuras  took  place.  These  battles  caused  ruin  to  both, 
the  Suras  and  Asuras.  They  were  inauspicious  to  the  common 
people. 

89.  Hiranyakasipu  shone  as  the  king  and  ruler  of 
the  three  worlds  for  ten  crores  of  years  increased  by  seven 
million  and  two  hundred  and  eighty  thousand  years. 

90.  As  a hereditary  ruler  Bali  reigned  for  ten  crores 
thirty  million  and  sixty  thousand  years  (i.e.  13  crores  and 
60  thousand  years). 

91.  In  the  company  of  Raksasas,  Prahlada  reigned 
victorious  for  as  many  years  as  the  period  of  administration 
of  Bali. 

92.  These  three  were  very  famous  as  the  Indras  of  the 
Asuras.  They  had  great  brilliance,  strength  and  splendour. 

The  entire  period  of  ten  Yugas  was  under  the  Daityas. 

93-95.  Thereafter,  Sukra  cursed  the  realm  extending  to  a 
period  of  ten  Yugas.  Then  these  three  worlds  of  Bali  were  over- 
run by  Mahendra. 

When  the  kingdom  of  the  three  worlds  of  Prahlada  by 
inheritance  was  taken  away  by  the  efflux  of  time,  it  came  over 
to  the  chastiser  of  Paka  (viz.  Indra)  by  rotation. 

Then  the  Yajiia  forsook  the  Asuras,  and  went  over  to  the 
Devas.  When  the  Yajiia  went  over  to  the  Devas  those  Asuras 
spoke  to  Sukra. 

96.  “ Why  has  this  happened  ? Even  as  we  are  widely 
awake,  Yajiia  has  abandoned  our  kingdom  and  gone  to 
the  Devas.  We  cannot  stay  here  to-day.  Let  us  enter 
Rasa  tala”. 

97.  On  being  told  thus,  Sukra  became  dejected.  Con- 
soling them  with  his  words  he  said — “O  Asuras,  do  not  be 
afraid.  I shall  sustain  you  all  by  means  of  my  spiritual 
brilliance. 


2.3.72.98-114 


911 


98.  Rainfall,  medicinal  herbs,  Rasd  (the  world)  and 
other  things  whatsoever — let  all  these  things  entirely  remain 
with  the  Suras.  The  sin  will  be  theirs  (?) 

99-101.  “I  shall  give  them  all  to  you.  It  is  being  held 
up  by  me”. 

Thereafter,  on  seeing  the  Asuras  supported  by  the  intelli- 
gent preceptor  Sukra,  Devas  became  excited  and  frightened. 
With  a desire  to  be  victorious,  they  held  consultations  ‘O,  this 
preceptor  is  forcibly  removing  everything  from  us.  Well,  we 
shall  hasten  lest  he  should  resuscitate  andreplcnisu  them.  After 
killing  them  forcibly  in  surprise  attack  we  shall  make  the 
remaining  ones  go  to  Patala. 

102.  Thereafter,  the  excited  Devas  approached  Danavas 
and  killed  them.  On  being  killed  by  them,  Danavas  rushed 
to  Kavya  himself. 

103.  On  seeing  them  suddenly  attacked  by  the  Devas 
Kavya  protected  the  frightened  sons  of  Diti  from  the  Devas. 

104-111.  On  seeing  the  Devas  standing  there  steadily, 
Kavya  thought  that  it  was  fate.  After  meditating  and 
remembering,  the  earlier  happenings  he  said  to  Danavas: — 

“The  entire  area  of  the  three  worlds  was  conquered  by 
Varuana  by  means  of  three  paces.  Bali  was  bound  over.  Jambha 
was  killed.  Virocana  was  slain.  The  great  Asuras  were  slaught- 
ered by  Suras  in  the  twelve  wars.  Most  of  those  who  were 
very  important  were  slain  by  means  of  different  strategies. 
Only  a very  few  of  you  remain  now  after  the  battle.  I shall 
devise  a plan  for  you.  Let  some  period  of  time  be  waited  for.  I 
shall  go  to  the  lord  NUalohita  (i.e.  Siva),  the  great  lord,  for 
the  sake  of  Mantra  (holy  spell  etc.)  and  victory.  The  Hotr 
shall  kindle  and  lit  up  the  Fire  by  means  of  Mantras.  It  will 
burn.  After  returning  here  later  I shall  bless  you  all.  Covered 
by  means  of  bark  garments,  you  do  perform  penance  in  the 
forest.  The  Devas  shall  not  kill  you  till  my  return.  After 
securing  unrivalled  and  matchless  Mantras  from  lord  Mahes- 
vara,  we  shall  fight  Devas  once  again.  Thereby,  you  will 
attain  victory”. 

112-114.  After  consulting  (one  another)  the  Asuras 
said  to  the  Devas  : — “We  all  have  laid  down  our  weapons. 


912 


Brahmtinifa  Purdna 


All  of  you  can  pass  on  to  the  worlds  (i.e.  occupy  them). 
Covered  with  bark  garments  we  shall  perform  austerities  in  the 
forest”. 

On  hearing  these  truthful  worlds  of  Prahlada^  the  Devas 
became  delighted  and  free  from  ailments  and  worries.  They 
returned.  When  the  Daityas  had  drowned  their  weapons,  they 
(theDevas)  went  back  to  their  abodes  whence  they  had 
come. 

115-1 18a.  Then  Kavya  said  to  them — “Be  patient  to 
wait  for  some  time  without  any  undue  enthusiasm  for  war. 
Be  engaged  in  austerities.  Time  is  the  means  of  achieving  your 
purpose.  O Danavas,  stay  in  the  hermitage  of  my  father  and 
wait”.  After  giving  directions  to  the  Asuras,  Kavya,  approached 
Mahadeva,  bowed  down  to  him  and  said  thus  to  the  lord,  the 
source  of  origin  of  this  Universe  : — “O  lord,  I wish  to  secure 
those  Mantras  which  are  not  in  the  possession  of  Brhaspati.  I 
want  them  for  the  sake  of  defeating  the  Devas  and  according 
freedom  from  fear  to  the  Asuras”. 

118b-120a.  On  being  told  thus,  the  lord  said  : — “If  you 
wish  to  secure  the  Mantras , O Brahrnana,  observe  the  holy 
rite  as  instructed  by  me,  remaining  celibate  and  observing 
concentration  and  the  purity  of  mind.  With  the  head  hanging 
down,  if  you  inhale  the  smoke  from  the  holy  sacrificial  pit  for 
the  full  period  of  a thousand  years,  welfare  unto  you,  you  will 
secure  the  Mantra  from  me”. 

1 20b-l  21 . On  being  told  thus  by  the  lord  of  the  Devas, 
Sukra  of  great  power  of  penance,  touched  the  feet  of  the  lord 
and  said,  “Certainly,  O lord,  I shall  observe  the  holy  rite  as  I 
have  been  directed. 

122-125.  Thereafter,  Kundadhara  was  employed  by  the 
lord  as  the  person  producing  the  smoke  for  him. 

When  Sukra  had  gone  for  the  welfare  of  the  Asuras, 
when  he  was  staying  near  Mahcsvara  observing  celibacy 
for  the  sake  of  Mantras , the  Devas  understood  by  means 
of  their  diplomacy  that  the  realm  (?  weapons)  had  been  laid 
aside  by  the  Asuras. 

The  Devas  attacked  them  at  that  vulnerable  point,  with 


2.3.72.125-134 


913 


great  anger.  The  Dcvas  with  Bfhaspati  as  their  leader  took 
up  weapons  and  rushed  at  the  Asuras. 

125.  On  seeing  the  Devas  taking  up  the  weapons  once 
again,  all  the  groups  of  Asuras  rose  up  suddenly.  They  became 
frightened. 

126-128.  (They  thought  thus)  : — “When  the  weapons 
have  been  set  aside,  when  freedom  from  fear  has  already  been 
accorded,  when  our  Acarya  (Preceptor)  has  undertaken  holy 
rites  and  observances,  these  Devas  have  abrogated  (unilaterally) 
the  agreement.  They  are  desirous  of  killing  their  enemies’*. 
(Then  they  told  one  another)  : — “You  are  now  devoid  of  an 
Acarya.  Welfare  unto  you.  You  had  trusted  them.  We  are  all 
engaged  in  penance  wearing  bark  garments  and  deer-skins.  We 
are  incapable  of  yiy  action  and  are  devoid  of  activities, 
properties  and  possessions.  We  are  not  at  all  competent  to 
conquer  the  Devas  in  a battle.  Without  being  engaged  in 
battle  we  shall  seek  refuge  in  the  mother  of  the  preceptor”. 

129.  Thereafter,  those  frightened  Asuras  resorted  (to 
her).  Freedom  from  fear  (Assurance  of  protection)  was  granted 
by  her  to  those  frightened  Daityas  who  sought  freedom  from 
fear. 

130.  Our  seeing  the  Asuras  being  taken  under  her 
protection,  the  Devas  p mdered  over  their  strength  and  weak- 
ness and  then  struck  at  the  Asuras  violently. 

131.  On  seeing  the  Asuras  being  slain  by  the  Devas, 
the  infuriated  gentle  lady  (the  mother  of  the  preceptor)  spoke 
to  them  “I  shall  cause  the  destruction  of  Indra”. 

132-133.  With  great  agitation  and  fury,  she  paralyzed 
Indra  quickly  and  went  away  from  that  place.  On  seeing 
Indra  benumbed  and  immobilised,  the  Devas  became  fright- 
ened. On  seeing  Indra  thus  brought  under  control,  the  Devas 
ran  off  from  that  place  like  deluded  ones. 

When  the  groups  of  Devas  had  gone,  Visnu  spoke  to 
Indra  : — 

134.  “Enter  me,  O lord  of  Suras,”  said  he.  “Welfare 
unto  you.  I shall  take  you  away”. 

On  being  told  thus,  Indra  entered  Visnu. 


914 


Brahmdn^a  Purdna 


135-136.  On  seeing  that  Indra  was  saved  by  Visnu, 
the  gentle  lady  became  furious  and  spoke  these  words  : — “I 
shall  burn  you,  O Indra  with  my  power  along  with  Visnu, 
even  as  all  the  living  beings  witness  the  same.  Let  th$  power 
of  my  penance  be  seen”. 

Those  two  Devas,  Indra  and  Visnu  conspired  thus  on 
being  attacked  by  her. 

137-138.  “How  shall  both  of  us  get  released  together” 
said  Visnu  to  Indra.”  Indra  then  said — “O  lord,  kill  her 
before  she  burns  us.  I shall  be  particularly  attacked.  Kill 
this  lady.  Do  not  delay”.  Thereupon  Visnu  closely  watched 
her  and  got  ready  for  causing  the  death  of  that  woman. 

139-140.  Thereafter,  bearing  in  mind,  that  Indra  was  in 
trouble,  lord  the  destroyer  of  the  enemies  of  Suras,  hastened 
Visnu  in  his  action.  He  wanted  to  be  quicker  than  the 
mother  of  Kiivya  who  was  also  in  a hurry.  Visnu  was  aware 
that  what  he  was  desirous  of  doing  was  a cruel  deed.  Be- 
coming furious  he  pierced  her  head  with  his  weapon  and  cut  it 
into  three  parts. 

141.  On  observing  that  horrible  slaughter  of  a woman 
his  wife,  Bhrgu  the  powerful  one  became  angry.  Then,  due 
to  the  murder  of  his  wife,  Visnu  was  cursed  by  Bhtgu. 

142.  “Since  a woman  who  should  not  be  killed  has 
been  killed  by  you,  though  you  are  conversant  with  what  is 
righteousness,  you  will  have  to  take  birth  among  human 
beings  for  seven  times”. 

143.  Thereafter  on  account  of  that  curse  the  lord  is 
born  again  and  again  among  human  beings  here  (in  this  world), 
for  the  welfare  of  all  the  worlds,  whenever  there  is  a destruc- 
tion of  piety  and  virtue. 

144.  After  speaking  to  Visnu,  he  himself  took  up  the 
head  and  joined  it  to  the  body.  After  putting  them  together, 
he  spoke  these  words  - 

145-146.  “I  shall  make  you  who  have  been  killed  by 
Visnu  actually  regain  your  lost  life.  If  the  entire  range  of  pious 
activities  is  known  to  me,  if  all  virtuous  holy  rites  have  been 
performed  by  me,  if  I speak  the  truth,  come  back  to  life 
through  the  power  of  that  truthfulness”. 


2.3.72.147-160 


915 


That  gentle  lady  was  then  resuseitated  on  account  of 
hiS  truthful  statement. 

147-149.  After  sprinkling  her  with  cool  water  he  said 
“Come  baek  to  life”.  Then  on  seeing  her  gct-up  as  though 
waking  up  from  sleep,  ill  living  beings  were  surprised.  Words 
and  sounds  of ‘Wcll-dme’  of  all  living  beings,  of  even  invisible 
oans,  echoed  in  the  quarters. 

159a.  On  seeing  that  noble  lady  resuscitated  thus  by 
Bhrgu,  even  as  all  living  lyings  were  watching  they  thought 
that  it  was  a miracle.  On  seeing  his  wife  brought  back  to 
life  by  Bhrgu  who  remained  calm  and  composed,  Indra  was 
not  at  all  happy.  He  became  afraid  of  Bhrgu. 

I50b-I53a.  Spending  sleepless  nights  over  this  incident, 
Indra,  the  intelligent  chastiser  of  Paka,  spoke  to  his  daughter 
Juyanti,  these  words: — “This  preceptor  of  Asuras  is  performing 
a severe  penance  for  making  the  world  devoid  of  Indra. 
Therefore,  O my  splendid  daughter,  I have  been  made 
very  vexed  and  agitated  although  I am  endowed  with  fortitude 
of  mind.  Go  and  honour  him.  Be  alert  and  render  service  to 
him  in  various  ways  pleasing  to  his  mind  and  dispelling  his 
fatigue”. 

153b- 157a.  That  lady  of  splendid  activities,  Jayantl,  the 
daughter  of  Indra,  assumed  a decent  form  and  went  to  the 
peccptor  who  had  undertaken  an  ordinarily  unbearable  holy 
observance.  She  carried  out  everything  in  accordance  with  what 
had  been  mentioned  by  her  father.  Speaking  sweetly  and  using 
agreeable  words,  she  used  to  praise  him.  She  served  him  at  the 
proper  time,  massaging  his  limbs  and  giving  pleasure  to  the 
sense  of  touch. 

Serving  him  thus  in  an  agreeable  manner,  she  stayed 
with  him  for  many  years. 

When  the  austere  holy  rite  of  inhaling  smoke  lasting  for  a 
thousand  years,  was  concluded,  Siva  who  was  much  delighted, 
asked  the  preceptor  to  choose  any  boon  he  liked. 

157b- 160.  “A  holy  vow  such  as  this  has  been  observed 
only  by  you  and  not  by  anyone  else.  Hence  you  will  surpass  all 
the  Devas  by  the  power  of  your  penance,  intellect,  learning, 
strength  and  brilliance.  O delighter  of  the  members  of  the 
family  of  Bhrgu,  whatever  mystic  syllable  and  holy  spell 


916 


Brahmania  Pur&na 


( Brahma ) I possess  shall  be  revealed  unto  you  along  with  its 
Angas  (ancillary  adjuncts),  and  Rahasya  (Esoteric  secret). 
Whatever  Yajna  and  Upanisads  I have  will  be  known  to  you. 
These  things  should  not  be  mentioned  to  anyone.  Thereby, 
O excellent  Brahmanas,  you  will  become  one  who  will  excel 
e very-one.” 

161.  After  granting  this  boon  to  that  son  ofBhrgu, 
Bhava  further  gave  him  the  status  of  a Prajapati  (patriarch), 
the  status  of  being  the  presiding  deity  of  wealth  and  immunity 
from  death. 

1 62.  On  securing  these  boons,  the  preceptor  became  highly 
delighted.  Hairs  over  his  body  stood  on  their  ends  due  to  his 
excessive  pleasure.  On  account  of  his  delight,  a divine  eulogy 
of  the  great  lord  came  out  from  his  mouth. 

Therefore,  he  stood  aside  and  eulogised  Nllalohita. 

163-166.  Obeisance  be  to  Sitikantha  (the  Blue-throated 
god ) , the  foremost  one  among  the  Suras,  Suvarcas  (of  excellent 
effulgence) , Lelihdna  (one  who  exhibits  the  mystic  Mudra  of 
frequently  licking  with  the  tongue),  I^ehya  (one  who  can  be 
approached  by  the  mystic  Mudra  of  licking  up),  Vatsara  (the 
presiding  deity  of  the  year,  Jagatpati  (Lord  of  the  Universe), 
Kapardin  (having  matted  hair)  Urddkvaroman  (having  the  hairs 
standing  up ) , Haryaksavarada  (the  bes tower  of  boons  to  Kubera ) , 
Samsiuta  (one  who  has  been  eulogised) , Sutirtha  (who  is  a holy 
Tirtha  incarnate)  Devadcva  (Lord  of  the  Devas) , Ramhas 
(Vehemence  personified) , Usnifin  (having  a turban),  Suvaktra 
(One  of  excellent  charming  face),  Sahasr&kfa  (God  of  thousand 
eyes),  Mtihvas  (Bountiful),  Vasureta  (Distributor  of  wealth) , 
Rudra  (one  roaring  terrifically),  Tapas  (one  who  performs 
penance),  Ciravasas  (wearer  of  bark  garments) , Nisva  (Devoid  of 
possessions),  Muktakeia  (one  who  has  kept  the  tresses  of  hair 
loose),  Senani  (commander-in-chief  of  the  army  of  gods),  Rohita 
(Red-coloured). 

167-1 70.  Kavi  ( Poet-Seer)  Rdjavrddha  (of  excellent  brilli- 
ance), Tak$akakridana  (One  sporting  with  Taksaka  serpent), 
GirUa  (Lord  of  the  mountain),  Arkanetra  (having  the  sun  as  an 
eye),  Tati  (Ascetic),  Ajyapa  (Imbibing  the  ghee  offering), 
Suvrtta  (One  of  good  conduct),  Suhasta  (a  god  having  excellent 
hands) , Dharwin  (wielder  of  a bow),  Bhdrgava  (possessing  radi- 


2.3.72.171-176 


917 


ance  and  effulgence)  Sakasra-Bdhu  (Thousand-armed),  Sahasrd - 
malacaksus  (having  a thousand  eyes  devoid  of  dirt),  Sahasrakukji 
(having  a thousand  bellies),  Sahasracarana  (having  a thousand 
feet),  SahasraSiras  (having  a thousand  heads),  BahurRpa  (multi- 
formed),  Vedhas  (Creator),  Bhava  (source  of  origin),  ViSvarilpa 
(immanent  in  the  universe),  Sveta  (the  white  one),  Puru$a 
(the  Supreme  man),  Nisangin  (possessing  a quiver),  Kavacin 
(wearing  a coat  of  Mail),  Suksma  (the  subtle  one),  Ksapatia 
(the  destroyer). 

171.  Tatnra  (the  Copper-coloured  one),  Bhima  (the 
terrible  one) , Ugra  (the formidable),  Siva  (the  benevolent  one) , 
Mahddeva  (the  great  god),  Sarva  (Identical  with  everything), 
VisvarupaSiva  ( omnipresent  and  auspicious ) . 

172.  fliranya  (abounding  in  gold — so  the  bestower  of  gold) 
Vasifjha  (identical  with  sage  Vasistha) , Var^a  (causing  rain), 
Madhyama  (the  middle  one),  Dhdman  (the  asylum),  PiSanga  (the 
tawny-coloured) , Pingala  (the  reddish  brown-coloured) , Arutja 
(the  pink-coloured). 

173.  Pinakin  (wielding  the  bow  Pinaka),  I$umdn  (possess- 
ing arrows),  Cilra  ( the  variegated  one,  the  miraculous  one), 
Rohita  (Maroon-coloured) , Dundubhya  (worthy  of  being  honour- 
ed with  the  sound  of  wardrum) , Ekapdda  ( having  a single 
foot )>Arha  (the  Deserving  one),  Buddhi  (the  intelligent  one), 
Mrgavyddha  (one  who  had  assumed  the  form  of  a hunter  of  deer 
in  Daksa’s  sacrifice) , Sarva  (immanent  in  everything),  Sthdnu 
(standing  steady),  Bhi$ana  (the  terrible  one). 

174.  Bahurupa  (Multiple-formed),  Ugra  (the  awful  one), 
Trinetra  (three-eyed),  Uvara  (the  Supreme  Ruler),  Kapila 
(Identical  with  sage  Kapila  or  Tawny-coloured),  Ekavira  (the 
sole  hero),  Mrtyu  (The  god  of  Death),  Tryambaka  (the  three- 
eyed)  . 

175.  Vdsto$pati  ( Presiding  deity  and  protector  of  build- 
ings) , Pinaka  (having  the  bow  Pinaka) , Sankara  (one  who  brings 
happiness) , Siva  (the  auspicious  one) , Aranya  (the  forest- 
dweller)  , Gr  hast  ha  (the  house-holder) , Tati  (Ascetic),  Brahma - 
edrin  (the  religious  student  observing  celibacy) . 

176.  Sdnkhya  (approachable  through  the  philosophy  of 
Sdnkhya) , Toga  (Accessible  through  Yogic  practice),  Dhydnin 
(meditating  one),  Dikfita  (the  initiated  one),  Antarhita  (the 


918 


Brahm&nia  Purfina 


hidden  one),  Sarva  (identical  with  every  one),  Tapya  (worthy 
of  being  approached  through  penance),  Vydpin  ( the  all- 
pervading  lord). 

177.  Buddha  (the  enlightened  one),  Suddha  • (the  pure 
one),  Mukta  (the  liberated  one),  Kevala  (the  single  one) , Rodhas 
(staying  on  mountain  slopes),  Cekitdna  (the  intelligent  one), 
Brahmin tha  ( the  proficient  one  in  Vedas) , Maharsi  (Great  Sage 
and  Seer) . 

1 78.  Catttfpada  ( having  four  legs) , Medhya  ( the  holy  one ) , 
Varmin  (having  the  armour),  Sighraga  (of  fast  movement), 
Sikhaniin  (having  a tuft  of  hair),  Kapdla  (holding  a skull), 
Danfin  (holding  a staff) , Vih'amedhas  (of Universal  intellect). 

179.  Apratita  (Unobserved),  Dipta  (the  illuminated  one) 
Bhdskara  (Creator  of  lustre),  Sumedhas  (of  excellent  intellect), 
KrUra  (the  cruel  one) , Vikrta  ( the  deformed  one) , Bibhatsa  (the 
hideous  one),  Siva  ( the  bestower  of  welfare). 

180.  Suci  (the  bright  one),  Paridhdna  (the  enveloping 
one),  Sadyojdta  (Newly  born),  AIrtyu  (God  of  Death) , Pisitasa 
(meat-eater),  Sarva  (the  benign  one),  Megha  (the  cloud), 
Vaidyuta  (the  lightning). 

181.  Dak$a  (the  skilful),  Jaghanya  (the  lowest  and  last), 
Lokdnam  Uvara  (Lord  of  the  worlds ),  Andmaya  ( free  from  illness) 
Idhma  (the  sacred  fuel),  Hiranya  (Gold),  Ekacak$us  (single- 
eyed). 

182.  Sresfha  (the  most  excellent),  Vdmadeva  (A  handsome 
god) , liana  ( the  ruling  master) , Dhimdn  ( Intelligent) , Mahdkalpa 
( the  great  sacred  precept) , Dipta  (the  shining  one),  Rodana 
(crying  one),  Hdsa  (the  laughing  one). 

183.  Dr<)handhanvin  (having  a firm  bow ) , Kavacin  (having 
the  coat  of  mail) , Rathin  (having  a chariot),  Varuthin  (having 
an  army )9  Bhrgundtha  (Lord  of  the  Bhrgus),  Sukra  (the  bright 
one  or  identical  with  Sukra),  Gahvariffha  (Resident  of  a cave) , 
Dhimdn  (Sensible). 

184.  Amogha  (never  failing),  Praidnta  (tranquil),  Saddvi - 
prapriya  (ever  endearing  to  scholarly  Brahmanas),  Digvdsah 

(the  nude  one,  lit.  one  having  cardinal  point  as  garment) 
Krltivdsa  (wearing  the  elephant-hide)  ; obeisance  be  to  the 
slayer  of  Bhaga. 


2.3.72.185-195 


919 


185.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  Pams  (Animals  i.e.  In- 
dividual Souls),  to  the  lord  of  all  elements,  Prabhu  (the  lord), 
to  Rk,  Yajus,  Saman,  Svaha  and  Svadlia. 

186.  Va$atkdratama  (Identical  with  that  Vedic  syllable 
va$at) , obeisance  to  you  the  soul  of  all  Mantras.  Obeisance  to 
the  creator,  the  dispenser  of  destiny,  the  maker,  the  supporter 
and  the  destroyer. 

187.  Obeisance  to  you  the  lord  of  things  of  the  past, 
present  and  future,  to  Karmdtman  (the  soul  of  holy  rites),  to 
one  identical  with  Vasus,  Sadhyas,  Rudras,  Adityas  and 
Asvinldevas. 

188.  Obeisance  to  you  identical  with  Visvedevas, 
Marutas  and  the  very  soul  of  Devas,  to  you  conversant  with 
the  process  of  Agniffoma,  to  one  identical  with  Paius , Mantras 
and  Medicines. 

189.  Obeisance  to  you  identical  with  Dak$ind  (Monetary 
gifts),  and  Avabhrtha  (Valedictory  bath  after  yajfia),  to  Tapas 
(penance),  Satya  (Truth),  Tydga  (sacrifice)  and  Santa  (control 
of  sense  organs). 

190.  Obeisance  to  you  the  nonviolent  one,  to  the  coveto- 
us one  (?),  true  of  good  dress  and  guise,  to  AniSa  (Devoid  of 
night  i.e.  darkness),  to  one  born  of  Bhutas  (living  beings), 
to  you  the  Soul  of  Yoga. 

191-195.  Obeisance  to  God  who  is  identical  with  the 
Earth,  the  firmament,  the  bright  light,  the  heaven;  to  the  worlds 
Jana,  Tapa  and  Satya,  to  you,  identical  with  all  the  worlds,  to 
the  Umnanifcst  one,  to  the  great  one,  to  the  great  Element,  to 
the  great  Sense-organ,  to  the  Tanmdtra  ( the  subtle  essence  of 
elements) , bow  to  you  identical  with  the  Principles  (Tattoos). 
Obeisance  to  you  the  eternal  one,  to  the  lord  having  no  sex- 
distinction,  to  the  subtle  one,  to  the  gross  one,  to  the  pure  lord 
pervading  all,  to  you  identical  with  the  eternal  objects. 

Salute  to  you  in  the  three  worlds  beginning  with  the 
Earth  and  ending  with  Heaven.  Obeisance  be  to  you  in 
the  four  worlds  beginning  with  Mahar  and  ending  with  S'itya. 

O lord,  favourable  to  the  Brahmanas,  I have  spoken 
erringly  in  the  course  of  this  Namastotra  (Eulogy  of  repeating  the 


920 


Brakm&nda  Purdna 


names  of  god) . Whatever  has  been  mis-spoken  in  this,  you 
deserve  to  forgive  thinking  “O  ! he  is  my  devotee.” 


CHAPTER  SEVENTYTHREE 

Description  of  the  Glory  of  Vipiu 


Suta  said  : — 

1.  After  propitiating  Isana,  Nllalohitn,  the  lord  of  the 
Devas,  Sukra  the  preceptor  of  Asuras  remained  humble  after 
prostrating  at  his  feet.  With  palms  joined  in  reverence,  he 
spoke  the  words  (indicating  his  wish) . 

2.  After  touching  the  body  of  the  preceptor  of  the  Asuras 
with  his  hand,  the  delighted  lord,  Hara,  manifested  himself  to 
his  view  adequately  and  then  vanished  there  itself. 

3.  When  the  lord,  along  with  his  followers,  had  vanished 
Sukra  the  preceptor  spoke  these  words  to  Jayanti  who  was 
standing  there  with  palms  joined  in  reverence. 

4.  ‘‘O  gentle  lady  of  great  fortune,  whom  do  you  belong 
to  ? Who  are  you  who  underwent  misery  when  I was  in  misery? 
Why  are  you  vying  with  me  who  am  endowed  with  great 
power  of  penance. 

5.  O lady  of  exquisite  hips  and  excellent  complexion,  I 
am  highly  pleased  with  this  constant  (unwavering) , devotion, 
humility,  self-control  and  affection. 

6.  O beautiful  lady,  what  do  you  wish  ? What  desire  of 
yours  is  to  be  fully  gratified  ? Even  if  it  be  very  difficult  to  gel, 
I shall  get  it  fulfilled  for  you”. 

7.  On  being  told  thus  she  said  : 

“It  behoves  you  to  know  it  by  means  of  your  power  of 
penance,  O very  learned  and  pious  one,  you  alone  will  know 
definitely  what  I have  desired  to  do”. 

8-10.  On  being  told  thus  Sukra  the  preceptor  of  Asuras 
observed  every  thing  by  his  divine  vision  and  said  to  her  : — 
“O  excellent  lady,  you  arc  the  daughter  of  Mahendra.  You 
have  come  here  for  my  welfare.  O Beautiful  lady  of  excellent 


2.3.73.11-21 


921 


hips,  you  wish  to  be  in  touch  with  me  for  ten  years  without 
being  seen  by  any  living  being.  O gentle  lady  with  the  shining 
lustre  of  the  blue  sapphire,  O excellent  lady  of  bright 
eyes,  choose  this  desire  from  me,  O lady  of  sweet  speech.  Let 
it  be  so,  O lady  with  the  majestic  gait  of  the  elephant  in  its 
rut  we  shall  go  home”. 

11-12.  Thereafter,  the  holy  lord  Bhargava  reached  his 
house  accompanied  by  Jayantl.  He  lived  there  with  her  for  ten 
years  invisible  to  all  living  beings,  after  being  covered  by  Maya 
(Magical  power  of  illusion). 

13.  After  coming  to  know  that  Sukra  had  returned  with 
his  object  realised,  all  the  sons  of  Diti  became  delighted. 
Desirous  of  seeing  him,  they  went  to  his  house. 

14-16.  After  going  in  when  they  did  not  see  their  pre- 
ceptor because  he  had  been  concealed  by  Jayantl,  they  under- 
stood that  it  was  the  sign  (of  his  not  having  returned.)  They 
went  back  in  the  manner  they  had  come. 

Bfhaspati  understood  that  Sukra  had  been  restrained  by 
Jayanti  for  ten  years  for  the  sake  of  pleasure,  due  to  the 
boon  granted  to  her  as  well  as  due  to  her  desire  for  the 
welfare  of  the  Devas. 

Considering  that  as  a good  opportunity,  Bfhaspati  was 
urged  through  a secret  council  of  the  Devas.  He  assumed  the 
form  of  Sukra  and  addressed  the  Asuras. 

17-18.  On  seeing  them  assembled,  Bfhaspati  said  to 
them  : — 

'‘Welcome  to  you  for  whose  sake  I perform  sacrifices. 

I have  come  back  for  your  welfare.  I shall  teach  you  all  the 
Lores  acquired  by  me”. 

Thereupon  they  became  delighted  in  their  minds  and 
approached  him  for  the  sake  of  Vidyas . 

19-21.  At  the  end  of  the  stipulated  period  of  ten  years, 
Sukra,  the  preceptor  of  Daityas,  suddenly  remembered 
that  ten  years  had  been  completed.  He  decided  to  look  after 
his  Y&jyas. 

Sukra  said  : — 

“O  gentle  lady  of  pure  smiles,  I am  going  to  see 
mine  Y&jyas  O chaste  lady  with  broad  eyes  of  three  colours, 
D lady  of  rolling  eyes”. 


922 


Brahmdntfa  Purdna 


On  being  told  thus,  the  gentle  lady  said — “O  sage  of 
great  holy  rites,  resort  to  your  devotees.  This  is  the  holy 
virtuous  dharma  of  good  people.  I will  not  make  you  err  from 
your  duty”. 

Suta  said  : 

22-25.  After  going  ihere,  he  saw  that  the  Asuras  had 
been  deceived  by  the  intelligent  preceptor  of  the  Devas  in  the 
form  of  Sukra.  Thereupon,  he  spoke  these  words 

“Know  ye  all  that  I am  Sukra.  This  is  the  Arigirasa 
(i.e.  Brhaspati) . O Danava*,  you  have  been  cheated  even  as  I 
continue  to  be  attached  to  you  all”. 

On  hearing  him  speak  in  that  manner,  the  Daityas  be- 
came confused  and  bewildered.  They  saw  both  of  them  sitting 
firmly  and  smiling  pleasantly.  Thereupon,  all  of  them  stood 
there  utterly  deluded.  They  did  not  take  up  anything.  (They 
did  not  do  anything)  . 

26-29.  When  they  wen*  confused,  Sukra  spoke  to  them 
again  : — “This  is  (evidently  pointing  to  himself)  indeed  your 
preceptor;  this  is  (pointing  to  Brhaspati)  Angiras,  the 
preceptor  of  the  Devas.  All  of  you  follow  me.  Leave  off  this 
Brhaspati.” 

On  being  told  thus,  they  closely  looked  at  both  of  them. 
The  Asuras  could  not  find  out  any  difference  between  these 
two. 

When  without  any  excitement,  B»  haspati  said  to  them — 
“This  man  is  Angiras  indeed.  O Daityas,  I am  Sukra,  your 
preceptor.  This  is  Brhaspati  in  my  guise. 

O Asuras,  this  man  makes  you  confounded  though  my 
form”. 

30-33.  On  hearing  his  words  they  consulted  one  another 
and  spoke  these  words — “This  holy  lord  has  been  imparting 
instructions  to  us  for  the  last  ten  years.  Indeed  he  is  our 
preceptor.  This  Brahmana  is  some-one  (else)  desirous  of 
securing  an  opportunity”.  Then  all  those  Danavas  bowed  down 
and  made  obeisance  to  Brhaspati.  Deluded  by  the  lore 
imparted  by  him,  they  accepted  his  words  (as  true)  . 
Those  Asuras  became  angry  with  their  eyes  turning  red  and 
they  spoke  to  him  (i.e.  Sukra) . 


2.3.73.34-46 


923 


“This  is  our  well-wisher  and  preceptor.  You  may  go. 
You  arc  not  our  preceptor.  Whether  he  be  Bhargava  or  Angi- 
rasa,  let  him  alone  be  our  preceptor.  We  shall  abide  by  his 
command.  Well,  you  may  go.  Do  not  delay”. 

34-36.  After  saying  thus,  all  the  Asuras  accepted  Brhas- 
pat-  as  their  preceptor  and  resorted  to  him. 

When  the  Asuras  did  not  pay  heed  to  his  beneficial 
utterance,  Bhargava  became  furious  with  their  arrogance. 
Then  he  said  thus  : — 

“Although  apprised  and  instructed  by  me,  you  do  not 
resort  to  me.  Hence,  you  will  lose  your  sense  and  attain  defeat 
and  destruction.” 

37-38.  After  saying  thus  to  them,  Sukra  went  back  the 
way  he  had  come.  On  coming  to  know  that  the  Asuras  had 
been  cursed  by  Sukra,  Brhaspati  became  delighted  that  his 
object  had  been  fulfilled.  Knowing  that  the  Asuras  were 
doomed,  he  became  pleased.  He  then  re-assumed  his  form  and 
disappeared  from  that  place. 

39-40.  When  he  vanished,  the  Danavas  became  per- 
plexed. They  spoke  thus  to  one  another.  “O  fie  upon  us.  We 
have  been  deceived  due  to  our  affection.  We  have  been  made 
disinclined  towards  piety  by  the  Creator.  We  have  been  doom- 
ed in  our  own  activities  through  fraud,  and  application  of 
Maya  (Illusion)”. 

41.  Thereafter,  the  Asuras  became  afraid  of  the  Devas. 
Hence,  they  hastened  to  follow  Sukra,  keeping  Prahlada  as 
their  leader. 

42.  After  approaching  Sukra,  they  stood  around  him 
with  their  heads  bent  down.  On  seeing  that  his  Tdjyas  had 
approached  him  again,  Sukra  said  to  them  : — 

43.  “You  have  been  cautioned  at  proper  time  by  me. 
But,  since  you  did  not  pay  heed  to  ine  or  approve  me  you  have 
met  with  discomfiture  on  account  of  that  arrogance”. 

44-46.  Prahlada  then  said  to  him  : — “Do  not  forsake 
us,  O Bhargava,  we  are  your  own  Tdjyas.  We  have  resorted  to 
you.  We  are  your  special  devotees.  When  you  were  not  seen, 
we  were  deluded  by  that  preceptor  of  the  Devas.  It  behoves 
you  to  protect  us  after  understanding  everything  with  your 
divine  vision  of  long  range.  If  you  do  not  favour  us,  O son  of 


924 


BrahmAn^a  Pur&na 


Bhrgu,  we  are  cursed  mentally  by  you.  So  we  shall  enter 
Rasatala”. 

Sutasaid  : — 

47.  On  understanding  the  facts  as  they  were  in  reality, 
Sukra  was  soon  pacified  on  account  of  his  great  compassionate 

nature.  Then  he  ceased  to  be  angry. 

48.  He  said  this  : — ‘‘You  need  not  be  afraid.  There  is 
no  necessity  to  go  to  Rasatala.  This  event  was  inevitable. 
Hence,  it  befell  you  even  when  I was  alert. 

49.  Destiny  is  very  powerful.  It  cannot  be  changed.  As 
for  the  loss  of  your  sense,  you  can  regain  it  as  you  please. 

50.  “Has  the  time  of  succession  come  ?”  said  Brahma. 
It  was  due  to  my  favour  that  the  glorious  realm  of  the 
three  worlds  has  been  enjoyed  by  you  all. 

51.  A long  period  of  time  reckoned  as  ten  Yugas,  has 
been  completed  since  you  had  attacked  the  Devas  and  ruled 
over  their  head.  Brahma  had  declared  that  much  as  the  period 
of  your  rule. 

52.  In  the  Savarnika  Manvantara,  you  will  have  the 
suzerainty  once  more.  Your  grandson  Bali  will  become  the 
future  lord  of  the  worlds. 

53.  This  period  and  the  over-lordship  of  your  grand- 
son have  been  declared  by  Brahma  himself.  Therefore,  we  did 
not  have  any  sorrow  when  the  worlds  were  recaptured. 

54.  Since  Bali’s  activities  were  not  prompted  by 
personal  love  or  passion,  Brahma  had  become  pleased  and  the 
kingdom  had  been  bestowed  upon  him  in  the  Savarnika 
Manvantara. 

55.  IS  vara  (lord  Siva)  lias  told  me  that  the  kingdom  of 
the  Devas  should  pass  on  to  Bali.  Hence,  he  remains  waiting 
for  the  proper  time.  He  is  invisible  to  all  living  beings. 

56.  (Defective  text) . Immortality  has  been  granted  to 
you  by  the  delighted  self-born  lord  Brahma.  Hence  why 
should  you  be  lacking  in  enthusiasm  regarding  the  succession 
by  turns  ? You  get  agitated  suddenly. 

57.  It  is  not  possible  for  me  to1  make  it.  Predestined 


2.3.73.58-68 


925 

course  of  events  move  on  beforehand.  I have  been  prohibited 
by  Brahm&  who  knows  the  future,  O lord. 

58.  These  two  are  my  disciples.  They  are  on  a par  with 
Bfhaspati.  They  will  support  you  when  you  are  overwhelmed 
by  or  engaged  in  conflict  with  the  Devas”. 

SUta  said  : — 

59.  On  being  told  thus  by  Sukra  of  indefatigable 
activity,  Prahlada  and  other  descendants  of  Diti  went  along 
with  those  two  priests. 

60-62.  On  hearing  about  that  inevitable  matter,  the 
descendants  of  Diti  and  Danu,  commended  at  once  the  Victory 
spoken  of  by  Sukra.  Wearing  the  armours  and  wielding  the 
weapons,  all  of  them  challenged  the  Devas  for  a fight.  On 
seeing  the  Asuras  readily  advanced  for  battle,  the  Devas  made 
preparations  for  the  same  and  fought  with  them. 

This  battle  between  Devas  and  Asuras  lasted  a hundred 
years.  In  it  the  Asuras  defeated  the  Devas.  The  distressed  and 
afflicted  Devas  spoke  among  themselves. 

The  Devas  said  : — 

63.  It  is  on  account  of  the  great  power  of  §anda 
and  Marka  that  we  have  been  conquered  by  the  Asuras. 
Hence,  by  declaring  a Yajfia,  something  should  be  done 
conducive  to  our  own  welfare. 

64.  We  shall  invite  them  for  a sacrifice  and  thereby 
conquer  the  Asuras.  Then  the  Devas  invited  both  Santfa  and 
Marka. 

65-66.  They  were  invited  to  the  sacrifice  and  told  thus  : — 
O Brahmanas,  let  the  Asuras  be  abandoned.  After  conquering 
Danavas,  we  shall  make  you  receive  a share.  In  this  manner 
§an<la  and  Marka  left  off  the  Asuras  then. 

67.  Thereafter,  Devas  gained  victory  and  the 
Danavas  met  with  discomfiture.  After  vanquishing  the  Asuras, 
the  Devas  approached  San<Ja  and  Marka  (?). 

68.  (The  Danavas)  who  had  no  support,  who  were 
overwhelmed  by  the  curse  of  Kavya  and  who  were  once  again 
harassed  by  the  Devas  entered  Rasatala. 


926 


Brahmdn^a  Pur&tja 


69.  Thus  the  Danavas  were  rendered  inactive  by  Tndra 
as  well  as  due  to  the  curse  originating  from  Sukra. 

70.  When  the  cult  of  sacrifice  became  slack,  lord  Visnu 
incarnated  again  and  again  in  order  to  destroy  Sjn  and  re- 
establish Dharma  (Piety). 

71.  Lord  Brahma  pronounced  that  those  Asuras  who 
did  not  abide  by  the  directions  of  Prahla  la  were  sure  to  be 
killed  bv  human  beings. 

72.  Hence,  Narayana  was  born  of  Dharma  in  the 
Caksusa  Mamantara.  The  son  of  Vena  (i.e.  Prthu)  made 
TajHa  function  in  the  Vaivasvata  Manvantara. 

73-74.  When  the  son  of  Vr*na  came  into  being,  Brahma 
himself  was  Purohita  ( Priest ) . 

In  the  fourth  reckoning  of  period  of  time  called  Yuga, 
when  the  Suras  were  in  distress,  he  was  born  within  the  ocean 
(?  the  Varaha  incarnation  of  Visnu  ?) 

In  the  case  of  slaving  Hiranyakasipu  he  became 
Narasimha  (Man-lion) , a second  Rudra,  with  his  son 
( ? Prahlada)  placed  in  front. 

75.  When  Bali,  the  lord  of  Daityas  and  the  son  of 
Virocana,  was  performing  a sacrifice,  he  became  a Brahmana, 
the  delighter  of  the  family  of  Aditi  and  spoke  thus  to  Bali  at 
an  auspicious  time  : — 

76.  “You  are  the  king  of  the  three  worlds.  Everything 
is  vested  in  you.  It  behoves  you,  O king,  to  give  me  three 
paces  of  land,  so  said  the  lord. 

77.  “I  shall  of  course  give”,  said  the  king  Bali  the  son 
of  Virocana.  Thinking  him  to  be  only  a Dwarf  he  became 
glad  and  offered  the  same. 

78.  That  Vamana,  O excellent  Brahmanas,  the  lord 
covered  the  entire  Universe  by  means  of  three  paces,  viz. 
heaven,  ether  and  Earth. 

79.  The  lord  BkUtdtmd  (the  immanent  soul  of  all  living 
beings)  excelled  even  the  sun  by  means  of  his  refulgence.  The 
glorious  lord  illuminated  the  quarters  and  interstices. 

80.  After  taking  away  the  Royal  splendour  of  Asuras, 
the  mighty-armed  Visnu  of  great  prowess,  brightened  the 
worlds  and  shone. 


2.3.73  81-92 


927 


81-83.  He  drove  the  Asuras  along  with  their  sons  and 
grandsons  to  Pa  tala.  They  were  Namuci,  Sambara  and 
Prahlada. 

The  cruel  ones  among  them  were  killed  by  Visnu. 
Completely  shaken,  the  other  Asuras  fled  to  all  directions. 

The  lord  Madhava,  the  immanent  soul  of  all  living 
beings,  O Brahmanas,  showed  a great  miracle  to  the  great 
elements  along  with  the  special  forms  as  well  as  to  Bali 
along  with  his  army. 

The  entire  univeisc  saw  itself  in  his  physical  body. 

There  is  nothing  in  all  the  worlds  which  is  not  pervaded 
by  the  lord. 

Devas,  Dauavas  and  human  beings  became  en- 
chanted and  deluded  on  seeing  that  foiin  of  Upend ra  {i.e. 
Vamana) . They  were  fascinated  hy  the  splendour  of  Visnu. 

Bali  was  bound  with  great  nooses  along  with  his  kins — 
men  and  groups  of  friends. 

86-87.  The  entire  family  ol  Viro^ana  was  confined  to 
Patala. 

Thereafter,  lord  Visnu  bestowed  to  the  noble-souled 
Indra  the  wealth  and  glory  of  immortal  beings  (i.e.  Devas). 
These  three  incarnations  are  r membered  as  his  splendid 
divine  manifestations.  Then,  the  lord  of  great  prowess  appeared 
among  human  beings. 

88-90.  He  had  seven  incarnations  as  human  being. 
Understand  them  along  with  the  leader  (i.e.  the  priest  or 
preceptor). 

In  the  tenth  Treta  Yuga,  when  Dharma  became 
adversely  affected,  he  assume  1 the  fourth  manifestation  of 
Daltatreya.  Markancjeya  was  his  preceptor. 

In  the  fifteenth  Tretayuga,  the  fifth  incarnation  took 
place  as  Mandhata,  the  Emperor.  Utathya  was  his  preceptor. 

In  the  nineteenth  Tretayuga,  the  lord  was  born  as  the 
son  ofjamadagni  with  ViSvamitra  as  his  preceptor.  He  annihi- 
lated all  the  Ksatriyas.  This  was  the  sixth  manifestation. 

91-92.  In  the  twentyfourth  Treta  Yuga,  the  lerd 
took  his  seventh  incarnation  as  Rama,  the  son  of  Daiaratha, 
for  killing  Ravana,  and  had  Vasi?tha  as  his  preceptor. 


928 


Brahm&n<ja  Pur&na 


In  the  twenty-eighth  Dvapara  Yuga,  the  lord  had  his 
eighth  incarnation  as  Vedavyasa.  He,  was  born  of  Parasara 
with  Jatukarnya  as  his  preceptor. 

93-98.  The  lord  Visnu  who  was  born  of  Aditi  and 
Kasyapa  in  the  Vamana  incarnation  took  birthf  (as  Krgna) 
the  son  of  Devaki  and  Vasudeva,  with  Gargya  as  his  preceptor. 

The  lord  is  incomprehensible.  He  is  one  who  cannot  be 
ordered  about.  He  has  perfect  control  over  his  senses.  He 
has  restrained  his  Kama  (Love). 

The  lord  sports  in  the  world  like  a child  with  his  toys. 
This  powerful  lord  Visnu  cannot  be  comprehended. 

There  is  nothing  which  is  more  excellent  or  greater  than 
this  lord  of  cosmic  form. 

At  the  close  of  the  twenty-eighth  Dvapara  Yuga,  when 
Dharma  was  adversely  affected,  lord  Visnu  was  born  in  the 
family  of  Vrsni  in  order  to  carry  out  the  annihilation  of 
Asuras  and  to  re-establish  piety  and  virtue.  The  lord  of  Yogic 
power  fascinates  all  living  beings  by  means  of  his  Yogic 
Maya.  Assuming  human  form,  the  Lord  moves  about  on  the 
Earth  in  a concealed  form  or  disguise . 

99-101.  For  the  sake  of  his  divine  sport,  the  Lord 
took  his  incarnation  among  human  beings  with  Sandipani 
also  as  his  preceptor.  During  this  incarnation  the  lord  of 
great  virility  killed  the  Daityas  who  had  taken  up  human 
bodies,  such  as  Karnsa,  Salva,  the  great  Asuras,  Dvivida, 
Arista,  Vrsabha,  Putana,  Kes'i  who  came  as  a horse,  the 
elephant  Kuvalayapida,  the  athlete  (Canura  etc.),  the  lord  of 
Rajagrha  (Jarasandha ) etc.  The  thousand  arms  of  Bana  were 
cut  off  by  the  lord  of  miraculous  activities. 

102.  Naraka  was  killed.  So  also  the  extremely  powerful 
Yavana.  All  the  valuable  gems  of  the  kings  were  taken  away 
by  him  along  with  their  splendour  and  glory. 

103.  The  heroic  warriors  of  the  Kuru  race  were  killed 
by  him.  So  also  the  kings  who  were  in  the  Rasatala. 

These  were  the  exploits  of  the  Supreme  Soul  for  the 
welfare,  of  all  the  worlds. 

104.  In  this  Kali  Yuga  itself,  when  the  SandhyA 
(Junction)  period  is  yet  to  lapse,  the  lord  will  be  born  under 


2.3.73.105-117 


929 


the  name  Kalki  and  VisnuyaSas.  He  will  have  great  exploits 
and  belong  to  the  family  of  ParaSara. 

105.  It  is  the  tenth  incarnation  which  is  yet  to  take  place. 
Yajnavalkya  will  be  his  preceptor.  He  will  be  taking  behind 
him  an  army  full  of  horses,  elephants  and  chariots. 

106-109.  He  will  be  surrounded  by  hundreds  and 
thousands  of  Brahmanas  who  have  taken  up  weapons.  Th& 
powerful  lord  will  put  an  end  to  the  Mlecchas  with  the  followers 
functioning  duly.  He  will  go  round  among  the  Udicyas  (North- 
erners), Madhyadeias  (Middle  lands),  other  sides  of  the 
Vindhyas,  Daksinatyas  (Southerners),  Dravidas  along  with 
the  Simhalas  (those  who  stay  in  Lanka),  Gandharas,  Paradas, 
Pahlavas,  Pavanas,  Sakas,  Tubaras,  Sabaras,  Pulindas,  Baradas, 
Vasas,  Lampakas,  Andhrakas,  Puncjras,  and  Kiratas.  He  will 
chastise  those  who  are  not  very  pious  and  in  some  places 
those  who  hate  piety  and  devotion. 

110-111.  He  will  wander  over  the  whole  of  the  Earth 
without  being  seen  by  any  living  being.  lie  will  be  bom  as  a 
human  being  as  the  son  of  Devasena  the  intelligent. 

The  lord  Visnu  who  had  been  born  in  the  previous  birth 
as  a powerful  one,  Pramiti  by  name,  will  be  born  in  the  Gotra 
of  Candramas  when  the  Kaliyuga  is  complete. 

112-115.  Thus  these  ten  incarnations  of  the  lord  are 
remembered.  He  accepts  different  wombs  in  the  three 
worlds  partially,  adopting  at  different  periods  of  time, 
different  physical  bodies,  and  different  purposes  for  the  mani- 
festations. He  will  be  born  in  the  twentyfifth  Kalpa.  For 
twenty-five  years  he  will  be  exterminating  the  living  beings 
and  all  human  beings  ( ?) . With  this  cruel  act,  he  will  render 
the  Earth  left  with  only  the  seeds.  He  will  subdue  Vrsalas 
(low  caste  people)  and  almost  those  evil-doers. 

Thereafter,  Kalki  will  become  contented  along  with  his 
army. 

116.  Those  who  are  not  killed  in  this  action,  those  who 
achieve  something,  will  become  deluded  suddenly  and  fight 
with  one  another. 

1 1 7.  After  the  annihilation  of  all  those,  on  being  urged  by  the 


930  Brahmantfa  Purdpa 

inevitable  future  events,  he  will  establish  himself  in  between 
Gariga  and  Yamuna,  along  with  his  iollowers. 

118-123.  When  Kalpa  comes  to  a close,  the  kings 
will  be.destroyed  al  -ag  with  their  soldiers.  Then  the  subjects 
will  become  free  from  restraint.  When  the  arrangement  for 
defence  recedes,  th^y  will  kill  one  another  in  battie.  They 
will  remove  the  wealth  and  property  of  one  another.  They  will 
not  have  any  pleasure  in  doing  so.  They  will  be  excessively 
dejected.  They  ii  forsake  cities  and  villages  (and  stay 
elsewhere).  All  their  hoiy  rites  and  devotional  observances 
will  become  upset.  They  will  have  stunted  growth.  They  will 
not  live  long.  They  will  be  staying  in  the  forests  like  this 
resorting  to  rivers  and  mountains.  They  will  have  only  leaves 
and  roots  to  eat.  They  will  be  wearing  bark  garments,  l.  avcs 
or  deer  skin.  They  will  be  undergoing  the  terrible  difficulties 
due  to  mixture  of  castes.  They  will  be  short-lived.  Their  means 
of  sustenance  such  as  agriculture  etc.  will  be  affected.  They 
will  have  to  face  many  harassments  and  obstacles.  T hey  will  be 
miserable. 

In  this  miserable  plight,  during  that  period  of  Kalisandiy - 
dmia  (Residual  period  of  the  close  of  the  Kali  Yuga) , the 
subjects  will  become  reduced  in  number.  They  .vill  be  affecto  1 
along  with  the  Kali  Yuga. 

124-126.  When  Kali  Yuga  lapses  completely  and  when 
the  Krtayuga  begins  to  function  once  again,  the  people  will 
resume  once  again  every  thing  by  nature  and  not  otherwise. 

Thus  the  entire  activity  of  the  Devas  and  Asuras  has 
been  recounted  to  you.  In  the  context  of  the  description  of  the 
race  of  Yadu,  the  great  reputation  of  Visnu  has  been  recounted. 

I shall  now  narrate  the  lines  of  Turvasu,  Puru,  Druhyu 
and  Anu. 


2.3.74.1-10 


931 


CHAPTER  SEVENTYFOUR 

Royal  Dynasties 


SUta  said  : — 

1.  Vahni  was  the  son  of  Turvasu.  Gobhanu  was  the 
son  of  Vahni.1 2  Trisanu,  the  unvanquished  hero,  was  the  son  of 
Gobhanu. 

2.  Karandhama  was  the  son  of  Trisanu.  Marutta  was 
his  son.  Marutta,  the  son  of  Aviksit  mentioned  before,  was 
another  king. 

3.  It  is  heard  that,  that  king  Marutta  was  issueless. 
He  adopted  Dusyanta  the  son  of  Puru,  as  his  son. 

4.  It  is  said  that  thus,  in  view  of  the  former  curse 
of  Yayati  in  the  context  of  the  transference  of  old  age,  the  race 
of  Turvasu  got  merged  in  the  family  of  Puru. 

5.  The  successor  of  Duskanta  (?  Dusyanta)  was  the 
king  named  Sarupya. 2 Andira  was  born  of  Sarupya.  He  had 
four  sons. 

6.  They  were  Panrjya,  Kerala,  Cola  and  Kulya.  Their 
realms  were  Pandyas,  Keralas,  Colas  and  Kulyas. 

7.  The  two  sons  of  Druhyu,  viz.  Babhru  and  Setu  were 
renowned  warriors.  Aruddha  was  Setu’s  son  and  Ripu  is  men- 
tioned as  the  son  of  Babhru. 

8.  This  strong  king  fought  a great  battle  with  Yauvana£va 
for  full  fourteen  months.  Due  to  great  strain,  he  was  killed  in 
that  battle  by  Yauvanasva. 

9.  The  heir  and  successor  of  Aruddha  was  the  king 
named  Gandhara.3  The  great  realm  of  Gandhara  is  named 
after  him. 

10.  The  horses  born  (bred)  in  the  country  of  Gandhara 
are  excellent  horses.  Dharma  was  the  son  of  Gandhara.  Dhrta 
was  his  son. 

1.  AlHT.p.144  records  Garbha  as  the  descendent  of  Vahni  and 
Gobh&nu  comes  after  Garbha. 

2.  The  same  as  Sarutha  in  V&.P.  But  Bharata  is  regarded  as  the  son  of 
Dusyanta  and  Sakuntala  in  Mbh.  etc. 

3.  It  means  Druhyu  dynasty  ruled  over  a part  of  Afghanistan. 


932 


Brahmd#4a  Pur&na 


1 1 . Durdama  was  bom  as  the  son  of  Dhrta.  Pracetas 
was  his  son.  Hundred  sons  were  born  to  Pracetas.  All  of  them 
were  kings. 

12.  They  were  the  rulers  of  the  Mleccha  territories  in  the 
northern  quarter. 

Anu  had  three  sons.  They  were  great  heroes  and  extremely 
pious. 

13.  They  are  renowned  by  the  name  of  Sabhanara, 
Kalacaksus  and  Paraksa. 

The  son  of  Sabhanara  was  Kalanala,  the  scholarly  king. 

1 4.  Srftjaya  was  the  son  of  Kalanala.  He  was  righteous 
and  famous.  The  heroic  son  of  Srftjaya  was  Puraftjaya  by  name. 

15.  This  king  was  on  a par  with  Indra.  His  fame  became 
established  even  in  heaven.  Mahamanas,  the  righteous  one, 
was  the  son  of  that  Mahasala  (the  great  householder) . 

16.  King  Mahamanas  was  the  lord  of  the  seven  con- 
tinents. He  became  an  emperor  of  great  renown.  He  begot 
two  well-reputed  sons. 

17.  They  were  Ufinara  who  was  conversant  with  piety 
and  Virtue  and  Titiksu  who  was  righteous.  Usinara  had  five 
wives  who  hailed  from  the  families  of  saintly  kings. 

18-20.  They  were  Nrga,  Krmi,  Darva,  Nava  and  the 
fifth  one  Drsadvati.  Usinara  had  from  them  five  daughters  who 
supported  the  family.  After  performing  severe  penance  when 
he  became  old,  the  following  virtuous  sons  were  born  to  him. 

Nrga  was  the  son  of  Nrga.  Nava  was  the  son  of  Nava. 
Kimi  was  the  son  of  Kmii.  The  virtuous  son  named  Suvrata 
was  the  son  of  Darva.  Sibi  (famous  as)  Ausinara.  O Brah- 
manas,  was  the  son  of  Drsadvati. 

21.  The  city  of  Sibi  became  well  known  as  Sivapura.1 
That  of  Nrga  was  Yaudheya;  that  of  Nava  was  Navarasfra  and 
the  city  of  Krmi  was  Knnila. 

1.  The  following  are  the  locations  of  places  mentioned  here  : 

i.  Sivapura — The  country  of  Siaposh;  it  included  Kafiristan  (De  211 ) - 

ii.  Yaudheya— Located  between  Hydaspes  and  Indus  (De  215) . 

iii.  Navarijtra — Nausari  in  Baroach  Diet.  Gujarat  (De  139) 

iv.  Krmilfi — untraced. 


2.3.74.22-34  933 

22-23.  The  city  of  Suvrata  was  Ambasfa.1  Now  under- 
stand the  sons  of  Sibi. 

Sibi  had  four  sons  honoured  in  the  world.  They  were 
known  as  Sibis.  They  were  Vrsadarbha,  Suvlra,  Kekaya  and 
Madraka.  Their  territories  were  flourishing  viz.  Kekayas, 
Madrakas,  Vf§adarbhas  and  Suviras. 

Listen  to  the  children  of  Titiksu 

24-25.  Titiksu  became  famous  as  the  king  in  the  Eastern 
quarter.  The  mighty  USadratha  was  his  son.  Hema  was  his  son. 
Sutapas  was  born  to  Hema  and  Bali  was  the  son  of  Sutapas. 

26.  The  noble-minded  Bali  who  was  bound  by  Vamana 
was  a great  Yogin  and  he  took  birth  in  human  womb  being 
desirous  of  children,  as  the  family  was  nearing  extinction 
due  to  absence  of  issues. 

27-28.  He  begot  sons  who  established  the  disciplined  life 
of  four  castes.  He  begot  Anga,  Vanga,  Suhma  (?  Purujra) , 
Yuddha  (?)  and  Kalinga.  This  group  is  called  Baleya  K?atra 
(i.e.  Ksatriya  dynasty  of  Bali).  Brahmanas  too  known  as 
Baleyas  perpetuated  the  line  of  that  lord. 

29-32.  Many  boons  were  granted  to  the  intelligent  Bali 
by  Brahma  who  had  become  pleased . They  were — Mahdyogitva 
(State  of  being  a great  Yogin) ; longevity  extending  to  one  Kalpa; 
invincibility  in  battles;  ability  to  visit  the  three  worlds, 
prominence  in  the  matter  of  progeny  due  to  his  power  of 
piety  and  devotion,  state  of  being  unrivalled,  ability  to 
understand  the  principle  of  Dharma  (Devotion,  Virtue  and 
Piety) . (He  was  told  thus) — “You  will  establish  the  four  castes 
duly1’.  On  being  told  thus  by  the  lord  (Brahma) , Bali,  the  king, 
attained  great  tranquility.  After  a long  time  the  scholarly 
king  attained  his  own  region. 

33.  Their  territories  viz.  Angas,  Vahgas,  Suhmakas, 
Pun^ras  and  Kalingas  were  very  flourishing.  Understand  their 
genealogy. 

34.  All  those  sons  of  his  were  Kfetrajas  (bom  of  his  wife 
to  another) . They  w$re  born  to  a sage.  Those  sons  of  great 
prowess  were  bom  to  Sudesna  by  Dirghatamas. 

1 . The  country  of  the  tribe  of  Ambutai  who  lived  in  northern  Sindh 
at  the  time  of  Alexander.  (De  6) 


934 


Brahmdnda  Purina 


The  Sages  said: — 

35.  How  were  the  five  sons  of  Bali  begot  as  K$etrajas , O 
holy  Sir,  by  the  sage  Dirghatamas.  Kindly  recount  this  to  us 
who  ask  you. 

Suta  said: — 

36.  Formerly,  there  was  a well-  renowned  and  intelligent 
Sage  named  Usija.  The  wife  of  this  noble-souled  sage  was 
Mamata  by  name. 

37.  The  younger  brother  of  Usija  was  the  priest  of 
heaven-dwellers  named  Brhaspati.  He  had  a great  deal  of 
effulgence.  He  approached  Mamata. 

38.  Mamata  who  did  not  like  Brhaspati  said  to  him — 
“I  am  the  wife  of  your  elder  brother  and  I am  pregnant  too. 

39.  This  child  in  my  womb,  O Brhaspati,  yells  con- 
stantly practising  the  recitation  of  the  Vedas  along  with  their 
Angas  (ancillary  subjects). 

40.  You  too  are  Amogharetas  (one  whose  semen 
never  goes  in  vain) . It  does  not  behove  you,  O lord,  to 
approach  me  on  this  occasion  or  in  the  manner  you  think.’ * 

41-42.  Though  told  thus  clearly  Brhaspati  of  great 
effulgence  could  not  resist  the  passionate  impulse  of  himself, 
although  he  was  a noble  soul. 

The  righteous-souled  Brhaspati  did  indeed  have  sexual 
intercourse  with  her.  Even  as  he  was  discharging  the  seminal 
fluid,  the  child  in  the  womb  spoke  to  him. 

43.  — “Do  not  discharge  semen  O Bfhaspati.  There  is 
no  space  here  for  two.  You  are  one  whose  semen  never  goes  in 
vain.  But  I have  come  here  before.*’ 

44.  On  being  told  thus,  the  exalted  sage  Brhaspati,  be- 
came infuriated  then.  He  cursed  the  son  of  his  brother  U£ija, 
though  he  was  yet  in  the  womb. 

45.  “Since,  out  of  delusion,  you  told  me  thus,  at  a time 
eagerly  desired  by  all  living  beings,  you  will  enter  a period  of 
prolonged  darkness**. 

46.  Thereupon,  due  to  the  curse,  the  son  of  U£ija  be- 
came a sage  named  Dirghatamas.  He  earned  great  reputation 


2.3.74.47-57 


935 


and  he  was  on  a par  with  Brhaspati  by  means  of  his  splendour 
and  prowess. 

47.  He  was  an  Orddhvaretas  (a  person  abstaining  from 
sexual  inter-course).  He  lived  in  the  hermitage  of  the  brother 
(of  his  father).  He  heard  Godharma  ( the  dharma  of  the  cattle ) 
from  a lordly  bull,  the  son  of  Surabhi. 

48.  His  faiher’s  brother  built  a house  for  him.  While  he 
was  staying,  the  bull  came  there  casually. 

49.  The  son  of  Surabhi  grazed  the  Darbha  grass  spread 
in  the  yard  for  the  Daria  rites  (the  holy  rites  to  be 
performed  on  the  New  moon  day).  Dirghatamas  caught  hold  of 
him  by  the  horns  even  as  he  was  struggling  to  free  himself. 

50-51.  On  being  held  by  him,  the  bull  did  not  move 
even  a step.  Then  he  told  the  sage — “Leave  me,  O most 
excellent  one  among  the  mighty  beings.  O dear  one,  a mighty 
person  like  you,  I have  never  come  across  anywhere.  I am  the 
vehicle  of  tord  Tryambaka,  and  am  born  now  on  the  Earth. 
Therefore,  O excellent  one  among  the  mighty  beings,  release 
me.  Acquire  my  affection  in  return  and  choose  a boon.” 

52-53.  On  being  told  thus,  he  spoke  to  him  (the  Sage 
said  to  the  bull)  — “Where  will  you  go  alive  away  from  me  ? 
Hence,  I will  not  leave  you  though  a quadruped,  (because) 
you  have  eaten  other’s  property.  Then  the  bull  replied  to 
Dirghatamas. 

54-55.  “O  we  do  not  incur  anything  like  the  sin  of  theft, 
O dear  one.  Wc  do  not  distinguish  between  what  should  be 
eaten  and  what  should  not  be  eaten  or  what  should  be  drunk  and 
what  should  not  be  drunk.  O Brahmana,  we  do  not  differen- 
tiate between  what  should  be  done  and  what  should  not  be  done 
or  what  should  be  approached  and  what  should  not  be  appro- 
ached. We  arc  not  at  all  sinners,  O Brahmana.  This  Dharma 
of  kine  is  well  known.” 

56.  On  hearing  the  name  of  cows,  he  became  bewildered 
and  released  him.  With  his  devotion  and  desire  to  hear  the 
bull’s  words  he  propitiated  the  son  of  the  cow. 

57.  By  the  grace  of  the  leading  bull  he  accepted  Godharma1 

1 . This  obscure  rite  is  mentioned  by  Buddha  in  derision.  Mbh. 
attests  to  the  existence  of  this  practice— MW  365A 


936 


Brahm5$4a  Purdna 


(law  of  cattle).  He  retained  it  in  his  mind.  Being  eagerly 
devoted  to  it,  he  became  one  like  the  Bulls. 

58.  Thereafter,  as  ill  luck  would  have  it  he  became 
deluded  in  his  mind  and  so  he  sexually  desired  the  wife  of  his 
younger  brother  (or  son  ?)  Autathya,  although  she  struggled 
and  cried  in  protest. 

59.  It  was  by  resorting  to  Godharma  that  he  desired  his 
daughter-in-law.  Saradvan  did  not  brook  it,  as  he  considered  it 
an  outrage  and  insult. 

60-62.  On  seeing  this  perversity,  the  noble-souled 
Saradvan  thought  over  it  deeply.  He  understood  the  future 
consequences.  With  the  eyes  turned  red  due  to  anger,  he  dis- 
paragingly said  to  Dirghatamas — “You  do  not  distinguish 
between  what  should  be  approached  and  what  shquld  not  be 
approached.  Adopting  Godharma , you  have  desired  your  own 
daughter-in-law.  Since  you  are  ill-behaved,  I abandon  you.  You 
may  go  along  with  your  evil  action.  Since  you  are  blind  and 
old  (I  considered)  that  you  should  be  sustained,  but  you  have 
acted  in  a vile  manner.  Therefore,  you  are  forsaken.  I consider 
you  as  one  of  evil  conduct.’ * 

SUta  said : — 

63-64.  Therefore,  he  (i.e.  Saradvan)  thought  of  a cruel 
activity.  He  rebuked  him  in  many  ways,  caught  hold  of  him 
with  both  arms  and  put  him  in  a sealed  box.  Then  he  cast  it 
off  in  the  waters  of  Ganga. 

65-67.  The  sealed  box  was  carried  by  the  current  and 
was  wafted  here  and  there  for  seven  days.  A king  named  Bali1 
saw  it.  He  was  conversant  with  the  principles  of  piety  and 
matters  concerning  wealth.  He  was  accompanied  by  his  wife. 
He  saw  the  box  sinking  and  floating.  When  it  came  near  the 
bank  the  pious  king  Bali,  the  son  of  Virocana,  took  it.  He  pro- 
pitiated Dirghatamas  with  different  kinds  of  foodstuffs  and 


I.  The  text  has  mixed  up  Bali,  the  great  rival  of  Indra  and  this  Bali, 
the  king  of  East  India.  The  story  of  having  Afiga,  Vahga,  Kalihga,  Puo<Jra, 
Suhma  as  the  sons  from  Dirgha-tamas  to  his  queen  Sudep^A  is  of  a different 
Bali  and  not  of  Indra*s  rival.  See  MLBD.  PE.  pp.104-105. 


2.3.74.68-80 


937 


kept  him  well-looked  after,  in  the  harem.  On  being  delighted 
due  to  that,  he  (the sage)  asked  Bali  to  choose  a boon. 

68-69.  The  leading  Danava  who  was  desirous  of  sons, 
chose  the  boon  thus. 

Bali  said  : — 

O sage  of  exalted  dignity  and  fortune,  O bestower  of 
honour,  I am  desirous  of  progeny.  It  behoves  you  to  beget 
sons  of  my  wife,  sons  endowed  with  virtue  and  wealth. 

On  being  told  thus,  the  sage  said  to  him — “So  be  it”. 

70.  The  king  sent  his  wife  named  Sude$na  to  the  sage. 
On  seeing  him  blind  and  old,  the  queen  did  not  go  to  him. 

71-73.  She  beautified  her  maid  with  ornaments  and  sent 
her  to  him.  The  sage  of  great  Self-control  with  a pious  soul 
begot  two  sons  viz.  Kak?ivan  and  Caksus  of  her  in  the  womb 
of  a Sudra  lady.  The  two  sons  Kaksivan  and  Caksus  had  great 
prowess.  On  seeing  them  well  learned  in  the  Vedas  in  accord- 
ance with  the  injunctions,  and  on  observing  them  to  be  masters 
of  everything  and  expounders  of  Vedic  lore,  on  finding  that 
they  have  achieved  spiritual  enlightenment  and  that  they 
had  become  the  most  excellent  ones,  Bali,  the  son  of  Virocana, 
said  to  the  sage — “These  two  are  my  sons”. 

74-75.  He  (the  sage)  said — “No”.  Thereafter,  he  said 
again — “These  are  my  sons.  They  arc  excellent  Brahmanas 
born  of  Sudra  womb,  the  servant  of  yours. 

Considering  me  blind  and  old,  Sudesna  your  chief  Queen 
sent  her  Sudra  maid  to  me  thereby  insulting  me. 

76-77.  Thereupon,  Bali  propitiated  the  excellent  sage 
once  again.  Bali,  the  lord  rebuked  his  wife  Sudesna.  He  made 
her  bedecked  in  ornaments  and  offered  her  to  the  sage. 

78-79.  The  sage  Dirghatamas  then  said  to  the  Queen— 
4<0  splendid  lady,  I will  be  completely  smeared  with  curd  mixed 
with  salt  and  I will  remain  nude.  Without  any  feeling  of  re- 
vulsion you  must  lick  my  body  from  head  to  the  sole  of 
foot.  Thereby,  O gentle  lady,  you  shall  attain  sons  as  desired  by 
you. 

80.  The  Queen  carried  out  his  behest  but  coming  to  the 
anus  she  had  feelings  of  revulsion  and  so  she  avoided  it. 


938 


Brahmdn<fa  Purdna 


81-82.  Then  the  sage  told  her,  “Since,  O splendid  lady, 
you  avoided  the  anus,  you  will  have  the  eldest  of  your  sons 
without  anus. 

Thereupon,  that  queen  replied  to  Dirghatamas — “O 
exalted  one,  it  does  not  behove  you  to  give  me  a son  like  this” 

The  sage  said  : — 

83-84.  “O  Queen,  this  is  your  own  fault.  It  cannot  be 
otherwise.  O Queen  of  good  holy  rites,  I shall  grant  you  a 
grandson  like  this;  Even  without  the  anus,  he  will  have 
capability. 

Touching  her  belly  Dirghatamas  said  thus  : — 

85-86.  “O  lady  of  pure  smiles,  since  the  curd  has  been 
licked  by  you  from  my  body,  your  conception  is  complete.  Your 
womb  is  filled  like  the  ocean  on  the  full-moon  day. 

Five  sons  comparable  to  the  sons  of  Devas  will  be  born 
to  you. 

They  will  be  lustrous  and  virtuous.  They  will  have  exploits. 
They  will  be  oppressors  of  their  foes.  They  will  be  performing 
sacrifices. 

87.  Then  Anga  was  born  as  the  eldest  son  of  Sudesna. 
Thereafter,  Vanga,  Kalinga,  Pun<Jra  and  Suhma  were  born. 

88.  These  five  sons  were  born  of  the  wife  of  Bali  and 
they  perpetuated  the  line.  It  was  thus  that  these  sons  were 
formerly  given  to  Bali  by  Dirghatamas. 

89-90.  In  view  of  certain  reasons,  progeny  of  Bali  had 
been  prevented  by  Brahma,  saying — “Let  there  not  be  any 
offspring  of  this  noble-souled  king  by  his  own  wives.  That  was 
why  he  begot  children  of  human  womb. 

The  delighted  cow  Surabhi  spoke  these  words  to 
Dirghatamas. 

91.  “O  sage,  you  pondered  over  Godharma  and  did  like 
this.  Therefore,  I am  pleased  with  your  single-minded  devotion 
to  us. 

92-94.  Hence,  I shall  dispel  your  chronic  darkness.  You 
will  be  able  to  see.  By  sniffing  and  inhaling  the  air  from  your 
body,  I shall  dispel  the  sin  of  curse  imprecated  by  Brhaspati, 
which  lingers  yet  in  your  body.  J shall  dispel  the  fear  of  old 
age  and  death  in  you.” 


2.3.74.95-106 


939 


The  moment  he  was  sniffed  and  smelt,  he  became  com- 
petent to  see  as  the  darkness  was  dispelled.  He  became  a young 
man  endowed  with  longevity  and  power  of  sight.  He  became 
Gautama  because  his  Tamas  (darkness)  was  removed  by  a 
cow.1 

95.  Kaksivan  went  to  Girivraja  along  with  his  father 
and  performed  elaborate  penance  as  directed  by  him. 

96.  After  the  lapse  of  a great  deal  of  time,  he  became 
sanctified  through  austerities.  The  saintly  lord  got  rid  of 
his  defects.  He  attained  the  status  of  a Brahmana  along  with 
his  younger  brother  Caksus. 

97.  Then  the  father  said  to  him  : — “O-  lord,  now  I am 
one  endowed  with  son.  With  you  as  my  famous  son,  O dear 
one,  I am  now  contented  and  happy. 

98-99a.  Thereafter,  he  engaged  himself  in  Yogic  practice 
and  attained  the  abode  of  Brahma. 

After  attaining  the  status  of  a Brahmana,  Kaksivan  begot 
a thousand  sons.  Those  .sons  are  remembered  as  Kusmandas 
and  Gautamas. 

99b- 100a.  Thus  the  mutual  contact  of  Dirghatamas  and 
Bali  the  son  of  Virocana,  has  been  recounted.  Their  children 
have  been  enumerated. 

100b-101.  After  performing  the  coronation  of  his  five 
sinless  (meritorious)  sons,  lord  Bali  became  satisfied.  Resorting 
to  Yogic  power  and  having  communion  with  the  Supreme  Soul, 
he  moves  about  in  the  world  biding  his  time.  He  is  invisible  to 
all  living  beings. 

102.  King  Dadhivahana  was  the  son  of  the  saintly  king 
Anga.  Due  to  the  fault  of  Sudesna,  that  king  was  called 
Anapdna  without  anus. 

103.  King  Diviratha  is  remembered  as  the  son  of 
Anapana.  The  learned  king  Dharmaratha  was  the  son  of 
Diviratha. 

1 04-106.  These  are  said  to  be  the  descendants  of  Iksvaku. 
They  will  be  born  in  the  Kaliyuga  in  the  family  of  Brhadbala. 


1 . A popular  etymology  of  Gautama. 


940 


Brohm&tiia  Purina 


They  shall  be  endowed  with  great  vigour  and  exploit. 
They  will  be  heroic,  learned  and  truthful.  They  will  conquer 
the  sense-organs. 

In  this  context  the  following  verse  regarding  the  family  is 
cited  by  the  people  who  know  future  events.  9 

— “This  family  of  Ik§vakus  shall  continue  up  to  Sumitra. 
Having  reached  Sumitra  in  the  Kali  Yuga  it  will  become 
extinct.” 

107-1 10.  Thus  the  Ksatriya  clan  originating  from  Manu 
and  Aila  (Pururavas)  has  been  recounted.  Henceforth,  I shall 
narrate  to  you  the  lineage  of  king  Brhadratha  of  Magadha, 
especially  the  kings  of  the  past,  present  and  future1  born  in  the 
race  of  Jarasandha,  in  the  family  of  Sahadeva,  in  accordance 
with  their  importance. 

Understand  the  same  as  I recount. 

Sahadeva  was  vanquished  and  killed  in  the  Bharata 
battle.  The  saintly  king  Somapi  was  his  son.  He  ruled  the 
kingdom  of  Girivraja  for  fifty-eight  years. 

111.  His  son  Srutasravas  ruled  for  sixty-seven  years. 
His  son  Ayutayu  ruled  the  kingdom  for  twenty-six  years. 

1 12.  Niramitra  enjoyed  the  Earth  for  a hundred  years 
and  went  to  heaven. 

Suk$aira  held  sway  over  the  Earth  for  fifty-six  years. 

113.  Brhatkarman  ruled  the  kingdom  for  twenty- three 
years.  Senajit  is  reigning  at  present.  The  following  kings  of 
the  future  will  rule  the  kingdom  for  the  period  (mentioned 
against  their  names). 

114-115.  SrutaAjaya  will  rule  for  forty  years.  The 
mighty  king  Ripufljaya  of  great  intellect  and  exploit  will  rule 
over  the  Earth- for  thirtyfive  years. 

Suci  will  stay  in  the  kingdom  (as  a ruler)  for  fiftyeight 

years. 


1.  VV.  107-203  give  the  brief  history  of  different  ‘Future*  dynasties. 
The  dynasties  mentioned  here  are  (1)  B&rhadratha,  (2)  Pradyota,  (3) 
Sisun&ga  (4)  Nanda,  (5)  Maurya,  (6)  Kanva  and  (8)  Andhra. 

For  the  discussion  of  these  historical  dynasties,  see  Introduction 
‘‘Historic^l^radition  in  Bd.P." 


2.3.74.116-129 


941 

f 

116.  K?ema  will  be  the  king  for  full  twenty-eight  years. 
The  vigorous  king  Suvrata  will  retain  the  kingdom  for  sixty- 
four  years. 

117-118.  (?)  Dharmanetra  will  be  five  years  old  when  he 

becomes  a king.  He  will  enjoy  (the  kingdom)  for  fifty-eight 
years.  Su£arma  will  reign  over  the  kingdom  for  thirty-eight 
and  protect  the  Earth  after  exterminating  the  Ksatriyas,  due 
to  the  force  of  inevitability  of  the  future. 

Drdhasena  will  be  a king  for  forty,  ten  and  eight  years  (i.e.  58 
years) . 

119.  Then  Sumati  will  obtain  and  rule  the  kingdom 
for  thirty-three  years.  Thereafter,  king  Sunetra  will  enjoy  (the 
kingdom)  for  forty  years. 

120.  Satyajit  will  rule  over  the  Earth  for  eighty-three 
years.  After  obtaining  the  kingdom  Vi$vajit  will  rule  over  it 
for  twenty-five  years. 

121-124.  Arifljaya  will  retain  the  Earth  (as  a king)  for 
fifty  years.  Thus  there  will  be  twentytwo  kings  (called) 
Bphadrathas.  They  will  retain  the  kingdom  for  full  thousand 
years. 

When  the  Brhadrathas  pass  away,  when  there  will  be  no 
slayers  of  heroes,  Sunaka  will  kill  his  master  and  crown  his 
son.  Even  as  all  the  Ksatriyas  remain  watching,  he  will  kill 
his  master  the  king  and  crown  his  son  Pradyoti  by  his  might. 

He  will  be  made  to  do  like  this  by  the  (inevitability  of 
the)  future.  All  the  vassal  kings  will  bow  down  to  him.  That 
excellent  person  will  rule  as  a king  for  twenty-three  years. 

125.  Thereafter,  Palaka  will  be  the  king  for  twenty-four 
years.  Visakhayupa  will  be  the  king  for  fifty  years. 

126.  Ajaka  will  have  the  kingdom  for  twenty-one  years. 
His  son  Nandivardhana  will  be  the  king  for  twenty  years. 

127-129.  These  five  kings  called  Pradyotas  (Descendants 
of  (Pradyoti)  will  rule  for  one  hundred  and  thirtyeight 
years.  Si£unaga  will  dispel  their  entire  glory  and  become  (king) 
in  Varanasi.  His  son  will  go  to  Girivraja.  Si£unaga  will  be  the 
king  for  forty  years;  Kakavarna,  his  son,  will  be  the  king*  for 
thirtysix  years.  Thereafter,  Ksemadharm&  will  be  the  king  for 
twenty  years. 


942 


brahmdntfa  Purdna 


1 30.  Then  Ksatraujas  will  obtain  the  kingdom  and  rule 
for  forty  years.  Vidhisara  will  be  king  for  thirtycight  years. 

131.  Ajatagatru  will  be  the  king  for  twentyfive  years. 
Darbhaka  will  be  the  king  for  thirtyfive  years. 

132-133.  Afterwards  Upayi  will  become  king  (and  rule) 
for  thirty-three  years.  On  the  fourth  day  that  kingwill  build 
an  excellent  city  named  Kusumapura  (now  Patna  in  Bihar)  on 
the  Southern  bank  of  Ganga.  Nandivardhana  will  be  the 
king  for  forty  years. 

134-135.  Mahanandi  will  be  the  king  for  forty-three 

years. 

Thus  SiSunaga  and  his  descendants  will  be  the  kings  for 
three  hundred  and  sixty  years.  Kings  of  the  family  of  Sisunaga 
are  thus  only  ten.  They  are  all  Ksatriyas  by  caste.  Other  kings 
will  rule  thereafter  for  an  equal  period. 

136-138.  There  will  be  twenty-four  kings  in  the  dynasty 
of  Tksvaku,  twenty-five  (rulers  of)  Paficalas,  twenty-four 
Kalakas,  twenty*  four  kings  in  Haihaya  dynasty,  thirty  two 
rulers  in  Ekalinga  dynasty,  twentyfive  kings  in  Saka  race,  thirty 
six  rulers  in  the  Kuru  dynasty  and  twenty-eight  kings  of 
Mithila;  the  Surasena  rulers  were  twenty-three,  the  Vltihotra 
rulers  twenty.  Thus  all  these  kings  will  be  contemporaries  (?) 

139.  Mahanandi’s  son,  begot  of  a Sudra  woman,  will 
become  the  king  by  force  of  Time  (circumstances).  (He  will 
be  called)  Mahapadma.  He  will  be  an  exterminator  of  all 
Ksatriyas. 

140-141.  Thereafter,  all  the  future  kings  will  be  born 
of  Sudra  wombs.  Mahapadma  will  be  a single  ruler  of  great 
power,  the  sole  Emperor  He  will  rule  for  eighty-eight  years 

142.  Thereafter,  his  eight  sons  will  be  kings  for  twelve 
years  in  due  order,  in  the  family  of  Mahapadma. 

143.  The  leading  Brahmana  Kaiitilya  will  exterminate 
all  of  them.  That  leading  man  will  enjoy*  the  Earth  for  a 
hundred  years. 


•As  suggested  by  Pargiter  (DKA  p.26)  bhuktd  maht  ‘the  earth  that  was 
enjoyed’  (for  100  years  etc)  was  a better  reading. 


2.3.74.144-161 


943 


144.  Kautilya  will  instal  Candragupta.  He  will  be  king 
for  twenty-four  years. 

145.  Bhadrasara  (?)  will  be  king  for  twenty-five  years. 
The  king  will  accord  contentment  to  Asoka  (by  installing  him 
as  a king)  for  thiriy-six  years. 

146.  His  son  Kulala  (Kusala,  Kunala)  will  be  king  for 
eight  years.  Bandhupalita,  the  son  of  Kusala,  shall  enjoy  the 
kingdom  for  eight  years. 

147.  Indrapalita  will  be  the  heir  and  successor  of 
Bandhupalita.  [For  Ten  years’  as  emended  in  DKA  p.  29]  . 
Devavarma  shall  become  the  ruler  of  men  for  seven  years. 

148-149.  His  son  shall  be  the  king  Satadhanu.  Brhad- 
ratha  shall  be  the  king  for  seven  years.  Thus  these  nine 
Mauryas  will  enjoy  the  Earth  for  full  hundred  and  thirtyseven 
years.  From  them  the  kingdom  will  go  to  the  Suhgas. 

150.  Pusyamitra  the  commander-in-chief  will  overthrow 
Brhadratha  and  rule  the  kingdom  for  sixty  years. 

151.  Agnimilra  will  be  the  king  for  eight  years.  There- 
after, Sujycstha  will  be  the  king  for  seven  years. 

152.  Vasumitra  will  then  become  king  and  reign  for 
ten  years.  Then  Bhadra  will  be  the  ruler  for  two  years. 

1 r)3.  Thereafter,  Pulindaka  will  be  the  king  for  three 
years.  Thereafter,  Ghosa  will  be  the  king  for  three  years. 

154.  Vajramitra  will  be  the  king  for  seven  years. 
Bhagavaia  will  be  the  king  for  thirty  two  years. 

155-157.  His  son  Devabhumi  will  be  the  king  for  ten  years. 
Thus  these  ten  kings  of  the  family  of  Sungas  will  enjoy  the 
Earth  for  full  one  hundred  and  twelve  years.  From  them,  the 
kingdom  will  go  to  the  Kanva  family.  The  Minister  Vasudeva 
will  kill  king  Devabhumi  who  will  be  indulging  in  vice  from 
childhood  onwards.  He  will  become  the  king  in  the  realm  of 
the  &ungas.  He  will  be  a Kanvayana  (Belonging  to  the  family 
of  Kanva)  and  will  reign  for  five  years. 

1 58.  Bhumimitra,  his  son,  will  be  the  king  for  twenty-four 
years.  After  him  Narayana  will  be  the  king  for  twelve  years. 

159-161.  His  son  Susarma  will  be  the  king  for  four 
years.  The  kings  called  Kanvayanas  shall  be  four  and  they 


944  BrahmSnja  Purdna 

will  reign  for  fortyfive  years  and  enjoy  the  Earth.  Then  the 
kingdom  will  pass  on  to  the  Andhras. 

Sindhuka  belonging  to  the  Andhra  race  will  uproot  by 
force,  Su£arma  the  Kanvayana  and  hold  sway  over^the  Earth. 

Sindhuka  will  be  the  king  for  twentythree  years. 

162-163.  Kr$na,  his  brother,  will  be  the  king  for  ten 
years  after  him.  His  son,  Sri-Santakarni  [Satakarni]  will  be  a 
great  king;  Santakarni  will  be  the  king  for  fifty-six  years.  His 
son  Apolava  will  be  the  king  for  twelve  years. 

164.  Patuman  will  be  the  king  for  twenty-four  year?. 
Anistakarma  will  be  the  king  for  twenty-five  years. 

165.  Then  for  a full  year,  Hala  will  be  the  king.  The 
extremely  powerful  king  named  Pattallaka  will  be  the  king  for 
five  years. 

166.  Purlsabhiru  will  be  the  king  for  twentyone  years. 
Satakarni  will  be  the  king  for  a year. 

167.  Sivasvati  will  be  the  king  .for  twenty-eight  years. 
Gautamlputra  will  be  the  king  for  twenty-one  years. 

168.  Then  Yajrla-Srl  Satakarni  will  be  the  king  for 
nineteen  years.  After  him  Vijaya  will  be  the  king  for  only  six 
years. 

169-170.  His  son  Dander!  Satakarni  will  be  the  king 
for  three  years,  pulomari  (?)  shall  be  the  king  for  seven  years. 

Thus  these  thirty  Andhra  kings  will  enjoy  the  Earth  for 
four  hundred  and  fiftysix  years. 

171.  Five  families  of  Andhras  have  passed  away.  Those 
belonging  to  their  families  are  seven  in  the  future  (?)  There- 
after there  will  be  ten  Abhira  kings. 

172.  Gardabhin  kings  arc  seven.  Then  the  Saka 
rulers  are  ten.  There  will  be  eight  Yavana  families  and 
fourteen  Tus&ras. 

173.  There  will  be  thirteen  Gurundas  and  eleven 
Maunas.  Andhras  will  enjoy  the  Earth  for  three  hundred 
years. 

174.  The  ten  Abhiras  will  be  kings  for  sixty-seven 
years.  The  seven  Gardabhins  will  enjoy  the  Earth  for  seventy- 
two  years. 


2.3.74.175*187 


945 

175.  Sakas  will  enjoy  the  Earth  for  three  hundred  and 
eighty  years. 

Havanas  will  enjoy  the  Earth  for  one  hundred  and  sixty 

years. 

176-177.  Tu saras  will  retain  the  kingdom  for  five 
hundred  years.  The  thirteen  Qurupdas  who  belong  to  Mleccha 
tribes  will  enjoy  the  Earth  for  three  hundred  years  (?)  along 
with  Visalas. 

The  eleven  Maunas  will  reign  for  three  hundred  years. 

178.  When  they  are  exterminated  by  force  of  time, 
the  clan  of  Kilakila  shall  rule.  After  the  Kilakilas,  Vindhya- 
sakti  will  be  the  king. 

179.  He  will  retain  the  Earth  for  ninety-six  years. 
Understand,  henceforth,  the  kings  of  the  future  belonging  to 
the  land  of  Vidisa. 

180-181.  The  serpent-king  Sadacandra,  the  son  of  Se§a, 
the  king  of  Serpents,  will  conquer  the  city  of  Suras.*  He 
will  uplift  the  race  of  Nagas  (serpents). 

The  second  king  will  be  Candramsu.  Thereafter, 
Nakhavan  will  be  the  king.  The  fourth  one  born  in  this  family 
will  be  Dhanadharnia. 

182.  Bhutinanda  shall  succeed  him  as  ruler  in  Vidisa. 
His  younger  brother  will  be  Nandiyasas  by  name. 

183.  t In  his  family,  there  will  be  only  three  kings.  His 
daughters’  son  shall  become  the  king  in  Purika. 

184.  Vindhyasakti’s  son,  a heroic  warrior  named 
Pravira  will  enjoy  the  city  Kancanaka  for  sixty  years. 

185.  He  will  perform  Vajapeya  sacrifices  after  distri- 
buting excellent  Daksinas  at  the  conclusion.  His  four  sons 
will  become  rulers. 

186-187.  Three  of  them  by  marriage  alliance  with 
Vindhyakas**  shall  become  kings.  Supratika  and  Gabhlra 


* Surapurafljaya  but  Soarapurnjaya  in  Va.  P.  99.368. 

**i indhyakanam  kulandm  te  nrpa  vaivdhikas  trayah.  the  word  vaiodhika  renders 
the  meaning  obscure  if  not  absurd.  Va.  P.  99.372  reads  : vindhyakdnam  kule 
Hite  njpd  vaivahikds  trayah . 

(when  the  dynasty  of  Vindhyaka  was  terminated,  there  were  three  kings 
of  the  Agni-kula  (the  race  of  the  Fire  god) . 


946 


J BrahmUpfa  Pwr&na 


shall  enjoy  the  kingdom  for  twenty  years. 

King  Sankamina  will  become  the  ruler  of  Mahi$i.  There 
shall  be  six  Pusyamitras  and  thirteen  Strimitras  ( Paftamitras 
in  Va.  P.) 

188.  There  will  be  seven  kings  ruling  over  Mekala  for 
seventy  years.  The  kings  in  Komala  will  be  very  powerful. 

189.  They  are  called  Meghas  and  they  are  very  intelli- 
gent. There  will  be  nine  kings  in  that  line.  All  the  Naisa- 
dhas  will  be  great  kings,  and  the  family  will  last  till  the 
close  of  Manvantara. 

190-193.  They  are  bom  in  the  family  of  Nala.  They 
will  be  vigorous  and  extremely  powerful. 

ViSvasphani  will  be  the  king  of  Magadha.  He  will  be 
very  vigorous.  After  uprooting  all  the  kings,  he  will  create 
other  castes  viz.  Kaivartas,  Madrakas,  Pulindas  and  Brahma- 
nas.  Those  kings  will  establish  the  people  in  different  lands. 
ViSvasphani  will  be  extremely  powerful  and  noble.  In  battle 
he  will  be  as  brilliant  as  Visnu.  The  king  Vi£vasphani,  it  is 
said,  will  appear  like  a eunuch.  After  exterminating  the 
current  Ksatriyas,  he  will  create  other  Ksatriyas. 

194.  Nine  Naga  kings  will  rule  over  the  city  of 
Campavatl.  Seven  Naga  kings  will  enjoy  the  beautiful  city  of 
Mathura. 

195.  The  descendants  of  those  seven  families  will  enjoy 
the  territories  around  Ganga  such  as  Prayaga,  Saketa  and 
Magadha. 

196.  They  will  enjoy  the  following  territories  abounding 
in  jewels  and  food-grains  vi^.  Naisadha,  Yaduka,  SaiSita  and 
Kalatoyaka. 

197.  Devaraksitas  (those  guarded  by  Devas)  will  rule 
over  the  territories  of  Kosala,  Andhra,  Paundra,  Tamralipta 
and  Sagara  as  well  as  the  charming  city  of  Campa. 

198.  Guha  will  protect  the  following  territories  viz. 
Kalinga,  Mahisa  and  Mahendranilaya. 

199-200.  Kanakahvaya  (one  named  Kanaka)  will 


2.3.74.201-208 


947 


enjoy  the  territories  of  Strirastra  (realm  of  women)  and 
Bhojaka. 

All  these  kings  will  be  contemporaries.  There  will  be 
Yavanas  (Yavana  kings)  who  will  be  difficult  to  please  and 
quick  in  being  furious.  They  will  be  untruthful  and  unrighte- 
ous in  the  affairs  of  Virtue,  Love  and  Wealth. 

201 . Those  kings  will  not  be  regularly  consecrated  with 
the  ritualistic  sprinkling  of  holy  water  over  the  head.  Those 
kings  will  be  evil  in  their  conduct,  due  to  the  evil  influence  of 
the  Yuga.1 

202.  Those  persons  will  become  kings  by  turns  after 
the  lapse  of  some  time.  They  will  be  devoid  of  Dharma.  They 
will  be  base  and  mean  in  the  matter  of  love  and  wealth. 

203.  On  account  of  them  all  the  territories  will  become 
inter-mixed.  They  will  follow  the  customs  and  conventions  of 
the  Mlecchas.  They  will  act  in  contravention  of  established 
principles  of  religion  and  ruin  the  subjects. 

204-206.  When  their  turn  comes,  when  the  era  becomes 
abounding  in  women,  the  kings  will  be  greedy,  miserly  and 
untruthful.  The  subjects  will  slowly  and  little  by  little  decline 
and  decay  in  regard  to  length  of  life,  features  of  the  body, 
physical  strength  and  learning.  When  the  subjects  thus  reach 
the  lowest  point  (of  deterioration)  the  kings  and  emperors 
will  be  over-whelmed  by  Kdla  (God  of  Time,  or  death)  and 
they  will  be  ruined.  Struck  down,  by  Kalki,  all  the  Mlecchas 
will  face  destruction. 

207.  Similarly,  all  those  who  are  unrighteous  and 
extremely  heretic  will  face  destruction. 

Even  the  name  ‘king*  will  vanish,  when  only  the 
Sandhyd  period  of  junction  between  two  Yugas  in  the  Kali 
Yuga  remains. 

208.  The  few  people  who  survive  till  that  period  will 
face  various  hardships,  as  Dharma  (virtue)  has  become 
discredited.  They  will  become  destitutes  without  possessions 

1.  VV.20 1-241  depict  the  gloomy  picture  of  the  Kali  Age.  This 
description  is  common  to  other  Purapas  also.  R.  C.  Hazra,  in  PRHRG  states 
that  such  was  probably  the  condition  of  Hindu  society  from  200  B.G.  to 
A.D.  200. 


948 


Brahmdntfa  Pur  ana 


and  belongings.  They  will  not  have  proper  means.  Their 
wealth  and  assets  will  be  taken  away  and  destroyed.  They 
will  be  afflicted  by  sickness,  miseries  and  sorrows. 

209.  They  will  be  ruined  due  to  drought  and  absence 
of  rain  and  by  killing  one  another. 

210.  They  will  have  none  to  support  them.  Due  to 
great  fear,  they  will  desert  their  profession  and  places  of  work. 
They  will  become  still  more  miserable.  They  will  leave  off 
cities  and  villages.  They  will  begin  to  dwell  in  forest. 

211-212.  Thus,  when  all  these  things  arc  destroyed, 
the  people  will  abandon  their  houses  and  resort  to  rivers  and 
mountains.  When  the  feelings  of  affection  are  lost,  they  will 
become  miserable  with  all  their  friends  devoid  of  friendship. 
They  will  errand  deviate  from  the  discipline  and  duties  of  the 
four  castes  and  stages  of  life.  They  will  have  a mixed  caste 
with  intermarriages  etc.  and  it  will  be  an  awful  state  of 
affairs. 

213-21 7a.  They  will  resort  to  rivers,  marshy  places  in 
the  foreshores  of  seas  as  well  as  mountains.  Men  will  resort  to 
Anga,  Kaliriga,  Vanga,  Kasmlra,  Kasi,  Kosala  and  large  lakes 
and  ponds  around  the  mountain  Rsikanta. 

The  noble  people  along  with  the  Mlecchas  will  go  to 
the  shores  of  the  salty  sea  and  to  the  top  of  Himavan  and  the 
forests  in  between. 

Men  will  sustain  themselves  with  the  meat  of  deer,  fishes, 
birds  and  beasts  of  prey  as  well  as  sugar-cane  plants,  honey, 
greens,  fruits  and  roots. 

Like  the  sages  of  olden  days,  they  will  make  for  them- 
selves different  garments  of  leaves,  barks  of  trees  and  hides  of 
deer  and  wear  them. 

217b-220.  With  wooden  spikes  they  will  attempt  to 
ferret  out  seeds  and  other  edible  things  from  beneath'  the 
ground.  With  great  effort,  they  will  keep  goats,  sheep,  donkeys 
and  camels.  Men  will  resort  to  the  rivers  for  the  sake  of  water 
and  sustenance.  The  kings  will  be  harassing  one  another  by 
means  of  their  evil  dealings.  They  will  think  highly  of  them- 
selves, They  will  be  devoid  of  progeny.  They  will  not  main- 
tain cleanliness  or  good  habits  and  conventions.  Men  will  be 


2.3.74.221-231 


949 


like  this,  engaged  fully  in  sinful  activities.  The  common 
people  will  have  to  obey  people  of  mean  and  base  nature,  evil 
conduct  and  depressed  condition. 

221-222.  No  one  will  live  beyond  a life  span  of  twenty- 
three  years.  They  will  be  weak  and  oppressed  by  old  age. 
1 hey  will  be  sick  and  fatigued  on  account  of  sensuous  attach- 
ment to  worldly  objects.  They  will  be  taking  in  leaves,  roots 
and  fruits  as  their  food  and  will  wear  barks  of  trees  and  hides 
of  antelopes  for  dress.  Desirous  of  means  of  sustenance  and 
occupations  for  livelihood,  they  will  be  roaming  over  the 
Earth. 

223-225.  By  the  time  the  subjects  reach  this  situation, 
the  Kali  Yuga  will  come  to  a close.  Kali  Yuga  consisting  of  a 
thousand  years  according  to  divine  reckoning,  will  lapse  and 
along  with  the  Kali  Yuga,  the  people  will  also  pass  away. 
When  the  Kali  Yuga  lapses  completely  along  with  the  Sand- 
hyamsa  (period  of  junction  or  transition),  Krta  Yuga  will 
dawn. 

When  the  Sun,  Moon,  Brhaspati  (Jupiter)  and  Tisya 
constellations  meet  together  in  one  Rdii  (sign  of  zodiac) , the 
Krta  Yuga  will  set  in. 

226.  The  genealogy  and  the  order  of  succession  of  the 
kings  of  the  past,  present  and  future,  has  been  completely 
recounted  to  you. 

227.  It  should  be  known  that  the  period  beginning  with 
the  birth  of  Parlksit  and  ending  with  the  coronation  of  Maha- 
nanda  consists  of  a thousand  and  fifty  years. 

228-229.  (Defective  Text).  It  is  possible  to  mention 
proof  (?)  for  the  fact  that  the  period  after  Mahapadma  and 
ending  with  the  Andhra  kings  is  remembered  as  comprising 
eight  hundred  and  thirty-six  years.  This  has  already  been 
mentioned.  This  period  has  been  calculated  by  well-known 
sages  conversant  with  Puranas. 

230-231.  The  stellar  zone  consists  of  twentyseven  stars. 
The  Saptarsis  are  seven  sages  (Ursa  Major) . During  the  period 
of  Pariksit  the  Saptarsis  were  in  the  Pitrya  constellation  (i.e. 
Magha)  where  they  stayed  for  a hundred  years.  They  will 


950 


Brahnum&a  Parana 


stay  for  a hundred  years  in  each  of  the  contellations  by  twins. 
Hence,  the  period  of  dynasty  of  Andhras  will  be  two  thousand 
seven  hundred  years. 

232-234.  This  Yuga  of  Saptarsis,  it  should  be^  known 
is  in  accordance  with  the  divine  reckoning.  The  numbers 
of  months  calculated  in  accordance  with  the  divine  reckoning 
are  remembered  as  six  and  the  divine  years  are  seven.  From 
them  the  divine  period  begins  to  function  (360x7^=2700) 
The  first  two  (stars)  of  the  Saptarsis  are  seen  in  the  sky  in  the 
north.  Between  them,  a constellation  is  seen.  It  should  be 
known  that  the  Saptarsis  are  in  conjunction  with  that  star.  This 
period  of  contact  will  last  for  a hundred  years. 

235-238.  This  is  the  basis  for  the  contact  of  the  Rsis 
and  the  stars.  The  Saptarsis  in  contact  with  Magha  constellation 
were  there  for  hundred  years  in  the  age  of  Parlksit. 

(?)  Hundred  years  will  be  completed  with  the  twenty- 
fourth  (king)  in  the  line  of  Andhras. 

The  subjects  will  violently  attack  the  Prakrtis  (ministers 

etc) . 

When  the  holy  rites  laid  down  in  Srutis  and  Smrtis  fall 
into  disuse  and  become  slack,  when  the  discipline  of  life  in  the 
four  stages  and  castes  becomes  upset,  the  subjects  will  be 
oppressed  by  falsehood  in  regard  to  virtue,  wealth  and  love. 
They  will  be  deluded  and  morally  weak.  They  will  become 
involved  in  Sarhkara  (inter-mixture  of  castes) . The  Sudras  will 
have  alliance  with  the  Brahmanas  (and  other  “twice-born” 
people.). 

239.  Brahmanas  will  perform  Tdgas  (sacrifices)  on  behalf 
of  Sudras.  Sudras  will  be  the  source  of  origin  of  Mantras. 
Brahmanas  will  resort  to  them  and  attend  on  them  with  a 
desire  to  get  some  base  means  of  livelihood. 

240.  Their  subjects  will  be  falling  away  from  Dharma 
little  by  little.  At  the  end  of  the  Yuga,  the  subjects  will  be 
utterly  destroyed. 

241.  Kali  Yuga  began  on  the  day  when  Kr?na  passed 
on  to  heaven.  Understand  how  it  is  calculated. 

242-243.  Three  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  years 
(3,60,000)  according  to  human  reckoning  constitute  the  Kali. 


2.3.74.244-259 


951 


Yuga.  That  is  the  period  of  a thousand  years  according  to 
divine  reckoning.  The  two  periods  of  its  conjunction  have 
already  been  mentioned.  When  the  entire  period  lapses,  Kfta 
Yuga  sets  in. 

244.  The  two  dynasties  viz.  that  of  Aila  and  that  of 
Iksvaku  have  been  recounted  along  with  their  different  clans 
and  subdivisions.  The  solar  dynasty  of  Iksvaku  is  remembered 
as  ending  with  Sumitra. 

245-246.  Persons  conversant  with  the  lunar  dynasty 
know  that  the  Ksatriya  race  of  Aila  ends  with  Ksemaka. 
These  renowned  descendants  of  the  Sun  of  the  past,  present 
and  future  have  been  glorified.  They  are  remembered  to  have 
been  born  as  Brahmanas,  Ksatriyas,  Vaisyas  and  &udras. 

247-248.  Thousands  of  noble  souls  have  passed  on  in 
different  Yugas.  Their  number  is  legion.  Many  names  are 
repeated.  Hence,  the  kings  are  not  fully  enumerated  family- 
wise.  In  this  Vaivasvata  Manvantara,  Nimi’s  race  comes  to 
an  end. 

249.  I shall  mention  those  persons  from  whom  the 
Ksatriya  race  begins  in  this  Yuga.  Even  as  I recount  it  try  to 
understand  the  same. 

250.  Devapi,  the  king  belonging  to  the  family  of 
Puru,  and  Maru  who  belongs  to  Iksvaku  family,  these  two 
are  endowed  with  great  Yogic  power.  They  occupied  the  village 
called  Kalapa. 

251-253.  In  the  twenty-fourth  Catur-Yuga  (set  of  four 
Yugas ) these  will  be  the  persons  responsible  for  the  function- 
ing of  Ksatriya  race.  A son  named  Suvarcas  will  be  born  to 
Iksvaku  in  the  twentyninth  Yuga.  He  will  be  the  founder 
in  the  race.  Paula  shall  be  the  first  person  in  the  Aila  dynasty 
of  Devapi.  These  two  will  be  the  persons  who  set  the 
Ksatriya  race  function  in  the  set  of  four  Yugas.  The  same 
principle  regarding  the  perpetuation  of  the  line  should  be 
understood  everywhere.  When  the  Kali  Yuga  lapses,  they 
will  be  born  in  the  Krta  Yuga. 

254-259.  In  the  first  Treta  Yuga,  along  with  the 
Saptac$is,  they  will  set  the  Gotras  of  Brahmanas  and  the 


952 


Brabmdnia  Purdna 


families  of  Ksatriyas  function.  With  a part  of  Dvapara,  the 
Ksatriyas  will  stay  behind  along  with  the  sages.  It  is  for  the 
sake  of  the  nucleus  of  the  races  of  Brahmanas  and  Ksatriyas 
in  the  future  creation  of  the  Krta  Yuga. 

In  the  same  manner,  the  Saptarsis  stay  behind  among 
the  Asuras  along  with  the  kings  in  every  Yuga  for  the  perpe- 
tuation of  the  line.  The  relationship  of  the  Ksatriyas  with 
the  Brahmanas  is  remembered  as  one  of  extermination  (?) 

The  progeny  of  the  seven  Manvantaras  has  been  heard 
by  you.  The  origin  of  the  Yugas  as  well  as  of  the  race  of 
Brahmanas  and  Ksatriyas  is  mutually  interdependent  (?) 

The  origin  and  destruction  of  these,  how  these  function 
and  how  they  meet  with  destruction  after  beginning  to 
function, — only  the  Saptarsis  know  this  because  of  their 
longevity. 

260-261.  In  this  order,  O Brahmanas,  the  families — Aila 
and  Iksvaku  are  originated  in  the  Treta  and  destroyed  in  the 
Kali  Yuga.  They  will  follow  the  Yuga,  till  the  close  of  the 
Manvantara. 

162.  When  the  Ksatriyas  were  completely  exterminated 
by  Rama  son  of  Jamadagni,  this  entire  Earth  was  rendered 
confused  by  the  Ksatriya  kings. 

263-264.  I shall  recount  the  original  cause  of  the  two 
races.  Understand  it.  The  origins  of  the  family  of  Aila  and 
that  of  Iksvaku  are  different  (Sun  and  Moon) . 

The  kings  and  other  Ksatriyas  come  in  a series  ( ?) . Just 
as  those  belonging  to  the  family  of  Aila,  so  also  those  of 
Iksvaku  are  well  renowned  kings. 

265.  Hundred  and  one  families  belonging  to  them  have 
been  accorded  coronation.  The  extent  of  the  Bhojas  is  remem- 
bered as  twice. 

266.  (Defective  Text) . Three-fourths  of  the  Ksatriyas, 
become  established.  The  other  one-fourth  is  scattered  here  and 
there  in  various  directions  (?).  Undersand  even  as  I recount 
those  who  are  equal  (?)  to  those  who  are  of  the  past. 

267.  There  are  hundred  descendants  of  the  Prativ- 
indhyas,  hundred  Nagas  along  with  Haihayas,  hundred  and 
one  Dhrtara?tr&s  and  eighty  Janamejayas. 


2.3.74.268-278 


953 


268-269.  Hundred  Brahmadattas,  hundred  Sarins  and 
Virins  and  hundred  Paulas,  Svetas,  Kasyas,  Kusas  and  others 
who  have  gone  by  and  Sasabindus  are  a thousand.  All  of  them 
performed  horse-sacrifices  distributing  millions  of  coins  as 
monetary  gifts. 

270-271.  Thus  there  had  been  hundreds  and  thousands 
of  saintly  kings  in  the  past  in  the  current  Manvantara  of 
Vaivasvata  Manu.  Many  of  the  children  born  to  them  are 
remembered.  But  understand  that  it  is  impossible  to  describe 
them  in  detail  and  in  the  proper  order  even  in  hundreds  of 
years. 

272-274.  Twentyeight  sets  of  four  Yugas  have  gone  by 
in  the  Vaivasvata  Manvantara  along  with  these  saintly  kings. 
Understand  those  that  yet  remain.  Forty-three  sets  of  four 
Yugas  are  yet  to  come  in  the  future  along  with  the  future 
kings.  Thereafter,  the  Vaivasvata  Manvantara  will  come  to 
a close,  thus  everything  has  been  mentioned  to  you  either 
succinctly  or  in  detail. 

275-278.  On  account  of  the  innumerable  repetitions  it 
is  impossible  to  mention  all  completely  along  with  the  Yugas. 

These  five  families  of  the  sons  of  Yayati  are  beneficial 
to  the  people.  They  have  been  recounted.  They  have  passed  by 
sustaining  the  worlds. 

By  retaining  in  memory  and  by  listening  to  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  five  families  of  great  intellect  one  acquires  five 
excellent  and  rare  worldly  benefits  viz.  long  life,  reputation, 
wealth,  children  and  heavenly  bliss  for  an  indefinite  period. 

Thus,  O Brahmanas,  the  third  Pdda  (section)  has  been 
recounted  to  you  in  detail  as  well  as  in  the  proper  order. 

What  else  shall  I describe  ? 


