




BRAHMA PURANA 

PART IV 

GAUTAMI-MAHATMYA 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS • DELHI 



First Edition: Delhi, 1957 
Reprint-Delhi, 1987, 1994, 2003 

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 

Branches 

Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 
120 Royapcttali High Road, Mylapore, Madras-600 004 


PRINTED IN INDIA 

BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, A-45 NARAINA 
INDUSTRIAL AREA, PHASE 1, NEW DELHI 110028 AND PUBLISHED BY 
NARfiNDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR MOTILAL BANARSIDASS, DELHI 110007. 



CONTENTS 


GAUTAMl-MAHATMYA 
[THE GLORIFICATION OF GAUTAMl] 

CHAPTERS 

1. Holy Centres 759 

2. Siva’s Marriage 762 

3. Gift of a Water Vessel to Brahma 766 

4. How Ganga Entered the Matted Hair ot Siva 770 

5. Vinayaka and Gautama 776 

6. Descent of GautamI 784 

7. Glory of the Holy River 789 

8. The Descent of Bhagirathi 793 

9. The Holy Centre Varaha 799 

10. Kapotatlrtha 801 

11. Kumaratirtha 809 

12. Krittika Tirtha 811 

13. DaSa£vamedha TIrtha 812 

14. Paisaca Tirtha 815 

15. Ksudha Tirtha 816 

16. Indra Tirtha : Ahalyasahgama Tirtha 819 

17. Janasthana Tirtha 825 

18. Cakra tirtha 827 

19. ASvabhanu Tirtha 832 

20. Garuda Tirtha 835 

21. Govardhana Tirtha 839 

22. Papapranasana Tirtha 840 

23. Visvamitra Tirtha 844 

24. Sveta and other Tirthas 847 

25. Sukratlrtha and Mrtasanjivani Tirtha 851 



Contents 


26. Seven Thousand Holy Centres 854 

27. Paulastya Tirtha 856 

28. Agnitlrtha 859 

29. Rnamocana Tirtha 861 

30. Kadru-Suparna-Sangama Tirtha 863 

31. Sarasvatisangama 866 

32. Review of the Greatness of Five Tirthas 868 

33. Sami and other Holy Centres 869 

34. Twentytwo Thousand Holy Centres 870 

35. The Twentyfive Confluences of Various Rivers 878 

36. Amjtasangama and other Holy Centres 881 

37. Description of Seventeen Holy Centres 885 

38. Sixteen Thousand Holy Centres 893 

39. Cakra Tirtha 905 

40. Cakregvara and other Holy Centres 910 

41. Naga tirtha a Holy Centre 932 

42. Matftirtha 940 

43. Brahmatirtha and other Holy Centres 943 

44. Avighnatirtha 945 

45. Se§atirtha and other Holy Centres 947 

46. Vadava and other Holy Centres 949 

47. Atmatirtha 952 

48. Aivattha and other Tirthas 954 

49. Somatirtha 957 

50. Dhanyatirtha 959 

51. Vidarbhasarigama and other Holy Centres 961 

52. Purnatirtha and other Holy Centres 963 

53. Ramatirtha and other Holy Centres 973 

54. Putratirtha and other Holy Centres 991 

55. Holy Centres Yamatirtha etc. 1004 

56. The Holy Centre Tapastirtha and Others 1010 

57. Holy Centre Arsti§enatirtha etc. 1014 

58. Holy Centre Tapovanatirtha etc. 1020 

59. Holy Centres Indratirtha etc. 1027 

60. Apastambatirtha and other Holy Centres 1038 

61. Holy Centres Yamatirtha and Others 1042 

62. Holy Centres Yak$inisangama etc. 1047 

63. Suklatirtha and other Holy Centres 1048 

64. Cakratlrtha and other Holy Centres 1050 



Contents 


65. Vanisahgama and other Holy Centres 1051 

66. Vi?nutirtha and other Holy Centres 1054 

67. Lakgmitirtha and other Holy Centres 1057 

68. Bh&nutlrtha and other Holy Centres 1061 

69. Khadgatirtha and other Holy Centres 1065 

70. Anvindratirtha and other Holy Centres 1067 

71. Kapilasangama and other Holy Centres 1071 

72. Devasthana and other Holy Centres 1074 

73. Siddhatirtha and other Holy Centres 1076 

74. Paru$n!sarigama and other Holy Centres 1077 

75. Markandeya th tha and other Holy Centres 1080 

76. Yayatatirtha and other Holy Centres 1081 

77. Apsaroyugasarigama Tirtha and other Holy 

Centres 1086 

78. Kotitirtha and other Holy Centres 1088 

79. Narasimhatirtha and other Holy Centres 1090 

80. Paiiacatirtha and other Holy Centres 1091 

81. Nimnabheda and other Holy Centres 1094 

82. Nanditata and other Holy Centres 1096 

83. Bhavatirtha and other Holy Centres 1100 

84. Sahasrakunda and other Holy Centres 1101 

85. Kapilatirtha and other Holy Centres 1104 

86. Sankhahrada and other Holy Centres 1105 

87. Ki$kindha—A Holy Centre 1106 

88. Vyasatirtha—A Holy Centre 1109 

89. Vafijarasangama and other Holy Centres 1113 

90. The Holy Centre Devagamatirtha 1118 

91. The Description of Ku^alarparta and other Holy 

Centres 1120 

92. The Holy Centre Manyu 1126 

93. Sarasvata and other Holy Centres 1129 

94. Cificikatirtha and other Holy Centres 1134 

95. Bhadratirtha 1138 

96. Patatri tirtha 1142 

97. Vipratirtha also known as Narayanatirtha 1143 

98. Bhanutirtha and other Holy Centres 1146 

99. The Holy Centre Bhilla 1150 

100. Cak?ustirtha and other Holy Centres 1154 

101. Urvaii and other Holy Centres 1162 



Contents 


102. Meeting of Godavari and the Sea in Seven 

Branches 1167 

103. R?isatra and BhimeSvaratirtha 1169 

104. The Confluence ofGanga with Sea 1172 

105. The Benefits of Listening to the Purana 1175 

INDEX 1185 



gautamI-mAhAtmya 

[THE GLORIFICATION OF GAUTAMl ] 


CHAPTER ONE 
Holy Centres 

The sages said : 

1. Listening to the description of holy centres in detail, we 
never feel satiated. We ask you to narrate the great secret once 
again, the great grandeur of the holy centre, the most excellent 
of all excellent holy centres. 

Brahma said : 

2. Formerly, O excellent brahmins, I was asked this very 
same question by Narada. Then I told him that with great 
effort. 

N&rada said : 

3. This has been heard by me from you, O lord of the 
universe, O source of origin of the Universe, viz. that the re¬ 
sorting to the holy centres is better than austerities, sacrifices 
and charitable gifts. 

4. O lord of the Devas, how many varieties of holy centres 
are there? What are their benefits ? Which is more excellent 
than all the other holy centres for ever ? 

Brahmd said : 

5-7. There are four varieties of holy centres, O most vener¬ 
able sage, viz. Daiva, Asura, Arsa and Manusa. They are 
well-known in heaven, on Earth, nether regions—nay, in all 
the three worlds and resorted to by gods etc. The holy centre 
Ar§a is more desirable than the holy centres pertaining to human 
beings. The holy centre belonging to Asuras bestows more bene¬ 
fit than the holy centres belonging to sages. O son, the holy 
centre belonging to gods is more desirable than the holy centres 
belonging to Asuras. 



760 


Brahma Purina : Gautmi-M&hdtoqya 


8. The holy centre created by Brahma, Visnu, MaheSa 
and others is called Daiva (Divine). They do not know any¬ 
thing greater than this because one is produced from the three. 

9. The holy centre of the three worlds is cited as human. 
There also, the holy centre in the Jambu island is highly ex¬ 
cellent with many qualities. 

10. Among the holy centres of Jambu 1 island Bharata 
Varsa is the holy centre well known in the Vedas. Among the 
holy centres of Bharata Dantjlaka 2 forest is the most excellent 
of all holy centres. O son, it is called a holy centre because it is 
a sphere of holy rites. 

11. The holy centres mentioned by me to you are there 
itself. Listen to their names mentioned by me briefly. 

12-13. The different types of holy centres are Daiva, Asura, 
Arsa and Manuka i.e. divine, demoniac, saintly and human. 

Between Himavan and Vindhya there are six rivers of divine 
origin. Similarly, O brahmin, there are six rivers of divine 
origin between Vindhya and the Southern Sea. These twelve 
rivers are glorified as the most important of all. 

14. Since Bharata bestows much merit it is highly honoured. 
Hence that sub-continent is called the sphere of holy rites by 
Devas. 

15-19. In some places the holy centres of mountains are 
Divine ones. 

That which is surrounded by demons is called Asura. 

In the divine regions great sages perform penances and 
create holy centres due to the divine power or the power of their 
penance. They create these centres for their own welfare, pros¬ 
perity, worship and salvation. They are called Ar§a (Saintly 
holy centres). 

O Narada, they call the holy centres created by men as the 
human holy centres. These centres are created by men for their 
own benefit and prosperity or for the acquisition of fame. 

1. One of the seven continents of the earth having nine divisions or varfas 
including Bharata or India, the remaining six being Piak?a, S&lmali, Kuia, 
Krauflca, $&ka and Pu?kara (Vide Agiti P. 108. 1-3) 

2. A forest tract lying between the God&varl and Narmada rivers in the 
South and a scene of many episodes in the Ram&yapa. 



1.20-33 


761 


Thus O excellent sage, there are four different types of holy 
centres. 

No one, even the Yogin, knows the different types. O 
Narada, it behoves you to hear about them attentively. 

Many persons who profess to be scholars hear and recount. 
But some meritorious person knows how to speak and hear by 
virtue of his own good qualities. 

N&rada said : 

20-22. I wish to hear factually their difference and features, 
on hearing which one attains perpetual liberation from all sins. 
O Brahma, in the beginning of the Kfta age 1 there is no other 
means except resorting to holy centres which bestows the desired 
results with least amount of strain. O Creator, there is no other 
speaker or knower equal to you. You are born in the navel 
lotus of Vi$nu. You are born ahead of all. 

Brahmd said : 

23. These six rivers in the south of the Vindhya are 
glorified, viz. Godavari, Bhimarathi, Tungabhadra, Venika, 
Tapi and Payo$nI. 

24. Bhagirathl, Narmada, Yamuna, Sarasvati, Visoka and 
Vitasta are dependent on the Himalayan ridges. 

25-33. These are the holiest rivers. They are cited as the 
holy centres. 

The holy centres surrounded by the following Asuras are 
the Asura holy centres: Gaya, Kolasura, Vrtra, Tripura, 
Andhaka, Hayamurdhan, Lavana, Namuci, Spagaka, Yama, 
Patalaketu, Madhu and Puskara. They are auspicious. 

O Narada, the saintly holy centres are those holy centres 
frequented by the following sages: Prabhasa, Bhargava, 
Agasti, Nara, Narayana, Vasis$ha, Bharadvaja, Gautama, 
Kafyapa, Manu and others. 

The human holy centres are those created by the following 
human beings: Ambari$a, HariScandra, Nahu$a, Rama, 
Kuru, Kanakhala, Bharata, Sagara, Asvayupa, Naciketa and 


1. The first of the four ages of the world during which righteousness has a 
complete sway. 



762 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mdhdtmya 


Vr?akapi the suppressor of foes. O brahmin, they are holy cen¬ 
tres created by them for their own fame, benefit, prosperity etc. 

Wherever there are holy centres that have sprung up them¬ 
selves anywhere in the three worlds they are called Daiva holy 
centres. They call them Punyatirthas. 

The different holy centres have been mentioned by me. 

What is not dug up by anyone is called Devakhata (dug up 
by gods). O sage,} the different holy centres have been briefly 
recounted by me to you. Merely by knowing them man is 
released from all sins. 


CHAPTER TWO 
Siva's Marriage 

Ndrada said : 

1. The holy centre that is presided over by three deities 
is the most excellent of all holy centres. Kindly recount to me 
its form and different types in detail. 

Brahma said : 

2. The other holy centres or sacred regions and sacrifice 
or other holy rites are effective only as long as the holy centre 
presided over by three deities, is not visited. 

3-5. Resorting to Ganga yields greater benefit than holy 
rites, fasts and Kpcchra rites. Kjrcchra 1 rites should be per¬ 
formed in holy centres. O sage, holy centres purify all objects, 
oneself, mother, father etc. Except in holy centre presided over 
by the three deities there cannot be any remission in sins. Re¬ 
membered, seen or touched it yields all desired objects. This 
Ganga is the most excellent of all rivers. It bestows all desired 
things. It is presided over by three deities, O excellent sage. 
Listen to its origin. 


1. A common word for several types of austerities involving bathing, fas¬ 
ting, worship and other prescribed religious observances. 



2 . 6-14 


763 


6. Ten thousand years before, when Devas were ascendant 
Taraka 1 became very powerful. He became very arrogant due 
to the boons granted by me. 

7-8. The great glory as well as wealth of Devas was taken 
away by that powerful demon. Thereafter, Devas along with 
their leader Indra sought shelter in the lord of the worlds, the 
great grandfather of the Universe, who was lying in the milk- 
ocean. With their palms joined in reverence Devas who had 
none else to approach said to Visnu: 

Devas said : 

9. O lord, you are the saviour of the worlds. You increase 
the fame of Devas. O lord of all, O source of origin of the Uni¬ 
verse, O lord with the three Vedas for your form,obeisance to you. 

10. You alone are the creator of the world, destroyer of 
Asuras and lord of the worlds. O Jaganmaya (who are identical 
with the Universe), you are the cause of creation, sustenance, 
and destruction. 

11. In the whole of the three worlds, there is no other sa¬ 
viour to the embodied beings under the storm and stress of adver¬ 
sities. O lotus-eyed one, excepting you there is none to quell 
the three kinds of distress. 2 3 

12. You are the father and mother of the universe. O lord, 
you are easily accessible through service. Be pleased, O lord, 
save us from great dangers. Say, who is the destroyer of our 
distress excepting you ? 

13. You are the primordial maker. You are the Boar, Fish 
and Tortoise. 8 When fear overwhelms us you protect us by assu¬ 
ming different forms. 

14. O lord Hari, we have no other refuge. Our lordship 
has been taken away. Our women have been disgraced. We 
have been rendered homeless. O lord, why don't you protect 
us? 


1. A demon who after propitiating Siva by his penance became a great 
terror to the world and was ultimately killed by Skanda. 

2. The three kinds are adhyatmika, adhidaivika and adhibhautika or 
those due to diseases and other bodily causes, those due to super-natural agencies 
and those caused by natural calamities. 

3. Three well known incarnations of god Vi?$u. 



764 


Brahma Purina: Gautaml-M&h&tmya 


Brahmd said : 

15. Then the lord of LaksmI, who lies on the serpent Se?a, 
said to them: “Whence has this danger and fear come over to 
you? Please speak out without any tension.** Then they said to 
the lord of LaksmI in regard to the Asura Taraka. 

Devas said : 

16-17. A terrible danger from Taraka has overwhelmed us. 
It causes hairs to stand on end. We are not capable of killing 
him in battles or by curses or austerities. He will meet death 
from a child who is not yet ten days old. Hence, O lord, let action 
be taken with regard to him. 

Brahmd said: 

18-20. Again Narayana said : “O Devas, I am not very 
powerful. He cannot be killed by me or by my child or by Devas. 
Taraka, the scorcher of the worlds, will meet death from that 
extremely powerful child who may be born of lord Siva. Hence, 
let us all go, O Devas, along with sages in order to strive for the 
marriage of lord Siva. This is the first attempt that should be 
made by us who are powerful enough for that.** 

21-22. After saying “So be it” Devas went to the excellent 
mountain Himavan full of jewels and to Mena the beloved wife 
of Himavan. All of them said this to Himavan and his wife: 

23-25. “Daksa’s daughter who is the mother of the worlds, 
who is Siva stationed as Sakti, who has various forms in the 
world such as Buddhi (intellect), Prajfta (intelligence), Dhjrti 
(courage), Medha (faculty of comprehension), Lajja (bash¬ 
fulness), Pu§ti (nourishment) and Sarasvati (Speech) and who 
sanctifies the worlds shall enter Mena’s womb in order to achieve 
success in the affairs of Devas. On being born that mother of 
the Universe will become Siva’s wife. She will protect all of us 
as well as you.” 

Brahmd said : 

26. Himavan approved of the scheme of Devas. Mena 
became extremely enthusiastic and said “Let it be so”. 

27. Then the mother of the Universe was born as Gauri 
in the abode of Himavan. She was engaged in meditation of 



2.28-44 765 

Siva. She was his beloved. She considered him as her ultimate 
resort. 

28. Devas said to her: “Enter penance for Isa”. ThenGauri 
performed penance on the ridge of the mountain Himalaya. 

29-30. Again Devas took counsel with one another. They 
said: “How can Isa meditate on her? Does he meditate on the 
Atman or anything else ? We do not know. How can the lord 
of Devas be made to fix his mind on the daughter of Mena ? 
Some means should be employed in regard to this. Thence 
you will derive excellence.*’ 

Then the highly intelligent Brhaspati of liberal intellect said: 
Brhaspati said : 

31. The intelligent Cupid who wields the flowery bow and 
excites people must hit the quiescent Siva by means of splendid 
flowery arrows. 

32. Pierced by the arrows the three-eyed lord may fix 
his mind on her. Then the lord will certainly marry her. 

33. The arrows of the victorious Cupid have never been 
ineffective anywhere. So when the mother of the Universe 
gets married a son will be born to her. 

34-35. That son born to the three-eyed lord will kill Taraka. 
Give unto Kama, Vasanta the storehouse of flowers as an assist¬ 
ant. He delights the minds of everyone. 

Brahmd said : 

36. Saying “So be it” Devas, the suppressors of their enemies 
felt relieved. They sent Cupid and Spring to Siva. 

37. Holding his bow and accompanied by Spring and his 
consort Rati, Cupid hurried to perform that very difficult task. 

38-39. Holding the bow and arrows he stood in front of 
Siva and began to think “Shall the lord Siva, the preceptor of 
the worlds, be pierced ? I am the conqueror of universe. But 
are my arrows firm in regard to him ?” 

He was reduced to ashes by Siva by his fiery eyes. 

40-44. In order to watch the same activity steadily Devas 
came there. Listen to the surprising event that happened then. 
Devas looked at Siva. Even as they glanced at Cupid, they 
saw him reduced to ashes and they were frightened. With the 
palms joined together Devas eulogised the lord. 



766 Brahma Pur&na: Gautami-M&h&tmya 

Devas said : 

Great fear of Taraka has overwhelmed us. Make the dau¬ 
ghter of Himavan your wife. 

Brahma, said : 

Lord Siva whose mind had been pierced, immediately acted 
according to the entreaties of Devas. It is the nature of noble 
souls that they do not consider their own welfare while they 
make sacrifices for the sake of others. 

Devas sent Arundhatl, Vasistha, the discus-bearing Vi§nu 
and me for the arrangement of the wedding. 

In this manner the alliance between Himavan and Siva, 
the lord of the Universe, was effected. 


CHAPTER THREE 
Gift of a Water Vessel to Brahma 

Brahma said : 

1-4. The wedding took place on the excellent Himalaya 
mountain which is wonderfully bedecked in different kinds 
of jewels, which is full of various sorts of trees and creepers, 
which is frequented by different birds, which is encompassed 
by rivers, lakes, tanks, wells, which is frequented by Devas, 
Gandharvas, 1 Siddhas, 2 3 Caranas, 8 Yak§as 4 5 and others, which 
is richly endowed with splendid wind, which was the sole cause 
of excessive merriment, which is surrounded by Meru, 6 Man- 
dara,® Kailasa, 7 Mainaka 8 and other mountains and which is 

1. Semi-divine beings skilled in singing and music. 

2. A group of semi-divine beings of great purity and holiness. 

3. The panegyrists of gods. 

4. A class of semi-divine beings who attend on Kubera, the god of wealth. 

5. A mythical mountain and abode of celestial beings. 

6. Another mythical mountain used by gods and demous as a rod for 
churning the ocean. 

7. A Himalayan peak on which resides god Siva. 

8. Another mountain which escaped when Indra planned to cut off wings 
which all mountains are supposed to have previously. 



3 . 5-12 


767 


encircled by Vasi^tha, 1 Agastya, 2 Paulastya 8 , Loma$a 4 and 
other sages while great festivities were being celebrated. 

5. There on a raised divine platform was an altar beauti¬ 
fully studded with jewels and bedecked in gold well arranged 
by Vi^vakarman. 6 It was rendered beautiful by a row of 
columns of diamonds, rubies and sappliires. 

6. It was surrounded by the deities Jaya, 6 LaksmI, 7 
Subha, 8 Ksanti, 9 Klrti, 10 Pu§ti u etc. It was also surrounded 
by the splendid mountains Meru, Mandara, Kailasa and 
Raivata. 12 

7. It was honoured by the powerful Vi§nu, the lord of the 
universe. Golden coloured Mainaka, the most excellent among 
mountains, shone there. 

8. The sages, the guardians of the quarters and the Adityas 13 
accompanied by Maruts 14 constructed the altar for the wedding 
ceremony of the trident-bearing lord, the chief of Devas. 

9-12. Visvakarman, Tvastr 16 himself made the altar 
with festoons. The wedding ceremony took place when the 
place was rendered beautiful by the divine cows such as Surabhi, 16 
NandinI 17 , Nanda 18 and Sunanda 19 that yield everything 
de sired. _ 

1. An ancient sage and priest of Iksvaku kings. 

2. Another sage said to have been born out of a waterjar and to have 
drunk up the ocean. 

3. Probably the sage Pulastya is meant who was a mind-born son of 
Brahma and the father of Vi£ravas and grandfather of Kubera and Ravana. 

4. A sage and great story-teller. 

5. A great architect and artificer of gods. 

6. 7, 10, 11. Daughters of Dak$a Prajapati. 

8. Two $ubhas are known, one being Dhruva’s mother and the other 
wife of Angiras. 

9. Probably Santi or Rjama both also daughters of Dak?a Prajapati. 

12. A mountain Raivata or Raivataka, is known to exist in Gujarat. 

13. A group of Vedic gods originally numbering six which later in¬ 
creased to twelve. 

14. Another group of Vedic gods associated with storms, lightning, 
thunder etc. 

15. A Rgvedic deity said to be the ideal artist, divine artisan; men¬ 
tioned in VigQupuraga as a son of Visvakarma. 

16. Another name of Kamadhenu the divine cow; also a cow bom 
from the hunkara of Brahma. 

17. The cow of plenty belonging to sage Vasisiha, said to be born of 
Surabhi. 

18. & 19. Names not traceable elsewhere. 



768 


Brahma Purdna: Gautami-M&h&tmya 


All these were present there, viz. the oceans, rivers, serpents, 
mothers of the worlds etc. along with vegetable kingdom and 
seeds. 

Ila [Earth] carried out the function of productivity, the 
herbs performed the work of growth, Varuna performed the 
work of drink, Kubera performed the work of charitable gifts; 
Agni performed whatever was desired by the lord of worlds. 

13. The eternal Visnu performed worship separately in 
different places. The Vedas accompanied by their secret prin¬ 
ciples gave charming instructions. 

14. The celestial damsels danced. The Gandharvas and 
Kinnaras 1 sang. O excellent sage, Mainaka held fried grains 
(for the sacrifice). 

15. The invocation of holy water was performed inside the 
house, O Narada. The couple, the most excellent among Devas 
sat on the altar. 

16. After setting the holy fire ablaze duly and performing 
the sacrifice with fried grains, O son, the couple went round the 
rocky slab duly. 

17. During the course of touching the slab, Siva urged by 
Vi§nu, touched the toe of the right foot of the goddess with his 
hand. 

18. Performing the sacrifice there near Siva, I saw her. 
My semen got ejaculated due to my evil mind on seeing the toe. 

19. In the entire three worlds, who is not deceived by Cupid? 
Defiled and ashamed, I scattered the ejaculated semen in small 
droplets. 

20. From the minute particles of my semen the Valakhi- 
lyas 2 were born. Then there was a great commotion caused by 
Devas. Overwhelmed by shame, I stood up from my seat and 
started. 

21. Even as Devas watched silently, O Narada, I went ahead. 
On seeing me go, Mahadeva spoke to Nandin: 

Siva said ; 

22. Call Brahma here. I shall make him free from sin. 

1. Horse-headed celestial musicians dwelling in Kubera’s city. 

2. Pigmy sages no bigger than half a thumb, numbering 6000 and 
residing in the solar region. 



3 . 23-34 


769 


Even if other people commit offences good people take pity on 
them. They have sympathy for them in their minds. This is 
the nature of worldly objects. They delude even great scholars. 

Brahmd said : 

23-25. After saying this, Lord Siva accompanied by Uma 
began operations. The lord of the worlds did this due to his 
sympathy for me and desire for the welfare of the worlds. Lis¬ 
ten to it attentively, O Narada. 

“The Earth and Waters shall become the means of redemp¬ 
tion of sinners from their sins. I shall extract their ultimate 
essence that is holy.” After declaring this the lord extracted their 
essence. 

26-27. He made the Earth into a water-jar and poured 
water into it. With great effort he chanted P&vam&nya 1 and 
other hymns and consecrated them. The lord who dispels sins 
remembered Sakti who sanctifies the universe and invoked her 
there. Then the lord of the worlds said to me, “Take this water- 
jar. 

28. Indeed the waters are goddesses and mothers. The 
Earth is another mother. So both of them are the causes of exist¬ 
ence, creation and destruction. 

29. It is here that Dharma is established. It is here that 
the eternal sacrifice is established. It is here that enjoyment and 
salvation, mobile and immobile beings are established. 

30. By remembering it the mental sin perishes. By bowing 
to it the verbal sin perishes. By bathing, drinking and per¬ 
forming the holy ablution, the physical sin perishes. 

31. This alone is nectar in the world. There is nothing 
greater in sanctity than this. O Brahma, take this water-jar 
consecrated by me with holy Mantras. 

32. Whoever remembers or drinks the water herein attains 
all desired things. Take this water-jar. 

33. Of all the five elements, water is the element of great 
effect. This water is the best among all those waters. Take this 
water-jar. 

34. O Brahma, by touching, remembering and seeing the 

1. The verses in the ninth Marsiala of the Rgevda relating to Soma 
PavamSha; also known as 'P&vamani’. 



77 0 Brahma Pur&na : Gautami-MShatmya 

water herein, which is very splendid, holy and sacred, one is 
liberated from sin.” 

35-36. After saying this the supreme lord gave me the 
water-jar. Then Devas joyously spoke to their lord. There was 
great exhilaration there. Cries of victory rang the sky. 

During the wedding festival of the lord I saw the tip of the 
foot of the mother. Due to this sin I attained the state of a fallen 
fellow. The merciful father gave me Ganga water kept in the 
holy jar. It is holy and sanctifying even by remembering. 


CHAPTER FOUR 

How GangS Entered the Matted Hair of Siva 
Narada said : 

1. Goddess Ganga stationed in your water-jar increased 
your merit. O lord, tell me in detail how it came to the mortal 
world. 

Brahmd said : 

2-3. There was a great asura named Bali. This enemy of 
gods was invincible. He was incomparable in regard to virtue, 
fame, protection of subjects, devotion to elders and preceptors, 
truthfulness, virility, power, renunciation and forbearance in 
the three worlds. 

4. On seeing his prosperity increased Devas became wor¬ 
ried. They spoke to one another, “How will we conquer Bali ?” 

5. While he was ruling over the kingdom of the three worlds 
dispelling thorns, there were no enemies, no ailments, no 
anxieties in any way. 

6. While Bali was ruling over the kingdom, none of these 
was seen even in dream, viz., famine, evil, denial of God, wick¬ 
edness. 

7. Devas did not have place or happiness because they 
were pierced by the arrows of his prosperity; they were severed 
by the sword of his renown, their limbs were cut by the spear 
of his command. 



4 . 8-20 


771 


8. Keeping their jealousy in front they talked to one an¬ 
other. With their body set ablaze by the fire of his fame they 
were agitated. They approached Visnu. 

Devas said : 

9. O lord of the worlds, O lord holding conch, discus and 
club, we are distressed. Your lordship always holds weapons 
for our sake. 

10-17. Our misery is this much even when you are our 
lord, O lord of the Universe. How can the head of those who 
bow down to you, bow down to asuras ? 

Mentally, physically and verbally, we have sought refuge 
in you alone. Having your feet alone as our shelter how can 
we bow down to Asura? 

We worship you by means of great sacrifices. We eulogise 
you, O Acyuta, by means of words of praise. Having you alone 
as our shelter, how can we bow down to Asura? 

Devas with Indra as their leader always depend upon your 
vigour and power. Having acquired our status bestowed by 
you, how can we bow down to Asura ? 

Through the form of Brahma you are the creator. You 
protect us as Visnu. You are the annihilator through your power 
of Rudra. How can we bow down to Asura ? 

Lordship and glory is the cause of everything in the world. 
Without it (life) is useless. O lord of Devas, with our prospe¬ 
rity dispelled how can we bow down to Asura ? 

You are one without a beginning. You are the creator of the 
universe. You are one without an end. You are the preceptor 
of the universe. How can we bow down to this Asura ? 

Our limbs have been nourished by your lordship and glory. 
After conquering the three worlds with our strength we shall 
become stable, O lord of Devas. How can we bow down to 
Asura ? 

Brahmd said : 

18. On hearing these words, the slayer of the asuras spoke 
with reference to the tasks of the Devas. 

V&sudeva said : 

19-5J&). This asura Bali is my devotee. He cannot be con¬ 
quered by Devas or Asuras. Just as you all are persons to be 



772 


Brahma Purdna: Gautaml-Mdh&trnya 


nourished by me so also Bali is to be nourished by me. Without 
a battle, O Devas, I shall take away his kingdom which extends 
to the three worlds. I shall bind him by means of words with 
miraculous power and give the kingdom unto you all. 

Brahmd said: 

21. After saying “so be it” Devas went to heaven. The 
holy lord, the lord of Devas entered the womb of Aditi. 1 

22. When he was born there were great festivities. The 
lord of sacrifices was born, O brahmin, as Vamana. 2 3 

23-27. In the meantime, O brahmin, Bali the most excel¬ 
lent of all strong men made preparations for the horse sacrifice. 
He was accompanied by his priest Sukra who was conversant 
with the Vedas and Vedangas. 8 He was sanctified by impor¬ 
tant sages. While the sacrifice was going on, while Bali went 
on with the performance of sacrifice, while chief of the sages 
performed the duties of a Rtvij, 4 * while Sukra functioned as the 
chief priest, while Devas, Gandharvas and Nagaswere seated 
in order to receive their respective share in the sacrificial 
offerings, while these words were being exchanged, viz. 
“Let it be given”, “Let it be partaken of”, “Let the worship 
be performed separately”, “It is complete”, “Again it is 
filled up” etc., Vamana who was singing S&man verses came 
slowly to that place. Vamana who was wearing ear-rings 
and holding an umbrella came to the sacrificial hall. 

28-31. He began to praise the sacrifice. Vamana had 
assumed the form of a brahmin. He was the lord Daitya- 
sudana (the slayer of Daityas). He was the bestower of bene¬ 
fits of sacrifice and austerities. He was the slayer of asuras. 
Bhargava (a descendant of Bhpgu, i.e. Sukra) recognised him 
and then in a hurry spoke to the king, the king who had great 
splendour, who was a conqueror with the duties of Ksatriya, 
who was a donor of riches with devotion, who was the most 
excellent of all powerful men, who was initiated in the sacrifice 

1. The mother of gods. 

2. The dwarf incarnation of Vi?QU. 

3. Subjects necessary for the study and proper understanding of the 
Vedas, eg. £ikfa (Phonetics), Nirukta (Etymology) etc. 

4. A priest officiating at a Vedic sacrifice. There are usually four such 

priests, viz. Hotr, Adhvaryu, Brahman and Udg&tf. 



4.32-44 


773 


along with his wife, who was meditating on Vi§nu, and who 
was pouring oblations separately. Sukra who was the most 
powerful in the family of Bhrgu and who was extremely intel¬ 
ligent spoke to the king: 

Sukra said : 

32-33. This brahmin who has the size ofa dwarf and who has 
come to your sacrifice, O Bali, is not really a brahmin. It is true 
that he is the lord of sacrifices, the sanctifier of sacrifices. He 
who is greater than the greatest, who is the great Man, has 
come here to request you. Only after taking counsel from me 
should it be given by you, O lord. 

Brahmd. said : 

34-35. Bali the suppressor of enemies said to his preceptor, 
Bhargava thus. 

Bali said : 

Blessed am I because the lord of sacrifices is coming to my 
house so unexpectedly. If he requests me anything after com¬ 
ing here, of what avail is my cogitation ? 

Brahmd said : 

36. So addressed by Sukra, his priest, Bali, accompanied 
by his wife, went to that place where the leading brahmin 
Vamana, the son of Aditi, was present. 

37-40. With palms joined in reverence he said, “Why have 
you come ? Tell me that 1 ”. Then Vamana said: “A piece of 
ground measured by three steps should be given to me for 
staying. I do not wish for anything else.” 

After saying “So be it” he poured a stream of water from 
the pot embellished with different jewels. Thereafter, he gave 
the Earth to Vamana even as the chief sages were watching, 
even as the priest Sukra was watching. While the illustrious 
Devas were watching he gave the Earth to Vamana. While the 
asuras were watching cries of “Victory” rose up, in the sky. 

41. Vamana said slowly : “Hail to you, O king, Be happy. 
Grant me the measured g/ound, the three steps that have been 
promised.” 

42-44. “So be it”, said the lord of asuras, “Let it be taken”. 
Even as these words were uttered, even as he was watching 



774 


Brahma Purina : Gautaml-M.ahd.tmya 


Vamana, something wonderful happened. The lord of sacrifices 
increased in size so much that the moon and the sun came up 
to the breast and the Devas over the head. In exploit and size 
he increased, lord Acyuta, who has no end, who is the maker 
of the worlds and who identifies himself with the universe. 
On seeing him, the king of asuras who was humble and who 
was accompanied by his wife, said to the lord: 

Bali said : 

45. O Visnu, O lord of worlds identifying with the Uni¬ 
verse, take the steps as many as you can. O lord of Devas, O 
creator of the Universe, it is I who have conquered in every 
respect. 

46. At the very same time when he was saying this Sukra 
too said this very earnestly: “O lord of kings, due to my intel¬ 
ligence you have already been propitiated before.’* As he spoke 
thus, Visnu of great sacrifice said: 

Visnu said : 

47. O lord of Daityas, of great arms, O king of Daityas, 
I shall take steps. See. 

As he said so, he (ie. Bali) said again and again, “O Vi§nu, 
take the steps.” 

Brahmd said : 

48. After standing firmly on the back of the tortoise he 
placed a step in the sacrificial hall of Bali. He, the eternal lord, 
placed the second step over the whole world. 

49. Then he said to Bali: “O lord of Asuras, there is no 
place for the third step. Where shall I place the third step ? 
Give me the ground.” 

Laughingly Bali said with palms joined in reverence. He was 
accompanied by his wife. 

Bali said : 

50-52. The entire universe has been created by you, O lord 
of Devas. I am not a creator. Due to. your fault it has become 
too small, O lord of cosmic identity. 

Still, I have never uttered a lie, nor will I ever utter a lie 
proving me to be a man of truthful, statement. Step on my back. 



4.53-63 


775 


Then, the lord who is worshipped by Devas, whose form is 
evolved by the three Vedas, became pleased. 

He said, “Choose a boon. Welfare unto you, O lord of 
Daityas, I am pleased with your devotion.” 

BrahmH said : 

53-54. He said to the lord of the Universe—“O Trivikrama 
(one who took three steps), I do not beg anything of you.” 

Visnu who was pleased granted him whatever was desired 
by his pure mind viz., the lordship of the nether worlds, the 
future status of Indra, the overlordship of Indra and a great deal 
of imperishable fame. 

55-57. After granting all this to Bali, Lord Vamana placed 
Bali, the enemy of Devas in nether worlds along with his son 
and wife. He gave the kingdom of Devas to Indra as at the time 
of its origin. 

In the meantime he went back to his region honoured by 
Devas. 

O highly intelligent one, that second step of Visnu, my father, 
became my abode. On seeing my abode I thought: 

58. “What is that work which shall be auspicious in this 
second step of Visnu whereby my water-jar shall become excel¬ 
lent ?” 

59-63. The water bestowed by the enemy of Tripuras is 
highly meritorious. It is excellent. It bestows boons. It is calm. 
It is highly conducive to tranquillity. It is splendid. It bestows 
splendour. It is eternal. It yields worldly enjoyment and salva¬ 
tion. It is in the form of the mother of the worlds. It is nectar. 
It is pure panacea (for all ills). It is holy. It is sacred. It is 
worthy of worship. It is the greatest and the most excellent. 
It is conducive to splendour. By remembering it sanctifies the 
worlds. What if it is seen ? Remaining pure, I shall utilize that 
water as the libation to my father. 

Thinking that, I took that water and used it for argha 
(offering). 

The water for Argha , that was consecrated by the recitation 
of Mantras fell on Vi$nu’s foot. That water fell on the Meru and 
flowed to the Earth in four ways. 



775 Brahma Purina : Gautaml-Mdhdtmya 

64-68. The waters flowed in four directions, viz. East, 
South, West and North. 

By means of his matted hair, Sankara caught hold of the 
water that flowed towards the South. 

The water that flowed towards the West went back to the 
water-jar. 

Vi$nu caught hold of the water that flowed towards the 
North. 

The sages, Devas, manes and the guardians of quarters cau¬ 
ght hold of the auspicious water that flowed towards the East. 
Hence it is called the most excellent. 

The waters that reached the Southern quarter are the mothers 
of the worlds. The waters that flowed from the foot of Vi§nu are 
conducive to the welfare of brahmins and the mothers of worlds. 
Thus they became cause of prosperity by remaining within the 
matted hair of MaheSvara. By remembering their power one 
would attain all desired things. 


CHAPTER FIVE 
Vin&yaku and Gautama 

N&rada said : 

1. How the River Ganga stationed in the water-jar reached 
the matted hair of Lord Siva, has been heard. Kindly tell me 
how* it reached the mortal world. 

Brahmd said : 

2. O highly intelligent one, there are two divisions in the 
waters stationed in the matted hair of Mahesvara, because of 
two persons who took them away. 

3. One part that is well known in the world was brought 
by the brahmin Gautama who used to perform holy rites, donate 
charitable gifts and practise meditation after worshipping Siva. 

4-5. The other part was taken away, O extremely intelli¬ 
gent one, by the powerful K?atriya monarch Bhagiratha after 
propitiating Sankara by means of penances and holy rites. Thus 
O excellent sage, the Ganga had two different forms. 



5.6-18 


777 


N&rada said : 

6. For what reason was Gautama the conveyor of the water 
stationed in the matted hair of Mahesvara? Tell me, by which 
Ksatriya was it brought. 

Brahmd said : 

7. For your pleasure, O dear one, I shall recount in detail 
how the river was brought by the brahmin or the other one. 

8. O sage of great lustre, Ganga became the beloved of 
Sambhu at the very time when Uma became the beloved of the 
lord of Devas. 

9-10. Siva was thinking about the means of dispelling my 
sin. Accompanied by Uma the glorious lord observed the god¬ 
dess particularly. Since he was indulgent in pleasant activities 
he created the excellent juice. It was excellent because he was 
fond of its beauty and sweetness, feminine qualities as well as 
holy nature, and 

11. Ganga was the most beloved of all, O excellent brah¬ 
min. He kept her on his head (as a token of honour). Since Uma 
knew this, Mahesvara was always worried over it. 

12. Ganga alone came out of the matted hair for some 
other reason. Siva had concealed Ganga in his matted hair. 

13-14. On knowing that she (Ganga) was held by him in 
his head, Uma was not able to bear it. On seeing her stationed 
in the matted hair, again and again Gauri spoke to her lord in 
anger thus: “Send her away, O lord of aesthetic taste.” 
However, the lord declined to send her away. 

15. On account of that misery Uma said “Oh, I am help¬ 
less.” 

On reflecting that the lord was concealing Gahg& in his 
matted hair, she spoke these words in secret to Vinayaka, Skanda 
and Jaya. 1 

16-17. “This lover, the lord of Devas will never forsake 
Ganga. Now she too is the beloved of my lord. How will my 
lord abandon her, his beloved ?” After reflecting thus many 
times, Uma spoke to Vinayaka. 

P&rvati said : 

18. The lord will never abandon Ganga even if attempted 

■ ■ . — 4—w 

1. Wife of Pufpadanta, a gaga (attendant of Siva). 



778 Brahma Purina'. Gautami-Mah&tmya 

by Devas, Asuras, Yak§as, Siddhas, including yourself, kings or 
others. 

19-20. Either I shall go to Himavan and perform penance 
once again or I shall entrust the job to holy brahmins who have 
dispelled their sins by practising austerities. Requested by them 
Ganga may go to the Earth. 

Brahma said : 

21-23. On hearing these words of his mother Ganesa, the 
lord of obstacles said to his mother: 

“It is proper to consult my brother Skanda and Jaya (and 
do everything). We shall do that whereby my father will cast 
off Ganga from his head.” 

O brahmin, in the meantime there was a drought lasting for 
twenty four years. It caused great fright to all living beings in 
the mortal world. Then the whole universe consisting of mobile 
and immobile beings perished. 

24-27. (There was great disaster everywhere) except the 
sacred hermitage of Gautama that bestowed all desired things. 

Formerly, I desired to create the mobile and immobile 
beings, O dear son. A sacrifice was performed by me on the 
mountain Devayajana. Thereafter that mountain became 
well known as Brahmagiri associated with my name. 

That Gautama has resorted to that excellent mountain and 
is staying there ever since. Neither mental worries nor physical 
ailments, neither famine nor absence of rain, neither fear nor 
grief, neither poverty nor misfortune are ever heard of in his 
excellent and highly meritorious hermitage on the auspicious 
Brahmagiri. 

28. Excepting his hermitage in no ocher place the offer¬ 
ing was made to Devas or manes. O dear son, there was 
neither a donor nor a Hotr 1 nor a person performing sacrifices. 

29. The propitiation of Devas in heaven was accomplished 
only when the brahmin Gautama made offering or performed 
a sacrifice. 

30. Sage Gautama became well known in the world of 
Devas and in the mortal world. People knew that he alone was 
the donor and the enjoyer of pleasant things. 

1. An officiating priest reciting Rgvedic hymns during a sacrifice. 



5.31-43 


779 


31. On hearing about this the sages of different hermitages 
enquired about the hermitage of Gautama and went there. 

32. Sage Gautama devoutly nourished all those sages 
as if they were his disciples, sons or fathers. 

33. Whatever was desired by them was provided by him. 
The sage rendered service to all of them in the proper order, 
in accordance with their ability and in a manner befitting 
them. 

34-35. At the bidding of Gautama, the herbs and other 
vegetables became the mothers of worlds. Again Brahma, 
Visnu and Mahesvara were propitiated by him. Then the 
herbs and other vegetables grew up and were used by the peo¬ 
ple then and there. They were thought of and sowed by the 
power of penance of Gautama. 

36-38. Whatever was thought of by Gautama was realised. 
All prosperities were achieved. Everyday Gautama addressed 
the sages like sons, disciples or fathers. He asked them, “What 
shall I do for you?”. He nurtured them for many years as a 
father would do his sons. Thus, O dear son, Gautama acquired 
great renown. 

Then Vinayaka spoke to his mother, brother and Jaya. 
Vinayaka said : 

39-42. Mother, the brahmin Gautama is being sung about 
in the abode of Devas: “Gautama has done that which can 
be achieved by Devas only with effort.” O goddess, thus the 
power of penance of the brahmin has been heard by me. Dear 
mother, that brahmin may be able to dislodge Ganga stationed 
in the matted hair after worshipping the three-eyed lord by 
means of penance. He alone can plead to the beloved of my 
father, who is stationed in the matted hair of my father. Some 
means should be employed so that the brahmin may plead to 
her. Due to his power the excellent Ganga will descend from 
his head. 

Brahm& said : 

43. After saying this to his mother, the lord of obstacles 1 
went to the place where the lean Gautama who was wearing 

1. Lord Gagesa who is supposed to be the creator as well as the remover 
of obstacles is propitiated at the commencement of all important undertakings. 



760 Brahma Purina : Gautami-M&hdXmya 

the holy thread was present. He was accompanied by his bro¬ 
ther and Jaya. 

44-46. After staying for a few days within the precincts 
of Gautama’s hermitage, the lord of obstacles said to the 
brahmins: “We must not stay there. Let us go to our own 
abodes, clean and pure hermitages. We have been nourished 
by Gautama’s food. Let us ask sage Gautama’’. After discussing 
among themselves thus the excellent sages took leave of the 
sage. Due to his fond feelings he prevented the sages severally. 
Gautama said : 

47. Gautama said humbly with palms joined in reverence: 
Stay here alone ye all. O leading sages, I shall serve your feet. 

48. While I stand by here, ready to serve you all, it is not 
proper for you, Devas on the Earth to resort to another 
hermitage. 

49. In my opinion this hermitage alone is the holy penance 
grove for all. O sages, please do not go to any other hermitage. 

Brahmd said : • 

50. On hearing these words of the sage, Vinayaka remem¬ 
bered his duty of causing obstacles (in secret). With palms joi¬ 
ned in reverence he said to the brahmins. 

Ganddhipa said : 

51. We have all been bought over by the food offered 
to us. Why then should Gautama not forbid us? We are not 
allowed to go to our own abodes by peaceful means. 

52. Nor does this excellent brahmin who has helped us 
deserve any punishment. Hence I shall endeavour in an intelli¬ 
gent manner. Let that be approved of by you all. 

Brahmd said: 

53-56. Then the brahmins replied: “Let it be done for help¬ 
ing this brahmin with a desire for the welfare of the world. 
Do anything which will do good to all the brahmins.” 

On hearing the words of the brahmins Ganadhipa (Lord of 
ganas or attendants of Siva) approved of them and said. 

Vindyaka said : 

What is particularly good for Gautama is being done. 



5 . 57-65 


781 


Brahmd said: 

Vinayaka of liberal mind coaxed and cajoled the brahmins 
again and again. He bowed unto them. He took the guise of a 
brahmin himself. Ganesvara who sided with his mother habi¬ 
tually, said to Jaya. 

Vindyaka said : 

57. O Lady of splendid face, do everything in such a man¬ 
ner as no one else comes to know. Assume the form of a cow and 
go to the place where Gautama is present. 

58. Consume the paddy. O beautiful lady, destroy them 
and distort them. If you are beaten, or shouted at or even 
looked at do something (by way of retaliation). Bellowing 
loudly remain in a struggle between life and death. 

Brahmd said : 

59-60. Vijaya (Jaya) who sided with Vighnesvara did so. 
Jaya assumed the form of a cow and went to the place where 
Gautama was present, eating the paddy plants (on the way). 
Gautama saw her. On seeing the cow in a state of aberration, 
the brahmin prevented her by a blade of grass. 

61. On being forbidden by him, the cow cried aloud and 
fell down. When the cow fell down there was a great hue and 
cry. 

62. Ou hearing the cry and on seeing the action of Gautama 
the brahmins became distressed. Keeping Vighnaraja at the 
head the brahmins said. 

The Brahmins said : 

63. All of us are going away from here. We should not 
stay in your hermitage. We all had been nurtured by you like 
a son. O leading sage, we are taking leave of you. 

Brahmd said : 

64. On hearing these words of the brahmins who were 
determined to go from there, he was as though struck down 
by the thunderbolt. He fell down in front of the brahmins. 

65. The brahmins said to him: “See this goddess mother 
of the Rudras, the beloved deity of the worlds sanctifying them, 
fallen on the ground. 



782 


Brahma Purina: Gautaml-M&h&tmya 


66. When due to the power of fate, this cow whose form 
and features are like those of gods and holy centres has fallen 
down O excellent sage, what remains for us to do is to go away. 

67. If we continue to reside in your hermitage (the merit of) 
the holy rites performed by us will dwindle down and waste 
away. O brahmin, we do not have any other asset. We are 
only ascetics whose only assets are their penance. 

Brahmd said : 

68-72. Standing humbly in front of the brahmins, Gautama 
said. 

Gautama said: 

Your holinesses alone are my refuge. It behoves you to 
make me pure. 

Brahma said : 

Then Lord Vighnakjrt (Ganesa, the creator of obstacles) 
surrounded by the brahmins, said. 

Vighnaraja said : 

This cow neither dies nor lives. In this extremely doubtful 
situation we shall mention the expiation and the goal. 

Gautama said : 

This cow will never gain sense. She will certainly die. How 
will this cow get up ? It behoves you to tell me the way of ex¬ 
piation. Undoubtedly I shall do everything. 

The Brahmins said : 

73. This intelligent (brahmin) will speak in accordance 
with the opinion of all of us. His statement is (as good as) 
our statement. It should be considered authoritative by you, 
O Gautama. 

Brahmd said : 

74. Induced by the brahmins as well as the powerful 
Gautama, Vighnakrt (i.e. Lord GaneSa) in the guise of a brah¬ 
min spoke these words to all. 

Vigknardja said : 

75. I shall speak truthfully on behalf of all. Let the sages 
as well as Gautama accept my suggestion. 



5 . 76-88 


783 


76. We have heard that the water that had been in the 
jar of Brahma born of the unmanifest one, is now staying within 
the matted hair of Lord Siva. 

77. Bring it quickly by means of austerities and holy rites. 
O holy sage, pour that water over this cow that has fallen on the 
ground. After that all of us shall stay in your house as before. 

Brahmd said : 

78. When that leading brahmin said thus in the assembly 
of the brahmins, there was a shower of flowers there. Cries 
of “Victory” rose up. Then the humble Gautama spoke these 
words with palms joined in reverence. 

Gautama said : 

79. Let the desire in my mind be fulfilled due to my power 
of penance, by the grace of Fire god, by the grace of gods and 
Brahma as well as by your grace. 

Brahmd said : 

80. After saying “Let it be so,” the brahmins took leave 
of the leading sage and went to their abodes that were now 
rich in food and water. 

81. When those brahmins had gone, Ganesvara returned 
accompanied by his brother and Jaya. After fulfilling his task 
he was extremely delighted. 

82-83. After the brahmins had returned, after Ganesa 
had gone, the excellent sage Gautama whose sins had been 
dispelled by his penance, began to ponder over the same inci¬ 
dent. “What is this that has befallen me?” After a great deal 
of reflection the brahmin understood it by his powerful intui¬ 
tion. 

84-88. He came to the firm conclusion that the affair was 
made-up for the task of the gods. “I consider everything con¬ 
ducive to welfare. It is a help unto the worlds. It is (a task) 
most pleasing to &ambhu and Parvati. It is the task of bringing, 
Ganga on the Earth. There is no sin in me at all”. Thinking 
thus in his mind, the excellent brahmin became extremely 
delighted. After consulting his wife the excellent brahmin said: 
“After propitiating the bull-bannered three-eyed lord of the 
worlds,"! shall bring the excellent river. I shall delight Parvati, 



784 


Brahma Purina: Gautami-M&h&tmya 


the consort of Siva. The co-wife of the mother of the Universe 
is stationed within the matted hair of Mahesvara.’* After deter¬ 
mining thus in his mind the excellent sage Gautama departed 
from Brahmagiri with a desire to please Sam bhu who was stay¬ 
ing in Kailasa, who is worshipped by the mighty Devas and 
whose power is most terrible. 


CHAPTER SIX 

Descent of Gautami 

N&rada said : 

1. After going to the peak of Kailasa what did the holy 
lord, Sage Gautama do? Did he perform any penance? What 
excellent method did he adopt for attaining the goal? 

Brahma said : 

2-3. After going to that mountain, O dear son, Sage Gau¬ 
tama controlled his speech. On the excellent mountain Kailasa 
he spread Ku£a grass and sat thereon with purity of mind and 
body. Then he sang this hymn. While Mahesvara was being 
eulogized there was a shower of flowers. 

Gautama said : 

4. (Lord Siva) accompanied by Uma assumes eight cosmic 
bodies that are always beneficial to the people. It is to bestow 
the desired enjoyment of worldly pleasures to those who seek it 
that the lord assumes these bodies. Hence the people eulogize 
the lord as the Great God. 

5. Ilvara assumes the body of the Earth for this purpose 
viz. in order to create happiness by means of its own objects of 
pleasure and to sustain the entire (universe consisting of) mobile 
and immobile beings. It is conducive to the prosperity of the 
universe and its increase. 

6. The form of waters (of Siva with eight cosmic bodies) 
is for creation, sustenance and annihilation of the Earth and also 
in order to provide for support to the Earth. For granting hap¬ 
piness Mid piety to the people, Siva of tranquil body assumed 
the form of waters that is well established in the universe. 



6.7-15 


785 


7. Siva’* cosmic bodies of Sun, Moon and Fire caused the 
following viz., the demarcation of the units of time, the oozing 
current of nectar, sustenance, creation and destruction of living 
beings and joy, happiness and progress of the subjects. 

8. The form of Isa viz. Vayu is evolved for the following 
purpose. It is for creating prosperity, movement, power, imperi¬ 
shable things, the proper arrangement of the living beings and 
for the accomplishment of their joys. Certainly, O holy lord, 
you alone are responsible for this. 

9. Without mutual differences there cannot be action and 
piety, a thing that is one’s own and not one’s own, neither dire¬ 
ctions nor atmosphere, neither heaven nor Earth, neither worldly 
pleasures nor salvation. Hence, O Isa, this ethereal body of 
yours. 

10. (This ethereal body) assumes the form of word. In 
order to establish virtue the Vedas are divided into Rk, Yajus 
and Saman. In the world (i.e. among non-Vedic sacred litera¬ 
ture) the Gathas (songs), Smjrtis, Puranas etc. (also flourish). 

11. The various ancillary objects pertaining to sacrifice 
constitute the sacrificial body of Siva. The sacrifice and the 
instruments of sacrifice, the form of the Rtvik, time, space and 
result, O Sambhu, you are all these things. They say that your 
sacrificial body is the ultimately real entity. 

12. You are everything. You are the maker, donor, surety, 
charitable offering, the omniscient witness, the great Puru§a, 
the supreme soul and the ultimate reality. You are everything. 
Of what avail are the verbal outpourings? 

13. You are not pointed out by the Vedas and other sac¬ 
red literature or preceptors. Nor are you accessible by means 
of intellect etc. You alone are unborn, unmeasurable and the 
lord expressed by the word Siva. You alone are the Truth. O 
holy lord, obeisance unto you. 

14. (Defective Text) Once Siva saw his Prakfti in unison 
with the Atman as “This is my asset.” At that same time, the 
Prakj-ti that cannot be imagined or argued upon stood separate. 
The lord of cosmic form is one of unimaginable power. 

15. The eternal Siva whether possessed of all excellent 
virtues "or devoid of any trait is the power of the creator of the 



786 


Brahma Purdna: Gautami-M&hdtmya 


Universe. At every creation she becomes increased in purity. 
It has occupied the reason, its own reason. 

16. Production, sustenance, increase and destruction of 
food—these are the eternal laws of nature. There is nothing which 
the beloved of Siva cannot accomplish. 

17. It is the Mother, the mother of the universe, the beloved 
of Siva accompanied by Uma of grand and excellent renown 
for whose sake the living beings give food and wealth and per¬ 
form penances and virtuous rites. 

18. Even Indra yearns for her benign glance. One shall 
acquire auspiciousness from her names. Pervading the Universe 
she makes it free from impurities. That Uma has always a form 
similar to the form of the Moon. 

19. It is due to her grace that the pleasures of intellect, 
eyes, consciousness and mind of all living beings beginning with 
Brahma, whether mobile or immobile, become fruitful. The 
beautiful wife of the preceptor of the world is the goddess of 
speech. 

20. “The mind of even the four-faced lord (Brahma) has 
become defiled. Why not that of other creatures.” Thinking thus, 
the goddess should perform the descent of Ganga by means of 
different methods in order to sanctify the universe. 

21. By means of all testimonies and by going through the 
Vedic passages, people came to believe in the lordship of Siva. 
They performed all pious rites and enjoyed all worldly pleasures. 
This is the perpetual power and glory of Siva. 

22. The things to be accomplished, the most excellent and 
pleasing to be evolved, the rite, the performer of the rite and the 
instruments of the rite are expressed in the Vedas and found 
in the world—those are said to be the achievements of the 
primordial lord. 

23. It is the Lord of Uma who must be meditated upon. 
After attaining him the good Yogins are not reborn. They are 
liberated. After meditating upon the excellent Brahman and 
the great Pradhana 1 it is lord Siva who is the essence. 


1. The primordial matter, the inert stuff of the universe as opposed to 
spirit, more usually known as Prakfti. 



6 . 24-33 


787 


24. As and when Sambhu assumes the forms of the immea¬ 
surable Maya 1 for the welfare of the universe, you too assume 
forms befitting contact with him. O Mother, that is your 
chastity. 

Brahma, said : 

25-26. As he was eulogising thus the bull-bannered lord, 
accompanied by Uma, appeared in front of him. The glorious 
lord Sambhu accompanied by Ganesa and his retinue went in 
front of him and spoke these words in delight. 

Siva said : 

27. What shall I give you, O Gautama? I am delighted 
at your devotion, eulogy and splendid holy rites. You may ask 
anything, even for those things that are not easily accessible 
to the gods. 

Brahma said : 

28. On hearing these words of Siva having the universe 
for his body, Gautama was overwhelmed by the tears of delight. 
Expert in making statements, Gautama thought thus. 

29. O fate ! O piety ! O the worship of brahmins, O the 
wonderful way of che world ! O creator, obeisance to you. 

Gautama said : 

30. O lord of Devas honoured by the gods, if you are plea¬ 
sed with me give me the splendid Ganga stationed within your 
matted hair. O lord with the Vedas for abode, obeisance 
be to you. 

The Lord said : 

31. What has been requested for by you is for helping the 
three worlds. Rid of fear from every quarter you may request 
for something that will be helpful to yourself.’ 

Gautama said : 

32. Indeed it is this that I choose. Let those devotees who 
eulogise you and the goddess by means of this hymn be pros¬ 
perously endowed with all desired things. 

Brahma said : 

33. “So, be it”, said the lord of Devas who was delighted, 
“Free from all ailments you may request for other boons from me.” 

1. The cosmic power which creates illusory appearances. 



788 Brahma Purina ; Gautami-Mdh&tmya 

34-45. Thus urged by the lord, Gautama said to Sankara 
with joy: 

“O Sankara, let brahmin slaughter and other sins perpetra¬ 
ted mentally, verbally or physically be destroyed the by mere 
ablution in this river in any place upto the sea where it flows. 
It shall be the holiest of all holy rivers. 

“O Hara, merely by remembering thus let there be that merit 
which is acquired in other holy rivers during the lunar and 
solar eclipses, during vernal and equinotical transit of the sun 
or during his northern and southern transit or during the holy 
occasion of Vaidhjrti. 1 

“In Kfta 2 Yuga penance was praiseworthy, in Treta it was 
the sacrificial rite, in Dvapara, sacrifice and charitable gifts, 
and charitable gifts alone in Kali age. 

“Yugadharmas (the virtues peculiar to certain Yugasoreras) 
and DeSadharmas (the virtues peculiar to certain countries) 
are honoured in accordance with the contact of the particular 
country or time unit. 

“O Hara, merely by remembering this, let there be that merit 
which is acquired elsewhere by means of ablutions, charitable 
gifts and other observances. 

“Wherever this river flows till the time it reaches the sea 
you must also be there. Let this be my most excellent boon. 

“O Siva, let these persons realize salvation, viz. those who 
coine within ten Yojanas (i.e. 120 Kms) of this river even if 
they are great sinners, the manes who come here for bathing 
and other people who take bath. 

“On one side stand all holy rivers whether in heaven or 
mortal world or nether world and on the other side stands this 
liver. Still this river shall be the better one. 

“Enough of this, O Sambhu, obeisance to you.” 

Brahm<l said: 

46-47. On hearing those words of Gautama Siva said: 
“So be it. A holy centre greater than this has never been, nor 
will there ever be. It is truth. It is truth. It is truth. It is well 

1. A particular position of the sun and moon. 

2. The first of the four cosmic ageshaving a duration of 1728000, 
1296000,864000 and 432000 human yean equivalent respectively to 4800,3600, 
2400 and 1200 divine yean. 



6.48— 7.5 


789 


established in the Veda. Gautami is the holiest of all rivers.” 
After saying this the lord vanished there itself. 

48. Then after the lord who is honoured by the worlds, 
had gone, Gautama became full of power. He grew matted 
hair. Leading the Ganga, the most excellent of all rivers, 
he entered Brahmagiri surrounded by Devas. 

49-50. Then, when Gautama came there, O Narada, with 
matted hair, there was a shower of flowers. The leading Devas, 
the highly fortunate sages, brahmins and ksatriyascame there, 
honouring that brahmin with cries of “Victory”. They were 
joyous. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 
Glory of the Holy River 

Narada said : 

1. After leading the Ganga from the matted hair of Mahes- 
vara and coming to the holy mountain Brahmagiri, what did 
Gautama do? 

Brahm& said : 

2-3. The pure Gautama of wholly controlled mind, led 
Ganga. He was honoured by Devas and Gandharvas, the resi¬ 
dents of the mountains. He placed his matted hair on the top 
of the mountain. Remembering the three-eyed lord, that ex¬ 
cellent brahmin said to Ganga with palms joined in reverence. 

Gautama said : 

4. O mother born of the matted hair of the three-eyed 
lord, O goddess bestowing all desired things, forgive. You are 
calm. Go happily, carry out what is conducive to the welfare 
of all. 

Brahmd said : 

5. On being spoken to thus by Gautama, the Ganga who 
assumed a divine form and wore a divine garland and unguent, 
said to Gautama. 



790 


Brahma Purdna: Gautami-M&hatmya 


Gafigd said : 

6. Where shall I go? To the abode of Devas, or to the 
water-jar or to the nether worlds? It is known that you are 
truthful of speech. 

Gautama said : 

7. O goddess, you have been requested by me for helping 
the three worlds. You have been given to me by &ambhu. 
O goddess, let it not be otherwise. 

Brahma said : 

8-9. On hearing the words of Gautama, Ganga accepted 
the suggestion offered by the brahmin. It divided itself into 
three for flowing in heaven, Earth and the nether worlds. In 
heaven it flowed in four channels, in the mortal world it flowed 
in seven channels and in the nether worlds it flowed in four 
channels. Thus it had fifteen different channels. 

10. Everywhere it has the power of everyone of the chan¬ 
nels. It destroys all sins. It bestows all desired things always. 
It is thus alone that she is sung about in the Vedas. 

11. Human beings see only the part of Ganga that flows 
over the mortal world and not that which flows over the nether 
worlds. Nor do the human beings of ignorant intellect see 
Ganga flowing in heaven. 

12. Till Ganga reaches the Sea, it is one of divine nature. 
On being bid farewell by Gautama, it went towards the 
Eastern Sea. 

13. Then Gautama the great among the sages circumam¬ 
bulated Ganga, the splendid mother of the Universe fre¬ 
quented by Devas and Sages. 

14-16. At the outset Gautama worshipped the three-eyed 
lord of Devas and then determined in his mind, “I shall take 
bath near the banks” Immediately after being remembered, 
the lord who is an ocean of mercy appeared in front of him.* 
With palms joined in reverence and being humble due to 
devotion he asked the three-eyed lord Siva how the holy ablu¬ 
tion should be performed. 

Gautama said : 

17. O MaheSana, lord of Devas, with a desire for the 



7 . 18-29 


791 


welfare of the worlds tell me about the rules and injunctions 
regarding ablution in the holy centres. 

Siva said : 

18-20. O great sage, listen to all injunctions regarding 
Godavari. At the outset, Nandi (a holy rite) and other rites 
should be performed after cleaning the body. The brahmins 
should be fed and their permission obtained. Maintaining 
celibacy they should go to the river, avoiding conversation 
with fallen persons. 

He whose hands and feet and mind are well controlled, 
he who has learning, penance and renown enjoys the benefit 
of holy centre (and ablution therein). 

21. The devotee should abandon vicious nature. He should 
closely abide by his own duty. He should massage the limbs 
of the tired people. He should give them food in the proper 
manner. 

22-23. He should give garments and blankets to good 
people who may happen to be poor. He should be listening to 
divine stories of Hari as well as those connected with Ganga. 
A person who goes on pilgrimage abiding by these injunctions, 
will obtain the benefit of holy centre duly. 

The three-eyed lord said another thing to Gautama sur¬ 
rounded by the sages. 

24. The holy centres are within distances of two hands of 
one another. O Gautama, I am present everywhere and I am 
the bestower of all desired things. 

25. Ganga is the bestower of merits and salvation of men at 
Gangadvara, the place where Ganga rises, Prayaga and at 
the place where it falls into the ocean. 

26-29. Narmada, the excellent river, is in the mountain 
Amarakantaka. Yamuna joins Ganga at Prayaga and Sarasvati 
joins it at Prabhasa. 

O Narada, the following holy centre is the bestower of sal¬ 
vation. It is the place of meeting of three rivers viz., Krsna, 
Bhlmarathz and Tungabhadra. 

The river is the bestower of liberation at the place where 
Payo§nI joins it. But this GautamI, O dear one, is the bestower 



792 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mdhdtmya 


of liberation everywhere at my bidding. It will give salvation 
to all men always through the holy ablution. 

Some holy centres are extremely meritorious on certain 
occasions • when there is the advent of Devas. But GautamI 
is a holy centre unto everyone on every occasion. 

30. Plunging into and performing ablution in the Ganga 
for sixty thousand years is on a par with taking bath once 
when Bjrhaspati (Jupiter) is in the Leo (zodiac). 

31. It is rare that men are able to take bath in Gautami 
when the Jupiter is in the zodiac Leo (i.e. it is highly meri¬ 
torious then). (It is holy because) Rama stepped into it and 
particularly so because he resorted to this holy centre. 

32. When the sun is in the Leo zodiac the rivers Ganga, 
Narmada, Yamuna, Sarasvati, Bhimarathi and others come (to 
the river Gautami) for taking bath. 

33. When the sun is in the Leo zodiac if foolish persons 
avoid Gautami Ganga and go to other rivers for ablution they 
are sure to fall into hell. 

34-36. Within a distance of two hundred Yojanas, O most 
venerable among sages, there will be three and a half crores 
of holy centres. O Gautama, this Ganga belonging to Mahes- 
vara, is called Gautami, Vaisnavi, Brahmi, Godavari, Nanda 
and Sunanda. It is the bestower of desired objects. It is brought 
by the force of splendour of a brahmin. By mere remembrance 
it destroys all sins. It is always dear to me. Of all the five 
elements it is the water that has attained most excellence. 

37-38. The waters in the holy centres are said to be the 
holiest. Among those holy rivers Bhagirathi is the most excel¬ 
lent. Among different channels of Bhagirathi, Gautami Ganga 
accompanied by matted hair which was brought by you is the 
most excellent. There is no holy centre which is more auspi¬ 
cious than this either in heaven or on Earth or in the nether 
worlds. O sage, this holy centre is the bestower of all riches. 

Brahmd said : 

39-40. O dear son, what has been recounted thus to the 
noble Gautama, by the delighted lord himself has been narrated 
to you. 



8.1-9 


793 


Thus that Gautami Ganga is considered greater than the 
other rivers. The form of that river has been mentioned to you. 
Have you any desire to hear about anything else? 


CHAPTER EIGHT 
The Descent of Bhdgirathi 

Ndrada said : 

1-2. O lord, most excellent one among Devas, two types 
of channels of Ganga have been mentioned. One of them 
that has been brought by the brahmin has been narrated. The 
other type is stationed in the matted hair itself, of the lord of 
Devas. Tell me how it was brought down to the earth. 

Brahmd said : 

3. There was a king born of the family of Vaivasvata Manu 1 
and in the family of Iksvaku. O sage, his name was Sagara and 
the ocean takes its name Sagara from him. 

4. He was a performer of sacrifices. He was devoted to 
distribution of charitable gifts. He always thought about piety 
and good conduct. He had two wives devoutly attached to 
their husband. 

5-6. He had no progeny. So he was anxious. He invited 
Vasi§tha (the family priest) to his abode and worshipped him. 
The king asked him as to how he could have progeny. On 
hearing his words, Vasistha meditated and spoke to the king. 

Vasisfha said : 

7-9. O king, be devoted to the worship of sages together 
with your wives. 

Brahmd said : 

After saying this, O brahmin, the sage went back to his abode. 

Once a great ascetic came to the abode of that saintly king. 
He worshipped that sage. The sage who was extremely pleased 

■ 1. The .seventh Manu who was thesonof Sflrya and father of Ikfv&ku, the 
founder of the Solar Race of Kings. 



794 


Brahma Purina : Gautami-Mihitmya 


said to him. “O extremely fortunate one, tell me the boon you 
wish to have.” On being told thus he chose sons. 

10. That sage said to the king, “To one of your wives a son 
will be born and he will sustain the family. To the other wife 
there will be born sixty thousand sons.” 

11. When the sage went away after bestowing the boon, 
thousands of sons were born. The king performed horse and 
other sacrifices and distributed plenty of gifts to the deserving. 

12. In one horse sacrifice the king got himself duly initia¬ 
ted. He employed his sons along with their armies in the work 
of protecting the horse. 

13. Getting a loophole somewhere Indra took away the 
horse. Those sons searched for the horse but could not find it. 

14-15. The sons of Sagara were sixty thousand and they 
were experts in different tactics of warfare. Even as they were 
watching, the asuras took away the anointed horse and went 
to the nether region. The sons of Sagara could not see the asura 
who had employed black magic. 

16. Not being able to see the horse, the powerful sons of 
Sagara wandered here and there. Even then they did not find 
the horse. 

17. They went to the world of gods then. Searching the 
mountains, lakes and forests, they did not see the horse then. 

18. The holy rite for the safe journey and other similar 
auspicious rites were performed by the officiating priests 
on behalf of the king. Unable to see that beautiful creature, the 
king became worried. 

19. Wandering (here and there) the sons of Sagara went 
to the world of Devas in their search for the horse. The horse 
was not there. 

20. Thereafter the sons of the king came to the Earth and 
searched the mountains and forests. There also they did not 
see the horse then. 

21. In the meantime a divine voice was heard there saying, 
“O sons of Sagara, the horse is kept bound in the nether world 
and not anywhere else.” 

22* On hearing this the sons of Sagara became desirous of 
going to the nether world. They dug up the Earth all round. 



8.23*35 


795 


23. Distressed by hunger they went on eating dry soil day 
and night. They dug up hurriedly and rushed to the nether 
world. 

24. On hearing that the powerful princes, the sons of Sagara 
who had accomplished their tasks had come (to the nether world) 
the asuras became frightened and they went near Kapila. 1 

25. Kapila the extremely intelligent sage was sleeping in 
the nether world. Formerly, a most important task of Devas had 
been accomplished by him. 

26. He had achieved that success by continuous wofk 
without any sleep. Therefore he was tired. When the task had 
been accomplished the glorious Kapila said to Devas, “Give me 
a place for sleeping.” 

27-29. They gave him the nether world. Again, the sage 
said to Devas : “If a fool wakes me up he will be immediately 
reduced to ashes; then only, will I lie down in the nether 
world; if not I won’t sleep at all.” 

When Devas said “So be it” he began to lie down there. 

The asuras who knew his power and who were endowed 
with Maya (witchcraft) planned to slay Sagara. 

30-31. The asuras were afraid even without being fought. 
They hurried to the place where the extremely furious sage 
Kapila was lying. They hurriedly tethered the horse near his 
head. They stood watching silently a little away from the place 
eager to see what would happen. 

32. Then the sons of Sagara entered the nether regions. 
They saw the tethered horse and the man lying down. 

33-35. They considered him the person who took the horse 
by force and spoiled the sacrifice. 

Some of them said then, “Let us kill this fellow and take the 
horse back”. 

Some said, “Let us take away this tethered sacrificial animal. 
Of what avail is this fellow !” 

Then other heroic persons said—“We are kings. We are 
administrators. Let us waken this fellow who has committed 
the crime and kill him with our heroic power.” 

1. A celebrated sage and propounder of the Sarfikhya system of philosophy. 
He is said Jto be the son of Karandama-Prajapati and Devahuti. The Brah- 
magdapura^a (ch. 93) mentions him as an incarnation of Vijpu. 



796 Brahma Purina : Gautami-Mdhitmya 

Uttering these harsh words they kicked the sage with their 
feet. 

36. Then Kapila the excellent sage stared at the sons of 
Sagara with great fury. With his anger he reduced them to 
ashes. 

37. Then all the sons of Sagara were burnt up. But the 
king Sagara who was initiated to the sacrifice did not know 
these things. 

38-39. It was Narada who informed noble Sagara about the 
abode of Kapila, the situation of the horse, the aberration of 
asuras and the annihilation of the sons of Sagara. But the anxious 
king did not know what he should do in the circumstances. 

40-42. This king had another son who was well known as 
Asamafijas. Due to his foolishness, he used to hurl down boys 
and citizens into water. Having been informed by the citizens 
collectively the king understood his wickedness. He became 
furious and told his ministers, “Let this Asamafijas, who has 
forsaken the duty of a K$atriya and killed children be banished 
from the kingdom.” 

43. On hearing those words of Sagara, the ministers hur¬ 
riedly abandoned the son of the king. Asamafijas went to the 
forest. 

44-45. (The King thought thus) “All my sixty thousand 
sons are destroyed by the curse of the brahmin in the nether 
world. One (who remained) has gone to the forest. Now what 
shall I do?” 

Asamafijas had a son who was well known as Amsuman. The 
king called that boy and told him the task on hand. 

46. Propitiating Kapila, the boy Am&iman gave the horse 
to Sagara. Thus was the sacrifice completed. 

47. His son was a brilliant and virtuous king named Dilipa. 
His intelligent son was well known as Bhagiratha. 

48. On hearing about the sad end of all of his grandfathers 
he became very distressed. The humble prince asked the great 
king, 

49. “How shall I accomplish the expiation of the Sagaras?” 
The king said to Bhagiratha, “Dear son, Kapila knows it”. 

50. On hearing his words the boy went to the nether world. 
After bowing down to the sage, he intimated everything to him. 



8.51-60 


797 


51 -52. That sage meditated for a long time and said to BhagI- 
ratha, “Propitiate Sailkara by penance, O excellent king, and 
splash your ancestors with the water stationed in the matted 
hair of Siva. Then you as well as your ancestors will become 
satisfied.” 

“I shall do so”, said he to the sage. After bowing down to 
him he said again. 

53-54. “Where shall I go ? O excellent sage, tell me every¬ 
thing what I should do”. 

Kapila said : 

Go to the excellent mountain Kailasa and eulogize Mahes- 
vara. Perform penance according to your capacity. Then you 
will attain your desired object. 

Brahma said : 

55. On hearing the words of the sage that boy whose acti¬ 
vities were those of children bowed down to the sage and went 
to the mountain Kailasa. Becoming pure (in mind and body) 
he decided to perform penance. (Then) Bhagiratha said : 

Bhagiratha said : 

56. O lord, wearing crescent moon, I am a boy and my 
intellect too is puerile. I do not know anything. Even then, be 
pleased, O lord. 

57. I bow down to Siva who is worthv of being worshipped, 
O lord of the immortals, for the welfare of those who are devoted 
to my welfare and who help me mentally, physically and verbally 
(even for) once. 

58. May Siva bring about things desired by those by whom 
I have been begot and nurtured, those whose Gotra (lineage) 
is the same as mine and those whose duties are also the same. 
I bow down to lord Siva with the crescent moon on his head. 

Brahma said : 

59. Even as he was eulogising thus Siva appeared in front 
of him. Urging him to choose a boon as he pleased, he said to 
Bhagiratha. 

Siva said : 

60. O Bhagiratha of great intellect, what cannot be given by 



798 Brahma Purina: Gautami-M&hdtmya 

Sadhyas 1 and Devas will certainly be given by me to you. Tell 
me without fear. 

Brahma said : 

61-G3. The delighted Bhaglratha bowed down to lord Siva 
and said. 

Bhagiratha said : 

In order to sanctify my ancestors, O lord of Devas, give me 
the excellent river stationed within your matted hair. Every¬ 
thing will be complete thereby. 

Brahm& said : 

MaheSa smiled and said to Bhagiratha. 

Siva said : 

64-68. O son, she is given unto you by me. O dear, of good 
vow, eulogize her once more. 

Brahma said : 

On hearing the words of the lord, Bhagiratha of pure mind 
performed penance for that purpose. With devotion he eulo¬ 
gized Ganga. 

He attained her grace too, like a mature man although he 
was only a boy. Leading Ganga derived from Mahesvara he went 
to the nether world. He intimated everything to the noble sage 
Kapila. 

After establishing Ganga in the manner mentioned before and 
strenuously circumambulating her he spoke with palms joined 
in reverence. 

Bhagiratha said : 

69. O goddess, my ancestors have fallen as a result of the 
curse of sage Kapila. O mother, it behoves you to save them 
therefrom. 

Brakm& said: 

70-73. “So be it”, said the divine river who helps everyone. 
In order to help the worlds and to sanctify the ancestors, parti- 

1. A class of inferior deities who, according to Vi$nupurapa, were the 
grandchildren of Dak$a-Prajapati. 



8.74—9.2 


799 


cularly in order to fill up the sea drunk up by Agastva 1 , in order 
to destroy sins merely by being remembered, the divine river 
did what she was told by Bhaglratha. She splashed the princes, 
the sons of Sagara who had been reduced to ashes by the curse 
of brahmin, in the nether region. She filled up the holes dug up 
by the Sagaras, the river flooded the mountain Meru and stopped. 
The young king spoke to her thus: 

74-77. “You must remain in the land of holy rites.” 

Saying “So be it” she came to Himalaya. From that holy 
mountain, she came to the subcontinent Bharata. From its mid¬ 
dle the holy river flowed towards the eastern sea. Thus this 
river Ganga brought by a Ksatriya, O great sage, has been 
mentioned to you. 

This same river belongs to MaheSvara, Visnu and Brahma. 
It is sacred. Bhaglrathi the divine river is stationed on the peak 
of Himavan. 

Thus, the water stationed within the matted hair of Mahes- 
vara attained two forms. To the south of the Vindhya, Ganga 
is called Gautaml. In the north of the Vindhya, she is called 
Bhagirathi. 


CHAPTER NINE 
The Holy Centre Vardha 

JVarada said : 

1. My mind is not satiated by listening to the stories men¬ 
tioned by you. The predilection of my mind is to listen to the 
benefit of the holy centres separately. 

2. At the outset recount to me in proper sequence how 
Ganga was brought by the brahmin. Tell me the holy benefit 
of the holy centres separately in the proper sequence together 
with its legends. 


1. The sage Agastya drank up the ocean because, according to Mahabha- 
rata, the. latter was hiding demons who could be killed by the gods only 
after this act of Agastya. 



800 


Brahma Purdna : Gautaml-M&hatmya 


Brahmd said : 

3. I am not able to recount entirely the benefit, greatness 
and the individual importance of the holy centres. Nor are you 
capable of listening to it. 

4-6. Still I shall recount something. Listen to it attentively, 
O Narada. 

After bowing down to the three-eyed lord, I shall briefly 
speak about the holy centres mentioned by sages and the words 
of the Vedas. 

O sage, the place where the three-eyed lord revealed himself 
is the holy centre named Tryambaka. It is the bestower of worldly 
pleasures and salvation. Another holy centre is “Varaha” which 
is well known in the three worlds. 

7-8. I shall describe its features as well as how Visnu’s name 
came to be associated with it. 

Formerly a Raksasa well known by the name of Sindhusena, 
harassed and defeated Dcvas. Taking away sacrifice he reached 
the nether region. 

When sacrifice went over to the nether world the Earth 
became devoid of sacrifice. 

9. When sacrifice perishes one shall have neither this world 
nor the other. At that time, the situation was thus. 

Following the enemy Devas entered the nether region. 

10-12. With Indra as their leader they were not able to 
conquer him. Approaching Visnu the Purana Purusa (lit. the 
primeval male) they intimated to him the evil action of the 
Raksasa viz., the entire destruction of sacrifice. 

The Lord said: 

Assuming the physical body of a Boar along with the conch, 
discus and mace in hands I shall go to the nether region and 
bring the holy sacrifice after killing the leading demons. 

13-16. May Devas go to heaven. May your mental fever 
disappear. 

Brahmd said : 

It was by that path whereby Ganga reached the nether re¬ 
gions, O dear son, that the discus-bearing lord hurried to Rasa- 
tala (nether world) after breaking through the Earth. 

The glorious lord in the guise of a Boar killed the Raksasas 



9.17—10.3 


801 


and Danavas residing in Rasatala. He held the great sacrifice 
in his mouth. The lord in the form of a Boar, the enjoyer of sacri¬ 
fices, the conqueror of enemies, came out of Rasatala by the 
same path whereby Vi$nu had entered it. 

17-18. There, on the mountain Brahmagiri, Devas waited 
for Hari. Coming out by that path he came to the Ganga- 
sravana (the current of the river Ganga). He washed his 
blood-stained limbs, O Narada, with the water of Ganga. 
Therefore it became (well known as) Varahakuntfa. 

19-22. Hari, the most excellent one among Devas, placed 
in front of Devas the sacrifice he had kept in his mouth. It was 
thus that the sacrifice was born of his mouth. 

Thereafter the sacred ladle is called the most important part 
of sacrifice. Its form became that of a Boar for another reason. 

Hence the holy centre Varaha is the holiest Tirtha. It bestows 
all desired things. Performing the holy ablution and charity 
at that place bestows the benefits of all sacrifices. 

If anyone stands there and remembers his ancestors or does 
any meritorious deed, his manes will be free from all sins. They 
shall attain Heaven. 


CHAPTER TEN 
Kapotatirtha 

1. I am not competent to recount to you the greatness of 
Kusavarta. Merely by remembering it one’s purpose is accom¬ 
plished. 

2. The holy centre well known as Kusavarta is the bestower 
of all desired things unto men. It has been stirred up by KuSa 1 
by the noble Gautama. 

3. The sage brought the river after stirring it with Kusa. 
Performing ablution and offering charitable gifts there bestows 
satisfaction to the manes. 

1. A sacred" grass used in religious rites; also known as darbha in older 
texts. 



802 


Brahma Purdria : Gautaml-M&h&tmya 


4-7. Nilaganga which is the most excellent of all rivers 
comes out of the Nilaparvata (Blue mountain). 

If a man of mental and physical purity performs ablution 
etc., whatever holy rite he performs, know that all those are 
everlasting. They bestow satisfaction to the ancestors. 

The excellent holy centre Kapotatirtha is well known in the 
thiee worlds. 

O sage, listen. I shall tell you about its form and features, 
which will do you great good. 

On Brahmagiri there was an extremely terrible hunter. 

He used to harass brahmins, ascetics and other decent men 
as well as cows, birds and animals. That sinning soul of this 
nature was inclined to become furious and was a speaker of 
untruth. 

8-10. He was of a terrible shape and size. He was very 
fierce. His eyes were blue. His arms were short. He had defor¬ 
med teeth. He had lost his nose and eyes. His legs were short but 
his belly was huge in girth and he was short in height. His arms 
were small. He was utterly deformed and his voice resembled 
the braying of a donkey. He had a noose in his hand. He was 
evil-minded and sinful. He wielded the bow ever and anon. 

O Narada, his wife and children too were like him. Urged 
by his wife, he entered the dense forest. 

11. That sinner killed animals and birds of many forms. 
Some of them, both living and dead, he put inside a cage. 

12. He returned home scorched and distressed due to 
hunger and thirst after wandering through many places. 

13-14. After the months of spring season on an afternoon, 
the sky was suddenly overcast with clouds. There was a rumbling 
sound of thunder. A violent gust of wind blew, showering 
hailstones. It was extremely terrible due to heavy downpour. 
As he went ahead, the tired hunter could not even know his path. 

15. As the sinful fellow was too tired, he could not know, 
where it was water and where it was land, where was a deep pit 
and where the path was right, where to take shelter and in which 
direction he should move. 

16-17. He thought thusWhere am I going? Where should 
I stay? What shall I do? Like the god of death I am the extractor 
of vital airs of all living beings. The spirit that causese ven my 



10 . 18-32 


803 


death has come, viz. the shower of hailstones. I do not see any¬ 
one who can save me. No rock, no tree nearby.” 

18-20. After thinking thus in diverse ways the hunter saw 
a tree nearby in the forest. It was like the lord of the forest, like 
the moon among the stars, like a lion among animals, like a 
householder among the persons of various stages and like mind 
among sense-organs. It was the saviour of living beings. The 
tree was splendid and excellent, embellished with branches and 
tender sprouts and leaves. With his clothes drenched in water, 
that hunter resorted to that tree and sat beneath it. 

21. He thought of his wife and children wondering whether 
they were alive or not. In the meantime the sun also set. 

22. There was a pigeon on that excellent tree. He was sur¬ 
rounded by his wife, sons and grandsons. He had resorted to 
the same tree. 

23. He lived there happily well-contented, delighted and 
free from fear. Many years passed by since that bird began to 
live there. 

24-28. His wife who was chaste was highly pleased with him. 
His hollow cavity in that excellent tree was not at all affected by 
water or wind. That pigeon lived there along with his wife and 
children. On that particular day both of them, the he-pigeon 
and the she-pigeon had, by chance gone out in search of prey. 
The he-pigeon returned to the tree. As ill luck would have it, 
dear son, the she-pigeon was caught alive by the hunter. The 
he-pigeon looked at the children separated from their mother. 
On observing that a terrible downpour was going on, that the 
sun had set and that his hollow was a void he began to lament. 

29. The king of pigeons was not aware that the she-pigeon 
was bound and kept in the cage. The he-pigeon began to sing 
in praise of his beloved. 

30. “Even now my beloved wife, the source of my welfare, 
who increases my joy, the mother of my virtue and the control¬ 
ling mistress of my body, has not come back. 

31. It is she alone who assists me in the acquisition of virtue, 
wealth, love and liberation. When I am pleased she laughs; 
when I am angry she tries to wipe off my misery. 

32. ~She is a comrade unto me; she helps me by her counsels. 
She abides by my words and suggestions. Even after the sun has 



804 Brahma Purdria: Gautaml-M&h&tmya 

set, my beloved wife, the source of my welfare, has not come 
back. 

33. She does not know any holy rite, mantra, god, virtue or 
asset other than me, her husband. Her husband is her holy rite; 
her husband is her life; her husband is her Mantra. She is 
fond of her husband. 

34. Even now my beloved, the source of my welfare has not 
come back. What shall I do? Where shall I go ? Is this my house? 
Without her it appears to be a forest. 

35. In her company my house is full of splendour and glory. 
Even if it is terrible, it is splendid. Even now she does not come 
back. By her presence alone this place is a home. 

36-37. Without her I cannot remain alive. For her I shall 
even forsake my body. But what will my children do? I will 
be deprived of my religious rites now.” 

Even as he was lamenting thus, the she-pigeon who was in 
the cage heard his lamentation. On hearing it she spoke thus 
to her husband from within the cage. 

The she-pigeon said : 

38. O bird of great intellect, I am here imprisoned (and) 
helpless. I have been brought here by the hunter bound by 
ropes and nooses. 

39-40. I am gratified and blessed. My husband recounts 
my qualities. Undoubtedly I am contented. 

When my husband is satisfied the deities are pleased with 
me. They are extremely pleased. Otherwise I would perish. 

41. You are my deity. You are my lord. You are my friend. 
You are my ultimate resort. You are my holy rite. You are the 
great Brahman. You are my heaven. You are my salvation. 

42. O my beloved husband, the cause of my welfare, do not 
be worried. Make your intellect steady and stable in virtue and 
piety. It is by your favour that different kinds of worldly pleasu¬ 
res have been enjoyed by me. 

43. Do not have any grief or worry due to me. Keep your 
intellect steady and stable in virtue and piety. 

Brahmd said : 

44. On hearing these words of his beloved the he-pigeon got 



10.45-56 


805 


down from the tree and went hurriedly to the place where the 
she-pigeon was in her cage. 

45. On approaching, he saw his beloved, and the hunter as 
though dead. He said, “Now the hunter is motionless. I shall 
release you.” 

The she-pigeon said : 

46-49. O extremely fortunate one, do not release me. Know 
that (the worldly) relationship is unstable. (The birds) that 
move about constitute the food of the hunters. One living being 
is the prey of another. I do not think that this hunter is guilty 
in any manner. Keep your consciousness of virtue steady. 

To the twice-born, the fire-god is a preceptor. The brahmin 
is a preceptor unto all castes. Husband alone is the preceptor 
of women. The guest is a preceptor unto all. Certainly the 
goddess of speech becomes pleased with the people who propitiate 
the guest by means of delightful words. If food is given to him 
Indra will be pleased. 

50. If his feet are washed the manes are pleased. If he is 
given food to eat, Prajapati is pleased. By rendering service to 
him Laksiru can be propitiated along with Vi?nu. 

51-55. If he is offered a bed, the gods are pleased. Hence, 
let my guest be worshipped. If a guest is scorched by the glare 
of the sun and is tired and if he comes to one’s house one should 
view him like a god. Indeed he is the bestower of benefits of 
all sacrifices. 

Gods, manes and fires follow the exhausted guest. If he is 
pleased they also rejoice. If he is disappointed they are also 
disappointed. 

Hence, O beloved husband, forsake misery in every respect 
and attain calmness. Keep your intellect auspicious and practise 
virtuous activities. 

It is considered by all that rendering help or harassing persons 
is of great consequence. People render help to those who help 
them. But he who befriends those who harass him is a virtuous 
person. 

The he-pigeon said : 

56. O lady of excellent face, what has been said by you is 



806 Brahma Purdtj.a: Gautami-Mahatmya 

befitting us both. What you think is excellent. But I have some¬ 
thing to be said. Listen to it. 

57. There are some who fill their belly with thousands; 
others with hundreds and still others with tens. Some fill them¬ 
selves with happiness. But we fill our belly with great difficulty. 

58. Some hoard their wealth and grain in deep pits. Others 
hoard their wealth in big barns. Some keep their wealth in pots. 
But we keep our wealth in our beaks. 

59. O splendid lady, how shall I honour and propitiate 
this exhausted guest? 

The she-pigeon said : 

60. Fire, water, splendid speech etc., can be offered to the 
guest. Grass, wood etc. should also be given to the suppliant. 
This hunter is distressed due to chillnes». 

Brahmd said : 

61. On hearing these words of his beloved the king of birds 
ascended the tree and saw a fire burning far off. 

62. He went to the place where the fire was burning and 
brought a burning splinter in his beak. He lit a fire in front of the 
hunter. 

63. During the mid-night he dropped dry twigs, leaves and 
grass into that fire. 

64. On seeing the fire blazing, that hunter who was distressed 
by cold warmed his exhausted limbs and attained happiness. 

65. On seeing the hunter consumed by the fire of hunger, 
the she-pigeon said to her husband, “O highly fortunate one, 
release me. 

66. I shall propitiate the distressed hunter with my own 
body. O dear one of good holy rites, attain the worlds belonging 
to those who have worshipped their guests”. 

The he-pigeon said : 

67. O splendid lady, when I stand (i.e. when I am alive) 
this duty is not laid down for you. I shall be the one who pro¬ 
pitiates the guest, permit me to be so. 

Brahmd said : 

68-69. After saying these words he circumambulated the 
fire three times remembering the four-armed lord Mahavisnu 



10.70-80 


807 


who is the soul of the Universe, who is worthy of being sought 
refuge in and who is favourably disposed to his devotees. Saying 
“Eat as you please” he entered the fire. On seeing him cast off 
his life in the fire the hunter spoke these words. 

The hunter said : 

70. Fie upon this life of mine with a human body, for, this 
daring act has been undertaken for my sake by this king of birds. 

Brahma, said : 

71-72. The she-bird spoke to the hunter who said thus. 
The she-pigeon said : 

O highly fortunate one, release me. This, my husband is 
going far off. 

Brahma said : 

73. On hearing her words the hunter released the she-pigeon 
from the cage hurriedly as though he was afraid. 

74-78. After circumambulating the fire she sang to her dead 
husband. 

The she-pigeon said : 

Dying immediately after the husband is the greatest duty of 
women. This is the path laid down in the Vedas. It is honoured 
in the world. 

Just as the snake-charmer forcibly takes out the snake from 
its hole, so also the woman who is accompanied by her husband 
shall go to heaven. 

The woman who follows her husband shall stay in heaven 
for as many years as there are hairs in a man’s body, viz. three 
and a half crores of years. 

After bowing down to the Earth, gods, Gaiiga, and trees and 
after consoling her children, she said to the hunter: 

The she-pigeon said : 

79. The woman who follows her husband shall stay in hea¬ 
ven for as many years as there are hairs on a man’s body, viz. 
three and a half crores of years. 

80. O highly fortunate one, it is due to your grace that such 
a thing har happened to me. Pardon my guilt for leaving my 
children. I shall go to heaven along with my husband. 



808 


Brahma Pvrdna: Gautami-Mdhatmya 


Brahmd said : 

81. After saying thus, the good mannered she-bird entered 
the fire. As soon as she entered the fire there was a cry of victory. 

82. Then the pair were seen in the sky seated on an aerial 
chariot resembling the sun and extremely splendid. They were 
like gods themselves. 

83-85. With great delight both of them spoke to the hunter 
who was surprised much. 

The Couple said : 

We are going to the abode of gods. We are taking leave of 
you, O highly intelligent one. The staircase leading to heaven 
for both of us is the guest in you. Obeisance to you. 

Brahmd said : 

On seeing them seated on the excellent aerial chariot, the 
hunter cast away his cage along with his bow. With palms joined 
in reverence he spoke. 

The hunter said : 

86. O highly fortunate ones, I am not to be abandoned by 
you. Something should be given to me who do not know any¬ 
thing. I am your guest here and thus should be honoured. It 
behoves you to recount to me the manner of my expiation. 

The Couple said : 

87. Go to Gautami river, welfare be to you. Taking bath 
there for a fortnight you will be liberated from your sins. 

88. After being liberated from your sins if you plunge into 
Ganga again you will acquire the merit of a horse-sacrifice. You 
will become sanctified. 

89-90. If you take a holy ablution in the excellent river 
Gautami, you will abandon this defiled body. Mounting on an 
excellent aerial chariot, you will go to heaven. 

Brahmd said: 

91 -94. On hearing their words the hunter did so. He became 
seated on an extellent aerial chariot. He assumed a divine form. 
He wore divine garlands and garments. He was eulogized by 
celestial damsels. The he-pigeon, the she-pigeon and the hunter 
proceeded to heaven. Such is the power of Ganga. 



11.1-10 


809 


Thenceforward that holy centre is well known by the name 
Kapota (pigeon). All the holy rites performed there, viz. bathing, 
distributing charitable gifts, worshipping the manes and all 
other holy rites such as Japa, Yajria, etc. are capable of giving 
everlasting benefit. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 
Kumaralirtha 

Brahma .'.aid : 

1. Another holy centre is Karttikeya pertaining to Lord 
Subrahmanya, well known as Kaumara. Merely by listening to 
its name one shall attain nobility of birth and exquisite beauty. 

2. When the asura Taraka was killed and the three worlds 
became quiet and normal, Parvati spoke to her eldest son 
Karttikeya with great pleasure: 

3. “By my consent and the grace of your father, be delighted 
in your mind. Enjoy as you please the worldly pleasures in the 
three worlds, which are dear to your mind.*’ 

4. Thus addressed by his mother, Visakha (Karttikeya) 
the beloved of gods, sported about as be pleased with the wives 
of gods. The wives of gods also sported about. 

5. While the wives of gods were being enjoyed, O Narada, 
the heaven-dwellers were not able to prevent Karttikeya. 

6-7. Then Devas intimated to Parvati that act of her son. 
Though he was frequently prevented by his mother and Devas, 
the spear-bearing lord did not act according to their suggestions. 
The six-faced lord was so much attached to the women. Afraid of 
his curse, Parvati thought over the matter. 

8-10. Again and again the goddess thought about this due to 
her affection for her son. In order to achieve the task of Devas 
she decided that the wives of Devas should be protected. If 
Skanda(Karttikeya) attempted to sport with any, lady Parvati 
made her look like herself. When the six-faced lord called the 



810 Brahma Purdna: Gautami-Mdh&tmya 

wife of Indra or Varuna and stared at her he saw the form of his 
mother in her. 

11. He set her aside after a bow. Again he called another 
lady. Seeing his mother’s form in her too he became ashamed. 

12. Thus he saw in all women the form of his own mother. 
He saw the entire universe full of the forms of his mother. Think¬ 
ing thus, he became free from all attachments. 

13-14. He knew that it was his mother who started dissua¬ 
ding him from his actions. He thought thus: “If I am to be 
dissuaded from enjoyment of pleasures why was I persuaded 
to act so at the first instance? Whatever my mother did was only 
to make me a laughing stock.” Hence, he was extremely asha¬ 
med and went to Gautami. 

15. (He then said) “Let this river whose form is also like 
that of my mother, hear my statement. Hereafter whatever has 
a feminine name will be considered by me like my mother.” 

16-17. On coming to know of this, Sankara, the lord of the 
worlds, accompanied by Parvatl stopped him. Then Subrahmanya 
said, “It has already taken place.” Then the delighted lord 
began to think: “What shall I give?” 

With palms joined in reverence Skanda said to his father 
again. 

18-22. “I am commander-in-chief and the leader of gods 
and I am your son. O lord of Devas and the one who is worship¬ 
ped by Devas, this much is enough. Why should there be other 
boons? 

Or, if you are desirous of granting me a boon, I shall ask 
for the welfare of worlds and not of myself. O lord, it behoves 
you to permit me. Let the great sinners such as the defilers of 
preceptors’ bed, be rid of their sins merely by plunging into this 
river. O lord of Devas, let even the low creatures attain excellent 
birth; let the ugly and the deformed be richly endowed with 
beauty by taking their bath here.” 

Brahmd said : 

Saying “Let is be so” Sambhu approved of what was 
suggested by his son. Thenceforward that holy centre became 
known as “Karttikeya”. Taking bath and distributing charitable 
gifts there yields the benefit of all sacrifices. 



12.1-16 


CHAPTER TWELVE 
The Kfttika Tirtha 


811 


Brahma said : 

I. The holy centre next to Karttikeya is known as Krttika- 
Tirtha. Merely by hearing about it one will acquire the benefit 
of drinking Soma juice. 

2-3. Formerly, for quelling Taraka, Fire god drank the se¬ 
men of Siva. On seeing him with the Semen within, O sage, the 
wives of sages desired for the same. Of the seven sages Vasistha’s 
wife Arundhati had her menstrual bath. Excepting her, the 
other six women became pregnant through the Fire god. 

4-6. They had scorching experience in their menstrual bath. 
They shone splendidly. They consulted mutually: “What shall 
wc do? Where shall we go? How can wc attain merit?” After 
saying thus mutually they went to Ganga and pressed them¬ 
selves hard. The foetuses coming out of them floated in the water 
in the form of foam. Through water and wind they joined toge¬ 
ther. Thus the six-faced lord with a single body was born. 

7. After causing the abortion of the foetuses the wives of 
sages went home. On seeing their deformed bodies the sages 
said : 

8. “You may go. You may go quickly. It is not proper for 
women to be licentious.” After saying this their husbands cast 
them off. 

9-10. On being forsaken by their husbands, those six women 
became very miserable. On seeing them thus Narada said: 
“By the names of Karttikeya, Gafigeya (son of Ganga), Agni- 
bhava (born of Fire god) and Tarakantaka (slayer of Taraka) 
Siva’s son is well known. Go to him. Ere long he will become 
pleased and grant you worldly pleasures.” 

II. At the instance of the divine sage the Kjttikas approa¬ 
ched the six-faced lord and themselves intimated to him cverv- 
thing in the manner it had taken place. 

12-16. Karttikeya approved of them and said to them “All 
of you go to Gautaml. Take your bath and worship Mahesvara. 
I shall come there itself, and lead you to the abode of Devas”. 
Saying “So be it” the Kfttikas took their bath in Ganga and 



812 


Brahma Pur Aria: Gautami-M&h&tmya 


Gautami. They worshipped the lord of Devas at the bidding of 
Karttikeya. By the grace of the lord they went to their abode 
and were accepted by the sages. 

Thenceforward that holy centre is called Krttikatlrtha. He 
who takes bath on the full moon day in the month of Karttika, 
in conjunction with the Kfttika stars, acquires the benefit of all 
sacrifices. He becomes a virtuous king. He who remembers 
that holy centre or hears about it becomes rid of all sins 
and acquires long life. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
Daiaivamedha Tirtha 

Brahmd said : 

1. O great sage, listen to the description of the holy centre 
of Dasasvamedha 1 . Merely by listening to its name one shall 
acquire the merit of a horse-sacrifice. 

2. The glorious Visvarupa of great strength was the son of 
ViSvakarman. Pramati was his son. His son was lordly Bhauvana. 

3. His chief priest was Kasyapa who was an expert in all 
wise lores. The brawny-armed Bhauvana, the ruler of the whole 
world asked him: 

4. “O sage, I wish to perform a horse sacrifice simultaneously 
with ten horses.” 

He then asked his preceptor the brahmin: “Where shall I 
perform the sacrifice?” 

5. He said : “O excellent king, there are Devayajanas 
(places for the worship of Devas) at different places where ex¬ 
cellent brahmins performed great sacrifices.” 

6. Ten sacrifices were simultaneously performed by the 
priest. In that sacrifice in a group, a number of sages were 
employed as Rtviks. 

7-8. Avoiding Devayajana, the priest had initiated the 
sacrifices in another place. Hence defects and obstacles over- 


1. A sacred place in Kurukyetra (MBh, Vanaparva, 9.14) 



13 . 9-19 


813 


whelmed him. The sacrifices could not be completed. On 
seeing them the king was extremely worried. On observing the 
sacrifice incomplete the king spoke to the preceptor. 

The king said : 

9. Is it because of the defect of place, or of the defect of time, 
or my defect or your defect that the ten horse sacrifices have not 
become complete? 

rahma said : 

10. The grief-stricken king accompanied by his preceptor 
KaSyapa went to Samvarta the elder brother of Brhaspati. They 
spoke to him. 

KaSyapa and Bhauvana said : 

11. O holy sage, the bestower of honour, ten horse-sacrifices 
have to be performed simultaneously. Tell us about the place 
and the preceptor thereof so that all the ten will be completed. 

Brahma said : 

12. The excellent sage Samvarta meditated for a while 
and spoke to Bhauvana: “Go to Brahma. He will tell you about 
the preceptor and the place of sacrifice.” 

13. Bhauvana of great intellect came to me accompanied 
by the noble Kasyapa. They asked me about the preceptor, 
place of sacrifice and other things. 

14. Then O dear son, I spoke to Bhauvana and Kasyapa: 
“O leading king, go to Gautami. That place is highly merito¬ 
rious for sacrifices. 

15-16. This Kasyapa alone is your excellent preceptor. He 
is a master of Vedas. By the grace of this preceptor as well as of 
Gautami, with a single horse sacrifice and the holy ablution 
therein, O king, you will achieve the benefit of ten horse sacri¬ 
fices.” 

17. On hearing it the king Bhauvana went to the banks of 
Gautami with Kasyapa to assist him. He got himself initiated for 
the horse sacrifice. 

18-19. Then the horse sacrifice, the lord of Yajfias was begun. 
When it was completed, the king became ready to offer the 



814 


Brahma Parana: Gautami-Mdhdtmya 


whole of the Earth. Then an ethereal voice addressed the excellent 
king who was standing by after worshipping the brahmins, the 
Rtviks and Sadaspatis 1 (types of priests). 

The Ethereal Voice said : 

20-22. O king, everything has been given by you who are 
desirous of giving the whole Earth with mountains, forests and 
parks to Kasyapa, your priest. 

Eschew your desire to give the Earth as gift. Offer food that 
yields great results. There is no meritorious thing like the gift 
of food in all the three worlds particularly on the bank of Ganga 
if it is given with great faith, O sage. 

This horse sacrifice with many monetary gifts has been per¬ 
formed by you. You are satisfied, welfare unto thee. No worry 
need be felt. 

Brahma said : 

23-25. Still Bhauvana wanted to give the Earth away as 
gift. The Eartli said to him then again and again: 

The Earth said : 

O son of Visvakarman, do not give me away. If a person 
goes to the banks of Gautami and gives a morsel of food iL is as 
good as though I have been given wholly. Why do you give me 
then, O Bhauvana? I shall sink into water. It behoves you not 
to give me. 

Brahma, said : 

2b. Then Bhauvana became afraid. He asked, “What then, 
should be given?” Again the Earth addressed Bhauvana surroun¬ 
ded by the brahmins. 

The Earth said : 

27-28. Gingelly seeds, cows, money, grains—whatever is given 
on the banks of Gautami is everlasting in its benefit. Why then, 
do you give me, Bhauvana? If a person goes to the banks of 
Ganga and gives a morsel of food, it is as good as though 1 have 
been given wholly. Why do you give me then, O Bhauvana? 

Brahma said : 

29-30. On hearing the words of the Earth Bhauvana, the 
ruler of the whole world, considered that it should be so. He 

1. Lit. lord of the seat or sacrificial assembly. 




14.1-12 


815 


then gave food to the brahmins on a big scale. Ever since then, 
people know it to be Dasasvamedhika Tirlha. By taking bath 
there, the fruit of ten horse sacrifices is acquired. 


C HAPTER FOURTEEN 
PaiStic a Tirtha 

Bra/iruti said : 

1-f Another holy centre is the Paisaca Tirtha. It is honou¬ 
red by persons who expound the doctrine of Brahman. I shall 
recount to you its form and features. On the southern bank of 
GautamI, at the side of Branmagiri, O Narada, there is a moun¬ 
tain Anjana. On that mountain, O excellent sage, there was an 
excellent celestial damsel Afijana. She had a downfall due to a 
curse. Her face resembled that of a monkey. Her husband’s 
names was Kesari. Adrika was another wife of Kesari. She too 
was a celestial damsel who had a downfall due to a curse. Her 
face and head resembled those of a cat. She too stayed on the 
Afijana mountain. 

5. Once Kesari who was well known in the world went to 
the southern sea. In the meantime sage Agastya came to that 
Anjana mountain. 

6. Both of them, viz. Anjana and Adrika worshipped the 
excellent sage Agastya duly and pleasingly. 

7. Then the delighted holy sage said to them, “Let a boon 
be chosen”. They said to Agastya, “O lord of sages, give us two 
sons. 

8. They should be stronger than all others and more excel¬ 
lent too. They should be persons who render help to the whole 
world”. 

Saying “So be it”, that sage went to the southern quarter. 

9-12. Once Anjana and Adrika were singing, dancing and 
laughing on the top of the mountain. 

The two Devas, Vayu and Niryti saw them and smiled. 
They wSre overwhelmed by lust and they rushed to those ladies. 
They said, “We are Devas, the bestowers of boons. Be our wives”. 



816 


Brahma Purina : Gautami-Mdhdtmya 


They too replied, “Let it be so”. They then sported about on the 
top of the mountain. Hanuman was born of Afijana and Vayu. 
The king of Pisacas (evil spirits) named Adri was born of Adrika 
and Nirjrti. 

13-14. Then the ladies said, “Due to the boon of the sage 
sons are born to us. Our form is ugly and distorted. It is defiled 
at the head and face due to the curse of Indra. It behoves you 
to know about this.” Then Lord Vayu and Nirrti spoke: 

15. “By taking bath in Gautami you will be released from 
the curse”. After saying this the two delighted Devas vanished 
there itself. 

16. Then, for the sake of pleasing his brother Hanuman, 
Adri who had the form and features of a Pisaca took Afijana, 
his mother and made her take her bath. 

17-20. In the same manner Hanuman took Adri whose form 
was that of a cat, to Ganga and rushed to the banks of Gautami. 

Thenceforward that holy centre was well known as PaiSaca 
and Afijana. (Being) near the mountain of Brahma that is 
auspicious. It yields all desired things. The holy centre Mar- 
jara extended to fiftythree Yojanas to the east. Away from the 
holy centre Marjara is the holy centre Hanumanta and Vr?a- 
kapi. The confluence of Phena is the bestower of all desired things. 
Its form, nature and situation is recounted there itself. 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 
Ksudha Tirtha 

Brahma said : 

1. Listen attentively, O Narada. The holy centre well known 
as K§udha Tirtha is being recounted. It is highly meritorious 
and it bestows all desired things to men. 

2. Formerly, there was a sage Kanva. He performed penan¬ 
ce and he was the most excellent among those who were conver¬ 
sant with the Vedas. Once wandering among penance-groves 
he was afflicted by hunger. 



15 . 3-12 


817 


3-7 Gautama’s holy hermitage was richly endowed with 
food and water. He saw himself hungry and Gautama pros¬ 
perous. He noticed this incongruity and became detached. He 
thought, “Gautama is an excellent brahmin. I too am a person 
well-established in penance. Begging of a person equal to one in 
status is not proper. Even though I am overcome by hunger, 
even when my body is afflicted, I am not going to take food in 
the abode of Gautama. I shall go to Gautami Ganga and earn 
wealth”. After deciding like this the intelligent sage went to the 
sacred Ganga. After taking bath he sat on the Kusa grass with 
controlled mind. He eulogized Gautami Ganga and Ksudha 
(hunger), the greatest distressing thing. 

Kaiiva said : 

8. Ganga, obeisance be to you, the destroyer of agony 
and distress, and to you, O Hunger, the cause of agony and 
distress to all the people. 

Obeisance O splendid one, born of the matted hair of 
Mahesana. 

Obeisance O K§udha coming out of the mouth of great 
Death. 

9. O Gautami assuming a calm form in regard to meri¬ 
torious souls and furious form in regard to the wicked souls 1 O 
destroyer of the distress and sins of all, in the form of a river ! 

10. Obeisance be to you, the bestower of agony, distress 
and sin, to all in the form of hunger. 

Obeisance O goddess, the cause of welfare and the sup¬ 
pressor of sins. 

Obeisance O goddess, the cause of peace. Obeisance, O 
destroyer of poverty. 

Brahmd said : 

11. As he eulogized thus two forms appeared in front of him, 
one the charming form of Ganga and the other the terrible form 
of K§udha, After bowing down with palms joined in reverence, 
the excellent brahmin said. 

Kanva said: 

12. Obeisance be to you O Godavari, the cause of all aus¬ 
picious things, O Brahmi (belonging to Brahma), O Mahes- 



818 


Brahma Parana : Gautami-Mdhatmya 


var! (belonging to Mahesvara), O splendid Vai§navl (belon¬ 
ging to Vi§nu), O three-eyed goddess ! 

13. Obeisance be to you, O Godavari, born of the matted 
hair of the three-eyed lord, the destroyer of sins of Gautama, O 
river that flows into the sea in seven channels ! 

14. O goddess Hunger obeisance, obeisance to you, O sinner 
unto all sinful persons, O destroyer of virtue, love and wealth, 
full of misery and greed ! 

Brahma said : 

15-17 On hearing the words of Kanva both of them were 
delighted and they spoke to the brahmin. 

Gaiiga & Ksudhd said : 

O (sage) of good holy rites, O cause of welfare, mention your 
desire. Choose boons. 

Brahma said : 

Kanva bowed down to Gaiiga and Ksudha in due order and 
said: 

Kanva said : 

18. O Ganga, O goddess, give unto me wealth and all char¬ 
ming and cherished desires, long life, enjoyment of worldly 
pleasures and salvation. 

Brahmd said : 

19-23 After saying this to Gautam! Gaiiga, the excellent 
brahmin said to Hunger. 

Kanva said : 

O hunger, O thirst, O wretched one, never be in me or in 
anyone born of my family. O extremely sinful and harsh one, 
go away. 

This is another boon I wish for. If persons afflicted by hunger 
were to eulogize you with this hymn let them not have miseries 
of poverty. 

Let those men who devoutly perform such sacred rites as holy 
ablution, charitable gifts, chanting of Japas etc. in this holy 
centre of great merit become rich. Another boon I wish for is 
this—If a person reads this hymn whether in the holy centre 



15.24—16.9 


819 


or in the house, let him not have the fear from poverty and 
miseries. 

Brahma said : 

24. After saying “So be it” to Kanva both of them went to 
their respective abodes. Thenceforward that holy centre was 
called Kanva, Gaiiga and Ksudha. O dear one, it dispels all 
sins and increases the delight of manes. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

Indra-Tirtha : Ahalyasaiigama-Tirtha 

Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre named Ahalya-Samgama is one that 
sanctifies the three worlds. O excellent sage, listen to what hap¬ 
pened and how it happened. 

2. Out of great curiosity, O lord of sages, many types 
of beautiful girls possessing good qualities had been formerly 
created by me. 

3-6. Among them I created a girl of exquisitely splendid 
features. On seeing that most excellent girl of great beauty 
in every limb, I thought thus, “Who is capable of nurturing 
this girl ? Neither among the Asuras nor Devas is there anyone 
who has the ability to nurture her”. This was my thought. 
Then I gave that highly intelligent girl to Gautama for bringing 
her up—to Gautama who was an intelligent brahmin superior 
to all in good qualities, who possessed the power of penance, 
who had all characteristics and who was conversant with 
the Vedas and Vedarigas. 1 

7-9. “Protect and bring up (this girl), O excellent sage, till 
she attains the age of youth. When she attains youth, bring 
her back to me”. After saying this I gave that girl of slender 
waist to Gautama. The excellent sage whose sins had been dis¬ 
pelled by penance took her and nurtured her duly. The ex- 


1. Disciplines auxiliary to the study of the Vedas. 



820 Brahma Pur&na : Gautami-M&h&tmya 

cellent sage without any aberration brought Ahalya near me 
after bedecking her duly. 

10. On seeing her, Indra, Agni, Varuna and other Devas 
told me severally, “O lord of Devas, she should be given to me.” 

11-15. In the same manner the sages, Sadhyas, Danavas, 
Yak§as and Raksasas also approached me. On seeing all of 
them gathered together for the sake of that girl Indra became 
all the more enamoured in particular. 

I remembered the greatness, majesty, and courage of Gau¬ 
tama and was surprised. Then this good thought occurred to 
me, “This lady of splendid face should be given to Gautama 
alone. She is not suitable for anyone. I shall give her to him 
alone.” I thought in this way also, “The mind and courage 
of everyone has been stirred up by this girl.” 

Then Devas and sages uttered “Ahalya”. I too said so. 
Looking at Devas and sages I said loudly again and again: 

16. This lady of beautiful eyebrows will be given to that 
person who circumambulates the Earth and thereafter ap¬ 
proaches me sooner than others and not to anyone else. 

17. On hearing the words uttered by me, Devas proceeded 
ahead in their circumambulation of the Earth. 

18. After Devas had gone Gautama, the lord of sages, too 
made some effort like this for the sake of Ahalya. 

19. In the meantime, O brahmin, the divine cow Kama- 
dhenu 1 had partially delivered her calf. Gautama saw her 
thus. 

20. Remembering “This is the Earth” be circumambulated 
her. Then he circumambulated the Linga 2 of the lord of Devas. 

21-22. After circumambulating both of them Gautama the 
excellent sage decided thus—“Devas have not completed even 
one round of the Earth. I have completed two rounds.” After 
deciding thus, that sage came near me. 

23. After bowing down to me Gautama of great intelli¬ 
gence said to me, “O lotus-seated lord, the soul of the universe, 
obeisance be to you again and again. 

1. The wish-fulfilling cow bom at the churning of the ocean by the gods 
and antigods. 

2. The phallic symbol of Lord Siva worshipped in the form of a stone column. 



16.24-41 


821 


24. O Brahma, the entire Earth has been circumambula¬ 
ted by me. What is proper in this connection? O lord of Devas, 
you know it better yourself”. 

25. By meditation I understood it and said to Gautama: 
“The lady of beautiful eyebrows will be given to you alone. The 
circumambulation has been completed. 

26-29. O brahminical sage, Dharma(Virtue) is inscrutable 
even to the Vedas. The divine cow having partially delivered her 
calf is (identical with) the Earth consisting of seven continents. 
If that divine cow is circumambulated, the Earth too has been 
circumambulated. By circumambulating the Liriga one shall 
obtain the same benefit. Hence, O sage Gautama of good 
holy rites, I am pleased with your effort, courage, knowledge 
and penance. O great sage, this girl, the most excellent one in 
the world is given to you.” After saying this, O sage, I gave 
Ahalya to Gautama. 

30-31. After the wedding had been celebrated, Devas 
came there slowly. They had completed their circumambulation 
of the Earth. They saw Gautama, Ahalya and their union that 
increased their pleasure. On seeing this after their arrival, Devas 
were surprised. 

32. When the rites connected with the wedding were over 
Devas returned to heaven. The jealous husband of Sac! (wife of 
Indra) glanced at her (longingly) and went to heaven. 

33. Delighted in my mind, I gave the sacred Brahmagiri 
which is splended and which bestows all cherished desires, to 
the noble Gautama. 

34-35. The excellent sage Gautama indulged in dalliance 
there along with Ahalya. Indra heard about this gift of Brahma 
to Gautama in the heaven itself. In order to see that hermitage, 
sage Gautama and his uncensured wife, Indra assumed the guise 
of a brahmin and came there. 

36. On seeing the sage’s splendid beautiful wife and wealth 
Indra felt jealous and an evil thought entered his mind. 

37. O dear one, Indra who was full of lust did not realize 
the risk; he was not aware of the time and place or even the 
danger of curse from sage Gautama. 

38-4 L Arrogant due to his overlordship of the kingdom of 
the Devas, he was meditating upon her alone continuously. He 



822 


Brahma Parana: Gautami-Mdh&tmya 


felt his limbs scorched by the pangs of passion. He was always 
thinking thus, “How shall I make myself content? How shall I 
enter this hermitage?” 

Though he stayed there in the guise of a brahmin he did not 
succeed in getting an opportunity to go inside. 

Once the highly intelligent sage Gautama performed his 
morning rituals and went out of the hermitage along with his 
disciples. The excellent sage went out to visit the penance grove 
on the GautamI river, the brahmins and different kinds of culti¬ 
vated grains. Indra saw him going out saying (to himself) 
“This is the opportunity”. He did what was pleasing to his mind. 

42. Indra who was desirous of attaining pleasures assumed 
the form of Gautama. Looking at Ahalya who was beautiful 
in every respect he spoke to her. 

Indra said : 

43. “I am attracted by your good qualities. Remembering 
your beauty I have begun to falter in my steps.” Saying this and 
grasping her hand he went inside the hermitage. 

44. Ahalya did not know that he was a paramour. She 
believed him to be Gautama and indulged in sexual dalliance 
with him as she pleased. Meanwhile Gautama came there 
along with his disciples. 

45. Everyday it was the custom of Ahalya to welcome him 
as he returned speaking pleasing words to him and satisfying 
him by her graceful qualities. 

46. On this occasion he was unable to see her. The highly 
intelligent sage Gautama considered it a highly surprising 
mystery. O Narada, the people looked at the excellent sage 
standing at the door. 

47. The watchman and the domestic servants at the hall of 
Agnihotra sacrifice were awestruck and surprised. They spoke 
to the excellent sage Gautama. 

The Watchman said : 

48. “What a mystery is this, O holy sage, you are seen both 
inside and outside. You entered the house accompanied by your 
beloved. You are outside also. Oh the power of your penance 
is wonderful !You can assume different forms at your will.” 



16.49-63 


823 


Brahma said : 

49-50. On hearing it, the sage was surprised. “Who has 
entered inside? Who is standing there? O dear Ahalya, why 
don’t you reply?” On hearing these words of the sage Ahalya 
spoke to the paramour. 

Ahalya said : 

51-53. “Who are you ? In the guise of the sage you have 
committed a sin”. Saying this she hurriedly got up from her 
bed in great fear. Indra the sinner became a cat due to the fear 
of the sage. 

On seeing his beloved Ahalya outraged and defiled the sage 
said furiously, “What is this rash act? Why has it been com¬ 
mitted?” 

Although her husband said this, she did not say anything 
in reply because she was too much ashamed. 

54. The sage saw a cat distressed by fear and moving about 
surreptitiously. He said to him, “Who are you? If you utter a lie 
I will reduce you to ashes.” 

55-58. With palms joined together in reverence, Indra said 
thus. 

Indra said : 

“O ascetic, I am the husband of SacI, the breaker of towns, 
one who has been eulogized much. This sin has been com¬ 
mitted by ine. O sinless one, I have spoken the truth. O 
sage, I have committed an excessively despicable act. What 
is it that those whose hearts are pierced by the arrows of cupid 
do not do? O brahmin, O storehouse of compassion, forgive 
me, a great sinner. Good men are never harsh towards a 
person even if he has committed a guilt.” 

On hearing his words the brahmin said to Indra in great anger. 

Gautama said : 

59. “Sin has been committed by you due to your passion 
for the vagina. Hence become a person with a thousand vaginas 
in your body”. 

He said to Ahalya also in anger, “Be a dry river”. 

60-63. „ (Defective text). Narrating her wrong action she 
tried to pacify him. 



824 


Brahma Pur&na: Gautami-M&h&tmya 


Ahalyd said : 

“If women were to love other men even mentally they will be 
eternally doomed. They should treat all persons as their brothers. 
Be pleased, O holy sage, and listen to my words. He approached 
me assuming your form. These persons are my witnesses.” 

“It is so”, said the watchmen, “Ahalya speaks the truth”. 
The sage knew the truth by means of meditation too. Be¬ 
coming calm he said to the chaste lady: 

Gautama said : 

64. “O fair lady, when you come into contact with the 
Gautami, the chief of rivers, you will become a river and there¬ 
after will regain your own form that is pleasing to me”. 

65-66. On hearing these words of the sage the chaste lady 
did so. Ahalya the beloved wife of Gautama came into contact 
with the divine river. Thereafter she attained that form which 
had been created by me formerly. 

Then, with his palms joined in reverence the king of Devas 
said to Gautama. 

Indra said : 

67-68. “O mighty among the sages, save me. Save me. 
A sinner (no doubt) but I have come to your house as a guest.” 

On seeing him fallen at his feet Gautama said mercifully: 
“I have been pacified by Devas, wishing to free you from 
my curse.” Gautama the most excellent sage said: 

Gautama said : 

69-71. “By taking bath in the sacred holy centre Ahalya 
Sangama, O husband of SacI, you will be rid of your sins instantly 
and will become one with a thousand eyes”. 

I have witnessed both these surprising events, O Narada, 
viz., the resurgence of Ahalya and the transformation of 
Indra into a person with a thousand eyes. 

Thenceforward that pure holy centre became well known as 
Ahalya-Saiigama and Indra-Tirtha. It bestows all cherished 
desires on men. 



17.1-10 


825 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 
Janasthdna Tirtha 

Brahmd said : 

1-4. There is still another holy centre well known as Janas- 
thana. It extends to four Yojanas. It bestows salvation on men 
even by remembering it. 

Formerly, there was a king Janaka born in the solar dynasty. 
He married Gunarnava (ocean of virtue), the daughter of the 
lord of waters (i.e. Varuna). 

King Janaka married Gunarnava, the generator of virtue, 
wealth, love and liberation. In view of her befitting good quali¬ 
ties she was really Gunarnava (ocean of virtue). 

Yajfiavalkya the leading brahmin was the priest of that king. 
The excellent king asked his priest Yajfiavalkya: 

Janaka sdid : 

5-7. Enjoyment of worldly pleasures as well as salvation— 
these two are the most excellent as declared by the greatest of 
sages. Enjoyment of worldly pleasures is excellent through men, 
maidservants, elephants, horses, chariots etc. But in the end all 
is sapless. It is salvation alone that bestows immortality and 
therefore salvation is more excellent than enjoyment. How can 
one attain salvation through enjoyment? 

The attainment of salvation by eschewal of attachment is a 
strenuous task. Hence, tell me, O greatest of sages, how can 
salvation be easily achieved? 

Tajhavalkya said : 

8-9. O king, the lord of waters (Varuna) is your father- 
in-law and well-wisher. Hence, he can be your preceptor. Go to 
him and ask. He will instruct you in what is conducive to your 
welfare. 

Yajfiavalkya and Janaka went to king Varuna and unper¬ 
turbed they asked him about the path of liberation in the proper 
order. 

Varuna said : 

10. Salvation is effected in two ways: (i)through Karmans 
(holy rites) and (ii) through Akarman (refraining from work*). 



826 Brahma Purdna : Gautami-M&hdtmya 

The path decided in the Veda is this. Karman is more conducive 
to welfare than Akarman. 

11. Everything including the four aims of life, is bound 
with Karman. It is not true that the path of salvation is obtained 
by Akarman alone. 

12. All grains are obtained, O excellent king, through 
Karman. Hence Vaidic Karmans should be wholeheartedly 
performed by men. 

13-15. Men obtain (enjoyment of pleasures) and salvation 
through that Karman. Karman is based on birth in the various 
stages in life. 

O leading king, conversant with piety and bestower of honour, 
the four stages are realized through Karmans. 

Among the four stages that of the householder is remem¬ 
bered as the bestower of merit. It is my opinion that enjoyment 
and salvation are possible in the householder’s life. 

Brahmd said : 

16. On hearing this, King Janaka and Sage Yajftavalkya 
honoured Varuna and spoke these words again: 

17. “What is that place, what is that holy centre, which 
bestows worldly pleasures and liberation? Tell us, O excellent 
Deva, you are omniscient. Obeisance be to you.” 

Varuna said : 

18. In the whole of the Earth the sub-continent of Bharata 
is the most meritorious. In the continent of Bharata, Dan<^aka 
is the most meritorious. Karman performed in that region is 
the bestower of worldly pleasures and salvation to men. 

19. Among holy centres, GautamI Ganga is the most ex¬ 
cellent. It bestows salvation. By means of sacrifice and charit¬ 
able gifts performed there, one shall obtain worldly pleasures 
and salvation. 

Brahmd said : 

20. On hearing the words of the lord of waters, Yajftavalkya 
and Janaka went to their city after being permitted by Varuna. 

21. King Janaka performed horse sacrifice and other holy 
rites. Yajftavalkya the leading brahmin made that king per¬ 
form the sacrifice. 



17.22—18.7 


827 


22-26. Resorting to the bank of Ganga, king Janaka attai¬ 
ned liberation through sacrifice. So also, many kings attained 
liberation by the grace of Gautami. Thenceforward that holy 
centre is known as Janasthana. Since it was the seat of many 
sacrifices, it is glorified as Janasthana. It extends to four Yojanas. 
On being remembered, it dispels all sins. 

One shall obtain all cherished desires. One shall even obtain 
salvation by taking bath or offering charitable gifts or by per¬ 
forming oblations to the manes or by remembering the holy 
centre or by approaching it or by resorting to it devoutly. 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 
Cakratlrtha 

Brahma said : 

1. O Brahmin, there is a great holy centre well known as 

Cakratirtha. By taking holy ablution there with devotion a man 

shall obtain the world of Visnu. 

• • 

2. O King, if one fasts on the eleventh day of the bright lunar 
fortnight and takes bath in the Ganika Sangama one shall attain 
the everlasting region. 

3. Even as I recount what had happened there formerly, 
listen to it. 

There was a Vaisya of plenty of wealth. His name was 
Visvadhara. 

4. When he was much advanced in age, O sage, an excellent 
son was born to him. He possessed all good qualities. He was 
very handsome. He was indulgent in sports. He was splendid 
in appearance. 

5. The son who was dear to them more than their life pas¬ 
sed away untimely. On seeing him dead the parents were afflic¬ 
ted by misery. 

6-7. They became inclined to die along with him. They 
lamented: “O son, you were in the prime of youth. You were an 
ocean of virtue. Still you have been taken away by the sinful and 



828 Brahma Purina : Gautami-M&h&tmya 

evil-minded god of death. You are dearer to us than even our 
life breath”. 

8-10. On hearing their lamentation thus Yama’s mind 
became overwhelmed by sympathy. On hearing the piteous 
cry of the couple, Yama abandoned his city and went to Goda¬ 
vari. Seated on its banks he began to meditate on Janardana. 
Within a short while everywhere, all round, the subjects became 
old, very old. The whole Earth was filled with old people so 
much so that they began to say: “My ground extends this much. 
Let it be said. By whom was it filled?” No living creature died. 
The Earth was over-burdened. 

11. Thereupon, O excellent sage, the goddess of Earth went 
to the place where Indra, the conqueror of enemies’ cities, was 
seated along with the Devas. On seeing the Earth Indra bowed 
to her and said this. 

Indra said: 

12. O Earth, What is the purpose of your arrival here? 
May it be said. 

Earth said: 

13. O Indra, I am afflicted by a heavy burden, in the 
absence of death. I have come here to enquire about the cause 
thereof. May it be mentioned to me. 

BrahmS said : 

14-18. On hearing these words of the Earth Indra spoke 
these words. 

Indra said : 

If there is any cause, O Earth, it will be known by me. I am 
the lord of all Devas. 

Brahmd said : 

Then, on hearing his words the Earth said to Indra: 

Then, let Yama be ordered so that he would annihilate the 
subjects. 

On hearing these words of the Earth Siddhas and Kinnaras 
were ordered to bring Yama quickly, O great sage, by Mahendra. 
Thereafter all of them, Sidhas along with Kinnaras, immediately 



18 . 19-26 


829 


went to the city of Yama. There they did not see Yama. After 
returning hurriedly they made a report to lndra. 

Siddhas and Kinnaras said : 

19. O lord, although he was searched for all round stre¬ 
nuously, Yama was not seen by us in the city of Yama. 

Brahma said : 

20. On hearing these words of Siddhas and Kinnaras, Savity 
(the sun) who was his father was asked by Indra, “Where is 
Yama?” 

The Sum said : 

21. O Indra, Yama is now on the banks of Godavari 
performing a very severe penance. I do not know what the rea¬ 
son is. 

Brahma said : 

22-23. On hearing these words of the Sun Indra became 
suspicious. 

Indra said : 

Alas ! Woeful ! O woeful ! My lordship of Devas has come 
to an end. Yama of evil activities performing penance at Goda¬ 
vari ! It is my opinion that he is surely desirous of seizing my 
position, O Devas. 

Brahma said : 

24-25. After saying this, the celestial damsels were imme¬ 
diately summoned by Indra. 

Indra said : 

May this be quickly mentioned to me, who among you is 
capable of spoiling the penance of my enemy Yama who is 
performing austerities on the banks of the Gautami river? 

Brahmd said: 

26. Even on hearing these words of Indra, O great sage, 
no one said anything. Then in great rage Indra said to celestial 
damsels. 



830 


Brahma Purina : Gautami-Mihitmya 


Indra said: 

27. No one has replied to me. Therefore we ourselves 
shall go. Let all Devas be ready. Let them, without any delay, 
come with their armies. We shall slay our enemy who is desirous 
of ruling over heaven by means of his penance. 

Brahma said: 

28-110. When this was said, the army of Devas appeared 
there. 

On coming to know about the motive of Indra, the discus¬ 
bearing lord Hari, the preserver of worlds, sent his discus for 
the protection of Yama. Where the discus appeared is the ex¬ 
cellent holy centre Cakratirtha. 

Then Menaka who was suspicious about the outcome said 
to Indra: 

31-32. “O lord of Devas, no one among us is capable of 
even looking at Yama. It is better to die at your hands than at 
Yama’s. Amongst us, that harlot K§ama is proud of her beauty 
and youth. Request her and send her to dissuade Yama, if you, 
O lord, consider it necessary.” 

Brahma said : 

33. On hearing her words, Indra the lord of Devas, ordered 
Ksama after duly honouring her. 

Indra said: 

34. O harlot, go. Carry out my task, beautiful woman. 
If you fulfil it and return, you shall be as dear to me as Sacl. 

Brahma said : 

35. On hearing the words of Indra, Ksama flew over the 
quarters. The beautiful lady came near Yama in a moment. 

36. Brightening the ten quarters the lady came near Yama. 
She sang the sweet Hindolakasongin an exquisitely graceful style. 

37-40. Then the delicate tremulous mind of Yama was 
moved. He opened his eyes filled (as though) with the fire of 
passion, O great sage, and stared at her although she was a 
hindrance to his welfare. Thereafter the lady immediately be¬ 
came melted and attained the state of a river. This harlot joined 
the river Gautaml. Her songs of praise were sung by the Ganas 



18.41-49 


831 


and Kinkaras. Due to the power of the holy centre she ascended 
to heaven. On seeing the harlot going to heaven seated in an aeri¬ 
al chariot, Yama of tremulous eyes was surprised very much. 

Then the Sun came there and said to Yama: 

The Sun said : 

41. Carry out, dear Son, your duty of annihilating the 
subjects. See the wind that blows always, Brahma who creates 
subjects. Earth that carries them and me who wander over the 
three worlds. 

Brahma said : 

42-43. On hearing the words of his father, Yama said: 
Tama said : 

Surely I shall not carry on this despicable work. It docs 
not behove you to command me to do this extremely cruel task. 

44-46. On hearing the words of Yama the Sun spoke thus: 
“O Yama, how is your duty despicable ? It is proper for 
you to do (this work). Did you not see that that harlot on having 
plunged into the waters of Gautami went to heaven immediately, 
even as the Ganas and Kinkaras were singing songs of her 
praise. 

Oh son, severe penance has been performed by you. It is 
very difficult to do. I do not see its end. Hence go to your city.” 

47-49. On saying these words lord Sun took his bath and 
went to heaven. Yama too had his bath at the confluence and 
went to his city. 

The slayer of the living beings cast off his doubts, O great 
sage. On seeing Yama go, the discus too went away to the place 
where Govinda embellished with the garlands of sylvan flo¬ 
wers, was present. The man who reads this or listens to this 
narrative shall obtain long life. All his adversities shall perish. 



832 


Brahma Purina : Gau tarn i- Mdhdtmya 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 
Aivabhanu Tirtha 


Brahmd said : 

1-3. The two rivers Aruna and Varuna are very auspicious. 
Their confluence with Gaiiga is also very holy, O excellent sage. 

They bestow merit more than the lake Manasa, the holy 
centre Prayaga and the river Mandakini. Listen now to its origin 
which destroys all sins. 

The eldest son of Kasyapa, Aditya, is well known in the 
worlds. He is the eye of the three worlds. He has hot and 
powerful rays. He has seven horses to draw his chariot. He is 
honoured by the people of the world. Usa, the daughter of 
Tvastf, was well known as the most beautiful woman in the 
three worlds. 

4. Unable to endure the severity of the heat of her husband, 
the beautiful woman of good waistline thought, “What should 
be done by me?” 

5. The extremely intelligent Manu and Yama were her 
sons born of Vivas van (Sun). The holy river Yamuna (too was 
her daughter). Listen to that incident which caused surprise. 

6-8. She -created her own shadow strenuously in the form 
of herself. Usa then said to her: 

“Be like me. At my bidding, look after my husband and 
children. Till I come back, be the beloved of my husband. Nei¬ 
ther to my children nor to my husband should you reveal this 
fact”. 

“So be it”, said the shadow. 

U§a went out of her abode. 

9. After saying this she went ahead, desirous of peaceful form. 
After going home U§a mentioned everything to her father. Tvastr 
was surprised. Being fond of his daughter he said to her: 

Tvasfr said : 

10. It is not proper on the part of a married woman to do 
as she pleases. How do your children and husband do? O gentle 
lady, I am afraid I may be considered uncultured. Go back to 
your husband’s abode once again. 



19 . 11-24 


833 


Brahmd said : 

11. Thus urged by her father she said ‘‘No, No” again and 
again. She went to the Northern Kuru country’ for performing 
penance. 

12. There she assumed the form of a mare and performed 
a severe penance. U§a steadily meditated upon her husband 
who was too fierce to be looked at. 

13. In the meantime, O dear one, the shadow Chaya who 
had assumed the form of Usa, cohabited with her husband. 
Children were born to her. 

14-17. (The sons were) Manu Savarni and Sani. Vi$ji, 
a wicked daughter, was also born. Chaya behaved differently 
to her own children and the children of U§a. Yama therefore be¬ 
came angry. Yama the lord of southern quarter kicked his step, 
mother Chaya who was behaving differently. In her excitement 
due to the wickedness of her step-son Chaya cursed Yama, son 
of the Sun god. 

“O sinner, may your foot become putrefied at my bidding.” 
With his foot putrefied he went to his father crying. He informed 
Savitr of the entire episode. 

Tama said : 

18-21. O excellent Deva, she is not my mother because I 
have been cursed by her thus. A (true) mother never gets angry 
even if children act against her wish. I might have uttered 
something due to my stupidity. I might have done something 
mischievous. If she had been my mother she would not have 
become angry. Hence she is not my mother. 

Mother is so called because everything child does, whether 
good or bad, becomes measured in her. O dear father, she stares 
at me everyday as though she would burn me. She speaks to me 
with words as ferocious as black fire. She is not my mother. 

Brahma said : 

22-24. On hearing this from his son Sun began to think 
(and understood). “This is Chaya and not U$a. Desirous of 
quietening me she is engaged in penance. The daughter of 
Tva§tr win the northern Kuru in the form of a mare.” 

On coming to know that she was there Lord Sun went thither 



834 Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mdhatmya 

where his wife was staying. He himself assumed the form of a 
horse. 

25-28. On seeing her in the form of a mare, the sun in the 
form of a horse rushed at her. On seeing the horse excited by 
passion and on hearing the sound, Usa the chaste lady hurriedly 
fled to the South. She had been meditating on her husband. 
She was afraid of being attacked by the horse. She did not know 
who it was. When the husband approached her she fled to the 
South in great hurry. “Who will be my saviour now, the sages 
or the Devas?” She thought herself. The sun in the form of a horse 
pursued his beloved who was running fast. Wherever Usa went 
the sun also went there. 

29-31. If anyone comes under the influence of Cupid, what 
wicked thing does he not do? Facing the southern direction they 
crossed Bhagirathi, Narmada and other rivers, parks, forests 
. and Vindhya mountain. Distressed with fear, the daughter of 
Tvastf went to GautamI because she had heard that in Janas- 
thana there were sages who could protect her. After entering 
GautamI, the mare went to the hermitage of sages. 

32. The horse too came there. It was the Sun in that form. 
People who were staying in Janasthana stopped that horse. 
Lord Sun, the husband of Usa, then cursed them in anger. 

The Sun said : 

33-36. Since you stopped me you will become banyan trees. 
Brahma said : 

By their eye of knowledge the sages saw that he was the 
husband of Usa. Thereupon they eulogized the lord of Devas 
in great delight. 

Even as he was being eulogized by the sages the Sun approa¬ 
ched the mare sexually. The face of the horse came into contact 
with the face of the mare. After realising that it was her husband, 
the daughter of Tvastr shed the semen from her month. From 
• their semen the Asvins were born in the river Ganga. 

37-40. The following persons came there, viz. groups of 
Devas, Siddhas, sages, rivers, cows, medicinal herbs, groups of 
luminaries, holy chariot of the seven-horsed lord (i.e. Sun), 
Aruna the charioteer of the Sun, Yama, Manu, Varuna, Sani 
son of the Sun god, the holy river Yamuna, Tapi, MahanadI 



19 . 41 — 20.1 


835 


and father-in-law of the Sun (i.e. Tva§tj*). O sages, out of won¬ 
der, the rivers had assumed their respective forms. They came 
there to see this wonderful event. On realising his purpose Sun 
spoke to his father-in-law. 

The Sun said : 

41. O Tvasty, mount me on to the lathe and chisel off my 
splendorous parts for pleasing Usa who has performed excellent 

penance. O Prajapati, you cut off mv parts until she finds herself 
pleased. 

Brahmd said : 

42. After saying ‘‘So be it”, Tvastr began to cut off the 
splendorous parts of the Sun in the presence of Somanatha. 
They know it as Prabhasa. 

43-47. The place where Usa in the form of a mare came 
into contact with her husband, the place where Asvins were 
born, is called A^vatirtha. 

It is also called Bhanutlrtha where there is the hermitage with 
five banyan trees. Tapi and Yamuna came there to see their 
father (i.e. the Sun). The confluence of the rivers Aruna and 
Varuna with the Ganga is splendid. 

There are nine times three thousand (i.e. 27000) holy cen¬ 
tres of Devas there severally pertaining to Devas who had come 
to that holy centre. Ail these holy centres are good. Ablution 
performed and charitable gifts distributed there bestow great 
and everlasting merit. 

O Narada, by remembring, reading and listening to this, 
man becomes rid of all sins. He becomes virtuous and happy. 


CHAPTER TWENTY 
Garu$a Tirtha 


Brahmd said : 

1. The holy centre named Garutfa destroys all obstacles. 
I shall recount its power, O Narada, listen to it attentively. 



836 Brahma Purdna: Gautami-M&hdtmya 

2. There was an extremely powerful son of Se§a named 
Maninaga. Afraid of Garuda he propitiated Sankara with 
devotion. 

3. Then the lord Mahesvara, Paramegthin became pleased. 
He said to the great Naga, “O Naga, choose a boon’*. 

4. The Naga said, “O lord, grant me the boon of freedom 
from Garuda”. 

“So be it”, said Sambhu to him, “You shall have freedom 
from the fear of Garuda”. 

5. The Naga who was not afraid of Garuda, the younger 
brother of Aruna, went out to the place near the milk ocean 
where Vi§nu was taking rest. 

6. The Naga wandered here and there over the place which 
was pleasingly chill. He went to the place which was occupied 
by Garuda. 

7. On seeing the Naga moving about fearlessly Garuda 
seized him and took him off into his own abode. 

8. By means of nooses, Garuda bound the mighty Naga. 
In the meantime, Nandin said to l£a, the lord of the universe: 

NandikeSvara said: 

9. Certainly the Naga has been either swallowed or im¬ 
prisoned by Garuda, O lord of Devas. Hence he does not come. 
The naga may not come out alive. 

Brahmd said: 

10-13. On hearing the words of Nandin and understanding 
the situation himself Siva said: 

Siva said : 

The Naga has been bound and imprisoned in the abode of 
Garuda. Go quickly and tell the lord of worlds, Vi§nu. At my 
instance, you, yourself, bring the Naga bound by Garuda, son 
of Kasyapa. 

On hearing the words of lord Siva Nandin went and intimated 
to the lord of Sri, the ultimate resort of the world, Vi§nu, (the 
details). 

Pleased in his mind Narayana spoke to Garuda: 

Vipiu said : 

14. O son of Vinata(Garuda), give Nandin the Naga at 
my instance. 



20*15-28 


837 


Vainateya the bird understood it but said “No”. In the 
presence of Nandin, Garutfa spoke to Visnu in anger: 

Garu$a said : 

15-19. Other masters give their servants whatever is most 
pleasing to them but you do not do so. Instead you want to take 
away what has been acquired by me. 

See, the three-eyed lord wishes to release the Naga through 
Nandin. But you wish to give Nandin the Naga captured by me. 

I bear you always along the path. Hence something should 
be given to me by you always. It is not proper for you to say 
“Give” in regard to the Naga acquired by me. 

This cannot be the practice of good masters who wish to 
maintain good service. Good men give unto the servants. But 
you are one who takes away what has been brought by me. 

O Kesava, it is through my power that you conquer the 
asuras in battles. In vain do you boast, I am extremely power¬ 
ful. 

Brahmd said : 

20-24. On hearing these words of Garu<ja Visnu the bearer 
of discus and club laughed in the presence of Nandin even as 
the guardians of the worlds were watching. 

The extremely intelligent lord said this: “You have become 
lean by bearing me (regularly). It is due to your power that I 
conquer Asuras, O excellent bird.” 

After saying this, O brahmin, the lord of Sri spoke this, with 
his anger calmed down: “Be quick. Bear the small finger of 
my hand, in the presence of Nandin.” 

Placing the small finger of his hand over the head of Garutfa 
Visnu said again: 

“It is true that you carry me always. See to your duty, O 
bird.” 

When the finger was placed over his head the head pene¬ 
trated into his belly and the belly went inside the foot ahd became 
smashed. Then, the distressed Garutfa said piteously out of 
shame, with palms joined in reverence: 

Garuda said: 

25-28.*" Save me, save me, O lord of the universe, your 



838 


Brahma Purina: Gautami- Mdhatmy a 


servant. You are the lord of all gentle and submissive worlds. 
You are the supporter and the supported also. Those who are 
powerful, forgive thousands of offences. All the sages call you 
merciful since you have great sympathy even for those who have 
committed offences. 

O mother, residing in the lotus, O mother of the Universe, 
save me who am distressed. O Kamala, fond of your son, save 
me who am miserable and wretched. 

Brahmd said : 

Then the merciful goddess Sri spoke to Janardana: 

Kamala said : 

29. O lord, save your own servant Garu^a who has been 
involved in adversity”. 

Thereupon Janardana spoke to Nandin the attendant of Siva: 
Visnu said : 

30-31. Take the Naga to Siva along with Garu^a. On being 
glanced at by Mahesvara and favoured by liim Gambia will 
regain his own form. 

Brahma said : 

After saying “So be it” Nandin went to Siva along with the 
Naga and Gambia and intimated everything to him. Siva, who 
has the crescent moon on his forehead spoke to Garutfa: 

£iva said : 

32-33. O hero of long arms, go to Ganga, Gautami the 
sanctifier of worlds. She is calm and bestower of all cherished 
desires. After plunging into it you will regain your body and all 
cherished desires. 

O bird, Gautami, the bestower of all desired things, is the 
refuge for all living beings whose enterprises are ruined by ad¬ 
verse fate and who are tormented by all sins in hundreds and 
thousands of ways. 

Brahmd said : 

34-36. Garuqla listened to his words with humility. He 
went to Gaiiga. After plunging into it he bowed down to Siva 
and Vi§nu. Then the bird of golden complexion regained his 



21.MO 839 

adamantine body and great strength. Hurrying up, O excellent 
sage, the intelligent one went again to Vi§nu. 

Thenceforward that holy centre of Garuda became the 
bestower of all desires. 

If a man of purity in mind and body performs the holy ablu¬ 
tion, O dear one, everything becomes everlasting in its benefit. 
The centre is pleasing to Siva and Visnu. 


CHAPTER TWENTYONE 
Govardhana Tirtha 

Brahma said : 

1. Then there is the Govardhana Tirtha which destroys 
all sins. It generates merits unto all ancestors. Even on being 
remembered it dispels sins. 

2. Its power has been tested by me, O Narada. 

There was a certain brahmin farmer known as Jabali. 

3. Even at midday he never rested his bullocks. He hit 
them with his whip on their backs and sides. 

4. On seeing those bullocks full of tears in their eyes, the 
cow Kamadhenu, the mother of the worlds, said to Nandin. 

5. Nandin too was distressed and intimated everything to 
Siva. Siva said to the Bull, “May whatever you say be fulfilled.” 

6-7. Backed by Siva’s permission Nandin withdrew all the 
bovine species. When all cattle had vanished in heaven and in 
the mortal world, Devas came to me in hurry and said: 
“It is impossible to live without cows”. I then told them, “Go 
to lord Siva and request him”. 

8. In the same manner they eulogized Siva and intimated 
to him the matter under reference, Siva said to Devas, “My 
Bull knows everything”. 

9-10. Those Devas spoke to the Bull, “Give us the cows 
and bullocks that are helpful to us”. 

The Bull said to Devas, “Let the sacrifice Gosava be per¬ 
formed. Thereby you will obtain all cows both divine and 
human.” 



840 


Brahma Buraia : Gautami-Mahatmya 


Then the sacrifice Gosava was performed by Devas. 

11-13. The sacrifice was performed on the auspicious banks 
of Gautami. Then the cattle flourished. That holy centre was 
named Govardhana and it increased the pleasure of Devas. The 
holy ablution performed there, O excellent sage, yields the bene¬ 
fit of gifts of thousands of cows. We do not know what the bene¬ 
fit will be if any charitable gift is made. 

By seeing Siva, the lord of Devas, the presiding deity Gau- 
tamesvara, one attains heavenly world as long as the mountain 
Meru lasts on Earth. 


CHAPTER TWENTYTWO 
Papapranaiana Tirtha 

Brahma said : 

1. There is the holy centre named Papapranaiana (Des¬ 
troyer of sins). It dispels the fear of sins. I shall recount it, O 
Narada. Listen to it attentively. 

2. There was a brahmin known as Dhjtavrata. His wife was 
a young woman named Mahi. She was the most beautiful woman 
in the world. 

3. Their son was named Sanajjata. He resembled the sun 
in splendour. Death urged by Kala, O sage, took away Dhjrta- 
vrata. 

4. Unable to see anyone to protect her, that beautiful widow 
with a young son went to the hermitage of Galava. 

5. After entrusting her son to him that woman deluded by 
sin wandered here and there over many countries leading a lec¬ 
herous life. 

6-10. Her son became the master of Vedas and Vedangas 
in the hermitage of Galava. Still, due to the faults of his mother 
he too became sexy and passionate. 

There is a place known as Janasthana. People of different 
castes stayed there. The lady Main resided there adopting the 
profession of a prostitute. 



22.11-23 


841 


Her son too wandered over many countries as a lecherous 
debauchee. As time passed he too came to Janasthana and lived 
there. 

The son of Dhrtavrata, the brahmin (Sanajjata) was desirous 
of a harlot. The lady Mahi too wanted men who would lavishly 
spend money on her. 

Due to the curious turn of fate the mother and the son had 
sexual union. She did not recognise her son nor did he recognize 
his mother. 

11. Although their union lasted for a long time, the mother 
and the son did not know the real facts about each other. 

12. Although the brahmin’s actions were bad, he possessed 
a good mind due to the virtue of his father. Listen to this wonder¬ 
ful account, O Narada. 

13. Living a carefree life he did not abandon prayers per¬ 
taining to Brahman. After performing the morning prayers 
he worked for earning wealth. 

14-15. With the power of his learning he earned a lot and 
gave everything to that harlot. He used to get up early in the 
morning and go to Ganga. He performed all acts of cleanliness, 
ablutions, prayers, etc. After performing all those he used to bow 
down to brahmins and return home. 

16-17. When he went to GautamI in the morning he was 
invariably ugly. His limbs were all afflicted by leprosy. Impure 
fedd blood oozed out of his body. 

When he returned after bath in Gautami Ganga, he used to 
have handsome features. He was calm. He resembled the fire 
god and the sun. He appeared like the sun in human form. 

18-23. That brahmin himself was not aware of the two 
different appearances. The holy sage Galava, devoutly attached 
to penance and pursuit of knowledge, had his hermitage on the 
banks of Gautami and lived there in the company of other sages. 
The brahmin Sanajjata took bath everyday in the holy river and 
bowed to Galava at the very same place. After bowing to Galava 
he used to go to his own place. 

Galava observed the physical features of Sanajjata both 
before and after his bath and prayers. On seeing this Galava 
was surprised and he thought there must be some reason behind 
this. 



842 


Brahma Purina : Gautami-Mahatmya 


Once when this brahmin was about to leave after bowing to 
Galava, the sage called him out of wonder and spoke to him. 

Gdlava said : 

24. Who are you? Where will you go? What do you do? 
Where do you eat? What is your name? Where do you sleep? 
Who is your wife? Tell me. 

Brahma said: 

25-29. On hearing the words of Galava, the brahmin said 
to the sage: 

The Brahmin said : 

I shall tell you tomorrow decisively everything connected 
with the matter. 

Brahma said: 

Saying this to Galava, Sanajjata went home. Taking food at 
night he went to bed with the harlot. Sanajjata was taken by 
surprise on remembering the words of Galava. He said to her: 

The Brahmin said : 

You are endowed with all good qualities. Though you had 
been a harlot yet you are a chaste lady (now). Our mutual love is 
quite befitting. Let it continue as long as we live. 

Still I wish to ask you something. What is your name? 
Where is your family? What is your native place? Where are your 
relatives? Let everything be mentioned to me. 

The Harlot said : 

30-31. There was a pure initiated brahmin Dhj-tavrata by 
name. I am Mahi, his wife. My son had been left in the her¬ 
mitage of Galava. He was an intelligent boy known as Sanaj-. 
jata. Due to my previous defects I abandoned my family tradition. 
I am staying here as a carefree harlot, but, O brahmin, know 
me to be a brahmin lady. 

Brahm& said: 

32. On hearing her words he was hit in a vulnerable spot. 
He fell suddenly on the ground. Seeing him in this condition 
the harlot spoke to him. 



22.33-43 


843 


The Harlot said : 

33-36. What has happened, O excellent brahmin? Where 
has your love gone? What is that word uttered by me which has 
afflicted your mind so much? 

Consoling himself by means of his own effort the brahmin 
spoke these words. 

The Brahmin said : 

My father was the brahmin Dhjtavrata. I am his son Sanaj- 
jata. This lady, my mother Mahi has come here by chance. 

Brahma said : 

On hearing his words she too became excessively distressed. 
For the whole of that night both of them lamented. 

Afterwards when the day dawned with the bright sun, the 
brahmin went to Galava, the greatest among the sages, and 
intimated to him. 

The Brahmin said : 

37-39. O brahmin, I am the son of Dhjrtavrata. I have 
been nurtured by you and my sacred thread has been tied by 
you. O holy lord, this is Mahl my mother. 

What shall I do. How can I expiate? 

Brahma said : 

On hearing the words of the brahmin, Galava spoke words of 
sympathy to the Brahmin: 

“I am seeing everyday this uncommon feature of having two 
forms in you. 

40. It was then that you have been asked about the news. 
Everything has been heard and understood by me. The evil 
action which you have committed has entirely perished in Ganga. 

41. By virtue of the sanctity of this Tirtha, due to the grace 
of this goddess, you have been purified, O dear one, everyday. 
In this matter you need not worry at all. 

42-43. Everyday in the morning your features appear sin¬ 
ful. Again I used to see your excellent form. When you come 



844 


Brahma Purdna : Gail torn i-Mdhd tmya 


you are sinful. When you go you are sinless. I see this everyday. 
You have been made pure by the goddess now. 

44-46. Now nothing remains for you to do. This mother 
of yours, O brahmin, who is known as a harlot, has repented 
much. She has refrained from committing sins. In regard to all 
living beings, love is natural. But due to the great merit result¬ 
ing from association with good people, the turning away can be 
effected by the grace of fate. Due to the merit acquired by pre¬ 
vious actions she has sufficiently repented. 

47-49. By taking her holy bath in this Tirtha she will become 
purified’*. 

Accordingly both of them, the mother and the son did so, 
O Narada. Due to the holy dip both of them were undoubtedly 
rid of their sins. Thenceforward they call that Tirtha Dhau- 
tapapa. It is known as Papapranasana and Galava. Whether it 
is a “Great sin” or a minor one, whether it is little or big- 
this holy centre Dhautapapa shall destroy everything. It yields 
good merit. 


CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE 
ViSvdmitra Tirtha 

Brahmd said : 

1. To the south of it, O brahmin, is the very rare Tirtha 
known as Pitftlrtha. It is pure. It dispels all sins. 

2. They know this as Pitjtlrtha, O brahmin, because it was 
the place where Rama, the son of DaSaratha, propitiated his 
ancestors, in the company ofSita. 

3. If holy bath, charitable gift and water libation unto the 
ancestors were performed there everything attains an everlasting 
status. No worry need be felt in this respect. 

4-5. The place where the great king Rama, the son of 
Dasaratha, honoured the great sage ViSvamitra along with the 
sages, the seers of reality, is the holy centre ViSvamitra. It yields 
great merit. It is frequented by ages. I shall recount its features 
as cited by the expounders of the Vedas. 



23 . 6-17 


845 


6-7. Formerly, there was a great drought, extremely terri¬ 
ble unto the subjects. The extremely intelligent Visvamitra 
went to the GautamI, accompanied by his disciples. 

On seeing his disciples, sons and wife very lean and afflicted 
by hunger the glorious sage became distressed and spoke thus to 
his disciples. 

Visvamitra said : 

8. Let something to eat, something to munch and crunch be 
brought, no matter what the quantity be, in whatever manner 
possible, from wherever it is available. Let it be brought as it is. 
Do not delay. You must go now itself. It must be brought in a 
trice. 

Brahma said : 

9-12. At this bidding of the sage the hungry disciples set out 
in a hurry. Wandering here and there they saw a dead dog. 
Taking it they rushed back and offered the same to their precep¬ 
tor. Saying “Good ! well done !” he grasped it with his hand. 

“Cut the flesh of the dog. Wash it with water. Cook it duly 
after repeating the Mantras and perform Homa into the fire in 
accordance with the injunctions. 

After propitiating Devas, sages, Pitrs, guests, preceptors 
and others, all of us shall partake of the remainder”, said the 
sage thus. 

13-17. On hearing the words of Visvamitra, the disciples 
did exactly so. When the dog’s flesh was being cooked, Agni 
the messenger of Devas went to the abode of Devas and intimated 
everything to them. 

Agni said : 

Dog’s flesh has to be taken by Devas as it has been offered by 
the sage and it has occurred so. 

Brahmd said : 

At these words of Agni, Indra assumed the form of a vulture 
and flying through the sky took away the closed pot that was 
filled with the flesh. 

On seeing that the disciples informed the sage about the 
vulture. “O excellent sage, the pot has been taken away by the 
senseless vulture”. 



846 


Brahma Puraria: Gautami-M&hatmya 


Thereafter, the holy sage became furious. He was ready to 
curse Indra. On coming to know of this, Indra filled the pot 
with honey. 

18. Indra in the form of a bird, thereupon, placed the pot 
filled with honey among the comets. ViSvamitra became angry. 
On seeing the pot, the sage said thus furiously. 

Visvamitra said : 

19. “Give us the dog’s flesh alone. You can take away the 
excellent nectar. If not, I shall reduce you to ashes.” 

Becoming frightened Indra spoke then. 

Indra said : 

20. “Perform the Homa of honey duly and drink it along 
with your sons. Of what avail is this unholy filthy flesh of a dog, 
O great sage?” 

Visvamitra said : 

21-25. No. If a single person, that is, I alone take it in, 
what is the benefit? The subjects are exhausted and distressed, 
O Indra. Of what avail is that honey (wine)? If the people get 
nectar I shall also consume the same. Or after the divine Pitrs 
have consumed flesh, I shall partake of that. I do not speak 
untruth. Believe me. 

Thereafter the frightened lord of thousand eyes called the 
clouds quickly and showered nectar. The brahmin Visvamitra 
propitiated Devas at first and the three worlds thereafter by 
means of holy nectar offered by Indra. He then partook of it 
along with his disciples and his wife. 

26-28. Thenceforth that holy centre is mentioned as the 
bestower of great merit. It is the place where Indra came and 
where the nectar was offered without meat. It is a holy centre 
that bestows merit on men. The holy bath taken there and the 
charitable gifts offered yield the benefit of all sacrifices. Thence¬ 
forth that holy centre is remembered as Vis'vamitra, Madhutir- 
tha, Aindra, Syena and Parjanya. 



24 . 1-11 


CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR 
Sveta and other Tirthas 


847 


Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre known as Sveta Tirtha in the three 
worlds is very auspicious. On being simply remembered it rids 
people of all sins. 

2. Formerly, there was a brahmin Sveta who was the dearest 
friend of Gautama. He stayed on the bank of GautamI river 
and was engaged in the worship of guests. 

3-5. He was devoutly attached to Siva in thought, words 
and deeds. That excellent brahmin continued to meditate 
on and worship Siva till the last days of his life. When his days 
were over, the messengers of lord Yama came there to take away 
that excellent brahmin devoted to Siva, but, O Narada, they 
were not able even to enter his abode. When the time passed 
away Citraka spoke to (the god of) Death. 

Citraka said : 

6. O Mrtyu, why does not Sveta come yet? His span of 
life has come to an end. Nor have the messengers of Mrtyu too 
come yet. Why ? This pazzles me. 

Brahma said : 

7. The infuriated Mrtyu thereupon went himself to the 
abode of Sveta. Seeing his messengers highly frightened and 
standing mum, Mrtyu said, “What is the matter, O messengers?” 

The messengers then said to Mrtyu. 

The Messengers said : 

8. We are not able even to look at Sveta who is protected 
by Siva. What terror can there be to those with whom Siva is 
pleased ! 

Brahmd said : 

9-11. Then Mrtyu with the noose in his hand entered the 
place where that brahmin was worshipping Siva. The brahmin 
was not at all aware of either Yama’s servants or Mrtyu himself. 
On seeing Mrtyu holding the noose and standing near 



848 Brahma Purdna: Gautami-M&hatmya 

Sveta who was worshipping Siva with devotion the surprised 
Nandin said : 

Nandin said : 

O Mftyu, what do you see here? 

Mj-tyu spoke to Nandin. 

Mjtyu said : 

12-15. I came here to take away Sveta. Hence I am looking 
for the excellent brahmin. 

Nandin said : 

Go out, go out. 

Brakmd said : 

Then Mjtyu threw up the noose against Sveta. O great sages, 
Nandin then became angry. Nandin hit Mjtyu with the baton 
given by Siva. Mjtyu fell on the ground. Then the messengers 
saw that Mjtyu was struck down. They intimated the incident 
to Yama. 

16-20. Then Dharma whose vehicle is buffalo and who 
controls all addressed his attendants and associates, viz. Citra- 
gupta, Kala, Yamadanda, buffalo, ghosts and vampires, Adhis, 
Vyadhis, ailments of eyes, belly and ears, the three types of fever, 
sins, and hells severally. “Hurry up, hurry up”, said Yama to 
them and himself proceeded ahead, surrounded by these and 
others, to the place where Sveta the excellent brahmin was wor¬ 
shipping Siva. On seeing Yama approaching, Nandin who was 
wielding his weapons said to Vinayaka, Skanda and Bhutanatha 
(Chief of Ghosts) who was whirling a baton (to be ready). 
Then a fight ensued which terrified the worlds. 

21. Karttikeya pierced the servants of Yama by means of 
his javelin. He killed Yama, the powerful ruler of the southern 
quarter. 

22-24. The followers of Yama who survived intimated this 
to Aditya. On hearing about that extremely wonderful event 
Aditya approached me accompanied by Devas and followed 
by the guardians of quarters. 

Lord Vi§nu, Indra, Agni, Varuna, moon, sun, Asvins, Maruts 
and I—all of us went to Yama. 

25-26. The powerful lord of the southern quarter was 



24.27-34 


849 


lying dade on the bank of Gahga. Seas, serpents, rivers and living 
beings came there in order to see Yama the lord of Devas and son 
of the god Sun. On seeing Yama with all his armies killed Devas 
became frightened. With palms joined in reverence they said 
to Sambhu. 

Devas said: 

27-30. You always possess the quality of being fond of your 
devotees and that of slaying the wicked. O primordial Maker, 
obeisance to you. O blue-throated lord, obeisance to you. O lord, 
fond of Brahma, obeisance to you. O lord, fond of Devas, obei¬ 
sance to you. 

Yama and his attendants were unable to take away the 
brahmin Sveta whose span of life has come to an end, (because) 
he is your devotee. On seeing the great lord they remain conten¬ 
ted. O lord, truly you possess the quality of being fond of your 
devotees. 

Even Yama, the annihilator is not able to look at those per¬ 
sons who have sought refuge in you, the merciful lord. After 
realising this, O lord, they worship you with devotion. 

You alone are the lord of worlds; you alone are the leader 
of worlds; without you none is competent? Excepting you who 
will be competent to make this arrangement? 

Brahmd said : 

31. Even as they were eulogizing him lord Siva appeared in 
front of them. He asked them pleasantly: “What shall I give you?” 

Devas said : 

32-34. This is Dharma, the son of Vivasvat and the Controller 
of all embodied beings. He has been established in the arrange¬ 
ment of Dharma and Adharma. He is the guardian of southern 
quarter. 

He does not deserve death. He is not an offender. He is not 
a sinner. Without him no work of the creator of Universe can 
take place. 

Hence, O Lord of Devas, revive Yama along with his army 
and vehicles. O lord, a request can never be fruitless in regard 
to great men. It is certainly fruitful. 



850 


Brahma Pur&na: Gautami-M&hatmya 


Brahmd said: 

35. Then the lord said, “Certainly I shall revive him; 
undoubtedly I shall make Yama come back to life, if Devas 
agree to my suggestion now.” 

36. Then Devas said: “We shall do as you bid—you in 
whose control the entire Universe along with Hari, Brahma 
and others function.” 

37-38. Then the lord said to Devas who gathered there: 
“Let not my devotee undergo death.” 

“No”, said Devas, “In that case, O lord, the people inclu¬ 
ding the mobile and immobile will become immortal. O 
lord, idential with the universe, then there will not be any 
difference between mortals and immortals.” 

39-42. Siva said to them again: “You listen to my speech. 
We are the perpetual masters of our .devotees, and the devotees 
of Vi$nu who resort to Gautaml. Mjrtyu does not deserve that 
lordship and mastery. Yama should never discuss them nor 
talk to them. They should never be attacked by worries and 
physical ailments, etc. Those who seek refuge in Siva are 
liberated at the very moment. They are worthy of being bowed 
to by Yama along with his followers.” Then Devas said to 
lord Siva, “Let it be so”. 

43-46. Then the holy lord spoke to Nandin, his vehicle. 
Siva said: 

Sprinkle the dead Yama with the waters of Gautami. 
Brahmd said: 

Then Yama and his attendants were sprinkled by Nandin. 
They woke up alive and went to their abode. 

Visnu and Devas stayed on the northern bank of Gautaml 
worshipping Mahesvara, lord of Devas. 

47-50. On the northern bank the following numbers of holy cen¬ 
tres were established: (a) eighty thousandth) fourteen thousand, 
(c) six thousand and (d) six thousand. Thus there were one 
hundred and six thousand holy centres on the northern bank. 
On the southern bank there came to be (a) six thousand, (b) 
thirty thousand holy centres. Thus there are thirty six thousand 
holy centres on the southern bank. O Narada, the recounting 



25.1-8 


851 


of Svetatirtha is meritorious. The place where Mj-tyu fell down 
is called Mftyu Tlrtha. By merely remembering it one lives 
upto a thousand years. The holy dip and the offering of charit¬ 
able gifts there destroys sins. If it is listened to, read or remem¬ 
bered it removes impurities. It yields worldly pleasures and 
salvation to the people. 


CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE 
&ukratirtha and Mrtasanjivanl Tirtha 

Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre known as Sukratirtha is conducive to 
the achievement of all Siddhis. It subdues sins and destroys 
ailments. 

2-4. There were two great sages of excellent virtue, namely 
Angiras and Bhrgu. Their sons known as Jiva (Jupiter) and 
Kavi (Venus) were very intelligent and handsome. The sons 
were obedient to their parents. On seeing that their sons had 
had their initiation ceremony the fathers spoke to each other. 

The sages said : 

Only one of us need be the preceptor for our sons, main¬ 
taining discipline. Let one be the preceptor and let the other 
one remain carefree and happy. 

Brahma said : 

5. On hearing this Angiras said to Bhargava quickly, “I 
shall teach them equally. Let Bhargava remain carefree and 
happy.” 

6. On hearing these words of Angiras the scion of the family 
of Bhpgu said “So be it” and entrusted his son Sukra to Angiras. 

7. He taught both the boys separately on account of his 
unequal feeling towards them. After a long time Sukra spoke 
to Bfhaspati. 

Sukra said : 

8. O preceptor, everyday you teach me with discrimination. 



852 Brahma Purdna: Gautami-Mahdtmya 

This discrimination between son and disciple is not proper 
on the part of a preceptor. 

9. Only teachers of deluded thinking practise discrimina¬ 
tion. There is no limit to the sins incurred by the persons of 
discriminatory feelings. 

10. O preceptor, you have been well-understood. I shall 
bow down to you again and again. I shall go to another pre¬ 
ceptor. It behoves you to permit me. 

11. O brahmin, I shall go to my father. If he too were to 
have this discrimination, I shall go elsewhere. O lord, I take 
leave of you. Bid me depart. 

Brahmd said : 

12. After taking leave of his preceptor Brhaspati and on 
being permitted by him Sukra went from there thinking, “I shall 
go to my father only after I have acquired learning.’* 

13. So “Whom shall I approach? Which preceptor will 
be excellent?” thinking thus he asked Vfddhagautama of great 
intellect. 

Sukra said : 

14. Who can be my preceptor, O excellent sage? Tell 
me. I shall go to that person who is competent to be the pre¬ 
ceptor of all the three worlds. 

Brahma said : 

15. Old Gautama told him to approach Lord Siva, the 
preceptor of the Universe, lord of the worlds. 

Sukra said : 

How can I see that lord of Devas ? Where can I propitiate 
him? 

On being addressed thus, Gautama said. 

Gautama said : 

16. Remaining pure in mind and body on the Gautami 
Tirtha propitiate Siva by means of hymns. Being pleased there¬ 
by the lord of three worlds will impart learning to you. 

Brahmd said : 

17. At those words of Gautama, the scion of the family of 



25 . 18-28 


853 


Bhrgu went to Ganga. After taking a holy dip and becoming 
pure the boy began eulogizing Siva. 

18-21. “O Sambhu, I am seeking refuge in you, the sole 
refuge for the poor and the helpless. O lord with the crescent 
moon, I am a boy of puerile intellect. I do not know how to 
eulogize you. Obeisance be to you. I have been abandoned 
by my preceptor. I have neither friends nor comrades. In 
every respect you are the lord. O lord of the worlds, obeisance 
be to you. You are weightier than the weightiest and greater 
than the greatest. I am only a small boy. O lord identical with 
the universe, obeisance be to you. It is for the sake of learning 
that I have come to you. O lord of Devas, I do not know your 
way. Look at me with kindness. Obeisance be to you, O lord, 
witness unto the worlds.” 

Brahmd said : 

22-23. Even as he was eulogizing thus the lord of Devas 
became pleased with him. 

Siva said: 

Welfare unto you. Choose what you wish even if it were 
to be difficult of access unto Devas. 

Brahmd said : 

24-27. Sukra said to the lord of Devas, with palms joined 
in reverence and the mind greatly pleased. 

Sukra said : 

O lord, I beg of you that learning which is not accessible 
to the sages as well as Brahma and others. You are my pre¬ 
ceptor. You are my deity. 

Brahmd said: 

The excellent Deva granted unto suppliant Sukra the Vidya 
called SafijavanI which was unknown even to Devas. 

Other Vidyas are secular. Vedic lore is known to many. 
When Sankara is pleased what is it that remains unachieved. 

28. After acquiring the great learning he went to his father. 
By virtua-of his learning Sukra received honour. He became the 
preceptor of Daityas. 



854 


Brahma PurSna: Gautami-Mahatmya 


29-32. Afterwards Kaca, the son of Bfhaspati acquired 
Vidya from Sukra. The reason thereof was something very 
different. From Kaca, Byhaspati acquired this and from him 
Devas acquired it separately. It was this great Vidya which 
they called Mrtajivanl. 

The place where Sukra acquired that Vidya after worship¬ 
ping Siva on the northern bank of Gautami is called Sukratirtha. 

This Tirtha is conducive to the increase of life and health. 
Holy dip and charitable gifts at that place bestow everlasting 
merit. 


CHAPTER TWENTYSIX 
Seven Thousand Holy Centres 

Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre known as Indra Tirtha destroys the sin 
of brahmin slaughter. Even by being remembered it destroys 
heaps of sins and masses of sufferings. 

2. Formerly, when Vj*tra was slain, O Narada, the sin of 
brahmin slaughter pursued Indra who was frightened by the 
very thought of Brahmin slaughter. 

3. He, the slayer of Vftra, began to run here and there. 
Wherever he went the thought of Brahmin slaughter pursued 
him. 

4-5. He entered a great lake and penetrated a lotus stalk. 
Assuming the form of a fibre Indra took his abode there. The 
slaughter-thought stood watching on the bank of the lake for 
a thousand divine years. During this whole period Devas re¬ 
mained without Indra. 

6-7. Devas had consultations among themselves without excite 
ment: “How can Indra be regained?” After thinking of the 
place of slaughter, I spoke to Devas: “Let Indra be sprinkled 
with the waters of Gautami. After taking a holy dip he will be 
purified in his soul and will become Indra once again.” 



26 . 8-23 


855 


8-9. Accordingly they decided and went to Gautami, 
Devas and sages were desirous of showering the lord after he 
had taken a holy dip. The infuriated Gautama spoke as Indra 
was about to be showered with the holy water. 

Gautama said : 

10. I will reduce to ashes all those persons who will sho¬ 
wer the sinful Indra who had defiled the bed of his preceptor. 
Let Devas go away quickly. 

Brahma said : 

11. On hearing the words of the sage Devas avoided Gau¬ 
tami and hurried to Narmada taking Indra with them. 

12-13. They stood ready for showering Indra on the nor¬ 
thern bank of Narmada. As Indra was about to be showered, 
the.holy sage Mandavya said, “If the showering is performed 
I will reduce you to ashes.” Then Devas worshipped Mandavya 
by hymns and persuaded him by cogent reasons. 

Devas said : 

14. O sage, wherever Indra the thousand-eyed lord is 
about to be showered, a terrible obstacle crops up there. 

15-17. Hence, O sage, the cause of our welfare, perform 
Santi rite for quelling the evil. Be pleased to grant us boons. 
O sage; we shall offer you a place where you shall perform sacri¬ 
fice (‘Removal of dirt’). We shall give to you many other 
excellent things as well. Hence, it behoves you to permit. The 
place where the ablution of Indra is to take place shall be full 
of grains, trees and fruits. It will bestow all cherished things 
on men. There will never be drought or famine in this place. 

Brahmd said : 

18. Then Mandavya, the excellent sage, honoured by the 
world agreed to it. The rites of ablution and purification were 
performed there with all ceremonials. 

19-23. Then that land was called Malava by Devas and 
sages when Indra was showered and purified. They brought 
Gautami Ganga and showered him again for the increase of 
merit. Devas, sages, I, Visnu, Vasistha, Gautama, Agastya, 
Atri, KaSyapa, Yak§as and Nagas and others performed holy 



856 


Brahma Purina : Gautamx-Mahitmya 


ablution by that sacred water. Then I showered Indra with 
the water coming out of Kamandalu. Two rivers Punya and 
Sikta arose therefrom and joined Ganga. 

24-27. Their confluences are well known. They are re¬ 
sorted to by sages. Thenceforth that holy centre is called Punya- 
sangama Tirtha. 

At the confluence of Sikta (with Ganga) the holy centre 
is called Aindra Tirtha. Seven thousand splendid holy centres 
cropped up there. A holy dip and the distribution of charitable 
gifts at the confluence gives everlasting benefit. This must be 
realised. No worry need be felt on this account. He who reads 
this holy narrative or listens to it shall be rid of all sins of 
thought, words and deeds. 


CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN 
Paulastya Tirtha 

Brahmi said : 

1. The holy centre Paulastya Tirtha is mentioned as one 
which fulfils all desires of men. I shall mention its magic power 
that gives lost kingdom back to one. 

2. The eldest son of Visravas who is now the lord of nor¬ 
thern quarter was formerly richly endowed with all types of 
riches and achievements. He was the ruler of Lanka as well. 

3. He had three step-brothers, viz. Ravana, Kumbhakarna 
and Vibhlsana. They were very powerful, endowed with 
unmeasured luster. They were his enemies as well. 

4-5. They too were the sons of Visravas but they were 
Raksasas (because they were born) of a Raksasi (ogress). 
Dhanada (Kubera), seated in the aerial chariot and accom¬ 
panied by his step-brothers used to come to me everyday with 
great devotion and return after a while. 

R&varia’s infuriated mother spoke to her sons. 

j Ravana's mother said : 

6-7. I shall die. I don’t (care to) live, O sons, because of 
this disparity and dissimilarity. 



27 . 8-17 


857 


Devas and Danavas were mutual enemies (though) they 
were brothers (step-brothers). (Step-brothers) wish for each 
other’s slaughter in pursuance of victory and prosperity. Hence, 
you are not at all desirous of victory, nor are you competent. 
You have no manliness. Aimless and useless is the life of that 
fellow who permits an enemy to be prosperous. 

Brahma said : 

8. On hearing those words of their mother, O sage, the 
three brothers went to the forest and performed penance. 

9-10. All these three obtained boons from me. At the 
instigation of their uncle Marlca and their maternal grandfather 
and at the instance of their mother Ravana requested for Lanka. 
Due to their Raksasahood and the defects of their mother, there 
was a great enmity between the brothers. 

11-13. Then a war between brothers ensued like the war 
between Devas and Danavas. In the war Ravana conquered 
his quiet and calm elder brother Dhanada and captured the 
city of Lanka, the (aerial chariot) Puspaka and other things. 
He then proclaimed throughout the three worlds consisting of 
mobile and immobile beings: “He who ofTers refuge to my 
step-brother is liable to be killed by me.” 

Forsaken and ousted by his brother, Dhanada did not re¬ 
ceive any support anywhere. He went to Pulastya his grand¬ 
father and bowed to him. 

Dhanada said : 

14-17. I have been ousted by my wicked brother. Wliat 
shall I do ? Tell me what should be my support and refuge, 
the fate or a holy centre? 

Brahmd said : 

On hearing the words of his grandson Pulastya said: 
Pulastya said : 

Dear child, go to Gautami and eulogize lord Mahesvara. 
There in the middle of Gariga your wicked brother will have 
no access. You will attain prosperous achievement. Do so at 
my bidding. 



858 


Brahma Puraiia : Gautamf-Mdhdtmya 


Brahmd said : 

18-19. Saying “So be it” Dhanada went to GautamI accom¬ 
panied by his wife, parents and the aged Pulastya. The lord of 
wealth took bath in Ganga. Maintaining all holy rites he eulo¬ 
gized Siva, lord of the lord of Devas, the bestower of worldly 
pleasures and liberation. 

Dhanada said : 

20-23. O Sambhu, you alone are the master of this Uni¬ 
verse consisting of mobile and immobile beings. There is no 
one else. If anyone swaggers after slighting you out of delusion, 
he is worthy of being punished. 

You sustain everything by your eight cosmic bodies. Every¬ 
thing exists (and functions) at your bidding. Still, non-scholars 
shall never attain you who are possessed of ancient glory and 
splendid refulgence. 

Something was born out of her dirt and Amba jokingly said: 
“O lord, this is your heroic son.” You glanced at it and it be¬ 
came Vighnaraja. Oh, the (powerful) action of the glance of 
I$a ! 

On seeing Kama and Rati separated in their conjugal enjoy¬ 
ment Girija’s eyes were filled with tears. She spoke to Isa about 
this. As a result of that, the bodiless Kama acquired body and 
Rati acquired the fortune of conjugal bliss from the lord of 
Uma. 1 

Brahmd said : 

24. Even as he was eulogizing thus, the three-eyed lord 
appeared in front of him and asked him to choose a boon as he 
liked. Out of excessive delight he did not utter a word. 

25-27. Dhanada and Pulastya were silent. Lord Siva was 
delighted repeating “O, choose the boon, O, choose the boon.” 
Then an unembodied voice was heard there telling Mahesvara 
thus: “The status of the protector of wealth should be granted to 


1. The reference here is to the episode of the burning of Kama by Siva's 
glance when he was trying to inspire Siva with amorous thought for Parvati 
at the instigation of gods at a time when Siva wa? engaged in deep 
meditation, (vide V&lmiki Ramaya^a, Bala Ka^a, Ch. 23). 



27 . 28 — 28.4 


859 


Dhanada.” It was only after knowing the silent wish of Pulastya 
and the father of Dhanada, that the voice made the splendid 
intention explicit. 

28. The divine voice became auspicious. What should 
take place is like what has already taken place. What is about to 
be given is like what has already been given. What should be 
attained is like what has already been attained. 

29-33. He who had a number of enemies and who ex¬ 
perienced miseries worshipped Somes vara and acquired Linga, 
the lordship of a quarter, the mastery of wealth, vast liberal¬ 
mindedness, wives and sons. 

On hearing that voice Dhanada spoke these words to the 
Trident-bearing lord of Devas: “Let this be so.” 

Saying “May it be so,” the lord of Devas assented to the 
Divine voice. The lord then honoured Pulastya, sage Visravas 
and Dhanapala with holy boons and went away. Thenceforth, 
they know that holy centre as Paulastya Tirtha or Dhanada 
Tirtha or Vaisravasa Tirtha. It is holy and splendid. It fulfils 
all cherished desires. Holy dip etc. in these holy centres bestows 
much merit. 


CHAPTER TWENTYEIGHT 
Agnitirtha 

Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre known as Agnitirtha is the bestower of 
the fruit of all sacrifices. It subdues all obstacles. Listen to the 
benefit of that holy centre. 

2-4. The brother of Agni was well known as Jatavedas. He 
was the bearer of Havya. 1 He was the excellent clever brother 
of the Fire-god, very fond of him. As he was carrying Havya 
to gods and was at the abode of the sages on the banks of Gau- 

1. Any substance, e.g. clarified butter, food etc. to be offered as oblation, 
to gods; opposed to ‘Kavya’ or what is offered to ancestors. 



860 


Brahma Pwr&ria : Gautami-M&hatmya 


taml, Madhu the powerful son of Diti killed him even as the 
chief Sages and Devas were looking on. When Jatavedas died, 
Devas did not get their Havya. 

5 When his dear brother Jatavedas died, Agni was over¬ 
whelmed by anger. He entered the waters of Gahga. 

6 When Agni entered the waters of Ganga, Devas and 
human beings cast away their lives because they are considered 
to be Agnijlvas (having their life in Agni). 

7-8 Devas, sages, and Pitrs went to the place where Agni 
had entered water. Saying “Without fire we will not be alive” 
they began to praise Agni particularly. On realizing that Agni 
had entered the waters the heaven-dwellers spoke pleasing 
words to him. 

Devas said : 

9. O Agni, resuscitate the lives of Devas by means of Havya 
and those of pitrs by means of Kavya. By the cooking of food 
and the splitting of seeds resuscitate all human beings. 

Brahma said : 

10-13. Agni said to Devas: 

“My brother who was very strong has gone. O Devas, while 
your work is being carried out, my fate will be the same as that 
of my brother Jatavedas. Hence I am not enthusiastic enough 
to work for you. Jatavedas who always performed his duty, 
working for you, has met this fate. I do not know what mine 
will be. Moreover, I may not have the ability to move about 
from world to world. Even granting that I may have the ability 
for it, if your work is not regularly performed by me my fate 
might be the same.” 

Then, Devas and' sages spoke with emotion. 

14-15. “Longevity, love for work and ability to move about 
will be given to you. O carrier of oblations, we shall give you 
the Prayajas and Anuyajas (i.e. the benefits of these holy rites). 

You are the excellent mouth of Devas. All Ahutis are first 
given to you. O excellent Deva, we shall partake of what is 
given by you.” 



28 . 16 — 29.4 


861 


Brahma said : 

16-19. Thereupon the Fire-god was pleased at the words of 
Devas. He attained the power to move about here and there. 
He was capable of carrying Havya to Devas and Kavya to 
Pitrs. At the instance of Devas, Agni became powerful and 
fearless everywhere. He is called by the names Jatavedas, Bi-had- 
bhanu, Saptarci (seven-rayed), Nilalohita (Blue-red), Jalagar- 
bha (one who hid under water), Sainigarbha (one who lies 
latent in Sami tree), Yajnagarbha (one who lies concealed 
in Yajfta), 

Devas dragged Agni from under the water and performed 
Abhiseka. Thereafter Agni became Sarvaga (moving about 
everywhere). He got two abodes: one on this Earth and another 
in heaven. Then Devas went away to their abodes in the manner 
they had come. 

This holy centre is called Vahnitlrtha. 

20-22. There have cropped up some seven hundred Tirthas 
of great merit. If a man who has controlled himself performs 
the rites of holy dip or distribution of charitable gifts in this 
Tirtha, he attains the benefit of a horse sacrifice and even more. 
That will be splendid and without deficiency. Devatirtha, 
Agneyatlrtha and Jatavedasa are all there. There is a multi¬ 
coloured Linga established by Agni. By visiting that lord one 
shall obtain the benefit of all sacrifices. 


CHAPTER TWENTYNINE 
Rnamocana Tirtha 

Brahma said : 

1. Those conversant with the Vedas know the holy centre 
Rnapramocana. I shall mention its features, O [Narada. Listen 
to it attentively. 

2-4. There was a favourite son of Kakslvan named Pj-thu- 



862 


Brahma Purina : Gautaml-Mahitmya 


£ravas. Due to his detachment he did not marry. Nor did he 
worship fire. 

His younger brother was competent, but, O sage, due to his 
fear of incurring sin he did not marry before his elder brother. 

Then the manes spoke separately to the elder and the younger 
sons of Kak§ivan. 

Pitrs said : 

5-7. Let the marriage be performed for removing the three¬ 
fold debts. 

Brahmd said : 

Thereupon the elder one said: “No, what is the debt? By 
whom is it incurred?” The younger one said to the Pitrs: “Due 
to the fear of sin, O intelligent ones, it is not proper for me to 
marry while I have the elder brother.” The grandfathers there¬ 
upon spoke to both of them again. 

Pitrs said : 

8-9. O sons of Kaksivan, both of you go to the holy Gautaml. 
Perform the rite of holy dip therein. The holy dip in Gautaml 
fufils all cherished desires. Go to Gautaml Ganga which sanc¬ 
tifies the three worlds. Perform the rites of bath and libation 
in that river with due faith. 

10-12. Gautaml is the bestower of all cherished things 
when it is seen, meditated upon or plunged into. There is no 
sort of restriction of place, time, caste etc. for plunging into 
it. The elder brother will be freed from the sin of indebtedness 
and the younger one will not incur the sin of marrying before 
the elder brother. 

Brahma said : 

Then the elder brother Pjthusravas performed the holy dip 
and libation rites. He became free from indebtedness to Pitrs. 
Thenceforth that Tirtha is called Rnamocana. O Narada, by 
taking bath or distributing charitable gifts a debtor becomes 
free from all debts mentioned in Vedas and Smjrtis as well as 
ordinary debts incurred by him. 



30 . 1-13 


863 


CHAPTER THIRTY 
Kadru-Suparna-Sahgama Tirtha 

Brahma said : 

1. There are two holy centres viz. Suparnasahgama and 
Kadrava Sarigama where lord Mahesvara has resorted to the 
banks of Ganga. 

2. The following holy puddles and deep pits are also there 
viz. Agnikun<ja, Raudra, Vaisnava, Saura, Saumya, Brahma, 
Kaumara and Varuna. 

3. The river Apsara joins Ganga and that confluence is a 
holy centre. Merely by remembering that holy centre a man 
can be assured and become contented. 

4. It quells all sins. Listen, O Narada, attentively. 

Formerly, Valakhilyas, the great sages, were harassed by 
Indra. All of them spoke to sage Kasyapa after giving a moiety 
of their penance. 

Valakhilyas said : 

5. Beget a splendid son through whom Indra’s arrogance 
can be quelled. We shall give you a moiety of our penance. 

The sage said to them, “So be it”. 

6. That Prajapati made Suparna pregnant. He made 
Kadru the mother of Nagas too pregnant. 

7-8. Prajapati who was desirous of going abroad told those 
two pregnant ladies, “You must not commit any offence. You 
must not go anywhere. For certain, you will be cursed if you 
to elsewhere.” 

Brahma said: 

9-13. After saying thus to his wives he went away. When 
their husband had gone, both of them went to the sacrifice of 
sages with purified mind. The sacrificial chamber was crowded 
with groups of brahmins. It was situated on the banks of Ganga. 
Both of them were arrogant because of their youth and wealth. 
They were mad too. Though forbidden many times by the 
sages, the seers of truth, they spoiled the Havi offerings in the 
sacrifice. Who can prevent the misconduct and evil actions of 



864 


Brahma Parana : Gautami-Mahitmya 


women ? On seeing both of them fallen in the evil path the brah¬ 
mins became enraged and excited. (They cursed them thus) 
“Since you are clinging to the evil path you will become rivers. 
Thereupon Suparna and Kadru became rivers. 

14-17. Prajapati Kasyapa returned home after some time. 
He heard the details of the incidents in the sessional sacrifice 
and the curse of those two ladies. On hearing it he was perple¬ 
xed and thought, “What shall I do?” He told the sages known 
as Valakhilyas. They said to the brahmin Kasyapa: “Go to 
Ganga GautamI and eulogize Mahesana. They will then be¬ 
come your wives again. You go to that place in the middle of 
Ganga where lord Mahesvara resides perpetually due to the fear 
of sin of brahmin slaughter, by the name of Madhyamesvara.” 

18. Saying, “So be it” Kasyapa of holy rites took bath in 
Ganga and eulogized Mahesvara, the lord of Devas, by means 
of sacred hymns. 

KaSyapa said : 

19. He is the sole master of the three worlds but he has not 
the least feeling of pride of possession. May that Siddhanatha, 
the maker of the entire Universe and the husband of Siva, be 
pleased. 

20. You alone are competent to dispel the misery of all 
embodied beings, whether mobile or immobile, who have been 
scorched by the sun of therefold misery 1 and who run about here 
and there. 

21. The three types of Yoga (contact) of Sattva etc. 
(Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) of Lord Siva cannot be recounted 
even by Sakra and others. Considering Soma (i.e. Siva) to be 
of diverse wonderful activities, an excellent person who is always 
devoted to charitable gifts is happy always. 

Brahma said : 

22. Eulogized by these and other hymns, lord Siva, the 

1. The there well known miseries are adhyatmika (caused by self), adhi- 
daivika (caused by supernatural beings), and adhibhautika (caused by the 
great elements); the terms are interpreted with slight differences by different 
commentators. 



30 . 23-33 


865 


beloved husband of Gauri became pleased. Sambhu granted 
many boons to Kasyapa. 

23-24. To him who was seeking his wives the lord said: “The 
two wives of yours will have the forms of rivers. They will reach 
Ganga, the most excellent river. Due to this mere contact they 
will regain their own bodies.” 

Due to the grace of Ganga they became pregnant once again. 

25. Then the noble-souled Prajapati, became delighted on 
regaining his wives. He invited those brahmins who had resor¬ 
ted to the banks of Gautami. 

26. The delighted Prajapati performed their Simantonna- 
yana rite (parting of hairs on the head ritualistically). He fed 
the brahmins in accordance with injunctions. 

27-29. The brahmins had their food in the abode of Kas¬ 
yapa. Kadru was seated near her husband. Looking at the 
brahmins she squinted and winked her eye and laughed at 
them. They became excited (and cursed) : “O sinful woman, 
let that sinning eye of thine with which you winked and laughed 
be split.” Then Kadru became blind of one eye. She is called 
the mother of serpents. Then the holy sage Kasyapa pacified 
the sages. 

30-33. They were pleased and said: “The Gautami, the most 
excellent of rivers will protect one from thousands of crimes 
on being resorted to. Kasyapa, the excellent sage, did so along 
with his wives. Thenceforth, they know that their confluence 
is a holy centre. The river Kadru is all round and the river 
Sauparnika is in the East. The holy centre Jatadhara extends 
all round from the Kadru to the east as far as the Sauparnika 
river. This holy centre is a bit holier than Varanasi. It sup¬ 
presses all sins. It bestows the benefit of all sacrifices.” 



866 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mahatmya 


CHAPTER THIRTYONE 
Sarasvatlsahgama 

Brahmd said : 

1. The holy centre named Pururavas destroys all sins even 
on being remembered. Why not on being visited? Those who 
are conversant with the Vedas know it. 

2. King Pururavas went to the abode of Brahma. There, 
by chance he saw the divine river Sarasvatl laughing by the 
side of Brahma. On seeing her richly endowed with beauty the 
king asked UrvaSi: 

The King said : 

3. Who is this beautiful saintly lady near Brahma? She is 
the most excellent lady among all ladies (assembled here). She 
(seems to) illuminate this assembly. 

Brahmd said : 

4. Urvasi said to the king: “This is the splendid divine 
river Sarasvatx, the daughter of Brahma. She comes here daily 
and goes back.” 

On hearing it the king was surprised (and he said), “Bring 
her near me” 

Brahmd said : 

5-9. Urvasi said again to the king who used to distribute 
plenty of monetary gifts. 

UrvaSi said : 

I shall mention everything to her and fetch her. 

Brahmd said : 

Then out of pleasure the king sent Urvasi there. Urvasi 
then went and repeated the words of the king. Sarasvati 
agreed to what was mentioned by Urvasi. She promised saying 
“So be it” and went to the place where Pururavas was stay¬ 
ing. He indulged in sexual dalliance on the banks of Saras¬ 
vatl for many years. Sarasvan was born as (her) son and his 
(Sarasvan’s) son was Brhadratha. 



31 . 10-20 


867 


10-12. I observed Sarasvatl going everyday to the abode of 
the king. I saw Sarasvan (her son). I saw evidences of 
similar activities with regard to other persons also. So I cursed 
her, “Be Mahanadl.” Afraid of my curse Vaglsa (Sarasvatl) 
went to the divine river GautamI, who is the holy mother sancti¬ 
fying the whole world, who was born of Kamandalu (water- 
pot), who is the suppressor of the three distresses and who is the 
bestower of pleasures here and hereafter. 

13-16. After going to GautamI, the divine river, she re¬ 
counted (the story of) my curse from the beginning. Ganga 
said to me: “It behoves you to make her free from the effects of 
the curse. It is not proper on your part to have cursed Sarasvatl. 
This is the nature of women because youthful women desire 
men. O Brahma, all young women are naturally unsteady. O 
lotus-seated lord, you are the creator of the Universe. How is 
it, that you do not know this? Whom does not cupid deceive 
naturally?” 

Then I withdrew the curse and said “Sarasvatl shall be 
visible too.” 

17-20. Due to that curse the river Sarasvatl is both visible 
and invisible in the mortal world. 

Pururavas, the most excellent and virtuous king, went to the 
place where the divine river (Sarasvatl), agitated due to the 
curse, joined Ganga. He performed penance and propitiated 
lord Siddhesvara. He acquired all cherished desires by the 
favour of Ganga. Thenceforth that holy centre is called Puru¬ 
ravas. It is also called Sarasvatlsahgama and Brahmatlrtha. 
The lord there is Siddhesvara and the holy center bestows all 
cherished things. 



868 


Brahma Pur&ria : Gautami-Mah&Lmya 


CHAPTER THIRTYTWO 

Review of the Greatness of Five Tirthas 

Brahmd said : 

1. Sages know these five holy centres as very holy, viz. Savi¬ 
tri, Gayatri, Sraddha (Faith), Medha (Intellect) and Sarasvati. 

2-4. By taking bath there and drinking water therein one 
is released from all sins. Savitri, Gayatri, Sraddha, Medha 
and Sarasvati—these were my eldest daughters. (Then)I created 
the most beautiful woman in the world, the most excellent among 
all. 

On seeing her, O excellent sage, my mind became deranged. 
I was desirous of seizing her and on seeing what I was going to 
do that lady fled. 

5. That maiden assumed the form of a hind and I became 
a stag then. In order to save virtue, Sambhu became a hunter of 
the stag. 

6. Those five daughters of mine (also) became afraid of me 
and went to Ganga, the great river. Thereupon Mahesvara 
went ahead for the sake of saving virtue. 

7. Then Hara, the hunter of stag, took up his bow and 
arrows. Isa said to me, “I will kill you.” 

8-11. I desisted from that (evil) action and gave the maiden 
to the Sun. The five daughters beginning with Savitri assumed 
the forms of rivers and flowed together. Again they came near 
me to the heavenly world. The place where these rivers joined 
the divine river Ganga came to be called Paiicatirtha. All 
confluences are holy. Sarasvati (is the most important of) 
these five rivers. Holy dip, distribution of charitable gifts, what¬ 
ever a man does in those rivers yields all cherished things. It 
yields salvation through Naiskarmya (cessation of activities). 
The holy centre of Mrgavyadha is also there. It bestows all 
objects on men. It has the benefit of heaven and salvation. It 
yields the benefit of Brahmatirtha. 



33.1-12 


889 


CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE 
Sami and other Holy Centres 

Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre well known as Samitlrtha subdues all 
sins. I shall narrate it. Listen to it attentively, O Narada. 

2. There was a Ksatriya named Priyavrata. He was the 
most excellent of all conquerors. He was initiated for a horse 
sacrifice by his preceptor on the southern bank of Gautaml. 

3-6. Vasistha was the priest of that king of powerful arms. 

When that horse-sacrifice wherein the sages were the Rtviks 
(officiating priests), began, a Danava named Hiranyaksa came 
to that sacificial chamber. Devas with Indra as their leader 
became frightened on seeing that demon. Some of them went 
to heaven. Havyavat (Fire-god) entered the Sami tree. Visnu 
went to the Asvattha (the holy fig tree), Bhanu (Sun-god) went 
to the Arka plant. Siva went to the Vata (Banyan) tree. Soma 
(Moon) went to the Palasa tree. Havyavahana (Fire-god) went 
to the waters of Ganga. The Asvins (Twin gods) took the sacri¬ 
ficial horse (and fled). Yama turned himself into a crow. 

7. In the meantime, the holy sage Vasistha took up a 
Yasti (thick stick) and commanded demons to stop. 

8. Then the sacrifice began to function again. The Daitya 
who had his own intrinsic strength went away. Thereafter these 
holy centres became auspicious. They bestow the benefits of 
ten horse-sacrifices. 

9. The first holy centre is Samitirtha, The second holy 
centre is Vaisnava. The other holy centres, viz. Arka (belonging 
to Sun-god), Saiva (belonging to Siva), Saumya (belonging to 
Moon-god) and Vasi?tha (belonging to Vasi?tha) are the besto- 
wers of all cherished things. 

10-12. When the elaborate horse sacrifice had been comple ¬ 
ted Devas and sages became pleased. They spoke to Vasistha, 
Priyavrata the sponsor of the sacrifice, those trees and Ganga 
with great joy: “These have gone here and there for the fulfilment 
of horse-sd£rifice. The holy centres bestow the benefit of horse 
sacrifice.** Devas said thus. Therefore by taking holy dip and 



870 


Brahma Purina : Gautaml-Mdhdtmya 


distributing charitable gifts in these holy centres, one surely 
attains the benefit of a horse sacrifice. 


CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR 
Twenty-two Thousand Holy Centres 

Brahmdsaid : 

1-2. Listen to the names of some holy centres lam going 
to recount now. They are Visvamitra, Hariscandra, Sunahsepa, 
Rohita, Varuna, Brahma, Agneya, Aindra, Aindava, Aisvara, 
Maitra, Vai§nava, Yamya, Asvina and Ausana. 

3. There was a king born in the family of Iksvaku, named 
Hariscandra. The sages Narada and Parvata came to his 
abode. After receiving them with great hospitality Hariscandra 
said to the two sages: 

Harikandra said : 

4. The whole world undergoes sufferings for the sake of a 
son. What is it that one gets from a son? A son may be wise 
or foolish, excellent or middling. 

Brahmd said : 

5-9. Parvata and Narada spoke to Hariscandra: 

Ndrada and Parvata said : 

The reply can be one, hundred or thousand. O king, all 
the replies are good. Still this is being mentioned. O excellent 
king, to a person without a son the other world does not exist. 
(He cannot expect to go there.) To that person of ill luck this 
world too does not exist (i.e. he cannot be happy here too). 
O ruler of men, a person who takes bath at the birth of his son 
shall derive the benefit of holy bath at the end of ten horse sacri¬ 
fices. By obtaining a son one attains prestige. (One may 
become) the most excellent among the immortal beings. 
(What) the Devas get through nectar, the brahmins and other 



34.10-19 


871 


castes get through a son. A son releases his father and grand¬ 
fathers from the three debts. 1 

10. Of what avail is (the vow of taking in only) roots and 
water? Of what avail is the practice of growing beard and 
moustache? Of what avail is penance without a son? O great 
king, a son is said as one leading to heaven and salvation. 

11. Son alone is the other world, virtue, love and wealth. 
Son is liberation, the great light. He is the person who takes 
all embodied beings (across the ocean of worldly existence). 

12. Without a son, O leading king, heaven and salvation 
are very difficult to achieve. In the world, it is the son who is 
the most conducive to the achievement of virtue, love and wealth. 

13-15. A charitable gift given or a sacrifice performed 
without a son is fruitless. It appears to me that life itself, without 
a son is fruitless. One gets relief from debts to the manes through 
a son by whom people are redeemed from sins. If a father 
sees the face of a live son born to him he gets pleasure. By seeing 
a son, a father obtains all those enjoyments and pleasures that 
can be had in the mortal world or in heaven. Hence there is 
nothing else in the three worlds as desirable as a son”. 

On hearing these words the king was extremely surprised 
and he spoke again to the two sages. 

Haritcandra said : 

16. Tell me how I can obtain a son. I am willing to go 
anywhere and perform any rite, whatever be the means thereof. 
By manly endeavour, repetition of Mantras, performance of 
sacrifices or distribution of charitable gifts a son should be got by 
me. 

Brahma said : 

17-19. They said to the excellent king Hariscandra who 


1. The three well known debts are: (1) Rsi-rna or debt to the sages, which 
one discharges by the study of Veda; (2) Deva-fna or debt to the gods, 
which is discharged by performing worship and sacrifice; and (3) Pitr-rna 
or debt to the manes, which is discharged by procreation of a son. Evidently 
these great debts or obligations aim respectively at acquisition, dissemination 
and advancement of knowledge, preservation of religious and moral values, 
and perpetuation of the human race. 



872 


Brahma Parana : Gautaml-Mdh&tmya 


was seeking a son, after meditating deeply for a short while: 
“O bestower of honour, go to Gautaml. There the lord of waters 
fulfils whatever excellent wish one has in mind. Varuna has been 
glorified by sages as the bestower of everything. On being deli¬ 
ghted he will grant you a son at the proper time, sooner or later.’* 

On hearing this, the excellent king carried out the sugges¬ 
tions of the sages. 

20. Resoiting to the banks of Gautami he propitiated 
Varuna. Varuna who was pleased said to Hariscandra : 

Varuna said : 

21. O king, I shall grant you a son. Being issueless you 
have performed holy rites; certainly a son will be born to you 
if you are prepared to offer him in sacrifice. 

Brahma said : 

22-23. Hariscandra said to Varuna, “I shall sacrifice 
him”. 

Hariscandra then prepared the holy offering pertaining to 
Varuna. The king then gave it to his wife. Thereafter a son was 
born to the king. When the son was born, the lord of waters, 
the most excellent among the eloquent ones, spoke. 

Varuna said : 

24-28. The son should be sacrificed today itself. Do you 
remember your former promise? 

Brahma said : 

Hariscandra said this to Varuna who approached him duly: 
Hariicandra said : 

A sacrificial animal becomes fit for sacrifice after it passes 
ten days. Thereafter I shall perform the sacrifice. 

Brahm&said : 

On hearing the words of the king, Varuna agreed and re¬ 
turned home. When the boy passed the tenth day he approa¬ 
ched the king once again and said, “Perform the sacrifice”. 



34.29-39 


873 


The King said to Varuna : 

O lord of waters, the sacrificial animal without teeth is 
useless. Go now and come when the boy cuts his teeth. 

29-31. On hearing those words of the king the lord of waters 
went again. When the teeth were cut, O Narada, and the boy 
was aged seven years, Varuna said to the king again, “Perform 
the sacrifice”. The king said to Varuna, “O lord of waters, 
these teeth will fall off. Other teeth will come up. Then I shall 
perform the scrifice. Please go away now.” Varuna went 
away. When the new set of teeth grew up, O Narada, he said 
to the king, “Perform the sacrifice”. The king said to the lord 
of waters. 

The king said : 

32. If a Ksatriya happens to be the sacrificial animal, the 
same will be the most excellent one, if he knows the science 
of archery. 

Brahma said : 

33-35. On hearing those words of the king, Varuna went 
to his own abode. When Rohita became efficient in the use of 
miraculous weapons, when that suppressor of enemies became 
conversant with the Vedas and scriptures, when the sixteen year 
old Prince Rohita was crowned as heir-apparent, the delighted 
Varuna went to the place where the king and Rohita were 
present. Varuna said to the king, “Sacrifice your son”. 

36. The king said, ‘ ‘yes’ ’. After saying so, the king said to the 
Rtviks and his eldest son Rohita, within the hearing of Varuna: 

HariScandra said : 

37-38. Come on my great hero, come on my son, I shall 
sacrifice you unto Varuna. 

Brahmd said : 

Then Rohita asked his father, “What is this?” The father 
explained everything in detail in the manner it had happened. 
Even as Varuna was listening, Rohita said to his father: 

Rohita said : 

39. I am pure. I am in a hurry. At the very outset, O great 



874 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-M&h&tmya 


king, I shall perform the sacrifice unto Visnu, the lord, of the 
worlds, along with the Rtviks and the priest, Varuna being the 
sacrificial animal. It behoves you to grant permission for the 
same. 

Brahma said : 

40-43. On hearing those words of Rohitathe lord of waters 
was overwhelmed by great anger. 

Taking up his divine bow and seated in his chariot without 
any discomfort Rohita went to the forest on the banks of Ganga 
where Hariscandra, the lord of men, had propitiated Varuna 
and obtained a son. In the meantime the infuriated Varuna 
made king Hariscandra suffer from dropsy. Five years elapsed 
and as the sixth year was running, the prince heard about the 
ailment of the king. 

44-46. He then thought thus: “Though I was born to my 
father I had been the cause of distress unto him. What bene¬ 
fit did he derive from me? Now what shall be my duty?” 

On the banks of Ganga the prince saw holy sages. He saw 
the most excellent sage known as Ajigarta. He was wandering 
on the banks of Ganga accompanied by his three sons and wife. 
He had no means of subsistence. On seeing him the prince 
bowed to him and spoke: 

Rohita said : 

47-49. How is it that you appear to be gloomy, lean and 
lacking in sustenance? 

Brahma said : 

Ajigarta said to prince Rohita: 

Ajigarta said : 

I have no means for supporting my family. I have many 
dependents to be fed. We will die without food. Tell me. What 
shall we do? 

Brahmd said : 

50-53. On hearing it the prince spoke to the sage: 



34 . 54-59 


875 


Rohita said : 

What is it that you have in mind? Tell me, O most excellent 
one among the eloquent ones. 

Ajigarta said : 

I do not have gold, silver, cows, grains, garments etc., O 
great king. Therefore, I do not have any means of subsistence. 
I have three sons and a wife. I am the fifth one. There is no 
one to buy anyone of us in exchange for food. 

Rohita said : 

54. O Ajigarta of great intelligence, what will you take 
from me? Tell me truthfully. You need not say anything else. 
Indeed, brahmins are truthful in speech. 

Ajigarta said : 

55. Take one of the three sons, or me, or take this (woman) 
my wife. We shall keep alive by this sale. 

Rohita said : 

56. Of what avail is your wife? O intelligent one, of what 
avail are you, an old man? Give me a youthful son of yours, 
whomsoever you may wish to give. 

Ajigarta said : 

57. O Rohita, I will not sell my eldest son Sunahpuccha. 
The mother will not sell the youngest one. Hence I shall sell 
Sunahsepa, the one between these two. Tell me the amount 
(you wish to give) for him. 

Rohita said : 

58. A sacrificial animal has to be kept ready for Varuna. 
(He must be) a man of superior qualities. If you are willing 
to take a price in exchange, tell me truthfully, O great sage. 

Brahmd said : 

59. Saying “So be it” Ajigarta fixed a thousand cows, 
(measures) of grains, gold coins and clothes as the price of his 
son. “O Prince”, he said, “give the excellent things (tome), I 
shall give my son to you”. 



876 


Brahma PurdQa : Gautami-Mahatmya 


Brahmd said : 

60. Saying “So be it” Rohita too gave him money and 
clothes. After giving it, Rohita went to his father along with 
the son of the sage. He informed his father about the son of the 
sage bought for a price. 

Rohita said : 

61-67. Perform the sacrifice unto Varuna with (this) 
animal. You be free from your ailments. 

Brahmd said : 

Then after the words of his son Hariscandra said: 
Harikandra said : 

The Vedas say that Brahmins, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas should 
be protected by the king. Indeed, excellent brahmins are espe¬ 
cially the leaders of all castes. They are persons worthy of being 
worshipped even by Visnu. Where are persons like me? By sli¬ 
ghting and dishonouring them, kings will be faced with the des¬ 
truction of their family. Brahmins are identical with the holy 
centres. They are identical with Devas. They are the saviours 
of persons about to fall into hell. After making them sacrificial 
animals how can I pretend to protect miserable persons. It is 
not proper that I should make a brahmin the sacrificial animal. 
It is better to die of ailments. I will not make a brahmin the 
sacrificial animal at all. Hence, dear son, go happily along with 
the brahmin boy. 

Brahmd said : 

68-70. In the meantime an etherial voice spoke thus: 

The Ethereal Voice said : 

O great king, go to Gautami along with your Rtviks and 
priests as well as this brahmin’s son who is the sacrificial animal 
and Rohita, your son. The sacrifice has to be performed by you 
without killing Sunahsepa. The sacrifice shall of course be 
complete there. Hence, go, O king of great intellect. 

Brahmd said : 

71-74. On hearing that voice the excellent king hastened 



34 . 75-92 


877 


to Ganga along with sage Visvamitra, his priest Vasi?tha, sage 
Vama as well as other sages. After reaching Gautaml Ganga 
he got himself initiated for the human sacrifice. He prepared 
the altar, pavilion, sacred pit etc. and erected the Post for the 
sacrificial animal and other things as well. After everytliing was 
ready and the sacrifice began Sunahsepa, the sacrificial animal, 
was tied to the Yupa (post) along with the chanting of Man¬ 
tras. On seeing him sprinkled with water Visvamitra said this: 

Visvamitra said : 

75-79. Visvamitra said to Devas, sages, to Hariscandra and 
particularly to Rohita: “May all of you free this Sunahsepa the 
excellent brahmin boy. O Devas, to whom the offering is to 
be given in the sacrifice, let not this sacrificial animal, Sunah- 
sepa, the excellent brahmin boy, be offered to you, in the sacri¬ 
ficial fire along with fats, hairs, skins and the flesh consecrated 
by the chanting of Mantras. Let the leading brahmins be sprin¬ 
kled over with water. Let them go to Gautami and take their 
bath there. Let them eulogize Devas severally by chanting Man¬ 
tras and hymns. Engaged in auspicious things let them rejoice. 
Let sages and Devas, partakers of offerings, protect this boy.” 

Brahma said : 

00-81. The sages said, “So be it”. The excellent king agreed. 
Sunalisepa went to Ganga, the sanctifier of the three worlds. 
After taking bath, he eulogized those Devas, the partakers of 
offerings. Even as Visvamitra stood listening, the delighted 
Devas said to Sunahsepa. 

Devas said : 

82-84. Let this, sacrifice be complete without killing 
Sunahsepa. 

Brahma said : 

Varuna specifically spoke (so) to the excellent king. 

Then the human sacrifice of the king, known in all the worlds, 
was completed. Thus by the grace of Devas, the sages of holy 
centre, the. sacrifice of the king was completed. 

85-92. Visvamitra honoured Sunahsepa in the midst of 



878 


Brahma Purana : Gautami-Mdh&tmya 


assembly. After honouring him in the presence of Devas, he 
made him the eldest of his sons. The sons of the intelligent 
Visvamitra who did not accept the status of Sunahsepa as the 
eldest son were cursed by Visvamitra. He honoured those sons 
who accepted his status as the eldest son and granted them boons. 
Thus this narrative has been recounted by me. All these inci¬ 
dents happened on the southern bank of Gautaml. At that 
place many well known sacred holy centres praised by Devas 
and others cropped up. Listen to their names from me, O sage 
of excellent intellect. 

They are Hariscandra, Sunahsepa, Visvamitra, Rohita and 
others. They are twentytwo thousand holy centres. Having a 
dip therein and distribution of charitable offerings bestow the 
benefit of a human sacrifice. O excellent sage, the greatness of 
this holy centre has been described. He who reads this or causes 
this to be read or listens to this with devotion shall get a son if 
he has no son. He gets other things too pleasing to his mind. 


CHAPTER THIRTYFIVE 

The Twentyfive Confluences of Various Rivers 
Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre known as Somatirtha is one that increa¬ 
ses the pleasure of Manes. Listen attentively to the extremely 
sacred incident that happened there, O Narada. 

2. Formerly Soma (Moon) full of nectar had been the king 
of Gandharvas and not of Devas. Then Devas approached me 
and said : 

Devas said : 

3. Formerly Soma, the bestower of vital airs on Devas, 
had been taken away by Gandharvas. Not able to meditate on 
him, sages and Devas became extremely distressed. Let some 
strategic means be employed so that Soma can be ours. 



35.4-19 


879 


Brahma said : 

4. Vak (Sarasvatl) said to Devas: “The Gandharvas are 
madly passionate over women. O Devas, it behoves you to 
bring Soma after giving me to them.” 

5. The immortal ones replied to Vak: “We are not com¬ 
petent to give you away. It is impossible to live without Soma, 
nor is it possible to live without you”. 

6-13. Again Vak said to Devas: “I shall come here again. 
A way should be thought out. Let an excellent sacrifice be per¬ 
formed on the southern bank of Gautami. If Devas are prepared 
let them come there for sacrifice. Gandharvas are always fond 
of women. Exchange me for Soma”. 

“So be it”, said Devas who firmly agreed to what was said 
by Sarasvatl. Through the messengers they invited Devas, Yak§as, 
Gandharvas and Nagas severally to the sacred mountain. There¬ 
after, O sage, the name of that mountain became Devagiri. 
There came Devas, Gandharvas, Yaksas, Rak§asas, Siddhas, 
sages and the eight species of inferior gods. 1 

While the great sacrifice was being performed by the sages 
on the banks of Gautami, the thousand-eyed lord surrounded by 
Devas, spoke in the presence of Sarasvatl after honouring 
Gandharvas. 

Indra said : 

Exchange the nectar-souled Soma of yours for Sarasvatl. 
Brahma, said : 

14. At the instance of Indra those Gandharvas, passionate 
over women, gave Soma to Devas and took Sarasvatl. 

15-19. Devas possessed Soma and Gandharvas possessed 
Sarasvatl. While she stayed there she secretly came near Devas 
everyday saying, “Let it remain a secret”. That is how, O 
Narada, Soma was bought. While buying Soma one should 
speak in a low tone. Thereafter Devas possessed both Soma and 
Sarasvatl. The Gandharvas had neither Soma nor Sarasvatl. 

For the sake of Soma all the following came to Gautami: 


1. ‘Devayonayah’ is demi-gods or inferior gods such as Adityas, Vasus, 
Visvcdevas etc. 



880 


Brahma Purdria: Gautami-Mah&tmya 


cows, Devas, mountains, Yaksas, Raksasas, Siddhas, Sadhyas, 
sages, Guhyakas, Gandharvas, Maruts, Nagas, medicinal herbs, 
Mothers, 1 Guardians of quarters, Rudras, Adityas, Vasus, 
Alvins and other Devas who deserve a share in the sacrifice. 

20-21. Twentyfive rivers, O sage, have joined Ganga. The 
place where the entire ghee offering was given is called the holy 
centre of Purna. As mentioned before, the rivers that joined 
Gautami have holy centres in their names. Now listen to holy 
centres with their names O Narada. 

22-27. The holy centres are: Somatlrtha, Gandharva, 
Devatirtha, Purnatirtha, Sala, Sriparna-Sangama, Ilasangama, 
the holy confluence of Kusuma, Pustisangama, the auspicious 
Karnika Sangama, Vainavl Sangama, Krsarasangama, Vasa- 
vlsaiigama, Sivasarya, Sikhi, Kusumbhika, Uparathya, San- 
tija, Devaja, Aja, Vpddha, Sura and Bhadra—all these joined 
Gautami. These and many other rivers, the holy rivers in the 
world, went to the Devaparvata mountain for the sake of Soma. 
Others also came to the sacrificial pavilion. Those holy rivers 
joined Ganga in due order. 

28-31. Some of them were in the form of rivers flowing east; 
some in the form of rivers flowing west, others in the form of lakes 
and still others in the form of streams. All these holy centres 
are severally well known. Taking bath in them, or performing 
Japa, Homa and Pitrtarpana (water libation to the manes) 
fulfils all cherished desires of men. It gives enjoyment and 
salvation. The people who read about these or remember them 
become liberated from all sins and go to lord Visnu’s regions. 
Twenty rivers have been mentioned between Purna and Pravara. 
Then there are five divine rivers, my daughters. All together 
twentyfive of them have been described thus. 


1. ‘M&tarah’ is divine mothers or female energies of great gods, e.g. 
Brahm&ni, Mahesvari, Vaisnavi, Aindri etc. 



36.1-13 


881 


CHAPTER THIRTYSIX 

Amrtasahgama and other holy centres 

Brahma said : 

1. Mahanadi is an excellent river. Its confluence is called 
Pravara-Sangama. Lord Siddhe^vara presides over this holy 
centre. He renders help unto all his devotees. 

2. There was an extremely horrible fight between Devas 
and Danavas. (Later on) there was mutual love and amity too 
between them, O great sage. 

3. They went to the mountain Meru. Devas and Danavas 
consulted one another. They wished for the welfare of each 
other. 

Devas and Daityas said : 

4. It is possible to obtain immortality through nectar. 
Let us make the excellent nectar and drink it. We shall become 
immortal. 

5-6. We shall join together and protect the worlds. Aband¬ 
oning fight we shall attain happiness. Fighting is a cause of 
misery. With pleasure and avoiding jealousy, we shall enjoy 
riches earned by us. Loving treatment is always pleasant to us. 

7. What has happened to the contrary should never be 
remembered. The pleasure that one derives from absence of 
enmity is not obtained even by our rule over the three worlds 
or by acquiring a higher position or even in salvation. 

Brahma said : 

8-9. Thus becoming friendly to one another Devas and 
Danavas joined together with great delight and churned the 
Ocean. They made the Mandara mountain their churning rod 
and Vasuki the rope. Devas and Danavas churned the ocean. 

10. Therefrom the holy nectar dear to Devas came out. 
When the holy nectar was produced they said to one another: 

11-13. “We shall go to our abodes. We have done our duty. 
We are tired. Let this be distributed among all in an 
equitable manner. In an auspicious hour when all have assem¬ 
bled together, O excellent Devas, let this holy nectar be dis¬ 
tributed.** After saying thus Daityas, Danavas and Rak$asas 



882 Brahma Purina : Gautami-M&hatmya 

went away. After they had gone Devas began to consult one 
another. 

Devas said : 

14. Our enemies, our suppressors have gone after confiding 
in us. The nectar should not at all be given to them. 

Brahmi said : 

15-18. Brhaspati agreed and said to Devas thus: 

Bfhaspati said : 

Drink this nectar in such a manner that our enemies do not 
become aware of it. This is the secret advice to defeat our ene¬ 
mies. Those who are conversant with the science of politics 
know that the enemies are to be hated in every respect. The 
enemies are never to be trusted. They should never be told (any 
secret). They should never be consulted. Nectar should not 
be given to them. They are likely to become immortal thereby. 
When those enemies, Daityas, become immortal we will not be 
able to defeat them. Therefore the nectar should not be given 
to them. 

Brahma said : 

19-21. After consulting each other thus, Devas said to 
Brhaspati: 

Devas said : 

Where shall we go? Where shall we have secret counsel? 
Where shall we drink it? Where shall we stay? We shall do 
that alone first. O Brhaspati, tell us. 

Brhaspati said : 

Let the immortal beings go to Brahma and ask him the 
great expedient in this matter. He alone is the knower, donor 
and speaker (thereof). 

Brahmd said : 

22-27. On hearing the words of Brhaspati Devas came near 

me. After bowing down to me they intimated to me what had 
transpired. 

O son, at the instance of Devas I went to Hari along with 



36.28-36 


883 


Devas. Everything was then mentioned to Visnu and Sambhu 
the remover of poison. 

Visnu, Sambhu and I went to the cave of Meru along with 
Devas, Gandharvas and Kinnaras without the knowledge of 
Asuras. After making Hari the watchman we sat for drinking 
Soma juice. 

Aditya was the person to take note of those who partook of 
Soma. Soma was the distributor of share of nectar and the dis¬ 
cus-bearing lord was the watchman. Neither Daityas nor Dana- 
vas nor Raksasas knew it except Rahu the highly intelligent son 
of Simhika. He drank the Soma juice. Rahu who had acquired 
efficacy to assume any form he desired entered the place. 

28. He assumed the form of Deva and held the drinking 
bowl. On realising that it was a Daitya, the Sun-god intimated 
to Soma. 

29. Soma gave nectar to that Daitya who had the form of 
a non-Daitya but informed Visnu. 

30. By means of his discus, Visnu lifted the Daitya who 
could manage to gulp nectar. Visnu cut off his head immediately. 
But, O dear one, that head became immortal. 

31-32. The body bereft of head fell on the Earth. The 
body that had touched the nectar fell on the southern bank of 
Gautami, O great sage, and shook the Earth. The body too 
became immortal, O son, and that was mysterious. 

33. The body was dependent on the head and the head was 
dependent on the body. Both of them became immortal. This 
demon became extremely powerful. Devas thought: 

34. “ (if) the head were joined to the body it will eat all 
Devas. Hence we shall destroy at first this body which has come 
down to the Earth”. Then all the excited Devas said to Sankara: 

Devas said 

35. Destroy the demon’s body that has come down to the 
Earth, O lord, excellent among Devas. You are the ocean of 
mercy and the saviour of those who seek refuge in you. 

36. Kindly do something so that the body of the demon 
does not join the head. 



884 


Brahma Purdi}a : Gautami-Mdhdtmya 


Brahmd said : 

37-38. I$a sent his excellent &akti, the goddess Mother, 
the protectress of the worlds, along with the “Mothers”. The 
goddess held the weapons of Isa. She was full of the energy of 
Isa. Desirous of eating it up she went to the place where the 
body came down to the Earth. 

39. Dcvas pacified the head alone there itself on the Meru. 
The body fought with the goddess for many years. 

40-41. Rahu said to Devas : Pierce my body at the very 
outset. The excellent juice is within it. Extract it from the body. 
When the juice is separated, the body shall be reduced to ashes. 
Hence do that at the outset. 

Brahmd said : 

42. On hearing these words of Rahu Devas became pleased. 
They performed his consecration. “Be pleased. Be the most 
excellent of all planets.” 

43-46. At the instance of Devas, Sakti who is mentioned as 
Isvari, pierced the body of the lord of Daityas. Equipped with 
the power of Devas she immediately extracted the excellent 
nectar outside. After placing that body there Ambika devoured 
it. Ambika of great strength is called Kalaratri and Bhadrakali. 
The excellent juice, the most excellent juice of all juices that 
had been placed there, oozed out and became the river Pravara. 
She took in the nectar too that had been extracted and placed. 

47-48. Then the excellent river Pravara was born. It is 
auspicious and nectarous. It was born of the body of Rahu 
and is fully endowed with the Sakti of Rudra. It is the most 
excellent and beautiful of all rivers. It is induced by nectar. 
There are five thousand meritorious holy centres there. 

49-51. Worshipped by Devas Sambhu himself stayed there. 
The delighted Devas gave unto the divine river excellent boons, 
severally: “Whenever Sambhu, the lord of Devas, is worshipped, 
you too shall be worshipped with a desire for the welfare of 
worlds. O goddess, stay here. O goddess of juice, stay here, 
always bestowing all (spiritual and worldly) achievements. 

52-56. You will be the bestower of cherished things on 
being eulogized, glorified or meditated upon. At the behest 



36.57-37.4 


885 


of deities all the desires will be fulfilled, the desires of those who 
bow down to you with devotion and de ire for anything what¬ 
soever. 

Sages call this Nivasapuram (city of residence) since the 
eternal residence of Siva and Sakti has taken place there. The 
highly delighted Devas gave excellent boons to Pravara. The 
confluence of Pravara with Ganga is the favourite of Devas. 
It has been described to you. Worldly pleasures and salvation 
will be obtained by all who take their holy dip therein. What¬ 
ever they desire in their minds will be realised even if it happens 
to be inaccessible to the gods”. 

After granting this, Devas went away. 

57-58. Thenceforth, they know it as the holy centre of 
Pravara Sangama. The place where the Sakti was induced by 
the Lord of Devas is called Prerita. It is also well known as 
Amyta. In this manner Pravara is a great river. Know that a 
holy dip and distribution of charities etc. at the confluence of 
Pravara is of everlasting benefit. It yields pleasure to the Manes. 


CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN 
Description of seventeen holy centres 

Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre where Siva is called Vfddhesvara is 
named Vrddha Sangama. I shall describe it in detail. Listen 
to it. It destroys sins. 

2-3. There was a sage belonging to the family of Gautama, 
named \ » »ldha. He was a sage of great penance. When the 
brahmin was a boy as the son of Gautama (scion of the family 
of Gautama) he had no nose. He was born without a nose. 
Hence he had an ugly form. Due to the lack of worldly attach¬ 
ment he wandered to various holy centres in the land. 

4. Since he was shy and modest he had no contact with any 
preceptor. Since he was bashful and reserved he had no op¬ 
portunity to learn along with other pupils. 



886 Brahma Purana: Gautami-M&h&tmya 

5. With great difficulty (somehow) he was initiated into 
the study of Vedas by his father Gautama. After doing so 
much Gautama set out on a journey. 

6. Thus, much time elapsed. The brahmin was supported 
by the brahmin mother. That Gautama had no opportunity 
to study the Vedas. 

7. Gautama did not engage himself in a regular study of 
any scriptures. But he observed vows regularly and performed 
rites in sacred fires. 

8-10. He was brahmin only by name, by the practice of 
Gayatri and the performance of holy rites in sacred fire. He 
maintained his brahminhood with this much alone. O sage, 
Gautama the noble brahmin continued to perform holy rites 
in the fire and repeated the Gayatri Mantra. O son, Gautama 
became long-lived. His span of life increased but he could not 
get a wife. There was no one to offer him his daughter (in 
marriage). 

11. He was wandering about in the holy centres in various 
places in different forests and holy hermitages. 

12. During the course of his wanderings, Gautama came to 
Himalayas. There he espied a beautiful cave overgrown with 
creepers and branches of trees. 

13. The great brahmin sat down there and decided to stay. 
Entering within he saw an excellent woman. 

14. She was a lean old woman with flaccid limbs. She was 
a virgin practising celibacy and performing penance. She 
was staying in isolation there. 

15. On seeing her the excellent sage stood ready for making 
obeisance to her but she prevented him. 

The old woman said : 

16. You are about to become my Guru (preceptor). It 
does not behove you to salute me. Longevity, learning, wealth, 
fame, virtue, heavenly enjoyment etc. of a person, perish if a 
Guru were to bow down to his disciple* 

Brahma said : 

17-18. Gautama who was surprised (at this remark) spoke 
to her with palms joined in reverence: 



37.19-30 


887 


Gautama said : 

You are a saintly old lady superior to me in qualities. I am 
younger in age with lesser knowledge and learning. How can 
I be your Guru? 

The old woman said : 

19-23. In this connection, O sage of good holy rites, I 
shall narrate to you what happened long ago. 

The son of Ar§tisena was known as Rtadhvaja. He was a 
meritorious, intelligent and heroic Ksatriya devoted to the duties 
of Ksatriyas. Once, attracted by a desire for hunting, Rtadh¬ 
vaja went to a forest. He took rest in this cave. He was a clever, 
intelligent youth surrounded by a large army. As he was taking 
rest, a celestial damsel, the daughter of the king of Gandharvas, 
known as Susyama saw the excellent king. On seeing her the 
king became enamoured of her and she too began to love him. 
O sage of excellent intellect, the king indulged in sexual dalli¬ 
ance with her. As his passionate love was fully satisfied the 
great king took leave of her and went back home. 

24. I was born of that Susyama, O sage of great intellect. 
As she was about to go back to heaven, O sage, my mother said 
this to me: 

Sufyamd said : 

25-30. O gentle lady, he who enters this cave will become 
your husband. 

The old lady said : 

After saying this, O sage of great intellect, my mother ex¬ 
pired. You are the only man who has entered this cave. Never 
has anyone else entered it. My father performed penance after 
ruling over his kingdom for eighty thousand years. Then he 
went to heaven. After my father had gone to heaven, O great 
sage, my brother ruled over that kingdom for ten thousand years 
and then died. But I remained here itself. O brahmin, I have 
never been wooed by anyone else. I have neither father nor 
mother. O brahmin, I am mistress of myself, a K?atriya girl 
waiting ready (for you). Hence, O brahmin, accept me who 
have been seeking a man and observing the holy vows. 



888 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mdhatmva 


Gautama said : 

31. O gentle lady, I am aged a thousand years. You are 
older than I. I am a boy. You are an old lady. Hence, our 
mutual union is impossible. 

The old lady said : 

32-34. You have been indicated formerly as my husband. 
No one else is accepted by me to be my husband. You have 
been granted to me by Brahma. Hence, it does not behove you 
to disown me. Or, if you do not desire me in spite of the fact 
that I am undefiled and ever prepared to follow you, I shall 
abandon my life even now in your presence. To all embodied 
beings death is far better than the non-acquisition of what is de¬ 
sired. There is no end to sins if one abandons persons attached to 
one. 

Brahma said : 

35-37. On hearing the words of the old lady, Gautama said: 
Gautama said : 

I am devoid of penance. I do not possess good learning. I 
am poor and without possession. I am not a suitable bride¬ 
groom for you. I am deformed and bereft of worldly pleasures. 
I have no nose. What shall I do? I have neither learning nor 
penance as my asset. Hence first, O splendid lady, you should 
make me handsome and bestow on me good learning. Afterwards 
you can carry out what you have stated. Thereupon, the old 
lady said to the brahmin: 

The old lady said : 

38-39. Goddess Sarasvat! has been propitiated by me, O 
brahmin, by means of penance. So also the Waters of beautiful 
form and Agni the bestower of comeliness. Hence, goddess 
Speech will grant you learning and Agni, the beautiful god, 
will grant you a lovely form. 

Brahmd said : 

40. After saying this to Gautama the old lady pleaded 
(fire god) and made him handsome as well as learned. 



37.41-54 


889 


41. Thereafter, Gautama who became learned, handsome 
and brilliant married the old lady. With great pleasure he 
sported with that charming lady for many years in the cave. He 
was happy and delighted in his mind. 

42-43. While the couple stayed happily in their cave on the 
mountain, O most revered sage, sages Vasistha, Vamadeva 
and others who had been wandering over sacred holy centres 
reached that cave. 

44-45. On coming to know about the arrival of those sages, 
Gautama accompanied by his wife welcomed them with great 
hospitality. Some of them laughed at them. Some of those sages, 
boys proud of their youth, as well as men of middle age saw 
the old lady as well as Gautama and laughed. 

46-48. They saw that the old lady was lean and lanky with 
hairs over the body. Her lips were hanging down. Her ears 
were broad like the winnowing basket. Her teeth, nose and 
hairs were all too long. She was infirm with her physical form 
shattered and decaying. They saw that Gautama was equipped 
with learning, good fortune, brilliance and comely features. 
On seeing this (disparity) some of those childish sons of sages 
began to laugh. On seeing her the narrow-minded disciples 
said smilingly: 

The sages said : 

49. Is this your son or grandson, old lady? Who is this 
Gautama? Tell us the truth, O gentle lady. 

After saying this those brahmins laughed. 

50-54. (They went on saying thus) “O saintly lady, truly 
the fruit of penance has been said to be powerful. By means of 
penance one attains peace and tranquility. If one is incompe¬ 
tent one is faced with exhaustion. O splendid lady, only he who 
views (everyone) with equanimity has peace and tranquility. 
Truthful speech amounts to the protection of what has been 
acquired in the course of many births. 

Of what avail is profuse speech now. It is practically mean¬ 
ingless and worthless. You alone are blessed lady endowed 
with good fortune in this world. Tell us (is it not so?). 

Your sins have been burnt by austerities you have practised. 
You have been glorified by your exertion in performing penance. 



890 


Brahma Purdna: Gautaml-Mahatmya 


In this world, you have become lean and emaciated by prac¬ 
tising austerities and subjugating your sense-organs, by worship¬ 
ful hospitality to the guests and the nursing and nurturing of 
your son. Let not the body be nourished by accumulating 
sins. 

55-60. Mercifulness, charitable gift, penance, truthful¬ 
ness, cleanliness, subjugation of sense-organs, worshipful hospi¬ 
tality to the guests, quiescence, protection of sons etc.—by means 
of all these you are maintaining your duty. If anyone has only 
such activities as are conducive to the acquisition of what is 
required by his belly, he is considered certainly fit to be confined 
to hell. O beautiful iady, tell me who is that woman who endures 
all miseries? Who is that woman who is on a par with a dog (for 
miserable life)? A woman even of good eyebrows should be con¬ 
sidered unholy if she is devoid of husband and sons. O splendid 
lady, certainly you are endowed with virtue because of your 
continuous hospitality to the guests. You are feeding brahmins 
with cooked food. Although you are very old and bereft of 
your husband you are still virtuous and splendid. Although 
you are deformed (physically) you must be considered beauti¬ 
ful. Although you have no wealth you are still rich. Penance 
has been performed by you with good concentration. Ekan- 
gu§$ha (standing on a single toe) and similar other severe 
and difficult penances have been performed by you. 

61. Lord of Lak§mi (i.e. Visnu) has been worshipped very 
well by you in your previous birth with devotion. Good charit¬ 
able gifts have been distributed, sacrifices with good monetary 
gifts have been performed (by you.) 

62. Holy centres have been duly visited and plenty of gifts 
have been given and much has been sacrificed. Hence Gautama, 
the knower of the Vedas has been obtained by you as son. 

63. He is conversant with all the principles of Vedas and 
Vedangas; he is well read in all the scriptures. A son (like) 
Gautama is very difficult to obtain even by the merit of all the 
three worlds. 

64. (Defective Verse) Is he your great-grandson, grandson 
or son ? Or is he your daughter’s son? Sesainum seeds are causes 
of satisfaction through a son but in the case of daughter’s son 
they are like those kept in a leather bag. 



37.65-74 


891 


65-66. O old lady with plenty of penance, through this 
boy you will attain the great region of Vi$nu or a pure befitting 
family (in the next birth). In this matter no worry need be felt.” 

Thereupon some of the disciples of sages said in surprise: 
“A youthful woman is poison unto an old man but a young man 
is like nectar unto an old woman. Oh, the conjunction of desir¬ 
able and undesirable things has been seen by us after a long 
period.” 

Brahma said : 

67. Thus spoke some of them even as the couple were lis¬ 
tening to their talk. 

After saying this and after receiving due hospitality the 
great sages went away. 

68. On hearing the talk of the sages the couple were ashamed 
and sorry. The highly intelligent Gautama in the company 
of his wife asked Agastya the great excellent sage: 

Gautama said : 

69. What is that land or holy centre where happiness can 
be had? What is that place which bestows worldly pleasures 
and salvation? O highly intelligent one, tell me quickly. 

Agastya said : 

70-71. These words have been heard by me from the sages 
who had been narrating the same: “All desires are realised 
in Gautami river”. Hence go, O sage of great intellect, to 
Gautami, the destroyer of sins. I shall follow you. Do as you 
please. 

Brahmd said : 

72-73. On hearing these words of Agastya Gautama and the 
old lady went there. That holy sage performed penance along 
with his wife. He eulogized lord Visnu and Sambhu. The holy 
sage propitiated Ganga on behalf of his wife. 

Gautama said : 

74. Like a tree unto the travellers in the desert, O Siva, 
you in the company of your consort are the sole refuge unto 
those persons who are distressed in this world. 



892 


Brahma Purdna: Gauatmi-Mdhalmya 


75. You entirely remove the sins of all living beings—high 
and low. O Kr§na, you are like the cloud to the planets that 
wither due to drought. 

76. O GautamI, you are the ladder leading to the fort of 
Vaikuntha that is difficult of access. You are the river of nectar. 
Be the refuge of seven (? worlds) coming beneath. 

Brahmd said : 

77. Then the delighted GautamI, worthy of being sought 
refuge in, spoke to Gautama who was accompanied by the old 
woman, who had sought refuge in her and who was in great 
distress. 

GautamI said : 

78-80. Pour my water over your beloved wife after conse¬ 
crating it with Mantras. Pour the water out of pots sanctified 
with Mantras and other modes of worshipful service. She will 
then become beautiful with all her limbs rendered youthful. 
She will have conjugal felicity, fascinating eyes and good traits. 
She will attain beautiful physical form. Your beautiful wife 
shall pour water over you. That being done you will have all 
good traits in full and you will attain a beautiful form. 

Brahmd said : 

81. At the instance of Ganga they said ‘yes’ and did as they 
were told. Both of them obtained beautiful form by the grace 
of GautamI. 

82. The water used for pouring became a river; it became 
well known, O excellent sage, by the name of the old woman. 

83. It was known as ‘VrddhanadL’ Similarly, Gautama 
was called ‘Vrddhagautama’. He was so called by the sages 
staying along with them. 

The old woman said to GautamI Ganga in visible form : 
Vfddhd said : 

84-85. O goddess, let this river be called Vyddha after my 
name. Let its confluence with you be an excellent holy centre. 
By means of holy dip, charitable gifts, Homas etc., let it be 
conducive to the increase of beauty, good fortune, wealth. 



37.86—38.7 


893 


sons and grandsons. Let it bestow longevity, health and 
welfare. Let it give victory and increase pleasure. Let it 
sanctify the manes. 

Brahmd said : 

86. “Let it be so”, said Ganga to the old lady, the beloved 
wife of Gautama. The Linga installed by Gautama is glorified 
by the name Vrddha. 

87-88. The excellent sage attained great joy there itself 
along with the old woman. The holy dip and charitable gifts 
there are the bestower of all desired things. 

Thereafter, that holy centre is called Vfddha Sangama. 


CHAPTER THIRTYEIGHT 
Sixteen thousand holy centres 

1 • The holy centre named Ilatlrtha is one that brings about 
spiritual achievement of men. It sanctifies men who commit 
(even) such (heinous) sins as brahmin slaughter etc. It bestows 
all cherished things. 

2. Once a ruler of men named Ila born of the family of 
Vivasvan (Sun) went to the hunting forest along with a large 
army. 

3. He wandered over the forest infested with beasts of prey, 
full of birds of various shapes and sizes and rendered beautiful 
by the branches of trees. 

4. Wandering over the forest with his mind inclined to the 
sport of hunting the excellent king determined to stay there. 
Ila said to his ministers: 

Ila said : 

5. All of you go to the city looked after and protected by 
my son. May you all look after the welfare of the land, treasury, 
army, kingdom as well as the Prince. 

6-7. Let Vasisj-ha too go like my intelligent father accom¬ 
panied ky his wives. I shall stay in the forest maintaining 



894 


Brahma Purdya : Gautami-Mdhdtmya 


sacrificial fires. I shall stay here with a few horses, elephants 
and men who can enjoy forest pleasures and who are skilled 
in the sport of hunting. Let all others go back to the city from 
here. 

Brahmd said : 

8-10. Saying “So be it** they went away. King Ila him¬ 
self went to the mountain Himavat slowly. Staying on the 
Himavat full of jewels the king saw a cave wonderfully studded 
with different jewels. A certain Yaksa leader known as Samanyu 
lived in that cave on that beautiful excellent mountain. His 
wife Sama was devoted to her husband and eagerly engaged in 
rendering service to him. 

11-16. That highly intelligent Yaksa roamed about here 
and there in his forest as he pleased, accompanied by his wife. 
He sported about dancing and singing. Though he had assumed 
the form of a deer the Yaksa could know (whatever happened 
there). But Ila did not know that the cave was (used as 
residence by and) under the protection of the Yaksa. That abode 
of the Yaksa was large and wonderfully embellished with many 
jewels. There the king stayed surrounded by a large army. He 
stayed in the abode all alone. The Yaksa who was accompanied 
by his wife and who had assumed the form of a deer was furious 
over this trespass. He thought thus: “I am not strong enough 
to defeat Ila. If I request him he is not likely to give my 
abode back to me. My abode has been taken away by him. 
How can I kill this arrogant fellow in battle?” After thinking 
thus he (wanted to) send his own heroic followers, the bow¬ 
bearing Yaksas. 

Yaksa said : 

17. Defeat king Ila in battle, Ila who is arrogant because 
he possesses elephants. It behoves you to do that which will 
make him leave and go elsewhere from my home. 

Brahmd said : 

18-21. At those words of the Yaksa leader all those Yak§as 
proud and undaunted in battle went to Ila and said: “Go out 
of this cave-home. Otherwise, you will be defeated in battle 



38.22-30 


895 


and have to run out of this”. At those words of the Yak$as, 
the emperor fought with them in anger. After defeating the 
Yak§as, he stayed there for ten nights. With his abode taken 
away and with his servants killed the Yak§a leader assumed the 
form of.a deer and stayed in the forest along with his wife. Wor¬ 
ried over the situation he spoke to the Yaksini, his beloved wife 
in the form of a doe. 

Yaksa said : 

22. O beloved, how will I conquer (this king) who is strong, 
invincible, proud on account of glory and heroism, blind due to 
arrogance and very much attached to the sport of hunting? 

Yaksini said : 

23. Tell me, O loved one, is there any means of subduing 
his arrogance? If my words (or deeds) can help, tell me. I shall 
do that. 

Yaksa said : 

24-25. O lady of excellent waist, there is a means of sub¬ 
duing the arrogance of the king. O lady of great fortune, 
do that whereby the pride of this king is driven away. It will 
be splendid and pleasing to me. 

O blessed lady, go to that place where this silly king is staying. 

26-27. There you reveal yourself in front of Ila after assu¬ 
ming the form of a hind, O splendid lady. Draw king Ila to the 
forest known as Umavana. O lady of good fortune, attract 
that king who is staying in my abode and who is very much 
attached to the sport of hunting. Let the evil-minded one attain 
the form of a woman. 

28. O beloved, this king is evil-minded and is indulging in 
vices. He will fall into adversity through this. This is the means 
thereof that has been thought of by me. 

29. The kingdoms of all kings come to an end through 
the increase of sins and indulgence in vices. Assuming the form 
of a charming hind lead him on to the forest Umavana, O lady 
of good eyebrows. 

30. If this king gets in there he will undoubtedly become a 
woman. £) gentle lady, this should be done by you. It is not 



896 Brahma PurAiia: Gautami-Mah&tmya 

proper for me because I am a man. You are a woman and a 
Yakginf besides. 

Takfini said: 

3 1. How is it that you should not go to the excellent forest 
Umavana? What will be the harm if you go there? Tell me 
that briefly. 

Taksa said : 

32. Siva roamed about as he pleased on the excellent moun¬ 
tain, Himavat accompanied by Uma and followed by Devas 
and his Ganas. Once Parvatl said to Sankara standing alone 
in an isolated place: 

33-35. ‘‘This is the nature of women that they would love 
to have sexual dalliance in secret. Hence, O lord of Devas, 
give me a fixed place well guarded at your behest and known 
as Umavana. 

O lord, excepting you, Ganesa, Kartikeya and Nandin who¬ 
ever enters this place should be turned into a woman.” 

36. Order was accordingly given by the delighted lord with 
the Moon on his crest. What is it that a man does not do, on 
being lovingly requested by his beloved? Hence I should not go 
to the excellent Umavana. 

Brahmd said : 

37. On hearing the words of her husband the Yaksin! who 
could assume any form as she pleased and whose eyes were large, 
became a hind and appeared in front of Ila. 

38-40. The Yaksa remained there alone. The king espied 
the hind. On seeing the hind the king who was particularly 
attached to the sport of hunting started by himself and followed 
the hind seated on his horse. She (the Yaksin!) attracted the 
king who was overwhelmed by (the spirit of) hunting and gra¬ 
dually went to that forest called Umavana. In some places 
(on certain occasions) she became invisible and in some places 
she revealed herself. 

41. Standing still, sometimes walking andl running as though 



38.42-53 


897 


she was afraid, that hind of roving eyes dragged him on to 
the forest of Umavana. 

42-46. Following closely riding on his horse he reached 
that forest Umavana. On realising that he had entered Uma¬ 
vana, the Yaksini who could assume any form she desired aban¬ 
doned the form of the hind and assumed a divine form. She 
stood near an ASoka tree with one of her hands resting on its 
branch. The young maiden Sama who had assumed a divine 
form and who had applied (over her body) sweet smelling 
divine unguents (was delighted) because she had achieved 
her object. The tired king Ila was searching for the hind with 
rolling eyes. Fully remembering what her husband had said 
she smilingly looked at the king and said to him. 

Sama said : 

47. O delicate-limbed one, O young maiden, O Ila, where 
are you going alone seated on a horse and dressed like a man. 
Whom will you follow? 

Brahma said : 

48-52. On hearing (himself addressed by) the name Tla’ 
the king became furious and rebuked the hind. Still the 
Yaksini said, “O Ila, what is it you are looking for?” On hearing 
(himself addressed by) the name Tla’ the king who was seated 
on the horse holding the bow and who had conquered the 
three worlds became angry and showed her the bow. Again 
she said to the noble-souled king: “O Ila, see for yourself. 
Tell me thereafter whether I am speaking the truth or lying”. 
Thereupon the king surveyed himself and saw the pair of pro¬ 
truding breasts between his arms. He became bewildered won¬ 
dering what had happened to himself. 

Ila. said : 

What has happened to me? Surely you must know it clearly. 
Tell me everything precisely. Tell me, O woman of holy rites, 
who you are. 

The Yakfini said : 

53.- Samanyu, my husband, stays in an excellent cave of 



898 Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mdhdtmya 

the Himalayas. He is the lord of Yak?as. He is prosperous. I 
am his wife, a Yaksini. 

54-56. It was his Yak?as who had been killed by you out 
of delusion without a formal fight. It was in his splendidly cool 
cave that you had been seated. In order to make you come out 
from the same, I assumed the form of a hind and entered the 
forest Umavana. You too entered it. Formerly, Mahesvara 
had declared: “The ignorant man who comes within this range 
will acquire womanhood”. That is why you have attained 
womanhood. It does not behove you to grieve over this. Even a 
mature person cannot know the mysterious future. 

Brahmd said : 

57. On hearing the words of the Yaksini (the king) seated 
on the horse fell down. After pacifying him the Yaksini said 
again: 

Yakfini said : 

58. You have once for all become a woman. It does not 
behove you to strive to regain manhood. Learn the arts befitting 
women. Learn all these things such as the graceful charms of a 
woman, the elegance and coquetry of a woman, nay, all the 
activities of a woman. 

Brahmd said : 

59-60. After attaining all those accomplishments Ila said to 
Yak$inl: 

lid said : 

Who will be my husband? What is my duty? How can man¬ 
hood be attained again? Mention this to me who am particularly 
distressed. There is no better thing conducive to welfare than the 
suppression of grief of distressed people. 

Yakfini said : 

61. There is a son of the Moon named Budha (Mercury). 
O extremely fortunate lady, to the east of this forest is the her¬ 
mitage of that youth of great handsome features. 

62. It is through this path that the planet Budha goes to 
meet his father, Moon, and also to pay respects to him everyday. 



38.63-75 


899 


63. When the quiescent Budha goes (along this way) reveal 
yourself to him. O fortunate lady, on seeing him you will fulfil 
all your cherished desires. 

Brahma said : 

64. After consoling her the Yak$inl of splendid eyebrows 
vanished. She also • reported the matter to her husband, the 
Yak$a, who became happy on hearing it. 

65-67. The army of Ila that had been stationed there, went 
away. Ila stayed in the forest Umavana singing, dancing and 
pursuing activities of feminine interest. She pondered over the 
ways of Karman. Once while Ila was dancing, the intelligent 
Budha saw her on his way to meet his father. On seeing Ila, 
Budha halted on his way, approached her and said thus: 

Budha said : 

68-70. Be my wife and become comfortably placed in my 
abode as the most beloved of all women. 

Brahmd said : 

With great devotion Ila approved of the suggestion of Budha 
and did accordingly. She remembered the earlier statement of 
the Yak$irii and therefore, O sage, became satisfied. 

After taking her to his excellent home Budha indulged in 
sexual dalliance with her with great pleasure. In every respect 
she pleased her husband. After the lapse of a great deal of time 
the delighted Budha spoke to his beloved: 

Budha said : 

71-75. What is it that you wish that I should give you, O 
gentle lady? What is that delightful thought that lurks in your 
mind? 

Brahmd said : 

The moment he made that statement Ila spoke to Budha, the 
son of the Moon, who was her delighted lover: “Give me a 
son”. 

Budha said: 

This semen of mine is infallible as well as one that is the 



900 


Brahma Purina: Gautami-Mahdtmya 


outcome of great delight. Hence you will have a son who will 
be a Kgatriya well known all over the world. He will be the 
founder of Lunar dynasty. He will be like the Sun in brilliance. 
He will be on a par with Brhaspati in intelligence. He will be 
equal to the Earth in forbearance. He will be like a lion in vigour 
and vitality in the battle-field. In anger he will be on a par 
with the Fire-god. 

Brahmd said : 

76. At the nativity of the noble son of Budha, there were 
cries of “Victory” everywhere in the abode of Devas. 

77. When the son of Budha was born the great Devas came 
there. With great joy, O highly intelligent one, I too came there. 

78-79. The moment he was born, the boy made a highly 
pitched loud sound. Hence the sages and Devas who had gathe¬ 
red there said, “Since his sound was loud (Puru—loud, great; 
Rava—Sound), he shall be Pururavas”. Delighted in their 
minds they named him so. 

80. Budha taught his son all the splendid arts of a Ksatriya. 
At that time Budha taught his son the science of archery along 
with its practical application. 

81. Like the moon in the bright half of the lunar month 
he grew up very fast. 

Once that highly intelligent boy noticed that his mother 
Ila was overwhelmed by sorrow. He humbly bowed down to 
I la and said : 

Aila said : 

82. Budha, my father, is your beloved husband, O mother. 
I, your son, am skilful. Wherefore then do you have this mental 
anguish? 

Ili said ; 

83-84. It is true, dear son, that Budha is my husband and 
you, my son, are a mine of virtues. I have never experienced 
any worry on account of my husband or son. Still, O highly 
intelligent one, I am worried because I frequently recollect a 
former misery. 

Then he said to his mother: 



38.85-96 


901 


Aila said : 

85-86. Tell me at once, my dear mother. 

Brahmd said : 

Ila spoke to him thus: “It is a secret. How can I tell you? 
Still 1 shall tell you, my dear son, since the son is the ultimate 
resort of parents. A son is the exceedingly splendid ship for 

those who are about to sink in the ocean of miserv.” 

€ 

Brahma said : 

87-89. On hearing those words of his mother the humble 
son placed her feet on his head and said to her with choking 
words with his eyes filled with tears: “If a son does not 
remove the difficulty of his parents by means of remedies 
(at his disposal), then, alas, his birth and life are futile. Though 
alive, he is (no better than) dead. Holy rites such as resorting 
to pilgrim centres, distribution of charitable gifts, performance 
of sacrifices, penances and other things are meritorious only 
when they are performed by a person who has pleased his parents. 
Speak out, my dear mother, all those thoughts that lurk in your 
mind as they are.” 

She spoke to her son with the lower lip hanging loosely down 
on account of her hot breaths. Excited like one about to be 
drowned in the ocean of misery she narrated everything in the 
manner it had occurred. 

90-96. She narrated all these details: The family of the 
Iksvakus born of the Solar dynasty, her own birth therein (as 
a man), her name (as a man), his dear sons and wife, his priest 
Vasi$tha, his own region, departure to the forest, sending off 
his priest and ministers back to the city, of his indulgence in the 
sport of hunting, entry into the cave of the Himalayas, access 
to the abode of the leading Yak?a, entry into the forest of Uma- 
vana and the complete transformation into a woman, the state¬ 
ment of Yaksini that no man was permitted to enter the place 
as ordered by Mahesvara, the granting of boon, the contact with 
Budha, love and the birth of a son. These and other things she 
completely narrated. After hearing everything Pururavas spoke 
to his mother: “What shall I do? What shall I do to earn merit? 
If you are satisfied with this much that is enough, O mother. 
If there is anything else in your mind please tell that also to me.” 



902 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mdhatmya 


lid said : 

97-98. I would wish for the excellent manhood. I should 
like to regain the excellent kingdom and the coronation of my 
sons, especially that of yours. I should like to do all these, viz. 
to give charitable gifts, to perform sacrifice and to be on the path 
of salvation. I wish to do everything by virtue of your favour 
my dear son. 

The son said : 

99. I am asking you the means whereby you will attain 
manhood. Tell me exactly whether it is through penance 
or through some other means. 

Ild said : 

100. Dear Son, go and ask Budha your father. He knows 
everything precisely. He will advise you what is conducive to 
your welfare. 

Brahma said : 

101. At those words of his mother, Aila immediately went 
to his father. After bowing down to him he asked him what 
he and his mother should do. 

Budha said : 

102-103. I know Ila, O highly intelligent one. I know he 
was transformed into Ila. I know how he entered the forest 
Umavana and also the command of Sambhu. Hence the redemp¬ 
tion from the curse shall be only through the favour of Sambhu 
and that of Uma. Only by propitiating them can the curse be 
removed and not otherwise. 

Purtiravas said : 

104. How can I see that lord as well as mother Uma? 
Shall it be through any holy centre or through penance? Father, 
mantion this at the outset. 

Budha said: 

105. Dear Son, go to Gautami. The glorious Siva who dis- 



38 * 106-115 


903 


pels curses and bestows boons stays there always accompanied 
by Uma. 

Brahma said : 

106-110. On hearing the words of his father Pururavas 
became delighted. Wishing for the manhood of his mother, 
hurrying to perform penance, the intelligent (son of Budha) 
went to the Gautamigariga that sanctifies the three worlds, after 
bowing down to the Himalaya mountain, his mother, father 
and preceptor. Ila and the son of Moon followed their son 
who went ahead. From the excellent mountain Himavat all of 
them came to Gautaml. 

They took their holy bath there and performed penance for 
a short while. Thereafter, they recited the splendid cuology of 
Bhava, the lord of Devas. Listen to the order of their etiologies. 
Budha euologized first, then Ila and then their son Pururavas 
eulogized goddess Gauri and Sankara. 

Budha said : 

111. Let those two deities be my refuge; those two deities 
who take delight in the sound of the girdle, who resemble the 
natural gold, who have good features and who are worshipped 
by Skanda and Ganesvara. They are worthy of being sought 
refuge in. 

lid said : 

112-113. Let Sankari and Sankara be my refuge. Medita¬ 
ting upon those two deities, the embodied beings who have been 
scorched by the forest fire of the three types of worldly distresses, 
attain the greatest beatitude immediately. 

I am distressed. My mind has been afflicted. There is no 
one other than you to protect me from suffering, distress 
etc. O lord, your feet are extremely meritorious and worthy of 
being sought refuge in. Let them be by my refuge. 

PurUravas said : 

114-115. Gauri and Hara are worthy of being sought refuge 
in by the entire universe. They are the immanent souls of the 
universe. This entire (visible universe) rises from, prospers in 



904 Brahma Purina : Gautami-Mihitmya 

and finally merges with those two deities. Let them be my 
refuge. 

In the course of a great festival Devas said, “O Isa, touch 
and hold the feet of the daughter of the lord of mountains”. As 
soon as this was said they were lovingly held by Siva. Let those 
two feet be my refuge. They are worthy of being sought refuge 
in. 

The eminent goddess said : 

116. What is it that you all wish to have? What shall I 
grant you all—tell me. You have performed that which is diffi¬ 
cult even unto Devas. Welfare unto you all. Be satisfied, for 
you have done your duty. 

PurUravas said : 

117. King Ila had unwittingly entered your forest, O Am- 
bika (Mother). O goddess of Devas, forgive him. It behoves you 
to grant him manhood. 

Brahma said : 

118. “So be it” said the goddess to all of them, the goddess 
who abided by the opinion of Bhava. Then the lord who is always 
devoted to the utterances of the goddess said: 

Siva said : 

119*122. Let this king regain his manhood merely by taking 
a holy plunge here. 

Brahmi said: 

Water oozed out from the body of Ila as she took her holy 
dip. Whatever she had acquired from Yak$ini, such as dance, 
music, graceful charms etc. entered the waters of Ganga along 
with the continuous flow of water and the following rivers issued 
forth: Njtya (Dance), Gita (Song) and Saubhagya (Conjugal 
Felicity). They also joined Ganga. These three confluences are 
very holy. Holy plunge and charitable gift in these confluences 
bestow the benefit of the kingdom of Devas. 

123. After regaining manhood by the favour of Gauri and 
Sambhu Ila performed the Vajapeya sacrifice for the achieve¬ 
ment of great prosperity. 



38,124—39.6 


905 


124-125. That excellent king brought all these: his priest 
Vasi§tha, his wife and sons, his ministers, his army, and his trea¬ 
sury. Then he established a kingdom in the Dantfaka with the 
four types of military units. There that city became well known 
after the name of Ila. 

i 126-128. This charming town in the valley of Sahya sur¬ 
passes even the city of Mahendra. 

After getting fed up with the enjoyment of worldly pleasures 
in that excellent city he crowned his sons born previously, in 
the kingdom that had come to him by succession in the Solar 
dynasty. Afterwards he sprinkled (the holy water) on Alia with 
great affection saying, “Let this (boy) be the founder of the 
Lunar dynasty (and) a glorious king.” 

O sage, (in fact) he became more intelligent and excellent 
than all others (and so) the eldest. 

129-131 Sixteen thousand holy centres grew up in the pla¬ 
ces where the splendid sacrifices were performed by king Ila, 
where he met the sons after regaining his manhood and where the 
rivers arising from the faculty of dance, music, conjugal felicity, 
auspiciousness etc. bastowed by Yak§ini joined Ganga, O Narada. 
The holy centres grew up on both the banks. O dear one, Sambhu 
is called Ilesvara here. Holy dip, charitable gifts etc. in them 
fjestow the benefit of all sacrifices. 


CHAPTER THIRTYNINE 
Cakra .Tirtha 

Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre famous as Cakratlrtha destroys sins of 
brahmin-slaughter etc. because it was here that lord Hari ob¬ 
tained <his discus. 

, 2. The place where Lord Visnu stood and worshipped San- 

ikara far the sake of discus is mentioned as Cakratlrtha. 

3-6. By merely listening to it one is freed from all sins. 



906 


Brahma Purdna: Gautami-Mahatmya 


Once Daksa began a sacrifice. When Devas had gathered, 
lord Siva was slandered and insulted by Dak§a in the assembly 
of Devas. The great lord was slighted. Daksa’s mind was so 
polluted that he wantonly neglected to invite the lord of Devas. 
SaU, the daughter of Daksa, heard the reason for not inviting 
Siva- when it was mentioned by Ahalya. The goddess of Devas 
became angry. “I shall destroy my father who is a sinner. 

I will not forgive him at all”, said she on hearing the derogatory 
remarks made by her father against her husband. 

7-9. “Where is the limit to the sins of those women who 
listen to the censure of their husbands. Whatever may be his 
nature or status the husband is the ultimate resort of women. 
What doubt is there then in regard to Mahadeva, the lord of 
everything, the preceptor of the Universe? His censure has been 
heard by me. I shall therefore not hold on to this despicable 
body. I shall cast off this body.” 

After saying thus that goddess of Devas, the highly chaste 
lady, was overwhelmed by great fury and she blazed. 

10-12. With thoughts directed towards Siva alone she 
abandoned her body through yogic power. 

Mehesvara heard everything from Narada. On hearing 
it he became angry. He asked Jaya and Vijaya 1 and both of 
them said that Daksayani’s (Daksa’s daughter’s) (ultimate wish) 
was the destruction of the sacrifice of Daksa. 

On hearing this, Mahesvara went to the place of sacrifice 
surrounded by his terrible Ganas. He went along with the se¬ 
nior Bhutas (ghosts). 

13. That sacrifice sponsored by Brahma and Devas was 
entirely surrounded by them. It had been guarded with purity 
of mind by Dak$a, the sacrifices 

14. It had been looked after from all round by Vasistha 
and other formidable sages. It had been well protected every¬ 
where by Indra, Adityas, Vasus and others. 

15-16. It had been embellished with the Vedas, Rk, Yajus . 

1. According to Vamana Purana, Jaya was a daughter of sage Gautama 
by Ahalya in addition to Jayanti and Aparajita. Vijaya was presumably another 
name of either of the latter two. 



39.17-27 


907 


and Saman as well as the utterances of Svaha. It had been ador¬ 
ned all round by Sraddha (Faith),Pustf (Nourishment), Tus^i 
(Satisfaction), Santi (Peace), Lajja (Bashfulness), Sarasvati 
(Speech), Bhumi (Earth), Dyau (Heaven), Sarvari (Night), 
K$anti (Forbearance), Usa (Dawn). Asa (Hope), Jaya (Vi¬ 
ctory), Mati (Intellect) as well as others. 

17-19. It had been constructed by Visvakarman and the 
noble Tvastf. It was splendidly flourishing with cherished de¬ 
sires (fulfilled) through these divine cows that showered any¬ 
thing anyone desired, viz. Surabhi, Nandim, Kamadhuk and 
Kamadohini. There were the trees and creepers of Kalpa, Pari- 
jata, Kalpalata etc. In fact whatever is the most covetable thing 
was present in that sacrifice there. It was well protected by Indra, 
Pu§an and Hari themselves. 

20. These utterances were heard all round, viz. “Let this 
be given,” “Let this be eaten”; “Let this be done”, “Stay here 
happily”. Thus the sacrifice of Dak$a had been honoured. 

21-24. It was Vlrabhadra accompanied by Bhadrakali 
who went ahead. He was full of sorrow and anger in his mind. 
Afterwards holding the spear and Pinaka bow Mahadeva followed 
bedecked by the great Bhutas (spirits). Those spirits encircled 
the sacrifice all round Mahesvara. They destroyed the sacrifice. 
A great commotion ensued there. Some of them fled. Some 
went to Siva and began to eulogize the lord of Devas. Some 
were angry with Sankara. On seeing the sacrifice destroyed thus 
Pu?an came there. 

25. After uprooting the teeth of Pu§an Vlrabhadra routed 
Indra in a trice. O brahmin, he pierced and split the eyes of 
Bhaga. 

26. Again, he whirled the Sun-god with his arms and hurled 
him down. Thereupon, all Devas sought refuge in Visnu. 

Devas said : 

27. Save us, save us, O lord with the club in hands, from 
the danger arising from the leader of the Bhutas. There is a 
certain Gana (attendant) of Mahesvara. He is the leader of 
Pramathas. Even as Hari was watching the entire sacrifice 
pertaining to Vignu the entire sacrifice was destroyed. 



908 


Brahma Purdrn : Gautamt-Mdhdtmya 


Brahmd said : 

28. In order to kill the leader of Bhutas the discus was dis^ 
charged by Hari. As it advanced and approached him the 
leader of Bhutas grasped it. 

29. When the discus of Vi?nu was grasped, the guardians 
of the quarters went away due to fear. On seeing the sacrifice 
(destroyed) and Devas in that (agitated) state the Patriarch 
Dak§a eulogized lord Siva with devotion. 

Dakfa said : 

30-35. Be victorious, O Sankara, lord of Soma (Moon). 
Be victorious, O omniscient one. Salutation to you. Be victo¬ 
rious, O Sambhu the benefactor, be victorious. Salutation to the 
lord identical with time or God of Death. O primordial maker, 
salutation to you. O blue-throated one, salutation to you. 

O lord fond of Brahman, salutation to you. O lord in the form 
of Brahman, salutation to you. O lord, Paramesvara of three 
abodes, obeisance to the three-formed lord. O lord having all 
as your form (or Multiformed one), obeisance to you. O lord, 
the support of the three worlds, the bestower of cherished desires, 
obeisance to you, who can be realized only through Vadanta. 
Obeisance to you, the supreme soul. O lord with sacrifice for 
your form, obeisance to you. O lord, the abode of sacrifice, 
obeisance to you. O lord, the bestower of sacrifice, salutation to 
you. O the conveyor of sacrificial offerings, obeisance to you. 
O lord, obeisance to you, the destroyer of sacrifice. Obeisance 
to you, the distributor of benefits, O lord of universe. Save me, 
save me. O lord, fond of those who seek refuge in you. O lord, 
you alone are the refuge of devotees as well as non-devotees. 

Brahmd said : 

36. As he eulogized thus, Mahesvara became pleased with 
him and said to him, “What shall I give you”? (He replied) 
“O lord, let my sacrifice be complete”. 

37. “So be it” said Mahesvara, lord of Devas, Sankara, the 
soul of all living beings and the ocean of mercy. 

38. After making the sacrifice of Daksa complete, O sage, 
and after saying thus the lord vanished along with his Bhutas. 



39 . 39-49 


909 


39-40. Devas went away to their respective abodes in the 
manner they came. 

Then once a great battle ensued between Devas and Daityas. 
Therein Devas became afraid of Daityas. With complete devo¬ 
tion Devas eulogized Visnu, the lord of Sri in the following words: 

Devas said : 

41-42. Indra and other Devas perform penance seeking 
the benign side-glance of LaksmI. We seek refuge in that lord, 
who has become Brahman and to whose feet Lak§ml is devoted. 

In all the three worlds there is none equal or superior to 
Nrsimha whose vehicle is Garuda. With great sympathy, let 
that lord of Devas protect all of us who have sought refuge in 
him from great dangers. 

Brahma said : 

43. Thereupon the lord holding the conch, discus and club 
became pleased and said to them: ‘‘What for have all of you 
come? I shall do it for you.” 

Devas said : 

44. O slayer of Madhu, Devas have an excessive danger 
from Daityas. Hence, O Lord, try to save them. 

Brahmd said : 

45-46. Hari said, “O Devas, my discus has been caught 
hold of by Hara. What shall I do? The discus is gone and all 
of you have fallen into misery. Yet your protection will be 
afforded by me. Let all Devas go back. 

Brahma said : 

47. Then, after Devas had gone Vi§nu prepared himself to 
get the discus. After going to Godavari he began the worship of 
&ambhu. 

48. With great devotion Visnu performed the daily worship 
of the consort of Uma with a thousand divine sweet smelling 
golden lotuses. 

49. “Obeisance, the Pinaka-bearing Mahes'a, who removes 
great danger in the forest of worldly existence and who fulfils 
all cherished desires”. 



910 


Brahma Ptirdna : Gautami Mdndtmya 


50. By means of this Mantra and with the mind endowed 
with devotion lord Visnu worshipped Siva, the lover of 
Bhavani. 

51-52. As the worship proceeded something happened 
between them. Listen to that. The lotuses were found to be 
one short of a thousand. When Visnu noticed the shortage he 
dislodged his own eye and offered Arghya. 1 Taking the vessel 
of Arghya containing a thousand lotuses and meditating on 
Sambhu, Hari who had no other refuge, offered Arghya. 

Vi$nu said : 

53. O lord, you alone know the innermost feelings of men. 
You alone are refuge and overlord. What doubt can be there ? 

Brahmd said : 

54. Speaking thus with tears welled up in his eyes he got 
himself merged as though with I svara. Then Sambhu appeared 
in front of him, accompanied by Bhavani. 

55. He embraced Hari closely and filled him with various 
boons. He got back his original eye as well as discus. 

56-58. Then all Devas eulogized Hari and Sankara. They 
eulogized Ganga the most excellent of all rivers as well as the 
bull-bannered lord. Thenceforth that holy centre is remembered 
as Cakratlrtha. Merely by listening to it one is freed from all 
sins. He who performs the rites of holy dip, charitable gifts and 
libation to the manes, shall be rid of all sins. He will attain 
heaven along with the ancestors. This holy centre can be seen 
with a mark of discus even today. 


CHAPTER FORTY 
Cakrefvara and other Holy Centres 

Brahmd said : 

1-4. The holy centre Pippala comes after Cakratlrtha 
because the lord here is called CakreSvara and it was from here 

1. Things such as water, honey etc. offered to deities, guest etc. as a token 
of respect. 



40.5-15 


911 


that lord Hari obtained his discus. The place where Vi?nu him¬ 
self stood and worshipped Lord Sankara for getting the discus 
back is cited as Gakratirtha. They know the place as Pippala 
where Sambhu became pleased with Vi?nu. Even &c?a is not 
competent to narrate its glory. Listen, O Narada, to the reason 
for the name Pippalesa given to Cakrcgvara. Listen to it with 
devotion because what is mentioned in the Vedas is being 
recounted by me. 

5. There was a famous sage named Dadhlci. He was en¬ 
dowed with good qualities. His wife was a chaste lady of noble 
birth and highly intelligent. 

6. She was the sister of that lady well known as Lopamudra. 
She was famous by the name Gabhastini and glorified as 
Vadava. 

7. She was the beloved wife of Dadhici. He performed 
penance regularly along with her. Dadhici was devoted to the 
duties of a householder and he always maintained the sacred 
fire. 

8. He resorted to Ganga and was devoted to the propitia¬ 
tion of gods and guests. He was fondly attached to his wife. He 
was as calm as Agastya. 

9-10. Due to his spiritual power Daityas and Danavas 
came to that region, O great sages. It was there that Agastya 
too had his hermitage. After defeating Daityas who came for 
attacking them Devas, Rudras, Adityas, twin brothers Alvins, 
Indra, Visnu, Yama and the Fire-god came there. 

1 i. They were excessively delighted by their victory. They 
were eulogized by the Maruts. On seeing Dadhici, the great 
sage, the leading Devas bowed down to him. 

12. With great delight, Dadhici welcomed and honoured 
Devas severally. Accompanied by his wife he thereafter per¬ 
formed the duties of a householder to them. 

13-14. Devas were asked about their welfare and general 
happiness by him. They chatted with him. Devas who were 
delighted in their minds bowed down to sage Dadhici who was 
made happy by his wife and who was seated there. 

Devas said : 

15. What is it that is difficult to be obtained by us, O sage, 



912 Brahma Purdna: Gautaml-M&h&tmya 

in this world since a sage like you, the very Kalpa tree 1 in this 
world, is kind to us. 

16. This alone is the benefit of all living men, O excellent 
sage, viz., the holy plunge in the holy centres, kindness to all 
living beings and meeting with people like you. 

17. Listen, O sage, to what is being said by us out of 
affection. 

We have come here after defeating Daityas and killing 
Rak$asas. 

18. We are happy, O brahmin, and especially so since we 
see you here. We have no use for our weapons. Indeed, we are 
not capable of carrying them. 

19-20. We do not see, O leading sage, a place fit enough 
for keeping these weapons. If they are kept in heaven, Daityas 
will take them away. If they are kept in nether regions they 
will (surely) take them away. Hence, the weapons are being 
placed, O bestower of honour, in your sacred hermitage. 

21. There is no fear at all here, O brahmin, from Danavas 
and Raksasas. This is a sacred place well protected at your 
behest. There is no one equal to you in the power of penance. 

22-24. O most excellent one among the knowers of Brah¬ 
man, we have conquered our enemies. Daityas have already 
been killed. We don’t need our weapons any more. They have 
become burdensome since they have fulfilled their purpose. The 
place worthy of placing them is near you, O leader among 
sages. Along with our lovely maidens wc shall enjoy divine 
pleasures in the heavenly park, Nandana. Therefore, we shall 
go (now) along with Indra. We have fulfilled our tasks and we 
shall go to our respective abodes. As for the protection of 
weapons, let them be guarded by you. Therefore, bid us fare¬ 
well. You are capable of holding and guarding them. 

Brahmd said : 

25-30. On hearing their words, Dadhici said to Devas : 
“Let it be so”, although he was prevented by his wife who said 
thus : “What (have we to do) with the affairs of Devas 7 In 


1. The divine wish-fulfilling tree obtained by the churning of the ocean 
(Vide Agnipurana, Gh. 3). 



40 . 31-35 


913 


fact, it has an adverse effect. Of what avail is indulgence in 
the other people’s affairs to those who have understood scrip¬ 
tures, who abide by the supreme entity and who are free from 
attachment to the activities of the world. O sage, there is no 
happiness thereby either here or hereafter. Listen, O excellent 
brahmin, if the place (for keeping weapons) is given the enemies 
of Devas will hate us. If these weapons are lost or taken away, 
O great sage, Devas will become angry and turn into our ene¬ 
mies. Hence, O excellent one among the knowers of Vedas, 
this excessive affectionate attachment to other people’s objects 
is not proper. As long as the material kept in deposit exists 
there is friendship, but once it is lost or taken away they will 
become' our enemies. If one has power to give away things in 
charity, he should give them to the needy without any thought. 
If not, good people should help others by speech, thoughts and 
acts. But keeping things belonging to other peoples is repu¬ 
diated by good people. Therefore, my dear husband, get rid of 
(these weapons) immediately.” 

Brahma said : 

31-34. On hearing these words of his beloved wife the 
brahmin said thus to his wife of splendid eyebrows. 

Dadhici said : 

Having given consent at first to Devas, O gentle lady, 
saying “No” to them will not give me any pleasure. 

Brahrid said : 

On hearing these words of her husband the beloved wife 
(of Dadhici) remained silent, thinking “Excepting the fate 
nothing else is capable of doing anything to men.” At that 
opportune moment the excellent Devas deposited those highly 
shining weapons, bowed down to the great sage and went to 
their abodes. After depositing their weapons in a safe place 
Devas became contented. 

When Devas had gone, the excellent sage Jived in great 
delight while practising virtue in the company of his wife. 

35. A long time elapsed. A thousand years according to 
the reckoning of Devas passed away. Devas neither spoke 



914 Brahma Purdna : Gautami-M&h&tmya 

about their weapons* O great sage, nor did they seem to think 
about them. 

36. Dadhlci said to Gabhasti : “O gentle lady, Asuras are 
powerful, behaving inimically toward me. Devas do not 
appear to be desirous of taking away their weapons deposited 
with us. Tell me what is proper in the circumstances.” 

37. She said to her husband humbly: “It has already been 
said, dear lord. You know what is proper in this situation. The 
powerful Daityas, who have increased their efficiency and who 
are endowed with the power of penance will take away these 
weapons’*. 

38. Therefore, Dadhlci did thus for protecting weapons. 
He washed those weapons with holy water inspired with 
Mantras. The water absoxbed the essential splendour of all the 
weapons and Dadhlci drank this holy water. 

39. Deprived of their intrinsic splendour those weapons 
gradually wasted away as time passed by. 

Then at last Devas came and said to Dadhici : “Great 
danger from our enemies has befallen us. 

40-41. Give back those weapons, O excellent sage, which 
had been kept with you by Devas.” 

Dadhici said : “Due to the fear of asuras and also due to 
the fact that you did not come for a long time, the weapons 
have been liquefied and drunk by me. They can be said to be 
stationed in my body. What is proper in this situation, you 
may please say”. 

On hearing what was mentioned by him, Devas spoke to 
him thus with great humility. 

42. “O leading sage, give us the weapons. Can you say‘Yes’ 
or do you refuse ? Without them we will be lost for ever. Our 
enemies are powerful. Where shall we go ? 

43. Neither in the mortal world, nor in the netherworld, 
nor in the heaven, O dear one, is it possible for us to stay 
today. You are an excellent brahmin. Moreover, you are en¬ 
dowed with (the power of) penance. It is not proper to say 
anything else in your presence.” 

44. The brahmin said then : “You may take the weapons 
assimilated in my bones. There is no doubt about this.” 



40 . 45-54 


915 


Devas said to him : “Of what avail is this to us ? Without 
the weapons the great Devas have become ‘effeminate’ 

45. Again, the excellent sage said : “I shall abandon the 
spirits animating my body (as) I am endowed with the power 
of Yoga. You may make weapons out of my bones (as they have 
merged with them). Let them be excellent ones with excellent 
forms.” 

46. “Do so”, said Devas in reply to Dadhici who resembled 
Fire-god and who was never deficient in intrinsic power. At that 
time the wife of the sage was not there in the vicinity to say 
pleasing words to him, O great sage. 

47-48. Not seeing her, but afraid of her, Devas said to the 
brahmin : “Do so quickly”. With pleasure the sage cast off his 
vital spirits (ordinarily) very difficult to abandon, saying to 
them : “Use this body as you please. Let all Devas be pleased 
with my bones. What have I to do with this body ?” 

Brahmd said: 

49-50. Having said thus the noble-souled sage seated him¬ 
self in the Padmasana (“lotus pose”). He fixed his eyes at the 
tip of his nose. He was as pure as the light. By his yogic power 
he gradually led the vital air along with the gastric fire, to the 
inner portion of Daharakasa (the ethereal portion in the cavity 
of the heart). He fixed his intellect in Brahman which is im¬ 
measurable, which is the highest in status and which should be 
meditated upon. He attained identity with Brahman. 

51. On observing that his physical body had become life¬ 
less Devas in their hurry, said to Tvastr, “Make a number of 
weapons immediately”. 

52-53. He said to them: “O Devas, how should it be done? 
This terrible body is that of a brahmin. I am afraid and in¬ 
competent to make weapons. If the bones are torn off I shall 
make excellent weapons from them quickly.” 

Thereupon, Devas said to bullocks in their great hurry: 

Devas said : 

54. O bullocks, to facilitate your work your faces are made 
adamantine in a trice by Devas for getting weapons. Tear off 
the body of Dadhici and give the pure bones now. 



916 


Brahma Pur ana : G autami-Mdhdtmya 


Brakmd said : 

55. At the instance of Devas they did so. They licked the 
bones clean and gave them to Devas. Devas of brave valour 
and strength hurriedly went to their abodes and so did the 
bullocks. 

56-57. After making the weapons of gods the noble Tvasty 
went away hurriedly. 

Then, after some time, the wife of the sage who was of good 
conduct, who had been the beloved wife of her husband, who 
was gentle and who had a boy in the womb came there. She 
held in her hand a pot full of water. She was on her way back 
after worshipping Uma. Carrying fruits and flowers she came 
quickly eager to see the sacred fire, her husband and the 
hermitage. 

58. On her way, her necklace slipped from her neck and 
fell on the ground. The bangle also fell down from her wrist. 
Her right eye throbbed. Seeing all these omens she became 
distressed in her mind. 

59-61. “What calamity is going to befall me immediately?” 
She pondered thus in her mind. While she was coming home, 
the fall of a meteor prevented her from proceeding. She came 
to the hermitage in great bewilderment but did not see her 
husband in front. Wondering where could he have gone she 
asked the Fire-god. The Fire-god mentioned everything to her in 
detail—the advent of Devas, request for the bones of, the sage, 
the collection of the bones and their departure. On hearing 
everything she became distressed. Due to agitation bom of 
misery she fell on the ground. Slowly she was consoled by the 
Fire-god. She said to Fire-god: 

621-63. “I am not capable of cursing the immortal beings. 
What shall I do ? I shall enter fire.” 

Brahmd said : 

After checking her anger and grief for her husband the 
chaste lady then spoke these righteous words : 

r 64-67. “Everything that is produced in this human world 
.^ destructible too. It should not be bewailed. Meritorious 
men abandon their lives in protection of cows, brahmins and 
Devas. Blessed are those living beings Who, after obtaining an 



40.68-75 


917 


efficient body endowed with virtue in this world that whirls like 
a wheel, abandon it for Devas and Brahmins. All the vital airs 
of every embodied being are sure to go away. There is no 
doubt at all in this. After realizing this, those masterminds cast 
them off for brahmins, cows, Devas and the distressed beings. 
I had dedicated myself to him. Though prevented by me he 
agreed to keep the weapons. Who knows the mind of the creator 
whose activities are beyond the comprehension of men of mortal 
world ?” 

Brahma said : 

68-69. After saying this, she duly worshipped the sacrificial 
fires along with the skin and hairs of her husband. She slit 
open her stomach, took out her son from the womb and held 
him in her hand. After bowing to Gariga, the Earth, plants and 
trees in the penance grove and medicinal herbs, she entered 
the hermitage (once again). 

She said : 

70. This boy is bereft of his father, mother and other rela¬ 
tives born of his family. May all the groups of living beings, the 
gurdians of quarters and medicinal herbs protect him. 

71. Those who view and protect a boy bereft of his 
mother and father without any distinction from their own 
children are certainly to be honoured and saluted even by 
Brahma and others. 

Brahma said : 

72-73. After saying this the lady with her mind devoutly 
directed towards her husband cast off her son. She placed the 
boy near the holy fig-trees with the sacrificial vessel (in her 
hand). She circumambulated the fire and entered it. She went 
to heaven along with her husband. 

74. The trees in the hermitage and the residents of the 
forest who had been nurtured by the sage Dadhlci like his own 
children, began to cry. 

75. The animals, the birds and the trees, all of them said 
to one another. “We cannot live without him. Nor can we live 
without that mother*'. 



918 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mdhdtmya 


The trees said : 

76-78. Only those men are blessed and contented who 
give natural and continuous affection to the children of the 
parents who have gone to the next world. Formerly the sage 
and his wife had been treating us in a manner which (our own) 
father and mother were not habituated to. Fie on us. We are 
sinners. It is certain that hereafter, to all of us, this boy is 
Dadhlci, this boy is the mother. This is the eternal virtue. 

Brahma said : 

79. After saying thus the medicinal herbs, plants and trees 
approached king Soma (i.e. the Moon) and requested for excel¬ 
lent nectar. 

80. Soma gave them excellent nectar. They gave the boy 
the nectar that is dear to Devas. 

81. Satisfied with this, the boy grew up like the moon in 
the bright half of the lunar month. Since he had been brought 
up by the Pippalas (fruits of the fig tree), the boy was (called) 
Pippalada (the eater of Pippala fruits). After growing up 
he said to the Pippalas thus in great wonder. 

Pippalada said : 

82. Men are born of men. Birds are born of birds. Plants 
and creepers are produced from seeds. No inconsistency is seen. 
How was I with hands, feet, vital breath etc. born of you? 

Brahma said: 

83-84. On hearing his words the trees told him everything 
in the proper order viz., the death of Dadhici, the entry of the 
chaste lady into the funeral pyre, the collection of bones by 
Devas etc. On hearing these details the boy was overwhelmed 
by sorrow and he fell on the ground. 

85. He was consoled by trees by words endowed with 
meanings. On recovering he again said to those medicinal 
herbs, plants and trees : 

Pippaldda said : 

86-87. I will kill the murderers of my father. Otherwise it 
is unbearable to live. A real son maintains the friends and 



40 . 88-98 


919 


enemies of his father. He alone is the real son. Others are ene¬ 
mies in the form of sons. They say that friends of father redeem 
even the enemies. 

Brahma said : 

88. The trees took that boy to the presence of the Moon. 
Those trees intimated the utterance of the boy to Soma (Moon). 
On hearing it, Soma spoke to Pippalada : 

Soma said : 

89. Learn all the branches of knowledge in a formal way, 
my dear soil. You will attain at my behest the power of 
penance, auspicious speech, heroism, handsome features, strength 
and intellect. 

Brahma said : 

90-92. Pippalada then said to the Moon humbly : 

Pippalada said : 

I consider all these futile as long as I do not take revenge 
on the murderers of my father. Hence, tell me at the outset. In 
which land, on which occasion, by the help of which Deva or 
Mantra or holy centre can my ambition be realised, O excellent 
Deva ? 

Brahma said : 

93. After meditating for a long time the Moon said: “Whe¬ 
ther it is enjoyment of worldly pleasures or attainment of salva¬ 
tion, everything is attained undoubtedly from lord MaheSvara”. 

94. He said to the Moon again : “How will I see Mahe- 
3vara ? I am a boy with childish intelligence. I have neither 
skill nor power of penance.” 

The Moon said : 

95-98. O gentle boy, go to Gautami. Eulogize Cakresvara 
Siva. Dear boy, with a very little effort, the lord will be pleased 
with you, the merciful lord will be pleased. Sambhu has been 
realised personally by Vi$nu the powerful lord. He granted 
boons to Visnu and the discus honoured by the Devas. Go 
there, O highly intelligent one. Go to the river Gautami in the 
Danqlaka forest. The medicinal herbs know that holy centre 



920 


Brahma Parana: Gautaml-M&h&tmya 


CakreSvara. After going there, eulogize Sankara, lord of Devas, 
with full devotion. Delighted in his mind he will grant you all 
cherished desires. 

Brahma said : 

99-100. At the instance of the Moon, O brahmin, the sage 
Pippalada came to the place where Rudra, the lord of the uni¬ 
verse, the bestower of Discus (was present). 

Overwhelmed by a great sympathy the Pippalas (holy fig 
trees) took him to their penance groves. After taking his holy 
dip in Godavari and after bowing down to the lord of the three 
worlds, the pure Pippalada eulogized Siva with full devotion. 

Pippalada said : 

101-107. I bow down to Sambhu the primordial lord in 
whom bold and self-possessed persons seek refuge earnestly for 
their salvation. Those self-possessed persons have cast off all 
worldly desires. They have renounced all actions. They have 
controlled their minds as well as vital airs. 

He is the witness unto all. He is the immanent soul in every¬ 
one. He is the lord of all. He is the repository of all arts. Let 
that enemy of Cupid have mercy on me after understanding 
everything that is within my mind. 

The Ten-headed (Ravana) had conquered the lords of the 
quarters. He shook the Kailasa mountain honoured by Devas. 
He went down beneath the nether worlds when pressed down 
with toe (by Siva). His body was bruised. On hearing his 
piteous cries the lord laughed along with the goddess and 
granted him pardon. Though the lord had been furious, yet he 
was pleased with him. In this manner, O Mahesvara, you are 
(sometimes) a donor unto (even) undeserving persons. Bana 
became praiseworthy after performing the noble worship, beauti¬ 
ful and fascinating, unto the Moon-crested lord. By performing 
the daily worship he surpassed Indra in prosperity. 

After conquering enemies and worshipping Devas Visakha 
i.e. Skanda went ahead to bow down to his father. He became 
angry on seeing the lord of Ganas (i.e. Vinayaka) held in the 
lap. Lord Siva took him (also) in his lap and laughed. Though 
he was seated in the lap of Siva, the boy was reluctant to leave 



40 . 108-119 


921 


off the lap of his mother due to his childish innate nature. 
Unable to pacify his furious son Siva assumed his half-female 
form. 

Brahma said : 

108-109. Then the extremely delighted self-born lord spoke 
to Pippalada. 

Siva said : 

O Pippalada, welfare to you. Choose any boon as you wish. 
Pippalada said : 

110. My father of great renown who was never arrogant 
and who was truthful has been killed by Devas, O Mahadeva. 
So also my chaste mother. 

111. O lord, after hearing in detail the death of both of 
them on account of Devas, I am overwhelmed by misery and 
anger. I am not eager to live. 

112. Hence, grant me sufficient capacity to destroy Devas. 
In all the three worlds, you alone, O Moon-crested one, are 
worthy of being served by those who should not be killed. 

hvara said : 

113. O sinless one, if you are capable of looking at my 
third eye you will be competent to assail your foes. 

Brahma said : 

114. Then he desired to look at the third eye of the lord 
but could not. Then he said to Sankara : “I am not able’*. 

hvara said : 

115. O boy, do some penance so that you will be able to 
look at my third eye. Then you will undoubtedly attain your 
desire. 

Brahmd said : 

116-119. On hearing these words of Isana the son of 
Dadhici of righteous soul decided to perform penance. Although 
he was a boy he engaged himself solely in meditation on Siva 
like a powerful person, there itself for many years. Everyday he 
used to get up early in the morning, take his bath and bow 



922 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mahaimya 


down to the elders and preceptors in due order. He used to sit 
comfortably and fix his mind in theSusumna (the tubular struc¬ 
ture inside the spinal column) without thinking of anything else. 
By means of crossed arms he made the sign of Svastika over his 
navel. He forgot the world and its affairs. He thought of supe¬ 
rior excellence of one position over another. He meditated on 
the splendour of Siva. Pippalada looked at the third eye of the 
lord. With palms joined in reverence in the form of a cup he 
humbly spoke thus. 

Pippalada said : 

120-121. Formerly, this boon had been granted to me by 

Siva, the lord of Devas. The lord of Devas had said that the 
moment I was able to see the brilliant splendour of the third 
eye, whatever I wanted would happen. Hence give me that 
which will bring about destruction of enemies. 

122-123. At that very time, a voice said: “O highly brilliant 
one, your mother went to heaven after saying thus : ‘Men who 
have forgotten what is conducive to their welfare, who are 
engaged in harassing others and whose minds wander here and 
there fall into the abysmal depths of hell.’ ” 

124. On hearing that aerial voice, Pippalada became 
angry. When the fire of pride and prestige burns within, advice 
regarding proper conduct is meaningless. 

125-127. Krtya, the female deity of destruction, said to him, 
“Give; Give”. Since the brahmin was remembering Vadava thus, 
Krtya that came out of his eyes had the shape and features of 
Vadava. She contained within herself plenty of fire for destroy¬ 
ing all living beings. That Krtya became one with fire within, in 
view of the fact that he was meditating on his mother with the 
child in the womb. Even as she came out she was extremely 
terrible. She was as terrible as the tongue of Mrtyu (Goddess 
of death). 

128. She said to Pippalada, “What is my duty ? Tell me 
that”. Pippalada said to her, “Devour Devas, my enemies.” 

129-130. Saying “So be it,” she caught hold of Pippalada 
standing in front of her. He said, “O Krtya, what is this ?” 
She said, “What has been said by you is carried out by me. 
The body is made by Devas.” 



40.131-143 


923 


Thereupon, that frightened sage went to Siva and eulogized 
that lord. Then Siva said to Krtya : 

Siva said : 

131. O Krtya, do not seize living beings remaining within 
a range of a Yojana (12 km) at my behest. Go far away from 
that place and do your duty. 

Brahma said : 

132. That Krtya which had the form of Varava stood at a 
distance of a Yojana to the East from the holy centre Pippala. 

133-134. I big blaze of fire, capable of destroying the 
world, came out of her. On seeing it, Devas became afraid and 
approached Siva. Eulogizing the lord, the frightened heaven- 
dwellers said to Siva : 

Devas said : 

135. O Sambhu, protect us. The Krtya and the fire born 
of it assail us. O lord of all, O bestower of protection from fear 
to the frightened persons, be our refuge. 

136. O Siva, you alone are the refuge to the creatures that 
are attacked from all sides, that are distressed and that are 
extremely wearied. 

137. The Krtya coming from the fire of your eye has been 
requested by the sage and she is desirous of destroying the three 
worlds. You are our protector and none else. 

Brahma said : 

138-139. The lord of the universe said to them : “This 
Krtya does not harass those who live within the range of a 
Yojana. Hence, you all, by day and night, remain here itself, 
O immortal ones. You will have nothing to fear from her. 

Brahma said : 

140. Again, they said to the lord of Devas : “O lord 
honoured and worshipped by gods, how shall we live here 
after abandoning heaven granted by you ?*’ 

Brahma said : 

141-143. On hearing the words of Devas Siva said : 



Brahma Purana Gautami-Mdhdtmya 


924 

Siva said : 

Here is the Deva with eyes all round, the Deva who has 
faces all round, who always blows up with his rays and who is 
considered the father of all living beings. Let that lord Sun 
alone remain here directly in his visible form for ever. All 
others will be considered remaining here in his physical form. 

Brahmd, said : 

144-148. At the instance of Sambhu Devas created (the 
Sun) from Parijata tree. TvasJr said to the Sun: 

Tvasfr said : 

O lord of the universe, stay here itself. Protect these Devas 
yourself. We too shall stay here in the presence of Sambhu by 
means of our parts. 

BrahmO, said : 

All round Cakresvara, within a range of a Yojana, resorting 
to the banks of Ganga the excellent Devas stood by. Each had 
a fourth of an Anguli (about 2.5 cms.) of the bank of Ganga. 
They were three crores and five hundred, O excellent sage. 
Who is competent to speak about or hear the prosperity of 
these holy centres. 

Thereafter, Devas spoke to Siva. 

Devas said : 

149-155. O lord of Devas identical with the Universe, 
quieten Pippalada. 

Brahma said : 

Saying ct O yes”, the lord of the universe said to Pippalada: 
Siva said : 

Even if Devas are destroyed your father will not return. His 
life had been given by your father for the realization of the 
task of Devas. Who can be so kind to the wretched and the 
distressed in this world ? Similarly, O dear one, your mother, 
a chaste lady, has gone to heaven. No one is equal to her, not 
even Lopamudra (wife of sage Agastya) and Arundhatl (wife 
of sage Vasi${ha). Much fame has been acquired by your 



40.156-163 


925 


father due to whose bones Devas are victorious and happy for 
ever. An act of everlasting fame has been performed by your 
mother. Excellent fame spreading everywhere has been acquired 
by you, the son. 

It behoves you to protect those who have dropped off from 
heaven for fear of your exploits. It behoves you to save the 
immortal ones who have fled because they were afraid of you. 
There is no meritorious deed superior to the protection accord¬ 
ed to the distressed. 

156. A person who has gone to heaven lives in the other 
world without any malady for as many years as there are days 
when the fascinating fame prevails in human world. 

157. Only those who have no fame are considered dead 
here. Only those who are devoid of renown are (considered) 
blind. Those who are not habitually liberal in gifts are eunuchs. 
Only those who are not invariably virtuous are to be pitied. 

Brahma said : 

158. On hearing the lord of Devas the sage became calm. 
After bowing down to the lord he spoke with palms joined in 
reverence. 

Pippalada said : 

159-163. I shall bow down to Siva worthy of being wor¬ 
shipped by Devas and others for the welfare of these people 
and others too, viz. those who help me by words, thoughts and 
deeds and those who are engaged in actions conducive to my 
welfare. May lord Siva do what these people wish, the people 
by whom I have been guarded and nurtured (as though) I 
belonged to the same family as theirs and I had the same 
qualities as theirs. I am bowing down to the Moon-crested lord 
for ever. O lord, O lord of Devas, let this holy centre be known 
all over the three worlds by the name of those by whom I have 
been brought up like my father and mother. If they attain fame 
I shall become free from indebtedness to them. If Devas admit 
that this holy centre is superior to other holy residences of 
Devas and all other holy centres on Earth, I shall condone the 
guilt of Devas for ever. 



926 


Brahma Purina: Gautami-M&hatmya 


Brahmd said : 

164. In the presence of the thousand-eyed lord (Indra) 
and others he spoke these words of fine sentiment and good 
syllables. Devas too agreed to the words uttered by the son of 
Dadhlci. 

165. After appreciating the intellect, humility, learning, 
heroism, strength, truthfulness, filial devotion, and purity of 
emotions, Sankara said to Pippalada. 

Sankara said : 

166. Dear boy, whatever cherished desire you have and 
whatever is pleasing to Devas you will attain. Speak out what 
is conducive to your welfare. Do not hesitate to speak out your 
mind. 

Pippalada said : 

167. Those who take holy plunge in Ganga and those who 
are virtuous, O Mahesa, and sec thy lotus-like feet—let them 
attain their desires immediately. After their death let them 
attain the region ofSiva. 

168. O lord, my father has attained your region. So also 
my mother, the Pippala and the immortal ones. After seeing 
the lord of lords they have attained happiness. Let them see 
you. Let them attain your region. 

Brahma said : 

169. Saying “so be it” to Pippalada, Mahesvara, lord of 
Devas spoke to him congratulating him along with Devas. 

170. Devas were pleased after being freed from fear aris¬ 
ing from him. All of them spoke this to the son of Dadhici in 
the presence of Siva. 

Devas said : 

171. Undoubtedly, what is liked by Devas has been per¬ 
formed by you. The behest of the lord of Devas, that embelli¬ 
shes the three worlds has been carried out by you. 

172. O brahmin, what is requested for by you earlier is 
for others and not for yourself. Therefore, say something that 
you wish. We shall grant you something. 



40 . 173-183 


927 


Brahmd said : 

173. Devas repeated the same.thing to the excellent 
brahmin again and again. After bowing down to Sambhu, the 
Pippalas and Uma, Pippaiada spoke with palms joined in 
reverence. 

Pippaiada said : 

174-179. I desire to see my parents who have always been 
the subjects of discussion by means of words. Blessed are those 
living beings in this world who arc under the control of their 
parents, who are devoted to their service and who eagerly 
await their command. 

After obtaining the sense-organs, the physical body, nobility 
of birth, capacity, intellect and the beauty of form, he, the 
son, shall be contented by utilising them in their service. 

Seeing their own mother is easy even for animals and birds. 
Even that has become difficult for me. I ask you. Is it the 
result of my sins ? 

(?) If it had been difficult of access to all (there would not 
have been any complaint). If it is easy of access to someone 
and not to others it is not proper. There is no other sinner 
than I. 

O excellent DeVas, if only I can get a glimpse of my parents 
I shall deem it as the fruit of my acts of thought, speech and 
body, 

Who will be competent to count the great sins of those 
persons born in the world who cannot see their parents ? 

Brahmd said : 

180-183. On hearing those words of the sage, Devas con¬ 
sulted among themselves and said to him. “Surely you will see 
today your parents, the auspicious couple, seated in an excellent 
aerial chariot and eager to see you. Cast off your sorrow, 
covetousness and delusion, and pacify your mind”. After some 
time, the excellent Devas said to the son of Dadliici : “See. 
See your parents, the auspicious couple, are eager to see you. 
They are seated in an excellent aerial chariot. They have 
heavenly characteristics with golden ornaments. They are being 



928 Brahma Purina : Gautami-Mdh&tmya 

fanned by the celestial damsels. They are eulogized by the 
Kinnaras.” 

184. On seeing his parents he bowed down to them in 
the presence of Siva. Their eyes were filled with tears of 
pleasure. Somehow he spoke to them. 

The Son said : 

185. Other sons who perpetuate their families redeem 
their parents. But I am merely the cause of splitting the belly 
of my mother. Even though I am like this I shall look at them 
due to delusion. I am a wicked person with an evil mind. 

Brahmd said : 

186. On looking at them he could not speak anything 
further out of sorrow. Devas spoke to Pippalada and his 
parents. 

Devas said : 

187. Blessed are you, dear son, whose fame has spread in 
the world and has gone up to heaven. The three-eyed lord has 
been directly perceived by you. Devas have been consoled by 
you. With you as son the excellent worlds will never dwindle 
down. 

Brahmd said : 

188. At that time a shower of flowers fell on his head from 
heaven. The shouts of “Victory” uttered by Devas arose, O 
great sage. 

189. After bestowing blessings on his son and after bowing 
down to Sambhu, Ganga and Devas along with his wife Dadhlci 
spoke to his son. 

Dadhlci said : 

190. Get yourself a wife. Have devotion to Siva and serve 
Ganga. After procreating sons and after performing sacrifices 
with due gifts, dear son, you can be contented. Thereafter, 
proceed to heaven for a long stay there. 

Brahmd said: 

191-192. “I shall do thus” said Pippalada, the son of 



40.193-202 


929 


Dadhici. Along with his wife, Dadhlci consoled his son again 
and again permitted by Devas he returned to heaven. 

With great bewilderment Devas said to Pippalada. 

Devas said : 

193-199. Welfare unto you. Quieten Krtya and the great 
fire arising from her. 

Brahma said : 

Pippalada said to them: “I am incapable of warding her 
off. T shall never utter a lie. You can yourselves speak to 
Krtya. 

On seeing me that highly terrible Krtya will do just the 
opposite thing*’. 

Devas went unto her and spoke to her and the fire, plead¬ 
ing for their being pleased for the sake of peace. Both of them 
said : “No. I have been created by the brahmin for devouring 
everything; so also the fire born of me. How can it be other¬ 
wise ? The five great elements and everything that is mobile 
and immobile must be kept in our mouth. There is nothing that 
remains to be mentioned.” 

After consulting me (Brahma) Devas said again to both 
of them. 

“Both of you devour everything in due order.” 

Vadava then spoke to Devas thus. O Narada, listen to it. 

Va4ai&said : 

200-202. O excellent Devas everything is worthy of being 
devoured by me in accordance with your wish. 

Brahma said: 

That Vadava became a river, O sage, and joined Ganga. 
The immortal ones call fire arising from her the primordial 
fire. It was extremely terrible and they know that it is the 
first of elements. 

Devas said : 

Waters should be considered the eldest. So also you are the 
first. Still, devour the eldest (ocean) according to what we say. 
Go and devour as you please. 



930 


Brahma Parana: Gautami-Mah&tmya 


Brahmd said : 

203-205. Fire-god said to Devas : “There is water there. 
How can I go ? If you alone take me up to the vast sheet of 
water I shall go.” 

They said: “O Fire-god, in what way should your move¬ 
ment be ? 

The Fire-god said to those Devas, “If a virtuous virgin 
places me in a golden pot and takes me to a place were I can 
move about myself (it shall be proper).” 

On hearing those words of his, Devas said to the virgin 
Sarasvatl : 

Devas said : 

206-209. O Sarasvati, bear this Fire-god on your head and 
take him to the ocean. 

Brahmd said: 

Sarasvati said to Devas: “I alone an unable to hold him. If 
I am helped by four others I shall carry him to the ocean quickly.” 

On hearing the words of Sarasvati Devas spoke to Ganga, 
Yamuna, Narmada and Tapati severally. 

Accompanied by them she was able to carry him. After plac¬ 
ing the Fire-god in a golden pot and carrying it on their heads 
they went to the ocean. 

210-212. The five rivers (including) Sarasvati brought the 
fire and placed it in Prabhasa where Somanatha, the lord of 
Devas, the lord of the universe, the moon-crested lord is stationed 
along with Devas. The great fire presides over the place drinking 
water slowly. Then Devas spoke to Siva, the most excellent Deva. 

Devas said: 

213-217. Tell us the way of sanctifying the bones of the 
cows as well as the bones of us. 

Brahmd said: 

Siva then said to everyone: “By plunging into Ganga scru¬ 
pulously Devas and cows are released from their sins. There is 
no doubt about this.” 

Thereafter, the bones taken from the body of the sage were 
washed. Being washed there, they attained sanctity. 



40 - 218-228 


931 


The place where Devas got rid of their sins is the holy centre 
Papanagana (Destroyer of sins). A holy dip and distribution of 
charitable gifts there destroy even the sin of brahmin slaughter. 

The holy centre where the cows were sanctified is cited as 
Gotirtha. By taking a holy dip there the highly intelligent de¬ 
votee shall obtain the benefit of a cow-sacrifice. 

218. The place where the bones of that brahmin became 
sacred, O Narada, should be known as Pitrtirtha. It is condu¬ 
cive to the increase of delight of the manes. 

219-220 If the ashes, bones, nails or hairs of any living 
being, even if he has committed sin, were to fall into this holy 
centre he will stay in heaven as long as the moon, sun and stars 
exist. So, from the holy centre of Cakregvara three holy centres 
are evolved, O Narada. Then the sanctified cows and Devas 
spoke to Sambhu. 

The cows and Devas said'. 

221-223. We shall go to our respective abodes. The sun is 
established here. As long as the sun stays Devas shall be estab¬ 
lished. O lord of worlds, it behoves you to permit it. The eter¬ 
nal sun is the immanent soul of mobile and immobile beings. 
The sun in the nature of a Deva has been established there by 
us where Ganga, mother of universe, and the three-eyed Lord 
Siva are established. The residence and the establishment of 
Devas shall be where the three-eyed lord is. 

Brahma, said : 

224. Taking leave of Pippalada Devas went to their own 
abode. The Pippalas attained the everlasting (pleasures of) 
heaven after the lapse of some time. 

225. The brahmin Pippalada of great exploits established 
the position of trees in the overlordship of the field and wor¬ 
shipped Sankara. 

226. The courageous son of Dadhlci of fierce splendour 
married the daughter of Gautama and begot sons. He earned 
wealth and fame and attained heaven along with his friends. 

227. Thenceforth that holy centre is called Pippalegvara. 
It is sacred and it affords the benefit of all sacrifices. The very 
remembrance of it destroys sins. 

228. What doubt is there then (that sins will be removed) 



932 


Brahma Purdiia\ Gautami-Mdhdtmya 


through holy dip and charitable gifts and by the visit to the 
Sun. Cakregvara and PippaleSa are the two names of the lord 
of Devas. 

229-230. After knowing this along with the esoteric 
truth one shall achieve all cherished desires. That holy centre 
is called Prati?thana because the sun is installed there and 
the abodes of Devas are established there. It is dear even to 
Devas. This narrative is verv sacred. He who reads this 

r 

narrative or listens to this or remembers it lives for a long time. 
He will be righteous and become wealthy. Remembering 
&ambhu at the time of death he will attain him as well. 


CHAPTER FORTYONE 
Nagatirtha a Holy Centre 

Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre well known by the name of Nagatirtha 
is auspicious. It bestows all cherished things. Here the lord is 
Nagesvara. Listen to the detailed description of the same. 

2. In the city of Pratisthana 1 there was a king known as 
Surasena. He was a prosperous intelligent king born of Lunar 
Dynasty. He was an ocean of virtue. 

3. In the company of his beloved wife he made great efforts 
for getting a son. After a long time a serpent of very terrible 
features was born as his son. 

4. Surasena, the king, nursed and brought him up. No man 
ever knew that the king’s son was a serpent. 

5. Excepting his mother and father, no one whthin or 
without knew (this secret). Neither the nurse nor the chief 
minister nor the priest knew it. 

6. On seeing that terrible serpent the excellent king and 
his wife were acutely distressed everyday. (They thought) that 
having no sons is far better than having a serpent for a son. 

1. (a) An ancient city near modern Allahabad, situated on the eastern 

aide of the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna, (b) The capital of Salivahana 
on the Godavari. 



41.7-16 


933 


7-8. There was a special thing in this instance. The great 
serpent used to speak like men. That serpent said to his father, 
“Perform the holy rites of tonsure as well as Upanayana (sacred 
thread) and the study of the Vedic texts. Till he studies the 
Vedas a twice-born is considered equal to a Sudra.” 

Brahma said : 

9. On hearing these words of his son Surasena was extre¬ 
mely distressed. He fetched a certain brahmin and got the con- 
secratory rites duly performed. After learning the Vedas the 
serpent said to his father. 

The serpent said : 

10. Celebrate my marriage, O king. I am desirous of a 
woman, O excellent king. This is my opinion that your duties 
will not be fulfilled otherwise. 

11. One should beget sons in accordance with the injunc¬ 
tions of the Vedas and perform all consccratory rites. There is 
no redemption for one who does not become a father and per¬ 
form such rites. 

Brahma said : 

12-13, Being surprised the father said to that son with the 
shape of a serpent : 

$ urasena said : 

Who will give liis daughter in marriage to a person whose 
voice frightens even brave men ? Tell me my son. What shall 
I do ? 

Brahma said : 

14-16. On hearing those words of his father the clever 
serpent said. 

The serpent said: 

There are many types of marriages of kings, O king, O ruler 
of men. Forcible abduction, with the use of weapons, is also a 
type of marriage. When the marriage of the son is celebrated 
the father can be contented. 

If you are not celebrating my marriage I shall undoubtedly 
die in Gaiiga. 



934 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mdhdtmya 


Brahmd said : 

17. On realizing the decision of that son, the excellent 
king without a (human) son called his ministers for discussing 
the marriage and said. 

Stirasena said : 

18-22. My son Nage^vara is the heir apparent. He is an 
ocean of virtue. He has good qualities. He is intelligent. He is 
heroic. He is invincible. He scorches the enemies. If Naga is 
seated in a chariot with his bow he becomes incomparable 
in the whole of the earth. His marriage is to be celebrated. I 
am becoming old. I want to be carefree after placing the bur¬ 
den of my kingdom on his shoulders. My beloved son will not 
get rid of his childish nature till he marries. Hence all of you 
approve of this. All of you, engaged in what is conducive to my 
welfare, may kindly make efforts for the celebration of his 
marriage. Once my son is married I will not have any worry at 
all. Those who have fulfilled their worldly duties place the 
burden on their sons and go to forest for performing penance. 

Brahmd said : 

23. On hearing the words of the king the ministers humbly 
joined their palms in reverence. Delightedly they spoke to the 
king of profound brilliance : 

The Ministers said : 

24. Your son is superior to all in virtue. You are renowned 
everywhere. Therefore in the matter of your son’s marriage 
what is there to be deliberated upon ? What is there to be 
worried about ? 

Brahmd said : 

25. When the ministers said so, the excellent king of grave 
features did not mention to the ministers the fact that his son 
was a serpent. They too did not know it (from other sources). 

26-28 The king said to them again : “Who shall be the 
bride richly endowed with virtues ? Who will be that prosperous 
king, born of a great dynasty and abode of good qualities, 
worthy of alliance with us ? Who is that heroic king whose 
alliance shall be praised by all ? 



41.29-41 


935 


On hearing those words of the king the Chief Minister of 
great intellect, a man of noble birth and excellent conduct who 
was ever engaged in what was conducive to the welfare of the 
king and his affairs, spoke thus. He had understood the mind 
of the king and he was aware of his wishes. 

The Minister said : 

29. O great king, there is a king named Vijaya in the 
Eastern land. He has countless horses, elephants and jewels. 

30. That intelligent great king has eight valorous sons. 
Their sister Bhogavatl is precisely like another LaksmI. She is 
a suitable wife unto your son, O king. 

Brahma, said : 

31-34. On hearing the words of the old Minister the king 
replied to him : 

The King said : 

How can his daughter be (the wife) of this son of mine ? 
Tell me that. 

The old Minister said : 

You have been understood, O great king. I have observed 
what (thoughts are there) in your mind. Permit me to carry 
out the duties of a Surasena (i.e. one who has heroic soldiers in 
his army). 

Brahma said : 

On hearing the words of the old Minister, he honoured him 
with ornaments, garments and words (of praise). He then sent 
him with a great army. 

35-41. He went to the Eastern land and met the great 
king. He addressed him by a variety of respectful words in 
accordance with the requirements of polity and strategic means. 
The highly intelligent (minister) made an alliance for the 
marriage of Bhogavati, the daughter of the great king, and 
Naga the intelligent son of king Surasena. The alliance was 
contracted through false and true utterances. He honoured the 
king with ornaments, garments etc. After receiving the due 
honour the king said then, “I shall give”. 



936 Brahma Purdna: Gautaml-Mdhdtmya 

After returning from there the extremely intelligent old 
minister informed Surasena about the marriage proposal. 

Afterwards when a great deal of time elapsed the highly 
intelligent old minister went there along with a great army. He 
was adorned with ornaments and garments. He went there 
quickly surrounded by all other ministers. The great intelligent 
minister, the old minister surrounded by other ministers spoke 
everything connected with the marriage to the great king. 

The old Minister said : 

42. The intelligent son of king Surasena, well known by 
the name of Naga, the ocean of virtue, does not wish to come 
here. 

43-44. The marriage rites of Ksatriyas, O king, are of 
various types. Hence the marriage shall be through weapons 
and ornaments, O extremely intelligent one. Indeed Ksatriyas 
and brahmins do speak the truth. So let this marriage through 
weapons and ornaments be permitted. 

Brahmd said : 

45-46. On hearing the words of the old minister the excel¬ 
lent king Vijaya considered the utterance of the minister and 
the king truthful. The king celebrated the marriage of Bhoga- 
vati elaborately with a weapon (by proxy). Then he sent her in 
accordance with (the injunctions of) scriptures. 

47-51. Vijaya who was much^delighted entrusted his own 
ministers with many cows, gold coins, horses, etc. (to be given 
to Surasena). Those ministers with the old Minister at their 
head took her (the bride) to Pratisthana and intimated to 
Surasena that she was his daughter-in-law. They conveyed the 
message of Vijaya too in so many words. They became con¬ 
tented after handing over to Surasena the different types of 
ornaments, maid-servants, garments and other things. King 
Surasena received with great honour those ministers of Vijaya 
who had arrived there along with Bhogavati and bade farewell 
to them (after giving them some presents) so that Vijaya 
could be pleased. 

52. The young maiden of excellent waistline, the youthful 
pretty daughter of Vijaya engaged herself in serving her father- 
in-law and mother-in-law everyday. 



41-53-63 


937 


53-54. The great and extremely terrible serpent who was 
the husband of Bhogavati was staying in a deserted house in 
an isolated place. It had been rendered splendid by means of 
jewels. Fragrant flowers had been scattered there. The abode 
was (thus) pleasingly cool. That serpent used to say to his 
father and mother again and again (thus) : 

55. “Why does not my wife, the princess, come near me at 
all ?” On hearing these words of her son, the mother of the 
serpent said : 

The King's wife said : 

56. O Nurse, of great beauty and fortune, go quickly and 
tell Bhogavati, “Your husband is a serpent”. (Tell me) what 
she says thereupon. 

Brahmd said : 

57. After saying “so be it” and approaching Bhogavati she 
said to her in secret very humbly. She said so in a manner fit 
for reporting an unprecedented thing. 

The Nurse said : 

58-63. O extremely fortunate lady of gentle manner, I 
know your husband to be a deity. Nowhere should this be 
mentioned by you that he is a serpent and certainly not a man. 

Brahmd said : 

On hearing these words of that (nurse) Bhovavati said this. 
Bhogavati said : 

Normally the husband of a woman of the mortal world is a 
man of the mortal world. A husband of the divine species is 
obtained only by merit. 

Brahmd said : 

She reported these words of Bhogavati entirely to the 
serpent, the mother of the serpent and to the king in the due 
order. The king cried when she said this because he remembered 
the effect of Karmans. Bhogavati said to the female companion 
mentioned before : 



938 


Brahma Bur ana : Gautaml-Mdhatmya 


Bhagavatt said : 

Welfare unto you. Show me my beloved husband. My 
(youthful) age passes in vain. 

BrahmS said : 

64-65. Then she pointed out that terrible serpent. Bhoga- 
vati went to the bedchamber filled with fragrant flowers. On 
seeing her husband in secret (that is) the terrible serpent em¬ 
bellished with jewels, she immediately joined her palms together 
in reverence and spoke to her husband. 

Bhogavati said : 

66. Blessed am I, honoured am I whose husband is a 
deity. 

Brahm&said : 

67-68. After saying this and remaining there on the bed 
the lady of slender limbs made the serpent sport about through 
songs delightful to serpents as well as contacts with his limbs. 
She pleased her husband by means of fragrant flowers and 
beverages. Due to her favour the serpent was able to recollect, 
O sage. After remembering everything perpetrated by fate the 
serpent said to his beloved wife at night. 

The serpent said : 

69. Though you are the daughter of a king, O my beloved 
wife, how is it that you are not afraid on seeing me? 

She said (in reply) “Who is competent to transgress what is 
laid down by fate ? To women, the husband alone is the 
refuge. ” 

Brahmd said : 

70. Then the extremely intelligent and delighted Nagendra 
said to his wife. 

The serpent said : 

71. I am pleased with your devotion. What is it that 
you desire ? What shall I grant you ? O lady of beautiful 
limbs, it is due to your favour that I have regained the ability 
of remembering everything. 



41.72-82 


939 


72-74. Formerly I was a powerful serpent, a son of Se?a, 
coiled round the arm of Mahesvara. I was then cursed by the 
angry Pinaka-bearing lord of the Devas. I was your husband, 
and you my wife named Bhogavatl. Once Siva was delighted at 
the words of Um& in secret. Therefore he laughed boisterously. 
O gentle lady, I too laughed in the presence of the lord. Then 
Sambhu became angry and cursed me thus : 

Siva said : 

75-78. You will be born of human womb. You will be 
endowed with knowledge and wisdom. 

The Serpent said : 

Then O gentle lady, Sambhu was pacified by you along with 
me. And this was said by him, O gentle lady : “You shall per¬ 
form my worship in the GautamI when you are in the form of 
a serpent. I shall endow you with knowledge and wisdom. 
Then you will be freed from the curse due to the grace of 
Bhogavatl.’’ It is for this reason that I have acquired this state 
and you too, O lady of splendid face. Now take me to GautamI 
and perform the worship along with me. 

79. Then I will be released from the curse. Both of us 
shall goto Siva once again. Siva alone is the ultimate resort 
unto all distressed persons always. 

Brahmd said : 

BP. On hearing the words of her husband, she went to 
GautamI along with her husband. After taking bath in 
GautamI she performed the worship of Siva. 

81. Then the lord became delighted, O sage, and granted 
them the divine form. The serpent took leave of his parents and 
got ready to go to Siva’s world along with his wife. On coming 
to know of it the extremely intelligent father said. 

The father said : 

82. The eldest son (of a king) holds the rank of Crown 
Prince. You are my only son. Hence rule over the entire 
kingdom. Beget many sons. After I proceed to the supreme 
abode, go to Siva’s city. 



940 


Brahma Purana: Gautami-Mdhdtmya 


Brahmd said : 

83-86. On hearing these words of his father the king of 
serpents said—“So be it”. Along with his wife, father, mother 
and sons he ruled over the vast kingdom after attaining the 
beauty of Cupid. When his parents went to heaven he placed 
his sons in his own place. Accompanied by his wife, ministers 
and others he went to Siva’s city. 

Thenceforth that holy centre is well known as Nagatirtha. 
A holy dip and distribution of charitable gifts in the place 
where lord Nagesvara was installed by Bhogavatl bestow the 
benefit of all sacrifices. 


CHAPTER FORTYTWO 
Matrtirtha 

Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre known as “Matrtirtha” is conducive 
to all sorts of achievements of men. A creature is freed from 
all mental ailments merely by remembering that holy centre. 

2. There was a terrible battle between Devas and Asuras. 
Devas were not able to conquer Danavas in battle. 

3. Then, along with Devas, I approached the Trident¬ 
armed lord standing in his abode. With my palms joined in 
reverence I eulogized him by reciting a number of prayers. 

4-7. Devas and Asuras after mutual consultation came to 
an agreement that they should churn the ocean. O Mahesa, 
while they were churning there emerged Kalakuta (a virulent 
poison). Excepting you who else could have been competent to 
swallow it ? 

Cupid is competent to keep the three worlds under his 
control by means of his flowery weapons. He is worthy of being 
saluted by other Devas too. (Even he) met with destruction 
when he tried to extend his power over Hara. 

O enemy of Cupid, after churning the ocean you gave to the 
heaven-dwellers the best thing, viz. the nectar, and yourself 



42.8-18 


941 


consumed the poison. This adds to your glory. It is certainly a 
greatness of yours. 

Thereupon the three-eyed primordial lord was satisfied. 

Siva said : 

8-10. I shall give you whatever is desired by you. May 
the excellent Devas speak out their needs. 

Devas said: 

We are in great terror of Danavas. O bull-bannered one, 
come along with us. Kill our enemies. Save us, O lord, we are 
having a protector in you. 

O Siva, if you had not been a disinterested friend what 
could the miserable embodied beings have done ? 

Brahmd said : 

11. On being requested thus he went at the very same 
moment to the place where the enemies of Devas were camping. 
A fierce battle raged between Sankara and the enemies of 
Devas. 

12. Then the three-eyed lord became tired. Siva (then) 
assumed the Tamasa form. As he fought, drops of sweat fell 
from his forehead. 

13. Having resorted to the Tamasa form he killed Asuras. 
On seeing that form the Asuras went to the Earth 'from the top 
of Meru. 

14. Killing all Daityas Hara too went to the Earth. Being, 
frightened, they went around here and there all over the 
Earth. 

15. In the same manner Rudra too followed them in 
anger. In the same manner (as before) drops of perspiration 
fell down as Sambhu fought. 

16. Wherever the drops of perspiration came into contact 
with the Earth, O sage, the Mothers with the features of Siva 
were born. 

17. All of them said to Mahesvara, “We shall devour 
Asuras’*. Then the lord surrounded by Devas said : 

Siva said : 

18. Those Raksasas who came from heaven to the Earth 



942 Brahma Purina : Gautami-Mahatmya 

have reached the nether worlds (now). All of you hear my 
speech. 

19. Let the Mothers go wherever the enemies go. Now, the 
enemies have gone to the nether worlds. They are afraid of 
me. Following these enemies all of you too go to the nether 
worlds. 

Brahma said : 

20-23. Piercing the Earth, those Mothers went to the place 
where Daityas and Danavas were hiding. The Mothers killed 
all those terrible enemies of Devas. Through the same path 
they returned to Devas. Ever since the departure of Mothers 
and till their return, Devas had been staying on the banks of 
Gautami. This holy centre is called Pratisthana because 
Mothers departed therefrom and Devas were firmly established 
there. It is holy and conducive to victory. Wherever Mothers 
were born there were separate holy centres called Matrtirthas. 

24-25. In different places there were holes leading to the 
nether worlds. 

Devas granted boons to the Mothers: “Let them be wor¬ 
shipped in the world in the same manner as Siva for ever.” 
After saying this Devas vanished and Mothers remained there 
alone. 

26-28. Wherever the goddesses Mothers stayed the places 
are known as Matrtirtha. They are worthy of being resorted to 
even by Devas. Why not then by the human beings ? 

A holy dip, distribution of charitable gifts and water libation 
to Manes—everything has everlasing benefit in accordance with 
the utterance of lord Siva. 

He who listens to this narrative, reads or remembers this 
narrative of the holy centres of the Mothers shall become long- 
lived and happy. 



43.1-11 


943 


CHAPTER F ORTYTHREE 
Brahmatirtha and other Holy Centres 

Brahma said : 

I. There is another holy centre which is difficult of access 
even to Devas. It is known as Brahmatirtha. It bestows on men 
worldly pleasures and salvation. 

2-3. O excellent sage, when the hosts of Devas stood by 
(on the banks of GautamI), when Daityas had entered the 
nether worlds and Mothers followed them, my fifth face having 
the terrible form of an ass said even as I was sitting in the 
midst of Devas. 

4. “O Daityas why do you flee? You need not fear. I am 
coming quickly. I shall devour all Devas who come over 
here.” • 

5. On seeing it preventing me and intending to devour in 
this manner all Devas became frightened and they spoke to 
Visnu: 

6. “Save us, O Visnu, save us, O lord of Universe, cut off 
the face of this Brahma”. 

The discus-bearing lord said to Devas : “I shall cut off 
the head with my discus. 

7-8. But the moment it is cut off it will destroy theuniverse 
consisting of mobile and immobile beings. Hence, I shall tell 
you this secret. Let all Devas hear the entire thing. 

The three-eyed lord is the proper person to cut off the 
head of Brahma. He will hold it undoubtedly.” 

Then Sambhu was eulogized and addressed by me: 

9. Sacrifice is transitory. It is incapable of according a 
visible benefit. It is not at ail fruitful to the person who per¬ 
forms it. Thinking thus and deciding that one with matted hair 
was a sure guarantee for the gift of the fruit, people resorted 
to him and got realization. 

10. Then the lord of Devas was pleased. For achieving the 
task of Devas and for rendering help to the people he spoke to 
Devas thus : “So be it”. 

II. After cutting off that fierce face of sinful nature that 
made hairs stand on ends, after cutting it off with his nails he 
said : “Where shall it be placed ?” 



944 


Brahma Purina : Gautami-Mah&lmya 


12-13. Then Earth spoke to Devas: “I am not capable 
of holding the head. I will be going down to the nether 
regions.” 

The Ocean said : “I am not capable of holding the head. 
I will go dry in a trice.” 

Then Devas said to Siva : “This head of Brahma must be 
held by you out of pity for the people.” 

14. “If it is not cut off the entire universe will be destroyed; 
if it is cut the result is the same.” 

After thinking thus Lord Siva held the head of Brahma in 
his hand. 

15. On seeing that extraordinary and difficult task on the 
banks of Gautami, Devas eulogized the lord out of love and 
devotion. 

16. The extremely terrible head of Brahma had been 
inimical to Devas. It had approached for devouring them. By 
the tips of his nails as sharp as a needle the crescent-crested 
lord plucked it off. Since there was danger in casting it off he 
held it in his hand out of compassion. 

17. On seeing that super-divine activity, all those Devas 
who were standing near Brahma eulogized the lord of Devas. 

18. Thereafter that holy centre is known as Brahmatlrtha. 
Even today the form of Brahma is one with four faces. It stands 
there. 

19-23. He who sees only the head goes to the region of 
Brahma. 

The place where Rudra stood and cut off the head of 
Brahma is the holy centre Rudratlrtha. 

The place where the Sun stays directly in the form of Devas 
is the excellent Saurya TIrtha. It is reputed as the bestower of 
benefits of all sacrifices. If one takes bath and visits the Sun, 
one does not take birth again. 

The fifth head of Brahma that was cut off by Mahadeva was 
installed in the holy centre Avimukta. By doing so he had done 
what is conducive to the welfare of Devas. 

If a brahmin-slayer visits the head in the holy centre 
Brahmatirtha and the skull of Brahma himself installed in the 
holy centre Avimukta on the banks of Gautami he becomes 
sanctified. 



44 . 1-9 


945 


CHAPTER FORTYFOUR 
Avighnatirtha 

Brahmd said : 

1. The holy centre Avighna has been declared to be des¬ 
tructive of all obstacles. In this connection I shall narrate an 
incident. Listen devoutly, O Narada. 

2. On the northern bank of Gautami a divine sacrifice was 
held but it could not be concluded due to some obstacles. 

3. Then Devas spoke to Hari and me. Thereupon, I 
entered in meditation, saw the cause and spoke to them : 

4. “This sacrifice is not concluded on account of certain 
obstacles created by Vinayaka. Hence, let Devas eulogize the 
primordial lord Vinayaka.” 

5. After saying “So be it” Devas took their holy plunge in 
Gautami. On the banks of the river Devas eulogized Ganesvara, 
the primordial lord. 

Devas said : 

6. We seek refuge in that Vighnaraja who is worthy of wor¬ 
ship and bowed to by Devas and even by Siva, Visnu and 
Brahma in all undertakings. He is worthy of being meditated 
upon. 

7. There is no other deity equal to Vighnaraja in fulfilling 
wishes cherished in the heart. After coming to this conclusion, 
even the destroyer of Tripuras, Lord Siva worshipped him at 
the time of slaying the Tripuras. 1 

8. May that VighneSvara, son of Ambika, bestow upon us 
freedom from obstacles immediately, in this great sacrifice. If 
he is meditated upon, the heart wishes of all embodied beings 
become fulfilled. 

9. It was an occasion for merriment to the goddess when 
a son was born the moment he was conceived. Hence, while 
bowing down to Vighnaraja, the contented Devas spoke of him 
as “Sadyojata” (“Born in a trice”). 

1. Literally, ‘three cities’, built by Maya for the Asuras out of gold, silver 
and iron and in Heaven, Sky and Earth respectively; they had the power 
to travel anywhere; said to have started tormenting Devas and so were burnt 
ultimately by Lord Siva. 



946 


Brahma Purdna: Gautami-Mdhdtmya 


10. Gariadhinatha was given to amusement. At one time 
he had been lying on the lap of his mother. Although he was 
prevented by his mother he forcibly concealed the moon among 
the matted locks of his father. 

11. He sucked the milk from the breasts of his mother. Still 
he was not satisfied. His heart had been rendered sour due to 
the jealousy of his brother. “Be Lambodara (pot-bellied).** 
Sambhu, thus, named Vighnaraja Lambodara. 

12. Surrounded by Devas MaheSasaid: “Startyourdance.** 
He was delighted by Ganesa by the sound of his anklets. He 
,:hcn crowned his son as the lord of Ganas. 

13. This deity holds the noose of obstacles in one of his 
hands. With the other he holds the axe placed on the shoulder. 
If he is not worshipped he causes obstacles, even to his mother. 
Who else is equal to Vighnapati? 

14. In all undertakings for acquiring virtue, wealth, love 
etc., he is to be worshipped at the outset. He is worshipped by 
Devas and Asuras everyday. I bow down at firstto that lord who 
is worshipped at the beginning of every rite and whose worship 
prevents destruction. 

15. Achievement of benefits is befittingly effected by ex¬ 
tending worship and entreaties unto him. In view of this the 
Mouse-vehicled lord takes excessive pride due to his independent 
power. He is fond of his brother. I worship that deity. 

16. I seek refuge in Srlganesa who is extremely delightful 
and who delighted his mother by means of exquisite dances 
and songs as well as all kinds of desires and sportful amusements. 

17. I seek refuge in Sriganesa who is made ever more power¬ 
ful by his father’s grace brought about for helping Devas in 
their fight against Asuras, and by eulogies and Mantras . and 
the acts of obeisance (offered by devotees). 

18. At the victorious campaign against Tripuras his father 
did an unusual thing (i.e. instead of being worshipped by his 
son he had to worship his son). I bow down to Ganesa who has 
been worshipped by his father with pleasure and who brought 
about freedom to his father. 

J Brahma said: 

19-25. Thus eulogized by Devas VighneSa spoke to them: 



44.19-45-3 


947 


Ganda said: 

Hereafter, all sacrifices, performed by Devas shall be free 
from obstacle by my favour. 

Brahma said : 

When the divine sacrifice was completed Gane£a spoke 
to Devas : 

Ganefa said : 

Those who observe holy rites and enlogize me devoutly 
through this hymn will never experience the misery caused by 
poverty. 

Let all be assured that all the undertakings of those persons 
who take their holy plunge here and who distribute monetary 
gifts in devont spirit, will be successful. 

Brahma said : 

Simultaneously with this utterance Devas too said: “So 
be it**. When the sacrifice was concluded Devas went to their 
abode. 

Thereafter that holy centre is called Avighna. It bestows 
cherished desires and destroys obstacles. 


CHAPTER FORTYFIVE 
Se$atirtha and other Holy Centres 

Brahmd said : 

1. The holy centre known as Se§atirtha grants all cherished 
desires. I shall describe its features which have already been 
stated by me. 

2. The great Naga (serpent) named $e?a was the lord of 
nether worlds. Surrounded by all Nagas he went to Rasatala. 

3. This lord of Nagas was ousted (from Rasatala) by 
R&ksasas, Daityas and Danujas who entered Rasatala. He there¬ 
fore became agitated and spoke to me. 



Brahma Pur ana : Gautami- Mahd tmya 


948 

$e$a said: 

4. Rasatala had been given by you to Rak§asas as well as 
to me. They do not give me room. Hence, I am seeking refuge 
in you. 

5. Then I said to him. “Go to Gautami, O Naga. By 
eulogizing Mahadeva there you will get everything you desire. 

6. There is no other holy centre in the three worlds which 
can accord what you desire*’. 

Induced by my suggestion the Naga took his holy plunge 
in Ganga carefully. With palms joined in reverence, he eulogized 
the lord of Devas. 

£e$a said : 

7-9. Obeisance to the lord of three worlds, the destroyer of 
Dak§a’s sacrifice. Obeisance to you, the primordial Maker. 
Obeisance to the lord identical with the three worlds. 

Obeisance to the thousand-headed one. Obeisance to the 
lord carrying out the duty of annihilation. Obeisance to you 
having the form ofKala. Save me, O Sankara, Lord of every¬ 
thing, save me, O lord of Moon, O lord accompanied by 
Uma, O omnipresent one. O lord of the universe, obeisance to 
you; Give me whatever I desire in my mind. 

Brahma said : 

10-14. Then the delighted Mahesvara granted boons desired 
by the Naga. For the destruction of enemies of Devas—Daityas, 
Danavas and Raksasas, he gave Sesa a trident. Then he was 
advised by Siva, “Kill the leading enemies by means of this”. 

Along with the other Nagas he returned to Rasatala and kill¬ 
ed his enemies in battle. 

After killing Daityas, Danavas and Raksasas with his trident 
he returned to the place where Lord Hara, Sesesvara was 
present. 

A crevasse appeared in the path whereby the king of Nagas 
came from Rasatala to the place where the lord was present, in 
order to see the lord. 

The holy water of Ganga flowed through that crevasse. It is 
the bestower of great merit. 

15-16. That water flowed to Ganga. Beyond that is the conflu- 



45.17—46.4 


949 


ence of Ganga. There is a big sacrificial pit in front of the lord. 
At the place where the Naga performed Homa a fire remained 
present always. The water became hot. It is here that we have 
the confluence of Ganga. 

17. After propitiating the lord of Devas the delighted Naga 
of great fame attained what he desired from Siva and went to 
Rasatala. 

18. Thereafter that holy centre is called Nagatirtha. It is 
holy. It fulfils all desires. It destroys sickness and poverty. 

19-20. It is conducive to longevity. It is holy and bestower 
of fortune. Through holy dips and distribution of gifts it yields 
salvation. He who listens and reads this with devotion, he who 
remembers this attains salvation. The place where Siva handed 
over the trident to Sesa is the holy centre Se§e£vara. 

There are altogether, O eminent sage, two thousand one 
hundred holy centres on the banks (of the river). They bestow 
all riches. 


CHAPTER FORTYSIX 
Vatfava and other Holy Centres 

Brahmd said : 

1-2. It is the fire Varava (lit.‘mare*; Vadavanala — sub¬ 
marine fire) that is known as Mahanala. The lord is called 
Mahanala and the river is called Varava. 

Dear Sir, I shall describe that holy centre which dispels death, 
old age and other defects. 

Formerly, the sages performed a sacrifice in the Naimisa 
forest. 

3-4. The sages of great austerities made Mrtyu (Death) as 
slaughterer. 1 When sacrifice went on with Mrtyu as the slaugh¬ 
terer, no one died among the mobile and immobile beings. 
Excepting the sacrificial animals, O excellent sage, mortal beings 
attained immortality. 


1. Samitj- is one who officiates in a sacrifice as a slaughterer of the sacrificial 
victim. 



950 


Brahma Purana: Gautami-M&h&tmya 


5. Therefore, heaven became void and the mortal world 
was overcrowded because they were neglected by Mrtyu. Then 
Devas said to the Raksasas. 

6. *'All of you go to sacrifice. Destroy that great sacrifice of 
sages.” 

On hearing these words of Devas the Raksasas said to 
Devas : 

7. “We shall destroy that sacrifice. But what is our benefit 
therefrom? No one engages himself in any activity anywhere on 
any occasion without a proper reason.” 

Brahma said : 

8. Devas said to Asuras: “You too will get the benefit of 
sacrifice (?). Hence you go to the excellent sacrifice of sages”. 

9. On hearing it they hurried to the place where the sacri¬ 
fice was on in order to destroy it, especially at the instance of 
Devas. 

10. On coming to know of it, the sages said to Mrtyu : 
“What shall we do? At the instance of Devas the Raksasas have 
come here as the destroyers of sacrifice.” 

11-12. The residents of Naimisa forest discussed the matter 
with Mytyu. Accordingly, they abandoned their hermitage, O 
Narada. They took with them only the sacred fire leaving the 
utensils behind for the successful conclusion of the sacrifice. They 
hastened to GautamI Tirtha along with the slaughterer. 

13. After taking their holy plunge there they eulogized 
Mahesana for their protection. With their palms joined in 
reverence they eulogized the lord of Devas. 

The sages said : 

14-17. We seek refuge in that Somesvara who sportingly 
created this universe; who is the creator and dispenser of the 
destiny of the three worlds; who has the cosmic form and who 
is beyond both the existing and the non-existing. 

Mftyu said: 

I seek refuge in that Sankara, the lord of Devas, who creates, 
protects and destroys everything merely by his will. 

I shall seek refuge in Sankara who has great strength and 



46.18-25 951 

huge body; who has big serpents as his ornaments and who is 
the lord assuming a huge form. 

Brahmd said: 

Then the lord said : “What is it that you wish?” 

Mrtyu said : 

18. O lord of Devas, a terrible danger has befallen us from 
the Raksasas. Protect our sacrifice. Protect us so that our 
sacrifice be concluded. 

Brahma said : 

19. The lord did so. The three-eyed bull-bannered lord 
did so. With Mptyu as the slaughterer the sacrifice was con¬ 
cluded. 

20. The immortal ones slowly came there for their respec¬ 
tive shares in Havi offering. The furious sages said to them 
along with Mrtyu. 

The sages said: 

21. Since Raksasas had been sent by you for destroying our 
sacrifice, let the sinful Raksasas be your enemies. 

Brahma said : 

22-23. Thenceforth the Raksasas became the enemies of 
Devas. Devas and sages crowned Vadava, the Krtya, 1 saying, 
“You be the wife of Mrtyu.” The holy water that flowed at the 
time of coronation became the river Vadava. 

24-25. The Linga installed by Mrtyu is known as Maha- 
nala. Thereafter, they know this holy centre as Vadava San- 
gama. 

That holy centre where the lord is Mahanala yields worldly 
pleasures and salvation. There are altogether a thousand holy 
centres on the banks on either side. They give all desired things. 
By remembering them sins can be washed away. 


1. A demoness or evil spirit created by black magic or bom of sacrifice 
for destructive purposes. 



952 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mahatmya 


CHAPTER FORTYSEVEN 
Atmatirtha 

Brahmd said : 

1. The holy centre known as Atmatirtha yields worldly 
pleasures and salvation to men. I shall describe the efficacy of 
that holy centre where Siva is called JiianeSvara. 

2. There was a son of Atri known as Datta. He was a favou¬ 
rite of Hara. He was the beloved brother of Durvasas. He was 
an expert in all sciences and learning. He went to his father, 
bowed to him humbly and said. 

Datta said : 

3-6. How can I realize the Brahman? Whom shall I ask? 
Where shall I go? 

Brahmd said : 

On having the words of his son, Atri meditated and said. 
Atri said : 

Dear son, go to Gautami and eulogize Mahesvara there. 
When he becomes delighted you will acquire knowledge from 
him. 

Brahmd said: 

Saying “So be it” the son of Atri went to Ganga. He had 
purity and self-control. With his palms joined in reverence he 
eulogized Sankara with devotion. 

Datta said : 

7. O overlord of Devas ! As ill luck would have it, I have 
fallen into the well of worldly existence. I am sunk in the mire 
of misery by delusion. I am enveloped by the darkness of ignor¬ 
ance. I am not able to realize the supreme soul. 

8. I am pierced by the powerful trident of sins. I am torn 
asunder by the razor of worries and anxieties. I am scorched by 
the terrible heat of five sense-organs. I am wearied. Redeem me, 
O Somanatha. 

9. I have been bound by the fetters of proverty. I have 
been damned by the scorching flames of fire of sickness. I have 



47.10-19 


953 


been attacked by the serpent of Death. I am frightened much. 
What shall I do, O Sambhu ? 

10. I have been extremely distressed by births and deaths, 
thirst and hunger, Rajas and Tamas. I have been overwhelmed 
by old age. O lord, see the condition in which I am placed today 
and be merciful. 

11. I have been landed in difficulty severally by lust,anger, 
jealousy, arrogance, vanity and other faults. I have been pierced 
by them. O lord, like a true leader ward off these enemies of 
mine. 

12. This is true that somebody will dispel the misery of some 
fallen fellow. Except from you, O Somanatha, I do not have 
even a sympathetic word anywhere. 

13. It is only as long as I do not utter the words “Obeisance 
to Siva” that I have to suffer from these, viz., anger, fear, delu¬ 
sion, misery, ignorance, poverty, sickness, lust and other similar 
vices and even death. 

14. I am not virtuous. I am not devout. I am not discreet. 
I am not merciful. You are a donor. Hence, O lord, worthy of 
being sought refuge in, place the word ‘Soma’ in my mind. 

15. I do not earnestly beg for the overlordship of Devas, O 
Somanatha. I request humbly for the presence of lotus-like feet 
of Srisomanatha in the middle of my lotus-like heart. 

16. Even as I have been known to you as a sinner, listen 
to my submission. Let me be present always where the word 
“Siva” is heard. 

17. O consort of Gauri, O Sankara, O Somanatha, O lord 
of the universe, O storehouse of sympathy, O soul of all, where 
eulogies are offered thus, there some happy and successful 
person is sure to dwell. 

Brakm&said : 

18. On hearing the eulogy of Dattatreya, Lord Hara was 
pleased. Bhava, the creator of the universe, said to that Yogin, 
“I am the bestower of boons”. 

Atreya said : 

19. This is the boon I seek, O lord, worshipped by Devas, 



954 


Brahma Pur&na : Gautami-M&hatmya 


viz. the knowledge of the soul, liberation, vast devotion 1 to 
you and the greatness of this holy centre. 

Bra.hmd.said : 

20. “Let it be so”, saying this Siva vanished there itself. 
Thenceforth wise men know that holy centre as Atmatirtha. O 
Narada, one shall attain salvation by taking holy dip there and 
by distributing monetary gifts. 


CHAPTER FORTYEIGHT 
ASvattha and other Tirthas 

1. There are some other holy centres, viz. ASvattha, Pippala 
and Mandatirtha in the North. Listen to their excellence. 

2. Formerly, the saintly lord Agastya of the southern 
quarter was induced by Devas to make a request to Vindhya 
mountain. 

3-5. Surrounded by one thousand sages he approached 
Vindhya mountain abounding in trees of various kinds. With 
enumerable peaks Vindhya was trying hard to excel in height 
mountain Meru and the Sun. He had risen to a great height. 
Sage Agastya, the strong-willed husband of Lopamudra, was 
received with great acclaim along with other brahmins. The 
sage praised the mountain and spoke with the accomplishment 
of the object of Devas in mind. 

Agastya said : 

6. I am going on a pilgrimage, O excellent Mountain, 
along with these sages, the seers of truth. I am going in the 
southern direction. 

7. O lord of mountains, give me the way, I beg of you. 
Accord me a hospitable welcome. Till I return you should stay 
thus. 

8. It should not be otherwise. “So be it”, said the excel¬ 
lent mountain surrounded by sages. Sage Agastya went in the 
southern direction. 

1. The printed word Bhukti (enjoyment of pleasures) does not fit in the 
context. Bhakti ( devotiou) seems to be the right word. (Ed.) 



48 . 9-23 


955 


9. Slowly and slowly he went to GautamI and got initiated 
for the sacrifice. Surrounded by sages he performed the sacri¬ 
fice for a year. 

10. There were two sinful sons of Kaitabha. They were 
Raksasas, the source of vexation to the virtuous. They were 
known in the abode of Devas as Asvattha and Pippala. 

11. Asvattha disguised himself as the holy fig tree and 
Pippala assumed the form of a brahmin. Both of them were 
anxious to destroy the sacrifice. 

12. The evil-minded Danavas assumed the desired forms 
Asvattha the form of a tree and Pippala the form of a brahmin. 

13. Both of them harassed brahmins daily, O saint. Who¬ 
ever touched Aivattha was devoured by that tree. 

14. Pippala, the younger Raksasa posed, as a chanter of 
Samans and devoured his disciples. That is why even today the 
chanters of Samans among the brahmins are devoid of com¬ 
passion. 

15-16. On seeing the brahmins dwindling in number the 
sages realized that they were being devoured by the Raksasa. 
The intelligent sages approached Sanaiscara (Saturn), son of 
the Sun-god, who was performing penance on the southern 
bank of GautamI and observing the holy rites. They reported to 
him the (mischievous) activities of the two Raksasas. 

17. The son of the Sun-god said to the sages : “I shall 
kill those Raksasas, O brahmins, when I complete my penance. 
With the penance (as yet) incomplete I am powerless to kill 
them.*’ 

18. Again, the sages said : “We shall give you the 
benefit of our penance”. 

On being told thus by the brahmins the son of Sun-god 
said to them, “It is done**. 

19. Saturn, the son of the Sun-god, approached the 
Raksasa in the form of a holy fig. Saturn was in the guise of a 
brahmin. As a brahmin he circumambulated the Raksasa. 

20. As he circumambulated the Raksasa the sinful demon 
thought that he was an ordinary brahmin. He therefore ate 
him up by his power of Maya. 

21-23. After entering his body, Saturn looked at his in- 



956 


Brahma Purdna Gantami-Mdhdtmya 


testines. On being looked at by Saturn the sinful Raksasa was 
reduced to ashes like a mountain struck down by thunderbolt. 

After reducing Asvattha to ashes he went to the other 
Raksasa who was equally the abode of sin and who had assum¬ 
ed the form of a brahmin. He approached the Raksasa with 
humility as a disciple would approach his preceptor. 

24. As usual Pippala devoured Saturn, the son of Sun-god. 
When Saturn-entered his body he looked at the intestines in 
the belly of the Raksasa. 

25-27. The moment he was looked at by Saturn the 
Raksasa was reduced to ashes. After killing both of them 
Saturn said : “What remains to be done now ? Let all sages 
tell me”. 

Then the sages with Agastya as their head became pleased. 
They granted boons to Saturn, the slow moving son of the Sun- 
god. 

Being pleased, the powerful Saturn spoke to the brahmins : 
Saturn said : 

28. The tasks of the people will be accomplished when 
they touch the holy fig tree on my day after observing all holy 
rites. They will not have any trouble arising from me. 

29. There is another boon : The tasks of the people will be 
accomplished when they take a holy plunge in the holy centre 
Asvattha. 

30-33. (The following Mantra is to be recited) “O holy 
fig tree, subdue immediately the throbbing of my eyes, the 
throbbing of my arms, the effects of bad dreams, vicious 
thoughts and suppress my enemies too.” 

On Saturdays men should get up early in the morning, O 
divine sage. They should meditate on Siva. Repeating the 
above Mantra they should touch the holy fig tree. Thus the 
evil effects due to adverse planets will be dispelled. 

Brahma said : 

Thereafter, they know this holy centre as Asvattha and 
Pippala. There are other holy centres known as Saturn, Agastya, 
Satrika, Yajfiika and Samaga. Sixteen thousand and eight holy 



49 . 1-8 


957 


centres originated in this manner. A holy plunge therein and 
distribution of holy gifts yield the benefit of all sacrifices. 


CHAPTER FORTYNINE 
Somatirtha 

Brahma, said: 

1. The holy centre Somatirtha has also been mentioned 
by noble men. By taking a holy plunge and by distributing 
charitable gifts there, the benefit of drinking Soma juice can 
be had. 

2. Formerly, the medicinal herbs were the mothers of 
worlds. They are honoured by all living beings. They are also 
my divine mothers. They are prior to all prior ones. 

3. Virtue is rooted in them. So also the study of Vedas 
and sacrificial rites. All the three worlds, and their mobile and 
immobile beings are sustained by these. 

4. All the ailments are undoubtedly cured by them. Food 
comes from them and all lives are saved by them. These 
medicinal herbs are worthy of being honoured by the worlds 
but being free from egoism they spoke to me. 

Medicinal herbs said : 

5-8. O most excellent Deva, give us a king. Give us our 
husband. 

Brahmd said : 

On hearing their words the medicinal herbs were told by me: 
“All of you will obtain a husband, a king, who will heighten 
your pleasure**. 

On hearing the word “king” they said to me again, O sage: 
“Where shall we go ?*’ 

They were told by me, “May the mothers go to Gautaml. If 
she is satisfied you will have a king worshipped by the world.” 

O excellent sage, they went to the river Gautaml and 
eulogized her. 



958 


Brahma Purdna: Gautamt-Mah&tmya 


Medicinal herbs said : 

9. O Gautamf, of meritorious waters, O beloved of Sambhu, 
if you had not come down to the Earth, could the people with 
miseries arising from their contact with different sins, have 
found it possible to live ? 

10. Who knows the fate of persons on the Earth, O queen 
of rivers ? O mother Ganga, you are the destroyer of their sins. 
You are easily accessible to them for ever. 

11. O Ganga, worthy of being honoured by the three 
worlds, O mother of the worlds, does anyone understand your 
real greatness ? Although his body is closely embraced by 
Gauri, lord Siva holds you on his head. 

12. Obeisance to you, O mother, bestower of all desired 
objects ! Obeisance to you, O destroyer of sins, O goddess 
identical with Brahman ! Obeisance to you, O river, rising 
from the lotus-like feet of Visnu ! Obeisance to you, O river 
rising from the matted hair of Sambhu ! 

Brahmd said : 

13-16. Even as they were eulogizing thus the goddess said: 
“What shall I give you ?” 

Medicinal herbs said : 

£) mother of the universe, give us a husband, a king of 
excessive splendour. 

Brahma said : 

Then the river Ganga spoke these words to the medicinal 
herbs. 

Gafigd said : 

I am of the nature of Nectar, the medicinal herbs are 
mothers of nectarous nature. I shall give you Soma (Moon) 
as your husband as he has nectar within. 

Brahma said : 

17-20. Devas, sages, Moon and medicinal herbs accepted 
that proposal. Thereafter, they went to their respective abodes. 
Where the great medicinal herbs obtained the king of nectar- 



50.1-7 


959 


ous soul, the Moon, the dispeller of all distresses and sins, that 
holy centre is known as Somatirtha. It bestows the benefit of 
drinking the Soma juice. If a person takes a holy plunge there 
and distributes monetary (and other) gifts his deceased ances¬ 
tors will attain heavenly abode. 

He who listens to this daily, or reads, or remembers it 
devoutly obtains a long life. He shall have sons. He shall be 
rich. 


CHAPTER FIFTY 
Dh&nyatirtha 

Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre known as Dhanyatirtha is the bestower 
of all cherished desires. It yields prosperity and welfare. It 
dispels all adversities. 

2. After getting Moon as their husband, the medicinal 
herbs became joyous. They spoke these words liked by Ganga 
and the entire world. 

Medicinal herbs said : 

3-5. There is a sacred legend in the Vedas which those who 
are conversant with the Vedas know. 

He who, in the vicinity of Ganga, gifts away a land full of 
plants, the land that is on a par with his mother, nay which is 
his own mother, shall attain all cherished desires. 

If a man gladly and devoutly gifts away to a person 
in the form of Vi$riu, Brahma or Ha a land full of plants, cows 
and medicinal herbs he will attain all cherished desires. What¬ 
ever is gifted is to be known as one of everlasting benefit. 

6-7. The medicinal herbs have the Moon as their king. 
The Moon is the lord of the medicinal herbs. He who after 
knowing this gifts away medicinal herbs to a person who knows 
Brahman attains all cherished desires. He is honoured in the 
world of Brahma. 



960 


Brahma Purina’. Gautami-Mdhatmya 


Those very same medicinal herbs who were delighted and 
who had Moon as their king said again and again : 

The medicinal herbs said : 

8. O king, you redeem him who gifts us on Ganga. You 
are the excellent one, O lord of herbs. The mobile and immo¬ 
bile beings are dependent on you. 

9. The medicinal herbs conversed with king Soma: £t O 
king you redeem him who gifts us to brahmins. 

10. We are in the form of Brahman, we are in the form of 
vital airs. O king, you redeem him who gifts us to brahmins. 

11. O king, you redeem him who successfully performs 
holy rites and who gifts us away always to brahmins. It is an 
adoration unto us. 

12. Whatever is there in the world, whether mobile or 
immobile, is pervaded by us. O king, you redeem him who 
gifts us away to the brahmins. 

13. O king, you redeem him who gifts away Havya or 
Kavya which is nectarous and which is consumed or some¬ 
thing which is weightier. 

14. O king, you redeem him who devoutly hears, remem¬ 
bers or reads this episode from the Vedic text.” 

Brahma said : 

15. That place on the banks of Ganga where this episode 
had been told by the medicinal herbs in the company of Soma, 
the shining one, is called Dhanyatfrtha. 

16. Thenceforth that holy centre is called (by such names 
as) Ausadhya, Saumya, Amrta, Vedagata and Matrtlrtha. 

17. A holy plunge, Japa, Homa, charitable gifts, libation 
to the Manes and gifting of food performed there are capable of 
bestowing endless benefit. 

18. On both banks there are altogether one thousand six 
hundred holy centres which dispel all sins and increase wealth. 



51.1-11 


961 


CHAPTER FIFTYONE 

Vidarbh&sahgama and other Holy Centres 

BrahmS said : 

1, Vidarbha-Sangama (the confluence of Vidarbha and 
Ganga) is holy. So also is Revati-Sahgama. What happened 
there I shall narrate. It is what those conversant with the 
Puranas knew. 

2. There was a sage known, as Bharadvaja. He was superior 
to others in penance. His sister Revatl was ugly in form. Her 
voice was disgusting. 

3-6. On seeing her deformed and loathsome her brother, 
the valorous Bharadvaja was extremely worried. He had his 
splendid hermitage on the southern bank of Ganga where he 
sat pondering thus : “To whom shall I give this girl, my sister 
of terrible features. No one will take her, but my sister has to 
be given away. Oh ! no one should have a girl who is the sole 
cause of misery, a veritable death at every step even to a living 
being !” 

Even as he was pondering thus, an excellent sage came 
there to see Bharadvaja, a regular observer of vows. 

7. He was a quiet young man of sixteen years with a 
splendid body. He was a mine of good qualities with subdued 
sense-organs. He was known by the name of Katha. He bowed 
down to Bharadvaja. 

8. Bharadvaja duly honoured that brahmin Kajha. 
Standing in front of him he asked Katha the purpose of his 
visit. 

9. Katha said to Bharadvaja : “I have come to you as a 
student seeking learning and as a person desirous of seeing you. 
What is proper (in this situation) may be done. 

10. Bharadvaja spoke to Katha: Study whatever you 
desire, such as Purana, Smrtis, Vedas and the various treatises 
on Dharma (virtue). 

11. I know everything, O highly intelligent one. Speak 
something sweet. Do not delay. It is only through merits t at 
one gets a disciple who is of noble birth, who is engaged in 



962 Brahma Purina: Gautaml-Mahdtmya 

piety, who is devoted to the service of his preceptors, who is 
proud (of his heritage) and who grasps what is heard.” 

Kafka said : 

12. O brahmin, teach me, your disciple. I am devoid of 
sins. I am eager to serve you. I am your devotee. I am of noble 
birth and a speaker of truth. 

Brahma said : 

13. Saying “So be it”, Bharadvaja imparted to him all 
knowledge. After acquiring knowledge, Katha was delighted 
and he spoke to Bharadvaja: 

Kafha said : 

14. O preceptor, I would like to give you your fee. Tell 
me what is thought desirable by you, even if it be a very rare 
thing. Obeisance be to you. 

15. Even after acquiring learning if there are persons who, 
out of delusion, do not give a suitable present to the preceptor, 
they fall into hell and remain there as long as the Moon and 
stars shine. 

Bharadvaja said: 

16. Duly accept this girl. Make my sister your wife; you 
must treat her lovingly. I ask for this as my fee. 

Kafha said : 

17. A disciple should always be like a younger brother or 
son to his preceptor. A preceptor should be like a father. 
How can then there be an alliance here ? 

Bharadvaja said : 

18. You make my statement true. What I command you 
should be offered as Dak§ina by you. Remembering everything, 
O Ka{ha, support and maintain Revati with your mind directed 
to her. 

Brahmi said : 

19-22. Saying “So be it” Kafha grasped the hand of 
Revati at the instance of his preceptor after she had been duly 
offered. 



51.23—52.6 


963 


On seeing her Katha worshipped Sankara, lord of Devas 
there itself for the sake of Revati’s beauty as well as Siva’s 
favour. (As a result of that) Revatl became beautiful with all 
her limbs very fascinating. In beauty she became incompar¬ 
able. The water of ablution performed by Ravatl flowed down 
and joined Ganga. That turned out to be a river named after her. 
It is reputed as Revatl. It betows beauty and conjugal bliss. 

23-26. Again with various kinds of Darbha grass he per¬ 
formed consecration by sprinkling water for attaining holy form 
and features. That water became the river Vidarbha. 

By taking a holy dip in the confluence of Revati and Ganga 
with great faith a man is freed from all sins and he is honoured 
in the world of Visnu. 

In the same manner, O sage, if a man takes a holy bath in 
the confluence of Vidarbha and GautamS, with full faith, he 
instantaneously attains worldly pleasures and salvation. 

There are altogether a hundred holy centres on the banks 
of the river. They dispel all sins. They bestow all spiritual 
achievements. 


CHAPTER FIFTYTWO 
Purnatirtha and other Holy Centres 

Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre well known as Purnatirtha is on the 
northern bank of Ganga. Even when a man takes bath there 
without being aware of it he shall attain auspicious good 
things. 

2. Which living being can (fully) describe the greatness 
of the holy centre Purnatirtha where (both) the discus-bearing 
lord and the Pinaka-bearing lord stay. 

3-6. Formerly, in the beginning of the Kalpa there was a 
king, son of Ayus named Dhanvantari. He performed horse- 
sacriflces as well as other kinds of sacrifices. He made numerous 
charitable gifts. He enjoyed worldly pleasures in abundance. 



964 


Brahma Purfina : Gautami-Mahalmya 


After realizing the unsteadiness of worldly enjoyment he ex¬ 
perienced highest detachment. Dhanvantari thought: “If one 
performs penance, Homa or Japa on the top of a mountain, or 
beyond the ocean or on the banks of Ganga or in the temples 
of Siva and Vi§nu ot particularly at any holy confluence all 
his holy rites will have everlasting benefit.” 

After coming to realize this Dhanvantari performed a great 
penance. 

7. Dhanvantari who was richly endowed with wisdom and 
absence of worldly desire and who resorted to the feet of 
Bhimesa (the Awe-inspiring lord) performed an elaborate 
penance at the place where Ganga joined the ocean. 

8. Formerly, a great Asura (named Tamas) had been 
humbled by this king. He had fled from the battle-field out of 
fear and concealed himself in the ocean for a thousand years. 

9. When after king Dhanvantari had gone to the forest 
his sons had begun to rule over the kingdom and the (old) king 
became disinterested (in worldly affairs) Tamas come out from 
the ocean. 

10-11. The powerful Asura Tamas came to the banks of 
Ganga where king Dhanvantari was continuously engaged in 
Japa and Homa and was eagerly pursuing the knowledge of 
Brahman. Thinking “I shall destroy my enemy who is per¬ 
forming a penance” Tamas came out from ocean. 

12. “I have been ruined many times by this powerful king. 
I shall destroy this enemy”. Thinking thus Tamas came out 
from the ocean. 

13-14. By means of Maya (power of deception) he had 
assumed the form of a young maiden of excellent eyebrows 
and fascinating appearance. Laughing, singing and dancing 
she came near the king. 

On seeing her exquisitely charming in all her limbs for a 
long time (the king had been attracted by her). She had been 
quiedy devoted to him and faithfully serving him with good 
behaviour. Then out of sympathy he spoke to her thus. 

The king said : 

15. O good lady, who are you ? Why are you staying in 



52.16—28 


965 


this dense forest ? Whose sight makes you appear so delighted? 
Tell me who am asking you. 

Brahma, said : 

16-18. On hearing these words the young lady spoke to 
the king: 

The young maiden said : 

When you are here who else can be the cause of my delight? 
I am the royal splendour of Indra, O king. On seeing you 
fully endowed with love I am extremely delighted. Hence I am 
moving about in front of you again and again. I am inaccessi¬ 
ble to all who are devoid of remarkable merits. 

Brahmd said : 

19-20. On hearing these words the king immediately 
abandoned his extremely difficult penance. He meditated upon 
her. He was rooted in her. She became his sole refuge. Then 
having destroyed his great penance Tamas vanished. 

21-24. In the meantime I approached him in order to 
grant him boons. On seeing that excellent king fallen from the 
height of penance as though dead and much excited. I consoled 
him by means of various arguments (I told him) : “Your 
enemy named Tamas, O king, after having caused your fall from 
penance is now satisfied and gone away. It does not behove 
you to bewail. All young women without any difference what¬ 
soever delight as well as harass men. Why then specifically that 
young woman evolved out of Maya should not ?** 

Then the king freed from perplexity and bewilderment said 
to me with the palms joined in reverence: 

The king said : 

25. How will I, O Brahma, achieve my desired object ? 
What shall I do? How can I, O Brahma, completely realise the 
fruit of penance ? 

Brahma said : 

26-28. Then I replied to him : “Eulogize Visnu the lord 
ofDevas with all efforts. Then you will attain (spiritual) 
success. Indeed, he is the creator of universe. He is the pri- 



966 Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mdhdtmya 

mordial lord worthy of being known through the Vedas. He is 
the bestower of all desired objects. In the three worlds there is 
none else to bestow this on men”. 

That excellent king went to the Himalaya, the most excellent 
mountain. With the palms joined in reverence he devoutly 
eulogized Visnu. 

ft 

Dhanvantari said : 

29-43. Be victorious, O Visnu. Be victorious, O unimagin¬ 
able one. Be victorious, O conquering one. Be Victorious, 
Acyuta (Unswerving one). Be victorious, O protector of cows, 
O Lord of Wealth. Be victorious, O Kjrsna, O lord identical 
with the universe. 

Be victorious, O protector of living beings, O lord. Be 
victorious. Victory unto the lord lying on the Serpent. Be 
victorious, O omnipresent one. Be victorious, O Govinda. 
Obeisance to the Maker of the universe. 

Victory to the enjoyer (Devourer) of the universe. O lord, 
be victorious. Obeisance to the sustainer of the universe. Be 
victorious, O lord. You are the Sat (existing) and the Asat 

(non-existing). Be victorious, O Madhava. (Obeisance) to the 

* 

virtuous one. 

Be victorious, O bestower of love. You are Kama (Cupid). 
Be victorious, O Rama, O ocean of good qualities. Be victorious, O 
bestower of nourishment. Be victorious, O lord of nourishment. 
(Obeisance) to the bestower of welfare. 

Be victorious, O ruler of living beings. Be victorious, O 
lord of living beings. (Obeisance) to the prescriber of honour. 
Be victorious, O bestower of Karman. You are the Karman. 
Be victorious, O lord clad in yellow garment. 

Be victorious, O lord of everything, you are everything, you 
are everything. Victory to one of auspicious form. Victory to 
the overlord of living beings. Be victorious. Obeisance to the 
knower of Vedas. 

Be victorious, O bestower of birth. O (lord) stationed in 
creatures. O supreme soul, obeisahce be to you. Be victorious, 
O bestower of salvation. You are salvation. Be victorious, O 
KeSava, the bestower of worldly pleasures. 



52.44-47 


967 


Be victorious, O bestower of worlds, O lord of worlds. Be 
victorious, O destroyer of sins. Be victorious, O favourite of 
devotees, be victorious. Obeisance to the holder of discus. 

Be victorious, O bestower of honour. You are honour. Be 
victorious, O (lord) bowed down to by the world. Be victorious, 
O bestower of virtue. You are virtue. Be victorious, O (lord) 
who has crossed the ocean of worldly existence. 

Be victorious, O bestower of food. You are food. Be victo¬ 
rious, O lord of speech. Obeisance to you. Be victorious, O 
bestower of power. You are power. Be victorious, O bestower 
of boons, leading to victory. 

Be victorious, O bestower of Yajhas. You are Yajna. Be 
victorious, O lord with eyes like the petals of a lotus. Be victo¬ 
rious, O bestower of charitable gifts. You are the charitable 
gift. Be victorious, O slayer of Kaitabha. 

Be victorious, O bestower of fame. You are fame. Be victo¬ 
rious, O bestower of forms, O (lord) assuming forms. Be victo¬ 
rious, O bestower of happiness, O lord of happy soul. Be victo¬ 
rious, O sanctifier of sanctifiers. 

Be victorious, O bestower of peace. You are peace. Be 
victorious, O lord born of Sankara. Be victorious, O bestower 
of beverages. You are beverage. Victory to (the lord) having 
the form of blazing flame. 

Be victorious, O Dwarf, O lord of wealth. Be victorious, O 
smoke-bannered fire. Be victorious, O lord of the form of the 
donor of the entire universe. Obeisance be to you. 

You alone are competent for destroying the difficulties of 
living beings residing in the three worlds, O Sripundarikaksa 
(Lotus-eyed one), O storehouse of mercy, O Visnu, place your 
hand on my head. 

Brahma said : 

44. Lord (Visnu) the wielder of conch, discus and club, 
the bestower of plenty and all cherished desires asked him to 
choose any boon he pleased as he eulogized thus. 

45-47. Dhanvantari became delighted in his mind due to 
the granting of boon by the discus-bearing lord. The king 
humbly told Govinda, the lord of Devas who was standing in 
front of him for granting the boons : “The kingdom of Devas 



968 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mdhdtmya 


is desired by me. Once it is granted by you, O Vi?nu, I shall 
attain contentment.” Vi$nu who was eulogized and worshipped 
vanished there itself. Accordingly the king gradually attained 
the suzerainty of Devas. 

48-49. As a result of the fruition of various past Karmans 
the thousand-eyed lord Indra had been ousted from his post 
three times : 

(1) once by Nahu§a after the killing of Vj*tra, 

(2) on the assassination of Sindhusena, and then 

(3) when he outraged the modesty of Ahalya for some 
reason. 

50. By remembering these different incidents the lord of 
Devas became grief-stricken and anxious. He spoke these words 
to Vacaspati : 

Indra said : 

51-52. For what reason, O lord of speech, am I ousted 
from my kingdom every now and again ? Having no glory at 
all is far better for men than being pulled down from exalted 
positions again and again. Who knows for certain the mysterious 
ways of Karman of living beings ? None else is competent to 
know the secret of all living beings. 

Brahmd said : 

53-54. Bfhaspati said to Indra : “Go to Brahma and ask 
him. He is the knower of past, present and future. He will tell 
you how this has come about, O highly intelligent one”. 

Both of these highly intelligent ones came near me and 
bowed to me. With their palms joined in reverence they spoke 
to me thus : 

Indra and Brhaspati said : 

55. What it that fault, O lord, whereby the noble-minded 
husband of Sac! is being ousted from his kingdom ? It behoves 
you to dispel this doubt, O lord. 

Brahmd said : 

56. O brahmin, then I meditated for a long time and 
spoke to Brhaspati : “It is on account of the fault of Khanka- 



52.57-67 


969 


Dharma (violation of one’s duties) that he has fallen off from 
his kingdom. 

57-60. Violation of one’s duty is caused variously by : 

(1) the defects in place, time etc.; (2) misplacing of faith or 
wrong utterance of Mantras; (3) non-giving of monetary gifts 
due to someone; (4) gifting away bad articles; (5) slighting 
gods and brahmins. Such violation of duties by embodied be¬ 
ings inevitably causes excessive mental distress and loss of 
status. In regard to the men of disturbed minds even if a right¬ 
eous action is performed it has harmful effects. It will not be 
capable of bringing about the fulfilment of tasks and peace of 
mind. When the performance of duty is imperfect will not the 
result be harmful 7” 

61-63. O sinless one, the earlier incident too was described 
to them by me, viz., that there was the son of Ayus named 
Dhanvantari, who was glorious and liberal-minded; how obsta¬ 
cle was created by (the Demon) Tamas and how it was dispelled 
by Visnu. The incidents of the previous birth and other similar 
things were also described by me. 

On hearing this both of them were surprised. They said to 
me again : 

Indra and Brhspati said : 

64-67. By what means can that fault be counteracted, O 
excellent one among Devas ? 

Brahma said : 

After meditating once again I spoke to them : “Let the 
thing that dispels defects and brings about spiritual achieve¬ 
ments, that which redeems persons from miserable existence be 
listened to. It is the refuge of persons of distressed minds. It 
brings eternal bliss unto the living ones too. 

Go to Gautami, the divine river and eulogize Lord Visnu 
and Lord Sankara. In the three worlds there is no other means 
of purification than those two (lords) and that (river).” 

O excellent sage, both of them went to Gautami at that 
very time. They took their bath, visited Lord Vi$nu and Lord 
Sankara and eulogized them joyously. 



970 


Brahma Pur ana : Gautami-M&h&tmya 


Indr a said : 

68-73. Obeisance to Matsya (Fish), to Kurma (Tortoise). 
Obeisance, obeisance to Lord Varaha (Boar). Obeisance, obei¬ 
sance to Lord Narasimha (Man-lion), to Vamana (Dwarf). 

Obeisance be to (the lord) in the form of a horse. O Trivi- 
krama, obeisance be to you. Obeisance be to the lord in the 
form of Buddha, in the form of Rama and Kalki. 

Obeisance to you, O lord. Obeisance to Ananta (Infinite 
one). Obeisance to Acyuta, obeisance to Jamadagnya (Parasu- 
rama). Obeisance to you in the form of Varuna and Indra. 
Obeisance to you in the form of Yama. 

Obeisance to the lord, to the supreme lord in the form of 
three worlds. You are omniscient, holding Sarasvati in the 
mouth. Obeisance be to you. 

You are Laksmivan (Prosperous), therefore, O sinless one, 
you hold LaksmI in your chest. You are multi-armed, multi¬ 
thighed, multi-footed, multi-eared, multi-eyed and multi¬ 
headed. You are happy and after attaining you many have 
become happy. 

O Hari, impurity, wretchedness and absence of glory trou¬ 
ble men, only as long as they do not seek refuge in you, the 
ocean of mercy. 

Brhaspati said : 

74-82. O Isa, those desirous of liberation speak of you thus: 
You are the subtle supreme light in the form of the infinite. 
You are the Oriikara itself which is beyond Prakyti. You are in 
the form of knowledge and bliss. You are all. 

Even those who have no desire, O Lord, propitiate you by 
means of five great sacrifices. 1 Those persons who have achieved 
their desires enter your divine world which is beyond the ocean 
of worldly existence and which is your cosmic body. 

They view all living beings with equality. In the six 
waves (i.e. the activities of six sense-organs including mind?) 

1. According to Manu (3. 69-71), the five great sacrifices to be performed 
daily by every householder are : Brahmayajna or study/recitaliun of Vedic 
texts; Devayajna or‘sacrifice to the gods; Pitryaina or oblatiou made to the 
manes; Manu?yayajna or honoring of guests; and Bhutayajfia or offering 
of food etc. to animats, birds etc. 



52 . 83-88 


971 


they maintain calmness. By means of knowledge they forsake 
the fruits of action and by means of meditation they enter you, 
O Sambhu. Neither the pious duties pertaining to the castes 
nor the Vedas and scriptures, neither the path of meditation 
nor the practice of abstract contemplation (are suited to me). 
It is through devotion that I bow down to Lord Soma, Rudra, 
Siva, Sankara of quiescent mind. 

Even a fool, O Sambhu, shall attain your body of the nature 
of liberation through devotion to your feet. 

The excellent benefit acquired in jrianas, yajfias, penances, 
meditations and homas of great benefit, is this that one has 
a perpetual devotion to Somesvara. 

O lord, in whom the whole universe dwells, devotion to you 
constitutes a series of steps to heaven and salvation that is 
always liked by all living beings and which is the fruit of every¬ 
thing seen and heard. 

Wise persons do not mention the series of steps for the 
acquisition of the fruit in the form of attainment to your feet. 

Hence, O merciful one, let me have devotion to you. I do 
not have the means of serving your form. In conformity with 
your greatness, O Is'a, have mercy on us, the sinners. 

I bow down to Somesvara, the lord who is eulogized by 
Srutis and Puranas thus : “You are both, the gross as well as 
the subtle. You are without beginning. You are the eternal 
one. You are the father and the mother. You are the existing 
and the non-existing.” 

Brahma said : 

83-88. Then the delighted Hari and Hara the lord of 
Devas said : 

Hari and Hara said : 

Let whatever you desire be chosen, any boon that may be 
extremaly inaccessible. 

Brahm& said : 

Indra said to the lord of Devas : “My kingdom is every now 
and again lost and regained. Let that sin be subdued so that 
I can be stable in my kingdom an d everything belonging to me 



972 Brahma Pur&na: Gautami-M&h&lmya 

become stready. If the lords of Devas are well pleased every¬ 
thing will be steady for ever.” 

Saying “So be it” they approved of the words of Indra 
and they were extremely delighted. On seeing them (i.e. Indra 
and Brhaspati) a smile spread over their faces. Their forms 
were devoid of deficiencies. They stood without any support. 
They were free from aberrations. They were worthy of being 
sought refuge in by the worlds. Both of them were the 
bestowers of worldly pleasures and salvation. 

Hari and Hara said : 

89-92. This great holy centre has three presiding deities. 
The river Gautami is the bestower of whatever is desired. 
Repeating the Mantra given below take a holy plunge in it with 
great respect. For the welfare of Mahendra, let Brhaspati per¬ 
form purificatory ablution. Let him remember us both for 
the achievement of stability of riches. Here is a Mantra : 

“Whatever good and meritorious deeds have been perform¬ 
ed in this as well as in the previous birth let them attain per¬ 
fection and completness, O Godavari, obeisance be to you.” 

If anyone repeats the above Mantra and takes a holy dip 
in Gautami his holy rite shall attain perfection due to the bless¬ 
ings and favour of us both. He shall be freed from the faults 
committed in the previous births. He shall become meritorious. 

Brahma said : 

93-94. Surendra and Dhi§ana (Brhaspati) said “So be it” 
and did accordingly with great delight. The preceptor of the 
heaven-dwellers performed the great ablution of Indra. 

The holy river that arose therefrom was called Mangala. 
Its confluence with Ganga is holy. It is the bestower of auspi¬ 
ciousness. 

95-100. Vi§nu identical with the universe was eulogized 
by Indra and he became visible. From the lord of the universe 
Indra obtained an idol as extensive as the three worlds. It is 
well-known by his name as “Govinda”. A cow as extensive as 
the three worlds was obtained by that wielder of thunderbolt. 
It was given by Vi?nu. Therefore, Indra became Govinda (one 
who got a cow). The kingdom of the three worlds was obtain- 



52.101—53.7 


973 


ed by Indra from Hari (Vi$nu), O sage. Therefore it became 
stable due to Mahesvara, lord of Devas. 

The place where Brhaspati, the preceptor of gods, eulogized 
Mahesvara for the stability of kingdom of the noble-souled 
Devendra, became the holy centre well known as Govinda. The 
lord there is Siddhesvara and the Linga is worshipped by Devas. 
The confluence of the Mahgala is the holy centre Purnatlrtha. 

101-105. Beyond that is the holy centre well known as 
Indratirtha as well as the centre well known as Barhaspatya 
where the lord is Siddhesvara, Visnu and Govinda. 

A holy bath, distribution of charitable gifts and any other 
activity conducive to merit performed in these holy centres 
must be understood to bear everlasting benefit. They are very 
dear to the Manes. 

He who listens to the greatness of that holy centre, he who 
reads and he who remembers it everyday regains lost king¬ 
doms. 

There are altogether thirtyseven thousand holy centres on 
both the banks, O the noblest among sages. They bestow all 
spiritual achievements. 

There is no other holy centre yielding great benefit like the 
Purnatlrtha. If any man does not resort to it his birth etc. are 
fruitless. 


CHAPTER FIFTYTHREE 
R&matirtha and other Holy Centres 

BrahmS. said : 

1. The holy centre known as Ramatlrtha has the power of 
destroying the sin of brahmin-slaughter. Merely by remember¬ 
ing it, one is freed from all sins. 

2-7. There was a king named Dasaratha. He was a Ksa- 
triya bom of the dynasty of Iksvaku. Like Indra, the destroyer 
of cities (of enemies), he was strong, intelligent, heroic and well 
known in the world. Like Bali he was ruling over the hereditary 



974 


Brahma Parana : Gautaml-Mdhatmya 


kingdom. O highly intelligent one ! he had three queens: 
Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyl. These were of noble birth, 
blessed and endowed with beauty and excellent features. While 
that king, the ruler of Ayodhya, was reigning over the kingdom, 
while Vasistha the most excellent one among the knowers of 
Brahman was his exclusive priest, there was neither sickness nor 
famine, neither lack of rain nor mental worries. The brahmins, 
Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and the Sudras enjoyed pleasures. Men of all 
stages of life enjoyed bliss while that leading king, the scion of 
the family of Ik§vaku, was ruling. 

8. Quarrel arose between Devas and Danavas for the king¬ 
dom. In that quarrel sometimes Devas and sometimes others 
gained the upper hand. 

9-10. While it was going on thus, the three worlds became 
extremely afflicted, O Narada. I then spoke to Daityas, Danavas 
and Devas. But they did not act according to my advice. Again 
a great fight ensued between them. 

11-14. Devas and Asuras went to Visnu and liana identical 

• • 

with the universe and spoke to them. Both of them replied to 
Devas, Asuras, Daityas and Danavas, “Be stronger by means 
of penance and fight thereafter”. They said, “So be it” and they 
went for penance with determination. Again Devas marched 
against Raksasas in a spirit of jealousy and rivalry. A terrible 
battle ensued. In that battle neither Devas nor Daityas nor 
Danavas came out victorious. As the fight was going on, an 
unembodied voice said. 

Ethereal voice said : 

15-18. Only they will win to whom king Dalaratha offers 
help and not others. 

Brahmd said: 

On hearing this, both of them, Devas and Danavas went 
ahead for victory. Vayu came to the king hurriedly and said. 

Vayu said : 

O king, you must come to the battle between Devas and 
Danavas. This is well known that victory is there where 
Dalaratha is. Hence you must be on the side of Devas, so that 
Devas should be victorious. 



53.19-37 


975 


Brahma said : 

19. On hearing those words of Vayu, king Dasaratha said, 
“O Vayu, I shall surely come. Go back assuredly”. 

20-21. When Vayu had gone back. Daityas came to the king. 
They too said, “O lord, it behoves you to help us. O prosperous 
king Dasaratha, victory depends on you. It behoves you to help 
the lord of Daityas.” 

22. The king said, “I have been requested for help by Vayu 
before and 1 have promised my help to Devas. Let Daityas and 
Danavas go back.” 

23. The king went to heaven and did accordingly. He 
fought against Daityas, Danavas and Raksasas. 

24. Even as Devas were watching, the brothers of Namuci 
split the carriage-axle of the chariot of king Dasaratha with 
sharp arrows. 

25. In his hurry and flurry the king did not know that the 
carriage-axle had been split, but Kaikeyi of excellent eyebrows 
who was by the side of the king noticed it, O Narada. 

26-28. This was not intimated to the king by her. After 
seeing the axle broken, the woman of holy rites put her own hand 
in the wheel like the axle, O the noblest among sages. It was 
something very wonderful. Dasaratha, the most excellent among 
chariot-warriors, conquered Daityas and Danujas through his 
chariot in which she had placed her hand. He obtained many 
boons from Devas. Permitted by Devas he returned to Ayodhya. 

29. But in the middle of the way he saw his beloved wife. 
On seeing what Kaikeyi had done he became surprised much. 

30. Then he granted her three boons, O Narada. After 
acknowledging what was said by the king Kaikeyi spoke thus : 

Kaikeyi said : 

31-37. O great king, let these boons granted by you remain 
with you. 

Brahma said: 

The great king gave the queen various ornaments. Accom¬ 
panied by his beloved queen the victorious king went to his city 
happily in the chariot. When a proper occasion comes what is 
it that cannot be given to one’s beloved. 



976 


Brahma Purdna'.Gautami-Mahdtmya 


Once king Daiaratha was wandering at night in a forest, 
surrounded by professional hunters. He stopped the flow of a 
river by discharging arrows. Although he knew that a king 
should be free from seven vices, 1 he did so under the urging of 
adverse fate. The king of great powerful arms entered a pit and 
killed the animals that came there for drinking water by means 
of his sharp arrows. Listen to the perversity of time. 

When the king entered the pit an old man and his wife were 
speaking to their son. There was an old man on that excellent 
mountain. He had a son Sravana by name. The Brahmin could 
neither hear nor see. His wife was also like that. They spoke to 
their son. 

The parents said : 

38-40. We are thirsty and the night is dark. Dear son, you, 
a (mere) child, constitute the entire life of us, old people. 

Fie upon the life of blind and deaf old men ! Dear son, fie, 
fie upon the life of persons whose bodies are shattered due to 
old age ! 

Men should live only as long as they have wealth and strong 
body, as long as they can command without being thwarted. 
Otherwise, they should die in holy centres or similar places. 

Brahmd said : 

41. On hearing these words of the old people the son who 
was fond of his parents spoke thus, dispelling their misery with 
his sweet words: 

The son said : 

42-43. While I am alive why should you have such misery 
as this? Of what avail is a son who does not remove the mental 
agony of his parents through his own excellent conduct ? He 

1. Manu (7. 45-48) has given two lists of vyasanas : (1) those arising from 
lust and (2) those arising from anger. Under the first he enumerates the 
following fen: hunting, playing the game of dice, sleeping during the day, calu¬ 
mny, promiscuous intercourse, intoxication, singing, dancing, music and idle 
rambling. Under the second the following eight are enermerated; deceit or 
crookedness of temper, rashness, seeking of other’s discomfiture, envy, fault¬ 
finding, robbing of other’s money or non-payment of just debts, use of abusive 
language, and inflicting of harsh punishment. 



53.44-60 


977 


who acts to the contrary brings about grief and affliction to the 
whole family. 

Brahma said : 

44-48. After saying this and pacifying his old parents the 
noble son bowed to them and placed them on the branch of a 
tree. The son of the sage took watcr-pot in hand and started. 
The sage did not know the king nor did the king perceive the 
sage. Both of them were in hurry. The brahmin entered the 
water and began to fill water in his pot bent downwards. The 
king took him to be an elephant and hit him with sharp arrows. 
Even a wild elephant should not be killed by kings. Although 
the king knew this he hit the brahmin thus. What is it that a 
person deceived by fate does not do? Struck at a vulnerable 
spot the miserable brahmin spoke these words: 

The brahmin said : 

49. By whom was this mean act committed causing misery 
to a good brahmin like me? O my father, I am not guilty of 
anything whatever. 

Brahmd said: 

50. On hearing these words of the distressed sage the king 
was stunned. Without any enthusiasm he went to that place 
slowly. 

51-52. On seeing that excellent brahmin who appeared to 
be shining with his splendour he too became unconscious as 
though pierced by thorns. After steadying himself by his own 
efforts the king spoke thus: 

The king said : 

53-54. O the noblest among sages, who are you? Why did 
you come here? Say this to me who have committed a sin. Tell 
me the means of expiation. 

O extremely intelligent one, the slayer of a brahmin should 
never be touched, should never be seen, not only by persons of 
higher caste but by Gantfalas too. 

Brahmd said : 

55-60. On hearing the words of the king, the son of the sage 
spoke thus. 



978 


Brahma Parana : Gau.taml-Mahd.tmya 


The son of the sage said: 

My vital airs are about to come out. Hence, I shall say some¬ 
thing in brief. Know that your Karmans are bearing fruit after 
realising your own wanton action. 

I do not bewail for my own sake. My parents are very old. 
Who will assist them? They had me as their only son and they 
are blind. 

Without me how will they live in this great forest? What an 
unfortunate fellow am I ! There has come a break in my service 
to my parents. 

O fate, what has been done by you by depriving me of my 
life! 

Still, O king, take the pot with you and go there quickly. 
Give them water to drink lest they should die. 

Brahma said : 

61-65. Even as he was saying this his life became extinct. 
The king threw down his bow and arrows. Taking up the water 
pot he hastened to the place in that great forest where the old 
people were staying. At that very time the old couple were talk¬ 
ing to each other thus: 

The old people said : 

(Our son) is grief-stricken or angry. Or he is devoured by 
some animal. How is it that he has not come back ? He is our 
only support. What shall we do without him? What will become 
of us? 

There is no other son like him in this world consisting of 
mobile and immobile beings. Even when censured he does not 
disobey us. 

Indeed our life is harder than adamant. We do not see him. 
Our life is entirely in his power. Still our vital airs do not come 
out quickly. 

Brahma said : 

66. The old couple were talking together in that forest in 
this way. Meanwhile Dasaratha came to the place slowly. 

67-71. On hearing the footsteps they thought their son had 

come. 



53 . 72-79 


979 


The old couple said : 

O dear son, why have you come after so much delay? You 
are our eyes. You are our ultimate resort. Why don’t you speak, 
dear son? Are you angry with us, the blind old couple? 

Brahma said : 

Grief-stricken as though he had been pierced with thorns, 
bewailing his own evil action, that great king spoke to them, O 
Narada as though he was afraid : “Please drink the water”. 

On hearing the words of the king (they said): “This 
speaker is not our son. Who, are you ? Say that first. We 
shall drink the water afterwards”. Then the king said to 
them. 

The king said: 

72-75. Your son is there where there is an expanse of 
water. 

Brahma said: 

On hearing that the distressed couple said : “Tell us the 
truth and not otherwise.” 

Thereafter, the king related everything precisely as it had 
happened. 

On hearing this the old people fell down (and cried) : “Take 
us there. Do not touch us. The sin of touching a bralimin-slayer 
never perishes. 

The excellent king took the old man along with his wife to 
the place where the son had fallen dead. Touching the dead 
body of their son they lamented. 

The old couple said : 

76. Just as our death has been brought about through 
separation from our son, so also, O sinner, you will meet with 
your death on account of separation from your son. 

Brahmd said : 

77-79. Even as they prattled thus, O brahmin, their life 
became extinct. Then the king cremated the old couple and the 
son of the sage together. 



980 Brahma Parana : Gautam i- Mdhdtmya 

Thereafter the dejected king went to the city, O sage. He 
mentioned everything without any omission to Vasi§tha. 

Indeed Vasisfha was the ultimate resort to the kings of Solar 
Dynasty. After consulting excellent brahmins Vasi§tha mentioned 
to him the mode of atonement. 

Vasiffha said : 

80-83. Call together Galava, Vamadeva, Jabali, Kafyapa 
and other (experts too) and perform a horse sacrifice with many 
monetary gifts. 

Brahmd said : 

King Dasaratha performed many horse sacrifices through 
brahmins. In the meantime, an unembodied voice said : 

The Ethereal Voice said : 

‘‘Indeed, the body of king Dasaratha has become pure. He 
will become worthy of being communicated with. Sons also 
will be born to him. By the virtues of his eldest son the king 
will become free from sins. 

Brahmd said : 

84-88. Then, after a lapse of time through the help of sage 
Rsyasrnga sons were born to him. They were comparable to 
Devas. They were born for the achievement of the object of 
Devas. 

Rama was born of Kausalya. Laksmana and Satrughna of 
Sumitra and the most intelligent Bharata was born of Kaikeyi. 

All of them were intelligent, loved by the king and obedient 
to the king. 

Sage Visvamitra came to that king, O highly intelligent one. 
He begged for Rama and Laksamana for protecting Yajfias. 
The sage had already known their greatness. 

The old king who had obtained the sons after a long time 
said “No” to him. 

The king said : 

89-90. Somehow in my old age, due to my good luck, my 
sons are born, O sage. They yield much pleasure to me. I shall 



53.91-108 


981 


willingly give up this kingdom along with my body, but not 
these sons. 

Brahmd said : 

91-96. Then king Dasaratha was advised by Vasi$tha. 
Vasisfha said : 

Descendants of Raghu have never been taught to deny re¬ 
quests. 

Brahma said : 

With great difficulty the king said to Rama and Laksmana. 
The king said : 

Both of you protect the sacrifices of ViSvamitra, the brahm- 
inical sage. 

Brahma said : 

Saying thus to his sons and heaving hot sighs with withered 
lips the king who wanted to do what is laid down in scriptures 
handed over the sons to Visvamitra. 

Saying “So be it” and bowing down to Dasaratha again 
and again they went along with Visvamitra for protecting his 
sacrifices. 

97-100. Then the delighted sage taught them various arts 
and science such as the Vidya of Mahesvara along with the 
science of archery, the arts pertaining to the use of sastras and 
astras (ordinary and miraculous weapons), the secular arts 
partaining to the use of chariots, elephants, and horses, the arts 
of wielding clubs, and the discharge of weapons and their recall 
through Mantras. 

After attaining Vidyas, Rama and Laksmana killed Tafaka 
in the forest for the welfare of forest-dwellers. 

By the touch of their feet they made Ahalya rid of her 
curse. They killed Rak$asas, who had come for destroying 
sacrifices. 

101-108. Both of them who had acquired ali learnings 
protected sacrifices with bows in their hands. 

After the sacrifice had been concluded the great sage 
Visvamitra went to visit Janaka along with Rama and 
Laksmana. 



982 


Brahma Pur ana : Gautami-Mahatmya 


Prince Rama demonstrated his wonderful skill in archery as 
approved by his preceptor, in the midst of kings. 

Pleased with that Janaka gave Sita who was not born of any 
womb and who was LaksmI herself. 

The prosperous king Dasaratha who used to abide by the 
advice of Vasistha and others celebrated the marriages of 
Satrughna, Bharata and others, O sage. 

Then a long time passed. With the permission ofhis subjects 
and preceptor, the king decided to give kingdom to Rama. 
Kaikeyl became agitated by jealousy and rivalry on being 
urged by bad luck in the form of Manthara. She created ob¬ 
stacles by requesting for the kingdom on behalf of Bharata and 
for (Rama’s) exile to the forest. The king did not grant this. 
In order to make his father truthful in his statements Rama 
entered the great forest along with Sita and Laksmana. 

109-111. By his good qualities he had already won the 
hearts of good people. When Rama who had no desire for the 
kingdom set out with the intention of residing in the forest, 
along with Sita and Laksmana, the distressed king Dasaratha 
was overwhelmed by sorrow. He remembered Rama, Laksmana 
and Sita of many good qualities. Recollecting them Dasaratha 
gave up his life. 

112-115. O highly intelfigent one, when that king was in 
the world of mobile and immobile beings he had committed 
certain evil actions. As a result of the same he was led by the 
followers of Yama. There are many terrible awful hells, such as 
Tamisra and others in the abode of Yama. The king was then 
thrown into several hells one by one. He was cooked out, 
powdered and pounded. He was dried up, bitten and again and 
again burnt, O highly intelligent one. In these and other terrible 
hells the king was tortured. 

116. Traversing his forest path Rama came to Citrakuta. 
Three years elapsed there itself, O highly intelligent one. 

117. Again he went in the southern direction to the 
Darujaka forest. It is well known in the three worlds. Among 
all the countries that place is the most meritorious. 

118-119. He entered that terrible forest frequented by 
Daityas. It had been abandoned by the sages because they were 



53 . 120-136 


983 


afraid of Daityas. By killing Daityas and Rak§asas he rendered 
service to the sages and roamed about in the Dandaka forest. 
In this connection I shall narrate an incident. Listen attentively, 
O Narada ! 

120-129. Rama was slowly proceeding ahead (in the 
forest). King Dasaratha was in the hell. When Rama reached 
within five Yojanas of Gautami Yaraa said to his servants : 

“Rama, son of Dasaratha, is advancing towards Gautami. 
Now pull out of hell the king, the father of that intelligent 
Prince. Rama’s father should not be tortured in hell as long as 
he (Rama) is within five Yojanas after crossing Gautami. 

If the messengers do not carry out these holy words of mine 
all of you will be sinking in the terrible hell. 

Good men say that Gautami is the great Sakti who is in¬ 
separably connected with Siva. She is in the form of water. 
She is worthy of being honoured by Visnu, Brahma and 
Mahesa and should be saluted. The sin caused by transgressing 
her cannot be got rid of by anyone. If the son of any sinner were 
to think of Ganga that sinner is set free from many an impassable 
hell and attains salvation. Then when the son is stationed near 
Gautami, how can the father be tortured in hell by anyone ? 

On hearing the words of the Lord of Southern Quarter, the 
servants of Yama took away from hell the king of Ayodhya 
who was being cooked there. They spoke these words to 
him. 

The Servants of Tama said : 

130. Blessed are you, O great king, whose son is such a one 
as this. By whom is a good son who is a place of rest as it were 
both here and hereafter, obtained ? 

Brahma, said : 

131-136. After taking rest, the king spoke these words 
slowly to the servants: 

The King said : 

I was being cooked again and again in the awful hells. 
How was it that I have been dragged out of it so quickly ? It 
behoves you to mention it to me. 



984 


Brahma Purana : Gautami-Mahatmya 


Brahmd said : 

A certain (messenger) of calm mind from among them 
said this to the king : 

The Messenger of Tama said : 

This is a secret of the Vedas, scriptures, Puranas etc. kept 
with great effort. It is being revealed to you. It is the efficacy 
of the holy centre as well as your son. Rama, your glorious son, 
has come to the banks of Gautaml. Hence, O excellent one 
among men, you have been pulled out from the terrible hell. 

If Rama along with Laksmana were to remember you after 
taking bath in Gautaml, O excellent king, and if he offers balls 
of rice etc. you will be relieved of all sins and you will go to 
heaven. 

The King said : 

137. I shall go there and say to my sons what your ex¬ 
cellencies have stated. You alone can be my refuge. It behoves 
you to accord me permission. 

Brahmd said : 

138. On hearing the words of the king, the servants of 
Yama gave him permission out of pity. The king went to his 
sons. 

139-142. The body (that he had at that time) for under¬ 
going torture was awful. He was frequently heaving sighs. 
Surveying himself and remembering the sinful deeds committed 
by him he became ashamed. He reached Ganga after wandering 
about as he pleased. 

After reaching the banks of Gautaml, Rama and Laksmana 
along with Janaki duly took their bath. 

On that day, the residents had nothing to eat on the banks 
of Gautaml. 

On seeing it Rama’s brother Laksmana became sad and he 
spoke to Rama. 

Laksmana said : 

143-146. We are the sons of DaSaratha. Your power is 
great. But we have no food to eat. The residents on the banks 
of Ganga too have no food to eat. 



53.147-154 


985 


R&ma said : 

Dear brother, the Karman committed by us cannot be 
otherwise. When the world is full of food we are desirous of 
food. 

O son of Sumitra, we have not fed a brahmin. 

O Laksmana, those persons who, out of contempt, do not 
propitiate and worship Brahmins remain hungry for ever. 

After taking bath and worshipping Devas sacrificial fire has 
to be lit and sacrifice should be performed. Then the lord will 
provide us with food at its own time. 

Brahma said : 

147-152. While the brothers were talking together thus 
and observing the way of Karman king Dasaratha came to that 
place slowly. 

Immediately after seeing him Laksmana drew his bow in 
anger and said, “Stop Stop. Are you a Raksasa ora Danava.” 

On seeing him coming nearer still he said “Go. Go away. 
The virtuous king Rama, son of Dasaratha, is staying here. 
He is devoted to his preceptor. He is truthful. He renders 
service to Devas and brahmins. He is capable of protecting the 
three worlds. 

Persons like you who commit sins have no entry into the 
place where Rama stays. If, O sinner, you were to enter you 
will be killed.*’ 

On hearing these words of his son (the king) again and 
again meditated upon the result of evil action. With palms 
joined in reverence he gently called his daughter-in-law and 
sons and said with his face bent down. 

The King said : 

153-154. Iam king Dasaratha, dear sons. Listen to my 
words. I have become distressed because I have been surround¬ 
ed by three sins of brahmin slaughter. See my body split and 
cooked in hells. 

Brahmd said : 

Then with palms joined in reverence Rama, Sita and Laks¬ 
mana made obeisance to him. They prostrated before him on 
the ground and said : 



986 


Brahma Pur ana : Gautam i- Mahdtmya 


Sita, Rama and Lakfmana said : 

155-164. Dear father, O excellent king, of what action is 
this the result ? 

Brahmd said : 

He mentioned the three deaths of brahmins as they had 
happened. 

The King said : 

Dear sons, there is no atonement for the slayers of brahmins 
anywhere. 

Brahmd said : 

Overwhelmed by great sorrow they fell down on the ground. 
Remembering all these things such as the king, their exile, 
mother, father, the onset of sorrow, the, course of fate, the fall 
into hell and similar things the prince fell unconscious. On 
seeing the king unconscious Sita said : 

Sita said : 

Noble persons like you do not bewail at the onset of sorrow. 
They think of remedies, supernatural or human. An adversity is 
never averted by persons who lament even in a thousand Yugas. 
Wise and far-sighted persons never become perplexed. Why 
then, O ruler of men, do you feel sad in vain ? Give (unto me) 
the sin of that slaughter, the terrible one, that occurred first. I 
shall duly perform the expiation for the sin resulting from the 
death of that brahmin who was sinless, who was the master 
of Vedas and Vedangas, who was a doer of meritorious deeds 
and who was devoted to his father. I shall perform expiation in 
accordance with the injunctions of the scriptures. Both of you 
do not grieve over it. Let Laksmana take up the second sin and 
you the remaining one. 

Brahmd said : 

165. These righteous words were uttered with firmness by 
Sita. Both of them said ‘So be it’. Then Da£aratha spoke : 

Dataratha said : 

166. You are the daughter of Janaka, the knower of Brah- 



53.167-181 


987 


man. You are not born of any (mortal) womb. You are the wife 
of Rama. There is no wonder that you speak befittingly ? 

167-169. But you need not undergo the least of strains. By 
the holy dip, distribution of charitable gifts and offerings of 
Pinzas on GautamI I will be freed from the three sins of brah¬ 
min slaughter and I will go to heaven. What is befitting to 
your family has been uttered, O daughter of Janaka. Ladies of 
noble family take one across the sea of worldly existence. What 
is it that is difficult of access if Godavari favours. 

Brahma said, : 

170. Saying “So be it*’, preparations were made for the 
offering of Pindas. But the slayer of enemies did not see any 
eatable thing to be offered as Pinda. Then he spoke to Laks- 
mana. 

171. Laksamana said politely, “Here are Ingudi fruits*’ 
and in a moment oil cakes of Ingudi were brought. 

172. Rama sadly hesitated to decide on the offerings of 
Pinda to his father at Gaiiga through the oil cakes. 

173-175. A divine voice was heard there saying, “O prince, 
get rid of your sadness. Why ? You are banished from the king¬ 
dom. You have come to the forest. You are penniless. You are 
devoted to virtue and you are not wicked. Hence it does not 
behove you to bewail. 

He who is conceited on account of his wealth and performs 
religious rites on that basis, is a sinner. 

Listen attentively, O Rama, to what all the scriptures say. 

O king, the deities should be propitiated by the same food 
as the devotee takes.” 

176-181. When the Pinda was placed on the ground he did 
not sec his father. Where the dead body fell there is the ex¬ 
cellent holy centre Savatlrtha. Even its remembering dispels 
deadly sins. 

The following came there : Guardians of quarters, Rudras, 
Adityas, and Alvins. They were seated in their respective aerial 
chariots. In their midst their father shone like the sun. He 
had excessive lustre. He was seated on an excellent aerial 
chariot. He was being eulogized by Kinnaras. But Rama did 



988 Brahma Parana : Gautami-Mah&tmya 

not see his father. Looking at Devas in their chariots Rama 
said with palms joined in reverence, “Where is my father?” 
Then a divine voice was heard addressing Rama and Sita. 
“King Dasaratha is rid of three sins of brahmin slaughter. 
See him, O dear one, standing alone with Devas.” 

Devas also said to him : 

Devas said : 

182-185. You are blessed. You can rest contented. O 
Rama, your father has gone to heaven. 

Blessed is he who redeems his ancestors from hells. By that 
blessed one the three worlds are to be decked. See him, O 
mighty one, he is freed from sins. He has the lustre of the Sun. 
Even if he is endowed with all riches, a sinner can be compared 
to a burnt tree. Even a penniless fellow is looked at like the 
crescent-crested lord if he is meritorious. 

Brahma said : 

On seeing his son the king showered blessings on him and 
said : 

The king said : 

186. O sinless one, welfare unto you. You can rest content¬ 
ed. I have been redeemed by you. In this world, blessed is that 
son who is the redeemer of his ancestors. 

Brahma said : 

187. Devas said to Rama, the most excellent among men : 
‘‘Go, dear, go away happily for achieving the object of Devas”. 

Then, on hearing their words Rama said to Devas. 

Rdma said : 

188-190. O Devas, what duty still remains to be performed 
by me for my elderly father ? 

Devas said : 

There is no river equal to Gariga. There is no son equal to 
you. There is no lord on par with Siva. There is no Mantra 
equal to Pranava. 

O Rama, the tasks for the sake of your elders have been 
performed by you. O bestower of honour, all your ancestors 



53.191-206 


989 


have been redeemed by you. All go to their respective places. 
You too go away happily. 

Brahma said : 

191-194. At those words of Devas Rama, the elder brother 
of Laksmana, became delighted along with SIta. He was sur¬ 
prised on noticing the greatness of Ganga. He said these words : 

Rdma said : 

Ah ! the power of Ganga cannot be compared to anything in 
the three worlds. We are blessed because Ganga, the sanctifier 
of the three worlds, has been seen by us. 

Brahma said : 

With great pleasure Rama installed Mahesvara. He wor¬ 
shipped Isana with the sixteen articles of worship with great 
devotion. Is vara had thirtysix Kalas (digits) and requisite 
coverings. With palms joined in reverence. Rama eulogized 
Sankara. 

Rdma said : 

195-206. I bow to Sambhu, the ancient Puru§a. I bow to 
the omniscient lord of vast expense. I bow to lord Rudra, that 
lord of never-ending capacity. I bow to Sarva. I bow with my 
head. 

I bow down to that unchanging great lord. I bow to the 
consort of Uma, the preceptor of the worlds. I bow to that 
destroyer of poverty. I bow to that dispeller of sickness. 

I bow to the lord of welfare, of unimaginable form. I bow 
to the lord in the form of the seed causing creation. I bow to 
that lord who is the cause of sustenance of this universe. I bow 
to the lord of destruction. 

I bow to that unchanging lord fond of Gauri. I bow to that 
eternal lord identical with the destructible and indestructible. I 
bow to the lord in the form of knowledge whose existence is 
incomprehensible and whose capacity is immeasurable. I bow 
to that three-eyed lord with my head. 

I bow to the lord merciful to the living. I bow to the lord 
always terrifying. I bow to the donor of desired things. I bow 
to the lord of Soma, to the lord of Uma at the outset. 



990 


Brahma Pur ana : Gautami-Mah&tmya 


I bow to the lord with three Vedas for his eyes. I bow to 
that lord devoid of three forms. I bow to the meritorious lord 
beyond existing and non-existing. I bow to the destroyer of sins. 

I bow to that lord engaged in the welfare of the universe. I 
bow to the lord who assumes many forms, who is the protector 
of universe; and who is the creator of Sat and Asat. I bow to 
the lord of universe. 

I bow to the lord of sacrifices who bestows Havya and Kavya 
offerings. X bow to that lord who gives everything when propitia¬ 
ted, who is auspicious unto the worlds and who is the (ultimate) 
goal. I bow to my beloved deity who is fond of charitable gifts. 

I bow to the lord of Soma who is not independent (i.e. 
bestower of fruits based on one’s actions). I bow to that consort 
of Uma. I bow to that lord of victory. I bow to the lord of 
Vighnesvara and Nandi. I bow my head to that lord who is 
fond of his sons. 

I bow to the lord who destroys sorrow and misery of worldly 
existence. I bow to the bearer of Moon. I bow to the supporter 
of Ganga. I bow to Isa worthy of being worshipped. I bow to 
the husband of Uma, the excellent one among Devas. 

I bow to the lord whose pair of feet are worshipped by 
Devas and Asuras as well as by Brahma, the primordial deity, 
Visnu, Indra and others. I bow to the lord who wished for 
three eyes in order to see the eye-music of the face of the 
goddess (?) 

I bow to Soma who is worshipped with the articles of wor¬ 
ship, viz., mixture of milk, sugar candy, ghee, curds and honey, 
fragrant incense, lamps, flowers of various colours and different 
kinds of cooked food. 

Brahmd said : 

207. Then the lord said to Rama accompanied by Laks- 
mana, “Welfare unto you. Choose the boons”. Rama said to 
the Bull-bannered lord. 

Rama said : 

208. O Sankara, let the undertakings of those persons 
come to a fruitful end, who devoutly propitiate you by means 
of this prayer, O excellent one among Devas. 



53.209—54.1 


991 


209. Let those Manes, O Sambhu, who are fallen into the 
ocean of hell be sanctified by the offerings of Pindas and let 
them go to heaven. 

210. Whatever sin one has committed ever since the birth, 
by thoughts, words and deeds let it be immediately destroyed 
merely by taking bath here. 

211. If, O Sambhu, anyone devoutly gives even a minute 
particle to the suppliants here, let that be of everlasting bene¬ 
fit to the donors. 

Brahma said : 

212-213. The delighted Sankara said to Rama : “Let it be 
so”. When the lord, the most excellent one among Devas, had 
gone, Rama too, accompanied by his followers, slowly went to 
that place where Gautami rose from. Thenceforth that holy 
centre is called Ramatlrtha. 

214. The place where the arrow fell down from the hand 
of merciful Laksmana became the holy centre “Banatirtha”. 
It dispels all adversities. 

215-217. The place where the holy bath and the worship 
of Sankara was performed by Laksmana, became Laksmana- 
tirtha. So also is the case of Sitatirtha. It is capable of dispell¬ 
ing sins of different types entirely. 

Where Ganga the sanctifier of three worlds, had a contact 
with the feet of Visnu (i.e. Rama) and where Rama took bath 
that is the holy centre Ramatlrtha. How can its special ex¬ 
cellence be described ? There is no holy centre anywhere equal 
to that Ramatlrtha. 


CHAPTER FIFTYFOUR 
Putratirtha and other Holy Centres 

Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre well-known as Putratirtha is said to be 
a meritorious Tirtha. Even by hearing its greatness one attains 
cherished desires. 



992 


Brahma Purdna : Gautaml-Mdhdtmya 


2-3. I shall describe its qualities. Listen attentively, O 
Narada. The sons of Diti 1 (Daityas) and the sons of Danu 1 
(Danavas) became week and exhausted. The sons of Aditi 1 
became superior to them in every respect. Then Diti became 
overwhelmed by a spirit of rivalry on account of her misery 
due to separation from her sons. She approached Danu. 

Dili said : 

4-5. O gentle lady, our sons have become powerless. What 
shall we do ? In the world Karman is extremely powerful. See 
the progeny of Aditi. They are unafflicted. They are excellent. 
They have a good kingdom with fame and splendour of victory. 
They have vanquished all enemies. Their renown and virtue 
are increasing. They are capable of destroying my mental peace 
and delight. This inequality is in spite of the fact that the same 
person is our husband, the family is the same and the general 
features and duties are the same. 

6. I will not survive this. I have become shattered on see¬ 
ing the splendour and glory of the children of Aditi. I am 
dejected and am experiencing a peculiarly miserable condition 
on seeing the excessive prosperity of Aditi. Even if we enter the 
forest fire it is certainly conducive to happiness. The prosperity 
and glory of a rival should not be seen even in dream. 

Brahma said : 

7. Even as the charming lady was saying thus with deep 
sighs and sad face the son of Paramesthin who had been 
honoured and whose weariness had gone, said to her after con¬ 
soling her. 

Paramef thirds son said : 

8-12. O gentle lady, do not be grief-stricken; what is 
desired is achieved only by merit. Kasyapa of noble features 
knows the means of achieving it. He will tell you, O chaste lady, 
should you be humble in every respect. 


1. According to Mahclbharata, Adiparvan, Diti, Danu and Aditi were 
daughters of Daksa Prajapati and were married to Kas'yapa, grandson of 
Brahma and son of Marici. 



54.13-19 


993 


Brahma said : 

Danu said to Diti as she was saying thus, O Narada. 

Dam said : 

O gentle lady, satisfy your husband Kasyapa by your good 
qualities. If your husband is pleased you will attain your cheri¬ 
shed desires. 

Brakmd said : 

Saying “So be it” she satisfied Kasyapa in every respect. 
The holy lord Kasyapa, the Patriarch, said to Diti. 

Kafyapa said : 

13-15. O Diti of good holy rites, what shall I give you ? 
What is it that you desire ? Choose it. 

Brahmd said : 

Diti said to her husband that she wished for a son endowed 
with good qualities, who would be the conqueror of the uni¬ 
verse and who would be bowed to by all. She said thus humbly: 
“O father of Devas, I choose this gift that I shall become a lady 
with a valiant son in this world through the child that is born. 

KaSyapa said : 

16. I shall impart to you a holy rite lasting for twelve 
years. It will yield good fruits. After the holy rite is concluded, 
I shall impregnate you, as you desire. Ambitions are realized 
only when one is free from sins. 

Brahmd said : 

17-19. On the suggestion of her husband the delighted 
Diti of wide eyes bowed to him and performed the holy rite 
imparted by him adhering to the instructions laid down by her 
husband. 

How can living beings who shun visits to the holy centres, 
who are averse to distribution of charitable gifts to deserving 
persons and observances of holy rites realize their ambitious 
desires ? 

After the holy rite had been duly performed Kasyapa im¬ 
pregnated Diti. Again, he spoke to Diti, his beloved wife, in 
secret. 



994 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mdhdtmya 


KaSyapa said : 

20-21. Since even the sages adhering to their penance do 
not attain what they desire if they disregard the ancillary rites 
as laid down (in the scriptures), O lady of pure smiles, what is 
censured should not be done. You must neither sleep nor move 
about during both the junctions (i.e. dawn and dusk). Do not 
keep your tresses loose. 

22. O fortunate lady, one should not eat, sneeze or yawn 
during dawn and dusk when hosts of evil spirits gather together 
(and are very active). 

23. These activities should always be pursued, especially 
laughter, with something to screen it with. You must never 
stand at the bounding edge of the house during dusk and dawn. 

24. My beloved one, neither during the day nor at night 
should one step over the threshing rod, mortar, winnowing 
basket, pedestal, scabbard and other things. 

25. One should not lie down with the head towards the 
north, especially at dusk and dawn. One should never utter a 
falsehood nor frequent other people’s houses. 

26. No man except one’s husband should be looked at 
wantonly. 

If you strictly adhere to these observances a son who will 
enjoy the riches of the three worlds will be born to you. 

Brahmd said : 

27-30. She promised the same to her husband who is 
worshipped by the world saying “So be it”. Kasyapa then went 
away, O brahmin, hither and thither amongst Devas. The 
foetus within Diti increased in size and strength since it had 
been meritoriously procreated. 

Maya 1 Daitya had known all these things exactly through 
his miraculous power, Maya. Maya had intimate and pleasant 
friendship with Indra. He went to Indra and intimated every¬ 
thing to him in secret, viz. the intentions of Diti and Danu, the 
holy vow, development of the foetus and its valour and all 
other things. All these Maya intimated to Indra out of love. 

31. If merits of various kinds are acquired, it is possible to 


1. The architect and artificer of the non-gods. 



54.32-41 


995 


have a friend who is the sole abode of confidence, devoid of fear 
of any calamity. 

N&rada said : 

32. Maya the very powerful Daitya was the beloved 
brother of Namuci. How did then Maya become friendly with 
the slayer of his brother, O lord of Devas ? 

Brahmd said : 

33. Formerly, there was a very powerful leader of Daityas 
named Namuci. His enmity towards Indra was terrible. It 
caused hairs to stand on end. 

34. Once Namuci, the heroic leader of Daityas, saw Indra 
abandoning the battle and going off. Then he pursued him. 

35. On seeing him coming Indra became overwhelmed 
with fear. Leaving off Airavata, Indra entered the foam in 
water. 

36-40. The thunderbolt-armed Indra instantly killed his 
enemy through the foam. Namuci was slain and his younger 
brother Maya performed a great penance as an expiation for 
the annihilation of the brother’s foe. He was able to secure 
Maya (deceptive powers) of diverse kinds terrifying to the gods. 
By means of penance he secured boons from Visnu, the ultimate 
refuge of all worlds. Then he became an efficient donor and 
lovingly delightful conversationist. Maya worshipped the sac¬ 
red fires and the brahmins and waited impatiently for an 
opportunity to conquer Indra. From Vayu, Indra knew that 
Maya was a liberal donor unto the suppliants; that he was 
eulogized by the bards and that he was his enemy with the 
power of Maya. Then Indra assumed the form of a brahmin 
and approached asura Maya who had started a strategic battle. 
He spoke to Maya again and again. 

Indra said: 

41. Iam an excellent brahmin, O lord of Daityas. I have 
come to you as a suppliant after hearing that you are the most 
distinguished among the donors. Give unto me, a suppliant, 
the boon sought after. 



996 


Brahma Puraria : GautamUMdhdtmya 


Brahmd said : 

42. Maya took him for a brahmin and said : “It has been 
given to you by me. When a suppliant is in front, do virtuous 
persons begin to ponder over (the subject begged for) whether 
it is too much or too little ?” 

43-45. When this was said Indra replied, “I wish for 
friendship with you”. Maya said again to Indra, “Of what 
avail is this, O excellent brahmin ? I have no enmity with 
you.” Indra then said: “O Hail to Maya.” Indra was then 
advised by theDaitya, “Speak out the truth”. Thereupon Indra 
revealed to the Daitya his own body which was thousand-eyed. 
Then Maya who was extremely surprised said to Indra : 

Maya said : 

46-48. W T hat is this ? You are the thunderbolt-armed one ! 
Friend, this is an action not befitting you. 

Brahma said : 

Laughing and embracing him Indra said : ‘‘That is enough. 
Learned men achieve their desired object by any means what¬ 
soever”. 

Thenceforward, O greatest of sages, Indra had great love 
for Maya and Maya too acted for the welfare of Indra. 

49. Maya went to Indra’s abode and intimated everything 
to him. Indra asked Maya, the expert in Maya, “What am I to 
do ?” 

50. Out of love Maya gave his Maya to Indra. Indra was 
then delighted on acquiring it and said “O Maya, what should 
I do ?Tell me that.” 

Maya said : 

51-52. Go to the hermitage of Agastya. The pregnant Diti 
stays there. You remain there for some days waiting on her. 
Holding the thunderbolt enter her womb and cut the growing 
foetus till it comes under your control or dies. Then the enemy 
will cease to exist. 

Brahmd said : 

53-55. Saying “So be it” and after honouring Maya Indra 
immediately went to Diti, his step-mother, in great humility. He 



54.56-68 


997 


began to serve that noble lady, the mother of Daityas. Dili 
was not aware of the real intention of Indra who was actually 
inimical. But the living entity that was inside the womb knew 
the intention of Indra. It was the unfailing splendour of sage 
KaSyapa, inaccessible to enemies. 

56-58. The thousand-eyed lord Indra was desirous of 
entering within. Holding his thunderbolt, he waited for an 
opportunity. Once he saw her sleeping at dusk with her head 
to the North. The thunderbolt-armed lord said to himself, 
‘‘This is the opportunity’* and he entered the belly of Diti : 
The living entity that was staying within, saw Indra holding 
the weapon and desirous of killing him. Then he said to the 
lord boldly: 

The foetus in the womb said : 

59. O thunderbolt-armed one, why don’t you protect me, 
your brother. You are desirous of killing me. There is no other 
greater sin than killing (someone) outside battle. 

60. (Killing) except in battle (is never just), O lord of 
large arms. O Indra, fight (with me) when I come out. Hence 
this is not proper on your part. 

61. You are the person who has performed a hundred 
sacrifices; you are the thousand-eyed one, you are the husband 
of Saci; you are the annihilator of the cities (of enemies); you 
are the lord ofDevas armed with thunderbolt. O lord this is 
not proper on your part. 

62. Or, if you are desirous of a battle, facilitate my com¬ 
ing out. O thunderbolt-armed one, shun this path. 

63-64. Great men do not step on the evil path even though 
there may be an emergency. (I am) devoid of learning; I have 
no weapon. Nor do I have any collection of implements. O 
thunderbolt-armed one, you are learned. Aren’t you ashamed 
in attempting to kill me ? Noble men never indulge in a despi¬ 
cable act. 

65-68. Do you expect fame or merit by killing me? If 
brothers staying within the womb are deliberately killed, will 
it be an act of manliness! If, on the other hand, you have any 
eagerness for fighting with me, my brother, (you can have it) 
undoubtedly. 



998 


Brahma Purdij,a : Gautami-Mahatmya 


After saying this he stood up there showing the fist to Indra. 

(Hecontinued then.) This is the fruit, O Indra, of being 
a slayer of a brother or committing breach of trust. Why 
did you attempt to kill me? Does this yield any fame? Is 
there manliness in this? He by whose command the entire world 
consisting of mobile and immobile beings, functions has now 
become slayer of a boy ! He is trying to kill me. 

Brahma said: 

69. Even as he was saying thus Indra cut the foetus with 

his thunderbolt. Neither greedy persons nor those who are blind 
with anger have any sympathy anywhere. 

70-72. (The foetus) did not die. (The pieces) said sadly, 
“We are your brothers**. Again he cut those pieces. They said, 
“O Satakratu (one who has performed a hundred sacrifices), do 
not kill us, your brothers confidently resting in the mother’s 
womb”. 

There is not even an iota of mercy in the minds of those 
persons whose intellects are affected by hatred. 

He saw seven times seven (i.e. fortynine) pieces cut apart 
without any sign of emotion. All of them had hands, feet and 
life. On seeing this he was surprised. 

73-76. The auspicious pieces stationed in the womb had 
many but similar forms. Those multiformed pieces began to cry. 
Indra said to them “Maruta” (Do not cry). They therefore 
became Maruts of extremely powerful splendour. Even while 
remaining within the womb they consulted one another free from 
all misapprehensions about Indra. They said to Agastya, the 
noblest among sages in whose hermitage their mother was 
staying : 

“Our father and your brother esteems your friendship much, 
O sage. We know that you have a tender feeling for us. The 
thunderbolt-bearer Indra has done to us what even a Candala 
does not do”. 

77-79. On hearing these words Agastya went there in excite¬ 
ment. He roused Diti who was distressed due to pain in the 
womb. The extremely infuriated Agastya cursed the husband 
of &aci. 



54.80-86 


999 


Agastya said : 

O Indra, your enemies will always see your back in battle¬ 
field. 

If enemies see the backs of self-respecting fighters as they flee 
from battle-field it is death unto them even though they are 
physically alive. 

Brahma said : 

80-81. Angrily Diti cursed Indra who was within her 
womb. 

Diti said : 

O Indra, what has been committed by you is not an act of 
manliness. Hence this curse will take effect on you. You will be 
humiliated by women and ousted from your kingdom. 

Brahmd said : 

82. In the meantime the patriarch Kasyapa came there. 
He became distressed on hearing from Agastya about the evil 
deed of Indra. 

Indra who was within the womb spoke to his father like a 
frightened person. 

Indra said : 

83-84. I am afraid to come out because of Agastya and 
Diti. 

Brahma said : 

The patriarch Kasyapa who came near his wife saw the act 
of his son, his stay within the womb, and heard about the curses 
of Diti and Agastya. So he became distressed. 

Kafyapa said: 

85. Dear son Indra, come out. Why did you commit this 
sin? Persons born of pure families do not become inclined to¬ 
wards sins. 

Brahmd said : 

86. The thunderbolt-armed one came out and spoke with 
his face downwards on account of shame. Physiognomy of men 
itself speaks out their good and bad deeds. 



1000 


Brahma PurSna : Gautami-Mdhatmya 


Indra said : 

87-94. Undoubtedly I shall do what is said (by you) as 
conducive to welfare. 

Brahmd said : 

Then KaSyapa came near me along with the guardians of the 
quarters. He told me everything that had happened and asked 
me (how to bring about) the normalcy of the womb of Diti, 
freedom of the thousand-eyed lord from the curse, the friendly 
alliance of all those (pieces) within the womb with Indra, their 
freedom from illness, absence of defects for the husband of SacI 
and non-effectiveness of the curse given by Agastya, in due 
order. 

Then I spoke these words to Kasyapa, who was endowed 
with humility : “O KaSyapa, O Prajapati, bestower of honour, 
go immediately to GautamI accompanied by Indra, Vasus and 
guardians of quarters. Take your bath there and eulogize 
Mahesana in the company of everyone. Then by the grace of 
Siva everything conducive to your welfare shall befall you/’ 

Saying “So be it’* Kasyapa went to Gautami then. After 
taking bath, he eulogized the lord of Devas by these words. 

For the removal of all miseries only two things are well- 
known—the sacred river Gautami and Siva the merciful. 

Kafyapa said : 

95-100. Protect, O Sankara, O lord of Devas. Protect, O 
lord, bowed to by the worlds. Protect, O sanctifier, protect, O 
lord of speech with serpents for ornaments. 

Protect, O virtuous one seated on the bull. Protect, O lord, 
with three Vedas as the eyes. Protect, O upholder of the Earth, 
O lord of wealth and glory. Protect, O Sarva with the elephant’s 
hide for garment. 

Protect, O lord, destroyer of three cities. Protect, O crescent- 
crested one. Protect, O lord of Yajfias, O lord of Soma. Protect, 
O lord, the bestower of cherished things. 

Protect, O abode of mercy. Protect, O bestower of auspici¬ 
ousness. Protect, O origin of everything. Protect, O protector, 
O Indra, lord of wealth. 



54.101-113 


1001 


Protect, O brilliant one. Protect, O lord of wealth bowed to 
by Brahma. Protect, O lord of the universe. Protect, O lord of 
Siddhas. Protect, O perfect one, obeisance be to you. 

O Siva, O ocean of mercy, you alone are the refuge of the 
embodied beings whose minds are dejected due to the wanderings 
through the terrible forest of worldly existence. 

Brahma said: 

101. Even as he eulogized thus, the bull-bannered lord 
appeared in front of him. He asked Kasyapa, the patriarch, to 
choose a boon as he pleased. 

102-103. Kasyapa spoke these words very humbly to Siva. 
He narrated in detail the evil deeds of Indra, the curse, the des¬ 
truction of sons, the mutual enmity, the incurring of sins and 
curse by Indra. Then Vrsakapi said to Diti and Agastya. 

£iva said: 

104-106. The Maruts who are your sons and who number 
fortynine shall be fortunate ones taking their shares in the Yajftas. 
They will always be accompanied by Indra and they will be 
joyous. Wherever Indra has a share in the Havis offerings in 
any sacrifice, Maruts will undoubtedly have priority therein. 

107. No one will ever vanquish Indra when accompanied 
by Maruts. He will be victorious always. Stay happy for ever, 
O Patriarch. 

108. From now onwards if persons commit fratricide 
unjustly they will meet with extermination of their family as 
well as other calamities for ever. 

Brahmdsaid : 

109-113. Sambhu emphatically said to Agastya, the noblest 
among sages : 

Sambhu said : 

O sage, do not be angry with the husband of Sac!. O extre¬ 
mely intelligent one, be calm. The Maruts have become 
immortal. 

Brahmd said : 

The delighted bull-bannered lord Siva spoke to Diti also. 



1002 


Brahma Parana : Gautami-Mahatmya 


Siva said : 

You had thought thus : “Let a son be born to me who will 
be embellished with the riches of the three worlds” and then 
had strictly pursued the path of penance. That penance has now 
become fruitful to you. You have now splendid sons with nume¬ 
rous qualities. They have become strong and heroic. Hence 
cast off your mental anguish. O lady of beautiful eyebrows, be 
free from excitement and beg for other boons as well. 

Brahma said : 

114. On hearing these words of the lordofDevas, Diti 
bowed to Sambhu with arms joined in reverence and said : 

Diti said : 

115. The birth of a son is a great event for parents in the 
world. It shall be particularly endearing to a mother, O lord, 
worshipped by Devas. 

116. If that son happens to be one richly endowed with 
handsome features, heroism and valour (there is no doubt that 
he will be more endearing). Even one such son (is endearing). 
What to say when there are many such (sons) ! 

117. By virtue of your power my sons will be certainly 
strong and victorious. They are the true sons of the Patriarch 
and the brothers of Indra. 

118-119. (They are valourous) due to the favour of 
Agastya and Ganga. There will be auspiciousness, O lord, where 
there is your favour. What doubt is there in it ? I am content¬ 
ed. Still I shall submit this devoutly. Listen, O lord, to my 
words and do what is conducive to the welfare of the universe. 

Brahma said : 

120-123. When she was told by the Maker of the universe, 
“Speak out”, Diti humbly said : 

Diti said : 

The acquisition of a child in the world is very difficult, O 
lord, saluted by Devas. It is particularly pleasing to the mother. 
What to say if it happens to be a son ! 

If that son is endowed with good qualities, glorious and 
long-lived, of what avail is heaven, salvation or the status of 



54.124-136 


1003 


Paramesthin himself? The acquisition of a virtuous son is 
always welcomed by the living beings desirous of benefits both 
here and hereafter. Hence let that benefit be conferred if one 
takes one’s holy dip here. 

Sankara said : 

124-126. It is fruit of great sins that one is unable to beget 
children. If a woman were to be barren or a man to be impo¬ 
tent that defect can be rectified merely by taking bath here. 
One shall take bath and offer fruits and recite this prayer and 
then one obtains a son as a result of the bath and charitable 
gifts performed for three months. A barren woman shall bear a 
son by taking bath here. 

127-128. Any woman who has had her bath after mens¬ 
truation shall bear a son if she takes her bath here. Within 
three months after conception a pregnant woman shall devoutly 
take her bath, offer fruits, visit me and eulogize me with this 
prayer. She will then give birth to a son who will be equal to 
Indra. 

129. O Diti, listen. If persons do not beget sons due to 
offences committed against the manes or due to the fault of 
misappropriation of money, the following is the best atonement. 

130. In such cases the person shall offer balls of rice, pro¬ 
pitiate manes and gift away a bit of gold. Then he will certainly 
have a son. 

131. The family of these persons does not flourish : those 
persons who take away or misappropriate money kept in trust, 
persons who conceal jewels or deny their existence, and those 
who do not perform the rite of Sraddha. 

132. This (holy river) shall be the resort of such guilty 
persons after their death. Children deserving praise shall be 
born to those living persons who perform pilgrimage to the holy 
centres. 

133-136. The devotee shall take a holy bath at the conflu¬ 
ence of Diti and Ganga and worship lord Siddhesvara who is 
beginningless and unageing, who is extensive, whose body con¬ 
sists of existence, knowledge and bliss, who is the great lord 
served by the chiefs among Devas, sages, Siddhas, Gandharvas 
andYogins, who is in the form of Linga, who is brilliant and 



1004 Brahma Pur ana : Gautami-Mdhdtmya 

who is free from illness. He shall worship everyday with all arti¬ 
cles of worship. He shall be devout. He shall perform holy rites 
with full control over the limbs and sense-organs. He shall 
eulogize me by means of this prayer on the eighth and four¬ 
teenth days of the lunar fortnight. He shall gift away gold in 
accordance with his capacity. He shall feed brahmins. Who¬ 
ever does these on the Gariga shall obtain a hundred sons. 

137-141. After attaining his cherished desires he shall go to 
the city of Siva on death. Whoever eulogizes me by means of 
this prayer, wherever be he, shall beget a son within six 
months. Undoubtedly it is so even if she happens to be a barren 
lady. 

Brahmd said : 

Thenceforth that holy centre is cited as Putratirtha. By 
taking bath there, by distributing charitable gifts and perform¬ 
ing other similar rites there one shall attain all cherished 
desires. 

The place where friendship with the Maruts took place is 
called Mitratirtha. Since this holy centre rendered Indra sinless 
it is called Sakratirtha. 

Where Indra obtained his glory, that holy centre is named 
Kamalatlrtha. All these holy centres are the bestowers of all 
cherished desires. 

“All will happen” saying this Siva vanished. AH (those 
assembled there) went away in the manner they had come, 
with contentment. 

It is well known that there are a hundred thousand holy 
centres there that bestow merit. 


CHAPTER FIFTYFIVE 
Holy centres Tamatirtha etc. 

Brahma said : 

1-2. The holy centre well known as Yamatirtha is the 
enhancer of the satisfaction of the Manes. It is sacred. It 



55 . 3-17 


1005 


bestows all desired things seen and unseen. It is resorted to by 
all holy men. I shall recount its power that destroys all sins. 

There was a powerful Pigeon well known as Anuhrada. 

3. His wife was a shc-bird named Heti who could assume 
any shape she liked. Anuhrada was the grandson of Mrtyu and 
Heti his granddaughter. 

4. As time passed on they begot sons and grandsons. His 
enemy was the powerful king of birds named Uluka (owl). 

5. His sons and grandsons were fiery and powerful. Bet¬ 
ween these two (sets of) birds there was a long-drawn enmity. 

6-8. The hermitage of Pigeon was on the northern bank of 
Ganga. The king of birds named Uluka was on its southern 
bank. He resided there along with his sons and grandsons, O 
excellent brahmin. Those two strong sets of birds were anta¬ 
gonistic to each other. Surrounded by their strong sons and 
grandsons those powerful birds fought for a long time. Neither 
the owls nor the pigeons won or lost. 

9. By propitiating Yama and his grandfather Mrtyu, the 
Pigeon obtained miraculous Yamya weapons and became supe¬ 
rior to all. 

10. Similarly, the owl propitiated Fire and became strong. 
A terrible fight ensued between them as they became excessively 
arrogant on account of their boons. 

11-12. The owl discharged towards the pigeon a Fiery arrow. 
The pigeon hurled the noose of Yama at his enemy. He dis¬ 
charged the thick rod as well as the nooses of Mrtyu. Again 
a fight ensued between them like the one between Adi (a kind 
of bird) and Baka (crane) formerly. 

13-14. On noticing the fire closely approaching her husband 
in the course of that great battle, the chaste lady Heti, the she- 
pigeon, became extremely distressed. On seeing her sons being 
particularly enveloped by the fire, Heti approached the 
Fire-god and eulogized him through various utterances. 

Heti said : 

15-17. His mode of granting gifts and his form are not 
invisible. All the objects are his soul(?) It is through him that 
Devas partake ofHavyas (sacrifical offerings). I bow down to 
lhat husband of Svaha, to that enjoyer of Yajnas. 



1006 


Brahma Parana : Gautami-M&hdtmya 


I seek refuge in that lord who is the mouth of Devas, who 
is the carrier of Havyas, who is omniscient, who is the perfor¬ 
mer of Homas on behalf of Devas, who is the messenger of Devas, 
who is the primordial lord and who has bright light as his 
asset. Inside the body he dwells in the form of vital airs and 
outside he is the bestower of cooked food. He is an instrument 
for the performance of Yajfias. I seek refuge in that Fire-god, 
the conqueror of wealth. 

Agni said : 

18. O she-pigeon, this miraculous weapon of mine that has 
been discharged in the course of the battle is infallible. Where 
should it be made to rest, O chaste lady. Tell me that. 

The she-pigeon said : 

19. Let the miraculous weapon rest in me—neither in my 
sons nor in my husband. O lord of Havyas, be truthful in 
speech. O Jatavedas, obeisance be to you. 

Jatavedas said : 

20-21. I am delighted at your words, O chaste lady, as 
well as at your devotion to your husband. O Heti, I shall 
bestow happiness on you and on your husband and sons. This 
miraculous fiery weapon of mine will not scorch you, your hus¬ 
band or your sons. Therefore, O she-pigeon, go happliy. 

Brahma said : 

22. In the meantime she-owl saw her husband encircled by 
the nooses of Yama and struck by his rod. Being distressed and 
frightened she approached Yama. 

The she-owl said : 

23. People sympathise (with others) because they are 
frightened by you. Afraid of you they practise celibacy. Afraid 
of you, they do good actions. Afraid of you, they scrupulously 
cling to their duties. 

24. It is because they are afraid of you that they refrain 
from destructive acts as they rush to the forest from the village; 
afraid of you they adopt gentleness; afraid of you they imbibe 
Soma juice; afraid of you steadfastly they hold on to die prac- 



55.25-33 


1007 


tice of distribution of charitable gifts of cooked food and cows; 
afraid of you they expound the principles of Brahman. 

Brahma said : 

25-30. While she said this the lord of the southern quarter 
said to her : 

Tama said : 

Welfare unto you. Choose a boon. I shall give you what¬ 
ever pleases your mind. 

Brahma said : 

On hearing these words of Yama, that chaste lady said to 
him : 

The she-owl said : 

My husband is encircled by your nooses and struck by your 
rod. Hence, O excellent one among Devas, save my sons and 
husband. 

Brahma said : 

Becoming sympathetic on hearing her words Yama said 
again and again : 

Tama said : 

O Jady of splendid face, tell me a befitting place for the 
nooses and the rod. 

Brahma said : 

31. She spoke to lord Yama : “O lord of the universe, let 
the nooses hurled by you enter me. Let the rod penetrate me.” 
Thereupon lord Yama sympathetically spoke to her again. 

Tama said : 

32-33. Let your husband and sons, let all of them come 
out alive and free from ailments. 

Brahma said : 

Yama stopped the nooses and the Fire-god stopped the fiery 
missile. The two gods made the pigeons and owls happy. They 
said to the birds : “Let the desired boon be chosen**. 



1008 


Brahma Parana : Gautami-Mahatmya 


The birds said : 

34-40. Under the pretext of our hostility we have been able 
to have a view of both of you which is usually very difficult to 
achieve. We birds are sinful ones. O excellent ones among 
Devas, of what avail is a boon? If you two lovingly decide that 
a boon has to be given, we do not, for our own sake, request 
for the same. One who begs for one’s own sake should indeed 
be pitied, O great Devas. Fruitful is the life of that person who 
always acts for the welfare of others. Fire, water, sun, earth and 
different kinds of food grains—all these exist for the sake of 
others. Good people too exist similarly for the sake of others. 
Brahma and others are linked with death, and when this is 
realized, O lord of Devas, eagerness for the realization of one’s 
own interest becomes fruitless. Wha t has been fixed by Brahma 
at the time of a man’s birth can never be otherwise. Therefore 
creatures strain themselves in vain. Hence, we two shall beg for 
something auspicious for the welfare of the worlds, what is 
conducive to the good of all. Both of you may be pleased to 
agree to it. 

Brahmd said : 

41. For the acquisition of virtue and fame and with a desire 
for the welfare of the worlds, the two birds spoke to the lords 
well known in the world. 

The birds said : 

42-43. O lords of the worlds, let the two hermitages of us 
both be in the holy centres on either side of Ganga. This is our 
foremost boon. 

Whether the holy dip, charitable gifts, Japa, Homa and 
worship of the Manes are performed by a meritorious person or 
a person of evil actions, even if these are performed in a hapha¬ 
zard manner—let everything be meritorious and everlasting; 
this is our second boon. 

The Devas said : 

44-45. Let this be so. We are delighted to say another 
thing also. 

Tama said : 

There shall be no untimely death for seven generations in 



55.46-56 


1009 


the families of those persons who recite Yama’s prayer on the 
northern bank of Gautami. 

46. The man who conquers his soul and recites everyday 
the prayer of Mrtyu shall be the recipient of all riches. 

47-49. He will never be tormented by eighty-eight thou¬ 
sand varieties of ailments. In this holy centre, O excellent 
birds, a pregnant chaste lady shall take holy dip for seven days 
within three months and a near-barren lady within six months. 
That lady shall give birth to a heroic son.That son will live for 
a hundred years. He shall be rich, intelligent and heroic. His 
sons and grandsons will flourish. By offering balls of rice and 
distributing charitable gifts the manes will attain liberation. 
By taking holy dip a man shall be free from sins committed 
by thought, speech and deeds. 

Brahmd said : 

50-53. Immediately after the statement of Yama the Fire- 
god said to the birds : 

Agni said : 

I shall bestow good health, prosperity and beautiful form 
on those persons who observe sacred rites and recite my prayer 
on the southern bank. 

If this prayer is recited by anyone at any place and if this 
prayer is written down and kept in the house there can be no 
fear from fire. 

If a pure person takes his holy dip and performs charity in 
the holy centre of Agnitirtha, he will undoubtedly derive the 
benefit of Agnistoma sacrifice. 

Brahmd said : 

54-56. Thenceforth learned men know that holy centre 
variously as Yamyatirtha, Agneyatirtha, Kapotatirtha, Uluka- 
tirtha and Hetyuluka Tirtha. 

There are three thousand three hundred and ninety holy 
centres there. Everyone is conducive to the attainment of 
salvation. 

Those man who take their holy dip in them and practice 
charity become purified even after their death. They will be 
endowed with riches and sons. They will become splendid and 
attain heaven. 



1010 


Brahma Parana : Gautami-MdhStmya 


CHAPTER FIFTYSIX 
The holy centre Tapastirtha and others 


Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre well known as Tapastirtha excessively 
increases Tapas (power of penance). It bestows all cherished 
desires. It is sacred. It increases the happiness of the manes. 

2. Listen to what happened in that holy centre. It is des¬ 
troyer of sins. There arose a controversy amongst the sages as 
to the greatness of waters versus fire. 

3. Some considered waters the most superior. Others con¬ 
sidered fire the most superior. The controversy among the sages 
on the subject of fire versus water proceeded thus. 

4-8. Without fire where can life exist ? It is so because fire 
is the very essence of life. It is the soul. It is offerings. Every¬ 
thing is born of fire. 

The world is sustained by fire. Fire illuminates the 
world. Hence there is no greater deity than Fire-god. He alone 
is the inner light. He alone is the great flame. Nothing exists 
without fire whose abode is the entire set of three worlds. 
Therefore, there is nothing other than Fire-god which has the 
superiority over all other living beings. The semen deposited 
by a man in the womb of a woman has more power than its 
physical form. That power is of fire and not anything else. 
Indeed fire is the mouth of Devas. Hence they know none 
superior to this. 

9-12. Others who expound the Vedas advocated the supe¬ 
riority of water. Indeed food is produced from water. Fire is 
produced from water. Everything is sustained by water. Waters 
are remembered as mothers. Those who know the ancient lore 
say that water is the very life of the three worlds. Nectar is 
produced from water. Medicinal herbs are possible only through 
water. 

Thus some said that the Fire-god is superior. Others said 
that Waters are superior. Those expounders of Vedas, those 
sages who were voicing mutually opposed views approached me 
and said. 



56 . 13-23 


1011 


The sages said : 

13-17. Tell us whether fire or water is superior. You are 
the lord of the three worlds. 

Brahma said : 

I too said to all those sagfes, the regular performers of holy 
rites who came there : “Both of them are worthy of being 
worshipped in the world. The world is evolved out of both. 
Havya, Kavya and Amrta are produced from both. Life in the 
world is sustained by both. The sustenance of the body (is 
through both). There is no special difference between the two. 
Their superiority is considered equal. This is my emphatic 
pronouncement that neither is superior to the other. 

But the excellent sages considered that one of them must 
be superior. They were not satisfied with my words. Those sages 
went to Vayu (the Wind-god). 

The sages said : 

18-22. Who is the superior of the two, O Vayu? You arc 
the vital air. Truth is rooted in you. 

Brahma said : 

Vayu said : “Fire is superior. Everything is founded on 
fire”. Saying “No” amongst themselves those sages went to 
the Earth. 

The sages said : 

Speak the truth, O earth, as to who is superior. You are 
the support of the mobile and immobile beings. 

Brahma said : 

The Earth humbly said this to the sages who came there. 
Bhumi said : 

The waters, the eternal goddesses are the supports even unto 
me. Everything is born of waters. Hence superiority is well 
established in waters. 

Brahma said : 

23. After saying ‘No* amongst themselves the sages went to 



1012 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mdhatmya 


the lord lying down in the ocean of Milk. By uttering prayers 
they eulogized the lord holding conch, discus and iron club. 

The sages said : 

24-27. We seek refuge in that true entity which knows the 
entire universe, future, present and„that which is hidden in the 
cavity and which the entire set of three worlds of diverse and 
variegated forms enter on death. We seek refuge in that truth¬ 
ful entity which is imperishable, permanent, and immeasurable, 
which the sages mention as one that is comprehensible through 
the Vedas and those resorting to which obtain what they desire. 
The Yogins do not get the form of Visnu which is (identical 
with) the elements and which is the most important entity in 
the universe consisting of the great elements. We, the sages, have 
come here to say it. O abode of the universe, tell us the truth. 
You are the immanent soul of all the embodied beings. You alone 
are everything, O lord, everything is in you. Still alas, no one 
anywhere knows you on account of the influence of Prakrti (i.e. 
Maya). No one knows you though you are within, without and 
everywhere and you convert yourself in the form of the universe. 

Brahma said : 

28-29. Then the divine voice, the unembodied one, the 
support of the universe spoke. 

Divine voice said : 

Let both these (i.e. water and fire) be propitiated by means 
of penance, devotion and regular observances. That element 
can be said to be superior^ from which one attains fulfilment 
first. 

Brahma said : 

30-31. Saying “So be it” the sages worshipped by the 
worlds went away. They were weary, inwardly depressed and 
extremely detached. 

All of them went to Gautami, the sole mother of all the 
worlds, the sanctifier of the three worlds, for performing penance. 
They observed holy rites with self-control. 

32. Then they were ready for the worship of the Water- 
god and Fire-god. Some were the worshippers of Agni and 



56.33-40 


1013 


some adhered to the worship of waters. Then the divine voice, 
Sarasvati, the mother of the Vedas, spoke. 

The Divine voice said : 

33-35. Waters are the source or origin of fire. Purity, 
cleanliness are obtained through water. Without water how can 
the worship of fire be accomplished ? When water is made 
ready one becomes authorized to perform holy rites. A man 
becomes impure, dirty and unfit for holy rites till he faithfully 
plunges into cool waters, even if he be a scholar of the Vedas. 
Hence waters shall be the superior ones since they are remem¬ 
bered as mothers. Therefore, the superiority belongs to waters 
since they are the mothers particularly of fire. 

Brahma said : 

36. Those sages, the expounders of the Vedas, heard these 
words. Thereupon they came to the conclusion that the sup¬ 
eriority must be of the waters. 

37. The holy centre where this happened, O Narada, is 
called Tapaslirtlia. The holy centre where thetwoSatras of the 
sages took place is called Satratlrtha. 

38-40. It is also called Agnitirtha. So also they know this 
as Sarasvata (TIrtha). A holy plunge and the distribution of 
charitable gifts there is splendid and it bestows all cherished 
objects. 

There are one thousand and four hundred holy centres 
there. They are the bestowers of merit. A holy plunge and 
distribution of charitable gifts here bestow heavenly pleasures 
and salvation. 

The place where the doubts of the sages were dispelled by 
the divine voice is the source of the river Sarasvati which flows 
into Gaiiga. Who indeed could fully describe the glory of that 
confluence ! 



1014 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mdhalmya 


CHAPTER FIFTYSEVEN 

Holy Centre Ars\isenatirtha etc. 

Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre well known as Devatirtha is on the 
northern bank of Gariga. I shall describe its power that destroys 
all sins. 

2. There was a king well known as Arstisena. He was 
endowed with all good qualities. The name of his wife wasjaya. 
She was just like another Lak§mi. 

3. His sort was named Bhara. He was intelligent and a 
favourite of his father. He was an expert in the science of 
archery and the Vedas. 

4-5. His wife was a beautiful lady well-reputed as Supra- 
bha. Thereafter king Arsti§ena placed the responsibility of the 
kingdom on his son and took initiation for a horse sacrifice 
through the chief priest. He intended to perform the horse 
sacrifice on the banks of Sarasvatl. 

6-10. The king was initiated by Rtviks and important 
sages devoted to (the study of) Vedas and scriptures. In the 
presence of the brahmins and the sacred fires, Mithu the 
valiant king of Danavas, an evil-minded spirit of great exploit, 
destroyed the sacrifice and abducted the king, his wife and 
priest, O sage, and went hurriedly to the nether rigions. 

When the excellent king was thus taken away and the 
sacrifice was destroyed the immortal ones and the Rtviks went 
away to their respective places. The son of the king’s priest was 
a boy well known as Devapi. The boy saw his mother but could 
not see his father. He was supnised and excessively distressed. 

11-12. He asked his mother : “O mother, where has my 
father gone ? I would not like to live without him. Dear 
mother, tell me the truth. Fie, fie upon the life of those persons 
of evil deeds, bereft of their fathers. Dear mother, if you do not 
tell me I will enter water or fire”. 

13. The mother said to the son : “The king, his wife and 
the priest, your father, were taken away by a Danava to the 
nether worlds.** 



57 . 14-23 


1015 


Devapi said : 

14. Where was he taken? By whom was he taken ? How 
was he taken? In which rite? Who were all watching it? 
What is the abode of the Danava? Tell me. 

The Mother said : 

15. While Devas were watching, in the presence of the 
sacred fires and the brahmins, Mithu the Daitya abducted the 
king who had been initiated in the sacrifice to the nether worlds 
along with his wife and the priest. 

Brahmd said : 

16-17. On hearing those words of his mother Devapi re¬ 
membered his duty : “I will see Devas, fire, Rtviks and Asuras. 
My opinion is that my father should be sought among these 
and not elsewhere.” 

After deciding thus Devapi spoke to Bhara the son of the 
king: 

Devapi said : 

18-20. All those who have been taken to the nether worlds 
should be brought back by me through the power of penance, 
celibacy, holy rites, and sacred observances. 

Of what avail is that wretch, whether alive or dead, who 
does not retaliate when a terrible insult has been inflicted. 
Rule over the entire Earth like your father Ar§p?ena. O king, 
my mother should be protected by you till my return after ful¬ 
filling my task. O Bhara, permit me to go. 

Brahmd said : 

21-23. After a careful deliberation Devapi was addressed 
thus by Bhara. 

Bhara said : 

Achieve your puropse. Go happily. Do not have the least of 
worry. 

Brahmd said : 

Devotedly meditating on the feet of the king of immortals, 
Devapi searched out the Rtviks and bowed to them severally. 
With the palms joined in reverence the boy Devapi said. 



1016 


Brahma Purina : Gautami-M&h&tmya 


Devapi said : 

24-26. The sacrifice should have been saved by you all. 
The sponsor of sacrifice who had been initiated therein, the 
priest and the wife of the initiated one should have been saved 
by you all. Even while you were all watching, O Rtviks, the 
king and others have been abducted by him after destroying the 
sacrifice. This is not proper. Still, I consider this (necessary). It 
behoves you all to return them devoid of all ailments. O leading 
brahmins, otherwise you will deserve a curse. 

The Rtviks said : 

27-28. In a sacrifice, the Fire-god should be worshipped 
at the outset. It is Agni who is the presiding deity here. Hence, 
we the servants of the sacrificial fires do not know (these 
things). That carrier of the Havyas (offerings) (i.e. the Fire- 
god) is the donor, the enjoyer, the remover and the maker. 

Brahma said : 

29. Turning his back upon the Rtviks and worshipping 
the Fire-god, Devapi duly intimated it to the Fire-god. (Then 
the Fire-god replied.) 

Agni said : 

30. Just like the Rtviks I too am a servant of Devas. I 
carry Havya to Devas. They are the enjoyers (and therefore) 
they are the saviours too. 

Devapi said : 

31. I shall call Devas and carefully distribute their shares 
in the Havis to each. Hence, you go hurriedly towards them. 

Brahma said : 

32. Devapi approached Devas and bowed to each of 
them. He then intimated to them the statement of Rtviks, of the 
Fire-god and (his own threat of) curse. 

Devas said : 

33. When we are invoked by the Vedic Mantras by the 
Rtviks in the proper order we partake of our shares in the Havis. 
We are not otherwise free, O excellent brahmin. 



57.34-46 


1017 


34. Hence, we are the perpetual followers of the Vedas. 
We are induced by the Vedas. O brahmin, we are dependent. 
Therefore, intimate this to the Vedas. 

Brahma said : 

35-36. Devapi cleaned himself and then invoked the Vedas 
with care. He was endowed with (the power of) meditation 
and penance. The Vedas appeared before him. 

Bowing down to them again and again he spoke to the 
Vedas. He intimated to them the statement of the Rtviks, the 
statement of Agni and the statement of Devas. 

Vedas said : 

37-41. We too are dependent, O dear one. We are the 
followers of Isvara and subject to his control. He is the support 
of the entire universe, but he is not supported by anyone. He 
is unsullied. He is the sole abode of all power. He is the store¬ 
house of all riches. He is the great god, the maker. He is Mahe- 
svara, the annihilator. We are in the form of words and sounds, 
O brahmin. We speak, we know. It is our duty that we speak 
(i.e. explain) what you ask. We know by whom they were taken 
away. We know his name, his city and his power. We know 
that they have been eaten but they are not destroyed. We also 
know how you can acquire the capacity to get them back again, 
whom to propitiate and where (for the same purpose). 

Brahma said : 

42-46. On hearing this he pondered for 1 a long time and 
spoke to the Vedas. 

Devapi said : 

O Vedas, be pleased to speak this alone immediately, entire¬ 
ly and truthfully. I shall get back all those who had been taken 
to the nether worlds. Adequate obeisance to them all. Obeisance 
be to you all. 

The Vedas said : 

O Devapi, go to the Gautami. There eulogize Mahesvara. 
The merciful lord (when) pleased will surely bestow on you 
what you desire. (When) eulogized lord Siva will be pleased. 



1018 Brahma Purdna : Gautaml-M&hdtmya 

This is true, O extremely intelligent one. King Ar?fisena, Jaya 
his chaste wife and Upamanyu your father—all of them stay in 
the nether worlds devoid of ailments, due to the boons bestow¬ 
ed by lord Siva. Due to the boons bestowed by lord Siva you 
will kill Raksasa Mithu and attain fame and virtue. This is 
possible. It is not otherwise. 

Brahma said : 

47. At the instance of the Vedas the boy Devapi went to 
Gautami. The brahmin took his bath and having got the proper 
opportunity eulogized Mahelvara. 

Devdpi said : 

48. O lord of the chiefs of Devas, I am a mere boy. You 
are the preceptor of preceptors. I have no power to eulogize 
you befittingly. Obeisance be to you, O Sambhu. 

49. The Vedas do not know you. Neither Devas nor sages. 
Neither Brahma nor Visnu. As you are so you are. Obeisance 
be to you. 

50. You protect, O Mahegvara, those who are sinning souls, 
who are helpless, who are miserable, who are poor and who 
are sickly. 

51. The heaven-dwellers who are worshipped by penance, 
holy rites and Mantras will give them the benefit ordained by 
you, O lord of the worlds. 

52. (Even) beggars will turn out to be donors. Whatever 
they desire is not wanting at your door. You are the cause of 
this unique situation. 

53. O preceptor of the universe, O lord, at the mere utter¬ 
ance of the word Siva, you protect ignorant persons, sinners 
and those who are immersed in the ocean of hell. 

Brahmd said : 

54-56. Even as he was eulogizing thus, the three-eyed lord 
appeared in front of him and said. 

Siva said : 

Tell me what boon (you wish to have), O Dev&pi. Enough 
of your despondency, O boy. 



57.57-64 


1019 


Devfipi said : 

O lord of the universe, I wish to redeem the king, the king’s 
wife and the preceptor who is my father. I wish for the death 
of my enemy. 

BrahmS said : 

57. On hearing the words of Devapi the lord of the uni¬ 
verse said “So be it”. At the behest of Sankara, Devapi got 
everything. 

58. Calling Nandin, one of his Ganas, the merciful lord 
Sambhu sent him with his Spear, O Narada. 

59. Nandin went to the nether worlds and killed Mithu 
and the leading Asuras. Bringing his father and others he 
handed them over to them (Devapi). 

60. The horse sacrifice of the self-possessed Ar§^i§ena was 
performed there. The Fire-god, Rtviks, Devas, Vedas and sages 
said : 

Agni and others said : 

61. Where Sambhu, the lord of Devas, the lord of the uni¬ 
verse, favourably disposed towards his devotees appeared per¬ 
sonally, O Devapi, that place has become the holy centre Deva- 
tlrtha. 

62-64. This holy centre shall be conducive to the destruc¬ 
tion of all sins; it shall bestow all spiritual achievement; it yields 
merit and your fame shall be perpetual. 

Brahmd said : 

When the horse-sacrifice was concluded Devas granted them 
boons. After taking their bath they became contented and went 
to heaven. Thereafter fifteen thousand and hundred and eight 
holy centres cropped up on both the banks. Let it be known 
that a holy dip and distribution of charitable gifts there bes¬ 
tow excessive merits. 



1020 


Brahma Pur&na: GautamUM&hatmya 


CHAPTER FIFTYEIGHT 

Holy Centre Tapovanatirtha etc. 

Brahma said : 

1-2. The holy centres on the southern bank of GautamI 
well known as Tapovana, Nandini Sangama, Siddhe^vara and 
Sardula are very holy. Listen to their details by merely listen¬ 
ing to which one is rid of all sins. 

3. Agni (Fire-god), Hotr was formerly the carrier of Havyas 
unto Devas. He got as his wife the beautiful daughter of Daksa 
named Svaha. 

4. She was childless in the beginning. She performed 
penance for a son. The Fire-god said to his wife Svaha, the 
uncensured lady who performed elaborate penance and delight¬ 
ed the Fire-god. 

Agni said : 

5-8. Children will be born, O splendid lady; do not per¬ 
form penance. 

Brahma said : 

On hearing the words of her husband she desisted from 
penance. Excepting the words of husband nothing else fulfils 
the cherished desires of women anywhere. 

Some time passed by. Terror from Taraka increased. 
Karttikeya was as yet unborn, although Mahesvara and BhavanI 
had been indulging in amorous dalliance in secret for a long 
time. Devas became frightened and approached Agni. The 
heaven dwellers spoke to him thus for realizing the task of 
Devas. 

Devas said : 

9. O highly fortunate one, go to lord Sambhu worshipped 
by the three worlds. Inform Siva that there is danger from 
Taraka. 1 


1. A powerful demon who by the performance of severe penance had 
secured a boon from Siva and had later became a great terror to gods; killed 
by Skanda who as a result of a divine planning was bom to Siva and Parvati. 



58.10-22 


1021 


Agni said : 

10. One should not go to that place where a couple remain 
in secret communion. This is a general rule. What then with 
regard to the trident bearing lord ? 

11. There is no deliverance from hell to that person who 
overhears the conversation of a passionate couple who remain 
in an isolated place indulging in frank carefree talk. 

12. He is the master of all the worlds. He is Mahakala 
wielding trident. By whom can he be looked at while he is 
staying in a secret place along with Bhavani. 

Devas said : 

13. This is justifiable when a great danger is overshadowing 
us. What is the rule to be followed and mentioned elsewhere ? 
(i.e. This is an extraordinary situation) when there is great 
danger from Taraka you are the Taraka (redeemer). 

14. The life of good men is meant for others especially 
(when they are immersed) in the ocean of great danger and 
terror. 

Or you can go in another form (in disguise) and speak the 
words befitting (the role). 

15. After intimating to Sambhu the words of Devas come 
back quickly. Then, Fire-god, we shall offer you worship (on 
behalf) of the two worlds. 

Brahma said : 

16-18. At the instance of Devas the Fire-god assumed the 
form of a parrot and went to the place where the lord of the 
worlds was sporting with Uma. Then the Fire-god went ahead 
timidly in the form of a parrot. The carrier of the Havyas (Fire- 
god) could not go through the doorway. Then he went to the 
window sill and remained there with face turned down and 
trembling. On seeing him Sambhu in that secret place laugh¬ 
ingly said to Uma. 

Sambhu said : 

19-22. See, O gentle lady, the parrot that is the Fire-god 
himself who has come here at the instance of Devas. 



1022 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mahatmya 


Brahmd said : 

Parvati bashfully said to the lord, “O lord, enough’*. The 
lord of Devas called the Fire-god moving about in front of him. 
in the form of a bird and said, “O Agni, you have been recog¬ 
nised through various ways. Do not speak anything. Open your 
mouth. Take this in and carry it with you.” After saying this 
lord Sambhu discharged a great deal of semen into the mouth 
of Fire-god. 

With this semen within him Agni could not at all go. 

23-27. Utterly tired, Agni sat down on the bank of Ganga. 
He then discharged a greater portion of that semen into Kftti- 
kas wherefrom Karttika was born. 

The remaining portion of the semen of Sambhu that had 
been within his body, Agni split into two and deposited into his 
beloved wife Svaha who was particularly eager to have a child. 
Formerly, she had been assured by saying “You will have child¬ 
ren. ” Agni remembered this now and deposited the semen of 
Sambhu. Excellent twins were born of that semen discharged 
by Agni. They were Suvarna and Suvarna, unrivalled in the 
world in handsome features and beauty. It was pleasing to Agni 
and it perpetually increased the pleasures of the worlds. 

28. Out of love Agni gave Suvarna (in marriage) to the 
intelligent Dharma. He made Samkalpa the beloved wife of 
his son Suvarna. Thus Fire-god performed the marriages of 
his son and daughter. 

29-34. Due to the fault of the mutual intermixture of the 
semen both the children of Agni (became lax in sexual beha¬ 
viour) . The son Suvarna who could assume many forms, 
assumed the forms of the excellent Devas and indulged in sexual 
intercourse with the wives of Indra, Vayu, Kubera, Varuna and 
the leading sages. If any lady was fond of any particular per¬ 
son he assumed the form of that person and indulged in amo¬ 
rous dalliance with that lady. In some places the son of Agni 
who had splendid form assumed the forms of husbands of chaste 
ladies and sported about with them fully satisfying (Cupid). On 
account of his action Suvarna became contented. 

Although she was the wife of Dharma, the daughter of Svaha 
named Suvarna became an adulteress. If any person had a 
beautiful wife pleasing to his mind, Suvarna assumed that form 



58.35-42 


1023 


and sported about with those husbands whether human beings, 

Asuras, Devas or sages. She indulged in sexual sports with these 

and others endowed with beauty, munificence, stability and 

majesty and having the brilliance of her father (Agni). If any 

wife of any Deva gained his approbation, she used to assume 

the form of that lady and sport with him. By means of diverse 

ways and activities she used to attract his mind and achieve 

the fulfilment of her love. 

% 

35. On seeing these (amorous) activities of Suvarna and 
Suvarna, the son of Agni as well as the daughter of Agni, Devas 
and Asuras became angry and they cursed the son and daughter 
of Agni at that time. 

Devas and Asuras said : 

36-37. Since this act involving transgression (of moral 
laws) has been committed, since this sinful deed marked by 
deceitful behaviour has been done, O Havyavaha (the carrier 
of Havyas), your son shall become one of infidels and one 
going everywhere. 

Similarly, Suvarna too shall not be steadfast to any single 
person. She shall not be satisfied with any one person. She will 
resort to many ignoble embodied beings of different species. 
This shall be the defect of your daughter, 

Brahma said : 

38. On hearing these words of imprecation Agni approach¬ 
ed me with great fright and spoke, “Tell me the mode of ex¬ 
piation for the children’*. 

39-41. Then I said : “O Agni, go to GautamI, After 
eulogizing Sankara, O large-armed one, intimate to the lord of 
universe (everything). 

O Agni, such a child as this has been born to you due to the 
semen of MaheSvara deposited in your body. Hence intimate to 
the lord these imprecations of Devas. For the protection of his 
own progeny Sambhu will do something conducive to their 
welfare. 

42. Eulogize the lord and the goddess. Siva will be pleased 
with your devotion. Then you will get the fulfilment of cherish¬ 
ed desires in regard to your children. 



1024 


Brahma Purina : Gautami-Mdhd tmya 


43. Then at my instance, Agni went to Ganga and 
eulogized Mahesvara by means of laudatory statements equal to 
the Vedas in importance. 

Agni said : 

44-47. He is the creator of the universe. He has the cosmic 
form. He is unsullied. He is the primordial maker and the 
self-born. I bow down to that lord of the universe. 

I bow down to that three-eyed lord who becomes fire and 
annihilates; who is the creator in the form of water and who 
protects in the form of the Sun. 

(Obeisance) to the lord who is the cause of satisfaction to 
Devas in the form of the (sponsor of sacrifice) and to the 
living beings by making neat arrangement in the form of Vayu 
(wind); who protects in the form of Siva; who is conducive to 
perpetual happiness (in the form of) Visnu, and who accords 
space to the living beings in the form of firmament. 

Brahma said : 

48. Then the delighted lord Siva, the unchanging and the 
endless, asked Agni, worshipped by Devas to choose any boon 
he liked. 

49. Humbly he said to Siva, “Your semen is stationed in 
me. Due to that the handsome son Suvarna well known through¬ 
out the worlds was born. 

50-51. Similarly, the daughter Suvarna was also born 
from it, O lord of the universe. On account of the defect of 
mutual interchange of semen, O Siva, both the children have 
become defective due to the transgression of moral laws. 
Devas have cursed them. O lord, quell it.” 

On hearing these words of Agni Siva said the following that 
is conducive to the outcome of auspiciousness. 

Siva said : 

52-56. Due to my semen Suvarna of great expolit was born 
of you. Complete magnificence and all accomplishments will be 
bestowed upon this Suvarna by me. O Agni, listen to my words. 
He will become the sanctifier of the three worlds. He alone is 
the nectar in the world. He alone is the beloved of Devas. He 



58.57-67 


1025 


alone is the enjoyment of worldly pleasures and salvation. He 
alone is Daksina (monetary gift) in the sacrifice. He alone is 
the beautiful feature of everything. He is the preceptor of the 
preceptors. One should know that the excellent semen from me 
is the most excellent thing. Especially that which is deposited 
in you. What worry can there be in regard to thac ? Without it 
everything is deficient. Due to it riches arc perfect. 

57. Men without Suvarna are dead though (physically) 
alive. A rich man though devoid of good qualities is worthy of 
being honoured, but not so a poor man though endowed with 
good qualities. 

58. Therefore, there is nothing greater than Suvarna. So 
also this Suvarna though restless and fickle shall be excellent. 

59-61. Everything deficient, if glanced at by her will be¬ 
come perfect. She is to be attained in the three worlds by 
means of penance, Japas and Homas. O Agni, her power and 
excellence is recounted a little. She will stay everywhere. She will 
wander about after coming there. Suvarna, Kamala, shall be 
holy. From now onwards the merit of your children who loiter 
as they please shall be one like which has neither been nor will 
ever be. 

Brahma, said : 

62- After saying thus Siva assumed the form of a Linga 
and remained there manifest with a desire for the welfare of 
the worlds. 

63- 65. After acquiring boons Agni became delighted along 
with his children, the son and the daughter. Suvarna, the 
daughter of Agni, remained joyous along with her husband 
Dharma. His son also remained jolly along with Samkalpa. 

In the meantime O sage, Sardula, the lord of Danavas, 
attacked and defeated Dharma and fraudulently abducted 
Suvarna, the daughter of Agni, the abode of fortune, conjugal 
felicity and graceful charms. 

66-67. Suvarna well known throughout the world was 
taken to the nether worlds by him. Agni the carrier of Havyas 
and Dharma the son-in-law of Agni eulogized again and again 
Vi§nu, the lord of the worlds, and intimated to him the matter 



1026 Brahma Purdria: Gautamx-Mahdtmya 

on hand. They intimated to the powerful lord the matter on 
hand. 

68-69. Lord Visnu cut off the head of Sardula with his 
discus. The divine lady Suvarna, the most beautiful women in 
the world, was brought by the lord. She was the daughter of 
Maheivara as well as the beloved (daughter) of Agni too. 
Vi§nu showed her to Mahesvara,0 Narada. MaheSvarabecame 
pleased and embraced her again and again. 

70-74. The place where the discus that shone brilliantly 
and cut off Sardula’s head was washed is well known as Sankara 
Tirtha as well as Vaisnava Tirtha and Siddha Tirtha. 

In the place where Agni and the eternal Dharma attained 
great delight, in the place, O excellent sage, where tears of 
delight fell down a river named Ananda and Nandini arose. 
Its confluence with the Gariga is sacred. Siva is present there. 
In the very same confluence, Suvarna is manifestly present even 
today. 

75-77. She is also well known as Daksayani, Siva, Agneyi, 
Ambika, Katyayani, Isvarl and Jagadadhara (support of the 
universe). She is the perpetual bestower of the cherished desire 
of the devotees. She adorns both banks. The place where Agni 
performed penance is the holy centre Tapovana. There are 
these and other holy centres on both sides. O sage ! A holy 
dip and the distribution of charitable gifts in them is auspicious 
and it bestows all cherished desires. 

78. There are fourteen thousand holy centres on the 
northern bank and sixteen thousand holy centres on the 
southern bank. 

79. In different places, the holy centres have special marks 
of recognition. They have separate names as well. It has been 
briefly mentioned by me. 

80. Whoever listens to this, reads or remembers this, will 
be perfect in all desirable respects. 

81. If a man knows this and performs holy dip etc. there, 
he remains rich always and particularly righteous. 

82-84. The holy centre to the west of Abjaka is known as 
Sardula. It is superior to all holy centres such as Varanasi. 

He who takes his holy bath there, salutes Pitrs and Devas 



59.1-11 1027 

and performs libations, becomes rid of all sins. He is honoured 
in the world ofVi§nu. 

Between Tapovana and Sardula there are many holy 
centres. The greatness of each and every one cannot be described 
by anybody. 


CHAPTER FIFTYNINE 
Holy Centres Indratirtha etc. 

Brahmd said : 

1-2. A holy bath and distribution of charitable gifts in 
these holy centres prevents return to the worldly existence. 
The holy centres are Indratirtha, Vrsakapatirtha, the con¬ 
fluence of Phena where there is the holy centre of Hanumanta, 
and the holy centre Abjaka where the lord is Trivikrama. 

3. I shall mention what has transpired on the southern 
bank of Ganga. On the northern bank there is the holy centre 
named Indresvara. Listen with devotion observing holy rites 
with controlled senses. 

4. The excessively arrogant enemy of Indra named Namuci 
was very strong. He fought with Indra Indra removed his head 
with Phena (watery foam). 

5-7. That foam of waters assumed the form of Vajra 
(thunderbolt) and it cut off the head of his enemy Namuci. 
Thereafter, the foam fell on the ground on the southern bank 
of Ganga. After piercing the Earth it entered the nether worlds. 
The sacred water of Ganga originating from the nether worlds 
came to the Earth’s zone through the path pointed out by the 
thunderbolt. That water followed the river Phena called after 
the name Phena, i.e. foam. 

8. Its confluence with Ganga is holy and well known 
throughout the worlds. It is conducive to the destruction of all 
sins like the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna. 

9-11. The holy centre where the step-mother of Hanuman 
became free from the state of a cat merely because of a holy 



1028 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mdhdtmya 


dip there due to the grace of Visnu is called Marjara. This 
has been previously recounted to you. It is also called Hanu- 
manta. The narrative has been mentioned before. It is also 
called Varsakapa and Abjaka. Listen to it with attention. 

There was a strong ancestor of Daityas well known as 
Hiranya. 

12. By performing penance he became invincible to all 
Devas. He became very terrible. His son also was very power¬ 
ful, difficult to be conquered by Devas. 

13-16. He was known as Mahasani. His wife was Apara- 
jita. A long-drawn continuous battle ensued between him and 
Indra. On all occasions Mahasani of great virility used to 
conquer Indra in the battlefield along with his elephant and 
hand him over to his father. After binding him he used to see 
him devoid of strength and forsake cruelty and hand him over 
to Hiranya. The father of Mahasani was superior to Devas and 
he used to put Indra in the nether worlds under surveillance. 

17. After conquering Indra Mahasani marched against 
Varuna in order to conquer him. Varuna of great intellect 
offered his daughter to Mahaiani. 

18. Varuna gave his own abode in ocean to Mahasani. 
Friendship was generated between Varuna and Mahasani in 
this way. 

19-20. Varuna’s daughter VarunI married Mahasani. In 
all the three worlds Mahasani the great Daitya was incompa¬ 
rable in virility, fame, heroism and strength. When the universe 
was devoid of Indra, Devas had mutual consultation. 

Devas said : 

21. Visnu alone shall be the person to restore Indra. He 
alone is the slayer of Daityas. He alone shall be the seer of 
Mantras. He will create another Indra. 

Brahmd said : 

22-23. After having consultation together thus, Devas in¬ 
timated this to Vi§nu. 

Saying, “ Mahasani, the great Daitya, cannot be killed by 
me” Vi?nu went to the lord of waters, Varuna, his father-in-law. 



59.24-33 


1029 


After going to Varuna, Kesava said to him about the defeat and 
discomfiture of Indra. 

24-26. (He said) “You must do something whereby Indra 
comes out”. At those words of Visnu, O sage, the lord of the 
waters hurriedly went to the valorous Mahasani, the husband of 
his daughter, and the son of Hiranva. Lord Varuna was exces¬ 
sively honoured by his son-in-law. The Daitya then humbly asked 
his father-in-law (the reason of) his arrival. Varuna mentioned 
to the Daitya the reason of his arrival. 

Varuna said : 

27-28. O mighty-armed one, give me Indra who has been 
conquered by you before. Dear friend, the overlord of Devas 
has been imprisoned in the nether worlds. He is worthy of our 
honour always. O slayer of enemies, give him to me. If the 
enemy is released (voluntarily) after being imprisoned, it will 
confer great glory on good men. 

Brahma said: 

29-30. With very great difficulty the lord of the Daityas 
said “So be it” and gave to Varuna Indra, the husband of Saci, 
along with his elephant. He appeared excessively majestic in the 
midst of Daityas. With diverse ways and modes of worship 
Mahasani honoured Indra in the presence of the lord of 
Waters (Varuna). 

Mahaiani said : 

31. By whom have you been created, O Indra ? Your valour 
is useless. Wherefore do you boast so much? You are being 
tormented by enemies in the battlefield. Still you continue to 
be Indra. This is ridiculous. 

32. If any woman is imprisoned by a man it is proper on 
the part of her husband to set her free. Women are always 
dependent on men (So are you). O my good Indra, you shall 
also be a man! 

33. You have been caught and imprisoned by me in the 
battle along with your vehicle. Your miraculous weapon 
(Thunderbolt) of uncontrollable power has been (cast off) some¬ 
where. Fie upon your life ! After being set free through the 
intercession of the lord of waters you still wish to live despite 



1030 


Brahma Purina : Gautaml-M&hdtmya 


the fact that you have lost the costly jewel, Cintamani, the park 
Nandana, the celestial damsels, fame, strength and everything 
that could be enjoyed by the lord of Devas. 

34. “That which is the storehouse of fame is life, that which 
is antagonistic to fame is death”—even after knowing this, O 
Indra, how did you get yourself released through the intercession 
of the lord of Waters ? Why don’t you feel ashamed ? 

35. You were staying in heaven surrounded by Devas 
fanned by your beloved wife and eulogized by the celestial 
damsels. I think, indeed, bashfulness is afraid of you. 

36. “You are the slayer of Vj-tra, killer ofNamuci, breaker 
of cities; with the thunderbolt in your hand you have split the 
mountains”. Thus Devas honour you. Hence, O victorious one I 
abandon all these. 

37. How is it that the maker of people like you, the lord 
born of the imperishable lotus, did not get his heart broken? 
People like you continue to live, continue to mix with the people 
of the world even after getting insult and injury from enemies. 

Brahmd said: 

38. After saying this, the lord of Daityas gave Indra to the 
noble-souled Varuna. Thereafter, he said these words again. 

Mahdiani said: 

39. From now onwards Indra shall be the disciple and 
Varuna the preceptor—Varuna who is my father-in-law and 
through whom, O Indra, you have attained freedom. 

40. In the same manner you shall behave like a servant 
unto Varuna. Otherwise, I will be obliged to imprison you and 
hurl you into the nether worlds. 

Brahmd said : 

41. After rebuking Indra thus and laughing again and 
again he took leave of Varuna and said (to Indra) “Go, go”. 

42. Indra then reached his abode completely overwhelmed 
by shame. He told his wife the details of his defeat and discomfi¬ 
ture at the hands of the enemy. 

Indra said : 

43. I have been told thus and treated thus, O lady of splen- 



59.44-54 1031 

did face. O fortunate lady, tell me whereby I can console my 
soul. 

Indrani said : 

44. O Indra, the slayer of Bala, I know the origin of 
Danavas, their Maya, mortification, grant of boons as well as 
their death. 

45. Hence, I shall say for your satisfaction everything 
necessary for the death or defeat of that demon. 

46. He is the heroic son of Hiranya. He is the powerful son 
of rny paternal uncle (Puloman). Hence, he is my brother 
(cousin). He became arrogant due to the boons granted to 
him. 

47. He propitiated Brahma by means of penance and obser¬ 
vances. He acquired a great power like this. What is it that 
cannot be achieved by means of penance? 

48. Hence, no undue worry or wonder should be entertained 
by you. Listen. This must be pursued as it is overdue. 

Brahma said: 

49-52. After saying thus, the daughter of Puloman said to 
Indra in great humility. 

Indrani said: 

There is nothing which cannot be achieved by penance. 
There is nothing which cannot be achieved by sacrificial rites. 
There is nothing which cannot be achieved by devotion to Visnu 
and Siva, the lord of worlds. Again dear husband, this extremely 
splendid thing has been heard by me. O overlord of Devas, only 
women know the nature of women. Hence, O lord, there is 
nothing which cannot be achieved by the Earth and waters. It 
is through them only that penance or sacrificial rite can take 
place. 

53. There too you shall go to that land which has become 
a holy centre. There you will attain all cherished desires by 
worshipping Visnu and Siva. 

54. Again this has been heard by me. Only those women 
who are chaste ladies know everything. The world consisting of 
the mobile and immobile is sustained by them. 



1032 


Brahma Purina : Gautami-Mah&tmya 


55. The forest ofDandaka is in the middle of the Earth 
and is its essence. Ganga, the mother of the universe flows there. 
O lord, worship Siva there. 

56-57. Or worship Visnu, lord of the worlds, the lord who 
dispels the agony and the grievance of the wretched and the 
distressed. The sole refuge of helpless men who are drowned in 
the ocean of misery is lord Siva or lord Visnu or Mother Ganga. 
There is no other refuge anywhere. Hence by all means satisfy 
these with mental purity and concentration. 

58. By means of devotion, penance or prayer perform the 
rite of propitiation along with me. Then you will attain welfare 
by the favour of lord Siva and lord Visnu. 

59. If a man performs a good rite unknowingly the lord 
gives him as much benefit as he deserves; but if he performs it 
knowingly it shall be hundred times more beneficial. If a man 
performs a holy rite along with his wife it has everlasting 
benefit. 

60. In every performance of a man it is the wife who 
assists him. Even if the tasks are very small they are not fruitful 
without her. 

61. If a man does any thing alone he gets only half the 
benefit, but if he does it along with his wife, O lord, the man 
gets abundant benefit. 

62. This idea occurs in the Vedas too, which say that one 
who has understood holy rites very well takes the help of his 
wife. 

It is heard that there is one excellent river Gautami in 
Dandaka forest. 

63. It subdues sins entirely. It bestows all cherished desires. 
Hence, go there along with me. Perform meritorious rites yield¬ 
ing great benefit. 

64-66. Then you will get profuse happiness after slaying 
the enemies in battle. 

Brahma said : 

Saying “So be it” the lord of hundred sacrifices went to 
Ganga well known as Gautami along with his wife and precep¬ 
tor, He went to Gautami, the mother of the universe, flowing in 
the middle of Dandaka forest. The delighted Indra went there 



59.67-72 1033 

with an intention to perform penance unto Sambhu, the lord of 
Devas. 

67. At the outset he bowed down to Gahga. After taking 
the holy bath he joined his palms in reverence. Seeking sole 
refuge in Siva he recited the following prayer : 

Indr a said : 

68. May that Pinaka-bearing lord be pleased with us— 
the lord who creates, protects and devours the entire universe 
consisting of the mobile and immobile beings through his own 
Maya but does not get entangled in it; who is single, who is 
independent and who is of the nature of non-dual knowledge and 
happiness. 

69. May that consort of Parvati be pleased with me, the 
lord whose reality even Sanaka and others conversant with the 
esoteric doctrine of Vedanta, do not know; who is the bestower 
of all cherished desires and who is the enemy of Demon 
Andhaka. 1 

70. The self-born lord created Brahma and saw his terrible 
head. He plucked it off with the tips of his nails. He hurled it 
when it stuck to his nails and from it the three objects 2 of 
worldly existence, viz., virtue, love and wealth, originated. 

71. Sin, poverty, greed, begging, delusion and adversity 
were born therefrom. Many other endless things also took shape 
from them. They became influential. They had the features 
of worldly misery. This entire visible world is pervaded by 
them. 

72. On seeing everything, the lord of Devas became bewil¬ 
dered and said to the goddess: “The whole universe is crumbling 
down. O goddess of the worlds, protect it. O mother of the 
worlds, the sole refuge, O gentle lady, O fortunate one. 


1. A demon with a thousand arms and heads, two thousands eyes and feet, 
so called because he walked like a blind man; killed by Siva when he attem¬ 
pted to carry off the Purijata tree from Svarga. 

2. Trivarga, i.e. the three supreme objects desired by worldly persons, vu., 
Dharma, Artha and Kama. The fourth is Moksa or ultimate deliverance 
from the world of transmigration. All the four together are know as caturvarga 
i.e. four kinds of highest objects or Purufdrthacatu}taya i.e. four supreme 
objects of human endeavour. 



1034 


Brahma Purina : Gautami-M&h&tmya 


73. O bestower of boons, the foundation of the universe, 
be victorious. You are the enjoyment of worldly pleasures, you 
are the concentration, you are the highest liberation. You were 
Svaha, Svadha, Svasti (hail), the primordial spiritual achieve¬ 
ment, the speech and the intellect, O immortal goddess, devoid 
of old age. 

74. At my behest you accord protection to the three worlds. 
They shall be created by you alone as variegated and wonderful 
as the one created by Prakfti.” 

75. On being told thus by lord Siva, the beloved wife of 
the lord became eager to embrace and chat lovingly to the lord. 
When she became tired she closely clung to half of the body of 
Siva and discharged drops of sweat from the tips of her 
fingers. 

76-78. From that, Virtue (Dharma) was the first to appear; 
then followed Lak§ml, Danam (charitable gift), good rain, the 
animals of rich variety, lakes, grains, flowers, fruits, the articles 
conducive to conjugal felicity, good bearing, dress and demean¬ 
our, great medicines linked with amorous toilet and sport, 
dances, songs, nectar, Purana, Vedas, Smrti texts, polity, food, 
beverages, weapons, scriptures, domestic utensils etc., mira¬ 
culous arrows etc.,holy centres, forests, sacrifices, social services, 
auspicious vehicles, splendid ornaments and elegant seats. 

79-81. Due to contact with Bhava and on account of your 
fire, laughter, excellent perspiration, gentle talk and other secret 
activities and modes the world consisting of the mobile and 
immobile beings became devoid of sins, O goddess. Everything 
born therefrom also became so. 

Happiness is abundant. Auspiciousness shines perpetually. 
This is because of your feelings, O goddess. Hence, O mother 
of the universe, O chief of the worlds, save me. I am afraid of 
worldly existence. There are some people who become silly due 
to abstruse arguments. Others get merged there. I bow down to 
that non-dualistic beautiful body of Siva and Sakti. 

Brahma said : 

82-86. Even as he was eulogizing thus, Siva appeared in 
front of him. 



1035 


59.87-95 
Siva said: 

O Indra, what is that thing you desire and seek from me? 
Tell me the best thing that you require. 

Indra said : 

My enemy is very powerful. He appears like thunderbolt. I 
have been imprisoned, abducted, taken to the nether worlds and 
harassed in many ways. I have been pierced by words sharp 
like arrows. This endeavour of mine is for the purpose of killing 
him. For that purpose, O lord, O lord of worlds, give me that 
virility whereby I will be able to conquer my enemy. Grant me 
other things loo which will destroy the enemy. If that person 
from whom defeat and discomfiture had been experienced, is 
destroyed, I will consider myself born again. Renown is better 
than victory and splendour. 

Brahma said : 

87-93. Siva said to Indra thus : 

“Your enemy cannot be slain through me alone. Hence you 
propitiate Visnu, the unchanging lord also. With your intellect 
concentrated on nothing else, propitiate lord Janardana Nara- 
yana, the sole refuge of the three worlds. Propitiate him along 
with your wife. Then, O Indra, you will acquire what is pleas¬ 
ing to you through him and through me”. 

Lord Mahesvara, the primordial Maker, said again : 

“Practice of Mantras, penance and Yogic exercises bestow 
spiritual achievement even if they are carried on at any conflu¬ 
ence. The sages know it. What then if these things are practised 
at the confluence of Gautami with the ocean ! or in the caves of 
mountains or at the confluence of rivers! 

There is a brahmin, a great sage named Apastamba on the 
southern bank of Ganga. His mind remains fixed on the feet of 
Mukunda. I am pleased with him also, O slayer of Bala. There¬ 
fore you propitiate the club-bearing lord along with your wife.” 

Brahma said : 

94-95. After taking bath in the sacred confluence of Phena 
and the Ganga he eulogized the lord on the southern bank of 
Ganga along with Apastamba. With great purity of mind he 



1036 


Brahma Purina : Gautami-M&hitmya 


eulogized lord Janardana by reciting various kinds of Vedic 
Mantras. He propitiated him through penance also. 

96. Then Vi§nu became pleased and spoke, “What should 
be given?” 

Lord Indr a said : 

“Give me a slayer of my enemy”. 

97-99. Janardana said to him, “Know that it is already 
granted.” 

By the grace of Siva, Vi$nu and Ganga a person rose up 
from the water. He had the form of Siva and Vi$nu. He was 
having trident and discus in his hands. He went to the nether 
worlds and killed MahaSani, the enemy of Indra. He is called 
Abjaka. He is Vrsakapi. He became a friend of Indra. 

100. Though he was a resident of heaven, Indra used to 
follow Vrsakapi always. Seeing him attached to another person. 
Sac! became angry due to her love. The lord of hundred sacri¬ 
fices laughingly consoled SacI and said thus : 

Indra said : 

101. O IndranI, I do not seek refuge except in my friend 
Vr?akapi. Either libation of water or the Havis offering in 
fire had been my favourite always. 

102. I do not go anywhere else. My beloved one, I swear 
so by your body. O beautiful lady, it does not behove you to 
think suspiciously about me. 

103. You are a chaste lady and my beloved one. You assist 
me in the performance of holy rites and advise me (on im¬ 
portant matters). You have children. You are of noble birth. 
Who else can be my beloved ? 

104-106. Hence, at your suggestion I reached the great 
river Ganga. By the favour of the discus-bearing Visnu, the 
lord of Devas, by the favour of Siva, the lord of Bhutas, by the 
favour of Vrsakapi, my friend Abjaka who was born of water 
and who is well known in the world. I have overcome my 
miseries, O fortunate lady. I am Indra here, the unfallen one. 
What cannot be achieved if a wife acts according to her 
husband’s wish ! 

107. It may be difficult to attain liberation there (in a 



59 . 108-118 


1037 


householder’s life) but, O splendid lady, the three things be¬ 
ginning with wealth (i.e. wealth, virtue and love) are possible. 
A wife who desires welfare in the two worlds is the greatest 
friend. 

108. If she is of noble birth, if she always speaks pleasing 
words, if she is chaste, if she is richly endowed with good 
qualities and beauty and if she has equanimity during affluence 
and adversity, what is it that cannot be achieved by her in the 
three worlds! 

109. It is because of your ideas that, my beloved wife, this 
auspicious thing has happened. Hereafter, I have to do only 
what is ordered by you and nothing else. 

110. For practice of piety and attainment of other world 
there is nothing equal to a good son. To a distressed man there 
is no other curative remedy than his wife. 

111. There is nothing like Ganga for the attainment of 
salvation as well as for relief from sins. Listen to another thing 
also, O lady of splendid face. 

112. There is nothing other than the realization of non¬ 
difference of Siva and Vi§nu for the achievement of virtue, 
wealth, love and salvation and for getting rid of sins. 

113. Hence, O chaste lady, due to your intellect all these 
mentally cherished things have been obtained by the grace of 
Siva, Visnu and Ganga. 

114. It is on account of this that my position as Indra has 
become stable again by the power of my friend, I think. O 
beautiful lady, Vr§akapi who was born of waters and is my friend. 

115. You are my perpetual dear companion. There is 
nothing more endearing to me. 

Among holy waters Gautami and Ganga are the best and 
among Devas Hari and Sankara are the best. 

116. Hence, by the grace of all these I have acquired 
everything desired by me. This holy centre well known in the 
three worlds is pleasing to me. 

117. Hence, I will request Devas for only this : Let them 
in due order permit this. Let the sages, Ganga, Devas, Hari and 
Sankara permit this. 

118. O Devas, on either bank of the river, there is Sankara 
in Ijidresvara and lord Janardana in Abjaka on the other side. 



1038 


•Brahma Purina : Gautami-Mdhdtmya 


119. Visnu, Trivikrama, directly sanctifies the Dandaka 
forest. Whatever holy centres are in between are the bestowers 
of everything meritorious. 

120-124. Merely by taking bath here all of them will 
attain liberation along with their ancestors of five generations. 
If anything is given to the suppliants here, even if it be as 
little as a sesamum seed, it accords everlasting benefit to the 
donors. It bestows all cherished desires. It yields salvation. 
The narrative ofVisnu and Sambhu is conducive to the attain¬ 
ment of wealth, fame, longevity, health and merit. It yields 
salvation through knowledge and holy dip. Those who read or 
listen to the glory of this holy centre shall acquire merit. They 
will attain the power of memory of Siva and Visnu that causes 
the total destruction of all sins. It is this, that even the sages 
who have conquered their sense-organs and mind, seek. 

Brahma, said : 

125-127. Devas and sages spoke to him, ‘It will be so*. 

There are, on the northern bank of GautamI, seven thousand 
holy centres that bestow salvation and that are worthy of being 
resorted to by Devas, sages and Siddhas. Similarly, on the 
southern bank there are eleven thousand holy centres. Abjaka 
is mentioned as the heart of Godavari by great sages. It is the 
abode of rest of Isa, Visnu and Brahma. 


CHAPTER SIXTY 

Apastambatirtha and other Holy Centres 

Brahmdsaid : 

1. The holy centre well known as Apastamba is famous in 
the three worlds. A mere remembrance of it is capable ofdestroy¬ 
ing all sins completely. 

2. There was a highly intelligent sage of great fame named 
Apastamba. His wife named Ak§asutra was devoted to the pious 
activities of her husband. 



60.3-13 


1039 


3. His son named Karki was extremely intelligent and was 
a knower of truth. The excellent sage Agastya came to his her¬ 
mitage. 

4. After worshipping Agastya the wise great sage followed 
by his disciples began to ask. 

Apastamba said : 

5-6. O excellent sage, among the three Devas who is the 
one deserving worship ? From whom can we have worldly 
pleasures and salvation ? Who is the bestower of food ? Who is 
the infinite one, O brahmin ? Who is the deity of Devas? Which 
lord is worshipped by means of Yajrias ? Who is being sung 
about in the Vedas ? O great sage Agastya, speak out to dispel 
this doubt of mine. 

Agastya said : 

7. In the matters of virtue, wealth, love and liberation 
scriptures are said to be the authority. And among scriptures 
Vedas are considered to be the greatest authority. 

8. The Purusa sung about by the Vedas is greater than 
the greatest. That which, is destructible is Apara (not great)— 
The Amrta (non-destructible) is called Para (great). 

9. That which is Amurta (unembodied) is Para and the 
Murta (embodied) is Apara which is of three kinds according 
to the distribution of attributes—Satcva, Rajas and Tamas. 

10. The very same entity is called in three forms as Brahma, 
Visnu and Siva. The greatest entity, the sole one, is the object 
to be known by the three Devas. 

11. The spreading of the single one into many is due to 
difference in attributes and activities. The three forms arise for 
the good of the worlds. 

12. Only he who knows the highest truth (or principle) is 
the learned one and not the other. He who speaks of difference 
(in the three forms) is called Lingabhedin (the splitter of 
Linga). 

13. There is no atonement for that person who speaks of 
(real) difference between them. There is difference in the 
physical forms of the three Devas. 



1040 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mahdtmya 


14. The Vedas are our authority in respect of the separate 
physical forms. The one that is formless is superior to them. 

Apaslamba said : 

15. By this (statement) I have not come to any fixed con¬ 
clusion. In this respect too, let the secret doctrine be elaborated 
upon and explained quickly. That secret doctrine should be free 
from doubts and alternatives and it should be (important 
enough so as) deserving all riches. 

Brahmd said : 

16-18. On hearing this the holy sage Agastya spoke these 
words. 

Agastya said : 

Athough there is no difference amongst these Devas, still the 
achievement of everything is possible only through Siva of the 
nature of happiness. Siva is that excellent brilliance which is 
the cause of the universe. O sage, propitiate that lord alone 
with the utmost devotion. The annihilator of all sins is in the 
Dandaka forest on Gautami. 

Brahmd said : 

19-20. On hearing these words of the sage, he attained great 
pleasure. He asked: Which one yields worldly pleasures ? 
Which one yields salvation ? Is it the (one with form) or 
the one without form? 

Which is the form for creation ? Which is the form for 
protection ? Who is the donor ? Who kills everything? What is 
it where all these things come to an end ? 

Agastya said : 

21. The form Brahma has the characteristics of the creator, 
the form Vi$nu is the protecting one, the form Rudra is 
destructive. 

Brahmd said : 

22. Apastamba went to Ganga and took his bath there. 
With self-control and holy observances he eulogized lord 
Sankara, O Narada, by means of this prayer. 



60 . 23-31 


1041 


Apastamba said : 

23-31. (Prayer) 

I seek refuge in that Somanatha who is present in all living 
beings and who is fire in wooden pieces, fragrance in flowers, 
the future tree in seeds and gold in stones. 

I seek refluge in that Somanatha who sportingly created 
this universe, who is the maker and dispenser of the destiny of 
the three worlds, who has the cosmic form and who is beyond 
both Sat and Asat (the existing and non-existing). 

I seek refuge in that Somesvara by remembering whom an 
embodied being is not affected by the great curse of poverty, 
sickness etc. and those who resort to him obtain everything 
desired. 

I seek refuge in that Somesvara by whom, after taking into 
consideration the Trayidharma (the righteous activities laid 
down in the three Vedas), Brahma and others had been assigned 
duties, by whom the body has been divided into two. 

I seek refuge in that Somanatha to whom the obeisance 
sanctified by Mantras proceeds, to whom the Havis offered in 
the fire and the worship performed also go. It is the Havis handed 
over by him that Devas partake. 

I seek refuge in that Somesvara than whom there is no 
greater or more excellent one, than whom there is nothing 
subtler and who is greater than the greatest. 

I seek refuge in that Somesvara at whose behest the whole 
of this universe follows as if in a single action,the universe which 
is variegated and diversified, which is great and whose form is 
unimaginable. 

I seek refuge in that Somesvara in whom there is superhu¬ 
man power, the overlordship of everything, the states of being 
the maker and the donor, greatness, love, fame, happiness and 
the primordial virtue. 

I seek refuge in that Somesvara who is perpetual refuge 
for all, who is worthy of being worshipped by all, who always 
loves a person who seeks refuge, who is always auspicious and 
who is the form of everything. 



1042 


Brahma Purdna : Gautami-Mahdtmya 


Brahmd said : 

32-34. Then the delighted lord said to the sage, O Narada, 
“ (Seek anything) for your own sake or for others.** 

Apastamba said to £iva : 

“Those who take their bath and visit lord I^vara, the lord 
of the worlds should obtain their cherished desires”. 

“Let it be so”, said Siva to the sage. Thenceforward that 
holy centre is cited as Apastambatlrtha. It is capable of 
dispelling the darkness of Avidya that is beginningless. 


CHAPTER SIXTYONE 
Holy Centres Tamatirtha and others 

Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre Yamatlrtha is well known as the 
increaser of pleasure to the Manes. It subdues sins entirely. 
Listen to what happened there. 

2. Here is the story. It is an ancient legend. There was a 
divine bitch, O sage, famous by the name Sarama. 

3. She had two extremely excellent dogs as sons. They 
always followed people. They had four eyes. They had only 
the air for their food and they were the favourites of Yama. 

4. She used to keep watch over the cows of Devas as well 
as the animals set apart for Yajiias. The Raksasas, Daityas and 
Danavas followed her while she was watching. 

5-6. The highly intelligent Raksasas tempted that bitch, 
the mother of the dogs, who was guarding (the cows), by means 
of agreeable words and gifts. The splendid cows kept as the 
sacrificial animals were taken away by the sinful Raksasas. Then 
the bitch gradually came to Devas and said. 

Saramd said : 

7-11. The Raksasas bound me with nooses and hit me with 
blows. The cows and the animals kept apart for the completion 
of Yajfias, O Devas, were taken away by them. 



61 . 12-21 


1043 


Brahma said : 

Immediately after hearing her words, Brhaspati said to 
Devas. 

Brhaspati said : 

This (bitch) has deformed features. I see her sin. Those 
cows have been taken away only with her connivance and not 
otherwise. This sinful bitch appears like a virtuous one by her 
bodily movements. 

Brahma said : 

At the words of his preceptor, Indra hit the bitch with his 
foot. On account of that kick milk flowed out of her mouth. 

Indra said : 

O bitch, milk has been drunk by you. It has been given to 
you by Raksasas. Therefore, our cows have been taken away by 
them. 

Saramd said : 

12-13. It is not my fault, O lord. Nor is it the fault of 
anyone. O lord of Devas, there is neither guilt nor negligence 
on my part. It is on your arrival that the cows were taken away 
by them. Are you then to be blamed. O lord ? Your enemies 
are very powerful. 

Brahma said : 

14-17. Then the preceptor of Devas meditated and under¬ 
stood her misconduct. (He said) “O Indra, it is true that she 
is to be blamed. She has sided with our enemies”. 

Then Indra cursed her : “O sinful woman, become a bitch 
in the mortal world; you have become a sinner but you commi¬ 
tted this sin out of ignorance.” 

Then on account of the curse of Indra she was born in the 
mortal world due to her sin. As cursed by Indra she became 
very terrible. 

The lord of Devas attempted to bring back thosc^pows which 
were taken away by the Raksasas. He intimated this to Visnu. 

18-21. Vi$nu got ready to kill Daityas, Danujas and Rak- 
§asas who had taken away the cows. He took up his great bow 



1044 Brahma Purdrui : Gautami-Mah&tmya 

Sarnga which is famous in the three worlds and which is the 
destroyer of Daityas. 

Lord Visnu who had conquered his enemies and who is 
worshipped by Devas and who is the lord of the universe stood 
in the Dantfaka forest with the bow Sarriga in his hand. Vi§nu 
killed the powerful Daityas, Danujas and Raksasas who were 
there and by whom the cows had been taken away. There the 
lord is well known as Sarrigapani. 

22. Then Visnu fought with the sons of Diti and the Rak- 
§asas. Frightened of Visnu they went to the southern quarter, 
O great sage. 

23-26. Then Visnu the great lord followed them. He over¬ 
took them by Garuda, his vehicle. With the arrows as swift as 
mind discharged from the Sarnga, Visnu killed them on the 
northern bank of Ganga. The enemies of Devas were annihilat¬ 
ed by the powerful Visnu. By the arrows of great velocity, 
having good sound and well-inspired by means of magical and 
mystical words, discharged from the Sarnga those enemies of 
Devas were annihilated. The place where the cows were recover¬ 
ed is called Banatirtha. It is well known in the worlds as Vais- 
nava and Gotirtha. 

27. In the southern bank of Ganga the cows were set apart 
as the sacrificial animals. These cows had fled and the Devas 
herded them together on Ganga. 

28. In its middle they caused an island to be made as the 
place of rest for the cows. Through those cows the Yajfia of 
Devas was celebrated on Ganga. 

29. The island of cows in the middle of Ganga is called 
Yajfiatirtha. That spot of sacrifice of Devas is the splendid 
bestower of all cherished desires. 

30. The (Divine power) of Ganga assumes an embodied 
form, O sage of great splendour. It is a raft that takes one across 
the ocean of worldly existence which is worthless but boundless. 

31. She is the Yogamaya, the goddess of the universe, the 
bestower of freedom from fear on devotees. Beyond that, on the 
southern bank of Ganga is the holy centre of Gorakga. 

32-33. The two dogs, the sons of Sarama and the favourites 
of Yama, with four eyes each described to Yama the details of 
their mother’s guilt and the (subsequent) curse. 



61 . 34-46 


1045 


After intimating this duly they asked Yama as to what they 
should do to bring about happiness and the removal of the 
curse. 

34-36. Tl»e son of Sun (Yama) went to his father accom¬ 
panied by them and related to him (everything). On hearing 
it the Sun said to his son: “Dear son, O excellent Deva, take 
your bath duly in the GautamI Gaiiga, the sole sanctifier of the 
three worlds in the Dantfaka forest. Take your bath with full 
faith, due concentration and mental purity. With great devo¬ 
tional feelings eulogize Brahma, Visnu, me and Isa in due order. 
Your servants will attain satisfaction.” 

37-38. On hearing the words of his father, Yama was 
delighted in his mind. For pleasing him, Yama delighted in 
his mind, went to GautamI for propitiating the two gods. With 
mental purity and concentration he propitiated the excellent 
Devas in GautamI Gariga, the dispeller of sins. 

39-40. Accompanied by the dogs the glorious lord of the 
southern quarters propitiated Sun-god and Brahma on the 
southern bank. By himself the valorous Dharma propitiated 
Isana and Visnu on the northern bank. He prayed to them 
for many boons which would do good to the worlds. They 
granted the excellent boon removing the curse of Sarama. 

Yama said : 

41. O Brahma, Visnu and MaheSvara, those who take their 
holy dip in these holy centres shall obtain their splendid desires 
for their own good as well as for others’ good. 

42. Those who take their holy bath in the Banatlrtha and 
remember Sarngapani Visnu will never experience the miseries 
of proverty for ages. 

43-45. If anyone with self-control and holy observances 
takes his holy bath in the Gotlrtha or Brahmatirtha, bows down 
to Brahma and circumambulates the island, it is as fruitful as 
the circumambulation of the Earth consisting of seven conti¬ 
nents and holding rich resources within its bowels. If he gives a 
little sun to a brahmin and if he performs Homa with anything 
in the holy fire after reaching Devayajana, he shall attain plenty 
of benefit of horse sacrifice and other Yajflas. 

46. If a man recites but once Gayatri, the mother of Vedas, 



1046 Brahma Purina : Gautami-Mahatmya 

it is as much fruitful as though all the Vedas have been read 
by him. The person who has no desire (while performing all 
these holy rites) becomes worthy of liberation. 

47. By taking holy bath in the southern bank and by 
worshipping goddess Sakti devoutly and duly one shall attain 
all cherished desires. 

48. The Sakti of Brahma. Visnu and MaheSa is the mother 
in the form of the three Vedas. (One who worship her) attains 
all cherished desires. He shall be endowed with sons and riches. 

49. If a man with self-control takes bath in the southern 
bank and sees Sun-god it is as fruitful as performing Yajfias 
with various monetary gifts. 

50. He who takes his holy bath in the northern bank of 
Gahga, bows down and sees Visnu, attains the great region of 
Visnu. 

51-52. A man of self-control shall take bath in the Yama- 
tlrtha and see the honoured YameSvara. He shall then 
make the merit of Pitrs everlasting, yielding benefits and con¬ 
ducive to the increase of their fame. By means of holy dip, 
charitable gift, Japas and eulogy even the manes of evil actions 
shall attain liberation. 

Brahmi said : 

53-58. There arc eight thousand and three holy centres 
such as these, O Narada. A performance of holy bath and 
charitable gift there yields everlasting merit. 

The remembrance of these (holy centres) is meritorious and 
conducive to the destruction of sins of many births. By listen¬ 
ing to their glory one’s liberation shall be achieved along with 
that of the Pitj*s, and a reading of their narrative shall liberate 
one along with all the members of one’s family. Their awful 
sins too will be destroyed at my behest. 

The devotee shall perform holy bath and other rites there. 
He shall offer as charitable gift something with the soul under 
control. Then he shall perform the rites offering balls of rice to 
the ancestors. He shall bow down to these Devas. He shall 
obtain wealth, grains, fame, valour, longevity, health, riches, 
sons, grandsons, and a beloved wife. He shall obtain other 
desired objects also. He shall never be separated from his rela- 



62.1-9 


1047 


tives. He shall be delighted in his mind. He will be honoured 
by his kinsmen. He shall redeem even the Pitrs staying in hells. 
He will sanctify his family members. Accompanied by his 
beloved ones he shall remember Vi§nu and Siva at the time of 
death. Then he shall attain the blessed state of liberation as 
stated by those lords. 


CHAPTER SIXTYTWO 
Holy Centres Yaks inis ahgama etc. 

Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre named Yaksinl-Sangama yields all 
benefits. By taking bath and offering charitable gifts there one 
shall obtain all cherished desires. 

2. One shall obtain the benefit of Satrayaga 1 merely by 
taking bath at the place where the lord is Yaksesvara who 
bestows worldly pleasures and salvation by granting his vision. 

3-5. There was a sister of Viivavasu 2 named Pippala. She 
went to the Satra of the sages residing on the bank of Gau- 
tami. On seeing the sages there feeble and emaciated she 
laughed with great arrogance. She had (the temerity) to laugh 
at her elders. She repeated the Mantras firmly : “Let there be 
Vausa$. Let there be Srausat”. She had repeated the Mantras 
with a wrong accent. Therefore, they cursed her: “Be a flowing 
river” Then she became the river famous as “Yaksini”. 

6. Then ViSvavasu worshipped the sages and the three¬ 
eyed lord. Making the river join Gautami he made it free from 
curse. 

7-9. Thereafter that holy centre is remembered as Yak$i- 
nlsangama. By performing the rites of holy bath there and by 
giving charitable gifts one obtains all cherished desires. The 
place where Sambhu accompanied by Siva became pleased with 
ViSvavasu is the greatest holy centre Saiva (pertaining to 
Siva). It is well known as Durgatfrtha also. 


1. Soma sacrifice lasting for more than twelve days. 
2«_ A Gandharva chief. 



1048 


Brahma Parana : Gautami-Mahdtmya 


It dispels all sins. It destroys all evil destinies and adversities. 
O great sage, it is the essence of all important holy centres. It 
is a holy centre praised by excellent sages. It bestows all spiri¬ 
tual achievements on men. 


CHAPTER SIXTYTHREE 
Suklatirtha and other Holy Centres 

Brahma said : 

1. The holy centre well known as Suklatirtha is the giver 
of success in all endeavours to men. By merely remembering it 
one shall attain all cherished objects. 

2. There was a sage named Bharadvaja who was extremely 
rightepus and well-known. His wife was Paithinasi by name. 
She was the ornament of a noble family. 

3. That chaste lady sat on the bank of GautamI and pre¬ 
pared sacrificial offerings for Fire-god and the Moon as well as 
for Indra and Fire-god. 

4. When the Puro<ja$a was being cooked a terrible demon 
was born out of the smoke. He was a terror unto all the three 
worlds. He was desirous of devouring the Punxjasa. 

5. “Who are you destroying my Yajfia out of anger ?** The 
sage Bharadvaja, the excellent brahmin, asked him immediately. 
On hearing the words of the sage the Raksasa replied to him. 

R&ksasa said : 

6. O Bharadvaja, know me as (the demon) well known as 
Havyaghna. I am the eldest son of Sandhya and Pracina-Barhis. 

7. This boon has been granted to me by Brahma : “Devour 
Yajflas as you please.** My younger brother Kali is strong and 
extremely terrible. 

8. I am black. My father is black. My mother is black. 
So also my younger brother. I will destroy the sacrifice. I will 
cut off Yupa (sacrificial post). I am the destroyer. 

Bharadvaja said : 

9. Let my Yajfia be saved by you. Performing Yajfia is my 



63.10-23 


1049 


favourite and eternal duty. I know you are a destroyer of 
Yajfias (but) save my sacrifice along with the brahmin (priest). 

Tajnaghna said : 

10. O Bharadvaja, understand this brief statement of mine. 
Formerly, I was cursed by Brahma in the presence of Devas and 
Danavas. 

11-12. Then the lord, the grandfather of the worlds, was 
pacified by me. (He said) “When the excellent sages sprinkle 
you with Amj*ta (Nectar), O Havyaghna, you will be free from 
the curse and not otherwise”. O brahmin, if you do this what¬ 
ever you desire you will get. This is not at all false. 

Brahma said : 

13-15. Bharadvaja said again : “You are my friend, O 
highly intelligent one. Tell me that whereby my sacrifice can 
be saved. I shall do that. Devas and Daityas joined together 
and churned the milk ocean. They obtained nectar with great 
effort. How can that be easily accessible to us ? Please, if you 
are favourably disposed tell me that which is readily available.’* 
On hearing the words of the sage the Raksasa said happily. 

Rdkfasa said: 

16-17. The water of Gautami river is called Amrta. Gold 
is called Amrta. Ghee produced from cow’s milk is also Amrta, 
and Soma juice too is Amrta. Sprinkle and shower me with 
these or at least with these three, viz. the water of Ganga, ghee 
and gold. The water of Ganga is superior to all. It is divine 
Amrta. 

Brahma said : 

18-23. On hearing this the sage experienced great pleasure. 
He took in his palm with great respect, the Amrta, the water of 
the Ganga and sprinkled the Raksasa with it. He sprinkled 
everything connected with the Yajfia such as the sacrificial post, 
sacrificial animal and the circular platform of the sacrifice. 
When the noble-souled sage sprinkled, everything became white. 
The Rak$asa became white. He who was dark in colour before 
became white in a moment. Bharadvaja the valorous one con¬ 
cluded his Yajfia, bade farewell to the Rtviks and cast off the 



1172 Brahma Purina : Gautami-M&hAtmya 

38-39. The embodied soul who takes holy plunge there, in 
the confluence of Godavari and the sea, is meritorious. He 
redeems his ancestors from the terrible hell and goes to the city 
of Siva. 

Bhimanatha is the Brahman itself which is to be understood 
through the Vedas and which should be prayed to, bowed to, 
and meditated upon. When lie is seen the embodied beings 
never enter again the worldly scene of terrible misery. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FOUR 
The Confluence of Gafiga with Sea 

Brahmd said: 

1-5. That Ganga who is worthy of being respected and 
honoured even by the gods joined the eastern sea, followed by 
all the Devas and eulogized by the sages and Maruts and 
Vasi§tha, Jabali, Yajfiavalkya, Kratu, Angiras, Daksa, Marici, 
Vaisnavas (devotees of Vi?nu). 

Satatapa, Saunaka, Devarata, Bhrgu, AgniveSya, Atri, Marici, 
Daksa, Manu, Gautama and others along with KauSika, 
Tumbaru, Parvata and so on had their sins destroyed comp¬ 
letely. 

Agastya, Markanda etc. devoted to yogic practices, along 
with Galava, Pippala and others, including Vamadeva, descen¬ 
dants of Angiras and Bhrgu who were proficient in Smrtis and 
agreeable due to their knowledge of the Vedas went to the divine 
river Gautami. All of them were fully conversant with the sub¬ 
jects treated of in the Puranas. Indeed they knew many things. 
They began to pray by reciting Mantras and many Vedic pass¬ 
ages of lovely nature. They were contented and pleased in their 
minds. 

On seeing the river in confluence Siva and Hari revealed 
themselves to the sages. 

6. The immortal ones began the eulogy of the two lords, the 
dispellers of the distress of everyone, while they were being 
(respectfully) watched by the Manes. 

7. The Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Maruts, the Guardians of the 



104.8-16 


1173 


Quarters—all these joined their palms in reverence and prayed 
to Hari and Sankara. 

8. O Narada, these two lords are ever established in the 
seven well known confluences as well as the meeting place of the 
ocean and the Ganga. 

9. It is the place where lord Mahesvara is called Gauta- 
mesvara. There Madhava is ever present along with Rama 
(Laksmi). 

10. Siva well known by the name Brahmeivara has been 
installed by me for helping all people and for my own reasons. 

11. The lord well known as Cakrapani was eulogized by me 
in the company of the Devas. Visnu is present there along with 
the Devas and the groups of Maruts. 

12-13. A certain Tirtha is well known as Aindratlrtha. The 
Tirtha is otherwise called Hayamurdhaka. Visnu is (installed) 
there as Hayamurdhan (Horse-headed). The Devas too are on 
the top thereof. There is (another) Tirtha well known as Soma- 
tirtha, where Siva is called Somesvara. For the sake of Indra 
whose renown was on a par with that of Soma, Soma (Soma 
juice, Moon) was formerly prayed to by the Devas and the sages 
with the Rk Mantras ending with Indrdyendo Parisrava (O Indu— 
Soma juice, moon—flow out everywhere for the sake of Indra). 

14. (3rd Mantra, 114thSukta of the IX Mamjala) (Tr. 
According to Sayana) “O Soma, protect us with all these, viz. 
the seven Diks (quarters) (excluding that of which Soma is the 
lord, i.e. north) presided over by different suns, the seven Hotfs 
(Vasatkartrs), the seven Rtviks, the seven dazzling sons of 
Aditi (excepting Martamja who was thrown up, according to 
RV X. 72-8). O Indu, flow out everywhere for the sake of 
Indra.” 

15. (4th Mantra, 114th Sukta, IX Man^ala) “O Rajan 
(Lord as the person making them work) Soma, protect us by 
means of the Havis cooked for your sake. Let not the inimical 
assailant kill us nor destroy anything (wealth etc.) belonging 
to us. O Indu, flow out everywhere for the sake of Indra.” 

16. (2nd Mantra, IX-114) “O Sage (self-address by the 
seer of the Mantra) KaSyapa, adore the king Soma making your 
eulogies come up flourishing, thanks to the Suktas of the seers 
oL the Mantras. That Soma has become the lord, protector of 



1174 Brahma Pur&na : Gautaml-M&h&tmya 

the creepers. O Soma, Indu, flow out everywhere for the sake 
of Indra.” 

17. (3rd Mantra, IX-112) “I am the composer of the 
Suktas. Hence I am the father and son. I am the physician, 
Brahma of the Yajfia. This lady who makes the groats, gruel 
etc. is the mother or daughter. All of us of diverse mental pre¬ 
dilections and activities are desirous of wealth and like cows we 
serve the world. O Indu, flow out everywhere for the sake of 
Indra.” 

18. By saying thus (i.e. by eulogizing Soma thus) the Soma 
was obtained for the Vajra-wielding Indra. By giving (the same 
Soma) to them Indra got his hundred sacrifices complete. 

19-21. Hence thatTirthais called Somatirtha. Agneyatirtha 
is in front. Agni performed great Yajfias and having pleased me 
thereby obtained what he desired by my favour. I am stationed 
there for ever for the sake of helping the world. Similarly Visnu 
and Siva too are stationed there. Hence the Tirtha is called 
Agneya. Beyond that is the Aditya Tirtha where the Sun full of 
the Vedic Mantras, comes everyday for adoration. 

22. He comes in some other guise at midday in order to see 
me, Sankara and Hari. There, at midday, all people should be 
bowed to always. 

23. That is because it is not certain in what guise Savitj- 
(Sun) comes there. Hence it is called Aditya Tirtha. Thereafter 
comes the Barhaspatya Tirtha. 

24. It is said that Brhaspati was worshipped by the gods in 
that Tirtha. He also performed different Yajfias there. Hence 
they know this Tirtha as Barhaspatya. 

25. Merely by remembering that Tirtha, propitiation of 
(malignant) planets can be achieved. Another Tirtha is on the 
excellent mountain Indragopa. 

26. For some reason the great Linga was installed there by 
Himalaya. Hence it is called Adritiriha. 

27-28. Ablution therein and offering gifts yield auspicious 
results fulfilling cherished desires. 

Thus that Gautami Ganga originated from Brahniadri and 
proceeds towards the ocean. A few of the Tirthas there have been 
mentioned by me. These are auspicious and holy secrets. 

29. O Narada, who has the power to narrate in full that 



104.30—105.6 


1175 


highly powerful Gautamithat is famous in the Vedas and Puranas 
and revered by the sages and all the people. 

30. There can be no offence if the description by one prom¬ 
pted by devotion is inadequate. There is no doubt about it. For 
the sake of the benefit of the world certain features of that river 
have been indicated with very great difficulty. 

31-33. Who is competent to describe Gautaml’s power in 
every Tirtha? Perhaps Visnu, lord of Laksmi, and Siva Somes- 
vara may be. Only in due course of time, do some Tirthas some¬ 
where become meritorious, O highly intelligent one. But 
Gautami is always so unto men. It is meritorious everywhere and 
always. Who can fully narrate her good qualities? Hence it is 
but proper to offer obeisance to her. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIVE 
The Benefits of listenings to the Purdna 

Narada said : 

1-2. Olord of Suras, O master of the Suras, you say that 
the holy Ganga has three presiding deities. She had been brou¬ 
ght down by a Brahmin and she is a splendid river sanctifying 
the Universe. On both of her banks at the beginning, middle 
and end she is pervaded by Visnu, Isa (Siva) and you, O most 
excellent one among the Suras. Narrate once again succinctly. I 
have not been fully satisfied. 

Brahmd said: 

3-4. At the outset she was stationed in a Kamanijalu 
(waterpot). Then she flowed from the feet of Visnu. Thereafter 
she was stationed within the mess of the matted hair of Mahe- 
Svara. It is bowed to by all. Thanks to theBrahminical power, it 
was brought to the holy mountain after propitiating Siva assidu¬ 
ously. Thereafter she proceeded towards the eastern sea. 

5. Proceeding thus the divine river joined the sea. She has 
all the Tirthas (on her banks) and fulfils all the desires of men. 
Her power is unique. 

6r I do not think that there is any Tirtha superior to it in 



1176 


Brahma Purina: Gautami-Mdhdtmya 


all the three worlds. Whatever thing one cherishes in one’s heart 
can be realized by her own power. 

7-8. Till today her greatness has not been adequately 
described by anyone. Whatever little is mentioned is out of 
devotion. This is my opinion that there will not be any Tirtha 
greater than this river which is virtually Brahman (Supreme 
Absolute) itself. There cannot be any propriety in comparing 
her with another Tirtha. 

9. Wherefore has the intellect of everyone not been rendered 
completely calm even after hearing the eulogy of the Ganga 
through the nectar-like statements of mine ? O sage, this appears 
to be the most mysterious thing in all the three worlds. 

Narada said : 

10-12. You are fully conversant with piety, wealth, love and 
salvation and hence competent to advise thereon. The Vedas 
with their secrets, the Puranas and the Smjrtis and whatever 
there is besides—all these are rooted in your utterance. O lord, 
kindly mention which is the best and foremost among the 
Tirthas, Danas, Yajftas, Tapas’, services to the deities and practis¬ 
ing of the Mantras. O lord, whatever you say with devotion 
should necessarily be so and not otherwise. 

13. O Brahman, it behoves you to dispel this doubt of 
mine. 

On hearing from him what had been lurking within his 
mind Brahma was surprised and he said : 

Brahmi said : 

14. Listen, O Narada. I shall tell you the secret of the 
excellent Dharma. 

The Tirthas are of four kinds. The Yugas also sire as many. 

15. The Gunas are three, the Purusas are three and the 
eternal deities are three. The Vedas in combination with the 
Smrtis are enumereted as four. 

16. The aims of human life are four; speech is of four kinds. 
The Gunas'too are four along with Samatva (equilibrium), O 
Narada. 

17. Dharma (piety, righteousness) is universal everywhere 
because virtue is eternal. That too is considered to be of 



105 . 18-29 


1177 


various kinds inasmuch as the Sadhya(what is to be attained )and 
Sadhana (means of attaining) are different. 

18. Its basis always is of two kinds—place and time. Dharma 
with the time as the basis waxes and wanes for ever. 

19. In accordance with the Yugas it wanes quarter by 
quarter, O highly intelligent one. Dharma stands in need of Desa 
(Place) in both respects. 

20. Dharma based on time is ever firmly established in 
De£a. When the Yugas wane Dharma does not wane in the 
Deias. 

21. If it were to be wanting in both Dharma would have 
been totally non-existent. Hence Dharma based on De£a has 
the full complement of the four quarters. 

22. That Dharma abides in the Desas in the form of 
TIrthas. In the Kfta Yuga Dharma leans on the prop of 
De£a and Kala and settles down. 

23. In the Treta Yuga Dharma is deficient in one Pada 
but has the full complement of the four quaters in respect to 
Dela. In Dvapara the deficiency is half in respect to Time but 
in De£a it is fully present. 

24. In the Kaliyuga Dharma moves about unsteadily on 
one leg (having only a quater of itself). But it does not wane for 
one who comprehends Dharma in this way. 

25. The differences in castes are maintained in accordance 
with the power of the Yugas. Dharma is of diverse nature as it 
follows Gunas and those who work according to Gunas. 

26. It is in accordance with the Gunas that the TIrthas, 
Varnas, Vedas, heaven and salvation take their origin or lose 
their power. 

27. By virtue of such a form and activity Dharma be¬ 
comes unique. Kala is said to be Abhivyafijaka (that which 
makes something manifest) and Deia is said to be Abhivyarigya 
(that which is manifested). 

28. Whenever Kala assumes Abhivyakti (manifestation) 
that itself, O Brahman, is its token. Hence there is no doubt in 
this respect. 

29. The form of the Devas and the Vedas shall be in 
accordance with the Yugas. Those ofKarmans (rites), TIrthas, 
castfes and stages of life too (are in accordance with the Yugas). 



1178 


Brahma Purina : Gautami-Mih&tmya 


30. A Tirtha having three presiding deities is adored in all 
the worlds in the Satyayuga; in the other Yuga (i.e. Treta) 
that with two presiding deities; and in the Dvapara Yuga one 
with a single presiding deity. 

31. It should be known that there is no such thing in 
Kaliyuga. Now listen to another thing. In the Krtayuga a 
Tirtha is Daiva (of divine significance). They know that the 
same in Treta is Asura (of Asura significance). 

32. It is said to be Ar§a (of the saintly significance) in 
Dvapara and Manuka (of human significance) in Kaliyuga. I 
shall henceforth mention another reason. Listen, O Narada. 

33-35. What you have asked in respect to GautamI, I shall 
explain to you in detail. O great sage, ever since the Ganga 
came to the matted hair of Hara’s head she had become the 
great favourite of Sambhu. Uma, the goddess of the three 
worlds, the mother and benefactress of the universe, well known 
as the quiescent Sruti, the bestower of enjoyment of pleasures 
and salvation, knew this mental proclivity of the lord and said 
so to the elephant-faced one (Gajanana). 

Brahmd said : 

36. On hearing those words of his mother the elephant¬ 
faced one spoke : 

Gajavaktra said : 

37. What is to be done ? Tell me my mother. Undoubtedly 
I shall do so. 

Brahmi said : 

38. Uma said this to her son, “Ganga is stationed in the 
matted hair of Mahelvara and as such has truly become the 
favourite of I la. Just make her come down. 

39. Further this is surprising that Ila occupies that place 
always, O son. Where Siva stays, the Suras and the eternal 
Vedas too stay. 

40. The sages too stay there itself, so also all the men and 
the Manes. Hence make liana, Mahelvara the lord of the Devas, 
leave the place. 

41. When the lord is turned away from Ganga, they too 



105.42-51 


1179 


are turned away. Listen to these words of mine. Turn Sankara 
away from her in every respect.*’ 

Brahmd said : 

42. On hearing those words of his mother, Ganesvara said 
once again : 

43-46. “Lord Siva cannot be turned away from her by me. 
In case Siva is not turned away from her the Devas too cannot 
be turned away, O mother of the Universe. There is another 
reason too. Formerly Ganga was made to come down by 
Gautama, the noble-hearted sage, worthy of being worshipped 
by the entire world and the benefactor of all the three worlds. 
It was through the means suggested by me and adopted at your 
instance that the venerable Brahminical splendour propitiated 
the lord of the Devas, Bhava by means of austerities and prayers. 
At that time, that Gautama was told thus by the delighted 
Sankara.” 

Sankara said : 

47. O highly intelligent one, choose as boons all good and 
pleasing things that you cherish in your heart. I shall grant you 
everything that you may desire. 

Brahmd said : 

48. When Gautama was told thus by Siva, he said thus, 
even as I was listening: “O Sankara, to me who beg of you 
give the meritorious Ganga enmeshed in the matted hair. Of 
what avail to me is another boon ?” 

Brahmd said : 

49. Sambhu, the benefactor of all the worlds, said to him 
once again : 

Sambhu said : 

50. Something that is to your own benefit has not been 
mentioned. Hence request for something very difficult. 

Brahmd said : 

51. With palms joined in reverence Gautama said to Bhava 
with his spirit undepressed : 



1180 


Brahma PurSna : Gautami-MMtmya 


Gautama said : 

52. This itself is the most difficult thing that I have been 
able to see you. O Sankara, by your grace, that has been 
achieved by me today. 

53. Noble-minded persons become blessed and contented 
merely by remembering thy feet. What to speak when, Thou, the 
great Lord, have been seen directly ? 

Brahm&said : 

54-56. When this was spoken by Gautama, Bhava said to 
the Brahmin with great delight: “Request has been made by 
you for helping the three worlds. O highly intelligent one, 
not for yourself. (Now) ask something for your own self”. 

On being told thus the Brahmin thought it over and 
begged Siva with great humility and devotion with undepressed 
spirit. He made the request once again for rendering help unto 
all the worlds. Even as the guardians of the quarters were 
listening Gautama said thus : 

Gautama said : 

57. Inasmuch as the divine river extending up to the ocean 
has been released from Brahma’s mountain, O bull-bannered 
one, it is incumbent upon thee to stay thereon everywhere and 
always. 

58. O lord of the worlds, thou alone art the giver of the fruit 
unto those who desire benefits. O lord of the Devas, other 
Tirthas are auspicious only in certain places. 

59. They know that place alone to be the yielder of aus¬ 
piciousness where thy presence is constant. It is the place 
where Ganga stationed in the crown of thy matted hair has 
been handed ever. O Sankara, thou being present everywhere 
there are Tirthas (everywhere). 

Brahma said : 

60. On hearing those words of Gautama, Siva said again 
with delight : 

Siva said : 

61-64. A devotee may give away anything anywhere but 



105.65-74 


1181 


that should be given with excessive devotion. He may offer 
libation unto the (departed) ancestors, he may listen to sacred 
stories, he may recite or remember them, O Gautama. What¬ 
ever the man does on the Gadavari with due observances of 
vows bears ample fruit. Merely by remembering Gautami one 
acquires that piety and virtue that one obtains by gifting 
away the entire beautiful earth adorned with Dharma and 
consisting of mountains, forests and parks and decorated with 
gems and handed over with all medicinal herbs and the oceans 
too. O brahmin, the earth near the river Godavari is mentioned 
to be of this sort. 

65-67. O excellent brahmin, by performing holy ablution, 
Dana etc. devotedly in the great river Gautami, worthy of the 
veneration of the entire universe, a man obtains more 
merit than what is acquired by a wise devotee when he observes 
all the vows in my presence at the time of the solar of lunar 
eclipse and gifts away beautiful cows adorned with everything 
unto Visnu or a king along with their calves at a confluence 
famous all over the world. 

68. Hence the Gahga Godavari led by you shall become 
the destroyer of all sins and the bestower of everything desired. 

Ganeivara said : 

69. O mother, this has been heard by me directly from 
Siva who was speaking to Gautama. For this reason Sambhu is 
invariably present in the Ganga. 

70-72. O mother, who can make that ocean of mercy leave 
the place ? Still, Mother, this can be done. Fettered by the 
nooses of hindrances (i.e. due to unexpected obstructions,) men 
may not go to the Godavari though it is nearby. They may not 
bow down to Siva nor remember the lord and eulogize him. 
However, Mother, I will do something for your satisfaction, for 
there is distress in disobeying what you say. Forgive me. 

Brakmd said : 

73-74. Ever since then, VighneSa creates some obstacles 
in regard to men. He who devoutly goes to Gautami ignoring 
the obstacles gets his purpose fulfilled. No further duty remains 
for him. 



1182 


Brahma Purina : Gautaml-M&h&tmya 


75. To the base man many obstacles do occur even as 
he desires to set off from his house. If he goes to the Ganga 
after setting his foot firmly over it does he not obtain any benefit 
from it ? 

76. Who can describe its power (completely) should he 
be even Sadasiva himself? Everything has been succinctly 
narrated by me closely following the tradition and mythology. 

77. In the extensive mythological legends there is every¬ 
thing conducive to the attainment of piety, wealth, love and 
liberation in the entire world consisting of mobile and immobile 
beings. 

78. The Purana has been narrated for the benefit of all the 
worlds. It consists of many pious rites. If perused carefully it 
contributes to the good of the worlds. It contains everything 
mentioned in the Vedas. It consists of all the secret doctrines 
of the Srutis. The very name (Purana) indicates that it is the 
cause of everything excellent. 

79. If anyone devoutly listens to or recites one verse or 
one word out of this or utters ‘Ganga 5 , ‘Ganga 5 , he shall obtain 
the spiritual benefit thereby. 

80. The word Ganga uttered or the water of the Ganga 
imbibed becomes excellent. It is cabable of destroying the 
stigma of Kali age. It is auspicious. It gives splendour and all 
Siddhis (super-natural powers). It is worthy of veneration in 
the world. It grants desired things. 

81. Well done, O Gautama ! Welfare unto you. Who else 
is equal to you ? It is you who eagerly brought this Ganga to 
the Dandaka forest. 

82. He who utters ‘Ganga Ganga* even from hundreds of 
Yojanas away becomes rid of all sins ; He goes to the world of 
Vi§nu. 

83. In all the three worlds there are thirtyfive millions of 
Tirthas. When Jupiter is in the sign of Leo, all these Tirthas 
come to the Ganga for a bath. 

84. Holy ablution in the Bhagirathi for sixty-thousand years 
is equal to a single bath in the Godavari when Brhaspati (Ju¬ 
piter) is in Simha (Leo). 

85. O son, this Gautami grants salvation unto all men who 
bathe therein anywhere at any time. That is due to Siva’s bidding. 



105.86-90 


1183 


86. Merely by listening to it one gets that benefit which is 
obtained by performing thousands of ASvamedhas (Horse-sacri¬ 
fices) or hundred of Vajapeya sacrifices. 

87. O Narada, if this Purana narrated by Brahma is kept 
in the house by anyone he need not be afraid of the Kali age. 

88-90. This excellent Purana should not be narrated to 
anyone and everyone. This should be recited only to a noble- 
hearted devotee of Vi§nu who is calm and has great faith. This 
accords worldly pleasures and salvation. It destroys sins. Merely 
by listening to it a man becomes contented and his desires are 
fulfilled. If one copies this and gives the book to a Brahmin he 
gets rid of all sins. He never enters a womb thereafter. 




INDEX 


A 

Abduction of virgin by Kr$Qa, 476 
Abhayada, son of Manasyu, 69 
Abhimanyu, 8, 78, 87 
Abhitfuta, 47, 1146 
Abhuktarajas, 30 
Abjaka, 1036 
Abuddhiman, 750 
Acamana, 141, 599 
Actions causing downgrading of cas¬ 
tes, 618ff 

Actions causing upgrading of castes, 
620ff 

Actions leading to heaven, 623ff 
Actions leading to hell, 626 
Actions which cause a person to 
assume an ugly form, 569 
Acyuta, 4 

Adhibhautika suffering, 685 
Adhidaivika suffering, 685 
Adhomukha (hell), 118 
Adhr;ta, 31 
Adhvarivan, 31 
Adhvaryu, 772fn 

Adhyatma (spiritual) doctrine, 704f 
Adhyatmika suffering, 685 
Adikeia, 1150 
Aditi, 14, 164, 992 
Aditya, 15, 33-36, 58, 190, 832, 883, 
1138 

Adityas, 31, 767fn, 1104 
Aditya Tirtha, 1174 
Adri, 816 
Adrika, 815 
Adritirtha, 1174 
Agasti, 761 

Agastya, 767fn, 799, 956, 1039, 1110, 
1168 

Agastya curses Gael's husband, 998 
AghamarfaQa 332, 581 
Agneya, 870 
Agneyi, 8 

Agneyi Dharana, 177 
Agni, 9-10,30,47, 845,860, 1067, 1078 
names o£ 861 
Agnib&hu, 29 
Agnidhra, 29 
Agnidhra, story of, 656 
Agni, K|ttikas and Karttika, 1022 
Agnihotra, 56 
Agnfiv&la (hell), 537 
Agnikugd&> 863 


Agnistubh, 8 
Agni tirtha, 859 
Agnivarcas, 2fn 
Agriculture, 430 
Aguru, 2 

Ahalya, 819ff, 968 
Ahalyasahgama Tirtha, 819 
Ahamkara, 731, 743 
Ahavaniya, 285, 1123-24 
Ahinagu, son of Devanika, 53 
Ahirbudhnya, 14 
Ahuka, 92 

Aila, founder of lunar dynasty 
Aila Sudyumna, 38 
Ailments, classification of, 228 
Aindava, 870 
Aindra, 870 
Aindra Tirtha, 856 
Airavata, 17, 20, 27 
Aiivara, 870 
Aitareya Brahmana, 22fn 
Aja, 52 

Ajagava, 23 
Ajagava Rudra, 54 
Ajaikapada, 14 
Ajaka, 58 
Ajapariva, 79 
Ajigarta, 874 
Ajigarti, 1092 
Ajina, 9 
Akalma^a, 30 
Akapivan, 30 
Akfialva, 44 
Akflaka, 122 
Alqrtavrapa, 2fn 
Akrura, 96-98 
coming of, 446 
return of, 450 
Aksahfdaya, 52 
Ak$ara, 732 

Ak;ara (imperishable), 701 
Ak^asutra, 1038 
Akfatas, 579 
Akfauhipi, 48fn 
Akuti, 7fn 

Alabu (gourd) as vessel, 27 
Alaka, 56fn 
Alarka, 64, 73 
Ali, S.M., 56fn 
Amarakaptaka, 791 
Amar&vati, 247fn 
Am&vasu, 57 


, 905 



1186 


Brahma Purina 


Ambari*a, 38, 52, 556, 761 

Ambarya, 1091 

Ambubhi^pavas, 60 

Amha, 19fn 

Amra, 2 

Amjta, 960 

Amft&ahgama, 881 

Amin, 15 

Aihiu, 39 

Amiuman, 52, 796 

Au ala, 13, 19fn 

Anamitra, 52, 93 

Ananta, 19, 115-16, 283 

Ananta Vasudeva, glory of, 371 

Anaraqiya, 52 

Anarta, 39, 65 

Ai^dakataha, 114 

Andhaka, 761, 1033 

Andhakas, 39 

Andhakupa, 547fn 

Andhatamisra, 547fn 

Anenas, 41, 61 

Anga, 8, 21, 71 

Arigarasetu, 79 

Angas, 71-72 

Anger, 5, 1066 

Angiras, 6fn, 8, 12, 29, 31, 54,65, 168, 
1078, 1109fn 

Angiras and Bhfgu, 851 
Angirasas, 23, 1104 
Anila, 13,19fn 
Aniruddha, 480, 496 
Afijana, 815 
Ai^jika, 16 

Annihilation, 15, 32, 677 

An taka, 27 

Antardhana, 9, 27 

Antardhi, 9 

Anu, 65, 67, 69, 1082 

Anuhrada (son of Hiranyakasipu), 15 

Anuhrada (pigeon), 1005 

Anupa, 24 

Anvaharya, 400 

Anvikgiki, 430 

Anvindratirtha, 1067 

Apa, 19fn 

Apana, 402 

Apara, 1039 

Aparajita, 14, 1028 

Apara Vidya, 690 

Aparpa, 181 

Apastamba, 1035, 1038 

Apastambatirtha, 1038 

Apava, 7fn 

ApomOrti, 30 

Apratibuddha (unenlightened), 748 
Apratitfha, 554 
Apsara (a river), 863 
Apsaras (celestial damsels), 17 


Apsaroyugasahgama, 1086 
Aiapi, 23 
Arapya, 8, 30 
Ardra, 41 
Arghya, 51, 160 
Annaman, 30 

Arista, 14, 17, 31, 299fn, 437 
Ari^tanemi, 12, 15 
Arjuna (the Pa^tfava), 2, 17, 86 
defeated and exhausted, 516 
leads the ladies, 515 
Arjuna trees, breaking of, 419 
Arka (a plant), 142 
Ar$a, 759, 760 
Ar$ti?eQa, 887 
Arfti^e^a, 63, 1014, 1018 
Ar?ti?ei?atirtha, 1014 
Artapangu, son of Rtuparpa, 52 
Armui, 17, 836, 1114m, 1142 
Arundhati, 12, 13, 924 
Aryaman, 14 
Asamai\jas, 51, 796 
Asandiva, 44, 1143 
Asikni (daughterofPrajapati Virata), 

Asipatravana (hell), 537,555 
Agfaka, 61 
A$(avakra, 520 
Asti, 467 

Astral Science, 13 
Asura (creation), 656 
Asura holy centres, 759, 760, 761 
Asuras, 1, 3 

ASvabhanu Tirtha, 831 
Aivatara, 17 

Asvattha (Tirtha), 954-56 
(tree), 2 

Asvatthama, son of Droqia, 31 
A£vayupa, 761 
Ajvina, 870 
Asvins, 31, 36, 191 
birth of, 834 
Atigambhira, 1086 
Atiganda, 1140 
Atiratra, 8 
Atithi, son of Kuia, 52 
Atman, 123 
Atmatlrtha, 952 

Atonement for having no sons, 1003 
Atratitfha, 557 
A trey a, 31, 1067 
Atreyi, 1169 

Atri, 6fn, 7, 21-2, 29-31, 53, 54, 1078, 
1098,1109&, 1147 
Atyantika pralaya, 677 
Audumbaras, 60 
Aurva, son of Kafyapa, 31 
son of Vasi?tfca, 30 
a descendant of Bhfgu, 47, 49 



Index 


1187 


Au?adhya, 960 
Ausana, 870 
Avabh|thasnana, 54fn 
Avadhutas, 461 
Avanti, 243 
Avici, 547fn 
Avidya, 410, 745 
Avidyasarga, 731 
Avi^hnatirtha, 945 
Avijiiatagati, 13 
Avik$ita, 79 
Avimukta, 502, 944 
Avyakta (unmanifest), 732 
Avyaya, 30 
Ayahpana, 547fn 
Ayasa, 557 
Ayati, 65 

Ayodhya, 40fn, 44fn, 45, 52 
Ayomukha, 16 
Ayu, 57, 61 
Ayu?man, 7 
Ayutajit, 52 


B 


Babhru Devavydha, 91f 
Babhrus, 60 

Badari, a mountain, 127 
Badava, 304fn 
Bahlika, 1088 

Bahu, son of Vfka, 47, 48-49 

Bahuda (a river), 44fn 

Bahuputra, 12 

Bahva^u, 57 

Bakula, 2 

Bala, 12, 16 

Balahaka, 17 

Balaka£va, successor of Ajaka, 58 
Balakhilyas (Valakhilyas), 255 
Balariuna, 39, 95, 97, 467 
glory of, 503 
defeated by Rukmin, 481 
enters the water, 512 
sport with ploughshare, 474 
Baleya Kgatras, 71 
Bali, 406, 770ff 
son of Sutapas, 71 
son of Virocana, 15 
Baria, a devotee of Siva, 15 
Banyan tree, 294 
Bards, 24 

Barhaspatya Tirtha, 1174 
Barhiketu, 50 
Ba?kalas, 60 

Bath for purification, 609 
Battle between Devas and Daityas, 
909 


Benefits of singing devotional songs of 
Vi$pu while keeping awake at 
night, 641 
Bhadra, 70 

Bhadrak&li, the terrible goddess, 
213AF, 884 
Bhadrapati, 1142 
Bhadraratbia, son of Haryanga, 12 
Bhadrafregya, 64 
Bhaga, 15, 159 
Bhagiratha, 521, 776, 796 
Bhagirathi, 761, 1054 
Bhanus, sons of Bhanu, 13, 30 
Bhanutirtha, 1061, 1146 
Bhara, 1014-15 

Bharadvaja, 31,63,73,761,961 -2,1098 
Bharadvaji, 1109 

Bharata, 3fn, 43fn, 73, 101, 105fn, 761 
Bharata subcontinent, 135ff 
Bharata War, 48fn 
Bharbhara, 15 

Bharga, son of Veiiuhotra, 64, 65 

Bhargabhumi, son of Bharga, 65 

Bhargava, 47, 60, 73, 761 

Bhasas, 17 

Bhasi, 17 

Bhaskara, 36 

Bhaskareivara, 235 

Bhautika sarga, 731 

Bhautya, 32 

Bhauvana, 812, 1152 

Bhavatirtha, 1098 

Bhavya, 8 

Bhilla, 51, 1150 

Bhima, Amavasu’s successor, 57 
Bhinianatha, 1172 
Bhimasena, 86 

Bhimaratha, son of Ketuman, 64, 73 
Bhimarathi, 761, 791 
Bhimeia, 964 
Bhi?ma, 77 

Bhi$maka, King of Kun^ina, 476 
Bhogavati, 935, 937-8 
Bhojas, 39 
Bhrama (hell), 537 
Bhrgu, 6 fn., 30, 58-9, 1109 fn 
Bhfgu Adhvaryus, 54 
Bhfgutunga, 69 fn. 

Bhurloka, 122 
Bhuta, 15 

Bhutas (Elements), 5 
Bhutasarga, 731 
BhOtayajfia, 970 
Bhuti, 32 

Boar, 274, 406, 800, 801 
Bondage, 1170 

Brahma, 4, 11, 18-20, 23-4, 39, 53-5, 
61, 71, 134, 169, 186, 257, 527 
a day of, 730 



1188 


Brahma Purdiia 


and Vigmiy dispute between, 1052 
delighted by Hiragyakafipu’s pe¬ 
nance, 526 
four forms, 405 

the creator, 863, 870, 1040, 1105 
Brahmagiri, 778, 801 
Brahmaloka, 25 
Brahman, 68, 772 fn 
Brahmapara, 389 
Brahma Puraga, praise of, 754 ff 
Brahmas, seven, 16 
Brahma’s fifth head, 944 
Brahmasiras, 55 
Brahmatirtha, 943 
Brahmin slaughter, 854 
Brahmayajria, 970 
Bfhadaiva, 41 
Bfhaddarbha, 72 
Bfhadratha (Jarasandha), 66 
Bfhanmanas, 72 

Brhaspati, 27, 38, 54,852, 1096, 1097, 
1098 

Bfhati, 8 

Brhatkarman, son of Bhadraratha, 72 
Brhatkirti, 1144 
Buddha, 41 fn, 55, 898 
Buddha (enlightened), 748, 750 f 
Budha, son of Soma, 38 
Budhyamana (that is being enlight¬ 
ened), 748 f, 751 

Bullocks lick Dadhici’s bones, 916 

G 

Gaitraratha, 56, 68 
Caitrarathi or Bindumati, daughter of 
Sasabindu, 44 
Gakratirtha, 826, 905, 1050 
G£Uc$u?a, 8, 70 
C&kfuga Manu, 8, 29, 31 
Cak?u;a Manvantara, 14, 15, 20, 30, 
177 

Cak?ustirtha, 1154 
Cakreivara, 910, 919, 924, 931 
Calculation of time 678 
Gampa, 72. 

CamDaka. 2 
Camphor Malini, 72 
Gaiicu, 47 
Gagdalas, 44-5 
Gandana, 2 
Gandra, 6 fn. 

Candramas, 15 
Gandrasva, 43 
Gindrayana, 351 

Gagura and Muijtika (wrestlers), 443, 
458f 

Caragas, 766 fn. 

Gaum, 58-9 


Garus, 58 

Cattle breeding, 430 
Caturanga, 72 
Caturyugas, 29 fn. 

Cedi, 39 fn, 66 
Chandas, 4 fn 
Charitable gifts, 340 
Chaya, 833, 1138 
Chinas, 49 fn. 

Churning the Ocean, 881 
Cificika, 1134, 1137 
Cintimagi, 1030 
Citragupta, 551 
Citraka, 847 
Citrakuta, 185 
Citrasena, 1164 
Citraratha, 20, 27, 71 
Cleaning of vessels etc., 607 
Colas, 50 

Composers of Scriptures, 1080 
Conditions during Rama’s rule, 533 
Conduct leading to hell, 629f 
Conduct of the Good, 597 
Confession of Cincika, 1136 
Contact (with sensual objects), 1066 
Coronation oath, 22 fn 
Cosmic Egg 126, 170, 1105 
Cosmic Ego (Ahamkara), 5 
Cows of Devas, 1042 
Cows taken away by the Rakgasas, 1042 
Created beings, two types of, 656 
Creation, 3fn, 4, 32 
Creation of Varnas, 424 
Cuficulas, 60 
Cupid (Kama), 205, 765 
reduced to ashes, 765 
Curse of brahmins, 509 
Curse of Son of Gadhi, 1087 
Curse of the intelligent &ukra, 1082 
Curse of Yayati, 465 
Curse to Ahalya, 823 
Cyavana, 30, 39 
Cycle of births and deaths, 568 

D 

Dadhici 210, 910ff, 928 
Dadhiv&hana, son of Ahga, 71 
Daityas, 16, 21, 27 
Daiva, 656, 759 
Daiva holy centres, 762 
Daiva variety defined, 760 
Dak$a, 4.6fn, 7,9-12,13, 20, 31, 175ff 
906, U09fo 
hymn of, 228f 
Daksayani. 33 
Dakpga (fire), 285, 1123-4 
Damanabhaffyaka, 144 
Dfhnodara, the name explained, 419 



Index 


1189 


Danavas, 16 
origin of, 10-11 

Dantfaka, 38, 760, 826, 982, 1032, 
1044, 1091, 1126 
Danqla Niti, 430 
Daqi^asuka (a hell), 547fn 
Danu, 14-16, 992 
Daradas, 23fn 
Daria Sraddha, 589 
Darva, 70 
Daryas, 50 
Dasaratha, 844 

gets rid of three sins of brahmin 
slaughter, 988 

grants three boons to Kaikeyi, 975 
offers help to Devas, 974 
story of, 973ff 
Dasaratha vs Lomapada, 72 

Dasarneyu, 70 
Daiasvamedha Tirtha, 812 
Dasra, 36 
Dasyus, 23fn 
Datta, 30, 952, 1078 
Dattatreya, a manifestation of Visnu, 
406, 530, 953 

grants boon to Karttavirya, 531 
Daughters of Viraria, 12 
Dead dog, 845 
Debts, 871fn 

Descent of Bhagirathi, 793 
of Gautami, 784 
Despicable action, 631 
Destiny of Vi?nu worshippers, 637ff 
Devabahu, 30 
Devadaru, 2 
Devagamatirtha, 1118 
Devakhata, 761 
Devala, son of Visvamitra, 60 
son of Pratyusa, 13 
Devanika, son of Kgemadhanvan, 53 
Devapi, 1014-16, 1018-19 
Devapraharanas, children of Kfiasva, 
15 

Devarata, 60-1 
Devas, 1,3, 15,21,23, 27 
origin of, 10-11 

and Asuras curse the son and dau¬ 
ghter of Agni, 1023 
deposit weapons with Dadhici, 913 
want the weapons back, 914 
Devatirtha, 1014 
Devavrdha, 91 

Devayani, daughter of Uianas, 65,1081 
DhanaSjaya, 17 
Dhaneyu, 70 

Dhanunnaha (festival of bows), 442 
Dhaavan, son of Dhghatapas, 63 
Dhanvantari, son of Ayus, 963 
son of Dbghatapas, 73 


Dhanvi, 30 
Dhanyatirtha, 959 
Dhara (or Dhava), 19fn 
Dharana, 718 
Dharma (a Prajapati), 6fn 
(a sage), 12 
four types, 109 
Dharmadeva, 19fn 
Dharmaketu, son of Suketu, 65 
Dharmanetra, 72 
Dharmaratha, 50 
Dharma-vyasas, 1113 
Dhars^akas, 39 
Dhata (a sage), 30 
Dhatf (an Aditya), 14, 132 
Dhava, 2, 13 
Dhenuka, 426 

and Pralamba, slaying of, 425 
Dhisana, 9 

Dhivaras (fishermen), 22 
Dhr?nu, 38 
Dhrsta, 37, 39 

Dhf^taketu, son of Sukumara, 65 
Dhrtaraslra, 15, 17, 78 
Dhrtavrata, 840, 842-3 
Dhrti, 54 
Dhftiman, 30-1 
Dhnava, 7, 8, 13, 19fn, 167 
Dhdmini, 76 
Dhundhu, 42-3 
slaying of, 41-3 
Dhundhumara, 41 
Dhyanajapyas, 60 

Dialogue between Vasigtha & Karala- 
Janaka, 729 
Dilipa, 51, 52, 796 

Dirghatapas, son of Kasyapa, 63, 73 
Distance between world of Yama and 
the mortal world, 536 
Diti, 14, 15, 18, 992 
curses Indra, 999 
Diversity, 740 
Divine ordeal, 376fn 
Divine wish-fulfilling tree, 912 
Diviratha, son of Dadhivahana, 71 
Divodasa, son of Bhimaratha, 64, 73 
Dog’s flesh, 846 
Don’t’s for a householder, 615 
Do’s and don’t’s for a virtuous person, 
598ff 

Doomsday fire, 291-2 
Doubt, 1067 
Draupadi, 78 
Dravina, 13 
Dr^haratha, 72 
Dftlhafva, 43 

Siug^of twelve years, 47fn 
of twenty-four years, 778 



1190 


Brahma Purdna 


Dnadvati, 61, 70 
Druhya, 65, 67, 69, 1082 
Duliduha, son of Anamitra, 52 
Durdama, son of Bhadrasregya, 64, 73 
Durdhara, 557 
Durgatirtha, 1047 
Dunnukha, 17, 1140 
Durvasas, 952, 1078 
Duryodhana, 48fn, 78 
Du?yanta, 72 
Duties of a brahmin, 612 
of a religious student, 614 
of a vaifya, 613 

of different castes and stages of 
life, 612 

Dv&para Yuga, 2fn, 32 
Dvaraka, 95, 97, 99 
creation of, 469 
Dvaravati, 39 
Dvimurdha, 16 

Dvivida (friend of Naraka), 506, 508 

Dvyamu;yayarta, 589 

Dwarf, 406 

Dyuti, 30, 54 

Dyutiman, 29 


E 


Earth, 5, 6, 8, 9, 13, 20-22, 24, 27, 
38, 42, 46-47, 50, 53-54, 65-68, 
70-72, 80, 92, 114, 139, 167 
afflicted by heavy burden, 828 
as Dhatri, Vidhatri, Pavani & 
Vasundhara etc., 28 
gets rid of K$atriyas, 531 
magnitude and extent of, 12 
protector of, 25 

Eight crowned queens of Krona, 514 
prakftis, 743 
sons of Rukmini, 479 
Vasus, 13 
Ekacakra, 16 

Ekam&ra, a holy centre, 230f 
Ekaparpa, 181 
Ekapafala, 181 
Ekoddi?ta Sr&ddha, 611 
Elapatra, 17 
Elements, 402, 695 
Elephant of T ndra, 72 
Embryo, 568 

Entry into the city of Yama, 544, 
545 

Erak& reed, 511 
Eternal creation, 5 
liberation, 1 
lordly Banyan tree, 292 
Evil conduct, 631 


F 

Fasting as a source of great strength, 717 
Fire-god, 83, 190, 200 
assumes parrot's form, 1021 
Firmament, 5 
Five defects of Yoga, 698 
great elements, 2o7 
great sacrifices, 970 
untruths that are not sinful, 645 
Foetus, 568 

Form of good conduct, 598 
Four castes, 257, 296fn 
lores, 430 

varieties of holy centres, 759 
yugas, 678 
Future Manus, 32 
Manvantaras, 31 

G 

Gabhasti, 914 

Gadadhara, 1137 

Gadhi, son of Kulika, 58, 60, 75 

Galava, 31, 45, 60, 840-41, 843 

Gambhira, 1086 

Gand a > 1140 

Gandhamadana, 56fn, 57fn, 154 
Gandhari, 78 
Gandharva music, 39 
Gandharvas, 3, 17, 21, 27, 766 
origin of, 10-11 
Gandhavati, 248fh 
Gandiva, 518 
Ganesa, 778 

Ganga, 2fn, 57', 74, 103, 116, 125f, 
210, 448, 798, 930 
as Bhagirathi, 52 
as Gautami, Vai$pavi, Brahmi, 
Godavari, Nanda and Sunanda, 
792 

as Jihnavi, 57 

enters the matted hair of Siva, 770 
in heaven, flows in four channels, 
790 

in mortal world, flows in seven 
channels, 790 

division into three for flowing in 
heaven, earth and the nether 
worlds, 790 

two different forms of, 776 
Gangadvara, 353, 791 
Garakga, 1044 
Gardabh&kga, 15 
Garga, 66, 73, 116, 418 
G&rgya, 87 
story of, 468 

G&rhapatya, 285, 400, 1123, 1125 
Garuda, 17, 20, 836, 1044, 1113, 



Index 


1191 


1114fn, 1142 
Garuda Tirtha, 835 
Gauramukha, 2fn 
Gaurj, 764 

Gautama, 31, 761, 776, 778, 799, 817, 
819, 855, 886, 1152, 1161 
leaves Brahmagiri, 784 
curses Indra, 823 
prays to have the splendid Ganga, 
787 

Gautami, 789 

Gaya, 8, 9, 38fn, 73, 761 

Gayatri, 868 

Gho;a, son of Lamba, 13 

Gift of food, 573 

Goal of the Virtuous, 559 

Gocapala, 70 

Godavari, 761 

Gold, as vessel, 27 

Gomati, 2fn, 44fn, 59, 64, 65, 381fn 
Gotirtha, 931, 1044 
Govardhana (mountain), 433 
worship of, 429 
Govardhana Tirtha, 839 
Govindasvamin, 247 
Gfdhras, 17 
Grdhri, 17 

Greatness of Narsimha, 314 
of Vasudeva, 633fT 
Greediness, 1066 
Grtsamada, 63 
Grtsamati, 73 

Gudapaka (a hell), 556 
Guest, 1131 

Guggula (Aromatic resin), 149 
Gulf of Cambay, 24fn 
Gunamava, 825 
Gutjdika Yatra, 354 

H 

Haihayas, 40fn, 47-49, 64, 83 
as Yadavas, 84 
Haimavati or Dr?advati, 44 
Hamsa, 56fn, 697 
Hanumiui, 816, 1027, 1108, 1159 
Hara Bahurupa, 14 
Hari, 1, 3, 19, 32, 50-51, 54, 109 
incarnations of, 407 
sends his discus for Yama’s pro¬ 
tection, 830 

Harina Kri^ana (Deer play), 427 
Hariscandra, 47, 60, 761, 870, 874 
Harita, son of Rohita, 47 
Hariya, 60 
Harsana, 1140, 1142 
Harjanga, 72 

Harya^va, son of Dj^hasva, 43 
Harya£vas, 11-12 


Haryatvata, son of Vijaya, 63 
Havighna, 30 
Havirdhana, 9 
Havya, 29, 859 

Hayagriva and Paricajana, 483 

HayamQrdhaka, 1173 

Hayamurdhan, 761 

Hayasiras, 16 

Heaven, 5, 6, 722 

Hells, 117 

Hemanta, 196 

Heti, 1005 

Himalaya, 197 

Himavan, 20, 27, 179, 194, 199, 764 
Hindolaka song, 830 
Hiraijya, 1028, 1031 
Hiranyagarbha, 3fn 
Hiranyagarbha Brahma, 54 
Hiranyakasipu, 15, 527, 1090 
becomes haughty, 527 
killing of, 526 

Hiranyaksa, 869 
Hiranyaksas, 15, 60, 271 
Hiranyapura, 16 
Hiranyaroman, 20, 30 
Holy banyan tree, 329 
Holy centres, 759 
Holy dip in the ocean, 339 
Holy fig tree, 258, 264 
Holy pilgrimage, benefit of, 356 
Homa, 22, 120, 160 
performance of, 599 
Horse Sacrifice, 50, 264, 794 
Hotr, 772 fn 
Hrada, 16 

Hrada, son of Hrada, 15 
Hrsikesa, 325 fn 
‘Human’ holy centres, 761 
Hunda, 16 
Hutahavyavaha, 13 

I 

Ik$vaku, 31, 37, 40, 41, 53, 793 
dynasty, 41 fn 
family of, 60 
Ila, narrative of, 893 fT 
Ila, 37, 55, 72, 893, 897, 901 
Ilatirtha, 893 
Ilvala, 16 

Indra, 18, 19, 20, 27, 45, 50 fn, 58-59, 
61,65-66,71-72, 74,85,86, 99,152, 
168,194,465,823, 854-55,968, 994, 
1028-29, 1031, 1068 
assumes a fibre’s form, 854 
assumes brahmin’s guise, 821, 995 
assumes Gautama’s guise, 822 
assumes vulture’s form, 845 
a thousand-eyed person, 824 



1192 


Brahma Purina 


plays dice with Pramati, 1163 
removes Namuci’s head, 1027 
dethronement and re-establishment 
of, 63 

Indradyumna (a king), 241,248,265, 
272, 282 

Indradyumna (a sacred lake), 288, 
329, 341 

Indraputra, 1069 
Indratapana, 15 
Indratirtha, 819, 854, 1027 
Inferior One (Apara) 1120 
Invitees at a Sr&ddha ceremony, 590 
Ira, 14 

Iron as vessel, 27 

Iron club out of Samba’s belly, 509 
Isa, 30 
liana, 730 
Isika, 55 

Isvari (Sakti) pierces the body of the 
Rahu, 884 
Itihasas, 248 

J 

Jabala, 1054 

Jabali, story of, 839 

Jahnu, son of Suhotra, 30, 57fn, 58,74 

Jaleyu, 70 

Jamadagni (or Bhargava)31, 59, 1169 

Jamadagnya Parasurama, 531 

Jamadagnya Rama, 60 

Jambavan, 95 

Jambavati, 95 

Jambu, 2, 760 

Jambudvipa, 27fn, 102, 108 

Jambunada, 102 

Jambu river, 102 

Janaka, 825 

Janaloka, 121 

Janamejaya, desccndent of Kuru, 
66 

Janamejaya, son of Puranjaya, 70, 72 
Janasthana, 834, 840 
Janasthana Tirtha, 825 
Japa, 120 

Jara, the hunter, 513 
Jarasandha, 467-68 
Jatavcdas, 859 
Jatayu, 1142 
Jaya, son of Syfijaya, 63 
Jaya, 1 fn, 60, 767 fn, 777-8, 781, 906, 
1014, 1018 
Jayadratha, 72 
Jayanta, 1068 
Jayanti, 554 

Jayatsena, son of Nadina, 63 
iva, 851 
ftinesvara, 952 


Jpnbhana missile, 497 
Jupiter, 121 
Jvara (fever), 216 
Jyotihsthala, 209 
Jyotis, 30 
Jyoti^a, 4 fn 
Jyoti$man, 29 

K 

Kaca, 854 
Kacchana. 60 

KadrQ, H, 17, 863, 865, 1114fn, 1115 
KadrQ-Suparna-Sahgama Tirtha, 863 
Kaikeya, 47, 71 
Kaikeyi, 975, 982 
Kailasa, 116, 766 fn, 920, 1076 
Kaitabha, 28, 275 
sons of, 955 
Kakola, 555 
Kak?eyu, 70 
Kaksivan, 861 
Kakudmi, 39 
Kakutstha, 41 
Kala, 15, 306, 576, 678 
Kala, Dhruva’s son, 13 
Kaladanda, 1148 
Kalaka, 16 

Kalakeyas, sons of Kalaka, 16 

Kalakuta, 940 

Kalanabha, 15-16 

Kalanala, son of Sabhanara, 70 

Kalanemi, 400, 409 

Kalanjara (mountain), 71fn, 1081 

Kala Pasa, 1148 

Kalaratri, 884 

Kalasarpas, 50 

Kalasutra, 557 

KaJayavana, 469f 

Kali, 2 fn 

Kaliriga, 71 

Kaliya, suppression of, 421 
Kali Yuga, 32 

Kalki, manifestation of, 535 
Kalpa, 4 fn, 18, 32,71,678 
Kalpa lire, 291 
Kalpa-Vrk?a, 264, 310,912 
Kama, 15, 206 
burning of, 858 
Kamadamana, 656f 
Kamadhenu, cow of sage Vasistha, 
46, 839 

Kamali or Repuka, 60 
Kambala, 17 
Kambojas, 40-50 
Kaihsa, 299 fn, 406, 415 
slaying of, 457, 463 
K&mya, 7 

Kanakhala, 127 fii, 761 



Index 


1193 


Kanauj, 44 fh 

Kaficanaprabha, successor of Bhima, 57 

Kaydu, 380 

Kankalinl, 1144 

Kanva, 816, 1088 

Kapala Gautama, 320 

Kapalin, 14 

Kapardi Raivata, 14 

Kapha, 402 

Kapila, 16, 17, 50, 73, 795, 1071 
Kapila Sangama, 1071, 1104 
Kapilasva, 43 
Kapilatlrtha, 1104 
Kapittha, 2 
Kapivan, 30 
Kapotatirtha, 801-2 
Karala, 557 

Karambhavaluka (a hell), 555 
Kardama Prajapati, 6 fn, 7 
Karki, 1039 
Karkotaka, 17 
Karman, 139, 1080, 1170 
Karmendriyas, 731 
Karnikara, 2, 198 
Kartavirya, 80f 
Karttikeya, 13, 1020 
Karuriyastava (a hymn), 279 
Karur, 50fn 
Karusa, 31, 39 
Karu?akas, 60 
Karu?as, 40 
Kaseya, 73 
Kasi, 39 fn, 63, 73 
burning of, 500 
Kasika, 73 
Kasmala, 557 
Ka^tha, 678 
Kasya, 63 

Kasyapa, 11-12, 14 fn, 16-18, 30-31, 
33, 63, 716, 812, 863,1114 fn, 1142 
Katha, 961-2 
Kathiawar, 24 fn 
Kati, 60 

Katyayanas, descendants of Kati, 60 

Kaumara, 863 

Kaumodaki (iron club), 467 

Kausika, 31, 60 

Kausikas, 60 

Kausiki, the river, 59, 675 
Kaustubha, 283 
Kavaca, 331 
Kavasa, 1065 
Kaveri, 57, 58 
basin, 50 fn 
Kavi, 8 

Kavi (Venus), 851 
Kavya (a sage), 30 
Kavya (distinguished from Havya) 
859fn 


Keka (sound notes), 195 
Kekayadesa, 47fn 
Keralas, 50 

Kesara mountains, 102, 104 
Kesari, 815 
Kesin, 377 
slaying of, 442 

Ke£ini, daughter of Vidarbha, 51, 57 
Ketu, 16 
Ketumala, 56 fn 

Ketuman, son of Dhanvantari, 64, 73 

Ketuman, son of K$ema, 65 

Ketuman, son of Rajas, 20 

Ketuvirya, 16 

Kevala, 744, 750 

Khadgatirtha, 1065 

Khadira, 2 

Khalada, 70 

Khasa, 14, 17 

Khyad, 8 

Kilavajranipatana, 461 
Killing of Rukmin by Bala, 482 
of Vftra by Indra, 373 
King Sagara, 49-50 
King Vyaya, 935 
Kinnaras, 768fn 
Kirti, 54, 767fn 
Kirtiman, 7 
Kiskindha, 1106 
Kltadha (a hell), 537 
Knowledge, 1080 
path of, 725 
praised, 120 

Kokamukha, 579, 583, 662 
KokS river, 576, 583 
Kolasura, 761 
Konaditya, 141 
Konarka, 144-5 
Kosal, 41fn 
Kotitirtha, 1088 
Krakaca, 556 
Krcchra (a hell), 118 
Kfcchra rites, 761 
Kykaneyu, 70 
Krmi, 70-71 

Kfmibhak?a (a hell), 118, 537 
Knnipuya (a hell), 118 
Kfmisa (a hell), 118 
Krodha, 6 fn 
Krodhana, 1 140 
Krodhavaja, 14, 17 
Krostr> 84, 88, 93 
Kfiasva, 12, 44 
Kratu, 6 fn, 8, 29, 1109 fn 
Kraunca, 760 
Krauficadvipa, 111 
Krauhci, 17 

Kr?na, 9, 50, 94ff, 96-99, 240 
fight with C&Qiira, 460 



1194 


Brahma Purina 


marries damsels brought from Nara- 
ka’s residence, 493 
punishes the God of Wealth and 
others, 489 

encounter with Batta, 498 
(river), 791 

Kr$na Dvaipayana, 133 
K|“?nahjana, 247 
Kfta age, 2fn, 32 
Kftaka 122 

Kfti (son of Raivata) 30 
K r ti (son of Vijaya), 63 
Kf ttikas, 13 fn 
Kfttika Tirtha, 811 
Kftya, female deity of destruction, 
502, 920-21, 929, 951 

Ksama, 830 

K$ara, 701, 746 

Ksarakardama (a hell), 547 fn 

K^atravfddha, son of Samkfti, 63 

Ksatriyas, 39, 48, 58, 60 

Ksenia (successor of Sunitha), 64 

K$emadhanvan, son of Pundarika, 52 

K§emaka, 64 

K?epanas, 461 

K§etra, 744 

Ksetrajna, 744 

K?ipra, 246 

K§udha Tirtha, 816 

K?uradhara, 556 

Kubera, 190, 856 

Kudmala, 555 

Kuhara, 17 

Kuhii, 54 

Kuk$i> 7, 15 

Kulacalas, the seven mountains, 105 
Kumara, 55 

Kumara, Agni’s son, 13 
Kumaratlrtha, 809 
Kumbhakarna, 856 
Kumbhanabha, 15 
Kumbhipaka (a hell), 537, 553 
Kuru, 761 
Kuruk?etra, 2fn 

Kusa, (a king of Lunar race), 58 
Kuril (a division of Jambu Ihripa), 
Kusa (son of Rama), 52, 1102 
Kusadvipa, 110 
Kufamba, 58 
Ku^anSbha, 58 
Kusatarpana, 1120 
Kuriisthali or Dvaravati (modem 
Dvarka), 39fn, 40 
Kusavarta, 801 
Kurika, 58, 74-75 
Kutsa, 8 

Kuvalasva, 41-43 

Kuvalayapida (elephant), 443, 459 


L 

Lak§mi, 54, 767fn 

Lak?mi and Daridra, dispute bet¬ 
ween, 1058 
Laksmitirtha, 1057 
Lalabhak?a (a hell), 118, 537, 547fn 
Lak§aprajvalita (a hell), 554 
Lamba, 12 

Lambodara, 946 
Lanka, 82 

Lauhi, son of A?taka, 61 
Lava, 1021 
Lavana, 761 
Lekhas, 30 
Liberation, 1, 4 

Lifting of goddess Earth by Yajna- 
varaha, 525 
Lingabhedin, 1039 
Lohargala, 579 
Lohita, 60 

Lokaloka, a mountain, 114 
Lokapalas, 274 

Lomaharsana, pupil of Vyasa, 
24fn 

Lomapada, 72fn 
Loma^a, 767fn 

Lopamudra, 64, 910, 924, 954 
Lord Kr?na, coronation of, 432 
casts off his mortal body, 514 
Lord Purusottama, glory of, 368 
Lord Visnu, different manifestations 
of, 522 

in the form of a Boar, 801 
kills Hiranyakasipu, 529 
Lotus as vessel, 27 
Lotus-bom Brahma, 4fn 
Love, creation of, 5 

M 

Madhava (son of Manu), 30 
Madhava(a deity), story of, 322 
Madhu (an Asura), 761 
Madhu (a son of Manu), 30 
Madhu (father of demon Dhundhu), 
42 

Madhu (a powerful son of Diti), 860 

Madhu (another Asura), 27, 28 

Madhu and Kaifabha, 275, 406 

Madhucchandas, 60, 1061, 1164 

Madhuparka, 336 

Madhyamesvara, 864 

Madra, 70 

Madraka, 71 

Magadha, 8, 24, 39fn 

Maghavan, 16 

Mah&bahu, 16 



Index 


1195 


Mahabharata, 132 
Mahabhima, 535 
Mahadeva, 14 
Mahaghora, 554, 558 
Mahajvala (a hell), 117 
Mahajyefthi, 343 
Mahaikarna, 17 

Mahamanas, son of Mahas&la, 70 
Maliamaya, 410 
Mahanabha, 15 
Mahanadi, 262, 881 
Mahanala, 951 
Mahanila, 17 
Mahapadma, 17 
Mahaprabha, 554 
Mahapreta, 558 
Mahapura, 1160 
Maharaurava, 554 
Maharloka, 121 

Mahasala, son of Janamejaya, 70 
Mahasani, 1028, 1036 

Mahasiras, 16 

Mahat (great principle), 5, 122, 730, 
743 

Mahatamisra, 555 

Mahati, daughter of Aristanemi, 51 

Mahavafa, 555 

Mahavici, 553 

Mahavisnu, lfn 

Mahayugas, 29fn 

Mahendra mountain, 531 

Mahi, 842-43 

Mahi, story of, 840 

Mahima, 1100 

Mahisakas (or Mahi^makas of Mahi$- 
mati), 50fn 
Mahismati, 81fn 

Mahodaya (Kubera’s city), 248fn 
Mainaka, 766fn 
Maitra, 870 
Malada, 70 

Malini or Grahamalini, 78 
Manasottara, a mountain, 112-13 
Manasyu, son of Suvira, 69 
Mandara, 766 fn 
Mandavya, 855 

Mandhata, son of Yu van a ^va, 44 
Mahgala, 972 
Mani, 17 

Manikupd^l^ 1 * 1152, 1156, 1161 

Mariinaga, son of §e?a, 836 

Manivati, 16fn 

Mafijusa, 554 

Man-lion, 1090 

Manly being, creation of, 257 

Manojava, 13 

Manovati (a city), 247fn 

Manthara, 982 

Mantras, 46, 72 


Matftirtha, 940, 960 
Manu, 29fn, 34, 36, 37-38, 761, 832, 
833 

Manusa, 759 
Manvantara, 6, 14, 29 
Manyu, 1126-28 
Marica, 16, 533, 857 
Marici, 6, 16, 22, 29, 257, 1109fn 
Marisa, mother of Dak?a and wife of 
Pracetas, 9-10, 177, 389 
Marjana rite, benefit of, 329 
Marjara (a holy centre), 1028 
Markapdcya, 292-3, 329 
Markapdeya Hrada, 329 
Markandcya tirtha, 1080 
Marriage of Bhogavati by proxy, 936 
Marriages, types of, 933 
Mars (Angaraka), 121 
Marianas, 60 
Martanda, 33 
Maruta, 998 

Maruts, 18, 19, 31, 767fn 
story of, 998ff 
Marutvati, 12 

Marutvats, sons of Marutvati, 13 
Matinara, son of Rceyu, 72 
Matra, 678 

Matsya-madhava, 320, 328 
Maudgalya, 1054 
Maya, 9941T 
Maya, 654ff 

of Mahesvara, 1051 

Mayavati, 478 
Mayavi, 15 
Meat eating, 607 
Medha, 868 
Medhatithi, 29 
Medhya, 29 

Medirinal herbs, 958-59 
Meditation, 1 
two types of, 741 
Meghahasa, 1074-75 
Mekhala, 89fn 

Mena (Lima’s mother), 207, 764 
Menaka (or Mena), 830, 1086 
Mendicant sage, stage of, 616 
Mental sons of Brahma, 6 
Mercury (Budha), 121 
Meritorious rites, various kinds of, 734 
Mcru (a mountain) 27 fn, 31, 36, 
39,56,101,102 ff, 208, 254 f, 576 fn, 
766 fn, 883, 954 
Mcru mandara, 56 fn 
Merusavarnis, 29 
Mind, 5 

Mind-bom sons of Brahm&, 1109 fn 
Miseries in the womb, 68fi 
of transmigration, 689 



1196 


Brahma Purdna 


of old age, 687 
Mithu, 1014-15, 1019 
Mitra, 15, 37 

Mitrasaha or Kalma§apada,' 52 
Mitrayus, 2 fn 
Mixed castes, 617 
Mlecchas, 23fn, 49 
Mlecchas and Dasyus, 48fn 
Mobile and immobile beings, crea¬ 
tion of, 257 

Monkey Dvivida, slaying of, 50Gff 
Moon (god), 191, 959, 1096 
abducts T&ra, 1097 
forcibly drags Tara, 1096 
gives up Tara, 1098 
Mfgavyadha, 14 
MftajivanI, 854 
MrtasanjivanI, 1159 
M^tasanjivani Tirtha, 851 
Mfttikavati, 89fn 
Mptyu, 847-48 
Mucukunda, 144, 468, 470 
Mudgala, 60, 1054 
Muhurta (unit of time), 158, 678 
Muhurta, 12 

Muhurtas, sons of Muhurta, 13 
Muk takes!, 1050 

Muni (a son of Apa, one of the 
eight Vasus), 13-14 
Muni (mother of Apsarases), 17 
Mura, Killing of, 483 
Murtiman, 58 
Mu$aka, 16 
Mu$ti, 461 

Mu$tfka, fight with Balarama, 461 
N 

Nabha, son of Nala, 52 

Nabha, son of Svaroci?a Manu, 30 

Nabhaga, 37-39, 40 

Nabhas, 30 

Nabhasya, 30 

Naciketa, 761 

N^dika (a unit of time), 678 
Nadina, son of Sahadeva, 63 
Nadvala, 8 
Naclvaleyas, 30 

Naga (son of king Surasena), 935 
NSgakesara, 2 
Nfigas, 17,21,115 
N&gatirtha, 932 

NSgavithi (daughter of Yami), 13 
N&gendra, 938 
N&geSvara, 932, 934 
Nahuga, 17, 65, 761, 968 
Naigameya, 13 

Naimi?a or Naimisa (forest), 2fn, 949-50 
Naimitti Kalaya, 678ff 


Naimittika Sraddha, 589 
Naivedya, 338 
Nakara, 331 
Nala, 16, 52-53 
Nala, son of Nijadha, 52 
Nalada, 70 

Names of the banyan tree, 329 
Namuci, 16, 761, 975, 995, 1027 
Nanda, 767fn 
Nandana, 1030 
Nandin, 839, 848 
Nandini, 767fn 
Nandini Sangama, 1020 
Nanditata, 1096 
Nara, 5, 303, 761 

Narada, 11, 12, 81, 656, 7%, 1109fn 
Naraka (asura), 16, 583 
killing of, 482ff 
Nara-Narayana, Ifn, 353 
Naras, 5, 330 

Narasimha (Man-lion), 314, 526 
worship of, 318 
mantra, 317 
Narasimhatlrtha, 1090 
Narayana, 1, 5, 6, 32, 51, 69, 303, 
306, 329, 761 
Narayanatirtha, 1143 
Narayanis, 60 
Narikela, 2 
Nari?yanta, 37-38 

Narmada (a river), 24fn, 50fn, 761, 930 
Narmada (queen), 44 
Nasatya, 36 

Natural reabsorption, 681 

Nava, 70, 71 

Nava, 70 

Navara$tra, 71 

Nectar, 27, 881 

Nighna, son of Anaraiiya, 52 

Nikumbha, 64 

Nikumbha, son of Haryasva, 43 
Nila, 56fn 

Nilaganga, 802 
Nilaparvata, 802 
Nimnabheda, 1094, 1096 
Nine Khavas of Bharata, 105-106fn 
Nirguna, 741 
Nirmoha, 30 
Nir r ti, 815 
Nirucchv&sa, 556 
Nirukta, 4fn 
Nirutsuka, 30 
Nisadas, 20, 1072 
Ni?adha (mountain), 56fn 
Nisadha, son of Atithi, 52 
Niiatha and Ulumuka (two sons of 
Balarama & Revati), 476 
Niti of Bfhaspati, 1097 
Nivasapuram, 885 



Index 


1197 


Nivatakavacas, 16 
Niv^tta, 684 
Nivftti, 701 

Non-despicable action, 631 
Nrga, 70 
Nyagrodba, 2 
Nyasa (rite), 334, 336 

O 

Observances common to the four 
varnas, 613 

Occasions when rituals are not to be 
performed, 610 
Ocean called Sagara, 51 
Ojaskara, 27 
Old couple, curse of, 979 
Old woman, 886, 888 
Omkara, 331 
One day of Brahma, 678 
Onkara Mandhata, 50fn 
Organic (suffering), two types of, 685 
Origin of Vi?nu, story of, 403 

P 

Padmabhu (Brahma), 4fn 
Padmasana (Brahma), 4fn 
Pahlavas, 23fn, 48-50, 58 
Pailusa, 1065-66 
Paisaca Tirtha, 815, 1091 
Paithinasi, 1048 
Pakasasana, 18fn 
Palas, 678 

Palasa leaf as vessel, 28 
Panasa, 2 
Pancajana, 51, 52 
abduction by, 466 
killing of, 466 
Pancajanya, 466 
Pancalas, 75 
Pancanada, 50 
Paficaratra, 273 
Pancatirth, 329, 341 
Paficatirtha pilgrimage, 290 
Pandavas, 79, 97 
Pandu, 78, 86 
Pan<jya kingdom, 24fn 
territory, 50fn 
Papanaiana, 931 
Papapranasana Tirtha, 840 
Para, 1039 
Para Brahma, 690 
Paradas, 48-50 
Paramanyu, 70 
Parame?thi, 6fn 
Parantapa, 30 
Par&rdha, 678 
Par&iara, 4fh 


Parasu, 1130 

goes to heaven, 1133 
Paras'urama, 48fn 

kills King Sahasrarjuna, 531 
Para Vidya (the superior knowledge), 
690 

Parijata, 2, 924 
episode, 488 

taken away by Kf$pa, 492 
Pariksita, 78 

crowning of, 522 
Pariluinpa, 557 
Pariplava, 30 
Paritapa, 556 
Parjanya, 19, 30 
Pamasa (river), 91 
Parthivas, 60 
Paru§ni, 1079 
Paru§nisangama, 1077 
Parvana Sraddha, 587 
Parvati, 13fn, 183 

devises a way to check Karttikeya, 
809 

Pary^vartanaka, 547fn 

Pasupatayoga, 246 

Patala, 2 

Patalaketu, 761 

Patatri Tirtha, 1142 

Path of the world of Yama, 533 

Patin, 9 

Paulastya, 767fn 
Paulastya Tirtha, 856 
Paulomas (sons of Puloma), 16 
Paundraka, king of Varanasi, 500, 501 
Paurukutsani (daughter of Furukutsa), 
58 

Pavaka, the lord of Vasus, 19 
Pavamana, 1134, 1137 
Pavamani, 769fn 
Pavamanya, 769fn 
Payosni, 761, 791 
Penance, 4fn, 7, 27 
Perceptible and imperceptible, 749 
Perfect knowledge, 710, 713, 723, 
1066 

Perishable and imperishable, 729, 736, 
740 

Persons forbidden to receive Sraddha, 
592 

Phena, 71, 1027 
Pigeon, 803 

Pindaraka (a holy centre), 509 
Pippala, 910-11, 923, 955-56, 1047 
Pippalada, 918-20, 922, 924, 926, 
928-29, 931 

Pippalas, 931 
Pippalesa, 911 
Pippalesvara, 931 



1198 


Pitfalls in the achievement of Yogic 
power, 699 
Pitps, 21, 27 
kingdom of, 20 
Pitftirtha, 844, 931 
Pitjyajfia, 970 
Pitta, 402 

Placing of Bali, the enemy of Devas, 
in nether worlds, 775 
Plak?a 20, 28, 760 
Plak;a dvipa, 108 

Playing the game of dice with (Bala) 
Rama, 480 
Pleasure, 5 
Folestar, 121, 124 

Postnatal ceremonies, performing of, 
418 

Postponement of daughter's marriage, 
1139 

Pot filled with honey, 846 
Power, 10 

of An.ima (minuteness), 730 
of laghim£ (lightness), 730 
of Prapti (accessibility), 730 
Prabha (a goddess), 54 
Prabha (daughter of Svarbhanu), 16, 
61 

Prabhakara, 70 

Prabhasa, 13, 19fn, 761, 835, 930 
Prabhu, 7 

Pracetas, 9, 10, 12, 1109 
Pracinabarhis, 9, 1100 
Practice of Yoga to achieve libera* 
tion, 692 

Pradhana, 5, 122, 731 
Pradyumna, 407 
Prahlada, 1090fn 
Prahrada, 15 

lord of Daityas and Danavas, 20 
Prajapati, 6fn, 19 

Prajna, as twenty-sixth principle, 750 
Praka£a, 30 

Prakfta Pralaya, 663, 677, 682 
Prakrti, 123, 743, 1120-21 
as Sati, 191 
Pralamba, 325fn, 427 
Pramad, 812, 1162 
outsted by cunning gamblers, 1165 
Pramloca, 381 
Pramsu, 37 
Praria, 13, 30, 402 
Praparodha, 547fn 
Pralaya, rite of, 1125 
Pranayama, two types, 741 
Pronins, 60 
Prapi t Ssatigama, 1120 
Prapita vessel, 1125 
Pr&pti, 467 
Prasenajit, 44, 94f 


Brahma Purina 

Pratardana (son of Dfsadvati and 
Divodasa), 64, 73 
Pratik?atra (son of Anenas), 63 
Pradratha, 72 
Pratisancara, 681 
Prati$thana, 38fn, 57, 932 
Pratita, 30 
Pratyu§a, 13, 19fn 
Pravara Sangama, 881 
Pravira, 72 
Pravftta, 684 
Pravftti, 701 

Prayaga, 38fn, 57fn, 791 
Preceptor 112 
of Daityas, 853 
Previous merit, 1140 
Price of Ajigarta’s son, 875 
Primordial being, 156 
nature, 156, 170 

Princess regains her eyesight, 1161 
Principles of piety, 623 
Priya, a daughter ofDak$a, 31 
Priyangu, 197 
Priyavrata, 7, 8fn 
story of, 869 
Procreation, 10 
Progeny, 6-8, 11 
of Srikf?na, 493 
Prohibited actions, 599 
Prsadhra, 37, 40 

Prthu, 8, 9, 20ln, 23-25, 28-30, 41 
birth of, 21, 1072 
equated with Brahma, 28fn 
origin and glory of, 19 
son of Vena, 19, 21, 26-27 

Prthulaksa, son of Caturanga, 72 
Pfthusravas, 861 
Pulaha, 6fn, 29, 1109fn 
Pulastya, 6fn, 29, 82, 857-58, 1076, 
1109fn 

Puloman, 16, 1031 
Pundarlka, son of Nabha, 52 
Purtdra, 71 
Pundrakas, 71 
Punnaga, 2 
Pupya, 856 
Punyajanas, 27, 40fn 
Punyasangama Tirtha, 856 
Punyatirthas, 761 
Purana, 3fn 
Purariapuru§a, 329 
Puranic. lore, 91 
Purafijaya, 8 
Purna, 880 
Purnabhadra, 72 
Purpatirtha, 963 
Puru, 8, 60, 65-68, 79, 1082 
approves his father’s suggestion and 
accepts his old age, 1084 



Index 


1199 


Purukutsa, 44 

Pururavas. 55, 56, 654, 866, 900, 
903 1094 

Puru$a, 5, 6, 50, 155, 329, 1120, 
1124 

Siva as, 191 
Puru$a Sukta, 581, 1122 

9Q9 

Puru$ottama, 1, 4, 260, 264, 343f 
Purusottama (a holy centre), 240f, 326 
Puru sot lama K?etra, 379fn 
Puru?ottama Shrine, 290, 377 
Pu?an, 15 

Puskara, 2fn, 760-61 
Puskaradvipa, 112-114 
Puskarini, 8 
Pu?padamstra, 17 
Puspaka, 857, 1076-77 
Puspotkata, 1129 
Pusti, 54, 767fn 

Put. hell lo which the childless are 
condemned, 23fn 
Putana, slaying of, 416 
Putra, 8, 23fn 
Putratirtha, 991 
Ptiyodaka, 547 

Q 

Qualities and actions leading to 
heaven, 627ff 

R 

Raghu, son of Dilipa, 52 

Rahu, 70, 883-4, 1074 

Raibhya, 30 

Raibhya Manu, 29 

Raivata (son of Raiva), 30, 39 

Raivata Kakudmin, 39-40 

Raivata Manu, 29 

Raja, 23 

Rajas, 703 

Rajas qualities, 161 

Rajasuya Sacrifice, 8, 20, 31, 54, 87 

Rajatanabha, 27 

Rajeya, 61 

Raji, son of Prabha, 61-62 
Raksasas, 3, 17, 21, 40 
origin of, 10, 11 
Raksobhak?ana, 547fn 
Raktaksa, 1140 

RSma, 31, 52, 406, 532, 761,844, 980, 
988, 1101, 1102, 1106 
Rama (Balarama), 98 
Rama (son of Jamadagni), 83 
Ramaganga, 44fn 
Ramana, 13 
Ramatlrtha, 973 


Rambha, 61, 63, 169 
Ramesvara, 144 
Rasa, 402 
Rati, 205 
Raucyamanu, son of Prajapati RucI, 
29, 32 

Raudra, 537, 863 
Raudrasva, son of Subahu, 69, 70 
Raurava (a hell), 117, 537, 554 
Ravaoa, 82fn, 856-57, 920, 1076-77, 
1101-6 

killing of, 532 

shakes the Kailasa to and fro, 1077 
Rceyu, son of Raudrasva, 70, 72 
Rcika, son of Aurva, 60 
Rcika, son of Kavya, 58-60 
Reabsorption, three kinds of, 677 
Reciting prayer of Mftyu everyday, 
merits of, 1009 
Recreation, 3fn 
Renu, 60 
Rerius, 60 

Revati, 39, 310fn, 961-62 
enters the blazing fire, 574 
Revati-Sahgama, 961 
Rewa, 39fn 
Rgveda, 46fn 
Ripu, 8 
Rista, 37, 40 
Rites of a Sudra, 613 
Rivalry between Devas and Asuras, 
1118 

between Visvamitra and Vasi$tha, 
1086 

Rks, 6, 15 

Rksa mountains, 50fn 
Rk?avan, 89fn 
Rnamocana Tirtha, 861 
Rock as vessel, 27 
Rohini, 311 fn 
Rohita, 870-72 

son of Hariscandra, 47 
Romahar?ana or Lomaharsana, the 
intelligent Suta, 2 fn 
R$isatra, 1169 
Rsyasriiga, 72fn, 980 
Rtadhvaja, son of Satrujit, 64 
Rtadhvaja, story of, 887 
Rtuparna, son of Ayutajit, 52 
Ruci, 7fn 

Rudhirandha (a hell), 118 
Rudra, the destructive, 1040 
the powerful, 6, 14, 49, 55, 174ff, 
210 

Rudras, 14fn, 31 
Rukmakavaca, 89 
Rukmin, slaying of, 479 
Rules of holy ablution, 345 
of worship, 334 



1200 


Brahma Pur&na 


Rupatirtha, 654 
Ruru, 31 
Ruruka, 47 
Ruthakas, 251 


S 


Sabala (a hell), 117 
&abalasvas, 12 
Sabda Brahman, 690 
Sabhanara, 70 
Saci, 1068 

daughter of Puloman, IG 
Sacrifice taken away, 800 
Sadhya (a wife; of Dharma), 12 
Sadhyas (deities) 31 
Sadhyas (sons of Sadhya), 13 
Sadyojita, 945 

Sagara, 23fn, 47, 48fn, 51, 761, 793 
Sagaranupa, 24fn 
Sage (Kapha) kicked, 796 
Sage (Kapila) reduces Sagara's sons 
to ashes, 796 
Sages, 21, 27 
Saguna, 741 
Saha, 30 

Sahadeva (son of Haryatvata), 63 

Sahasrakunda, 1101 

Sahasrarjuna, 82, 83 

Sahi?nu, 30 

Sahya, 1120 

Saibya, 90 

Saithhikeyas, 15-16 

Sairhhiki, 1104 

Saindhavayanas, 60 

§5ka, 760 

&&kadvipa, 111 

Sakalya, 1129-30 

&akas, 23fn, 48-50 

S&kha, 13 

Sakra, 14-15 

&akuni, 15, 40 

Sakuntala,173 

Sala, 2 

Sal a (son of Sudhanvan) 53 

Sdla (tree), 28 

Salada, 70 

Salamala, 537, 554 

S&Uutkayanas, 60 

Salavati, 60 

Salavatyas, 60 

Salla, 63 

Salmaladvipa, 109-110 
Salmali, 558, 760 
Salvation, 1170 

through enjoyment, 825 
through Akarman, 825 
through Karmans, 825 


two ways of, 825 
Salya, 16 
Sama, 894, 897 
Saman, 6 
Samana, 31, 402 
Samanyu, 897 

Samba abducts daughter of Duryo- 
dhana, 503 

dresses in the guise of woman, 509 
Sambala, village of, 535 

Sambara, 16, 1051 
killing of, 477-8 
Sambhu, 8, 14, 787, 939, 1022 
Sambhuta, 44 
Saihdamsa, 537 

Saihhatasva, son of Nikumbha, 44 
Sariihrada, 15 
Samxtirtha, 869 
Samitr, 949 

Samjna, 33, 34-36, 164f 
Samkalpa (wife of Suvarna) 1022 
Saihkalpa (born of Sankalpa), 13 
Samkhya, 154, 743 
and Yoga, 695 

and Yoga systems, identity of, 739 
principles of, 719 
system, 50fn 

Samkfti, son of Jayatsena, 6C, 63 
Saihkrtyas, 60 
Sampati, 1142 
Samrat, 7 
Samsapayana, 2fn 
Samudra Tirtha, 1167 
Samvarta, 298,813 
Sarhvartaka, 304 
Samvartavasu, 66 
Samyamini, 247fn, 260fn 
Sanaiscara, 34, 36, 955, 1138 
Sanandana, son of Brahma, 453fn 
Sanajjata, 840, 842-3 
Sanatana, 30 
Sanatkumara, 6 
Sancayana rite, 610 
Sandamsa (a hell), 119 
Sandhya prayers, 1144 
Sandhyas, 599 
Sandlpani, 466 
Sani, 833 
SaAjavi, 853 
Sankalpa, 12 
Sankara Vasudeva, 3 
Sankarsana, 116 
Sahkha, 17 
Sankhahrada, 1105 
Sankhapada, the son of Praj&pati 
Kardama, 20 
Saiikhapala, 17 
Sankharoman, 17 
Sankukarna, 16 



Index 


1201 


Sannateyu, 70 
Sannipatas, 461 
Santa, 72fn 
Santapana, 15 
Sapintfikarana Rite, 588 
Saptapadi, 46fn 
Sapta-Parna, 2 
Saptar$is, 6fn 

Saradvat, son of Gautama, 31 
Sarama, 1042 
Saramana, 16 
Sarameyasana, 547fn 
Sarasvan, 867 
Sarasvata, 1129 

Sarasvati, lfn, 761, 791, 866, 879, 930 
Sarasvatisangama, 866 
Sardula, 1020 
Sarmistha, 1081 
daughter of Vrsaparvan, 16, 65 
Sarnga, 1044 
Sarva, 14 
Sarvajit, 16 

Sarvakarma, son of Raimasapada, 52 
Sarvamedhamakha, 74 
Saryatas, 40 

Saryati, 37, 39, 65, 1063-64 
Saryati dynasty, 40fn 
Sasada, 40-41 
Sastras, 49 
Satadyumna, 8 
Satahrada, 16 
Satarupa, 7, 78fn 
Sati, 175ff 

abondons her body, 906 
Satrajit, 94-96 

Satrughna and Bharata, marriages of, 
982 

Satrujit, son of Vatsa, 64 
Sattva, 155, 703 
Saturn (Sauri), 121 
Satyabhama, 96 
infuriated, 488 
Satyadhfti, 75 

Satyaketu, successor of Dharmaketu, 
65 

Satyaloka, 122 

Satyanetra, son of Atri, 30 
Satyaratha, 47 
Satyas, 30 
Satyavak, 8, 30 
Satyavatl, 4fn, 59-60 
daughter of Gadhi, 58 
Satvavrata, 44-46 
Saudasa, son of Sudas, 52 
Saumya, 863, 960 
Saunaka, 66 

Saunakas, sons of Sunaka, 63 
Saura, 863 
Saufravas, 60 


Savarna, 33-34 
Sivarpa, son of Savarna, 34 
Savanna Manu, 31 
Savanpi, 2fn 

Savarpika Manvantara, 36 

Savami Manu, 29, 31 

Savitf, 15 

Savitri, 868 

Science of Polity, 113 

Secret of the excellent Dharma, 1176 

Self-born lord, 5 

Selling of daughter etc., 1139 

Sense-organs, 706 

Serpent, 932 

Serpents, 3 

origin of, 10-11 
Se?a, 17, 116, 259, 405 
incarnation of, 503 
the seventh child of Devaki, 410 
the Tamasi form of Visnu, 115 
Se?atirtha, 947 
Seven Brahmas, 6fn 
continents, lOOfn 
oceans, 296fh 

Sages (the Great Bear), 121 
sons, 1140 

splendid wives of Kf$na, 480 
Seventh Man^ala, 46fn 
Shadow, 832 

Shifting of Cowherds’ Colony to 
Vfndavana, 418 

Shrine of Puru?ottama, 307 
Sibi, 70-71 
Siddhas, 766fn 
Siddhatirtha, 1076 
Siddhesvara, 1020, 1076 
Sikhandini, 9 
Siksa, 4fn 
Sikta, 856 
Silver as vessel, 27 
Simhika (daughter of Dili), 15-16 
(mother of Rahu) 883, 1014 
Sindhudvipa, 52, 1150 
Sindhusena, 800, 968 
Sintvali, 54 
Sisiira, 13, 196 
Sisumara, 124f, 126 
Sisupala, 86, 476 
SitS, 1107 

Siva, 14fn, 15, 87, 143, 169-70, 175flF, 
920 

assumes half-female form, 921 

marriage, 761, 766 

the overlord of Yak?as, Rak?asas, 

kings, goblins and ghosts, 20 

thousand and eight names of, 217- 

225 

Siva, wife of Anila, 13 
Sivamahimnah S to tram, 1100 



1202 


Brahma Purina 


Six sons of Hiranyakasipu 410 
faced lord with a single body, 811 
women become pregnant through 
Fire-god, 811 

Sixteen Vikaras (products), 743 
Skanda, 6, 777-8 
Skull as vessel, 27 
Slander-monger, 11 9 1 
Slayer of Mura, 279 
Slaying the Tripuras, 945 
Slisti, 8 
S.M. Ali, 27fn 

Soma, 9, 10, 12-13, 15, 19fn, 21, 
27, 53-55, 70, 72, 875, 919, 958, 
1076, 1078 
Soma (Juice), 118 
Soma (moon), 109 
Somanatha, 930 
Somatirtha, 878 

Son born to the King Hariscandra, 
872 

Son who earns wealth solely depen¬ 
ding on his own might, 1155 
Sopitapura, 496fn 
Southern path, 547 
Speech, 5 

Splendid lady given to Gautama, 
820 

Spots in body, where the Yogin should 
concentrate and meditate, 717 
Sraddha, 40-41, 148, 333, 868 
explanation of, 40-4 lfn 
foods offered in, 585 
people for whom and places in 
which prohibited, 584 
performance of and associated le¬ 
gend, 575 

ritual, details of, 584 
the exclusive fifteen days for the 
performance of, 585 
various things resulting from the 
performance of, 585ff 
Sraddhadeva, 33, 53 
Sraddhavati, 248 
Srama, 13 
Sr&nta, 13 
Sravana, 976 
Sr&vasta, 41 
Sravasti, 4lfn 
Srigiri, 1144, 1150 
Sri Kj-$na, 119, 299fn 
nativity of, 411 
Sripuru$ottama, 356 
Sri R&ma, 40fn 
Srivatsa, 257, 259 
Stmai?a, 16 
Srhgaka, 761 

SfAiaya, son of K&l&nala, 70 
son of Pratik$atra, 63 


Sruta, son of Bhagiratha, 52 
Srutayu, 57 

Stage of a householder, 614 
Stamba, 30 
Sthaleyu, 70 
Sthandileyu, 70 
Sthavistha, 1061 

Story of Candala, a devotee of Vi?nu, 
642 

a foolish Brahmin & a siddha, 650ff 
a terrible hunter, 802 
a vaisnava, Caodala & Brahmara- 
ksasa, 643 

Narada transformed as Susila, 658f 
Somasarma, 648 
Striratnakuta, 70 

Subahu, a Rak§asa killed by Rama, 
533 

Subahu, son of Matinara, 72 

Subahu, son of Sudhanvan, 69 

Subha, 767fn 

Subhadra, 284 

Subhatreyi, 1078 

Subhra, 1129 

Subrahmanya, 13fn 

Subtle soul, 727 

Succhaya, 8 

Suci, 17, 30 

Sucimukha (a hell), 547fn 

Sudarsana, 283 

Sudas, friend of Indra, 52 

Sudhama, 30 

Sudhanvan (Sambhuta’s successor), 
44 

Sudhanvan, Ahinagu’s successor, 53 
Sudhanvan, son of Abhayada, 69 
Sudhanvan, son of Prajapati Vairaja, 
20 

Sudharma, son of Vidarbha, 658 
Sudharma, assembly hall, 465 
Sudharma, the assembly chamber and 
the Parijata tree go back to heaven, 
515 

Sudra, 40, 70 

Sudras, 29 

Sudyumna, 8, 38 

Suffering, three types of, 685 

Sugrivi, 17 

Suhma, 71 

Suhmakas, 71 

Suhotf, 73 

Suhotra, 73 

successor of Kancana, 57 
Sukanya, 39 

Sukaia (.a hell), 117, 537 
Sukaramukha (a hell), 547fn 
Suketu, 50 
son of Ketuman, 65 
Suklatirtha, 1048 



Index 


1203 


Sukra, 9, 30, 852, 1081 
curses Moon, 1098 
Sukratirtha, 851 
Sukfti, 30 
Suktimati, 89fn 
Sukumara, son of Anarta, 65 
Sulaprota (a hell), 547fn 
Sumali, 27 
Sumanas, 8 
Sumati, 2fn, 31, 1165 
Sumukha, 17 
Sun, 94, 142, 831, 954 
Sunabhojana, 537 

Sunahotra, son of Kgatravjraddha, 63 
Sunahpuccha, story of, 60, 875 
Sunahsepa, 60, 75, 870, 875, 877, 
1092 

Sunaka, son of Gftsamada, 63 
Sunama, 463 
Sunanda, 767fn 
Sunanda, 58 

Sun-god, i25, 141, 143, 145ff, 160ff, 
190 

assumes a horse’s form, 834 

one hundred and eight names of, 

172-174 

Sunltha, successor of Sannati, 64 
Sunitha, 8 

daughter of Yama, 21 
Suniti, 8fn 
Sunj-ta, 7 
Suparna, 863 
Suprabha, 1014 
Surabhi, 14fn, 17, 767fn 
Surasa, 14, 17, 70 
Surasena, 932, 936 
Suresvari (goddess of Devas), 33 
Suruci, 8fn, 27 
Surya, 6fn, 15 
Susmanta, 72 
Suiyama, 887 
Suta, 2, 3fn, 8, 24fn 
Sutapas, 30, 71 
Suvama, 1022, 1024 
Suvama and Suvarna, activities of, 
1023 

Suvira (son of Sibi), 71 
Suvira (son of Puru), 69 
Suvrata, 70, 71 
Suyati, 65 
Suyava, 1092 
Svabhojana (a hell), 119 
Svadha, 576 
Svaha, 1020 
Svarakalpa, 16 
Svarbhanu, 16 

Svargaratha, Son of Diviratha, 71 
SvSrocisa Manu, 29-30 
SvArocisa Manvantara, 17, 30 


Svastika, 115 
Svastyatreyas, 70 

Svayambhuva Manu, 7, 8fn, 27, 29 
Svayamvara, 184ff 
Sveta, story of, 847 
Sveta and other tirthas, 844 
Svetadvipa, 260fn, 320, 338 
Svetaganga, 320, 327 
Sveta King, 320, 322 
Svetamadhava, 320, 328 
Syamantaka jewel, 94-95, 97-98 
Syeni, 17 


T 


Tadaka, 16 
Tailapaka, 556 

Tak§aka, lord of serpents, 17, 20, 27 

Tala, 537 

Tilajahghfis, 47-48 

Tamala, 2 

Tamas, 703, 964-65 

Tamasa Manu, 29-30 

Tamas qualities, 161 

Tamisra, 547fn, 555 

Tamra, 14, 17 

Tarnsu, 72 

Tanvi, 30 

Tapa, 6fn 

Tapana, 19 

Tapastirtha, 1010 

Tapasvin, 8 

Tapasya, 30 

Tapatl, 930 

Tapi, 761 

Tapobhuta, 30 

Taporati, 30 

Tapovanatirtha, 1020 

Taptakumbha (a hell), 117 

Taptaloha (a hell), 117 

Taptamurti, 547fn 

Tara, 54-55, 1096 

Taraka, 16, 763ff, 1020 

Tarakamaya (battle), 55, 399fn 

Tarakayanas, 60 

Tarksya Prajapati, 1142 

Tarpapa rites, 131, 141, 234, 332-333 

Tataka, 981 

Tattvadarsin, 30 

Tejovati, 2471h 

Things forbidden in a Sraddha 

ceremony, 594fT 

Things to be given in Sraddha 

ceremony, 594 
Three cities, 945 
debts, 871 
fires, 285 

kinds of distress, 763 



1204 


steps of Vamana, 772 
types of feelings, 1170 
Vedas, 161 
Tiladhenu, 351 
Tilapaka, 555 
Time units, 678 
Tirtha, 264 
Tiruchirapalli, 50fn 
Tirupati, 50fn 
Titikfu, 70-71 
Tochari tribe, 23fn 
Tortures in hell, 547 
of death, 688 
of men in hell, 689 
Trading activity, 430 
Trasadasvu, son of Purukutsa, 44 
Trayi, 430 

Trayyarupa, son of Tridhanvan, 44 

Treta Yuga, 2fn, 32 

Tridhanvan, son of Sudhanvan, 44 

Trikuta, 1119 

Tripura, 761 

Triianku, 47 

Trivarga, 1033fn 

Trivi$tapa, 63 

Truth praised, 646 

Tryambaka, 14, 800 

Tunduras, 23 

Tungabhadra, 761, 791 

Turvasu, 48fn, 65, 66, 67, 69, 1082 

Tu?aras, 23fn 

Tu?itas, 15, 30 

Tva?tr, 14, 33-36, 767fn, 924, 1070, 
1138, 1140 

cuts off the Sun’s splendorous 
parts, 835 

makes weapons of Dadhici’s bones, 
915 

Twenty-eight hells, 547fn 
Twenty-five principles, 740 
Twenty-two hells in the realm of 
Yama, 537 

Twisting and Churning of Vena’s 
thigh, 1072 
Two Brahmans, 690 
paths, 701 

types of Karman, 1170 
Types of men who attain heaven, 
630f 

U 

Uccaifrsravas, lord of horses, 20 
Ud&na, 402 
Udd&laka, 42 

Uddhava goes to Badarik&frama, 511 
Udgatr, 772fn 
Ugragandha, 557 
Ugrasena, 505 


Brahma Purina 

Anakadundubhi, Devaki & Rohipi 
enter fire, 514 

powders the iron club, 509 
release and crowning of, 465 
Ujjayini, 249 
Ukya, son of Sala, 53 
Ultimate reabsorption, 685 
Uma, 174ff, 206ff 
Uma and Siva, story of, 179 
Umavana, 895-6, 898 
Unbaked mudpot as vessel, 27 
Unity, 740 
Unmanifest, 743 

Upadanavi, daughter of Hayasiras, 
16, 72 

Upad vipas (sub-continents), 101 fn 

Upamanyu, 1018 
Upamsu Vrata, 45 
Upendra, 435 
Upper regions, 121 
Upsetting of cart, 418 
Ordhvabahu, son of Soma, 30 
Orja, 30, 576 

Urvasi, 55-56, 57fn, 866, 1094, 1162 
as stake, 1163 
departure of, 1094 
Usa, 1138 

assumes mare's form, 833 
and Aniruddha, 495 
daughter of Bana, 494, 832 
U$adgu, son of Svahi, 88 
Usadratha, 71 
Usanas, 7, 55 
Usinara, 70 
Utkala, 38fn, 239f 
Uttama, 8fn 
Uttama Manu, 29 
Uttanapada, 7, 8fn 
Uttanka, 42-43 

V 

Varava (Submarine fire), 304 
Varava, 922, 923, 929, 949, 951 
Varava Sangama, 951 
Vahn(jvala (a hell), 118 
Vaibhi$api, 1159 
Vaidehl, 1101 

Vaikania, son of Vikarna, 72 
Vairaja, son of Virat, 7, 8 
Vairin, 31 
Vairipi, 8 

Vai?pava, 863, 870, 1044 
Vaisravana, 19, 27 
the lord of kings, 19 
Vai^v5mitrl, 1169 
Vai£vanara, 16 
Vaiiyas, 28, 39, 40 
Vaitaptfya, 13 



Index 


1205 


VaitaraQi, 537, 547 
Vaitaram* (a hell), 118, 237 
Vaivasvata Manu, 29, 32, 37, 40, 793 
Vaivasvata Manvantara, 6fn, 14-15, 
17, 31, 177 
Vaji, 31 
Vajra, 517 

Vajra (the king of Yadus), 513 
Vajrakantakasali (a hell), 547 
Vajrakapota, 556 
Vajrakuthara, 556 
Vajramahapida, 557 
Vajranabha, 16, 53 
Valakhilyas, 151, 768fn, 863 
Valmiki, 1102 
Vamadeva, 1072 
Vamadevi, 1169 
Vamana, 16-17, 529, 772 
Vamsya, 16 
Vanayu, 57 
Vaneyu, 70 
Vanga, 71 
Vangas, 71 

Vanisangama, 1051, 1053 
Vafijarasangama, 1113 
Varaha, 576, 799-800 
Varahakunda, 801 
Varanasi, 64, 73 
Varcas, Soma’s son, 13 
Varta, 430 

Vanina, 15, 18-19, 37, 825, 874, 
1028, 1030 

asks for Rohita’s sacrifice, 872 

Varuna, 863, 870 
Varuiji, 1028 

Vasatkara Mantras, 21, 50 
Vasistha, 6, 29-31, 41, 45-47, 49-50, 
60, 761, 767fn, 869, 1109, lllOfn, 
1147 

injunctions of, 553 
Va§i?th as > 30 
Vasi${hi, 1169 
Vasu, 7, 12, 29, 31, 54 
Vasu, daughter of Dak$a, 19fn 
Vasudeva, 39, 61, 120, 256-7, 280, 
405, 410 

Vasuki, lord ofNagas, 17,20,452, 881 
Vasurodha, 72 

Vasus, sons of Vasu, 13, 31, 49 
Vafa, 329 
Vatapi, 16 
Vafarodha, 547fn 
Vateivara, 329 
Vatsa. 39fn, 64 
Vatsabhumi, son of Vatsa, 65 
Vayu, 875 

Veda, 49, 1150, 1152 
Vedadvipa, 1095 
Vcdagata, 960 


Vedaiigas, 4fn, 772fn 
Vedasiras, 30 
Vedavyasas, 1113 

Vedhaka (a hell), 118 

Vedic lore, 113 

Vedic rites (twofold), 684 

Vena, 8, 21-23, 25-26, 28, 1072 

Venika, 761 

Venuhotra, successor of Dhtftaketu, 

65 

\ 7 cnus (U^anas), 121 

Vibhiiana, 320, 856, 1103, 1107, 1159 

Vibhitaka, 578 

\ r ibhu, son of Satyaketu, 65 
Vices of gambling, 1165 
Vidarbha, 90 
Vidarbhasangama, 961 
Vidravana, 16 
Vidura, 78 
Vidya, 745 
Vidyadharas, 16fn 
Vidyasarga, 731 

Vidyuts, sons of Bahuputra, 15 
Vijaya (son of Cancu), 47 
(son of Jaya), 63 
Vijaya, 906 
Vijaya Saptami, 147 
Vikania, 72 
Vikramasvamin, 247 
Vikrita, 6fn 
Viksobhaija, 16 
Vikuk?i> 40 
Vilepana, 557 

Vimohana (a hell), 117, 537 
Vinafi, 14, 17, 1114fn, 1115 
Vinatasva, 38 
Vinayaka, 777, 920, 945 

remembers his duty of causing 
obstacles, 780 

Vindhya mountains, 23fn, 50fn 
Vindhyapaga, 262 
Vindhya region, 23fn 
Vindhyas, 24fn 
Violation of duties, 969 
Vipracitti, 15-16, 406 
Vipratirtha, 1143 
Virabhadra, 213ff 

accompanies Bhadrakali, 907 
Viradha and Kabandha, 533 
Viraja, daughter of Pitys, 65 
Virajas, 30 
Virana, 12 
Viras'va, 41 

Virat (an immense being), 6 
Virocana, 27 
son of Prahrada, 15 
Virtuous hunter, 1150 
Virtuous person seen to be miserable, 
1156 



1206 


Brahma Pur&na 


Visakha, 13 

Vi&kha (Karttikeya), licentious be¬ 
haviour of, 8D9 
ViSasana (a hell), 118, 547fn 
Vi?pu, 3, 4, 6, 14-15, 42, 50, 59, 65, 
104, 107, 119fn, 126, 140, 143, 159, 
169-170, 191, 239, 1124, 1183 
cuts off head of Sardula, 1026 
cuts off Rahu’s head, 883 
dislodges his own eye and offers 
Arghya, 910 
energy of, 123f 

kills the powerful Daityas, Danujas 
and Rakgasas, 1044. 
laces his small finger over Garuqla’s 
ead, 837 

prepares himself to get the discus, 
909 

the lord of Adityas, 19 
the protector, 1040 
world of, 362 
ViSoka, 761 
ViSravas, 856 
Visti, 833, 1139-40 
Viiva, 12 
Visvaci, 68 

Vis'vadhara, story of, 827 
Viivakarman, 13, 167, 169, 282, 
767fn, 1069 

Visvamitra, 31, 45, 46fn, 47, 59, 
60-61, 844-45, 870, 877, 980, 1169 
makes Sunahsepa his eldest son, 
878 

Visvamitra Tirtha, 844 
ViSvaratha, 60 
Visvarupa, 812, 1140, 1171 
consigns himself into fire, 1171 
ViSvavasu, 1047, 1163 
Visvayu, 57 

Visvedevas, sons of Visva, 13, 31, 576 
Vitasta, 761 
Vitatha, 73 

Vivasvan, 15, 30, 31, 35-36, 53 
Vivasvat Aditya, evolution of, 33ff 
Vraja, 9 

Vfddha (Gautama), 885ff 
Vfddhakausika, a brahmin, 1154 
V^ddha Sahgama, 885 
Vrddhasarma, 61 
VrddheSvara, 885 
Vj-ddhi SrSddha, 585 
Vj-ka, son of Ruruka, 47 
Vfkala, 8 
Vrkatejas, 8 
Vr?a, 70 
Vpadarbha, 71 
Vr?akapatirtha, 1027 
Vre&kapi, 14, 762, 1036 
Vr?ala, 13 


Vr§aparvan, 1081 
Vr§nis, 32, 39 
Vnotsarga, 351 
Vrtra, 761, 854 
and Indra, 442fn 
Vyakarana, 4fn 
Vyakta (manifest), 732 
Vyana, 402 
Vyasa, 2fn, 31, 132 
Vyasanas, 976fn 
Vyasas, 1113 
Vyasatirtha, 1109 
Vyaya, 1140 

W 

Wealth, a man devoid of, 1058 
Well-known miseries, 864 
What will happen in Kaliyuga, 663ff 
Wicked monkey ruins entire universe, 
506 

Wife of Madhucchandas, 1063 
priest regains her life, 1064 
Wind god, 190, 194 
Winds, 402 

Wine liked by Balarama, 474 
Wives of seven sages, 1168 
Woman, creation of, 257 
Worldly existence, cycle of, 566 

Y 

Yadavas, destruction of, 512 

indulge in drinking bouts in Pra- 
bhasa, 511 

Yadu, 65-66, 69, 84, 1082 
Yadudhra, 30 
Yadus, 49 
Yajftadvipa, 1095 
Yajfiatlrtha, 1044 
Yajftavalkya, 60, 825 
Yajnavaraha, 525 
Yajus, 6 

Yak$as, 3, 17, 21, 27, 257, 766fn 
defeating of, 895 

Yaksini assumes a divine form, 897 
Yakgini Sahgama, 1047 
. Yama, 6fn, 33-44, 190, 761, 832-33, 
‘848-48, M148 
abandons his city, 828 
as calf, 27 
as Dharmaraja, 36 
as he appears to sinners, 550 
conquering of, 467 
Yama (Narisyanta’s son), 39 
Yama (the son of Vivasvat), 20 
Yamadutas, 60 
Yamatirthas, 1004, 1042 
Yarn! or Yamuna, 12, 36 



Index 


1207 


YamunS, 33, 164, 761, 791, 930 

Yamya, 870, 1148 

Yaioda, 410 

Yasovati, 248fn 

Yati, 65 

Yaudheyas, 71 

Yavanas, 48-50 

Yavanesa, 469 

Yayatatirtha, 1081 

Yayati, son of Nahu?a, 38fh, 65-69, 
79 1081 

Yogi 68, 80, 154, 691, 698 
conditions favourable for, 693 
unfavourable conditions, 642 


Yogasiddha, Bfhaspati’s sister, 13 
Yogic Atman, 155 
knot, 200 

MAya, 186 

gwer^ 35-36, 59, 99, 170, 182-3, 

practice, defects of, 713, 715 
practice, injunctions regarding, 714 
Yogin, 25, 81 
Yudhi^tbira, 86 
Yuga, 10, 15, 42, 47, 730 
Yukta, 30, 742 
Yuvanafva, 41, 44 









