
;' • ••• ; '• 

&5ti : 


• 




r-r . 


M0&gg 




; r v, -*-n- 






: : 

■ 


■ ot : . - 




■ ; ••• : ' 




- - •' " - 
'■ 

























































• r 







ANCIENT INDIAN 
TRADITION & MYTHOLOGY 


Translated by 

A BOARD OF SCHOLARS 


Edited by 

Dr. G.P. BHATT 
Late Prof. J.L. SHASTRI 


Volume 34 







ANCIENT INDIAN TRADITION AND 
MYTHOLOGY SERIES 

[PURANAS IN TRANSLATION] 

Volumes Released 
SIVA 1-4 
LINGA 5-6 
BHAGAVATA 7-11 
GARUDA 12-14 
NARADA 15-19 
KURMA 20-21 
BRAHMANDA 22-26 
AGNI 27-30 
VARAHA 31-32 
BRAHMA 33-36 
VAYU 37-38 
PADMA 39-48 

SKANDA, PARTS I-XVII, 49-65 


Volumes Under Preparation 

SKANDA, PARTS XVIII-XXIV 
BHAVISYA 
BRAH MAVAJVARTA 

devIbhAgavata 

kAlikA 

mArkandeya 

MATSYA 

vAmana 

VISNU 

VISNUDHARMOTTARA 


BRAHMA PURANA 


Translated, and Annotated by 

A BOARD OF SCHOLARS 


PART II 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED • DELHI 


First Edition: Delhi , 19S5 
Reprint: 2002 


O MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED 
All Rights Reserved. 


ISBN: 81-208-0034-6 


A Iso available at: 

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 

41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, 22 Bhulabhai Desai Road, Mumbai 400 026 
236, 9th Main III Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore 560 011 
120 Royapettnh High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004 
Sanas Plaza, 1302 Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002 
8 Camac Street, Kolkata 700 017 
Ashok Raj path, Patna 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 


UNESCO COLLECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS—Indian Series. 
This book has been accepted in the Indian Translation Series of the UNESCO 
Collection of Representative Works, jointly sponsored by the United 
Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO) and the Government of India 


Printed in India 

BYJAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRIJAINENDRA PRESS, 
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE-I, NEW DELHI 110 028 
AND PUBLISHED BYNARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED, 
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007 


PUBLISHER’S NOTE 


The purest gems lie hidden in the bottom of the ocean or in the 
depth of rocks. One has to dive into the ocean or delve into the 
rocks to find them out. Similarly, truth lies concealed m the 
language which with the passage of time has become obsolete. 
Man has to learn that language before he discovers that truth. 

But he has neither the means nor the leisure to embark on 
that course. We have, therefore, planned to help him acquire 
knowledge by an easier course. We have started the series of 
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology in English Translation. 
Our goal is to universalize knowledge through the most popular 
international medium of expression. The publication of the 
Puranas in English Translation is a step towards that goal. 





PREFACE 


The present volume contains the Brahma Parana Part II 
(Chapters 41-105) in English Translation. This is the thirty- 
fourth volume in the Series on Ancient Indian Tradition and 
Mythology. 

The project was planned in 1970 byLala Sundar Lai Jain 
of Messrs Motilal Banarsidass, with the aim to universalize 
knowledge through the most popular international medium, viz. 
English. Hitherto the English translations of ten Puranas, 
namely Siva, Linga, Bhagavata, Garuda, Narada, Kurma, 
Brahmanda, Agni, Varaha and Brahma (part 1) have come out. 

The present volume contains chapters 41 to 105. It opens 
with the narrative of Indradyumna, king of Avanti, his perform¬ 
ance of horse-sacrifice at the holy centre Purusottama and the 
establishment of images of Sankarsana, Krsna and Subhadra in 
the magnificent palace which he built there. The account ex¬ 
tends to the forty-eighth chapter ending with the description of 
Purusottama, the centre sacred to Visnu. The text then passes 
on to the story of sage Markandeya with the significant refer¬ 
ence to Siva’s temple by the side of Markandeya lake which 
was built in A.D. 800 by Kundala Kesarin, king of Orissa. 
This is followed by the description of holy shrines, the procedure 
of worship of deities therein and the benefits of their worship. 
The Purana expiates upon the merits of living and dying 
at this centre. Chapters 69 to 103 describe the narrative of Sri 
Krsna and thelegends ofBalarama, PradyumnaandAniruddha. 
Chapters 104 and 105 which conclude this part glorify different 
manifestations of the lord as well as review the path of the 
world of Yama. 

Most of the chapters in this as well as the preceding part 
describe the holy places of Orissa. They seem to have been 
composed by one who was well acquainted with Orissa. We 
may, therefore, conclude that the group of chapters relating to 
Orissa might have sprung up in that centre. 






viii 


Preface 


Acknowledgement of obligations 

It is our pleasant duty to put on record our sincere thanks 
to Dr R. N. Dandekar and the UNESCO authorities for their 
kind encouragement and valuable help which render this work 
very useful. We are grateful to Shri T. V. Parameshwar Iyer 
for his valuable assistance in the preparation of this work. We 
also express our gratitude to all those scholars who have offered 
suggestions for improving the same. 

In fine, we avail of this opportunity to state that any critical 
suggestion or advice for improvement is welcome and will 
receive proper consideration from us. 

—Editor 


CONTENTS 


PART II 

A. ABBREVIATIONS xiii 

B. TRANSLATION AND NOTES 
CHAPTERS 

41. The Narrative of Indradyumna; Description of 

Avanti 241 

42. The Holy Centres Sighted 248 

43. A Review of Past Incidents 254 

44. Description of Holy Centres 261 

45. Horse-sacrifice 264 

46. Prayer for Welfare 272 

47. Origin of Idols 280 

48. Description of Purusottama 285 

49. A visit to the Holy Banyan Tree by Markanqieya 291 

50. Markancjeya views Annihilation 292 

51. Markantjeya wanders in the belly of the Lord 296 

52. Prayer to the Lord 297 

53. Markan^eya’s vision of the holy lord 301 

54. Visit to Krsna shrine 308 

55. Greatness of Narasimha 314 

56. Greatness of Sveta Madhava 320 

57. Mode of Procedure for a Holy Dip in the 

Ocean 328 

58. Rules of worship and Mantras 334 

59. Merit of a holy dip in the Ocean 339 

60. Glory of five holy spots—PaftcatirthI 341 

61. Mahajyes{hl Full-Moon day in the month of 

Jyesjha 343 



Contents 


62. 

Holy ablution in propitiation of Krsna 

345 

63. 

Glory of holy procession : Gun^ika yatra 

354 

64. 

The twelve holy pilgrimages and their benefits 

356 

65. 

The world of Visnu 

362 

66. 

Glory of lord Purusottama 

368 

67. 

Glory of Ananta Vasudeva 

371 

68. 

Glory of holy shrine of Purusottama 

377 

69. 

Narrative of sage Kantfu 

380 

70. 

Doubts raised by sages 

397 

71. 

Lord’s incarnation in the family of Yadus 

404 

72. 

Incarnations of Hari 

407 

73. 

Nativity of Srlkjrsna 

411 

74. 

Kamsa takes steps to ward off danger 

415 

75. 

Putana slain and Cart smashed 

416 

76. 

Cowherd’s colony shifted to Vrndavana 

418 

77. 

Suppression of Kaliya 

421 

78. 

Dhenuka and Pralamba are slain 

425 

79. 

Worship of Govardhana mountain 

429 

80. 

Coronation of Lord Krsna 

432 

81. 

Arista is slain 

437 

82. 

Kesin is slain 

442 

83. 

Akrura comes to the cowherd’s colony 

446 

84. 

Return of Akrura 

450 

85. 

Kamsa is slain 

457 

86. 

The son of Sandlpani restored 

464 

87. 

The onslaught of Jarasandha 

467 

88. 

Mucukunda’s Prayer 

468 

89. 

Balarama returns to the cowherd’s colony 

472 

90. 

Balarama’s sport with Ploughshare 

474 

91. 

Return of Pradyumna 

476 

92. 

Rukmin is slain 

479 

93. 

Naraka is killed 

482 

94. 

The prayer by Indra 

485 


Contents 


xi 

95. 

Lord Krsna marries sixteen thousand and one 
hundred virgins 

491 

96. 

Progeny of Sri Krsna 

493 

97. 

Usa and Aniruddha—their marriage 

495 

98. 

The burning of KasI 

500 

99. 

Glory of Balarama 

503 

100 . 

The monkey Dvivida is slain 

506 

101. 

Sri Kr?na returns to his abode 

508 

102. 

Lord Krsna ascends heaven 

513 

103. 

Episode of Krsna concluded 

514 

104. 

Different manifestations of the lord 

522 

105. 

Path to the world of Yama 

535 



ABBREVIATIONS 


Common and self-evident abbreviations such as Ch(s)— 
Chapter(s), p—page, pp—pages, V—Verse, VV—Verses, 
Ftn—footnote, Hist. Ind. Philo—History of Indian Philosophy 
are not included in this list. 


ABORI Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute , 
Poona 

AGP S. M. Ali’s The Geography of Pur anas, PPH, New 

Delhi, 1973 

AIHT Ancient Indian Historical Tradition , F. E. Pargiter, 

Motilal Banarsidass (MLBD), Delhi 
AITM Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology Series MLBD, 
Delhi 

AP Agni Parana , Guru Mandal Edition (GM), Cal¬ 

cutta, 1957 

Arch.S.Rep. Archaeological Survey Report 
AV Atharva Veda , Svadhyaya Mandal, Aundh 

Bd. P. Brahmdn$a Purdna , MLBD, Delhi 1973 
BG Bhagavadgita 

Bh. P. Bhdgavata Pur ana, Bhagavat Vidyapeeth, Ahmedabad 

Br. Brdhmana (preceded by name such as Satapatha) 

BS. P. Bhavisya Purdna , Vishnu Shastri Bapat, Wai 

BV. P. Brahma Vaivarta Purdna , GM, 1955-57 

CC Caturvarga Cintdmani by Hemadri 

CVS Carana Vyuha Sutra bySaunaka; Com. by Mahidasa 

DB Devi Bhdgavata , GM, 1960-61 

De or The Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and Media - 

GDAMI eval India , N. L. De, Orienta Reprint, Delhi, 1971 
Dh. S. Dharma Sutra (preceded by the author’s name 

such as Gautama) 

ERE Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics —Hastings. 

GP Garutjla Purdna Ed. R. S. Bhattacharya Chow- 

khamba, Varanasi, 1964 





xiv 


Abbreviations 


GS Gjhya Sutra (preceded by the name of the author 

such as Apastamba) 

HD History of Dhartna Sastra, P. V. Kane, G. O. S. 

IA The Indian Antiquary 

IHQ The Indian Historical Quarterly 

JP Purana (Journal of the Kashiraj Trust), Varanasi 

KA Kaufilya Arlhaiaslra 

KP Kurma Parana, Venkatesvara Press Edt. Bom¬ 

bay, also Kashiraj Trust Edt., Varanasi 1971 

LP Lingo Purana , GM, 1960; also MLBD, Delhi, 1981 

Manu. Manusmjli 

Mbh. Mahabharata, Gita Press, Gorakhpur, VS 2014 

MkP Markantfeya Purana 

MN Mahabharata Ndmanukramani, Gita Press Gorakh¬ 

pur, VS 2016 

MtP Matsya Puran.a , GM, 1954 

MW Monier Williams Sk. English Dictionary MLBD, 

Delhi, 1976 


NP 

PCK 

Pd. P. 
PE 

PR or 
PRHRC 

Sat. Br. 


Naradiya or Narada Purana, VerikateSvar Press, 
Bombay 

Bharatavarsiya Pracina CaritrakoSa, Siddheshwar 

Shastri, Poona, 1968 

Padma Parana, GM, 1957-59 

Puranic Encyclopaedia ,. V. Mani, English, MLBD, 

Delhi, 1975 

Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs 
R. C. Hazra, Calcutta, 1948 
Rg-Veda, Svadhyaya Mandal, Aundh 
Satapatha Brahmana 


SC or SMC Smfti Candrika —Devanna Bhatta 
SEP Studies in Epics and Puranas, A.D. Pusalkar, Bhara¬ 

tiya Vidya Bhavan (BVB), Bombay 


CHAPTER FORTYONE 


The narrative of Indradyumna 
Description of Avanti 

Brahma said : 

1. O brahmins, formerly, in the Krtayuga there was a 
glorious king who was known as Indradyumna. He was as valor¬ 
ous asIndra. 

2. He was truthful in speech, pure in thought and efficient 
in work. He was most excellent among the wielders of weapons. 
He was handsome and fortunate. He was heroic and liberal in 
charitable gifts. He enjoyed pleasures and spoke pleasingly. 

3. He performed many sacrifices. He was favourably 
disposed to the brahmins. He was truthful in utterance. He was 
an adept in the science of archery, Vedas and other scriptures. 
He was contented. 

4. He was the lover of humanity and he looked splendid 
like the moon on the full moon-night. Like the sun he was 
dazzling to look at, he was terrible to the hosts of enemies. 

5. He was a devotee of Visnu. He was endowed with 
Sattva attribute. He conquered wrath and the sense-organs. He 
was interested in the spiritual lore. He was desirous of salvation. 
He was interested in virtue. 

6. While that king, the repository of good qualities, ruled 
over the Earth he thought of propitiating Visnu. 

7. “How shall I propitiate Visjriu, the lord ofDevas? In 
which holy centre or sacred spot or the river bank or hermitage 
shall it be ?” 

8-9. Pondering thus in his mind he thought of all holy 
centres on the earth. He saw them in dreamy vision. After see- 
ing the holy centres, sacred spots and cities he mentally repaired 
to the holy centre Purusottama that bestows salvation on the 
devotees. 








242 


Brahma Parana 


10. The king went there accompanied by his flourishing 
army and vehicles. He duly performed a horse sacrifice where 
much wealth was distributed as gift. 

11-12. He got a lofty palace built there. He established the 
images of Samkarsana, Krsna and Subhadra therein. He 
constructed five holy spots there. He performed the rites of 
ablution, charitable gift, penance, sacrifice and the visit to the 
deity regularly. He devoutly propitiated the lord duly every day 
by the grace of the lord. In course of time he attained salvation. 

13-14. O brahmins, by taking ablution in the ocean named 
(after) Indradyumna and visiting Markandeya, Vata (banyan 
tree), Kr?na and Bala-Rama one attains salvation certainly. 

The sages said : 

15-21. Formerly, why did that lord of the world, Indrady¬ 
umna go to that great holy centre Purusottama that bestows 
salvation? 

O most excellent one among Devas, after going there how 
did that excellent king duly perform horse-sacrifice and worship 
the lord? How did he manage to build an excellent mansion well 
known in three worlds in that rarest of holy centres that bestows 
all benefits? 

How did that leading king create the idols ofKr?i?a, Rama 
and Subhadra endowed with all characteristic marks, O Patriarch 
Brahma? 

How did that king install Krs^a and other deities who 
are worshipped by Devas, in that palace which was most excel¬ 
lent in the world? 

O most excellent among Devas it behoves you to recount 
all this precisely and in detail, the whole narrative of that intelli¬ 
gent king. 

We are not fully satiated by the nectar-like words of yours. 
We wish to hear more. Our curiosity has grown excessively. 

Brahma said: 

22-23. Well done, O excellent brahmins that you have 
asked me about the ancient story that is holy, destructive of sins, 
splendid and conducive to worldly pleasures and salvation. I 
shall mention the story as it had happened in the Krta Yuga. O 


41.24-35 


243 


leading sages, listen with concentration and restraint over the 
sense-organs. 

24. The city of Avanti 1 in Malava, known as the most 
excellent one over the earth, was the capital of that monarch. 

25. It was thronged by citizens who were delighted and 
well nourished. The rampart wall, and the arched gateway 
were firmly built. There were strong mechanical means of bolt¬ 
ing the doors. The city was embellished by moats. 

26. It was filled by different merchants with different 
articles for sale. The city was beautiful with streets and bazars. 
It was bedecked by triangular and quadrangular lawns. 

27-31. It was full of rows of mansions with upper stones 
and apartments; the four cross-roads were well partitioned. 
Houses and towers abounded in that city which was adorned by 
hundreds and thousands of palaces which resembled royal swans 
with pure wonderful necks and which looked charming and gay. 
The whole city was in a joyous mood due to sacrifices and festi¬ 
vities ; the sounds of songs and musical instruments spread every¬ 
where. It was adorned with flags and ensigns of different colours. 
There were armies of elephants, horses, chariots and infantry 
men. The city was filled by soldiers of all kinds. It had various 

centres where crowds gathered together. O excellent sages, the 

city was rendered prosperous by the people who lived there such 
as the Brahmins, Ksatriyas Vaisyas and Sudras. The city was 
embellished by great'scholars who made it their permanent home. 
There were no dirty people there; neither fools nor weak men 
resided in it. 

32-35. There were no sickly persons, no crippled or maimed 
persons. None indulged in the vice of gambling there. Men and 
women were always delighted and nobleminded. 

The people sported about in day and night with great joy. 
Men were dressed well and splendidly. Their ear-rings were 
polished and cleaned. They were handsome and noble. They 
were bedecked in divine ornaments. They had all good traits and 
they resembled cupid in their gaiety. 

1. Avanti—~ Ujjayini. In the wider sense the name signifies Malava-desa. 
The town is situated on the bank of Sipra. The renowned poets like Kali¬ 
dasa lived there. It is one of the seven cities capable of giving liberation 
(moksa ). 




244 


Brahma Parana 


Their hair were fine. Their cheeks were beautiful. Their 
faces were handsome and they wore moustaches. They were 
conversant with holy scriptures. They could pierce through the 
army of the enemy. 

36. They were liberal donors of jewels and the enjoyers of 
riches. O excellent sages, charming women were seen in that 
splendid land. 

37. Their mode of walking was like that of the swan or the 
elephant; 1 their eyes extended upto the ears; the waists were 
slender and the buttocks exquisite, their breasts were plump and 
elevated. 

38. Their tresses were glossy and beautiful. Their cheeks 
were fine and their forelocks steady. Their teeth were like the 
clearly \ Isible lightning streaks. Their faces were like the full 
moon. They bent their necks in exhibiting their emotions with 
gesticulation and charming twists; their ears were adorned with 
ornaments. 

39. Their lips were red like Bimba fruits. They shone with 
their mouths coloured by chewing betal leaves. They were 
bedecked in golden ornaments. 

40. Some were dark-complexioned, some were fair-comple- 
xioned; they had fine buttocks, their girdles and armlets produc¬ 
ed charming sounds-. They wore divine garlands and garments; 
they applied divine scents and unguents over their bodies. 

41. The women were clever and competent. They were 
lovely with attractive faces and charming limbs. They were 
pleasing to look at. They were endowed with beauty and good 
colour and form. They had smiling faces. 

42. Mad and intoxicated they sported about in assemblies 
and quadrangular court-yards. They delighted others by songs, 
instrumental music and spicy conversation. 

43. The chiefs of harlots, experts in dancing and singing 
could also be found there. They were experts in the art of con¬ 
versation, scanning and scrutiny. They were endued with femi¬ 
nine charms and fine qualities. 


1. The mode of ladies’ walking is often 
an elephant. Elsewhere it is likened to the 
after they have shed water. 


compared to that of a swan or 
slow-moving autumnal clouds 



41.44-60 


245 


44. There were others too, the women of noble families 
endowed with noble traits, chaste, fortunate and embellished by 
all good qualities. 

45-52. The city abounded in fruit-bearing trees and flowcr- 
ing plants, in charming parks, splendid groves and meritorious 
gardens. There were divine shrines and temples beautified by 
different sorts of flowers. The following were the important 
trees:— Salas, Talas, Tamalas, Bakulas, Nagakesaras, Pippalas, 
Karnikaras, sandal trees, Aguru, Campakas, Punnagas, coco¬ 
nuts, jack fruit trees, Sarala trees, citron, Lakucas, Lodhras, 
Saptaparnas, Subhanjanas, mangoes, Bilvas, Kadambas, Simsa- 
pas, Dhavas, Khadiras, Patalas, Asokas, Tagaras, black Kara- 
vlras, yellow Arjunas, Bhallatas, Siddhas, Amratakas, 
Nyagrodhas, Asvatthas, Kasmaryas, Palasas and Devadarus. 
There were Mandaras, Parijatas, Tintidikas, Vibhltakas, old 
embylic myrobalam trees, Plaksas, Jambu trees, Sirlsa trees, 
Kaleyas, Kancanara trees, Madhus, Jambiras, Tindukas, 
Kharjuras, Agastyas, Bakulas, Sakhotakas, Harltakas, Kankolas, 
Mucukundas, Hintalas, Bljapurakas, and other trees. There 
were Ketaki groves, Atimuktas and Kubjakas. 

53-60. The gardens were adorned by Mallikas, Kundas, 
Banas, stems of plantain trees, Matulungas, Pugaphalas, Arece 
palms, Pink Sindhuvarakas, Bahuvaras, Kovidaras, Badaras, 
Karanjakas and many other charming trees in full bloom. There 
were creepers and bushes in the gardens comparable to their 
counterparts in the Nandana 1 garden. They were always full of 
fragrant flowers. They bent down due to the weight of fruits. 
The gardens were surrounded by many domestic and wild 
animals. The place was resonant with the diverse cries of birds. 
The chief birds were Cakoras, Satapatras, Bhpigaras, Priyapu- 
trakas, Kalavinkas( Partridges) Peacocks, Parrots, Cuckoos, doves, 
Kharijarltas (Wagtails), herons, vultures and pigeons. There 
were many other sorts of charming birds that sang songs pleasing 
to the ears. There were rivers, lotus-ponds and lakes. There 
were other sacred water-reservoirs adorned by lilies as well as 
blue lotuses, .white lotuses, fragrant Kalhara flowers and other 
beautiful flowers growing iri water. They had sweet divine 
fragrance. The plants put forth flowers and shone in all seasons. 

1. Nandana : name of a celestial garden. 






246 


Brahma Pur ana 


61-65. The lakes were rendered beautiful by swans, Karan- 
<Java ducks and ruddy geese. There were Sarasa birds, tortoises, 
fishes, crocodiles. There were web-footed swimming waterfowls. 
There were other birds flying in the sky and moving about in 
waters. The sky was sweetly resonant with the cries and songs 
of birds of variegated colours. The magnificent city was render¬ 
ed beautiful by divine temples and shrines. There were many 
beautiful birds that swam in water or flew about over the land. 
In the different gardens there were many flowering trees. The 
three-eyed lord who slew the Tripuras is seated in that city. 

66-70. The deity Siva is known by the name Mahakala. He 
bestows all cherished desires upon the devotee who should take 
holy dip in the sacred ditch Sivakunda which is destroyer of 
sins. The learned devotee should perform Tarpana rites for 
Devas, Pitrs and sages. He shall go to the shrine of Siva and 
perform three circumambulations. Restraining his sense-organs 
and wearing washed and dried cloth he shall enter the sanctum 
sanctorum and worship the deity by offering flowers, sweet 
scents, incenses, lights, ablution, devoutly offered Naivedyas, 
musical instruments, songs, circumambulations, etc. He shall 
propitiate Siva by obeisance, dances, and hymns of praise. 

By worshipping Mahakala, Siva, even for once, but duly 
and devoutly, the man obtains the benefit of a thousand horse- 
sacrifices. 

71. Rid of all his sins he will ride in an aerial chariot equipp¬ 
ed with all desirable things and go to heaven where there is 
the abode of lord Siva. 

72. He will become glorious and assume a divine form. 
Bedecked in divine ornaments he will enjoy excellent pleasures 
until the dissolution of all living beings. 

73-74. O excellent sages, he will be devoid of old age and 
death in the world of Siva. When his merits begin to dwindle 
he is reborn here in an excellent brahmin family. He shall be 
a brahmin and master of all Vedas. He shall be an expert in all 
sacred lores. Thereafter, he shall attain Pasupatayoga and attain 
salvation. 

75-76. In that city, there is a holy river Ksipra. He who 
takes bath there and performs Tarpana to the Pitrs and deities 
shall be liberated from sins. Seated in an excellent aerial chariot 


41.77-89 


247 


he goes to the celestial world and enjoys pleasures of all sorts 
there. 

77. Lord Visnu the overlord of Devas is also stationed there 
itself. He is named Govindasvamin. He yields worldly pleasures 
and salvation to the devotees. 

78-79. By visiting that deity the devotee obtains liberation 
for himself and twentyone generations of his family. He goes to 
the world of Visnu in an aerial chariot which has solar colour, 
clusters of tinkling bells, is richly endowed with desirable things 
and can go wherever it desires to go and which is very steady. 
The Gandharvas will sing in praise of him. He is honoured in 
the world of Visnu. 

80-85. Devoid of ailments he enjoys various pleasures until 
the dissolution of all living beings. He will be blessed with good 
features, good fortune and happiness. In due course of time, the 
intelligent devotee shall be re-born as a brahmin on the earth in 
the house of excellent Yogins. He shall be proficient in the 
Vedas and other scriptures. After adopting the Yoga of Visnu, 
lie will attain salvation, with no return to this earth. 

O brahmins, there itself the man shall visit Visnu named 
Vikramasvamin. By visiting the lord, the devotee, whether it be 
a man or a woman, shall attain the benefits that are mentioned 
before. 

There are other Devas too, viz. Indra and others led by 
him. O excellent sages, there are Mothers who bestow their 
cherished desires. By visiting them, and by duly and devoutly 
worshipping and bowing to them the mangoes to heaven. Such 
is the city of great beauty protected by that lion of a monarch. 

86-89. It was gay and joyous with perpetual festivities like 
the city of Amaravatl * 1 pertaining to Indra. It consisted of 

1. Amardvati. The capital city of Indra. Its location is as follows: Brah¬ 
ma’s world extends over 10,000 Yojanas on Mahameru mountain. There are 
eight cities—each 2,500 square yojanas in extent—of the asfadikpalas in 
parts of this Brahmapuri: 

(i) In the centre Brahma’s city—Manovatl; 

(ii) To the east of Manovati, Indra’s city Amaravatl; 

(iii) In the south-east corner, Agni’s city Tejovati; . 

(iv) On the southern side, Yama’s city, Samyamini; 

(v) In the south-west comer, Nirfti’s city Krsnanjana; 


i 






248 Brahma Purana 

eighteen sectors or sub-divisions. The cross-roads were exten¬ 
sively wide and large. 

The twanging sound of bowstrings echoed everywhere. It 
was adorned by the presence of Siddhas. The people consisted 
mostly of the learned groups; the loud chanting sound of the 
Vedas reverberated everywhere. 

O brahmins, day and night the discourses on Itihasas, 
Puranas and scriptures and the critical reviews of poems are 
heard. O Brahmins, thus, the city of Avanti of excellent virtues, 
has been cited by me. It was here that, formerly, Indradyumna 
of great intellect ruled as king. 


CHAPTER FORTYTWO 
The Holy centre sighted 

Brahma said: 

1. Administering the excellent country formerly, from that 
city, that king of great intellect, protected his subjects like his 
own bosom-born sons. 

2-7 He was highly intelligent and truthful in speech. He 
was heroic and a veritable repository of all virtues. He was 
learned and richly endowed with piety. He was the most ex¬ 
cellent among all those who wielded weapons. Possessing good 
conduct, truthfulness and control over his sense-organs the glori¬ 
ous king conquered the cities of his enemies. In refulgence he 
was like the Sungod; in beauty he was like Asvins, * 1 he possessed 
their increasing good qualities, he had the valour of Indra; 
adorned by all traits he shone like the autumnal moon. He per¬ 
formed various sacrifices such as Horse Sacrifice and others. 

(vi) In the west, Vanina’s city Sraddhavati; 

(vii) In the north-west comer, Vayu’s city Gandhavati; 

(viii) In the north, Kubera’s city Mahodaya; 

(ix) In the north-east corner, Siva’s city, Yasovati. 

(See Devi Bhagavata, 8th Skandha) 

1. ASvins —Asvinikumaras, ASvinidevas viz. Satya and Dasra. The 
two were the sons of Surya. They became physicians of Dcvas. 



42.8-17 


249 


There was no other king equal to him in charitable gifts, 
sacrifices and austerities. 

At every sacrifice, he gave the leading brahmins much 
wealth consisting of gold, jewels, pearls, elephants and horses. 
There was no limit to the wealth possessed by him such as ele¬ 
phants, horses and prominent chariots, blankets, deer-skins and 
garments, jewels, cash and food-grains. 

8. Thus endowed with riches and adorned by good qualities 
the king administered the excellent kingdom with his mind 
assured of realizing all cherished desires. 

9. Once he pondered over this, in mind—“How shall I 
propitiate Visnu, the lord of all Yogas ? How shall I propitiate 
lord who bestows worldly pleasures and salvation ?” 

10-12. He pondered over the scriptural texts, Tantra 
texts and extensive Agamas. He poured over the Itihasas, 
Puranas, the ancillaries of the Vedas, Dharmasastras, codes of 
law propounded by the sages, Vedangas, Scriptural texts and all 
source-books of the extant lores. After assiduously resorting 
to his preceptors, the brahmins who had mastered the Vedas, he 
attained the highest point of learning and became fully con¬ 
tented. 

13. After realising the greatest entity, the unchanging lord 
Vasudeva, he passed beyond all illusory knowledge. 1 Restraining 
his sense-organs, he became a seeker of liberation. 

14-16. He thought thus—“How shall I propitiate the eternal 
lord ofDevas? He is yellow-robed. He has four arms. He holds 
a conch, a discus and an iron-club. His chest is covered with 
garlands of Sylvan flowers. His eyes are large like the petals of 
a lotus. He has the scar Srivatsa in his chest. He appears splen¬ 
did with crown, shoulderlets and other ornaments. 

Having thought thus, the king set-off from his city Ujjayini, 
accompanied by a large army, his priest and his servants. 

17. The Charioteer-soldiers followed him in chariots resem¬ 
bling aerial vehicles. They were decorated with flag-staffs and 
fanners. The soldiers carried weapons in their arms. 


1. bhr&nti-jfl&na —illusory knowledge, such as the knowledge of “snake 
in rope or of silver in a shell”. This is known as the pratibhisika jnana. 




250 


Brahma Purdna 


18. The cavalry men followed the king with horses on a par 
with the wind. They carried javelins and iron clubs. 

19-20. The (brave warriors) experts in wars of conquests 
followed him with Himalaya-born elephants in their rut. These 
elephants were comparable to mountains. They had trunks like 
the poleshafts. They were fierce and intoxicated, of sixty years 
in age. Their Howdabs were golden. They were adorned with 
flags and ringing bells. 

21-22. Innumerable infantry-men followed him. They had 
bows, javelins and swords. They wore divine garlands and gar¬ 
ments. They had applied divine scents and unguents (over their 
bodies). They were young and they wore earings of finished 
gold. They were mighty heroes, experts in all weapons and 
missiles and eager to fight. 

23-26. The women of the harem followed him. They were 
bedecked, richly endowed with beauty and blooming youth. 
They were embellished by all ornaments. They wore divine 
garments and were bedecked in divine garlands. They had 
smeared their limbs with divine scents and unguents. Their faces 
resembled the autumnal moon. Their waists were fine and their 
dress, exquisitely beautiful. Their ears were beautified by the 
forelocks. Their lips resembled the Bimba fruits. They had fine 
teeth and their eyes were large like the petals of the lotus. Their 
mouths were coloured by the betal leaves they had chewed. They 
were protected by watchmen and guards. They went ahead in 
high and low vehicles that were splendid and bedecked in jewels 
and gold. The birds sang songs in their praise. They were sur¬ 
rounded by men armed with weapons. 

27-33. Many courtesans and harlots followed him along 
with their attendants. They were beautiful in every limb and 
they were bedecked in all ornaments. They were loving, fortu¬ 
nate and beautiful. They were endowed with feminine charms. 
Bedecked in all sorts of ornaments they rode in various vehicles 
and followed him. He was accompanied by brahmins who were 
conversant with the Vedas and their ancillarics * 1 and who were 


1. Veddfigas —ancillarics. They are six in number: 

(i) Stk^d —Science of proper articulation and pronunciation. 

(ii) Chandas —Metre; 



42.34-42 


251 


masters of topics in different scriptures. So also the Ksatriyas, 
Vaisyas, Sudras of eight subcastes accompanied him. The gold¬ 
smiths, blacksmiths metal-workers, breakers of stones, jewellers, 
potters, cobblers, cooks, small vendors, cane-makers, artisans 
working on lids, barbers, those who make gourd-like supports of 
lutes, those who make and mend arrows, those who work in gold, 
sword-makers, those who prepare oblations, those who repair 
vehicles, those who make sweet pies, those who sell (drinking) 
water, garland-makers, those who make joints, those who sell all 
sorts of things, groups of village merchants and residents of 
different towns, followed him with their riches, jewels, gold, 
folk women and attendants. 

34. There were people who sold missiles, those who sustain¬ 
ed themselves by trading in betal leaves, the sellers of grass, the 
sellers of fuel. 

35. All those who sustained themselves by the stage, those 
who sold meat, oil-mongers and cloth merchants followed him. 

36. Sellers of fruits, those who sold leaves, those who 
tiansported grass and fodder and thousands of washermen 
(followed him). 

37. There were cowherds, barbers, tailors, shepherds, goat¬ 
herds and those who tended deer and swans. 

38. There were people who sold foodgrains, powdered fried 
grains, gaggery and salt. 

39. There were musicians, dancers, bards, actors, story-tellers 
and those who are experts in Puranas. 

40. There were poets, versifiers, composers of poems, experts 
in different poems, followers of Garutfa who dispel poison and 
those who test different jewels. 

41. There were blacksmiths, coppersmiths, those who work 
in bellmctal, Ruthakas?, those who make scabbards, painters, 
turners and Pavakas. 

42. There 'were makers of sticks and batons, those who 
make swords, those who maintain by selling ale or gambling; 


(iii) Vyakarapa —G rammar; 

(iv) Nirukta —Etymology; 

(v) Jyotija —Astronomy and Astrology; 

(vi) Kalpa —Ceremonial represented by Sutra works. 







252 


Brahma Purana 


wrestlers, messengers, Kayasthas (accountants and clerks) and 
other workers. 

43-44. There were physicians and surgeons on human beings, 
elephants, trees and cows and those who cut and burn; there 
were weavers, there were thosq who painted, those who made 
wicks and oil paintings, those who maintained by selling quails, 
partridges and other birds and animals. 

45. All these citizens and those who have not yet been 
mentioned followed him. The entire residents of the city followed 
him too. 

46. Just as the sons eager to sec other villages follow their 
father who proceeds ahead so also those citizens followed him. 

47. Thus the glorious king surrounded by a great concourse 
of people as well as (the four divisions of the army viz the ele¬ 
phants, horses, chariots and infantry, proceeded slowly. 

48. Going ahead thus, followed by the armies the king 
reached the shore of the Southern sea after a long time. 

49-58. There the king saw the ocean and was struck with 
wonder. It was beautiful and it appeared to be dancing in front 
of him; it was confused and agitated on account of hundreds 
and thousands of waves; it was filled with many living organisms 
and it was the abode of many jewels, it contained many waves 
and billows; it was full of miracles, it was the king of sacred 
waters, very noisy and extremely terrible, it had no other shore; 
it was the deep abode of crocodiles, it resembled groups of 
clouds; 

It was full of fishes, tortoises, conches, oyster shell, crocodiles, 
skate fishes, porpoises, crabs and serpents of great poison. 

The briny sea, the bed-chamber of Visnu, is the lord of 
rivers, it is holy and it dispels all sins, it is the bestower of all 
cherished desire; it is majestic due to many whirlpools, it is the 
place of resort for the Danavas, it is the divine charming wood- 
stick of nectar (i.e. the source of origin for nectar); it is the lord 
of waters of divine source of origin, it is the most distinguished 
supporter of the life of all living beings; it is the most sacred of 
all sacred objects and most auspicious of all auspicious things; it 
is the most sacred of all holy waters; it is the most unchanging 
lord of oceanic creatures, it cannot be pierced or split by any 
living being, it is the source of the nectar of Devas, it is the cause 


42.59-84 


253 


of origin, sustenance and annihilation; it is eternal. It is the 
basis of subsistence for all. It is the holy lord of rivers. 

59. . After reaching the sea-shore the king encamped there in 
a beautiful holy land endowed with the qualities of a good land. 

60-68. The place was full of Sala, Kadamba, Punnaga, 
Sarala, Jack coconut, Bakula, Nagakesara, Kharjura, Pippala, 
Tala, citron, pomegranate, Amrataka. Lodhra, Bakula, Bahuvara, 
Kapiuha, Karnikara, Patala, Asoka, Campaka, Dadima, Tamala, 
Parijata, Arjuna, Praclnamalaka, Bilva, Priyahgu, Vata, 
Khadira, Ingudi, Saptaparna, Asvattha, Agastya, Jambuka, 
Madhuka, Karnikara, Bahuvara, Tinduka, Palas'abadara, Nlpa, 
Siddhanimba,Subhanjana, Varaka, Kovidara, Bhallata, Amalaka 
Tala, Ilintala, Kankola, Karanja, Vibhltaka. Sarja, Madhu, 
Kasmari, Salmali, Devadaru, Sakhotaka, Nimbavata, Kumbhi, 
Kostha, Harltaka, Guggula, sandal, Aguru, Patala, Jambira’ 
Karuna, tamarind, red sandal and many other trees resembling 
the trees of Kalpa. The trees bore flowers and fruits during all 
seasons. 

69-71. It was resonant with the chirping sounds and divine 
cooings of different birds such as cuckoos, peacocks, parrots, 
sparrows, Haritas, royal bees, Catakas, Bahuputrakas, Jlvaiijl- 
vakas, Kakolas, partridges, doves, and other kinds of birds charm¬ 
ing in appearance and sweet in voice. They were beautifully 
perched on the trees in full bloom and they were chirping. 

72-74. There were many flowering plants such as Ketaki, 
the perpetually white flowers of Mallika, Kunda, Yuthika, Tagara, 
Kutaja, Bana, Atimukta, Kubja, Malatx, Karavlra, golden 
Kadalis and various other fragrant flowers beautiful to look at. 
These flowers of various colours abounded in forests, parks and 
gardens. They were sweet-smelling. 

75-84. The place was frequented by Vidyadharas, Siddhas, 
Caranas, Gandharvas, Serpents, Raksasas, goblins, Kinnaras, 
sages, Yaksas and various animals too. There were deer, monkeys, 
lions, boars, and buffaloes. There were antelopes and other 
animals wandering everywhere. There were tigers, elephants and 
wild animals too. Thus the place was full of trees, gardens and 
parks comparable to the Nandana park; there were creepers, 
hedges, bushes and different sorts of water reservoirs. There were 
birds such as swans, Karanqlavas, Cakravakas, floating geese and 



254 


Brahma Purana 


the Kadambas decorated by clusters of lotuses, lilies, Kalhara 
flowers etc; thcre-wcrc other flowers loo growing in water; there 
were mountains with bright peaks and charming caves They 
abounded in different sorts of birds and various minerals, rhe 

peaks were full of wondrous miracles; they were auspicious 

abodes of all living beings; they contained all medicinal herbs 

and the ridges were vast and variegated. 

Thus, the king saw the place beautified collectively by all 
these beautiful things. It was a place worshipped by the three 
worlds. It was ten Yojanas in length and five Yojanas in width. 
The holy centre was endowed with all mysteries. It was extremely 

rare. 


CHAPTER FORTYT1-IREE 
A Review of Past Incidents 


The sages said : 

1 -2. O Lord, was there no idol of Visnu in the excellent holy 
centre pertaining to Visnu, formerly ? Wherefore did that king 
go there with his army and vehicles, and established Kfsna, 
Rama and Subhadra, the bestower of auspicious things. 

3. O lord of the universe, great indeed is our doubt in this 
matter and so also is our wonder. We wish to hear everything 
in detail. Tell us the reason thereof. 

Brahma said : 

4. Listen you all. I shall succinctly mention the story of 
some past incidents. It is a story that destroys sins : Formerly, 
Lord Visnu was asked by Laksmx. 

5. On the wonder-inspiring golden peak of Sumeru, the 
lotus-born goddess bowed to the unchanging creator of all worlds, 
named Vasudeva. 

6-17. The peak ofMeru is always rendered splendid by the 
presence of Siddhas, Vidyadharas, Yaksas and Kinnaras, Devas, 


43.6-20 


255 


Danavas, Gandharvas, Magas, Apsaras, sages, Guhyakas, Sidd- 
has, Sauparnas, Maruts and other people residing in the abode 
of Devas, Sadhyas, and Patriarchs viz. Kasyapa and others. It 
was made charming by the presence of Balakhilyas 1 and others. 

The peak of the Meru mountain was adorned by the 
glowing Karnikara groves which abounded in flowers of all 
seasons that resembled gold and which shone in brilliance like 
the sun. 

There were many other trees such as Sala, Tala, Punnaga, 
Asoka, Sarala, Nyagrodha, Amrataka, Arjuna, Parijata, Amra, 
Khadira, Is T ipa, Bilva, Kadambaka, Dhava, Khadira, Palasa, 
Sirsamalaka, Tinduka, Naringa, Kola,Bakula, Lodhra, Dadima, 
Sarja, Tagara, Karna, Sisi, Bhurjava and Nimba trees; there 
were other trees golden in colour and bent under the weight of 
fruits. The peak of Meru was rendered splendid by Devas and 
adorned by many plants endowed with fragrant flowers. They 
were Malatl, Yuthika, Malli,Kunda,Bana, Kuruntaka,KaravIra, 
Ketaki, Kubja, Kirhsuka, Patala, Agastya, Kutaja and Mandara 
flowering plants. There were other flowers too that yielded 
pleasure to the mind. 

The peak was rendered beautiful by many flights and 
flocks of different birds that chirped sweetly. It was rendered 
resonant by the sweet, cooings of cuckoo and the excited crowings 
of peacocks in an intoxicated state. Thus the peak was rendered 
resonant and beautiful by different birds, trees and flowers. It 
was frequented by Devas. The unchanging lord of the universe, 
the creator of the universe, the maker of the worlds stationed 
himself there. The lotusborn goddess lowered her head in his 
presence with a desire for the welfare of the world and put this 
great question to that excellent lord. 

Sri said : 

18-20. Tell me, O lord of worlds, there is a great doubt 
lurking in my mind. The world of mortals is the land of holy 


1. Balakhilyas or Vdlakhilyas —Sixty thousand hermits bom to Kratu, 
a hermit, by his wife Santati. Everyone of them was of the size of half a 
thumb, but they were as bright as the blazing sun and had attained control 
over their senses. 




256 


Brahma Purana 


rites. It is extremely inaccessible and excessively surprising; it is 
a great ocean of lust and fury where people are seized by the 
crocodiles of greed and delusion. O lord of Devas, if you consider 
me who have bowed down, as worthy of being blessed tell me 
how a devotee is liberated from this ocean of worldly existence. 
Excepting you, there is none else in the world who can clarify 
this doubt decisively. 

21. On hearing those words of his consort, Visnu the lord of 
Devas spoke with pleasure. What he said was nectarlike. It 
was the great essence. 

The .lord said : 

22. O gentle lady, the well known deity Visnu is stationed 
in the excellent holy centre. The deity is fascinating. The lord 
awards excellent benefits. He can be easily worshipped and 
propitiated. 

23. There is no other God in the three worlds, on a par 
with him. By glorifying this lord one is liberated from all sins. 

24-25. This leading holy centre has not been perfectly 
understood by the immortal beings, Daityas, and Danavas. O 
fair-faced lady, this has been kept as a secret by me even from 
excellent sages Marlci and others. But I shall recount to you the 
leading holy centre. O fair-complexioned lady of fine buttocks, 
listen to it with a single-minded attention and emotional 
fervour. 

26-27. (When the previous Kalpa comes to a close and the 
new) Kalpa 1 is about to begin, when the mobile and immobile 
beings have perished when Devas, Gandharvas, Daityas, Vidya- 
dharas andNagas have been dissolved, everything was enveloped 
in darkness. Nothing could be seen or known. In that darkness 
the soul of the living beings, the Supreme Being, the preceptor 
of the universe is alone kept awake. 

28. He is the lord and cause of Lord Siva the three deities, 
viz. Brahma the creator of the Universe, and Visnu. The great 
lord ofYogic soul is known as Vasudeva. 

29. At the conclusion of his Yogic slumber he created 


1. Kalpa —a period of one thousand yugas or fourteen Manvantaras. 



43.30-43 


257 

Br ahma and unchanging being. He was in the midst of his 
umbilical lotus resembling the filament of the lotus. 

mann 36 1 k* rd °f the world, who originated in that 

nanner, slowly created the world constituted of five great ele- 

m ^. tS - . 1C gr0SS eIcments t,lat had their natural cause in the 
subtle elements were created by him. He created the mobile and 
unmobde beings of four types viz. the oviparous, the viviparous, 
the sweat-formed (worms etc.) and the vegetables and trees that 
pierce the ground and grow. Brahma, the patriarch, pondered 
over the Atman in his mind and created the universe of mobile 

and immobile beings. He created different subjects. He created 

; aUC1 aod °‘ her sa S cs > Gandharvas, Nagas, Raksasas, the four¬ 
teen worlds of seven heavens and the netherworlds. He created 
comments, oceans, Gahga and other rivers. He created Yaksas 
Vidyadharas, monkeys, lions and different sorts of birds. He 
created people of four castes viz. Brahmins, K 5 atriyas, Vaisyas 

^cverfn R Tf d aHCn tribCS and IaSt ' b0rn (^tcastes) 
severally. He created the entire universe of mobile and immobile 

cings whatever that can be termed as living being viz. the 
grass, the bushy hedge and ants. 

37 After thinking, he created a manly being from his right 
s'de. He created a woman from his left. He created human beings 
Irom his two parts. 

38-43. Since then, the subjects are being procreated bv 
sexual intercourse. 


After thinking deeply and creating diverse forms of living 
beings whether of low, middle or higher order and all of my 
shrines, the lotus-born deity meditated upon the physical form 
of Vasudeva. Immediately after being meditated upon by that 
lord Vasudeva revealed himself as the glorious being'with thou¬ 
sand eyes, thousand legs and thousand heads. His eyes resembled 
the lotus. His body was dark-coloured like the rain-bearing 
cloud. The scar Srlvatsa was his characteristic sign. Brahma, 
the grandfather of the worlds saw him, all on a sudden. After 
offering seats, Arghya, Padya etc without any omission, Brahma 
eulogised him with concentration, by means of high class hymns 
of prayer. 7 

Thereafter, I spoke thus to Brahma the lotus-born lord:— 






258 


Brahma Fur ana 


><0 dear one, tell me the reason why I have been meditated 
upon, now”. 


Brahma said : 

44-46. O lord of the universe, tell me about the most excel¬ 
lent abode on the earth, greater than all other abodes and 
shrines. O lord of Devas, sacrifices, charitable gifts and holy 
rites are pathways leading to the portals of heaven. Similarly, 
Yogic practice, truthfulness, penance, faith and holy pilgrimages 
to the various holy centres are also the causes of heaven y 
pleasures. But they are difficult of access to ordinary mortals. 
For the welfare of the Universe, tell me the easiest means for 
some other centres than those mentioned above. 

47-49 O beloved one, on hearing the words ofBiahma I 
said thusj—“Listen, O Brahma, I shall mention the rarest of 
holy centres on the Earth. It is devoid of impurities. It is the 
most excellent of all holy centres. It is the blessed shrine that 
enables one to cross the ocean of worldly existence. It is conducive 
to the welfare of cows and brahmins. It is meritorious. It is 
conducive to the rise of happiness of all the members of four 
castes. The holy centre is extremely splendid and it yields worldly 
pleasures and salvation unto men. O great grandfather to all 
those who reside there, it is extremely meritorious. 


50-52. The eternal lord of holy centres originated from Him. 
The great and well known holy centre is resorted to in the four 
Yugas. The lord is the most excellent being among all Devas, 
sages,religious students, Daityas, Danavas, Siddhas, Gandharvas, 
Nagas, Raksasas, and Vidyadharas, nay of all mobile and 
immobile beings. Hence, it is called the best of all. 

53. On the shore of the Southern ocean a place extending 
to ten Yojanas all round the place where there stands a holy 
big tree, is the rarest of all holy centres. 

54. This holy fig tree does not perish when the Kalpa comes 
to a close and the dissolution of all the worlds starts. It remains 
there as before. 


55. Even the sin of brahmin slaughter is dispelled merely 
when the holy fig tree is seen and its shadow falls on one. What 
doubt then in the case of other sins ? 


43.56-68 


259 


56. All those creatures who circumambulate and make 
obeisance, shake oft their sins and go to the abode of lord Visnu. 

57-58. To the north of the holy fig tree and to the south of 
the abode of lord Visnu is a palace. It is a pious and victorious 
spot, ihe devotee should stop there. Men who visit my idol 
there made by the lord himself go to my world without any 
strain. 

59. O my beloved, on seeing men (and women devotees) 
going thus, (God of death) came near me once, bowed to me 
with the bent head, and said thus:— 

Tama said : 

60-68. O lord, O lord of worlds, O lord of the universe, I 
am bowing down to the lord with all these characteristics. He 
stays in the milk ocean. He lies on the body of Sesa. 1 He is the 
most excellent bestower of boons. He is the lord and creator and 
is not created by anyone. He is the maker of all worlds. He is 
conducive to the happiness of all. He is the ancient Purusa. He 
is worthy of being known. He is the eternal lord manifest and 
unraanifest. He is the creator of the greater and lesser beings. 
He is the lord of worlds. He is the preceptor of the universe. 
There is the scar Srlvatsa 2 on his chest. He is adorned by the 
garlands and sylvan flowers. He is clad in yellow robes. He has 
four arms in which he holds conch, discus, mace etc. He is 
bedecked in necklaces, shoulderlets, crown and armlets. He is 
fully endowed with all characteristic marks. He is devoid of all 
sense-organs. He stands motionless like the steady peak of a 
mountain. He is subtle and eternal in the form of luminary. 

1. $a —Adisesa, Chief of the Nagas, is the reposing bed of Vis^u. 
But he is also represented as supporting the earth at the behest of 
Brahma. According to a myth, Balabhadra Rama, the elder brother of 
Srikr§na was born from a portion of Sesa. 

2. Srivalsa —Once sage Bhrgu went to the abode of Mahavisnu. There 
he saw Mahavisnu in deep slumber. Seeing Mahavisnu whose task is to 
preserve the world, sleeping like the irresponsible person, Bhrgu gave him a 
kick on his breast. Visnu sprang up suddenly, saw Bhrgu standing before 
him. He begged pardon of the sage. He declared that he would carry 
Bhj-gu’s footprint permanently on his chest as a sign of his repcntence for 
having shown disrespect to him. This footprint still remains on Visnu’s 
chest and is known as Srlvatsa. 






260 


Brahma Purana 


Re is devoid of both positive and negative aspects. He per¬ 
vades (everything). He is greater than Prakfti. I bow unto that 
lord of the universe, the lord who bestows happiness”. 

In this manner, Lord Yama eulogised me formerly by the 
side of that holy fig tree by raciting different hymns and made 
obeisance. 

69. O highly blessed lady, on seeing him standing outside 
with palms joined in reverence, I asked the (God of Death) 
about the purpose for which I had been eulogised. 

70. O Vaivasvata of long brawny arms, indeed, you arc the 
most excellent of all Devas. Why did you eulogise me ? Tell me 
all in brief. 

Yama said : 

71. In this meritorious shrine known as Purusottama, there 
is an excellent idol made of sapphire. It bestows all cherished 
desires. 

72. O lotus-eyed lord, by visiting it with emotional fervour 
and faith, even men devoid of desires go to the abode called 
Sveta. 1 

73. Hence, O slayer of enemies I am notable to carry on 
my activities. O great lord, be pleased. O lord, withdraw the 
idol. 

74. On hearing the words of Yama I spoke to him : O 
Yama, I shall conceal it with sands all round. 

75-76. Then, O gentle lady, that idol was concealed by me 
under the heap of Earth and creeping plants, so that men who 
seek for heavenly pleasures could not see it. O gentle lady, 
after covering it up with creeping plants with golden cover¬ 
ings and appendages; I sent Yama to his own city 2 in the 
South. 

Brahmi said : 

77-78. Every event that happened there, O brahmins, in 

1. Suela or Svetadvlpa —Colonel Wilford identifies it with Britain— 
J. Dowson. Hindu Mythology and Religion p. 315. 

2. The city of Yama is named Samyaminl. 



43.79—44.2 


261 


that holy excellent shrine Purusottama, Janardana, the lord of 
Devas, related fully to his splendid consort. 

79-89. The lord mentioned everything immediately to her: viz. 
Indradyumna’s departure to that place, vision and description of 
the holy centre, building of the palace, performance of horse- 
sacrifice, dream, sight of a log of wood on the shore of the briny 
sea; vision of Vasudeva, the king of sculptors, O brahmins, the 
making of the idol with due colours in particular, the installation 
of idols in the palace that was most excellent in the world. O 
leading brahmins, glorification of Kalpa at the time of pilgri¬ 
mage, episode of Markandeya, installation of Sankara, glory of 
five holy centres, vision of the trident-bearing lord, that of the 
holy fig tree, O brahmins, and its prosperous consequence, the 
vision of Baladeva, Krsna, in particular and Subhadra there it¬ 
self. Vision of Narasimha and the glorification of its prosperity, 
vision of infinite Vasudeva, glorification of the merit, greatness 
of Svetamadhava, vision of heavenly portals, vision of wide 
ocean, the holy dip therein, the performance of Tarpana rite, O 
brahmins, the efficacy of holy dip in the ocean by Indradyumna, 
benefit of five holy centres, Mahajyestha, abodes of Krsna and 
Balarama, the benefit of entire pilgrimage, description of the 
world of Visnu and of holy centre once again. 

The great lord mentioned all these to the Goddess. 


CHAPTER FORTYFOUR 
Description of the Holy Centre 

The sages said : 

1. O lord, we wish to hear the rest of the story of the king. 
After going to that excellent holy centre what did the lord of 
men do? 

Brahma said : 

2. Listen, O leading sages, I shall mention briefly the vision 
of the holy centre that the king had and his activities thereafter. 



262 


Brahma Purana 


3 After going to the holy centre well-known to the three 
worlds the king saw the beautiful (surrounding) regions and 

the rivers. . , r 

4 There is a sacred river there which takes its source from 

the foothills of the Vindhya Forest. It is a splendid river that 
dispels sins and it is known as Vindhyapaga. 

5 This river of great current is on par with Ganga. it tails 
into'the southern ocean. That excellent river of meritorious 
waters is known as Mahanadi. 1 

6 She is the beloved wire of the southern ocean. Her beauty 
is enhanced by hundreds of tributaries. There arc villages and 
cities on cither of its banks. 

7. O leading sages, these villages are full of well grown 
plants. They are very charming and thronged by delighted and 
well nourished people. They are finely dressed and bedecked in 
ornaments. 

8. The Brahmins, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras are lound 
there engaged in their duties. They are splendid in their 
traits and very peaceful. 

9-10 Their mouths are filled with betal leaves. They are 
bedecked in garlands and necklaces. The Vedic mantras fill the 
mouths of the brahmins. They have learnt the Vedic Mantras 
along with the six ancillary subjects. They have learnt the Vedic 
mantras by heart in their Padapatha and Krama Patha. Some of 
them are engaged in Agnihotra and some in the holy rites of 
Aupasana. They are experts in the scriptural topics. They per¬ 
form sacrifices distributing wealth by way of Daksinas. 

11-12. In the quadrangles, the royal highways, gardens, 
parks, assemblies, mansions and temples of the deities, the 
following are heard by the common people viz. the mythological 
traditions, Itihasas and Puranas, the Vedic Mantras with their 
ancillaries and the characteristically good discourses on poetry 
and scripture. 

13-19. The ladies who resided in that land were justifiably 
proud of their beauty and blooming youth. They were fully 


1. Mah&nadl —a river celebrated in the Puranas and flowing through 
the region of Utkala (Orissa). 



44 . 20-25 


263 


endowed with all characteristic marks. Their buttocks were 
ample. They were dark-complexioned but their faces resembled 
lotuses or the autumnal moon. They had plump and elevated 
breasts. Being prosperous they were beautiful to look at. They 
wore golden bangles and they were richly adorned by lustrous 
robes. They were as soft to the touch as the interior of the plan¬ 
tain tree. They had the lustre of the pollen dust of lotus flowers. 
They were lovely with the lower lips resembling the Bimba 
fruit and the eyes extending upto their ears. Their faces were 
beautiful and their tresses lovely. They were bent under the 
weight of necklaces. Their eyes resembled the petals of red or 
blue lotus. Other slender-bodied ladies had their teeth sparkling 
like the streaks of lightning. Their forelocks were curly. They 
shone with their hairs partitioned on upper side. Their necks 
were made beautiful due to the various ornaments. They were 
bedecked in garlands and necklaces. With their earings studded 
with jewels and the beautiful Karnapuras (ear-ornaments) they 
were seen resembling the celestial women. They had splendid 
traits. 

20-22. These excellent ladies dallied with highly blessed 
bride-grooms singing divine songs. They sported about with vari¬ 
ous musical instruments such as lutes, flutes, Mrdanga, drums 
and other types of drums like the Panavas, Gomukhas and 
Dundubhis. The conches too produced sweet sounds. Sporting 
about with sweet musical instruments these elegant ladies deli¬ 
ghted one another. Expertly playing in these musical instruments 
and singing sweetly, these excellent ladies were gay and jolly, 
mad and passionate, by day and night. 

23. The whole of that holy centre was frequented by mendi¬ 
cants, iecluses, Siddhas, householders, religious students, those 
who had mastered Mantras, those who had realised self by practis¬ 
ing austerities and those who had become Siddhas by means of 
performing sacrifices. 

24-25. The king, thus saw the rarest of holy centres. He 
thought—Here itself I shall propitiate the eternal lord Visnu, 
the great lord, the preceptor of the universe, the sole redeemer, 
the supreme saviour, the infinite lord of chiefs of all, the unvan¬ 
quished lord. 



264 


Brahma Pur ana 


26-30. This is now known to me as the mental TIrtha 
Purusottama. It is the place where the huge holy fig tree stands 
like the Kalpa tree. The idol having the lustre of sapphire has 
been hidden by the lord himself. There is no other splendid idol 
of Visnu seen anywhere. I shall endeavour to make Visnu the 
lord of the universe of truthful exploit visible to the eye. I 
shall duly observe excellent holy rites by performing sacrifices, 
charitable gifts, austerities, meditations, worships and observ¬ 
ances of fasts. With the mind not resting on any other topic, with 
the mind dwelling on him and not thinking of anyone else, I shall 
begin the preliminary activities for the construction of Visnu’s 
abode. 


CHAPTER FORTYFIVE 
Horse-Sacrifice 


Brahma said : 

1. O excellent brahmins, after thinking like this the king 
made the preliminary arrangements for the propitiation of 
Visnu. 

2-6. He called for experts in astronomical calculations 
and the masters of astrology. He got a spot of land sanctified. 
With great assiduity and joy he consulted the wise 
brahmins who had mastered the Vedas and scriptures, the 
ministers, counsellors and those who were experts in the 
science of architecture. On an auspicious day, at an auspicious 
hour when the combination of the moon and the constellation 
was good and when there was favourable beneficial influence of 
planets the king offered libation with faith and concentrated 
mind. There were shouts of victories. Auspicious sounds were 
raised by charming musical instruments, the chanting sounds 
of the Vedic Mantras and sweet vocal songs. Flowers, fried 


1. Kalpa-vfkfa —a tree in paradise. It gives any object which a 
person desires to get. 



45.7-18 


265 


grains and raw rice grains (were scattered). Sweet scents were 
offered. People accompanied him with sacred lamps and pots 
filled with water. 

7. After duly offering libation, the king Indradyumna 
called the heroic rulers of Kalihga, Utkala and Kosala and said: 

The king said : 

8-9. With great concentration you go together for the 
collection of rocks and slabs. Take with you chiefs of sculptors 
and artisans expert in rocks to the extensive Vindhya Moun¬ 
tains splendid with many caves and caverns. Examine the 
ridges and peaks and get the splendid rocks chopped off. Let 
them be brought here on carts. Do not delay”. 

10. After commanding them to proceed, Indradyumna 
spoke to the ministers and priests. 

The king said : 

11-12. Let messengers go in haste, to each and every 
corner of the earth where there are kings and let them proclaim 
my order, cc At the behest of Indradyumna may the kings start 
together with their priests, ministers and four divisions of the 
army, viz. elephants, horses, chariots and foot-soldiers. 

Brahma said : 

13. Thus the messengers who were commanded by the 
noble king went to different kings and proclaimed the words of 
that monarch to them. 

14. On hearing the words of messengers the kings came 
there in a hurry accompanied by their armies. 

15-17. Those who had been ‘staying in the eastern, 
southern, western and northern quarters, those who lived at the 
outskirts and border lands, the residents of the adjacent terri¬ 
tories, the dwellers of the mountain regions and the inhabitants 
of all islands came there. O brahmins, on hearing the command 
of Indradyumna, they came with their chariots, elephants, in¬ 
fantry and cavalry in elaborate and extensive array. 

18. On observing that the various kings had arrived with 
their ministers and priests, the delighted king announced the 
weighty task on hand. 





266 


Brahma Parana 


The king said : 

19-21. Listen, O leading kings, to what I am going to say. 
My mind is worried as to how I shall be able to perform the 
great Horse Sacrifice in this auspicious and excellent holy centie 
that yields worldly pleasures and salvation and to build a 
palace pertaining to Visnu. O excellent kings, if you all assist 
me I shall carry out these things with collaboration and co¬ 
operation of all of you. 

Brahma said : 

22-33. When the intelligent king of kings announced this, 
they were delighted. At his behest they offered the requisite 
things in cash and kind. /They showered coins and jewels, gold 
pieces and pearls. They presented blankets, deerskins, auspici¬ 
ous antelope skin coverings, diamonds, lapis lazulis, rubies, 
emeralds and saphires. They supplied elephants, horses and the 
chariots. Innumerable materials of worship and articles of 
utility high and low, were supplied by them in plenty. Hundreds 
of jars and vessels were filled with rice grains, barleys, pulses of 
various kinds, gingely seeds, mustard seeds, Bengal grams, 
wheat, Masoor dais, rice of various kinds such as Syamaka, 
Nlvara, Madhuka and horse gram. Other grains and food¬ 
stuffs grown in villages or forests and heaps of rice were 
supplied by them. Hundreds and thousands of jars were filled 
with ghee and various foodstuffs and unguents and whatever 
was needed for the holy rites. On seeing that every thing 
necessary for the sacrifice had been gathered, the brahmins 
conversant with the rules of holy rites assembled. On seeing 
the brahmins who had mastered the Vedas and Vedangas and 
who were experts in the scriptural texts and the performance of 
holy rites, the sages, great sages, celestial sages and ascetics, 
religious students, householders, forest dwellers and recluses, the 
newly initiated brahmins and others" strictly adhering to the 
performance of Agnihotras, preceptors, venerable teachers and 
others who regularly recited the Vedic passages and performed 
penance, and many other holy personages who were present as 
members of the assembly watching the proceedings—on seeing 
all these the glorious king spoke to his preceptor. 


45.34-45 


267 


The king said : 

34. Let learned brahmins who have mastered the Vedas go 
about and find out a place worthy of being used for success¬ 
fully concluding the horse-sacrifice. 

Brahma said : 

35-37. Thus ordered, the royal priest carried out the 
behest of the king. He gladly accompanied the ministers, 
architects and carpenters. Keeping the brahmins who were 
experts in the holy rites of sacrifice in front, the intelligent 
brahmin (the priest) converted the Fishermen’s village into 
sacrificial chamber with lofty pinnacles and bylanes. 

38. (All round the sacrificial chamber) hundreds of 
palaces were built. They were beautiful and they resembled the 
abode of Indra. They were bedecked in gold and jewels. 
Excellent gems enhanced their beauty. 

38-40. The columns were wonderfully built of gold. Thci e 
were many big ornamental gateways in and near the surround¬ 
ings of the shrine of sacrifice. Solid and pure gold was used for 
them. The righteous king erected harems for the kings who 

had come from different lands. 

41. He got constructed many comfortable houses and 
residences for the Brahmins and VaiSyas who had come there 
from different lands. 

42 Due to heir love and affection^ for that king (Indra- 
dyumna), the excellent kings and their womenfolk assembled 
there during the festivities, bringing with them precious stones 

and jewels (as presents). „ 

43. As those noble persons enjoyed themselves in their 

respective camps; their sound reached heaven like that of the 

rumbling sea. 

44 O excellent sages, the king gave specific orders that 
food, beverages and items of bedding should be duly supplied 
to the visitors. 

45. Delicious foodstuffs of various kinds prepared with 
rice, sugarcane, barley milk and milk products were served to 
guests. The excellent king himself approached them and 
ordered for the immediate supply of things they wanted. 







268 


Brahma Parana 


46-49. There were many expounders of Brahman in that 
sacrifice. Noble and excellent brahmins came there accompa¬ 
nied by their disciples. The king greeted them all lovingly. He 
followed them to their camps. Eschewing all arrogance, the 
king of great splendour (did everything to their honour). The 
artisans and sculptors finished their work in regard to the holy 
altar of sacrifice and informed the king. On hearing that every¬ 
thing was complete the alertful unerring king experienced a 
joyful horripilation alongwith his ministers. 


Brahma said : 


50-57. When the sacrifice began to function eloquent 
expounders of syllogisms discussed the causes and arguments, 
desirous of defeating one another. 


O brahmins, everything was arranged for the guests by the 
lion among kings in a manner befitting even the lord of Devas. 
The ornamental gateways were made of gold. The various 
items of bedstead and seats were studded with jewels. There 
were chambers of crystal and pots and dishes of peculiar shape 
and workmanship. The king did not find any of these pots not 
made of gold. But the sacrificial pots were made of wood be¬ 
cause it had been prescribed in the scriptures. Of course they 
were embellished with gold. O brahmins, the animals of the 
land and water were duly offered at the proper time. The 
kings saw the animals of excessive splendour present there. He 
saw cows, buffaloes and old ladies too. There were aquatic 
animals, birds and beasts of prey. There were oviparous, vivi¬ 
parous, sweat-born and vegetation. They also saw the moun¬ 
tainous people and the subsidiary grains. Thus every body was 
gay and jolly, due to the presence of milk animals and food- 


grams. 

58-65. On seeing the sacrificial chamber the visiting kings 
were struck with wonder. Much of sweet and cooked rice was 
distributed among the brahmins and the vaisyas. While a full 
hundred thousand brahmins were taking food there, the 
Dundubhi (drum) produced loud sound frequently like the 
rumbling sounds of the cloud. At the close of every day it was 
sounded many times. Thus the royal horse sacrifice increased 
and flourished. O brahmins, the surplus quantities of the 


45 . 66-74 


269 


cooked rice were scattered about. There were canals of curds 
and eddies of milk. The entire population of Jambudvlpa was 
present there along with the people of other islands. Brahmins 
were seen in large numbers in that great sacrifice. O excellent 
brahmins, thousands of men wearing car-rings of finished gold 
took the vessels with them and served the brahmins, and 
announced what they were serving. Other men who followed 
served beverages. The people gave the brahmins those of 
cooked food usually enjoyed by the monarch. 

(56-67. The king honoured the brahmins who were conver¬ 
sant with the Vedas and the kings, lords of the earth, who had 
come there as visitors. He distributed wealth by way of gifts. 
He welcomed kings who were great fighters in battles and who 
had come there from different quarters. He welcomed the 
actors, dancers and others who were experts in music and 
dance. 

68-74. 'The king had a thousand one hundred charming 
wives who had plump and elevated breasts. Their eyes 
resembled the petals of blue lotus. Their faces resembled the 
autumnal moon. They were of noble birth and endowed with 
qualities. The beauty of the sacrificial chamber was enhanced 
by his excellent wives who wore garlands studded with 
jewels. They had necklaces of precious stones that spread the 
divine lustre of the moon. The chamber was beautified by 
flagstaff's and banners. The elephants were drenched in ichor 
and were pleasing to look at. They were huge, like mountains'. 
Hundreds andcrorcs of tuskers bedecked in ornaments beauti¬ 
fied the sacrificial hall. The crorcs of excellent horses beautified 
the holy place. They had the velocity of the’wind. They were 
of excellent breed hailing from the Sindhu region. They were 
white in colour with dark coloured ears. .There were innumer¬ 
able foot soldiers. They were ready to face all eventualities 
with different weapons lifted up. They were comparable to the 
sons of Devas. The king surveyed the entire sacrificial chamber 
(and the surroundings). He derived joy. The delighted king 
spoke thus. 




270 


Brahma Pur&na 


The king said : 

75-77. O Princes of good restraint, bring you, the excellent 
horse marked with auspicious traits. Take it all over the Earth. 
May the sacrifice be performed here by the learned conversant 
with holy rites and piety. May there be brought elephants 
sixty years old, black antelope, birds, bulls and cows along with 
the persons who tend them. 

78-82. After bringing various objects along with gold 
plattus the king gave them to the brahmins in accordance with 
the injunctions and in great faith. The lord duly presented the 
kings residing in different lands with cash, elephants, horses, 
good garments and lands. He propitiated the brahmins with 
different sorts of jewels along with foodstuffs and edibles. He 
delighted the poor and the helpless persons by giving them 
various things they desired. The excellent king attaining gifts 
of their choice returned to their respective native lands. 

He delighted his own family including house servants both 
male and female by giving them whatever they desired. Thus, 
the king felt contented due to the successful performance of 
horse-sacrifice. He felt he was blessed. 

Extra verses Between verses 77 and 78 

[May the sacrifices function and may the place pertaining 
to Visnu (be started). Whatever the Brahmins desire in their 
mind may be given to them, even if the objects be women, jewels, 
villages and cities. Let the fertile lands or fields be given to the 
suppliants. So also other beautiful things be given to those who 
ask for them. The words “not available”, should never be 
uttered. Let this sacrifice function as long as the ancient lord 
becomes visible to me, very near the venue of sacrifice. 

O brahmins, after saying thus, Indradyumna the most 
powerful of long arms made gifts of the following articles :— 
Masses of gold, crores of ornaments, a hundred thousand ele¬ 
phants, hundred thousands of horses, a hundred million bulls, 
cows with their horns wrapped in gold, beautiful milch cows 

along with the vessels for milking made of bellmetal. He gifted. 

these articles to the brahmins who understood the Vedas. He 
was glad to do this. 


Extra verse* to Ch. 43 


271 


In that great sacrilicc he gave valuable clothes, deer skin- 
coverings white in colour and pure in quality, and excellent 
corals and jewels. He gave away different sorts of jewels such as 
diamond, lapis lazuli, ruby, pearl, etc. He presented the brahmins 
with five hundred pure virgins bedecked in ornaments and eyes 
resembling lotuses. Many beautiful mature women were given 
as ladies of love to the brahmins and others who sought them. 
Those ladies had heavy breasts. They had covered their breasts 
by their bodice. They were so slcndcr-waisted that they appear¬ 
ed as though they did not have the waist at all. They had good 
buttocks. Their eyes were as large as the petals of lotus; by 
bending their necks they exhibited their emotional fervour and 
amorous gestures. Many of them were bedecked in bangles. They 
wore anklets on their feet. They were clad in silk garments. O 
excellent brahmins, they were gifted to everyone of the suppli¬ 
ants among the brahmins at the horse-sacrifice. The dishes 
prepared were full and delicious with different ingredients 
appropriately added. There were many delicacies prepared from 
candid sugar, savouries prepared after frying them in oil, baked 
breads made of flour, other items of edibles prepared neatly, 
confectionery items fried in ghee, sweets and salted dishes, sweet 
pies and well cooked rice. In order to please everybody the 
cooked food was served again and again. There was no end to 
the wealth already gifted or going to be gifted. 

On seeing this great sacrifice Devas, Daityas, Caranas, 
Gandharvas, Apsaras, Siddhas, Sages, and Prajapatis were 
struck with great wonder. The excellent sacrifice was very splen¬ 
did. The priests, ministers and king Indradyumna were all 
delighted. There was no dirty person there. There was no 
one wretched or hungry person left. There was no calamity or 
casuality; there was neither mental agony nor physical ailments. 
There was no premature death. There was no death due to 
poisonous bites; there was no evil influence of adverse planets. 
The people were well nourished and jolly during the great 
festival of that king. The sages richly endowed with austerities 
and power of penance who had been staying there for a long 
time said that there had never been such a sacrifice before with 
the lavish display of wealth and food-grains. 






272 Brahma Purana 

Thus, O .excellent brahmins, the king concluded the ex¬ 
cellent sacrifice called Asvamedha]. 


CHAPTER FORTYSIX 
Extra verses at the beginning of Chapter 
[The sages said : 

O lord of the chiefs of Devas, tell us what we ask re¬ 
garding the ancient incidents. How were the idols made 
formerly by Indradyumna ? In what manner was Visnu pleased 
with him ? Please mention all these incidents to us. We are very 
eager to hear. 

Brahma said : 

O leading sages, listen, to the Purana that is on a par with 
the. Vedas. I shall recount the past events and the origins of 
the idols. 

When the great sacrifice duly functioned, when the palace 
was also built, he was worried over the idols day and night. 

I do not know, by what means I can see the supreme 
lord, the lord of Devas, the lord of all, the sanctifier of the 
world, the cause of creation, sustenance and annihilation”. 

The king was extremely worried. He never slept either at 
night or by day. He did not enjoy any pleasures. He did not 
relish bath and toilet. He did not like make-up. 

His pleasure did not grow due to musical instruments, 
scents, songs, colour, elephants in their rut, horses, lapis lazuli, 
sapphire, ruby, gold, silver, diamonds and crystals. He did not 
feel pleasure in anything that money could buy or mind could 
desire. He did not feel glad due to the animals of the forest or 
by moving about in the firmament. 

Rock, clay and wood are the three substances used for 
making the idols of Visrm. Of these three, which is the most 
preferable ? How can an idol marked by all traits could be made ? 


Interpolatory verses 


273 


Ii the idol is made ol one of these three and is installed it shall 
be liked by the lord. It will be worshipped by devas”. Thus the 
king became worried and he thought thus. 

After worshipping the lord in accordance with the injunc¬ 
tions laid down in the Scriptural text Pancaratra , 1 the king 
began to eulogise. 

O Vasudeva, obeisance be to you. O cause of liberation, 
obeisance to you. O lord of the world, protect me from the ocean 
of worldly existence of birth and death. 

O lord, resembling the firmament, devoid of impurities, 
obeisance to you. O Sankarsana, obeisance to you. O holder of 
the earth, protect me. 

Obeisance to you, the deity having the lustre of gold- 
wombed Brahma, obeisance to you, O shark-emblemed one. 
Obeisance to you. O lover of Rati, O enveloper and annihilator, 
protect me. 

Obeisance to you, O deity resembling collyrium. Obeis¬ 
ance to you, O deity favourably disposed towards your devotees. 
O Aniruddha, obeisance to you. Protect me. Be the bestower 
of boons. 

O abode of the learned, obeisance to you; obeisance to you 
O deity fond of the learned. Obeisance to you O Narayana. 
Protect me who have sought refuge in you. 

Obeisance to you, O most excellent one among the strong. 
Obeisance to you, O ploughshare-armed deity. O great grand¬ 
father, the four-faced lord, the abode of the universe, protect 
me. 

Obeisance to you, the deity having the lustre of blue clouds. 
Obeisance to you, the deity worshipped by Devas.] 


1. Paflcar&tra —a system of spiritual doctrines, by following which one 
attains, the position of Uparicara. 






274 


Brahma Purana 


The Prayer for Welfare 

Brahma said : 

1-2. Thus the king concluded the great Horse sacrifice in 
accordance with the injunctions laid down in the Vedas. 

He was afraid of the ocean of worldly existence. Foi the 
purity of his mind and for attaining the highest region of Visnu, 
he sat in an isolated place and eulogised the lord, the bestower 
of bliss on the universe. 

The king said : 

3-4. O support of the universe, O lord of the universe who 
enable us to fulfil our desires. O lover of Laksmi, O ocean of 
mercy, favourably disposed to your devotees, and fond of the 
good, O Visnu, O great lord, save me who have been immersed 
in the ocean of worldly existence. O deity resembling the fire 
of dissolution. Obeisance to you the annihilator of the sons of 
Diti, O Narasimha of great vigour and bright eyes, save me. 

5. O great Boar 1 just as the earth had been formerly 
lifted up by you by your curved fangs, from the nether worlds so 
also save me from the ocean of misery. 

6. O lord Krsna, these idols of yours, the bestowers of boons, 
have been eulogised by me. You, Baladeva and others, are 
stationed in separate forms. 

7-9. O lord, O lord of Devas, Garuda and others are the 
parts of your body. O lord, the guardians of quarters 2 with their 

1. This refers to the Boar incarnation of VisijLU. The boar entered 
the sea and found out the earth that had sunk. The boar lifted the earth 
at his tusks, came out of the ocean and set the earth firm over the water. On 
the way, the fierce and wicked Hiranyaksa hindered him. The Boar killed 
Hira^yaksa and disappeared. 

2. Guardians of quarters —lokapalas. They are sometimes regarded as 
the guardian deities of different orders of beings, but more commonly of 
the four cardinal and four intermediate points of the world. They are 
1 Indra, of East; 2 Agni of South-east; 3 Yama of South; 4 Surya of South¬ 
west; 5 Varuna of West; 6 Vayu of North-west; 7 Kubera of North; 
8 liana of North-east. Others substitute Nirfti for Surya and Iiani or 
Pfthivi for liana. According to Dharraa-saiigraha, the Buddhists enumerate 
14 lokapalas. 



46.10-18 


275 


weapons and Kesava and others arc the parts of your body. O 
lord of the Universe, O lord of all worlds, of large and delighted 
eyes, your different forms mentioned by the learned have been 
worshipped and eulogised by me. O lord, you who have been 
bowed by me are the bestower of virtue, love and wealth. Grant 
boons and confer your blessings upon me, O lord. 

10. Hara, Sankarsana and others who have been glorified 
as your variant forms, have been evolved for your worship. They 
are dependent on you, they resort to you for support. 

11. O lord of Devas, in fact, you have no other form separate 
from you. The various forms of yours are only for your worship 
by the devotees. 

12. O lord, how can man mention you as twofold, you 
who are one and only one. You are all-pervading Consciousness 
by nature and you are unsullied. 

13-14. Your supreme form is devoid of positive and negative 
aspects. It is unsmeared. It is devoid of impurities. It is subtle, 
steady, unmoving and firm. It is rid of all sins. It is stationed 
as mere existence. O lord, even Devas do not know that. How 
can I know it ? 

15-16. The learned worship that other form of yours which 
is clad in yellow robes, has four arms, holds conch, discus and 
iron club in hands, wears a crown, shoulder-lets etc, has the 
scar Srlvatsa in the chest and is adorned by garlands of sylvan 
flowers. Others also who resort to you for support worship that 
form. 

17. O lord of Devas, most excellent one among Devas, O 
bestower of freedom from fear on devotees, O deity with eyes 
like the petals of lotus, save me. I am immersed in the ocean of 
sexual objects. 

18. Excepting you, O lord of worlds, O husband of Lak§ml, 
I do not see any one in whom I can seek refuge. O slayer of 
Madhu, 1 be pleased. 


1. O slayer of Madhu. Madhu and Kaifabha sprang from the ears of 
Visnu. They were about to kill Brahma who was lying on the lotus sprin¬ 
ging from Visnu’s navel. Visnu killed them and obtained the names : 
Kaitabhari and Madhusudana. 






276 


Brahma Purana 


19-22. I have hundreds of ailments due to old age. I am 
afflicted by miseries. I am deluded. I experience pleasure and 
pain, happiness and sorrow. I have been bound and fettered by 
nooses of activities. I have fallen into the very terrible and 
awful ocean of worldly existence. Having sensual objects for its 
waters it is very difficult to cross. Passionate attachment and 
invidious hatred make it agitated like the fishes. It is majestic 
with the sense-organs acting as whirlpools. Greed and sorrow 
constitute its turbid waves. There is no one to cling to or to 
resort to as support. The ocean of worldly existence is very fickle 
but without any essential significance. O lord, deluded by 
Maya I am wandering in it for a pretty long time. I am born 
again and again into thousands of species of living beings. 

23. O lord, I have passed through births, thousands and 
ten thousands of them of diverse kinds, in this world. 

24-25. The Vedas have been studied by me together with 
their ancillaries. Different scriptural texts, Itihasas and Puranas 
and many fine arts have been learnt and understood by me. 
Satisfaction and dissatisfaction, hoarding and dwindling, income 
and expense, victory and defeat, prosperity and adversity, rise 
and fall have been experienced by me. 

26. Separations from and union with wives, enemies, friends 
and kinsmen have been faced by me. Many and many kinds of 
fathers have been seen by me. 

27. Many miseries have been experienced by me. Many 
miseries have been misunderstood and enjoyed as pleasures by 
me. I have had cousins and kinsmen, sons and brothers, in 
plenty. 

28. I have lived within the belly of women that abounds 
in urine and floating masses of faeces. O lord, great misery has 
been experienced by me while staying in womb. 

29. O lord, all those miseries that are usual in childhood, 
youth and old age have been suffered by me. 

30. The miseries at death, in the path and the abode of 
Yama as also the tortures in hell have been experienced by me. 

31-33. Again and again, I have been born amongst worms, 
insects, trees, elephants, horses, deer, birds, buffaloes, camels, 
cows and monkeys, among the twice-born people and Sudras, 
in the wombs of rich Ksatriyas and impoverished ascetics, of 


46.34-45 


277 


kings and their servants and other embodied souls. O lord, I 
have taken birth in their houses again and again. 

34. O lord, many times I have been the slave of glorious 
prosperous men. From the impoverished state I had attained 
the state of a lord and master. 

35. Many were killed by me. I have been killed by many. 
I have caused death to many and my death has been caused by 
many. Much had been given to me by others and many times 
gifts have been distributed by me. 

3G. For and on behalf of my parents, friends, brothers and 
wives, among rich and learned brahmins well-versed in the vedas 
and poor ascetics. 

37-42. Setting shame and bashfulness aside, O lord, many 
piteous words have been uttered by me. O lord, I do not see 
that abode amongst mobile and immobile beings of divine, 
animal or human origin, where I have not been. 

O lord of the universe, sometimes I had my stay in hell. 
Sometimes' I stayed in heaven. Sometimes my stay was confined 
to the limits of human world and sometimes in the sacred waters 
of holy centres. Just as the bucket in the contrivance to raise 
water, goes up or down or stays in the middle, bound always 
with the rope, so also, O excellent Deva, I have been fettered 
by the rope of Karman. I whirl up and down and in the middle 
due to the influence of Karman. Thus, in the wheel 1 of worldly 
existence, which is very awful and which causes hairs to stand, 
I have been revolving for a pretty long time. I do not know 
what I do. All my sense organs are in utter confusion. 

43. A fugitive (terrified of life) attacked by grief and greed 
I have become senseless. Now, O lord, utterly helpless and 
confused, I seek refuge in you. 

44. O lord, save me who have become miserable and 
immersed in the ocean of worldly existence. O lord of the uni¬ 
verse, if you consider me your devotee have pity on me. 

45. Excepting you I have no other kinsmen who may have 
some consideration for me. O lord, after resorting to you, my 
lord, I cease to have any fear from any quarter or direction. 


1. The idea often occurs in Sanskrit poetry. 

xr ^rr i 







278 


Brahma Purarta 


46-49. O lord, I have no fear at all in regard to life or 
death or acquisition and preservation of good things. 

O lord, those base persons who do not worship you duly 
cannot have redemption from the fetters of worldly existence. 

If they have no devotion to Visnu the creator of the uni¬ 
verse, of what avail is their mobility of birth, good conduct, 
learning, or even life itself? 

Those who are deluded and are under the influence of 
Tamasika nature censure yoq. They fall into hell. They arc 
born again and again. They have no redemption from the ocean 
of hell. 

50-55. Those men of evil nature, O lord, who slender you, 
are the basest of men. 

O Visnu, wherever I am born as a result of my activities, 
may my devotion unto you be always steady. It is by propitiat¬ 
ing you that Devas, Daityas and other persons of self restraint 
have attained the greatest realization. Who will not worship 
you, O Lord ? 

O Lord, even Brahma and other Devas arc not competent 
to eulogise you adequately. How can I then, with the limited 
human intellect eulogise you who are beyond and greater than 
nature. 

O lord, due to my ignorance you have been eulogised in a 
haphazard manner by me. If you have mercy on me forgive my 
fault. 

O lord, good men have forbearance in regard even to one 
who has committed a crime. Hence, O lord of Devas, be pleased 
to retain affection for your devotees. O lord, you have been 
eulogised by me with the mind full of devotion. Vasudeva, may 
all that be true. Obeisance to you, O lord. 

Brahma said : 

56. O excellent sages, the Garuda-cmblemed deity who was 
eulogised thus by him became pleased with him and granted him 
the boon of his choice. 

57. He who worships the lord of the universe every day 
and eulogises him by this hymn, shall become intelligent. He 
shall certainly obtain liberation. 


46.58-67 


279 


58. The pure man who repeats this excellent hymn during 
the three Sandhyas every day shall attain virtue, wealth, love 
and liberation. He shall surely become a scholar. 

59. He who reads, listens to and narrates this with great 
concentration shall shake off his sins and obtain the divine 
world. 

60. This hymn is conducive to wealth. It dispels sins. It is 
auspicious. It bestows worldly pleasures and salvation. It is a 
rare esoteric secret. It is sacred. It should not be imparted to 
any one and everyone. 

61. It should not be imparted to an atheist, a fool, an un¬ 
grateful person, an arrogant or to one of wicked intellect. It 
should never be handed over to a knave. 

62. It should be imparted to one endowed with devotion, 
good qualities and good conduct, to a devotee of Visnu, to a 
calm person habituated to perform his duty with faith. 

63. This hymn Karunyastava (a hymn of mercy) causes 
destruction of sins. It bestows happiness and salvation, and 
grants desires. This hymn of the lord mentioned by me is the 
most excellent of all. 

64. Those pure men who meditate continuously on the slayer 
of Mura, 1 the subtle deity, the ancient Purusa attain liberation 
and enter Visnu as do the butter-offering consigned to the fire 
of sacrifice by. reciting the Mantras. 

65. Visnu is the only lord who dispels sorrows of worldly 
existence. He is greater than the greatest being. There is no one 
greater than that lord. He is the creator, protector and annihi- 
lator. He is the essence of ail material objects. 

66. Of what avail is their learning ? Of what avail are the 
good qualities they possess ? Of what avail are their sacrifices, 
charitable gifts and severe penance ? All these are useless if they 
do not have devotion to lord Krsna who is the preceptor of the 
universe and who is the bestower of happiness and salvation. 

67. He who has devotion to the deity known as the best of 
all Purusas is the most blessed in the world. He is*pure. He is a 


1. The slayer of Mura: Lord Krsga slew the two powerful asuras : 
Mura and Naraka when he attacked Pragjyoti?a, the capital city of 
Naraka, 








280 Brahma Purdna 

great scholar, the most excellent by virtue of sacrifices, austeri¬ 
ties and noble traits. He is the wise knower, liberal donor and 
speaker of truth. 


CHAPTER FORTYSEVEN 
The Origin of Idols 

Brahma said : 

1-2. O leading sages, after eulogising and bowing thus to the 
eternal lord of the universe, Vasudeva thebestower of >all desired 
benefits, the worried king spread Kus'a grass on the ground and 
a single cloth over Kusa grass. Keeping his mind concentrated 
on him he restrained his sense-organs and went to sleep. 

3. At the time of going to bed his thought was—“How does 
Vasudeva, the lord of Devas become visible ? How is that lord 
going to dispel my agony ? 

4. Vasudeva, the preceptor of the universe revealed himself 
to the sleeping king as one who held conch, discus and iron 
club. 

5-8. He saw the lord of Devas, the preceptor of the universe, 
in the course of a dream. The lord was holding conch and discus. 
His fierce hands held iron club and discus. He had the bow 
Sarnga, arrow and sword. There was a halo of shining refulgence. 
He had the colour and lustre of the sun at the end of Yugas. 
He resembled the blue lapis lazuli. He was seated on the shoul¬ 
ders of Gannia. The splendid deity had eight arms. O self- 
possessed sages, the lord spoke to the king :—“Well done, O 
king, of great intellect”. 

O king, I am satisfied on account of this great sacrifice 
and your devotion and faith Why do you bewail in vain ? 

9. O king, the idol here is eternal and worthy of being 
worshipped. I shall tell you the means whereby you will obtain 
that idol. 7 7 

. 1(M2 ;. When this ni ght dawns, at the rise of the sun devoid 
o impurities, (you shall go) to the place where the sea water 


47.13-24 


281 


come:; to an end. It is adorned by different trees. O king, even 
within the shore line much water is seen. It is the water that 
has rushed m there in a flood from the waves of the briny sea. 
There is a great tree on the shore standing both on land and in 

the water. Though the billows strike at it, the tree does not 
shake. 

13. O king, go there alone in a sportful mood. Take an axe 

with you and wade through the waves. You will reach the 
tree. 


• , 14 "i 5 ' ° u reacllin s the holy % tree chop it off unhesitat- 

in S 7- hop, pear and chisel that tree of wonderful appearance. 
O king, evolve my divine idol after full consideration. Leave off 
worries that delude you. 


Brahma said : 


16. After saying this, Lord Visnu, the highly blessed deity, 
vanished from sight. On account of this vision in his dream the 
king was extremely surprised. 

17. The king spent that night eagerly expecting (what had 
been foretold). His mind dwelt on it alone. He repeated the 
Mantras and hymns pertaining to Visnu. 

18-19. When the night dawned into day the king got up. 
He took a holy dip in the ocean in accordance with the injunc¬ 
tions. He gave charitable gifts to the brahmins, offering villages 
and cities. After performing the rout ine rites of the forenoon, 
the king went ahead. 

20. Neither a chariot nor a charioteer, neither an elephant 
nor a foot-soldier accompanied him. The highly intelligent king 
entered the great shore alone. 

21-22. There he saw the huge tree, the refulgent tall tree. 
It was very terrible, fierce, holy and extensive. Its height was 
great and the size very large. It stood well protected near the 
seashore. It had the colour and lustre of dense red madder. The 
tree had neither a name nor a species. 

23. O brahmins, on seeing that tree the king was joyous. 
He chopped it off with his sharp and steady axe. 

24. He was desirous of splitting it unto two. When the log 
was being examined a wonderful event was seen. 



282 Brahma Purdna 

25-28. Visvakarma 1 and Visnu assumed the forms of two 
brahmins and came there. Both these brahmins were equally 
highly blessed. They shone with their refulgence. They had 
divine garlands and unguents. They approached king Indra- 
dyumna and said : “O great king what is it that you are going 
to do here ? O king of powerful arms, why was this tree chopp¬ 
ed off? O king of powerful arms, this tree had been standing 
isolated on the shore of the great sea (away) from the desolate 
thiclc forest. Why has it been cut down ? 

Brahma said : 

29-30. O brahmins, on hearing their words the king became 
glad. On seeing them arrive there like the moon and the sun 
endowed with forms the king bowed to these lords of Universe, 
He spoke to them sweet and soft words as he stood with his head 
lowered in reverence. 

The king said : 

31. It is my desire to propitiate the lord of Devas, the lord 
of the worlds devoid of beginning and devoid of end. For that 
I shall make the idol. 

32. In the course of a dream I have been directed by the 
lord of Devas the noblest and the greatest Soul. It has thus 
been narrated to you two. 

33. On hearing the words of the king who was on par with 
lord Indra, the lord Visnu, the lord of the Universe laughed 
with satisfaction and spoke thus. 

Visnu said : 

34-38. Well done, well done, O highly blessed one. Your 
inclination is excellent. The ocean of worldly existence is terri¬ 
ble. It is as restless as the leaves of the plantain tree. It is 
insignificant and more or less full of misery. Enjoyment of plea¬ 
sures. is like the crocodile. It makes it excited. The sense-organs 
act like foams and whirlpool. - It is very difficult to cross. It 
causes hairs to stand on end. Hundreds of different ailments 


1. Viivakarmd , the architect of gods. 



47.39-47 


283 


act like eddies. The ocean of worldly existence is like a water 
bubble. Since in such an atmosphere your mind is inclined to 
propitiate Visnu, you are really blessed. O leading king, you are 
adorned by all good qualities. The entire Earth with all subjects, 
mountains, parks and forests, towns and villages, and adorned 
by the four castes, is blessed, since you, O leading king, are the 
lord and protector of subjects. 

39. Come on, O highly blessed one, this tree is comfortably 
cool. Sit here alongwith us both. We shall discuss pious topics. 

40. This is my associate who has come here to help me. 
He is the most excellent among the artisans. He is equal to 
Visvakarma himself. He is an expert in all activities. He will 
make the idol thought of by you. Leave the shore now. 

41-47. On hearing these words of the brahmin, the most 
excellent king left the shore and stood in the cool shade of the 
tree. Then the soul of the universe, the deity who had assumed 
the form of a brahmin, O leading brahmins, gave this order 
to the chief of Artisans—“Make the idol. The first one shall be 
in the form of Krsna. It should be extremely calm. The eyes 
should be as large as the petals of the lotus. He should have the 
scar Srivatsa and Kaustubha 1 jewel. He should hold conch, 
discus Sudarsana 2 and iron club. 

The second idol should have the colour and lustre of the 
moon and cow’s milk. It should be marked by the Svastika sign. 
He should hold the plougshare as his weapon. He is the lord of 
great strength named Ananta. 3 His end has never been seen and 
understood by Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Yaksas, Vidya- 
dharas and serpents. Hence he is known as Ananta. 

1. Kaustubha: —a celebrated jewel, obtained with thirteen precious 
things at the churning of milky ocean and suspended on the breast of Krsna. 

2. Sudariana : —The discus of lord Krsna which he received from 
the fire-god to fight with Indra when the latter showered rain to protect the 
forest Khan<Java from burning. According to another version, Visvakarma, 
the divine architect put the sun in a turning machine, turned him and 
decreased his radiance. Out of the dust of the sun, produced by this pro¬ 
cess, Visvakarma made the discus-weapon, the aerial chariot, Puspaka, the 
Trident of Siva and the Sakti (lance) of Subrahmapya. Of these weapons, 
the discus Sudarsana was given to Mahavisnu. 

3. Ananta , the Naga chief Sesa. Balarama, the eldest brother of 
Srikisna is said to be part incarnation (am$avatara)of Sesa. 






284 


Brahma Purana 


The third idol should be of Subhadra 1 the sister of Vasu- 
dcva. It shall be splendid and gold-coloured. It should be 
marked with all characteristics. 

Brahma said : 

48. On hearing his words, Visvakarma did all efficiently, 
instantaneously. He made the idols of auspicious traits. 

49. The car-rings were of wonderful design and shone in 
the ears. The hands were kept on the discus and ploughshare, 
Krsna holding the discus and Balarama the ploughshare. The 
idols were approved of by the pious people. 

50-51. The first idol had white lustre and colour. It was as 
refulgent as the autumnal moon. The eyes were reddish. The 
body was huge and the head looked savagely fierce due to the 
hoods. It was the fierce Balarama who was clad in blue robes, 
He was haughty and intoxicated due to his inordinate strength. 
He wore a single ear-ring. He had a divine form. He held the 
iron club and the threshing rod. 

52-53. The second idol was Visnu’s. His eyes resembled the 
lotus; his body the blue cloud. He shone like the Atasi flower. 
His eyes were as large as the petals of the lotus. He had yellow 
garments. He was very fierce and auspicious. He was marked 
by the characteristic sign ofSrlvatsa. The discus filled one of his 
hands. He had a divine form that dispelled sins. 

54-55. The third idol made by Visvakarma was that of 
Subhadra. She had the colour and lustre of gold. Her eyes were 
large like the petals of a lotus. She was clad in robes of various 
and wonderful colours. She was bedecked in necklaces and 
shoulderlets. She was adorned by wonderful ornaments. Gem- 
studded necklaces dangled round her neck. Visvakarma made 
her very beautiful with plump and elevated breasts. 

56-57. On seeing this wonderful deed of making the idols 
m a trice, on seeing that the beautiful idols richly endowed with 
all characteristic signs, clad in a pair of divine clothes and 
adorned by different jewels were made quickly, the king was 
excessively surprised and he spoke thus. 


1. Subhadra —sister of Srikrsna was married 
her son. She is deified. 


to Arjuna. 


Abhimanyu was 



47.58—48.6 


285 


Indradyumna said : 

58-60. Are you twoDcvas who have come here in theguise 
of brahmins. Both of you have wonderful activities. You are 
of divine conduct, not human. 

\ f t you , a f not Devas or human beings, are you Yaksas or 
Vidyadharas ? Arc you Brahma and Hrslkesa? Are you Vasus 
or Asvins ? I do not know whether you are really present here 
or merely stationed in Maya form (whatever it may be). I seek 
refuge in you two. May your real self be revealed tome. 


CHAPTER FORTYEIGHT 
Description of Purusottama 

£ri Bhagavan said : 

1-2. I am neither a Deva nor Yaksa neither aDaityanor 
the king of Devas. I am neither Brahma nor Rudra. Understand 
me to be ParameSvara (The Supreme Lord). I dispel the agony 
of all worlds. My strength and manliness are in perfect state. I 
have no end. I am to be propitiated by all living beings. 

3. The deity whom the Yogins call Vasudeva can be com¬ 
prehended only through perfect knowledge. It is mentioned in 
all scriptures. The lord is mentioned (as Brahma) in Vedanta 
texts. 

4. I am Brahma, Visnu and Siva. I am Indra, the king of 
Devas. I am Yama who restrains the universe. 

5. I am the earth and other elements. I am the three¬ 
fold sacrificial fire. 1 O king, I am also the firegod swallowing 
what is consigned into him. I am Varuna, lord of Waters. I 
am earth and the supporter of the Earth. 

6. Whatever there is in the world that can be expressed by 
a word, whether mobile or immobile, I am that. 


1. Three fires —Garhapatya, Ahavaniya and Daksina. 






286 Brahma Parana 

The whole universe .consisting of mobile and immobile 
beings is nothing other than what I am. 1 

7. O excellent king of good holy rites ! I am pleased with 
you. Choose any boon that you wish. Whatever is desired by 
you, whatever is cherished in the heart by you, I shall give you 
immediately. 

8. Persons without merit do not have my vision even in a 
dream. Due to your steadfast devotion you have seen me 
directly. 

Brahma said 

9. O brahmins, on hearing these words of Vasudeva the 
king experienced horripilation all over his body and he recited 
the following prayer : 

The king prayed : 

10-16. O lover of Sri, obeisance be to you. O consort of 
Sri, obeisance to the yellow-robed one. O bestower of glory, O 
lord of Sri, O abode of glory and prosperity, obeisance to you. 
O home of Glory, I bow down to the primordial Purusa. Isana 
the lord of all, having faces all round. I bow down to you 
who are eternal and unsullied. 

I make obeisance to one who is beyond sound, beyond 
attributes, devoid of positive and negative aspects, unsmeared, 
attributeless, subtle and omniscient and who conceives and 
creates all. 

I bow down to one who resembles the colour in the rainy 
season; who is engaged in activities conducive to the welfare 
of cows and brahmins, who protects all, who pervades all and 
who purifies all. 

I bow down to the lord who holds conch and discus, who 
holds iron club and the threshing rod; I bow down to the lord 
who grants boon and who has the lustre of the petals of the 
blue lotus. 

I bow down to Hari who lies down on the serpent couch 


!• This tendency towards monotheism is due to the influence of 
Vedantic advaitavada, but generally the Puranas represent polytheistic creed. 



48.17-28 


287 


in the milky ocean. 1 bow down to Hrsikesa who dispels all 
sins. 

I bow down to you, the lord of the chiefs of Devas, who 
bestows boons and pervades all. 

Brahma said : 

17. After eulogising thus, he bowed to the lord with palms 
joined m reverence. After bowing down and falling down on 
the ground he said. 

The king said : 

18-21. O lord, if you arc pleased with me, I choose this 
excellent boon. The following persons shall meditate on the 
greatest legion : Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas, Yaksas, 
Raksasas, Nagas, Siddhas, Vidyadharas, Sadhyas, Kinnaras, 
Guhyakas, the sages who are highly blessed and experts in the 
different texts of scriptures, recluses, interpreting Yogins, Vedic 
scholars, and those others who are conversant with the scrip¬ 
tures on liberation. The region that is devoid of attributes, 
free from impurities, peaceful, highly sanctifying and worthy of 
being hidden as a secret. Due to your favour I wish to go to 
that region which is very difficult of access. 

The Lord said : 

22. May everything be to your welfare. Obtain everything 
desired by you. Everything will happen as you wish by my 
favour. There is no doubt about it. 

23. O excellent king, rule over the great kingdom conti¬ 
nuously for ten thousand nine hundred years. 

24-26. You will then go to the divine region which is 
difficult of access even to Devas and Asuras. Your desire shall 
be fulfilled. I shall show you the calm and peaceful region 
worthy to be known. It is the unchanging, unmanifest secret 
region, greater than the greatest, subtle, unsmeared, motionless 
and steady. It is devoid of old age and grief, devoid of activities 
and cause. I shall show you that region by attaining which you 
will derive the highest bliss and realize the greatest goal. 

27-28. O leading king, may your fame stay here on the 
Earth as long as there are clouds, as long as the sky exists, as 






288 


Brahma Purina 


long as the moon, sun and stars last, as long as the seven 
oceans exist; as long as Meru and other mountains stand and 
Devas stand in heaven. So long your fame will remain un¬ 
diminished. 

29. This sacred water-reservoir named Indradyumna- 
saras is born as a part of sacrifice. By taking bath in it even 
for once, people attain the world of Indra. 

30. He who offers rice balls on the splendid bank of the 
lake shall redeem twentyone generations and go to the world 
of Indra. 

31. He will go there in aerial chariot honoured by celes¬ 
tial damsels and the divine musicians singing in loud voice. 
He shall stay therefor the duration of fourteen Indras. 

32-36. To the South of the lake, in the South West corner 
there is a holy fig tree. There is a raised platform close by. It 
is covered by a bushy grow* of Ketaki plants. The place is full 
of different trees with innumerable coconut palms, Camakas, 
Bakulas, Asokas, Karnikaras, Punnagas, Nagakesaras, Patalas, 
Amratas, Saralas, sandal trees, Deodars, Nyagrodhas, Asvatthas, 
Khadiras, Parijatas, Arjunas, Hintalas, Talas, Sims'apas, 
Badaras, Karanjas, Lakucas, Plaksas, Jack, Bilva and many 
other trees. All of them adorn the place. 

_ 37-41. On the fifth day in the bright half of the month of 
Asadha when the constellation is Magha, devotees will keep us 
there for seven days. Good-featured Courtesans clad in splen¬ 
did dress will install the idols. Sweet and pleasing songs as well 
as dances coupled with sports (will entertain them). Fanning 
with chowries ha-vmg golden handles and fans decorated with 
jewels, the auspicious ladies will instal us there. There will be 
religious students, recluses, excellent brahmins, householders, 
forest-dwellers. Siddhas, and others will assemble there and 
eulogise Rama and Kes'ava by reciting hymns of excellent words 
and letters and the Mantras of Rk, Yajus and Saman. 

42. By eulogising, visiting and devoutly bowing to the 
idols men shall stay in the prosperous city of Hari for ten 
thousand years in accordance with the divine reckoning. 

43-45. He will be honoured and worshipped by heavenly 
nymphs and Gandharvas singing sweetly. He shall sport about 
there as a follower of Hari, KeSava. He will go to the excellent 


48.46-50 


289 


ne win certainly be a master of four Vedas. 



precious gems. He will enjoy all 
client world. When the power of 
turn to the earth as a man and be 


havr> — coins an( j wealth 


sun wear- 


Brahmd said : 



. , . _ . ouuiIUUCIU oi 

jewels ana gold coverings. With shouts of victory and auspi¬ 
cious slogans the intelligent king accompanied by his ministers 
and priests brought the images there. 

With the accompaniment of sounds of different musical 
instruments and auspicious chanting of vedic Mantras, he 
installed them in a holy, beautiful auspicious place. He got 
them installed through brahmins in an auspicious time when 
the constellation was auspicious and the (lunar day) was 
splendid, in accordance with the injunctions and regulations 
laid down in the sastras. The king did every thing with the 
permission of his preceptor. After offering monetary gifts 
duly to the preceptor he distributed money among the Rtviks 
and others in accordance with the injunctions of the Sastras. 

54-58. After duly performing the rites of installation in 
the palace, the most excellent abode, he established all of 
them duly by holy rites. He worshipped them with fragrant 
flowers of all sorts. He offered gold, jewels, pearls and splendid 
clothes. Gems of various kinds, divine chairs, villages, towns, 
cities, lands and territories were gifted by him. After giving 
away such gifts, after performing different sacrifices and after 
ruling over the kingdom in the most fitting manner the king 
became contented. He abandoned every thing he possessed. 





290 


Brahma Burma 


Then he attained the highest abode, the greatest region of 
Visnu. 

59-60. Thus excellent sages, the pious king has been re¬ 
counted by me. The greatness of the holy centre has also been 
mentioned. What else do you wish to hear ? On hearing the 
words of Brahma born of the unmanifest, the Brahmins thought 
it wonderful and gladly asked him again. 

The sages said : 

61-62. O most excellent Deva, at what time is one to go 
to Purusottama shrine ? O lord, what is the mode whereby the 
Pahcatirtha pilgrimage is to be performed ? Tell us the respec¬ 
tive merits and benefits of taking holy dip and offering charit¬ 
able gifts in each of these Tirthas as well as of visiting the 
deity. Mention them separately. 

Brahma said : 

63-71. If any one observes fast and performs penance in 
the holy centre of Kuruksetra, standing on one leg, conquering 
anger and sense-organs and continues it for seventy thousand 
years he may derive some benefit thereof. But, O excellent 
Brahmins, if he observes fast and visits Purusottama but once 
he obtains a greater benefit than. that. Hence, O excellent 
sages, Purusottama is to be visited in the month of Jyestha 
assiduously by brahmins and other castes who desire to attain 
heavenly world and who have perfect restraint. After perform¬ 
ing pilgrimages to the five Tirthas duly, the excellent man 
should visit Purusottama on the twelfth day in the bright half 
of the month of Jyestha. Those who visit the undiminishing 
lord Purusottama on the twelfth day, reach the world of Visnu 
from where they never fall off. Hence, O excellent brahmins, 
one must assiduouly go there in the month of Jyestha. After 
taking the holy dip in the five Tirthas, Purusottama should be 
visited. Even that person who is far off but who devoutly 
glorifies Purusottama everyday with a pure mind shall go to the 
city of Visnu. The man who undertakes pilgrimage with faith 
and concentration toKrsna (shrine) shall be liberated from all 
sins. He shall go to the world of Vi§nu. By visiting the wheel 


49.1-11 


291 


of Hari, that is kept above the palace even from a distance 
and by bowing to it devoutly, the man is immediately liberated 
from sins. 


CHAPTER FORTYNINE 
A Visit to the Holy Banyan Tree by Markantfeya 
Brahma said : 

1-4. At the close of the Kalpa, O excellent sages, when 
the great annihilation began to function, when the sun, moon 
and wind perished, when the mobile and immobile beings 
were destroyed, when the sun of dissolution rose up, when the 
fierce rumbling sound of the clouds of dissolution was heard 
when the trees and mountains crumbled due to the calamitous 
mass of lightning and thunder, when the whole world was 
crushed, when the great comets portended distinction, when 
the waters in the lakes and rivers were dried up, O brahmins, 
the fire of utter annihilation accompanied by the wind entered 
the worlds, brightly illuminated by the twelve Adityas. 

5. It pierced the Earth, entered the nether worlds and 
caused consternation among Devas, Danavas and Yaksas. 

6. O leading sages, burning from below, the fire destroyed 
everything in a trice, the world of Nagas and whatever there 
was on the earth. 

7-8. The Doomsday fire blazed up hundreds and thou¬ 
sands of Yojanas. The wind blew quickly. The entire universe 
including Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas, Yaksas, Nagas and 
Raksasas was burned by the blazing lordly fire. 

9-10. When blazing brightly, it was very terrible. Known 
as Kalpa fire it had great flames and excessive refulgence. It 
shone and produced a loud report. Burning with its own 
brilliance it resembled ten million suns. Immediately it burned 
the three worlds, the abodes of Devas, Asuras and mortals. 

11. In the middle. of this terrible dissolution of such a 





292 Brahma Purarja 

devastating nature an extremely virtuous sage was engaged in 
the path of meditation. 

12. O Brahmins, he stood there alone. He was known as 
Markanqleya. He was bound by the noose of delusion. His 
sense-organs were agitated by hunger and thirst. 

13-14. O brahmins, his throat, lips and palate were 
parched. On seeing the great fire he became extremely terri¬ 
fied. Oppressed by thirst and faltering at every step, he 
wondered over the earth like a senseless fugitive. Unable to 
find a saviour he ran about here and there. 

15-19. He did not derive any pleasure. O brahmins, he 
did not find any place of rest. He thought within himself : — “I 
do not know in whom I shall take refuge. How can I see that 
lord, the eternal Purusesa” Thinking thus with his mind in 
concentration on the eternal lord the cause of the great dissolution 
he reached that divine region of the eternal lordly Banyan 
tree well known as PuruseSa. O excellent sages, he hastened 
near the tree. After reaching it he sat under its root. There 
was no fear from the black fire there. There was no showering 
of burning sparks of fire. The Doomsday fire did not come 
there. There was no thunderbolt either. 


CHAPTER FIFTY 
Markantjleya views annihilation 

Brahma said : 

1. Then great clouds rose up in the sky presenting a 
wonderful sight. They were like herds of elephants bedecked in 
necklaces of lightning streaks. 

2-5. Some of them were dark-complexioned like the blue 
lotus. Some resembled the lilies. Some the filaments. Some 
were yellow. Some had the green shining colour. Some resem¬ 
bled the Eggs of the crow. Some had the lustre of lotus petals. 
Some were of vermillion hue. Some had the huge size of excel¬ 
lent cities. Some .were comparable to excellent mountains. 


50.6-20 


293 


Some shone like collyrium. Some had the lustre of emerald. 
Great clouds bound by clusters of lightning and streaks rose up, 
O highly blessed ones. They had terrible forms and they roared 
with a terrible rumbling noise. 

6-10. The clouds then covered the sky. The entire earth 
including the mountains, forests and mines, and the quarters 
were filled by them. They were showering jets and columns of 
water, O excellent sages. Thereafter, urged by lord Brahma the 
terrible clouds flooded the entire earth with water. Showering 
water they filled up earth. They extinguished the awful, terri¬ 
ble and inauspicious fire. Urged by lord Brahma, they rained 
for twelve years filling everything with currents of water. Then, 
O brahmins, the oceans transgressed their own shore-lines. 

11-15. The mountains crumbled. The earth sank. At the 
extremities of the sky the clouds whirled and revolved. They 
enveloped the sky. Struck by the forceful gust of wind they 
perished. O excellent sages, Visnu the primordial lord residing 
in a lotus drank up the terrible wind. O brahmins, he then 
slept in that.terrible vast sheet of water without any support 
and enveloped in darkness. When Devas, Asuras and men 
perished, when the earth was rid of Yaksas and Raksasas, the 
tired sages meditated .on the Lord. On opening up his eyes he 
saw the earth filled with water. He did not sec the Banyan 
tree, earth, quarters and the sun. 

16-18. He did not see the moon, wind, Devas, Asuras or 
Nagas, in that terrible vast sheet of water when mobile and 
immobile beings had perished. Getting immersed therein, O 
brahmins, the sage began to swim. In great agony he swam 
about here and there. O brahmins, he was about to be drown¬ 
ed. He could not see any saviour. On seeing him perplexed 
and bewildered the lord who had been delighted at his medi¬ 
tation, spoke to him in sympathy. 

The Lord said : 

19-20. O dear, O Markan<Jeya of holy rites, you are tired 
like a boy. You are my devotee, hence, come to me quickly. 
O dear one, O excellent sage, do not be afraid. You have come 
to my presence. O Markandeya of great courage, I find that you 
are like a boy afflicted by fatigue. 



294 


Brahma Purdna 


Brahma said : 

21. O brahmins, on hearing his words, the sage was extre¬ 
mely infuriated and surprised too. He said. 

Markandeya said : 

22-24. Who is calling me by name as though slighting my 
penance ? Who is thwarting, as it were, my body, many thou¬ 
sand years old ? This looks quite unmannerly. I have been 
honoured by Devas, too. Brahma, the lord of Devas addresses 
me “O Long-lived one”. My head is hardened due to extreme 
penance. Who is that short-lived rogue who wishes to hasten 
his death by calling me Markandeya ? 

Brahma said : 

25-26. O brahmins, after saying thus, the sage became 
worried and anxious— <c Is this a dream that I have seen ? Or is 
this a delusion ?” 

After thinking thus he decided thus dispelling his misery “I 
shall seek refuge in lord Visnu with devotion”. 

27. The sage then sought refuge in Visnu. His mind solely 
dwelt on him alone. Once again he looked at the Banyan tree 
towering above the water. 

28-34. On one of its wide branches there was a beautiful 
golden and divine palanquin made by Visvakarman. It was 
studded with diamonds and lapis lazuli. It was decorated with 
crystals and corals. Rubies too were put in precious stones, 
covered with various sheets and beautified by valuable gems. 
It looked miraculous in many ways. It was adorned by a halo 
zone. He saw lord Kjrsna who had assumed the form of a boy 
stationed on it. He had the refulgence of a crore of suns. He 
shone in his brilliance. He had four arms and beautiful limbs. 
His eyes were large like the petals of a lotus. He had the scar 
Srlvatsa on his chest. He held a conch, a discus and an iron 
club. His chest was covered with garlands of sylvan flowers. He 
wore divine ear-rings, weighty . necklaces round his neck. He 
was bedecked in divine gems and jewels. On seeing him the 
eyes of the sage bloomed in wonderment. His hairs stood up all 
over his body. He bowed to the lord and said this : 


50.35-43 


295 


Markanieya said : 

35. How is it that this boy stays here alone and fearless in 
this terrible vast sheet of water where all mobile and immobile 
beings have perished ? 

Brahma said : 

36. Although the sage was aware of the past, present and 
future, he did not understand the lord as he was deluded by 
his Maya. When he did not understand him he said with 
dejection : 

Markandeya said : 

37-43. In vain is the vigour of my penance; futile is my 
perfect knowledge, futile are my rites, my long life is in vain. 
My human birth itself is in vain, since I do not know the divine 
lord sleeping in the palanquin. 

Brahma said : 

That brahmin who pondered thus, who senselessly floated 
about for a saviour and who was completely bewildered became 
extremely dejected and dispirited. O brahmins he could not 
look at the brilliance of the boy as he stayed there resembling 
the rising sun and supported by his own greatness. O leading 
sages, on seeing the sage coming towards him the boy said to 
him laughingly in a voice that resembled the rumbling sound 
of the cluster of clouds. 

The Lord said : 

O dear one, I know that you are tired and you have 
approached me for protection. Enter my body quickly. This 
is the plan devised by me for you. 

Brahma said : 

On hearing his words the deluded sage did not utter any¬ 
thing. The helpless sage entered his wide open mouth. 




296 


Brahma Purdna 


CHAPTER FIFTYONE 
Markandeya wanders in the belly of the Lord 
Brahma said : 

1. After entering the belly of the boy the sage saw the 
entire earth consisting of different realms and countries. 

2-4. He saw seven oceans 1 :—Of salt water, sugarcane 
juice, wine, ghee, curds, milk and fresh water. He saw seven 
continents—Jambu, Plaksa, Salmala, Kusa, Kraunca, Saka 
andPuskara. He saw Bharata and other Varsas (sub-conti¬ 
nents). He saw the golden mountain Meru, its peaks shining 
with gems and jewels. It had many caves. 

5. He saw four castes, 2 first to last in his belly. He saw 
deer, monkeys, lions, boars, Srmara variety of deer, rabbits, 
elephants and other animals. 

6-9. Whatever holy centre, village or city there was on the 
earth, he saw everyone of them therein. He saw agricultural 
operations, breeding of cows and cattle and business activities 
of buying and selling. He saw therein Indra, Devas and other 
heaven-dwellers, Gandharvas, Apsaras, Yaksas, eternal sages, 
Daityas, Danavas, Serpents and snakes. O excellent sages. He 
saw Rahu the son of Simhika, and other enemies of Devas. 
O excellent brahmins, in his belly he saw those mobile and 
immobile beings which had been formerly seen by him on the 
face of the earth. - 

10-12. Or of what avail is much talk or the same thing 
repeated over and over again ? He saw the entire mobile and 
immobile beings beginning with Brahma and ending with a 
blade of grass. He saw the Bhurloka, Bhuvarloka, Svarloka, 
Mahar, Jana, Tapas, Satya, Atala, Vitala, Patala, Bhutala, 
Vitala, Rasatala and Mahatala. In fact, he saw the entire 
cosmic egg in his belly. 


1. Seven oceans : Sea of Lavana (salt water), of Iksu (sugarcane 
juice), of s ura (liquor) of Ghrta (clarified butter), of Dadhi (curd), of 
island ^ an ' ^ rcs h Water. Each of these surrounds a particular 

2. Four Casus : Brahmana, Ksatriya, Vaisya, Sudra. These castes 
exist even today, though they arc dwindling fast. 



51.13—52.1 


297 


13-16. O excellent brahmins, by the favour of that lord 
his movement was unimpeded. His memorv was unimpaired. 
O brahmins, wandering thus over the entire universe in his 
belly he could never reach the end of the body.of Visnu. 

O brahmins, when he could not reach the end of his body, 
the sage sought refuge in the lord the bestower of boons. 

Then, O brahmins, he suddenly came out of the open 
mouth of the noble-souled Purusawith the speed of the wind. 

Extra eight verses according to another reading occur between the 
4th and 5 th verses of Chapter 51 

Pie saw the Meru mountain inhabited by sages and abound¬ 
ing in trees. It was full of animals and mysterious and wonder¬ 
ful objects. It was beautified by tigers, lions, boars, Camara, 
deer, buffaloes, elephants, monkeys and other animals. It was 
peopled by Lord Indra and other Devas, Siddhas, Caranas, 
Nagas, and those others who lived in the abode of Devas. 

Brahma said : 

Thus the excellent sage, the brahmin, who wondered about 
in the belly of that boy, saw the glorious Sumeru, Himavan, 
Hemakuta, Nisadha, Gandhamadana, Sveta, Durdhara, Nila, 
Kailasa, Malaya, Vindhya, Pariyatra, Arbuda, Sahya, Sukti- 
man, Mainaka, and the mountain Rksa. He saw these and 
other mountains that were there. O excellent sage, he saw them 
bedecked in gems and jewels. He saw Kuruksetra, Pancala, 
Matsya, Madras, Kekayas, BahUkas, Surasenas, Kasmlras, 
Tanganas, Khasas, Kiratas, Karnapravaranas and Marus. 


CHAPTER FIFTYTWO 
The Review of the Prayer to the Lord 

Brahma said : 

1. O excellent sages, after coming out of the belly of that 
boy, he once again saw the earth turned into a vast sheet of 
water. It was devoid of people. 





298 


Brahma Parana 


2. He saw that same lord in the form of the infant boy 
whom he had seen before. He was stationed on the branch of 
banyan tree in a palanquin. 

3. That lord had the scar Srlvatsa on his chest. He was 
clad in yellow robes and had four arms. His wide eyes resembl¬ 
ed the large petals of the lotus and he stayed there taking up 
the universe. 

4. On seeing the sage floating and swimming like a sense¬ 
less person and approaching him after coming out of his mouth, 
the lord spoke with laugh. 

The Lord said : 

5. O dear one, I hope you stayed in my belly comfort¬ 
ably and have had your rest. While wandering about what 
wonderful thing did you observe there ? 

6. O excellent sage, you are my devotee and have resorted 
completely to me. But you are tired. Hence, to help you I 
speak to you. See me again. 

Brahma said : 

7-10. On hearing his words he experienced horripilation 
due to delight. He .looked at the deity who was bedecked 
with lustrous gems and jewels and who was too dazzling to 
be seen. In a Muhurta, O brahmins, by the favour of that 
lord he had a new pair of eyes delighted and devoid of im¬ 
purities. O brahmins, the sage bowed his head at his feet that 
are worshipped by Devas and which had red toes and sole. 
With a voice chocked with delight he began to eulogise him. 
The delighted sage looked at the Supreme being again and 
again with palms joined in reverence and began to eulogise : 

Mdrkandeya said : 

11. O lord of Devas, O lord of Universe, you have 
assumed the form of a boy by your Maya, O beautiful lotus¬ 
eyed one, save me, I am miserable and I have sought refuge 
in you. 

12. Omost excellent one among Devas, I am scorched by 
the fire called Samvarta. O lord, save me. I am afraid of the 
rising of sparks pf fire in flames. 


52.13-24 


299 


13. I am dried up by the fierce wind that is the life-giving 
breath of the universe. I am perplexed and bewildered as well 
as tired. Save me, O lord, save me. 

14. Scoiched by theAdityas, Pralayavartaka and others, 
I do not derive peace. Save me, O lord. 

15. 1 am thirsty and afflicted by hunger. O lord of uni¬ 
verse, I am miserable too. I do not see any saviour. Save me, 
O lord. 

16. In this terrible vast sheet of water, as the mobile and 
immobile beings have perished I do find no resort, save me, O 
lord. 

17. O lord of Devas, the mobile and immobile beings 
were seen by me in your belly. I am surprised and bewildered. 
Save me, O lord. 

18. In this worldly existence that has no basic support, be 
pleased O Lord, O most excellent one among Devas, be pleased. 
O deity fond of the learned and Devas, be pleased. 

19. Be pleased, O Lord of the learned. Be pleased, O 
support of the learned. Be pleased, O lord of the worlds, O 
cause of the cause of the Universe. 

20. Be pleased, O lord of Devas. Be pleased with me, O 
deity that bear the burden of the earth. Be pleased, O deity 
residing in waters. Be pleased, O slayer of Madhu demon. 

21. Be pleased, O lover of Laksml, be pleased, O lord of 
Devas. Be pleased, O slayer of Kamsa and Kesin. Be pleased 
O destroyer of Arista. 1 

22. Be pleased, O Kjrsna, O destroyer of* Daityas. Be 
pleased, O slayer of Danu’s sons. Be pleased, O resident of 
Mathura. Be pleased, O scion of the family of Yadus. 

23-24. Be pleased, O younger brother of Indra, be pleased 
O bestower of boons, O unchanging one, You are the earth, 
water, fire, wind and firmament. You are the mind, Ego, and 

1. Arista, : An asura, a servant of Kamsa. Once, at the instance of 
Kamsa he went to Gokula disguised as an ox to kill Srikrsna. The ox 
instilled terror^ in people by crushing hills and mountains, with its horns 
and bellowing like a bull. But Srikrsna faced the beast with courage and 
rained blows on him so that it was thrown hundred yojanas away and it 
cried. At the time of death it regained its former form and was recognized 


as asura 










300 Brahma Parana 

cosmic intellect. You arc the Primordial Nature. O lord of 
the universe, you are Sattva and other things. 

25. You are the Purusa, the seed of the Universe. You are 
more excellent than others. You arc the sense-organs. O lord, 
you are the objects, and subtle primary elements. 

26. You arc the guardian of the quarters. You are 
Devas, Yajfias and sacrificial gifts. You are Indra, Siva, offer¬ 
ing and the sacrificial fire. 

27. You are Yama, the lord of manes; O lord, you are 
the lord of Raksasas (Nirrti) himself. You are Varuna, lord of 
waters; you are wind and the lord of wealth (Kubera). 

28. You arc Isana, Ananta, Ganesa, Sanmukha, Vasus, 
Rudras, Adilyas and Khecaras (Planets). 

29-30. You are Danavas, Yaksas, Daityas, Maruts, 
Siddhas, Apsaras, Nagas, Gandharvas, Caranas, manes, Vala- 
khilyas, and Prajapatis. O Acyuta, you are sages, ascetics, 
Asvins and demons. 

31-33. You are other species too, whatever can be termed 
a living being. Of what avail is much talk ? You are every¬ 
thing beginning with Brahma and ending with the blade of 
grass. You are the whole universe consisting of mobile and 
immobile beings, all things of the past, present and future. 
Your greatest form, O lord, is steady, motionless and fixed. 
Even Brahma and others do not know that. Then what about 
others of deficient intellect. O lord, you are intrinsically pure. 
You are perpetual and greater than Prakj-ti. 

34-35. You are unmanifest, permanent, infinite, all-perva¬ 
sive, supreme lord. You are the firmament, the greatest being, 
the calm one, the unborn and unchanging. 

36. Who is competent to eulogise you adequately, you 
who are devoid of attributes and unsullied. O lord, you have 
been eulogised by me the deficient one of insignificant mind. 

O lord of the chiefs of Devas, it .behoves yod to forgive that, O 
eternal one. 


53.1-5 


CHAPTER FIFTYTHREE 
Markandeya's Vision of the Holy Lord 


301 


Brahma said : 


1. Thus eulogised by Markan^eya, O brahmins, the lord 
became pleased. He said in a voice as majestic as the rumbling 
sound of clouds. 


The Lord said : 

2. O excellent sage, tell me freely what you have in your 
mind. O brahmanical sage, I shall give you everything, what¬ 
ever you may desire from me. 

Brahma said : 

!3. O brahmins, on hearing the words of that noble infant, 
the sage became extremely delighted. With his mind dwelling 
on him he said : 

Markandeya said : 

4. O lord, 1 wish to know you. O bestower of salvation, I 
wish to'*know your Maya (Illusion). O lord of Devas, by your 
favour, my power of memory is not impaired. 

5. I have hurriedly wandered through your body. O lord, 
I entered your body through your mouth. O lord, I saw all 
worlds in your belly. 

Extra verses 

[O lord, the following are stationed within your body viz.— 
Devas, Danavas, Raksasas, Yaksas, Gandharvas and Nagas. 
Indeed, I saw the whole universe consisting of mobile and 
immobile beings. I saw the border lands of the mountain 
Sumeru thronged by sages and beautified by minerals. The 
place was full of trees and creepers of all kinds; fountains and 
springs there were many, it was full of animals of all kinds; 
it was wonderfully charming and beautified by animals such 
as tigers, lions, boars, Samara deer, buffaloes, elephants, ante¬ 
lopes, monkeys, and other animals. It was occupied by Indra 
and other Devas, Siddhas, Caranas, Nagas, Sages, Yaksas, 
Apsaras and other dwellers of heaven. Such was the borderland 
of the mountain Sumeru. I, an excellent sage and a brahmin, 
wandered further on in your belly, as a boy. 





302 


Brahma Purana 


I saw the Himavan, Hemakuta, Nisadha, Gandha- 
madana, Sveta, Kankanlla, Kailasa, Dardura, Mahendra, 
Malaya, Vindhya, Pariyatra, Arbuda, Sahya, Suktiman, Mai- 
naka, Cakra and many other mountains. O lord, I, the excel¬ 
lent sage, saw all those mountains adorned by gems and 
jewels. 

I saw Kuruksetra, Paficala, Matsya, Madras, 

Kaikayas, Bahilkas, Surascnas, Kasmiras, Kiratas, Karna- 
pravaranas, Ekapadas, Dvipadas, Tripadas, Bahunetrakas, 
Aindras, Pragjyotisas, Kambojas, Tamralip takas, Angas, 
Vangas, Suhmas, Kalapas, Utkalas, Mahoragas, Nagas, 
Kalingas, Konkanas, Arbudas, Malavas, Dravidas, Saurastras, 
Navanas and many other lands. Wandering through your body 
I saw these and many other lands, O noble-souled one. 

I saw the following holy centres :—Prayaga, Kuru¬ 
ksetra, Puskara, Naimisa, Gaya, Gangadvara, Kubjamra, 
Badari, Sindhusagara, Kokamukha, Suddhatirtha, Brahma- 
varta, Kusasthali, Lauhajahgha, Aivatirtha that rids one of 
all sins, Kardamala, Agnitirtha, Amarakantaka, Lohargala, 
Jambumarga, Bhogatirtha of much holy water, Utpalavartaka, 
the holy centre Sripuru§ottama, Ekamukha, Kedara, Kasi, 
Viraja, Kalanjara, Gokarna, Srlsaila and Gandhamadajia. O 
Lord I saw these and other holy centres, shrines and temples 
in your body, as a boy. 

I saw the-• following holy rivers :— Ganga, Satadru, 
Yamuna, KausikI, Carmanvatl, Vetravati, Candrabhaga, 
Sarasvati, Vipasa, Vitasta, Sindhu, Godavari, Vasvokasara, 
Nalini, Payosnl, Narmada, Aparna, Tungabhadra, Karatoya, 
Mahanadi, Suvarna, Krsna, Sibira the great river, VaitaranI, 
Kaverl, Sona, Bhlmarathl, Visala, Sipra and Vetravati. These 
and other rivers I saw while wandering, through your belly 
entirely, the belly of a noble soul. I saw the sky beautified by 
the moon and sun. It was shining with its own refulgence 
similar to that of fire and sun. O boy, I saw the earth too, 
rendered splendid by the forests. There the bralimins perform¬ 
ed various sacrifices. The Ksatriyas were engaged in the acti¬ 
vities of pleasing and humouring the people of all castes. The 
Vaisyas performed the agricultural operations. O Purusottama, 
all these and many other things were seen.] 


53.6-15 


303 


6. O lotus-eyed one, I wish to know you, the unchanging one. 

Why have you swallowed this universe and why do you 

stay here in the form of an infant ? It behoves you to expound 
all this to me. 

7. O sinless one, what for is the entire universe stationed 
in your body ? O suppressor of enemies, How long have you to 
stay here ? O lord of Devas, I wish to know. Tell me every¬ 
thing in detail. 

8. O lotus-eyed one, I wish to hear everything in detail 
and in the precise manner. O lord, what I have seen is 
immense and inconceivable. 

Brahma said : 

9. Thus requested by him, the lord of Devas of great 
refulgence, the foremost among the eloquent ones spoke the 
following words to Markanqleya. 

The Lord said : 

10. Admittedly, O brahmin, Devas do not know me in 
reality. Out of affection for you I shall tell you how I create 
this universe and discharge it. 

11. O brahminical sage, you are one with great filial affec¬ 
tion. You have sought refuge in me alone. Your celebacy is 
great. Hence, I have seen directly. 

12. Formerly, the term'Nara* was given by me to the 
waters. They are my perpetual resort. Hence, I am called 
Narayana. 

13. I am Narayana; I am the permanent unchanging, 
source of origin, the dispenser of destiny and the annihilator of 
all living beings. 

14. O excellent brahmins, I am Visnu, I am Brahma, I am 
Indra too. T am king VaiSravana 1 and Yama the Lord of 
ghosts. 

15. O excellent brahmin, I am Siva, Soma and patriarch 
Kasyapa. I am creator and dispenser of destiny and I am 
sacrifice too. 


1. Vaxiraoaria : Kubera, king ofYaksas. 






304 


Brahma Pur ana 


16-17. The lire god is iny mouth, the earth is my foot, the 
moon and sun constitute my eyes; heaven is my head. The 
hollow space and quarters arc my ears, the waters originate 
from my sweat, the firmament constitutes my body, the wind 
is stationed in my mind. I have performed hundreds of sacrifices 
with the requisite monetary gifts. 

18-21. Those who have learned the Vedas worship me at 
the sacrificial altar. The leading Ksatriyas and the rulers of 
the earth, desirous of attaining heaven also worship me. 
Similarly, the Vaisyas desirous of conquering upper regions, 
worship me. 

It is I who assume the form of Sesa and hold aloft the earth 
having the mountains Meru and Mandara as its ornaments and 
extending as far as the four oceans. 

O brahmin, formerly, this earth was about to sink under 
water. Assuming the form of boar, it was lifted up by me with 
my strength. 

O excellent brahmin, I have become the submarine fire 
Vadava 1 and entering the ocean I drink up waters and let them 
out as well. 

22-27. The brahmins form my face, Ksatriyas my arms, 
Vaisyas my thighs and Sudras my feet. They become thus by 
their exploits gradually. The Rgveda, Samaveda, Yajurveda and 
Atharvaveda spring up from me and re-enter me alone. 

It is me alone that the brahmins, ascetics, those who value 
peace very much, those who have restrained themselves, those 
who are desirous of gaining perfect knowledge, those who are 
devoid of lust and wrath, those who are unattached, those who 
are bereft of sins, those who adhere to Sattva quality, those 
who have no arrogance or egotism and those who are experts in 
spiritual matters for ever worship and meditate upon. 

I am the luminary named Samvartaka. I am the fire called 
Sarhvartaka. I am the sun called Samvartaka. I am the wind 
called Samvartaka. 


1. Badava : the fire of sage Aurva’s penance which started to burn 
the world but which, at the request of pitrs he threw down into the sea 
where it took the shape of a horse-head and living beneath the sea continued 
vomiting heat at all times. 



53.28-39 


305 


O excellent brahmin, what appear like the forms of stars in 
the firmament are the pores of my hairs. Understand this. 

28-33. Understand that all oceans, the storehouses of gems 
and jewels, and the four quarters are my robes, bedsheets, and 
abode. Lust, fury, delight, fear and delusion, O excellent one, 
understand that all these constitute my forms. 

O brahmin, by performing splendid actions men attain me. 
Adhering to truthfulness, charitable gifts, severe penance and 
nonviolence towards all creatures, performing holy rites laid 
down in accordance with my injunctions (people attain me}. 
Those who ponder over my body are active, only because I 
prompt tneir knowledge and conscience and not in accordance 
with their love. 

The twice-born, those who learn the Vedas well, those who 
worship by holding different sacrifices, those who have rest¬ 
rained themselves and those who have conquered anger—attain 
me. I cannot be attained at all by men of evil actions. 

34-39. (I cannot be attained) by persons overwhelmed by 
greed, by miserly persons, by ignoble persons and those who 
have not regulated their life actions too. 

Know that this is the benefit of men who have purified their 
souls inasmuch as I am inaccessible to those of confused state 
or deluded mind, who have recourse to deceptive Yogic path. 

O excellent one, whenever virtue is afflicted or fades away 
and evil rises up, I create myself then. 

When the terrible Daityas and Raksasas who are fond of 
violence and who cannot be killed by excellent Devas come to 
be born in this world, I take birth in the houses of meritorious 
persons entering human bodies and suppress every evil. I create 
Devas, human beings, Gandharvas, Nagas, Raksasas, the 
mobile and immobile beings and then I annihilate them by my 
own Maya. At the time of Karman or realization of their 
fruits, I think about proper bodies and create them. 

Additional verses 

[I create them by permeating into human bodies for 
fixing up the bounds of decency. 

My virtue is white in colour in Krta age, it is dark in Treta, 






306 Brahma Purana 

red in Dvapara and black in Kali age. At that time (i.e. in 
Kali age) there' will be three parts of evil. 

When the hour of destruction arrives I adopt the extremely 
terrible form of Kala (God of Death) and destroy the set of 
three worlds. Alone, I destroy everything mobile and immo¬ 
bile. I have three duties, viz., creation, sustenance and dis¬ 
solution. I am the soul of Universe. I am conducive to the 
happiness of all worlds. I am unbroken (i.e. not divisible). I 
am all-pervasive, infinite, Hrslkesa of great strides. Alone I 
lead the wheel of time (I make it move and whirl). That is my 
form as Brahman. It suppresses all living beings and it endea¬ 
vours for all living beings.] 

40. Thus, O excellent sage, my soul is well embedded in all 
living beings. O leading brahmin, still no one knows me. 

41-44. All devotees in the whole of the universe worship me 
in every way. 

O sinless brahmin, whatever of painful nature has been 
experienced by you in me, is entirely for the rise of happiness 
and welfare. 

All mobile and immobile beings seen by you in the world 
have been evolved by me. My soul is the conceiver and creator 
of all living beings. 

I am named Narayana. I hold conch, discus and iron-club. 
I am the soul of the universe. Fascinating all the worlds, I 
sleep, O brahminical sage, till a thousand sets of four Yugas 
pass off completely. 

45. Thus, O excellent sage, for the duration of the period 
till Brahma rises up I remain in the form of an infant though. 
I am not an infant. 

46. O leading brahmin, honoured and worshipped by 
brahminical sages, boon has been granted to you by. me in the 
form of Brahma. I have been propitiated many times. 

47. When the mobile and immobile beings had perished 
you set out. Seeing everything in a vast sheet of water you 
were bewildered. It was observed by me and hence you were 
shown the universe. 


53.48-60 


307 


48-52 When you entered my body y„„ saw thc universe 
aod worosurpmoi You could n„, „ ndcrstand the rM , ^ 
behind it. Then, O bralunimcal sage, you have been disgorged 
through the mouth immediately by me. My own soul Lorn- 
prehensible to Devas and Asuras was revealed to you by me. 

O brahmmical sage, till Brahma of great penance wakes up, 
move about here comfortably and confidently. 

O excellent brahmin, after the grand-father of the universe 
has woken up, I shall singly create elements, physical bodies— 
viz. ether, earth, fire, wind, and water. Indeed, I shall create 
mobile and immobile creatures. 


Brahma said: 

53. O brahmins, after saying this, when the period of a 
thousand sets of four Yugas was completed the lord again spoke 
to him in a voice as majestic as the sound of rumbling cloud. 

The Lord said : 

54-55. O sage, tell me the real truth. What did you eulogise 
me for ? Choose the most excellent boon. Ere long, I shall give 
it to you. You are more long-lived than Devas. You are my 
devotee of steady holy rites thereby, O leading brahmin. Now 
' obtain a still longer life. 


Brahma said : 

56. On hearing that splendid speech of the lord and glanc¬ 
ing at him, the sage bent down his head, made obeisance and 
spoke thus again : 

Markandeya said : 

57-60. O lord of Devas, O most excellent of the twice-born, 
since your form has been seen, O Hari, when you are seen, my 
delusion has gone away. It is the truth. Similarly, O lord of the 
Universe, I wish for the welfare of all worlds. I wish for the 
toning down of diversity by your favour. In this holy and pure 
shrine of Purusottama, O lord, I shall build a big temple for 
Siva. It shall resolve the dispute between the devotees of Siva 
and the devotees/of Visnu. In your place, let me instal Sankara. 




308 Brahma Purina 

61. Thereby the people in the world will know Lord 
Vi?nu and Lord Siva as the same form. 

Then the lord of the universe replied to the great sage. 

The Lord said : 

62-63. This Linga is the greatest cause, the lord of the 
worlds. It is for the sake of propitiation and for toning down 
the rigour of diversity. 

O leading brahmin, at my behest, build the Siva temple 
instantaneously. By virtue of power stay in the world of Siva. 

64. O brahmin, when Siva is installed it is I who am ins¬ 
talled. There is no difference between us two. We are one in 
(emotional fervour) but split into two forms externally. 

65. HewhoisRudra is himself Visnu. He who is Visnu is 
himself Rudra. There is no difference between the two as in 
regard to the Wind and Ether. 

66-69. Only childish men do not know that he who is 
Garuda-emblemed is the full-emblemed three-eyed lord who 
slew the Tripuras. Hence, O brahmins, build a temple of Siva, 
named after you. To the north of the lord of Devas make the 
holy reservoir very splendid. It will be well known in the mortal 
worlds by the name Markandeya Hrada. O excellent brahmin, 
he will dispel all sins. 

Brahma said : 

O excellent sages, after saying this to Markandeya the all- 
pervading lord Janardana vanished there itself. 


CHAPTER FIFTYFOUR 
Visit to Krfna Shrine 

Brahma said : 

1. O brahmins, henceforth, I shall recount the mode of 
visiting the five Tlrthas (holy centres) and the benefit derived 
from holy dips, .charitable gifts and visits to the deities. 


54.2-14 


309 


2. The pure man should go to the eddy called Markandeya 
Hrada and dive therein facing the north. He should take the 
holy dips thrice and repeat this Mantra, 

3-4. “O Enemy of Tripuras, O destroyer of the eyes of 
Bhaga, save me. I am immersed in the ocean of worldly existence. 
I have been seized by sins and rendered unconscious. 

Obeisance to Siva, the calm one, the dispeller of sins, O 
lord of Devas, I am having my holy ablution. May my sins 
perish”. 

5. After taking the holy dip in the water of depth upto the 
umbilicus, the intelligent devotee should duly perform Tarpana 
of Devas, sages, manes, and others by means of water mixed 
with gingelly seeds. 

6-7. After bath and Acamana, the devotee shall go to the 
temple of Siva. He shall enter the shrine of deity and circum¬ 
ambulate thrice. After worshipping the lord by the root 
Mantra, O Brahmins, he shall bow down and propitiate the 
lord by the Aghora Mantra. 

8 . O three-eyed lord, obeisance be to you. O Moon-orna¬ 
mented lord, obeisance to you; O Virupaksa, save me. O 
Mahadeva, obeisance be to you. 

9. By taking the holy dip in the eddy of Markanqleya 
Hrada, thus, and by visiting Sankara, the man obtains the 
benefit of ten horse-sacrifices. 

10-11. Liberated from all sins, he goes to the world of 
lord Siva. There he enjoys excellent pleasures till the ultimate 
dissolution of all living beings. He then returns to this world 
and is born as a brahmin of vast learning and renown. He 
adopts Yoga pertaining to Sankara and attains salvation. 

12. Thereafter, the devotee should go to the holy fig tree 
on a par with the Kalpa tree, circumambulate it thrice and 
worship the banyan tree with great devotion, repeating the 
following Mantra :— 

13-14. “Om obeisance be to the holy banyan tree of un¬ 
manifest form, cause of the great dissolution, permeated by the 
great tasty juice. 

O banyan tree, you are immortal, surviving all through the 
Kalpa. You are the abode of Vi§nu. O banyan tree, dispel 
my sin. O Kalpa tree ! obeisance to you”. 





310 


Brahma Purana 


15. By devoutly circumambulating and bowing down to 
the Banyan tree resembling the Kalpa tree the man is imme¬ 
diately liberated from sins like the serpent that is rid of its 
old and decaying slough. 

16. O brahmins, even by passing through the shadow of 
this Kalpa tree, a man eschews the sin of brahmin slaughter. 
What doubt is there in regard to other sins ? 

17-18. By visiting Visnu in the form of the banyan tree 
that has originated from the body of Krsna and that is a great 
being consisting of splendour of the Brahman and by bowing to 
it, O brahmins, the devotee derives a benefit that is superior to 
the benefit of Rajasuya and horse-sacrifice. Redeeming the 
members of his family he goes to the world of Visnu. 

19. By making obeisance to Vainateya, Garuda son of 
Vinata who is stationed in front of Krsna, the devotee shall be¬ 
come, liberated from all sins. He shall then go to the city of 
Visnu. 

20. He who visits Purusottama, Samkarsana and Su- 
bhadra after visiting the banyan tree and Vainateya, attains 
the greatest goal. 

21. After entering the shrine of Visnu and circumambu¬ 
lating the lord thrice he should worship and propitiate San- 
karsana and Subliadra, repeating their own Mantra :— 

22-23. Obeisance to you, O Rama holding the plough¬ 
share. Obeisance to you, O deity with the iron club as the 
weapon. Obeisance to you, O lover of Revati. 1 Obeisance to 
you, (O deity) favourably disposed towards devotees. Obeis¬ 
ance to you, O excellent one among strong persons. Obeisance 
to you, the holder of the earth. O enemy of Pralamba, Obeis¬ 
ance be to you. Save me, O elder brother of Krsna. 

24-26. By propitiating lord Balarama thus, the man will 
derive the desired benefit. The lord is worshipped by Devas. 
He is invincible. He has the size and shape of the peak of the 
mountain Kailasa. His face is lovelier than the moon. The 
.lord wears blue robes; his head is hideous on account of 
hoods. He holds the plough. He has great strength. He is 
bedecked with single ear-ring. He who devoutly propitiates 


1. Reoati—Wfc of Balabhadra or Balarama. 




54 . 27-37 


311 


the son of Rohini 1 is liberated from all sins. He goes to the 
world of lord Visnu. 

27-28. The man enjoys happiness there until the dis¬ 
solution of all living beings. When the merit dwindles down he 
returns to the earth, here in the excellent family of Yogins. He 
becomes an excellent brahmin, the master of all scriptures. He 
derives perfect knowledge and attains salvation that is difficult 
of access to others. 

29. After worshipping the ploughshare-bearing lord thus, 
the clever devotee shall worship Krsna with great concentra¬ 
tion uttering the twelve-syllabled Mantra. 

30. The self-possessed bold persons who devoutly worship 
Purusottama by reciting the twelve-syllabled Mantra attain 
Salvation. 

31. O brahmins, neither Devas nor Yogins, nor the 
Chanters of Saman hymns attain that goal which those who are 
devoted to the twelve-syllabled Mantra attain. 

32. Hence, one should devoutly worship Krsna, the pre¬ 
ceptor of the universe, by reciting that Mantra alone. After 
worshipping with scents, fragrant flowers, etc. he should bow 
to the deity and propitiate him. 

33-37. Be victorious O Krsna, O lord of the universe. Be 
victorious O destroyer of all sins. Be victorious O slayer of 
Canura and Kesin. Be victorious O slayer of Kamsa. 

Be victorious O lotus-petal-eyed lord. Be victorious O 
holder of discus and iron club. Be victorious O deity dark in 
complexion like the blue cloud. Be victorious O bestower of 
happiness on all. 

Be victorious O lord worthy of being worshipped by the 
universe. Be victorious O destroyer of the world. Be victorious 
O Visnu worthy of being worshipped by the worlds. Be victori¬ 
ous, O bestower of desired benefit. 

O excellent lord, O Purusottama, I am immersed in the 
terrible ocean of worldly existence. It is significant. Miseries 
arc like foams therein. It is terrible with wrath making it 
agitated as if through crocodiles. The objects of sense-organs, 

1. Rohm : mother of Balabhadra. She was the second wife of Vasu- 
deva, the other being Devakl, mother of Srlkrsna. 






312 


Brahma Parana 


constitute the flooding waters therein. The different ailments 
are like its waves and foams. It is impassable due to the whirl¬ 
pools of delusion. O lord, save me. 

38-41. O brahmins, by worshipping Krsna thus the 
devotee attains the benefit of thousands of horse-sacrifices. 
Krsna is the lord of Devas. He is the bestower of boons. He is 
favourably disposed towards his devotees. He is the bestower of 
all benefits. He has two arms and stout shoulders. His eyes 
are large as the petals of the lotus. His chest and arms are 
large. His face is splendid. He is clad in yellow robes. He 
holds conch, discus and ironclub in his hands. He has a coronet 
and shoulderlets as ornaments. He is endowed with all noble 
characteristics. He is adorned by the garlands of sylvan 
flowers. After visiting him the man shall join his palms in 
reverence and prostrate in front of him like a rod. He derives 
the benefit of thousands of horse-sacrifices. 

42. By visiting and bowing to Krsna the man obtains that 
benefit which has been glorified as the result of holy dip and 
charitable gifts in the holy centres. 

43. By visiting and bowing to Krsna a man obtains that 
benefit which results from a sacrifice where much gold is distri¬ 
buted together with precious stones and other valuables. 

44. By making obeisance to Krsna a man obtains that 
benefit which has been glorified as the result of sacrifices and 
the Vedas. 

45. By visiting and bowing to Krsna a man obtains that 
benefit which is attained by all charitable gifts, holy rites and 
observances. 

46. By visiting and bowing to Krsna a man obtains that 
benefit which has been cited as the benefit accruing from diffe¬ 
rent sorts of severe austerities. 

47. By visiting and bowing to Krsna a man obtains that 
benefit which is glorified as the result of the vow of celibacy 
perfectly practised. 

48. By visiting and bowing to Krsna a man obtains the 
benefit of a householder who strictly adheres to the disciplined 
conduct of life. 

49. By visiting and bowing to Krsna a man obtains the 


54.50-61 


313 


benefit glorified as the result of life in the forest led by (forest- 
dweller). 

50, By visiting and bowing to Kfsna, a man obtains the 
benefit cited as the result of renunciation as mentioned before. 

51. O brahmins, of what avail is much talk in regard to 
the greatness of that lord. By devoutly visiting Krsna a man 
obtains salvation which is most difficult to obtain. 

52-53. The man will be liberated from sins accumulated 
in the course of crorcs of Kalpas. He will be endowed with 
the greatest glory. He will be endued with good qualities. He 
will redeem twentyone generations of his family. He will go to 
the city of Visnu on a very brilliant aerial chariot flourishingly 
endowed with all desirable things. 

54-55. For a period of hundred Kalpas he will enjoy 
pleasures pleasant to the mind along with Gandharvas and 
Apsaras like the four-armed Visnu. 

Falling off from that world he comes here to the earth and 
is born as one conversant with Dharma, master of Vedas and 
devoid of malice in the excellent family of brahmins. 

56. He will be engaged in the performance of his own 
duty. He will be quietly controlling his sense organs. He will 
be engaged in the welfare of all living beings. Attaining per¬ 
fect knowledge pertaining to Visnu, he will attain salvation. 

57. Thereafter, O brahmin, he shall worship Subhadra, 
favourably disposed towards her devotees by reciting the 
requisite Mantra. He shall then propitiate her by bowing to 
her with palms joined in reverence. 

58. Obeisance to you O omnipresent Goddess. Obeisance 
to you the bestower of auspicious happiness. Save me, O God¬ 
dess with eyes like the petals of a lotus. O KatyayanI, obeis¬ 
ance be to you, Subhadra. 

59-61. By thus propitiating that Goddess, who creates the 
universe, who is beneficial to the universe, who was the sister 
of lord Baladeva, who is the bestower of boons and who is 
auspicious, the man goes to the abode of Visnu, on an aerial 
chariot that can go at one’s own sweet will. Till the dissolution 
of the world he sports there like aDeva. Then he comes here 
and attains the state of a human being. He shall become a 







314 Brahma Purarfa 

brahmin conversant with the Vedas. After attaining Yoga 
pertaining to Lord Visnu he attains liberation. 


CHAPTER FIFTYFIVE 
The Greatness of Narasimha 

Brahma said : 

1. By thus visiting and bowing to Bala, Krsna and Su- 
bhadra, the devotee obtains virtue, wealth, love and liberation. 

2 . Just as he comes out of the temple of the deity, the 
man becomes blessed. After bowing to the deity the man 
returns to his abode with great concentration. 

3. He returns to his abode where lord Visnu’s idol, made of 
lapis lazuli, is covered up by sands. By bowing to the lord who 
vanished there he enters the city of Visnu. 

4. O brahmins, that lord who is identical with Devas and 
who slew the most excellent one among Asuras stays there with 
half of his body made like that of a lion. 

5. By devoutly visiting Narasimha lord, and by bowing to 
him one is liberated from all sins. There is no doubt in this. 

6 . Those men on the earth who are the devotees of Nara- 
simha, incur no sin at all. They will have all desired benefits. 

7. Hence, by all means one shall resort to Narasimha 
since he bestows the benefit of virtue, wealth, love and 
salvation. 

The sages said : 

8 . O lord, since you say that the glory of Narasimha is the 
bestower of happiness and is very difficult of access it has 
kindled great wonder in us. 

9. O lord of the universe, we wish to hear the power of 
that lord in detail. Our eagerness is very great. 

10. O lord, obeisance be to you. For rendering help to 
devotees, tell us how Narasimha, the lord of great strength 
becomes pleased. 


55 . 11-22 


315 


Tell us all about those (achievements) which originate 
by the favour of Narasirhha. O great grandfather, be pleased 
with us. 

Brahma said : 

12 . O brahmins even as I recount listen to the power of 
that lord who is unconquered and incomprehensible and who 
bestows worldly pleasures and salvation. 

13. O brahmins, who is competent to recount the good 
qualities of that lord half of whose body is that of a lion ? I 
shall mention a few succinctly. 

14. We hear many human and divine accomplishments 
which are undoubtedly realized by the favour of that lord. 

15. Due to the favour of that lord, one’s movement be¬ 
comes unimpeded in the mortal world, heaven, netherworlds, 
quarters, water, city as well as mountain. 

16. In this world including the mobile and immobile 
beings O brahmins, there is nothing impossible to achieve for 
lord Narasimha who is always sympathetic to his devotees. 

17. I shall mention the mode of procedure for the worship 
of the lord. This is helpful to his devotees. I shall mention 
what it is whereby the deity with half the body of a lion is 
propitiated. 

18. O leading sages, listen to the eternal Kalparaja 
(Royal ritual), the real principle of Narasimha which has not 
been understood by Devas and Asuras. 

19. O brahmins, the leading aspirant devotee should 
subsist on a diet of milk accompanied by greens, roots, barley 
food, fruits, fried grain powder and oil cake. 

20-22. A pure loin cloth alone should constitute his 
garment. He should conquer his sense-organs and establish 
himself for meditation in the forest, an isolated place, mountain, 
confluence of rivers, a barren land, a holy centre of Siddhas or 
in the hermitage of Narasimha. Then he should worship the 
lord in accordance with the injunctions. O leading sages, on the 
twelfth day in the bright half of the lunar month he shall 
observe fast. With his mind and sense organs in perfect restraint 
he should repeat the mantra for two million times. 




316 


Brahma Pura$a 


23. O brahmins, there is no doubt that the aspirant would 
be liberated from all sins whether they be subsidiary or major. 

24-25. He should circumambulate and worship Narasimha 
with flowers, scents, incenses, etc. After bending the head 
before the lord the devotee should apply Jati flowers smeared 
with camphor and sandal paste on the head of lord Narasimha. 
Thereby Siddhi results. 

26-28. The lord is not hindered anywhere in any of his 
activities. Even Brahma, Rudra and other Devas are incompe¬ 
tent to bear the refulgence of the lord. What then in regard to 
Danavas, Siddhas, Gandharvas, human beings, Vidyadharas, 
Yaksas, Kinnaras andNagas. There are those who wish for other 
Mantras, (than those of Narasimha). All these perish (on see¬ 
ing Narasimha), like darkness when the refulgence of the sun 
or fire is revealed. 

29. The (Talisman) that is inspired once by the repetition 
of Mantras bestows steady pleasures. The talisman that is ins¬ 
pired thus twice, becomes a divine amulet. It protects the 
devotee from Devas as well as Danavas. 

30. It should also protect from all those enemies such as 
Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Yaksas, Vidyadharas, Nagas, goblins, 
demons as well as similar antagonists. 

31-34. The amulet that is inspired (with Mantras) thrice, 
cannot be broken by Devas and Asuras. 

O excellent Brahmins, lord Narasimha of great strengths 
protects the aspirant devotee within a radius of twelve Yojanas. 

The devotee should then go near a Crevasse and observe 
fast for three nights. He should then kindle the holy fire with 
Palasa twigs and logs. 

O leading brahmins, the aspirant should make two hundred 
sacrifices with (as many) Palasa twigs soaked in honey, sugar 
and ghee repeating Vasatkaras. 

The opening of Crevasse should be visible instantaneously. 

35. The learned aspirant shall unhesitatingly enter the 
Crevasse with the coat of mail on, as he goes ahead, his diffi¬ 
culty, darkness and delusion perish. 

36. A wide royal road beautified by humming bees becomes 
visible. O brahmins, remembering Narasimha he enters the 
nether worlds. 


55.37-57 


317 


37-40. After going there, the aspirant should repeat the 
mantra of Narasimha the undiminishing mantra. 

Thereafter, thousands of women playing on the lute come 
out to welcome him. O brahmins, after greeting him they take 
the leading aspirant, holding him by the hand. 

O excellent brahmins, they make him drink the divine 
elixir. Immediately after drinking it he becomes very powerful. 
His body becomes divine. 

He dallies with those girls till the ultimate dissolution of all 
living beings. When his body is split he becomes merged in 
Vasudeva. 

41-46. When the residence there, no longer appeals to him 
he starts therefrom. The leading aspirant takes the following 
things with him :—A tablet, a trident, a sword, a yellow orpi- 
ment, a jewel, a mercury, a pair of elixir sandals, collyrium, the 
skin of a black antelope, the pleasing pill, waterpot, rosary, 
staff, Siddhavidya named Safijlvanl and the scriptural texts. 
If the trident, that is enveloped by the wavelike formation of 
sparks of blazing fire is placed in the heart even for once it 
burns sins accumulated in crores of births. If it is placed in 
poison it destroys poison. If it is placed over the body it dispels 
leprosy. Even after committing the sin of foetus slaughter he 
becomes purified by this divine remedy. When patients are 
afflicted by powerful planets, the devotee shall think about 
the blazing deity. Thereby the terrible planets will perish quickly 
in the heart. 

47. The amulet (inspired with Narasimha Mantra)' tied 
round the neck of children affords a permanent protection: It 
destroys tumour, pustule, boils, as well as spider poison. 

48. If afflicted by ailments, the devotee should perform a 
sacrifice with sacrificial twigs, ghee and milk, thrice a day during 
the junctions (i.e. dawn, midday and dusk). If this is continued 
for a month it will dispel all ailments. 

49 . I do not see anything that cannot be achieved in the 
three worlds consisting of mobile and immobile beings. What¬ 
ever accomplishment he desires, he certainly achieves it. 

50-57. Another method: the devotee worships the lion one 
hundred and eight times. He takes seven lumps of clay from the 
anthill, cremation ground, four cross-roads. Mixing them with 




318 


Brahma Purdna 


red sandal he pours cow’s milk and rolls it into a lump. With 
this lump he makes the image of a lion six fingers (in length and 
height). Taking a bark leaf he applies yellow orpiment over it. 
This he ties round the neck of Narasimha. The aspirant then 
worships the deity with water. He repeats the Mantra innume¬ 
rable times. With the sense-organs perfectly under restraint' he 
continues the repetition of Mantra for seven days. Within a 
Muhurta the entire earth is flooded with water. 

Or the devotee shall worship Narasimha on the top of a tree. 
By performing the Japa of the Mantra one hundred and eight 
times the devotee can prevent a great downpour. 

The noble aspirant puts the image of Narasimha in a cage 
and closes it. He should then whirl it. Within a short while a 
great gust of wind will undoubtedly blow. He can restrain it 
quickly by means of water inspired with the repetition of Nara- 
simha Mantra seven times. 

If the aspirant digs the earth and keeps the image concealed 
at the threshold of anyone, the entire family of that person will 
be annihilated. If it is taken out, it accords peace. 

58. Hence, O leading sages, the devotee should always 
worship the lord of beasts, of great power, the bestower of all 
desires. 

59-60. Liberated from all sins he goes to the world of 
Visnu. 

By devoutly worshipping the most excellent one among 
Devas, who has assumed the form of a lion, the Brahmins, 
Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, womenfolk, Sudras and the lowcaste people 
are liberated from inauspicious miseries accumulated in the 
course of crores ofbirths. 

61-67. O Brahmins, by worshipping that excellent Deva they 
attain all desired things such as Deva-hood, lordship of the 
immortal beings and Gandharva-hood. They attain the status of 
Yaksa or Vidyadhara or other types of desired things. 

By visiting, eulogising, bowing to and worshipping Nara¬ 
simha, men obtain a kingdom, heavenly pleasure and salvation 
which is very difficult to attain. 

By visiting Narasimha a man obtains the desired benefit. 
Liberated from sins he goes to the world of Visnu. 


55.68-77 


319 

By devoutly visiting once that lord who has assumed the 
form of a lion, one is liberated from inauspicious miseries 

accumulated in crores of births. 

On the following occasions the lord should be remembered. 
At the time of war, or a calamity very difficult to surmount, or 
at the time when one is afflicted by thieves, tigers etc., or 
when there is danger to life in a dense forest or when one is 
likely to be afflicted by poison, fire and water or when one is 
afflicted by kings and others, oceans, planets, sickness etc. By 
remembering the lord on these occasions a man is liberated 
from hosts of calamities. v 

Just as the desert of darkness is dispelled at sunrise so also 
all calamities perish by visiting the lord. 

68-77. When lord Narasimha is pleased, a man obtains 
the miraculous pill, collyrium, sandals of the nether worlds, 
elixir as well as other desired things. 

There is no doubt that one obtains all those desires for which 
one worships Narasimha with his desires kept in mind. 

By visiting the lord of the chiefs of Devas, by devoutly 
worshipping him and bowing to him, the devotee derives ten 
times the benefit of ten horse sacrifices. He is liberated from all 
sins. He is embellishsd with all good qualities. He is richly 
blessed with the fulfilment of all desires. He is devoid of old age 
and death. Seated in an aerial chariot the devotee goes to the 
world of Visnu. 

The aerial chariot is golden. It is embellished with clusters 
of twinkling bells. It has good refulgence. It is richly furnished 
with all desirable things. It can goto any place one wishes. It 
has the colour and lustre of the midday sun. Pearl necklaces are 
suspended from it. Hundreds of celestial damsels are present in 
it. It is resonant with the divine sound of singing the Gandhar- 
vas. He is eulogised by Apsaras. He is as happy and gay as 
Devas. He redeems twentyone generations of his family. Thus 
he goes to the world of Visnu. O excellent brahmins, there in 
the world of Visnu he enjoys excellent pleasures in the company 
of Gandharvas and Apsaras. He assumes the form with four arms. 
He enjoys pleasures and happiness till the final dissolution of the 
world. When his merit dwindles he returns to. this world and is 
born as a brahmin in an excellent family of Yogins. He masters 







320 Brahma Parana 

the four Vedas and their ancillaries. He attains Yoga pertaining 
to Vi?nu and obtains liberation. 


CHAPTER FIFTYSIX 


Brahma said : 


The Greatness of Sveta Madhava 


1 . By visiting and devoutly bowing to Vasudeva-Ananta 
the man is liberated from all sins. He attains the highest region 
of Visnu. 

2. He has been propitiated by me and thereafter by Indra, 
Vibhlsana 1 and Rama. Who does not wish to be propitiated? 

3. The man who takes holy dip in the Svetaganga and 
visits Svetamadhava as well as Matsya Madhava (Lord Visnu 
in the form of a fish) goes to Svetadvlpa. 


The sages said : 

4-5 It behoves you to recount fully the greatness of Sveta- 
madhava. O Lord of the Universe, recount the installation of 
Hari in detail. Lord Svetamadhava is well known in that sacred 
and excellent holy centre. He is well known in the whole of the 
universe. Who installed that lord formerly? 


Brahma said : 


6 . O Brahmins, there was a powerful king named Sveta 
intheKrtayuga. He was intelligent, valorous and truthful. He 
was conversant with holy rites and he was steadfast in perform¬ 
ing them. 

7. In his kingdom, men used to live upto ten thousand 
years without sickness. No body perished or was despondant in 
that kingdom. 

8-9 When this state of affairs continued thus in the kingdom 
for some time, O brahmins, the son of a very righteous sage 
named Kapala Gautama passed away even before he cut his 


I. Vibhima : brother of 
Vibhisana were bom to Visravas 


Ravaija. Ravana, 
by his wife Malini. 


Kumbhakarna, and 



56.10-19 


321 


teeth. The intelligent sage brought the dead boy to the presence 
of the king. 

10 . On seeing the boy in this long slumber without sen¬ 
tience, O brahmins, the king took a vow of resuscitating the 
infant boy back to life. 

The king said : 

11 . If I do not within seven days bring back this boy who 
has gone to the abode of Yama, I shall ascend the burning 
pyre. 

Brahma said : 

12 . After saying thus, the king worshipped the great lord 
with one thousand and one hundred blue lotuses. Then he 
repeated the Mantra. 

13. On seeing the surpassing devotion of the king, the Lord 
of the universe came there together with Yama and said C T am 
delighted and satisfied”. 

14-15 On hearing the words of the Lord suddenly and seeing 
Lord Kara who had smeared his limbs with ashes, who had 
hideous eyes, who in refulgenee resembled the Kunda flower and 
the autumnal moon, who was wearing the hide of a tiger and 
whose tresses were marked by the moon he fell instantaneously 
on the ground, bowed to him and spoke. 

Sveta said : 

16-17. If you have mercy upon me, O Lord, if you are 
pleased on seeing me, may this boy, the dear child of a brahmin, 
who is under the control of the God of death, come back to life 
once again. This is the holy rite I have taken upon myself. O 
Lord Mahesvara, kindly instal a long life in this boy who is 
dead suddenly. Kindly accord all round welfare. 

Brahma said : 

18. On hearing these words of Sveta, lord Mahesvara be¬ 
came joyous. He called the God of death who is terrible to all 
living beings. 

19. O Brahmins, he restrained the unthwartable Kala, the 







322 Brahma Purana 

obedient servant of Yama; he resuscitated the boy from the 
jaws of death. 

20-21. After bringing back the sage’s son to life and 
according welfare to the entire universe, O brahmins, the Lord 
vanished there itself together with goddess Uma. Thus the 
excellent king enlivened the son of the sage. 

The sages said : 

22. O Lord of Devas, O Lord of the Universe, O unchang¬ 
ing source of origin of the three worlds, tell us now the greatest 
fact of the deity named Sveta. 

Brahma said : 

23. Listen, O leading sages, O sinless ones, for the welfare 
of all living beings I shall mention factually what you ask of me. 

24. The greatness of Madhava is destructive of all sins. 
On hearing it the man attains the desired pleasures. 

25. O brahmins, I have heard his anecdote formerly from 
the sages, the divine story of the deity called Madhava. Listen 
to that story which dispels fear, grief and agony. 

26-28. King Sveta ruled over the kingdom for thousands 
of years with great concentration. He pondered over various 
holy rites of secular and Vedic nature and also over the restraints 
and observances. O Brahmins, he resolved to propitiate Kesava 
and adopted holy rites for that purpose. He went to the greatest 
holy centre on the shore of the Southern Sea. In a beautiful 
auspicious spot on the shore near Krsna’s shrine* Sveta built 
a beautiful palace. 

29-30 To the south of the Lord ofDevas he built the 
palace ofa hundred bows’ lengths. O leading Brahmins, with 
white marble rocks, Lord Madhava was made to appear like a 
white man resembling the moon by king Sveta. He performed 
the installation duly as (previously) thought of. 

31-33. The king made charitable gifts to the brahmins, 
ascetics, poor and helpless persons. Thereafter, the king went 
to the presence of Lord Mahadeva. Repeating the twelve syllabl¬ 
ed Mantra alongwith Omkara he prostrated on the ground. 
Then the blessed king observed the vow of silence and abstaining 
from food for a month entered into Samadhi (trance). At the 


56 . 34-45 


323 


end of prayerful observance the king stood at the feet of Visnu 
and began to eulogise the lord of Devas. 

Sveta said : 

34. Om obeisance to Vasudeva, obeisance to Samkarsana, 
obeisance to Pradyumna, Aniruddha, obeisance to Narayana. 

35 - Obeisance to the omniformed, to the creator of the 
foi m of the Universe, to inconceivable deity devoid of attributes 
to the pure one, of (splendid) activities. 

36. Om obeisance to the deity with the umbilical lotus, to 
the source of origin of the lotus-born lord; to the lotus-coloured 
one, to you with the lotus in hand. 

37. Om obeisance to the lotus-eyed bountiful lord with a 
thousand eyes i obeisance to the thousand-footed, thousand¬ 
armed and thousand-furied lord. 

38. Om obeisance to Varaha (Boar), the bestower of 
boons, the most excellent, the most praise-worthy deity of good 
intellect, Acyuta of gold complexion. 

39. Om obeisance to the lord in the form of a boy, obe¬ 
isance to the deity with the lustre of a tender lotus, obeisance 
to the deity with the rising sun and the moon for the eyes, 
obeisance to the lord with the tresses resembling Munja grass. 

40. Obeisance to Kesava, obeisance to Narayana. Obeisance 
to Madhava, obeisance to Govinda. 

41. Om obeisance to Visnu, obeisance to the lord endowed 
with wealth and strength; obeisance to the slayer of Madhu, to 
one who holds pure rays. 

42. Obeisance to the infinite one, the subtle one, to one who 
bears the Srivatsa scar, obeisance to Srlvikrama and the deity 
who wears the divine yellow robes. 

43. Obeisance to you the cause of creation; obeisance to 
the protector and the sustainer, to one endowed with attributes, 
and also to one devoid of attributes. 

44. Obeisance to the lord of dwarfish forms, to one of 
dwarfish activities, to one of small eyes, to one of dwarfish 
vehicle. 

45. Obeisance to the infinite deity worthy of being wor¬ 
shipped, to one of unmanifest forms, to one who cannot be 
argued about, to the pure and the dispeller of fear. 









324 


Brahma Parana 


46-47. Obeisance to the deity who acts as a raft (for 
crossing) the ocean of worldly existence, to the deity of colour 
forum, to the deity of auspicious gentle form, to the deity 
assuming terrible forms, to the deity that breaks worldly existence, 
the bestower of worldly pleasures, to the deity in the form of 
universe; obeisance to the creator of worlds. 

48. Om obeisance to the deity of divine forms, to the deity 
whose breath is constituted by the moon and fire. Obeisance to 
one whose tresses are constituted by solar and lunar rays. 
Obeisance to the deity conducive to the welfare of cows and 
brahmins. 

49. Om obeisance to the deity on the form of Rk; Obeisance 
to the deity in the forms ofPadaand Krama. Obeisance to you, 
who arc eulogised by the Rks; obeisance to the deity whose means 
is Rk. 

50. Om obeisance to the upholder of Yaju’s mantras, to the 
deity who has assumed the form of Yajus, to one who is worthy 
of being worshipped through Yajus, to one who is served, to 
the lord of Yajus Mantras. 

51. Om obeisance to you, O lord of Sri; Obeisance to 
Srldhara; obeisance to the most excellent one; obeisance to the 
lover of Sri; obeisance to one of self-control; obeisance to the 
Yogin worthy of being meditated upon by the Yogins. 

52. Om obeisance to the deity in the form of Saman. 
Obeisance to the excellent tone of the Saman. Om obeisance 
to the gentle one of Saman. Obeisance to the deity conversant 
with the Samayoga. 

53. Obeisance to the Saman. Obeisance to the deity sung 
about by the Saman songs. Om obeisance to the uplifter of the 
Saman. Obeisance to the deity conversant with the Saman. 
Obeisance to the composer of Saman songs. 

54. Obeisance to the deity whose head is Atharvaveda; 
obeisance to the deity whose from is Atharvan; obeisance to 
the deity whose foot is Atharvan; obeisance to the deity whose 
hand is Atharvan. • 

55. Om obeisance to the deity with adamantine head; 
obeisance to the slayer of Madhu and Kaitabha; obeisance to 


56.56-65 


325 

one stationed in the waters of great ocean. Obeisance to one 
who redeemed the Vedas and brought them out of waters. 

56. Obeisance to Hrslkesa 1 of brightly illuminated form. 
Obeisance to you, lord Vasudeva. Obeisance to you Narayana. 

57. Obeisance to the deity conducive to the welfare of 
the . world. Om obeisance to the destroyer of delusion. 
Obeisance to one who breaks existence. 

58. Obeisance to one who bestows salvation; obeisance to 

one who dispels bondage; obeisance to the maker of luminaries. 
Obeisance to the deity of fiery form. 

59. Obeisance to the lord of Yogins; obeisance to Rama 
who redeems all; obeisance to happiness; obeisance to the 
happy-eyed; obeisance to the upholder of merits. 

60. Obeisance to Vasudeva worthy of being saluted; 
obeisance to Vamadeva; obeisance to one who creates bodies 
for the embodied souls; obeisance to the breaker of difference. 

61 - Obeisance to the one whose body is saluted by Devas; 
obeisance to you of divine crown; obeisance to one who is 
the abode of fame; obeisance to one who serves as a shelter. 

62. Om obeisance to the maker of riches; obeisance to one 
who bestows riches and residence; obeisance to the deity of the 
form of sacrifice; obeisance to the lord of sacrifices; obeisance 
to the Yogin. 

63. Obeisance to the lord of ascetics who preach Yoga. 
Obeisance to one who holds a discus; obeisance to Samkarsana; 
obeisance to one who slew Pralamba. 2 

64. Obeisance to the holder of ploughshare whose velocity 
is great and whose sound resembles the sound of clouds. 
Obeisance to you a perfect knowledge of the wise, O Narayana 
the ultimate resort of all living beings. 

65. O Lord excepting you, I haye no other kinsmen or 
guide for redeeming me from hell. Hence, O deity favourably 
disposed towards those who bow down, I bow to you with 
emotional fervour. 


1. Hr$\kefa : One who has controlled the sense-organs that is a 
yogin . Krsna is said to be yogesvara. 

2. Pralamba : an asura who attacked Srikrsna and Balarama but 
was killed by the latter. 






326 


Brahma Purd?i a 


66. O Kesava, O Acyuta, excepting you there is none to 
wash off the impurity of body and mind, O lord of Devas. 

67. I have approached you after eschewing all sorts of 
contacts and unions. O Kesava, may my contact remain with 
you for attaining self-realization. 

68. O Kesava, I know that this worldly existence is full 
of pain. It is impossible to cross it during adversities . I am 
afflicted by my threefold searching tortures. Hence, I seek refuge 
in you. 

69. The entire universe is deluded by enticing desires 
through your Maya. It is attracted by covetousness, etc. Hence, 
I have resorted to you. 

70-72. O Visnu, nothing is conducive to happiness for an 
embodied soul stationed in the world. 

O lord of sacrifices, as the mind is gradually turned to you, 
one may attain the ultimate pleasure, if one is not enamoured 
of the benefit of actions. CC 1 am doomed. I am devoid of dis¬ 
criminating faculty 0 . The Universe is seen unhappy and 
dejected thus. 

O Govinda, save me from worldly existence. It behoves you 
to uplift me. I am immersed in the ocean of worldly existence 
which cannot be crossed, with delusion forming its waters. O 
Lotus-eyed one, excepting you there is no other saviour unto 
me. 


Brahma said : 

73-74. O Brahmins, thus the lord was eulogised by king 
Sveta in that divine excellent holy centre known as Purusottama. 
In consideration of his devotion, Hari, the lord of Devas, the 
preceptor of the universe came in front of the king surrounded 
by all Devas. 

75-77. He resembled the blue cloud. His eyes were large 
like the petals of lotus. By the tip of his hand the glorious lord 
held SudarSana with a bright disc allround. In his left hand he 
held the splendid conch Pancajanya of great lustre. It was 
devoid of impurities. It resembled the moon and the liquid 
content of the milky ocean. The emblem of the lord was the 


56.78-88 


327 


king of birds. 1 The glorious lord held the iron club, sword and 
Sarhga bow. He said :-‘«WeIl done, O king, since this ex¬ 
cellent idea lose within you, O sinless one,., choose whatever is 
desired by you and whatever is conducive to my welfare. I am 
delighted with you”, 

Brahma said : 

78. On hearing these nectar-like words of the Lord of 
Devas, Sveta bent down his head with devotion and said with 
his mind concentrating on the lord. 

Sveta said : 

79-80. O lord, if 1 am a devotee, grant me this excellent 
boon. The unchanging region of Visnu is above everything 
up to the abode of Brahma. It is devoid of impurities and Rajas. 
It is.pure. It is rid of the contact with the world. O lord of the 
universe, I wish to go to that region by your favour. 

The Lord said : 

81-82. After enjoying the nectar of ruling over the kingdom 
you will go to that abode which Devas, sages, Siddhas and 
yogins do not approach. It is the greatest abode devoid of ail¬ 
ments. After passing over the worlds you will attain my world. 

83. O leading king, your glory will spread throughout the 
world. I will always be present here. 

84-88. Devas and Danavas will sing about this as Sveta 
Ganga, pure and holy Ganga. My devotees who have great 
concentration will go to heaven even by touching the sacred 
water of Sveta Ganga, O leading king, by the tip of Kusa grass. 

He who visits this idol of lunar splendour named Madhava 
and worships it even once, casts off other worlds. He is honour¬ 
ed in my world. The idol resembles the conch and cow’s milk. 
It is destructive of sins. It has eyes resembling a lotus. 

For many Manvantaras he will enjoy as he pleases the 
extensive pleasures in the company of my followers. He will be 
surrounded by beautiful celestial virgins. The Siddhas and 
Gandharvas will sing his praise and serve him. 


I. King of birds —Garuda, the Vehicle of Mahavisnu. 






328 


Brahma Purdna 

89-91. Falling off from that place he comes here as a man. 
He shall be born as a brahmin mastering the Vedas and Vedan- 
gas. He will be glorious. He will enjoy all pleasures and live for 
a long time. He will possess elephants, horses, chariots and 
other vehicles. He will be surrounded by wealth and food- 
grains. He will be pure and endowed with handome features. 
He will be fortunate and accompanied by sons and grandsons. 

He will return to the holy centre Purusottama at the root of 
the Banyan tree on the sea-shore. Remembering Hari and 
casting off the body he shall gc to that calm and quiet place. 


CHAPTER FIFTYSEVEN 

Mode of Procedure for a Holy Dip in the Ocean 
Brahma said : 

1-3. By visiting Svetamadhava and Matsyamadhava by his 
side and by bowing to the first incarnation of Madhava in the 
form of a Fish, one is liberated from all miseries. Lord 
Matsya Madhava had at the outset assumed the form of Rohita 
fish. He had been thinking of the earth stationed at the bottom 
of the nether worlds. He established himself there in order to 
redeem the Vedas. 

4. He goes to the greatest abode where Hari himself is 
present. Returning to this placc(eartli)in due course of time he 
shall become a king on the earth, 

5. By resorting to Matsyamadhava a man becomes un- 
thwartable. He shall be a donor, enjoyer of pleasures, a wor¬ 
shipper, a devotee of Visnu and truthful in speech. 

6. Afterwards he attains Yoga pertaining to Hari and 
gains salvation. O leading sages, the greatness of Matsyama¬ 
dhava has been recounted by me. By visiting him the devotee 
will obtain all cherished desires. 

The sages said : 

7. O Lord, we wish to hear further. The rites of wiping off, 


57.8-17 


329 


causing sprinkling of water by means of Kusa grass, ablution, 
charitable gifts, etc are performed on the sea-shore. Kindly 
mention the entire benefits thereof. 

Brahma said : 

8-10. Listen. O leading sages, to the benefit of Marjana 
rite performed duly. One attains excellent merit due to devo¬ 
tion. Out of devotion one must direct one’s mind towards him. 
The rite of taking holy dip in the eddy called Markandeya 
Hrada is to be preferably performed in the forenoon. Especially 
on the fourteenth day of the lunar fortnight this rite is 
destructive of all sins. Similarly, the rite of ablution in the 
ocean is equally praise-worthy at any time. Especially on the full 
moon day (by the holy dip) one attains the benefit of a horse- 
sacrifice. 

11. The Pancatlrthi (a set of five holy centres and sacred 
waters) is as follows :—The eddy named after Markandeya, 
the holy banyan tree, the shrine of Kfsna, the shrine of Bala- 
rama and the great Indradyumnasaras (Lake of Indra- 
dyumna). 

12. One should visit the Tlrtfiaraja (king of holy centres, 
the holy Banyan tree) on the full moon day in the month of 
Jyestha. If the constellation Jyestha coincides with it, it is 
especially auspicious. 

13-15. The devotee should be pure mentally, verbally and 
physically. He should not think of anything else. He should be 
free from all Dvandvas (mutually opposed pairs). He should 
free from lustful attachment and rivalry. The beautiful banyan 
tree is the Kalpa tree itself. After taking holy dip near it, the 
devotee shall circumambulate the lord thrice with great con¬ 
centration. O Brahmins, by visiting this Lord one is liberated 
from sins accumulated in the course of seven births. He attains 
extensive merits and the desired salvation. 

16. O brahmins, I shall mention its names and size, in 
the Yugas Krta, etc, in due order. 

17. The names of the banyan tree in the Kjtayuga etc are 
respectively.—1) Vata, (2). Vatesvara, (3) Purusa and (4) 
Puranapurusa, O brahmins. 






330 


Brahma Purdria 


18. The sizes of the Kalpa tree in the four Yugas are 1) 
one Yojana 2) three fourths of a Yojana (3) half a Yojana and 
4) onefourth of a Yojana. 

19. After bowing to the banyan tree repeating the 
mantra mentioned before, the devotee shall go to the South 
to a distance of three hundred bow’s lengths. 

20. At this place one can behold Visnu. Here is a 
pleasing entrance to the heavenly world. A log of wood 
equipped with good qualities is dragged by the waters of the 
ocean. 

21. By bowing to him and then by worshipping him, the 
devotee is liberated from all ailments, sins, evils and things of 
other sorts. 

22-24. Through 'the heavenly door the devotee views 
the ocean as one with fierce foams. He shall then perform the 
rite of Acamana. Remaining pure be should meditate 
afterwards, fix the eight-syllabled Mantra in the (fingers of the) 
hand and (limits of) the body that is the Mantra which 
learned men say thus—Om namo Narayanaya. 

What can be done with many Mantras that cause only 
mental confusion ? This mantra Om namo Narayanaya is the 
means of achieving everything. 

25. The waters are glorified as Naras because they are the 
sons ofNara (human beings). At the outset the waters had been 
the abode of Visnu. Hence, he is known as Narayana (having 
Nara (waters) for abode. 

26. The greatest in the world is Narayana. The greatest 
among Devas is Narayana, Truthfulness is devoted to Narayana. 

27-33. The element earth is devoted to Narayana, the ele¬ 
ment water is devoted to Narayana, the element fire is devoted 
to Narayana, the element sky is devoted to Narayana, the 
wind is devoted to Narayana, the mind is devoted to Narayana, 
the ego and the cosmic intellect are of the nature of Narayana. 
The past, present, future, whatever is called by the name Jiva 
(living-organism) is of the nature of Narayana. 

Sound and other objects of sense-organs, ears and other 
sense-organs the Prakrti and Purusa—these are of the nature 
of Narayana. 


57.34-42 


331 


Lord Narayana occupies water, dryland, nether worlds, 
heaven, sky and mountains supporting all these visible objects. 

Of what avail is much talk ? The whole universe consisting 
of mobile and immobile beings, from Brahma to the blade of 
grass—is identical with Narayana. 

O Brahmins, I do not see anything greater than Narayana. 
All these visible and invisible things in the world are pervaded 
by him. 

34. The waters are the abode of Visnu. He is the lord of 
waters. Hence, one should always remember Narayana, the 
dispellcr of sins, in the waters. 

35. Particularly at the time of bath the pure devotee 
shall worship and remember Narayana in the water. He shall 
meditate on him and perform the Nyasa rite in the (fingers of 
hand and (the limbs of) body. 

36-42. He should fix Omkara and Nakara (syllable Na) in 
the thumbs of his hands. The other syllables he shall fix in 
the index and other fingers covering the whole palm. 

Pie shall fix Omkara in the left foot and Nakara (syllable 
Na) in the right foot. He shall fix the syllable Mo in the left 
hip and the syllable Na in the right hip. 

He shall fix the syllable Ra in the umbilical spot and the 
syllable Ta in the left arm. After fixing the syllable jVa in 
the right arm he shall fix the syllable Ta on the head. (The 
mantra is Orh namo Narayanaya. 

The learned devotee shall meditate on Narayana, in the 
heart, at the sides, behind, in front, below and above and 
thereafter begin Kavaca 1 (coat of mail):— 

May Govinda protect me in the East, Madhusudana in the 
South, lord Srldhara in the West and Kesava in the North. 

Similarly, may Visnu protect in the South-East; the un¬ 
dwindling Madhava in the South-West; Hpslkesa in the North- 
West and Vamana in the North-East. 

May Varaha (Boar) protect the ground and Trivikrama 
above. After making Kavaca (the coat of mail) the devotee 
should think about the soul. 


1. Kavaca —Protective armour, composed of mystic syllables to be 
essentially recited at the worship of a deity. 










332 


Brahma Puraria 


43. I am lord Narayana who holds the conch, discus and 
club. After meditating on the Self he should repeat this 
mantra. 

44-45. “You are the fire, O Lord of bipeds, he who pro¬ 
vides (them) with Semen, he who excites their lust. You arc 
Pradhana (Prakrti and chief) of all living beings; the un¬ 
changing lord of all individual souls. You are the Arani 
(Source of fire) of the nectar. O Lord of waters, you are the 
source of origin of Devas. O Tirtharaja, (king of holy centres), 
remove my sms, obeisance be to you”. 

46. It is only after uttering this duly that one should per¬ 
form the rite of ablution. Otherwise, O excellent brahmins, 
the holy dip there is not valued much. 

47. After performing the rites of ablution and cleansing 
by means of the Mantras with the water as their divinity, the 
devotee shall thereafter repeat the Aghamarsana Mantra three 
times (all the while) standing within water. 

48. O brahmins, just as the horse-sacrifice removes sins so 
also does the hymn Aghamarsana 1 remove all sins. 

49-51. He should come out of water and wear two 
washed cloths free from impurities. He shall perform the 
Acamana rite and the Pranayama. He shall then pray to 
the junction as well as the sungod. Thereafter he should offer a 
handful of water libation alongwith flowers. With his hands 
lifted up he should pray to die sun-god with the significant 
hymns pertaining to him. Thereafter, he shall repeat the sacred 
Gayatri Mantra, hundred and eight times. He shall stand there 
with perfect concentration after repeating other Mantras per¬ 
taining to the Sungod. 

52. After circumambulating the sungod and bowing down 
to him he should sit facing the east and perform the rite of 
(ve ic study, then he should perform Tarpana rites to the 
Gods and sages. 

53. He s hould perform Tarpana rites for sages, manes and 
ot lers. He the knower of Mantras, should perform Tarpana 

y repeating their names and Gotras. The water shall be mixed 
up with gingelly seeds. 


1. Aghamar$apa mantra : RV.X.190. 



57.54-65 


333 


54. The brahmin shall be authorized in the Tarpana rite 

lo he manes only after performing Tarpana rite to the deities 
at the outset with due attention. 


55. At the time ofSraddha, when the ball office is offered, 
the devotee shall offer it with a single hand. When performing 
the rite of Tarpana he shall use both hands. This is the pro¬ 
cedure to be followed always. ^ 


56. After repeating the name and Gotra (Spiritual line¬ 
age) he shall say ‘Trpyatam’ (may be pleased). Otherwise 
he should not utter anything. The left-hand should be joined 
to the right hand (and thus the libation should be offered. 

57. If out of delusion the devotee performs the rite of Tar¬ 
pana with the gingclly seeds kept on any of his limbs, it 
would be as though he had performed the rites of Tarpana to 
the forefathers by means of skin, flesh, blood and bone. 

58. One should notperform the rite of Tarpana to the 
deities and Pitrs with the gingclly seeds kept on any of the 
limbs. That water will turn into blood and he who offers it 
shall be sinful. 


59. O leading sages, if the person who offers libation 
stands in water and if the libation is offered on the dry ground, 
that offering is made futile. It does not benefit anyone. 

60. If the man stands on the ground and offers libation 
into the water, that water libation does not approach the 
manes. It turns futile. 

61. One should not stand in water and offer water libation 
to the manes. He should come out and perform water libation 
on a pure spot. 

62-65. The Tarpana rite shall not be performed in water 
or in vessels. While performing the rite one shall not be 
wrathful nor should one perform it with a single hand. The 
water libation that is not made on the ground does not benefit 
the manes. 

O brahmins, the earth has been given by me to the manes 
as their everlasting abode. Hence water libation should be 
offered there alone by one who seeks pleasure for the manes. 

They were born on the surface of earth. They died on the 
surface of earth and merged with it. During life time it was 








334 Brahma Parana 

on this earth that they stood. Hence, one should offer water 
libation on the ground. 

He should spread Kus'a grass with their tips to the East in 
regard to the Gods; to the South in regard of the manes. He 
should invoke gods and manes by repeating their Mantras 
separately. 


CHAPTER FIFTYEIGHT 
Rules of Worship and Mantras 


Brahma said : 

1-2. After performing the rites of Tarpana to Devas, Pitrs 
and others and having performed the Acamana rite silently, O 
Brahmins, the devotee shall draw the mystic diagram of a city 
on the shore of a great ocean. It should look very splendid with 
four corners and four gateways. The figure shall extend to a 
hand in size. In the middle of the city he should draw the 
mystic diagram of a lotus with eight petals and a pericarp. 

3. After drawing the mystic diagram O brahmins, the 
devotee should worship Narayana, the unborn lord by means 
of injunctions in regard to the eight syllabled Mantra. 

4-6. I shall now mention the excellent means of cleaning 
the body. He should think of the • (syllable A) in the heart 
alongwith a circular line. It should have three blazing tufts 
that burn and destroy sins. Pie shall think of the syllable Ra 
stationed in the middle of the lunar disc on the head. It should 
be white in colour, it should shower nectar and blood on the 
earth. After dispelling sins thus he is endowed with a divine 
body. 

7. Then he should perform the Nyasa rite with the eight- 
syllabled Mantra. He shall begin with the left foot and fix in 
due order. 

8. The aspirant should perform the following rites with 
the basic Mantra viz. the five limbs belonging to lord Visnu; 


58.9-21 


335 


the four groups or arrays and the purificatory rite of the hand 
also belong to the lord. 

r 9-} 2 . Eadi °f the Varnas (colours, syllables) should be 
fixed in the figures separately. He should fix the syllable Om as 
the white earth in the left foot, the syllable Na pertains to lord 
Siva. It is dark-coloured and is stationed in the right foot. 
They call the syllable Mo Kala (time, God of Death). The 
devotee should fix it in the left hip. The syllable jVd is the seed 
ol everything. It is stationed in the right hip. They call the 
syllable Rd Tcjas (fire). It is stationed in the umbilical region, 
The syllabic H a pertains to the wind and it resorts to the left 
shoulder. The syllable jVd should be known as omnipresent. It 
is stationed in the right shoulder. The syllable Ya is stationed 
in the head. It is in this that all the worlds are established. 

13. Om obeisance to Visnu—thus the head. Om obeisance 
tojvalana (the fiery blaze)—thus the tuft. Om obeisance to 
Visnu—thus the coat of mail. Om obeisance to Visnu—thus the 
throbbing for the binding of quarters. Om Hum phat—thus 
the miraculous weapon. Om Vasudeva is white—in the head 
thus. Om Am Sarikarsana is red—in the forehead. Garuda is the 
fire, the luminary sun thus. Aril Pradyumna is yellow—in the 
neck. He is the wind and cloud. Orh ArhAniruddha is black—in 
the heart. He is endowed with all power. Thus protected by 
four arrays the devotee shall start reciting Kavaca. 

14-17. “Visnu is stationed in front of me; Govinda in the 
right side; Madhusudana in the left; Vaikuntha above; Varaha 
on the surface of the Earth; Madhava in intermediary spaces. 
My protection is afforded by Narasirhha even as I move about 
or stay still, whatever I am awake or asleep. I am identical 
with Vasudeva”. Thus the devotee will become identical with 
the lord. He shall start the holy rite. As in regard to the body 
so in regard to the lord he should join the principles (tattvas). 

18-19. He should perform the rite of sprinkling with water 
with the mantra Ornkara and ending with Phat, dispelling of 
calamities. The mantra is efficacious in warding off the evil 
effect of the malefic eye of the sun, moon and fire. He should 
fix Visnu in the centre of the lotus between wind and ether. 

20-21. He should think of Ornkara in the form of a lumi¬ 
nary, in the heart. The eternal form of the luminary is seated 





336 


Brahma Parana 


in the pericarp. He should perform the Nyasa of the eight- 
syllabled Matra in due order. The greatest worship is rendered 
to the lord by that Mantra analytically and synthetically. 

22. He should perform the worship of eternal lord by the 
twelve-syllabled Mantra; thereafter he should fix it up in the 
pericarp, at the outside, after retaining it in the heart. 

23. He should meditate upon the eternal lord with four 
arms and possessed of great strength. He should think upon 
the lord with lustre of a crore suns. He should invoke the lord 
after duly thinking about him in his mind. 

24. (The invocation is as follows) :— 

May the Lord Narayana, the bestower of boons come in 
front of me in the form of a Fish, Boar, Man-lion and a Dwarf. 
Om namo Narayanaya—thus is the mantra for invoking the 
lord (obeisance to Narayana). 

25. The establishment of the seat is as follows :— 

At the extremity of foot-hills of the mountain Sumcru the 
seat is conceived of in the mystic lotus. “O Slayer of Madhu, 
stay here for the welfare of all animals. Om namo Naraya¬ 
naya (Obeisance to Narayana)—thus the establishment of the 
seat”. 

26. The Arghya is offered with the following mantra :— 

“Om obeisance to Lord Visnu, Hyslkesa, the lord of Dcvas, 

of rulers of the three worlds. Om namo Narayanaya (obeis- 
sance to Narayana), thus the Arghya. 

27. Om the water offering for washing the wet. O Eternal 
Padmanabha, O Lord, the water is offered at your feet. O 
Visnu, with eyes like the petals of a lotus, O Madhusudana, 
please accept it. Om namo Narayanaya (Obeisance to 
Narayana)—thus the Padya. 

28. The holy offering is made as follows :—“O Great 
Lord, the best among the Purusas, the Madhuparka as prepared 
by Brahma and other sages is devoutly offered unto you. 
Please accept it, “Om namo Narayanaya”—thus the Madhu¬ 
parka. 1 


1. Madhuparka : a mixture ofhoney, curd and butter offered to the 
guest or the bridegroom on the wedding ceremony. 



58.29-38 


337 


to T?;r,V° r rituali!tic rinsin S of the mouth is offered 

h 3, *n V A ° f th ' °* 4 «‘ “ *»Piciom it 

d":^m" Kr (or ™ >ne your m<>uth - 

30. The ablutionary rite is as under •_ 


t ‘T° U u are Water ’ Carth ’ fire > wind - ° lord of the Universe, 
I am bathing you with water merely as a routine activity. Om 
namo Narayanaya” thus the ablution. 

^ * The two cloths are offered as follows :_ 

O Lord, equipped with the principles, having the lustre 
and colour of sacrifice, O lord Kes'ava, two cloths having the 
lustre and colour of gold are ofFered to you. Om namo 
Narayanaya”—thus the cloths. 

32. The unguent is offered as follows 

O Kesava, I do not know your body nor your activities. 
The scent is offered by me. Let it be accepted to smear your 
body with. Om namo Narayanaya”—thus the unguent. 

33. The sacred thread is offered as follows :—“I dedicate 
the sacred thread wound into threefolds by the lotus-born 
deity through the Rk, Yajus and Saman. It has the blessing of 
Savitrl. Om namo Narayanaya”—thus the sacred thread. 


34. Ornaments are offered as follows :— 


cc O Madhava, equipped with divine gems, with the lustre 
like that of fire and the sun, may your body shine splendidly 
with ornaments. Om namo Narayanaya”—thus the orna¬ 
ments. 


35-38. When worshipping, the words Om namah shall be 
used alongwith each of the syllables of the basic Mantra. Or 
the worship can be performed with the basic mantra alone. 

“May this offering of incense be accepted. The divine 
juice of the plant rendered fragrant by the addition of scents, 
has been offered by me with great devotion. 

Om namo Narayanaya”—thus the'incense is offered. 

The light is offered as follows :— 

The refulgence “as that of the sun and the moon, the 
bright-light of the lightning and fire—you alone are that, O 
Lord of luminaries; may this lamp be accepted. Om namo 
Narayanaya”—thus the lamp. 










338 


Brahma Pur ana 


The Naivedya is offered as follows :— 

“The four varieties of cooked rice, equipped with six types 
of tastes O KeSava, this Naivedya (food offering) has been 
devoutly offered to you. Oiii namo Narayanaya”—thus the 
Naivedya. 

39-47. The devotee shall fix Vasudeva in the petal in the 
East, Samkarsana in the South, Pradyumna in the West and 
Aniruddha in the North, Varaha in the South-East, Narasimha 
in the South-West, Madhva in the North-West and Trivikrama 
in the North-East. 

Similarly, he snould fix Garutfa in front of the Lord of 
eight syllables; he shall fix the discus at the left side and the 
couch at the right side. Similarly, he shall fix the great iron 
club on the right side, the mighty bow on the left. The two 
divine quivers on the right side and the sword to the left. 
After establishing Sri to the right (i.e. the South) he should 
fix prosperity (pusti) to the North. Ke should fix the garland 
of sylvan flowers, the scar Srivatsa and the jewel Kaustubha in 
front. He should fix the weapons of the lord of Devas in the 
angular points. With the Tantrika mantras he should fix Indra, 
Agni, Yama, Nairrta, Varuna, Vayu, Dhanada and Isana in 
the eight quarters and Ananta and Brahma beneath and 
above and worship them. 

Worshipping the lord of Devas thus, stationed in the 
mystic diagram, he shall obtain his cherished desires. 

48. He who observes Janardana who in accordance 
with this injunction is worshipped in the mystic diagram, shall 
enter the eternal Vi$nu. 

49. If Kesava is worshipped even for once in accordance 
with this injunction, the devotee will surmount birth, death 
and old age. He will attain the region of Visnu. 

50. An abode in the white Island (Svetadvipa) is allotted 
to the person who remembers Narayanawith devout attention. 

51. His name with Orhkara at the beginning and Namah 
at the end is called the Mantra of all Principles. 

52-53. He should offer scents and fragrant flowers in 
accordance with this very injunction. For each one of syllables 
he shall offer flowers in due order. He shall show mystic 
gestures in the order of their occurrence. He should perform 


59.1-6 


339 


the rite of recitation of the blja Mantra. There arc eight 
mystic gestures viz lotus, conch, Srlvatsa, iron club, Garutfa, 
discus, sword, and the bow Sariiga. Repetition of the name 
may be for eight, twcntycight or hundred and eight times. In 
accordance with his capacity, or desires entertained or the 
frequency mentioned, the devotee shall perform the rite of 
recitation with great concentration and attentively. 

I he ritualistic dismissal of the deity is as follows :—“O 
Purana Purusottama, go, go to the greatest abode where 
Dcvas viz. Brahma and others live joyfully. Om namo Naraya- 
nava”, thus the dismissal. 

1 hose who do not know this mode of worship of Hari may 
worship him by reciting the basic Mantra. 


CHAPTER FIFTYNINE 
The Merit of a holy dip in the Ocean 

Brahmd. said : 

1. After duly and devoutly worshipping the lord thus, the 
devotee should bend his head thereafter and propitiate the 
ocean. 

2. O Lord of streams you arc the vital breath and source 
of origin of all living beings. O king of sacred waters fond of 
Lord Visnu, obeisance be to you. Save me. 

3-4. O brahmins, by taking the holy dip perfectly in the 
ocean thus, in that excellent holy centre, by duly worshipping 
Narayana devoid of ailments and by bowing to Rama, Krsna, 
Subhadra and the ocean the man attains the benefit of perform¬ 
ing hundreds of horse-sacrifices. 

5-6. He will be rid of all sins. He will be devoid of all 
miseries. He will be glorious like gods and be justifiably proud 
of handsome features and blooming youth. He can redeem 
twentyone generations of his family. He goes to the world of 
Visnu on an aerial chariot with the lustre and colour of the 









340 


Brahma p urd 


ata 


sun and glorified with the divine sound of music produced 1 
the Gandharvas. 

7-9. For the period of a hundred Manvantaras or more 
he will enjoy excellent pleasures and carry on dalliance with 
the celestial damsels. He will be devoid of old age and death 
When his merit dwindles he returns to the world and is born 
in a family endowed with noble qualities. He will be hand¬ 
some, fortunate, glorious truthful and celibate. He conquers 
his sense-organs. He is born as a brahmin conversant with the 
meaning of the Vedic and scriptural passages. He will be one 
who performs sacrifices. He will be a devotee of Visnu. After 
performing the Yoga pertaining to Visnu he will attain salva¬ 
tion thereby. 

10-15. Intelligent devotees give charitable gifts to 
brahmins at that place on the following occasions. During 
eclipse of planets, during tropical, equinoctical or other tran¬ 
sit of the sun from one zodiac to another, during Yugadi days, 
(i.e. during the transit of the sun at a particular juncture), 
during Vyatipata (ill-owned occasion), when day comes to a 
close, during the full moon days of Asadha, Karttika and 
Magha or any other auspicious occasion. For these charitable 
rites the devotees attain a thousand times more benefit than 
the very same rites at other holy centres. If the descendants 
offer balls of rice to the manes in accordance with the injunc¬ 
tions at this place the manes derive everlasting satisfaction. 
Thus the benefit of holy dipin the ocean has been recounted by 
me. O brahmins, the benefit of charitable gifts and the benefit 
o cring balls of rice at this centre have also been recounted by 
me. The holy dip confers the benefit of virtue, wealth and 
salvation, causes longevity, renown and fame, yields worldly 
pleasures and bestows salvation upon men. It destroys the evil 

benefits^ drCamS ’ despeIs sins - II « holy and gives all desired 

16 23. O excellent Brahmins, the knowledge of thePurana 
should not be imparted to an atheist. O Brahmins, so long as 
the glory of this king of holy centres is not described the other 

holy centres such as Puskara roar with the pride of their mani¬ 
fold glories. 

The Puskara and other holy centres confer only their res- 


60.1-5 


341 


pcetive henefits. But the king of holy centres bestows the bene¬ 
fit of all rivers and holy centres. The rivers, brooks, and other 
holy spots enter this king of holy centres. Hence, it has acquired 
excellence. The ocean, the lord of rivers is the king of all holy 
spots since it bestows all cherished desires and it is more excel- 
lent than all other holy centres. 


O brahmins, just as darkness perishes when the sun rises, so 
also the sins perish due to the holy dip in the Tirtharaja. 

There never was nor will ever there be a holy centre on a 
par with Tirtharaja where lord Narayana is always present. O 
brahmins, who can recount the excellent qualities of this Tirtha¬ 
raja where ninetynine crores of holy centres abide peacefully. 

Hence, brahmins, whatever is done there viz., the holy dip, 
charitable gift, sacrifice, recitation of mantras and the worship 
of Devas is done with a never-ending benefit. 


CHAPTER SIXTY 
Glory of five holy spots Pahcatirlhi 


Brahma said : 

1. O excellent Brahmins, thence the devotee should go to 
the holy spot of sacrifices where the splendid and sacred lake 
Indradyumna is situated.; 

2. The intelligent devotee should go there with pure mind 
and body, and meditate mentally on lord Hari, approach the 
sacred waters, perform the Acamana rite and repeat this 
Mantra :— 

3. “O holy spot that is sanctified by the performance of 
horse sacrifice, and which destroys sins, I am taking a holy dip 
in you. Remove my sin. Obeisance be to you”. 

4-5. After uttering this, he should duly bathe. With 
gingelly seeds and water he should perform Tarpana to Devas, 
Pitrs and others. He should perform Acamana rite with res¬ 
trained speech. He should offer balls of rice to the Pitrs and 




342 Brahma Purdna 

worship Purusottama. By performing these rites he obtains merits 
and benefits of ten horse-sacrifices. 

6. He redeems seven former generations and seven sub¬ 
sequent generations of his family. Like a God he goes to the 
world of Visnu on an aerial chariot that can go in all directions. 

7. He can enjoy pleasures and happiness there, as long 
as the moon, sun and stars last. Falling off* from that world he 
returns to the earth and attains salvation thereafter. 

8-9. The devotee should conclude his pilgrimage to the 
five holy spots. He shall observe fast on the eleventh day. He 
who visits Purusottama on the fifteenth day in the bright half 
of the month of Jyestha, obtains the benefits and sport in the 
abode of Lord Visnu. He then goes to that highest region from 
which lie never returns. 

The sages said : 

10. O lord, great-grandfather, why do you praise the 
month of Jyestha in preference to Magha and other months. 
Kindly tell us the reason thereof. 

Brahma said : 

11. O leading sages, listen, I shall briefly mention why I 
praise the month of Jyestha. in preference to other months. 

12-14. All holy spots, rivers, lakes, lotus, ponds, wells, tanks, 
eddies, streams and oceans flow into the holy centre of Puru¬ 
sottama for seven days beginning with the tenth day in the 
bright half of the month of Jyestha. Hence, O branmins 
whatever rite is performed there at that time such as holy 
ablution, charitable gifts, visiting the deity etc. should become 
inexhaustible in merits. 

15. O excellent brahmins, the tenth day in the bright half 
of the month of Jyestha removes ten sins. Hence it is called 
‘Dasahara’. 

16. The man who visits Balarama, Krsna, and Subhadra 
meditates upon them with concentration and mental purity will 
get rid of all sins and go to the world of Visnu. 

17. O Brahmins, by visiting Purusottama, Rama and 
Subhadra during the first day of the northern and southern solar 
transits the man goes to the world of Visnu. 


60.18—61.16 


343 


18. By visiting Govinda, the most excellent of all Gods, 
seated on the swing, on the full moon day in the month of 
Phalguna the devotee of great self-restraint shall go to the city of 
Govinda. 

19-20. When the day of Visnu arrives, O brahmins, the 
devotee will perform the holy pilgrimage to the five holy spots 
in accordance with the injunctions and visit Sankarsana, Krsna 
and Bhadra. He attains the rare benefit accruing from the 
performance of various sacrifices. Rid of all sins, he goes to the 
world of Visnu. 

21-22. He who sees Krsna smeared with sandal paste on 
the third day in the bright half of the month of Vaisakha goes 
to the palace ofLord Visnu. He who sees Purusottama on the 
full moon day in the month of Jyestha, when the constellation 
of Jy e ?tha occurs will redeem twentyone members of his family 
and go to the world of Visnu. 


CHAPTER SIXTYONE 

In praise of Mahajyesthi Full moon day in the month of Jyestha 
Brahma said : 

1. When the Mahajyesthi occurs due to the contact of a 
zodiac and a constellation he should go to the holy place called 
Purusottama. 

2. O brahmins, by visiting Krsna, Rama and Subhadra on 
the Mahajyesthi day, the visitor obtains more benefit than that 
of twelve pilgrimages. 

3-16. By visiting Krsna on the Mahajyesthi day he obtains 
the benefit as is obtained when the rites of ablution and charit¬ 
able gifts are performed in the following holy places, rivers, etc. 
during the solar eclipse. They are—Prayaga, Kuruksetra, Naimisa 
Puskara, Gaya, Gangadvara, Kusavarta, the confluence of Ganga 
and the ocean, Kokamukha, Sukara, Mathura, Marusthala 
(the holy desert region), Salagrama, Vayutlrtha, Mandara, 

. the confluence of Sindhu and the ocean, Pintfaraka, Citrakuta, 






344 Brahma Purdtfa 

Prabhasa, Kanakhala, Sankhoddhara, Dvaraka, Badarikasrama 
Lohakunda, Asvatirtha that liberates one from all sins, Kama- 
laya, Kotitirtha, Amarakantaka, Lohargala, Jambumarga, Soma- 
tirtha, Prthudaka, Utpalavartaka, Prthutunga, Sukubjaka 
Ekamraka, Kedara, KaSI, Viraja, Kalanjara, Gokarna, Srlsaila 
Gandhamadana, Mahendra, Malaya, Vindhya, Pariyatra 
Himalaya, Sahya, Suktiman, Gomanta, Arbuda, Gahga, Tlrthas 
on the bank of Yamuna, Sarasvatl, Gomatl, seven rivers 
Brahmaputra, Godavari, Bhimarathi, Tungabhadra, Narmada 
Tapi, Payosni, Kaveri, Ksipra, Carmanvatl, Vitasta, Gandra- 
Bhaga, Satadru, Bahuda, Rsikulya, Kumari, Vipasa, Dj-sadvatl, 
Sarayu, Gahga, GandakI Mahanadi, Kausiki, Karatoya, 
Trisrota, MadhuvahinI, Mahanadi VaitaranI and other rivers 
not mentioned there. 'O excellent brahmins, of what avail is 
much talk? All holy centres, all holy shrines, oceans, moun¬ 
tains, rivers, lakes, etc. on the earth. 

17. Hence, O excellent sages, those who are desirous of 
attaining their longed-for benefit, will assiduously go to 
Purusottama on the MahajycsthI day. 

18-20. By visiting Rama and Krsna together with Subhadra 
on the MahajyesthI day the devotee goes to the world of Visnu 
after uplifting his family. 

After enjoying great and excellent pleasures there, till the 
dissolution of all living beings he returns to this place when the 
merit dwindles. He will then be born as a brahmin mastering 
the four vedas. 

He will be devoted to his own duty. He will be peaceful. 
He will be a devotee of Krsna. He will conquer his sense- 
organs. By adopting the Yoga pertaining to Visnu, he will 
attain salvation. 


62.1-11 


345 


CHAPTER SIXTYTWO 
Holy Ablution in Propitiation ofKrsna 

The sages said : 

• L 0 ° Iotus - bom one, when does the holy dip ofKrsna take 
place. By what means and in accordance with what precepts? 
Mention this, O excellent one among the knowers of precepts. 

Brahma said : 

2. O sages, even as I recount, listen to the rules of holy 
ablution (in propitiation) of Krsna, Rama and Subhadra. It is 
meritorious and destroyer of all sins. 

3. O brahmins if, in the month of Jyestha the constella- 
ation Margasiras coincides with the full moon, that is the 
auspicious time for the ablution of Hari. 

4. There is a pure well devoid of impurities. It is full of 
sacred water reservoirs. O brahmins, the sacred river Bhogavatl 
becomes visible there at that time.. 

5-10. Hence, from that well, the devotee should draw water 
in golden vessels on the fulLmoon day, for the ablution ofKrsna, 
Rama and Subhadra. O brahmins, the devotee, should make a 
raised rostrum for the ablution of Rama and Krsna. The rostrum 
should look splendid and well decorated with flags. It should 
be firm as well as comfortable to walk upon. It should be beauti¬ 
fied with flowers and nice pieces of clothes. It should be spacious 
and fumigated with incenses. It should be enclosed with white 
clothes and decorated with pearlnecklaces dangling down. To 
the accompaniment of musical intruments and auspicious 
shouts of victory the idols of Krsna, Balarama and Subhadra 
should be installed on the platform. 

O brahmins, men and women, brahmins, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, 
Sudras and people of other castes, householders, religious 
students newly wed, ascetics and celibate students should pour 
water over Krsna and the ploughshare-armed Balarama station¬ 
ed on the platform. 

11. O excellent brahmins, all the holy sacred waters 
mentioned above bathe the deities separately with their waters 
moved with flowers. 







346 


Brahma Purdna 

12-14. Loud sounds arc then heard from drums of various 
kinds such as Pataha, Bheri, Muraja and Mrdanga, from conches 
Kahalas, cymbals, gongs, bells and various musical instruments. 
Women raise auspicious shouts along with the charming sounds 
raised by sages in the form of prayers, shouts of victory and 
sounds of flutes and lutes. The tumult raised there resembles the 
sound of rumbling sea. 

15-16. The sages raise the chanting sound of Vedic 
Mantras and hymns from holy scriptures accompanied by 
Saman songs. At the time of ablution, excellent devas eulogise 
them with great joy along with ascetics, householders old as 
well as those newly initiated religious students. 

17-18. Rama and Kesava are fanned with chowrics with 
their handles studded With precious stones by dark-complexion¬ 
ed courtesans bending under the weight of their breasts. They 
are clad in yellow or red cloths and stoop down by the weight 
of garlands. They wear jewel-studded divine ear-rings with 
golden branches. 

19-20. Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Sadhyas, Visvedevas, 
Maruts, guardians of quarters and many others eulogise 
Purusottama. They are surrounded by Yak§as, Vidyadharas, 
Siddhas, Kinnaras and Apsaras all occupying the firmament. 
There are Devas, Gandharvas and Caranas also :— 

21. “Obeisance to you, O Lord of the chiefs of Devas, O 
ancient Purusottama, O lord, the cause of creation, sustenance 
and annihilation, O lord of the world, O lord of the Universe. 

22. Devoutly we bow to the lord holding the three worlds, 
who is favourably disposed to the brahmins, who is the cause of 
liberation and who bestows all desired benefits. 

23. O excellent sages, Devas eulogised Krsna, Balarama 
of great strength and Subhadra and remained in the sky 
itself. 

24. Together with Gandharvas they sang auspicious songs 
while the celestial damsels danced, the divine musical instru¬ 
ments were played and the cool gentle winds blew. 

25. The clouds gathered in the sky, showered water and 
strewed flowers. The sages, Siddhas and Caranas shouted cries 
of victory. 


61.26-46 


347 


26 (So also) Lord Indra and other Devas, sages, Pitrs, 
Prajapatis, Nagas and those others who resided in heaven. 

27-45. Thereafter, Deva took the materials of ablution 
duly inspired by the racitation of Mantra together with other 
auspicious requisites. Indra, Visnu of great strength, sun, moon, 
Dhata, Vidhata, Anila (Wind God), Anala (fire God), PQsan. 
Bhaga, Aiyaman, Tvastr, Amsuman and Vivasvat accompanied 
by his consorts, Mitra, Varuna, the lord surrounded by Rudras, 
Vasus, Adityas, the two Asvins, Visvedevas, Maruts and 
Sadhyas alongwith the forefathers, were present there. There 
were Gandharvas, Apsaras, Yaksas, the Raksasas, Nagas, 
celestial sages, excellent brahminical sages, Vaikhanasas, 
Valakhilyas who subsisted on winds and who drink lunar rays. 
Bhrgus, Angiras, the pious ascetics, Vidyadharas, holy persons 
of Yogic achievement surrounded them. Pitamaha, Pulastya, 
Pulaha of great penance, Angiras, Kasyapa, Atri, Marlci, 
Bhrgu, Kratu, Hara, Pracctas, Manu, Daksa, seasons, planets, 
luminaries, rivers in their embodied form, immortal Devas, 
ocean, eddies, different Tirthas, Earth, heaven, quarters, trees, 
Aditi the mother of Devas, the wives of heaven-dwellers such 
as Hri, Sri, Svaha, Sarasvatl, Uma, SacI, Sinivali, Anumati, 
Kuhu, Raka, Dhisana and others, mountains Himavan, Vindhya 
and Meru of numerous peaks, Airavata with his followers. Kala, 
Kasthas, fortnights, month, seasons, day, night, Uccaissravas 
most excellent of horses, Vamana, Airavata king of elephants, 
Aruna, Garuda, the trees along with the medicinal herbs, lord 
Dharma assembled together. Kala, Mrtyu, Yama and the servants 
of Yama, groups of Devas who have not been already mentioned 
because of their nuraerosity came for bathing the lord, from 
different quarters. O brahmins, the heaven-dwellers came upon 
the vessel which contained auspicious articles for ablution. The 
vessels of gold, O brahmins contained divine articles of requi¬ 
sites as well as holy and divine waters of the river Sarasvatl. 
Devas stationed in the firmament, bathed Kjrsna and Balarama 
with the water vessels mixed alongwith flowers. 

46. So also the aerial chariots of Devas moved about in the 
sky. In these divine chariots they could go wherever they were 
pleased to go. The cars were of different type high and low. 
Some of them were stationary. 









348 Brahma Parana 

47. They were of wonderful workmanship with divin 

jewels studded in them. They were resorted to by Apsaras 
rendered beautiful by flags. Their charm was enhanced by son ?s 
and musical instruments. ® 

48. They, O excellent sages; all these bathed Krsna, Bala- 
rama and Subhadra and eulogised them with great joy. 

49. Be victorious.be victorious.protcctor of the world. O saviour 
of devotees, be victorious, be victorious, one favourably disposed to 
one who bows down, be victorious, be victorious. O refuge of living 
beings, be victorious, be victorious. O primordial lord, O cause 
of many, be victorious, be victorious O destroyer of Asuras, be 
victorious, be victorious, be victorious. O most excellent * one 
among the gods, be victorious, be victorious. O deity lying 
down in the ocean, be victorious, be victorious. O foremost one 
among the Yogins, be victorious be victorious. O deity with the 
sun for the eye, be victorious, be victorious. O king of Devas be 
victorious, be victorious. O enemy ofKaitabha, be victorious 
be victorious. O excellent one (eulogized in) the Vedas, be 
victorious, be victorious. O deity in the form of a tortoise, be 
victorious, be victorious O excellent deity in the form of sacri- 

, ’ be victorious, be victorious. O deity with the umbili¬ 
cal lotus, be victorious. O deity who move about on the 

mountains be victorious, be victorious O Yogasayin (one who 

s eep t e ogic slumber), be victorious, be victorious, be 
victorious. O holder of velocity, be victorious, be victorious, O 
Viivamurti (deity of Universal form), be victorious, be 

° ^° der ° f dlSCUS> be vic t°rious, be victorious. O 
lord of living beings, be victorious, be victorious. O upholder 

Mnton a H ’ V1C f iWS > bC victorious - O Sesasayin (one 
roherf 1 ? Serpent ’ be vlctorious > be victorious. O yellow- 
ovelt r^ vlc * orious be victorious. O Somakanta (one as 
residing in tT^V 11 • C ViCtonous > be victorious. O Yogavas (one 
Dalmnavatrfk 6 ^ 0glc P ower )> be victorious, be victorious, O 
WctorW^^ a (o«e whose mouth emits fire), be victorious, be 

storeLuseof I' victorious > b e victorious. O 

abode of Ho g< k° d . qua lties ’ b e victorious, be victorious. O 
on the Veh 7 P C be victorius. O deity going about 

ic e aruda, be victorious, be victorious. O abode of 


16.49 


349 


happiness, be victorious, be victorious. O banner of virtue, be 
victorious, victorious. O abode of the earth, be victorious, be 
victorious. O Gahana Caritra (One whose conduct is abstruse) ; 
be victorious, be victorious. O Yogigamya (one who can be 
realised by Yogms), be victorious, be.victorious, be victorious. 
O deity comprehensible through Vedas; be victorious, be 
victorious. O deity spreading calmness and peace, be victorious, 
be victorious. O cause of nourishment, be victorious, be vie- 
tonous, OJfianamurti (one whose form is perfect knowledge), 
be victorious, be victorious. O mine of fortune, be victorious, 
be victorious. O Bhavavedya (one who can be understood only 
through emotional fervour), be victorious, be victorious. O 
(deity) that causes salvation; be victorious, be victorious. O 
deity with a physical body devoid of impurities, be victorious, 
be victorious. O abode of all living beings, be victorious, be 
victorious. O cause of sacrifices, be victorious, be victorious. 
O deity devoid of attributes, be victorious, be victorious. O 


Moksakara (Liberator), be victorious, be victorious. Bhusaranya- 
refuge of the Earth, be victorious, be victorious. O refulgent 
one, be victorious, be victorious. O refuge of the worlds, be 
victorious, be victorious. O lotus-eyed one, be victorious, be 
victorious. O cause of creation, be victorious, be victorious. O 
deity endowed with Yoga, be victorious, be victorious. O deity 
whose body is dark-coloured like the Atasi flower, be victorious, 
be victorious. O Samudravistadeva (one whose body has 
entered the ocean), be victorious, be victorious. O deity 
acting as the bee in regard to LaksmI who is the lotus, be 
victorious, be victorious. O deity under the control of the 
devotee, be victorious, be victorious. O lover of the worlds, 
be victorious, be victorious. O extremely quiescent one, be 
victorious, be victorious. O greatest deity of essence, be victorious, 
be victorious, O holder of discus, be victorious, be victorious. 
O deity accompanied by those who enjoy, be victorious, be 
victorious. O bluerobed one (i.e. Balarama), be victorious, 
be victorious. O bringer of peace, be victorious, be victorious. 
O liberator, be victorious, be victorious. O dispeller of sins, be 
victorious, be victorious. O Kpsna, lord of the universe, be 
victorious, be victorious. O younger brother of Samkar§ana, 
be victorious, be victorious, O lotus-eyed one, be victorious, be 




350 


Brahma Purdna 


victorious, O bcstowcr of desired benefits, be victorious, be 
victorious. O deity whose chest is covered with garlands, be 
victorious, be victorious. O wielder of discus and ironclub, be 
victorious, be victorious. O lover ofLaksmI (whose abode is the 
lotus) be victorious, be victorious, O Visnu, obeisance be to you. 

Brahma said : 

50-51. Thus Indra and other Devas were delighted in 
their minds after eulogising thus. Siddhas, Caranas and others 
who reside in heaven and the sages Valakhilyas loved to Krsna, 
Balarama and Subhadra. O excellent sages, after bowing to 
them they stationed themselves in the firmament. 

52-53. After visiting, eulogising and bowing to Krsna, 
Rama and Subhadra, the heaven-dwellers went to their res¬ 
pective abodes. The aerial chariots of Devas moved about in 
the sky. Some were lofty. Some were low. Some could go as they 
pleased. Some were stationary. 

54. The aerial chariots were of wonderful workmanship 
with divine jewels inlaid. They were resorted by the celestial 
maidens. They were beautified with flags and banners while 
musical instruments and songs enhanced their charm. 

55. The devotees who visit Purusottarna, Balabhadra and 
and Subhadra on that occasion go to the eternal region 
(whence there is no return to the earth). 

56. By seeing Purusottarna seated on the platform accom¬ 
panied by Subhadra and Balarama the devotees go to the abode 
of Visnu which is devoid of ailments. 

57. O excellent sages, the man who performs auspicious 
rites and visits the Lord seated on the couch accompanied by 
Balarama and Subhadra obtains the benefit which is equal to 
the benefit of charitable gift of a hundred tawny cows at the 
holy centre Puskara. 

58. By visiting Lord Kj*sna seated on the couch a man 
obtains the benefit which is equal to the benefit of charitable 
gift of a hundred virgins. 

59. By visiting lord Kr§na seated on the couch a man 
obtains the benefit which is equal to the benefit of charitable 
gift of a hundred pieces of gold coins. 


1.60-70 


351 


60. By visiting lord Kr§na seated on the couch a man 

obtains the benefit which is equal to the charitable gift of a 
thousand cows. 

Gl. By visiting lord Krsna seated on the couch a man 

obtains the benefit which is equal to the getting of land as 
prescribed in the Sastras. 

62. By visiting Lord Krsna seated on the couch a man 
obtains the benefit equal to the gifts of cooked rice and due 
hospitality to guests alongwith Arghya. 

63. By visiting Lord Krsna seated on the couch a man 

obtains the benefits which is equal to that of performing 

Vrsotsarga. 1 

64. By visiting lord Krsna seated on the couch a man 

obtains the benefit which is equal to the gift of water in 
summer or in any other season. 

65. By visiting lord Krsna seated on the couch a man 
obtains the benefit which is equal to the gift of Tiladhcnu. 2 

66. By visiting Lord Krsna seated on the couch a man 
obtains the benefit which is equal to the gift of elephants, 
horses and chariots. 

67. By visiting lord Krsna seated on the couch a man 
obtains the benefit which is equal to the gift of a cow with its 
horns plaited with gold. 

68. By visiting Lord Kp§na seated on the couch a man 
obtains the benefit which is equal to the charitable gift of a 
water and cow. 

69. By visiting lord Krsna seated on the couch a man 
obtains the benefit which is equal to the gift of ghee and a cow. 

70. By visiting lord Krsna seated on the couch a man 
obtains the benefit which is equal to that of performing 
Candrayana 3 according to sacred injunctions. 

1. Vifotsarga. : letting loose a bull or a bull and four heifers as a 
meritorious deed, especially on the occasion of a Sraddha in honour of de¬ 
ceased ancestors. 

2. Tiladhcnu —a cow presented to a Brahmin. 

3. Candrayana : This is a fast prescribed in the Dharmasastra, so 
called because it is regulated by the moon, the food being diminished 
everyday by one mouthful for the dark fortnight and increased in like 
manner during the white fortnight. 







352 

Brahma Parana 

71. By visiting lord Krsna seated on the couch a m 
obtains the benefit which is equal to that of monthly observ! 
ance of facts as laid down in the Sastras. 

72-77. Ofwhat avail is much talk FO excellent brahmins 

the greatness of that lord is as follows. By visiting Krsna 
accompanied by Balarama and seated on the couch as well a! 
Subhadra, the man who performs an auspicious rite obtains 
the benefit which is glorified as the result of holy rites and 
c aritable gifts m all the holy centres. Hence, O excellent 
sages, the man or woman must see Purusottama. Thereby he 
or she obtains the benefit of holy dip in all the holy centres 

With the water that remains after the ablution rite of 
Krsna the devotee must bathe and sprinkle himself. 

A barren lady, a lady whose child is dead, a ladv in a 
wretched state or afflicted by evil planets, those who are seized 
y Raksasas Bhutas and Pisacas, those who are afflicted by ail¬ 
ments should be sprinkled with water that remains after the 
of ablution. They then attain their cherished desires. 

ness atif hC : h ° SCekS S ° nS ° btainS Sons » she who ^eks happi- 

rated f o r S ^ PPin “ S ; ^ Wh ° is afflicted b y agents is lfbe- 
rated from ailments. She who seeks riches obtains riches. 

79. All those sacred waters on the face of the earth Ho 

ritTofTblut^on. Xleenth Part ° f ^ WatCr that rCmains after ‘he 

witHLwa^hat^^V 0116 Sha11 Sprinkle one ’ s “mbs 

has been performed ^tTs* T ** ** ° f K W a 

en pertormed. It is the bestower of all desires. 

and who proceeiTaheaTf Kr? T Wh ° SC ablution is performed 
a man ?" 

the resuh Of thr ee circumambulatLTofThe “ 

t s r h 

mage all over the earth. Dle lrom the pilgn- 

84. B y visiting K W a fiming the South, a man obtains the 


62.85-97 


353 


benefit.which is derivable from visiting Nara and Narayana 1 2 in 
the penance grove Badarl. 

85. By visiting Krsna facing the south a man obtains the 
benefit which results from the holy dip and charitable gift at 
Gangadvara- and Kuruksctra. 

86. By visiting Krsna facing the south a man obtains the 
benefit which is equal to the benefit of (the holy dip) in 
Prayaga on the MahamaghI day i.c. (full moon day in the 
month of Magha). 

87. By visiting Krsna facing the south a man obtains the 
benefit which is equal to the ablution and charitable gifts in 
Salagrama on the Mahacaitrl day (i.c. full moon day in the 
month of Citra). 

88. By visiting Krsna facing the south a man obtains that 
benefit which is equal to the benefit of MahakarttikI (i.e. full 
moon day in the month of Karttika) at Puskara. 

89. By visiting Krsna facing the south a man obtains the 
benefit which is derivable from the holy dip and charitable gift 
at the confluence of Gahga and the ocean. 

90. By visiting Krsna facing the south a man obtains the 
benefit which is the result of holy bath accompanied by charit¬ 
able gifts in Kuruksetra at the time of solar eclipse. 

91-92. By visiting Krsna facing the south a man obtains 
the benefit of the holy bath and the charitable gifts at the 
holy centres on the Ganga, Yamuna, Sarasvatl and also on the 
banks of holy lakes etc. 

93-94. By visiting Krsna facing the south a man obtains 
the benefit that is usually obtained by holy dips and charitable 
gifts during the eclipse of the sun in the holy centres such as 
Puskara, Gaya, Amarakantaka, Naimisa and other holy shrines. 

95-97. Of what avail is much talk ? Of what avail is the 
repeated talk ? By visiting Krsna facing the south along with 
Subhadra and Balarama a man or a women obtains the bene- 


1. Nara-Ndrdyana : two hermits who had spent many thousands of 
years in Badaryasrama doing penance. Arjuna was the rebirth of Nara and 
Srikrsna was the rebirth cf Narayana. 

2. Gangddvdra —Haridvara or Haradvara, identifiable with the place 
where the river Ganges falls from the Himalayas. 









354 


Brahma Parana 

fits mentioned in the Vedas, scriptures, Puranas, Bharata and 
Dharmasastras (Ethical texts) by the learned men as the bene- 
fit of meritorious deeds. 


CHAPTER SIXTYTHREE 
Glory of the Holy Procession : Guntjlikd Tatra 
Brahmd said : 

1. Those who observe Kr?na, Balarama and Subhadra 
seated in a chariot and going in a procession to the Mandapa 
called Gundika go to the abode of lord Visnu. 

2. Those who visit Krsna, Balarama and Subhadra occu¬ 
pying the Mandapa for seven days, go to the world of Visnu. 

The sages said : 

3. Who initiated the procession to the auspicious Gundika 
Mandapa ? What is the benefit of witnessing this procession ? 

4-5. Why do Krsna, lord of the universe, Sarhkarsana and 
Subhadra leave off their (permanent abode and proceed in a 
chariot, to the Mandapa in a holy secluded spot on the bank of 
that lake and stay therefor seven nights ? 

Brahmd said : 

6-7. O brahmins, formerly lord Visnu was requested by 
Indradyumna : 

O lord of Devas, let there be a procession to the bank 
of my lake. It will yield worldly pleasure and salvation to us. 
Purusottama the lord of Devas granted him this boon. 

The Lord said : 

8. O king, there shall be a procession for seven days on 
the banks of your lake. It will be called Gundika. It will bestow 
all desired benefits. 

® king, toe devotees, whether Brahmins, Ksatriyas, 
Vaisyas, or oudras whether male or female shall worship me, 


63.13-23 


355 


Sarhkarsana and Subhadra occupying the Marujapa. They 
shall worship with great faith by means of fragrant flowers, 
scents, incenses, lights, (food offerings), presents, obeisance, 
circumambulations, shouts of victory, hymns, charming songs, 
and musical instruments. Nothing is difficult of access to them. 
O excellent king, whatever benefit is desired by them will 
certainly befall them due to my favour. 

Brahma said : 

13. After saying this to him the lord vanished there itself. 
That glorious and excellent king was fully satisfied. 

14. Hence, O excellent brahmins, one shall by all means 
visit lord Visnu, the bestower of all desires, at Gundika. 

15. A man if he has no son, obtains sons, if poor, gets 
riches, if sick, is liberated from ailments. A virgin will get a 
good husband. 

16. The man derives longevity, glory, fame, intelligence, 
strength, learning, courage and obtains cattle, progeny and the 
wealth of handsome features and blooming youth. 

17. By visiting lord Visnu a man or woman devotee attains 
whatever pleasure he or she wishes for. 

18-19. By witnessing Gunqiika-procession with great con¬ 
centration, O excellent brahmins, and by visiting lord Kr?na, 
Rama and Subhadra in the bright half of the month of Asadha, 
the man or woman derives the benefit of fifteen horse sacri¬ 
fices or even more. 

20-23. He will redeem seven earlier generations and 
seven subsequent generations of his family-—He will be fortu¬ 
nate and handsome as well as heroic. He will be bedecked in 
all ornaments studded with jewels. He will be served by 
Gandharvas and Apsaras vying with each other. In an aerial 
chariot that can go wherever one desires to go the devotee 
shall go to the city of Lord Visnu. He will freely enjoy the 
desired pleasures. He will be devoid of old age and death. Till 
the ultimate dissolution of all living beings he will enjoy excel¬ 
lent pleasures. When the merit decreases he will return to this 
place and be born as a brahmin who has mastered the four 

Vedas. 





356 Brahma Purana 

Thereafter, he will adopt Yoga pertaining to Visnu and 
attain salvation. 


CHAPTER SIXTYFOUR 
The Twelve Holy Pilgrimages and their Benefits 

The sages said : 

1. Mention separately the benefit which a man or a 
woman with perfect self-control acquires by making holy 
pilgrimage. 

Brahma said : 

2. O brahmins, even as I recount, listen to the benefit of 
holy pilgrimage severally, that a man acquires after under¬ 
taking the pilgrimage to that holy centre with great restraint. 

3-4. A man who undertakes pilgrimage in accordance with 
the injunctions, visits and bows to Krsna, Samkansana and 
Subhadra at the time of Gund&a, Utthanadvadaii (twelfth 
day in the bright half of Karttika), the full moon day in the 
month of Phalguna, and during equinoctical transit will acquire 
the fruit thereof separately. As long as the fourteen Indras 
reign he will stay in the world of Visnu. 

5. A man undoubtedly enjoys pleasures for as many 
Kalpas as the number of times he undertakes pilgrimages in 
the month of Jyestha. 

6-8. A devotee should undertake pilgrimage to that sacred 
excellent and beautiful holy centre of Srlpurusottama, which 
accords worldly pleasures and salvation to men and which is 
conducive to the pleasure of every living being. Thereafter, the 
devotee, whether a man or a woman shall control the sense- 
organs. He shall continue pilgrimages till twelve such Yatras 
are completed with great concentration and mental purity. He 
who, thereafter, eschews stubbornness and arrogance and 
instals the idols shall enjoy various pleasures and in the end 
acquire salvation. 


64.9-19 


357 


The sages said : 

9. O Lord, we wish to hear, even as you recount, the 
installation and worship of the lord of the universe and the mode 
of these rites as well as charitable gifts and the fruits thereof. 

Brahma said : 

10. O leading sages, listen to the installation of idols 
urged by Brahma. By devoutly performing this, the man or the 
woman acquires the benefit. 

11. O excellent brahmins, when the twelve pilgrimages 
are completed, the devotee should carry out the installation 
that destroy sin. 

12-13. On the eleventh day in the bright half of the 
month of Jyestha, the devotee with concentration should go to 
the holy reservoir. With purity and control he should perform 
Acamana and invoke holy centres and sacred waters. Meditat¬ 
ing on Narayana with full devotion he should perform the rite 
of holy dip. 

14. The rite of holy bath should be performed in accord¬ 
ance with the injunctions prescribed by the sages in regard to 
him. 

15. After taking holy bath perfectly in accordance with 
the injunction (the devotee) who is conversant with the names, 
Gotras (spiritual lines) and the procedure, should perform 
Tarpana rite to Devas, sages and manes as well as others. 

16-17. Coming out of water and wearing two newly 
washed and dried cloths free from impurities, he should ritual- 
istically touch water and stand or sit facing the sun. He should 
repeat the holy sacred and meritorious Mantra of Gayatrl, the 
mother of Vedas, the dispeller of all sins. He should repeat the 
holy Gayatrl one hundred and eight time. 

18. He should repeat other holy passages and Mantras 
pertaining to the sun with faith and concentration. After 
making three circumambulations he should bow down to the 
Sungod. 

19. In regard to the people of the first three castes the 
rite of holy bath and the repetition of Mantras is in the 
manner mentioned in the Vedas. The utterance of the Vedic 
passage is to be avoided by women as well as Sudras. 







358 


Brahma Purdna 

20-22. The devotee shall go home silently and worship 
Purusottama after washing his hands and feet and after ritual- 
istically touching and sipping water in accordance with the 
precepts. He shall bathe the Lord with ghee, milk, honey, 
scented water and the holy water mixed with sandal paste. 
Thereafter, the devotee shall dress the lord with an excellent 
pair of clothes with devotion. He shall smear the lord with 
sandal paste, Agallochum, camphor and saffron. 

23. With great devotion he shall worship Lord Visnu 
offering lotuses and other flowers pertaining to Visnu (like 
jasmine etc.). 

24. After worshipping the lord the ruler of the universe, 
the bestower of worldly pleasures and salvation, in this manner, 
he shall burn incense along with agallochum in front of the 
lord. 

25. O excellent sages, he shall burn aromatic resin too 
along with scents. He shall light a lamp with devotion using 
ghee (instead of oil) according to the means. 

26. With concentration he shall offer twelve other lamps, 
O excellent sages, he shall burn it with ghee or gingelly oil. 

27. By way of Naivedya (food offering) he shall dedicate 
milk pudding, sweet Saskulis, Vatakas (special kinds of baked 
or fried cakes) sweets, a little quantity of molasses and fruits 
too. 

28. After worshipping Purusottama with five items of 
service (i.e. bathing, offering cloths, worshipping with flowers, 
showing lamps and incense and food offerings) the devotee 
shall repeat “Om obeisance to Purusottama” a hundred and 
eight times. 

29-32. Then he shall devoutly propitiate lord Purusottama 
thus : Obeisance to you O lord of the worlds, O bestower of 
freedom from fear on the devotees, save me, O Purusottama, I 
am merged in the ocean of worldly existence. O Govinda, 
O lord of the Universe, may the twelve pilgrimages undertaken 
by me to you be perfectly completed owing to your grace”. 

After propitiating the lord thus and prostrating before him 
like a log of wood, the devotee shall worship the preceptor by 
means of flowers, cloths and unguents, since, O excellent sages, 
there is no difference between the two. 


64.33-45 


359 


33. With faith and concentration, O excellent sages, the 
devotee shall make a flowery bowerlike Mantfapa over the 
lord. 

34. Thereafter, he shall resolve to keep awake at night. 
For this purpose he shall arrange for the discourses on the 
divine story of Vasudeva or devotional songs. 

35-36. The learned devotee shall pass night meditating, 
reading or eulogising the lord. When the twelfth day dawns he 
shall invite twelve Brahmins who have mastered the Vedas, 
who are conversant with Itihasa and Puranas, who have con¬ 
trolled their sense-organs and who have taken holy baths signi¬ 
fying their successful conclusion of holy rites. 

37. After taking bath perfectly in accordance with the in¬ 
junctions, the devotee shall control his sense organs and put on 
washed (and dried) clothes. Thereafter, he shall bathe lord 
Visnu with devotion as before. 

38-39. He should worship the lord with scents, fragrant 
flowers, presents, Naivedyas, lights, different items of service, 
obeisances, circumambulations, repetitions of mantras, eulogies, 
propitiations, charming songs and instrumental music. 

After worshipping the lord of the Universe thus, he should 
worship the brahmins. 

40-41. With faith and devotion he should offer twelve 
cows, gold umbrellas, and pairs of sandals to them. 

O brahmins, he should offer wealth, clothes, etc. to them 
with great devotion since Govinda is propitiated and honoured 
with emotional fervour. 

42. Thereafter, he should give the preceptor a cow, cloth, 
gold, umbrella, pair of sandals, foodgrain and bellmetal vessel 
with devotion. 

43. He should feed brahmins. The food served should 
begin with milk pudding. There should be sweet cooked rice 
and various kinds of edibles prepared in jaggery and ghee. 

44. After the brahmins have been fed to their satisfaction 
and their minds are at rest, he should give them twelve water 
pots together with sweets. 

45. Devoid of revelry he should give them monetary gifts 
according to his capacity. 






360 


Brahma Pur ana 


He should hand over the pot and the monetary gifts to the 
preceptor also. 

46. O excellent brahmins, after worshipping those brah¬ 
mins, he should devotedly worship his preceptor who is the 
bestower of perfect knowledge and who is on a par with Visnu 

47. The learned devotee should honour him with gold 
cloth, cow, foodgrains and other articles. Thereafter, he should 
repeat this mantra. 


48. “May Lord Purusottama who has neither beginning 
nor end, who holds conch, discus and iron club and who is 
the omnipresent lord of the Universe be pleased with this. 

49. After uttering this mantra he should circumambulate 
brahmins thrice. He should bid farewell to the preceptor by 
bending his head with devotion. 

50. Thereafter, he should follow those brahmins with devo¬ 
tion to the boundary of the village. Thus following them he 
should pay homage and bid them farewell. 

51. Accompanied by kinsmen and relatives he should take 

meals with proper restriction on his tongue. There may be 
other devotees, poor people, mendicants and hungry persons 
m need of food, with whom he should share food. 

52. By performing this rite perfectly well, the devotee 
whether a man or a woman should derive the benefit of thou¬ 
sands of horse-sacrifices and a hundred Rajasuya sacrifices. 

53-57. The noble devotee will take a divine form for his 
departure to heaven and will redeem a hundred generations of 
his ancestors. He will clear the way for a hundred future genera¬ 
tions, O brahmins. He will be richly endowed with all charac- 
enstic signs and be bedecked in all ornaments. He will have all 
hi desires realized, he will.be devoid of fever like a God. He 

vot^U 1 C1 -u K nd T d With handsomc ^ures and blooming 
youth He will be embellished with all good qualities. He will 

the Ga g r d ^ r CdeStial damsds ' He wiI1 be admired by 
worldnfrTw WlH fl ° Ck ar ° Und him - will go to the 
sneed t+i IT* ° n the aerial chariot that has a steady 

Whertj ? V UStre and colour of the sun, that can go 
n . , r 1 * S esire to S° anc ^ that is embellished with all sorts 

of jewels, flags and banners. He will become a young man of 
great strength. Whtle traversing the sly he will illuminate the 


64 . 58-71 


361 


quarters and will not suffer from fatigue. He will grow intelli¬ 
gent. 


58-65. In the world of Visnu he will enjoy pleasures in 
consonance with his desires for the period of a hundred Kalpas. 
He will stay there devoid of sickness and fever. He will be eulo¬ 
gised by Siddhas, Apsaras, Gandharvas, Devas, Vidyadharas, 
Nagas and sages. 

O brahmins, he will assume a form with four arms joyfully 
like Visnu, the lord of the universe, holding conch, discus and 
iron-club. He will enjoy excellent pleasures there and sport with 
Devas. Then he will come to the abode of Brahma that bestows 
all desires and that is beautified by Siddhas, Vidyadharas, Devas 
and Kinnaras. He will enjoy there for a period of ninety Kalpas. 
O leading brahmins, from that he will come to the world of 
Rudra who bestows the desired benefits to the world which is 
frequented by Devas, which bestows happiness and salvation, 
which is adorned with hundreds and thousands of lofty mansions, 
which is beautified by Siddhas, Vidyadharas Yaksas, Daityas 
and Danavas. The man enjoys happiness there for the period of 
eighty Kalpas. At its conclusion he goes to the world of rays, 
Goloka which is equipped with all pleasures and which is charm¬ 
ing, being adorned by Devas, Siddhas and Apsaras. 


66-71. For a period of seventy Kalpas he enjoys there such 
excellent pleasures as are difficult of attainment in the three 
worlds. He is as steady-minded as an immortal being. From 
these he comes to the excellent world of Prajapati. He is 
surrounded by Gandharvas, Apsaras, Siddhas, sages and Vidya¬ 
dharas. 


For a period of sixty Kalpas, he enjoys various pleasures 
there At its conclusion he goes to the abode of Indra equipped 
with different miracles. He is surrounded by Gandharvas, 
Kinnaras, Siddhas, Devas, Vidyadharas, Nagas, Guhyakas, 
Apsaras, Sadhyas and other excellent Devas. After coming there 
he enjoys happiness for a period of fifty Kalpas. From these he 
goes to the world of Devas beautified by lofty places. It is sacred, 
difficult of access and beautified by Devas. The intelligent 
devotee enjoys for forty Kalpas. Then he comes to the world of 
Naksatras which is also difficult of access. 








362 


Brahma Pur ana 

72. For a period of thirty Kalpas he enjoys excellent plea¬ 
sures there as he wishes. From there, O excellent brahmins he 
comes to the world of the moon. 

73-74. He enjoys the rarest of pleasures for a period of 
twenty Kalpas in that world where the moon shines splendidly 
in the comapny of all Devas. Then he comes to the world of the 
sungod which is honoured by Devas, which is divine, which is 
full of wonderful miracles and which is surrounded by Gan- 
dharvas and Apsaras. 

75. O excellent brahmins, after enjoying splendid pleasures 
there for a period of ten Kalpas he comes to the world of Gan- 
dharvas which is most difficult of access. 

76. After enjoying various pleasures to the fullest satisfac¬ 
tion for the period of a Kalpa, he comes to the earth and be¬ 
comes a virtuous king. 

77-78. He becomes an Emperor of great vigour embellished 
by noble qualities. After ruling over the kingdom virtuously, 
and after performing sacrifices where as much monetary gift is 
distributed he goes to the world of Yogins that is auspicious and 
bestower of liberation. There he enjoys excellent pleasure till 
the ultimate dissolution of all living beings. From there he 
comes to the world of mortals and is born in an excellent family 
of Yogins. O brahmins he is born in an excellent family of a 
devotee of Visnu, which is difficult of access and is approved of 
by good men. He becomes an excellent brahmin mastering four 
vedas. He performs sacrifices with due monetary gifts. He adopts 
Yoga pertaining to Visnu and attains liberation. 

Thus, O brahmin, the benefit of pilgrimages has been 
perfectly cited by me. It yields worldly pleasures and liberation 
to men. What else do you wish to hear ? 

CHAPTER SIXTYFIVE 
The World of Visnu 

The sages said : 

1-3. O lord, we wish to hear about the world of Vi?nu the 
world which is devoid of sickness, is lovely, delightful to the 
. people and full of mystery. 


65.4-17 


363 


O lord, mention the magnitude of that world, its pleasure 
its splendour and its power. By what holy rites do virtuous men 
go there ? Is it due to the vision or touch of holiness or due to 
holy dips in the sacred waters of holy centres ? Mention in detail 
and factually. We are greatly eager to hear this. 

Brahma said : 

4-5. O sages, listen all of you, even as I speak about that 
highest region which is wished for by the devotees. It is blessed, 
holy land and destructive of the world. It is most excellent 
of all the worlds. It is named (Visnu-loka) after the name of 
Visnu. It is a sacred abode full of all mysteries. It is honoured 
and worshipped by the three worlds. 

6-11. It is filled with many trees such as Asoka, Parijata, 
Mandara, Campaka, Malatl, Mallika, Kunda, Bakula, Nagake- 
sara, Punnaga, Atimukta, Priyangu, Tagara, Arjuna, Patala, 
Cuta, Khadira, splendid groves of Karnikara, Naranga (Orange 
citron), Panasa (jack tree), Lodhra, Nimba (Margosa) Dadima 
(Pomegranate),Sarjaka, Draksa (Grape, vines), Lakuca, Khar- 
jura, Madhuka, Indraphala, wood apple, coconut palms, palmyra 
trees, Srlphala, innumerable splendid trees of various kinds, 
Sarala, Candana (Sandal), Nipa, Devadaru, Subhanjana, Jati, 
Lavanga, Kankola, such trees as emitted the odour of camphor, 
creepers with plenty of betel leaves, Areca palms and various 
other trees appearing splendid in all seasons with their abundant 
fruits. 

12-17. It is full of various flowers in branches in creepers. It 
is filled with water-reservoirs of diverse lands and different kinds 
of beautiful meritorious spots resonant with the chirping sounds 
of many birds. There are hundreds of tanks and lakes full of 
water and charming. Lilies, hundred-petallcd lotuses, excellent 
Kokanada (a variety of lotus), Kalhara flowers and other water 
flowers, splendid with different colours (are abundant in those 
ponds). They are full of swans and Karancjava ducks. They are 
rendered beautiful by ruddy geese. There are other aquatic birds 
such as Kayastikas, Datyuhas, Catakas, Priyaputras and Jivan- 
jlvakas. There are other sweet-voiced divine birds moving about 
in water or flying in the air. Thus the world is adorned by many 
divine, miraculous trees and charming and holy water reservoirs. 






364 


Brahma Purana 


18-22. In that city of Visnu, worshipped by ail, people 
walk about in divine aerial chariots. They are decorated with 
various jewels beset with pure gold; they can move about at 
their will. They are resonant with the divine music of Gandhar- 
vas. They arc as refulgent as the midday sun. They are adorned 
by the celestial maidens. The beds and scats therein are made 
of gold. They are rich in means of pleasures of various kinds. 
Flags and pearl necklaces are suspended from them. They move 
about in the sky in groups. They are of diverse colours. The 
various parts of these aerial chariots are made of gold. They are 
rendered fragrant by the contact of flowers mixed admirably 
with sandal and agallochum. The instruments of music fill them 
with sweet sounds. The passages in these aerial chariots afford 
comfortable movements. They have the speed of wind and mind. 
Groups of tinkling bells are attached to them. 

23-24. The people sport about with various young women 
of Gandharvas and the group of celestial clans. The young 
women look very splendid with their faces as charming as the 
moon. Their breasts are plump and lifted up. Their waists are 
beautiful and elegant. Some are dark in complexion and some 
fair. Their gait is like that of elephants in their rut. 

25-28. Those women surround the excellent man and fan 
him with chowries of golden handles. They are bedecked in 
variety of jewels. They rejoice singing, dancing and having ins¬ 
trumental music. They are lethargic due to intoxication. This 
excellent world shines with the Yaksas, Vidyadharas, Siddhas, 
Gandharvas, Celestial nymphs, Devas and sages. Those lofty- 
minded persons by whom the lotus-eyed lord Krsna, the lord of the 
universe, is seen near the royal banyan tree on the shore of the 
southern sea go to this world of Visnu and enjoy great pleasures. 

29. As long as the heaven stands alongwith the moon and 
stars, they dally with the celestial nymphs. They resemble 
heated gold. They are devoid of old age and death. 

30. They are free from miseries. They are rid of thirst, 
fatigue and suffering. They assume the form of the lord :—They 
have four arms. They are adorned by garlands of sylvan flowers. 
They possess great vigour and power. 

31. They have the scar called Srlvatsa. They hold conch, 


b5.32-44 


365 


discus and irouclub. Some are Ha.- t , - 

, . c , ' mcarc am k-complexioned like the blue 

lotus. Some resemble the gold. 

32. Some appear worthy of being aazed at lit. 

»me resemble .he ,apis Jui; «£* ££?£££* 
with earmgs. Others are like the diamond. Phoned 

33. O excellent brahmins, the worlds of other lords, and 
Devas do no. Amo m .he same manner as does the worid of 
Visnu being full of mysteries and miracles 

34. O brahmins, by the power of'that lord, there is no 
bdngs° n ° f retUmt,H the ultimate dissolution of all living 


35. Those who visit Krsna, Rama and Subhadra in the 
holy shrine Pumsottama move about in the divine city (justi- 
fiably) proud of their handsome features and blooming youth. 

36. In the middle of the city shines the place of Visnu which 
resembles molten gold, which has the lustre of the midday sun 
and which is embellished by jewels. 

37. It is beautifully decorated with many hundred and 
thousands of buntings and banners. It is encircled by a golden 
rampart extending to ten thousand Yojanas. 

38. With the charming well-arranged flags of various 
colours wonderfully displayed, the city shines like the autumnal 
moon surrounded by the stars. 

39. It has four main gates. It is very extensive and well- 
guarded by watchmen. It is lofty and charming. It consists of 
seven city areas. 

40-41. The first area is made of gold; the second is fitted 
with emiralds; the third is full of sapphire and beyond that it 
consists of dark blue precious stones; the fifth is brightly 
illuminated by brilliance. O brahmins, the sixth is full of 
diamonds and the seventh abounds in lapis lazuli. 

42. With wonderful, brilliant pillars set with jewels and 
beautified by gold plates and coral that great mansion shines 
exquisitely. 

43-44. The Siddhas walk about there. They brighten the 
ten quarters. Just as on the full moon night the moon shines 
with the stars so also lord Visnu mounting a high seat shines 
alongwith Laksmi. He is dark-coloured, clad in yellow robes. 
He bears the scar Srlvatsa. 





366 


Brahma Purana 


45. In his right hand lord Vi§nu holds the terrible and 
shining discus Sudarsana that destroys all other weapons and 

that consists of all fiery splendour. 

46-47. O excellent sages, in his left hand, lord Visnu holds 
his conch known as Paficajanya. 1 .It has the lustre of theKunda 
flower, moon and silver. It resembles a white necklace and the 
cow’s milk. By its sound it makes the whole universe agitated. 

It is adorned by a thousand curls. 

48-52. In his right hand he holds KaumodakI, the iron 
club which destroys Daityas and Danavas, which is fiercely 
terrible and which destroys evil deeds. It has the shape of flame 
of the blazing fire and is unbearable even to Devas. In his left 
hand shines the bow Sarnga that has the lustre of the sun. 
(It is with this bow and) the excellent arrows that resemble 
the sun and are agitated by the series of flames that the lord 
annihilates the three worlds consisting of mobile and immobile 
beings. He is the cause of each and every bliss. He is glorious. 
He is expert in all scriptural texts. He is the lord and preceptor 
of all worlds. He is bowed to by all Devas. 

He is the lord of Devas with a thousand heads, a thousand 
feet and eyes. He has a thousand names, a thousand limbs 
and a thousand arms. 

53-55. The lord with large eyes like the petals of a lotus 
shines on his throne. The lord of the universe the preceptor of 
the universe, shines very clearly like the lightning streak. He is 
surrounded by Devas, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Apsaras, Yaksas, 
Vidyadharas, Nagas, Caranas, glorious sages, Suparnas, 
Danavas, Daityas, RaksaSas, Guhyakas, Kinnaras and Devas of 
divine splendour. He shines eulogised by these people. 

56-58. The following ladies of immortal beings are station¬ 
ed there viz—Kirti (Fame), Prajfia (Wisdom), Medha 
(Intellect), Sarasvati (Speech), Buddhi (Intelligence), Mati 
(Reasoningpower), Ksanti (Forbearance), Siddhi (Achieve¬ 
ment), Murti (Form), Dyuti (Refulgence), Gayatri, Savitrl, 
Mangala, Sarvamangala, Prabha, Mati and Kanti (Lustre) 
belonging to Narayana. Then there is Sraddha (Faith), goddess 
Kausiki, vidyut (Lightning) Saudamini, Nidra (Slumber), 


1. Paficajanya —Krsna’s conch taken from the asura Pancajana. 



65.59-71 


367 


Ratn (Night), Maya and other womenfolk of the immortal 
beings. 

59. All these are established in the abode of Vasudeva. 
Of what avail is much talk? Everything is established there. 

60-67. The following ladies dance every day at the place 
where Purusottama stays :-Gh r taci, Menaka, Rambha, Saha- 
janya, Tilottama, UrvasI, Nimloca, Vamana, Mandodarl, 
Subhaga(fortunate one), Visvaci, Vipulanana, Bhadrangl, Citra- 
sena 5 Pramloca, Sumanohara, (very charming), Munisammohini 
(one who fascinates sages), Rama, Candramadhya, Subhanana, 
Sukesi (possessed of good tresses), NilakesI (possessed of blue 
tresses), ManmathadipanI (one who kindles the fire of love), 
Alambusa, MisrakesI, Punjikasthala, Kratusthala, Varangi, 
(possessed of excellent limbs), Purvacitti, Paravatl, Maharupa, 
Sasilekha of auspicious face, Hamsalilanugaminl, Mattavarana- 
gamini (one who walks like an intoxicated elephant), Bim- 
bosthl and Navagarbha—these are the celestial ladies of 
Devas. These and other celestial ladies are proud of their beauty 
and youth. Their wrists are fine and their faces are beautiful. 
They are bedecked in all ornaments. They are endowed with 
the faculty of singing sweet songs. They are endowed with all 
noble signs. They are experts in vocal and instrumental music. 
They perform dance everyday at the place where lord Puru¬ 
sottama stays. 

68. There is neither sickness nor fatigue. There is neither 
death nor snow and sunshine. There is no hunger, no thirst, no 
old age, no deformity, no unhappiness. 

69. O brahmins, 1 do not behold any other world better 
than the world of Visnu. It is the cause of bliss and it bestows 
the desired benefits. 

70. O brahmins, all those worlds which we hear as the 
worlds in the heavenly sphere, all those who perform meritorious 
rites, do not merit even a sixteenth part of the world of lord 
Visnu. 

71. Thus O brahmins is the greatest abode of Vi$nu 
endowed with all enjoyable pleasures and attributes. It is 
conducive to the pleasures of everyone. It is holy and full of 
mysteries. 








368 


Brahma Purdna 


72. Atheists and profligates do not go there. Nor do the 
following go there viz.—the ungrateful and those who are of 
uncontrollable sense-organs. 

73. The devotees of Visnu who worship Vasudeva the 
preceptor of the universe with devotion, go to the world of 
Vi§nu. 

74-77. After visiting Krsna, Rama and Subhadra in this 
rarest of holy centres on the shore of the southern ocean, 
excellent devotees cast off their bodies near the Kalpa tree. 
Those men who die in the holy centre Purusottama go to that 
world. He who remembers Purusottama in between the baniyan 
tree and the ocean and those who die in Purusottama go to 
that world. They go to that greatest abode. 

Thus, O excellent sages, the eternal world of Visnu, the 
cause of bliss unto all, the bestower of worldly pleasures and 
liberation, has been mentioned by me. 


CHAPTER SIXTYSIX 
The Glory of Lord Purusottama 

The sages said : 

1-9. O lord of the universe, the glorious world of lord Visnu 
has been recounted by you. It has many mysterious features. 
It yields perpetual bliss, worldly pleasures and liberation. 
Purusottama, the rarest of holy centres in the world has 
perfectly been glorified by you. By casting off his body there, 
a man will directly go to the abode of Visnu. 

Wonderful, indeed, is this path of liberation that you have 
mentioned for helping men viz. the abandonment of body in the 
holy centre named Purusottama. 

Without any strain, O lord of Devas, excellent men abandon 
their bodies in that holy centre and go to the region of Visnu 
devoid of ailment. 

O lord of Devas, by bearing the greatness of holy centres 


66.10-18 


369 


ZZZSSr*- ** — - - -d we feci 

and late. O excel,cm Dcva. you V„o, ^'^iTTe 
same manner as yon praise lire holy cenlre Purusorlama O 
grandsire, your intent has been understood by uss.hereW yon 
p.aise the holy centres Purusottama that bestotvs liberation 
Ccrtamly, there is no other holy centre on par with Pnrn- 

sottama. Hence, O excellent Deva, you praise it over and 


Brahma said : 

10. O excellent sages, the truth, the very truth has been 
cited by us on all. There is no other holy centre on Earth that 
is equal to Purusottama. 

11. All those holy centres and shrines do not deserve even 
a sixteenth part of Purusottama. 

12. Just as Visnu, the lord of all, is the most excellent of all 
excellent ones so also the holy centre of Purusottama is the most 
excellent of all holy centres. 

13. Just as Visnu has been cited as the most excellent one 
among the sons of Aditi so also Purusottama is the most ex¬ 
cellent one among the holy centres. 

14. Just as the moon among the stars and ocean among 
lakes so also the holy centre of Purusottama is the most 
excellent among the holy centres. 

15. Like (fire).among the Vasus and Sankara among the 
Rudras, so also Purusottama is the most excellent of all holy 
centres. 

16. Like brahmins among the four castes and Garuda among 
the birds, Purusottama is the most excellent of all holy centres. 

17. Just as the Meru is the most excellent among mountains 
with lofty peaks, just as the Himalaya is the most excellent 
among the mountains so also Purusottama is the nost excellent 
holy centre. 

18. Like LaksmI among young women and Gariga among 
the rivers Purusottama is the most excellent of all holy centres. 






370 


Brahma Puraqa 


19 Like Airavata among the leading elephants, like Bhrgu 
among the great sages, Purusottama is the excellent of all holy 

20 Like Skanda among the commanders of armies, like 
Kapila among the saintly men of great achievements Puru¬ 
sottama is the most excellent of all holy centres. 

21. Like Uccaissravas among the horses, like Usanas among 
the poets, Purusottama is the most excellent of all holy centres. 

22. Like Vyasa among the sages, like Kubera among \ aksas 
and (like Vibhisana among) Raksasas, Purusottama is the 
excellent of all holy centres. 

23. Like mind among the organs of sense, like earth among 
the elements, Purusottama is the most excellent of all holy 
centres. 

24. Like the holy big tree among all trees, like wind among 
those who float and spread, Purusottama is the most excellent 
of all holy centres. 

25. O brahmins, just as the crest-jewel is the most excellent 
of all ornaments, so also Purusottama is the most excellent of 
all holy centres. 

26. Like Citraratha among the Gandharvas, like Kulisa 
among weapons, Purusottama is the most excellent among 
all holy centres. 

27. Like the letter A among all syllables, like Gayatrl 
among all vedic mantras, Purusottama is the most excellent of 
all holy centres. 

28. O excellent brahmins, just as the head is excellent 
of all limbs so also Purusottama is the most excellent of 
all holy centres. 

29. Just as Arundhatl is excellent among chaste ladies so 
also Purusottama is the most excellent of all holy centres. 

30. Just as the doctrine of salvation is the greatest of all 
doctrines and lores so also Purusottama is excellent of all holy 
centres. 

31. Like the king among men, like the Divine cow among 
cows, Purusottama is the most excellent of all holy centres. 

32. Like a piece of gold among jewels, like Vasuki among 
serpents, Purusottama is the most excellent among holy centres. 

33. Like Prahlada among all Daityas, like Rama among 


66.34-67.11 


371 


the wielders of weapons, Purusottama is the most excellent of 

all holy centres. 

34. Like the shark among fishes, like lion among violent 
animals, Purusottama is the most excellent among all holy 
centres. 

35. Just as the milky ocean is excellent of ail oceans so 
also purusottama is the most excellent of all holy centres. 

36. Just as Varuna is excellent of all aquatic beings, 
justasYama is excellent of all Yogins. so also Purusottama 
is the most excellent of all holy centres. 

37. O excellent sages, just as Narada is excellent of all 
divine sages so also Purusottama is the most excellent of 
all holy centres. 

38. Like gold among metals, like the gift of coins among 
all sacred gifts, Purusottama is the most excellent of all holy 
centres. 

39. Like Daksa among Prajapatis, like Kasyapa among 
sages, Purusottama is the most excellent of all holy centres. 

40. Like the Sun among planets, like Pranava among 
Mantras, Purusottama is the most excellent of all holy centres. 

41. Just as the horse-sacrifice (asvamedha) is glorified as 
excellent of all sacrifices, O excellent brahmins, so also that 
holy centre is the most excellent of all holy centres. 

42. Just as the food-grain plant is the most excellent of 
all plants; like the cocoanut or palmyra among the grassy 
species, Purusottama is the most excellent of all holy centres. 

43. Just as the holy rite of all sacred places is the means 
of redemption from worldly existence so also Purusottama is 
excellent of all holy centres. 


CHAPTER SIXTYSEVEN 
The Glory of Ananta Vasudeva 


Brahma said : 

1-11. O excellent brahmins, the benefits of Japas, Homas, 
austerities and charitable gifts in the holy centres and shrines 
have been mentioned to you. 







372 


Brahma Purana 

O brahmins, I do not sec a holy centre which is equal to 
the holy centre Purusottama on the earth. Of what avail is 
much talk and repeated utterance. Truth, it is the truth, 
really the truth that the holy centre Purusottama is extremely 
great. By visiting the holy centre Purusottama but once, bv 
touching the waters of the ocean but once, by knowing the 
doctrine of Brahman but once, there is no further staying in 
the womb. 

The devotee should stay for a year or at least for a month 
in the excellent holy centre of Purusottama, the place where 
Lord Visnu is present. In that case the Japa performed or 
Homa offered by him is great. A great penance has been per- 
formed by him. 

He goes to the great abode where Visnu the lord of Yogins 
is ever present. Accompanied by celestial women he enjoys 
pleasures of various sorts. At the end of Kalpa the excellent 
man returns to the mortal world. O brahmins, he is born in 
the house of Yogins. He endeavours to understand what should 
be understood. After acquiring the Yoga of Visnu, be attains 
liberation. Know the glory of Kalpa tree, Rama, Krsna, Su- 
bhadra, Markandeya’s eddy. Indradyumna’s lake is also men¬ 
tioned. The glory of Sveta Matsya and of the heavenly door 
and the rules regarding bath in the ocean have been mentioned. 
The rules regarding ritualistic cleansing marjana and the 
proper time of contact with Ganga have also been mentioned 
by me. What more do you wish to hear ? The glory of Indra- 
dyumna has also been recounted. The Purana that enables 
one to liberate himself, that is full of mysteries and miracles, 
that is holy and excellent and that is a great secret conducive 
to richness has also been mentioned fully by me. 

The sages said : 

12. We are not satiated by listening to the story of the 
lord. It behoves you to relate once again the great secret 
doctrine. 

13. . The details of Vasudeva the infinite deity have not 
been explained perfectly by you. O lord, wc wish to hear. 
Kindly mention it in detail. 


67.14-28 


373 


Brahma said : 


14. O excellent sages, I shall mention the greatest essence, 
the greatness of the infinite deity Vasudeva, the rarest in the 
three worlds. 


15. Formerly, in the Adikalpa (first of the Kalpas), O 
brahmins, I was born of the unmanifest. Visvakarman spoke 
these words. 

16-18. I urged Visvakarma the leading architect of Devas, 
whose activities are of the greatest nature—“Make an idol of 
Vasudeva, carving it out of a rock. On seeing it, men and 
women in the South will worship it duly and devotedly. Once, 
Devas and the lord of Devas Indra sensed danger from Danavas 
and Raksasas. Being afraid they had come to the peak of 
Sumeru in heaven. They propitiated Vasudeva and stayed 
there without any calamity or agitation. 

19-22. After hearing my words, Visvakarma made a pure 
idol holding conch, discus and iron club. It was endowed with 
all traits. It had eyes as large as the petals of a lotus. It had 
the scar-Srlvatsa. The excellent idol was owe-inspiring. The 
chest was covered with garlands of sylvan flowers. It wore 
crown and shoulder-lets. It was clad in yellow robes. The 
shoulders were plump and round. It was bedecked with two 
ear-rings. Thus the divine idol was got made by me through 
secret mantras and the time for installation had come. 

23-24. At that time, Indra, the king of Devas, came to 
my abode riding on Airavata, his excellent elephant. He was 
surrounded by Devas. By means of ablution, charitable gifts, 
he propitiated the idol. Taking the idol with him he returned 
to his capital. 

25-28. By propitiating the idol for a long time after res¬ 
training his speech, body and mind he gained in strength. He 
killed Vftra and other Asuras as well as the cruel and tenrible 
Danavas led by Namuci. He then enjoyed the worlds Bhuh, 
Bhuvah, Svar etc. 

After the advent of Treta Yuga, there was a valorous over- 
lord of the Raksasas, Dasagriva (Ravana). He had great pro¬ 
wess. For ten thousand years he performed holy rites and 
severe penance, abstaining from food and conquering sense- 
organs. This penance was very difficult to be performed by 




374 


Brahma Purana 


ordinary persons. Pleased with that penance I granted him a 
boon. 

29-30. He could not be killed by Devas, Daityas, Nagas, 
and Raksasas. lie could not be killed by the terrible attendants 
of Yama who had the power to curse beside their infallible 
weapons. After securing this boon the Raksasa defeated Yaksas 
and their lord.Kubera. He then attempted to conquer Indra. 

31-36. He fought a terrible battle with Devas. The Rak¬ 
sasa defeated the king of Devas. The son of Ravana, Megha- 
nada acquired the title Indrajit by conquering him. There¬ 
after Ravana of great strength reached Amaravatl. In the 
splendid abode of the king of Devas, Ravana saw the idol of 
Vasudeva as refulgent as collyrium. It was endowed with the 
characteristic marks of Lord Visnu. It had the scar Srivatsa. 
It had large eyes like the petals of a lotus. The chest was 
covered by the garlands of sylvan flowers. It was bedecked in 
crown and shoulderlets. It held conch, discus and iron club in 
its hands. It was clad in yellow robes. It had four arms. It was 
bedecked in ornaments. It was the bestower of all benefits. 
Leaving off the heaps of jewels, (Ravana) immediately des¬ 
patched the auspicious idol to Lanka by the aerial chariot 
Puspaka. 

37. The glorious and righteous Vibhlsana, the younger 
brother and minister of Ravana was a devotee of Narayana. 
He was entrusted with the administration of the capital Lanka. 

38. On seeing that the divine idol was taken away from 
the abode of the lord of Devas, he experienced horripilation all 
over his body. He was struck with surprise. 

39-40. With a delighted mind he bowed his head to the 
lord. After saying—“My birth is fruitful today. My penance is 
fruitful today”, the righteous Vibhlsana made obeisance again 
and again. He went to his eldest brother. With his palms 
joined in reverence he spoke thus :— 

41. O king, it behoves you to favour me with this idol. O 
lord of the worlds, I shall propitiate it irnd cross the ocean of 
worldly existence. 

42-43. On hearing the words of his brother, Ravana spoke 
“O heroic one, take the idol. What shall I do with it ? I have 


67.44-58 


375 


propitiated the self-born deity and am conquering the three 
worlds. I shall also worship Mahadeva who wields various 
miraculous powers and who is the source of origin of all living 
beings. 

44-45. Then Vibhisana of great intellect worshipped the 
splendid idol for one hundred and eight years and acquired 
the boon of old age. He attained the attributes of Anima 
(minuteness) etc. He acquired the realm and overlordship of 
Lanka. Even now, he enjoys all pleasures as he wishes. 

The sages said : 

46-47. On hearing this extremely immortal narrative the 
origin of the infinite deity-Vasudeva, difficult of access on the 
earth, we are extremely surprised. O lord, we wish to hear the 
greatness of that lord, precisely and in detail. It behoves you 
to mention it fully. 

Brahma said : 

48-49. That sinful ruthless Raksasa (Ravana) defeated 
'Devas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, guardians of the quarters, 
human beings, sages and Siddhas in battle. He kidnapped ex¬ 
cellent women and settled them in the city of Lanka. There¬ 
after, he attempted the abduction of Slta. 

50-58. He deceived Rama through Marica in the form of 
a golden deer. 

Rama and his brother Laksmana the son of Sumitra be¬ 
came infuriated and (resolved to slay Ravana. After killing 
Bali of great prowess, he crowned Sugrlva as the king and 
Angada as the Heir-apparent. With eyes resembling the petals 
of a lotus Rama was surrounded by extremely terrible monkeys 
of great strength such as—Hanuman, Nala, Nila, Jambavan, 
Panasa. Gavaya, Gavaksa and others. They possessed great 
power and they were pure. With massive boulders of mountains 
he got the bridge built over the great ocean. With his vast 
army, Rama crossed the ocean and fought an unparalleled war 
against the Raksasas. The powerful Rama slaughtered Yama- 
hasta, Prahasta, Nikumbha, Kumbha, Narantaka, Yamantaka, 
Maladhya, Malikatfhya, Indrajit Kumbhakarna and Ravana. 
He got Slta the daughter of Janaka, the king of Videha tested 





376 Brahma Pur ana 

by the fire ordeal. 1 He bestowed kingdom on Vibhlsana and 
brought the idol of Vasudeva to Ayodhya formerly protected 
(by himself and his ancestors) riding in the aerial chariot 
Puspaka sportingly. 

59-61. Out of affection he crowned his younger brother 
Bharata and Satrughna as heir-apparents. Rama who is favou¬ 
rite of his devotee, ruled over the kingdom as an Emperor. 
Propitiating his own ancient form born of Visnu, Rama en¬ 
joyed the ocean-girt earth for eleven thousand years. There¬ 
after he attained his own region i.e. the region of Visnu. 

62-67. Rama gave that idol to the lord of oceans (saying) 
“You are blessed. You will protect this idol in your waters with 
perfect concentration”. 

In the Dvapara Age, the lord the preceptor of the Uni¬ 
verse, incarnated in the family of Vasudeva at the request of 
the earth on account of the emotional instability of the people 
due to the demons’ activities. The lord incarnated for slaying 
Karhsa - and was assisted by Balarama. O brahmins, at that 
time, with some other purpose in view and for the welfare of 
worlds, the lord took out that idol, the bestower of all cherish¬ 
ed desires and benefits, from the waters of the ocean—the lord 
of the rivers. He then placed it in that excellent holy centre, 
Purusottama, the rarest of all holy centres. Ever since then, O 
brahmins, that lord the dispeller of the agony of Devas, the 
bestower of all desires, stays there itself in that holy centre, the 
bestower of liberation. 

68. Those who devoutly resort to the infinite lord of all, 
mentally, verbally and physically attain the highest region. 

69. By visiting Ananta (infinite) even for once and by 
devoutly worshipping and bowing to him, the devotee derives 
ten .times more than the benefit of Rajasuya and Asvamedha 
sacrifices. 

70-71. The man redeems twenty-one generations of his 
family. He then goes to the city of Visnu seated in a highly 

1. ^ Divine Ordeal (divya-pariksa). Yajnavalkya prescribes ten 
ordeals viz tula, agni, jala, visa, kos'a, tandula, tapta-masa, phala, dharma, 
tulasi. 

In the Yuddhakaitf a of the Ramayana, Valmlki has described Sita’s 
entering and standing in fire as a test of her purity. 



67.72—68.3 


377 


refulgent aerial chariot that has the lustre and colour of the 
sun, that is richly furnished with all desirable things, that can 
go as one desires it to go and that has a row of tinkling bells. 
He shall be surrounded by the celestial ladies. Gandharvas will 
be singing in praise of him. 

72-74. He will enjoy excellent pleasures there. He will be 
rid of old age and death. Assuming a divine form the glorious 
devotee will enjoy pleasures until the dissolution of all living 
beings. 

When his merits dwindle he will return to the earth and be 
born as a brahmin who has mastered the four Vedas. By adopt¬ 
ing Yoga of Visnu he will attain liberation. 

Thus, O excellent sages, the infinite deity Ananta has been 
glorified by me. Who is competent to recount all the merits of 
visiting the shrine even in hundreds of years ? 


CHAPTER SIXTYEIGHT 
Glory of the Holy Shrine of Purufottama 


Brahma said : 

1. Thus, the glory of (Infinite deity) and the holy shrine 
of Purusottama that yields worldly pleasures and liberation 
unto men has been recounted by me. It is very difficult of 
access. 

2-3. It is the place where the glorious lord stays the lord 
whose eyes resemble the lotus, who holds conch, discus and 
ironclub, who is clad in yellow robes and who has killed Kaiiisa 
and KeSin. 1 

There is no doubt that those who see there Krsna who is 
bowed to by Devas and Asuras, Samkarsana and Subhadra are 
blessed. 


1. KtSin : a follower of Kaiiisa who at the instruction of Kamsa 
went to Gokula, in the form of a horse, to kill Srikrs*a. But Snkrsna 
killed him and got the name Kesava. 







378 


Brahma Purana 


4. Those who meditate upon Krsna the overlord of the 
three worlds', the bestower of all desired benefits, are liberated 
souls. 

5. Those who are devoted to Krsna, those who remember 
Krsna at night (when they go to bed) and again when they 
get up enter Krsna when their bodies are consumed on death 
like the ghee offering consigned to fire with due repetitions of 
Mantras. 

6. Hence, O excellent sages, the lotus-eyed deity Krsna 
should be assiduously visited in that holy centre by those who 
seek salvation. 

7. The lofty-minded persons who visit Krsna, (Balarama) 
and Subhadra at the time when the deities are laid to rest go 
to the world of Visnu. 

8. Those who devoutly visit Purusottama, Balarama and 
Subhadra at any time, go to the world of Visnu. 

9. He who stays in the holy centres of Purusottama for 
the four months of rainy season derives more benefit than the 
benefit accruing from the holy pilgrimage to the other centres 
of the Earth. 

10. Those lofty persons who reside there itself during the 
seasons, after conquering sense-organs and controlling anger, 
derive the benefit of a penance. 

11. Within a month a man obtains at Purusottama their 
benefit which others obtain after performing penance in other 
holy centres for ten thousand years. 

12. Lofty-minded persons always obtain the usual benefit 
of penance, celibate life eschewed of attachment at the 
holy centre of Purusottama. 

13. Lofty-minded persons obtain the benefit which is 
glorified as the meritorious benefit of ablution and charitable 
gifts in ail other holy centres. 

14. Everyday, the pure person derives that benefit which is 
mentioned as the result of perfectly performed pilgrimage, holy 
rites and observances. 

15. A man of perfectly restrained sense-organs obtains 
everyday the same benefit as one obtains (on other holy 
centres) after performing different rites of sacrifice. 


68 . 16-28 


379 


16. There is no doubt that the people who resort to the 
Kalpa tree in the holy centre of Purusottama 1 and abandon 
their bodies become liberated souls. 

17. Those who abandon their bodies anywhere between 
the baniyan tree and the Ocean obtain* the greatest liberation 
which is very difficult to get. 

18. Even if the man is forced to give up his life against 
his wish, he will be liberated from misery. He will attain 
salvation which is very difficult to get. 

19. Even the animals of low strata of species such as germs, 
worms, moths etc., attain the greatest salvation by abandon¬ 
ing their bodies there. 

20. O brahmins, see the illusion of the world in regard to 
other holy centres. The fruits of all other holy centres are 
derived from the only holy centre Purusottama. 

21. The man who faithfully visits Purusottama for once 
will become the most excellent man among thousands of men. 

22. The lord is glorified as Purusottama in the Vedas, 
Puranas and in the world because he is greater than Prakrti 
and more excellent than Purusa. 

23. He who is cited as Paramatman (the Supreme Being) 
in the Puranas and in Vedanta is present for the uplift of 
universe. Hence, he is Purusottama. 

24. Here in this centre whether it is on the road, or in 
the cemetery or in a house of a pupil or anywhere among diffe¬ 
rent spots in the streets whether willing or otherwise the man 
who gives up his body derives liberation. 

25. Hence, O excellent brahmins, one who gives up his 
body in this holy centre will achieve liberation. 

26. Who can adequately mention the glory of Puru¬ 
sottama ? Just by visiting the baniyan tree there a man dispels 
the sin of brahmin slaughter. 

97 Only a part of the good qualities of the holy centres 
has been related by me. Who can mention the entire merits 

adequately even in hundreds of years ? 

28. O excellent sages, if you seek for perpetual salvation, 

stay in that holy centre alertfully. 


1. Purufottama-kfetra : a centre in Orissa, sacred to Vi?i?u. 









380 


Brahma Purana 


Vyasa said : 

29. On hearing the words of Brahma born of the unmani¬ 
fest one, sages resided there and attained the highest region. 

30. Hence, O excellent brahmins, you too stay in this 
holy centre—Purusottama, if you seek for perfect creation here¬ 
after. 


CHAPTER SIXTYNINE 
Narrative of Sage Kan<fu 

Vyasa said: 

1-4. O excellent sages, there was a great sage, Kandu in 
that holy centre Purusottama which is conducive to the happi¬ 
ness of all living beings and which bestows the benefit of virtue, 
wealth, love and liberation. The sage was extremely virtuous. 
He had great refulgence. He was truthful in speech, pure and 
en g a g e d in the welfare of all living beings. He had control over 
his sense-organs. He had conquered wealth. He was a master 
of the Vedas and Vedangas. By propitiating Purusottama he 
attained great Siddhi. There were other great sages too who 
had achieved much. They used to perform great holy rites. 
They were engaged in the welfare of the people. They had 
subdued their sense-organs and conquered anger. They were 
rid of rivalry and malice. 

The sages said: 

5.. Who was this Kantfu? How did he attain the greatest 
salvation? O excellent one, we wish to hear his story. Please 
narrate. 

Vyasa said: 

6. O leading sages, listen to his interesting story. I shall 
mention in brief the activities of that sage. 


69.7-18 


381 


7-9. O excellent sages, the hermitage of Kandu was on the 
holy banks of Gomati 1 river. It was a secluded and charming 
spot, full of fruits, roots and bulbous roots. It abounded in 
sacrificial twigs, ICusa grass and flowers. Many trees and creepers 
grew there. It was beautified by different kinds of flowers. It 
was a charming place resonant with the chirping sounds of 
various birds and those of different kinds of animals. The 
hermitage was adorned by a grove of plantain trees. It abounded 
in fruits and flowers in all seasons. 

10. The sage performed a great penance. It was extremely 
wonderful on account of rites, fasts and observances, ablutions, 
vows of silence and restraint of senses. 

11. During the summer he practised fivefold penance with 
four fires on the four sides and the sun overhead; during the 
rainy season he slept on the bare ground; during winter he stood 
in neck-deep water—thus he performed a great penance. 

12. On seeing the power of penance of that sage, Devas, 
Gandharvas, Siddhas and Vidyadharas were struck with wonder. 

13. O excellent sages, with the force of his strength Kandu 
scorched the three worlds, Earth, firmament and heaven. 

14. On seeing him engaged in penance Devas said thus :— 
cc Wonderful is his great courage ! Wonderful is his great penance !’ 

15. Without excitement they consulted one another. Inclu¬ 
ding Indra they were bewildered and frightened. Hence, they 
wanted an obstacle to be putin the way of his penance. 

16-17. Having come to know their intention, Tndra, the 
destroyer of Bala, the lord of the three worlds, spoke to the 
beautiful celestial damsel Pramloca. She was proud of her 
beauty and youth. She had slender waist and attractive breasts 
plump and beautiful. She was endowed with all characteristics. 

Indra said: 

18. O Pramloca, go quickly to the place where this sage is 
performing penance. O splendid lady, in order to impede his 
penance make his mind agitated. 


. 1. Gomati : a celebrated river of Puranic fame which flowed through 

Naimisa-forest where several sacrifices had been performed by the sages. 
The word ‘Gomati’ means ‘abounding in water’. 







382 


Brahma Puraria 


Pramloca said: 

19. O most excellent Deva, O my lord, I always carry out 
your behests. But in this matter, I have some doubts. My lif e 
has to be risked. 

20. I am afraid of that excellent sage, who is steadfast in 
the vow of celibacy. He is very fierce and refulgent as fire and 
sun. His penance is brilliant. 

21. When he comes to know that I have approached him to 
create impediment in his penance, sage Kandu of excessive 
splendour will curse me angrily. It will be unbearable. 

22-24. There are many celestial damsels proud of their 
beauty and blooming youth such as Urvasi, Menaka, Rambha, 
GhflacI, Punjika, Sthala, VisvacI, Sahajanya, Purvacitti, 
Tilottama, Alambusa, MisrakesT, Sasilekha,Vamana and others. 
They are slender-waisted. Their faces are attractive. Their 
breasts arc plump and lifted up. They are experts in the extensive 
amorous dalliances. Employ them there. 

Brahma said : 

25. On hearing her words the consort of SacI said again;— 
Let others stay by. O splendid lady, you are very clever in this 
affair. 

26. O lady of fine buttocks, I shall send Kama, Vasanta 
(Spring) and the gentle breeze to assist you. Go with them to the 
place where this great sage lives. 

27. On hearing the words of Indra that excellent lady of 
attractive eyes went with them by the aerial path. 

28. After going there she saw the excellent and charming 
forest. She saw the pious sage, seated in the hermitage perform¬ 
ing his brilliant penance. 

29. Along with them, she surveyed the beautiful forest 
comparable to the Nandana forest. It contained excellent flowers 
of all seasons. It was agitated by groups of monkeys. 

30-31. The forest was holy. It was endowed with clusters 
of lotuses. It was filled with trees with abundant sprouts. She 
heard sweet songs of birds pleasing to the ears. She saw trees 
laden with fruits and flowers of all seasons. They were resonant 
with the songs of birds. 


69 . 32-49 


383 


32-37. The lady of wide eyes saw many trees there :—Amra 
(Mango), Amrataka, coconut, palm, Tinduka, Bilva, Jlva, 
Dadima, Bljapuraka (pomegranate), Panasa (jack tree), 
Lakuca, Nipa, beautiful Sirlsa, Paravata, Kola, Arimeda, 
Amlavetasa, Bhallataka, Amalaka (Embylic myrobalans), 
Sataparna, Kimsuka, Inguda, Karavira, Harltaki, Vibhitaka, 
Asoka, Punnaga, Ketaki, Bakula, Parijata, Kovidara, Mandara, 
Indlvara, Patala in full bloom, Devadaru, Sala, Tala, Tamala, 
Nicula and Lomaka. These and other trees laden with fruits 
and flowers she saw there. 

38-39. The forest was accompanied by many birds that 
chirped sweetly such as Cakora, Satapatra, Bhjrngaraja, parrots, 
cuckoos, sparrows, Harltas, Jivajivakas, Priyaputra, Cataka and 
various other birds. 

40-42. She saw beautiful lakes with crystal clear waters and 
full of waterborn flowers such as lilies, lotuses, splendid blue 
lotuses, Kalhara etc. The lakes were beautified by these flowers. 
There were aquatic birds such as Kadambas, Cakravakas (ruddy 
geese), waterfowls, Karandavas cranes, swans, tortoises, por¬ 
poises. The lakes were filled with these aquatic beings. 

43-45. Alongwith Kama and others Pramloca wandered all 
round the forest. After surveying the beautiful and wonderful 
forest in their company that excellent lady was extremely 
wonderstruck. Her eyes beamed with pleasant surprise. O 
excellent brahmins, she said to Cupid, Spring and the gentle 
breeze. 

Pramloca said : 

Assist me. Ye all severally be prepared. 

Brahma said : 

46-49. After saying this, she who was proud of her ability 
to agitate the passion of everyone said thus:—I shall now go to 
the place where this sage is present. The sage is like a charioteer 
with the body as the chariot and the sense-organs as horses. I 
shall convert him into a bad charioteer with the reins, dropped 
by the weapons of Kama. Whether he be a Visnu, a Brahma or 
a Siva, I shall get him split up by the arrows of Kama . 





384 


Brahma Pur ana 


After saying this she came to the place where the sage was 
seated. Such was the power of the penance of the sage; the 
beast of prey in the penance-grove had become quiescent. 

50. Standing on the banks of the river, only a very short 
distance from him, that excellqnt celestial damsel with the 
sweetness of the cuckoo in her voice began to sing songs merrily. 

51. An untimely but sweet and charming note of the cuckoo 
was heard and Vasanta exerted his full force. 

52. A gentle breeze withhis abode in the Malaya mountain 
blew there making the excellent flowers fall down gently into 
small or big heaps. 

53. Holding the flowery arrows, Kama went near that sage 
and made his mind agitated. 

54. On hearing the sweet sound of the song the sage was 
surprised and his mind was afflicted by the arrows of Kama. He 
went to the place where the lady of beautiful eyebrows was 
standing. 

55. On seeing her he was delighted with wonder; his eyes 
beamed. He experienced horripilation all over his body. His 
upper garment dropped down. He was completely upset. 

The sage said : 

56. O lady of good buttocks, who are you? Whom do you 
belong to? O fortunate blessed lady of atrractive smiles, you 
have captivated my mind. O lady of fine eyebrows and slender 
waist, tell me the truth. 

Pramloca said : 

57. I have come here to collect flowers. I am your servant- 
maid. Command me quickly? What shall I do at your bidding? 

Brahma said : 

58. On hearing her words the sage lost his courage. He 

was dubed. Taking that damsel by her hand he entered his 
hermitage. 

59. O excellent brahmins, then Cupid, Spring, Breeze 
became satisfied. They returned to heaven. 

60. After going there they spoke to lndra of their activities, 
on hearing which lndra and Devas became delighted. 





69.61-73 


385 


61. Immediately after entering the hermitage sage Kandu 
assumed a very beautiful form like that of a Cupid. 

62. It was richly endowed with handsome features and 
blooming youth. It was very charming. It was bedecked in divine 
ornaments. It was the physical form of a blooming youth of 
sixteen years. 

63. Suddenly, due to the power of his penance he assumed 
a form clad in divine garments, and beautified with divine 
garlands and unguents. It was lovely and capable of enjoying 
all pleasures. 

64. On seeing his vim and vigour she was excessively 
surprised saying— <c Wonderful, indeed, is the power of penance.” 
She rejoiced much. 

65-66. O excellent sages, eschewing his rites of holy bath, 
prayer during dusk and dawn, repetitione of holy names, 
sacrifices, study of the Vedas, worship of deities, observances 
of holy rites, fasts, and meditation he sported with her day and 
night with great joy. With cupid penetrating into heart he did 
not know that his penance was getting reduced. 

67-68. With his mind drawn to sexual pleasures he was 
not aware of the passing time. Twilights, nights, days, fortnights, 
months, seasons and years sped on. 

O brahmins, clever in secret amorons dalliance, that lady 
of fine buttocks, skilled in engaging conversation diverted his 
mind with various lustful emotions. 

69. The sage Kandu engaged himself in vulgar sexual 
intercourse with her. Many hundreds of years he stayed with her 
in the valley of the Mandara mountain. 

70. Once she said to that highly blessed sage—“O brahmin, 
I wish to go to heaven. It behoves you to permit me with a 
pleasant face.” 

71. Thus requested by her that sage whose mind was 
fondly attached to her said— cc O gentle lady, please stay for a 
few days more.” 

72. Thus requested by him that slender-framed lady 
enjoyed sexual pleasures in the company of that noble sage for 
a further period of a hundred and odd years, 

73. When requested by her thus— <c O holy sir, please 




Brahma Parana 

386 

grant me permission. I am going back to heaven,” he once 
again replied—“Stay for some days more.” 

74. When a further period of more than a hundred years 
elapsed, that splendid-faced lady said with a lovely smile of 
great endearment-“0 brahmin I am going to heaven”. 

75. When urged by her thus, the sage said to that lady 
of large eyes—“O lady of beautiful eyebrows, stay with me for 
a long time more: you will go later to heaven.” 

76. Frightened of being cursed by that sage, the lady of 
fine buttocks stayed with him for a further period of slightly 
less than two hundred years. 

77. Repeatedly requested by that lady for permission to 
go to heaven that highly blessed sage merely said— < "Stay 
further”. 

78. The timid lady was afraid of his curse. Amiably sub¬ 
missive she was aware of the agony of frustration in loye. So, 
when requested by him, she did not part from the sage. 

79. The great sage sported and diverted himself with her, 
day and night, with his mind overwhelmed by cupid. The 
more he indulged himself the fresher became the ways of 
expressing his affection. 

80. Once the sage went out of his hut in a great hurry. 
As he rushed out the splendid lady said—“Pray, where do you 
go?’ 5 

81. When asked by her thus he said— cc O auspicious lady, 
the day is coming to a close. I shall say my prayers for the 
dusk. Otherwise, it will be a great omission of my holy rites.” 

82. The delighted lady then laughed and said to the sage— 
“is it only now; O sage conversant with all holy rites, that the 
day is coming to a close? Has it not passed of many times 
before ?” 

The sage said : 

83-84, “O gentle lady, you came to this splendid bank of 
the river this morning. O lady of fine buttocks, you were seen 
by me and you entered my hermitage, Now it is the dusktime. 
The day has come to a close. Why do you laugh at me now? 
Let it be mentioned to me in real feeling of earnestness”. 






387 


69.85-93 
Pramloca said : 

85. “O brahmin, this is true that I came here in a morning. 
It is not false. But hundreds of years have passed by, since I 
came to you.” 

86. Thereupon, the brahmin asked the lady of large eyes 
in great perturbation—“O timid lady, even as I was engaged 
in dalliance with you, what period of time did pass by?” 

Pramloca said : 

87. “Nine hundred, seven years, six months and three days 
have passed ofF till date.” 

The sage said : 

88. “O timid lady, arc you telling me the truth or are you 
jesting with me ? I think I have stayed here with you only for a 
day.” 


Pramloca said : 

89. “O brahmin, how will I utter a lie in your presence ? 
Particularly when asked by you as you proceed ahead along your 
path ?” 


Vydsa said : 

90. O excellent brahmins, on hearing her words that^sage 
censured himself saying—“Fie upon me who have not adhered 
to disciplined good conduct . 

The sage said : 

91 My austerities have perished. The spiritual wealth of 
the knowers of Brahman is doomed. Sense ofdifcnmm^on h« 
been taken away. A woman has been created by someone only 

“The Brahman that is beyond air : Crmis (billows;of 
worldly entanglement) should have been real,zed by■ me^the 
conquest of self. Fie upon this great ev.l element of Kama by 

whom this adverse goal has been effected. 

03 T he vedas, and holy rites, all causes of welfare have 
been damned today by Kama, the pathway leading to e 
hell.” 






388 


Brahma Purdna 


94. After censuring himself thus, that sage conversant with 
piety spoke these words to tlxat celestial damsel who was seated 
there. 


The sage said : 

95. O sinful lady, go away as you please. The task of the 
king of Dcvas has been duly accomplished by you by causing 
perturbation in me through your amorous gestures. 

96-97. I am not reducing you to ashes by the fire of dread¬ 
ful anger. Friendship is generated in good people through seven 
words or seven steps. 1 I have stayed with you for long. Or, 
what is your fault ? What can I do to you ? This is exclusively 
my own fault for I could not conquer my sense-organs. 

98. Wastage of my austerities has been brought about by 
you who seek the favour of Indra. Fie upon you the despicable 
one, the cause of great delusion. 


Vyasasaid : 


99. When that brahminical sage said this to that lady of 
fine waist, she trembled excessively and perspired profusely. 

100. To that chaste lady who was quaking with fear and 
whose tender creeperlike body was drenched in sweat, the ex¬ 
cellent sage said furiously—“Go. Go away”. 

101. Rebuked by him she went out of his hermitage and 
traversing the path of firmament she mopped off her sweat 
drops by the sprouts of trees. 

102. The young damsel moved from tree to tree. She wiped 
off her body from which perspiration flowed in profuse drops. 
With the pink sprouts she mopped off the sweat drops. 

103. The foetus that had been implanted in her body by 

sage came out of her limbs in the form of sweat drops and the 

sense of horripilation. 


104. Trees took up that foetus and unified it in a body. 

Developed through his rays by the moon that child in the womb 
grew up by and by. 


1. One can befriend a person by 
seven steps together: 


speaking 


seven words or by footing 






69 . 105-115 


389 


105. She became the lovely-eyed daughter of trees, Marisa 
by name. O brahmins, it was she who became the wife of Prace- 
tas and the mother of Daksa. 

106. When his power of penance was exhausted, the excel¬ 
lent and holy sage Kandu went to the holy shrine of Visnu 
named Purusottama, O brahmins. 

107-11 1. He saw the rarest of holy centres on Earth that 
bestows salvation on the shore of the southern sea. It had plenty 
of flowers in all seasons. It was the bestower of happiness unto 
all men. It was the receptacle of all good qualities. It was 
conducive to wealth. Formerly, it had been frequented by 
Bhrgu and other great sages and Siddhas. It was the bestower 
of all cherished desires. It appeared very beautiful with sands 
scattered all round. Clusters of Ketaki plants enhanced its 
beauty. Trees and creepers grew there in abundance. The 
auspicious chirping sound of various birds was heard everywhere. 
Everywhere the holy spot could be traversed comfortably. (It 
was always resorted to by Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Yaksas and 
other persons seeking salvation. There, he saw Hari adorned by 
all Devas. He was resorted to by the people of brahmin and 
other castes in the various stages of their lives. 

112. - As soon as he saw the holy centre and lord Purusot¬ 
tama, the excellent sage considered himself contented as one 
who had fulfilled his duties. 

113. There he sat with fully concentrated mind and pro¬ 
pitiated Hari. The excellent sage, a great Yogin stood with his 
arms lifted up. With a singlcminded attention he performed 
Japa (repetition of holy names) of Brahmapara (Brahman the 
great redeemer). 

The sages said : 

114. O sage, we wish to hear about the excellent and great 
Brahmapara whereby lord Kesava was propitiated by Kandu 
who performed this Japa. 

Vyasa said : 

115. Visnu is the greatest Para (the other shore—the des¬ 
tination after crossing the ocean of world by existence). He is 
Apara-para (It is difficult to cross him—to comprehend him). 





390 


Brahma Purana 


He is greater than the greatest Beings. He is of the form of the 
greatest Atman. He alone is known as Brahmapara (Brahman 
the great redeemer). He is the greatest Para (the other shore). 

He is greater than the greatest. He is Parapara (the redeemer 

of those who redeem). 

116. He is the cause and also one who has resorted to the 
cause, the cause of that too, the greatest cause of cause. Thus, 
in the effects, it protects all by means of its manifold forms such 
as Karman (object) and Kartr (the Agent). 

117. The lord is Brahman, he is identical with every thing; 
Brahman is the lord of subjects. He is Acyuta (the unswerving). 
Visnu is the unchanging, unborn, permanent Brahman. He is not 
contaminated by depreciation and other defects. 

118. Just as Purusottama is the imperishable, unborn, 
permanent Brahman so also may the defects ofpassionate attach¬ 
ment subside. 

Vyasa said : 

119-121. O excellent brahmins, on hearing the repetitions 
of the holy Mantra viz Brahmapara by the sage and on realizing 
his great and steadfast devotion, lord Purusottama, favourably 
disposed towards his devotees, approached him with great plea¬ 
sure riding on his vehicle Garutfa the son of Vinata. The slayer 
ofMadhu (=Visnu) spoke to him in a voice as majestic as the 
rumbling sound of the cloud. He seemed to make the quarters 
resonant. 

The lord said : 

122. O sage, mention to me the greatest task that is thought 
of by you in your mind. I have come to you as the bestower of 
boons. O sage of good holy rites, choose the boon. 

123-125. On hearing these words of the discus-bearing lord 
ofDevas (the sage) opened his eyes and saw Hari in front of 
him. He resembled the blue Atasi flower in complexion. His eyes 
were as large as the petals of a lotus. He held conch, discus and 
iron club in his hands. He wore the crown and shoulderlets. He 
had four arms and elegant limbs. The lord was clad in yellow 
robes. He had the Scar Srlvatsa. He was bedecked in garlands 
of sylvan flowers. 






69.126-134 


391 


(Extra Verse) He was endowed with all the characteristic 
marks. He was bedecked in all jewels. He had smeared his limbs 
with divine sandal paste. He was embellished with divine 
garlands. 

126. Then the sage was struck with great wonder. His hairs 
stood on end due to delight. He prostrated himself on Earth 
like a long staff and made obeisance. 

127. After saying—“My birth is fruitful today. My penance 
is fruitful today,” the leading sage began to eulogise the lord. 


Kandu said : 

128. O Narayana, O Hari O Krsna, O lord of the universe 
with the Srlvatsa scar, O seed of the universe, O abode of the 
universe, O witness of the universe, obeisance be to you. 

129. O unmanifest one, O victorious one, O source of origin, 
O chief Purusottama, O lotus-eyed one, O Govinda, O lord of 
the worlds, obeisance be to you. 

130. O golden-wombed one, O abode of Sri, O deity wit 
the umbilical lotus, O eternal one, O deity with the Earth in the 
womb, O steadfast one, O Isana, O Hrsikesa, obeisance be to 

131. O deity without beginning and end, O immortal and 

unconquerable one, be victorious, O most excellent one amon^ 
those who conquer; O unconqucred one, O Indra, O Kr§na, 
resident abode of Sri, obeisance be^to you. . . 

132. O deity with the Yogic Atman, O incomprehensi e 

Atman; O soul of the world, you arc eternal. O deity difficult 

to be realised, O deity as immovable and steady as the mountain 
peak. Obeisance be to you, the lord of Kusa. . _ 

133. O excellent one, O bestower of boons, O infinite one 
O source of origin of Brahma, O mine of good qualities, O lord 
of dissolution, origin and contact, O Vasudeva, obeisance be to 

ycm. . . 

134. O Parjanya (Lord of Rain) , O maker of holy rites, 

Duspara (one who cannot be easily comprehended), O Dura- 
dhisthita (one inadequately supported ?)» O dispe er o mis y 

and agony, O Hari lying down in the waters, obeisance be to 

you. 








392 


Brahma Pur aim 


135. OBhutapa (lord of Elements), O unmanifest one, O 
deity not agitated by the elements and principles, O abode of 
living beings, O soul of living beings. O deity containing living 
beings in the womb, obeisance be to you. 

136. O performer of Yajhas, O upholder of Yajnas, O crea¬ 
tor ofYajnas; O bestower of fearlessness; O deity with the 
Yajna in the womb (?), O golden-limbcd one, O deity born of 
Devaki, obeisance be to you. 

137. You are the knower of Ksetra (Physical form, holy 
centre) you are the holder Ksetra; you possess Ksetra; you are 
the destroyer of Ksetra; you arc the maker of Ksetra; you have 
selfcontrol; O soul of Ksetra, O deity devoid of Ksetra, obei¬ 
sance be to you, the creator of Ksetra. 

138. O abode of good qualities, O receptacle of good quali¬ 
ties, O support of good qualities; O deity who are conducive 
to good qualities; O enjoyer of good qualities; O garden of 
good qualities; O deity who abandon good qualities (i.e. 
attributes), obeisance be to you. 

139. You are Visnu; you are Hari; you are the discus¬ 
bearing lord; you areJisnu (victorious); you are Janardana; 
you are the Element; and the Vasatkara; you are the future one, 
the lord of the present one. 


140. You are the creator of the Bhutas (living beings); you 
are the unmanifest one; You are Bhava (source of origin); you 
are the holder of Bhutas. You are lord conceiver and creator of 
Bhutas. They call you the unborn overlord. 

l ^° U are infinite ; y° u are (deity) conversant with 
what is done; you are Prak r ti; you are Vr § akapi (Visnu). You 

<te U ” thW " abI ' ; y °" «■•««; yo- «re 

You are 3 u are J^entical with Visvakarman, you are Jisnu. 
L»rT v„r. n n8 3 “ < »>!« Sankara (b'n'- 

Tapas rwoLT 7°“ ”* the Satya ( world ) 1 you are the 

lapas (world), you are the Jana (world). 

you 1 are one CO ™i ueror of universe, you are welfare; 

imperishable one 0 ^ 7 ° fbemg s °ught refuge in. You are the 
cldSambhu; you are the 








69.144-154 


393 


144. You arc the sun; you are the Omkara, you are the 
vital breath; you are the dispeller of darkness; you are Parjanya 
(god of Rain); you are well reputed; you arc Brahma; you are 
Indra, lord of Devas. 

145. You are Rk. Yajus and Saman; you are Atman; you 
arc the honoured and approved one, you are fire and wind; you 
are Kubera; you arc Havis (ghee offering). 

146. You are the creator; you are the enjoyer; you are the 
Hotf (one who performs Homa offerings), you are Havis (obla¬ 
tion) Kratu (sacrifice); you are the poet, you are Hari; you are 
the most excellent lord of worlds; you are Acyuta. 

147. You are the glorious deity with the vision of every¬ 
thing; you are the destroyer of enemies suppressing everyone; 
you are the day; similarly, you are the night; learned men call 
you Vatsara (year). 

148. You are the units of time such as Kala; Kastha, 
Muhurta, Ksana and Lava; you are a boy; you are an old man; 
you are man, woman and eunuch. 

149-150. You are the source of origin of the universe, you are 
the eye, you are Sthanu (Siva, stump); you are the deity of pure 
ears; you are permanent; you are unconquered; you are Upen- 
dra (younger brother of Indra); you are an excellent one. 

151. You arc Atman the support of all (?) You are not per¬ 
ceptible to sense-organs. 

152. You are Agranl (leader); you are Gramani (leader 
of groups); you are Suparna (Garuda); you are one without a 
beginning, you are the collection; you are very great, you are 
one who held the Atman; you are Acyuta (unswerving). 

153. You are Yama; (Restraint); you are Niyama (observ¬ 
ance of regulations); you are lofty; you are four-armed; you 
alone are the cooked rice and the immanent soul; you are men¬ 
tioned as the greatest Atman. 

154. You are the preceptor and the weighty one; you are 
the weightier being; you are the left one (adverse one); you are 
the right one (the favourable one, clever one); you are Pippala 
(a variety of medicinal plant), you are one who do not go, you 
are the manifest one; you are the Prajapati (patriarch). 




394 Bramha Purdna 

155. You arc one with golden umbilicus; you are the lord; 
you are the moon; you are one whose physical form cannot be 
specifically pointed out; you are Yama; you are the destroyer 
of the enemies ofDcvas. 

156. You are lord Samkarsana; you are the eternal maker; 
you are Vasudeva of unmeasurable soul; you alone are one 
devoid of attributes. 

157. You are the eldest; you are the most excellent; you are 
one who endure; you are Madhava; you are thousand-headed 
lord; you are unmanifcst one with thousand Visions. 

158. You are the thousand-footed lord, you are Virat 
(Immense Being); you are the lord ofDevas; O lord of Dcvas; 
you alone stand ten Angulas beyond all. 

159. You alone are^nentioned as that which is past; you are 
the excellent Purusa; Indra; you are Isana and that which is 
going to occur in future; you are the Rta Divine law, you are 
Amrta (Nectar). 

160. It is from you that this world grows up; you art the 
great being without anyone to excel you; you are the elderly 
Purusa; O lord, you stay in ten forms. 

161. A fourth part of yours constitutes the Universe; your 
nine parts are immortal in heaven; nine parts are stationed in 
the firmament; this part is the eternal manly being. 

162. Two of your parts are stationed on the Earth; four 
parts were also here. (?) Yajnas originate from you, the cause 
of rain in the world. 

163. The Virat (Immense Being) originated from you; it 
is the Man who is in the heart of the universe; he excelled the 
elements by splendour, fam e and glory. 

164. It is from you that Prsadajya (ghee mixed with coagu¬ 
lated milk), the diet of Dcvas originated. The medicinal plants 
of the village of the forests and the animals etc originated from 
you. 

165. You are devoted to what should be meditated upon 
and the meditation; you created the medicinal herbs. O lord of 
Dcvas, having seven faces you are named Kala; you have an 
illuminated physical form. 

166. The whole universe mobile and immobile is born of 
you and established in you. 







69.167-178 


395 


167. O lord, the most excellent one among Devas, the 
greatest refuge of the worlds you are Aniruddha, you are 
Madhava, you arc Pradyumna the destroyer of the enemies of 


Devas. 

168. O lotus-eyed deity, save me 0 Narayana, obeisance to 
you. O Puru?ottama, obeisance to you. 

169. Obeisance to you, O lord of worlds, obeisance to you 
the abode of LaksmI; obeisance to you, O abode of attributes; 
obeisance be to you; O mine of good qualities. 

170. O Vasudeva, obeisance be to you. O most excellent 
Deva, obeisance be to you. O Janardana, obeisance be to you; 
O eternal one, obeisance be to you. 

171. Obeisance to you O deity comprehensible to the 
Yogins; O abode of Yoga, obeisance be to you. O lord of 
LaksmI; O lord of universe, obeisance be to you. 

172. O lord of the universe, O source of origin of the uni¬ 


verse, O lord of the men of perfect knowledge, obeisance to you. 
O lord of heaven, obeisance be to you. O lord of Earth, obeis- 
ance be to you. 

173. Obeisance to you, to the slayer of Madhu; O lotus¬ 
eyed one, obeisance to you; O destroyer ofKaitabha, obeisance 
be to you; O Subrahmanya (Excessively favourable to the 
brahmins). Obeisance be to you. 

174. O great Fish, obeisance be to you. O Acyuta, holding 

up Srutis on your back. Obeisance to you who agitated t 
oceanic water and delighted the lotus-born lady. 

175. O Horse-headed deity of great snout, O deity, having 
the great manly frame, O Horse-faced deity, obeisance to you 
the annihilator of Madhu and Kaitabha. 

176. Obeisance to you, to the great tortoise, to the deity 
with the great body of a tortoise, to the deity who lifted up e 
Earth, to that form that held the mountain aloft. 

177. Obeisance to the great Varaha (Boar), to (the deity) 

who lifted up the Earth. Obeisance to the Primordial Vara a, 
to the creator of the form of the universe. , 

178. Obeisance to the infinite one, to the subtle one, 
chief one, to the most excellent one. Obeisance to you of the 
form of the atom, to one comprehensible to the yogins. 




396 


Brahma Purarta 


179. Obeisance to the greatest cause of causes; to the abode 
of the circle of leading Yogins; to the being very difficult to be 
known. Obeisance to you who lie down on the couch of the 
great serpent stationed in the milky ocean; obeisance to the 
deity with fine ear rings made of gold and studded with jewels. 

Vjasasaid : 

180. Eulogised thus by him Madhava was delighted and he 
said—“O excellent sage, tell me quickly what you wish from 
me. 


Karttfu said : 

181-185. O lord of the universe, I am deluded by your 
Maya. I wander about in the ocean of worldly existence which 
is very difficult to be crossed, which causes hairs to stand on 
end, which is impermanent, full of miseries and restless like the 
plantain leaf. It has no support. It has no base. It is a support. 
It is as fickle as bubbles in water, it is full of all calamities; 
it is difficult to be crossed; it is terrible to behold. My 
mind is drawn to and afflicted by sensual objects. I do not 
find any end to this worldly Existence, O lord of Devas. I am 
afflicted by the fear of worldly existence. I seek refuge in you O 
Krsna. Redeem me from the ocean of worldly existence. O lord 
of Daityas, Danavas and Devas, I wish to go to that eternal great 
region of yours from which it is difficult to return. 


The lord said : 

contirn" ? sage » y° u are m y devotee. Propitiate me 

desired S,io n “'“ myfaVOUr attain the 

JL n E r n , Ksa ' nya! - Va % as . women folk, Sudras and the 

WtoLr t T greatSiddhis if they are my devotees, 
hat doubt then about you, O excellent brahmin: 

ed with nfrfert f 1?^ ifhe ’ S m y devot ee and if he is endow- 
abomtthS Uh ’ aUainS thcdesired end - Wha ‘ d o^t then 

Vyasa said : 

189. O brahmins, after saying thus to him, Visnu the lord 





69.190—70.1 


397 


favourably disposed to his devotees, the lord whose movement is 
very difficult to comprehend vanished there itself. 

190. After he had gone, O excellent sages, Kandu eschew¬ 
ed all lustful desires. He became delighted in his mind and 
he attained a proper mental quietude. 

191-92. He restrained all his sense-organs. He was rid of 
the feelings of “my-ness”. He was free from egotism. With 
single-minded devotion he perfectly meditated on Purusottama 
who is free from smearing attachment, who is devoid of attri¬ 
butes, who is quiescent and who is established in his sole 
existence. He attained the greatest of liberation that is difficult 
of access even unto Devas. 

193. He who reads or listens to the story of the noble 
Kandu shall be liberated from sins. He goes to the heavenly 
world. 

194-195. Thus, O excellent sages, the land of holy rites has 
been cited by me. So also the greatest holy centre for liberation 
named Purusottama has been recounted. It pertains to Lord 
Purusottama. 

Those men devoid of impurities who visit the omnipresent 
lord, who eulogise the lord who grants boons, and devoutly 
meditate upon the deity named Sripurusottama who bestows 
salvation, who dispels worldlymiseries and who is devoid of old 
age, enjoy the pleasures of a king. Later they enjoy divine 
pleasures in heaven. Freed of all defects they later go to the 
unchanging abode of Hari. 


CHAPTER SEVENTY 
Doubts raised by sages 


Lomaharsana said : 

1. On hearing the words of Vyasa, the sages of restrained 
sense-organs became satisfied, delighted and struck with wonder 
again and again. 




398 


Brahma Purina 


The sages said : 

2. Wonderful indeed are the attributes of the sub continent 
Bharata mentioned by you. So also of the shrine named Sri- 
purusa in the holy centre Purusottama. 

3. ' O sage, the most excellent among eloquent ones, who will 
not be delighted and surprised on hearing about the excellent 
greatness of the shrine named Purusa? 

A We have a doubt in our hearts. It has been there lor 
a long time. Excepting you, there is no one on the Earth to 
clarify that doubt. 

5. O great sage, it is about the origin of Balarama, Krsna 
and Subhadra on the Earth that we wish to ask. We would like 
to understand it thoroughly. 

6. Why were the heroic Krsna and Sankarsana (Balarama) 
born in the house of Vasudeva? Why was she too born in that 
house there, O sage ? 

7-8. How did the terrible ordeal of a stay in the womb 
appeal to them? The womb that is sling and lubricious due to 
urine and faeces? It is painful, distressful and miserable. Why 
were they born in this mortal world that consists mostly of 
miseries? Though it is devoid of essence and very fickle like a 
watery bubble, yet it is very terrible and it causes hairs to 
stand on their ends. 

9. O sage, the most excellent among the eloquent ones, 
recount to us in detail the activities that they pursued on being 
born on the Earth. 

10-12. Mention their wonderful and superhuman story, how 
did the lord of Devas, the most excellent and intelligent one 
among Devas attain the state of Vasudeva in the house of 
Vasudeva? 

He left off the holy world of Devas surrounded by the 
immortal beings and adorned by meritorious persons and came 
over to the mortal world here. 

Why did that leader of Devas and human beings, the un¬ 
changing source of origin of the Earth unite his divine soul with 
mortal bodies? 

13-20. Alone, the lord makes the circle of human beings 
whirl without ailments. Why did that wielderof discus and 





70.21-26 


399 


ironclub decide to be born among human beings? It is Visnu 
the lord who protects all living beings in the universe. Why 
did that lord come over to the Earth and carry on the activity 
of a cowherd? 

He is the soul of Elements. He created and sustained the great 
elements. He is one whose glory is hidden in the womb. How 
was it that he was conceived in the womb by an ordinary women 
who walked about on the Earth? In his incarnation as the 
Dwarf at the request of Devas he won over three worlds by 
means of three paces. The excellent threefold path of the three 
aims of life (virtue, love and wealth) was immediately restored. 
He is the lord who, at the hour of dissolution, converts the 
universe into an aquatic body and drinks it up. He makes the 
world a vast sheet of water and lies therein with his form partly 
manifest and partly unmanifest. 

He is the ancient lord, the soul of ancient beings, the destroyer 
of enemies. He assumed the form of a Boar. By the tip of his 
curved fangs, he lifted up the Earth. 

He is the most excellent among Devas, who on behalf of Indra 
conquers the three worlds and gave it over to Devas as their 
realm. 

He assumed the form of a lion and split it further into two 
(i.e. half man, half lion). TheDaitya of great prowess, Hiranya- 
kasipu was killed by him. 

21-26. Formerly, lord Hari became the Aurva and Samvar- 
taka fires (submarinefire and fire of dissolution). Stationed in 
the nether regions he drank the watery essence of the ocean. 

In every Yuga they call him Brahman with a thousand feet, 
with a thousand rays. They call him the lord who bestows 
thousands, the lord with a thousand heads. 

In his umbilicus a lotus grewup. It was the abode of Brahma. 
It was a lotus of molten gold in the vast sheet of water, in the 
world of serpents. 

In the war called Tarakamaya, 1 many Daityas were killed 
by him with the weapons presided over by Devas. 


1. Tarakamaya : a war which arose in consequence of Soma (Moon) 
havin carried ofFTara, the wife of Brhaspati. 





400 


Brahma Purana 


The arrogant demon Kalancmi 1 was struck down by the 
lord seated on Garu<ja. 

He adopts the perpetual Yoga and lies downat the northern 
end of the milky ocean. He envelops everything in great dark¬ 
ness. 

27-28. Aditi conceived the ancient lord in her divine 
womb. Indra who was challenged by Daityas was held in womb 
by Aditi and saved. 

By his Yogic powers he created regions and made Daityas 
stay there embedded in waters. After creating Devas and the 
leaders of Devas he made Indra their lord. 

29-30. By Garhapatya and Anvaharya rites he created the 
material essential for Yajnas while his hand was hanging down¬ 
wards, Ahavaniya fire, Vedas, initiation, sacrificial twig, 
Proksaniya vesssel, Sruva ladle, Avabhrtha, and the persons 
partaking of their shares in havya. 

31-33. He made Devas the partakers of Havya and Pitrs 
the partakers of Kavya. He assigned shares to them in the 
sacrificial rites and laid down rules regarding Yajna. Vessels, 
monetary gifts, initiation, Caru offerings, Ulukhalas (Mortars) 
sacrificial post, Soma juice, Pavitras (ringlike loops made 
of Kusa grass), paridhis (sacrificial sticks placed round the fire), 
articles required for sacrifice such as Camasas, all these the lord 
created. He classified Sadasyas (audience) and Yajamanas 

(performers of Sacrifice); He made the various excellent sacri¬ 
fices such as Medha etc. 



34 He divided sacrifices according to Yugas and the 
(of endurance) of the people. The rites of Paramesthin 
also classified m accordance with Yugas. 


power 

were 






70.39-49 


401 


(past, present, future), three holy rites, three castes and three 
Gunas were created by him. Formerly, all the worlds were 
created by that lord of infinite activities. He is present in all 
living beings in the form of attributes. 

39-40. The lord diverts himself through the contact of 
sense-organs of men. He is the leader of to-and-fro travel. He is 
the creator and overlord. He is the goal of those who possess 
virtue. He is the non-goal of persons of sinful rites. He is the 
origin of division of four castes. He is the custodian of division 
of four castes. 

41-44. He is one who knows the fourfold division of lores. 
He is the seat of support for the four divisions of society, four 
stages of life. He is the intervening space between the quarters. 
Earth, wind and fire. He is luminary in the forms of sun and 
moon. He is the lord of Yugas. He walks about at night. He is 
the greatest luminary; he is (mentioned) as the greatest penance; 
they call him the greatest without anyone else greater than him¬ 
self; he is the great Supreme soul. He is the lord of sons of 
Aditi, the lord is the annihilator of Daityas. He is the destroyer 
during the concluding days of yugas. He is the smiter of the 
destroyers of worlds: he is the bridge of bridges of worlds; he is 
the holiest of all holy rites. 

45. He is the deity worthy of being known unto the Vedic 
scholars; he is the greatest lord among those who are sources of 
origin; among the gentle he is Soma; among those of fiery 
refulgence he is fire. 

46. He is one who is the overlord of Indra; he is the 
penance of those who perform penance; he is the humility of 
those whose behaviour is conditioned by statesmanship, he is the 
brilliant splendour of those who are refulgent. 

47-48. He is the physical form of those who deserve physi¬ 
cal forms; he is the goal of those who deserve goal. 

The wind originates from Ether, fire originates from wind 
(that is the vital breath) (?), the vital breath originates from 
heaven. The lord, (the destroyer of Madhu) is fire and vital 
breath. From juice originates blood and flesh originates from 
-blood. 

49. Fat is produced from flesh; bone is produced from fat; 




402 


Brahma Purana 


marrow is generated from bone and semen is produced from 
marrow. 

50-56. Foetus is evolved out of semen, due to that activity 
at the root of which is Rasa (juice). There the first part is that 
of waters. It is called heap pertaining to the moon. The second 
heap should be understood to have been born of the heat of the 
womb (?) One should know that the semen is of the nature of 
the moon; and the menstrual blood is of the nature of fire. 
Emotional fervour follows the Rasa. The moon and fire are 
present in the seed (?). The semen comes under the category 
of Kapha (Phlegm) and the menstrual blood in the category of 
Pitta (bile). The heart is the place of the phlegm and the bile 
is established in umbilicus. The heat is in the middle of the 
body and it is remembered as the seat of the mind. The 
place in between the umbilicus and belly (?) is the place 
where fire-god is present. The mind is the lord of subject. 
The phlegm is thought of as the moon. The bile is fire. 
Thus the universe is of the nature of fire and moon. When 
the foetus has thus begun to function and when it increases 
in size like a lump of flesh, the wind enters the body and 
comes in contact with the greatest Atman. It becomes split 
into fire within the body and grows in size. 

57-63. The winds are Prana, Apana, Samana, Udana 
and Vyana. Prana moves round increasing the great Atman (?) 
Apana increases the hinder body; Udana (increases) half of 
the embodied soul (?); Vyana is so called because it pervades 
the body. The Samana makes it return. Then the elements 
are attained and they become perceptible to the sense- 
organs. The five elements are Earth, wind,, firmament, waters 
and fire. 

The Elements permeating the sense-organs create their 
respective parts (in the body). They say that the mass body 
pertains to Earth; Vital breath is the part of air; pores and 
hollow cavities originate from firmament; exudations func¬ 
tion from watery element. Eyes and the warmth of the body 
is the fiery element. The guide of all these is the mind. 

The villages and territories function through the power 
of the lord. Purusa, the lord, creates the eternal worlds. 





70 . 64-75 


403 


The sages said : 

Why did Visnu attain the form of a man in this mortal 
world O biahmin, this is our doubt. It gives us a great 
surprise. 

64-65. How did the goal of those who deserve the goal 
take up the human body? Visnu. is mentioned by Devas and 
Daityas as a great wonder. O great sage, tell us the wonder¬ 
ful story of the origin of Visnu whose splendour is unmeasured 
and whose strength and prowess are well known. 

66-69. May the real principle of Visnu who is a great 
miracle on account of his activities, be mentioned. How did 
that lord, the dispeller of the agony of Devas, Purusottama 
(take birth as a human being) ? The lord of the universe 
is omnipresent; he is the great lord of all the worlds; 'he is 
the lord and cause of creation, sustenance and annihilation; 
he is the cause of happiness- of everyone; he is inexhaustible, 
permanent, infinite. He is devoid of both decline and increase. 
He is unsmeared, free from attributes, subtle unafflicted and 
unsullied. He is free from all conditioning factors. He is 
stabilised in his sole form of Existence. He undergoes no 
change or. transformation; he is the eternal, perpetual great 
soul. He is unmoving and all-pervading. He is devoid of 
impurities. He is ever satisfied and he has none to support 
him. 

70-75. In the Krta Yuga the state of being Visnu and 
Hari is heard of; among Devas, he has the state of Vaikuntha 
and among mortals he has the state of Krsna. 

We wish to hear about the inscrutable way of activities of 
this lord for ever, both past and future. The lord is unmanifest 
but his symbols are clearly manifest. Narayana is the infinite 
Atman. He is the unchanging source of origin. Hari the eternal 
lord became Narayana, Brahma, Indra, Rudra, Dharma, 
Sukra and Bfhaspati. Formerly, this lord in the form of Atman 
of Pradhana created Brahma. That primordial Purusa created 
Prajapatis in the previous Kalpa. Thus the lord Visnu is the 
over-lord of lords of all the worlds. Why, then, did Hari gQ 
to the family of Yadus in the mortal world ? 




404 


Brahma Parana 


CHAPTER SEVENTYONE 
Lord's Incarnation 


Vyasa said : 

1-9. Having bowed to Visnu, the lord of Devas, I shall 
mention the story. Obeisance to the powerful ancient Purusa, 
to the unchanging permanent lord. 

Obeisance to the lord in the form of four arrays; to the lord 
without attributes and to the lord with attributes; to the excel¬ 
lent one, to the weightied one; to the most excellent one, to the 
unmeasured one; to the deity forming part of the Yajna, to the 
part of all; to one attainable by Vedas etc; there is nothing 
minuter than that lord. There is nothing larger than that un¬ 
born lord by whom this'universe is pervaded—the universe 
consisting of mobile and immobile beings. The universe is of 
peculiar nature different from what is manifest and what is 
unmanifest. It appears and vanishes. They say that such a 
world is created by the lord and in the same way it is withdrawn 
by him. 

With great concentration I bow down to Brahma the 
primordial lord. Obeisance to one without aberration, to the 
pure one, to permanent and greatest Atman, to the deity who 
has the same sole form always; to Visnu the conqueror of every 
one. 

Obeisance to Hiranyagarbha (Brahma), Hari and Sankara 
to Vasudeva, the essential one, to the cause of creation, 
sustenance and dissolution. 

Obeisance to the single-formed and multiformed deity; 
obeisance to the gross-formed and sub tie-formed deity; obeis¬ 
ance to the manifest and unmanifest-formed deity; obeisance 
to Visnu the cause of salvation. 

Obeisance to Visnu who is identical with the universe and 
who is the root cause of creation, sustenance and dissolution of 
the universe, Obeisance to the greatest Atman. 

10 13. I bow down to Acyuta, Purusottama who is the 
support of the universe;.is the minutest of all minute beings; 
who js stationed in all living beings; whose form is that of 
knowledge* Who ,s extremely devoid of impurities in fact but 
who stands m the form of objects as a result of erroneous per- 







71.14-25 


405 


ception. I bow down to Visnu who swallows the universe and 
who is competent to create and sustain the universe- I bow 
down to the lord of world who has no beginning, who is un¬ 
born, who has no decline and who has no change. (After bowing 
down thus) I shall recount in the same manner as the lotus- 
bora deity Brahma said when formerly he was asked by Daksa 
and sages. 

14-15. After bowing down to the . lord Brahma who san¬ 
ctifies the three worlds by uttering the Rk and Saman mantras 
through his mouths who came out of the vast sheet of water and 
whose behest is certainly carried out by Asuras and human 
beings, I shall mention fully the opinion of Brahma born of 
unmanifest one. 

16-20. Holy rites are revealed by him after directing 
creation The waters are called Naras by the sages, the seers of 
the principles since waters constitute his place of resort (Ayana) 
of lord Visnu as Narayana. 

Narayana, the ommiprcsent lord, envelops everything. 
Brahma who is both Saguna (with attributes) and Nirguna 
(attributeless) is stationed in four forms. One form cannot be 
specifically mentioned. Learned men see it in white form, 
encircled byclustersofflames.lt is the form which Yogins 
steadfastly adhere to. It should be known as staying nearly as 
well as far off. It is beyond the Gunas (attributes). It is called 
Vasudeva. It appears free from the felling of myness. Forms, 
colours and similar things, that are conceivel, but not real are 
not present in it. It is always pure, single-formed and well- 
established. 

21-25. The second form called Sesa upholds the Earth with 
its head. It stands below in the nether rigions. It is called 
Tamasa (having Tamas attribute and hence assumed the status 
of a lower species of animal. 

The third form is interested in protecting the subjects and 
performs activities. It should be known as predominatly 
possessing Sattva attribute. It is the cause of stabilizing Dharma. 

The fourth form is stationed in the middle of waters. It lies 
on the couch of a serpent. Its attribute is Rajas. It always 
creates. 

The third form of Hari is interested in protecting the 







406 


Brahma Purana 


subjects' invariable. It establishes virtue on the Earth. It des¬ 
troys the haughty Asuras who break the laws of vtrtue. 

26-28. It protects Devas and Gandharvas and all those 

who are interested in protecting virtue. 

Whenever there is any drawback in virtue and evil gains 
the upper hand, this form creates itself, that is, it takes up 


lncaruauuus. T1T , . . ^ . 

Formerly, it assumed the form of a Boar. With its snout it 
pierced through the water and lifted up the Earth with single 
curved fang as though it was a lotus plant. After assuming the 
form of a man-lion Hiranyakasipu was killed by it. 

29-35. Other Danavas too such as Vipracitti were struck 
down by it. He assumed the form of a Dwarf; bound Bali by 
his Maya. Covered the three worlds with his steps and defeated 

the sons of Diti. # 

The valorous son of Jamadagni was born in the family of 
Bhrgu. Remembering the murder of his father, Parasurama 
killed Ksatriyas. Born as Dattatreya, the valorous son of Atri, he 
related the eightfold Yoga to the noble Alarka. The same lord 
became Rama the valorous son of Dasaratha and in a battle 
killed Ravana who had terrified the three worlds. 

When the lord of Devas, the lord of the universe was lying 
asleep in the vast sheet of water be adopted the Yogic- slumber 
on the couch of the serpent for the period of a thousand Yugas. 
He was established in his own greatness. 

He had kept the three worlds in his belly, the whole universe 
consisting of mobile and immobile beings. He was then eulogis¬ 
ed by Siddhas and sages who were in the world of Janaloka. 

36-42. From his umbilicus there grew up a lotus. The 
quarters were its petals with which it was adorned. It had the 
refulgence of fire and the sun. It was embellished by the 
mountains that acted as the filaments. The winds were its 
blossoms. It was the excellent abode of Brahma. It was there 
that four-faced lord of Devas, Brahma was born. 

At that time, two Danavas, Madhu and Kaitabha were 
born of the impurities from his ears. Those two Danavas of 
great strength and prowess attempted to kill Brahma. The 
lord got up from his bed in the ocean and killed them. I d° 
not attempt to enumerate these and other activities fully. But 







72.1-8 


407 


the incarnation of the unborn lord at Mathura is relevant to 
the context now. 

Thus the form of Sattvaguna undertakes incarnations. It 
is called Pradyumna and is engaged in the activity of protection. 
It can assume the forms of Devas, human beings and lower 
animals. It will have the respective nature (of the species where 
incarnation is taken). It is due to the will of Vasudeva. 

O excellent brahmins, if it is worshipped it bestows desired 
benefits. Though the lord is contented he undertakes the form 
as human beings. Listen to the sequal now. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYTWO 
Incarnations of Hari 

Vyasasaid : 

1. Listen, O leading sages, I shall recount to you briefly 
the incarnations which Hari took up in order to remove the 
burden of the Earth. 

2-4. O brahmins, whenever there is increase in evil and 
virtue dwindles down, lord Visnu takes incarnation by dividing 
his body into two in order to protect the good, establish virtue 
and chastise the wicked and other enemies of Devas. He is 
born in every Yuga for protecting the subjects. 

5-6. O brahmins, formerly, the Earth was afflicted by 
excessive burden. The Earth went to the assembly of heaven- 
dwellers. After bowing down to Devas including Brahma, the 
Earth narrated every thing speaking piteously in her grief. 

The Earth said : 

7. Fire is the preceptor of gods; sun is the preceptor of cows, 
Narayana is the preceptor of those worthy of being saluted by 
me as well as other people. 

8. Now, Daityas, the followers of Kalanemi have come to 
the mortal world. Day and night they harass the subjects. 





408 


Brahma Pur&na 


9. • That Asura Kalancmi who was slain by all powerful 
Visnu is now born as Karhsa the great Asura and a son of 
Ugrasena. 

10-11. There arc many other very powerful asuras such as 
Arista, Dhcnuka, Kesin, Pralamba, Naraka, Sunda, Bana, the 
fierce son of Bali and many others. They are wicked souls born 
in the abodes of kings. 1 do not attempt to enumerate them 
all. 

12, O Devas holding divine forms, there are many 
Aksauhinis (huge armies, of haughty leading Daityas of great 
strength), on me. 

13-14. O lords of immortal beings, afflicted and distressed 
by their excessive burden I am unable to steady myself. I 
hereby submit to you, O highly blessed ones, may the extra 
burden be removed from me lest I should sink into the nether 
worlds in my bewilderment. 


Vyasa said : 

15. On hearing these words of the Earth Brahma was 
requested by Devas to remove the burden of the Earth. 

Brahma said : 

16-18. O heaven-dwellers whatever the Earth says is true. 
You all, I and Hara—all of us are the excellent and elegant 
powers of Narayana. Among these powers there is superiority 
and inferiority complex by way of hindering others and being 
hindered by them. Hence come ye. We shall go to the excellent 
shore of the milk ocean. There we shall propitiate Hari and 
intimate everything to him. 

19. That lord is the Atman of all. He is identical with the 
universe. He will always work for your benefit. With a small 
part of himself he will be born over the Earth and he will 
establish virtue. 

Vyasa said : 

20. After saying thus Brahma went along with Devas. With 
full concentration, he eulogised the Garu^a-emblemed deity. 






409 


72.21-31 
Brahma said : 

21. O lord with thousand forms, obeisance, obeisance be 
to you; O thousand-armed one, O many-armed and many- 
footcd one, obeisance, obeisance to you, O lord engaged in 
creation, maintenance and destruction of the universe, O 
incomprehensible one. 

22. You are the subtlest of all subtle beings; you have a 
great magnitude, O lord, you are weightier than the weightiest. 
O lord, possessed of Pradhana, cosmic intellect and sense- 
organs, O lord identical with the chief worlds, be pleased. 

23. On account of the mighty Asuras born on the Earth, 
O lord, this Earth is extremely afflicted. She is pained under 
the heavy weight of suffering. In order to get the burden re¬ 
moved she has approached you the ultimate resort of worlds, 
the redeemer without any other greater being. 

24-25. O lord ofDevas, all of us are ready to carry out 
your orders viz—Indra, the slayer of Vptra, Nasatya and 
Dasra (Asvins), Varuna, Rudras, Vasus, Sun, wind, fire and 
Devas. What should be done by these and by me, O lord, 
command us. We shall await your behest for even eschewing 
defects. 

Vyasa said : 

26-27. O excellent brahmins on being eulogised thus, the 
great lord, plucked out two hairs from his head, one white and 
the other black. He then spoke thus to the Devas. “These two 
hairs of mine will incarnate on the Earth distressed due to 
excessive burden. 

28. May all Devas incarnate on the Earth. Let them fight 
with the mighty proud Asuras who are already born before. 

29. Then, there is no doubt about it, all those Asuras on 
the Earth will be exterminated after being reduced to powder 
by means of different weapons. 

30. O immortal ones, this hair of mine will be born as the 
eighth child in the womb of DevakI, the wife of Vasudeva who 
is comparable to a goddess. 

31. After birth on the Earth it will kill Kamsa bom of 
Kalancmi. AJter saying this, Hari vanished there itself. 





410 


Brahma Purana 


32. Those Devas then bowed down to the noble lord who 
became invisible, went to the top of Meru and then descended 
on the Earth. 

33. The holy sage Narada said thus to Kamsa—“The 
eighth child in the womb of DevakI born in the Earth will kill 
you”. 

34. On hearing it from Narada, Kamsa became infuriated. 
He kept DevakI and Vasudeva as prisoners in their own house 
and guarded them well. 

35. O brahmins, whenever a son was born Vasudeva 
immediately handed over that son to Kamsa as he himself had 
told him before. 

36. The sons of Hiranyakasipu became well known as 
these six children in the womb. Urged by Visnu, his (Yogic) 
slumber joined them gradually to the womb of DevakI. 

37. This Yogic slumber pertaining to Visnu is also called 
Mahamaya and Avidya. The entire universe is deluded by her. 

Lord Hari said to her : 

38. O slumber, go hence. One by one take these children 
(of Hiranyakasipu) who are in the nether worlds now to the 
belly of DevakI at my behest. 

39. When they have been killed by Kamsa, my sinless part 
named Sesa will become the seventh child in the womb of 
DevakI by means of a small part. 

40-41. In the cowherds’colony, there is another wife of 
Vasudeva named Rohinl. At the birth of Devakl’s child, it 
should be taken to the belly of Rohinl. People will then say 
that there was an abortion of the seventh child in the womb of 
DevakI due to her fear from Kamsa and also due to the 
rigours of imprisonment. 

42. Since the child in the womb has been dragged away, 
the heroic boy comparable to the peak of Meru, Sankarsana 
will be born in the world. 

43. Then, I shall be born in the auspicious womb of 
DevakI. You should also go to the womb of Yasoda without delay. 

44. I shall be born at night on the eighth day in the dark 
half of the mouth of Sravana during the rainy season. You 
will be born on the ninth day. 





72.45—73.1 


411 


45. O uncensured lady, urged by my Sakti, Vasudeva will 
take me to the bed ofYasoda and you to that of Devaki. 

46. O gentle lady, Kamsa will seize you and hurl you 
against a rocky slab. Thereafter, you will attain an abode in 
the firmament. 

47. With due deference to me, Indra will bow down to you 
a hundred times; with his head bent down in obeisance he 
will accept you as his sister. 

48. Thereafter, you will kill thousands of Daityas. With 
various abodes (i.e. shrines) you will adorn the entire Earth. 

49. You are identical with the following deities :—Bhuti 
(Existence), Sannati (Obeisance), Klrti (Renown), Kanti 
(Splendour), PrthivI (Earth), Dhrti (Courage), Lajja 
(Bashfulness), Pu?ti (Nourishment), Uma and other goddesses 
whoever they may be. 

50-51. If the devotees eulogise you in the morning and in 
the afternoon with their forms bent down in humility, and 
address you as Arya, Durga, Vedagarbha, Ambika, Bhadra, 
Bhadrakali, Ksemya and Ksemakari, they will have whatever 
they desire, due to my favour. 

52. Worshipped by means of wine, meat and other pre¬ 
sents and various items of foodstuffs you will become de¬ 
lighted and fulfil all desires of men. 

53. Undoubtedly, all of them will have welfare always 
due to my favour. It need not be suspected at all. O gentle 
lady, go, in the manner mentioned before. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYTHREE 
The nativity of Srikrsna 


Vyasa said : 

1. In accordance with what was mentioned by the lord of 
Devas formerly, the mother of the universe i.e. the Yogic 
slumber Maya took the six children to the womb of Devaki 
one by one and removed the seventh forcibly. 




412 


Brahma Purdna 


2. When the seventh child in the womb was transferred to 
the womb of Rohini, Hari entered the womb of Devaki for 
helping the three worlds. 

3. On the same day the Yogic slumber took birth in the 
belly of Yasoda in accordance with what was mentioned by 
Brahma. 

4. O brahmins, when the part of Visnu entered the 
Earth the seasons became auspicious. The planets in the sky 
moved perfectly (and favourably). 

5. No one dared to look at Devaki due to her excessive 
refulgence. On seeing her blazing splendidly, the minds of 
onlookers became excited. 

6. Day and night the deities eulogised Devaki who held 
Visnu in her womb. 


Devas said : 


7. You are Svaha, you are Svadha, you are Vidya, you 
are Sudha (Nectar), you are splendour. For the protection of 
worlds, you have incarnated on the Earth. 

8. Be pleased, O gentle lady, do what is auspicious to the 
universe. For the delight of all, bear Isana in your womb. 
It is by him that the entire universe has been sustained. 


Vyasa said : 


9. Thus eulogised by Devas, she conceived the lord in her 
womb, the lotus-eyed lord, the cause of safety and security of 
the world. 

10. The entire universe is like the lotus. In order to make 
it bloom the noble deity Acyuta manifested himself like the 
sun. It was Devakl’s womb that bore him even as the sky at 
dawn bears the sun. 

11. When at midnight, Janardana the support of all, was 

born, the clouds produced gentle sounds and Devas showered 
flowers. 


i-i 12 : 13 - ? n SCemg the Jord born, the lord whose lustre was 
i e that of the petals of a full-blown blue lotus, who had four 
arms and whose chest was marked by the Srivatsa scar, Vasu- 
deva eulogised him. 

O excellent brahmins, after eulogising him with pleasing 




73 . 14-23 


413 


words, the highly intelligent Vasudeva who was afraid of 
Kariisa intimated to him thus : 

Vasudeva said : 

14-15. O lord of the chiefs of Devas, bearing conch, 
discus and iron-club, you have been realised by us as the lord. 
O lord, be pleased to withdraw this divine form. O lord, today 
itself Karhsa will begin to torture me on coming to know that 
you have incarnated in my abode. 

Devakisaid : 

16. May that lord ofDevas be pleased, the lord of Devas 
who has now revealed an infant’s form by means of his own 
Maya, whose form is endless, whose form is this entire universe 
and who bears the world in his womb. 

17. O lord, the Atman of ail, withdraw this four-armed 
form. O destroyer of Asuras, sons of Diti, let not Karhsa know 
about your incarnation. 

The lord said : 

18. Formerly, O gentle lady, I had been eulogised by 
you, desirous of a son. Since I am now born of your womb, 
your prayer has become fruitful. 

Vyasa said : 

19. O excellent sages, after saying thus, the lord became 
silent. During the night itself Vasudeva took him and went 
out. 

20. When Vasudeva set out, the watchmen became 
deluded. The porters and watchmen of the city of Mathura 
were enchanted and deluded by the Yogic slumber. 

21. When the clouds discharged a heavy and fierce down¬ 
pour during that night, Sesa shielded Vasudeva by means of 

his hoods. . 

22. Bearing Visnu, Vasudeva waded through Yamuna with 

the waters reaching only up to his knees though the river was 

majestic and agitated due to whirlpools. 

23. On the bank of Yamuna he saw Nanda and other 
elderly cowherds who carried revenue to be paid to Karhsa. 




414 


Brahma Pur ana 


24-25. At that time, O sages, Yas'oda too was deluded by 
Yogic slumber. She gave birth to a girl who was Maya her¬ 
self. When the people were enchanted, Vasudeva of unmeasur¬ 
ed lustre, placed the boy on the bed of Ya soda, took the baby 
girl and came away quickly. 

26. On waking up, Yasoda saw her new-born son, dark in 
complexion like the petals of a blue lotus. Thereat she re¬ 
joiced very much. 

27. Taking the baby girl back to his abode, Vasudeva 
placed her on the bed of Devakl. 

28. O brahmins, thereafter the watchmen heard the crying 
sound of the infant and got up suddenly. They intimated to 
Kamsa about the birth of a child to Devakl. 

29. Kamsa rushed to Devakl and seized the baby girl from 
her even as Devakl tried to prevent him crying aloud “Leave 
off, leave off” till her throat ached. 

30. He hurled her on the top of a rocky slab. On being 
hurled thus she flew up and took up a position in the sky. She 
assumed a formidable form with eight large hands armed with 
weapons. She laughed aloud (in derision) and furiously spoke 
to Kamsa thus : 

Yogamdya said : 

31-32. O Kamsa, what do you gain by seizing me? He 
who will kill you is born. He is the entire possession of Devas. 
Formerly, he had been Death unto you. After considering this, 

you may do something quickly that may be conducive to your 
own welfare. y 

Vydsa said : 

After saying this, the goddess with divine garlands, scents 
and ornaments went away through the sky even as Kamsa 
stood watching. She was eulogised by Siddhas. 





74 . 1-10 


415 


CHAPTER SEVENTYFOUR 
Kariisa takes steps to ward, off his danger 


Vyasa said : 

1. Distressed in mind (due to this) Kamsa called all 
Asuras, Pralamba, Kesin and others and spoke to them thus : 

Karitsa said : 

2. O Pralamba of great arms, O Kesin, O Dhenuka, O 
Putana, may my words be heard by Arista and others. 

3. It seems attempt is made by the wicked immortal 
beings, to kill me. Of course they are scorched by my prowess. 

I do not consider them heroic. 

Indra’s younger brother (i.e. Visnu) has been sent by 
Devas due to the words of the Earth. O my heroic friends, he 
is already scorched by my valour. I do not mind him at all. 

4. O leading Daityas, I am surprised at what is mentioned 
by that girl. O my heroic friends, the fact that they arc strain¬ 
ing themselves provokes only my laughter. 

5. Still O leading Asuras I have to exert myself to harm 
those wicked ones, more than what those evil ones may do. 

6. “The lord of the past, present and future is born to 
bring about my death”, So says the girl born of the womb of 
Devakl. 

7. Hence, we have to endeavour very much in regard to 
boys on the Earth. If any extraordinary strength is visible in 

any boy he should be killed assiduously. 

Vyasa said : 

8 After commanding the Asuras thus Kamsa came back 
to his abode. Without any ill will unto them he spoke to Vasu- 
deva and Devakl. 

Kamsa said : 

9. It was in vain that all your children were killed by me. 
An entirely different boy has been born to bring about my 

10. Hence grieve not for what has happened. Who is not 




416 


Brahma Purana 


killed when his span of life comes to a close? Moreover, it is 
certain that more sons will be born to you two. 

Vyasa said ; 

11. O excellent brahmins, after consoling them thus, 
Kamsa delighted them by releasing them. Thereupon, he 
entered his inner apartment. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYFIVE 


Putana slain and Cart smashed 


1. Vasudeva who was released went to Nanda’s cart. He 
saw Nanda who was delighted because a son was born to him. 

2. Vasudeva then said to him with great respect :_ 

Good luck, good luck, even in your old age a son is now born 
to you. 

3. The yearly revenue to the king has been paid: The 
purpose for which you all came here has been served. Hence, 
my noble friends should not stay here. 

® Nanda, the task for which you came here has been 
accomplished; why do you tarry then? You must all go back 
to the cowherds’ colony quickly. 

5. That son of mine born of Rohinl should be looked after 
by you in the same manner as your own son. 

Vyasa said : 


6. Thus urged, the powerful cowherds led by Nanda paid 
the revenue and went back after loading their carts with 
vessels and articles of trade. 


7. Whde they were staying in the cowherds’ colony a 
certain (ogress) named Putana who had been going about 
i mg chddrcntookup Rrsna whowas asleep at night and 
fed at her breasts. 


8. All the childern whom Putana 
the night used to die instantaneously. 


fed at her breasts during 






75 . 9-21 


417 


9. Krsna seized her breasts and pressed them forcibly with 
both of his hands. He sucked the breast furiously and drank 
up even her vital breath. 

10. The terrible Putana groaned loudly as she died with 
the nervous cards snapping one by one. She fell on the ground. 

11. Frightened on hearing her loud cry the residents of 
the cowherds’ colony woke up and saw Putana lying dead and 
Krsna was in her lap. 

12.0 brahmins, then the extremely frightened Yasoda took 
up Krsna from her (dead body). She warded off the evil 
effects on the boy by whirling the cow’s tail over him and by 
similar rituals. 

13. Nanda the cowherd took some cow-dung and smeared 
Krsna’s forehead with it, according him protection thereby. 
Even as he did so he uttered these Mantras :— 

Nanda said : 

14-20. May Hari the source of origin of all living beings 
save you; the universe originated from the lotus that grew up 
from his umbilicus. May lord Kesava who assumed the form of 
a boar and by whom the Earth was held at the tip of his 
curved fang, protect you. The whole universe was thus sup¬ 
ported by the Earth. May the lord Kesava in the form of 
Man-lion protect you everywhere; the lord who split open 
the chest of his enemy with his claws. May Visnu protect 
your private parts along with the belly; may Janardana 
protect your calves and feet. May Vamana protect you always, - 
Vamana who instantaneously became very huge, covering up 
the three worlds in as many steps and whose weapons, shone 
(in all the three worlds). May Govinda protect your head. 
May Kesava protect your neck. May the unchanging Narayana 
whose prowess is unimpeded, protect your face, arms, forearms, 
mind and the sense-organs. May Govinda protect you in all 
the quarters. May Madhusudana protect you in the intermediary 
quarters. May Hrsikesa protect you in the sky and may 
Mahldhara protect you on the Earth. 

Vyasa said : 

21. The boy for whom the benedictory rites were performed 




418 Brahma Purana 

by Nanda the cowherd, was laid in the child’s cradle b e neath a 
cart. 

22. On seeing the huge body of the dead ogress Putana, 
the cowherds were frightened and surprised. 

23. Once (the infant) Srikrsna who was lying beneath the 
cart cried out for breast milk and kicked up his legs. 

24. Hit by his legs the cart was upset. With all the vessels 
and utensils broken the cart lay there topsy turvy. 

25-29. O brahmins, all the cowherds and the cowher- 
desses came there crying, “Alas, Alas.” Knowing that the child 
was safely lying supine, the cowherds asked—“By whom was 
the cart upset?” The boys there said—“It was kicked down by 
this infant boy who was crying. We saw the cart being over¬ 
turned when struck by the legs of the boy. No one else has 
done this.” 

Thereat the cowherds became still more surprised. Nanda 
who was extremely surprised caught hold of the boy and held 
him close to himself. 

Yas'oda who too was bewildered worshipped the broken 
cart with curds, flowers, fruits and raw rice grains. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYSIX 
Cowherds ’ colony shifted', to Vrndavana 

Vyasa said : 

1. Thus urged by Vjisudeva, Garga went to the Cowherds’ 
colony disguised and unknown to the cowherds. He performed 
the postnatal ceremonies and rites for the two boys, 

.... The highly intelligent Garga, the most excellent among 
the wise ones, gave the name Rama to the elder boy and 
Kj*$na to the younger one. 

3. O brahmins, in a short while the two boys became well 
known as very powerful. They began to crawl on their knees. 

4. With their bodies smeared with the ashes of cowdung 
cakes they roamed about here and there. Neither Yasoda nor 
Rohini was inclined to stop them. 






76 . 5-19 


419 


5. They played about in the middle of the kine-enclosure. 
Then they stepped into the folds of calves. They were eager to 
pull the tail of the new-born calf. 

6-7. When Yas'oda could not prevent those restless boys 
from playing about and walking about as they pleased, she 
bound Krsna of unimpaired activities to the middle of a mortar 
by means of a rope and then spoke in anger. 

YaSoda said : 

8-15. Now, O restive one, go about if you are strong 
enough. 

Vyasa said : 

After saying thus that housewife became busy with her 
household activities. As she was engaged thus the lotus-eyed 
lord dragged his mortar through a pair of Arjuna trees. As he 
drew the mortar sideways between the two trees two Arjuna 
trees with-lofty branches broke down. On hearing the ‘Kata- 
kata’ sound of the snapping trees the frightened people of the 
Cowherds’ colony came there and saw the trees lying down on 
the Earth with broken branches. They saw the smiling infant 
boy with a tooth or two in his mouth, lying in between the 
trees with a rope tied firmly round his belly. Since he was tied 
with a rope round his belly he became to be called Damodara. 

The elderly cowherds, Nanda and others took counsel to¬ 
gether in their great dejection. They were excessively frightened 
due to the great calamities. 

“We have nothing to do with this spot. We shall go to some 
other place.” 

16-19. “Many evil portents are seen here indicating destru¬ 
ction, such as the death of Putana and the upsetting of the 
cart. Without any such cause as gust of wind the two' trees 
have fallen down. Hence, we shall go away from this place. 
We shall go to Vrndavana. Do not delay. Better to get away 
before these portentous great calamities overwhelm the Cow¬ 
herds’ colony completely.” 

After deciding to go thus, the residents of Vraja spoke to 
their family members. “Hurry up. Do not tarry.” 




420 Brahma Purdna 

Thus in a trice, they set off with their cattle wealth and 
carts. 

20-24. Thus the residents of Vraja went along with their 
herds of cattle and calves in groups. 

O’ brahmins, within moments, that place of cowherds 5 
colony became scattered with multitudes of male and female 
crows as broken bits and remnants of various articles lay 
strewn about.. 

Krsna of unimpaired activities desired the prosperity of the 
cows. In his auspicious mind the lord meditated upon Vrnd- 
avana. Thereat, O excellent brahmins, fresh shoots of grass 
grew all round as if in the rainy season although it was the 
middle of summer when every tiling remained parched up. 

The cowherds now colonized Vrndavana with their carts, 
cattle enclosures and camping sites arranged in the form of a 
big crescent. Rama and Krsna then began to tend the calves. 

25-28. Continuing their childish sports they stood or moved 
about (as they pleased) among the cattle. Peacocks 5 tail em¬ 
bellished their crests. They adorned themselves with the flowers 
of the forest. They made noise among the cowherds with their 
flutes and various musical instruments evolved out of leaves and 
twigs of trees. With hanging forelocks, the boys shone like fire. 
They roamed about in that great forest laughing and playing 
(as theypleased). They played together as well as with other 
children. Along with them they tended the calves and moved 
about here and there. As time passed they reached the age of 
seven. 

29-32. The protectors of the universe tended the calves 
in that great colony of cowherds. 

Then the rainy season arrived with patches of clouds 
covering up the sky. It seemed to bind the quarters by the 
currents of downpours of rain. Fresh blown flowers and glow¬ 
worms covered the Earth. So it appeared as though set with 
emerald and adorned with rubies. Everywhere the river waters 
flowed down and astray like the minds of indisciplined persons 
immediately after inheriting a large fortune. The powerful boys 
reached the colony at the proper time and played in the company 
of cowherd boys equal to them in age. They played like the 
immortal beings. 






77 . 1-11 


CHAPTER SEVENTYSEVEN 

Suppression of Kaliya 


421 


Vydsa said : 

1 . Once, Krsna went to Vjrndavana forest without Rama. 
Surrounded by cowherd lads he moved about. He shone 
splendidly in garlands of forest flowers. 

2. He went to the river Kalindl that had gently moving 
ripples and waves and that appeared to be smiling all round 
by the clusters of foams sticking to the banks. 

3. There he saw a hideous and extremely terrible whirl¬ 
pool of serpent Kaliya, which had been defiled by sparks of 
poisonous fire. 

4. As the fire of poison spread, the great trees that grew 
on its banks were burnt. Even the birds (that flew over it) had 
been burnt when they came into contact with its watery spray 
as the wind wafted it up. 

5. On seeing that highly terrible serpent which was like 
another jaw of Death lord Krsna thought thus : 

6-7. In this whirlpool lives that wicked Kaliya with poison 
for his weapon. Formerly, he had been left in the ocean by me. 
The evil fellow had not been conquered then as he disappeared 
in the ocean. The whole of the ocean-going river Yamuna has 
now been defiled by him. Hence, the water of Yamuna is not 
being used by the thirsty travellers or cows that constitute our 
wealth. 

8 . This king of serpents should be curbed and restrained 
by me whereby the residents of the cowherds* colony who are 
continuously frightened now should move, about with comfort. 

9. It is for this purpose that I have incarnated in the world 
of human beings. So I should chastise these wicked souls who 
have gone astray. 

10. Therefore, I shall climb this great tree of Kadamba 
which is not very far off from it, I shall jump into the eddy 
of the serpent that causes destruction. 

Vydsa said : 

1 1. After thinking thus and girding up his loins, he quickly 
fell into that whirlpool of the king of serpents. 






422 


Brahma Purina 


\2. As he jumped into it, the great eddy was stirred up 
by him. He sprinkled even the trees growing far away. 

13. Those trees that were sprinkled with the hot water 
heated by the flames of the defiled person of the serpent blazed 
suddenly. The flames then spread over all the quarters. 

14. Lord Krsna clapped and dashed against the whirlpool 
with his arms. On hearing that sound the king of serpents 
approached him. 

15. His eyes turned red due to wrath; his hoods became 
agitated through poisonous flames. He was surrounded by 
pink-coloured serpents of great poison. 

16. There were hundreds of wives of the serpent. They 
appeared splendid by their attractive necklaces. Their earrings 
sparkled as they moved along with their jerking trembling 
bodies. 

17. Krsna was then encircled by those serpents which 
bound him with their bodies. With their fangs rendered nasty 
by poisonous flames, they bit Krsna. 

18. On seeing him fallen there afflicted by the bodies of 
serpents, the cowherd lads went back to Vraja (the colony of 
cowherds) and lamented in their excessive grief. 

The Cowherds said : 

19. In his. delusion Krsna went into the eddy of Kaliya. 
He has sunk into it. He is being bitten by the king of serpents. 
Hence, all of you come. Do not delay. 

Vyasa said : 

20. On hearing these words comparable to the stunning 
blow of the thunderbolt, the cowherds and the cowherdesses, 
Yosoda and others, hastened to the eddy. 

21. Alas, Alas where is this (beloved) person of cowher¬ 
desses (lying) extremely perturbed ?” Saying thus, the people 
accompanied Yasoda. They were confused. They were faltering 
in their steps. 

22. Rama of wonderful exploits, Nandagopa and other 
cowherds hastened to Yamuna, desirous of seeing Krsna. 

23. And surely did they see Krsna, but he was encircled 






77.24-34 


423 


by the serpent. He was completely under his control. His eflort 
to release himself had been made ineffective. 

24. O excellent sages, staring anxiously at the face of his 
son, Nandagopa stood motionless. The highly blessed Yosoda 
was also like that. 

25. The cowherdesses and others looked on helplessly. In 
their extreme distress and grief they wept continuously owing 
to their love for Kcs'ava. Those ladies said in the frightened 
timidity of their minds: 

26. Ail of us shall now enter this great eddy of the king 
of serpents alongwith Yasoda. It is not proper on our part to 
go back to our colony. 

27. What is that day without the sun? What is that night 
without the moon? What are those cows without milk? What 
is that cowherds’ colony without Krsna? We will never go back 
to the cowherds 5 colony without Krsna. 

28. Vyasa said : 

On hearing these words of cowherdesses, the son of Roliini 
of great strength steadily looked at those distressed cowherds 
and said. 

29. He saw Nanda extremely distressed with his eyes 
fixed to his face. He saw Yasoda perturbed and faintingwithout 
being fully aware of his greatness. 

Balarama said : 

30-33. O lord of the chiefs of Devas, why is this human 
feeling revealed too much? Don’t you know own Atman? You 
are the pivot of this universe: you are the support of Devas. 
You are the maker, protector and distroyer of the three worlds. 
You are identical with the three Vedas. To both of us,0 Krsna, 
who have taken incarnations here the cowherds are the real 
kinsmen. So also the cowherdesses. Why then do you neglect 
them, your kinsmen who are distressed? You have exhibited 
the human traits. You have demonstrated puerile fickleness. So, O 
Krsna, may this wicked fang-weaponed serpent be suppressed. 

Vyasa said : 

34. Krsna who was thus reminded kept his legs slightly 









424 


Brahma Parana 


parted in a gentle smile with a sudden dash and blow. He 
released his "body from the bondage of the serpent’s coil. 

35. With both of his hands he made the middle hood bend 
down. As the head of the serpent king became bent he rode 
and danced on it. 

36. The hood of the serpent became wounded due to the 
kicks from the feet of Kr§na whenever the hood was raised. 
After the kick his head bent low. 

37. By frequent hits and blows from Krsna the serpent 
became unconscious and deluded. Due to the fierce kickings he 
vomited blood. 

38. On seeing that serpent had been compelled to bend 
his head and neck to shed blood from his mouth the wives of 
the serpent lord sought shelter in Krsna. 

The wives of the Serpent lord said : 

39-42. O lord of the chiefs of Devas, you have been under" 
stood. You are the excellent lord of all. You are the greatest 
and inconceivable splendour, a portion of which is Paramesvara. 
You are that lord not born of anyone else. Even Devas are not 
competent to eulogise you (adequately). How can women 
describe his form? The whole cosmic Egg consisting of the 
entire Earth, sky, water, fire and wind is only a bit of a part 
of that lord. How can we describe him and eulogise him ade¬ 
quately. Hence, O lord of the universe, be pleased with one who 
is distressed and fatigued. This serpent is about to die. May 
our husband be given to us even as alms are given to the 
beggars. 

Vyasa said : 

43-49. After this had been mentioned by them, the serpent 
with the timid eyes and exhausted body spoke slowly. 

Be pleased, O lord of Devas, your eight-fold lordship is 
very natural. It has nothing else that surpasses it. 

How can I eulogise it ? You are the greatest being, the first 
among the great. You are of the nature of great being. You 
are the greatest, greater than the greatest. How can I eulogise 
you? O lord, I am created by you with certain form in a 
certain species with certain traits in the characters and my 







77.50—78.1 


425 


activities have conformed to them. If I had acted contrary to 
that, O lord of Devas, the punishment that had been meted out 
to me has been endured by me. It is not punishment but only 
a boon. Let there not be aiiy other boon for me. O Acyuta, 
my vigour has been destroyed; my person has been dispelled, 
I have been suppressed. May life be spared unto me. Commend 
me, what shall I do? 

The lord said : 

50. O serpent, you must not stay any longer in the waters 
of Yamuna, go to the waters of the ocean along with your sons 
and attendants. 

51. O serpent, when he sees the imprints of my feet on 
your head during your stay in the ocean, Garuqla the enemy of 
serpents will not strike you. 

52. After saying this lordHari released the king of serpents. 
The serpent lord bowed down to Krsna and went to the ocean. 

53. Even as all the living beings stood watching, the serpent 
king abandoned his white eddy and went away along with 
servants, children and kinsmen accompanied by all his wives. 

54-57. When the serpent had gone, the cowherds embraced 
Krsna with a joy as though the dead man had come to life. 
They sprinkled Govinda on his head with tears of joy. The 
joyous cowherds and others eulogised Krsna of unimpaired 
activities with surprised minds. On seeing the river flowing 
with auspicious water once again they were glad. Krsna re¬ 
turned to the colony of cowherds with the cowherdesses singing 
songs about his charming activities and the cowherds eulogising 
him. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYEIGHT 
Dhenuka and Pralamba are slain 

Vyasasaid : 

1. Once again, Bala and Ke^ava started tending the cows 
together. Wandering along the forest they came to the beautiful 
grove of palmyre trees. 




426 


Brahma Purdna 


2. The Asura Dhenuka occupied that palmyra grove after 
assuming the form of a donkey. Human flesh and beef consti¬ 
tuted his diet. 

3. On seeing the beautiful palm grove richlyendowed with 
plenty of fruits, the cowherds became desirous of plucking those 
fruits. They said thus: 


The cowherds said : 


4-5. “O Rama, O Krsna, this spot of land is always 
guarded by Dhenuka. Hence, these fruits of palm trees had been 
avoided by us. These fruits have a joyous fragrance. We wish to 
let them be struck down if it pleases you. 

6. On hearing these words of the cowherd lads, Sariikar- 
sana and Krsna knocked clown the palm fruits to the ground. 

7. On hearing the sound of the falling palmyra fruits the 
evil-minded king of Asuras, a son of Diti who had assumed the 
form of a donkey came there in great fury. 

8-9. With the pair of his hind legs the powerful asura 
kicked him in the chest. He was immediately seized by means 
of those two legs. After catching hold of him thus Krsna 
whirled him in the sky. When he lost his life thus, he hurled 
him on a big palm tree. 

10. As he fell down from the top of the palm tree the dead 
donkey brought with him many fruits on the Earth like a gust 
of wind bringing down clouds. 

11. Krsna and Balabhadra playfully seized other asuras 
too in the form of donkeys—this asura’s kinsmen came there 

(to attack them) and hurled them on to the top of the palm 
trees. 


12. Within a short while, O sages, the Earth was adorned 
y the ripe palm fruits and the dead bodies of the asura 

donkeys. The whole area shone well. 

13. O brahmins, thereafter without any obstruction the 
cows comfortably grazed fresh shoots of grass inthatpalmgrove 
where they had not been grazing before. 

• uIl- ^ 1Cn ^ at asura donkey had been struck down along 
c 1S y° un § er brothers, the palmgrove appeared splendid 
and fearless to the cowherds and cowherdesses. 





78.15-28 


427 


15. Then those two sons of Vasudeva much delighted 
after killing asura Dhenuka, went to the Bhandlra forest. 

16. Jesting and shouting, singing and collecting the fruits 
of the trees those two noble boys shone splendidly like two bulls 
with tiny horns. 

17-21. They grazed the cows in the forest. When they 
strayed far off (into the forests) they used to call them by 
their names. They kept a noose ready on their shoulders in 
order to bind the straying cows. They were adorned by gar¬ 
lands of sylvan flowers. They were clad in robes of golden 
colour or of the colour of collyrium. (i.e, yellow and blue). 
They resembled the weapon oflord Indra (i.e. the thunderbolt). 
They were like the black and white clouds. They moved about 
delighting each other by means of sports usually indulged in 
by the people. They were the lords of worlds. They were 
engrossed in human activities and they honoured human 
qualities. They roamed about in the forest with sports 
having human traits and attributes. They engaged themselves 
in various exercises through swings or through wrestling 
bouts or through hurling huge stones. Thus the powerful 
lords performed exercises. 

22. An Asura named Pralamba, desirous of catching them, 
came there, even as both of them were sporting about thus. 
He was disguised as an ordinary cowherd. 

• 23. That inhuman being, the excellent Danava Pralamba, 
unhesitatingly entered the midst of those cowherds assuming 
a human form. 

24. He considered ways and means to find about a 
vulnerable point in them very quickly. He desired to kill 
Krsna and Balarama. 

25-26. The boys were playing a children’s game called 
Harina Kridana (Deer play). In this game the boys jumped 
in pairs, Govinda with Srldaman, Bala with Pralamba (the 
asura in disguise) and the. other cowherds with similar other 
cowherds. Thus they jumped together. 

27-28. Krsna defeated Sridaman; the son of Rohini defeat¬ 
ed Pralamba. Other cowherds were defeated by those be¬ 
longing to Krsna’s side. (According to the rules) those who 




428 Brahma Pur ana 

were defeated carried victors upto the stem ofBharidira tree and 
returned to the starting place). 

29. The Danava carried Samkarsana on his shoulders and 
walked quickly. He did not stop (at the stipulated plaee). He 
appeared like the cloud carrying the moon. 

30. Unable to bear the weight of Rauhneya the excellent 
asura increased in size with his body like a cloud in the rainy 
season. 

31-32. On seeing him with a huge body comparable to a 
burnt mountain, with garlands suspended round the neck as his 
ornament, with a crown over his head Balarama was dismayed. 
The asura was terrible. His eyes were like the wheels of a cart. 
When he walked, the Earth appeared to shake. As he was thus 
carried off Balarama said to Krsna: 

Balarama said : 

33-34. O Krsna, O Krsna, I am being carried off by a 
certain Asura with a terrible form like that of a mountain. See, 
he is disguised like a cowherd. O slayer of Madhu, what should 
be done now please tell me. This wicked one is going at a 
rapid pace. 

Vyasa said: 

35. The noble Krsna who was aware of the magnitude of 
strength and prowess of Balarama said to Rama with a gentle 
smile splitting his lips apart: 

Krsna said : 

36-39. Why is this human feeling resorted to so very 
specifically? O soul of all, you are the most worthy of being 
concealed among all concealable persons. O lord of the entire 
universe, O elder brother, remember the cause, the one Atman 
and similarly that person who is in the universe turned into a 
vast sheet of water (i.e. supreme Being). You and I, O soul of 
the universe, are the only cause. For the sake of the universe, 
or e sake of Earth, we are stationed as separate ones. Let 
the Atman be remembered O unmeasurable Atman and kill the 

U ^ a to ^ luman trait alone let what is conducive 

to the welfare of the kinsmen be carried out. 




78.40—79.4 


429 


Vyasa said : 

40-42. O brahmins, reminded thus by Krsna the great 
Atman, the powerful Balarama laughed and then began to in¬ 
jure pralamba; with his eyes turned red due to anger he bit 
him on his head with his fist. Due to this blow his eyes came 
out. The brain was expelled. Vomitting blood the excellent 
Asura fell down on the ground dead. 

43-44. On seeing Pralamba killed by Balarama of wonderful 
deeds the cowherds were delighted. They eulogised him saying 
“well done, well done. Pralamba.”. 

When Pralamba the daitya was killed Rama was eulogised 
by the cowherds and Krsna. They then came back to the 
cowherds’ colony. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYNINE 
Worship of Govardhana Mountain 


Vyasa said : 

1. Even as Rama and Kesava sported about thus, the 
rainy season passed off and the season of Autumn set in when 
lotuses blossomed forth. 

2. The season in which the sky was devoid of impurities 
and the stars sparkled arrived at the cowherds’ colony. Krsna 
then saw the residents of Vraja engaged in preparations for 
Indra’s festival. 

3. On seeing the cowherds enthusiastic and desirous of 
celebrating the festival the highly intelligent Krsna spoke to the 
elders out of curiosity. 

Kr$na said : 

4. “What is this festival of Indra wherein you are so very 
delighted?” 

As he asked thus with great eagerness, Nandagopa said to 
him : 




430 


Brahma Parana 


JVandasaid: 

5. Satakratu, king of Devas, is the lord of clouds and 
waters. It is on being urged by him that the clouds shower 
juice in the form of rain. 

6. Plants and foodgrains are produced by that rain. We and 
other embodied beings sustain ourselves by eating them. So we 
propitiate the Deities. 

7. It is through the plants and foodgrains grown by him 
that these cows become nourished and delighted. They yield 
calves and produce milk in plenty. 

8. The land without plants and grass and people afflicted 
by hunger are not seen in the places where rain-bearing clouds 
are seen. 

9. The cloud squeezes the terrestrial water through the 
rays of the sun. Parjanya, lord of the cloud, showers it on the 
Earth for Existence and growth of the world. 

10. Hence, during the rainy season, the joyous kings, we 
and other embodied beings, worship Indra the lord of Devas in 
the festival. 

Vyasa said : 

11. On hearing the words of Nandagopa in regard to the 
worship of Indra, Kfsna spoke thus, in order to rouse the anger 
of the lord of Devas. 

Kr$na said : 

12.. Odear father, we are not agriculturists. Nor do we 
sustain ourselves by trading activities. The cows are our deities 
since we are persons roaming about in the forests. 

13. The four lores are Anvlksiki (Metaphysics), Tray! 

(The three Vedas), Varta (Profession for livelihood) andDanda 
Niti (Civil and Military administration). Of these listen to ( the 
divisions of) Varta from me. 

14. O highly blessed one, the lore Varta consists of three 
breeding 3310113 ^ Agriculture > trading activity and cattle 

, ^ U ^ t * Vat ’ an * s t ^ ie occupation of agriculturists, trade 
lat o usinessmen. To us, cows provide the greatest of occupa- 





79 . 16-25 


431 


tion. With these three different activities, the lore of Varta is 
practised by people. 

16. Whatever be the calling one has adopted, it should be 
considered as his great deity. It should be honoured and wor¬ 
shipped. Only that calling renders him true help. 

17. If after reaping the fruits of one profession a man 
honours another, O dear father, he does not derive any thing 
splendid both here and hereafter. 

18. Let our borderlands and outskirts be worshipped ; our 
forest extends to them, the mountains mark the boundary of the 
forests ; and the mountain is our ultimate goal. 

19. Let a sacrifice unto the mountain or a sacrifice unto the 
cows be performed. What have we to do with Mahendra? The 
cows and the mountains are our deities. 

20. The brahmins are devoted to Yajfias with the chanting 
of Mantras; the farmers are devoted to Yajnas with their plough¬ 
shares. We who depend upon the mountains and forests shall 
practise Yajnas of the mountains and cows. 

21. Hence, let the mountain Govardhana be honoured and 
worshipped with all due offerings after killing the sacrificial 
animal in accordance with injunctions. 

22. Let the whole quantity (of milk and milk products) of 
the entire colony of the cowherds be taken. Do not be anxious 
and worried over anything. Let the brahmins and other persons 
who desire be fed thereby. 

23. When it is worshipped, the homas are performed, the 
brahmins are fed. Let herds of cows, with the autumnal flowers 
adorning their crests go round the mountain that has been 
worshipped. 

24. O cowherds, this is my proposal. If this is carried out 
with pleasure, the cows, mountain and I myself would have been 
propitiated. 

Vyasa said : 

25. O brahmins, on hearing these words of his, Nanda and 
other residents of the colony became delighted with their faces 
beaming with pleasure. They said “Well said, well said, my 
boy.” 

26. “O dear one, your suggestion is very splendid. All of us 




432 Brahma Purdna 

shall carry out what has been proposed by you. Let the sacrifice 
unto the mountain be performed. 

27. Accordingly the residents of colony performed Yajna 
unto the mountain. They offered oblations unto the mountain 
by curds, milk puddings, meat etc. 

28-32. They fed hundreds and thousands of brahmins. The 
cows that were duly decorated and worshipped circumambulated 
the mountain. So also the bulls that bellowed like the rainbear¬ 
ing rumbling clouds. 

O brahmins, saying ‘T am Indra” Balarama stood on the 
top of the mountain and ate many kinds of food-stuff's brought 
by the leading cowherds. Then Krsna climbed up to the top 
of'the mountain and worshipped the mountain. The cow¬ 
herds had secured boons after performing the festival of the 
mountain. Once again, they returned to their colony. 


CHAPTER EIGHTY 
Coronation of Lord Krsna 

Vyasa said : 

1. When his festival was thus hindered, Indra became 
extremely infuriated. He spoke thus to the clouds named 
Samvartaka. 

Indra said : 

. ^ ® clouds, even as I speak, listen to my words and 

immediately thereafter carry out my behest without any linger¬ 
ing thought or hesitation. 

The wicked Nandagopa, puffed up with the pride of the 

strengt e derives from the support of Kr§na, and assisted by 
other cowherds has now broken (the line of) my festivals. 

ence, at my instance, let their cows be harassed due to a 
eavy ownpour. It is the cow that supports them to a large 
extent and contributes to their successful cattle breeding. 





80 . 6-16 


433 


I too shall assist you, riding on my lofty elephant that 
resembles the peak of a great mountain. You will have the 
collaboration of winds as well. 

Vyasa said : 

6. O brahmins, on being commended thus by the lord of 
Devas, those clouds let down a terrible gust of wind and 
downpour for the annihilation of cows. 

7. Then, O brahmins, Ear.h, sky and quarters became 
one as it were, due to the great showers that filled them all. 

8. The cows began to tremble as the winds blew and the 
showers fell. They gave, up their lives and fell down with 
their heads and faces directed sideways. 

9. O excellent brahmins, other cows stood over their 
calves covering them with their laps. Still other cows were 
deprived of their calves by the heavy downpour of water. 

10. The distressed calves exhibited their wretched faces. 
The chill wind made their necks shiver. They seemed to tell 
Krsna cf O save us, O save us” by uttering few feeble words. 

11. On seeing the entire cowherds’ colony bewildered with 
the cows, cowherds and cowherdesses in utter confusion, Hari 
thought of the means of saving them. He said. 

12-13. “This is wrought by lord Indra who is opposed to 
us due to the break in the sense of festivals in his honour. 
Hence this entire cowherds’ colony should be protected by me 
now. I shall uproot this mountain with my prowess. I shall 
hold up its big rocky ridge over the cowherds’ colony like a 
big umbrella.” 

Vyasa said : 

14. After thinking thus, Kr?na uprooted the Govardhana 
mountain and playfully held it aloft with a single hand. 

15-16. The lord of the universe said to the cowherds 
after uprooting the mountain: “Enter ye all together. The 
shower has been prevented (here). Be seated in befitting 
places where there is no terrible gust of wind. Be fearless. 
After entering this place you should not be afraid of this that 
the mountain may fall. 





434 


Brahma Purana 


17. On being advised thus by him the cowherds and the 
cowherdesscs who had been afflicted by the heavy downpour, 
entered the sheltered spot along with their cattle wealth. 
They kept their utensils and belongings loaded in carts. 

18-19. Krsna held the mountain, aloft very steedily. He 
was then watched by the residents of the cowherds’ colony 
with delight and wonder manifest in their eyes. He was 
observed by cowherds and cowherdesses with their eyes widely 
dilated due to joy. His conduct and exploit was eulogised by 
them. Thus Krsna held the mountain aloft. 

20. The great clouds prompted by Indra who was desir¬ 
ous of destroying the cowherds showered for seven nights in the 
cowherds’ colony. 

21. As the great mountain was thus held aloft and the 
herds of cows were saved, Indra’s vow became falsified. So 
he withdrew the clouds. 

22. When the sky was cleared of clouds, when Indra’s 
advice became futile and the lord of Devas became disappoint¬ 
ed the delighted colony of cowherds was re-established in its 
own place. 

23. Krsna then released the great mountain Govardhana 
and replaced it in its spot, closely watched by the residents of 
Vraja with wonderment evident in their faces. 


Vyasa said : 

24. When the mountain Govardhana was held up and the 
herds of cows were saved by Krsna, the chastiser of Paka (i.e. 
Indra) desired to visit Krsna. 

25. The lord of Devas, the conqueror of enemies rode on 

Airavata his great elephant and paid a visit to Krsna on the 
mountain Govardhana. 

^ orc ^ S reat prowess, the protector of the uni- 
verse had assumed the form of a cowherd. Surrounded by 
cowherd lads he was grazing the cows there. 

° brahmins, he saw Garuda the leading bird, who had 

created a shadow over the head of Hari from above by means 

of his wing and who remained invisible for others. 

, 28 ' Demounted from his elephant Airavata, with his eyes 
enlarged due to pleasure Indra smilingly spoke to Visnu. 





80 . 29-41 


435 


Indra said : 

29. O Kfsna, O Krsna of mighty great arms, listen, why 
I have come near you. This should not be misunderstood (and 
thought otherwise) by you. 

30. You are indeed the great lord, the support of every¬ 
thing. You have incarnated on the surface of the Earth in 
order to remove the burden of the Earth. 

31- Becoming inimical to you because of the break in the 

series of my festivals great clouds had been directed by me to 
destroy herds of cows. This great havoc was perpetrated by 
them. 

32. The cows were saved by you by uprooting the great 
mountain. O heroic one, I am delighted by this extremely 
wonderful feat of yours. 

33. Q Krsna, I think, the purpose of Devas has been 
served today. This excellent mountain has been held aloft 
with a single hand by you. 

34. Moreover, O Krsna, I have come near you, after being 
prompted by the cows saved by you. It is very much for your 
sake also, you are the cause of causes. 

35. Urged by the words of cows, I shall crown you as 
Upendra (younger brother of Indra). You shall become Govinda, 
the lord of cows. 

36. Then he brought the bell from his vehicle, Airavata. 
Filling it with sacred waters he performed the rite of coro¬ 
nation. 

37. When Krsna’s coronation was performed, the cows 
made the Earth wet with the milk flowing from their udders. 

38. After crowning Sri Krsna at the instance of cows, the 
husband of SacI, Devendra spoke to Krsna again humbly and 
lovingly. 

Indra said : 

39-41. This has been done due to the utterance of cows. 
Similarly, listen to another matter also which I am going to say, 
O Highly blessed one, due to my desire to remove the burden 
of the Earth. 

O sustainer of the Earth, my own part, a tiger among men 






436 


Brahma Pur ana 


named Arjuna has incarnated on the Earth. He should always 
be protected by you. 

He will be your associate and friend in the act of removing 
the burden of the Earth. O slayer of Madhu, he should be 
protected by you in the same manner as your soul. 

The lord said : 

42. I know Partha born into the Bharata family from a 
part of yours. As long as I continue to live on the surface of 
the Earth, I shall protect him. 

43. O Indra, lordofDevas, O suppressor of foes, as long 
as I stay on the Earth, no one will conquer Arjuna, in battle. 

44-45. O lord of Devas, when the asura of mighty prowess 
named Kamsa, other ones (named) Arista, Kesin, Kuvalaya- 
pida and Naraka have been killed there shall be a great battle. 
O thousand-eyed one, know that in the course of that battle 
the burden of the Earth shall be removed. 

46. • Go, it does not behove you to be sad and anxious for 
the sake of your son. No enemy of Arjuna, howsoever great, 
will be too powerful in my presence. 

47. For the sake of Arjuna I shall protect Yudhisthira and 
others also. When the Bharata battle is concluded I shall hand 
over toKunti all these persons led by Yudhisthira, (safe and) 
unwounded. 

Vyasa said : 

48. On being assured thus the king of Devas embraced 
Kfsna and mounted on his elephant Airavata went back to 
heaven once again. 

49. Accompanied by* cowherds and cows Krsna returned 
to the Vraja along the path sanctified by the loving glances of 
cowherd lasses. 






81.1-9 


CHAPTER EIGHTYONE 

Arisfa is slain 


437 


Vyasa said : 

1. When Iridra went away, the cowherds who had wit¬ 
nessed Krsna of unimpaired activities holding aloft the moun¬ 
tain Govardhana said to him lovingly. 

The Cowherds said : 

2. O highly blessed one, from this great danger all of us 
and the cows have been protected by you through this activity 
of holding up the mountain. 

3. (If this is only)a childish play, it is (really) unrivalled. 
O dear one, tending of the cows is a profession viewed at with 
abhorrence. But your activities are divine. How is this? May 
it be explained to us. 

4. Kaliya was suppressed in the water. Pralamba was 
struck down. (Now) this Govardhana has been lifted up. 
(Really) our minds are full of doubts. 

5* Truth. It is the truth : O excessively valorous one, we 
swear by the feet of Hari, on observing your prowess we do 
not think that you are an ordinary person. 

6. Whether you are a Deva or a Danava, whether you 
are a Yaksa or a Gandharva—You are our kinsman in our 
consideration. Obeisance be to you. 

7. O Kesava, the love of the entire cowherds’ colony in¬ 
cluding women and children is heaped on you. This feat 
is impossible to Devas too. 

8. Your boyhood and this excessive valour, your birth 
amidst us, not very splendid in itself—all this, on being 
considered, O Krsna of immeasurable Soul, produces suspicion 
in us. 

Vyasa said : 

9. On being addressed thus by the cowherds, O excellent 
brahmins, Krsna remained silent for a while with feigned 
anger (in spite of his) love and said. 




438 


Brahma Purana 


Srikrsna said : 

10. o cowherds, if due to your relationship with me you 

are not ashamed and if I am worthy of being praised, of what 
avail is your pondering over other matters ? 

11 if you have any love for me, if I am worthy of being 
praised by you, O my kinsmen, let that venerable offering be¬ 
fitting a kinsman be made unto me. 

12. I am neither a Deva nor a Gandharva, neither a 
Yaksa nor a Danava. I have become your kinsman. Hence, 
nothing other than this should be thought of me. 

Vyasa said : 

13. On hearing these words of Hari and realizing that he 
had feigned anger due to love, the highly blessed cowherds 
kept quiet. They gained in strength thereby. 

14-15. Krsna observed that the sky was clear and devoid 
of impurities; that the bright light of the autumnal moon 
spread everywhere; that the cluster of lilies was full-blown 
rendering the quarters fragrant and that the forest region was 
charming due to the humming swarms of bees. He was there¬ 
fore inclined to indulge in amorous sports with the cowherd 
lasses. 

16. The lotus-footed lord sang sweet songs in the company 
of Rama, pleasing to the womenfolk. He feigned that he was 
observing holy rites there. 

17. On hearing the sweet and charming sound of the 
songs, the cowherd lasses left ofT their abodes and hurriedly 
came to the place where Krsna stood. 

18. A certain cowherd lass followed his footsteps and sang 
slowly. Another one listened to it attentively and mentally 
remembered him. 

19. A certain lass uttered “O Krsna O Krsna 5 ’ and be¬ 
came bashful. A certain lass who was blindly in love with him 
went near him without shame. 

20. A certain lass who was standing within her abode saw 
her father (father-in-law) standing outside. She closed her eyes 
and meditated on Govinda completely identifying herself with 
him. 







81 . 21-31 


439 


21. Surrounded by the cowherd lasses and eager to begin 
the charming dance of Rasa, Govinda approved of the night, 
charming with the autumnal moon. 

22. The cowherdesses were fully engrossed in the activities 
of Krsna. When Krsna went to a different spot those lasses 
walked about in the forests of Vrndavana in groups. 

23. Eager to see Krsna, the cowherdesses wandered here 
and there, O brahmins, on seeing the footprint of Krsna during 
that night. 

24. Thus in the course of different types of activities and 
sports of Krsna, the cowherd lasses became agitated simultane¬ 
ously and roamed about in the beautiful forest of Vrndavana. 

25. From there the cowherd lasses losing their hopes of 
seeing Krsna, came back to the banks of Yamuna and sang 
about his conduct. 

26. Thereupon, the cowherdesses saw Krsna of unimpaired 
activities, the saviour of the three worlds coming to them 
with his face beaming like a full-blown lotus. 

27. A certain lass became extremely delighted on seeing 
Krsna coming. With wide open eyes she shouted “Krsna, 
Krsna, Krsna”. 

28. A certain lass looked at Hari with knit eyebrows over 
her broad forehead. She seemed to squeeze honey from his 
lotus face through her bee-like eyes. 

29. A certain lass closed her eyes after seeing Govinda. 
Meditating on his own form she appeared to be in Yogic 
slumber. 

30. Then Krsna humoured, delighted and consoled some 
ladies with pleasing conversations, some by glances with knit 
eyebrows and some by gently touching them with hands. 

31. Hari of elegant conduct sported about and diverted 
himself with those cowherd lasses who were delighted in their 
minds by means of Rasa dances enthusiastically pursued. 

Extra Verses : (According to another reading ) 

[Women of the cowherds’ colony assembled together 
for the group dance of Rasa. They tried to be by his side. They 
never stayed steadily in any single spot. Hari caught each 
of the cowherd lasses by her hand from the midst of group 




440 Brahma Purana 

assembled for the Rasa and made each close her eyes by gently 
stroking her with his hand.] 

32. Then began to function a series of music with songs of 
autumn along with the sounds of the moving bangles. 

33. Krsna sang about the autumnal moon, the moonlight 
and the lily pond, but the womenfolk of the cowherds uttered 
the name of Krsna alone again and again. 

34. One (of those ladies) after dancing round and round 
became fatigued. The heat warmed up her moving bangles. 
That cowherd lass put her creeper-like arms on his shoulders. 

35. A certain cowherd lass whose arms moved about 
gracefully and who was an expert in singing, eulogising found 
pretexts, embraced and kissed him emotionally. 

36. Hari’s arms came into contact with the cheeks of cow¬ 
herd lasses and acted like the clouds. The downpour from these 
clouds was the series of sweat drops and the plants issuing 
therefrom were the hairs standing on end. 

37. When Krsna sang the usual songs of Rasa in highly 
shrill notes, the ladies shouted “Well done, Krsna, O Krsna” 
with notes twice as shrill. 

38. When he went anywhere they followed him; when he 
moved in a circle they stood in front of him. The womenfolk 
of the cowherds’ colony resorted to Hari both directly and 
inversely. 

39. At that time Krsna sported himself together with the 
cowherd lasses. Even when he was away from them for a 
moment they felt that period of time equal to a crore of years. 

40. Though prevented by their fathers, husbands and 
brothers the cowherdesses who were fond of sexual intercourse 
delighted Krsna during the nights. 

41. The slayer of Madhu, whose soul is immeasurable who 
had destroyed his enemies and who was in the prime of youth 
honoured them and sported together with them. 

42. He was the lord in the form of Atman. He permeated 
all living beings including them and their husbands. He stood 
pervading everything. 

43. Just as Ether, Earth, fire, water, wind and Atman are 
present in all living beings so also he stood pervading every¬ 
thing. 







81.44-56 


441 


Vydsa said : 

44. Once in the evening when Krsna was engrossed in 
Rasa the asura Arista came there, arrogantly terrifying the 
people of the cowherd colony. 

45-50. The asura had assumed the form of a bull, with 
sharp horns. His eyes sparkled like the sun. His form was like 
that of a rain-bearing cloud. He was kicking and tearing up 
the surface of the Earth with his hoofs. With lips, often rubb¬ 
ing and striking them, in his fury he raised his tail. The 
muscles of his shoulders were hard and tough. The hump on 
his back was large and raised up. He could never be surpassed 
in majestic magnitude. Dung and urine stuck to his hind 
quarters. He was repulsive to the cows of that colony. The 
loose dewlap hang down from his neck. There were markings 
of his butting against trees in front of him. He appeared as 
though he would cause abortion among the cows. He hit and 
killed everything on his way with great force. He always roam¬ 
ed through the forest (?). His eyes were terrifying. On seeing 
him the cowherds and the cowherdesses were excessively 
frightened. They shouted c ‘Krsna, O Krsna.” Thereupon 
Krsna roared like a lion and clapped hands to make a loud 
report. 

51-56. On hearing that sound the bull ran towards 
Krsna. With the tips of his horns pointed ahead and his eyes 
fixed to the belly of Krsna, the evil-minded Daitya in the form 
of a bull rushed along. On seeing the demonaic bull of great 
strength rushing towards him Krsna did not move from his 
seat. Smilingly and playfully he stood there with contempt 
towards the asura. But when he approached him, Krsna seized 
him like a crocodile seizing his prey. Catching hold of his 
horns he made him incapable of moving. Then he hit his belly 
with his knee. After catching hold of him by his horns he 
dispelled his arrogance and strength. He seized and twisted the 
neck of Arista in the manner as one does with a wet cloth (in 
order to squeeze out water). Thereafter Krsna uprooted one of 
his horns and struck him with the same. 

Thereat, the great asura vomited blood through his mouth 
and died. When the asura was killed the cowherds eulogised 




442 Brahma Purdna 

Krsna like Devas who praised the thousand-eyed Indra former¬ 
ly when Vrtra was killed. 1 


CHAPTER EIGHTYTWO 
KeSin is slain 

Vyasa said : 

1-4. When Arista was killed thus, when Dhenuka had 
been struck down, when Pralamba had been slain, when the 
mountain Govardhana was held up, when the serpent Kaliya 
had been suppressed, when the two lofty trees had been broken, 
when Putana was killed and when the cart had been over¬ 
turned, Narada narrated everything to Kamsa in the manner it 
had happened. He narrated the exchange of children between 
Yasoda and DevakI and all other details in full. On hearing 
these details from Narada of divine vision, the wicked Kamsa 
became furious with Vasudeva. 

5. Due to his excessive wrath he taunted everyone in the 
assembly of Yadavas. He rebuked Yadavas and thought of 
what should be done next. 

6. “Bala and Krsna are small boys (now). Before they 
grow stronger they should be killed by me. Once they attain 
youth they cannot be checked from their evil activities. 

7. Here I have Canura of great prowess and Mustika of 
great strength. I shall get those two haughty boys killed through 
these two in a wrestling bout. 

8 . Under the pretext of a great sacrifice in the name of 
Dhanurmaha (festival of bows) I shall fetch them here from 
the cowherds’ colony. I shall do those things strenuously that 
will reduce their power and destroy them. 

Vyasa said : 

9. After thinking like this, the wicked Kamsa decided to 

1. Refers to the Rgvcdic legend (Rv 1.80) of Vrtra and Indra. Vrtra 
was more powerful than Indra but the latter killed him deceitfully. 




82.10-21 


443 


kill Balarama and Krsna. Accordingly he said to the Valorous 
Akrura. 

Kamsa said : 

10 . O lord of charitable gifts, may the following task be 
carried out at my instance for my pleasure. Drive in a chariot 
from here and go to the cowherds’ colony of Nanda. 

11 . There, two sons of Vasudeva are born from the parts 
ofVisnu. They are born for my destruction. The wicked ones 
are flourishing day by day. 

1 2. The great sacrifice the festival of bows will take place on 
the fourteenth day of the lunar fortnight. They should be 
brought by you there for taking part in the wrestling bout. 

13. My wrestlers Canura and Mustika are experts in duels. 
Let the people see duel between the two combatants. 

14. Then there is the elephant Kuvalayapida. Prompted 
by its mahout the elephant will kill the wicked boys the sons of 
Vasudeva. 

15. After killing them I shall kill the wicked Vasudeva and 
Nanda too. I shall kill my father Ugrasena as well. 

16. Thereafter, I shall seize the cattle-wealth of the cow¬ 
herds. I shall confiscate the wealth of all those wicked ones who 
are desirous of killing me. 

17. O lord of charitable gifts, excepting you all these Yada- 
vas are wicked in my opinion. I shall endeavour to kill them 
also one by one. 

18. Thereafter, I shall make this kingdom devoid of Yada- 
vas. As it is rid of ail thorns I shall rule it through you. Hence, 
O heroic one, go for my love. 

19. You should speak to them in such a manner as to make 
the cowherds bring as present unto me ghee and curds the pro¬ 
ducts of buffalo’s milk. 

Vydsa said : 

20-21. O brahmins, thus commanded, Akrura the great 
devotee of the lord became delighted because he could see Krsna 
the next day. Saying ‘So be it’ he (Akrura) who was fond 
of seeing Krsna got into a chariot and hurried out of the city 
of Mathura. 




444 


Brahma Purana 


Vyasa said : 

22. Kesin who too was urged by Kamsa as his powerful 
messenger came to Vmdavana desirous of killing Krsna. 

23. He came to the colony of cowherds. With his hoofs he 
dug up pits on the ground. When he waved his manes he shook 
and scattered the clouds. He traversed through the aerial path 
of the moon and the sun. 

24. Frightened by the neighing sound of the asura in the 
form of a horse the cowherds and cowherdesscs sought refuge in 
Krsna. 

25. On hearing their words—“Save us, O save us”, Krsna 
spoke in a loud tone like the rumbling sound of the rain-bearing 
cloud. 

Krsna said : 

26. O cowherds, do not be afraid. You belong to the clan 
of cowherds, why are you so afraid of Kesin ? Why are you 
losing courage and prowess befitting the heroes ? 

27. This wicked horse has only very little strength. He is 
making a proud display of the loud neighing sound. He is only 
an ordinary messenger in the army of asuras. He is vaunting 
and galloping—Of what avail is this ? 

28. O wicked one, come. come. I am Krsna. Just as the 
Pinaka-bearing lord knocked off the teeth of Pusan, so also I 
shall knock off thc_tceth from your mouth. 

Vyasa said : 

29. After saying thus, Krsna stood face to face with Kesin. 
The asura too rushed at him with a wide open mouth. 

30. Then Krsna enlarged his arm and thrust it into the 
mouth of the wicked horse, Kesin. 

31. His teeth were knocked off by the arm of Krsna that 
was thrust into the mouth of Kesin. They looked like the bits 
of white clouds. 

32. O brahmins, Krsna’s arm that went into the body of 
Kesin became the cause of his destruction like the ailment that 
is neglected m the early stages by trustworthy persons (atten¬ 
dants, relatives or oneself;. 





82.33-45 


445 


33. His lips were torn off. The corners of the mouth were 
made gapingly wide. He vomited frothful blood. The tendons 
were loosened and untied. 

34. Stretching his legs he fell on the ground and discharged 
dung and urine in plenty. His body was drenched in sweat. He 
became exhausted and ultimately ceased to struggle for life. 

35. With his mouth torn apart by the arm of Krsna, that 
extremely terrible Asura fell down like a tree that is severed 
into two by the lightning stroke. 

36. The two halves of the dead horse Kesin, each having 
two legs, one ear, one eye, one nostril and a moiety of the back 
and the tail shone remarkably. 

37. After killing Kesin, Krsna was surrounded by the joyous 
cowherds. His body had no sign of strain. Hale and hearty he 
stood there laughing. 

38. When Kesin was killed, the cowherds and the cowher- 
desses were surprised. They eulogised the lotus-eyed lord in 
charming words indicative of their love. 

39. The sage Narada hurriedly came there seated on a cloud. 
On seeing Kesin killed his mind was extremely delighted. 

Narada said : 

40. Well done. Well done, O lord of the universe, O Acyuta ! 
Kesin, the tormentor of heaven-dwellers, has been killed by you 
playfully. 

41. (?) You were eager to bring about his death in this 
battle between a man and a horse. Killed by you here that 
wicked asura has gone to heaven. 

42. O slayer of Madhu, good rites have been performed by 
you in this incarnation that caused surprise in me (?) But by 
virtue of this action, my mind is delighted and satisfied. 

43. O Krsna, Devas and Indra had been afraid of this horse 
that used to shake ofT his manes, neigh (loudly) and seethe 
clouds high up in the sky. 

44. O Krsna, since this wicked Kes'in was killed by you, you 
will become worthy of being sung about in the world by the 
name of Kesava. 

45. Hail to you. I shall go now. O slayer of Kesin, day 




446 Brahma Purarta 

after tomorrow I shall meet you once again in the course of 
battle with Kamsa. 

46. When Kamsa, the son of Ugrascna, is struck down along 
with his followers, O supporter of the Earth, you will remove 
the burden of the Earth. 

47. O Krsna, I shall be there witnessing matches, old duels 
as told by you. 

48. I shall now go, O Krsna, great task of Devas has been 
accomplished by you. I have been honoured by you. Hail to 
you. I shall go now. 

Vyasa said : 

49. When Narada had gone, Krsna who was not dismayed 
entered the cowherd’s colony as the sole receptacle of beverage 
to be drunk by the eyes of the cowherd lasses. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYTHREE 
Akrura comes to the Cowherds' colony 

Vyasa said : 

1. Akrura who was eager to see Krsna set off in a chariot 
that went very fait to the cowherds’ colony of Nanda. 

2. Akrura thought thus :—There is no one more blessed 
than I am because I shall be seeing the face of the discus-bearing 
lord who has incarnated with a part of his. 

3. Today my birth is fruitful. My night has turned into a 
bright morning, since I shall be seeing the face of Visnu which 
has the eyes resembling the petals of a full blown lotus. 

4. I shall be seeing that face of Visnu which has lotus-like 
eyes and which dispels the sin of men even if it is fancied. 

5. I shall be seeing the face of the lord from which the 
Vedas and Vcdangas have come up and which is the greatest 
abode of Devas. 

6 . I shall be seeing that lord of the universe who is wor- 
shipped as the best of Purusas to whom the offering is made in. 
the sacrifice and who is the support of every one. 




83.7-18 


447 


7. I shall be seeing that Kcsava who has neither a beginn¬ 
ing nor an end and by worshipping whom with a hundred sacri¬ 
fices, Indra attained the overlordship of immortal beings. 

8 . I shall see that lord of the universe whose form neither 
Brahma nor Indra nor Rudra nor Asvins nor Vasus nor Adityas 
nor Maruts know. 

9-10. He will speak to me, he who is the soul of all, who is 
omnipresent, who is all, who is stationed in all living beings, 
who is unchanging, who is all-pervading, who is Existence, alone, 
who is himself the lord, who performed Yogic feat and who 
stationed himself in the forms of Fish, Tortoise, Boar, Man-lion, 
etc. 

11. The lord of the Universe has attained a human form 
and is stationed in the cowherds’ colony for certain (specific) 
tasks. He is the unchanging lord who can take up any formas he 
wishes. 

12. That infinite lord who holds the Earth stationed on the 
top of the peak and who has incarnated himself for removing the 
burden of the Earth will call me—‘O Akrura’. 

13. Obeisance, obeisance to the lord whose Maya the uni¬ 
verse is incompetent to dispel, the Maya that consists of kinship 
with father, kinsman, friend, brother, mother and other kindred 
relations. 

14. Obeisance to that soul of learning by keeping whom in 
the heart, the mortal beings surmount ignorance, the Yogic 
illusion. 

15. I bow unto him who is called Yajnapurusa by the sacri¬ 
ficial priests, who is called Vasudeva by devotees and who is 
called Visnu by those who arc experts in Sastras. 

16. He is the receptacle of universe in whom Existent-non¬ 
existent is retained. May he of the Sattva Guna be gentle to 
me ? 

17. Continuously do I seek refuge in Hari the most excell-, 
ent of Purusas; On remembering him one becomes the recipient 
of all auspicious things. 

Vyasa said : 

18. Thinking about Visnu thus, humbly and devoutly in 
his- mind, Akrura reached the cowherds’ colony when there was 
still some sunlight (a little before sunset). 






448 


Brahma Parana 


19-22. There he saw Kr?na engaged in milking the cows. 
He was in the midst of calves. His lustre was like the lustre of 
petals of the blue lotus. His eyes resembled the petals of a full 
blown lotus. His chest was marked with the scar Srlvatsa. His 
arms were long hanging down (on either side). His chest was 
broad and raised up. The nose protruded (prominently). He 
possessed a lotus-like face that supported a graceful smile. His 
nails were red and raised. He had fixed his legs steadily on the 
ground. He wore a pair of yellow garments. He was bedecked 
in sylvan (flowers) and peacock feathers. His hands resembled 
creepers and were of dark blue colour. He embellished himself 
with white lotuses. 

23. O brahmins, near him he saw Balabhadra, a scion of 
the family of Yadus. He was white in complexion like the swan, 
moon and Kunda flower. He was clad in blue robes. 

24. He was tall with prominent arms; his face was like a 
full-blown lotus. He appeared like another Kailasa mountain 
surrounded by layers of clouds. 

25. On seeing them, O brahmins, that highly intelligent 
Akrura experienced horripilation all over the body. His face 
beamed like a blowing lotus flower. 

26. Akrura then thought within himself thus Here is the 
p-eatest of splendours. Here is the greatest of regions. Vasudeva 
is stationed here in two forms. 

27. May both of my eyes simultaneously attain fruit¬ 
fulness when the creator of the universe in the form of Kr?na 
is seen. ill this limb (of mine) on coming into contact with 

fruition ? ^ t0 ^ ^ race ^ le l° r d be on the path of 

28. Touching my lotus-like hand today itself the lord of 
^• le ,r WiIlmake * Serious. Excellent achievement is 

oS™ whose sins are entireIy dis P elled b y a touch 

,. 29 ' Wth his large hands be will embrace me, the greatest 
lend, the kinsman who has no other deity. Then itself my 

u will be sanctified. The bondage of the nature of Karman 
breathes thereby (?) 

3 . Alter getting into contact with his limbs when I bow 
down with palms joined in reverence, he of bigears (of great 





83.31-36 


449 


renown) will say to me ‘AkrQra’. At that time alone do we 
feel that we are alive. Fie upon the birth of that person who 
is not at all respected by the great one. 

31. To him there is no one who is the most beloved, the 
greatest of friends. He has no one who cannot be a friend 
or who has to be hated or who has to be neglected. Still the 
lord resorts to his devotees in the same manner as the divine 
trees which when sought after bestow riches. 

32-33. (Defective) Devas led by Asvins, Rudras, Indras 
and Vasus grant boon when they are delighted. The spaces 
between the eyes (?) of the womenfolk of asuras were removed 
by him as he struck the' army of the lord of asuras. By pour¬ 
ing water therein (i.e. into the hands of the lord) Bali 
attained charming pleasures even when staying on the Earth. 
Similarly, Indra, the lord of immortal beings, attained the 
lordship of Devas for the duration of a Manvantara. 

34. Still it is possible he may not honour me because 
although I have no defects, I am considered blameworthy for 
I have been taken over by Kamsa. Fie upon that person who 
is excluded by good men. 

35-36. Is there anything which is not known to this lord 
who is of the nature of perfect knowledge, who is a mass of 
Sattva elements, who has no defects, who is always unmanifest 
and who is stationed in the heart of all persons in this world. 
Hence, I shall go unto the lord of the Universe with a devoutly 
humble body. He is the lord of lords. He is the partial 1 incar¬ 
nation ( ariiSdvatara ) without beginning, middle or end, of 
Purusottama the unborn lord Visnu. 


1. But the devotees consider Krsna Purna avatara (complete incar¬ 
nation) and not the partial incarnation (amsavatara). 








450 


CHAPTER EIGHTYFOUR 

Return of Akrura 


Brahma Purana 


Vyasa said : 

1. Thinking thus on his way and approaching Krsna, 
that scion of the family of Yadavas bowed his head to the feet 
of Hari saying - T am Akrura’. 

2. The lord too stroked him with his hand marked by the 
lines of flag, thunderbolt and lotus. He dragged him with love 
towards himself and closely embraced him. 

3. Balarama and Kr?na were duly greeted and honoured 
by* him. The two who were delighted took him with them and 
entered their chamber. 

4-6. After being greeted by them and having taken his 
meals Akrura precisely mentioned everything to them; how 
Vasudeva was rebuked by Karhsa; how Devakl was insulted by 
that wicked Kamsa, how that wicked Kamsa behaved towards 
Ugrasena and why he had been sent by Kamsa. 

7. On hearing everything in detail the lord, the slayer of 
Kesin said—“O lord of charitable gifts, all this has been 
understood by me. 

8. O highly blessed one, I shall undertake what is the most 
proper expedient in this matter. It should not be considered 
otherwise. Know that Kamsa is already killed by me. 

9. Rama and I shall go to Mathura along with you, 
tomorrow. The elderly cowherds will accompany us taking 
many presents with them. 

10. O heroic one, let this night be passed off. It does not 
behove you to worry over anything. Within three nights I shall 
kill Kamsa alongwith his followers.” 

Vyasa said : 

11. After directing cowherds in regard to Akrura, Kesava 
and Balabhadra went to the abode ofNandagopa and slept 

12. When the day dawned with pure atmosphere, the 
extremely powerful Balarama and Krsna began their prepar¬ 
ations to go to Mathura in the company of Akrura. 





84.13-24 


451 


13. On seeing this, the cowherd folk were full of tears. 
The bangles in their hands got loose. They heaved sighs in their 
misery and spoke to one another thus: 

14. “After reaching Mathura how will Krsna return to the 
cowherds’ colony? He will imbibe honey of the sweet tale of 
the city-lasses by his cars. 

15. After getting involved in the net of elegant speech of 
the city lasses how will his mind revert to the cowherd boys 
and cowherd lasses of vulgar nature? 

16. The ruthless wicked Fate has struck at the cowherd 
damsels since it removes Krsna who is the essence of our 
colony. 

17. The following attributes of the city lasses are extraor¬ 
dinary—their words are uttered with smiles couched in emotional 
fervour; their movement is graceful and elegant; their side- 
glances are very attractive. 

18. If our rural and vulgar lord is held up by the fetters 
of their seductive charms, by what expedient will he return to 
us. 

19. This Kesava goes to Mathura driving in a chariot. 
He has been duped by Akrura who is really Krura (cruel) and 
who is one who has dashed our hopes. 

20. Does not this wicked Akrura know us earnestly in love 
with him? Wherefore does he take our lord elsewhere, lord who 
provides us with imperishable delight? 

21. This excessively merciless Krsna is going away 
accompanied by Rama and seated in a chariot. May steps be 
taken hurriedly to prevent him. 

22. What do you say? Is it this—“It is not proper on 
our part to say anything in front of our elders”? But what will 
the elders do to us who already are burnt by the fire of 
separation? 

23. All these cowherds, led by Nandagopa, are ready to 
accompany him. No one attempts to make Govinda return. 

24. In regard to the womenfolk residing in Mathura the 
night has turned into a bright morning. The lotus-like face of 
Acyuta can now be enjoyed by their eyes which resemble the 
bees. 




452 


Brahma Purdn a 


25: All those persons are blessed who will unobstructedly 
view Krsna on the way, as he starts from here and will 
experience the sense of horripilation. 

26. It will be a festive occasion to the eyes of the residents 
of Mathura, after seeing the face of Krsna. 

27. What auspicious dream was seen by those fortunate 
ladies? Without any impediment they will see the lord with 
their wide attractive eyes. 

28-30. Alas, after showing them a great treasure the eyes 
of the cowherd lasses have been plucked by the merciless Fate. 
Love for us (in the heart) of Krsna who is going to Mathura 
has become feeble. Even the bracelets in our hands have be¬ 
come loose suddenly. Akrura with a cruel heart is hurriedly 
driving the horses. Is there a man who will not have any 
sympathy for the women who are distressed thus? 

31. May this column of dust raised up by the wheels of 

Krsna’s chariot be seen. Now even that dust is not seen_the 

dust by which Krsna has been taken away from us.” 

32. So lamented the cowherd lasses. Even as they were 
watching him with great sincerity and affection, Kesava left 
that land of cowherds’ colony (far behind) in the company of 
Rama. 


_ 33 * Travelling thus in a chariot fitted with quick horses, 
Rama, Akrura, and Srlkrsna reached the banks of Yamuna at 
midday. 

34. Then Akrura said to Krsna:—“Both of you be waiting 
here, until I complete rites in the waters of Yamuna.” 

• ,, ^ brahmins, after they had consented saying “So be 

it” Akrura of great lustre entered the waters of Yamuna, had 
his bath and then performed Acamana. 

35-45. There in the waters of Yamuna he saw Balarama 
with a thousand hoods. His physical form was as pure and 
white as the Kunda flower. His eyes were large resembling the 
pe a s o a u blown lotus. He was surrounded by a large 
number o f serpents, sons of Vasuki. 1 He was being eulogised by 
em. e was bedecked in garlands of fragrant sylvan flowers. 
He was dad m b lue garments. He had handsome features and 

le g<: ndhewa7inlSfe\1^ h r Sand » “<= 









84.47-49 


453 


beautiful ornaments. His car-rings were fine. He was inebriate 
and was stationed on the bottom bed of the river water. In his 
lap he saw Krsna. He was dark in complexion like the cloud. 
His large eyes were copper-coloured. He had graceful limbs and 
four arms. The discus and other weapons were like ornaments 
unto him. He wore two yellow clothes. He was bedecked in 
garlands with flowers of onion colour. He was like a cloud ren¬ 
dered wonderful by Indra’s bow (i.e. rain-bow) and many 
streaks of lightning. The Srivatsa scar marked his chest. He 
shone with beautiful armlets and coronet. He was unafflicted 
and bedecked in lotus. Pie was being meditated upon by 
Sanandana 1 and other sages who had achieved yogic power, 
who were devoid of sins and who were seated there with their 
eyes fixed to the tips of their noses on recognizing Balarama 
and Krsna. Akrura was struck with wonder. He thought within 
himself—“How did they come here so quickly?” As he was 
about to say something, Krsna stunned his faculty of speech. 
Thereafter, he came out of the water and went near the chariot. 
There too he saw both of them seated in the chariot. Balarama 
and Krsna were there as before, in human form. Coming back 
and diving under the water once again he saw them in the 
same manner as before. They were being eulogised by Gan- 
dharvas, sages, Siddhas and Nagas. 

47. Thereupon, he understood the real nature of the lord 
as existence. The lord of charitable gifts then eulogised lord 
Acyuta full of all perfect knowledge. 

Akrara said 

48. Obeisance, obeisance to the great Atman of the form of 
Cit (Consciousness) alone; to the all-pervading lord of unima¬ 
ginable greatness, to one of single form, to one of many forms. 

49. O unimaginable one, obeisance to you, of the form of 
sound; obeisance to you who have become identical with the 
sacrificial offering of ghee, obeisance to the lord of the form of 
perfect knowledge, O lord, greater than Prakrti. 


1. Sanandana : belonged to the Sanakadi group and was the mental 
son of Brahma, having taken incarnation long before Brahma started his 
work of creation. 






454 


Brahma Purdna 


50. Though-one, you are stationed in five different forms 
viz—the Atman of Elements, the Atman of sense-organs, the 
Atman of Pradhana; the Atman (i.e. individual soul) and the 
supreme soul. 

51. Be pleased, O lord identical with all virtuous rites, 
O Mahesvara, O imperishable being amongst the perishable 
ones. You are praised with the conception of Brahma, Vi?nu 
and Siva. 

52. O deity whose form, nature, purpose and aim can¬ 
not be adequately expressed; O deity whose name cannot be 
specifically mentioned, I bow to you, the greatest lord. 

53. O lord, you are the unborn one. You are the greatest 
eternal Brahman without aberrations wherein there are no im¬ 
posed ideas of name, caste and the like. 

54. Since, without some sort of conception, no matter can 
be comprehended, you are being worshipped under the names: 
Krsna, Acyuta, Ananta and Visnu. 

55. O unborn lord, O soul of all, by means of these diffe¬ 
rent conceptions, you arc identical with Devas and the Uni¬ 
verse. O soul of the universe, you are devoid of differences 
and aberrations. In every object of the world there is nothing 
which is different from you. 

56-58. You are Brahma, Pasupati, Aryama, Vidhata, 
Dhata, lord of Devas, wind-god, fire-god, lord of waters, lord 
of wealth and annihilator. Although you are the one and only 
Being, you are differentiated through different Saktis and rule 
over the whole universe. In the form of a ray (?) you create 
and destroy the universe. O unborn lord, this universe is full 
of your attributes. Your greatest form is imperishable; it is 
expressed by the word c sat\ I bow into that deity of perfect 
knowledge, the existent arid the non-existent. Om obeisance to 
Vasudeva; obeisance to Samkar§ana; obeisance to Pradyumna; 
obeisance to Anuruddha”. 

Vyasa said : 

59. After eulogising Krsna thus under the water that 
scion of the family ofYadavas worshipped the lord of all by 
means of incense and flowers mentally conceived. 

60. After eschewing other objects, fixing the mind therein 





84.61-69 


455 

in the deity who had become identical with the Brahman and 
staying there for a long time he returned from Samadhi. 

61. Considering himself contented and blessed, O excellent 
brahmins, he came out of the waters of Yurauna and approached 
the chariot once again. 

62. There he saw Rama and Krsna seated as before. 
Krsna spoke thus to Akrura who was evidently surprised as 
was indicated by his eyes. 

Srikrsna said : 

63. O Akrura, what wonderful thing was seen by you 
within the waters of Yamuna ? Since your eyes are wide open 
due to surprise (I ask you thus). 

Akrura said : 

64. O Acyuta, here itself standing in front of me in its 
embodied form I see the same miracle as was seen by me in¬ 
side the water. 

65. This universe itself is a great wonderful form of yours, 
O noble Krsna. I had come into contact with you who are 
interested in miracles. 

66. But, of what use is this ? O slayer of Madhu, we shall 
go to Mathura. I am afraid of Kamsa. Fie upon one’s life if 
one has to sustain oneself by the doles offered by others. 

Vyasa said : 

67. After saying this, the scion of the family of Yadu 
drove those horses as swift as the wind. In the evening Akrura 
reached the city of Mathura. Observing the city of Mathura 
and looking at Krsna and Balarama he spoke this. 

Akrura said : 

68. You two of great vigour and prowess will go on foot. 

I shall alone go in with my chariot. You two should not go to 
the house of Vasudeva. It is for your sake that the old man is 
expelled by Kamsa. 

Vyasa said : 

69. After saying this Akrura entered Mathura. Balarama 




456 


Brahma Purdna 


and Krsna too entered the city and reached the Royal High¬ 
way. 

70. They were glanced at with delighted eyes by the 
citizens men and women. The two heroic boys went ahead 
sportingly like two elephant cubs. 

71. As they wandered here and there they saw a washer¬ 
man and dyer. They requested him for beautiful clothes of good 
colour. 


72. He was the special washerman of Kamsa. He was very 
arrogant because he had the special favour of Kamsa. He 
hurled many abuses against Balarama and Kesava. 

73. With a blow of his palm in anger, Krsna struck down 
the head of that wicked washerman and let it fail on the 
ground. 


74. After killing him and taking clothes from his house 
Krsna and Balarama, clad themselves in yellow and blue 
robes, joyously and went to the gardener’s abode. 

75. Seeing them with a wide gaping eyes, the gardener 
was struck with wonder and he thought mentally —“In which 
family are these two bom ?” 

76. On seeing those two charming boys clad in yellow and 
blue robes he resolved that they were two Devas who had 
come to the Earth. 

77. He was requested for flowers by those two boys whose 
faces beamed like full-blown lotuses. Thereupon, he supported 
himself on his hands and touched the ground with his head. 

78. That gardener who maintained himself by selling gar¬ 
lands spoke to them “O my lords, you two have come to my 
house with delighted gentle faces. I am blessed. I shall worship 

79. Then with his face beaming with delight he gave them 

w atever flowers they desired- He tempted them by offering 
them more. 6 


- The excellent gardener bowed to them again and 
ag am and gave them beautiful fragrant and pure flowers. 

1-85. Krsna was delighted and granted a boon to the 
g r ener gentle one, Sri (Goddess of glory) who is 
supported by me will never forsake you. O gentle one, you will 
ver ave oss o strength or of wealth. Your progeny, sons 




84.86—85.6 


457 


and" grandsons, will continue (to be born as long as the earth 
and sun last. After enjoying extensive pleasures, you will in 
the end attain my bliss due to my grace. You will then attain 
divine world. O gentle one, at all times your mind will dwell 
in virtue. The children born as your progeny will have longe¬ 
vity. Among your progeny there will never be calamities and 
faults. O highly blessed one, your family will last as long as 
the sun and moon last. 

86. After saying this, O excellent sages, Krsna came out of 
that house in the company of Balarama. He was duly wor¬ 
shipped by the gardener. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYFIVE 
Kariisa is slain 

Vyasa said : 

1. Thereafter, Krsna saw a hump-backed lady in the prime 
of her youth, coming along the royal high-way with the vessel 
of unguent in her hand. 

2. Krsna gracefully said to her :—“O lady with the eyes 
like the blue lotus, to whom is this unguent being taken by 
you ? Speak the truth. 

3. She was addressed by him with love. She too had the 
feelings of love towards Krsna. That hump-backed lady looked 
at him attentively and said gracefully. 

The hump-backed lady said : 

4. O loving one, why don’t you know me ? I have been 
employed by Kamsa in the task of preparing unguents. I am 
well known as Naikavakra. 

5. The unguent ground and pasted by anyone else is not 
conducive to the delight of Kamsa. I am highly favoured by 
him and I am given much wealth too. 

£rikr$na said : 

6. May this fragrant unguent beautiful and befitting kings, 
be given to us at least as much as will suffice our bodies. 




458 


Brahma Parana 


Vyasa said : 

7. On hearing that, she spoke to Kr?na with respect and 
eagerness “May it be taken.” She gave them unguent enough 
for their bodies. 

8. Embellished and smeared with the unguents, the two 
leading mainly ones shone like a white and a black cloud 
adorned with the rain-bow. 

9. Thereafter, Krsna who was well conversant with the 
mode of suggestive talks and hints, talked to her lovingly, 
caught hold of her chin with two of his fingers and raised it up. 

10. Krsna then pulled both of her legs and made her 
straight. With the body straightened she became the most 
excellent one among women. 

11. In a charming ajnd graceful manner she caught hold 
of Krsna by his robes and said in lingering words couched in 
love 

— c Come to my house’. 

12. “I will come to your house”, said Krsna to her and 
bade her farewell. Looking at Rama’s face he laughed aloud. 

13. With their bodies embellished and smeared with un¬ 
guents, clad in blue and yellow garments and with their hand¬ 
some features enhanced by garlands of flowers of various 
colours—the two went towards the chamber of bows. 

14-15. After occupying (the chamber) they asked the 
guards there, about the most excellent bow. When that was 
mentioned by the guards Krsna immediately took up that bow 
and bent it. As he was stringing it, the bow broke and made a 
loud report. The whole of Mathura was filled with that sound. 

16. When the bow was broken they were asked by the 
guards to explain. They hit the army of the guards and came 
out of the chamber. 

After getting information of the return of Akrura, and 
after hearing that a bow was broken, Kamsa said to Canura 
and Mustika. 

Kariisa said : 

18. The two cowherd boys have come. They are the 
destroyers of my life. Just in my presence they should be killed 
by you iii a wrestling bout. 




85.19-31 


459 


19. If they are destroyed in a mutual combat by you, I 
will be satisfied and will give you all desired benefits. This 
cannot be otherwise, O strong ones. 

20. Whether by just or unjust means, these enemies of 
mine should be killed by you. By their death the kingdom will 
be common to you both.” 

Vyasa said : 

21-23. After commanding the wrestlers thus, he called the 
mahout and told him loudly—“The intoxicated elephant 
Kuvalayaplda should be placed by you at the entrance to the 
assembly. With that those two cowherd lads who will be coming 
to the stage door for the purpose of wrestling, should be killed.” 
After commanding him also thus and seeing that all the cou¬ 
ches and cushioned seats had been brought, Karhsa whose 
death was imminent awaited sunrise. 

24. Then all the citizens occupied the common couches and 
seats and the kings occupied the royal couches and sofas along 
with their attendants. 

25. The wrestlers, umpires and judges were kept in the 
middle of the stage by Kamsa, very near him. Kamsa himself 
occupied a raised sofa. 

26. Separate couches, seats and platforms were assigned to 
the residents of the royal harem, the chief courtesans and the 
ordinary ladies of the city. 

27. Nandagopa and other cowherds were seated in their 
(specially reserved) couches. Akrura and Vasudeva occupied 
extremities of the platform. 

28. In the middle of the common ladies of the city was 
seated Devaki who was very fond of her son. Though it be the 
time of death, I shall see the face of my son. 

29-31. The instruments of music were played; Canura 
jumped and bounced frantically, the common people shouted 
“Ha Ha”, Mustika slapped and clapped his arms. After killing 
Kuvalayaplda who was driven against them by the Elephant 
driver, Balarama and Krsna entered the stage. Proudly and 
playfully they looked on, like two lions in the midst of deer. 
Their limbs had been smeared with the ichor and the blood of 





460 Brahma Purana 

elephant. The elephant’s tusks now became their excellent 
weapons. 

32. Afterwards there was a tumultuous loud sound all over 
the stage, along with the wonder of the people—“O this is 
Krsna. O this is Balarama.” 

33. “This is the boy by whom the terrible ogress Putana 
had been killed; he by whom the cart had been upset and the 
pair of Arjuna trees were broken.” 

34. “This is the boy who mounted the serpent Kaliya and 
danced; this is he by whom the great mountain Govardhana 
was lifted up and held for seven nights.” 

35. “Here is seen that Krsna the noble lord, by whom the 
wicked asuras Arista, Dhenuka and Kesin were playfully slain.” 

36. “This lad of great arms is Balarama, his elder brother. 
He sportingly goes ahead delighting the minds and eyes of the 
womenfolk.” 

37. “It is he who is mentioned by wisemen who survey the 
topics in the Puranas as follows “Gopala will redeem the entire 
Yadava family”. 

38. “He is that part of Visnu which has incarnated on the 
Earth; of Visnu who is identical with everyone; of Visnu who 
is the source of origin of everything. Indeed he is the dispeller 
of burden of the Earth”. 

39. When Rama and Krsna were described thus, the 
breasts of DevakI instantaneously exuded milk due to affection. 

40. On seeing his sons, Vasudeva felt as if he was witnessing 
a great festival. Due to delight he dispelled the old age that had 
descended on him. 

41. The ladies of the royal harem and the ordinary ladies 

of the city made their eyes wider. They never ceased from look¬ 
ing at him. 

The woman said : 

4 2-50. O friends, see the face of Krsna with the eyes resem- 
mg t e otus. It is embellished by drops of sweat due to his 
exertion in his battle with the elephant. It is like the full blown 
autummal lotus with the snow drops clinging to it. 

eyes ’ ma y your birth be made fruitful (by looking at 



85.51-57 


461 


O beautiful lady, may the chest of this boy he looked at. It 
has attacked even imperishable beings. (?) ; it is marked b 

Snvatsa scar; it is the abode of universe and it is competent to 
destroy enemies. May his pair of arms too be seen. O immature 
lady, don’t you see this Balarama whose, face is white as the 
lotus stalk ? He has come here with a blue garment. Balarama 
is put on an equal footing with Mustika who swaggers as well 
as with Canura, O friend; Just, see this, please. O friends see 
Krsna approaches Canura for a mutual combat. Are there no 
elderly persons here who will do what is proper ? Where is Krsna 
of a very tender body who is just approaching his youth ? Where 
is that great Asura whose body is as hard and tough as an ada¬ 
mant? The two fresh youths stay on the stage with their grace¬ 
ful charms. But the asura-like wrestlers, Canura and Mustika 
are excessively terrible. It is highly improper on the part of 
judges and umpires to function at this wrestling bout because 
an unequal fight between a boy and a strong person has been 
arranged for (?) by these umpires. 

Vyasa said : 

51-52. Even as the womenfolk of the city were talking like 
this, lord Krsna generated much delight in them. He entered 
the stage making the ground quake. Balarama clapped his arms 
and bounced gracefully. The fact that the ground did not 
crumble, down at every step was a great wonder. 

53. Krsna of unmeasured valour fought with Canura. 
Mustika the asura who was an expert in wrestling, fought with 
Balarama. 

54-55. Krsna fought with Canura. The duel was very terri¬ 
ble and awful without any weapon being used. Other recourses 
were Sannipatas (causing the opponent to fall down), Avadhti- 
tas (Shaking up), Ksepanas (Hurlings), Mustis (Fisting) 
Kilavajranipatana (hitting with the elbows and knees as though 
with a thunderbolt ?) and neat thrusts with the feet). 

56-57. (Defective) In the course of that festival of assemblies 
they had to show their strength. The more Canura fought with 
Krsna, the loss of vital breath he sustained was the more. He 
did not get any kinsman to encourage him. Krsna, identical 
with the universe fought with him playfully. 




462 


Brahma Purana 


58-63. On seeing the decreasing power of Canura and the 
increasing power of Krsna, Karhsa was dejected and angry. To 
get some respite the infuriated Karhsa • waved his hand and 
stopped instrumental music. When thus Mrdangas (drums) and 
other instruments were suspended, the instruments of Devas in 
the sky, were played instantaneously. “Be victorious, O Krsna 
kill Canura, O Kesava. Devas who remained hidden to the view 
eulogised thus in their delight. After playing with Canura for 
some time, Krsna lifted him up and whirled him in his attempt to 
kill him. After whirling the asura wrestler in the sky for a 
hundred times, the conqueror of foes dashed him on the ground 
(though he had died even in the atmosphere itself. When he 
was hit on the ground Canura’s body broke into a hundred pieces. 

64-68. He made the Earth marshy and slushy with the flow 
of blood. 

At that time Balarama of great strength fought with Mustika 
in the same manner as Krsna fought with the asura Canura. He 
too hit his head and chest with his fist and knee. He threw him 
on the ground, and killed him. Thereafter, with a flow of his 
left fist Krsna made Tosalaka of great strength, the king of 
wrestlers, fall on the ground. When the wrestler Canura was 
killed, when Mustika had been struck down and when Tosalaka 
was slain the other wrestlers ran away. Then Krsna and Sarhkar- 
sana jumped and bounced on the stage. 

69. They dragged other cowherds of the same age to them¬ 
selves in their delight. With his eyes turned red Kamsa spoke 
to his men who had gathered in large. 

70. - Let these two cowherds be forcibly removed from the 
the assembled group. Let the sinful Nanda be seized and bound 
with fetters. 

71. Let Vasudeva also be punished in the same manner as 
one not old. Let all these cowherds too who vaunt and swagger 
along with Krsna, be punished suitably. 

72-77. Let their cows and wealth be taken away ? 

When Kamsa was commanding thus Krsna laughed. With 
great speed he jumped on to the couch and seized Kamsa. 
When he caught hold of his hair his crown dropped down. Krsna 
felled Karhsa on the ground and himself fell over him. Kamsa, 
son of Ugrasena, was deprived of his vital breath as Krsna with 




85.78-87 


463 


his enormous weight fell on him. Being the support of entire 
universe Krsna had that enormous weight. Catching hold of 
the hair of the dead Kamsa, Krsna of great strength dragged 
the body of Kamsa to the middle of the stage. It was itself very 
great and weighty. A weighty thing fell over it. Further it was 
dragged. Thus Kamsas’s body was disfigured due to the speed 
activity of noble Kr?na. When Kamsa was thus killed, his 
brother came there furiously. 

78-80. Sunama (i.e. the brother of Kamsa) was playfully 
thrown on the ground by Balarama. On seeing the king of 
Mathura contemptuously killed by Krsna, there was a great hue 
and cry everywhere around the stage. 

Immediately Krsna of great arms accompanied by Balarama 
touched the feet ofVasudeva andDevakl. Vasudeva andDevakl 
lifted him up and they themselves bowed to him and stood 
steady as they remembered his words at the time of his nativity. 

Vasudeva said : 

81. Be pleased, O lord of Devas, O most excellent one, O 
lord, O Kesava, favouring us you have lifted us up. 

82. Since after being propitiated by me the lord has incar¬ 
nated in my house for destroying the wicked ones, thereby our 
race is sanctified. 

83. You remain within living beings. You are stationed 
within living beings, O soul of everyone, it is from you that 
the past and future function, invariably. 

84. O Acyuta, identical with Devas, O incomprehensible 
and unimaginable one, you are worshipped in the course of a 
Yajna. O lord of Yajnas, you are the Yajna and the performer 
of Yajna. 

85. O son ofDevakl, the fact that out of affection, my 
mind is full of vague notions in respect of you is great decep¬ 
tion. 

86. You are the maker of all living beings. You have 
neither beginning nor end. Where is the tongue pertaining to me, 
a mere human being, which says— c O son’. 

87. By what expedient, excepting Maya, will that person 
be born of us, O lord of the Universe, that person from whom 
all this universe has evolved ? 




464 


Brahma Purdna 


88. How can that lord be borne by a female human being, 
that lord in whom the entire universe consisting of mobile 
and immobile beings lias been established ? How can he be 
made to lie down in the womb or in the lap ? 

89. O great lord, be pleased. Protect the universe. Since 
you are having the partial incarnation you are not my son, O 
soul of the great lord, O lord of the universe, why do you delude 
the mind of every one from Brahman to an ordinary tree. 

90. My eyes had been deluded by Maya. I had the feeling 
“Here is my son.” Much afraid of Kamsaat that time, you were 
taken to the cowherds’ colony. O lord of cows, you entered 
then my intellect, even as I was afraid and agitated due to the 
enemies. 

91. You are Visnu, O lord, you have attained what cannot 
be attained by Rudras, Maruts, Asvins and Indra for rendering 
help to the worlds. Our great delusion had surrounded us 
hitherto. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYSIX 
The Son of Sandipani restored 

1-5. On seeing DevakI and Vasudevaas persons who had 
attained perfect knowledge by annihilating Karmans, Kfsna 
sretched his Vaisnavi Maya once again in order to fascinate the 
multitude of Yadus. He said “O mother, O father, for a long 
time Samkarsana and I were eager to see you but we could not 
because we were afraid of KLamsa. Now after a long time you 
are seen by us. 

That portion of one’s life which is spent without worshipping 
one’s parents is indeed futile in the case of good sons ? 

O father, if an embodied being performs the worship of pre¬ 
ceptors, Devas, brahmins and parents, his life becomes fruitful. 
Hence, O father, all our defaults and transgressions should be 
excused. We had been overwhelmed by Kamsa’s prowess and 
exploits. Hence, we were helpless and at the mercy of 
others. 









86.6-17 


465 


Vyasa said : 

6. After saying this, both of them bowed down to the 

elderly persons of Yadus. After worshipping them duly they 
made them contented. 7 

7. Then Karhsa’s wives surrounded the dead body of 
Kamsa and lamented. His mothers too were fully overwhelmed 
by sorrow and misery. 

8. They were upset in various ways. They were agitated 
due to repentance. Krsna consoled them. His own eyes became 
turbid due to tears. 

9. He then released Ugrasena from prison. He crowned 
Ugrasena whose son had been killed. He crowned him in his 
own kingdom. 

10. After being crowned in the kingdom he, the lion among 
the descendants of Yadu clan, performed the obsequies of his 
son as well as of others who were killed there. 

11-13. As he concluded the post-funeral rites and re-occu¬ 
pied the throne, Krsna said—“O lord, unhesitatingly command 
us in regard to any task. As a result of the curse of Yayati this 
family does not deserve a kingdom. Still now, when I am ready 
as your servant, you can command even Devas, why not 
kings ?” After saying this to Ugrasena, lord Krsna who had 
assumed human form for a specific task said to Vayu in the 
human speech. 


Srikr$na said : 

14-15. O Vayu, go to Indra and tell him thus—“O Indra, 
enough of your pride and arrogance. Let your Assembly hall 
named Sudharma be given to Ugrasena by you. It is Krsna who 
says—This excellent jewel as befitting a king, this Assembly 
hall is named Sudharma. It is proper for Yadus to sit in it”. 


Vyasa said : 

16. Thus urged, the wind god went to Indra and spoke 
everything to him. Indra gave the assembly hall Sudharma to 
Vayu. 

17. All those leading Yadus, having Krsna’s arms for 
support enjoyed that divine assembly hall decorated with jewels 
and brought over there by Vayu. 




466 


Brahma Parana 


18-19. The two heroic lads, Balarama and Krsna had 

already acquired perfect knowledge. They were perfectly wise. 

But these excellent scions of the family of Yadu were desirous 
of maintaining the utility of the contact of disciples and pre¬ 
ceptors. Accordingly they went to Sandipani of the spiritual 
lineage of Kasya and resident of the city of Avanti for learning 
the use of weapons. 

20. They accepted his discipleship. They were duly en¬ 
gaged in serving the preceptor. To all the people they thus 
practically demonstrated their proper conduct. 

21. Within sixtyfour days and nights they learned the 
science of Archery alongwith its secrets and digests. O brah¬ 
mins, it was miraculous indeed. 

22. Considering their super-human activity that could not 
at all have been imagined (in persons of their age) Sandipani 
thought that the moon and the sun had come to him. 

23. The moment they were uttered, (the two brothers) 
learned the Mantras of all miraculous missiles. They said— 
“What monetary gift should be paid as the preceptor’s fees? 
That may be mentioned.” 

24. Observing their ability to act beyond the pale of 
sense-organs the highly intelligent preceptor requested (the 
resuscitation) of his son who was dead in the holy centre of 
Prabhasa on the shore of the briny sea. 

25. Equipped with their arms they went to the briny 
ocean. They said to the sea—“May the son of our preceptor be 
restored”. 

26-27. With palms joined in reverence and having the 
vessel of Arghya with him, the great ocean said—“The spn of 
Sandipani has n. t been abducted by me. An asura named 
Pancajana, assumed the form of a conch and abducted the 
child. O slayer of Asuras, he is staying in my waters.” 

28. On being told thus, Kr§na went inside the water, killed 
Paficajana and took the excellent conch originating from his 
bones. 

29-32. The conch Pancajanya’s sound reduced the 
strength of asuras, increased the refulgence of Devas and 
destroyed evil. Krsna and the powerful Balarama blew the 
conch Paficajanya and went to the city of Yaraa. There they 




87 . 1-8 


467 


conquered Yama, son of Vivasvat and regained the boy who 
was in the tortures of hell, who now got back a body as before. 
Krsna and Balarama, the most excellent among the strong ones, 
gave the boy to his father. Balarama and Krsna returned to 
Mathura protected by Ugrasena. They delighted men and 
women there. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYSEVEN 
The Onslaught of Jardsandha 

Vyasa said : 

1-2. Kamsa of great strength had married the two daugh¬ 
ters of Jarasandha named Asti and Prapti. O brahmins, Jara- 
sandha the powerful king of Magadha came therein great fury 
surrounded by a great army. It was to kill Krsna together with 
the Yadavas that he came there, for Krsna had killed the hus¬ 
band of his two daughters. 

3. The lord of Magadha attacked the vicinity of Mathura. 
He was accompanied by twenty three Aksauhinls 1 of the army. 

4. Surrounded by only a limited number of soldiers, the 
powerful Balarama and Krsna came out of their city and 
fought with the strong soldiers. 

5. Thereafter, O excellent sages, Balarama and Krsna of 
great strength thought of taking up their ancient weapons. 

6-8. The discus, the sarnga bow, two quivers with in¬ 
exhaustible supply of arrows and the iron club named Kaumo- 
daki—all these came from the firmament to those heroes. 

The ploughshare came into the hand of Balarama from the 
sky. O brahmins, it resembled the Sarhvarta fire. So also the 
Musala (iron-club) called Sunanda came over to them. 

In the battle, the heroic lads Balarama and Krsna defeated 
the king of Magadha together with his army. 

1. An army consisting of 21,870 elephants, 21,870 chariots, 65,610 
horses, 109,350 feet is called Ak?auhini. 





468 


Brahma Purana 


9. O excellent brahmins, although Jarasandha of evil 
design was conquered, Krsna did not consider him defeated 
because he returned alive. 

10. O excellent brahmins, Jarasandha came again accom¬ 
panied by his huge army. He was conquered by Balarama and 
Krsna. He fled from the battlefield. 

11. Thus, the arrogant king of Magadha fought eighteen 
battles with the descendants ofYadu led by Krsna. 

12. Although Jarasandha had more armies he was defeat¬ 
ed by the heroes of Yadu clan who had only a small army. He 
was defeated in all battles and he fled on all occasions. 

13. The fact that the army ofYadavas won all times indi¬ 
cates the greatness of discus-bearing Visnu (i.e. Krsna) 

14. It is a mere sport on the part of the lord of universe to 
discharge many forms of weapons on the enemies because the 
lord had human attributes and activities. 

15. In fact with his mere mental thought he can create and 
annihilate the universe. What detailed attempt need he make in 
destroying the enemy’s sides ? 

16. Still the lord follows the activities of human beings. 
Allying himself with the strong persons he fights with the 
weaker ones. 

17-18. He uses the four-strategic expedients such as peace¬ 
ful overtures,- gifts, threats or creating dissention in enemies 
ranks and the actual striking. In some places he resorts to 
fleeing. The sport of the lord of universe functions according 
to his will. He imitates the activities of embodied human 
beings. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYEIGHT 
Mucvkundcis Prayer 

Vyasa said : 

1. O brahmins, Syala called a brahmin of the cowherds 
colony (named) Gargya by the (ignoble remark) Sandha 





88.2-14 


469 


(impotent) in the presence of Yadavas and all the Yadavas 
laughed at it. 

2. Thereupon, the infuriated brahmin went to Southern 
territory and performed a penance. He was desirous of a son 
who would be a terror to the Yadavas. 

Propitiating lord Siva he ate powdered iron. The lord 
was pleased with him in the twelfth year and he granted him a 
boon. 

4. The \ avanesa (a Greek King) who had no son honour¬ 
ed him. As a result of sexual intercourse withhis wife a son of 
fiery splendour was born to him. 

5. He was named Kalayavana. The Greek king crowned 
the boy who had a chest as hard as the adamantine tip and 
went to the forest. 

6. Proud and arrogant by virtue of his prowess, he asked 
about the powerful kings on the Earth. Narada told him about 
the Yadavas. 

7. He was surrounded by crores and thousands of crores 
ofMlecchas (alien tribes) who were richly equipped with ele¬ 
phants, horses and chariots. He made an elaborate attempt 
thus. 

8. O sages, he was ceaselessly thinking of the Yadavas 
everyday. He became very furious with them. He marched 
against the city of Mathura. 

9-12. Kfsna thought thus:—“On observing the Yadava 
army destroyed by Kalayavana, the king of Magadha will 
strike at us. The powerful Kalayavana will destroy the ex¬ 
hausted army of the king of Magadha. Thus two types of cala¬ 
mity are likely to befall us. Hence I shall make a very invincible 
fort for my clan. Even ladies can fight from within it. What 
then about the 1 eading Vrsnis ? May not the wicked enemies 
harm the Yadavas much when I am inebriate, erring, sleeping 
or out of the territory.” 

13. After thinking thus Kjrsna begged of the great ocean a 
piece twelve Yojana. He created the city of Dvaraka there. 

14. It had great parks and outer walls. It was beautified 
by hundreds of lakes. It had hundreds of thick ramparts. It 
resembled Indra’s city Amaravatl. 






470 


Brahma Purana 


15: Lord Krsna brought the people of Mathura there. 
When Kalayavana was expected he alone went to Mathura. 

16. When the army (of Kalayavana) encamped outside 
Mathura, he came out without any weapon and the Yavana 
saw him. 

17-18. Knowing that he was Vasudcva, the king too with 
his arms alone for weapons, followed the lord who is not attain¬ 
ed even by the minds of great Yogins. Followed by him 
Kysna entered a cave where king Mucukunda was lying asleep. 

19. The Yavana also entered the cave. He saw a man lying 
on a bed. Thinking him to be Krsna, the wicked Yavana kicked 
him with his foot. 

20. The moment the Yavana was seen by him he was con¬ 
sumed by the fire of anger. O sages, he was instantaneously 
reduced to ashes. 

21. That king had taken part in the battle between 
Devas and Asuras and defeated Asuras. He had to remain for 
many nights without sleep and so was distressed. He requested 
Suras for the boon of slumber. 

22. He was also informed by Devas thus—“He who wakes 
you up when you are asleep will soon be reduced to ashes by 
the fire issuing from your body. 

23. After reducing that sinner he looked at Krsna and 
said—“Who are you ?” Krsna said : “I am born of the lunar 
race. 

24-25: I am the son of Vasudeva, the scion of the family 
of Yadu”. 

On hearing it Mucukunda remembered the words of the 
elderly Gargya. After recollecting everything he bowed down 
to Krsna, the lord of all .identical with everyone. He said— 
“You are the greatest Isvara. You are born of Visnu’s part. 

26. Formerly, this was mentioned by Gargya—Hari will 
take birth in the line ofYadu towards the end of Dvapara Yuga 
in the twentyeighth cycle of four Yugas. 

27-30. Therefore, there is no doubt at all. You are the 
one come to me. You are the one that render help to all men. I 
am unable to endure your great splendour. He uttered words 
unto him so bold and resonant as the rumbling sound of the 
rain-bearing cloud, to him who was petted and fondled by you. 








88.31-42 


471 

However, in the great battle between Devas and Asuras the 
heroic Devas and Asuras were incompetent to endure your 
great refulgence. I too am unable to bear that refulgence You 
are the greatest refuge to the creature that has fallen in the 
ocean of worldly existence. You are the sole dispeller of agony 
of those who resort to you. Be pleased. Remove my inauspici- 
ousness. 

31. You are everything viz-oceans, mountains, rivers, 
forests, Earth, sky, wind, water, fire, you are the highest being. 

32-35. You arc the one devoid of sound etc., the unageing 
one devoid of birth and destruction. All beings attain their 
scries of births from you who pervade everything. The immortal 
beings, Pitps (Manes) Yaksas, Gandharvas, Raksasas, Siddhas, 
Apsaras—attain their births from you—men, animals, birds, 
reptiles, deer, trees, and the time-scale divided into past, present 
and future—everything mobile and immobile, all those things 
with or without forms, those which are gross and subtle—O 
creator of the universe, you alone arc all those things; there is 
nothing without you. 

36. O lord, no peace or happiness was attained by me 
anywhere; by me who wandered amidst the cycles of worldly 
existence and who had been attacked by the three forms of 
scorching agonies. 

37. O lord, miseries alone were taken up by me as 
pleasures, like the mirages that are understood as water-reser¬ 
voirs. They were conducive to my agony alone. 

38-39. Kingdom, Earth, army, treasury, allies, sons, wives, 
attendants, and the objects of senses beginning with sound—all 
these, O unchanging one, were taken by me to be the cause of 
happiness. O lord of Devas, in effect they were sources of dis¬ 
tress, of a scorching nature. 

40. O lord, even Devas attaining the goal of the common 
world became desirous of help from me. Where is permanent 
happiness (available) ? 

41. Without propitiating you, the basis and source of 
origin of all the worlds, by whom is permanent happiness 
attained? 

42. People whose minds are deluded try your Maya attain 






472 Brahma Purdna 

birth, death, old age etc. of a sinful nature. They see the King 
of the dead in the middle. 

43-45. Then those men are bound by means of hundreds of 
nooses in hells. They attain very terrible misery. This is your 
cosmic form. I am very much sensuous. I am deluded by your 
Maya, O great lord, I wander amidst deep pits of ‘my-ness 5 . 

I have sought refuge in you. You who have no other side 
(? a vast one), the primordial Isa, than whom there is no 
other greater region. My mind is distressed due to exhaustion 
and agony of worldly existence. I am desirous of attaining the 
transformed (?) shelter, being disgusted with worldly affairs.” 


CHAPTER EIGHTYNINE 
Balarama returns to the cowherds' colony 

Vydsa said : 

1. Eulogised thus by that intelligent Mucukunda, the lord 
of all living beings, the lord who has no beginning or death 
spoke thus. 

Srikrsna said : 

2. O lord of men, go to divine worlds as desired by you. 
You will be strengthened by my grace and your prosperity and 
prowess will be unimpeded. 

3. After enjoying the great divine pleasures, you will be 
born in a great family. By my favour you will be able to remem¬ 
ber your previous births. Thereafter, you will attain salvation. 

Vydsa said : 

4. Thus blessed by the lord the king bowed to Acyuta; 
the lord of the worlds came out of the cave. Then' he saw short- 
statured men; 

5. The king understood that the Kaliyuga had arrived. He 
went to the abode of Nara and Narayana in order to perform 
penance (on the mountain) Gandhamidana. 





6. Slaying the enemy by means of a stratagem, Krsna 
captured his army shining with horses, elephants and chariots 

after arriving at Mathura. 

7. After bringing it to Dvaravatihe offered it toUgrasena. 
(Thereby) the army of the Yadus had no fear of the onslaught 
of enemies. 

8. O leading brahmins, having subdued all quarrels Bala- 
deva became eager to see his kinsmen and so went to the cow¬ 
herds’ colony of Nanda. 

9. As before, the conqueror of enemies spoke to the 
cowherds and cowherdlasses with affection and respect. 

10. He was embraced by them. He embraced some of 
them. With some cowherds and cowherdesses he cracked 
jokes. 

11. The cowherds spoke many pleasing words to Balarama. 
Some cowherdesses spoke joyously in their love and others 
spoke with malice. 

12. Other cowherdesses asked thus “Is Krsna the lover 
of womenfolk of the city happy ? Is he agitated by stirring 
emotions of love. 

13. Does not Krsna whose affection is momentary, deride 
our activities and increase the good fortune and pride of the 
ladies of Mathura. 

14. Does Krsna ever remember our following him and 
singing alongwith him ? Will he come here at least once to 
see his mother ? 

15. Or, of what avail is this talk regarding him? May 
other stories be mentioned, for without us his (life) is possible 
and without (him) our (life) is possible. 

16. Father, mother, brother, husband and kinsmen who 
is not abandoned by us for his sake. (But) he load been un¬ 
grateful. 

17. Still, does Krsna ever (mention) anything about his 
coming here ? Nectar-like words must be uttered by you. 

18. He appears to be devoid of love towards us because 
his rnindis attached to the ladies of the city. It seems it will 
be difficult to sec him.” 





474 


Brahma Pur ana 


Vyasa said : 

19. He (Balarama) was called (by the cowherdlasses) by 
the words Krsna, Damodara etc. The cowherdlasses whose 
minds were attracted by Krsna laughed in good tunc. 

20. The cowherdlasses were consoled by Rama through 
gentle and sweet messages of Krsna couched in loving emo¬ 
tions and devoid of arrogance. The notes were as sweet as 
honey. 

21. As before Balarama continued funny stories and jokes 
with the cowherds whose minds were attracted by Krsna, the 
cowherds who were the residents of Vraja. 


CHAPTER NINETY 
Balarama's sport with Ploughshare 

Vyasa said : 

1-2. The noble lord Balarama was thus roaming about in 
the forest alongwith the cowherds. He was Sesa the supporter 
of the Earth, who had assumed the false guise of a human 
being. He had accomplished great tasks. It was for fulfilling 
a great task that he had taken up this incarnation. Hence, 
for the purpose of his enjoyment Varuna spoke to Varuni 
(wine). 

Varuna said : 

3. O wine, you have always been liked by (Balarama) 
of great prowess, O auspicious one, go now for his joy and 
enjoyment of pleasures. 

Vyasa said : 

4. Thus advised by him Varuni (wine) stationed herself 
in the hollow of a Kadamba tree growing on-the banks of 
Yamuna in Vrndavana. 

5. Roaming about that spot Balarama inhaled the inten- 
sive odour of wine. After smelling it he experienced the delight 
that he previously used to have in wine. 




90.6-18 


475 


6. O sages, thereafter, Balarama saw a current of liquor 
suddenly falling from Kadamba. He derived great joy there¬ 
from. 

7. He drank it joyously in the company of cowherds and 
cowlici desses while experts in songs and instrumental music 
sang elegantly. 

8. Shining with the pearl-like drops of sweat due to 
excessive heat and fatigue he became agitated and said - ;t O 
Yamuna, come hither. I wish to take my bath”. 

9. The river disregarded those words of inebriated person. 
She did not approach him. The infuriated Balarama (there¬ 
upon) seized his ploughshare. 

10. Agitated due to inebriation he caught hold of her by 
the tip of his ploughshare - “O evil-minded one, won’t you 
come, won’t you come ? Then go elsewhere as you please”. 

11. Dragged by him suddenly the river left her usual path 
and flooded the forest where Balarama was present. 

12. She approached him in an embodied form. Due to 
fear her eyes were agitated. She said to him “O you having 
lionclub as your weapon, be pleased, leave me off”. 

13. He said “If you disregard me in spite of my heroism 
and strength I shall split you into a thousand bits with the 
blows of my ploughshare”. 

Vyasa said : 

14. When he said thus, he was propitated by the river. 
When the ground there was flooded, Balarama released 
Yamuna. 

15-16. Splendour came to him in the forest when he had 
his bath. Laksm! took with her a blue lotus as his ornament, 
an ear-ring, a garland of never-fading lotus flowers sent bj 
Varuna and two blue cloths having the lustre of the sea and 
gave these presents to him. 

17. Having aborned himself with the blue lotus, embelli¬ 
shing himself with the beautiful ear-ring and clad in blue 
garments, the glorious one shone with splendour. 

18. Thus embellished, Rama sported there in the cow¬ 
herds’ colony. After two months he went to Dvaraka. 




476 


Brahma Pur ana 


19. Balarama married Revatl the daughter of king 
Raivata. Two sons, Nisatha and Ulumuka were born of her. 


CHAPTER NINETYONE 
Return of Pradyvmna 

Vydsa said : 

1. Bhismaka was the king of Kundina in the realm of 
Vidarbha. His son was Rukmin and his daughter was Rukmini. 

2. Krsna loved Rukmini and the lady of beautiful smiles 
loved him in return. Due to hatred, Rukmin did not give her 
to the discus-bearing lord. 

3. Urged by Jarasandha and Rukmin together, Bhismaka 
of great exploit gave Rukmini to Sisupala. 

4. Then for the purpose of marriage the kings led by 
Jarasandha, and Sisupala went to Kundina the city of 
Bhismaka. 

5. Surrounded by Balarama and other scions of the Yadu, 
Krsna went to Kundina to witness the marriage of Sisupala, 
the king of Cedi. 

6-12. On the eve of marriage day Krsna abducted that 
virgin even as Rama and other kinsmen were opposed to it. 
Then the glorious Paundraka, Dantavaktra, Viduratha, 
Si su pal a, Jarasandha, Salva and other kings became infuriat¬ 
ed. Allying themselves with Balarama and other leading 
scions of the family of Yadu they made earnest attempts to 
kill Krsna but they were defeated. Taking the vow - “Without 
killing Krsna in the battle I shall not re-enter Kundina”, 
Rukmin rushed at Krsna to kill him. After killing his army 
fully equipped with elephants, horses, foot-soldiers and 
chariots the discus-bearing lord playfully hurled him on to 
the ground. 

After defeating Rukmin Krsna married Rukmini duly in 
accordance with the injunctions regarding Raksasa type of 
marriage.The valorous Pradyumna, apart incarnation of cupid, 




91.13-24 


477 


was born of her. Sambara kidnapped him but he killed 
Sambara. 

The sages said : 

13. How was that heroic one kidnapped by Sambara and 
how was Sambara killed by him ? O highly intelligent one, 
narrate this divine anecdote to me. 

Vyasa said : 

14. On the sixth day after his birth, O brahmins, Kala- 
sambara kidnapped Pradyumna from the lying-in-chamber 
thinking—“O this one will be my killer”. 

15. Taking the boy with him he hurled him into the briny 
sea, infested with crocodiles, the awful abode of sparks that 
abounded in eddies and whirlpools generated by billows. 

16. As the boy fell down there a fish caught hold of him. 
Though burned by its gastric fire the boy did not die. 

17. O brahmins, this fish alongwith other fishes was caught 
by fishermen and offered to Sambara the most excellent one 
among the Asuras. 

18. His wife named Mayavati, the uncensured queen of 
his household, supervised over the work of cooks. 

19. When the belly of the fish was ripped open she saw 
an excessively splendid boy who was the first shooting sprout 
of the tree of cupid that had been burned. 

20. “Who is this ? How did he happen to come into the 

belly of the fish ?” 

Narada spoke to her 

Narada said : 

21-22. This is the son of Kfsna abducted from the lying 
in-chamber by Sambara who is capable of creating and anni¬ 
hilating the worlds. He was cast off into the ocean, was 
swallowed by a fish and now he has come under your control. 
O lady of good eyebrows, look after this jewel of a man 

confidently. 

Vyasa said : 

23-24. Informed thus by Narada she looked after the boy. 






478 Brahma Purana 

Ever since the boyhood of the child she was fascinated by his 
excelling handsome features and overwhelmed by excess of 
love. O excellent brahmins, when he was embellished by 
extensive youthful features, that lady of graceful elephantine 
gait, became very much attached to him. 

25. Mavavati taught all the Mayas (illusory tricks) to 
the noble Pradyumna who was befitting her and in whom she 
had fixed her heart and the eyes. The lotus-eyed son of 
Krsna told her who was attached to him. 

Pradyumna said : 

26-31, Setting aside the emotions of a mother why do you 
behave like this in an entirely different manner ? . 


Vyatsa said : 

She told him - ct You are not my son. Kalasambara kid¬ 
napped you, the son of Krsna. You were cast off into the ocean. 
You were obtained by me from the belly of a fish. Your mother 
is crying now but your beloved is extremely fond of you”. 


Vyasa said : 


Thus informed Pradyumna challenged Sambara for a fight. 
With his mind turned turbulent due to fury the powerful one 
fought. After killing the entire army of that asura, Pradyumna, 
son of Krsna passed over seven Mayas and employed the 
eighth one too. With that Maya he killed Sambara. 

Then he returned to the city of his father accompanied 
by her. 

32. On seeing him present in the harem accompanied by 
Mayavatl, Krsna’s wives had delightful ideas. The uncensured 
lady Rukrainl said with her eyes fixed on him with affection. 

Rukmini said : 


33. This is the son of a fortunate lady. He is in the 

res ness o is youth. If my son Pradyumna were alive he 
would be of this age. 

3 \ °, my bel ° ved child, your mother is fortunate who-' 
ever she be, she is embellished by you. Or, (considering 




91.35—92.2 


479 


from the way) my affection turns and from your physical 
features, it it clear that you are Krsna’s son. 


Vyasa said : 


35. In the meantime, Narada came there along with 
Krsna. Delighted he said to the gentle lady RukminI who was 
moving about in the harem : 

Srikrsna said : 

36. O lady of fine eyebrows, this is your son who has 
come here after killing Sambara by whom he had been 
abducted from your lying-in-chamber when he was but an 
infant boy. 

37. This Mayavatl is the chaste wife of your son. She is 
not the wife of Sambara. May the reason thereof be heard. 

38. O RukminI, when Cupid was killed, his wife 
eagerly waiting for his nativity, deluded Sambaraby assuming 
an illusory form. 

39. In the course of enjoyment of conjugal and other 
pleasures, this lady of charming eyes showed only the splendid 
illusory form to the asura. 

40-42. Kama has incarnated as your son. This is Rati 
his beloved wife. You need have no doubt about this. This 
is your splendid daughter-in-law. 

Vyasa said : 


Then RukminI and Kesava were fully delighted. The 
entire city said-’“Well done, well done” On seeing RukminI 
who was rejoiced by her long-lost son, every citizen of Dvara- 


vatl was surprised. 


CHAPTER NINETYTWO 
Rukmin is slain 


Vvasa said : 






480 


Brahma Pur aria 


She gave birth to a daughter Carumatl also. 

3-5. Krsna had seven other splendid wives. They were: 
Kalindl, Mitravinda, Satya the daughter of Nagnajit, the 
gentle lady Jambavatl who was always contented, RohinI 
another virtuous daughter of Madra king with good conduct, 
Satyabhama the daughter of Satrajit and Laksmana of sweet 
and beautiful smiles. The discus-bearing lord had sixteen 
thousand other wives. 

6-7. Pradyumna of great vigour married the splendid 
daughter of Rukmin in a Svayamvara ceremony. She loved the 
son of Hari. Aniruddha of great strength and exploits was born 
of her. He was an ocean of prowess and a suppressor of enemies 
but he was held (treacherously in Mahabharata) war. 

8. Krsna chose the granddaughter of Rukmin as wife unto 
his grandson. Although Rukmin vied and contended with 
Krsna he gave her to his daughter’s son (i. e. Aniruddha) 

9. O brahmins, to attend her marriage Rama and other 
descendants of Yadu went to Rukmin’s city named Bhojakata, 
along, with Lord Krsna. 

10. After the marriage of noble son of Pradyumna was 
concluded, Kalinga king and others spoke these words to Rukmin. 

Kalinga king and others said-. 

11. Balarama is not perfectly conversant with the game of 
dice; his indulgence in it is however, very great. Hence, O 
extremely lustrous one, we shall conquer him in the game of 
dice alone. 

Vyasa said : 


12. So be it ’ said Rukmin who possessed great strength, 
to those kings. He played the game of dice with Rama, in the 


assembly. 




14. Then Rukmin the most excellent 


was desirous of victory. 



92.15-24 


481 

15. Then, O brahmins, exhibiting all his teeth, the foolish 
overlord of Kalinga laughed at Bala. The haughty Rukmin 
spoke then: 

Rukmin said : 

16. O members of the assembly, this Balarama devoid of 
learning has been defeated by me in the game of dice. He is 
not conversant with either the manner of fighting or the lore of 
the game. 

Vydsa said : 

17. On seeing the king of Kalinga with the teeth in his 
mouth fully exhibited, and Rukmin indulging in harsh words, 
Balarama became infuriated. 

18. With his mind full of fury Balarama put up the stake at 
a crore of gold coins. Rukmin too accepted it: He threw the 
dice for that purpose. 

19. Baladevawon the stake. He said to him loudly “This 
is won by me”. 

“The victory is mine” loudly proclaimed Rukmin to Bala in 
false words. 

20. “It is true that this stake was announced by you. But 
it had not been accepted or approved of by me. That being the 
case if (you say) you have won how (can’t I say that) I have 
won ? 

21. Then loud resonant words rose up in the sky aggravat¬ 
ing the fury of noble Baladeva. 

22. The speech in the firmament said : “The stake is won 
by Baladeva. What is uttered by Rukmin is false. Certain 
things are accepted through actions even without mentioning 
words.” 

Vydsa said : 

23. Then Bala of great strength got up with his eyes turned 
red due to fury. With the dice board itself he hit and killed 
Rukmin. 

24. With great force he held the king of Kalinga who was 
throbbing and trembling. In his fury he broke his teeth with 
which he had openly laughed at him. 






482 Brahma Purina 

25. The infuriated Bala seized a great column of gold and 
killed those kings who belonged to his side. 

26. When Bala was angry thus, O brahmins, the entire 
assembly of kings became eager to flee crying out “Alas, Alas”. 

27. On hearing that Rukmin was killed by Bala, Krsna did 
not utter a single word for fear of offending Rukminx or Bala. 

28. Then, O excellent brahmins, the descendants of Yadu, 
accompanied by Krsna returned to Dvaraka taking Aniruddha 
with them after his marriage rites were concluded. 


CHAPTER NINETYTHREE 
Naraka is killed 

Vyasa said : 

1-2. O sages, seated on the back of the inebriated Airavata, 
Indra the lord of the three worlds came to meet Lord Krsna 
at Dvaravatl. After entering the city he approached the lord 
and mentioned to him the vicious activities of the asura 
Naraka. 

3. O lord, all miseries have been subdued by you, the lord 
of Devas, though stationed in the form of a human being. 

4-5. For affording protection to those people who perform 
penance, the following asuras have been killed by you—Arista, 
Dhenuka, Kesin, Pralambaand others. Those who harassed the 
universe were destroyed by you, namely, Karhsa, Kuvalayaplda, 
the child-slayer Putana and many others. 

6. When the three worlds have been saved by your 
excellent intellect as well as brawny baton-like arms, the 

heaven-dwellers partook of oblations in the sacrifice and be- 

came gratified. 

7. O lord, it behoves you to pursue efforts and counter¬ 
measures after listening to the reason for which I have come 
now. 

8. O suppressor of enemies, this son of Bhumi named Naraka 





93.9-21 


483 

who is the king of Pragjyotisa harasses and destroys all living 
beings. ' s 

9. After killing Devas, Siddhas, kings, and others that 
Asura imprisoned their daughters in his own palace. 

10. He has taken away the umbrella of Pracetas that 
exudes water. He has removed the Maniparvata, peak of the 
Mandara. 

11. That Asura has taken away the illustrious ear-rings 
of my mother Aditi, the ear-rings that exude nectar. He now 
desires to take possession of my elephant Airavata. 

12. O lord, I have told you about his evil activities. What 
steps should be taken by way of remedy may be pondered over 
by yourself. 

Vyasa said : 

13. On hearing this, lord Krsna, son of DevakI, smiled 
and caught hold of the hand of Indra. He then got up from the 
excellent seat. 

14. He then rode on Garuda who traversed through the 
sky. He kept Satyabhama also on its back and went to the city 
of Pragjyotisa. 

15. Even as the residents of Dvaraka watched him, the 
delighted Indra mounted his elephant Airavata and went to 
heaven. 

16. For a hundred Yojanas all round the city of Pragjyo¬ 
tisa, the entire place was covered with terrible nooses in order 
to ward off the army of enemies. 

17. Lord Krsna hurled his discus Sudarsana and cut off 
those nooses. Then the asura Mura got up. Kesava killed him. 

18. By the fire from the sharp edges of his discus Hari 
burned seven thousand sons of Mura as though they were mere 
moths, 

19. O brahmins, after killing Mura, Hayagrlva and 
Pancajana the intelligent lord hastened to Pragjyotisa. 

20.. There Krsna fought with Naraka who had a great 
army. In that battle Lord Krsna killed thousands of asuras. 

21. By hurling his discus the discus-bearing lord, the power¬ 
ful destroyer of asuras, split Naraka into two, Naraka, son of 
the Earth, who was hurling weapons and missiles on him. 




484 


Brahma Purana 


22. When Naraka was killed, the Earth approached the 
lord of the universe taking with her the earrings of Aditi. She 
spoke these words :— 

The Earth said : 

23. O lord, when I was lifted up by you in the form of 
a Boar, this son had been born of me as a result of my contact 
with you. 

24. He had been given to me by you and now has been 
struck down by you. Take back these two ear-rings and protect 
his children. 

25. It is for reducing my own burden that O lord of 
gentle and pleasant face, you have come to this worlds a part of 
yours. 

26. You are the creator, re-creator, annihilator, eternal 
source of origin and one whose form is identical with that of 
the universe. O Acyuta, how ami to eulogise you ?. 

27. You are the one all-pervading and the pervaded; deed, 
the doer and the thing done. You are the Atman, the inner 
soul of all living beings. O Acyuta, how can I eulogise you? 

28. You are the Supreme Atman, the innermost soul, the 
soul of living beings, the eternal lord. These are not your 
praises. They are the statements of facts. How shall anyone go 
about (this act of eulogy) ? 

29. O lord, the soul of all-living beings, be pleased. May 
what is done by Naraka be excused for making him free from 
defects. My son has already been struck down. 

Vyasa said : 

30. “So be it”, the lord said to the Earth. O excellent 
sages, the conceiver and creator of the living beings took up 
jewels from the residence of Naraka. 

31. The lord of unequalled exploits saw sixteen thousand 
one hundred virgins in the harem, O excellent brahmins. 

32-35. He saw six thousand terrible elephants with four 
tusks and two million and one hundred thousand Kamboja 
horses. Immediately the lord despatched those girls, elephants 
and horses to Dvaraka through the servants of Naraka. The 
umbrella of Varuna and the jewel mountain were put on the 









94.1-10 


485 


back ofGamda .he lord of bird,. Accompanied bySatyabhami 
fjZitT *“ “ d W ' n " oHea ' r “ to restore" ear-rings 


CHAPTER NINETYFOUR 
The prayer by Indra 

Vyasasaid : 

1. Playfully carrying the umbrella of Varuna, the jewel 
mountain and bearing lord Krsna on his back accompanied by 
his wife, Garuda went ahead. 

2. Lord Krsna reached the gateway of heaven and blew 
the conch. Then Devas approached the lord along with the 
vessels full of materials of worship. 

3. After being worshipped by Devas, Krsna entered the 
abode of the mother of Devas that had the shape of the peak 
of white mountain. After entering it he saw Aditi. 

4. Accompanied by Indra he bowed to her. The lord gave 
her the excellent earrings and intimated to her the death of 
Naraka. 

5. Then Aditi the mother of Devas was pleased.Unruffled, 
she directed her mind to the lord who is the creator of the 
worlds and eulogised him. 

Aditi said : 

6. Obeisance to you, O lotus-eyed one, O lord causing 
fearlessness to devotees, O lord, the eternal Atman, O Atman of 
living beings, O Atman of everything,© creator of living beings. 

7-10. You are of the nature of vital airs, soul and mind, 
intellect and sense-organs. You are beyond three attributes. O 
pure one, you are devoid of mutually clashing opposites. O lord 
stationed in die heart of all, O lord devoid of all con¬ 
ceptions such as those of whiteness, and length. You are 
untouched by birth, You are devoid of dreamy state. You are 
nil these—dusk, night, day. Earth, firmament, wind, water, fire, 






486 


Brahma Parana 


mind, intellect and subtle elements. You are Acyuta, the cause 
of creation, sustenance and destruction; you are the lord of 
makers and doers. With your forms named Brahma, Visnu and 
Siva, you arc the lord of all. This universe consisting of mobile 
and immobile beings is pervaded by your Maya. 

11. O lord, if one takes the non-Atman to be the Atman, 
this misconception is your Maya. It is from this that the ideas 
of T, ‘Mine* etc. emerge. 

12-19. O lord, this is the activity of your Maya amid the 
ocean of worldly existence. 

Those men who arc devoted to their own Dharmas and by 
whom you have been propitiated, surmount all this Maya and 
proceed to self-liberation. 

Brahma and Devas, human beings and animals are enveloped 
by the darkness of delusion. They are involved in the great 
whirlpool of your Maya. 

O lord, these men bound by your Maya desire to obtain all 
desires when rebirths of the Atman cease, after propitiating 
you. 

You were propitiated by me with a longing for sons and for 
the extermination of the hosts of foes. It was not for liberation. 
Indeed, it is the activity of Maya. 

It is like the longing for loin-cloth and similar things from 
the wish-yielding Kalpa tree. This kind of guilt happens in the 
case of those who perform meritorious deeds deriving worldly 
fruits. It originates from their own defects. 

Hence, be pleased, O unchanging lord, who cause illusory 
delusion into the entire universe. Destroy our ignorance, O 
lord of all living beings having perfect knowledge and good 
intention. 

Obeisance to you, to the discus-armed one, obeisance to you 
who have the conch in your hand. Obeisance to the deity holding 
the ironclub. O Visnu, obeisance to you, having lotus in your 
hand. 

I see your form rendered splendid by gross signs and symbols. 
I do not know the greatest principle. O Supreme lord be 
pleased. 







94.20-32 


487 


Vyasa said : 

20-23. Thus eulogised by Aditi the lord laughed and spoke 
to Aditi. 

Srikrsiia said : 

O gentle lady, you are our mother. Be pleased. Be one that 
bestows boons. 

Aditi said : 

Let it be as you wish. O tiger among men, you will be 
unconquerable by Devas, Asuras and human beings. 

Vyasa said : 

Immediately thereafeer, Satyabharaa accompanied by Saci 
bowed to Aditi and said again and again—‘Be pleased’. 

Aditi said : 

24. O lady of fine eye-brows, due to my favour you will 
never have old age or deformity. O lady of blameless limbs, you 
will enjoy all worldly pleasures. 

Vyasa said : 

25. Permitted by Aditi, the king of Devas duly worshipped 
the lord with adequate reverence. 

26. Then, O excellent ones, Kfsna accompanied by Satya- 
bhama visited the divine gardens and parks such as Nandana. 

27-28. There Kesava, the lord of the Universe, the destroyer 
of Kesin saw the Parijata tree which put forth bunches of 
excessively fragrant flowers, which was divine, which caused 
cool comfort and delight, which was beautified by tender 
sprouts, which had the lustre similar to that of gold and which 
was produced when the milk ocean was churned for getting 
nectar. 

O excellent brahmins, on seeing the Parijata tree, Satya- 
bhama spoke to the lord. 

Satyabhdma said : 

29-32. O Krsna, why is not this tree taken to Dvaraka ? 





488 


Brahma Purdna 


If these words of yours are true—"Satya is my most beloved 
one”, let tliis tree be taken to my house for beautifying my 
garden. O Krsna, these pleasing words are often mentioned by 
you to me—"O Satya, neither Jambavatl nor RukminI is so 
much desired by me as you are”. If, O lord, those are not mere 
complimentary flattering words, if they are really meant, let 
this Parijata be an ornament to my house. 

I shall appear very splendid amongst my co-wives if I wear 
the bunch of its flowers on my braid of hair. Hence I desire 
for it. 

Vyasa said : 

33. The lord who was requested thus laughingly placed 
the Parijata tree on Garuda. Then the guards of the park 
said. 


The guards of the park said : 

34. O lord, SacI is the crowned queen of Devas. It does 
not behove you to take away the Parijata tree specially adopted 
by her. 

35. When the milk ocean was being churned for obtaining 
nectar, this tree had been adopted by Devas for embellishing 
Sacl. If you take this, you will not go safe and secure. 

36. You seek for this Parijata out of foolishness. Who will 
go out safe and secure if he takes this with him? O Krsna, the 
lord of Devas will indeed be furious over this. 

37. The immortal ones will follow Indra with the thunder¬ 
bolt raised up in his hand. Hence, O Acyuta, enough of your 
attempts to quarrel with Devas. Scholars do not praise that 
action which is very bitter in its result. 

Vyasa said : 

38-44. When this was mentioned by him, the infuriated 
Satyabhama said :— 


Satyabhdmd said : 

Who is SacI and who is Indra the lord of Devas, in regard to 
this Parijata tree ? This Parijata tree is common to the worlds. 
It originated formerly (as common to all). Why should Indra 





alone take it ? Just like the wine, moon or Sri, O guards of the 
park, this tree born of the ocean is common to all. 

If Saci clings to this, on account of her pride in the mighty 
arms of her husband, go quickly to her and mention these 
words—Satyabhama says in words couched in her pride over 
her husband, “If you are the beloved of your husband, if you are 
fond of him, prevent my husband from removing this tree. I 
know your husband Indra. I know the lord of Devas. Still I, a 
human being, shall remove this Parijata.” 

Vyasasaxd : 

45. The guards of the park who were addressed thus, went 
to §aci and told her what they were told. Saci then encouraged 
her husband the over-lord of Devas. 

46. Then, O brahmins, Indra who was surrounded by the 
armies of Devas began to fight over the Parijata tree. 

47. Then Indra stood ready with the thunderbolt in his 
hand. Devas also stood in readiness holding their weapons such 
as iron clubs, sword and tridents. 

48-50. On seeing Indra seated on his lordly elephant, sur¬ 
rounded by Devas and approaching him for a battle, the lord 
blew on his conch. He filled the quarters with sounds. He dis¬ 
charged thousands and ten thousands of arrows. On seeing the 
quarters and the firmament covered with hundreds of arrows, 
Devas discharged many missiles and weapons. 

51. Then lord of the worlds playfully split each of the 
missiles and weapons discharged by Devas, into a thousand 
bits. 

52. Garuda snatched the noose of the king of waters (i.e. 
Varuna), split it into bits like the body of a young serpent and 
moved about. 

53. The lord, the son of Devaki, struck down on to the 
ground the staff discharged by Yama. It was broken when he 
hurled his iron club at it. 

54. The lord Krsna smashed the palanquin of the god of 
wealth into minute bits like gingelly seeds. The sun' and the 
moon lost their prowess.as it was destroyed by a single glance 
of the lord. . 





490 


Brahma Parana 


55. The fire god was split into hundreds by means of arrows. 
The Vasus were made to flee in all dirctions. The tips of the 
tridents of Rudras were split by the discus and the Rudras 
themselves were struck down on to the ground. 

56. The Sadhyas, Visvedevas, Maruts and Gandharvas 
were sent up into the sky like the cotton bits from a Salmali tree 
by the Sarhga-bearing lord through his arrows. 

57. Garuda killed and ate Devas and Upadevas by means 
of his beak, wings and claws. 

58. Then Indra, the lord of Devas, and lord Krsna, the 
slayer of Madhu showered each other with a thousand arrows 
like two clouds by heavy downpours. 

59. In the utter confusion obtaining there, Garuqla fought 
with Airavata and lord .Krsna with Devas accompanied by 
Indra. 

60. When weapons and missiles were split and scattered, 
Indra hastily seized the thunderbolt and Krsna took up his 
discus Sudarsana. 

61. On seeing the king of Devas and Sri Krsna holding up 
their thunderbolt and discus respectively the whole of the uni¬ 
verse consisting of mobile and immobile beings raised a hue 
and cry. 

62. Lord Krsna caught hold of thunderbolt hurled by 
Indra. Without releasing his discus he told him c stay, stay’. 

63. As the king of Devas lost his thunderbolt, as his vehicle 
was wounded by Garuda, he became inclined to run away then. 
Satyabhama spoke to him. 

Salyabhama said : 

64. O lord of three worlds, it is not proper for the husband 
of Sad to run away. SacI will honour you with a big garland 
of Parijata flowers. 

65. Of what nature is your divine realm ? You are unable 
to see Sacx approaching you lovingly as before shining with the 
Parijata garlands. 

66. O Indra, enough of your endeavour. It does not behove 
you to be ashamed. Let this Parijata tree be taken away. Let 
Devas be rid of pain. 




94.67—95.1 


491 


67. On account of her excessive pride and arrogance SacI 
did not view me with reverence as I went to her house. Nor did 
she honour me. 

68. Being a woman, my mind is very light. I was devoted 
to the praise of my husband. Therefore, O Indra I picked up a 
quarrel with you. 

69. Hence, enough of this Parijata which is another man’s 
property. Why should it be taken away ? Which woman does 
not become proud due to beauty and fame. 

Vyasa said : 

70. O brahmins, when addressed thus the king of Devas re¬ 
turned and said to her : 

O my angry friend, stop from expatiating on a sorrowful 
fact. 

71-73. I do not experience any shame on being conquered 
by that lord of universal form who is the cause of creation, 
sustenance and annihilation of the universe. 

He is without a beginning or a middle or an end. The worlds 
are resting in him. They originate from him. He is the cause of 
origin, protection and annihilation. O gentle lady, if I am routed 
by him how can I feel ashamed of it ? 

Who can conquer him ? His form is the entire world. It is 
subtle and minute. It is known only to those who have under¬ 
stood the Vedas. He is unborn, and unmade. He is the perma¬ 
nent lord. He is the primordial lord who can remove universe if 
he pleases. Who can conquer him ? 


CHAPTER NINETYFIVE 

Lord Krsna marries sixteen thousand and one hundred virgins 
Vyasa said : 

1. O excellent brahmins, eulogised thus by the king of 
Devas, lord Krsna laughed and spoke in an emotionally majes- 
tic manner. 





492 


Brahma Purana 


The lord said : 

2. You are Indra, the king of Devas. O lord of the universe, 
we are mortals. The crime committed by me should be excused 
by you. 

3. May this Parijata tree be taken to its proper site. O 
Indra, it was at the instance of Satya that it was taken by me. 

4. Take back this thunderbolt which had been hurled at me 
by you. O Indra, it is your own weapon that pierces enemies. 

Indra said : 

5. O Lord, why do you try to delude me by saying “I am 
a mortal”. We know you; we are conversant with the infinite 
happiness. 

6. As you are, so you are, O lord of the universe. O lord, 
you are firmly fixed in your work. O slayer of Asuras, you re¬ 
move thorns of the universe. 

7. O Krsna, may this Parijata tree be taken to Dvaravatl. 
Except with you this will not remain anywhere else in the mortal 
world. 

Vyasa said : 

8. After saying “So be it” to the lord of Devas Sri K r sna 
came to the Earth, eulogised by the liberated Siddhas, Gan- 
dharvas and sages. 

9. Taking the excellent tree with him, Krsna hastened. 

He then reached the aerial space over Dvaraka and blew the 
conch. 

10. O brahmins, getting down from Garuda in the com- 
pany of Satyabhama he delighted the residents of Dvaraka. 

U. He fixed the great tree Parijata in his garden. People 

who approached it were able to remember their previous 
birth. 

12 - 18 . The ground three Yojanas all round it was ren¬ 
dered fragrant by the sweet scent of its flowers. Coming and 

oo ing at it, the Yadavas saw divine and superhnman scents on 
that tree. 

Krspa took possession of elephants, horses, and other 
wea t roug t by the servants from the collection of Naraka. 




Krsna, on an auspicious day married damsels brought from 
Naraka’s residence. 

O excellent brahmins, with a separate body for each of 
these, Krsna married them in accordance with piety. There 
were sixteen thousand and one hundred women or even more. 
Lord Krena took up as many forms. But those virgins consider¬ 
ed him as their sole lord individually, thinking, “Krsna 
married me alone.” 

During the nights, O brahmins, Krsna the creator of the 
universe, Krsna of universal forms, stayed in the abodes of all 
of them. 


CHAPTER NINETYSIX 


Vyasa said 

1. Pradyumna and other sons of Krsna born of RukminI, 
have already been mentioned. O brahmins, Satyabhama gave 
birth to Bhanu and other sons. 

2. Prapaksa and others were the brilliant sons of RohinI 
and Krsna. Samba and others of mighty arms were bom to 


Jambavatl. 

3. Bhadravinda and other powerful sons were born to 
Nagnajiti. The sons the chief of whom was Sangramajit were 


born as sons ofSaibya. 

4. Madri’s sons were VVka and others. Laksmana had 
sons the chief of whom was Gotravan. Sruta and others were 
the sons of KalindT. 

5. The discus-bearing lord had sons in other wives too. 
On the whole, he had eightyeight thousand and one hundred 

sons. , 

6. Among them Pradyumna was the eldest. He was t e 
son of RukminI. Aniruddha was the son of Pradumna and 
Vaira was born to him. 

7. O excellent brahmins, Aniruddha of great strength who 
had been held as a prisoner of war, married Usa, the Daughter 
of Bana and the grand-daughter of Bali. 








494 


Brahma Parana 


8. In the course of events, Krsna and Sankara fought with 
each other during which the thousand arms of Bana were cut 
off by the discus-bearing lord. 

The sages said : 

9-10. O holy brahmin, how did the fight between Sankara 
and Krsna take place for the possession of Usa ? How did 
Hari destroy the arms of Bana ? O highly blessed one, it be¬ 
hoves you to mention all this to us. Our curiosity to hear this 
splendid story is great. 

Vyasa said : 

11-12. O brahmins, on seeing Parvati sporting about with 
Sambhu, Usa the daughter of Bana too desired it very much. 
Gauri conversant with the workings of everyone’s mind spoke 
to that beautiful damsel—“Enough of your yearning too much. 
You will also sport about with your husband”. 

Vyasa said : 

13. Thus consoled by Parvati, she thought within herself— 
“When ? Who will be my husband ?” Parvati then said to her 
again. 

Parvati said : 

14. “O princess, that person will be your husband, the 
person who will molest you in your dream on the twelfth day 
in the bright half of the month ofVaisakha”. 

Vyasa said : 

15. On that day, in the manner mentioned by the goddess 
a man molested her in the course of her dream. She too loved 

him. When she woke up she did not sec the man. She became 
very eager. 

Ufa said : 

16-18. “Where have you gone ?” said Usa without bashful¬ 
ness. O brahmins, she said to her friend. The minister of Bana 
was Kumbhanda. Citralekha, his daughter was the friend of 
Usa. She asked her “Who is being mentioned by you ? In her 




96.19—97.4 


495 


bashfulness she at first denied everything. Her friend thereupon 
created confidence in her and heard everything through her own 
words. After mentioning everything when everything was 
known by her Usa said :— <c Immediately do somethihg by way 
of employers to attain him as mentioned by the goddess.” 

Vydsa said : 

19-22. Citralekha then drew the pictures of Devas, asuras, 
Gandharvas, and human beings, on a cloth and showed them 
to Usa. She turned her face from Gandharvas, Suras and 
Asuras. She began to look at human beings especially at 
Andhakas and Vrsnis. On seeing Krsna and Balarama the lady 
of fine eyebrows became bashful. O brahmins, on seeing Pra- 
dyumna she turned her bashful glance away from him. When 
her real lover, the son of Pradyumna was seen, she said—“It 
is he, It is he. He is my husband.” Citralekha then consoled 
Usa and went to Dvaravatl traversing the path by her Yogic 
power. 


CHAPTER NINETYSEVEN 
Usa and Aniruddha were brought back 

Vydsa said : 

1-2. Bana bowed down in front of the three-eyed lord 
and said—O lord, without any battle (to fight) I am disgust¬ 
ed with my thousand arms. Will there be any battle at all, 
making my arms fruitful ? Without a battle they are conducive 
to be burdensome. Of what avail are they to me ? 

Sankara said : 

3. O Bana, when there is an unprecedented breakage in 
your flagstaff - you will have a war that will delight the flesh- 
eating asuras. 

Vydsa said: 

4. Joyously he bowed down to Sarabhu and returned to his 
mansion. On seeing breakage in his flagstaff he was very muc 
delighted. 








496 


Brahma Purdna 


5-6. In the meantime, by virtue of her yogic power 
Citralekha the excellent friend (of Usa) brought Aniruddha to 
the harem of virgins. The guards came to know that he was 
indulging in sexual intercourse with Usa. They went to their 
king and intimated everything to him. 

7. Aniruddha the destroyer of heroic enemies seized a great 

iron beam and killed the army of servants sent against him by 
that noble king. 

8-10. When they were killed, Bana himself came there 
seated in his chariot. He endeavoured to slay him. Fighting to 
his ability (Bana) was defeated by the heroic (Aniruddha). 
Thereupon Bana fought with him by means of his Maya. 
Discharging a serpent missile by means of mantras he bound 
the scion of the family ofYadu. At Dvaravat! the members of 
the family ofYadu began to cry aloud—“Where has Aniruddha 
gone?” Narada told them that he had been imprisoned by Bana 
11-12. The Yadavashad already heard that Aniruddha 
was carried off by a woman who was an expert in Yogic 
lore, to Somtapura 1 the capital city of the asura monarch Bana 
Hence, they believed in what Narada said. Accordingly lord 
Krsna mounted Garuda who came to him immediately on being 

'° Ba -' s —I— -V V-J 

I3 'r , the entrance to ^e city he had a fight with the verv 
powerful Pramathas. After destroying them, helent near Bana’I 

(FeVCr) to Waheivara 

sst 

figh, with J&rtgJbaS beg “ *° 

S • But (the Jvara of Mahesvara) 

6 Sopitapura ; This capital citv ofR- 
Karttikeya, Bhadrakali, Asmi and nth^ j- ? a ” a was Protected by Siva, 

Srikrsria and Bar.a, the former defeated , < ? lV * nitlC3 - In the battle between 
through the northern gate. Within ^ r 11 th * sentri « and entered the city 
then released Aniruddha and Usa from their defeated ’ Srikrsija, 






97.19-30 


497 


was dispelled from the body of Kfsna by the Jvara pertaining 
to Visnu. On seeing him (i. e. Mahesvara Jvara) agitated due 
to the painful blow of Nar ay ana’s arms, lord Pitamaha said 
“kindly excuse him.” Thereupon saying— “O I have already 
forgiven”, lord Krsna dissolved the Vaisnava Jvara within him¬ 
self. 

19. Lord Krsna said thus to Mahesvara Jvara—“Those 
who remember our fight between us shall be free from fever. 
After saying this lord Krsna went away. 

20. Then the lord defeated and destroyed the five fires. 
Visnu playfully smashed the army of Asuras. 

21. Then the son of Bali, Sankara and Karttikeya assisted 
by the entire army of asuras fought with Krsna. 

22. The fight between Krsna and Sankara was very terrible. 
The worlds were agitated when they were harassed by weapons 
and missiles. 

23. The battle raged furiously. Then Devas thought:— 
“Certainly the dissolution of the universe has arrived”. 

24. Krsna made Sankara burst open Jrmbhana missile. 
Thereby the Pramathas and Daityas perished all round. 

25. Sankara who was attacked by Jrmbha (Yawning) sat 
within his chariot. He could not fight with Krsna of unimpaired 
activities. 

26. Guha’s vehicle was destroyed by Garuda. He himself 
was affected by Pradyumna’s missile. His trident was blown off 
by a hissing angry sound of Krsna. So Guha fled away from 
the field. 

27-28. When Sankara burst open, (?) when the army ot 
the asuras perished, when the army of the Pramathas was 
destroyed by the lord with the bow named Sarhga and when 
Guha was defeated, Bana came there to fight with the soldiers 
of Krsna’s son. He was seated in a great chariot where the 
horses were managed by Nandlsa. 

29. Balarama of great prowess hit the army of Bana by 
means of many arrows. Pradyumna did not go astray from 
virtue. He abided by the rules of war as laid down m the 

30. Bana saw his army crushed and suppressed .by Bala 
by means of his iron club after being dragged by the tip of his 






498 Brahma Purdna 

ploughshare, as well as by the arrows of the discus-bearing 
lord. 

31-32. Then there was a brief encounter of Krsna with 
Bana. They hurled blazing arrows at each other piercing 
through their armour. Krsna cut off those arrows discharged 
by Bana by means of his own arrows. Bana hit and pierced 
Krsna and the discus-bearing lord pierced Bana. 

33. Then, O brahmins, Bana and Krsna were eager to 
conquer each other. They hurled missiles and iron clubs at each 
other. 

34-35. When all the weapons were being cut off, when the 
miraculous missiles became ineffective, Krsna decided to kill 
Bana with a massive use of force. Thereupon, lord Krsna whose 
splendour was like that of a hundred suns and who was the 
enemy of Asuras took up Sudarsana, his discus. 

36. Even as Krsna, the enemy of Madhu, was going to 
hurl discus for the destruction of Bana, the naked goddess 
Kotari, the demoniac lore, appeared before him. 

37. On seeing her in front Kr?na closed his eyes and 
discharged Sudarsana against Bana in order to cut off the 
thousand arms of his enemy. 

38-40. Hurled by Acyuta, the discus gradually cut off the 
arms of Bana. When the arms were cut off the discus immediately 
returned to the hands of the lord. Because of the hurling of 
many weapons and missiles by the-Asura, Krsna decided to 
hurl the discus at Bana for slaying him. When this was known 
by the enemy of Tripuras, the husband of Uma, he'rushed at 
Krsna. On seeing the blood gushing out from the body of Bana 
because his arms had been cut off Rudra spoke with gentle 
words of overtures. 

Rudra said : 

41. O Krsna, O Krsna, O lord of the universe, I know 
(hat you are Purusottama the great lord, the great Atman 
the greatest being without beginning or without end. 

s P°. rt i nasmuc h as you take up physical forms 

among Devas, animals and human beings, is characterised by 

the slaying of Daityas. 




97.43-50 


499 


43. Be pleased, O lord, fearlessness (freedom from fear) 
has been offered to Bana by me. The words uttered by me 
should not be falsified by you. 

44. He has grown old in serving me and having my support. 
O unchanging one, it is not your fault. (?) Boons have been 
granted to this Daitya by me. Hence, I request fo. your 
forbearance. 

Vyasa said : 

45. Thus requested, Krsna became delighted as evidenced 
by his bright face. His anger towards the Asura disappeared. 
He spoke to the Trident-bearing lord of Uma. 

The lord said : 

46. O Sankara, may Bana live (since) he has been grant¬ 
ed boons by you. The discus has been withdrawn by me out of 
' deference for your words. 

47. The freedom from fear granted by you is the freedom 
from fear granted by me. O Sankara, it behoves you to see 
yourself not different from me. 

48-49. ' It is those men who had been deluded by ignorance 
that see all these differences. What I am, so you are. (We are 
identical with) this universe including Devas, Asuras and 
human beings. 

Vyasa said : 

50. After saying this Krsna went to that place where the 
son of Pradyumna had been imprisoned. When dried up by the 
winds of Garuda the serpents that fettered him perished. 

He made Aniruddha sit on Garuda alongwith his wife. Thus 
Balarama, Krsna and Pradyumna came to Dvaraka. 






500 


Brahma Parana 


CHAPTER NINETYEIGHT 
The burning of Kafi 

The sages said : 

1-2. Krsna who assumed human form performed great 
deeds. Playfully he defeated Indra, Sankara and Devas. May 
his other activities too withstanding the divine intercession, be 
mentioned. We are very eager to hear. 

Vyasa said : 

3. O excellent sages, even as I narrate, let this be listened 
to with great attention how Varanasi was burned by Krsna 
during his incarnation as a human being. 

4. (Defective) Paundraka, king of Varanasi was told by 
the people deluded by ignorance—“Vasudeva has taken in¬ 
carnation on the Earth. You are that incarnation.” 

5. Accordingly, he thought that he was the incarnation of 
Vasudeva on the Earth. He who lost all faculty of reasoning 
adopted the symbols of Visnu. O excellent brahmins, he sent a 
messenger to Krsna. 

6-7. “Leave off the discus and other symbols that pertain 
to me. O foolish one, eschew everything pertaining to Vasudeva. 
For the sake of your sustenance bow unto me”. 

When he was addressed thus, Krsna said to the messenger. 

The Lord said : 

8-12. Go and tell Punqlraka thus : C5 I shall leave my symbol, 
the discus on you (I shall hurl it against you) O messenger, may 
these words be mentioned as mine. 

“The good intention behind your words has been understood. 
May what should be done be carried out, I shall come to your 
city taking the symbols with me. I shall discharge discus certainly 
towards you. Since you have commanded me to come I shall 
carry it out tomorrow without delay. O king, seeking refuge in 
you, I will do that whereby there will not be further fear from 
you.” 

Vyasa said : 

13. When the messenger who had been instructed thus, 






98.14-25 


501 


had gone away, Krsna rode on Garuda who came to him on 
being remembered, and hastened to that city. 

14. On hearing about the endeavour of Krsna and that 
of his (Paundraka’s), the lord of Kasi came as his supporting 
ally, with all his armies surrounding him. 

15. With a great army (of his own) and that of the king 
of Kasi, Paundraka Vasudeva marched against Krsna. 

16-18. From a distance Krsna saw him seated in an elegant 
chariot. He carried discus, conch and iron club in his hands and 
he held a lotus with another hand. He wore a garland and 
held the bow Sarnga. The emblem of Garuda adorned his 
banner. Krsna saw the scar Srivatsa marked on his chest. He 
wore a crown on his head and earrings too. He was clad in 
yellow robes. On seeing him, lord Krsna laughed heartily. 

19. O brahmins, he fought with his army that was very 
strong in elephants and horses and that contained swords, daggers, 
maces, tridents, javelins and bows. 

20. Instantaneously he slew the army by means of arrows 
discharged from his bow and blazing like fires, and by means 
of hits and blows with the iron clubs and discus. 

21. After destroying the army of the king of Kasi also, 
Krsna spoke to Paundraka who was deluded and who bore 
his own characteristic marks. 

The lord said : 

22. O Paundraka, through the messenger you had told me 
<f Leave the symbols.” I shall now accomplish it. 

23. This discus is left off; this iron club is discharged 
against you. This Garuda has been directed. Let him mount 
your banner. 

24. After saying this, he discharged his discus by which 
Paundraka was torn asunder. He was then threshed with his 
iron club. Garuda of Paundraka was smashed by his own 
Garuda. 

25. When there was a great hue and cry the overlord of 
Kasi stood ready for avenging the slaughter of his friend. He 
fought with Vasudeva. If Kr?na cut off his head with the 
arrows discharged from his bow, he hurled it into the city of 
Kasi, causing wonderment amongst the people. 










502 


Brahma Purana 


2/. After killing Paundraka and the king of Kasi alongwith 
his followers Krsna returned to Dvaraka and sported like an 
immortal being staying in heaven. 

28. On seeing the head of the king of Kasi fallen in his 
city the wonder-struck people said—’“What is this? By whom is 
this heinous crime committed? 

29. On understanding that he was killed by Vasudcva, his 
son propitiated Sankara assisted by his priest. 

30. Sankara was propitiated by him at the great holy centre 
‘Avimukta’. The lord then said to the Prince, “Choose your 
boon”. 

31. He chose thus—“O lord, O Mahcsvara, by your 
favour, may a Krtya (female deity of destruction) rise up for 
destroying Krsna who slew my lather.” 

Vyasa said : 

32. When this was uttered “It will be so”, a great Krtya 
rose up from the chamber of sacrificial fire at a spot beyond 
Daksinagni. 

33. It had an awful face blazing terrible with flames of fire. 
The tresses were dishevelled and blazing. Angrily shouting 
‘Krsna Krsna’ it went to Dvaravatl. 

34. On seeing the terrible Krtya with hideous eyes, the 
people of Dvaraka sought refuge in Sri Krsna who is worthy of 
being the refuge to the worlds. 

The people said : 

35. After propitiating the bull-emblemed deity this great 
Krtya lias been created by the son of the king of Kasi for 
killing you, the discus-bearing lord. Kill this terrible Krtya 
having a confused mess of matted hair blazing like flame of 
fire. 

Vyasa said : 

36-41. Sudarsana, the discus of Visnu was playfully hurled 
down amongst the dice as he had been engaged in the game. It 
became very terrible, spitting flames of fire. Clusters of fiery 
flames appeared like matted hair. It pursued Krtya quickly. 
When hit and smashed by thediscus Krtya rushed along quickly. 
The discus too followed her. Krtya hurriedly entered Varanasi. 
O excellent sages, its prowess was restrained by the discus of 





98.42—99-6 


503 


Visnu. Then the vast army of Kasi and the army of Pramathas 
(attendants of Siva) marched against discus. They were equipped 
with various weapons and missiles. They were discharging 
missiles and weapons. 

After burning that army with its own prowess, the discus 
went to Varanasi. It burnt citizens, their servants, horses and 
elephants. 

42-43. It burnt the entire city with all its chambers and 
forts. Flames of fire surrounded the outer walls and arched 
gateways of all abodes. It was an unbearable sight even to 
Devas. Still the fury of discus did not abate. It was as indifferent 
as though very little had been accomplished. Shining and 
blazing as before, the discus went back to the hand of Visnu. 


CHAPTER NINETYNINE 
Glory of Balarama 

The sages said : 

1. O sage, we wish to hear again about the exploits of the 
intelligent Balarama. It behoves you to recount his heroism 
unto us. 

2. His exploits, such as dragging Yamuna have already 
been heard by us here. Hence, O blessed one, kindly recount 
anything else which Bala performed. 

Vydsa said : 

3. O sages, listen to the activities carried out by Rama 
the infinite one, the unmeasurable one, the incarnation ofSesa, 
the holder of the Earth. 

4. Samba the heroic son of Jambavatl forcefully abducted 
Duryodhana’s daughter whose Svayamvara was awaited. 

5. Then the infuriated Karna, Duryodhana and others 
including Bhlsma and Drona of great prowess bound him after 
conquering him. 

6. On hearing about it, O sages, the Yadavas became 









504 Brahma Purdna 

furious with Duryodhana and made efforts to kill the Kauravas 
by way of retaliation. 

7. Bala stopped them and spoke to them although his words 
were indistinct through inebriation :— 

“I alone will go unto the Kauravas. At my instance they 
will let him off”. 

8. Then Balarama went to Hastinapura. He camped in the 
middle of a park at the outskirts of the city. He did not enter 
it. 

9. On coming to know that Balarama had arrived, 
Duryodhana and others brought unto him by way of presents, 
greetings, along with Arghya and water for drinking. 

10. After duly accepting those things he said to the 
Kauravas—“It is Ugrasena’s order—Release Samba quickly”. 

Vyasa said : 

11. O excellent brahmins, on hearing his words, Bhlsma, 
Drona, Karna, Duryodhana and others became angry. 

12. Bahllka and all other kings too, were angry on seeing 
Balarama who had the threshing rod for his weapon and 
realizing that the race of Yadu did not deserve a kingdom, 
they said :— 

The Kauravas said : 

13. O Balarama, what is it that you say ? Which Yadava 
will pass an order on those who are born of Kuru’s family ? 

14. If even Ugrasena can pass orders on Kauravas, 
enough of the white umbrellas and ornaments befitting kings. 

15. Hence, go back, O Balarama. Neither at your bidding 
will we release Samba whose activities are unjust. 

16. Formerly, Kukuras and Andhakas used to bow unto 
us, for we are worthy of that honour. Now-a-days that usual 
obeisance is not made. What is this commanding attitude of a 
servant towards a master ? 

17-18. (Defective) You have become haughty because you 

have been invited for feasts and offered seats on the basis of 

equality. It is not your fault that good polity pleases only when 
it is not expected (hopefully). He who has been mentioned by 
you, O Bala, is worthy of being worshipped by us and treated 



99.19-33 


505 


with love. But that has not been acquired by your family from 
ours. 

Vyasa said : 

19. After saying this the Kauravas remained adamant. 
They did not release Krsna’s son. After making this unanimous 
decision they entered Hastinapura. 

20. Maddened by the anger originating from the insult, 
Balarama lifted up his rugged ploughshare and rolled it. 

21. Then the ground was pierced as the noble Balarama 
kicked it with his heel. He clapped his hands filling the quarters 
with the sound with his eyes turned copper-coloured and knitt¬ 
ing the eyebrows in the face he said : 

Balarama said : 

22. Alas, the insignificant wicked haughty Kauravas wish 
to rule over us. It is brought abput by adverse time. 

23-24. The behest of Ugrasena cannot be transgressed. It 
is virtually awaited by Indra along with Devas. Still these 
people do not care for Ugrasena’s command. 

Ugrasena always occupies a seat in the divine assembly hall 
of Indra. But fie upon the satisfaction these people derive from 
the ordinary throne of a king that had been enjoyed by hund¬ 
reds of men and then left over like the leavings of food. 

25. The womenfolk of the servants of Ugrasena wear bun¬ 
ches of flower, of Parijata tree, still he is not a king for these 
people. 

26. Let Ugrasena, the lord of kings stay by. I shall go to 
that city after making the Earth devoid of Kauravas. 

27-29. I shall kill all these viz. Kama, Duryodhana, 
Drona, Bhlsma, Bahllka, Duhsasana, Bhurisravas, 'Somadatta, 
Sala, Bhlma, Arjuna, Yudhisthira, the twin-borns Nakula and 
Sahadeva, and others along with their horses, elephants and 
chariots. I will take the heroic Samba accompanied by his wile 
to Dvaraka and inform Ugrasena and other kinsmen. 

30-33. O I shall hurl Hastinapura immediately into 
Ganga along with the Kauravas. I have been urged by the 
king of Devas to reduce the burden of the Earth. 








506 


Brahma Purana 


Vyasa said : 

After saying this, Balarama, whose emblem was a palm tree 
and whose weapon was ploughshare, placed it with its face 
downwards on the top of the city outer wall and pulled. 
Suddenly, the city of Hastinapura rolled. On seeing it the 
Kauravas were agitated in their hearts. They cried out :— 

The Kaurvas said : 

34-35. O Rama, of great arms, let (everything) be for¬ 
given by you. May the fury be restrained. Be pleased (O lord) 
with the threshing rod for your weapon. Samba is released 
along with his wife. O Bala, your strength is realized. Let the 
guilt of those who have not understood your prowess be for¬ 
given. 

Vyasa said : 

36-39. O leading sages, the Kauravas came out of their 
city immediately and released Samba along with his wife. 

When Bhlsma, Drona, Krpa and others bowed to him and 
spoke pleasing words, Bala the most excellent among the 
strong ones, said—“I have forgiven”. 

O brahmins, even today that city appears as though it had 
been tossed about. Such is the power of Rama. He was fully 
endowed with strength and vigour. 

Then the Kauravas duly honoured Samba along with 
Balarama. They bade farewell to him after offering him the 
appropriate dowry and sending his bride along with him. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED 
The Monkey Dvivida is slain 

Vyasa said •: 

1-4. O .sages, listen ye all. O brahmins, may the other 
activities of Bala the powerful be heard. 

There was a monkey of great prowess named Dvivida. He 
was a friend of Naraka the leader of Asuras, one who was 


100 . 5-20 


507 


opposed to Devas. That powerful monkey nursed continuous 
animosity towards Devas. 

Dvivida said : 

Kxsna killed Naraka who was proud .of his strength. Hence 
I shall take revenge on all Devas. 

Vy as a said : 

5-10. He destroyed Yajnas and annihilated men. Deluded 
by ignorance he damned and demolished sacrificial rites. Ho 
violated bounds of decency. He destroyed embodied beings. 
The fickle fellow burnt territories, cities and villages. At places 
he hurled mountains and powdered villages. He uprooted 
mountains and hurled them into oceans. Standing in the 
middle of the ocean he made it agitated. Thereby, O brahmins, 
the ocean was excessively stirred up and it overflew the shores, 
flooding the villages andcities nearby. He used to assume diffe¬ 
rent forms as he pleased and crushed down plants and trees as 
he wandered here and there. The monkey reduced everything 
to powder. This entire universe was thus rumed and ravaged 
by that wicked monkey. 

11-14. O brahmins, self-study of the Vedas and repetition 
of the Vasatkara Mantras ceased. Everyone was extremely , 
miserable. 

Once Balarama, the highly blessed Revatl and other excel 
lent ladies were seated in the Raivata garden and engaged, in 
drinking wine. Elegant ladies were singing in the midst of high¬ 
ly elegant and charming assembly. The chief and the most 
excellent among the descendants of Yadu sported like Kubera 
on the Mandara mountain. 

At that time the monkey came there, seized the plough¬ 
share and the threshing rod of Balarama and began to emulate 
him standing in front of him. The monkey stood in front of the 
womenfolk also and chattered and laughed. 

15-20. He struck and hit the bowls and jugs filled with 
beverages. Thereupon Bala, with great fury surging up in his 
soul, rebuked him. In spite of that the monkey disregarded 
him and made tinkling chattering noise. Thereat, Bala got up 





508 


Brahma Purdna 


in anger and seized liis iron club. The excellent monkey seized 
a terrible rocky boulder, and hurled it (against Bala). The 
most excellent Yadava split it into a thousand bits by his iron 
club. The rocky boulder fell on the Earth. The monkey dodged 
the iron club and fell down. On getting up in great anger and 
gathering up his strength he struck him on his chest. Then the 
monkey was hit on his head with his fist by Bala. Thereupon 
Dvivida vomited blood and fell down. His life became extinct. 
As his body fell down the peak of the mountain crumbled. 

21-23. O sages, the peak split into a hundred pieces as 
though it had been struck down by the thunder-bolt of Indra. 
Then Devas discharged showers of flowers over Rama. They 
approached him and praised him cc Well done. A great task has 
been accomplished. O heroic one, the universe had been 
harassed by this wicked monkey who used to render help unto 
asuras. Fortunately, he has been destroyed.’ 5 

Vydsa said : 

Thus the activities of Balarama, the incarnation ofSesa, the 
supporter of the Earth, cannot be measured and stipulated. 
There were many. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND ONE 
Srikrsna returns to his abode 

Vydsa said : 

1-4. Thus Krsna performed the task of annihilating asuras 
with Balarama to assist him. Similarly, for the sake of uni¬ 
verse, he destroyed the wicked kings as well. Accompanied by 
Arjuna, the lord disburdened the Earth by slaying Aksauhinls 
of soldiers. After reducing the burden of the Earth, after killing 
the kings, Kj*sna, exterminated his own family under the pre¬ 
text of the curse of brahmins. Thereupon, lord Krsna left off 
Dvaraka and his human form which had been his own part. He 
entered his own abode of Visnu. 


101.5-17 


509 


The sages said : 

5. How did Krsna exterminate his family under the pre¬ 
text of the curse of brahmins ? How did he give up his human 
form ? 

Vyasa said : 

6" 7. The great sages Visvamitra, ICanva and Narada were 
seen by some young men of the Yadava family in the great 
holy centre Pintfaraka. 

Elated due to their blooming youth, and urged by the 
inevitability of the future events they embellished and dressed 
Samba, son of Sambavati in the guise of a woman, and said to 
the sages after approaching and making obeisance to them. 

The young men said : 

8-13. O saintly lords, this woman is desirous of a son. What 
will she give birth to ? 

Vyasa said : 

O sages of good holy rites, the brahmins were endowed with 
divine wisdom. Hence, though an attempt was made by the 
young men to deceive them they could not be deceived. Those 
brahmins cursed them to their doom. The infuriated sages 
replied—“She will give birth to an iron club whereby the entire 
family of Yadavas will perish. 

Thus warned by those brahmins the young men mentioned 
everything precisely to Ugrasena. 

An iron club came out of the belly of Samba. Ugrasena 
powdered that iron club and scattered the powder into ocean. 
It grew into an Airaka reed. O brahmins, when the iron club 
was powdered, there remained a piece which could not be re¬ 
duced to powder by the Yadavas. It had the shape of a minia¬ 
ture iron club. 

14-17. It was also cast off into the ocean. A fish swallowed 
it. When it was killed by the fishermen the iron piece came out 
of its belly which a hunter immediately caught hold of. 
Though Krsna understood the truth, and though he was all- 
powerful, he did not wish to alter the course of events as 
brought about by the fate. 





510 


Brahma Parana 


A certain messenger, sent by Devas visited Kr?na and said : 
“O lord I have been sent as a messenger y asus, ^ svins, 
Maruts, Adityas, Rudras, Sadhyas and other Devas. O lord, 
Indra submits to you. O lord may it be listened to. 

Devas said : 

18-21. The lord has incarnated for reducing the burden of 
the Earth. More than a hundred years have gone by. You have 
been propitiated by Devas since Dai tyas of evil conduct have 
been killed. The burden of the Earth has been brought down. 
Let Devas with you as their leader go back to heaven. O lord 
of the universe, you have spent more than a hundred years on 
this Earth. If it pleases you, kindly repair to heaven. Our lord 
is intimated thus by Devas—If you still desire to be here we, 
your followers and servants, too, will have to be here alone for 
the requisite period of time. 

The lord said : 

22. O messenger, I know fully well what you say. But the 
destruction of Yadavas is only just started by me. 

23. If they remain uncxlerminated, they will constitute a 
great burden unto the Earth. Hence I shall hurriedly bring 
that down within seven nights. 

24. In the same manner as it had been taken from the 
ocean I shall replace Dvaraka in the ocean, exterminate Yada¬ 
vas and then return to heaven. 

25. I shall cast off my human body too, assisted by Sam- 
karsana. It should be considered by the leader of Devas that I 
have come there. 

26-27. The burden of Yadavas on the Earth is greater 
than the burden of Jarasandha and others who have been 
killed. Hence, after bringing down this very great burden 
of the Earth, I shall go over there in order to protect the 
world of immortal beings. Please tell them thus. 

Vyasa said : 

28. Thus informed by Vasudcva O sages, the divine 
messenger bowed to him and went to heaven near the king of 
Devas. 


101.29-40 


511 


29. Day and night the lord witnessed evil omens in hea¬ 
ven, on Earth and in the sky as well, indicating the destruction 
of Dvaraka. 

30. On seeing them he said to Yadavas—“See the extre¬ 
mely terrible evil omens. In order to subdue these, we shall 
go to Prabhasa. Do not delay”. 

31-22. Uddhava the great devotee of the lord bowed down 
to Krsna and said : 

“O lord, mention to me. What has to be done by me now ? 
O lord, command me now. I think the lord will annihilate this 
entire family. O Acyuta, I see evil signs for the destruction of 
this family. 

The lord said : 

33-34. Equipped with the divine facility of movement 
originating from my favour, go to the holy hermitage of 
Badarikasrama, on the mountain Gandhamadana.lt is the most 
sacred spot on Earth as it is the abode of Nara and Narayana. 
Keeping your mind in me, you will attain Siddhi there, due to 

my favour. 

35. After finishing this family I shall go to Heaven. T e 
sea will engulf Dvaraka in its flood when it has been abandon¬ 
ed by me. 


Vyasa said : 

36. Thus advised and urged by Krsna, Uddhava bowed to 
liim and went to the abode of Nara and Narayana. 

37. Then Yadavas, O brahmins, got into fast moving 
chariots and went to Prabhasa alongwith Krsna, Balarama and 

Mh 38.' After rr.cl.ing Prabhisa, .1.0 Kukuras andl Andhakas 
were sanctified and delighted. As it was approved of by \ asu 
deva they indulged in drinking bouts. , 

39 As Yadavas went on drinking . mutua struggle en¬ 
sued amongst them giving rise to a eonfUgrauen of quarrel 

,h TurtdbyTh=drmfa.e, they struck a. one another 
by means of weapons. When they had exhausted then weapons 
they took up Eraka reed nearby. 





512 


Brahma Parana 


41. When the Eraka was grasped by them, it appeared as 
though it had turned adamantine. With this they hit one an¬ 
other with terrible blows, 

42-43. O brahmins, Pradyumna, Samba, Krtavarma, 
SatyakT, Aniruddha, Prthu, Viprthu, Carudesna, Subahu, 
Akrura and others hit and struck one another with the ada¬ 
mantine pieces of Eraka reeds. 

44. Krsna restrained them. They thought that he was one 
who had come to assist them. They bit and struck one another. 

45. The infuriated Krsna seized a fistful of Eraka from 
them. Thus the iron club became the fistful of iron for their 
destruction. 

46. As an Assailant he killed all Yadavas. Suddenly they 
too approached him and hit one another. Others also did like¬ 
wise. 

47. Then O excellent brahmins, even as Daruka went on 
watching, observing, Jaitra, the chariot of the discus-bearing 
lord was dragged by the horses through the middle of the 
ocean. 

48. The discus Sarnga, quivers, conch and the sword 
circumambulated him and went away along the solar path. 

49. O excellent brahmins, within a moment Yadavas 
were destroyed except the mighty-armed Krsna and Daruka. 

50. While taking their rounds both of them saw Balarama 
seated at the root of a tree. A great serpent was coming out of 
his mouth. 

51. After wriggling out of his mouth that serpent of huge 
dimension went towards the ocean. It was worshipped by 
Siddhas as well as Nagas. 

52. Taking Arghya with him the ocean came face to face 
with Balarama. Worshipped by the excellent Nagas he entered 

the water. On seeing the passing away of Bala, lord Krsna said 
to Daruka. 

The lord said : 

53 58. Mention all this to Vasudeva and Ugrasena viz.— 
the passing away of Balarama, the destruction of Yadavas. 

1 s r) U rem j ain in yogic posture and cast ofT this physical 
body. The residents of Dvaraka and Ahuka should be informed 


102 . 1-8 


513 


that the ocean will flood this city. Hence all of you should 
stand ready with well equipped chariots and wait for Arjuna’s 
arrival. When the Pandava prince comes you must not stay in 
Dvaraka. You must go along with him wherever Arjuna, that 
descendant of Kuru, may go. After going there tell Arjuna, son 
of KuntI these words of mine. “These are my people. They 
should be protected by you in accordance with your ability”. 

Thus you shall accompany Arjuna taking the people of 
Dvaraka. Vajra shall become the king of Yadus. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWO 


Lord Krfna ascends Heaven 


Vyasa said : 

1. Thus directed, Daruka bowed to and circumambulated 
Krsna and went away as instructed. 

2. After going to Dvaraka he did as he was bid. He 
brought Arjuna there and made Vajra the king of Yadus. 

3. Lord Krsna reinstated the greatest Brahman of the 
nature ofVasudcva into the Atman and held it in all living 


being^. 

4. O excellent ones, honouring the words of brahmins and 
Durvasas, the lord remained in the yogic posture keeping one 
of his feet over the other knee. 


5. The hunter Jara came there, holding a great arrow 
fitted with the last remnant bit of the iron club. 

6. O excellent brahmins, on seeing the foot of the lord 
having the shape of a deer the hunter stopped. With the same 
remnant of the iron club he hit the lord. 


7-8. On going up (to the victim) the hunter saw a man 
with four arms. He bowed to him again and again and said, 
“Be pleased. This has been committed by me out of ignorance 
suspecting you to be a deer. I may be excused. It does not 
behove you to burn me as I am already burned by my own sin. 








514 


Brahma Pur ana 


Vyasa said : 

9-13. Then the lord said to him—“You need not have 
even the least bit of fear. O hunter, go to heaven, the resort of 
happiness, by the virtue of my grace”. 

Vyasa said : 

Immediately after he had uttered these words, an aerial 
chariot arrived there by virtue of his grace. The hunter got into 
it and went to heaven. When he had gone the lord cast off that 
mortal body and united his Atman with the supreme Atman, 
the Brahman, the unchanging, unimaginable, pure, unborn, 
unaging, undying, immeasurable soul of all identical with 
Vasudeva. Then he attained heaven. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THREE 
The episode of Krsna concluded 

Vyasa said : 

r0 

1. Arjuna found out the cast off physical bodies of Krsna 
and Balarama and performed the requisite consecratory rites. He 
did the same for others too. 

2. The eight crowned queens of Krsna, RukminI and 
others, took the dead body of Krsna and entered fire* 

3. Revati the excellent lady, embraced the body of Bala¬ 
rama and entered the blazing fire which cooled and delighted 
her by the mere touch of her body. 

4. On hearing about this, Ugrasena, Anakadundubhi, 
DevakI and RohinI entered fire. 

5. Arjuna performed their funeral rites in accordance with 
the injunctions. Taking all the people and Vajra with him he 
left Dvaraka. 

6. Thousands of wives of Krsna went out of Dvaravatl. 
Looking after Vajra and the people, the son of Kunti went 
ahead slowly. 


103.7-18 


515 


7. O brahmins, the assembly chamber Sudharma, that had 
been brought to the mortal world by Kisnawent back to heaven. 
So also the Parijata tree.. 

8. It was on the day on which Krsna left the Earth and 
went to heaven that the Kali age, with time for its body set in. 

9. The great ocean flooded Dvaraka. The sea did not 
engulf the house of the most excellent one among the descendants 
of Yadu. This was the only thing it did not envelop in its 
waters. 

10. Since Krsna the lord, is permanently present there, O 
brahmins, the great ocean does not even today, go beyond the 
limit (of this house). 

11. It is an abode of great merit. It destroys all sins. It is 
a place where Visnu sports about. On seeing it one is liberated 
from sins. 

12. O excellent sages, in the land ofPancanada (watered by 
five rivers), equipped with much of wealth and foodgrains, 
Arjuna made arrangements for the residence of all the people. 

13-14. The ladies whose husbands had been killed in the 
battle-field were being led by Arjuna who had the bow in his 
hand. On seeing them led by Arjuna, robbers felt greedy. The 
Abhiras (cowherds) who were very haughty, who committed sin¬ 
ful deeds and whose minds were afflicted by covetousness gather¬ 
ed together and consulted one another. 

The Abhiras said : 

15-17. Here is Arjuna armed with his bow. Alone he is 
leading the women-folk whose husbands had been killed. He is 
taking them beyond us. Let his strength be reduced and ridicul¬ 
ed. By killing Bhlsma, Drona, Jayadratha, Kama, and others 
he has become arrogant. He is not aware of the strength of the 
rural folk. He treats others with contempt regarding them infe¬ 
rior to him in strength, especially the people of villages. 

Vyasa said : 

18. Tnereafter Dasyus who hurled lumps of clay and who 
struck with their staffs rushed at those womenfolk whose hus¬ 
bands had been killed. They attacked them in their thousands. 
Turning back, the son of Kunti spoke to the Abhiras laughingly . 





516 


Brahma Purdna 


Arjuna said : 

19-24. “Return, O unrighteous ones, if you are not desirous 
of dying”. 

Vydsa said : 

They disregarded his words and seized the wealth and the 
womenfolk from the son of KuntI, the womenfolk who had 
been the wives of 

Then Arjuna began to string up his bow Gamjiva that never 
became infirm in battle. But that powerful hero could not string 
it up. 

With great difficulty he tied up the string but it became loose 
again. Although he racked his brain the son of Pandu could not 
remember the mantras with which they had to be discharged. 

Arjuna discharged the remaining arrows against these. But, 
though they were discharged from the Gandiva bow they did not 
inflict any injury. The everlasting arrows received from the 
god of‘fire became exhausted. Thus when he fought with the 
cowherds Arjuna was defeated and exhausted. 

25-26. Arjuna thought— 1 “It was really Krsna’s strength 
whereby the various kings were conquered by me through 
volleys of arrows”. 

Even as the son of Pantfu-was watching with wide open eyes, 
those excellent ladies were abducted by Abhiras. Others went 
away as they desired. 

27. When the arrows were exhausted Arjuna struck them 
with the tip of his bow. O brahmins, at the blow the Dasyus 
laughed derisively. 

28. Even as Arjuna was watching, O excellent sages, those 
Mlccchas seized the excellent women of Vrsnis and Andhakas 
and carried them to their places all round. 

29. Arjuna became dejected saying—“Alas; Alas, I have 
been abandoned by that lord.” He lamented. 

Arjuna said : 

30. That bow, those miraculous missiles, that chariot and 
those horses—all these are destroyed at one'stroke like the chari¬ 
table gift to one who is not learned in the Vedas. 


103.31-42 


517 


31. O, fate indeed is very powerful. Without that Atman, 
I am devoid of all efficiency. I have been led to ignoble defeat. 

32. These are the same arms as before; this is the same fist 
of mine. This is the same spot. I am the same Arjuna but with¬ 
out merit everything has gone worthless. 

33. My superior powers and those of Bhimawere certainly 
effected by Lord Kjrsna. Without him, I have been conquered 
by the cowherds. How can it happen otherwise ? 

Vyasa said : 

34. Saying thus, Arjuna went to Indraprastha. There he 
crowned as king, the Yadava scion Vajra. 

35. Arjuna saw there the highly blessed sage Vyasa with 
his abode in the forest. He approached him humbly and saluted 
the sage. 

36-41. As Arjuna bowed down to his feet, the sage closely 
looked at'him. He spoke “Why are you so exceedingly pale and 
colourless ? Did you follow a column of dust kicked up and 
raised by goats ? Was the murder of a brahmin committed by 
you ? Are .you miserable because your hopes of victory have been 
shattered ? Surely you don’t have brilliant lustre (in your face) 
now. Were your offsprings and others rebuked while they were 
begging ? Have you taken any lustful interest in any woman who 
cannot be carnally approached ? You are lacking lustre thereby. 
Are you in the habit of eating sweets alone without giving a 
portion to brahmins ? Or were the riches of any miser removed 
by you ? I hope, O Arjuna, you have not been affected by the 
glare of the sun or the gust of wind ? Has the evil eye struck 
you ? How can you be devoid of splendour otherwise ? Are you 
defiled in the water from the nail or have you been sprinkled by 
the water from ajar ? Why do you very much lack in lustre ? 
Or have you been defeated by base men in battle.” 

Vyasa said : 

42. Arjuna who was thus addressed took a deep breath and 
said. “O holy sir, may it be heard”. O brahmins, he mentioned 
about his mortification precisely. 









518 


Brahma Purana 


Arjuna said : 

43. He who had been our strength, our splendour, our 
prowess, our exploit, our glory, our lustre—lord K^na—has left 
us. 

44-45. Without him, O sage, we are like stumps and pegs. 
He had been one who used to speak smilingly to us. He, the best 
of men, had been the cause of strength of our missiles, of our 
arrows and of my bow Gandlva. 

46. It was due to his supervision that glory, victory and 
increase of wealth never forsook us. But to our misfortune, the 
lord himself has forsaken us now. 

47. It was through the power of Krsna that Bhlsma, Drona, 
Karna, Duryodhana and others were destroyed. But that Krsna 
has left off the Earth. 

48. To me the Earth appears like a lady who has lost her 
blooming youth, whose splendour is destroyed and whose lustre 
has vanished. O dear one, I am not the only one to suffer from 
the bereavement of the discus-bearing lord. 

49. Due to the power and magnificence of Krsna I was able 
to kill Bhlsma and others. I was like fire and they were like 
moths. But today, without lord Krsna, I have been defeated by 
cowherds. 

50. My bow Gandlva is well known in the three worlds due 
to his magnificence. But without him, it has been slighted by 
the cowherds by means of mere sticks. 

51. O great sage, thousands of helpless ladies have been 
carried off, in spite of my endeavour, by the Dasyus who had 
batons for their weapons. 

52. All the womenfolk of Krsna, while being brought over 
here by me, have been carried away by the cowherds who 
carried sticks as their weapons. 

53. It is not surprising that I am devoid of splendour. The 
fact that I am alive is miraculous. I have been marked by the 
mud in the form of insults at the hands of base men. I have been 
ashamed, O grand-father. 

Vyasasaid : 

54. On hearing the words of the noble-minded Arjuna, who 


103.55-67 


519 


was dejected and miserable, O excellent brahmins, I spoke 
thus : 

55. Enough of your being ashamed, O Arjuna, it does not 
behove you to bewail. Understand that the working of time in 
all living beings is like this. 

56. O Arjuna, Kala is conducive to the nativity of living 
beings as well as to their non-existence. Knowing that Kala is at 
the root of everything, be steady-minded. 

57-58. Rivers, oceans, mountains, Earth, Devas, human 
beings, animals, trees and reptiles are created by Kala and later 
they attain dissolution through Kala. Knowing that all this is 
of the nature of Kala you shall attain mental peace. 

59. O Arjuna, the greatness ofKrsna is just as you say. He 
had taken up incarnation on Earth for reducing its burden. 

60. Formerly, the Earth that had been afflicted by burden 
had gone to Devas. It was for that purpose that Visnu who could 
assume any form that he desired had taken up incarnation. 

61. That task has been achieved, the kings have been killed. 
The family of Vrsnis and Andhakas has been duly finished. 

62. O Arjuna, there was nothing else to be done by him on 
the face of the Earth. So the contented lord went away as he 
wished. 

63. This lord of Devas performs creation at the beginning 
and sustains during its maintenance. He is competent to annihi¬ 
late as well, as has been done now. 

64. Hence, O Arjuna, you must not feel aggrieved due to 
this discomfiture. At the moment of creative activity men will 
have exploits. 

65. It is exemplified by the fact that Bhisma, Drona and 
other beings were killed by you alone. O Arjuna, is not this 
attack a deficiency in their case, as brought about by Kala ? 

66. Just as their mortification was brought about by the 
magnificence of Visnu and through you, so also is your mortifi¬ 
cation at the hands of Dasyus. It is caused by the magnificence 
ofVisnu. 

67. That lord, the lord of the universe, permeates other 
bodies and performs the task of dissolving all living beings in 
the end. 






520 


Brahma Purana 


68. During the origin of this creative process the lord was 
your ally, O son of Kuntl. At the close of created beings those 
who are viewed with sympathy by the lord had been your 
adversaries. 

69. Who could have believed at the beginning that you 
could kill Kauravas including Bhisma ? Who could have believ¬ 
ed your discomfiture at the hands of cowherds ? 

70-71. Arjuna, this is only a peculiar type of activity of 
Kjrsna in respect of all living beings. The fact that Kauravas 
and others were defeated by you in the battle and that the 
women under your protection were carried away by Dasyus 
this is only the lord’s sport. 

I shall tell you an anecdote, O Arjuna, in the manner it 
had occurred. 

72. O Arjuna, formerly the brahmin Astavakra was in¬ 
terested in staying under water for many years even as he was 
worshipping the eternal lord. 

73. WhenAsuras had been defeated, there was a great fes¬ 
tival on the top of Meru. The celestial damsels saw him on 
their way to the festival. 

74. O Arjuna, Rambha, Tilottama and hundreds and thou¬ 
sands of other ladies eulogised and praised that great soul. 

75. They praised the sage who wore weighty matted hair 
and who was standing immersed in water up to his neck. 
With humility they bent down their heads. They were eager in 
repeating the hymns. 

76. They eulogised him so much that he became pleased 
with them. O most excellent among the descendants of Kuru, 
they eulogised that most excellent brahmin. 

Astavakra said : 

77. O highly blessed ladies, I am delighted. Whatever is 
wished for by you, may be requested for from me. I shall grant 
it even if it.is very difficult to grant. 

Vyasa said : 

78-82. Rambha, Tilottama and other celestial damsels 
said : 


103.83-92 


521 


The Apsaras said : 

If you are pleased, O brahmins, grant what is not achieved 
by us ? 

Others said O brahmin, if you are pleased we wish to 
obtain Krsna as our husband”. 

Vycisa said : 

Saying, <c It will be so”, the sage got up from water. As he 
got up they saw that he was deformed with crookedness in eight 
ways 

O scion of the family of Kuni, on seeing the deformed sage 
the celestial damsels laughed. Some concealed their laughter. 
But some laughed openly. The infuriated sage cursed them. 

Aslavakra said : 

83-85. Considering me ugly and deformed you have laugh¬ 
ed derisively at me. Hence I curse you. 

Due to my favour, you will obtain Krsna as your husband. 
But afflicted by my curse, you will fall into the hands of 
Dasyus. 

Vyasa said : 

86. On hearing these words, the sage was propitiated by 
them. He said, “You will go once again to the world of the lord 
of Dcvas.” 

87. Hence, O Arjuna, even the least bit of sorrow need not 
be felt by you. Everything has already been ordained by the 
lord of all. 

88. Your strength, splendour, prowess and greatness have 
been condensed by the lord desirous of annihilating you all. 

89. Death is inevitable to one who is born; fall is a sequal 
to rise. Close contact leads to separation in the end; hoarding 
leads to destruction. 

90-92. After knowing all these things the learned men 
neither feel sorry nor elated. There are others like them who 

derive lessons from such events. 

Hence, O excellent among men, know this. Eschew the 
entire kingdom. Alongwith your brothers, go to the forest, for 
performing penance* 


jBMfjj 







522 


Brahma Purana 


Hence go. Intimate to Dharmaraja (Yudhisthira) these 
words of mine. O heroic one, day after tomorrow attain the 
ultimate goal along with your brothers. 

Vyasa said : 

93-95. Thus advised, Arjuna approached his elder brother 
and informed him and the other brothers including the twins 
Nakulaand Sahadeva what he had seen and experienced. On 
hearing the words of Vyasa uttered by Arjuna, the sons of 
Pandu crowned Parlksit in the kingdom and went to the forest. 

Thus, O excellent sages, the activities of Vasudeva, born in 
the family of Yadu, have been mentioned by me in detail. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FOUR 
The glorification of different Manifestations of the lord 
The sages said : 

1. O excellent sage, the rare manifestation and the diverse 
activities of lord Krsna as well as Balarama in the world have 
been mentioned by you. 

2. Listening to the story of the lord we are not contented. 
We wish to hear about the other manifestations of the lord of 
the universe. 

3. There was a manifestation of Visnu of unmeasured 
splendour, mentioned by good men in the Puranas. It has been 
heard by us as Varaha (Boar). 

4. We do not know his full conduct nor the details of the 
process whereby the incarnation took place. We do not know 
the extent of the existence of Gunas and Karmans in him. We 
do not know the extent of his will in the causation thereof. 

5. Of what nature was this Varaha ? What was his form ? 
What is the deity ? What are his conduct and prowess ? What 
was performed by him then ? 


104.6.20 


523 


6. The story of the great boar is conducive to the happiness 
of brahmins assembled at the sacrifice of those whose mind is 
always set on holy rites. It is pleasing to all the worlds. 

7-9. O brahmin, we wish to know how Narayana assumed 
the form of the Boar. How Visnu, the suppressor of foes, lifted 
up the Earth that was within the ocean, by means of his curved 
fangs. It is our inclination to hear about the activities of the 
slayer of foes, in detail. We wish to hear about the manifesta¬ 
tions of Visnu alongwith his activities in due order. It behoves 
you to recount the nature of the lord, O holy brahmin. 


Vydsa said : 

10. The burden of questions cited by you is indeed immense. 

I shall recount in accordance with my capacity. May the glory 
of Visnu be heard about. 

11. Fortunately your mind is inclined to listen to the 
prowess of Visnu. O excellent brahmins, I shall recount to you 
the manifestations of Visnu. 

12-20. It is him that the brahmins conversant with the 
Vedic lore call with a thousand mouths, a thousand-eyed, 
thousand-footed, thousand-headed, the unchanging lord 
with thousand hands, thousand-tongued, brilliant lord with a 
thousand crowns. He is the bestower of a thousand, the dev- 
ourerof a thousand, the unchanging one with a thousand 
arms. The various parts of the Yajna are mentioned as iden¬ 
tical with him viz. Havana, Savana, Hotr, Havya, Holy 
vessels, altar, initiation, sacrificial twig, ladle, soma 
juice, winnowing basket, throbbing rod, proksam vessel, Daksina- 
yana, Adhvaryu brahmin who sings saman, Sadhya, Sadana, 
Sadas, Yupa, Cakra, Dhruva, Darvi, Cams, Ulukhalas, 
Pragvamsa, the altar and whatever is beyond that. He is iden¬ 
tical with the mobile 'and immobile beings whether short or 

huge in size. He is one with the rites of atonement, Arghya 
Sthantjila, Kusa grass, lire lhat conveys the mantras and 
Yajnas, the share and he tvho conveys the share. They ra 
him as one who partakes of his share a. the outset, sw *e 
imbiber of Soma, as one who has put offering 
who has lifted up the weapon. The brahmms conversant with 
IT vSas call him the eternal lord of Yajna, thousands of 







524 


Brahma Purana 


manifestations of the lord of Devas, of Visnu marked with the 
scar Srlvatsa had taken place before; they will occur in 
future too—so says Brahma. 

21-22. O highly blessed ones, it is about this holy and 
divine story that you have asked. It is based on the incarna¬ 
tions of Visnu. It is an auspicious story that dispels sins. O 
highly blessed ones, listen to this with your full concentration. 
May your wider soul be engrossed in the lord. O sinless ones, 
I shall recount in due order what you ask me. 

23. I shall mention the greatness of Vasudeva, the con¬ 
duct of life of the highly intelligent one, for the welfare of 
Devas and mortal beings as well as the origin of the worlds. 

24. The supreme Atman manifests himself on many occa¬ 
sions. I shall recount the manifestations that are divine, sacred 
and endowed with good qualities. 

25. The lord of Devas, the lord of universe, who sleeps 
for the period of a thousand sets of four Yugas, manifests 
himself against some (specific) task after the thousand sets of 
four Yugas are completed. 

26-32. The ancient lord whose splendour was as brilliant 
as that of the well kindled fire created all these :- Brahma, 
Kapila, the three-eyed Siva, Devas, seven sages, Nagas, 
Apsaras, Sanatkumara of great magnificence and the noble 
Manu who was the lord and creator of subjects. When all the 
mobile and immobile beings had perished, when Devas, Asuras, 
human beings had perished, when Nagas and Raksasas had 
perished, the lord remained in the middle of the ocean. (At 
that time) two Raksasas—Madhu and Kaitabha who were very 
powerful desired to win him. After boundless boons had been 
granted to them they were killed by the lord. 

Formerly, as the lotus-umbilicused lord was sleeping in 
the waters of the ocean, Devas and sages were born in that 
lotus. This manifestation of the lord of the universe is the 
one which pertains to the lotus. In the course of this mani¬ 
festation the Purana is mentioned with the same concentration 
as the celestial Vedas. The manifestation of the great 
soul is mentioned in the Vedas. In this course this manifesta¬ 
tion, Visnu the most excellent of Devas assumed the form of 
a Boar. 


104.33-36 


525 


Extra seven verses 


[The Yajnavaraha (the Boar of the sacrificial form) appeared 
thus. The Vedas constituted his face. Sacrificial posts were 
his legs. Sacrifice was his tooth, sacrificial fire was his face, the 
fiery flame was his tongue, the Darbha grass constituted his 
hair; Brahma was his head; he performed great penance (?) 
Day and night constituted his eyes; He was of a divine 
form; the ancillaries of the Vedas constituted his ear-orna¬ 
ments; the clarified butter was his nose; the sacrificial ladle 
was his snout. The great Saman songs were his loud snorting 
sounds. He was glorious and full of truthfulness and piety. 
He was duly greeted for his exploits in due order; the expia¬ 
tory rites were his terrible nails (colours). He had the form 
of a sacrificial animal from knee to face. The intestines were 
the ancillaries, (?) the Homa was his symbol, the seeds and 
the medicinal plants constituted his great fruits, recitations 
were his inner soul; the Mantras were his loins; the Soma 
juice was his blood; the altar was his shoulder. Havis 


(offering) was his scent offering; Havyas and Kavyas cons¬ 
tituted his velocity; Pragvamsa was his physical body. He was 
lustrous, purified by different initiations. Daksina was his heart. 
He was a Yogin in the form of a great sacrifice. The eight 
Upakarman rites constituted his golden ornaments round the 
neck; the Pravargya was his circular ornament. The different 
metres constituted his gait and paths; the secret doctrine of 
the Upanisads constituted his seat. He had his own shadow 
as his wife and assistant; he stood up like a mountain with a 

jewelled peak.] . . 

33-36. The Earth extending upto oceans and consisting 

of mountains, tree-groves and forests got immersed in the vast 
sheet of water. The lord dived into the vast sheet of water and 
lifted the Earth by means of his curved fang, with a desire for 
the welfare of the worlds. The lord, , the primordial cause of 
the world, the lord with a thousand heads reinstated the Earth 
once again. Thus the goddess Earth immersed into the waters 
of the ocean was lifted up formerly by Yajna-varaha, the one 

who sought the welfare of living beings. 

Thus the incarnation of Varaha has been mentioned O 
brahmins. Thereafter (is the manifestation of) Narasimha 







526 Brahma Purana 

(Man-lion). In this incarnation, Hiranyakasipu was killed by 
the lord who became a lion. 

37-38. Formerly, O brahmins, in the Krtayuga, this enemy 
of Devas was the leader of asuras. He was proud of his strength. 
He performed great penance for ten thousand years. For a 
thousand years he was engaged in Japas and observance of 
fasts. For five hundred years he adopted the holy rite of 
silence, 

39. Brahma was delighted by his penance and observance 
of restraints by his mental control and subjugation of sense-organs 
and at his celebacy. 

40-44. O brahmins, the self-born lord Brahma came there 
on a shining aerial chariot with the lustre of the sun and fitted 
with a swan. He was accompanied and surrounded by all these 
Adityas, Vasus, Maruts, Daivatas, Rudras, Visvasahayas, Yaksas 
Raksasas, Kinnaras, Disas (guardians of quarters), Pradisas 
(guardians of the intermediary directions), deities of rivers, oceans, 
stars, Muhurtas(the presiding deity of time units of 48 minutes), 
planets traversing firmament, celestial sages, persons grown old 
in performing penances, the learned Siddhas, the holiest saintly 
kings, Gandharvas, Apsaras and Devas. The glorious Brahma, 
the preceptor of mobile and immobile beings, the most excellent 
one among the knowers of Brahman spoke to the asura. 

Brahma said : 

45. O you of good holy rites, I am pleased wtih your 
penance. Welfare unto you. Choose a boon. Obtain your 
cherished desires. 

Hiranyakatipu s aid: 

46 50. O grand-father of the worlds, none of these should 
curse me by imprecations—Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas, Yaksas, 
iNagas, Raksasas, infuriated sages and those who are endowed with 
penance. This the first boon I choose. I should not be killed by 
any o t ese things weapons, missiles, mountains, trees whether 
ry or wet. I should not be killed above or below. He who is 
a e to l me at one blow of his hand along with my servants, 
armies and vehicles shall cause my death. I shall be all these : 
sun, moon, wind, fire, water, atmosphere, firmament, everything. 


104.51-59 


527 


I must be anger, love, Varuna, Indra, Yama, Kubera, the 
presiding deity of riches as well as the over-lord of Yaksas and 
Kimpurusas. 

Brahma said : 

51. O dear one, all these divine and wonderful boons have 
been granted to you by me. O dear one, you will attain all 
these desires. 

Vyasa said : 

52. After saying this, lord Brahma immediately went to his 
abode frequented by the brahminical sage. 

53. On hearing about the granting of boon, Devas, Nagas, 
Gandharvas and sages approached him. 

Devas said : 

54. O lord, with this boon, that Asura will harass us. 
Hence, O lord, be pleased, let the manner of his destruction be 
also thought of. 

55. O lord, you are the self-born lord, you are the cause 
of all living beings, you are the creator of Havyas and Kavyas. 
You Are the unmanifest being. You are certainly Prakrti. 

Vyasa said : 

56/ Then, on hearing these words conducive to the welfare 
of all, lord Brahma spoke to Devas. 

Brahma said : 

57. O Devas, the fruit of penance must of course be obtain- 
ed by him. But as the benefits of penance are exhausted 
lord Visnu will slay him. 

Vyasa said : 

58. On hearing these words of the lotus-born Brahma 
Devas felt joyous. They returned to their divine abodes. 

59. Immediately after he had obtained the boon, the 
asura Hiranyakasipu became haughty and he harassed his 
subjects. 


mm i 









528 


Brahma Purana 


60. He overpowered and insulted the highly blessed sages 
of holy rites, interested in truthfulness and piety and of subdued 
sense-organs. 

61. That great Asura defeated Devas stationed in 
heaven. He kept the three worlds under his control and lived in 
heaven. 

62. Whenever that asura became haughty due to his 
obtaining the boon he roamed over the Earth. He made asuras 
worthy of shares in the Yajnas and Devas, unworthy of shares 
in the same. 

63-64. The Adityas, Vasus, Sadhyas, Visvedevas and 
Maruts sought refuge in Visnu of great strength, worthy of 
being sought as refuge. They sought refuge in the eternal lord 
of Brahman identical with the Yajnas unto Devas and Brahman 
the lord of the past, present and future bowed to by all the 
worlds. They sought refuge in the omnipresent lord Narayana 
worthy of being sought refuge. 

Devas said : 

65. O lord of Devas, save us today from the fear of Hiran- 
yakasipu. Indeed you are our greatest lord. You are our 
greatest preceptor. 

66. O most excellent one among Devas, you are indeed 
the supreme creator of all of us, Brahma and others. O lord, 
with the eyes resembling thepetals of a full blown lotus devoid 
of impurities, O lord, the destroyer of the enemy hosts, be our 
refuge for the destruction of the race of Diti. 


Vasudeva said : 


67. O immortal ones, cast off your fear. I grant you all, 
fearlessness. O Devas, you will regain heaven as before without 
delay. 


68. I shall kill this asura along with his attendants. I shall 
kill this leading Danava haughty on account of his acquiring 
the boon that he cannot be killed by the leading immortal 


ones. 


Vyasa said : 

69. After saying this to the chiefs of Devas and bidding 




104.70-93 


529 


them farewell, the lord of great strength came to the abode of 
Hiranyakasipu. 

70-74. The lord had half of his body human and half of 
the body leonine. Adopting the man-lion form, the lord clapped 
one hand with the other. He resembled the cloud; he 
had the voice and the brilliant prowess of the thick rain¬ 
bearing cloud; he was as impetuous as the cloud. On seeing the 
asura of great strength, guarded by the haughty asuras, the 
lord whose exploits were like those of a proud tiger hit and 
killed him with a single hand. 

This manifestation of the Man-lion has been recounted. 
The next great manifestation is that ofVamana. In the course 
of this manifestation, formerly, the powerful Visnu adopted the 
form of a Dwarf destructive of Daityas. In the Yajna of the 
powerful Bali these great Asuras who could not be agitated by 
others were agitated by the three paces of Visnu. 

75-93. The following types of Asuras and Danavas and 
those of the following names assailed Hrslkesa who had taken 
the steps. They were Vipracitti, Siva, Sanku, Ayahsanku, 
Ayahsiras, Asvasiras, Hayagriva, Vegavan, Ketuman, Ugra, the 
great Asura Ugravyagra, Puskara, Puskala, Asvapati, Prahlada, 
Kumbha, Samhrada, Gamanapriya, Anuhrada, Harihaya, 
Varaha, Samhara, Anuja, Sarabha, Salabha, Kupatha, 
Krodhana, Kratha, Brhatklrti, Mahajihva, Sankukarna, 
Mahasvana, Diptajihva, Arkanayana, Mrgapada, Mrgapriya, 
Vayu, Garistha, Namuci, Sambara, Viksara the great, 
Candrahanta, Krodhahanta, Krodhavardhana, Kalaka, 
Kalakopa, Vrtra, Krodha, Virocana, Garistha, Varistha, 
Pralamba, Naraka, Indratapana, Vatapi, Ketuman proud 
of his strength, Asiloma, Puloma, Vaskala, Pramada, Mada, 
Svamisra, Kalavadana, Karala Kesi, Ekaksa, Candramas, 
Rahu, Samhrada, Sarhvara and Svana were the Daityas. Some 
of them had Sataghnis (hundred smashers) and discus in 
their hands; some carried iron clubs in their hands; some carried 
Asvayantra weapons (mechanical devices driven by horses). 
Some had Bhindipala variety of iron club as their weapons; 
some had tridents and mortars in their hands. Others were 
holding axes. Some had nooses, Mudgara iron clubs or Parigha 
iron clubs in their hands. The Danavas used great rocky 






530 


Brahma Purana 


boulders as their weapons. They were armed with javelins. 
They were awful Danavas with diverse kinds of weapons. They 
were very powerful and came from different lands. There were 
Danavas with faces resembling those of tortoises, cocks, rabbits, 
owls, donkeys, camels, boars, cats, peacocks, crocodiles, rams, 
cows, goats, sheep, bulls, mountain lizards, porcupines, jackals, 
mice, frogs, wolves, sharks, Kraunca birds, Garuda, mules and 
peacocks. All of them were terrible and awful. Some were clad 
in the hides of big elephants. Some were clad in deer skins. 
Some covered their bodies with the barks of trees. Some had 
blue robes. Some had turbans or crowns. Some had rings. Some 
wore coronets, some had long loose tresses. They were refulgent 
with their necks resembling the conch. They wore various types 
of dress and garments. They had applied diverse kinds of un¬ 
guents. They wore various kinds of garlands. They seized and 
wielded their respective blasting weapons and gathered round 
Hrslkesa. 

94-96. With the soles of his feet and the palms of his hands 
he crushed Daityas. He assumed a great and terrible form and 
roamed over the Earth. As he grew in size and roamed over the 
Earth, the moon and the sun at first stood on a level with his 
chest. When he flew up in the sky they stood against his umbilicus. 
When he of unmeasured prowess further grew in size they stood 
on a level with his knees. 

97-98. After killing the leading Asuras and seizing the 
entire Earth from them, Visnu the most excellent among the 
strong ones granted the Earth unto Vamana. Indra the mani¬ 
festation of the great Atman named Vamana has been recounted 
to you. This glory of Visnu is being recounted in detail by the 
brahmins who are conversant with the Vedas. 

99. A further manifestation of Visnu the great Atman, in 
the nature of a living being, is well known as Dattatreya. He 
was equipped with great forbearance. 

100-102. When the Vedas perished, when the holy rites and 
sacrifices became defunct, when the rigidity of discipline of the 
four castes became loose and when piety weakened, it was he 
who restored all these. When truthfulness got lost and when 
falsehood prevailed, when the subjects became shattered and 
scattered and when virtuousness became disarrayed, Vedas were 


104.103-116 


531 


restored by him along with the Yajiias and holy rites. The four 
castes were made by that great Atman, free from admixture. 

103. Boon was granted by the intelligent Dattatreya to 
Karttavlryathe intelligent king of Haihayas. 

104. O king, this pair of arms of thine which was placed 
at my service shall certainly become a thousand arms. 

105. O lord of the Earth, you will protect the entire Earth. 
Engaged in battle you become so dazzling that you will not 
be stared at by the enemy. 

106. This glorious and auspicious manifestation of Visnu 
has been recounted to you. There is another manifestation of 
the great Atman namely Jamadagnya Parasurama. 

107. In the course of this manifestation the lord Parasurama 
killed king Sahasrarjuna in battle. Previously he had been 
invincible to the enemies in battle by the prowess of his thousand 
arms. 

108-109. King Sahasrarjuna was seated in the chariot. 
Parasuratna struck him to ground. Sahasrarjuna was crying 
like the rumbling cloud. Parasurama assailed him. The scion 
of the family of Bhrgu cut off his thousand arms by his refulgent 
axe. He slew him together with his kinsmen. 

110. The Earth where crores of Ksatriyas remained scatte¬ 
red about, the Earth that is adorned by the mountains Meru 
and Mandara was rid of Ksatriyas twentyone* times by the 
lord. 

111. After making the Earth devoid of Ksatriyas, Para¬ 
surama of great fame performed a horse sacrifice in order to 
dispel his sins. 

112-116. In the course of this sacrifice, the scion of the 
family of Bhrgu gave the Earth as gift unto Kasyapa the son 
ofMarici. In this sacrifice precious articles were offered as gifts. 
Parasurama, the most excellent among those who fought 
gave elephants, horses, chariots, gold, and cows as gifts in 
that horse-sacrifice. For the welfare of the worlds, lord Jama¬ 
dagnya, the scion of the family of Bhrgu, of great fame and 
great penance stays even today on the most excellent 
mountain Mahendra like a Deva. He is the manifestation 







532 


Brahma Parana 


of the great Atman of Visnu, the perpetual lord of Devas, the 
unchanging lord. He is well known as Jamadagnya, son of 
Jamadagni. 

117-120. In the twentyfourth cycle of four Yugas, the lord 

of large eyes resembling the blue lotus was born as the son of 

Dasaratha. Visvamitra preceded him in the course of this mani¬ 
festation. The lord of great arms divided himself into four. The 
lord resembled the sun in refulgence. He became well known in 
the world as Rama, son of king Dasaratha. The lord of great 
renown was born for augmenting piety, propitiating the people 
and curbing the wicked. They say that the lord of men engaged 
in the welfare of all living beings stayed in the forest for four¬ 
teen years. He was conversant with all holy rites and virtuous 


deeds. . 

121-122. Followed by Laksmana, Rama engaged in the 

welfare of all living beings, performed penance in the forest for 
fourteen years. Laksml took the form of Slta and followed her 
husband (to the forest) and remained at his side. 

123-127. Living in Janasthana, 1 the leader among men 
performed the task of Devas. Seeking the whereabouts of Slta, 
the lord of great fame killed Ravana, the ruthless descendant 
of Pulastya, who had injured him. The lord killed Ravana the 
leader of Raksasas. The king of Raksasas was indestructible to 
Devas, Asuras, Yaksas, Raksasas and Nagas. He was in colla¬ 
boration with crores of Raksasas. He was comparable to a mass 
of blue collyrium. He was invincible. He was incapable of being 
held. He was haughty and had exploits similar to that of a tiger. 
Devas dared not look at him. He was arrogant due to the boons 
that had been granted to him (by lord Siva). Lord Rama 
killed him along with his ministers and armies in the battle. 

128. Rama the lord of the living beings killed Ravana who 
had a huge body, who was very powerful and who resembled a 
mass of clouds. 

129. For the sake of Sugrlva, Bali the powerful lord of 
monkeys was killed in battle and Sugrlva was crowned in his 
place. 


1. Janasthana : A part of DaijiJaka forest which lies in the basin 
of Godavari. Rama had lived in this forest with Sita and Laksmana for a 
long time during the period of his exile. 









1 ° 4 .i 30-141 533 

130. The great Asura, the haughty son of Madhu, the 
Danava named Lavana, the heroic demon, proud of his boons 
was killed in the forest (named) Madhuvana. 

131-132. Marlca and Subahu who were the most excellent 
ones among strong persons, who caused impediments in the 
Yajnas of the sages of purified souls, were killed by that great 
Atman, an expert in battle in the course of the fight. Other 
Raksasas too were killed by him. 

133. The tiger among men killed Viradha and Kabandha, 
the Raksasas of terrible exploits who had been formerly two 
Gandharvas deluded by imprecation. 

134. In the battle Rama killed his enemies by means of 
arrows, that had the lustre of fire, sun-rays and lightning streaks, 
that had the tail ends fitted with feathers of various kinds made 
of molten gold and the strength of which was like that of the 
thunderbolt of Mahendra. 

135. Weapons were given to him by Visvaraitra the intelli¬ 
gent sage for slaying the enemies who could not be assailed even 
by Devas. 

136. Formerly, when a certain sacrifice yvas performed by 
Janaka the great Atman, the great bow belonging to Mahesvara 
was broken by him even as he playfully and sportingly touched 
it. 

137. After performing these tasks Rama the most excellent 
among the virtuous performed ten horse-sacrifices where flesh 
was offered to the deities. 

138. While Rama was ruling over the kingdom people were 
not malicious or jealous. They did not speak inauspicious words. 
Winds blew without agitation. No wealth was stolen or taken by 
force. 

139. No widow lamented. There were no calamities. Every¬ 
thing was auspicious when Rama was ruling over the earth. 

140. No living being had any fear from water, fire, wind or 
blows (of any sort) . Old men never performed the funeral rites 
of boys (i.e. boys never died before old men). 

141. The Ksatriyas were devoted to the Brahmins. The 
Vaisyas were devoted to the Ksatriyas. The Sudras served the 
three castes without any pride or egotism. 









534 


Brahma Parana 


142. Women did not stray from their husbands; the hus¬ 
band did not stray from his wife. The entire universe was 
restrained and subdued. The earth was rid of robbers. 

143-151. Rama alone sustained the people. Rama alone 
was the saviour. People lived for thousand years. They had 
thousand sons. When Rama ruled over the earth all living be¬ 
ings were devoid of ailments; there was unity among the deities, 
sages and human beings everywhere on the Earth. The people 
who are conversant with ancient legends sing the following 
popular folk song thus— 

People had a close and real bond of love with Rama. The 
intelligent lord had greatness. He was a young man with red 
eyes and refulgent face. He spoke with limitation and restraint. 
His arms extended upto his knees. He had a gentle face. He 
had great arms and leonine shoulders. He ruled over the earth 
for ten thousand years. There were the following sounds conti¬ 
nuously in his kingdom—the sound of the chanting of Rks, 
Saman and Yajus Mantras; the twanging sound of the bow. 
This sound never ceased viz. u Let this be given, let this be eaten.” 
Rama the son of Dasaratha richly possessed Sattva attributes 
and other qualities. He shone with his own brilliance, more 
brilliantly than the moon and the sun. He performed hundreds 
of holy sacrifices at the conclusion of which excellent gifts were 
offered to the Brahmins. He of great strength left Ayodhya and 
went to Heaven. It was in this manner that the lord of great 
arms, the scion of the family of Iksvaku killed Ravana along 
with his attendants and went over to Heaven. 

152. There was another manifestation of the great Atman 
Krsna for the welfare of worlds. It was well known in the 
Mathura Kalpa (period-of activity at Mathura). 

153-154. In the course of this manifestation, the powerful 
lord in human form killed Daityas, Salva, Sisupala, Kariisa 
Dvivida, Arista, Vrsabhaand Kesi, ogress Putana, the elephant 
Kuvalayaplda, Canura and Mustika. 

155. Thousands ofarmsofBana of miraculous activities 
were cut off. Naraka was killed in the war. So also Yavana 
of great strength. 

156. All the jewels of the kings were taken away by him 




i •- — :;. -. . ;• 


104.157—105.1 535 

due to his brilliance. The kings of the Earth whose conduct 
was wicked and sinful were killed. 

157. The following manifestation of the great Atman is 
conducive to the welfare of the world. It is the manifestation of 
Kalki named Visnuyasas also. It will occur in the village of 
Sambhala. 

158-159. These and many other manifestations of the lord 
have taken place for the welfare of the worlds. In these manifes¬ 
tations, the lord of great renown was praised by Devas. These 
manifestations are sung about in the Puranas by the expounders 
of Brahman. Even Devas are deluded in enumerating these 
manifestations. 

160. The Puranais on a par with the Vedas and Srutis (?) 
The enumeration of manifestation is but indicatory, not exhaus¬ 
tive. 

161-163. The manifestations of the lord, the preceptor of the 
worlds, worthy of being glorified have been thus glorified. By 
the glorification of manifestations of the lord, the Pitrs are pleas¬ 
ed. He who listens to the (manifestations) of Visnu of unmea¬ 
sured prowess, withpalms joined in reverence (attains happiness). 
By listening to the yogic Mayas of the lord of Yoga man is 
liberated from all sins. Due to the favour of the lord he obtains 
flourishing income, great prosperity and extensive pleasures 
quickly. 

Thus, O excellent sages, the holy manifestations of Visnu of 
unmeasured splendour have been glorified by me. They dispel 
all sins. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIVE 
Review of the path of the world of Tama * 

The sages said : 

1. O sage, we are not satiated by hearing about holy 
meritorious rites. Greatly sung by you they are like nectar. 
Our enthusiasm is further increased. 







536 


Brahma Purana 


2. O sage, you know everything, origin and dissolution 
of living beings and the goal reached through actions. Hence, 
we ask you, O great sage. 

3. It is heard that the path of the world of Yama is 
extremely impassable. It causes pain and misery. It is always 
a terror to living beings. 

4. How do men go to the abode of Yama through that 
path ? O foremost among eloquent persons, tell us the magni¬ 
tude and extent of the path. 

5. O omniscient sage, we earnesdy ask you to tell us 
entirely. O sage, how do men avert the miseries of hell ? 

6. By what means do they prevent the hellish tortures ? 
By charitable gifts, holy rites and observances ? 

What is the distance between the human world and the 

i. 

world of Yama ? 

7. How do people attain the heavenly goal ? By what 
deeds do they go to hell ? How many are the abodes in 
heaven ? How many are the hellish abodes ? 

8. How do men of good deeds go ? How do men of evil 
deeds go ? What is the form and what is the magnitude ? 
What is the caste of the two ? Even as an individual soul is 
being led to Yama’s abode what is its form, shape and extent ? 

Vyasa said : 

9. O leading sages, listen, even as I recount. O sages 
of good holy rites, the cycle of worldly existence is unageing. 
It has no permanent existence. 

10. I shall decisively mention the path of Yama entirely. 
I shall recount everything in detail beginning from the time 
of departure. I shall recount it in a manner that no one else 
will be able to recount. 

11. O excellent ones, I shall mention the form and nature 
of the path about which you have asked me and also the dis¬ 
tance between the world of Yama and the mortal world. 

12. That distance is 86000 Yojanas. That pathway is very 
hot like the rqd hot copper plate. 

13. That pathway should of necessity be traversed by all 
living beings called individual souls. Meritorious men go to 
the meritorious sections and the sinful go to the sinful. 



105.14-28 


537 


14-17. There are twentytwo hells in the realm of Yama. 
Men of evil deeds are cooked there in separate places. The 
chief among those hells are Raurava, Raudra, Sukara, Tala, 
Kumbhlpaka, Samdamsa, Sunabhojana, Salmala, Vimohana, 
Kltada, Krmibhaksa, Lalabhaksa, Bhrama, Agnijvala, 
Asipatravana. There are rivers of putrescent and purulent 
matter. There are rivers of blood. There is the terrible 
Vaitaranx river of foetid matter. 

18-20. On that great path there is no place where the 
pei'son of great fatigue can rest. There is neither the shade of 
trees nor lakes nor tanks. There is neither a watering shed nor 
a well. There is no assembly or raised platform. There is no 
abode or hermitage. There are neither rivers nor mountains. 
That great path has of necessity to be traversed by all. 

21 -24. When the time arrives everyone has to leave off 
his friends, kinsmen, riches etc. and go along that great path. 
All living beings whether they are oviparous or viviparous, 
sweat-born or of vegetable kingdom that breaks open the 
ground and grows, whether they are mobile or immobile, will 
go along that path. Devas, Asuras and human beings are 
under the control of Yama and they follow him. All beings 
termed Jivas whether a man • or a woman or an eunuch have 
to traverse that path. All the people whether old, middle-aged 
or young have to traverse that path and the death may take 
place in the forenoon or afternoon, at midday or in the middle 
of the night, in the morning or at dusk. 

25-28. Death may take place during childhood or in the 
womb. One may die at home as a householder or when one 
is on a journey away from home. A person may die in the 
forest or in water or on dry land; they may die in their abode 
or in a holy centre. That great journey has to be undertaken 
by the people who sit on the ground or on a chair or on a 
couch, whether asleep or awake. The creature enjoys the 
stipulated span of life here and at its close his vital airs cease 
to function even if he does not like it. 

The embodied soul comes across some cause such as water, 
fire, poison, weapon, starvation, or sickness and thereby it is 
deprived of its vital airs. 






538 


Brahma Parana 


29-33. The soul casts off the gross physical body made of 
the five elements and takes up another body from its own ac¬ 
tions befitting the tortures undergone in hell. 

For the sake of experiencing happiness and misery he derives 
a firm solid body. He who commits sins, reaps the adverse 
fruits. He who performs good deeds enjoys happiness and 
delight even in the abode of Yama. 

The heat in die body becomes disturbed and displaced. 
When urged by the severe gust of wind it blazes even without 
fuel. It pierces the vulnerable vital spots. The organic wind 
Udana begins to function, blowing upwards. It prevents the 
water and foodstuffs taken in from having a downward motion. 

34. Those who make charitable gifts of water and cooked 
rice do not undergo any forture there along with their wives, 
sons and kins. 

35. He who makes a charitable gift of cooked rice with 
the mind sanctified by faith derives satisfaction there even 
without (the presence of) cooked rice then. 

36. The tlieist who lias faith in God or holy scriptures, 
utters no falsehood and by whom severance of affection has not 
been effected, attains a happy death. 

37. These men face a happy death :—those who are devot¬ 
ed to the worship of Devas and brahmins, those who are not 
jealous, those who have spotless character, those who are liberal 
in gifts and those who possess the attribute of modesty. 

38. He who does not eschew virtue either due to lust or 
due to fury or out of hatred; he who carries out what is men¬ 
tioned by elders and he who is gentle meets with a comfortable 
death. 

39. Those who offer water to the thirsty, give food to the 
hungry, meet with timely death with ease and happiness. 

40-45. Those who make gifts of riches conquer chillness; 
those who make gifts of sandal paste conquer scorching heat; 
those who dispel agonies and distresses of others conquer pain; 
those who impart perfect knowledge conquer delusion; those 
who make a gift of lights conquer darkness. 

All these have death under delusion—the perjuror, he who 
tells lies, he who kills others and he who censures the Vedas. 



105.46-57 


539 


The attendants of Yama are terrible. They have putrid 
odour. They have massive iron clubs in their hands. These 
persons are wicked in their designs. When they appear in front 
of him the dead man begins to tremble. He cries incessantly 
calling out his mother, father and brothers, O brahmins. That 
word Yama is indistinct. It appears as a single syllable. Due to 
fright, his eye rolls. There arc convulsive movements in the 
body; he coughs and heaves a sigh. Thereafter he casts off that 
body afflicted by pain. 

46. He attains another body having the same shape as 
the previous one. It is for experiencing the tortures caused by 
his bad Karman. This body does not originate from the parents. 

47. Pain is derived by them in accordance with their 
magnitude, age, condition and manner of sitting. 

Then the emissiry of Yama binds him with terrible nooses. 

48-50. When the creature’s death is imminent he is dis¬ 
tressed due to the pain. The elements have abandoned his body. 
The vital air comes upto his neck. The soul is ejected out of the 
body. He laments excessively. Having come out of the body 
consisting of six sheathlike vestures he becomes gaseous in form. 
Then he is abandoned by the parents, brothers, uncles, wives, 
sons, friends and preceptors. 

51. Watched by those people in distress, with their eyes 
full of tears he casts off his body, attains a gaseous form and 
goes ahead. 

52-54. All such dead men are taken along the great path 
by the attendants of Yama. They are bound with nooses and 
dragged along and struck with iron clubs. They are led along 
the great path which is full of darkness. It is very terrible and 
endless. It yields both happiness and misery. To the persons of 
sinful activities it is impassable and unbearable. It is very diffi¬ 
cult to traverse. It is always injurious to* the sinful persons. 

55. On seeing the living creature with the span of life 
extinct, the terrible emissaries of Yama come there desirous of 
taking him aw&y. 

56-57. These emissaries come there seated on various 
animals and birds at the departure of the dying man. The 
animals are bears, tigers, donkeys, camels, monkeys, scorpions. 






540 


Brahma Pur aria 


wolves, owls, serpents, cats, vultures, kites, Jackals, bees and 
herons. 

58. The emissaries of Yama are excessively terrible and 
competent to frighten all living beings. They assume different 
forms and their faces resembl.e those of bears, buffaloes, 
vampires. 

59. Some have long faces; some are hideous-faced; some 
have crooked nooses; some have three eyes. They have massive 
jaw bones, cheeks and faces. Some have hanging lips. 

60. The limbs of some are smeared with blood and flesh. 
Their teeth come out of their mouths resembling spouts of 
shooting plants. They arc very hideous in their shape. Their 
curved fangs are very fierce. 

61. Their mouths resemble the nether worlds with blazing 
terrible tongues. The eyes are awful in their shape and size. 
They are shining, roving and tawny-coloured. 

62. The eyes of some resemble fire or the eyes of the cat 
or owl. Some eyes are protruded like the eyes of the beetle. 
Some resemble the glowworm. Their hair are dishevelled and 
stand erect. 

63. They are bedecked in garlands and skulls. Their limbs 
drip with blood (?). Their ornaments resemble terrible ser¬ 
pents tied up round their heads. 

64. There are black serpents round their necks. They are 
very terrible due to their kissing sounds. Their tresses are 
coarse and stiff. They arc terrible and they resemble fiery 
flames. 


65* Their faces are covered with reddish brown mousta¬ 
ches and brown or tawny-coloured hairs. Their staff-like arms 
are very terrible. They hang down on either side and they 
resemble iron clubs. 

66. Some of them have only two arms; others have four 
arms, still others have ten, sixteen or twenty arms. • 

67. There are still others with innumrable hands. Some of 
them have thousand arms. Terrible weapons of various forms 
shine in their hands. 

68. These emissaries of great strength threaten the aying 
men with different brilliant weapons such as javelin, iron club, 
discus etc. or nooses, fetters and batons. 


105.69-82 


541 


69. When the span of life of the men comes to an end these 
extremely terrible emissaries come to take away the creatures. 
All of them carry out the orders of Yama. 

70. The creature assumes a physical body befitting tortures 
in the hell and originating from its own actions. It is this body 
of the creature that is taken away towards the abode of Yama. 

71. With the nooses, adamantine fetters andiron chains, 
the creature is bound by the infuriated servants of Yama. He is 
beaten and taken over to the abode of Yama. 

72-75. The dying man falters, cries and shouts frequently 
“Alas, my father, O my mother, O my son.” He is defiled by 
his own evil actions. He is hit by sharp pointed javelins, keen- 
edged iron clubs and iron hammers. He is tortured with the 
blows of swords and javelins and terrible adamantine batons. 
He is threatened and rebuked with thundering shouts by the 
emissaries equipped with thunderbolts and javelins. One by 
one the creatures are led by the awful and infuriated servants 
who beat them on all sides. The creature is in agony. He faints 
and mutters in despair. It is dragged and taken along the 
path. 

76-78. The man of sinful activities goes to Yama’s abode 
along the terrible pathway full of Kusa grass, thorns, ant-hills, 
pikes, pebbles and gravel. It is infested with blazing fires fiercer 
than hundreds of thunderbolts (soaked in) acid. He is scorched 
by the blazing sun. He is burnt by its rays. He is pulled and 
dragged by the emissaries of Yama terribly shouting like vixens. 
He is bitten and dragged by hundreds of those vixens. 

79. That great path has to be traversed by these sinful per¬ 
sons frightened in some places, terrified in some places and 
faltering here and there. They are shouting and lamenting due 
to misery. 

80. The living beings have to traverse the path even as they 
are rebuked and burnt in their bodies, They are agitated due 
to terror. They run about in great dejection and agitation. 

81. Men who are devoid of charitable gifts are scorched 
and burnt by the heated sand. They have to go along the path 
strewn with thorns. 

82. Those who are guilty of slaying living beings have to 
traverse the path with their bodies emitting putrescent odour of 






542 


Brahma Puraria 


fat and blood with faeces and urine smeared all over as though 
they were unguents. They will have their skin burnt or cracked 
everywhere. 

83. The destroyers of living beings must of necessity go 
along the path shouting and lamenting, cooing and chirping 
out of tune. They shall be in agony due to their pain. 

84. Those who are guilty of slaying living beings must of 
necessity go along the path even as they arc being pierced and 
smashed by javelins, iron clubs, swords, maces and arrows or 
by the sharp pointed tridents. 

85-89. Sinners must traverse the path even as they are 
eaten by dogs, tigers, wolves and herons. 

Flesh-eaters must traverse the path even as they are cut and 
severed by a jumbled mass of bubble or sawn and torn by saws 
and scissors. 

Those who habitually eat meat must traverse the path even 
as they are gored by the tips of horns of buffaloes and oxen 
and scraped by boars. 

Those who are sinful by imbibing wine shall traverse the path 
even as they are being eaten and stung by the swarms of bees 
and flies with their needle-pointed antenae. 

Those men who treacherously kill their trusting master, friend 
or woman must traverse the path in agony and distress even as 
they are split and pierced through by means of weapons. Those 
men who kill animals and strike guiltless persons traverse the 
path pertaining to Yaraa even as they are being swallowed by 
the Raksasas. 

90-99. Those who take away the robes and covering cloths of 
other men’s wives run about naked to the abode of Yama, when 
they turn into ghosts. They are chased by the servants of Yama. 

Those wicked-minded and sinful persons who commit sinful 
deeds and take away cloths, foodgrain, gold, houses or fields 
have to traverse the path leading to Yama’s abode even as they 
are beaten and shattered by stones, rods and batons. They shall 
shed profuse blood. 

Those men who profess not to be afraid of hell and snatch 
away the wealth and property of brahmins and those base men 
who revile at and strike brahmins are tacked on to dry twigs. 
Their ears, eyes, and noses are cut off; they are smeared with 



105.100-108 


543 

putrid blood, they arc struck at by the terrible and hideous 
servants of Yama as well as vultures and jackals of Yama: those 
sinners go to the abode of Yama shouting and lamenting. 

Thus the path is extremely inviolable. It has the lustre of 
fire. It is terrible, impassable and inaccessible. It has been 
pointed out (as the path to be traversed by) men. It has the 
lustre and colour of heated copper. It emits sparks and flames 
of fire. It is strewn with thorns and yellow Amaranth twigs that 
are hideous and that strike and bit much. It is fully covered by 
javelins and thunderbolts. It blazes with severe thorns. It is 
mixed with sand burning like coal. It is impassable on account 
of fires and worms. It is terrible with clusters of flames. It is all 
the more scorched by the rays of the sun. The embodied soul is 
led along this path, being dragged by the ruthless servants of 
Yama. 

100-102. Whenever a creature shouts in misery or falls any¬ 
where he is hit with weapons by the servants of Yama. Thus the 
most covetous among the sinners, and he who has no right 
policy is beaten by the servants of Yama who cannot be checked 
or resisted. Helplessly the creature is led along the path. Every¬ 
one has to traverse that impassable path. 

103-104. The dying man is led along the very impassable 
path contemptuously by the emissaries of Yama. O brahmins, 
the creature is then ushered into the terrible city of copper and 
iron. He is taken there by the servants of Yama. That city is very 
extensive in magnitude. It extends to a hundred thousand 
Yojanas. 

105. It is mentioned as a square splendid city with four 
main gates. The outwalls are made of gold. They are ten 
thousand Yojanas in height. 

106-108. That city is beautified by sapphires, lapis lazuli, 
the great blue stone and rubies. Agitated by terrible Devas, 
Danavas, Gandharvas, Yaksas, Raksasas and serpents that city 
is extremely awful. 

The eastern gate of that city is splendid. It is beautified by 
hundreds of banners and festoons. It is adorned with diamonds, 
sapphires, lapis lazuli and pearls. It is full of Gandharvas and 
Apsaras singing and dancing. 




544 


Brahma Purina 


109. The entry through this door is exclusively for Devas, 
sages, Yogins, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Yaksas and Vidvadharas. 

110. The excellent northern gate is adorned with bells and 
chowries. Umbrellas and chowries are placed there. It is studded 
with different sorts of jewels. 

111. It is resonant with the sweet notes of flutes and lutes 
as well as charming and auspicious songs. The Saman fills the 
air with sages in crowds everywhere. 

112-118. Those who are conversant with virtue, those who 
are devoted to truthfulness and those who observe holy rites 
enter through this door. The following types of people too enter 
through this door : those who give water to the thirsty in the 
summer, those who offer warm fire during the winter; those who 
shampoo and rub gently (the feet of) tired persons ; those who 
are engaged in pleasing words; those who are devoted to charit¬ 
able gifts, those who are the heroic ones, those who are devoted 
to their mothers and fathers ; those who serve the brahmins and 
those who worship guests continuously. 

The western gate of the city is embellished with jewels. The 
steps are studded with wonderful jewels. The gate is beautified 
by bestoons in the shape of iron clubs. It is resonant with the 
sounds of drums, Bheri and Mrdanga, conches and Kahala pipes. 
It is full of auspicious chanting sounds raised by the delighted 
Siddhas. 

It is through this gate that the delighted man, the devotees of 
Siva, enter the city. The following also gain entry through this 
gate. Those who take holy dip in all sacred waters ; those who 
serve the five sacred fires ; those who die in the course of cam¬ 
paign ; those who die on the Kalanjara mountain; those who 
lose their lives in fires; those by whom the eternality has been 
achieved, those who are killed in the interest of their masters, 
friends and the general public or in the encounter with the 
thieves of cattle. O sages, all these people, the heroic men, enter 
the city through the western gate. 

119-122. The southern gate of that city is very terrible. Its 
frightening cries of “Ha Ha” fill up the air. It is enveloped in 
darkness. It is infested with animals with dark-pointed horns. 
The place is strewn with thorns and is impassable. Scorpions, 
serpents & Vajrakitas (adamantine worms?) prick and pierce, 



105.123-128 


545 


(everyone). There are wolves, tigers, hares, lions, foxes, dogs, 
cats and vultures all having flame-filled mouths. It is through 
this gate that all men of sinful activities gain entry. 

123-128. The following types of sinners enter through the 
southern gate : Those who kill brahmins, cows, boys, old men, 
sick men, persons who seek refuge, persons who have trusted, 
women, friends and persons who have no weapons; those foolish 
persons who indulge in sexual intercourse with the forbidden 
women; those who steal other men’s riches; those who misappro¬ 
priate money deposited or kept in trust; those who poison 
others or commit arson ; those who rob others of their lands, 
houses, beds, clothes and ornaments; those who ruthlessly wound 
others in their vulnerable points ; those who are habituated to 
utter lies ; those who work havoc in villages, cities and in 
different places of the country; those who commit perjury; 
those who sell their daughters ; those who invariably consume 
forbidden food, those who outrage the modesty of their daughters 
and daughter-in-laws; those who speak harsh words to their 
parents; all others who have been mentioned as people committ¬ 
ing great sins—All these people enter through the southern 
door. 






















' •V . ' ■ ‘ 


ffiKHlpt; 




§® 

—V \ ' : ' ' ^ V'V 




ISBN 81-208-0034-6 


; : V 


y?$M& 


; . . : 

... 

;: * '•*- ;T? ;-;i - }:t| 







































































