




BRAHMA PURANA 

PART I 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS • DELHI 



UNtico coufcnoN or uruscHTAtTvi WOK K5~ Indian Series 

Thi$book Aoi been accepted tn the Indian Tranetation 
^fies of the Vnesco Collection of Rcpreseniatife 
books jointly sponsored by the United Nations 
Educatfonaf^ ^lenr(fie and Cnltaral Organization 
{UNESCO) and the Ooremment of India. 


Fifsl Edilion: Delhi, 195S 


Printed in Indie by Shentilel Jeio, at Sbn Jeioendn Frees, 

A-4S NeieiM, Pbiee I, New Delhi 110 02R aodpubliriied by 
Nerendre Prakaeh Jain Tor Motilal Bananidau, Delhi 110007, 



CONTENTS 


CHAPTERS 

1. On the Origin ofDevas and Asarait 1 

2. Origin and glory of Pfthu 19 

3. Manvaniaras 29 

4. Evolution of Vivasvat Adilya 33 

5. Review of the Solar Race 37 

6. Kings of the Solar Race 45 

7. Birth of Soma 53 

8. Kings of the Lunar Race 36 

9. Genealogy of Ancient Ksairiyai 61 

10. The Narrative of Yayiti 65 

I i. Dynasty of Yayati 69 

12. Birth ofSrlkrf^a 04 

13. The Family of VritM* 86 

14. How the Syamantaka jewel was brought back 93 

15. Akrura obtains Syamantaka 97 

16. Seven ConcinenM 100 

17. JambOdvipa 105 

18. Magnitude of Oceans and Continents 108 

19. Magnitude of Nether worlds 114 

20. Hells in nether regions 117 

21. Upper Regions 121 

22. Pole Star 124 

23. Holy Centres : Their Greatness 126 

24. A Dialogue between Brahma and Sages 132 

25. Bharata Subcontinent 135 

26. The Glory of Konaditya 140 

27. Efficacy of Devotion to Sun*god 145 

28. Glory of Siin*God 150 

29. Names of Sun-god 157 

30. Nativity of Sun-god 160 

31. One Hundred and Eight Names of Sun-God 170 

32. Penance of Uma 174 

33. Testing of Parvatl 183 

.34. Parvati weds Siva 189 

35. Hymn in Praise of Siva 201 

36. Umft and Sankara leave Himalayas 205 

37. Destruction of Dakfa^s Sacrifice 209 

38. The Prayer by Dak^a 217 

39. The holy Centre of Ek&mra 230 

40. The holy centre ofUtkala 237 




CHAPTER ONE 


On the Origin of Devas and Asuras 

1. After paying obcisancr to N^ayana and to Nara^ 
the best among men and goddess Sarasvati^* one should utter 
the Puranic lore.* 

2. I make obeisance unto that eternal alhpcrvadtng, stead¬ 
fast and pure entity named Purusottama from whom this entire 
illusory universe with all its extensive diversities is evolved, in 
whom it abides, in whom it gets ultimately dissolved* in the suc¬ 
ceeding Kalpas and by meditating on whom, the sages attain 
eternal liberation without the tint of worldliness. 

3. I make obeisance to Hari the delightful, spotless, omni¬ 
potent, attributcless, beyond the states of the manifest and un¬ 
manifest, devoid of worldl incss, attainable by meditation alone, 
omnipresent and the destroyer of the cycle of birth and the un- 
ageing bestower of liberation, whom the learned at the time of 
sam^hi meditate upon, who is pure space-like, abode of eternal 
bliss and the gracious lord, devoid of all dirt and attributes. He 
is devoid of manifoldness. He is beyond the manifest and unmani- 
fest. He is the overlord, comprehensible through meditation 
alone. He is the cause of annihilation of worldly existence and 
unageing. 

1. Am-jVjrdrw-—Later epics an<S k&vyas speak of Nara as Arjuna and 

Narayana as According to Mbh. S&ntl Parva (Cb. 384) Nara and 

Narayaoa were the t%^ incarnations of Mahivisi^u. According to another 
Tradition Nara and NSriya^ia were the two sages who did penance for thou¬ 
sands of years in the Badarik&rrama in the Himalayas. (P. Ency. p. 552). 

2. Sarowatii The goddess of Speech and Learning (Brahma P. Ch. 43). 

3. The verse b commoo to the Purinas. Originally it belonged to the 
Mah&bhkrata, sicce the term Jaya mendor cd in the verse was applied to the 
Mahibh&rata which originally consisted of dght thousand and eight hundred 
verses (P.E. under Jg^). 

4. This is an old concept. But, later on, a single endcy—NMyapa^ 
was conceived as consisting of three forms: Brahmi, VilQU and $iva, 
repr es enting the ^ree qualities-^mas, Sattva and Tamas re^ectively. 
The three are anigDed separately the vrork of crendon, csdstence and diaolu- 



2 


Brahma Purh^a 


4A2, In the very holy, channing and extremely sacred 
Naimi$a^ forest, a great sacrifice lasting for twelve years was per* 
formed by the sages. The forest abounded in flowers of diverse 
kinds and trees such as Sila, Karntkara,Panasa, Dhava, Khadira, 
Amra, Jambu, Kapittha, Nyagrodha^ Devadaru, Aivattha, P^i* 
j&ta, Candana, Ajjuna, Campaka and others. Many kinds of 
birds and beasts lived there. It abounded in i^uni, Pajala, 
Bakula, Sapta^Parna, Punnaga, Nfigakesara, Sala, Tamala, Nkri« 
kela and Arjuna. It was beautified by many trees, Campaka and 
others embellished by variety of water^^eservoirs such as pools 
and holy lakes. It abounded in people of various castes—Brah« 
mins, K^atriyas, Vaiiyas, Sudras, pet^le of all stages of life, stu¬ 
dents, householders, forest-dwellers and ascetics. It was richly 
endowed with birds of various sorts, cows and cattle wealth and 
storage of barley wheat, chick peas, pulses, beans, sesamum and 
sugarcane and other plants. It was adorned by stocks of paddy 
and other fresh vegetables. There in that forest the bright, sacred 
fire was kindled and the sages performed a sacrifice extending 
for twelve yean. Thus the sages and ocher brahmins congregat¬ 
ed there. 

13-14. The brahmin guests were suitably welcomed and 
honoured by the hosts along with the duly seated priests. In the 
meanwhile there arrived Romaharfana,* the intelligent Suta. On 
seeing him the excellent sages were extremely delighted and they 
honoured him in a fitting manner. 

15. He too made obeisance to them and occupied a respec¬ 
table seat. The brahmins conversed with Suta for some time. 

16. At the end of preliminary conversation, the sponsors of 

1. JVWin^ m mod. Nimstr: It U iituated on the left bank of 

Gomati in the SiUpur dittriec, U. P. The place is so called because the rim of 
the revolvmg ^eelofVirtue wai ibattered here and virtue had to make a per- 
naanent abode in this region (Kim 2.7). Or the place k ao called becauK here 
an army of Asoras waa defrayed by Sage Gauramukha in a twinkling of eye 
(Varaha P.). According to Matiya. k was situated at dte confluence of G<^ 
mad and Gangi. The place was sacred in Krta age, as Pufkara in Tretk, 
Kunikfetra in Dvipara and GahgS in K^li, KithaVt Saddnti (10.6), 
Ka^rifta^i Brkhamga (26.5), Chtodogya Upaniiad (L2.I3) refer to it. Ihe 
Rkmkymoa (7.91} itatea that Riraa pesfonned Aivamedba here* 

2. or Imikmptgat a toous dkcaple efVyitaioutoa Vyiaa 
gave the eolkctiaft cf Puripaa. Romabarpipa had mx dkeipka: flwmati, 
Agnivircas, Mitriyui, iiihfepkyana, Akruvrapa and Sivarpi. 



ij7-ao 


s 


Che aacrifice accompanied by the priests and other honoured 
guests who had congregated there wanted to clear their doubts 
by means of questions put to him. 

77is Sages said: 

17. O excellent one, you are well-versed in Purai^as, Aga- 
mas and other holy texts together with traditional tales. You 
are aware of the origin and exploits of Devas and Daityas. 

18. There is nothing unknown to you in the Vedas, Scrip- 
tures, Bh^ata,^ Parana^ and treatises on salvation. O highly 
intelligent one, you arc omniscient. 

19-21. Suta, wc desire to know how this entire visible world 
consisting of the mobile and immobile beings originated at the 
outset, along with Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas, Yaksas, Rik^asas 
and Serpents. Where did it get merged ? Where will it get 
dissolved ? 

Lomahatfca^a said: 

22-30. Obeisance to Viynu, the universal Soul who is immu¬ 
table, mysterious, of unchanging form and all-conquering. Obe¬ 
isance to Hiranyagarbha*, Hari and Sankara Vasudeva the pro¬ 
tector who is the agent of creation, sustenance and destruction. 
Obeisuce to Vi^^u who has unitary and manifold forms. Obei¬ 
sance to the deity who is gross as well as subtle. Obeisance to 

The Viyu P. (1.1.3) giva the derivation of hii ntme as follows: 

L Bkdrcia: The origiziAl name of the Mahibhirata was Jaya composed 
by Vyasa. It consisted of eight thousand and eight hundred verses. Vaifam- 
piyana added fifteen thousand two hundred itantas and the book waa named 
BhJtrata. When Sftta recited this book to the bennlts in the Naamifa forest, 
the book had one lakh of stanzas. Hence, it was called MahiUitrata. 

2. Parian: Origiaally the word was used coUeedvely for the laered trea¬ 
tises which described Greatioo, Re-creation, Genealogies of Kings, Ages of 
Manus, History of rulers atsd dittifigiiidted persons. Lator on, with the 
addition of more matter, it became an Bocyclopaedia of Geoeral knowfodge 
related to dlfierent subjects, divided and subdivided iaio Puritias arid Upa- 
Puri^. For m £pki mi Ardpoi rfhdiai Pumlkaf and Majumdar. 

9. Hirm^egmhke: Brahmi wu bom from the gotdea-egg formed outof 
the seed depotised i^tbe srmtew Maou 1.9. The word is oftm used in the 
Veda. 



4 


Brahma 


Vif^iu who becomes manifest and unmanifest and who is the cause 
of liberation. Obeisance to Vi^u the Supreme Soul who is at 
the root of creation, maintenance and destruction of the universe 
and who is identical with the universe. I bow unto Acyuta, 
Puru^ottama who is the support of this great as well as small world 
(the macrocosm and microcosm). He is factually devoid of im¬ 
purity. He has the form of perfect knowledge. He is stationed in 
the form of this Visual world in our illusory vision. I bow to 
Vi^t^u who consumes the universe, who is the lord of creation and 
sustenance, who is omniscient, lord of the universe, the birthless 
and deathless, immutable, and the primordial, subtle overlord of 
the univene. I bow to Brahma and others. I bow to my lord 
preceptor, the son of Parafara^ and the knower of the essence 
of Uie import of all Sutras and the Purai>as. He is the master 
of the Vedas and Vedahgas.^ After bowing down to my lord pre¬ 
ceptor I shall recount the Purapa which is on a par with the 
Vedas. 

31. I shall mention in the same manner as was mentioned 
by the lotus-born lord Brahma* formerly on being asked byDaksa 
and other excellent sages. 

32. Listen to the wonderful story that I narrate to you now 
and which is pr^nanc with meanii^. It provides with auxiliar>*‘ 
to those mentioned in the Vedas. 1 shall tell you the story that 
liberates people in>m sins. 

33. He who listens to this story frequently, he who perpe¬ 
tually retains this in memory shall perpetuate his family and be 
honoured in the heavenly region. 

1. father of Vyisa from Satyavad, the tUherman's daughter 
with whom he had an intercourse without marriage. This girl, later on, mar¬ 
ried Saatanu, king of Hasdnipur. 

2. KrdtMgAr: C^tain classes of works regarded as auxiliary to the Vedaa 
and designed to aid in Che correct proounciatioa and interpretation of die text 
and the right employment of mantras in cmmonials. The Vediogas are six 
(1} Sik ^—the scienoe of prey eg articulation and pronunciation, (2) 

the science of prosody, (3) Vyikaraoa—grammar, (4) AEndta etymological 
explanation of difScult Vedie Words, (3) —astremomy tad (6) 

Ka^^^ritual or reremonial. 

3 BrahmAi According to Puranic tradition, there grew up a. 

lotus in the navel of Vifgiu and to that lotus BrahmA took his form. Seated 
in the lotus, BrahmA performad penance. Thereafter he began the work of 
creation. He is vailed Padmtssna, PadmabhC etc. therefme. 



1.34-45 


5 


34. Pradhana is the eternal unmanifest cause which is of 
the nature of sat (existent) and asat (non-existent). Puru^a, 
the lord, evolved the universe out of it. 

35. O excellent sages, know that he is Brahma of unmeasur¬ 
ed refulgence. He is the creator of all living beings. He is Nara- 
yana the greatest Being. 

36. Cosmic Ego (Ahazhkara) was born of Mahat (great 
principle) : from Mahat, Bhutas (Elements) were born. Varie¬ 
ties of living beings were born of the Elements. Thus is the eter¬ 
nal creation. 

37. It is being glorified with details of all aspects in accord¬ 
ance with my intelligence and in the manner I have heard. Now 
listen to it. It shall enhance the reputation of all of you. 

38-40. The glory of persons who had performed meritorious 
deeds and whose renown is permanent is proclaimed herein. 

The Self-born lord who was desirous of creating varieties of 
subjects from the unmanifest Pradhana created waters^ alone at 
the outset. He instilled vigour in them. The waters arc called 
Naras (born of Nara—man); waters arc the progeny of Nara.* 
At the outset, they were his place of resort. Hence he is remember¬ 
ed as Narayapa. A gold-wombed ^g took shape and floated 
on the waten. 

41-42. Brahma himself was born there. We have heard that 
he is self-born. The gold-coloured lord stayed there for a year 
and then split the Egg into two—4ieaven and Earth. In the middle 
of these two halves the Lord created firmament. 

43-45. He held the Earth floating on the waters. He creat¬ 
ed ten quarters, as well as mind, speech, love, anger and plea¬ 
sure. 

Desirous evolving creation befitting these, he created Praja- 

1. Manu. 1.8 saiarjidau, tdsu riryam avdk^ipat. **Waters are 

Che first creatiwi the Self-existent. He laid seed in them.'’. The account of 
creation (sai^a) as described here is fcvmed in Macusmrti Cb.I. 

2. Cp. Manu 1.10. 

inft ?rRT ffir sftwr ^ : i 

<IT ^ ^ II 

Por Che third P&da» this Purina reads: 

*noi flW cfn ^ 



€ 


Brahma 


patis' (Lords of subjects) viz. Marlci, Atri, Aogiras, Pulaitya> 
Pulaha^ Kratu and Vasi9(ha. Thus the lcH*d of great refulgence 
created seven mental sons.* In the Pura^as these are known aa 
the seven Brahma. 

46. Subsequent to the seven sons of Brahma who were 
identical with Karayana, Brahma created Rudra out of his fury» 

47. He created the divine l^Hrd Sanatkumva who was the 
eldest of all his previous sons. O brahmins^ the subjects and 
Rudras were bom of these seven. 

48-50. Skanda and Sanatkumara stayed there cmdensing 
their brilliance. Seven great families of divine nature comprising 
the groups of Devas were bom of seven Brahmas. They had 
progeny and they performed holy rites. The families were adorn¬ 
ed by great sages. Brahma created lightning, thunder, clouds> 
saffron-coloured rainbows, birds and Paijanya (lord of clouds) 
at the outlet. He composed Rks, Yajus and Saman for conduct¬ 
ing sacrifices. 

51. We have heard that he created Sadhyas and other 
Devas. Living beings high and low were bom of his limbs. 

52-53. Even when Prajapati had created such an extensive 
horde of progeny, the created subjects did not multiply. Then he 
split his body into two halves. One half became a man and the 
other half a woman. The man begot of the woman different 
kinds of subjects. 

54. With hb grandeur he pervaded heaven and Earth and 
stored by Vi^u created Virat (an immense being) and Viraf 
created Purufa* 

55. Know that Klanu was that Purusa. The Manvantara 
the ruling period of Manu is the second one of Manu, the mental 
son of Brahmd. 

1. lords of subjects. The word is as old as the Veda. Formerly^ 

there were ten Prsj&patir. But as the mimber at subjects increased, eleven 
more were added to this mimber. Thus there were twentyone Praj^iatis 
whose functions were to bcilitate creadoa. They were BrsAmS, Manu^ 

Bhfitt, Dhemdy FIom, Msrfrit FttUhCf KratUf 

ParentffhU Candrs, aaJ V*krita 

2. Seven Srahmde^--nevea mental sons of Brahmh. Each Manvantara has 
different saptarfii. The S^tirfis of the proent Vaivasvata Manvantara^ 
consist of Marici, Ahgiras, Atri, Pulastya, Vadvth*, Pulaha and Kratu. 



1.56-69 


7 


56. That Vairaja (Son of Viri{) Puru^a, l<Mtl of creation 
of the subjects^ was the lord who created. The subjects created 
during Narayau^s creation as well as Manu's were not bom of 
the w(Hnb. 

57. On hearing this account of creation at the outset, a man 
becOTies longUved, well-renowned and blessed with progeny. 
He will obtain his desired goal. 

58. Apava—that Purufa and Prajapat!—was desirous of 
creating subjects. He obtained 6atarupa,’ an Ayonija lady as his 
wife. 

59. With his grandeur, Apava pervaded heaven and stood 
by. Then, O excellent sages, Satarupa was delivered of her pro¬ 
geny righteously. 

60. She performed a severe penance for ten thousand years 
and obtained as her husband that Purusa of bright penance. 

61. O brahmins, that Puni^a is called Svayambhuva Manu 
(Manu bom of the selfbom lord). His Manvaniara consisted 
of seventyone cycles of Yugas. 

62-64. ^tarupa bore to Vairaja Puru^ the heroic sons 
Priyavrata and Uttanapada. After the heroic sons (a daughter) 
K&mya was bom. O excellent sages, Kamya (was the wife) 
of Kardama PrajSipati. The sons of Kamya were four viz. Sam- 
rat, Kuksi, Virat and Prabhu. Prajapati Atri adopted Utt&na- 
p^a as his son. Sunrta bore four sons to Uttwapada. 

65. The charming daughter of Dharma is known as Sunr{^. 
She was born as a result of horse sacrifice. She was the illustrious 
mother of Dhruva. 

66. Prajapati Uttanap&da begot four sons of Sunrta viz. 
Dhruva, Kirtiman, Ayu^man and Vasu. 

67. O brahmins, the highly blessed Dhruva, seeking very 
great fame, performed penance for three thoiisand divine years. 

68. Prajapati Brahma being delighted gave him a stable 
abode, on par with his own in front of seven sages. 

69. On observif^ his prestige and greatness flourishing, for¬ 
merly Usanas the preceptor of Devas and Asuras sang this Verse: 


1. of Sviyftmbhuvz Manu boein raUed ^iva. He 

took hit filter SatarOpi u hit wife. The couple had two tooi: Priyavrata 
and UttAiiapi^dfl two daufhten: PraiCti and AkOd. Prasad was married 
to DakH Prajapati and AkCti to Rud Praj^ad. 



6 


Brahma Purd^a 


70. Wonderful is the power of his penance. Wonderful is his 
learning. Wonderful indeed is Dhruva' whom the seven sages 
liavc kq>t ahead of themselves. 

71. 3ambhu bore to Dhniva(two sons) viz. and Bha- 
vya. Succhiya bore live noble sons to Sli^ti. 

72. They were RIpu, Purafijaya, Putra, Vrkala and Vfka- 
tejas. Brhati bore to Kipu the son Cdksu^ who had an all round 
splendour. 

73. He begot CAk$usaManu of Puskarim, Vairini the dau- 
ghtcr of Araiiya the Prajapati of great soul. 

74. O leading sages, ten sons of great prowess were born to 
Manu and Nadvala the daughter of Prajapati Vairaja. 

75-76. The first nine were Kutsa, Puru, Satadyumna, Tapa- 
svin, Satyavak, Kavi, Agni$tubh, Atiratra and Sudyumna. The 
tenth was Abhinunyu. These sons of great prowess were born of 
Nadvala. Agncyl bore six sons of great lustre to Puru. 

77. They were Anga, Sumanas, Khyati, Kraiu, Angiras 
and Gaya. Sunitha bore to Anga a single son Vena. 

78. There was a great uproar due to the misdemeanour of 
Vena. For procreating progeny the sages churned his right hand. 

79-81. A mighty king was born when his hand was churned. 
On seeing him tlie s^cs declared: ^^This king will make his 
subjects delighted. His refulgence is great. He will earn great 
renown.” He was born equipped with a bow and a coat of mail. 
He was as lustrous as the burning fire: Prthu, the son of Vena 
protected this Earth. He was the oldest of K^triyas. He was the 
first and foremost of those whose coronations were performed with 
a Rajasuya^ sacrifice. He was the overlord of the Earth. 

82-85. The intelligent Suta and Magadha were born of 
being desirous of securing the means of subsistence for his sub¬ 
jects, the king (Prthu)mLiked this Earth in the form of a cow. 
O excellent sages. The king milked the cow alongwith Devas» 
sages, Pitfs, Danavas, Gandharvas, Apsaras, serpents, Punya- 
janas, creepers etc. On being milked by them the Earth gave 

1. DAruxt^Sviyambhuva Manu, son of Brabmi, bad two sons: Priya- 
M^ata and UtUnapSda. Uttin^ftdahad two wives: Suruci and Suniti. Suruci 
gave birth to Ultama and Suniti to Dbruva. 

2. jacq/k#—performed at the coronation of a king. MBh. 11 
describe the R^asUya sacrihee of king Yudhiftbira in detail. 



a .86-100 


9 


them as much milk as could fill up their vessels. They sustained 
their lives thereby. At the end of sacrificej two righteous sons 
were bom to Prthu viz Antardhi and Patin. 

86-87. Sikhandinl bore Havtrdhana to Antardhana (i.e. 
Antardhi). Dhifana, the daughter of Agni> bore six sons to 
Havirdhana viz Pradnabarhif, Sukra^ Gaya, Kr^na, Vraja and 
AJina. Lord Pracinabarhi$ was a great Prajapati. 

88-91. After Havirdhana, excellent sages, it was lord Pra- 
cinabarhif by whom the subjects moving about on the Earth 
were brought up and made to flourish. After concluding the 
rigorous penance on the shore (of the ocean), the king married 
Savarna the daughter of the ocean. Savarrta, the daughter of the 
ocean, bore ten sons to Pracinabarhi;. They were called Prace- 
tas. They were well-versed in archcry. Performing holy riles 
jointly they practiced a great penance for ten thousand years 
lying submerged under the waters of the ocean. 

92*95. While the Pracetas were performing penance, the 
Earth was left unguarded. Hence the trees overgrew the Earth 
and enveloped it. Thereby, the destruction of subjects set in. 
The trees grew so dense that the wind was unable to blow. For 
ten thousand years the subjects were unable even to stir. All the 
Pracetas who were performing penance heard about it. They 
became furious and generated wmd and fire through their 
mouths. The wind uprooted the trees and desiccated them. 
The terrible fire burned them. Tims the trees w«*c destroyed. 

96. On knowing that the trees were being destroyed and that 
only a fetv of them remained, Soma approached the Prajapatis 
and said: 

97. O kings, O sonof Praclnabarhis, restrain your wrath. 
The Earth has been denuded of trees. May your fury and fire be 
subdued. 

98-99. This girl of excellent complexion is the jewel of the 
forest. She had been held by me in my womb as I was aware of 
the future. This daughter of the forest is Marina by name. O 
highly blessed ones, may she be your wife. May she raise the lunar 
Tacc. For this purpose alone she has been created. 

100. With half the splendour pertaining to you and with 
half of my splendour, the learned Prajipati named Dakfa will 
i>e bom of herr 



10 


Brahm 


101. He is on par with Agni* He will make this Earth and 
the subjects Sourish once again. He will develt^ this EarSkt 
practically burned out by the Sery splendour pertaining to you. 

102. Then, at the instuce of Smia, the ascetics restrained 
their fury towards the trees and accepted Mari(h as their lawfully 
wedded wife. 

103. O brahmins, with a part of Soma, Dakfa Prajapati 
of great splendour was born of Mariya and the ten Pracetas. 

104. AAer mentally creating the immobile and mobile 
beings, the bipeds and the quadrupeds, Dakya created women. 

105. Lord Dakya gave ten of his daughters to Dharma, 
thirteen to KaSyapa, the remaining (twentyseven) named after 
twcntyseven constellations to king Soma. 

106. Devas, birds, cows, serpents, Daityas, Danavas, Gan- 
dharvas, Apsaras and other classes of people were bom of them. 

107. O leadii^ brahmins, it was only after this that the 
procreation by means of sexual intercourse began. The subjects 
before arc said to be born of mental conception, sight or touch. 

The Sages said: 

108. The origin of Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, serpents,. 
Raksasas, as well as that of Dakya the great soul has been heard 
by us. 

109-110. Indeed, Dakya of auspicious rites was bom of the 
right thumb of Brahma. His wife was bom of the left thumb. 
How could Dak;a of great penance be bom of Pracetas ? O Suta, 
plesise clarify our doubt. How did the grandson of Soma attain 
the status of his father-in-law ? 

Lmakarftt^ said : 

111. O brahmins, origin and annihilation do occur conti* 
nuously among living beings. Sages and other learned people 
are not deluded in this respect. 

112. Dakyas and other beings are bom in every Yuga. They 
are annihilated afterwards. A learned man does not become de¬ 
luded thereby. 

113. O occellent brahmins, formerly there was neither 
seniority nor juniorship (conditioned by time). Penance alone 
was the important factor. Power was the cause (of this consider¬ 
ation) 



hI14-127 


11 


114. He who understands this side*creation of Dakya com* 
prising the mobile and immobile beings, shall be blessed with 
progeny. He will live the full span of life. He is honoured in the 
heavenly world. 

The SagBS said: 

115. O Lomahar^a recount in details the origin of Devas, 
Danavas, Gandharvas, Rak^asas and serpents. 

LomaharfOM saiii 

116. Formerly, Prajapati Dakfa was directed by the self* 
born lord (who said) ''create subjects.’* O brahmins now listen 
how he created them. 

117. The Prajipati created living beings mentally. He creat* 
ed sages, Gandharvas, Asuras, Yakfas and Rik^asas. 

1)8-119. O brahmins, when his mental progeny did not 
multiply, the virtuous Prajipati began to ponder over ways and 
means of increasing subjects. He became desirous of creating 
variety subjects by the process of sexual intercourse. He took 
Asikni the daughter of Prajapati Vlrana as his wife. She was en¬ 
dowed with the power of penance. She, the great was capable of 
sustaining the worlds. 

120-127. Prajapati Dak$a the great begot five thousand sons 
of Asikni the daughter of Virata. On seeing those highly blessed 
sons desirous of increasing the subjects, the celestial sage Narada 
of sweet tongue spoke to them certain words which broi^ht their 
destruction and invited a ctu^ for hiimclf (?}. Formerly Sage 
Ka$yapa was afraid of Dak|a’s curse, hence he procreated the 
more excellent son (Narada) in the daughter of Dakfa. This 
N^ada was the son of Brahma formerly. Like his father Brahma, 
Daksa again created Narada in his wife Asikni the daughter of 
Vlrana. Dak^a’s sons Haryaivas were completely destroyed by 
Brahma. Daksa of unmeasured exploits attempted to destroy 
Brahma. Keeping the Brahmanical sages ahead he was request¬ 
ed by the latter not to be angry. Dakfa then made a compro¬ 
mise with Brahma. "May Narada be born of my daughter as 
your son.*’ Then Dak^a gave bis beloved daughter to Brahmi. 
Fearful being cursed again (?) S^e N&rada was bom of 
her. rr 



12 


Brahma PurS^a 


Thi Sages said: 

128. O lord, how were the sons of Prajapati destroyed by 
Narada the great sage ? We wish to hear all about it factually. 

Lomaharfana said: 

129. Haryasvas, the extremely powerful sons of Dak^a arriv¬ 
ed (at a spot near the sea) desirous of making the subjects multi¬ 
ply: Narada spoke to them. 

130-131. ‘*Alas, all of you arc very puerile. You do not 
know the magnitude and extent of this Earth. Still, O sons of 
Pracetas you are desirous of creating subjects. But how will you 
create the subjects within it, above it and below it? On hearing 
his words they wondered in all directions. 

132-134. They have not returned so far like rivers merging 
into the sea. When Haryaivas vanished, lord Dakfa, son of 
Pracetas procreated a thousand sons in the daughter of Virana. 
They were known as Sabalaivas. They were also desirous of 
multiplying the subjects, Narada spoke to them as he had spoken 
to Haryasvas. They told one another. 

135. The great sage said pertinently: let us trace out our 
brothers. When we have found them out and ascertained the 
extent of the Earth, we shall easily create the subjects.** 

136. They too went in all directions along the same path. 
Till today they have not returned like rivers flowing into oceans. 

137. Ever since then, O brahmins, a brother who goes in 
searcli of a lost brother perishes himself. Thus a wise brother 
should not go in search of his lost brother. 

138. On realising tliat they too had perished Prajapati Daksa 
procreated sixty daughters in the daughters of Virana. ThU we 
have heard. 

139. O brahmins Ka^yapa, lord Soma, Dharma and other 
sages took them as their wives. 

140-141. He gave ten daughters to Dharma, thirteen to Kai- 
yapa, twentyseven to Soma, four to Ari$(anemi, two toBahu- 
putra, two to Ahgiras and two to Kr^iva. Now listen to their 
names. 

142-146. The ten wives of Dharma were Arundhati, Vasu, 
Yami, Lambi, 6&1&, Marutvatl, SaAkalpk, Muhurti, Sadhyi 
and Viiva. O brahmins, understand the children born of these. 



1J47.157 


13 


Viivedevas were bom of Viiva. Sadhya gave birth to Sadhyas/ 
Marutvats were bom of Marutvati. Vasus were the sons of Vasu» 
Bhanus were the sons of Bhanu> Muhurtas were born of Muhurta» 
Gho$a was the son of Lamba. Nagavlthi was the daughter of 
Yam!; objects of the Earth were born of Arundhatl. Saihkalpa, 
the soul of the universe was bom of Sankalpa; Vr;ala was bom 
of Nagaviihi the daughter of Yam!. 

147. Daksa, the son of Pracetas, gave his daughter in mar* 
riage to Soma: All those are named after constellations. They 
are glorified in the Astral Science. 

148. Those others who arc known as Devas going ahead of 
luminaries arc the eight Vasus. I shall mention them in detail. 

149. Apa, Dhruva, Soma, Dltava, (or Dhruva), Aiiila, 
Anala, Praryu^ and Prabhasa are the names of Vasus. 

150. Apa*8 sons were Vaitatidy^^ Srama, Srajita and Muni. 
Dhruva’s son was Kata who reckons time in the world. 

151. SomaU son was Varcas whereby people become reful¬ 
gent. Dravina and Hutahavyav&ha were the sons of Dhava. 
Manohara’s sons were Siiira, Prana and Ramana. 

152. Siva was the wife of Anila. Her son was Manojava. 
Anila had two sons: Manojava and Avijfiatagati. 

133. Agni*s son Kunma was enveloped by splendour in the 
duster of Sara reeds. His sons were Sakha, Viiakha and Naiga- 
meya. 

154. He was the adopted son of Krttikas.^ Hence he was 
called Karttikeya. They say that the sage Devala was the son of 
Pratyu^. 

155*156. Devala had two sons endowed with knowledge and 
forbearance. Brhaspati’s sister Yogasiddha was excellent lady 
who expounding the Brahman wandered over the entire world. 
She was detached at first, but later on she became the wife of 
Prabhasa the eighth among the Vasus. 

157. The highly blessed I^japati Viivakarman was bom 

1. When Subrahmaaya was born, Devas d^uted six mothers to breast* 
feed him and they were called KftcikSs. Certain Puriiitai hold that Subrah* 
mapya had da faces and he was fed on six breasts at the same time. Six mothers 
were deputed to feed him, as he was bom with ifat &ces. Again according to 
certain Puraoas4t %vas P4rvaU who deputed the Krttikis. The child came 
to be kzto%vn as Khrttikeya as it was led by KrttiUs. 



14 Brakrm Fmifa 

of her. He was a carpeater of Devai and the architect of thoi> 
sands of arts and crafts. 

138. He was the maker of all c^naments and the most excel* 
lent among the artisans. It was he who made the a^ial chariots 
for Devas. 

159. Human beings too subsist on the works of art of that 
great architect. 

Surabhi bore eleven Rudras to Kaiyapa. 

160-162. That chaste lady sanctified by her peziance (gave 
them birth) by the grace Mafaadeva. 

They were Ajaikapada, Ahirbudhnya» Tvaitfi Rudra the 
powerful^ Kara Bahurupa, Tryambaka, Aparijita, Vr^akapi, 
Sambhu, Kapardi Raivata» Mrgavyadha, Sarva and Kapilin 
O excellent brahminsi these are the eleven (?) well-known 
Rudras^ lords of the universe. 

163. A century ol these Rudras of unmeasured strength has 
been mentioned in the Pur&ttas. O leading sages» the entire uni¬ 
verse consisting of the mobile and immobile beings is pervaded by 
them. 

164-165. O leading brahmins, now listen to the names of 
the wives of Prajapati Kaiyapa. They are Aditi, Diti, Danu, 
Ariftk, Surasa, Khasa, Surabhi, VinatA, TamrA, Krodhavaia, 
Ira, Kadru and Muni. O brahmins, know the children bom of 
them. 

166-169. In the previous Manvantara there were twelve 
magnificent and excellent Devas named Tu^itas. When the Vai- 
vasvata Manvantara was imminent they told one another thus— 
*^During the Manvantara of GAksu» Manu of great fame, O 
Devas, all ^you shall gather Mother for the welfare of the world. 
Come quickly ye all and enter the w^b of Aditi. We shall be 
born then. It will be to our welfare and advantage*’ After saying 
thus they of prolific refulgence were bom of Aditi and Kaiyapa 
in the Cakfu^a Manvantara. 

170-171. Vi^pu and Sakra were bom again then. The 
following are the twelve Adityas: Aryaman, Dhatr» Tva^fr, 

1. : According to this Purine, sic vm Eudtat wore bom to 

Surabbl. Other Pwipi give dUferait origins lod ^ 

Rudrss. The names of Rudr« fim there are ibe s ynonyms of kwd Aiva. 



1J7M87 


IS 


Pu?an> Vtvasvan^ Savitr> Mitra» Varuna, Aih<a and Bhaga of 
Ifreat splendour alongwieh V 49 U and Sakra. 

172. In the C&k?u|a Manvantara they were known as Tusi- 
tas. In the Vahrasvata Manvantara they are called Aditya. 

173. Brilliant children of unmeasured splendour were born 
of those ladies of holy rites who had been mentioned as the twenty- 
seven wives of Soma. 

174-175. The wives of Ari^tanemi liad sixteen children. The 
four Vidyuts were the sons of Bahuputra the wise sage. In the 
previous Gaksufa Manvantara Rks were honoured by the brah¬ 
min sages. Devapraharanas are known as the children of Kri&iva» 
the celestial sage. 

176. These are born again at the end of a thousand cycles 
of four YugaSi these are the groups of Devas. Thirty-three of 
them are bom of Kama. 

177-178. O brahmins, annihilatim and origin are said to 
befall them too. Just as the sun rises and sets in the firmament so 
also the groups of Devas in evoy Yuga. 

We have heard that two sons were bom to Did. 

179-180. They vrere Hiranyakaiipu and HiranylJc^a. A 
daughter named Sizhhika was also bora to her. She became the 
wife of Vipracitti. Her sons of great strength are known as Sairii- 
hikeyas. Hira^yakaiipu had four sons of well reputed proweu. 

181. They were Hr&da, Anuhrada, Prahrada and Samhrada. 
Hrada was the son of Hrada. 

182. Hrada’s sons were Maya>d, Siva and K^a. Virocana 
was the son ofPrahrJula, Bali was the son of Virocana. 

183-184. O ascetics, Bali had hundred sons of whom Bana 
was the eldest. (The most in^ortant of them are) Kumbha- 
Nabha, Gardabh&k^a, Dhftaraitra, Surya, Candramas, Indra- 
tapana, and Kuk$i. Ba^a was the eldest and the strongest amon¬ 
gst them. He was a devotee of Siva. 

185. In a former Kalpa, Baga propitiated lord Siva and 

boon 'T shall sport about at vour side.*’ 

186-187. Hirapyakfa had five sons. They were both scho¬ 
lars and warriors. They wo'e—Bharbhara, fiakuni, Bhfita, Santa- 
paoa, Mahanibha of great ea^losti and Kalaoibha. 

Danu a hundred sons of energetic ea^Ioitt. They were 



16 Brahma 

ascetics of great prowess. Z shall enumerate the most important, 
among them. 

188-192. They are I>vimurdha, Sahkukarna, Hayaiiras, 
Ayomukha, Sambara, Kapila, Vamana, Marici, Maghavan, 
Ilvata, Srmana, Viksobhapa, Kctu, Ketuvorya, Satahrada, 
Indrajit, Sarvajit, Vajranabha, Ekacakra, Mahabahu> Taraka 
of great strength, VaUvanara, Puloman, Vidravai^a Maha- 
^iras^ Svar-bhanu, Vf^patva, Vipracitti of great virility. These 
sons of Danu were begotten by Kasyapa. 

193-194. Vipracitti was the chief among Danavas of great 
strength. O excellent brahmins, it is not possible to enumerate 
their children because they are too numerous. The sons and 
grandsons were also too many to mention. Prabha was the 
daughter of Svarbhlmu, 8acl was the daughter of Puloman. 

195. Upadanavl was the daughter of Hayaiiras, 8anni$tha 
was the daughter of Vf^aparvan, Puloman and Kilaka were the 
two daughters of Vaiivinara. 

196-198. They were the wives of Marici. They had great 
strength and they bore many children. They had sixty thousand 
sons who delighted Danavas. Marici who performed a very 
great penance, procreated another fourteen hundred sons who 
stayed in the city of Hiranyapura. The Dinavas named Paulo- 
mas (Sons of Puloni&) and K^akeyas (Sons of K^aka) were 
very terrible. Vipracitti^s sons were born of Sizhhika. Due to 
the admixture of Daityas and Danavas they became valorous 
and powerful. 

199-201. Thirteen very powerful Saimhikeyas were known 
as Vaihiya, Salya,Nala,Bala, Vatapi,Namuci, Ilvala, SrmaQa, 
Afijika, Naraka, Kalanabha, Saramana and the powerful Svara- 
kalpa. 

Mu$aka and Hupdn were the sons of Hrada. 

202. Marica the son of Sunda was bom of Tadaki. These 
are the excellent Danavas who made the race of Danu flourish. 

203-204. Their sons and grandsons were hundreds and thou¬ 
sands. The Nivataltavacas were bom in the family of Daitya 
Saihhrada who had purified his spul by observing penance. The 
highly blessed Vaidyutas are reputed to have been t^m toTimri. 
They had three crores of sons and they resided in Ma^ivatl.^ 

L AfseiMtf—The cigiiul of N^dyidharas, a group of temi-godi who wear 
Sy l a n ds. 



1.205-223 


17 


205*209. It was difficult for Devas to kill them. They were 
struck down by Aijuna (the Pandava.) 

(Timra^s daughters were) KrauficI, Syeid, Bhad, SugrivI^ 
Suci and Grdhrl. KrauAci gave birth to owls and crows, Syeni 
to hawks and falcons, BhwtoBh^as (vultures, cocks), Grdhri 
CO Grdhras (vultures), Suci to aquatic birds, Sugrivi to horses, 
camels and donkeys. Thus listen to the race of Tamra. 

Vinata had two sons—Garuda and Arutta. Garuda is the 
most excellent among the flying birds. He is very terrible in his 
activities. 

Surasa*5 children were a thousand serpents of unmeasured 
prowess and many heads. O brahmins, they move about in the 
Armament and they are noble souls. The sons of Kadru were 
very strong and had unmeasured strength and prowess. They 
were one thousand in number. 

210*213. The multihcaded Nigas of mighty valour were 
born. They were under the control of Garuda. The most impor¬ 
tant of these were: 

Vasuki, Tak;aka, Airavata, Mahapadma, Kambala, 
Ai$vatara, Elapatra, Sankha, Karkofaka, DhanaAjaya, Maha* 
nlla, Mahakarna, Dhrtara^^ra, Balahaka, Kuhara, Pufpadarh* 
^tra, Durmukha, Sumukha, ^nkha, Sankhapala, Kapila, Va- 
mana, Nahusa, Sankharoman, Mai?i and others. 

214. Their sons and grandsons were in hundreds and thou¬ 
sands. There were fourteen thousand cruel snakes which live on 
air. 

215. O brahmins, there is a group called Krodhavaia. These 
have terrible fangs. The birds on land are infinite. They are the 
progeny of Earth. 

216. Surabhi gave birth to cows and buffaloes, Ira gave 
birth to trees, creepers, plants and sp^ies of grass ail round. 

217*218. Khaia gave birth to Yak^ and Rik^as, Muni 
gave birth to Apsaras (celestial damsels); Arista gave birth to 
Gandharvas of immense prowess and unmeasured energy. Thus 
these descendants of Ka^yapa consisting of mobile and immobile 
beings have been related. Their sons and grandsons are in hund¬ 
reds and thousands. 

219*223 Q brahmins, this creation existed in the Sviroct^ 
Manvantara; what follows occurred in the Vaivasvata Manvan- 



18 


Brahma Purd^a 


tara. Brahma commenced a big and extensive sacrifice pertain¬ 
ing to Varu^a. Listen to the creation of subjects in the course of 
sacrifice whom Brahma himself had created as his sons from his 
mind in the previoits Kalpa. 

O brahmins, then ensued the mutual animosity between Devas 
and Danavas in which Dili lost all her sons. She propitiated 
Ka^yapa with great devotion; duly honoured and served by her, 
Kaiyapa was highly pleased. He permitted her to ask for a boon. 
She requested him for a son of unmeasured prowess who would 
be capable of killing Indra. 

224*223. On being requested thus, Kasyapa of great austc* 
rity granted her boon. After granting the boon Kaiyapa spoke 
to her—“Your son will kill Indra if you retain the foetus for a 
hundred autumns maintaining cleanliness and performing rites.“ 

226. O excellent sage.s, shall it bc“ said tltat gentle lady 
with devotion (to her lord) of great austerity. Maintaining 
cleanliness she conceived. 

227*228. After impregnating Diti Kasyapa returned. Hr 
desired for an excellent group of Devas of unmeasured prowess. 
After withdrawing liis invincible splendour that could not be des* 
troyed even by the immortal beings he went to a mountain rasolv* 
mg to perform penance and holy rites. 

229-231. The chestiser of Paka^ stood wailing for a loop¬ 
hole to gain entry within her. Tlie unswerving Indra saw a loop¬ 
hole when the century of years nearly came to a close. Without 
washing her feet Diti went to bed and slept. Indra entered her 
belly. Armed with his thunderbolt he cut the foetus into seven 
parts. On being split by the thunderbolt the foetus groaned. 

232*233. “Ma rodlh*' (Do not cry) said Indra to the child. 
It split into seven parts. The infuriated Indra, the suppressor of 
enemies further cut each of these pieces into seven more pieces 
by means of his thunderbolt. O excellent brahmins, those child¬ 
ren later on came to be known as Manits.^ 

1. PikoJasoHay Lord Indra who chattiied the Aaura Pika. 

2. Did bore a child in her womb. When ludra knew that the 
child when bom would ilay him, he entered the womb when Diti was asleep, 
with a desire to kill it there itself. The child began to cry but Indra said *'Do 



1.234-2.1-3 


19 


234. They became Maruts according to what Indra had 
said. These fortynine Devas became the associates of Indra, the 
wielder of thunderbolt. 

235-238. O excellent brahmins, Hari desired for an excellent 
group of Devas of unmeasured prowess with these functioning as 
such. He allotted Prajapatis for each multitude. Gradually, 
the kingdoms with Prthu at the head were organized. That Hari 
is the heroic Puru^, K^na, Vif^u, Prajipati, Patjanya, Tapana 
and Ananta. The whole universe belongs to him. O excellent 
brahmins, there is no fear of recession unto him who knows 
perfectly this creation of living beings. Whence can be fear for 
the other world ? 


CHAPTER TWO 


Origin and glory of PfUta 


Lomaharfo^ said: 

1. After crowning Pfthu the son of Vena as the overlord, 
Brahma began to allot realms to each deity separately. 

2. He crowned Soma in the kingdom of birds, creepers, 
constellations, planets, sacrifices and austerities. 

3. He crowned VaruM in the realm of waters. He made 
VaiiravaQa the lord of kings; Vi^nu the lord of Adityas and 
Pavaka the lord of Vasus.’ 

not cry—mi ruda.'* Then Indra cut the child into fortynine pieces. They 
were bom alive and they got the name Marut. When grown up they became 
helpen of Indra. 

I. Vatta: a class of deities, ei^t in number: Apa, or Aya, ^iruva. Soma, 
Dhara or Dbava, Anila, Anala, FratyC^ and Prabhasa. Sometimes Aihba is 
substituted for Apa. Adi Gh. 66, Verses 17, 18. 

Compare this Purio^* Ch. 1. Verse 149. 

They were bom to Dharmadeva of hit wife Visu, dau^ter of Dakia. 
IKffereat Purists giw different names. This shows some of them had more 
than one appellation. 



20 


Brahma PuTd$a 


4. He made Dak^ the lord of Prajapatis, Indra the lord of 
MaruU, and Prahrada of unmeasured prowess the lord of Daityas 
and Danavas. 

5-6. He crowned Yama the son of Vivasvat in the kingdom 
of Pitfs. He made the trident-bearing Siva the overlord of Yak- 
9as, Rak^as, kings, goblins and ghosts. He made Himavan 
the lord of mountains and the ocean tlic lord of rivers. 

7. He made lord Citraratha the overlord of Gandharvas, 
Vasuki the lord of Nagas and Tak^ka the lord of Serpents. 

8. He made Airavata the king of eleplianis, Uccaihlravas 
the lord of liorses and Garuda the lord of birds. 

9. He made Sardula (tiger) the lord of animals and the 
bull the lord of cows. Hr crowned Plak^ as the king of Vege¬ 
tables and plenty. 

10. After allotting realms like this, lord Brahma established 
the guardians in each quarter. 

11. In the ca.stern quarter he crowned Sudhanvan the son 
of Prajapati Vairaja ihc guardian of quarters. 

12. In the southern quarter he crowned Sahkliapada the 
son of Prajapati Kardama. 

13. In the wt'stcrn quarter he crowned Ketuman the unswerv¬ 
ing son of Rajas. 

14. In the northern quarter he crowned Hirapyarnman the 
invincible son of Prajapati Parjanya. 

15. Till today the entire E^th consisting of its towns and 
continents is being virtuously administered by them with due 
deference to their respective jurisdiction. 

16. In accordance with the injunctions laid down in the 
Vedas king Frthu was crowned^ as the overlord in the course of 
Rajasuya Sacrifice. 

17. Afterwards, when the Cak;u^ Manvantara of unmea¬ 
sured splendour had passed off he allotted the realm on the Earth 
to Vaivasvata Manu. 

18. I shall describe in detail the story of Vaivasvata Manu 
for your knowledge if you intend to hear. The story of this per¬ 
sonage has been narrated in the Pura^as. 

' 1. Hiitorians trace the origin of kingship to Pfthu. The observance of 
roairmtinn and the religious and political riCo such as Rl^asCya Hkcrifice 
support the view that the Hindu monarchial system is very old. 



2,19-32 


21 


Thi sag€5 sQxi\ 

19-23. O Lomahar^a, please do describe the birth of 
Pfthu in detail, how this earth was milked by that noble soul; 
how it was milked by Pitrs, Devas, Sages, Daityas, Nagas, Yak^, 
trees, mountains, ghosts, Gandharvas, excellent brahmins and 
Rik^asas of immense strength. O sage of holy rites, it behoves 
you to recount the special vessels they took for milking. Please 
mention the calves that they had and the type of milk they receiv¬ 
ed. Who milked the earth? Whatfor was the hand of Vena 
churned formerly by the infuriated sages ? O dear one, relate the 
cause thereof. 

Lomahar^ai^ satJ : 

24. Listen, I shall relate in detail the story of Pfthu the son 
of Vena. O leading brahmins, listen with attention and zeal. 

25. O brahmins, 1 shall never relate this to an unclean per¬ 
son, to a petty-minded one, to one who is not a disciple, to one 
who does not perfcMm holy rites, to one who is ungrateful or tu 
one who is antagonistic. 

26. This story is conducive to heavenly pleasure, renown, 
longevity and wealth. It is on a par with the Vedas. Listen to 
this secret story in the manner it has been mentioned by tiie sages. 

27. He who narrates this story of Pfthu the son of Vena 
daily after bowing down to the brahmins shall not repent for his 
omissions and coinroissions. 

28. Formerly, there lived a Prajapati named Ahga who was 
born in the family of Atri. He was as powerful as Atri and he 
guarded Dharma. 

29. He had a son named Vena who was not interested 

in Dharma. Vena the patriarch was bom of Sunitha^ the 
daughter of Yatzta. 

30. Due to the iault of his maternal grandfather, Vena, the 
son of the daughter of Yama, turned his back on his virtuous 
duties and indulged in lust and covetousness. 

31. That king broke the conventional barriers necessitated 
by Dharma. Transgressing the Vedic canons and codes he be¬ 
came engrossed in evil and sinful acts. 

32. When he was Prajapati, tl^ subjects were deprived of 
an opportunity to study the Vedas or utter Vafatkara Mantras. 
Neither sacrifices were performed nev Soma was drunk. Devas 
too could not drink Soma. 



22 


Brahma Pur^ 


33. one should peribnxia sacrifice. No one should per- 
form Homa*^—^was the cruel order promulgated by that monarch 
as his destruction was imminent. 

34. am the person for whom the sacrifice should be made. 
I am the performer of sacrifices. I am the foremost among sattras. 
Ail sacrifices should be performed in my favour^’> he declared. 

35. When he adopted an unbecoming and impr<^er atti¬ 
tude and transgressed the traditional cmventions^ Marici and 
other sages addressed him thus. 

36-37. Vena, do not commit a sinful deed. For many 
years we have taken up this vow of sacrifice. This is the eternal 
norm. O kin^, you are born of Atri. You are undoubtedly a 
Praj&pati. You have entered into a solemn agreement thus 
will protect the subjects’*^ 

38. The wicked Vena conversant solely with what was harm¬ 
ful ridiculed the instructions of great sages and acted contrarily. 
Vma saii\ 

39. Who else is he the creator of Dhanna ? Whose behest 
am I to pay heed to ? In this Earth who can equal me in 
learning, strer^th, austerity and truthfulness ? 

40. I am the source of origin of all living beings and of holy 
rites in particular. You are confounded and deluded. You are 
of unsound mind (and hence) do not understand me. 

41. If I wish I can burn this Earth or float it in the waters. 
I can blockade and torment the earth as well as heaven. 

42-43. When they could not dissuade him from his arrogant 
deluded pose, the sages got infiiriatcd. Even as the mighty kii^ 
was throbbing with rage the sages cai^ht hold of him. In their 
fury they churned his left thigh. 

44. As the king’s thigh was being churned a short-statured 
dark-complexioned beii^ came up. 

45. O excellent brahmins, utterly frightened he stood there 
with his palms joined in reverence. On seeing him excessively 
bewildered the sage Atri asked him to ait. 

46. O foremost among the eloquent, he became the founder 
of Nifkdas. He created DhSvaras (fishermen) from the sins of 
Vena. 

1. The sutement shows that kingship wu ccoditioned by ceftain ret- 
pontibilities. See the Ceftaafita Oaik io the Aitareya firihmaoa. For deteib 
Jayaawal*! Hindu P$Uty. 



2.47-57 


25 


47. The Tusaras^ and Tunduras^ who have their abodes 
on the Vindhya* mountains and who indulge in sinful deeds, 
O brahmins, have emanated from the tliigli of Vena. 

48. Thereafter, the noble sages who were still in tension, 
caught hold of his right hand and churned it like the Arapi (the 
wood for generating fire by attrition). 

49*50. Pfthu was bom of that hand. He blazed like fire. 
His body dazzled with hery brilliance. He held a bow that bang¬ 
ed with a loud report and some divine arrows too. I'he name of 
the bow was Ajagava: for his protection lie wore a coat of mail of 
great lustre. 

51. When he was bom, the living beings all around were 
very much delighted and they flocked there. O highly blessed 
one, Vena went to heaven. 

52. O brahmins, Vena the tiger among men was saved from 
hell named ‘Puxn'^ by that noble and virtuous son who was 
bom of his hand. 

53. The oceans and rivers took jeweh (to present him with) 
and waters for his ablution and approached him reverently. 

54-55. Lord Brahma came there accompanied by Devas 
and Ahgirasas. The living beings too both mobile and immobile 
came there and sprinkled water over Pfthu. The subjects were 
delighted by that mighty monarch. 

56. Prthu, that valorous son of Vena of great splendour, was 
duly crowned as Uic sovereign monarch by those who were ex¬ 
perts in holy rites. 

57. The subjects who were alienated by his father were 
reconciled to him. Due to affection bis title ^Raja** became 
meaningful. 


Tufiras^Toch^ei tribe oa the north of Hindu Kush mounuini. 
In the Harivazhia they are classed along with Sakas, Diradas, Pahlavas and 
considered to be Miecchas and Dasyui (115). But they are ranked with wild 
tribes, originating from king Vena’s sins and located in the Vindhya region. 
They are said to have been represed by king Sagara. 

2. Tttnduras: Classed with Tu|kras and located in the Vindhya region. 

3. Vindhjf^ mcwUdH\ One of the seven chief mountaio chains which sepa¬ 
rates South India from North India. 



Put, a hell to which the childless are condemned. ’Putra* *a ton* is lo 


called because he protects his anccston from this hell. 

5. Rdjd from ra^, so called because he delighted his subjccti. 



24 


Brahma Fttrdna 


58. As he marched against the oceans, waters stood stunned 
and solidified. Mountains gave way. Never did his banner^post 
break down. 

59. The earth yielded rich harvest without being ploughed. 
Cooked food cropped up at the very thought: cows yielded milk 
in abundance. There was honey in every leafy cup. 

60. Meanwhile during the course of splendid sacrifice of 
Brabmi the intelligent Suta was bom of Suti on the Sautya day. 

61. In the very same sacrifice Magadha too was bom. They 
were called there by the sages for eulogising Prthu. 

62. The sages told Suta^ and M^gadha.^ May this king 
be eulogised. This job befits you ami this king deserves it also. 

63-64. Then Suta and Magadha addressed those sages— 

is Devas and sages that we propitiate by performing sacred 
rites. O brahmins, we do not know the name, fame, traits 
or exploits of this bnlliant king whereby we would eulogise 
him.*’ 

65-66. They were persuaded to eulogise Prthu by means of 
what would happen in future. O excellent sages, all those activi¬ 
ties which Prthu of great strength pursued later on in the three 
worlds were proclaimed by them by way of blessings and benedic¬ 
tions. Ever since that day in all the three worlds benedictions 
are offered by Sutas, Magadhas and Bards. 

67. Delighted by their eulogy Prthu, the lord of subjects, 
granted the Anupa* land to Suta and Magadha to Magadha. 

68-69. On seeing him the subjects were extremely pleased. The 

1. SOia was a royal herald or bard* whose business was to proclaim the 
heroic deeds of the king and his anccslora and who had therefore to know by 
heart the portions of the epic poems and ancient ballads. The most celebrated 
Suta was Lomaharfaba who was a pupil of Vyasa. 

2. One who used to adulate the kii^. He is called M&ga- 
dha because he belonged to Magadha. 

3. AnQp»—**A country situated near water** or *'a marshy country/' 
The name was applied to tracts near the seacoast, generally in combination 
*'SSgar4nt^a** in Bengal; in or near the Pi^dya Kingdom in the south, in 
the north and west of the peninsula of Kathiawar and on the western coast 
generally. But the name was more specially ^plied to a tract on the wmt 
coast which constituted a kingdom in the Pd]>dava'i time. The only country 
which rests on the Vtndhyas and borders on the sea is the tract on the east of 
the Gulf of Cambay, north of Naimadd river. For details sec M&r. P. fn, p. 
344, Pargiter*! edition. 



2 . 70-81 


25 


learned men said—“This king will offer all of you the means of 
subsistence^. They requested PrthUj the noble son of Vena 
sayii^—“At the instance of great sages offer us the means of our 
subsistence.” 

70. Thus approached in a body by the subjects the mighty 
king was moved by a desire to do what was conducive to the 
welfare of subjects. Seizing his bow and arrow he pursued the 
Earth. 


71. Afraid of him the earth took the form of a cow and fled. 
As she fled, Prthu chased her with bow and arrows. 

72. Affer passing through the world, Bruhmaloka etc. due to 
the fear of Prthu she saw Prthu with bow held ready for discharge 
(standing before tier). 

73. He was of unerring aim. He was brightly illumined by 
the sharp blazing arrows. He was a great Yogin of noble soul. 
He was invisible even to the inunortals. 


74-75. Unable to obtain a way of escape .she resorted to hun. 
Herself worthy of being honoured by the three worlds she joined 
her palms in reverence and said to Prthu :—“You don^ seem to 
see sin in killing a woman. O king, how wiH you sustain your 
subjects without me ? 

76-80. O king, the worlds arc stationed in me. Tlic universe 
is supported by me. O king, with my destruction the subjects 
will perish. Understand it. If you desire to do what is conducive 
to the welfare of your subjects you will not kill me. O Protector 
of Earth listen to these words of mine. Begun with proper means 
all activities become fruitful. Find out some means whereby you 
will be able to sustain subjects. O king, Even if you kill me you 
will not be able to nurture your subjects. I shall be favourable 
to you, O highly intelligent one, restrain your wrath. They say 
that women even in the lower species of animals, should not be 
killed.^ Seeing with your open eyes, O protector of Earth, it 
does not behove you to eschew virtue.** 

81. On hearing these and many other statements the 
noble-minded king, of virtuous soul, controlled liis anger and 
spoke to the Earth: 


1. DhtrmaIXstraj prohibit the sUyiog of Brihizu^u and women. 



26 


BroAma Put&^q 


Pftku saii: 

82-87. If one were to kill many animals or a single animal 
for the sake of a person whether it be himself or any other, one 
may incur sin thereby. If many were to obtain happiness, when 
one inauspicious person is killed there cannot be any major or 
minor sin in slaying that inauspicious person; O gentle lady. As 
for me, O earth it is in the interest of subjects that I will be killing 
you, should you, at my instance not be prepared to do what is 
conducive to the welfare of the universe. If you turn your face 
against my bebest I will kill you with my arrow and proclaiming 
myself I will sustain the subjects myself. Hence, O foremost one 
among the righteous persons, pay heed to my behests and enliven 
the subjects. Indeed, you are capable of sustaining them. Sub¬ 
mit to me and be my dai^hter. Then I shall withdraw this arrow 
«that is frightful in its appearance and that is now ready to kill you. 

Thi Earth said: 

88-89. O heroic one, undoubtedly I shall do all these things. 
Bind my calf so that I can discharge milk with my affection kindl¬ 
ed. O foremost one among those who uphold virtue, keep me 
levelled up everywhere so that the milk that flows down shall 
spread everywhere. 

Lomakatfom said: 

90. Then with the tip of his bow the son of Vena, Prthu 
swept aside hundreds and thousands of mountains. Therefore, 
the height of the mountains increased. 

91. In the previous creation when the surface of the Earth 
was uneven there was no demarcation of villages and cities. 

92. There were no cultivated plants, no breeding of cattle, 
no agricultural occupation nor was there any bazar or shopping 
centre. There was no problem of truth and falsehood. There 
was neither greed nor indecent rivalry and competition. 

93. It was only after the advent of Vaivasvata Manvantara, 
ever since the days of Vena (and his descendants), that all these 
began to ^pear. 

94. O brahmins, wherever the land was level the subjects 
began to colonise. 



2*95-108 


27 


95. Then che diet of subjects consisted of fhiits and roots. 
They were faced with great difficulties, as we have heard. 

96-97. Pfthu made lord Svayambhuva Manu the calf. 
He the tiger among men, then milked the Earth in his own hand. 
Pfthu the valorous son of Vena milked the vegetable kingdom. 
Even to this day the subjects subsist on those food grains and edi¬ 
bles. 

98-99. O excellent brahmins, the sages, Devas Pitfs, reptiles, 
Daityas, Yak;as, Punyajanas, Gandharvas, mountains, trees— 
all these milked the Earth. The milk, calf, milkman and vessel 
were separate for each of them. 

100* O brahmins, to the sages the calf was Soma, the milk¬ 
man was Brhaspati; their milk was penance and the Vcdic metres 
were their vessels. 

101. To Devas—the vessel was gold, the calf wais Indra, the 
milk was Ojaskara (that which enhances prowess) and the milk¬ 
man was Sun-god himself. 

102. To Pitfs—the vessel was silver; the calf was Yama; 
the milkman was Antaka and their milk was nectar. 

103. To N&gas—the calf was Tak^aka ; the vessel was Alabu 
(gourd); the milkman was Airavata; their milk was poison. 

104. To Asuras—the milkman was Madhu; the milk was 
Maya; the calf was Virocana and tlic vessel was iron. 

105. To Yaksas—the vessel was unbaked mudpoi; the calf 
was lofd Vaiirava]^; the milkman was Rajata-nabha and the 
milk was Antardhana. 

106. To Raksasas—the calf was Sumali, the milk was blood, 
the milkman was Rajatanabha and the vessel was skull. 

107. To Gandharvas—the calf was Citraratha, the vessel 
was lotus; the milk-man Suruci and the milk was sweet 
scent. 

108. To mountains—the vessel was rock; the milk was jewels 
and medicinal herbs; the calf was ^Himavan and the milk-man 
was the great mountain Mcru.^ 

1. Mtru. At the churning of the ocean the milkman was the mountain 
Meru. Con^^are /eti JogJhari MaUtft. 

According to the Pur&oat, Meru forms the central point of JambOdvfpa. 
It his been equated with the high land of Tartary north of the Himilays (MW). 
According to S. M. All (Tfu ^tkt Perggar), Meru can be identified 

with the Pamir plateau. 



28 


Brahma Purd^a 


109. To trees—the calf was Plak^a; the milkman was the 
Sala tree in full bloom; the vessel was the leaf of Palasa tree 
and the milk was the skill for re-plantation of rice after it was 
cut or burned. 

110. And then the Earth is Dhitri (the supporter), Vidhatrl 
(maker)» Pavani (purifier), Vasundhara, holder of riches. It is 
the source of origin of all beings mobile and immobile. It is the 
support of all. 

111. It yields everything that everyone desires. It grows all 
plants. It extends to the oceans. It is well known as Medim. 

112. The (fat) of the asuras Madhu and Kaifabha spread 
throughout the Earth. Hence Earth is called Medini by the ex¬ 
ponents of Truth. 

113. O brahmins, the Earth enjoyed the honour of being 
the daughter of king Prthu, the son of Vena. Hence, the Earth is 
called PfthN^. 

114. The Earth divided and reformed by Prthu nourished 
with mines and plants. It abounded in towns and cities. 

115. Prthu, the son of Vena, wielded a great prowess. He 
was tlic most excellent among kings. Undoubtedly he was worthy 
of being honoured by all beings. 

116. Pfthu indeed is wcH'thy of being honoured by the highly 
blessed brahmins who Itavc mastered die Vedas and Vedangas 
because he is eternal widi Brahma as the source of his origin.^ 

117. Prthu the first king, the valorous son of Vena should 
be honoured by highly blessed kings who desire stable kingship 
(on the earth). 

118. The primordial king who grants subsistence to the 
wt^ld, the well renowned Prthu should be honoured by valw>us 
warriors who are desirous of attaining vict^y in the batde-field. 

119. The warrior who goes to war after glorifying king Prthu 
returns unscathed from the terrific scene and attains fame. 

120. Pfthu alone should be honoured by the Vailyas who 
seek for wealth and who up trade and such-like activities. 
Pfthu grants the means of subsistence. For he is renowned (or 
that. 

1. Pfthu, the first king, has been equated with Brahmi. The conq>arison 
suggesu that he is divine. In fact, be is human but becomes diviae when he is 
consecrated. He is invested with kingly re^onsibiUcies which he has to shoul¬ 
der. He attains divinity by his acts secular or ceremonial and not otherwise. 



2.121—3.M0 


29 


121. Pfthu should be honoured by Sudras who serve the 
three castes seeking for their welfare. 

122. Thus different calves, milkmen, milk and vessels have 
been mentioned by me. What more shall I describe now ? 


CHAPTER THREE 
MAJ/VAjn’AXAS^ 


The sages said: 

1-2. O Lomahar^na, O highly intelligent one, describe 
in detail the Manvantaras along with their previous creations. 
O Suta, we wish to hear (actually, how mnay Manus were there 
and hotv long the Manvantaras lasted. 

Ijomaharfona said: 

3. O brahmins, they cannot be described in detail even in 
hundreds of years. O brahmins, listen to the brief description of 
the Manvantaras. 

4-7. There were six Manus in the past viz. Svayambhuva, 
Svaroci^a, Utiama, Tamasa, RaivataandCak9U^a,0 brahmins, 
Vaivasvata is the present Manu. There will be seven Manus in 
future:—Viz. Savari?!, Raibhya, Raucya, and four Merusavarnis. 
Thus the Manus of the past, present and future, are fourteen in 
number. I shall now mention sages, Devas and their sons too. 

8. The following seven were the sons of Brahma:—Marici, 
Atrx, Ahgiras, Pulaha, Kraiu, Pulastya and Vasi^fha. 

9-10. O brahmins, there are seven sages in the northern 
quarter. Ten sons of great prowess were bom of Svayambhuva 
—Agnidhra, Agnibahu, Mcdhya, Medhatithi, Vasu, 
Jyotisman, Dyutiman and Havya. O brahmins, thus the first 
Manvantara has been cited. 

1. A manvActm coataini tevmiyone cyclei of Mahayugas which are 
equal to 12,000 yean of gods. The Purft^ mention fourteen Manvantaras 
which derive thd^ names from fourteen successive mythical progenitors and 
sovereigns of the earth. There are seventyooe Caturyugas in each Manvantara. 
At the end of 71 such Caturyugas (71 X * Manu completes his life-span. 


30 


Brahma Puflt$a 


11-15. Aurva the son of Vasi^^ha^ Stamba, Kasyapa, Prana, 
Brhaspaii, Datu, Atri, and Cyavanai—O brahmins, these great 
sages have been acclaimed by Vayu as sages of great holy rites. 
Devas in tlie Svarocl^a Manvaniara are known as Tu^itas. O 
brahmins the following were the noble sons of Svaroci$a Manu:— 
Havighna, Sukfli, Jyoti^, Apomurii, Pratita, Nabhasya, Nabha 
and Orja. Thus, the kings of great virility and exploits have been 
glorilied. O brahmins, thus tlie second Manvaniara has been 
mentioned by inc. 

16-19, O excelleni brahmias, I shall mention the third 
Manvaniara now. Vasi^tha had seven sons. They are known as 
V^if^has. Htratiyagarbha’s sons were extremely refulgent. O 
excellent sages ! undentand these ten sons of Manu as I mention 
them to you. 

They are:—Crja, Tanurja, Madhu, M&dhava, Suci, 
Sukra, Saha, Nabhasya and Nabhas. Devas in this Manvaniara 
are Bhwus. The third Manvaniara has been cited thus. 

2U-23. Now, I shall mention the fourth Manvaniara. O 
brahmins, the seven sages therein are:—^Kavya, Pfthu, Agni, 
Jahnu, Dhata, Kapiv^ and Akaptvsm. O excellent brahmins, 
their sons and grandsons are glorified as noble brahmins in the 
Pura^ias. In the Manvantara of Tamasa Manu, the groups of 
Devas arc Satyas. These have been glorified as the ten sons of 
Tamasa Manu:— Dyuti, Tapasya, Sutapas, Tapobhuta,Sana- 
tana, Taporati, Akaltnaia, Tanvi, Dhanvi and Parantapa. This 
is the fourth Manvantara O excellent sages: 

24-28. In the fifth Manvantara the seven sages are Deva- 
bahu, Yadudhra, Vedaiiras, Hiranyaroman, Parjanya,Urdhva- 
b&husonof Soma, and Satyanetra son of Atri. Devas are Abhukta- 
rajas. The Prakrtis are Pariplava and Ratbhya. The sons of 
Raivata are Dhrtiman, Avyaya, Yukta, Tattvadariin, Nimtsuka, 
Arapya, Prakaia, Nirmc^a, Satyavak and K^ti. This is the fifth 
Manvantara. 

29-33. I shall mention the sixth Manvantara now. O excel¬ 
lent brahmins, undentand that there are seven great sages :Bh|^, 
Nabha, Vivasvan, Sudhama, Virsyas, Arinfiman and Sahif^u. 
O brahmins, the following are Devas in CUtfufa Manvantara. 
The heaven-dwellers are not difierent fi*om sages. There are five 
groups of Devas named Lekhas. O excellent sages, the N&dvale- 




3 , 34-53 


31 


yas of great prowess and noble souls arc the sons of sageAhgiras. 
The ten sons of Cakju^a Manu, Rum and others arc well known. 
Thr sixth Manvantara has been mentioned thus. I shall narrate 
seventh Manvantara now. 

34-41. Atri, Vasi^fha, Kasyapa the great sage, Gautama 
Bharadvaja, Visvamitra and Jamadagni the son of Rcika of 
noble sou! are seven sages in the heaven now. The following are 
Devas in thr present Vaivasvata Manvantara—viz. S^hyas, 
Rudras, Visvedevas, Vasus, Maruts, Adityas and Alvins Ijorn of 
Vivasvat. Iksvaku and others are the ten sons of Vaivasvat. O 
brahmins, the sons and grandsons of these great s^cs of great 
prowess mentioned herein arc present in all quarters. In all Man- 
van taras the seven groups of seven are well reputed. They arc 
present in the world for establishing virtue and protecting the 
world. When u Manvantara passe.s off, four groups of seven pro¬ 
ceed to heaven ai^er completing their duties and reach Brahma- 
loka free from ailment.s. Then others endowed with penance hi) 
up their places. O brahmins, these (Manus and others) of past 
and present mic in this order. 

42*46. The following arc kjiown as the great sages of future. 
They will be present in the Manvantara of Savarrii: Rama, 
Vyasa and Atrcya. They arc brilliant and well known. Bhara- 
dvaja, Dro^a’s son Aivatthama of great lustre, Gautama who 
never grows old, Saradvat son of Gautama, Kauiika, Galava, 
and Aurva son of Kasyapa will be bom as the sons of Savar^a 
Manu, O excdlenc sages. O leadii^ brahmins, Vairin, Adhva- 
rivan, Samana, (?) Dhrtiman, Vasu, Ariifa, Adhffta, VSji and 
Sumati—these seven will be noble heroes. 

47. By repeating their names after getting up early in the 
morning, one attains Itappiness as well as fame and will also be¬ 
come long-lived. 

48. These seven Manvantaras have been mentioned. Now, 
listen to the succinct description of the future Manvantaras. 

49-53. O brahmins, the Savariu Manus are five. Under- 
staxid them. One of them is the son of Vivasvat. Four arc the 
sons of Prajipati Parame$(hin, O brahnuns, who attained golden 
complexion like the mountain Mem. They arc the grandsons of 
Dakfa and the soils of Priyi, the daughter of Daksa. They will 
become kings endowed with strict austerity cm the ridge of Mcru. 



32 


Brahma Purd^a 


They arc of great prowess. The son of Prajapati Ruci is 
known as Raucyamanu. He is Ruci*s son begot of the gentle lady 
Bhuci. Hence, he is named Bhautya. These are the future Manus 
in this Kalpa. O excellent brahmins, the whole earth including 
cities and seven continents will be protected by them for the 
period of a thousand cycles of four ages. 

54*56. Axmihilation occurs continuously in these Manvan- 
taras due to the penance of Prajapati. Seventyone sets of four 
Yugas, Kfta, Treia, Dvapara and Kali constitute what is called 
Manvantara. These fourteen Manus who have been glorified 
eixliancc reputation. They arc mentioned as very powerful in the 
Vedas and Puranas. O brahmins, they are Prajapatis whose 
glorification is conducive to the achievement of wealth and 
blessedness. 

57. At the end of Manvantaras there is annihilation and at 
the conclusion of the process of annihilation creation takes place. 
It is impossible to meutioji their ultimate end even in the course 
of hundreds of years. 

58*60. O brahmitts, it is impossible to mention the ultimate 
end of creation or destruction of subjects.O excellent brahmins, 
destructions in the course of Manvantaras are mentioned in the 
Vrdas. At tliat time, Devas and seven sages stay on with their 
parts still retained since they are endowed with penance, know¬ 
ledge and celibacy. When a thousand cycles of four Yugas are 
completed the Kalpa comes to ait end. Then the living beings 
arc burned by the rays of the sun. 

61-64. Keeping Brahma at their head, along with Adttyas, 
the brahmins enter Lord Hari, Naraya^ the most excellent 
^ong gods. Hr is the creatt^ of all creatures. Again and again 
at the end of every Kalpa they enter him. The lord is unmanifest 
and permanent. This entire universe belongs to him. O leading 
sages, now I shall recount the creation of VaivasvataManu, the 
current one of great lustre. Here, in the context of the description 
of races, the family where lord Hari, the supreme Atman, was 
born is being mentioned. The lord was born in the family of 



CHAPTER FOUR 


Evolutwn of ViDosoai Adilya 

Lomaharfona said: 

1 • O excellent brahmins, Vivuvan was bom of Dik^ya^ 
and Kajyapa. The gentle lady, the daughter of Tvattr named 
Samjfla was the wife of Vivasvan. 

2. That beautiful lady was well kjiown in the three worlds 
as Sureivari (goddess of Devas). She was the wife of lord Mir* 
tanda of great soul. 

3. Saihjfla had been endowed with lair complexion, beauty 
and freshness of youthful bloom. She was not satisfied with the 
complexion of her husband. She was endowed with penance that 
had made her brilliant and dazzling. 

4. Since, Aditya’s limbs had been burnt by the refulgence 
of his disc, Aditya’s complexion did not appear to be very attrac¬ 
tive. 

5. Aditya is called Martanda for the following reason:— 
Once unknowingly Kaiy^^ had uttered out of his filial affection 
‘T h<^e he is not dead even as he lay in the womb.*' 

6. The refulgence of Vivasvan increased day by day whereby 
the son of Kalyapa scorched the three worlds too much. 

7. O brahmins, Aditya the foremost among those who scor¬ 
ched the earth begot three children of Samjfta, a daughter and 
two Prajapatis. 

8. At the outset, Vaivasvata Manu, the Prajapati known as 
Sraddhadeva was bom. Yama and Yamuna were born as twins. 

9. On seeing the dark-coloured Vivasvan, Samjfta could 
not bear it. Therefore, she created her own shadow known as 
Savari^. 

10-11. That illusory Samjfta arising out of her shadow bowed 
to Samjfta. O excellent brahmins, with her palms joined in rever¬ 
ence she said—*'0 lady of pure smiles tell me. What shall I do 
for you. O fair-complexioned lady, I abide by your direc¬ 
tives. Command me.** 

SahjM saidi 

12. ^'Welfare unto thee, I shall go to my lather’s abode. 
Thou wilt unhositatingly stay behind in my bouse. 



Brahma 



13. These two sons of mine and this daughter of beautiful 
slender waist should be nurtured by thee. O splendid lady, never 
should this secret be divulged to our lord/’ 

Savari^d said: 

14» gentle lady, not until I am caught hold of by my 
. tresses, never till I am threatened with a curse, will I divulge the 
secret. O gentle lady, obeisance to Thee. You shall go comfort¬ 
ably assured thus”. 

Lmahar^ai^ said: 

15*17. Having commended Savarna and having beenassu* 
red by her saying. ^*So, it shall be” that lady in her pitiable state 
approached (her father) Tva^tr and stood by him bashfully. 
That splendid lady standing thus abashed near her father was 
rebuked by him. Again and again she was directed by him, saying 
”Go back to your husband”. Assuming the form of a mare 
and thereby concealing her beauty that blameless lady went to 
the northern Kurus and began to graze grass. 

18-19. Taking the second Samjfta to be the real Samjha, 
Aditya begot of her a son equal to himself in every respect. O 
brahmins, since he was on a par with his elder brother Manu, 
he too became Manu by name. He is called Savarna (son of 
Savarna) too. 

20*21. The second son who was born of her was known as 
Sanai^cara. Samjfla, like an ordinary woman of Earth, loved her 
own sons more. She was not equally disposed to the elder ones. 
Manu forgave this weakness on her part but Yama did not. 

22. Out of anger and childishness or may be due to the 
inevitability of what was destined to happen, Yama, the intrinsi* 
cally careless son of Vivasvat liAed up his leg (as though to kick 
her] and threatened Sadijfta. 

23. The mother of Savarna, who became extremely dis¬ 
tressed cursed him wrathfully—”May this foot of yours fall 
down”. 

24. Extremely frightened and distressed due to the curse, 
and growing suspicious by the utterances of SamjfiA, Yama inti¬ 
mated everything to his iather with palms joined in reverence. 

25-27. ”May this curse be averted” said be to his iather, O 



4.28*38 


35 


brahmins. mother should be impartially afTectionate to all 
her sons. O Vivasv^, she wants to remove us and she desires to 
become the sole bendiciary. Of course the foot was lifted up by 
me to her but it did not touch her, maybe due to my puerile 
whim, maybe due to my extreme desire, maybe due to my delu* 
sion—^whatever that maybe—it behoves you to forgive me. O 
lord of worlds, O most excellent one among those who scorch, I 
have been cursed by my mother. O lord of rays, may my foot 
never fall ofF, I beg you favour”. 

yivasvin said: 

28. In this matter, O son, there will undoubtedly be a great 
reasem wherefore fury has stirred you who are conversant with 
righteousness and who (invariably) speak the truth. 

29. It is impossible to falsify the words of your mother* 
Worms will take the flesh from your foot and it will fall off to 
the ground. 

30. The words of your mother will be rendered truthful 
but you will be saved by avoiding the wone effects of the curse. 

31. Aditya spoke to SamjAa;—^'How is it that more affec¬ 
tion is shown to one when all sons are on a par with one 
another?” 

32. Evading (a straight reply) she did not tell (the truth) 
to Vivasvat. He entered into self-meditation and found out the 
truth by his Yogic power. 

33-35. O excellent sages, the lord was ready to curse her to 
destruction but she mentioned the truth to Vivasv&n in the 
manner it had transpired before. On hearing the same, Vivasvat 
was infuriated and rushed to Tva^tf. On seeing Vivasvat, Tvaftr 
honoured him suitably. As the sun was about to scorch him in 
anger, he ^peased him quietly. 

Tvofff said: 

36-38. Affected by excessive refulgence this complexion of 
yours is not alluring. It was because she could not brook it. She 
is now grazing grass in the meadow in a forest. O lord of rays, 
by adopting Yogic power you will presently tee your wife of aus¬ 
picious conductwho is worthy of praise and who is endowed with 
Yogic powers. O lord 1 O suppressor of foes, if my suggestion ia 



S6 Brahma 

approved by you I shall turn your complexion favourable u> 
you. I shall make it alluring. 

39. When Vivasvat agreed to the pr^osal Tvaftr mounted 

him on the lathe, whetted him and his ccxnplexion sparkl¬ 

ing. 

40. Then his form became mort dazzling due to the well 
knit relulgence. It was very alluring aud lie appeared very splen¬ 
did. 

41. Adopting his Yogic power be met his wife who had 
assumed the form of a mare. She could not be thwarted by any 
living being due to her observance of holy rites and her own 
brilliance. 

42-43. The lord assumed the form of a horse and approached 
her as she grazed about fearlessly in the form of a mare. It was 
in her mouth that he had his sexual intercourse, as she began 
fidgeting due to her suspicion that he might be a person other 
than her own husband. She let out the semen of Vivasvat through 
her nostrils. 

44-49. Two sons were bom of her thus. They were Aivins 
who later became excellmt physicians. They were known as 
Nasatya and Dasra. They were the sons of the eighth Prajapati. 

Bhaskara revealed his alluring fmn to Samjfta. O excellent 
sages, on Keing her hxuband in the attractive ibrm she became 
delighted. 

Yama was extremely distressed due to his activity. He deli¬ 
ghted his subjects by his righteous conduct. He was loiown as 
Dharmarija. Due to his righteous activities he became extre¬ 
mely brilliant and attained the lordship of Pitn and status of 
the guardian of a quarter, O ascetics, Manu the son of Sivarpa 
is the future Prajapati in the Sivaruika Manvantara. Even today 
he is performing penance m the Menn 

50-54. His brother Sanaiicara attained the status of a pla¬ 
net. With that rehilgence (of Aditya) Tvastr evolved the discus 
of Viftiu for destroying the Asuras. The we^on is new thwart-^ 
ed in a battle. The youngest daughter YamI became the famous 
excellent river Yamunk who sanctifies the world. The brother is 
called Savaroa Manu. The second son, the brother of Manu, 
became l^anailcara, the planet satum, honoured in the worid. 
He who listens to this narrative on the origin of Devas and 



3 . 1 - 1 ] 


37 


Tctatai the same in his memory will attun great &me. Even when 
involved in adversities he will be liberated therefrom. 


CHAPTER FIVE 
Review of the Solar Race 

Lotnaharsana said'. 

1-2. Vaivasvaia Manu had nine sons, all equal to him in 
■every respect. They were lk$viku, Nabhaga, Dhr$ia, Sary&ti, 
Narl$yanta, Praihiu, Riffa, Karu$a and Pr^hra. O excellent 
sages, these were the nine sons. 

3-7. O brahmins, before the birth of these sons, Praj&pati 
Manu of great intellect had been desirous of begetting sons and 
so performed the sacrifice with Mitra and Vanina as deities. In 
the course of that sacrifice, O excellent brahmins, Manu poured 
libation in the part pertaining to Mitra and Varupa. It is said 
in the Vedas that Ila was born therefrom. She was clad in divine 
:ganncnts and bedecked in divine ornaments. She had a divine 
physical form. Manu the holder of the sceptre called her lift, 
nnd said—“O gentle lady, follow me. “Ila spoke these words in 
reply to Prajapati who was desirous of a son and who was righte- 
■ous. 


Ila said: 

8. “O foremost among the eloquent, I am bom in the por¬ 
tion pertaining to Mitra and Varupa. I shall go to them. Do not 
violate my Dharma.” 

9. After saying this to lord Manu and approaching Mitra 
and VaruM, Hi the lady of beautiful hips spoke to Mitra and 
Varuna with palms joined in r ev eren ce. 

10. “O Devas, I am born in the portion pertainii^ to you. 
What shall I do unto you. I had been asked by Manu to follow 
him.” 

11. O excellent brahmins, Mitra and Vampa spoke thus to 
the chaste lady lift who was devoted to piety and who had spoken 
the truth. 



38 


Brahma 


12-16* iair-complexi(Hied lady of beautiful hips, we are 
delighted by your piety, seIf«xitrol, humility and truthfulness* 
O highly blessed lady, you will become famous as our daughter* 
You alone will turn out to be the son of Manu perpetuatii^ his 
line. You will become famous in the three worlds well known as 
Sudyumna, favourite of the universe, practising piety and mak¬ 
ing the race of Manu flourish*’. 

After hearing this, she retismed. While she was returning 
from the presence of her father, Budha availed himself of the 
opportunity and invited her for sexual dalliance. O brahmins, 
Pururavas was born to her by her union with Budha, son of 
Soma. 

17. After giving birth to Pururavas II& became Sudyumna. 
He got three sons who were extremely virtuous. 

18-23. O brahmins, they were Utkala, Gaya and Vinat&iva. 
O brahmins, the Utkala land was given to Utkala^, Vinat&iiva 
had his land in the western quarter, and O leading sages, Gaya 
had the land Gayi* in the eastern region where Manu suppress¬ 
ed the challenging foes. He divided the Earth into ten provinces 
to be ruled over by them. Among them the eldest son obtained 
the Middle Country. In view of his beii^ a daughter as well, 
Sudyumna did not get this realm, but at the instance of Sage 
Vasiftha he got a foothold in Pratiffhana*. 

Dhr^i^u, Ambari^ and Dand^ha got equal shares. The excel¬ 
lent Da^d^ha forest was named after Dandaka. Merely on enter¬ 
ing this forest a man becomes liberated from his sins. O brah¬ 
mins, after begetting sons Aila Sudyumna went to heaven* 

O excellent brahmins, the kingdom of the r^hteous king 
Sudyumna was fairly established. After attaining the kingdom, 
the king of great fame gave it to Pururavas. O excellent s^es, 
he was a son of Manu with the characteristics of a woman and 
a man. He ruled over the kingdom as Ila as well Sudyumna* 
He was well renowned. 

24. The Sakas were the sons of Narifyanta. Ambariia the 
most excellent of kings, was the son of Nabhaga, O brahmins* 

1. UtksU (Odrs)^BAodem Orins. 

2. • A reaowaed pUce of pilgriaufe Mcred to Che Pitfi. 

S. PraHftkiaa A sacred place in Frayiga now called Jbua. Once 
this place wu ruled over by kLog YayAli. 



23. Dhar^fakas became very proud of tlieir might to fight 
in battles. The residents of K&rufa^ the land of Karufa were 
Kfatriyas irrepressible in war. 

26. The sons of Nabhaga and Dhnta were originally K$at* 
riyas who later on became Vaijyas.* Amiu had an only son who 
is known as Prajapati. 

27-31. Nari^yanta’s son was king Yama who held the staff 
of chastisement. Saryati had twins as children. The son was 
known as Anarta. The daughter was known as Sukanya who 
became the wife of Cyavana. Raivatawas the son of Raiva(?). 
His eldest son Kakudmi was very righteous. He ruled in the city 
of Kujasthall.’ Accompanied by his daughter be approached 
Brahma and listened to Gandharva music for the duration of a 
Muhurta of the Lord. O brahmins, actually it comprised of 
many Yugas of the mortals. He returned to hb city which was 
peopled by the Yadavas. 

32. It had been converted into a city named Dvaravatl. 
It looked very beautiful with many gateways. It was protected 
by the Bhojas, Vr^nis and Andhakas whose leader was Vasudeva. 

33-34. O excellent brahmins, Raivata realized the true 
nature of exbtcnce. He gave hb daughter Revatl of good holy 
rites to Balarama in marriage and himself went to the peak of 
Mount Mcru. He stayed there and performed penance. Bala¬ 
rama the righteous, sported about in the company of Revad 
and was very happy. 

Thi sages said: 

33-36. O highly intelligent one, how b it that even after 
the lapse of many Yugas, old age did not afflict Revad or Raivata 
Kakudmin ? How was the line of Saryati perpetuated on earth 
after he had gone to Mcru. We wish to hear evcrythii^ precisely. 

Lmahar^ai^ said: 

37-41. O excellent sages, O sinless ones, netthg old age nor 
hunger nor thirst nor death nor the circle of seasons has any 

1. KirQsft was e htUy country south of KAH and Vatu between Cedi 
and Magadha. It comprised the hilly country of which Rewa is the centre 
fromaboutthenver Ken on Ae west as far as the confines of Bebar on the eait 

2. Thu shows that the system of caste was not rigid in those days. 

3. JTaihstAa/f'MMravut^Mod. Dvftraki. 



Brahma Purina 


40 

adverse influence in the Brahmaloka at any time. When Raivata 
Kakudmin departed for the heavenly world> O brahmins, the 
city of Kusaschall was attacked and destroyed by Punyajanas^ 
and Rak^asas. That righteous noble king had a hundred bro* 
thers. On being attacked and massacred by the Rak^tsas they 
fled in all directions. O excellent brahmins, after fleeing in all 
directions they established their extensively large line in differ* 
ent plaices. O excellent sages, their K$atriya groups are well- 
reputed as Sary&tas. They were endowed with good qualities 
and became famous in all quarters. They had entered dense 
Ansts all round. They were endowed with great prowess. 

42*46. The two sons of Nabhaga and Ri|^ were originally 
Vaiiyas who later became tvahmins. The Karu^as (the Kfatriya 
sons of KarQfa) were irrepressible in battles. O excellent brah¬ 
mins, Pf^adhra inflicted violent injuries on the cow of his pre¬ 
ceptor and due to the curse of his preceptor he attained the state 
of a Sudra. Thus, O exceuent sages, the nine sons of Vaivasvata 
Manu have been recounted. O brahmins, it was when Manu 
sneezed that his son Ik$v&ku was bom. Ik$v&ku had a hundred 
sons who distributed monetary gifls in plenty. Vikuk^i was the 
eldest among them and he was endowed with great valour. He 
was a great lord exceptionally conversant with religious virtues. 
He became the lord of Ayodhya* He had five hundred sons. 
The eldest among them was Sakuni. 

47-50. They were very powerful amd the sole protectors of 
the Northern region. O excellent brahmins, there were other 
administrations in the Southern region niunbering flAy-eight. 
Sai&da was the leader of all these. On the A^faka day Ik$v&ku 
commanded Vikuk^f—powerful one, kill some rabbits and 
bring their flesh for performing Sr&ddha.^’* 

1. Pu^yajwu —Acceding to Vifuu Pur&^a, Raivsu, King of Kuia- 
ftball, bom of the race of Saryati, w»t to see Brahmi. Taking advantage of 
his abtence from the place, Pupyajaaa took control over Kurfastbali. Afraid of 
the demon the hundred brothers of Raivata left the country. Alter that £aryati 
dynasty merged with that of Haihaya. 

2. A city in North India which e^|oyed great importance and 
rqwtation for many years as the capital of kings of solar race. Till the time of 
^ Rima this city maintaixkod poni^ and glory, and alter that gradually it fell 
in decay. 

3. ir4Ma —The offering given to Pitrs. According to the Purioai, 



5.51-38 


41 


O brahminsi after planning to perfoim the Srftddha rite but 
before executing it he ate part of the meat of the rabbit which was 
meant for the Sraddha. Hence, he was called Sattda. At the 
instance ofVasiftha he was exiled by Ikfvaku. 

51. O brahmins, when Ik$vaku passed away Saiada be¬ 
came the king. Sai&da’s heir and successor was a powerful king 
named Kakutstha. 

52. Kakutstha’s son was Anenas and Prthu was his son. 
Vlr&iva was Pfthu^s son and Ardra was born of him. 

53. O brahmins, Yuvaniiva was Ardra^s ton and his son was 
'Sravasta. Sravasta was the king by whom Sravast!^ was built. 

54. Brhadaiva was the successor of King Sravasta; his son 
Kuvalaiva was a very righteous monarch. 

55-56. It was he who obtained the title Dhundhumara, the 
slayer of Dhundhu. 

Tht Sages said: 

O highly intelligent one, we wish to hear about the manner 
whereby Dhundhu was slain. We wish to hear it precisely how 
Kuvalaiva came to be known as Dhundhumara. 

Lomahar$<u}a said: 

57. Kuvalaiva had a hundred sons. All of them were good 
bowmen, powerful, clever in leanung and unassailable. 

58. All of them were righteous. All performed sacrifices 
wherein they distributed plenty of money as gifts. Bfhada^va 
crowned his son Kuvalaiva in the kingdom. 

6raddha ii a very important ceremony. MW offers the foUowine remarks 
about Sr&ddha. ^'SrSddha is a ceremeny in honour and for the benefit of dead 
relations observed with great ttricCncM at various fixed periods and oo occa- 
dom of rqjotciog as well as mourning by the surviving relatives. These cere* 
monies are performed by the dally offerit^ of water and on stated occasltmi by 
•offering Pindss or balls rice and meals to three paternal and three maternal 
ibrefathers^ i.e. to father, grandfather and great grandfather'*. 

1. SrdwH —Name of a city situated north of the Ganges and founded by 
Jong ^rivasta of Ikiviku dynatty. It was the ancicat c^tal of Kosal where 
4he rich merchant Aaath^od»ka built for Buddha a rcddeoce in the Jeta- 
vana monastery which became his favourite retreat during the rainy season. 
Other authorities derive the name from Sage Sivalta whoreaided there; it has 
ibeea identified by General Gunnlogham with the modon dty Sahet Mahet, 
•58 miles north of Ayodhyi. 



42 


Brahma 


59. After transferring the royal glory to his son he entered 
the forest. Uttanka, the brahminical sage, stopped him as he was. 
about to leave. 

UitaAka saiii 

60-71. It is your duty to protect your subjects O king. I am. 
imable to perform a carefree penance; very near my hermitage 
there is a flat sandy waste land of desert. The sea (nearby) is 
filled with sand. It is known by the name of Uddalaka. There ia 
a great Asura Dhundhu who remains hidden under the ground, 
beneath the sand. His body is huge. He is very powerful. He is 
indestructible even by Devas. He is the son of Asura Madhu. He 
is lying down there performing a severe penance for the destruc¬ 
tion of the entire world. At the end of a year when he heaves 
a deep sigh the whole Earth shakes. A great column of dust is 
raised by the air he lets out when he sighs. His huge body today 
conceals the path of the sun. The Earth-quake lasts for a week. The 
column of dust is accompanied by flames, burning coal and smoke. 
He is extremely terrible. Hence, O dear one, I am unable even 
to stay in my hermitage. With a desire to do what is beneficial 
so the worlds, slay that huge monster. May the worlds heave a 
sigh of relief after he has been assassinated by you. O lord of the 
Earth, indeed, you alone are ccxnpetent to kill him. O king, in 
the previous Yuga, a boon had been granted unto you by 
Due to this boon granted to you, you will enhance the refulgence 
and splendour of the penon who slays that terrible great Asura of 
inordinate power. Indeed, this Dhundhu of great splendour 
cannot be slain, O king, by a person of mean splendour even 
after a long time, nay, not even in the course of hundreds of Yu- 
gas. His virility is immense; inaccessible even to Devas. 

On beir^ requested thus, by the noble Uttanka, the saintly* 
king gave him his son Kuvalalva for the work of killing Dhundhu. 

Bfhaddiva said: 

72-73. saintly lord, I have already laid down my arms. 
Here is my son, O excellent brahmin, he will undoubtedly slay^ 
Dhundhu.’* 

After directing his son for slaying Dhundhu, the saintly kii^ 
went to the mountain and adc^ted holy rites. 



574*88 



LomaharfOffa saidx 

74. O brahmins, accompanied by his hundred sons and 
sage Uttanka, Kuvala^va proceeded ahead for slaying Dhundhu. 

75. At the behest of Uttahka and with a desire for achieving 
the weliare of the worlds, lord Vif^u permeated him with his own 
splendour* 

76* When that invincible king proceeded ahead a loud 
sound arose in heaven—^‘This glorious and invincible king will 
become the slayer of Dhundhu’*. 

77. They showered him all round with divine scents and 
garlands. The celestial drums were sounded loudly. 

78. Accompanied by his sons, that powerful king, the most 
excellent among the victorious, went to the sea and dug up the 
inexhaustible sandy deposit. 

79-81. O brahmins, Dhundhu was ferretted out by his sons 
who dug the entire western portion. Even as he lay concealed by 
the sands he appeared to whirl up furiously all the worlds by the 
fire of his mou(h. O leading sages, like the ocean at the rise of the 
moon he let out jets of water coining up in waves and foams. All 
the hundred sons of the king excepting-three were killed by that 
demon. 

82. Then that brilliant king of immense splendour who had 
resolved to kill Dhundhu approached the powerful Asura. 

83-84. The king, a great Yogin, drank up the speedy current 
of water let out by the monster and quenched the fire with the 
very same water. After slaying the aquatic Asura of huge body 
by means of his inordinate strength the king fulfilled his mission 
and met Uttanka sage. 

83. Uttanka granted boons unto the noble king. He granted 
him inexhaustible wealth and non occurrence of defeat at the 
hands of his enemies. 

86. He granted him a perpetual interest in righteousness and 
everlasting stay in the celestial world. To those sons who were 
slain by the Asura he granted permanent abodes in heaven. 

87. The eldest of those who remained is called Drdhaiva 
and the junior princes were called Candr&iva and Kapili jva. 

88. Haryaiva is known as the son ofDrdhaiva, son ofDhun- 
dhum&ra. Harya|ya’s son was Nikumbha who was ever devoted 
to Kfatriya duties. 



44 


Brahma Purfhfa 


89. O brahmins, Samhata^va son of Nikumbba was an ex- 
pert in warfare. Akf iaiva and Kriaiva were the sons of Saihha- 
tiiva. 

90. His daughter Haimavatl became famous as Driadvatl. 
Her son PrasenajU was renowned in the three worlds. 

91. Prasenajit married the chaste lady Gaurl by name. 
Cursed by her husband she became the river Bihudk.^ 

92. His son Yuvaniiva was a lord of kings. M&ndhata was 
Yuvanaiva^s son and he conquered the three worlds. 

93. His wife Caitrarathl was the daughter of Saiabindu. 
She was called Bindumatl also. She was a chaste lady and in the 
whole world she was unrivalled in beauty. 

94. That chaste lady was the eldest sister of ten thousand 
brothers. O brahmins, Mandh&tk procreated in her two sons. 

95. They were Purukutsa who was conversant with holy 
rites and Mucukunda who became the kii^. Purukutsa’s son 
Trasadasyu became a monarch. 

96-97. Sambhuta,hisson, was bom of queen Narmadi. Sam- 
bhuta’s successor was Sudhanvan, Sudhanvan^s son was Tri- 
-dhanvan, suppressor of enemies. The scholarly Trayyaruna was 
the son of king Tridhanvan. His son Satyavrata was a mighty 
prince. 

98-99. He was wicked. He put in obstacles when the Man¬ 
tras were chanted in the course of a marriage. He abducted the 
wedded wives of other persons. Whether it was due to his childish¬ 
ness or lust, or delusion, or fool-hardiness or fickle-mindedncss, 
he abducted lustfully the daughters of many citizens. 

100. Calling out furiously disgraceful one'' many times, 
Trayyaruna banished him on account of his sinfiil deeds. 

101-102. Thus exiled he said to his father. "Where shall I 
go ?" He asked him many times. 

The father replied—"Go and stay among the Cantatas. O 
•defiler of my family, I do not seek such a son as you." Thus 
commanded he went out of the city at the instance of his father. 

1. iMuitf: From the numerous rtfereaces to this river, in the Purinas, 
it appears to have been a considerable river between the Gomat! and GahgA in 
or near the territory ^ Ayodhyi, having its sourca well up in the HimUayas. 
The only river vrfaich satMei these conditioai is the modem Rg m aga ft gt 
*whtclkJoins the Ganges on the left, near Kanau}. 



5.103^6.1-6 


45 

103-109. Vasiftha the holy sage did not restrain him. O 
brahmins, the heroic Satyavrata, banished by his father stayed 
near the slums of the Cindalas. His father went away to the 
forest. O brahmins, on accent of that sin, Indra did not rain in 
that land for twelve years. 

Sage Viivamitra of great penance kept his wife in that land 
and performed an elab<Mace penance beyond the sea. His wife 
tied her middle son round her neck and went about offering 
him for sale in exchange of a hundred cows for maintaining the 
other sons. O brahmins, seeti^ the son of the great s^e tied 
round the neck for sale, the righteous son of the king released him. 
Satyavrata the mighty prince sustained him for pleasing Vi ivA- 
mitra and to get his sympathy. Since he was tied round the neck 
he was called G&lava. The intelligent sage of severe penance was 
thus relieved by that heroic monarch. 


CHAPTER SIX 
Kings of tho SoUsr Race 

Lomakarfo^ said: 

1. Lord Satyavrata, abidii^ by the rules of graceful beha¬ 
viour maintained the wife of Visvimitra, out of sympathy and as 
a result of his own vow. 

2. He killed wild buffaloes, boars and deer and tied up the 
pieces of their meat Co a tree near Visv&mitra’s hermitage. 

3-6. He adopted the holy rite of Up&xhiu Vrata (maintain¬ 
ing silence) and took to initiatioa (for a penance) lasting for 
twelve years. He stayed there at the instance of his &cher. When 
the king went to the forest it ws^ sage Vasi^tha who administered 
the city of Ayodhyi, and the whole kingdom. He looked after 
the affairs of the harem as well in view of his relationship as the 
preceptor and the family-priest the monarch. O sinless ones, 
whether it was due to his childishneas or to the unavoidability of 
the future evenly Satyavrau maintained a perpetual grudge 
against Vasif^ha: Tor, when he was banished, in spite of his being 



46 Brahma 

A favourite by his father^ sage Vasiftha had not tried to 
intercede* 

7-8. The Mantras chanted at the celebration of a marriage 
become effective when the seventh step is taken.^ Hence Satya* 
vrata killed the bridegrooms at the seventh step. But O brahmins, 
Satyavrata cherished anger against Vasi^fha thinking in his 
mind—^‘Although Vasi^^ha knows Dharma he does not save me.’* 

9-10. It was on ethical grounds that Vasi^^ the saintly 
lord, did not intervene on behalf of Satyavrata. This silent be¬ 
haviour was not understood by Satyavrata. The noble father too 
was dissatisfied with him. Therefore, Indra did not shower rain 
for twelve years. 

11-16. But now he took upon himself the vow of a great holy 
rite which is very difiicuU to maintain on the Earth. O brahmins, 
he maintained it thinking that eq^iation for his sin would be done 
thereby and the family saved. Vasiffha the saintly lord did not 
restrain his father when he was being banished because the sage 
thought that his father might crown his son. 

The powerful Satyavrata maintained the vow for twelve years. 

Once when there was no meat anywhere, the prince saw 
K&madhenu* cow of sage Vasi^fha.* O excellent sages, the 
king who followed the convention of the land where he stayed 
killed that cow. He had been so hungry and utterly exhausted. 
Due to his anger against Vasiffha and delusion (be did not 
hesitate in this heinous crime). He ate the meat of cow and fed 
the sons ofViivamitra therewith. On knowing about it, Vasiffha 
became furious. 

Vasiftha said: 

17-19. O ruthless one, undoubtedly I shall fix this peg of 
sin even if the previous two pegs are not effective. Now your sin 
is threefold, dissatisfying your father, abductii^ another man’s 

1. Saptaptdi A rite of wmlking seven steps round the sacred fire at the 
coQcluiioa of the marrisge ceremony. 

2. KSmadhmu: A mythical cow ttf Vaastka which latufied all desires. 

9. Vdsifd^ 0 f VoHffkat Son of Varuca» a celebrated sage, the fiunily 
priest of the tolar race of kings and author of several Vedic hynni, particu¬ 
larly at the seventh Macdala of the ^igveda. He wat the typical representative 
of the Brahmanic dignity and power. The efforts of Visvamitra to rise to his 
level tem the lut^t of many legends. 



6 . 20 ^ 


47 


wife and slaying of the cow belongixtg to your precepted. Seeii^ 
thus his three pegs of sin, the ULge of great penance called him 
Triianku.^ Hence he is known as Trilanku. 

20. Since he znaintained his wife, sage Viivamitra was pleas¬ 
ed and he granted him boons. 

21. When the prince was asked to choose a boon as he pleas¬ 
ed he said shall like to go to heaven in this physical form**. 

22-23. When the drought of twelve years* had passed off, 
the sage Viivimitra crowned him in the ancestral kingdom and 
pe rf o r med a sacrifice on his behalf. This sage of great penance 
made him ascend heaven in his physical fonn even as the gods and 
Vasiftha looked on. 

24. His wife Satyaratha bom of the family of Kaikeya* 
bore him a sinless son, Hariicandra. 

25. That king is known (both as Hariicandra and Trai- 
iankava. He is wellknown as an emperor and the performer of 
Rajasuya sacrifice. 

26. Hariicandra’s son was the king named Rohita. Harita 
was Rohita*s son and his son is known as Caficu. 

27. O excellent sage, Vijaya was the son of Caficu. He was 
the conqueror of the entire Earth, hence, he was called Vijaya. 

28. Ritruka was his son; and he was an expert on Royal 
wealth and virtue. Vfka was the s<m of Ruruka and B^u was 
bom of Vfka. 

29*30. The kings Haihayas and Talajanghas ousted him 
ih>m power. His pregnant wife took shelter in the hermitage of 
Aurva. Even in that righteous Yuga he was not very pious. 
Sagara the son of Bahu was bom alongwith the poison. 

31*34. He went to the hermitage of Aurva and was well 
protected by Bhargava. From Bhargava the king Sagara obtained 
the miraculous weapon belonging to Agni. He conquered Earth 


1. TriJaiktt: Satyavrat^ coa of kina Trayyini^ He was called TrisaAku 
because he had committed three sins: (i) he had invited the wrath of his father 
by going astray, (ii) he abducted ocher mea's ivives; (iii) he had consumed 
the cow*i flesh. 

2. Droughi ^ jrms: There are several references to such droughu 
in the Puranic lore. 

3. Xatkiya; ThtrKing oTKekaya dela. The country and the tribe derived 
their froffl hiiffi The dynasty belonged to the solar race. 



Brahma /V^tkr 


48 

after killing Haihayas and TalajaAgbas^. That unerring king 
the knower of real Dharma luppres&ed the religious rituals of 
Sakas,* Pahlavas*, K^atriyas and the Paradas/ O excellent 
sages. 

Thi sagis said : 

How was he bom alongwith the poison in the forest? Why 
did that unerring king furiously suppress the traditional religious 
rites of Sakas and othen as well as those of K^triyas of mighty 
prowess? O highly intelligent one, narrate this to us in detail. 

Lomahar^a^a said: 

35*36. B&hu was indulging in vice. Hence, he was entirely 
deprived of his kingdom, O excellent brahmins, by Haihayas 
and TalajaAghas alongwith Sakas. The five groups of kings viz 
Sakas, YavanaSi* Paradas, Kambojas* and Pahlavas exhibited 

1. The Haih^ya race comprised the follow¬ 
ing tribes, Vldhotras (or Vltahavyat), $aryitu, Bhojas, Avsntii, Tuo^ikeras 
(or Kuodiker^)* TAlajaaghas, BhmraUs, Suj&tyas^Yidavas, SCrasenas, Anartas 
and Gedies. 

2. Sakai were originaUy Kfatriyas, but they were demoted as Madras at 
they incurred the displeasure and anger Brahmins. 

Sakas and Yldavas had helped the Haihaya kings. ParaiurSma, Sagara 
and Bharata defeated them in war and drove them off from the country. 

Mbh (Udyoga ParvaGh. 19} mentioas that king Sudakfioa of Kambqjas- 
approached Duryodhana with an Akiauhiitf, along with the Yavanas to take 
part in the Bhirata war. 

3. Pakiaaas; Pahlavi people or aadcnt Persians who lived in the Punjab. 
King Sagara defeated their conihderation, abrogated their laws, degraded them 
and made them wear beards. 

4. FOradasx They are mentiwed with hill tribes, to have dwelt in the 
Western portion of the Him&layaa. Manu (x. 43-44) states they were Kfat- 
riyai but were degraded because they did not obiove sacred rites. They were 
ordered by king Sagara to wear long hair and they became Mlecchas and 
Dasyus. 

i. Taoanasi They were originally Kaatriyas, but became Sddras by the 
curse ^Brihma^^. According to Mbh (Adi P. Ch. 35) the Vavana race origi¬ 
nated fhmi Turvasu, son of Yay&ti. Mbh (Udyoga P. Gh. 19} mentions that 
king Sudakiioa of Kambcga jMoed Duryodbant and fought on his side. HU 
army conasted of Kambogas, Yavanas and other tribes. Pacini derives the 
word Yavana from yu—to mix and not to mix, t.e. those who could be asso¬ 
ciated with in certain matters such as alliance In war but not in other matters 
such as ftUlMoe by marriage, since they were d egr aded people. 

lived in the extreme north of India beyond Indus and were 



6 . 37 ^ 


49 

their valour on behalf o( Haihayas. 

37. Deprived of hU kingdom king B&hu went to the forest 
followed by his wife. In his unbearable misery he put an end to 
his life. 

38. His pregnant wife hailing from the family of Yadus 
followed him. O sinless ones, previously poison had been adminis* 
tered to her by her co-wife. 

39. This co-wife arranged the funeral pyre of their commcm 
husband in the forest and ascended it. O brahmins, Aurva, the 
descendant of Bhrgu, protected her sympathetically. 

40. The child in the womb came out along with the poison 
at the hermitage and thus the mighty king Sagara was bom. 

41. Aurva performed the post-natal and other rites for the 
child. He taught him Vedas and Sistras. Thereafter, he taught 
him the mode of wielding miraculous weapons. 

42-43. He taught him the miraculous weapons of fire, O 
highly blessed ones, which were unbearable even to the immor¬ 
tals. Endowed with great strength enhanced by the power of 
miraculous missiles the king, ere long, killed the Haihayas in 
battle like the infuriated Rudra destroying the Vaius. F^^emost 
among the renowned persons he earned further reputation in the 
world. 

44. Thereafter, he resolved to exterminate Sakas, Yavanai, 
Kambojas, Paradas and Pahlavas. 

45. Being slaughtered by that heroic noble Sagara they 
sought shelter in Vasi^tha after submitting to that learned sage. 

46. Vasi^tha the extremely brilliant sage offered them free¬ 
dom from fear on certain conditions. He then restrained Sagara. 

47. On hearing the words of his preceptor and being faithful 
to his promise Sagara suppressed their traditional rituals and 
changed their guise. 

48. He released Sakas after shaving half of their heads. 
He completely shaved off the heads of Yavanas and Kambojas. 

claaed with D&radai, Yavanas, ^akaa and Chfrus. The country was famoos 
for its lar^ fleet, and breed of horses. I^easd places Kambojas south of Kash¬ 
gar and east of modem Kafiristan. They were Aryans by speech. They were 
otK^triya caste and became degraded through the extinction cf sacred rites. 
They called MlecchsB as they foQowed evil cuftimis. They were degraded 

by King Sagara who ordered them to shave their heads like Yavanas. 



Brahma Purity 


SO 

49. The Paradas were made to keep their tresses untied and 
the Pahlavas were asked to grow moustaches and beards. They 
were deprived of Vedic studies and the chanting of Va;a}kkra 
Manras by that noble king. 

50-51. O excellent brahmins^ all these K;atriyas—viz. 
^*SakaS) Yavanas, Kambojas» Paradas» Kilasarpas,^ M&hi^kas,* 
DaryaS)’ Golas^ and Keralas were deprived of their traditional 
religious practices by king Sagara of noble soul at the instance 
of Vasiftha. 

52. After conquering this Earth, that virtuous and victorious 
king took initiation tor the horsesacrifice and released the sacri¬ 
ficial horse to wonder at will.* 

53. His horse that was roaming about near the South- 
Eastern sea on the shore was stolen and taken underground. 

54-55. Thereupon, the king got that place dug up through 
his sons. When the great ocean was being dug up they came upon 
the primordial Purufa, lord Hari, Praj&pati and Lord 

Vif^u who was sleeping in the guise of Kapila.* 

56. O excellent sages, they were burned by the fiery splen¬ 
dour that came out of his eyes as he woke up. But four of them 
escaped. 

57. They were Barhiketu, Suketu, king Dharmaratha 
and the valorous PaAcanada. Th^ were the kings who main¬ 
tained the line. 

!• KdUsarpa s not idoitxfiable. 

2. itfSAyataf—the same as the Mihiimakas of MShismatl-^an ancient 
dty which was situated on NarmadS river at a place where the Vindhyas and 
^Sa mountains contact the valley. The town is identifiable with OhkSra 
M&ndhiU in Madhya Pradesh. 

3. Daryas-^xhc reading is defadve. 

4. Cff/af—people living in the Cola country in the South. The Cola 
country extended along the Goromandal coastal plain from Tinq>ati to Pud- 
dukottai where it abutted oo, the Findy^ territ^. Its ewe was the middle 
K&ved basin with Karur and Tiruchirpalli as its main centre. 

5. Th$ hoTM^uierifiet^ A particular horse was let loose and allowed to 

wander at will for a year. If another king, out of jealousy or malice ci^tured 
the horse, he had to fight with the army which protected the horse. The fifdtt 
lasted till he was forced to submit. A hundred such sacrificn entitled the sacri- 
ficer Co diylace Indra from the Dominion of heaven. The horse was sometimes 
not but k^t bound during the ceremony. 

6. ^4^: An ancient sage, identified with Viwu and considered as the 
founder of S&dikhya syitenu 



€.58-72 


51 


58*59. Lord Hari, Narayau granted him the boon that 
Ik^vaku^s race would be everlasting and they would have unre* 
ceding fame. The lord said that the ocean will be known as his 
son and his residence in the heavenly world would be everlasting. 
Taking Arghya unto him the ocean saluted the monarch. 

60. Hence, the ocean earned the title S&gara. Sagara got 
back the sacrificial horse from the ocean. 

61. That king of great fame performed a hiuidred horse 
sacrifices. We have already heard that he had sixty thousand 
sons. 

The sages saiix 

62. O Sutaja, how were the mighty valorous sixty thousand 
sons of Sagara bom ? By what process or holy rite were they 
bom ? 

Lomaharsa^a satd\ 

63-64. Sagara had two wives. They had their sins burnt 
by penance. The elder wife was the daughter of Vidarbha named 
Kefinl. The younger one was Mahatl the daughter of Ariffa* 
nemi. She was extremely righteous and tinrivalled in beauty in 
the world. 

65*72. Aurva granted them a boon, understand it, O excel¬ 
lent brahmins. (He said)—**one of you endowed with penance 
may accept sixty thousand sons. Let the other accept one son who 
will perpetuate the race. You can choose as you please’*. One of 
them, accordingly accepted sixty thousand sons and the other 
accepted one son who would uphold the race. The s^e said-^ 
‘^So be it*’. Keiinx bore a son Asamaftjasa to Sagara. That son 
of great bustle became the king by the name of Paflcajana. 
The other lady gave birth to a gourd full of seeds. So we hear. 
There, sixty thousand foetuses, eachof the size of a gangellyseed, 
grew up. As time passed they grew bigger comfortably. The 
nurses deposited those foetuses in pots filled with ghee. They 
gave each of them nourishing food. In the course of ten mmths 
dtey grew up in due order. These princes delighted Sagara in 
due course. O brahmins, thus he had sixty thousand sons. The 
sons of the king were bom out of the gourd, like big foetus. The 
divine q^leudour of N&riyana had permeated the bodies of those 
noble persons.'* 



52 


Brahma Parity 


73* The only son (of the other lady) named Paftcajana be-*^ 
came the king. Pa&cajana’s ion was Axhiuman. He was very 
valorous. 

74-77. Dillpa was his son. He became renowned as Khaf- 
vahga. He obtained only a Muhurta-long span of life. He came 
down from heaven and conceived of the three worlds by means 
of his intellect and intrinsic strength. O sinless ones, Dillpa’s 
successor was lord Bha^ratha. He was the person who made 
the sacred river Gangi descend (from heaven). He took it to 
the ocean and made it his daughter. Hence, Gahgi is called 
Bhagirathl by the chroniclers. Bhagiratha’s son was renowned by 
the name Sruta. 

78. Nabbaga was Grata’s son. He was extremely virtuous. 
Ambariya was the son of Nabhaga and the father of Sindhu- 
d\1pa. 

79. Ayutajit was the valorous successor of Sindhud>opa. 
Ayutajit’s son was ^tuparoa of great iame. 

80. He was conversant with the divine Mantra called Ak$a- 
hrdaya. That mighty king was a friend of Nala. Rtupar^’s 
son was Artapanji. He had earned great fame. 

81. Sudas was his son. That king became the friend of Indra. 
King Saud&sa was the son of Sudas. 

82. King Mitrasaha became well known as Kalma^p&da. 
Kalmafapada’s s<m was known as Sarvakarma. 

83. Sarvakarma’s son was the famous Anaranya. Nighna 
was the ion of Anaranya. N^hna had two sons. 

84. They were Anamitra and Raghu. They were the most 
excellent of all good kings. Anamitra’s son was Duliduha who 
was a scholarly king. 

85-87. Dillpa was his son. He was the great^and-iather 
of R&ma. Dilipa’s son Raghu was the mighty king of Ayodhya. 
Aja was bom as the son of Ra^iu. To him was bom Daiaratha. 
R&ma was bom to Daiaratha. Rama’s son was Kufa. 

88. Atithi was bom of Kuia. He was a righteous king oT 
great feme. Ihe valorous son Niyadha was bom of Atithi. 

89. NaU was the kxi of Nifadha; Nabha was the ton ^ 
Nala. Nabha’s son was Pupdarika and his son was Kiemadb-^ 
anvan. 



6.90-7.14 


5S 


90. The valorous Dev&nika was the son of Kfemadhanvan. 
The son of DevanJka AMnagu was a great lord. 

91. Ahinagu’s successor was Sudhanvan. Sudhanvan’s son 
■was king Sala. 

92. Sala’s son ww a righteous soul, Ukya. VajranAbha was 
his son and Nala was the son of that noble monaioh. 

93. O excellent sages, only two Nalas are known in the 
Pur&OSLS. One was Virasena’s son and the other a leading scion 
of the Iktvaku race. 

94« The kings bom in the fiunily of Ikfvaku have been 
glorified in accordance with their importance. Such were the 
Icings o( the solar race who were highly brilliant and brave. 

95. He who reads this creation of Aditya, Vivasvin, lord 
Sraddhadeva, the bestower of nourishment to the people shall 
be blessed with progeny. He will attain the world of VivasYin* 


CHAPTER SEVEN 
Birth of Soma 


1. O Brahmins, the father of Soma, the saintly lord Atri 
was the mind-born son of Brahma who was desirous of creating 
subjects. 

2. Formerly, Atri performed a great penance for three thou¬ 
sand divine years. So we have heard. 

3. His semen attaining the state of Soma juice rose up. 
Water exuded from his eyes in ten directions and illuminated t^ 
ten quarters. 


4. The ten delighted goddesses of the quarters conceived 
that foetus. They hrid it collectively but they were unable to do 
so any longer. 


5. When the ten quarters were unable to uphold the foetus, 
it fell down to the Earth along with them. 

6. On seeing Soma fallen to the esirth, Brahmi, the grand¬ 
father r£ the worlds, made him ride in a chariot for the welfare 
of the worlds. 




Brahna Purity 



7. O excellent sages, when the son of Atri the noble sage fell 
down, Devas, the sons of Brahma, and others eulogised him. 

8. The splendour of the refulgent Soma who was being eulo¬ 
gised, was spread all round for the nourishment of the worlds* 

9« The Soma of excessive fame, circumambulated the ocean- 
girt Earth twentyone times by means of that inportant chariot. 

10. His splendour that exuded reached the Earth and turn* 
ed into the medicinal herbs whereby the universe is sustained. 

11. Lord Soma acquired refulgence through the eulogies 
and holy rites. The highly blessed lord performed penance for 
hundred thousand billion years. 

12* Thereafter, O excellent sages, Brahmi the foremost 
among those who know the Brahman offered him kingdom of 
seeds, medicinal herbs, brahmins and waten. 

13. After acquiring that extensive realm, Soma the most 
excellent of those who possess gentleness performed the Rajasuya 
sacrifice with hundreds and thousands of gold pieces as sacrificial 
gifts. 

14. O bralimins, we have heard that Soma distributed the 
three worlds as gifts to those important brahminical sages who 
had assembled there for sacriftce. 

15. The Rtvik was Hiranyagarbha Brahma, Atri and Bhrgu 
Adhvaryus. Hari together with many sages was the participant. 

16. Nine goddesses who served him—Sinivall, Kuhu, Dyuti, 
Pufji, Prabhi, Vasu, Kirti, Dh|ti, Lak^. 

17. After the Avabh^tha^ ablution the overlord Moon who 
was unexcited and who was worshipped by Devas and sages 
shone excessively illuminatii^ the ten quarters. 

18. After attaining this rare prosperity coveted even by the 
sages, his intellect, O dear ones, whirled. In his impudence 
tactlessness too clouded his intellect. 

19. Slighting the son of Angiras, Soma who was deluded by 
the arrogance of excessive proq>erity, suddenly abducted the 
wife of ^haspati. 

20. Although repeatedly requested by Devas and celestial 
ii^es he did not hand over Tiri back to AAgiras. 

!• x mUutioii of the lacrificer and the sacrificial veneb 

after a Mcrifice. 



7.21-36 


55 


21-22. Ulanas then attacked Ahgiras from the rear. Taking 
hia bow Ajagava Rudra did the same. A massive miraculous 
missile firahmafiras was discharged by that noble deity aiming 
at Devas. Thereby their fame was destroyed. 

23. Thereupon, the battle between Devas and Asuras en¬ 
sued. It became known as Tirakamaya battle. The battle raged 
furiously causing destruction of the worlds. 

24. O brahmins, Devas and Tusitas who remained alive 
sought shelter in the eternal and primordial god Brahma. 

25. Then Brahmk himself restrained Rudra and Ufanas 
and handed over Tara back to Ahgiras. 

26. On seeing her pregnant, Brhaspati was furious and said— 
“By no means should the foetus be retained by you in your 
vaginal passage that belongs to me.*' 

27. She went to a forest of I^ika reeds and expelled the foetus. 
Immediately after the birth that lordly child seized the bodies 
of Devas. 

28. Thereupon, the excellent Devas became suspicious and 
said to Tara “Tell us the truth; who is the father of this child 
Soma or Brhaspati 

29. When she did not answer thein on being asked by Devtts, 
Kumaxa the foremost among the slayers of Dasyus,. began to 
curse her. 

30. Thereupon, Biahma restrained him and asked Tir& 
to clarify the doubt “O Tara, tell us the truth whose son is this ?’* 

31-32. With her palms joined in reverence she told Brahma 
that he was the son of Soma. Then PraJ^ati Soma kissed him 
on the head and named the son Budha. Budha stands in the 
firmament diametrically <^posite to ^haspati. 

33. In a princess he begot a son. His son was Pururavas of 
great brilliance, the son bom to Ila. 

34. That noble king begot of UrvaS seven sons. Thus the 
birth of Soma that increases fame has been recounted to'you. 

35-36. O excellent sages, now understand his line. Listen¬ 
ing to the story of Soma is conducive to attaining wealth, longe¬ 
vity and health. It is holy. It is the means of attaining whatever 
is thought of. On hearing it one is released fiom all sins. 



CHAPTER EIGHT 
Kings of thi Lmar Rocs 


Brahma Pstrgna 




Lomaharfo^ said: 

1. O excellent sages, Bodha’s son Pururavas was learned 
and brilliant. He was liberal and he performed sacrifices distri* 
bating gifts extensively* 

2. The king was an expounder of Brahman. When attacked 
by the enemy in battle he was irrepressible. He performed Agni« 
hotra and other sacrifices. 

3. He was truthful in speech and pious in mind. He indulg* 
ed in sexual intercourse very secretly. He was perpetually unri¬ 
valled in renown. 

4. The entire Vedic lore was present in him due to his pen¬ 
ance. The famous celestial damsel Urvaii set aside prestige and 
wooed him. 

5-6. O brahmins, the king spent periods ten, five, five, 
sa, seven and eight years staying with Urvaii in the charming 
garden Caitraratha, on the banks of Ganga, in Alaka^, in 
Viial& and in the excellent park Nandana. 

7. He stayed in the Northern Kurus which abounded in 
charming fruit trees, in the foothills of Gandhamadana^ and in 
the top of the Meru. 

1. AUkA: the capita] of Kubcra, lituatcd on a peak of the Him&layai 
inhabited abo by Siva* 

2. GandhamOdmai S. M. Ali (f/W Gtoirepky of thi Pvr^saf, pp. 58, 59) 
remarks: the Gandhamidana U the range the locaticn of which ia highly con¬ 
troversial. There U a cooluaian in the Purheu about the ranget which inun^ 
diately surround or flank Meru. The Vifou Purina atatea Mem is cooHned 
between the mountains Nila and Nisadha (on the North and South). 
The Gandhamidana ii alio mentioned in some Purioas. It is also spoken of 
as one of the Southern Buttresses ^Meru (Afatiya), as csie of the filament 
mountains on the «vest» as a range of boundary mountain «i the south, and a 
Varfa mountain of Ketumila (K^). The Bhigavata gives diflereat names 
to diflerent parts of natidheniVi^^ftr For initawr#^ the buttress is called Meru- 
mandara, the filameit mountain the Haihsa, Gandhamidana is restricted to 
the eastern range. But according to S. M. Ali, Gandhamidana means the 
northern ridge of the Hindukush arch with its northern exteosiou the Khw^a 
Mohammad range, the Hindukush consists of two parallel ranges which come 
closer to each other at the apo of the arch, south of the Pamirs (Mou). These 
ridges are well-defined in Afghanistan, less so in Kashmir and rel^^ar again 



«^-21 


57 


8 . In these excellent and important sylvan regims usu^y 
frequented by Devas, the king dallied in the company of Urvafl^ 
with great joy. 

84 He sported about in extremely holy lands praised by 
sages. He administered his kingdom from Prayiga.* 

10. The royal son of Ila, the most excellent among men, 
wielded power. He earned fame at Pratii^ana on the northern 
bank of GaAga. 

11-12. The seven sons of Aila Pururavas were on a par with 
the sons of Devas. Those noble princes bom in celestial ragions 
were Ayu, Amavasu, Vitviyu, $rutiyu» Drdh&yu, Vaniyu, 
Bahv&yu. These were the sons of Urvafi. 

13. Am&vasu’s successor was Bhima, an imperial king. The 
glorious Kafleanaprabha was the king who succeeded Bhima. 

14. KaAcana's successor was the mighty and learned Su* 
hoCra. Jahnuwas the son of Suhotra.He was born of the womb 
•of Keiinl. 

15-21. He performed a great saa*ifice of long duration. 
<jreedily seeking a husband Gahga wooed him as her hus¬ 
band. Since he dissented, Gahga flooded his sacrificial hall. 
O excellent brahmins, on seeing hb sacrificial hall thus flooded 
the infuriated son of Suhotra, king Jahnu* cuned her. He 
proclaimed—**Sce, I shall drink up your waters and make your 
•eflort futile. O Gahga, ere long reap the fruit of your arrogance.*’ 
Thereafter, on seeing Gahga drunk up by the saintly king the 
sages brought her back. Thereafter, she came to be known 
Jahnavi the dau^ter of Jahnu. Jahnu married K&veri the dau¬ 
ghter of Yuvanaiva. Due to the curse of Yuvan&lva Gahgft 


on the east. The Puriau called the northern ric^e Gandham&dana. The 
•coatradictory atatemeatt In the Puriaas that Gandham&dana is In the south, 
east or west are reconciled if we keep in nund the correct alignment of the nor¬ 
thern range of Hindukusb. This range touches the Pamirs in the south and 
fAlIa away frnn it toward* louthwett and southeait. 

1. Urv^\ A heavenly nymph. For detail! P.E. 

2. Prav4go^a holy city in Uttar a Pradeia, situated at the meeting- 
point of Gahgi and Yamuni. 

9. sage. There b a legend that once Gaftgi which flowed 

through the earth submerged the hermitage of Jahnu who became angry at 
her haughtineM and drank up the river. But at the ^treaty of Bba^ratha be 
pushed Gaflgi through hb ev. Since that event Gadgi got the name JkhnaW. 



Brahma PwrB^ 


58 

flowed into two halves flanking Kiveii the most excellent 
of riverSi the uncensured wife of Jahnu. Jahnu begot his beloved 
and righteous son Sunanda, of Kaveri. Ajaka was his son. 

22. Ajaka^s successor, king Balkkalva was a habitual hunter. 
Kuia was his son. 

23-27. Kuia had four s<ms of divine brilliance: Kuiika,. 
Kuianibha, Kutamba and Murtiuian. This king Kuiika was 
ousted from power by the Pahlavas and he roamed in the forest. 
Resolving shall obtain a lordly son equal to Indra*’ he perform¬ 
ed a penance. Indra in his fear approached him and under¬ 
stood his purpose. When full thousand years had passed, Indra 
met him. On realising that he was competent to procreate a son, 
after seeing the sage of severe penance the thousand-eyed 
Indra agreed to become his son. 

Most excellent of Devas Lord Indra resolved to become his 
son. King Gidhi was Maghavan himself born as the son of 
Kuiika. 

28. Paurukuts&nl (Daughter of Purukutsa) was his wife 
and Gadhi was born of her. Gidhi’s daughter was the blessed 
splendid lady Satyavatl. 

29. Lord G&dhi gave her in marriage to Rclka the son of 
Kivya. Her husband the descendant of Bhrgu, the delighter of 
the members of the family of Bhrgu, was pleased with her. 

30. He prepared two Cams for securing sons for her and 
Gadhi too. Rdka the descendant of Bhrgu called her and said: 

31-32. One part of Cam should be used by you, and the 
other part should be used by your mother. A brilliant son, the 
leader of K$atriyas will be bom to her. He will not be conquered 
by the Ksatriyas in the world. He will slay the leading Kfatriyas. 
O auspicious lady, this Cam will secure for you a calm and cou¬ 
rageous 8(Mi who will be the most excellent brahmin with austerity 
as his asset.** 

33-36. After saying this to his wife, ^dka thescion of the family 
of Bhfgu, perpetually devoted to penance, entered the forest. At 
that time in the context of his pilgrimage to holy places the king, 
Gidhi came to the hermitage oS ^eika accompanied by his wife 
in order to see his daughter. Carefully handling the Ganis^ 
Satyavad approached her mother and told her abimt their effi- 



8.37-54 


59 


cacy. As they looked alike, the mother in her ignwimce gave to 
her dai^hter her own Cam and swallowed the daughter's Cam 
instead of her own. 

37-40. Then Satyavatl conceived a foetus that was destined 
to destroy the Kfatriyas. Her body became bright and resplen¬ 
dent. She assumed a fearful look, l^clka saw her and understood 
the fact by his Yogic power. The most excellent brahmin said 
to his fair-complexioned wife—*3y changing the Cams, O gentle 
lady, you have been deceived by your mother. An extremely 
fearful son of mthless activities wiU be bom to you. You will 
have a brother, an ascetic who will realise the Brahman. 

41-47. The entire Vedic lore had been instilled (into the 
Cam) by me with my penance.’’ 

Thus warned by her husband, the highly blessed Satyavatl 
propitiated her husband^^^Let not a base brahmin like this be 
bom as a son unto me begotten by you.” 

When requested thus, the sage said~”0 gaitle lady» this is 
not my desire. I did not imagine that it should be thus. But 
die son is destined to be mthless in activities on account of his 
father and mother.” 

Thus addressed, Satyavatl said: ”0 sage, if you wish you can 
create even worlds. What then about a mere son ? It behoves 
you to grant me a straightforward son of subdued nature. O my 
lord, well may such a grandson be bom to txs if this cannot be 
altered otherwise, O excellent brahmin.” 

Then, he blessed her through the power of his penance. He 
said ”0 gentle lady fair complexion, whether it be the son or 
grandson I don’t feel any diffcrrace. Everything shall take 
place in accordance with what you desire.” 

48. Thereafter, Satyavrata gave birth to a son, named Jamad- 
agni. He was tranquil and devoted to penance. (As a descen* 
dant of Bhrgu) he was also known as Bhirgava. 

49-54. It was <hie to the change of Caru pertaining to Indra 
and Vif^u given by Bhfgu. Jamadagni was bom due to the sacri¬ 
fice perfonned in the half pertaining to Vi|Qu. The holy-naturcd 
Satyavatl devoted to tmthiul virtue flowed as a great river named 
Kaufiki^ 

1. Kaulikl—tbe hermiuge of uge Vsivtmatra stood on its bank. 
It bsa been idmtified with Gcnutl (P.E.) The modem name of this river is 
Kod which flows through Bihar. 



60 


Brahma Purity 


There was a king in the family of Ikfvaku named Re^u. HU 
blessed daughter was Kimali known also as Renuka. The son of 
Rclka endowed with penaiu:e and learning begot the terrible 
Jamadagnya Rama of Kamali, daughter of Reou. He was an 
excellent master of the science of archery as well as all lores. 
He shone like the blazing fire. Thus Jamadagni the most excel¬ 
lent among the knowers of Brahman was bom as the extremely 
famous son of Satyavati due to the potency of penance of Rclka 
son of Aurva. (The middle son was Suna^f^ha and the young¬ 
est was SunatjLpuccha. 

55-60. G&dhi, the son of Kufika begot Viivamitra as his son 
and successor. He was subdued in mind due to his penance and 
learning. VUvamitra the rightemis soul attained equality with 
the brahminical sage (Vasif(ha) and later became a brahminical 
sage. He is remembered by the name Viivaratha too. Due to 
the grace of Bhrgu he was born of Kaufika and perpetuated the 
race of Kauiika. Devarita and others are known as the sons of 
Vifvimitra. They are famous in the three worlds. Their names 
are Devarata^ Kati, Hirauyakfa, Re^u, Reinuka^ Saihk{ti» Gal- 
ava^ Mudgala, Madhucchandas» Jaya» Devala^ Af^aka, Kac- 
chapa, and Hariya, The Katyayanas are the descendants of 
Kati. Hiranyaksa, Repu and Renuka were horn of Salavatl. 

61-63. The spiritual lines of the noble Kauiikas are famous. 
They are: Prauins, Babhrus, Dhyanajapyas, Parthivasj Deva- 
ratas, Salahkayanas, Ba^kalas, Lohitas, Yamadutas, KarusakaSi 
Sauiravas, Kauiikas, Saindhavaynas, Devalas, Re^us, Marfa^as 
from Yajftavalkya, Audumbaras, Ambubhisnavas, Tarakiyaoas, 
Ouftculas, Salavatyas, Hira^yaksas^SamkrtyasyGalavas^Naraya^U. 
The Kauiikas are numerous and their lines are mei^ed with 
many other sages. O excellent sag^, in thU race there U that 
admixture of brahmms and Ksatriyas^ as evidenced by that of the 
•descendants of Puru and the brahmuiical sage Kauiika. 

64. Suxxabiepha U known as the eldest cf the sons of Viiva- 
mitra. That excellent sage changes his spiritual line from that of 
Bhlrgava to that of Kauiika. 

65-68. 8una^iepha, the son of Viivimitra was employed as 
the sacrificial animal in the sacrifice of Hariicandra. Suna^iiepha 

]. This shews that the caste was not rigid during this period. 



9J-8 


61 


was handed over to Viivamitra by Devas. Since he was handed 
over by Devas he came to be known as Devar&ta. Seven sons 
beginning with Devarita were bom to Viivamitra. A^faka^ the 
son ofViivimitra, was bom ofDr^advatl. Afpika*s son was Lauhl. 
Thus the group of descendants of Jahnu has been mentioned by 
me. Henceforthj I shall mention the family of Ayu the noble 
soul. 


CHAPTER NINE 
Girualcgy of Ancient K^aifiyas 

Lcmaharfoifa said": 

1 *2, Ayu had five sons who were mighty heroes born of the 
daughter of Svarbhwu named Prabha. They became kings. 
Nahufa was the eldest among them. Vitldhaiarnii came next. 
The rest—Rambha, Raji and Anenas became famous in the three 
worlds. 

3. Raji begot five hundred sons. This group of Kfatriya 
princes is known as Rajeya.They generated fear even in the mind 
of Indra. 

4. When a battle between Devas and Asuras, destined to be 
tremendously terrible^ was imminent^ both went to Brahm4 and 
spoke to him: 

Devas and Asuras said : 

5. O lord of living beings, who will be victorious in the battle 
between us ? We wish to hear precisely. 

Btahmd said : 

6«^7. There is no doubt that only those will conquer the three 
worlds, on whose behalf lord Raji takes up anns and fights in 
the battle. Where there is Raji there is courage; where there is 
course there is glory. Where there is glory and courage there is 
righteousness and victory. 

8 . Thus advised by Lord Brahma Devas and Asuras became 



62 Brahma 

delighted. Desirous of victory and hopeful of winnii^ him over 
they approached Raji the leader of the pe<^le. 

9. Indeed, kli^ Raji bom of Prabha, and the grandson of 
Svarbhanu, was excessively resplendent. He was destined to 
perpetuate the lunar race. 

10. Delighted in their minds, Devas and Asuras said to 
Raji—*Tlease take up your excellent bow for our victory**. 

11. Thereupon, conversant with the purpose of Devas and 
Asuras, Raji said thus, with an eye on his own interest and reveal¬ 
ing his glory. 

Jiaji said: 

12. Indra, I shall fight in the battle if after conquering 
the asuras through my valour I can duly become Indra. 

13. At the outset O brahmins, Devas who were delighted 
in their minds assented to the proposal. king, this desire of 
your can be realised as you wish*’. 

14. On hearing the words of Devas king Raji asked the 
leaders of Asuras too, in the same manner as he had asked Devas. 

13. The Asuras full of arri^ance and realising their own 
interest, proudly spoke to the monarch thus. 

Asuras said: 

16-21. ‘*Our Indra is Prahrada on whose behalf we fight 
and conquer. O excellent king, you join us shining with glory 
in this battle.” 

Even as the king was about to say ”so be it” he was urged by 
Devas, ”Youwill certainly becomelndraafier conquering Asuras”. 
The king who was thus urged, killed those Asuras who could not 
be slain by the thunderbolt-armed Indra. After killing all Asuras 
lord Raji of great glory and self-control redeemed the lost glory 
of Devas. Then, in the company Devas, Indra said to Raji 
of great valour—am Rajiputra(son of Raji), O dear one, you 
are Indra of all Devas. I, Indra, am your son, I shall attain fame 
throng your activities. 

On hearing these words of Indra Raji was deceived by his 
Mayi. 

22-25. The delighted king said to Indra—”So be it.” 

When that saintly king passed away Raji’s sons seized their 
legacy, the kingdewn of heaven ttom Indra. The five hundred 



9 . 26-38 


63 


sons attacked the abode of Indra» the heavenly world Triviffs^a.^ 

When they became excessively deluded, passionately mad, 
irreligious and batters of the brahmins, their power and valour 
were destroyed. Then Indr a regained his prosperity and the 
excellent abode after killing the sons of Raji who were slaves of 
lust and wrath. 

26. He who listens to this narrative of dethronement and 
re-establishment of Indra and he who retains it in memory will 
never fall to wretchedness. 

Lomahofsana said\ 

27. Rambha was issueless. I shall mention the line of Ane- 
nas. King Pratik^atra of great fame was the son of Anenas. 

28. Pratik^atra’s son Srftjaya was very famous. Jaya was 
SrAjaya*s son and Vijaya was lus son. 

29. Krti was the son of Vijaya and his son was Haryatvata. 
Haryatvata’s son Sahadcva was a valorous king. 

30. Sahadeva*s son the pious Nadina was a famous king. 
Nadlna*s son was Jayatsena and Jayatsena’s son was Samkrti. 

31. Samkrti’s son was K^traviddha. He was righteous- 
souled and he earned great fame. The line of Anenas has been 
recounted. Now hear K^trav^ddha’s lineage. 

32. K^atravfaddha’s s<m was 8uciahotra of great fame 
Sunahotra had three successors who were extremely righteous. 

33-34. They were KaSya, Salla and Grtsamada. Gftsa- 
madams son was Sunaka. 8aunakas (sonsofSunaka) weie brah¬ 
mins, Kfatriyas, Vai^yas and Sudras. Ar^fi^^a was the son of 
Salla and his son was Kaiyapa. 

35-37. Kaiyapa^s son was Dirghatapas who ruled over 
Kali. Dhanvan was the son of Dirghatapas and Dhanvantari 
was his son. At the conclusion of a great penance when the king 
had become old, lord Dhanvantari was bcHii. He was the great 
ruler of Kali and was an expert physician. He could cure alt 
ailments. 

38. He learnt medical science frMn sage Bharadvaja He 
divided therqseutic processes into eight sectiems and taught them 
to his disciples/* 

1. A bode of Indrm. 



64 Brahma PurA)a 

39. Dhanvantari’s ton was Ketuman. The heroic Bnima* 
ratha was the son of Ketumin. 

40. Bldmaratha’i ton was Divodasa. Divodasa was a right¬ 
eous monarch who became the ruler of V&ranasi. 

41-42. At this timc^ O lMahmins» a Rakfasa named K^e- 
maka attacked Varai^asi and rendered it desolate. It had been 
cursed by Nikumbha that it would remain void and desolate for 
a thousand years. 

43. As soon as it had been cursed king Divodasa founded a 
beautiful city at the extremity of his realm on the banks of Go- 
matl. 

44-48. Formerly, Vira^asI belonged to Bhadrairenya. It 
was after killing one hundred sons of Bhadraire^ya who were 
excellent bowmen, that king Divodksa occt^ied the territory*. 
By that powerful king the realm of Bhadraire^ya was seized* 
Bhadraftepya had a son Durdama who later became famous. 
As he was a child, Divodisa let him alone out of mercy. Then 
the king seized the hereditary realm of Haihaya. 

The legacy of his forelathers that had been forcefully taken 
away by Divod&sa was retaken by Durdama the son of Bhadra- 
Ire^ya. O blessed ones, thus revenge was taken by that king of 
good spiritual splendour. 

49. The heroic Pratardana was bom of Dr^vati and Divo¬ 
dasa. That son even as a boy mightly beat back the enemy. 

50. Pratardana had two sons: Vatsa and Bharga. Vatsa*s 
son was Satrujit and his son was 

51. His son was Alarka. He was favourably disposed to the 
brahmins and truthful in speech. A verse has been sung by the 
veterans about Alarka the saintly monarch. 

52. He was a handsome youth. He ruled for sixtysix thou¬ 
sand years. He upheld his family by his mighty prowess. 

53. By the grace of Lopamudra he attained the maximum 
loi^evity. Endowed with youth and beauty he ruled over a very 
extensive kingdom. 

54. When the period of curse came to an end the mighty 
king killed the R&k$asa K^emaka and re-occupied the beautiful 
city of V&rioad. 

55. Sannati’s successor was a righteous king Sunitha* 
Sunltba's successor K^ema gained good fame and glory. 



9.56.10.1-8 


65 


56. Kfema's son was KcCum&n andSuketuwas his sotu Yfe 
know firom traditional records that Dharmaketu was the son of 
Suketu. 

57. Dharmaketu's successor was the mighty warrior Satya- 
ketu. Satyaketu's son was king Vibhu. 

58. Anarta was Vibhu's son and Sukumara was his son. 
Sukumira's son Dhr^faketu was extremely virtuous. 

59. The successor of DhrK^^tu was king Vet^uhotra. 
Venuhotra's son was king Bharga« 

60. Vatsabhumi was the son of Vatsa and Bhargabhumi 
the son of Bharga. These were the descendants of Anglras the 
scions of the family of Bhrgu. 

6 ]. They were brahmins, K$atriyas and Vaiiyas, thousands 
in number and endowed with brilliance. These Kiiyapas (rulers 
of Kail) have been recounted. Understand the descendants of 
Nahufa. 


CHAPTER TEN 
Tfu J^anattpe of tqyiti 

Lomahatfona said: 

1. Nahu^a had six successors who possessed the refulgence 
of Indra and Viynu. They were born of Viraja the daughter of 

Pitrs. 

2. They were—ati, Yayati, Saryati, Ayati, Yati and Suyati. 
Among them it was Yayati who became the king. 

3. Yati was the eldest. Yayati was jtmior to him. The 
extremely virtuous Yati married Gomad the daughter of Kaku- 
tstha but he became a s^e> He realised Brahman and attained 
absolution. 

4-8. Yay&ti, the eldest of the remaining five conquered the 
Earth. He married DevayanI the daughter of Uianas and Sar- 
mifthi the Asura lady the daughter of Vnaparvan. 

Devayani *gave birth to Yadu and *I\irva5u. Sarmifthi the 
daughter of Vr^ervan gave birth to Druhyu, Anu and Purfi. 



Brahma Par^ 


66 

Indra who was pleased with him gave him an extremely res-» 
plendent divine chariot. It had all its parts made of gold. £x« 
cellent divine white horses as fast as the mind were fitted to it. 
He conducted his activities by means of this chariot. With this 
fine chariot the invincible Yayiti conquered the Earth in six 
days and defeated Devas and Asuras in battle. 

9-17. That chariot belonged to the kings of Kuru race. 
From Janamejaya the descendant of Kuru, whose other name 
was Sadivartavasu it was handed over to Emperor Parik;ita the 
scion of the family of Kuru. The chariot vanished due to the 
curse of sage Garga. King Janamejaya spoke harsh words to 
Garga and violently injured Garga’sson who was then a mere boy. 
Hence, he incurred the sin of brahmin slaughter. Emitting the 
bad odour of rusting iron the saintly king roamed about here and 
there. He was shunned by the citizens and the country-folk. 
He did not attain pleasure of peace of mind by any means. He 
was extremely miserable. He failed togetccmsolation from any 
quarter. The king then sought refi^^e in Saunaka the leading 
brahmin. O excellent brahmins, in order to sanctify him, !§au- 
naka perfemned a horse sacrifice on behalf of king Janamejaya. 
When he had completed the concludmg ablution of Avabhftha 
the stinking odour of rusting iron was expelled. The divine cha« 
riot was in the possession of Cedi ruler havii^ been handed over 
to him by Indra who was pleased with him. From him Brbad- 
ratha acquired it. From him it came into the possession of king 
Brhadratha (Jarasandha). After killing JarSisandha, Bhima re¬ 
deemed that excellent chariot. Out of love the scion of the family 
of Kuru, BhTma gave it to Vasudeva. 

18. After conquering the Earth extending to the oceans and 
containing seven continents Yayiti, the son of Nahufa, divided 
his kingdmn among his sons. 

19*21. Yayiti crowned his eldest son Yadu in the Eastern 
quarter; Puru in the middle land; Turvasu in the South-Eastern 
quarter. The entire Earth with its cities and seven continents b 
being ruled till today by them with due deference to their res¬ 
pective jurisdiction. O excellent sages, 1 shall recount their 
progeny later on. 

22. The king was ageing. He sec aside hb bows and arrows. 



10.23-34 


67 


He entrusted the entire admimstraticm to his Idasmen includii^; 
the five leadii^ men, his sms. 

23. Having deposited his arms, the king roamed over the 
Earth. King Yayati was extremely delighted. 

24*25. After distributing the kingdom thus, Yayiti said to 
Yadu—^*Dear son, accept my old age. Becoming youthful once 
again by your handsmxe features and depositing my old age with 
you, I shall travel round the Earth on another mission. Do accept 
my old age^’. 

Tadu said: 

26. O king, Alms have been promised to a brahmin by me. 
I have not yet handed them over to him. Without fulfilling it I 
shall not take up your old age. 

27. There are many defects in senility caused by drink and 
diet. Hence, O king, I am not enthusiastic over acceptir^ your 
old age. 

28. O king you have many sons whom you love more than 
me. O knower of virtues^ choose another son to take up your 
senility. 

29. Thus repulsed by Yadu the king became furious. Ya¬ 
yati, the most excellent among the eloquent said thus, rebuking 
his son. 

Taydti said: 

30. “What other stage of life will you have ? What virtue 
or righteousness is left for you, O wicked one, after sighting me 
since I am your preceptor'*. 

31. Saying thus, O brahmins, in his anger he cursed hb son 
thus—“O deluded one, your subjects will be undoubtedly 
deprived of their kingdcm. 

32. O excellent brahmins, Yayati was repulsed by three of 
hb other sons too, the king repeated the same to Druhyu, Turvasu 
and Anu. 

33. The infuriated Yayiti, the unconquerable monarch 
cursed them also. O excellent brahmins, everything about him 
has been predsety mentioned by me. 

34. Aftevxurtijig the four sons elder to PurQ thus, O brah¬ 
mins, the king addressed the very same words to Puru also. 



68 


Brahma Psf^Q^ 


35» Puru^ if you agree, I &hall become youthful oncc^ 
again with your hands<xne features and shall roam about the 
Earth after depositing my old age with you.*’ 

36. That valorous Puru took over the senility of his father* 
With the handsome features of Puru, Yayati roamed about the 
Earth. 

37. Seeking the ultimate satiety of lustful dalliance the lord|. 
the most excellent of kings uidulged in amorous sports in the 
garden Caitraratha in the company of Vtivkcl. 

38. When he became utterly dissatisfied and disgusted with 
lustful orgies and enjoyment of pleasures the king took back his 
senility from Puru. 

39^. In this connection, O excellent sages, the following 
verses were sung by Yayiti—'^Hewho withdraws within himself 
all lustful passions like the tortoise that draws its limbs within 
itself is indeed a person who has attained y<^a‘ 

Never does lust and lechery subside by indulging in die en¬ 
joyment of sexual pleasures. Just as the fire blazes all the more 
with the ghee poured in, so also it increases at every indulgence. 
If one were to possess all grains of rice and barley on the Earth, 
if one were to possess all gold, if all were to become the master 
of all animals on the Earth or if one were to indulge in sexual 
union with all women one will find that it is not enough to quench 
thirst. That being so one should not be deluded by these things. 
When one docs not have anysinful feeling towards any living 
being, mentally, physically and verbally one is likely to attain 
Brahman. When one is not afraid of others, when none is afi'aid 
of him or when one does not like or dislike others too much, one 
attains Brahman. Happiness befalls that person who eschews 
greed and covetousness which are impossible to be eschewed by 
the wicked, which do not bec^e old even when one bectnnes 
old and decrepit and which is an oilment that comes to an end 
only when the vital airs die out. When ont beccones old, one’s 
hair grow old; whenonc becomes old, one’s teeth become old; 
but the hope and greed for wealth and life never grow old when 
one grows old. The h^pincss that one is supposed to derive from 

1, The (ortoise simile is very popular with the yogins. A yogi withdraws 
Us lustful painocu within himself just as the tortoise withdraws its Jimba within 
toeir. 



10,47—n.M 


69 


indulgence in scxiial pleasure^ the great happiness that one may 
have in heaven—these two do not deserve even a sixteenth 
^art of h^piness one is sure to have when greed is destroyed/* 

47«51. After saying this that saintly king entered the forest 
accompanied by his wife. He performed a great penance of long 
duration. That king of great fame performed penance on the 
peak Bhrgutuhga/ At the conclusion of penance he performed 
holy rite of refraining from taking food and cast off his mortal 
body, Accompamed by his wife he attained heaven. O excellent 
sages, there were bom five excellent saintly kings in his family. 
The entire Earth is pervaded by them as if by the rays of the sun. 
O excellent sages, the man who listens to the story of Yay&ti 
continuously shall become endowed with progeny, longevity and 
renown. Now listen, I shall recount the family of Yadu honoured 
by kings. It was in this that Nariyapa, Hari was bom as the 
uplifter of the family of Vnnis. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 


Dynasty of Tayati 

Thi brahmins said: 

1. O Sveta, we would like to hear precisely the line of sue* 
•cessors of Puru, Druhyu, Anu, Yadu and Turvasu, separately. 


Lomaharjarfa said: 

2. O leading sj^es, Ibten at the outset of the race of Puru 
even as I relate it in detail and in due order. 

3. Su^ra was the son of Puru: Manasyu was his son. The 
kii^ Abhayada was the son of Manasyu. 

4. Sudhanvan was the son of Abhayada, Sudhanvan’s 
aon wss Subihu, Raudraiva was his son. 


1. place macie sacred by the performaoce of Upas by 

Bhrgu. Rclka hadlived thtf e with bis wife and childrm. It has been located 
either in the Himftlayas or in (he Vindhyas (MW). 



70 


Brahma Pur^ 


54. Raudriiva had ten sons and ten daughters. The sona 
were—Daiirneyu, Krkapeyu^ Kakyeyu^ Sthandileyu, Sannateyu^ 
^ceyu, Jaityu, Sthaleyu, Dhaneyu, and Vaneyu. The daughters 
were Bhadra> ^udri, Madri, SalsuU, MaUdi) KhaLada, Nalada^ 
Surasi^ Gocapala and Striratnakuta. Sage Prabhakara of the 
iamily of Atri was their husband. 

9*i4. When the sun was eclipsed by Rahu and he seemed 
to be falling down from the firmament to the Earthy the whole 
world was envelc^>ed in darkness. Then it was his sage who caus* 
ed light. At this utterance of the sage, *Hail to Thee\ the sun 
who was about to fall did not fall to the Earth from the firma* 
ment. This sage of great penance founded the excellent spiritual 
lines after Atri. In sacrifices Devas ofTered him the same power 
as were bestowed on Atri. He b^ot of Bhadra a son named Sonia» 
In all he had ten sons of great merit who were engaged in severe 
penance. O brahmins, they established their spiritual lines. 
They were masters of the Vedas, They were known as Svastyi* 
treyas. They were devoid of three types of worldly wealth, viz. 
gold, cattle and land. 

Kak^eyu had three sons of great might and heroism. 

15. They were Sabhanara, Cak^uya and Paramanyu, Sabha* 
nara*s son was the learned king Kalanala. 

16. Kilinala's son Sffijaya was conversant with virtue. 
The heroic king Purafijaya was the son of Srfijaya. 

17. O excellent sages, Janamejaya was the son of Purafijaya^ 
Mah^la was the son of pious king, Janamejaya. 

18. He was recognized by Devas and his fame was estab¬ 
lished all over the Earth. The son of Mah^la named Mahi- 
manas was virtuous. 

19. Mahamanas was a bom hero; he was honoured by 
Devas too. O brahmins, Mahamanas begot two sons. 

20-23. They were Uflnara wbo was conversant with Dharma 
and Titikfu who was very mighty. 

Uilnara had five wives, daughters of king Vrfa as a result of 
great penance. They were Nrgi, Knni, Navi, Darvi and 
Dffadvatl. Ulinara begot of them five sons who perpetuated his 
line. Nrga wasbom ^Nrg&,KrmiofKrmi; NavaoTNaviand 
fluvrata of Darvi, Sibi of Drfadvad. 

24-29. O brahmins, the realm of Sibi it known as the &bis> 



11.30-39 


71 


that of Nrga as the Y^idheyai; chat of Nava as the Navar&$tra, 
the city of Kimila belonged to Kimu The realm of Amba^thas 
belonged to Suvrata. 

Understand the sons of Sibi. The four sons of Sibi are known 
as the Sibis. They were—^Vryadarbha) Su^ra^ Kaikeya and 
Madraka. Their realms were very flourishing by the names of 
Vrtadarbhas, Su^aras, Kaikeyas and Madrakai. 

O brahmins, Titikfu became a kii^ in the Eastern region. 
He had many sons. U^adratha of great vigour was prominent 
among them. His son was Pheoa. Sutapas was born of PheiUL 
Bali was the son of Sutapas. His quiver was golden. He was a 
great Yogin and a king. 

30-36. He procreated flve sons who continued his lineage 
on the Earth. Anga was bora at the outset. Then were bora 
Vaoga, Suhma, Puodra and Kalinga. The Kfatriya descendants 
of Bali are known as Bileya K^atras. There were brahminical 
descendants of Bali too. They too established their family on the 
earth. 

O brahmins, a boon had been granted to Bali by Brahma who 
was pleased with him. Thereby he acquired the following attri* 
butes: 

He was a great Yogin. His span of life extended to that of a 
Kalpa. He was unequalled in strength. He had a deep insight 
in the principles and topics of Dharma. He was unconquerable 
in battle. He held an important position in the matter of deciding 
what Dharma was. He had a clear vision of three worlds. He 
was accorded prominence at the sacrifice of Prasava(?). When 
this was said to him by the lord, via *‘you will establish the four 
castes duly*' he attained mental peace. O brahmins, after a 
great deal of time, he went to the heavenly abode. 

The realms of the five descendants wte —^Angas, Vangas, 
Suhmakas, Kalingas and Pui^d^akas. 

Now the descendants erf* Afiga are related. 

$7. Anga*s son was Dadhivihana, the leader of kings. 
Dadhivahana*s son was king Diviratha. 

38. The son of Diviratha was Svargaratha who was equal 
in vsdour to Indra. His son was Citraratha. 

39. While he performed a saorifice on the Kilafijara^ motm* 

1. RAlslU|m (t mouatsln). It is one of fee twoUy mounti^ ^retd 
on the four Tdes of mount MibScicru. 



72 


Brahma Purity 


tain the Smia juice was drunk by Svargaratha aloi^ with Indra. 

40. Gitraratha’s son was Daiaratha. He became famous by 
the name Lomapida and SantA was hb daughter.^ 

41« By the grace of ^fya^rhga a heroic son of great fame was 
bom to Dafaratha who commanded the four divisions of the 
army and made the family flourish. His name was Caturanga. 

42. GaturaAgab son was known by the name Ffthulak^. 
The kii^ of great fame Campa vraa the son of Prthulak^. 

43. Campa’s city was Campk which was formerly known as 
MUinl. By the grace of Pur^bhadra, his son HaryaAga was born. 

44. Then made the excellent vehicle» the ele* 

phant of Indra descend to the Earth by means of Mantras. 

45. Kuig Bhadraratha was the son of HaryaAga. King 
Brhatkarman was the son of Bhadraratha. 

46«4B. Brhaddarbha was his son and B^hanmanas was born 
to him. The leading king Brhannianas begot Jayadratha. King 
Drdhar^tha was bc^n to him. Drdharachab success^* was Jana* 
mejaya the conqueror of the universe. HU son was Vikar^. 
Vaikartui was his son. He had a hundred sons who made the 
family of the Angas flourUh. 

49. Thus, all the kings bom of the family of AAga have been 
glorified by me. They were noble souls pledged to truthfulness. 
They were mighty warriors and they procreated children. 

50. O brahmins, O excellent sages, lUten. I shall mention 
the family of king ^ceyu the son of Raudrasva. 

SI-53. ^ceyu’s son was king Matinara who ruled over the 
whole Earth. MatiniLra had three extremely virtuous sons— 
Vasurodha, Pratiratha and the righteous Subahu. All of them 
were conversant with the Vedas, truthful in speech and favourable 
to the brahmins. O excellent sages, his (laughter Ila was an 
expounder of the Brahman. Tamsu married her. 

54-55. Tazhsu’s valcnous son was the pi<His king Dharma- 
netra. He was an expounder of Brahman aind an assailcr of foes. 
HU wife was Upadana>4, who hort four splendid s<ms to him 
viz Dufyanta, Su^manta, Pravlra axul Anagha. 

1. There ii some ccafusioa here. Siati wu (he daughter of king Dsss- 
ratba. Lom^&da had adopted her at hU daughter. She was married to sage 
BfyairAga. Loii^>4da was not identical with Dassratha. 



11.56-73 


7$ 


56-61. Du^yanta's valorous heir was Bharata. His c^iginal 
name was Sarvadamana. He had the strength of ten thousand 
•elephants. The ton of Dufyanta, the great soul was a great Em¬ 
peror. Bharata was bom of Sakuntala and this country is named 
Bharata after him. The sons of king Bharata perished through 
the fury of Matrs (Mothers). This story had been told by me 
previously. Thereupon, the great brahminical sage Bharadvija 
the son of Brhaspati, the descendant of Ahgiras performed great 
sacrifices. Due to the effort of Bharadvaja, a son was bom to 
Bharata who was so named because the birth of the previous 
sons had been futile. After the birth of Vitatha, Bharata had 
passed away. After crowning Vitatha, Bharadvaja returned to 
his hermitage. 

62-64. Vitatha begot five sons—viz. Suhotra, Suhotr» 
Gaya, Garga and K^ila. 

Suhotra had two sons, Kaiika o( great might and king Grtsa* 
mati. Grtsamati had Brahmin, Kyatriya and Vaiiya sons. Kaiika 
had two sons viz Ki^eya and Dirghatapas. 

65. The learned scholar Dhanvantari was the son of Dirgha¬ 
tapas. Dhanvantari’s son Ketuman is well known. 

66-67. The scholarly Bhlmaratha was the son of Ketuman. 
The son of Bhimaratha became the ruler of Vira^asl. He was 
well known as Divodasa and he destroyed all Kfatriya kings. 
The heroic kii^ Pratardana was the son of Dtvodksa. 

68. Pratardana had two sons, viz Vatsa and Bhirgava. 
Alarka was the son of ku^ Sanmatiman. He too was a king. 

69-70. The king seized the hereditary pre^erty of Haihaya. 
The ancestral pr<^ercy forcibly seized by Divodasa was taken 
back by irrepressible son of Bhadrairenya, the noble Durdama. 
He had been formerly let off mercifully by Divodasa thinking 
that he was a mere boy. 

71-72. The king Aftaratha was the son of Bhimaratha. O 
brahmins, that boy was struck by this Kfatriya son desirous 
putting a stop to the enmity, O excellent sages. 

Alarka, king of Kaii 

to the brahmins. 

73. This scion and the i^>liter of the fiuxiUy of K&ii kings 
was a youth endowed with handsome features who ruled for sixty- 
ajx (thousand )3rears. 


, was truthful in speech and favourable 



74 


Brahma 


74-75. It waj to the grace qS Lopimudri that he attained 
the maximum span of life. O excellent sages, towards the end of 
his life the king killed the Rik^asa Kyemaka and re-established 
the beautifiil city of V&ra^asl. Alarka’s successor was king Kfe- 
maka. 

76. Kfemaka's son was Varfaketu. King Vibhu was his 
successor. 

77. Anarta was the son of Vibhu and Sukumkra was his son.. 
Sukum&ra’s son was the mighty warrior Satyaketu. 

78. This son of great refulgence became an extremely vir¬ 
tuous king. Vatsabhumi was the son of Vatsa and Bhargabhumi 
was bom of Bhargava. 

79. These descendants of Ahgiras were born in the family 
of Bhrgu. O excellent sages, they were brahmins, Kfatriyas, 
Vailyas and Sudras. 

80-87. There is another line of kings viz. Ajamidha. O ex¬ 
cellent brahmins, may it be listened to. Brhat was the son of 
Suhotra. Brhat had three sons viz. Ajamidha, Dvimidha and the 
powerful Puruznldha. Ajanudha had three wives endowed with 
fame viz.—Nitl, KefinI and Dhumud. All oi them were excellent 
ladies. The valorous Jahnu was bom of KeiinI and Ajanudha. 
He performed a sacrifice of Img duration called Sarva Medh&- 
makha. Eager to have him as her husband Gahga approached*, 
him like a humble lady. As he declined the pr<q>osal GaAgi^ 
flooded his sacrificial hall. O brahmins, on seeing the sacrificial 
chamber thus flooded all round king Jahnu became infuriated^ 
He said to Gafiga—Ganga, ere long, re^> the finiits ^this 
arrogance of thine. I shall condense your water flourishing in the 
three worlds and drink it 

On seeing Ganga drunk up, the highly blessed great sages of 
noble souls bought her back as Jalmavl his dauj^xter. 

Jahnu married Kiveri, daughter o£ Yuvaniiva. Later <m,. 
due to the curse of Gafigahalfofher body was turned into a river* 

88-91. The valorous beloved son of Jahnu was Ajaka*. 
Ajaka’s successor was king Bal&kafva who was fimd of hunting. 
Kuiika was his son. This king was murdered by wild foresters 
along with the Pahlavas. Kuitka perfi>rmed a peuauce resolvijig 
to hiiDMal£—*l shall obtain a lordly son equal to lisdra.’* Indra 
approached him out of fear and understood his purpose. Indra 



11.92-97 


75 


hisuelf became the $od Kxiiika. He was king G&dhi. Vi<vi» 
mitra was the soa of Gidhi and Aftaka was bom of Viiv&mitra. 

1 (O brahmiASi Viivabidhi, ^vajit and Satyavatl (also) were 
horn. Jamadagni was bom of Satyavati and ^cika. Dcvarata 
and others were the sons of Viivimitra. They became {amous in 
three worlds. O brahzmns^ listen to their names. They were 
Dcvar&tai Kati, Hira^yakfa and Re^u.The descendants of Kati 
were Kityayanas. Hiraoyikta %vas bom of $&lavati. Re^uki 
was the daughter of Renu. The spiritual lines of noble Kauiikas 
are known as Sizhkftyas, Galavas, Maudgalyas, Pacini, Babhrus^ 
Dhyknajs^yaS) Pkrthivas, Devaritas^ S&Iahkkyanas, Saufravas, 
Lohitas^ YamadutaSi Karifis^ and Saindhavayanas. O brahmins^ 
there and other descendants of Kuiika arc well known in the 
world. Many descendants of Kuiika are those who could have 
marriage sdliances with other sages. O excellent sages, in this 
Cuniiy there is thus the admixture of brahmins and Kyatriyas 
due to the connection of Paurava and the brahminical sage 
Kauiiika. Sunah^epha was the eldest of the sonsofViiv&mitra. 
That leading sage was originally a Bhargava (descendant of 
fihrgu).Later on, he attained the state of being a descendant of 
Kuiika. Devarata and others were also the sons of Vitvaxnitra. 
Dr^advatl’s son A^pUta was bom of VUvaznitra). 

92-97. Aftaka’s s<hi was Lauhi. Thus descendants of Jahnu 
have been mentioned by me. May another line pertaining to 
Ajamldha be heard, O excellent saiges. Suianti was born of 
raiinl and Ajamldha. Purujiti was the son of Suianti. Bahyaiva 
was bora of Purujiti. Bahyiiva had five sons comparable to the 
immortals. They were—Mudgala, Sffijaya, king Bfhadaiva, 
Yavinara the valorous and Kfinilaiva the fifth one. These five 
kings are known as Paflcalas because they were competent to- 
protect the five realms. Their five realms were flourishing. Hence 
they got the designation Pafic&las. Mudgala’s successor of very 
great fame was Maudgalya. Indrascni bore Vadhnyaiva to 

* (His son Satyadhrti was a master of archery. On seeing a 
celestial lady in fiont him, his semen got discharged among 
tome reeds of Sara. Twins were bom it. Out of sympathy 


*Tbe text putsHlMse vem within biaekets without niunber. 



76 


Brakma PmS^a 


•Santanu who had gone ahunting took them up and brought 
them up. The boy was known as Kipa, the gtd GautamI was 
known as Krpl. These are said to be Saradvatas. These are 
known as Gautamas too. Henceforthi I shall mention the line of 
succession of Divodasa. Dtvodasa’s successor was king Mitrayu 
(who became a) brahminical sage. Mitrayu's son was Soma. 
Therefore they are known as Maitreyas. These too though bom 
of K$atriya family entered the spiritual line of Bhigu)^ 

98. Paflcajana was the son of S^fijaya. King Somadacta was 
the son of Paftcajana. 

99-101. Sahadeva of great fame was the successor of Soma- 
-datta. Sahadeva^s son Sonuka was well known. Ajanudba of great 
power was the son of Gfisamat!. When the family declined in 
prosperity Ajanudha's son Somaka was bom. Jantu was the son 
of Somaka. His hundred sons shone brilliantly. The youngest 
of them Lord Pffata was the father of Drupada, These noble 
Somakas are known as Ajaurudhas. 

102-105. Dhuminl the crowned queen of Ajaxnidha longed 
for a son. O excellent st^es, she was highly blessed, chaste and 
noble. Desiring a son she performed holy rites. For ten thousand 
years she perfomied a dillicult penance. She conducted sacrifices 
duly. The pious lady ate very little. O excellent sages, she lay 
down only on the Kuia of Agnibotra. Ajanudha had sexual 
union with the gentle lady Dhuminl and procreated ^k^ who 
was smoke-coloured and handsome in appearance. 

106. Sarhvara^a was bom of ^^a and Kuru was born of 
•Sathvarana. He shifted his capital from Prayaga and founded 
Kurukfctra. 

107. That spot is holy, beautiful smd frequented by pious 
persons. His family is extensive and his descendants are known 
as Kauravas. 

108. Kuru had four sons—Sudhanvan, Sudhanu, Paiikfit 
and the most excellent Arimejaya. 

109. The r^hteous Janamejaya was the successor of Paiik- 
•fh. ^rutasena, Agrasena and Bhlmasena (succeeded him). 

* (The intelligent Suhotra was die successor of Sudhanvan. 
iHii son was king Cyavana who was an expert on virtue and 

I. The text puts tlwK vefsai within bcKkett without number. 



lKllO-120 


77 


wealth. K|tayaj&a was bom of Cyavana. This knower of Dhanna 
performed sacrifices and begot the heroic Caidyoparivara as 
his son. He was a well known king who became a friend of Indra. 
He was known as Vasu too and he could traverse the skies. 

Girika bore to Caidyt^arivara seven manly sons. They were 
Bfhadratha who was a mighty warrior and king of Magadha; 
Pratyagratha, Kratha whom they call Manivahana, Sakala^ 
Juhu, Matsya and Kali the seventh. Brhadratha’s successor 
Kuiagra was well known. Kuiagra^s scholarly and valorous 
son was ^^bha. Now» I shall mention the family of Juhu. It is 
endowed with all good qualities. Juhu begot a son Suratha who 
became a king. 

110. All these were highly blessed, valorous and mighty. 
The intelligent Suratha was the son of Janamejaya. 

111. The valorous Viduratha was bom as the son of Suratlia. 
Rk;a of great might was the successor of Viduratha. 

112. His second son was bom through the favour of Bhara* 
dvaja and he became well known by that name. In this lunar 
race there were two BJ^^as and two Parik^its. 

113. O brahmins, there were three Bhimasenas and two 
Janamejayas. Bhimasena was the son of second 

114. Pratipa was bom of Bhimasena. Three mighty sons 
were bom to Pratipa. They were $antanu, Devapi and Bihlika. 

115. O excellent brahmins, iSantanu was a king of this race. 
Now listen to the race of B&hlika the saintly king. 

116. Somadatta of great fame was the son ofBahlika. Three 
sons were bom of Somadatta. They were Bhuri, Bhurifravas 
and Sala. 

117. Sage Dev&pi became the preceptor of Devas. Cya* 
vana’s son Krtaka was a chum o[ this noble sage. 

118. ^antanu the f<mmost among the descendants of Kuru 
became a kiz^. I shall mention the family of Santanu well known 
in the three wivlds. 

119. That lord begot of Gangk a mhi named Devavrata. 
He became famous by the name of Bhifma. He was the grwd* 
fitther o[ the Piod^vas. 

120. Kill bore the son Vicitraidrya to Santanu. He was a 
righteous souTSevoid of sins. 



78 


Brahma Purina 


121. Kffoa Dvaipiyana generated Dhrtariftra, Pa^u and 
Vidura in the wives of Vicitra%irya. 

122. Hundred sons were begotten ot Gftndhari by Dhrta- 
r&ftra. Among them Duryodhana was most excellent. He 
became the lord of all. 

123. Afjuna was the son of Pi^du and his sm was Abhi** 
manyu. Parlk^it was the son of Abhimanyu. 

124. Pirikyita (Abhimanyu) begot two sons of Kali, viz. 
the king Candrkpida and Silrykplda the knowers of Brahman. 

125. Candrkpida begot hundred sons who were excellent 
bowmen. They are known as the Kyatriya descendants of Jana« 
mejaya. 

126. The mighty Satyakar^a was the eldest among them. 
In the city of Hastinapura he performed a sacrifice in which much 
wealth was distributed as gift. 

127. Satyakarna^s successor was the valorous Svetakar^a. 
That righteous king was issueless and he entered a penance* 
grove. 

128. His beautiful wife MilitU, daughter of Subahu> (other* 
wise known as) Grahamiiinl, and a descendant of Yadu became 
pregnant in the forest. 

129. When the conception had taken place, king Sveta- 
kart^ continued his journey as be had done previously. 

130. On seeing her beloved husband going, the chaste lady 
Mil in! the lotus-eyed daughter of Subahu followed him to the 
forest. 

131. On the way (he youthful maiden gave birth to a tender 
son. Leaving the son there she followed the king to the forest. 

132. The highly blessed chaste lady did the same thii^ as 
DraupadI the chaste lady had done before^. Tlie tender, tiny boy 
b^an to cry amidst the mountain bushes. 

133*136. Taking pity on that noble boy, clouds appeared 
in the sky. The two sozu of Sraviythi, Paippalidi and Kauiika 
saw him. They took pity on him, took him up and washed him 
with%vater. His sides drenched in blood were scraped on the rock. 
When his sides were carefully temped the boy became dark* 
complexioned like a goat. Hence, the two bfahmins named him 

1. Draupftdl had followed Yudhiiftum to the forest. 



1L137-151 


79 

up by the two brahmins in the 

chamber of Romaka. 

137. The wife Romaka adopted him as her son and brou¬ 
ght him up. The boy became the son of Romakl and the two 
brahmins became her attendants. 

138. Such is the race of Puru. The family of the P&pd&vas 
was established there. Their sons and grandsons had their spans 
of life simultaneously. 

139-140. In this context the following verse had been sung 
by Yayati the son of Nahufa. That intelligent king was highly 
pleased when old age was transferred to his son. This Earth may 
be devoid of sun, moon and planets. But the Earth will never be 
devoid of descendants of PurQ. 

141. This well known dynasty of Puru has been mentioned 
to you by me. I shall now mention the dynasties of Turvasu, 
Druhyu, Anu and Yadu. 

142. Vahni was the son ofTurvasu. Gobbanu was his son. 
The unconquerable king Traiiinu was the son of Gobhanu. 

143-144. Karandhama was the son of Traii&nu and his 
son was Marutta. Another Marutta, the son of Avikfita has 
already been mentioned by me. This king had been issueless. 
He performed sacrifice where much wealth was gifted in charity. 
A daughter named Samyata was born to the king. 

145. She was given to the noble Samvarta as gift. She ob¬ 
tained a pious son Dufyanta, descendant of Puru. 

146. Thus, O excellent brahmins, the race ofTurvasu merg¬ 
ed into the &mily of Puru as a result oi the curse of Yay&ti in 
the context of transferring his old age. 

147-148. Dufyanta’s successor was king Karurmna. Ahilda 
was bom of Karurmna. He had four sons. They were called:—* 
Pa^ya, Kerala, Kola and king Coiz. Their flourishii^ realms 
are Pa^yas, Colas and Keralas. 

O king 1 Babfarusetu was Druhyu’s ton. 

149-151. Angarasetu was his son. He is called the lord of 
winds. This mighty king was killed with difliculty in the course 
of battle with Yauvan&lva. A tremendous battle ensued that 
lasted for ten months. The king Gandhira was the lucccnor of 
Adgftrasetu. The great country of Gandhira was named after 


Ajapariva. The boy was brought 



80 Brahma Pur^& 

him. The horses hailing from Gandh&ra are the most excellent 
of all horses. 

152. Dharma was the son of Anu. Dhrta was his son. Sa^» 
druha was bom of Dhrta. Pracetas was his son. 

153*154. Sucetas was the son of Pracetas His sons have been 
mentioned by me. 

Yadu had five sons con^)arable to the sons of Devas. They 
were Sahasrada^ Payoda, Nila and Afijika. Sahasrada 

had three virtuous sons. 

135. They were Haihaya, Haya and king Vcnuhaya. The 
son of Haihaya was Dharmanetra. 

156. Karta was the son of Dharmanetra. His son was Sahaflja. 
The city Sahaftjani was founded by Sahahja. 

157. The valorous Bhadraireoya was the son of Mahi;man. 
The successor of Bhadrairepya was named Durdama. 

158. The son of Durdama was Kanaka. The forebears of 
Kanaka were well known in the world. 

159. They were Kftavirya, Kftaujas^ Krtakannan and 
Krtigni. Arjona was born of Krtavarya. 

160. Endowed with a thousand hands he became the lord 
of the Earth consbting of seven continents. All alone, he con¬ 
quered the Earth with a chariot that had the brilliance of the 
sun. 

161. Performing a penance that was extremely difficult to 
be performed, for the period of ten thousand years K&rta>^rya 
prt^itiated Datta the son of Atri. 

162-164. Datta granted him four boons of inordinate gla¬ 
mour:— (1) the full complement of a thousand arms. (2) the 
ability to retain knowledge even in sinful atmosphere (S) After 
conquering the Earth with fierce ruthlessness, acquiring an abi¬ 
lity to reconcile and propitiate the subjects through r^hteous- 
ziess, and (4) having won in many battles and having killed thou¬ 
sands of enemies in battle, death at the hands of one superior to 
htm in battle. 

165* O brahmins, he acquired a thousand arms (»xly when 
he was engaged in fighting. They manifested themselves as if by- 
tfie power of Yoga in the case of a Master of Yogic feats. 

166. This entire eardi consisting of seven continents and 



11.167-181 


81 


oceans, towns and cities was conquered by him by a ruthless and 
fierce process. 

167. O excellent sages, it is heard that seven hundred sacri¬ 
fices were duly performed by him in the seven continents. 

168-169. O excellent sages, hundreds and thousands of gold 
pieces were distributed as gifts; in each of these there were golden 
sacrificial altars. All of them were made splendid by Devas, 
Gandharvas and celestial maidens stationed in their aerial 
chariots and fully bedecked in ornaments. 

170. In his sacrifice Narada the musician, son of Varidisa, 
sang this laudatory song. Narada was wonder-struck by his 
grandeur. 

}fdTaia said x 

171. Other kings will certainly never emulate Kkrttavlrya 
in performing sacrifices, offering charitable gifts, practising aus* 
terities, possessing valour or learning. 

172. That Yogin was seen moving about in the seven conti¬ 
nents in his chariot, wielding his leathern shield, sword and bow. 

173. Due to the power that great king who protected the 
subjects righteously there was neither grief nor bewildered flutter 
among the subjects. No money or valuable article was lost by 
them. 

174. He became an emperor endowed with the enjoyment 
of all jewels. He alone was the guardian of the cattle. He alone 
was the guardian of fields. 

175-181. That Arjuna who could create showers because 
he was a Yogin was the lord of clouds. With his thousand arms 
the skin whereof had become hardened because the bowstring 
had frequently struck it, he shone like the sun in Autumn with his 
thousand rays. That brilliant king defeated Nagas, sons of Kar- 
ko^aka and established them in his city Mahifmati^. That lotus¬ 
eyed kii^ playfully restrained the onward rush of the ocean with 
his arms during the rainy scasem and made it flow back. The 
river Narmada abounding in crocodiles was rolled up by him 

1. ■ tdqitified with die modem Mahe^mra on Narmsdi, 

but this seenu to be unteiuble, for Mahelvars lies vdthin the ancient Avsad. 
Probably the cit^aa be identified vndi OihkAra Mlndhiti or such some 
place near there.* 



82 


Brahma Purih/a 


when he sported in its waters. With its thousand waves moving 
to and fro it appeared as though the river approached him hesi¬ 
tatingly. When the great ocean was agitated by his thousand 
arms> the mighty Asuras residii^ In the netherworlds hid them¬ 
selves in fright. With his thousand arms the king ^itated the 
ocean scattering the great waves into sprays, making the fishes 
and huge whales move about in flutter and flurry, causing the 
gusts of wind split the foams and stirrii^ up the eddies. 

182-185. Thus, he ^itatcd the ocean like the Mandara 
mountain that had been churned formerly by Devas and Asuras 
and chat stirred up the milk ocean. 

Great serpents were frightened by stirring up the ocean. 
They were suspicious that Garud^ about to swoop 
down on them. In their fear they jumped up. On seeing the 
terrible excellent king they bowed down with their hoods motion¬ 
less. They appeared like the stumps of plantain trees swayed by 
the wind in the evening. By the exercise of his bowstrings he 
bound the haughty king of Lanka (Ravau)^ after making him 
faint with five arrows. He defeated his army in the battle of 
Lanki. Capturing and bringing him under his control forcibly 
he imprisoned him in his city of Mahiymatl. 

186. On hearing that his gruulsoxi Rava^a had been im¬ 
prisoned by Sahasraijuna, sage Pulastya went to Mah!;mad 
and met Sahasrarjuna. 

187-19S. On being requested by Pulastya he released R&- 
vana the grandsm of Pulastya. 

The loud twanging report of his bowstring made on his thou¬ 
sand arms resembled that of the thunderbolt of the throbbing 
cloud at the close of Yugas. 


1. Rivsoa—gTsodsoQ of PuUitys snd ton ot N^invss. He ksd two 
brothers Kumbhskarca snd ViWms snd s sister SOipi^akhi. He bad alto 
a atcp*brother, Kuben who being the eldest among brothera the kiog 

of LaAki. But RAvapa drove him out and himself became a king. Well-vened 
sa the Vedai and Che peHbrmer of penance and tacriBeca Rivaoa was called 
a RAk|ata because he and hit mi^ty team of warriors protected the country’s 
gaait. The VAlialki RAaiyaca» which contains the oUett record of his aedvi- 
lies derives the term RAksaia frem raks to protea. Because of his immoral 
,tetivities the term leal its origiaal meaniag and came to be used in derogatory 



11.194-204 


8S 

Indeed^ the vain and vigour of Bh&i^ava was very wonderful 
since he cut off the thousand arms of that king, the arms that 
resembled the golden cluster of palm trees. 

Once, thirsty fire-god begged of him for enough material to 
quench his thirst. Accordingly the heroic Sahasrarjuna granted 
the iire-god his request for alms, the seven continents, cities, 
vill^es, cowherd colonies—nay the whole of his realm. Due to 
the power of Sahasrarjuna all these blazed along with the 
eagerness of Are-god to bum more. He burned the mountains 
and forests of Kirtta^rya. Though accompanied by the Aregod 
he was extremely frightened when he burned the vacant but 
beautiful hermitage of Vaiijiha the son of Varu^a. Formerly, 
Varut^a had begot this brilliant excellent son who became a 
seer. 

194*201. That sage Vasi^tha became famous as Apava. 
The saintly lord Apava cursed Arjuna—*‘A great misdeed has 
been perpetrated by you, O Haihaya, in not having spared this 
forest of mine. A powerful man will kill you. The mighty and 
valorous son of Jamadagni named R&ma will chop off your thou¬ 
sand arms. The powerful resplendent brahmin the descendant 
of Bhrgu will thrash you and kill you.** 

No doubt, the king had secured the boon whereby the sub¬ 
jects obtained prosperity and did not come to grief. (No doubt) 
he suppressed hU foes. The prosperity of his subjects could be 
retained only as long as he protected them righteously. 

But, due to the curse of the sage, he acted unrighteously and 
liad to court death. In fact, O brahmins, a boon to that effect 
(i.e. death at the hands of hb superior alone) had been chosen 
by himself. The noble king had a hundred sons, but only Ave 
of them survived. These were heroic, mighty and righteous. 
They were trained in the right use of missiles. They were 
famous. They were Surasena, Sura, Vfya^a, Madhupadhvaja 
and Jayadhvaja. 

This Jayadhvaja was a king of Avanti. Kartta^nryab sons 
were mighty and vigorous. 

202. Jayadhvaja*s son was Talajangha of great might. He 

a hundred sons who became well known as TilajaAghas. 

20S-204. O excellent sages ! many groups of valorous kings 
are well known among the noble descendants of Haihaya. They 
were—the ^^dhotras, Suvratas, Bbojas, Avantb, Tauodiheras, 



Brckma Pur^^ 


84 

TilajaAghas, Bharatas and Sujatas. TThey had not been recount'*^ 
ed in detail because they are too numerous. 

205. O brahmins» Vrya and others were the descendants 
of Yadu (Because of Yadu they are called Yadavas). They were 
meritorious in their activities. Vr$a was the founder of a separate 
line. Madhu was his son. 

206. Madhu had a hundred sons. was the perpe* 

tuator of the line. Because of they arc called Vrsnis. 

Because of Madhu they are known as Madhavas. 

207-209. The Haihayas are called Yadavas after Yadu. 

He who daily repeats the story of Kartta>4rya will never incur 
the loss of wealth. He will regain what is lost. 

O excellent brahmins, the lines of the five sons of Yayati 
have been glorified thus. They were heroes (wellknown all over 
the world. O excellent sages, just as the five elements sustain 
the mobile and immobile beings, they support the worlds. 

210-213. On hearing the five lines of kings a king will be¬ 
come an expert on virtue and wealth. He will have self-control. 
He will have five sons. He will get five rare and excellent things 
in the world—longevity, fame, sons, prowess and prosperity by 
retaining five groups in memory. Even as I relate, O excellent 
sages, listen to the line of kings descending from Kro^d* who per¬ 
petuated the line of Yadu, who performed sacrifices and who was 
meritorious in his activities. One is liberated from all sins on 
listening to the line of Krofpr since in his family was born god 
Vifi^u himself. He upliAcd the family of Vr^ni. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 
Birth of KfpjA 

LomaharfoM saidx 

1. Kro;tr wives—G&ndhari and M&dri. G&ndhirf 
gave birth to Anamitra of great might. 

2. Midd gave birth to Yudhijit and Devamldhufa* Thus 
the flourishing family of VrfQis came to be threefold. 



I2.a*24 


85 


3. Madri had two (more) sons : the splendid VfS^i and 
Andhaka. Vr?ni had two sons—Svaphalka and Citraka. 

4. O excellent s^e$, there is no fear from sickness^ no fear 
of drought in the place where Sv^halka the *’ighteous soul is 
present. 

5. O excellent sages, once, Indra the chastiser of PAka did 
not shower rain in the realm of the king of Kaii, for three years. 

6. He therefore brought the excessively htmoured Sva- 
phalka there (to his kingdom). Due to the arrival of Sv^halka, 
Indra showered rain. 

7-8. Svaphalka married the daughter of the king of Kifi, 
named GAndinl. She was so called because she gave every day 
a cow to a brahmin. Akrura a liberal doncH', a performer of 
sacrifices, a learned hero and one fond of receiving guests, was 
born of Svaphalka. He distributed wealth as gift to the Brahmins. 

9-10. Other sons too were bom viz.—Upamadgu, Madgu, 
Medura, Arimcjaya, Avikfita, Akfepa Satrughna, Arimardana, 
Dharmadhrk, Yatidhanna, Dharmolqa, Andhakaru, Av&ha 
and Prativaha. Varahgana a beautiful daughter was also bom 
to him. 

11. O excellent brahmins, Prasena and Upadeva of divine 
splendour were born to UgrasenA, a woman of beautiful limbs, 
by Akrura. 

12-17. Citraka begot these sons—viz. Prthu, Vipfthu, 
Aivagriva, Aivabahu, Svaparsvaka, Gaveja^, Ari^tancmi, 
Aiva, Sudharma, Dhaimabhrt, SubAhu, and Bahubahu, and two 
daughters Sravifltha and Sravaiji, He begot of Asikni the heroic 
son Sura, Devamidhu^a. Ten courageous sons were born of the 
crowned queen Bhojya. At the outset was bom the mighty 
Vasudeva (otherwise known as) Anakadundubhi (so called be¬ 
cause) when he was bom drums were beaten in heaven and the 
loud Ttport of Anaka drums arose in the skies. At that time heavy 
shower o! flowers fell on the abode of Sura. In the whole of this 
mortal wcx^Id there was none equal to him in handsome features. 
He was foremost among men and he had the splendour of the 
moon. 

18-24. The other nine sons were bom:—Devabhiga, Deva- 
iravas, Anadhr^ti, Kanavaka, Vatsavin, Grfijatna, Syima, 
Samika and Ga^uya. He had five excellent ladies as daiighten— 



86 


Brahma Purdfa 


Pfthukirti, Prth&, Srutadevi, 8nitairava and Rajadhidcvl. 
These five were mothers of mighty heroes. Jagrhu was bom as 
the son of Srutadeva and the kii^^ of Avanti. King Si^upala was 
born of Srutairava and the king of Ce6i. Formerly, he had been 
Hiratiyakaiipu the king of Daityas. Dantavakra of great might, 
the heroic overlord of Karu$as was born of P^thuklrti as the son of 
Vrddhaiarman. Kunti adopted PrthA as his daughter. P&ndu 
married her. King Yudhif^hira conversant with virtuous con* 
duct was born of Kunti through the blessings of Dharma; Bhima* 
sena was born through the blessings of Vayu and Arjuna was bom 
through the blessings of Indra. Arjuna was a hero who had va* 
lour and exploit equal to that of Indra. In the whole world he 
had none to iace him in a chariot*battle. Sini was born of Ana* 
mitra the youngest of the sons of Vr^^i- 

25» Satyaka was the son of Sini and Yuyudhana was the son 
of Satyaka. Uddhava was the blessed son of Devabhaga. 

26*28. They call the excellent Devairavas the most excel* 
lent among the learned men. Anadhr^fi begot of Aimaki, Satru* 
ghna a son who repulsed foes and earned fame. 

Srutadeva too gave birth to a son. The son of Srutadevi ia 
well known as Nai^adi (a son of Ni^ada-hill tribe). O excellent 
sages, he was Ekalavya who was brought up by the Ni^adaa 
(huntsmen). 

Vasudeva the valorous son of Sura gave his broom-bom 
heroic son Kauiika to Vats&van who had no issue. He gave the 
son (as in a religious act) along with water libations. 

29-31. To Gandufa who had no son, Vifvaksena gave his 
sons Cirude^^, Sude^a and Paficala who had characteristic* 
marks of a warrior. He was a warrior who never remained with* 
out a battle. O excellent brahmins, this mighty warrior was the 
youngest son of Rukmii^. When Cknidc^i}^ went on his com* 
paigns thousands of crows closely followed him thinking—‘^To* 
day we will enjoy the delicious flesh of those who are killed by 
C&rudef^**. 

32. Tantrija and Tantripala were the two sons of Kanavaka^ 
VIru and Afvahanu were the two heroic sons ol Grfijama. 

33*34. Aftmilra wts the son of Sykma. i^azntka ruled over a 
kingdom. He felt depressed being a mere Bhoja. Hence he per* 



12*35-50 


87 


formed a R&jasuya sacrifice. Ajiuiatni the destroyer of enemies 
was bom to him. Henceforth^ I shall describe the heroic sons of 
Vasudeva. 


35. Thus the race of Vrfni is threefold. It is mighty and it 
has many branches. One who retains this extensive race in me* 
mory is never afflicted by any calamity. 

36-38. Vasudeva had fourteen excellent women as his wives. 
The first five were: a descendant of Puru named Rohim, Madi* 

VaiiakM^Bhadraand Sunamnl.The second set of seven ladies 
comprised Sahadeva, Santidevi, Siidevi, Devarak$itii» VrkadcNd^ 
Upadevf and Devald. The thirteenth and the fourteenth were 
Sutanu and Yada\1. These two had at first been maid servants. 

39. The descendant of Puru named Rohi^I was the daughter 
of Bahlika. O excellent sages, she was the eldest and most favou¬ 
rite wife of Anakadundubhi. 

40-41. RohinI had eight sons and a daughter. The eldest 
son was Rima. The others were Parana, Satha, Durdama» 
Damaiia, Subhra, and Uiinara. The daughter was 

named Gitra. O excellent sages, this Citra afterwards became 
famous as Subhadra. 

42. The renowned Sauri (Kryi.ta} was born of Devaki and 
Vasudeva. The beloved son Niia^ha of Rama was born of Revatl. 

43. Abhimanyu, the skilled chariot-fighter was bom of 
Subhadra and Arjuna Satyaketu was born of the daughter of 
kii^ of Kafl and Akrura. 

44. Understand individually by their names the sons of 
great valour who were bom to Vasudeva in his highly blessed 
seven wives. 


45-50. Bhoja and Vijaya were the twosmsof Santideva. Vrka- 
deva and Gada were the two sons of Sunami. Vrkadevi gave birth 
to the noble son Agavaha. The (laughter of the king of Trigarta 
and wife of Si^iriyam was inquisitive to ascertain his manliness* 
No semen was dischazged. In his twelfth year he had the c<riour 
of a black pig. Falsely accused, Gargya was urged by anger* 
He seized a cowherd lass and began to indulge in sexual 
intercoxu*se. That cowherd lass was a heavenly nymph in dis¬ 
guise. She conceived the foetus of Gargya. It was unerring and 
very difficult tp bear. It was through the behest of the trident¬ 
bearing lord Siva that the heavenly nymph, the wife of G&rgya, 



88 Brahma Purd^a 

in human form had done this. A heroic son of great might 
named Kalayavana was bom of her. 

51*57. O excellent sages, the boy grew up in the harem of a 
Yavana who had no son. He grew into a youth of leonine frame. 
The upper half of his body was shapely muscular and cylindrical. 
Hence, he came to be called Kalayavana. 

The king (Yavana) was in the liabit ofhghting. He asked the 
excellent brahmin Narada who mentioned the ^d Andha- 
kas as the persons whom he should fight. He marched against 
Mathura with an Ak^uhinl of soldiers. He sent a messenger to 
the nnd Andhakas. Keeping the highly intelligent Krypa 

as their leader the Vry^is and the Andhakas met together and 
took counsel as they were afraid of the Yavana king. They dccid* 
ed to run away. Out of deference to the Pinaka*bearing lord 
Siva they abandoned Mathuri and resolved to colonise Kufa* 
ithall, Dv^ravatl. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
Tht Family of Vffnis 

Lomakar^ana said: 

1. Kros^ had a son of great fame named Vfjinivin. Svahi 
the most excellent of sacrificers was the son of Vrjinivan. 

2*3. King Uyadgu the most excellent of eloquent ones was 
the son of Svahi. Desirous of pre^eny, a very excellent son, he 
performed several sacrifices wherein much wealth was gifted to 
the sacrificing priests. Citraratha endowed with many holy rites 
was born as his son. 

4. Heroic ^iabindu was the son of Citraratha. He per¬ 
formed sacrifices wherein much wealth was distributed as the 
sacrificial fee. He followed the holy conduct of life lived by saintly 
kings. 

5. King Ffthuiravas of extensive fame was the son of Saia- 
bindu. Those who are conversant with the Puririas praise Antaira 
ito the deserving son Prthufravas. 



13.6^16 


89 


6*7. Suyaj&a was the son of Antara. U^t was the son of 
Suyajfta. He performed all sorts of sacrifices. He had great reve¬ 
rence for Religion. Sineyu the scorcher of enemies was the son 
•of U^t. King Maruta his son was a saintly king. 

8-9. Marut obtained Kambalabarhis as his eldest son. 
Although he was against holy rites due to wrath> he performed 
many such rites deshing to obtain a son {or his son Kambala- 
barhis. After a hundred still bom children the son Rukmakavaca 
was born. 

10. After killing a hundred bowmen protected with coats 
of mail by means of sharp arrows in the battle, Ruknxakavaca 
attained excellent glory. 

11-13. Parajit^ the slayer of inimical heroes, was born of 
Rukmakavaca. Parajit had five valiant sons. viz.—Rukmefu, 
Prihurukma, Jyam^ha, Palita and Hari. The father gave Palita 
and Hari to Videhas. With the support of Prthurukma,Rukmefu 
became a king. Externed by bo^ of them, king Jyamagha 
stayed in a hermitage. 

14.16. The tranquil king was advised by the brahmins (to 
conquer new territories). Taking up his bow and waving his 
flag in his chariot the king went to another land on the banks of 
Narmada. Single-handed he conquered the cities of Mekhali^ 
and Mrttikavatl.* After conquering the mountain ^k^avan* 
he stayed in Suktimatl.^ Jyamagha’s wife Saibya was a powerful 
chaste woman. Hence, though he had no son in her he did not 
marrv another woman. 

1. Mtkkaia {Mtkda), Mekhali was a country which had attained Pu- 
ranic fame in ancient India. The inhabitants of this place were called Mekha- 
las. They were K^atriyas (warriors) formerly. But they became persou of 
low caste when they showed jealousy towards the Brahmins. 

2. MxtHkdvatl, a place of habitation in ancient Bbitrau. Bhojas, as a 
Yidava tribe, dwelt in Krto^'s kingdom in Su^riitra and Bhojas inhabited 
Mrttikavati, situated somewhere on this north-eastern limits of the modem 

•Oujarat. 

3. of the seven principal nuxintains in India. 

4. Identification not certain. Scktimatl range might be the 
southern portion of the Eastern Ghats and the hiUs of Mysore. General Cun¬ 
ningham’s identification of Scktimat mountains where the town Suktimat was 
laid out, with the high range of mountains to the south of Seboa and Ranker, 
which gives rise t9 Mahinadt, Pain and Seonath Riven is challenged by F.B. 
Pargitcr (Mar. Pu. p. 285). 



Brahma 



17. He gained victory in another battle and c^^tured a 
virgin thereat: Slightly afraid the kii^ told his wifo**-**Here ia 
your daughter*in-law’’. 

18-19. On hearing this she said to him—lord, pray tell 
me whose daughter-in-law she is ? On hearing it, the noble 
king Jyamagha said:— 

Thi king said: 

have brought this girl as the wife of the son who will be 
born to you*\ 

Lmahar^at^a saidx 

20. Due to severe penance of that virgin, that fortunate 
chaste woman Saibya, in her old age, gave birth to the son Vi- 
darbha. 

21. Vidarbha begot of this daughter-in-law, a princess, two 
learned heroic sons Kratha and Kaiiika who became experts in 
warfare. 

22. Bhima was Vidarbha's son and Kunti was his son. The 
valorous son Dhrs^ was bom to Kunti. He was very bold in 
battle. 

23. Three heroic sons of very great virtue were born to* 
Dhr9ta, Viz., Avanta, Dai^ha and the powerful Vi^ahara. 

24. Vyoman was the son of Daiarha. It Is said that Jimuta 
was Vyoman’s son. Jimuta’s son was Vikfti and Bhimaratha was 
his son. 

25. Navaratha was Bhimaratha’s son and his son was Daia- 
ratha. $akuni was born to him. 

26-27. From him was bom Karambha king. Devarata 
was the son of Karambha and his son was Deval^atra. Daivak- 
fatri, was the too of Devakfatra. He looked like a ditdne child. 
He earned great fame. King Madhu of sweet speech was abo> 
bom to him. It was he who perpetuated the line of Madhu. 

28-29. Punidv&n the most excellent man was bom of Madhu 
in his wife VatdarbM (daughter of the Vidarbha king). Madhu 
had another wife Aikfviki (bom ot the family of Ikfvftku). 
Satvan endowed with good qualities was bom of her. He en¬ 
hanced the glory of Sitvmts: AAer knowif^ this creatioo of Jyi- 



13.30-44 


9! 


magha of noble soul one attains pleasure and is always blessed 
with progeny. 

Lomaharfo^ said: 

30*38. Kauialya bore many sons to Sitvata richly endowed 
with pious qualities viz.—Bhagin» Bhajamana, the divine king 
Devavfdha, Andhaka of mighty anns» and Yadunandana 
(?) The detailed narrative q( the four has been glorified here. 

Bhajamana had two wives viz Bahyaka SfAja^ and Upablih* 
yaka Srfljayi. Many sons were born to him in these two wives. 
Krimi^ Kramapa, Dhy^fa and the heroic Purafijaya, these were 
bom to Bhajamana in Bahyaka Srfijayi. 

Ayutajit, Sahasrajit, Satajit and Daiaka—these were bom to 
Bhajamana in Upabihyaka Srfljayi. 

KingDevavrdha who had performed sacrifices resolved thus— 

son endowed with good qualities should be bom to me/^ 
Accordingly he performed an elaborate penance. While perform¬ 
ing penance, it was the water of Panjasa^ river that he used always 
(for drinking and bathing purpose). The river did everything 
to please him. She was worried with thoughts about him. She 
could not decide what to do. That excellent river thought thus 
in view of the auspicious nature of that king—*^He has not yet 
found out a woman in wluim he can beget such a son (endowed 
with all good qualities). Hence, I shall myself go and become his 
wife.” 

39. She became a young maiden assuming a fine physical 
form. She wooed the king and the lord too liked her. 

40-41. The liberal king impregnated her with a brilliant 
foetus. On the tenth month, the most excellent of women gave 
birth to Babhru Devavrdha who was endowed with good qualities. 

In this context, those who are conversant with the Pura^ic 
lore are heard singing thus about this race glorifying the good 
qualities of the noble Devavrdha. 

42-44. Whether wc look at him in front or (ran far cm* at 
close quarters, Babhru is the most excellent among men. Deva- 
brdha was equal to Devas. Seven thousand lixtysix men attained 

1. or (Vsj^tt) ii (he modem Banas* there are two rivers of 

this name, (1) a ttibutafy of the Chambal riaag near Uday^ur and (2)a 
stream rising near-nsount Abu and flowing is the Rasn of Kacchh. 



-92 


Brahma Purg^ 


immortality due to fiabhru Devavrdha. He performed maay 
sacrifices, he was the lord ofdoaors^ most in teiligeut) favourably 
'disposed towards the brahmins; he held weapons with a steady 
grasp. His family was very big. The Bhojas of Mrttikavad 
belonged to his family. 

45*48. The daughter of Kaiya hort four sons to Andhaka— 
Viz. Kukura, Bhajamana, Sa^aka and Balabarhis. 

Vr^ti was the son of Kukura. Kapotaroman was the son of 
Vr^fi. His son was Tittlri. Punarvasu was bom to him. Abhijit 
was born to Punarvasu. It is said that twin sons were born to 
Abhijit. They were known as Ahuka and Srahuka. They were 
the most excellent of all who earned renown. 

49-54. In this context they cite the following verses about 
Ahuka. * The exalted Ahuka resembles a youth, is endowed with 
eighty coats of mail, goes ahead with attendants in white livery. 
The following shall not go in front of him—He who has no son, 
he who has not given one hundred gifts, who is not destined to 
live for a thousand years, who is not of pure activities and who 
does not perform sacrifices. To the East ten thousand elephants 
marched along with ten thousand chariots rumbling like clouds. 
Their banners scraped the 1^ of the moon (i.e. they flowed and 
fluttered at a great height). They were fitted with protective 
fenders. Twentyone thousand huge boxes filled with silver and 
gold accompanied them. To the northern quarter as many thou¬ 
sands of these had parched. The Bhojas were the protectors of 
entire Earth. Their hands are scared with the tinkling bells and 
bowstrings.*^ 

They say this also—The Andhakas gave their sisters in mar¬ 
riage to Avantis. 

55. Two sons were born of Kasya and Ahuka—^Devaka and 
Ugrasena. Both of them were on a par with divine children. 

56. Four sons ccmiparable to Devas were born to Devaka— 
Devavin, Upadeva, Sudeva and Devarak$ita. 

57-61. He had seven daughters who were married to Vasu* 
deva—DevakI, Santidevi, Sudeva, Devarakfiti, Vrkadevi, Upa> 
devi and Sun&mnl. 

Ugrasena had nine sons. Kaxiisa was the eldest. Others were 
Nyagrodha, Suniman, Kaoka, Subhuia^a, Raftr^ala, Sutanu, 
Anavriti and Puytimin. 



14J-10 


93 


Five occellent ladies were their sisten—Kamsa, KamsavaU, 
Sutanu, Ra^trapall and KaiUca. 

Ugrasena of the family of Kukura has been described along 
with children. 

A man who retains in memory the race of the Kukuras of 
unmeasured prowess shall attain an extensive family for himself 
after being blessed with children. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 
How the Symaniaka Jewel was brought back ? 

Lomaharfow said : 

1. Viduratha^ a prominent chariot •warrior was the son of 
Bhajamana. The heroic Rajadhideva was the son of Viduratha. 

2^3. The following valiant sons were born to Raj&dhideva 
viz.—Datta» Atidatta, Sonafva, Svetavahana, Sami» Dand^^r* 
man, Dantaiatru and Satrujit. Sravana and Sravistha were their 
sisters. 

4. Pratichatra was the son of Sami. Svayambhoja was the 
son of Pratichatra. Hrdika was hom to Svayambhoja. 

5-6. All his sons possessed great valour. Krtavarma was the 
eldest amoi^ them. Satadhanva was the middle one. The other 
sons were Devwta, Naranta, Vaitarana, who was a physician, 
Sudanta, Atidanta, Nikaiya and Kamadambhaka. 

7-8. The wise Kambalabarhi^a was the son of Devanta. He 
had two sons Asamaujas and Nasamaujas. No son was bom to 
Asamaujas. His brother gave his soi\s Stidam;tra, Suciru and 
to Asamaujas. 

Thus Andhakas have been described* 

9. Gandh&rl and Madri were the wives of Kroitr* Gan* 
dhiii gave birth to Anamitra o( great might. 

10. Madri gave birth to Yudhijit (known as) Dcvamldl^ufa. 
She gave bink to Anamitra who conquered the enemies and who 
was never ddeated in battlefield. 



Brahma Pwi$a 



11. Nighna was Anamitra’s son. Two sons were bom to 
Nighna: Prasena and Satrijit. Both of them conquered the ar« 
mies of enemies. 

12. Prasena was a resident of Dvaravad. He came to acquire 
a great Jewel, named Sywiantaka^ from sun. 

13-23. The sun was his close friend, a friend no less than his 
own vital breath. Once, as the night was about to pass off, the 
king, the most excellent one among the chariot-warriors, went to 
the banks of the river in his chariot in cmler to bathe and worship 
the deity. Even as he was praying to Sun-god the deity appeared 
in hb presence. The lord revealed hb physical form with the 
halo of brilliant refulgence. The king addressed the sun-god 
standing before him thus—lord of Luminaries I see you stand¬ 
ing in front of me with your brilliant disc in the same manner 
as I see you in the firmament. What special significance has been 
accorded to me as a result c^your being my associate 

On hearing thb, the lord took oflT the excellent jewel Syaman- 
taka and kept it aside. Then the king saw him in hb (bare) 
physical form. On seeing him he became pleased and chatted 
with him for a short while. Then Satr&jit spoke to him as he rose 
up to go—l<»d, you illuminate the worlds continuously. 
Hence, it behoves you to give me thb excellent jewel.’* 

Then the Sun gave him the Syamantaka jewel. The king tied 
it round his neck and entered the city. The people rushed at him 
shouting ‘^Here goes the sun”. The king made hb city and the 
harem wcmder-struck. He gave that excellent Jewel to his bro¬ 
ther Prasenajit lovii^ly. 

24. The Jewel exuded molten gold in the abode of 

and Andhakas. The clouds showered rains at the proper seas<Mi. 
There was no fear from sickness. 

25. Lord desired to get the excellent jewel from him. 

28. The Vrfpb and Andhakas had comt to know that Kfwa 
had requested for the jewel. Hence they suspected him to be the 
cause of Prasena's death. 

29. Being susoecced thus the righteous Kff^a who had not 

1. 4)>H4«4siU. The details of thb fabulous gem are found in thb and the 
IbOowing chapter. It b not pomble to identify thb gem with the Kobinoor that 
adorns the British crown. 



u.so^s 


95 


perpetrated that felony took the vow will fetch that jewel*’ 
and went to the forest. 

30-33. He wandered all over the places where Prasena had 
been hunting. He got the footsteps of Prasena traced through 
trust-worthy persons. 

Searching through the excellent mountains ^k^van and 
Vindhya he became tired. Then the lofty-minded saw 

Prasena lying slain along with his horse but did not get that jewel. 
Then, not far off from the dead body of Prasena the lion was seen 
killed. A bear was indicated (as the culprit) by the footsteps. 
Following those footsteps lord Kr|na went to the abode of the 
bear. 


34-35. In the cave he heard the words uttered by a woman. 
O brahmins, they had been uttered by the uurse who was holding 
the boy, the son of Jimbavin and who was playing with the jewel. 
The words *‘Do not cry’* had been uttered by her. 


Tht JfuTSi said'. 

36. *The lion killed Prasena. The lion was killed by J&m- 
bavin. O gentle boy, do not cry. This Syamantaka is yours”. 

37-38. Since the words were clear he hastened to the cave. 
He placed Yadus along with his brother Balar&ma at the entrance 
to the cave. He himself entered the cave quickly. He saw 
Jambavan staying inside the cave. 

39. Then he fought a hand-to-hand fight with Jambav&n 
within the cave for twentyone days. 

40. After Krfna had entered the cave (and did not come out 
for long) Balarkma and others returned to Dv&ravatl and an¬ 
nounced that Kffna was slain. 

41. Kry^a defeated Jambavan of great might and obtained 
Jambavatl the daughter of the king of bears, acclaimed (by all). 

42. He took the Syamantaka jewel in order to clear himself 
(of false accusation). After consoling the king of bears he came 
out of the cave. 

43-45. With humble attendants going ahead of him, Kryna 
returned to Dvaraki. Bringing the jewel and clearing himself 
of the false charge he gave it to Satrijit in the open assembly of 
S&tvatas. ThtM the slayer of foes who 1:^ been falsely 

accused, rede em ed the Syamantaka and cleared himself. 



96 


Brahma PurO^ 


Satrijit had ten wives and hundred sons in them. 

46. Three of them were well renowned. BhaAgak&ra was- 
the eldest. Others were the heroic Vatainati and Vasumedha. 
O excellent brahmins, his three daughters too were famous in the 
quarters. 

47-50. SatyabhamA was the most excellent among them. 
Others were Vratini of steady holy rites and Prasvapini. He gave 
(Satyabhama) to Kr^na. The sons of fihahgakara were Sabhak^a 
and Naveya, the most excellent men. They were endowed with 
good qualities, well renowned and richly endued with handsome 
features. Yudh&jit was born as the son of Midn and Vr^^i (?). 
Svaphalka and l&Igraka were born as the sons of Vr^ni. Svaphalka 
married the daughter of the king of Khii. 

51. She was G&ndin! by name. Her father gave him many 
cows. The mighty son well known as Sruiavan was born of her. 

52-59. Then the highly blessed Akrura who distributed 
wealth ingif^ was born. (The other sons were)—Upamadgu, 
Madgu, Mudara, Arimardana, Arik^pa, Upek^a, Arimejaya 
the slayer of foes, Dharnubhrt, Dharma,Grdhrabhoja, Andhaka, 
Avaha and Prativaha. There was a iair-complexioned daughter 
Sundari. She was the crowned queen of Viiruiaiva. His daughter 
was Vasundhara who was endowed with beauty and blooming 
youth. She was the most charming among sdl Satvatas; Akrura 
begot of Ugrasena two sons Vasudeva and Upadeva. They had 
divine refulgence and delighted the race. Citraka*s sons were— 
Ffthu, Viprthu, A^vagriva, Aivab^u, Supar^vaka, Gave^aua, 
Ari^puiemi, Dharma, Dharmabhirt, Subahu and Babubahu. 
He had two daughters Sravi?^ and Sravapa. 

False accusations never befall him, nay they never touch him 
who understands false accusation of Kr^na that has been cited 
here. 



\5.U19 


97 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 
AkrSra Obtains Syamantaka 

Lomaharsai^ said : 

1. Babhru Akrura got the excellent jewel Syamantaka which 
Kryna had handed over to Satrajit, stolen through Satadhanvan 
of the Bhoja family. 

2. Akrura had sought Satyabhama^ the uncensured lady. 
He was waiting for an opportunity to seize Syamantaka jewel. 

3. The mighty Satadhanva killed Satrajit at night, took 
away the jewel and banded it over to Akrura. 

4«5. O brahmins, Akrura took the excellent jewel and con¬ 
tracted alliance with Satadhanvan—should not be exposed 
by you. If you are attacked by we will come to your sup¬ 
port. Undoubtedly the whole of Dvaraka abides by me today.*' 
6-7. When her father was killed, Satyabhami became extre¬ 
mely dejected. She rode in her chariot to the city of Varap&vata 
and informed her husband (Kr;^) of what had been committ¬ 
ed by Satadhanvan of the Bhoja family. After intimating every¬ 
thing to her husband, the aggrieved lady shed profuse tears. 

8. After performing the obsequies and offering libations of 
water to the P&ndavas who were (supposed to have been)burned, 
Hari engaged S&tyaki for the condolence rites for the Pandavas. 

9. SrikiTfu then, hastened to Dvaraka and spoke to Bala- 
rama, his elder brother. 

Srikrpfa said : 

10-11. Prasena was killed by the lion, Satrajit by Satadhan- 
van. Syamantaka must come to me. O lord, I am its owner. 
Hence, O mighty one, get into the chariot quickly. After killing 
the mighty Bhoja we shall take possession of Syamantaka. 

Lmahar^ai^ said: 

12*19. Then a tremendous battle took place between Bhoja 
and Krfpa. Satadhanvan searched for Akrura ail round. 

On seeing Bhoja and SiikrKia engaged in a duel, Akrura, 
though capable did not show sympathy on account of a curse (?). 
The frighten^ Bhoja resolved to run away on Hrdayk (his 



Brahma Purina 


9B 

marc) who raced a hundred azul odd Yojanas. She was known 
to be capable of running a hundred Yojanas at a stretch, O brah¬ 
mins, it was the mare he rode when he fought with Sri 
After he had covered a hundred Yojanas he found Hrdaya ex¬ 
hausted. She was killed. The vital airs went up due to fatigue 
and misery. KffM said Co Rama. 

Srikff^a said: 

mighty one, stay here. I have detected some defects in the 
horse. I shall go on foot and seize the excellent jewel Syaman- 
taka.’’ O Brahmins, Srlkrft^a who was fully conversant with the 
excellent missiles went on foot and at the outskirts of Mithila 
he killed Satadhanvan. 

20-21 • But he did not find the Syamantaka jewel on his 
person. R&ma said to him when he returned after killing the 
mighty Bhoja ^^Give me the jewel.” Kt^na said—”It is not with 
me.” Then R&ma became fimous, rebuked him vigorously 
uttering ”Fie on you, fie on you” and spoke thus. 

Balardma said: 

22. ”1 excuse you because you happen to be my brother. 
Goodbye I am going to leave you for ever. I have nothing to do 
with you» nor with Dvirakl, nor with the Vr^Qis”. 

23. Then Rama, the suppressor of foes, entered Mithila 
where he was honoured by the king with coveted gifts. 

24. In the meantime Babhru Aknira the most excellent 
one among the intelligent persons performed many sacrifices 
unrestrictedly. 

25. For obtaining Syamantaka, the excessively famous son 
of G&ndin donned the coat of mail in the form of initiation as a 
protective means. 

26. For sixty years the virtuous soul displayed jewels and 
other preciotis stones in the sacrifice alone. 

27. The sacrifices of that noble soul are known as Akrura- 
Dainty food and monetary gifts were distributed in all 

of them. Whatever was sought by a persM was given to him. 

28. It was then that lord Diuyodhana %rent to MithilA and 
received Craining fromBalarama in the exercise of divine missiles. 

29. Later on, R&ma was appeased by Vnvi leaders and 



15.3(M0 


99 


Andhakas as well as by the ooble Kn^ who brought him back 
to Dvaraka. 

30*34. After getting Satrajit killed while he was asleep 
along with his kinsmen^ Aknira of great might, the leader of 
men, had also left Dv^aka. He too was persuaded to return 
aloi^ with the Andhakas. Kffu condoned his guilt because he 
was afraid of creating split amongst his own people* 

After the departure of Akrura there had been no shower in 
that realm. Due to drought the land had become lean. Then 
the Kukuras and Andhakas appeased and propitiated Akrura. 
When that lord of charitable gifts re-entered Dvaravat! the thou¬ 
sand-eyed lord (Indra) rained profusely over the Kak|a region, 

O excellent sages, as a token of affection the intelligent Akrura 
gave to Srikr^ his sister of ^proved conduct in marriage, 

35* Then, by his Yogic power understood that the 

Jewel was with Babhni Akrura* In the open assembly Srikrfpa 
said to AkrOra. 

Srikfp^a said: 

36-37. O lord worthy of honour, hand back that excellent 
jewel which is in your possession. Do not commit anything igno¬ 
ble. O sinless one, the fiiry that has been surging within me for 
the last sixty years has grown terribly. Much time has elapsed. 
It brooks no further delay* 

38-40. Then, at the instance of Babhru handed over 

the jewel without a strain in the assembly of S^tvatas* 

^be suppressor of foes, was delighted in his mind when 
jewel was secured by straightforward means from Babhru« 
But he returned it to Babhru. 

Tying the excellent jewel Syamaataka round his neck after 
it had been handed over to him by Kr^ria the son of Gindini 
ahone on earth as the sun shines in the sky. 



100 


Brahma 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 
Sivrn ContimniP 


Thi sages said\ 

1 -9. A wonderiuUy great narrative has been related by you. 
The stories of Bharata kings, of Devas, D&navas, Gandharvas, 
Nagas, Rakfasas, Daity^, Siddhas, and Guhyakas have been 
narrated; their wonderful exploits, activities and holy rites have 
been recounted. Different divine stories and excellent nativities 
have been mentioned. O highly intelligent one, the creation of 
Brahma, Praj&patis, Guhyakas and celestial nymphs has also 
been narrated by you. How the mobile and immobile beings were 
born, how the manifold universe originated has been told by you, 
O highly blessed one. This beautiiUl narration has been heard 
by us. The ancient tradition that yields meritorious benefits has 
been mentioned in sweet and smooth flowing wt^ds. It delights 
our mind as well as our ear. It is on a par with nectar. Now 
we wish to hear about the entire zone of the earth. O omniscient 
one, it behoves you speak it out. We are very eager to hear. How 
many are the oceans, continents sub*continents, mountains, 
forests, sacred rivers and holy spots of Devas etc. O highly inteU 
ligent one, what is the magnitude of each, what is their support? 
Of what nature are they? It behoves you to narrate the stance of 
this universe precisely. 


1. Seven Contittents : (1) JambC (2) Sska, (3) Ku^si, (4) PUk|a} (5) 
Pufkarft, (6) Ssimali (7) KrauAca. A short description of these continents is. 
AS foUows: (1} jAmba^lt is the crntral one of the seven conti&ents surrounding 
the mountam Meru, so called either from the JsmbC trees abounding in it or 
from an enormous Jamba tree on Mount Mem visibie lik e a standard to the 
whole continent. See S. M. Ali, Op. etC, chapters V-Vll m 

(2) S&ka can be identified with Malaya, Siam, Indc^China and Southern 
China or the South-Eastern comer of the land mass of which Jambfidvlpa 
ocev^ied the ceutre. 

(3) KuU included Iran, Iraq, the soutb-wotem comer of the land 
round Mem. 


(4) PUksa identified vnth the basin Mediterranian since PUk|a at 
Pikhara tree is the characteristic of warm temperate or Mediterranian lands 
identifiable with Greece and adjoining lands. 

(5) Fuskare covered the whole of Japan, Manchuria and the south-eastern 


Siberia. 



16.10-24 


101 


Lmokoffa^ $aii\ 


10. O sageS} please hear as I succinctly relate it to you. A 
full detailed description of it is impossible even in the course of a 
hundred years. 

11-12. O brahminS) there are seven continents viz—JambO, 
Flak fa, Salmala, Kuia, Kraufica, 6aka and Pufkara. These 
are encircled by seven oceans, the briny ocean, sea of the sugar- 
oane juice, wine, ghee, curds, milk and sweet water. 

13. The Jambudxipa is situated in the middle. In its centre, 
O leading brahmins, is the Meru the mountain of gold. 

14-1S. Its over-all height is cigbtyfour thousand Yojanas. 
Sixteen thousand Yojanas of it constitute the portion beneath 
the ground. The peak portiem extends to thirtytwo thousand 
Yojanas. At its root the extent all-round is sixteen thousand 
Yojanas. This mountain stands as the pericarp of the lotus of 
the earth. 

16. The Himavan, Hemakufa and Nifadha are the Varfa 
mountains to its South. The l^la, Sveta and Srhgin are the Varfa 
mountains in the north. 


17. The two in the middle extend to a hundred thousand 
(Yojanas) and others are ten (thousand Yojanas) less. They are 
two thousand Yojanas in height and girth. 


18-24. Bh^ata is the first sub continent, then is the Kim- 
puru^ Varfa O brahmins, these and another varfa viz. Hari- 


(6) Sdhnal^^the tropical part oi Africa borderifig the Indian Ocean on 
the West. It induded Madagasgar—the Zenj of the Arab and Persian ge^ 
graphers, the Hariaa of the Puri^ai and the Saihkhadvtpa of some other 
^vriters. 

(7) Kraufica is represented by the basin of the Black Sea. 

(B) UpcitApoi (sulxontmeats): (1) BbSrata (2) Kimpurufa (3) Hari- 
varfa (4) Ramyaka (5) Hiraomaya (6)Uttarakuni(7) lUvjtA (8)Bhadrgiv4 
and (9) KetumiUa. According to PX. (p. S42) there are dgbt long mountain 
ranges which divide the Jambu into 9 countries which look like nine 
petals of die lotus gower.Hie t%iro countries of the north and south eztremitiei 
(Bhadra and KetuttAla) are bow«sb^ed. Four of the renuuning seven are 
longer chan the rest. The central country is known ai Uivrta. 



Brahmi PurS^tt 


102 

var^ are to the South of Meru. Ramyaka is a northern sub¬ 
continent. Next to it, is Hiranmaya. The northern Kurus are 
like Bhirata. O excellent brahmins, each of these extends to 
nine thousand Yojanas. There is the Ilivyta Varfa. In its centre 
stands the lofty golden Mem. O highly blessed ones, the Iliivrta 
Varya extends to nine thousand Yojanas in all directions from 
Mem. There are four mountains here which stand as the exten¬ 
sive supporting pillars of Mem. They extend to ten thousand 
Yojanas. The mountain Mandara lies in the east, Gandhamk- 
dana is to the south. Vipula is to the west and the Supar^va is to 
the north. There stand the following trees—Kadamba, Jambu 
Fippala and Vafa as the flag staff of mountains. They extend to- 
eleven hundred Yojanas. O excellent brahmins, the Jambu 
tree gives the name Jambfrdvfpa to this continent. 

25. Each of the fmits of this Jambu tree is of the size of a 
huge elephant. Thesefruits fall all over the t(^ of the mountain 
and get shattered and scattered. 

26. By the juice of these, the famous Jambu river flows and 
it is being dmnk by the pet^le staying there. 

27. The people there are hale and hearty and sound in 
mind because they drink it. They never even perspire. No bad. 
odour comes out of their bodies. They do not experience old age 
or debility of sense-organs. 

28. The clay on the banks gets soaked in the juice. When 
it gets dry by the gentle wind that blows there it becomes gold. 
It is called Jambunada. The mnaments for Siddhas are made 
thereto. 

29. The Bhadra^va subcontinent is to the east of Mem> 
Ketum&la is to the west. O excellent sages, between these two 
Varyas lies the Ilavrta Varya. 

30. The park of Caitraratba is in the east; the Gandha- 
TWflflana is in the south; the Vaibhraja is in the west and the 
Nandana is in the north. 

31. There are four lakes frequented and enjoyed by Devas— 
the Aruvoda, Mahabhadra, Asitoda and Mkoasa. 

32. The Kesara mountains to the east of Mem are— 
SftntavfUi, Cakrakumbha, Ktiraii, M&lyavin, Vaikaflka and 
othen. 



16.33*51 


103 


33« Triku^a^ &iira, Pataoga, Rucaka, Nifadha and othtn 
are the Kesara nunintains to the south of Mem. 

34. Sikhivasa, Vaidurya, K^ila, Ga&dhamadana» Jwudhi 
etc. are the Kesara mountains to the west. 

35«39. They are very proximate to the Mem and are station* 
ed in its belly. Sahkhakuta, ^fabha, Hamsa^ Naga, Kalaiijara 
etc. are the Kesara mountains to the north. 

O leading brahmins, at a height of fourteen thousand Yojanas 
on the Meru b the great city of Brahma. All round it in the eight 
quarters are the excellent and iamous cities of Indra and other 
guardians of the quarten. 

Originating from the foot of Vi^u and flooding the dbc of 
the moon GaAga falls down from Heaven to the city Brahmi 
and flows all round. Having fallen there it flows into four streams 
in the four directions. 

40-46. They arc Siti, Alakanandi, Cakfu and Bhadri in 
order. 

The Sita flows along the firmament to the East from mountain 
to mountain. Then through Bhadr&iva, the Var^a in the east) 
it flows into the ocean* 

Similarly, O excellent brahmins the Alakanandk flows to the 
south, approaches Bharata and splitting itself into seven streams 
it flows into the ocean. 

The Cak^u crosses the western mountains and reaches Ketu- 
mala the western Var^ and then flows into the sea. 

O excellent brahmins, the Bhadra crosses the northern moun¬ 
tains and the northern Kurus and then flows into the northern 
ocean. 


The mountains Malyavan and Gandhamadana extend upto 
NUa and Ni;adha mountains. The Mem b in the centre of these 
two. It b stationed in the form of pericarp. 

The Bharatas, Ketuzxialas, Bhadraivas and Kurus are the 
petab of Loka mountain outside the mountains of boundary. 


The JaUtara and Devakupt are the two mountains of 
boundary. They extend from south to north between NUa and 
Niyadha motmtains. 


47*51. The Gandhamfciana and the Kailksa extend Stem 
west to cas^ to ei^ty thousand Yojanas. Utey are stationed in 
the ocean. Nifadha and Pkriyitra—the two mountains of bmm^ 



Brahma Purbja 


104 

dary-«-exteiid from south to north between P^la and Ni?adha» 
They are stationed to the east and west of Mem. 

The Trijrhga and the Jamdhi are the northern Var^ moun¬ 
tains. They extend from east to w«t and are stationed within 
the ocean; they extend from one ocean to another. 

Thus, O brahmins, the boundary mountains have been men¬ 
tioned by me. They are stationed in pairs within the belly of Mem 
in all the four quarters. 

52-53. Around the Mem the Kesara mountains are situated. 
They have already been mentioned alongwith Sitanta and others. 
O brahmins, the water troughs amongst those mountains are very 
charming. TThey are frequented by Siddhas and Caranas. The 
forests and the cities in them are very beautiful. 

54. There are excellent shrines of Lak^mi, Vi^pu, Agni, 
Surya and Indra in them, O excellent sages. They are frequented 
by men and Kinnaras. 

55. Gandharvas, Yakfas, R&k^asas, Daityas and Danavas 
sport about in those charming water troughs day and night. 

56. O brahmins, these places are heavens on earth. They 
are abodes of the righteous. Those who commit sins never go 
there even after hundreds of births. 

57. O brahmins, in the Bhadrafva sub-continent lord Vi^pu 
stays as Hayaiiras with the head of a horse; in the Ketumala he 
stays in the form of a boar and in the Bharata he assumes the form 
of a tortoise. 

58* Eternal Govinda stays in the Kurus in the form of a fish. 
Hari, the lord of all, stays everywhere in his Viivarupa (Universal 
form). 

59-62. O brahmins, he is the support of all and identical 
with all. 

O excellent brahmins, in the eight Vardas, Kimpum^a etc. 
there is neither misery, nor fatigue, neither strain nor fear of 
hunger. 

The subjects are healthy and sound, free from agony and 
devoid of distress. They live upto ten or twelve thousand years. 
No earthly worries titch as hun^ or thirst assail them, O brah- 
miu. 1 a these sports there is no such division of time: Krta, 
TreU» Dvipara and Kali. 



117.1-8 


105 


In each of these Vardas there are seven mountains called 
Kulacalas.' O excellent sages, hundreds of rivers flow there. 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 
Jambttdvipa 


Xomakarfana said: 

1. To the north of ocean and to the South of Himalayas is 
the sub«contineiit Bhirata. The subjects arc called Bhiratis. 

2. O leading sages, its extent is nine thousand YojanaSs 
This is the land of holy rites to those who opt for heavenly plea- 
'Sure and absolution. 

3. The seven Kulaparvatas arc Mahcndra, Malaya, 

Sahya, Suktimin, Vindhya and Pariyitra 

4. It is from here, O brahmins, that the heaven is attained; 
one attains absolution too from here, men attain the state of diffe¬ 
rent species of animals or fall in hell from here alone. 

5. It is from here alone that men go to heaven or realize 
absolution at the end of their series of birth. Nowhere else on the 


earth are holy rites prescribed for men. 

6-8. Listen to the nine divisions of this sub-continent.* 
The arc Indradvipa, Kaseruman, Tamraparna, Gabhastimin, 


Nagadvipa, Saumya, Gandharva and Vanina. 


1. is a chief mounuin range. Kul^arvaUi 
arc seven in number. Any one aS these is supposed to c«it in each Vvya or 
'division of a continent. The principal sev^ ranges of Bb&rata Varfa include 

(1) Mabendra (2) Malaya (8) Sahya (4) Suktimat (5) ^Lkn (6) Vindbya 
and (7) Piriyitra. (See 17.9} 

2. Bh&raU itself is a group of nine islands each separated frtxn the 
^thcr by i>fra nt and not mpi dr easily acceoable between each othes*. They are 

(]} Indradvipa (2) Kalerumin (9) Timrapartut (4) Gabbasti (5) Saumya 
(6} G&ndharva (7) Viruea (8) Niga (9) Bhirata. In some of the PurApas. 
Sam/d it replaced by SMtU; in others SMsU is substituted far Gandharva. 
$. M. Ali identifies the nine islands u fallows: 


(1) i<tMd^e-~tbe Trans-Brahmaputra region. 

(2) KaUrmti ^e coastal plain betwM 
Mahftnadl. 


the deltas of Codivarl and 



Brahma PurfU^ 


106 

BharaU, the ninth among them, is an island encircled by the 
ocean. This island extends from South to Nm^th a thousand 
Yojanas. 

Kiratas stay in the East, Yavanas stay in the West. 

9. Brahmins, K^triyas and Vaiiyas stay in the centre. 
Sudras stay everywhere. These people have their means of sub¬ 
sistence in sacriBce, battle, trade and service. 

10. O sage, the Satadru, Candrabhaga and other rivers 
have their source at the foot of the HimaviUi. The Vedasmrti 
and other rivers originate from the Pariyatra. 

11-14. The Narmada, Surasa and other rivers flow from the 
Vindhya. The Tipi, PayofnI, Nirvindhyi, Kivcri and other 
rivers flow frem the foot of the mountain and as it is well 
known they dispel sin. 

The Godivari, BhImarathI, KnnavenI and other rivers origi* 
nate from the foot of Sahya. As it is said they dispel the fear of 
sins. The Krtamili, TitnraparnI and other rivers start from 
Malaya. The Trisandhyi, R$ikulyi and other rivers have their 
source in Mahendra. The Rfikulyi, Kumira and other rivers 
flow from the foot of 6uktimin. 

15-19. There are thousands of tributaries and branches of 
these rivers. The people of this land bathe in and drink their 
waters. They are the Kurus, Paflcilas, the people of middle land, 
eastern lands, residents of Kamarupa; people of southern terri¬ 
tories such as Paundras, Kalihgas and others. The Parintyas 
westerners) Saur&^fras, Sudras, Abhiras, Arbudas, Murukas, 
Malavas, residents of Pariy&tra, Sauviras, Saindhav&pannas, 
Salvas, residents of Sakala territory, Madraramas, Amba^^has, 
Pkrasikas and others. They drink waters of these riven and stay 
on their banks. They are lughly blessed, hale and hearty. 

(3) Timatama or Timrtpsrca (aaociated with the river 
the lector of the Indian peninsula south of Kiverl river. 

(4) CMastimM the billy belt between Nannad& and Godivari riven. 

(5) cdocuei and kinedoms extended all over the mountainotii. 
belt between Narmada ranfes upto Chhota Naapur. 

(6) fatfla ■ ‘Kathiawad refion. 

(7) iSirhhala Tiryinn^ not meatiooed In this Purina. 

(8) Viruna^the westen coast of India. The AraUan Sea has loo^ been 
known as the abode of Varuna. 

(9) Bhirata is the ninth divinco. 

According to Cunningham Greater India was divided into nine Khaodsst- 



17.20*29 


107 


20. O great sage, the four Yugas, viz. Krta,Treti, Dvapara 
and Kali are reckoned only in BKarata and nowhere else. 

21. The ascetics perform penance here; the Yajvins perform 
sacrifices; people give charitable gifts with devotion to obtain 
heaven. 

22. Here, in the Jambud>dpa the Supreme Being is wor* 
shipped through sacrifices. It is Vi^u who is identified with 
sacrifice that u worshipped. In other D>dpas he is worshipped 
otherwise. 

23. O great sage, in the Jambudvipa, it is the subcontinent 
Bhirata which is most excellent since it is tbe land of holy rites 
and activities. Others are the regiems of enjoyment. 

24. Here, O excellent one, after thousands and thousands 
of birth alone does a creature attain human birth sometimes 
through the accumulation of merits. 

25-29. It is said that Devas sing (its praise thus):—*'Blessed 
are they who are bom (again and again) as men in Bhirata 
which is the source of heavenly pleasures as well as liberation. 

Holy rites should be performed in utter disregard of their 
benefits. They must be dedicated to identical with the 

Atman. Those who are pure attain birth in the land of holy rites 
(i.e. Bharata) and get merged into that infinite Being (after 
death)’. We do know that when the merit that had originally 
yielded heavenly pleasures subsides, those who are blessed will be 
re-bom in the land of Bhirata and not those who are devoid of 
Intelligence. 

O brahmins, this Jambudvipa, which consists of nine sub¬ 
continents and which extends to a hundred thousand Yojanas 
has been mentioned by me. 

O brahmins, the briny sea that extends to a hundred thousand 
Yojanas and that is like a bangle in shape encircles the Jambu¬ 
dvipa externally. 



i08 


Brahma Purd^a 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 
Thi Magnitudi of Oceans and Continents 
Lamakarfo^a said: 

1. Just as the Jambudvipa U encircled by the briny sea so 
also the briny sea ii encircled by the Plak^a d^dpa« 

2. The extent of Jambudvipa is one hundred thousand 
Yojanas. O brahmins^ twice that is cited as the extent of Plak^a* 
*d^npa. 

3-4. Medhitithi, the overlord of the Plak^advipa, had seven 
sons. The eldest was Santabhaya by name, ^iiira was the next 
one. Others were Sukhodaya, Ananda, Siva, K$einaka and 
Dhruva. All of them were kings in Plakya Dvipa. 

5. The sub-cmtinents are Sintabhaya, Siiira, Sukhada, 
Ananda, Siva, Kfemaka and Dhruva. 

6. There are Varfaparvatas, the mountains demarcating 
the boundary. They are only seven, O excellent sages. Listen 
to their names. 

7. They are Gomeda, Candra, Narada, Dundubhi, Somaka, 
•Sumanas and Vaibhraja. 

8. O sinless ones, accompanied by Devas and Gandharvas 
the subjects live in the charming Var^ mountains and lands. 

9. The countries and territories therein are holy. People are 
bom afler long periods (of gestation). Neither mental agony nor 
4ulment8 afflict them. Tliey feel happy throughout the year. 

10. There are seven rivers in these Vardas which flow into 
the oceans. I shall name them. Their mention dispels sins alto¬ 
gether. 

11. They are Anutapti, $ikhl, Vipaia, Tridivi, Kramu, 
Amrta and Suk|ta. These are seven rivers there. 

12. O brahmins, the mountains and rivers mentioned here 
^tfe the main ones. Small rivers and mountains are in thousands 
there. 

13. The people of the region drink waters thereof and 
feel delighted. Every river, O brahmins, flows downwards and 
no river flows up. 

14. O excellent brahmins, the different Yogas are not 
xeckoned in these seven climes. The time is perpetually like 
^t of the Treti-yuga. 



16.15-32 


109* 


15. O Brahmins, in all these continents beginning with 
Plakfa and ending with Saka the people live for five thousand 
years without any ailment. 

16-17. Dhanna is four types among them in accordance 
with the divisions of Varies (castes) and Airamas (stages of life). 
The Vari^ are four. 

O learned men, I shall mentim them to you, O excellent 
sages, they are Aryakas, Kurus, Vivasvats and Bhivins. They 
are brahmins, Kfatiiyas, Vaiiyas and Sudras. 

18. In the centre, there is a big tree of the size of Jambu 
tree. It is the Plaksa tree frcm which O excellent brahmins, the 
continent derives its name. 

19. Hari identical with all, lord of all, creator of the universe 
is worshipped in the form of Stxna (Moon) by those Vajrtias, 
Aryakas and others. 

20. The Plakfa is encircled by the ocean of Sugarcane juice. 
It is of the same size as the cmtinent Plak^a and it emulates a 
halo around it. 

21. Thus, O excellent sages, the Plak^a continent has been 
recounted to you briefly. Now I shall tell you the history of 
SalInaiad^dpa. 

22-23. O brahmins, the overlord of Salmaladvipa is the 
heroic Vapufmloi. O excellent brahmins, his sons are Sveta, 
Harita, Jimuta, Rohita (Harita ?) Vaidyuta, Manasa and 
Suprabha. There are seven Vardas named after them. 

24. The ocean of Sugarcane juice is encircled by Saixnala- 
dvipa twice its size in extent. 

25. It should be known that there are seven mountains there, 
the source of jewels. They signify the different Varfas. There 
are seven main rivers too. 

26-27, The moxmtains are: Kumuda, Unnata, Balahaka, 
Droi^a that abounds in great medicinal kerbs, Kaiika the fifth 
mountain, Mahi^ the sixth and Kakudman the seventh. Now, 
O brahmins I shall mention names of the rivers. 

28. They tfe 6 ro 9 i, Toyi, Vitr^Oi, Cakri, 6 ukr&, Vimo- 
canl and Nivitti. Merely on being remembered they quell sins 
immediately. ^ 

29-32. The seven Varyas are Sveta, Lohita, Jimuta, Harita,. 



110 


Brahma Purina 


Vaidyuta^ M&nasa and Suprabha. These Varyas contain the 
four Vardas. 

O excellent brahmiiu, in the Varyas of Silmala Dvtpa the 
Vandas stay. They are Kapilas (tawny), Arunas (pink), Pitas 
(yellow) and Kryi^s (black). They are brahmins, Kyatriyas, 
Vaiiyas and Sudras. They worship lord Viy^iu, the lord of all, 
the unchanging Atman, in the form ot* wind. They worship by 
performing sacrifices. Ihey %rorship the lord stationed in 
Yojanas. 

S3. In thb charming place there live Devas. Salmali is the 
iree which gives the continent its name. 

34. This is encircled by the ocean of wine which in extent 
is equal to S&lmalad^pa itself. 

35. The ocean of wine is encircled by Kuiadvipa twice the 
size of Salhiala in extent. 

36*38. Jyotiymkn is the overlord of Kuiadvipa and has 
seven sons. They are Udbhida, Venuman, Svairatha, Randhana, 
Dhrti, Prabhakara and Kapila. The Varya moxmtains are named 
after them. Human beings stay there along with the Daityas and 
D&navas. So also stay Devas, Gandharvas, Yakyas, Kin^uruyas 
and others. There also live four Varnas interested in carrying 
out their duties. 

39. O excellent brahmins, they are Damins, Suymins, 
Snehas and Mandehas. They are to be citedin order as brahmins, 
Kyatriyas, Vaiiyas and Sudras here. 

40-42. Since their authwity declines by the performance 
of bedy rites the people in Kufadvfpa wmhip Janirdana as 
Brahman and dispel Ugra, the fierce deity, the bestower of the 
benefit of Adbikara. 

O excellent brahmins, the following are the seven Varya 
mountains in that D>npa:—^Vidruma, Hemaiaila, Dyutitnin, 
Puiyimin, Kuieiaya, Hari and Mandara mountain. 

43-44* The rivers are seven. Listen to their names in order. 
They are EHifitapapi, Sivi, Pavitri, Sammati, Vidyudambhas, 
Malu and unnamed river. AH theae dispel sins of the worship¬ 
per. There are thogwids of other small r i v ers and mountains. 

45. There is a stump of Kuia grass in the Kuia Dvipa simI 
this gives the cemtinent its name. This Dvipa is encirded by an 
ocean ot ghee of an equal size. 



18.4&«4 


111 


46. The ocean of ghee is encircled by Kraufica Dvipa. O 
excellent sages, Krauficadvipa is another great continent. May 
the account of the same be heard attentively. 

47. It extends to twice the aixe of KuiadWpa In Krauftca*- 
•d\dpa, Dyutimin is the over-lord and the noble Dyutimin had 
seven sons. 

48-54. The king named Varfsis after the names of his sons. 
They were—Kuiaga, Mand^a, Ufna» Rvara, Andhakaraka, 
Muni and Dundubhi. O brahmins, these were his seven sons. 

O excellent sages, there are Vardas, mountains very charm¬ 
ing and frequented by Devas and Gandharvas. Now, I shall 
mention their names. They are Krauftca, Vamana, Andhaka- 
raka, Devavrata, Dama, Put^d^iikavana and the great mountain 
Dundubhi. The latter ones are twice in size of the previous ones. 
Just as one I>dpa is twice another Dvipa in size, the mountains 
also are twice in size. In these charming Varjas and on these 
excellent Varfa mountains the subjects live without agony along 
with the groups of Devas. O excellent brahminsi they are known 
as Pujfkalas and Puykaras. They are brahmins, Kyatriyai, Vaiiyas 
and Sudras cited in due order. O excellent sages, listen to the 
names of rivers which they drink from. 

53-61. There are hundreds of local riven but the following 
seven are chief:*^KumudvatI, Sandhyi, Ritri, Manojavi, 
Khyati and Pund^iika. These seven are Var|a rivers. 

The lord Janardana, in the form of Yogirudra is also wor¬ 
shipped there by the Varnas, Pu^kara and others at the holding 
of a sacrifice. 

The KratiAca Dvipa b encircled all round by the ocean of the 
skin of curds of equal magnitude. O excellent sages, the ocean 
of the skim of curds is encircled by Sakadinpa, whose magni¬ 
tude is twice as that of Kraufica d^pa. 

Bhavya the noble lord of S&kadvlpa had seven sons and he 
gave them seven Varias. 

The sons were—Jalada, Kuxnfira, Sukumira, ManXraka, 
Kusumoda, Mooalu and Mahfidruma. The seven Varfas, are 
named after their names in due order. 

62-64. There are seven mountains in that continent whidi 
demarcate the boundary of Varias. The mountains are Udaya- 



112 Brahma 

giri, Jaladhara, Raivataka, Ambbc^iri, Astikeya and 

Kesari the most excellent of all mountains. 

Saka is the great tree here. It is frequented by Siddhas and 
Gandharvas. On coming into contact with the wind blowing 
from its leaves, great delight is experienced. 

65. Many realms arc there consisting of four castes. Noble* 
souls devoid of agemy and calamity stay there. 

66-67. There are highly meritorious rivers here. They dispel 
sins and fears thereof. They are :—Sukumarl, Kumiri, Nalinl^ 
Re^uka, Ik^u, Dhenuka and Gabhastt. O excellent brahmins,, 
there are ten thousands of other small rivers there. 

68-70. There are hundreds and thousands of mountains 
also. Those who are stationed in clouds etc drink joyously the 
water of those rivers. The realms in the Varias are equipped 
with the fourth aim of life (i.e. liberation). The rivers too are 
holy and they descend to Earth from heaven. There is no loss 
of Dharma, no struggle, no sorrow. Nor is there any action 
repugnant to the limits of decency in those seven regions. 

71-74. The four Varnas are Magas, Mftgadhas, M&nasas, 
and Mandagas. The Magas are brahmias; Magadhas are 
K^atriyas; Manasas arc Vaifyas and Mandagas are 6udras. 

Vi^nu, who has assumed the form of the sun is worshipped 
by the residents of Sakad>dpa by performing appropriate holy 
rites in the manner they are laid down. The residents have 
perfect control of their souls and minds. 

O brahmins, Sakadvipa is encircled by the ocean of milk 
of the size of Sakadripa. It is as though encircled by a girdle. 

O brahmins, the ocean of milk is encircled by Pufkarad^dpa. 

75-76. Pu^karadvipa is twice as much as the 6akad\dpa 
in size. 

In Pu^karadripa the over^lord is Savana and his sons are 
Msdi&vlta and Dhktaki. The two Var^ are named after them 
—Mahivlu and Dhatakikha^da • 

77. O highly blessed ones, there is only one Var^ moun¬ 
tain named Minasottara. It is well renowned. It has the shape 
of a girdle. It is in the centre Dvlpa. 

78. It is fifty thousand Yeganas high and extends to many 
Yojanas. It is cylindrical in shape. 

79. This mountain is so stationed that it appears U> divide 



18*e0-94 


113 


the circular D^pa in the middle. Hence^ the two Var^ are 
separated. 

80. Each of the two halves is circular in shape and the 
great mountain is between them. Men there live upto ten 
thousand years. 

81-84. They are devoid of ailments and sorrow* They are 
free from passion and hatred. O brahmins^ there is no distin* 
ction of the base and exceUent» of the killer and the killed 
among them. They do not have malice, jealousy, fear, fury, 
defect or greed and similar base qualities. 

The Mahivlta Var^ adorned by the Dhitaki«khaod* is 
frequented by Devas, Daityas and others on the Minasottara 
mountain. 

In that Dvipa called Puskara there is neither truth nor 
falsehood. There are neither rivers nor mountains. Men have 
similar dresses and features. They are similar in form to Devas. 

85. The continent is devoid of Varpas, Airamas and the 
conduct of life as such. It is devoid of holy rites. There is 
neither the Vedic lore, nor the Science of polity, neither busi¬ 
ness manual nor the code of service. 

86. Consisting of two Varfas, O brahmins, it is called the 
terrestrial heaven. The time passes happily with everyone 
devoid of old ^e and sickness. 

87. Such is the situation O brahmins, in the Pu^kara, 
Dhatakikhanda and Mahavlta. 

In the Pu^aradvlpa the holy fig tree is the excellent abode 
of Brahma. 

88-89. Brahma stays there, worshipped by Devas and 
Asuras. 

Pu^kara is encircled by the ocean of meat^ water equal in 
size and extent to it. 


Thus the seven Dvipas are surrounded by the seven oceans. 

90. The Dvipa and the ocean that surrounds it are equal. 
The latter <mt is twice in size as the carli^ me. 


The water in each of these oceans remains ^ways the same 
in volume. 

91-94. They do not become leu or more in the manner 
that water in a jK>t becomes leu when heated by fire. 

When the moon waxes, the water in the ocean does not 



} 14 Brahma PurS^ 

increase. Waters move up or down in the same volume, neither 
mcM*e not less. 

O excellent sages, during the moonrise and moonset in the 
two halves of the lunar month the waters of the ocean are 
seen moving up or down one thousand five hundred Angulas. 

The diet of the pec^le in the Pu|ksira Dvfpa comes to them 
by itself. 

95-99. O bradunins, there the subjects enjoy foodstuffs of 
all the six tastes always. 

All round the ocean of sweet water a world is seen station¬ 
ed. It is twice the size of the ocean. The ground is golden 
but devoid of all creatures. 

Beyond that is the mountain Lokiloka extending to ten 
thousand Yojanas. That mountain is as many thousand Yojanas 
in height also. 

Beyond that is darkness. It has encircled the mountain all 
round. That darkness is enveloped by the cauldron of the Egg 
(Aod^l^t&ha). 

This universe extends to fif^ crores of Yojanas along with 
the Andakatiba, Dvipas, oceans and mountains. 

O excellent brahmins, this earth is the support of all 
worlds. It is superior to all other creations, it is noble and ex¬ 
cellent. 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 
Thi MagniUuU of Ntiiurwoflds 
Lmahatfotfa said : 

1. O excellent sages, the mttent of the Earth has been 
related. Its he^^ht (above the lowermost of the nether worlds) 
is said to be seventy-thousand Yojanas. 

2-8. O excellent sages, each one of the nether worlds is a 
tlbousaad Yojanas above the lower one. The seven netherworlds 
are—^Atala, Vitala, Nitala, Sutala, Talitala, Rasatala and 
Ffttila. 



39.9-20 


115 


The grounds of these nether worlds are black, white, pink, 
yellow, gravelled, rocky and golden. O leading brahmins, 
^excellent palaces adcMti them. 

In them the communities of D&navas, Dattyas and kins, 
men of N&gas of huge bodies live, O excellent brahmins: 

Narada who entered the heavenly assembly coming straight 
to heaven from the nether regions said that the nether worlds 
were more charming than the heavenly world. 

There are pure jewels of brilliant lustre which delight the 
onlookers. The ornaments of the Nagas, the residents of the 
nether regions shine splendidly in heaven; there is nothing 
that is equal to it. 

Who is not attracted and delighted by the right of nether 
regions which are rendered splendid by the lasses of Daityas 
and Dinavas ? Even a liberated soul is drawn to it. During 
daytime, rays of the sun spread diffused light but not the 
glaring sunlight. 

9*20. During the night the light of the moon is not utilised 
for its coolness but only for illumination. 

Since that passes away is not taken notice of by the Nigas 
who enjoy with gaiety the foodstuffs and the edibles they con¬ 
sume and the great beverages they drink. Nor are Danujas and 
others aware of it. 

O brahmins, the forests, rivers, lakes, and lotus ponds, the 
cooing of the cuckoo and other sweet birds, the pleasing skies, 
the unguents and the continuous notes and sounds of musical 
instruments such as the lute, flute and Mrda^a drums, 
O brahmins—all these and other beautiful things are enjoyed 
by virtue of their good luck by Dinavas, Daityas and N&gas 
residing in Pitila. The TamasI form of Vi^Qu, named Se^a is 
beneath the lower regions. 

Daityas and Dinavas are not capable of recountig his good 
qualities. He is honoured by Devas and celestial sages. He is 
spoken of as Ananta. He has a thousand hoods and he is clearly 
bedecked in Svastika ornaments devoid of impurities. He illu¬ 
minates all quarters by thousand jewels on his hoods. 

Fch* the welfare of the universe he deprives the Afuras of 
their proweiSpJIis eyes whirl and rove due to intoxication. He 
has only one earring at all times. 



116 


Brahma Air^or 


Wearing a crown and garlands he shines like a white moun¬ 
tain aflame with Are. 

He is clad in blue garments. He is intoxicated with pride. 
He is resplendent with white garlands. He is lofty like the 
mountain of Kail&sa where the celestial GaAga falls. He has 
placed his hand on the plough-share; he holds an excellent 
iron club. He is attended upon by the embodied splendour of 
Varu^ia. 

At the end of the Kalpa^ Rudra in the form of Sankarfapa 
comes out of his mouth, blazing like the flame of poisonous 
Are and devours the three worlds. 

He holds the entire sphere of the world rising above like a 
peak» 

21-27. Worshipped by the entire hordes of Devas Se|a is 
stationed at the root of P&tila. His prowess, power, form and. 
features cannot be described or known even by the gods. The 
whole of the Earth is turned into pink by the flames of jewels 
on his hoods. It acts as a floral garland for Seya. Who will be 
able to recount his prowess? When Seya with his eyes rolling and 
roving due to intoxication, yawns and stretches himself, the 
whole of the Earth along with its rivers, forests and mountains, 
quakes and moves. 

The Gandharvas, Apsaras, Siddhai, Kinnaras, Nagas and 
Rkk^asas never reach the end of his good qualities. Hence, he 
is Ananta. He is unchanging. The Naga lasses apply red 
sandal paste on him as unguent. WaRed by the wind of res¬ 
piration it acts as the perfumed powder for the quarters. It was 
by propitiating him that the ancient sage Garga understood 
the luminaries factually and the predictive astrology based on 
omens. 

The Earth is thus held on his head by the noble Naga. He. 
holds universe including Devas, Asuras and human beings. 



20 - 1-17 


CHAPTER TWENTY 
Hells in nsther regions 


117 


•Lomaharfo^ said : 

L Thereafter^ O brahmins^ the helU are situated beneath 
the waters. The sinners are hurled down into them* Now» hear 
•about them attentively, O excellent brahmins. 

2-6. They are Raurava, ^ukara, Rodha, T&na, Viiasana, 
Mahajvala, Taptakumbha, Mahalobha, Vimohana, Rudhtr- 
andha, Vaitarani, KfioUa, Krmibhojana, Asipatravana, Krwa, 
L&labhak^, Puyavaha, Pipa, Vahnijvkla, Adhahiiras, Sad- 
azhia, Krs^utra, Tamas, A^ci» Svabhojana, Apratistha and a 
second A\dci. There are other similar hells extremely terrible 
-which fall under the jurisdiction of Yama. They terrify by 
means of weapons and fires. The persons who are engaged in 
-sinful activities fall into them. 

7. He who commits peijury, he who speaks with partiality 
and he who utters falsehood falls into Raurava hell. 

8. O excellent sages, he who destroys a foetus, he who 
murders his preceptor, he who slays cows and he who aufibcates 
•others—all these fall into terrible Raurava hell. 

9. He who drinks wine, he who slays a brahmin, he who 
steals gold and he who comes into contact with these—all these 
fail into Sukara hell. 

10. He who murders a king, a Vaiiya and a royal soldier, 
he who defiles the bed of his preceptor and he who indulges in 
:sexual intercourse with his sister—all these fall into Taptakumbha 
hell. 

11 • He who sells his chaste wife, he who keeps wine for sale, 
he who sells safiron and he who discards a devoted friend or 
servant—all these fall into Taptaloha hell. 

12-13. He who indulges in sexual intercourse with his 
daughter or daughter-in-law is hurled into Mah&jvila hell. He 
who insults preceptors and elders, he who reviles at them, he 
who slanders the Vedas, he who sells the Vedas and he who 
cohabits with the forbidden women ialls into Sabala hell, O 
brahmins. 

14-17« Aehief Ialls into Vimoha hell, so also the person who 
defiles the line demarcation of boundary. 



118 Brahma Purd 9 a 

He who hates Devas, brahmins and Pitr8> he who spoUa 
jewels—fails into Kfinibhakfa helL 

He who performs an ill-conducted sacrifice falls into Krmiia 
helL 

The base man who takes food prior to PitrSi Devas and guests 
falls into Lalabhakfa hell. The maker of arrows falls into Vedhaka 
hell. 

Those who make arrows with knots, those who make sworda 
and other destructive weapons fall into the terrible hell Viiasana. 

He who receives gifts from indecent men falls into Adho- 
mukha hell. 

18. He who performs a sacrifice on behalf of a person not 
entitled to that privilege, he who foretells by studyii^ stars and 
he who partakes of sweet cooked food all by himself falls into 
Krmipuya hell. 

19. O brahmins, the brahmin who sells lac, gravy, gingelly 
seeds and salt falls into the same hell. 

20. O excellent brahmins he who rears or eats poultry^, 
goats, pigs and birds falls into the same hell. 

21-22. He who subsists on the stage or the trade of fish, 
hcwho partakes of food from the hand of the bastard, he who 
administers poison, he who adopts the profession of a spy or a 
secret informer, he who rears bufialoes, or being a brahmin 
indulges in sexual intercourse on Parvan days, he who com*- 
mits arson, he who hates friends, he who behaves as a deceptive 
and he who performs a sacrifice on behalf of all and sundry in 
the village and he who sells Soma juice falls into hell Rudhir- 
andha. 

23'»24. He who destroys honey, he who commits multi-* 
murder of villagers falls into hell Vaitara^. 

Those who drink semen, those who bre^ boundary lines or 
flout limits of decency, those who do not observe pollution (i.e. 
after birth of an infant or death of kinsman) and those who* 
maintain themselves on deception fall into Krcchra hell* He who 
cuts off a forest in vain falls into hell Asipatravana. 

25. Those who hunt wild goats, sheep, or deer fall into 
hell Vahnijviia. O brahmins, they too who bum things that 
fliould not be burnt, fall into hell. 

26. He who commits omissions in the observance of holy 



20 * 27-38 


119 


rites and he who errs while performing duties of his stage 
(iirama) fall into Sautdaifaia hell and endure its tortures* 

27* Those men and religious students who have vowed to 
celibacy but who discharge semen by day or during dreams» at 
night and those who are taught by their sons fall into Svabho- 
jana hell* 

28. These arc the main hells* there are hundreds, and 
thousands of similar hells where the perpetrators of heinous 
crimes arc cooked by day and night and tortured. 

29. These sins and thousands of similar sins are atoned for 
by men who are brought to suffering to one or other of these hells. 

30. Those who act contrary to the tenets of disciplined life 
of Var^ias and Airamas mentally, physically or verbally, fall 
into these hells. 

31. The gods in heaven are seen by the people of hells 
with their heads directed above. The gods see the residents of 
hells far below, their heads directed below. 

32-33. The following beings attain absolution in that 
order:—the immobile beings, worms, aquatic animals, birds, 
animals, men, righteous persons and Devas. The latter ones of 
these constitute a thousandth part of the former ones among 
them. All these, O highly blessed ones, progress till they achieve 
salvation. 

34. There are as many dwellers in hell as there are crea¬ 
tures in heaven* He who commits sins but is avene to expiate 
for them, falls into hell. 

35. Holy rites of expiation have been mentioned by great 
sages in proportion to sins. They have mentioned them being 
fully aware which particular expiation is capable of quelling the 
particular sin. 

36. O leading brahmins, Manu and other sages have men¬ 
tioned rites of atonement—elaborate ones if the sin is elaborate 
and minor ones if the sin b minor* 

37. The acts of expiatims are in the nature of austerities 
or holy rites. Of all of them the remembrance of Sri KrffA it 
the mostefiective* 

38* After committing a sin if a person repents fi>r it, he 
should remeqjber ^ of expiation for 

him. This is Ae greatest of all holy rites. 



120 


Brahma PurS^ 


39. Remembering Vif^u at dawn, night, diuk or midday 
the man attains Vifpu because his sins are immediately quelled. 

40. By remembering Vif^u his pains and strains perish 
immediately and they attain absolution. Attainment of heaven 
is an obstacle Into him. 

41. O leading brahmins, the benefits such as attaining the 
status of Indra as a result of Japa, Homa, worship etc are 
obstacles to a man whose mind is set on Vuudeva. 

42. Where is the attainment of heaven characterised by a 
return once again to the Earth? Where is the Japa of Vasudeva 
which is the most excellent cause of absolution (where there is 
no return to this earth) ? 

43. Hence, no brahmin, no man, who remembers Vifnu 
day and night, falls into hell. If he has incurred sins they perish 
immediately. 

44. That which delights the mind is heaven. That which is 
contrary in effect is hell. O excellent brahmins, good and evil 
are given the appellations of heaven and hell. 

45. The one and the same object is conducive to misery 
as well as happiness. It produces malice and wrath. Hence 
there can never be an object solely of the nature of sorrow? 

46. The same object generates pleasure at the outset, but 
later on, it yields misery. The same object causes pain, wrath 
but later on gives pleasure. 

47. Hence, there is nothing which is solely of the nature of 
sorrow or solely of the nature of pleasure. It is the changed 
phase of mind that is characterised by happiness or sorrow. 

48. Knowledge alone is the greatest Brahman; knowledge 
alone is effective for removing bondage. The universe is of the 
nature of knowledge. There is nothing greater than knowledge. 

49*50. O brahmins let this be understood that knowledge 
alone is learning and ignorance. 

Thus the sphere ofEarth has been recounted to you by me. 
Similarly, O brahmins, I have recounted the nether regions, 
hells, oceans, mountains, cmitinents subcontinents and riven 
succinctly. Evoything has been mentioned to you. What else do 
YOU desira to know ? 



2LM3 


CHAPTER TWENTYONE 
Upper Regions 


121 


'The sages said : 

N2. Everything has been mentioned to us by you. We wish 
to know further about the upper worlds Bhur> Bhuvar^ Svar etc. 
'We also wish to know how the planets are stationed and what 
their magnitude is. O highly blessed Lomaharfa^a, mention 
these precisely. 

Lomaharfcsta said : 

3* That area which is illuminated by the rays of the sun 
4md the moon is known as earth. It consists of ocean$> rivers and 
mountains also. 

4. The extent and magnitude of the sky is the same as 
those of the earth. 

5. O brahmins, the disc of the sun is stationed a hundred 
•thousand Yojanas away from the earth. The disc of the moon 
is stationed a hundred thousand Yojanas away from the sun. 

6. Full hundred thousand Yojanas above the moon, the 
•entire sphere of the stars shines. 

7. O brahmins, mercury (Budha) is two hundred thousand 
Yojanas above the sphere of stars. Venus Uianas is stationed so 
many Yojanas above Mercury. 

8. Mars (Ahgaraka) is stationed so many Yojanas above 
Venus. The preceptor of Devas, Jupiter, is stationed two 
hundred thousand Yojanas above Mars. 

9. Saturn (Sauri) is stationed two hundred thousand Yqanas 
above Jupiter. The sphere of seven s^es (the Great Bear), O 
^excellent brahmins, is stationed a hundred thousand Yojanas 
beyond it. 

10. Polestar Dhruva that is the pivot of entire luminaries is 
stationed a hundred thousand Yojanas above seven sages. 

IK O excellent sages, the three worlds have been succinctly 
mentioiied. This is the ground for the benefit of sacrifice. The 
aacriiice is established here. 

12. The Maharloka is a crore of Yojanas abom Dhruva* 
It is here thatlhe Kalpavisins reside* 

13. The Janaldca is two cr ores of Yojanas above Mahar- 



122 Brahma Pitrdf^ 

loka. It is here that Sanandana and other sons of Brahma live* 
O brahmins, they are pure-minded. 

14* Four times that distance above Janaloka (i.e. eight 
crores of Yojanas) is theTapas region. It is there that the gods 
called Vair&jas arc stationed. They are devoid of physical forms. 

15* Six times that distance above the Tapas region (i.e. 48 
crores of Yojanas) shines the Satyaloka. This region releases 
one from the bondage of death (that which does not kill again) 
and is known as the world of Brahmi. 

16. Wherever there is earthly ground or object that can be 
traversed by foot, it is called Bhurloka. Its extent has been 
mentioned by me. 

17. O excellent sages, the space between the earth and the 
sun, frequented by the sages, Siddhas and others, is called 
Bhuvarloka. It is the second of upper worlds. 

18. The space between Dhniva and the sun which extends 
to one million four hundred thousand Yojanas is said to be 
Svarloka by those who are conversant with the geography of 
the worlds. 

19. This set of three worlds is called Krtaka (artificial) by 
the brahmins. The three worlds Jana, Tapas and Satya are 
called Akftaka (Natural). 

20. In between the two, Maharloka is known as Kftaka- 
krtaka. At the end of a Kalpa it becomes empty but is not 
annihilated entirely. 

21. O brahmins, these seven upper worlds have been men¬ 
tioned by me to you as also the seven nether worlds. This is the 
detailed description of the cosmic Egg. 

22. This is enveloped by thecauldrOT the Egg (Ai^ka- 
(aha) all round, at Che sides above and below like the seeds of 
an apple ihtit. 

23. The Egg is enveloped by water ten times its size. The 
encircling vt^ume of water is enveloped by fire. 

24. O brahmins, the fire is enveloped by wind; and the 
wind is enveloped by Ether. O excellent sages, the Ether ia 
enveloped by Mahat. 

25. These seven art such dtat the outer one is ten times 
the size of the inner one. The Pradhina standi enveloping the 
Mahat* 



2L26-40 


123 


26. It is infinite and endless. It has no reckoning since it 
cannot be measured by any unit» nor calculated by any figure. 

27. O brahmins^ it is the cause of entire creation. It is the 
great PrakrtL There are thousands and thousands of such cosmic 
Eggs* 

28-30. There are eggs like these» crores and hundred crores 
in number. 

Just as there is fire in the wood> or oil in the gingelly seed 
so also the Puru^a is statimed in the Pradhana which it pro¬ 
vides. He is known as the conscious Atman. 

O excellent brahmins, the Pradhana and the Puruta are 
sustained by the Energy of Vtipu that is the soul of all living 
beings. They mix together in their activity. Thus the energy of 
VifQu alone is the cause of separation and int^ration of Purufa 
and Pradhina. 

31-36. O excellent sages, at the creation of the universe it 
is the cause of agitation. 

Just as wind contains chillness of each and every drop of 
water so also the Energy of Vi;t^u contains both Pradhana and 
Purufa together. 

A tree with its roots, stem and branches grows out of the 
first seed. Many seeds come out of that thereafter. From those 
seeds grow other trees. These have the same characteristics, 
causes and parts. 

In the same manner the Mahat etc are evolved, at the out¬ 
set from the unevolved Pradhana. From the Mahat to Viiefa 
this is the process of creation. Therefrom the gods and others 
are bom. Their sons are bom, their sons and grandsons. It 
goes on. 

Just as there is no deficiency or decline in the tree due to 
the growth of another tree from ia seeds so also the elements 
do not dwindle by the creation of other elements. 

37. Just as the Ether, time, etc. are as the czmt of the tree 
by their mere presence, nearly so also Visnu is the cause of 
universe without tmdergoxng transformation. 

38-40. In the seed of a grain all these are present in latent 
fbmt —viz—the root, stalk, sprout, leaf, stem, ovary, flower, milk 
(soup), rice-grain, husks wd the bits o( grain. O excellent sages, 
when all the camplemenu of causes for the growth are present, 
these parts, already present within manifest themselves. 



124 


Bfdmta 


In the same manner^ the physical forms of gods and human 
lacings are already present in the diverse activities. They grow 
up, by coming into c<mtact with the energy of Vi;ttu. 

41-44. That Viypu is the great Brahman from whom this 
universe evolves, inwhom it subsists and in whom it is dissolved. 

That Brahman is the greatest abode; and the great region 
beyond Sat and Asat. The universe consisting of mobile and 
immobile beings is identical with him. 

He alone is the Primordial Nature. He alone is the universe 
when his form becomes manifest. In him alone everything is 
^evolved and dissolved. 

He is the agent of rites; he is worshipped; he alone is the 
sacrifice and the benefit thereof; he alone is the means of 
•sacrifice. There is nothing which is separate and different from 
him. 


CHAPTER TWENTYTWO 
foU Star 


Lomakarfo^ said : 

1. Pole Star is situated at the tail end of the form of lord 
Vi^nu in heaven which consists of constellations and which has 
the shape d Siiumira^ (the Gangetic porpoise). 

2. He himself revolves and he makes the moon, sun and 
other planets too revolve. The constellations follow him in a 
circular orbit. 

3. Along with the planets, the sun, moon, stars and cons¬ 
tellations are tied to Dhruva by gaseous rows and lines. 

4-5. Vi^u is the greatest abode. He is the support of that 
luminous form in heaven with the shape of Gangetic porpoise 
mentioned above. 

T ijfwaire (the Geagetic porpobe) is a coosteUatioa, sc called because it 
is ie tteimape of a crocodile. It is said to be the stairy form of Vifou. Ac the 
taMkd of it is Dhfuva which autooaticallf rotates sad also makes plaoecs 
Hkthe sun and die moon to rotate. Stars fbUow the seif*rotatiiif Dhrura and 
rotate hke a whed« 



22.6-17 


12S 


(Meditating on the lord) in his hearty the son of Uttanapada, 
Dhruva propitiated the Patriarch Brahma and stationed himself 
at the tail end of the stellar Gangetic porpoise. 

6. The support ofSiiumara is ViKiu the presiding deity of 
all humanities. The Siium^a is the support of Dhruva and the 
sun is supported by Dhruva. 

7. This entire universe including Devas^Asuras and human 

beings is supported by the sun. O brahmins, now listen, by 

what method he supports the universe. 

8. For eight months the sun absorbs water in the form of 
juice. Then he showers water in the form of rain. That gives 
rise to foodgrains. This entire universe rests on food. 

9-10. After absorbing water from the universe by his 
hot rays, the sun nourishes the moon. By the water-essence 
passing through the gaseous nerves the moon is held aloft over 
the clouds having their forms evolved out of smoke, fire and 
wind. The clouds are called Abhras because they hold waters 
and do not let them fall oflT. 

11. When nudged by the wind the waters in the clouds fall 
off. O brahmins, they attain the impressions of previous actions 
activised by the opportune time, and beceme pure. 

12. O brahmins, the sun-god abscM^bs four types of waters, 
viz. those of rivers, oceans, earth and those present in the living 
beings. 

13-14. The multi-rayed sun absorbs water from the celestial 
Ganga and immediately discharges it on to the earth without 
allowing it to get entangled with the clouds. 

O excellent brahmins, the man who lias washed the dirt of 
all sins due to his contact with it never ialls into bell. Indeed, 
it is said to be a divine bath. 

15. On seeing the sun, that water &Ils from heaven without 
the clouds acting as intermediary. That water from the celestial 
Ganga is absorbed and cast off by the rays of the sun. 

16. The water that falls fran heaven on seeing the sun 
during K^tdka and other stars should be known as the water of 
Ganga poured out by the elephants of quarten. 

17. The water that fallsdown during the even numbered 
(i.e. Rohi^I, JLrdra etc) from heaven after being absorbed by 
the sun is immediately scattered by the rays of the sun. 



126 


Brahma Purib^ 


18. O brahminsj both of them are extremely meritorious to 
human beings. They dispel sins. O excellent brahmins, one can 
have divine absolution with the waters of celestial Gaoga. 

19. O brahmins, the water that is showered by the clouds 
nourishes living beings and makes the medicinal herbs grow 
well. It is the nectar that enlivens aUl. 

20. All kinds of medicinal plants increase thereby. Until 
they are mature and ripe they continue to be the means to the 
people. 

21. Day by day men with the sacred scriptures as their 
guides p>erform sacrifices in the manner they have been laid 
down and thereby nourish the gods. 

22-23. The entire universe consisting of mobile and 
immobile beings is supported by rain. Thus the sacrifices, Vedas, 
castes beginning with the brahmins, Devas, animals and the 
rest of living beings—everyone is supported by rain. O excellent 
sages that rain is generated by the sun. 

24. O excellent sages the support of the sun is the Polar 
Star and that of the Polar Star is Siiumira and that support 
of Siiumara is Visou. 

25-26. VifQu is stationed in the heart ofSiiumara. He 
maintains all living beings. He is the primordial cause and 
eternal. 

Thus, O excellent sages, the cosmic egg has been cited by 
me along with the divisions of the earth, oceans etc. What else 
do you desire to know ? 


CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE 
Holy Ctntm : Thir Gnabuss 

Thi sinis Msd: 

h O Suta conversent with piety, it behoves you to narrate 
the tale of holy ihriaei and centres over the earth. We are in* 
eluted to hear the same. 



■23.2-13 


127 


iMtaharfo^ said; 

2« He whose hands and feet are clean, whose mind is fully 
restrained and who has learning, penance and fame, enjoys the 
benefit of visiting holy shrines. 

3. The pure mind is the holy centre unto men. So also the 
•control over speech and the restraint on the sen8eK)rgans. 
There are holy centres present in the physical body itself. They 
make the man understand the path of heaven. 

4. The wicked mind situated within does not become 
purified by ablutions in the sacred water in the holy centres, 
like the unclean mudpot of stale liquor which cannot become 
pure even when washed with water a hundred times. 

5. Neither holy centres, not charitable gifts nor holy rites, 
nor penance groves can purify the man whose mind is wicked, 
who takes delight in arrogance or who has not conquered hit 
sense-organs. 

6.. Wherever a man stays after keeping his sense-organs 
fully under his control—the holy centres of Kurukyetra, Prayaga 
and Puskara are present there. 

7. Hence listen. I shall mention holy centres and sacred 
shrines—whatever there are on the earth, O excellent sages. 

8*9 They cannot be explained in detail even in the course 
of hundreds ofyesurs. 

O excellent brahmins I shall mention holy centres ofPu^kara, 
NaimUa forest, Prayiga and Dharmaranya as the foremost 
among holy spots. 

There are Dhenuka, Campaka and Saindhava forests. 

10. The meritorious Sagararaoya forest, Da^d^ka forest, 
Gaya, Prabhasa, Sridrtha, and the divine Kanakhala.^ 

11. Bhrgutuhga, Hiranyakfa, Bblmakanya, Kuiasthall 
Lokargala, Kedara and Mandara forest. 

!2. Mahalaya, Ko(idrtha, that di^els sins, Rupatirtha, 
Sukara and Cakradrtha of great benefit. 

13. Vyksatirtha, Somadrtha, Skkho(akatIrdia, Koka- 
mukha tirtha and the holy Badarl mountain. 

]. JCsaatts/s A holy place of pilgrimage on the bank of Gthga. Kill* 
dSsa refers to tbir place hi his MtghadOta. This is the place where Dakia 
Prkjipati perfennod the sacrifice. 



128 Brahma i’urdp# 

14. Somatirtha, Tungaku^^ Skanda^ramatirtha, Surya- 
prabha, Dhenusaras and (he seventh ayufmika. ? 

15. KotitIrthaatDharmodbhava, the Sirva«kixnika-tlrtha^. 
Suryaprabha, Mahikundaand SonUbhi^ecanatirtha. 

16. Mah&itotra, Koraka, Paficadharas Tridb4ra> Sapta^ 
dharai Ekadhara and Amarakantakadrtha. 

17. 8&lagr&ina, Cakratlrtha> the excellent Kadallhrada,. 
Vidyutprabha, Devahradatirtha, and Vi^tLuprabha. 

18. Sa^khaprabha, Devakunda, Vajriyudhatlrtha^ Vas- 
trapada, Barhapada and Lokarohana. 

19. Svayamvafa, Bhadrabala, Kauiambai Divikara, S&ras- 
vata Dvlpa, Vijayadvlpa, and Kamaja Dvlpa. 

20. (?) Sollayangopacara^ Cavarambana, Pur^vat (?) 
Sn&naku^d^t Praykga and Guhi V4(tupada. 

21 • Kany&kuQd^i Vi^iiku^d^i Jambumarga the excellent 
holy centre, Gabhastitirtha and the clean Yay&ti Pattana. 

22. Bhadravata Kolitlrtfaa, Mahakalavana, the great 
Narmadktirtha, Tirthablja and Arbuda. 

23. The Paftcatirtha including Vasisthatlrtha, Priyasarh- 
jAaka, V&rfika and the splendid Pafijiraka. 

24. Sudrtha, Brahmarudra, Kanykkumarika, 8akratlrtha,. 
Pafleanada and Repukaditha. 

25. The pure Paitamahatirtha, the excellent Raudra* 
pada, Mapiinanta, Kkznikhya, Kr^patlrtha and Kulihgaka. 

26. Srliakrayajana, Brahmavaluka, the holy Vyasat!rtha>. 
PuQd^^ the excellent Maidmantha. 

27. Dlrghamantha, Haihsapidatlrtha, 8ayana, Daiaiva* 
medha, Ked&ra and Tajnasodbheda. 

28. Rudrakupa, Saihyamanltlrtha. Sazhtr&van&sika, Sya* 
mantapaAcaka, and Brahmatlrtha very pleasing to lode. 

29. Prthividrtha, P&riplava, Pfthudaka, Daikivamedhika^ 
Sak;ida and Vijaya. 

30. The Kolit&thaat Pafleanada, Varaha, Yakfi^hrada^ 
PuiKlarika, S<»iiadrtha, and die excellent Muflj&vataratha. 

31. The BabOravanadrtha situated in the fewest Badail* 
vana, Svarlokadviraka and KapUadrtha« 

32. Suryadrthai Varufthkna, Bhavabhavana, Yakfarikfa* 
satirtha, and Brahoatlrtha the excellent holy centre. 



^ 3 . 33-49 


129 

S3. Kameivara, Matrdrtha^ ^tavana, the abode of the 
earthly Hamsa (swan) and the Sarasatirtha. 

34. Dajijvamedha, Kedarai excellent Brahmajfta Sap tar- 
fikunda and the well^elimited tirtha of the goddess. 

35. Ihaspada (the support here^ on earth) Ko(ticrta» 
Kimv&na, Kiihjaya, Karand^va, Viivatirtha and another 
Trivi^tapatirtha. 

36. Panikhatatirtha, Miirakatlrtha, Madhuka^t^tlrtha, 
Manomayatlrtha, the divine Kauiikitfrtha and the excellent 
Kanyfitlrtha. 

37. The Brahmatirtha, Manastirtha^ the sacred holy centre, 
Saugandhika the holy forest, Mani tirtha and Sarasvatidrtha. 

38. The most excellent holy centre liinatirtha, the holy 
Paficay^flaka, Triiuladhara, Mahendra, and the divine abode 
Mah&laya, 

39. The divine holy centre S&kambharitirtha, Suvarttk* 
khya, Kapimada, K^reivara, Virupak^a, Bhrgutlrtha and 
Kuiodbhava. 

40. Brahm&varta, Brahmayoni, the mountain Nllaparvata, 
the eddy Bhadrakarna and the eddy Sakrakarpa. 

41. Saptasarasvata, the holy centre of Auianasadrtha, 
Kapalamocana, Avakirna and Paficakatirtha. 

42. Catussamudrika, Satkaiicanasahasrika, Repuka, Pafl- 
caka^aka and Ainasa-Vimocanatlrtha. 

43. Sthwuthirtha, Urtha of Ktmi, Svargadvira, Kuia- 
dhvaja, Vi^veivara, Vamakara and the hermitage ofN&raya^a. 

44. Gangahrada, the holy Vapi and Badari, Indramir- 
gartakietra and Jirikavasa. 

45. O braluninj, Somatirtha, the meritorious Kotidrtha, 
the holy spot of Ko(idrthasthall, an eddy by Bhadrakall. 

46. The holy forest of Arundhativana, the excellent 
Brahmavarta, Aivadevi, Kubjavana and Yamun&prabhava. 

47. \^ra-Pramok 9 a, Siddhartha, Miyavidyodbhava, 
Mahahrada, Vetasikarupa and Sundarikairama. 

48. Brahmatutlrtha, which is verygreat, Gangodbhavasara- 
svatl, Bahukitirtha and Vimaliiokatirtha. 

49. Gautamitlrtha, Airivatitirtha, Satasahasrikadrtha, 
Kofidrtha iiTthe abode Bhartrsthkna and the excellent Kkpill- 
tirtha. 



Brahma 


130 

50. The Paftcanadatlrtha of the intelligeiit M&rka^^eya, 
Somatlrtha, Sivoda and Matsyodarftirtha. 

51. Suryatlrdia having the lustre the sun, the holy forest 
Soxnakavana, Aninaspada, V&manaka and the Suryatlrtha 
abounding in sands. 

52. The Urtha called Avimukta, the Nilakan^hahrada, 
PU&camocana, and Subhadrihrada. 

53. Vimalakun^a, Tirtha of Ca^Mvara, Sreffhasthana- 
hrada and Samudrakupa. 

54. The forest of Jaigl^vya, the forest ofHf^Ikeia, Ajamu- 
kharasa, and the whirlpool of Gha^t^kar^a. 

55. Pup^arikahrada, the tank of Kk^fhaka, Sma^ana* 
Btambha, Kumbhatfrtha and the Viniyakahrada. 

56. The well born of the Siddhas, the holy lake Brahma- 
laras Bhadriv&sa, Nagatlrtha and Somatlrtha. 

57. Bhaktahrada, the lake of milk, Pretkdhkra, Kumara- 
katlrtha, Brahmavarta Kuiavaru and the holy centre Dadhi- 
karnodaya. 

56. The great holy centre of Sr^gatirtha, the excellent holy 
centre of MahanadI, the divine lake Brahmasaras, and the holy 
Akfayavafaat Gayafirfa. 

59. Gomayatlrtha in the South, Hayaiantika in the north, 
Kapilahrada, Gfdhrakuta and S&vitrihrada. 

60. The forest Gitavana that destroys sins, Yonidvkra, 
Dhainuka, Dhanv^a, Lohika and Matahgahrada. 

61. Pitrkupa, Rudrakupa, Matitirtha, Sumklin, Brahma* 
sthana, Saptakun(;ld, and ManiraUiahrada. 

62. The hermitage of Mudgala, the whirlpool of Mudgala, 
the holy centre Janakakupa, and the holy Tirtha Vinaiana. 

63. The holy centre Soka, Bhiratatlrtha, Jye${halika, 
Visveivara of hundredfold merits, and Kanyasaihvedha. 

64. Nidhitirtha, Ramabhavatirtha, the hermitage of 
Vasi^tha, Devaku(a, Devakupa and the hermit^e of Kau^ika* 

65. Kutokarpahrada, Kauiilddruma, Dharmaditha, Kafl* 
canatlrtha and the holy centre Uddalaka* 

66. Caodktnu, Mklinidrtha, Vanaca^^ikatlrtha, San- 
dhyitfrtba, KUadrtha, KapU&tirtha and Lohitin^va. 

f7« SoQodbhava, Vamiagulma, the centre of Rkma Bhad- 



23.68-79 


ISl 


Pupyavartahrada, Srfmattirtha and the hermit^e Badari- 
kldrama. 

68. Ramatlrtha» Vitas ta» Menijadya, the Rohitii and 
the lake of Indradyumna. 

69. Avasarga, Mahendia, Sritirtha and the holy centre 
Ifutirtha, Varf ika, and the abode of Kubera. 

70. Kanyitirtha, Gokaroa, the abode, of Gopati Saibvarta, 
Vilvasa and the group of seven deep pools named Sapta^ 
godavaiihrada. 

71 • Another B ad ar Ihrada, Brahmas tha na vi vard hana, 

Jitihrada, Devahrada, and Kidaprathana. 

72. Sarvadevavrata, Kanyalramahrada, Mahar&jahradai 
the holy Sakratlrtha and Kundaka. 

73. Ahgaratirtha, the fimst Rudrara^yaka^ Medhivin, 
Devafarada and the holy centre Amaravartana. 

74. The holy Manditkinihrada^ K|ama, M&he<vara« 
Gangatlrtha, Tripuru|a> and Bhlmatapdavamukha. 

75. Prthuku(a, Sklvmkuta, So^a, Rohitaka> Kapilahradai 
Malya and Kapilahrada belonging to Vasi^tha. 

76^79. The eddies, the holy waterspots of Valakhilyas, the 
seven sages, other great sages and the Akhapdita-hrada. 

The man who is endowed with faith who takes his bath 
duly in these sacred water spots and holy centres should ob¬ 
serve fast and control his sense-organs. He should perform 
Tarpaoa rites for Devas, s^es and Pitrs. After worshipping 
the deities he should stay there for three nights. 

O brahmins, benefits arc derived severally from each of 
these holy centres. Undoubtedly, the man obtains die benefit 
of a horse-sacrifice by making journeys to these places. 

He who listens to this narrative daily, or who narrates this 
greatness of holy centres is liberated from sins. 



132 


Brahma 


CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR 
A Diahfnu bitween BrahmS and Sages 
The sages said : 

1. O Suta the most excellent among the eloquent ones, tell 
us about the most excellent place on earth, that bestows virtue, 
love, wealth and salvation and that Is the most excellent of 
all holy centres. 

Lomaharfoj^ said : 

2. O excellent brahmins formerly, the great sages asked 
my preceptor this very question that you ask me just now. I 
ihall mentimi it. 

3-6. My preceptor Vyasa, the holy sage was seated in his 
hermitage in Kuruktetra. The hermitage was rendered splen¬ 
did by different varieties of flowers. It abounded in different 
kinds of trees, creepers and herds of different animals. There 
were the following trees—Punnaga, Karnikara, Sarala, Deva- 
dkru, $ala. Tala, Tamila Panasa, Khadira, Pafala, Aioka, 
Bakula, Karavlra, Campaka and other trees, all in full bloom. 
My preceptor was an expert in sacred scriptures. He had com¬ 
posed the great Mah&bhiuata. He was the foremost among 
intellectuals. He was omniscient and engaged in activities con« 
ducive to the welfare of ^1 living beings. He was engrossed in 
spiritual quesd. He had mastered Ae Vedas and Vedangas. 
He had expounded the Pur&Qas and Agamas. He was the son of 
ParUara. He was handsome with eyes as wide as the petals of 
the lotus. 

The sages of holy rites came there to see the calm sage. 

9-14. The following were the sages who came viz.—Kal- 
yapa, Jamadagni, Bharadvaja, Gautama, Vasiffha, Jaimini, 
Dhaumya, Mirka^d^ya,ValmBd, Vijvamitra, ^tinanda,Vatsya,. 
Garga, Asuri, Sumantu, Bhirgava, Kanva, Medh&tithi, Gum 
Ma^d&vya, Cyavana, Dhumra, Asiu, Devala, Maudgalya, 
Xr^ab^hu, Plji^alada^AkrtavraQa, Samvarta» Kaufika, Raibhya, 
Maitreya, H&rita. SandUya, Agaitya, Durvasas, Lomafa, 
N&rada, Parvata,Vaiiamp&yana, G&lava, Bhaskari, Purapi,Suta, 
Pulastya, UlQka, Pulaha, Viyu, Devasthina, Tumburu, Sanat- 
kumara, Paila, and Kf^panubhautika. 



24.15-26 


135 


15. The intelligent son of Satyavatl surrounded by 
these and other excellent sages shone like the moon surrounded 
‘by the stars. 

16. The sage, the knower of the Vedas honoured those 
sages who came there. TTicy loo honoured him in return. 
Thereafter, they engaged themselves in convcnation. 

17. At the end of their preliminary talk the excellent sages, 
the residents of the penance-groves asked Kf^na (Dvaip&yana), 
the son of SatyavaU to clariiy their doubts. 

Tht sages said : 

18. O sage, you know the entire range of sacred lore, via* 
the Vedas, Puri^as, Agamas and Bh&rata. You know the past, 
present and future. 

19*21. O excellent sage, tell us. We ask you the highly 
pleased soul, the following things on seeing the universe lub- 
me^ing in the ocean of worldly existence without any suppew^t 
•and (miserably) unconscious (of the same). This ocean of 
worldly existence is painful and utterly full of misery. It has no 
TCal substance. It is terrible with passions acting like crocodiles, 
the objects of sense-organs acting like flood waters, the sense- 
organs like a blended mass of whirlpool, the visible objects like 
hundreds of confused masses of waves, delusion making it turbid 
like mud. It is impassable, grave and difficult to be crossed due 
to covetousness. 

22. What is it that is conducive to welfare in this terrible 
'world that causes hairs to stand on end* It behoves you to 
uplift the worlds by offering advice. 

23. It behoves you to recount that rare and extremely 
.great holy centre which bestows liberation, We wish to hear 
about the land of holy rites on this earth. 

24*25. It is only by perfectly performing the holy rites on 
'this earth in the manner they have been laid down that a man 
^ttaiu the greatest perfection. By repugnant activities he faiu 
into hell. The intelligent man attains abs^^ution in the holy 
•centre of salvatimi. Hence, O highly inmll^ent one, recount 
what you have been asked by the excellent brahmins. 

26. On b^umg the w<Mtls those sages of purified souls 
the intelligentVyasa, coovenantwitb the past and future said: 



134 


Brakm PkrSfg 


VySsa said : 

27-30. Listen O si^. I shall mention as you ask, the con* 
venation that formerly took place between the sages and 
Brahmi on the summit of Mem that is spacious and bedecked 
with variety ofjewels. It abounds in many trees and creepen 
rendered splendid by divene kinds offlcwen. There the atmos¬ 
phere is full of chirping sounds of various birds. It is literally 
scattered with animals with a confusing mass of their offsprings^ 
Many wonderful and mysterious things arc present there. Rocks 
and pebbles of different colour He scattered embellished with 
minerals and metals of all kinds. It contains several hermitages 
thronged with sages. 

31-33. The four-faced lord of the universe was seated there. 
He is the source of origin of the universe. Being the lord and 
support of worlds, he is worthy of being saluted by all. He was 
then surrounded by Devas, D&navas, Gandharvas, Yak^s^ 
Vidy&dharas, serpents, sages, Siddhas, Apsar&s and other 
heaven-dwellers. Some of them were eulogising him. Some were 
playing on musical instruments and singing songs in his praise. 
Others were dancing. 

34-35. Thus, when the time was joyous and the living 
beings had gathered together, when the gentle southern breeze 
served them wafUng the sweet odour from different kinds oT 
flowers, Bhrgu and other sages bowed to lord Brahma. O 
brahmins, those excellent sages asked the father thb very same 
topic. 

Tkt sages said : 

36-37. "0 lord, we wish to hear about the land of holy 
rites on the surface of the earth. O lord of Devas, it behovea 
you to recount the most inacce^ible centre of absolution” 

Vyisa said i 

On hearing their words, Brahmi, the lord of Devas, said 
them in reply to the questions they asked, O excellent sages. 



25 . 1-13 


CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE 
BUrais 


135 


Brahmd said : 

1. O sages^ you listen to what I am going to say now. It 
is a splendid^ancient traditiozul account connected with the 
Vedas. It grants worldly pleasures and salvation. 

2. The Bharata sub-continent is the land of holy rites in 
the whole of the earth. Heaven and hell are the lands for reap¬ 
ing the fruit of those holy rites. 

3. O brahmins^ by committing sins or performing holy 
rites in that subcontinent a man necessarily attains the fruit 
thereof whether auspicious or inauspicious, 

4. There is no doubt that by performing their ordained 
duties in that sub-continent, the brahmins and othen of per¬ 
fect self-control attain the highest success. 

5. O excellent brahmins, in that Varya, a person of self- 
control attains everything viz. virtue, wealth, love and libera¬ 
tion. 

6. O excellent brahmins, Indra and other Devas have 
attained the status of a deity after performing splendid holy 
rites in that sub-continent. 

7* Other men too had attained salvation in that Varya. 
They had control over their organs. They were devoid of 
passion and indecent rivaliy. 

8. Those persons who are devoid of ailments and who stay 
in heaven with aerial chariots had previously performed splen¬ 
did holy rites in that land of Bharata and had attained heaven 
thereby. 

9, Devas do always wish for a residence in Bhirata that 
yields the benefit of heavenly pleasures and liberation. They 
oRen spoke when shall we visit Bharata*\ 

10*13. * 0 most ^eacpdlent one among Devas, it has just been 
Stated by you that except in Ks&rata, rites holy or unholy are 
not conducive to meritorious or sinful results. But it seems likely 
that holy rites are not enjoined oo men elsewhere. Hence, O 
Brahmk, recount Bharata to us in detail, if you are kind to ui. 
O lord, nienuon everything, how this sub-continent U situated. 
What are the*continent mountainshere ? What are its divisions. 



136 


Brahma Puribia 


BrakmS said: 


14. Li$tcn, O brahmins, the Bharaca sub*continent has nine 
sub>divisions which are separated by oceans. They are equal to 
one another. 

]5>16. They are Indrad>4pa, Kaseru, Tamravarna (? 
T&mraparpa), Gabbastiman, N&gadvipa, Saumya, Gandharva 
and Varu^. Bharata surrounded by the ocean is the ninth 
among them. The island extends from south to north and is 
one thousand Yojanas long. 

17. In the east of it, the Kir&tas stay. The Yavanas stay in 
the west. O brahmins, the Brahmins, K^triyas, Vaiiyas and 
Madras stay in the middle. 

18'>20. They are sanctified by holy rites and worldly pur* 
suits as sacrifice, warfare, trading. Their general behaviour is 
intelligible through their activities, which cause heavenly 
pleasures and liberation. They incur merit and sin thereby. 

There are seven Kula mountains viz., Mahendra, Malaya, 
Sahya, BOktimibt, ^kfa, Vindhya and Piriyatra. There are 
thousands of other mountains nearby. 

21*24. They are vast, lofty and beautiful. They are immense. 
Their ridges are (^wonderful and variegated nature. They are 
Kol&hala, Vaibhrdja, Mandara, Dardala, Vit&dhvaga, Daivata, 
Main&ka, Surasa, Tungaprastha, N&ga, Godhana, Pa^dura, 
Pufpa, Vaijayanta, Raivata, Arbuda, R$yamuka, Gomantha, 
Krtafaila, ^rl Cakora and hundreds of other mountains. The 
pMpulated realms are interspersed with these mountains. The 
Mlecchas live in parts of this territory. 

25-27. Excellent waters of these riven are drunk by those 
people. O excellent brahmins, know these rivers. 

The following rivers rise from the foot of the Himav&n ;— 
Ganga, Sarasvati, Sindhu, Candrabhfiga, Yamuna, Satadru, 
VipSii, Vitasti, Airivad, Kuhu, Gomatl, Dhutap&pi, Bahuda, 
Difadvad, Deviki, Cakfu, Nifthivi, GaodakI.a^ Kauiild. 

28-29. The following rivers originate frtnn the P&riyatra 
mountain:—Devasmrti, Devavad, Vitaghni, (Kali) Sindhu, 
Venya, Candana, Sad&niri, Mahl, Garmaavatl, Vrd, Vidiih, 
Vetravad, Sipri and Dravantl. 

30-32. The following rivers originate Scorn the foot of ^fa 
fountain i— 





:2S.33-50 


m 

Mahanadi, Narmada, Suratha, Kriyi, Manda* 
icini, Daiarpa, Citrakufa, Citrotpala, Vetravatl, Karamodi, 
Pisacika, AtUaghuiropI, Vipatt, ^ivali, Sameruja, Suktimad, 
•SakunI, Tridiviand Kramu. 

33-34. The following rivers have their source in the foot¬ 
hills of the Vindhya mountain t^Sipra, Payof^li Nirvin- 
dhya, Tapi, Vena, Vaitaratit» Sinivail, Kumudvatf, Toya, 
Mahagaurl, Durga and Antal^iia. These rivers are splendid 
and their waters are holy. 

35-40. The following excellent rivers originate from the 
foot of Sahya mountain :—Godavari, BMnurathii Krina- 
vaj^ii, Tuhgabhadra, Suprayoga, and Pipanalinl. 

The holy rivers of coot waters rising from the Malaya moun¬ 
tain are Krtamila, Tamrapairi], Pufpavad and Utpalavatl. 

The following rivers originate from the Mahendra mountain: 
Pitrsomi, Rfikulya, VaAjula,Tridivi,Langalin!andVanriakara. 

The following rivers take their source frcm the mountain 
Suktiman :—^The Suvikaia, Kumari, Mandagi, Mandagamixu, 
Kfaya and Payoftd. 

These rivers are holy. They are on a par with Sarasvad and 
GaAga. They fall into the sea. They are the mothers of the uni¬ 
verse. They may dispel sins. O excellent brahmins, there are 
thousands of other small rivers too. 

41-42. Some of them flow during the rainy season (with 
plenty of water). Some of them are perennial rivers. 

The Middle lands consist of the following climes :— 
Matsyas, Kumudamalyas, Kratulas, Kaii, K(^as, Andhras^ 
.Kalingas, Maiakas and Vrkas. These are the main realms. 

43. That spot of land to the north ofSahya where the 
river Godavari flows is the most charming in the entire earth* 

44-50. The city of Govardhana, the residence of the noble 
Bhargava is, indeed, very beautiful. 

The followup lands contain KyatriyaSi Vailyas and Sudras:— 
Vahlkas,^ Riyadhinas, Sudras, K&latoyadas, Aparintas, Sodras^ 

1. VMU-BiUu. The term rden to the peo^ of Pui^b who were 
shut out by the Swmti, Kurukyetraezid other natural features Aten the central 
country which r^sained ttue to P^^ih*** The terns is abo ipp l i c abl c to 



Brahma Psrdf^ 

Bihlikas^, Keralas» Gandharu^ Yavanas, Siodhus, Sauviras,. 
Madrakas» Satadnihas, Kalidgas, Paradai, Haribhfifikas, Maf- 
baraS} Kanakas, Kaikeyas, Dambham&likas. 

The following realms comprise the northern lands 

O brahmins, they are Kambojas, Barbaras, liaukikas, 
VIras, Tufiras, Pahlavas, Dhayatas (?) Atreyas, Bharadvajas,. 
Pufkalas, Daierakas, Lampakas, Suiia^kas, Kulikas, Jingalas,. 
Ofadhis, Calacandras, Kiratas,Tomaras, Harhsamirgas^Kkimi- 
ras, Karupas, SSlikas, Kuhakas, and Migadhas—These are the 
northern climes. Now understand the eastern climes. 

51*53. Andhas, VkmiAkurakas, Vallakas, Makh&ntakas, 
Angas, Vahgasi Maladas, Milavartikas, Bhadratuhgas, Prati- 
jayas, Bh&ryihgas, Apaxnardakas, Prigjyotiyas, Madras, Videhas 
Timralip takas, Mallas, Magadhakas, and Nandas—these are 
the eastern realms. 

54-57. There arc other climes, those of the Southern, 
region : The Purnas, Kevalas, Gol&ngulas, ^slkas, Musikas, 
Kum&ras, Rkznathas, Sakas, Mahkristras, Mahi^akas, KaliAgas, 
AbMras, Vaijikyas, Atavyas, Sarvas, Pulindas, Mauleyas, 
Vaidarbhas, Daodakas, Paulikas, Maulikas, Ahnakas, Bhojavar- 
dhanas, Kaulikas, Kunlalas, Dambhakas and Nllakklakas. 

These are the Southern realms. Nowundentand the Western 
climes :— 

58-62. The Surparakas, Kalidhanas, Lolas, Tklakafas etc 
arc the residents of Western climes. 

Listen to the residents ofVindhya mountains :—^Thc Malajas,. 
Karkalas, Melakas, Colakas, Uttaznaroas, Daiirtias, Bhojas, 
Kijkindhakas, Tofalas, Koialas, Traipuras, Vaidiias, Tumburas, 
Caras, Yavanas, Pavanas, Abhayas, Rundikeras, Carcaras, 
Hotravartia.—these are the realms and pet^Ies residing on 
Vindhya mountains. 

HezKcforth, I shall mention the climes founded on moun¬ 
tains. 

the people who vfcrc thought to be injure sad contemptible for aot observing 
the rules pretaibed for the fourfold society of Aryan people. 

1. ViUUu —BShllka—B&lhlka. Balkh or ancient Baetrims. But there 
were two tribes of VAhlO mi one settled in Ae pUini ofPwuab betweai Che- 
aab'iad Sutlej riven and the o^er among the lower ilepet of the HbnSlayaa 
bsArcen Chenab and Bias. 



25.6S-78 


139 


63-66. They am the Nlharas, Tu|ftm&rgas» Kurus, Tuhga* 
Qas, Khasas, Kar^aprivaraoas, Oroas, Darghas, Kuficakas, 
Citramargas, Miiavas, Kiritas and Tomaras. 

The Yugas, Kfta, Treti, Dvipara and Kali are followed 
here. The injunction! befitting the four Yl^as are strictly 
adhered to : 

Such is the Bhirata subcontinent situated with its subdivi- 
sicHU. There ij a great ocean to its South West and East. The 
Himalaya mountain stands to its north like the string of a great 
bow. 

O excellent brahmins this Bharata is the seed of everything. 

67-68. It is the cause of different states such as the state of 
Brahma, the state of Amareia (Indra),the state of Devas, Maruts, 
animals, Yak^as, Apsaras serpents, reptiles, and immobile 
beings. O brahmixts, people attain these states as a result of 
their merits or demerits. O brahmins, there b no other holy 
place of rites in all these worids. 

69. O brahmins, thb is the perpetual desire of all Devas^ 
*‘If we arc to fall off from the status of Devas onto the Earth 
may we attain Bhirata as the place of our birth*’. 

70. What men do cannot be doat by Devas and Asuras. 
Men are engaged in holy rites while Devas and Asuras are 
eager to obviate their Karman. 

71. O brahmins, in the whole of the Earth there is no other 
sub-continent equal to Bhkrata where different Varnas— 
Brahmins, Kiatriyas and others attain their cherished goal, 

72. Excellent men who are highly blessed are bom in 
Bharata. Theyderive the benefits of virtue, love, wealth and 
liberation. 

73-76, O brahmins, who is competent to narrate the 
excellent qualities of Bharata ? It b there that the rare benefit of 
austerities b attained. The firuit o( all charitable gifts, all 
sacrifices, pilgrimage to holy centres, service to the ciders and 
preceptors, rites of propitiation of Deities, the benefit of life of 
a householder, dtfferoit htdy rites, different sacred scriptures, 
practice of the virtueof non violence, the benefit of all cherbhed 
desires, the fruit of a celibate life, the benefit of self-study of 
the Vedas, the frutti of residence in the forest, that of the life of 
a recluse, tin* benefit ofdigging welb, etc. and perfbrming sacri- 



140 


Btahma PmS^ 


Aces and the benefit of other holy rites—these are attained only 
in Bhirata^ nowhere else. O excellent brahmins, Devas are 
always delighted in wishing for a splendid life there. 

79-80. Thus the excellent Bhirata sub-continent has been 
adequately recounted by me. It dispels all sins; it is holy and is 
conducive to the attainment of wealth. It enhances intellect 
•and wisdom. 

He who controls his sense*organs and listens to this account 
or repeats the same shall be liberated fn>m sins and shall attain 
the world of V4t^u. 


CHAPTER TWENTYSIX 
The Ghfy of Kor^iiditya 

Brahmd said : 

1*9. There in the Bhirata subcontinent is a land that 
bestows heavenly pleasures and liberation. It is situated on the 
southern ocean and it is well known as Ondadeia. The region to 
the north of the ocean is the beautiful VirajaMa^d^^* This is 
the land of those who are habituated to the attainment of good 
•qualities. It is embellished with good attributes. The brahmins 
born in that land have perfect control over their sense-organs. 
They are always engaged in penance and study of the Vedas. 
They are worthy of being honoured and saluted. They are 
famous for their ability to officiate in the rites of Sraddha, 
•charitable gift, marriage rites and sacrifices. They are experts 
in sacred rites. They are of divine origin. The brahmins 
therein are r^ularly engaged in performing the six types of 
holy rites. They are masters of Vedic loft. They are crniversant 
with mythology and Ancient Historical tradition. They arc 
e:q>erts in all scr^tures. They perform sacrifices regularly. 
They are devoid of indecent rivalry. Some are engaged in 
sacrificial rites and some are interest in maintaining holy 
Bxjet ordained in the Smitis. The residents of that land are 
qi^owtd with sons, wivesand riches. They are truthful in speech. 



26.10-27 


141 


They perform homas. They live in the holy lan<i of Utkala 
rendered beautiful by sacrifices and festivals. The people 
belonging to the other three castes, Kfatriyas and others are 
righteous. They control their sense-organs. They are calm. 
They are engaged in their respective duties. Sun-god known 
as ‘Ko^aditya* is the lord in that land. Those who vbit 
lord Bhaskara there are liberated from sins. 

The sQgts said : 

10. O excellent one among Devas, we wish to hear further. 
Tell us now about the holy shrine of the sun in that land where 
lord sun is stationed. 

BrahmA said : 

11-17. The holy shrine of the sun b situated on the holy 
and beautiful shore of the briny sea. Tlie land is endowed with 
all good qualities. It b full of sands. It abounds in varieties of 
trees such as Campaka, Aioka, Bakula, KaravTra, Pa^la, 
Punnaga, Kan>ikira, Nagakesara, Tagara, Dhava, B&na, 
Atimukta, Kubjaka, Kadamba, Lakuca, S&la, Panasa, Devadaru, 
Sara!a, Mucukunda, white and red sandal trees, Aivattha, 
Saptapar^ia, Amra, Amritaka, T&la, Arka, coconut, wood apple 
and many other trees all round. There are flowering plants 
such as Malat!, Kunda, Mallika, KetakI, etc. which shine with 
blossoms in all seasons. The shrine of lord sun is famous in the 
whole world. The region all round to the extent of a Yojana 
yields worldly pleasures and salvation. 

18. The thousand-rayed lord sun b directly present there. 
He is well known, as Koo&ditya. He is the bestower of w<x*ldly 
pleasures and liberation. 

19-27. On the seventh day in the bri^t half of the Magha 
month the devotee should observe last. After performing purifi¬ 
catory rites he shall take bath in the ocean in the presence of 
lord Sun. With a pure mind he shall rememb^ him with 
concentration. After performing Tarpa^a rites for Devas, sages, 
mortab and Pitirs, he shall come out of the sea and wear a pair 
of cloths free from dirt. They should have been washed 
and kept diyrithe previous day itself. With complete purity 
he shall poform Acamana after sitting on the seashore* As the 



142 


Brahma 


Sun rises up in the morning he shall sit facing hun. He shall 
draw the mystic diagram of a Iona with the red sandal paste. 
It should have eight petals, fibunents and be circular with the 
pericarp moving upwards. The intelligent devotee shall put 
gingelly seeds, rice, grains, red flowers, Darbha grass, and red 
sandal into a cc^per vessel and pour water therein. If a copper 
vessel is not available he shall put gii^elly seeds in a cup made 
of the leaf of Arka plant. O excellent sages, he should cover 
this vessel with another vessel and keep it down. He should then 
perform Nyasa rites of hands and limbs. With the heart and 
other organs he should meditate on the sun as his own self with 
sincere faith. The intelligent devotee should worship the deity 
in the petals in the middle as well as in south-east, south-west, 
north-east and north-west. He shall then worship (once again) 
in the middle. 

28-33. After propitiating the lord for attaining supreme 
happiness he should worship the mystic lotus. From the sky he 
should invoke lord Sun and establish him on the pericarp. He 
should show mystic gestures. After performing the rite of ablu¬ 
tion he should meditate on Sun with concentration thus He 
is stationed in the refulgent disc, his eyes are tawny; he is red 
with two arms, wearing garments pink like the lotus; he is endow¬ 
ed with all characteristics and he is decked in all ornaments. 
He is calm bestowing boons, bedecked in a halo of great brilli¬ 
ance. After seeing the rising Sun resembling thick paste of 
saffron he should take that vessel and keep it cm the head. 
Kneeling on the ground he should silently affer Arghya into 
the Sun. He should concentrate his mind on the lord and repeat 
the three-syllabled Mantra. 

34. He who has not received proper initiation should 
merely repeat the name of the Sun god and make water offerings 
withfaith and fervour since lord sun can be made favourable 
through devotion. 

35. He shcmld make water offering, in die soudi-east, 
iCAith-west, north-east, middle andin the four directions b^;inn- 
iag widi diceasc He shail rq>eat the following Mantras and 
'Mke water oiimngs in the direction indicated :—Hrim, 
obeisance to the heart (south-east); Hdm, obeisance to 
itbt head (imsth-weft); Aim, ofaeisanoe to the tuft of hair 



26.S6-46 


145 


^north^weat); Hnum, obeiaance to the coat of mail (north- 
■east), Hraum, obeisance to the three eyes (an the middle); 
Hra^, obeisance to the missile, (in the fiMir quarters). 

36» After the water ofTeriag he should offer sweet scents, 
incense, light and food. After repeatixag prayers and holy names 
he should bow to the deity, show mystic gestures and discharge 
the deity ritualistically. 

37*38. Whether Brahmins, Kfatriyas, Vaijyas, or Sudras 
men or women whoever make water offerings to Sun with perfect 
•control over their sense-organs and mind, with great devotional 
favour and pure conscience, enjoy the desired pleasures and 
attain the greatest goal. 

39. Those who remember him as the illuminator of three 
worlds traversing firmament will obtain happiness. 

40. The devotee should not worship Vifi^u, Siva or the lord 
<rf'Devas (Indra) unless the water-offering has been made to 
the Sun-god in the manner prescribed in the Sastras. 

41*42. He who makes water offerings with great concentra- 
don to Sun-god on the seventh day after taking bath and 
remaining pure will obtain the desired benefit. Hence, one 
should strenuously endeavour to make water offering every day 
to Sun-god along with sweet scents and beautiful fiowen. He 
shall remain pure too. 

43. The ailii^ man is liberated fi^m sickness, he who seeks 
wealth will attain wealth; he who seeks leaming will obtain 
learning and he who seeks sons shall be blessed with tons. 

44. Whatever desire he may cherish in his mind, the 
intelligent man shall fully obtain that desire and benefit by 
offering libation of water. 

45. The devotee, whether a man or a woman shall take 
bath in the ocean, offer libation of water to Sun-god and bow 
down to the deity. He or she will obtain the desired benefit 
thereby. 


4S-A. The man who has taken hath in the waters of Ganga, 
shall sprinkle water on the head of Sun-god by means of Kuia 
grass. Thereby liberated from all sins he passes on to heaven. 

46. Tbereafrer, die devotee shall proceed to the tenqile of 
Sun-god taking flowers with him. After entering the shrine he 


shall circumambulate thrice and worship Sun-god. 




144 


Brahma Puribfa^ 


47* O excellent saget, on the day of Sun-god the devotee 
shall worship Ko^irka reciting Vedic Mantras and T&ntrika 
texts, with great devotion. He shall offer scents, sweet and 
fragrant flowers, lights, incense and foodofferings. 

48-52. He shall prostrate before the deity lying flat on the 
ground like a long pole. He shall eulogise the lord and shout 
cries of victory unto him. By worshipping thus the thousandray* 
ed lord of the universe, a man obtains the benefit of ten horse- 
sacrifices. He will be liberated from all sins and assume a youth¬ 
ful divine form. O brahmins, he will redeem seven ancestors and 
successors in his family. He will go to the world of Sun-god on 
an aerie 1 chariot that has solar lustre and colour that is ex¬ 
cessively refulgent and that can go wherever one likes it to go. 
He will be sung about by Gandharvas. After enjoying excellent 
pleasures there till the final diisolution of all living beings, when 
his merits have been exhausted, he will return to the Earth 
and be born in the excellent family of Yogins. He will become 
a pure brahmin learning all the four vedas and engaged in holy 
rites. After becoming united with the sun he will attain 
liberation. 

53-55. In the bright half of the month of Caitra the 
devotee should make the holy pilgrimage to Damana^bhaHjakd, 
He who makes pilgrimage to that place will obtain the benefit 
as mentioned before. 

During the period of going to bed and rising up of the Sun 
i.e. during the tropical and equinoctical transits, O brahmins, 
persons of perfect cOTtrol over their sense-mgans shall perform 
holy pilgrim^e on Sundays, the seventh day the month or 
on Parvan days. They go to the world of Sun^god on the aerial 
chariot having solar lustre and colour. 

56-59. Lord Mah&deva is also present on the shore of the 
ocean. He is known zsRdmeivara, He is the bestower of desired 
benefits. The devotees should have a dip in the vast ocean and 
visit the lord, the enemy of lust (Kama). They should propitiate 
the lord with sweet scents, fragrant flowers, incense, lights, 
excellent fbod-t^eringi, proitratkms, eulogies, songs of prayer 
sweet musical instruments. They will become noble souls 
attain the benefit of RAjasuya and horse sacrifices. They 
will attsun great success. 



26.60—27.1-6 


145 


60. They will go to the world of &va on an aerial chariot 
that can travel as it pleases and that has clusters of tinkling 
bells suspended from it. Gandharvas will sing songs in their 
praise. 

61. They will enjoy charming pleasures until the dissolu¬ 
tion of alt living beings and vdicn their merits have been ex¬ 
hausted they will return to the Earth and be bom as brahmins 
learning the four Vedas. 

62-63. Being united with Brahman they will attain 
liberation. 

He who passes away in the holy centre of the Sun will reach 
the world of Sun-god andrejoice in heaven together with Devas. 
Reborn as a man he will become a virtuous king. 

64-65. Becoming united with the Sun-god he will attain 
salvation. 

Thus, O excellent sages, the rare holy centre of KoQarka on 
the shores of the ocean has been recounted by me. It yields 
worldly pleasures and salvation. 


CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN 
EfficQcy of Devotion to Swt^god 

The sages said : 

1-6. O most excellent one among Devas, what has been 
cited by you about the holy centre of the Sungod that yields 
worldly pleasures and salvation, has been hea^ by us. Listenii^ 
to the pleasing stories coming through your mouth—the holy 
stories of the simgod that dispel sins—we have not reached the 
point of contentedness. O most excellent one among Devas, the 
fimmostamong the eloquent ones do enlighten us on the follow¬ 
ing points:— the benefit from the worship of the lord, the 
benefit of charitable gifts, the benefits of prostration, kneeling 
down, circumambulation, and tht offerings of lights and incense, 
the rite of scrubbing and cleaning, the benefits of observance 
of fasts anS the merits of taking food only at night. Of what 
form is water libation and where is it to be oftered? How is 



146 


Brahma Ainfpa 


devotion to be pursued 7 How is the lord pleased ? O excel¬ 
lent one among Devas, we wish to hear. 

Brahm^ said : 

7. O excellent brahmins, understand even as they are being 
recounted, the procedure of water libation of worship, de¬ 
votion to the Sun-god, and the faith as well as concentration of 
mind. 

8. Devotion is a pure mental feeling; faith is a favourite 
feeling. Meditation is a perfect concentration. Now listen to 
what I am going to say. 

9. He who narrates the story of the lord with devotion, he 
who wonhips him, he who maintains the holy fires, is called 
the eternal devotee. 

10. He is an eternal devotee whose mind dwells on the 
lord, who thinks about him, who is engaged in the worship of 
the lord and who renders service unto him. 

11. He who praises or permits the holy rites that are per¬ 
formed for the furtherance of the Vedas, O brahmins, is the 
real devotee. He is realty a great man. 

12. The man who performs the holy rites of the Sun is a 
devotee of the higher type. But he should not censure other 
deities nor be jealous of the devotees of those deities. 

13. The man who constantly remembers the Sun-god 
whether staying or moving about, whether sleeping or waking, 
while smelling or keeping the eyes closed or open is indeed the 
greatest devotee. 

14-15* The devotion of thb nature should be practised by 
one who knows. All holy observances are performed with de¬ 
votion and concentxation with the mind dwelling cmi reality. A 
charitable gift should be given to a brahmin (with devotion) 
and actually Devas or the Pitn accept it 

16. Devas accept whatever is offered with devotion whether 
it be a leaf or a flower, a fruit, or water. They avoid athebts. 

17. Purity of mind, good conduct and due observances 
sl^nild be applied to everyone. Whatever b performed with 
.|Rmty of mind becomes fruitful. 

18« One b liberated from sins by the prayer, repetition of 



27.19-32 


147 


holy names, offerings of presents and the worship of Sun*god 
together with observance of fast with devotion. 

19. There is no doubt about this that he who keeps his 
head on the ground and performs obeisance is liberated from 
all sins instantaneously. 

20. The devout man who circumambulates the Sungod 
circumambulates in effect the whole of the earth consisting of 
seven continents. 

21. If a man keeps Sungod in his mind and circumambul¬ 
ates ether, know that Devas have been circumambulated by 
him. 

22-25. O highly blessed ones, the devotee shall take food 
only for once on the sixth day of the lunar fortnight. Main¬ 
taining the holy regulations and restrictions and endowed with 
devotion, the man shall worship sun-god on the seventh day. 
He shall attain the benefit of performing horse-sacrifice. 

He who worships sun-god after observing fast for day and a 
night goes to the world of sun-god by means of a vehicle of 
fiery lustre. One who performs this holy rite on the sixth or 
seventh day of the lunar fortnight attains the supreme goal. 

The devotee who observes fast on the seventh day of the 
black fortnight and conquers his sense-organs and who worships 
the sun-god offering all precious stones, goes to the world of 
the sun-god on a vehicle that has the lustre of a lotus. 

26-32. The devout man shall observe fast on the seventh 
day of the bright fortnight. He shall worship the siuigod with 
the offerings of all white substances. Freed from all sins he goes 
to the world of sun-god. 

On the first day of the following holy rite the devotee shall 
drink a palmful of water held in a leaf cup of the Arka plant. 
He shall increase it by one every day for twentyfour days. Then 
he shall decrease the number by one every day. This process 
continues for two years and the holy rite is concluded then. This 
holy rite Arkasaptami bestows all cherished desires. It is a 
praiseworthy holy rite. 

If a Sunday coincides with the seventh day of the bright 
lunar fortnight it is called Vijaya Saptami. Whatever is offered 
as a charitable gift on that day yields a great benefit Ablution^ 



148 BrchM Purdna 

charitable gU^, penance, sacrifice or fast-^verything observed 
on VijayasaptamI is destruc tive of all great sina» 

Those men who perform Sriddha on Sundays and worship- 
the deity Mah&iveta derive great benefits* Their holy rites 
directed to the Sungod arc fruitful. No impoverished or sick 
'member is born in their families. 

^37« He who plasters the walls of the temple with white,, 
yellow or red clay, 

He who observes fast and worships the Sungod with 
different fragrant flowers will obtain all cherished desires. 

By lighting lamps for the Sun-god with ghee or gingelly oil 
the devotee will attain longevity and beautiful form. He will 
never have the deficiency of visim. 

A person who is engaged in making charitable gifh of lamps 
continuously, shall make the lamp of perfect knowledge blaze. 
With the intellect and the sense-organs clear, the man will be 
liberated sometimes. The gingelly seeds are extremely sacred. 
Charitable gift of gingelly seeds is very excellent. Gingelly seed 
used in holy rites in fire or in lamps is destructive of great sins. 

38. He who makes perpetual offerings of lamps to temples,, 
quadrangles and highways shall become blessed and handsome. 

39. The first preference should be given to lamps with ghee. 
The second preference should be given to the juices of medi¬ 
cinal herbs. It should never be offered with the extracts from 
fat suet or bones. 

40. The lamp shall always bum with the flame leaping 
upwards. It shall never be directed downwards. Thus the 
person who offers lamps becomes refulgent. He shall never 
attain the state of an animal. 

41. The burning lamp should never be taken away nor 
should it be destroyed. The remover of a burning lamp may 
attain imprisonment, destruction, wrath or darkness. 

42-45. The donor of lamps shines in the heavenly world 
like an array of lamps. 

He who adorns tamps with saffion, agallochum and 
paste shall become an excellent man with riches, fame and. 
glorious splendour. 

By offering perpetusd libations of water at sunrise accom* 



27.46-55 


149 

panicd by red flowers mixed with red sandal paste» the clean 
man shall attain success in the course of a year. 

The holy rite of the Sun-god should be observed as 
ibllows:— 

The devotee shall stand facing the sun from sunrise to sun¬ 
set turning when the sun changes direction. He shall continu* 
ously repeat some Mantra or hymn of prayers. This Aditya- 
vrata is destructive of all sins. 

46. He who offers everything along with its ancillaries 
together with the libation of water at the time of sunrise, en- 
•dowed with faith, is liberated from all sins. 

47. He who offers water-libation accompanied by gold, 
-cow, bull, plot of land or cloths will derive benefits lasting for 
seven births. 

48. The libation of water shall be assiduously offered into 
€he fire, water, atmosphere, clean ground, idol or ball of rice. 

49. The libation of water shall not be offered to the 
left or right. It shall be offered straight in front along with 
ghee andGuggula (Aromatic resin) by one who is endowed 
with devotion to Sun-god. 

30-55. The devotee shall offer all worship in front of the 
Sun-god. He is instantaneously liberated from all sins undoub¬ 
tedly. 

By offering Siivasa (turpentue) Devadaru (cidar oil), 
Satjaka (exudation of the Sala tree), camphor, agallochum 
and incense, devotees will go to heaven. 

By worshipping Sun-god during his transit to the tropics of 
<]!apricorn and Cancer in particular, the devotee is liberated 
from all sins. 

By worshipping Sun-god particularly during the Equino- 
'Ctical Visuva transits, SadaSti (i.c. transit to Virgo, Sagit¬ 
tarius, Pisces or Gemini) transits and eclipses, one is liberated 
iiomsins. 

By worshipping Sun-god with devotion whether it is the 
proper time or otherwise on the seashore or elsewberei a man 
is honoured in the world of Sun-god. 

By offering oblations to Sun-god with K^saras (cooked 
grngeUy seeds), milk puddings, tweet piei, fruits, roots or rico 
cooked in gCec he will obtain his cheriihed desires. 



150 Brahma PurO^ 

By performing libation of ghee^ a man will become 
excellent of men. 

56. By performing libation with milk the devotee 15 never 
afflicted by mental distress. 

By performing libation mth curds^ the man attains 
fruition in hU affairs. 

57. He who is mentally and physically pure and fetches 
water for the ablution of sungod from a sacred river or a holy 
pool attains the supreme goal. 

58. By offering an umbrella^ banner canopy, flagstaff and 
chowrics to Sun-god with faith* one will attain his desired, 
goal. 

59. Whatever article a man dedicates to Sun-god with 
devotion will be returned to him by Sungod a hundred thou¬ 
sand times more. 

60« The devotee wipes off his sin, be it the physical* verbal 
or mental by offering obeisance to Sun-god. 

61. Even by hundreds of sacrifices with adequate monetary 
gifts as laid down in scriptures one does not attain benefit 
which is obtained in a single day by the wonhip of Sungod. 

CHAPTER TWENTYEIGHT 
Glc^ of Sm^od 

The Sagis saiii 

1-6. The wonderftil glory of Sun-god* lord of the universe^ 
has hem heard, O most excellent one among gods, even as you 
are recounting the most rare and inaceuible tales among them.. 
O lord of Devas* O lord of universe tell us again what we are 
anxious to know. O brahma, we wish to hear the same. We are 
extremely eager. Which deity shall a devotee desiring liber¬ 
ation worship, no matter whether he be a householder or a 
religious student or a forester or a recluse ? Whence can his 
celestial attainmoit be assured? Wher e from is the supreme 
weliarc gained ? What shall he do» while in the heaven, to 



28.7-17 


151 


prevent his falling off therefrozo? Who is the god of gods? Who 
is the father of manes? O lordofDevas^ tell us that than which 
there is no greater Being. O Brahma^ whence is this universe of 
mobile and immobile beings originated ? Whom does it resort 
to at the time of dissolution? It behoves you to mention that. 

Brahma said : 

7. O excellent brahmins, risii^ up, Sun-god makes the 
tmiverse by his rays free from darkness. There is no other lord 
greater than him. 

8 . He has neither beginnir^ nor death. He is eternal, un* 
changing and force. With his rays he scorches the three worlds 
revolving round. 

9. He is identical with Devas. He is the most excellent 
among the scorchers. He is the lord of entire universe. He is 
the witness unto every activity, auspicious or inauspicious. 

10. He makes the living beii^ shrink. He creates them 
once again. With his rays he illuminates and scorches the earth. 
He causes rain too. 

11. He is the creator and dispenser of destiny. He is the 
first cause of living beings. He purifies all living beings. He 
never faces decline nor does his disc ever dwindle. 

12. He is the father of Manes and the deity of gods. He is 
known as the steady and steadfast abode from which one never 
falls off. 

13. They say that^ at the time of creation, the entire uni¬ 
verse is evolved from Sun-god and at the time of dissolution 
reverts to him. 

14. Abandoning their abode—the physical body—innumei^ 
able Yogins turn into gaseous state and retire to Sungod who is 
a mass of refulgence. 

15. Just as the birds of sky resort to the branches of treesi 
the sages and the liberated souls along with the gods resort to 
his thousands of rays and stay there. 

16-17. Householders, Janaka and other kings possessing 
Yogic virtue, Valakhilyas and other sages who expound Brah¬ 
man, others who arc forestnlwellen and Vyasa and other 
mcndiGantsa>r recluses—all these acquire Yogic power and 
enter the disc of the Sun. 



Brahma Puribfd 


1S2 

18. the glorioiiB son of Vyasa attained Yogic virtuci 

entered the rays of the Sun-god and got union with him never 
to be separated again. 

19« Brahma^ Vispu» Siva and othen are mentioned in the 
Vedas as the bestowers of happiness and the Vedas are only 
words. But lord Sun who destroys darkness is the visible god. 

20. Hence devotional punuiU should not be directed else¬ 
where by him who longs for auspicious benefits, since what is 
not seen never nullifies what is seen. 

21. Hence, Sun-god should always be worshipped by you. 
Indeed, he is the mother, father and preceptor of the universe. 

22«27. The lord without beginning, lord of worlds, lord of 
universe possessing garlands of rays, stationed in the form of 
Sun, blazes, O excellent brahmins. Brahma, devoid of beginning 
and end, permanent lord devoid of decline, created oceans, con- 
tinenu and the fourteen worlds. For the welfare of the world 
he stayed on the banks of the river Candrasarit after creating 
lords of subjects, Prajapatis and other subjects. Therefore, the 
immanifest hundred thousand rayed Sungod divided himself into 
twelve Adityas. They arc :—Indra, Dhatr, Paijanya, Tvastr, 
PQfan, Aryaman, Bhaga, Vivasvat, Viniu Amia (7) (Aihiumkn 
Varupa and Mitra. 

O excellent brahmins, this entire universe has been pervad¬ 
ed by Che Sungod the supreme soul by these twelve-physical 
forms. 

28. The first form of Aditya named Indra is the king of 
Devas. It destroys the enemies of Devas. 

29. His second form glorified by the dame Dhitf is Praji- 
pati who creates diffoecit kinds of subjects. 

30. His third form well known as Parjanya is stationed 
amongst the clouds. It causes rain through the rays. 

31. His fourth f<n*m well known by the name Tvasp* is 
statkmed amidst trees, plants and medicinal herbs all around. 

32. His fifth form well known by the name PQfan is 
statkmed in grains and ediUe foodstuff. It 8tcc<Mtls perpetual 
nourishment unto die fubjeoo* 

53. His sixA form well known as Aryami is the outer cover- 
iiDf'of the Wind. It is stationed among Devas. 

34« His seventh form well known as Bh^pi is stationed 



*28.35-47 


153 


among the elements, living beings and the physical bodies of 
the embodied souls. 

35. His eighth form %^U known as Vivasvan is established 
fire; it digests the food-in-take of the embodied souls. 

36. His ninth form well known as Vifi^u incarnates and 
destroys the enemies of Devas. 

37. His tenth form well known as AiMumin is established 
in the Wind; it delights the subjects. 

38. His eleventh form called Varupa is stationed in the 
waters; it protects subjects continuously. 

39. His twelAh form known as Mitra is stationed on the 
Candrasarit river for the welfare of the world. 

40. Stationed there he performed a penance having air 
alone as his food. 

By the benign glance of his eyes he blessed his devotees 
bestowing several boons. 

41. This first abode was well established later on by the 
lord. Since Mitra (the Sun-god) stayed there it is known as 
Mitravana (forest of Mitra). 

42. O excellent brahmins, this universe is pervaded by the 
supreme being Sungod through these twelve forms. 

43. Hence, the Sungod should be meditated upon and 
worshipped by men with devotion as stationed in the twelve 
forms and their mind shall dwell upon him. 

44. Thus, by bowing to the twelve forms of Sun-god, by 
listening to their accounts and by reading (this account), a 
man is honoured in the world of Sungod. 

The Sages said : 

45. If this sun is the primordial eternal lord where¬ 
fore did he perform penance desirous of boons like a common 
person ? 

Brahmd said: 

46. I shall mention the secret of (Sun-god). This was 
asked by Narada the noble-souled sage and explained to him 
.formerly by Mitra. 

47. The twelve forms of Sungod have been mentioned to 
you before.^ Two of them viz Mitra and Vanipa performed 



154 


Brahma Purii^ 


48. Among them, Vanina performed penance in the Wes« 
tern ocean with water alone as his food«in«take. Mitra perf<HTned. 
penance in Mitravana with air alone as his food«*]n*take. 

49*50. Descending from the peak of Meru during his sojourn 
through the worlds, Narada the Yogin of selfcontrol reached 
Gandkamhdana, He came to the place where Mitra was perform* 
ing penance. Seeing him er^aged in penance N&rada*s curiosity 
was aroused. 

51-52. He thought thus—^*This Mitra is devoid of decline 
and is unchanging. He is manifest and unmanifest. He is eternal. 
The whole of the three worlds has been held as one unit by 
this noble-souled Being. He is the father ofall Devas. He is* 
greater than the greatest Being. Which deity did he worships 
then ? Which ancestors did he propitiate Afrer reflecting* 
thus Nirada spoke to the lord. 

Jidrada said : 

53. Vedas and their ancillary (subsidiary) sections 
and in the Pur&tuts you are glorified as the unborn, perpetual' 
creator of great and excellent fonn. 

34*56. Everything whether past, present or future is found¬ 
ed in you, O lord, the four stages of life worship you every 
day. You have assumed different forms. You are the father and 
mother of everyone. You are the ever-present deity. Wc do not 
know which forefather or lord you worship.** 

Mitra said : 

57. This eternal great secret cannot be adequately express¬ 
ed, even if it should be explained. O brahmin, I shall mention 
it precisely to you since you are endowed with devotion and. 
piety. 

58-61. That which is subtle, incomprehensible, unmanifest, 
steady and devoid of sense-organs, sensual objects and elements 
is the immanent soul of all livmg beings. He is called the 
knower of shrincj the immortal soul* He is the being that lies- 
latent in the mind conceived of as separate from three attribu-' 
tes. He is known as lord Hira^yagarbha. In the Yoga treatises 
he is known as the cosmic intellect, great principle and the 
chief Being. In the systems of SUikhya and Yoga he is said to 



28.62-73 


15S 


be of various natures and names. He has three features; he is 
the soul of the universe; he is known as One and Imperishable. 

62. As a matter of fact the whole of the three worlds is 
one unit. Himself unembodted, he is present in all the bodies. 

63. Though he stays in different bodies he is not tarnished, 
by physical activities. He is your immanent souh mine too, as 
well as of all those others stationed in bodies. 

64. He is the witness unto all living beings. He cannot be 
comprehended by anyone at any place. He is Uentical with the 
universe, with attributes and without attributes. He is known 
as comprehensible through perfect wisdom. 

65. He has the extremities of feet, hands, eyes, heads and 
mouths all round; he has cars all round; he stands enveloping 
everything. 

66 . The universe is his head; the universe constitutes his 
Arms, feet, eyes and nose. He moves about in the body happily 
and comfortably as he wills. 

67. The body is meant by the word Kfetra. The Supreme 
being, the Yogic Atman, comfortably knows everything con¬ 
cerning the body. Hence, he is called the knower of the body. 

68 . He is called Purufa because he lies latent in the 
unmanifest city—the cosmic mind. The word Viiva connotes 
the knowables of diverse kinds. It is called sarva (the com¬ 
posite whole), pervading the universe. 

69. Since he has many forms he is known as Viivarupa. 
The ultimate greatness belongs solely to him. He is called 

70. The sole, eternal Being, holds the title Mahapurufa. 
Endowed with Sattva quality, intelligence and efficiency he 
creates his own soul by his own self. 

71. By his own soul he creates many souls hundredfold, a. 
thousandfold, in hxmdred thousands, in crores. 

72. Just as the water that falls fms firmament undergoes 
a change in taste by virtue of diverse tastes present in the Earth 
so also the soul undergoes change in attributes due to its. 
various contacts. 

73. Just as the singular air within the body functions as 
five organic airs, so also the supreme Being has tinity and 
diversity undoubedly. 




156 


Brahma Par^a 


74« Just as fire undergoes changes in name by virtue of 
particularity of dliTerent sects so also the individual souls 
undergo different titles such as Dhruva, Brahma etc. 

75. Just as a single lamp lights up thousands of lampS) so 
also he, though single, gives birth to thousands of forms. 

76. When he realizes his self he becomes alone and single. 
When singleness dissolves, diversity and multiplicity begin to 
function. 

77. There is no living, mobile or immobile, who is 
permanent in this universe. The supreme self alone is called 
indeclinable (immeasurable, incomprehensible) and omni¬ 
present. 

78. O excellent sages, the unmanifest consisting of three 
attributes originated from him. That which is tintnanifest, that 
the form of which is not clear, is called primordial nature. 

79. Understand that primordial nature is the womb of 
Brahman; he who is of the nature of existent and non-existent 
is wonhipped in the world, in the holy rites pertaining to 
Devas and manes. 

80. O brahmins, there is none greater than he; therefore 
he the father or lord is greater than every being. He is com¬ 
prehensible through the soul. Hence I worship him* 

81. The embodied beings who are present in heaven make 
obeisance to him. Thereby, O celestial sage, they attain the 
benefit and goal as directed. 

82. Devas who have assumed different forms, who are 
stationed in their respective stages of life, devoutly worship that 
primordial Being. He bestows salvation on them. 

83. He is called omnipresent and devoid of attributes. 
Having heard thus and having understood it, I worship the 
lord. 

84. Those who are sanctified by him resort to the sole and 
single entity. This is a further achievement unto them that 
they enter the sole and single entity. 

85. Thus, O N&rada, the secret doctrine has been narrat¬ 
ed to you. O celestial sage, by virtue of your devotion to tis^ 
the greatest fact has been revealed u> you. 

86 . AU those sages who iid^ibed this ancient knowledge 
•devote themselves to the worship of Sungod. 



28.87—29.1^ 


157 


Brahmd said : 

87. Thus, this had been formerly recounted to Nirada by 
Sun^'god—through his form—Mitra. O caccellent bralimins, 
thus, the story of sun*god has been mentioned to you. 

88 . O excellent brahmin thb narrative recounted by me 
should be mentioned only to the good. This should never be 
imparted to one who is not a devotee of the solar deity. 

89. There is no doubt that the man vrho listens to this 
account and narrates the same to another, will enter the lord 
of thousand brilliant rays. 

90. The agonized will be liberated from ailment by listen¬ 
ing to this story from the beginning. Those who are desirous of 
knowing shall derive perfect knowledge and the desired goal. 

91. O sage, he who reads this account obtains the path of 
salvation instantaneously. Whatever one wbhei for, one un* 
doubtcdly attains it. 

92. Hence, lord Sun should be worshipped by you all. He 
is the creator, dispenser of destiny and the preceptor of all. 


CHAPTER TWENTYNINE 
Jiam of Sun^god 


Brahmd said : 


1. O excellent sages, the three worlds have the sun as their 
source of origm. The entire universe including Devas, Asuras 
and human beings originates from him. 

2-3. The brilliance of the deities viz—Rudra, Upendra 
and Mahendra, the splendour c£ the leading brahmins and 
heaven-dwellers of great refulgence, nay the refulgence of all 
the worlds is lord Sun—the soul of all, the lord of all—Devas 
as well as human beings. The sun alone is the root cause of 
three worlds. He alone is the greatest deity. 


4. The ^hee offerings duty c^igned to the fire produce 
clouds which in turn generate rain. * Rain mginates food-grain 
whereby the subjects are nourished. 



158 


Brakma Purb^a 


5. Everything is bom of him; everything is dissolved in 
him. He is the cause of origin and destruction of the universe* 

6 . The meditation of those who meditate, the liberation of 
those who are liberated centre round Sungod. They are absorb* 
<d in him but are reboi n of him* This happens frequently* 

7-8. The following units of time have their origin in the 
Sun-god—moments, Muburta (units of 48 nets) ^ days, nights, 
fortnights, months, years, seasons and Yugas. These cannot be 
reckoned without him; without calculation of time there is no 
holy observance, there is no holy rite in the sacrificial fire* 

9-10. Without sun-god who steals water and then showers 
it, how can the seasons be classified ? How can fruits and 
flowers occur ? How can vegeution be produced ? How can 
grasses and medicinal herbs grow ? It is due to his power that 
these occur in the universe. Otherwise, there will be an absence 
of all dealings among the creatures here and hereafter* 

11. The sun does not blaze if there be no rain; the sun is 
not happy if there be no rain; the sun has no halo if there is no 
rain; the sun blazes due to water. 

12-13. Tlie sun is tawny in spring; during summer he res¬ 
embles gold, he is white during rainy season; he is pale, grey 
during autumn; he is copper-coloured in early winter; he is red 
during late winter. Thus the colours of sun-god caused by the 
seasons have been recounted. 

14-18. With colour naturally belonging to the season, the 
sun causes welfare and prosperity. There are twelve general 
names of Sun-god and there are twelve other names severally. 

I shall mention all of them. 

The following are the twelve general names Aditya, 
Saviti, Surya, Mihira, Arka, Prabhakara, Martanda, Bhiskara, 
Bhanu, Citrabhinu, Divikara and Ravi* The Sungod is known 
by these twelve general names. 

The following are the twelve Adityas reckoned separately :— 

Vi|Qu, Dh&tf Bhaga, Pu^, Mitra, Indra, Vani^, Aryama, 
Vivasvin, Amiumin, Tvayfr ^nd Pkijanya* They are separate 
forms rising in twelve months respectively 

19. VifQU blazes in the month of Caitra. Aryami in 
Vaiialdia; Vivasvin in Jyeylha and Aihium&n in Afidha. 



•29.20-35 


159 


20. Parjanya blazes in the month of ^ravana, Varupa in 
Trauftlu^ada, Indra in Aivayuja and Dhatr in Karttika. 

21. Mitra blazes in the month of Margafirfa; Pu^> Bhaga 
in M&gha and Tvaffr in PhAlguna. 

22 . Vifpu blazes with one thousand two hundred rays. 
Aryami with one thousand three hundred rays. 

23-26. Vivasvan with one thousand four hundred rays; 
Adiium&n with one thousand five hundred rays; Parjanya and 
Vanina like Vivasvan; Bhaga is like Mitra one thousand and 
foiir hundred rays; lord Tva^tr with one thousand and one 
hundred rays; Indra with one thousand and two hundred rays; 
Dhatr with one thousand and one hundred rays; Mitra with 
a thousand rays and Pu^an with nine hundred rays. 

During the northern transit of the sun, the rays increase; 
during the southern transit the rays decrease. Thus, sun-god 
sustains worlds by thousands of rays. 

27. The means of protection in different seasons 1% msmifold. 
The sun has a set of tweniyfour names. They have been 

mentioned already. The sun has another set of one thousand 
names. They have been glorified in detail. 

The sages said : 

28. O Prajapati, O great lord, what is the merit and the 
1 of those who eulogise the sun-god with those thousand 

names ? 


Brahmd said : 

29-30. O leading sages, listen to the eternal truth. Enough 
of those thousand names, should one recite the following 
auspicious prayer. Listen, I shall relate to you those secret, 
sacred and splendid names of the Sun-god. 


31-33. The Prayer of Twiniyone names. 

The twentyone names of Lord sun arc VikarC^u, Vivasvan, 
Martanda,Bh&skara, Ravi, Lokaprakafaka, Sriman,Lokacak^u 4 , 
Mabeivara, Lokasakfi, Trilokefa Karti, Harta, Tamisraha, 
Tapana, Tipana, Suci, S^Ufvavihana, Gabhastihaita, 
Brahmapya Sarvadevanamaskrta. These are twentyone 
names of the Sun-god. This prayer is always liked by Sun-god. 



160 


Brahma PurS$ir 


34. This prayer is ealled 'Royal’. It is well known in 
the Uiree worlds. It is conducive to the health of body. It 
causes increase in riches and enhances glory. 

35. O excellent brahmins, he who remains pure and eulo¬ 
gises the Sun-god with this hymn atthe two junctions viz sunrise 
and sunset, is liberated from all sins. 

36. By repeating this hymn but once in the presence of 
the sun all sins perish whether they are mental, physical or 
verbal or caused by other activities. 

37. Repetition of thb hymn for once is Uxe Mantra for 
Homai and worship during the twilight, it is the mantra for 
incense, for Arghyaandfor oblations too. 

38. If this great Mantra is accompanied by the gift of 
cooked rice, or obeisance or circun^ambulation it dispels all 
sins. It is splendid. 

39. Hence, you all should eulogise the lord, the bestower 
of boons, one who grants all cherished desires, assiduously, by 
reciting this hymn, O brahmins. 


CHAPTER THIRTY 
^fatiuify of Sun-god 

Thi sag€S said :— 

1-2. The sun-god has been mentioned by you as the eternal 
lord who is devoid of attributes. What is heard by us as men-* 
tioned by you now is that he was bom in twelve forms. How 
was that lord of great lustra the mass of refulgence bom of 
womb of a woman ? Our doubt in respect to this is very great. 

Brahmd said :— 

3« Dakta had sixty excellent splendid daughten viz:—^Aditi 
Diti, Danu, Vinata and others. 

4. Dakfa gave thirteen of his daughters to Kafyapa. Aditi 
gave birth to Devas the Imds of three worlds. 

5. Did gave birth to Daityai; Danu to Dinavaa who were 




S0.6«15 


161 


haughty on account of their strength. Vinata and others gave 
birth to mobile and immobile beings. 

6 . O sage, with the sons and daughters and their sons and 
grandsons, the entire universe b pervaded. 

7. Devas were important among the sons of Kaiyapa. They 
are purely of Sattva quality. The other sons were of Rajas and 
Tamas qualities. 

8 . The creator Paramesthin, the most excellent one among 
those conversant with the Brahman, Prajapati made Devas the 
partakers of shares in sacrifices and the lords of the three 
worlds. 

9-10. Due to enmity, Daityas and Danavas harassed them 
collectively. 

The Rak^asas too joined them. The combat raged furiously, 
continued lor a thousand years according to divine calculation. 
Devas were tortured. Daityas and Danavas were victorious, in 
the battle. 

On seeing the sons routed by Daityas and Danavas and the 
three worlds destroyed, O excellent sages, Aditi was afflicted. 
On seeing her sons deprived of shares in sacrifices and afflicted 
by hunger she became dbtressed. 

11. She endeavoured much for propitiating the sun. 
Restralnii^ her diet and concentrating her mind she resorted 
to the holy observances of regulations. She eulogbed Sun-god 
stationed in the firmament as a mass of refulgence. 

Aditi said : 

12*15. Obebance to you who bear inimitable lustre, that 
b very subtle and worthy of homage. O lord of rays, 1 bow to 
you, the eternal support of refulgence, lord of refulgent ones. I 
bow to that fierce form which you have, while taking up the Juice 
at the proper for rendering service to the worlds. I bow 
to that fierce form you have when you hold the watery juice 
taken during eight months. I bow to that form of youn that 
b cmnbined with Rajas during the two junctbns (Le. at dawn 
and at dusk} • Obebance to you» that soul with attributes that 
will bestow on me what 1 desire in my mind. I bow to that 
blazing form you have by virtue of unificatiM of Yajus and 
Siman (the three Vedas)* ( 



162 


Brahma Puritfa 


16. Obeisance toyouj the lustrous one that scorchest the 
three worlds. The form that is beyond it is meditated upon 
by utterring Om. It is gross and non^gross. It is free from 
impurities, O eternal lord, obeisance to that form. 

Brahmd said : 

17. O brahmins, desirous of propitiating Sun-god, that 
gentle lady eulogised thus day and night. She maintained the 
observance of all holy rites. She abstained from taking food* 

18. O excellent brahmins, aAer a long time, the sun-god 
became visible to that daughter of Dakfa. 

19. She saw a massive peak of refulgence enveloping the 
sky and standii^ on the ground. She saw the sun-god extremely 
unbearable by virtue of dense mass of flames. 

20. On seeing him, the gentle lady became excessively 
awe«struck. 

Adifi said : 

21-23. O lord of rays, the original cause of the univene, 
I am unable to look at you. O sun-god, be pleased with me; let 
me see the form you possess. O lord, sympathetic with devotees, 
protect my sons, your devotees. 

Thereupon, the sun-god came out of that mass of refulgence. 
The lord sungod was then seen resembling copper. 

The sun-god said to that gentle lady who bowed to him 
reverentially. 

^‘Ohoose any boon from me; whatever you wish’* 

24. Touching the ground with her knees she bent her head 
and replied to Sungod the bcstower of boons who stood near 
her. 

Adiii said : 

25. O lord, be pleased. The three worlds that belonged to 
my sons and their shares in sacrifices, have been taken away by 
Daityas and D&navas of superior valour and might. 

26. On that account, O lord of rays, grant me a favour. 
With a part of yours adopt their brotherhood, my s<m, and 
destroy th^ir enemies. 

27-28. O sui% be pleased and favour them with sympathy, 



30.29*39 


163 


O lord, so that they may once again be the partakers of their 
ahares in sacrifice and be overlords of the three worlds. O un« 
aevcring lord, the remover of distress of those who resort to 
you, you are one who can do this work. 

29. Thereafter, O bradimins, lord Sun the thief of waters, 
the lord who had a pleasant gentle iace, spoke to Aditi who 
bowed to him. 

30. '*Witb the thousandth part of mine I shall be born in 
your womb. Efficient that 1 am, 1 shall, ere long, kill the enc* 
mies of your sons and become delighted’*. 

31. Having spoken thus, lord Sun vanbhed thereafter* 
Having secured everything she had desired she ceased from her 
activities in pursuit of penance. 

32*34. In order to fulfil her desire, at the end of a year 
thereafter, the Sui^od took up his residence in the womb of Aditi 
by means of one of his rays Sufumna amongst a thousand. With 
great concentration and mental purity she performed several 
holy rites: Krechra, Gandrayana, etc. O brahmins, it was with 
this viz. shall conceive this divine foetus with great purity’’ 
that she performed those holy rites. Thereupon Kaiyapa spoke 
to her, with words full of wrath. 

35-37. ‘*Why do you destroy the Egg of the foetus by 
observing a perpetual fast ?” Provoked by his query she spoke 
furiously to him—^‘See the foetus for yourself. It is not killed* 
He will certainly cause a death-blow to the enemies”. In¬ 
furiated by the utterance of her husband she uttered these 
words and discharged the terrible ibetus that was dazzling 
with splendour. On seeing that the foetus had the refulgence 
of the rising sun, Kaiyapa bowed and eulogised respectfully in 
words of high order. 

38. Even as he was eulogised the lord revealed himself out 
of the Egg of the foetus. He had the lustre and colour similar 
to those of the petals of a lotus. He pervaded the quarten by 
means of his splendour. 

39. Addressing Kaiyapa the excellent %zge and bis wife 
from the firmament an unembodied voice as grave and maj« 
estic as the fumbling sound of the cloud uttered thus * 



164 


Brahma Purlhia 


Thi Void said i 

40. O sage, since this foetus of Aditi was pronounced 
slain by you, this son of yours will come to be called M&r- 
tanda. 

41 -42« He will slay Asuras, the enemies who took away 
shares Innn sacrifices. 

On hearing the voice from die firmament, Aditifelt excessively' 
delightful since without a war Danavas had their prowess crip* 
pled, Indra challenged Daityas for a fight. 

43. In the company of Devas he felt very joyous; Danavas 
rushed against him. The battle of Dcvas with the Asuras was 
terrible. 

44*46. With the intervening spaces between the worlds 
brightened up by the continuous shower of weapons and mis¬ 
siles the combat raged furiously. On being stared at by sungod, 
Asuras were burnt by his refulgence and were reduced to ashes 
in the course of that battle making the heaven^dwellers attain 
unparalleled delight. They eulogised Aditi and the sun*god, the 
source of the mass of refulgence. They regained the lost rights 
and their due shares in the sacrifice. 

47. Lord Sun too aercised his rights. Enveloped by his 
rays beneath and above like the blossoms of Kadamba he 
resembled a ball of fire. His physical fonn appeared clearly. 

Jhisagis said: 

46. How did the sun*god, later on, attain the shining form 
like the globular blossoms of the Kadamba? O lord of the 
universe, recoimt it to us. 

BrahmH said: 

49. Afrer bowing to him and propitiating him, the Pra* 
japati Tvaytr Viivakarmat gave his daughter Saxhjfia to the 
Sun^od. 

50. The lord of the rays begot three children of her, two 
highly blessed sons and a daughter, Yamuni. 

51. The sun*god scorched the three worlds consisting of 
the mobile smd immobile beings with his abundant refulgence. 

52. Seeing the form of the sun-god like a ball of fire and 



'30.53-6S 


165 


unable to bear the excessive splendour, Saihjfii spdce to her 
shadow—Cbiy &. 

Sayhjhd saidx 

53. O splendid lady, welfare unto you. I shall go to my 
father’s house. At my bidding you stay there itself without 
being affected in the least. 

54. These two boys of mine and this faircomplexioned 
daughter should be brought up by you. This secret should not 
be divulged to the lord at any rate. 

OUfyd said: 

55. Unless I am seieed by tresses, until I am cursed I shall 
never reveal your secret. You may go wherever you have desire 
to go. 

56*57. Assured thus Saihjfti went to the abode of her father. 
She continued to stay in her father’s house for a thousand years. 
Frequently pressed by her father to return to her husband she 
assumed the form of a mare and went to the northern Kurus. 

58-61. O excellent brahmins, desisting from food the 
chaste lady performed a penance there. 

When Sarbjfia had gone off to her father’s place, Ch&ya 
who had assumed her form abided by her instructions and 
approached the sun-god. Taking her to be Saihjfta, the sun- 
god begot ofher two sons and a daughter. The Earthly Samjfta 
(i.e. Ghaya) did not show as much affection to the children 
bom before as she showed to her own children. Manu (the 
elder son) did not mind it but Yama (the younger son did 
not brook it. 

62. Afflicted in many ways by his step-mother he became 
extremely sad. Whether it was due to anger or to childishness 
or Co the tomt of his inevitable future he threatened her with 
his lifted foot but he did not let it fall on her form. 

CkiyS said: 

63, Since you have threatened your father’s wife senior 
to you (in age), this foot of yours vdil undoubtedly Ihll oft 



Brchma Pwi^a 




Brakmd saidi 

64» Yazna became extremely afflicted in mind due to that 
curse. Accompanied by Manu» that righteous soul intimated 
everything to his lather. 


Tama said*. 

65-66. O lord, our mother does not treat us with equal 
afiectitm. Leaving off the elder ones she desires to nourish the 
younger ones with devoted love. Of cotirse the foot was lifted 
up but it did not touch her body; whether this was due to my 
childishness or delusion it behoves you to forgive the same. 

67. O father^ I, the son, have been cursed by thismother in. 
great anger. Hence, O foremost one among those who blaze, I 
do not consider her as my true mother. 

68 . O lord of rays, think of the ways and means whereby^ 
your grace, my foot may not fall off as a result of my mother’s 
curse. 


Th$ Sm-godsaidi 


69. O son, certainly a great reason must lie behind this 
aflair since you, conversant with virtue and holy rites, have 
been swayed by wrath. 

70. There are remedies for all curses but there is none to 
ward off the curse of one’s mother. 


71. It is not possible to n^ative the curse of your mother.. 
But I shall do something to attenuate the effects of the curse. 

72. Worms will take off flesh fran your foot and go down 
to the earth. Thereby your mother’s curse will be carried out 
and you will also be saved. 


Bfokmdsaidx 

73-74. Adityasaid toChiyi:—’‘When the sons are equal 
why did you treat one with more affection? Certainly, you are 
not the real mother: Saiiijfik has gone away somewhere. A real 
mother will not curse her children even if they are worthless 
(bols. 

75. Afraid of being cursed by Sungod she who had been 
avoiding it so far, revealed herself to him. 



30.76-87 


167 


76. On httring that, the lun-god went to hit ftther-in-law. 
(Tvaftr) of holy rites, honoured the sun-god of great 
splendour. As the god appeared at the point of burning him up 
in hii wrath, he pacified him. 

ViivakormS said: 

77. This form of youn, permeated by excessive refulgence 
is unbearable. Unable to bear it, Saihjfii is performing a pen¬ 
ance now in the forest. 

78. Today you will see her. Of auspicious conduct she 
is performing a penance for your gentler forms and features, in 
the forest. 

79. Brahmins statement has been heard by me. O lord, if 
it pleases you, I shall make your form more lovely and glossy, 
O lord of heaven. 

Brahmd said : 

80-81. Thereupon the sun-god said to Tvaftr ‘Sobeit*. 
Permitted by the sun-god Viivakanni mounted him on his lathe 
in the Sakadvipa and began to whet the disc that had been 
originally circular and rough. 

82. When the sun, the central pivot of the worlds, began 
to rotate, the Earth along with the oceans, mountains and 
forests rose up into the sky. 

83. O brahmins, O highly blessed ones, the entire firma¬ 
ment including the moon, planets and stars came tumbling as 
if pulled down and agitated. 

84. Waters of oceans splashed up. The great mountains 
crumbled down with their rows of ridges broken up and 
scattered. 

85. The abodes having Dhruva the Pole Star for their 
support came down, O excellent sages, as the cofds of rays that 
hdd them together, snapped. 

86. Thousands of huge clouds were tossed up by gusts of 
wind as they fell and wli^led about with great velocity. They 
rumbled terribly as they were shattered to pieces. 

87. O excellent sages, with the Earth, sky and nether 
regions whirling about along with the routing Sungod the 
entire cosmos became excessively agitated at that time. 



Brahma PwUffa 


m 

/ 88. On seeing the three, worlds thus whirled about, the 
oelestiaL sages and Devas eulogised the sun-god alongwithSrahma. 

« 89«92« ^^You are the priznordial lord of Devas. You are 
bom for the prosperity of Earth. You stand by in three forms 
at the time of creation, sustenance and dissolution. Hail to you, 
O lord of Universe, O Sun-god, O bcstower of virtue.” 

As the lord was being whetted and scraped Indra and other 
Devas eul<^ised thus 

lord, O lord of the universe, be victorious. O lord of 
cosmos, be victorious”. 

The seven sages, Vasiftha, Atri and others eulogised him by 
various hymns. They said: ”Hail, Hail”. 

Tlie Valakhilyas^ too eulogised sun*god by their excellent 
worlds and passages of the Vedas. 

93-96. Ahgiras and others were extremely joyous and they 
eulogised Sungod who was being whetted. 

lord, you bring salvation to those who are desirous of 
liberation. You are the object of meditation for those who 
meditate. You are the goal of all living beings following 
the section of the Vedas on Rituals. O lord of Devas, you are 
worthy of being worshipped. O lord of worlds, may we achieve 
welfare. May we the bipeds have welfare. Let welfare befall 
the quadrupeds.” 

The Vidyadharas, Yak|as, Rak^asas and Nagas joined their 
palms in reverence. With heads bent they made obeisance to 
Sun-god. They uttered different words pleasing to ears and 
minds. 

97-100. ”May your splendour be bearable to the living 
beings. O sanctifier of living beings.” 

Then Haha, Huhu, Narada and Turoburu* all experts in 
the art of mu$ic-^b^;an to sing in praise of Sun-god. They 
were experts in $adja, Madhyama and Gandhara notes. Their 

1. thousand hermits of the size ci half a thumb live 

in the solar region. Wearing hides of they travel in front ot the am in 

the shape of birds. 

2. H&hi Hnhfl, NIrada and Tumbtiru were diitinguisbed muncians in 
Ancient World. Purank Utmture is full of thdr anecdotes. Similarly, Vilv&d, 
GhfUcI, Urvafl, Tilotcamh, MmaH, Salvyanyi and Rambbi were celeiCial 
courtesans hi^y skilled in the art of instrumental munc. 



30.101-109 


169 


songs were pleasing by virtue of their soft Modulation, intona¬ 
tion (beating of time and mode of perimmance). 

While Sungod, lord of the worlds, was being whetted, the 
celestial damsels danced. They were Viivad, GhrtacI, TJrvafl, 
Tilottama, Mcnaldi, Sahajanya and Rambha, the most excel¬ 
lent one among the celestial nymphs. 

101-102. They showed various gestures and dancing tricks. 
Emotions were tickled by their poise, elegant movements and 
seductive twists. 

Various musical instruments such as lutes, flutes, gongs, 
drums of diverse kinds such as Panavas, Pu^karas, Mrdai^^as, 
Pafahas, Anakas and Durulubhis, and hundreds and thousands 
of conches were played. 

103. A great tumult arose as they were singing, dancing 
and playing on instruments such as Turyas and Vaulitras. 
Gandharvas and Apsaras raised their pleasing sounds every¬ 
where. 

104. Then, with their palms joined in reverence, with 
their bodies bending low with devotion, the deities made 
obeisance, even as the thousand-rayed Sun-god was being 
whetted. 

105. Amidst that sonorous din, in the assembly of living 
beings, Visvakarma went on whetting slowly and steadily. 

106. The Sun-god was whetted carefully and skilfully up 
to the knees by Vifvakarma. He did not approve of further 
whetting. Hence, he was brought down from the lathe. 

107. As the surplus refulgence was shed off, the unbearable 
-form vanished. It increased in pleasing lustre and attractive 
shape. 

108-109. By listening to this story ofwhetting of Sungod 
who is the cause of seasons when snow falls, clouds shower water 
and heat increases and who is praised by Siva, the lotus-seated 
Brahma and Vispu, one goes to the world of Sungod at the 
final departure from this world. 

Thus it was, O excellent sages, that Sun-god took birth 
formerly. His excessively beautiful form has already been 
^counted by me. 



170 


Brahma PurS$it 


CHAPTER THIRTYONE 
Om Hundred and Eight J^ames of Sun^God 
Tht sagis said : 

1-2. Please tell us more stories about Sun-god. Listening^ 
to the pleasing stories we never reach the point of satiety. The 
Sungod if brilliant. He has great refulgence like that of mass of* 
fire. O lord, we wish to know this—whence is the greatness and. 
power of that god ? 

Brahmd said : 

3-4. When the worlds were enveloped in darkness^ when, 
mobile and immobile beings perished at the outset, the 
cosmic intellect wasbmt of Primordial Nature. It was the cause* 
of the attributes. Ego, the activiser of great elements, was bora, 
thereof. Then wind, fire, waters. Ether and Earth originated. 
Thereafter, the (Cosmic) Egg was bom. 

5. It is in this Egg that these seven worlds are founded.. 
The Earth is inclusive of seven continents and seven oceans. 

6. Lord Visou, lord Siva and I (Brahma) were stationed, 
there alone. All of us were deluded by all-enveloping darkness. 
We were meditating on the supreme god. 

7. Thereafter, Sun-god the dispeller of darkness, the deity* 
of great brilliance, appeared. Then he was recognized as Savitr 
(Sun-god) by us by our Yogic power of meditation. 

8. After realising him as the Supreme Soul we eulogised, 
him by means of divine hymns. 

9. Rrayer: You are the primordial lord of Devas. By your 
power of lordship you are called livara. You are the first 
maker of all living beings. You are the cause of daylight and. 
the lord of Devas. 

10. You are the enlivener of all living beings. Devas,. 
Gmidharvas, R&kfasas, sages, Kinnaras, Siddhas, Nagas and. 
birds. 

11. You are Brahma, Siva, Viypu. You arc Praj&pati. You. 
are the wind god, Indra, Moon, Sun-god and Varupa. 

12. You are time, the creator, annihilator and sustainer. 



SL13-24 


171 


You are the lord. You are the riverSi oceans, mountains, lightn*^ 
ing and Rainbow. 

13-14. You are (the cause of) dissolution and origin. You 
are Eternal, manifest and unmanifest. Beyond livara is Know¬ 
ledge. Beyond Knowledge is Siva. You alone are the lord, 
greater than Siva. You are Paramelvara. You have the extre¬ 
mities of feet and hands all round. You have eyes, hands and 
mouths all round. 


15. You have thousand tays, thousand faces, thousand feet 
and thousand eyes. You are the cause of Elements. You are the 
worlds Bhu, Bhuvahj Svab, Mahar, Satya, Tapas and Jana. 

16. The form that the leading Devas praise is divine, 
brilliant, and difficult to comprehend. It dazzles, it illuminates 
the world. Obeisance to you. 

17. The form that you possess is resorted to by Devas and 
Siddhas. You are eulogised hy Bhrgu, Atri, Pulaha and others. 
Your form is extremely unmanifest. Obeisance to you. 

18. The form that you possess is comprehensible to those 
who know the Vedas. It is accompanied by cminiscience. You 
are the overlord of all Devas. Obeisance to you. 


19. The form that you possess is identical with the world. 
It is the creator of Universe. It is worshipped by Fire-god and 
Devas. It is stationed everywhere, yet incomprehensible. 
Obeisance to you. 

20. The form that you possess is greater than sacrifice, 
greater than the Veda, greater than the world, greater than 
heaven. It is famous as the supreme soul. Obeisance to you. 

21. The form that you possess isunrealisable, unobservable 
and unchaining. It is not realized in meditation. It has neither 
a beginning nor an end. Obeisance to you. 

22. Obeisance to the causes. Obeisance to you who liberate 
from sins. Obeisance to you honoured by Adid. Obeisance to* 
you who dispel ailments. 

23. Obeisance, obeisance to you who bestow boons. Obeis¬ 
ance to you who bestow happiness. Obeisance, obeisance to 
you who bestow riches. Obeisance, obeisance to you who- 


bestow int^ect. 

24. When eulogised thus, die I 




asnuning the briOuat 



172 


Brahma Pur^ 


form expresied inauspicious worlds—'Vhat boon shall be given 

to you?”. 

% 

Devos said : 

25. ”0 lordi none will be tempted to bear this excessively 
brilliant form of yours. Vor the weliare of the worldi may that 
form become bearable.’’ 

26. Saying “Let it be so/’ the Sungodthe cause of all 
creation began to bestow hcat^ rain and snow for the fulfilment 
of all worldly affairs. 

27. Ever since, the adherents of Sahkhya, Yoga and other 
systems of thought who seek salvation meditate on you who are 
seated in heart. 

26. Even if a man is devoid of good traits, even if he is 
imbued with heinous sins, he surmounts all by resorting to 
your feet. 

29. The holy rite of Agnihotra, Vedas and sacrifices where«> 
in much wealth is distributed as gifts do not deserve even a 
sixteenth part of devout obeisance of the devotee being offered 
to you. 

30. Devotees resort to you who are on a par with the 
^eatest of all holy centres, the most auspicious of all auspicious 
things and the holiest of all holy objects. 

51. Those who bow down to you, who are eulogised by 
Indra and others are liberated from sins and go to your world. 

The sages said; 

32. O Brahma, for a very long time we had been cherishing 
this desire to hear. Tell us the hundred and eight names of 
Sun-god which had previously been mentioned by you. 

Brakmd said: 


33. O brahmins, even as I recount to you the hundred and 
eight names of the Sungod, they constitute a great secret which 
yields celestial pleasures and salvation. 


Cm Hundred and Eight Homes a/Sun-Gcd 

3445. (l)Surya (2) Aryaman (noble-spleodoured) (3) 
Bl^ga (fortune) (4) Tvay(r (3) Puyan (nourisher) (6) Arka(7) 



31.35-45 


173 


Savitr (one who begets subjects) (8) Ravi (9) Gabhastiman 
(possessed of rays) (10) Aja (unborn) (11) Kala (Time) (12) 
Mftyu (Death) (13) Dh&tr (creator) (14) Prabhakara (cause 
of lustre) (15) Identical with Earth (16) Water (17) Fire (18) 
Ether (19) Wind (20) Parayania (the greatest resort) (21) 
Soma (Moon) (22) Bthaspati (Jupiter) (23) Sukra (Venus) 
(24) Budha (Mercury) (25) Ahgaraka (Mars) (26) Indra (27) 
Vivasviui (possessing riches) (28) Diptamsu (having bright 
rays) (29) Suci (pure) (30) ^uri (31) Sanaiicara (Saturn) 
(32) Braluna (33) Vif^u (34)Rudra (35) Skanda (36) Vai- 
Sravana (Kubera) (37) Yania-(38) Vaidyula (lightning) (39) 
Jathara Agni (gastric 6re) (40)Aindhana (fuel fire)(41) Teja- 
saih Pati (Lord of brilliance) (42) Dharma^vaja (banner of 
Virtue) (43) Vedakarti (creator of the Vedas) (44) Ved&hga 
(ancillary of the Vedas) (45) Vedavahana (having Vedas 
for Vehicle) (46) Krta (47) Treta (48) Dvapara (49) Kali (50) 
Sar\‘amar&iraya (supportof all immortal beings) (51) Identi¬ 
cal with time units such as Kala, Ka^thk, Muhurta, Kfapa 
(night) Yamas, and K^apas (52) Samvatsarakara (cause of 
the year) (53) Aivattha (holy fig tree) (54) K&lacakra 
(Wheel of Time) (55) Vibhavasu (having lustre as riches) (56) 
Saivatapuru»a (permanent Being) (57) Yogin (58) Vyaktivy- 
akta (hfanifest and Unznanifest) (59) Sanatana (Eternal) (60) 
KMadhyak^a (Presiding deity of Time) (61) Prajadhyakfa 
(lord of subjects) (62) Viivakarma (of universal activities) 
(63) Tamonuda (dispeller of darkness) (64) Varupa (65) 
SagaramiSa (part of the Sea) (66) Jimuta (cloud) (67) Jivana 
(enlivener) (68) Ariha (destroyer of enemies) (69) Bhutalraya 
(support of Elements) (70) BhQtapati (Lord of living be¬ 
ings) (71) Sarvalokanamaskrta (bowed by all the worlds) 
(72) Srastr (creator) (73) Vivartaka (transformer) (74) 
Yajfti (Possessor of sacrifices) (75) Sarvasya Adi (cause of all) 
(76) Alolupa (n<m-greedy (77) Artanta (without an end) 
(78) Kapila (79) Bhanu (80) Kimada (bntower of desires) 
(81) Sarvatomukha (having faces all round) (82) Jaya (Vic¬ 
torious) (83)Vi4ala (extensive) (84)Varada (bestower of boons) 
(85) Sarvabhiitahitarata (engaged in the wel&re of all living 
beings) (86) Manah (mind) (87) Suparpa (88) Bhfitidi 
(cause of elements) (89) Sighraga (moving But) (90) Prkna- 



174 


Brahtui Pur/bfa 


<lhftraQa (mstainer of life) (91) Dbanvantari (92) Dhumaketu 
(comet) (93) Adideva (first lord) (94) Adite^i Suta^i (Son 
'OfAditi) (95) Dvadaiitmi (having twelve forms) (96) Ravi 
(97) Dakva (Efficient} (98) Piti» M&tA, Pitimaha (father, 
mother, grandfather) (99) Svargadv&ra (gateway to heaven) 
(100) Prajidv&ra (entrance to the Subjects) (101) Mokfa* 
-dvira (entrance to Salvation) (102) Triviftapa (heaven) (103) 
Dehakarti (creator of the body) (104) Prafintatma (of calm 
aoul) (105) VUv&tmi (soul of the universe) (106) Vifvatomuklta 
'(having faces all round) (107) CariGaritm& Suk9m&tmi (the 
-subtle soul of the mobile and immobile beings (108) Maitreya 
Karu^nvita (ion of Mitra endowed with mercy). 

46. O excellent sages, this is the beautiful hymn of one 
hundred and eight names of the S ungod of unmeasured 
'Splendour. He is worthy of being glorified. It has thus been 
recounted by me. 

47-49. For the welfare of all I make my obeisance to the 
tun-god who is served by Devas, manes and Yakyas, who is 
'Saluted by Asurai, mcx>n and Siddhas, and who has the lustre of 
gold and fire. 

The man who reads this hymn with great concentration 
at sunrise shall obtain sons, wives, riches, heaps of precious 
gems, faculty of remembering previous birth, perpetual memory 
and the finest of intellects. 

The man who repeats this prayer of the most excellent of 
Devas, with pure mind and concentration, is liberated from 
conflagration of miseries and ocean of sorrows. He obtains all 
objects of his desire. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTWO 
p0rmC9 of Umd 

Srahmd saidt 

1-3. The omnipresent 1ml Rudra who was famous as the 
enemy of the three cities^ the three-eyed, beloved of Utn&, and 

1. 8ivt wfap destroyed three cities of gold, alver and itma in 

the ifcy, air and earth built for Aiuras by Maya. 



32.4*13 


175 


inoon«crested drove out all Devai, Siddhas, Vidyidharas 
Oandharvas, Yak^as* Nagas and &ages who had assembled at 
Dakfa’s sacrifice. The lord destroyed sacrifice which was in 
progress, which had all the requisite materials fully stocked, 
including precious gems (as gifts to the priests). 

4. O brahmins, Indra, and other gods were frightened by 
his valorous exploits. They could not desire peace and tran« 
quility. They sought refuge in heart. 

5-6. O excellent sages, it is this lord who is present in the 
holy centre, Ekamraka in the land o( Utkala. He is the trident¬ 
bearing full-bannered lord who bestows boons. He is the 
Pinaka-armed lord who destroyed the sacrifice of Dakya. He is 
•clad in the bide of Elephant and bestows all desires. 

7hi sagis said : 

7. Why did lord Siva who b interested in the welfare of 
all living beings, destroy Dakya’s sacrifice adorned by Devas, 
Yakyas, Gandharvas and others? 

8. O lord, we think that the reason thereof cannot be 
insignificant. We wbh to hear thb account. Our eagerness is 
inordinate. 

3rahmi said: 

9. Dakya had eight daughters who were living with their 
husbands. The father once invited them at house and honoured 
them. 

10-13. O brahmins, honoured well by him, they stayed 
on in the house of their father. The eldest of them was Satl, 
the wile of lord Siva. Dakya had not invited her because lord 
Siva never bowed to Dakya. As he stood in natural brilliance 
he never offered obebance to hb father-in-law. Satl came to 
know that her sbters had arrived at their iathcr^s house. Al- 
thoi^h she was not invited she too went to her father’s abode. 
The &ther accorded her a welcome leu ardent than that ex¬ 
tended to others because she was not jliked by him. The gentle 
lady who was infuriated on thb count said to her father in 
anger. 



176 


Brahma Purlbf/t 


Satl muf: 

14. O Lord, indeed, I am more excellent than my younger 
sisten. Why don’t you honour me? Considcrii^ my position, 
you have totally neglected me and I stand despised. Beii^ the 
eldest and the most excellent I deseive welcome from you. 

Brakmd said'. 

15'19. Addressed thus, Dak^a sp<Ae to her with his eyes, 
turned red. 

Dakfa said: 

My younger daughters are more excellent, greater and 
more worthy of welcome than you. O Sad, their husbands are 
honoured and respected by me. They are far greater than the 
three*eyed lord. They have realized Brahman. They perform 
holy rites. They are great Yogins and righteous. They are 
superior to Siva and more worthy of praise. My excellent sons- 
in-law are—Vasi^jha, Atri, Pulastya, Ahgiras, Pulaha, Kratu, 
Bhrgu and Marici. Biva contends with them always and they 
too vie with him. Siva indeed is antagonistic to me. Hence, 

I do not encourage you.” 

20. So said Dak^ with a deluded mind which provoked 
her curse on him and the sages. Thus addressed, the infuriated 
Sad spoke to her lather: 

SaH said'. 

21. Since you rebuke and disrespect him who is tmdefiled 
verbally, mentally and physically I eschew this body, O father, 
that has originated from you. 

Brahmi said: 

22. Due to that insult Sad was infuriated. She felt miser¬ 
able. After bowing to the self-bom lord Sati uttered these 
words: 


Sati said: 


Wlure I am going to be rebom, 
1 uttdeluded with a refulsent oh 




I a 


light- 
luld 



32 . 24-35 


177 


attain the status of the virtuous wife of the intelligent diree- 
eyed lord. 

Bfakma said: 

24*25. The infuriated gentle lady seated herself there 
alone and entered into self^meditation. She performed the rite 
of Agne)i Dharana^ within her soul. The soul being raised from 
all limbs, went out of the body. Urged by the wind, fire emerg* 
ed from all limbs and reduced her body to ashes. 

26. On hearing about the death of Satl and the factual 
cause thereof, the trident*beafing lord Siva was very angry and 
prompted to destroy Daksa. 

^iva said : 

27*28. Since Sati who had come suddenly was insulted 
and since the other dau^ters were praised along with their 
husbands, these great sages, O Dakya, will be bom in the 
Vaivasvata Manvantara in your second sacrifice as persons not 
born of a womb. 

29-32. After pronouncing the curse on the seven sages he 
cursed Dakfa: 

You will become a human king in the Cakfuya Man¬ 
vantara as the grandson of Pradnabarhis and the son of 
pracetas. 

You will be bom of Miii|a the daughter of the trees when 
Cikfu$a Manvantara arrives. You will be known as Dakfa. 
O Suvmta, I shall frequently put obstacles in your way at that 
time also 

33*35. Oaksa who was thus cuned, cuned Rudra in 
return. 

Dak fa said: 

O ruthless one, since you have cursed even the sages on 
account of my activities, the brahmins will not worship you in 

1. Xgmyi Dhifa^a. A yog! could reduce his body to sshte by the process 
of Yoga. Gmpare K&Hdisa. 'Yogeniate tattfity^Am'*. The kmgs dltmglRi 
dynasty used to bum up their bodies by takinf rccoune to Yoga. Ip this pro¬ 
cess, the yogi feeirno pain while his body is aflame with fire, it is said that the 
fire becomes as cod as the moon till his whole body » reduced So ashes. 



178 


Brahma Purd^ 


any sacrifice along with Devas. After pouring ghee for you in 
the holy rites, O cruel deity, they shall touch water. Abandoning 
heaven, you will stay here alone in the world till that age comes 
to a close. Thereafter, you will never be worshipped an die 
Earth together with Devas. 

Rudra said: 

36-38. Devas and others who partake of shares in sacrifice 
will be bound by the discipline of four castes. Hence, I shall 
not take food with them. I shall take food separately. The 
world of the Earth is the first among the worlds. Alone and 
single-handed I sustain it at my will and not at your behest. 
When it is supported the other worlds abide perpetually. Hence 
I stay here always out of my own accord and not at your 
bidding. 

Bfokmd said : 

39. Thereafter, Daksa who was cuned by Rudra of un¬ 
measured splendour left off his body as the son of the self bom 
lord and was reborn among human beings. 

40. At that time, lord Dak|a, the lord of sacrifices per¬ 
formed all sacrifices along with the gods. He worshipped them 
by means of sacrifices as a householder. 

41. The king of mountains begot of Mena, a daughter 
called Uma, in the Vaivasvata Manvantara. She had previously 
been Satl. 

42. That girl had been Sad formerly. Later on, she was 
bom as Uma. She became the wife of Rudra. 

43-49. Rudra is never left off by her as long as he wishes 
for an abode in the course of Manvantaras. 

The following gentle ladies never forsake their husbands:— 
Goddess Aditi always follows Kaiyapa, son of Marici. Sri is 
always with Nirkyana. Saci follows Indra, K3rti follows V4 qu, 
U9& follows Sim. Arundhad follows Vasi^lha. 

Similarly, in the C&ksufa Manvantara Dakfa was bom as 
the son of Pracetas and grandson of Prkcinabarhij. He was 
bom as a king. He was bom of Mkrifft and Pracetas. It is heard 
by us that he took his second birds due to the cune of Rudra. 
The great sages, Bhrgu and others were bom at first in die 



32 . 50-60 


179 


Treta Yuga in the Vaivasvata Majivantara in the coune of 
sacrifice of the great lord who had assumed the body ofVanioa. 
They repented remorsefully in the course of their subsequent 
birth as a result of the mutual curse of Dak^t and lord Siva. 

50. Never can a creature gain glory by enmity. It is never 
conducive to prosperity even if he takes another birth because 
he is always afiected by both auspicious and inauspicious 
things. No enmity should be pursued by one who knows this. 

Thisagts said: 

51-54. How did Sati the daughter of Daksa come to be 
bom in the abode of the lord of the mountains after casting off 
her body in anger? How did she have a body in the later life? 
How was she united with Rudra? How did they converse 
together? How did the Syayarhvara marriage happen in that 
lioary past? O lord of the universe, how was that marriage full 
of wonderful incidents, celebrated? O Brahma, it behoves you 
to narrate all this in detail. We wish to hear that meritorious 
stor> which is extremely delightful to the mind. 

55. O leading sages, listen to the story that is destructive 
of sins. Listen to the story of Umi and iSiva. It is a story that 
bestows desirable benefits. 

56. Once Himav&n asked Kasyapa the most excellent of 
human beings who had arrived at his abode, about the various 
happenings in the world, conducive to welfare and glory. 

57. what means are the ever-lasting worlds and great 
glory obtained? How is the state of beii^ worthy of worship by 
good men attained? Mention it to me, O sage.’’ 

Kafyapa said: 

5B. O mighty one, all this is obtained through a child. 
My all-round glory is due to my children. So also in regard to 
Brahmi and the sages. 

59. Don’t you see this yourself, O lord mountains, 
wherefore do you ask me? O lord of mountains I shall recount 
what happened previously in the manner itwas teen by me. 

60. While (.was once going to Vir&Qasi I saw a brand 
new anH divine aerial chariot stationed in the sky. It was un¬ 
paralleled and magnificent. 



Brahma PurOna 


180 

61. Beneath it in a hollow spot I heauxl the shout of agony. 
I knew it by my power of penance. I stood there hiding myself. 

62. Then, O leading lord of mountains, a brahmin who 
was pure and who observed virtuous rites came there. He was 
purified by ablution in the holy waters. Me was in the midst of 
a great penance. 

63. As he was going along, the brahmin was extremely 
frightened by a tiger. O lord of mountains, he entered the spot 
where there was a hollow pit. 

64. That distressed brahmin then saw his departed ance¬ 
stors hanging by a \^ra£ia reed beneath the pit. He asked them 
who teemed to be highly dispirited. 

Th$ Brahmin said : 

65. O sinless ones, pray, who arc you ? You are hanging 
down suspended upside down in the Vlrax^a reed. You are 
dispirited. By what means, is your liberation possible ? 

The Pitfs said : 

66. We arc your forefathers, grandfathers and great-grand¬ 
fathers. You had performed meritorious deeds. But wc arc 
afflicted by your wicked action. 

67. O highly blessed one, this is a hell stationed here in 
the form of this hollow pit. You are the Virana reed, we hang 
on to you. 

68. O brahmin, we can stay, only as long as you live. When 
you are dead we will be falling into the hell; we are sinful. 

69. If you marry and beget a virtuous son, we will be 
liberated from this sin thereby. 

70. O stm, it cannot be by any other means whether penance 
or the fruit of pilgrimi^ to holy centres. O highly intelligent 
one, do this and redeem us, your forefathers, from our fear. 

Kaifopasaid : 

71-73. He prcmixsed, saying—be it.’* He propitiated 
the bull-bannered lord, r ede em ed his f<^efmther8 frmn their fear 
and became die lord’s attendant. By the name of Suvela he 
became a fevourite of Rudra. He became the chief of Ganas of 
Rudra, approved of by all and devoid of dirt. 



32*74-86 


181 


Hence, O lord of mountains, perform a severe penance and 
beget a virtuous child, a fair-complexioned daughter. 

Brahmd said : 

74. Thus advised by the sage, the lord of mountains took 
up holy observances and performed an unparalleled penance. 1 
was pleased thereby. 

75. I rushed to him and said :—“1 am the bestower of 
boons. O lord of mountains, of good holy rites, I am delighted 
at this penance. Tell me what you want. 

T/u Himavdn said : 

76. O lord, if you are pleased with me grant me this boon. 
I wish for a son adorned by all good qualities. 

Brahmd said : 

77. O brahmins, on hearing those words of the king of 
mountains, 1 granted him the boon the object of his wish. 

Brahmd said : 

78-81. O lord of mountains of good holy rites, a daughter 
will be bom to you as a result of this penance. By virtue of 
your favour you will obtain splendid fame. You will be worshipp¬ 
ed by all Devas. You will be surrounded by crores of holy 
centres and sacred riven. She will be your eldest daughter. Two 
other splendid daughters shall follow her. 

Brahmd said : 

Afier saying this I vanished there itself. In due coune of time 
the lord of the mountains begot of Mena three daughters 
Apar^a, Ekaparna and Ekapatala. 

82-86. These daughters performed greatpenance. 
ate a leaf of the holy fig tree in the course of a thousand years. 
Ekapatala ate one leaf of the Papda tree in the course of a thou¬ 
sand years. Their penance continued for a hundred thousand 
years. It was sttch a penance as could not, be performed by 
either Devas or Dinavas. 

Aparpi completely abstained fitHn food. Her mother said to 
her forbidding such a course. She was distressed due to her 



182 


Brdtma PutS9^ 


motherly afTection. She said ma’* (0» not). The gentle 
lady who performed such a difficult penance was thus addressed 
by her mother. Hence, she became known by that name. She 
was honoured by Devas. 

87. Thus the universe of mobile and immobile beings had 
thb noble set of the three virgins. The story of the austerities 
of these virgins will be told as long as the Earth lasts. 

88. All those three maidens adopted Yogic means. Penance 
itself sustained their bodies. All of them were highly blessed. 
All of them had perpetual youth. 

89. They are the mothers of worlds and celibate ladies. By 
means of penance they bless the worlds. 

90. The iair-complexioned Uma was the eldest and the 
most excellent among them. She was endowed with great Yogic 
power. She went over to Great Lord as his spouse. 

91. (?) Dattaka was the son of Uianas. His son was a 
scion of family of Bhrgu. Ekapar^iii bore a son Devala to him. 

92. The third of those girls Ekapafali approached Jai* 
glfavya, son of Alarka as his spouse. 

93**94. SaAkha and Likhita are known as her two sons not 
born of the womb. 

Um& the fair-complexioned lady performed penance. Observ* 
ing that all the three worlds were fumigated by her penance 
and Yogic practice I spoke to her : 

95. goddess, O splendid lady, why do you scorch all 
worlds by austerities ?ThU entire visible world has been creat¬ 
ed by you. Once you have made it do not destroy it. 

96. Indeed, you sustain these worlds by your own splend¬ 
our. O mother of the universe, be pleased with us. Tell me what 
is it that is sought by you ? 

Tht goddiss said ; 

97. O Sire, you know whatfor 1 am engaged in the per¬ 
formance of this penance. Then why do you ask ? 

Btakmd said: 

98. Then I spoke to her—O splendid lady, he for whom 
you pe rfo rm this penance, will approach you here itself and will 
woo you. 



32.99—33,1-8 


183 


99. O splendid lady. Siva the most excellent of the lords 
of all worlds is your husband. All of us are his servants the most 
submissive ones, 

100-101. O goddess, that lord of Devas himself will 
approach you. He is the self-bom lord of eluant form. His 
external features may seem defonned but there is no one equal 
in handsome features to him. My lord is a resident of the world 
of mountains. He is the primordial lord of mobile and immobile 
beings. He is incomprehensible and unmeasurable. Without the 
crescent moon whose lustre is like that of Indra he appears to 
have assumed a terrifying form. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE 
Tilting of P^ati 

Brahmisaid : 

1-8. Devas rushed to Parvati and said : goddess, 

8iva, that lord of Devas, by whom you have been created and 
who cannot remain without you, shall be your husband. Do 
not perform penance.** Thereafter, O brahmins, Devas circum¬ 
ambulated her and vanished. She stopped her activities of 
penance and resorted to the Aioka tree that grew at the ent¬ 
rance of her hermitage. 

At that time, lord Siva who dupels the agony of Devas 
came there. The moon constituted the ornamental mark on 
his forehead. He had assumed a deformed body short in stature 
and simian in features. His nose was split and the hair was 
tawny. He was hump-backed too. With twisted contracted 
face he said— gentle lady, I woo you*. 

Umi who had achieved Yogic power knew that it was 
Siva who had come. She honoured and wonhipped him with 
Arghya, Pidya and Madhuparka^ (water for washing the feet 

I. A mixture of hooey, milk, curd aad butter as an ofTer- 

iof to a guest ^wcially to a bridefroom when he first airivei at the bride's 
house. * 



Br<Ama 


184 

and materials of greeting). Respectful to brahmins she offered 
flowers to that brahmin. With her mind purified by inner 
emotional fervour and desirous of obtaining his mercy through 
her activities she spoke : 

Tk$ ifiditsi said : 

9-^10» lord, 1 am notfm. I have my father and mother. 
O leading brahmin, 1 am only a simple girl. My father alone 
is competent to give me away. Go to my father, the prosperous 
lord of the mountains and request him. O brahmin, if he 
gives me to you chat is acceptable to me also**. 

Brahmi said : 

11. Then the lord approached the king of mountains with 
the same deformed body and said, lord of mountains, give 
me your daughter.*’ 

12. At the sight of his deformed body he understood that 
he was the eternal Rudra. Dispirited because he was afraid of 
his curse he spoke 

Thi lord of mountains said : 

13-14 O lord, I do not insult or disrespect the brahmins. 
They are gods on the Earth*. O highly intelligent one, hear 
what had already been thought of and desired by us. 1 am 
arranging Soayarfufortf of my daughter. My plan has been 
approved by the brahmins.^ Whomsoever she may choose he 
will become her husband. 

2. The lines indicate the position which the BrihmaoM had attained 
during the age of PurS^as. The term BhOdeva as the synonym of a Brihmaoa 
supports the view that like the consecrated mon arch the Brihmaoa was consi- 
dered to be a deity. Cmnpare verse 46 <£ this chapter where PIrvaU t el ls the 
crocodile to spare the BrShmaoa boy because Brahnum^ were iavoctrite to her, 
and again in vene 55 where die says, cottdderBrifamaoas to be most ttcellent 
among cartes.** 

S. Self-choice, the election of a husband by a princess or 

dau^ter of a Kiatriya at a public assemMy of suitors. 

4. This Aom that die consent rf Brahmapai (dergymen) wu neces¬ 
sary for hokBuf Svayaikvara where a prineoi could select a bioband of her 
own choice. 



33 . 15-28 


185 


15. On hearing the words of the moiuitain lord^ the lofty 
minded, ftill-bannered lord came near the goddess and said 

^i9a said : 

16. O gentle lady, I hear that your Svayaihvara has been 
approved by your father. O sinless lady, it is said that he whom 
you choose therein will be your husband. 

17. Hence, O good-faced lady, I shall take leave of you 
and go. You are inaccessible to me. Leaving off a handsome 
person how can you woo one like me ? 

Brahmi said : 

18-20. Thus addressed by him she pondered over what he 
had said. Realising her mental emotion directed towards Rudra, 
as well as the clarity of her mind, she said to the lord of Devas^ 
not misunderstand me. I shall woo you. It is by no means 
surprising. O lord, if at all you have feelings of suspicion about 
me, 1 shall woo you here itself, O h^hly blessed one. You are 
already present in my mind.** 

Brahma said : 

21-22. Parvati stood there with a bunch of flowers in her 
hands, placed it on diva’s shoulders and said *^You have been 
chosen.** 

Thereupon, the lord, who was chosen by Parvati spoke as 
if resuscitating the Afoka. 

Sivasaid : 

23-28. Since I have been wooed with holy bunch of flowers 
you will have no <^d age. You will become immortal. Your 
form is loveable. Your flowers are lovely. You bestow love. 
You are my favourite. You will be a steadfast beloved of Uevas. 
You will always possess flowers that will serve as your orna¬ 
ments. You will be having flowers that will yield fnuts which 
you will eat as food. You will smell as nectar. You will have 
sweet scenu. You will be devoid of fear. Extremely happy you 
will traverse worlds. Henceforth, the hermitage will be known 
as Citrakufa. The seeker of merit who comes to this hemutage 
will attain the benefit of a horse-sac r ifice. He who diet here 



Brahma PurO^ 


186 

will go to the world of Brahma. He who performing holy 
rites casts off his life here shall reap the benefit of your per> 
forming penance. He shall be the lord of Gapas. 

Btahmd said : 

29. After saying this^ the lord^ the creator of the universe^ 
the lord of all living beings took leave of the daughter of 
Himavan and vanished. 

SO. When the lord of unmeasured soul had gone> Pirvati 
sat on a rock with her face turned to the direction where he 
had gone. 

31. With her face cxxrned to Siva the great lord» the lord 
of worlds, she became dispirited like the night devoid of the 
moon. 

32. Then the daughter of the mountain-lord heard the 
cry of an unhappy boy in a lake near the hermitage. 

33. Siva the lord of Devas had assumed the form of a boy 
who had gone to the centre of the lake for playing. He was 
then caught by a crocodile. 

34. Adopting the Yogic Maya the cause of origin of the 
universe, he assumed that form in the middle of the lake and 
spoke thus : 

Tki boy said : 

SS'SS. Let some one protect me. I have been seized by a 
crocodile. Fie on this misery, even as a boy who has not yet 
realized his cherished desire and purpose. 1 am courting death 
in the jaws of this wicked crocodile. Although 1 am very sad 
on being seized by the crocodile I am not bewailing for myself, 
I am bewailing for my parents. On knowing that 1 am dead 
after being devoured by the oocodile, they who arc fond of 
me, their only son, will surely cast off their lives. Alas, it is 
tragic that 1, a mere boy who have not yet entered the main 
stage of life will die after being seized by a crocodile. 

Br^mSsaid : 

On hearing that cry of the distressed brtJunin the 
splendid lady stood up and proceeded to that place where that 
brahmin boy happened to be. 



33 . 40-49 


187 


40. That moon-faced lady &aw the boy of handamne 
features caught in the jaws of a crocodile and t^emblit^( with 
fear. 

41. On seeing Parvat! approaching^ that massive, splendid 
and glorious crocodile hastened to the middle of the lake taking 
the boy along with him. 

42. On being dragged thus, the lustrous boy cried aloud 
in distress. On seeing the boy in this miserable state that lady 
of great holy rites was distressed and spoke thus : 

P&Tvati said : 

43. O king of crocodiles of great power, huge fangs and 
terrible exploit, leave of this boy who is the oniy son of his 
parents. Leave him off immediately. 

Tht cTQCodiU S4xid : 

44-45. O madam, he who comes within my grasp at the 
outset on the sixth day is ordained as my prey by the creator. 
O highly blessed daughter of the king of mountains, this boy 
has come to me on the sixth day. Certainly, he has been urged 
by Brahma. By no means will I release him. 

PilrvaU said : 

46. In exchange of the penance that has been performed 
by me on the peak of the Himavan, release this boy, O king of 
crocodiles, obeisance be to you. 

Thi crocodiU md : 

47. O splendid-faced gentle lady, let there not be any was¬ 
tage of your penance over a small boy. O excellent one, do 
what I say. I shall release him then. 

48. O lord of crocodiles, speak out quickly. What is not 
repugnant to good men shall be deme. Entertain no doubt 
about this, since brahmins are very favourites to me. 

Thi cfocodili said : 

49. Offer me quickly whetever penance has been performed 
by you ^eAer it be very little or much more. Offer the same 
to me in entirety. He shall be released then. 



Brahma Pur^ 


188 

Thilady said : 

50. O great crocodile of powerful grasp, everything has 
been granted to you, every thing of the merit that lias been 
acquired by me ever since my birth, leave off the boy. 

Brahmd said : 

31. Then the crocodile blazed on being enveloped by that 
penance. Like the sun at midday he became too dazzling tob(^ 
seen. Delighted in mind he spoke to her. 

Thi crocodile said : 

52*53. O gentle lady of great holy rites, should this much 
have been done without thinking deeply ? Gathering the power 
of penance together is a sad affair. Its eschewal is not com* 
mendable. O lady of slender waist, take back your penance as 
well as this boy. I am pleased with your devotion to brahmins. 
Hence, I grant this boon unto you. Thus urged by the crocodile, 
the lady of great holy rites said :— 

Pdrvatl said: 

54. O crocodile, even with my body, the brahmin should 
be assiduously protected by me. Penance can be acquired by 
me once again. But the brahmin cannot be secured once again. 

55. O great crocodile, it is after pondering over it deeply 
that the liberation of the boy has been effected by me. Penauce 
is not more valuable than brahmins. 1 consider brahmins to 
be most excellent among castes, 

56* O leader of crocodiles, after giving away I shall never 
retake it. It lias already been bequeathed to you. No man 
shall take back what has already been given away, crocodile. 

57. This has already been given to you by me. I am not 
going to take it back, let it rejoice within you. But, let this boy 
be released. 

Brahmd said: 

58. (Decisively) told thus, that crocodile praised her, re¬ 
leased the boy and bowed down to her. After takir^ leave of 
her he vanished there itself. 



33 . 59 — 34 . 1 ^ 


189 


59. Released near the bank of the lake by the crocodile^ the 
boy too vanished there itself Itke an object acquired in dream. 

60. Considering that her p>enance had dwindled down, 
the gentle lady the daughter of the great mountain Himavln 
began to perform the same once again with strict observance 
of regulations. 

61. Knowing that she was desirous of performing penance 
once ^ain, O brahmins, 8iva appeared before her and asked 
her not lo perfonn pcnancc. 

62. O gentle lady of great holy rites, as your i>enance lias 
been granted to me alone^ you will get it back a thousand 
times more and it shall never dwindle down. 

63. Thus acquiring the everlasting excellent penance 
Parvati was pleased and delighted. She stayed there eagerly 
awaiting the Svayaihvara celebration. 

64. I'he man who always reads this episode of the daughter 
of the king of mountains will acquire a change of form. He will 
become the chief of Ganas and be equal to Kumara. 


CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR 
PSrvaii weds ^iva 

Brahma saidi 

1-6 In due course, the Svayamvara of the daughter of the 
mountain was celebrated on the lofty peak of the Himavan 
Riled with hundreds of lofty chambers. The Himavan, the king 
of the mountains, an expert in meditation came to know of the 
secret talk of bis daughter with the lord of Devas. Even after 
knowing it, with a desire to conform to dxe traditional proce* 
dure he proclaimed theSvayaihvara celebration of his daughter 
all over the world. He thought thus—my dai^^hter woos 
$iva in the presence of Devas, Dknavas and Siddhas, residing 
in all parts of the world, that alone will be proper, praiseworthy 
and suitable to my dignity^*. After thinking thus and keeping 
lord Siva in heart, the king of mounuins annotanced Svayaih- 
vara amongst Devas ending with Brahmk. The most excellent 



190 


Brahma Pard$a 


king of the mountains littered his land with precious gems and 
organiaed the Svayamvara ceremony very carefully. 

7. Immediately after the Svayamvara his daughter had 
been announced, Devas and others, the residents of all the 
worlds came there assuming divine forms and dresses. 

B. Informed by the king of mouniaiiis 1 went there ac¬ 
companied by Devas. I was seated on my full blown lotus seat 
and surrounded by Siddhas and Yogins of immeasurable 
spiritual power. 

9-12. Riding on his Airavata, the chief of the leading 
elephants, which exuded profuse currents of ichor, the lord of 
immortal beings (Indra) came there at the head of Devas 
holding hit thunderbolt. The lord of Devas had a thousand 
eyes and his features were eluant by viture of hU divine un¬ 
guents and garlands. 

Sea^ on his golden chariot with waving flags the son-god 
came there hurriedly. He brightened the quarters so that he 
appeared to be equal in lustre to them though he was superior 
to them in refulgence and power. 

One of the sons ofKajyapa viz. Aditya came there in his 
chariot equal in lustre to fire and solar splendour. His rays 
were those of the midday. His earrings br^fhtened up by 
jewels, dazzled all. 

Riding on his terrible bufialo, the god of Death Yama 
hastened to that place. He was holding his sceptre (rod of 
chastisement). His physical body was yellow in colour. In 
prowess he was comparable to none. He was unparalleled in 
brilliance, strength and power of demanding obedience. His 
limbs were well developed and he wore garlands. 

13-16. Riding in bis chariot, wind god who sustains the 
world, came there, beautiful in dress and demeanour. Gold 
and jewels enhanced his elegance. In height and stoutness his 
body vied with great mountains. 

Coming in the centre of the leading Devas, the fire-god 
wearing grand apparel, stood Acre, blazu^. Superior to all in 
splendour, and steeped in excessive brilliance he warmed the 
leaders of Devas and Asuras. 

Riding in an excellent divine aerial chariot, the most ex¬ 
cellent in the universe, Kubera the lord of all chiefs of wealth 



34 . 17-26 


191 


came there in a hurry with liis slender stafT-likc body brighten¬ 
ed by different sorts of jewels. 

Riding in an aerial chariot of wonderfuJ form studded with 
great shining precious gems the Moon god arrived there instill¬ 
ing enthusiasm in the leaders of Devas and Asuras by means of 
his splendour and grand apparel. He was elegant in form and 
dress. 

17-21. Riding on Garudawho resembled a mountain, the 
macebearing lord Vifi^u hurried to that place. Garlands of 
sweet scent were tied round his limbs; his dress was wonderful 
and his slender body was dark-complexioned* 

Aivins, the excellent physicians %vere seated in the same 
aerial chariot. Charming in their brilliant and elegant apparel, 
the two bold and excellent Devas hastened to the venue of the 
marriage rites. 

The noble-souled Naga king of fiery solar splendour rode in 
an aerial chariot along with the other Nagas and arrived there. 
He had the colour of fire-emittiDg sparks. 

The sons of Diti the great Asuras, reiulgent like fire, sun, 
Indra and the wind-god came there even before Devas clad in 
nice apparel befitting their excellent features. 

At the bidding of Indra the king of Gandharvas arrived 
there along with Gandharvas and i^aras. Bedecked in shoul- 
derlets and riding in a divine chariot he had a handsome form 
wonderful to behold. 

22-26. Several other Devas, Gandharvas, Yak^, Serpents 
and Kinnaras too came there, riding in aerial chariots. They 
were clad in different sorts of beautiful apparel. 

The overlord of mountain kings, Himsdaya shone amidst 
the leading Devas, superior to some, equal to-others in beauty of 
form. Delated himself and delighting others by his power of 
command and prosperity he beautified the spot of Svayaihvara 
ceremony. 

It was for accomplishing the task of heaven-dwellers that 
Sad protested agamstDak^a, died of herself and was reborn in 
the abode of Himavin. Being the cause of worlds, she gave 
birth to the universe. She was the mother of Devas and Asuras. 
She had formerly been the wife of Siva, the intelligent Purufa 
and she had bc» praised as the great ^akrti in the Pur&nas. 



192 


Brahma Pwitr^a 


Now as Uma she was seated in an aerial chariot covered 


with gold and studded with jewels. She was fanned (on either 
side) by the waving chowries. She held a garland of sweet- 
scented flowers of all seasons. She stood ready to proceed ahead 


quickly. 


Brakm^ said: 


27-28. As the Uma stood there in the assembly of Devas, 
holding the divine garland, as India and other Devas had come 
there ready for Svaymvara, Siva assumed the form of an infant 
(with five tufts of hair) with a desire to test her again. The 
lord of great lustre lay asleep in the lap of Umi. 

29. All of a sudden, Uma saw the infant lying (asleep in 
her lap). By means of meditation she understood who it was 
and took him up with great delight. 

30. She of pure thoughts attained a )uisband of her choice. 
Holding him to his bosom she turned round and sat down. 

31. On seeing the infant lying in the lap of Um& Devas 
were conqsletely deluded. ^*Who is this infant ?** They mut¬ 
tered to one another and then shouted loudly. 

32-33. This slayer of Vrtra (Indra) seized his thunder¬ 
bolt and lifted up his hand against the infant. The raised hand 
of Indra remained in that position stunned by Siva the lord of 
Devas in the form of the infant. The slayer of Vrtra could not 
hurl his thunderbolt. He could not even move. 

34. Then the powerful son of Aditi and Kaiyapa named 
Bhaga, who too was deluded, lifted up his bright weapon, 
desirous of cutting up the infant. 

35. His hand too was stunned; his strength, splendour and 
yogic power became ineffective. 

36-37. Vi^nu looked at Siva shaking his head. When those 
ai^ry Devas stood thus, I was extremely Stated. By mews of 
meditation I understood that it was 6iva, the lord of the chiefs 
Devas who was lying on the lap of Uma. 

38-44. On realismg that it was lord Siva, I stood up im¬ 
mediately widi reverence. I saluted the feet of Siva. O 
brahmins, then I eulogised him with ancient songs and secret 
names conducive to merit. **You are the unborn Imd. You are 
nevOT M. You are the lord who created the greater and smaller 



34.45-56 


193 

beings. You are the primordial Nature (Prakrti) as well as 
Puru$a. You are the Brahman worthy of meditation. You are 
the imperishable and undying Being. You are the supreme soul. 
You are the lord and great cause. You are the creator of 
Brahma. You are the maker of PrakrtL You are beyond Prakfti. 
This gentle lauly b Prakrti the permanent instnmient unto you 
in the process of creation. She has assumed the form of your 
wife and has come to you as the cause of the universe. 

O lord, obeisance to you as well as to your glorious consort. 
O lord of Devas, it was at your bidding and by your favour that 
these Devas and subjects had been created by me. They are 
now deluded by your Yogic Maya. Be pleased with them. May 
they be as they were before. 

O brahmins, afler submitting this to the lord 1 spoke at this 
occurrence to all those Devas who were stunned. 

45-49. ye deities, you are confounded. You don’t 
understand lord Siva. You immediately seek refuge in lord and 
his divine consort. He is the unchanging great Soul.” 

Then all those heaven-dwellen who were stunned, bowed 
to lord Siva with their mind s purified by emotional fervour. 

Siva, the lord of Devas was pleased with them. He immedi¬ 
ately restored Devas to their former self. When this process of 
reviving Devas was going on, the lord of Devas assumed a 
wonderful body possessed of three eyes. 

50-56. Devas, eclipsed and dazzled by the brilliance of 
Siva closed their eyes. The lord granted them powerful eyes 
competent to behold him. Then they looked at the lord of Devas. 
On seeing the third eye Indra and other Devas recognized 
him as Siva. 

In the presence of heaven-dwellers the delighted goddess 
placed garland at the feet of the lord of unmeasured lustre. 
Sayii^ ^^Well done, Well done.” Devas, once again, bowed to 
the lord along with the goddess, with their heads resting on the 
ground. 

In the meantime O brahmins, I spoke to Himav&n the great 
mountain of massive splendour. I was accMnpanied by Devas. 

You are worthy of being praised and honoured by all. You 
are really great. Since you have the alliance with Siva your 
prosperity %rill be great. Let the auspicious marriage rite be 
perfemed. There shall be no delay in diis matter? 



194 


Brahma 


Then after bowing to me Himavan replied: 

Himavdn said: 

57« O lord, you alone are the cause of my all-round rise 
and prosperity. The favour has come about suddenly and the 
reason thereof can be you alone. O sire, conduct celebration 
of marriage after fixing up the pr<^aiume. 

Btahmd smd\ 

58. On hearing the words of the king of mountains, O 
brahmins, I said thus to the lord—lord, let the marriage 
rite be celebrated*’. 

59-63. Siva, the lord of the worlds said to me —**As you 
like”. O brahmins, instantaneously I created a city for the 
marriage. It was made splendid by different sorts of jewels, 
precious stones and gems of various colours; gold and pearls 
came in their embodied form and dec<Hated that excellent city. 
The ground was wonderfully paved with Emerald. It was 
adorned with columns tKf gold. Sbaning crystab constituted the 
walls. Pearl necklaces were suspended from them. At the 
entrance to that beautiful city, raised platform was constructed 
for the marital rites. That place of noble Siva, lord of Devas, 
shone well. The moon and the sun (assumed the form of) two 
brilliant gems and rendered the place warm and cool. 

64. Wafting sweet fragrant smell, very pleasing to the 
mind, the wind-god came there, evincing his devotion to lord 
3iva. He was gentle to the touch. 

65-68. The four oceans, Indra and other Devas, the cel¬ 
estial rivers, the great terrestrial rivers, Siddhas, sages, Gand- 
harvas, ^saras, Nagas, Yak^, Rak^asas, aquatic and Sky- 
bound birds and animals, Kinnaras, Garaw, Tumbaru, Narada 
Haha, Huhu and the singers of Saman hymns brought with 
them other sorts of gems and came to the city. Ascetics and 
sages, experts in singing vedic Mantras chanted holy Mantras 
of marriage rites with delighted minds. 

69. Mk>thers of the universe and the celestial virgins began 
to sing Joyously in the course of that wedding ceremony of 
the lord. 

70. The six seasons were simultaneously present in their 



34.71-79 


195 


embodied forms at the marriage function. They spread pleasing 
scents everywhere. 

71-79. la the course of marriage celebration of the daughter 
•of the mountain, the rainy season was present with the 
following characteristics:— 

Resembling the blue clouds, delighted at the chanting sound 
of the Mantras, the peacocks danced about everywhere pro¬ 
ducing their crowing notes called 'Keka\ 

It was highly elegant with darkling, rolling tawny, clear 
like lightning streaks. It was made splendid by the white 
cranes with lilies for their crest-jewel. 

It became refulgent as the freshly grown mushrooms, plan¬ 
tain trees and trees and creepers of other sorts had sprouts 
coming out. It was rendered noisy by countless frogs that woke 
up longing for flourishing currents of clear water and that 
were rendered lethargic by intoxication. 

It was accompanied by the delightful crowing Keka sounds 
of the peacocks that brought about a break in the haughty 
anger excited by Jealousy in lovely maidens, though lofty- 
minded. These maidens bore a grudge against their lovers and 
their anger made them haughty in their minds. 

The rainy season shone with the rainbow that was present 
very near the rainy clouds. The beautiful form of the crooked 
rainbow shone with various colours. It spread golden splendour 


everywhere. 

In the rainy season the pleasing winds shook the splendid 
forelocks of celestial damsels. The winds were fragrant because 
they were blowing against flowers of diverse colours. They were 
cool by their contact with the waters of fresh and dense clouds. 

The disc oS the moon was concealed by the rumbling cloud. 
The beautiful Durva grass near water-logged spou was sprinkled 
with fresh water. The rainy season that arrived with such 
traits was respectfully looked at by the yearning and pining 
harlot maidens who had been heaving deep sighs rendering the 
atmosphere as it were filled with smoke. 


The rainy season was like a maiden. The cackling sound 
of the swans was like that of the anklets. The clouds were 


lifted and raised. The Krfling lightning streaks were the 
necklaces. The clear lotuses were the eyes. 



Brahma Furi^ 


196 

The black layers of clouds supported the swaxu in the* 
waters of different colours. The downpour of water made the 
lilies bend down^ the lilies that served the purpose of eyea« Their 
beauty was enhanced by the fragrant pollen dust. 

Thi Autumn 

80-88. The season of autumn was present at the marriage 
function of Parvatl, the daughter of lord Himavan. 

The quarters looked very beautiful. The autumn was like a 
lady who had taken out her bodice in the form of a cloud. Buds 
of lotuses that resemble the breasts made their appearance. The 
cackling sound of swans was like the tinkling of anklets. 

The banks of rivers were like buttocks ample and extensive. 
The chirping Sarasas served as the girdle. The blue lotuses in 
full bloom were charming like the dark-coloured eyes. 

The ripe red Bimba fruits were like the lower lips. She 
smiled with Kunda Bowers appearing like teeth. The lady of 
autumn had dark-coloured curly umbilical hairs with the spread¬ 
ing fresh green creepen. 

The lady of autumn was sweet-voiced with the humming 
sound of intoxicated swarms of bees. The rolling clusters of 
lilies were the charming earrings that heightened her beauty. 
The lady of autumn had the sprouts growing from the bran¬ 
ches of red Afoka tree for her fingen. She was embellished in 
garments constituted by its bunches of flowers. 

The red lotuses were the tips of her feet. The Jasmine Jati 
flowers were her nails. The steins of the plantain trees were 
her thighs. The moon was her face. 

The lady of autumn appeared like a charming beloved full 
of love. She was richly endowed with all characteristics. She 
was bedecked in all ornaments. 

Divested of her bodice covering, in the form of black cloudy 
the full moon repres e nted her lovely face; the blue lotuses were 
her eyes; the lotuses, which blossomed by the rays of the sun, 
acted as her breasts delighting the mind through the soft winds, 
rendered fragrant by the pollen dust of different flowers. 
With the sweet cackling sounds for her tinkling anklets the 
lady of Autumn was preset at the wedding functimi of Um&. 

Hmanta end &iiira 

89. The two seasons Hemanta and SUira (the early winter 



M.90-U7 


197 


<and the later winter) o£ great lustre came there flooding the 
^quarters with excessively chill waters. 

90. The Himav&n the most excellent of mountains was 


approached by the two seasons. They are showering flakes of 
snow in quick succession. Enveloped by a shower of flakes 
Himavin appeared to be as it were an attendant. 

91. With the dense shower of snow flakes that fell deep 
below, the Him&laya shone like the ocean of milk. 

92. That great mountain was approached by successive 
seasons, like a prejudiced person who is gratified by the service 
of the great. 


93. With his peaks covered with layers of snow the 
mountain shone like a ruler of the Earth with large and white 
umbrellas. 


94. The winds frequendy enhanced the passionate love 
<tf Devas and their maidens. The lotus ponds were fllled with 
clear water. The lotuses and lilies grew in abundance. With 
these they appeared to be charming like women who reveal the 
•tips of their breasts slightly. 


The Spring SHisom 

95*117. At the marriage of the dat^hter of the mountain 
lord Spring was also present. 

The celestial elephants full of delight entered the lake 
£lled with waters which were neither too hot nor too cold. They 
were rendered tawny by the petioles of pollen. With the cackl* 
ii^of ruddy geese the atmosphere became resonant. The 
mango and the Priyangu trees were in full bloom vying with 
<each other. With their bunches of flowers one appeared to 
threaten the other* Both of them looked adnurably splendid. 

On the white snow^clad peaks, the Tilaka trees with their 
blossoms appeared like elderly guests accompanied by infants. 
They appeared as though they had come (or some specific 
purpose. 

The Aioka creepers in full bloom supported by the big Sila 
trees shone like loving maidens with their am twined round 
the necks of their lovers. 

The following trees were laden with fruiu and flowers : 
They were the mango, Kadamba, I^pa, Tfcla, Tamila, Sarala, 



198 


Brahma Purd$a 


Kapittha (Wood apple) ^ Aioka, Arjuna, Kovidara^ 

Pimnaga» Nagejvara, Kamikara, Lavaaga, Kalaguru (Agal* 
schum), Saptaparu, Nyagrodha, Sobhafijana and Cocoanut. 
There were other trees also. They were seen everywhere. 
There were beautiful water reservoirs with waters sparklh^ 
like gold. They were filled with blue lilies and fishes. Aquatic 
birds and animals like ruddy geese^ Kirapd^vas, swans, Koya- 
Datyuhas (water crows) and cranes abounded in them.. 
Birds were seen on the tops of trees with wings of diverse 
colours and the limbs of various forms. They appeared to be 
embellished as it were. 

Birds and animals with their passion roused and their bodies 
excited produced cries and sounds as if they were threatening^ 
those engaged in amorous sports. 

On that mountain, in the course of marriage celebration of 
the daughter of the mountain*Iord winds blew making the limbs 
delighted and cool. The winds originating from the Malaya, 
mountain slowly blew down the white flowers from the trees. 

All reasons of meritorious nature shone with their respective 
traits intermingled. Those seasons whose special traits have been 
recounted looked very charming at that place. 

The Malatl creepers shone with their bunches of flowers. 
Intoxicated swarms of bees were humming amongst them. These 
creepers appeared as if they were terrifying one another. 

The petals of flowers were resorted Co by the intoxicated 
swarms of bees. The waters were rendered blue by the blue 
lotuses, white by the white lotuses and red by the red lotua 
stalks. 


There were clusters of golden lotuses in lakes of extensive 
water surface, in some, beautiful flowers grew continuously; in 
some there were lotuses with stalks like lapis lazuli. 


The ponds were very beautiful with lotuses, lilies and other 
flowers. The rows of golden steps were rendered resonant by 
various birds O brahmins, the lofty peaks of that moimtain^ 
thickly ovei^rown with Kartiik&ra trees in full blooms shone 
like golden peaks. 

The quarters shone pink in colour on account of the 
trees with their flowers slightly opened. They were gently shaken 
by the wind. 



34.118-124 


199 

There were Krfnarjuna trees and the blue Aioka trees m 
that mountain, ten times their number. They were in full 
bloom. They appeared to compete with one another in their 
growth. 

Forests of Kimiuka trees resonant with sweet sounds shone 
on all ridges that mountain. 

With groves of Tamala trees, the Himavin had a special 

beauty as though groups of clouds were lying hidden in its 
joints. 

With tall sandal and Campaka trees with their branches 
spreading extensively, and profusely laden with flowers, and 
with the cooing sounds of intoxicated cuckoos the Himalaya 
shone very well. 

On hearing the low sweet intoxicating cooing sound of the 
cuckoos the peacocks fluttered their wings and grew sweetly. 
IiOrd K&ma found his strength enhanced by their sounds. He 
stood ready to pierce the celestial nuidens m their limbs, keep¬ 
ing his hands fixed to the bow and arrow. 

Tki summer x 

118-124. At the time of marriage the summer season came 
to the Him^aya with the power of sunshine melting water. 
There remained very little water in the reservoirs. 

The summer season too brightened the peaks of the snow- 
clad mountain all round by means of many trees profusely in 
bloom. 

During that season the winds were very pleasant. They blew 
and wafled the fragrance of (the flowers of) Pafalat Kadamba 
and Arjuna that grew extensively. 

The tanks were made pink in colour due to the pollen dust 
fiill blown lotuses. The banks were resonant due to the cackling 
of swans. 

The Kurabaka trees were covered with flowers on the peaks. 
They were resorted to by swarms of bees. 

On the wide side-valleys and ridges of the mountain the 
Bakula trees put forth lovely flowers all raund. 

Excellent sages accompanied by various seasons came there 
to increase the prosperity of the marital rites of Uma and Siva. 
The trees abounded in flowers of various sorts. The lands were 
beautiful by virtue of sweet sounds of different sorts of birds. 



Brahms Purd$a 




125-126. When the living beii^ had begun to assemble 
dius» when hundreds of musical instruments were played, I got 
the daughter of the mountain embellished with befitting orna¬ 
ments and led her myself into the city, O brahmins. 

127-128. Thereafter, I spoke thus to the lord lia. am 
present in the capacity of the preceptor. I shall pour the holy 
ghee into the fire. If you grant permission, holy rites can be 
carried out immediately.’* 

Sankara, the lord of Devas, the lord of the universe said to 

me. 

Ava said : 

129. lord of Devas, O Brahma, whatever has been 
thought of, whatever is desired, do it. I shall carry out your 
directions, O lord of the universe.” 

130-135. Thereafter, delighted in my mind I took up Kuias 
immediately and bound the hands of Siva and Parvatl together 
in the Yogic knot. The fire-god stood there with palms joined 
in reverence. The auspicious Mantras of Vedas assumed physical 
forms and were present at tlie marriage. I performed sacrifice 
in the manner laid down. The ghee-like necter was poured as 
offering. I made the lord (and the goddess) circumambulate 
the fire. The binding knot was untied. Along with Devas, my 
mental sons and Siddhas, I was delated within myself. As the 
marriage rites were over I bowed to the bull-bannered lord. O 
brahmins it was due to their Yogic power that the mauriage of 
Uma and Siva was effected. 

That great marriage was concluded in this way. Devas did 
not know how it happened at all. 

Thus the details of marriage have been recounted to you. 
Listen further about the marru^ of the lord. It is very wonder¬ 
ful. 



35J-7 



CHAPTER THIRTYFIVE 

Hytrai in Praise of iiva 

Brahmd said : 

1. When the marital ceremony of lord Siva of unmeasured 
splendour was performed^ Indra and other Devas were highly 
pleased. They eulogised the lord in glorious words and paid 
obeisance in reverence^ in the following way. 

Devas said : 

2. Obeisance to the lord whose symbol is the mountain. 
Obeisance to the lord who is the wind in velocity. Obeisance 
to the lord, the destroyer of pain and the bestower of splendid 
riches. 

3. Obeisance to the lord who has the blue tuft. Obeisance 
to the lord, husband of Uma. Obeisance to the lord in the form 
of the wind. Obeisance to the lord of one hundred forms.^ 

4. Obeisance to the deity of terrible form, of deformed 
eyes, one thousand eyes and one thousand feet.* 

5. Obeisance to the deity in the form of Devas; obeisance, 
obeisance to the lord, the ancillary of the Vedas. Obeisance to 
the deity who stunned the arms of Indra,* obeisance to the 
.germinating sprout of the Vedas. 

6. Obeisance to the overlord of mobile and immobile 
beings; obeisance, obeisance to one who suppresses sinners. 
Obeisance to the deity whose symbol is a water reservoir; 
obeisance, obeisance to one who annihilates the Yugas. 

7. Obeisance to the deity with skulls for garlands; obeisance 
to the deity who wears skulls for the sacred thread; obeisance 
to the deity with a skull in his hand; obeisance to the deity 
holding a staff; obeisance to the deity holding the iron-club. 

1. Itudro himdr9d/9m$. P. E. has a long anecdote oa Satarudra. 

The Veda declare oaphatically that there is a an^e Rndra: Eko m Aadrs 

but at the same time U speaks of numerous Rudras that 

on earth: asandehjeta ntift a M ^ h Smyem^ 

2. Seharrekea^ thousand-footed. These epi¬ 
thets are to primeval being (Pvw«) ht RV 3CdO. 

3. Gf.Cai.*4, W 3344. The slayer of Vrtra (Indra) lifted up his M 
:Co strike fivm in the form of la infant lying in the lap of Pirrati but his right 

remained and he could not hsi his tbundtffaolt. 



Brahma Purd^ 




8. Obeisance to the !ord» the master of three worlds; 
obeisance to the deity, interested in the world of mortals. Obeis¬ 
ance to the deity with the iron club in hand; obeisance to the 
lord who dispels the agony of those who bow down to him. 

9. Obeisance to the destroyer of the head of sacrifice; 

obeisance to him who removed tresses; obeisance to* 

him who plucked the eyes of Bhaga;^ obeisance to the deity 
who removed the teeth of Pu^.* 

10. Obeisance to the wielder of Pinaka,’ trident, sword, 
dagger and iron-club. Obeisance to the destroyer of the god of' 
Death, obeisance to the deity with the third eye. 

11. Obeisance to one who annihilated the god of Death,^ 
obeisance to the deity who resides cm the mountain; obeisance 
to the deity with the necklace of gold; obeisance to one wearing 
car-rings. 

12. Obeisance to the destroyer of Yogic power of Daityas;. 
obeisance to theYogin; obeisance to the preceptor; obeisance 
to the deity with the moon and the sun for eyes; obeisance to* 
the deity with an eye in the forehead.* 

1. Who piutkid tht ^h one of the twelve Adityai. 
DevaJ asKxnbJed together and decided upon the sbve of Yajftss due to each or 
them and in thus fixing up shares they left out Rudra. Enraged at this neglect 
Rudra made a bow and fought against Devas. l>uring the fight he extracted 
the eyes of Bhaga and the teeth c( Pfiian. Ultimately Devai satisfied and plea 
ted Rudra who returned to Bhaga and Pflfan ibe eyes and teeth which had been 
extracted« 

2. Who rmwod tht Uith PfiMn^one of the twelve idityas bom. 

as sons of Kaiyapa Pr^jipati, by his wife Adid. 

In a sacrifice which Siva attended uninvited there was a fight between 
Devas and Siva. In this fight against Siva PQ^an lost his teeth (Mbh. Sauptika. 
Parva Ch. Id). 

3. Pir 0 ka"~namt ^diva'sbow. 

4. AnmhilaUd Iko god of dioth, diva gave Mrkagdu a boon that a pious ton 
would be bom to him but he would live tmly for sixteen years. The child waa 
bom and named MSrkaodeya. He was educated in Vedas and SSstrM.When 
the hour of his death arrived, the boy embraced the Jihga idol of diva. When 
Yama, the god ofdeath came to fetch hiin, the angry diva ante out of the idot* 
and killed Yama. At the request of gods Yama was revived to life but Mftr- 
ks94q« was granted youth for ever. 

^ An^iniho Fonhoad ... The two eyes of diva represent the Sun and 
tire Moon; the third eye in the forehead b the eye of wisdom. But it emits 
fire when it opens at the time ofDinoiuticei or even earlier when diva b angry.. 



35.13-22 


203 


13. Obeisance to one taking delight in cremation-ground; 
obeisance to the bestower of boons (staying) in the cremation 
ground; obeisance to the destroyer of the rude and the impolite. 
Obeisance to the deity devoid of garment; obeisance to the 
deity who laughs as boisterously as hundred thunderbolts;, 
obeisance to the lord of mountain. 

14. Obeisance to the householder saints obeisance to the 
perpetual wearer of matted hair; obeisance to the celibate one; 
obeisance to one with shaven bead, obeisance to one with partial¬ 
ly shaven head; obeisance to the IcM'd of Paius.^ 

15. Obeisance to one who performs penance in the water; 
obeisance to one who bestows Yogic lordslup and prosperity; 
obeisance to one who is calm and tranquil; obeisance to one 
who has controlled his sense-organs. Obebance to one who* 
causes dbsolution. 

16. Obeisance to one who causes blessings; obebance, obeis¬ 
ance to one who sustains the world. Obebance to Rudra; obeis¬ 
ance to Vasu, obebance to Aditya; obebance to Alvin. 

17. Obebance to the father of all; obebance to the supreme 
being of perfect knowledge; obebance to Vi Ivedevas; obeisance 
to ^rva, Ugra, Siva, the bestower of boons. 

18. Obebance to the terrible one; obeisance to the com¬ 
mander-in-chief; obeisance to the lord of Palus; obebance to 
the pure; obeisance to the destroyer of enemies; obeisance to 
Sadyojata. 

19. Obeisance to Mahadeva; obebance to the wonderful, 
obeisance, obeisance to the trident-bearing deity; obebance to 
Pradhana; obebance to the incomprehensible; obebance to the 
effect; obeisance to the cause. 

20. Obeisance to you—Puru^a; obebance to one who- 
causes the wish of Puru^a; obebance to one who causes the con¬ 
tact of Purufa and the Gui^ of Pradhana. 

21. Obebance to one who makes Prakrti and Puru^ 
jfunction; obeisance to one who commits what b done and what 
b not done; obeisance to one who bestows union with the fruit 
of actions. 

22. Obebance to the knowerof the time of all; obebance 


1. L^rd otjlm or iadividuaJ souls. 



1204 


Brahma Purina 


to one whorestraiiuall; obeisance to one who disturbs the 
•equilibrium of Gupas; obeisance to one who bestows means of 
subsistence. 

23. Obeisance to you the lord of the chiefs of Devas; 
obeisance to you the creator of living beings; O Siva be genUe 
in face to be looked at, O lord* be gentle to 

Brakmd raid : 

24. On being eulogised thus by all Devas, the l<ml of the 
universe, the lord ofUma spoke thus to the immortal beings. 

Lord Jtudra said : 

25. O Devas, in regard to Devas I am both harsh aod 
gentle. Tell me the boons you wish to choose. I shall grant 
them undoubtedly. 

Brahmd said : 

26«30. Thereafter, Devas bowed down to the three-cyed 
lord and said to him : 

‘‘O lord, let this boon be retained by you alone. When there 
is any task, you will grant the boon desired by us.** 

Brakmd said : 

After saying **Let it be so**, the lord bade forewell to Devas 
and other people. Thereafter he entered his abode together with 
the Pramachas.^ 

He who recites this wonderful episode of festivities in the 
presence of Devas and brahmins shall become equal to Ganeia, 
who has no parallel. After death he shall become happy. 

O leading In'ahmins, he who listens to this hymn or reads 
it shall go to the world of the lord. He shall be worshipped by 
Devas, Asuras and others* 


1. JVawflrtsf gsQsift Siva's acttfi4aw. 



88.M2 


CHAPTER THIRTYSIX 
Umd and SaAkara leave Him^ayas 


205 


BrahmAsaid : 

I. When the lord entered his abode and was seated com* 
fortably in an excellent seat^ his ruthless enemy the cup id was 
ready to hit and pierce him with his shafts. 

2-4. He was notorious for neglect of good conduct. He was 
evil-minded and of base iamily. It was he who harassed the 
worlds. Concealing his body by covering up his limbs^ he put 
obstacles in the rites of sages. He had come there accompanied 
by Rati.^ Both had assumed the forms of ruddy geese. As an 
assailant O brahmins, he was ready to hit and wound the lord. 
Hence, the lord of Devas glanced at him contemptuously by ' 
opening his third eye. 

5. Then, with thousands of clusters of flames, the Are 
originating from his eye burned immediately the spouse of Rati 
together with his attendants. 

6. On being burned he became distressed and lamented 
piteously and out of tune. Propitiating that lord he fell down on 
the ground. 

7. With his limbs encompassed by fire the cupid, the 
scorcher of the world fell down into a swoon instantaneously. 

8. His excessively distressed wife lamented piteously. In 
great agony she ruefully requested the lord and the goddess for 
mercy. 

9. Realizing her pathetic plight, the sympathetic lord and 
the lady Uma glanced at the desolate Rati consolingly and said. 

Umd and MahsSvata said : 

10. Indeed, O gentle lady, he has been burned up. His 
resuscitation here, is not desired. Bodiless though he be, O 
gentle lady, he will carry out your tasks. 

II. O splendid lady, when lord Visnu incarnates as the 
son of Vasudeva, your husband will be reborn as his son. 

Bfohmd said : 

12. After securing that boon, the fair*faeed wife of Kama 

1. Rsti—wife of KimAdeva, god of love. 



t06 


Brchma Purina 


went back to the land of her choice. She was pleased. She was 
free from languor. 

13. O brahmins, after burning up Kama the delighted 
bulUbannered lord sported about on the Himalaya mountain 
Jn the company of Uma« 

14-17. Accompanied by the goddess, the three-eyed lord 
sported about in various places such as—beautiful caves, lotus- 
ponds and lakes, charming places free from crowds of people, 
Karpikara forests, lovely banks of rivers frequented by Kinnaras,^ 
peaks of the lord of mountains, tanks and lakes, different parks 
.and groves, amongst Campa bushes, places, resonant with the 
•chirpings and cooings of different birds, holy centres, sacred 
waters, lawns studded with jewels, etc, etc. In all these holy and 
charming spots embellished by Vidyidharas and frequented by 
Candharvas, Yak^s and the immortal beings, the three-eyed 
lord sported about along with the goddess. 

18. Surrounded by Devas led by Indra, sages, Yakyas, 
Siddhas, Gandharvas, Vidyadharas, leading Daityas and others 
of various sorts, the couple derived great pleasure on that 
mountain. 

19. There the celestial damsels and the leading Devas 
•danced; the delighted Gandharvas sai^; the brahmins medita¬ 
ted; some hurriedly played on the musical instruments and some 
eult^ised the excellent qualities of the lord. 

20. The noble lord, who destroyed the eyes of Bhaga, who 
was accompanied by hii powerful attendants comparable to 
Indra, Yama and fire-god, did not leave off that mountain just 
for pleasing the goddess. 

Thi sagis said : 

21. What did the great lord the destroyer of Kama do, 
'Staying there accompanied by Uma ? We wish to know this. 


Bra/and said : 


22-23. On the peak of the Himavan, the lord with the 
crescentmoon for his caste mark on the forehead delighted the 


1. Kwura-^ mythical bdag with a human figure and the head of a 
horse or with a horse's body ud the head of a man, originally perbi^ a kind 
of monkey, in Uter timei reckoned among the Gandharvas or celesdU choria- 
ten and celebrated as mundia. 



36.24-34 


207 


goddess and diverted himself. Desirous of pleasing the goddess 
he cut jokes and provoked mirth along with the leading Ganas 
of different shapes and sizes»who were omniscient^ magnanimous 
and splendid and who could assume any form they liked. 

24-25. Once it so happened that Uma went to her mother 
Mena who was seated in a bright and wonderful golden seat. 
On seeing the chaste blameless goddess who came there in a 
•divine form^ the mother greeted her by offering a valuable 
seat. Then, Mena the lotus-eyed beloved of Himav&n spoke 
to her when she was comfortably seated. 

Mind said : 

26-27. O my daughter of splendid eyes, you have come 
after a long time. Now tell me why do you play sports with 
poor wretched persons in the company of your husband ? Only 
the low people sport about as your husband does, my precious 
girl. Those who are pK>or and those who have no support sport 
with such wretched and poor people, O Uma. 

Brakmi said : 

28. On being bluntly told thus by her mother Um& was 
not pleased. Endowed with enormous patience she did not say 
anything to her mother. Dbmissed by her mother she went 
straight to her lord and said : 

P&roati said : 

29. O lord of the chiefs of Devas I will not stay on this 
mountain. O lord of massive splendour, make another residence 
for me in any of the three worlds. 

Ths lord said : 

30-31. You were being told always by me to go in for a 
separate residence, O goddess, but, O gentle Jady, the proposal 
did not appeal to you at all. But now, O gentle lady, O splendid 
one, why do you sedt a residence elsewhere ? Tell me O lady 
of pure smiles the cause for the change of your view. 

Thi goddess said : 

32^34. O iord of Devas, today I bad been to the abode of 
my noble father. O creator of the worlds, my mother met me 



Brahm Ari(i» 


208 

in a room where there wai no one else. After honourings me by 
offering seat etc. she spoke to me thus “O Uma, my auspicious 
girl your husband sports with the poor wretched people. Sports 
and pastime of Devas are never of that sort.’’ 

O bull^'bannered lord Siva I the fact that you sport about with 
the attendants of poor status is not approved of by my mother.’’ 

Brakmd raid : 

35-38. Then, in order to humour the goddess and make 
her laugh, the lord laughed biosterously and said i 

The lord said : 

This is true. There is no doubt about this why were you 
angry ? O lotus-eyed one, I do roam about in the forests and 
mountain caverns, surrounded by naked Ganas.^ Sometimes I 
wear the hide of an elephant. Sometimes I have no cloth to 
wear. Sometimes I stay in the cremation ground and have it 
as my abode. 1 have no permanent abode anywhere. 

O gentle lady, do not be furious with your mother. Your 
mother has spoken the truth. Unto all creatures in the world 
there is no other kinsman on a par with one’s mother. 

Tha goddess said : 

39"40. O destroyer of three cities*, I have nothing to do 
with my kinsmen. O great lord, do such things as will enable 
me to derive happiness. 

Brahmd said : 

On hearing the words of the goddess the lord of Devas left 
his father-in-law’s residence for pleasing her consort. Accom¬ 
panied by his wife and Ga^ he went to the Mem mountain 
frequented by Devas and Siddhas and other Beings. 


1. Ga^oj-^ttendants of 8tv« under the spedal superintendmee of 
god Gspela* 

2. Destroy of thu The three strong cities, triple fortificttioii built 
of goi^ iUvor and mas in the sky, air nd earth, by Maya for the Aiurai and 
ihMral by Siva, 



37,1.17 


209 


CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN 
Destruction of Dakfo's Socrijice 


The sagis said : 

U2. O Brahmli^ how was the horse*sacrifice of Prteetasa 
Dak fa the Prajapati destroyed in the Vaivasvata Manvantara ? 
How did the lord, the soul of ail, become infuriated after 
knowing that the goddess had been made angry ? How was the 
sacriHce of Daks a of unmeasured splendour destroyed by the 
great lord in rage ? 

Bfohmd said : 

3. O brahmins, I shall describe to you how the sacri* 
ficc was destroyed in rage by the great lord in retaliation 
of the treatment meted out to his consort—Satl. 

4-6, O excellent Brahmins, the wonderful peak of Mcru, 
Jyotihsthala by name, is worshipped in the three worlds. It is 
adorned by precious jewels. It is incomprehensible, unthwarta* 
ble, and bowed to by the pet^Ie. Pormerly, the lord was seated 
there on the ridge of the mountain wonderfully beautified by 
all sorts of minerals. He shone well and was as comfortable as 
he was seated in a palanquin. The daughter of the lord of the 
mountains stood away by his side. 

7.17. He was served by the following: The noble-souled 
Adityas, Vasus of great prowess, Alvins, the noble and excellent 
physicians, Vaiiravau^ the lord of Yakfas, the glorious lord 
whose abode was in Kailw and who was surrounded by 
Guhyakas, Usanas, the great sage Sanatkumara and other 
great sages, Angiras and other celestial sages, Viivavasu the 
Gandharva as well as Narada and Parvata.^ Many groups of 
Apsaras came there. The pure, auspicious and pleasant breeze 
blew wafting different kinds of fragrance. The trees of the 
toresi were laden with flowers of all seasons. The Vidyadharas, 
Sadhyas, Siddhas and ascetics worshipped and served the great 
lord, the lord of Paius. Similarly, there were qther living beings 


1. VaUratmoe Kubera, son of VUnvss. 

2, /iOnda wsd PotpoIo—T wo tagts expert ta mime who lived for a lonf 
time as inteparable friends. 



210 


Brahma Pur^ 


that had assumed different forms. There were extremely terrible 
Rakfasas, and Pilacas of great strei^th who were very bold, 
who assumed many forms and who held different sorts of wea« 
pons and means of striking. The followers of the lord com¬ 
parable to the fire-god also stood there. Nandlivara, permitted 
by the lord was also there holding a blazing trident brightly 
illuminated by its own radiance. Ganga, excellent of all rivers 
and the source of all sacred waters attended upon him in her 
embodied form. Thus the great lord stayed there worshipped 
by the celestial sages and the highly blessed Devas. 

18-27. After the lapse of some time the Patriarch Dak^ 
resolved to perform sacrifice in the manner laid down and 
mentioned before. Led by Indra, Devas came from their 
heavenly abodes to his sacrifice at Gangidv&ra^. Noble-souled 
Devas who had fiery lustre came there on shining aerial can. 
The Gahg&dvara was thronged by Gandharvas and Apsaras. 
It abounded in trees and creepers. Dak^ the most excellent 
among thevirtuoxu ones was surrounded by groups of sages. 

The residents of the Earth, firmament and heavenly world 
joined their palms in reverence and stood near him. The 
Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Skdhyas, Maruts and Vi^^u came 
there to partake of their shares in the sacrifice. The excellent 
Devas, Ajyapas, Somapas, Aivins, Maruts and different groups 
of Devas came there. These and other congregations of living 
beings, the four species of living ot^nisms such as the ovovivi- 
parous, viviparous, the sweat-born ones and the shorting ones 
(plants) came there. Devas had been invited along with their 
womenfolk and the sages. Seated in the aerial chariots (or 
lofty chambers) they shone like blazing fires. 

On seeing the raised platform devoid of Rudra, Dadldci, 
the great sage, spoke to the sages 

sages, Sankara the leader of all, is not seen in this great 
sacrifice; the sacrifice does not shine without him. 

28. By worshipping those who should not be worshipped 
and by not worshipping those who are worthy of being w<»hipp- 
ed a man undouf>tedly incurs great sin. 

1. Gsi^4doira-^A locality into the I&do-Gsngetic pUne where the river 
Cahgi falb from the HimAlayas. Thii place is known ss Haridvira. 



37.29-35 


2!1 


Brahm& said : 

29-33. After saying this, the brahmiaical sage said to 
Dak^ again. 

Dadhici said \ 

Why do you not worship the lord of Paius ? 

Daksasaid : 

I have many Rudras of my own; they have matted hairs 
and they are armed with tridents. They arc eleven in number 
and they stay in eleven abodes. We do not recognize any other 
Maheivara beside them. 

Dadhici said i 

This is the warning I shall give you all. My lord has not 
been invited. Just as I am sure that I do not see a deity above 
Sankara so also I am sure that this elaborate sacrifice of Dakya 
will not attain completion. 

Dakfa said : 

This entire offering has been sanctified by the due chanting 
of Mantras. It is dedicated to the lord of sacrifice. O brahmins, 
by means of gold vessels I offer this to the unparalleled god 
Vi^Qu as his sliare in the sacrifice and not to Sankara. 

O Dadhica, this is duly offered as the permanent share to 
Visnu, the lord of the universe. I give this share in the sacrifice 
to that excellent deity and not to Ankara. 

Brakm^ said : 

34. Knowing that Devaswere going somewhere, the chaste 
daughter of the king of mountains spoke these words to lord 
Siva her husband. 


Umd said : 

35. O lord who know all facts, where do these Devas with 
lord Indra at* their head go? Tell me truthfully. I entertain 
great doubts on (hat count. 



212 


Btakma Pur/h^ 


Mahihara said : 

36. The highly blessed, the most excellent patriarch Dak?a 
is perfonning a horse^sacrifice. Those heaven-dwellers are 
going there. 

Ths goddess said : 

37. O blessed one, why d<m*t you go to this sacrifice ? By 
what ban is your departure prevented ? 

Mahiioara said : 

38. O highly blessed lady, all this has been manipulated 
by Devas alone. No share is allotted to me in any sacrifice. 

39. O fair-complexioned lady, following the path of pre¬ 
vious precedent in the allotment of shares Devas do not offer 
me the rightful share in the sacrifice. 

Umd said : 

40-42. O lord, among Devas, you are superior in power 
and good qualities. You are invincible and unthwartable by 
virtue of splendour, fame and glory. O highly blessed one, on 
account of this ban in respect to the share (in sacrifice) I am 
extremely distressed. I tremble excessively. What sort of chari¬ 
table gift, holy observance or penance shall I perform, whereby 
my husband, the infinite lord shall now obtain a substantial or 
an appropriate share ? 

43-45. As she spoke the delighted lord thought that his 
wife was most agitated. He said gentle lady of slender 

belly and limbs you do not know me fully. Do you speak these 
words in propriety 7 O lady of large eyes, I know and all good 
people know through meditation. Due to your anger all Devas, 
the three worlds, have been destroyed. They highly praise me 
as the lord of sacrifices; they sing the Rathantara hymn {or my 
sake; they worship me by means of sacrifices. The priests who 
perform sacrifices allot share unto me. 

TTii goddess said : 

46. O lord, even a vulgar person behaves like a lofty* 
minded person in the assembly o( pe^le. Particularly in front 
of ladies he praises himself and arrogates. 



37.47-53 


213 


TTu lord said : 

47. O goddess ofDevas, I do not praise myself as you seem 
to think. O beautiful fair-complexioned lady, I shall create a 
being and assert my right to this share. 

£rakmi said : 

48. After saying this to Uma his wife, whom he loved 
more than his vital breath, the lord created a goblin from his 
mouth. It arose from the fire of his fury. 

49. The lord said thus to him :~*‘Go and destroy the 
sacrifice of Daksa. With my permission, immediately destroy 
that holy rite of Dalc^a.*’ 

50. That goblin knew that Dak^a was the cause of Mother’s 
indignation. Hence, he destroyed the sacrifice of Dak^i play¬ 
fully. This he did by the order of Rudra to assume the form of 
a lion. 

51. The extremely terrible Bhadrakall^ the great goddess 
was created from that indignation. As a witness to the actions 
of her lord she accompanied him. 

52. In fact, the goblin was the lord himself, who assumed 
•the form of the fury of the lord and took up hu abode in the 
cremation ground, the resting place of ghosts. He is known as 
Vlrabhadra.* Eventually he wiped off indignation and sorrow 
of his consort Uma. 

53. From the pores of his bodily hairs he himself created 
some leading Ganas, the terrible followers who had virility and 
exploit akin to that of Rudra himself. 

1. form of PirvaU. Lord Siva, on hearing about the self- 
immolation in fire of his wife Satl, at the famous sacrifice conducted by Dak^ 
rushed in all anger to the spot and beat the earth with his matted hair, and 
there ensued two forces caUed VlraUudra and BhadrakSll. This BbadrakiU 
was really Sail in another fonn. 

2. VfradAadra~^Th&e are two different opinions in the PurSnas regard¬ 

ing the origin of ^^rabhmdra. According to the PurSn** his birth was due to 
the anger of fiiva. When Siva knew that his wife Pirvad jumped into the fire 
and died at the sacrifice of Dakfa, he struck hii matted hair ca the ground and 
Irocn that, Vlrabhadra and Bhadrakll! came into being. But according to 
MM, (S&nd Parva, Gh. 284) Vlrabhadra vrai bom from the mouth of Siva 
to destroy the sacrifice of Dakea« Prom each of the hairporcs of Vlrabhadra 
a fearful mouterwas bom, aD of whom formed a of ghosts called 

Oapas. 



214 


Brahma Atr29d 


54. These followers ofRudra, who had the valour of Rudra 
himself, jumped out of bis pores in hundreds and thousands. 

55. O brahmins, the tiimultuous sound produced by those* 
GaQas ofRudra was extremely sonemus and appeared to fill 
the entire firmament. 

56. The heaven«<lwellers were frightened by that loud 
tumult. The mountains crumbled down and the earth quaked. 

57. Gusts of wind blew ruthlessly. The abode of ocean 
became stirred up and excited. Fires did not blaze nor did the 
sun shine. 

56. Neither did glimmer the planets nor the stars nor the 
constellations. Neither sages nor Devsis nor D&navas had 
any lustre in their faces. 

59. When darkness envelc^>ed everything thus, those seated 
in the aerial chariots were burned up. Terrible stormy gusts 
of wind blew ruthlessly with the stinking odour of rotting 
ordure. 

60. Some of the goblins shouted and cried aloud; others* 
crashed and thrashed. With the velocity of the wind and the 
mind they ran helter-skelter in hurry. 

61. The ritual vessels were broken to pieces and reduced 
to powder. The sacrificial chambers crumbling down appeared 
like the stars fallen bom the sky. 

62-65. Various sorts of foodstuffs and beverages were 
swallowed and lapped by the goblins. Hugh mountains like 
masses of divine cooked rice, beverages and foodstuffs, rivers of 
milk, marshy sloughs of ghee and milk pudding, divine 
honey and watery whey and gruel, sand-like candies and sugar, 
rivers with floating cooked rice of all the six tastes, channels of 
liquid treacle and molasses pleasing to the mind, high and low 
heaps of meat, footstufis of different sorts—nay all those exquisi¬ 
tely prepared lambatives and edibles, juices and squashes were 
gorged up by those enormous beings with their mouths of 
diverse kinds. Those beings issuing from the anger of Rudra, 
and comparable to fire of Death destroyed some and scattered, 
others. 

66. Those gigantic beings towering high like moimtains 
agitated and tarified everyone everywhm. Those beings of 
various forms hurled the celestial damsels playfully. 



37 . 67^1 


215 


67«68. Such were the Ga^as. Accompanied by them» the 
valorous Vlrabhadra, impelled by the fury of Rudra, quickly 
burned that sacrifice welKguardcd by all Devas* He burned it 
up * in the presence of Bhadrakali* The others produced loud 
crying sounds that frightened all living beings. 

69. Cutting the head of sacrifice they yelled terrifically* 
Then Dak^ the patriarch and Indra and other Devas joined 
their palms in reverence and said ;—*^May this be known who 
are you* please ?” 

Virabhadra sdid : 

70-73. O leading Devas, 1 am neither a Deva nor a Daitya. 
I have not come here to eat or to enjoy. I have not come here 
to see anything nor am I impelled by curiosity. 

O excellent Devas, I have come here for destroying the sacri- 
fice of Daksa. I am wellknown as VIrabhadra. I have come 
out of the fury of Rudra. 

(This lady) shall be known asBhadrakall who has emerged 
from the fury and indignation of the Mother. She is sent by 
the lord of Devas and so has come to the venue of sacrifice. 

O leading king, seek refuge in the consort of Uma, the lord 
of Devas. Better to face the fury of the lord than to court the 
challenge of his attendants. 

Brahmd said : 

74-8]. Then the planted sacrificial posts were pulled up 
and cost off here and there. The vultures, greedy of ftesh were 
swooping down or flying about. The gusts of wind generated 
by their fluttering wings shook down everything. Hundreds of 
vixen howled. The sacrifice of the arrogant Dak^a was harassed 
by the Ganas. Thus harassed the sacrifice assumed the form of 
a deer and jumped high into the sky. 

Observing the sacrifice slipping away in that form, lord 
(Vtrabhadra) seized his bow and arrow and went after it. Due 
to the wrath of that Ga^ut unmeasured splendour a terrible 
drop of sweat flowed fi'om his forehead. The moment the 
drop of sweat fell on the ground, a huge fire appeared, that was 
comparable to the blazing fire of death* Then, O excellent 
brahmins, there appeared a man»like being. He was very short 



216 


Brahma Purhf^ 


lo stature. His eyes were red; his beard and moustache 
were green. He was terrific. His hair stood up on his head. His 
limbs were profusely covered with hair. His ears were red. He 
was awful and black in colour. He wore a red cloth. That 
Puru^a of great prowess burned down the sacrifice like a fire 
that bums down a heap of straw. 

82-89. The frightened Devas fled in all directions. As he 
moved about with long studies the Earth consisting of seven 
continents shook all round. When that great Being began to 
function like this, striking terror into the world of Devas I 
worshipped the great lord and said to him— lord, Devas 

will offer share unto you too. O lord of Devas; let this be with¬ 
drawn. All these Devas and thousands of sages know no peace» 
O great lord on account of your ai^er, O leading Deva con¬ 
versant with virtue, the Being who was bom of your sweat will 
be known as Jvara (Fever). He will move about in the world. 
O lord, the whole of this earth would not bear his vigour if he 
stayed as one single Being. May he be diffused in manifold forms. 
When the lord was requested thus by me and when the share 
too was allotted, the Pinakabearing lord of Devas said to me— 
‘*So be it.” The Pioaka-bearing lord himself derived great 
pleasure. 

90-92. Dak^ sought refuge in lord $iva. He restrained the 
Pra^ta and Apana winds in the cavity of the eye with great 
effort. 

The lord, the conqueror of enemies opened his eyes fully 
and looked all around. He then smiled and spoke soft words— 
”Tell me what shall I do for you ?” When the great story was 
narrated to Devas accompanied by Pitrs, Dak^ the Prajapati 
joined his palms in reverence and spoke to the lord. He was 
afiraid, suspicious and even terrified. His face and eyes were 
covered with tears. 

Dakfc said : 

93-97. O lord, if you are pleased, if I am your fitvourite, 
if 1 am to bebleued, ifbocm is to be granted to me (I shal l 
request for this). Some of the food has been eaten. Some beve¬ 
rage Is dnmk. ^me are simply bitten, some destroyed, some 
are ground into powder* This is the state regarding the requisites 



38 . 1-3 


217 


•of sacrifice. These were acquired by me during the course of 
long time with great strain. O great lord, let this not go in 
vain in regard to me, due to your favour. 

Brahmd said : 

The lord Siva who removed the eyes of Bhaga said—So be 
it. 

The Patriarch Daksa bowed to the three^eyed lord Siva the 
presiding deity of virtue. After securing the boon from lord 
Siva, Dak^ knelt on the ground and eulogised the bull^banner- 
ed lord by his thousand and eight names. 


CHAPTER THIRTYEIGHT 
Tht Prqfer by Dakfa 

1. O excellent brahmins, on seeing the virility of Siva 
^hus, Dakfa joined his palms in reverence and bowed down. 
Then he began to eulogise. 

2. Obeisance to you, O lord of the chiefs of Devas, Obei¬ 
sance to you, O slayer of Bala, O lord of Devas, you are the 
most excellent one in strength, you are worshipped by Devas 
and Danavas. 

3-63.0 thousand-eyed one, O one of deformed eyes, Othrcc- 
eyrd one, one fond of the overlord of Akfas, you have hands 
and feet all round; you have eyes, heads and mouth all round; 
you have ears all round; you stand envelopii^ everything in 
the world, Sankukarna (Pike-eared), Mahakar^ (Long-eared), 
Kumbhakar^(Pot-eared), Arnavilaya (ocean-dweller), Gajen- 
-drakarna) (elephant-eared), Gokaru (cow*earcd), Satakarpa 
(hundred-eared). Obeisance to you Satodara (hundred-bellied), 
SativarCa (having hundred curly locks oC hairs), Satajihva 
(havinghundred tongues), Sanatana (Eternal), One who is 
'Worshipped by the G&yatrixu, singing songs of praise, one who 
is wonhipped by those who have stopped perfonning activities. 
Devadknavagppti (Protector of Devas and D&navas), Brahmi 
and Satakratu (Indra). You are Murtimin, (Embodied), 



216 


Brahma 


Mahamurti (having physical form), Samudra (Ocean), Sarasaih 
Nidhi (storehouse of lakes), in wbcMit Devas abide as cows in. 
the cowpen. I see in your body the moon, fire, lord of waters, 
sun, Vi$Qu, Brahma and Bfhaspati (Jupiter). You are the action, 
cause and effect, the maker and the instrument. You are Asat 
and Sadasat (existent as well as non existent). You are 
the source of origin and scat of Dissolution (Prabhava and 
Appaya)» Obeisance to Bhava, Obeisance to 6arva. Obeisance 
to Rudra. Obeisance to the bestower of boons (Varada)» 
Obeisance to Paiupati (Lord of Paius) Obeisance to Andha- 
kaghatin (one who hit Andhaka). Obeisance toTrijata (having 
three locks of matted hair). Obeisance to Trifir^a (having 
three heads). Obeisance to Triiulavaradh&rin (one who holds 
excellent trident). Obeisance to Tryambaka (three-eyed). 
Obeisance to Trinetra (three^ed). Obeisance to Tripuraghna 
(one who destroyed the three cities). Obeisance to Ca^d^ (the 
fierce). Obeisance to Munda (one with shaven head). Obeis¬ 
ance to Viivacandadhara (One who holds the universe fiercely) • 
Obeisance to Da^din (One who holds a staff). Obeisance to 
Sankukarna (One having pike-ears). Obeisance to Ga^d^ca^d^ 
(fierce lord of the fierce goddess). Obeisance to Crdhva Datudi* 
keia (One who holds the staff pointed upwards and one who 
has hairs growing up). Obeisance to 6uyka (Dry). Obeisance to 
Vikrta (the deformed). Obeisance to Vilohita(one who is parti-* 
cularly red. Obeisance to Dhumra (smoke-coloured). Obeisance 
to Nllagriva (the blueneckcd). Obeisance to Apratinipa (one 
who has no replica). Obeisance to Virupa (the deformed). 
Obeisance to Siva. Obeisance to Surya (identical with the 
sun). Obeisance to Sury^>ati (the lord of the sun). Obeisance 
to Suryadhvajapatakin (one having the sun as flagstaff and. 
emblem). Obeisance to the lord of Pramathas. Obeisance to 
Vrsaskandha (bull-shouldered). Obeisance to Htranyavan^ 
(golden coloured). Obeisance to Hirapyavarcas (golden coat 
mail). Obeisance to Hira^yakitacuda (Obeisance to one with 
golden tufts). Obeisance to Hiraityapati (Lord of gold). 
Obeisance toSatrughata (One who kills enemies). Obeisance 
to Gapd^ (the fierce one) Obeisance to Par^asanghaiaya (one 
who lies amidst clusters of leaves). Obeisance to Stuta (the 
eulogised one). Obeisance to Stuti (the eulogy). Obeisance to* 


S8.1-63 


2I» 

Stuyamana (one who U being eulogised). Obeisance to Sarva 
(identical with all)« Obeisance to Sarvabhak^ (one who eats 
every thing). Obeisance to Sarvabhutintaratman (the immanent 
sou! in all living beings). Obeisance to Homa.) Obeisance to 
Mantra). Obeisance to Sukladhvajapatikin (One whose flag- 
staff and banner are white). Obeisance to Anamya (one who 
cannot be bent). Obeisance to Namya (one who should be 
bowed to). Obeisance to Kilakila (tumultuous noise). Obei¬ 
sance to Sayamina (lyingdown) Obeisance to $Ayica (one who 
has already lain down). Obeisance toUtthita (one who has got 
up). Obeisance to Sthita (one who stands). Obeisance to- 
Dhavamana (one who runs). Obeisance to Bhuta (one who has 
become). Obeisance to Kufila (the crooked). Obeisance to 
NartanaiiU (one habituated to dance). Obeisance to Mukha- 
vaditrak&rln (one who plays with his mouth as with a musical 
instrument). Obeisance to B&dh&paha (one who dispels obs¬ 
tacles). Obeisance to Lubdha (one who is greedy). Obeisance 
to Gltaviditrakarin (one who sings and plays on musical 
instruments). Obeisance to Jye^tha (the eldest). Obeisance ta 
Sre^tha (the most excellent). Obeisance to Balapramathana 
(one who suppresses Bala).Obeisance toKalpana (conception). 
Obeisance to Kalpya (one who is to be conceived). Obeisance 
to K$ama (the competent)«Obeisance to Upak^ama {very nearly 
efficient). Obeisance to Ugra (the fierce one). Obeisance to Daia- 
b&hu (ten-armed). Obeisance tpKap&lahasta (having the skull 
in hand). Obeisance to Sitabhasmapriya (one fond of white 
ashes). Obeisance to Vibhi^ai^ (the terrUying one). Obeisance 
toBluma (the terrible). Obebance to Bhlmavratadhara (one 
who observes terrible holy rites). Obeisance to Nanavikrtava- 
ktra (one who has many deformed faces)«Obeisance to Khad- 
gajihvogradadi^trin (one with sword-like tongue and fierce 
curved fangs). Obeisance to Pakfamazfasalavadya (one who 
has huge musical instruments at hb sides). Obebance to 
Tumbivipapriya (one fond ofTumbivItii, a kind of lute). 

Obebance to Aghoraghorarupa (one who has the form of 
Aghora, a terrible form). Obebance to Ghoraghoratara 
(one who b more terrible than the most terrible). Obebance 
to Siva. Obeisance to Sknta (calm). Obeisance to Sintatara 
(calmer). Obeisance to Buddha (enlightened). Obebance to 


. 220 


Brahma Purdifa 


Buddha (pureone). Obeisance to Samvibhigapriya (one fond 
■of classification). Obeisance to PrapaAca (extensive universe). 
Obeisance to Ugra (fierce). Obeisance to Sirhkhyapara (one 
devoted to Simkhya philosophy). Obeisance to Candaika- 
ghanta (one having a fierce t^ll). Obeisance to Ghanfanada 
(sound of the bell). Obeisance toGhanjin (one with a bell). 
'Obeisance to Sahasraiataghanfa (one who has thousands and 
thousands of bells). Obeisance to Ghanfamalapriya (one fondof 
A garland of bells). Obeisance toPr&nada^d^ (one awarding 
life sentence). Obeisance to Nitya (the permanent). Obeisance 
to you Lohita (Red in colour). Obeisance to Hurhhurhkira 
(one shouting Hurfihum). Obeisance to Rudra. Obeisance to 
Huihhumkirapriya (one fond of the sound (Huthhum) Obei* 
lance to Aparavin (Endless, limitless). Obeisance to Nityarti- 
girivrkyapriya (one who is always fond of tree on the moun¬ 
tain) . Obeisance to Mirga-M&msairgila (the jackal at the 
wayside with a price of meat). Obeisance to Taraka (one 
who redeems). Obeisance to Tara (one who crosses). Obeisance 
to Yajfladhipati (the over-lord). Obeisance to Krta (what is 
■done). Obeisance to Prakfta (what is perfectly done). Obeisance 
to Yajftavaha (one whose vehicle is Yajfta). Obeisance to 
Danta (one who has controlled sense-oigans) Obeisance to 
'Tathya (truth). Obeisance toVitatha (untrue). Obeisance to 
Tafa (shore); Obeisance to Tafya (one favourable to the 
shore). Obeisance to Ta(inlpati (lord of rivers). Obeisance to 
Annada (bestower of cooked rice). Obeisance to Annapati 
(Lord of cooked rice). Obeisance to Annabhuja (one who 
eats cooked rice). Obeisance to Sanasrallr$a (the thousand¬ 
headed). Obeisance to Sahasracarana (having thousand feet) 
Obeisance to Sahasrodyataiula (one who has lifted up a 
thousand tridents) .Obeisance to Saha$ranayaiia(thou^nd-eyed) 
Obeisance to Bil&rkavarna (one having the colour rising 
sun). Obeisance to Balarupadhara (one having the form of 
>a boy. Obeisance to B&lirkarupa (one having the form of the 
rising sun). Obeisance to Balakrijanaka (one who plays like 
boys). Obeisance to Suddfaa (the pore one). Obeisance to 
Buddha (enlightened). Obeisance to Kfobhai^ (one who 
^causes agitation). Obrisance to Kfay^ (one who causes decline). 
Obeisante to TarartgtAkitakeia (one whose hair is marked with 



38.1*63 


221 


waves). Obeisance to Muktakeia (one whose tresses are re^ 
leased). Obeisance to Satkarmatuffa (one who is pleased with 
six types of holy rites). Obeisance to Trikarmanirata (one 
is engaged in the three holy rites). Obeisance to Varn&jrama* 
dharma*pravartaka (one who makes castes and stages life 
function duly and severally). Obeisance toSrey^ha (themost excel¬ 
lent). Obeisance tojycftha (the eldest). Obeisance to Kalakala 
(indistinct but sweet sound). Obeisance to Svetapihgalanetra 
(one who has white and tawny coloured eyes). Obeisance 
to Kr^Q^raktekfana (one who has black and red eyes). Obei¬ 
sance to Dharmakimirthamokfa (virtuCi love, wealth and 
salvation). Obeisance to Kratha (one who injures). Obeisance 
to Krathana (one who slaughters). Obeisance to S&mkhya. 
Obeisance to Sizhkhyamukhya (CUef of the Skmkhya). Obei* 
sance to Yogidhipati (overlord of Yogas). Obeisance to 
Rathyadhirathya (Charioteer on the street). Obeisance to 
Gatufpathapatha (havir^; the pathway in thefourcross roads). 
Obeisance to Kr^^ijinottariya (one having the hide of a 
black deer as the upper garment). 


O liana Rudrasahghata (group of Rudras), Harikeia (one 
having green hair). Obeisance to you. Obeisance to Tryambaka 
(three-eyed). O Ambikanitha (lord of Ambika ), O manifest 
and unmanifest. Obeisance to you O Kala, O Kamada (be- 
stower of desires), O Kamaghna (destroyer of desires), Duff a- 
duritanivarai^ (destroyer of the wicked and the violators of 
good conduct), O Sarvagarhiu (despised by everyone). O 
Sarvaghna (destroyer of everyone). O Sadyojata, Obeisance to 
you. Unmadana (one who causes madness. Satavart^anga- 
toyardramurdhaja (one whose hair on the head is wet due to 
the waters of Gahga that has hundreds of whirlpools). O 
Candrardhasaixiyugavarta(one who has war-like eddies by means 
of crescent moon?). OM^havarta (having eddies with clouds) 
Obeisance to you. You alone are Nanirthadinakarta (the 
bestower of different sorts of rich») and Arthada (bestower of 


riches), Annasrafti (creator of cooked rice)» Bhokta (eater of 
cooked rice), Yajfiabhuk (partaker of iacri6ce), Anala (6rc), 
the four types of creatures Jariyuja etc. You alone, O lord of 
the chief of Devas, arc the four types of creatures. You are the 
creator of the mobile and immobile beings. You are Pratt- 



222 


Brahma PurS^a 


karta(onewho withdraws i.e. annihilates). O lord of the 
univene, you alone are the Brahman. They speak of Brahman 
in the waters, you are the great womb of everythii^. You are 
^Svadbi. You are the storehouse of luminaries. Expounders of 
brahman call you Rk, Sdman and Omk&ra. The excellent Devas 
and the expounders of Brahman who sing S&man say frequent* 
ly—‘‘Hari Ilari etc.** or ‘^Hara Hara etc.** You are full of 
Tujur Mantras, lUC Mantras, Sdman and Atharva Mantras. You 
are served by those who know Brahman, and Kalpas and Up* 
anifads. The Brahmins, K^triyas, Vaifyas, i^udras and other 
castes and stages of life are identical with you. You are A$ramas. 
You are Vidyut Stanitam (lightning and thunder). You are the 
year, seasons, month, fortnight, and Kali, Ka 9 tha, Nime$as, 
stars and Yugas. You art Vrfanam Kakudam (the chief of 
bulls). You are the peak of mountains. You are the lion, the chief 
among animals. You are Taksaka among Nigas, You are 
milk ocean among seas. YouareYajus among Mantras. You 
are thunderbolt among weapozu. You are truth among holy 
Titea. You are the following attributes viz. wish, hatred, lust 
•delusion, calmness, forbearance, industry, courage, greed, love, 
anger, victory and defeat. You are the wielder of arrow, bow, 
iron club (Khafvidga), banner and chariot. You cut, pierce, 
strike and lead. You are considered a thinker by us. You are 
the Dharma with its ten characteristics; you are Artha(Wealth) 
and Kama (love). You are Indra, Samudra (ocean) Sarits 
(rivers) Palvalas (Paddles) Sarasi (lakes) Lativallis (creepers 
and winding plants) Ti^ufadhayab (grasses and medicinal 
herbs), Pufus, (animal) and birds. You are the origin of Drav* 
yas (objects), Karmans (actions) and Gu^as (attributes). You 
are K&lapufpaphalaprada (bestower of fruits into the flower 
of time). You are Adi (origin) Anta (end) Madhya 
(middle). You are Giyatri and Oihkara. You are Harita 
(green) Lohita (red) Kffna (black) Nila (blue) Pita (yellow) 
Aru^a (pink) Kadru (tawny) Kapila (palebrown) Babhru 
(deep*brown) ,Kapota( dove*coloured), Mecaka (dark*coloured). 
You are well known as Suvar^etas (one having golden 
semen). You arc considered Suvarpa (gold in colour), Suvar* 
xanaman (golden named) Suytn^nptiy^ (fond of gold). You 
are Indu (moon), Yama, Varu^ Dhanada (bestower of 



38.64-73 


223 


ivealth i.e. Kubera), Anala (fire), U^bulU-Gitrabhanu (full- 
fledged sun), Svarbhinu(R&hu}« Bhinu(sun), Hotra(saicrifice), 
HoUi (sacriflcer), Homya (paraphernalia of oblation), Hutam 
(oblation). O lord, you are the Trisaupar^u mauitra and the 
3atanidiiya Mantra of Yajunreda. You are the most sacred of 
all sacred things. You are the most auspicious of all auspicious 
things. You are the mountain that destroys sins. You are 
(a tree), Jtva (individual soul), Pralaya(Dissolution). You are 
Prana (vital airs) and Rajogu^a, Tamogupa, and Sattva. You 
are Prapa, Apana, Samina, Udana and Vy&na. You are 
Unme^a (Opening of the eye), Nimeya (closing of the eye), 
Kala (time), Kalpa, Lohitanga (Red-limbed), Daih^trin 
(having curved fangs), Mahavaktra (havbg huge mouth), 
Mahodara (having large belly), Suciroman (having pure hair), 
Haricchmairu (having green moustache and beard), Orddhva- 
ke^ (having hair standing up), Calacala (moving and 
unmoving), Gitavaditranrtyaga (Interested in singing, play¬ 
ing on instruments aiul dancing), Gitavidanakapriya (Fond 
of singing and playing on instruments). You are Matsya (flsh) 
Jala (net) Jala (water), Ajayya (Unconquerable), Jalavyala 
(water-python) Kuticarya (Porpoise), Vikala (having advene 
time), Sukala (having good time), Du^kala (having bad time) 
K&lanaiana (Destroyer of K&la Time or god of Death). Mftyu 
(Death), Ak^aya (Everlasting), Anta (end), K^amamay&karot- 
kara (? One who offers and carries cut forbearance and 
<leception). 

64-73. Saihvarta (Dissolution), Vartaka (one who causes 
whirling), SaAvartaka and Balihaka (the clouds at the time of 
dissolution), Ghantikin and Ghanfakin and ghanfin (having bells 
of different types), Cu<lala (having tuAs), Lavanodadhi (the 
briny sea), Brahma, K&l&gnivaktra (having black Are in the 
mouth), Dat^in(having staff)» (having shaven head, Trid- 

andadhfk (one holding three staffs), CatuTyuga(of four Yugas), 
Gaturveda of four Vedas), Caturhotra (set of four sacrifices), 
Catufpatha (set of four paths), Catur&iramyaneta (leader of 
the pe<^le of four stages of life) Gaturvar^yakara (cause of divi¬ 
sion of four castes) Kfarikiara (perishable and imperishable) 
Priya (Beloved), Dhurta (wicked) Ga^atkaga^ya (worthy of 
being considmd by the Ga^as), Ga^kdhip* (the overlord of 



224 


Brahma PurSi^ 


Ga^as) Raktamilyimbaradhara (one who wears red gar¬ 
ments and garlands) I Girina (Liord of the mountain) Girij&priya 
(Pond of the daughter of the mountain lord)» Slips<a (chief of 
Artisans) Silpiire^tha (the most excellent among artisans) 
Sarvaiilpapravarcaka (He who msJces arts and crafts function)» 
Bhaganetrantaka (the destroyer of the eyes of Bhaga) ^ Cat^d^ 
(fierce), Pflynah Dantavinifanah (he who destroys the teeth of 
PGjan), Sv&hi Svadhi Vafa^kira Namask&ra (Obeisance). 
Obeisance be to you) Gudhavrata (one who performs holy 
rites in isolation)^ Gudha (well-hidden)» Gudhavratani^evita 
(one resorted to by those who perform holy rites in secret), 
Ttri;i^(One who crosses))Tara^ (one who redeems)»Sarv&nu« 
syutacirapa (one who has his Caracas (spies) spread in 
everyplace), Dhiti (creator), Vidhiti (dispenserof destiny) 
Sandh&ti (one who joins together), Nidhitk (one who depo¬ 
sits), Dharanidhara (sustainerof the earth), Tapas (penance), 
Brahman (the supreme Being), Satyam( truth), Brahmacaryam 
(the soul of living beings), Bhutakft (the creator of living be¬ 
ings) , Bhuta (one who has become Bhuta),BhavyaBhavodbhava 
(the source of wgin of every thing past, present and future), 
Bhurbhuvah svar (one who has gone to the worlds Bhuh, 
Bhuvahand Svah, V|ta (Surrounded), Agni (fire), Maheivara 
(great lord), Rekfatia (havii^ fiery vision) Dviksanak&nta 
(lover of one with two eyes), Danta (one who has self control) 
Adantavinaiana (Destroyer of those who have not conquered 
their sense organs) Brahmavarta (one who has turned out 
from Brahma?) Suravarta (one who makes Devas revolve), 
K&mavarta (one who makes Kama revolve), obeisance to you. 
K&mabimbavinirhanta (one who destroys the idol of Kama) 
Kartiikarasrajapriya (one fond of the garland of Kar^ikara 
flowers) Goneta (leader of cow), Gopracara (one who makes 
rays spread, or one who makes cows graze), Govn^fvaravahana 
(one who has, as vehicle, a cow and a leading bull), Trailo- 
kyagopta (the protector of three worlds), Govinda, Gopta 
(Protector), Gogarga. 


74^. Akha^d^candribhsmukha (one who is face to face 
with the full moon), Sumukha (having good face) Dur- 
mukha (having bad face) Amukha (having no face) Catur- 
mukha (four«&ced) Bahumukha (many-faced) Rapefvabhi-^ 



38.81-90 


223 


mukhal^ sadi (Always face to in battles), Hirat^yagarbha, 
Sakuni, Dhanada (bestower of wealth), Annapati (Lord of 
cooked rice), Vira( (Immense being), Adharmahk (Destroyer 
of evil), Mahfidaksa (very efficient), Da^d^lh&ri (Holder 
of staff) Ra^priya (fond of war), Tiithan (standing), Sthira 
(Steady), Sthinu (Snimp), Niskampa (unmoving), Suniicala 
(very still), Durvirana (one who cannot be checked) 
Durvi^aha (who cannot be borne),Durdarpa (having wisked 
arrogance), Duratikrama(one who cannot bemade submissive), 
Nitya (Permanent), Durdama (one who carmot besuppressed), 
Vijaya (Victory),Jaya (conquerer)Safa (hare),Saiadkanayana 
(having the moon as an eye), Sito^ (Bearing heat and 
chillness), Kfut (Hunger), Tna ((hint) Jark (Old age), Adhis 
(agonies), Vy&dhii (ailments), Vy&dhihk (destroyer of ailments) 
Vy&dhipa (the lord of sicknms) Sahya (Bearable) Yaj&a- 
mrgavyidha, (Hunter of Yaj&a in the form of a deer), Vyidh- 
InamAkara (mine of ailments), Akara (handless) Sikhapdl 
(tufted), Pundarika (lotus), Pu^darik&valokana (one who 
looks at lotuses), Dandadhfk (holding staff), Cakradapda 
(holding wheel and staff), Raudrabhkgavinaiana (Destroyer of 
terrible share), Vi^apa (one who drinks poison), Amrtapi 
(drinker of nectar), Surapi (drinker of wine), Kfiraiomapa 
(drinker of milk and some juice), Madhupk (drinker of honey) 
Apapa (drinker of water, Sarvapi (drinker of everything), 
B^bala (strong and weak). 

81-90. V'rfahgavahya (one who is to be carried over the 
body of the buU),Vr»abha(Bul!-leading deity), Vrfabhalocana 
(bull-eyed). You are well known as the leader of all worlds, 
Lokasamskrta (consecrated in the world). The moon and the 
sun constitute your eyes, Brahma isyour heart, Agniftoma sacri¬ 
fice is your body and it is embellished by virtuous holy rite. 

O Siva, neither BrahnU nor Vi^u nor the ancient sages are 
competent to know your greamess precisely like a lather 
protecting his son. 

O Siva, always protect one with the help of your physical 
subtle forms. Let them come into my vow. 

O sinless one, protect me. 1 am worthy of being protected 
by you. Obeisance be to you. You are sympathetic to the 
di^tees anil 1 am always your devotee. 



226 


Brahma PwrAi^ 


May he be my continuous protectofi he who stands alone 
on the shore of the sea after encompassing the miserable state of 
many thousands of men. 

Those who have conquered sleep, those who have mastered 
their breath, those who abide by the Sattva Gupa, and those 
who have similarity of vision and those who perform Yoga, see 
that brilliance. Obeisance to thatVogic Atman. 

When the close of Yugas is imminent he devours all living 
beii^^s and he lies down in the middle of waters. I resort to him 
who lies down in the waters. 

It as the fire of the Soma juice that enters the mouth of 
Rihn and drinks the nectar of the moon at night. As Rahu, it 
devoun the sun. 

Piarufas (souls of individuals) of the size of thumbs are 
stationed in the bodies of embodied persons. Let them protect 
me always. Let them always nourish me. 

91. Devas are procreated by Sv&has and Svadhau. To those 
who attain death Svfthas and Svadhas are offered. Svahi, 
Svadhit and Ahar eulogise you. 

92-96. Wliere the embodied persons ascend to and where 
the living beings descend from, those who del^ht but do not 
drag one—obeisance be to them, obeisance to them. Obeisance 
to those who are in the ocean, to those who are on mountains, 
to those who are in the impassable rivers, to those who are in 
caves, at the roots of trees, in cowpens, in dense forests, in the 
four cross*roads, in streets, in jungles, in assemblies, in chambers 
of elephants, horses and chariots, in old and dilapidated parks 
and tftmpiga. Obeisance to those who are in five elements, in 
quarters and intermediary junctions, to those who are in bet¬ 
ween Indra and the sun, to those who are in the rays of the 
moon and the Sun, to those who are present in the nether worlds 
and who have gone beyond that (I make obeisance alwa)^). 

97. You are identical with all. You are the omnipresent 
lord, the lord of all living beings, and the immanent soul in all 
living beings. Hence you have not been invited. 

98. O lordi you alone are worshipped in sacrifices with 
:.yanou8 lortt gifts. You aiooe are the doer of everything. 
Hence you have not been invited. 



38.99-110 


227 


99. Or O lord, I have been deluded by your subtle MayL 
Tor that reason too, you have not been invited by me. 

100. O lord of Devas, be pleased with me. You alone are 
my refuge. You are the goal and the foundation. It is my 
opinion that no one else is so. 

BfahMH said : 

101. After eulogising the great lord thus the highly intelli- 
gent Dak 9 a stopped. The delighted lord spoke to Daksa once 
again. 

Tks lord said \ 

102. O Dakfa of good holy rites, I am delighted with this 
hymn of yours. Of what avail is much talk ? You will come to 
my presence. 

103. After uttering the words of consolation the omniscient 
lord of the three worlds spoke the following words succinctly put 
in good sentences. 

Lord Siva said : 

104. O Dakya, you should not feel sad by this destruction 
of sacrifice. O sinless one, I am the destroyer of sacrifice and 
this has been seen by you formerly. 

105. O one of Good holy rites, accept this boon from me. 
Wear a happy and pleasant face and listen to me attentively. 

106. O Patriarch, by virtue of my favour, you will derive 
the fruit of a thousand hone and a hundred Vajapeya sacrifices. 

107-110. The holy rite of P&^upata has been prescribed by 
me. The Vedas and their six anciliaries are to be understood 
along with the schools of philosc^hy—Samkbya, Yoga etc. A 
penance too difficult to be performed even by Devas and 
D&navas should also be undertaken. Thus during the course of 
twelve years this holy rite has been prepared. It is subtle and 
no intelligent man shall censure it. In some respects it may 
conform to the disciplined life of four castes and four stages; 
in some respects it may not. But its aim is the liberation of 
individual soul from bondage. This holy rite of P&lupata 
has been prescribed by me, O Dak^a, for pe<^le of all stages 
of life. It releases one from all sins. If this holy rite is performed 



228 Brahma Pard^ 

well) Che benefit is splendid. O highly blessed one. may it be-> 
fall you. May this mental ailment be eschewed. 

Brahmd said : 

111. Afler saying this to Dak^ of unmeasured splendour 
the lord of Devas vanished along with his wife and attendants. 

112. O sages who are conversant with holy rites, after 
acquiring his share as mentioned before, the lord classified (ail*^ 
ments, fever etc.) in to various divisions, in the company of Uma. 

113. It is (or peace among all living beings that he classifi¬ 
ed thus. O brahmins, listen. For Nigas (elephants) it is the 
scorching of the tuft; for the mountains it is bitumen. 

114. It is NIliki (for water). For the serpents it is slough 
(limping). For the cow it is Khoraka (limping), For Earth it is 
the barren soil. 

115. O sages convenant vrith virtue! for dogs it is the 
obstruction of the vision; for horses it is the entanglement with 
the cavity. For peacocks it is the splitting of tl^ir tuft-like 
flower on the head. 

116. Redness in the eye is the fever of cuckoo. Split is 
the fever among noble persons. 

117. Hikkiki (coughing) is the fever of parrots. O brahmins, 
among lions fiitigue is the fever. 

118. O sages conversant with virtue, such are the fevers 
among living beings. It occurs at the time of birth, death and 
in the intervening period. 

119. What is called (ever is the refulgence of the great lord. 
It is very terrible. The supreme lord should be bowed to and 
honoured by all living beings. 

120> He who reads this narrative about the origin of fever 
with great attention without any wretchedness of mind shall be 
liberated firmn ailments. He will be gay and joyous. He will 
get the benefit of his wishes. 

121. He who rq>eats the hymn of Dak^a or he who listens 
to it vrill never have any thing inauspicious. He will obtain a 
long life. 

122, Just as Lord Siva is the most excellent amemg Devas 
so also this hymn of Dakfa is the most excellent among all 

12S, Withfgreat devotion this hymn should be repeated 




38.124-137 


229 


aasiduoiuly by those who seek famti heavenly pleasures, divine 
riches, glory, victory, knowlet^ and other things of a similar 
nature. 

124. He who is sick, he who b miserable, he who is in a 
wretched state, or employed in a dcngerous task by the ruler- 
all these are liberated from danger and fear. 

125. From the supreme lord he derives happiness and with 
this body itself he becomes the lord of Ga^as. 

126. In the house where the lord is eulogised, neither 
Yak^as nor Piiacas nor Nagas nor Vinayakas will create any 
obstacle. 

127. A women who listens to this with devotion and is 
sanctified by the lord shall be honoured in her parental abode 
as well as in the abode of her husband. 

126. The holy rites of that person who listens to this or 
narrates this frequently, shall fructify without any hindrance. 

129. By repeating this hymn, whatever one desires mentally 
or utters orally shall be realised. 

130-131. The devotee shall maintain holy observances with 
the complete control of his sense-organs. According to his 
capacity he shall offer oblations to the lord, to his consort 
Parvat! and their son Karttikeya and Nandifvara. Thereafter, 
he shall repeat the manes in due order. The man will attain his 
desired objects. He shall enjoy his cherished pleasures. 

132-137. After death he will go to heaven where he will 
be surrounded by thousands of beautiful women. 

If a person is endowed with all desires or defiled by all sins, 
if he reads this hymn of Dakja he will be liberated from sins. 
On death he will attain identity with the Ganas. He will be 
honoured by Devas and Asuras. He enjoys a trip in an aerial 
chariot yoked to a bull. He will be a follower of Rudra and 
stay in the region of Siva till the dissolution of the universe. 
Tbb has been mentioned by lord Vyisa the son of Paraiara. 
No one knows this nor should it be narrated to any one or 
every one. By listening to thb secret, those who are of sinful 
origin via. Vaifyas, Sfidm and women will attain the world of 
Rudra. 

There 1i no doubt that the brahmin who nuratei this on 
Parvan days attains the world o( Rudra. 



230 


Brahma Pvrd^ 


CHAPTER THIRTYNINE 
TTii holy Cmtre of Ekitmsa 

Lomahar^ar^a said : 

1-3. ThuS) the excellent sages heard the meritorious story 
about the fury of Rudra that destroys sins» as Vyasa recounted 
Lt| O brahmins. They heard about the fury and indignation of 
Pirvati, the anger of Siva, the origin of \Trabhadra and the 
nativity of Bhadrakall. 

They then heard about the destruction of Dak^a’s sacrifice 
and the wonderfiil valour of Siva. They also heard about the 
propitiation of the lord by Dak$a the great soul, the allotment 
of share to Rudra, the benediction of Dak fa that confers the 
. ihiit of all sacrifices. Those brahmins became surprised and 
pleased in turns. They asked Vy&sa for the rest of the story. 
Thus asked by them Vyisa described the holy centre of 
Ekamra 

Vyisa raid : 

6. On hearing the story mentioned by Brahmi, the leading 
sages were delighted. Their hairs stood on ends. They praised 
the lord. 

Th» sagos said : 

7>8. Wonderful indeed is the glory of the lord, eulogised 
by you. O most excellent one among Devas, the destruction of 
the sacrifice of Dakfa (is also wonderful). Now it behoves you 
to recount Ekamra, the most excellent of holy centres. O 
Brahma, we wish to hear about it. Our eagerness is beyond 
measure.*' 


Vydsasaid : 

9. On hearing their words, the fburiaced lord of worlds 
recounted that holy centre of lord 3iva which yields worldly 
pleasures and salvation on this voy earth itself. 

1. ANnirs-^A holy eo^tre in Isnd of UtkaU dittmet from one ia 
South India. 



39.10-27 
Brahmdsaid : 


231 

10-11. Listen, O leading sages, I shall succinctly mention. 
There is a great holy centre known as Ekamra. It dispels a!) 
sins. It is extremely inaccessible to ordinary persons. It is as 
auspicious and splendid as Vara^tast. It has a crore of LiAgas 
and eight holy water spots in it. 

12. O excellent brahmins, in the previous Kalpa, there 
was a single Mango tree there by which name, the holy centre 
came to be known as Ekamra. 

13. It was full of delighted and well-nourished people, 
both men and women. Most of the people there belonged to 
the learned group. It abounded in riches and foodgrains and 
similar things. 

14. There were many houses full of cattle. It was well 
decorated with towers and minarets. There were many traders 
and businessmen and variety of jewels beautified it. 

15. The city was beautified by streets and embellished by 
palaces as white and pure as royal swans. There were many 
lofty mansions with upper apartments. 

16. It contained massive doorways arranged in groups of 
three. A white outer wall enhanced its beauty. It was well 
guarded by weapons and beautified by moats and trenches. 

17. It was adorned by various Sags and emblems of variegat¬ 
ed colours such as white, red, black, dark or yellow. They 
were wafted and waved to the winds. 

18. The people were gay and joyous in perpetual festivities 
with various kinds of musical instruments such as Che lute, Sute 
and drums. The area was adorned with slings fcM* hurling 
missiles. 

19. There were many temples of gods embellished by outer 
walls and gardens. The ways of worship therein were wonder¬ 
ful and they enhanced the beauty of the holy centre. 

20-27. The women were slender-waisted and joyous. Their 
necks were adorned by necklaces. They had large eyes like the 
petals of the lotus. Their breasts were plump and lifted up. These 
ladies were dark-complexioned with faces shining like the full 
moon. Their forelocks were steady. Hicir cheeks were fine. Their 
girdles and anklets sounded sweet. They had good tresses of hair; 
their buttocks were beautiful and their eyes were large extend- 



232 


Brahma Purd^a 


ing as far as the ean« They were richly endowed with all 
clwacteristic signs and bedecked in all ornaments. They wore 
i^ite and lustrous garments. Some were golden^coloured. Their 
bodies bent down due to the weight of their breasts. Their 
mode of walking was like that of the swans and elephants. They 
had smeared their limbs with divine scents and unguents. They 
felt sweet languor due to intoxication. They had ample and 
beautiful buttocks. They had ever-smiling faces. Their teeth 
appeared like lightning streaks. They had lips like the Bimba 
fruits. They had sweet voice. Betel leaves added colour to their 
mouths. They were artful, beautiAil to look at. They were for¬ 
tunate. They spoke pleasing words to everyone. They were 
proud of their perpetual youthiul bloom. They wore divine 
garments. They were embellished by their chastity. They resem¬ 
bled the celestial ladies and they sported about in their respec¬ 
tive houses. They remained gay and jolly by day and night. 

28. The men too were richly endowed with their noble 
traits and bedecked in all ornaments. They appeared to be 
haughty by virtue of their youth and handsome features. 

29. O excellent sages, they were brahmins, K^triyas, 
Vaijyas and 8udras. Those who lived there were very virtuous 
and engaged in their respective profession. 

30-32. There were many bright-eyed courtexans compara¬ 
ble to Ghrtad, Menaka, Rambhi, Tilottami, Urvaii, Vipracitti, 
Vijv&cl, Sahajanya and Pramloca. They had smiling faces and 
they spoke pleasing words. They were clever and skilled in arts 
and cmib. They were endowed with good qualities. 

S3. O excetknt sages, the women were eeeperts in dancing 
and singing. They were proud of their feminine virtues. 

34. These beautiful women, pleasing to behold were experts 
in conversation and side-glancing at people. None of them 
was bereft of beauty, none harassed others, none could be called 
wicked or evil in their activities. 

35*37. Men were fascinated the moment their side-glances 
fell on them. 

Among the males diere were no impoverished, foolish, 
sickly, fUfty, miserly or decq>tive persons. None of 
jacked in tgmdioroe features. None wilfully harassed 



39.38-58 


233 


othm. None could be called evil or wicked in his activities. 
These men lived in that holy centre which was reputed aliover 
the world. The holy centre could be traversed comfortably; it 
was very pleasing to the people who resided there. 

38-50. The holy centre was thronged with different sorts 
of people. It was full of many kinds of plants and trees such as 
Karnik&ras, Panasas, Campakas, Ndgakesaras, Pitalas> Aiokas, 
Bakulas, Kapitthas, Dhavas, Cutas, Nimbas, Kadambas and 
other trees in full bloom; it was bedecked in Nipaka, Dhava 
and Khadira trees with creepers growing over them. There were 
other trees such as S&la, Tala, Tamila, Nirikela (cocoanut), 
Subhafljanas, Aijunas, Saptaparnas, Kovidaras, Pippalas, 
Lakucas, Saralas, Lodhras, Hint&las, Devadirus, Palaias, 
Mucukundas, Pirijitas, Kubjakas, plantains, Jambus, 
areca palms, Ketaki, Kara>dras, Atimuktas, Kixhiukas 
Mandira, Kundas and other flowering plants. The gardens 
were comparable to the Nandaxu garden by the chirping of 
•different birds, the trees laden with fruits that made them bend 
down and other living beings such as Cakoras, Satapatras, royal 
bees, cuckoos, partridges peacocks, crows and parrots. There 
were many other birds such as JlvaftjlvsUias, H&zitas, and 
Gatakas. They encompassed the forests. There were other birds 
•chirping very sweetly. The holy centre abounded in long tariff 
lakes, ponds, sacred water spots adorned with clusters of lotus 
plants. The lakes looked beautiful with clear water. There were 
lilies, white lotuses, blue lotuses, Kadamba birds, ruddy geese, 
water hen, f^an^va buds, swans and other aquatic animals. 
The spot was made highly beautiful with different kinds of 
trees, excellent flowers and water spots. It appeared splendid 
all round. There the lord with the full-emblem and elephant 
hide garment was present directly. 

51-58. Siva who yields worldly pleasures and salvation to 
the people sat among Devas and Ss^es who brought water 
severally from the sacred rivers, holy water spots, lakes, lotus- 
ponds, tanks, wells and oceans on the earth. For the welfare 
•of the people Siva evolved the holy lake Bindusaras in that 
holy centre, O ezcellmt brahmins* It was on the eighth day in 
the darit of the month of Mirgaflrfa, O excellent brah¬ 
mins, that the iMkt was created by the lord. 



234 


Brahma Pttrtev 


The devotee who undertakes a pilgrima^ to that place on 
the day of equinoctical transits shall duly take his bath in the 
Bindusaras in faith. He shall perform Tarpa^ rites unto 
Devas, sages, huxnan beings and Manes assiduously. Repeating 
their names and Gotras he shall p e rfo r m the libation of water 
with gingelly seed. By taking ablution duly in that holy water 
he shall attain the benefit of horse sacrifice. Those who offer 
charitable gifts to the brahmins on the following occasion derive 
hundred times the benefit which they may receive from other 
holy centres. 

59-63. There is no doubt that the devotees will accord an 
everlasting satisfaction to the Pitfs if they offer balls of rice to 
them on the bank of this take. 

He shall then go to the abode of lord Siva observing rest¬ 
raint in speech and control on sense-organs. After entering the 
shrine he shall circumambulate thrice. Pure (in his mind and 
body) he shall bathe Siva with ghee, milk etc. He shall apply 
sandal paste and sweet scent. He shall worship the moon-crested 
lord, the consort of Uma with different kinds of flowers worthy' 
of being used in holy rites such as BUva, Arka, lotus, etc. He* 
shall eulogise the deity with the Mantras mentioned in the 
Vedas or Aganus. 

64-73. A man who has not undergone the formal initiation 
shall worship by pronouncu^; the name and the basic Mantra. 
After worshipping the lord with scents, fragrant flowers, gar¬ 
ments etc, with incense, l^hts, food offering and presents, by 
means of eulogies, proitratioos on the ground, by sign songs, 
accompanied by musical instruments, by dances, repeated 
obeisances, shouts of victory, and circumambulations, the 
devotee becomes liberated from all sins. By worshipping the 
lord, the consort of Uma, the lord of Devas, the devotee gets 
rid of sins. They are endowed with handsome features and 
youthfulness. He can redeem twentyone generations of his 
family in this way. He is bedeck^ in divine ornaments. 
He will be bom as a performer of sacrifices, a liberal donor of* 
dLaritable gifts and an overlord of the earth. 

After taki^gbath in the waters of Bindusaras, the devotee 
shall visit the following shrinet—Muktf <vara, Siddheia Suvar^a 
jileivmra, Parameivmra and the subtle 1<^ Amratikeivara. He* 



39 . 74 ^ 


235 


shall duly worship them. He will be going to the world of 
Siva on the golden aerial chariot with clusters of tinkling bells. 
Gandharvas and Apsaras will be singing in his praise and 
embellish him. He will brighten up quarters. O brah> 
mins, along with the people who habitually reside in that world, 
he will enjoy all pleasures there pleasing to the mind, until the 
dissolution of all living beings. When the merits decrease he 
will return to the earth. O excellent brahmins, he will be reborn 
in the abodes of Yogins. He will become the master of the Vedas. 
After attaining the Paiupata Yoga he will attain salvation. 

74*75. Those who visit the temple of lord Siva on the 
following days go to the world of 3iva on the aerial chariot 
having solar lustre. The holy occasions are—the day of 3ayana 
(lying down), the day of Utth&pana (rising up), the monthly 
transit from one sign of zodiac to another, on the days of 
tropical transits, on the Aiokasaptaml and on the day of 
Pavitriropaiu. 

76. The intelligent people who visit the lord at any time, 
are liberated from their sins. They go to the world of lord 
Siva. 

77. The holy centre extending to two and a half Yojanas 
to the West, East, North and South of the lord is an area that 
yields worldly pleasures and salvation. 

78*83. In that excellent holy centre there Ls a Li^a named 
Bhaskareivara. It had been wonhipped by the Sun-god pre¬ 
viously. The devotees shall take bath in the holy ditch and 
then worship the three-eyed lord ofDevas. They will be liberat¬ 
ed from all sins. Seated in an excellent aerial chariot they 
will go to the world of lord Siva. The Gandharvas will sing 
in their praise. O excellent brahmins, ftiU of joy they remain 
there for the period of a Kalpa. After enjoying extensive plea¬ 
sures in the world of lord 3iva, when their merits dwindle, 
they come down to the Earth and arc bom in an excellent 
lamily. Or they arc bom in the abodes of Yogins. They will be 
nxasters of Vedas and Vedangas. They will be bom as excellent 
brahmins ei^ged in the welfare of living beings. They will 
become experts in the science of Salvation and will have equal 
consideration all. After attaining the excellent Yoga of 
Siva they derive salvation. 



236 


Brahma Ftah^ 


84-87. O brahmins, the devotee shall worship any Lihga 
he sees in that holy centre. Wherever thatLihga isseen vt4iether 
it is worthy of worship or not, whether it is obtained from 
forest or in the street, in the cremation ground or in the main 
cross-roads the devotee shall bathe that Li^a with devotion 
and faith. He must assure himself Uut the Lihga has no cracks. 
He shall then worship the Lihga with scenu fragrant and 
charming flowers, incense, height, food-ofierii^, obeisances, 
eulogies, prostrations, dances, songs etc. By worshipping thus 
in accordance with the injtmctions he shall go to the world of 
Siva. 

88. Even a woman, O leadii^ brahmins, attains the 
benefit if she worships in due faith. No doubt need be entertain¬ 
ed in this respect. 

89. Excepting lord diva, O excellent sages, who can re¬ 
count the good qualities of that excellent holy centre ? 

90-92. Whether a person possesses faith or not whether 
it is a male or a female person, the pilgrim shall go there on 
any day in any month. O brahmins, after taking bath in the 
waters of Blndusaras, he or she shall visit the temple of three- 
eyed lord diva and the goddess Umi the bestower of boons, as 
well as Canda, the Ga^a, Karttikeya, Ganeia, the bull, the 
Kalpa tree and Savltri. He goes to the world of lord diva 
immediately. 

93-95. By taking bath in the Kapila Tirtha that is des- 
structive of sins, one obtains all cherished desires and goes to 
the world oflord diva. He who performs pilgrimage in accor¬ 
dance with the injunctions after ccmtroUing the sense-organs, 
shall uplift twentyone generations and then attain the world 
oflord diva. 

He who takes his holy dip in Ekimra, the holy centre 
lord diva, that is as splendid as Viripatf, will certainly attain 
liberation. 



40.1-13 


237 


CHAPTER FORTY 
Thi holy untTi UtkaU 

said : 

1. Mother Viraja^ my mistrctfi is finxily established in 
Viraji. By visiting her a man protects bis family upto the 
seventh generation. 

2. By visiting that goddess even for once and by worshipp¬ 
ing and bowing to her with devotion a man redeems hii family 
and goes to my world. 

3. The other mothers of the world who stand in Viraja are 
goddesses who dispel sins and bestow boons. They are &vour- 
ably disposed to the devotees. 

4. There is the river Vaitaram there. It dispels all sins. 
By taking holy dip there* the excellent man is liberated Grom 
all sins. 

5. The self*bom lord Vi|i^u stays there in the form of a 
Boar. By visiting him and bowing to him with devotim^ man 
goes to Vifnu’s abode. 

6-8. There are eight holy sites in the holy centre of Viraja 
viz—KapUa* Gograha, Somatirtha, Alkbutirtha, Mrtyuftjaya* 
Krodatirtha, Vasuka and Siddhakrfvara. The intelligent pilgrim 
shall visit all these holy sites and take a holy dip therein in the 
Viraja with all his sense-organs controlled. By bowii^ down to 
the lords be shall be liberated from all sins. Seated in an 
excellent aerial chariot he goes to my wM'ld. The Gandharvas 
sing in his prabe and honour him. 

9. He who offers balls of rice in Viraja* my holy centre* 
shall undoubtedly accord ever-lasting satisfaction to the manes. 

10. O excellent s^es* men who cast off their body in 
Viraja my holy centre* do attain salvation. 

1 i. He who takes a holy dip in the ocean and visits K^ila* 
Vi^u and Varalu* goes straigfas to heaven. 

12. O excellent sages* there are many holy sites and shrines. 
They should be known as equal to that (Vir^&). 

13« O excellent brahmins, there is a secret and great holy 
centre which bestows salvation and destroys sins* in the land 
on the northern shore of the sea. 



238 


Brahma PurS^ 


14. It » covered with sands. It is sacred. It bestows all 
desires. It extends to ten Yojanas. This is one of the rarest of 
holy centres. 

15-21 • That holy centre contains many trees suchas Aioka, 
Arjuna, Punnaga, Bakula, Sarala, jack tree, coconut tree, S^las, 
palmyra, the wood apple, Campaka, Karpikara, mango, Bilva, 
P&fala, Kadamba, Kovidira, Lakuca, N^akesara, Sami, 
Amalaka (Embylic myrobalan), Lodhra, Citron, Dhava, 
Khadira, Saija, Bhuija, Aivakaiu, Tamila, Devadaru,Mandira, 
Pirijita, Nyagrodha, Ag\mXf Sandal, Kharj^a, Amritaka, 
Siddha, Mucukunda, Kirhiuka, Alvattha, Saptaparna, Madhu- 
dhara, Subhiftjana, 8iiiiiapa, N!pa, Nimba(Margose), Tindu, 
and Vibhitakas. These trees were laden Math fruits and 
fragrant flowers of all seasons. They were delightful to the 
mind. They were splendid. Many types of birds made the 
atmosphere resound. The sounds produced by the birds were 
pleasing to the ears. They were very sweet and excited love 
pangs powerfully. They afforded great pleasure to the mind. 

22-23. The place was full of various birds such as Cakoras, 
Satapatras (woodpeckers), Bhrhgarajas, (bees), parrots, 
cuckoos, partridges, Hiritas, Jivajivakas, Citakas, and other 
birds of sweet voice. They were chirping and their sounds 
were pleasing to the ears. They delighted everyone and they 
were beautifully perched (on the branches). 

24-31. There were clusters of Ketaki plants, Atimuktas, 
Kubjakas, Malatis, Kundas, Banas, Karaviras of black varieties, 
Jambtras, Aru^as, Kahkolas, Dadimas, Bijapurakas, Matuluhgas, 
Areca palms, Hintilas, groves of plantain trees and many types 
of flowering trees pleasing to the mind. There were creepers, 
and bu^es spreading like canopies. There were different kinds 
of water reservoirs such as oblong ponds, lakes lotus ponds, 
and tanks. The different water reservoirs were holy and decorat¬ 
ed with lotus-clusters. The lakes were beautiful with -clear 
water lilies, white lotuses, splendid blue lotuses, Kalhara 
flowen, and similar Bowen abounded in those lakes all round. 
There were Kadambaka birds; Cakrav&kas and water fowls. 
There were floating Kira^dAva birds, swans, tortoises, fish, 
M^dgus, DityOhas, Mrasai, Koyaifis and cranes and these 
enhanced the beauty of the plaoe* There were otb^ birds living 



4 . 32-49 


239 


in water, flying in the air or walking over the land. There were 
aquatic flowers; thus the whole hc^y centre looked very beauti¬ 
ful with different sorts of trees and flowers both on land and in 
water. There were aquatic and other types of elephants 
beautifying the place. 

32-35. The place was adorned by religious students, house¬ 
holders, forest dwellers and recluses. They were engaged in 
their virtuous duties. There were other people as well adorning 
it. The place was flUed with delighted and well nourished 
people. It was thronged by men and women. The place was 
the abode of all lores. It was a mine of all holy rites and 
virtues. Thus, the holy centre, endowed with all good qualities, 
was the rarest of all holy centres. 

O excellent sages, the famous lord Vispu abides there. As 
far as the boundary of the land ofUtkala extends, the place is 
very holy due to lord Knna*s favour. 


36-43. Everything is well established in the place where 
the supreme lord who pervades the universe is present. He u 
the lord of the universe and the soul of all. O excellent sages, 
we always stay in that land. Rudra, Indra, Devas Jed by Agni 
and I too stay there. So also the folioH^ing too stay there : 
Gandharvas^ Apsaras, Pitp, Devas, human beings Yak^as 
Vidyadharas, Siddhas, sages of praiseworthy holy rites, 
Vklakhilyas and other sages, the Patriarchs—Kaiyapaand others, 
Suparnas, Kinnaras, Serpents and other celestial beings; the 
four Vedas with their ancillaries, the different sorts, sacred 
treatises, the Itihisas and Puranas, the sacrifices with excellent 
monetary gifts and the different sorts of holy rivers. Tirthas 
and shrines, oceans and mountains too were established in 
that land. Who will not like to stay in such a place which 
is the holiest d* the holy, which is frequented by Devas sages 
and Pitfs and which is blessed with ail means of pleasures. 

Which land can surpass it in excellence ? 

44-49. It is the place where lord Purufottama stays as the 
bestower of salvation. 


Blessed indeed are those men who live in Utkala like Devas. 
They take their bath in the waters of the most excellent of holy 



Brahma PurOtfo. 


240 

centres and see Puru^ttamm. They are actually the dwellers 
of heaven. They never go to the abode of Yama. 

Fruitful indeed is the life the people who stay in Utkala 
which it the holy centre cd* Puni^ottama. The residents of Utkala. 
are highly intellectual because they see the lord in all these 
attributes. He is the most excellent df Devas, his eyes are large 
and pleasant; his brows, tresses and the crest are beautiful; he 
has a beautiful piece of ornament embellishii^; his ears, his 
smile is beautiful, his teeth are exquisitely fine, his ear rings 
adorn him beautifully; his nose and cheeks and forehead are 
very beautiful and possess good traits. The lotus*like face of 
lord Krsn* is site cause of delight to all. 










