THE 

BRAHMANDA PURANA 


PART V 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED • DELHI 



First Edition : Delhi, 1 959 
Reprint: Delhi, 1999 


Also available at: 

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 

41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, Warden Road, Mumbai 400 026 
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004 
Sanas Plaza, 1302, Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002 
16 St. Mark’s Road, Bangalore 560 001 
8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 017 
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 


UNESCO COLLECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS— Indian Series. 


This book has been accepted in the Indian Translation Series 
of the UNESCO Collection of Representative Works 
jointly sponsored by the United Naltons 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO) and the Government of India. 


PRINTED IN INDIA 

BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, A-45 NARAINA, 
INDUSTRIAL AREA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 110 028 AND PUBLISHED BY 
NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBUSHERS PRIVATE, 

BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007 



CONTENTS 


PART V 

LALITA-MAHATMYA 

(Continued) 

CHAPTERS 

31. Manifestation of Seven Chambers and the 

daughters of Matanga 1227 

32. Manifestation of the guardian deities of the 

seven chambers of Tripura in Srinagara 1 237 

33. Seven Chambers beginning with Topaz 

rampart and ending with the rampart of Pearls 1244 

34. The Region of Siva and of the guardians of 

quarters 1 253 

35. The preparation of materials of worship in 

Mahapadmafavi 1261 

36. The Inner Chamber of Cintama$i 1271 

37. Description of other inner Apartments in 

the Royal Chamber 1280 

38. Procedure of Practising the Royal mantra 1 289 

39. Glory of the Goddess Kamak$i 1299 

40. Greatness of Kamak§i 1311 

41. Propitiation of Goddess Kam&k$i 1324 

42. Various Mudras, Mystical Gestures with the 

fingers 1 334 

43. Types of Initiation and the True Service of 

the Preceptor 1336 

44. Meditation on the Goddess 1349 

ILLUSTRATION : Sri Cakra 1365 

INDEX J 367 



la.litA mAhAtmya 

( Continued ) 





THDEtTYONE 


Manifestation of Seven Chambers and the daughters of Mdtahga 
Agastya said : 

1 . What is this called Sripura P 1 Of what form and nature 
is it ? By whom was it built at the outset formerly. Narrate 
everything to me. 

2. What is its extent ? What is its colour ? Tell me, O 
holy lord. You alone are the veritable sun for drying up the 
mud of doubts. 

Hayagriva said : 

3-4. Lalita Paramesvari who was bom out of the great 
sacrificial fire, carried out the playful activity viz. of marriage 
(with KameSvara) . On being requested by Brahm& and others, 
she (secured the chariot Cakraratha endowed with all the 
characteristics mentioned before) and defeated the Asura named 
Bhanda who was thorn (a source of trouble) for the whole 
world. 

5. Thereupon, Devas beginning with lord Mahendra 
attained great satisfaction. They, therefore, were eager to 
build a splendid mansion for KameSvara and Lalita, fully 
furnished with all the objects of daily utility and enjoyment. 

6-7 Brahma, Vi?nu and MaheSvara, the sons of Lalita 
devl, invited Visvakarman 1 the carpenter of the Devas, skilled 
in all mechanical arts and crafts as well as Maya, the 
architect of the Asuras, who was 'a great ^expert in employ- 
ing Maya. At the behest of Lalita, they received them duly 
and said. 

Brahma, Vi$nu t Rudra , the Authorized officials said : 

8. O Visvakarman ! Conversant with all arts and crafts, 
O Maya of great prosperity, you both are well-versed in all 

1. The present chapter deals with the construction of the capital of 
Sri-Lalita and her consort Kamesvara. The trinity of gods — Brahma, Visrju 
and Mahesvara, the sons of Lalita Devi, commissioned Visvakarman 
and Maya, the architects of Deva3 and Asuras to build the cities Tripura 
or Sri -nagarl. 


1228 Brahmdnia Purdncr 

sciences (of engineering and architecture), you are experts in 
the process of building up and creation. 

9-10. By mere conception and imagination, you both 
can evolve wonderful constructions of great artistry. Sri-Nagaris 
should be built by you both for the sake of Lalitadevi who is 
the great ocean of eternal wisdom. They should be embellished 
with different kinds of jewels. They must be in the centres of 
the sacred spots of §odas!s and should be sixteen in number. 

11. It will be there that Lalita Paramesvari after divid- 
ing herself into sixteen (distinct forms) 1 for the sake of protect- 
ing the universe, will stay permanently. 

12. This is pleasing to us. It is pleasing to the gods too* 
It is also pleasing to all the worlds. Let it be built under that 
name itself. 

13. After listening attentively to these words of 
Karanadevas (Brahma, Vi§nu, Rudra, executive officials among 
gods in charge of specific activities such as creation, sustenance 
etc.), Visvakarman and Maya bowed to them and spoke — 
“Let it be so”. 

14. After bowing down once again, both of them asked 
the Karanapurusas — “In which sacred spots should the 
&rinagaris of great prosperity be built?” 

15. On being asked thus, Brahma and others spoke to 
those artisans once again, assigning the divisions of the sacred 
spots in a befitting manner. 

K&ranapurufos said : 

16-17. The earthly (terrestrial) sacred spots are nine. The 
first one is on the top of Meru mountain, then on the Nisadha 
mountain, on mount Hemakuta and on the Himalaya. The 
fifth one is on the Gandhamadana. The other four (sacred 
spots are) on the Nila, Mesa, Srngara (v.l. Srriga) and the 


1 . The number sixteen has a special significance in this Mahatmya. 
The letters of Lalit&*s full Mantra are sixteen, so are her forms and as 
shown below (w. 16 - 20 ) the same number of sacred spots — nine mountains 
on the earth + seven oceans — are the sacred sites for building Sri-nagaris. 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 31.18-29 


1229 


■great mountain Mahcndra. These are known as the* nine 
terrestrial sacred spots. 

18-20. The Aquatic sacred spots are declared as seven. 
They are in the seven oceans, viz. the salt sea, the sea of 
sugarcane juice, the sea of liquor, the sea of ghee, the sea of 
curds, the sea of milk and the seventh one the sea of pure water. 

Thus nine great mountains have been mentioned before, 
afterwards seven oceans have also been mentioned. Adding 
together there are sixteen sacred spots for building the Sripura 
of Amba. You are artisans and craftsmen skilled in erecting 
buildings of divine workmanship. In those sacred spots, you 
do build the divine mansions of Lalita of great prowess. 

21. The names of the mansions of Devi who killed 


the great Asuras shall be famous certainly by the names 
of the Nitya deities. 

22. That supreme Deity by her Nitya form pervades 
Kala. The goddess controls the whole of the world by her 
power of subduing. 

23-24. She is the great queen of the Nitya deities. 
Hence she is Nitya. There is no difference between them. 
Hence the different cities are famous by the respective names 
of the Nityas such as Kamesvaripuri, Bhagamalapuri, Nitya- 
klinnapuri etc., These names are well-known. 

25. Hence, both of you build the excellent city in 
accordance with the great principle of architecture (begin- 
ning) on an auspicious and suitable day, (on the day fitting 
with the initial letter of the name ?) 

26. On being told thus by Brahma, Visnu and 
Mahe£vara, who were the leaders entrusted with the work of 


causation (i.e. creation, sustenance and annihilation) both 
of them built Sripuris in the different sacred spots. 

27. Further, I shall mention the extent of Sripura and 
the deities presiding over the cities. Listen attentively, O 
husband of Lopamudra. 

28-29. The mountain Meru 1 is the support of everything. 
It is many Yojanas in height. Its body passes through all the 


1. The Verses 28ff describe Sripura on mount Meru. Though 
Pamirs are identified with Meru, the mountain described here is fictitious. 



1230 


Brahm&nda Purina 


fourteen worlds. It has four peaks in the east, in south-west, 
in north-west and in the middle. Their height is being 
mentioned. 

30. The three peaks mentioned in the beginning are 
each hundred Yojanas in height. There are three Lokas (worlds) 
there. 

31. They are Brahmaloka, Visnuloka and Siva I oka. I 
shall narrate how the abodes are arranged in these worlds on 
another occasion. 

32. Listen to the extent and height of the peak in the 
middle. It is four hundred Yojanas in height and extent. 

33. It was on that great peak that Srlpura was 
built by the artisans. O Pot-born sage, it extended to four 
hundred Yojanas. 

34. The various divisions therein are being pointed out 
to you severally. 

It is said that the first (outermost) fort-wall was built 
of iron. 

35. Its circumference was a thousand and sixteen 
Yojanas. It had gateways in the four directions. Its height 
was four Yojanas. 

36. The girth of the root of the chamber (i.e. at the 
bottom) was, O sage who drank the ocean, ten thousand 
Yojanas. Two Kronas beneath the top, separate windows were 
made. 

37. The height of the doorway of the chamber was a 
Yojana. In every gateway there were two door panels each half 
a Gavyuti wide (i.e. one Kro£a) . 

38. Every door frame was a Yojana in height and was 
made of iron. The bar for fastening the two door panels was 
half a KroSa long. 

continued from previous page 

This Sripiua had seven ramparts and enclosures. The walls were made of 
iron, bronze, lead, copper, silver, gold and within each enclosure the 
garden of heavenly trees viz. Kalpa, Santana, Hari-Candana Mandara, 
P&rijata etc. The palace of Mantri^l had a park of Kadamba trees. 

The structures e.g. Gopuras show that the M&h&tmya was composed 
by a South Indian. Constant reference to Kanci Kamako$tha etc. confirms 
this theory. 



Lali td-m&h&tmya 31.39-50 


1231 


39. Thus everything was the same in all the four door- 
ways. I shall mention the situation regarding the principal gate 
( Gopura ) , O Pot-bom sage. 

40-43. (Partially defective text). At the foot of the 
enclosure mentioned before, a distance of a Yojana is left in 
the middle. On either side, two Yojanas are taken and the 
whole edifice is erected. 

The width is also the same with the doorway in the middle. 
Two Yojanas on either side and one Yojana of the 
enclosure in the middle. Together O sage, the extent 
comes to five Yojanas. The two sides (? side-domes etc.) were 
two and a half Kronas wide ; each together the width comes to 
five Yojanas (? Kronas ) . It was thus, O sage, that the Gopura 
(ornamental gateway) was built. 

44. Hence the total girth at the bottom of the Gopura 
was twenty Yojanas (i.e. a square of sides each five Yojanas 
in length) . The higher we go up the Gopura the girth 
decreases. 

45. The height of the Gopura is mentioned as twentyfive 
Yojanas. At intervals of a Yojana each there were beautiful 
doorways with doors. 

46. The storeys were also as many. The higher one 
ascended the narrower they became. The extent of the top of 
Gopura was one Yojana. 

47. The length also was the same. But three crowns 
(domelike structure) were fixed there. The extent of the dome, 
O Pot-born sage was a Krosa. 

48. The height of each crown was two Kroias, the 
tapering feature, O sage, was the same as in the case of 
Gopura . The space within the crown (or between two crowns) 
was measured as half a Krosa. 

49. On the Gopura of the southern gateway the crowns 
were arranged from west to east. On the Gopura of the wes- 
tern gateway the crowns were arranged from south to North. 

50. It is said that the crowns on the northern gateway 
were arranged as in the case of the southern gateway. The 
arrangement of the crowns on the Eastern gateway was the 
same as in the case of the western gateway. 



1232 


Brahmdn<Ja Purdna 


5 1 . Within the enclosure (chamber ) named Kdldyasa 
(i.e. one made of iron) at a distance of seven Yojanas was the 
Kdrhsyaidld (bronze enclosure). Within the enclosure of bronze 
the arrangement of Gopuras etc. was in the same way as 
before. 

52. The girth of the enclosure at the bottom is describ- 
ed as before. This enclosure of bronze too had doorways in the 
east and other quarters. 

53-54. There were Gopuras on every gateway with the 
characteristic features of steps (or storeys) . The annular space 
between the iron enclosure and the bronze enclosure, O Pot- 
bom sage, was a big park with various trees. Whatever 
Udbhijja (sprouting and germinating species i.e. plants and 
trees etc.), (was in the world) was also there. 

55. There were thousands of trees with perpetual blos- 
som flowers and fruits. They possessed the splendour of tender 
sprouts for ever. They were endued with perpetual fragrance. 

56-64. There were thousands of trees* such as mangoes, 
Kankolaka (a plant with waxy aromatic berries, Piper cubela), 
Lodhra (symptocos racemosa Roxb), Bakula (Mimusops elengi) , 
Karnikdra (cassia fistula Linn) , Simiapa (Dalbergia sissoo Roxb) , 
$iri$a (Acacia sirissa) , Devadaru (Himalayan Gidar) Nameru 
(Elaeocarpus Ganitrus ) y PunndgaNdgabhadra y Mucakunda (Ptero- 
permunt suberifolium), Kafphala ( Kayphal in marathi, for 
description MW.), cardamons, cloves Takkola (Pimenta 
acris), camphor trees, Pilu (salvadora Persica), K aka tun da 
(the dark Agallochum) , Sdlaka (N. of a tall tree), Asana (the 
tree Terminalia Tomentosa), K due ana (a plant akin to Premna 
spinosa), Ara (A kind of plant) , Lakuca (Artocarpus Lacucha — 
a kind of bread fruit tree), Jack-fruit tree, Hingula, Pdfala 
(Bignonia Suaveolens— tree bearing trumpet flowers), Phalini 
(a species of plant Priyangu ), Twisted Ficus oppositifolia, 
Ganikd ( = sakurantja, N. of a plant), Bandhujiva (Pentapetis 
Phoenicea — a plant with redflower) Pomegranates, ASvakarna 
(the tree vatica roburta, has leaves like horses-ears) Hastikar^a 
(Butea Frondosa) Campaka (the campaka tree Cdpta in 


♦The botanical terms for plants mentioned here are taken from MW. 



1233 


Lalitd-m&h & tmya 3 1 .65-7 1 

Marathi) Kandkardruma (A thorn apple and many such plants 
likecarria sophora) Yuthikd (a kind of Jasmine), T&laparnl 
(Anethum graveolens), Tulasi (the holy basil plant), Sadd- 
phald (Ficus Glomerata or coconut tree) , Palmyras, Tamdla , 
Hint&la (a variety of Palm), data Palms, Saccharum Sara 
(used for arrows), a Barbura (a species of ocimum Villosum), 
sugarcane, different species of trees of Ficus, genus, cordia 
Laiifolia, Terminalia Belerica, the yellow myrobalan trees, 
Avakpufpa ( trees with blossom turned downwards, Ghonf&li (the 
jujube tree) , varieties of plants with heavenly perfumes, the 
marking-nut plants, Khadira (Acacia catechu), Sakhofa 
(Trophis Aspera) , sandal trees, aloe wood trees, K&laskandha 
(Diospyros embryoptcris) , Tamarind trees, Banyan trees, 
varieties of racemosa, Terminalia arjuna, Ficus religiosa, Sami 
trees, Dhruva trees, Rucaka (the citron tree), Kufaja (wrightia 
an t idosen terica ) t Saptaparnd (Alstonia scholaris) Kf tamdla 

(Trees cassia fistula) , Kapittha (Feronia Elephantum), Tintini 
(Trees with sour fruits) and thousands of other trees. 

65. For the sake of causing and enhancing the romantic 
feelings of the goddess, the specialities of all the different 
blossoms were present on those trees. There were excellent trees 
of various heights. 

66. Within the bronze enclosure, at a distance of seven 
Yojanas, there was the square-shaped copper enclosure. It was 
seven Yojanas in height. 

67-69. The space in between these two is called Katya* 
vd\ika (A park of Katya (i.e. wish-yielding tree). Those 
trees bore abundant fruits which were exquisite with golden 
outer rinds and which had seeds like precious stones and gems 
emitting the fragrance of camphor. .Divine yellow (silk ) gar- 
ments were the tender sprouts and shoots on their branches. 
Nectar was the honey juice exuding from them and ornaments 
were their flowers. There were many such glorious wish-yielding 
trees there. 

70. This is the second chamber named Katyavdpi (? Kal* 

m 

pav&ti — N. ). Within the copper enclosure was the Naga£ala 
(v.l. Sisa-fald, tin or lead enclosure) . 

71. The place in the oblique direction situated in bet- 
ween these two extended to seven Yojanas. The park there-in 



1234 Brahmfaia Purdna 

was Santdnavdfi having the same shape and features as Kalpav&pf 
(Kalpavdfi ) . * 

72. The space in between them is called Haricandanaodfikd . 
It is of the same shape and features as Kalpavafi and was full 
of fruits and flowers. 

73. In all these enclosures the arrangement of doorways,. 
Go pur as and the crowns on their tops was as before. 

74-75. The measurement of the openings in the Gopura . 
and that of every doorway and door panels was also the same 
as before. Within the brass enclosure ( Arakuta. If the reading 
Ndgaidlasya is taken — the lead (tin) enclosure) and seven 
Yojanas from it was the enclosure made of five metals and it 
was of the same (size and) shape as the previous one. The 
space in between them is called Mand&radrumavd fifed. (A garden 
ofMandara trees). 

76. Within the enclosure of five metals and seven Yoja- 
nas from it, it is said, was the enclosure of silver endowed with 
all the characteristic features mentioned before. 

77. The space in between them is called Pdrijdtadruma - 
vd filed (Garden of Parijata trees). It was filled with divine 
fragrance and it shone with heavily laden fruits and blossoms. 

78. Within the enclosure of silver was the golden enclo- 
sure. It was said to be extending to seven Yojanas. It was. 
rendered splendid by means of doorways as before. 

79. The space in between them is said to be Kadamba - 
taruvdfikd (A garden of Kadamba-AWia (cadamba trees) . There 
were many divine Nipa (Kadamba) trees two Yojanas in 
height. 

80-81. Liquor flowed down from them always. Those 
trees sparkled on account of plenty of closely blossomed flowers. 
Those Nipa trees from the garden yielded a splendid liquor 
named Kddambari which yields pleasure even to Yoginis and. 
which appealed to Mantrini always. They had excellent shade. 
They had plenty of leaves and shoots. The spaces between the 


•The five trees in Paradise are : Kalpa-vfksa, MandSra, Parijata, 
Santana and Haricandana ( yellow Sandal ) . There are parks or gardens of 
each of these celestial trees In the text. 



LaliM-mdh&tmya 31.82-90 




trees were always filled with the humming sounds of swarms of 
bees eagerly desirous of fragrance. 

82-84. The beautiful mansion of Mantranatha was there 
itself. In the intermediate points of the quarters beginning with 
south-east (i.e. S. East, S. West, N. West and N. East) four 
lofty mansions were built by the primordial Architect. The 
extent (area) of each of them was five Yojanas by five Yojanas. 
Their situation was in the shape of a square. In the other 
intermediate points of quarters there were Priyaka trees ( i.e. 
Nipa). This is glorified as the city of abode of Syama. 

85-86. There was another city for the stay of the army 
in the region of Mahapadma^avi. If her residence too were to 
be there itself, many Yojanas away it would have been impos- 
sible for Mantrinf to serve Sridevi every day. Hence, in the 
vicinity of the Cintamanigrha too, a mansion of Sriman- 
tranatha was built by the architect of Devas as well as by 
Maya. 

87. What person even if endowed with two thousand 
tongues will be able to describe the so many (innumerable) 
good points of the mansion of Mantrinl-devl in Sripura. 

88. The honoured daughters of Matanga sport about 
and sing here with the lute of sweet notes, whose eyes have 
become reddish on account of ( imbibing ) the tinge called 
Kadambari. 

Agastya enquired : 

89. Who is this sage called by the name Matanga ?* 
How is it that his daughters perpetually serve Mantraninatha 
though they are lazy and slow due to intoxication by means 
of liquor ? 

Hayagriva said : 

90. There was a great ascetic, a mass of austerities (as 
it were) named M&tanga. He was richly endowed with great 
prowess. He was keenly interested even in creating a world. 


1 . This MataAga sage is Lalita’s devotee and is different from the 
one in VR or referred to in PE, pp. 492-93. 



1236 


Brahminda Purina 


91-93. By means of his intellect invigorated by the power 
of penance, he could press his power of command into service 
everywhere. His son Matanga of courageous mind propitiated 
Mudri^i ( the deity having the signet ring) Mantrin&yika, by 
means of severe austerities. On being served for a long time by 
the son of sage Matanga, MantrinI went over to him and com- 
manded him “Choose your boon”. Matanga the most excellent 
one among the sages, the storehouse of penance said to Syama- 
lambika who manifested herself before him. 

Mitanga the great sage prayed : 

94. O goddess, merely by remembering you all the 
Siddhis beginning with Anima (minuteness) and all other 
glorious assets and powers have been realized by me. 

95. O mother, in all the three worlds there is nothing 
which I have yet to attain because I have realized all desires 
and I have been fortunate enough to remember your activities 
always in my memory. 

96. Still, your presence here shall not be fruitless. I 
shall request for only this, O mother. Fulfil this boon. 

97. Formerly, I had intimate association with Himavan, 
being friendly with him and cracking jokes with him. Playful 
and haughty he swaggered with words improper to be uttered. 

98. “I am the father of Gaurl”, so boasted he. That 
statement was not liked by me, because he had more of good 
things in him. 

99. When two friends have the same quality (and posi- 
tion ) and if one of them gets something more for any reason, 
it is natural for the other to covet the same. 

100. Though I have realized all my desires yet O Man- 
trininatha, I have performed penance to get the glory of 
being the father of Gaurl. Hence be my daughter. 

101. Thereby and undoubtedly you will become well 
known thro ugh my name”. 

On hearing these words uttered by Matanga, the great 
sage, she said, “So be it” and vanished. The sage became 
pleased. 



Lalitd-m&hAtmya 31.1 02—32.2 


1237 


102. In the course of a dream, she gave the great sage 
Matanga, with great joy, a bunch of Tamala flowers as 
ornaments for the ears. 

103. Due to the power of that dream, the wife of 
Matanga named Siddhimat! conceived Laghu£y&ma in her 
womb. 

104. Since she was born of him, she is glorified as 
Matangi. She was called Laghufyama, because Syama was her 
root cause. 

105. Crores and crores of beautiful daughters of Matanga 
along with the groups of Laghufyama, Mahaiyama and Matangi 
attained the status of subsidiary Saktis and they serve Priya • 
kapriyd (Mantrinl fond of Kadamba i.e. Nauclea cadamba). 

106. Thus the origin of daughters of Matanga has 
been mentioned, O Pot-born sage. So also the seven chambers, 
the enclosures made of iron etc. are mentioned. 


CHAPTER T* 



ITYTWO 


Manifestation of the guardian deities of the seven chambers of Tripur d 

in Srinagara 1 

Agastya said : 

1. There are deities guarding the seven enclosures 
beginning with that made of iron. O wise one, mention their 
names, so that my doubts can be cleared. 

Hayagriva said : 

o 

2. Mahak&la, the devourer of the worlds, having a 
dark-coloured body stays, O Pot-born sage, in the great garden 
of many trees. 

1 . Though the present chapter proposes to enumerate the guards of 
seven chambers, actually, only two — Mah&k&la in Mahd-K&la-Cakra, (w. 
7-41) the protector of the first garden and the Cakra of Vasanta (vv.44-60) 
are described fully. Thus every season— Gr i $ma (Summer), Varfi (rainy 
season) etc. have their cakras and the duty of protecting the gardens 
or parks in the remaining enclosures ( w.58-66 ) . Thus (Mah&kila + 6- 
seasons 53 ) seven guards are appointed to these seven enclosures. 



Brakmdnda Pur&na 



3. He wears a dark-coloured jacket. His eyes are red on 
account of intoxication. He continuously drinks the tonic 
beverage called the universe with which the cup of cosmic 
egg is filled. 

4. Seated in his throne of the nature Kalp&ntakalana 
(comprehending the end of Kalpa), he looks at Mah&kall 
whose complexion is as dark as the cloud and who has become 
tender-hearted, due to the action of the god of love. 

5. He constantly meditates on Lalita. He is even eager 
to worship Lalita. Through devotion to Lalita, he enhances 
his longevity. He is served by the servants the most important 
among them being Kala and Mftyu. 1 

6. Mahakali and Mahakala carry out the orders of god- 
dess Lalita. They stay in the first path (enclosure). They seize 
and impel the entire universe. 

Kdlacakra : 

7. The Kdlacakra (circle of Mahakala) of Mat ahga (?) 
forms his seat. It has four Avaranas (outer coverings) and is 
rendered beautiful with the Bindu (point) at the centre. 

8. The four Avaraitas are (1) triangle, (2) pentagon, (3) 
lotus of sixteen petals, (4) lotus of eight petals or spokes 
(radii). Mahakala is in the centre. 


1. The concept of Time has two aspects in this Pur&na (i) as the 
destroyer of every thing and (ii) the calculator or enumerator. The so- 
called Kala- cakra represents this complex concept. The Tan trie outline of the 
Cakra — with Mahakala as the centre and the figures of a triangle and a 
Pentagon and Lotuses with sixteen and eight petals — appears mystical. But 
the contents are descriptive of the concept of Kala: Thus the three Sandhy&s 
(twilights) are the Saktis, in the triangle ; parts of the day from dawn to 
noon are the Saktis in the Pentagon, days and nights and the special days 
such as the full moon and new moon days are the &aktis in 16 petals 
while units of time such as Kdla Kdffhd etc. are the 16 Saktis in the petals 
while names of years in Vedas are the 8 petals of another lotus. 

K&la or Mah&kala as the presiding deity of this Cakra occupies the 
central position and is depicted as deterrent, black-coloured, inebriated and 
boisterous with a suitably terrific spouse Mahakali. 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 32.9-22 




9. In the (vertices of the) triangle three great deities, 
the Saktis of Mahakala, viz. : Mahdkdli * , Mahdsandhyd (great 
Dusk) and Mahdniid (great night) are stationed. 

10. There itself in the vertices of the Pentagon are 

stationed the five Saktis, viz. : Pratytya (Dawn) , Pitrprasu 

(Twilight) when Pitrs are abroad), Prdhna (Fore-noon), 
Apardhna (Afternoon), Madhydhna (Noon). 

11-13. Then, O sage, listen to the Saktis stationed in 
the lotus of sixteen petals. They are (the various parts of time 
such as Dina (Day), Niid (Night), Tamisrd (Dark Night), 
Jyotsni ( Moon light Night) , Pakfini , Pradofd , NiHthd , Prahard , 
PUrnimdy Rdkd , Anumati , Amdvdsyd , Sinivdli , Kuhu, Bhadrd , the 
sixteenth Upardgd. These are remembered as the sixteen Saktis 
stationed in the sixteen petals. 

14-17. (The units of Time, such as) Kald> Kdffhd , Nime$a , 

Lava , Ksana, Truti, Muh Urta, Kuiapa, Hord , £uklapak$a , Kr$napak$a 
Ayana, Vifuva, the thirteenth. Sarhvatsard, Parivatsard and 
Iddvatsard — these are remembered as the Saktis stationed in 
the lotus of sixteen petals. 

Years forming a yuga in Vedic works such as Idvatsard , 
Induvatsard (N. Udvatsara ) , Avatsard and Tithi, Vdra, Nakfatra , 
Toga and Karana — these Saktis are stationed in the lotus with 
eight petals. 

1 8. Kali , Kalpdy Kaland and Kdli, these four are the door- 
keepers of the shining Kdlacakra. 

19. All these deities of Mahakala are the wives of Kala. 
Due to intoxication, they have laughing faces. They hold 
goblets of red lustre filled with liquor. They are dark-com- 
plexioned. 

20. They are always absorbed in worshipping, eulogising, 
meditating upon and repeating the names of Lalita. They serve 
Mahakala seated in Kdlacakrdsana. 

21. Then, O Pot-born sage, the (guard) of Kalpakavafi 
is Vasanta — the spring season : (Vasanta) of great splendour, 
the favourite servant of Lalita. 

22. He is seated on a flowery throne. He is reddened due 
to intoxication by the liquor extracted from the honey of 


*Mahakaly& (great Dawn) 



1240 Brahmdn&a Purdna 

flowers. Flowers are his weapons and ornaments. He appears 
splendid with a flowery umbrella. 

23*. MadhuSri and MadhavaSrl — these two deities are 
the wives of that shining lord ( Vasanta) *. Both of them are 
inebriated through the spirituous liquor extracted from flowers. 
They are ardently desirous of the god of love having flowers for 
his arrows. 

24. The defender of Sant&navatika is GrUmartu (the 
summer season) of fiery eyes. He is the servant of Lalita, con- 
tinuously carrying out her commands. 

25** Sukrairi and Sucifri are remembered as his two 
wives. 

Haricandanavati, O sage, is occupied by Var$artu (the 
rainy season) . 

26-2 8a. That Var$artu has great splendour. Lightning- 
streaks are his tawny eyes. He is highly resonant with thunder- 
bolt as his boisterous laughter. He has haughty clouds for his 
vehicle. He is covered with clouds like coats of mail. He holds 
a jewel-set bow. He is absorbed in worshipping, eulogising, 
meditating upon and repeating the names of Lalita. He is, O 
conqueror of Vindhya, one who gives great delight to all the 
three worlds. 

28b-29. His Saktis are said to be twelve, viz.*** Nabha§rl> 
NabhasyaSri , Svarasd , Svara- (N. &z^a)-Malini, Ambd , Duld, 
Nirali (N. Sarasa), A b hr ay an i, Meghayan trikd, Var fay anti , 

Cibunikd (N. of a star in Krttika) and Vdridhard. They shower 
rain. They have eyes reddened due to inebriation. 


♦The season spring consists of two months Madhu (Gaitra) and M&dhaoa 
(Vaisakha) ; Naturally Madhuirl (the Beauty of Caitra and M&dhavafri (the 
beauty of Vaisakha) are his wives. 

♦♦The season summer (Grifma) consists of two months Sukra (or Jyesrha) 
and Suci (or Afadha). Hence his two wives are Sukrairt and Sueiiri (the 
beauties of these two months). 

***In the list of §akti? of the Rainy Season ( Var$artu ) the first two are 
the names of the Month Nabhas (Sravana) and Nabhasya (Bh&drapada) 
which constitute the Rainy season. Others are the deified natural phenomena 
in the rainy season. 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 32.30-42 


1241 


30-32. Alongwith those Saktis, Var$artu (the Rainy Season) 
always worships Lalita, the supreme goddess, with clusters of 
flowers raised by himself. He repeats her names. He adorns the 
countries of the devotees of Lalita by means of his wealth. He 
always torments the land of her enemies by means of drought. 
Such is the rainy season, the servant of the goddess. 

33. Saradrtu (the Autumn) stays permanently in the 
grove of Mandara trees and protects that chamber. He is splen- 
didly glorious. He delights the mind of the world. 

34. I$a$ri and Orjairl * are the beloved ones of that 
season. They gather water and with clusters of flowers raised 
by himself, he worships the empress, the consort of Srikame- 
£vara. 

35-36. Hemantartu (Season of early winter) of great 
splendour has his physical body as cool as snow (cool on 
account of snow) . His face is always delightful. He is the favou- 
rite servant of Lalita. By means of clusters of flowers raised by 
himself, he worships the supreme goddess (ParameSvari ) . He 
defends the park of Parijata. He subdues even Are. Sahahfri and 
SahasyaSri are his two excellent consorts.** 

37-39. The guard of the grove of Kadamba Trees is 
Siiirartu (the season of winter) of cool features, O excellent 
sage born of pot. Therefore, the entire surface of the land of 
that chamber is rendered cool by him. Therefore, Syama, the 
deity residing there is also of cool nature and features. His 
two excellent consorts are Tapahiri and TapasyaJri. * * * Along 
with them he worships Lalita, the mother who sanctifies the 
universe. 

Agastya said : # 

40-42. O Gandharvavadana (Hayagriva) O glorious 
one, among the seven chambers (and parks) consisting of 

* Months If a (ASvina ) and Orja (Karttika) cover the season called 
autumn. Hence they are treated as his wives. 

*+ Sahas ( M£rgasir$a) and Sahasya (Pau?a) are the months which 
constitute the season Hemanta. Hence these months are given feminine forms 
and are said to be his spouses. 

•••The months Tapas (MSgha)and Tapasya (Ph&lguna) form the season 
called Sifira and hence they are treated as the wives of the season Sijira, 



Brahmdnia Piirdna 


1242 

different kinds of trees Mah&kala, the guardian of the first 
Park has been heard by me. His Cakra (wheel or group) has 
been glorified by you as having four outer coverings. It is also 
heard from you that the guardianship of the Kalpaka and 
other parks belonged to the six seasons. But the deities of the 
Cakra are not heard (in respect of the seasons) . Hence, recount 
in the proper order the protecting deities ( Avarana deities) of the 
outer coverings of the Cakra of vasanta and others, since O 
holy lord, you are omniscient and great. 

Hayagriva said : 

43-45. Listen, O excellent sage, to the (enumeration of 
deities stationed in different Cakras (mystical circles). 
Kalacakra has been mentioned before. Vasantacakra (the mystical 
circle of spring season) is being described. It has seven outer 
coverings, viz. : (1) Triangle, (2) Pentagon, (3) Lotus with 
eight petals, (4) Lotus with sixteen petals (? Spokes), (5) 
Lotus with ten petals, (6) The same and (7) a square. In the 
centre of all, the deity of the spring season, of great brilliance 
is stationed in the Bindu (point) of the Cakra. 

46-48. Both the consorts Madhufri and M&dhaoaSri are 
seated on his lap. Vasantartu (has four hands ). With two of 
his hands he holds fast the breasts of his consorts, one of the 
breasts of one with one hand and one of the breasts 
of the other with the other hand. With the other pair of his 
hands, he holds the goblet of wine rendered fragrant with 
flowers and a piece of meat. The mental representation 
of the personal figure of all the f Itus (Seasons) should be carri- 
ed out in this manner, O suppressor of Vindhya. In the 
course of mental representation of Varjartu (Rainy season), 
it should be known that the first two Saktis (viz. : Nabhafitrl and 
Nabhasyairl) are seated on his lap and the other (ten) are close 
to him. 

49-56 Now listen to the enumeration of deities 
stationed in the circle of Vasanta. (There are altogether sixty 
of them, thirty are Tithis pertaining to Afadhuirl and thirty 
(Tithis) pertaining to M&dhava6rl) . The deities (of Madhu£ri) 
are Madhu$uklaprathamik&, Madhu£ukladvitiy&, Madhuiu- 



La litd-mdhd tmya 32.57-63 


1243 

klatrtfyA, Madhu£uklacaturthik&, Madhu£uklapaftcami, 
Madhu£ukla?a$thika, Madhu guklasap tami, Madhu£ukla$tami, 
Madhijguklanavamf, Madhugukladagami, MadhusuklaikadaSl, 
Madhulukladvadagi, Madhu£uklatrayoda£f, Madhuluklacatur- 
dagi, Madhuguklapaurnamasi, Madhukrsnaprathama, Madhu- 
kpsnadvitiya, Madhukrgnatrtlya, Madhukr?nacaturthl, Madhu- 
krgnapaficami, Madhukr^naga^thi, Madhukr$nasaptaml, 
Madhukr$nas{aml Madhukrsnanavami, Madhukr?nada£aml. 
O suppressor of the Vindhya, Madhukrsnaik&da£i, Madhukp$na- 
dvadaft, Mad huk r snatrayoda gl , Madhukpsnacaturdagl, and 
Madhvama (vasya). These are to be known as the Saktis (of 
Madhugri ) . 

57-58. In thi: manner, there are thirty other Saktis 
stationed above MadhavagrI beginning with Suklapratipat ( i.e. 
MddhavaSuklaprathamd etc.). These two together numbering 
sixty are well known as Vasantaiaktis, 

59-6 1. 1 The seats (of sixty deities in the seven outer 
coverings [dvarana) of Vas ant acakrardj a should be worshipped in 
the Cobra in accordance with the injunctions with their 
respective Mantras. There are sixty deities stationed in those 
sixty Bhftmis (seats). They are to be worshipped separately 
with their respective Mantras by the Sddhakas (Aspirants of 
spiritual enlightenment ) . 

Such is the Vasantacakra . The same is the case in the 

% 

other three*. But the deities are different according to the 
difference of Sukrairi , Sucifri, etc. Thus there are gloriously 
splendid sixty Saktis in the Griymacakra . 

62-63. In the same manner (understand) the different 
[Saktis) belonging to Nab ha and Nabhasya in the circles Varjd- 


1. Vasanta-Caba (vv. 49-60) is said to have sixty deities abiding in it. 
But the deities are different Tithis of the bright half and of the dark half 
both of Caitra and Vaig&kha which constitute the season Vasanta ( Cakra ) . 
Similar Cabas for the remaining seasons (rfw) each having sixty deities (15 
tithis of bright half + 15 tithis of the dark half per month. A season consists 
of two months. Hence 30 Tithis per month X 2 months constituting the season 
■*60 Saktis.) 

•The reading Ca trisu is wrong. N. 28.176 reads Cartusu (Ca Ttufu) ‘and 
in other seasons'. 



1244 


Brahmdntfa Pur&na 


cakra etc. There are sixty Saktis in each of the Cakras. Afraid 
of making the description voluminous, I am refraining from 
enumerating them. 

64. These are the Saktis pertaining to the fttus (Seasons). 
They bestow happiness on the devotees of Lalita. They are 
absorbed in worshipping, eulogising, meditating upon and 
repeating the names of Lalita. 

65-67. They move about in the Cakras of Kalpavdpikd 
etc. They are lazy and gracefully slow due to inebriation. They 
propitiate the great goddess Lalita through the honey produced 
in their own respective flowers. 

All of them together number three hundred and sixty. 
In the same manner there are deities, the guardians in the 
seven enclosures. 

They &re being recounted to you by mentioning the 
names also since you have asked. I shall take up the cases of 
other enclosures also to complete the description. Listen 
attentively. I shall give details and names of Saktis also. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE 

Seven Chambers beginning with Topaz rampart and ending with the 

rampart of Pearls 1 


Hayagriva said: 

1 . The characteristic features of seven enclosures 
built by the artisans have been recounted. Now the enclosures 
studded with jewels and precious stones are being glorified. 
Listen attentively. 

1. This chapter describes the seven concentric chambers or enclosures 
built of precious stones — each enclosure built exclusively of the following 
precious stones — Topaz and gold, rubies, Gonuda ( a gem of four colours 



Lali td-mdhd imya 33.2-9 


1245 


2. The intervening space between the enclosure of gold 
and the enclosure of Topaz is mentioned to be only seven 
Yojanas. 1 

3. It is there that the Siddhas and Siddha-women sport 

about in their excitement due to inebriation, with tasty juices, 

tonic beverages, swords and cosmetic ointments applied to the 
feet. 

4. They are endowed with devotion to Lalita and please 
the great people. They stay there and imbibe different kinds 
of juicy liquor. 

5. The arrangements of the doorway of enclosures 
built of topaz and other gems, are as before. The panels of 
doors, bolts and Gopuras> it should be known, are made of 
topaz etc. sparkling like the moon and the sun at the height 
of their lustre. 

6. The space in between the circular golden rampart 
and that of topaz is also remembered as made of topaz. 

7. In all the great enclosures and chambers described 
subsequently, the birds and lakes have the same uniform 
colour. 

8-9. The waters of the rivers are also of the same colour. 
The bejewelled trees too have the same colour. Those among 
the Siddha castes who had formerly worshipped the goddess in 
diverse ways and had passed away are born as the Siddhas 
here, along with their women. They repeat the Mantras of 
Lalita and they are exclusively devoted to the procedure of 
worship of Lalita. All of them devoutly repeat the names of 
goddess Lalita. 


found in the Himalayan region), diamonds, Lapis-Lazuli , Sapphires and 
Pearls. One wonders whether pearls were regarded more valuable than 
diamonds, sapphires in those days. The special feature of these enclosures 
was the uniformity in colour etc. of the Plant-world, nay even of water, birds 
etc. in each enclosure ; thus in describing the diamond enclosure, the water of 
river Vajra is to liquefy diamond and those who drink it have adamantine 
Physique (vv.29-31). Wine flows liberally in Lalitk-m&h&tmya and the 
residents of these whether Siddhas, Saktis etc. are inebriated but are 
devotees of Lalitt, repeat her Mantra, epithets etc. 

1. VV.2-9 describe the enclosure of gold and topaz. The residents of 

this enclosure are Siddhas ( male and female) . 



1 246 Brahmififa Purina 

10. Within the great enclosure of topaz and seven Yojanas 
from it is the square enclosure made of ruby. 1 2 

11. The ground too is paved with rubies. Gopura and 
other structures also are made of rubies. It is there that those 
who formerly stayed in the region of C&ranas and had sub- 
sequently attained Siddhis due to the destruction of former 
bodies, stay serving the lotus-like feet of the great queen; 

12. Womenfolk of the Caranas have beautiful limbs. 
They are desirous of getting inebriated. They frequently sing 
the musical compositions eulogising goddess LalitA. 

1 3. There itself, they occupy the platform amongst the 
Kalpa (wish-yielding) trees. They move about along with their 
husbands and drink sweet wine. 

14. Within the great enclosure of rubies and seven 
Yojanas from it, is the great enclosure of the gem called 
G omeda* (a gem from Himalayas, of four colours ) . 

The extremely lofty chamber of diamonds with the ground 
paved with diamonds, is in between them. 

15. It is there, O Pot-born sage, that the leading 
Gandharvas who had worshipped the goddess in their previous 
births stay along with the groups of celestial damsels. 

16. By means of notes on the lutes, they sing about 
the good qualities of the empress. They take excessive interest 
in the sole enjoyment of amorous pleasures. Their bodies 
resemble the body of the god of love. They are gentle-natured. 
They have great devotion towards Sridevi. 

1 7. The chamber of Gomeda gem is of the same shape 
and features as the previous one. In the middle of it there are 
crores of Yoginls and Bhairavas. They serve mother (goddess) 
K&lasarikar$aril there with devotion. 

* 18-22. Within the great enclosure of Gomeda gems, 
seven Yojanas from it, live the celestial damsels such as Urvafi, 


1. VV. 10*13 describe the enclosure of rubies. It is inhabited by 
C&ratias. 

2. VV. 14-26 describe the enclosure of gomeda. It is populated by 
crores of Yoginls and Bhairavas. Its special feature is the residence of Apsaras 
(Heavenly courtesans) and Gandharvas all drunkards but meditate upon 
Laliti. VV. 24-26 enumerate ihe fourteen sources of origin of these divine 
damsels. 



Lalitd-m&hAtmya 33.23-31 1247 

Menak&, Rambha, Alambusk, Maftjughojk, SukeSI, PurvacittI, 
Ghrtaci, Kftasthala, Visvicl, Puftjikasthala, Tilottama and 
other celestial harlots like them. Along with the Gandharvas 
they drink fresh liquor from the Kalpa-trees. They meditate 
upon Lalitadevi again and again. In order to enhance their 
own great fortune, they repeat her Mantra. All the Apsaras 
ladies originating from fourteen places stay there itself wor- 
shipping the goddess with joyous minds. 

Agastya enquired : 

23. O holy lord, recount the fourteen sources of origin 
of those Apsaras (celestial damsels ), O highly intelligent one, 
O great storehouse of all lores. 

Hayagrlva replied : 

24-26. The heart of Brahma, Kama, Mrtyu, Orvi (the 
Earth), the wind god, Sun’s, Moon's rays, Vedas, the fire-god, 
lightning, nectar, daughter of Dak$a and water.* Learned men 
consider these as the causes of birth of divine harlots, with 
dazzling riches of blessedness and grandeur. Along with the 
Gandharvas all these worship goddess Cakrini. 

27. The Kinnaras and the Kimpurugas, O sage, have 
resorted to the region of diamond. 1 They are accompanied by 
their womanfolk and they are maddened with inebriation. 

28. They get rid of all their sins by repeating the 
Mantra of the empress (La litk) . O Pot-born sage, they stay 
there dancing and singing. 

29-30. There itself, on the ground studded with diamonds 
flows the river Vajra, O sage. It shines with trees on either 
bank, thickly grown and having the form and features of 
diamonds. The sand particles of this river are solely diamond 
pieces. Verily, the water is liquefied diamond. That sanctifying 
river flows all round that region. 

31. Those excellent men who are devotees of Lalita 
ParameSani and drink its water, attain adamantine physical 


•Thirteen sources are enumerated here. The ocean of Milk is the 
fourteenth source. 

1. VV.2 7-33 describe the enclosure of diamonds* Its residents are 
Kinnaras and Kimpurufas. 


1 248 Brakm&ntfa Pur&na 

bodies, O Pot-bora sage. They become long-lived and free from 
sickness. 

32. When the thunderbolt hurled by him was dissolved 
and melted by Bhandasura, Satakratu (Indra) performed 
penance with great devotion towards VajrcSI. 

33. The goddess rose from its waters, gave the thunder- 
bolt to the enemy of Vala (i.e. Indra) and vanished once 
again. Gratified thereby he too went back to the heaven. 

34. Within the enclosure of diamond and seven Yojanas 
from it is the lofty VaiduryaSala (Enclosure of Lapis Lazuli. 1 ). 
It has Gopuras as mentioned before. The land there is also 
made of Lapis Lazuli. It has sparkling features. 

35. Those residents of Pa tala who had been aspirants 
for spiritual enlightenment and worshippers of Sridevi reside 
there in the forms of Siddhas with abundant happiness. 

36-38. Sesa, Karkotaka, Mahapadma, Vasuki, Sankha, 
Taksaka, Sankhacuda, Mahadanta, Mahaphana and many 
other Nagas like these stay there. So also their womenfolk. 
The class of virtuous and devout Daityas, the chief of whom is 
Bali, stays there along with the Nagas as well as its own women 
folk. They habitually repeat the Mantras of Lalita. They are 
initiated in the sacred lore of Lalita. They are the perpetual 
worshippers of Lalita. Thus the Asuras and serpents reside 
there. 

39. There, in the chamber of Lapis Lazuli, the rivers 
have icy chill waters. The waters in the lakes have sparkling 
lustre free from dirt. The lakes are adorned with cranes, swans 
and lotuses. 

40. The mansions are divine and embellished with Lapis 
Lazuli gems. Those serpents and Asuras play there along with 
their womenfolk. 

41 . Within the great enclosure of Lapis Lazuli and seven 

% 

Yojanas from it, there is the enclosure of sapphire 2 like another 
circle. 


1 . VV. 34-40 describe the enclosure of Lapis Lazuli. It is inhabited by 
the denizens of Pat&la viz. great Nagas like £e?a, Karkotaka, Bali and pious 
Daityas. 

2. VV. 41-49 describe the enclosure of Sapphire. 



Lalitd-m&k&tmya 33.42-53 


1249 


42. The ground in the middle of it, O sage, is paved 
with sapphire gems. The rivers there are sweet and the lakes 
pleasantly cool. There are different kinds of tasty and juicy 
objects of pleasurable enjoyment. 

43. Those people of earthly world who had attained 
mastery over Lalita’s Mantra attain the chamber of sapphire 
on giving up their bodies and stay there. 

44-46. They enjoy divine objects in the company of 
their womenfolk. They drink sweet wine and dance with great 
devotion. They sport about in those lakes and rivers, O Pot- 
born sage, in beautiful bowers and arbours and mansions of 
great prosperity. They repeat the names of oridevi always and 
recite her good qualities. Those highly fortunate people reside 
there surrounded by their women. 

47. When their Karmans become exhausted they go 
back to their human bodies on the earth. Enduced with the 
previous Vdsana (imprints of former actions) they once again 
worship CakrinT. Again they go to the great enclosure of 
sapphire in Srinagar a. 

48-49. On account of continued contact with that 
region, O sage, men are always endowed with dark emotions 
and feelings arising from R&ga (attachment) and Dve$a (hatred). 
Those who gain knowledge and wisdom, those who devoid of 
adverse effects of mutually opposed pairs and those who have 
subdued their organs of sense, O sage, possess surprising powers 
and they merge into Mahesvarl. 

50-53. Within the enclosure of sapphire and seven 
Yojanas away there is the enclosure of pearls. 1 It has Gopuras 
as mentioned before. The ground in between the two, O sage, 
is very pure and extremely refulgent. * Everything is studded 
and set with pearls, very cool and highly pleasing. The great 
rivers TamraparnI, Mahaparni, Sadamuktaphalodaka and 


1. The description of this inner-most enclosure is important. It 
mentions the fame of the river Tamrapanpl for pearl-fisheries. The mention 
of the rivers of Tamilnad only confirms the author's native Province. It 
gives the distribution of eight quarters to traditional Dik-P&las ( guardians 
of the quarters) such as Indr a, Agni, Yam a etc. Under Yama’s jurisdiction 
are hells which too are enumerated. 





Brahm&nfa Purdy* 


others like them flow in that great region. On their banks live 
all those residents of Devaloka who, in their previous births 
had successfully practised the repetitions of the Mantra of 
Sridevi. 

54. In the eight directions beginning with the east are 
the worlds of Sakra etc. with their doorways unitedly facing 
the pearl enclosure along its periphery. 

55-56. To the east of the central region between the 
gateways of pearl enclosure and sapphire enclosure is the 
world of Sakra and in the corner thereof is the site of the world 
of the fire-god (i.e. in the south-east). To the south is the city 
of Yama . There the lord stays holding his staff and (moves 
about) everywhere repeating the Mantras of Lalita. He is of 
impetuous and dreadful nature. 

57. His assistant official Guha implements the Law and 
Order of SridevI through the soldiers of Yama with Citragupta 
as their leader. 

58-62. At the bidding of Srldevi of great prowess, O 
Pot-born sage, he makes the sinners fall into the terrible 
painful hells. The sinners are as follows : Those who 

are cursed by Guha, who commit vile deeds, who cause hatred 
to Lalita, who show fraudulent devotion, who are fools, who 
are excessively haughty, who steal Mantras, who repeat evil 
Mantras, who possess evil lores, who resort to sins, who are 
atheists, who are habitually sinful, who aimlessly cause injury 
to living beings, who are hostile to women, who are disliked 
by the entire world and who give protection to heretics. O 
Pot-born sage, the hells into which they are cast are Kalasutra, 
Raurava, Kumbhlpaka, Asipatravana, the dreadful Kfmibhaksa, 
Pratapana, Lalak$epa, Sucivedha, Angarapatana and many 
other painful hells like these. 

63. To the west of it (i.e. in the south-west corner) 
is Nirrti who holds a sword. Resorting to the Rak$asa world, 
he worships Lalita. 

64-66. To the north of it (i.e. in the west) in between 
the two gateways, Varuna stays permanently resorting to the 
Varupa world. He is excited and inebriated by tasting 
spirituous liquor. His limbs are fair and pure. His vehicle 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 33.67-74 


1251 


is fish (shark). He always repeats Sridevata Mantra. He 
practises procedure of worship of Sridevl. With his nooses he 
binds those who dislike Sridevatddariana ( the philosophic system 
pertaining to Sri or Srividya) and takes them down. He sets 
free all devotees from bondage. 

67-69. In the comer north of it (i.e. North-west) is 
the world of Vayu. It has great lustre. There are Siddhas, 
divine sages , others who practise (retention of) air and other 
Yogins the chief of whom is Gorak^a 1 2 stay there. They have 
gaseous bodies. They have perpetual bliss and prosperity. 
They are eagerly devoted to the practice of Yoga. The glorious 
lord Marutelvara stays there, O Pot-born sage, along with 
those mentioned before. He has great inherent strength. He 
has different forms, different in every respect. 

70. The Saktis of Marutanatha 1 are three viz. : Ida, 
Pirigala and Susumna. They are always lethargic in their 
inebriation due to wine. 

71-74. He holds a flag in his hand. He is seated on his 
great vehicle, an excellent deer. He is absorbed in worshipping, 
eulogising, meditating upon and strictly adhering to the pro- 
cedure of worship of Lalita. He is surrounded by other Saktis 
too with all their limbs filled with blissful sensations. That 
lord Maruta of great glory always performs the Japa of Cakrini. 
At the end of Kalpa, by means of his inherent strength, he 
reduces the three worlds including the mobile and immobile 
beings, to the state of power in a moment and delights himself 
thereby. In order to achieve the requisite strength, for the 
same, he worships and meditates upon the goddess Lalitesvari. 
He is adorned with all types of ornaments. 

1 . . Mention of Gorakfa or Gorakhan&th as ‘the chief of Yogins' shows 
that Goraksa became a legend by the time of Lalitd-m&h&tmya. One wonders 
why his teacher Matsyendra is not mentioned as the pair Matsyendra and 
Gorak?a is still indissolubly popular. The mention of Gorakfa shows that 
this Mah&tmya was composed after the 10th Cent. A.D. 

2. The epithet ‘Natha’ to the wind god shows the influence of Yogic 
N&tha Cult. Here instead of mentioning five Pr&gas as his Saktis, the Yogic 
flow of breath in the 'right and left nostrils is noted as his &akti. Even the 
chief officers of Lalit& are mentioned as 'MantriQl nkthk* and Dapda-natha. 
This may be due to the influence of the Natha cult. 



1252 


Brahm&nia Purd#a 


75. Kubera, the Lord of Yak$as, of great lustre and 
glory, resides in Yaksaloka situated to the east of his (Vayu’s) 
world. He is in the middle of the two gateways. 

76. He is accompanied by Saktis : Rddhi, Vrddhi etc. 
nine Nidhis ( treasures) . By means of wealth and assets, he 
fulfils the desires of devotees. 

77. Along with Yaksis of charming features and obedient 
activities, he worships Cakrini with different kinds of wine. 

78. There are Yaksa generals such as Manibhadra, 
Purnabhadra, Maniman, Manikandhara and others like them 
in that place. 

79. To the east of his world (i.e. North-east corner) is 
the world of Rudra of great prosperity. He is bedecked in very 
valuable jewels. He is the presiding deity. 

80-82. He has fiery brilliance always due to wrathfulness. 
A big quiver is always kept fastened to him. He is always 
surrounded by many Rudras who are on a par with him, 
who have great inherent strength, who are efficient in maintain- 
ing the worlds, who have kept their bows well strung and 
who are stationed in the sixteen outer coverings. By means of 
his faces, he continuously repeats the Mantra of Sridevata. He 
is richly endowed with the practice of meditation. He is eager to 
worship Sridevi. The places near him are embellished by 
groups of many crores of Rudranis. 

83. All of them have highly refulgent limbs. They are 
proud of their fresh youthfulness. They are engrossed in the 
meditation of Lalita. They are perpetually lethargic in their 
inebriation due to wines. 

84. The glorious Maharudra who holds the trident is 
' served by other Rudras, the chief among whom is Hira^yabahu . 

He is accompanied by those Rudranis too. 

85-86. With the tip of his trident, he pierces those 
persons who have neglected visiting Lalita, who are haughty, 
and who are reproached by elderly people. He burns them by 
means of fierce fires originating from his eyes. He destroys 
their wives, children and servants. He is the great hero who 
obediently carries out the behest of Lalita. 

87. He stays thus in the extremely beautiful Rudraloka, 



Lalit&-mdh&tmya 33 .88 — 34 . 1 


1253 


O Pot-born sage. The attendants of that Maharudra, O sage, 
are the Pramathins. 

88-96. These Rudras are numerous. Who is competent 
to enumerate them (in full) ? There are thousands and 
thousands of Rudras over the earth. Those who stay in 
heaven are thousands and thousands. There are Rudras whose 
food is arrow, whose vital breaths are arrows and whose showers 
are arrows. They are brilliant. They have tawny eyes. They 
stay in the ocean and in the firmament. They have great 
prowess. They have matted hair and they hold wine goblets. 
They are blue-throated and red in complexion. They are 
above all living beings. They have arrows and Kapardas 
(Matted hair kept in the form of a crown). There are Rudras 
who pierce those people who drink wine in the vessels of 
their food. There are Rudras who act as chariots in the paths. 
There are Rudras residing in holy spots. There are others, 
thousands in number having Sfkas (arrows) and Ni$angas 
(quivers) . Rudras have spread far and wide in all quarters 
spreading the commands of Lalita. All of them are noble souls. 
They can bear three worlds in a moment. They are merci- 
ful and they protect those who are very clever in meditation 
on SrldevI, who regularly repeat the Mantra of Sridevi and 
who are the devotees of Sridevata. They resort to the Cakra 
of sixteen outer-coverings in the enclosure with the rampart 
wall of pearls. They worship Maharudra of great prosperity 
with his face blazing with fury. The chief among them is 
Hiranyabahu. 


CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR 

The Region of Siva and of the guardians of quarters 
Agastya said : 

1. What is that Cakra (circle) with sixteen outer cover- 
ings and with Rudra as the presiding deity 7 1 Who are the 
Rudras stationed there ? By what name are they glorified ? 


1. As this verse suggests, this chapter (main portion at least) describes 
the Cakra of sixteen Avarapas with Rudra (or Maharudra) as the central, 


1254 


Brahmin 4^ Purijia 


2. In which circular outer coverings and with which 
designation do they stav ? O storehouse of mercy ! Mention 
their names with their derivative as well as conventional 
meanings. 

Hayagriva said : 

3. There the abode of Rudra is said to be made out of 
cluster of pearls. It is rendered splendid. It is five Yojanas 
long and five Yojanas wide. 

4-6. It has sixteen outer coverings. It is very splendid 
and pleasing with a Pi (ha (stool, seat) in the middle. On that 
central Pifha , O sage, Maharudra sits permanently, blazing 
with anger and having bow ready strung. He keeps his hand 
always over it. He has three eyes. In the Trikona 1 (Triangle 
and first covering) O Pot-born sage, three Rudras are mentioned 
(as seated), viz.: Hiranyab4hu, Senani and Di£ampati. 

7-9a. The Rudras stationed in the hexagon are Vrksah, 
Harikefah, PaSupati, Sa§pifijara, Tvisiman and Pathinampati. 

The Rudras in the octagon are BabhruSah, Vivyadhi, 
Annapati, HarikeSa — upavitin, Pustanampati, Bhava and 
Heti. 

9b- 1 la. In the decagon the first one is Jagatampati 
the others are Rudra, Atatavin, Ksetrapati, Suta, Ahammanya 


presiding deity. He is always alert with his bow. In the enclosing triangle are 
three Rudras viz. Hiranyabahu, Senani and Diidm Pati. The names of 
Rudras in different Avars nas (sixteen in all) show the palpable in- 
fluence of Satarudriya from which they (i.e. the epithets) are borrowed and 
arranged around Mah&rudra. The meanings of the names of different 
Rudras make it clear how the Rudra was givfcn benevolent and malevolent 
epithets and as such the concept was complex in those times. Traditional 
duties of Trinity, of creation (Brahm&), maintenance (Visgu) and 
destruction (Rudra) are a simplistic (and inadequate) presentation. 

These Rudras stay in the NE of the Pearl-chamber and protect the 
devotees of Lalita ( w. 1 -52) 

1 . An analysis of the Mah&rudra Cakra shows the following distribution 
of Rudras : I Auarapa, a triangle — 3 Rudras posted; II Avara^a, Hexagon 6 
Rudras; III Octagon— 8 Rudras; IV Decagon 10; A wheel (Cakra) with 
16 spokes — 16 Rudras. After this merely Avarapa number and the names of 
Rudras posted there are given. In 16 Aoara^as 258 Rudras are posted. 

My sources do not possess such a figure of Rudra Yantra. 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 34. 1 1 -24 


1255 


( Ahantya in N.) , Vanapati, Rohita, Sthapati and Vj*ks&- 
nampati. These have kept their bows in readiness. 

lib- 14a. In the Duodecagon (Twelve-sided figure) the 
Rudras are Mantri, Vanija, Kaksapati, Bhavanti, (is the 
fourth) , Vagvibhu (is the fifth), Osadhin&mpati, (is the sixth) , 
Uccairghosa, Akrandayan, Patinampati, Krtsnavlta, Dhava 
and Sattvanampati. This is the fifth outer covering. 

14b-15. The following should be known as the deities 
Rudras of the sixth Outer covering, viz. : Sahamana, Nirvyadhi, 
Avyadhinampati, Kakubha, Nisangl, Stenanampati and 
Niceru* 

16- 19a. The following sixteen are the residents in the 
six teen-spoked Gakra viz* * Deity in the previous outer covering. 
The first is Paricara, Aranyapati, Srkavisa, Jighamsantah, 
Musnatampatayah, Asimantah, ( aSimantah in N.) , Suprajfia, 
Naktaflcarah Prakrtin&m-pati, Usni^I, Gire^cara, Kuluftca- 
nampati, Isumantah, Dhanvavidah, Atanvana, Pratipurva, 
Dadhanaka and Ayacchata ( Ayacchantah) . 

I9b-22a. In the eighth outer covering there are eighteen 
sets of deities, viz.: Visrjantati (those who forsake), Asyantah 
(those who throw), Vidhyantah (those who pierce), Asinah 
( those who are seated ) , Sayanah ( those who are lying down ) , 
Yantah (those who go), Jagratab (those who keep awake), 
Ti?thantah (those who stand), Dhavantah ( those who run) , 
Sabhyab> Samadhipah, A^vah, A^vapatayah (Lords of horses), 
Avyadhinyah (devoid of sickness), Vividhyantah, Ganadhya- 
ksah, Brhantah (Big ones) and Grtsa (O suppressor of Vindhya 
mountain. 

22b-24. The following Rudras are the deities of the 
ninth outer covering * 

Grtsadhipatis, Vratas, Vr&tadhipas, Ganas, Ganapas, 
Vi£varupas,Virupakas, Mahantah, Ksullakas, Rathins, Arathas, 
Rathas, Rathapattyas, Senas, Senanis, Ksattaras, Sangrahltrs, 
Taksanah, Rathakaraka and Kulala (Various artisans are 
deified as Rudras) . 

•These are seven and so the outer covering may be a heptagon. 

••The text Adhah parivaro etc. should be idyah paricaro as in N. 



1256 


Brahm&nia Purina 


25-28. The following are the Rudras in the tenth outer 
covering, viz.: Karmaras, Pufijisthas, Nisadas, I$ukrdganas, 
Dhanvakaras, Mrgayus, Svanis, Svanas,Asvas, Asvapatis, Bhava, 
Rudra, Sarva Pasupati, Nilagriva, Sitikaniha, Kapardi, 
Vyuptakesa, Sahasraksa, Satadhanva, Girina, Sipivista, and 
Midhustaina. 

29-32a. The following twentyfour Rudras are mentioned 
as occupying the eleventh Cakra (outer covering) : — Isuman, 
Hrasva, Vamana, Brhan, Varsiyan, Vrddha, Samrddhi, Agrya, 
Prathama, A$u, Ajira, Sighra, Sibhyaka, Urmyavasu, Anyarudra 
Srotasya, Divya, Jyestha,Kanistha, Purvaja,Avaraja, Madhyama 
Avagamya and Jaghanya. All of them are very mighty. 

32b-35. The following twentysix deities are remembered 
as stationed in the twelfth outer covering : — 

Budhnya, Somyarudra, Pratisarpaka, Yamyaka Ksemya, 
Uvocava, Khali, Slokya, Avasanyaka, Vanya, Kaksya, Srava, 
Prati^rava,Asusena, Asuratha, Sura, Avabhinda, Varmi, Varuthl, 
Bilmi, Kavaci, Sruta, Sena, Dundubhya, Ahananya and Dhrsnu. 
They have huge bodies. They are very mighty. 

36-40a. Listen, O sage, the following are the Rudras 
stationed in the thirteenth outer covering 

Prabhrsas, Dutas, Prahitas, Nisangins, Isudhiman, 
Yudhitaksnesu, Svayudha, Sudhanva, Stutya, Pathya, Kapya, 
Na^ya, Sudha, Sarasya, Nadhamana, Vesantah, Kupya (?) 
Avadhavarsya, Avarsya, Medhya, Vidyutya (?) Ighrl, Atapya, 
Vatya, (?) Re$mya (N), Vastavya, Vastupa, and Soma. All of 
them are very powerful. 

40b-43. The following are mentioned as the Rudra 
deities in the fourteenth outer covering, O sage. : 

Rudra, Tamraruna, Sanga, Pasupati, Ugra, Bhima, 
Agrevadha, Durevadha, Hanta, Haniyan, Vrsa, Harike^aka, 
Tara, Sambhu, Mayobhu, Sankara, Mayaskara, Siva, Sivatara 
TIrthya, Kulya, Parya, Aparya, Pratarana, Uttarana, Atarya, 
Labhya, $astha (?) ( Safpya in N) and Phenya. 

44-48. The following thirtytwo Rudra Devatas, O 
intelligent one, stay permanently in the fifteenth outer covering 
with their weapons : 

Sikatya, Pravahya, Irinya, Prapathya, (Osage), Kim£ila, 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 34. 49-57 


1257 


K$ayana (thereafter), Kapardi, Pulastya, Gosfhya, Grhya (as 
also), Talpya, Gehya, Katya, Gahvaresfha, urudipaka (Hradayya 
in N.), Nivestya, Pantavya (Pamsavya in N.), Rathanya, 
(Rajasyaka in N.),Sukya (£uskya in N.),HarIti, Alothas ( Alohya 
in N.) , Lopyas, Urya, Surmya, Payeya (Parna in N.) , Parnasa, 
Vaguramanaka, Abhighnanasidu (Abhighnan and Akkhidan 
in N.) , Prakhidan, Kirika and Dcvan&mhrdaya. 

49-51. In the sixteenth outer covering the following 
(four) blazing deities staying in the doorways in the east etc. 
worship Maharudra : — Viksinatkas, Vicinvatkas, Nirhatana- 
makas and Amlvaktras. Thus Maharudra is served by the thou- 
sands of Rudras stationed in the sixteen outer coverings. He 
carries out the behest of Lalita. He stays there in the north-east 
corner of the pearl chamber for the prosperity of the worlds. 


52. Enumerated in the Satarudriya scripture, these 
Rudras of great strength protect day and night all those who 
are richly endowed with devotion to Lalita. These (deities) 
put obstacles in the path of those who are not the devotees of 
goddess Lalita. 

53. In this manner the guardians of the quarters, 
beginning with Sakra resort to the pearl-chamber and perform 
service unto Lalita Paramesvarl. 


54. Within the pearl chamber and seven Yojanas from it 
is the chamber of emerald. 1 It is four Yojanas in height. 

55-57. It is rendered very splendid by means of the 
proper arrangements of the Gopuras etc. as before. Four 
Mansions belonging to Dandanatha are built there in the 
intermediate corners between the quarters beginning with 
southeast. They are as spacious and large as the abodes cf 
Mantrini. 

Those deities who were stationed on the steps of the 
leading chariot Giricakra during the great war with Bhandasura 
stay here (always) alert and watchful. All the grounds here 
are well paved with rows of emerald stones. They are very 
splendid. 


1. VV. 54-65 describe the emerald chamber of DaQdan&th&. 



1258 


BrahmOnia Purdna 


58-61. They are full of groves of golden palms. They 
are equipped in plenty by all the requisite things. There, all 
the deities have the same splendour and magnificence as 
Dan<}anatha. They move about, playfully whirling and shaking 
ploughshare and pestle. The palmyra trees are innumerable. 
They are as wonderful and bright as fresh gold. Their tranks 
are a Yojana in height. They have very broad and large leaves. 
Their barks are golden. They are very glossy and smooth. 
They have good shade and they are fully laden with fruits. 
From the top to the root many pots of liquor are kept hanging 
down from those palmrya trees. All these have been made by 
the artisans for pleasing Danqlanaiha. 

62-64. Drinking the palm juice continuously, the Cakra 
deities Jrmbhini and others, the Bhairavas beginning with 
Hetuka, the seven Nigraha deities, Unmattabhairavl and 
Svapnesi — all these are fully intoxicated. In that excitement 
of inebriation, they dance about all round in the various 
quarters wherever Dandini happened to glance at. All these 
deities have the same splendour and magnificence as the 
goddess. 

65. The residence of Dan^anatha (here) is only for her 
prestige. For the purpose of serving (Lalita), she has another 
residence in the Mahapadmatavi region. Since her mansion is 
far from the chamber, she has another mansion assigned to her 
for the purpose of serving (Lalita). 

66. In the emerald enclosure, seven Yojanas away from 
it is the rampart wall of coral as pink-coloured as the morning 
sun. 

67-69a. There the entire ground is paved and beauti- 
fied with corals. Here Brahma sits in his lotus seat. Brahma who 
resembles coral in his complexion always comes there 
from Brahmaloka along with all leading sages for serving 
Srilalitadevi. He is always active and alert in this respect. O 
Quaffer of the ocean, he remains there along with the creators 
of subjects beginning with Marici. 1 


1 . VV.66-70 Coral enclosure — residence of god Brahms. 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 34. 69*83 


1259 


69b-70. At the command of goddess Lalita and for 
the prosperity of the worlds, the great fourteen lores, thousands 
of subsidiary lores, the sixtyfour fine arts — all these assume 
physical bodies and resort to Brahma’s residence in the coral 
enclosure. 

71-72. Within the coral enclosure and seven Yojanas 
away from it is the world of Visnu. 1 In all directions it is 
surrounded by ruby Mandapas (raised dais with canopies etc.) 
Eager to serve Lalit&, Visriu assumes different forms four, ten 
or twelve and the eternal lord Madhava always stays there. 

73-75. The deities of ten incarnations who rose up 
from the nails of Sridevi in the course of great battle with 
Bhandasura reside in the Mandapa made of ruby. The only 
difference in this chamber from the previous ones is this that 
the surface is covered with that of ruby stones (here) . There 
within the chamber the lord holding the conch, discus and mace 
divides himself into twelve forms and accords defence in the 
quarters beginning with the east. 

76-83. Kesava of golden colour holds discus and 
protects the east. Narayana resembling the black cloud holds 
conch and protects west. As dark as the petals of blue 
lotus Madhava possessing honey (? ) protects ( everyone) . 
The great lord Govinda holds bow and has the lustre of 
the moon. He protects the right (i.e. the southern side). 
Visnu who resembles the filaments of the lotus holds the 
ploughshare and protects the north. Madhusudana who has 
the lustre of the lotus and holds Musala (pestle) protects 
the southeast; Trivikrama who has the refulgence of the 
fire holds sword in his hand and protects southwest. 
Vamana who has the brilliance of the mid-day sun holds 
thunderbolt and protects north-west. Srldhara who has 
the lustre of Pundarika (lotus) and has the sharped ged spear 
for his weapon protects the north-east. Hrsikela who has the 


1. VV.71-84 describe the region of Vi?nu with ruby Mandapas. The 

first Twelve names of Visnu uttered at the beginning of a Sandhyd ( morning 
or evening prayer) viz. Ke£ava, Nar&yaga, Damodara are regarded as the 
forms of Vi?nu with which he protects the world. 



1260 


Brahm&ntfa Purdna 


lustre of lightning and holds the club protects in the southern 
quarter ( or in the lower region) . Padman&bha whose reful- 
gence is equal to that of a thousand suns holds the Sarnga 
bow in his hand and surrounds the ruby dais in a clock- wise 
direction. Damodara who has all weapons, who is omni- 
potent and omniscient, who has faces all round, who resembles 
Indragopa (glowworm), who holds the noose in his hand, who 
is never defeated, who is the soul of everything and who is full 
of devotion to Lalita surrounds the ruby dais in a anticlock- 
wise direction. 

84. Thus by means of his twelve bodies the lotus-eyed 
Lord shines in the Visnuloka occupying the ruby dais. 

85. Within the enclosure of diverse kinds of gems and 
seven Yojanas from it there is a charming dais named Saha - 
srastambhaka 1 (thousand-columned) . 

86-87. It is set with and beautified with different kinds of 
gems. There is enclosure (chamber) there which is very high 
and which is built of different gems. There is a row of 
thousand columns transversely. (?) There are many such 
rows in the four directions. 

88. The covering above is as before by means of blocks 
of gems and jewels. It is there that Siva’a world stands aloft 
with sparkling splendour. 

89. It is remembered that the twentyeight Saiva-agamas 
(scriptural texts of Saivite philosophy) are present there in 
embodied form. There are excellent persons there, the chief of 
whom are Nandin, Bhrrigi and Mah&kala. 

90-94. There are thousands of elephant- faced lords. 
There are deities of twentysix Tattvas in that excellent 
Sivaloka on the hall of thousand columns. l£ana, the moon- 
crested lord is the knower of all lores. He carries out the 
orders of Lalita and abides by them. He repeats the Mantra 


1. VV. 85-94 give the description of a thousand-pillared hall and the 
residence of Siva. This Siva is Sridevi’s devotee (on a lower level) . Mention 
of 28 £aiva Agamas in V. 89 does not clarify whether the Advaita or Dvaita 
theory is advocated by them. 



1261 


Lalitd-mdhdtmya 35.1-2 

of Lalita continuously. He is always delighted in his mind. By 
means of his benign vision special to him, he illuminates the 
power of intellect which has the form of great refulgence of his 
devotees. He does so for the sake of enabling his devotees to 
achieve the Mantra of Lalita. The power of intellect can 
thereby be competent to dispel the dense darkness within and 
without. Mahadeva who stays in the thousand-columned hall 
is omniscient. He does everything. He is full of devotion to 
Sridevl. O Potborn sage, he stays there resorting to 
different enclosures. 


CHAPTER THIRTYFIVE 

The preparation of materials of worship in Mahdpadmdfavl 1 
Hayagriva said : 

1. Henceforth, we shall recount different chambers 
of Vdpitraya (three tanks) etc. Merely by listening to these, 
great prosperity can be attained. 

2. Within the thousand-columned enclosure and seven 
Yojanas away is the great chamber named Mandh . It is 
wonderfully built and beautified with all kinds of gems and 
jewels. 


1 . The description of the Mahdpadmd fav{ shows that it is a yogic 
allegory. It is beyond the ‘‘great Halls' 1 of Mind(vv 2-23), Buddhi 'Intellect* — 
(vv. 24-33), Ahadkdra ‘Ego* (vv.34-40), the sun-god (vv.41-50), the moon- 
god (vv. 5 1-58) and of Srngdra ‘love sentiment* (w. 59-69) , the last being 
the most difficult to cross. The ‘waters* of tanks ( V&pis ) are stated to be 
Amxta (nectar) , Ananda (Bliss, delight) and Vimaria (discrimination?) . The 
whole description suggests that this must be a figurative description of the 
Yogic process to the realization of goddess Lalita, the Cit-iakti. 

A further point to be noted is the Buddhist influence. The deities T&r&, the 
chief navigator in Amrta vdpl ( vv. 12-17) and Kurukulla, the chief of boats 
{Naukeivari) in Vimarfa-v&pikd> are Buddhist deities adopted in the Lalita 
cult. 



1262 


Brahm&nia Pur&na 


3. It has Gopuras. gateways, panels and bolts as before. 
The entire space within that chamber (enclosure) is a nectarine 
lake. 

4-5. There is a certain Rasayana (tonic beverage) by 
imbibing which Yogins and Siddhas become very powerful 
persons. Their bodies become as hard as adamant. They be- 
come very wise and intelligent too. That same Rasdyana has 
become the water of this lake of nectar. By inhaling its smell 
alone, one can become the master of beautiful ladies in the 
form of Siddhis. 

6-7. O suppressor of the Vindhya mountain, even without 
touching it (by inhaling alone), a person gets all his sins destroy- 
ed. Along the sides of both the enclosures, on the banks of 
the nectarine lake, there are many small ponds, all squares of 
sides half a Krosa each. The bottom of the lake is four Yojanas 
deep. 

8. A series of steps in the lake are wonderfully paved 
with different kinds of gems and jewels. The swans and cranes 
in the lake are golden and gem-coloured. 

9-12. Moving slowly and gently the ripples and waves 
dash against the two banks. By drinking the water therein, O 
Suppressor of the Vindhya Mountain, which is full of tonic 
beverage, the birds get rid of old age and death there. By 
means of their perpetual chirping, the K&ranfava (A species of 
duck) birds appear to be performing the Japa of the Mantra of 
great potentiality of goddess Lalita. As the region is entirely 
covered with numerous ponds, there is no other way of 
approaching that place without a boat. Moreover, without the 
permission of Mantririi and Dandanatha, no one can enter the 
region. There is a great Sakti named Tara working there as 
the deity in charge of the portals. 

13-14. Tara has many female attendants. They are dark 

in colour like the blue lotus. With thousands of gemset boats, 
they sport about in the waters of the lake, playing on their 

lutes, glutes, drums etc. They go to and fro between the two 

banks frequently. 

15. The boat-women of Tara are crores in number. They 
are all in their fresh bloom of youth. They dance and repeated- 
ly sing the meritorious glory of the goddess. 



Lalitd-m&k&tmya 35.16-28 


1263 


16. Some of them have oars in their hands. Some have 
horns filled with water in their hands. They drink the nectarine 
water of that lake. They move about in hundreds of rafts and 
boats. 

17-18. Mother Tara who is the chief among those Saktis 
who row the boats and whose complexion is dark, does not 
permit even the three-eyed lord to sail in the waters of the lake 
without the permission of Mantrini and Dagd&nath&. 

19-2 la. The group of Saktis in charge of the boats and 
rafts of Tara is very beautiful. They sing and sail about in boats 
rendered beautiful by means of gems and jewels. At every step 
they recite instances of the great munificence and exalted 
state of the empress. They steadily drink wine in goblets of 
rubies. In every boat there is a jewel-studded abode of fascinat- 
ing features where they live. 

2 lb-23. Some boats are made and beautified by gold, 
O sage, some are made of gems and precious stones. Some 
boats are in the shape of sharks and crocodiles. Some of them 
are deer-faced Some boats have leonine faces and some are 
elephant- faced. Surrounded thus by boats of wonderfully varie- 
gated forms, Mother Tara shines splendidly. She possesses her 
own huge boat. 

24. Rowing continuously in the waters of the lake, both 
clockwise and anticlockwise directions, Tar& guards this 
enclosure. 

25. Within the enclosure of Manab&la (Chamber of 
mind) and seven Yojanas away from it is the enclosure well- 
known as Buddhti&la (Chamber of Intellect). It is four Yojanas 
in height. 

26. The entire space in the middle of that chamber is 
occupied by Anandav&pikd (the lake of Bliss) . The great divine 
wine rendered highly fragrant by the Bahula ( Mimusops 
elengi ) flowers and having the lustre of heated gold serves the 
purpose of water in that river. 

27. The depth etc. of the lake of bliss are recounted as 
before. The structure of the series of steps etc. and the nature 
and features of the birds — everything is as before. 

28. By frequently drinking the water therein viz, : wine. 



1264 


Brahm&ni}a Purdya 


the Saktis stationed on its banks become mad with inebriation 
and play about. They become excessively red (in their faces) 
due to intoxication. 

29. The goddess Varum herself is the official in charge 
of the fleet of boats. They call her Sudhamalinl and also 
AmrteSvari. 

m 

30. She is surrounded by an army of §aktis stationed in 
the boats studded with gems and jewels. By her mere glance, 
she makes the three worlds perfectly inebriated. 

31-33. She resembles the midday sun (in refulgence). 
Her cheeks become red on account of intoxication. Her tresses 
are exquisitely embellished with garlands of Parijata flowers with 
which they are tied. She holds the goblet filled with wine where 
lotus flowers move to and fro. In another vessel set with jewels, 
she holds well-cooked piece of meat. Thus VarunI, the leader of 
the fleet of boats, shines. Only at the bidding of Mantrini and 
Dan^anatha does she give permission to anyone to cross the 
lake and not otherwise, even in the case of the three-eyed lord. 

34. Then within the great enclosure of intellect and seven 
Yojanas away from it, is Aharhk&ra Mahdi&la (the great chamber 
of Ego). It is fitted with Gopuras as before. 

35. The entire ground, O sage, between those two cham- 
bers is occupied by the pond named VimarSavapikd (the lake 
of deliberation and consideration). It is in the form of the Nectar 
of the Nerve Susumna (or of the Susumna ray of the sun) . 

36. Within the great Yogins, in their inner mind, there 
is wind filling it. In the hollow of the bonelike nerve Susumna 
there is the most excellent Amrta (Nectar). 

37. The same is the water in that lake, O ascetic. It is 
'remembered that the series of steps from the banks, birds, 
fleet of boats everything is as before. 

36. The gentle lady, the deity of the boats is well known 
as Kurukolla. She has dark complexion and features like Tamala 
tree. She wears dark-coloured bodice. 

39. She is surrounded by other deities of boats, all on a 
par with herself. Her hands are placed on a jewel-set oar. She 
is perpetually in a state of intoxication. 

40. Seated in her jewel-studded boat, O sage, she moves 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 35.41-50 1265 

about all round. The depth of water in the lake is mentioned as 
before. 

41. Within the enclosure of ego and seven Yojanas away 
from it is the SUryabimbamah&S&la ( the great chamber of the 
solar disc). It is four Yojanas in height. 

42-43. The space in the middle of that chamber is filled 
with Kuruvindakas ( the fragrant grass called cuperus rotundas). 
Formerly, the rising Aruna (charioteer of the sun) was greater 
than the sun (in refulgence) . The great goddess Lalita stays* 
(?) there where the early morning sunlight spreads. The sun 
performed a great penance and secured that lustre. 

44. The groups of planets, the constellations and stars — 
all these performed penance here and attained the power of 
illuminating the worlds. 

45. Martanda Bhairava is present there, O sage, in twelve 
different forms. He is accompanied by Saktis of fiery refulgence 
numbering crores. 

46. He is Mah&prakdiaxUpa (having the form of great 
radiance). His eyes are pink due to inebriation. He is eagerly 
engaged in perpetual sports among the groves of Kankola (piper 
cubeb) trees, O suppressor of the pride of the Vindhya moun- 
tain. He is wholly absorbed in it. 

47. His great Sakti is Mahaprakasa by name. Cak§u$mati 
is another Sakti. The deity Chaya 1 is remembered as another 

( Sakti) . 

48. Thus he is surrounded by three beloved Saktis. He 
continuously repeats the Mantras of Lalita Maheiani mentally. 

49-50a. He illuminates the sense organs of her devotees 
and makes them refulgent. He exterminates the dense darkness 
within and without. There in the regioA of Bdldtapodgdra (where 
the early morning rays of the sun spread) Martanda Bhairava 
shines. 


*N. docs not mention Lalita. It simply states : “O sage, there is always 
the spreading of the early morning light.'* 

1. It is strange that Saihjft&, the legitimate wife of the sun-god, is not 
mentioned but her shadow (ChAyd) whom she left with her husband and 
escaped (till the Sun-god's lustre was modified) is mentioned as * beloved 
Sakti' of the Sun-god. For Saxhjfifi and Chay& vide VP.1II. also PE p.182. 



1266 


Brakm&nda Pur&na 


50b-51. Within the great enclosure of solar disc and 
seven Yojanas away from it, is the chamber of Lunar disc. It is 
four Yojanas in height. It is endowed with Gofiuras , doorways, 
panels and bolts or before. 

52*54. The entire space within it is called Candrik&dv&ra 
(the doorway of Moonlight) . It was here in Candrik&dv&ra that 
the Moon-god performed a severe penance and attained his 
splendour and was bom of the eye of Atri. Here he stays with 
the name Soman&tha. He has pure form and features. He 
shines as the destroyer of darkness in all the three worlds. 
He enables the world to function properly. 

55. He drinks the nectar of moonlight in gobletfuls. 
He is surrounded by the Saktis of twentyseven constellations. 

56. Lord Sail stays there itself in Candrikadvara 
always in his full form. He has his own form and features and 
is devoid of black spot. 

57. The moon spends his time there in Japas, meditations, 
eulogies and hundreds of worships of Lalita, along with Alvin! 
and others (i.e. constellation Saktis) 

58. There are thousands of other Saktis named Taras. 
They stay near him. That chamber is filled with them. 

59. Within the chamber of Moon’s disc and seven 
Yojanas away from it, is the chamber named Srrigara (toilette.) 
It is four Yojanas in height. 

60. It is made of Kaustubha jewels in the form of dressing 
chambers. 

In its centre the entire space is called Mah&brfig&ra Parikha 
( moat of great amorous sentiment ) . 

61. Within the encircling Parikha (moat) filled with 
Srngararasa ( the essence of the sentiment of Love) there are 
Srhgara Saktis. They sparkle in their diverse kinds of jewels 
and ornaments. 

62. Haughty with intoxication, they move about in 
thousand boats. They always worship and serve the flower- 
weaponed lord (Kama) who is also intoxicated and who is 
seated in his boat. 

63. Subject to the control and commands of Lalita he 
enchants all the worlds, entire universe by means of his 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 35. 64.7 1 1 267 

arrows beginning with Sammohana (that which fascinates and 
deludes ) . 

64. Those who are enchanted by his power go to 
the region of Mahapadmatavi in order to honour and worship 
(Lalita ). They take up and assure pure guise and garments. 
They are full of devotion to Lalita. With great concentration 
in their minds they proceed towards the region of Padmafavi 
(Park of lotus flowers ) . 

65. But neither Suras nor human beings nor the 
celestial Siddhas become competent to go there. But Brahma, 
Visnu and Maheia, who are naturally pure in their minds go 
to the region of Mahapadmatavi at her bidding. 

66-67. Men of worldly inclination, those who are blind 
with passion, those who indulge in wishful thinking and too 
much of fanciful imagination, men excessively excited, those 
who are dusty and dirty due to doubtful and indecisive knowl- 
edge, men who are deeply immersed in passionate attachments 
— all these are not competent or clever enough to cross the moat 
of Mahdirfigdraparikhd which causes delusion even to the mature 
people. 

68-69. The oflicer incharge of Mah&SrngdraparikhA is 
Smara (God of Love) who enchants even the three worlds. 
Therefore, no one becomes powerful enough to go to Maha- 
padmatavi after going beyond all his (army)* that causes 

fascination and delusion even to the great. 

70. Then, within the chamber of Srngara and seven 
Yojanas away from it, is the great abode of Cakrar&ja named 
Cintdmanigrha ( the abode of Philosopher’s stone ) . 

71. The entire ground in its £entre is embellished with 
jewels and precious stones. It is called Mahapadmatavi. 1 It 
bestows all good fortune, exalted grandeur and great felicity. 


*N. reads Saitvam for Sarvam in our text. 

1. V.71 and onwards are devoted to the description of Mahapadmi- 
tavi proper. Here every thing is set in a magnified form. Thus the vessels for 
Arghya in the eastern portion of that chamber are Yojanas in dimension. 
The following gods have maintained the Arghya vessel along with their 
Kalis or &aktis to serve. The Fire-god (vv.79-83), with his ten Kalas, the 
Sun-god with his 12 Kalis (w.84-87), the moon -god with his 16 Kalis, 





Brahma# ja PurO#a 


72. There are Gopuras in the chambers (beginning with) 
•Sfngara and ending with Mahakala, O sage. The arrangement 
of Gopuras , in all the four directions is like this. 

73. It is mentioned that in all the quarters, there are 
altogether a hundred Gopuras , O sage. The chambers are 
splendid and it is mentioned that they are twenty five in 
number. 


74. I shall describe the region of Padmatavi which 
extends to one Yojana and which is the root of all the cham- 
bers, O sage, listen attentively*. 

75. An intervening space of six Yojanas is entirely paved 
and beautified with Ratnas (jewels and gems ) . All round the 
place there are Sthalapadmas (Dry land-lotuses) of huge stalks. 

76. The stalks are one Yojana in length covered with 
soft thorns. The length of the leaves is equal to the height of 
ten palm trees. 

77. The filaments of the lotuses have a length equal to 
the height of five T&las ( Palm trees) . The pericarps are reputed 
to be as high as ten palms. 

78. There are many crores and crores of lotuses here. 
They are very tender and in perpetual bloom. They have 
very agreeable fresh fragrance and wide petals. 

79-80. O Pot-born sage, in the eastern portion of the 
Mahapadmafavi chamber is the base of the Arghya vessel (vessel 
for materials of worship to venerable persons) . It is fiery by 
nature and a Kro£a high. It is circular in shape extending to a 
Yojana. It is endowed with ten Kalas, O Pot-born sage. 

81-83. All round that base there are Saktis with blazing 
bodies. The chief among them is Dhumrarcis. They are the 
* ten Kalas of Vibh&vasu (Fire-god). They have radiant youth- 
ful splendour. They are adorned with different kinds of orna- 
ments. They are gracefully lethargic due to love. They stay all 


(w. 88-93), Brahmi (v. 94) and VUqu (v.95), Rudra (v.96), I i vara 
(vv. 97-99), SaAkara (v.99) with their respective Kalis. 

The description is continued in the next chapter. 

*N.B. : The idea seems to be this : AU the chambers are connected 
with Padm&tavi, the intervals of their joints being one Yojana each. 



Lalitd-m&h&imya 35. 84*93 




round the fire-god in close embrace, the fire-god of great glory 
who constitutes the base ( of the Arghya vessel ) . The following 
are mentioned as the ten Kalas of Vahni ( the fire-god ) who 
stays in the form of the base, viz. : Dhumrarcis, U$na, JvalinI, 
Visphulingini, Su£rib, Surupa, Kapil&, Havyav&ha and 
Kavyavaha. 

84. The sun-god assumes the form of a vessel and 
occupies that base, the sun-god whose rise is well reputed as the 
destroyer of darkness of the three worlds. 

85. That vessel constituted by the sun is one and a half 
Yojanas in height and its bottom is a square of length and 
breadth extending to a Yojana each. It is excessively 
refulgent and radiant. 

86. There are twelve Kalds of extremely sparkling rays 
with their bodies in contact with that vessel all round like 
dolls. 

87. They are : — TapinI, Tapini, Dhumra, Marlci, 
JvalinI, Ruci, Su$umna, Bhogada, Vi£va, Bodhini, Dh&rigI and 
Ksama. 

88-9 1 . The Arghya intended for the worship of Lalita is 
kept in that vessel. It is the cause of great bliss. It is the most 
excellent Amrta. It contains the extract and essence of all 
medicinal herbs. It has an extremely agreeable fragrance. It 
is rendered sweet smelling continuously by never fading blue 
and white lotuses of very exquisite scent. It is heartily cool 
and free from impurities. Its desirable, gentle ripples, hundreds 
in number, add to its grandeur and splendour It has sparkling 
appearance with pleasing sounds arising from the moving ripples. 
It is said to be nectarine Arghya constituted by the Kalas of the 
Moon. There are many tiny boats mdde of jewels and gems. The 
splendid Kalas of the Moon, in their fresh youthful bloom 
occupy those boats and sport about. 

92-93. The following are the Kal&s, (digits) of the 
Moon-god: — Amrt&, Manad&, Pu?na, Tusfi, Pus#, Rati, 
Dhrti, &a£ini, Candrika, K&nti, Jyotsn&, Srih, Priti, Angada, 
Purna and Purg&mpta. These are the Kalas of the Moon god. 
They are in full bloom of fresh youth. 

Their faces are always beaming with laughter. 



1270 


Brahm&nfa Pur&na 


94. The following Kalas of Brahma play there viz. : 
Pu?ti, Rddhi, Sthiti, Medh&, Kanti, Laksmi, Dyuti, Dhrti, 
Jara 1 and Siddhi. 

95. Hari's Kalas aie as follows, Sthiti (Jar<t inN.) , PalinI, 
S&nti, Ifvari, Tati (Rati, in N.), Kamika, Varada, Hladini, 
Prlti and Dlrgha. 

96. The following Kal&s of Rudra are also stationed 
there : Tiksna, Raudri, Bhaya, Nidra, Tandra, Ksut, Krodhini, 
Trapa (Kriya in N) . Utkari and Mrtyu. 

97-99. The Kalas of the lord Isvara are mentioned as 
four in number with the colours yellow (bright), white, pink 
and (pale) white. They are l£vara’s Kal&s. Sankara’s Kalas are 
following sixteen, O suppressor of the Vindhya mountain : 
Nivrtti, Pratistha, Vidya, Santi, Indira, Dipika, Recika, 
Mocika, Par&, Suksma, Suksmamrta, Jfianamrta, Vyadhini, 
Suksmakala, VyapinI and Vyomarupika. These Saktis sport 
about there. 

100. Thousands of Vidyas seat themselves in Rudra’s 
boats and in the form of Saktis and play about here and 
there. 

101. They have been employed by Paramesthin to 
cleanse and purify the Arghya . After drinking that nectarine 
Arghya , the Saktis are always elated. 

102-103. The Saktis staying in Mahapadmatavi and 
Mahacakra always drink this Arghya when they are fresh and 
rendered fragrant. They fill thousands of gem-set pots and 
crores of golden pots with that great nectarine Arghya 
and distribute it among others. 

104. The Saktis attending upon those who stay in the 
abodes of Cintamani are proud and intoxicated. They offer 
this Arghya to Anima and other Saktis. 

1 05. Thus the preparation and other arrangements of 
Arghya in the eastern portion of the chamber Mah&padm&favi 
have been mentioned. Other things also in this matter will be 
mentioned afterwards. 

1. S third in N. The list of god Brahm&’s Kal&s in N. is as follows : 
Sr?ti, Buddhi, Smfti, Medha, K&nti, Lak$mi, Dyuti* Sthir&, Sthiti and 
Siddhi. 31-101. 



Lalitd-mdhatmya 36. 1-11 


1271 


CHAPTER THIRTYSIX 


The Inner Chamber of Cintdmani 1 


Hayagriva Said : — 

1 . (Defective Text) To the South-east of Chinta- 
manl mansion is Kundam&naka. It is a Yojana long, wide and 
high (with moat a Yojana broad around.) * 

2. At the bidding of Lalita, a sacred Cidvahni (fire of Cit 
i.e. knowledge and consciousness) blazes there. It is honoured 
and adored by hundreds of nectarine currents. It is the cause 
of the greatest prosperity. 

3. Without fuel, the fire of consciousness blazes with 
great flames. It is kindled by means of Sudhd (Nectar). It 
has the lustre of tender shoots of Kankoll — (a plant with 
aromatic berries.) 

4. There the Hotri (female priest) is the great goddess 
and the great Hotr (male priest) is Kame£vara. Both of them, 
the permanent Hotrs , protect the entire Universe. 

5 . Lalita functions without anyone superior to herself 
and without depending on anyone else. Urged by Lalita and 
Sankara, Kama functions. 

6-1 la. To the South-West of the prominent mansion of 
Cintamani, in the lotus-grove, stands the excellent chariot 
Cakraraja. It is very high. It has nine steps. It is set and beauti- 
fied by all kinds of gems and jewels. Its length and breadth are 


♦If the reading Khdtaka (N) for C&taka be accepted. 

1. VV.1-32 of this chapter state the position or distribution of places to 
various deities in Lalita's paraphernalia. The'following are their location : 

( 1 ) South-East — cid-vahni : Fed with nectar. 

The Priestess and the Priest — Lalita and her consort (w.1-15) 

(2) South-west in the Lotus-grove— chariot Cakrardja (w.6-10) 

(3) North-west of the mansion — Gtya Cakra-ratha . 

(4) North-East — Kirl-Cakra of Dapda-nithi (w.11-13) 

(5) Palaces of Vi$jju, Ganapati etc. are detailed in w. 14-32. 

The break-up of Topics and their consistent inclusion under specific 
chapters is not properly followed in this edition. Hence the distribution of 
the places of residence and their eakras are half-done here and the same 
topic continues in chapter 37. 



Brahm9$4a Purttya 


1272 

four Yojanas each and its height is ten Yojanas. As we go up, its 
area becomes gradually reduced. The pole to which the horses 
are yoked is very thick and sparkling. The four Vedas are its 
great wheels. The four aims in life Virtue ( Dharma ) , Wealth 
(Art ha), Love ( Kdma ), and Liberation ( Mok$a ) are its great 
horses. It is adorned with chowries ( in the form of serving 
(functioning) Tattvas (Principles). It is endowed with all 
characteristic features mentioned before. It is rendered splendid 
by the pearl-studded umbrella. In the course of the great battle 
with Bhan<Jasura, it had displayed its adventurous exploits. 
Thus the excellent chariot stands there sanctified by Sridevi’s 
seat. 

1 lb- 13. To the north-west of the mansion of Cintamani, 

■ 7 

in the lotus-grove itself at the border, is parked the leading 
chariot of Mantrinf, namely Geyacakra. 

To the north-east of the mansion of Cintamani, in the 
lotus-grove itself, stands the great chariot Kiricakra, the 
favourite chariot of Darujanatha. It should be known that like 
deities presiding over different parts of the body, these three 
chariots are on an equal footing in the whole of the sacred 
places of the series of Sripuras. 

14. There is an ever-blazing sacred fire-pit in the 
South-East. If penance is performed here, it is as efficacious 
as the penance with the G&yatri Mantra. It bestows freedom 
from fear. 

15-16. Behind that are the sun (named) Ghrni, the 
temple of Omkara, the deity Turiyagayatri (Fourth Gayatri) 
and Cak?u$mati, O Sage — 

Then the king of Gandharvas, Pari sad rudra (Rudra 
of the Assembly) and goddess Tarambika are stationed behind. 

1 7. Lord Hari, expressible in the great Mantra of the 
three names, has resorted to the South-Eastern part of the leading 
mansion of Cintamani. 

1 8. Mahagagapati resorts to his abode to the North of 
it. Still further north is Siva who is expressed by the Pafie&kfari - 
mantra (Mantra of five syllables viz. Sivdya nama ft). 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 36. 19-31 


1273 


19. Mrtyufijayeia who is expressed by the Mantra 
of three syllables ( Tryambaka)^ Sarasvati who is called (by the 
name) Dharana, reside to the north of his abode. 

20. The mansion of Matrka whose body is constituted 
by the letters beginning with the letter ‘A* and ending with 
the letter i K$A* is to the north of her, O suppressor of 
Vindhya mountain. 

21. To the north is Sampadefl as well as K&lasahkar?ani. 
(Thereafter) is &rimaha$ambhunatha, the cause of the 
manifestation of the goddess. 

22. The following deities have their mansions built 
consecutively to the North viz. Sri, Paramba (the great 
Mother goddess), Vi£adajyotsna (of clear moonlight) and 
Nirmala-Vigraha (of a body devoid of impurities) . 

23. The following four deities have their mansions 
successively to the north viz. — Bala, Annapurn&, Hayaru<Jh& 
and Sripaduka. 

24. From the ground which is to the north-west of the 
majestic Gin tamani mansion in the great park of lotuses itself, 
there are other deities who have taken up their abodes. 

25-27. Unmat tabhaira vi, Svapnavarahika, Tiraskarani- 
kamba, then another deity and then the fifth one all these 
deities have taken up their abodes as before. They are endowed 
with great prosperity. 

These two excellent deities viz. the great goddess Sripurti 
and Srimah&paduka have also taken up their abodes as before. 

All these Vidy&s (lores) explained by Lord Sankara in 
the treatise, $a tf&mn&yas&gara, do stay in the region of Mahapad- 
mafavi. 

28. In this manner, thpre are great mansions of 
SriraSmimala. They are made of jewels and gems. O ascetic, 
they have flags fluttering very much high above. The chambers 
are huge and lofty with stair-cases. 

29. In the eastern gate of the Palatial Cint&mani 
mansion, O quaffer of the ocean, on the right hand side is the 
great abode of Mantrinath&. 

30-31. On the left hand side is the abode of Danda- 
n&tha, made of gems and jewels. It is to the east of the place 

1. The mantra of three syllables : Orh jQth Safi 



1274 


Brahmdntfa Purina 


of Arghya that the abodes of Brahma, Visnu and Mahela are 
situated. They all illuminate the entire region of quarters 
by the rays of gems and jewels. All these deities are full of 
devotion to Lalita. They perform Japas solely of Lalita. They 
worship Sr! Devi thus. 

32. The place of Arghya and the preparation of Arghya 
materials mentioned before are, it is remembered, the same in 
all the entrances beginning with the Southern one. 

33. Now I shall describe in detail the abode of Cintamani. 
Listen, O great sage. It is situated in the centre of Sripattana 
and it extends to two Yojanas. 

34-37. Its wall made of the philosopher’s stones extends 
to a Kroia (two miles). The projected coverings above are also 
made of Cintamani slabs. They are very tall in the form of 
peaks in different places. The walls of the mansion are four 
Yojanas in height. Its higher storeys and floors extend to twenty 
Yojanas (?) It becomes narrower as it rises up. It has three 
large crowns with which it appears very radiant. These crowns, 
O sage, are forms of Icchd ( will ) , Kriyd ( action) and Jiidna (know- 
ledge) . They are always brilliantly refulgent and are solely 
made of Cintamani stones. 

38. Everything in the mansion of Cintamani is remem- 
bered as evolved out of Cintamani stones. It has four doorways 
each half a Krosa in width. 

39-1-0. The width of the panels is a quarter Kro$a, O 
Sage. Within the mansion of Cintamani in every doorway, the 
same (measurement) is mentioned. The form of Lalita Devi is 
concealed (?) .* It appears like the ocean of redness of Lalita ’s 
complexion which has the lustre of a thousand midday suns 
but cool like the Moon. O great sage, it extends frequently 
in the form of a current. 

41. The Eastern doorway is glorified as being constituted 
by the PUwdmndya (one of the Sacred Treatises) . The Southern 
doorway is characterised by Dak$indmndya scripture. 


•For pikitd in this text N. 32.42 reads PiwJitdh. It means : “The oceans 
of redness (of the complexion) of goddess Lalit& were (as if solidified and) 
enmassed there. 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 36. 42-48 


1275 


42. The Western doorway is characterised by Pafcimd- 
mndya. The northern doorway is characterised by Uttar&mndya 
scripture. 

43. Within the royal abode there are sparkling gemset 
lamps with their handle fixed on the walls. They have the 
splendour of ten million suns. They are fixed in various places 
all round, brightening the whole of the interior of the 
Mansion. 

44. In the splendid central area of the mansion of Cinta- 
mani in a part of the altar is the great and lofty Hindu Cakra 
(Circular spot) . 

45. The space in between the lofty wall of the mansion 
of Cintamani and Birdu is after leaving off a KroSa occupied 
by the wall cited to be three Kro£as ( in width) . 

46. In that section (extending to) three Krosas are their 
own rays of (Siddhis like) Animd etc. If we reckon the entire 
length of the three KroSas in Hastas (Cubits) it is said to be 
consisting of twentyfour thousand Hastas . 

47. From Bindu to the PifheSa, there are fourteen different 
(sections) . In the portion thus differentiated, the number of 
Hastas is being mentioned by me. 

48. The interior of the mansion of Cintamani, 1 O Sage, 
is twenty Hastas above the level of the ground of the lotus grove. 
The Animd and other ( Siddhis ) abide there. 


1 . In vv. 48 to 96 the places of different deities according to their 
importance are fixed and their residences at a higher altitude accor- 
dingly. The deities within a particular Antara form a group — a cakra with a 
presiding deity ( cakripi ) and a protecting deity — generally a Mudra. The 
cakra is given a designation. The ladder-like hierarchical positions of all deities 
are not completed here. Some cakras follow in the next chapter : 

Name of Cakra Presiding Deity Mdlini, Protectress — Sarva-mah&fikuSd 

Sarvajfia 10 Yoginis like SarvajflS, 

(w.81-96) 

Name of Cakra Presiding Deity Srf-Cakripi, Protectress — • Sarvonmddana 
Sarvasiddhiprada Mudrd , Antara of Yoginis like Saroasiddhipradd 

(w.86-90 

Antara of Protectress— Mudrd Sarva- Vaiyd 

Samksobhini 14 Saklis under Samkfobhipi 

(w.79-85) 



Brahm&nfa Purdna 


1276 

49. The extent of (the plot of the abodes of Aitimd etc. is 
four Nalvas. Four hundred Kifkus make one Naha, By the word 
Ki$ku it is a Hasta (cubit) that is mentioned. 

50-54. In the space within are made the abodes of 
(i Siddhis beginning with the East. They are Animd, Mahimd , 
Laghimd , Garimd , Ititva , VaSitva, Prdk&mya and Mukti (Libera- 
tion) , Icchd, Prdpti and Sarvakdmd — there are excellent Siddhis. 
(Or the Siddhis called the acquisition of whatever is desired 
and of all desirable things are excellent ones.) There are 
many Siddhis including eight Siddhis mentioned below 
and many others honoured by Yogins viz. — Rasasiddhi , 
Mok$asiddhi , Balasiddhi , Khadgasiddhi , Artjanasiddhi , which is 
Pddukdsiddhi , Vdksiddhl , Lokasiddhi and Dehasiddht thereafter. 

All these serve Parame£vari within that space. There are 
crores of Siddhis, O Sage, in that space between Animd etc. 

55. They are full of fresh youthful bloom. Their lotus-like 
faces beam with smiles (for ever). Their hands (palms) are like 
radiant Cint&mani gems. They are always sixteen years in age. 
They have noble and highly exalted nature. They play about 
in their excitement due to inebriation. 

56-57. Above the plot (of abodes) of Animd etc. is 
the plot of abodes of (Divine Mothers like) Brdhmi etc. It is 
very beautiful. Its level is twenty Hastas above the previous 

continued from the previous page 
A cakra 

Sarva- Presiding Deity Stmdari, Protectress — Mudrd Akarfapikd 

SaihkfobhaQa 8 Powerful Saktis like KusumS 

(w. 74-78) 

A cakra under Presiding Deity Saro&Mptirikd, Protectress — Mudrd Drdvfoikd 
Sarv&ftpQrik& 

(v.73) 

A cakra under Presiding deity Tripureil, Protectress— Sashkfobhfat 
Tripuri (v. 65) 

Abodes of M&q-devatis like BhQml etc. 

(w.50.59) 


Abodes of Siddhis 20 Hastas above the level of the 

Ground of the Lotus-grove 


(w.48-55) 



Lalitd-m&hdtmya 36. 58-68 1277 

level. Its extent is four Nainas. There are stair-cases in all the 
four quarters. Listen to the Devis stationed there. 

58. They are eight : Brahmi, Mahe£vari, Kaum&ri, 
Vaiggavi, Mahendri, Varahi, Ca.muii<J& and Mahalak?mi. 
These have built their abodes here. 

59. They are armed with different kinds of weapons. 
They have different Saktis as their retinue. Beginning with the 
East, they have got their abodes built in a circle. 

60-63. Then above it and on its exterior, O Pot-born 
Sage, the space is said to be Mudrdntaram. It is twently Hastas 
above the level of the previous plot. Its extent is four Nalvas. 
The following Mudrds have their abodes made there. They 
are ten* : — Sathk$obha , Dr&vana , Akarja, Valya , Unm&da , 
Mahdftku&a , Khecari, Bija , Toni and Trikhantfa. These 
Mudrds are established in the quarters beginning with the East. 
They are extremely beautiful in their features. They are restless 
in their fresh bloom of youth. With their agreeable refulgence 
they fill the interior of the above. Thus, O tiger among sages, 
they serve Lalita Paramesvari. 

64. These three Antaras constitute Cakra (Wheel) 
that fascinates the three worlds. Those who are Saktis among 
these have been recounted with their names expressed. 

65. The presiding deity of these is Tripura the leading 
deity of Cakra. The protectress deity of that Cakra is the 
Mudrd of the nature of Samk$obhana (Agitation) . 

66. Above the Antara of the Mudrds is mentioned the 
Antara of the Nityd-Kalds. It is twenty Hastas above the level of 
the previous Antara. Its extent is four Naloas. The stair-case and 
steps are one above the other. 

67-68. In that Nityd Kaldntara , the deities beginning with 
KdmdkarfaQikd have made their abodes all round. They are of 
the nature of sixteen Kalds (digits) of the Moon. With their 
cool exudations of nectar, they propitiate the quarters all round. 
Listen attenively to their names from me, O Pot-born Sage. 


+ Although the Mudris are female deities, they are translated here as if 
of a masculine gender implying ‘the capacity to do the particular job like 
sarhkfobha ‘Agitation* etc. done by that Mudr& viz. Sathkfobhitf, though 
noted here as Saihkfobha • 



1 278 


Brahmdntfa Purdna 


69-73a. The Nitya Kamakar?anika, Buddhyakar§anika, 
Nitya Ras&karsa$ika, Kala Gandhakar§anika, Nitya Citta- 
kar$anika, Kala Dhaii)&karsanik&, Nitya Sm!'ty&karsanik&, 
Kala Namakarsanika, Nitya Bljakar$anika, Kali Arthakarsa- 
niki, Am; takarsanl and Kala Sarirakar$anl — These are Gupta 
(invisible) Yoginls. TripuresI the ruler of Tripura is CakrinI, 
is also called Sai vasapurika who is the presiding deity of the 
Cakra. The protectress in this Gakra is the Mudra named 

Dravinika. 

• • 

73b-76. The plot of abodes above the Antara of the 
Nityakalas is exquisitely beautiful. It is twenty Haslas above the 
level of the previous Antara . It extends to four Nalvas . It is 
called Sarvasamkfobkana. It has staircase as before. There are 
eight very powerful Saktis with their eyes reddened due to 
inebriation. They are haughty on account of their fresh youth- 
fulness. They serve Parame$vari. 

The eight Saktis are — Kusuma, Mekhala, Madana, 
Madanatura, Rekha, Vegini, Ankusa and Malini. 

77-78. They have crores of attendant Saktis beginning 
with Ananga Sakti. This Cakra is called Sarvasamkfobhana . The 
presiding deity thereof should be known as one with the name 
Sundari. She is remembered as more concealed ( Guptatard ). 
The protectress of that Cakra is remembered as the Mudrd 
Akarfamkd . 

79. Twenty Hastas above the level of the Antara of 
Anafigaiakti , O Pot-born Sage, is the Antara of Sarfikfobhini and 
others. It extends to four Nalvas. It is the bestower of all good 
fortune and felicity. 

80. Fourteen proud Saktis, chief of whom is Sarvasarfikf - 
1 obhiniy live there. Listen to their names from me. 

81-85. They are : — Sarvasarfikf obhini, Sarvavidrdvini, 
Sarvdkarfanty Sarvdhlddanl y Sarvasammohini f Sarvastambhava , 
Sarvajrmbhinikd , Sarvavaiamkari , Sarvarahjand , Sarvonmddani , 

Sarv&rthasddhikd, Sarvasampattipurini , Sarvamantramayi and 
Sarvadvandvakfayarfikari. These are (collectively known as) 
Sampraddydkhyds residing in the city of Gakrini. The Mudras 
called Sarvavafyds are considered the protectresses in that Cakra . 
There are crores of Saktis there proud of being their servants. 



Lalitd-mdhdlmya 36. 86-96 


1279 


86-90. Twenty Hastas above the level of the Antara of 
Sarkk$nbhini and others, O pot-born sage, is the mansion of 
Sarvasiddhipradd and others. It extends to four Nalvas and is 
called Vi fly a. (?) [ Dhifnya in N. 32-94]. 

The deities are — Sarvasiddhipradd , Sarva-sampat-pradd , 

Goddess Sarvapriyarhkari , Sarvamafigalakdrini , goddess Sarvakdma - 
pradd , Sarvaduhkhavimocani , Sarvamr tyupraSamini , Sarvavighnanivd - 
rmf Goddess Sarvdngasundari and Sarvasaubhdgyaddyini . These 
goddesses are raised upwards from amongst the Kalds. They are 
remembered by the names Yoginis. 

Sri should be known as Cakrini (Presiding deity of the 
Cakra ). The Cakra is conducive to the achievement of all objects. 
The Sarvonmddana Mudras are the protectresses of the Cakra . 

91-96. Twenty Hastas above the level of the Antara of 
Sarvasiddhi and others, O Pot-born Sage, is the Antara of 
Sarvajnd and others. It extends to four Nalvas. The Cakra is 
divine and big; it is remembered as Sarvarakfdkara (Protective 
of everyone). 

Sarvajnd and others are recounted (below). They are 
Sarvajnd , Sarvaiaktiy Sarvaiivaryapraddyini, the goddess Sarva - 
judnamayiy SarvavyddhivindHni y sarvadhdra-svarupd Sarvapdpahari , 
the goddess Sarvdnandamayl, Sarvarak?kd-svar itpini and Sarvepsita - 
pradd. 

These leading Yoginis are devoid of arrogance. Malini 
is mentioned as the presiding deity of the Cakra and the Mudra 
is Sarvamahanku£a. 

Thus a few Cakras have been described in the mansion of 
Cintamani upto the Antara of Sarvajnd and others. Listen to the 
others also, O Sage. * 





Brahmdnda Purdna 


CHAPTER THTOTYSEVEN 

Description of other inner Apartments in the Royal Chamber 1 
Hayagrioa said : — 

1-2. Twenty Hastas above the level of the Antara of 
Sarvajfta and others is the Antara of VaSinI and others. It extends 
to four ffalvas. The stair-case and apartments should be known 
as before. That Cakra is well known by the name Sarvarogahara 
(Destroyer of all diseases) . 

3-4. Va£ini and other goddesses are stationed there in 
due order from the East etc. The first one is the goddess Va£ini. 

* 

1 . This chapter describes the remaining Anlaras of other deities and 
concludes with the poetic description of Lalita and her consort. 

The following are the Antaras in the upward direction. The last one in 
the last chapter is taken as the base : 

Bed or Couch of trf-Lalitd — 36 Tattvas as stair 

Bindu-Pitha 

(vv .45-67) 

Assumes forms of 50 Ptfhas 

Antara of AAga-devis (denoting parts of Lalit&'s body. 

( v v.40-44 ) 

The Abode of §oda& : Nity& ( Lalitk ) : Bindu Cakra. 

Bindu Cakra The NityS-devis dwell with 1 5 Isvaras 

Antara of 15 Nity& deities (Laliti is the 16th) 

(w.31b-39) 

Antara of 4 N&th&s — Influence of N&th Cult and Gurudom . 

(w.25-30) 

Antara of Samayeils 

Antara of K&meii, Vajrej!, Bhagam&la, SridevI ( Laliti) the 
4th Devi (w.19-24) 

Antara of weapons ( in person) of Kame £vari 

(w.lOb-18) 

N. of the Cakritf (Presiding deity) : Siddiu I, Protectress : Kheeart (v. 9); 

cakra: Sarvaiivarya (Ya etc.) (v. 6); Kaulini ($a and the rest) (7); 

serva- Pradh&raQa (v.5) (Ta- Varga) , Jay ini (5) {Pa-Varga) 
roga-hara (v.4) K&meivari (Goddess of speech accompanied by Ka-varga 

Medinl (v. 4) {Ca- Varga) ; VimaU (v.5) ( 'fa-oar ga) 

Antara of Valini and other goddesses like Kkmeivarl etc. 

(w.l-lOa) 

The Antara of sarvajfii as in chapter 36 



Lalitd-m&h&tmya 37 .5-15 


1281 

The goddess of speech named Kame$varl comes thereafter. 
She is accompanied by Kavarga (Gutturals). Modini the 
goddess of speech accompanied by Cavarga ( Palatals) , is the 
third one. 

5. Then comes the goddess of speech named Vimala who 
is embellished by the Ta-varga (cerebrals ) . The fifth one is the 
goddess of speech called Pradharajia accompanied by Ta-varga 
(Dentals). 

6-7. The sixth one is Jayini invigorated by Pa^varga 
(Labials). In the square of letters beginning with ' YA * is the 
goddess of speech called Sarvai£varya etc. Kaulini accompani- 
by the six letters beginning with *SA' is considered as the 
eighth one. All these goddesses are embellished with pearl 
ornaments. They are engaged in performing Japas. 

8. They are considered to be fondled by the spontaneous 
flow of prose and poetry. They stay there, O Pot-born Sage, 
delighting and amusing Sri-Devi by means of sweet lyrics and 
dramas pleasing to the ears. 

9- 10a. O scorcher of Vatapi, these deities have been 
famous by their secret names. The presiding deity of this Cakra 
is glorified by the name Siddha. 

Khecari is considered as the protectress of this Cakra . 

1 Ob-11. O Subduer of the Vindhya mountain, Twenty 
Hastas above the level of the Antara of Va&ni is the Cakra 
called Astra. Its extent is four Naloas. 

12-14. The five arrows of Kamesvara are the five 
goddesses of Btya (arrow) . The two goads of the primodialman 
and woman are very brilliant. Then there are two bows, O 
enemy of the Vindhya mountain. These nine weapons are con- 
ceived in the nine lotuses. Including the pair of nooses of 
brilliant lustre there are four weapons, O Pot-born Sage. Four 
belonging to Kame$varl and four to Sri Maheia ( i.e. arrow, 
bow, goad and noose ) . Put together there are eight blazing and 
shining weapons. 

15. These divine weapons are extremely gratified by the 
blood of the wicked Danavas that was drunk by them in the 
course of the great battle with the Asura Bhanda. Those divine 
weapons are active and alert now. 



1282 


Brahm&nia Pur Una 


16. Among other weapons there are supplementary 
weapons of these weapons. Their number runs into crores. 

17-18. Vajra-Sakti (Thunderbolt — Adamantine lance), 
Sataghni (a rocket-like missile capable of killing hundreds,* 
Bhufuntfi (A missile perhaps a fire-arm), Musala (a mace) 
Krpdna (a sword), PattiS a (A sharp-edged spear), Mudgara 
(An iron club) , Bhindipdla ( A sling for throwing stone) . 
Thousands and thousands of weapons like these serve with 
intoxicated excitement the great Saktis of the eight weapons. 

19-21. Twenty Hastas above the level of the Antara of 
weapons, O scorcher of Vatapi, is the abode of the three 
SamayeSIs. It is considered to extend to four Nalvas. There the 
three deities beginning with Karnesi and a fourth one also 
reside. She alone is the Goddess Lalita, the mother of the entire 
universe. Listen to the names of the three goddesses. Karnesi 
is the first. (The other two are) VajresI and Bhagamala. 
Thousands of Saktis serve them. 

22. All those different kinds of deities remembered as 
pertaining to all the systems of philosophy serve the great 
goddesses there beginning wish Karnesi. 

23-25a. Sri Devi is the deity that completes the number 
when these deities as well as the deities named Nityas, Cakrinis 
and the Yoginis are reckoned. Mother Lalita who reclines on 
the lap of Lord Kamesvara is the fourth one in the group of 
Karnesi and others. She is the sixteenth among Nityas. 
She is glorified as the ninth one among Yoginis and Cakra 
Devis. 

25b-28. O slayer of Ilvala, twenty Hastas above the 
' level of the Antarala of the Samayesis is the abode called 
Nathantara. It extends to four Nalvas. It is embellished with 
stair-case as before. The great Devis (Goddesses) there are 

A 

Nathas who have founded and popularised the Yogasastra. 
They are the instructors in Mantras for everyone. They are 
verily the great oceans of all lores. 


•Or a cylindrical piece of wood studded with iron pikes — MW, p. 1049a. 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 37. 29-39 


1283 


There are four Voganathas for the protection of the 
worlds. They had been created by lord Kamesa. Listen to their 
names. 

29-3 la. Mitrau (? two Mitras) , §o<jisa (?) and Carya.* 
For the sake of protection, O Pot-born Sage, many persons of 
the nature of Pddukds (Sandals) have been created by them. 
Those are persons with divine knowledge of the lores, groups of 
human beings, groups of Siddhas, Suratapasas (Celestial asce- 
tics) etc. They have attained Siddhis of Sdlokya (having the 
same world as that of the god-head), SdrUpya (having the same 
form) and Sayujya. (having complete identity). They are 
great teachers. Many serve the Gurus ( preceptors) . 

31b-35a. Twenty Hastas above the Antara of Nathas 

is the excellent abode called Nitydntara . It extends to four 
Nalvas . There are fifteen Nityas (eternal goddesses). They 

are Nitya Kamesvarl, Nitya Bhagamalini, Nityaklinna, Bher- 

un<Ja, VahnivasinI, Mahavajresvarl, Dutl.Tvarita, Kulasundarl, 

Nitya, Nilapataka, Vijaya, Sarvamangala, Jvalamalini and 

Citra. 

35b-39. All these Nitya deities have the form of 
Goddess. They are extremely powerful and valorous. They 
have assumed the status of the lunar days beginning with Pra- 
thamd (the first of those days). They pervade the three worlds. 
They have the forms of the three unitsofTime (Past, Present 
and Future). They are adepts in Kdlagrasa (consuming even 
Kata i.e. Time or god of Death). At the bidding of Devi 
(Goddess Lalita) they stay assuming the forms of hundred 
(years of) longevity of every one beginning with Brahma who 
lives for a very long time. 

They are always active and devoid of agony. They 
are born of the excellent body of Sri. For the prospe- 
rity of all the worlds, they serve Lalita who is in the form of 
Cit. Fifteen brilliant Is vara have undergone the status of being 
their abodes. It is considered that the abode of So^asI (i-e. 
Lalita considered as the sixteenth one in the group of Nityas), 
is the Binducaku i of special creation. 

*N. gives the names as follows : 

Mitresa Uddisa, Sa?thisa and Cary&. 



Brahm&rifa Purdna 


1284 


40-42. Then, O Pot-born Sage, twenty Hastas above the 
Antara of the Nityh deities is the Antara of the Aftga Devls 
(Deities of various limbs). It is said that it extends upto four 
Nalvas . The staircase and apartment are as before. O Sage, 
the Saktis beginning with Hrdaya Dev! (Deity of the heart) 
are in it. They are mentioned to be six in number viz. Hrddeui 
S irodevi (Deity of the head), Sikh&devi (Deity of the tuft), 
Varmadeoi (Deity of the armour), Dr$ (idevi (Deity of the 
vision) and Sastradevi (Deity of the weapons ) . 

43. They are very close to Lalita, the consort of 
§rikame£vara. All their limbs are full with the freshness of 
youthful bloom and beauty. They are very attentive. They hold 
weapons. 

44. Haughtily they move about both within the Bindu - 
pi (ha and all round too. They carry out the order of Lalita. 
They are the close companions and confidants of the VaJls. 

45-47. Then, ten Hastas above the Antara of the deities 
of the limbs, is the great Pi (ha (Pedestal seat) named Bindu 
Ndda . It extends to eight Nalvas. It resembles the rising sun. 
This should be known as Bindupi(ha, Mahdpifha f £ripi(ha y Vidyd - 
pi (ha and Anandapifha. It assumes the forms of fifty Pi (has . 

48-52. There the excellent couch of Srilalita Devi is 
placed. It is pervaded by five Brahmans (i.e. Brahma, Vi$nu, 
Mahesana, Is vara and the Supreme Brahman). It is very great 
and is the cause of the three worlds. It is mentioned that the 
four Pddas (legs) of that couch are ten Hastas high and three 
Hastas in girth. They are in the forms of Brahma, Vi$nu, 
Mahe&na and Hvara. They have attained the status of Saktis 
too on account of perpetual meditation on Sri. 

One of the legs of the couch resembles the Japakusuma 
(The China Rose) . It should be known that it is of the nature 
of Brahma. It is in the South East.* The fourth leg of the couch 


•Here there is an omission of the description of two more legs in the 
South-East and North-West and of the forms of Visiju and Mahesvara. 

The omitted lines as ascertained from N are as follows : 

The second leg of the couch has the splendour of a big sapphire. It 
should be known as of the nature of Vifgu and it is in the South-West 
direction. 

The third leg of the couch is as spotless as pure crystal. It should be 
understood to be representative of (lit. of the nature of ) Rudra and it is in 
the North-West direction. 



Lalitd-mdh&tmya 37. 53-64 1285 

has the splendour of Kariiik&ra (the pericarp of a lotus). It 
should be known that it is of the nature of I £ vara as it is in 
the North-East. 

53. All these have weapons with them. They are adorned 
with all ornaments. Above and below, they have the forms of 
pillars. They have personal forms in the middle. 

54. They keep their eyes closed in meditation on Sri. 
Their limbs are steady without any movement due to medita- 
tion on Sri. Above them, the plank of the couch is Sad&£iva. 

55. It has the splendour of a full-blown pomegranate 
flower. The plank is six Nalvas long and four Nalvas broad. It 
is continuously sparkling and refulgent. 

56-57. Beginning from the Antara of the A ftgadevis and 
ending with the plank of the couch, O Sage, stair-cases in the 
form of the Tattvas shine. They are made of Cintamani stones. 
They are thirtysix in number. 1 We shall mention the stairs in 
the ascending order. 

58-60. They are : — Earth, water, fire, wind, ether, 
smell, taste, colour, touch, sound, sexual organ, anus, 
feet, hands, organ of speech, nose, tongue, skin, eyes, ears, 
ego, intellect, mind, prakrti , Purus a y niyati (fate, destiny), 
Kdla (Time), Rdga (attachment) Kald (Arts), Vidyd (lore), 
Maya, the pure Vidy&, I £ vara, Sakti, Sada£iva£akti and Siva. 

61. Thus the rows of stairs numbering thirtysix have 
been recounted. The entire row of stairs is on the eastern 
side of the couch. 

62-63. Then over the couch is the bed made of the 
down and feathers of swan. Its height is only one Hasta. It 
extends to four Nalvas . There are brilliant pillows, both for the 
feet as well as for the head. It is further rendered splendid by 
sixtyfour golden vases and water-jars with pink colour. 

64. The sheet spread over it was made of saffron colour- 
ed fabric, pure and soft with the lustre of ruby. 


1 . Both Saivas and Sftktas believe in 36 Tattvas but of these the first 
12 are imaginary as S.N. Dasgupta puts it, while the remaining 24 are the 
mni» as in S&ihkhyas. The list of Tattvas is given in 58-60. For tabular 
systematic presentation vide Sir John Woodroffe’s The Garland of Letters 2nd 
Edt. pp.252-253. 



1286 


Brahmdntfa ' Pur&na 


65-67. It is on this that the primordial Lord Siva, 
KameSvara stays (permanently). He sits facing the East. He is 
endowed with sympathy and mercy. He is very handsome in 
his romantically loveable dress and guise. He is perpetually 
sixteen years old. He has the lustre of the disc of the rising 
sun. He has three eyes and four hands. He is adorned with 
necklaces, bracelets, coronets, bangles and other ornaments. An 
exquisite smile spreads entirely over his cheeks like the moon- 
light. Thus the lord sits there alert and watchful. 

68. (Description of Goddess Lali la) K 

Goddess Lalita is seated on his lap. She is reddish saffron 

in colour like the mid-day sun. She is always sixteen years old. 
She is proud of her fresh youthfulness. 

69. She has the lustre of unpolished ruby stone. The 
splendour of her nails is like that of sandal paste and lotus. She 
has redness in the soles of her feet regardless of application 
of red lac. 

70-71. Anklets and other ornaments on her feet produce a 
charming tinkling sound. The sound of her bangles is very 
charming. Her shanks (leg from ankle to knee) subdued the 
pride of excellent quiver of arrows of the god of Love. Her 
thighs shine like the trunk and the forearms of an elephant or 
like the stem of the plantain tree in complexion. Her hips and 
loins are beautified by a red silk cloth very thin and smooth 
to touch. She is refulgent with well developed hips and 
buttocks. 

72. The knot of her garment comes upto the middle of 
her thighs. She shines with a girdle set with gems and jewels. 
Her navel is depressed like a great whirl-pool and the three 
wrinkled folds spreading over it appear like a river of light 
and gleam. 

73. She has worn a number of pearl necklaces swinging 
to and fro over her breasts. Her slender waist appears to be 
breaking due to the weight of her plump breasts. 


1. The description of goddess Laliti is certainly romantic. But the 
woids ‘Bindu Pi(ha’, The Screen of Mahamay& > (e.g. v.93) scarcely veil its 
spiritual content despite poetic fancy. 



Lalitd-mah&tmya 37. 74-85 


1287 


74-76. Her hands are as soft as the glossy petals of 
Sirisa flower (Acacia Sirissa). All her four hands were embellish- 
ed with a number of armlets, bracelets and bangles. The 
fingers have rings round them. Her beautiful neck which is 
close by her husband is very beautiful. Her face is circular and 
lustrous like a mirror with beautiful chin with gentle curves. 
Her lips are red in colour. The row of her sparkling teeth is 
neatly set. They shine like the (thirtytwo) lores. They have 
the refulgence of buds of Kunda flowers (Jasmine). She 
appears to be radiating (lit. displaying) moon-light through her 
teeth. 

77. She shines with many ornaments set with pearls. Her 
eyes are as large and long as the inner petal of the Ketaka 
flower. 

78. In her forehead as charming as the crescent moon 
the forelocks have been neatly arranged. Her ears are adorned 
with different kinds of ornaments and ear-rings of ruby. 

79. The betel-leaf preparation that she chews is always 
rendered fragrant by camphor and musk. Her face is as sweet 
and charming as the moon in the autumn. 

80. Her beautiful coronet is well set with the fine 

pieces of Cintamani stone. She shines with her third eye in 
the forehead sparkling like a gemset Tilaka mark. 

81. Her tresses are dark and thick-set like the dense 

darkness. She shines with the mark of saffron applied in the 
middle of her head like a line. 

82. The crescent moon shines like a diadem. Her eyes 
move to and fro due to inebriation. She possesses all romantic 
dress and make-up exciting love. She is embellished with all 
ornaments. 

83. She is the mother of the entire world. She increases 
bliss perpetually. She is the source of origin of Brahma, Visnu, 
Girina, Iia and Sada£iva. 

84. She delights exeryone with the stream of sympathy 

exuding from benign side-glance. Thus that holy goddess 

Lalitambika, the destroyer of sin, appears replendent. 

85. People know that the benefit of worship of other 
deities is the opportunity to worship her. Hence, the benefit 
of her worship is the opportunity to worship her. 



1288 


Brahm&yja Purdya 


86. How can I then describe Goddess Lalita adequately. 
Even in the course of a thousand crores of years, a fraction of 
it cannot be described. 

87. She who is tc be described is in the form which is 
beyond (the ken of) speech. How can (my) words have access 
to her? (She is that ultimate reality) from where words recede 
without reaching her along with the mind. 

88. Of what avail is profuse utterance ? Listen to this 
fact. This is not being spoken by me out of partiality, love or 
delusion. 

89-92. O ascetic, let the branches of the Kalpa tree be 
pens. Let the seven oceans be ink-pots. Let the Earth 
which extends to fifty crores of Yojanas become the paper. 
Let the time for writing be more than a Pardrdha ( 1 followed 
by 17 zeroes) of years. Let the people in the world write 
each of them having a crore of hands. O Pot-born Sage even 
if all the speakers be as eloquent as Brhaspati, it is impossible 
to adequately describe a thousandth part of the lustre of a 
toe-nail of the lotus-like foot of Slide vi. Or (it is enough to say ) 
that all activities will be in vain in the matter of eulogising 
her. 

93. All round the Bindupifha a handsome and symmetri- 
cal curtain hangs down. It is the MahdmSydjaoanikd (screen of 
Mahamaya) and is dark in colour. 

94-95. The numerous ornaments and embellishments 
obtaining there are the rarest ones. Desirous of describing them 
my power of speech is struck down (stifled ) at the throat itself 
due to shame. Above the goddess about forty Hastas from the 
ground level, a chandelier and canopy are kept suspended. 
They are rare in all the three worlds. 

96. She alone knows everything regarding the good 
features obtaining there. Her exalted grandeur and felicity is 
far beyond even our comprehension. By whom can it be 
described ? 

97. Thus for the sake of slaying Bhanda, the great 
Daitya, Lalitimbika has manifested herself from the Cidanala . 
(the fire of knowledge and consciousness). She has entirely 
burned all Danavas. 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 37.98 — 38.3 


1289 


98. Presiding over Srinagara which had been built by 
celestial artisans and craftsman and which has sixteen holy 
establishments, she protects the Universe continuously. 

99. There are other Sripuras also in this manner. In the 
arrangement there is no difference among them. The differ- 
ence is only in the name. 

100. Those who recount the story of Sripura beginning 
with the garden of many trees attain the greatest goal. 

101. The men too who listen to it, who ask about it, who 
search for it and who hold the book thereof attain the greatest 
goal. 

102. Those devotees who get a replica of Sripura, made 
through craftsmen, with the different parts of the same duly 
represented and build a huge temple of Sridevi, do attain the 
greatest goal. 


CHAPTER THIRTYEIGHT 

Procedure of Practising the Royal mantra 
Agastya said : 

1. The great narrative such as the great manifestation 
(of the goddess), the slaying of Bhandasura and the stay at 
Srinagara of the goddess have been heard. 

2. Now, I wish to hear the means of practising her 
Mantra and the characteristics of her Mantras. Please recount 
all this. 

Hayagriva said : — 

3. The verbal product or the word is greater than all 
other objects. Of all words and utterances, O sage, the 
collection of the Vedic hymns is the greatest. 1 


1. W. 3-10 give a gradation of Mantras in importance and decide that 
Lop&mudr& Mantra i.e. the mantra beginning with Ha and the K&mar&ja 
Mantra that is the mantra beginning with Ka — are the most efficacious. Shri- 



1290 


Brahm&nda Purdna 


4. Of all the hymns in the Vedas, the Vedic Mantras 
(spells and secret formulae) are greater than the rest. The 
Mantras pertaining to Visnu are greater than all other 
Vedic Mantras. 

5. The Mantras pertaining to Durga are greater than 
those (Visnu Mantras) , O sage in regard to vigour and efficacy. 
O sage, the Mantras pertaining to Ganapati are greater than 
those (of Durga). 

6. The Mantras of the Sun-god are greater than the 
previous ones and those of Siva are still greater than these. 
The Mantras of LaksmI are more powerful than those (of Siva) 
and the Mantras of Sarasvatiare more excellent than those (of 
Laksm! ) . 


Alawani the local Tantrika whom I used to consult on such matters, told me 
that fi Ha Sa Ka La Hrim , Ha Sa Ka Ha La Hrim , Sa Ka La Hrim ' is Lopa- 
mudra mantra. And ft Ka F I La Hrim , Ha Sa Ka Ha La Hrim , Sa Ka La 
Hrim" is the K&ii or Kamaraja Mantra. When I inquired about the meaning 
of these disconnected syllables, he refused to disclose to an uninitiated person 
like me. But I found Laksmidhara saying the same about Kddi mantra in his 
commentary on Saundarya Lahari verse 32, the verse may be translated as 
follows : 

“The letters (or Mantras) indicated by 

I Siva ( Ka), Sakti (E) Kama and Ksiti (La). 

II by Ravi (Ha), Candra ( Sa) , Sinara (JTa) Haihsa (Ha), and Sakra 

(La). 

III by Para (Sa), Mara (Ka) , Hari (La) when joined at the end of 
each Pida with the particle Hrim , O divine mother. They form the limbs of 
certain aspects of Thine*'. 

So the Mantra is deduced as follows : 

I Ka E I La Hrirhf 

II Ha Sa Ka Ha La Hrim/ 

III Sa Ka La Hriml 

This mantra of 15 syllables is the keystone of this cult. This is the 
Kddi Vidyd. Kaivalydsrama interprets this very verse as Hddi Vidyd as follows : 

I Ha Sa Ka La Hrim 

II Ha SaKa Ha La Hrim 

III Sa Ka La Hrim. 

The only difference between Kddi and Hddi mantras is only of three sylla- 
bles viz. Ka, E, /. These are known as 'Male seeds' and these are used for 
the I P&da in Hddi Vidyd (Saundarya Lahari Verse 33). 

The symbols used in vv.12-14 to express the “seeds" of the Mantra are 
different than those given in Saundarya Lahari. 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 38.7-16 


1291 


7. The Mantras of Girija (Parvatl) are greater than 
those (of Sarasvati). The Mantras of various kinds handed 
down by sacred tradition (Arnica) are greater than those (of 

Parvatl) . Of all traditional Mantras, the Varaha Manus 
(Mantras pertaining to goddess Varahi) are more excellent 
than the above. 

8. The excellent Mantras of Sy&ma (RajaSyamala or 
Matanginl) are more splendid than the rest. O slayer of llvala. 
The Mantras of Lalita of ten different types are greater than 
they. 

9. Among (those ten) , O suppressor of the Vindhya 
Mountain, two leading Mantras are more efficacious. They 
are well known as Lop&mudra and Kamaraja. 

10. That (Mantra) which begins with 'Ha' is Lopa- 
mudra. That which begins with ‘ Ka ' is Kamaraja. The great 
ISvara, Kamaraja is expressed by Hamsa and other words. 

1 1 . Goddess Sri Lalitambika is expressed by the words 
Sinara etc. The difference between H&di (beginning with Ha 
and K&di (beginning with Ka) Mantras is caused by three 
Varnas (letters) . Of these two, the Kamaraja Mantra is the 
1>es tower of Siddhis on those who are devout. 

12-14. The leading Mantra of Hamsa etc. (i.e. of 
MaheSvara) is expressed by three sets of five (j Pancatrika) namely 
[I set] by Siva, Sakti,Kama, Ksiti (Earth) and Maya. [II set] 
by Hamsa (Mahesvara or swan), Bhrgu, Kama, Safimauli 
(Moon-crested Siva) and Sakra. [Ill set] by Bhuvane^a ( the 
lord of the universe), Candra (the Moon), God of love, Ksiti 
and Hrllekha (line of the heart). The leading Mantra of Kama 
etc. (i.e. Sri Lalitambika), having Smara as the source of 

origin is expressed in the mouth ofSri. 

15. Those highly fortunate ones who worship* (with) 
Paficatrika Maha-Vidya (the Mantra expressed by three sets 
of five i.e. 15 letters) which describes Lalitamba will have 

siddhi everywhere. 

16. After receiving from the great good preceptor the 
Mantra sanctified and consecrated by Tripafican^a (Three X five 


•v.l. Japanti (N) ‘perform the Japa of* 



1292 


Brahmdntfa Purdna 


letters « Fifteen letters) , the learned devotee should practise 
it very well in the manner expressed below. 1 

17-18. I shall mention it in due order. Osage, listen 
attentively. The devotee should get up early in the morning 
and think about of having in his head a brilliant lotus having 
the splendour of a thousand petals, fine filaments and good 
pericarp. He should meditate upon his noble and exalted 
preceptor who is kindly disposed and merciful, as stationed 
in that lotus. 

19-20. Thereafter, he should go out and carry out routine 
cleaning activities. After returning, he should anoint his body 
with scented oil. He should take bath in hot and pure water 
and apply unguents and perfumes over his body. 

Water is sacred and pure by nature. What then when it 
gets into contact with fire and is heated. 

Hence, one should take bath in hot water. If that is not 
available, any available water may be used. 

21. He should then wear clean clothes red or brown in 
colour. He should then perform Acamana ( ceremonious sipping 
of water). With great purity (in mind and body) the learned 
devotee should mentally meditate upon the great Ambika 
(Mo ther-godd ess ) . 

22. He should put sacred marks on his forehead in the 
manner to which he is accustomed, viz. Orddhva Pundra (in the 
shape of capital U ) , Paficavardhana ( in the shape of the leaf 
of castor oil plant) Tripundra (three parallel and horizontal 
lines) or Agastyapatra— shaped (like the leaf of Agasti Grandi- 
flora). Pure in soul (mind) he should perform Sandhyd Vandana 
in a secluded spot. 

23. He should offer Arghya (water-oblation) along with 
Darbha grass, raw rice, flower and sandal paste in a vessel of 
the shape of the leaf of an A£vattha ( Ficus Regligiosa) tree. 

24-25. Since she too is a deity deserving Argkyas , he 
should offer three Arghyas to Lalita. In accordance with his 
ability he should perform (for propitiating her) the Tarpana 
rites to goddess Lalit& with the Mula-Mantra at the beginning, 
and later to the Devas, the sages and the manes in accordance 

1. W. 17-32 describe the procedure of S&dhand for getting ‘^mastery” 
over the Lalid mantra. 



Lalitd-m&h&tmya 38.26-33 


1293 


with the injunctions. He should then worship the Sun god as 
well as the Goddess as stationed in the disc of the Sun. 

26a. Silently and pure in heart, he should enter the 
sacrificial chamber. 

26b-28a. He should apply over his body excellent 
camphor, musk, sandal paste and other ungunents. He should 
adorn his limbs with ornaments. He should dress himself beauti- 
fully and lovably. He should embellish his hair with fragrant 
flower garlands. In the matter of ornaments (there are no 
strict rules to be followed ) he can have ornaments in accor- 
dance with his wealth or he can have ornaments in Satikalpa 
( imagination) . 

28b. He should then perform the Ny&sa rites (Assign- 
ment of the parts of the bodies to various deities) mentioned 
subsequently in the section on worship. He should perform 
rites in due order. He should be seated on a smooth and soft 
seat. He should then meditate on the great £rinagara. 

29-31. He should meditate on the divine &rinagara 
beginning with the park of different kinds of trees and ending 
with Lalita. He should be pure within and without. Unembar- 
rassed and undismayed, he should perform worship along 
the path (procedure) mentioned in the Pdjd Khanka (the 
Section on worship). He should take up rosary rendered 
fragrant by means of camphor and musk. Seated facing the 
north or the east, he should perform Japa of the goddess 
seated on the throne. If the devotee performs the Japa three 
million six hundred thousand times, the Vidya would reveal 
herself into him gladly* 

32. Hotna should be oneitenth (of Japa), i. e. 
three hundred and sixty thousand. The Tarpana shall be one- 
tenth (of the Homo) i.e., thirty six thousand. The feeding of 
the Brahmanas is expressed as one-tenth of the same, i.e. three 
thousand six hundred. 

33. After having achieved the mastery over the Mantra, 
the devotee should continue Japa for other purposes desired 
by him. 1 By performing Japas, a hundred thousand times, 

1. VV. 33-62 described the “fruits'* or powers one achieves after 
performing specific quantity of Japa of mantra. 



1294 


Brahmd#<ta Purdna 


he can control all human beings. 

34. By performing Japas two hundred thousand 
times, he can fascinate and win over women. By performing 
Japas three hundred thousand times, he can control all beings 
and win them over. 

35. When the completed Japas come to four hundred 
thousand times, the daughters of serpents become excited 
in love for him. When the Japas reach five hundred thousand 
times, the women of Patala become excited for him. 

36. The entire group of beautiful women of th cBhQloka 
(Earth) shall be won over by performing Japa six hundred 
thousand times. The fawn-eyed beauties of the Svargaloka 
(Heaven) become excited by seven hundred thousand (Japa). 

37. All those who are born of the race of Devas can be 
won over and subdued by means of eight hundred thousand 
Japas. One shall win over all gods by means of nine hundred 
thousand Japas* 

38. One can win over and subdue Brahma, Visnu and 
Mahesvara by means of one million one hundred thousand 
Japas. One can achieve the eight Siddhis (Super-human 
powers) by means of one million two hundred thousand Japas. 

39. It was through this Mantra that Indra, achieved 
Indrahood, Visnu his Visnuhood, Siva his status as Siva. 

40. Indu(the Moon-god) achieved his moonhood by 
means of this, Bhanu (The Sun-god) achieved his solar status 
through this. Understand that the different refulgent mystic 
powers of all Devas have been acquired by this prominent 
Mantra. 

, 41. The person who performs Japa of this Mantra 

shall be rid of all sins. He shall have the most handsome 
features in all the three worlds. He can enchant and fascinate 
even the god of love. 

42. He shall be endowed with all Siddhis. He shall 


*Yenkt. ed. deletes the line : 
dafa-takfepa Sakr&didikp&l&n vaiam&nayetj 

He can control the guardians of quarters like Indra by one million 

Japa. 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 38.43-54 


1295 


be omniscient and shall be worshipped by all. Merely by his 
sight he can fill the inner (heart ?) of all others. 

43. He shall be equal to Vacaspati (Preceptor of 
Devas) in eloquent speech. In glory and magnificence, he shall 
be equal to the wind-god. In steadiness and firmness, he will 
be like the Himalaya mountain. 

44. In loftiness he will be equal to Meru. In depth and 
majesty he shall be like a great ocean. Within a trice he can 
cause excitement in villages, rural settlements, cities, etc. by his 
personality. 

45-46. By slightly bending his eye-brows, he can stun the 
evil-minded ones, cause yawning them, dispel them, enchant 
them and even kill them. He will possess the punitive 
powers got by black magic. 

47. His speech is sweet like the current of Ganga. 
O Pot-born sage, there is nothing unknown to him among 
the scriptures. 

48. He is competent to expound and refute all systems 
of Philosophy. He knows the entire range of Tattvas. He 
becomes omniscient. 

49. His heart is soft and tender with kindness towards 
all creatures. The three worlds are incapable of being an object 
of his fiery rage. 

50-53. At his sight, fawn-eyed ladies become excited and 
experience the following — the knot of their garments round the 
waist becomes untied or loosened ; their girdles slip down. On 
account of cluster of drops of sweet, they appear to be adorned 
with pearls; on account of excessive passion their eyes rove; 
rows and rows of their bangles set with jewels slip off from 
their lotus-like hands ; they become motionless due to the stiff- 
ness of their thighs; due to bashfulness their faces are bent down; 
their pudenda muliebra exude liquid secretions, hairs on the 
body standing on their ends serve the purpose of ornaments. 
By the activities of the god of love, they appear to have 
completely changed forms. 

54. Clusters of flames of excessive passion make them 
blaze as it were. They appear to be burned by showers of fiery 
arrows of the god of love. 





Brahmdoia PurUna 


55. They are afflicted by anxiety; they seem to suffer on 
account of the fever of love; they are dried up due to 
bashfulness. 

56-57. They have forsaken (the sense of dignity of 
their) family caste, (ethical) conduct of life, shyness, retinue, 
fear of the world, fear of kinsmen and fear from the other 
world too, and they earnestly request him in their heart of 
hearts. Those beautiful ladies rush a him wherever he stays 
in the forest, in the city, or in the temple or in other place. 

58. Just as a drop of water when blown about, 
moves up and down on a lotus leaf, so also the minds of 
beautiful ladies become restless on seeing him. 

59. * (Partially defective text) . He is humble and modest. 
Driving away the rude and impolite persons is the greatest 
achievement. Rows and rows of all lores serve him. 

60. When TrilokI Lai ana ( the three worlds in the form of a 
woman) shines with the discs of the moon and sun as 
her two breasts, begging to love him at his very sight, then, O 
ascetic, what need be said about other women more wretched 
and pitiable ? 

61. There is the holy proclamation of his fame and glory 
in all cities, streets, quadrangles and in parks perpetually. 
It acts as the heavenly tree (kalpaka tree yielding everything 
that we wish for) . 

62. At his very sight the signs of sinners perish. 
Only his good qualities are proclaimed everywhere by leading 
poets. 

63. Those who meditate on the great goddess ( Mah&devi ) 
by means of different letters, weapons, different vehicles and 
ornaments attain the respective super-human powers (Siddhis) 


•The Venkafesvara Press Text reads : 

Vinitdnauanitdndm oidrdvapamahdphalam / 

The text is defective — oinitd should be emended as Vanitd . 

N. (Nirnaya Sagar) text reads : 

Vanitdnavanitdndm oidrduapa-mahdnalaml 
‘He is the veritable huge fire who melts the butter in the form of ladies. 
(He is so exceedingly seductive) . 



LaliUt-m&h&tmya 38.64-68 


1297 


relevent to them (i.e. the letters used in Japa. The form of 
goddess meditated upon etc.). 

64. The first part of the Mantra has the fine white 
lustre of the jasmine and the Moon. That should be thought 
and pondered over at the root of Ahaicakra , (Wheel of the 
day) *. It has blazing flames. 

65. The second part of the Mantra is like the glow- 
worm. It should be observed in the Ahaicakra as one with 
shining flames till the tip of the hair (on the head)** 

66. The third part that dispels all sins should be observed 
in the follow of the two-petalled lotus placed inside the 
lotus of Bala and others. * * * 

67. For the sake of salvation, Ambika with white 
complexion and feature like the Moon-light should be meditated 
upon. 1 

In the rites for winning over and subduing others (the 
goddess should be meditated upon as having the red lustre of 
the dusk. 

68. For the acquisition of all sorts of wealth, the goddess 
with dark complexion is thought of. 

For making others silent and dumb, the blue-complexioned 
goddess is meditated upon. In the rites for making others 
benumbed, stiff and paralyzed, the yellow-complexioned goddess 
is meditated upon. 

*The text reads *ahaieakre * . It should be emended as t &-hfccakrarri t upto 
the plexus — yogic cakra — at the heart*. 

Nir^ayasagara text confirms this emendation. 

**The text is corrupt. It should be as in the Nirnayas&gara text : 
mbh&vantyo hrccakra dph&l&ntam jvalacchikhah. % 

'It should be observed at the yogic plexus in the heart (lustrous) like 
a fire blazing with flames'. 

*+*The Venkafesvara Press text reads: 

b&l&dipadn uutha 

The Nirnayas&gara text gives a better reading : 

LaUta-pattastha 

'That which is at the fore-head' 

The yogic plexus is of two petals. 

1. VV. 67-71 Various Dhyinas of Lalit& for different objectives or 

fruits. 





Brahm&ntfa Purina 


69. For the acquisition of power of composing poems, 
Lalitambika with white complexion, free from impurities and 
sparkling like crystal, should be meditated upon. 

For the acquisition of wealth, Lalitambika with golden 
complexion is contemplated. 

70. Those who meditate upon her as a great mass of splen- 
dour refulgent like a ruby-lamp from the Mulidharacakra to the 
Brakmarandhra ( the aperture on the crown of the head) shall 
achieve all siddhis (Super-natural powers) . 

71. Thus, O Pot-born sage, those who observe and 
meditate upon SrldevI by means of various types of Dhyanas 
obtain great glory and wealth. This is attained only by good 
people, never by bad people. 

72. Only, they, by whom severe penance has been 
practised, do perform meditation. He who meditates has no 
subsequent birth. He who is not Sankara himself, never gains 
Mantra Vidy& of Lalita Parame£vari). 

73. If this Mantra is possessed by anyone in a family, 
the members of his family shall be gratified and liberated. 
There is no doubt about it. 

74. This is decided in all the scriptures, that this lore 
about the goddess is concealed and hidden. Her Mantra is the 
greatest of all secrets. 

The Vedas and the scriptures eulogise Lalitesvari. 

75. She alone is the supreme Atman. She alone is the 
greatest destination. She alone is the greatest holy place of 
pilgrimage. She alone is the great fruit and result. 

76. Sages sing about her who gives five types of 
Siddhis. Sanaka and others meditate on her. The excellent 
gods beginning with Brahma, worship her. 

77-79. She is not attained by any of the following types 
of people — persons of despicable conduct, accused ones, men of 
crooked minds, who are against Devas, those who indulge 
in futile arguments, those whose intellect wanders in vain, the 
spoiled ones, those who have no good habits, those who live 
upon the leavings of others, those who have been dropped 
down from their families, cruel ones, those who hate systems of 
philosophy and cults of religion, persons of sinful practice, those 
who censure good conduct and custom, haughty fellows, those 



1299 


Lalitd-m&h&tmya 38.80—39.1 

who speak arrogantly, hypocrites and those with excessive pride. 
To people like these, men as well as Devas, she is inaccessible. 

80. It has already been said, O Pot-born sage, that she is 
worthy of being worshipped by Devas. 

It is for the purpose of slaying Bhandasura that she 
manifested herself from Cidagni (the fire of knowledge and 
consciousness) . 

81. The form of Maha-Tripurasundari is of extensive 
splendour. LaliteSvari was eulogised by Brahma as Kamaksi. 

82. The goddess is designated Lalita (the coaxed deity) 
as she was caressed by the mind of god Siva while he was 
meditating upon Lalitambika with utmost devotion. 

83. Whatever exploits she did, have been recounted. In 
another Section I shall mention the injunctions regarding the 
mode of worship as mentioned in scriptures. I shall mention 
her miraculous elegance and charm. 


CHAPTER THIRTYNINE 

Glory of the Goddess Kdmakfi 1 


Agastya said : — 

1 . “We honour and meditate about that great splendour 
which is without beginning and end, is unmanifest (yet) the 
prime cause of all manifested things and which is the sole essence 
of Bliss and knowledge. 

1. The goddess Kam&ksi glorified here* is different from the famous 
Kamaksi near Gauhati in Assam. That goddess represents the generative 
organ of Sati, Siva's first wife, which fell down as Siva was carrying her 
dead body. Kamaksi in this chapter is the famous goddess of K&fici near 
Madras. As Kd (goddess Sarasvati) and M& (goddess Lakgmi) were 
produced from her eyes (Akft) she is called Kamaksi (vv. 67-74). She is 
Tripura Sundari the Primordial Goddess who manifested there at Kahci 
due to the Penance of god Brahma was installed on Kdmakoffha. 

The whole chapter is in a way a Kfetra-M&h&tmya of Kafici as to how, 
why and where great god Brahm&, Vi$nu, Siva settled at Kafitf and partici- 
pated in the celebration of the marriage ceremony of Kamak$i etc. 



Brahm&ntfa Purdna 


1300 


2. O Hayagrlva of excessive intelligence, O greatest one 
conversant with Vedas and Vedantas, this highly meritorious 
and excellent narratative of Lalita has been heard by me. 

3. It has been mentioned by you that Tripura, the 
greatest deity is worthy of being worshipped by all. Her four 
arms are equipped with noose, goad, bow and arrows. 

4. Her Mantra* also has been mentioned. So also the 
Sri Cakra which has nine outer coverings and the mystic circles 
as its ornaments. (You have mentioned that) l£ani is the 
presiding deity of Sripura. 

5. In this city of Kafici which is sacred and which is an 
ornament of the entire sphere of Earth, there shines the blessed 
and illustrious deity well known by the name Kamaksi. Who is 
she? 

6. She has only two arms. Her slim creeper-like body 
shines magnificently and gracefully in every respect. Her beauty 
is something never seen before. She is the greatest deity in the 
form of great refulgence. 

Suta said : — 

7. “On being addressed thus by Agastya, the noble- 
hearted Hayagriva became delighted. In honour of that 
refulgence, he closed his eyes and meditated on that brilliance. 
After meditating upon and bowing down (to that refulgence), 
he spoke to Agastya : — ** 

Haygriva said : — 

8-14. “I shall explain to you a great secret, O husband 
of Lopamudra, listen. The first one who is subtler than the 
subtlest is the greatest Cit (consciousness) . She is the primordial 
cause. She is also called as cause of dissolution too, by means of 
her own form**, by persons who ponder about the reality of 
principles. 

Thereafter, the second deity ( called Suddha-pard) manifes- 
ted herself. She is the purest and greatest deity. She is endowed 

*N. reads Yantra and is a better reading with reference to Srl-yantra. 

* * Trqyffirokta~Soarupd 'Whose form is described in the three Vedas N. 



LalitH-m&h&tmya 39.15-22 


1301 


with two arms. By her right hand she shows the Togamudrd 
(Mystical gesture) and there is a book in her left hand. Her 
body has the lustre of snow, jasmine, moon and the pearl. 
(This deity is called Suddhapara ) . 

The third one is Parapara (greater than the greatest). 
She ( Her lustre ) is on a par with ten thousand rising Suns. 
She is bedecked in all ornaments. In her right hand she holds 
lotus. She has kept her left hand on the left thigh. A crown 
as well as the crescent moon is the ornament on her head. 

Afterwards that Tripura became manifested with four 
arms. She is “Para Aruna”. In her hands she gracefully holds 
noose, goad, sugarcane and five arrows. 

She is Lalita. She alone has manifested herself asKamak?! 
in Kafici. Sarasvati, Rama and Gauri worship that primordial 
deity alone. 

15-18. The two cities Kali and K&ftci are the two 
eyes of God Mahela. It is well known holy shrine of Vi$$u 
causing the presence of Siva too. It was at the shrine of 
Kafici that formerly, Brahma, the grandfather of all worlds 
performed an austere and difficult penance for the sake of 
having a visit of Sridevi. He was engrossed in meditation 
of the union of souls, O sage, and was performing holy rites. 
Laksmi, the deity greater than the greatest, with a lotus in her 
hand appeared before him. She was in the lotus seat and was 
accompanied by Visnu, the conqueror. 

19. She was dressed in all lovable and graceful garments 
and adorned by all ornaments. She was well-known as 
SifhhdsaneSvari (the ruling goddess of the throne). 

20. She had a wonderfully exquisite beauty. She was 
the greatest deity in the form of a great splendour. She was 
renowned as Adilaksmi (Primordial Laksmi) . She was stationed 
in the heart of everyone. 

21. They call her Tripura herself, the mother of Brahma, 
Visnu and Isa. She was famous by the name Kamak$i. On 

seeing her, he eulogised her with full devotion. 

Brahmd prayed : 

22. “Be victorious, O goddess, O mother of the Universe, 



1 302 BrahmdQia Pur tin a 

Be victorious, O Tripura-Sundari, O sister of Srinatha, be 
victorious. O Sri auspicious to all. 

23. Be victorious, O mass of glory and mercifulness. Be 
victorious, O heroine of sentiment of Love. Be victorious, O 
goddess of devotees with many Siddhis. Be victorious, O goddess 
saluted by leading Yogins. 

24. Be victorious, be victorious, O mother of the Universe, 
O goddess of eternal form. Be victorious, be victorious, O 
goddess, the bestower of happiness to all the people who praise 
and extol. Be victorious, O goddess worthy of being glorified 
by the Himalaya Mountain. Be victorious, O beautiful, consort 
of Sankara in the from ofKamesvara. 

25. Repeated obeisance to that goddess who frequently 
carries out creation, sustenance, annihilation, concealment 
and blessing of worlds simply by her volition. 

26. By means of very sharp arrows and missiles, she 
annihilates now all those sinful people who create confusion 
and chaos in the discipline of castes and stages of life. 
Obeisance, obeisance to that goddess. 

27. Obeisance obeisance to that goddess who is self- 
comprehensible and not known even to Yogins through Agamas, 
through Vedas or through other scriptural texts. 

28. Obeisance, obeisance to that goddess who is extolled 
and glorified as the supreme Brahman by the leading Sages, 
by those conversant with Principles, by the secret Amnayas 
(Sacred literature) and by the Vedantas (Upanisads). 

29. Obeisance, obeisance to that goddess who is not 
perceived by anyone though she abides in the heart itself of 
everyone, and who has the form of the subtle and perfect 
knowledge. 

30. Obeisance, obeisance to that goddess on whom 
Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Is vara and Sad&£iva meditate and in 
whom they are solely engaged. 

31. Obeisance, obeisance to that goddess who is the 
deity of imperial prosperity. Indra and others are the devotees 
of that goddess and they abide by her behest. 

32. Obeisance, obeisance to that goddess (about whom 
it is said) that the Vedas constitute her vital airs, that the five 



Lalild-m&hdtmya 39.33-43 


1303 


elements are her glances and that the entire Universe consisting 
of mobile and immobile beings is her smile. 

33. Obeisance, Obeisance to that goddess at whose 
bidding the thousand-hooded leading serpent (Sesa) supports 
the Earth, the base of all people. 

34. Obeisance, Obeisance to that goddess who is the 
embodiment of knowledge and power and at whose bidding the 
fire-god blazes, the Sun-god shines and scorches and the wind- 
god blows. 

35. Sages say that the twenty-five Tattvas and the five 
sheaths (coverings) of Maya are identical with her. Obeisance, 
Obeisance to that goddess. 

36-37. Obeisance, Obeisanee to that goddess (about 
whom it is said) that Siva, Sakti, Isvara, SadaSiva of pure 
consciousness are her different outward manifestations. Simi- 
larly, the preceptor, Mantra, deity and the fivefold vital 
airs are her diffusions. Obeisance, Obeisance to that goddess who 
shines in the form of Cit (consciousness) . 

38. She is the inner-most soul of all souls. She is Bliss, in- 
carnate. She is remembered as Srividya. Obeisance, Obeisance 
to that goddess. 

39. Obeisance, Obeisance to that goddess (about whom 
it is said that) the learned men know that all DarSanas 
(Systemes of philosophy) are her limbs. She has the forms of 
different religious observances. 

40. Obeisance, Obeisance to that goddess who shines in 
all worlds in the forms of mystic jewel, Mantra and medi- 
cine and whose form is the instruction in the Tattvas. 

41 . Obeisance, Obeisance to that goddess who shines in 
the form of different objects whethef space, time or other ordinary 
objects in the manner in which they exist. 

42. Obeisance, Obeisance to that goddess who is 
antagonistic to the Daityas (?), who habitually possesses all 
auspicious qualities and who is called Viivottirnd ( one who 
is transcendental to the Universe )*\ 

43. After eulogising Mahadevi thus, Brahma the grand 
father of all worlds bowed to her again and again and 
suddenly sought refuge in her. 



1304 


Brahmdrija Purtya 


44. On seeing Brahma bowing down then, that goddess 
became pleased. She the bestower of boons on all the worlds 
commanded him saying “Choose your boon”. 

Brahmdsaid : 

45. “There is no doubt in this that I am blessed and 
gratified by your vision due to my devotion. Yet I pray for 
something with a desire for getting a blessing unto the world. 

46. In this world which is the sphere of holy rites and 
devout services, the people are mostly deluded. Kindly be 
present here always in order to bless them”. 

47. Saying “So be it” she fulfilled that desire of Brahma. 
Thereafter, Brahma allotted to her a place of residence. 

48. After bowing down to the lotus-eyed Acyuta, the 
brother of Sridevi, he earnestly pleaded for his prepetual 
residence at Kaftci. 

49. Thereupon, Janardana said to him, “I shall do so”. 
Then the creator of the Universe who was satisfied said to 
Mahe&vari once again : — 

50-51. “Due to your love, let Siva too be present here 
itself”. Thereupon the great I Sana, KameSvara, lord of all 
lores, lord of all embodied beings, Mahadeva, the hero of 
the sentiment of love manifested himself on the right side of 
Sri Tripura. 

52. Thereupon, from the benign glance of the eye in the 
forehead of Sri Kamak?!, a certain young girl manifested 
herself. She was excessively refulgent and white in complexion. 

53-57. She possessed all the requisite dress and make-up 
of romantic life of love. She was a treasure-house (mine) of 
great beauty. Eagerly and respectfully and in the company of 
' Brahma, the lotus-eyed lord performed the marriage of the 
primordial male and female. The Devas beginning with Indra, 
the deities beginning with Vasus and Rudras, Sages beginning 
with Markandeya, Vasistha and others, the leading Yogins 
beginning with Sanaka, the celestial sages beginning with 
Narada, the living liberated souls as Vamadeva, Suka and 
others, Yak?as, Kinnaras, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Vidyadharas 
and Serpents, Maha£asta, the leader of Gartas, Durga and 
other mothers — all these deities and others seated in aerial 



Lai iUt-m&h&tmya 39.58-72 


1305 


chariots and excellent seats bowed down to ParameSvarl with 
palms joined in reverence. 

58-60. A wonderful city was mentally created by god 
Brahma in the middle of which was the splendid and beautiful 
temple of Paramelani accompanied by Vasudeva, the brother (of 
the goddess). Mahe£ vara came there. While lord MaheSvara 
married Gauri near the sacred fire, the divine Dundubhis were 
sounded and showers of Bowers fell. 

61. Who is competent enough to describe the auspicious 
celebration of marriage of the (divine) couple, the presiding 
deities of the worlds, even if he ( the describer) has a thousand 
tongues ? 

62. To the North-West of the temple of the primordial 
Sri is the extensive excellent abode of Mahe£a. It had been 
built by Parame§thin. 

63. To the South-East of the abode of Sri is the 
wonderful temple of Visnu. Thus those three deities are always 
present there. 

64. After circumambulating those great deities the 
couple, Brahma and Vi$nu reached the Sambhdvandgdra (the 
hall of Reception) . 

65. After coming there they joyously accorded welcome 
duly to the members of the assembly by reciting the Vedic 
Mantras. 

66. The primordial Adilaksmi, Sri Paramesvari, in front 
of all, glanced at Brahma with her right eye and at Hari with 
her left eye. 

67. It was at that time that goddess of speech 
named ( K&' and Kamala (Goddess of Wealth) named l M&' 
— both of them like encased masses of splendour manifested 
themselves. 

68. Both of them (Brahm& and Vi$nu) stood there bend- 
ing down their heads to Sridevata, with palms joined in rever- 
ence. They said “Be victorious, O KAmak$I O Kam&k$i” and 
bowed down to her. 

69-72. The rivers Gahga and Yamuna, came there for 
serving her in their embodied form. The three and a half 
crores of presiding deities of holy spots came there for the 
purpose of serving Tripuramba. Holding the C&maras with both 



1306 


Brahmdxiia Purdna 


hands Bharati (Goddess of speech) and Sri (Goddess of 
wealth) , fanned with them and served Sr! Devi in a befitting 
manner. On seeing the two deities Bharati and Sri born of the 
eyes of Adi$ri, the two deities with their creeper-like hands 
adorned with ornaments studded with invaluable gems and 
jewels and fitted with tinkling bells. All the assembled folk 
were particularly struck with wonder. Ever since then Kalya^i 
(goddess Tripura) got the name Kamaksi. Merely by repeat- 
ing this, Sri Devi bestows welfare. 

73-74. The three syllables Kd-Md-Kfi are the causes of 
all auspiciousness. Thereafter, the goddess of the Universe 
directed Sarasvati thus— “O deity who have mastered the 
Vedas and Ved&rigas, be present in Brahma perpetually. 

Even as Devas stood watching, goddess Sarasvati 
entrusted the Cdmaras in the hands of Ganga and entered the 
mouth of Brahm&. 

75-78. On being directed by the delighted Mahalak?mi 
(i.e. Tripura), Indira (goddess of wealth) obeyed her behest 
by means of her head and joyously went over to Visnu’s 
chest for the sake of stay worthy of her. 

With great devotion the couple Rama and Visnu bowed 
down to Tripurasundaii and requested her once again for the 
status of being the 'Protective* deity Avarana Devoid . 

Saying ( So be it* Tripurasundari granted the boon to 
both of them. Then Padm& and Acyuta obtained the status of 
protective deities. 

The charming Reflection of Mahagauri came there and 
placed Padma and Acyuta to the north of his own pi (ha 
(pedestal). He himself stood to the right (to the South). He 
.said to Mahagauri "Assume another form”.* 

79. He had the same shape and size as those of Maha- 
gauri with a shining divine body. He had a pair of feet shining 
brilliantly like the full moon with all its beauty. 

•Description of the reflection of the goddess. He (it) had all the 
characterisic features of the goddess. *It* is translated as ‘he' as the SK 
word is in the Masculine gender. 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 39.80-88 


1307 


80. The bangles and anklets went on tinkling as 
though a partridge* had been made the pedestal (?) His 
charmingly beautiful girdle set with jewels shone as brilliantly 
as lightning and tinkled sweetly. 

81. The pair of his arms shone with gem-set bangles and 
armlets. His excellent waistband was set with pearls. Lapis 
Lazuli and ruby. 

82. He shone with the waist refulgent with the three 
Volts (folds of skin on the stomach regarded as mark of beauty). 
He was adorned with a navel that appeared splendid like the 
whirlpool in the river Ganga. 

83. The breasts (in the reflection) were brilliantly 
adorned and beautified by means of sandal paste, camphor and 
saffron. The jacket worn over the breasts was exquisitely 
embellished with pearl ornaments. 

84. A good chain hung suspended from his waist just for 
the purpose of diversion. He was adorned with rings set with 
pieces of ruby. 

85. In his right hand there was a lotus resting within and 
he looked elegant, refulgent and charming thereby. A divine 
garland along with a number of ornaments shone there extend- 
ing upto the forepart of the foot. 

86. The cluster of rays from gems and jewels of 
brilliant ornaments brightened the faces of quarters. He 
was rendered splendid by means of gems round his neck fitted 
to fine heated gold. 

87. His neck had the red colour due to the rays of 
gems and jewels in the M&ftgalya SUtra (Holy thread indi- 
cating conjugal bliss ) . He was adorned with large ear-rings 
made of rubies to embellish the ears. 

88. He had lovely lips which were like tender sprouts 
and which had the beauty of the China rose and coral. He 
appeared splendid with a row of teeth having the lustre of the 
pomegranate fruit. 


• TiUirtkxta in our text. But Piftfarl-kfta “made good-coloured*' in N. is 
better. 



Brahmin 4 a Purina 


1308 


89. He had pure and tender cheeks glittering with gentle 
smiles. He was very charming in his nose-ring of matchless 
beauty and exalted splendour. 

90. He had a lifted up nose of blameless beauty with the 
sparkling splendour of the flower of sesamum indicum. His 
eyes had the sweetness and beauty of the blue lotus about to 
bloom. 

91. The lovely and graceful eyebrows shone like the 
flowery bow (of Kama) . His forehead could be compared to the 
crescent Moon. His face had the sweetness and charm of the 
full Moon. 

92 He was shining gorgeously with the sacred mark 
(on the forehead) made of musk richly endowed with agree- 
ably intense fragrance. In his lotus-like face with graceful 
forelocks it appeared as though the inebriated swarms of bees 
hovered round it. 

93-94a. The tied up braid of hair had in it garlands of 
Parijata flowers. The head was beautified by a crown abund- 
antly inlaid with gems and jewels. He was the abode of every 
aspect of beauty, the very storehouse of splendour of grace 
and charm. 

94b-96. Siva, Visnu and the great personages present 
there realized the identity of reflection as well as that of 
the goddess. In front of all the Devas who were looking up to 
her as their support, Mahe£ani who could freely do as she 
pleased, entered the reflection. On seeing her who created 
reflection and stayed within it after entering it, Brahma bowed 
down to her once again and requested thus : — 

, 97. “O Tripurasundari of great power, the perfect 

supreme spirit well known by the name Sri KamaksI, 
obeisance to you day by day. I am submitting something to 
you now. Kindly listen to it. 

98. For the prosperity of worlds and the opportunity 
for heaven-dwellers to serve you, O Sri Devi of perpetual 
bliss and felicity, the marriage of both viz. Mah&gauri and 
Mahe$a should be celebrated every year here itself. 

99. Let the foolish and confounded people of this Earth, 



Lalitd-m&hdtmya 39.100-109 


1309 

O great goddess, attain the greatest goal by seeing her and 
bowing to her devoutly”. 

100. The greatest goddess replied thereto by the 
ethereal voice ‘So be it’. She permitted all of them to 
return to their respective abodes. 

101. Remembering again and again this wonderful 
nature and activity of the goddess, they all bowed down to 
her and went from there in the manner they had come. 

102. Along with Mukunda and Siva, the delighted 
grandfather of the world i.e. Brahma installed her in the 
temple Srimandira fully equipped with the Mantras. After 
propitiating her through the Vedic Mantras, he bowed down to 
her with all the eight limbs touching the ground. 

103-109. Then by the ethereal voice the goddess 
addressed thus to Brahma : — 

“With great concentration, O Brahma of a steadfast mind 
instal Visnu and Siva in their respective abodes and serve and 
worship them there every year. Serve also the Kamagiri- 
pftha (the pedestal of Kamagiri) which has manifested itself 
here, which is accompanied by Srisa (Visnu), Mitra (the sun- 
god) , l£a (Siva) and Amba (Mother) and which is present 
in the middle of Sripura itself. It is accompanied by Laksmi 
on the left side and served by Vi§nu elsewhere (i.e. on the 
right-side), which has the form and features of Cit (conscious- 
ness) and Ananda (Bliss) , which is the presiding deity of all 
pithas and which duly held an unmanifest and invisible (phy- 
sical) body.* On an auspicious day with good constellation, 
for the prosperity of the worlds, you do worship it with 
refulgent and invincible (?) petal buds and pieces of 
diamonds and gems, O Brahma, duly and joyously. You 
should make the entire mystical diagram too.** Thus you pro- 
tect your world”. 

*N reads Sarv&dyam drddhaya yath&vidhi ‘Propitiate according to due 
procedure the invisible form which is Primordial of all.' 

+*N. shows that some lines are omitted after V.108. The translation of 
omitted lines is as follows : — “On a day with an auspicious constellation 
{Nakfatra) people will worship by meaqs of plantains and coconuts. Hence, 
for the increase in prosperity and felicity of the people .. . (Read verse 109 
in our text) . 



1310 


BrahmB$4a Purtina 


1 10. On being told thus, lord Brahma did so. He kept 
the goddess and her utterance in his heart (i.e. remembered 
them devoutly) . Then he went to his abode. 

111. Thus, O Pot-born Sage, the wonderful activity of 
Kamaksi has been factually recounted unto you. Consider her 
as Mahalak$mi herself. 

112. There is no doubt about this that worldly pleasures 
and salvation are within the reach of that person who always 
listens to this and who recites this with great purity. 

113-114. He shall become equal to Brhaspati in intel- 
lect. He shall be the lord of all learning. 

The glorious primordial lord Narayana who is kind to 
his devotees was propitiated by me formerly by means of pena- 
nce for a long time. Out of compassion he granted me, his son, 
the liberation of SdrUpya (having the same form as the lord). 
He then taught me the greatness of Mahatripurasundari. 

115. It is on account of this that I know something and 
I shall say and not otherwise. I shall mention the secret 
Mantra. Listen to it with great concentration and mental 
purity. 

116. Neither Brahm&nor Visnu nor Rudra knows this. 

• V 

These three are deluded by Maya of the Goddess. Even the 
fourth lord Igvara, Sadagiva does not know it. How can the 
ordinary deities know about it ? 

117. It is due to her blessing that Sadagiva who is 
the. immanent soul of every one and who is the embodiment of 
existence, knowledge and bliss, is able to do, not to do or to 
alter anything. 

118. Mahegvara who always considered thus — “I am 
th^t alone” but deluded by her Maya became helpless and 
assumed the form of Sava* 

119. Really it is she who alone is the cause of origin 
and dissolution of all these deities. But there is a particular 
thing, a special feature here. There is an element worthy of 
being mentioned. Listen to it. 


•Siva devoid of Sakti (symbolised by-»-in Siva) is no better than $aoa 
(a dead body). Such is the greatness and power of Sakti. 



Lali Ul-m&h&tmya 39.120 — 40.2 


1311 


120. The fourth one Iivara is the lord of the three 
(deities) beginning with Brahma. Sadaliva is the primordial 
maker of all the four. 

121. This secret has been mentioned. Her wonderful 
conduct of life has been recounted. I shall say something more. 
Listen with great attention. 


CHAPTER FORTY 

Greatness of Kdmdkfi 1 


Agastya said : 

1 . What are the different sportive and gracious activi- 
ties of Mahatripura-sundari who is installed on the pedestal 
of Kamako$(ha and who is well-renowned as Kamak§I ? 

2. That goddess Mahatripura-sundari who is Mahe£vari 
herself is well known as Srikamak$i. She is stationed in the 
terrestrial sphere. What are the activities of this goddess ? O 
most eloquent one, recount to me her divine life.’* 


1 . This chapter gives the following stories about the greatness of 
K&m&ksi. 

(i) P&rvati sportingly closes the eyes of Siva and commits the sin of 
dislocating the religious life of the world. She is made to atone for it by 
penance on the Kampi. Siva, in his loneliness— under Ek&mra tree 
performs Penance at K&fici. Due to K&m&kfi's blessings to both, they are 
united forever (w. 19-45). 

(ii) Quarrel between Brahm& and Vi?pu about Personal Superiority— 
Siva's appearance as column of fire— Brahmadeva's arrogance to Siva for which 
Bhairava plucks Brahm&’s head — Bhairava relieved of his Sin of Brahmahatyk 
through K&m&kfi’s grace (w.46-86) 

(iii) Birth of Sons to Dafaratha, King of AyodhyA (w.87-137) 

This story has no basis in Vilmiki R&miyaga; the first two stories have 
some basis in other Purigas, but here (as expected) our author changed 
them to glorify Kim&kfl 



1312 


Brahmti$4a Pur&qa 


Hayagnva said : 

3. “Although she is stationed here (on the earth) O Pot- 
born Sage, she abides in the heart of everyone. She bestows the 

fruit of acts on all embodied beings in accordance with their 
different activities. 

4. Whatever happens in the world is the result of her 
activities. One may think something, but she disposes of it 
freely in accordance with her will. 

5-7. The Saktis beginning with Tripura are her own 

incarnations. She herself was Mahalaksmi. She created three 

■ 

eggs formerly. Those eggs were the abode of the three great 
Dcvas as well as the three Saktis. From one egg were born 
Ambika and Purusottama; from another egg were born Sri 
(goddess of wealth) and Virifica (Brahma) and from the other 
the third, were born the goddess of speech and Siva. 

M.ihesvari united (in marriage) Indira ( the goddess of 
wealth) with Mukunda (Purusottama). She joined Param- 
cs'ana with Parvatiand Pitamaha with Sarasvati. 

8. She employed Brahma in the task of creating the 
worlds, Vasudeva in the task of sustaining and the three-eyed 
lord (Siva) in the task of annihilation. 

9. All these stay in Brahmaloka, Vaikuritha and Kailasa 
(respectively) always meditating on Mahalaksmi, the bestower 
of welfare. 

10. Once goddess Parvati was sporting about on the 
splendid peak of the Kailasa. She then closed the two eyes 
of Mahesa. 

1 1 . Since the Sun and the Moon were his two eyes, the 
whole of the three worlds became enveloped in darkness. It was 
devoid of light all round. 

12. Then the people in all the worlds abandoned the 
rites pertaining to the Devas and the manes. They were con- 
fused as to what they should do. They could not comprehend 
anything. 

13. On seeing it, lord Rudra spoke to P&rvatl thus : — 
“Sin has been committed by you, O gentle lady, by closing 
my eyes. 



Lalitd-m&h&tmya 40. 1 4-2 7 


1313 


14. The sages have abandoned their penances. The 
followers of the Vedic injunctions have dropped their 
Sandhya rites (Vedic prayers and rituals). O Ambika, all the 
Vedic rites have been ruined by you. 

15. Hence, for the expiation of the sin, perforin the 
difficult task of penance. Go to Kail and perforin holy rites 
and observances there for some time. 

16. Go to Kaflclpura afterwards. There you will see 
Kamakgi. Propitiate this eternal deity §iv& who destroys all 
sins. 

17. Keep the Holy basil Tulasi plant in front of you, 
perform penance on the banks of Kampa”. 

After having directed her thus, Mahadeva vanished there 

itself. 

18-19. l£ani who wished to follow the instructions of 
her lord, acted accordingly. By the penance of long duration, 
she became afflicted but her heart did not turn towards any- 
thing else. Kamaksi manifested herself in front of Siva and 
spoke these words : — 

“Dear child, O lady of good holy rites, I have become 

sufficiently pleased with your severe austerities” 

■ 

20-23. Afterwards Parvati opened her eyes and saw the 
goddess Ambika stationed in front of herself. She had the 
refulgence to ten thousand rising suns. She was bedecked in all 
types of ornaments such as crown, necklace, armlets, bangles 
and other types of jewellery. Her hands shone with noose, 
goad, sugarcane bow and the five arrows. The crescent moon 
shining on the top of her crown served as the ornament. 
It was she who engaged Brahma, » Hara, Rudra, I§a and 
Sada£iva in their positions. They call her Saguna Brahman . She 
is designated as the highest goal. She was the creator of two 
Universes. 

24-2 7a. On seeing the great imperial Divinity, she 
became highly delighted. Hairs stood on their ends all over 
her body. On account of pleasure her eyes beamed. Along with 
her friends such as Ca^dika, Mangala and others, she suddenly 
circumambulated her and fell (at her feet) with eight limbs 
(touching the ground ) . With the palms joined in reverence, 



1314 


Brakmfoiia Purina 


she bowed down once again to the goddess who was identical 
with herself. Mahatripurasundari looked at her kindly and 
lovingly and after embracing her with both of her arms, said to 
her thus : 

27b-30. “Dear one, obtain Rudra as your husband as 
desired by you mentally. For the sake of defending everything 
in the world follow my instructions. Where is the difference 
between you and me ? Undoubtedly you are I myself. What sin 
can there be in your case, O lady of great felicity ? Indeed you 
are the destroyer of sins. Leading Yogins consider you alone 
as the deity, in the form of Brahman. O dear one, this is but 
a sport, a great fascination unto the entire world”. 

As the great Empress said thus, Sarvamangala bowed 
down to her. By looking at her she attained great pleasure. 

3 1 . Even as Parvati was eulogising her, the other deity 
entered the heart of the delighted deity (Parvati) O great 
sage. 

32. She was struck with wonder and pondered over the 
incident again and again — “Is this a dream that has been seen 
by me ? Or is it a misconception and illusion?” 

33. After pondering thus she glanced all round. There- 
upon, she saw her smiling friends Jaya and Vijaya. As they 

bowed down to her she became delighted and said to them. 

34. “O dear ones, where had you been so long ? Did you 
see Kamaksi seen by me ? ” 

35. On hearing her words their eyes beamed with ecstatic 
delight. After placing the flowers intended for worship in 
front of her, they said : — 

36. “It is true that the great goddess has been seen now 
by both of us. It is neither a dream nor an illusion. She 
directly went into your heart”. 

After saying this, both of them bowed down humbly and 
sat beside her. 

37. At the root of the sole mango tree, the lord (Siva) 
who was in agony due to separation from Bhavani, control- 
led his sense-organs and meditated on Kamaksi for the sake of 
acquiring Gauri. 



Lalitd-m&h&tmya 40.38-51 


1315 


38. The great presiding deity Srividya was present there 
also. Delighted very much she kindly spoke to Siva who was 
steadily meditating on her : — 

39-41. “Stop your meditation, O destroyer of arro- 
gance of the god of Love. At my behest, accept once again the 
God of love who too abides by my directions. Stay here 
perpetually on my Pi (ha named Ekdmra , O deity of holy rites, 
by coming to my vicinity voluntarily for pleasing me. 
Do bless Gauri who resides on the banks of the river 
Kampa. Eschew two-fold distress that arising from your 
Yogic activities (i.e. penance etc. ) as well as that arising from 
her Viyoga (separation)’’. 

After saying this the great goddess Rama vanished there 
in his heart. 

42-45. Siva, the intellgent one, immediately got up after 
getting her blessing. Siva who was attended upon by all 
Devas became delighted in his mind. He boldly got up suddenly. 
He meditated upon Mahatripurasundari from whom the two- 
fold world consisting of the mobile and immobile beings 
rises up and in whom it merges. He accepted Siva who was 
adorning the river Kampa and whose mind is filled with sympa- 
thy. He accepted Siva in accordance with the (religious) 
injunctions regarding marriage alliance. He took her with him, 
rode on his bull and went to the peak of Kailasa. 

46. Listen to another thing, O Pot-born Sage of great 
intellect. O sinless one, I shall tell you the power of the primor- 
dial Laksmi. 

47-48. The three deities went to the assembly of Brahma 
and sat there. The guardians of the* quarters, all Suras, 
Yogins beginning with Sanaka, the celestial sages beginning with 
Narada, Vasistha and other ascetics — all these gathered together 
there. Both Brahma and Siva had five faces. Hence they 
could not differentiate them. 

49-51. They asked one another — “Who is Brahma? Who 
is Sankara ?” Even as they were discussing among them- 
selves, Siva vanished immediately. 

Then an argument rose between the five-faced Brahma 
and dark-coloured Vi^iju — “O ignorant one, you are born 



BrahmOftia Purdna 


1316 

from the lotus that came out of my navel. Hence, you are my 
son”. I am Brahma the maker of creation” (said Brahma). 
“There is similarity in name. You two— you and Rudra — are my 
sons since I am the creator”. 

52. Thus both of them were deluded by Maya. Between 
them appeared Mahe£vara in the form of a gr$at column of fire 
as though to demonstrate his greatness to them as Brahma. 

53-54. After realising that it was Mahe£ana. Visnu 
remained silent. But the five-faced Brahma stood there showing 
disregard to him. Over Brahma’s heads there was a wheel of 
brilliant splendour. 

In the middle of that circle the lord Siva manifested 
himself along with Uma. Brahma looked up once again and 
spoke these words disparagingly. 

55-56. On hearing those words, the destroyer of the 
Tripuras became enraged. He glanced at Visnu too like this 
angrily and emotionally. From them both was born Bhairava 
endued with anger. With his nail he picked off one of the heads 
of Brahma. All the persons there shouted and shrieked “Alas ! 
and ran away. 

57. The skull of Brahma stuck to the nail of Bhairava 
who tried to shake it off again and again but it did not fall 
off. 

58. In order to get rid of that sin of Brahmin-slaughter, 
he wandered over the whole of the Earth visiting all holy spots 
and the great rivers, like Gariga etc. 

59. Kapali (one holding the skull i.e. Bhairava) was not 
released from that sin of Brahmin-slaughter. His very face 
indicated his despondent state. He appeared dejected and 
devoid of splendour. After a long time he reached Kafici where 
Brahma had stayed before. 

60-63. There he begged for alms every day and served 
the great goddess Sri. He took bath every day in the 
Pafteatirtha (Holy waters of that name) that had all the char- 
acteristics of a sacred place. Bilvala (? Bhairava) stayed there 
for some time as though utterly confused. On account of his 
stay in the holy place viz. Kaflc! he gradually became pure in 
heart and got rid of all agony. He mentally meditated 



LalitH-m&h&tmya 40.64-74 


1317 


on Srldevi who was served by Lak$mi on the north and 
Vasudeva on the South. He came to the Srikamako?f:ha 
and stood in front of it. Practising self-control he meditated 
upon the feet of Adilak§mi. 

64. Checking the movement of vital airs within, 
Acalesvara (i.e. Lord Bhairava who did not move) remained 
motionless like a lamp in a place where no wind blows and like 
a sea with no ripples on it. 

65-66. Bhairava who was unrestricted in his activities 
performed an unbroken series of meditations — unbroken as like 
the continuous flow of oil— on the lord of the daughter of the 
mountain and Sri (the greatest goddess) . Neither Brahma nor 
Visnu, nor Kapila the great Siddha, nor Sanaka and others, 
nor the sages like Suka and others were competent to perform 
such a deep, concentrated meditation. 

67. On account of the sacred feelings regarding Sri and 
Yogic practice, Siva attained identity with Sri. Thereupon, 
goddess Sri Devi was delighted. In the middle of the night she 
stood before him surrounded by a halo of brilliant refulgence. 
She who was identical with speech (i.e. goddess of speech) 
spoke these words — 

68-69. “O Srikantha, the destroyer of all sins, what is 
the sin unto you ? You are identical with my form, what about 
difference in body ? This is the delusion of the whole world. 
By tomorrow you will be instantaneously liberated from the sin 
of (Brahmaga slaughter) . After saying this, Mah&simh&- 
saneSvari (Goddess of the great throne) vanished there. 

70-71. Bhairava became delighted in his mind. He con- 
sidered himself blessed due to the visiofri of Sri. He spent the 
remaining part of the night by engaging himself solely on 
meditation on Sri. Early in the morning he took his bath in the 
Paftcamahatirtha and performed Sandhya rites. Thereafter, 
he repeatedly shook hand ( in order to remove ) the skull stick- 
ing to it. 

72-74. Even then, it did not drop down. Hence, he 
became very much despaired. “Was that a dream ? or ( the 
deceptive ) Maya ? Or was it a hallucination ? Thinking thus 
repeatedly l£a became utterly perplexed in his mind due to 



1318 Brakm&t' i$a Pur&Qa 

grief. Thereafter, he controlled his grief. Siva, the leader of 
courageous persons, bowed down to the dais of the holy basil 
plant and worshipped it. He stood before it with all the sense 
organs perfectly under control. Then once again he entered the 
state of ecstatic trance. 

75-79. When a Yama (3 hours) passed by, the goddess 
again appeared before him. “O Sambhu, stop your meditation. 
Dip yourself here in this excellent lake”. After commanding thus 
she vanished. He became worried “Is this too a Maya (delu- 
sion) Or is this a dream ? What should be done by me ? Pre- 
viously this had been mentioned by the Supreme goddess Sr! 
Devi.” By tomorrow you will be instantaneously liberated from 
the sin of Brahmahatya”. A period of three hours has elapsed 
in the course of this day. Such being the case, everything is 
false”. Thus the lord became agitated with more worries. At 
that time a roaring sound was produced by the ethereal voice — 
“Dip yourself in the water”. On hearing this, Sankara got rid 
of his suspicions and came to a decisive conclusion. He dipped 
himself in the lake but got up in Ganga. 

80-82. On seeing Ka$i there, he began to think “What 
is this ?” He stood thus silently for a MuhUrta (short period) 
with the skull still sticking to his finger-nail. 

On seeing that the sun had sufficiently risen up to scorch 
everyone’s forehead, Siva of great self control and having the 
crescent moon (over his forehead) entered the city for the sake 
of alms. 

Wandering along the main street, he went to a few 
houses. Then he saw in front of him a certain woman having 
the same form and features as those of Sri Devata of Kailci. 

83. She gave him alms in the form of a refulgent mass 
of splendour and immediately vanished. Instantaneously that 
Kapala (skull) of Brahma dropped down from the tip of his 


84. On seeing that wonderfully excellent act of K&mak?i, 
the lotus-like face of Siva became delighted. He honoured it 
very much. 

85. He thought that the city in front of him was the 
city of Kafici that the holy river in front of him was the great 
river Kamp& and the deity was Kaniak?! herself. 



Lalitd-m&h&tmya 40.86-97 


1319 


86. Thus, due to the power of the goddess, Hara was 
liberated from his difficulty. Regaining normalcy he went to 
his own abode, praising the greatest Sri. 

87. I shall recount another gracious activity of great 
potentiality of Srimah&devi. Listen, O Pot-born Sage. To 
those who listen to it, it always yields whatever is desired. 

88. There was a glorious king named Da£aratha ruling 
over Ayodhya. For a long time, he had no issue and he was 
grief-strickcn. 

89. The intelligent king, very pure in conduct, secretly 
called his priest Vasi^ha who was conversant with the subject 
matter of all Sastras (scriptures) and said — 

90. “O glorious one, I have spent a long time but I 
have not obtained a single son. My agony due to (yearning) 
for a son increases continuously. What shall I do whereby I 
will get a child? Please tell it to me.” 

Vasifpha said : — 

91-95. “O great king of Manu's race, I shall tell you a 
secret — Ayodhya, Mathura, Maya, Ka$i, Kafici and Avantika — 
these are mentioned as highly meritorious (cities). They are 
the most excellent ones among the excellent cities. Men in 
Ayodhya worship Mahatripurasundari, the presiding deity, 
merely by her presence. There is no other great goddess equal 
to or similar to her. It is this Sridevata, O king, that all others, 
Brahma, Visnu, Mahe£a etc. along with their women- 
folk always worship with clusters of coconuts, jack fruits, 
plantains and plenty of excellent articles such as honey, ghee, 
sugar and varieties of milk puddings. One should worship 
Tripurambika with all these articles And other special varieties 
for readily prepared things. She alone will grant ere long all 
that we desire”. 

96. The king duly honoured his preceptor who told him 
thus. Fbr the sake of obtaining a bosom-born son, the king 
duly presented to his preceptor various articles of gifts that he 
desired and sent him back. 

97. Thereafter, the leading king endowed with great 
devotion worshipped Lalita ParameSvari in the manner men- 
tioned by his preceptor. 



Brakm&vfa Purdna 


1320 

98. * (Defective Text) Thus he performed the worship 

every day with delighted mind and having appropriate con- 
tacts, he ruled over Ayodhya which had become the abode of 
the deity. 

99-100. When the midnight hour had passed, the lamps 
continued to burn quietly. Due to sleep he was a bit lethargic. 
Goddess Tripurambika appeared in front of him in a romantical- 
ly exquisite dress and make-up. She held the noose, goad, 
bow and arrows in her four hands. She was embellished 
in all ornaments. Standing there she gently spoke these words 
to the son of Indumati, Da£aratha. 

Devi's Speech : 

101. O glorious and sinless Da£aratha, you are destined 
to have sons. There are certain sinful activities performed by 
you before, such as breach of faith, treachery etc. 

102. For the purpose of subduing such sinful activities, 
go to the excellent city of Kaflcipura. After taking your bath 
hi the Kampa, see me the sanctifying (goddess installed 
there). 

103-104. In the middle of the city of Kaflcipura you 
will see Kamako^ha in the middle of the ethereal cavity. It is 
the destroyer of sins with seven cavities in the form of 
doorways. It indicates the (attainment of) Empire. It 
bestows the achievement of the three aims in the life of men 
(i.e. virtue, wealth and love) . I am sitting there facing the 
East. I am Mahasane£vari (the great goddess of the throne). 

105. I am in the form of Mahalaksmi with only two 
arms. I hold a lotus (in the hand). I am CakreSvari, the great 
queen, invisible to ordinary persons with the gross (ordinary 
physical) eyes. 

106-109. To my right is seated Mahagauri bom of my 
eyes. She is the utmost limit of the essence of beauty. She is 
bedecked in all ornaments. She has been allotted residence 

•N correctly reads : 

Ayodhy&-devat&-dh&mni §i?ye tatraiva saAgatafe 

‘He slept in the shrine of the goddess of Ayodhy&Z 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 40.110-122 


1321 


there by me. She has two arms and she holds a lotus (in the 
hand) . She is stationed there in the form of Mahalaksmi or in 
the form of a K r tya (female deity presiding over magical rites). 
She is born of a part of mine. If a person sees her from the 
pedestal to the crown, all his great sins perish. What then is 
the case of Upafidtaka (minor sin) ? Bad inclinations, bad 
intellect, a series of arguments with evil motives, an ugly 
untidy physical form, all feelings and atheism — all these perish 
or disappear. 

110. Perform great PUjd unto me with sugar, honey, 
ghee, milk puddings, different kinds of edibles and foodstuffs 
and articles having six tastes. 

111. I shall be delighted and shall fulfil your boon”. 

After advising him thus the Empress of divine physical 

form vanished. 

112-113. The king got up suddenly. He thought with 
surprise — “What is this?”. He wakened queen Kausalya who 
too had witnessed some auspicious characteristics and eagerly 
told her details of his nocturnal vision. On hearing it, the 
queen became contented. 

114. Early in the morning the delighted king set out for 
Kaftcipura along with his wife, ministers and armies and 
reached it. 

115-122. He took his bath in the river Kampa and 
visited the sanctifying goddess. Thereafter, the king took his 
bath in the Paficatfrtha along with queen Kausalya. Accom- 
panied by his wife, he pleased the residents of that holy spot 
and sacred shrine by means of cows, lands, clothes, gold and 
other articles of gifts. They (in theft: turn) praised his devotion. 
With great devotion the excellent king entered the precincts of 
the temple. With great humility, he circumabulated three times. 
Thereafter, along with queen Kausalya, he came to Sannidhi 
(the front portion of the idol) and observed Mahatripurasun- 
dari whose abode was Kamako?fha, who is the mother of the 
Trimurtis (Brahma, Vispu and Siva) and who is present there 
in the form of Srlcakra . Along with his wife the devout king 
bowed down and prostrated with the eight limbs (touching the w 
ground) . In his own city, there was a temple of Tripura former- 



1322 


Brahm&nia Purdna 


ly built by Iksvaku and set apart by Durvasas along with his 
disciples for the purpose of worship. It had the full complement 
of men and women servants and various kinds of festivities 
and celebrations with hoisting of flags and erection of special 
abodes. There he had carried out the highly rich worship him- 
self as instructed by his preceptor. At that time in the course 
of a dream at night, in his own city, he saw a mast of splendour 
in a particular form. The excellent king saw the very same 
thing in the Sannidhi (Sanctum Sanctorum) of the goddess 
and meditated upon it. 

123. After meditating for a long time, the great king 
offered the deity many excellent garments and divine abodes. 
Thereafter, he eulogised her. 

The Prayer 

124 . “O goddess appearing splendid and beautiful on 
account of the great ornaments handing down upto the toe of 
the feet ! O goddess having lotus-like feet rendered beautiful 
by the rays and lustre of gems and jewels fitted on to the 
anklets 1 

O goddess having lovely and delicate golden girdle 
glittering above yellow robes, (O goddess) whose creeper- 
like arms are beautified by means of armlets, bracelets and 
bangles. 

125. O goddess with the Pundra variety of sugar-cane 
shining as bow in the delicately soft and tender left hand, with 
the gem-set ring and flowery arrows beautifying the right 
hand. 

O goddess having white garlands and necklaces lying 
^gracefully over the curves of breasts, O goddess whose 
body is rendered beautiful with the arms shining brilliantly 
due to the noose, goad and ornaments of armlets. 

126. O goddess who had conquered the beauty and 
splendour of the disc of the autumnal moon by the 
splendour of your face, whose cheeks have been adorned by the 
sparkling rays of gems in the earrings; O goddess who 
hold a lotus with an excellent fibrous stalk in the left hand, O 
Maheli (great goddess) with side-glances exuding a stream of 
kindness. 



Lalitd-m&h&tmya 40.127-137 


1323 


127. O goddess with conch-like neck sparkling with 
necklaces set with rubies and other jewels, O goddess having 
forelocks brightly illuminated by the crescent moon stationed 
on the forehead, O goddess having sparkling smiles and 
beautiful nose, O goddess who had conquered the petals of the 
blue lotus by the brightness of the eyes. 

128. O goddess with excellent creeper-like eyebrows, 
beautiful face and remarkably fine forehead, O goddess who 
are like a female swan having its abode in the lotus of the 
Manasa lake of leading Yogins, O goddess having a large 
golden crown inlaid with gems and jewels, O goddess who 
are beautiful in every limb and who are worthy of being 
saluted by all leading gods. 

129. O goddess who are the bestower of boons in accord- 
ance with the desires of the devotee, whose mind 
melts with compassion, who are proud (?) of her imperial assets, 
O goddess of the mystic wheel, O goddess whose lotus-like 
feet are served by Indra and other Devas, O great goddess of 
the throne, be manifest to me”. 

130. After eulogising thus with devotion that king came 
out and visited Mahagauri seated in her right side. 

131-133. He prostrated before her like a straight staff 
on the ground. He eulogised her also and offered various kinds 
of valuable robes and very costly ornaments. Then he circum- 
ambulated her along with his wife and came out. He then per- 
formed the great PUjd in accordance with the injunctions of his 
preceptor. Meditating on her alone, he stayed there for seven 
days. 

134. On the eighth day he bowed down to the goddess 
with devotion. He mentally prayed thus — “O mother, grant me 
what I have desired”. 

135. Kamaktf who was very much delighted, spoke 
through the ethereal voice : — “O king, four sons will be born 
to you. They will be my own parts”. 

136-137* On hearing this utterance, the face of the son 
of Indumati beamed with pleasure. Without having anyone 
else as his refuge, he prostrated before Sri with eight limbs 
(touching the ground). He took leave of the great Mother 



1 324 BrahmOftia Pur&Qa 

goddess mentally. Then he went to the city of Ayodhya along 
with his wife and ministers. 

138. K&maksi has such potentiality. She desires the 
welfare of all the worlds. She fulfils completely the desires of all 
her devotees. 

1 39. Many have duly and devoutly worshipped Kamak$i 
the greatest deity in the worlds and have attained all their 
desires. 

140. Even today, the devotees do obtain the benefit, O 
sage, of the benign glance of Kamak?i. Many will be like that 
( in days to come) . 

141. Who is competent to extol the greatness of this 
deity Srldevi ? Neither I nor Sambhu, nor Brahma nor Visnu. 
What then about others ? 

142. Thus the brilliant conduct (and kindly deposition) 
of KamaksI has been recounted to you to a certain extent. It 
is remembered as destructive of sins of those who listen to and 
read this. 


CHAPTER FORTYON E 

* 

Propitiation of Goddess K&m&kfi 


Agastya said : 

1-2. “Of what type is her Tantra (Mystical diagram and 
tailisman) ? Of what nature is the excellent Mantra ? Of what 
type is the disciple ? O Hayagriva, you are omniscient. You 
are the great Puru?a ( Visriu) himself. O holy lord, with a 
kind and benevolent look towards me, do explain all these 
things.*' 



1325 


Lalitd-m&h&tmya 41 . 3-10 

Hayagriva said : 

3-6 “Sri Cakra 1 2 alone is her Mantra (Yantra). She is 
Tripurambika and she is Mahalaksmi herself. Formerly, the 
Cakra was seen coming out of Atman throbbing and 
sparkling. It expanded and increased in luminosity. Indeed 
the greatness of this wheel (circle) cannot be (fully) compre- 
hended. 

The fact is Sricakra is Mahalaksmi herself. It was by 
worshipping it that the lotus-eyed Mahavi$nu attained the 
form of Kamasammohini (Enchantress of even god of Love), 
fascinating the worlds. After worshipping it, Igana became 
the lord of all lores. By propitiating it particularly 
Brahma became the progenitor of the Cosmic Egg. It is by 
means of its worship that the God of Love became the 
enchanter of even the sages. 

7-10. The Cakra a should be made of gold or silver etc. 
The devotee should place it in front of Sri Devi and worship 
it with sweet scents repeating the sixteen-syal tabled Mantra. 
Every day the devotee should wear auspicious dress and equip- 
ments. He should worship the goddess with thousands of 
sacred Tulasi leaves repeating the Mulamantra . He must medi- 
tate upon Sridevi. He should propitiate Mahalaksmi by means 
of splendid food offering such as honey, ghee, sugar, milk pud- 
dings and other blameless articles as well as black gram 
cakes of pleasing nature. The intelligent devotee should thus 
propitiate Mahalaksmi in three Mandalas (zones). Parameg- 
vari immediately appears before him. 


1. The present chapter deals with the propitiation of Kamak§i. For this, 
worship of Srt-Cakra is essential. As Saundarya-lahari verse 1 1 describes, Sri 
Cakra has the following diagrammatic formation : 

“The abode of nine angles — four of Siva and five of Sakti — together 
with eight petals, sixteen leaves, three roundings and three walls; enlarges 
itself into one of fortyfour angles" (See the enclosed figure on p. 1365). 
VV.3-6 describe the importance of Sri Cakra . 

2. VV.7-13 describe the procedure of worshipping Sri-Cakra &nd its 
efficacy. 



Brakmd$#a Purdya 


1326 


11-12. The delighted goddess will fulfil whatever he 
desires mentally. If a person worships with white flowers in 
the manner mentioned before, Bh&rati (goddess of speech) will 
dance on his tongue perpetually. If a person worships the Cakra 
with pink flowers in the manner mentioned before, he can 
control a king with imperial powers, as though he was a mere 
slave. 

13. If a person worships with splendid yellow flowers 
as before Sri (Goddess of Wealth) herself will certainly stay on 
his chest permanently. 

14. One shall not worship Siva with foulsmelling or 
odourless flowers even if they have good colours. One shall 
worship Siva with only sweet-smelling flowers and blossoms. 

15. Kam&ksi alone is Mahalaksmi. The Cakra is Srtcakra 
itself 1 . This Srividyd is the greatest Vidya (i.e. Mantra). The 
Ndyikd (heroine) is (the wife of the preceptor) (?) 

16-17. The leading Mantra of this deity, O ascetic, is 
Srividya alone. At the end of the Mantra ending with the 
world Kamaraja, join Sribijd. This sixteen-syllabled Vidya 
is glorified as Srividyd. 

Thus a great secret has been recounted. It must be 
guarded carefully and strenuously. 

18. This Vidya is the Sakti of all the three MUrtis. 
This Vidya is in the very form of the vital airs of all 
Mantras. 

19. If this is learned and understood hereditarily, this 
Vidya liberates one from bondage. If it is remembered, it 

1 destroys sins, old age and death. 

20. If it is worshipped, it destroys misery, misfortune, 
sickness and poverty. If eulogised, it suppresses multitudes of 


1. VV. 15-17 describe the importance of$ri-Vidy£. It consists of 16 
syllabled Mantra — the mantra of 15 syllables given in note of chapter 39 
and the syllable the Mantra of 16 syllables. The importance of this 

mantra is not still appreciated by the educated elite even in India. 



Lalitd-m&h&tmya 41.21-29 


1327 

obstacles. If it is meditated upon, it bestows the achievement of 
all objects. 

21. If a person is conversant with the principles of 
particular Mudr&s 1 (Mystic gestures) and if he has destroyed 
his sins by means of the spiritual worship of the Supreme 
Goddess (Pararaeiani), he shall attain the desired benefit. 

22. A man strictly observing the vow of celibacy, should 
worship with white flowers the deity clad in white garments and 
present in the centre of a white abode. 

23. The Naivedyas (food offerings) shoul 1 also be white 
such as curds, milk, cooked rice etc. The devotee should 
worship the Highest Deity (ParameSvai!) with imaginary 
white articles as well. While meditating, he should imagine (hat 
he is worshipping with white flowers etc. 

24. With pure mind the devotee should worship the 
sixteen-syllabled 2 Mantra with the Tryaksari Bijas (i.e. the 
three syllables forming the seed) . 

25-27. The syllables constituting the Mantras shall be 
repeated in the usual order as well as in the reverse order. He 
shall meditate on Sridevi in the form of a lamp in front of the 
lord. O ascetic, the Japa shall be mental, Upamlu (in 
whisper) or Nigada (clear loud utterance). It shall be 
accompanied by Srideviny&sa ( the fingers etc. to be placed in 
a particular form) . An idol of Sridevi also should be made. 
By repeating the Mantra one hundred thousand times, the 
devotee is liberated from great sins. 

28. If he repeats the Mantra two hundred thousand 
times, the greatest Kala destroys the sins of the S&dhaka 
(Aspirant devotee) committed in the course of seven births. 

29. By repeating the Mantra three hundred thousand 
times the devotee is liberated from the sins of a thousand births. 
There is no doubt about this, O sage, that he becomes exceed- 
ingly pure. In that order if he repeats the Mantra one million 


1. Mudri is the name of a particular position or intertwining of fingers. 
The various Mudr&s for LalitS-wonhip are given in the next chapter. 

2. W.24-29 describe the procedure of Japa of the 16 Syllabled 
Mantra and its efficacy. 



1328 Brahm&Qia Pur&Qa 

and six hundred thousand times, he shall attain proximity 
of Devi. 

30. The Purakarana 1 (Repetition of the name of 
deity accompanied with Homa etc.) is mentioned as follows. 
The Puj& is to be performed three times every day. Then the 
Japa , Tarpana , Homa and the feeding of Br&hmanas — all 
these should be performed. 

31. In the course of. Homa and Tarpana the word Svdhd 
should be used. In the course of Nyasa rites and worship 
the word Hamah should be used. At the time of Japa the 
devotee should duly worship Devi at the end of the Mantra. 

32. The Homa shall be one-tenth of Japa ; Tarpana 
shall be one-tenth of Homa; O suppressor of the Vindhya 
mountain, feeding of the Brahmanas is one-tenth of the 
Tarparia. 

33. If due to obstacles arising from time or place 
any of the ancillary rites has to be dropped, the devotee 
should repeat the Mantra twice that number and conclude 
Purakarana rites. 

34. Thereafter, for the sake of Kdmyaprayoga (rite for 
the achievement of any desired object) the devotee should 
repeat the Mantra three hundred thousand times. The 
devotee should observe Vratas steadily without emotional 
aberrations. He shall be engaged in the worship three times 
a day. If he performs Vaiya and other rites (rites in order 
to win over persons) thereafter, he shall attain Siddhi (that 
achievement). 

35-36. The repeater of the Mantras seated in the 
middle of the Cakra should contemplate after worshipping. He 
must think about himself as completely red (like the morning 
light) in colour. The Sadhya (the object to be achieved 
also should be thought of as pink in colour). There- 


1. The procedure of Purafcarapa of this Vidya is described in 
vv 30-33. This Vidya can be used for achieving certain peisonal objectives 
and can be used destructively as well. VV.34-39 describe how the Mantra is 
to be used for personal positive advantages and vv.40-70 explain how the 
mantra be used as black-magic such as Mdraoa, Uccdfana etc. 



Lalitd-m&h&tmya 41 . 37 -49 


1329 


upon, O enemy of the Vindhya, he shall become handsome 
with all fortunes and facilities. He shall win over everyone. 
There is no doubt about this. 

37-38. Equal parts of Gorocana (a yellow pigment), 
Kumkuma (saffron) and Sandal paste shall be taken. After 
performing Japa one hundred and eight times, the learned 
devotee should apply a Tilaka on his forehead with the same. 
Thereafter, if he sees, speaks to, thinks about or touches anyone 
with half of his body, he comes under his control like a slave. 

39. O ascetic, in the same way, if a flower, fruit, 
scent, beverage or cloth is taken and the Japa is performed one 
hundred and eight times and the article so taken is sent to a 
woman, immediately that woman is attracted towards him. 
Her heart will be in utter confusion. 

A rile to control other persons 

40. The devotee should draw the picture of a beautiful 
woman on the ground with Gorocana (yellow pigment). It 
should be in a secluded spot. She should be depicted as one 
dressed gracefully and amorously. She should be bedecked in 
all ornaments. 

41. Birth (pedigree), name, Vidya and the picture 
°f & goad — all should be written in her forehead, neck, breast, 
navel and knee. 

42-43. Words depicting god of love should be written 
in all joints. The devotee should face that direction and 
make a Tripufa of his body (? bent in three places). He 
should make kfotkini (the agitafory gesture) and repeat 
Mantra eight hundred times after uniting it (?) in the 
sacrificial chamber full of lustre of the sun and the moon. 

44-49. Even from a distance of a hundred Yojanas, he 
should then imagine and mentally conceive a woman of the 
following features. She is aflicted by the arrows of the god of 
Love. Her side glances show signs of excitement. Her pudenda 
throb indicating the increasing intensity of blazing passion. 
She is swallowed by the circle of shining rays inside 
Sakticakra. She has cast off her good conduct and feminine 



Brahmdn$a Purdna 


1330 

modesty. Her lotus-like eyes are large and wide. Her eyes are 
attractive. Her bashfulness has disappeared due to the loss of 
her fortitude (self-control). She is bound by the letters of 
Mantra, Yantra, medicine and the great Mudra. Her lotus- 
like heart trembles due to the flutter of fresh love. She is 
mentally repeating the Mahdmantra many times. The silken 
garment has been removed. She is as though deluded, agitated 
and burned down. Her form is strange and wonderful. She is 
as though drawn in a picture, devoid of consciousness, hit, 
thrashed, dissolved, motionless and as though transformed into 
another person. On account of the power of Mantra, she 
is whirling like the leaf of bamboo in a violent gust of wind. 

50. Thereafter, he should think that the Earth including 
mountains, parks and forests and bounded by the four oceans 
has come within the Cakra and is .blazing forth. 

51. If the devotee practises this rite for six months he 
becomes very handsome comparable to the god of Love. 
Merely by looking on, he attracts the world. By this very act 
of seeing, he wins over everyone. 

52. Simply by casting his glance he can excite any 
woman; by his sight alone he can remove poison; by his very 
look alone he can make some-one the lord of Speech; by his 
mere act of seeing he can enchant everyone. By seeing he 
instantaneously removes Cdturlhika (quartan fever) and other 
fevers. 

53. The devotee should secretly wear on h ; s person 
Sricakra drawn with yellow material. There is no doubt about 
it that thereby he can quickly stun the speech of the disput- 
ant. 

54. One should draw Cakra with the juice of Maha- 
nlll (Indigo plant) along with the name of the enemy. He 
shall then sit facing the south and burn the same in the fire. 
This causes the death of the enemy. 

55. If the name of the enemy is written in the Cakra 
with the cow’s urine and dung of buffaloes and horses and 
the Cakra is placed in Arania gruel made of fermentation 
of the boiled rice, it will enhance the hatred of the enemy. 



LalitA-mdhdtmya 41.56-65 


1331 


56. (Defective Text) The name is written with yellow 
pigment and the Cakra is tied with the hair from the sidelocks 
of children. The enemy will hang suspended like that (in the 
sky) (or if the same is hung up) this is a great means of 
Ucc&tana (Eradication or extirpation). 

57. If the Cakra be drawn with the juice of the Indigo 
plant mixed with milk, lac and Rocand and if the same is worn 
on one’s person one can win over the people of the four 
castes. 

58. If the same is written in accordance with the same 
injunction and put in water and if the water is used for drink- 
ing or bathing, the devotee will be blessed with great felicity 
and matchless fortune. 

59. If the devotee thinks continuously about the ter- 
ritory, city or excellent lady depicted in the middle of the 
Cakra as blazing up, O Sage, he can excite and stir them up 
within seven days. 

60. If the above rite is performed after drawing the 
Cakra in yellow colour and facing the East, the devotee can 
make all disputants stunned. 

61. The devotee should face the north and worship the 
Cakra drawn in saffron colour. The whole world can be won 
over by him thus and not otherwise. 

62. If the devotee draws the Cakra with red chalk and 
worship it facing west, he can then attract all women, win 
them over and make them excited. 

63. The devotee should wander over a mountain alone 
and in secret and worship the Cakra, O Suppressor of the 
arrogance of the Vindhya mountain. The repeater of the 
Mantras attains immortality and freedom from old age. There 
is no doubt about this. 

64. It is great secret that has been communicated, O 
great Sage. It should be preserved carefully. By guarding it, 
one shall attain all Siddhis. He will meet sure downfall 
if he discloses it. 

65. If, without performing the Puraicarana . O sage, 
anyone performs (the above-mentioned) holy rite he will not 
obtain mastery over the Mantra or achievement thereof) . 



1332 


Brahm&ntfa Purdna 


66. In order to quell defects in the performance, 
the learned devotee shall repeat Jafa one hundred thou- 
sand times more. He should duly perform the Puja too. Then 
only he shall become qualified and competent once again. 

67-70. If a person endowed with devotion worships 
the deity continuously without any desire (in return for 
worship), if he repeats the Mantra to his fullest capacity medi- 
tating upon her, she herself shall bear the burden of his weal 
in this world and accomplish liberation for him. Always 
staying near him, she will tell him everything. Just as the 
lowing cow follows the calf so also the goddess shall follow her 
devotee who has sought refuge in her.” 

Agastya said : — 

71. “O Hayagriva, what is the meaning of the term 
Parana gala 1 (one who has sought refuge) ? Tell me. Who is 
that Saranagata whom Gauri follows like a cow that follows her 
running calf? 

Hayagriva said : — 

72-74. “If a man places his burden on Srldevata, 
the burden of responsibilities etc. of this world as well as that 
of the other world and concentrate'; his mind always on her, 
it he is favourably disposed towards all everywhere, if he is 
devoid of antagonists, if without having any one else as his 
reiuge, he prays to Gauri exclusively stead-fastly to protect him, 
if he has the coniidcncc that she will protect him, if his aim 
and purpose is solely iier service and if he is eager to serve 
and worship her that activity is Sarariagati (seeking reiuge). 

75. If at any time people praise him or censure him, 
the man who has sought refuge in the deity thinks like this — 
“Let the worlds censure or let the people praise**. After 
thinking thus and after observing his own form with good 
intellect, he ceases to experience pleasure or sorrow. 

76-77. Sarandgati consists of six aspects thinking about 
favourable things, avouling unfavourable things; faith that 


1. VV. 72-70 explain the concept of Prapatti or Sarandgati, 



LalitH-m&h&tmya 41.78-83 


1333 


(the deity) will protect, soliciting the deity for protec lion, 
surrendering his own self and Karunya ( Piteousness or seeking 
compassion). After surrendering oneself one should dedicate 
the five Angas (all the five actions of the body). 

There is no other means like this to achieve worldly 
enjoyment as well as liberation from Samsara. 

78-81. The following qualities arc meant for the attain- 
ment of perfect knowledge. 1 The devotee shall always practise 
them — absence of pride, absence of hypocrisy, avoidance of 
violence, forbearance, straight-forwardness, service to the 
preceptor, cleanliness, steadiness, self-control, non-attachment 
to the objects of senses, absence of egotism, careful observation 
of the evils of birth, death, old ago, ailments and misery, 
absence of attachment and avoiding involvement with sons, 
wives, houses etc. continuous cven-mindedness irrespective of 
the desirable or undesirable happening or occurrence, unswerv- 
ing devotion to the deity, without thinking of other things, 
resorting to lonely places, distaste for the assembly of people, 
constant application to spiritual knowledge and understanding 
the purpose of factual knowledge or philosophy. 

82-83. He who works for the deity, he who has 
her for his goal, who is devoted to her, who avoids attachment 
and who bears no enmity to any living being attains the 
greatest Sri. The preceptor shall be an intelligent man like me 
and famous too, O Scorcher of Vatapi. The disciple is said to 
be one like you by the preceptor of the secret scriptures 
(i dmn&ya ). 


1. VV. 78-81 enumerate the qualities essential for attaining perfect 
knowledge. 



1334 


Brahmdnda Purdqta 


CHAPTER FORTYTWO 

Description of Various Mudrds . Mystical Gestures 

With the Fingers 1 

Agastya said : — 

1. “O Hayagriva, narrate the various positions of 
fingers in the formation of mystical gestures whereby SridevI 
becomes delight ed.” 

Hayagpiva said : — 

2-3. “ (The following one) is the great Mudrd Avdhani 

(invoking one) which is described as Trikhanda (having three 
parts). Turn your hands making the palms clearly face the front. 
Join your thumbs together. Keep the index-fingers bent and 
beneath the ring fingers. O ascetic, one should place the small 
fingers in their own places. 

Now I shall describe Mudrd called Sarhk$obhini (the 
Agitator) . Listen. 

4. The middle fingers should be kept in the middle 
flanked by the thumbs and small fingers. The index fingers 
are kept upright like rods. The ring fingers are placed over 
the middle fingers. 

5. If in this Mudra, the middle fingers are kept upright, 
O suppressor of the pride of Vindhya, the Mudra is then 
called Vidravini (Driving others) . 

6. The small fingers and the ring fingers are equally 
kept in the middle of the middle fingers and the index fingers 
that have the shape of goads, O Pit-born Sage. This Mudrd 
(named) Akar?ini ( Attracting one ) is capable of attracting 
the three worlds. 

7-9. The palms are made in the shape of cups. The index 
fingers have the shape of goads. The middle fingers are turned 
and kept beneath them. In this way, O celestial sage, the 
small fingers are in the middle of the middle fingers. The ring 
fingers are kept upright. The two index fingers are outside 


1. This chapter deals with Mudrds specially observed in $rividy&. 
The most important is Yonimudri described in w.17-18. 


Lalitd-mdh&tmya 42.10-19 


1335 


them. Then the thumbs are kept (upright) like rods reaching 
the place where the middle fingers move to and fro. This 
Mudra is well-known by the name Unmddinl , O Scorcher of 
Vatapi. 

10-11. In this Mudra, in the pair of ring fingers one is 
bent in the form of goads and kept beneath. The devotee shall 
make use of the index fingers also in the same manner. This is 
the Mudra called Mahdnkuid conducive to the achievement 
of all objectives. 

12-14. The arms are kept crossed — the right arm to the 
left and the left arm to the right, O celestial sage. The palms 
of the hands are turned. In this manner the small fingers and 
the ring fingers are joined, O ascetic. The index fingers are 
placed over them. The middle fingers are above all. O husband 
ofLopamudra the devotee should keep thumbs upright. 
This is the Mudra called Khecari (moving in the sky), the most 
excellent of all excellent ones. By knowing this alone 
perfectly, the devotee shall be the favourite one of Yoginis 
( the deities of that name) . 

15-16. The devotee should turn the palms of his hands 
making them touch other. He should join together the pairs of 
index fingers and thumbs simultaneously in the form of the cres- 
cent Moon. He should join the middle fingers together keeping 
the small fingers hanging down. After joining together these 
two fingers that are bent, the ring fingers are kept beneath 
all. This is Bijamudrd that is conducive to the proper functioning 
of all Siddhis ere long. 

17-18. The tips of the middle fingers are kept bent and 
placed above the index-fingers. Similarly, the small fingers are 
placed in the middle of ring 'fingers. All the fingers are 
thus joined together and pressed by the thumbs. This is the 
first Mudra termed Tonimudrd. 

19. O celestial sage, these Mudras cause delight unto 
Sridevi. They should be made use of at the time of worship in 
the proper order. 



1336 


Brahmtyda Purdjia 


CHAPTER FORTYTHREE 

Types of Initiation and True Service of the Preceptor 
Agastya said : — 

1. “O Hayagriva of great intellect, O ocean of nectarine 
mercy ! Inform me of the type of initiation 1 2 which is (necessary) 
in visualizing Srldevl.** 

Hayagriva said : 

2. “We shall communicate Dik$d (initiation) where- 
from one attains identity with the deity and whereby the dirts 
of sins of persons are washed off. 

3. The preceptor meditates uponSivapura (as stationed) 
in the hand, repeats the Mula Mantras of the deity AhgamalinI 
(?) and touches the body of the disciple. This is called Sparla - 
dikfd (the initiation by touch). 

4. The preceptor closes his eyes and meditates on Srl- 
kamaksI.With delighted mind he looks properly at the disciple. 
This is called Drgdikfd (the initiation by vision). 

5. Merely when the proceptor beholds, speaks and 
touches, perfect knowledge arises immediately. That initiation 
is considered &ambhavi (pertaining toSambhu the bestower of 
happiness). 

6. The body of the preceptor is similar to the body of 
the goddess as mentioned before. By his grace the disciple 
too shines with the same form as he. 

7. The leading spiritual preceptor properly gratified by 

* * 

means of service of long duration, silently intends initiation of 
the disciple. This is considered Mdnasi Difod (mental initiation) .* 

8. Of all the modes of initiation, this is the most 
excellent one. 


1 . Dikfd or Initiation is the essential pre-condition of Spiritual paths. 
It is the Guru who introduces a person to a spiritual discipline. Hence, the 
importance of Guru ( which unfortunately degenerated in Gurudom) . To 
make a person eligible to enter a spiritual path the Guru initiates him either 
by his touch ( sparia-dikfd ) , sight or even by his mind ( Mdruui Dikfd ) , the 
last being the best one. 

2. VV.8-35. describe the procedure of Dik?a. 


LalitA-mdhdimya 43 . 9- 1 4 


1337 


The devotee should at the outset perform Kriyddik$d 
(Initiation of holy rites) . Its mode is being recounted. 

9-14. On an auspicious day in the bright half of the 
month, the devotee (gets up early in the morning) and keeps 
his mind free from impurities. He should then remove the dirt 
from the tongue, mouth and face and clean them. He should 
then take his bath in accordance with injunctions. 

After concluding Sandhya rites he should stay in a 
secluded spot remembering the physical form alone of the 
preceptor. He should put proper curb on his food and remain 
silent 

Remaining in the same manner, the preceptor too should 
enter the abode of worship. He should repeat Devi Sukta 
along with Vidydnydsa ( the special position of fingers in the 
mystical rite pertaining to the Mantras) and M&trki I (diagrams 
of characters etc. as a part of the mystical rite). Then he should 
repeat the Puruja Sflkta. Thereafter he should propitiate Tripura- 
mbika by means of sixteen Upacdras ( Means of paying 
homage to deity) well known as follows : — Avdhana (invoking), 
Asana (offering a seat), P&dya (offering water for washing the 
feet), Arghya (materials of worship), Acamana (ceremonial 
ritualistic sipping of water), Sndna (bath), Vastra (offering 
Robe), BhUfd ( ornament) decorating with Gandha (scent). Puspa 
(flowers), DhUpa (incense), lamp) ,Naivedya( food offering) 

TdmbUla (prepared betel leaves and nuts), pradak$ind (circu- 
mambulation) and PrariAma (obeisance) . Then by means of 
SahasrAk$ara Vidya (one thousand-syllabled Mantra) he shall 
offer Pufpdhjali (handful of flowers). 

One thousand-syllabled Mantra I 1 . 

Om Aim Hrlrh Srim Aim Klim Sauh. Orii Obeisance (to 
you) O Tripurasundari, O deity in the heart, O deity in the 
head. O deity in the tuft, O deity in the (symbolic) armour, 
O deity in the eyes, O deity in the mouth (face),0 KamelvarJ, 


1. The Thousand-syllabled Mantra is nothing but a series of Lalita 
epithets including in them all the powers implied in the names of Siddhis, 
Nity&s, etc. It concludes with the secret sixteen- syllabled Kddi Mantra. 



Brakmdnda Pur Una 


1338 

O Bhagamalini. O Nityaklinna, O Bhcruruja, O VahnivasinI 
(deity abiding in fire) , O MahavajreSvari, O VidyeSvari 
( deity of lores ), O ParaSivadutI (messenger of the Supreme 
Siva), O TVarita, O Kulasundan. O Nitya,0 Nilapataka (deity 
with a blue banner), O Vijaya, O Sarvamangala, O Jvalamalini 
(deity wearing clusters of flames as garlands) , O Citra, O 
Mahanitya, O Paramesvari (O Supreme Goddess), O MantreS- 
amayi (identical with the lord of the Mantras), O $asthi£amayi 
(identical with the lord of Sasthi i.e. Sixth day of the lumber 
fort-night), O Udyanamayi* (identical with garden), O 
Lopamudramayi, O Agastyamayi (deity identical with Lopa- 
mudra and Agastya), O Kalatapanamayl (identical with the 
scorcher of K&la i.e. Siva), O Dharmacaramayl (identical with 
the conduct of righteousness) , Muktake£i Svaramayi (identical 
with the lord of the deity with loose tresses) , O Dipakalana- 
thamayi (identical with lamp and moon), O Vi$nudevamayi 
(identical with lord Visnu), O Prabhakara-Devamayl (identical 
with Sun-god), O Tejodevamayl (identical with the lord of 
refulgence), O Manojadeva- Mayi (identical with mind-born 
lord of love), O Anim&siddhi (the power of being very minute), 
O Mahim&siddhi ( the power of being very great) , O GarimUsiddhi 
(tha power of being weighty), O Laghim&siddhi (the power of 
being very light) , O Uitvasiddhi (the power of being the over- 
lord), O Vafitvasiddhi (the power of controlling others and 
winning over them), O Praptisiddhi (the power of achieving 
anything), O Prdkdmyasiddhi (the power of irresistible will) , O 
Rasasiddhi (the power of alchemy), O Mokjasiddhi (the power 
of granting salvation) , O Brahmi, O Mahesvari, O Kaumari, O 
Vai?navl, O Varahi, O Indranf, O Camunda, O Mahalak$mi, 
O Sarva-sarjikpobhinl (exciting all) , O Sarvavidrdvini (routing all) 
O Sarvdkarfini (attracting all), O SarvavaSarhkarl (winning over 
all), O Sarvonmddini (making everyone of us mad) , O Sarvamah - 
dAkuid (great goad unto all) O Sarvakhecari ( Khecarimudra 
of all) O Sarvabijd (seed unto all) , O Sarvayont (source of 
origin unto all) , O Sawdstrakhanfinl (the splitter of all missiles), 
O Trailokyamohini (enchantress of the three worlds), O Cakra - 

i 

svdmini (O mistress of the Cakra i.e. mystic circle) , O Prakafa - 

*N. reads Udydna or U44iydm % *a bandha in Yoga'. 



Lalitd-m&hdtmya 43.9-14 


1339 


yogtni (one who has manifested Yogic power), O Bauddha - 
DariandAgi (one having the Buddhist philosophy as one as of 
the limbs) , O Kdmdkarfiril (one who attracts love), O Buddhyd - 
karfani (one who attracts intellect), O Aharhkdrdkar$ini (one 
who attracts the principle of Ego), O Sabdakarsini (one who 
attracts sound), O Sparidkarfini (one who attracts touch), O 
Rdpdkar$inl (one who attracts form and colour), O Rasdkar$ini 
(one who attracts taste), O Gandhdk ar?inl (one who attracts 
smell), O Citt&karfini (one who attracts the mind), O Dhairyd- 
karsirti (one who attracts courage). O Smrtydkar$inl (one who 
attracts memory), O Namdkar$inl (one who attracts names) 
O Bijdkarfinl (one who attracts seed), O Atmdkar$ini (One 
who attracts soul), O Amrtdkarfxni (one who attracts 
nectar), O Sarirdkarpini (one who attracts body), O 
Guptayogini (one who has the secret yogic power), O Sarudid - 
paridQraka-Cakra-Sv&minl (O presiding deity of the mystic circle 
that fulfils all hopes), O AnaAgakusumd (one who has flowers 
(i.e. flower-shafts of god of love) O AnaAgamekhald (one who 
has the girdle of Ananga i.e. god of love), O AnaAgamddinl (one 
who maddens Ananga), O AnaAga-Madandturd (one who has 
been afflicted by the god of love having no body), O 
Anangarckhd (O streak of Ananga), O AnaAgavegini (one who 
has the impetus of Ananga), O AnaAgdAkuid (the goad of 
Ananga), O AnaAgamdlini (having the garland of Ananga), 
O Guptatarayoginl (one who has the Yogic Power that is more 
hidden), O Vaidika- DariandAgi (one who has Vedic systems 
of philosophy as limbs), O Sarvasarhkfobhakara-Cakra-Svdmini 
(O ruling deity of the Cakra that causes excitement in 
everyone), O P Urvdmndyddhidevatd (presiding deity of the 
scripture named Purvamnaya ) , • O Sr^firdpd (one having 
creations as her form), O Sarvasarfikfobhini (one who stirs up 
everyone), O Sarva- Vidrdoinl (one who routs everyone), O 
Sarvdhlddinl (one who delights everyone), O Sarvdkarfinl (one who 
enchants everyone), O Sarvastambhini (one who stuns everyone), 
O Sarvcjrmbhinl (one who is the ‘yawner' deity), O SarvaiaAkari 
(one who causes the welfare of everyone), O Sarvarahjini (one 
who delights everyone), O Sarvonmddinl (one who meddens 
everyone), O Sarvdrthasddhikd (one who achieves all objectives) 
O Sarvasampatprap&riQi (one who reimburses all riches), O 



1340 


Brakmfittfa Pur&#a 


Sarvamantramayi (one who is identical with all Mantras), 
O Sarvadvandvakfayakari (one who destroys all mutually opposed 
pairs of calamities), O Sampraddyayoginl (one who has the 
traditional power of Yoga), O Sauradartandhgl (one who 
has sysiems of philosophy of Surya as limbs), O Sarvasaubhagya - 
Ddyakacakrd (one who is the mystic circle that bestows all 
felicities) O Sarvasiddhipradd (one who bestows all spiritual 
attainments), O Sa rvnsam pat pr add (one who bestows all riches), 
O Sarvapriyamkari (one who does everything for the felicity of 
others), O Sarvamafigalakfiriiji (one who does everything 
conducive to auspiciousness to all), O Sarvakdmapr add (one 
who bestows all desires), O Sarvaduhkhavimocini (one who 
liberates all persons from miseries), O SarvamrtyupraSamini (one 
who suppresses deaths of all). O Sarvavighnanivarini (one who 
dispels all obstacles), O Sarvanga-Sundari (one who is beautiful 
in every limb), O Sarvasaubhdgjadayini (one who bestows all 
fortunateness and felicities), O Kulottirnayoginl (one who has 
the Yogic power of Kulottirnn), O SarvdrthasddhakacakreH . (O 
goddess of the mystic circle that achieves all objectives), O 
Sarvajnd (omniscient one), O SarvaSakti (omnipotent), O 
Sarvaiharyaphalapradd (one who bestows the benefit of all types 
of prosperity), O Sawajiidnamayi (one identical with all types of 
knowledge), O Sarvavyddhinivarinl (one who dispels and prevents 
all types of ailments), O Sarvddhdrasvardpd (one who 
is of the form of the support of everything), O Sarvapd - 
pdpahard (one who removes all sins), O Sarvdnandamayi (one 
identical with all the bliss (for everyone), O SarvarakfdsvarQ - 
pini (one whose form is the protection of everyone), O 
Sarvepsilaphalapradd (one who is the bestower of all desired 
benefits), O Niyogini (one who controls others), O Vaifnava - 
* darinndfigi (one who has the systems of philosophy of Visnu as 
limbs), O Sarvarakfdkaracakrasthd (one who is stationed in the 
mystic circle that accords protection to everyone), O 
Dakfindmn&yeH (the chief deity of all the scriptures named 
Daksipamnaya), O SthitirUpd (one who is in the form of 
sustenance), O VaSint (one who exercises authority), O Kdmei f, 
O Modinl (one who rejoices), O Vimald (devoid of impurities), 
O Arurid (the pink one), O Jayinl (the victorious one), O 
Sarveivari (Ruling goddess of all), Kaulini (follower of the 



1341 


Lalitd-mdh&tmya 43 . 9- 1 4 

Sakta rituals), Rahasyayogini (one who has the secret Yogic 
power), O Rakasya-Bhagini (one who enjoys pleasures in secret), 
O Rahasyagopinl (one who protects i.e. keeps secrets), O 
Sdktadariandngi (one who has the systems of philosophy of the 
followers of Sakti as her limbs), O S iTuarogahara-Cakrefl^voAdess 
of the mystic circle that dispels all ailments), O Paicim&mndyeH 
(the chief of the sacred scriptures named Pasciinamnaya), 
DhanurbdnapdfamkuSadevatd (the deity with bow, arrows, noo^e 
and goad), O Kdmeil , O VajreH , O Bhngamdlinl , O Atirahas\ayo- 
gini (one who has the highly secret Yogic power), O SaivadarSan 
dngi (one who has Siva's systems of philosophy as her limbs), O 
Sarvasiddhipradacakragd (one who is stationed in the mystic 
circle that bestows all Siddhis),0 Uttardmndyesi (goddess of 
scriptures termed Uttaramnaya) O Samhdtarupd (one who has 
the form ofannihilator), O Suddh&para (Pure and transcendent), 
O Bindupifhagatd (one who is stationed in the Bindu-pitha of 
the pedestal), O Mah&tripurasundart , O Pardpardtirahayayogini 

r 

O dmbhavadariandhgi (one who has the systems of philosophy 
of Sambhu as limb), O Sarvdnanda MayacakreH (the Presiding 
goddess of the mystic circle conferring bliss on everyone), O 
Tripur asundari) O TripuravaSini (one residing in the Tripura), 
O TripuraSri (the glory of Tripura), Tripuramdlini (having the 
three cities as a garland), O Tripurasiddhd (one who has attained 
Siddhis of the Tripuras), O Tripurdmbd , O Sarvacakrasthd 
(one stationed in all mystic circles), O Anuttardmndydkhyasvarupd 
(one whose form is what is called Anuitaramnaya), O 
Mahdtripurabhairavi , O Caturvidhaguiiar upd (one whose form is 
the fourfold Guna), O Kuld (O goddess Kula), Akuld (O 
one who has no family), Kuldkuld (one who has Kulas and 
Akulas), O Mahdkaulini (great follower of Sakti). O Sarvotlard 
(one who is greater than all), O Sarvadartandhgi (one who 
has all systems of philosophy as limbs), O N&vd>anasthitd (one 
who is stationed in nine scats), O NavdUari (one who has nine 
syllables), O Navamithun&krti (one who has the form of a newly 
married couple), O Mahefdtnukd (one who is in the form 
of Mahesa. one who is identical with ViJya, M.\d tava 
Brahma, Kamadeva, Skanda, Nandin, Indra, Manu, Gandra, 
Kubera, Agastya, the anger of Durvasas and Bhat^arakavidya, O 
Kalydna-tattvatrayarupd (having the three principles of great 



1342 


Brahm&nia Purdtya 


welfare), O Siva&iv&tmika (one who is in the form of Siva and 
Siva ) , O PUrnabrahmaiakti ( one having the complete power of Bra- 
hman ).0 Mah&paramefvarl (highly Supreme Deity), O Mah&tri - 
purasundari , I worship your sandals. Obeisance. Ka Erh Ila Hrirh , 
Hasa, Kahala Hrim , S aka la, Hrim , Airh Klirh Sauh Sauh Klirh Airh 
Srim .♦ 

15. With the utterance of this thousand-syllabled 
Mantra, the devotee should offer handful of flowers. Other- 
wise his worship shall be futile — so say the expounders of the 
Vedas. 

16-20. Thereafter, the devotee shall clean a spot of 
ground by smearing cowdung and place a Drona full of paddy 
there, along with a Drona of pure rice grains of praise-worthy 
colours. A new pot filled with a Drona of water should be kept 
therein. Five gems and freshly cut grass should be put into the 
pot. The water should be rendered fragrant by putting tender 
sprouts and barks of the following trees viz. Nyagrodha (ficus 
religiosa), Aivattha (ficus indica), Mdkanda (Mango). Jambu 
(Rose apple) and Udumbara (ficus elomerata) . He should 
place a ripe and splendid coconut over the pot. After 
worshipping it with fragrant flowers and other things he should 
show incense, light etc. He should repeat Sricintamani 
Mantra (or Srimantra as the wish-yielding Mantra) mentally 
and Malika Mantr.is also. The pot should be considered the 
physical body of Siikamaksi. The Mantras should be repeated 
touching the pot. When they have been repeated one hundred 
and eight times, the lamp sh >uld be shown again (waived 
round) . 

21-24. The teacher blindfolds the disciple with a cloth 
after calling him near in secret. He then makes him pros- 
trate three times, with eight limbs touching the ground. The 
preceptor places flowers in the hands of the disciple and 
makes him offer the same to the deity repeating the following 
prayer — 


•N. gives this mantra as follows : 

Ka Em ila Hrim, Ka-Sa-Ka-La-Hrim* Sa-Ka-La~Hrim Aim Klirh Saufi 
Klirh Aim Sriml 



LalitH-m&h&tmya 43.25-32 


1343 


“ O Sridevi, a mass of mercy, O goddess in the form of 
the greatest refulgence ! This handful of flowers is placed at 
the lotus-like feet of yours. You are my greatest abode. You 
are the greatest Brahman. You are my Supreme deity. From 
to-day onwards protect me and my sons. We seek refuge in 
you.’* 

After saying this, the disciple should place the lotus-like 
feet of the preceptor on his head (i.e. bow down to him). 

25-26. When the sandals are placed on the head by the 
preceptor, it will be due to the merit of the previous birth, 
that should be obtained by serving Brahma, Visnu and Siva. 

After saying this, he should rise up with great devotion. 
He should stand to the left of the preceptor calmly, unpreten- 
tiously and modestly. 

27-28. The cloth bound over his face should be untied 
and the remaining part of worship shall be shown to him. 
The articles for food offering should be sprinkled with the 
water from the gourd ( kept for the purpose) . The Naivedya 
(food offering) on Mahatripura-sundari should be in the form 
of sugar, honey, ghee, plantain fruits and milk pudding. The 
Naivedya should be duly offered. 

29-30. He should whisper the sixteen-syllabled Mantra 
slowely into the left ear of the disciple. Both of them then 
come out and the disciple is made to sit on a wooden plank. 
He should be pure and sit facing the east. The place shall be 
covered with a silk cloth. Repeating the Mantras he should 
sprinkle the water of 6'rikumbha ( sacred pot dedicated to Sri- 
devi) over the disciple. » 

31. The disciple should then take bath in ordinary pure 
water and wear two clothes. He should repeat the Mantra 
one hundred and eight times and then go to sleep. 

32. If an auspicious dream is seen, the Pur^ya (merit) 
thereof is excellent and it shall be added on. If a bad dream 


1 . Rules of discipline while behaving with one’s guru are scattered 
over v.59 to the end of the chapter. 



1344 BrahmAntfa Pur&na 

is seen; he should perform Japa one thousand and eight 
times. 

33. The worship of Tripuramba should be carried out 
in ihe manner mentioned above. If no dream is seen the achieve- 
ment ol Siddhi will be after some long time. 

34. With great devotion the disciple should partake 
of the remnants of offerings unto the goddess which have 
more benefit. The disciple shall imme liately be a sanctifier 
of rows. 

35. The disciple should dedicate unto his Guru (precep- 
tor) his body, possessions and vital airs. He should conduct 
himself obediently subservient to him continuously. He should 
never transgress his words. 

36. One should know that a preceptor is a rare 
redeemer from worldly existence. When pleased he grants the 
splendour of liberation from Samsara. 

37. The meaning of the letter ‘GU* is ‘darkness*. 
The letter “RU” means “One who dispels”. The preceptor 
is called Guiu because he dispels darkness. 

38. After obtaining a preceptor in the form of the 
bes tower of perfect knowledge, one should not have recourse 
to another preceptor. He should consider even the harsh 
words uttered by the preceptor as blessings. 

39. He should at the outset make obeisance to him and 
from him alone should receive secular, Vedic and spiritual 
knowledge. 

40-43. Thus, after carrying out the three types of initi- 
ation, the preceptor should instruct him in everything that 
should be performed. Devotion to Guru is a good conduct 
and malicious mischief towards him is a great sin. Remember- 
ing his (guru's) feet (iLself) is liberation (from samsara). 
This is the procedure as long as this body lasts. By uttering 
falsehood in front of the preceptor, one incurs a very great sin. 
Even by slaughtering a cow or murdering a Brahmana, one 

i 

will not incur such a great sin. An ideal disciple will be saying 
thus: “I have a series of preceptors beginning with Braluna and 
ending with a blade of grass. I have everyone worthy of my 
honour and worship. Who then is not honourable and respect- 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 43.44-52 


1345 


able on the surface of the Earth unto me ?” Such a disciple 
who is favourably disposed towards all is glorified as an ideal 
disciple. 

44. One sanctified by and equipped with many good 
qualities free from impurities, good qualities like decent habits 
and spotless character, is called Si$ya (disciple) because he 
abides by the S&sana (behest) of the preceptor. 

45. If one becomes tired by Japa, one should begin to 
meditate. If one is tired by Dhy&na (meditation) one should 
begin to perform Japa. If one is fully endowed with Japa, 
Dhyana etc., one accomplishes and acquires mastery over the 
Mantra. 

46. Just as, due to the power of contemplation, even 
a worm turns out to be a black bee so also, due to the 
power of ecstatic trance, a man becomes Brahman. 

47. Just as at the time of dissolution, the universe is not 
observed, so also (the external world should not be seen) when 
one closes the eyes (for meditation). This is the characteristic 
feature of Dhyana ( Meditation) . 

48. When the greatest principle that is beyond every- 
thing capable of being described and that is free from aberra- 
tions, is realized, the Mantras become servants along with 
the presiding deities of the Mantras. 

49. Ail his activities, since he strictly adheres to the 
realisation of the unity of Souls, constitute his Daraiana 
(Vision, System of philosophy) . The purpose of Yogic practice 
and penance is served by his Mantra. His (Pieceptor’s) very 
glance constitutes his (disciple’s) asset. 

50 If the false identification with the body is got rid of, 
when the great Atman is realized, one can have Sam&dhis (Medi- 
tation and trances) wherever one’s mind travels. 

51. If one sees and realizes the non-dualistic omni- 
present, quiescent and blissful Atman nothing remains for him 
to be obtained or known. 

52. Eulogistic pi ayer is on a par with ten million wor- 
ships. Japa is on a par with ten million eulogistic prayers; 
meditation is on a par with ten million Japas and getting 
merged (with the Supreme deity) is on a par with ten million 
meditations. 



1346 


Brahmdnia Pur Una 


53. The physical body itself is said to be a temple. 
The individual soul (himself) is MaheSvara (the great deity 
installed therein ) . One should abandon the Nirmdlya ( rem- 
nants of worship) of ignorance and unify souls with the 
concept C ‘I am he**. 

54. When it is covered in the husk, it is paddy. In 
the absence of husk, it is rice grain. The soul bound by the 
noose (of senses) is remembered as the jfiva (Individual Soul). 
Freed from the bondage, It is Mahesvara (Supreme Lord). 

55. The movement of birds in the Hramament is not 
observed ( distinct from the sky) . The movement of aquatic 
beings in water is not discerned (distinct from water) . Similar- 
ly the great conduct of noble-souled ones is not distinct 
from their environment. 

56. The worship connected with daily routine of holy 
rites should be performed during the day. The worship con- 
nected with the Naimittika (needed for a particular situation) 
rites should be performed at night. The performance of 
rites is a K&mya Karma (performance of acts for achieving 
desires) . This is the conclusion arrived at in scriptures. 

57. Recollection of Sripaduka is greater than millions 
and millions of great charitable gifts, millions and millions of 
great holy rites and millions and millions of great sacrifices. 

58. As long as the body is sustained, all activities 
pertaining to one’s caste and stage in life should be carried 
out with or without knowledge for liberation from Karmas. 

59. Whatever comes out of the mouth of the preceptor 
is called S&stra (scripture). Even if it is forbidden (in Sastra) 
one should carry it out. One should not transgress the com- 
mands of the preceptor. 

60. Even if one hails from a high caste, even if one 
possesses great learning and is endowed with wealth, one 
should, after seeing the preceptor from a distance, joyously 
prostrate one’s self before him once and circumambulate him 
three times. 

61. One should bow down to everyone whether a deity 
or a blade of grass regarding that it is the preceptor him- 



Lalitd-m&h&tmya 43.62-70 


1347 


self. One shall bow down to an idol made of metals or clay in 
the belief that it is the deity. 

62. (The following are sinful activities causing people to 
become Brahmaraksasas (demoniac Brahmanas, Brahminical 
demons). If one speaks in contempt of the preceptor or address- 
es him by base terms, if one defeats a Brahmana in arguments 
or if one reveals secret scriptural tenets or makes them public, 
one shall become a Brahmaraksasa. 

63. One shall continuously entertain non-dualistic 
conception, but no non-dualistic feeling in regard to the pre- 
ceptor. One should not censure other people’s religious cults 
or principles nor the Vedas, nor the scriptural texts nor the 
^gamas (philosophical treatises). 

64. If the disciple stays in the same village as the 
preceptor, he should pay ( personal) obeisance to the precep- 
tor during the three Sandhyas (dawn, midday and dusk) . If 
he stays about 3 Kilometres, (Kms) away he shall devoutly 
bow down to the preceptor once every day. 

65-66. If the disciple stays six Kilometres away he 
should present his respects to him during the five Parvans 
(festival days) in the course of a month). If the disciple stays 
at a distance ranging from one Yojana (twelve kilometres) to 
twelve Yojana (one hundred and fortyfour kilometres) he 
should bow down to the preceptor once in as many months as 
there are Yojanas (twelve kilometres). If the disciple stays 
still further he should go to the preceptor whenever he wishes. 

67. One should never approach a king, a deity or the 
preceptor with empty hands. He should offer fruits, flowers, 
garments etc. in accordance with his, capacity. 

68. (A preceptor) is personally Supreme Siva (Para Siva) 
himself encased in human skin. He wanders over the Earth in- 
cognito in order to bless a good disciple. 

69. It is to accord protection to good disciples that 
Siva assumes forms though he is formless. Siva the storehouse 
of sympathy is active in the world like a worldly person. 

70. Sriguru ( the glorious preceptor) is glorified as lord 
Siva himself without three eyes, lord Acyuta himself but not 
four-armed, and lord Brahma himself though not four-faced. 



1348 


BrahmQnia Purdna 


71. Like the blind men who do not see the rising sun, 
only those devoid of good luck do not see Sriguru who has the 
splendour of the greatest principle and who stands before your 
very eyes in the same manner. 

72. The most excellent deliberation is the deliberation 
on reality. The deliberation on Japas is the mediocre one. 
The deliberation on scriptural treatises is base and the deli- 
beration on worldly affairs is the meanest of mean things. 

73. There is no principle more profound than the 
preceptor. There is no greater pleasure than knowledge. 
There is no better worship than devotion and there is no 
greater benefit than liberation from Samsara. 

74. In all Vedas and scriptural texts it is mentioned 
in different contexts and in as many words that SrikamaksI is 
greater than the greatest among Brahma, Vi§nu, Siva and 
others. 

75- 78a. Many pairs are observed and heard of in all 
worlds. Some of them are mutually opposed and some are 
mutually complementary such as Sac! and Indra, RohinI 
and Candra, Svaha and Agni, Prabha (Lustre) and Sun, 
Laksmi and Narayana, Van! and Brahma, Girija and Siva, 
Agni and Soma, Bindu and Nada (sound), Prakrti and Punifa, 
what are termed as Adhdra (support) and Adheya (what is 
supported), Bhoga (enjoyment of worldly pleasures and) 
Mok$a (Liberation), Prana and Apdna, word and meaning, 
affirmative and negative, pleasure and pain etc. There is no 
doubt that all of them are the Supreme Brahman. 

78b-80a. They know that another refulgence has come 
up by the name of Kamak$i which Brahma, Visrui, Siva and 
others perpetually meditate upon. Thus if a person abides by 
the path of $akti> he should be the object of grace of Sridevi. 
He shall attain worldly pleasures and salvation ? 

80b-82a. Those who worship Kamak$i with or without 
Mantras, whether they are women, Vaisyas or Sudras, do 
attain the greatest goal. What then in the case of Ksatriyas 
and Brahmanas who worship with Mantras. 

Even if they are men of the world, they are liberated 
ones certainly, without any doubt. 



Lalitd-mdh&tmya 43.82 — 44. 1 


1349 


82b-83. Naivedya should always be offered during the 
five Parvan days, in the form of sugar, honey, ghee, plantain 
fruit and milk puddings. He who does not worship though he 
is competent will incur the curse of Devi. 

84-87a. If one cannot afford, one should always worship 
Ambika with articles mentally conceived and imagined. A 
householder shall worship Mahadevi with the full equipment 
of auspicious conduct and accompanied by his wife favourably 
disposed towards him. 

A preceptor shall, O Pot-born Sage, mention the code 
of good conduct thrice. If the disciple does not grasp (and 
conform to it), ’the Sin is that of the disciple and not of the 
preceptor. The devotee shall consider the preceptor and his 
wife as well as his parents like this, that they are Laksmi and 
Narayana or Sarasvat! and Brahma or Girija and Siva. 

87b-88, Thus every thing has been briefly recounted by 
me, O Pot-born sage. By concentrating on this much an intelli- 
gent disciple shall become omniscient. 


CHAPTER FORTYFOUR 

Meditation on the Goddess 


Hayagriva said : 

1 . The disciple conversant with the Mantras shall do 
as follows : — 1 

He should enter the special place intended for Japa bring- 
ing with him his seat ( Darbha mattress etc.) . Repeating the 
requisite Mantras duly, he shall sprinkle water (over the place 
of sitting) in the manner mentioned by the preceptor. 


1. W. 1-1 6 (and even later )deal with the procedure of meditating upon 
Lalit&. The main principle is : you can worship a deity after identifying 
yourself with the deity. Hence, the necessity of Nydsas (vide vv.8-18) . 





Brahmdnfa Purdna 


2. He should then meditate upon his own soul and the 
form of the deity withoit any distinction (between the two). 
He should sit in the Padm&sana posture facing the east. He 
shall sit steadily without thinking about anything eke. 

3. He should then make the Trikhan fa Mudrd. After 
making obeisance to the preceptor, elders and others, he should 
perform the rite of Nydsa with ‘Balabija’ Mantras repeating 
each twice in the fingers beginning with the middle finger in 
due order. 

4. He shall then purify the hand and continue the rite 
till Vahniprdkdra (fiery rampart wall) with the respective Astra 
Mantras. 

5. The Mantras beginning with the Pdda (foot) should 
be repeated in the reverse order and those beginning with “ KA 9 
in the usual order. After imposing the Vydpakanydsa (the 
pervading Nyasa) , he shall make it pervaded with Vdgbhava 
etc. 

6. He should allot the three types of physical bodies viz. 
Kdra$a (causal), Sukpna (subtle) and Sthula (gross). Then 
he should perform the rite of Nyasa of the Bdldbija Mantras in 
the navel, in the heart and in the middle of eyebrows. 

7. He shall place the Mdtrkd Mantras in the navel 1 etc. 
in due order after making them contracted at the root ( i.e. 
Mala Mantras) . Then he shall place the Balabijas repeating 
them twice. 

8-10. He should place them on the fingers beginning 
with the middle one, as well as in the two palms and not other- 
wise. Then he should perform the Nyasa etc. in the navel as 
well as on the pair of feet, knees, buttocks, private 
parts, anus, navel, heart and head in due order. He should 
then place in the heart the nine seats viz. Brahma, Vi?nu, 


1 . Letters of alphabet have a special yogic significance. It is presumed 
that all the letters of the alphabet from A to Kfa are distributed on the 
nerve-ple*uses or the Yogic Cobras , from the lowest- M Qlidhira Cakra upto 
the Ajfta Cakra which carries the last two Ha-Kfa on its two 'Petals* thighs 
(vide verse 24). 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 44. 11-18 


1351 

Rudra, I £ vara, Sadagiva, Pu?an, Tulika, Prakasaka and 
Vidyasana too and show it in the heart. 

11*12. Then he should show Mudra called Padmatri - 
khaniayoni . He should then fill (the mouth) with wind and 
produce the sound Hurh Hurh Hurh through half-closed lips. 
Thus he wakens Kundalini (the primordial cosmic energy 
lying encoiled with the body) by the power of Mantras. 
At the end of the twelfth (? repetition) the disciple should 
think about his identity with Siva and then place him in his 
position and place the Bija Mantras of V&gbhava etc. at the 
root, heart and arms. 

13*14. After placing his hands over the entire head as 
well as at the root, in the middle and the tips of the hand in 
due order, the disciple should place them in the limbs, begin- 
ning with the thumb and ending with the palms as well as in the 
heart etc. Then he shall perform Kumhuma Nydsa . 

15. Afterwards he shall perform the Nyasa of pure 
Mdtrkd encased by the third Bija. After placing the first two 
BijaSy he should place the last Bija. 

16-17. Afterwards he should perform the Vinydsa rite 
(placing the hand etc. ceremoniously) of BhUtala (surface of 
the Earth) but not very elaborately. He shall place the eight 
Vargas (groups of letters) in the navel, heart and the throat. 
Among these he shall take £a f ?a, and Sa at the outset and 
place them at the root in the heart and on the head. He should 
place them at the armpit, hip, right shoulder, left shoulder, 
loins and the heart also. 

18. For most of the lower six limbs he shall perform the 
Vinydsa rite through the letters beginning with *DA' (‘Ha* in 
N.) The sage shall be the Sabda*Brahman (Brahman in the 
form of sound) and the metre BhUtalipi* (? the characters of 


*Bhuta4ipi is explained as of the following order: 
1 . Short Vowels-fl,f, u,fj. 

Z. mixed or conjunct vowels e,ai,o t au. 

3. Ka-varga ( gutturals) . 

4. ca-varga (palatals). 

5. Ta-oarga (Cerebrals). 

6. Ta-varga (Dentals). 

7. ParVarga (Labials). 



1352 


Brahmdnia Purina 


the alphabets of the socalled Bhutas* (spirits etc.) 

19-23. Srlmula-Prakfti (The primordial matter) is men- 
tioned as the deity of th's Mantra. The disciple should meditate 
upon Bhairavi favourably disposed towards her devotees, in the 
following manner. She is matchless and she holds the rosary and 
the book in the upper hands and flowery arrows as well as the 
bow and (represents the Mudras viz. (Vara) boon and freedom 
from fear (Abhiti) with the other lotus-like hands. Around her 
neck she wears the Akfamdld necklace ( that accords) protection. 
She has heroic accoutrements covered by necklaces, armlets and 
bangles. She is adorned with gemset ear-rings along with 
divine unguents. Beneath the Lipikalpadruma (Wish-yielding 
tree called letters of Alphabet (?) she stays in an embodied 
lotus. She is identical with the Lipis (characters). She is embel- 
lished by many crores of DiUis (messengers) surrounding her. 
After meditating thus he shall place the letters on the surface 
of the Earth as well in the due order. 

24. He should place the Vargd$faka (eight groups of 
consonants) in those beginning with Mula and ending with 
AjHd (These are the mystical Gakras). After placing $A, SA 
and SA on the head, he shall place the vowels in these. 

25-26. The letters beginning with HA should be placed 
in the five parts of the face beginning with above as well as in 
i he root, in the middle, at the roots of the fingers, in the wrists, 
in the arms and in the feet, on the stomach at the sides viz. the 
right and the left, at the navel and at the back. He should 
place Sa, ?A and SA at the root, in the heart or on the head. 
Or he shall place ‘LA’ and other (letters) too. 

27-30. The order of letters in the BhUtalipi is as follows. 
(At the outset) the five short (vowels) viz. A, /, (t / then the 
conjunct letters four in number (i.e. E , At, 0 and AU) , then 
HA , YA and RA then VA and LA, then A and KA along with 


continued from previous page 

8. Ha, Ta, Va t Ra and La . 

9. Sa, $a, Sa . 

♦They are under the dominance of the following ni ne Iivaras: Brahm&, 
Vi?pu, Rudra, Kubera, Indra, Yama, Varuna, Soma and Devi (consisting 
of three Saktis). 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 44.31-36 


1353 


KHA and GA in the beginning. This is the order in the 
remaining groups. Then $A, SA and SA should be placed. 

The forty two letters are grouped (into nine classes) . 
The first group consists of five letters (the five vowels). The 
second one consists of four letters ( E , AT, 0 and AU). 
Then there are six groups each consisting of five letters ( Ha 
TA , VA, RA and LA and then the famous five groups 
gutturals etc. and the ninth one consists of letters ( &A , SA 
and 54). There are nine Ibiaras (lords) of letters. They 
are Brahma, Visnu and Rudra, DhaneSa (Kubera), Indra, 
Yama, Varuna, Soma and the three Sakti's (the last one 
taken as one deity) . This is the order in the BhUta lipi. 

31. The Pdf ha (Reading) in the Sr$ fi (creation) is thus. 
It is the opposite one in Sarhharti (Annihilation) . The Sthdnas 
(Places of Nydsa) are these alone. But Visarga and Bindu ( Visarga 
and Anusvdra) are to be added at the end of letters. 

32-33. Thereafter, the intelligent disciple shall perform 
Nyasa rites of Rati, etc. along with meditation. They resem- 
ble Japa flowers (China rose). Their bodies are pink like 
saffron. They should be meditated as seated on the left lap of 
Kama holding arrows and bow. 

Kama* is endowed with pleasure in sexual dalliance. He is 
the lover of a loveable woman. 

34. Being lustrous he is accompanied by Mohini (en- 
chantress). He is of loveable body. He follows a lady fond of 
quarrel, with appeasing movements. He is accompanied by 
Vilasini (the graceful and charming woman). 

35. Kama is accompanied by Kalpalata. Kamuka (Lust- 
ful one) is accompanied by a lady of dark complexion. Kama 
is beaming with pure smiles. Bandhaka ( A person who catches) 
is accompanied by Vismrta (v.l. in N. Vismayayuta ‘full of 
adbhuta sentiment.')** 

36. Ranutya (One who diverts himself) is accompanied 
by Vismitdkfi. Kama is accompanied by Lelihanh (Licking) 

•These appear to be a garland of epithets of the God of Love, though 
I have tried to construe them as the description of K&ma. 

••not intelligible. 



1354 


BrahmdtQ&a Purina 


woman. Ratindtha (Lord of Rati) is having quarters for his 
garments (i.e. is naked). He is fond of sexual dalliance. 

37. Ratinatha is accompanied by a beautiful hunch- 
backed woman. He is accompanied by Dhard (? Earth). Ramd - 
kdnta (Lover of Ram& i.e. Vi$nu) is worthy of being worshipped 
by Rama. The Niidcara (Night-wanderer) is enjoying sport. 

38. The lord ofMohini is an auspicious one; Nandaka (one 
who gladdens) is accompanied by Uttama (excellent woman) . 
Nandin (one who gives joy) is accompanied by excellent Suras. 
Nandana (the pleasing one) is one who delights. 

39. The five-arrowed one is endued with good handsome 
features. He is a boy and lord of treasures. He is accompanied 
by a lady fond of quarrel. Again, he is the companion of Rati 
(or accompanied by Rati) . 

40. Flower-bowed one is accompanied by (a beautiful- 
eyed lady) . He is the lord with a good (charming face) . He 
wields a great bow. He is blue in colour (?) and Jamilya (full of 
matted hair) . He wanders gradually. He is the husband of 
Palini. 

41 . Siva’s lover is wandering. It is an illusion. He wanders 
along with a beautiful woman. He who causes illusion is 
attained by Rama. He who is caused to wander is regarded as 
Bhrnga (Bee). 

42. His conduct is confused on account of Locana (one 
having beautiful eyes) with long tongue. She (?) follows that 
which is illusory and conducive to illusion. Mohana (the 
enchanter) follows Ratipriya (one who is fond of sexual 
dalliance ) . 

* 43. Mehaka ( one who fascinates) (is accompanied) by 

Palal&ksi (one whose eyes are like Butea frondosa flowers). 
Fascination is desirable in a housewife. VikateSa (Lord of the 
female deity Vikafa) is the upholder of delusion. He is increas- 
ing in size and is accompanied by Dhara. 

44. Lord of inebriation is incomparable. Manmatha is 
accompanied by Malaya (the Southern breeze) . He is the cause 
of intoxication. He is accompanied by Hladini ( the deity of 
delighting power). He is (sexually) desirous. He has faces all 
round. 



Lalitd-mdh&tmya 44.45-54 


1355 


45. He is the leader with black bees ahead. He is a 
musician accompanied by Nandini. He should be known as 
Ganaka (one who counts) when accompanied by Anamfi 
(Nameless one). He is regarded as a dancer in the company 
of Kali. 

46. When accompanied by Kalakarni (deity of misfor- 
tune) he indulges in playing and joking. When he is intoxicat- 
ed he is regarded as Kandarpa. As the husband of Syamala 
he is a dancer. He is sportive and engaged in amorous 
diversion when accompanied by his vehicle fish) . 

47. Coming into close contact with Unmattd (overpassion- 
ate woman) he rejoices increasing love and lust. 

Thereafter, he shall perform the Nydsa rite of Srikantha 
etc. along with meditation. 

48-50. The disciple shall remember Ardhanarllvara 1 
(lord Siva half of whose body is a woman), whose halves are 
similar (in colour) to saffron and gold, half of whose form is 
the daughter of the mountain. Hara is the king in whose 
hands there are two nooses, rosary and (Mudra) of 
granting whatever is desired. After meditating thus he should 
perform the Nyasa rite of the desired object in the spots of 
Lipis ( characters of the alphabet ) . 

These shall be VaramUrtis (excellent lords (idols)) viz. 
— Srikanthuti, Ananta, Suksma, Trimurti, AmareSvara, UrvISa, 
Bharabhuti, AtithlSa (? TithiSa), Sthanuka, Hara, Candida, 
Bhautika, Sadyojata, AnugraheSvara, Akrura and Mahasena. 

51-54. Then KrodhISa, Candida, Paftcantaka, Sivottama, 
Ekarudra, Ekakurma and Ekanetra along with Caturanana 
(four-faced Brahm&), Aje$a, Sarva, Some£a, Hara, Langali, 
D&ruka, Ardhanarisvara, Umakanta, Capa<jhya, D and in, Atri, 
Mina, Mesa, Lohita, Sikhin, Khadgadanda, Dvidanda, Sumah&- 
kala, Vyalin, Bhujange^a, Pinakin, Khadgeia, Baka, Sveta, 
Abhra, Lakulin, Siva and Samvartaka. 

1. The cult of Ardhan&riivara seems to be once popular in South 
India. In the Kail&san&tha temple at K&fici and other seven places in 
South India we have idols of Ardha-n£ri ivara. (Gopinath Rao — Elements of 
Hindu Iconography II. 1 ) The androgynous figure ( a Ursa cotta bust) discovered in 
the excavation of Taxili and head of an image from R&jgh&t (now in the 
Mathura Museum) show the spread of the cult in the north also, 



1356 


Brahm&n&a Purdna 


55-5 7a. The following are Svaraiaktis 1 (the presiding 
deities of vowels) : — Purnodari, Viraja, Salmali, Lolaksi, 
Vartulaks!, DIrghaghona, Sudirghamukhi, Gomukhf, Dirgha- 
jihvik&, Kuftjari, DrdhvakeSa, Dvimukhi, Vikrtanana, 

Satyalila, and Kalavidya. 

57b-61. The following are the Varnaiaktis (Presiding 
deities of Varnas or letters (i.e. consonants) viz. — Mahakali, 
Sarasvati, these two are endowed with all powers or are accom- 
panied by all Saktis viz. Gauri , Trailokyavidya, Mantratmaiak- 
tika, Lambodari, Bhutamata, Dravini, Nagari, Khecari, 

Mafijari, Rupini, VIrini, Kotara, Putana, Bhadra, KalI,YoginI, 
Sankhim, Garjini, Kalaratri, Kurdini, Kapardini, Vajra, Jaya, 
Sumukhesvari, Revatl, Madhavi, Varum, Vayavi, Raksava- 
dharini, Sahaja, Laksmi, Vyapini and M&ya. 

62-63. The Ranga (platform) should be made with the 
letters (colours) of Bal& mentioned twice before and the sixfold 
Nyasa rites are to be performed for the achievement of identity 
with the deity. The disciple should at the outset place Vighneia 
and others there along with meditation. 

64-7 la. They resemble the midday sun, they have 
elephant-faces and three eyes. They have in their hands the 
noose, goad, boon and freedom from fear (the last two 
in the form of Mudr&s ) and they are endowed with power. The 
following GaneSas are the presiding deities of the fifty one 
letters in due order, viz. — VighneSa, Vighnaraja, Vinayaka, 
Sivottama, Vighnakrt, Vighnahanta, Vighnarat, Gananayaka, 
Ekadanta, Dvidanta, Gajavaktra, Nirafijana, Kapardavan, 

1 . From V. 55 onwards we have the Tantrika-yogic significance of the 
fiftyone letters of the alphabet. Thus for example : 

(i) W.55 to 61 mention Saktis presiding over the letters of the alphabet. 

(ii) W 64-7 la enumerate the Vighnejas i.e. the impediment-warding 
Gage&s. 

(iii) VV.7lb-76a : The Saktis of the above Vighnesas. 

The trouble in tabulating them per letter of the alphabet is due to 
their irregular (less than fiftyone) number in some cases. W.55-57 
give the Saktis of 15 vowels while w.57-61 regard Mahikali and Sarasvati 
as the main deities endowed with 33 Saktis which are supposed to be of 
consonants. Thus the number of Saktis enumerated here is 15 + 33=48 and 
not 51 as required. 



Lalitd-m&h&tmya 44.71-79 


1357 


DIrghamukha, Sankukarna, Vrsadhvaja, Ganan&tha, Gajcn- 
drasya, Surpakarna, Trilocana, Lambodara, Mahanada, 
Caturmurti, Sadaiiva, Amoda, Durmada, Sumukha, Pramo- 
daka, Ekapada, Dvipada, Sura, Vira, Sanmukha, God named 
Varada, Vakratunda, Dvidantaka, Sen an! , GramanI, Matta, 
Mattamusaka-vahana, Jatin, Mundin, Khadgin, Varenya, 
Vrsaketana, Bhaksyapriya, Ganesa, Meghanada and Ganesvara. 

71b-76a. The following are their Saktis : — Sri, HrI, 
Pusti, Santi, Tus$i, Sarasvati, Rati, Medha, Kanti, 
Kamini, Mohini, Tivra, Jvalini, Nanda, Suya^as, Kama rup ini, 
Ugrgl, Tejovati, Satya, Vighnesani, Svariipini, Kamarta, Mada- 
jihva, Vikata, Ghurnifanana, Bhuti, Bhumi, Dviramya,* 
Amarupa (?), Makaradhvaja, Vikarnabhrukup, Lajja, Dirgha- 
ghona, Dhanurdhari, Yamini, Ratri, Candrakanta, Sasiprabha, 
Lolaksi, Capala, Rjvi, Durbhaga, Subhaga, Siva, Durga, 
Guhapriya, Kali and Kalajihva. 

76b-78a Thereafter, the disciple shall perform the Nyasa 
rites of the planets 1 with concentration and mental purity along 
with meditation. He shall remember the sun and other planets 
who have boons and freedom from fear depicted in their hands 
(by means of Mudras) who are embraced by their Saktis and 
who resemble saffron, milk, blood, jasmine, gold, conch, cloud, 
smoke and darkness (the traditional complexions assigned to 
planets ) . 

78b-79. After positing the sun beneath the heart, the 
moon on the head and Mars on the eyes the devotee should 
perform the Ny&sa rite of Sukra in the heart, Budha ( Mercury 
in the middle of the heart), Brhaspati on the neck, Sanaiscara 
(Saturn) in the navel, Rahuin the mouth andKetu on the pair 
of feet. 


*v.l. Dviramba, Uma, Marupi. 

1. Belief in the influence of planets is very old. They (nine in 
number) must be posited by Ny&sa at the various parts of the body; the Nyisa 
of planets is given in vv. 76-79. 

Similar belief about stars (and constellations) prevailed among ancient 
men and they are to be posted by Ny&sa on different parts of the body as 
instructed in vv.80-82a. 





Brahm&n<jia Pur&pa 


80-84a. The Tdrds (constellations) have the lustre of the 

blazing deadly fire but they have the Mudras of bestowing 

boons and freedom from fear in their hands. The disciple shall 
place these constellations after meditating upon them, as 

adorned by all ornaments. They shall be placed in the forehead, 

in the pair of eyes, the pair of ears, in the pair of nostrils, in the 

neck, on the pair of shoulders, then on the elbows (Reading 

should be KUrparayoh but then the metre goes wrong), on the 

wrists, on the breasts, in the navel, in the hips, on the thighs, 

on the knees, on the calves and on the pair of feet. 

The Ny&sa rite of the ceremonious placing of Yoginis 1 
should be performed by the pure disciple in the heart, in the 
navel, in the mystic Plexus called svadhisfhana cakra, in the 
middle of the eyebrow ( the Ajfiacakra) and on the head in 
due order. The disciple shall place the VarnaSaktis ( Saktis of the 
letters of the alphabet) in the middle of the lotus, moon and 
pericarp as well as on the petals. He should place all on 
the tips of the petals of the lotus and on the head. 

84b-89. The following are the Saktis 1 of the letters 
grouped in different classes. The following (?) sixteen Saktis 
(are concerned with vowels, their names being with those 
very vowels except in certain cases). They are Amrta, Anan- 
dinl, Indrani, Isani, Uma, Orddhvakesi, Rdvidu$i. Lrkarika 
Ekapadatmika AiSvaryakarini, Ausadhatmika, Ambika and 
Rak?atmika*. 

The following twelve Saktis should be known in the 
proper order. They are Kalika, Khecari, Gayatri, Ghan(adha- 
rini, Nadatmika, Camunda, Chatrika, Jaya, Jhankarini, 
Samjfia, T^kahasta and T a hkarini. 


] . Yoginis are appropriately posted on the Yogic Cakras in our body 
by Ny&sa (VV 81b-84a). 

2. Letters of the alphabet have their separate Sakti each per letter. 
VV 84b-9i give an alphabetic list of Saktis. Thus VV.84b*86a give the list of 
Saktis beginning with a , d, », f etc. but the number of vowel Saktis is 13 and not 
17* W 86b-91 give an alphabetic list of Saktis of consonants which are 35 as 
given here. Thus Svara»Saktis 1 3 + Vyanjana-Saktis 34 =*47 and 51 (the 
required number for all letters). 

^Actually only 13 Saktis and not 16 Saktis are enumerated here. 



Lalitd-mdhdtmya 44.90-100 


1359 


The following should be known as Dvayapannagd (Ten ?) 
Saktis, Ponkarini, ThankarinI, NaminI, Tamasi, Thahkarini, 
Day a, DhAtri, Nadini, P&rvati and Pha^karinl. 

90. The following six Saktis are in the proper orders— 
*Bandhini, Bhadra, Majja, YaSasvinl, Rama and L&minl. 

91. There are four Saktis viz. Varada, Sri, §an<Jha 
and Sarasvati. Then there are two Saktis viz. Hakim and 
K?ama. 

92. Thereafter, he should place Me$a and other Rdlis 1 
(signs of the zodiac) beginning with right foot and ending with 
left foot in this order viz. — foot, penis stomach, heart, arm, 
head (All of the right side), head, hand, heart, stomach, penis 
and foot (all of the left side). 

93-100. Then the disciple shall perform the Pfydsa rite 
for the following Pithas* ( i.e. holy cities where Devi shrines 
are famous) and one more namely Cakra. These Nyasas are per- 
formed in the mind (altogether fiftyone). They are Varanasi, 
Kamarupa, Nepal, Paun<Jravardhana, Varasthira, Kanyakubja, 

*vardhini in this text is not correct. 

1. Placement of different R&iis (signs of zodiac) on different parts 
of the body. 

2. Geographically the list of Pithas of the goddess is important. 
Some could not be traced and perhaps might be fictitious. These Pithas are 
to be placed in the position of letters per mental Nydsa. The Pithas with 
their modem names are given where necessary on the authority of N.L. 
De's Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and Mediaeval India . If old names are 
current they are retained as such but if a new name is substituted in the 
course of time the new name is given in Brackets. 

The following are the Pithas of the goddess : 

1. Varipasi, 2 KAmar&pa (Assam), 3 Nepal, 4 Paupdravardhana 
(or Pupdra variously identified with Papdua in Malda Dist. and with 
Birbhum, Santal Paraganas), 5 Varasthira (?), 6. Kinyakubja (Kanauj, 
u.p.), 7. Purqafaila (?), 8. Arbuda (mt. Abu), 9. Amratakeivara (?), 

10. Ekamra ( Bhubanei vara, Orissa), 11. Trisrotas (Gafigi ?), 
12. K&makoftha (Kafici : De doubts its identification with Kumbhakop am in 
Tamiln&d), 13. ftailasa. 14. Bhpgunagara (Bha roach, Gi^jarat) 15. Ked&ra?) 
16. Candra, Pu$kara (Pushkar near Ajmer ?), 17. Sri-Pitha (&ri-£aila ? 
Madhya Pradesh), 18. Ekavira (?), 19. J&landhara (Jalandhar, Punjab) 
20. M&lava, 21. Kulanna (?), 22. Devlkofa (the same as Sopitapura 
or Tejapur Assam or probably the town on the K&veri), 23. Gokarpa, 
24. M&rutesvara (?) 25. Attah&sa (Eastern Labhpur, Birbhum Dist., 



BrahmBnja PurOna 


1360 

Purna£aila, Arbuda, Am ra takeS vara, Ekamra, Triarotas, Kama- 

ko$thaka, Kailasa, Bhrgunagara, Kedara, Gandrapuskara, 

Sripifha, Ekavira, Jalandhara, Malava, Kulanna, DevikoSa, 

Gokarna, MaruteSvara, Attahasa, Viraja, RajaveSman, Maha- 

patha, Kolapura, Kailapura, Kalelvara, Jayantika, Ujjayini 

Citra, Ksiraka, Hastinapura, U<Jira, Prayaga, Sa$timaya- 

pura, Gaurisa (?),Salaya, Srisaila, Maru, Girivara, Mahendra- 
giri, Vamanagiri, Hiranyapura, Mahalaksmipura, Purodyana 

and Chayak$etra. These fiftyone are in the order of fifty- 

one letters. They shall be placed in the positions of letters. 

101. He shall place others in the positions men- 
tioned. They are united by the transit (conjunction ?) of 
letters (?). The sixfold Nyasa rite mentioned by l£vara him- 
self has been recounted by me. 

102. After having thus performed the Nyasa rite of the 
parts of the body, the disciple shall be Devatavigraha (one 
who has attained the physical body of the deity) . Thereafter, 
having performed six Nyasas, the disciple should perform 

Sricakra-riy&sa. 1 

Sati's lips fell here and the goddess is called Phullara) , 26. Viraja 
(the country round Jaipur in Orissa, also known as Gada-K$etra) , 
27. Rajavesman (?), 28. Mahapatha (?), 29. Kolapur ( Kolha- 
pur), 30. Kailapura (?), 31. Kalesvara (?) 32. Jayantika (Prag. 

Jyoti$a in Assam : If identified with Vaijayantika may be Banavari (N. 
Kanara Kamatak) , 33. Ujjayini (Madhya Pradesh), 34. Citr& (?), 35. 
Ksiraka (Khlragrama near Burdwan, Bengal, a Sakti Pit ha) 36. 
Hastinapura, 37. Udira (?), 38. Prayaga 39. §astimayapura (near 

Bombay ? 40. Gauriia (?), 41. Salaya (?). 42. &rlsaila 43. Maru (Marvar) , 
44. Girivara (?), 45 Mahendra-Giri (Orissa, Parasurama’s abode) 46. 
V&managiri (?), 47. Hiranyapura (near Jaipur Rajasthan), 48 

Maha-Lakfmlpura (?), 49. Purodyana (?) 60. Chayak§etra (Porbunder 
in Giyarat ? ) 

This list is given in extense to show that (i) the author gives only 50 
places instead of 51 ; (ii) the author sometimes gives the name of the country 
instead of a specific place, ( iii ) the author differs from the lists of &akti 
Pi {has as given in the Devi Bh&gavata, uttarardha vii. 30.54-84 where 108 
Pith as are enumerated. P.K. Desai's Devi Kaia Vol. I, pp. 272- 293 gives two 
different lists of the Pifhas. 

I . After performing the preliminary Ny&sas the devotee is to perform 
the Ny&sa of £ri-Cakra. It is very elaborate and should be read in the 
translation of vv.103 onward. 



Lalitd-m&h&tmya 44.103-122 


1361 


103. With Mantras beginning with Arh&a and ending with 
Anantyamurti he should perforin the Vydpaka (pervading) 
rite. He should place in the heart the Mantras for dedica- 
tion to Mystical circle of Cakreivari (goddess of the mystic 
circle, i.e. Sricakra) 

104-107. He shall place others viz. Ganapati and the rest 
in the positions mentioned. The left thigh is on a par 
with the right thigh. He shall place all of them in due order 
viz. Gane£a, Ksetrapala, Yogini and Batuka. At the outset 
Indra and others should be placed at the tips of the big toes 
of the feet, knee, side, shoulder, head, face and Muladhara 
( the first mystic plexus in the body) . 

The ten Siddhis beginning with A#im& should be placed 
on the shoulder, hand, back, chest, tips of the toes, buttocks, 
arms, back, head and the feet. 

108. The Siddhis are Anima, Laghima, Mahima, 
l£itva, VaSitva, Prakamya, Prapti, Iccha, Rasa, and 
Moksa. 

m 

109-110. Thereafter, O Brahmana, the intelligent 
disciple should place the eight Mother-goddesses in due order 
on the head, to the left, left-knee, right knee, right 
shoulder and left shoulder. 

111-116. Mothers are Brdhmi , M&heSvari , Kaum&ri 
Vaifnavi, Varahl, Indrani, Camunda, and Maha-laksmi. 
These should be known in due order by the learned men. 
He shall place the eight deities of the Mudras on these 
eight positions and place the remaining two on the head and 
the foot. 

Mudras are : — Sarvasamksobhini, Sarvavidravini, 

Sarvarthakargani, Sarvava£akarini, Sarvapriyakarini, Sarva- 
mahankusl, Sarvakhecari, Trikhan<Ja, Sarvabija, Sarvaprapu- 
rika and Yonimudra. These should be known as Mudras. 
The disciple shall place Cakresvari thereafter dedicating the 
Gakra (the mystic circle ) that fascinates the three worlds and 
making it pervade his own physical form. 

Thereafter, he shall place the sixteen Kala and Nitya 
deities in due order. 

11 7- 122a. These deities are — Kam&kar?anarup&, Sabd- 
akar§agarupini, Ahamkararupini, Buddhyakar^anarupini, Spari- 



Brahm&pfa Purina 


1362 

&kar$anarupa, Rupakarsanarupfai, Rasakar$agarupa, Gandha- 
kar$anarupini, Cittakar$anarupa, Dhairyakar$anarupinl, 
Smrtyakar$anarupa, H rdakar$anarupini, Sraddhakar?anarupa, 
Atmakarsanarupim, Amrtakar$ini and Sarirakar^ini. 

The places where they are to be allotted in the Nyasa 
rite, are the right ear, back, shoulder, elbow, back of the 
palm of the right hand, the right buttocks, knee, calf and 
forepart of the right foot. Then in the reverse order as 
regards the left foot etc. 

122b- 123. After placing Cakretl and after worshipping 
the Cakra 9 he should make it pervade his own physical form 
and then place the eight deities beginning with Anaftgakusumd 
in the (right part of) the bone of the forehead, right clavicle, 
right thigh and right calf. In the left it is in reverse order : 

124-125. Those eight deities are : Anangakusuma, Anan- 
gamekhala, Anangamadana, Anangamadanatura, Anangarekha, 
Ana riga vega, Ananganku£a and Anangadharamalini. 

126. After placing Cakresi, worshipping the Cakra and 
making it pervade his own physical form, he shall place the 
the Sakti-deities beginning with Sarvasamkgobhini. 

127. He shall place them in forehead, cheek, root of the 
foot, knee, in the calf both above and below and in the case of 
the left side, in the reverse order. 

128- 131a. (The Sakti deities are) Sarvasamk ?obh i ni, 
Sarvavidravini, Sarvakargani, Sarvaprahladini, Sarvasam- 
mohini, Sarvastambhini, Sarvajrmbhini, Sarvava£akarini, Sar- 
varafijini, Sarvonmadini, Sarvarthasadhini, Sarva^purini, 
Sarvamantramayi and Sarva-dvandva-k^ayankar^. 

13 lb- 133a. After placing Cakresi, worshipping the Cakra 
and making it pervade his own physical form, the disciple 
should perform the Vinyasa rite of the ten deities beginning 
with Sarvasiddhiprada in the right nostril, at the root of 
teeth, right breast, ( right ) elbow and wrist. In the left side 
it is in the reverse order. 

133b- 135. The deities are : — Sarvasiddhiprada, Sarvasam- 
patprada, Sarvapriyankara, Sarvamangalakarigi, Sarvagha- 



Lalitd-m&hfltmya 44.136-148 


1363 


mocinl, Sarvaduhkhavimocini, SarvamrtyupraSamini, Sarva- 
vighnavinaiini, Sarvangasundari and Sarvasaubhagyadayini. 

136-138. After placing Gakre£i and dedicating Cakra 
( If the reading is Samarcya — “After worshipping the Cakra”) 
and having made it pervade (his own) physical form, the 
disciple should place Sarvajfta and other deities in the chest 
and the teeth. 

These deities are : Sarvajfta, SarvaSakti, Sarvajftana- 
prada, Sarvajftanamayl, Sarvavyadhivina£inl, Sarvadha- 
rasvarupa, Sarvapapahara, Sarvanandamayi, Sarvaraksa- 
svarupini and Sarvepsitaphalaprada. 

139-141. After placing Cakre£i, dedicating the Cakra and 
making it pervade his own physical form, the intelligent 
disciple should place at the outset Varna and others and then 
Paksini* and others on the right side of the chin, neck, breast, 
navel and sides. 

Those deities are Vama, VinodinI, (v. 1. Vimocani) Vidya, 
Vasita, Kamiki, KameSvari, Para, MohinI, Vimala, Aruna, 
Jayini, Sarvesvari and Kaulini. These are their names mentioned 
by the wise. 

142-143. After dedicating the Gakra and having 
made it pervade (his own) physical form, he should place 
Gakre£vari in the heart after making a triangle. In the 
directions beginning with the East outside it, the intelligent 
disciple should place the four weapons. In the middle, in the 
corners beginning with South-east he should place the four 
Pi(has. 

144-148. After making a circle in the middle he should 
place the sixteen Nitya deities viz. : Kame£vari, Bhagamalini, 
Nityaklinna, Bherundini, Vahnivasinika, Mahavajresvari, (Siva) 
Duti, Tvarita, Kulasundarika, Kulya, Nilapataka, Vijaya, 
Nitya mangala, Prabhamalini and Gitra. These should be 
placed in another triangle in the heart, beginning with the foot 
(i.e. Apex kept down-wards) . 


♦The reading vafini in N. 44.140 is correct as there is no Pakfipi in the 
following list. 


1364 


Brahm&o4a Purdga 


149-151. Pramodini the eternal goddess and goddess 
Tripurasundari are on either side and the disciple shall place 
Devi Akhan^ajagadambika in their middle. 

After placing Cakresvari in the heart and making the 
Gakra raised up, he should show Mudra named Yoni and 
perform Japa of Sarvananda Mantra. Thus the Cakra- 
devi of the mystical circle will become one’s own. 1 


1. Absence of usual concluding remarks show that Lalita episode 
is not formally completed here. 



rr v *■ r • r i ^rvT" r r:jr ^ , 

4iu ^ m *’ 1 ■ k » ;-»■ r; 


<fi> 


v * 


| - A -«■-*- 


»■ *- « 






< 5 PTO 


U 


Vi y rrft-fi i, i, „ ^ ^ k . , . - 

n>$4? y,,> fT - 

4«r *{&■ *fa*i 


— ~Vt — 

'*'■ t^» I 0 1 * , J; i J t-i j 

'fT-T-^'Vv'j 1 ^*1 ^ ’ j 7 4 'i 

J ri <i <!( ' : « ‘J i 1 ’ 

'■MNj«m;TvM T ;;i i r.-j. n 




— t M ■, ] -: - yty-jfff q^4 — 

T?T^|trj - I r ^.v, il'V' ’■ ■ .; 5 M iJ •■'■*• ,r r- 

t si '"t~A ■ *« "" , - > r".r,’ «• /', (, v .•: , , j ! .• - * * ; j- i: 

% , o - J ' j- |J 

trtU'Tlf •• f ».* r •* ; i *f ■ r >' ■ ■! I-' , j nr/; 4 , /■ I; . y r y * ; *rr, 

^OJTn f r^TA r *»•»;, rr; rr t^ttc 

t /• i.j ’ ."l.'i r r <f ^t/'w r T’’ rr.T* 


41 csrf^rw’ ??ra5fir — 

^ . *v 


V 1 > 4 


rr^irffw frnf* ~ 

~ ".TT.:r frjr*T> wro) 


^ ; ti ^CTnjinT*^*? ~ 
>i" Kxy\: t^: 4 ■:■,• 


v *y, 1 ‘ \ m | 4 I # 





^ *io>nk f7r 


v\y **T- 

,’* JJ*/’ vj^t. 

; t{F <?; _ 

7 JU , 


tr.-p tii 4 k 

— 4 — 


n5^ ni 


■ f.'i - “ i 


fr* _• \ . " jjr 

i ' .ax i;.T r* M^rrw; 


L 


<w 


iii 


Ji! i i 'i ,+ 

- ynr <stn ffrm it — ^ Pk 


r 

...J 


w 


7 


vr ij 


Mir ^>1 /' 3 j «r v-r i :r' , 4,V^! ( 

■ j i 3 ) v *■/ m ^ ; r y) ^ ii: w) 

'Mi-)* 

6)51 

*)* «^q’y//r , 

£)x jrfrs-rud 

?) f r 


S M >r* i** /* - V <f ■ 


1 J 4 , .■■jirf7Ttrj 


i: 


- ft^TUf >r — 

qtrtj-ah: [ j \i 

i r*r iii 

lr 

J ryrA^-CT :^i 

v'Tj^vir * I 


i 


i>- 


r- 


u 



t ^ ^r. 

y w- 

jir ■ t r, 

o) yi&'s - 


> ' • 1 J | . 4 t' ^ 

’ /•<<'?/ •> 1». * -r/ 

- ^ - 
* ; ' ■ 



v =. i, 








^ , c.fsfja 

i 

jv »;,r^;-i , 1^-* r 

' 5 |J. fJ'j-H ^ 

‘t ic, ,J y s 1 : 


4 j,V|’W 


C <7 tj^rr 


3 • 

it 


J ; 


l i 


'$r<p, yvyi;/ 

7^fTT 


h ^ 

r 

4-tiurur 

V* 

rfjT^ 

3 ) 4 >^ J »• Mr 

■rii<j,r } 

f ' 'i - rj ’^ r . 

^ V) ’ .’ MM *' 


•* } i \ i-lS J-.fT, 

♦ ' t ' . 

y)y U |Mli!, 


T ' J M r ( ' * i -4" '4T j M 


w?.Ji 

<irnt rrn 


< ir-T.' M- VPJ }lf^ L * 
j • r^^Tr-VISIJTf^l 
V '^I^TAT J4 JJT3-ft I ' ♦ 


i * u r. r- v rr 
^ r*," *> ?:■ 

i V . / J rf X/ J ’ '3,*7 

^ * f jfM ;n ’3,«r 
i ; 4 \ .T .' n '* wr 

i)^ ^ ^*$< T r **' 




r 


itt 


m ' va*-‘ '5\ v '* v 

::»m i ; -4 1 ^ 

' ^-V 


;,ir . 1 _ 


» • i » * f T » .t 

t: I ■ f : ',j 

4 '.^r.‘r ■». rf it ir : - , 5 — 

. .. ’/ ,’-fj j\f ^r-' 


* 


^ — 


irf 3 ^ 

- 


J£m£ **bl r ’“—’. 1** V J 


H-J . V ^ . 

r-e^ ~ 




■’?•. • 

»' Mir fflfe 


< vf 


< 7 , “r-A Ci* ., .._ 

\ 1 u >» i - 

»(*tr M. wh vf ( 
m Jj" 


> •.)•%'! T ,i 1 jrtt r Vj I 

r . ' 1 1 r T 

;.f T/ - J’ >t’ 

.«■ ^ T> ' 4 t 


i> s # 

>./*r • ! 

' */•*’! * 4 TV 

— T^^nin TTffr _ 

4 " ^ r ^4 

'S’" : -r r |“ J 1 its ir i ’i rO ' 

" : r:.rr -^.j 


Soep. 1325 




1 . 

is not fc 



INDEX 


A 

Abhimanyu , bom of Subhadra-Arjuna 
Abhiiasta 573 

Abhra , a cloud Derivation 217 
Abhutasamplava (annihilation of all 
living beings) 356, 975-978 
Abhyagata, Atithi (guest) as synony- 
mous terms 551 
Abhyuksapa (sprinkling) 547 
Abodes of gods, eightfold 1015 
Abuddhi-purvaka (not preplanned or 
_ unpremeditated — prdkrta Sarga 3 1 
Acamana 546-547 

Acamana (Sipping of water) 547 ff 
Acdrya , his qualifications 316 
Acchoda ( r ) 499 
Acchodaka, a lake 530 
Adhyavasdya (Determination) 29 
Adibaka , the combat fought by Vasisfha 
and Visvamilra after assuming the 
form of Adi and Baka (two aquatic 
birds) 819 fn 
Adibaka the sixth battle 908 
Adinarayana, assumes the form of Mo- 
_ hini 1068 
Adrika , an Apsaras 499 
Adrika , wife of King Amavasu 500 
Advaita view through the mouth of 
Radha, consort of Lord Krsna 714 
Agamyagamana carnally approaching 
a forbidden woman 1050 
Agastya, husband of Lopamudra 1 229 
Agastya and Hayagriva on the Nature 
of Violence 1033 

Agastyapatra, a sacred mark on the 
forehead 1292 

Agastya' s Pilgrimage to sacred places 

1031 

Agneyi Dhdratid 125 
Agni (fire) as the tongue of gods 39 
Agni (the fire-god), three types : 
Divine, terrestrial, watery 232 ; 
Other kinds 233 ft 
Agni, race of 113; fortynine ritualistic 
functions related to 113 fn 1; 
Churned out of waters 115 fn.l 
Agni-s, mutual relations of 1 14 fn 1 ; 
Divisions of Dhisriya fires into 
Viharonlyas and Upastheyas explained 
116 fn 2 

Aonihotra, on a steep snow-capped 
precipice 537 
Agniffoma 550 


Ahamkdra Mahdidla, the great chamber 
of Ego 1264 

Ahimsd (non-injury) Intro. LX VI 
Aila and Iksvaku dynasties originated in 
Treta and destroyed in Kali 952 
Aims or goals of man’s life 300 
Airavata, birth of Airavata elephant 16 
Aja, son of Raghu and father of Dasa- 
ratha of Ayodhya 

Aja and Sapda, two Pi sac as who marry 
tlicir daughters to a Raksasa 445; 
their progeny ibid 

Ajatuhga, a holy centre for &raddha 527 
Ajfiana (ignorance), its nature 1011 
fn 1 

— Cause of three types of bondages 

1011 

— explained 1012 

Akharida — -Jagadambika a deity in 
the centre 1364 

Akrtavrana, a Brahmana boy saved by 
Paras'urama from a tiger 
Akrtavrana — a companion-disciple of 
_ Parasurama 721 

Akiti (Akuti) 110 

Akriira, his character 887 
Ahum, his generosity 887 
Aksauhirii, a division of army 704 
Akfauhirii — a unit of soldiers 1131 
Akfauhiriis of soldiers 1143, 1161 
Alaka (c ) 166 

Alaka (Capital City of Kubera) 842 
Alakanandd (r) 

Alakananda (r) — Gahga 783 fn 1 
Alambeya-s a group of Raksasas 449 
Alphabet , Tantrika-Yogic significance 
of letters 1356 

Amarakantaka (m.) 522 fn 2 
Amaranth, flower 512 
Amaravati (a city) 525 
Amdvasu (k) 499 

Ambasfi — the country of the tribe of 
Ambutai in N. Sindh 933 fn 
Ambika , her description 1313 
Amitdbha group of Devas — 20 in 
number 959 
Amrtd( r) 176 

Amiumdn, grandson of Sagara approa- 
ches Kapila, appeases him and 
brings the horse-back 773 ff. 
Kapiia’s boon to him. ibid. 

, installed as Crown Prince 

775ff 



1368 

, son of Asamafljasa and grand- 
son of Kesinl 760 
Anandavdpikd lake of bliss 1263 
Ananta (m. ) 628 
Ancient Lores Intro. LX 
Andhaka 17 

Andhaka— Candanodakadundubhi 
Andhakara , the eighth battle 909 
Andhras 545 

Ahgamdlini, a deity 1336 
Ahgdrapatana 1250 
Ahgiras, the race of 404 ff 
Animal- sacrifice, Brahmanical pro- 

test 298 

King Vasu’s support of animal 
sacrifice became a cause for 
his fall 299 fn 1 
Ah j ana (m.) 167 
Annapurna, a deity 1273 
Annihilation , the extent of the period 
977 

Antaras of the deities 1 280 
Antelope, black in colour 1121 
Anusahga corresponds to Vamsa, birth 
and genealogies of Brahmarsis 
(Brahmanical sages), Devar?is 
(Celestial sages) and Rajarsis 
(Royal sages) 

Anutapta (r) 176 

Apardjita , the horse of Lalita, a des- 
cription : 1 099 

Apava, his penance-grove was burnt 
by Karttavirya 874; An anecdote 
why it was burnt 874 ff 
Apava Vasis^ha curses Karttavirya 
649 fnl 

, Vasis(ha distinguished from 

Vasisfha, the narrator of the Para- 
surama Legend 649 
Apsaras (divine damsels) 1246 fn 2 

, or celestial damsels of great 

fame 1247; Their names ibid ; 
fourteen sources of their origin ibid 
Apsaras , their fourteen groups 899 
Aptorydma , a Soma sacrifice 91 fn 4 
ArdhandrUvara , Lord Siva half of whose 
body is a woman 1355 
ArdhanariSvara idol from Taxila as well 
as from Rajaghat 1355 fn 1 
ArdhandrUvara temple at Kafici 1355 
Army , six units 739 
Arufia ( m ) 167-168 
Arufia as Garuda, sons of Vinata 440 
Arundhati, wife of Vasisjha 484 
Arvdk-srotas= manusya sarga, fourth 
type of creation 44 
Asamafljasa, his banishment 756 ff 
AsamaHjjsa , possessed by a Pisaca 760; 
his former birth ibid ; His cruel 
nature 761 ; His banishment 762 ; 


Brahmdntfa Purdna 

Bhagavata account differs from Bd. 
P. ibid fn 1 

Asamafljasa , son of Kesinl 759 
Asamafljasa prince, different versions 
in the Pu.*arias about his life and 
character 761 
Ashbath, instructions 265 
Asipatravana, a hell 1250 
Asita (m. connected with Sage of that 
name ) 526 

Affaka , a Sraddha 818 fn 1 
As faka son of Disadvati and Visva- 
mitra 849 

Astronomy in pre- telescope age 198 fn 
Asura, a derivation 86 fn 1 
Asura generals 151 
Asuras, Daityas , Ddnavas 426 ff 
A suras, deprived of Nectar 1068 
A-suras — non-wine-imbibers 1063 
Asuras resort to the mother of their 
preceptor-Sukra for protection 91 4ff; 
Visrm kills the lady and is cursed 
by Bhrgu, the husband of the woman 
914; As a result of the curse Visntu 
takes birth among human beings 
for seven times. 

Asuri, An ancient teacher of Sankhya 
system 1 003 
Aivattha (a tree) 525 
Alvins, Nasatya and Dasra, sons of 
Vivasvat and Samjna in the form 
of a horse and mare respectively 
799 

Atharva-Veda 517; 2 sets of Mantras 
397 fn 3 ; genealogy of teachers 
345 ff; divisions of the text 346 fn 1 ; 
number of mantras 348 fn 2 
Atitvaritavikranti, a deity 1098 
Ativiraf extremely Superior being 716 
Atma-nivdsins — residents of the Self 
1007 

Atman, its nature 1018, 1019 
Atri, Descendants of 483 ff; progeny 
of 16 

Audbhida (m) 671 
Aupanisada Purusa 338 fn 1 
Aurva, a dialogue between — and Para- 
surama 581 ; description of his 
hermitage 753, 754; His reception 
to Sagara when the latter visits 
him 755; His enquiry for the pur* 
pose of visit 735 ; the wives of King 
Sagara propitiate the sage ; 
His gratification at their propitia- 
tion 758; His boon to the queens 
ibid; who invented the fire missile 
Intro. LXX 
Aulanasa niti 648 
AuHra 525 
Avabhrtha bath 1024 



Index 


1369 


Avasarpipf — a time-cycle 176 
Aoidyd (i) Cosmic aspect of 41 in 3; 
(li ) second type and stage of medi- 
tated creation — Tiiyak-srotas 42 
fh 2 ; (iii) third type of creation called 
Ordhva-srotas or Deoasarga-cTea- 
tion of heavenly beings 43 fn 1 ; 
(iv ) fourth creation called arvdk-srotas 
(down-currented) such as manusya- 
sarga; (v) fifth creation — Anugraha- 
sarga; five joints of, viz Tam as, 
Moha, Mahamoha, Tamisra, Andha- 
Tamisra 41 fn 3 
Avyakta (the unmanifest one) 29 
Ayodhyd, the capital city of King 
Dasaratha; Dasaratha’s return to 
the capital 1324; A King of — rela- 
ted to Jamadagni and an ally of 
Parasurama driven out of the city 
by Haihayas 736; Sage Aurva pro- 
tects the expelled King in his 
hermitage 736; The King dies of 
grief 736; the queen gives birth to 
a child later on known as King 
Sagara of Ayodhya 737 
Ayu, his line of rulers of Kasi 830; 
son of Pururavas and Urvafi. 
25 fn 1 ; installed as King by the sages 
after the death of Pururavas 22 
Ayuta, son of Yadu 21 

B 

Bald, a deity 1273 
Bald bija-mantra 1 350 
Baldhaka and seven generals of Asura 
Bhanda killed 1151 fT 

• m 

B aid tap od gar a, a region where Martan^a 
Bhairava shines 1 265 
Bali (k) granted boons by Brahma 
933; establishes four castes 933 
Bali, his period of rule 910 
Bali, son of Virocana and a King of 
East India 936 fn 1 
Bali bound over by Vamana 909 
Bandhas — bondages of 3 types caused 
by ignorance 1011 

Battle of one hundred years between 
Suras and Asuras 925 
Battles , Twelve, between Suras and 
Asuras, Intro. LV 

Battles caused ruin to both — Suras 
and Asuras 910; were inauspicious 
to common people 910 
Bhadrakdli 696 

Bhadrasena , King of Varanasi had 
hundred sons who were killed by 
Divodasa 855 
Bhadraiva— China 
Bhadrasomd, a river 216 


Bhadrdvati or Bhadrasoma Syrdaria 

783 fn 1 

Bhagamdldpuri 1 229 

Bhagiratha , bom of King Dilipa I 831 ; 

brought Ganga to the earth 831 
Bhagiratha, grandson of AmsumSn 774 
Bhagiratha , son of Dilipa 781 ; His 
propitiation of Ganga 781 

Bhdglrathi 1081 
Bhdglrathi --Ganga. (r) 532 
Bhairavas, 10 in number : Hetuka, 
Tripurari, Agnibhairava, Yama- 
jiliva, Ekapada, K&la, Karalaka, 
Bhimarupa, Hatakesa, Acala 

Bhairavas Asitanga etc. stationed on 
the sixth step 1114 
Bhairava guilty of Brahmin-slaughter 
1316; His meditation on Srldevi 

1 31 7 

Bhakti (devotion), threefold : Uttam& 
(the highest), Madhyama (the 
middle one), Kani^tha (the lowest) 
667 

Bhayfay an asura 1072; his assistant 
chiefs 1078; his wives ibid; enchan- 
ted by Visnu’s Maya 1079; his 
birth from the fire of anger of 
Rudra 1077; Crowned by Sukra 
1078; his brave sons 1131; his 
episode 1073 ff; invested with royal 
paraphernalia 1078; slain 1197; 
Bhanda advised by Sukra to give up 
Maya 1 082 ; advised by his minister 
Srutavarma and Bhimakarma 1082 

Bhanda reaches the Valley of Hima- 
vat to attack Devas 1081; unable 
to shatter the wall raised by the 
Mother 1082, 1083 
Bharata 618 fn 1 
Bharata, hermitage of 533 
Bharata (C), the birthplace of fourteen 

Manus 149 

Bharata (Country) from Bharata, son 
of Rsabha born of Nabhi and 
Merudevi Intro. LVIII 
Bharata, 9 divisions 174 
Bharata, a Karmabhumi, land of holy 
rites 1058 

Bhdrata, a subcontinent 778; its posi- 
tion, expanse ibid 

Bhdrata, after the name of Manu called 
Bharata because he supported the 
people 1 50 

Bhdrata , as Karmabhumi 150 
Bhdrata, countries named after tribes 
settled there 157 fT 
Bhdrata , description 149 ff 
Bhdrata , its seven Kulaparvatas 152; 
their identification 152 fn 2 



1370 


Brahmitfia Purina 


Bharata , origin of ihe name 140; Jain 
tradition regarding the name 140 
Bharata , original name Hima 140; 
derived from Manu Bharata, so 
called because he maintained the 
subjects 150; MP derives the name 
from Bharata, son of Nabhi 150; 
Divisions of Bharata and their 
identification 1 50-1 51 
Bharata , rivers 153 ff; their identifica- 
tion 153 ibid fn 1, 2, pp 154- 156 and 
footnotes on these pp. 

Bharata and its nine sub-divisions 1 50fF 
Bharata seven Kulaparvatas 152; 
Other mountains 152, 153; their 
Identification Ibid 

Bhdrati (goddess of speech) and Sri 
(goddess of wealth), born of the 
eyes of Adisri 1306 
Bhdrgava-missile, developed by Aurva 
740 

Bhdrgava Paraiurdma descends from 
the Sahya mountain and reaches 
the shore of the lord of rivers 786; 
liis talk with Varuna, threatens 
Varuna who submits to his desire 
789; Varuna’s apology 790 
Bhdrgava Paraiurdma, His last visit to 
Mount Mahendra 732; His per- 
formance of a horse-sacrifice 733, 
also fn 1 ; His donation of the 
conquered Earth to Sage Kasyapa 
734; His penance of atonement at 
the mountain Mahendra 724; 
His report of the battle with Kartta- 
virya wherein the latter was killed 
722; Record of his visit to Brahma- 
loka, Sivaloka, attainment of an 
esoteric mantra 722; Record of 
his second visit to Sivaloka, His 
encounter with Ganesa, the felling 
of the tusk of Ganesa, the rage of 
Parvati, reconciliation brought by 
the intervention of Radha, consort 
of Krsna 723; His return after 
penance to his father’s hermitage; 
his grief on hearing about the death 
of His parents; his vow to kill all 
Ksatriyas 726, 727 ; kills &ura and 
his warriors; slays Ksatriyas, offers 
libation of blood to the manes in 
the penance-grove of Kuruksetra 
729 

Bhdrgava Paraiurdma, sages* conversa- 
tion with him on the issue of Go - 
karya-kfetra 785 

Bhdrgava ( Paraiurdma ) reaches the 
hermitage of his father 721 
Bhdrgava Paraiurdma reclaims land 
from the sea 790 


Pity's advise to desist from further 
slaughter of Ksatriyas 731 
Bhdrgavas, their migration from West 
Asia after the fall of Troy Intro. 
LXX. 

Bhasma (ash) dear to Siva 262 
Bhautya Manu , his office-bearers 967 
Bkdvand (conception) 498 
Bhavdni , daughter of Himalaya, as 
Sati, daughter of Daksa in her 
previous birth 486 

Bhimasena , a musician Intro LXXX 
Bhrgu , 647; His wife restored to life 
by his power of penance 914; son 
of Brahma 650 ; the first Prajapati 
the race of 402 ff; 

Bhrgus and Angiras, narratives of 1 6 
Bhrgutunga 531 ; a mountain in Nepal 
on the eastern bank of Gandaka 
where the hermitage of sage Bhrgu 
was situated 869 
Bhuta-lipi 1351 
Bh uta-s — spirits 1351 fn 
Bhuta-s — attendants of Rudra, their 
characteristics 467, 468, their sixteen 
tribes 468 

Bhuvana-koia Intro. LVI 
Bhuvanakoia — different regions consti- 
tuting the universe 978 fn 2 
Bilva (a tree) 525 
Bindu Cakra (circular spot) 1275 
Bindu Lake, source of Gang a. 1 65 ; 

streams of 165 
Binduptfha 1284 

Bindusara (lake) justification for its 
nomenclature 1 68, 1 69 
Birds aquatic 594 

Boar , Divine, in yajna terminology 38 
Boar- Incarnation of Visnu described, 
38 

Brahma (Burma) 531 
Brahmd , afraid of Sakti and her gob- 
lins 1041 eight sons of 397, 485; 
discrepancy in number 397 fn 1 ; 
sons of — as Prajapatis 400 four 
faces 34, his nature and personality 
explained 34, 35 ; his 8 mental sons 
485 ; his merge into the equilibrium 
of three gurias 957 fn 1 ; his request 
to Kamaksi for her residence at 
Kafic! 1304; desires both Visrui 
and Siva to stay at Kanci ; resembles 
coral in complexion 1258; His 
residence in coral enclosure 
Brahmd, Vis$u, Maheia as sons of 
Laiita 1227; their abodes 1274 
Brahmd, Viftiu and Rudra deluded by 
M£ya 1310 

Brahmd and £iva both with five faces 
1315 



Index 


1371 


Brahma and Vifnu, deluded by Siva’s 
Maya 1316 

Brahma as the sacrificing lord of sacri- 
fice 581 

Brahma curses Indra 1059 
Brahma, in his lotus seat 1258 
Brahmaearin, feeding a 498 
Brahmahrada (a lake) 527 
Brahmakunda (eddy of) 529 
Brahmaloka , abode of Brahma 1258; 
World of Brahma, a brief desci ip- 
tion 805 

Brahma-nirvana , concept 61, 61fn 
Brahman, expounders of — 324 
Brahman : means of attainment 353 
Brahman , Saguna 1313 
Brahmana , how to become — 529 
Br&hmanas , their modes defined 329 
BrahmandaP. the title Intro XVII; 
Extent Intro XVIII ; Position Intro 
XVIII; Transmission Intro XIX; 
Place of Composition Intro XIX; 
Chapter concordance of — and 
Vayu-Purana Intro XX; — and 

Narada Purana Intro XXII ff; Old- 
Javanese Recension Intro XXVI fT 
Brahman da , nomenclature 1 fn 1 ; 
Contents Ibid; As an independent 
work ibid; narrated by Vayu 8; 
five topics of 8; divided into four 
sections 8 

Brahmarida as Mahapurana Pailca- 
Iaksana characteristics ; Sarga, 
Pratisarga, Manvantara, Variisa 
and Vams&nucarita Intro XXX ff 
Brahmarida Purana, Etymologies in Intro 
LXXXI 

Brahmanda Pur ana, line of transmission 

4 

Brahmanda Purana narrated by Brahma 
originally. Brahma’s disciple Vayu 
recounted it to sages of Naimisa- 
ranya at the Sattra of twelve years 
27 fn 2 

Brahmardksasas 4-16 

Brahmaraksasas , Braliminical demons. 
The causes wliicli lead to become — 
1347 

Brahmaraksasis 446 
■ 

Brahmarfis (Braliminical sages) 95 
Brahmarsi , Devarsi, Rdjarsi, their names 
and authorities explained 350 
Brahmasana, a mat made of Darbha 
crass 784 

O , — 

Brahma-Sdvarni , Second Savarni 963 
Brahma* s one head cut off by Bhairava 

1316 

Brahma* s rage over the murder of 
Trisiras, his son 1059 
Brahma's world of gold 652 


Brahmatfrtha (a holy place for Sraddha ) 
528, 536 
Brahmatuhga 531 

Brahmi and others stationed on the fourth 
step of the chariot Geyacakra 1113; 
On the same step are stationed 8 
Kumdris — Laksini, Saras vati, Rati, 
Priti, Kirti, Santi, Pu?ti, andTusti 
1113 

BrahmopadeSa — Gayatri mantra 1051 
Brahmopeta, a Raksasa 380 
Brhadbala 692 

Brhadbala his distruction of Dhruva 16 
Brhaspali, his sexual relation with 
his brother’s wife 934 
Brhaspati, his wife abducted by Soma 
840; his efforts to restore Indra to 
his position 858 ff 

Brhaspati as the leader of Devas 913 
Brhaspati assumes the form of Sukra 
and deludes Asuras 921; Sukra 
reveals himself to Asuras who 
deny his prcceptorship 922 
Brhaspati- Mamatd episode 934 ff 
Bruva (Brahmaria-impostor) 1056 
Buddhi-purvaka planned or premedi- 
tated 31 

Buddhiiala (Chamber of intellect ) 1 263 
Buddhist Bhikfus , a reference, its bear- 
ing on date 307 fn 1 
BuJha , his chariot 229 
Budha , his son Pururavas from Ila 
Buffalo , vehicle of Dai^danatha 1119 

C 

Caitraratha (park) 166 
Caitraratha forest 342 
Cakra (m) 174 

Cakra deities — deities of giricakra 1258 
Cakra of 16 avaranas with Rudra as 
the central 1253 fn 1 
Cakraraja , Chariot of Lalita, its 9 
steps 1108 

Cakraraja, the leading cakra of Lalita, 
a de*scnplion 1123-1124 
Cakraraja of Lalitadevi 1107-1115 
Cakras, their presiding deities, their 
protectresses 1275 fn 1 
Cakravartin : his seven jewels 294 fn 1 
Caksus (r) 168 
Caksusa Manvantara 381 
Cakfusmati, a deity 1272 
Can4ika^ - Maya, killed Mahisa, Sum- 
bha and Nisumbha 1129 
Candra (r) 179 
Candrabhagd (r) (Chinab) 534 
Candragupta, the minister of Kartta- 
virya 636 
Candra-Prabha (m) 



1372 Brakmdnia Purdna 


Candratirtha Kumar! = Cape Comorin 
or Kany&kumar! 525 
Candrik&dvara , the doorway of Moon- 
light, where the moon-god perform- 
ed penance and attained splen- 
dour 1 266 

Car aka Branch of Black Yajurveda, a 
list of prominent Adhvaryus 326 
Carakas An etymology 341 fn 2 
Caste , classification made during the 
Treta period 293 

Caste , origin of 51. Echo of Purusa 
Sukta Rv.X.90.51 

Caste originated from Visnu. It merges 
in him. again 653 
Castes 301 ff 
C&turhotra 320 
Cdturvidya 320 

Cdturvydha (One with four arrays) 
35 

Celestial damsels , their fourteen sources 
of origin 1246; 1247; drink liquor 
from the Kalpa-trees 1247; medi- 
tate upon Lalita devi ibid. 

Central Asia, an integral part of the 
Bharata of the Puraniic world 12 
Chamber hall of Bha#da 1127 
Chariot , given to Yayati by Indra 861 

, remained with the Kings of 

Puru’s line upto Janamejaya 

, disappeared with Pariksita 861 

, given to Brhadratha of 

Magadha by Indra 862 

, taken from Brhadratha by 

Bli!ma after killing Jarasandha 

, gifted to Srikrsna by Bhima 

862 

Chariot of Dapdanatha, the Commander- 
in-Chief 5 Steps 1116 fn 1 — 1st 
step — Bindu, seat of Dandan&yika ; 
2nd step — seat of 3 deities : Jrm- 
bhini, Moliini, Stambhini; 3rd 
step — seal of Andhini ; 4th step — seat 
of 6 deities, 7 Dhatus; 5th step — 
seat of 8 guardians of quarters, 
gods, demi-gods Nagas etc.; 6th 
step — seat of 8 deities 
Chariot of stars and planets 229 
Charioteers of Lalita 
Cid-Vahni, fire of knowledge and con- 
sciousness 1271 

Cintdmarii , her abode in the centre of 
&ripattana 1274; her inner Cham- 
ber 1271; her mansion in the great 
park of lotuses — 273 
Cintdmarii mansion , a description 1274 
Cintdmarii mantra 1342 fn 
Cintdmarii stones, three crowns made of 
1274; 3 forms of crowns — Iccha, 
Kriya and Jhana 1274 


Citragupta, the leader of Yama’s sol- 
diers 1250 

Citrajiva , a bow of Mantrinayika 1104 
Citrakarmd lord of ganas 1076 
Citrakufa (m) 526 fn 1 
City of Lalitd , a description 1089 
Clouds, their kinds 217, fn 2; their 
description 217, 218 
— Pufkaravartaka 218; Parjanya 219; 

219; their varieties 214 

Clouds wind-bearing 217 fn 2 
Constellations (Taras), their posting on 
the various parts of the body 1 358 
Continents, their Common features 
from Plak?a to Sakadvipa 1 38 fn 2 ; 
Distribution 144 fn; four-continent 
(Caturdvipa) theory 146 
Continents , Sub-con tinents, their num- 
ber 66 

Continents and their Sub-Divisions 134 
Cosmic Egg 192; Constitution of 32; 
enveloped by seven elemental shea- 
ths 31 ; Contains seven continents, 
seven oceans, great mountains and 
rivers 31 ; protected by sheaths 
200 fn 1 

Cosmography , Puranic 134 
Creation, a detailed description 95ff; 
Anugraha why it is so called 50; 
another kind of 44 ff; nine-fold 
division (1) Mahat, (2) Tanmatra 

(3) Aindriya (4) Mukhya (5) 
Tiryaksrota (6) Ordlivasrotas ( — 
daivata) (7) Arvaksrotas (8) Anu- 
graha (9 ) Kaumara 

Creation, mental : Gods, sages, manes 
and human beings 86 
Creation, preliminary, as mental 69 
Creation , Primary and Secondary 1019 
Creation — Primary and Secondary 36; 
of gods, sages and their dissolution 

36 

Creation consisting of 3 Prakrta and 
Vaikita ones 50 fn 2 
Creation Mukhya or Stliavara, Vaiki ta 
(immobile) 42 

Creation ninefold 44, 45 ; classified accor- 
ding to Vaikita and Prakrta 45 
Creation of animal-world 452 
Creation of Asuras, Devas, Pitis and 
Human beings 88 
Creation of bears 461 ff 
Creation of Bhutas 467 
Creation of elephants 464 ff 
Creation of Marjaras, their progeny 462 
Creation of mental sons of Brahma 46 
Creation of nine mental sons of Brahma 
(1) Bhrgu, (2) Angiras, (3' Marici, 

(4) Pulastya, (5) Pulaha, (6) 



Index 


1373 


Kratu, (7) Daksa, (8) Atri, (9) 
Vasiftha 46 

Creation of Rudra 46, of Dharma, Sam- 
kalpa and nine sages 47 ; of Devas 
and Asuras 48 

Creation , on the basis of Samkhya 9 fa 2 
Creation or re-creation after dissolution 
1020 

Creation of Brahma 46 
Crime and punishment 1039 ff 
Crimes sexual 1050 

Crown (mukufa) given to Hiranya- 
kaiipu by Brahma 1078 
Curse , effect of sages' curses illustrated 
267 

Curses of sages with no effect on Lord 
Siva 267 

D 

Daily a domination for ten Yugas 910; 

Sukra’s curse to the Yugas ibid 
Daityas, Ddnavas, their sons 428, 429, 
535 fT 

Daityas, Ddnavas , Yaks as, Gandharvas , 
etc; their origin 16 
Daityas killed by Siva in the Tripura 
battle 909 ; killed by Devas in the 
Andhakarika Battle 909 
Daityas were conquered by Raji in 
the Kolahala battle 910 
Daityas were killed by Indra in the 
Halahala battle 90 

Dak fa, a descendant of Pit r- gods 128fn. 

2; his son-in-law 125 
Dakfa and Prasuti , their 24 daughters 
as the mothers of the world 97 
Dakfa begot daughters from Virini 
16 

Daksa Prajabati, his daughters 10; the 
race of 407 ff 

— Curses Narada 409; Sixty dau- 
ghters of 409; 

— *s daughters married to sages 409 
Dakfipdmndya, a sacred scripture 1274 
Dams fra, her progeny 472 
Danibha (r) 180 
Dana (gift) three types 319 
Ddnava 489 

Dan da, son of Iksvaku ruled in DaQ- 
4aka (North Deccan) 817 
Daridaka (f) 533 

Dapdanathd (Sridanqlanatha ) 1100; 

her abode 1273; her emerald cham- 
ber 1 257 ; her four mansions in the 
chamber of emerald 1257; her 
residence 1258 

Davfandyikd (leader of the Army) 
stationed on the first step — Vindu 
1116 


Danu, daughter of Dak? a and wife of 
Kasyapa 1057; BD differs from 
Bhag. Version. Acc to BD Danu 
was born of Diti and Kasyapa 1 057 
Danu , Race of 435 ff 
Darbkin curses the moon 713 
DaSardjfla War Intro LXX 
Dataratha , ruler of Ayodhya 1319 
Daiaratha, son of Aja and father of 
Rama, Bharata, Satrughna and 
Laksmana 832 

Daiaratha, son of Indumati, King of 
Ayodhya 1 320 

Daiaratha accused of treachery, breach 
of faith etc. by the goddess 1320; 
advised by the goddess to go to 
Kailcipura and visit the temple 
1320 

Daiaratha blessed with boons of getting 
four sons 1323 

Daiaratha worships Lalita 1319 
Daiaratha' s entreaty to Vasiffha for ob- 
taining a son 1319 
Daiaratha's prayers to the goddess 
1322-1323 

Daiarha in the line of Jyamagha 878 
Daiarpa in Malwa 532 
Daidivamedhxka (a holy Centre for 
Sraddha) 526 

Ddst , a harlot, of four types (11 Deva- 
dasi, (2) Brahmadasi, 83) Sva- 
tantra and (4) §udrad&sik& 1051 
Dattdtreya, a part of Visnu 650 
Dattatreya, an incarnation of Visnu 
484 

Day, five parts 208 
Day, time-scale in terms of Muhurtas 
207 

Deities in Lalita’s paraphernalia; posi- 
tion or distribution of their places 
1271 fn 1 

Deities on par with Lalita 1108 
Deities comparable to Lalita ibid 
Deities Rahasya-yoginis ibid 
Deities Nigarbha-yogini-s ibid 
Deities Kulottirna ibid 
Deities Sampradaya or Ajnasaktis ibid 
Deities Gupta-tara ibid 
Deities Gupta (secret) ibid 
Deities Prakata (manifest) ibid 
Deities on the seventh step of the 
chariot Giti 1114-1115 
Deities stationed in different Cakras 
1242 

Deities Varna etc stationed on the fifth 
step of Giticakra or Gcyacakra 
1114 

Deluge , A description 969 ff 
Demi-Gods tribes 89 
Devaddru forest 265 



1374 


Brahmdnia Put ana 


Devaddruvana in Badarikasrama 532 
Devagrhas (Divine abodes) 232 
Devakrada (eddy of Devas) 531 
Devamitfhuan 1 7 
Devdpi of Aila dynasty 951 
Devardtapura 1 046 

Devas , their different origins 474 ; their 
five groups 958; sixty in number 
born to Kasyapa, son of Marici 
959 

Devas and Togis 550 
Devas as human beings 476, 477 
Devas attack Daityas all of a sudden : 
Sukra’s protection 911 
Devas conquer §anda and Marka — 
the two powerful Asuras 910 
Devas propitiate the Mother Goddess 
by means of human flesh 1083 
Devas with human appearance and 
descent 901 

Devdsura-samgrdma 12 th in number 
857 ; dethronement and re-estab- 
lishment of Indra 857-859; twelve 
battles fought by Devas and Asuras 
between each other 908-909; De- 
tails of the 1 2 battles between Devas 
and Asuras 909 ff 

Deva-Vamia , race of gods 128 ibid fns. 
2, 3 

Devavrata , a learned Brahmana 1045 
Devavrdha 17 
Deva-Ydna 213 

Devaydni, wife of Yayati gave birth to 
Yadu and Turvasu 861 
Devi-Sy Brahmi, Mahesvari, Kumari, 
Vaisnavl, Mahendri, Varalii, Ca- 
munda and Mahalaksmi 1277; 
Their abodes ibid 

Devikd — Deeg, a tributary of Ravi or 
Sarayu 526 
Devisukta 1337 

Devoteey his routine 1292; injunctions 
and prohibitions for his observance 
1337 

Devotee oj Siva , his status among Siva’s 
attendants 1007 
Devotee's prayer to Lalitd 1 143 
Dhanvantariy origin of 851; the physi- 
cian King, the founder of Ayurveda 
850 fn 1 

Dhard Sakti , Sakti of Earth 1051 
Dhararta (Retention of perception of 
the supreme deity) 596 
Dharma , features of 318 fT; progeny 
of 4 10 ; sons of 417 

Dharma (God of Death) cursed by 
Mandavya 267 

Dharma and Adharma with reference to 
rites 3j6 

Dharma-Sastra on Sraddha. Intro LVIII 


Dharma- Sutras, of Apastamba, Manu* 
Yajnavalkya 553 

Dharma , nature of dharma explained 
849 

Dharmapxstha (a lake) 533 
Dhdrffika-s ruled over Vahika-s bet- 
ween Bias and Sutlej, in Punjab 
817 fn l 

Dhenukd (r) 183 

Dhtsti 17 

Dhruva , its position among luminaries 
230; as the sin-destroyer 230 
Dhruva , his position in the firmament 
231 

Dhruva , the Pole stai 1 3 
Dhumatcis, a Sakti with blazing body 
1268 

Dhumra-locana (m) 168; identified with 
Nanga Parbat 168 fn 1 
Dhundhu, IkfVdku , Brhadbala — 
destroyed 16 

Dhundhumdra — Kuvalasva, An epi- 
sode 820, 821; Legend explained 
821 fn 1 

Dhutapadd (r) 180 
Dhutapapdy a tributary of Gariga at 
Varanasi *524 

Dhvaja , the ninth battle 909 
Dhyajta (meditation), its characteristic 
features 1345 
Diltpa (k) 832 
Diltpa , Son of Amsuman 781 
Dilipa II, grandfather of King Raghu 
of Iksvaku dynasty 832 
Dipapratistha, establishment of lamps 
734 

Dirghatamas , son ofMamata from Brhas- 
pati 934; Son of Usija-Mamata 
Dirghatamas outlines procedure to 
Sudcspa for begetting sons 937 
Dirghatamas restored to sight 938 
Dissolution : (1) Naimittika (Periodi- 
cal), (2) Prakitika (Pertaining to 
Prakiti), (3) Atyantika (the Ulti- 
mate one resulting from spiritual 
knowledge 968 

Dissolution , the state of inhabitants of 

w 

Sivapura during the period of 1 003 
Dissolution of the Universe 95, the pro- 
cess explained 1008 fn 1 
Dissolution — mobile and immobile be- 
ings enter Prajapati Brahma 974 
Dissolution {lay a ) due to Gunas in 
equilibrium 33 

Distances and locations of the Sun and 
other Planets 988 
Diti gave birth to Maruts 1 6 
Divine and Semi-divine beings , tneir 
gradations in descending order 
451 f2 



Index 


1375 


Divine Couples Laksmi-Vispu, Siva- 
Parvati, Brahma-Sarasvatl 1312 
Divine Mothers , tlieir abodes 1276 
Divoddsa , King of Varanasi 852; Con- 
temporary of Dasaratha of Ayodhya 
852 fn 1 

Doorkeepers of K&lacakra 1239 
Dravint, Sofipiy Bandhit.i , Mohini , t/n- 
mddint, deities on the third 
step 1113 

Dffadvati (r) 529 
Druhyiiy ruled over Afghanistan 931 
Drukyu dynasty ruled over Afghanis- 
tan 981 ff 

Dualistic and non-dualistic Conception , 
Occasions for 1347 
Dumint (Dhumini), sister of Bhanda 
1072 

Durmada killed 1 1 33- 1138 
Durvdsd sent by Siva to suppress the 
haughtiness of Indra 
Durbhin*s exploits 713 fn 1 
DdrvdsaSy a sage 1032 
Durvdsas , his curse to Indra for his 
arrogance 1036 

Duryodhana t enters Mithila, leceives 
training in mace-6ghting under 
Balarama 885 

Dvaipdyanay son of Parasara and Satya- 
vati 3; also called Vyasa — the arra- 
nger of mantras into four 
Vedas 5 

Dvaipdyana Vyasa , significance of the 
name 3 

Dvdpara-Tuga 501 
Duijavarman, a Kirata 1043 
Dvimapdalaviddha (a place) 525 
Dynasties , distribution over yugas 
952-953 

Dynasties in Future 940 fn 1 

E 

Earthy division accomplished by Prthu 
381 ; its length and extent 141 ; 
Sapta-dvipi theory 144; milking by 
Prthu, son of Vena 15 

Ekamray lord of Varai>a Saila 1032 
Ekdtnra Pith a 1315 

Ekaparpt i, married Asita 495; tlieir 
son Devala 495 
Ekdrpava 972 

Ekdrpava doctrine 37 ; explains the 
process of creation and dissolution 
37 

Emperor y his fourteen jewels 294 
Enclosure of coral-residence of god 
Brahma 1258 


Enclosure of diamonds 1247; Residence of 

Kinnaras and Kimpurusas ib id 

Enclosure of gold and topaZy the residen ts 

of siddhas (male and female ) 1 243 

Enclosure of gomeda 1246; populated 

by crores of Yoginls and Bhairavas 

1246; residence of Apsaras and 

Gandharvas — all drunkards ibid 

Enclosure of Lapis Lazuli y residence of 

Nagas like Sesa, Karko(aka, Bali 

and other Daityas 1248 

Enclosure of rubiesy inhabited by Gara- 

nas 1246 
* 

Enclosure of Sapphire y residence of 
manes 1 249 

Enclosures of Topaz and Gold 1 245 
Enlightened persons , their qualities 97 
Equinox 208 

Etymology 66 fn 1, of nak?atra, aditya 
etc. 239 

Evolution of the universe 9, 320 ff 
Evolution theory of Sdmkhya 28 

F 

Fastingy a form of penance 586 
Fate and activity 731 

Fire % sacrificial, carried from Sita 
(Oxus) to Kaveri 1 16 fn 1 
Fire-culty its spread in ancitn t times 116 

G 

Gddhiy son of Kusika married Puru- 
kutsanl, daughter of Purukutsa 845 
Gabhasti (r) 183 

Gajacchdvd or Kunjaracchaya 570 
Gaxiandthdy her exploits 1178 
Gapapati and the rest, their placement 
on the various parts of the body 
1361; Names of — and different 
interpi etations 7 1 2-7 1 3 
Ganapati (also called Vinayaka), Son 
of Lord Siva 708 
Gapas of Lord Siva 707 
Gapdaka (r) 618 fn 1 
Gandhakdliy a yoginl 529, 530 
Gandhamddana, a mountain 1228; 
location 145 fn 2 

Gandharvaraja, King of Gandharvas 

1272 

Gandharvas and Apsaras 438 ff; their 
divisions and sub-divisions 439, 440 
Gandharvi (r) 172 
Gapdika (hill) 

Gahgd 169 ff and footnotes, 545 
GaAgd (r) 216, 500, Descent of 778 
Gangd ( — Tripathagd ) her three ways 
of flowing 1 69 fn 1 , Seven channels 



1376 


Brahmdnia Purdna 


of 1 70; Their identification 1 70 fn 1 ; 
The regions watered by — and her 
tributaries 171 

Gafigd, why it is called BhSgirathi ? 
774 

Gangd and Yamuna 930 
Gangd , called Jahnavi= daughter of 
Jahnu 845 
Garu4a mantra 692 
Gaura (<«) 168 
Gauri, type of girl 571 
Gauri (r) 181 
Gaya, (a sacred place) 571 
Genocide of Bhrgus 404 
Geographical divisions of the Earth 65 
Gey a or Giti Cakra, chariot of Mantri- 
natlia 1112-1113 

Geyacakra, a chariot 1113, the leading 
Chariot of Mantrinu 1272 
Ghaptapatha 77 
Ghrjii, the sun 1272 
Ghrni and Muni , two brothers who 
devoured girls given in marriage 
to them 794 
Giricakra 1257 

Godharma (dharma of the Cattle) 935; 
Cult of the cow Intro. LVII law of 
the cattle 935 fn 1 ; 

Gods , Creation of 410 ff 
Gods Occupying planets at present 
240 If 

Gokarxta , a holy place in North Kanara 
779 fn 1, 780; submerged under the 
sea 780, 781 ; a place sacred to Lord 
Siva 524 
Gomati (r) fn 2 
Gopura — a kind of structure 1 230 
Gorakfa or Gorakhanath, the Chief of 
Yogins 1251; mention of — as the 
evidence that the Mahatmya was 
composed after the 10th cent. A.D. 

ibid in 1 . 

Grama's 3 in number fn 1 ; Sadja, 
Madhyama, Gandhara 806 fn 2 
Grdhravafa (a lake) 533 
Grismacakra has sixty deities 1343 
Guha , assistant official of Yama-1250; 
implements law and Order of $ri- 
devi 1250 
Guhyakas 166, 167 

Gutias, their nature 1010; their per- 
sonification in Brahma, Visnu and 
Siva 33 

Gupta Dynasty, mention of, Intro LXXX 
Guru, meaning of the word 1344 

H 

Haihaya 17 

Haihaya Arjuna's halt at Jamadagni*s 


hermitage 626 ff; five groups : — 
Vitihotras, Bhojas, Avantis, T Uri- 
el ikeras and Talajanghas 874 
Haihayas ( Talajanghas ), their rise to 
power 735 

Hairapuata , Country associated with 
Hairanvatl ( = Zarafshan ) river 
adjacent to Sogdiana 148 
Haldhala, the eleventh battle 909 
Hall of Reception S ambha vanagar a 

1305 

Hanumdn , son of Kesari 456 
Harivarfa, a sub-continent 162 
i/a)>agru;a= Gandharvavadana 1241 ; 
incarnation of Visnu as a sage 1031 
fn 1 ; partial incarnation of Visnu 
1035 

Haydrudha , a deity 1273 
Hells seven, tortures and sins that lead 
to them 991 fn 1 ; under the juris- 
diction of Yama 991, 1249; their 
quality ibid ; prominent— enumera- 
ted ibid'. Particular — for particular 
crimes 992 ff; Tortures in — 995 
Hemadri on Sraddha 569 
Hemakufa, a mountain 1228 
Hemantartu (Season of early winter) 
1241 

Himdlaya — Mend, their three daugh- 
ters — Ekaparna, Ekapatala, Aparna; 
their son Main&ka 494 
Himdlayas, description of 589 ff; 

forests on 592 
Himavdn 143, 546 
Himavarsa— Bharata 170 
Himsd (violence) 1038 
Hiranmaya (m) 168 
Hirariyabahu, Cliief of Rudras who 
pierces those who neglect visiting 
Lalita 1852 

Hiranyagarbha , birth of 32 ; creation of 
28' 

HiranyakaSipu, a powerful Asura 902 — 
killed by Narasimha, half -man and 
half-lion the first battle 908; Bali 
and Prahlada, the three Indras 
of Asuras 910; his peiiod of rule 
910; killed by a Man-lion 1129; 
killed by Narasimha 909; son of 
Diti-Kasyapu 426; performed 
penance 427 ; got boons from Brah- 
ma 427; his accomplishments 428; 
his sons 429; his further progeny 
429 

Hiraoydkfa, his five sons 428; killed by 
Varaha in a dual combat 909 
Holy Cities : Ayodhya, Mathura, 

Maya, Kail, Kanci, Avantika and 
Dvaravati 1319 



Index 


1377 


Holy Places , their effect 522 fn 1 
Horse- Sacrifice, conducted by King 
Sagara just as a formal affair 7 65; 
performed by Rama 8 
Horses, their auspicious marks : Phala- 
iukti, Svetasukti, Devapadma, 
Devamani, Devasvastika, Svastika- 
£ukti, Gadura and Puspagan^ika 
1099 

Houses , Nandyavarta, Viccliandaka 
1126 

Hunting expedition 623 
Hunting Scene 623 

I 

Identity between Krsnas (Krsna and 
Radha) and Bhavas (Bhava and 
Bhavani) 718 

Ikfvdku dynasty becomes extinct with 
King Sumitra in the Kali Age 940; 
his sons (1) Vikuksi, Nimi, Danda 
817 fn 2 

Ikfvdku Dynasty 816 ff; pre-Yayati 
peiiod 817 fn 
Ikfu (r) Oxus 177, 183 

Ila~ Iccha 16; daughter of Vaivas- 
vata Manu 80 1 ; her transformance 
into Sudyumna 801 ff; married to 
Budha the son of Soma ibid ; She 
gave birth to Pururavas ibid; how 
she was transformed into a male 
802, 803 

Ildvrta , a sub-continent 143, 162 
Incarnations , ten in number rose up 
from the nails of Sridevi 1259 
Indra— Pakasasana, the chastiser of 
Paka a raksasa 845 
Indra , consort of Saci 537 ; his arro- 
gance 1060; causes harm to the 
Kailasa mountain 1060 
Indra end Brhaspati , a discussion on the 
nature oi Karman 1088 
Indra and Durvdsas 1037 
Indra becomes devoid of splendour by 
Brahma’s curse 1059 
Indra cursed by Gautama 267 
Indraprastha, a city 1081 
Indrota Saunaka, a sage who made 
King Janamejaya perform a 
horse-sacrifice 861 
Initiation, its types 1336; by touch ibid; 
by vision ibid ; mental ibid; per- 
taining to Siva ibid 
If air i (Asvina) and Orjasri (Karttika) 
1241 

Isfdpiirta 552 

Iftapurta , sacrifice and charitable acti- 
vities 1042 


Iloara, lord of three deities : Brahma,. 
Visnu and Rudra 

J 

Jahnu , bom of KesinI he drinks up 
Ganga 782, 844; Place of obstruc- 
tion to the waters of Ganga 782 fn 1 
Jaigifavya , son of Sata-§alaka 496 fn 1 
Jamadagni , father of Parasurama; 
his advice to Parasurama to per- 
form a penance for 12 years as an 
expiatory rite 723; his hermitage 
721; murdered 641 resuscitated 
643 

JamadagnVs advice to Parasurama to 
forget and forgive 651 
JamadagnVs hermitage 625 ff, 639 ff 
Jamba , an asura, killed by Vi$nu 
though he had received the boon of 
not being killed by Indra 909 
Jdmbavati , her children 899 
Jambu (r) 

Jambudvipa, description 141, 165; its 
nine sub-continents 139, 142; £(> 
mountains 143; magnitude and 
extent of 1 1 ; V arsas of 1 62 
Jamhumdrga (a holy place for Sraddha) 
526 

Janaka — Mi thi 836 ; J anakapur (mod. 
Tirhut) in Darbhanga Dist. ibid 
fn 1 

Janamejaya (Lohagandhi) his horse- 
sacrifico 961 ; sought refuge in Sage 
Saunaka 861 ; loses Divine chariot 
which Indra gives to Brhadratha of 
Magadha 862; performed a horse- 
sacrifice wherein Indrota Saunaka 
was the priest 861 

Janas thana (mod. Nasik in Maha- 
rashtra) 833 

Japa flowers - - China rose 1 353 
Jdtakarman, a post-natal holy rite 
828 

Jatavedah-iild (a rock) 526 
Jatukarnya or Jdtukariia 5 fn 1 
Jaya-s , their birth out of the mouth 
of Brahma 422; their different 
names in different yuga-s 422 fn 1 ; 
their neglect of Brahma’s advice 
422, 423; Curse of Brahma and 
his conciliation 423, 424 
Jayd and Vijayd , friends of Gaur! 1314 
Jay anti, daughter of Indra, propitiates 
&ukra while he is in penance 915; 
daughter of Indra, stays w'ithBhar- 
gava for ten years invisible to all 
living beings 921 

Jfiana (Knowledge) inmarts Siddhi 
1033 



1378 


Brahmanda Pur&na 

• • • 


Jfldna-mdrga preferred to Karma- 
rriarga 300 

Jupiter , his chariot 229 
Jyamagha 1 7 ; a hen-pecked husband 
87 

Jydmagha and Vrfpi their dynasties 874 
Jydmagha marries &aibya 877; his 
grandsons Kratha and Kaisika 
Jyesfha-Sdman 572 fn 2 
jyoti (r) 179 
Jyotifmati (r) 172 
Jyotisfoma sacrifice 26 
Jyotsrd ( r ) 173 

K 

Kadi and Hddi mantras , difference be- 
tween the two explained 1290 
1291; fn 

Kadrii , mother of Serpents — Sesa, 
Vasuki, Taksaka and others 440ff 
Kailasa (m) 709, 777 ; description 166, 
249 ff; a mountain 1312 
Kaildsandtha temple at Kanci and other 
seven places in South India 1355 
Kaivalya (Absolution) defined 1014 
Kakahrada 53 1 

Kakfivdn , begot a thousand sons 939 
Kakfivan and Caksus — born of a Sudta 
women from Dirghatamas attain 

the status of a Brahmana 939 

* 

Kakutstha , son or heir of King Sasada 
819 

Kdla (time), five divisions, day, fort- 
night, month, season and Ay ana 
130 fn 2; identified with yuga 130 
fn 2 ; person of 1 30 ; Real Nature of 
120 

Kdla and Nityd deities 1361-1 362 ; their 
placement on the various parts of 
the body ibid 

Kdla as the propellor of stellar system 
215 

Kdla or Aiahdkdla, the presiding deity 
of the Cakra 1238 

Kalacakra 1242; circle of mahakala 
1238; its four coverings (1 ) triangle 
(2) pentagon, (3) lotus of sixteen 
petals (4) Ictus of eight petals 
1238 

Kdldgni (fire at the end of a Kalpa) 
784 

Kalakarpi, deity of misfortune 1355 
Kalahjara (m) in Bundclkhanda 532 
Kaldpa-grdma 22 fn 1 
Kalds 10 of Fire-god; 12 of Sun-god; 
16 of Moon-god, of Brahma, Visnu, 
Rudra, Is vara, Sankara 1268 ff 
K alas ar pis, a holy Centre 532 


Kdlasutra , a hell 1250 
Kali 695 

Kali , a relieving feature 308 
Kali age, a gloomy picture 304 ff ibid 
fn 2; dynasties of Intro xlii (1) 
Fauravas, (2) Aiksvakus, (3) 
Barhadrathas, (4) Pradyotas, 
(5) Sisumaras, (6) Nandas, 
(7) Mauryas, (8) Sungas, (9) 
Kanvayanas, (10) Andhras 
Kalingas 545 

Kalisandhyamia , plight of people in — 
930 

Kali yuga , a dark portrait 949-950; 
Origin 950 

Kalmdsapada— ^Saudasa a demon who 
devoured Sakti (Vasis*th a ’ s eldest 
son ) 20 

Kalpa, description of the end 52 
Kalpa-daha (end of the universe) 61 
Kalpaka Park 1 242 

Kalpas and Manvantaras their Duration 
57 fn 1 

Kalpavafika 1244 

Kama , God of Love, his epithets 1 353 
fn; his companions 1354-1355 
Kama (Cupid) is accompanied by 
Mohini, Vilasini, Kalpalata and 
others 1353-1355 
Kamadhenu disappears 641 
Kamakfi, goddess consort of Siva 
1032fn; her propitiation 1324 fF; 
the greatest among Brahma, Visriu, 
&iva and others 1348; Benefits 
accruing from her worship 1 348 
Kamdkfi and Kdmeivari epithets given 
to Lalita and Sankara by Brahma 
1095 

Kdmakosfha , abode of Mahatripura- 
Sundari 1321 

Kdmaksi— Mahatripura-Sundari— Ma- 
hesvari 1311 

Kamdkfi— Tripura ; her eulogy by 
Brahma 1301, 1302 ff; glorified 
1299; glory of the Goddess 1299 ff; 
grant of request of Brahma for her 
perpetual residence at Kanci 1304; 
grant of request of Brahma for 
Visnu and §iva to stay at Kanci 
with her; her greatness; anecdotes 
related to 1311 fn 1 
Kdmaksi, Ka (goddess of speech), Ma 
(goddess of wealth) 1305 
Kdmak$i at Kanci, Her forms : Cit, 
$uddhapara, Parapara, Para Aruna 

1300-1301 

Kamakfi of Assam distinguished from 
Kamaksi of Kanci 1299 fn 1 
Kdmagiripifha 1309 
Kamapd&lu (water-pot) 54 



Index 


1379 


Kdmardja, Kandarpa, Manmatha , Maka- 
radhvaja , Manobhava — five deities 
on the third step — 1 113 
Kdmardja expressed by the term Harhsa 
1291 

Kambojas 741 fa 1 
Kdmeivara, manifestation of 1 088 
Kameivaripuri 1229 
Kampd ( r ) 

Karitsa , a king 17; his attempt to kill 
Dcvaki, Vasudcva requests him to 
desist from such an attempt 897 
Kamsa-Vasudeva Episode 897 
Kanakananda, a holy centre near Gaya 
534 

Kaoakoldhala , an elephant of Lalita 
1098 

Kdflci 1058 

Kdflci — (mod. Conjeevaram) 1031 
Kdflci, Kamakosfhd, constant references 
in Lalita episode 1230 fn 
Kdflci, Ksetra-mahatmya 1299 
Kdhcipura 1313 
Kapdaprsfha 573 
Kdntipnra 532 

Kdnlipura — Kathmandu 53 1 
Kapila , a sage with a partial power of 
Visnu 7G3; Devas* eulogy of the 
sage 7G3-764; his assurance to 
Devas 764; gods pray to the sage 
770; the first and foremost teacher 
ofSankhya System 1003 
Kapileyas group of Raksasas 449 
Karanadevas— Brahma, Visnu, Rudra 
whose duty is to create, sustain and 
annihilate the universe 1228 
Kdraskaras 545 

Karma , the law of- — 69 fn 1, 97 
Karman (action) more lasting than 
Kalpa 92 ; at the end of a Kalpa 
92 fn 1 

Kdrttavirya — Sahasrarjuna, son of Krta- 
virya. He becomes the lord of 
seven continents with a thousand 
hands 870; His major exploits 871 
ff; conquers Karkofakas in Miihis- 
mati and builds liis city there, 
defeats Ravana in battle, 871, 
brings him to Mahismati and im- 
prisons him there, releases Ravana 
at the request of his grand-father 
Pulastya 

Kdrttavirya , Haihaya King ill-advised 
to confiscate Kamadhenu 633 
Kdrttavirya Arjuna allegations of villa- 
iny unjustified, vindication of charge 
against the account compared 
with ref. to other Puranas Intro. 
LXXIT ff; Blessed with a thousand 
arms by Dattatreya ibid 


Kdrttavirya killed by Parasurama be- 
cause Apava Vasis(ha had cursed 
him 873; had 100 sons who were 
strong, heroic and virtuous; His 
son Jayadhvaja, ruler of Avanti 
pcipetuated the line 873 
Kdrttavirya King of Haihayas 630 
Kdrttavirya obtains a fire- missile 

from the Sun-god; burns the hermi- 
tage of Apava 875; He is cursed 
by Sage Apava 875 
Kdrttavirya slain 698 
Kdii and KdUci 2 eyes of Mahesa 1301 
Kdiyapa, as the creator of beings 415; 
wives of — 415 fn 1; sons ol — 415- 
417; his horse-sacrifice 42G; pro- 
geny of 16; son of Maiici 386 
Kaiyapa Prajdpati , assigns overlordship 
to different kinds of creation 477- 
479 

2fdfyfl/>£ya=-=Kapeya Suta 57 

Kauberaka , son of Kubera 172 

Kaumdra-Tirtha 531 

Kausalya , queen of Hasaratlia 1321 

Kauiikas — their spiritual lines 848 

Kaufiki (eddy of) 533 

Kauiiki (r) 

Kaustubna, a gem 1064 
Kdveri (r) 467; sources of 525 
KcSini, daughter of the King of Vidar- 
bhas and wife of King Sagara 830 
Ketu , his chariot; his horses and their 
colour 230 
Ketumala 146, 147 
Khadira (a tree) 523 
Khasd, progeny of 441 ff 
Khydti , wife of Bhigu 589 
Khydti (r) 181 

Kimpurusa , a sub-continent 162 
King, his five sins 1038 
Kings, list offuture — Intro LXXX 
Kinkuvit (~ Vinkusi) 16 
Kiricakra, the favourite chariot of 
Hand ana tli a 1272 

Kiricakra and Geya (Giti) cakra 1123 
Kiricakraratha (Boar- wheeled chariot) 
deities stationed on the chariot 

1116 ff 

Knowledge (Jnana) obstacles to 
1013; Source of Yoga 1013 
Knowledge, perfect or supreme qualities 
for the attainment 1 333 
Koldhala , the twelfth battle 909 
Krama, a peculiar method of reciting 
Vedic texts 397 fn 2 
Kramu (r) 176 

Krauflca dvipa, a continent 180 ff; seven 
sub-divisions named after the seven 
sons of Dyutiman 137 
Kfcchra (a rite of expiation) 545, 1051 



1380 


Brahm&nia Purana 


Kfcchra- Cdndrdyapa 1050 
Ktiy&dSkfd (Initiation of holy rites) 
1337 

Kfmibhakfa, a hell 1250 
KroffUy a saintly king 875; his line 
875 ff 

Kffxia (or Srikrsna) eulogized 664 ff; 
(falsely) accused of the murder of 
Prasena for the sake of Syamantaka 
jewel 882; Wandeis in the forest to 
trace Prasena, learns the truth, 
tights with Jambavan, the king of 
bears and obtains his daughter 
Jamba vat i in marriage 882 ; marries 
Satyabhama ; marries the daughter 
of Akrura and obtains Syamantaka 
from him; Returns Syamantaka 
to Akrura 886; 

Ktfpa, his activities 90 1 ; his 1 6000 
wives 899; his epithets containing 
references to incidents in life 677 ff ; 
his exploits 928; his progeny 899, 
900; the aim of his birth 900 
Kfffla, his birth 895 
Kxfna, his sons about a million 899; 
80000 sons as great heroes and 
experts in war 899 
Krjria and Balarama, Dissention bet- 
ween the two brothers over Sya- 
mantaka 885; Reconciliation bet- 
ween the two 885 
Krwa as king at Naimisa sacrifice 2 1 
Krfria born to Devaki and Vasudeva 
894. Particulars in detail 895; Epi- 
sode of Nanda and Yasoda with 
reference to Krsna 896; Karhsa 
with reference to Krsna 897 

• m 

Krfria, Lord, a description 710 
Krfita-Premdmrta (a prayer) G82 
Krsfiadvaipcyana, son of Kali-Parasara 
485 

Krsridmrta, a prayer 675 ff 
Krfxtastotra , benefits accruing from the 
recitation of 681 
Krsna 1 s death, a reference 950 
Krtamald (r) 67 1 
Krtyasamuddefa (contents), 21 
Kfatriya expounders of mantras 324 
Kfatriyas achieving Brahminhood 850 
Kfemaka, a Raksasa colonised the city 
of Varariasi 

Kfepatiika (slings and other instru- 
ments to discharge missiles) 1132 
Kfetra and Ksetrajfia , concept explained 
1006; their union is eternal and 
caused by similarity and dissimi- 
larity of their characteristics 1006 
Kfetrajfla - Brahma appeared in die 
Cosmic egg 30 fn 


KfetrajHa individual soul 
Kubera t an account of his deformed 
body 480-481 ; lord of Yaksas 167, 
1252; accompanied by Saktis, 
Rddhi, Vrddhi and Nidhis 1252; 
worships Cakrini with different 
kinds of wine 1252 
Kuberatunga (m) 530 
Kuhn, defined 282 fn 
Kttmdradhdrd 531 
Kumdri (r ) 1 83 

Kumdrtpura 76; breaddi of the moat 
around 76 
Kumudvati ( r ) 181 

Kumbhakarpa , brother of Ravana 481 
Kumbhipdka , a hell 1250 
Kumkuma Nyasa 1351 
Ku(idd.fin 573 
Kurajida slain 1141 

Kutu or Uttarakuru (Western Siberian 
Regions) 148 fn 2 

Kurujangala , a forest country NW of 
Hastinapur 532 
Kurukfetra 528 

Kurukfetra, a sacrificial session at 6 
Kurukulla, the deity of boats 1264; 

Her complexion etc. ibid 
Kuiadvipa , a continent 179; its moun- 
tains and rivers ibid ff 
Kuiaplavana , a place where Diti per- 
formed penance 430 
KuSasthali (--Ujjain ?) 833 fn 1 ; City 
of Kusa Bd. P. locates it on the 
ridges of the Vindhya mountain 833 
Kuiasihali, a city 816 
Ku&ika — Kusanabha performed a pen- 
ance. A son Gadhl, by name born 
to him 

Kttiika family, members of — 324 

m J 

Ku$md$dat — goblins 4G8; akin to Pisa- 
cas 468 

Kufildksa, a general of great strength 
1132 

L 

Ladies who never leave their husbands 
even after the expiry of a Kalpa : 
Laksmi, Usa, Arundhati 
Lakuca (a tree) 148 
Lalabhaksa, a hell 1250 
Lalitd, a description 1286, 1287; her 
praise 1288; assemblage of deities 
around her 1089; bom, to kill 
Bhanda, out of the fire of great 
sacrifice 1073 ; Consort of Srikame- 
svara 1241 ; description cf her conch 
1284; Legs of the conch ibid also 
fn; her march to conquer Bhaiida 
1097; her supernatural powers- 



Index 


1381 


1130; manifestation. 1077; resorted 
to by the guardians of quarters 
1 257 ; Six charioteers of her chariot 
Cakraraja 1123. (i) Iradevi (ii) 
Tripura-bhairavi (iii) Samhara- 
bhairavi (iv) Rakta-yogini-valla- 
bha (v) Sarasa (vi) Camuijda 

Lalitd (Srldevi), promises Devas to 

kiLl Bhanda 1087 
• « 

Lalitd , different breeds of horses 
belonging to her and the regions 
they came from 1099 
Lalitd and Kamelvara, Deva's gifts to 
the wedded pair 1093; Marriage- 
celebration portrayed in a panel 
in Minaksi Temple, Madurai 1093, 
1094; their coronation 1094 
Lalitd called Paramesvari 1228 
Lalitd episode , a South Indian origin 
1230; importance of number 16, 
1228 fn 1 

Lalitd eulogi/ed by Brahma and other 
Devas 1 092 

Lalitd mantra , achievements of Sadhana 
1294-1298; procedure of Sadhana 
for getting mastery over — 1292 
Lalitd married to Kamesvara (Siva) 
and crowned 1091 ; Festivities in 
honour of the marriage 1091 
Lalitd Mother Goddess, her description 
1083, A hymn in praise of Lalita 
1084 ff fn 1 ; equated with Purusa 
in Purusa-Sukta 1085 
Lalitd Parameivari , March of the army 
1105 

Lalitopdkhvdna — an apocryphal part of 
the Brahmanda Pur ana 1031 fn 1 

m • 

Lauhitya (r) ( — Brahmapura in Assam) 
167, 532 fn 3, ; its identification with 
Brahmaputra 167 fn 1 
Lava , a minute division of time 278 
Lavana , a Raksasa killed by Satrughna 
832 

Letters of alphabet , a yogic significance 
1350 fn 1 

Liberation types 999 fn 1 

Linga Sarira, the internal body 29 

Lion 1100-1101 

Liquor- drinking, a prohibition 1048; 
a sin 1048 ff; in worshipping 
Mothers 1049 

Listener to the Purdpa y his qualifications 
1027 

Lohitd (lake) 167; 

Lohita (r) 467 

Lokadhatr — creator of the worlds 999 
Lokdloka 202 fn 1 ; a mountain 188; 
number of living beings residing 
therein 996 


Lokamdtrs (mothers of the worlds) 476 
Lotus of 16 petals 1239 
Luminaries , their locations, dimensions 
and movements 242; arrangement 
232 

Luminaries Divine 214 ff 

M 

Ala da (Manda in VaP) a lake 166 
Afadana (God of Love ) , his resurrec- 
tion 1211 

Aladhu and Kaifabha 381 
Afadhuparka (material of hospitable 
reception) 674 

Madrava {pi) 528; a holy place for 
Sraddha 527 

Mdgha as the first month of the year 
245 fn 1 

Mahadeva, Derivation 101 
Alahadevi, the great goddess appeared 
out of the sacrificial fire 1083 
Mahdganapati 1271 

Mahdkdla y guardian of the first Park 
1242 

Aiahdkdla Cakra 1242 
Aiahdlaya 531 

Mahdlaya (a sacred place) 530 
Afahameru 142-143 
Alahdnadi (r) 528 
Alahakufa ( m ) 528 

Afahdmdyajavanikdy screen of Maha- 
maya 1 288 
Aiahanadi (r) 545 

Aiahapadma to Andhras y period of calcu- 
lation 949 

Afahapadmafaui 1261 fn 1, 1267, des- 
cribed 1267 ff, fn 1 
Alahapanrii (r) 1249 
Alahdrudra y holds trident 1252 
Aiaha\attra a long and great Soma- 
sacrifice lasting for 13 to 100 days 
39 

Mahdirngaraparikha — a moat 1267 
Afahat (the great First Principle) 28 
Mahatripurasundari 1310, 1314 
Mahavidya, Paftcalrika 1291 
Atahendra (m) 523 fn 1 ; As the abode 
of Paras urama Ibid; As the resort 
of Indra Ibid 

Maheivara and Gauri y their marriage 
near the sacred fire 1305 
Mahi (r) 180 
Mahisa y an asura 248 
Aldhismali— Mahesvara, on the right 
bank of Narmada 681 fn 
Alahodara 608 
Maindka (m) 529 
Afalaka attacks Svargaloka 1060 



1382 


Brahmdntfa Pur dm 


JM&lint, presiding deity of a Cakra 
1279 

Mdlyavdn (m), location 145 fn 2 
Mamatd , wife of Usija 934 
Man y as a domesticated animal 90 
Manah , a chamber in the thousand- 
columned enclosure 1261 
ManahSala (chamber of mind) 1263 
Manasa (lake) 167, 528, 534; World 
ofPitis 502 
Manasasarovara (/) 

Manasvini ( r ) 172 

Mandakini (r) 842 

Mandakini = Gahgd 167 

MandehaSy demons, three crores 207 

Mandra low 

Manojavd (r) 181 

Mantra for eating meat 1042; 16 

syllabled — its procedure 1327; its 
objectives ibid) its Purascarana 
at the beginning and close of a 
6raddha 506-507 ; gains derived 
by repeating 507 

Mantra of Hamsa — (Mahesvara) 1291 
Mantra of Kdmardja 1290 
Mantra of Lopdmudrd 1 290 fn 
Mantra of Sri Lalita 1289 
Mantras , their eternality 349 fn 1 ; their 
types — Foim, censure, praise, scol- 
ding, con tentedness, question, per- 
mission, narrative, modes of bless- 
ing, other types 329 
Mantras , Vedic 1290 
Mantras of Ganapati 1290 
Mantras of Kamaraja 1291 
Mantras of Laksmi 1290 
Mantras of Lopamudra 1 291 
Mantras of Parvati 1291 
Mantras of Sarasvati 1 290 
Mantras of sexual intercourse 1053; A 
second mantra 1 054 
Mantras of Sun-god 120 
Mantras of Syama (Rajasyamala or 
Mntangini) 1291 

Mantras of the Goddess ; ancillary litcs: 
Japa (repeated utterance) 'Tarpana 
(libation of water), Homa (sacrifi- 
cial offering) 1328 
Alantras of Varahi 1291 
Mantras of various deities; their com- 
parative value in regard to deities 
1290, 1291 
Mantras of Visnu 1 290 
AlantnnathQ, her abode 1273; her 
sixteen names 1103 
Mantriai 1113; her functions 1115 
Alantrininathd and Davdandthd as the 
chief c ITicers of Lalita 1251 
ManUy lord of Manvantara 502 
Afanu, Sdvarna 958 


ManUy son of Vivasvan and Samjfia 
795; His brother Yama and sister 
Yami 

ManUy Svayambhuva and Vaivasvata, 
their importance 1 29 fn 1 
Mam, Vaivasvata , creative activity of 
395; Episodes of Devas etc. during 
the period of 395 ff; genealogy of 
his sons 803 ff; his creation 957 
Manu = Bharata for sustaining the 
people 150 

Manu-period Each period consists of 
Manu, 7 Sages, gods, Indra chief 
of gods and sons of Manu 958 
Manu-Sy 14 in number; their names 
Intro XL; as lords of subjects 960 
Manu Sdvarna, his nine sons 959 
Manvantara 361 fn. 1 ; in human and 
divine reckoning 356; procedure 
of 320 ; sets of gods and sages, Indra 
etc in each 362 ff and fits 
Manvantara (reign of a Manu) 96 
Manvantaras , their number 59; Intro 
XXXVI ff based on the concept 
of Yuga periods 
Marici 1258; the race of 405 ff 
Marici-s 12 in number 962 
Marriage , 4 types viz Kalakrita, 

Krayakrtta, Pitidatta, Svayam- 
yuta 1091 

Aiars , liis chariot 229 
Alar tan da Dhairava , in 12 forms 1265; 
His description ibid) His 3 Saktis : 
Mahaprakasa, Caksusmati and 
Chayii ibid 

Marut-s , birth of 430; the episode of 
Indra wilh reference to 430 fn 1 : 
Indra enters the womb of Diti and 
splits the child into several parts 
432, 433; anecdote of Indra, Diti 
and Maruts 430-434; 49 groups of 
16; acquired godhood 16 
Afarutsoma, a sacrifice 859 
Ala tang a (f) 533 
Matanga (a pond) 525 
Mdfhara (forest) 525 
Aldtrkd 1337 
AldtrkA mantra 1350 
Aiatsya-deia 692 
Alaya, son of Visvakarman 795 
Alaya , the architect of Asuias 1077, 
1228 

Afeasurements of distance 75 
A leat-eating permissible under certain 
circumstances 1042 
Medhatith 1. seven sons, who were assi- 
gned seven sub-continents 138 fn 1 
Meditation on the Goddess 1 349 
Meditation on the Goddess Lalita 1349 
ff; A procedure 1349 fn 1 



Index 


138 $ 


Megasthenes refers to Candragupta 
Maurya, not to Candragupta of the 
Gupta dynasty Intro XLII 
Meghdtfambara , name of the armour of 
Vi?anga 1 163 

Meru ( m ) 17, 231 ; its colours 143 
Meru, shape and size 143; identical 
with the Pamirs in Central Asia 

1229 

Meru-Savarpi — Daksa-Savarni ; details 
of office-bearers, gods, sages etc. 
under 962 
Metres , seven 221 

Milk Ocean , procedure for churning 

1063 

Milking the earth 80, 361 ff; List of 
persons who milked ihe earth 382 
Milky way, four stars in — do not set 

231 

Mithila, King of Mithila honours 
Balarama 885 

Mithila — Janakapur also known as 
Tirhut in Darbhanga Dist. 836 fn 1 

Mlecchas (barbarians) 548 
Mohini , beloved of Siva 1036; descrip- 
tion of her beautiful form 1071; 
her manifestation 106.7; her episode 
1 065 ff 

Mokfa , salvation, threefold 1013, 1014 
Monetary gift (daksina) at thejyoti?- 
torna sacrifice 20 
Monkey-chiefs 455 ff 
Monkey-leaders 456, 461 
Monkeys 592 

Months , their ancient and modern 
names 211 fn 2 
Moon , as the lord of stars 236 
Moon, as the Prajapati 1 32 
Moon (Soma), "Devas drink the digits 
of the moon gradually in the dark 
fortnight 280 

Moon-gods bom of the eye of Atri 1 266 
Mother-goddesses , their placement on 
the various parts of the body 1 361 
Mothers , Matr-goddesses 1048 
Mothers — 10 in number 1049 
Mountain system of the Pampas 1 1 - 1 2 fn 1 
Mountains , as the abodes of animals 
of prey such as tigers, lions, bears 
67 1 ; seven principal — called Kula- 
parvatas 739; six in number : 
Nila, Nisadha, Sveta, Hemakuta, 
I lima van and Srngavan 1142; 
twelve submerged in the sea reflect- 
ed in the Moon 1 74 

Mjgakdmd (r) 173 

Mrtyunjayesa, mantra of 3 syllables 
1273 


Mudrd , mystic gesture, explained 
1327 fn 1 

Mudrdntaram\211 ff 
Mudrds , eleven in Number 1361 
Mudrds observed in Srividya, Yoni- 
mudra, the most important mudri 
inSrividya 1334, 1335; Mahanku£a, 
1335; Khecari ibid ; Bijamudra ibid 
Mudrds Originally female, deities es- 
tablished in the quarters 1277; 
their names in masculine gender 
Saihk$obha, Dravana, Akarsa, 
Vasya, Unmada, Mahan kusa, Khe- 
cari, Bija, Yoni, Trikhanqla ibid 
Muhurtas , with the presiding deity 
412 ff 

Muhurta-s, a note on 412 f 1 ; details 
on 413 

Mukhya Sarga ~- Sthavara Sarga -- Cre- 
adon of immobiles 42; includes, 
immobilcs such as mountains, trees, 
first type of creation 42 
Mula Mantras 1 350 
Mupdaprsfha (m) on the Phalgu river 
at Gaya 533 
Muhjavdn (m) 168 
Murcchand — ascent and descent of 7 
notes 806 fn 3 

Murcchands 809, 810: rise and fall 

of sounds 833 

Music, embellishments on the basis of 
Vary as and Samsthana 81 1 ; names 
of Varnas (tone-patterns) (1) 
Sthayin (2) Arohin (3) Avarohin 
(4) Sancarin 812; Embellishments 
of Varnas 812 ff; Margas (Ways 
of Tala-procedure) 815 
Music , Science of Intro. LXI ff; Svaras, 
Gramas, Murchanas, Alankaras 
and Talas LXI, LXII, LXIII 
Music, Pataka, one of 8 matras emplo- 
yed in the Margas 816 fn 1 
Music Vrltis (styles of rendering songs 
with accompaniment) ; Vrttis classi- 
fied : Citra Vrtti, Daksina Vrtti 
associated with the Three margas 
816 fn 2 

Musical instruments : Midanga, Mu- 
raja, Pataha, Dhakka, etc. 1097- 
1098 

Musicians of Gods — Gandharvas, Visva- 
vasu, Tumburu, Narada, Sarasvatl 
1124 

N 

Ndga-pdSa (noose of the serpents) 
692 

Magna (nudes) includes Jainas, Bud- 
dhists, Jivakas, ajivikas, the folio- 



1384 


Brahm&nia Pur&na 


wers of Mankhali Goshal and other 
sects who did not follow Brahman- 
ism. 540 

Nagnas, the naked who should not 
look at the Sraddha 540 
Nahufa cursed by the sages 267 
Naim if a — N imsar forest 8fn 2; Ety- 
mology and significance of the word 
ibid , as the birth-place of Puranas 
8fn 2 

Naimisa (U. P.) 532 
Naimija forest 1025 
Naimisa sages, their diet 21 
Naivedya articles of — in the worship 
of Lalita 1349 

Nakfatra-s , distribution of — to Vithi-s 
414 fl 

Nakuli — a missile which created mon- 
gooses 1148 

Ndlikd — a measure 989 fn 
Mini (r) 183 

Names of Cities after the Nitya deities 
1229 

Nanda (r) 530 

Nanda and Yaioda, their previous births 
898 

Nandagopa , head of cowherds marries 
Yasoda 896 

Nandana (a park) 166; a park of 
gods 842 

Nandi , bull, vehicle of lord Tryambaka 
Nandin Bhrngi and Mahakala 1260 
Nandiivara (a deity) 528; Chief Gana 
719 

Ndrada , a sage 609, 1046 
Ndrada (m) 

Narada , a musician LXXX 
Ndrada , his report to King Sagara on 
the destruction of his 60000 sons 
by Kapila 771; His 2 births 408, 
Narada’s hands in frustrating Dak- 
sa’s mission of populating the world 
408 f. 1 

Ndrada , son of Paramcsthin 408 — as 
the instructor of Daksa’s sons in 
Sarikhya Philosophy 408 
Ndrada, the mental son of Brahma 16 
Ndrada visits Indra and talks about 
Bhantfa's subjugation by Maya 
1081; visits the lord of mountains 
1074; informs Himavat that his 
daughter had been Kudiani (Sati) 
in her former birth 1 0 7 4 
Ndrada* s eulogy of the goddess 1096 
Narasimha , glory of 17 
Nardyaria causes men to sleep 35 
Nardyafia etymology of- — 37 ; contrast 
35 

Narmadd (r) 502, a river of Southern 
territory 502 


Narmadd , wife of Purukutsa and mother 
of Trasaddasyu 502, 621 
Ndtha cult , influence of — 1251 
Nathas who have founded and popula- 
rised the Yogaiastra 1282 
Nafya-Sastra, mention of Intro. LXXX 
Navardf\ra — Nausari in Baroach 932 
fn 1 

Navardf\ra — Nausari in Gujarat 932 
fn 1 

Netherworlds , Description of 1 92 ; Seven 
709 ; inhabited by Nagas 675 ; Sages 
at — 676; their names ibid 
Nikumbha curses the King of Varanasi 
855 

Nila (m) 143 

Nilakapfha, origin of the epithet 247 ff 
Nimt, son of Iksvaku ruled in Videha 
(Bihar) 817 fn 2; younger brother 
of Vikuksi 835; Jayanta, his capital 
ibid 

Niradha , a circular zone, not identi- 
fiable 533 

Nirmala-Vigraha a deity devoid of 
impurities 1273 

Nirrti , holding a sword, resorts to the 
Raksasa world 1550 
Nifadha (m) 143; a mountain 1228 fn 1 
Nifkala a form of god 596 
Nitya deities have the form of 
the goddess 1283; described ibid 
Nityaklinndpuri 1 229 
Nitya- Sri, eternal glory passed over 
to Bali 1038 
Niortti (r) 1 79 
Nivdra (a kind of rice) 585 
Non-Vedic religions Intro LVII 
Non-Violence Purana in favour of 
300 

Nose-ring , Its mention as an evidence 
on the date of Lalita episode 1071 
fn 1 

Nrsimha incarnation 426; slays Hiran- 
yakasipu 428 

Nude Ascetic sight to be avoided 537 
Numerals , technical terms 986 ff 
Nyagrodha (holy fig tree) Rohina 
where Yaksas live 448 
Nydsa of Bala blja mantra 1350 
Nyasa rite of Rati 1353 

O 

Objectives of Srf mantra 1328; Subjuga- 
tion 1328, 1329; attainment of 
beauty 1330; Pacification of fever 
etc. ibid ; immobilization of speech 
ibid , liquidation of the enemy ibid; 
Eradication or extirpation 1331; 



Index 


1385 


attainment of wealth ibid; longevity 
and youthfulness 1331 etc. etc. 

Ocean of milk cursed by the Brahmanas 
267 

Omens , evil 1125-1126 
Omkara , his temple 1272 
Omkdraparvan 529 

One thousand-syllabled mantra of God- 
dess Lalita 1337-1342 

P 

Padma (/) 467 

Padmdsana, Seat of lotus 1 350 
Pdlamaftjara (m) 525 
Paldia (a tree) 525 
Pallavas and Parados 742 fnl 
Patlcadaiakfari, a fifteen-lettered man- 
tra of Parasakti 1 054 
Paflcakdmay five gods of Love 1113 
Pahcakfart mantra (mantra of five 
syllables) 1272 

Pa flca-Laksana and Brahm&xda P. In- 
tro XLIII 

Paflcanada (the confluence of five 
rivers) 528 

Paftcaparvd avidyd 41 
Paflcaiikha an ancient teacher of San- 
khya System 1003 

Paflcdivamedhika (a holy centre for 
Sraddha) 526 

Paftcatirtha, holy place 1321 
Paflcavdrdhana , a sacred mark on the 
forehead 1292 
Pd(idukupa, a well 525 
Pardmbd 1273 

Parameiani, Supreme goddess, her idol 
accompanied by the idol of her bro- 
ther Vasudeva 1305 
Para Sakti 1050; Supreme power 1 034, 
1049 

Par a Sara, father ofVyasa 500; progeny 
of 1 6 ; son of Sakti- Adrsyantt 485 ; 
Descendants of 485 

Paraiurdma, a dialogue between Para- 
surama and Siva in the guise of 
a hunter 600; advised by Brahma 
to approach Siva about Haihaya 
650 ; as an avatdra of Visnu preceded 
Rama and Krsr^a 660; his acqui- 
sition of weaponry 604; the hymn 
of Siva*s praise 606; his penance; 
receives missiles from Siva 654; 
protects a boy from a tiger 61 1 ; 
praise of Lord Siva 612 ff; reconci- 
liation between — and Parvati 718; 
son of Jamadagni 597; practices 
penance 597; the youngest son of 
Jamadagni 667; kills Hyena (Tiger) 


and saves the Br&hmana boy’s body 
from death. 

Paraiurdma Legend Intro. LXVI, was 
Parasurama a Brahmin ? Parasu- 
rama, a full-blooded Ksatriya Intro. 
LXXI 

Paraiurdma receives missiles from Siva 
615 ; weapons from Siva 660 
Paraiurdma reclaims the land inun- 
dated by the ocean LIX ff 
Paraiurdma slays the tiger and saves 
a Brahman a boy 616 
Paraiurdma*$ penance. Dialogue bet- 
ween Parasurama and Siva 588 
Paraiurdma* s praise of Siva's family 7 15 ff 
Paraiurdma visits Agastya’s hermitage 
669 

Paraiurdma* s vow 651 
Paraiurdma* s vow to slay all Ksatriyas 
643 

Pdrijata Park 1241 
Par ik fit period of rule 949-950 
Pairsad-rudra , Rudra of the assembly 
1272 

Park of Vi?nu*s abode, a description 
1069, 1070 

Par^did (r) 879; assumed the form of 
a girl and married Devavrdha 880 
Parvans, days of changes of the moon 
281 

Parvata and Ndrada, divine sages 440 
Parvati, consort of Lord Siva 712; 

wife of Lord Siva 853 
Paicimdmndya, a sacred treatise 1275 
Paiupata way of behaviour 266 fn 1 
Paths of Pitrs = Pitryanas 84; Paths of 
Devas=Devayanas ibid 
Pausyaftji, a teacher of Samaveda, a 
disciple of Sukarman Jaimini 
834 fn 2 

Pavitra, a ring of Darbha grass to be 
worn in the hand when performing 
Sraddha 311 
Pavitra (r) 180 

Payoda (r) 173, identified with Kara- 
kul 

Penance , a list of persons who achieved 
heaven by austerities 300; Superior 
to sacrifice 300 

Penance of Aparna, Ekapama, Patala 
424 

Penances for sinners 1054 
Periods of Ancient Indian History Intro 
XLII — (1) Manu Vaivasvata 
Period, (2) Yayati Period, (3) 
Mandhata Period, (4) Parasurama 
Period, (5) Dasarathi Ramacandra 
Period, (6) Kr?na Period 
Personification of abstract entities 98 



1386 Brahmanda Purdna 


Phala-Sruti (merit accruing from hear- 
ing the Purina) 1025; rewards 
offered by Pitrs to the performers 
of Sriddha 504 fn 1 
Physical bodies , three types : Karana 
(Casual) Sflksma (Subtle) and 
Sthula (gross) 

Pidd raka ~ Pind ar aka (r) 525 
Pipdas — rice-balls, their way of dis- 
posal 520 

Piidca and Rdksasa , an anecdote 445 
Pildca-s. 548; sixteen varieties 471; 

Brahma grants boons to 471 
PiSdcas and Gandharvas , etymologies 89 
Pifhas : Bindupitha, Mahapitha, Srl- 
plfha, VidyapUha, AnandapUha 
and others 1 284 

Piidcas — their sixteen (? eighteen) 
tribes 468, 469 

Pifhas of the goddess 1 359; placement of 
the pithas on the different parts of 
the body ibid fn 2 
Pitrgandh 489 

Pitrloka , the concept dates from the 
Indo-Iranian period 487 
Pitrs , A classification 278 fn 1 ; details 
279-286 

Pitrs , Agnifvdttas 121 ; Barhisads 121 
Pitrs, as the gods of gods 519, Dynas- 
ties of 494; groups of 494 ff; Propi- 
tiation of 494 

Pitrs , fond of silver vessels 505 
Pitrs , mantra for purification 513; 
mantra for offering flowers 514; 
mantra for homa 514 
Pitrs, offering Rice-Cake, feeding 
Brahmapas, Establishing Fire 505 
Pitrs, rewards offered by — to the per- 
formers of Sraddha 504 
Pitrs, rules and regulations concern- 
ing — 486 

Pitrs, sons of Pulaha 502 
Pitrs, Sukalas, sons of Vasistha 502 
Pitrs, their birth 1 20 ; their daughters 
123 fn 2; their division 579; their 
sacred rites 579 ; their movement not 
checked by men even by penance 
579; their mental daughter Viraja 
502; their propitiation more useful 
than that of Devas 503 ; their 
sixteen (? eighteen) tribes 468, 469 
Pitrs amurti-s (formless) and samurtis 
(endowed with forms) 507 
Pitrs and Devas as fathers of one an- 
other 489 

Pitrs as sons of gods becoming fathers 
of their own fathers 488 
Pitrs born of Svadha 501 

i 

Pitrs classification of, Intro. LIX 
Pitts in relation to Sraddha 284 


Pitrs method of performing homa for 
514-516 

Pitts Saptarcis their Mantras 507 ff 
Pitrs seven classes, their mental dau- 
ghters and other details tabulated 
503 fn 1 

Pitrs Svadha Mantra 521 
Pitrs, worship of 585 
Pitryana 212 

Pivari , her daughter Kirtimati 501 ; 
her sonsrGaura, Prabhu, Sambhu, 
Bhuri, Sruta. 

Plakfa (a tree) 525; a continent 174; 
identified 174 fn 1 ; its mountain 
and river systems 175 ff 
Plaksaprasravana (a holy place) 529 
Planets , their identification with gods 
236; their Nyasa on the various 
parts of the body 1 357 ; their stars of 
birth 244 fn 1 

Poisons , regional varieties 1 1 45 
Potritii (Boar-faced deity) 1116 fn 1 
Prabhdsa (a holy place in Saurastra) 
526 

Pradhdna, presided over by Ksetrajna 
29 

Prdgvamia a room in which the 
family and friends performing the 
sacrifice assemble 39 
Praheti a Raksasa 1 67 
Prahlada, defeated by Indra in the 
battle that followed the churning 
of the ocean 909; his period of 
rule 910 
Prajapati 7, 460 

Prajdpati (lord of subjects) 63, 81 
Prajapati, ceasation of his activities 

972 

Prajdpati I his persons in the form o 
Trayl 973 

Prajdpati, creation of 460 ff 
Prajapati, Ruci 961 
Prajdpati born as Krsna 897 ; created 
the fourfold set 91 ; curses demons 
207 ; his stay in the waters of the 
single vast expanses of the sea in 
darkness during the night 973; his 
working up at the close of the night 

973 

Prajapati- s 400; variation in the list 
of--~in different Puranas 400 fn 1 
Prajdpati-s or Prajesvaras 400, 401 
Prdjdpatya world, the world of Brahma 
as the abode of Brahman as 82 
Prakriyd creation corresponds to Sarga 
Intro xliii 

Prdkrta Sarga prescribed by Ksetrajna 
32 

Prakrti and Purtifa represented as 
Satarupa and Manu 96 



Index 


1387 


Prdkrta Sarga the first creation of god 
Brahma 

Prakrti compared to a dancing girl 13 

Prakrti , products of 715 

Prakrtis (seven) 192 

Pramathas , Siva’s attendants 716 

Pramathins , attendants of Maharudra 

1253 

Pramati, an incarnation of Visnu, his 
exploits : slaying of Mlecchas, 

heretics and barbarous people 309 
Pramodini and Tripurasundari each on 
either side of the Supreme Goddess 
1364 

Prasuti , birth of 10 
Pratdpana , a hell 1250 
Pratisandhi defined 58 ; period of transi- 
tion between two Kalpas 10; 
transition from one yuga to another, 
from one Manvantara to another 
357 

Pratisarga (Dissolution and Rc-crea- 
tion) Intro XXXV ff; Pralaya of 
4 types (i) Nitya (Usual), (ii) 
Naimittika (Periodical), (iii) 
Prakritika (of primordial nature), 
(iv) Atyantika ! (Absolute or final) 
Pratisarga (Reabsorption into Prakrti) 
= Pratisancara 978 
Pratisfhana (mod. Jhusi, near Allaha- 
bad) 

Pratydhdra (restraint over the sense- 
organs) — a Yogic process 997 
Pratydhdra (withdrawing the sense- 
organs from external stimuli) 506 
Pravaha (wind), why it is so called 230 
Praydga (Allahabad) 532 
Praydga (city) on the bank of Yamuna 
844 

Prayer to lord Krfna of one hundred 
eight names 677 ff 
Preceptor Supreme §iva 1347; His 
glory ibid 

Preceptor and his wife at par wi th Lak- 
smi and Narayana, Saras vat i and 
Brahma, Parvatl and Siva 1349 
Preceptor as Sabda-brahman 1351 
Priyavrata , birth of 10; race of 134 ff; 
Names of his sons. Names of Dvipa 
assigned to Kingdom 135 fn 1 
Products oj churning the milk ocean ; poison, 
Kaustubha gem, Dhanvantari, 
Laksml, Visvaci, Ganga, elephants 
of the quarters, lotus garland, Tu- 
lasi and Nectar 1064 
Progeny of Daksa, Dharma, Bliava from 
Suvrata 961 

Prohibited things 1054 ff; for sale 1055 
Prthu (king) 15; son of Vena 381; 


made Yajna function 920; the 
milking of the earth 370-371 fn 1 

Pulaha , Prajapati 112, 500; son of 
Kardama Prajapati 502 

Pulaha (a sage) 618 fn 1 
Pulastya , his descendants 482 
Purdna, as the fifth Veda 527 

Pupdartka (a holy centre) 528 
Puydarika (r) 173, 181 
Punyajanas and Raksasas 816 
Purdna , characteristics of 8 fn 3 ; position 
in the sacred literature 9; etymo- 
logy of 22 ; some contents older than 
Atharvaveda 9 
Purification , rite of 547 ff 
Puroddsa , an offering 93 
Pururavas, son of Ila 13, 24; episode 
of — 24 fn 1 ; killed while confisca- 
ting the golden altar 22 
Purufa, Primordial Being 1027; Vedic 
concept 63 
Purusa Sukta 1337 

Purufarthas , the objectives of human 
beings 1097 

Purvamndya , a sacred treatise 1274 
Puskara , a continent, description 1 84 ff; 

identification 184 ff 
Pu$kara (a lake) 526, 665, 666 
Pufkardkfa slain 698-699 
Pufpdftjali (handful of flowers) 1337 
Putands 1141 

a 

Quarters , distance between — in Yojanas 
205; guardians of — stationed on 
the lokaloka in four directions 2 1 2 

R 

Radhd ard Krspa as the helpers of 
Parasurama out of the impasse 
when he smashed down Ganesa’s 
tusk 715 

Radhd and Sriddman 711 
Rddha cult Intro LIII; date Intro, 
LXXXI 

Rdhu 537; his chariot 229-230; horses 
of the chariot 230; His going to 
moon on the full-moon days 230 
Raivata Kakudmin, a King 816 
Rajas uya, Vajapeya less in importar cc 
than Trailokya-Vijaya 663 
Rdkd2\\ fn 1 
Rakfasa 489 

Rdkfasa and Taksa , their etymologies 89 - 
Rdkfasa Tdl (lj 173 



1388 


Brahm&nia Pur ana 


Rakfasa World where Nirrti stays 1250 
Rdkfasas, seven classes of 482 
Raktaratha — red chariot 1109 
Rdma^ ParaSurama 581 
Rama, son of Dasaratha, his perso- 
nality, his warlike activities 833; 
his sons : Kusa and Lava ibid; 
killed Havana, descendant of 
Pulastya ibid 

Rdma's forebears 584; — Rcika, Aurva, 
Cyavana, Bhrgu 585 
Ramanaka identified with Sogdiana 
147 fn 2 
Rasa dance 705 

Rasdyana (a tonic beverage) by imbi- 
bing which Yogi ns and Siddhas 
become powerful 1262 
Rafis, their placement on different 
parts of the body 1359 
Rati , Priti , Manoja , deities 
Rdtri (r) 181 

Raudri Srs(i, creation by Rudra 99 fn 1 
Raurava , a hell 1250 
Ravana , description of 481 ; Ravana’s 
previous birth 481 
jfibhu, a seer 997 
Rcika, grandfather of Rama 583 
Realization , the concept illustrated 
1346 

Re-creation of the universe at the begin- 
ning of a new Kalpa 41 fn 1 
Region , Middle 198 
Regions, Lower 198 
Regions, Upper 198 
Religion, a harmonious blending of 
different principles, unity under 
diversity 418, 419; Synthesis of 
Trinity 420 fn 1 

Religion and Philosophy in Dd. P., 
Vedanta, Saiikhya, Yoga, Bhakti 
Religious Sects in the Brahmanda P. 
Intro XLIV 

Rejiuka -Kamiili married Jamadagni, 
gave birth to Parasurama 725, 
847; Her death due to grief occa- 
sioned by the murder of her hus- 
band 725 

Repuka , Her lamentations 643 
Renuka's attempt at self-immolation 
646 

Restraints, niyamas 1033 
Review of the main sections of the 
Purana 1024 

Rgveda , divisions along with the prin- 
cipal teachers 333 ff; number of 
mantras 347 and fns. 

Ripu, son of Babhru, was killed in 
battle bv Yauvanasva 
Rites nitya naimittika, kamya 1346 
Rituals , Treatise on 636 


Rivers 1 1 6 — Vi tasta ( Jhclum ) , Candra- 
bhaga (Chenab), Iravati (Ravi), 
Vipasa (Bias), Kausiki (Kosi), 
Satadru (Sutlej), Si tit (Oxus or 
the Jaxartes or the Tarin-Yarkand), 
HradinJ or Hladini (Brahmaputra), 
Pfivani (Ghaggar) 116, fn 1 
Rivers and their tributaries flowing in 
Bharata 153-161 ; see detailed notes 
ibid. 

Rksa , the leader of the herds of mon- 
keys 455 

Rodha, a hell 990 fn 
Rohifit, a tributary of Gomatl river 23 
Romaharfana and the Puranas 346 fn 2 
Rsd, her progeny 472 
Rfabha, the first Tirthankara of Jains 
140 fn 1 

Rfi, one who goes everywhere 35 
Rfikanta, a mountain 948 
Rfya deer 585 

Rtus (seasons), as sons of Brahma 121; 

regarded as pitrs 123 fn 1 
Ruci Prajdpati 10 

Rudra, Astamurti conception 102 ff, 
fn 2 on p 102; fn 1 on p. 103; his 
abode 1254 

Rudra and Fire, an identification 102 
Rudra and Rudranis 1 252 ; engrossed in 
meditation on Lalila 1252 
Rudra World 1252 
Rudradhydya 1047 
Rudrakdnta 1 73 fn 2 
Rudraloka, the world of Rudra 1 005, 
1252 

Rudrani, curse of 496 
Rudra-s thousands in number 1253; 
described ibid 

Rudras , their distribution in the Maha- 
rudra Gakra 1254; their place in 
the Cakra and their performance 
1254 

Rudras and Saktis 950 
Rudras in the sixteen outer coverings 
1254-1257; as attendants of Maha- 
rudra 1257 

Rudra-Savami, sages, Devas etc under 
964 

Rukminf, daughter of the king of 
Vidarbhas and wife of lord Krsna 
899; her children 899 
Rules of discipline while behaving with 
one’s preceptor 1343 ff 
Rupavati,zi daughter born of Diti and 
Kasyapa 1057-1058 

S 

Sabaras 545 

Sacred marks on the forehead 1 292 



Index 


1389 


Sacrifice , ancient texts dealing with 302 

Sacrifice versus Religious gifts 560 

Sacrifices , Agnistomas, Asvamedhas, 
Rajasuyas, Nrmedhas 459 

Sacrificial Cult, inauguration 296 ff; 
How Sacrifice started functioning 
297 ff 

Sacrificial horse, of Sagara stolen by 
the wind-god and tied to a post at 
the hermitage of Kapila in the ne- 
ther worlds 766-767 ; Recovery of 
the Sacrificial horse 770 

Sacrificial session at Naimisa attended 
by Valakhilyas, other sagces Pitrs, 
Car anas etc. 25; continued for 
twelve years 26 

Saddmndya Sagara , a treatise by Lord 
&iva 1273 

§addmuktaphalodak& 1249 

Sadaiiva , primordial maker of Brahma, 
Vi$nu, Rudta and Is vara 1311 

Sagara, his conquest of the world 744 ; 
celebration of a great festival on 
his return from world conquest 
745 ff; derails of his rule 747; his 
enemies seek refuge in Vasistha, 
the family preceptor of the Iks- 
vakus 742; Vasistha offers them his 
protection and brings about their 
reconcilement with King Sagara of 
solar race 743; Sagara releases the 
enemy Kings on certain conditions 
744; his horse-sacrifice 829; Des- 
truction of his sons by Sage Kapila 
829 ; His surviving four sons : 
Barhiketu, Suketu, Dharmartha, 
Pancajana 829; Completion of his 
horse-sacrifice 829; his pilgrimage 
to Aurva’s hermitage for attaining 
a son 753; His journey to Aurva’ s 
hermitage 753 ; His praise for Aurva 
756 ff; instructs his grandson Arhsu- 
man to go to Kapila asrama, appe- 
ase the sage and bring the horse 
back 772-773 ; Lord of the Northern 
Kosalas 778 

Sagara episode LXIX 

Sagara performs a horse-sacrifice under 
the direction of Sage Aurva, Vasis- 
tha and other sages 762, 765 ff; 
performs the holy rite by the ins- 
truction of Vasistha 738; His expe- 
dition for the conquest of the world 
739; His conquest of Kambojas, 
Talajanghas, $akas, Yavanas, Kira- 
tas and others 741 

Sagara social, political and economic 
conditions of the subjects under 
his rule 750 


Sdgar a, why it is so called 778 
Sagara visits Aurva’s hermitage 750 
Sogara's sons , 60000 in number des- 
troyed by Kapila 768; Dcva’s 
comments on their Destruction 769 
Sages : Bhrgu, Angiras, Vasistha, 

Visvamitra, Gautama, Atri, Sukesa, 
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Marici 
and Kasyapa 274 

Sages, birth of 401 ; composers or 
seers of mantras 323 fn 2 ; creation 
of 109, 410 ff; seven 958; their 
names 958; Variation in names 
958 fn 2 

Sages, seven, mind-born and bosom- 
born sons of Isvara (gods) 322; 
their sons Rsikas 322 
Sages seven , in the Rohita Manvantara 
962-963 

Sages, spiritual or academic genealogy 
from Sakalya onwards 339 fn 1 
Sages, their ignorance of the Pasupata 
way of life 2G8 fn 1 
Sages, their division according to their 
families 323; their race 477 
Sages and Mantras, tlieir Character- 
istics 325 

Sages at Ddruvana, a description 265- 
266 

Sages engrossed in meditation on 
Brahman 324 

Sahas (Margasirsa) and Sahasya 
(Pausa) constitute the season 
Hcmanta 1241 

Sahisdha, the charioter of Bhargava 
Parasurama 732 

Sailoda (Jake), identified with Wular 
lake 168 fn 2 

Saiva-dgamas (scriptural texts of Sai- 
vitc philosophy) 1260 
Sail) a and Vai$nava culls — their Syn- 
thesis LIV 

Saivism XLIV ; Mythological legends, 
Siva-linga, Ganesa, epithets of 
Ganesa 

Sakadvipa, a continent 182; seven sub- 
divisions 137 fn 1 
Sdketa — Ayodhya 775 
Sakrdvatdra 529 

Sakti— Prakrti as the bestower of 
Siddhi 1035 

Sakti , son of Vasistha — Arundhat! 485 
Sakti and her goblins 1041 
Sakti deities, their placement on diffe- 
rent parts of the body 1362 
Sakti the eldest son of Vasistha and 
Arundhati 23 ; curses Kalmasapada 
23 

Sakti- s seated in the lotus of 16 petals 
1239 



1390 


Brahmdntfa Purdna 


Sakti-s, their names 1 358 
Saktis , Nitya 1159 
Saktis of Mahdkdla seated in the tri- 
angle 1 239 

Saktis of Mahdkdla , three in number — 
Mahakall, Mahasandhya, Maha- 
nisa 1239 

Saktis of Sridandanatha 1 100 
Saktism, Lalita-mahatmya, glorifica- 
tion of the Goddess Mahapadma, 
Kamaksi etc. Intro, LVI 
Salagrama (a sacred place near the 
source of Gandaka) 531 fn 1 
Salmala (a continent) 1 77 ff; its identi- 
fication ibid fn 1 ; its sub-continent 
178 ir 

Satnan, number of mantras 347 
Samantapaflcaka, a holy spot in Kuru- 
ki**tra 730 

Sdmaveda, genealogy of Teachers 342 ff 
SamjHd , wife of Vivasvan assumes the 
form of a mare 797 
Samkalpa (wishful thought) 29 
Samkhya influence upon the author 1003 
Samkhya way of re-creation after anni- 
hilation 1021 
Sampadeix 1273 

Sampatkari or Sampadtivara or Samp - 
panndthd 1098 

Samsthiti (existence) 498 
Samsdra — re-birth after the annihi- 
lation of all living beings 974 
Samudra-manthana, churning of the 
ocean of milk, the fourth battle 908 

Samvartaka (fire) Aurva 174 
Samvartaka clouds 970, 971 
Samyu , son of Brhaspati 
Sanatkumdra , a holy centre of 529 
Sanandana , Sanaka, Sanatoria, sons of 
Brahma 1 003 
Sanatkumdra , a seer 997 

San da and Mark a, how they left off 
the Asuras 925 ; as leaders of Asuras 
925 

— invited by Devas and promised 
share in the sacrifice if they 
leave Asuras ibid 
— leave Asuras ibid 
Sandhya , its period 208; prayers at the 
Junction of day and night as well 
as in the noon. 87 

Sandhya (r) 181 

Sandhvd rites 1313 

Sandhvd Vandana 1 292 
* 

Sandhyas, three : at dawn, midday 
and dusk 1347 

Sdtdilya 502 . a cave of 531 
Sangitayogini, deity of Sridcvi 1113 ; — 


in the middle step of the chariot 
Geyacakra 1113 
Safljivani Vidyd 703 
SaAkara, his qualities 100 
SdAkhya theory of evolution, its influ- 
ence upon the present Purana 
957 fn 1 

Sannydsa, defined and explained 319 
Santdnaka worlds wherein the Vairaja 
gods abide 491 
Santanu 500 
Santdli (race) 498 
Santati (r) 180 
Santi (r) 179 
Sapla-Goddvari 524 fn 1 

Saptanada (the confluence of seven, 
rivers) 528 

Saptapada produced when one accomp- 
anies another taking seven steps or 
when one talks seven words with 
another 

Sap tar f is (seven sages), Vedic concept 
64; their qualifications and charac- 
teristics 351 fn 1 

Saradartu (autumn) worships Lalita 
1241 

far ad van, death of 2 1 
Saradvdn and Dirghatamas 936 
Saramd , progeny of 474 
Sarandgati (seeking refuge) six aspects 

1332 

Sarasvati (r) 529; daughter of Brahma 
673 

Sarasvati — DharinI 1273 
Sarayu (r) 776 

Sarga — creation of the Universe, Intro 
XXXI ff. creation from the Brah- 
man : The Puranic Theory; 

Prakrta Sarga; nine creations of 
Brahma 

Sarmisfhd gave birth to Druhyu, Anu, 
Puru 

Sarpini, a kind of missile that created 
serpents 1145 

Sdrupya , a kind of Liberation 1310 
Sarvajfta deities, their placement on 
different parts of the body 1363 
Sarvananda mantra 1 364 
Sarvarthasiddhipradd , ten deities, their 
placement on different parts of the 
r body 1362 

S ary at as, ruled in Anarta (Gujarat 
and part of Malwa) 817 fn 1 
Saiabindu 566 

Sdstd , son of lord Siva and Mohini 
1036 

Sdstra (scripture) 1346 
Safacakra, six mystical nerve plexuses 
in the body 1117 



Index 


1391 


•Satarudriya repeated by the boy creat- 
ed out of the ashes of cupid by 
Citrakarma 1076 
Satarudra Mantra VS XVI 1047 
Satarudriya scripture 127)7 
S alarupa , birth of 10; Origin 94; An 
echo of Manu ibid ; fn 1 

Sati (Daksayani) born as Parvati 1074 
Satrajit ; father of Satyabhama and 
fatner-in-law of Srikrsna 883; ob- 
tained Syamanta Jewel from the 
Sun-god 881 ; hands the Jewel to 
his brother Prascna; 

An anecdote: how Prasena bedeck- 
ed himself with the jewel and went 
on hunting, was killed by a lion, 
the beast was killed by Jambavan, 
the king of beats. 

Satrughna, son of Dasaiatha, killed 
Lavaria the son of Madhu 832; 
Mathura was founded by him ibid 
Sattra (the sacrificial session) 1024 

Saturn , his chariot 229 
Sdtvat and Kauialya , their progeny 
. 879 ff 

Satyd , daughter of Nagnajit and wife 
of Lord Krsna 899; her children 
899 

Satyabhama , daughter of Satrajit :uid 
wife of Lord Krsna 899; her child- 
ren 899 

Satyavati, mother of Jamadagni of 
Bhrgu family 847; daughter of a 
fisherman, mothei of Vyfisa and 
queen of Santanu 500 
Satvavra*a, incurred the wrath of 
Sage Vasisffia 820; attained the 
favour of Visvamitra ibid ; reached 
heaven ibid 

Saudasa , King Kalmasapada as a 
demon 20 

Sauparpas or Trisuparnakas 553 
Saurparaka — Sopara 525 
Savarniy son of Samjha 960 
Sdvarp i I, his nine sons 963 
Sdvarni II, his nine sons 963 
Sdyana (lake), identified 172 fn 1 
Sections of Brahmanda Purina 9. 

(i) Prakriya (rites) 

(ii) Anusahga (consequence) 

(iii) Upodghata (introduction) 

(iv) Upasamhara (conclusion) 

Serpents — Taksaka, Karkofaka and 
Vasuki 1144 

Seven lokas : Bhur, Bhuvar, Svar > Mahar t 
Jana, Tapas and Saiya 709 
Seven sages 528 ; birth of, in different 
Manvantaras 396-400 
Sheaths (Kosas) 189 ff 


&ibi, his sons 933 

Siddhdntas , logically established doc* 
trines 1035 
Siddhas 57)0 

Siddha-s of sublimated sexual urge, 
approaching their wives once again 
for the enninuation of mankind 218; 
killing the child in the womb for the 
annihilation of the world ibid\ 
their placement on the various parts 
of the body 1361 

Siddhikfetra , the holy spot for accom- 
plishing super normal power 523 
Siddhis, Anima, etc. 1275; Anima, 
Mahima, Laghima, Garima, Isitva, 
Vasitva, Prakamya, Prap.i (acc. to 
Samkhya) 

— Additional: Iccha, Sarvakama, 
Mukti, — honoured by Yogims : 
Rasa, Moksa, Bala, Khae^ga, 
Anjana, Paduka, Viik, Loka, 
Doha 1276 

Silavati, wife of Kirata Dvijavarma 
1046 

Sin of selling the prohibited things for 
sale 1 055 

Sindhu (r) 467, 528, 534, 544 

Sinivdli explained 211 fn 1 

Sinners , countries of 545 

Sinners cursed to hell 1250 

Sidira, as the first season of the year 215 

Siffa (a wise man) 1015 

Siffa-s 317 

Sisfdcdra , identified with Dharma 317 
Si&umura (Gangetic porpoise ) parts of 
his body 231; a group of stars re- 
sembling a dolphin or a Gangetic 
porpoise 214 

Sitd (r) 168 - Yarkand-Tarim- 

Hwang-Ho 783 fn 1 
Sitd (a branch of Ganga), also called 
Alakananda 706 

Sitd, daughlrr of King Janaka, raised 
up from the ground on being plou- 
ghed. She wedded Rama, son of 
Dasaratha in Svayamvara 837 

Siva , activities related to Pasupata 
Vrata 274-277; Pdiupata Vrata des- 
cribed ibid. 

Siva, an eddy of 527 ; as the destroyer 
of sacrifice* 1 28 ; as the overba d of 
Pisacas 471 ; attracted by the form 
of Moll ini 1069; cursed by Daru- 
vana sages 265 ff; devoid of Sakti 
is Sava a dead body 1310; eight forms 
101 ; grants be)on to the boy created 
by Citrakarma, out of the ashes of 



1392 


Brahman (la Purina 


cupid 1077; his body besmeared 
with ash 262, his meditation on 
Kamaksi for acquiring Gauri 1314; 
liis personality 266; his regions 
1233; his unmannerly behaviour 
853; chooses Varanasi for his 
abode 834; his plan to get Vara- 
nasi evacuated by Divodasa 854 ; 
how he got rid of Brahma’s head 
that stuck to his nail 1318; in guise 
of a hunter 598; his ten qualities 
998; lord of Bhutas 1036; Names 
of his forms and abodes and the 
names of his consort and sons 103; 
origin of his Linga Image 258; 
His Eulogy by Brahma and Visriu 
263 ff; Sage’s curse 267 ; swallowing 
poison 247 

Siva-lihga, Installation 265 

Siva- Par vati \s visit to Visnu 1069 

Siva-sula (Siva’s trident) 694 

Siva and Daksa, their personal anta- 
gonism through previous births 
128 

Siva and his attendants 636; Rama’s 
eulogy of 656 ff; Eight forms of 
657 fn 1 

Siva and Visnu, identity of 714 

Siva burns cupid 1076 

Siva equates Parasurama with his 
son Skanda 659 

Siva eulogy by Devas 252-254 

Siva sage’s eulogy 271-274 

Siva-loka, world of Siva 1 260; excellent 
persons in — ibid, a thousand-pillared 
hall in — ibid 

Sivadatta , a Brahmana 671; his sons 
Rama, Dharma, Pi thu, Suri ibid 

Sivapura, a detailed description 1000; 
Inhabitants of the city 1001, 1002; 
Siva’s region described 654; the 
country of Siaposh which included 
Kafiristan 932 fn 1 ; City of £>iva 
999 fn 1 ; described 634; inhabitants 
of 635 fT 

Siva (r) 180 

Six seasons as the guardians of Kalpaka 
1242 

Skanda , birth of 494; Commander- 
in-Chief of the army of Devas 710; 
derivation of 498 fn I ; gifts offered 
to — by Devas 408; Ilis appointment 
as Commander-in-Chief 498; Atten- 
dants of 498; his birth 496 fn 1 

Skanda , his six faces, account differs 
from Mbh. Version 497 fn ] ; 
Derivation of 498 fn 1 


Skanda , Commander-in-Chief of the 
army of Devas 236 
Skanda Karttikeya 962 
Skanda Purana, Karttika-masa-maha- 

tmya 1388 n 2 
Smi ti end Sruti texts 585 
Social mobility in ancient India 850 
Social situation in ancient times 1055 
Solar Chariot , significance of its 

each part and of the horses yoked 
220, 222 fn 1 ; Names of devas who 
occupy 222, also fn 2 
Solar-System Movements of heavenly 
luminaries; Division of Time 198 ff 
Soma (m) 168 

Soma, attacked by Pulmonary consump- 
tion 841 ; healed by his father 842 
his chariot 226 fT; son of Sage Atri 
838; married 27 daughters of Daksa 
839; Nine goddesses served him 
840 ; abducted the wife of Brhaspati 
named Tara 840 

Somadatta 692 

Somanatha, the moon-god 1266 
Son, his role in the familv 752 
Sonilcpura , its location disputed 1077 
fn 2 

Soul, released soul with lordly powers 
60 fn 1 

Southern path for the Pitrs 276 

Sraddha, articles of food at 569 fi; as 
the developing factor 489; benefits 
accruing from the petiormancc 
of — 505; benefits of gifts in 558 fT; 
cups of leaves of tiers at 508 fn 1 ; 
why Brahinanas to be led at — 510; 
flesh of a cow at 569; food, fruits, 
vegetables etc. recommended for 
538 IT; fruit of performance of — 
on each titlii I"65; holy spots for 
521 ; Injunctions and Prohibitions 
512; lavish gifts to Brahmarias 
558; me? its of performing — at 
Sacred places 569; pankti-dusaka-s 
(ch filers of row of diners) 554; 
parts of the country recommended 
or prohibited for 540 ; people being 
worthy of being fed at 552; persons 
unfit for invitation to 573; persons 
unworthy of receiving religious 
gifts at the time of— 574 ff; proce- 
dure of 487; qualifications of a 
Brahmana worthy of being invited 
for 549; requisites of performing 
506; rules regarding 517; Five 
Mahayajnas 517; Tithis for perform- 
ing 563; types of — nitya, naimittika, 
kamya 563 ; the way of giving 
gifts 556 



Index 


1393 


Srdddha-Kalpa 549, 553, 578; proce- 
dure of ancestor- worship 486 f 2 
Sraddha- Sutra of Katyayana 569 
Sraddha in silver vessels 502 ; more 
impoitant than rites to gods 503 
Sraddha Mantras for offering Pindas 
at the time of 537 

Sraddha method of purification of 
different articles 543 ; Purification 
of nan — physical, mental and 
ritual 544 

Sraddha prohibition for the invited 
Brahmana 553 

Sraddha qualifications of a Brahmana 
for 569; Mitak^ara on the non- 
vegetarian food 569; Kalpataru on 
the non-vegetarian food 5C9 
Sraddha rite, things to be avoided at 
, 539 

Sraddha Ritual 537 
Sraddha seating arrangement for the 
invited at 552; row of diners at 
ibid 

Sraddha strict vegetarianism at — in 
Southern India 

Sraddha under different constellations 
5 06 fT 

Sraddha Valakhilyas at 331 ; Sannya- 
sins at 351 

Sraddha Yalis and Yogis as invitees to 
570 

Srdddhas asfaka 563 

Siicaba , Chariot of Lahta 1106; its 
worship 1325; diagrammatic for- 
mation of the Cakra 1323 fn 1; 
piotednre of worshipping Cakra 
_ 1325; Nyasa 1360 fT, fu 1 
Sri Caktini (presiding deity of a Cakra) 
1279 

Sridevatddariana , philosophical system 
pertaining to Sri or Siividya 1231 
Srtdevi Mantra 1231 
Srik'infha, Siva, his Nyasa rite 1353 
Sri/ctsnn, praise of the Lord 901-902 
Srikrsna , returns to Goloka accompa- 
nied by Sridamaii and R.ulha 719 
Sri Lalitd , her nine forms 1228, fn 1 
Srimahdpdduka , a d'dty 1273 
Srimandira 1309 
Srimahd fambhu ndtha, deity 1273 
Srinagara 1289 
Srinagar I -Tripura 1228 
Sri pad n ’:d 1316; a (ltd tv 1273 
.S ripnra -- S;i nagari 1227; Capital 
city of Sri Lai i Li and her Consort 
K5m‘*sva r a 1227 fn 1 
Sjipura on Mount M*ru 1229 
Srjhnrti , a d'dty 1273 
Sriraimimdld , a deity 1273 


SrUailam - Sriparvaia 523 fn 1 
Srividyd, mantra of 16 syllables 1326; 
the presiding deity 1315 

Srivrksa (a holy place) 526 
Srngara , a chamber of Moon’s disc, its 
description 1266 

Srtigavdn (m) 143, 1*14 
Srutarsis 86 in number 325 
Srutavarmd , the minister of lihan^a 
1 082 

Sritva , the sacrificial ladle 40 
Stages in life 88, 30 1 ff 
Stars, planets and ndhu , theii res- 
pective chariots 229 
Stars and planets, their horses of differ- 
ent colours 229 
Sthanu , Derivation 100 
Story of an antelope and his beloved 664 

Slotra, types 320 
Stratosphere, Divisions of 214 fT 
Su-Caksus (r) — Oxus 
Subjects or classes of people : Asuras, 
Serpents, Gandharvas, Pisaeas, 
Yaksas, and Raksasas 313 ff 

Sutandta (a king) 694; his light with 
Parasurama and his death 694 fT 

Sucivcda 1250 

Sudarsana , the discus of Visnu created 
by Tvastr from the pruned part of 
the Sun-god 800 fn 1 

Suddsa (of Rgvedic fame) 831 ; his 
son Mitrasaha well known as 
Sail das a or Kalmasapfula 831 

Slide end. wife of King P»ali 937 ; five 
sons born of her bv intercourse 
with Dirghatamas 938 , 

Sude sna sends her maid servant to 
Dirghatamas; the maid begets 2 
sons — KakMvan and Caksus — from 
Dirghatamas 937 

Sudharmu , assembly hall of Devas 1058 
Sudharmans, 12 in number 962 

Sudynmna , male form of Tie 802; His 
heirs and successors 802 
Sugrira and Vdli , monkey chiefs 455, 
456. 

Sitka , son of Vyasa 501 

Sukha group of Devas 20 in number 959 

Snkhi (r) 176 

Sitk r a, his curse on Dlnavas 936; ihc 
precentor of Danyas 1077 
Sukrd (r) 179 

Sukra’s advice to Bhanda to abandon 
^ Maya 

Sukra’s maslerv of Samjivani or Mrta- 
samjivani 647 fn 1 



1394 


Brahmdntfa Purdna 


Sukra* s plan to help Daityas 91 1 ; 
§ukra visits Siva, observes a holy 
rite and receives the protective 
mantra from him 91 3 
Sukra and Jayanti, their love-affair 

^ 17 fn. 18 

Sukra becomes Prajdpati (patriarch) by 
the blessing of Siva 916; Sukra 
eulogies Siva 916-917 
Sukra curses Asuras 923 
— is pacified 924 
— supports Asuras 92!) 

Sukra married to Yogotpatti 501 
Sukranitisdra 648 
Sukumari ( r ) 188 

Sumali , gave birth to a pot-gourd-like 
foetus 759; Her foetus contained 
sixty thousand sons 760 
Sumati , one of the two wives of King 
Sagara 830 ; her 60000 sons 830 
Sumati, the second queen of Sagara 
chooses, as a boon from Aurva, sixty 
thousand sons 

Sumati and KeSini, two wives of King 
Sagara 249 
Sumer u mountain 80 
Sumitra, a sage 784 

Sun , as the source of light to lumina- 
ries 232 

Sun, his performance of penance for 
attaining lustre 1265; his rays as 
the source of origin of particular 
planet 238 

Sun as a fire, its thousand rays 234; 
12 Suns anti their distribution over 
the year 235; a table showing a 
monthwisc distribution of Suns, 
their capacities and functions 235 
fn 1 

Sun as the divine fire 23 1 
Sun as the King of planets 236; his 
importance 237 ; Solar Rays as the 
sourc'* of origin of particular planets 

238 

Sun-god, Deities and sages who reside 
in — in their respective months 223ff; 
his chaiiot 214 

Sun-god and demons — a battle 207 
Sun-worship Intro. LVI 
Sunda-Nisunda (a holy centre for 
Srnddha) 527 

Sunvaka , Capital city of Asura Blianda 
1125; extended over a hundred 
Yojanas ibid ; Evil portents in the 
city ibid fn 2 
Suparna mantras 572 
Supernatural powers, eightfold 1015 
Superstition of pollution by sight 1035 
S ura , son of Karttavirya, kills Jama- 
dagni 724, 725 


Surabhi, her curse 19 
Surasd, progeny of 474 
Surat dp as as (celestial ascetics) 1283 
S urpanakhd sister of Ravana 481 
S uryabimbamahafala , the great chamber 
of the solar disc 1 265 
Suryaprabha (m) 167 
Suska, a sage 784 

Susvmnd — the bonelike nerve contain- 
ing Amrta 1264 

Suta, as a narrator of Brahmanda 

• ■ 

Purfina 6 ; — not a Brahmin ibid fn 2 
his name Romaharsana or Loma- 
harsana 6; — and the sages at the 
Satra 6; as the disciple of sage 
Vyasa 7 

Sutapa group of Devas, 20 in number 
958 ff 

Sura, son of Karttavirya, on hunting 
expedition, oti the bank of the 
Narmada river 724 
Svacchoda (lake) 166, 167 
Svacchoda (r) 166, 167 
Svapnavdrdhikd, a deity 1273 
Svara-Saptaka or Svara-mandala 806 
Svaiatakti-s presiding deities of vowels 
1356 

Svarbhanu an asura 21 ; abducted 
Krsna at the Naimisa sacrifice 21 
Svayambhu , the throe bodies of 417; 

their function, ibid 
Sveta (m) 143, 144 
Svddvada , an echo 92 
Sydmald , March of the Army 1 100 

Syamantuka — a glorious jewel obtained 
by Satrajit from the Sun-god ; given 
by Satrajit to his brother Prascna; 
Prascna killed by a lion in tin forest, 
79ie jewel passed over to Jamba- 
van King of bears; Krsna kills 
Jambavan, hands over the jewel 
to Satrajit ;Satraj:t killed by Sala- 
dlianva ; Syaman taka passes i t over 
to Akrura; Akrura gives the jewel 
to Krsna in the open Assembly 
Hall but Ki sna returns the same to 
Akrura at his own sweet will 
Symbolic description of the struggle 
between Lalita and Bhandasura 
1107 

T 

Taksaka , King of serpents 474 
Tdlajangha, son of Jayadhvaja 874; 
had 100 sons known as Talajan- 
ghas 874 

Tdmrd, her six daughters and their 
progeny 474-476 



Index 




Tdmrapawl (r) 524, 1249 

Tdna (in music) 307 fh 4, 308-309; 

Their names 808, 809 
Tantra Intro LXV 

Tapas (M&gha) and Tapasya (Ph&l- 
guna) from the season Siiira 1241 
Taptakfcchra (an expiation rite) 545 
Tdra, high sound in music 633 
Tardy a Sakti 1262; Her attendants 
ibid; Her activities in the company 
of her attendants 1262; Powers 
delegated to 1263 

Tdrd, daughter of Sugena, wife of 
V&li, mother of Ah gad a 
Tdrd-rahasya 695 fn 1 
T dr d-T antra 695 
Tdraka — an asura chief 1074 

'Tdrakdmaya a battle wherein thou- 
sands of Daityas were killed 428. 
The fifth battle of the twelve, bet- 
ween Devas and Asuras 428, 840 
fn 2, 908; Brahm&’s intervention 
841 ; Restoration of Tiri to her 
husband — Bfhaspati 841 ; Birth of 
Budha from Soma and Tiri 
Tarpafia (Water libation ) 506 
Tattoos, 36 in number 1285 
Teachers who handed down the Purina 
unto Sauti, Son of Sftta 1026 
Thaneivara (an ancient city in Kuru- 
ksetra) 528 fn 1 

Theft and Drinking , sins accruing from 
1042 

Three deities , description of their com- 
plexion 34 

Time , four measures for calculating — 
Saura, Saumya, N&k?atra, Savana 
209 

Tiraskarnikdmbikd, a deity 1273 
Tiraskarpikd, a deity who killed 
Balahaka, SOcimukha, and other 
'Daityas 1159 
Tiryd, her progeny 472 
Tiryak-srotas, second type of creation 
422 

Tortoise 1101 

To$apravar$a t a hunter 598 
Tradition, historical in Bd. P. Intro. 
LXXIV, Ruling dynasties since 
the beginning of Kali Age ibid 
Tradition departures in — in Krwa’s 
biography Intro. LIV 
T railokya- Vijaya (conquest of 3 worlds ) 
a mantra of SrlktfQa and a Kaoaca 
(a coat of mail) — a variety of 
mantras 654, 66ff 

Transitional period (Sandhyk) of yugas 

72 

Trayf ( the three Vedas) 541 


Trees in the forest on the Him&layas 
592 

Tretd-Tuga, prevalence of food-gather- 
ing economy 78 ; number of 85000 
kings 295; description 78 ff; 

Tribes , Sakas, Yavanas, Kambojas, 
Paradas and Pahlavas, Kalispar 4as, 
M&hi?ikas, D&rvas, Colas and 
Khaias 829; Ways of their hair- 
dressing 829 fn 1 

Tridivd (r) 176 

Trikakuda (m) 528 

Trikhanda Mudrd 1350 

Trim dr ti (Trinity) 1033 

TrimUrti-s BrahmA, Vifpu, Siva 1321 

Tripdciketd 553 

Trinity, their duties 1254 

Trinity of gods Brahm&, Vijgu and 
Rudra 34 
Triplakfa 529 

Tripundra, a sacred mark on the fore- 
head 1292 

Tripurd, B&1&, Laliti— Durg& 695 
Tripurd, guardian deities of her seven 
chambers in Srlnagara 1237 
Tripurd her temple at Ayodhyft built 
by Iksv&ku, progenator of Solar 
dynasty 1322 

Tripura the seventh battle 908 
Tripurd (Kam&k?!) her weapons : 
noose, goad, bow, arrows 1300 

Tripur a- ddha — burning of the three 
cities of gold, silver and iron in the 
sky, air and earth together with 
their demon-residents 6 1 2 fn 1 

TrUadku= Satyavrata 826 
TriSiras or ViSvajit 1057; preceptor 
of Indra ibid; His murder by Indra 

ibid 

Trivrtsoma, a threefold stoma 91 
Tryambaka , meaning 93 

Tryambaka and three Kap&las (post- 
sherds) on which Puroq&£a is offered 
identified 133 

Tulasl, a holy plant 1313 

Turn bur u, a sage expert on music 888 

Turiyd (fourth) G&yatri 1272 
Turvasu, son of King Yay&ti ; His race 
merged in the family of POru 931 ; 
— line ruled over the realms of 
P&$dyas> Keralas, Colas and Kul- 
yas ibid 

Turvasu (k) his dynasty 931 
Tu«& (r) 179 
Tvaftf 537 

Twelve battles between devas and 
asuras 17 





Brahmdntfa Pur&na 


U 

Ugrasena , father of Kamsa 889 
Umd 495; K&lid&sa on the meaning 
of this name 495 fh 1 
Um&tufiga (m) 531 
Units of timi 975, 976 
Universe , an allegorical description 
49 fn 2 

Universe , creation of 36 
Unmattabhairavl, a deity 1273 
Unmattabhairavl and Svapneil, Nigraha 
deities fully intoxicated 1258 
Untouchables 546 

Upacdras (16 in number) — Av&hana, 
Asana, P&dya, Arghya, Acamana, 
Sn&na, Vastra, Bhfi$&, Gandha, 
Pu?pa, DhOpa, Dlpa, Naivedya, 
TImbOla, rradak?iQ&, Prag&ma 
1337 

Upasarhkdra corresponds to Pratisarga 
dissolution of the Universe Intro 
XLIV 

Upasrffi , subsidiary creation 68 
Upodghdta, corresponds to Manvantara 
and Vam&nukirtana Intro xliii 
Urddhva Pup fra, a sacred mark on the 
forehead 1291 
Urjanta ( m ) 527 

Ormi-fafka (sixfold distress) 595 
Urvail , her contract marriage with 
Pururavas 843 nl ; Returned to 
Devas 844 ; her six sons : Ayus, 
Dhim&n, Am&vasu, Viiv&vasu, 
Srutiyus, Ghft&yus 
Upapdtaka (minor sin) 1321 
Usd, dawn 207 
U Janas, son of Bhrgu 495 
UJija, brother of Bfhaspatl 934 
Utkala (c) 467 
Utsarfiipt — a time cycle 1 76 
Uttdnapdda , birth of 10 
Uttahka , a sage 820 
Uttardmndya , a sacred treatise 1275 

V 

Vahnipr&kdra (fiery rampart) 1350 
Vaibhrd ja ( fores t ) 

Vaidyuta 167 
VaikaAkata 525 
Vaikrta (m) 525 

Vaikrta creation — Ordhvasrotas or Deva 
Sarga, 3rd type of creation 43 
Vaikunfha 709 

Vairdgya (absence of attachment) 1014 
Vainateva (Garuda) birth of 16; his 
installation as a king of birds 16 
VaiJeiika influence upon the author 
1003 fn 1 


Vaispavism Intro. L 
Ten incarnations of Vis^u — (1 V 
Var&ha, (2) Narasiihha, (3> 
V&mana, (4) Datt&treya, (5) M&n- 
dh&t&, (6) Paraiur&ma, (7) R&ma, 
son of Daiaratha, (8) Veda-Vy&sa^ 
ion of Par&fara, (9) Krftia, son of' 
DevakI and Vasudeva, (10) Kalki 
Vaifpavism and Saivism — a rapproche- 
ment between 714, 718 
VaiJampdyana the preceptor of Yijfia- 
valkya, an anecdote 340 
Vai slavism and tfaivism, their integra- 
tion as the aim of this Pur&gia 
Vaiivadeva sacrifice 537 
VaiJya expounders of mantras 324 
Vaitarapf (r) (BaitarapI in Orissa) 
532 fn 3 

Vaivasvata Mam , dynasty 381 ff; hit 
progeny 801; his ten sons, ibid ; 
his sons 389 

Vaivasvata Manvantara, M&rlca crea- 
tion 386 ff 
Vaivasvata Yama 520 
Vajrd (r) 

Vajra, a thief 1 043 ; An anecdote 1 044 
Vdlakhilyas 207, 998 
Vdli and Rdvapa 457-459 
Vdmana, a cave of 531 ; a Dwarf, the 
second battle 908 

VarhJa and Varhsdnucarita Intro XLI ff; 
a description of the dynasties of 
Kings — Remarks 800 fn 2 
Vapltrayi (three tanks) 1261 
Vapufmdn, seven sons of — who were 
assigned seven sub-continents 137 
Vardha — Boar-incarnation, the third 
battle 908 
Vardha Kalpa 36 

Vararuci, mention of Intro LXXX 
Vdrdpasi cursed by Nikumbha — a gana 
of lord Siva 855 ; Occupied by lord 
Siva 855; why it was called Avi - 
mukta ; colonized, after curse, by 
King Divod&s a after killing a hun- 
dred sons of Bhadrasena 855 
Varcovdn (lake) identified with Lake 
‘Nak Tso’172 fn 2 
VarpaJakti-s — presiding deities of 
Varrias 1356 

Vdrapdvata, a famous city in the Kuru 
Kingdom 884 

Vasanta Cakra (Circle of Spring season ) 

1 242 ; its seven outer coverings 1 242 ; 
deities stationed therein 1242; 
sixty deities of the spring season 

1243 fn 1 

Fojan/<xrf«(Spring season)described 1 242’ 
Varsartu (Rainy season) worships 
LalitS 1241 



Index 


1397 


Vdrtra (pertaining to Vjtra) the tenth 
battle 909 

Varupa, sacrifice of 397 f 398 
Varupa visits Bh&rgava 784 
Vdrunf= Sudh&m&lini or Amfte£vari 
1 264 ; incharge of fleet of boats 1 264 
Vasif fha-ViSvdmitra struggle 20 
Vastffha, descendants of 484-485; his 
seven sons and one daughter, their 
names 1 1 3 ; his visit to King Sagara 
after his world conquest 748; The 
sage addresses the King ibid ; Sagara’s 
reply to the sage 748-749 
Vasiffhas, their eleven sections 485 
Vasiffha and Arundhati, a hundred sons, 
of whom Sakti was the eldest were 
bom to Vasistha from Arundhati 
23 fn 

Vasiffha , lineage of 4; son of Brahma 
502 ; the mental son of Brahma 248 
Vasu, a king, his fall 298 
Vasudeva — Anakadundubhi, father of 
Kr?ria 890 fn 1 
Vasu-s cursed 267 

Vasudeva , Devaki, Yasoda, Nanda- 
Gopa — their previous births 898 
Vasudeva exchanges his son Krsna with 
the daughter of Nanda-Gopa 896; 
Kamsa spares the child sincf she 
was the girl 896: Acc. to Bh.P. 
Kamsa dashes the child on a slab 
of stone and kills her 896 fn 1 

Vasudeva Krspa born in Devaki 117 
Vasudeva marries Devaki 897 
Vdsuki, King of Nagas 474 
Vatsydyana , a sage atNagaloka676 fn 1 
Vdyu as the disciple of the self-born deity 26 
Vedas and Upavedas , their relation 349 
Vedic Literature , Vedic metres, 91 
Vedic sacrifices origin from the mouth of 
Brahma 91 

Vedic metres'. Gayatri, Trisfup, Jagati 
joined together at the consecration 
of Pur o^d I a offering 98 

Vedic sacrifice, spread of — from the 
Oxus in the Central Asia down to 
the Kaveri in the South India 
116 fn 1 

Vedic texts , their composers and ex- 
pounders 324 

Vedyardha = V eyaijdha (mountain) 

Intro. LVIII 
Vena , son of Prthu 1 5 
Venus , his chariot 229 
Vepukd (r) 183 

Vessels ( pdtras ) wherein oblations to 
Pitrs are offered, and their benefits 
508 

Vidarbha 692 


Vidyd-nydsa 1337 

Vidyas , 14 in number 349, 553 

Vidyut (r) 180 

VighneSas impediment-warding Ganefas 
1 356 ; their §akti-s 1 357 
Vikukfi, son of Ik?viku, ruled in 
AyodhyS 817 fn 2 ; Episode : how 
Vikuksi came to be known by the 
name Sa£ada 818 
Vimariavdpikd . the lake of deliberation 
and consideration 1264 
Vimocini (r) 179 
Vindhya (m) 525, 623 
Vinydsa rite 1351 

Violence to life , its condonment 1040, 
1041 

Vipiid (r) 176 

Vipracitti , was killed in the Dhvaja 
battle by Indra 
Vfracfatta , a kirata 1045 
Virdj cow , A Vedic concept 80 
Viraja (?) 530 fn 2 
Virajd (m) 528 
Virajas (a tree) 527 
Virajd, wife ol Nahusa and mother of 
Yayati 502 

Virajas , worlds in the firmament 500 
Virorana , killed by Indra in the 
Tarakamaya battle 909 
Vifadajyotsnd , a deity 1 273 
Visala (a city^ 842 
Visah*a, hi* advice to Bhanda 1129; 
born from the left shoulder of 
Bhanda 1072 

Vi(esa Kalpa special Kalpa when 2000 
Caturyugas are completed 975 
VindJana 529 
Visnn Vis to pervade 
Visnu, Boar incarnation of 36 
Visnu , born as Dattiitrcya, Mandhata, 
Para«hirama, Rama 928; born as 
Vedavyasa ibid : born as Krsna killed 
Asuras in human form ibid ; born 
asPramati in the Gotra of Candram- 
as ibid ; will be born as Kalki 
at the end of Kali Age ibid 
Visnn, brother of Sridevi 1304; curs- 
ed by Bh^gu 267; his device to 
restore splendour and refulgence 
of Tndra 1061 ; advises churning of 
the milk ocean 1062; his different 
incarnations in different manvan- 
taras and his accomplishment as 
Trivikrama 420; his intervention 
forwarding off Brahma’s curse upon 
Tndra; his reception of Siva Parvati 
1069; his region with ruby Manda- 
pas 1259; his request for his resi- 
dence at Kanci 1304; grant of his 
request ibid; 





BrahmQnia Purdna 


Vifliu, his twelve forms — Kesava, 
N&r&yaga, M&dhava, Govinda, 
Vifijiu, Madhusfidana, Trivikrama, 
V'&mana, Srldhara, Hr?lke£a, 
Padman&bha, OS mod ar a 1259. 
1260 

Vifltu, incarnations 901 
Vifjtu, manifestation 1031 
Vifpu, slaughter of a woman by Visnu 
17 

Vifttu as Hayagriva (horse-headed) 
1032; 

Vifpti, as V arSha, born in the ocean 
926 

— became Man-lion to kill Hiranya- 
kalipu 926 

— became a BrShmana and delud- 
ed Bali, son of Virocana ibid 
— killed Namuci, § am bar a and 
Prahlada 927 

Vi?nu and his glory 920 ff 
Viftiu kills the wife of Bhrgu and is 
cursed by him; his incarnation as 
the result of Bhrgu’s curse 914 
Viftiupada a penance grove 717; identi- 
fied with the lake Chakmaktin 
172 fn 2 

VifQuloka world of Visnu 1260 
Vifukra, his advice to Bhai>d a 1128 
Visukra and Visanga slain 1 187 
VUukra born from the right shoulder 
of Bhand& 1072 

Vtivakarman , architect of the Devas 
795, architect of Gods 1227 fn 1 
VilvarCpa with 3 heads called Triliras 
Vidvdmitra , a sage of great penance 
824; Trisanku episode 826; his 
progeny 848 

Vtivas— Visvedevas, ten sons of Dak? a- 
Vilva 51 7 ; their demand for a share 
in the sacrifice 519, 

Vithi 204 fn 1 

Vivarta-v&da as distinguished from 
Parinamavada is acceptable to the 
Purina in explaining the Brahma- 
world relation 30 

Vivasvdn Samjfid and Tvaffr — an anec- 
dote 796-799 
Vmddvana 705 

Vffa (a well), benefits of performing 
Sraddha at 526 
Vrm dynasty 879 ff 
Vjrfpis : 5 heroes of the race : 

Sankargaga, Vasudeva, Pradyumna, 
S&mba and Aniruddha 901 
Vftra , an asura 167; killed by Indra 
with the help of Visriu 909 
Vydpaka-n yasa 1 350 
Vyatip&tas in a year 281 fn 1 


Vydsa (a sage of yogic power) 530; 
a great yogin 50; 32 m number; a 
designation rather than a name 
304 fii 1 

Vydsa, his Disciples 331 ; the arranger 
of Vedic mantras 352 fn 1, 353 
Vydsa (a lake sacred to Sage Vy&sa) 
527 

Vydsa-tfrtha 529, 530 or Dvaipayana 
hrada 529 fn 

Vydsa split the Vedas into four 20 
Vydha theory : four Vyuhas : Sankar- 
?ana, V&sudeva, Pradyumna and 
Aniruddha Intio. LV 
Vyuffi (morning) 207 

W 

i 

Water, its indestructibility, a modern 
concept 215 fn 3 
Weapons of Sakti-s 1281, 1282 
Wine flows liberally in Lalita-mahat- 
mya 1245 

World , its evolution through the dis- 
equilibrium of Gunas 1021 
World of Brahmd — distance from the 
Earth 998 

Worlds (seven) 188 ff 
Worlds ( l okas ) three in number 1230 
Worlds, seven: Bhur, Bhuvas, Svar, 
Mahar, Jana, Tapas and Satya 
979 ff; -—detailed description 981 
Worlds , supported by Lord Siva 193 ff 
Worship , abode for — 1337 
Worship , mental, in the absence of 
material 1349 

Worship, procedure how the devotee 
should worship Lalita 1342 
Worship of Devas 586 

Y 

Yddavas — a hundred branches of the 
family 900; 30000000 in number 
900; born for annihilating the asu- 
ras 900 

Yadu (a king) 17, 21 
Yadu, the eldest son of Yayati 869; 
the Haihaya line 869 ff; His sons 
870 ; King Karttavirya was born in 
this line 870 

Yajamdna , the performer of a rite 512 
Yajfla (sacrifice) cursed by sages 267 ; 
went over to Devas and forsook 
the Asuras 910; with mobile or 
immobile beings 298; King Vasu’s 
views on both the animal or the 
non-animal sacrifice 299; King 



Index 


1399 


Vasii’ s fall in the nether-regions for 
expressing his thought quite frankly 
299 

YajHa-pravartana 14 fn 
Ydjflavalkya , assumes the form of a 
horse for receiving White Yajur- 
Veda from the Sun-god 341 fn 1. 
Ydjflavalkya and Sdkalya , a controversy 
335 and fn 1 . also 336-338 
Yajha-Vdrdha described 38 
Yajurveda, number of mantras called 
Yajus 347 originally single but later 
on split into two 302 
Yak fa and Rdkfasa, birth of 442, 443 ; 

their anecdotes 444 
Yak fa generals : Ma^ibhadra, Purna- 
bhadra, Maniman, Manikandhara 

1252 

Yakfaloka , situated to the east of V&yu- 
loka 1252 

Yakfas t Pupyajanas and Guhyakas 
446 fn 1 
Yam a 566 

YamaSy gods of Svayambhuva Man- 
van tar a 97 fn 1 

YamaSy moral observances 1033 
Yamund (r) 500, 529 
Yantripi and Tantripi , attendants of 
Mantrinatha 1104 
Ycdoddy wife of Nandagopa 896 
Ydtudhdna-s 548 

Yaudheya located between Hydaspes 
and Indus 932 fn 1 

Yauvandiva a king who killed Ripu, 
son of Babhru 931 
(2) mental daughter of Pitrs and 
mother of King Khatvahga 50 1 
Yaydti 16; his episode 859; married 
Devayani daughter of U£anas as 
well as &armisth& daughter of 
Vrsaparvan 

Yaydti, son of Nahusa 862 ; asks his 
sons one by one to transfer youthful 
age for his old age 862 ff; Puru's 
acceptance of terms for fulfilling 
his desire 864 ff 

Yaydti , gives parts of his kingdom to 
his sons 867; gives the hereditary 
throne to his youngest son PQru 867 


Ydydvara a vagrant mendicant 553 
Years five in number 130 fn 3 
Yogadharma 572 fn 1, 573 
Yogandthas , four in number ; their 
names : Two Mitras, Sodi£a and 
Gary 4 1283; attained siddhis of 
Sdlokya , Sdrupya and Styujya ibid; 
Yogandthas created by K&me£a 1 283 
Yogeivara, his acquisition and perform- 
ance 421 

Yogic cult 557 ; masters of 557 
Yogic Mdyd 898 
Yogin, importance of feeding 492 
Yogins , Omniscience of 577 
Yoginf-s , ten in number, their names 
1279 

Yoginls — their posting on the various 
parts of the body 1358 
Yogotpatti married to &ukra 501 
Yoni mudrd 1 364 
Yoni source of origin 999 

Yuga a period of five years 245 fn 1 
Yuga, its period of calculation 209 fn2 
Yuga Kfta-Yuga, a rosy picture 69 
Yuga consisted of five years : Intro 
XXXVI: (1) Saihvatsara, (2) 

Parivatsara, (3) Idavatsara, (4) 
Anuvatsara, (5) Vatsara. The 
period of yuga extended later on 
— Characteristics of Krta, Treta, 
Dv&para, Kali 

Yugandhara a place near Kuruk?etra 
545 

Yugas 301 ff 

Yugas , Caste-wise distribution 542 
Yugas : Characteristics 287 fn 1 

Division of Time adopted in cal- 
culating yugas 288 fn 1 ; Puranic 
period of yugas 290 fn 1 ; A Detailed 
description 291-296 
Yugas : Krta, Treta, Dvapara and 
Kali — Their period in human 
reckoning 290 
Yugas , special features of 71 
Yugas and classes of people 313 

Z 

Zone, magnitude in Yojanas 205 



