




THE 

GARUDA-PURANA 


PART III 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED • DELHI 



First Edition: Delhi, 1957 
Reprint: Delhi, 1992, 1997 


Also available at- 

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 

41 U-A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, Warden Road, Mumbai 400 026 
120 Royap)ettah High Road, Mylapore, Chermai 600 004 
Sanas Plaza, Subhash Nagar, Pune 411 002 
16 St. Mark's Road, Bangalore 560 001 
8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 017 
Ashok Rajpath, Pama 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 


PRINTED IN INDIA 

BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS. 
A-45 NARAINA PHASE 1. NEW DELHI 110028 
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBUSHERS PVT LTD. 
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007 



CONTENTS 


Part III 

B. Dliarma (Preta) Kanda (continued from AITM Vol. 13) 

Chapters Pages 

21. Ghosts and their Release 829 

22. On attaining ghosthood 832 

23. On Ghosthood 840 

24. Sins of Omission and Commission, Premature death 

of Children; Gifts 841 

25. On sons and grandsons 845 

26. On the rite of uniting the dead with the deceased 

ancestors 850 

27. Episode of King Babhruvahana 856 

28. Gifts for the Ghost 861 

29. Rites after death 864 

30. On bestowing Gifts 867 

31. On bestowing gifts 872 

32. Ttio Origin of life 875 

33. The world of Yama 885 

34. Results of Virtue and Sin 889 

35. Rites of Sapindikarana and Sraddha 900 

36. On fast and pilgrimage 904 

37. Gift of a Vessel filled with water 908 

38. On Salvation, Heaven, Gifts, Pilgrimage and good 

deeds 909 

39. Rules of impurity 912 

40. On accidental death 914 

41. Releasing the Bull (Vfsotsarga) 919 

42. On bestowing gifts 921 

43. On performing a iSraddha 923 

44. On accidental death 924 

45. The mode of annual Sraddha 926 

46. Results of activity 929 

47. On Sins and Vaitarani 932 



48. On Dharma and Adbarma 

49. Method of Final Release 


936 

941 


C. BRAHMA (MOK$A) KAWA 

Chapters 

1. Classification of the Puranas. The Nature of Deities 955 

2. Puranic Trinity: Brahma, Visnu, Siva: Their 

respective roles 965 

3. Creation of the universe: Variation due to difference 

in Gunas 972 

4. Gunas and their nature: Imbalance and Equilibrium 978 

5. Deities and their relative status 983 

6. Deities and their relative status 988 

7. Praise of Lord Visnu by deities and sages 995 

8. Praise of Lord Visnu by deities and sages 1004 

9. Nature of deities and the serial order of their 

position 1006 

10. Creation primary and secondary 1008 

11. Causes of Ignorance 1013 

12. Praise of Visnu by Brahma 1020 

13. Creation of deities after dissolution 1027 

14. Nature and form of Visnu & benefits ofVaisvadeva 1031 

15. Incarnations of Visnu 1035 

16. Incarnations of Mahalaksmi 1039 

17. Forms of Bharati in different births 1046 

18. Incarnations of Rudra and after 1049 

19. The Episode of Nila 1056 

20. The Episode of Bhadra 1063 

21. The Episode of Kalindi 1067 

22. The Episode of Laksmana 1070 

23. The Episode of Jambavati 1075 

24. The glory of Venkatacala and lord Srinivasa 1080 

25. Glory of Venkatc^a and the method of worship 1091 



26. On the mountain Venkata, Svamipuskarini and the 


deities residing there 1096 

27. Visit to places of pilgrimage 1108 

28. Anecdotes of the glory of Visnu 1112 

29. On unfolding the mystery and secret of Reality 1126 

GLOSSARY 1135 

GENERAL INDEX 1145 




CHAPTER TWENTYONE 


Ghosts and their Release 


Garuda said : 

1. O lord, I am desirous of asking you how the ghosts 
ultimately get free and when men are no longer afflicted by 
them. 

2. How do the symptoms of ghostly affliction decisively 
vanish ? How can ghosthood be warded off lest it should recur 
again ? 

•3. What is the time-limit, if any, of ghosthood ? In how 
many years does a long-standing ghosthood disappear utterly ? 

The lord said : 

4. I shall tejl you how the ghosts become free and also 
how the person knows that he is tormented by a ghost. 

5-7. He (the ghost-afflicted man) shall explain the signs 
and symptoms to the astrologer. If he dreams of a holy plant 
like a Gampaka or of a mango tree laden with fruits or if he 
dreams of a Brahmin or of a bull or of himself in a place of 
pilgrimage or of the death of a kinsman and if in dream he 
takes this as truth, this is all due to pretadofo}. Mysterious events 
do often occur if the ghost has bad intentions. 

8. If a person desires to visit a holy place and. his heart 
is set upon it, but somehow there is a break in carrying out 
his desire, that is due to the bad intention of a ghost. 

9-10. The evil intentions of the ghost come in the way 
of holy man whose pious activities are disturbed at each step 
or take an evil course or if a person falls a victim of eradication 
and turns cruel, O lord of birds, that is due to the bad intent¬ 
ions of a ghost. 

1. Preta-dofa —bad intention of the ghost. The dead have to pass 
through the state of preta before they attain to the status of pitr. For their 
release from pretahood, the abservance of obsequial rites is necessary. If the 
descendent abstains from performing the obsequy, the gltost turns malevolent 
and proves harmful to him. 



830 


Gam da Parana 


11. If a person performs holy rites for the redemption 
of a ghost, he will find his acticms fruitful. The ghost shall be 
satiated permanently. 

12-13. O Tarksya^, take this as truth that he who per¬ 
forms such rites becomes contented. He will make his soul perma¬ 
nently wedded to weal; the ghost will have a long-standing 
satiety. When the ghost is satisfied he will wish his kinsmen 
well for ever. 

14. There are certain sinful, wicked ghosts who harass 
their descendants. But, they too, when propitiated, cease to 
liarass them. 

15. O lord of birds, they too, when their time comes, 
become free due to their sons’ rites and they bless their kinsmen 
with opulence and flourishing wealth. 

16. The wretch of deluded soul who in spite of seeing, 
hearing and feeling the depredations of the ghost does not 
succour, is tarnished with the curse of the ghost. 

17-18. In every birth he takes he will become extremely 
indigent, sick, devoid of progeny and cattle and he may not 
get proper livelihood either. The ghosts perpetrate all these 
things. Then they go back to Yama’s abode. From that place, 
when their evil actions wear off, and the appointed time arrives, 
they get release. 

Gam da said : 

19-20. Sometimes astrologers say that there is an afflic¬ 
tion of ghosts but no specific indication is there as to the name 
of the ghost, his clan, etc; neither bad dream nor harassing 
activity is observed. O lord of deities, what should be done 
then? Please tell me precisely. 

The lord said : 

21-22. Brahmins say only what is true. They never tell 
lies. Fully believing in what the Brahmins say the person (advised 
and warned of ghosts) shall devoutly pray^ to the manes, per¬ 
form puraicarana^ rite and offer oblations to Visnu. 

1. Tarksya —an epithet of Garuda. 

2. Purakaraffa—a^. rite preparatory to another rite, e.g. the Nandi- 
mukha rite is preparatory to the lite of marriage. 



II.2l.31 


831 


23. By means of japas, homos and donas he should sanctify 
his body. O lord of birds, if this is performed, all obstacles and 
hindrances are dispelled. 

24. He is never afflicted by BhUtas and Piidcos^ or other 
sorts of ghosts. By performing rites of oblations to Narayana 
with the ancestors in view he shall be freed of all sorts of 
affliction. This is my sworn statement. 

25-27. If there is an affliction of ghosts, the victim is 
never relieved by any other activity. Hence, one shall with due 
endeavour devoutly pray to the manes. He who repeats 
Gayatri mantra^ with the manes in view, either in the ninth or 
tenth year, ten thousand times and performs homas a thousand 
times, after having previously performed Mdrdyam Bali\ 
Vrfotsarga* and other rites shall be free from all sorts of tortures. 
He will attain all sorts of pleasure and the best of worlds. He 
shall be honoured by his cousins and kinsmen. 

28. There is no godhead on par with cither one’s father 
or mother. Therefore, one should always worship the manes 
with hearty devotion. 

29-31. One’s father is the instructor in wholesome things 
and he is a visible deity. Other deities may be the lords of 
bodies (but not the progenitors). Verily, this physical body can 
yield either hell or heaven or salvation. Who is more worthy of 
respect and honour than he (i.e. father) due to whose favour 
one is born in bodily form ? 

After pondering over this, if one gives anything to the 
pitrSj O bird, that returns to him which he enjoys. This is what 
those who know the Vedas say. 

1. Bhulas and PtSdeas —malevolent beings, instigators of evils. 

2. Gayatri mantra —The holiest of all the mantras chanted by thousands 
of devotees at their morning, midday and evening ablution or ritual. It 
is so called because it is composed in the Gayatri metre. It runs thus 

Tat savitur vareriyam 
bhargo devasya dhimahi 
dhiyo yo nah pracodayat 

3. Ndrdyaxia bait —day-long rite performed by the descendent of the 
deceased who died without the rite of dyki-ddna etc. at the time of death. 

4. Vffotsarga —a rite of releasing the bull in favour of the deceased. 



832 Garuda Purina 

32. He who saves his father from the hell named put is 
called putra here and hereafter.^ 

33. If one’s father or mother dies either due to acoident 
or due to a foul play, one shall have to adjourn religious rites, 
pilgrimages, nuptial rites and the annual ^r&ddha. 

34. He who reads this chapter entitled Soapnadhyaya or 
hears it, wherein the various dream symbols of ghosts have 
been indicated, will never see the same himself. [He will not 
be afflicted by ghosts]. 


CHAPTER TWENTYTWO 

On attaining ghosthood 


Garuda said : 

1-2. How do these ghosts come into being ? How are 
they redeemed from pretahood ? What are their features. 
What is their diet, O lord ? How aret he ghosts propitiated ? 
O lord of deities, where do they stay ? Please favour me, O 
lord, with an answer to these queries. 

The lord said : 

3. It is the men of sinful actions actuated by their 
previous misdeeds who become ghosts after death. Please listen 
to me, I shall tell you in detail. 

4-5. He who desecrates wells, tanks, lakes, parks, 
temples, water sheds, groves of trees, almshouses etc., and 
misdirects any one in religious rites for monetary gain is a 
sinner. After death he becomes a ghost and remains as such 
till the final deluge. 

1. Putra —so called because he protects his father against falling into 
the bell named pumi Manu IX. 138. 


fqdT i 



11.22.18 


833 


6. Out of greed if people upset the boundaries of 
villages and destroy pasture lands, tanks, parks, underground 
drainage, etc., they become ghosts. 

7. Sinful persons meet with death at the hands of 
Candalas, infuriated brahmins, serpents, animals with curved 
teeth or in watery graves or struck by lightning. 

8-13. Those who meet with foul death such as committing 
suicide by hanging from a tree, by poison or weapon, those who 
die of cholera, those who are burnt to death alive, those who die 
of foul and loath-some diseases or at the hands of robbers, those 
who arc not cremated duly after death, those who do not 
follow sacred rites and conduct, those who do not perform 
Vrsotsarga and monthly Pin4a rites^, those who allow Sudras to 
bring sacrificial grass, twigs and other articles of homa, those 
who fall from mountains and die, those who die when wails 
collapse, those who are defiled by women in their menses, those 
who die in the firmament and those who are forgetful of Visnu, 
those who continue to associate with persons defiled due to 
births or death, those who die of dog-biting or meet with 
death in a foul manner, become ghosts and roam over the 
earth. 

14. One who discards one’s mother, sister, wife, 
daughter or daughter-in-law without seeing any fault in them, 
obtains ghosthood surely. 

15. One who deceives his own brother, kills a brahmana 
or a cow, drinks liquor, defiles the preceptor’s bed, steals gold 
and silk-garments, becomes a ghost, O bird. 

16. One who usurps a deposit, deceives a friend, enjoys 
other man’s wife, kills other’s faith, is cruel, definitely becomes 
a ghost. 

17. One who discards the family-customs, takes to 
other customs, is without knowledge and good character, 
definitely becomes a ghost. 

18. To illustrate this there is an anecdote narrated by 

1. rite —the rite of offering a rice-ball to the manes at the 

obsequial ceremonies nr Sraddhas. 



834 


Ganida Purdna 
% • 


Bhlsma^ to Yudhisthira.* O you of good rites, I shall narrate 
the same to you, on hearing which you may feel pleasure, 

Yudhi^fhiia said : 

19. O grandfather, please tell me what those evil deeds 
are as a result of which one becomes a ghost and what are the 
means of redemption from the same on hearing which I shall 
not be deluded thus further. 

Bhlpna said : 

20. I shall tell you entirely what those causes are 
whereby one turns a ghost and how he is set free after falling 
into a dismal hell impassable even to gods. 

21. I shall tell all those things, on hearing which a 
person is set free from ghosthood. 

22. O dear, there was a brahmin of rigorous sacred rites 
named Santaptaka. For practising penance, he went to a 
forest. 

23. He was a man of kind, compassionate nature. He 
used to perform homas and yogic practices as well as great 
sacrifices. He used to spend time usefully engaged. 

24. He strictly observed celibacy. He observed penances. 
He was soft-hearted, truthful and pure. He was afraid of the 
other world. 

25. He strictly followed the instructions of his preceptor. 
He was delighted in serving guests. He observed yogic 
practices. He was free from Dvandvas (like happiness and 
misery, heat and cold and such opposite pairs). 

1. Bhiftna —the son of Santanu, king of the lunar dynasty His birth 
name was Devavrata. He was named Bhiama, a person of terrible vow, when 
he declared not to marry or assert his claim to the throne which passed on 
consequently to his step-brother Vicitravirya. For details see Puranic 
Encyclopaedia under Bhisma. 

2. TudJiisffiira —‘firm in battle’. Name of the eldest Pandava prince, 
also named ‘Dhartna, Dharmaraja, Ajitasatru’. Son of Kunti and Pandu and 
the grandson of Vicitravirya, he became the emperor of Hastinapur at the 
conclusion of the Great Bharata war after eighteen days’ severe fighting. 



11 . 22.37 


835 


26. Practising yoga incessantly to conquer mundane 
existence, he subjugated the sense organs. Following the path 
of good conduct he eagerly desired salvation. 

27. He spent years in the secluded forest. Then the 
idea of visiting holy centres entered his mind. 

28. He thought within himself “I shall keep immersed my 
body in the waters of a holy river till I die.” Accordingly he 
hastened to a holy centre where he took bath at sunrise. He 
performed the rites of Japa and Namaskdra (obeisance) and 
started on journey. 

29-31. One day, this brahmin of great penance lost his 
way and reached a forest full of thorny shrubs, secluded and 
devoid of big trees. While he was hurrying up, he saw five 
terrible ghosts. 

On seeing these five awful ghosts of deformed features 
he was terrified and he closed his eyes in sheer fright. Then, he 
cast off his fear and became bold enough to ask in sweet words 
“O sires, how is it that you are so deformed ?” 

32. What was the sin committed by you ? Wherefore 
have you attained this deformity ? Where are you procceeding 
in company ? 

The lord of the ghosts said : 

33. O excellent brahmin, our ghosthood is the outcome 
of our own misdeeds. We had been engaged in harassing 
others. Hence, we became victims of foul death. 

34. In this state of our ghosthood we are oppressed with 
hunger and thirst. We are unable to speak. We have lost our 
mental equilibrium. We have lost consciousness too. 

35. We are Pisacas born of our own misdeeds. We do 
not know the difference between one quarter and another. We 
are extremely distressed. We do not know where we go. 

36. We have neither fathers nor mothers. This ghost¬ 
hood is due to our own misdeeds. We are extremely dejected 
and sorrowful because the attack is all too sudden. 

37. O Brahmin, we are delighted on seeing you. We 
feel refreshed. Please wait a little. I shall narrate everything 
from the very beginning. 



836 


Garuda Purana 


38. My name is Paiyufita. This ghost is known as 
Sucimukha. The other one is ^ighraga and the others are 
Rohita and Lekhaka. These are our names and we are ghosts. 

The brahmin said - 

39. How can ghosts, the outcome of evil actions, have 
names ? You may have some purpose in view in having these 
names. Please tell me. 

The Pretardja (King of ghosts) said : 

40. O excellent brahmin, While I myself took all sweet 
things I left stale things for brahmins to eat. 

41. While I was on earth as a man, I showed the hungry 
brahmins the exit door. Hence, my name is paryufita. 

42. O excellent brahmin, whenever a brahmin begged 
him for food, out of hunger, this ghost used to run away, 
hence, he is called Sfghraga. 

43. This other one irritated many brahmins with sharp 
tongue when they came to him for food, hence he is called 
SScimukha. 

44. In his life on earth, this ghost ate sumptuously, in 
isolation, the food-stuffs offered to gods and manes in the 
absence of brahmins. Hence, he is known as Rohaka. 

45. Whenever a needy person requested him for some¬ 
thing, this ghost pretended to be silent and went on scratching 
on the ground. As a result of this he is known as Lekhaka. 

46-47. Thus acquiring our ghosthood and names from 
our misdeeds we have got ourselves deformed too. 

This Lekhaka is goat-mouthed; Rohaka is mountain¬ 
faced; Sighraga is cow-faced; SUcimukha is needle-mouthed; I, 
Paiyufila^ am crane-necked. 

48-49. Taking this illusory form, we wander over this 
wide region. We suffer from terrible distress. O Brahmin, you 
can judge from our deformred faces with protruding lips and 
twisted shape. Our teeth are long, our bodies huge, our faces 
crooked, due to our misdeeds. Thus I have told you ho^v we 
turned ghosts. 

50. We have become somewhat wise on seeing you. If 



11.22.58 


837 


you wish to hear more, you can ask us further whatever you 
like to know. 

The brahmin said : 

51. The creatures on this earth subsist on food, I wish 
to know precisely what you all eat for your subsistence. 

The ghost said : 

52. If you are inclined to hear what we eat, O noble 
sir, listen attentively. 

The brahmin said : 

53. O king of ghosts, please tell me what you eat. 

Thus requested the ghosts began to explain their diet 

respectively. 

The ghosts said : 

54. O brahmin, our diet is extremely loathsome, despised 
by all living beings. On hearing it from us you arc sure to 
hate us. It is so despicable. 

55. Mucous, secretions, faeces and urine together with 
other exudations, filth as well as leavings of food constitute 
our diet. 

56. We eat, drink and revel in the house where people 
do not pay attention to cleanliness and where they scatter 
litter carelessly. We haunt unclean beings as well. 

57. We reside and enjoy in the house where there is no 
purity and where people do not observe truthfulness and 
restraint and where outcastes, robbers, etc. join together and 
take meals. 

58. We take delight in haunting the house where no 
mantras are recited, where no oblation is offered, where no 
homa is performed and where people do not read the Vedas^ 
regularly nor perform religious rites.® 

1. Vedas —Originally there were only three Vedas : Rg, Yajus and 
Saman, collectively called Trayi : ‘the sacred triad’ but, a fourth, the 
Alharvaveda, was subsequently added to them. Each of the Vedas has two 
parts—the Mantra and the Brahmana. According to the orthodox faith of the 
Hindus, the Vedas are not human composition, being directly revealed by 
the supreme Being Brahman. They are called Sruti, ‘what is heard or 
revealed’ as distinguished from Smrti, ‘what is remembered’ or ‘is the work 
of human origin*. 

2. Religious riles —as the worship of deities, observance of Vratas. 



838 


Garuda Purdna 


59. We hover round the house where gods are not 
honoured, where the householder is a vile wretch, without 
shame and decency and where the poor husband is controlled 
by his sturdy wife. 

60. We enjoy gaiety in the house where covetousness, 
fury, somnolence, sorrow, fear, haughtiness, lethargy, quarrels 
and deception reign supreme. 

61. We lick up the urine mixed with semen from the 
vaginal passage of the widow having illicit intercourse with 
her paramour. 

62. Dear friend, I am ashamed to tell you about the 
food we take. O piou.s brahmin, we lick up the menstrual 
blood from the generative organ of a woman. 

63. O noble brahmin, prefering penance to riches, and 
engaged in performing the sacred rites^, I ask you, out of 
frustration. Plea.se tell me the means of warding off ghosthood. 
It is better to die a hundred times than turn a ghost. 

The brahmin said : 

64. A person who is assiduously engaged in fasts such 
as Krcchra^, Gandrayana^ is never born as a ghost. 

65. He who observes fast, keeps awake at night and is 
purified by meritorious deeds is never born as a ghost. 

66. He who performs A§vamcdha and other sacrifices, 
makes liberal gifts and builds monasteries, parks, drinking 
water-sheds and cowpens is never born a.s a ghost. 

1. Sacred riles —as the sacraments {Sarhskarns) dcsciibcd in the 
Grhya sutras. 

2. Krcchrn —As expiatory rites, various kinds of Krcchras (morti¬ 
fications of the body) arc enumerated by Manu (11. 211-21G). They are 
Krcchra-sanlapana, Atikrrchra, Taptakrcclira and Pardkakrcchra. 

3. Candrayana —A religious observance or an expiatory rite regulated 
by the moon’s age (the period of its waxing and waning) in which the 
daily quantity of food consisting of fifteen mouthfuls at the full moon is 
diminished by one mouthful everyday during the dark fortnight till it is 
reduced to zero at the new moon and is increased in like mannei during 
the bright fortnight. Yajflavalkya smrlt 3. 324 et seq, and Ms 11.216 ; 



11 . 22.77 


839 


67. He who helps brahmins to give their virgin daughters 
in marriage, according io his capacity, he who enables students 
to study, and he who accords shelter and refuge to the needy 
is never born as a ghost. 

68. If a man takes food offered by a fallen man and 
dies with that food undigested in his stomach, he is supposed 
to have courted a foul death and hence, he becomes a ghost. 

69. If a priest officiates at the sacrifice of an unworthy 
person and neglects that of a worthy sacrificer, if a man lives 
in the company of despicable people he becomes a ghost. 

70. He who associates with drunkards or indulges in 
intercourse with a woman addicted to wine or eats meat 
unconsciously becomes a ghost. 

71. He who misappropriates a brahmin’s wealth, or the 
proi)erty of the temple or that of his preceptor and he who 
takes money from his son-in-law before giving his daughter 
in marriage becomes a ghost. 

72. He who forsakes his innocent and guiltless mother, 
sister, wife, daughter or daughter-in-law becomes a ghost. 

73. All these are sure to be born as ghosts—a man 
misappropriating a trust property, a man treacherous to his 
friend, a man fond of another man’s wife, a faithless man and 
a deceptive wretch. 

74. A man hating his brother, a murderer of a brahmin, 
a slayer of a cow, a wine-addict, a defiler of the preceptor’s 
bed, one who casts off customary rites, or one who is fond of 
telling lies, a stealer of gold or one who takes possession of 
plots of land illegally—all these are born as ghosts. 

Bhi^ma said : 

75. When the brahmin spoke thus, the beating of drums 
Was heard in the sky. The gods showered flowers over the 
brahmin. 

76. Five celestial chariots arrived there and took the 
ghosts away, the ghosts having taken leave of the saintly 
brahmin. 

77. The ghosts were relieved of their sins after the 
pious speech of that brahmin. They all achieved the highest 
region {Vaikunfha). 



S40 


Garuda Parana 
• • 


78. On hearing this anecdote, the lord of birds quaked 
like the Aivattha tree. He asked the lord again, for the benefit 
of human beings. 


CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE 

On Ghosthood 


Garuda said : 

1. What do the ghosts do in their ghosthood ? When 
do they speak sometime ? Please tell me, O lord of gods ! 

The lord said : 

2. I shall tell about their form, signs and dreams. Being 
oppressed by hunger and thirst they enter their former home. 

3. Though possessed of airy forms, they give signs to 
their sleeping descendents, O bird. 

4. They visit the place where their sons, wives and 
relatives sleep. 

5. If a person dreams of a horse, an elephant, a bull, 
or a man with deformed face, if a person awakened from sleep 
sees himself in the opposite side of the bed, this is all due to 
the working of a ghost. 

6. If a man is fastened with chains in dream, if his dead 
ancestors demand food in dream, 

7. If one snatches the food from him while he is eating 
in dream, if thirsty, one drinks water, 

8. If in dream one rides a bull or moves with bulls or 
if one springs up in the sky or goes to a holy place hungry, 

9-10. If one speaks aloud among cows, bulls, brahmanas 
horses, elephants, deities, ghosts and demons—this is due to the 
working of a ghost. Many are the signs of ghosts in dream, 
O bird. It is due to a ghost if one sees his wife, relative, son 
or husband as dead. 



II.24.7 


841 


11. He who begs in dream oppressed by hunger or 
thirst should give pindas to the manes to ward off coming 
distress. 

12. If one sees in dream his son, cattle, father, brother, 
wife, getting out of house, it is due to the working of a ghost. 

13. These signs, O bird, call for atonement. One should 
bathe at home or at a holy place, give water oblation to a 
deity at the root of a fig tree. 

14. Or give black corn, perform worship, offer gifts to a 
Vedic scholar and do homa as far as his means can allow. 

15. If, in faith, one reads or hears this discourse, the 
ghosts disappear immediately from his vicinity. 


CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR 

Sifis of Omission and Commissions Premature death 
of Childrens Gifts 


Garuda said : 

1. As the Sastras^ declare none dies a premature death. 
But, how is it that a brahmin scholar of the Vedas or a mighty 
monarch sometimes meet with death prematurely. Hence, what 
is stated in the l^astras^ by Brahma appears to be untrue. 

2. What is stated in the Vedas, viz, A man lives for a 
hundred years* is not actually experienced in the Kali age.^ 

3-7. People, belonging to different classes,—brahmana, 
Ksatriya, Vaisya and Sudra including Mlecchas who live in 
Bharata do not live upto hundred years. 

1. bistros —Sacred Books whose authority is considered to be valid 
in all times. 

2. A full span of human life is one hundred years. Rv. 7.66.16; 
10.161 

3. Kali Age. For a detailed account of the concept of four ages, see 
Pargiter’s Ancient Indian Historical Tradition. Ch. XV., pp. 175-176. 

The Kali Age is said to have started after the conclusion of Bh&rata 
war or after Lord Kr^na ascended heaven. The latter view is more probable, 
for Lord Kr^pa could not have lived in Kali Age. 



842 


Garuda Purina 


A person can meet with untimely death, no matter if he 
is a child, old or young, rich or poor, handsome or ugly^ 
learned or fool, of high or low birth, an ascetic or a yogi, 
intelligent, pious and all-knowing brahmin or a mighty 
monarch. Please tell me how this is so. 

The lord said : 

8. O wise bird, well said. You are my staunch devotee. 
Please listen to my important words that dispel all sorts of sins. 

9. O lord of birds, the brilliant son of Kasyapa,^ I shall 
tell you how god of death induced by Brahma, takes away the 
life quickly. 

10. It is true that a man lives for a hundred years as 
stated in the Vedas. But due to the influence of his misdeeds he 
dies a premature death. 

Il-i2. Now, people do not make a regular study of the 
Vedas; they do not follow the traditional conduct; they commit 
sins and due to idleness forsake their duties. They take food 
from any house they visit. They are fond of other men’s wives. 
All these reduce their longevity. 

13. Evil deeds take men quickly to Yama’s abode, if they 
do not possess faith, if they are impure, if they do not practice 
Vedic rites, if they have cast off auspicious things or if they 
indulge in falsehood or if they practise deception. 

14-15. Evil deeds bring about premature death even of 
a king if he does not protect his people, if he is devoid of virtue 
if he is cruel, if he indulges in vice, if he is a fool, if he 
stays out of Vedic discussion, if he harasses his people. 

16. If a man forsakes his duties or resorts to forbidden 
activities or those which are enjoined on others he dies quickly. 

17. If a Sudra does something other than service to the 
twice-born he is wasted in any of the hells—bad, worse or worst 
or as the case may be. 

18. If one neglects both, Z)5rta, ja/»a, Ao-Tia, study of the 
Vedas or worship of gods on a certain day that is a day wasted 
in the life of that man. 

1. KaSyapa —son of Marici and grandson of Brahma, had a son 
Garuda born ofVinata* 



11.24.30 


843 


19. I affirm that the attributes of body evolved out of the 
morsels of food and lymph arc not permanent or steady or 
rooted in firm grounds. 

20. The food cooked in the morning becomes stale in the 
evening. How can one expect permanence in the body sustain¬ 
ed by such a food ? 

21. O lord of birds, realising that the body bound with 
its activities is already lost, people should strive for burning 
away their sins. 

22. Body belongs to one who nourishes it with food or 
to one who generates, father, mother or both. It is reduced to 
ashes or devoured by dogs or eaten up by worms. What sanctity 
can there be in regard to it ? 

23. A person should make an earnest effort for the 
destruction of sins. The sin which he commits in various births 
is threefold. 

24. Wlien he takes birth as a human being the sins visit 
him. When he remembers his past sinful life he becomes 
sorrowful. 

25. When he resides in human womb after sojourning 
in the various beings such as birds, etc., the full velocity of his 
past actions forces an impact on him. Only after residing in 
the womb does he realise it. 

26. He begins to realize the tortures of life, such as 
anxiety, sicknes.s, distress, old age, deformity and the rest. 

27. But the moment he comes out of the womb, ignorance 
envelops him. As an infant he realizes nothing. 

28. In youth too, he does not realize, blinded as he is by 
sexual urge. But he who realizes it fiom the very beginning 
attains salvation. 

29. From the time of conception itself, death awaits the 
person whether he be infant or an old man or a youth, whether 
he be rich or poor handsome or ugly. 

30. Even if one is illiterate or a scholar, a brahmin or 
another caste, surely he must die. A man of great wisdom 
devoted to penance or practice of yoga, of liberal gifts and 
virtuous life cannot expect to derive pleasure without a physical 
body. 



844 


Garuda Purdna 


31. When the actions of previous births ripen, man 
succumbs to death. From the time of conception to the fi/th 
year even a slight sin may cause death. 

32-33. It is due to major sins that man dies after the 
fifth year. Usually, he completes the allotted span of life, dies 
and is born again. It is as a result of the influence of sacred 
rites and gifts that he is able to complete his life’s term. 

Garuda said : 

34. How should the rites of pinda be performed if a 
person dies in infancy ? What should be done when death 
occurs in the womb itself? What should be done when the 
death occurs before the tonsure ceremony ? 

35. What are the rules of obsequy if death occurs 
after the tonsure ceremony ? 

The lord said : 

36. If there is still birth or abortion, the impurity is for 
as many days as the number of months of conception. 

37 . Nothing else need be done, if one desires to maintain 
confirmity with the rules conducive to the welfare of the soul. 
If the child dies after birth but before the tonsure ceremony the 
dead body is merely buried. 

38. Milk should be distributed according to one’s 
capacity among the children in the neighbourhood in order to 
please them. After the tonsure and upto five years, if the child 
dies, cremation should be performed duly. 

39. Milk should be distributed to children and they may 
be fed also. The rites of children upto five, on being dead, 
should be in accordance with the tradition of the family. 

40 . Udakumbha rites^^ should be performed. Milk 
puddings should be given. O foremost among birds, the child 
is a link in paying off debt to ancestors.* 

41-43. It is but certain that whoever is born shall die 

1. Udakumbha rite —a rite of propitiating the manes by offering water 
from an earthen jar. 

2. The son is absolved of debt to his parents by performing 
obsequial rites or sraddhas after their death. 



11 , 25.4 


845 


and whoever dies shall be born again,^ When a child dies at a 
tender age without enjoying the pleasures of life he is sure to be 
born again. Hence, gifts are given, O foremost among birds. 
The rites are performed to ward off rebirth. This is what I feel. 
If nothing is made over as a gift, he will be born in an indigent 
hoiisc. Such anecdotes are many in the Puranas. 

44-45. Sumptuous food should also be given. Inclination 
to give is rarely found in the world. 

It is the fruit of penance of no mean measure that one 
gets good food and the power to digest it, good sexual virility 
and handsome women, good wealth and inclination to give it. 

By making gifts, one can enjoy later; by resorting to holy 
centres one can attain pleasure and by speaking sweet words one 
can become a scholar or a religious saint. 

4b. By not making gifts one becomes indigent; due to 
[)ovcrty one commits sins, due to sins one falls into hell. He is 
born again as indigent; again he commits sins anrl again he 
falls into hell. 


CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE 

On sons am! f^rnneisons 


The lord said : 

1-2. I hereafter, I shall explain precisely certain factors 
concerning men and women. A child after the age of five is 
established as such. He is able to know the various .sense organs 
and difTcrentiate colours. 

3. Death or bondage of living beings is a result of 
their previous actions. It is the sin that causes death. 

4. If there is miscarriage, there is no obsequial rite. 
Milk is distributed when infants die. Due to mishaps to 

1. Death after bii ih and birth ufter de.atli—thus moves the cyt Ic in 
rirrle, till tint soul is reh-ased from tlte bondage of action. Cr>mparc 
lihaiffivndi’ilA 

STTflFT % TOW ^ TO ifTnr ^ I 11. 27. 



846 


Garuda Piirdnn 


children, if death occurs, water-pots, milk puddings etc. are 
made over as gifts. 

f). The rites in the event of the death of a childcare the 
.same as for the older people except that the rites of Vnot^nrga 
and Mahadana arc performed for the older people on the eleventh 
and twelfth days. 

6 . Infants and older children of the neighbourhood are 
fed and clothed. Water-pots are gifted whether the deceased is 
a boy, young man or old. 

7. Till the second year, the dead body is merely btiried. 
Thereafter, O foremost among birds, the body is cremated. 

8 . A child is called infant till the teeth arc cut; till the 
toi.sure’ ceremony he is called a child; a boy till the ku.sa girdle 
is put. This is in accordance with ail sacred texts.“ 

9-10. From the time of conception till he is sixteen months 
old he is called infant; from sixteen months to twentyseven he is 
called a Ijoy; from twentyseven months to five years he is 
called Kumara; from five to nine years he is called Pauganda.'* 
He is known as Ki.sora till the sixteenth year. After the 
sixteenth year he attains maturity. 

11. A boy’s death occurring at the fifth year whether 
normally or due to accident, all rites as mentioned above, 
sJionJd be carrietl out including the ten pittdas. 

12. Since the rites are not many, since contact with the 
w(^rldly objects is of short duration and since body loo is of 
small stature, the obsequies also are not elaborat(\ 

1. Tonsute ceremony —wherein the buy’s lieacl is shavctl and only .t 
.''ingle lock on the ciown of the he.ul is lelt. I'iic ceieinony is perfoirned 
either in the fust or in the thud ye.ir. t'l. M.itiu 2.3.). 

C\ 

c sa 

2. Ainuflji—"The giidlc of a brjlnnana made of a triple .string of 
Miifija grass. Cf. Ms. 2. 42 

r^f?riTT??r^arT i 

c. 

O O >9 

TT II 

c 

3. Pniii’ittiifa — .\ecoi ding to S.Sl'.U the boy tioni the fifth to the 
sixteenth year is called paugancla. 



11.25.24 


847 


13. If a child dies before the fifth year, the articles of 
diet and daily necessaries to which it is accustomed can be 
made over as gifts. 

14-15. Sons evolved out of the semen of brahmins arc 
favourites of Divine sages. In the same way, whether they arc 
in the age group of • children, young men or old men, both 
Yama and his emissaries too certainly consider. The all- 
pervasive soul experiences both pleasure and pain. 

16-17. Forsaking the body like the serpent casting off its 
slough, the subtle soul of the size of the thumb' roams about 
in its aerial form oppressed by hunger. 

18. Therefore, certainly, gifts should be made. From the 
birth to the fifth year, uncooked things should be gifted to the 
Brahmana. 

19. If there is accidental death after the fifth year, 
VrKotsaroa and other rites arc performed but the rite of sapintU- 
karana is not necessary. 

20. It is on the eleventh day that sons usually perform 
the sixteen iraddhm and make the Udakumbha and other 
similar gifts. 

21. In the case of all persons beyond the age of five at 
death brahmins should be fed and major gifts offered according 
to capacity. The gift of earthen lamp should also be made. 

22. O foremost among birds, ghosts should be propitiated 
by due performance of rites. If the person does not perform 
the rite he himself will become a ghost. 

23-24. Therefore, before other rites arc accomplished, 
he should perform ekoddhta^ for the mane for appeasing his 
hunger, put the rice-ball over darbhas while wearing the 
sacred thread over the right shoulder. When this is done, the 
obsequial rites are completed. 

1. The personal soul is of the size of a thumb. Cf. Mahrtbhnralti, 
Satya"ati akhyana where Yama is stated to have forcibly dragged the thumb¬ 
sized soul out of the body of Satvavan: 

2. Ekoddtsla —a ^laddha or funeral rite performed for one definite 

individual deceased not including other ancestors. Cp. Miliik^ard on the 
Yajnavalkya Smiti ; qR?*! ^ i( 



848 Gam da Purdna 

25. Thereby a son yields all pleasure to his parents. If 
dead early he is born again in the family. 

26-28. Just as the same single sky, moon or sun are 
reficctcd in different water-pots, so also the Atman is reflected 
in different sons (and daughters) and roams about. 

The mentality of the progenitor at the time of sexual 
intercourse when the semen and the menstrual blood mingle is 
reflected in the child born of that union. Hence, we can say 
that the boy takes after the father. 

29-30. It is possible that the child may differ in qualities 
but not in features. We have never seen a blind man procreat¬ 
ing a blind child, a mute procreating a mute child, a deaf 
procreating a deaf child or an idiot procreating an idiot. 

Gariidn said : 

31-32. There are ten kinds of sf)ns' : Aurnsa (legitimate) 
Ksehaja (procre^ited in one’s wife by another man) and others. 
There is a son SangthUr (adopted) or Dasipiitra (son of a slave 
gill). I Tow do these sons perform rites for (heir fathers. What 
is the goal they attain ? If any one has only daughters and no 
son or grandson, who should perfirni sraddha rites for him ? 
What are the rules regarding the same ? 

The laid said : 

33. A man is released from his debt to the manes on 
seeing his son’s face.^ 

34. A man is released from three types of debts on 
seeing his grandson ^ On seeing his son, grandson, and great 
grntulsfin he attains eternal or celestial worlds. 

35. The Ksetraja and other sons contribute to his worldly 
welfare. The Aurasa (legitimate) son performsduly. 

1. Manu, however entimoiMtcs twelve kinds of sons grouped into 
two divisions, viz. six gotriyas and six agotriyas. To the fo> mer belong 
Anrasd, KseUnja, Datlnkn, Krtlriuui Cudliotfinnnn and Aftaviddha. To the latter 
belong KAniria, Sahodha, hril/i, Pauuarbhava, Svajamdntta and Stiudra —.Ms. IX, 

I ■■)(]. IGO. 

2. \’idc footnote 2, jj 844 

3. Eveiy one who is born has three debts to pay olT : to sages, gods 
and manes. lie who learns the Vedas, olfers s.icrifices to gods and begets a 
son becomes free fiom the three debts. 



11.25.45 


849 


36. The other nine^ types of son perform Ekocidi^fa 
hadciha, not Parvana®. The brahmin son takes one upward 
but the adopted son causes his down-fall. If the latter were to 
perform the annual iraddha it will result only in his falling into 
hell. 

37. O bird, the Safigrhitr son may very well make gifts 
excluding cooked food-stuff. He shall perform only Ekoddi^la 
and not Patvana. 

38-41. If he proceeds, in this manner, every year, there 
is no harm. If he forsakes Ekoddi>pi and performs Pdrvana he 
makes himself and the manes victims of Yarna’s wrath. The 
Sahgrhitr, Ddsipulra and other sons should perform iraddha with 
uncooked foodstuff in holy centres. If ilic Sangrhilr son performs 
iraddha with cooked rice his iraddha becomes fruitless like the 
food offered by a isudra to a brahmin. The grandfather and 
the other manes do not accept anything offered by him. C) 
foremost among birds, knowing all these things, one shall avoid 
procreating sons in lower caste women.'’ 

42-43. Apravrajila* and a f^udra procreating sons even 
in brahmin women procreate only Candalas. O lord of birds, 
one shall marry legitimately a woman of liis own caste and 
procreate sons. 

44. If they are of good nature he will be happy. If 
they arc of bad nature he will go to hell. Even sons of lower 
caste people, if good-natured, cause happiness. 

45. A single son, free from the sins of Kali is lionoured by 
the siddhas and fanned by celestial damsels with divine clunvries. 
He will be able to lift hundreds of manes, kinsmen, sons, 
grandsons and great-grandsons fallen into the abysmal depths 
of Inferno. 


1. nine types oj ions. l''outiioic l,p. 8tU. 

2. the gcncial ccrcinoiiy of otfering obhitions to tlie Manes 
on the fourteenth day of each liaif inontli and tl»c days of the full and new 
moon, 

3. lower caste wotw-n —Women of Sudra caste. 

4. apravrajita —One who has not renounced the world. 



850 


Garuda Purdt^ 
« • 


CHAPTER TWENTYSIX 

Sapindikarana^ 


Garuda said : 

1. O foremost among deities, take pity on me and tell 
me truly when the sapinda rite has to be performed for the 
dead. 

2. How do they attain their goal when sapinda rite is 
performed ? What happens when it is not performed ? How 
can you say that sapir^da is performed both for man and 
woman. 

3. How can both husband and wife derive the benefit 
of sapinda ? If the husband is alive how can one perlbrm 
sapinda for a woman ? 

4. O lord of deities, how in the heaven does she attain 
the region of her husband ? When the sacred fire is lit how is 
sraddha performed along with Vrfotsarga on the same day ? 

5. O lord, how could the water-jar be gifted, if the 
sapinda rite is performed already ? Please tell me, out of grace, 
since the welfare of the world is involved. 

Tke lord said : 

6 . I shall tell you the truth how sapinda should be per¬ 
formed, O foremost among birds, the dead man is on the 
Great Highway for the period of a year (after death). 

7. Thereafter, he sojourns in the Pitrloka* together with 
the manes. Hence, the sapinda should be performed by the son 
to his father. 

8. When a year is complete, the son should perform 
pinda-prave^a duly on the anniversary of death. 

9. O Excellent bird, when the sapinda is performed on 
the anniversary of deatli the dead man attains his cherished goal. 

1. sapiodiharapa —the rite of uniting the dead, willi his deceased ances¬ 
tors. See Vol., II. p. 787. f.n. 1. 

2. Ptliloka —The world of the manes where the spirits of the Dead 
abide for sometime before tliey enter the heaven or discend to the world of 
mortals. The spirit of the deceased person is entitled to the designation 
ofpitr« and an abode in pitfloka after passing through the state oipreta as 
a result of sapwdil^araita rite which absolves him of pretahood. 



11.26.20 


851 


10. After sapin^ikarana^ he abandons his identity and 
becomes one with the manes. The assimilation with grandfather 
is made within six months from the period the rite is complelcd. 

11. No joyous ceremony such as marriage, etc, can be 
performed if the householder dies and the sapin^a has not been 
performed. Even a mendicant will not take alms from that 
house unless the sapinda is performed duly. 

12. As long as the pindas arc not merged, one remains 
impure. O lord of birds, the dead man gets a new appellation 
after this tnerge. 

13. The obligations of a lamily are many, Man’s life is 
being wasted every moment. Human body is not permanent. 
In view of this, the twelfth day after death is thought to be 
appropriate for the sapinda rite. 

14-15. Wliether one has maintained the .sacrificial lire or 
not, one should perform the sapinda on the iwcllth day. If that 
is not possible, alter three fortnights or alter six months or on 
the anniversary day. 

The sapinda rite is made obligatory by the sages who 
know the truth. 

IG. After sapinda rite ekoddista shall not be [)ei formed. 
If it is performed it shall be done lor the three, avoiding 
days. 

17-18. Ekoddista, if not peiformed for the three -father, 
grandlathcr, great giandfalher - tantamounts to a .slaughter of 
pitis. If one is unable to perform the three separate .sraddhas, 
one shall perlorm all the three on the same day which is not the 
sraddha day of the grandfather. 

If the day or month of death is not known, parvana and 
not ekoddista sraddha is recommended. 

19. If the body has not yet been evolved no sraddha is 
enjoined for him together with the other manes. If the 
sixteen sraddhas are performed he is released from pretahood, 
acquires the status of pitrs and rejoices in their company. 

20. If there be no son, sapindikarana is not possible. 
There is no sapindikarana for a low caste woman cidier, so long 
as she lives witli her husband well and good, but there is no 
sapindikarana for her after her death. 



852 


Garuda Parana 


21. The woman whose marriage has taken place 
according to the practice observed in the marriages, such as 
Btdhina, etc, is entitled to rice-ball and water libation which 
should be oflered by the dynastic title of'hcr husband. 

22, The woman who is married according to the custom 
Ibllowcd in the marriages such as dsura, etc. is also entitled to 
pinda and water which should be ofTered by the dynastic title 
ol' her lather. 

23-24. 1 he sapindikarana for the deceased is always per- 

lormcd by the son alone. If the deceased has no son, it should 
be performed by his wife; if no wife, by his elder brother; if 
iKj elder brother, by his younger brother, or by his younger 
brother’s son; if no younger,brother or his son, by a close relative 
or by a disciple. After sapindikarana, he should perform 
Jsfandimukha} 

25. O lord, if a dead man is issueless, his younger brother 
or his wife can perform the sapinda. 

26. According to Manu, if among many brothers in a 
family only one has a son that son is common to all brothers. 

27. 'riie sapinda of persons devoid of sons should be 
peifoimed by the wife or rtviks or the family priest. 

28. A son whose tonsure ceremony has been held is 
entitled to perform his father’s sraddha but he shall not recite 
the vedic mantras. He can very well say svadhd. 

29. A woman’s sapinda can be performed by three 
persons, beginning with her husband (i.e. husband, son or 
husband's brother). 

30 . Either before a year, or after a year or on the 
anniversary day, the sapinda rite can be performed. After that, 
all individual rites are forbidden. 

31. After sapinda, all individual sraddhas are avoided. 
He who gives separate pinda virtually kills the Pitrs. 

32. When sapindikarana is performed a separate irdddha 
for each mane is not enjoined. If a separate .Sraddha is perform¬ 
ed, the sapinda rite should be performed again. 

1. NandimiiUia Sraddha —The ceremony performed in memory of the 
manes, preliminary to any festive occasion such as marriage, etc. 



11.26.43 


853 


33. If after performing sapin(.la any one performs 
t'ko(l(]if}a, he makes himself and the dead man victim of Yama’s 
wrath. Upio a year the rite for redemption from ghosthood 
should be performed under the specific name and gotta by the 
I lo use holder. 

34. The water-jar oll'cring, feeding, gifts of lights, etc. 
after tlie sapinda rite is over, should be made in a single unit. 

3.'). O bird, the brahmin odiciating in the first annual 
sraddha should be given the cost of water-pots and other 
articles (if water-pots and other articles are not given) after 
being fed. 

36. After the pitula offering has been made, he should 
gift as much of Ibotl-stulf to a brahmin as would last for a year. 
A person for whom all due rites are performed shall obtain a 
divine i)ody and will proceed in the divine aerial car fully 
contented, to tlie realm of Yama. 

37. If lather is alive, no sapinda rite is performed to the 
dead son. No sapinda is performed to the woman whose husband 
is alive. 

38. if the chaste wife ascends the pyre on the fourth day, 

the and other rites for her should be performed on 

the day when the same are due for her husband. 

39. An adopted daughter shall subscribe to her husband’s 
gob a till the birth of a son After the birth of her son she 
reverts to the gotra of her father. 

40. If the wife ascends the funeral pyre there is aways 
the identity of rites for her husband and wife. I’lie .separate 
Sraddha (ekocidista) shall be performed by the son on the 
anniversary of his father’s death. 

41. If both husband and wife die on one and the same 
day, without a child and arc cremated in the same pyre, the 
kinsman should perform separate Sraddha for cacli. The sapinda 
is along with her husband. 

42. This is my sworn statement that if any one offers 
separate pindas to the deceased couple—husband and wife—he 
is not affected by major sins at all. 

43. If both husband and wife die and are cremated in 
the same pyre, food is cooked for pinda at the same time but 
pindas are offered separately. 



854 


Garuda Purand 


44. This separate offering is enjoined only for a year. 
Vriotsarga, Nava sraddha (the first annual offering on the day 
of death) and the sixteen separate sraddhas, the pada-dana,^ 
major gifts are offered separately for a year. The dead person 
will be satiated for ever. 

45. If two persons, men or women, of the same gotra 
die on the same day, the altar for the ritual is common for both, 
but the offering of gifts is separate. 

46. The Sraddha performed on the eleventh day should 
consist of the same kind of cooked food in the case of husband 
and wife but not in the case of others. 

47. If Sraddhas are performed in holy centres, in the 
dark fortnight or during the period of solar or lunar eclipse, 
the same cooked food can be used for many Sraddhas. 

48. If a woman is burnt along with the corpse of the 
husband, the fire burns out the body. It cannot burn the soul. 

49. Just as the impurities of metals are removed when 
metals are melted in fire, so the woman shall remove her 
impurities in the fire that is on a par with nectar. 

50-51. Assuming a divine body in heaven botli of them 
attain purity. Just as the oil in a metallic vessel can be heated 
but not burnt to ashes by fire, so also cremated along with her 
husband she cannot be reduced to nothing. Her soul remains 
immortal though it is merged into the soul of her husband. 

52. If she is separated from her husband and dies else¬ 
where she cannot attain the region of her husband till the day 
of final deluge.^ 

53. Leaving off her mother, father and sons she will 
attain an everlasting happiness by following her dead husband. 

54. Calculating by the celestial calander she shall stay in 
heaven for thirty five million years with the stars. 

55. At the end of that period she is born in a noble 
family, where she will be highly delighted in the company of 
her husband since she has remained chaste throughout. 

56-57. If a woman who is married duly according to 
religious rites does not associate herself with her husband she 

1. pada-danu —the gift of padas. See Vol. II, p. 821, Verse 10. 

2. The day ojfinal deluge —The day ol'pralaya when the whole univcise, 
at the cud of a kalpa, is destroyed. 



11.26.67 


855 


will remain miserable for seven births subsequent to tiiis. She 
will be evil-conducted and repulsive in speech. The woman of 
such a despicable character who goes after another man, leav¬ 
ing her own husband shall be born as a lizard or an alligator 
or a leech. 

58. Hence, a woman shall endeavour to serve her 
husband in thought, word and action and follow him in life 
and death. 

59. A woman who commits sins against her husband 
alive or dead shall never get a husband in her re-birth. She will 
be the most unfortunate creature among women. 

60. By not thinking of any one else and by serving her 
husband with devoted attention, a woman shall derive half the 
merit her husband achieves by the worship of God, propitiation 
of the manes and hospitality to guests. 

61. By doing her duty like this she will attain the region 
of her husband after death and shine like a celestial damsel in 
heaven as long as the sun and the moon shine in the firmament. 

62. If reborn they will be born in a flourishing family 
and will live together for a long time. A chaste lady will never 
sulfer from the pangs of separation from her husband. 

63. O lord of birds, I have told you all. Now, I shall 
tell you some special things which yield happiness to the dead. 

64. The sapinda rite is performed on the twelfth day or 
thereafter, in any case within a year. The Udakumbha and 
feeding rites are performed every month. 

65. A rite already done need not be repeated except the 
rites for the dead. If any one does it ^ain the previous rite 
becomes fruitless. 

66. The rites for the dead, of course, can be repeated. O 
lord of birds, if any auspicious ceremonies (such as marriage 

etc) arc to be celebrated, the sapin^a rite should be completed 
before that. 

67. A son who performs sapinda rite according to the 
rules shall offer monthly pindas as well together with feeding 
and UdeJiumbha rites. 



856 


Garuda Purdna 


CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN 

Episode of King Bahhmvahana 


Garuda said ; 

1-2. Mow do the gliosis originate .■* What arc their 
features () lord, of what misdeeds arc tlie great ghosts and 
piuicas tiic outcome :* f) lord, the slayer of Madhu demon, for 
the benefit of every one, please shed light on these vital points. 
What are the meritorious rites and chaiiiies whereby the ghost 
is redeemed ? O lord, if you wish me well, please tell me every¬ 
thing 

The lord said \ 

3. O Garuda, you have [lut a pertinent question. For 
the benefit of human beings please listen to the narrative of a 
ghost that I am going to tell. 

4. This is tlie secret of secrets which is not to be divulged 
to any one and everyone. O mighty one, you arc my devotee. 
I tell you, therefore. 

5. O bird, formerly in Tretayuga there was a king 
Uabhruvahana by name, in the prosperous city Mahodaya. Me 
was beautiful and righteous too. 

G. He used to make gifts and perform sacrifices. He 
was rich, revered by saintly men, devoted to brahmins, endowed 
with good manners as well as sympathetic and chivalrous 
qualities. 

7. Powerful that he was he protected his subjccls like 
his own sons. One day, he started on a hunting expedition. 

8. He entered a thick wild forest overgrown with 
variegated trees, infested by hundred of tigers and resonant 
with the chirping sound of different kinds of birds. 

9. In the middle of the forest, he saw a deer at a great 
distance and hit it with an arrow. 

10-11. With the arrow sticking to its body the deer 
vanished behind the trees. The king followed the blood¬ 
stained track. In the pursuit of the wounded deer he reached 
another forest. 



n.27.25 


857 


12-13. His throat became parched with hunger and 
thirst. He was utterly exhausted. He saw a pond and plunged 
into the water together with the horse. He drank the cool water 
rendered fragrant with the contact of lotuses. 

14-15. He came out of the lake and sat under the 
cool shade of a beautiful lig tree resonant with the chirping 
sound of hovering birds. The tree appeared to be tiic foremost 
leader of all the trees there. 

16-17. While he rested at the root of that tree, lie saw a 
ghost who was excessively hungry and thirsty. 

The ghost was of awfully terrihe appearance, dirty, rough 
and skinny, with dishevelled hair and running here and tliere. 
II is feet were mere bones and sinews. There were many other 
ghosts surrounding him. 

18-10. On seeing this liideous ghost, Babliruvahana was 
struck with wonder. Tiie ghost too seemed to be deliglited on 
seeing the king who had come to that dreadful, dense forest. 
He apjiroached the king. () (xaruda, the king of ghosts then 
addressed the king thus. 

20. Verilv, rnv ghosthood has come to an end. 1 h.tve 
attained the great goal. O mighty king, thanks to your eonlai I, 
none else is hapj^iei’ than 1. 

The kin» uiid : 

21. () bhu k and hideous bi'ing, you appear to be a 
ghost. Please tell me the exact stat(‘ of facts of your life 
willingly. 

22. Thus being asked by the king, the ghf'st revealed 
everything. 

The (>hn\t \ni(l : 

2.3. O foremost of kijigs, I shall tell you everything 
of my life from the very beginning. On hearing the cause 
of my ghost-hood it behoves you to take pity on me. 

24. Vaidi.sa is a city endowed with many riches. It 
abounds in gems of all variety. It is surrounded by villages and 
countric.s of all sorts. People are busy in performing holy deeds. 
The city abounds in fruit-bearing trees. 

25. It was here that I stayed, engaged in the worship of 



858 Garuda Purina 

• • 

gods. Please know that I am born of Vai^ya parents and my 
name is Sudeva. 

# 

26. I propitiated gods by sacrificial ofierings and the 
manes by oblations. The brahmins were propitiated by me 
with various kinds of gifts. 

27. They were provided with foodstuffs and means of 
recreation by me. Both to the virtuous and the indigent, 
helpless people, I had made many gifts. 

28. But, unfortunately, all those gifts became utterly 
useless in my case. 

29. I have no son, no friend, no kinsman and no 
acquaintance to perform my obsequial rites. 

30. O excellent king, my ghosthood appears to be 
permanent. The sraddhas, like the eleventh day .sraddha, the 
three fortnightly Sraddhas, the half-yearly, the anniversary, the 
monthly ones are sixteen. 

31. Preta-sraddhas not being given, they say, ghosthood 
becomes permanent even though hundreds of other sraddhas 
are performed. 

32. O king, realizing this, save me from ghosthood. 

33. A king is supposed to be one who befriends people 
of all castes. Hence, O king, save me, I shall give you a 
precious gem. 

34. O foremost among excellent kings, of powerful 
valour, if you have pity for me, please carry out the rites of 
obsequies for me so that I may attain an auspicious state. It is 
also advisable that you perform such rites as would ward off 
your future disaster. 

The king said : 

35. How do ghosts originate even after the rites of 
obsequies are performed for them. By what evil deeds do 
pvdeas originate, please tell me. 

The king of ghosts said : 

36. O excellent king, those who steal or misappropriate 
a brahmin’s wealth, temple property, woman’s wealth or 
children’s money are turned into ghosts. 



11.27.50 


859 


37. Those who indulge in sexual intercourse with saintly 
women, or women of their own gotra or forbidden women 
or those who steal conch shells become major ghosts, 

38-40. Those who steal corals and diamonds, those who 
steal garments, those who steal gold, those who do not face 
enemies but turn away from battlefield and are killed, those 
who are ungrateful, those who are atheists, harsh, roguish and 
foolhardy, those who are devoid of five major sacrifices— 
become ghosts, O great king. 

The kitiff said : 

41, How arc ghosts freed from that state. Please tell 
me. How am I to perform rites to prevent my own future 
disaster ? What are the rules regarding the performance of 
those rites. Please tell me all. 

The (ihosl said : 

42-45. O lortl of kings, please listen to a brief description 
of the Kardyona rite. Hearing of sacred sastras, worship of 
Visnu, society of the good destroy ghosthood. I, therefore, tell 
you al)f>iit the worshi[) of Visnu. 

7’ake two gold pieces and with the same make an idol of 
god Naiayana. 'I’hc idol should be decorated with ornaments, 
d’wo yellow pieces of cloth .sliall be u.scd to clothe it. Smear 
the .same with sandal paste and sprinkle Aguru over it. It 
should be bathctl in holy water collected from various centres 
and fumigated with fragrant incense. 

4h-47. Lord Sridhara should be worshipped in the east; 
Madhusudana in the south, Vamadeva in the west and 
Gadadhara in the North. Brahma and Siva should be 
worshipped in the centre. 

48. Then, O king, the deities .should be propitiated after 
circuniambulation and offerings of ghi, curd and milk into the 
fire. 

49-50. Then the devotee should take bath and humbly 
perform jnpas with concentration. He must then start the 
Aurdhvadchika rites, humbly, without anger and covetousness. 
He should perform all sraddhas and Vrsotsarga. 



860 


Gariida Purdna 


51-52. To thirteen brahmins he should gift umbrellas, 
sandals, rings, gems, vessels, scats and foodstuffs. Water-jars 
filled with water should be given for the benefit of ghosts. *Thcn 
giving a bed as gift the utensils should be offered to the ghost. 

53. Then the Sompnta rite should be performed with 
one’s own name, repeating ./Vfl/v7MW<7. If any one docs this duly 
he shall secure welfare. 

The king said : 

54. O Ghost, how should the utensil be made and how 
should the same be donated. Kindly state. 

The ghost said : 

55. You have asked well. I shall tell you about the gift 
by offering which one shall not get ghostliood. 

56. This gift is called prctatihnta} which removes all evils. 
It is rare in the world and it destroys the evil state*. 

57. G(*t a jar of heated gold manufactured by the smith. 
Fill it with milk or butter. With full devotion to Brahma, 
Visnu, § iva and the guardians of rpiarters, give the same to a 
Brahmana. What avails hundreds of other gifts as compared to 
this. 

58-50. Brahm.5, Visnu in the middle, pacifying .‘Sankara 
in the cast and the guardiajis of the cjuai ters in their serial order 
should he worshipped, O king, with incense, flowers and sandal. 
The golden vessel should he gifted together with milk and ghi. 
60. 7’his gift is the best of all It removes even the 


1. f>Telii-glm(n — an rarlhon jar symbolical rf the bcfly wliidi is 
mortal as the jar itself. 

The rites c>{prctn-^hfifn are manv and start with the death rf a person. 
Half way fiom the place of death to the cemetery there is a public in 
cvciy village where the bearers of the corpse take rest and where the son 
of the deceased breaks the e.irthen jar, offers a rice-ball and cries aloud. 

Prrlaghalfi is also a j.ar whereby the water is pouted at the root of a 
sacred tree for the pro|)iiiation of a departed soul. Obsequial sections in the 
Puranas refer to this rite falling: on the tenth, eleventh, thirtccntli or .seven¬ 
teenth day according to the family custom. 



II.28.2 


861 


major sins. It should be made in good faith, O king, to ward 
olT ghoslhood. 

61. Even as the ghost was saying this, O son of Vinata, 
the royal army consisting of elephants, horses and chariots 
arrived there. 

62-64. When the army arrived, the ghost disappeared 
but not before it had given a ruby to the monarch. Thereupon, 
the king left the forest for his capital. After reaching the city 
he performed the aurdhvadehikn} rites duly in accordance with 
the statement of the ghost. 

65. With due sr.iddha performed by the king, the ghost 
attained a nice state. Then, what wonder is there if the father 
arhieves the same with the sraddha performed by the son ? 

66 . Wftosoever hears or tells this holy narrative will not 
obtain ghosthood, even though he may have committed many 


CHAPTER TWENTYEIGHT 

Cifls for the Ghost 


Caruda said : 

1. O lord, for the bench t of everyone, please tell me, 
how, whether by making gifts or performing holy rites, can the 
ghosts be pleased. 

The lord said ; 

2. O bird, please listen. I shall tell you about the gift 
which dispels all inauspicious obstacles. 

Make a jar of molten gold. Fill it up with ghee or milk. 
Worship Brahma, Siva, Visnu and the guardians of the quarters 
in the serial order. Then, offer the jar to a worthy brahmin. Of 
what avail arc the hundreds of other gifts made by you ? 

1. auTdhvadehika —funeral rites, obsequial ceremonies. 



862 


Garuda PurSm 


Garuda said : 

3. O lord, what is said by you may kindly be explained 
in detail. Please tell me, O lord, what are the rites they should 
perform for the dead since the moment he breathes his last. 

4. What are the rites to be performed in his favour 
which can debar him from turning into a ghost ? 

5-6. O best of gods, do also tell me what activities, good 
or bad, lead one to become a dreadful or fierce-looking preta or 
piMca. Tell me, O lord of gods, I wish to know all this. 

7. Why are the five gems put unto the mouth of the 
dead ? Why are gingelly seeds strewn on the ground ? Why arc 
the Darbha blades scattered beneath ? 

8. Why are the feet kept southward ? Why is the ground 
besmeared with cow-dung ? Why is Visnu meditated upon and 
his hymn recited ? 

9. Why do the sons and grandsons walk ahead ? Why do 
they offer the gift of a lamp ? Why do they adore Visnu ? 

10. Why do they, when ill, make a gift to a brahmin ? 
Why do kinsmen, friends and enemies forgive them faults ? 

11. Why do they gift gingelly seeds, iron, gold, cotton, 
salt, seven types of grains, land or cow ? 

12. How docs a man die ? What is his course after death. 
How does he take shelter in the body being carried (to the 
cremation ground) ? I request you, O lord, to explain all this 
for the benefit of the world. 

13. Why docs the son carry the corpse on his shoulders 
and the grandson light the fire ? Why is the anointpient done 
with the butter ? 

14. Why is the Tama Sukla^ recited ? Why is the water 
carried to the North ? Why is the sun looked through a cloth ? 

15. Why are barley, mustard-seed, durva, stone and 
leaves of morgosa enjoined in the rite ? Why do men 4nd 
women wear a lower and an upper garment ? 

16. Why should the meals be taken along with other 
persons on returning home? Why do the sons give nine 
pindas ? 


1. Tama-SQkta-^KV. 10.15 



11.28.29 


863 


17. Why is the milk in the eastern pot placed on the 
cross-road ? Why are the three wooden sticks tied and put on 
the cross-road in the night ? 

18. Why is an earthen lamp put every night for one 
year ? Why should the water be offered in the name of the 
dead by the relatives and other people ? 

19. Why should the nine pindas be offered ? How is the 
gift to be given to the gods and manes. Why is the call made 
for the bearers of the corpse ? O lord, why is the rite of pinda 
repeated ? 

20. What should be given next after the gift of pin^a is 
made ? Why are the bones collected ? Why is a bed given to a 
brahmin in favour of the deceased ? 

21. Why is a bath prescribed for the householder on the 
second day ? Why on the fourth day ? Why on the tenth day 
along with the mourners ? 

22. Why should they anoint their bodies with oil. Why 
should the corpse-bearers be taken home on return from 
the cremation ground ? Why should the corpse-bearers anoint 
their bodies with oil on the bank of a stream or a stagnant 
reservoir ? 

23. The pinda given on the tenth day is accompanied 
by meat, why ? Why is the pinda on the eleventh day given 
after releasing the bull ? 

24. Why the sixteen sraddhas ? Why are the food, water 
etc. given everyday for three hundred and sixty days of the 
year ? 

25. Why is the food put in a vessel for satiating the 
dead? O lord, does the mortal man die at the appointed time?’ 

26-27. I do not see an outlet, then from where docs 
the soul go away ? From where do the elements —earth, water, 
fire, air and sky pass away ? tell me O lord ! 

28. From where do the five thieves of the body—greed, 
affection, desire, love and pride go away, O lord ! 

29. Whatever little action has been done, whether good 
or bad, whatever gifts have been tendered which procure 
merit, where do these go away after the body has decayed ? 

1. OrdinarUy no creaturr dies a premature 

death. 



864 


Garuda Purina 


30. Why is the rite of sapiru^ana done within the year 
of death ? With whom is the union of the deceased»sought 
for and how ? 

31. What does in the end happen to the people who 
pass away burnt or unburnt or who have fallen off their caste 
or who have committed sins or behaved badly or changed 
faith' or committed suicide or murdered a brahmin or 
turned thieves or deceivers ? 

32. What happens to that Sudra who drinks the milk of 
a brown cow, reads scriptures, wears the sacred thread or 
possesses a brahmin wife ? O lord of the world, I am terribly 
afraid of that sinner. Please answer my queries, for the welfare 
of the world. 


CHAPTER TWENTYNINE 

Rites after death 


The lord said : 

1. O noble being, you have put pertinent questions to 
me. Listen to my explanation of all obsequial rites for the 
benefit of the people. 

2. I shall explain the same on the authorities of the 
Vedas and Smrti texts. This has not been revealed even to gods 
and yogins who are devoted to meditation on the self. 

3. Dear, it is a guarded secret, not disclosed to anyone 
hitherto. Since you are rny devotee I shall keep nothing 
hidden from you. 

4. There is no salvation for a man without a son®. He 
can never attain heaven without a son. He must obtain a son, 
somehow. 

1. Muahals -If the word Maugatya refers to the Mughab who invaded 
Bharata from llie not(h*wcstem side, the verse must be a later interpolation. 

2. ^rfeffer— 

5^'*! g T >4i|g 3PT rc T I Ms. 9. 137 



11.29.17 


865 


5. Even if ultimate salvation is not possible, a son will 
necessarily save him from hell. The cremation rites should be 
performed by the son. A grandson can lit the funeral pyre. 

6 . By strewing gingelly seeds and Darbha grass on the 
ground the attention of the mind is diverted to Vaikuntha. 
If the five gems are put into the mouth, life flourishes (in the 
next birth). 

7. The ground should be smeared with cow-dung. 
Gingelly seeds and Darbha grass should be strewn. The sick 
man put thereon will be able to burn off his sins. 

8 . The Darbha bed helps the sick man ascend the 
heaven. In the midst of the pack of Darbha grass gingelly 
seeds should be strewn. 

9. If the ground is not smeared with cow-dung, there is 
no purity. If smeared already, it should be re-smeared. Then 
alone it becomes pure and holy. 

10. Evil spirits, demons, ghosts and terrible giants of 
low strata attack the sick man lying on the ground which is not 
smeared with cowdung by the people. 

11. If the daily homo, Srdddha or washing the feet of the 
holy brahmin guests arc performed on the bare ground without 
the mystic diagram drawn they arc no better than left undone. 

12. Without the mystic diagram it is not possible to 
secure the recovery of the sick. The gods Brahma, Visnu, 
Rudra, the goddess 8rl and the sacrificial fire preside over the 
my.stic diagram. Hence, the mystic diagram should be drawn 
invariably. 

13-14. Otherwise, the dead man whether child, youth, 
or old cannot transmigrate. He will be playing about with the 
wind. In the aerial form, the dead has no 8raddha rite nor 
water libation. 

15. Gingelly seeds originate from my sweat, O Garuda 
and hence are holy. Asuras, Danavas and Daityas flee from 
the place where gingelly seeds are kept. 

16. Gingelly seeds, white, black or brown destroy sins 
committed by the body. 

17. One gingelly seed offered in the holy rite is on a 
par with the gift of a droja^a measure of golden gingelly seeds. 



866 Garuda Purina 

Gingelly seeds offered in tarpana and homa have an evedasting 
benefit. 

18-19. Darbha grass is born of my hair and the gingelly 
seeds originate from my sweat. Not otherwise. The holy sacred 
thread is an essential item in all religious rites. The whole 
universe rests on it. Brahma and other deities are propitiated 
when the sacred thread is worn in the normal way. When it 
is worn over the right shoulder and under the left arm, the 
manes are propitiated. 

20. Brahma is stationed at the root of Darbha grass. 
Kesava is stationed in the middle. Know that Sankara is 
stationed at the tip of the Darbha grass. Thus, the three deities 
are stationed in the darbha grass. 

21. Brahmins, mantras, kusa grass, fire and TulasI plant, 
O lord of birds, never become impure, though utilized fre¬ 
quently. 

22. Kusas become impure, when used with pindas. 
Brahmins become impure when they partake ofpretafood. 
Mantras become futile when practised by Sudras. The fire in 
the funeral pyre is not so holy. 

23. O bird, there are five types of boats to succour 
saintly men who may otherwise get drowned in the ocean of 
worldly existence— Tulasi, Brahmins, Cows, Visnu and the 
Ekadasi day. 

24. In the worthless but impassable ocean of worldly 
existence there are six holy things yielding salvation— Viftiu, 
Ekadasi, Cahgd, Tulasi^ Brahmins and Cows. 

25. Gingelly seeds are holy and unparalleled. Similarly, 
darbhas and Tulasi too. The three ward off mishaps. 

26. Holding the Darbha grass in the hand, the performer 
of the rites shall sprinkle water over the ground. At the time 
of death, the darbha grass should be strewn near the bed of 
the dying person. 

27. The dead body should be enveloped with darbha 
grass and placed over the bed made of the same grass. Then 
it is sure that the dead man will attain Vi9nu’s region, even 
without the recital of mantras. 

28. The man lying on the death-bed of Kula grass on 



II.30.5 


867 


the ground is as pure as a man who has performed expiatory 
rites in the world. 

29. If the ground is smeared with the Cow-dung and 
the death bed is made of Kusa grass, whatever charity is given 
therefrom dispels all sins. 

30. Salt is on a par with everything divine. It yields 
everything the person wishes for himself. No dish tastes sweet 
without salt. 

31. Hence, salt is favourite with the manes. The gift of 
salt leads them to heaven. It is said that salt is originated from 
Visnu’s body. 

32*33. Hence, yogins praise a gift of salt. Whenever a 
brahmin, a Ksatriya, a Vaisya or a 8udra is on deathbed, salt 
should be given as a gift. It opens the doorway to heaven. 


CHAPTER THIRTY 

On bestowing Gifts 


The lord said : 

1-2. Listen O Garud^, I shall explain to you the best of 
all gifts which when rendered with the mantra bhiih^ bliuvah, 
svalf delight the sages and gods—iSiva, Indra, etc. 

3-4. This great gift should be given for redeeming the 
ghosts. He who offers it will stay in Rudraloka^ for a long 
time and then be born as a king. He will be endowed with 
comely features, good fortune, fluency in speech, all riches and 
unparalleled valour. Leaving off Yama’s region he will go to 
heaven. 

5. He who. makes a gift ofgingelly seeds, cow, plot of 
land or gold to a worthy brahmin will have his sins, accruing 
in different births, instantaneously quelled. 

1. - The thiee mystical syllables prefixed to the Gayatri 

mantra. 

2. Rudraloka —^Thc region of Siva covering the Kaiiasa and the 
adjoining mountains. 



8G8 


Garuda Purdna 


6. Gingelly seeds and cows constitute the major gifts and 
they quell all major sins. The two should be given finly to 
a brahmin and never to a member of any other caste. 

7. Gingelly seeds, cow, plot of land are given to 
brahmins after the rite of sankalpa^. They are not given to 
the people of other castes. Sometimes, they are given to 
dependents also. 

8. Whenever a gift is made to dependents or to women, 
it is done without the rite of saftkalpa. Whenever a person is in 
death-bed or when there is an eclipse, all kinds of gifts should 
be made. 

9. When someone is in the death bed it is better to 
make the gifts before the life is extinct. A gift made when one 
is alive stands in good stead, unimpeded. 

10. It is truth, the exact truth that the gifts made when 
the sense-organs are operative and when the same are 
approved by his son yield endless benefits. 

11. During the period of sickness, when the body is 
lying on the ground and during transport he will have no 
trouble. 

12. When the person is in the deathbed with eyes half- 
closed, the gift of gingelly seeds alongwith kusa grass to the 
lame, the blind and the one-eyed yields an imperishable fruit. 

13. Gingelly seeds, iron, gold, cotton, salt, seven grains, 
plot of land and cow—each constitutes a holy gift. 

14. The gift of iron and gingelly seeds pleases Yama. 
The gift of salt wards off fear from Yama. 

15. The gift of cotton wards off danger from the ghost. 
Cows gifted away enable the giver to cross all difficulties and 
save him from the threefold affliction®. 

1G. The gift of gold yields happiness in heaven. By 
gifting a plot of land one is born as a king. If one gifts gold 
and plot of land one shall never experience any torture or 
distress in hell. 

1. Snitkalpa— a solemn vow to perform an observance. 

2. Threefold affliction : &dliyatmika—caused by the mind (sorrow, 
etc), udlndaivika—caused by fate (pain etc), adhibhautika—caused by 
living beings. 



11.30.28 


869 


17. The emissaries of Yama who arc as terrific in 
appearance as Yama himself bestow boons if gifts of seven 
grains are made and they are satiated. 

18. By remembering Visnu, one attains the highest goal. 
Thus, I have told you all about the goal attainable by the 
mortals. 

19. If the son on seeing his father lying on the ground 
with the eyes half-closed makes gifts with the consent of his 
father, he is honoured by the gods. 

20. At the time when the father is in the deathbed, the 
gifts made by the son exceed the merit one earns by performing 
a Sraddha at Gaya. The son prospers and thereby pleases 
his family. 

21. The father being dead, the sons should perform the 
obsequial rites devotedly. Thus, they can make their father 
cross the ocean of distress. 

22. What avail the abundance of charitable deeds. 
Enough that he performs the funeral rites of his father. Even 
the horse sacrifice^ does not merit a sixteenth part of the 
merit accruing from all these. 

23. The son who makes gifts in favour of his father who 
is lying ill in death-bed is honoured even by the gods. 

24. The father should make gifts of iron with his hands 
lixed in the ground. The giver of gifts never finds Yama terrific, 
lie will not go to his abode even. 

25. Dagger, iron club, baton, sword and lancet are the 
weapons in the hands of Yama to curb sinners. 

26. Hence, gifts of weapons shall be made. For, this gift 
is lor the propriation of Yama’s weapons. 

27. A child in the womb, infant in the arms, young men 
or old men can burn off their sins by means of these gifts. 

28. The different emissaries of Yama—Ghurinas, ^an<^as, 
Markas, Udumbarasare delighted by gifts of iron. 


1. aivanudha —a sacriHcc ■wJicicin a hoisc is let lose for a year, to 
wander at will and followed by an army of brave warriors. Whosoever oilers 
resistance is cither killed or subdued. The horse, however, returns to the 
place of sacrifice, at the end of the year and u ultimately sacrificed. 
The ceremony entitles the sacrificer and the horse to an abode in heaven. 



870 


Garuda Purdt.ia 


29. Sons, grandsons, kinsmen, clansmen, friends, wives, 
etc. of those who do not make such gifts are no better than 
the slayers of brahmins. 

30. Listen to the course of a man dying on the earth. 
The first stage is that of Ativaha (the subtle body in transit); 
then that of ghost; then at the end of a year that of a pitr. 

31. There are three fires, three worlds, three Vedas, 
three deities, three times, three junctures, three Varnas and 
three powers. 

32-33. Brahma presides over the body of a man from 
the foot to the hips. Visnu presides over the body from the 
umbilicus to the neck. The manifest and the unmanifest deity 
l^iva in the form of Rudra is stationed on the head. The deities 
Brahma, Visnu and l^iva are only the different aspects of the 
same godhead. 

34. 1 am the vital air stationed inside the body of 
living beings. Considering the inclination of the living being 
as actuated by the actions of his previous birth, I mould the 
mind and divert it to virtue or evil, joy or sorrow, or things 
done or undone. 

35. It is I who induce their activities. By actions life 
attains heaven, hell or salvation. 

36. The prosperity of man, consigned to heaven or hell, 
is possible through Sraddhas. Hence, people shall assiduously 
perform different kinds of 3raddhas. 

37. The names of the ten incarnations of the lord, viz— 
Matsya (fish), Kurma (tortoise), Varaha (boar), Narasiriiha, 
3rirama, Par^urama, Kr^na, Balarama, Buddha and Kalki shall 
be remembered always. 

38. He will be posted in heaven. After enjoying the 
pleasures therein when he is born again on the £^rth, he will 
enjoy riches.^ He will be endowed with the qualities of 
mercy and chivalry. He will have sons and grandsons. He 
will live for a hundred years. 

39. He should offer gifts to the needy and adore Vi$nu 




1. BhagavadgUd VI. 41. 



11.30.51 


871 


with the requisite Nydsas^ or repeat the mantras of eight 
syllables* or twelve syllables.® 

40. White flowers should be offered in worship together 
with food offerings cooked in ghee. Frequent incenses and 
scents should be offered and hymns from the Vedas, Smrtis 
such as of Manu should be recited. 

41. Visnu is mother, Visnu is father. Vi§nu is kinsman. 
If I do not see Vi?nu nothing is of any consequence to me. 

42. Visnu is on earth. Vi?nu is in water. Visnu is on 
the mountain. Visnu is in fiery flames. Everything identifiable 
in the universe is with Visnu. 

43. I am the waters. I am the Earth. 1 am the darbha 
grass. I am the gingelly seeds. I am the cows. I am the 
subjects. 

44. I am gold. 1 am grains. I am honey. I am ghee. 
I am brahmins. I am deities. I am 8iva. I am mantras : 
bhuhy bhuvafyy svah. 

45. 1 am the giver. I am the taker. 1 am the sacrificer. 
I am the sacrifice. I am the remover. I am virtue, earth and 
water. 

46. O bird, I divert a man’s mind to virtue or evil 
through auspicious and inauspicious activities. Whatever man 
does is actuated by the actions of his previous birth. 

47. It is I who induce thoughts of virtue. It is Yaina 
who induces thoughts of evil. It is 1 who induce thoughts of 
ascetics towards virtue. It is I who accord salvation. 

48. O Garuda, the river Vaitarani is beneficent to men 
of virtue. After dispelling all sins the virtuous man goes to 
Vi§nu’s region. 

49-51. If one makes a gift of a brown cow which grants 
all wishes, one is freed from ail sins—the sins committed in 
infancy, childhood or youth, in previous births, during nights 
or mornings, middays or afternoons, at dusk or dawn wiiether 
it is by means of action, thought or speech. 

1. Njfdsa —touching the limbs of the body with the hand accompanied 
by appropriate mantras. 

2. Mantra of eight sjfllablts—Om name Visudeaijra 

3. Mantra of twelve syllables'-0/n namo bhagavatt Vdsudtod^a 



872 


Garuda PurSna 
• • 


52. May cows remain in front of me, may cows remain 
behind me, may cows remain ever in my heart. I reside iif the 
midst of cows. May the splendour of all living beings, the 
splendour present in deities remove my sins. May Laksmi 
assume the form of a cow and dispel my sins. 


CHAPTER THIRTYONE 

On bestowing gifts 

1. Men tainted by sins go to Yama’s abode. A gift 
made in my name accords endless benefits. 

2. A person who gifts plots of land stays in heaven for 
as many years as the number of steps the land measures. 
Those who make gifts of sandals go seated on horse-back. 

3. By making a gift of umbrella one will traverse after 
death, without difficulty, the paths where other men are 
excessively oppressed by the heat of the sun. 

4-5. If food is given in gift with the dead man in view 
he will be nourished by the same. Men who make gifts of 
lamps can traverse those regions infested by terrible darkness, 
without the aim or regular form, which shall for him become 
illuminated brightly. 

6. The gift of lamp is conducive to the pleasure of 
those who die in the month of Asvina, Karttika or Magha or 
on the fourteenth day of the lunar fortnight. 

7. Lamps shall be gifted daily for a year after the death 
for the benefit of the dead in the troublesome path. 

8. The pure soul who is engaged in the gift of lamps 
shall brighten his path and his family. He shall be honoured 
among the luminaries of the sky. 

9-10. He who makes a gift of lamps cither for the dead 
or for himself facing cast or north or places them in temples 
or in the houses of brahmins will be able to traverse the Great 
Path without any distress. 



11.31.26 


873 


II. He who makes gifts of seats, vessels or foodstuffs to 
brahmins goes along the path happily and enjoys everything. 

12-15. By making a gift of water-jar the thirsty shall 
drink water. Vessels, clothes, flowers, rings shall be gifted on 
the eleventh day for the dead to attain the highest goal. Thus 
those who wish the dead well shall make gifts of the thirteen 
articles according to their ability. The dead shall be pleased 
thereby. Foodstuffs, gingelly seeds, water-jars thirteen in 
number, a ring, pair of clothes should be gifted in favour of 
the dead to help him attain the highest goal. 

16. He who makes gifts of a horse, a lx»at or an elephant 
to brahmins will become happy. 

17. He who makes a gift of buffalo sojourns in many 
worlds. A she-buffalo, the mother of the vehicle of Yama, 
accords benefit. 

18. A gift of betel leaves together with flowers increases 
the delight of those who are in Yama’s abode. Being delighted 
with that they do not harass him. 

19-20. The man who gives according to his ability gifts 
of cows, plots of lands, gingelly seeds, gold and an earthen jar 
full of water, with the dead in view attains the fruit of the 
gift of a thousand water-jars. 

21. If a person makes a gift of clothes, the awe-inspir¬ 
ing terrible emissaries of Yama black and tawny in colour do 
not threaten him. 

22. By making gifts of potfuls of foodstuffs one shall be 
happy in those paths which one should otherwise have to 
traverse exhausted utterly and oppressed by thirst. 

23. A bed with smooth cotton within and covered by a 
velvet cloth should be given to gods and brahmins. By that 
the dead man will be freed from ghosthood and rejoice with 
deities, 

24. Thus, O Tarksya, I have explained to you the gifts 
which should be offered when performing obsequies. I shall 
now tell you how death enters the body. 

25-26. Deathinevitable to all living beings in this 
mortal world. 

O lord of birds, when the living beings die, the vital air 
shrinking to irs subtle size comes out of the throat. 



874 


Garuda Pur Una 


27. It may escape through any of the nine apertures or 
through the pores of hair or through the palate. The subtle 
soul escapes through Ap&rud- in the case of sinners. 

28. When the vital air escapes, the corpse falls down. 
When struck down by Death it falls like a tree bereft of its 
support. 

29. The earthly matter becomes merged in the principle 
of fire. The gaseous matter becomes assimilated in the principle 
of wind. The ethereal matter gets dissolved in the principle 
of ether and the all-pervasive soul gets merged in Safikara. 

30. The five vices—passion, etc. and the five sense- 
organs, O bird, are the villains stationed in the body. 

31. Lust, anger and egotism are led by the mind which 
is the annihilating agent in collusion with merit and demerit. 

32. The form of the universe is evolved out of one’s 
own activities. The next body it transmigrates to is also the 
result of its merits and demerits. 

33. Just as a householder enters a new furnished house 
after the former has been burnt and destroyed, .so also the soul 
enters a new body endowed with all objects and the five 
sense-organs. 

34-36. Many are the excretions and discharges from the 
body including faeces, urine, bile, phlegm, marrow, flesh, fat, 
and semen. These together with the bones and sinews are burnt 
along with the body. 

O Tarksya, thus the position of the.se in all embodied 
beings has been clarified. 

37-39. Now, I shall tell you how the body looks like. 
Human body is a single column of sinews embellished with 
two pegs and endowed with the sen.se-organs in nine operturcs. 
It is constantly attacked by the objects, agitated by lust and 
anger, tossed by love and hatred, victimised by an unquench¬ 
able thirst, entrapped in the network of covetousness, 
enshrouded in the cloth of greed, bound by illusion but presid¬ 
ed over by a conscious being. It is, as it were, like a city with 
six vestibules with the Purusa in charge thereof. 

1. apdna —One of the five life-winds in the body which goes down- 
words and out at the anus. The other four arc pr&na, samSna, vy&na and 
ud&na. 



II.32.4 


875 


40. All the bodies are invested with these attributes and 
features. All the deities and the fourteen worlds^ are present 
therein. 

41. Those who do not understand themselves are no better 
than brutes. The four kinds of living beings have their bodies 
of the same nature and same content. 

42. Eight million four hundred thousand varieties of 
creatures were created by me formerly. 

43. They are svedajas^ (insects), Udbhijas, (plants), 
andajas (birds) and jarayujas, born from the womb, O sinless 
one, I have thus explained what you asked me. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTWO 

The Origin of Life 


Gariida said : 

1-4. How does life come into being in the four species- 
of living beings ? How are the following formed : skin, blood, 
flesh, fat, marrow, bone, the living nucleus, hands and feet, 
tongue, generative and excretory organs, hair, nails, joints, 
ducts and the different lines drawn over the body, lust and 
anger, fear and shame, mind, Joy, skin of various coloui's 
punctured with holes and shrouded with a network of fatty 
matter. I consider it a wonderful piece of jugglery in this 
world of human existence. O mighty one, who is the guiding 
hand here ? O lord, let me know all about this matter. 

1. Fourteen worlds —Roughly speaking there are three Ma5 : heaven, 

earth and nether region, but according to fuller classification the lokas arc 
fourteen : seven higlier regions rising from the earth one above the other, 
viz., cTT'., and seven lower regions descen¬ 
ding from the earth one below the other, viz., tictvt, THTcfcT, 

JTIRTvT, and I 

2. Four species : swdlaja-—generated by warm vapour or sweat 
(insects); udbhijja—sprouting, germinating (as a plant); aodaja—oviparous 
(birds) and jar&yuja—born from the womb, viviparous (human beings). 



876 


Gartida Purdrta 


The lord said : 

5. I shall tell you a great secret with the (fecisive 
method of unravelling the same, by knowing which one 
becomes omniscient. 

6. O Garuda, you have put a pertinent question about 
the origin of life. Hence, listen attentively. 

7. The first four days of menstrual flow of blood shall 
be avoided when the sin of a brahmin’s slaughter resides in her. 

8. Brahma had removed this sin from Indra' and 
apportioned a fourth in women. Hence, even the glancing at 
her face during these days shall be eschewed. 

9. A woman in her menses is an outcaste on the first 
day, a slayer of brahmin on the second day and a washer¬ 
woman on the third. She becomes pure on the fourth day. 

10. After seven days, she becomes pure enough to take 
part in the worship of manes and deities. If conception takes 
place within seven days the progeny is impure. 

11. Whatever be the thoughts of parents during the 
intercourse, like that is the progeny. There is no doubt in this. 

12. If the sexual intercourse takes place on even nights, 
boys are conceived and if on odd nights girls arc conceived. 
Hence, it is better to have sexual intercourse on even nights,- 
leaving the first seven days after the menstrual discharge. 

1. Indra slew Vrtra and ihfrcby incurred the sin of BrahmahalyA 
Brahma removed the sin and apportioned the fourth part in the wonu n 
during the days of menstruation. 

2. By sexual intercourse on odd nights, girls arc born, on even nights 
sons are born. MS III. 4.')-48 

Trar?T: I 

II 

grT ff T yiT OTg T<d^44 5r«rr i 

^ ii 

II 



11.32.25 


877 


13-14. The sixteen days from the appearance of blood 
are the days of heat for women in a general way. If conception 
takes place after the intercourse on the fourteenth night, the 
son born will be virtuous and endowed with good qualities and 
good fortune. Ordinary people will never get such an auspicious 
chance, O lord of birds. 

15-16. Conception, usually, takes place within eight 
days. On the fifth day the woman is given sweet dishes which 
is a good tonic for the embryo. Astringent and pungent things 
should not be taken at all. The woman’s parts can be likened 
to a medicinal vessel. The seed of a man is like an ambrosial 
food. 

17. A man depositing his semen in her vagina is actually 
sowing a seed. For the proper growth of the child she should 
avoid excessive sunshine. Cooling articles should be resorted to. 

18-19. On the night auspiciously selected for the inter¬ 
course, the pair should chew betel leaves and apply scents and 
sandal paste over their bodies. The ideas and thoughts that 
hover in the mind of the man at the time of intercourse have 
a lasting influence in moulding the character of the child 
conceived. 

20. The semcn mixing with the blood causes the foetus. 
The foetus develops in the womb like the moon in the sky. 

21. The consciousness is present in the semen in the 
form of a seed. When love, mind and semen act in unison, a 
secretion takes place in the womb. 

22. If the blood is predominant at intercourse, the child 
will be a girl. If the semen is predominant, the child will be 
a boy. 

23. If the semen and the blood arc of equal potency, the 
child will be a eunuch. The nucleus of the foetus is formed 
within a day. It becomes frothy bubble in five days. 

24. Within fourteen days it becomes a mixture of flesh 
and lymphatic substances. 

25. It becomes a solid flesh in twenty days, sufficiently 
strong (in twenty five days) and (after that) it begins to 
develop gradually. The foetus would have assimilated complete¬ 
ly the five elements within a month. 



S78 


Garuda Ptir&i^a 


26. By the time the two months are over, the fat and 
the skin are evolved. The marrow and the bones are*formed 
in three months time. The hair and the heels are formed in 
the fourth month. 

27. The ears, nose and the belly are formed in the fifth 
month. The throat, back and the reproductive organs are 
developed in the seventh month. 

28. By the eighth month, all the limbs are completed. 
In the beginning of the ninth month the child in the womb is 
fully developed. 

29. Whether the child be a girl or a boy or a eunuch 
it comes out in the ninth or tenth month. 

30-32. Equipped with three energies, big-eyed, endowed 
with six kosas, five indriyas, ten na^Is, ten pranas, the child 
as such is known by the Yogins. Marrow, bones, semen, flesh, 
hair, blood are the six kosas of the paheabhautika body of a 
creature. This paficabhautika body develops in the ninth or 
tenth month. 

33. Then being dragged by the wind in the womb, 
agitated with pain, nourished by the susumna nerve in the 
woman’s womb, the same comes out. 

34-36. The principles of earth, water, fire, wind and 
ether envelop it through the coils of sinews. O lord of birds, 
the parts predominant in the principle of earth are skin, bones, 
nerves, hair and flesh. O son of Kasyapa, listen to those 
predominant in the principle of water. 

37. The saliva, urine, semen, marrow and blood 
constitute the parts predominant in the principle of water. 
They should be realized carefully. 

38. Hunger, somnolence, thirst, lethargy and brilliance, 
O lord of birds, are considered by yogins as constituting the 
qualities of fire in the human constitution. 

39. Love, hatred, bashfulness, fear and delusion are 
the qualities, O bird, derived from wind. 

40. Running, breathing, contracting, stretching and 
thwarting are the qualities of wind in the physical body. 

41. O bird, resonant sound, cavity, gravity, hearing 
and supporting everything are the qualities of Ethip'. 



11.32.56 


879 


42. £arS} skin, eyes, tongue and nose are the five sense- 
organs. Hands, feet, rectum, phallus and speech are the hve 
organs of activity. 

43-44. There are ten principal nerves in the body :— 
Ida, Pihgala, Susumna, Gandhari, Gajajihva, Pusa, YaSa, 
Alambusa, Kuhu and ^ahkhini. 

45. The ten vital airs stationed in the body are Prana, 
Apana, Samana, Udana, Vyana, Naga, Kurma, Krkara, 
Devadatta and Dhanafijaya. 

46. The wind accords vitality and takes the assimilated 
food to all the joints of the body. 

47. The food, as soon as it is taken, is split into two by 
the wind. 

48-49. The digested food enters the rectum and the 
solid and liquid waste matter goes out separately. The prana 
blows on the gastric fire from below, over which food and 
water are brought by the wind. The fire thus blown separates the 
waste matter and the nutritive element. 

50-51. This waste matter goes out of the body in the 
form of twelve types of waste matter. Ears, eyes, nose, tongue, 
teeth, navel, rectum, pores in the body, nails, kidneys are the 
passages through which the waste matter gets out. The six- 
chambered body is evolved out of the mixture of semen and 
blood. 

52. O son of Vinata, the roots of hair in the body are 
thirty five millions and the teeth are thirtytwo in number 
usually. 

53. The nails are twenty and the hair growing on the 
face and head are seven hundred thousand. Generally, the 
fleshy matter in the body weighs about a thousand palas. 

54. O bird, the blood is a hundred palas in weight 
as mentioned by elderly persons. The fat is about ten palas 
and the skin is about that much. 

55. The marrow is about twelve palas in weight and 
the blood plasma is three palas. The semen is two Ku^avas 
in volume and the manstruai blood is one Kudava. 

56. The weight of the phlegmatic matter is six and a 
half palas. Faeces and urine are in accordance with indigested 



880 Garu4a Puriifo 

food and drink. This is the physical body and I shall* mention 
its all-pervasive character. 

57. Pleasure, pain, fear and welfare—these come to a 
person by actions alone. 

58-59. Out of the embryo the wind drags the living being 
whose head is downwards and feet upwards, the palms of the 
hands on the flanks of knees, the thumb and fingers of the hand 
on the knees, the eyes and nose on the back and the centre of 
the knee. 

60. Thus the living being in the embryo of the mother 
develops gradually. The bones attain hardness. Life is sustained 
by food and drink. 

61. The tubular organ Vapyayani is set close to the 
navel part. The child in the embryonic state is fastened with a 
cord to the aperture therein. He comes out of confinement 
(along with the cord) in the scheduled time. 

62. In the womb he eats and drinks whatever is eaten 
and drunk by the mother. Thereby he receives nourishment 
and develops in form. 

63. In the womb he recollects the past events and 
happenings of worldly affairs. Tormented from all sides he feels 
depressed. 

64. “As soon as I leave the womb I shall be very 
cautious. I shall never repeat mistakes. I shall so act that I 
may not be bom again.” 

65. The living being thinks thus and further recollects 
events of hundreds of past births—events which accrued to him 
from causes known and unknown. 

66. Then at the scheduled time the living being emerges 
from the embryo with the head downward in the ninth or 
tenth month. 

67. While leaving the womb he suffers and faints. When 
he comes out of the womb he cries in anguish. 

68-69. Then with the touch of air he obtains a little 
relief and comes to consciousness. Then the hypnotising power 
of Vi?nu overpowers him. Deluded by that power he loses power 
of discernment. 

70. In childhood he remains in that state; passing 
through childhood he attains youth and old age. 



n.32.82 


881 


71. Then he succumbs to death, then he attains birth. 
Thus, on the wheel of existence he is made to rotate like the 
potter’s wheel. 

72. Sometimes he goes to heaven, sometimes to hell. 
In heaven or hell he reaps the fruits of his activities. 

73. Sometimes, when he has exhausted the merit of his 
actions he descends to the earth by the residue of his merits. 
Heaven or hell is not a permanent abode, this you should know, 
O best of birds. 

74. People going to hell suffer from extreme tortures 
which they derive from their hellish activities. Their tortures 
increase when they see their companions enjoying in heaven. 

75. Extreme distress awaits the inmates even in the 
celestial region inasmuch as the thought of fear haunts their 
mind from the very start they enter heaven that after their 
merits are exhausted they would be thrown into hell. 

76. Looking at the tortures suffered by the people in 
hell, the residents of heaven feel that after the expiry of their 
merit the same fate awaits them in hell. Thus all the while 
they remain discomfortable in heaven. 

77. A Jiva in the embryo is put to great suffering. He 
suffers in Childhood and old age as well. 

78. In youth he suffers from the evil effects of vicious 
desires, jealousy, rage. He is afflicted by bad dreams. Old age 
ends in death which is extremely painful. 

79. Being dragged by the emissaries of Yama he is thrust 
into hell. From hell he descends to the earth to suffer again the 
utmost pangs of birth and death. 

80. Thus, on the wheel of this universe, people are made 
to rotate like the potter’s wheel and are tortured incessantly, 
tangled by the noose of their actions. 

81. O bird, there is no pleasure whatsoever in this world 
abounding in a multitude of sorrows. O son ofVinata, people 
should endeavour for salvation. 

82. Thus, I have told you all about the child in the 
womb. I now answer your further query in the serial order, if 
you desire to hear. 



882 


Garuda Purdjna 
% • 


Garuda said : 

83. I am satiated with the answer to both of my queries. 
I implore you, now, to answer my third query too. 

84. You have asked me what should be done for a dying 
person. Now listen, I shall tell you my answer in brief to your 
query. 

85. Knowing that the person is going to die, he should 
be bathed with cow-urine, cowdung, sacred clay, water from 
sacred rivers and other waters sanctified by Ku^a grass. 

86-87. He should be dressed in pure, auspicious, clean 
clothes. He should be laid on earth besmeared with cowdung, 
bestrewn with darbha grass, with tips pointed to the south and 
overspread with gingelly seeds. 

88. His head should be put in the east or in the north 
with gold in the mouth. 

89. O lord of birds, Salagram stone and TulasI leaves 
should be kept nearby. An earthen lamp should be kindled. He 
should utter : Orh namo bhagavate V&sudevdya. 

90. He should draw Om at first, worship the same and 
offer charity. 

91. He should worship lord Visnu with flowers, incense 
etc, and pay homage glorifying his deeds and concentrating on 
him with sincere devotion. He should offer charity to the 
brahmins, poor and the indigent. 

92. He should give up attachment for the son, friend, 
wife, fields, corns, wealth and set his heart on Visnu. 

93. He should recite Purufa sukta if he is in distress, O 
good one. Ifhe is dying and is unable to recite, the sons and 
other relations should do the same. 

94. I have told you all that can be done when death is 
imminent. Now, 1 shall tell you, in brief, the fruits of all these 
activities. 

95. Bath purifies a man, removes impurity. Meditation 
on Vi?nu yields all sorts of fruits. 

96. A blade of darbha grass takes him to heaven. There 

is no doubt in this. Bath with water mixed with gingelly seeds 
and darbha grass is as much -sanctifying as the bath at the end 
of sacrifice. ** 



11.32.110 


883 


97. A circle should be drawn around the dying person, 
for, it is said, Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Laksmi and hre 
reside within the circle. 

98. If he is laid on earth with his head eastward or 
north-ward, O lord of birds, he reaches the sublime regions if 
his sins are minimum in life. 

99-100. If five gems are put into his mouth, knowledge 
dawns upon him. 

In this shadowy world of unsurmountable difficulties, the 
following six incite devotion : meditation on Visnu, observance 
of vow on the eleventh day of the month (ekadasi), listening 
to the Bhagavadgita, worship of the sacred plant TulasI, 
brahmins and cows. 

101. By muttering the mantra Orii namo bhagavaU 
Vasudivaya, one is completely absorbed in Brahma. Even by 
worshipping me alone, one can reach my region direct. 

102. In the obsence of entanglement, attachment 
vanishes by the knowledge as revealed in the Purufa Sukta. 

103-104. But one who has other sources as well obtains 
reward in proportion to the additional sources. All those 
sources he should utilize for the pleasure of lord Visnu. I have 
thus told you in detail the benefits derivable from ablution, etc. 

105-106. The various features of the cosmos are present 
in the body as well. The various worlds, mountains, continents, 
oceans and the planets like sun, etc, are ail present in the body. 

107-108. The sole of the foot is atala^ (the nether world 
of that name); the upper surface of the foot is vitala; the knee 
is satala; the calf is taldtala; the thigh is rasdtala; the private 
parts are mahdlala. The pdtdla is in the hips. Thus the lower 
worlds are explained and must be noted by the learned men. 

109-110. The BhUr is stationed in the centre of the navel; 
the Bhuvar is above it. The Svar is in the heart. The Mahar is 
in the throat- Th^ Janas is in the mouth; the Tapas is on the 

1. Seven lower regions descending from the earth one below the 
other arc named Atola, Vitala, Satala, Taldtala, Rasdtala, Mahdtala and Pdtdla 
while seven higher regions rising from the earth one above the other are 
called Bhur, Bhuvar^ Svar, Mahar, Janas, Tapar, Satya or Brahma. 



S84 Garuda Purina 

• • 

forehead and the Satya or Brahma is in the aperture of the 
head. Thus tlie fourteen worlds are explained. 

111-112. The mount Meru is in the triangular shoulder 
blade. The mount Mandara is in the lower angle i.e. hips. The 
mount Kailasa is in the right angle. The Himalaya is in the 
left angle. The mount Nisadha is in the upper surface. The 
Gandha-madana is to the right and the Ramana is in the linear 
section in the left side. Thus, the seven great mountains are 
present in the body. 

113-114. Thejambu dvipa is stationed in the bones; 
the Saka dvipa in the marrow; the Kuia dvipa in the flesh, the 
Krauflca dvipa in the head; the Salmali dvipa in the skin: the 
Gomeda in the hair; the Puskara dvipa in the nail and 
oceans thereafter. 

115-116. The salt ocean is stationed in the urine; the 
milk ocean in the milky exudations of the body. The wine 
ocean is stationed in the phlegm; the butter ocean in the 
marrow; the rasa ocean in the lymphatic secretion; the curd 
ocean in the blood; the water ocean in the region of excreta 
and the ocean of sugar cane juice in semen. 

117-119. The Sun is stationed in the sound-circle; the 
Moon in the spot-circle; the Mars in the eyes; Mercury in the 
heart; the Jupiter in the navel; the Venus in the semen; the 
Saturn in the umbilical region; Rahu in the mouth and Ketu 
in the feet. The planets are stationed in the body. Thus, the 
body is divided from head to foot. 

120-123. Those who are born must die too. Hunger, 
thirst, unconsciousness and the affliction due to the bites and 
stings of serpents, scorpions and flies have all their origin in 
Rudra. O bird, the base wretches who sin and who are 
devoid of mercy and virtue are dragged through scorching sand 
and blazing lire, seized by their hair by the servants of Yama. 

124. They live in the region of Yama and when they are 
reborn they will be born in cottages. O Tark^ya, thus, man is 
born in the mortal world as a result of his own actions. 

125-126. The five characteristics, viz. the span of life, 
action, wealth, learning and death are created in men even as 



II.33.2 


885 


they are in the womb. The life is born as a result of action; it 
is dissolved as a result of action. 

127. Happiness or misery, fear or welfare are the results 
of actions. The foetus lies in the womb with the feet up and 
the face downwards. 

128. From the moment of birth the Maya of Vi§nu 
enamours and deludes the life. The life takes its birth with its 
association brought about by its own actions. 

129. Due to merit, man enjoys pleasures in heaven and 
is fortunalety born in a noble family*. If he is sinful in actions 
he is born in a mean-minded family. 

130. He becomes poor, sick, foolish, sinful and miserable. 
O son of a sage, I have thus told you the various features of 
the birth of a life. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE 

The world of Tama 

Garuda said : 

1. What is the extent of the region ofYama ? What is 
its expanse in proportion to that of the three worlds habitated 
by the mobile and immobile beings ? Please tell me the length 
of the pathway as recorded by tradition. 

2. O lord, what are the merits or demerits, sins or 
virtues, as a result of which men go there. Please tell me all 
-concerning this. 

1. The same idea is found in the Bhagavadgita VI. 41 

5n*3T mr: I 

ifr*Twtsf«rirT^ ii 

In V. 128 above, a reference was made to life’s associations that deter¬ 
mined the future birth of man. Here the Pur&na speaks of his enjoyments in 
heaven and rebirth in a pious noble family. Because of the predominance of 
impulses to enjoyment his release is not possible. 



886 


Garuda PurS^o 


The lord said : 

3. The distance between the mortal world and the 
region of Yama is eighty six thousand yojanas (one million 
thirty two thousand kilometres). 

4. The pathway is so hot as the red hot copper. It is 
impassable. It blazes. Sinners among men, of confused thoughts 
go there. 

5. There are many sharp thorns of awful appearance. 
The area is entirely covered by the burning fire. 

6. There is no shady tree where the people can take rest. 
Their own actions in the form of the nooses of Yama drag them 
on. 

7. On the way, there is no provision to sustain life. No 
water is available whereby thirst can be quenched. 

8. Many arc oppressed by hunger and many by thirst 
on that High path. On that impassable path of Yama many 
shiver with chillness. 

9. The wayfarers find the path difficult in accordance 
with the gravity of their sins. They are helpless, miserable and 
confounded as they plod on. 

10. Some bemoan piteously, some speak harshly. Agitat¬ 
ed by the effects of their actions they undergo endless distress. 

11. O bird, that pathway has some special characteristics. 
Those who have been devoid of convetousness in the world 
procceed along that path peacefully. 

12. The various gifts that people make in the world 
stand them in good stead in the region of Yama. They go- 
ahead (and make everything comfortable). 

13. Sraddhas and water libations are of no avail to the 
sinner. These wretches hover here and there in their aerial 
form, 

14. O good one who are devoted to virtue, the pathway 
has been narrated to you thus. Now I shall tell you the hard¬ 
ships one has to undergo on the way to the region of Yama. 

15. The city of Yama is in the southwest direction. It 
is wholly adamantine, divine and impenetrable to deities as 
well as demons. 

16. It is square in shape with four entrances ^d seven 



11.33.28-29 


887 


outer fort walls. Yama is seated inside together with his 
messengers. 

17. The city extends over a thousand Yojanas (1200 
km.) and is studded with gems resplendent like lightning, 
blazing fire and the sunshine. 

18. The special palace of Yama with its golden splendour 
is very extensive and twentyfive yojanas in height. 

19. It is decorated with jewels of lapis lazuli and there 
are thousands of pillars all round. There are many pearls over 
the windows from where hundreds of flags and banners hang 
downwards. 

20. It is resonant with the sound of hells, hundred in 
number. Hundreds of festoons cover them. It is embellished in 
various ways as mentioned here and in many other ways as well. 

21. The lord of justice is seated therein his auspicious 
judgement seat which is ten yojanas in width and which 
resembles the blue cloud. 

22. Yama knows virtue, practices virtue and is bene¬ 
volent to those who are virtuous. He is terrifying to the sinner 
and sweet to the virtuous. 

23. The wind blows there very gently. Many festivals 
are celebrated there. Many sages conduct discourses there. 
Different musical instruments are played. 

24-25. In the centre of the city, just near the entrance ' 
(to Yama’s palace) Gitragupta’s palace is situated. It is twenty- 
five yojanas in length and ten yojanas in height. Highly divine, 
it is surrounded by an iron-wall. There are hundreds of streets 
where people move about and the whole city shines with 
hundreds of banners. 

26. Citragupta’s palace is gay with hundreds of lamps 
burning and hundreds of musical notes reverberating. It is well- 
painted by those who are experts in the art of drawing and 
painting. 

27. There, seated in his wonderful driving seat he 
calculates the age of human beings and others. 

28-29. He never commits any mistake in the matter of 
merit or demerit. Whatever the man acquired in his various 
births good or bad along with his eighteen defects is written 



888 Garu^a Purdiiia 

down by Citragupta. To the east of Citragupta’s palace js the 
building of the Fever. 

30. To the south is the abode of Colic pain and the 
Spider Tumour. To the West are the abodes of the Noose of 
Kala, Indigestion and Non-relish for food. 

31. To the north of the central seat, the abode of Cholera 
can be seen. To the north-east the abode of Head-ache and 
to the south-east the abode of Unconsciousness. 

32. Dysentery resides in the south-west and the Burning 
sensation in the north-west. Citragupta is ever surrounded by 
these. Whatever job is executed by them is immediately 
written down by Citragupta. 

33. O Tark§ya, the messengers stay in different places 
at the threshhold of the palace of Dharmaraja torturing the sin¬ 
ful wretches of evil human beings. 

34. Men are bound with nooses by the messengers of 
Yama and thrashed with heavy iron clubs. All that is in 
accordance with their own evil actions. 

35. They are hit and beaten with various weapons and 
different mechanical devices. They are split with saws and 
scissors as though they were pieces of lumber. 

36 Others are burned and baked with blazing coal as 
though they were balls of iron. 

37. Others are seen being dragged here and there on the 
ground and chopped with sharp knives. They are seen wailing 
and shouting. All this is due to their own evil actions. 

38. Some are fettered. Some are fried in oil. Thus, 
the sinners are tortured by the messengers of Yama. 

39-40. Others in millions are heard shouting: ‘Give, 
Give’ and demand repayment of debts. Thus, O Tark§ya, 
are hells for the sinner. Should I describe them in detail ? 
They have already been described in the sacred codes. I shall 
now explain the benefit accruing from gifts whereby the person 
feels pleasure even in hell. 



II.34.7 


889 


CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR 

Results of Virtue and Sin 


The lord said: 

1. O Tarksya, listen to the precise traits of virtue and 
sin. The merit and demerit go ahead of men. 

2. In the Krta^ age they extol penance; in the Treta 
they extol knowledge, in the Dvapara sacrifices and charities 
and in the Kali only gifts are extolled. 

3. Those who recite the mantras mentioned in the 
smrtis and perform I^fdpSrtd^ and other rites as far as they can, 
are never assailed by sins. 

4. Men who grow trees by the roadside and who dig 
tanks and lakes, go along this highway very happily. 

5. He who gives fuels (here on the earth) is never tor¬ 
tured by snowfall, ice or chillness in the abode of Yama. He 
finds his way warm and pleasant. 

6 . By giving gifts of plots of land men go along that 
road fully satisfied, decorated and richly adorned by fragrant 
flowers. All their wishes are fulfilled. He who has gifted plots of 
land is deemed to have gifled gold, gems, pearls, jewels and 
clothes. 

7 . The gifts that men make in the world stand in 
good stead in their pathway leading to Yama’s palace. 

1. Four ages : The ages are four : Kfta or Satya, Treti, Dv&para and 

Kali. 

The duration of each is said to be respectively 1,728,000; 1,296,000; 
864,000 and 432,000 years of men, the four tc^ether comprising 4,320,000 
yean of men which is equal to one Mah&yuga. It is also supposed that the 
regularly descending length of the yugas represents a corresponding physical 
and moral deterioration in the people who live during each age, kfta being 
called the golden and kali or the present age the *iron* age. 

2. IffipOrla —Ifta means personal piety. Purta means works for the 
benefit of othen. Compare 



890 Garuda Purina 

8. Different sorts of dishes and foodstuffs whifSh the 
sons offer serve the purpose of the pitrs. 

9. It is the same dtman that is known as son.^ It is the 
son who comes to the succour of his father in the abode of 
Yama. It is he who saves father froni hell. He is therefore 
called putra (son).* 

10. Hence, a son should perform Sraddha till his death. 
The dead man, moving about in his subtle body, will derive 
enjoyments thereby. 

11. At the time of cremation in the funeral pyre if water 
libations are offered by the descendent, the dead man goes to 
Yama’s abode in all pleasure. 

12. In an earthen vessel which is not baked, milk should 
be given for three days for propitiating the dead. Three pieces of 
things should be tied with a string and dropped on the cross¬ 
way. 

13. O bird, the dead man in his aerial form in the sky 
will be drinking the milk on the first, second and third day. 

14. Oh the fourth day, the bones should be collected by 
the son along with his nearest relatives. After that, he should 
give water-libation to the deceased. 

15. The water-libation should be made in the first three- 
hour period, not later in the forenoon nor at midday nor in the 
afternoon nor during dawn or dusk. 

16. The first water-libation should be performed by the son 
along with the members of the clan and kinsmen. It can be 
performed by the members of the same caste or even by those 
of other castes. 

17. No brahmin should offer water libation to a Sudra. 
In that case, he will be violating the sacred code of conduct. 

18. At the death of a l§udra if a brahmin takes firewood 
to the funeral pyre or follows the corpse he becomes impure 
for three days. 

1. Atman as son Qfltf?! I 

3TTc*?r t 14.9.4,8 

2. The son as the saviour of his father. Compare 

cnPTTcjc^ ii 



11.34.29 


891 


19. After three days he should take bath in the river that 
joins the sea, perform hundred pranayamas and drink ghee in 
order to regain purity. 

20. A Sudra can offer water-libation to the member of 
any caste; a Vaisya to the member of three castes. A Ksatriya 
to the member of two castes; but a brahmin to the member of 
his own caste. 

21. If they goto offer water-libation, the members of 
the clan should eschew the use of tooth-pick twigs for nine days, 
O son of Kasyapa. 

22-23. O foremost among birds, if a person joins the 
funeral either on the way to the cemetery or in the house of 
mourning he should leave the party after cremation only at the 
same place or in the house itself. This is what is laid down 
by the learned. The women go ahead and the men follow.^They 
should sit on a rock and perform acamana. 

24. There must be sufficient water in the vessel to cover 
up the mustard seeds and the Durva grass should be strewn on 
the top. Those who took part in the cremation rites should 
chew mergosa leaves and take oil bath. 

25. Members should cook food for the party, outside the 
house. They should not eat meals prepared inside the house. 
They should take food in earthen vessels, avoiding shallow vessels. 

26. They should remember the virtue of the dead and 
recite Yama-Gatha.® They should realize that the auspicious 
and inauspicious is brought about by the actions alone. 

27. Even when he enters the new body the dead man is 
associated with the residual merits and demerits. 

28. After the ten days’ rites are completed, the dead 
man’s soul enters the new body. When the nava sraddhas to¬ 
gether with the sixteen others are performed, a new body is 
created for the soul. 

29. The descendants help to shape a body for the soul, 
either with the gingelly seeds or the holy grass and put up the 
five jewels in the mouth for the body to grow. 

1. But according to the custom prevalent in northern India, men 
precede women when the corpse is being taken to the cemetery while 
the process is reverie on return. 

2. RV. X, 14. 



892 Garuda Purina 

0 

30. If there is no menstruation, no conception takes 
place. Therefore the descendant should be careful not to eschew 
the rite of strewing the gingelly seeds and the darbha grass on 
the earth. 

31. He may be born among the cattle or among the 
stable. Wherever he is bom the sraddha reaches him. 

32. Just as the arrow discharged by the archer reaches 
the goal, so the sraddha reaches the person for whom it is 
performed. 

33. No Sraddha can propitiate the soul so long it does 
not enter the body. If the soul is not propitiated duly during 
the ten days (after it leaves the body) it will have to wander 
in the ether without food, agitated by hunger. 

34. The soul (of the deceased) stays in the water for 
three days, in the fire for three days and in the ether for three 
days. For one day, it stays in Indra’s heaven. 

35. When the body has been burnt in fire, the descen- 
dent should offer water libation to the departed soul. The 
mourners should take bath and feed upon the cake or the rice- 
meal. 

36. They should perform the Navaka sraddha on odd 
days, viz., the first, third, fifth, seventh, ninth and the 
eleventh. 

37. Whether at the threshold of the house or at the 
cremation ground or in a holy place or in a temple, wherever 
the first day’s rites are performed, the concluding rites too 
should be performed there. 

38. The Sraddha on the eleventh day is common to all 
castes. There is a ceremonial ablution for purification. 

39-40. After performing the eleventh day iraddha they 
become free from impurity accruing from death. After the 
ceremonial bath, they should gift a bed to the brahmana. This 
releases the dead from pretahood. If there is no member of the 
same clan for the performance of the rite, another man can 
perform the same. 

41. Of whatever eatable the pi^d^ is made on the first 
day as prescribed, the same should be used for«the entire 
Sraddha. 



11.34.55 


893 


42. The sraddha should be performed for ten days, 
pronouncing the name and gotra of the dead but without 
mantras. Whosoever performs the Sraddha should enter the 
house discording the clothes he wore at the Sraddha. 

43. Whether of the same lineage or of a different clan, 
a man or a woman, whosoever performs the first day’s rites 
shall perform the concluding rites on the tenth day as well. 

44. With the offering of ten pindas by the descendant 
the soul acquires a new body just as the foetus does in the ten 
months in the womb. 

45. The rite of pinda and water-libation shall continue 
as long as there is impurity accruing from death. I'his is 
applicable to the members of all castes. 

46-47. When impurity is far three nights, three pindas 
should be given on the first day, four on the second and three 
on the third day. Milk and water should be given in separate 
cups. Ekoddista should be done on the fourth day. 

48. By the pinda of the first day, the head is formed. 
Eyes, ears and nose are formed on the second day. 

49. Cheeks, mouth and neck are formed on the third day. 
Heart, sides and stomach are formed on the fourth day. 

50. Waist, back and anus are formed on the fifth day. 
Thighs are formed on the sixth and ankles are formed on the 
seventh. 

51. The calves are formed on the eighth day, O lord. 
Feet are formed on the ninth and hunger on the tenth. 

52. On the eleventh day, the pinda is offered to the 
dead man along with meat. Bread and cooked rice together with 
milk should be offered to a brahmana after washing his feet. 

53. The sixteen sraddhas to be performed on the eleventh 
day are in anticipation of the twelve monthly sraddhas, the 
eleventh day fraddha, the tripaksa, the six weekly iraddha 
and the two six monthly iraddhas, O bird. 

54. The day on which the death has occurred is the 
basis fur all monthly and annual sraddhas. That month is the 
first one when the eleven days are completed. 

55. That is the first sraddha which is performed by the 
hand of the dead at the spot of death or at the seat of the 
brahmana. Eleven days should be counted from this date. 



894 


Garuda Purib^a 


56. For all monthly sraddhas the tithi falling hn the 
day of death is the base. During the rikta days and tripaksa, 
tithi is not reckoned by scholars. 

57-58. If the man dies on the full moon day, the fourth 
day is deficient for him. If the man dies on the fourth or the 
ninth day, the fourteenth day is deHcient for him. The deficient 
days are called riktas by the experts. 

59. The food that is cooked on the eleventh day with the 
dead man in view should be discarded on the cross-roads and 
the performer should bathe again. 

60. Since the eleventh day, a potful of com with water 
should be gifted to a worthy brahmana every day for a year. 

61. The bones in human body number three hundred 
and sixty. 

62. These bones are nurtured by gifting the water-pots. 
When the water-pot is gifted, the ghost obtains relief. 

63. If a person dies in the forest or at an odd place, 
cremation may take place on any day but impurity will be 
counted from the day of death. 

64-65. By gifting a vessel full of gingclly seeds, incense 
etc. the brahmin is purified on the eleventh day, the ksatriya 
on the twelfth, vaiiya on the fifteenth and sudra in one month 
from the day of death. The same period holds good in case of 
birth as well. 

66. Three nights in three months, two fortnights in six 
months, the day before the year is complete, water-oblations 
should be made with the dead in view. By acting in this way 
the caste men obtain purity. 

67. Since the eleventh day from the date of death, the 
pin^a should be given every day for a year after worshipping 
V^deva. 

68. As the rays of the sun cover the stars, so does the 
Piijicla cover the pitrs. Never one becomes a ghost, if the pin^a 
is given by the descendent. 

69. O foremost among birds, the deities extol the gift 
of a bed. Man’s existence on the earth is not permanent. There 
Is no guarantee that after death the descendent wotild gift the 
bed. 



11.34.83 


895 


70. The relationship of ordinary kinsmen or even of 
father lasts as long as the man lives. After death seeing the 
gulf in between, love ceases to operate in a trice. 

71. The self alone is the kinsman or the enemy.^ Even 
as he lives one shall think of this and perform his duty piously. 

72. “After my death who will be there to gift a bed of 
silk cloth.*’ Thinking thus, he should gift things with his own 
hand while he is alive. 

73-78. The bed stead should be of good wood, ornament¬ 
ally inlaid and engraved. The bolts and cross-bars should be 
golden. It should be covered with red velvet cloth. The pillow 
should be nice and exquisite. It shall be fumigated with incense 
and scents. A golden idol of Lord Visnu and Laksmi should be 
put on the sides. A vessel full ofghee, betel leaves, saffron powder, 
camphor, sandal paste should be placed near by. A lamp, a pair 
of sandals, umbrella chowries, seat, vessel and the seven kinds of 
grass hould be kept near the bed. Other requisites of man going 
to sleep, such as drinking pot, mirror, etc., should be kept ready. 
The cot should be embellished with a covering of five colours. 
The bed should be gifted to a brahmin afler duly worshipping 
him. This gift of bed will bestow pleasures of heaven upon 
the giver. The brahma^ should be honoured duly and provided 
with five clothes. 

79. They should be given ornaments for ears, neck, fingers 
and arms and vessels necessary for domestic use. 

80-81. They should be given water for washing feet or 
sipping and five gems along with raw rice grains. While 
making the gift the giver should pronounce: OKr$na, just as 
your bed in the milk ocean is never without Lak^, so also 
let my bed be never empty in all births I take. 

82. With this prayer to lord Krsna the bed should be 
given to the Brahmin. The same procedure is prescribed even 
when the gift is made on the eleventh day. 

83. Even if a kinsman makes this gift, the dead man wilt 
be happy in the other world, nourished by the articles of gift. 
O lord of birds, a special thing to be noted I mention now. 

1. Compare : I 

II Bh. G. VI. 5. 



896 


Garuda Pur an a 


84-86. Whatever had been regularly used by tJie deceased 
formerly, the garments, vessels or vehicles, whatever had been 
liked by him before should be made over as gifts. Among the 
gifts, the gift of bed makes the dead man extremely happy 
in the city of Indra or Yama. 

87. The wry-faced attendants of Yama will not torment 
him. He will never be oppressed by excessive heat or cold. 

88-89. As a sequel to the gift of bed he will be free 
from the bondage of actions. Even if he had been a sinner he 
is sure to go to heaven, seated in a splendid aerial chariot 
and attended by celestial damsels. The dead man shall stay in 
heaven till the final deluge^ when all living beings are 
destroyed. 

90. The woman who performs nine or sixteen 
^raddhas and the regfular monthly rites for the whole of year 
and also makes the gift of bed for her husband will have an 
everlasting welfare. 

91. While alive she will be of some benefit to her hus¬ 
band*. Adhering strictly to truth, she will lift up her husband 
from hell. 

92. For favour of the dead woman, a golden doll, 
saffron powder, collyrium, clothes, ornaments or bed can be 
gifted in the following manner. 

93-94. What is useful to women, ornaments, etc., the 
garments worn by the dead woman should all be collected and 
placed properly. Then the guardians of the quarters, the deities 
of planets, the images of Vinayaka, should be worshipped. 

95. Then the performer of rites wears a white cloth 
after the ceremonial bath and takes a handful of flowers. He 
stands in front of the brahmin repeating the following mantra: 

96. “This is the idol of the dead (woman) with all the 
necessary requisites and gems. O brahmin, this is gifted to you. 

97. The Self itself is Sambhu, the auspicious Gauri and 
Indra together with all the deities. Hence, the bed is being 
gifted. May her soul be gratified.” 

1. Final Delugt —When the universe » destroyed at the end of a kalpa. 

2. Elsewhere, the Purapa extols the self-immolation of woman by 
ascending the pyre of her husband. 



11.34.109 


897 


98. The gift of bed should be made to the preceptor or 
to a brahmin burdened with a big family. After accepting the 
bed the brahmin shall exclaim with pleasure—‘'Ha ! who has 
given me this.” 

99. Then after bowing to the brahmin and circum¬ 
ambulating him he should be allowed to go. Thus, O bird, the 
gifts are made to the brahmin. 

100. Gifts of cow, house, bed or virgin should not be 
made to many simultaneously. If gifts are divided among 
brahmins they bring about the downfall of the giver. 

101. O Tarksya, listen to the benefit that accrues to one 
who makes a gift thus. For a hundred divine years or more he 
is honoured in heaven. 

102-104. As a result of the gift of a bed he acquires more 
benefit than he would by performing holy rites in vyatipata} or 
Kdrttika month or at the confluence of two ayanas^ or eclipses 
of sun and moon at the holy city of Bvaraka^^ Praydga, Xaimifa* 
Kurukfetra^ or Arbuda^ or on the Ganges or at the confluence of 
Sindhu with the ocean. 

105-107. He will be born in the world of mortals, on the 
destruction of his karman, as a comely man, very rich, compre¬ 
hending virtue, and a master of all sacred literature. Again 
after dying, he will go to Vaikuntha seated in a divine aerial 
chariot, surrounded by celestial damsels. He then deserves the 
havya and kavya offerings and rejoices in the company of the 
pitfs. 

108-109. Whether performed on the astakas^, on the 
new-moon day, on Magha and on other pitr-days, hear, O 
Tarksya, the ^raddha, if the dead are turned in ghosts, is 
rendered ineffective without sapindikarana. 

1. vyatlpdta —a particular conjunction of stars. 

2. The sun’s passage, north and south of the equator, 

3. DvArakd or Kuiasthall near the extreme western promonotory was 
the capital of the country Anarta in the peninsula of Gujarat. 

4. Pfaimifa —was on the river Gomati in the Ayodhyi kingdom. 

5. Modern Kurukletra (Panipat). 

6. Modern Mount Abu in Rajasthan. 

7. offaka —the eighth day of three months —■ pau^a, migha and 
ph&lguna on which the manes are to be propitiated. 



898 


Garu^a Purdna 


110. Sapin(^ikarana should be done at the end of the 
year after death. So^aii should be performed for the purifica¬ 
tion of the corpse. 

111. For the purification of the mane’s lineage fifty (?) 
should be added. Further action may be taken by adding 
more. For the sudra, the same is done at will. 

112. Presently, sapin^ana should be done within the 
period of twelve days accompanied by sacrifice. Until it is 
done the ghost hovers round the fire. Hence, sapin(;lana with 
fire shall be done within twelve days. 

113. Gaya ^raddha or amavasya sraddha should not be 
done in the middle of the year without sapindikarana. 

114. If there be many co-wives and if only one has a 
son, all of them shall be deemed to have a son, by that son 
alone. 

115. Asapinda son should not perform mane’s rites in 
fire. If he does so, he will incur the sin of slaying his father. 

116. If a woman discards her life, after the death of her 
husband^, her sapindana should be done along with that of 
her husband. 

117. Whosoever may be the father’s wife—vaiSya or 
ksatriya, the son is entitled to perform sapindana for her. 

118. If a brahmana has married a sudra, then the son 
should perform ekoddUt^ sraddha for her (but not sapindana). 

119. The sons bom in four castes should be united with 
their respective mothers by the sapindana rite. 

120. When a iraddha is done in anva^fakya^j when a 
ifraddha is meant for prosperity, then during sapindana separate 
pinda should be done for the father as well as mother. 

121. The sapii>d^a of the mother should be done with 
the grandmother and of father with the grandfather. This is 
what I think, to be proper, O Tarksya. 

1. According to this Pur&na, for a woman, ascending the pyre of her 
husband was optional. 

2. anvaf(olya —a ir&ddha performed on the ninth day of the dark 

half of the three memths following the lull moon in i.e. Pau$a, 

M&gha and Ph&lguna. 



11 . 34.135 


899 


122. If a woman dies sonless, the husband should per¬ 
form sapindana and she should be duly united with three 
mothers. 

123. If a woman has neither son, nor husband, then her 
sapindana should be done by her brother or husband’s brother 
or in their absence by a successor. 

124. If the woman has neither husband nor son nor a 
clansman nor the husband’s brother, then her brother should 
perform ekoddista. 

125. If sapindana is left out by negligence or due to 
some other obstruction then navaka, so<;la§a and annual 
sraddha should be performed, 

126. A wise man will do all this after the cremation has 
taken place but not otherwise. (If the man has died unknown 
and hence not cremated) the descendents should make an 
effigy of grass and burn the same in fire. 

127. It is the son who should do the sapindana of his 
father not the father of the son. Due to affection the sapindana 
of the son should not be done by the father, 

128. If there be many sons, only the elder should per¬ 
form the obsequial rite. Navaka sraddha, sapindana, §odasa 
sraddhas should be done by one only. 

129. Even when the property is undivided, the sages 
have stated that only one son can perform the funeral rites. 

130. If divided the others too can perform the rites 
separately, each of the sons doing the same rite himself. 

131. If the sixteen sraddhas are not performed for the 
deceased his ghosthood becomes permanent, even if hundreds 
of sraddhas are performed in his favour. 

132. Fora sonless person, his brother, brother’s son, 
sapinda, or disciple may do sapindana. 

133. For all sonless persons, the daughter can perform 
sapindana through rtvij or a purohita. 

134. If after the death of father, an eclipse takes place 
within a year, the sons should neither do parvana nor 
nandimukha. 

135. Similarly, during great calamities within the year, 
Tirtha fraddha, or Gaya Sraddha or any other Iraddha for the 
manes should not be done at all. 



900 Garuda Purdna 

136. No pin^la should be offered to the manes if* their 
sapindana has not taken place. 

137. According to some, gifts for the Yajflapurusa and 
for the deities can be made even if the year is not complete. 

138. Whatever is given to the manes except arghya and 
pinda ail that should be done according to the prescribed 
method. 

139. The manes of the deities are deities; the manes of 
the manes are sages; the manes of the sages are deities; father 
wins through them. 

140. The lord of sacrifice is the lord of all manes, deities 
and men. Whatever is given to him, is given to all. 

141. If the son performs the sraddha of his father within 
the year of his (father’s) death he is absolved of the fruits of 
his sinful acts performed in several births previously. 

142. If no pinda is gifted and no water libation is made 
the deceased obtains ghosthood and moves in air oppressed by 
hunger and thirst. 

143. If father obtains ghosthood, rites due to themanesare 
of no avail. If mother obtains ghosthood, the manes rites for 
the father do not cease to be. 

144. If mother is dead, father is alive, the sapindana 
should be done with the grandmother if she is already dead 
(but should wait if she is alive). 

145. O bird, hear. I tell you the truth : For those 
dead persons whose pinda has not been united, no sraddha 
and no water-libation is fruitful even if offered a thousand 
times. 


CHAPTER THIRTYFIVE 

Sapindikarana and Sraddha 

Garuda said : 

1-3. O lord, I have another doubt, please clear it. 
Suppose the mother of a man dies but all other relatives such as 
Either, grandfather, great grandfather and great gre%t grand- 



11 . 35.13 


901 


father and their wives are alive (except of course the mother) 
with whom shall the lady be joined in Sapindikarana ? 

The lord said : 

4. O bird, I shall repeat the mode of sapit^dikarana 
already mentioned to you. The lady in question shall be joined 
to Uma, Laksmi and Savitri. 

5. Three generations from one are those who share the 
pinda. The next three generations are those who do not share 
the pinda. The next three generations are those who receive 
the wipings of the food-offerings sticking to the hand and the 
tenth is near the line. 

6. These are the names assigned to men in one’s father’s 
as well as mother’s family. The householder who performs 
the sraddhas saves ten preceding and ten succeeding generations. 

7. When sapindikarana is done, the householder is consi¬ 
dered first (i.e. reckoning is made from him). His fourth 
grandfather, i.e. the great-great-grandfather is tyajaka for him 
i.e. neither pinda nor water libation is offered for him. 

8. Grandfather of the fourth degree of the first tyajaka 
is the first lepaka [i.e. the 7th grandfather reckoning from the 
householder]. Grandfatlier of the 4th degree of the first lepaka 
is in the 10th degree since he is the fourth in reckoning from 
the 7 th one. 

9. The householder is one, ten generations before and 
ten generations after. These twentyonc generations are meant 
whenever the word twentyone generations is used. 

10. Now, listen to the benefit accruing from performing 
the sraddhas and offering gifts according to ^astras in favour of 
the dead. 

11. The father blesses the performer with the birth of 
sons, the grandfather with cattle-wealth and the great-grand- 
iather with coins of gold. 

12. Such are the benefits derivable from sraddhas and 
tarpanas. The great grandfather blesses one with plenty of 
foodstuffs. 

13. O bird) the man whose line is broken shall stay in 
hell permanently like an elephant stuck in the mud. 



902 


Garuda Purdf^ 


14. Or he may be born in other species of living beings 
such as a tree, a bird, a reptile. If a child is born and dies, 
the man cannot be freed from hell, still. 

15. For his sake the Netr&yana bali should be performed 
by his preceptor or disciple or even by a distant relative. 

16. He will be freed from sins and saved from hell. He 
will stay permanently in heaven. No doubt need be entertained 
on this account. 

17-18. If a member of the brahmin caste dies on days 
when the moon is in conjunction with any of the stars 
Dhanistha and the four succeeding ones, ending with Revatl, 
it is very inauspicious. Cremation or water libation is not 
performed during those days. 

19. Even if the family is excessively miserable no job for 

livelihood should be taken up during these days. Every job 

shall be done after the five days are over. 

20. Great distress will befall sons and clansmen 

of the dead who dies on any of these five days. Loss in the 
house is also inevitable. 

21. Still if the immediate cremation is conducive to the 
welfare of the people the cremation with the following extra 
procedure can be duly performed and an immediate offering 
in the fire can also be made. 

22. The immediate offering is held to be sacred in 

regard to the body to be cremated. The body is well consecrat¬ 
ed with mantras by the brahmins duly. 

23. Four effigies of Darbha are consecrated with the 
mantras of the naksatras. These are thrown beside the corpse. 

24. Cremation is proceeded along with the effigies. On 
the expiry of the period of impurity the son shall perform rites 
for tranquillity and peace. 

25. The man who dies on any of these five days does not 
attain salvation unless for his sake the gingelly seeds, cow, gold 
and ghee arc gifted away. 

26. Gifts are made to brahmins to ward off impending 
calamity after the expiry of impurity period. QTts help the 
deceased attain release from the bonds of his previons actions. 



11.35.39 


903 


27. Food-stufFs, sandals, umbrella, gold coins, clothes 
and other gifts are given to the brahmins for redemption from 
all worldly sins. 

28. Whether it is a young man or an old man or a child, 
if any one dies in five days and no redemptionary rites are 
performed it will create obstacles. 

29-32. In the ^raddha for the deceased the following 
eighteen are prohibited; benediction, twice-twisted darbhas 
recital of svasti astu (hail),/>rflna»a (orii), Ekoddiffa^ Agnikarana 
(consigning cooked rice to the fire, Ucchiffo, (leavings of food), 
Vaiivadeva iraddha^ Vikira, (scattering of cooked rice bits), recital 
of the words svadha, Pitr, and Anu Avdhana invocation, lighting 
of the torch (ulmuka) the circumambulation, following upto the 
border, offering of gingelly seeds into the fire (Tilahoma) and 
Purnahuti. If these are included in the rites, the performer 
will suffer utter destruction. O son of Kasyapa, I have already 
told you about the sixteen Sraddhas. 

33-34. The sixteen iraddhas already mentioned are;— 
One at the place of death, then midway to the cremation ground, 
at the funeral pyre, in the hand of the corpse and the fifth 
Pnltivefyaka offered to the spirits living in the cremation ground, 
the sixth at the collection of ashes and bones, then the pin^as 
offered during the ten days. Thus sixteen in all. 

35-36. O Tarksya, listen to another mode of reckoning 
sixteen sraddhas. Ten daily pindas, one extra at the collection 
of bones, then five for Brahma, Visnu, Siva and others. These 
sixteen Sraddhas are reckoned by persons who know the 
Ritual. 

37. O bird, a third method of reckoning the sixteen 
Sraddhas is as follows:— the twelve monthly Sraddhas together 
with that on the eleventh, that on tripaksa (after the expiry of 
si.x weeks) and those on the two rikta days. 

38. The first set of sixteen Sraddhas are for purifying the 
corpse. The fifty Sriddhas are for purifying the line of Manes 
(pitrpankti). 

39. If enjoining {sapindikara^a) is devoid of fifty s'raddhas 
it shall not reach the pitrs. The redemption from ghosthood is 
possible only if fifty Sraddhas are performed. 



904 


Garuda Purdna 


40. If the performance of fifty sraddhas is even slightly 
deficient, the presence of pitrs cannot be effected. It is corollary 
to the fifty sraddhas that the descendent should perform sapin- 
dana (effectively). 

The rules regarding the cremation of the corpse 

41-43. The hands and feet of the dead together with the 
covering cloth should be tied to the bamboo bier. If this is not 
done, there is risk of an attack by the pisacas. If the dead body 
is taken out during the night there is a fear from spirits roam¬ 
ing in the sky. The dead body should not be left unattended. 
By touching it mishaps may occur. 

44. When there is dead body in the middle of the village 
and if any one takes food with that knowledge, that food is 
known as flesh, and water as blood. (No one shall take food 
or water before the dead body is removed). 

45. When there is a dead body in the village the 
following is avoided: Chewing the betel; chewing the tooth¬ 
brush twig, taking food-, sexual intercourse and offering of 
pindas. 

46. Ceremonial ablutions, gifts, sacrifices, water- 
libations and worship of gods are futile when performed with a 
dead body in the village. The convention holds good for all 
kiths and kins. 

47. O lord of birds, this convention prevails among 
cousins and kins. If it is violated, the dead man is tarnished by 
sins. 


CHAPTER THIRTYSIX 

On fast and pilgrimage 

Garuda said ; 

1 -4. Why is the rite of fasting considered holy and the 
bestower of salvation ? What is the goal attained by person 
who had left his house and died in a holy centre ? What is it 



II.36.I4 


905 


if he died before reaching the holy centre ? What is it if he 
died in the house itself? What is it if he died in a cottage (as 
a Vanaprastha) or if he took to Sannyasa either in the holy 
centre or in the house. How shall the rites be performed in 
such cases ? What is the procedure if he does not die a proper 
death ? O lord, what are the rules if the performer wavers and 
does not stand on his resolve ? What are the rites which enable 
him to achieve realization ? 

The lord said ' 

5. If any one observes the rite of fasting and dies he 
will cast off his human form and become equal in lustre to 
me. 

6. He will have the benefit of performing as many 
sacrifices, complete with due fees as the number of days he 
was able to live observing the rite of fasting. 

7. If such a death takes place after taking to Sannyasa 
whether in the holy centre or elsewhere the benefit accruing 
from the same is twice that of the previous one. 

8. If a person suffering from an incurable disease such 
as plague etc. observes fast and dies he has no rebirth. He 
rejoices in heaven like a deity. 

9. If a sick man takes to Sannyasa he is released from 
the cycle of rebirth in this world of sorrows and afflictions. 

10. Brahmins should be fed everyday. Gifts of a vessel 
full of gingelly seeds or gifts of lamps according to his capacity 
should be made. Gods should also be worshipped. 

11. If gifts are made in favour of the dead, his major 
and minor sins are washed away. On death, he attains immor¬ 
tality on par with sages. 

12. Hence, observance of fast enables men to attain 
heaven. Man should strive for salvation when his body is in 
perfect health. 

13. The deities Brahma and others bestow contentment 
and nourishment on the man who forsakes his sons, wealth 
and goes to a holy centre. 

14. If a person dies after observing the fast on reaching 
the holy centre or on the way, he goes to the sphere of sages. 



906 


Garuda Pura^a 


15. If a person dies at home after observing the fast he 
alone will sojourn in heaven leaving the members of his family. 

16. If a person casts off food and water and drinks only 
the water from my feet he is not reborn on the earth. 

17. The family deities protect the man who goes to a 
holy centre and abstains from food. The emissaries of Yama 
guard him. No torture at the hands of Yama’s attendants is in 
store for him. 

18. A person who makes frequent pilgrimages to holy 
centres can destroy sins. The person who cremates him, if he 
dies, enjoys the benefit of making the pilgrimage. 

19. A frequent visitor to holy centres, even if he dies 
outside the holy centre, is reborn as an intelligent Brahmin 
well-versed in the Vedas at a holy place and in a noble family. 

20. If a man observing fast, O Tarksya, survives it he 
should invite brahmanas and gift away his possessions. 

21. Following the instructions of brahmins he should 
observe Candrayana and Krcchra. He should never tell a lie 
thereafter. He shall practise virtuous actions. 

22. When a person returns to his own house after making 
pilgrimage to the holy centre he should take the permission of 
pious brahmins and perform expiatory rites. 

23. If a person is able to make pilgrimage to holy centres 
at the stage of death after previously making gifts of gold, cow, 
land, elephant and horses, he is the most fortunate of all. 

24. A person starting on a pilgrimage when death is 
imminent should make gifts of cows at every step if the act is 
not involved in violence. 

25. The sin committed at home is washed off by oblutions 
in holy waters, while the sin committed at the holy centre 
becomes adamantine and is never washed off at all. 

26. There is no doubt in this that he will be distressed 
for ever by those sins as long as the sun, the mocm and the 
stars shine. O bird, the gifts made therein are of everlasting 
beneHt. 

27. Even indigent persons when sick shmild make gifts. 
Such gifts should consist of a cow, gingelly seeds, gold and of 
seven g^ins* 



11.36.37 


907 


28. On seeing a person making liberal gifts, the deities, 
sages and Citragupta are excessively delighted. 

29. So long as one is in free possession of one’s wealth, 
one should make it over to the brahmaruis. After death, the 
entire wealth goes to others. Who will not therefore have the 
grace to give ? 

30. By offering gifts of wealth to brahmapas, the sons 
in fact, prepare for their salvation along with sons, grandsons 
and great grandsons. 

31. What is given to father will be requited a hundred* 
fold; to mother a thousandfold; to a sister a hundred thousand 
fold and to a brother manyfold. 

32. If, out of covetousness, a person does not give any 
thing during sickness, that miserly sinner will indeed repent 
after death. 

33. Wealth is acquired with strain and stress. It is 
naturally unsteady. The only solution is in being gifted to 
others. Otherwise there awaits only disaster. 

34. Just as an unchaste wife laughs at her husband who 
fondles the son too much, as also death laughs at a person who 
makes fuss about protecting himself, and the earth laughs at a 
person who guards too much his wealth. 

35-36. A virtuous man of liberal temperament and 
gentleness, even after acquiring a lot of wealth, considers it to 
be as useless as a blade of grass. He feels no torment, no delusion 
and no fear of the emissaries of Yama at the hour of death. 

37. The after-effects of death in water last for seven 
thousand years; thcae of death in fire for eleven thousand years; 
those of death in scorching sun for sixteen thousand years; 
those of death in a battle for sixty thousand years; those of 
death in thwarting the seizure of cow for eighty thousand years, 
and O Bharata, those of death in fasting are everlasting. 



908 


Garuda Purdna 
• • 


CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN 

Gift of a Vessel filled with watet 

Garuda said : 

1-2. O lord, please explain to me the mode of giving 
water-jar precisely. What are the rules of giving ? How many 
vessels should be given ? What are their characteristics ? By 
what stuff are they to be filled ? To whom are they to be 
given ? When are they to be given to propitiate the dead ? 

The lord said : 

3. O Tarksya, now I shall explain the mode of gifting a 
water-jar. It should be offered to the brahman in favour of 
the dead along with a rice-ball and the libation of water. 

4. For the pleasure of the dead on their way to Yama’s 
abode, these vessels should be given on the twelfth day, after 
six weeks, after six months or at the end of a year. 

5. The vessel should be placed on the ground cleaned 
and smeared with cowdung. They should be filled with cooked 
food and water. 

6. Satiating food should be given to the dead. The 
dead man is delighted thereby as he goes along with the 
attendants of Yama. 

7. On the twelfth day, twelve such jars should be given. 

8. A Vardhani [a vessel] filled with cooked food and 
water should be given to a brahmin with Visnu in view after 
due sathkalpa.^ 

,9. A single vessel should be given in favour of Yama. 
Thereby, the dead man attains release. Another vessel should 
be given in favour of Citragupta. Thereby, the dead man 
remains happy at Yama’s abode. 

10. Sixteen vessels filled with cooked black gram and 
water should be given to sixteen brahmanas, one to each. 

11. The sixteen <$raddhas are performed beginning with 
Utkranti-^raddha (the first of the scries). 

12. From the eleventh day a vessel should be given 
every day for a year. 


1. Samkalpu —a solemn vow to perform an obser\’ance. 



II.38.8 


909 


13. A Vardhani filled with cooked rice and water should 
be given everyday for a year along with a bamboo vessel. 

14. A vessel full of water should be gpven to a brahmin, 
after covering it with a cloth and scenting it with fragrant 
stuffs. 

15-16. Every day, O bird, with due sariikalpa, a vessel 
should be given to a brahmin well versed in the Vedas and 
observing all rites. He must be a deserving person, not a fool. 
Only the man who is endowed with Vedic lore can cross and 
enable others to cross the ocean of worldly existence. 


CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT 

On Salvation^ Heaoen, Gifts, Pilgrimage and good deeds 
Garuda said : 

1-3. O lord, please explain to me the nature of salvation 
and heaven realizable or accessible by gifts or pilgrimages. 
How does a man attain salvation and how docs he reach and 
stay in heaven for a long time ? What are the causes of fall of 
living beings from heaven and other regions among the upper 
seven worlds. 

4. After obtaining human form in any of the thirteen 
castes in Bharata, if a man dies in a holy centre he is never 
born again. 

5. The seven cities of Ayodhya, Mathura, Maya, Kaflci,. 
Avantika, Kaii and Dvaravati confer salvation. 

6. If at the time when the vital airs have reached the 
throat (when death is imminent) a man says T have renounc¬ 
ed* , he attains the region of Visnu after death and is not bom 
again. 

7. He has already tucked his clothes for his journey to 
his goal of salvation if he pronounces the two letters Hari even 
for once. 

8. He who remembers me ever and anon saying 
krftfa, krfi?a is lifted up by me from hell just as the lotus springs 
up breaking through the water. 



910 


Garuda Purdm 


9. Undoubtedly one attains salvation if one dies near a 
Salagrama stone which is powerful for annihilating all sins and 
defects. 

10. There is no doubt in this that salvation is ever 
present wherever Salagrama stone or the stone of Dvaravati or 
both are present. 

11. O bird, by growing, nurturing, sprinkling, saluting 
and extolling the TulasI plant Man’s sin accumulated in various 
births is wiped off. 

12. He who has taken ablution in the holy lake of 
Manasa where wisdom is the eddy, truth the water and which 
removes the dirt of love and hatred is never tarnished by sins. 

13. God is not present in wood, stone or clods of earth. 
He is present in our heart. Hence, one should invoke the heart 
Avhich plays a prominent part in devotion. 

14. Fishermen visit Narmada, the holy river, every 
morning. But their mind does not become pure. 

15. Men reap the fruits of their actions in accordance 
with their feeling; their goal in the other world is also befitting 
that. Their activity yields accordant fruits. 

16. He who lays down his life for the sake of his 
preceptor, a brahmin^ a woman or a child attains salvations. 

17. After making various gifts to brahmins if a person 
dies during the period of fast he is freed from all bondage and 
attains salvation. 

18-19. Such are the ways which lead either to salvation 
or heaven. In thwarting the seizure of cows, civil commotions 
and national calamities or disasters in holy places and temples, 
it is equally beneficent whether one succumbs or survives. Life 
becomes pleasant by making gifts and enjoyments. Death is 
efficacious in battle and holy places. 

20. Casting themselves off, human beings whether of 
high, middling or low class attain their heavenly abode. 

21-22. A man dying in Harik$etra, Kuruksetra, 
Bhrguksetra, Prabhasa, l^ri^aila, Arbuda, Pu$kara or Bhutesvara 
attains heavenly abode for the period of a day of Brahma and 
thereafter falls to the earth. 

23. He who accords gifts to a brahmin devoted to the 



11.38.36 


911 


observance sufficient to last for a year raises his family and is 
honoured in heaven. 

24. He who offers a virgin in marriage to a brahmin 
well versed in the Vedas shall stay in Indraloka along with 
the members of his family. 

25-26. By giving gifts a man shall reap the fruits thereof. 
There is no doubt in this that he who resuscitates and repairs 
tanks, wells, lakes, parks and temples in ruins reaps twice the 
merit derived by the original builder. 

27-29. He who gives to a scholarly brahmin burdened 
with a family, ornaments for the ears, neck, fingers and arms, 
a cosy house fully furnished with utensils and other requisites, a 
cow and the contrivances to prevent chillness, gusts of wind 
and scorching heat, is honoured in heaven for thirty-five million 
years. The woman of the same caste who follows her husband 
in death attains heaven and stays for as many heavenly years 
as she spent human years in this world with him. 

30. If a woman leaves her sons, grandsons and other 
relatives and follows her husband in death both of them attain 
heaven along with three generations. 

31. Even if a woman has committed sins including evil 
intention against her own husband she can wash off her sins if 
she follows her husband in death.^ 

32. Even if the husband has been a sinner and wicked, 
his sins will be washed off if the wife follows him after death. 

33. If a man offers only a morsel of bread to the needy 
he will be proceeding to heaven in an aerial chariot endowed 
with chowries and umbrellas. 

34. If he offers maintenance sufficient for a year, the 
sins committed by him till his death are destroyed. 

35. If he helps a brahmin to celebrate the marriage of 
his daughter, he washes off his sins of the past, future and 
present births. 

36. The merit accruing from digging ten wells is 
acquired by digging a tank. The merit accruing from digging 

1. Refers to Salt custom which seems to be optional when this 
Pur&t^a was written. 



912 Garuia PurS^ 

ten tanks is acquired by digging a lake. O bird, a drinking 
water shed erected in a dry place is equal to digging ten lakes. 

37. The drinking water shed erected in a dry place is 
equal to a gift to an indigent brahmin. He who shows mercy 
to living beings becomes a leader of the world. 

38. By means of meritorious deeds like these one can 
attain heaven. After reaping the fruits of his virtuous deeds 
one becomes well established. 

39. Leaving off useless insignificant activities one shall 
ever be virtuous. Gifts, truth and mercy constitute the essential 
characteristics of the three worlds. 

40. A gift made to an indigent man is excellent; the 
worship of a Linga in a secluded place is so. If a man contri¬ 
butes to cremate the corpse of an orphan he reaps the fruit of 
performing millions of sacrifices. 


CHAPTER THIRTY-.NINE 


Garu4a said : 

1. O lord, out of compassion for me, please tell me the 
rules of impurity, for my knowledge and for the welfare of 
human beings. 

The lord said: 

2. O lord of birds, the impurity accruing from birth and 
death is fourfold. The rules of impurity are applicable to all 
the four castes. 

3. The days of impurity are ten for the relatives on the 
father*s and mother's side. People should avoid taking meals, 
during this period, with the relatives of the dead. The bereaved 
fiunily should neither offer nor receive gifts, should neither 
undertake nor conduct sacrifices. The study of the Vedas and 
ifistras is stricdy prohibited. 



11.29.16 


913 


4. One should observe the following while performing 
obsequial rites : suitability of place and time, sufficiency of 
wealth, justiffcation of purpose, validity of reason and his 
capability. 

5. If a person is dead in the forest conflagration or in a 
foreign country, the relatives should take bath along with the 
dress; the impurity is soon removed thereby. 

6. If a child is dead in the womb or is born dead, there 
should be no obsequial rite, no water-libation and no impurity 
at all. 

7. Artisans, architects, physicians, slaves (male or 
female), kings and Vedic scholars are purified immediately. 

8. He who is at fast or at sacrifice reciting the mantras 
or he who has set up a sacrificial fire or he who is a 
reigning ruler—these are exempt from impurity as also those 
who are exempted by the king. 

9. In impurity accruing from birth, the rules are less 
strict. Mother is purified after ten days, father just after 
taking bath. 

10. During the days of marriage, festivity, sacrifice, if a 
person dies, there is no impurity. The food-stuff collected for 
use can be utilized by the persons concerned. This is what 
Manu hzis said. 

11. In birth the relatives incur no impurity. Impurity 
attaches to parents alone. Primarily, it is the mother who be¬ 
comes impure. Father is purified by the touch of water alone. 

12. In birth or death impurity lasts for ten days, O bird. 

13. By giving food to the hungry and the indigent, the 
parents get rid of impurity—the sages have declared. 

14. Man is purified after bathing in water from the 
earthen jar mixed with gingelly seeds and clay from holy 
places. 

15-16. He should gift some articles to the village 
assembly, gold, cow and bull to a br&hmana. If k^atriya he 
should do the same twice, if vailya thrice, if ludra four times. 
Wealth should be given to a brahimn. 



914 


Garuda Purdifa 


17. A person distanced by seven or eight generation or 
he who has not undergone a Sacrament incurs no impurity. 

18. For men who have lost life for the sake of a 
brahmin, a cow, a woman or in the battlefield, infirmity lasts 
only for a single night. 

19-20. Brahmins do not incur impurity if they are 
engaged in an auspicious rite. Those who arrange cremation 
of an orphan child with the brahmin assisting them in this act 
become purified as soon as they take bath. 

21. When ^udras, following a corpse, reach a pond or a 
stream or a reservoir, they should return home. While return¬ 
ing they should be glanced at by a brahmin which is enough 
for their purification. This is what the Vedic scholars say. 


CHAPTER FORTY 

On accidental death 


Garuda said: 

1-2. O lord, I wish to hear this explained. Some 
brahmins have tragic deaths. How is the passage in regard to 
those ? What is their place ? What is their goal ? What are the 
rules of observance in regard to them ? Please tell me the 
after-effects of such untimely unnatural deaths ? 

The lord said : 

3. O Garu<iia, I shall tell you in detail about their 
passage, rules of observance and place. It is a great secret— 
the rite in case of abnormal death. 

4-12. There are people who are dead by £ssts, killed by 
fanged animals, dead by strangulation, who are slayers of 
preceptors killed by wolves, who die of arson or iniprecations of 
brahmins, who die of cholera, who commit suicide, who fall 



11.40.20 


915 


from a peak and die, who hang themselves to death, who are 
drowned in tank, river or ocean,—listen to their plight. These 
go to hell. Those who are killed by the mlecchas and other 
infidels, who are defiled by dogs, jackals, etc., who are 
not cremated, who are full of germs, who die of leaping or 
great ailments or contact with foul women, or an attack by a 
low-born person, who die of water, of serpent-bite, who are 
struck by lightning, killed by fanged beasts, who die of falling 
from trees, who are defiled by-women in menses and impurities 
who are sudras, washermen and others, who are likely to fall 
into hell by committing sinor escaping it become ghosts—for such 
persons there is no rite of cremation, no water-libation, no rite of 
obsequy and no observance of impurity. For these people, 
O Garuda, the rite of Narayana bali should be performed. 
Now, for the benefit of the entire world, I shall narrate the 
procedure of this rite that dispels the fear of sins. 

13. For a brahmin, the rite should be performed within 
six months; for a ksatriya within three months; for a vaiiya 
within a month and a half and for a iudra immediately. 

14-15. The Narayana bali should be performed through 
brahmins in GaAgd^ Tamund, Naimiia and Pufkara^ in a tank 
full of water, in an eddy of pure water, in a cow-shed, in a 
house or in a temple in front of Krsna’s image. 

16. Water-libation should be performed with mantras 
from the Vedas and the Puranas. With the articles of worship 
lord \'isnu should be propitiated. 

17. Rites accompanied by reciting the Purusa-sukta and 
Visnu mantras should be performed. Facing the south, the 
dead should be identified with lord Visnu. 

18. The mantra runs thus! “May the lord Pun^arikaksa 
who has no beginning, no end, who bears on his person a 
conch, a discus and a mace confer salvation to the dead. 

19-20. After offering water-libation, the house-holder 
who is not affected by passion and hatred, who is pure, restrain¬ 
ed in senses, devoted to virtue and benevolence shall observe 
silence along with his kinsmen, O Garuda. 

1. Pufkara —the same as modern Pufkara in Rajaitlian. 



916 


Garu4a Purina 


21. Then he shall perform eleven sraddhas with full 
concentration observing all rules. 

22-23. He should make various gifts of water, grain, 
wheat, Priyahgu, cooked rice soaked in ghi, silver coin, 
umbrella, turban, cloth, vegetables, milk, honey and sandals. 

24. Gifts should be made to all without depriving any¬ 
one of the line of those assembled. The rice-balls placed on the 
ground should be accompanied by scents, flowers and grains. 

25. Gifts made to brahmins should be in accordance 
with the Vedic and Gastric injunctions. Water-libation should 
be offered separately through a conch or a copper vessel. 

26. The performer of rites should hold breath and kneel 
on the ground. He should first give the arghya and then per¬ 
form ekoddista. 

27. The first rice-ball should be offered with the mantras 
dpo daivP^ madhumati^ and the second with the mantra 
Upay&magrhitosP. 

28. The third rice-ball is given with the mantra yena 
pdvaka cakfasd^^ the fourth with the mantra ye devdsah^f and the 
fifth with the mantra samudrarh gaccha.^ 

29. The mantra agnirjyotiV is for the sixth, htraryagarbhah^ 
for the seventh, Tamdyefi for the eighth zxidyajjdgraP^ for the 
ninth. 

30. The mantra ydh phalinih^^ is for the tenth and bhadram 
karriebhih^^ for the eleventh. Thus all the rice-balls should be 
offered. After this, he shall perform the sraddha for eleven 
deities on the next day. 

1. VS. 12.35 

2. ?IV. IV. 57.3 

3. VS. VII. 4ff. 

4. ?tV. 1.50.6 

5. ?tV. IV. 35.8 

6. VS. 6.21 

7. VS. 3.9 

8. VS. 13.4 

9. VS. 37.11 

10. VS. 34.1 

11. ilV. 10.97.15 

12. ?tV. 1.89.8 



11.40.43 


917 


31. Five brahmins should be invited and arghya given 
to them. They should be learned, of good conduct, most 
excellent in their family, free from physical decrepitude and 
noble. Never should they be of the condemnable type. 

32. The image of Visnu should be made of gold, that of 
Rudra of copper, that of Brahma of silver and that ofYama 
of iron. 

33. The effigy of the dead should be made of lead or 
Darbha grass. Nyasa of Samavedin should be conducted with 
the mantra Tam&ya tvd. 

34-35. Lord Govinda should be placed in the west with 
the mantra; agna dyahi,^ Prajapati in the east with the mantra 
agntm ile;^ Yama in the south with the mantra ife tvd^ and in the 
middle a mystic diagram should be drawn on the ground 
where the body of darbha grass is placed. 

36. In five vessels containing five gems there be invoked 
Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Yama and the dead person. 

37. The cloth, the sacred thread and the coins should 
be separate for each deity. The mantras too are separate for 
each deity. 

38. Five sraddhas are performed separately for the 
deities with due observance of rules, and water is poured over 
the pindas separately. 

39-41. Water with gingelly seeds shall be taken in a 
conch or a copper vessel or if it is not available in an earthen 
vessel along with the articles of worship. O lord of birds, the 
following articles should be gifted to a pious brahmin—seat, 
sandal, umbrella, coins, water pot, vessel, foodstuffs and 
grains, thus constituting the eight padas as well as a copper 
vessel with gingelly seeds along with gold and compatible 
dakfinds, 

42-43. Fields with grain plants already grown should be 
gifted to a Rgvedin, a milch cow to a Yajurvedin, a new cloth 
to a Samavedin with Lord Siva in view, and similarly gingelly 
seeds and iron with Yama in view. The sacrificial fee should 
be paid to the officiating priests. 

1. RV. 616.10 

2. ?IV. 1.1.1 

3. ^tV. 1.1.22 



918 


Gambia Purdna 


44. An effigy should be made with the medicinarherbs. 
O Ka^yapa, Palaia leaves and bunches should be split into 
several pieces. 

45. The hide of a black deer should be spread and the 
effigy of kuia grass placed over it. Three hundred and sixty 
blades ofkusa grass representing the number of bones in the 
body should be used. 

46. The blades ofkusa grass should be tied well to 
constitute the different limbs. Forty blades ofkusa grass at the 
head and ten at the neck. 

47. Twenty in the region of the heart, twenty in the 
belly, hundred in the thighs and twenty at the hips. 

48. Four for the penis, six for the testicles, ten for the 
toes. This is the procedure to represent the bones. 

49. A coconut is placed at the head; a silver piece in 
the palate; five gems in the mouth and a plantain fruit in the 
tongue. 

50. Sands represent the entrails; saffron is placed at the 
nose; clay represents the fat and cow’s urine the urine. 

51. Sulphur represents the Dhatus (the principal 
constituents of the body). Haritala', Manahsila^ and fried 
barley flour represent flesh and honey represents the blood. 

52. A clump of twigs and leaves represents the matted 
hair, hide of deer represents the skin, mercury represents 
semen and brass pieces the faeces. 

53. Manahsila is scattered over the bodyi gingelly cakes 
on the joints, palm leaves on the cars and two Gufijas (berries) 
on the nipples. 

54. Lotus petals are placed on the nose and the um¬ 
bilical region; brinjal on the testicles and red garlic on the 
penis. 

55. Ghi should be applied over the navel. Lac represents 
the loin cloth. Pearls are placed at the breast and saffron over 
the head. 

56. Comphor« incense, aguru, garlands are used to 

1. Yellow orpiment 

2. Red arsenic 



11 . 41,1 


919 


decorate the effigy. It is clothed with silken cloth. A gold 
piece is placed over the chest. 

57. Rddhi (success) and Vfddhi (prosperity) represent 
the arms, two chowrie pieces the eyes; red lead is applied to 
the corners of the eyes. Betal leaves arc offered (to the mouth). 

58. Thus, the worship of the dead is performed with 
different medicinal herbs. Due rites are performed in fire and 
sacrificial vessels are kept around. 

59. The dead body is sanctified by the mantras ianno 
devi^f punantu imam me Varunafi and by the water from the 
^alagrdma stone. 

60. A good milch cow and a vessel full of gingelly seeds 
is gifted with Visnu in view. 

61. Gingelly seeds, iron, gold, cotton, salt, cow—each of 
them is considered to be pious. 

62. Then, Vaitarani* decorated with ornaments should 
be given accompanied by a iraddha. 

63. Then rites for the release of the ghost should be 
performed with Vi§nu in view. 

64. The Preta is mystically discharged. The corpse or 
the effigy is cremated while meditating upon Visnu. 

65. (On the cremation of effigy) three days’ impurity is 
observed; Otherwise, impurity lasts for ten days while a rice- 
ball is offered on each of the ten days. All other rites are per¬ 
formed for a year. Thereby the dead man attains salvation. 


CHAPTER FORTYONE 

Releasing the Bull {Vrsotsarga) 

Lord Vi$^u said : 

1. O lord of birds, the rite of releasing the bull 
( Vrfotsarga) should be done, as prescribed in the month K^rttika 

1. RV. 1.9.4 

2. VS. 19.37 

3. RV, 1.25.19 

4. Here by Vaiiartmf a cow b meant, not the river. 



920 Garu^a Pur&na 

or on the full-moon day (purnima) or on other auspici5us 
days. 

2. One should get married, release the bull, perform 
Nandimukha^ and establish hre. 

3. Fire should be established beside the water reservoir, 
well, cowshed and everything should be done according to 
marriage rites such as the recitation of the mantras by the 
brahmins. 

4. He should do putrdsSdana^ irapam^ upanayana^ etc. At 
the end of paryukfana, the brahmin should do home. 

5-6. Six offerings should be made with the mantra 
prathama ahar^ to Agni, Rudra, Sarva, Pasupati, Siva, Bhava, 
Mahadeva, Isana, Yama. 

7. Once, homa should be made with pif^aka by reciting 
the mantra PGfd g^. Homa should be made both with caru 
and Payasa. 

8-9. First vydhrti^-homA should be made, then PrdyaScitta^ 
Samirava-prdiana^ Pranitd parimokfana and Pavitra-pratipatti. 
Dakfim shoOld be given to the brahmins officiating at the 
sacrifice. By reciting fa^anga mantras dedicated to Rudra, the 
ghost obtains release. 

10. Bull of one colour and a calf should be bathed and 
decorated with ornaments. 

11. By releasing the twins the ghost obtains release. 
Then water-libation should be made by reciting the mantras. 
The brahmins should be feasted and gratified with the sacrificial 
fee. 

12. Then ekoddis^a should be performed accompanied 
by water libation and gifts of food. 

13. This should be done on the twelfth day and in each 
month separately. The prescription relates to the release of the 
ghost. 


1. A Sr&ddha ceremony performed in memory of the manea preli - 
minary to any festive occasion such as marriage. 

2. Not mentioned in Bloomfield’s Vedic concordance. 

3. RV. VI. 54.5 

4. Wydhfti homa —Oblations poured into the fire by muttering the 
formula: bhdh svSkSt bhuah svdhd, svafy tvdkd. 



11.42.10 


921 


CHAPTER FORTYTWO 

On bestowing gifts 


The lord said ; 

1. As a calf can trace its mother cow among a thousand 
cows, so also the actions done in previous births can follow the 
doer. 

2. The sun, Vanina, Vi?nu, Brahma, moon, fire and 
lord Siva appreciate the person who gifts plots of land. 

3. There is no gift equal to the gift of land, no treasure 
equal to landed property, no virtue equal to truthfulness and no 
sin equal to falsehood. 

4. Gold is the first offspring of fire, land of Vis^u, and 
cow of the sun. He who gifts gold, cow and land actually 
makes a gift of three worlds. 

5. He who gifts knowledge, land and cow is blessed. 
Reciting Epics and the Pur^as, cultivating seeds in the fertile 
land and milking the cow save people from the distress of hell. 

6. Even persons committing heinous sins are purified 
merely by making gift of a cow or a plot of land. 

7. If someone seizes cows or land unlawfully due to 
greed he should be stopped. He goes to hell who does not 
protect these. 

8. Even when the vital airs stick to the throat (when 
death is imminent) actions unworthy of performance should 
not be carried out; only worthy actions should be followed. 
This is known to Vedic scholars who have declared thus. 

9. There is as much of sin in seizing cows or land as 
that which results from slaughtering a thousand cows, in doing 
an evil action or in depriving someone of his lovelihood. In. 
helping someone to secure the means of livelihood, the benefit 
that accrues is equal to that of the gift of a hundred thousand 
cows. 

10. It is better to give away a cow once for all rather 
than give away a hundred cows and seize one. It one seizes a 
cow he cannot expiate for that sin by even giving a 
hundred cows. 



922 


Garuijla Purdi}a 


11. If a person voluntarily gifts something and wontonly 
seizes the same he becomes a great sinner. He goes to hell 
where he stays till the universe is dissolved in Deluge. 

12. The merit that accrues to one in offering protection 
to a poor brahmin who is emaciated due to unemployment 
cannot be surpassed in sacredness even by performing a horse 
sacrifice accompanied by all sacrificial fees. 

13. The merit one secures by guarding the Vedas and 
performing sacrifices accompanied by sacrificial gifts cannot 
equal the merit of protecting a weak brahmin. 

14. The Vehicles and forces maintained with the wealth 
misappropriated from the brahmins break down at the time of 
battle like bunds made of sand. 

15. If one seizes land gifted by another he is reborn as 
a worm in faeces where he remains for sixty thousand years. 

16. The brahmanical asset enjoyed by the deception of 
affection burns the entire family till the seventh generation. 
The same if enjoyed stealthily burns the race so long as the 
moon and the. stars shine in the sky. 

17. Clever persons may be there who can digest powder¬ 
ed iron or stone or even poison. But is there a man in the 
world who can digest the property of a brahmin ? 

18. By destroying the wealth of gods (temples), by 
seizing a brahmin’s wealth or by dishonouring and slighting 
a brahmin a family falls in esteem. 

19. There is no question of dishonouring a brahmin 
though devoid of learning. No one performs homa in ashes 
instead of in blazing fire. 

20. Gifts made during the transit of the sun from one 
sign of Zodiac to the other, Havyas and Kavyas offered at that 
time enable one to be honoured in heaven for seven Kalpas. 

21. Out of the three—acceptance of monetary gifts, 
imparting knowledge to the seeker and presiding over another 
man's sacrifice, acceptance of monetary gifts is the best. The 
sin, if any, in the acceptance of monetary gifts is removed by 
japas and homas but even the Vedas do not sanctify a person 
who presides over another man’s sacrifice but himself does not 
perform any sacrifice. 



1L43.5 


923 


22. A person who performs japas and homas and 
abstains from accepting cooked food from others is not tarnish¬ 
ed by any sin even if he accepts the gift of the whole earth, full 
of precious jewels. 


CHAPTER FORTYTHREE 

On performing a ^raddha 


The lord said : 

1. Those who violate rules for the observance of rites in 
water and fire, those who break vows of renunciation and fast 
should make gifts of cow or bull for the purity of sense-organs. 

2. Either the mother or a kinsman can perform the 
expiatory rite on behalf of a boy less than twelve but above 
four. 

3. Boys of less than four years in age can never be 
guilty or sinful. Even the king cannot punish them. There is 
no expiatory rite prescribed for such boys, in the iastras. 

4. If a woman falls sick after the menstrual blood has 
come out let her discard her cloth on the fourth day and touch 
the havis. She becomes pure thereby. 

5. Sometimes, a person is ill and the necessity arises 
for an ablution. In the circumstances, a healthy man should 
take ablution ten times. He should touch the sick man after 
every bath. Thereby, the sickman is purified even without 
ablution. 



924 


Garuda Purd^a 


CHAPTER FORTYFOUR 

On accidental death 


Lord Visnu said : 

1-3. O bird, now listen. Those who die of their will, or 
through horned animals, toothed animals, reptiles, low caste 
people (Candalas), suicide, poison, beating, water, fire, air, 
hunger are counted among great sinners. So also the women of 
bad character. 

4. Such sinners do not deserve nava-irdddha or cremation 
or sapindana or sixteen liraddhas. 

5. Just as money is thrown in water, or sacred fire on 
the cross-roads, similarly, rites performed for the sinner bear 
no fruit at all. 

6-8. However, when the year is complete, the affectionate 
desccndents should do the following : They should worship 
lord Visnu and Yama on the eleventh day of the bright half 
of the month with incense, flowers, uncooked rice and offer the 
rice-balls soaked in ghi and mixed with honey and gingelly 
seeds. This all the performer should do in silence, facing the 
south, putting the sacred thread on and meditating on lord 
Visnu and Yama. 

9. Then taking the articles of worship together he should 
throw them into the water, muttering all the while the personal 
name and the surname of the dead. 

10. Then again, he should worship lord Visnu and 
Yama with sandal paste, flowers, incense, lamp and eatables. 

11. He should keep fast on that day and invite the 
brahmanas of noble families, of good character, learned and 
austere. 

12. They may be nine or seven or five, according to his 
ability. Next day, at noon, Visnu and Yama should be 
worshipped. 

13. The brahmins should be seated facing the north. 
Lord V4pu and Yama should be invoked and worshipped. 

14. The performer of the rite should keep wearing the 
sacred thread to the right. He should name the dea4 and think 
upon him, lord Vi^nu and Yama and complete the rite. 



11.44.27 


925 


15. He should remember his other ancestors too and 
offer pinda to each separately or all together. Ten or five 
pindas, as prescribed, should be offered. 

16. First, he should offer a pind^ to Vijiiu, then to 
Brahma, Siva, his attendents and then the fifth to the dead. 

17. While offering a pin^a he should utter the name and 
surname of the dead and the name of lord VisOu. Bowing with 
head, he should give the fifth pind^ to the departed soul. 

18. Remembering the dead he should give, according to 
his ability, a cow, a plot of land, articles of food, gingclly seeds 
to the brahmanas with darbha grass in hand. 

19. So also coins, betel and corn should be given to the 
brahmanas. The headman among the brahmanas should be 
honoured with gold. 

20. Taking the personal name and the surname of the 
dead the performer should gift the articles with the formula : 
May Visnu be pleased. While the brahmanas are leaving he 
should follow them with his face to the south and throw water 
over the earth. 

21. While he throws water over the earth, he should 
mention the name and surname of the dead and pronounce : 
‘May the departed soul be pleased’. Then he should eat together 
with his friends and relatives, in perfect silence. The procedure 
should be repeated every year on the anniversary of the dead. 

22. When all this has been done, the sinners go to 
heaven. So also when sapindikarana has been performed. 

23. If some one dies through water or by any other 
accident caused by inadvertence (and if he has no descendent to 
perform his obsequies) the king should perform the same as 
prescribed in the Astras. 

24. A man should not approach a serpent, willingly or 
unwillingly. In each fortnight of the month he should worship 
a naga on the fifth day. 

25. A replica of the naga should be made of clay 
and worshipped with white flowers and scented sandal. 

26. One should ofFcr incense and a lamp and throw white 
rice*grains. So also com with mango-juice and milk. 

27. Similarly, money and clothes should be given. 



926 Garuda Purina 

One should eat only sweets on that day and perform a 
deva-irSddha. 

28. Then according to his ability he should offer an idol 
of snake made of gold to the best of brahmins. Then after giving 
a cow, he should say, *0 king of serpents be pleased.* 

29. According to his means he should perform other 
rites too. All this should be done as prescribed in his own 
branch of the Vedas. Thus, he can effect the release of his 
ancestors from ghosthood and carry them forward on the path 
to heaven. 


CHAPTER FORTYFIVE 

The mode of annual irUddha 

1. O Foremost among birds, I shall now tell you the 
mode of annual ^raddha. Either the ksetraja or the aurasa 
-son should perform the annual Iraddha in the manner as he 
performs the parvana Sraddha. 

2-3. The other sons should perform ekoddista and not 
parvana. If the father or the ksetraja and aurasa sons do not 
maintain lire, they should not perform ekoddisfa but should do 
p^apa every year or they can perform ekoddista also. 

4-7. If either or both, the son and the father, maintain 
sacrificial fire, the annual iraddha should be of parvana type 
and the ksetraja or aurasa son should perform it. But some say 
whether the dead man does or does not maintain the sacrificial 
fire, ekoddista should be performed on the ksaya day. If there 
is ksaya either at the time of amiiv&sya or in the pretapak^ay 
the ^raddha should be of pirvaij^a type and can be performed 
by any son, while ekoddista should be done for persons without 
sons or for women. 

8. If at the time of pihva^ jr&ddha the performer is 
defiled by impurity he should perform it on the expiry of 
impurity. 

9. If at the time of ekoddista there is any obstacle, the 
4r&ddha should be performed in the next month on the same day. 



11.45.23 


927 


10. The iraddha of a ludra should be performed silently 
{i.c. without reciting mantras) by his wives or sons. The same 
holds good in the case of a iraddha of an unmarried girl in a 
brahmin family. So says Manu. 

11. If two or more die at the same time, the bathing 
shall be done simultaneously with due mantras but ^raddhas 
should be performed separately. 

12. The i^raddha of the eldest should be performed first 
and thereafter according to the age. This is the procedure in 
simultaneous deaths. 

13. He who docs all this every year without fail will 
obtain the best of state having liberated all the manes. 

14. If the day of death is not known nor the starting 
day, only the month is known then daria should be the day 
for ^raddha. 

15. If the month is not known but the day is known 
then that day may be in Margasirsa or in Magha. 

16. If both the day and the month of death are not 
known then the day and the month when he set out on journey - 
should be taken into count for sraddha as stated by me before. 

17. Even if the day and the month of starting are not 
known then those should be the same when the news of his 
death is received. 

18. Even if the month and day are forgotten, when he is 
not on travel, these should be taken as before. 

19-20. When the householder has gone out of his country 
and some one dies at home, the period of impurity is over, the 
Sraddha is on and the householder returns to learn about the 
sad news, in such a state the householder is not effected by 
impurity. 

21. The Iraddha that has been started by the sons 
should be finished by them^ while the householder shall remain 
aloof. 

22. If a donor or a receiver does not know of impurity due 
to birth or death of a relative then no fault accrues. 

23. If either of these knows impurity accruing from 
death or birth of a relative, the fault is of the receiver only, not 
of the donor of the gift. 



928 


Garuda Pur&^a 


24. Whosoever performs the death anniversary of the 
dead in the above way, liberates him even if the day of death 
remains unknown to him. 

The lord said : 

25. In the daily Iraddha the brahmins shall be worshipp¬ 
ed, according to one’s capacity, with scents and other things 
and the manes should be invoked and worshipped. 

26-27. Avdhandf SvadhSkSra, Pi^da, Agnikaratjta need not 
be performed. The performer shall observe celibacy during 
the period. He should worship the ViiSvedevas, offer the 
cooked food to the brahmins along with the fee. He should 
pay homage to them as they take leave of him. 

28. With the Visvedevas in view, the brahmins are fed 
sumptuously. This rite of feeding the brahmins is called Nitya 
^raddha or Deva sraddha. 

29. The iSraddha for the mother is performed first. That 
for the father on the anniversary day. That for the grandfather 
on the father’s and mother’s side on the next day. 

30. If he is unable to perform the same on separate days 
he should perform all the iraddhas on the same day. The rite 
of V^aisvadeva should also be performed similarly. 

31. In that case, the offering is made first to the father, 
then to the mother and then to the maternal grandfather. 

32. In the sraddha to the mother, if brahmins are not 
available, eight noble and chaste ladies whose husbands and 
sons are alive should be fed. 

33. When performing iffSpurtCf the procedure is the same. 
When calamities set in, to ward them off, he should perform a 
Sraddha in the manner of daily sraddha. 

34. The person performing nitya, daiva and vfddha 
iraddhas as well as the kamya and naimittika rites in the 
manner as mentioned before achieves the desired result. 

Thus, I have told you all, O Garuda. What else do you 
want to know ? 



929 


CHAPTER FORTYSIX 

Jtssults of activity 

Garuia said: 

1. The different kinds of heavenly enjoyments, worldly 
pleasures, strength, nourishment and valour men acquire by the 
power of merit. 

2. All these happen to meritorious persons here or there, 
it is true, definitely true. The lord’s statement cannot be 
otherwise. 

3. Virtue triumphs, not evil. Truth triumphs not false- 
hood. Forgiveness wins, not anger. Vi$nu conquers not the 
asuras. 

4. I have understood this truth that everything auspi¬ 
cious results from merit. When our merit is at the peak we are 
devoted to lord Kr^t^a. 

5-6. There is still a query. What is that action by which 
one takes sinful births? How does one become a victim of hell? 
O lord of deities, please tell me briefly what I desire to know; 
how and what are the forms taken by him ? 

Lord said : 

7. O T^khya, men indulge in activities which result in 
meritorious or inauspicious fruits. O Kaiyapa, now listen how 
men derive traits from their particular activities. 

8. The preceptor guides the seeker, the king chastens the 
wicked, Yama regulates and rectifies the person of secret sins. 

9-10. When the expiatory and deterrent tortures in hell 
cease, the living beings are bom again in human form with the 
characteristic traits of their sins. O foremost among birds, I 
shall tell you what these signs are. 

11. Having suffered and crossed tortures in hell they 
return to the world of mortals marked with the characteristic 
signs. 

12. If a person has been guilty of falsehood in speech, 
he becomes a stammerer, a teller of lies or dumb. The brahmin 
slayer is bom consumptive or leprous; the wine>addict becomes 
black-toothed. 



930 Garuia Purdt^a 

0 

13. The thief of gold becomes bad-nailed; the defiler 
of the preceptor’s bed becomes ugly-skinned; he who associates 
with sinners is bom in a low family. 

14. He who takes meals at another’s house without prior 
invitation is born a crow. A brahmin who performs a sacrifice 
for low castes is born a village-pig. He who performs many 
such sacrifices is born an ass. 

15. He who eats unscrupulously becomes a tiger in 
wilderness. He who scolds others without a cause becomes a 
cat; he who burns dry wood is born a glow-worm. 

16. He who imparts knowledge to the undeserving' be¬ 
comes a bull. He who offers stale food to a brahmin becomes 
a hunch-back. He who is malicious to others is born blind. He 
who steals a book is bom similarly. 

17. He who habitually steals fruits is born a monkey or 
alternatively suffers from goitre. 

18-19. He who takes food offered unwillingly becomes 
impotent. He who is averse to thinking on self is born a 
stupid trader. He who is ignorant of the truth of virtue falls 
in a deep ocean. He who steals gold is born an alligator. He 
who poisons others becomes a snake. 

20-21. O bird, he who has sexual intercourse with an 
ascetic lady assumes a ghostly form. He who steals water 
becomes a Cataka.* He who steals grams becomes a mouse. He 
who rapes an immature girl becomes a serpent. He who covets 
his preceptor’s wife becomes a chameleon. He who interferes 
with the flow of water becomes a fish. 

22. He who sells the forbidden articles becomes deform¬ 
ed in the eye. He who censures others is born of defiled womb. 
He who deceives a woman becomes an owl. 

1. Imparts ktwwUdge to the unworthy — 

Compare a iruti text quoted by Yaska in his Niruktam—a treatise on 
etymology : 

Vidy& ha vai br&hmapain &jag&ma 

Gopiya miiti ievadhi? te’ham asrai / 

AsflyakSy&nrjave’ yatflya 

Na m& brQy& viryavatl yath& syfim If 

2. C&taka—a bird which is supposed to live only on rain drops. 



11.46.34 


931 


23-24, He who takes food on the fast day after a relative’s 
death becomes a dog. He who does not pay the promised sum 
to a brahmin becomes a jackal. He who kilb a serpent be¬ 
comes a boar. He who slanders brahmins becomes a tortoise. 
He who subsists on the worship of idols becomes a Gan^ala.^ 

25. The seller of forbidden fruits becomes indigent. He 
who keeps a i§udra woman as concubine becomes a bull. He 
who kicks the sacred fire becomes a cat. He who eats another’s 
meat becomes a patient. 

26. He who indulges in sex at the prohibited time 
becomes a eunuch. A stealer of scents becomes a foul-smeller. 
A stealer of other goods becomes a swallow. 

27. O lord of birds, these and other signs brought about 
by their actions are seen in men and others. 

28. Persons who commit such sins fall into hell and are 
re-born in different species of animals. 

29. After passing through these births men and women 
are re-born in human form when their merit and demerit are 
equalized. 

30. When men and women unite in sexual act and both 
the semen and the blood are mixed, the child born will be 
nourished with all the elements in proper proportion. 

31-32. The receptivity, the inducement, misery, desire, 
death, effort, feature, complexion, love, hatred, birth, death— 
these are attributed to the beginningless soul that seeks for 
its beginning (by entering the womb). 

33-34. Bound by its own action the soul takes up 
body after body and undergoes series of births. This is what 
I have told you already. This is how the circle whirls in the 
four species of being. Thus, O Garuda, do the birth and 

1. The statement would seem absurd but priesthood and idol-worship 
have often been the target of criticism from very early time. They have 
become the object of derison even in modem age, at the hands of social 
reformists among the Arya-samiya—a sect which is very popular in northern 
India now-a-days. 

Compare an oft-quoted verse from die PaKeatanlra : 

Narakftya matis to cet paurohityaih samAcara / 

Varfaih yAvat kimanyena mathacintA-dina-trayam // 



932 Garuda Purd^a 

0 

death of living beings rotate. The rise in the course is 
due to virtue and the fall is due to evil. 

35. O bird, all these take place in all castes according 
to their previous actions. In deityhood or manhood the acts 
of benevolence and indulgence recur due to their previous 
karman, 

36-37. O son of Vinata, whatever is observed is the 
fruit of action. If a person indulges habitually in evil actions 
due to passion, it is certain that he will fall into a terrible hell 
from which there is no escape. 


CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN 

On Sins and Vaitarani 


Garuda said : 

1. O lord of gods, please tell me the mode of gifts, their 
glory and greatness and the magnitude of Vaitarani.^ 

The lord said: 

2. Listen to the magnitude of the dreadful Vaitarani, 
the mighty river at the threshold of Yama’s city. 

3. That river is hundred yojanas wide. It is impassable 
and foul-smelling. To the sinner it is terrifying even at the 
very first sight. 

4. It is full of putrid blood with sediments and marshy 
deposits of fiesh. On seeing a sinner it assumes the form of 
melted ghi in a vessel. It abounds in worms and fiesh brought 
by vultures. 

1. Vaitaraifi —a river in the way to hell, full of pus, blood, flesh and 
abounding in wonns, etc. which the dead have to cross before they reach the 
city of Yania. If a person has donated the Vaitarani cow at the time of his 
death, the river assumes a pleasant sight for him to cross over But if he has 
not, it flows with pus, etc. making it very unpleasant for him to wade through. 



11.47.20 


933 


5. It is full of crocodiles, fishes with adamantine blade¬ 
like tails. It abounds in aquatic creatures capable of piercing 
through the flesh. 

6. There blaze as many as twelve suns as it were the 
time of Deluge. The sinful people groan aloud and fall into it. 

7. “Alas brother, alas son, alas mother’*, they shout 
frequently. They try to swim about but sink in it. 

8. It is incumbent on all mortals to witness the mighty 
river. Persons who had made gifts in their life-time can cross it 
easily, otherwise they sink into it. 

9. Those who have slighted their mothers, preceptors 
or priests can stay there permanently. 

10. So also those who forsake their chaste, virtuous and 
noble wives without any fault. 

11. Those who deceive their credulous masters, friends 
and sages, women, children, cripples and others get submerged 
in the putrid slough and groan there painfully.* 

12. One who attacks a hungry brahmin or reproaches 
him is eaten up by worms so long as this world lasts. 

13-15. One who promises a brahmin to give him a sum 
but does not give, one who defiles a sacrifice, one who rapes 
a noble woman, one who slanders others, one who interrupts 
religious discourses, one who is guilty of perjury, one who is a 
wine-addict or one who invites brahmins but refuses to feed 
them—these stay there permanently. 

16-18. One who acts as an incendiary, one who poisons 
others, one who seizes what is given, one who destroys fields 
and breaks bunds, one who defiles other men’s wives or being 
a brahmin sells wine or marries a slave girl, one who harasses 
cattle oppressed by thirst, one who outrages the modesty of a 
virgin, one who terrorises persons worthy of receiving gifts, a 
^udra drinking the milk of a brown cow, a brahmin eating 
meat—these stay there permanently. 

19-20. A miser, an atheist, a worthless wretch, a person 
extremely furious and irritated, a person who considers his own 

1. Contrast %dth note 1, p. 931, where priesthood and idohworship are 
held ih derison. 



934 


Garu^a Pura^a 


words authoritative, a person who contradicts what others, 
say, haughty egotist, a swaggerer, an ungrateful, treacherous, 
fellow—all these persons stay at Vaitara^i for an indefinite- 
period. 

21. O son of Kasyapa, if one is fortunate to cross it, it 
is due to these reasons which are favourable. To these you 
will listen now. 

22-23. In the equinoxes, in the holy Vyatipata, at the 
end of a day, during eclipses, during the transit of the sun to a 
different zodiacal sign, on the new moon day and other 
auspicious occasions if a thing is gifted to a brahmin it is 
laudable. Whenever gifts are made with faith the riches become 
everlasting. 

24. Bodies are perishable, riches are transitory, death 
is ever present. Hence, virtue should be accumulated. 

25-29. The gift of Vaitarani cow should be made as. 
follows. 

The colour of the cow should be either black or tawny. 
Its horns should be covered in gold, its hoofs in silver. A copper 
vessel should be given representing the milking vessel. Two- 
black clothes should adorn the cow. Seven kinds of grains 
should be kept in vessels for gift. A golden idol of Yama should 
be made with a copper rod in hand. A canoe should be made 
with sugar cane. The cow should be brought over that raft. 
It should be meditated as born out of the sun. An umbrella, 
a pair of sandals, a ring and a pair of clothes should be gifted 
to a brahmin. Holding the kula grass and water in the hand 
the person should recite the following mantra : 

30-32. “I have heard that there is a river Vaitarani at 
Yama’s abode. I wish to cross it. Hence, I give you this 
symbolic Vaitarani cow. O brahmin, in the form of Vis^iu, 
thou sanctihest the cow, thou art a god on earth. This Vaitarani 
cow is given to thee along with dakfvfd. May cows stand in 
front of me. May cows stand at my back. May cows abide in 
my heart. I stay in the midst of cows.” 

33. The person circumambulates the idol of Yama and 
the Vaitarani cow and gives it to the brahmin. 



11.47.46 


935 


34-35. The brahmin stands in front while the house¬ 
holder holds the tail of the cow saying : *‘0 cow, you wait 
for me at the terrific threshold of Yama for lifting me up. 
Obeisance to Vaitarani, Obeisance'*. Thereafter, he follows the 
brahmin with the articles of gift to his house. 

36. O son of Vinata, by making gifts, the river becomes 
easy to cross and the gift-maker obtains ail that he wishes to 
possess. 

37. As a result of his noble actions one obtains pleasure 
here and hereafter. Its efficacy is increased a thousandfold if 
a healthy man makes this gift. If a sick man makes the gift 
its efficacy is only a hundredfold. 

38. If a thing is gifted on behalf of the dead by his son 
or descendent, the gift is indirect and its efficacy is rendered 
normal. Hence, gifts should be made by one’s own seif. After 
death who will care to gift for him ? 

39-40. The life of a person devoid of gifts and virtue 
is pitiable. Then why not achieve a permanent fruit with the 
help of perishable body ? Vital airs are only guests and they go 
away for certain sooner or later. 

41. O lord of birds, thus I have told you all about the 
delusion of living beings. The rites of obsequies are performed, 
for the redemption of the dead. If men understand this 
auspicious advice it bestows benefit on them. 

42-43. O brahmins, this is what the omnipotent Vi§nu 
has ordained Garu(^a was delighted on hearing the details of 
the dead. He asked the lord again about various rites and holy 
centres after meditating on the lord who is the cause of all 
causes. 

44. O sages, these details on the origin of creatures 
which I have mentioned to you arc conducive to salvation, as 
also the rites of obsequies. I shall now mention the great panacea 
for the removal of ills and sufferings of this mortal world. 

45. Profit is theirs, success is theirs whose heart is set on 
Vi?nu whose body has the hue of a blue lotus. How can there 
be a failure in store for those persons ? 

46. Dharma wins, not adfaarma; truth wins not falser 
hood; foi^veness wins not anger; Vis^u wins not demons. 



936 


Garu^a Purina 


47. Vi§nu is mother, Vi§nu is father, Vi?nu is km. No 
mishap accrues to those whose heart is set on Visnu. 

48. Auspicious is lord Visnu. Auspicious is the lord who 
has Garuda for his banner. Auspicious is the lord whose eyes 
resemble the blue lotus. The lord is the store-house of 
auspiciousness. 

49. Meditation on lord Visnu, worship of the holy river 
Gahga and the brahmins—the three constitute the quintessence 
of merit in the three worlds. 

50. On drinking the nectar in the form of hearing the 
lord’s sermon breathing the essence of all ^astras, through the 
mouth of Suta, the sageSaunaka and others were highly satisfied. 

51. They lauded Suta, well-versed in the brahmanical 
scriptures and were highly delighted on hearing the Puranic 
lore. 

52. A person achieves purity externally as well as 
internally if he meditates on the lotus-eyed Visnu, no matter 
in whatever state, pure or impure he may be passing through. 


CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT 

On Dharma and Adharma 


Garuda said : 

1. The people of all castes who live in this mortal 
world die at their own time and obtain different worlds according 
to the magnitude of their pious deeds. 

2. They go on different paths ordained by God. 
Through what virtue they obtain pleasure and through what 
merit they get family, strength and age ? Tell me O lord. 

Suta said: 

3. On hearing this, the lord said to Garuda, explaining 
in detail how the body functions, how it is boimd by actions. 



11 . 48.13 


937 


how this world—mobile and immobile—goes how it is created 
and how and by whom it is administered. 

The lord said : 

4-6. For those walking on the path of Yama, the four 
vargas— dharma, artha, kama and moksa—are secondary. 
Having entered the body measuring a thumb of his own hand 
and being held by the noose, he weeps again and again and cries: 
“I was having the body of a brahmin in the pious country of 
Bharata, yet due to infatuation 1 did not worship lord Indra or 
perform rites for propitiating the manes and deities. I had na 
relations, no sons and no progeny. Due to fondness for my body, 

1 did not act in right direction. I got the rare brahmana-ho(^ 

yet I did not study the Vedas and Puranas. The gem that I got 
and which I hold in my palm was lost. O my soul, now suffer 
for whatever I have done in my previous life. 

7. The ksatriya who has drunk blood from his forehead 
in the battle, has as well drunk Soma in the sacrifice; dead or 
alive he gets release. 

8. Though he may have done many impious acts and 
drunk many undesirable drinks, if he takes weapons and faces 
the enemy in the war he is released from sins immediately, 

9-10. One may be a ksatriya or a vaisya or a ^udra or one 
may belong to a low caste, if he kills in war the nobles or the 
cultured, children, women or old men, the poor or the ascetics 
or remains indifferent when these are in trouble, the deities 
become indifferent to him. The manes do not receive his 
libations of gingelly water and the fire does not receive his 
offering of oblation. 

11. Due to policy or fear, if a person does not face the 
foe in war, O bird, know it for certain that he is sure to die 
one day afterwards but before that his k^atrahood goes in vain. 
If he donates gold or earth to a brahma^a, he is born in 
human form in this world in a noble and illustrious fomily. 

12. He who dies in war is deemed to have given gifts 
during eclipse, to have bathed in a holy place, to have gone to 
Gaya and offered rice-ball to the manes. 

13. A ksatriya repents that in the battlefield, at the 
time of his master’s murder or when the cows were seized or 



938 


Garu^a Purdija 


forcibly carried away by the foe, when women and children were 
killed or when his companions were in trouble he did not use 
his sword. 

14. When a vaiiya is caught in the noose, he repents 
that he did not cherish truth in business transactions due to 
greed in support of his family. 

15. A ^udra repents that having obtained body he 
neither gave reputable gifts to the brahmanas nor worshipped 
them nor built a tank on the earth. 

16. [The Jiva that has left the body thinks thus :] 
abandoned my family profession. I lived in pride. I did not 

give up my ghost in a holy place. I did not earn virtue or 
worship God for release.” 

17. Such people are born as mlecchaSt outcastes, etc. 
Having given up their physical bodies they enter into airy 
bodies and become averse to religious activities. 

18. Whatever religious acts they have done keeping 
them in view and moving in the way, hear O bird, what they 
speak about among themselves. 

19. The three in the world are the best of all : Jambu- 
dvipa among the dvipas, the land of the bright among the 
countries of the world and human beings amongst all creatures 
on the earth. 

20. There are four castes—brahmin, k^atriya, vaisya 
and ludra. Among these the brahmin caste is the best. People 
can derive pleasure from religion. When they start on the 
High way, leaving their bodies after death, they revive their 
previous associations. 

21. *I stayed as worm and insect. I was a reptile. 

1 was a mosquito. I was a quadruped. I was a wild boar.’ 

22. Staying in the womb, he recollects everything. But 
coming out of the womb he forgets whatever he thought while 
he was in the womb. 

After birth he passes through three stages : childhood, 
youth and old age. 

23. Through infatuation the thoughts of the womb are 
soon forgotten but they revive when the body succumbs to 
death. When the body is destroyed, thoughts remain with the 



11.48.33 


939 


self. They revive when the self enters into the womb and takes 
up another body. 

24. When that is again destroyed, thoughts remain in 
the self. The process goes on till the eternal release is 
accomplished. 

‘*In my body I cheated others, gambling, cheating and 
stealing. I lived by transgressing religion.’* 

25. “I struggled hard for earning money. I did not enjoy 
riches to my satiety. I did not offer betel, corn, milk to fire, 
deities, guests and relatives.” 

26. “Even during the solar or lunar eclipse I did not 
visit holy places. My body was full of waste and urine. Now, 
O soul, suffer for what you did in your previous body.” 

27. “I did not see nor bowed to nor worshipped lord 
Visnu’s idol on the earth. I also did not devoutly praise the 
lord of Prabhasa. Hence, O soul, suffer for what you did in 
your previous body.” 

28. ‘‘Having gone to the admirable land near a holy 
place, I did not put money in the scholar’s hand, nor gave it 
to a preceptor after taking ablution in the holy water. Hence, 
O soul, now suffer for what you did in your previous body.” 

29. “I did not worship the mother Goddess, nor Vi^nu 
nor j§ahkara, nor Ganeia, nor Candl nor the sun with due rites 
by offering sandal paste, etc. Now, O soul, suffer for what you 
did in your previous body.” 

30. “I obtained the title of deity even as a man. But due 
to infatuation I lost that glory. I was a fool not to own my 
infirmities. O soul, now sufifer for what you did in your previous 
body.” 

31. Having thought over these points, O bird, which 
grant virtue, wealth and fame, man obtains release perpetually. 

32. Being addressed thus by the messengers of Yama 
the dead arc struck with clubs. They cry *0 fate, O fate* and 
curse themselves that the money earned by them was not gifted 
to the deserving brahmins. 

33. The emissaries of Yama tell again ‘you neither 
gifted the earth nor cow nor water nor cloth nor fruit nor 



940 Garuda Purii^a 

betel nor ointment in your life on this earth. Then why do 
you lament? 

34. Your father died, your grandfather died. She also 
died who bore you in her womb. Your relations also died. 
You saw them all dead. 

35. Your body has been burnt by fire. Your wealth and 
com are taken over by your sons. Whatever good and virtuous 
actions you did those only will go along with you. 

36. None who is dead can ever come back, may he be a 
king, a mendicant or a brahmana. He who dies in the battle¬ 
field is also dead and he who survives is also dead. 

37. Thus speak those gams along with the kinnaras and 
he though sad at heart hears but patiently their strange uttera¬ 
nces. Envested with an aerial body and sitting in the aerial car 
due to the influence of gifts, he gives out in speech his impassion¬ 
ed thought. 

38. “Dharma is father, compassion is mother, speech is 
sweet-tongued wife, bath in a holy place is equal to relatives. 

39. Whatever good is done by hand the same is heaven. 
A religious person is a symbol of happiness and a sinner is all 
misery. 

40. That man on the earth deserves praise who is 
religious, who has conquered pride and anger, who is humble 
though learned, who does not trouble others in vain, who is 
satisfied with his wife and keeps away from unlawful sexual 
desire. 

41. He who offers sweets, he who performs Agnikotra, 
has studied Vedanta, has performed religious rites fasts for a 
month within a year and remains chaste — these six in this 
world are worthy of honour. 

42. A man of good conduct can also be put in this 
category. A Vapi (an oblong reservoir of water) a well, a 
tank, a cistern and temple of a deity in the heart of a devotee 
constitute the best virtue. 

43. Feeding a Vedic scholar for a year, arranging the 
marriage of a Brahmin’s daughter, freeing a brahmin family 
from debt, tilling land and digging well to nieet^ the need of 
a thitsty and hungry person constitutes a virtuous act. 



11.49.10 


941 


44. Whosoever with a pure mind hears or recites this 
chapter on the essence of virtue is considered to be noble and 
religious. He goes to the highest world after death. 


CHAPTER FORTYNINE 

{Method of Final Release) 

Garuda said : 

1. O ocean of mercy ! I have heard that this world of 
creatures is born out of ignorance. Now, I wish to hear the 
infallible method of Final Release. 

2. O God, O deity of deities, O lover of refugees in 
this insignificant world filled with the filth of sorrows ! 

3. There are creatures staying in many bodies, being 
born and dying. There is no end to this process. 

4. They are always suffering, none of them is happy. 
O lord of moksa, tell me how one is released. 

The lord said : 

5. Hear, O bird, I shall tell you what you ask about 
Simply by hearing the same, you will get release from the 
world of mortals. 

6-7. There is God, transcendental self, indivisible Siva, 
all-knowing, all-doing, lord of all, pure, without a second, 
self-luminous, without beginning, without end, unchangeable 
the highest of the high, attributeless and of the nature of 
existence, consciousness and bliss. 

8. The creatures are his parts and parcels. Like sparks 
of fire being struck by the beginningless knowledge, they 
separate into different bodies, through beginninglcss actions. 

9. They are controlled by virtues and vices in the form 
of bliss and sorrow. Their bodies have different castes, age 
and enjoyment born of their different actions. 

10. Then again in every birth, O bird, they obtain 
subtle bodies and after attaining mokfa they acquire indestruc¬ 
tible frames. 



942 Garuda Purdifa 

# 

11. The departed souls enter into insentient objects, 
worms, birds, animals, men, deities but after release do not 
enter into any object or any body at all. 

12. Passing through four types of bodies in order of 
their karman and leaving one body after the other a thousand 
times, taking birth in human form and acquiring knowledge 
due to good acts one obtains release. 

13. In the eightyfour lacs of bodies of creatures one 
does not acquire true knowledge anywhere unless one is born 
as man. 

14. Here, after thousands of crores of births a creature 
obtains human form only sometime due to the aggregate of 
virtue. 

15. Having obtained a rare human form he should 
endeavour for mok^a. If he does not endeavour for it, there can 
be no greater sinner in the world. 

16. Born in the most beautiful human form he incurs 
the sin of slaying a brahmin if he neglects his self. 

17. Without human body it is not possible to obtain the 
supreme goal. One should be, therefore, very cautious to guard 
wealth in the form of his body and perform good actions. 

18. One should always protect self which is the 
receptacle of virtue. One should always try to look after the 
body at any cost. 

19. If alive, he may reap the result of his good actions. 
He may get a village, a field, a house or a wealth. But he may 
not get human body again. 

20. A wise man finds out means to preserve his body. 
Even a leper does not wish to discard it. 

21. Body is useful for Dharma, Dharma for knowledge, 
knowledge for meditation and meditation for immediate release. 

22. If a person cannot protect himself from evil then 
who else will do the same ? 

23. If he cannot treat the disease here itself how shall 
he cure himself hereafter, at a place where^' there is no 
medicine ? 



11.49.35 


943 


24. Old age is like a tigress. Age runs away like water 
from a leaking pot. The disease kills like an enemy. Hence, one 
should practice virtue alone. 

25. So far as sorrow does not come, calamities do not 
approach, organs do not defunct, one should practice virtue. 

26. So far as this body remains intact he should practice 
virtue. One is a perfect fool who digs a well only when the 
house is on fire. 

27. Time fleets while man is ignorant due to the pressure 
of work he is engrossed. People do not realize what is harmful 
or what is wholesome for them. They are deaf to their own 
interest. 

28. Even after seeing the distressed, the dead, the 
fallen and the aggrieved people do not ever fear having drunk 
the wine of infatuation. 

29. Wealth is evanescent like a dream, youth is fading 
like a flower, age is fickle like a lightning. Knowing this who 
can entertain fortitude ? 

30. A life of hundred years is too little. Half of that 
goes in sleep or idleness. Whatever little is left is wasted due 
to childhood, disease, old age and sorrows. 

31. Alas ! Is not that man dead who is idle at a place 
of action, sleeps at a place of awakening and is confident at a 
place of fear. 

32. When the soul comes and stays in the body like the 
foam of water, when the company of the beloved is but 
temporary, how can a person stay fearless ? 

33. He who does not know reality calls as useful what 
is useless, as permanent what is impermanent and as meaningful 
what is meaningless. 

34. Being infatuated by divine illusion he falters even 
seeing, misunderstands even hearing and misses sense even 
readily. 

35. Even when the crocodiles in the form of death, 
disease, old age are drowning this world in the ocean of time, 
he does not realize the Truth. 



944 


Garu^a Pura^a 


36. He does not observe that Time is running out at 
every moment, just as a pot of unbaked clay is not seen as 
broken inside water. 

37. It may be possible to wrap the wind, rend the 
ether, knot the waves but it is not possible to maintain 
perpetuity of the age. 

38. Since even this wide earth is burnt, even the lofty 
Meru is shattered, even the deep water of the ocean is dried, 
what can be said about the insignificant body ? 

39. I have a son, wife, wealth and relations. Thus, while 
the goat of man thinks, the wolf of time takes him away by 
force. 

40. This has been done, this is to be done, this other is 
half done. Thus thinking one is taken by Yama. 

41. One shall do to-day what is to be done tomorrow, 
before noon what is to be done afternoon—but whether done 
or not done. Death does not wait whether a person has 
completed the task or left it incomplete. 

42. Death-fire is there. Old age has shown him the way. 
Fierce diseases are his accompanying soldiers. The man attacked 
sees no protection. 

43. Split with the needle of greed, soaked in_thc oil of 
passions, cooked in the fire of anger and envy, man is eaten 
up by death. 

44. Death takes away even children, young people, old 
men and those in womb—such is this world. 

45. Not to speak of wife, mother, father, son and other 
relatives, the soul leaves even his own body and goes to the 
abode of Yama. 

46. This world has sorrow as the root. Whosoever 
possesses the same is sorrowful. Whosoever leaves it is happy. 

47. So leave in a moment this world which is the 
source of all sorrows, abode of all calamities and shelter for 
all sins. 

48. Man can get rid of fetters of iron and wood but not 
the fetters in the form of his son and wife. 

49. So far as a being makes relations deaf to heart, the 
cones of sorrow are being pegged in his heart. 



11.49.62 


945 


50. Eternally this world is destroyed by the thieves in 
the form of organs staying in the body who feed on the objects 
of pleasure and take away all wealth by deception. 

51. Just as the fish tempted by flesh does not see the 
iron-cone, so also a creature, tempted by enjoyment does not 
anticipate Yama’s torture. 

52. The people going on the wrong path do not dis¬ 
tinguish between good and evil. These men deserve hell, O 
bird, who are engaged only in filling up their bellies. 

53. Sleep, fear, sex and food are equal for all creatures. 
He who possesses knowledge is a man and he who is without 
knowledge is an animal. 

54. Foolish people are troubled by natural call in the 
morning, by hunger and thirst at midday and by sex and 
sleep at night. 

55. People love their bodies, wealth, wives, etc. Alas ! 
being infatuated by ignorance they are born and they die. 

56. Therefore, one should always shun company. If it is 
not possible, one should associate with the great. 

57. Association with the good and discrimination are 
two clear eyes. Whosoever lacks them is a blind man who can 
go astray from the right path. 

58. Men are busy with their own affairs devolved on 
them by their ancestral profession or by their paticular stage in 
life. They do not know about true religion. Being deceitful 
they perish. 

59. Why should many preachers practising vows, but 
with their vision blinded by ignorance laboriously move here 
and there. 

60-61. Men engaged in ritual practices are satisfied 
with very little; being misguided they conduct sacrifices 
accompanied by mantras and oblations. 

Some fools infatuated by my illusion wish for mokfa by 
torturing their bodies by fasts, taking cores but once in a day. 

62. Can the ignorant fools get release by torturing their 
body ? Can a serpent die simply by beating the hole wherein 
it dwells ? 



946 


Garu4a Purat^a 


63. The imposters who guise themselves wjth matted 
hair and deer-skins and pretend to be pious move about 
deceiving people. 

64. For him who takes delight in the pleasures of the 
world and pretends that he knows Brahman, both Karman and 
Brahman are far distant. 

65. Alike at home and in forest, naked and shameless, 
the donkeys move here and there. Do they become unattached ? 

66. If men achieve release by anointing mud and ash 
will they be relea sed ? 

67. Jackal, mouse and dear live in the forest and 
consume grass, leaves and water. Are they also ascetics ? 

68. From their birth to their death, frogs and fish stay 
in the river such as Ganga. Do they become Yogins ? 

69. Doves, l§ilaharas and Catakas do not drink water 
from the earth. Are they Vratins ? 

70. People are content with their routine work. But 
that does not help them to reach the goal. It is the knowledge 
of truth or reality that effects release.^ 

71. O lord of birds, ignorant fools, fallen in the dark 
well of six darianas and bound by the noose of attachment, fail 
to realize the truth in the form of para-brahman. 

72. Floating on the surface of the ocean in the form of 
Veda-sastra and caught by the waves of six nigrahas,^ the bad 
logicians suffer miserably. 

73. A person well versed in the Vedas, Agamas 
and Puranas but ignorant of Reality is not distinct from a 
magician whose utterances resemble the caw'-caw sound of a 
crow. 


1. The perceptible world is a creation of Maya, a project of brahniaft. 
When brahman withdraws MSyS (mi= non existence or unreal creation) 
into his eternal existence nothing but brahman remains. The lemoval bf 
ignorance is, in fact, the attainment of brahman on the part of individual 
soul. 

2. Mgraha —flaw in argument whereby a disputant is put down in 
argument. Six or more nigrahas are explained in different texts of Nyitya 
philosophy. 



11.49.85 


947 


74. Those who are worried about the sources and objects 
of knowledge take recourse to l§astras which they study day and 
night but they are miles away from the goal of Ultimate 
Truth. 

75. Literary compositions arc decorated by the figures 
of speech, syntactical arrangement of words and by variety of 
meters. The fools who are worried cannot derive any solace 
from them. 

76. Reality is something else and people suffer due to 
something else. The meaning of the scriptures is something else 
and people define something else. 

77. A few proud people without traditional knowledge 
misinterpret the Vedas which they do not rightly understand. 

78. They study the Vedas and discuss. But they do not 
realize the Ultimate Reality just as a spoon does not know the 
taste of food. 

79. The head carries the flowers, the nose knows the 
scent. The people study the Vedas. But very few persons 
understand the same. 

80. Not knowing the Reality of the self, a fool is 
infatuated by the sastras. When the goat stands in the shed, 
the shepherd seeks for it in the well in vain. 

81. The knowledge of the sastras is not competent to 
destroy the infatuation accruing from worldly affairs. The wick 
of a lamp cannot remove darkness which light alone can do. 

82. For the ignorant person the study of Sastras is useless 
as a mirror is useless for the blind. But for the wise the same 
works as the means of true knowledge. 

83. I^astras are the source of knowledge which one 
desires to attain. But that is not an easy affair. One may not 
achieve knowledge even in one thousand divine years. 

84. Scriptures are many, age is short. Obstacles come 
in battalion. One should pick up truth from falsehood as a 
goose picks up milk from water. 

85. Having studied the Vedas and realized their essence 
the wise man should leave all the fastras just as one desiring 
corn leaves the husk. 



948 


Gambia Pur&ija 


86. Just as one satiated with nectar has no use of food, 
no one who is in search of Reality has anything to do*with the 
iastras. 

87. One cannot obtain release by reading the Vedas or 
the ^astras. Release comes from experience, not otherwise, O 
son ofVinata. 

88. A particular stage (JiSrama) in life is not conducive to 
release; nor any system of philosophy, nor any ritual nor the 
combined knowledge of the sastras. 

89. The word of Guru alone can grant release. All 
knowledge is in vain. Among thousands of scriptures the word 
of Guru alone is vivifying. 

90. The knowledge of the non-dual entity derived from 
the word of Guru can effect release. The practice of the ritual 
or the study of the crores of scriptures is quite in vain. 

91. Knowledge is twofold : One arising from the study 
of scriptures, the other arising from discrimination. Sabda- 
brahma is known from the scriptures and Parabrahma is known 
from discrimination. 

92. Some seek for the knowledge of non-dual brahman 
(i.e. brahman without Maya) and some for that of the Dual 
(brahman with Maya). But they do not realize reality devoid 
of dvaita and advaita. 

93. Two words mine [mama) and not mine [na mama) 
signify bondage and release. By mine the person is bound and 
by not mine he is released. 

94. That is the right action which docs not put one 
into bondage. That is the right knowledge which brings him 
release. All other action is but a labour and all other knowledge 
is but an artisanship. 

95. So far as actions thrive, so far as desire subsists, so 
far as organs are active, there can be little talk of realizing the 
Self. 

96. So far as one takes pride in body, so far as affection 
for worldly objects is there, so far there is persistence in efforts, 
so far as desire to do is there. 

97. So far as mind is not steady, so far as one does not 

meditate on scriptures, so far as Guru’s blessing is not there, 
there can be little talk of realizing the Self. ^ 



11.49.110 


949 


98. Penance, vow, pilgrimage, muttering of mantras 
sacrifice, worship, talk of the Vedas and Sastras are meaningful 
only when one knows Reality. 

99. Therefore, by all efforts and in all conditions, focus 
your attention on atmariy O bird, if you desire release. 

100. Tortured by the threefold suffering one should 
take shelter in the shade of the tree of moksa which has 
blossoms of dharma and knowledge and fruits of heaven and 
release. 

101. Therefore, one should derive knowledge of Reality 
from one’s preceptor. Thus one is easily released from the 
bondage of one’s actions. 

102. Now, hear, I shall tell you the last step by which 
one can attain the final goal. 

103. When the hour of great departure arrives he should 
without fear cut off all attachments with the weapon of 
detachment. 

104. The calm man should leave the house, start on 
pilgrimage and bathe in the holy waters. Then having prepared 
a seat as prescribed he should sit upon it with detachment. 

105. With a pure mind he should meditate upon the 
pure, three-syllabled Om signifying brahman. Without forgett¬ 
ing the brahma-bija one should conquer the breath and 
control the mind. 

106. He should control the organs from the objects of 
senses with intellect as his companion. The mind drawn away ^ 
by the actions should be possessed for the good by the intellect. 

107. “I am brahman the supreme shelter. I am brahman 
the highest stage,” having thus concluded he should concen¬ 
trate his personal self on the universal self. 

108. Pronouncing Om the one-syllabled brahman and 
remembering me whosoever leaves his body obtains the highest 
state. 

109. Where the hypocrites devoid of knowledge and 
self-control do not reach, the wise obtain that state. 

110. The wise who are without ego and infatuation who 
have left attachment and vices, who contemplate on soul, 
whose desires have turned back, who are free from the effects 
of joy and sorrow, attain that imperishable state. 



950 


Garu^a Pura^a 


111. He obtains release who bathes in the holy tirtha of 
mind whose pond is knowledge, water is truth and w^ich is 
devoid of filth of attachment and envy. 

112. Whosoever meditates on me with full devotion 
without attachment for any worldly object, who has imbibed 
complete awareness and whose mind is all pleasure. 

113. With a desire to die whosoever leaves his house 
and stays in a holy place where he breathes his last, can obtain 
release. 

114. Ayodhya, Mathura, Maya, Kaii, Kahci, Avantika 
Puri and Dvaravati—these seven places of pilgrimage can grant 
release. 

115. Thus I have told you, O Garuda, about the ways 
of release. Preaching the same with knowledge and control, 
one may obtain release. 

116. Those who have realized self can get release. 
Those who resort to the ritual can go to heaven. Those w'ho 
commit sins go to hell. Others rotate on the wheel of birth 
and death.^ 

SUta said 

117. Thus, having received the answer of his queries 
from the mouth of the lord, Garuda was delighted and he 
bowed to the lord of the world. 

118. “My doubts have been cleared, O lord, by your 
words”—so saying he took leave of Visnu and went to the 
hermitage of Ka^yapa. 

119. One may assume body sooner or later after death. 
There is no inconsistency in this approach. 


1. The Bhagavadgit& declares that after leaving the worne-out or 
diseased body the soul enters the new one immediately, as a man discarding 
worne-out clothes puts on new ones. But this is not true of each and every 
individual soul. Some souls wander in aerial bodies for indefinite time, some 
go to heaven, some to hell, staying in either place till their merits or 
sins are exhausted (kifi^e pur.ye martyaloikaTh vijanti). Some enter the 
womb very soon, to reap the fruits of their actions in human, animal or other 
form on the globe of this earth. «. ' 



11.49,133 


931 


120. Gani^a repeated what he had heard from the lord. 
Marica was also delighted on hearing the words of Lord 
Visnu. 

121. O brahmanas, I have removed your doubts and 
told you the most wonderful Purana known as Garuda. 

122-123. Garuda got it from Visnu. Bhrgu got it from 
Garuda, Vasistha from Bhrgu, Vamadeva from Vasisjha, 
Parasara from Vamadeva, Vyasa from Parasara and I from 
Vyasa. Thus I have told you the secret of lord Visnu. 

124. A man who hears the same or narrates the same 
is blessed with pleasure here as well as hereafter. 

125. Whatsoever sorrows having been told about them 
who go to the city of Yama, whosoever hears about them gets 
release. 

126. After hearing about the results of actions described 
here, men may become averse to pleasures. The account is, 
therefore, meaningful for the listener. 

127. O ye that have controlled your organs, praise the 
lord from whom this voice has come out like a stream of nectar, 
by drinking (or hearing) even a drop or a handful of syllables 
of which a man may attain union with Paramatman. 

fydsa said : 

128. The sages were fully satisfied having drunk the 
Vaisnavi nectar of words coming out of the mouth of Suta, 
replete with the essence of scriptures. 

129. They praised the Suta who knew the essence of the 
iastras. 

130. Thus having heard through the mouth of Suta the 
words of lord Vi§nu allaying the doubts of Garuda the sage 
Saunaka was fully satisfied. 

131. The sages honoured Suta with liberal praise saying, 
*‘0 Suta you deserve a very high praise.” Then they bade him 
farewell, the sacrifice being over. 

132. This holy Garuda Purana destroys sins committed 
by the listeners. This should be heard therefore. 

133. Having heard the Purana, gifts of bed, etc., should 
be given in charity or else it would not be fruitful. 



952 


Garu4a Pwra^a 


134. First of all, this Purana should be worshipped, 4hen 
the reciter with the fee in cash, clothes, ornaments and cows. 

135. To obtain merit the reciter should be honoured 
devoutly with gifts of gold, corn, earth and other things. 

136. The man who hears it or narrates it gets rid of 
fierce tortures in hell and shaking off his sins aside enters 
heaven where he enjoys the company of celestial nymphs. 



BRAHMA (MORJ^A) KLArSTDA 




CHAPTER ONE 


Classification of the Pitrinas. The Nature of Deities 

1. The lord of Yadavas,* accompanied by his elder 
brother Balarama,^ looked splendid in the battle-field—the lord 
who was a thunderbolt to the enemy, the best and the noblest 
among men, cupid incarnate to the women, kith and kin of 
the cowherds, chastiser of the wicked kings, a loving child to 
his parents, Yama to the lord of Bhojas^ as ordained by fate, 
the transcendental soul for meditation on the part of Yogins.* 

2. Salutation to lord Narayana,^ the source of the 
universe. After paying due homage to the lord, I shall narrate 
his story. 

3. The great sages, ^aunaka and others preached 
spirituality and practised penance in the holy region of 
Naimisa.* 


1. Vrfpfndm pati —lord of tUc descendents of Vrsni, an ancestor of lord 
Kr$na. 

2. Balarima —^The elder brother of Sri Krsna, son of Vasudeva and 
Rohini was the incarnation of Se^a, the serpent chief.— PE.^ p. 99. 

3. Bhojas —a branch of Yadu dynasty inimical to the Vnois. 

4. Lord >s called the greatest of Yogins (Yoglsvara). 

5. Lord Vi?nu is called Nltriya^a because he abides in the waters of 
the ocean : 

ITNt JTRT STN^TT «rrTt t I 

?IT ^ 

Manu 1. 10. 

6. Ptaimifa or MaimiSot mod. Ninosar. It is situated in the Sit&pur 

district in the Uttara Pradeia, on the left bank of the Gomati river. The 
place is so called because the rim of the revolving wheel of virtue was 

shattered here and Virtue had to make a pomanent abode in the region 
(Vftyu 2.7). Or the place is so called because here an army of asuras was 
destroyed by the sage Gauramukha in a twinkling of an eye (Variha 



956 


Garuda Purdt^a 


4. They had conquered their senses, regulated their diet, 
were devoted to truth. They worshipped Vi?nu, the primeval 
preceptor of the universe with supreme devotion. 

5. Versed in the knowledge of sastras, invested with 
supreme glory they meditated on brahman—the eye of the 
universe and practised penance in the Naimisa region. 

6. Some worshipped the lord of sacrifices with sacrifices. 
Some worshipped the lord incarnate of knowledge through 
knowledge. Some worshipped him with supreme devotion. 

7. Once upon a time, the sages held a council with a 
desire to ascertain the means of Dharma, Artha, Kama and 
Moksa.^ 

8. Twenty-six thousands of sages reputed for their self- 
control gathered there. They were accompanied by their 
disciples and disciples of disciples who could not be counted 
in number. 

9. The pure-souled sages of great lustre who were 
devoid of malice and attachment assembled there to devise 
ways for the welfare of the people. 

10. How can we create the people’s firm devotion for 
lord Hari ? How could our threefold activity bear fruit for 
the welfare of the world ? 

11. The sages were eager to put up such queries to 
Saunaka. He, the wise man, could very well guess their 
anxiety. With hands joined in reverence and head bent as a 
token of modesty he said in reply. 

Saunaka said : 

12. In the holy hermitage of the Siddhas* there abides 
Suta who is well versed in the Puranic lore. He, the best of 

Purana). On the authority of the Matsya Purana A.A. Borooah (Ancient 
Geography of India) places it about the confluence of the Gomati and the 
Ganges. It was sacred in the Kita age, as Puskara in the Treta, Kuruksetra 
in the Dvapara and the Ganges in the Kali age. 

1 . Caturvarga —four ends of human life taken Colleetivriy are call-d 
PuTufirlha. 

2. Siddhas : Some divine beings of great purity and holiness character¬ 
ized by eight super natural faculties (siddhis), viz. at^imli, It^himu, prapti, 
prakamya, mahimS, Isitva, Vas'itva and KSmavasiyitS. 



III.I.21 


957 


the self-controlled, is the disciple of Vy^a. He will answer the 
queries to your entire satisfaction. 

13. Let us put our queries to him. Thus, iSaunaka, 
accompanied by the sages, went to the hermitage of the 
Siddhas. 

14. Saunaka and the Naimisa-dwelling sages approach¬ 
ed Suta and put their queries to him when they found him in 
proper mood. 

The sages said ; 

O you of good vow, please know that wc have come to 
you as guests and wc expect that you will receive us as such. 

15. By what means and in what manner with sacred 
ablution, gifts, etc. shall lord Visnu be worshipped so that he 
may be gratified thereby. 

16. Please tell your conclusive answers to our query 
so that they may serve as the means of our final release. 

Sula said : 

O sages, listen, I am going to tell you my conclusive 
answers to your queries. 

17. Haying paid homage to lord Visnu, LaksmT, Vayu, 
Bbaratl, Sesa, the preceptor Vyasa and lord Krsna I shall 
answer your queries as far as I understand. 

18. There is nothing equal to Narayana, nor has it been 
nor would it be. In this faith, I accomplish my task, achieving 
purpose. 

Saunaka said ; 

19. O noble Suta, please tell us why homage is paid to 
lord Visnu at the very beginning. O you of good vow, do also 
tell us about the proper procedure of reciting a Purana. 

20. You have paid homage to lord^ Visnu, Lak^rni, 
Vayu, Bharat! and Vyasa. Why this order in paying homage ? 
O Suta of blessed virtue, let us know the reason thereof. 

Sfila said : 

21. Vi^^u shall be worshipped at the outset—He who 
is knowable through the Vedas, Sastras and Purinas. He alone 



958 


Gnru^a Furdna 


is the source of energy and lumination. He alone is w/)rthy of 
our praise. 

22-23. He is the supreme deity, superior to the gods. 
He alone is wortliy of adoration, not Siva or others. The 
arrogant people who bypass Visnu and pay homage to Siva, 
Ganesa, Candika, Renuka, Surya, Bhairava, Vayu, Sarasvati, 
Parvati and Laksmi are a-Vaisnavas, i.e. averse to the worship 
of Visnu.^ The sages have proclaimed thus. 

24-25. Hence, one should not bow to each deity 
separately, for they are not satiated by individual worship. 
Whatever worship is rendered unto them they reciprocate 
partially and at the same time dedicate that worship to the 
supreme lord Visnu adored by Laksmi and others. 

26. O lord of birds, these deities should neither be 
worshipped nor saluted by brahmins and other castes desirous 
of salvation, for they are the source of trouble here and here¬ 
after. They can grant the worshipper the dark, inferior regions. 

27-28. People in any stage of life* should not worship 
them even in adverse circumstances Those who for the 
accomplishment of desire worship Laksmi, Brahma, Jsiva, 
Indra, Yama, undergo great hardships, great calamities, foul 
diseases such as leprosy, fistula. Those who vow to Brahma, 
Rudra, Vayu and other gods, excluding Visnu are called 
a-Vaisnavas. 

29. O great sages, I shall tell you an important secret 
which you should keep close to the heart and not divulge to 
any other. O brahmins, you should worship the image of 
Vayu® and not the image of Brahma, Rudra, or other deity. 

30-32. When at w'orship, you should set up an image of 
Vayu, the symbol of Visjnu at an appropriate place. You 

1. This shows the sectarian character of this K&Q^a. 

2. The life of a twice-born is divided into four sb^;es, viz; Brahma- 
carya, GSrhastliya, V&naprastha and Sannyisa; each emuists of a period of 
twenty-five years, the total extent of the period being one hundred years. 
$otdyur pen Purufah. 

3. The deity Viyu is identical with VifQu. When the worship of a 

deity other than Vif^u it forbidden, that of VSyu is allowed. Viyu is a 
symbolical representation of Vifpu. * 



in. 1.39 


959 


should worship Vi?nu, the lord of Laksml^ in the appropriate 
manner. You should thereafter worship the image of Vayu 
with the remains of gifts. The stupid people who worship Vayu 
and the rest with fresh garlands, incense and sandal but not 
with the remains considerably suffer here and hereafter. There 
is no doubt in this. As an expiation, they should recite Svasti 
mantras' and meditate upon Visnu. 

33. The stupid who bow to the images of Siva, Vayu 
and others set up by the hypocrites, the followers of Tamasa 
god Rudra® for the attainment of desire suffer eternally. 

34. If the best of brahmins have set up an image of 
Vayu, one should pay homage to the same. If with the remains 
of o.ffering made to Visnu, Vayu is worshipped, there is not in 
the least any fault. 

35. V5yu, the father of Hanuman,® is the preceptor of 
all. Hanuman is the regular worshipper of Rama. Knowing 
this, one should pay homage to Visnu as well as Hanuman, the 
offspring of the great god Vayu. 

36-37. There is no other way of paying homage, O 
best of brahmins, you all should keep this as a gfuarded secret. 

The devotees of Visnu or the followers of the sect should 
pay homage to Visnu and Vi?nu alone. By doing so, in an 
appropriate manner they can acquire virtue. 

38. Those who do not worship, even in adversity, any 
god other than Visny arc the true devotees of the lord. Those 
whose minds are diverted to other gods are not the real 
devotees in any sense. You should not entertain any doubt in 
this respect. 

39, The learned declare those Puranas to be sacred or 
worth hearing which preach the cult of Vis^u from beginning 


1. vs. 36.17. 

2. Rudra. Rudraa, eleven in number, are the inferior manifestations 
of Siva who is the head of the group. Emanated from tlie fire ttf fury of 
Brahm& he is possessed of Tamogoffa. 

3. In fact Haoum-in was a foster-child of Viyu. His actual parents 
were lord Siva and P&rvatl. 



960 Ganida Purdna 

• • 

#> 

to the end. In the iron age, such Puranas are welcome to attain 
popularity among the masses. 

40. There are a number of Puranas which preach 
respective dharmas to the four castes. Stupid people accept 
their verdict and feel jealous of one another. 

41. There is no deity equal to Visnu, no preceptor 
equal to Vayu, no place of pilgrimage holier than the bank of 
the Ganges, no devotee of gods equal to the devotee of Vi§nu. 

42. The Puranas devoted to Visnu are called sattvikas.^ 
These should be preached to the people but not others which 
cause suffering. 

43. In the Kali age, only three principal puranas are 
devoted to Vi§nu. Among these the Bhagavata Purana renders 
more good to the people. 

44. The Bhagavata Purana opens with the description 
of the origin of the universe, Visnu, Brahma, Rudra and others. 

45. The wise declare knowledge to be manifold, 
consisting of various grades—high, low and middling. All that 
knowledge is found in the Bhagavata Purana. Hence, 
Bhagavata is the highest of all Puranas. 

46. The Visnu Purana comes next, then comes Garuda. 
The three are principal Puranas in the Kali age. Garuda 
contains some additional matter. 

47-48. O brahmanas, listen to that speciality. The 
Garuda Purana is divided into three parts. The first part is 
called Karma Kanda^ the second Dharma Kanda^ and the 
third Brahma Kanda.* Among these the third part is the best. 

1. The Mah&purS^as are classified into three categories—Vaisnava, 
Brahma and Saiva. The Puri^as glorifying Vi^nu are styled as Sattvika; 
those glorifying Brahma as Rajasa and those glorifying Agni and Siva as 
Tamasa. According to this description the eighteen MahapurA^as can be 
classified into SSttvika, Rajasa and Tamasa as under. 

Sdttvika : Bhagavata, VifQu, Garuda Matsya, Kurma, V'ayu. 

Rajasa : Skanda, Padma, Vamana,'V&r&ha, Agni, Bhavi^ya. 

Tdmasa : Brahmiod^* hiAga, Brahmavaivarta, Marka^dcya, Brahma, 
Aditya. 

Garuda mentions Aditya instead of NArada. 

2. The same as Acfiraka^da. 

3. The same as DharmakAnda. 

4. The same as Mok^akA^da. 



III.1.59 


961 


Listening to this part grants virtue which is equal to the 
virtue of listening to complete Bhagavata. 

49. When the third part is recited one obtains merit 
equal to the merit of reciting the Vedas. There can be no 
second thought in this respect. 

50. O brahmins, by listening to the third part of the 
Pur^a one obtains merit equal to that one obtains by reciting 
and understanding the same. Mere recitation awards one-tenth 
of the merit which accrues to the person who listens to and 
understands the same. 

51. Next in order of merit is the Matsya Purana, then 
comes Kurma Purana, then Vayu. These three arc also 
Sattvika Pur^as. O best of sages, in the sixfold scries of 
Sattvika Puranas, there is lot of knowledge to be discovered. 

52. Among the Sattvika Puranas, Matsya and Kurma 
are inferior, Vayu is middling. Visnu and Bhagavata are 
superior. 

53. Skanda, Padma, Vimana, Varaha, Agni and 
Bhavisya are Rajasa Puranas. Each of these contains sections 
on the Rajasa and Tamasa material. 

54. They are Rajasa, Rajas being prominent in them. 
Those seeking for release should not listen to these sections. 
Only the Sattvika part among these Puranas should be listened 
to—that provides merit equal to that of listening to Garuda. 

55. Brahma, Brahmanda, Brahmavaivarta, Liiiga, 
Markandeya and Aditya are the Tamasa Puranas. Parts of 
these Puranas are sattvika and rajasa. 

56. They should not be listened to by the seekers of 
truth, for they are T^asa. O best of sages, there are Sattvika 
portions in them, listening to which accords merit equal to 
the merit of listening to Garuda (in part). 

57-59. Smaller in size arc the Upapuranas' which are 
eighteen in number. Among these, Visnudliarmottara, 

1. On the nomenclature of the Upapitrdpas, authorities differ. PE. 
designates the eighteen UpapurSpas as under: 

(1) Sanatkum&ra, (2) Ndrasithha, (3) NSradiya, (4) iSivadharma, 
(5) Durvisas, (6) KSpila, (7) Minava, (8) IJjanas, (9) V&ru^a, 



962 


Garu^a Purdna 


Bhagavata,^ Tattvasara, Nreimha, Viiyu and Haihsa are 
Sattvika, undoubtedly. By listening to these one secures half of 
the merit one would receive by listening to Garu^a. 

60-63. Bhavisya, Brhannarada and Laghunarada 
consisting of a dialogue between Yama and Narada, Karttika 
Purana and Brhad Brahmanda are the Rajasa Puranas. By 
listening to these one gets full enjoyment. One gets one-fourth 
of the merit one would obtain by listening to Garurja. The 
wise have declared thus. Bhagavata, Siva, Nandi, Pasupata, 
Rainuka, Bhairava are Tamasa Puranas—so declare the wise 
who are conversant with the cult of Visnu. 

64. Listening to these Puranas imparts merit equal to i 
of the merit accruing from listening to Garuda. Bhagavata is 
the best of all Puranas. 

65. By reciting the Purana one gets merit equal to that 
one would get by reciting the Vedas. One who hears the 
Purana recited gets half of the merit one gets by hearing the 
Vedas. If one hears the Purana recited and understands what 
he hears gets tenfold the merit of the one who hears the Vedas 
and understands them. 

66-67. The reciter (who understands the meaning) gets 
twice that merit and the commentator or expositor gets even 
more. 

The wise declare that the Purana is equal to the V’edas 
in the weightiness of purpose and the greatness of glory. It is 
more valuable than the Vedas so far as the meaning is 
concerned. This is declared by those who understand the 
mystery of Visnu. 

68. The wise declare that the praise of Vi§nu and the 
thousand appellations of the deity recorded in this Purana are 

(10) i^Kilika, (11) S^mba, (12) Saura, (13) Aditya, (14) Mahrsvara, 
(13) Devibh&gavata (16) VasiHha (17) Vi^^udharmottara (18) Niiamata. 
Other authorities replace NaradJya, Aditya, Vasistha and Nllamaia by 
Pilraiara, Narada, Brahmai^qla and SSmba. 

The Gan:^a mentions Tattvasdra, Vdju and Hathsa ar rng the 
Upapurapas. 

1. By ^Uh3gavat:t' De\-i bhSgavata is meant. 



III.1.73 


963 


the best among those who can bestow merit. Listening to the 
two obtains tenfold or more merit one earns by hearing the 
Bharata. 

69. In Bharatavarsa*, in the golden age [satyayuga) ^ the 
daityas® are born in the brahmin families. They take some 
Verses out of the Bharata consisting of 6000 verses and replace 
them by new ones. 

70. The sage Vyasa (the author of this Purana) paid 
homage to Visnu and composed among the Puranas the 
Bhagavata Purana, at first, in the glorification of Lord Visnu. 
Thereafter he composed Garuda. 

71. Garudn is one of the principal Puranas as declared 
in the Sastras. There is no Purana equal to Garuda in the 
exposition of Vaisnava cult. 

72. As Visnu is the best of Gods, as Sudarsana® is the 
best of missiles, as the horse sacrifice* is the best of sacrifices, 
as Rudra is the best among the inferior deities. 

73. As the Ganges is the best among the rivers, lotus 
among the water-plants, Vayu among the superior deities, so 
Garuda is the best of all Puranas devoted to the cult of Vi§nu. 


1. GaruHa (1.54, 13>14) speaks of Bharata, son of Rsabha and 
Meiudevi. Bharata (derived from Bharata) is the southern Varfajambfldvi pa. 

2. The terms, Daityas, Danavas, Asuras denote peoples originally 
(AIHT, pp. 290-291) and refer to human beings. As the people deviated 
Irom tiie prescribed rules of conduct they were called by such appellations 
which denoted h ared, opprobrium and abuse. 

3. This discus-weapon produced by Visvakarman was given to 

Mahavi$nu to be used by him to destroy the enemies (Vif^u P. Amsa 3 
Ch. 2). According to another account the fire-god gave the discus-weapon 
to lord to fight against Indra. 

4. On the efficacy of Aioamtdha (horse-sacrifice) see Manmmtti : 

111.261 

The sacrifice was regarded as a symbol of sovereignty and power. The 
performer of the sacrifice let loose a horse to wander at will for a year, 
attended by a guardian. V\'hen the horse entered a foreign country, the 
ruler was bound either to submit or to fight. In this way, the horse returned 
at the end of a year, with the guardian obtaining orenforemg the submission 
princes whom he brought in his train. After the successful return of the 
horse, the horse was sacrificed amidst great rf|joiciags. 



964 


Garttda Purina 
• • 


74. In the Garu^a Purana, Visnu is the princip&I deity. 
Being worthy of praise and easy to approach he should be 
honoured and worshipped at first. 

75-76. After Visnu comes the blissful Laksmi who is 
equally worthy of honour and worship. 

O best of brahmins, then comes Vayu, the noblest and 
the best among the brahmins and the lord of aspirants of 
Visnu. He should be worshipped when the recitation of a 
Purana begins. 

Next, the Goddess Bharatl should be worshipped as she 
represents the Goddess speech itself. 

77. Next, among men, the sage Vyasa, the author of 
the Puranas should be worshipped. Being the devotee of 
Visnu he is entitled to worship. 

Saunakti said ; 

78-79. How is it that the Sage Vyasa comes last in the 
list of those who are worthy of worship. O you of good vows, 
tell us the reason thereof. 

Sula said : 

80. Homage should be paid to Vyasa at the end while 
homage is rendered to Vis^iu at the beginning. Visnu is the 
principal deity in the Puranas and Vyasa the incarnation of 
speech—words and their meaning. Vyasa cannot be equated 
with Visnu. 

81. O best of sages, out of regard for you, I shall tell 
you the reason thereof. In the Puranas dominated by 
Tamoguna, Vyasa is eulogized as a great sage. 

82. Enticed by the knowledge of this factj the asuras 
and their followers who worship Vyasa at first in preference to 
Visnu enter the region of pitch darkness. Hence, Vy^a is 
worshipped at the end. This knowledge is the secret of secrets 
which should be kept close to the heart. 

83-84. Whoever is said to be worthy of homage, should 
not be accepted as such, for Vi?nu alone is worthy of worship. 

85. Vi^^u and Vy^ are identical. The Sigrtis declare 
that Vyasa resembles Viwu in many respects. 



III.2.2 


965 


86. The three—Vayu, etc., are declared to be worthy of 
worship. 

87. In lightening the burden of the earth, Hanuman^ 
the son of Maruti is the principal organ of Visnu. 

88. Bharat! (also called Sarasvatl), identical with 
speech, is the second organ. Sesa® is the third organ. The 
trio is not treated on equal terms with Visnu. 

89. They who are declared to be principal deities are 
worthy of worship. Vayu and the rest are secondary, hence 
they are not to be worshipped (on equal terms with Vi§Qu). 

90. Among Bhima® and others Bhi§ma* and Drona* are 
the principal. The noblest of men they are worthy of worship. 
Thus I have told you about the relative status of the gods who 
are more or less worthy of worship. What else do you wish to 
hear. 


CHAPTER TWO 

Purdnic Trinity : Brahmiy Vi?nu, ^iva : Their respective roles 
Saunaka said : 

1. Please tell us how the lord created gods out of the 
constituents. O sage, I am not aware of the serial order of 
creation and their traits distinguishing one another. 

2. Thus spoken to by Saunaka, Suta said in reply. 


1. Hanumdn —^The son of AAjana by god wind or Marut. Fora 
different version, see note 3, p. 959. 

2. Sefa—a celebrated serpent chief having one thousand heads and 
represented as forming the couch cf Visnu or as supporting the entire world 
on his head. 

3. Bhtma —third among the sons of Pandu. In age he was junior to 
Yudhifthira and Arjuna and senior to Nakula and Sahadeva. 

4. Bklftna —son of Santanu and Gahga was the ancestor of 
and Kauravas and fought on the side of Kauravas. 

5. i)ro(ia—taugbt the Kauravas and Paod<ivas the science of arms and 
archery. He fought for the Kauravas but was killed by trickery. 



966 


Garuia Purdno 


Suta said : 

O best of brahmanic sages, you have put a pertinent 
question to me. 

3. Garuia had pul the same question to Visnu. I shall 
tell you, O pious one, what Visnu had proclaimed to Garuda. 

Gam da said : 

O blessed one, of the nature of existence, consciousness 
and bliss, please tell us how this universe came into being ? 

4. When the process of creation is revealed, your 
excellence is manifested. I shall like to know the relative 
superiority of the gods, Brahma, Vi?nu and others. 

5. W’hat are the means whereby one can attain mokfa. 
Thus questioned by Garuda lord Krsna spoke in reply. 

The lord said : 

6. The eternal, indeclinable Visnu is of the basic form. 

Because he is all-pervasive, his incarnation as Krsna is known 
as complete. 

7. Manifested in multiforms he becomes one at the time 
of dissolution. 

8. There too, there is a demarcating line. He, the 
supreme reality, should be known by all means. 

9. By knowing him as many, in different forms or many 
and-onc or by observing his different traits, forms or compo¬ 
nents such as existence, consciousness and bliss, one is absolved 
of tamas immediately. 

10-13. When the hour of dissolution arrives, O best of 
birds, the forms of Visnu that w’ere manifest in different indi¬ 
viduals assemble in the all-embracing body of Visnu. O bird, 
they are united with the root. 

If Visnu becomes one with his reflection jiva, then how 
can jiva remain dependent on Visnu. 

14. Thus they explain the meaning of pratibimba. The- 
difference between the two—reflected and reflection—is obvious. 
therefore. 



in.2.26 


967 


15. Krsna, R^a and others of equal cadre arc the 
emanations of basic reality. Though they manifest in different 
forms, they are not to be thought'of as separate. 

16-17. Those who are in search of reality should note a 
special point. Jivas arc related to the root only partially. They 
stand as Jivas distinct from the root. 

18. The knowledge of the root is essential. Those who 
are not aware of the root are asuras. They think that by 
illusion, the non-dual entity shows many forms as reflections in 
the mirror. 

19. But this sort of thinking takes them to the region of 
pitch darkness. 

The marks that distinguish Self from Supreme self are 
twofold: internal and external. 

20. The external marks disappear as the material 
dissolves. The internal difference remains even in the state of 
release. If both the internal and external differences disappear 
(there being non-dual br.-ihman in existence), how can there be 
a difference due to reflection and the thing reflected ? 

21. The distinguishing mark of the self going to be released 
is consciousness or awareness (cit ). The distinguishing mark of 
the Self going to hell (region of darkness) is suffering 

22. For the Jiva who is prone to migrate, the distin¬ 
guishing mark is mixed (cidrupa and dukkharupa ). The grass 
body is an external appendage for the seeker. 

23. As the evil-minded asuras often cause distress, Visnu 
feels distressed on that account. Thus the nature of the lord 
being none other than distress itself, the lord acquires nature 
of reflection. 

24. One should note the distinguishing mark of the 
lord’s reflection in the daityas. 

25. Among the divine forms as that of Surya or of 
human forms as that of Sita, there is not in the least any 
difference internal or external. 

26. He who ponders over the difference goes to hell. The 
image of an object or a person reflected in the mirror is ahrays 
akin to the object or pei'son reflected. 



968 


Garu4a PurSiia 


27, At the hour of dissolution, O best of birds, the Jivas 
in the form of lord’s reflection do not merge into lord. 

28. Not even the slightest doubt be entertained, O son 
of Vinata, about the non-difference between reflection and the 
object reflected. 

29-30. When the hour of dissolution arrives the lord sleeps 
in the ocean keeping Jivas in his belly, also the released souls, 
Brahma, Maruts, etc, as well as those going to be liberated, 
those present in hell, those who are likely to fall, those who 
are stationary, those who rotate on the wheel of life and death, 
those who are wild beasts, bears, etc.—Keeping all these in the 
belly the lord sleeps in waters for duration of a Kalpa.^ 

31. Laksmi corresponds to knowledge embodied in the 
V^edas. She is nourished by devotion to Visnu. She exhibits 
devotion to Visnu by the movements of her body and offers 
homage to the lord. 

32. There \vas nothing but Visnu and Laksmi as the 
creation came into being. 

33. The goddess Laksmi served as a couch to the lord. 
She was her lord’s abode. Among the females she was the first 
who praised the lord thus. 

34. In your excellence, you exceed all. None is compar¬ 
able to you, none excels you. You alone are the non-dual 
Brahma. The term is applicable neither to Brahma nor to 
Laksmi nor to Riidra nor to Brhaspati. 

35. The term is applicable primarily to Visnu. It is 
secondarily applicable to Brahma, Rudra and others. Being the 
store-house of endless merits Visnu is called Brahma. 

36. Other gods contain no fulness of merits, hence they 
are not called Bralima. 

37-38. They ai e non-eternal in relation to space or time. 
No problem could have arisen, were they found eternal in all 
respects. But the problem stands, for Brahma and other gods 
are not eternal due to the shortage of their merits. 


1. Kalpa — day of Brahma consisting of 1,000 Yugafc or fou^'teen 
Manvantaras, being a period of 432 million years of mortals. 



III.2.46 


969 


Though I am comparable to lord Vasudeva, in respect of 
etemality in relation to time and space, I am not equal to him 
in the fulness of merit. The Vedas declare your manifold 
merits which in all authoritative texts remain uncontradicted. 
Your merits are endless, some being manifest and some hidden. 

39-43. Therefore, we are unable to evaluate your merits. 
Neither I, nor Sarasvati^, Siva, Rudra, Sati, the daughter of 
Daksa, Parvati the daughter of Menaka or Mena, Indra, 
Indrani, Agni, Yama, Narad a, Bhrgu, Vasistha, Ganela, Bali, 
Virata, Bhuman-, Sami, Kaseru, Kinnara, manes, gods, 
Gandharvas*, Tusyas, kings and their proteges can praise your 
Virtue. 

Brahma is inferior to me by crores of merits. Vayu being 
equal to Brahma is inferior to me by the same number. 

The two are equal to each other in the matter of detach¬ 
ment, in their devotion to Visnu, in their courage, stability, life, 
strength, restraint and intellect from the origin to the dissolu¬ 
tion of the universe. The two are inseparable in the e.xercise of 
their power or support. 

44. The Vedas equate Visnu with Brahma in support 
of the universe. They declare Vayu as Jiva the life principle 
of the universe. Brahma cannot function as the creator without 
the support of Vayu. 

45-46. Vayu cannot function without the support of 
Brahma. They support each other in activating the universe. Their 
mutual superiority can very well be evaluated by taking 
recourse to time. 

When lord Brahma controlled the principle of intellect 
from activating material creation lying dormant in the uni¬ 
versal egg, Vayu was unable to set it in motion. The evolution 
of the universe was the event of later date. 


1. Sarasvatt —the daughter of Brahma was born from his mouth. 
Brahmi fell in love with her. She tried lier best to avoid him but found 
escape impossible. She yielded to his desire. As a result a son called VirSt 
was born to them. PE., p. 696. 

2. BA liman» Earth. 

3. Gandharvas — a. class of demi-gods, regarded as the singers or 
musicians of gods. 



970 


Gamia Purina 


47. The honourable Sarasvati was born after Brahma 
had completed his one year. When ten years were completed, 
the honourable Vayu came into being. In the material world, 
Vayu is inferior to Visnu. But, their coordination docs not 
suffer by this inferiority. 

48. Sarasvati was born after Brahma completed a year. 
Sarasvati is therefore inferior to Visnu in respect of time. Vayu 
is much more inferior in the same respect. 

49. After Vayu had completed a year Vak was born. 
As it was born after, it perished early. 

50. Sesa, the lord of snakes, Indra, and Rudra—the three 
are equal in knowledge, strength and spirit. Still they are 
inferior to each other in respect of time. They last for two 
thousand divine yean. 

51. Sesa, Rudra, Brahma and Vayu are of equal cadre 
and equal efficacy in the process of evolving the material 
creation. They are inferior to one another only in respect of 
time. But this inferiority should be totally ignored. 

52. Varum, Parvati and Sauparna—the three were born 
after ten years. They should be treated at par with Sarasvati 
and Bharatl. 

53. Indra is superior to Rudranl (wife of Rudra). This 
knowledge is always gainful. Possessed of this knowledge one is 
called the knower. He alone has the knowledge of the Vedas. 

54. One who is ignorant of different traits of gods is not 
the knower of the Vedas. He is merely a Vedavadin, not a 
Veda-pathaka. 

55. Whatever syllables of the Vedas are repeated by 
men of three castes, constitute the very names of Hari which 
are ever dear to him. 

56. Hari is my master. I am a life-long slave of Hari. 
Brahma and other gods are my life-long preceptors. 

57. The Vedas declare Hari as the lord of all. He who 
learns the Vedas with this knowledge is the best of the twice- 
born. 

58. He alone is the knower of the Vedas. Other than 
him is only a Veda-v&din who carries the burden of the Vedas 
on his shoulders. 



IIL2.68 


971 


39-60. Men possessing knowledge of brahman (Supreme 
reality) and that of the supreme text (viz., the Vedas) speak 
to each other thus—Veda is water wherein abides Visnu. Men 
of teaching and other professions incur countless sins which out 
of compassion, he condones if they utter his three names. 

61. The Supreme lord, when he observes that a guiltless 
person, with an honourable place in society, has committed a 
sinful deed, is extremely irritated and howls at him. 

62. O Govinda, you can be realized only by means of 
true knowledge, not by any other means. You are of the nature 
of bliss. Rise, O Kesava and be favourable to me. O lord, you 
have the power to create as well as dissolve the Universe. 

63. You generate Brahma and urge him to create the 
Universe. You generate Rudra and urge him to dissolve it. 
You observe god Brahma, Sesa and the rest who are worthy of 
approach. 

64. Rise up, O Hari, that arc ever watchful. Deprived 
of true knowledge and engrossed in worldly affairs from katpa 
to kalpa, I undergo tortuous pains of unbearable suffering, 
O lord. 

65. O Hari, you arc of the nature of consciousness {cit 
iakti). You tlirow sinful daityas and evil minded persons in the 
dungeon full of intense darkness. They say you are of the nature 
of suffering, O Hari, since you are distressed by that act of 
yours. 

66. Rise, O Narayana, V^udeva, Krijna, Acyuta, 
Madhava, Vaikun(ha, lord of Laksmi, of compeissionate nature. 
Homage to you. 

67. Rise, O lord of Madhu, lord of Sarasvati, Lord of 
Rudra, lord of Ambika, lord of the moon, lord of ^ci, lord of 
the brahmins, lord of devotion, lord of cows. Rise, O lord. 

68. You that are fond of i^tras, rise up. You that are 
fond of ]^k hymns rise up. You that are fond of Yajus rise up. 
You that are a primary cause and fond of Saman, rise up. You 
that are the enemy of Mura' and fond of Atharva lore, rise up. 

1. Mura —the atura born to Suiiyapa prajftpad of his tvife Danu. It 
was at this time that lord Kffpa, the incarnation of MahAvifpu attacked 
PrSgjyotifa, the capital city d Aaura Naraka. Mura went to lielp his friend 
Naraka. In the fight that ensued, Naraka and Mura were dain m 
PE. p. 511. 



972 


Garu4a Purdna 


69. You that are of primeval form, you that aroi^fond of 
prose, you that are of variegated form, you that are fond of 
praise, you that are lord of LaksmT, we please you with 
melodious song. Rise, O lord, rise immediately. 


CHAPTER THREE 

Creation of the universe : Variations due to difference in Gums 
Lord Krsna said : 

1. God Visnu had a desire to create beings worthy of 
creation, lo release beings worthy of release. Visnu ever 
cherishes such desires, though the expression of such desires is 
expressedly material. 

2. Hari assumed a material form and swallowed dark¬ 
ness. That form of the lord they declare to be material. Those 
who do not know this enter the pitch dark region. 

3. The incarnations of lord Visnu are perfect. Perfect is 
that supreme form. Perfection begets perfection. 

4. Superiority and inferiority rest on personality, not on 
the facilities of Space and Time. 

5. The Supreme lord is full. The Super-imposed universe 
is full. When the Super-imposed full is taken off that which 
remains is also full. 

6. It has become a custom to say that he incarnates in 
the person ofKrsna for lightening the burden of the eardi. 
There can be no dissolution of the world without his wishes. 

7. Too much effort should not be made for realizing 
Self. Too much effort made for self-realization occasions trouble. 
Too much eHbrt leads to certain disease, it is certain. 

8. The teacher and the disciple should make common 

effort to know what it is possible to know. The teacher and the 
disciple who work together in that direction can rightly be 
called by those designations. ^ 



III.3.18 


973 


9. O son of Vinata, those who think upon the lord as 
Supreme Reality are the teacher and the taught in the right 
sense of the word. 

10. They say there is no harm to cut jokes with the 
teacher, if the joke is simple enough. 

11. If the disciple cuts joke with the teacher out of 
ridicule or rage, if the teacher makes an ironical remark—the 
disciple and the teacher go to hell where they stay as long as 
the moon and the stars shine in the sky. 

The High-Soiiled red-eyed Hari, possessed of strong 
semen, deposited his energy in Maya consisting of three gunas 
with an auspicious force. 

Gaiuda said : 

12. O Hari, please tell us about the nature of your 
energy and its constituents. Is that energy the very nature of 
yours or is it a separate entity ? Tell me, O lord, as you know 
the truth. 

Lord Krpia said : 

13. O son of Vinata, the energy which lord Hari 
deposited in Maya is the very nature of the lord. The wise who 
know the truth have declared thus. 

14. I'hey have also declared that the energy being 
material is a separate entity, like the lotus in the navel of 
Visnu. This fact is not detrimental to the concept of the lord 
being full of energy, as tlie lord is the very form of knowledge. 

15. Lord Vasudeva is of the nature of energy everywhere 
and in all times. O lord of birds, if he were not possessed of 
energy he would not be both livara and Purusa, 

16. The people in general regard him as twofold : of the 
form of male and of the form of female. The two should not 
be considered to be separate entities, O lord of birds. 

17. If the lord were separate from the female form, O 
lord of birds, how could the woman be his reflection. 

18. Hence, the female is inseparable from the male form. 
The two forms constitute the very nature of the lord. This 
should not be taken otherwise. 



974 


Garuda Purdna 


19. The neutral form is alien to his nature. It is the 
effect and not his real nature. It is not present in Hari, O lord 
of birds. Know that in the form of Hari there is reflected the 
form of Laksmi. 

Garuda said : 

20-21. Tlie contact of a woman with a woman is futile. 
So say the wise. The female form being the mirror, how can 
there be reflected another female form ? How could the female 
form abide in the female form. What is the reason thereof. 
Tell me, O lord. 

Lord Krftia said : 

22-23. Lord Visnu assumes different female forms, O 
lord of birds. How can it be possible that Laksmi (a female 
form herself) may not be reflected therein, since she, the 
eternal one, being inseparable from the lord is always at his 
service in her many forms. 

24. Hence, it is the separation from her lord (and not 
her union with him) that can be the object of doubt on the 
part of the disciple. 

O Garuda, lord Visnu can never remain without Laksmi 
who is ever devoted to his lotus-feet. 

25. Those seeking for release should know that Laksmi 
can never remain without Visnu in any space or time. 

26. Lord Visnu deposits energy in her to further growth of 
creation. The asuras hold that energy is the magical power of 
the Lord. But they are fools who ignore reality and as a result 
enter the region of pitch darkness. 

In fact what we call Maya is nothing but Prakrti (the 
primordial nature) invested with subtle form that is different 
from magic. 

27. They should know that Laksmi is the very Self of 
Lord Visnu who deposits energy in her. The union of the two is 
not without a purpose. 

28. She is beginningless, eternal and truthful. How can 
she be a fake, O lord of birds ? Prakrti is eternal ^ruth though 
not manifest in distinct form. 



III.3.39 


975 


29. But if she be an empirical reality, how can she be 
eternal and if she be non-eternal, O lord of birds, how can 
she be the cause of creativity in her subtle form ? 

30. If she be the cause of creativity in the subtle form, 
who can be the cause of creativity in the gross form ? 

31. If you say: By the power of illusion, Visnu manifests 
himself in many forms. But when illusion disappears by 
knowledge, the universe (of various forms) is absorbed in 
Visnu. O lord of birds, hear, I shall produce an argument. 

32. Hari, being omniscient, how can ignorance abide 
with him? As darkness cannot co-exist with the sun, there can 
be no ignorance co-existing with the lord. 

33. Hence, the lord is not associated with Maya. If that 
were so, O lord of birds, how could we explain the difference 
between the omniscient lord and the lord of limited knowledge. 

34. How could the Vedas declare the identity of the two 
who are of contrary nature. Not circumscribed by space and 
time, the creator of the universe is omnipotent and is above all 
sorrows. 

35. The individual soul, on the other hand, is the 
creator of a small world, being prone to sorrows and afflictions 
of births. The two are contradictory in nature and appear to be 
distinct. Such is the power of illusion of the magician lord. 

36. The devotees of Visnu and their followers are 
exempt from censure and reproach. He who bears malice to 
them cannot receive the pleasure of Visnu. Even in the state 
of release he cannot enjoy perfect bliss. 

37. Those who perceive a difference between the 
Supreme and the subservient Self become subject to reproach 
and are overpowered by suffering and afflicted by affliction. 
They enter the region of pitch darkness whence there can be no 
return. 

38. O lord of birds, the primordial nature (Prakrti) is 
subtle in form. It has the nature of eternal truth as are the 
infinitesimal particles of space, time, air and other elements. 

39-40. The seekers of eternal wisdom should know that 
the material objects consist of infinitesimal particles. You should 



976 


Ganida Purdna 
• • 


know, O bird, that in the categories of the material objects 
there is a category called ViScsa^ of which the final Vi^esa is 
the paramanu.^ 

Garuda said : 

41. O Krsna, O Madhava, O lord of Satvatas,^ you say 
that the ultimate particle of a substance is paramanu. 

42. It is still not clear to me. The ultimate particle is 
indivisible (the other particles are divisible). That which is 
divisible cannot be ultimate particle. This view is invariable, 
so it appears to me. 

Lord Kr$na said : 

43. There are experts who can perceive the divisible 
particles of a substance but not the ultimate particle. 

44. The sages declare the ultimate particle to be Viicsa. 
Following the view of ancient sages, the philosophers Kanada* 
and Gautama,® O lord of birds, have indorsed that the ultimate 
Visesa called Paramanu is indivisible. 

45. The infinitesimal particles are divisible. Those who 
declare them indivisible are totally wrong in their view. 
Therefore, O son of Vinata,® the particles are divisible in 
many parts. 

1. ViSefa —a particular or an eternal distinguishing mark of each of 
the nine dravyas. 

2. Paramim —the thirteenth part of the atom of dust which is seen 
moving in the sun-beam : 

^ <r57Tr»r: It 

3. Sdtvalas —a family of Y&dava race whose founder was Yadu, son 
of King Yayati. King S&tvata founded a branch of the Yadavas after his 
name. He had four sons : (1) Bhajin Bhajamina, (2) Devavrdha, (3) 
Andhaka Mahabhoja and (4) Vff^i. Krfua, the celebrated hero of the 
Mahabhirata was born in the S&tvata-Vr^ui family. 

4. Kaudda or Katabhtd or Kaoabhakfa —the names of the founder of 
the Vaiie;ika system, which may be said to be a doctrine of atoms. 

5. Gautama —the propounder of the Nyiya system fjf philosophy. His 
Ny&ya-Sutra is the earliest treatise on the subject. 

6. Vinaid —the mother of Amt^a and Garuda and a wife of Kalyapa. 



III.3.55 


977 


46. O lord of birds, the infinitesimal particles arc 
divisible in many parts. There are, in the same way, many 
forms of lord Hari. These forms are divisible while the lord 
himself is indivisible. 

47. That which is the subtlest of the subtle forms is 
also the greatest of the great. No characteristic difference 
should be traced among the forms of the lord who is of 
inconceivable form. 

48-49. None else but the lord is eternal in respect of 
time, space and quality. The wise define the eternity of time 
as time not circumscribed by time, the eternity of space as 
space not circumscribed by space, the eternity of attribute as 
an attribute not circumscribed by attributes. 

50. Thus, the lord is characterized by his threefold 
eternity. Though omnifarious or all-pervasive, he can still be 
circumscribed by space. His inconceivable and wondrous powers 
are manifest in the forms he takes for the welfare of the people. 

51-53. In respect of attributes and time, there is no 
difference in the forms of the lord. Being all-pervasive though 
circumscribed by space, there is no difference even in the 
minutest form of the lord. Still he is divisible even in subtle 
parts. Such is the virtue of his supreme power. 

54. Therefore, O Garuda, know that he incarnates in 
particular forms. His all-pervasive form (which does not 
incarnate) they call Naraya^ia.^ 

55. Thus, in all conditions and in all entirety, there is a 
fivefold classification of the different forms of the lord, viz., the 
eternal and non-eternal, the animate and inanimate and 
the lord circumscribed and not circumscribed by time, space and 
attributes. Lord Hari, the primeval Puru^a of mighty power, 
deposited energy in the primordial nature called Maya* and 
produced creation characterized by three gunas, viz.,sattva, rajas 
and tamas. 


1. Ndrij/aiia —^An epithet of V’ispu. The word is derived differently in 
the MS. 1.10. See GP. p, 955 , Fn, 5 . 

2. Prakfti or Primordial nature consisting of the three 

essential qualities satWa, rajas and tamas. It is distinguished from Puru|a, 
the original source of the material world. 



978 


Garuia Piir&na 


CHAPTER FOUR 

Gunas and their nature : Imbalance and Equilibrium 
The lord said : 

1. When the lord created the three gunas, their com¬ 
posite form being PrakrtP, there sprang up Laksmi in Iier 
threefold form, viz., Sri, Bhu and Durga. 

2. Sri was characterized by sattva, Bhu by rajas and 
Durga by tamas. Thus say the wise. 

3. O lord ot birds, one should not recognize any 
difference among Sri, Bhu, Durga—the three forms of Laksmi. 

4. Those who recognize difference among the three, by 
virtue of three distinct gunas are thrown in the pitch dark 
regions. 

Purusa assumed three forms: Visnu, Brahma and Siva, 
each containing the respective guna—sattva, rajas and tamas. 

5. Visnu pervaded the universe to sustain people with 
sattva guna. He inspired Brahma to create beings with rajas 
guna. 

6. Brahma created the universe with rajas guna. Hence, 
Brahma is the first creator and not Visnu. 

Visnu inspired Rudra to annihilate the world with 
tamo guna. 

7. Visnu, when he inspired Rudra, was called Rudra. 
But Rudra and Visnu are not identical. Visnu is not identifiable 
with Brahma either. 

8. Brahma and Rudra are pervaded by Visnu. This 
very knowledge leads one to release. It is never otherwise. 

9. They should recognize the respective functions of the 
three : Brahma, Visnu and Rudra. Those who do not 
recognize the same go to terrific hells whence there is no return. 

10. The eternal lord Visnu pervaded the gunas, and 
activated them for the purpose of creation. 


1. Equilibrium of the three guQai—Sattva, Rajas and Tamas—is called 
Praktti: sattva-rajas-tamasSth sflmyavasthi prakftil^. 



III.4.22 


979 


11. When the three gunas were activated there was 
evolved Mahat^ out of the constituents of the three gunas. 

12. Out of Mahat were evolved Brahma and Vayu. They 
were born twins after the lapse of a year since Mahat came 
into being. 

13. Mahat being activated by rajas, the creation was 
evolved out of the gunas in the state of imbalance. 

Gamja said : 

14. O son of Devaki, you have explained to me the 
nature of creation evolved out of the gunas. I have gained by 
your grace the correct knowledge of the principle of Mahat in 
imbalance. 

15-20. O lord, now explain to me the significance of the 
gunas in imbalance. 

Lord Kr^na said : 

O lord of birds, before I explain to you the gunas in 
imbalance, I shall explain to you, first of all, what gunas in 
equilibrium would signify and before I do that O lord 
of birds, I shall explain to you the portion of the gunas in their 
material forms, ether, etc. 

With the aggregate of tamas, O lord of birds, were joined 
the particles of rajoguna twice in proportion. With the aggre¬ 
gate of rajas, O son of Vinata, were joined the particles of 
sattva guna twice in proportion. 

The gunas are evolved out of the primordial nature, they 
are not primary. Since forms of Prakrti are many and not 
categorizablc, the gunas are secondary, not primary. 

21. Thus I have explained to you, O lord of birds, the 
nature of the gunas, their number and the way how they 
function. 

22. Of the three gunas, the sattva alone is pure. O 
Garuda, it is not mixed with rajas guna or tamas guna. 


I. Mahnt —In Sarhkhya philosophy the great principle Mahat 
(intellect) distinguished from manas the second of the iwi-ityfivc principles 
recognized by the .Siihkhyas. 



980 


Garuda Parana 


23. It is called keoala sattva, not that it is superior to other 
gunas but because it was the only existing guna at the begin¬ 
ning of Creation which got mixed with the rest at the time of 
dissolution. 

24-25. O lord of birds, the sattva remains pure at all 
times (except at dissolution). Those who think contrarily enter 
the lower regions of pitch darkness. O lord of birds, only the 
rajas and tamas are mixed gunas. 

26, O lord of birds, they are mixed at the beginning and 
at the end of creation. With the aggregate of rajas, more than 
a hundred part of Sattva is mixed. O best of birds, it is not 
otherwise. 

27-28. O son of Vinata, of the aggregated hundred parts 
of najas one part is tamas. It is mixed with the aggregated part 
of rajas. 

29. O dear, such is the position of the aggregated rajas 
mixed with tamas. In the aggregated tamas, there is mixed sattva, 
O son of Vinata. 

30. O Garuda, sattva is mixed with tamas approxi¬ 
mately more than the tenth part of tamas. 

31. O son of Vinata, with the ten aggregated parts of 
tamas is mixed rajas in one tenth part. 

32. O best of birds, this is the position of the aggregated 
tamas. 

Garuda said: 

33-37. O lord of Satvatas, I have strong doubts in regard 
to that. 

In an aggregated guna, whatever parts of another aggre¬ 
gated guna are found in greater or smaller proportion, the 
guna acquires that name, like the milk in water. How is that ? 
O lord ! 

On hearing the query of Garuda, the lord spoke with great 
affection, appreciating the query of his devotee. 

The lord said : 

O lord of birds, the aggregated sattva is greater than the 
aggregated rajas or aggregated tamas. 



III.4.54 


981 


Sattva is not mixed either with rajas or with tamas. The 
learned declare the aggregated rajas or tamas by those very 
names and not by any other. 

38. Poison mixed with milk or sacrificial oblation is 
nothing but poison, the same is the position of gunas, O bird. 

39-43. O lord of birds, I shall now tell you of the state 
of equilibrium of the gunas. 

Whatever is the product of aggregated rajas, whatever 
has entered in the mahat principle is also called rajas. When 
the hour of dissolution comes, rajas remains in mahat by twelve 
parts. In the aggregated sattva it remains by ten parts; in the 
aggregated tamas by one part^ O bird. 

A part of aggregated rajas remains in rajas by one part. 

44. Thus, O bird, the principle of mahat is dissolved in 
the three gunas. 

45. O lord of birds, when the gunas are mixed in equal 
proportion, the learned declare it to be the equilibrium of 
gunas. 

46. Those who think otherwise, are placed in the pitch 
dark regions. 

Gatuda said: 

47. O lord, tell me, in brief, how the aggregated gunas 
stand in equilibrium, at the time of final dissolution {pralaya ). 

Lord Kfsna said : 

48. The learned declare that the aggregated gunas stand 
in equilibrium, being mixed together. 

49-53. O dear, now, I shall tell you about the imbalance 
of guijas. 

The rajas which remained mixed by ten parts with sattva, 
by one part with tamas, by one part with rajas at the time 
of dissolution, remains mixed by ten parts with sattva, by one 
part with rajas and by one part with tamas. Thus the twelve 
parts stand conjoined and constitute mahat. 

O son of Vinata, there is another speciality in this context. 

54. In the principle of mahat, one part is tamas. Thus 
the mahat principle is mixed with all gunas. 



982 


Garu4a Purdna 


Garufla said : 

55-56. O lord of Satvatas, I have heard, formerly from 
Brahma that the mahat principle was evolved out of four com¬ 
ponents of gunas, i.e. one part of tamas and three parts of 
rajas. 

57. Thus, the principle of mahat consists of four parts, 
being the form of Brahma himself which the learned declare to 
be due to the imbalance of gunas. 

58. It is evolved out of thirteen parts. O fond of 
devotees and merciful one, please clear my doubts regarding 
this point. 

Lord Kffna said : 

59-62. What Brahma had stated to you and what I 
have said just now is not open to doubt. Rajas is mixed with 
primary sattva by ten parts, the total is but one constituent. 

The second constituent consists of rajas extent in the 
primary rajas. The third constituent consists of rajas present in 
the primary tamas. The fourth constituent consists of one part 
of rajas present in the primary tamas being designated as tamas. 

63. Thus, the three parts of rajas and one part of tamas 
constitute the body of Brahma due to the imbalance of gunas. 

Gatud'i said : 

64. Mahat consists of four parts, of which the three arc 
rajas, one is tamas—this is what you have declared to me. 

65. O lord, it appears from your statement that the 
body of Brahma is constituted of rajas. 

66. There is a doubt, O lord, on this point. The body of 
Brahma is constituted of pure sattva, they say. How could it 
be formed of rajas. 

Lord Kffna said : 

67-68. In the threefold rajas of twelvefold aggregate there 
exists sattva tenfold more in proportion to rajas. 

69. In the threefold rajas of twelvefold ag^egafe, there 
exists sattva tenfold more in proportion to tamas. 



III.5.3 


983 


70. In the threefold rajas of twelvefold aggregate there 
exists tamas elevenfold more in proportion to tamas. 

In the threefold rajas of twelvefold aggregate there 
exists rajas onefold more in proportion to tamas. 

Now, I shall tell you about the mixed parts, hear, O 
Wise one. 

71-72. The material that constitutes mahat, O lord of 
birds, consists of thirteen parts of gunas of which rajas 
contributes twelve portions and tamas one. I shall tell you 
about their sub-division. First of all, I shall tell you about the 
parts of gunas. 

73. Parts of rajas : One part of tamas, ten parts of rajas, 
one part of sattva—twelve parts in all. 

74. Parts of tamas : One part of rajas, eleven parts of 
tamas. 

75. Parts of sattva : Ten parts of sattva. 

Such is the position of sattva in the mahat principle. 

76. Since Brahma is constituted of more sattva parts 
than any other deity he is called l^uddha sattva i.e. 
consisting of pure sattvika quality. 

77. I have thus told you about the constituents of mahat, 
O son of Vinata, the knowledge whereof leads one to release 
from the cycle of birth. 


chapter five 

Deities and their relative status 

1. In the mahat principle, as described above, lord 
Visnu entered together with Laksnil and activated the same. 

2-3. From mahat ego was born*, being constituted of 
knowledge, substance and activity. In the constitution of ego 


1 . SdAkAya-KdrikS cf Isvarakr$na 

K&rika 22 



984 Garuda Purdna 

tamas contributed one part, rajas ten and sattva contributed 
more. Lord became his atman. 

4. Characterized by the principle of ego, Sesa^ was evolv¬ 
ed at the beginning of creation. After the lapse of a thousand 
years, were born Siva and Garuda. 

5. The eternal Visnu entered the ego. Lord Visnu and 
Lak^ml activated the ego. 

6. I am threefold : of modified (i.e. secondary) form, 
born of tamas and of tejas. Lord Rudra is the controller of the 
three. 

7-10. Lord Rudra controls all secondary objects. There¬ 
fore, he is called secondary. Controlling taijasa forms he is 
called taijasa. 

Lord Visnu and Laksm! entered the ego which the lord 
set to motion. He, the lord, evolved five organs of intellect : 
ears, eyes, touch, taste, smell, and five organs of action, viz., 
tongue, hands, feet, anus and phallus.^ 

11. O lord of birds, from the mahat were evolved the 
presiding deities of eleven organs of sense.® 

12. In the beginning was born Varuni, the presiding 
deity of the mind and then Gaurija. 

13. These were evolved from Sesa one after the other, 
within ten years serially. 

14. Then were evolved Indra and Kama—the presiding 
deities of the mind. O Tarksya, bondage and release came 
afterwards. 

15-17. Then I was evolved in the bodily form constitut¬ 
ed of skin and called a creator. Then, O best of birds, 
creatures possessed of hands came into being. Saci,^ Rati,® 

1 . Stfa or AdUefa —One of the PrajSpatis. He is the son of Ka^yapa 
and Kadru. 





Siihkhyatattvakaumudi, Kirika 26 

3. EUi'ctt organs of sense —five organs of intellect and five organs of 
action and one mind. 

4. ^acf —daughter of Puloman, an asura chief, became the wife of 

Indra. * 

5. Jtati—Wife of Kfimadeva. See infra, p. 990, Fn. 4. 



III.5.28 


985 


Aniruddha,^ Manu* the son of self-born Brahma, Brhaspati* 
and Daksa* were born in human form. 

O bird, after Daksa was born Pravaha,® also called 
Ativaha who by self-urge causes objects to move. 

18. Thereafter, the organ of perception came into being. 

19. I^atarupa, wife of Svayambhuva Manu, Yama, 
Moon and Sun—the four presiding deities of their respective 
organs came into being. 

20. O lord of birds, the moon is the presiding deity of 
ears. Varunai the presiding deity of the tongue came after the 
Sun. 

21-23. After Varuna were bom the wives of Daksa, 
their offsprings : Bhrgu and Agni—the presiding deities of the 
tongue. These high-soulcd ones control the organ of speech 
Kravyada and others, of which mention has been made before, 
do not control any principle. They are grouped in a separate 
categoi-y, for they are not the presiding deities of any principle 
of life. 

After that, O lord of birds, were bom the presiding 
deities of the generating organ. They are : 

24. Visvamitra, Vasistha, Atri, Marici, Pulaha, Kratu, 
Pulastya, Angiras and Vaivasvata Manu. Manu and others of 
endless number are the presiding deities of the generating 
organ. 

25. O lord of birds, thereafter were born the presiding 
deities of anus. They arc: 

26-28. Mitra—one of the twelve Suns, Tara the wife of 
Brhaspati the presiding deity of the quarters, Nirrti, Pravahi— ^ 


1. Amruddhor—^n. of Pradyumna and grandson of Kf^^a. Uyt, 
daughter of the Asura Bai^a, fell in love with him. With the help of 

who defeated Bi^a in a battle, Aniruddha carried off hb beloved as 
his wife to Dvarak&. 

2. Sviyamhhuoa Manu .: Bom of Brahmi and Satarupa he is known as 
the author of the Manusmrti. 

3. Bfhaspati —the preceptor of the Devaa (Devaguru). 

4. Dakfa —son of BrahmA bom from his right thumb. 

5. Praaaha —name of a wind that moves upwards in the body. 



986 Garuda Purdna 

the consort of Pravaha. These four, O lord of birds^ are the 
presiding deities of the principle of Vayu. 

O lord of birds, the following are the presiding deities of 
smell—Visvaksena, Asvins, sons of Vayu, lord of ganas and 
wealth, seven Vasus^ and agni the eighth. 

29. Now, I shall tell you the names of seven Vasus : 
Drona, Prana, Dhruva, Arka, Dosa, Vasu, Vibhavasu being 
the seventh. 

30. Rudras are ten in number. The primary Rudra is 
called Bhava. O best of birds, now I shall tell you the ten 
names of Rudra.® 

31. Raivanteya, Bhlrna, Vamadeva, Vrsakapi, Ahirbu- 
dhnya, Bahurupa, Mahan. 

32-33. These are ten Rudras, O bird. Now listen to six® 
Adityas, viz., Urukrama, Sakra, Vivasvan, Varuna, Parjanya, 
Atibahu. Except Parjanya, they are mentioned before. 

34-35. O lord of birds, Parjanya is at par with Gahga, 
Savitr, Aryaman, Dhatr, Pusan, Tvastr and Bhaga. Mahat is 
forty-seven. Pravaha and Ativaha have been mentioned above. 

36-39. O lord of birds, Vi^vedevas are ten, viz., Purura- 
vas, Adrava, Dhuri, Locana, Kratu, Daksa, Satya, Vasu, Kama 
and Kalaka. 


1 . Aflavasus — Gana-devataa. They were born to Dharniadeva of 
his wife Vasu, daughter of Oak$a. They are Dhara, Dhruva, Soma, Ahar, 
Anila, Anala, Pratyu$a and Prabhasa (M.B. Adi. 66). 

According to Vi?nu Purana (Ch. 15. Sec. 1) the eight Vasus are 
named Apa, Dhruva, Soma, Dharma, Anila, Anala and Pratyu;a. 

In the Bhagavata Fur^i^a they are Dro^a. Prana, Dhruva, Arka, Agni, 
Do$a, Vasu and Vibhavasu. 

The names of Vasus differ in different Pura^as. 

2. The rest of the Purai^as mention eleven Rudras. The present 
Puraqa mentions ten but gives only seven names. 

3. An obvious departure from ancient tradition which mentions 
twelve Adityas. A number of names in these lists do not corres^nd with 
the names of this hst. 



III.5.49 


937 


Thus are the Rbhus,^ three groups of Pitrs,^ Dyuloka and 
Bhuioka. 

Thus were born the eighty six deities, the presiding ones 
of the organ of smell. 

40. The lord of ganas is the presiding deity of ether 
and of the organ of smell. 

41. Excluding Visvaksena, Jaya and the rest are the 
councillors. In their mutual relationship some are equal and 
some unequal. 

42. These arc the secondary controllers of the organs of 
sense. Hence, they are inferior to the presiding deities of the 
tattvas. 

43-44. Apana is the presiding deity of the principle of 
touch, Vyana that of form, Udana that of taste and Samana 
that of smell. The four Maruts are mentioned as the lords 
of wateis. 

45. O lord of birds, I shall now tell you about Jaya 
etc., who came after Visvaksena. In the materialistic creation 
Agni stands first. Cyavana son of sage Bhrgu and Utathya son 
of Brhaspati come after agni. 

46-48. Manus, eleven in number, were also created first 
viz, Raivata, Caksusa, Svarocisa, Uttama, Brahma-Savarni, 
Rudra-Savarni, Deva-Sav.arni, Savarni, Indra-Savarni, Daksa- 
Savarni and Dharma-Savarni.® 

49. Seven groups of manes were created thereafter, 
O lord of birds. 


1. Rbhus are a group of divine beings who attained divinity 
by performing tapas. RV. 1.111 mentions one Angiras, the son of BrahmS 
who had a son named Sudhanva. Sudhanva had three children : Rbhusan, 
Vibhvas and Vaja. The three were names of Rbhus. 

2. The three groups of Pitfs include Agnisvattas, Barhisadas and 
Somapas. 

3. Manus are fourteen in number. They are Svayambhuva (2) Sva- 
roci^a, (3) Uttama, (4) Tamasa, (5) Raivata, (6) Gaksu$a, (7) Vaivasvata, 
(8) S&varni, (9) Dharma, (10) Sivari^ika (II) Pisahga, (12) Apisahgabha, 
(13) 8abala, (14) Var^aka. But the present Pur&r^a mentions only eleven. 
The Pur&Qas differ in the number and nomenclature of Manus. 



988 


Garu^a Purana 


50-54. Born thereafter and inferior to these are the 
following six : Gaiiga the wife of Varuna, Vibhavasu tlie wife 
of Parjanya, Syamala the wife of Yama, Usa the wife of 
Aniruddha, Rohini the wife of the moon and Sariijnakira the 
wife of the sun. 

After Gahga, Svaha, the presiding deity of the mantras 
was born. Svaha is the wife of Agni, being inferior to Gariga 
and others. 

After Svaha was born Budha, the presiding deity of 
knowledge. Budha, the son of the moon, is inferior to Svaha. 

55-56. O bird, after Budha, Usa was born. Usa who 
attained the greatest fame by this name was the wife of Asvins. 

She is inferior to Budha. Thereafter was born l^anaiscara 
the presiding deity of the principle of earth. 

57. Inferior to Usa was Puskara, the presiding deity of 
all activities known also as ^anaiscara. 

58. Thus having created the presiding deities, Visnu, 
the lord of gods, entered the principles together with Laksmi. 


CHAPTER SIX 

Deities and their relative status 


Lord Kr^na said : 

1-3. O lord of birds, the presiding deities of the 
principles, stationed in their respective orbits, began to praise 
lord Visnu in the prescribed manner. In you of recognizable 
or unrecognizable qualities there exist contrary qualities. 
Severally, they are many. I have no power to enumerate them. 

Thus feeling shy and bashful, Laksmi spoke to Visnu in 
the modest and humble tone. 

Lakfml said : 

4. O lord, I bow to your lotus-feet. I have no resort 
except the shelter of your feet. Your lordship possesses Virtue, 
Some 1 have known, some I have not. 



III.6.I2 


989 


5. Please give me shelter. Protect me from dangers. 
There is none more delightful, none more endearing than your 
lordship. 

Brahma, said : 

6. “O lord of Laksmi, an abode of living beings, you are 
the ocean of knowledge and omniformed. Where am I with my 
limited knowledge and full of ignorance and where your lord- 
ship all-powerful and omniscient. I am ignorant with my 
circumscribed knowledge. So is Her Ladyship Laksmi. 

7. I have very little knowledge, very little devotion and 
very little detachment. And whatever little I possess is also 
due to your favour. There too, O Visnu, who are an abode of 
the universe, I have no ownership. 

8. O lord, eschew my ego and attachment to worldly 
affairs. I desire nothing more. I deserve the attainment of 
right knowledge. I am not a negligent or an imprudent pupil. 

9. Let my organs of senses that are inclined to move in 
wrong channels fall at your lotus-feet. I am inferior to Laksmi 
by millions of virtues, I have no capacity to sufficiently praise 
your merits. Be pleased, O lord.’* 

10. Thus with palms joined in reverence Brahma praised 
the lord in the presence of Garuda. Then, the god of gods, the 
noble Vayu was visibly moved to love and devotion at the 
sight of the lord. 

11. With eyes overflowing with tears and speech 
characterized in faltering accents he began to praise the lord. 

Vdyusaid ; 

“These gods are your servants. Your lotus-like feet are 
inaccessible to us. 

12. O lord of Laksmi, I beg the favour of yours 
granting me the four objects of human life,^ O lord. 

The world is the creation of lord’s Maya. 1 see no other 
cause for evolving the world. Let me not go astray, O lord. I 
am anxious to serve your lotus-feet. 


1 . See p. 156, Fn. I, 



990 


Garuia Purina 


13. “O lord, you incarnate for rendering favour to the 
people who are averse to devotion, who are given to sinful acts 
and who are terribly suffering from (threefold) affliction.^ O 
lord, you have no other object of life. 

14. O Vasudeva, out of mere sport, you incarnate in 
human form. You render welfare to the cows, brahmins, gods 
and the world of vegetation, tliat being the sole purpose of your 
incarnation on this earth.^ 

15. O lord, you are the foremost of pious activators. O 
lord of the mind-born god, the consort of Rati®, our mind, 
engaged in praise of your merit, finds no satiation whatsoever. 

16. O Mukunda, I am your steadfast devotee. Pray 
create devotion in me for your lotus-feet. This and nothing else 
do I crave of you. 

17. O god of gods, in whatever station you are present, 
let me also be there by your favour. Conversely, in whatever 
station I am present, let your presence be also there, O lord. 
This is my utmost desire. The four-faced Brahma alone is 
aware of it. 

18. O lord, let my subconscious mind be also at your 
worship; let my activities be your circumambulation, let my 
behavioral conduct also be your praise. O lord, I offer all 
these to you with my conscious mind. 

1 . Threefold affliction : viz adhyatmika., adhibhautika and adhidaivika. 
Adhydlmika is twofold: (1) Physical—pertaining to self, caused by diseases. 
(2) Mental—pertaining to mind, caused by desire, anger, greed, etc. Adhi: hau- 
tika —p>ertaining to body, caused by man, animals, wild beasts, birds, snakes, 
etc. Adhidaivika —caused by evil influences of Yak;a, R&k;asa, etc. 

2. BhagavadgUd : 

ii 

The lord incarnates for the protection of the noble, destruction of the 
wicked and establishment of virtue. 

3. Rati—-wife of Kamadeva. According to Hindu Mythology, the 
gods wanted a commander for their forces in their war with TSraka. They 
sought the aid of Kama in drawing the mind of ^iva towards P&rvati whose 
issue could vanquish the Asura. Kama undertook the mission but Siva being 
offended at the disturbance of his penance burnt him down w^ the Are of 
his third eye. Subsequently he was allowed by Siva to be bom again in the 
form of Pradyumna at the request of Rati. 



III.6.28 


991 


19. The material substances intended for my use are 
nothing but different forms of Hari. O God of gods, I always 
regard these to be such» and worship the same with proper 
devotion. 

20. The Sandal paste, fragrant flowers, the incense, the 
clothes, the eatable food-stuff—all these are for the pleasure of 
Visnu. I undertake this vow for the gratification of Visnu. 

21. I abhor the non Vaisnava people and love the 
Vaisnava ones. I cut off the tongue of the people who reproach 
lord Visnu. With the heated liquefied tin I fill the ears of those 
who hear his reproaches. 

22. O God, by your favour I possess sufficient strength 
for the purpose. Still I lack in strength to offer sufficient 
prayers. I am inferior to Laksmi by millions of virtues. 

23. I crave for eternal pleasure accruing from the 
company of the person who sings praises of Hari. Those who 
unitiate others to the same are Vaisnavas attached to Visnu. 

24. Lord Visnu is verily pleased with those who recite 
this praise. And when the lord is pleased there is nothing that 
remains inaccessible to the praiscr.” 

25. Thus, the noble Baladeva eulogized lord Hari and 
stood in front of him with palms joined in reverence. 

Sarasvati said : 

“O lord, is there a man who can appreciate the excellence 
of your Virtues and be satisfied with the counting of your 
praise. 

26. O god of gods, you are praised by Brahma and other 
gods. Your merits entering the ear-hole of a person destroy 
our attachment for the body that is the cause of our rebirth. 

27. Your praise, O lord, destroys our attachment not 
only for the body but also for our home, wife, sons, etc., and 
for fields, animals, gems or other precious articles. 

28. Though the Vedas have tried to explain your 
identity (they have not done it fully). Lak^i too has failed to 



992 Garuda Purdna 

gauge your essence. Neither the four-faced Brahma nor Vayu 
knows your reality. 

29. I cannot sufficiently praise you, O lord. I am inferior 
to Brahma and Vayu. Hence, be merciful and protect me, O 
lord.” 

30. O lord of birds, thus Sarasvat! praised Hari and 
became silent. Thereafter, Bharat! began to praise lord Hari. 

Bhdrati said : 

31-32. ‘‘O lord of Brahma, O lord of Laksml, O slayer 
of Mura, I have firm faith in your virtues, the praise whereof 
produces detachment of the people towards material objects 
and develops their firm devotion whereby you, O lord, are 
entirely pleased. 

33. I have, therefore, strong desire to praise your 
virtues, O lord. 

The act of your praise removes sorrows root and branch. 

34. When sorrows are removed, the deserving devotee 
enjoys fruits of pleasure. The absence of devotion, on the 
contrary, invites sin and destroys virtue. 

35. Knowing all this, my revered preceptor Vayu who 
was very kind and affectionate to me, declared your qualities, 
the source of all pleasure and bliss, selecting them out of the 
many accruing from pious deeds. 

36. Even lord Siva, the friend of the distressed, does not 
feel Jealous of our holy fame. I derive bliss of pleasure by your 
favour, by the favour of Laksmi and Vayu. 

37. Whatever act is enjoined by Vayu, the same is 
endorsed by you. 

38. Your lordship does not contradict Vayu and Vayu 
does not contradict your lordship. I feel no inferiority or handi' 

cap in the accomplishment of my task. 

39. As in the original form, so in the assumed form at 
the stage of incarnation, Vayu feels no suffering. ^i$pu, V&yu 
and other incarnations do not suffer even when they take 
human shape. 



III.6.48 


993 


40. Vayu appears to be powerless but he protects all 
customs current in different yugas. While he takes human 
forms he does not suffer from the pangs of birth. 

O lord, I and Vayu do not suffer on that account. O 
destroyer of Asura Madhu, thus situated, I am unable to 
sufficiently evaluate your merits, O lord. 

41. In the process of incarnation, the wise should know, 
there are no tortures accruing from Yama. Know that once I 
went to slay the demons in the hellish region. (But I did not 
suffer at the sight of the sinners being tortured there). 

42. O god, I am inferior to Vayu in both human and 
divine forms.” 

43. Thus, having rendered praise Bharat! was silent, O, 
lord of birds. 

Then Sesa^ who was younger in age to Bharat! spoke to 
the lord with palms joined in reverence. 

^efa said : 

44. “I do not know your worthy self nor does Rudranor 
Garuda. I am inferior to Bharat! in hundreds of pious deeds. 
O lord, give me your shelter and protection.” 

45. Thus having praised the lord, Sesa remained silent. 
Thereafter, Garuda began to praise the lord in the following 
way. 

Garuda said : 

46. *‘0 lord, how far can I praise your lotus-feet where¬ 
upon my heart is set. How can I, a viviparous being be able 
to enumerate your virtues ?” 

47. Having praised Visnu, Garuda was silent. There¬ 
after Rudra began to praise him thus. 

Rudra said : 

48. “O lord, I have been ignorant of your pervading 
power. My devotion was centred on the lotus feet of lord Siva. 
I lost devotion for you and bore malice. I acted contrary to 
your desire. 

1. Se$a or Adiie;a, chief of the NSgas is the son of Ka^yapa and 
Kadru. He carries and supports the earth at the behest ofBrahma. 



994 


Garuda Purina 
• • 


49. O lord, I, being stupid and devoid of disd'etion am 
unable to eulogize your virtues. I am inferior to Bharat! in 
hundreds of marks. O lord, grant me your shelter and 
protection.” 

50. Having praised the lord thus, Rudra was silent. 
Thereupon, the goddess Varuni who was younger to Sesa 
spoke thus. 

Varuni said : 

51. “O lord of Laksmi, O lord of Brahma, O lord of 
Manu, O lord of speech, O lord of Rudra, O lord of men, I 
am unable to praise you. Neither Parvati nor Brahmi the 
consort of Garuda can do that. 

52. I am inferior to Sesa by ten marks. O lord of the 
universe, I pray you, grant me eternal protection.” 

53. O lord of birds, having praised the lord thus, Varuni 
became silent. Brahmi, the wife of Garuda, who was inferior 
to her in age, spoke thus. 

Brahmi said : 

54. “O Hari, O lord of the universe, I have no power to 
praise you in words nor the power to hear your praise. He 
who remembers your personality, O lord, is blessed indeed. 
Who else on earth can know the lord, the blissful one. 

55. Therefore, I cannot sufficiently praise your virtues. 
O lord, I am inferior to Rudra in Virtue by ten marks.” 

56. O lord of birds, having praised thus, Brahmi was 
silent. Then, Parvati who was younger to Rudra began her 
praise. 

Pdrvati said : 

57. O Narayana, O Vasudeva, O lord, I have no selfish 
motive in praising you. O lord, you are unparallel in virtue. 

58. Your appellation Nir&yana alone has the power to 
confer detachment from worldly affairs and devotion to the 
lord. It can wipe off the sin of slaying a br&})|nana and of 
having illicit connection with the wife of the preceptor. 



III.7.5 


995 


59-60. I praise your name as the devotee of your lord- 
ship but cannot sufficiently praise your virtues. I am inferior 
to Rudra in virtues by ten marks. There can be no second 
thought in this matter.” Thus saying, Parvati was silent, O lord 
of birds. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

Praise of Lord Vifmi by deities and sages 
Lord Kr^na said : 

1. Indra who was younger to Parvati said :— 

Indra said : 

“At first a person should realize the Self in his heart and 
then praise the lord. O lord of lords, if he offers praise without 
knowing him it becomes insulting to the lord, the holder of 
discus. 

2. But even the recital of your name confers merit to 
the reciter. 

O lord, Rudra and others do not have sufficient power 
to render homage to you. How can I, an insignificant person, 
offer homage to you. 

3. I am inferior to Rudra in virtue by ten marks. Lord 
Kama is equal to me in knowledge and strength (Neither 
Kama nor any other god can praise you sufficiently). 

4. Having praised the lord, the god of gods stood 
motionless with palms joined in reverence and forehead 
lowered in humility. 

Thereafter, Brahma, the self-centered god spoke in the 
following words. 

Brakmdt the self-centered god, said : 

5. “Homage to the lord abounding in qualities. Homage 
to the lord, the image of knowledge. Homage to the lord. 



996 Garuda Purd^a 

devoid of ignorance. Homage to Brahma, the all-pffrvasivc 
lord. 

6. I am inferior to Indra in merits by ten degrees. O 
inscrutable one, I do not ever know yoU. O lord of the 
universe, you should protect me, O Visnu, grant me divine 
abode.” 

7. The self-centered Brahma praised Hari in this 
manner and was silent. 

Thereafter, Indrani praised Hari in the following way. 
Indrdni said : 

8. “Incessantly I dwell upon your lotus-feet that bear the 
marks of thunderbolt, goad, banner and lotus. O lord, I think 
upon the dust of your lotus-feet which even the wise people 
cannot carry by their mind. 

9. I am inferior to the self-centered Brahma in virtue 
by ten degrees. O compassionate lord who are fond of devotees, 
grant me your shelter and protection.” 

10. Having praised the lord thus, goddess Indrani was 
silent. Thereafter Rati (wife of Kama—god of love) who was 
younger to Indrani in age began to praise the lord. 

Rati said : 

11. “I think upon the lotus-face of Man-lion (Nrsimha) 
who had incarnated himself in half-human and half-animal 
form out of desire to render protection to his devotee, who 
(the lord), accompanied by Laksmi and attended by Brahma, 
Rudra and others looks splendid by curly tresses of hair. 

12. Though I am equal to Indrani in all respects I 
cannot sufficiently praise your virtues. O lord, I pray for your 
eternal protection.” 

Thus having rendered praise with devotion, Rati stood 
silent by the lord. 

13. Thereafter, Dak§a who was junior in age to Rati 
began to praise the lord- 

Dakfa said : 

14. “I meditate upon the holy feet of the lo^ which out 
of devotion are water-washed and worshipped by Brahma, 



III.7.22 


997 


the ablutionary .water being turned in Gahga, the holiest of 
holy Indian rivers. 

15. The dust from the lord’s feet on the matted locks of 
hair made !§iva auspicious. O compassionate lord who have 
incarnated on earth for favouring your devotees, I do not 
possess sufficient strength to praise such power of yours. The 
Vedas declare that I am at par with Rati. I have not attained 
mokfa. Please protect me as such, O primeval lord (from 
sensuous pleasures) ”. 

16. Having praised thus, Daksa was silent. Thereafter, 
Brhaspati, who was junior to him in age, spoke thus. 

Brkaspati said : 

17. I meditate upon your lotus-face. O lord, you may 
kindly endow me with power to detach myself from vicious 
objects of pleasure. 

18. I, the individual soul, regard myself as the creator, 
enjoycr, and bestower of objects of pleasure. O lord, cut off 
my attachment immediately to my sons, wife, friends, cattle, 
for they are surely destructible. 

19. O lord, rolling on the wheel of birth and under¬ 
going pain in the process of that action, I have come up here. 
O overlord, I cannot praise you sufficiently. O lord, I pray 
you to grant me protection as you granted to Rati.” 

20. Having praised the lord thus. Sage Brhaspati stood 
by him in complete silence. Aniruddha who was younger to 
him in age began to praise him thus : 

Aniruddha said : 

21. ‘^O lord, a man of poor intellect is averse to hearing 
the sweet narrative of your lordship. Such a person indulges 
in sensuous pleasures, the kissing of a woman’s lovely cheek or 
pressing his penis into their vagina filled with feces and 
intestines, like a pig fond of excrement. 

22. I, indulging in sinful activity, am fallen in a pit filled 
■with marrow, bones, bile, phlegm, blood, filth, covered with skin 



998 


Garu4a Purina 


and entrail, I feel pleasure thereto. O lord, the power* (Sakti) 
that co-exists^ with you is the cause of creation. 

23. I, of perverted intellect, roll on the wheel of 
creation which is of the nature of sorrows, being entirely 
devoid of pleasure and emitting filth from the nine pores® of 
the body frame. 

24. O lord, I bow to you—I who have (unfortunately 
left tasting the nectar of your auspicious narrative and have 
completely gone over to the worldly affairs such as the 
maintenance of my family—a fact which destroys my Vaisnava 
dharma.^ 

1 have not abandoned my house (which as a Varia- 
prastha I should have done) nor have I been disposed to 
charitable deeds. 

25. O lord, remove this filth off from me. Give me an 
ambrosial drink in the form of story of your divine life. Like 
the consort of Indra, I cannot praise your virtues, O lord.” 

26. O lord of birds, thus having praised the lord, 
Aniruddha stood silent. Thereafter, Manu, the son of Brahma 
and who was junior to Aniruddha said thus : 

Manu said : 

27. “Though I am born of a womb, I have not sufiered 
the embryonic pains. Hence, I have taken shelter with your 
worthy feet. 


1. This accords with the dual system of Vaisnava pliilosophers— 
Ramanuja, Madhva, Vallabha and others. But according to the non-dual 
(advaita) system ofGaudapada and Sankara the difference between Saktiman 
and his Sakti is apparent, not real. Nor is the lord or his Sakti the cause of 
creation, for the very concept of creation is empirical. 

2. nine poies ; 2 of the car, 2 of the eye, 2 of the nose, 1 of the 
mouth, 1 of ihepenisand 1 of the anm. 

3. Vaifpava dharma — 

The Vai$nava dharma as outlined in the Bhagavad Gita enjoins the 
devotee to abandon all dharmas and to resort to the lotus-feet of the lord—a 
view propounded by the exponents of the \''ai$nava cult. 

qferjq- ?nsr i 

c2TT «rror ii 



III.7.35 


999 


28. Manavi—the wife of Manu, Yama—the lord of 
Sariiyamini, the Moon—the presiding deity of the eight 
quarters, the Sun—the presiding deity of the eye are equal to 
one another when they have set out on the path of release.” 

29. Thereafter, Varuna, twice inferior to Vayu and 
junior to the Sun, began to praise the lord, O lord of birds. 

Varuna said : 

30. “O lord, this abode in the form of my body is built 
by your choice. So are the son, wife, riches and other objects. 
The stupid, possessing very little knowledge of reality are 
attached to worldly affairs. They are drowned in the ocean of 
suffering. 

31. O lord, undo this wrong notion of mine and favour 
me with the chance to serve at your feet. I am inferior to 
Manu by sixteen arhSas, O slayer of Mura.' 

32. Having praised thus, Varuna stood attentive with 
palms joined in reverence. Thereafter, Narada, who w’as junior 
to Varuna began to praise the lord. 

Mdrada said : 

33. “O lord, there is nothing more pleasing than hearing 
or uttering the praise of the lord. O lord, you purify those 
who utter your name, together with their ancestors and 
successors. 

34. He is not a brahmana but an ass who does not 
utter the name Hari. O lord, I do not know your actual form. 

I am always inferior to Varuna.” 

35. Having praised the lord thus, O lord of birds, 
Narada stood silent before Hari. Thereafter, Bhrgu^ who was 
junior to Narada began to praise the lord. 


1. The slayer of Mura —See Fn. 34 on p. 5. 

2. Bhrgu —a sage, the son of Brahma, was the founder of Bhrgu 
Vaihsa. Members of the Bhrguvatiisa are called Bhargavas. Bhrgu Varhia has 
been reputed, for many of its members were R?is of great sanctity and 
grandeur. 

For the Mythological origin of this family note the following : 


^TSsgrTcft il 



1000 


Guruda Purina 
• * 


Bhrgu said : 

36. O lord, what better Vehicle you need when you 
have Garuda as such. When you have Kaustubha gem 
for your ornament, what more ornament you need. What 
more riches do you need from a devotee when you have 
X-aksmi (the goddess of wealth) as your wife. O lord of speech, 
what more praise can I render unto you. I do not 
know your good qualities. O lord I am always inferior to 
Varuna by full one quarter of merits.” 

37. Thus having praised Hari, Bhrgu stood in silence. 
Thereafter, Agni who was inferior to Bhrgu in age began to 
praise the lord, the Supreme primeval Purusa. 


Agni said : 

38. “O lord, spirited by your energy, I carry oblations 
sprinkled over with ghee at the altar of sacrifice. 

39. Supported by your energy, 1 enter the belly of a 
person and cook the food therein. I derive my energy from 
yours, O lord. I am equal to Bhrgu in every respect.” 


Prasuti said : 

40-42. ‘‘Even the Sages are perplexed in understanding 
the meaning of your name. The deities and their consorts are 
always engaged in your praise. So are Mandhatar, Dhruva, 
Narada, Bhrgu, Vaivasvata and the rest. I offer salutation to 
you, O lord, out of my devotion. Homage to you, O lord, 
who look after our well being. Hence, I do not know your 
benign aspect. I do not possess ability to offer praise.” O lord 
of birds, having offered praise Prasuti remained silent. 

43. Agni, sage Bhrgu son of Brahma and the embodi¬ 
ment of speech and his wife Prasuti—the three are equal in 
status. 


44. The three are inferior to Varuna by one quarter, 
to Pravaha by half, to Dak§a by one hundred, superior to 
Mitra by twice that number. ^ 



III.7.54 


1001 


45. Thereafter, Vasis^ha son of Brahma junior to 
Prasuti began to offer praise. 

Vasiffha said : 

46. “Homage to Brahma, the self-bom deity, one who 
abhors relations with the wicked sinners O lord, I bow to 
your lotus-feet. 

47. O lord, son of Vasudeva, protect me ever. I am 
always inferior to Agni. I am always inferior to Mitra in 
certain aspects.” 

Having praised the lord thus, Vasistha stood silent before 
the lord. 

48. Thereafter, Marici, son of Brahma, junior to 
Vasistha praised Hari with great devotion. 

Afarici said : 

49. “My intellect is weakened. I have developed attach¬ 
ment to worldly affairs. I walk in wrong direction. My senses 
are quite perverted. I hanker after scanty pleasures. I turn 
my mind to objects that arc far off from you. I stoop to wicked 
acts, O lord. 

50. O lord, characterized by such points, I am equal to 
Vasisfha.” 

51. Having praised the lord thus, Maiici became silent, 
O bird. Atri, who was junior to him, praised Hari with hands 
joined in reverence. 

52. “O lord, You have manifested yourself for creating, 
protecting and destroying the universe. Your form is truth itself 
eternal and unchanging. It is the essence of joy and 
unmodifiable. 

53. Your real nature is devoid of Sattoa, rajas and tamos. 
It is apportioned in all objects wherein your existence remains 
unmanifest. Therefore, O lord, destroyer of Mura, I, like 
Maiici am unable to praise your virtues.** 

54. Having praised thus, O bird, Atri stood silent. There- 
afler Ahgiras^ began to prabe the lord. 

1. A^ras —a celebrated sage to whom many hymns of the B'gveda 
are ascribed. 



1002 


Garu4a Purdna 


Angiras said : 

55. “O lord, I do not see your body possessed of many 
arms, bellies and foreheads, adorned with thousands of diadems 
and other precious jewels. I am unable to praise your eternal 
form though I am equal to Atri in all aspects.” 

56. O lord of birds, having spoken thus, Angiras stood 
silent before the lord. Pulastya^ who was junior to him, began to 
praise the lord. 

Pulastya said : 

57. “Lord Hari manifests himself to his devotees and 
confers auspiciousness. Homage to you, O lord, that savest the 
sinner from the suffering of hell. 

58. I am unable to praise your virtue, O lord. I am 
equal to Angiras in that aspect. 

59. Having praised thus, Pulastya stood in silence before 
the lord. Thereafter, Pulaha who was junior to Pulastya in age 
began to praise the lord thus. 

Pulaha said : 

60. “O lord, you are devoid of form and desire. Still I 
offer you bath, cloth, water, fruits, flowers and foodstuff. O 
lord of Vaikuntha® this worship rendered unto you is altogether 
fruitless. Thus say the noble sages. 

61. I, therefore, offer my worship unto you, O lord, with 
no desire for return but only with the intention to place myself 
at your service. O lord of Vaikuntha, I cannot praise you 
enough. I am equal to Pulastya in my capacity. There is no 
doubt in this.” 

62. O bird, having praised thus, Pulaha became silent. 
Thereafter Kratu, who was junior to Pulaha began to praise 
the lord thus. 


1. Pulastya —a celebrated sage is one of the mental sons of Brahmd. He 
was born from the ear of BrahmS, Mahabh&rata, Adi parva, Ch. 

2. Vaikufitha or Vaibhra—the dwelling place of Vi described on 
the eastern peak of Mount Mem or on the Northern ocean. 



III.7.70. 


1003 


Kratu said : 

63. “Your names, at the time of death, O lord, destroy 
all suffering accruing from birth. Your names, when recited 
remove, all of a sudden, the pains of birth and confer release. 
Of such, yourself, O lord, I place myself at disposal. 

64. O lord Visnu, not to speak of those who meditate 
on you, even those who utter your name for devotion attain 
release.’’ 

65. O lord of birds, having praised thus, Kratu stood 
silent. Thereafter Vaivasvata Manu^ who was junior to him 
began to praise the lord. 

Vaivasvata said : 

66. “I am always engaged in worldly activities, in sensual 
enjoyment, occupied with the objects of senses, and averse to 
joys arising from your sight. 

67. I am attached to this thievish body—a heap of flesh, 
bones, marrow and blood. When I maintain a preceptor, holy 
fire, sacred cow, etc. I cannot easily get away from worldly 
objects. O lord, remain merciful to me always. 

68. I listen to the scandal of others. But I cannot 
sufficiently praise you, O lord. I walk over the path traversed 
by the common people but I do not follow the path of 
renunciation walked over by a few. 

69. I spend on prostitutes and roguish people. But I do 
not spend on brahmins and saints, O destroyer of Mura.” 

70. Having praised the lord thus, Vaivasvata Manu 
became silent. Thereafter, Visvamitra* who was junior to 
Vaivasvata Manu began to praise the lord. 

1. Vaivasvata Manu, the seventh in the list, a leader among Devas. 
The complete list of fourteen Manus comprises (1) Svayambhuva, (2) 
Sv&rocifa, (3) Uttama, (4) TamasS, (5) Raivata, (6) Cakfu;a (7) Vaivas¬ 
vata, (8) S&varoi, (9) Dharma, (10) S&varnika (11) Pis'ahga, (12) Apiiah- 
gabfaa, (13) Sabala and Var^aka. 

2. VilvAmitra, the contemporaiy of Vasiftha was Rfatriya by birth. 
He acquired Brahmanhood by practising penance. He is mentioned in 
relation with King TriiaAku in the PurA^as, with RAma, son of Daiaratha 
in the RAmAyatiia and with King SudAs in the l^gveda. 



1004 


Garu^a Parana 


ViSvimitra said : 

71. ‘‘O lord, I have not meditated on your lotus-feet, 
nor performed sandhyd nor adhered to Dharma that opens the 
gate of knowledge. I have not heard your narrative which could 
remove the impurity of my body. O lord, protect me, I am 
equal to Atri^ in all respects. 

72. Thus having praised the lord, the sage Viivamitra 
remained silent. 

73. Excepting Bhrgu, Narada and Daksa, the seven 
sons of Brahma, yisvamitra and Vaivasvata Manu are equal 
to one another in this aspect. 

74. Others are inferior to fire. Still others are more 
virtuous. O lord of birds, hear. I am going to tell you the 
praise ofHari by Mitra who was junior to Visvamitra in age. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

Praise of Lord Vifnu by deities and sages 

1. O lord of birds, Mitra who was junior to Visvamitra 
began to praise Narayana, the source of the universe. 

Mitra said : 

2. “I, who am ignorant of reality, bow to your lotus-feet 
for release from the meshes of worldly existence—the feet that 
stop the rotation of life and death and constitute an abode for 
the well-being of the world. Lord Vasudeva alone knows all this, 
not I, nor fire, nor Brahma nor Visnu nor Siva, O lords of 
sages. 

3. Not to speak of others, even the chiefs among the 
devotees of Visnu do not know him. O lord, protect me ever 
from all others. I am inferior to Visvamitra, though 1 am 
twice superior to Parjanya. I cannot praise you enough, 
O lord. 


1. Atri —one of the mental sons of Brahm&. 



III.8.13 


1005 


4. Thus, having praised Hari, O lord, Mitra remained 
silent. Tara, who was junior to Mitra beg^n to praise the lord. 

Tara said : 

5-6. “There are people who are singularly devoted to you 
O lord. Having abandoned all activities together with their 
kith and kin they are engaged in hearing and reciting your 
narrative. O Visnu, these pious people are devoid of all 
attachments. 

7. O lord, I who am equal to Mitra, have fallen in 
their midst.” O lord of birds, thereafter, Nirrti who was junior 
to Tara said. 

Nirrti said : 

8. “People attain supreme position by Yoga and devotion 
directed to your lordship by rendering service to those who are 
superior to me in virtue. 

9. By knowledge accompanied by detachment O lord, 
and by the control of mind, the devotees reach the highest 
ladder. Hence, protect me, O lord, who am equal to Tara in 
position. 

Thereafter, Pravahi who was junior to Nirrti began to 
praise the lord. 

Pravahi said: 

10. “Children arc born of semen by intercourse. Pros¬ 
perity accrues by your favour. Your narrative, O lord, that 
serves as the elixir of life, can take a devotee to the path of 
salvation. 

11. O lord of lords, let my devotion remain ever at the 
service of your feet. I am equal to Nirrti in status.”^ 

12. Lord of the inter-spaces of quarters, Nirrti, Pravahi 
and the beloved of Pravaha—these four are Parjanyas, thrice 
superior in merit to others. 

13. Now, I shall tell you, O lord of birds, of the people 
who are junior to them. 


1. The second half of this verse is defective, and not translatable. 



1006 


Garu^a Purdpa 


First of all, the noble Visvaksena who was junior to the 
mistress of Pravaha and was a member of the assembly of Lord 
Visnu began to praise the lord. 

Visvaksena said : 

14. “If all-joyous lord Kr^na be the conferer of salvation, 
if there be full devotion as the self-evident means of attaining 
release. 

15-16. If there be guileless devotion towards preceptor, 
holy hermits, Brahma and others, O lord, if there be attach¬ 
ment for Tulasi and other sacred plants, one attains release 
from the tangles of birth and death, there is no doubt in this.” 
17. O lord, having said thus, Visvaksena remained 

silent. 

Thereafter, Garuqln with hands joined in reverence and 
head bent low, said, “I am inferior to Mitra in status. There is 
no doubt in this.” 


CHAPTER NINE 

Nature of deities and the serial order of their position 
Garuda said : 

1. O lord, of great wisdom, I shall like to know the 
nature of deities Aj^a and others in the serial order of their 
position. 

Lord Kfsna said : 

2-4. The deities Ajana and others are bom in different 
families of gods. Thereafter come 6fteen deities of action, viz, 
Vir&dha, Caru, Desna, Citraratha, Dh|'tar^(ra, Kiiora, Huhu, 
Hsdia, Vidyadhara, Ugrasena, Viivavasu, Par&vasu, Citrasena, 
Gop§la and Bala. 

5. O lord of birds, such Gandharvas are hundred in 
number. They are equal in status to Ajdnaja in the state of 
release and bondage. 



III.9.22 


1007 


6-7. Ajanaja deities who are hundred per cent inferior 
to Karmaja deities are ghrtacl, Menaka, Rambha, Urvaii, 
Tilottama, Suketu, l^abari, Maftjugho^a, Pihgala and other 
prominent Yaksas (Yaksanis). 

8-15. Equal to Ajanaja and hundred percent inferior to 
Karmaja are Vi^vamitra, Vasisjha, Narada, Cyavana and 
Utathya. 

The noble sages equal to Ajaneya are ^atarci, Kaiyapa, 
Parasara the middle, Pavamanya, Pragatha, Ksudra-sukta, 
Devala, Grtsamada, Asuri, Bharadvaja, Mudgala, Uddalaka 
RsyaSrhga, Sahkha, Satyavrata^ Suyajfia, Babhravya, Mandukya, 
Baskala, Dharmacarya, Agastya, Dalbhya, Dardhya Acyuta 
Kavaija^ Harita, Kanva, Viriipa, Musala, Visnuvrddha, Atreya, 
l§rivatsya,Vatsala, Bhargava, Apnavana Mandukeya, Mandukya, 
Javali, Vitihavya Gftsamada, l^aunaka. The very names of these 
sages (who arc his devotees) are pleasing to Hari. 

16. 1 shall tell you, O Tarkhya, listen. I have sixteen 
thousand wives who have borne to me sixteen thousand sons 
who are equal to Ajanajas in merit. 

17. Kaieru, the daughter ofTvastr is senior to these in 
merit. O lord of lords, now I shall tell you about those who 
are junior to these in age. 

18. Pitrs are hundred per cent junior to seven Ajanajas. 
Conversely, the Vedic scholars declare them to be hundred 
per cent senior to Ajanajas. 

19. O best of birds, listen, I shall tell you about those 
who are junior to Pitps in age. 

Of the eight there sprang Deva-Gandharvas. They are 
less in number to the Pitrs by hundred and eight. 

20. Thereafter were bom Anandas who were hundred 
per cent superior to Gandharvas in virtue. They were 
principally the attendants of Devas, who received direct orders 
from them. 

21. These are hundred per cent inferior to ga^. And 
hundred percent inferior to Deva Gandharvas are the K^itipas. 

22. Hundred per superior to these me Uttama 
ganas among mankind. Having so fer made mcidental 
remarks, I shall now take up the matter in hand. 



1008 


Garu^a PurdJ^a 


23. Thus the deities Brahma, Laksmi, etc., completed 
their praise and stood in silence with their palms joined in 
reverence. 

24. Thus praised, Visnu, the eternal lord of gods, 
thought of granting shelter to his devotees. 

25. This pious praise is pleasing to the lord. It is sacred 
as well as destroyer of sins. It is the means of imparting bliss 
of self-realization. 

26. Those who do not read or hear this praise of the 
lord are hypocrites. 

27. The wicked people who do not differentiate the lord 
from the deities and at the same time enjoy the pleasures of life 
eat nothing but faeces abounding in hundreds of worms. 


CHAPTER TEN 

Creation Primary and Secondary 

Garuda said : 

1. Thus praised by the gods, the lord of the Satvatas 
disappeared after granting them the favour of his shelter. 

2. O lord Krsna, I wish to know what sort of shelter 
the overlord granted to his devotees. O compassionate lord, 
please tell me truly if your lordship thinks I am fit to hear. 

Lord Kr}i 2 a said : 

3. The supreme lord Visnu entered the related tattoos 
which he set to motion with the desire to create the universe. 

4. In the beginning the lord created the primordial egg 
constituted of gold and which was spread over fifty crores of 
yojanas around. 

5. Above it, there is a minute particle of golden hue of 
the same dimension as the egg itself. Above that, there is the 
earth as wide as the fifty crore yqanas. 

6. Thus the dimension of the egg extends over hundred 
crore yojanas. The egg is encompassed by seveil enclosures all 
around. 



III. 10.23 


1009 


7. The first enclosure consists of water extending over 
ten thousand crores of yojanas. The second enclosure consists of 
fire. 

8-9. It is enclosed all round by waters. The third en¬ 
closure is called Hara. It is ten times more in dimension than 
the dimension of fire. The fourth enclosure consists of ether. 

10. It is enclosed all round ten times more than ether. 
The fifth enclosure consists of ahankdra (ego) ten times more 
than ether. 

11. The sixth enclosure consists of It is enclosed 

all round ten times more than ether. 

12. The seventh enclosure consists of three gunas—sattva, 
rajas and tamas. 

13-16. It is enclosed all round ten times more than 
mahat. After mahat comes the enclosure tamas. It is enclosed 
all round, ten times more than mahat. 

After mahat comes the enclosure tamas. It is five times 
more than mahat. Thereafter comes rajas which is two times 
more than tamas. Thereafter comes the enclosure sattva which 
is two times more than rajas. The three combined are called 
Ekavarana *a single enclosing’. 

The prime germ of nature ‘ether’ comes thereafter. It is 
limitless. The eternal Visnu abides therein. 

17. The river Viraja forms the eighth enclosure. It flows 
in between the spaces of ether. It spreads over five yojanas all 
round. 

18. It is the most sacred river that wards of rebirth. O 
bird, those who bathe herein go to Brahmaloka where they 
rejoice with the four-faced Brahma.^ 

19. Those who take bath in the Viraja® river abandon 
their subtle bodies and attain liberation. 

20. Those alone who have realized the Self and abide in 
Brahman can cross the Viraja river. 

21-23. O lord of birds ! The sage Vyasa and others, 
though they have realized the Self cannot cross the Viraja 
river, since they have still to reap the fruits of their karman. 

1. Infra p. xoiifn. i. 

2. Viraja—-a mythological river. 



1010 


Gamia Pttrdna 


They live on this earth as far as Brahma lives till the 
seeds of their karman are destroyed root and branch. They can 
then cross the river Viraja, O lord. 

24. Others who have the seeds of their karman still 
fructifying cannot cross Viraja. 

25. O lord of birds, the river Viraja does not disappear 
even at the time of dissolution. 

26-27. The river Viraja is identical with Laksmi and it 
has the function of destroying the subtle bodies. 

There are devas Rjus by name who are worthy of attain¬ 
ing Brahman. 

28. They are many in number being at par with the 
jivas who attain liberation individually or along with the Rjus, 

These are characterized by thirtytwo marks and are 
capable of attaining the position of Vayu. 

29. Inferior to these are the yogins called Siva-Yogins 
who are characterized by twenty-eight marks. In between the 
compass come Suras who are characterized by sixteen to twenty- 
four marks. 

30-31. After Suras come Astakas. They are called sages. 
Inferior to these are Cakravartins. 

Within one hundred lives of god Brahma they can 
realize their Self and get their karman destroyed. O bird, within 
one hundred kalpas one becomes identical with Vayu. 

32. Thereafter, having passed through hundred births, 
one becomes Brahma and thereafter one goes to the abode of 
Visnu. 

33. O lord of birds, in the forty kalpas of Brahma after 
getting all karmans destroyed even Rudra can realize his Self. 

34. O bird of good vows, after the expiry of forty-one 
kalpas one becomes Se$a and attains liberation becoming one 
with Brahman. 

35. Even Indra can get his karman destroyed, realize 
Self and attain with Brahma the highest region of Hari. 

Garuda said : 

36-37. O lord, I have heard from Brahma tbatjven Rudra 
can realize Brahman when his karman is destroyed after com- 



IIM0.46 


1011 


pleting the eightyfive kalpas of Brahma, then how can you 
adjust your statement that even Rudra can attain Brahma after 
completing the forty kalpas of Brahma”. O lord, how can the 
contrary statements be reconciled ? 

38. On hearing the words of Garuda the lord spoke 

again. 

The lord said : 

39. There is no contrarity between two statements. The 
stupid alone will cherish doubt, the wise have no doubts at all. 

40. O lord of birds, astakas are eighty, with the addi¬ 
tional thirteen they come to ninety three in the fortieth Brahma 
kalpa—the four-faced' Brahma has so declared. 

41. Since Reality is to be kept strictly secret, Brahma 
said so in olden days. O bird, you should understand this 
problem in the right way. 

42. O bird, those who misinterpret the term Pancasiti 
Drahma-kalpa as the eightyfive kalpas of Brahma are totally 
ignorant. I have told you the truth. 

43-44. After the Viraja river, O bird, comes the bound¬ 
less ether presided over by Lak.smi, The dimension of the ether 
cannot be measured by any count, O lord of birds. 

45-46. The Virat Brahma was made the presiding deity 
of the universal egg.^ 

Thus the everlasting, eternal Hari made special arrange¬ 
ments by appointing the presiding deities over the different 


1. Brahma is four-faced (Caturmukha). Originally he had five heads 
hut one was cut off by §iva for telling a lie. According to another version, the 
fifth head was burnt off by the fire of Siva’s eye for speaking disrespectfully of 
§iva. We read in the Satarudrasamhita that it was Kulabhairava a terrible 
form of .’Siva who cut off the fifth head. V'isnu Puriina (ch. 8), however, 
gives a different version. It states that Bhairava attempted to cut off the fifth 
head of Brahmi at the instance of l^iva but gave up the attempt when .^iva 
intervened at the behest of Visnu. 

2. Brahmdtu^a —the egg of Brahman, the primordial egg from which 
the universe sprang. 



1012 Garu(la Pur ana 

principles. The lord Visnu stood encompassing alf regions 
above and below. 

47. O lord of birds, the above account refers to the 
primary creation. Now, I shall tell you about the secondary 
creation. 

Garudasaid ; 

48. O lord, you have already spoken on creation and I 
have heard of the same very attentively. 

49. O lord, now tell me in detail, what is the primary 
and what is the secondary creation. I am curious to hear about 
the same from you. 

The lotd said : 

50. From the unmanifest Prakrti to the gross eleincnls 
the evolutes of Prakrti are primary.^ The knowledge of the 
same leads one to liberation. 

51. O lord of birds, the universe evolved out of the 
Cosmic Egg is secondary creation. 

52-53. Creation, dissolution, recreation andreleasc, deities, 
major sages and regions Bhu, Bhuvah, Svar are eternal and 
unchangeable. The existence of the universe is actual and not 
a fiction. 

54. Those who speak otherwise are the slayers of truth. 
The course of the universe is true, O lord, the service of the 
lord is also true. 

55. Raising up my arm I declare that no scripture is 
superior to the Vedas and no deity is superior to Kesava. 

56. Those who worship other deities, may they be pitrs 
or preceptors, at the cost of lord Visnu go to the darkest 
regions. 

57. O lord of birds, now hear about the secondary 
creation. He who understands the same, attains the highest 
region. 

I. (1) Mahat: (creation of the great principle: intellect), (2) 
Tanm&tr^ : (creation of subtle elements). (3) BhQta : (creation of gross 
elements)—this set of threefold creation is primary ant! originates from 
avidyi—ignorance). 



III.ll.14 


1013 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 


Lord Kr^na said : 

1. Lord Visnu, the primeval Being, slept in the Gospiic 
waters for full one thousand years. 

2. Laksmi served as a couch of water, O bird, and Vidya 
as the air propelling water into waves. 

3. The same Goddess pervaded the embryonic waters in 
the form of darkness (tamas). In the embryonic waters there 
was nothing else. 

4-5. O best of birds, Laksmi praised Hari in the 
embryonic waters. 

Prakrti assumed the forms of Laksmi and Prthivi. She 
slept with Hari and praised the lord in the Cosmic waters with 
the mantras : O god Narayana, I offer my homage to you. 
Please attend to my entreaties . 

6. O blessed one, please remove my illusion. Confer 
liberation to the worthy. The primordial Prakrti is twofold : 
Para and Apara. 

7. Inferior to Prakrti is Brahmani. The fair-faced Uma 
is inferior to Brahmani. Saci, the consort of Indra, is inferior to 
her. The three are inferior to Prakrti, the primordial nature. 

8. O Hari, we do not beg of you for the removal of the 
three. In every man there exist two Prakrtis. 

9-10. One is eternal and unborn, the other is wrapped up 
by Tamas. The two are popularly known as Ajas, the elder and 
Aja the younger. One awards pleasure and pain, the other 
awards only pain. 

11. Those worthy of liberation are blessed to share 
knowledge and supremacy. Prakrti that wards off knowledge 
and supremacy is named dark-complexioned. 

12. The apara Prakrti is Paramacchadilka since it covers 
the Self from the vision of the Supreme Self. 

13. Such a wretched tamasic Prakrti abides in human 
beings, O bird, she does not abide in Brahman. 

14. She assumes the role of a Pisaeika for the individual 
struggling for release. I am the propeller of the two (Para and 
Apar^.) 



Garu4a Purina 

15. O lord Visnu O blissful one, that which envelops the 
gunas is the most beneficial. 

16. O sovereign lord, O supreme god, you confer 
liberation to your devotees after deserting the wicked Prakrti 
that envelops the universe all round. She envelops all of us who 
are ever transmigrating. 

17. Since she is eternal, her removal becomes a necessity. 
O auspicious lord, accept my entreaties, drive her away from me. 

18. Lord Hari, though always wakeful, plays the role of 
one who has just wakened from sleep. It is just to test the 
ignorant. 

19. Out of his navel there grew up a golden lotus which 
became the substratum of the world. The lotus was constituted 
of matter, of which the earth was the presiding deity. 

20. It was as illuminating as the eternal solar deity. 
Visnu whose nature is consciousness and bliss was surely distinct 
from it, 

21. Those who think that Visnu is identical with Prakrti 
go to inferior regions, as also those who are associated with 
these. 

22-23. O lord of birds, the phenomenon can be explained 
by the analogy of a diadem. 

Diadems are twofold : identical and non-identical. As a 
matter of illustration they are assumed to be identical. In fact, 
they are not identical, O lord of birds. 

24. He created the universe, divided into several regions 
and inhabited the people therein. During the period of dissolu¬ 
tion the lord alone exists taking rest which the learned declare 
to be a sort of sleep. 

25. O lord of birds, with the dissolution of the Universe 
the lord is not effected. Brahma and Vayu do not perish ever. 

26. Knowledge of the Supreme lord is circumscribed by 
condition as the water for washing the feet. When the organs 
of senses stop to work it is called ‘sleep’. 

27. O lord of birds, Brahma and Vayu are eternal. How 
can it be said that they are n®t dissolved at dissolution? 

28. O lord of birds, Brahma and Vayu are not the real 
entities. The sub-conscious state Supli is similar to another sub¬ 
conscious state named dream {svapna ). 





1015 


29. This state is metaphorically applied to Brahma. 
Hence, O lord of birds, the existence of Brahma, and Vayu 
should not be taken for granted. Those who realize this fact 
are for ever blessed with wealth as the merit of penance. 

Garuda said : 

30. The notion of Supti is caused by ignorance. Supti 
is not actual. 

31-32. O lord, if there is a cause, there can be effect. 
There can be no effect without a cause. It you base your argu¬ 
ments on this statement, then O blessed one, there being no 
cause how could Brahma suffer from fear. 

Or assuming that Brahma suffers from fear, can we lose 
anything from this assumption. 

33. Thus addressed, the lord said in reply. 

Fear is caused by ignorance. Thus the causal theory 
becomes applicable in regard to Brahma. 

34-35. If we do not admit ignorance to be the cause of 
fear or pleasure then how could there ever be a feeling of 
fear or pleasure. 

Hence, whatever feeling of fear or pleasure inspires the 
devotee is caused by ignorance. 

36. If fear or pleasure are caused by ignorance, then 
there should be no actual fear or pleasure, both being the 
results of ignorance O lord, then how is it that the seeker of 
the truth is extremely devoted to the lord ? 

37. On hearing the words of Garuc^a, lord Krsna said in 
reply. O wise one, the fear is assumed, it is not actual. 

38. It is assumed just for the pleasure of the lord. Fear 
etc. are, in fact, not real. 

39. For him who has attained the fruits of his activities 
no sorrow is caused by ignorance. How can there be a sorrow 
in the lord ? 

40. By the command of the lord the devotee assumes fear. 
The lord is pleased thereby. In fact, the fear never enters in him. 

41. Brahma observes all this. But this does not prove 
that ignorance (as a cause) is existent in Brahma. O lord of 
birds, Brahma is never found to be sorrowful. 



1016 


Garu^a Purd^a 


42. If he makes no attempt to realize Brahma and*obtain 
pleasure thereby, Brahma appears to be distressed just for deiud> 
ing the ignorant. 

43. The knowledge of Bralima comes to the seeker 
according to his power of receptivity. 

44. The manifestation of the unmanifest knowledge and 
the acquirement thereof is called the visibility of knowledge 
(Jflana-vyaktata). 

45. Hence, the supreme lord being knowledge itself there 
is no scope of ignorance. The four-faced Brahma was evolved out 
ol a golden lotus from the navel of Visnu. 

46-47. He was endowed with the power of reflection. He 
reflected to himself : “Will or desire has been created, for 
deluding the ignorance and propitiating the lord, out of 
knowledge itself, not from ignorance. Lord Brahma queried 
himself : “Who has created me.” 

48. For an answer to this query Brahma entered the 
lotus-stalk. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 

1. The noble Brahma, the devotee of Visnu who was 
seated on the lotus entered the lotus-stalk. 

He meditated upon lord Visnu who though non-dual and 
qualityless is the cause of his origin. 

2. Brahma, the perpetual devotee of Hari, O lord of 
birds, was swayed by ignorance when he meditated upon the 
source of his birth. 

3. As the mind of Vi?nu is constituted of nothing but 
desire, to his utmost he indulges in self-reflection. 

4. In the form of Hari, O lord, there exist both, simul¬ 
taneously, illusion and knowledge. But the two remain invisible 
like moving water in the clouds. 

81. Brahma is born of (i) the Cosmic Egg, (ii) the ifavel lotus and 
(iii) the body of Siva. 



111.12.15 


1017 


5-6. Sometimes, he manifests both,^ there being a 
distinct purpose for this manifestation. 

Now, hear attentively how the lord himself declared his 
holy form, devoid of differences as it is known to the Vedas, 
but which Brahma with his limited capacity is not capable of 
knowing, as he (Brahma) does not realize his form to be 
identical with Visnu. 

O lord of birds, there is no ignorance in this conception. 

7-8. Similarly, Brahma is incapable of know^ing the form 
of Laksmi. Not to speak of others, O lord of birds, Brahma does 
not know the form of both Vi§nu and Laksmi. The Vedas 
know the form of Visnu in entirety. So does Laksmi. 

9. O lord of birds, since Brahma with his circumscribed 
knowledge does not know the form of Visnu he is charged with 
the fault of eternal ignorance not conditioned by time or place. 

10. Brahma entered the lotus-stalk but he could not 
visualize Visnu, the source of his being. Thereafter, Brahma 
heard from the lotus-stalk a voice containing two syllables: 
O Brahman, perform tapa —penance. 

11. Recognizing clearly that it was the voice of the lord 
enjoining penance, he practiced penaiice at the feet of the lord, 
just for his pleasure. 

12. O lord of birds, then lord Vi?nu manifested himself 
to confer favour to his best devotees. 

Then the great god Brahma looked at the four-armed 
Lord Vi?nu with eyes resembling full blown lotus. 

13. The lord wore Srivatsa gem on his chest and the 
Kaustubha round his neck. He looked with the most agreeable 
and affectionate glance. 

14. At the sight of compassionate Visnu who is fascinat¬ 
ed by his devotees, Brahma knelt and worshipped him with 
devotion. With hb soul engrossed in meditation he, the 
eminent devotee, lauded Hari thus. 

Brahmisaid : 

15. O lord-of Laksmi, O lord of the world, abode of the 
people, goddess Laksmi does not know your real form. By 


1. Knowledge and illusion. 



1018 


Garu4a Purdm 


your grace, she understands your qualities which are Icnown 
to the Vedas. 

16. Still Laksmi does not know your traits in entirety. 
Nothing remains which the Vedas have not covered up. There 
are yet some distinct traits which are not expressed by the 
Vedas. 

17. Some special traits arc declared in the Vedas which 
are known only to the aspirants. O lord, at first, the four 
Vedas—Rg, Yajus, Saman and Atharvan—know them rightly. 

18. The Vedas are so called because they know the lord. 
So do the Puranas, Mahabharata and Paficaratra texts. 
Goddess Laksmi too knows of the traits ofVisnu as large in 
number as they come within her knowledge. 

19. She knows the distinct qualities of the lord which 
are mentioned in the Vedas, as far as her capacity permits. 
She knows the traits in general but not in particular. 

20. I too know certain traits declared in the Vedas as 
far as my capacity, by the favour of Laksmi as well as yours. 

21. There are still certain traits which remain unknown 
to many. But iSesa, the Serpent-chief knows them too. These 
remain hidden to others due to their bad Karman. 

22. ^§a knows those traits which are known to many as 
far as he is able to know. Thereafter, he knows those too, which 
are hidden to others. He is, therefore, called the one who has 
the knowledge of all traits of Vi^nu. 

23. The lord of Uma, Hara, knows, by your favour, the 
traits of the lord as far as his capacity. O lord, therefore, he is 
called the one who has obtained what is not accessible to others. 
O lord, when he knows my regions he knows your form as well. 

24. O lord, you are eternal, indestructible super con> 
sciousness. I cannot make a better choice among many. 

The gods who incarnate on earth are devoid of knowledge, 
absorbed in the objects of senste. 

25. The gods who are absorbed in the objects of senses 
are attached to outward pleasures. The gods who are attached 
to sexual pleasures talk in vain of liberation.^ 

26. O lord, there is no distinction between your nature 
and that of the lord. Since*you possess no material bcdy there 
cannot be eternal ignorance associated with you. 



III.12.37 


1019 


27. You possess a body eternally constituted of bliss and 
knowledge. Still the devotees regard, you have a physical body. 
Since you have no physical body, their calling you a bodiless 
one should only be correct. 

28. My homage to you, O bodiless one who are devoid 
of Ego or attachment. I too am devoid of physical body and 
unattached to outward objects. 

29-30. O lord, the objects of enjoyment—^woman, heaven, 
silken clothes, garlands—come within the range of my material 
desires, still I am devoid of any material desire. 

Rudra, etc., invested with physical bodies and attached to 
outward objects are possessed of ignorance, O bird. 

31. O lord, I become attached to women. I wear silken 
clothes and put on garlands, just for the propitiation of 
lord Visnu, not for my physical enjoyment. 

32-36. I have no other desire, except the attainment of 
eternal bliss. I am not, therefore, attached to outward pleasures 
nor my wife too is attached to them. Though not actually stupid 
she appears to be stupid. To the wise she appears to be wise. 
To the stupid she appears to be stupid. 

O lord, I possess as much of knowledge as is possessed by 
Vasudeva. As much knowledge is possessed by Vasudeva, so 
much knowledge is possessed by the wise.men of straight nature. 

The stupid men of complex nature arc characterized by the 
intricacy of ignorance. 

I have a perfect vision of knowledge as distinct and clear 
as the perception of an object in the light of the sun. Vasudeva 
possesses as much of knowledge as the perception of an object 
in the light of a lamp. 

Vayu is inferior to us both, though his inferiority is not 
too visible. Hence, one should not think of complete knowledge 
to be present inVdyu. Thus, I have explained to you the extent 
of knowledge in the lord as well as in V&yu and others till they 
obtain release. 

37. The five !^jus attain knowledge at release; V&yu 
and others at dissolution; Gilyntri suffers stupefiicdon either at 
dissedution or at re-creation. 



1020 


Garu^a Purdna 


38. O lord of lords, Bharati is at par with Gayatri. 
Those who are versed in the principles of knowledge related to 
Visnu should know all about this. 

39. I too suffer from illusion, sometimes but this illusion 
is assumed for stupefying Daityas, so that the supreme god Visnu 
may be gratified thereby. 

Like an ignorant person I put queries for stupefying people. 

40. As darkness does not exist with the rise of the sun 
so ignorance does not exist with the rise of knowledge. 

I know reality for certain, still I assume listening to, as 
if I know it not. 

41-42. Men of complex nature, though they have passed 
through hundred births, remain in ignorance so long as they do 
not realize Self. After they have realized Self there remains no 
ignorance. 

43. O lord of gods, after passing through series of births 
and realizing Self I obtained complete knowledge. 

44. But the great sages have declared that even when 
passing through the series of births and before attaining to 
complete integration I possessed a complete knowledge of the 
Self. O great lord, Sarasvati, who was born as Samjna,^ has no 
ignorance. 

45. No notion of ignorance should be ascribed to Brahma 
and Vayu. Now I relate to you a secret which every aspirant 
shall desire to know. 

46. Among incarnations, Bharati is knowledge incarnate, 
devoid of all sorrows. 

47. For stupefying Daityas she professes to be sorrowful 
partially. In fact, she imbibes no sorrow whatsoever. 

48-49. For a short while, when the realized object deludes 
the grasp, there is ignorance. But in the basic form, there is no 
ignorance in Bharati. How can there be one in Sarasvati ? 

50. So Sarasvati never incarnates partially. O slayer of 
Madhu, I too do not incarnate in part. 


I. The remark is not confirmed in any other text. 



III.12.63 


1021 


51-54. She and myself are possessed of knowledge. Vayu 
who incarnates in part possesses strength and knowledge in the 
original form but less when he incarnates. 

Strength and knowledge are manifest in Vayu in ail 
incarnations, though the proportion is less in Trctd than in any 
other age. 

55. As much of strength and knowledge as he reveals in 
Treta, the same he manifests when he incarnates in Dvapara. 

56. As much of strength and knowledge as he manifests 
in Dvapara, the same he manifests when he is born in Kali. 

57-58. Vayu shows his strength and knowledge for stupe¬ 
fying Daityas. 

O lord, those who recognize difference in each incarna¬ 
tion of Vayu go to dark region?. They are daityas, not devas. 

\Vc find no dilference between Vayu and Hari as we 
investigate into the nature of Hari. 

59. I sever the tongues of those who reproach Hari. 
Vayu incarnates on earth with that object in view. 

60. [The following should be avoided as they amount to 
the censure of Visnu.]^ 

To think that Lord Visnu is devoid of qualities while he 
is possessed of qualities. 

To think that he is identical with me, while full of bliss 
he is not identical with me. 

61. To think that he takes birth while possessed of 
eternality, consciousness and bliss he does not take birth. 

62. To think that he can be cut and severed in parts 
while he cannot be cut and severed in parts.® 

To think that he can get separated from Lak^m! while he 
is inseparable from LaksmI. 

To think that he suffers from sorrows while in fact he is 
devoid of sorrows. 

63. To think that Vyasa and Rama (Parasurama) are 
not the sage and the Brahmana.® 

1. The first two statements establish the concept of duality (dvaiUwdda) 
of the Vai^i.iava School to which RamAnuja, Madhva and VallaUia belong. 

2. Bhagavad GU& II. 

3. Parasur&ma, the son of Jainadagni, was a Brahmatm by birth, 
though by profession he was a warrior. Or, the word R&ma may signify 



1022 


Garu^a Purdna 


To differentiate among Kr$na, Rama and other incarna¬ 
tions. • 

64. To think that Rama (son of Da^aratha), Kfsna and 
other incarnations can be vanquished in the battle. 

65. To think that Lord Kr^na worshipped ^iva for the 
continuation of his line by getting offspring. 

To think that Rama, aggrieved at the separation of Sita, 
set up the image of Lord Siva (at Rameivaram) 

66. To think that Lord Krsna is Visnu while in his 
physical form he is composed of hve bhutas.^ 

To think that man is constituted of supreme consciousness 
and bliss while in fact man is not constituted of supreme 
consciousness and bliss. 

67. To assume that father, mother and Brahmins are 
made in the form of Vispu, while in fact they are not 
made in the form of Visnu. 

To think that lord Visnu and Rudra are identical in 
status while in fact Rudra is subordinate to Visnu.^ 

68. To think that lord Visnu and Surya are identical. 

To think that Surya is the greatest of deities and Visnu is 

his subordinate. 

69-70. Those who offer homage to the holy fig tree or 
the sacred basil plant, unless these grow up naturally, and 
those who overpass l^alagrama incur sin in common with those 
who censure the lord. 

71. Those who, being on the verge of liberation, regard 
the lord as a separate entity come to grief in course of time.'* 

Rama, the son of Dasaratha. Then it would mean “To think Rama 
(D&iarathi) is not identical with the supreme lord is tantamount to the 
censure ofVi?nu.” 

1. Rdmeharam —a holy place in South India. According toKamba Rimi- 
yana Rima encamped on the sea-shore to cross over to Lahki to release 
Slt& flrom Rivaoa’s custody. This temple was built by RUma at that time. 

The present text denies the installation of &va Lihga by R&ma, 
for that would impart more glory to l^iva which a VaiSpava Purina cannot 
bear. 

2. Though divine in nature, the incarnations of Vi^pu, etc., in human 
form are cmistituted of five gross elements (pafica mahatAfitas). 

3. This shows the sectarian character of the present Puripa. 

4. When the state of liberation draws near, the limits of religion and 
cthio are crossed and the notion of duality disappears. 



III.12.84 


1023 


72-73. Those who regard the lord as a fscparatc entity 
are stupid.^ Those who pay homage to the plants, unless these 
grow naturally, should be regarded as asuras. 

74-75. Neglecting the holy fig-tree, devoid of boughs, 
those who pay respects to the holy basil plant less than two 
months old or a young cow that has not delivered—should be 
declared asuras. 

76. Life beginning with the plants and ending with 
humanity constitutes my arms. Full one hundred years of my 
life constitute an age of Kali. 

77. The period of Kali is counted by Kalpas. Life exists 
though Kali expires. 

During the day of Brahma the sinners who have strayed 
from the path of virtue go to the dark regions. 

78. While staying there they wait for the turn of their 
destiny while the attendants of Vayu carry out the orders of 
the lord and torture them severely. 

79. After the lapse of one hundred years the living 
beings together with Kali will have their subtle bodies smashed 
with the thrust of a club by Vayu. 

80. Gradually, they will enter the dark regions allround. 

81. Of all the ages, Kali comes at the end. Kali is the 
foremost of those who slander the devotees of Visnu. 

82-83. In this world of mortals or in the world of extreme 
darkness, there is none equal to Kali who slanders the lord, 
among the devotees of Siva who find pleasure in ignorance and 
aversion in knowledge. 

Kali is known asDuryodhana,^ the endless pain incarnate. 

84. The wife of Kali hundred percent less in qualities, 
is known as AlakpnU popularly known as Manthara.^ 


1. Though there is a focus on identity as stated here, the distincdon 
between the JIva (the individual soul) and Paramitman (the supreme soul) 
is mentioned. The distinction is a omitinual process till the Jiva is merged 
in Brahman. 

2. Duryodhana —who strayed from the path of Virtue has been 
identified with Kali—the presiding deity of the iron age. 

3. MarUhard —an evil genius and an agmt of Kali is described here 
as the mistress of Kali. 



1024 


Garu4a Pur&na 


85-87. Hundred per cent less in qualities was Vipiacitti.^ 
Then came Jarasandha,* Kalanemi® and Kaiiisa.® The latter 
was hundred per cent less in qualities. Less by five per cent in 
qualities were Madhu and Kaifabha,® also known as Hariisa 
and Hidambaka. Bhauma® was equal to Vipracitti. 

88. Less by eight per cent in qualities was Hiranya- 
ka^ipu.^ Less by three per cent in qualities was the great Asura 
Hiranyak§a.® 

89. Maniman* was equal to him in qualities. Baka^® 
was a little inferior to Maniman. The great Asura Taraka'^ was 
less by twenty per cent in qualities. 

90. Sambara,^® the tormentor of people was less by six 


According to Vdlmiki Rdmdyatia, Manthara was a hump-backed nurse or 
slave of Kaikeyi who instigated her mistress, on the eve of Rama’s coronation 
as heir-apparent to beg of her husband by the two boons formerly promised 
to her by him, the banbhment of RSma for fourteen years and die installation 
of Bharata on the throne. 

1. Vipracitti —a danava born to Praj&pati Kasyapa by his wife Danu. 
He was the eldest of the thirtythree notorious asuras. 

2. JardsaruOia —Son of Bt'hadratha and king of Magadha, was killed 
by Bhima in a duel. 

3. Kdlarumi —a great asura. In later years he was born as Kariisa, the 
son of Ugrasena. 

4. Kathsa—Son of Ugrasena, king of Mathura and an incarnation 
of Kalanemi. 

5. Madhu and Kaifabha —the two asuras bom of the ear-wax of 
VifQu ( Vifnu-karpa-malodbhutau ). 

6. Bhautndsura^Nurak&sursi, son of Hirat^yakja. 

7. Hiranyakaiipu —Son of Kasyapa and Diti, his elder brother was 
HiranylLk^a. He was called Hira^yakasipu because his mother Diti delivered 
the child on the golden seat which was set up for the sages at the aivamedha 
sacrifice. 

8. Hirat^dkfa —Son of Kaiyapa and Diti and the elder brother of 
Hiranyakaiipu. 

9. Maniman —Bora of Vytra, son of asura DanSyu. 

10. Boka—an asura who terrorized the people of Ekacakra on the 
Ganges. He was killed by Bhima. 

11. T&raka (Tkraldbura), an asura chief who was killed by 
K&rttikcya, the eldest son of lord Siva. 

12. Sambara : The Purkpas refer to this leader of the Asuras as 
having played a prominent part in the Devfisura war. 

There is a hint in the Kgveda 1.17. about the killing of Sambara 
by Indra. 



III. 12.95 


1025 


per cent in qualities. Salva^ the meanest of the Daityas, was 
equal to l^ambara. 

91. Hi^imba* was two per cent less in quality than 
Sambara. Bana’ was inferior to Hidimba. Then came Kicaka.* 

92. Dvapara Mahahasa*^ was equal to Asura Bana. 
Inferior to him by ten per cent in quality was Namuci,* the 
strongest of Daityas. 

93. Paka’ and llvala* were equal to Namuci. The vilest 
of daityas was Vatapi* less by four per cent in qualities than 
llvala. 

94. Dhenuka,^® the king of daityas, was less than one 
and a half per cent in qualities. The meanest of the daityas was 
Ke^in^^ less than half per cent in qualities than Dhenuka. 

95. The great asura Tinavarta^® was equal to Kciin. 
O lord, Hamsa^® was less by ten per cent qualities than Ke^in. 

1. hAlva —ruler of Saubha was the friend of SisupMa, at the death of 
^iiupala he besieged Dvaraka and was killed by lord Krf^a. 

2. Hidimba—an asura whom the Pandavas confronted in the 
forest after their escape from the lac palace. Bhima killed him and married 
his sister Hidimbi. Ghatotkaca was Bhima’s son by Hidimbi. 

3. Batia —a powerful asura was killed by lord Kr^na. 

4. Kicaka —Brother-in-law of Matsya, king of Virata and son of 
Kekaya, king of the Sutas. 

5. Mahdhasa —not identifiable. 

6. JVawuft—Son of Praj&pati Kaiyapa by his wife Danu. This fierce 
giant was killed by Indra. 

7. Pdka —an asura, killed by Indra who got the name P^kasasana. 

8. llvala —an asura who lived in the Maiiimati city, llvala and his 
brother Vatapi ate up a number of brahmins and Agastya cursed them to 
death. 

9. Vat&pi —an asura, brother of llvala. He was eaten along v/ith 
his food by Agastya. 

10. Dhenuka —an asura who lived in the forest of K&li. He was killed 
by Balabhadra Rama and l§ri Krsna. 

There is another story that while Balabhadra Rkma, Sri Krs^a and 
other cowherds were looking after the cows an asura entered into the midst 
of the flock (dhenu). Rama and Kf^na saw him, struck him against a tree 
and killed him. 

11. Keii —an asura, son of Kafyapa by his wife Danu. 

12. Tftfivarta —son of asura Taraka. 

13. Ha/hsa —an asura who clashed with Kf^na and was kicked down 
to pktkla where he died of snake-bite. 



1026 


Garu^a PurSna 


96. Tririk^ was equal to Hariisa and Paurika* was equal 
to him likewise. In the previous birth he was known as Vena.® 

97. Kumbhandaka® and Kuparnaka® were less by one 
per cent qualities than him. O lord, Dulilasana® was equal to 
Jadisandha. 

98. The best of Daityas, Vikarna’ was equal to Karhsa. 

Less by hundred per cent in qualities than 

Kumbhakarna® was Kradhya®. 

99. Less than hundred per cent in qualities was the great 
asura Satadhanvan.'® The best of Daityas, KarmarP^ was equal 
to him. 

100. Kalakcya'® was equal to Vena. The meanest of 
daityas is equal to his superior. 

101. This is due to the influence the gods exercise over 
them. Less by hundred per cent in qualities than Kalakeya wzis 
asura Cittaman.'* The presiding deity of Gittaman was superior 
to him by hundred per cent in qualities. 

102. Less by htmdred per cent in qualities was the asura 
Padaman.^® The presiding deity of the eyes is superior to him 
by hundred percent in quality. 

1. Tririk —not identifiable. 

2. Paurika —a king of the ancient country PurikS. He was such a sinner 
that he was born as a Jackal in his next birth. 

3. Vtna —an ancient king who was notorious for his bad rule. 

4. Kumbhdp^a —Minister of Ba^a. Father of CitralekhS companion 
of the daughter of BSpa. 

5. Kup&r^aka : not identifiable. 

6. Duiidsana —Son of Dhrtara?tra and brother of Duryodhana. 

7. Vikar^a —Son of DhftarSftra was one of the seven great warriors. 

8. Kumbhakar^et—JiicoibKt of R&va^a was the son of Viiravas. 

9. Kradhyd —not identifiable. 

10. Satadhanvan —a Yidava king killed by Balabhadra and Srikr^ria. 

11. Karmdri —not identifiable. 

12. Kilakeya —Which K&lakeya is meant is not clear. Kdlakeya is 
not the proper name of a particular’ Asura. The term refers to 60,000 sons 
of K&U by Kaiyapa Praj&pati. They fought against Devas, on the side 
of Asura Vftra. 

13. CitUan&n —not identifiable. 

14. Pidamdn--not identifiable. 



III.13.2 


1027 


103. Less by hundred per cent in qualities was the 
asura l^aktiman. 

104. Less by hundred per cent in qualities than Padaman 
was the great asura Spariaman.^ 

105 Less by hundred per cent in qualities was Canda- 
man.® Less by hundred percent in qualities was Sisnaman.® 

106. Less by hundred per cent in qualities was Karma- 
man.* The presiding deities Rudra and others are urged by the 
deities who lived at the beginning of Kalpas. 

107. O lord, sometime they go contrary to your wishes, 
while I and Vayu, O lord, never go contrary to your wishes. 

108. O lord, Rudra and other gods lose their link with 
their root when they incarnate. Hence, they become powerless. 

109. O lord of earth, my intellect alone remains un¬ 
impaired. Even then, O lord, I need sufTicient strength to fully 
offer my praise. 

110. O Sovereign lord, be compassionate to me who am 
your constant devotee”. Thus having offered praise Brahma 
stood before the lord with his palms joined in reverence. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

Creation after dissolution 

Lord Krsna said : 

1. Lord Visnu, the slayer of Asura Madhu, the recep¬ 
tacle of compassion, was thus praised by his son Brahma, spoke 
in a voice as loud as the thunder of reigning clouds. 

The lord said : 

2. O Brahman, please start re-creating® the universe in 
the fashion you did in the previous Kalpas. 

1. SpeffSamdn-^not identitiable. 

2. Caodamdn —not identitiabie. 

3. ^ifoamin —not identiFiable. 

4. Kartnamin—not identifiable. 

5. After each dissolution of the univene, there is rc-crcation. Lord 
Vi?ou enjoins Brahmi to create the universe afresh. 



1028 


Garu^a PurSrta 


3. You have no axe to grind thereby. You create the 
universe to carry out my instructions.” Thus spoken to by Vi§nu, 
Brahma praised the lord. 

He thought of creating the Universe, just for pleasing 

Him. 

4-5. O Garuda, at first, Brahma, who represented 
intellect^ created Vayu® who became the presiding deity ol life. 
He is the soul of mankind.® 

6. Then, from his right hand he created Brahman! and 
Bharati. The two control the unmanifest Prakrti. 

From his left hand was created Fire, the son of Truth, 
representing the principle of Intellect. 

7. From his right hand was created Hara representing 
Ego. At first, Sesa was born. Garuda came next. 

8-9. Thereafter Brahma created Rudra. Thus, Brahma 
created the universe. Ten years after his own birth, Brahma 
created Vayu. A year after, he created Gayatrl. 

10. A year after, he created Bharati. A thousand divine 
years after, he created Sesa. 

11. A thousand divine years after, he created Garuda. 

12. .^Vfter the lapse of the same period, he created Varunl. 

13. When ten years had lapsed after Garuda was created 
he created Sauparni. 

14-15. After the lapse of ten years, he created Parvati; 
after the lapse of ten years, he created the moon, die presiding 
deity of the mind.* After the lapse ol ten years he created 
Indrn, the presiding deity of the right arm. After the lapse of 
ten years he created Saci.® 

1. The primordial creation was evolved out of intellect which is an 
unconscious principle. Drahmfl, the conscious principle pervaded intellect 
to create the universe. 

2. Brahma created the principle of breath (prapa) which is the 

principal constituent of life. The gross body cannot function without breath. 
Hence breath is the presiding deity of life. ^ 

3. To regard Vayu (breath) as the soul is hyperbolical. Vayu and 
Atman are different entities. They cannot be equated with each other. 

4. The moon is born out of the mind of BrahmS (Candrama 

manaso jfltah) and at the dissolution of the universe the mind is merged into 
the moon (manas candre niliyate). ^ 

5. —the wife of Indra. 



III.13.28 


1029 


16. After the lapse of thirty years since Indra was bom, 
he created, from his left arm, Kama, the presiding deity of the 
mind.^ 

17-18. After the lapse of ten years since the birth of 
Kama, he created Rati, the wife of Kama Brahma is the presid¬ 
ing deity of Kama. After the creation of the universe, he created 
Ego. 

19. After the lapse of ten years, he created the right 
nose. After the lapse of five years he created the left nose. 

20-21. Seven years after the creation of ego, he created 
Brhaspati. Five years after, he created Tara- who became the 
wife of Brhaspati. 

22. Twentyfive years after, he created Manu* his son 
from his mind. 

23-28. Five years after, he created Satarupa.^ Twenty 
years after, he created Daksa from his right thumb. Five years 
after, the four-faced Brahma^ created Prasuti from his left 
thumb. 

Brahma made an all-out effort and created offspring for 
the increase of population. First of all, he created Daksa.* 
Twenty-five years after Daksa, he created Aniruddha,’ out of 
the joints of his middle finger. 

Twenty five years after, he created Viraja out of the joints 
of his middle finger. 

One hundred years after, Aniruddha, he created Pravaha 
from the joints of his little finger. Ten years after, he created 
Parvaii. 

1. deitji of the mind: Since desire is born out of the mind, Kama 
(Desire) is said to be the presiding deity of the mind. But, as stated 
previously, the mind is governed by the moon. 

2. Tdra —Wife of Bihaspati who eloped with Gandra (the moon). 

A child bom of their union was called Budlia. She returned to Bihaspati 
later on. 

3. M^nu —the mental son of self-born Brahmt was called 
Svdyambhtwa. 

4. SatarUpd —the wife of Manu. 

5. On the four-faced Brahmfl, see P. Fn. 

6. Dakfa. This is repeated. 

7. Amuddha. This feature is not mentioned elsewhere. 



1030 Garu4(i Pur&na 

0 

29. One hundred years after, he created Vamadeva from 
the joints of his little finger. 

30. He created Yama from his back. Eight years after, 
he created $yamala who became the wife of Yama. 

31. Thirty years after Yama, he created the moon from 
the right ear. The moon became the presiding deity of ears. 

32. Nine years after, the lord created Rohini. He created 
Ganida from his left ear, of which Garu(ja became the presiding 
deity. 

33. Twenty years after the creation of the moon, he 
created the sun from his right eye. 

34. Six years after the creation of the sun, he created 
Sarhjfla from his left eye. 

35-36. A hundred years after, he created Varuna from 
his organ of taste and made him the presiding deity of that 
organ. 

Twenty years after, he created Ganga from the very organ 
of taste and made her the presiding deity of that organ. 

37. Ten years after, he created Narada from his lap. 
Narada became very dear to him. 

38-40. He created Agni from his organ of touch, sixty 
years after. 

He, the presiding deity of speech,^ created Svaha^ after 
five years. Svaha became the presiding deity of the mantras. 

O lord of birds, ten years after, from his eye-brows, he 
created Bhrgu,® the best of the Brahmanic sages. 

After a year, he created a woman who became the wife of 
Bhrgu. 

41. A hundred years after Bhrgu, he created Kasyapa 
out of his mind. 

42. A year after, he created Aditi. Ten years after 
Kasyapa, he created Atri. 

43. Ten years after, he created Bharadvaja. 

Ten years after, he created Vasi§fha. 


1. Either Brahmil or Brhaspati is meant. 

2. Svihd, the wife of god Agni. ^ 

3. Bhfgu'. Son of Brahma and the founder of Bhrgu Vaihsa, was- 
born of Brahmfi’s skin. 



III.14.2 


1031 


44. Ten years after, he created women, to become their 
consorts, at the interval of one year each. 

45. After Vasisfha, he created Gautama. Ten years after, 
he created Jamadagni. 

46-47. Ten years after, he created Vaivasvata Manu. A 
hundred years after Manu, was born Visvaksena, the most 
p)owerful son of Vayu. Fourteen years after, the lord of ganas 
was born. 

48. O lord of birds, eight years after, he created Kuberaj 
a year after, he created his consorts. 

49. Ten years after Visvaksena, he created Jaya and 
others the devotees of the lord. 

50. After Jaya, he created the deities of activities—Valla 
and others. A hundred years after, he created the bull Nandi, 
the Vehicle of Siva. 

51. Thirty years after, he created Parjanya, the presid¬ 
ing deity of Mantras and Yantras. 

52. Ten years after, he created Puskara, the presiding 
deity of the principle of activity. 

O lord of birds, thus Brahma started creation at my 
bidding, in order to oblige me. 

He who understands this obtains liberation. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 

Nature and form of lord Vifnu and Benefits of Vaiivadeva 

Garuda said : 

1. O lord, let me know the incarnations of lord Vi$nu, 
Laksmi and gods, O you of good vow, as also the difference 
amongst them in regard to their qualities. 

Lord Krfna said : 

2. The eternal, primeval lord has all the qualities in 
conunon with Brahma and others. 

He is independent, ancient and complete in himself. Such 
a being is second to none, O lord of birds. 



1032 Garuia Purdna 

3. His feet and their soles, his nails, hips and thi'oat are 
aW full. 

4. Other parts of his body, viz, thighs, belly, breast, 
shoulders, arms, hair of the head and the body pores of the hair, 
beards, teeth, penis, scrotum, hair on the scrotum, armpit, eye, 
ear are also complete. 

5. How shall I describe the original form of lord Hari ? 
So long as there is strength in his composite body there is 
strength in his each and every hair, he can be called complete. 
He is the creator of all, the destroyer of all and the enjoyer of 
quintessence of all substances. 

7-8. He is not the enjoyer of non-essential part of 
substances. O lord of birds, now hear, I shall tell you the 
essence of substances. 

The Juices of the grape, sugar-cane, cocoanut, mango, 
bread-fruit, orange, betel-nut, date. Banana fruit—the compas¬ 
sionate lord drinks these juices when these are in their form of 
seed. 

9-10. He drinks the juices of the betel, Khadira tree, 
flower. Sandal, wheat, barley, bean, harem (?), cultivated and 
wild rice, corn and unhusked rice. 

11-16. Lord Visnu receives the juices of forbidden 
vegetables, salts, foodstuff, prescribed eatables, soup, substantial 
foodstuff—milk, curd, butter-milk, ghee, foetid, mustard, 
pepper, cumin seed food cooked in the sacrificial ghee, treacle 
roasted or fried in the oil, butter, clove, sugar,—lord Vasudeva 
partakes of these essences with pleasure. 

By order of the lord of LaksmI, the abode of all living 
beings, Vasudeva enjoys the essences of all these things. O best 
of disciples, the rest of the juices are enjoyed by the ruling 
monarch, the lord of the earth. 

The devotees of lord Vasudeva, usually, have no knowl¬ 
edge of essences. Leaving aside these devotees, we talk of the 
devotees of Visnu who enjoy the essences of substances and 
thereby avoid coming to grief. 

Those who partake of meals without performing Vaisva- 
deva' are the low class of people who eat the stale food. 

1. VaiivadMva —an ofiering to all deities made by {U'eseating oblations 
to fire before meals. 



III.14.34 


1033 


17-18. O lord of birds, I shall tell you the additional 
benefits accruing from Vaisvadeva—benefits which arc most 
guarded secrets, not to be disclosed to any. 

Those who offer gifts in respect of the Sun, leaving Vayu 
and the Supreme lord Hara stationed therein can be said to 
enjoy the essence. Lord Visnu is said to enjoy the part of 
essence, not of the total quintessence, although he can enjoy 
the entire essence by his might unchecked. 

19. O lord of birds, I quote another list of essences of 
substances. 

Juicy substances, grapes and the like lose their quint¬ 
essence with the lapse of time. 

20-28. Ripe grapes lose their essence after four days; the 
rose apple after the same period; the bread fruit after a month, 
the date after six months, the cocoanut after twcntyfour hours 
since its breaking forth; the cocoanut and the date after they 
go dry, the mango after a fortnight, the areca nut after a year, 
the betel after twentyfour minutes; the cooked food, soup, 
milk-rice after three hours, the foodstuff roasted in the oil after 
a month and a half, the food roasted in ghee after twelve hours; 
the vegetables after nine hours; the citron, ginger, amalaka, 
camphor and mango lose their value after a year. 

Parpata loses essence after a fortnight. The holy basil is 
always full of essence. Dry or green it is always fresh. 

29-33. The holy basil, as thought of containing essence 
even on the EkadasI (eleventh) day should be held either by 
the hand or the nose, but never by the organ of the tongue. 

On Ekadasi, the day sacred to Visnu, the cooked food 
loses essence. 

On Ekadasi O lord of birds the holy centre of V'^i^nu is 
full of essence for the whole of the day, exceeds in essence on 
the second day (so on and so forth). O blessed one, the holy 
places of bath, if polluted by the articles of worship, scent, etc., 
lose their essence, similarly if mixed with sweet water. 

O lord of birds, on Ekadasi, sacred to Vi§i;iu, milk, ghee, 
honey and water are full of essence, while other stuffs arc with¬ 
out essence. The best of the sages have declared thus. 

34. In the month of A^adha, O Garuda, the vegetable 
loses all essences. 



1034 


Gatuia Pm drai 

0 

35. In the month of Bhadrapada, O lord of birds, the 
curd loses all essences. In the month of Alvina, the milk loses all 
essences. 

36. If a woman does not put the traditional mark 
Ordkoapunira}- on her forehead she becomes devoid of essence. 
Those who are averse to devotion of Hari are called asuras. 

37. The mouth devoid of Hari’s name is without an 
essence. The cooked food, a part of which is not offered to 
Hari is essenceless. 

38-41. The hemp blossom becomes essenceless after three 
days. Mallika (Jasmine) for three hours and Jati (a kind of 
Jasmine) for half that period; a lotus after nine hours, Karavira 
after twentyfour hours, Parijata after twentyfour minutes, 
saffron after three years, milk after ten years, camphor after a 
year, sandal for all times. 

I shall now tell you of things that have no essence. 

42-47. The chaff of gram, Medhyd (a fruit-bearing 
plant), gruel, the holy basil, parched or fried grain, Upodvaji^ 
gourd, KoSdlaki (?) the egg plant, tamarind, Bilva fruit, 
Udumbara fruit, onion, garlic—these are essenceless in all 
times. 

The performance of Vaisvadeva ^raddha on Ekadasi, 
offering of water libation to the manes, cremation of the dead 
with the mantras are always essenceless. 

Lord Hara does not accept such inauspicious gifts. He, 
the omniscient lord, makes sinners reap their evil deeds while 
he himself does not taste them. The partaking of essenceless 
food is the result of their evil deeds. 

48. Common people do not partake of essential food. 
On the other hand, noble persons like Kunti and others partake 
of essential food. Lord Visnu himself drinks the sacred but not 
the polluted water. 

49. Who can tell the movements of Hari ? The lord is 
of blissful nature. There is none equal to him at any time or 
place. O lord of birds, now 1 shall tell you all about the 
incarnations of Hari. 

1. OrdhoO'ptittdrit^A mark worn by the Vaifpavas on Ifieir forehead 
with yellow ochre colour. 



III.15.8 


1035 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 

Incarnations of Vif^u 

The lord said : 

1. Lord Hari, the primeval being, thought of incarnat¬ 
ing himself. He appeared as Visnu, the repository of all 
virtuous deeds. 

2. Lord Visnu, the germ of all creation, incarnated as 
Vasudeva. He entered the womb of Maya and created Vayu. 

3. He entered the womb of Jaya and was born as 
Saihkarsana^ (Balarama). 

4. The lord was born as Pradyunma. He created Saras- 
vati, Bharati and the Goddess (Durga). 

5. He created Mahat (in subtle form) with sixteen 
digits accompanied by ego. I shall now tell you the sixteen 
digits. 

6-7. They are : Five primary elements {mahdbhutas),^ 
five organs of actions {karmendriyasY and five organs of know¬ 
ledge (jftanendriyas)^ and one mind.* 

Thereafter was born Aniruddha. The omnipotent lord 
gathered Souls and created Gods Brahma and others and 
invested them with the gross body. O lord of birds, then the 
primeval Purusa Visnu was bom as Sanat Kumara.* 

8. The lord then became Sanandana and in that form 
he practised celibacy and subdued the ten organs of senses, a 

1. SathkaTfaoa, Balabhadra, Rama. He was the elder brother of 
Sri Kr^na and the eighth incarnation of Mah&visnu. 

2. Five gross elements : earth, water, fire, wind and ether. 

3. Kanmndriyas : Organs of activity, viz., (1) anus, (2) phallus 

(3) hands, (4) feet, (5) Speech. 

4. Jft&nendriyas or buddhlndriyas : (1) ears, (2) Ain, (3) eyes, 

(4) tongue and (5) nose. 

5. Some regard mtnas as the eleventh indriya (mamis tvtkidasam 
smxtam ). 

6. Smat Atunint-—also known as Sanat Suyfita. He is one of the four 
Sanakidia, the other three being Sanaka, Sanandana and Sanktana. 

The Sanakidii were the meauU sons oi Brahmi who as infants were 
asked to create sutgocts. But they hcang' the incarnations of Sattva (purity) 
were not prepared to undertake creation. They remained edibates for ever. 



1036 Garuid Purdna 

feat which cannot be accomplished by everybody. The 'prince 
Sanandana was no other than the lord himself. 

9. Lord Visnu became a hog' and took the earth out of 
waters. He slew Hiranyaksa, protected the pious and established 
rule of law over the earth. 

10. The lord incarnated himself as Mahidasa from his 
mother Yamini and father who was not a sage. In his incar¬ 
nation as Mahidasa^ he preached philosophy of Paficaratra. 

11. Visnu, known as Narayana, was born in Badari* for 
effacing sin and destroying impurities. He practiced penance, 
taught sages and humbled celestial women. 

12. The lord became Kapila,* explained tattvas, removed 
doubts and instructed Asuri.® 

13. The lord was born of Atri and Anasuya. He was 
known as Datta.* He imparted instructions in logic to his 
disciole Alarka.’ 

A 

14. Born in the Solar race from Akuti® and constituted 
of permanency (consciousness and bliss) he ruled in the S\ayam- 
bhuva Manvantara together with the Devas. 

15. Olord of birds, the wide-strider Visnu was born of 
Nabhi® and Marudevi, the daughter of Agnidhra and showed 
marvels to the honourable learned men of Bharata. 

1. The earth was merged under water by Hiranyaksa. Maha Visnu 
incarnated as the boar and brought the earth out of water by his large teeth. 

2. Mahidasa—a preacher of Paiicardtra system of philosophy. 

3. Badari —^Badarikasrama, Badaryasrama. A holy place in the 
Himalayas where Nara and Narayana performed penance for thousands of 
years. 

4. Kapila was an authority on Sahkhya. He has written two books, 
Saihkhya-pravacana and Tattva-Samdsa. 

5. Asuri—a, disciple of Kapila. Compare— 

^ ^srr ^ ii 

No work of Asuri has so far been discovered, 

6. Datta Ar«ya~the son of hermit Atri, Anasuya the consort of Atri 
gave birth to Oattatreya. But Dattatreya was an incarnation of Mahavi^pu. 

7. Alarka —No work is ascribed to liim. 

8. Akuli —wife of Ruci Prajapati. 

9. Ndbhi —the eldest son of Agnidhra. He was the father of Rsabha 
whose son is Bharata. India was called BhSrata after the«jname of this 
high'SOuled king. 



III.15.21 


1037 


16. Lord Hari incarnated himself as tortoise^ supporting 
the Mandara* mountain when it was being used by gods and 
asuras for churning the ocean. 

17-18. Lord Hari was born as Dhanvantari® who was as 
bright as an emerald. 

Lest the undesirable things should occur, the lord seized 
the jar of nectar and assumed the form of a pretty damsel 
MohinI* and deluded the puffed Asuras. 

19. The noble lord incarnated himself as Nrsirhha* and 
killed Hiranyakasipu® by tearing up his thighs with his nails. 

20. The lord was born as Vamana’ to Aditi and 
Kasyapa for restoring to Indra the land which had been 
usurped by Bali. 

21. The lord was born to sage Jamadagni and was 
known as Para^urama.® He wanted to liberate the earth from 
the yoke of Ksatriyas who hated the Brahmanas. 


1. Incarnation as tortoise. Mahavisnu incarnated as tortoise and 
supported the Mandara mountain when it was being used for churning the 
milky ocean. 

2. Mandara —a mountain in the east of Bharata, near Kailasa. It 
was used as the churning stick when the milk-ocean was churned. 

3. Dhanoantari —born from the ocean of Milk when it was being 
churned by Devas and Asuras. 

4. Mohini —When Devas and Asuras quarrelled with each other 
over the right of partaking the nectar obtained from the sea of milk, 
Mahavisnu appeared before them in the guise of Mohini and turned the 
attention of Asuras on her while the nectar was carried away by Devas. 

5. Mrsirhha or Narasithha —Incarnation as lion-man for killing Hiranya¬ 
kasipu, the brother of Hiranyak$a and protecting Prahlada, a devotee, 
against his aggressive desigpis. 

6. Hira$yakaiipu —son of Kasyapa and Diti and brother of 
Hiranyakfa, Vajrihga and Siihhika, he was a terror to the devotees of 
Maha-Vi;nu, including his son Prahikda. 

7. Vdmana —an incarnation of Mah&vi^nu. In the guise of a 
dwarfish brahmin, Mahavisnu begged Mahabali of the entire earth and 
thrust him to the nether regions. 

8. Paraiurima —An incarnation of Mah&visnu. He destroyed the 
wicked Kfatriya kings as a revenge for the death of his father Jamadagni by 
Sahasrarjuna Kkrttavirya. 



1038 


Garuia Purdna 


22. The lord was born as Vyasa' from Parai|ira-Satya- 
vati. He divided the Vedas into four Sarhhitas for his pupils 
—Paila and others. 

23. The lord was bom in the house of Raghu* in the 
Solar dynasty, to Kausalya and Da^aratha. He challenged the 
ocean to fight and subjugated him. He fought against Ravana 
and killed him. 

24. Then, in the twenty-eighth Dvapara age, lord Visnu 
incarnated as Vyasa. 

Bom as the son of Paraiara and Satyavati,^ he classified 
the Vedas into four divisions. 

25. The lord was born as Krsna* to Devaki and Vasu- 
deva. He killed Kamsa and his associates, and protected the 
Pandavas. 

26. Then in the Kali age, the lord was born in the 
Kikatas^ as Buddha.* He deluded the asuras and flouted the 
Vedas. 

27. Then, at the interval between KalkP and Satya age, 
the lord will be born in the house of Visnugupta and slay the 
rulers who have turned thieves. 


1. Vydsa —son of Parasara from Kali, the daughter of a fisherman. 
He arranged the Vedas into four Saihhitas. The Mahabharata and the 
PurSnas are ascribed to him. 

2. Rama (DAsarathi)—an incarnation of Mahavi$nu. He defeated 
the Brahmin sage Parasurama and killed the Brahmin asura Ravar.a. 

3. Satyavati —Called by various names : Kali, Matsyagandha, she 
was the fisherman’s daughter. By copulating with her. Sage Parasara got a 
son named Vy&sa. Later on, she married Santanu and delivered two sons 
GitrShgada and Vicitravirya. 

4. A'rftMi—a full incarnation of Mahavisnu. Born in the Yadava 
dynasty as the son of Vasudeva and Devaki, Sri Krfna was the ninth of the 
ten incarnations of Mah&vi^nu. 

5. Klkafas —name of a country, modern Bihar. 

6. Buddha, better known as Gautama Buddha. He was the ninth 
incarnation of Mah&vi$nu, born to convert every asura to Buddhism and 
send him to hell. 

7. Kalki —an incarnation of Mahavif^u. As the son of Visnuya^ 
he will destroy all lawless people; restore normalcy, establish four classes and 
four stages of life. This would be at the end of Kali and the beginning of 
Kria age. 



111 . 16.10 


1039 


28-29. The incarnations of Vi?nu N&r^yana are twentyfour: 
beginning with Keiava and Samkar^ana. Those beginning with 
Visva are one thousand. Those b^inning with Para are 
enumerable. 

These incarnations are of lord Narayana himself. There is 
not the slightest variation in this statement. 

30. Lord Visnu is complete in all respects by virtue of 
strength, form and qualities. He is eternal by virtue of his 
eternal qualities, not otherwise. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

Incarnations of Mahl^akfmi 


Lord Kfsna said : 

1. O lord of birds, now, listen to the nature of Maha- 
laksmi, her incarnations and the extent of knowledge peculiar 
to her. 

2. O lord of birds, the universe is distinct from the lord. 
The personal soul is the eye that perceives the universe. The 
knowledge of the universe is the knowledge belonging to 
Laksmi. 

3. The eternal Goddess Laksmi is inseparable from the 
lord. The feet of the lord are her only shelter. She is a released 
soul. She is always awakened. 

4-5. O lord of birds, she is called Prakrti, for, she creates 
the Universe by her qualities—sattva, rajas and tamas and 
consumes the world by tamas. 

6-8. As the consort of Vasudeva, she is called Maya; as 
the consort of Sankar$ana,Jaya; as the consort of Aniruddha, 
$anta; as the consort of Pradyumna, Krti; as the consort of 
Visnu, Laksmi—the presiding deity of Sattva gu^a. As the 
presiding deity of tamogupa, she is Durgi or Kanyaka. As the 
sister of Krsna, the son of Nanda, she is called Kanyaka. 

9-10. As the goddess of earth; the presiding deity of 
rajasy she is the consort of Boar. As the presiding deity of the 
Vedas, she is Ann!q}ur 9 &. As the consort of N&raya^a, she is 
Laksmi, the unborn. 



1040 


Garuia PurSa^a 


11. As the consort of Yajfia Varaha, she is Daksina! 

12. As the consort of Vr^abha, she is Jayanti. As the 
daughter of Janaka and the wife of R&ma, she is Sita. 

13-14. Rukmini and Satyabhama were the wives of lord 
Kr^na. The incarnations of Lak^im are many, O lord of birds 
and there is no difference among them. The forms of Lak^ml, 
O bird, are inferior to Visnu who p(»sesses enumerable 
distinctions. 

15. Brahma and Vayu are inferior to Visnu by millions of 
qualities. Now, I shall tell you about the nature of Brahman, 
O lord of birds. 

16. Bom of Lord Vi§riu and his consort Maya, Brahma 
is called Viriflca. 

17. Bom of Aniruddha and his consort iSanta, and 
constituted of intellect ( Mahat ), he obtained the appellation— 
Mahaviriflca. 

18. Born ofVasudeva from Maya by rajas, he (Viriflci) 
is called Vidhi. 

19. Bom of Universal egg from the navel lotus of Visnu 
and seated in the lotus itself, he is called Caturmukha—the four¬ 
faced god, O best of birds. 

20. Thus they declare the four names of Brahma. I shall 
now tell you the names of Vayu, O lord of birds. 

21. Bom of Samkar^na and Jaya, he is called Vayu 
known by the appellation PradhSna. 

22-23. As he activates men to work he is called Sutra- 
Vayu who assumed the form of dhrti to praise Narayana at 
Badari with steadfast devotion. He stays in the heart of his 
loyal devotees and is called Hari. Present in the heart of all, 
Vayu ever remembers lord Hari. 

24-25. Vayu is* therefore, called Sthiti, O lord of birds. 
Or Vayu alone remembers Hari. Staying in the White Island 
{Svetadvipa) ^ O lord of birds, he is called Smfti. 

26. Vayu abides in the hearts of all people—this is what 
Lord Vi^nu has declared Hence, he is called Mukti. 

1. Svtia-dtApa-^li has 'not been posable to Identify 4his island. 
Colonel Wilford has attempted to identify it with Britain. H.M., p. 153. 



III.16.44 


1041 


27. With my consent, he confers liberation to his devotees 
by imparting knowledge to them. V4yu is called mukti. 

28. Abiding in the hearts of his devotees he multiplies 
their devotion for Visnu. Therefore, he is called the devotee of 
Visnu. 

29. He constitutes the consciousness of living beings. He 
is called consciousness. 

30. O bird, he is the lord of gods and of his associates. 
Hence, he is called an Overlord. 

31. Staying in the heart of the people, O lord, he observes 
their strength. O lord of Vinata, he is, therefore, called Bala. 

32. Abiding in the hearts of people he conducts sacrifices 
through their sons and grandsons. He is, therefore, called a 
sacrificer. 

33. From Anantakalpa to Vayukalpa, there is no 
complexity in Yoga. Therefore, Rju is called Yogya. 

34-35. Complexity ofYoga arises from Hari’s worship or 
from the worship of Isa, Rudra, and others with an object in 
view. Those who perform such worship are called anrjavas. 

36. Among the sages too, those who worship Hari for 
attaining the object of their desire are called anrjus. The same 
practice is current among the people. 

37. [He cannot obtain release] until he gives up Hari’s 
worship with an object in view, for desire is an obstacle in the 
path of realization, even for the sages. 

38. Impressions of countless activities performed in 
previous ages are obstacles to the person seeking for liberation. 
He should, therefore, give up worship which aims at the fulfil¬ 
ment of desire. 

39. By enlightenment received from Guru’s instructions 
all activities practically cease to be. Being initiated in Yoga 
and practising the same, the aspirant achieves liberation after 
all. 

40. The worship of the lord with an object in view 
imparts riches which controvert knowledge and lead to darkness. 

4i-44. If the lord is worshipped without any motive that 
worship leads him to perfect knowledge. 

To take a stone, say Sdlagrima or a Brahmana for lord 
Visnu or water for a holy place or Siva, Surya or KarttUceya 



1042 


Garu^a Purina 


for Vi^nu, O lord of birds, is a false knowledge. To take *6tone, 
etc., as nothing but an entity inseparable from Visnu is called 
Vififubuddhi. One should not differentiate one form of the lord 
from the other. 

45. Vayu is called Rju the worthiest since he worshipped 
the lord without a motive. Those who worship the lord with 
a motive are called anrjus. 

46. Vayu is called wisdom (prajfta) since he shows the 
lord ever in sight to those who are on the verge of liberation. 

47. He is called jhana (knowledge) as it shows Hari, 
even beyond the range of sight. 

48. Stationed in the heart of devotees and showing them 
what is wholesome and what is not, he is called Guru. 

49. Stationed in the heart of Yogins and meditating on 
the lord as a distinct entity he is called a meditator. 

50. As he comprehends the lord according to his ability 
and as he knows the qualities abiding in Rudra and other gods 
he is called Vijfla, O best of birds. 

51. He is non-attached Viraja since he has abandoned 
all activities associated with the fulfilment of desire. 

52. Or he is called Viraja because abiding in the hearts 
of Yogins he creates, aversion in them for worldly pleasures. 

53. When the results of virtue and sin are exhausted, 
the gods, as far as Vayu, deserve perfect bliss. 

54. As Vayu creates objects of enjoyment for the pleasure 
of gods, sages and nobles, he is called joyful. 

55. O lord of birds, Vayu is the principal deity who 
suffers both pleasure and pain. 

56. Whatever calamity befalls the deities is due to the 
influence of Asuras. 

57. Human soul suffers from affliction caused by the 
Daityas. People suffer often and anon specially in the Kali age. 

58. Vayu consumes all sorrows accruing both from virtue 
and vice in the Kali age. Hence, Vayu is called Kali. 

59. O lord, whatever joys or pleasures accrue to the 
people are due to divine influences. There is not in the least any 
doubt in this. 

60. O son of Vinata, Devas do not go to hell, and 
Daityas do not seek pleasure from the objects of pleasihre. 



III.16.72 


1043 


61-62. Whatever plea:tare they enjoy accrues to them 
from Devas. Devas have no tamas; they suffer from no pain by 
coming in contact with the objects of pleasure. Whatever pain 
they suffer is due to the influence of asuras. 

63. Hence, Kali is a sufferer, Vayu is joyous. Ordinary 
people and sages have both pleasure and pain. 

64. Vayu enjoys the fruits of his virtuous deeds. He 
suffers from his sinful actions. It is hard to escape the results 
of good or bad activities. 

65. Partial incarnations of Lord Vayu from Prana to 
Sukha arc nineteen in number. O lord of birds, the lord has 
descended on earth several times, each time with a separate 
identity. 

66-67. O lord of birds, I shall explain to you the total 
incarnations of Vayu. Listen. 

Of the fourteen Indras, the second is called Virocana 
who is identical with Vayu. With his eyes expanded all around, 
he, the partial incarnation of Marut. is also called Rocana. 

68. When lord Rama incarnated on earth, Vayu was 
born as Hanuman^ for rendering assistance to Rama. 

69. When lord Krsna descended on earth, he was born 
as Bhima, the offspring of Vayu. 

70-71. Vayu will be born as Maniman daitya, known 
as 6ahkara. He will be so called, for he will abolish caste and 
destroy dharma. 

72. Then he will be born as the son of Vasudeva. There 
will be none equal to him in the fourteen worlds.* He will be 
fully equipped with wisdom. 


1. Hanuman —a monkey-chief. He was the son of Ahjan& by the 
god wind or Marut. He is represented as a monkey of extraordinary strength 
and prowess which he manifested on several critical occasions on behalf of 
Rama whom he regarded as the idol of his heart. 

2. The fourteen worlds are divided into two groups: seven higher 
and seven lower regions. Bhu, Bhuvah, Svah, Mahah, Janah, Tapas, Satya, or 
Brahma are the upper regions rising from the earth, one above the other; 
while Atala, Vitala, Satala, Ras§tala, Talitala, Mahatala and PatSla are the 
lower regions descending from the earth, one below the other. 



1044 


Garuia Purdna 


73. The full incarnations of Vayu are three. Their creed 
is one and the same which is propounded in the Bhagavata. 

74. The purpose of each and every incarnation is two¬ 
fold : establishment of order and suppression of the wicked. 
There is no other purpose for the lord to incarnate. 

75-76. In the three incarnations of Vayu, viz. Vairocana 
etc., O lord of birds, there are no pangs of birth. In the four 
incarnations there is no fusion of semen and blood. Hence, in 
these four incarnations there is nothing inauspicious. 

77. In the four incarnations, at the hour of birth, the 
lord, at first, dries up the embryo before he is born out of the 
womb. 

78-80. Of the twenty-three forms of the Supreme lord 
Brahma, Vayu is one. In the enjoyment of eternal bliss, pleasure, 
etc., Vayu is at par with Brahma. This truth knows no varia¬ 
tion; listening to this leads to release. O lord of birds, I shall 
now tell you about the descent of Vayu. 

81. In the Kfta age, there were born from Pradyumna 
twins Savitri and Sarasvati. 

82. In between the two, was born Vani. Savitri was 
married to Virifica, Sarasvati to four-faced Brahma. 

83. These are the three forms of Vani. I shall now tell 
you about the incarnations of Bhdrati. Please hear attentively. 

84. Being the presiding deity of the Vedas she is the 
Veda itself. She is the mistress of Vayu, the great meditator. 

85. She is also the mistress of Vayu—knowledge 
incarnate. Being of the nature of joy she is identical with joy. 

86. She is the mistress of Vayu who is identical with joy. 
Vayu is the preceptor of Bharati. Since she is devoted to Vayu, 
the preceptor, she is called Gurubhakti. She is the mistress of 
Vayu, the great preceptor. 

87-88. She has devotion for Hari, hence, she is called 
Hari~Priti. She is the mistress of Vayu of the form of dhrti. 

89. Since she is the presiding deity of all sacred texts, 
she is identical with them. She is the wife of lord Vayu. 

90. She presents all objects of senses to lord Visnu for 
propitiating him or for his enjoyment. Hence, she is called 
Bhuji. 



III. 16.102 


1045 


91. She became the mistress of Citra. In the name of 
Sraddha she became the mistress of lord Rocana. 

92. O lord of birds, Hanuman, the son of Vayu, lived in 
the Treta age. Then, Bharati was born as the daughter of 
a Brahmin, !^iva by name. 

93. Not only Bharati and her companions such as Saci, 
etc., but also all the rest who were born of him were married 
to their partners. 

94-95. His daughter named Mali was ako called Anyaga 
(one who has relations with another than her partner). She 
was born together with Saci, etc., at the end of Treta, O lord of 
birds. Born of Anala, she is known as Indrasena. As she 
delighted Nala, she is called the delighter of Nala. 

96-97. She was separated from her lord, since in her 
previous birth she had illicit relations with Vayu in human 
form. 

In her previous birth Mati had died as a maiden together 
with Saci and others. 

98. She was born out of the sacrifice conducted by 
Driipada and was named Draupadi. She married Bhimasena. 
The sin of illicit copulation with a person in her previous life 
did not visit her in the next birth. Hence, she had no separation 
from her husband. 

99. Bharati, the daughter of Kasiraja known by her 
popular name Kali became the mistress of Bhimasena. 

100. Draupadi, the daughter of Drupada, gave up her 
body together with her maidens. O lord of birds, she will be 
born in the Kali age in the house of l§ankara in the village of 
Karati. 

101. She died as a maiden to become the mistress of 
Vayu in her third birth. 

102. O good one, such are the mistresses of V^yu and 
Brahma. O lord of birds, they are inferior to their husbands in 
hundreds of merits. 



1046 


Garu^a Purfyta 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 

Forms of Bhdrati in different births 

Garuda said ; 

1-2. You have said, O lord, that Bharat!, Saci, etc., had 
the self-same bodies in all their four births. O cherisher of 
good vows, please tell me the reason thereof. Asked by Garui^a 
thus, lord Krsna, the destroyer of asura Madhu, answered him 
thus. 

Lord Krfna said : 

3. O lord of birds, O noble one, I shall tell you the 
reason thereof. Please listen. 

4-5. O lord of birds, in the Krta age, formerly, Parvatl 
the mistress of Rudra, Sac!, the mistress of Indra, Syamala, 
the mistress of Yama, Usa, the mistress of Alvins, went to the 
region of Brahma. 

6. In the presence of Brahma, they displayed their 
amorous feelings. O best of birds, on seeing that they were 
excited by love, Brahma cursed all the four. 

7. "Since you are excited by love, you will be born as 
mortals and will marry the mortals.” 

8-9. After they were cursed by Brahma they came to 
the mountain Meru^ where they saw Brahma again. They 
practised deception on Brahma while the latter stood silent. 
They deceived him thrice. 

10-11. When lord Brahma had been deceived again, he 
cursed the ladies in the following way. 

Since you have practised deception on me four times, 
you will have four births in human form. 

In the first birth, you will be born as normal human 
beings. 

12. In the second birth, you will be born as human beings 
but turn unchaste. In the third birth you will be born as 
human beings and married to men with whom you will remain 
for life. 


I. Mtru —a mountain round which all the planets are said to 
revolve; it is ako said to consist of gold and gems. The Sun and Simoon go 
round this mountain, e\'eryday. 



III.17.27 


1047 


13. In the fourth birth, as in the first, you will not turn 
unchaste and you will not be separated from your husbands. 

14. Thus cursed by Brahma, the four ladies discussed 
the matter among themselves on the peak of Meru. They said: 

15. “The curse of Brahma cannot be nullified, though 
we make hundreds of attempts. Association of the divine with 
the human is not commendable. It brings misfortune. 

16-17. Association with the noble brings wealth and 
prosperity. Of all the gods, Vayu is the best. We can associate 
with him in human form without degrading ourselves. 

With this unanimous decision they began to worship 
Bharat!. 

Pleased with their worship, at the end of one thousand 
years, Bharat! said. 

18. “O ladies of good vow, wherefore do you worship 
me?” Being devoted to her, they expressed their woes thus. 

19-20. “O madam, Brahma has, in fury, cursed us thus— 
“In the first birth, you will be born as human beings, in the 
second too as such, but will turn unchaste. In the third, you 
will marry and live with your mates for life. In the fourth, as 
in the first, you will not turn unchaste.” 

21. Now, that we shall be united with human beings we 
shall not incur the sin of unchastity if we unite ourselves with 
Vayu. O Bharat!, we desire to be identical with you in these 
births. 

22. Thus urged by the ladies, O best of birds, Bharat! 
agreed to their request and descended to the earth together with 
those ladies. 

23. She was born to a Brahmin named ^iva. She 
practised penance for the fulfilment of her object. 

24-25. The great lord Visnu , named Siva was pleased 
with her penance and conferred a boon to all those women. O 
ladies, you will enjoy in the company of a suitable person in 
the form of Krsna even without having an intercourse. 

26. Since urged by Parvat! you have displayed amours to 
lord Brahma, Parvat! will be considered to be the best amongst 
you all. 

27. Even though she remains in the company of lord 
Kfsna, she will not be sexually united with him. 



1048 


Garu4a PurSifa 


In the second birth, you will be stained with, a scandal 
for having illicit intercourse with a person other than your 
husband. 

28. Thus, lord Hari, stationed in the heart of Rudra, 
conferred boon to the ladies and disappeared. 

29. When the lord had left for his celestial abode, the 
ladies gave up their physical bodies and were born as daughters 
to king Nala and were named Indrasena and others. 

30. They went to forest (for living an ascetic’s life) but 
fell in love with Sage Mudgala at first sight. 

31. At the same time, Vayu intervened and overpowered 
Mudgala. Vayu copulated with Bharati and her companions. 

32. When Bharati left her present body she was born as 
Draupadi. She was so called as she was the daughter of 
Drupada. 

33. Since she was born of sacrifice she was known as 
one not born of a womb. As she was dark-complexioned she 
was known as Krsna. 

34. While she lived as Kr?na she had the recollection 
that she was in fact Bharati. Saci and others too recollected 
their original Self but only sometimes. 

3b. Bharati alone had the memory of her previous life 
during the intercourse, not others. 

36. When Parvati indulged in intercourse with her 
husband she had no such idea. She thought she was indulging 
in love-sport in a dream. 

37-38. When Draupadi copulated with Arjuna, she felt 
she was Bharati. iSaci, Uma and Syamala thought they were 
sporting in dream. 

39-40. In fact, Vayu had entered into the bodies of 
Arjuna, Yudhisthira, Nakula and Sahadeva. When the latter 
were copulating with Bharati, Syamala, Usa and Draupadi, it 
was Vayu who in fact had the intercourse. 

41-42. In the form of Draupadi, Saci and the rest had 
their intercourse with Vayu in the body of Arjuna and others, 
hence, their union with Arjuna and others was not illegal. 

43. Similarly, Bharati had no intercourse with Yudhi¬ 
sthira, Arjuna and others, since they could not copulate with a 
mortal. ^ 



III.18.5 


1049 


44-46. As they havfe realized Self, even if they transgress 
norms they cannot invite scandal. 

O lord of birds, once upon a time, Dharma and Vayu 
copulated with Kj-sna jointly. Even then Krs^ia cannot be 
accused of unchastity. 

47. The gods know some peculiar ways of copulation, 
of which the mortals are quite ignorant. 

48. It is the swan alone who can distinguish water from 
the milk. 

49. When Bharati, etc. in the form of DraupadI are 
copulating, their male partners are divine beings, not human 
ones. Hence, their copulation with human beings such as 
Arjuna is not untenable. 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 

Incarnations of Rudra and after 

Lord Kffna said : 

1. I shall now tell you about the subsidiary creation for 
your knowledge. Please, hear attentively and retain the same 
in your memory, O lord of birds. 

2. After Virifica, was bom the powerful l§esa. When 
Lord Visnu and Laksmi rested in the ocean. 

3. Se^a served as a couch, though lord Hari did not 
need it. 

(When the lord moved) Sesa was replaced by Garuda, 
(Here is the praise of Hari by Garuda). 

Gcatuia said : 

always remain as your slave, O Hari. I always worship 

you. 

4. I am always your devotee. I shall remain so in each 
and every birth of mine*". 

5. Thus, Garuda served as the Vehicle of lord Hari. 
Garuda was the son of Vayu called Sfitra. Bom of Vinata he 
was popularly known as Vainateya. 



1050 


Garuia Purity 


6. O lord of birds, identical with ego, you were born of 
Virifica identical with intellect. The propitiation of Hari has 
been the mission of your life. 

7. O lord, the three are at par with one another but 
are superior to Gayatri and Bharati in respect of virtues. 

8. Sesa, the devotee of Narayana, was possessed of three 
arhSas of Visnu, Vayu and Ananta. 

9. O lord, born of Sumitra and Dasaratha, Laksmana 
was the incarnation of Sesa having certain ariisas of Vayu and 
Ananta. 

10. O lord of birds, Sita was born of Earth in order to 
propitiate Rama. Balabhadra was born of Vasudeva and Rohim^ 
having the am^as of both. 

11-12. He, the son of Rohini, was pervaded by Hari of 
white and dark complexion. 

The three—Sesa, Laksmana and Baladeva—are the incar¬ 
nations of lord Visnu. 

Lord Visnu has ordained that the three should not be 
counted among his incarnations. 

13. I shall now tell you the incarnations of Rudra. 
Hear attentively, O lord of birds. 

14. Rudra identical with ego obtained the title ‘ever- 
inauspicious’ and was assigned the task of destruction. 

He became the presiding deity of tamas. Being not 
auspicious he was called ever-inauspicious (Sada-aiivah). 

15. As he ever wore the inauspicious garland of skulls, 
he was called ever-inauspicious. He should be ever distinguished 
from Siva, the devotee of Visnu. 

16-17. As he wore the unholy hide of an elephant, des¬ 
troyed the sinful wicked people and with the consent of lord 
Visnu made the worldly people averse to the lord, he was called 
ever-inauspicious. 

18. Sometimes, influenced by the Asuras, he acted con¬ 
trary to the wishes of the lord, he was called ever-inauspicious. 
As such, he should be distinguished from Siva, the devotee of 
lord Visnn. 

I Rokipf —Vasudeva had two wives Devaki and Ro^i^i. Sri Kf^^a 
was bom from Devaki and Balabhadra from Rohini. 



III.18.28 


1051 


19. As he liked to abide in the cemetery he was called 
inauspicious. As such, he should be distinguished from Siva, 
the devotee of lord Vi|nu. 

20. To practise penance, he remained in the salt-ocean 
for ten divine years. Hence, he obtained the title tapasj O 
lord of birds. 

21. Suka, the son of Vyasa, who had been influenced by 
Vayu was the incarnation of Rudra. He was born for the 
spread of knowledge in the world. 

22. Rudra was bom as the great ascetic Durvasas of 
Sage Atri and Anasuya, humiliation of K^triyas being the 
mission of his life. 

23. Born of Drona, A^vatthaman was Rudra himself. He 
was born to reap the fruits of the seeds of his actions sown in 
the former birth and to illumine (by contrast) the virtues of 
his enemy. 

24. Stationed in the north-eastern direction, Rudra 
obtained the title of Vamadeva. Stationed to the left of Vayu, 
he is propitiated by him, his worthy disciple. 

25. Hence, Rudra got the title of Vamadeva. Further, 
on the strength of his lordship and nobility he obtained 
the titles of Kala and Bala and not by the virtue of his hand¬ 
some features. 

26. To slay the Asuras of Tripura^ who were inimical 
to Visnu, Rudra assumed the form of Aghora. Hence, he 
is called Aghora. 

27. To confer boon to the daityas who had followed the 
path of service and practised penance, Rudra was born in a 
trice and was called Sadyojata. 

28. Aurva, the son of t}ru, was called Rudra. Dru was 
so called because he was given to loud weeping 

I. Tripura —the thrre cities of gold, silver and iron in the sky, air 
and earth built for the asuras by Maya. These cities were burnt down, 
along with the asuras inhabiting them, by Siva at the request of gods. 

According to another version the three cities or castles of the Asuras 
Taraka, Vidyunm&li and Maya were received as gifts from BrahmS pleased 
by their penance. These were destroyed with a single shaft by Siva who 
Avas annoyed at their savage activities. Prof V. S. Agrawal considers the 
burning of Tripura as historical event. 



1052 


Gamia Purdna 


29. The son of Oru was called Aurva. Rudra was 'called 
Aurva since he wanted to revive the cult of weeping (in 
devotion). 

Garu4a said: 

30. O lord, please tell me why Sage Oru wept in 
devotion and why his son Aurva tried to revive the cult of 
weeping. 

31. O lord of good vow, I, your grandson, desire to 
hear all this in detail. Being addressed by Garuda, the compas¬ 
sionate lord spK)ke in reply. 

Lord Kr$na said: 

32. Rudra saw his own self reflected in Sahkarsana who 
was possessed of good qualities, whose lotus-feet were bowed to 
by Brahma, Sesa and others desirous of gaining victory (over 
the senses), as well as by Bharati and Svastipas. 

33-34 On seeing Hari, Rudra was extremely delighted. 
His eyes were brimful of tears. His throat was choked with 
emotion. He was beside himself with joy. He said: 

O lord, during the enumerable Kalpas of Brahma that 
have passed so far, I have never remembered your name. O 
Lord, then, by what virtue have I seen your lotus feet adorned 
with beautiful nails? 

On seeing, over and over again, the lotus feet of the lord, 
Garuda was choked in throat. 

35. With his body shivering with fear Rudra wept and 
spoke to the lord again. 

"O Mukunda, Narayana and omniformed lord, how shall 
I praise you with my tongue. 

36. My very sight b productive of sin. My very speech 
b attended by sin. My very eyes are set on women, instead of 
being set on you. 

37. I have been attached to my children, wife and other 

members of my family. I have no ability to offer praise. My 
tongue b not free to eulogize you. By what merit have I seen 
you O lord? ** 



III.18.46 


1053 


38. O lord of many ears, I did not hear your narrative 
with attention. Conversely, I have been indulging in gossip 
with the lay people. By what merit have I seen you, O lord? 

39. Seeing the footstool whereon the lord had put his 
feet, Rudra had his throat choked with emotion. He wept while 
his body shivered with fear, thinking how could he hear the 
narrative of the lord. 

40-4-2. O lord Vaikuntha, known as Vayu, I have not 
offered any scent or flower to you. I have applied these to my 
arms. Mixed with perspiration from my breast, arm-pits, hair 
of the head and other parts of my body, the flowers and scents 
have acquired the impurity of urine and faeces. O lord, I have 
not offered any cloth or scent to you. By what merit have I seen 
you, O lord. 

Breathing in the scent of flowers that had been left after 
they were offered to the deity, Rudra’s throat was choked and 
he wept while his body shivered with fear. 

Rudra said: 

43. O lord! how could I touch your body. O man-lion 
stationed at the tip of nose, O lord of nose, 1 have not smelt 
the fragrance of fresh lotuses. If I have smelt, I have not 
offered the same to you. 

44. By what merits, O lord, have I seen your face with 
lovely nose and shining teeth. 

Breathing out the scent of flowers that were left after they 
had been offered to the deity, he had his throat choked again 
and again. 

45. With his body shivering with fear, Rudra wept and 
said: O lord, how do I breathe out the smell of flowers that hud 
been left after they were offered to you ? 

46. O lord Jihva, as you always sit on the tongue (of the 
faithful), if a person in the presence of your image takes bath 
every day in the water containing the remains of the eatables 
that had been mixed with Tulasi leaf offered to you, that has 
been sprinkled over with the water wherewith your feet have 
been washed, though the offering of the eatable has been made 
just by word of mouth, obtains the merit of performing ten 
thousand crores of sacrifices. 



1054 


Garu4a Purdna 


47. Such remains of eatables, as luminous as the Sun, I 
have neither eaten nor offered to you. I have taken meals but 
not offered the same to you. 

48. I have not offered any eatable at your lotus-feet. By 
what merit have I seen you, O lord ? 

While eating the remains of the eatables> after they had 
been offered to you, I saw your face tended by LaksmI. 

49. I saw your head adorned with diadem and curly hair 
being the support of heaven and earth. I have seen your face 
by the aggregate of merit accumulated in my several previous 
births, in the company of noble people. 

50. Alas! O lord, it will disappear again by the aggre¬ 
gate of sins accumulated in my several previous births. 

Thus, at the sight of Hari adorned by all merits Rudra 
wept out of devotion. 

51. O omniformed lord, your lotus-feet kept in the 
heart by the great Yogins, have been seen by me out of com¬ 
passion. O Vasudeva, how shall I see them again. Thus 
Rudra wept again. 

52. I saw your belly in the field of battle containing three 
worlds. I saw your body adorned with discus, conch, etc., which 
could stop the recurrence of birth. O lord of Laksmi, how 
could I see it over and over again. 

53-54. O lord, full of bliss, equipped with good nails, 
hair and nose and abounding in virtues, your chest wide and 
shining with brilliant Kaustubha gem with bright ornaments 
and the company of Laksmi, tender and adorned with the leaves 
of Tulasi and flowers of various sorts and anointed with sandal 
paste—such a wide and beautiful chest I have seen by your 
compassion alone. 

55. How shall I see you again and again ? Thus, out of 
devotion, Rudra wept and wept again. Thus Rudra obtained 
the title Oru and his son obtained the title Aurva. 

56. Since he made Rudra fertile, the son of Rudra was 
named Aurva. Aurva saw people worthy of liberation as well 
as engrossed in the objects of senses. 

57. Aurva praised the lotus-feet of Vi$nu, remembered 
them again and again and felt choked in the throat. These 
sinners employ their senses to evil objects every day. 



III. 18.69-70 


1055 


58-59. How shall I shun them and remain unattached. 

I do not know this, O lord. Thus he wept bitterly. 

These stupid people are addicted to the objects of senses 
just for attaining pleasure. Addicted to the objects and for 
satisfying their desire they spend their wealth. They are delud¬ 
ed by your Maya. They lose their power of discernment. O 
omniformed lord when will you relieve them of delusion. 

60. Aurva, with his body shivering with fear remembered 
Maya of the lord and wept. 

61. These men of wicked nature accumulate wealth with 
great effort. These animals (in the garb of human beings) 
earn with great toil without any return. 

62. Deluded by the Mayaof Visnu, these wealthy people 
do not part with their wealth in favour of a worthy person who 
can be equated with the lord. The noble have declared their life 
to be a wastage. Thus sorrowful at their loss Rudra cried aloud. 

63. Their life is lived in vain. Their youth too is spent 
in vain. Death that remains ever close to a man laughs at 
them. But these deluded people know it not. 

64. Let my family live for hundred years. Let my sons 
live for hundred years. Let me also live in comfort for hundred 
years. Let my auspicious wife too live for hundred years. 

65. Let my cows always yield milk. Let me give my son 
to my daughter-in-law and my daughter to my son-in-law. 

66. I shall marry my daughter in a noble and rich family. 
1 shall give wealth to them on their marriage. Taking note of 
these people who are devoid of discernment, lord Vamadcva 
laughs at their folly. 

67. [The stupid person speaks thus: ] 

“I shall not hear the narrative of the lord lest it should 
destroy my good fortune. I shall not worship the lord, lest it 
should cause destruction of my sons and prosperity.” 

68. Lord Vasudeva, designated as fortune confers fruits 
of acts to all and sundry, at the opportune time. Solely devoted 
to Vasudeva, Aurva saw these stupid people and wept. 

69-70. O lord of birds, Aurva is Rudra who has been 
rightly instructed by lord himself. When Satl, the daugh¬ 

ter of Dak^a abandoned her body in Dak^*s sacrihce, O lord 



1056 Garu(fa Purdna 

of birds, she was reborn as the daughter of Himadri and 
Menaka. Rudra was designated as Aurva. 

Be celibate, asked by Brahma thus Rudra remained 
celibate. 

71. But when Rudra married the daughter of Himadri 
he became attached to her. Hence, he got the designation Para. 

72. Rudra had ten brothers. Among these, the three, viz. 
SadaSiva Saumitreya and Rauhineya—were inferior to Rudra 
and his consort by one himdred merits. 

Garuifa said : 

73. O compassionate lord, please tell me about the 
Eternal Bliss {dnanda)y explaining its nature to satisfy my 
curiosity and for enlightening the seekers after truth. 

74. O lord, please tell me, since I am your disciple, just 
for lifting me up, and out of compassion for me. Since you are 
fully satiated, you have no desire to be fulfilled. 

75. Thus addressed by the lord of birds, the lotus-eyed 
lord was pleased and spoke with compassion. 

Lord Kr$na said'. 

76-77. Satananda was born of Gayatri, Ekananda of 
Brahma. Satananda belonged to Brahma, l§esa and Sarasvatl, 
O best of birds, while Ekananda belonged to Bharati, O son of 
Vinata. 

78. O bird, such is the information about Ananda. 1 have 
told you all. What more do you desire to know? 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 

Tfu Episode of Nila 

Garuda said: 

1, O lord Krs^, Govinda, you have said that Brahmam 
and Bharat! are superior to Rudra by hundred merits, O best 
of gods. 

2-3. O lord of gods, I have heard all what Brahma has 
said of the gods and goddesses ending with Uma, about the 
athias of Ananda found missing to the extent of a thousand. 



ni.19.21 


1057 


4-5. O all-pervasive, supreme lord, please tell me your 
ideas on Knowledge, Bliss, Strength, etc., including Vayu at the 
last and the proportion of ariiias in them reaching a thousand. 
Considering the views of your predecessors on this topic, you 
proclaim your judgment, O Gkjvinda, since you are omniscient, 
O lord. 

Thus accosted by Garuda, Vasudeva said in reply. 

Lord Krftta said : 

6-7. O lord of birds, by the degrees of Ananda 
present in each, I have explained to you the superiority and in¬ 
feriority of jflana, bhakti, etc. Brahma has declared that if 
hundred per cent Ananda is felt, there would be endless gunas. 

8-11. Accordingly, Ananda is thousandfold in jhana, 
hundredfold in Bhakti, of the same proportion in Bharati, 
Maruti and Vayu. 

12-15. Just as the flame of fire hundredfold more power¬ 
ful than the earthen lamp is not so illuminating as the lamp 
itself or just as the wide-spread fire is not so refulgent as the 
Sun, just as the moon, twice as large as the Sun is not so re¬ 
fulgent as the Sun, in the same way, O lord, know the relative 
gradation of Ananda in jhana, bhakti, etc. I know my 
qualities, O lord of birds, which are endowed with many specia¬ 
lities and which possess subtle forms. There is nothing which 
remains unknown to me. 

16. Goddess Laksmi too knows me in all my incarnations. 

17. She knows my indivisible subtle qualities endowed 
with many specialities, through Brahma or by my grace. 

18. Goddess Laksmi knows her own subtle form endowed 
by special traits. 

19. Brahma too perceives the all-pervading Vasudeva 
endowed with noble qualities proportionately larger than those 
of Vayu. Ears do not know the qualities of the lord which are 
subtle and special. 

20. Except lord Brahma even the gods, until and unless 
they are released, are ignorant. Brahma and Vayu know their 
Self and the Supreme Self endowed with special traits. 

21. Sarasvati perceives my special qualities who am a seh 
born lord but not beyond my form as Kf ^na constituted of three 
gui!tas. 



1058 


Gamia Puriija 


22. O lord of birds, 8esa and Rudra perceive me stationed 
in the tamoguna. But they do not know my other gu^as and 
their special traits. O dear, I have told you the truth. 

23. Uma, Suparna and Varuni—the three know me very 
well as I am stationed (in their heart). But, O lord of birds, my 
special traits perceived by Rudra are not known to them at any 
place or time. 

24. O lord of birds, Indra and other gods know me as 
peivading the Ego; Dak^ and other Prajapatis as pervading 
the intellect. So also Soma and Surya. 

25-26. Others know me pervading the elements; Others 
know me as pervading the Cosmic Egg; others as present in the 
heart of devotees like yourself, others as existing (in the form 
of Atman) in the heart of all. 

O lord of birds, you should realize me as such. Now hear 
what I tell you about my six wives. 

27. RukminT, etc. are my six principal queens. O lord of 
birds, amongst them Nila was the daughter of Agni in the pre¬ 
vious creation. I make no distinction in sexual enjoyment with 
them. 

28. As a maiden she cherished to wed Krsna (my form), 
She relished what she conceived in mind. O lord of birds, Agni 
tried his best to marry her with one of the pitfs. 

29. But the maiden did not agree to any proposal, her 
mind being extremely set on Krsna. 

30. Then, the fire-god spoke to his daughter. O silly 
one, why don’t you marry ? Thereupon, the maiden spoke to 
her father thus. 

O father, in this life, accompanied by all facilities, there 
can be no husband without Hari. He alone can be my husband. 

31-33. In this world, there are several women who 
though married are always widows. Those who do not regard 
Hari as their husband—Hari who is beginningless, eternal, the 
quintessence of the universe, beautiful, bestower of liberation 
and accomplisher of desires—are always widows. 

O father, leaving Kf$na, I shall not seek for the hand qf 
any person, though forced by misfortune. He may be only an 
apparent cause (of producing children). As he ij^ devoid of 
devotion for the loid, as he is impure, pouring forth impurities 



III.I9.42 


1059 


from nine doors,' emitting bad smell and contemptible, he 
is not acceptable to me. For such a despicable person I have 
no love, O my father, when as an option lord Kr$na is there. 

34. The celestial women abandon their husbands and 
enjoy intercourse with the lord who stays with them (in 
heaven). As these women find their husbands in the lord, they 
are honoured by the people. There can be no second thinking 
in this respect. 

35. If they get husbands devoted to Visnu, their life 
becomes fruitful. They can get husbar.ds devoted to Vi^nu by 
the aggregate of merits accumulated in several births. 

36-37. Those who have husbands not devoted to Visnu 
should immediately cast off their bodies. If at the time of 
giving up their bodies they remember lord Visnu in the form 
of Krsna as their husband, they do not incur the sin of commit¬ 
ting suicide—this is the statement of the Sastras. 

The women should desert their husbands if they are averse 
to Visnu. 

38. If they have stored merit accruing from their pious 
acts performed In previous lives, their husbands can be devoted 
to Visnu. 

39. Rare are the devotees of Vi$nu in Kali age. Rare is 
a devotion for the lord. Rare is the narrative of the lord to 
be heard in the mortal world. Initiation in the cult of Vi§nu 
is rare, very rare. Rare is the company of the devotees of Hari. 

40. Rare is the chance for circumambulating the lord or 
for homage to Hari. Rare is the means for maintaining his 
devotees. Rare is the gift of food to them. 

41. Rare is the tantric worship conducted for the lord. 
Rare is the recitation of his name. Rare is the worship of his 
devotees. Rare is the dialogue with him. 

42. Rare is the touch of Salagrama stone,* or the 
sight of the pious Vai^navas. Rare is the holy touch of the cow 


I. Aw apertures of human body, are nine : two eyes, one 

mouth, two ears, two nostrils, the organ of excretion and the generating organ. 

a. A stone emblem of Vi^Qu. There are about nineteen classes of 
S&lagrima. See P.E. under SilagrSma. 



1060 Garu^a Purina 

or the singing of holy chants. Rare is the noble and good 
preceptor. 

43. Rare are the people with faithful wives and worthy 
sons. Rare is the sight of the lord on the mountain Sesa. Rare 
is the sight of Rahganatha^ on the Kaveri.* Rare is the sight of 
the Ganges.® 

44. Rare is the worship of Varadaraja* in Kaftci.® 
Rare is the sight of Rama’s bridge.* Rare is the ability to under¬ 
stand Madhva philosophy.’ 

45-46. Rare is the sight of Visnu on Bhima,® Reva® 
(Narmada), Gaya*® or Badari. 

On the Sesa mountain, or the holy hermitage of Srinivasa, 
the ascetics are very rare on the mortal soil. 

47. At Prayaga,** rare is the sight of Madhava. 

48. Hence, I do not desire a husband other than lord 
Krsna. Having uttered such words to her father she went to the 
mountain Sesa. 

49-50. At the sacred place Kapila, she ascended the 
great mountain. She saw Srinivasa therein. She paid hom¬ 
age, abstained from food for three days, went to the holy spot— 
the destroyer of sin. In order to secure a worthy husband she 
went to a solitary place for meditation. 

51. To the north of it, at the distance of two Krosas at 
Mahatala, she commenced a great penance in a solitary pit. 

52. She meditated upon Narayana for one thousand 
divine years. At the end of this period, she began to praise the 
lord. 


1. Rangan&tha —a tutelary deity. 

2 . Kdveri —a river, rises in the western ghats, flows south-east through 
Mysore and falls into the Bay of Bengal. 

3 . Ganges —a famous river of Northern India. 

4. Varadardja —a tutelary deity. 

5. Kdfici —modem Conjceveram in Madras. 

6 . R&ma's bridge. 

7t Madhva philosophy —Unqualified Dualism. 

8. Bhfmd —A river in Southern India. 

9. RtvA —Narmada river. 

10. GayS —a famous city in Bihar, a place of pilgrimage. 

11. Prayiga —a celebrated place of pilgrimage at tho» confluence of 
GaAga and Yamuna near Allahabad. 



III.19.62 


1061 


The maiden said : 

53-54. You are my mother, father, husband, friend, son, 
preceptor, brother, sister and my darling. Throughout this vast 
universe, O lord, I have been trying to know Reality but have 
not succeeded in my attempt. Father, mother, etc. are just 
artificial relations. You are the sole true relation, my lord. 

55. Hence, I shall be your wife. This is my vow. O you 
of attractive form, I pray, I may not be united with a person I 
do not desire. 

56. O lord, ward off from my sight the people who have 
offended you, who have tried to frustrate my desire to become 
your devotee, who bear malice to their preceptors and your 
worshippers. 

57. O lord, you ward off my talk with those who hate 
you. You establish my contact with your lotus feet. Homage 
to you, O lord who inhabit Sri Saila^ and who are the abode 
of Laksmi, your loving consort. 

58. O lord of Laksmi, the superior and inferior, the pri¬ 
mary cause of creation, I have not seen you since long. Of 
you, the four-armed god, the vision is possible only by the aggre¬ 
gate of merits accumulated in several previous lives. 

59. Polluted by all sorts of sins, O lord, how can I have 
your vision. O lord of birds, I am your devotee, the devotee 
of your devotees. O abode of the universe, be pleased with 
me. 

60. Thus praised, the compassionate lord Varadaraja 
was pleased by her devotion. He appeared before her and 
said: 

61. O good lady, express your desire. I have come to 
you to fulfil the same. 

On hearing the words of Visnu, her face was brightened 
with smile. 

62. She spoke to Han, the abode of Laksmi and the lord 
of the universe with great devotion. O lord with a lovely face, 
may I become your wife. 


I. SrUaila : A hill to the south of river. 



1062 Garuia Purina 

63. On hearing her words, the lord spoke to her iji gentle 
words. 

The lord said : 

‘*0 blessed maiden, I shall become your husband when I 
incarnate as Krsna on earth.” 

64-66. Thus addressed by the lord, the maiden who was. 
extremely pleased spoke to Hari, the depository of merits, in 
the joyously faltering voice. 

The maiden said : 

May I become your wife when you incarnate on earth as. 
Krsna, on the day previous to our marriage. May I precede 
other women in enjoying intercourse with you : 

The lord agreed and spoke to her again. 

The Lord Said : 

67. Since you as a maiden have sought for my favour 
which I bestowed upon you, O pretty maid, as a result of it, the 
other maidens will also reap the fruit of their cherished desire. 

68-69 Thus after bestowing the boon on the maiden the 
lord disappeared all at once. The maiden gave up her body 
there and then and was born in the house of Kumbhaka and 
was called Nila. Kumbhaka was the brother-in-law of Nanda- 
^obha. 

70-71. He was the first who carried Kavya to the pitrs. 
He was abiding on the mount Vrsabha, at that time. I went to- 
his house, O best of birds. Being unconquerable, by the boon 
conferred by lord Siva, I killed him and was married to Nila. 

72-74. In her second birth, Nila was born as the daughter 
of Nagnijit, Kavyavaha. In the Svayarhvara of Nila, I controlled 
seven bulls who by the favour of lord Siva were uncontrollable 
by gods and mortals. I conquered kings who had assembled at 
the ceremony. 1 married her. 

75. Thus Nila was born twice on earth and married to me. 

I shall now tell you the birth of Bhadra. Please hear the narra> 
tive, O lord of birds. 


I. Kavya —oblations meant for Pitts. 



III.20.12 


1063 


CHAPTER TWENTY 

The Episode of Bhadrd 

Lord Kff^a said ' 

1. O lord of birds, Bhadra, the daughter of Nala, desired 
lord Visnu to be her husband. As she, who was auspicious by 
merit, worshipped and circumambulated the lord she was called 
Bhadra. 

2. To Bhadra the maiden, the father Nala spoke thus. O 
Bhadra, why do you trouble your body (by worshipping the 
lord). What is the fruit of this suffering, tell me, O daughter. 

Bhadrd said : 

3. Dear father, now hear. None can declare the gain 
derivable from paying homage to lord Visnu. 

4. Even then, I shall tell you something, as far as I can, 
just for the welfare of the world. The compassionate lord Visnu 
is alone my guide. I am a slave of his slaves. May he protect 
me. I bow to his feet. Saying so, she prostrated at the feet of 
the lord. 

5. The wise declare that homage to Hari, if it is not 
accompanied by the prescribed worship, is fruitless. O father, 
now, hear details. “One should bow to lord Visnu by reciting 
the formula : O lord of Rama, O lord of Madhu, O lord of 
Sarasvati, homage to thee.” 

[Bhadra continued] 

6. (O father) the lord of lords is pleased not so much 
by worship as by offering homage to him or by reciting his 
name. 

7. O father, people attain health and prosperity by 
offering homage to him. But such prosperity and good health 
are valueless. They occasion suffering in hell. 

8-9. Yama puts such people in the mortar and crushes 
them with pestle. If there be people who do not circumambu¬ 
late the lord Yama crushes their feet in the talayantra. If there 
be people who do not utter the name of Hari and Kfs^a, 
Yama extracts their tongue which he grinds in the mortar. 

10-12. What avails residence in Kaii or death at Prayaga 
or in the battlefield or performance of a sacrifice or visit to holy 



1064 


Garu^a PurSna 


shrine or deep study with sharp intellect, if the name of lord 
Hari is not uttered or if homage is not paid to him. 

If there be people who do not circumambulate the 
lord, their activities come to nothing. Thus say the learned 
people. 

13. Offering homage to the lord and uttering his name 
are superior to the worship rendered unto him. Hence, one 
should pay homage to Visnu as well as utter his name, O 
father. 

14. Rare is to attain human life which is mortal and 
evanescent as the bubble in waters. O father, do not trust 
your body, make no distinction between your own and other 
people. 

15. So far you have not rendered homage to the lord, not 
uttered his name. The hour of death is quite uncertain. Do not 
trust your body, O lord. 

16. O lord of lords, Nala heard her speech simple and 
straightforward. He paid homage and at his best circumambu¬ 
lated the lord. She too did likewise. 

17-19. Continuing the tradition for long and meditating 
on lord Narayana she gave up her body at last. As she meditated 
on Hari at the hour of death she was born to the sister of my 
father Vasudeva. She was named Kaikeyi and was also called 
Bhadra as she was possessed of auspiciousness. 

20. Her five brothers Kaikeyas gave her to me in marriage, 
O best of birds. 

21. I am going to tell you about the circumstances how 
Mitravinda was married. O noble lord of birds, now hear 
attentively. 

22. In the previous creation Mitravinda performed at will 
several sacrifices, Agnisoma and others for attaining Hari as 
friend. 

23. There being many ways to attain her purpose, 
Matravinda thought of a sure one. She found that the hearing 
of the SdUvika Puranas^ was the best way. 

I. The SAttvika Puranas constitute Vi^^u, NSra^a, Bh&gavata, 
Garuda, Padma and Var&ha. 



III.20.31 


1065 


24. That Purana alone is worthy of hearing which narrates 
the merits of Visnu and Vayu. One should hear that Purana 
out of faith and devotion for Visnu. There could be no better 
way of attaining the lord. 

25. If they hear a Purana which contains no reference to 
Visnu, their life becomes miserable. Their baths of purification, 
their repetition of lord’s name, their five great sacrifices, their 
observance of vows, their performance of Istapurta^ and 
Krcchra Gandrayana^ are rendered useless. All such perfor¬ 
mances are fruitless including the ceremony of initiation in the 
Vaisnava cult, though it may have been properly performed, 
if it is devoid of Hari’s narrative. 

26. The wise declare that the life of such people is render¬ 
ed fruitless as have not heard the Bhagavata or the Brahma- 
kanda of the present Purana, in the company of their preceptor 
or the ‘followers’ of the Bhagavata sect. 

Such is the efficacy of the illustrious narrative of the 
glorious lord. 

27. One should not linger even for a moment where there 
is no stream in the form of lord’s narrative, no resort at the feet 
of Narayana, and no talk about the lord. 

28-29. In the village, where there is no recital of the 
Bhagavata Purana, no follower of the Bh^avata cult who can 
taste the flavour of the Bhagavata verses, where there is no 
exegesis or commentary on the supreme songs of the lord or 
his one thousand names, where there are no people who under¬ 
stand the substance thereof, one should not live even for a 
moment. 

30. The day is wasted if there is no talk of lord Vi^nu, 
no narrative of his divine tale. Though he has human form, 
which is rare to attain, his life is wasted. 

31. The ear adorned with the divine flowers looks not so 
beautiful as the one adorned by the ornaments in the form of 
Visnu’s tale. 

1. IffdpUrta —a technical term for performing sacrifices and digging 
wells and doing other acts of charity. 

2 . Kfcchra Cdndripafta —a religious observance or expiatory penance regu¬ 
lated by the period of the moon's waxing and waning. 



1066 


Garu4a Purdna 


32. Fruitful is the life of the people who narrate or listen 
to the tale of the lord as told in the Bhagavata Purana. 

33. Those who clad in head dress and bodice hear or 
recite the narrative of the lord are alone worthy of respect in 
the world, not those who are addicted to vicious objects of 
senses. 

34. Those who recite the Bhagavata Purana out of greed 
for riches or those who know but do not reveal the secret of the 
Bhagavata go to Yama’s abode. 

35-37. Those who create interest in Dharma and Karma 
Kandas but not in the Brahma Kanda and those who recite the 
Purana by accepting fee go to Yama’s abode. Those alone are 
worthy of recital who remain satisfied with whatever money is 
offered willingly by devotees. 

38. Those who are extremely greedy of wealth have no 
right to recite this Purana. 

39. For the well-being of the people who regard lord 
Visnu and none else to be all-pervading, lord alone undertakes 
the charge. 

The pious followers of lord Visnu fear no misfortune or 
calamity. 

40. The lord bestows the fruits of auspicious and inauspi¬ 
cious Karmans. One should never endeavour for the accumu¬ 
lation of wealth, rather one should fix one’s mind in devotion 
for Visnu. 

41. One should take bath for purification, recite sacred 
mantra, dispose articles of worship. Being purified thus, he who 
is well versed in the Puranas should recite regularly the 
Bhagavata Purana every day. 

42. Acquisition of wealth, knowledge of the Vedas and 
^astras and the narrative of Visnu come as a result of previous 
auspicious activities. Of these listening to Hari is very rare. 

43. One should enjoy the essence of the Bhagavata 
Purana—a rare thing in this mortal world. One should enjoy 
the essence so that tears of joy may trickle down the eye—a 
phenomenon very rare to Occur.' 

44-46. Listening to the essence of the Bhagavata Purana 
and then retaining the same in memory is an act hard to accom- 



III.21.5 


1067 


plish. Rare is the achieving of desire and indignation, absorp¬ 
tion in meditation, association with the pious Vaisnavas. The 
omission of such occurrences makes even the wise as the target 
of doubt. 

47-48. Therefore, I remained always engaged in listening 
to the auspicious tale of Hari. I recited his name, heard his 
tale so long as I lived. After death, I was bom on earth from 
the womb of Sumitra, the sister of Vasudeva. 

49. Since she obtained Hari as Mitra (as friend) I was 
named Mitravinda. 

50. In the Svayamvara, Mitravinda discarded all candi¬ 
dates who had come to woo her and put garland around my 
neck as a token of acceptance. I then conquered all the kings and 
reached home with her. O lord of birds. 


CHAPTER TWENTYONE 

The Episode of Kdlindi 


Lord Krfrm said : 

1-2. O lord of birds, now I shall tell you the birth of 
Kalindi too. 

A daughter was born to Vivasvat of the solar race. O lord 
of birds, she was Kalindi known also as Yamuna, the daughter 
of the sun. She practiced penance with a desire to obtain lord 
Kr^na for her husband. 

3. Penance, they say, is a self-reflection, whereby reality 
is sought to be determined or it is a way of repentance for the 
sins of previous life. 

4. Prdya is a penance wherein the mind is controlled. 
Hence, Prayaicitta (expiation) is a way of self-control. It is not 
the tonsure of head which they do while entering penance. 

5. This penance has its root in remorse. O lord of birds, 
you may hear in detail. 



1068 


Garuia PurSna 


O lord, I have not uttered the sacred mantra? I have 
thrown myself in the forest conflagration in the form of Klesas 
(i. e. worldly afflictions). 

6. I have not remembered the ambrosial name of Hari. 
Rather, I have remembered his faults. I have not thought upon 
the ambrosial essence of Hari’s teachings. Rather, I have indulg¬ 
ed in gossips with the common people. 

7. I have not worshipped the lotus-feet of Hari. On the 
other hand, I worshipped my sons and friends. I did not bow 
at the lotus feet of Hari. On the other hand, I worshipped the 
feet of my friends. 

8. I have not seen the face of Hari covered with tresses 
grey as the incense smoke. I have fondled with my sons with 
affection and not caressed your loving face. 

9. I have adorned my sons and friends with ornaments 
but not the face of my lord who can eschew the effects of my 
sins which I committed in my previous life. 

10. I did not partake of the remanent of food offered to 
you but I partook of six varieties of food at the house of my 
friends. I did not offer you flowers and fragrances but did the 
same to my sons and friends. I am now tired of my sons 
and friends. When shall I sec your face, O lord ? 

11. I have polluted my tongue by consuming the 
prohibited vegetables not sanctified by mantras, a part of which 
has not been offered to you, which are not permitted in the 
coteries of your devotees and which are forbidden in the codes 
that prescribe rules of conduct. When shall I sec your face, 
O lord ? 

12. I have not purified my body by worshipping you 
with the eight-syllabled mantra or by visiting holy places or by 
blowing conches in front of your idol. When shall I see your 
face, O lord ? 

13. I have incurred sin by not offering perfumes and 
flowers, ornaments or clothes. My body is polluted by anoin¬ 
ting it with the perfumes prepared by those who are not the 
devotees of Visnu. When shall I sec your face, O lord? 

14. O Vasudeva, my feet are burnt since they have not 



III.21.25 


1069 


traversed the shrines of Visnu. My eyes are burnt since they 
have not sighted your charming face. 

15. My hands are burnt since they did not perlbrm 
your worship. I have incurred sin by indulging in sinful activities. 
When shall I see your face, O lord ? 

16-17. O lord, do not mind my faults, have pity on me. 
I have sincerely placed myself at your service. O lord, as many 
hair do I have on my body so many sins do I have on my 
head. When shall I see your face, O lord ? 

18. I have not attained even the slightest pleasure since 
I gave up your worship, in spite of the fact that I have my hus¬ 
band, sons, friends, servants, buildings, cattle and wealth. Hence¬ 
forth, I shall not visit my kins and friends. I shall ever remain 
your devotee, nay a slave. 

19. Those who regard their kins and friends as the 
sources of joy have their faces filled with urine and faeces. This 
is what I know. 

20. Wealth spent on friends is a mere waste. It turns 
into filth, dirt and impure matter. Given to the devotees of 
Hari it becomes the cause of attaining Hari. 

21. Whatever has passed so far, I have suffered utterly 
thereby. Please, favour me with the company of the noble by 
your grace and not with the company of the wicked by your 
indifference. 

22. O lord, my body is tarnished by association with the 
wicked. It is not detached from worldly pleasures. Without you, 
what course shall I adopt, O lord, have mercy on me and 
favour me with protection. 

2.3. Thus the daughter of Surya repented. And she set 
her mind on Hari after repentance. 

24. Lord Hari is the best of all gods. He embodies all 
merits. Everything in the Universe emanates from him. Hence, 
he contains all qualities. 

25. He is the first and foremost of the gods as the letter 
a is in the series of alphabet. Brahma and other gods do not 
possess all merits. But somehow, by the favour of Laksmi or 
the aggregate of virtues accumulated in previous lives Brahma 
has come to embody all virtues. 



1070 


Garu4a Purd^a 


26. But Brahma is not so complete in merits as Lak^mi. 
Laksmi is not so complete in virtue as Vis^u. Bharat is not so 
complete as Viyu. Varuni is not so complete as l§e$a. 

27. Parvati is not so complete as Rudra. Others too are 
not complete either. 

Brooding over the matter in her mind, she practiced 
penance on the bank of Yamuna river. 

28. At that time, I had gone ahunting on the bank of 
Yamuna.^ I saw her there practicing penance. I spoke to my 
friend Arjuna. 

29. O friend, approach the maiden immediately and 
ask her about (he purpose of her penance. 

30. Thus asked, Arjuna approached her and asked 
her the purpose of her penance. After knowing her purpose, he 
returned and told me all that he had learnt of her. Then, at 
the auspicious hour, I married her. 

31. I did so, for I was moved by her penance. I had no 
personal mptive, O lord of birds. I always remain in full bliss 
otherwise. What more joy or comfort could I derive from this 
alliance. 

32. I married just to favour her, but not for my 
pleasure, I shall now tell you the story of Laksmana and the 
reason why I married her. 

33. Listen, I am going to tell you a great secret. There 
is nothing that the preceptor will not disclose to his disciple. 


CHAPTER TWENTYTWO 

Marriage of Lakfmand with ^ri Krf^a 
Lord Kffna said : 

1. O lord of birds, in her previous birth Laksmana was 
the daughter of a learned Brahmana Vahnideva. Since she 
possessed auspicious marks, she was called Sulak^mana. 


I. celebrated river, said to be the sister of Yama. 



III.22.22 


1071 


2-3. Like Laksml, Hari, Vayu, Gayatri> Rudra, 
Laksmana was possessed of good qualities. She drew her name 
from thiee sources, viz., her traits, activities and devotion. 

4. Narayana, the lord of Lak^mi is possessed of thirty 
two auspicious traits. O lord of birds, I tell them serially. The 
person who hears the same obtains a quick deliverance. 

5-17. The lord has seven feet, n inetysix fingers, four hands, 
sharp teeth. These four combined constitute the first trait. A 
loving, round and blooming face is the second trait. An un¬ 
elevated chin is the third. Sharp and small teeth the fourth. 
Red lips the fifth. Blood-red hands the sixth. Red and bright 
nails the seventh. Red cheeks the eighth. Marks of conch and 
disc the ninth. Thin but developed belly marked with three 
wrinkles the tenth. The deep navel the eleventh. The plump pair 
of thighs the twelfth. Long, extensive waist the thirteenth. Well 
set scrotum the fourteenth. Straight and elevated penis the 
fifteenth. The red soles the sixteenth. Depressed ankles the 
seventeenth. Lovely neck the eighteenth. Lotus eyes the 
nineteenth. Red arms and knees the twentieth. The wide 
breast the twentyfirst. Lion-like shoulders the twentysecond. 
Small mouth the twenty third. Extended eyes the twenty-fourth. 
Small and tender penis the twentyfifth. Even feet, even waist, 
even knee, even thighs the twentysixth. Even legs, even hands 
and even cars from twenty-seven to thirty-second. Thus, the lord 
possesses thirty two traits. The same number of traits exist in 
his consort Laksmi. 

18. Brahma too has thirtytwo marks. So has Bharati. 
The same number of marks characterize Visnu. 1 shall tell 
you my decisive thought on this point. 

19. My consort Laksmi is ignorant of the value of 
even my single mark. Those who know Hari say that Hari is 
possessed of many marks. 

20. O lord of birds, Laksmi knows the additional marks 
as compared with her own in the Vayu form of Vi?nu. Bharati 
has one hundred additional marks in comparison with her own. 

21-22. O lord of birds, do not think, therefore, that such 
forms of the lord as Viiva have the same qualities as those of 
Vifziu. Gods, like Rudra, have twenty-eight marks as they have 



1072 Garu4o. Pur ana 

no marks of eyes and brows. But the absence of these marks 
should not be regarded as defect. 

23. In the absence of marks of eyes and brows, lord 
Hari contains anger; his penis and belly are somewhat larger 
in proportion. 

24-27. The ladies of the lord, Laksmana, etc., have twenty 
seven marks. Varuni, etc., have twentysix. Candrama contains 
twentyfive; Kubera twentyfour; the nose and breath twenty two; 
Saci the same niimber; Pravahas nineteen; Yama the same 
number; Varuna eighteen; the air seventeen; Vaivasvata 
sixteen; Mitra fifteen, Kubera twentyfour; Fire thirteen; 
Ganga twelve; Budha eleven; Sani ten; Puskara nine. 

28-30. I have sixteen thousand women who are my 
beloveds, possessed of eight marks. Pitrs have seven marks; 
Devas and Gandharvas six, their successors five; Kings four and 
others three. 

31. A slight arrangement of the belly, small feet, short 
ears, long tufts, except in a Brahmana lady and in the consort 
of Siva, are regarded as great defects. 

32-33. Laksmana has five defects, except those of the 
head and the ankle. There are eight other defects in the body, 
such as the enlargement of the navel, legs, etc. These defects 
are present in Saci, O lord of birds, such defects should be 
marked by the seeker. 

34-44. O lord of birds, one should know the following 
defects well known to the learned. 

Enlarged belly, long navel, fierce prolonged teeth like a 
pole or a plough, eyes deep like the hidden well, long ears, lips 
and nose, long ankle, curved feet, bad navel, dark brown teeth, 
long legs, long penis, single scrotum, single nose, red beards, 
red hair, curved mouth, body scorched as a hill, red back— 
these are the bad signs in Kali. Shoulders and ears without 
hair, red cheeks, pale forehead, pale shoulders, pale hands, 
fierce look, fierce glance, indistinct sound, excessive eating and 
excessive. drinking, breasts as dry fruits, hairy thighs, hairy 
back, hairy forehead with three long parallel lines, penis marked 
with the snake-like fish, tip of the tongue marked with the shoe- 



III.22.70 


1073 


like fish, the anus marked with penis-like fish, feet marked with 
scorpion-like fish, the mouth marked with a dog-like fish, 
hands marked with many lines, nose hairy, thumb and little 
finger overlong. Suchlike bad marks abound in the Kali age. 
Several good marks are present in me, O lord of birds. 

45. Thirtytwo marks of Visnu, Brahma has already 
explained with reference to himself. 

46. Those stated by me or by Brahma are not contra¬ 
dictory to each other. Whatever I had stated I repeat succinctly. 

47. I have stated these by collecting the scattered 
material together. As it is evident, there is no contradiction in 
what I have stated at other places in the text. 

48. Lady Laksmana and others possess twenty-seven 
marks. In comparison to Bharati she is short of five marks in 
pudendum, ears, hands, breast and belly. 

49. O lord of birds, she has neither the additional 
marks of gods, nor the additional marks of Rudra. She is 
possessed of twenty six marks minus six marks of Varuna, plus 
additional marks in ears, belly, nose, hair, ankle and pudendum. 

50-54. Indra possesses twenty-five marks, devoid of 
seven marks (of Varuna), with additional marks in hands, feet, 
belly, ears, penis, ankle and lips. Saci contains twentythree 
marks and nine defects, with additional marks in pudendum, 
hair, lips, ears, legs, cheeks, breasts, ankles and lips. 

55-56. The wind pravaha contains twentytwo marks of 
merit and ten marks of defects. There are some additional 
marks on her thumb. The Sun contains twenty marks of 
merit and eleven defects. Fire contains nineteen marks of merit 
and thirteen defects. 

57-70. Vaivasvata contains eighteen marks and fourteen 
defects; Mitra seventeen marks of merit and fifteen defects; 
Kubera sixteen marks of merit and sixteen defects. My eldest 
son contains fifteen'marks and seventeen defects; Gaiiga fourteen 
marks of merit and eighteen defects; Budha (Mercury) 
thirteen marks and nineteen defects; Sani (Saturn) twenty 
marks and twenty defects; Puskara eleven marks and twenty 
one defects; Pitrs ten marks and twentythree defects. Devas, 



1074 


Garu4a Purina 


Gandharvas eight marks and twentyfour defects; Gandharvas 
in human forms seven marks and twentyfive defects; Kings 
six marks and twentysix defects. Some others possess four or 
five marks and three defects. This is the lower limit for the 
number of marks, merits and defects. 

If a common man or a royal person possesses some 
additional marks (and no defect) he is neither a man nor a 
god. Each and every person cannot be wholly whole or per¬ 
fectly perfect. Devas and Daityas possess twenty seven marks of 
merits and twenty seven marks of defects. None but the 
supreme god has thirtytwo marks and no defects. 

71-72. Thus, Sulaksana grew up in her father’s house. 
Once when her father was distributing food among his friends 
and relatives, for the prosperity of his family she said to her 
father : O father, gifts should be made over to those who have 
realized the lord in their self. If they are made to an unworthy 
person who has not realized the Self, the food and the drink go 
waste. 

73-74. Now, I shall tell you about lord Hari, where he 
stays, what he eats and what he drinks. Please hear attentively. 
Hari in the form of child Kr?na drinks milk, eats butter, and 
wears fresh dress and ornaments. Gifts should be made, thus, 
for the pleasure of Visnu. 

75. Hari eats and drinks in the company of his friends. 
Therefore, a householder should gift sumptuous food and tasteful 
drink in favour of the lord and receive his blessing. Otherwise, 
all that food and drink go in vain. 

76. The donor should be conscious that the lord receives 
his gift with pleasure. He should confer gifts to a worthy person. 
If knowing thus, he donates gifts every day. Visnu is pleased 
thereby. Otherwise, gifts of the donor are rendered waste. 

77. One should keep one’s house decorated with the arti¬ 
cles of precious metal knowing that lord always likes them. 

78. Lord Govinda abides with his sons in the house of the 
devotees of Vi§nu. The lord by the name of Mukunda abides 
in the abode of Mitra. By the name of Aniruddha he abides in 
the public rest house. By the name of Nariyana he abides in the 
house of a Br&hmana. 



III.23.3 


1075 


79. By the name of Hari he abides in the cowpen. By the 
name of Vamana he abides in the stable. By the name of Saihkar- 
sana he abides in Sudra. By the name of Pradyumna he abides 
in Vaiiya. 

80. By the name of Janardana he abides in K^tra. By 
the name of Mahidasa he abides in the fisherman. By the name 
of Upendra he abides in the earth. 

81. By the name of Cakrapani he abides in the elephant. 
By the name of Vi^va he abides in the heart. By the name of 
Bhutabhavana he abides in dogs. 

82. By the name of Trivikrama he abides in the ant. By 
the name of Hari he abides in the firmament. By the name of 
Ananta and Hari he abides in all castes The multi-formed Hari 
has no class, no family, no race. 

83. Knowing all this, Laksmana set herself to propitiate 
the lord. “May lord be pleased with my worship and become 
my husband”. 

84. Desiring Visnu to be her lord she gave up her body 
and was born in the country of Madras. 

85. In the Svayariivara of Laksmana I hit the target, 
conquered the rival wooers and married Laksmana, brought 
her home and gratified her desire. 

Now, I shall giue details of my marriage with Jambavati 
and explain why I married her. 


CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE 

The Anecdote of Jdmbaoati the consort of Srikrfna 

Lord Kfsn^ said : 

I. Jambavati, the daughter oi Soma, in her previous 
birth became my wife. She became superior to all the ladies, 
of my harem. 

2-3. When I am deep in love with Laksmi, my passion 
for Jambavati subsides. When I am less in love with Laksmi 1 



1076 Garu4a Pur&na 

have equal passion for all. But among these I have Inore love 
for Jambavatl. 

Garuia said : 

4. O omniformed lord, what sort of worship was per¬ 
formed by Jambavati that she became superior to all others. 

5. Thus asked by Garuda, lord Krsna, son of Devaki, 
spoke in a voice resembling the thunder of clouds. 

Lord Krfna said : 

6. Jambavatl, the daughter of Soma in her former birth, 
purified her life as well as her father’s by the worship of 
Visnu, 

7. She heard the sacred Puranas, bowed to and circum¬ 
ambulated Visnu who takes men across the ocean of life and 
death. She kept him ever in her memory. 

8-9. O lord of birds, by hearing the Puranas ceaselessly 
she and her father became detached from worldly affairs. 
Wealth, friendship and her previous possessions—elephants, gems, 
house, etc., she regarded as evanescent. 

10-11. She thought, “all this wealth, friendship, etc., 
are given and taken back by Hari.” She was not distressed 
thereby. “The most compassionate lord has taken pity on me 
to-day”, she said. 

Both she and her father set their heart on Vasudeva with 
sincere devotion. She became averse to seeking means for her 
sustenance. She accepted whatever came to her without being 
sought. 

12. She placed her wealth at the lotus-feet of the lord 
who takes men across the ocean of suffering. She set her tongue 
to the praise of Hari. 

13. She applied her hands to the act of sweeping the 
temple of Visnu with devotion that removes impurity. She 
directed her ears to hearing the sacred tale of Hari—the tale 
that takes one to heaven or effects release. 

14. She set her eyes to seeing the idols of Visnu—a fact 
that effaces impurities of body accrued from eternal times. 



III.23.24 


1077 


She set her body to the pious embraces of the Vaisnavas, kept 
herself in their company or busied^ herself with her body 
anointing with the fragrant substances that were left after the 
worship of Hari. 

15. She set her organ of smell to the feet of Hari—the feet 
which give release from the circle of birth and death. She set 
her organ of taste to partake the remanents of what had been 
offered to Hari and were mixed with Tulasi leaves. 

16. She set her feet to traversing the path sacred to Hari, 
her head to bowing at the feet of lord, her heart and mouth to 
his praise and service as is the practice among the illustrious 
devotees of Visnu. 

17. She directed her intellect to thinking upon the sup¬ 
reme spirit, and her organ of speech to the praise of the 
lord. 

18. Thus, she placed her life at the feet of the lord, started 
on pilgrimage with her father, to propitiate lord Visnu. 

Before she started on pilgrimage she worshipped at first 
the Brahmanas and the devotees of Visnu with clothes and 
ornaments. 

19. Thereafter she made a vow in the presence of the 

lord. 

20. O lord, so long I remain on pilgrimage, I shall be 
in Yaugic practice. May you, O lord, favour me with the 
company of the faithful, not with the company of non-believers. 

21. Let me hear the narrative of Hari. May I not go 
on pilgrimage with friends, sons, relatives and also with those 
who start on journey with a set moti\T or purpose. 

22. Fruitless is the pilgrimage of those who do not carry 
Salagrarna stone with them. 

23. If one goes on pilgrimage on foot let him take the 
l^alagrama stone with himself. Such a person obtains full fruits 
of his pilgrimage. 

If he wears shoes or protects his feet, he derives the fruit 
of his pilgrimage less by one fourth. 

24. If he goes on pilgrimage on a vehicle or a horse he 
derives the fruit of his pilgrimage less by one half. If he goes 



1078 Garu^a PurSna 

riding on a bull, he derives the fruit of his pilgrimage less by* 
one-fourth. 

If he subsists on the food provided by another, his pilgri- 
mage is wasted. He derives no fruit of his pilgrimage. 

25. But there is no sin if he accepts food from an ascetic, 
Vedic Scholar or a high-souled person. 

Having made this vow she set out on pilgrimage. 

26. She took bath, washed off the ointment and listened 
to the Puranas. She shared food with her father and together 
with him set out on journey the next day. She walked the dis¬ 
tance of one Kosa, the very next day. 

27. She worshipped and fed the Brahmanas and listened 
to the story of the lord. Those who perform journey in this way,, 
their journey becomes fruitful. 

28. The noble have declared that pilgrimage without 
compassion is barren. Similar fate awaits those who do not 
hear the divine story of lord Hari on their way to a shrine. 

29-30. The same fate awaits those who go on pilgrimage 
on horse or in other vehicles. 

Slaying a horse (in asvamedha) invites sin that can be 
washed off at the sight of the idol of Visnu at a sacred shrine. 

31. The sin accruing from the worship of lord without 
devotion can be wiped off by the repeated uttering of the Vedic 
mantra for the purpose or by meditating upon Visnu. What¬ 
ever is performed by way of worship without devotion is a sheer 
waste. Thus say the learned devotees of Visnu. 

32. Hence, O lord of birds, one should devote oneself to 
Visnu, hear his narrative which destroys sins, remember one¬ 
self falling at the feet of the lord, thus he should devote himself 
to the service of the lord. 

33. She proceeded, O lord of birds, together with her 
father to visit lord Visnu, the consort of Laksnu, at the Se?a 
mountain. She thought of Hari all the way to the shrine. 

34. “When shall I see lord Visnu of wide chest, adorned 
with Srivatsa.' When shall I see the lord with lovely belly 
marked with three folds. 

I. Srivatsa —a mark on Lord Vi^i^u’s chest. According to ancient tradition. 
Sage Bhrgu once struck Mahavi$nu, with his feet on the chest.'^Vijnu bore- 
this mark with pleasure. The mark is designated as Srtvatsa. 



III.23.48 


1079 


35. When shall I see the lord with the neck resembling 
a conch and the resting-place for Maharloka. When shall I 
see the navel of the lord, the resort of the firmament. 

36. When shall I see the face of the lord, the resort of the 
people of Janas. 

37. When shall I see the head of the lord, the resort of 
Satya people. When shall I see the hips of the lord, the resort of 
Bhu people. 

38. When shall I see the thigh of the lord, the resort of 
Talatala people. 

39. When shall I see the tender knees of the lord, the 
resort of Sutala people. When shall I see the soles of the lord 
the resort of Patala people. 

40. Thus pondering, on her way to the shrine, she reached 
the mountain Sesa where she saw lord iSesa possessed of one 
thousand hoods. The mountain abounded in various trees and 
was inhabited by monkeys. 

41. She said : “I have seen this mountain by my merits 
accumulated since various births.” 

At the sight of the lord her eyes overflowed with tears. 
She stood up immediately and bowed to the lord. 

42. One should salute the lord in front of the image and 
not at the back. She bowed to the lord with the eight organs of 
her body, placing Salagrama in front. 

43. The devotees of Visnu should act accordingly. The 
consort of Laksmi abides at the peak of the mountain, wor¬ 
shipped or honoured by Laksmf, Brahma and others. 

44. I shall see the mighty, supreme lord of Lak|m!. I shall 
attend the mountain and put up my residence at the holy 
hermitage of Kapila. 

45. Lord Visnu is here in his visible form and not else¬ 
where. 

She took bath, dressed her hair and offered rice-balls to 
the manes at a sacred place. 

46. She gave cows, land, gold, etc., in charity and ascend¬ 
ed the mountain. 

47-48. She put l$alagrama in front and bowed to the lord 
with devotion. She had traversed one hundred steps before she 



1080 


Garu(^a Purdna 


found herself in front of the lord where sitting comfortably she 
heard the recital of the Bhagavata and the portion of the Parana 
which contains the praise of the mountain Venkata.^ 

With full devotion she heard the glory of lord Vehkatadri 
from the honourable preceptor Jaigisavya. 


CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR 

The glory of Venkafacala and lord Srinivasa 
Jaigisavya said : 

1. O girl, Attend to the merit one obtains in ascending the 
mountain Venkata. 

2. In each and every step of the mountain the people 
recite Bhagavadgita remembering lord Srinivasa. They are 
transported to the highest region of delight. When the lord is 
pleased, they attain liberation. O girl, there is nothing 
inaccessible to a person with whom lord Hari is so pleased. 

3. He who hears this Parana while ascending the 
mountain attains the merit of visiting holy places of pilgrimage. 
Therefore while ascending the steps the devotees should praise 
Hari Srinivasa and their preceptor. 

4. She heard the glory of ascending the steps, set up 
and worshipped the holy Salagrama thereon and started 
ascending. 

5. O lord of birds, while ascending the steps the non- 
Vaisnava devotees feel no pleasure. O lord of birds, this very 
fact is enough to put them into deep dark regions. 

6. At every step of journey, one should remember 
Hari. The maiden said to Jaigisavya again. 

The maiden said : 

7. O Jaigisavya, please, tell me how Srinivasa, the lord 
of Laksmi appears to Brahma and others. 

1. Venkafa —a sacred mountain in the south. 



III.24.18 


1081 


Thus addressed by the maiden, the daughter of Soma, 
Jaigi§avya said in reply. 

Jaigifavya said: 

8-11. Brahma and others can see Srinivasa as of eternal 
form of lustrous body. This is how Vehkatesa is seen by Rudra 
and his associates. He appears to them as lustrous as one 
hundred thousand suns, which to the mortals is as lustrous as 
one thousand suns, as also possessed of the lustre of lightning. 
To the sages he appears like the sun and the moon, to holy men 
like constellations, to the worldly people like the mass of milk, 
to the liars as a blue stone, to the lay people as an ordinary 
stone only. 

12. People do not realize the true form of lord Hari. 
They are swayed by tamas and rajas. 

13. Those characterized by Sattva are seldom found in 
the Kali age. Those who appear to be devotees of Visnu are in 
fact not devotees at all. Rather, they arc busy in filling up 
their belly and meeting their sexual desire; for they undertake 
journey with that end in view. 

14. Rare is the diffusion of devotion in the iron age. 
Those who are devotees of the lord but still not detached from 
worldly pleasures cannot easily get the sight of lord Visnu. 

15. O lord of birds, I shall tell you the nature of a true 
devotee. A true devotee is one who is devoid of hatred, is full 
of affection and possesses keen insight and devotion. I shall now 
tell you the forms of hate. 

16. The supreme lord is distinct from Atman. He is 
independent as well as free. He is full of knowledge and bliss. 
To think otherwise is to abhor the lord. 

17. To pay more attention to Brahma, Rudra and others 
or among men to Brahmins, etc. and to regard Brahma, Rudra, 
and others as more honourable than Visnu is nothing less than 
dishonouring him. 

18. O noble one, to regard Vi§nu as a human being 
possessed of hands, feet, etc., is equal to hating the lord. To 
distinguish each incarnation of the lord from the other or to 
think of their death is also tantamount to a hate. 



1082 


Garu^a PurAm 


19. To hate the devotees of Visnu is a sin; to find fault 
with the instructions of the lord is showing hate. O inaid, those 
who are full of hate can never be true devotees. 

The maid said : 

20. O sage Jaigisavya, please tell me who are the true 
devotees. How did they show their devotion. Lord Visnu, 
3rmiv^a who is compassionate to devotees is indeed their 
protector. 

21. Thus addressed by the lord, Sage Jaigisavya revived 
his memory and spoke to the maid. 

Jaig^auya said : 

Prahlada, the devotee of Srinivasa Nrsirhha attained 
sovereignty of the world and the precious knowledge of atman 
from Nrsimha. 

22. ParaSara, the devotee of Sriniv^a had a great devo¬ 
tion for Vy^a, the incarnation of Visnu. He praised Vy^a 
and obtained the quintessence of knowledge from him. With his 
soul elevated by devotion he achieved liberation. 

23. The sage Narada, the devotee of Srinivasa had a 
devotion for Hari while he was in his mother’s womb. By that 
devotion he was adopted as a son by Brahma. By the attain¬ 
ment of knowledge he achieved liberation. 

24. Ambarisa was a devotee of Srinivasa as well as 
Hari. He attained knowledge from Durvasas. With his soul 
elevated by devotion he attained liberation. 

25. Mucakunda was the devotee of Srinivasa. Detached 
from worldly affairs and firm in devotion he received supreme 
knowledge of lord Visnu. With his soul elevated by devotion he 
attained liberation. 

26. Punt^arika, the devotee of Srinivasa was devoted 
to Visnu at the behest of his father. He obtained supreme 
knowledge by the grace of CJod and received liberation after 
his soul was elevated by devotion. 

27. Brahma, Vayu, Sarasvati are great Yogins. They 
are the constant devotees of lord Visnu. They are of pure form, 
not attached to worldly objects. 



IIL24.35 


1083 


28-29. Lord of mountains, lord of Nagas, lord of birds, 
Venus, Mars, Jupiter, moon, sun, lord of waters (Varuna), 
Agni (fire-god), Manu^ Dharma, Kubera, lord of obstacles, 
Asvins, groups of Maruts, Paijanya, Mitra—all these are the 
devotees of Visnu. 

30. Visvamitra, Bhrgu, Aurva, Kutsa, Marici, Atri, 
Pulaha, Kratu, 8akli, Vasistha, Gautamiya, Pulastya, and 
Bharadvaja—these are the devotees of Srinivasa. 

31. Mandhata, Nahusa, "Ambarii^, Sagara, Prthu, 
Haihaya, Iksvaku, Bharata, Yuyutsu, Sutala, Dharma, Vikuksi, 
Utthana, Bibhisana, Dasaratha—these wise and intelligent 
persons are the devotees of lord of Venkata. 

32-33. Bhagirathi,^ Samudra, Yamuna, Sarasvati,^ 
Godavari,® Narmada,* Krsna,* Bhimarathi,® Sarayu,’ Phalgu,® 
Kaveri, Garidaki* Kapila'®—these are the devotees of lord Hari. 

34-35. O maid, hear, I shall tell you a significant fact. 
At a congregation, where they narrate the tale of Visnu, where 


1. Bhdprathi —Gangd, so called because she was brought from the 
Himalayan mountain to the plain, by Bhagiratha, the descendent of 
Sagara. 

2. Sarasvati —The modern river of the same name flows between the 
Jumna and Sutlej. Formerly, it was a much larger river but in later times it 
perished, as it does now, in the sands of the desert. Vinasana was the name 
of the place where it disappeared. 

3. Godavari —A famous river of Janasthana, the scene of R&ma’s first 
conflict with the Rakfasas was the country on both its banks. 

4. Narmadd —^This river rises in the Vindhya mountain and falls into 
the gulf of Cambay. It flows in a wide flood-plain and is fairly deep. It fomu 
a suitable boundary between the political units north and south it. 

5. —^This river received very little attention in ancient times, 
and was almost unknown compared with the Godivari and Kaveri. The rea¬ 
son seems to be that the counjtry through which it flows was nearly all forest 
in ancient times. 

6. Bhfmarathi —Modem Bhima, the tributary of risiog near 

Pune. 

7. Saraj/u —It is a sacred river of Northern Kosal, with Ayodliy&, the 
sacred city of great antiquity lying along its bank. 

8. Phalgu —a river on which Gayi stands. 

9. Gafi^akf—a river which rises in the Himalayas and falls into the 
Ganges at Sonepur in Bihar. 

10. Kt^Ui —a river mentioned in the Marka^^^A pur^a. 



1084 


Garuda Purdna 


the devotees who understand the essence flock together—all 
those who are present are the devotees of the lord. 

36. Those who go on pilgrimage intent on realizing the 
lord are the devotees of the lord, not others, for the life’s 
purport of the devotees of Visnu stabilizes in the supreme lord 
and not in other matters. 

37. If reaching the mountain Sesa one does not gift 
food, cloth and ornaments to the deserving he is not entitled to 
be called a devotee of Visnu. Who can be a greater animal 
than him. 

38. The devotees of Hari such as Gahga, etc. live on 
the mountain Srinivasa in the service of the wide-stridcr Visnu. 
O maid, they should not be worshipped by the faithful. 

39. I shall narrate to you the purport thereof. I shall 
also tell you where one should worship and offer homage to the 
devotees, to each individually. 

40. He should worship the worthy Brahmanas at their 
feet, with hands joined in reverence. 

He should worship lord Visnu with eight organs of the 
body. He should worship his preceptor in the same way taking 
him for Visnu. 

41. He should bow to Gahga, Tulasi and the rest with 
the eight organs of the body. He should physically bow to the 
holy fig tree but to the cows and others mentally. 

42. The devotees of Visnu alone should worship the 
supreme god. Those who are rightly the devotees of Visnu 
but possess nominal knowledge are also entitled to worship 
him. 

43. But those who are nominally the devotees of Visnu, 
though possessed of knowledge are not entitled to his worship. 

44. Those who do not worship the supreme god Visnu 
go to the dark regions (i.e. hell) due to the great sin. 

45. Brahma, etc. are the names of Visnu which he 
himself had given to the gods. The wise lord did not 
transfer some of his names such as Kesava, just as a king, 
when he leaves the capital does not relinquish his title or pass 
it on to another. 



Ill .24.55 


1085 


46. O maiden, all this I have told you precisely. You should 
investigate the matter further by yourself. Worship should be 
made to me by my titles—Govinda, Narayana and Madhava. 

47. Together they ascended the mountain Vehkafa, 
chanting chants of praise, uttering the name of lord 8r!nivasa» 
feeling joy and pleasure and clapping their hands in expectation 
of seeing the lord. 

On hearing the words of lord Krsna, Garuda asked the 
lord how the travellers felt pleasure by uttering his name. 

Lord Krfna said : 

48. “O lord Srinivasa, this very name of yours is indeed 
omnipotent. Brahma and others take resort to you. Rama 
(Laksmi) has derived her name Sri from this very title. 

49. Lord Visnu has derived his name Srinivasa from the 
fact that he is the resort of Sri.” 

Thus addressing Srinivasa by name, dancing and clapping 
hands, with the thrill of hair on their person, they gave 
expression to their feeling. 

50. O lord, may we see your face this very day. When 
shall we get our desire fulhlled. O lord Kesava, you favour us 
this very day by showing your lotus-feet to us. 

51. In the epithet Kesava, the letter K devotes the 
primeval being Brahma which again signifies the lord of all 
beings. The word lia denotes the worthy lord Rudra who 
instigates dissolution of the universe. 

52. Hence, Hari is called Kesava. Addressing the lord by 
this epithet, dancing as well as trickling the spring of joy in 
the form of joyful tears and uttering the name lord Narayana, 
they continued their upward journey. 

53. As he is the resort of merits and demerits and as he 
abides in the waters of ocean, he is called Narayana. People 
who take resort to him obtain eternal release, O lord of birds. 

54. Waters are called Nara; as he resorts to waters (in 
the ocean) he is called Naraya^. Those who resort to 
Narayana get an eternal release. 

53. Naras (waters) are so called because as cosmic 
waters they emerge from his side-glances. As he is the resort 



1086 Garu^a Purina 

of these waters he is called Narayana and also because he is 
the source of this eternal universe. 

56. They danced, praising the lord thus : “O Govinda, 
there is no such Being as your supreme self, no such personage 
whose sight is so thrilling and delightful. 

57. In the word Govinda go means the universal speech. 
As you are expressed by the medium of universal speech you 
are called Govinda. O lord, you are known to or by the Vedas”. 

58-59. Thus they danced while their eyes flowed with 
joyful tears. “O Hari, the slayer of Asura Mura, please grant 
us an interview. We are slaves of your slaves. 

As you pervade the fourteen worlds^ you are called Vasu. 
As you play sports constantly or as the great declare you a god, 
you are called Vasudeva.” 

Thus uttering the names of the lord—Vasudeva, Madhava, 
etc., they danced joyously. 

60. “People call you Laksmipati the lord of Laksmi. 

The syllable dhava is the synonym of treasure. Hence, the 

learned call you Madhava (the treasure of Laksmi). O lord of 
Laksmi, protect us, your devotees.” 

61. Thus speaking they danced and persued their upward 
journey, uttering “O lord, grant us your eternal protection. As 
you are omnipresent you are called Vitala.'* Reciting names 
of the lord they reached their goal. Here, full of devotion, 
they sought the audience of the lord. 

The Maid said’. 

62. O best of sages, what is the name of this shrine? 
What rites shall we perform here ? whom did lord Siinivasa 
favour at this holy place, please tell us in detail. 

Jaigi^avya said : 

63. O maid, listen to the narrative of Prahlada, the 
best of the devotees of Visnu. Once, when he had no desire to 
fulfil, Prahlada went to see lord Srinivasa on the Sesa mountain. 

64. This was the place where Prahlada had spoken to the 
Daitya youths on the glory of Vi^nu. Hence, O maid, you 


1 . fourUtn Worlds —Sec p. 1043 fn. 2 . 



ni.24.75 


1087 


should worship lord Visnu (the abode ofLaksmi), in the form 
of Nrsirhha. 

Prahldda said : 

65. “O Daitya youths, you have attained human life which 
is very rare. Rarer is the knowledge of the glory of Nrsimha. 
That journey is fruitful whereon throughout they utter the 
narrative of Hari, O Daitya youths, Hari abides at the place 
where they sing his narrative, though he pervades the universe,” 

66-68. On hearing the same, the daitya princes said to 
Prahlada, the devotee of Hari. “O friend, if Hari is all-pervading 
why does he withhold his presence here in the midst of water.” 

Thus spoken to by the Daitya youths, Srinivasa appeared 
in the midst of water. 

69. Those who bathe in this holy pool stabilize their inte¬ 
llect which remains untarnished with impurity, even in this 
iron age (Kali), 

70. Thus bestowing favour on the Daitya youths, lord 
Visnu disappeared in the midst of waters. 

Even today, Nrsimha abides in the midst of waters. 
Prahlada too abides therein together with Daitya youths. 

71. Here in the afternoon, there is heard all around the 
word ‘Victory’. The place is called Narsimha in recollection of 
the Victory of the lord over Hiranyakasipu. Pilgrims who visit 
this holy place take plunge here. 

72. They took bath, offered an earthen lamp to a pious 
Brahmin Srinivasa, uttering ‘Govinda, Govinda.’ 

73. The maid sat in front of the principal deity and said. 
‘‘O noble Jaigisavya, please tell me how shall I have the 
audience of the lord.” 

On hearing this, Jaigisavya was extremely delighted at 
heart and said. 

74. O, maid, I tell you how you shall proceed. At the 
main gate of Sriniv^a you should recite the following. 

75. commit thousands of faults day and night. O lord, 
pardon all these faults of mine, O best of primeval beings. 



1088 


Garu4a Purdtfa 


76. O lord, efface those causes of mine which create 
hatred for the devotees of Visnu, whether they are mental, oral 
or physical.** 

77. O maid, at the main gate of the temple of Srinivasa 
you should remember, in the appropriate form Jaya and Vijaya. 
At the r^ht gate of Siiniv^a you should remember Canda and 
Pracanda. 

78. At the left gate, you should remember Nanda and 
Sunanda; at the extreme left gate you should remember the lily- 
eyed Kumudanetra. 

79-81. You should enter the temple with full devotion 
and reverence, circumambulating the lord twelve times. 

You should sip waters in the holy pool and bathe. You 
should enter r%ht in the interior of the temple and other cham¬ 
bers. While there, you should meditate on the deities sitting in 
their respective postures on their seats. 

82-83. In the middle of the seat you should bow to 
Sriniv^a with all the organs of your body. To the left of the 
lord, outside the pedestal, you should pay homage to the pre¬ 
ceptor, in front of the pedestal, just below at the south-east 
comer. In the south-western corner you should pay homage to 
the honourable Vy^a. The devotee of Visnu should be honour¬ 
ed all times everywhere. 

84. In the north-western comer you should honour 
goddess Durga with your soul elevated by devotion. 

Above the pedestal, in the south-east region you should 
bow to Yama, the presiding deity of Dharma. 

85. Above the pedestal, in the upper south-western region 
to Vayu. 

86. Above the pedestal, in the north-eastern region to 
Tndra, the supreme lord. To the east of the pedestal« to Nainrti, 
lord of the Aryamans. 

87. To the south of the pedestal, the goddess Durga also 
called Ugr&. To the west of the pedestal, to K^adeva, the 
lord of health. 

88. To the north of the pedestal, to Rudra the supreme 
lord. To the middle of the pedestal, to Var&ha the primeval 
man. 



111.24.104 


1089 


89. Above the pedestal, to Lak^mi called Sakti, the support 
of the universe. Above the pedestal, to Vayu and Kurma. 
Above that to Sesa and Kurma. 

90-91. Above that, cosmic Earth, the presiding deity of 
the universe. Above that, to Vanina, the lord of milky ocean. 
Above that, to Lak^m! called SvetadvIpS. Above that, to divine 
Laksmi called Mcm.4opil> 

92. In the middle of Pf/Atf, to Laksmi called Yami. By the 
sideofYami to Devi. To the south ofYama, to Surya in the 
form of an earthen lamp. 

93. To the left of God Yama, to Sri in the form of an 
earthen lamp. Ift front of Yama, to Agni also in the form of an 
ear them lamp. 

94. In front of the lord, he should bow to Bhumi the pre¬ 
siding deity of the elements, and to Durga, the presiding deity 
of tamas and the reclining couch of the lord. 

95. To the east, to the Atman in the form of steps of the 
pedestal. To the east, to knowledge (Jflana) in the form of steps 
of the pedestal. 

96. To the east, in the leaf of a lotus, to Vimala in the 
form of a female and to the deities, Brahma, etc. 

97. In the lotus-leaf in the south-east corner you should 
bow to the excellent gods and goddesses Utkarsa, Laksmi, 
Brahma, Vayu and Sesa. 

98. In the eight-petalled lotus to the right you should 
worship Narayana, Sesa; etc, in the form of a female. 

99. In the lotus leaf in the north-east, to liana, Narayana, 
Viraiica, Vayu, ether, Sesa and Dcvas in the form of a 
female. 

100-101. In the middle of the lotus, to Visnu, Laksmi 
Anugraha and to Vayu, ether, Sesa and Rudra in the form of a 
female. To lord Ananta in the form of p>edestal and to 
j^iiniv^a. 

102. To the left of l^rinivasa to Laksmi ; in the middle of 
Srinivasa to Dhara. 

103-104. Outside the pedestal, in the east, to Krpolka; in 
the south, to Maholka; in the west, to Virolka; in the north, to 
Ulka; in the four corners, to Sahasrolka. 



1090 


Garu^a Purand 


105-112. In the east to Vasudeva, in the south to* Saihkar- 
sana, in the west to Pradyumna, in the north to Aniruddha; in 
the south-east to Maya, in the south-west to Jaya, in the north- 
cast to Krtya, in the north-east to Santi; in the east to Kesava, 
in the south-west and north-west to Narayana and Madhava, in 
the south-east to Govinda, in the south to Visnu, in the south¬ 
west to Madhusudana, in the west to Trivikrama, Vamana, 
Visnu and Sridhara, in the north to Hr§ike^a and Padmanabha, 
in the north-east to Damodara. 

113-119. In the fourth enclosure, in the east to Mahakiir- 
ma; in the south-east to Varaha; in the south to Nrsimha and 
Vamana; in the south-west to Bhargava (Parasurama); in the 
west to Madhava Krsna; in the north-west to Buddha, in the 
north to Ananta in the form of Ulka and in the north-east to 
Vi^varupa; in the south-east to Varuni; in the south-west to 
Gayatri; in the north-west to Bharati, in the north-east to 
Girija. To the left of Girija to Sauparni; in the east to Indra 
with weapons, in the south-east to Visnu with his attendants 
and assemblage with the formula. To you 0 Agni with weapons, 
as stated previously. 

120-122. In the south to Yama, in the south-west to 
Nirrti, in the west to Varuna, in the north-west, to Vayu, in the 
north to Kubera, in the north-east to Siva, in the midst of 
north-etist and east to Brahma with weapons, in the middle of 
north-west to Sesa. Thus you should pay homage again and 
again. 

123. Thus, I have narrated to you the prescribed way how 
one should have the vision of the lord when one goes to a 
shrine to pay visit. 

Thus addressed, she went to the shrine together with her 
companions. 

124. This prescribed way of paying visit to Srinivasa 
which I have told you just now should not be divulged to any¬ 
one, O bird, since it is very, very secret. 

125. O lord of birds, it is very rare to keep company with 
the good and noble people who can throw light on the nature of 
tattvas. It is p>os5ible to have a preceptor onl^if one has iii 
store the aggregate of merits accumulated in previous existences. 



III.25.9 


1091 


126. In the company of holy pious people even iinauspi- 
cious things turn into auspicious ones. In the company of lord 
Visnu the unsteady mind leaves its steadiness, as water changes 
its nature in association with the sea-shell or in contact with 
the lotus leaf. 


CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE 

Glory of Venkale§a and the method of worship 

1. At the gate of the temple of iSrInivasa she and her 
companions saw Svamipuskarini saying, “O lord Hari, 
Srinivasa”, she meditated on the lord who takes Brahma and 
others across the ocean of existence. 

2. There, in the pool, Visnu abides, together with other 
gods for the preservation of people. Hence, the pool is called 
Svamipuskarini. Therein, the maiden and her companions took 
bath. 

3. O lord of birds, formerly, the gods purified themselves 
by taking bath and entered the temple of Srinivasa to practise 
penance with sincere devotion. As instructed by the preceptor, 
the maid too acted all accordingly, O lord of birds. 

4. Then, the lord in his full and beautiful form appeared 
before her. The maid saw the beautiful form of Srinivasa and 
was delighted thereby. 

5-7. She saw the lord wearing the gold-embroidered dress 
with an attractive head gear and bodice. His body was anoint¬ 
ed with the paste of musk whereof the smell had made the 
quarters fragrant. The lord had lotus-like blooming eyes, neck 
as round as the conch, long arms, golden sacred thread and 
looked as the cupid incarnate. He possessed charms which 
could subjugate any people and who had a body pretty and 
tender. 

8. At the sight of the lord, the maid was extremely delight¬ 
ed. Her body showed a thrilling hair. 

9. Her heart overflowed with pleasure at the sight of the 
lord. Her eyes were full of tears and her body showed joyful signs 



1092 


Garuia PurOtja 


of thrilling hair. She danced in the presence of the"lord. Her 
faults were destroyed with the feeling of devotion. In a tone 
full of emotion she addressed the lord thus. 

10. “O blissful lord, save me from worldly affections, grant 
me your eternal bliss by releasing me from the shackles of 
Karman. 

O lotus-eyed lord, save me by your sweet, charmii]^ 
glance full of ambrosial compassion. O lord, I am extremely 
distressed, save me by bestowing wisdom on me. 

11. O lord, dissociate me from my bad companions—desire 
wrath and greed, and destroy my strong foes, viz., the obstacles. 

12. O lord ofLaksmi, Sarasvati, Brahma and the universe 
protect me; O lord ofLaksmi, the primeval course of the Uni¬ 
verse, whose lotus feet are bowed to by the gods, protect 

»» 

me. 

13. Thus paying homage with reverence she praised the 
primeval lord. O lord of birds, there are innumerable merits 
n Visnu which are not known to Laksmi. 

14. [She continued] “Unknowneven to Laksmi, there exist 
several qualities in Hari. I cannot praise you adequately. Still 
I shall try to praise you, O lord. 

15. By the favour of Brahma, the lord of speech, by the 
favour of Rudra, above all by your favour, I praise you, O lord. 
Be kind enough to bestow peace on me. 

16. O lord, if you are pleased with me, bestow devotion 
on me for your feet. At your very sight, O lord, good and 
evil—both disappear for ever. 

17. The world is destroyed by illusion indicated by pride, 
It has turned deaf and blind by the excess of wealth. 

18. I do not seek for that wealth which would make me 
dumb to the entreaties of the poor or the preceptor and drive 
me off from the service of your lotus-feet. 

O lord, grant me company of the good that may help me 
to realize my inner self. 

19-20. Please extinguish my desire for sons, etc. Grant me 
devotion for your lotus-feet. Take off my treasure and bestow 
the same among your devotees. Grant me de^ption for your 
lotus-feet. 



III.25 32-33 


1093 


21. Please take off my learning, progeny, wealth and pride. 
Orant me devotion for your lotus-feet. Take off my jealousy 
and intolerance for the noble devotees of Visnu. O lord of 
Venkata grant me protection. 

22. O primeval cause of the universe, gram me that 
mantra which may enable me to meet you again. I ask for 
nothing more than my contact with your lotus-feet. Please 
grant me this all if you are so pleased with me.” 

23. Thus spoken to by her, Srinivasa was extremely pleas¬ 
ed. Emitting nectar from his mouth he spoke to her. 

”0 maid, I give you the most secret mantra which you 
should keep repeating with devotion. 

24-25. I tell you this mantra out of affection for you. 
Please listen to the mantra with devotion, as I disclose it to 
you; Oyh VyaAkaleiaya namah Orh. 

26. O maid, by this mantra you will achieve the object 
of your desire.” Having addressed the maid thus, the lord 
appeared before her in a symbolic form. 

27. The girl bowed to the lord and stayed in the vicinity 
of the lake named Svdmisaras. On that very day she propitiated 
the Brahmanas and other castes with the cooked food of 
ingredients. 

28-29. In the evening she paid homage to the idol and 
other symbols of the lord. She circumambulated the image and 
danced without reservation, proclaiming victory of the lord. 
During this performance, she set her eyes on the image of the 
lord and danced over and over again. 

30. ‘‘To day, my body is purified, my eyes have borne 
fruit, my feet have gained purpose, since I have circumambulat¬ 
ed you, my lord. 

31. My hands have attained the fruits of their existence 
since they have clapped to glorify the lord.” Thus she pleased 
the lord by these utterances which were full of praises for the 
lord. 

32-33. The gods sounded drums, played on instruments 
.and scattered flowers on her head. They danced around her, 
together with their consorts, clapped hands and paid homage. 



1094 Garutjla Purdna 

O lord of birds, she too danced before the lord on the *Ananda 
mountain every day. 

34. Immersed in bliss he returned to her hermitage to¬ 
gether with Jaigisavya. O lord of birds, those who do not go on 
pilgrimage thus have all their pious activities come to naught, 
thus say the noble. 

35-36. She went to the hermitage together with Jaigisavya 
and asked the preceptor about the mantra of Vyahkatesa. O 
sir, tell me the meaning of mantra so that I may perform Japa 
for the attainment of my desire. 

Jaigisavya said: 

O blessed one, listen to the meaning of the mantra of 
Vehkatesa and then think upon it concentratedly. 

37. The letter v denotes excellence, ^ denotes knowledge, 
k denotes happiness, t expresses consciousness. 

38. The word Ila signifies the soul. Collectively, it is 
called Vyankafa since it embodies supreme knowledge, undilut¬ 
ed pleasure and inunense wealth. 

39. Or V denotes the organs of senses which constitute 
the corpus of Hari. Kata means the aggregate of the organs of 
senses. 

40. Since he directs these organs inward he is called 
Vyaiikata or since he directs them outward he is called Vyankata. 

41. Or jy'a means the released souls who have attained 
supreme knowledge. 

42. Vyankafa would mean the aggregate of ‘released souls’. 
Vyankateia would mean the lord of released souls. The indivi¬ 
dual soul in the subtle body is called Vyankafa, 

43. Or the word Vyankafa means the aggregate of Daityas, 
so called because they are without knowledge. 

44. The lord Vyahkatesa is capable of liquidating them, 
he is called Vyahkatesa. 

45. Desire, rage, etc are evils that are contrary to bliss, 
hence they are named Vyahkata. Since he destroys these he is 
called Vyahkatesa. O maiden, on knowing this you should 
perform Japa. 



HL25.58 


1095 


46. O lord of birds, the maiden heard the glory of 
Vyahkata and passed the night in that dirama together with her 
father. She got up early in the morning, set her thought on 
Vyahkatesa and praised the lord. 

47. Sri Vyankatesa, Sri Nrsimha, Sri Varadaraja, 
Varaha, the god Srirahga, lord Visnu with Sesa for his repose— 
may all these deities make this morning auspicious for me. 

48. Lord Srikrsna, Balarama, lord Visnu who resides at 
Prayaga, Narayana who abides in Badari—may all these deities 
make this morning auspicious for me. 

49. Damodara, the abode of three worlds, lord Panc^u- 
rahga, lord Nrsimha, lord R^adeva who resides at Amogha— 
may all these make tliis morning auspicious for me. 

50. Sri Dharmaputra, of the form of Nrsirhha, Sri 
Pippastha who resides at Muhalla, Kola Nrsirhha and Surpa- 
kara Nrsirhha—may all these deities make this morning auspi¬ 
cious for me. 

51. Lord Brahma, Sarasvati, Bharatl, Sarva, Supariia, 
Sesa, Uma, Mahendra, Saci and others—may all these deities 
make this morning auspicious for me. 

52. Dvaravati, Kasika, Avantika, Prayaga, Kafici, 
Mathura, Mayavati, Hastimati—may all these cities make this 
morning auspicious for me, 

53. Bhagirathi, Sarasvati, Godavari, Sindhu, Krsna, Veni, 
Kalindi Yamuna, Narmada —may all these rivers make this 
morning auspicious for me. 

54. Vitasta, Kaveri, Tuhgabhadra, Suvafijara, Bhima- 
rathi, Vipasa, Tamraparni, Pinakini — may all these rivers make 
this morning auspicious for me. 

55. Svami Puskarini, Suvarnamukhari, Sripant^avi, 
Taumbaru, Kapila, the destroyer of sins. 

56. Guru, Vasistha, Kratu, Ahgiras, Manu, Pulastya, 
Pulaha, Gautama, Raibhya, Marici, Cyavana, Daksa,—may all 
these sages make this morning auspicious for me. 

57. Seven oceans, seven Kula-parvatas, seven dvipas, 
seven pleasure gardens, seven regions such as Bhur etc.,—may all 
these make this morning auspicious for me. 

58. Mandhatr, Nahusa, Ambari^a, Sagara, Nala, Dharma- 
raja, Prahlada, Kraturaj, Vibhisa^a, Gaya, Vyasa, Hanuman, 



1096 Gambia Pur3$a 

Alvatthaman, Krpa, Draupadi, Sita, Taraka, Mandodari—may 
all these make this morning auspicious for me. 

59. The forests of holy fig, holy basil, amalaka, Naga- 
kelara, Campaka, coral trees and flowers of various hues and 
fragrances—may all these make this morning auspicious for me. 

60. Thus after meditating on Srinivasa in her heart, the 
maiden performed the daily necessaries and went to Svamipu?- 
karini together with JaigTsavya and took bath in the prescribed 
way. She then repeated the mantra of VyankateSa and spoke to 
Jaigisavya and the preceptor. 


CHAPTER TWENTYSIX 

On the mountain Venkata, Svdmi Pufkarini 
and the deities residing there 


The maiden said: 

1. Why has Srinivasa come over here, please tell me, O 
sage ? Where was the mountain Sesa, the destroyer of sins situat¬ 
ed formerly? Please tell me, why has the lake Svamipuskarii^ 
come over here? 

Jaigisavya said: 

2. O fortunate one, O blessed one, hear how lord Vyan- 
katesa came over here. O illustrious one, our sins are destroyed 
by narrating and listening to the tale.^ 

3-5. In olden days, there was an asura named Hiranya- 
ksa, the son of sage Kasyapa and Diti. He functioned as a 
keeper at the second gate of the palace of Visnu. But as cursed* 

1. Such statements arc common to all the Puraitas. They show all- 
comprehensive and too liberal nature of the Pura^ic cult. They are hyper¬ 
bolical and should not be taken literally, 

2. The practice of cursing people at the slightest provocation was 
very popular in ancient India, (Vide DuroSsas: P.E.) The^veapon of curse 
in the hands of sages was more effective than the actual weapon itself. 



III.26.10-11 


1097 


by Sanaka the son of Brahma, he became a daitya^ and began 
to trouble the devotees of lord Visnu. 

Safijiva, known as Vijaya was a devotee of Visriu. 
Hiranyaksa the daitya began to trouble the devotees. But, as 
influenced by Vijaya, he thought of practising penance. There¬ 
upon his mother Diti spoke to him. 

Dili said: 

6-8. Dear son, do not take to penance. You are just eight 
years old. Do not trouble me. I cannot remain, even for a 
moment without you. Do not practice penance if you want me 
to remain alive. Though he was thus accosted by his mother, he 
being still under the spiritual influence of Vijaya said. 

Hiranyaksa said: 

9. “Dear mother, get rid of these worldly attachments. 
Direct your mind to the service of lord Visnu.* The very fact 
that you love me as your son is the cause of your pain and 
pleasure. 

10-11. O mother, as long as you have love for me, you 
will remain in trouble. O mother, you regard me as your son. I 
regard you as your mother. I regard the venerable sire as my 
father, while you regard him as your husband. O mother, all 

1. Jaya and Vijaya were the two watchmen who stood at the gate of 
lord Visnu in Vaikuntha. Once, the great hermit s^es Sanaka and others 
reached Vaikuntha to visit lord Vifnu. Jaya and Vijaya treated the hermits 
without request. The hermits cursed them that they would become D&navas. 
They were born to sage Kasyapa and his consort Did. Jaya became Hirany&> 
k?a and Vijaya Hirapyakaiipu. Hirapyaksa was killed by Vi$t)iu who took 
the form of a boar whereas Hiranyakaiipu was slain by the lord assuming 
the form of a man-lion. P.E., p. 81. 

In the second birth they made their appearance as R&vana and 
Kumbhakan^a and were killed by R&ma. 

In the third birth they were bom as 8iiup&la and Daijicjlavaktra and 
were slain by lord Krfpa. 

2. The Puritias dedicated to Vifpu preach the cult of devotion. Total 
dedication to the lord implies complete detachment from the objects of senses. 
In this context the cult of devotion is held to be superior to the cult of 
penance. In fact, the paurink cult is a replacement of old Vedic cult of 
sacrificial rites. 



1098 Gamia Purdxia 

# 

this is an appearance, not reality, for Visnu alone is the creator 
as well as protector. This is a fact which cannot be controverted. 

12. Hence, Visnu alone is the real mother. The mother 
who gives birth is so only formally. 

13. If motherhood accruing from giving birth were a 
principal factor, then you will also be the mother of ajar which 
you create. Or conversely, who will be the mother of Brahma, 
the uncreated god ? Therefore, the uncreated primeval lord 
Visnu alone is the father, he being the real creator. 

14-15. If the generating parents be the principal cause, 
then who is the protector and preserver of the child in womb ? 
If the protection of the child be confined to parents then who 
were the protectors of Kurma^ and Krpa** in their sufferings ? 
Tell me, O mother. 

16. The primeval lord Visnu alone is the son because he 
protects against the hell Purr? which is none other than this body 
itself. 

O mother, neither I your son nor your husband nor your 
parents nor brothers can ever be called your protectors. None 
other than Visnu is the protector. 

17. O mother, cut off your illusion with the weapon of 
knowledge and fix up your mind in Hari.^ O mother, the devo¬ 
tional remembrance of the name of Hari alone can destroy sins 
for ever. 

18. He who out of devotion remembers Visnu is purified. 
But in this land of activity (Bharata) it is rare to obtain a human 
form and rarer is the devotion for Visnu. 

19. Your life is wasted in vain. O mother, you should soon 
begin worshipping the feet of Srinivasa”. Having instructed the 
mother thus, the pious son adopted the life of an ascetic. 

1. The turtle (Kurma) that supported the Mandara mountain at the 
churning. According to Kurma Purirui, lord Vi^i^u pervaded the turtle at the 
churning when it got under the Mandara and lifted it upon his back. 

2. K^pa —One of the survivals in the Kaurava-Pindava wau-. Although 
on the side of the Kauravas, he desired the victory of the Pandavas. He was the 
advocate of ju/o dftarmattoto jayap. 

Or it may allude to some other person or incident not identifiable. 

3. Pum —signifies body here identified vnth hell. 

4. Knowledge as a means of devotion is recommended. 



III.26.28-29 


1099 


20. By his sincere devotion he pleased Brahma and got 
the boon of immortality. Then he, the best of daityas round¬ 
ed the earth in his hand and took the same to Patala. 

21. Then Hari incarnated as boar in the country of 
Mustas.^ Making way through the ocean he entered Patala and 
discovered the earth. 

22. Putting the earth at the tip of his teeth he lifted it 
up from the waters. Hiranyaksa, when he saw the earth lifted 
up, came upon Visnu but was struck at the ears and killed by 
Visnu who established the earth in the previous fashion. 

23. Visnu, as a boar, set up the elephants in all quarters 
and settled in .^rimufta. Then Visnu thought to himself. “Where 
shall the people propitiate me in my human form? Where shall 
I favour them with my blessings.” 

24. O good girl, thus Hari thought to himself. Then 
from Vaikuntha he came down to the earth, riding on Garuda 
and brought the mountain iSesa along with him. 

25. Then lord Visnu established the mountain Sesa over 
the region extending from Suvarnamukhari to Srikrsna 
Veni. 

26. He settled .^riiaila^ at the tail of the mountain, 
Ahobala at the middle and Srinivasa at the mouth. 

27. By practising even a little of penance at Ahobala, 
one can fulfil one’s desire. The holy rivers such as Ganga and 
others are always present here. 

28-29. Whoever abides here, full of faith and devotion 
obtains knowledge, wealth, progeny, kingdom, whatever be his 
needs. 

Whatever desire he entertains he obtains the fulfilment of 
it. Whatever is desired to be accomplished the same is accomp¬ 
lished there. The mountain is therefore called Gintamani. 


1. Not idcntihable. 

2. Srf’Jaila—Sk lofty rock which overhangs the river Kespa where the 
famous temple MallikSrjuna is situated (Arch. Surv. of S. India. R. Sewel. 
Vol I. 90; Arch. Surv. of W. India by J. Burgess, p. 223). 

The Agnipur&pa places Sriparvata on the river Kaveri and says that it 
was dedicated to the goddess Sri. 



1100 


Garuia Pur&na 


30-31. The mountain contains many lakes, h^nce it is 
called Puskaradri. It is golden in hue, hence it is named Kana- 
kadri. It has arrived from Vaikuntha,^ so it is called Vaikun- 
tha. It contains the wealth of nectar, so it is named Vyahkatadri. 

32-33. The glory of Vyahkata mountain is indeed very 
great. Even lord Brahma of four faces* cannot describe it* 
Those who propitiate the mountain every day receive immense 
reward. The lame are cured of their lameness, the blind are 
restored to their eye-sight. 

34. The dumb gain speech; the deaf are restored to hear¬ 
ing. The barren become fertile and are blessed with sons; the 
poor become rich. 

35. Mere devotion for this mountain can bring about 
these benefits. In fact, no one can realize the true nature of this 
mountain-lord. 

36. He who understands the true nature of this moun¬ 
tain is blessed with pleasure. Lord Visnu who knew the glory 
of this mountain left Vaikuntha and made his abode on this 
mountain on the bank of SvamipuskarinI together with his 
consort Laksmi. 

37. Homage to Srinivasa, lord of Vyankata, of charm¬ 
ing and auspicious body and the bestower of desired objects. 

38. O maid, now hear the glory of SvamipuskarinI. 
Lord Sriniv^a abides in the midest of this lake. 

39. Those who take bath herein attain liberation very 
easily and very quickly. In this holy place of pilgrimage there 
abide three and a half crore of Tirthas that constitute the entire 
lot of holy places in the three worlds. 

40. This sacred place of pilgrimage called Srinivasa is 
visited by all gods. This is what they declare to be the abode of 
Srinivasa. 

41. The very sight of Srinivasa destroys sins. At each 
and every visit the devotee is associated with the good. 

42. Association with the good leads to knowledge, know- 
edge leads to liberation. But the benefit is available only to 
those who are initiated in the cult of Visnu. 

1. Vaikuftha —a mythical place—the abode of lord 

2. Four facts of Brahndf Sec p. 1011 fii. 1. 



III.26.53-54 


llOi 


43. Mere ablution in the TUrthas, without initiation into 
the Vaisnava cult, cannot bring about liberation. Those who 
think otherwise are asuras, condemned to live in a wretched 
state. 

44. O maiden, in the north-west of this holy place, there 
dwells Vayu always engaged in the service of the lord. 

45. This is called Vayutirtha measuiing twelve hastas,. 
six in the west and six in the north. 

46. The Vaisnavas (the devotees of Visnu) and their 
devotees too while they take bath in this Vayutirtha should 
mutter prayers thus: “May the compassionate lord l§rinivasa be 
pleased with me while I take bath here. 

47. The god Rudra and other gods take bath in this 
Madhva-Tirtha. Those others who desire to take bath should 
do likewise early in the morning before sun-rise. 

48. Those who evacuate, urinate, vomit or spit or wash 
their anus or penis at his holy tirtha become asuras or raksasas. 

49-50. Those who listen to the recitation of the Bhaga- 
vata^ Purana attain indescribable merit. Lord Hari, Kesava 
who abides in this Madhvatlrtha is pleased with those who re¬ 
peat the eight-syllabled Mantra*, the best and the most confi¬ 
dential of all mantras. 

51. The gods do not know the merit that accrues to those 
who give l^alagrama in charity at the Vayutirtha. That merit 
is known only to Srinivasa, the lord of Vyahkata who bestows 
the same upon his devotees. 

52. Ablution in the pool at Vayutirtha without any desire 
of fruit is highly meritorious. It is a sheer luck if a devotee 
happens to hear the recitation of the Bhagavata Purana. 

53-54. Highly meritorious is the gift of Salagrama to a 
Brahmana and the gift of Visnu’s image of the colour of Jambu 
fruit, possessed of two faces, wielding four wheels, with the body 
anointed with saffron and adorned with gold-embroidered flag, 
good thunderbolt and the golden seeds of barley corn. 

1. Among the Vai$pava Purflpas, the Bhagavata Purina holds the 
prominent place. 

2. tight-syllabUdmantrai SriVya^kateiAya namalji. 



1102 


Garuia Purify 


55. O auspicious one, the gift of the idol o/a deity is 
excellent. More excellent or meritorious is the gill of a cow that 
yields abundant milk. Similarly, excellent are the gifts of 
precious clothes and jewels. 

56. The gift of wealth in coins that are extremely pre¬ 
cious to the donor is the best of all gifts, they say. To gift cloth 
etc. which arc discarded by the donor do not yield any fruitful 
result. 

57. The gift of milk-yielding cow is most excellent. The 
cows giving abundant milk are rare. Moreover, the donors do 
not generally give excellent gifts in charity. 

58. O maiden, the gift of the Bhagavata Purana at the 
Vayutirtha is most excellent, though very rare. The gift of 
wealth in coins too is very excellent, though this too is very rare. 
Discourse with the learned Vaisnavas who possess the essence of 
knowledge is indeed rare, very rare. 

59. In the north of l^rinivasa there is Gandratirtha where 
the moon shines always- 

60-61. The moon worships lord Srinivasa at this Tirtha. 
O maiden, those who take bath here are absolved of sins such as 
the sin of going to bed with the wife of the preceptor. 

62. He who after taking bath donates Salagr^a while 
sitting in the eastern direction attains knowledge that gets him 
release. He who makes the gift of Dadhivamana derives 
immense fruit. 

63-66. The idol of dadhivamana should have the size of 
barley corn. It should be round, blue in hue, slender in pro¬ 
portion and of pleasant aspect. It should wield a pair df wheels, 
five gopuras^ bow and arrow. It should be straight and round 
and adorned with a garland of wild flowers. It should contain a 
thousand heads, a silvery dot on the right side of the forehead 
and an auspicious semicircular mark on the left and the full 
moon in the middle. Such auspicious gifts are attended by good 
fortune to the donor. They are very rare in the Kali age. O 
maiden, know that this idol is equal in merit to the idol of 
Lak^mi Naraya^a. 

67. The gift of this idol is very rare, listening to the 
narrative of this idol is also rare. Listening to the real nature 



III.26.79 


1103 


of the lord, that too from the mouth of a devotee of lord Vijnu, 
is rarer still. 

68. Taking bath thereat and listening to the true nature 
of Vamana co-relate in equal merit. 

69. Taking bath in this auspicious pool is highly merito¬ 
rious. Lucky indeed is the person who takes bath at noon in 
this p>ool. 

70. Greatly meritorious is the gift of an idol of Visnu 
who had formerly assumed the form of a pig. The idol should 
measure in size as the Jambu fruit or should be circular as the 
egg of a hen. 

71-72. The idol should have the size of chick-pea and a 
pleasant aspect too. It should have two wheels one on each side, 
with the middle left blank. In the middle of the forehead it 
should have a golden dot. 

73. He should worship the idol of Bhuvaraha, give the 
idol to a Brahmana in charity, listen to the merits of his 
narrative and have a full view of the idol of l§rivaraha and 
thus achieve the aim of his life. 

74. By taking bath at the pool, listening to the auspi¬ 
cious narrative about the idol of Bhuvaraha, he shall attain 
worldly prosperity and then final beatitude. 

75. In the north-east of Srinivasa, O maiden, there is the 
most sacred Tirtha of Rudra. Being stationed there, god Rudra 
worships Srinivasa. 

76-78. This Tirtha is spread over an area of eight hastas. 
The devotee of lord Visnu must take bath here. After taking 
bath conccntratedly and attentively he should listen to the 
divine tale of lord Visnu. O maiden, while staying there he 
should perform all activities—bathing, eating, drinking and 
donating gifts—for the propitiation of goddess Lak^mi and lord 
Nfsimha every day. 

79. The idol of Lak?ml Nrsiihha is of the size of a berry 
fruit. It is round, marked with dot, adorned with a pair of 
wheel on the left side. It bean two streaks of gold and some 
marks of fluid of blood. It is yellow, of amiable disposition and 
marked with the lines of the lotus, etc. You should know that it 



1104 


Garu4a Pur&tyi 


gives prosperity to the devotee in this world and salvation 
hereafter. 

80. O lord of birds, the gift of such an idol made of 
Gandika stone is highly commendable, though it is very rare. 
(If unable to gift the idol) the devotee should take bath of 
purification, listen to the tale of Nfsiriiha, the lord of Laksmi. 

81. O maiden, by giving the idol of Srinrsimha, the 
devotee achieves the fulfilment of his wishes. 

82-83. In the midst of the north-eastern and eastern 
directions, there is Brahma-Tirtha. A bath therein is highly 
meritorious. It accomplishes all undertakings. As the gift of 
l^alagrama is highly meritorious, so is the gift of Laksmi 
Narayana. 

84-88. This idol is of the size of Udumbara. In comp¬ 
lexion it is as white as the cow. It bears four wheels, marks of 
gokhura and suvarnakina. Adorned with the garlands of wild 
flowers and vajrapunkha, such an idol of LaksmI-Narayana is 
rare to obtain, specially in the Kali age. The gift of such an idol 
is highly meritorious. 

89-90. A devotee should take ablution at the Brahma- 
tlrtha and listen to the tale of Laksmi Narayana. He who under¬ 
stands the merit of iSalagrama stone and of the idol of Laksmi 
Narayana obtains the fruit of that knowledge equal to that of 
merit. 

91. Indra-lirtha is situated to the east of Srinivasa. 
Indra, the lord of Saci, is stationed there to worship Srinivasa. 

92. One should donate the holy stone of Salagrama to a 
Brahmin well versed in the Vedas. The gift of Salagrama des¬ 
troys all sins, even those accruing from the slaughter of a 
Brahmin. 

93. O maiden, he who donates, at thisTirtha, the idol of 
Salagrama to a worthy Brahmin attains a status equal to the 
status of the lord. 

94-95. The idol of Sitarama is twofold: The one carrying 
five wheels and the other possessed of six wheels. There too, the 
one possessed of six wheels is superior to the other. The one that 
carries five wheels yields double fruit. ^ 

96-97. The idol of Sit^aznais of the size of a hen's egg. 



111.26.108 


1105 


It is smooth, of blue complexion, possessed of three faces, six 
wheels, adorned with the pollen of lotus, streaks of gold, 
flag, diamond, etc. 

98. The auspicious idol of Sitarama, capable of bestowing 
freedom upon the devotee is indeed very rare in this Kali age. 

99. O maiden, at this Indra-Tirtha, there is a holy stone 
called Sitarama. Donating gifts thereat is highly meritorious. 
But that is possible only to a person who has performed a great 
penance. 

100. If a devotee is unable to donate anything in charity, 
he should at least hear the glorious narrative of the lord. There¬ 
by, he can derive as much fruit as is available by the gift of 
Salag rama. 

101. O maid, to the south-east of Srinivasa there is a 
holy Tirtha called Vahni. The god Vahni is always stationed 
there to offer worship to Srinivasa. 

102. He who takes bath at Vahnitirtha and remembers 
lord Vi9nu with devotion attains supreme knowledge that confers 
final release. A bath at this Tirtha is highly meritorious. 

103. As the bath at this place is highly meritorious, so is 
devotion highly meritorious. Similarly meritorious is the gift of 
Salagrama or Vasudeva stone. 

104. The idol of Vasudeva is short, round, blue, auspi¬ 
cious, of pleasant aspect and possessed of Venu. The gift thereof 
is highly meritorious in the Kali age, O maid. 

105. If a devotee is unable to gift the idol, he should at 
least take bath at this Tirtha and listen to the glory of Vasudeva 
Sila. The wise declare the merit of the one at par with the 
merit of the other. 

106. To the south of Srinivasa, there is Yama Tirtha. 
Lord Yama is stationed there to offer worship to the supreme 
lord Visnu. 

107. Taking bath and giving gift thereat is attended by 
indestructible award. The gifi: of Salagrama Sila is what they 
recommend highly at this lllrtha. 

108. The gift of Patp&bhirama Sila is also meritorius. 
As big as the mango fruit, it has three faces. 



1106 


Garuda PurS^a 


109. It bears no wheel on the head, though otherwise it 
bears seven wheels. It is blue in hue, bears goldeli streaks, 
gopura, etc. 

110. The idol of PaJJavardhana Rama is highly merito¬ 
rious and blissful. He who donates Pat(avardhana attains sover¬ 
eignty. No doubt should be entertained on this point. 

111. In the Nairria Konay there is a Nairrta tirtha. God 
Nirrti is stationed to worship lord Srinivasa. 

112. A devotee should take bath thereat—an act which 
absolves him from rebirth. 

113. He who donates the idol of Purusottama in the 
form of Salagrama stone attains the supreme position. 

114. The idol of Purusottama is of the size of Audum- 
bara fruit auspicious and pleasant in appearance. It carries a 
pair of wheel beside the head-wheel. It has a golden dot, 
a diamond and a goad. 

115. The gift of the idol is highly meritorious and pleas¬ 
ing to Siinivasa. If it is not possible to make gift of that idol, 
O maid, he should listen to its traits. (One is on par in merit 
with the other). 

116. In the midst of southern and south-west corner is 
situated Sesa-tirtha. If a devotee takes bath here and donates the 
idol of Sesa to a Brahmin he goes to the highest regions whence 
there is no return to this earth. 

117-118. The idol of Sesa is of the Udumbara fruit, 
circular as the car-omament, with the face resembling that of 
the serpent chief l§e§a, carrying a pair of wheels with a fruit in 
one of the wheels. The idol has a faint colour though the form 
is quite distinct. 

119. The idol of Sesa is twofold: awakened and asleep. 

120. The awakened form is the one with rising hoods 
which number seven lacs. The sleeping form is rare to behold. 
It is one that bestows fortune in this world and liberation 
hereafter. 

121-122. If the idol carries nine to twenty wheels it is 
called Aouita. It confers endless fruits to the worshipper. If it 
carries more than twenty wheels it is called VihambJ^a. 



1IL26.135 


1107 


123. The giO of an idol of Sesa with saffron, wheels, and 
other traits is highly meritorious, though the idol with such traits 
is very rare in the Kali age. 

124. If he is unable to gift the idol, he should take bath 
in the Sesatirtha and listen to the traits of the lord with a clear 
mind. He too attains the highest position. 

125. O lucky one, beyond the l^esatlrtha, there lies a 
Varuna Tirtha. The god Vanina is stationed there to worship 
the lord. 

126. He should take bath at this Tirtha and donate 
the gift ofSi^umara, Matsya or Trivikrama, if he desires 
prosperity. 

127-128. The idol of Matsya is of the form of Jambu 
fruit. It is slender in tail, adorned with dot, with three wheels 
on the face and a single wheel on the tail. It bears the mark of 
^livatsa and a garland of flowers. The idol of l§imlumara has 
the symbol of wheel below the tail. 

129. The idol of Trivikrama bears a wheel on the face. 
(If he is unable to gift these idols) he should listen to their 
traits and the fruit of gifting them at the excellent Varuna 
Tirtha. He goes to Visnu’s region where he rejoices in the 
company of the gods. 

130. At the place where the above idols are stationed, 
Ganga, the best of the sacred rivers, is indeed present there. 

131. A bath at the Svam! Pu^kariniis highly meritorious 
and a bath at the sacred poob in the area of Svami Pu^kari^i 
is still more highly meritorious. 

132. The donation ofl^alagrama stone on the bank of 
the lake Svami Puskarini is highly meritorious. The gift of one’s 
daughter (in marriage to a bride-groom) is still more merito¬ 
rious. 

133. Meritorious is the gift of a Kapila cow; meritorious 
is the gift of eatables. 

134. O maid, you should take bath in the prescribed 
way in the Svami Pu?kari^ lake and other sacred pools and 
donate a bed to a worthy Brahmin. 

135. Thus addresKd by the sagejaigi^vya, the maid took 
bath in the Sv&mi Pu^karipl lake and observed fast. She took 



1108 


Garu4a Purdm 


bath at other holy places too. She offered gifts to the Brah- 
xnanas and halted there for twentyone days. * 

136. He who hears the glory ofSvamI Puskarini becomes 
highly devoted to lord Srinivasa who is identical with the 
universe. 


CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN 

Visit to places of pilgrimage 


Lord Krfna said : 

1. Desirous of taking bath the maid went to the Nanda 
river* that wards off sins. She asked the Brahmana preceptor 

there. 

2-3. Revered preceptor, what is the name of this river. 
What rite shall I perform here. Thus addressed, Jaigisavya, the 
Brahmana preceptor, spoke to her in reply. 

Jaigifavya said: 

O good one, listen. 1 shall tell you the glory of this river— 
the glory which destroys sins altogether. 

4. O fortunate one, this river is the destroyer of sins. 
Multitudes of sins, including the Brahmin-slaughter* are des¬ 
troyed by taking bath in this river. Those who take bath here 
can perceive its glory directly. 

5. The sinners, when they plunge into the river perceive 
the waters as dark. They should continue taking bath so long 
as the waters do not look bright to them. 

6. Until the waters become bright, the sins arc not wiped 
off. When the waters become bright, one should know for 
certain that their sins are wiped off. 

1. This river is separate from Nand& or Aparanandli of the North. 
The maid was visiting the sacred places in the south. The identification of 
Nand& in the text with Nand& or Aparanand& of the North does not suit the 
eontext. 



III.27.11-18 


1109 


7. O wide-eyed one, such-like glory of this river is per- 
eeptible on this earth even in this Kali age. 

One should take bath in this river and bestow valuable 
gifts on the deserving. One attains knowledge thereby and goes 
to the world of Visnu. 

8-9. By taking bath in this river, the moon* was released 
from the sin of copulating with his preceptor’s wife, Indra* was 
released from the sin of incest with Ahalya, Sukra from the sin 
of drinking wine, Bali from the sin of stealing gold, Rudra from 
the sin of Brahmana-slaughter,® Naga from the sin of taking 
back what was given in charity, Balarama from the sin of 
slaying Suta.* 

10. There has not been nor shall ever be a place of 
pilgrimage equal to it in merit. O blessed one, by taking bath 
herein make your life fruitful. 

11-18. Together with the sage Jaigisavya and her father, 
the maid took bath in the river in the prescribed manner and 
emerged out of waters. She repeated the sacred mantra® of 
Vyahkatesa and the Purusa hymn* as long as she remained 

1. Tara was the wife of Brhaspati. She doted on Candramas (the 
moon) with whom she eloped secretly. Budha was bom to Candra by TarS. 
After some time Devas intervened and Tara was restored to Bj-haspati. 

2. Once Indra entered the Airama of Sage Gautma in the guise of 
the sage when the latter was out for bathing. Indra took bed with Ahalyi, 
the wife of Gautama. But before he could get out Gautama came to the 
Asrama. Enraged at what he saw he cursed them both. Ahalyi was turned 
into stone and Indra lost his testicles. 

3. Brakma-hatya is one of the five major sins which entail severe 
penance for expiation (See Manu). There cannot be an easier way for the 
atonement of this sin than what is advocated here. 

4. Suta was beheaded at Kuruksetra by Balabhadra when he was 
reciting the Pur&inas to the sages in the Naimi;a forest. 

“At the forest of Naimi?a, Balabhadra saw Suta telling PurS^ic stories 
to the sages assembled there before him. Suta did not rise up when he saw 
Balar&ma and the latter moved to anger very soon cut off the head of the 
Suta. Later, to remedy the sin of killing Suta Balarima visited all the sacred 
places in Bharata'*. P.E. p. 774 

5 . McmUra of VyaAkaftia : 

Om VyeiAateiiya namaft 
Salutations to the lord of VyaAkafa 


6. ier.x. 90. 



1110 


Garu4a Purd^a 


in the waters. She propitiated the Brahmins, with gifts of cloth^ 
money and ornaments. Then she proceeded to Kumari Tirtha^ 
and took bath. She dressed up herself and stepped on forward 
journey. She came across the Viraja river* and asked the pre¬ 
ceptor Jaigisavya. O best of brahmins, what is the name of this 
sacred river. What rite shall I perform here. 

Thus asked, Jaigisavya, who felt compassion for her said: 
“O maid, this river, called Gahga, flows under the earth. Hence,, 
the sages declare her as antaragaAgd. O maid, the water of this 
river is pleasing to Sriniv^a. One who takes bath here attains 
the highest place”. On hearing the glory of the sacred river the 
girl took bath in the most purifying waters. 

19-20. She offered gifts to the Brahmanas and repeated 
the sacred mantra. She returned to Srinivasa the lord of Ven- 
kafa and circumambulated him with devotion. She propitiated 
the Brahmanas with fragrance, ornaments and cloth. 

21, Next morning, she went to Svamipuskarini and took 
bath there. She then went to the river Tumburu* and asked 
the preceptor again. ‘*Sir, please tell me what is the name of 
this river.” 

Jaigifaiya said: 

22-23. This charming river is called Tumburu. Once 
upon a time, the sages Narada^ and Tumburu® practised 
penance here, when lord Vi?nu appeared and showered blessings 
on them. 

24. He who takes bath in this river attains the highest 
place. But it is not open to all to have a bath here. 


1. Kumdritirtha —a place of pilgrimage. Mbh (Bhi^ma Parva, Ch. 9.. 
V. 36) speaks of Kum^ river in ancient India. 

2. Virajd (a river) —not identifiable 

3. Tumburu (here a river, not identifiable, not the sage). 

4. jVjroda, a sage expert in music. Purlinas record accounts of his- 
various births. For details, see /*.£., pp. 526 ff. 

5. Tumburu —son of Kaiyapa and Pradhi he was the best musician 
among the Gandharvas. Of the sons of Kaiyapa, the four Gandharva sons 
—Tumburu, B&hu, Hah& and Huhu were noted for their sweet and pleasant 
conversation. 



III.27.38 


1111 


25-27. A few privileged persons who have performed hard 
penance can have a plunge into this holy river. She took bath, 
drank waters, offered gifts and returned to Sriniv^. She 
worshipped the god, propitiated the Brahmanas and lighted the 
earthen lamps on the banks of the Svami lake. She placed the 
earthen lamps in a row on the steps of the lake. Thus, she pro¬ 
pitiated the great lord Srinivasa, the preceptor of the universe. 

28. Next day she reached the holy place of pilgrimage, 
sacred to Indra on the peak of the mountain Kapila.^ 

29. She took bath in the pool and bathed the holy idol 
of lord Srinivasa with the sacred waters of the lake Visvaksena 
which is purifying and which destroys all sins. 

30. She mounted the summit and saw the holy places of 
pancayudhas and bathed there. 

31-33. There, at the place, difficult to ascend she saw a 
fire-pit. High upon a place, she saw Brahma-tirtha which releas¬ 
es one from the sin oi Brahma-hatyd (slaughter of a Brahmana). 
Higher still, she reached the holy place of seven sages. These 
sacred places impart ten per cent additional gain in merit in 
their serial order. Who can describe the glory of these sacred 
places? 

34-36. The maid practised penance at these holy places. 
She continued the practice till I descended on earth. She gave 
up her body by way of yoga and was bom in the house of Jam- 
bavat.* She was called Jambavati. Her father J^bavat gave 
her in marriage to me. I married her and gave her a rank next to 
Rukminl. Who else than myself can describe the glory of Mount 
Vehka(a. 

37. Laksmi offers Naivedya to the lord of Vefika^. 
Brahma performs worship regularly every day. This is what 
l^astras have declared. 

38. One should not mock at the people who are given to 
the eating of Naivedya. For one’s own welfare, one shall partake 
of Naivedya. One shall not hesitate in accepting Naivedya. 
Otherwise one falls in hell. 

1. Kapila (a mountain) —not identi6able 

2. Jimbooair—n forest king gave his daughter J&mbavatl in marriage to 
Srlkn^a. As a result of their union their first son Skmba was bom. 



1112 


Garu^a PurSifa 


39. There has been no god higher than iSrinivasa nor 
there shall ever be. One should cook one's food in gh&, offer a 
portion to Srinivasa and partake of the rest himself. 

40. This secret of secrets I have declared to you, O 
lord of birds. This should not be divulged to any, since it is very 
confidential. O lord, now I shall tell you the rest of the story in 
continuation. 


CHAPTER TWENTYEIGHT 

Anecdotes of the glory of Vifnu 

1. Parvati, in her previous birth, was the daughter of 
Daksa. (known as Sati) she was married to Rudra (lord Siva). 
But she gave up her life by throwing herself in the sacrifice of 
Daksa. She was bom of Menaka and Himavat, the lord of the 
mountains. 

2. Parvati became the consort of Rudra. That Varuni, 
the wife of Sesa, became the-wife ofBalabhadra in her second 
birth as Revati.^ 

3. Her second form was pervaded by Sri (Laksmi) as a 
cloud is pervaded by water. 

4. Then Varuni, the wife of Sesa, practised penance in 
order to please Laksmi. Laksmi being pleased spoke to Varuni, 
the consort of Sesa. 

5-6. “When Rama (Balarama) constituted of a part of 
Visnu will be born as the son of Rohini*, pervaded by me 


1. Revatl —wife of Balabhadra. Revata, the son of Anarta, the 
grandson of King Saryiti was ruling over the island Ku^thali. Hundred 
sons beginning with Kukudman were bom to him. As the youngest of all, a 
daughter named Revati was bom. At the instruction of Brahmi, Revatl was 
given in marriage to Balabhadra. 

2. Rohhtfi —Vasudeva had two wives Devaki and Rohii^^i. Siilqr^oa was 
bom of Devaki and Balabhadra of Rohipi. In her former birth she was 
Surasfi, the wife of Prajfipati Kaiyapa, while the latter was bora as Vasudeva. 



III.28.17-18 


Ills 

you will be born as Sri to be united with Balabhadra. Do not be 
worried over this. So saying Laksmi went to the region ofVi?nu. 
Being a part of Laksmi she obtained the name Laksmi. 

7. When Sesa, the lord of serpents, lifts up the earth on 
his hoods, the lord Visnu is pleased to have copulation with 
her. 


8. Revati, the daughter ofRaivata became the wife of 
Balabhadra along with Varuni and Sauparna. The three out of 
the six are twice inferior to the wives of Vi§nu and ten times 
inferior to Rudra, Sesa and others. 


Garuia said: 

9. Varuni was born as the daughter of Revata who 
became the wife of Balabhadra, (the brother of lord Krsna). 
Varuni, the wife of Sesa has three forms. 

10. Parvati, the wife of Rudra has two forms: Nila and 
Jambavati are at par with Sesa. This is what I hear. 

11. Please tell me the reason thereof, O lord. You have 
also said that Rudra is superior to Uma in several qualities. 
Please let me know your conclusive opinion on this point. 

12-13. (I have also heard that) Revati is pervaded by 
Sri. She is Varuni, the wife of Sesa. The three—Revati, Suparna 
and Parvati are superior to Sesa. O slayer of Madhu, this too I 
have heard in some quarters. O lord of good vows, tell me the 
reason thereof. I am your disciple. 


Lord Krfna said: 

14-15. O lord of birds, to express the mutual superiority, 
inferiority or equality of Jambavati and others, I have used the 
term ‘hundred per cent superior, hundred per cent inferior.* 

16. O lord of birds, as I tell you, you should know it 
accordingly. O the noblest son of Ka.<yapa, now I shall tell you 
the h'neage of Indra. 

17*18. Among the fourteen Indras, the seventh was called 



1114 


Garu4a Fmdj}a 


Purandara. The body of Vrtra^ and those of his associates were 
called Pura. Because he cleft their bodies with Vajra, Indra was 
called Purandara. Among the fourteen Indras Mantradyumna is 
the sixth. 

19. Because he explained the eight Vedic mantras and 
shed light on their meaning he was called Mantradyumna. 

20-21. Arjuna, the son of Kunti was the incarnation of 
Mantradyumna (Indra), Vi$nu, and Ananta. Among the four, 
Vayu was prominent in Aijuna. 

22-23. The monkey lord Bali is also called Purandara. 
King Gadhi of the lunar race was also the incarnation of Mantra¬ 
dyumna. He was the father of Viivamitra. 

24. The Vedic mantras are called gah. Since he under¬ 
stood them by his sharp intellect he was called Gadhi. He 
incarnated on earth for preserving the Vedas. 

25. Vikuksi, the son of Iksvaku was the incarnation of 
Indra. He incarnated on earth for propitiating Hari. Hari was 
known as Vikuksi, for he realized Hari in his heart. 

26-27. Kusa,^ the son of Rama D^arathi was also Indra. 
Since he was created by sage Valmiki by means of Kusa grass 
he was named Kula, the son of SIta. 

28. Indradyumna, Purandara, Gadhi, Bali, Arjuna, 
Vikuksi and Kusa—these seven are Indras. 

29. Pradyumna, the son of Krsna was the incarnation of 
Kama (the cupid). He was called Pradyumna because he possess¬ 
ed excellent brilliance. 

30. Bharata, the younger brother of Rama was also the 
incarnation of cupid. He was called Bharata because he travelled 
on the footprints of king Bharata. 

1. Yx^<i —an asura. According to one version he was created by 
Kaiyapa from fire to slay Indra. According to another version it was Praja- 
pati Tva^tr who created him to kill Indra. But he was killed by Indra with 
deception. 

2. Kuia. According to Uttarar&miyava and Kathasaritsigara 
{^AloAkifowM Lmbaka TaraAga I) a son called Lava was bom to Sita while she 
was living in the Asrama of V&lmild. One day Sit& took Lava to the stream 
to bathe him. Vilmiki who did not know about this was upset not to see the 
child in the A^ma. He feared that he might have been eaten up by some 
animal and fearing that Sftli might die when she missed the ^]uld be created 
a child with Kula grass and laid it where Lava was lying before. 



III.28.45 


1115 


31-33. Kama, the presiding deity of the disc, was bomas 
Sudariana. He was the son of Krsna and Jambavati. Samba 
the son of lord Kr^pa was also the incarnation of K^a. 
Skanda, the son of Rudra was also Kama. Since he overcame 
the enemies he is called Skanda. Sanatkumara, the son of 
Brahma, O lord of birds, is the incarnation of Kama. 

34. Sudar^ana, Pradyumna, Bharata, S^ba, Sanatkumara, 
and Skanda these six are the incarnations of Kama (cupid). 

35. Indra and Kama are inferior to Uma, etc., by ten per 
cent. Between the two Kama is inferior to Indra. 

36. Prana (vital airs) is called ahariikara; it is apart of 
Garutmat. It is inferior to Kama and Indra by ten per cent. 

37. I shall now tell you about the successors of Kama, 
O lord of birds, hear attentively; the knowledge thereof leads 
to liberation from sins and effects the final release. 

38. Aniruddha, the son of Pradyunma the Kama incar¬ 
nate, was born to attend upon lord Kpsna. The younger 
brother of Rama was called l^atnighna. He was so-called because 
he smote his enemies. 

39-40. Aniruddha was born of Pradyumna the son of 
Srikrsna. Aniruddha was pervaded by the two, out of the three 
forms of Sahkarsana. 

41. Rati,* the wife of Kama consists of two forms. 
Rukmavati, the daughter of Rukma was the wife of Kama. 

42. By virtue of excessive brilliance she was called 
Rukmavati. Laksana, the daughter of Duryodhana was Rati 
incarnate. 

43. Kas];ha, the wife of Samba, was called Laksana, 
for though born of wicked parents she possessed good qualities. 
Rati, the wife ofK^a had two forms: one as the wife of K^a 
and the other as the wife of Samba. 

44. Svayambhuva Manu, at par with Bfhaspati the pre¬ 
ceptor of Devas, was the first son of the creator. He was bom to 
propitiate lord V49u. He formulated laws of the state. 

45. Brhaspati, the preceptor of gods had three forms. O 


1. Radf daughter of Dakfa Prajftpati who gave her to Kima to be his 

wife. 



IMS Garu4a Purdna 

lord of birds. When Rama incarnated on earth he w|is bom as 
Bharata. As such he was pervaded by Brahma. 

46. He took monkeys, the incarnations of Devas, across 
the ocean of life and death. He narrated the mighty exploits of 

lord Rama. He was known as Nara who incarnated to become 
absorbed in Rama. 

47. When lord Krsna incarnated on earth, Brhaspati, the 
preceptor of gods, incarnated as Drona. He was pervaded by 
the creator. AsBrhaspati was bornofDrona^ hewas called Drona. 

48. Brhaspati incarnated as Uddhava. He was pervaded 
by wind god in order to help the lord to relieve the earth of its 
burden and mankind of their suffering. 

49. As lord Hari is excellent among all, he obtained the 
name Budha. He became the friend of lord Krsna. The wise 
one was worshipped by all people. 

50. From the right thumb of Brahma was born Daksa.* 
To him was born Laksmi who became the wife of lord Visnu 
Since he, the Patriarch, gave birth to sons he was called 
Daksa. 

51. Know that Saci is the wife of Indra. Listen to her 
incarnations. When Rama descended on earth she was born as 
Tara. She became the wife of Bali and was called Saci. 

52-54. When Rama killed Bali, she became the wife of 
Sugriva. Thus she was a sinner. Hence, she could not go to 
heaven. 

She continued moving in the ether till when the lord 
incarnated as Krsna on earth. She was born as Tara and 
became the wife of Vijaya. She was known as Pisahgada. She 
wedded Pandava Arjuna to whom she bore a son Babhruvahana 
when Arjuna left her company. Tara and Gitrahgada are the 
incarnations of Sac!. 

1. Dro^a, son ofBharadv&ja and Ghrt^ci—a celestial maid. Once 
Bh&radvSja saw the bright and beautiful face of Ghftici. He had seminal dis¬ 
charge. The discharged semen was deposited in a Dropa (trough). A child 
was bom from that and he was named DroQa and brought up in the 
hermitage. 

2. Vide p. 999. fn. 2. 



HI.28.64-65 


1117 


55. Pulomaja was the wife of Mantradyumna. Kalika 
was the wife of Gadhiraja. Sumati was the wife of Vikuk^i. 
Kantimati was the wife of Kusa. These seven are inferior ta 
Saci. 

56. Sad, Rati, Aniruddha, Manu, Daksa, Brhaspati—these 
six are equal to each other. These are inferior to aharhkara by 
ten per cent. 

57. Pravaha (wind) is the son of principal Vayu. He, the 
strong one, is the strongest among Vayus. He is the lord of all 
directions. 

58. This Vayu breathes through nostrils. It is material 
and uniform in nature. It is also called Ativaha as it is resorted 
to by those who desire liberation. It is inferior to Daksa and 
others by five per cent. 

Garuia said: 

59. O lord, please tell me how he obtained the epithet 
Pravaha. What is the significance of the name. 

60. Thus addressed by Garuda, lord Krsna, the son of 
Devaki—was highly pleased. He appreciated Garuia and spoke 
in reply. 

Lord Kr$na said: 

61. O best of birds, as he ever takes the devotees of Hari 
across the ocean of existence, he is called Pravaha. 

62-63. Visnu is the best of all gods. Brahma and the rest 
are dependent on him. Whatever I state is the truth. 

I take hold of an infuriated serpent. If all what I have 
stated proves to be untrue then let the lord of snakes sting me*. 

So saying, he caught hold of an infuriated serpent but the 
serpent did not sting him. 

64-65. Because he held the serpent by hand, O lord of 
birds, the son of Vayu got the designation ‘Pravaha*. 

Those who do not worship the idol of Visnu but worship 


1. This amd the following statementi reveal the sectarian character of 
this Purina. They are indeed very peculiar in content. 



1118 


Garu4a Purdna 


the idols of inferior gods or goddesses—Renuka^, etc., of the form 
of Daityas, purposeless is their worship of Visnu as well as of 
the manes. This is true, very true, I say. If all what I have 
said is proved to be false and untrue, then let the lord of 
serpents sting me mortally. 

66. He who performs ^raddhas to the manes without 
offering gifts to Visnu, that sinner goes to hell. What I say is 
indeed true. 

67. Neither Laksmi is sovereign nor Brahma nor Vayu 
nor ^iva nor Parvati nor l§aci the daughter of Puloman and the 
wife of Indra. 

68. The primeval being Visnu alone is real. I declare 
this truth by my uplifted arms. If all this proves to be false 
then let the lord of snakes sting me. 

69-70. The supreme soul is real, so is the personal soul. 
The difference between the two is real, so also between the ani¬ 
mate and the inanimate, similarly between the inanimate and 
the lord. The difference between one soul and the other is also 
real. If all this is proved to be false then let the lord of snakes 
sting me mortally. 

71. So saying, he caught hold of the infuriated snake but 
the snake did not sting him at all. By catching hold of the in¬ 
furiated snake, this son of Vayu obtained the designation 
Pravaha. 

72. Accepting dual nature of the lord, you should accept 
the two as real. He who disregards this maxim, remains a 
sinner throughout life. Though he may be taking plunge in 
the holy rivers daily without fail, he does not obtain release. 

73. By accepting duality as a matter of fact, one feels 
quite happy. If ail this is proved to be false then let the lord of 
serpents sting me mortally. 

Garuia said: 

74. O supreme god, please tell me what duality is, of 
what nature ? What is the. source of this concept? How shall a 
person forsake duality. What bliss is derivable from renunciation 

1. EtjuJed —a godden of low status. She it not identifiable with 
Reouki, the wife ofjamadagni father of Paraiurima. 



IIL28.85 


1119 


LordKrfr^a said: 

75. In this body two organs are the strongest of 
all. They are two ears and two eyes. The two are inter¬ 
related. O lord of birds, I shall tell you the real nature of the 
two. 

76. Ears are prone to hearing gossips and enjoying 
them with pleasure. They are naturally averse to hearing the 
ambrosial tale of lord Visnu. They have twofold nature; 
dullness and control. 

77. Eyes are prone to gaze at men and women. Excessive 
doting takes away sleep. They are averse to seeing the devotees 
and their worship of the lord. 

78. Even the stupid person is aware of their dual nature. 
He rather accepts indulgence as a matter of course. In his stu¬ 
pidity he takes delight in entering his penis in the vagina of any 
female. 

79. Neither men and women nor ascetics have any dread 
or shame in this respect. Men can copulate even with their 
sisters, that too at day time, just as the priests do with the 
women at the soma sacrifice. 

80-82. This is the nature of the tongue that it eats what 
is not to be eaten, that it eats without offering it to the lord. 
This is the nature of the tongue to eat, lick or drink all that is 
not worthy to be eaten, licked or drunk, whether received as a 
gift or otherwise. The stupid person does not understand the 
true nature of the sense-organs, accepts the one and forsakes the 
other. If he acts otherwise his bath at the sacred place of pilgri¬ 
mage {tirthas) becomes fruit-less. O lord of birds, be pleased to 
know what is the essence of my statement. 

83-84. A person who bathes at the holy places should note 
the differing nature of the two. If without understanding the true 
nature of the two mistreaes, the ignorant fool accepts the one 
and abandons the other his ablution, etc. artf rendered fruitless. 
He attains neither prosperity here nor liberation hereafter. If 
all what I have said is proved to be false then let that lord of 
snakes sting me. 

85. Intellect is the wife of Puru§a. She has twofold nature 
O lord of binfa."One is wicked; the other is pious. Of the two 
the younger one is wicked, the elder one is pious. 



1120 


Purdna 


86. Through the younger one, the soul succumbs* to de¬ 
struction. Through the elder one he attains position. I shall now 
tell you about the nature of the younger. Listen and after 
listening try to abandon her. 

87. The younger one encourages the soul (her husband) 
to indulge in activities for the fulfilment of worldly desires. She 
disregards the sanctity of the Brahmanas, of lord Visnu and 
his narratives, of sacrifices, cows, the holy fig tree, of bath and 
purity. She misdirects to worship their stupid husbands and 
goddess Renuka and waive lights to Mayadevi. 

88-91. She encourages the stupid and ignorant husband 
to worship Bhairava and others and to put on yellow marks of 
turmeric powder on the forehead, to worship goddess Jye§tha 
on the eighth day of Jyesfha, to put on sacred thread round the 
neck with devotion, to worship god Marigandhi on the Mari- 
gandhi astami, to raise a column of earthen lamps on the auspi¬ 
cious day before Mahalaksmi (Supreme Nature) and Adya- 
laksmi (Primordial Nature) to put on Laksmi thread on the 
neck with a temptation that thereby he will attain riches. 

92-93. On the day when they change old girdles for the 
new ones she encourages them to give up girdles and put on 
chains. She encourages them to propitiate the women of fashion, 
to worship gods and goddesses with scents, flowers and incense 
and to waive lights from the vessels of brass, spread leaves of 
Neem on the ground, pay homage and seek forgiveness for their 
past misdeeds. 

94. She encourages men to worship goddess Mahadevi 
and forbids them feed the pious devotees of lord Visnu. She 
warns her husband (the soul) against feeding the Vaisnavas and 
threatens him with the dire consequences of total destruction 
and addresses him thus. 

95. O husband, now put a vessel of bamboo wood on the 
left hand and an earthen lamp on the right and move about 
for begging food at the five neighbouring houses, casting your 
sense of shame aside. 

96-97. At first, prepare food of six varieties, eat the same 
without letting the people know. Distribute the r^idue among 
your womanfolk, asking them to put their hand on the sacred 



III.28.107 


1121 


book and proclaim, *0 save us*. O husband, worship a good 
sword together with the devotees. 

98. Make a barking sound together with them. Keep 
always in your possession the powder of orpiment. Worship 
Bhimasena with five ambrosial articles. 

99. Make a present of silver-girdle to lord Bhimadeva 
and make a row of earthen lamps in front of the idol of the lord, 
feed the best of his devotees with devotion and make a thunder¬ 
ing sound ‘Bhima, Bhima’ at the top of your voice. 

100. Propitiate the best of the devotees of Bhima with 
garments, wine and meat. Worship Mahadeva in a proper way 
with the mantras of Maharudra and Atirudra. 

101. Worship even those devotees of lord Siva who 
though expert in the knowledge of Saiva scriptures belong to 
the 8udra class. 

102. Prepare vegetable dishes of different variety and 
propitiate the goddess ^akambharl with devotion and interest. 
Decorate her idol and praise her traits. Fix up your mind on 
the creator Brahma and eyes full of devotion at his idol and 
offer worship. 

103. Worship the best of his devotees, pay homage at his 
feet, and bow your head to him. On the fifth day of each 
fortnight of the month, make an earthen idol of lord 8e?a 
and worship him with milk, fried rice grains and such-like other 
articles used in worship. 

104. Wear a naga-pala around your neck; cat whatever 
is left of the food that has been offered to the deity. Make an 
offering of foodstuff on each fourth day of the two fortnights of 
every month. 

105. By these instructions, O lord of birds, the wicked 
intellect vitiates her husband, the soul. As he associates with her 
he, the husband in the form of the soul, is stung by her. 

106. Therefore, do not associate with her. Resorting to 
sacrifice make your life a complete success. 

The second wife, the noble intellect, encourages the 
husband in the following way: 

107. O my lord, do not propitiate any god or goddess 
except lord Visnu. Let not that (deceitful) Renuka attend on 



1122 Garu^a Purdr^a 

you. If lordHari, of unmanifest form is unable to protect you 
who else can do the same. 

108. If you propitiate her who is deceitful and an a-vedic 
deity, always inimical to you (though outwardly pleasing), 
you will by that very act contract diseases such as leprosy, 
fistula, etc., and you will go to hell. This, your bad wife, will 
not help you at all. Hence, O lord, do not follow upon the bad 
advice of that wretched lady. 

109. O lord, propitiate the brahmanas, the devotees of 
Visnu, who alone can help you to cross the ocean of suffering in 
this world. Therefore give up the worship of gods or goddesses 
(other than Vi§nu). Is there any gain in propitiating 
illusion. 

110. O my lord, if on the eighth day of each fortnight 
of the month of Jyestha, you worship AlaksmI taking her for 
Laksmi and wear the sacred thread round your neck as an 
insignia of devotion you will suffer an immense lot of trouble. 

111. When the emissaries of Yama tie you up with nooses 
and whip you severely, then Alaksmi (whom you propitiated 
during your life-time) will not be present there to help you. 
Hence, O lord, abandon your contact with >^lak?mi and seek 
shelter at the feet of lord Hari. 

112-113. O ignorant lord, do always resort to Vayu- 
tattva and not to Skanda-tattva. Eat fresh butter and not the 
one that has been left as refuge after god Skanda has partaken 
of his share. Wearing the thread of protection around your neck, 
do not suffer any more in this world. 

114. When the emissaries of Yama tie you with their 
nooses and beat you with whips, lord Skanda will not be present 
there to help you. O lord, give him up and seek the shelter of 
Lord Hari's feet. 

115-116. O husband, you raised a pillar of earthen lamps 
for propitiating the lord and wore a holy thread around your 
neck for your protection. But when the emissaries of Yama tie 
you with their noose and whip you severely, the pillar of light 
and the holy thread will not be there to render help. Take resort 
at the feet of Vi^u, therefore. 



ril.28.128 


1123 


117-119. On the day of your marriage, you wore a fresh 
girdle, waived lights put in the vessel of brass. You made a 
peculiar sound to propitiate your family god Siva. Chewing betel 
in the mouth you danced before the lord. But when after death, 
the emissaries of Yama tie you with their noose, your family god 
will not be there to help you. Where has he run away, tell me, 
O lord. 

120-121. You propitiated your family goddess, by gifting 
your car ornaments or in the absence of ornaments with the hair 
of your body. But when the fierce emissaries of Yama beat you 
with iron pestles or mace, your family goddess will not be there 
to help you. Riding on a donkey she would have fled away long 
before. 

122-123. You held a vessel of bambo wood by your left 
hand and an earthen lamp by your right and begged O stupid 
person from door to door when you had a facility of a settled 
life at home. When after death, the emissaries of Yama beat you 
severely and put you on the fire of thousands of earthern lamps 
that snub-nosed Renuka will not be there to offer protection. 
Where would she have fled away, tell me, O lord. 

124. That lifeless object, the sword you worshipped with 
devotion as a devotee would worship the idol. You barked like a 
dog. You discarded home when you had the facility of a settled 
life. 

125. When after death, the emissaries of Yama beat you 
up and you cried, then where did your family deity run away 
leaving you, the best of his devotees, all alone. 

126. You worshipped the idol of Bhimasena adorned with 
five jewels. You offered sweet dishes, loin cloth, etc., to the 
devotees. O silly one, you wandered when you had the facility 
of a settled life at home. 

127. When the emissaries of Yama beat you on the way 
to Yama’s region, where did the deity Bhima run away leaving 
you all alone? O ignorant one, take shelter at the feet of lord 
Vi§nu, O ignorant one. 

128. You offered worship to lord 8iva, repeating the 
name Hara which means the remover of ail suffering. When you 
had the facility of a settled life at home, you wandered. When 



1124 


Garu4a Purina 


your house was on fire, where did your lord Hara fly away 
{tell me, O lord). * 

129. At the festival of goddess Sakambhari, you worshipp¬ 
ed Sakambhari. Where did Sakambhari fly away, when the 
emissaries of Yama beat you severely. 

130. With concentrated devotion you worshipped Brahma 
and wearing a piece of cloth received in gift when you had the 
facility of a settled life at home. When after death the emmis- 
saries of Yama beat you with axes of sharp edge where did that 
Kulaladeva of bright teeth and shining eyes fly away leaving 
you, a true devotee, in wretched plight. Kulaladeva cannot be 
traced by any. 

131. On the fifth day of each fortnight you worshipped 
the earthen idol of Sesa with devotion. You wandered when 
you had the facility of a settled life at home. When after death, 
the emmissaries of Yama tied you with a serpent noose, then 
^vhere did Nagaraja run away leaving you, the best of his 
devotees, all alone. Tell me, that. 

132-33. You worshipped Vinayaka with the tiny shoots 
of Durva grass or with the fivefold variety of dishes. But when 
after death you were beaten up with the heated rods of iron by 
the emissaries of Yama, where did lord Vinayaka fly away leav¬ 
ing his single tusk behind. Tell me, O lord. 

134. You worshipped Visjadevi (the goddess of faeces) 
with devotion on the occasion of marriage. You wandered when 
you had the facility of a settled life at home. When after death 
the emissaries of Yama tied you with a noose and beat you 
on the way to Yama’s region where did the goddess of faeces 
fly away leaving you, a sincere devotee, all alone. 

135. At the wedding ceremony you went to a washer¬ 
man’s house, begged for the auspicious thread which you put on 
the earthen jar and worshipped. 

136. When after death the emissaries of Yama put the 
holy thread in your very mouth and beat you up, then where 
did the goddess Stambha-sutra run away. Tell me, O lord. 

137. At the wedding ceremony you worshipped Goddess 
Caula who fulfils the wishes of his devotees. You carried her in 
the winnowing basket to the bank of a river and propitiated her 



11.28.146 


1125 


together with the devotees. You wandered when you had the 
facility of a settled life at home. 

138. When after death the emissaries of Yama tied you 
with the noose and beat you on the way to Yama, where did 
goddess Caula fly away. O stupid one, take shelter at the feet 
of lord Visnu. 

139. When your son was suffering from fever you wor¬ 
shipped Brahmadeva at home with incense, earthern lamps, 
flowers and tasty dishes. You accepted Brahmadeva as your 
family deity, 

140. And when after death the emissaries of Yama tied 
you with a noose and beat you with the cane, where did 
Brahmadeva run away. O silly one, take shelter at the feet of 
lord Visnu. 

141. You worshipped Brhati for obtaining offspring and 
kept the fruit of Brhati hanging around your neck. You wandered 
when you had the facility of a settled life at home. 

142. When after death, the emissaries of Yama tied you 
with the noose and pricked you with the thorns of Brhati, O 
ignorant one, then where did Brhati run away. Tell me that. 

143. O ignorant one, take shelter at the feet of supreme 
lord Narayana, one who takes you across all sufferings. Do not 
worship the minor deities and do not hear their wasteful tales. 

144. Put all minor deities together in a tiny basket and 
throw them off at a distant place. Put aside those customs of 
your family that are likely to occasion your fall into terrible 
hells. 

145. O ignorant one, purge your soul by reciting the 
eight mantras (of purification) at this holy sight. Cast off all 
emblems of stupidity that have entered your heart and adorn 
your self with the emblems of lord Visnu. 

146. You are ignorant from the very beginning (and 
have remained as such to this very day). Listen to the tale of 
Visnu. You have wasted your life being led by vicious ideas. 
You should know that the association with the pious devotees 
of lord Visnu is difficult to achieve. Rarer is the knowledge of 
Reality—straight and simple. 



1126 


Garu4a Purina 


147. Think of Visnu as your preceptor and the support 
of your existence. O ignorant one, throw off your wicked i^eas. 
Resort to me, for I generate noble ideas in you. 

148. ‘‘Having obtained me as your noble preceptor, evolve 
feelings of detachment from your kith and kin. Know that know¬ 
ledge of Reality leads to liberation. The grace of Visnu and her 
consort Laksmi can alone take you across the ocean of life.” 

149. With this thought in mind I addressed the best of 
my devotees thus. Hence I got the designation Pravaha^ O lord 
of birds. Now hear what is relevant to the context. 


CHAPTER TWENTYNINE 

On unfolding the mystery and secret of Reality 

1. O best and noblest of birds, I shall now tell you the 
narrative as sequel to Pravaha, hear attentively. At the beginn¬ 
ing of creation Dharma was born of the body of Brahma. 

2. He came to be known as Dharma because he sustain¬ 
ed the noble by gentle treatment. He became the son of the 
solar deity and attained the designation of Yama.^ 

Since he admonished the sinners the learned call him 
Yama. 

Lord Kr^na said : 

3-4, After Prahlada came Gahga who became the wife of 
Varuna. She was inferior to Prahlada. She was superior to 
Varuna in glory, though in form she was inferior to him. 


1. As a god, Yama ts assigned the duty of ruling over the Dead. He 
is called the father of the Dead. He admonishes the sinners and appreciates the 
virtuous. Since he administers Justice according to traditional law he is 
known as Dharmaraja. 

When the life span of a living being is at an end, he sends his agents who- 
bring the departed souls to the city of Yama. From there he sends the holy 
souls to heaven and the sinful souls to hell. i. 



III.29.13 


1127 


To Visnu who bestows supreme knowledge on men Yama 
is friendly. 

5. Gahga^ is so called because she purifies the world by 
her waters. The devotees call her Visnupadi out of devotion for 
her. 

6. Formerly, she forced her way out of the nails of the 
left feet of Visnu whose symbol is sacrifice. In the beginning she 
broke through the upper part of the cosmic egg. 

7. She rushed into the belly of the lord the destroyer of 
the sins of the people and purified herself by contact with the 
filament of his lotus-feet. She destroys impurities by her very 
sight, touch, bath and creates devotion for the feet of Visnu, 
She is as white in complexion as the rays of the moon. Her eyes 
resemble those of the fish. She is worthy ofworship. Whosoever 
remembers her as rising from the feet of Hari attains liberation. 

8. Indra too, who drank in the heap of breath pressed, 
with hands, by the wind-god was not able to bear her upon his 
head. 

Knowing that Ganga had emerged from the feet of lord 
Hari, Siva, the chief among the devotees of Visnu moved by 
devotion at heart, took her up with reverence upon his head 
which though inauspicious became auspicious by her touch. 

9. O lord of birds, Gahga had four forms. As the wife of 
chief physician Janendra she was called Abhisecani. 

10. In her second form she became the wife of Santanu. 
As the wife of Su^ena, a monkey-chief, she was called Susena. 

11. Being the wife ofManduka she was called Mandu- 

kini. 

12. Parjanya was born to Gahga from Aditya. He is 
called Parjanya (a cloud) since the rains (release of water) are 
symbols of detachment. 

13. The word parjanya is derivable from Pahcajanya 
meaning a conch by omitting the word pafica and retaining 
Janya. It is symbolical of the idea that one should expel the six 

1. This information on the holy river of North India is peculiar to 
this Purina. The spirited enthusiasm displayed in the description and the 
narrative of this river indicates that the writer of this section might have lived 
on its bank. 



1128 


Garuia Purdrua 


aberrations Kama, Krodha etc. from his interior and meditate 
upon atman with detachment not impaired by affpction or 
hatred. 

14. One should never nourish his own sexual orgzui but 
should ever devote oneself to the phallic emblem of Siva. One 
should not attach oneself to the vagina of a woman. If he gives 
up his thought on vagina he becomes detached and attains 
liberation. 

15. Parjanyais always detached. O best of birds, Parjanya 
is, therefore, Yama. In this way sage Sarabha too is called 
antaka. He too is Yama. 

16. O lord of birds, Sarabha is one on whose body the 
hair glisten brightly. Sarabha is a cloud. The wife of Yama is 
Syamala. She is also the wife of Kali. 

17-18. She who with an awareness makes up her mind is 
called i§yamala. 

I shall now tell you about obstacles to one’s devotion for 
Visnu. One should keep them aside, throw them away just as 
one puts excretion in an iron vessel and throws it away or just 
as one throws off cloth burnt by fire or abandons battle which 
has no aim or the treatment of a physician which occasions pain 
to the patient. 

19. The devotees of Hari should dissociate from those 
who are devoid of devotion for Visnu and as such are considered 
to be inferior in society. He should avoid their company. 

20-21. The following are not dear to the bow-wielding 
lord Kr§na but they are deer to the mistress of Kali, those who 
are averse to the reciters of the Puranas, a delapidated pond, a 
wome-out garment, an old girdle, an old blanket, an old sacred 
thread, a house of which the inmates are always engaged in 
quarrel, or a house which contains a woollen canopy or a house 
which is full of woods and grass and is therefore shabby in 
appearance. All these are not dear to the bow-wielding lord but 
they arc dear to the consort of Kali. 

Grains of com—^Yavanala cooked in a vessel of bell-metal, 
husks of corn, oil-cake, gourd, wood-apple, a great quantity of 
butter-milk devoid of taste, pungent and hot—^all these are dear 
to the consort of Kali. 



III.29.33 


1129 


22-23. Bad face, censure of the noble, disrespect for the 
good, torture of children, stealing of rice, cloth, etc at the 
house of one’s husband, or wearing loose hair on the head or 
addiction to gambling and quarrels—all this is endearing to the 
consort of Kali. 

24-25- Since she avoided all these, she was called 
iSyamala. She became the consort of Vasudeva known as 
Devaki. The consort of the moon was called Rohini who was 
superior to AiSvinI and others. 

26. Holding rope in her hand, she could ascend a place, 
she was called Rohini. Sarhjfia was the consort of Aditya. She 
was of the very nature of Narayana. 

27. Because she knowing made up her mind she was 
called Sarhjfia, the consort of the solar deity. Virat is the presid¬ 
ing deity of the universe, therefore, he is called Virat. 

28. The six rivers Gahga, etc., are equal in merit to one 
another, each one of the group being neither superior nor infe¬ 
rior to the other. They purify the principal Agni. The river 
Gahga is always auspicious. 

29. Even by the knowledge of the sanctity of these puri¬ 
fying streams a devotee attains merit. Lord Kesava is extremely 
pleased thereby. Svaha, the consort of Agni is inferior to Gahga 
but superior to Sarhjna. 

30. Svaha is identical with Svahakara, the presiding 
deity of the mantras. 

31. Budha, the son of the lunar deity was more intelli¬ 
gent than Svaha, the consort of Agni. He became the presiding 
deity of the Vedas. Since he established Kingdom with great 
intelligence he was called Budha. 

The noble Abhimanyu was born of Arjuna and Subhadra. 
He contains the aihlas of Kf^na, moon, Yama, Alvins and 
Hara. 

32. Budha, the son of the moon is inferior to Svaha. 
He is devoted to the lotus feet of Visnu. 

33. Nam^, the wife of Alvins, is also called U?a. She 
is inferior to Budha and to Sv&ha (the wife of Agni) by ten 
per cent virtues. 



J130 


Garuda Purina 


34. The wife of Nakula was the daughter of th^ king of 
Magadha and the wife of Sahadeva was the daughter of Salya 
—the two together with Usa, the wife of Asvins wait upon 
Visnu possessed of sixfold virtue. O lord of birds, hence, also 
she is called Usa. O noble bird, now I shall tell you about 
those which come after. 

35. A spiritual power (energy) in the form of earth 
moves slowly but ceaselessly. That power is called Sanaiscara. 
It is inferior to Usa by ten per cent virtues. 

36. Puskala or Puskara^ of the form of activity is the twin 
brother of Sani. He presides over law and order. He is com¬ 
paratively gentle and inferior to l§anaiscara by ten per cent 
virtues. 

37. Since he delights Visnu by his devotion and sports 
in the Puskara lake^ he is known as Puskala among the 
people. 

38. O lord of birds, now I shall tell you about those acti¬ 
vities which are delightful to the lord. A person should rise 
early in the morning and remember lord Hari Narayana. 

39. He should bow to Tulasi and remember Visnu and 
his consort Laksrni, At the call of nature, while evacuating 
bowels he should remember Kesava of the form of apdna. 

40. At the time of purification he should remember Tri- 
vikrama, sipping waters of the Ganges. At the time of cleansing 
the teeth, he should remember Hari pervading the moon. 

41. At the washing of the mouth he should remember 
Madhava. At the itching of cows he should remember 
Govardhana. 

42. At the milking of cows, or when the fruits of merito¬ 
rious actions accomplished in the several previous births are 
ripened or at the touch of cows he should remember Gopala- 
vallabha (the beloved of cowherds—lord Sri Krina.) 


1. Pufkara or Pufkata —a holy place of pilgrimage in Ajmer. The 
present texi refers to Pufkara Idkt which was sacred to Brahmi who performed 
penance here. The Garuda Pur&Oa refers to Pufkala, the twin-brother of 
^anaiscara who abides in the pool and propitiates Vifou by^is wondrous 
aports. 



III.29.54 


1131 


43-44. In the house where there is no cow or the holy 
Basil plant in the courtyard where the inmates do not celebrate 
any festival for the Gods, where there is no recitation of the 
narrative of Visnu, one should never stay even for a moment, 
for association with the inmates of that house will lead to 
misery. 

45. He who does not keep a cow at home, is unaware 
of the art of milking it or is averse to nourishing it, passes his 
life in vain. 

46. He who does not give mouthful of food to the cow 
or does not tend it properly, can never pass a good, comfortable 
life. He is like an outcaste in the village. 

47. When the calf is sucking the breast he should remem¬ 
ber the boy Krsna; when the milk is being churned he should 
remember Hari sucking. 

48. When he bathes in waters mixed with the particles of 
earth from the sacred places of pilgrimage he should also 
remember Hari. When he puts sect marks on the forehead he 
should remember the twelve names of lord Visnu beginning with 
Kesava. 

49. In practising certain positions {mudrds) of his fingers 
he should remember lord Visnu adorned with conch, disc, mace, 
lotus, meteor, etc. 

50. In the evening when he performs Sandhya he-should 
remember Rama. While performing a Sraddha he should 
remember Acyuta, Ananta and Govinda. 

51. In the performance of five sacrifices Prana, etc., he 
should remember Aniruddha. When he offers oblations to the 
fire he should remember Vasudeva. 

52. When he goes on fast he should remember Hari 
pervading Vayu. When he wears dress he should' remember 
Upend ra. 

53 When he puts on new sacred thread he should 
remember Vamana N^ayaj^. When he waves lights before an 
idol he should remember ParaJurama. 

54. When he goes on fast or at the time of Vaiivadeva 
or other sacrifices or at the time of besmearing' body with the 



1132 Garuda PurSija 

holy ashes he should remember Narayana, Paralurama and 
Jamadagnya. 

55. When he thrice utters the name of sacred places of 
pilgrimage he should remember Krsna, Rama and Vyasa respec¬ 
tively. When he pours water out of the conch he should remem¬ 
ber Mukunda. 

56. When he offers undiluted food to Govinda, at each 
mouthful of food he should remember Govinda. When he par¬ 
takes of food, at each core of the eatable he should remember 
Acyuta concentratcdly. 

57. Whan he partakes of Vegetables he should remember 
Dhanvantari. When he eats food offered by another he should 
remember Pandurahga. 

58. When he eats butter he should remember the 
dancing Krsna. When he eats curd he should remember the 
premeval lord. 

59. When he drinks milk he should remember Gopala 
Krsna, lord Srinivasa, Visnu. When he eats food fried in the oil 
or ghee he should remember Vyahkatesa. 

60. When he partakes of grapes, pomegranates, banana, 
mango, orange, cocoanut or other fruits he should remember 
Balakrsna. When he drinks a good drink he should remember 
Nrsiriiha. 

61. When he drinks the ambrosial waters of the Ganges 
he should remember Visnu, the source of Gahga. 

62. When he is on the verge of death he should remem¬ 
ber the attributeless and the omnipresent Narayana and his 
Vehicle Garuda. When he kisses his son and other boys he 
should remember Krsna holding Venu in his hands. 

63. When indulging in intercourse with his consort he 
should remember Visnu playing with the Gopis’ pair of breasts. 

64. When he is going to sleep he should remember Hari 
as the incarnation of Vyasa. 

65. When he sings devotional songs he should remember 
Hari playing upon Venu. He should always utter the name 
Hari. 

66. When he plucks the leaves of Tulasi he should utter 
‘Rama, Rama*. When he cuts off a leaf he should remember 



III.29.70 


1133 


Kapila, aa incarnation of Hari. When he circumambulates 
Hari pervading Garuda he should remember Hari with 
concentration. 

67. When he bows to Visnu, the lord of lords, he should 
remember Vi?nu pervading Sesa. When he is in council with his 
ministers he should remember Narasiihha Narayana. 

68-69. When an undertaking is accomplished he should 
remember lord Vasudeva Hari. When he has accomplished 
activities as are endearing to lord Puskara, he secures the 
affection of Hari. 

70. Therefore, O lord of birds, he who hears with faith 
this incomparable narrative of Puskara, in all its details, is 
attracted to Dharma which creates devotion for the lord. 




GLOSSARY 


Abhaya-Mudra—a gesture of hand promising protection. 

Abhuta-Samplava—till the final deluge {mahSpralaya) when 
the universe is dissolved. 

Adhana (garbhadhana) —conception-laying ceremony. 

Aghamarsana—a prayer (RV.X. 190) repeated by Brahmanas 
for destroying sins. 

Aghara—sprinkling clarified butter upon the fire at certain 
sacrifices. 

Ahirhsa—non-violence as the virtue of refraining from indicting 
injury upon living beings by action, though and speech. 

Ahitagni—a person regularly maintaining sacred fires. 

Alarka—A king of Kasi and Karusa States. A pious and 
religious man, he practised yoga and thereby brought his 
senses under control. 

Amarakantaka or Amrakuta—a part of the Mekala hills, near 
Nagpur. 

Amrta-srava—that which pours out nectar. 

Amrta-yoga-s—certain conjunctions of stars which destroy 
evil and bring prosperity. 

Aiiga-nyasa—touching limbs of the body with the hand 
accompanied by appropriate mantras. 

Antyesti—funeral rite. 

Astaka—The eighth day of three months on which the manes are 
to be propitiated. 

Astakas—7th, 8th, 9th days of Pausa, Magha and Phalguna. 

Astaksari puja—worship of the lord with the eight-syllabled 
mantra, .^ri Kpnah >^aranam mama or SrivyankafeiSya namaf^ 
or Om namo Vdiudeodya. 

Asthi-safleayana, collection of bones, usually done on the fourth 
day after cremation. 

Ativaha— (I) the deceased person whose body is being carried 
to the cremation ground (2) the son of the creator Brahma, 
also named Pravaha. 

Aurdhvadehika—funeral rites. 



1136 


Garu^a Purdna 


Bhairava—a dreadful form of Siva. 

Bhava—devotional attitude of mind. 

Bhuta-taitva—the subtle constituents of the body known as 
tanmdtrds which function as the activitizing forces for the 
gross body. 

Bija-mantra—a mystic syllable like hrlniy hruniy etc. which 
comprises the essence of a full mantra. 

Brahmasutra—Sacred thread worne by the student before he is 
initiated to the Vedic study. 

Cakradhara— Sri Krsna, the wielder of the discus-shaped 
weapon named Sudarsana. The God of Fire had given this 
discus weapon to Sri Krsna and Gandiva to Arjuna. This 
Cakra was in existence even before the incarnation of Sri 
Kr^na. Viivakarma had made it for Maha-Visnu who 
used to destroy the Asuras b)fc this weapon. 

Camunda—According to Markandeya Purana a form of God¬ 
dess Durga was so called for slaying the demons—Canda 
and Munda. 

Caturvarga—the four ends of human life—Dharma, Artha, Kama 
and Moksa taken collectively, also known as purusartha. 

Caturvyuha—worship of Visnu in four-fold forms of Vasudeva 
Sahkar^ana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. 

Cudamani—a process for discriminating between good and bad 
omens. 

Daha-bali—an offering of pinda to the deceased at the time of 
cremation. 

Darbha-puttalaka—an effigy made of holy grass. 

Dasa—duration of the period of special influence ofa planet. 

Dasavatara—ten incarnations of Maha-Visnu, viz., fish, tortoise, 
boar. Man-lion. Dwarf, Parasurama, Rama, Krsna, Buddha 
and Kalki. 

Dattatreya or Datta—He was the preceptor of King Karttavir- 
y^juna known as Sahasrabahu. He was born of Anasuya, 
the wife of sage Atri. He is considered to be the incarna¬ 
tion of Mahavi$nu. He is famous for his knowledge of yoga 
and practice of penance. 

Dehantarapravela—the soul entering another body. 

Deluge—destruction of the universe at the end of aJCalpa. 



Glossary 


1137 


Dharma—a personification of Religion, Righteousness or Virtue. 
This is also a name of Yama, the god of death. 

Dharmapaya, a break in carrying out a religious act. 

Dipastambha—a pillar-Iike row of light. 

Dvadasatman—Twelve forms of Visnu to be worshipped in each 
month of the year, viz. Ke^ava, Narayana, Madhava, 
Vasudeva, Trivikrama, Vamana, Sridhara, Pradyumna, 
Hrukesa, Padmanabha, Damodara and Aniruddha. 

Ekantin—a devotee who is single-minded in Lord’s devotion. 

Ekoddista—a rite performed for one definite individual deceas¬ 
ed not including other ancestors. 

Fires : Garhapatya, Daksina, Ahavaniya represented by Brahma, 
Rudra and Visnu. 

Gayatrl—a verse composed in the Vedic metre called Gayatr! 
which is of 24 syllables, usually a triplet of 8 syllables 
each. 

Ghataspho|a—breaking of an earthen jar. This rite is performed 
by relatives on the half-way when 4he corpse is being 
taken to the cemetery. 

Gokarna—south of Goa, in the North Kanara District ; It is a 
famous place of pilgrimage—having the temple of Maha- 
balesvara, said to have been established by Ravana. 

Gotra—family or clan. 

Govinda—Lord Vi§nu lit., He who can be known through the 
Vedas. 

Guna-samya—equilibrium of three gii^as—sattva, rajas and 
tamas. 

Guna-vai§amya, disequilibrium of three gunas. 

Hayagriva—An epithet of Visnu who lost his head by the curse 
of Brahma and got the head of a horse fixed to his trunk 
which was replaced by his former head through the 
blessings of lord Siva. 

Hiranyagarbha—the individual soul which is ascertainable only 
by its action : 

Icchaiakti—the power of fulfilling a desire. 

Indra—lord of gods in heaven. But this lordship is temporary. 
Names of seven Indras arc known to this Parana. They 
are : Indradyumna, Purendra, Gadhi, Bali, Arjuna, 
Vikuk.;i and Kula. 



1138 


Garuia Purina 


Indrajala—magic, illusion, said of creation which is mere appear¬ 
ance, not a reality. 

Isjapurta—performing sacrifices, and digging wells and doing 
other acts of charity. 

Jhatidharma—norms current among the castes. 

Kalaratri—the night sacred to Siva. It falls on the fourteenth day 
of the dark half of Magha on which a rigorous fast is 
observed in honour of Siva. 

Kalpa-Vrksa—a wish-fulfilling tree in the pleasure-garden of 
Indra. 

Kamadhenu—a cow that grants all desires. 

Karmavipaka—ripening of actions. 

Karttikeya = Skanda=^Kumara = Subrahmanya. He is called by 
various other names. Most of these names are derivative : 
He was born from the semen of Siva which fell into Agni 
(\/skand to fall), so he got the name Skanda. Since he 
was breast-fed by the six divine Krttikas he was called 
Karttikeya. 

Kaustubha—a brilliant precious stone which floated up at the 
time of churning the sea of milk. This jewel which origi¬ 
nated from the sea was worn on the breast by Visnu. 

Kavaca—a mystical formula or a mystical syllabic considered as 
a preservative like armour. 

Ksetrapala—a tutelary deity consecrated on the South East 
corner of a temple for protecting villages and cities. 
This is a large image with three eyes, two or four or eight 
hands. 

Kula-parvatas (Seven)—Mahcndra, Malava, Sahya, Suktiman, 
Rksa, Vindhya, Pariyatra. 

Madhyantastha—all-pervading. 

Mahadvipas (Seven) —•Jambu, Plaksa, l^almala, Kusa, Kraufica, 
Saka and Pu^kara. 

Mahanadi—these are two such rivers : one rising near Kantara 
passes through Orissa and falls into the Bay of Bengal, the 
other a tributary of iSona is placed in the Deccan. 

Mahapatakas—five heinous crimes : slaughter of a Brahmin, 
drinking liquor, committing theft, indulging in incest with 
the prcceptor*s wife, associating with the above sinners. 



Glossary 


1139 


Mahayajfias—five great sacrifices, viz., Brahma, manu^ya, Deva, 
Bhuta, Pitf. 

Man<^ala (mystic diagram) —prepared in a consecrated temple 
on the ground. 

Matrganas—divine mothers, said to attend on Siva but usually on 
Skanda. They are normally said to be eight : Brahmi, 
Mahelvari, Candi, Varahl, Vaisnavi, Kaumaii, Camunda, 
Careika, or according to some, only seven : Brahmi, 
Mahelvari, Varahl, Vaisnavi, Kaumari, Mahendri, and 
Camunda. According to some, they are sixteen : Gauri, 
Padma, Sad, Medha, Savitri, Vijaya, Jaya, Devasena, 
Svadha, Svaha, Rddhi, Pusti, Dhrti, Tusti, Kuladevata, 
Atma-devata. 

Maurkhya mudra—mark of stupidity. 

Maya—nescience or ignorance, identical with ajftana or avidya 
which creates illusion by virtue of which one considers the 
unreal universe to be really existent and distinct from the 
supreme spirit. 

Maya—Prakrti—Avidya (In Ved.) Illusion by virtue of which 
one considers the unreal universe to be really existent and 
as distinct from the supreme spirit. (In Sahkhya) the 
material substance that constitutes the universe. (In 
Upanisads) ignorance that regards the unreal to be real. 

Mudgala-Mughal—The context indicates that the conversion of 
Hindus to Islam had begun by the time this portion of the 
Purana was written. 

Mudras—gestures ofhands. They are afljali, Vandini, Crddhva, 
Varahl, etc. 

Naisthika—a student who after studying the Vedas remains a 
Brahmacarin. 

Nandi— the bull of Siva which he rides, the name of the chief 
of Siva’s ganas who guards the door. 

Narayana—Lord Visnu whose abode is in the water or who is 
the resort of naras—good qualities. 

Narayana-bali, offering made to Lord Visnu. A particular rite, 
lasting for several hours, to propitiate Visnu in favour of 
the deceased, if an earthen lamp is not gifted at the time 
of death. 



1140 


Garu^a Purdna 


Nava-dvipa—nine islands—Bharata, IndradvZpa, Kaseruman, 
Tamravarna, Gabhastiman, Nagadvipa, Ka(aha, Siihhala, 
Varuna. 

Nava-vyuha—worship of Visnu in nine forms, viz., Vasudeva, 
Balarama, Kama, Aniruddha, Nara, Yama, Brahma, 
Visnu, Nrsirhha and Varaha. 

Nidhi—a treasure conducive to the flourishing of qualities, sattva, 
rajas and tamas. It is eight-fold, viz. Padma, Mahapadma, 
Makara, Kacchapa, Mukunda, Nanda, Nila, and Sahkha. 

A^seka—discharge of semen at the time of intercourse. 

Niskamabuddhi—a person whose mind is free from any wish or 
desire. 

Nityananda—eternal bliss, one of the three natures of Brahman, 
the other two being eternal existence and supreme 
consciousness. 

Niyoga—a practice which permitted a childless widow to have 
intercourse with the brother or any near kinsman of her 
deceased husband to raise up issue to him, the son so bom 
being called ksetraja. 

Pada-sodhana—washing the feet of the guest. This is the first 
of the acts a host has to perform when he receives the 
guest. 

Paficagavya—the five products of the cow taken collectively, i.e. 
milk, curds, clarified butter or ghee, urine and cowdung. 

Paficaka—five naksatras if a person dies in any one of these, it 
is considered to be very inauspicious. A rite is performed 
to avert the evil effect. 

Pafleapravahana—five boats (to cross the ocean of existence) 
viz., Tulasi (holy basil), Brahmanas, cows, Vi^nu and 
ekada^i the eleventh day in each of the two fortnights of 
a month. 

Farivedana—the marriage of a younger brother before the 
elder. 

Parvaina—the rite of offering oblations to the manes at a Parvan. 

Paiinairrta—western and south-western direction. 

Pa(tavardhanarama—a sacred stone the gift of which brings 
fortune to the donor. 



C lossary 


1141 


Pavitra—a ring of Ku^a grass wome on the fourth finger on the 
occasion of ^raddha to the manes. It is also tied around a 
vessel on such occasions. 

Pingla—rice-ball offered to the manes. 

Pinyaka—oil cake. 

Pranayama, restraining or suspending the breath during the 
mental lecitation of the names or attributes of a deity. 

Praya^citta—a religious act to atone for sins. 

Purnahuti—the final ghee-offering poured in the sacrificial fire 
indicates a successful completion of a sacrifice. 

Puryastaka—the soul of which the eight petals are : sound, 
touch, taste, colour, smell and the three gunas—sattva, 
rajas and tamas. 

Rasi—a sign of Zodiac. 

Sadangas—six organs of the body—2 thighs, 2 arms, head and 
heart. 

Sariiskaras—purificatory or ceremonial acts performed by the 
person concerned or by his relatives in his favour. They 
have a wide range beginning with conception and ending 
with death. 

Samudra—a legendary sage, the originator of Samudra-Sastra 
(Physiognomy), auspicious and inauspicious marks of a 
person. 

SarhyaminI—Yama’s capital on the mountain Mahameru, on 
the southern side of Manovati, the capital city of Brahma 
in the centre surrounded by eight cities in the eight 
quarters. 

Sankara—mixed castes. The union of bride and bridegroom 
belonging to different castes gives birth to children who 
can be categorised and designated differendy. The children 
so born are mentioned in the Puranas as (1) Ambastha, 
(2) Nisada, (3) Mahisya, (4) Mleccha, (5) Kara^a, 
(6) Suta, (7) Vaidehaka, (8) Can^ala, (9) Magadha, 
(10) Ksatr, (11) Ayogava, (12) Rathakara. 

Sapindikarana—a rite, usually performed at the end of one full 
year after the death of a person, now usually performed 
on the 12th day after death as part of the funeral obse¬ 
quies. This rite connects the deceased to the manes. 



1142 


Garuijla PurSna 


Sapta-dhanya—seven varieties of grain. 

Sapta-sindhus—seven oceans : those of salt, sugarcane •juice, 
wine, ghee, curd, milk and water. 

Satkausika—Six constituents of the body, viz, marrow, bones, 
semen, flesh, hair and blood. 

Siddha-yoga-s auspicious conjunctions of stars conducive to the 
fulfilment of tasks undertaken by the sadhaka. 

Skandha-vaha—persons who carry the corpse to the cemetery. 
Smrti—tradition as recorded in the Dharmasastras. 

Snanam Obligatory (Nitya) bath is taken thrice a day in the 
morning, at noon and at sunset at the beginning of Sandhya 
prayers. Naimittika bath is taken to wipe off impurity 
accruing from certain causes. 

bonanada—It rises near the source of the Narmada river and 
flows into the Ganges above Patna. It was called Hiranya- 
bahu or Hiranya-vaha. equivalent to the Greek Erannaboas. 

^raddha The offering given to Pit) s. According to the Puranas 
the ceremony is very important. Here the word pitrs does 
not mean ‘the souls of the dead’. Pitrs belong to a special 
class. 

^rivatsa—Once the sage Bhrgu kicked Visnu on the chest, for 
the latter had not shown respect due to a sage. Visnu 
carries Bhrgu’s footprint permanently on his chest as a 
mark of repentance and this footprint is known by the 
name Srivatsa. 

Sruti—tradition as recorded in the Vedas. 

Sthandila—a piece of ground levelled, squared and prepared 
for a sacrifice. 

Sunya-lihga—a phallic image of lord l§ivaat a solitary place. 

Sutaka—impurity to relatives accruing from the birth of a child 
in the family or the death of a related person. The 
number of days varies according to the caste. 

Suvarna-naga—a golden image of a serpent to be gifted to a 
Brahmin. 

Svadhakara—the oblation of food offered to the manes by 
exclaiming the word svadha. 

6vana-sabda—barking of a dog. In fact, the devotees of f>iva 
imitate the voice of the goat and not that of the dog. 



Glossary 


1143 


Because when Dak^ whose head was cut off and replaced 
by a goat’s head spoke in the voice of a goat it pleased 
Siva who was insulted by him. Likewise, the devotee imi¬ 
tates the voice of a goat just to please lord Siva. 

Tailodvartana—anointing the dead body with the oil. 

Tarpana—water oflerings made in propitiation of Manes, Deities, 
Brahminical sages, etc. 

Trisavana-snana—plunging into the water for three times. 

Tritattva = guna-lattva, the qualities of sattva, rajas and 
tamas represented by Visnu, Brahma and Rudra. 

Uccatana—eradication. 

Udakumbha—a water-jar, a rite of offering libations of water to 
the manes. 

Upakurvana—a student who after studying the Vedas becomes 
a house-holder. 

Utkranti-sriiddha—a rite to be performed immediately after 
death. 

Uttama-sloka—of excellent fame, an epithet of lord Visnu or 
of his incarnation Sri-krsna. 

Vaikuntha—the transcendental realm of Visnu, so called because 
it is free from the limitations (kuntha) of sorrow, delusion 
and fear. It is free from the pale of Prakrti (the matrix of 
the physical universe), time (an accessory of Prakrti) and 
Maya (the source of all phenomenality). 

Vaitarani—a river on the way to Yamaloka, or a cow the gift of 
which helps the departed soul to cross it. 

Vasana (Karma-janya) —impressions unconsciously left on the 
mind of a person by his past good or bad actions which 
produce pleasure or pain. 

Vastu—the site of a house. Vastu-yaga, a sacrifice performed on 
the occasion of laying the foundation of a house. 

Visarjaniya mantras—a set of mantras to be recited at the end 
of a sacred performance when the deities invoked are to 
leave for the regions. 

Visesa—a peculiar attribute, the eternal distinguishing nature 
of each of the nine dravyas. 

Vi§a-yogas—poisonous conjunctions of stars which are inaus¬ 
picious for die performance of any religious rite. 



1144 


Garuia Purina 


Vrata—a religious act of devotion or austerity. The Puranas 
prescribe several Vratasfor the accomplishment of Jificrent 
purposes. Their number cannot be fixed since new ones 
like the Satya Narayana are being added every day. 

Vratya—a man of first three classes who has lost caste owing 
to the non-performance of principal saraskaras or puri¬ 
ficatory rites, especially investiture with the sacred thread. 

Vrsa-dhvaja—an epithet of bull-bannered lord Siva. 

Yoga-ksema—acquisition and preservation, alabdhaAabho yogah 
syat ksemo labdkasya pHlanam—Mitdk^ard on jT. .J. I. 100. 

Yoga-pitha—'the holy seat for performing religious activities. 



INDEX 


A 

Abhaya, a mudra of protection 92 
Ablutions, for a householder and a 
retired (Vanaprastha) man 624- 
625; for a yati and for a student 
625 

Acara-saihhita, a treatise on conduct 
288 

Action, results of 723 
Actions, as the cause of heaven, hell 
or salvation 870 

Actions, result of—in the next birth 
727 

Activity, results of 929 
Acyuta-murti 143 fn. 2 
Adharma, a personification of vice 87 
Adhivasa 138 fn 1 
Adityas, 12 in number 819 
Aerial form, of the deceased 865 
Affliction, threefold 868, 868 fn, 

990 fn 1 

Ages, four, Duration of 889 
Agneyatirtha 255 
Agnidhara 258 
Agnikarana 928 
Agnistoma 258; Sacrifice 257 
Ahalya and Indra 1109 fn 
Aham —ahaihkara, the third of the 
eight elements 718 
Ahirhsa (non-violence) 706 
Ahitagni 633 
Aindra (tirtha) 255 
Airs, ten Vital 879 
Aksayaday 762 
Ak^ayavata 256, 261 
Akuti 4 fn 7; wife of Ruci Praja- 
pati 1036 

Alarka 4, 668; a disciple of Datta 
Atreya 1036 

Amarakai^taka, a holy place of pil¬ 
grimage in M.P. 248 
Ambika, offerings to 309 
Amrtesa Mrtyufijaya, Worship of 75 
Ananda (Eternal Bliss) 1056 
Ananta 37 fnl 
Anarta 897 fn 3 
Anasuyi 4 fn 3 
Andha-timisra, a hell 263 
AAga, a country 782 
Ahga-nyasa (assignment of limbs 
over the body) 95 


Ahgaresa, shrine of 254 

Angas, a country and the people 782 

Angiras 1001 fn 1 

Ahgula 134 fn 1 

Aniruddha 108 fn 5; son of Pra- 
dyumna 985 fn 1 
Antyajas 795 
Anvastaka 261 
Anvasfakya, a ^raddha 898 
Apana, one of the five life-winds 874 
Aparigraha (non acceptance of 
wealth) 706 

Apaviddha, a son 848 fn 1 
Apravrajita 849 fn 4 
Apsarasas (celestial nymphs) 18 
Aravind, forest 265 
Aravinda 259 

Arbuda 910; Mount Abu in Raj¬ 
asthan 897 

Army, comprising four divisions 782 
Army, four divisions of 782 
Aruna 27 fn 4 
Aryatirlha 247 

Asadha=June-July 133 fn 1 
Asagotra (indirect relation) 752 
Asana, adoration of 94; postures 
669, 797 

Asauca (impurity) 750; days of—751 
Asipatravana, a hell 264 
Aspirant, his daily routine 167 
Asrama 2 fn 2, 163 
Astaka 897 

Astamurti, the eight-formed lord 
Siva 763 fn 1 
Astavasus 986 fn 1 
Astrology 194-23, 218-220 
Asuras 856; evil activities of 967 
Asuri, a disciple of Kapila 1036 
Asvamedha 260, 838, 869 fn 1; a 
horse sacrifice 258, 869; efficacy 
of 963 fn 4; shrine of 254 
Asvattha tree 840 
Ativdha 870 

Atman, as reflected in sons and dau¬ 
ghters 848 769; different means 
for the realization of—700; medi¬ 
tation on 949; size of 808; the 
concept of—according to the 

Bhagavadgitd 705; as son 890 
Atri 4 fn 2; a mental son of Brahm& 
1004 fn 1 
Aurasa 848 fn 1 



JJ46 


Garuda Pur&m 


Aurdhvadehika fn 1; rites 859, 861 
fn I 

Avahana 928 
Avaisnavas 958 
Avantika 909 
Avici, a hell 262 
Ayana 897 fn 2 

Ayodhya 247, 909; a city that grants 
release 950 

Ayurveda, Indian medical science 
343 

B 

Babhruvahana, a King 782; episode 
of 856; story of 856; meets a ghost 
857 

Badri=Badarika 247; Badarikairama 
7 fn 1, 1036 

Bahubhiti, a city in Yama’s way 757 
Bahvapada, a city in Yama’s way 
757 

Baka, an asura fn 10 

Bala, Son of Virocana 5 fn 6, 26 

Balakhilyas 20 fn 7 

Balaruma, elder brother of 935 fn 2 

Balarama and §rikr?na 6 fn 1-2 

Bali 5 fn 6 

Bana 26; an asura 1025 fn 3 
Barrenness, causes of—in a woman 
826 

Bath, in the holy Ganges 625 IT; 
rules of 633; types of 629; ways 
of 630 

Baths, ten types of 757 
Behaviour, On student-tcacher-973 
Beings, division of—into 4 classes 795 
Betel leaf, chewing 633 
Bhadra, the Episode of 1063; as 
Kaikeyi 1064 

Bh jdrapada=August-September 
133 fn 4 

Bhagavata Purana 1066 
Bhigirathi, Gahga 1083 fn I 
Bhandira 248 

Bhdrata=Mahabhurata %3 
Bharata (as'rama of) 2)6. 258 
Bharatavarsa, derivation of 963 fn 1 
Bharata War 834 fn J. 

Bhurati, the Goddess of Speech 964; 
forms 1046 ff 

Bhaumasura or Xarakusura 1024 fn 6 
Bhima, third among the sons of 
Pa^idu 965 fn 3 
Bhimarathi (r.) 1083 fn 6 
Bhisma (m.) 255; son of Santanu 
834 fn 1, 965 fn 4 
Bhojas—a branch of Yadu dynasty 
955 fn 3 

Bhigu 7 fn 3, 999 fn 2; son of Brahmd 


1030 fn 3 
Bhrguksetra 910 
Bhrgutuhga 248 
Bhuman=earth 969 note 2 
Bhuma, a river in Southern India 
1060 

Bhutas and Pisacas 831 fn 1 
Bhutesvara 910 
Bhuvana-Ko^ 182, 186, 190 
Bhuvaraha 1103 
Bija 35 fn 2; six 36 fn 1 
Bindusaras 249 

Birth & Death, Cycle of 845 fn 1; 
wheel of 950 

Black magic for attaining victory in 
the battle 554; for becoming invi¬ 
sible 544; causing clay frog bellow 
like a bull 554; death 542, 550; 
dissention 542; invisibility 554; 
quarrel 543; destroying worms 
in the abdomen 565; for driving 
rats 542 for eradicating serpents 
542, for holding fire on the palm 
for extinguishing fire 550; for 
quelling dropsy and ascites 565; 
for quelling leprosy 565 keeping 
ivory steady in water 555; killing 
enemy 542; killing snakes 542; 
licking fire 550; numbifying water 
550; conflagration 534; burning 
sensation 554,564; protection against 
rain 550; quelling dropsy and 
ascites 565; leprosy 565; removing 
abscess 565; the fear of crocodiles 
564; remaining under water for 
three days 535; suppression of stools 
541; removing the splenic enlarge¬ 
ment 565, 566; winning favour in 
the Royal household 543 
—warding off the evil influence of 
planets and Bhutas 562-563 
Bodies, gross and subtle 941 
Body, after death 811, 950; consti¬ 
tution of 708; forms of—in diffe¬ 
rent births 727; importance of 
942 ff; thieves in the 945; tortur¬ 
ing—is not the way to salvation 
Body, paftcabhautika, Conception 
of—878; seven elements and seven 
Kosas of—description of 736 ; four¬ 
fold 736 

Bondage defined 701 
Bones, collection of—of the deceased 
751 

Brahma, a kind of marriage 852; 
four faces of 1100; fiaur-faced 1101 
fn 1; heard Garuda Purana from 
the mouth of Visiju 710; shrine 



Index 


1147 


of 253; threefold origin of 1016 
fn 1; (tirtha) 260; Vi?pu and 
other gods, relative superiority of 
966 

Brahma-bija 949 

Brahma—kanda, Sectarian character 
of 958 

Brahmacarya (celibacy) 706 
Brahmagita 707 

Brahmahatya (slaughter of a Brah¬ 
min), one of the 6ve major sins 
1109 

Brahmaloka 19 fn 1, 254 
Brahman 2 fn 5; one-syllabled 949; 
contemplation of 140; supreme 
reality 971 

Brahmanda 14 fn 2, 1011 fn 
Brahma sadas 254, 256, 258 
Brahmasaras 256, 258 
Braiimatirtha 248, 255 
Brahmavadins 21 fn 3, 796 fn 2 
Bralima yajha 173 fn 1 

Brahmins, conduct of 620; eyes of 
620 

Bihaspati 985 fn 3; a deity 147 fn 16 
Bfhaspati—niti-sara 327-365 
Buddha 6 fn 7, 1038 fn 6 

C 

Caksu«a Manvantara 4 fn 10 
Campaka, a forest 256 
Camunda 123 
Canda 1088 

Candrabhaga 248; (Chenab) 218 
Chandra-tirtha 1102 
Gandrayapa 706, 838 fn 3; a vow 813 
Canura, a wrestler 692 fn 3 
Castes 2 fn 1; Common characteris¬ 
tics of 622; mixed 294 
Cataka—a bird supposed to live on 
rain drops 930 
Caterpillar, maxim of 117 
Charity 175 

Childhood, stages of 846 
Chowrie 216 fn I 

Circle, a mystical diagram 724; im¬ 
portance of 724; around the dying 
person 883 

Cities, number of—in Yama’s way 
757 

Cities, Seven, capable of bestowing 
salvation 909 

Citra^pta 818, 908; palace of 887 
CitrakOta 247 
Classes Ml 

Cleansing of articles 301 ff. 
Cowdung, smearing the ground with 


Creation, beginning of 15; manasa 
20; of Progeniton 19; Primary 
1012 fn 1 ; Primary and Second¬ 
ary 108 ff 

Creation after dissolution 1027 fn 5 ff 
Creation as the will of the lord 972 
Creatures, Varieties of 875 
Cremation, Contributions to 912; 
rite of—<ievolves on the son 865; 
to counter the bad results of Pafi- 
eikas 749; of the corpse, rules re¬ 
garding—904 

Crime and Punishment 314 ff 
Cudamarii mantra for the dberimi- 
nation of good and bad omens 
585 ff 

D 

Daityas 865; D&navas, Asuras 963 
fn 2 

Dakinis, for removing the evil in¬ 
fluence of 541 

Daksa 7 fn 2, 24 fn 1, 985 fn 4 
Daksina Manasa 255, 260 
Daksinayana 136 fn 1 
Damodara 142 fn 2 
Danavas 856 
Dandavaktra 1097 
Darbha, importance of 865 
Darbha grass, Brahma, Kes'ava and 
Sankara stationed in 866; efficacy 
of 865 

Darsanas, six 946 
Dasa^vamedha 261 
Dasiputra, a son 849 
Dat(a Atreya, the son of Atri 4 fn 1, 
668 , 1036 

Dattaka, a son 848 fn 1 
Death, accidental 914; impurity for 
914; explained 736; forms of 725; 
inevitability of 873; life after 814; 
Occasions of 913; on accidental 
924; premature 863; pre-mature— 
b occasional 863; rites after 864; 
the after-effects of—in water 907 
Death-bed of Kus’a grass 867 
Death-fire 944 

Death or birth as the result of pre¬ 
vious action 845 
Deceased, lamentation of—813 
Debt, dbcharge of 844 fn 2 
Debt or obligation, a way of release 
from 848; dbcharge of 848 
Deities, as not separate from each 
other 967; auspicious marks of 
male and female 1071 ff; Nature 
of 953; and the serial order of their 
position 1006 ff; presiding over 
different parts at the body 870; 
Sraddhas for—917; three 870 



1148 


Garuia Pur&r^a 


Deities and their relative status 983, 
988 

Deluge 4, 240 fn 2, 832, 896 fn 1, 
933; final 896; universe dissolved 
in 922 

Departed souls 942; functions of—825 
Devakotaka 248 
Devala 149 fn 2 
Devanadi 259 

Deva-vrata=Bhi;ma 834 fn 1 
Devotion, types of 672 ff; to Vi?nu 
675-683 

Dhanvantari 5 fn 2; born from the 
Ocean of milk 1037 
DharanS, Ways for the practice of 
670 

Dharma, a personification of Reli¬ 
gion 89 fn 1; Discourse on 936; 
importance of 795; Secret of 770; 
Symbols of 621; effects of—622; 
Common—of Brahmanas, Ksatri- 
yas and Vaiiyas 621; Vaisnava 
998 fn 3; (Virtue and Righteous¬ 
ness) essence of 652; (duty)—of 
Brahmins 621; of Ksatriyas 621; 
of Vaisyas 621; of l^udras 621 
Dharma and Adharma 936 
Dharmapr^tha 256 
Dharmaraja=Yama 771 
Dharmaranya 253, 255, 260 
Dharma-^astra 170 fn 1, 620 ff 
Dharma-Vatsa; a Brahmana 763 
Dharma-yupa 255 

Dharana (retention) 699; retaining 
the deity in the mind 707 
Dhenuka an asura 1025 fn 10 
Dhenukaranya 255-256 
Dhenuvana 254 
Dhruva 23 fn 1 

Dhyana 707;—Contemplation 670; 
fixation of the mind in the object 
699; (meditation) 702 
Diagram, mystic 865 

Dikpalas 30 fn 2 
Dipa-nirvana, rite of 748 
Discus—^weapon 963 
Diseases, abodes of 888; Categories of 
diagnasb of 421 ff; Diagnosis 421; 
Dosas 422 ; Fistula 518 ; principles 
of Vata, Pitta and Kapha Sanni- 
pata 423; Synonyms 421 
Diseases and Remedies, allaying heat 
539; Chronic intermittent fever 
539; Compound of drugs 572-573; 
Decoctions 510; Drugs 569; ema¬ 
ciation and fainting 539; for acting 
sensation 540; for affected lungs 
540; for arresting foul discharges 
546; for attaining beauty 547; for 


bad odour in the mouth 538; for 
becoming intelligent 54^ for be¬ 
coming invisible 553; for bright 
lustre in the face 539; for brighten¬ 
ing body 541; for burning of the 
mouth due to lime in chewing 
betel 538; for bums 540; for car¬ 
diac colic ulcers 540; for curing 
all ailments 542; for curing asthema 
566; for curing burns and scalds 
553; for curing catarrh 566; for 
curing cholera 546; 558; for curing 
coatings of the eyes 563; for curing 
consumption 564; for curing dis¬ 
orders due to the derangement of 
wind 555; for curing dogs, horses, 
elephants 590 ff ; for curing cars 
546; for curing enlarged spleen 
555; for curing eye-coatings depi- 
iations of eye-lashes 558; for curing 
eye-soars, 546; fever, cough, con¬ 
sumption and catarrh 558; fis¬ 
tula 559; Haemoptysis 566; head¬ 
ache 555; harshness of voice 
(Aphonic) 566; Hydrocele 542; 
impaired digestion 555; loss of 
man-hood and virility 559; loss 
of sexual vigour 559; miscellane¬ 
ous eruptions 594; ocular afliic- 
tions 558; piles 553; ring worms 
565; spleen 552; strangury 553; 
teeth 563; tumours 546, 562-563; 
vaginal passage 546; vatarakta 
564; for dark spot in the teeth 
538; for deranged vayu 540; 

for destroying car-worms 546; 
flies and mosquitoes 543; urinary 
complaints 558; chlorosis 563; 
for dispelling diseases of the teeth 
555; dysentery, diarhoea 558; 
Suppression of feces, urine and 
cardiac colic 550; for dispelling 
tuberculosis 550; wrinkles, greying 
hair 549; 

for driving out serpent 548; for easy 
delivery of a child 551 ; for enab¬ 
ling a sterile woman to conceive 
555; for excruciating pain in the 
eye 541; for extinguishing fire 550; 
for facilitating conception 553; 
conception and defiverv 563: for 
facilitating sexual indulgence 554; 
for preventing wrinkles & greying 
of hair 554; for giving lustre to 
the body 549; for curing goitre 
538; for cooling headache 538; 
for healing ulcer 55S; for increas¬ 
ing appetite 560; for indigestion 





Index 


1149 


541; for Jhiflghmivata 540; for 
keeping a woman young 547; for 
long lile 541; for pain by blow 
541: for paralysis of thighs of 540; 
for protection against poison 567; 
for protection against the rigorous 
heat of summer 566; for protection 
against snakes 567; for protection 
against thieves & tigers 553; for 
quelling blood dysentery 551; 
poison 563; for reappearance of 
fallen hair 542; for rejuvenation 
546; for relief from thirst and fever 
567; for retaining health & viva¬ 
city 557; for sahghit&vata 540; for 
scalds & busters 540; for shapely 
beauty 566; for softening harsh 
voice 548; 

for sores in the mouth 538; for stop¬ 
ping bleeding 559; for stopping 
piles 559; for sword-cuts 540; for 
turning bad odour into a sweet 
fragrance 566; for turning white 
hair black 535; for ulcer in the 
lips 538; for ulcer of gums and 
teeth 538; for ulcerating wounds 
541; for urination with semen dis¬ 
charges 541; for vertigo, burning 
sensation, pitta jvara 539; for 
warding off the evil effects of 
planets & fear of ghosts 564;— 
the evil influence of planets & 
Bhutas 562-63;—evil planet 564; 
for worms in the teeth 538; 

for removing aches of pelvic region 
553; —^sdl germs in the teeth 558; 
burning sensation due to fever 
563;—blotches & scabs 553;— 
Cardiac and back ptain 557;— 
Gaturthaka fever 547;—chlorosu 
and other ailments of the piouth 
555; —Colic 557-558, 562; cough, 
hiccough and Asthema 548;— 
diabetes & urinary complaint 
559;—diarrhoea, dysentry 551; — 
disorders in the blood 548;—-dis¬ 
orders of Vayu 552; dyspnea 558; 
—^fever 552; fever caused by 
Dakini 547;—goitre 555, 564;— 
gravel & urinary complaints 559; 
—Gulmas 551; —luemorrhage 

552;—^hair 550;—on the body 
548;—heart pains 555;—hicco¬ 
ugh 559; —hysteric fits 552;— 
impaired digestion & ccflic 5^;— 
impurity c? blood 562;—bitches 
552;—Jeprosy 552, 553, 565;— 
leucoderma 565;—night blindness 
5^;—^pain in arms & neck 564; 


—pain in ducts of penis & cardie 
region 564;—pain in the eyes 548; 
—p^alysis of the thighs 551; 
—piles 552, 553;—PariQ&maiulas 
(Gastral pains) 557;—-poison 550, 
557, 564;—jmison of drinking 

555;—^purgatives 551; —scabies 

& piles 565;—scabs 566; —scro¬ 
fula, hydrocela; goitre 559; —Skin 
poison 565;—strangury 559; 
—^strangury gravel & jaundice 559; 
—Sula 549;—the fever of lions & 
other beasts of prey 564;—vomit¬ 
ing 552; 567;—weakness 549;— 
white leprosy 565 

Juices for different diseases 572-573; 
kinds of fever 425ff; Ku^tha 
(leprosy) 481; Kfmis (germs) 485; 
mutraghata (suppression of urine) 
459; of dial^tes 461; of Gulma 
(Intumescence) 465; of vidradhi 
(Erysipelas) 463; oils for different 
diseases 569-572; Pandu (Chlorosis 
and jaundice) 475; powder for 
gaining lost eye-sight 561; patho¬ 
logy of arocaka (non-relish for 
food) 443;—Arsas (piles) 449; 
—dysentery 455;—fevers 425 ff; 
—Hiccough 439; —hrdroga (ail¬ 
ment of the heart) 444;—mada- 
tyaya (dissention due to inebria¬ 
tion) 446;—^Rakta-pitta 434; 
^vaaa. roga asthma 443;—^Yak?- 
man (consumption) 440;—remov¬ 
ing wrinkles and grey hair 561;— 
for various ailments 560;—Vata- 
rakta 491; 

powder for quelling sinuses 562; 
prayer to lord Visnu for removing' 
all Aments. 

Recipes of medicinal compounds 
497; Rules of proper food and 
drink 503; Sleep 539; totha (Oe¬ 
dema and Anasarca) 475; for 
stopping bleeding 561; for substi- 
tutmg sinuses 562; Udara (ascites, 
dropsy, flatulence) 470; V&ta- 
vyidhi (diseases of the nervous 
system) 486; Vifama jvara 539; 
Visarpa (Erysipeles-itch) 479; 
wind, the courses of 590-593; 
Remedy for ear-ache 535;— 
Chlorosis 537;—eye salve, 536;— 
jaundice 537;—m^ng penis longer 
536;— Nisuias 

Disst^ution 663; kinds of 664; types 
of 410; description of 410 

DivocUsa, a King 693 fn 1 

Doors, for departure 794 



1150 


Garu4a Purd^ 


Dravids 189 fn 15 
Dreams, symbolical of Prcta-do$a 
829, 840 

Drinking watershed 912 
Drona, preceptor of Kaurava— 
Pan^avas 3116 fn 1. 

Drona acarya of Kuru princes 965 
fn 5 

Drugs, medicinal 597-605 
Duhkhada, a city in Yama’s way 757 
Durga 93 fn 2; worship of 123 
Durga = Ugru 1088 
Durvasas, a sage 20 fn 6 
Duryodhana 1023 fn 2 
Dussasana, brother of Duryodhana 
1026 

Duties of a Householder 621-622; 
of a student 621; Sannyasin 622; 
Vanaprastha 621; 

Dvandvas, opposite pairs 834 
Dvaraka 141 fn 2, 247; or Kusasthali 
897 fn 3 

Dvaravati or Dvaraka 909 
Dvipas (islands) seven in number 
183 

Dying person, condition of 726-727; 
three stages of (a) ativaha, (b) 
ghost, (c) pitr 870 
Dynasties solar 398-401; Lunar 402 ff; 
Yadavas 404; Pauravas 407; 
Kauravas 409 

E 

Efligy, of the dead 918; cremation of 
919 

Ego and Attachment 768 
Eight-syllabled mantra : Oiii namo 
Vuudevaya 1068 
Ekahuti-kriya 720 
Ekamra 248 
Ekavira 250 

Ekoddista 739, 755, 849; a Sraddha 
847 fn 2, 898 fn 2, 926 
Energy, as the magical power 974; 
as the very nature of lord 973; 
deposited in Maya 973 
Epics 12 fn 4 

Eradication, prescription for 541 
Excretions and discharges 874 
Expiation or atonement 654 ff 

F 

Fast and Pilgrimage 904 
Fastings, rites of W5 
Fasu, for a sick man 905 
Fee-sacrificial—for the officiating 

priest 917 
Fever, House of 888 


Fire, Ahavaniya 625; Garhapatya 
625; location of—633; fypes of— 
633 

Fires, three 870 
Foetus, development of 877 
Forest, description of a—772-773 
Form, neutral—alien to lord 974 
Forms, male and female, inseparable 
973 

Formulas, aham brahmasmi and tat 
tvam asi explained 710 

Four vargas—Dharma, Artha, Kama 
and Mok$a 956 fn 1 
Funeral code 810 
Funeral practice 891 
Funeral rites, rite of durmitra 748 

G 

Gadadhara 260; shrine of 254; 

worship of 265 ff 
Gaja, shrine of 254 
Ganas of Yama, their admonition of 
tlic deceased 939 ff 
Ganas, of Visnu 718 
Gan<^aki 249; (r) 1083 fn 9 
Gandhamadana, a mountain 757, 
884 

Gandharva, a city in Yama’s way 
759 

Gandharvas 18, 969 
Gandika stone for making idols 
1104 

Ganrsa 93 fn 1 

Ganga 758, 915; at Haridvara 247; 
at Prayaga 247; at Gahga- 
sagara-sangama 247; glorifica¬ 
tion of 1127 ff, fn I 
Gaiigadvara 250 

Ganges, a famous river of N. India 
1060 fn 3 

Garuda, an emblem in the banner 
of Vi;nu 712; as a younger brother 
of AruQa 7TO; as the destroyer 
of Nagas 712; brought soma from 
heaven 712; swallowed Nifidas 
712; mighty deeds of—712; praise 
of—713; fruits of meditating on 
713 

Garu^a-dhvaja 804 fn 1 or the term 
may refer to Vi;nu who has Garuda 
as the emblem cm his flag-staff 
Garuda mantra 579-584 
Gambia Purilpa, as a Vais^ava 
Purina 951; as the essence of know¬ 
ledge 710-711; Contents 14; fruits 
reciting or listen^ig to 713-714; 
how it descended to Stlta 951; 
its sectarian role 1022 fn 3; the 



In^ 


1151 


effect of listening to 951-952; 
tradition of 6 

Garuda, son of Kasyapa and Vinata 
712; travels of—117 
Gauramukha, the sage 955 
Gauri 21 fn 5; shrine of 254 
Gautama, the propounder of the 
Nyaya system of philosophy 976 
Gaya, a famous city in Behar 1060; 
expanse of—Ksetra 253; glory of 
251 ff; §raddha 252; )§raddha at 
259 

Gayaditya, a shrine of 254 
Gayaksetra 256 
Gayakupa 257 
Gayaloka 254 
Gayasiras 253 
Gayasurasiras 265 
Gayatra (tirtha) 255 
Gayatri 47 fn 4, 121 fn 1 
Gayatri Kalpa 122 
Gayatri mantra 384, 831 fn 2 
Gayatri, mystical syllables prefixed 
to 867; shrine of 253; worship of 
119 

Gems, five 865; Bhi^mamani 243; 
Bloodstone 245; Coral 246; Crys¬ 
tal 246; Diamond 224; Emerald 
236; Karkctana 242; Lapis Lazuli 
240; Pearls 228; Pulaka 244; 
Kuby 232; Sapphire 238; Topaz 
242 

Ghafiyantra 732 

Ghost-afllicted person and the 
astrologer 829 

Ghost, curse of the 830; Gifts for 
861; rites for the redemption of a 
830; story of a 786; 

Ghosthood, causes of 832, 833, 835, 
837, 839, 841; due to 828; means 
of warding off 838; ways to ward 
off 861 

Ghosts, propitiation of 832; story of 
five—773; their conduct and be¬ 
haviour 837-839; thdir diet 837; 

' the way of life and their food 778 
Ghosts and the Br&hma^a 835 
Ghosts and their release 829 
Gifts 652 ff, 909; and virtues 935; 
benefits of 872; eight 737; for 
redeeming 867; for the benefit of 
860; for the sages and gods 867; 
merits of 801; on bestowing 867, 
872, 921 ff; process of making 
302 ff; results of 738-739, 845; 
ten 737; at the time of deaA 906; 
for the dead by his kinsman 895; 
of golden gi^elly seeds 865; 
of a TOlden jar 861; of a laiy^ tor 
the deceased 862; of vessels for 


the deceased 908; of wealth to 
brahma^ 907; to quell obstacles 
750; to get release from sin 750 
Gingelly seeds, efficacy of 865; to 
drive off ghosts 865 
Gita, essence of—704-707 
God, nature of 941 
Godavari 250; (r) 249, 1083 fn 
Godhead, Brahmi, Visnu, iSiva— 
the different aspects of the same 
870 

Gods and Goddesses, relative superi¬ 
ority of 970 
Gokarna 249 

Gold, Conversion of copper into 554 

Gomaka 254; shrine of 254 

Gomati 247 

Gomeda dvipa 884 

GopAla, worship of 97 

Gopati, shrine of 255 

Gopracara 260 

Gotra, defined and explained 291 
fn 1 

Govardhana 249; a mountain in 
Vrndavana 692 fn 2 
Govinda, etymological meaning of 
1086 

Graha-yaga, for attaining pros¬ 
perity 310-311 

Grammar, different aspects of 605 ff; 
case endings 605 ff; Compounds 
610; Krt suffixes 607; Sandhis 
608; Subantas and Tinhantas 
605 ff 

Grandson, importance of 864 
G|tlhrakuta 257 

Gfdhresvara 255; sacred to Dharma 
253 

Great Path 872 

Gross elements—mahabhutas 1035 
Gudhotpanna, a son 848 
Gujarat 897 

Gui;uu, their nature, imbalance and 
equilibrium 978; three 662 

H 

Hair, roots of 879 

Haihsa, an asura 1025 fn 13 

Haihsatirtha 254 

Hanuman 959 fn 3; a monkey chief 
1043; son of Atijan5 and Viyu 
965 fn 1 

Hari, significance of two letters 909; 

Worship of 282 
Harikfetra 910 
Hasdnapur 834 fn 2 
Havana —rites 40 fn 1 
Havyaa— offerings of sacrificial food- 
ituflb to the deities 258 



1152 


Garu^d Purdr^a 


Hayagiiva 42{fn 3; Worship of 114 
Heaven 909; description of 735, 
virtues that take the virtuous to 
736 

Heaven or hell, not a permanent 
abode 881 

Hell 849; description of 730; nature 
and chvision of 730; principal 
hells 730; names of 314 Pracipal: 
Aprati^tha 733; Asipatravana 732; 
Atiiita 733; Maharaurava 731; 
Nfkfntana 731; Raurava 730; 
Minor : Different —s for diffe* 
rent sins 733-734 
Hermitages 765-766 
Hidimba, an asura 1025 fn 2 
Him&Iayas 758, 884 
Hiranyagarbha 708 
Hiranyak$a, elder brother of Hira^- 
yalmiipu 1024 fn 8 
Hiranyakaiipu 1024 fn 7, 1087; stm 
of Kajyapa and Did and brother 
of Hiranykkfa 1037 
Holy Characteristics 621 
Homage, order of paying—^to deides 
and sages 957 
Householder, Dudes of a 622 
Human form, due to virtue 942 
Human life, full span of 841 
Hymn, Acyuta or Ghakradhara 690; 

Mftyvft^a 688 ff 
Hymn to Acyuta or Cakradhara 690 ff 
Hymn to Narasiihha 683 

1 

Ida 90 fh 7 

Idob, gifts of 1107; installadon of 
153; various—described 1106 flF 
Ilvala, an asura 1025 fn 8 
Impurity, due to a reladve’s death 
894; exempdons from 913; period 
of—^for different castes 9f3 ff; 
rules of 912 

Impurity rite prohibited for the 
decea^ in certain circumstances 
915 

Incamadon, purp>ose 990 
Incamadons 870; ten 870; of per- 
sonalides 1113 ff 

Individual and the universal soul 
703 

Indra, city of 896; hissin of Brahma- 
haty& 876 
Indraloka 911 
Indra-drtha 1105 
Inferno 849 
Intellect 16 fh 3 

Intellectual, two-fold character of 

1120ff 


Ir&vad 249 

Ut^purta 889 fn 2, 928, 1065 
Isvara, shrine of 253 
ISnara and Purufa 973 
Hvara-cintana 706 

J 

JSgrat, a state of consciousness, wake¬ 
fulness 709 
'aigi$ayya 1087 
aimini, Samavedin 661 
aladhenu 780 

ambavat, a forest king 1111 fn 2 
kmbavati, anecdote of 1075 ff; Her 
prayers to lord Vi?nu 1077; dau¬ 
ghter of Jambavat 1111 
Jambu dvipa—^an island with Mem 
at the centre, including Bharata 
884 

Janardana 143 fn 3; 

Jan^dana (a mountain) 253 
Janugartaka 259 
Jahgama, a King 815 
Japa, repeddon of a mantra 699; 

rites of 835 
Jar, made of gold 861 
Jarisandha, King of Magadha 1024 
fn 2 

Jatakannan 749; rite of 749 
Jaya 1097 ; holy Purana Gamda 117 
Jaya-Vijaya, attendants of Visnu 98 
ina 4 fn 6 

iva, marks of—going to be released 
967; (p>ersonal self) 709 
Jh&na-yajfta—sacrifice of know¬ 

ledge 705 

Junctures, three 870 
K 

Kadru, mother of Nagas 712 
Kaikeyi 1064 

Kailaia 8 fo 1; the mountain 867, 
884 

Kakajahghi 255 

Kala, the part played by—^in r^ard 
to human life 726 
K&lakeya, a number of stsuras on the 
side of Asura V^tra 1026 
Kklahjara 249 
Kklasarpi 248 
KklasOtra, a hell 263 
K&le^vara, shrine of 253 
Kali 6 in 4, Omit meamadon in the 
Footnote 

Kali 849; his paraphernalia 1128; 

hit consort 1129 
Kali Age 826, 841 fn 3 
K&lindl, dau^ter of Vivasvat 1067; 




Index 


1153 


her penance to obtain Kry^a as 
her husband 1067; episode 1067 ff 
Kaliya, a Niga king 692 
Kalki 6 fn 7; incarnation of Visnu 
1038 

Kalpa 16 fn 2; a day of Brahmi 968 
Kalpas, seven 922 
Kamadeva 94 
Kamakhya 249 
Kamarupa (Assam) 249 
Kamatirtha 248 

Kamsa, Son of Ugrasena 1024 fn 4 
Kanada Kanabhuja, Kanabhaksa 
976 fn 4 ■ 

Kanaka (r) 254 
Kanakarka, shrine of 253 
Kanakhala 250, 260 
Kahci 248 fn 1, 909; Conjeeveram 
1060 fn 5 

Kanina, a son 848—^fn 1 
Kapila 3 fn 4; a mountain 1111 fn 1 
Kapila 258; (a river) 1083 fn 10 
Kapila, an authority on Sankhya 
1036 

Karkotaka 28 fn 2 
Karma-yoga 762 

Karman, noose of 767; of previous 
life fructifying in this life 1066 
Karmendriyas, Organs of activity 
1035 

Karna, son of Kunti, born before she 
was married to Pandu 212 fn 1 
Karttika 897 
Karttikcya 248 
Kasi 909 

Kasyap>a 2 fn 3, 842 fn 1; hermitage 
of 950 

Katodaka-kriyi 748 
Katyayana 605, 611 
Katyayani 42 fn 4 
Kausika 256-257 
Kaustubha 30 fn 1 
K^veri (r) 248,249, 1060 
Kavyas, offerings of rice-ball to 
thb manes 258; 1062 
Kedara, shrine of 253 
KedarasaKed^anath 247 fn 3 
Kesava, etymological meaning of 
1085; ai Siva 247 
Keii, an asura 1025 fn 11 
Keiin 691 fn 2 

Kicaka, brother-in-law of the King 
of Matsyas 1025 
Kikata 6 fn 5, 252 
Kikata—^Bihar 1038 & 5 
Knowledg^e,—of aham and Brahma. 70 
Knowlec^, as the means of release 
700; S&stras and Vedas not the 
means of true 948; imparting of— 


to the unworthy 930; two-fold 
948; and detachment (jAina and 
Vair&gya) 702; of Reahty 949 
KokAmidcha (drtha) 248 
Konagiri 250 
Kosala 225 fn 3 
Kofias of the physical body 878 
Kotiivara, shrine of 254 
Kodtlrtha 254, 257 
KrauAca, a city on Yama’s way 757 
KrauAca dvipa 884 
KrauAcapAda 256-257 
KrauAcutd 274 

KravyAda—the meat-devouring fire- 
god; a messenger of Yama 809 
Kfcchra 706, 838 fn 2 
Krcchra Gandrayai^a 1065 fn 2; 
Tapta-Kfcchra and S^tapana 
Details of 748 
Krpa 1098 fn 2 
KrporkA 1083 

Krfoa 249; (r) 1083; a full incarna¬ 
tion of.Visiju 1038 fn 4; as Yogi- 
jvara 955 fn 4; image of 915; 
Incarnation of 416; significance of 
letters 909 

Krymtsara, a symbol of Dharma 796 
Krybii—^Venika, mod. Krypa and 
Veniii 766 

Kfttrima, a son 848 fn 1 
Krurapura, a city in Yama’s way 
757 

Kyetraja, a son 848 
Kyetrapila 34 fn 1 
KubjAmraka 248 
Kulamfta or JAAnAmrta 686 ff 
Kulaparvatas 185 See fns on this 
page 

Kumaras-Kirttikeya 2 fn 7 
KumaradhArA 258 
Kumari-tirtha 1110 fn 1 
Kumbhadtama, brother of Riva^a 
1026 

Kumbhinda, minister of Asura Biiivt 
1026 

Kumbhipaka 264; a hell 808 
Kunti, mother of YuddhiytUra 834 
fh 2 

Kupa (WeU) 255, 260 
KApirtiaka, an asura 1026 
KAnna 10% fn 1 

Kurukyetra 218 fn 2, 247, 259, 897, 
910 

Kurus 186 fn 10 
Kuia, son of Sita 1114 fn 2 
Kufo-dvipa 884 
Kula-grasst as death-bed 866 
KuiAvarta 250 



1154 


L 

Lak^ana (indicatory process) 708 
Lak^mana, marriage of 1070 ff; 

Defects of 1072 flf 
Lakfmi 901; as a cow 872; as Prakrti 
974; as the principal goddess in 
the Garuda Purana 964; Consort 
of Vi^nu 718; (=Prakrti) their 
union not without purpose 974; 
worship of 34 

Lak$mipati=Lord of Laksmi, an 
epithet of Visnu 1086 
Lamp, burning of—^for the deceased 
756; giA of 872 
Lekhaka, a ghost 775, 836 
Lelih&na 259 

Liberation, concept of 724; state of— 
1022 fn 4 

Life, after Death 823; at Dharma- 
rSja’s abode 888; Origin of 875 
Life or Death as a result of action 885 
Lihga, worship of 912 
Lokas fourteen 719 
Lomasa, a sage 765, 770 
Lord and Universe, their fulness 972 
Lunar dynasty 834 

M 

Madhava, etymological meaning of 
1086 

Madhava-tirtha 1101 
Madhu and Kaifabha 691 fn 1, 
1024 fn 

Madhuparka 764 
Mahakila, at Ujjayini 766 

M4gha=January-February 133 fn 3 
Mahabhirata, story of 417 
Mahacandi, shrine of 254 
Mahahrada 257 
MahShasa, an asura 1025 
MahakSla 88 fn 2; a temple 218 fn 
4; in Ujjain 248 
Mah&kesi 248 
MahlUcofi 258 

Maha]ak$mi 250; Incarnations of 
1039 ff 

Mahimuni, Yajurvedin 661 
Mah&nadi 255; (r) 259 
Mahat (intellect) distinguished from 
Manas (Mind) 979 fn 1; the great 
principle intellect 718 
Mah&v&kya, aham brahm&smi 708 
Mahftvy&nfds 121 fn 1 
Mahendra 249 
Mahefvara, worship of 129 
Mahetfvari (r) 257 
Mahefvail worship 129 


Garuia Purana 

Mahidasa, a teacher of Paiicaratra 
system 1036 
Mahi^mati 249 

Mahodaya, a city 856; mod. Kan- 
nauj 766 
Maholka 1089 
Mainaka 21 fn 4 
Manana (deliberation) 702 
Manasa 250; holy lake of 910; sons 
of Brahma 17 
Mandapa = Lak smi 1083 
Mandara, a mountain 5 fn 1; 248; 
884; 1037 

Mandehas (wicked spirits) 625 
Mahgala, shrine of 255 
Maniman, an asura 1024 fn 9 
Manthara 1023 fn 3 ff. 

Mantra for arousing love 544; arrest¬ 
ing rapid discharge of semen 
544; for begetting a male child 
545; for captivating a lover 544; 
for captivating men in general 
544; for control of wife 544; for 
fiilfllling a wish 541; for removing 
the poison of a scorpion 550-551; 
of eight syllables 871; of Gana- 
pati for wealth and learning 556; 
of Ganapati for various purposes 
556; of Ganapati for subjugating 
women of twelve syllables 871; to 
obtain women 132; 

Mantras 12 fn 1 

Manu 20 fn 4, 913, 927; Svayam- 
bhuva fn 2, 4, 1029 fn 3; Vaivas- 
vata 4 fn 11, 1003 fn 1 
Manus, fourteen 987 fn 3; their 
progeny 268-272 

Margas, of JAana, Yoga, Karma and 
Bhakti 758 
Marica 951 
Marlci 27 fn 3 
Marjana 87 fn 3 
Markandeya 20 fn 5 
Markande^vara, Shrine of 254 
Marriage, types of 292 
Matanga (holy pond) 255. 258, 260; 

(region) 256; a Janapada225 fn 1 
Mathana 259 
Mathura 248, 771, 909 
Matrgana (female energies of Gods) 
683 fn 2 

MaunSditya, shrine of 253 
MauAji, a girdle of MuAja g;rass 846 
MAy& (Tripura) 702; defined 90fn 
6 ; synonymous with Prakrti 974 
Maya (r) 256 

Maya 909; bom of ignorance 704 
withdrawal of 704; 

Mayinaimi^a 247 

Means of realizing the self 948 



Index 


1155 


Meditation 42; On Visnu 707 
Mekala 245 fn 2 

Men and women, auspicious names 
of 1096 

Meru, a mountain 884, 1046 
Merudevi 4 
Mind, its control 767 
Mbcry, the root cause of 668; three¬ 
fold 868; types of 664 
Mitravinda 1064; Svayarhvara of 
1067 

Mlccchas and Dumbas 795 
Mohadan(^a 248 

Mohini 5 fn 3; Vi?nu disguised as 
1037 

Mok sa (liberation) 941 
Mudras 37fn 2 
Mughals 864 
Muhalia, a place 1095 
Mulaksetra 257 

Mundaprsjha 253-255, 257, 260 
Mura, an asura 971 

N 

Nabhi 4; Father of Rsabha and the 
grandfather of Bharata 1036 
Nabhitirlha 254 
Nagadri 256 

Nagas, splitting of their tongue 712 
Nagendrabhavana, a city in Yama’s 
way 757 

Naimisa or Naimisa 915; a holy 
place on tlic river Goniati 1 fn 1, 
897; 955 fn 6 
Nala, father of Bhadra 1064 
Namaskara (Obeisance) 835 
Namuci, an asura 1025 
Nana-krandpura, a city on Yama’s 
way 757 
Nanda 1088 

Nanda (river) 1108; Efficacy of 
1109 

Nandana—a divine park 782 
Nandana, a garden in Paradise 782 
Nandi, bull of Siva 88 fn 1 
NAndimukha 852 fn 1, 920 
Nandilirtha 249 
Nara 117; (tirtha) 255 
Nara-N§r5yana 3 fn 3 
Narada 3 fn 1, 767 
NdrAyana 32, 117, 247, 860; aus¬ 
picious marks of 1071; an epithet 
of Visnu 977 fn 1; etymological 
meaning of 1085-86; Bali 744, 
753, 831 fn 3; rite 860; rite, des¬ 
cription of 859 

Narmada 249, 910; (r) 1083 fn 4 

NAsikya 249 

Nerves, principal—879 


Nidhis (ei^t) 181 fn 1; special 
charactenstics of 181 
Nigraha, flow in argument 946 fn 2 
Nila, Episode of 1056 
Nila parvata 250 
Nimba, a tree with bitter fruits 810 
Nine pores or Nine doors 998 fn 2; 

1059 fn 1 
Ni$ada 712 

Ni^adha, a mountain 884 
Niscira 256; (r) 258 
Niyama, types of 669 
Niyoga 326 fn 1 

Nrsirhha—Narasimha (Man-lion) 

4 fn 4, 1037 fn 5 
Nyasa 32 fn 1, 871 fn 1 
Nyasa—touching parts of the body 871 

O 

Objects, consist of particles 975 
Objects of worldly existence 770 
Obscqual rites, impK>rtance of 869; 

preliminaries to 913 
Obsequies, persons authorised to 
perform 779; the funeral riles of 
the deceased 739 ff 
Orh 9 fn 5; explained 710 
Ohkara 700 
Orbs, mystical 12 fn 3 
Organs of action 984 fn 2; of activity 
879; of intellect 984 fn 2; of sense, 
eleven in number 984 fn 3 

P 

Pada, eight kinds of 737 
Padadana, 804, 854 fn 
Padmanubha 142 fn I 
Padmasana, a posture in meditation 
92 

Paila, Rgvedin 661 
Paka, an asura 1025 
Palaces, characteristics of 150 
Paheagavya 658, 749 
Pahcajanya 42 fn 1 
Paheaka, five constellations from 
Dhanistha to Revati 749; inauspi- 
ciousness of 902 

PaAcaka days, cremation or water- 
libation prohibited on 902 
Paflcalas 186 fn 9 
Paflcatattva, worship of 108 fn 1 
Pandu—father of Yudhifthira 834 
Pandu, son of Vicitravirya and 
brother of Dhrtaraftra 341 
P&ndu Mli 250 
Parabrahma 948 
ParamAttu defined 976 fn 2 
Param&tman, taking all forms 700 



1156 


Garuda Pur ana 


Paraiara 5 fn 9, 323 fn 1; a sage 
770; teachings of 323 ff 
Parasurdma 5 fn 7; an incarnation of 
Vi|i?u 1037 fn 28; son of Jama- 
dagni 1021 
Parivedana 326 fn 2 
Parjanya, a deity of rains 146 fn 3; 

explained 1127, 1128 
Particle, ultimate indivisible 976 
P&rvana 849 fn 2; iraddha 848, 
849 fn 2 
Paryuk^qa 920 
Paryufita, a ghost 775, 836 
Pa^upata tirtha 248 
Patrasadana 920 
Pauganda 846 
Paupdt^ 225 
Paurika, a King 1026 
Pavitra-pratipatti 920 
Payo?ni 249; mod. Puma 766 
Payovar^ana, a city in Yama’s way 
757 

Penance, a way of self-reflection or 
repentance 1067; Prajapatya 658; 
Krcchra 659; J Mahasantapana 
659; Taptakfcchra 659; Paraka 
659 

Personal soul, ,5izc of 847 fn 1 
Personalities, unfolding the secret 
of some—1129-1130 
Phalgu, a river 180 fn 1; (r) on 
which Gaya stands 1083 fn 8 
Phalgucandl 254 
Phalgu-tirtha 253-254, 260 
Phalgvm, shrine of 254 
Physiogonomy 203-217 
Pilgrimage 909; seven places of 950; 

visit to places of 1108 
Pii>da 256, 928 
Pinda-palana, a rite of 753 
Pii^da-prascka, a rite for the deceas¬ 
ed 752, 850 

PiOQla-prave^, a rite performed on 
the anniversary of death 850 
Pinda-rite 833 
Pinda-vidhi 741 

Pingall 90 fn 8; a writer on prosody 
615-616, 618 
Pisacas 835 
Pi^taka 920 
Pitrloka 850 fn 2 
Pitr-tirtha 762 

Pitrs (manes) 17; three groups 987 
fn 2 

Planets, descriptions of 191 
Poison, mantras for removing 81 
Potter’s wheel 881 
PrabhSsa 205, 247, 254, 910 
Pracaoda 1088 

Pradhfina, principle of nature 700; 


source ol the world 718 
Praavumna, son of 8rikr$na 693 fn 1 
Prahlada 1087 ' • 

PrSjapatya 19 fn 2; penance 658 
Prakrii (Primordial nature) defined 
975, 978 fn 1; or Pradhana 977 . 
fn 2 

Pralaya (dissolution of the universe) 
14 fn 1; the final deluge 854 
Pramloca 262 
Prana 707 
Pranava 626 

Pranayama 669; details of 698 ff; 
types of 77 fn 1 

Pranita (r) 250; parimoksana 920 
Pratibimba (reflection) 966 
Pratyahara 707; (withdrawal of 
mind from the sensual objects) 
670;—diversion of sense-organs 
from the objects 699 
Pravaha 985 fn 5; (son of Vayu), 
designation explained 1117 
Prayaga 247; a meeting place of 
Gahg.a and Yamuna 177; a place 
of pilgrimage near Allahabad 1060 
Prayascitta 920; defined 1067 
Preta-do^a, bad intention of the 
ghost; 825 ff 829; events indica¬ 
tive of 829 

Preta-ghata, an earthen jar 860 fn 1 
Pretahood, redemption from 832 
Preta-pinda (an offering to the 
mane) 751 

Pretaraja, King of ghosts 836 
Pretasauca, obsequies and impurity 
on the death of persons 320 
Pretasila 263; sections of 265 
Priesthood and idol-worship as tar¬ 
gets of criticism 9,31 
Progenitors, creation of 19 
Progeny, of Kasyapa and Vinat4 
819 

Prohibition 1021 ff 
Prosody, Acala-dhrti 613; Akrti 617; 
Amttadhara 619, Anahga-krida 
614; Anu5tup 615; Aparajita-616; 
Aparavaktra 618; Apavaha 618; 
Apida 619; Arsabha 619; Arya 
612; Aryagiti 613; Asambadha 
616; A?ti 616; Aiva-Ialita 617; 
Atidhrd 617; Atikfti 617; Ati- 
sarkari, Atisakvarl 616; Atyas^i 
617; Aupach^dasika 613; 618; 

BSlalalita—GSyatri 614; Bhadraka 
617; Bhadravir&t 618; Bhujanga- 
pra^ta 616; Bhujanga-Vijrm- 
bhita 617; Brhad ^5; Bhramara- 
Vilasita 615; Gaitdavr^tipata 



Index 


1157 


618; Candravartma 615; Can- 
drika 616; Gapala-vaktr& 613; 
Caruhasini 613, Gitra 613; Citra- 
lekha 616; Chitrapada 614; Dak- 
^inantika 613; Dandaka 618; 
Dhi-ti 617; Do^aka 615; Druta* 
madhya 618; Druta-vilambita 
615; Ela-616; Ganas 611; Gatha 
619; Giti 612; Halamukhi 615; 
Haitisaruta 614; Indravajra 615; 
Indravaihsa 615; Induvadana 
614; Jaladharamala 616; Jalod- 
dhatagati 615; Kalika 619; 
Kanya prati^tha 614; Ketumati 
610; Khanja G14; Kokilaka 617; 
Krauficapada 617; Krti 617; 
Ksama 616; Kusuma-vicitra 615; 
Kusumitalata 617; Lalita 616; 
619; Lavali 619; Madalekha 614; 
Maghyi 614; Malini 616; Mana- 
vaka 614: Mandakranta 617; 
Manigunatiikara 610; Manimala 
616; Manjubhasini 616; Matta- 
mayura 0l6; Manjusarini 615; 
Manoram.’i 615; Matra-sama 613; 
Matta-krida 619; Ma-vipula 613; 
Meghavisphilrjita 617, Mrgi 614; 
Muditavadana 615; Mukha- 
capala 612; Nari 614; Narttaka- 
taka 617; Nasi,a 620; Padaca- 
turdhva 619; Padakulaka 613; 
Panava 615; Pankti 615; Pankti- 
supratistha 614; Pathya 612; 
Pathya-vaktra 613; Prabhadraka 
616 Pracyavrtti 613; Praharana- 
kalika 616; Praharsini 616; Pra- 
kfti 617; Prama^ika 615; Pramita- 
k^ar^ 616; Prastara 620; Priyam- 
vada 616; Prav^ttaka 613; Prthvi 
617; Puspitagra 618; Pufa 615; 
Rathoddhata 615; Rucii^ 614, 
616; Rukmavati 615; Sajaghana 
612; Samanika 615; Sankiti 617; 
Oardula-vikridita 617; Oarkari 
(Oakvari) 616; Oasikala 616; Sau- 
rabhaka 619; Sikha 614; Siriihon- 
nata 616; iSisubhfti 615, Samu- 
drika 615; Sragdhara 617; Srag- 
vini 615; Sri 615; Sri Uktha 614, 
Sruk 616; Stri Atyuktha 614; 
Sukeiara 616; Suddhavirit 619; 
Sukha^dita 615; Sikhariid 617; 
Sunandini 616; Suvadank 617; 
Svagata 615; Syeniki 615; Tanu— 
madhya 6l4; Tanvi 617; Ta- 
Vipulk 613; Totaka 615; Tri^tup 
615; Uddisfa 620; Udgata 619; 
Udgiti 612; Udicyavrtti 613; 
Uijvala 616; Upacitraka 618; 
Upagid 612; Upaj4ti 615; Upas- 


thita 615; Upasthitapracupita 
619; Upendravajru 615; 

614; Utki-d 617; Vaitkliya 613; 
618; Vaktra 613; Va^^ini 616; 
V aiii sapatra-padta 617; Vaih- 
:iastha 615; Vanavasika 613; VSn- 
mati 618; Vasanta-dlaka 616; 
Vatormi 615; Vegavati 618, Vi- 
dyunmala 614; Vikrd 617; Vi- 
sloka 613; Viparit§khyanaka 618 
Vrsabha-Gaja-jrmbhita 616; Vi- 
pula 612, 613; Virajita 615; 

Visesa 619; Vrtta 615; 

Protection boats 725 
Prthu 4 fn 9 

Pulastya, a sage 1002 fn 1 
Pum, a hell 1098 
Puihsavana 287 
Pundarika (Visnuloka) 257 
Pundarikaksa 915 
Pundravardhanaka 249 
Punyaha mantras 157 fn 4, 749 
Purana, number of 661; people 
authorised to hear 711; people not 
authorised to hear 711; procedure 
of reciting 957; the sectarian 
character of 1117 ff; topics of 661; 
Puranas, classification of 955, 690 
fn 1; division into sattvika, rajasa 
and tamasa 962; merit accruing 
from 962; more valuable than the 
Vedas 962; 

Purascarana, a rite preparatory to 
another rite 830 fn 2 
Purification by atonement 736; kinds 
of 623 

PurnShuti 40 fn 2 
Pururava and Adrava 649 ff 
Puru^a 15 fn 1; as cit (consciousness) 
702; (soul) as a passive looker- 
on 718 

PuruSdsukta 882-883, 915 
Puryasfaka 698 

Puskara 247, 779, 790, 910, 915; 
a town 218 fn 1; or Puskala 1130 
fn 1; son of Varuoa 282 
Pu$kara dvipa 884 
Puspabhadra, a river 757 
Puspadanta, an attendant of Siva 147 
Putana 148 fn 2 
Putra, defined 832 fn 1 

Q 

Queries about the funeral procedure 
862 

Queries of Garuda 117-122 
R 

Races of Bh&rata 186 




1158 


Garuia Purina 


Radha 100 
Riuvata, a king 1113 
Rajagrha 252 
Rajas 16 fn 1 
Rajasuya 260 
Rak$asa 10 fn 2 

Rama 5 fn 10, 790; (Das'arathi) 
1038; story of 413 
Ramagiri 247 
Ramahrada 255 
Ramana, a mountain 884 
Ramatirtha 255, 258 
Ramesvaram 179 fn 3, 248; 1022 fn 1 
Ranganatha, a tulelary deity 1060 
Rati, wife of Kamadeva 94, 984 fn 5, 
990 fn 3 

Raudra, a city on Yama’s way 757 
Raurava, a hell 263 
Ravipdda 257 
Rbhus 987 fn 1 
Rddhi and Vrddhi 919 
Rajasvala, rites at the death of 749 
Release, method of 6nal—^941; way 
to 942 

Reality devoid of dvaita and advaita 
948 

Reality, unfolding the mystery and 
secret of 1126 ff 

Realization of the self as identical 
with the Supreme self 704 
Rabirth 665-668, 870; causes of 885; 
from heaven to earth 870; rites to 
ward off 845 
Re-incamation 1067 
Release, places that grant—950; 

way to 950 
Religious rites 837 
Religious rites, adjournment of 832 
Renuka, a goddess of low status 
1118 fn 1 

Results of good and bad actions 730 
Reva Narmada river 1060 fn 9 
Revati 1112 fn 1 
Rice-balls, eleven 916 
Rikta, tithi 894 

Rites after death 846; daily 630-633; 
obsequial 798 ff; obsequial—for 
the sinner 924; post-death 750 

Rivers, nam^s of auspicious 1095 
Rodha, a ghost 775 
Rohini 1112 fn 2; wife of Vasudeva, 
mother of Rohini 1050 
Rohita, a ghost 836 
Rta 9 fn 4 

Ruci 4 fn 6; an elderly sage, a story 
of 272; on wedlock, etc. 273-282 
Rudra 959, 986; incarnations of 
1049; progenitor of the Bhargava 
race 20 fn 2; shrine of 253 


Rudra-loka, region of §iva 867 
Rukmini, wife of Kr^na 692 fn 1 

S 

Sabda Brahman 948 
Saci, daughter of Puloman and wife 
of Indra 984 fn 4 
Sacraments, Annaprasana 288; Cu- 
dakarai;ia 288; Garbhadhana 287; 
Investiture 2M; Jatakarman 287; 
Namakarana 288; Ni^krama 288; 
Prasava 257; Puihsavana 287; 
Simanta 287 
Sacred places 247 ff 
Sacred rites 838 fn 1 
Sacred thread 866; merits of—724 
Sacrihee, rules of 625 
l^adahga (mantras) 

Sages, Council of 956; in the Naimisa 
forest 956; their queries to Suta 
957 

Sagotra (direct relation) 752 
Sahasrolka 1089-1090 
Sahodha, a son 848 fn I 
Sailagama, a city in Yama’s way 757 
Saitava, a writer on Prosody 613 
^akadvipa 884 
l^akamedha, a sacrihee 297 
Saktis, eight or nine 93 fn 3 
Salagrama 248, 910; a stone emblem 
of Vi 9 nu 1059; Characterbtics of 
142; size of the idol, etc. 1104 
Salagrama stone 141 fn 1, 882 
Salmali dvipa 884 
Salt, as the destroyer of sins 725; 
gift of 867; other merits of 725; 
gift of 867; importance of 867; 
origin of 867; produced from the 
body of Visnu 737 
Salva, friend of Sisupala 1025 
Salvation, dehned 701, 909; six holy 
things, leading to 866; six steps 
to 725; way of 910 
Samadhi 707; fixation of the mind in 
Brahman 699; meditation 670 
Samans 9 fn 1 

Sambara, a leader of Asuras 1024 
fn 12; an asura 693 
.^ambhala-Sambala 247 
Sarhkarsana 9 fn 3: Balarama 1035 
SampHta 860; rite 860 
Samsrava—pr'isana 920 
Sarhvartaka or Sarhvarta 259, 807 
Sandhya, detaib of 639 
Sanat kum&ra—A mental son of 
BrahmS 1035 
l§auca (purification) 7C(p 
Sandhya, prayers 120 fit 1, 625 




Index 


1159 


Sangrhitr, a son 849 
Sankalpa, a vow to perform an 
observance 868; rite of 868 fn I 
Sankha 28 fn 1 
Sinkbya 3 fn 6 

Sankhyakarika, of Isvarakrsna on 
evolution of Tattvas 983 fn 2 
Sannyasa, the benefits of—as a 
means of release 905 
l^antanu, father of Bhisma 834 fn 1 
Santapana, a Brahmana 772 
Santaptaka, a brahmana, story of 
834 

S&ntikapaustika 750 
Santosa (Contentment) 706 
Sapindana, rite of 721 fn 2 
Sapindikarana 649, 753 fn 2, 787 fn 
1, 850 fn 1, 898; essentiality of 
851; and Sraddha 900; Results 
of—901 

Saptagodavara 250 
Sapta-rsis (seven sages) 21 
Saptasarasvata 247 
Sarasvata (tirtha) 255 
Sarasvati 30 fn 3, 117, 121 fn 4, 
179 fn 1, 247, 253; (r) 1083 fn 2; 
daughter of Brahma, later on 
became his wife 969; Goddess of 
learning 98 fn 4 
Sarayu (r) 1083 fn 7 
Sarga (creation) a chart 17; Anu- 
graha 17; Arvaksrotas 17; Bhuta 
16; Kumara 17; Mahat 16 fn 3; 
Mukhya 16; Prakrta 17; Urdhva- 
srotas 17; Vaikrta 17; Vaikarika 
16 

Sarmisfha 27 fn 2 
Sastras—sacred books 841 fn 1 
Satadhanvan, a Yadava King 1026 
fn 10 

Sataraka, mod. Satara 766 
Sati, wife of Siva 20 fn 1; custom as 
optional 911 fn 1; custom of— 
endorsed 813 

Satvata, a family of Yadav'a race 
976 fn 3 

Satvata Tantra = Narada-Samhita 
3 fn 2 

Satya or Brahma 884 
Satyavati 5 fn 8; Matsyagandha, 
mother of Vyasa by Parasara, also 
wife of Santanu king of Hastina’ 
pur 1038 fn 5 

Saunaka 1 fn 3, 955; and Naimifa- 
dwelling sages 957 
Sauripura, a city in Yama’s way 757 
Sauvira 225 fn 4 

SSvitri 626 fn 1, 901; shrine of 233 

Savitra-tirtha 253*256 

Self, p>ersonal and universal 949; 


Reality of 947; Supreme form of 
768; analogy of Reflected and 
Reflection 967; and Supreme self 
distinguished 967; as friend 895; 
as Sambhu 896; as the kinsman 
or the enemy 895 fn 1 
Self-immolation (Sati) 896 
Self-immolation of women 896 
Self-realization, too much effort for— 
harmful 972 

Sense-organs 835; and their victims 
359 fn 1, 797 

Serpent gods, worship of 385 
Servants 342 ff 

Sc.^a 27 fn 5; (a mountain) 1084; 

the serpent chief 965 fn 2 
Sesa or Adisesa 984 fn 1 
Sesame, merits of 724 
Setubandha 248; a bridge upon the 
sea 179 fn 2 
Sex relations 543-545 
Sexual intercourse, auspicious night 
for 877; different nights for beget¬ 
ting sons or daughters 876 
Siddhas 260, 956 fn 2; hermitage 
of 957 

Siddhesa, shrine of 254 
Siddhi 74 fn 2 
Sighra, a ghost 775 
Sighraga, a ghost 836 
Silas, gifts of sacred 1105 
Sin, as the cause of death 845; diffe¬ 
rent forms in the next birth due to 
different sins 729; different 
diseases due to different sins com¬ 
mitted previously 729; how it 
spreads 727 

Sinners, characteristics of—^in the 
next birth 727 

Sins, characteristic traits of—in Re¬ 
birth 929; major and minor 314ff 
process of atonement 315 ff 
Sins and Vaitarani 932 
Sins of omission and commission 
841 

Soul’s lament 937 
Sis'upala 683 fn 1, 1097; attaining 
salvation 701 
Sita 790; story of 410 
Sitadhya, a city in Yama’s way-757 
Sitarama, a holy idol 1105 
Siva, eight inferior forms 94 fn 1; 
five faces of 83 fn -1; worship of 
84, 85, 89; worship of Paflcaratra 
83 

Six parts of the body 35 
Six subsidiary tractors related to the 
Vedas 45 fn 1 
Six-syllabled mantra 699 
Snake, idol of—as a gift 926 



1160 


Garuia Purdna 


Snake-bite, mantras to cure 97; 

remedy for 78 
Snakes, list of eight—78 
So^asi 752; middle—753; third—753 
Soma 131 fn 11 
Somaktui<^ 259 
Somapada 257 
Somapa 258 
Somatirtha 255 

Son as the saviour of his father 890 
fn 2, cremation rites to be perform¬ 
ed by—865; importance of 864 
fn 2; necessary for the parents’ 
salvation 864; need of a —to the 
parents 723; nine types of 849; 
saves parents from hell 805; san- 
gihitr 849 
Sona (r) 248 
Sonanada 259 
Sons, kinds of 848 fn 1 
Soul, after death 825; individual 
and supreme 1023; individual and 
supreme—identical as the base 
975; knowledge of 701; position 
of—after death 950 
Souls, individual and supreme— 
contradictory in nature 975 
Species, four 875; number of 942 
Sraddha, Amavasya !§raddha 898; 
anvastakya 898; Atithi—648; At 
Gaya 869; different kinds of 870; 
Eighteen prohibitions in—903; 
Ekodisfa 648, fifty—enjoined 903- 
904; for eleven deities 917 ff; 
fruit accruing from the perform¬ 
ance of 779 ff—in one’s life-time 
780 ff; gratifying nature of 787; 
imperative necessity of 870; kinds 
of 858; King authorised to per¬ 
form—for the issueless deceased 
782; mantras for pii^d^ in eleven 
^raddhas 916; mode of annual 
926; Nandimukha 648; Nava— 
924; Navaka 892; Nitya—647; 
Nitya, daiva and Vrddha 928; 
Parvana 926; for Preta 858; On 
performing 923; Procedure of 
640-647; sixteen 924; sixteen— 
enumerated 903, Three modes of 
reckoning sixteen sr^ddhas 903; 
YSjnavalkya on 304 ff. 

Sravana, glory of 818; (Listening to 
noble tenets) 702 
Srilva^= July-August 133 fn 2 
Sri 20 fn 3 

8 ridhara, at Kannauj 248; worship 
of 101 

Sriniv^, praise of 1085; prescribed 
way of worshipping 1089—1090 
l§riparvata 103 fn 5 


!§ripurusottama 249 
Sriranga 250 

Srisaila, §ri-parvata 910; a moun¬ 
tain in South India 766; 1099; 
a hill to the South of KrsnS river 
1061 

Srisailam 248 fn 2 
Srivatsa 42 fn 2; a mark on lord 
Visnu’s chest 1078 fn 1 
Stages, four 958 fn 2 
States of consciousness 698 
Steya (theft) 706 

Subjugation 541; for captivating 
any person 550; 547 for captivating 
a woman 547; of a man by a 
woman 543; (general) 543; of 
one's own husband 543 
Subrahmanya 259 
Sucimukha, a ghost 775, 836 
Sudarsana, worship of 112 
Sugriva 147 fn 3 
Suita, the son of Vyasa 711 
Sukratirtha 249 
Sumantu, Atharvavedin 661 
Sun, chariot of 193; his passage, north 
and south of equator 897; wor¬ 
ship of 29, 72, 74, 126 
Sunanda 1088 
Supratika 712 

Supreme lord, the cause of his anger 
971 

Supreme self, how to achieve 768 
Surewari 250 
Sufruta 421 fn 1 

Susupta, a state of consciousness, 
sound sleep 709 

Suta, slaughter of—at Kuruksetra 

1109 fn 3; and Vaisampayana, 
versed in the Puranic lore 661 

Sutapta-bhavana, a city in Yama’s 
way 757 

Sutas in the Puranika age 1 fn 1 
Svadha 22 fn 2 
Svadhakara 928 
Svadhyaya 706 
Svaha 22 fn 1 

Svami—Puskarini 1091, 1096, 1103, 

1110 

SvimiUrtha 248 

Svapna, a state of consciousness, 
dream 709 

Svapusta (tirtha) 255 
Svarga-dvaresvara, shrine of 254 
Svarnak$a 249 

Svarodaya or Pavanavijaya 220 
Svasti mantras 259 fn 1 » 
Svetadvipa 10 fn 3, 247, 1040 fn 1 
SvetadvipilasLakfmi 1083 



Index 


1161 


T 

Takfaka 27 fn 7 

Tamas 17 

Tamraparni 187 

Tapi (r) 250; mod. Tapti 766 

TarS, wtfe of Bfhaspati 1029 fn 2; 

and the Moon 1109 fn 2 
Taraka, a mantra 763; an asura 
1024 fn 11 

Tark^ya, an epithet of Garu(;la 830 
Tarpana (propitiation of gods and 
manes) 87 fn 1; 636-638; Gin- 
gelly seeds in 866 
Tattvas, evolution of 983 fn 1 
Tat twam asi explained 710 
Teeth, thirty two in number 879; 
twigs for cleansing 624; for giving 
lustre to 549; for reddening 546 
Tilaka (a mark on the forehead) 
for satisfying women 557; for sub¬ 
jugating f>eople 557; for subjugat¬ 
ing women 556-557. 

Time (Kala) 15 fn 2 
Times (three) 870 
Tirtha 765 

Tonsure ceremony 846 fn 1 
Towns, auspicious, names of 1095 
Trailokya-mohini 100 fn 1. 

Trikuta (m) 346 fn 1 
Trinity—Brahma, Vi?nu, Siva and 
their roles 965 

Tripura, £ulogy of 584; three cities 
1051 fn 1; worship of 93 
Tririk, an asura 1026 
Trivarga 770 

TroSvarta, an asura 1025 fn 12 

Trtiya 256 

Truth, ultimate 947 

Tulasi leaves 882 

Tulasi plant 910 

Tumburu (a river) and a sage 1110 
fn 5 

Tuhgabhadra (r) 

Turuska tree 236 fn 1 

U 

Udakumbha, a rite 844 fn 1, 855 
Ulka 1089 
Uma 901 

Universe, creation of 972; defined 
709; variations caused by diffe¬ 
rence in Gunas 972 
Upani^ads 8 fn 2 

Upapuranas, eighteen 661, 961 fh 1 
Upendra 143 fn 4 
Urdhva-pupdra, a mark on the 
foreheM 1034 


Urukrama 4 
Utkranti-sraddha 908 
Uttanapada, his family 23 
Uttaramanasa 255, 259 

V 

Vahni-tirtha 1105 
Vaideha, a city 763 
Vaikuntha 865, 1100; or Vaibhra 
1002; a description of 117 
Vainayaka 247 

Vaisnava 12 fn 5; (tirtha) 255 
Vaifvaoa Kavaca fur removing all 
ailments 574 

Vaisnava Philosophers : Ramanuja, 
Madhva, Vallabha 998 fn 1 
Vais'vadeva, a sacrifice 297; bene¬ 
fits of 1031; characteristics of 438 
Vaitarani 254, 919; a cow 737, 934; 
a river 871; a river in hell 737, 
816; description of 932 fn 1; Sins 
for which one stays at Vaitarani 
for indefinite period 934 
Vajranabha 31 

Vajapeya 258, 260; (sacrifice) 257 
Vajra (thunderbolt) of Indra 227 
Valakhilyas 193 fn 1 
Vamana, an incarnation of Vi>nu 
1037; incarnation 5 fn 5 
Vanaprastha 905 
Vapyayani a tabular organ 880 
Varadariija, a tuletary deity 1060 
Vardhani, a vessel 909 
Varnas 163; four 795 
Varaha (Tirtha) 248 
Varanasi 179 fn 4 
Varuna 131 fn 9 
Varunapraghasa, a sacrifice 297 
Varupa-tirtha 263 
Vasava (tirtha) 255 
Vasistha 21 fn 1 
Vasisthesa 259 
V^tu-PujS 146 fn 1 
Vastu-Puru¥a 146 fn 2 
Vasu, a king 711, 713 
V^udeva 894, 969 
Vasudeva-Sila 1105; etymological 
meaning of 1086 
Vasudhara, rite of 803 
Vasuki 27 fn 6 
Vatapi, an asura 1025 
Vausat 87 

Vayu, a deity 131 fn 10; a symbol o 
Visnu 958; as the best among the 
Brahmanas 964; Five vital ais 
72 fn 1; Third in position among 
the deities 964; worship of— 
identical with the worship of Vi9pu 
958 



1162 


Garuia Purdna 


Vayiilirtha 1101 
Veda-pathaka 970 
Veda-vadin 970 

Vedanta and Sarhkhya 697 ff. 701 
Vedas 837 fn. 837 ff; How to study 
626 

Venkata 1085 

VenKata mountain and lord Srini¬ 
vasa 1080 
Venva 225 fn 5 

Vctravali, mod. Betwa river 766 
Vibhavasu 712 
Vic«s and passions 874 
Vicitra, brother of Yama 315 
Vicitrabhavana, a city in Yama’s 
way 757 

Vicitravirya, son of Santanu and 
step-brother of Bhi^ma 831 fn 1 
Virlisa, a city 857 
Vidya Pranesvari 78 
VidyM 11 fn 1; eighteen 661 
Vijaya 1097 

Vikarna, brother of Duryodhana 
1026 

Vinata. 12 fn 6; mother of Garuc^a 
712, 819 

Vinayaka, harassment by 308; ima¬ 
ges of 896 
Vindhya 249-250 
Vipasa 248 
Vipascit 770 

Vipracitti, a danava 1024 fn 1 
Virababu 771 
Viradha, a city 764 
Viraja (river) 1009 fn 2, 1110 
Virajas 249, 259 
Virapahcanana 770 
Virasena, a King 770 
Virolka 1089 

Virtue 654; essence of 341; and Sin 
889 

Virtuous acts 940 
Visala 257, 259, 262 
Visaiga or Visarjana 803 
Vi^^a, a category 976 
Vi$nu, a nomenclature of 138 fn 2; 
a thousand names of 44; activities 
delightful to—1130-1133; and 

Lakfmi inseparable 974; as Brahma 
968; as the principal deity 964; 
BrahmS's praise of 1017 ff; con¬ 
templation of 72, 140,; description 
of 718; courtiers of 718; equated 
with Kalpa tree 117; glory of 
1112 ; hypnotising power of 880; 
incamat)^ as tortoise 1037; in¬ 
carnations of 1-6, 2 fn 6, 263, 410, 
1035; incarnations of—constitut¬ 
ed of live mahaUitStas 1022; ini¬ 
tiation in the cult of moKlft* 


tion on 284; Narayana, incarna¬ 
tions enumerable 1039; i>l&ture 
and form of 1031 ff; nava-vyuha 
worship of 35; of the nature of 
existence, consciousness and bliss 
966; Pahjarastotra of 41; pavitra- 
ropana of 136; praise of 1092- 
1093; prayer to—by deities and 
sages 995, 1004; prayer to—by 
various deities 989 If; by sages 
995; prayers to Visnu for fulfilling 
a desire in seven nights 577; the 
four-armed deity 707; the slayer 
of Mura 999 fn 1; Vayu’s praise 
of 989 ff; worship of 31, lOf; 
worship of—at the outset 937; 
as Narayana 955 fn 5 
Vi>nudharma, for defeating tno 
enemy 578 

Visnuloka 711, 725, 794 
Visnuyasas G fn 8 
Visvakarman, the divine architect 
963 


Visvamitra, a ksatriya sage 1003 fn 2 
Visvambhara, a Vaisya 764 
Visvavasu 132 fn I 


Vitala, an epithet of Visnu 1036 
Vivasvat (King of solar race) 1067 
Vratas, sacred rites 6 fn 10; 365-397; 
for acquisition of a kingdom 365; 
for attaining V6snu 372; for attain¬ 
ing Visvanara region 383; for the 
birth of a son 365; for the destruc¬ 
tion of sins 379; for freedom from 
3 debts 380; for good fortune, 
wealth and sons 370; for miscel¬ 
laneous purposes 384-397; for 
prosperity, health and good for¬ 
tune 368; for quelling evil 369; 
rules of 381; for victory in battle, 
365; for worldly enjoyment and 
salvation 369, 373-375, 378 


Vratyas 290, 320 
Vfsa-yajna, details of 802 ff 
Vfsaparvan 27 fn 1 
Vfsrii 4 fn 3; an ancestor of lord 
K.r$na 955 fn 2 
Vr$otsarga 831 fn 4, 850, 859; des¬ 
cription of a bull in 762; release of 
a bull 753 fn 1, 919; 162 ff 
Vftra, an asura 693 fn 1 
Vftrapura 1114 fn 1 
Vyadi 232 fn 1 
VyShrtis 626 
Vyihfti-homa 920 
Vyahkate^, mantra of 1093; mean¬ 
ing of the mantra 1094; narrative 
of 1096; praise of 1095 ^ 

Wiat 2 fn 4; cannot be equated 
VlfQU 964; compiler of the 



Index 


1163 


Vedas 661; son of Parasara 1038; 
divided a single Purana Samhita 
into eighteen Saihhitas 711; divi~ 
ded a single Veda into four 711; 
Homage to—at the end of the 
Purana 964; identical with Visnu 
964 

Vyatipata 897; a particular conjunc¬ 
tion of stars 897 

Vyuha 35 fn 1 

VV 

Waste matter, pores for getting out 
879 

Way of attaining release, heaven, 
hell, or rebirth 950 

VAValth, of four castes 627; playing 
of-628 

Women of lower caste 849 

World, bom of ignorance 941; of 
mortals and Yama, distance 
between 386 

Worldly prosperity, fickleness of—943 

Worlds, distance between Yama’s 
and Mortals’—756; essential cha¬ 
racters of 912; fourteen 875 fn 1, 
1043 fn 2, 1036; lower and upper 
883; three 870 

Worship, order of 39; of deities, direc¬ 
tions for 859; of deities and sages 
in their serial order 964; of deities 
prohibited 958 

Y 

Yadavas, loixl of 955 

Yajfia 4 fn 5 


Yajnavalkya 286 fn 1; teachings of 
288-323; on prohibitions 295-301 
Yak^as 10 fn 1, 18 

Yama 868, 1126 fn 1; as Malii$a— 
Vahana 807; attendants of 896; 
cities of 815; city of 896; consi¬ 
derations of—for children 847; 
emissaries of 869; his abode 750; 
his servants 730-731; his weapons 
869; pathway of 886 fF; palace of 
887; region of 806, 867; types of 
669; weapons 869; world of 885 
Yamaloka 794; cities of 816-817 
Yama-sukta 720, 862 
Yama’s city 932 

Yama—eighth part of a day 78 fn 1 
Yamas 6 fn 6 

Yamuna 915; the daughter of the 
sun 765 

Yamya, a city in Yamaloka 757 
Yoga 12 fn 2, 835; Advaita 701; de¬ 
fined 701; eight components of 
706; 676; factors assisting—698; 
obstacles in the way of practising 
699; obstacles to 701; 704 
Yoga and its components 668, 672 
Yogin, means of attaining the goal 
70 

Yogin, characteristics of a liberated 
soul 701 

Yonis, eighty-four 736 
Yudhi^thira=Dhanna, Dharmaraja, 
Ajatasatru 834 fn 2 
Yuga-dharraa 660 
Yugas, four 660 
Yupa (sacrificial stake) 260 


—00 0 — 









