




THE 

garuda-purAna 


Ttandatsd and Annotated by 


A BOARD OF SCHOLARS 


PART 11 


MOTILAL BANAR^ASS PUBUSHERS 
~ t>RIVATE UMXTED •DELHI 



Fint KdtUon: Deihii 1957 
RfpnnflkOu. 1987. 1994. 2003 


AUo aifail/tbie at: 

MOTTLAL BANARSIDASS 

41 U.A Qiuigalow Road. jAwaliar NagAi . Delhi I10m)7 
K Malmhixtin ChamlxT. *22 Uhiibdjlui Decu Roat?. Minnbai 400 025 
236, 9lh Main III Block, Jayimaj^r. Hang:iU»rc 5COO]] 
J20 Rnyapeiuli High R<j^. Myln|>ore, <*hciin;u 600 004 
Saruu Plaza. 1302 Bajl R;io Road, Pime 411 002 
8 C^imac Siirec. Kolkau 700 017 
Ashok RajpaUi. Patna 800 (M)4 
Chowk. Varanasi 221 001 


m Imita 

5Y lAlNENDRA PILMCASII fAlK AT 3IIKJ jAlKF^rDRA TRfAS. 
Mh NARAIKA. PHAKE*!. NF.W DF.1H1 110028 
AND rUBUSHED BYKAREKDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR 
MODIAI. BANARSlDAVi PrRIJSHF.RS PRIVATF. IJMITED. 
nUKCAlOW ROAD. DRt.HI 110 007 



CONTENTS 


PART n 

Acira (Kanna) (coatined £raa AITM Vol. 12) 

Chapters 

147 Diseases 

148 Diseases 

149 Diseases 

150 Diseases 

151 Diseases 

152 Diseasa 

153 Diseases 

154 Diseases 

155 Diseases 

156 Diseases 

157 Diseases 

158 Diseases 

159 Diseases 

160 Diseases 

161 Diseases 

162 Diseases 

163 Diseases 

164 Diseases 

165 Diseases 

166 Diseases 

167 Diseases 

168 Diseases 

169 DisesMs 

170 Diseases 

171 Diseases 

172 Diseases 

173 Diseases 

174 Diseases 

175 Diseases 

176 Diseases 

177 Disease 

178 Diseases 


Pages 

425 

434 

435 
437 

439 

440 

443 

444 
446 
449 
455 
458 
461 

465 
470 
475 
479 
481 
485 

466 
491 
497 
503 
510 
518 
524 
528 
531 

533 

534 
536 
543 



179 

Diseases 

546 

180 

Diseases 

547 

181 

Diseases 

548 

182 

Diseases 

549 

183 

Diseases 

551 

184 

Diseases 

553 

185 

Diseases 

556 

186 

Diseases 

559 

187 

Diseases 

560 

188 

Diseases 

561 

189 

Disestses 

563 

190 

Diseases 

564 

191 

Diseases 

567 

192 

Diseases 

569 

193 

Diseases 

572 

194 

V aif^a va-Ka vaca 

574 

195 

A Love for fulfilling a desire in seven nights 

577 

196 

VJi^u-dharma 

578 

197 

Giru^ am antra 

579 

198 

Eulogy of Tripura 

584 

199 

Cu^lamaQj 

585 

200 

Diseases 

589 

201 

Medical Treatment of horses and elephants 

590 

202 

Diseases 

594 

203 

Diseases 

596 

204 

Medicinal drugs 

597 

205 

Grammar 

605 

206 

Grammar 

608 

207 

Prosody 

611 

208 

Prosody 

612 

209 

Prosody 

614 

210 

Proscdy 

618 

211 

Prosody 

619 

212 

Prosody 

620 

213 

Dharma-^astra 

620 

214 

Dharma«lattra 

633 

215 

Dharma4istra 

636 

216 

Dharma^iastra 

638 

217 

Dhanna-iftstra 

639 



218 

Dharma«l&stra 

640 

219 

Dharma^iistra 

647 

220 

Dhanna*Ustra 

649 

221 

Dharxnaslira 

652 

222 

Expiation 

654 

223 

Yuga-dharma 

660 

224 

Dissolution 

663 

225 

Results of good and bad acts 

664 

226 

Yoga and its Components 

668 

227 

Yoga and its Components 

672 

228 

Devotion to ViiQu 

675 

229 

Devotion to Vinu 

677 

230 

Devotion to VifQU 

678 

231 

Hymn to Narasithha 

683 

232 

Kulimfta or Jfiinimrta hymn 

686 

233 

Mftyvaftaka Hymn 

688 

234 

Acyuta or Gakradhara Hymn 

690 

235 

Vedinta and S&nkbya 

697 

236 

Ved&nta and S&nkhya 

701 

237 

Essence of the Glti 

704 

238 

Essence of the GiU 

706 

239 

Essence of BrahtnaglUi 

707 

240 

Glory of Garuda Purina 

710 

Dharmi (Prett) 


Chapters 


1 

Garuda’s query 

717 

2 

Results of actions 

723 

3 

Description of Hell 

730 

4 

Pre*death and postnleath rites 

736 

5 

Annual rites for the deceased 

750 

6 

The glory of Vfiotsar^ 

761 

7 

The story of five ghosts 

772 

8 

Person authorised to perform obsequies 

779 

9 

The king authorised to perform rites 

782 

10 

The Gratifying Nature of Sraddha 

787 

11 

Doors for Departure 

794 



12 Importance of Dharma 795 

IS Obsequial Rites 798 

14 Merits of Gifts 801 

15 Observances immediate after Death 806 

16 Life after Death 814 

17 Glory of Sravaoas 818 

18 Life after Death 820 

19 Life after Death 823 

20 Functions of the Departed soul 825 



1.147.7 


425 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYSEVEN^ 

Disiasis 


DhanoaniAfi sdxi\ 

1. I shall eapt^'in the pathology of fevers for a thorough 
understanding of all types of fevers. The infuriated Rudra at 
the destruction of sacrifice of Dak^ cast a fiery look from his 
third eye in the forehead from whence fever originated. In the 
medical sience it is known as Rogapati (lord of diseases); 
Papma (sin), Mrtyuraja (king of death); Aiana (the de» 
vourer) Antaka (the finbher). 

2*3, It is caused by unhygienic misconduct* it produces 
delirium* unconsciousness and harassing rise in temperature. 
This cruel affliction is found in all sorts of animals and even 
in inanimate objects. In elephants it is called Pakala^ or 
K.tj(apakala or Hasiivktajvara: In horses Abhit&pa. In dogs 
Alarka. In clouds Indramada. In water Nllika. In herbs 
Jyotis (fluorescence). In soils O^ara (saline and barren). 

4. In the fever due to derangement of Kapha the indi¬ 
cations are hiccough* Vomiting sensation* Catarrh* sUflhcss 
and rigidity of the body, coldness of the skin and pain in every 
limb. 

5. As days pass* these symptoms are seen operating and 
increasing. Non-application of proper remedies or application 
of contrary remedies may aggravate them. 

6-7. The characteristic symptoms in Amajvara* (in 
fever due to constipation) are:—lx>ss of appetite* indigestion* 
rigidity of the body, lethargy* burning sensation in the heart* 
a reverse or relapse* drowsiness and lassitude* abdominal 


I« The chapter mentions the names of fevers which attach elephano, 
hOTKs, dogs* cloud, water, herbs and earth. 

2. Pikala !• a fever which attacks elephants. This is tenfold. Kil(a- 
pAkala is the deadliest of all feven ami kills elephants at once. For detail see 
ch. 9 of the of Pilakipya. 

9. GP mentions fever with or without constipation and the fever 
numipAta caused hr the dUturhance of the three humours. 



GaTu4c PufS^ 


426 

bruisei^ ill funccioniog of the humourit ialivation> hiccough, 
loss of hunger, moistness in the mouth tasting sweet, a trans* 
parent glossiness of the skin, temperature, heaviness of limbs, 
profuse urination and neither digestion nor exhaustion. 

8. In the Nirimajvara (fever without constipation) 
there is emaciation due to hunger, a lightness is felt in the 
limbs, abatement of temperature and relapse in eight days are 
the symptoms. When there is the admixture of different types 
of fever the characteristic symptoms of every one are seen. 

9. The Vayu principle in combination with the principle 
of Pitta brings about a type of fever when the following symp¬ 
toms are seen: Headache, swooning, vomiting, burning sensa¬ 
tion in the body, parchedness of throat and mouth, aching in 
the joints, insomnia, agitation, horripilation, yawn and perpe¬ 
tual prattle. 

10. In the fever due to the derangement of both $lesm& 
(phlegm) and V&yu (gas) the symptoms are: fall of temper¬ 
ature, loss of appetite, pain in the joints, headache, difficulty 
in breathing, frequert coughs, discoloration of the skin, pallid 
fane, sluggishness, chillncss, sensation of darkness, whirling of 
the head and lassitude. 

11. In the fever due to the derangement of both Slesma 
and Pitta humours the symptoms are:—chillness, rigidity, pro¬ 
fuse perspiration, burning sensation, unsteadiness, thirst, 
coughing, vomiting of bile and phlegm, stupefaction, drowsi¬ 
ness and bitter salivation. 

12. When all the deranged humours combine in pro¬ 
ducing a fever it is called Sannipata Jvara or Abhinyasa Jvara. 
where the symptom.^ mentioned before are present. In addi¬ 
tion to these there at^e other symptoms such as:—Burning 
sensation and chilliiess in alternation, vertigo sleeping in the 
day and wakefulness at night. 

13. The patient either sleeps always or does not sleep at 
all; sometimes he perspires profusely or never at all. He sings, 
dances nnd laughs. Natural functions of the body cease. 

14. Eyes become red hot, sunk in the sockets and full 
of tears. I'he eyelids droop down. There is pain in the calves, 
sides, joints, head and in the bones. Dizziness is felt. 



L147.24 


427 


15. Ringiog in the ears with acute pain, great chilliness 
or no chilliness at all alleraately; the tongue appears burnt 
and rough. The joints seem to crackle and appear loose and 
heavy. 

16. Blood^streaked bilious matter is vomited, the head 
begins to roll and toss. Excessive thirst is experienced; The 
rooms appear to be dark and brownish red and ringlets appear 
before the eyes. 

17. Pain is felt in the heart, l^oose motions or coming 
bit by bit. Chilliness of the face, debility, loss of voice, and 
delirium. 

18. Development of the humours, a long drowsiness, a 
diffused croaking sound in the throat. These are the indica* 
tions in Sannip&ta Jvara known as Abhinyksa Jvara also. The 
Ojas or vitality in the body becomes fully spent. 

19. The gaseous humour (Vayu) being held at the 
throat the bilious principle suppressed within tries to come 
out due to its expansive nature. Hence the eyes appear 
yellowish in colour in a patient of Sannipata Jvara. 

20. The Sannipata jvara wherein the dosas become 
excessively aggravated and the gastric function is impaired is 
incurable. Other types of Sannipata fevers can be cured with 
great difficulty. 

21. There is another type of Sannipata jvara where the 
Pitta humour remains aloof and produces burning sensation in 
the skin or in the viscera either before or after (the onset of 
fever), 

22-23. In the Sannipata Jvara due to Viyu and Kapha 
the chillness, burning sensation, etc, are felt more acute. When 
Kapha in fluid state is dried up by the pitta and when pitta 
subsides later, swooning, intoxication and thirst result. If there 
is burning sensation at the banning and somnolence and 
lassitude in the end, vomiting U the result. 

24. The Agantu (i.e casual fever due to extraneous 
causes) fever is of four types (I) due to hurt or blow, (2) due 
to contact, (3) due to curse, (4) due to black magic. If there 
is fever, due to bums or scalds it comes under the class 
Abhigh&taja i.e the Am type. 



428 


(laru4a 


23. If there is fever due to exhaustion, the wind prin* 
ciple contaminates the blood. There is pallor, pain and rise in 
temperature and swelling too. 

26. Malignant planets, narcotics, poisons, anger, fright, 
sorrow and love may cause fever. This may be classihed under 
the casual type but the special characteristics will be spasmodic 
laughter and cries. 

27. In the fever due to inhalation of drugs and narcotics, 
fainting, headache, vomiting and sneezing are the s{>ecial 
symptoms. The fever due to poison generates swooning, 
dysentery, darkness and discoloration of the skin, burning sen* 
sation and vertigo. 

28. Tht fever due to anger has the special symptoms of 
tremulousness and headache; that due to fright and grief is 
signified by perpetual prattle. 

29. The fever due to lust and love is marked by dizzi* 
ness, loss of taste for food, burning sensation, extreme shyness, 
loss of sleep and absence of firmness of mind and courage. 

30. In the fever due to adverse planets as in the 
Sannipata Jvara both the gaseous and bilious principles are 
aggravated. 

31. The fevers due to curse and black magic arc consi* 
dered to be very terrible and unbearable. The mantras and 
incantations of black magic excite the victim and harass him. 

32. Here and there in the body eruptions appear. The 
patient feels giddy. There is burning sensation and swooning 
in the end. The fever rises every day. 

33-34. Such are eight^ fever. In brief, they are 

of two kinds, viz. physical and menial; mild and virulent; 
internal and external; Prakrta (Natural t.e Seasonal) and 
Vaikfta (unnatural or sporadic); curable and incurable or 
mature and immature. In the former, the fever is in the body 
and in the latter it is in the mind. 

33-36. When Vayu principle is in combination with 
Kapha principle there will be chilliness. There will be burn* 

I. Betidd the righifc^d divisSoo of fever, there is s twofold divUion of 
lix kfnds, viz idrfrs-mdMs, ihato, prikria^wiikrta 

fdtthjfa'osddhj/a, and i&ma-niriniaya. 



1.147,44 


429 


ing sensation if it is in combination with Pitta, A mixture of 
these two when the do^as arc mixed. If the fever is within^ the 
disorder and detericration is internal and there will be consti¬ 
pation. In the case of exte rnal fever there may be loose 
motions. The fever is curable. 

37. In the rainy season a fever due to the derangement 
of Vayu is Pr&kfta; still this is geaeraliy incurable. Fevers due 
to the derangement of the other two in the rainy season are 
Vaikrta and definitely incurable. 

38. In the Autumn a fever due to derangement of Pitta 
is PrsJcrta, otherwise it is Vaikrta. 

39-40. In the spring, a fever due to the derangement of 
Kapha is Prakrta, otherwise it is Vaikfta. All Vaikrta fevers 
are incurable. Vayu deranged in the rainy season causes fever 
with the combination of Pitta and Kapha. Pitta deranged in 
autumn causes fever with the support of kapha. Due Co its 
nature and discharge there is no dai^ter in fasting. Kapha 
deranged in Spring causes fever with the support of V&yu 
and Pitta. 

In strong persons with less defects fever does not 
cause much harm and hence is curable. If the do^as are all 
altogether aggravated it is incurable. 

41. The characteristic sign of an Amajvara is immature 
virulence of fever)» low functioning of the gastric fire^ excessive 
urination, nonfunctioning of the digestive and excretory 
systems and loss of hunger. 

42. The characteristic sign of a Pacyamana (or ripen¬ 
ing or maturing) fever is virulence of fever, excessive thirst, 
prattling and delirium, rapid breathing, vertigo, loose motions 
and acute pain. 

43. Since digestion is possible by the removal of the 
Aina matter, a seven days fast is recommended in ibis case. 
Jvaras are classified into five taking into consideration the 
extent of dcrangcmcni in the malas (humours), die periodicity 
or the season of attack and the comparative strength or weak¬ 
ness of the patient or the exciting factors. 

44. Generally when there is a combination of manv 
factors these fevers are produced. They are Santata, (remit¬ 
tent) Saiata, (intermittent), Anyedyu (appearing gii every 



430 Garu4a Purity 

other day), Trdyaka (tertian) Gaturthaka (occurring once in 
four days). 

45-46. The dofas pervadii^ the ducts and vessels carry¬ 
ing the seven dhatusi urine and faeces distress the entire body 
and get aggravated on equal sight (?) etc. The Rasas or 
secretions are strong or weighty due to the special charac¬ 
teristics of the body. Alvotys they make the fever unbearablci 
having no antagonist, 

47. It may alleviate the dofas» fcver» heat or the dhitus 
by means of purity or impurity. 

48. Generally it reaches the limit either for complete 
abatement or for finishing (the patient) in seven» ten or 
twelve days in the case of Vayu, Pitta and Kapha respectively. 

49. This is Agniveia's^ opinion. According to H&rlta 
the crucial days are t%vice seven (fourteen) | ninth and eleventh 
This is the line of demsircation for the three dosas either 
for abatement or for finishing the patient. 

50*51. Based on purity or impurity the duration of 
the attack may be more. If lean persons contract disease and 
do not observe rules of diet and conduct^ even a slight a^ra- 
vation of the deranged do^a, strengthened by the support of 
other exciting factors may become fatal. 

52« The dosa increasing or decreasing irregularly will 
cause fever in its own time. 

53. The dofas being weakened, the fever subsides due 
to the powerful antidotes (by way of medicines) and its subtle 
form gets merged in the secretions. 

54* With the absorption of fever emaciation, pallor 
and sluggishnen vanish and its spreading in the whole of the 
body is checked since the dilation of the excretory vessels 
helps them to be thrown out through natural outlets. 

55, The Santata is remittent fever. Hie Satata (inter¬ 
mittent) is contrary to it since its beginning is irr^ular though 
it becomes acute during the night. 


I. The Puries*t refierence to Afniveis sod HirlUt in ebspten on 
Ayurveda ifidkatci that the iyurvedie sectioo of the Purina ia based on 
authority and is tberetee autlmic. 



M47.67 


431 


56. Generally, the morbid humour getting mingled in 
blood produces the Satata type of fever. The Anyedyu type 
of lever comes at the lime of the juncture of day and night. 

37. In this fever, vessels containing fleshy matter and 
fat substance are contaminated. Due to the combined action 
of Pitta and Vayu there is pain in the head. Due to Kapha 
and Pitta there is pain in the Trika (Spine). 

SB. Pain in the back is due to the combined action of 
Vayu and Kapha. This fever subsides for a day in the middle. 
In the fever Caturthaka the fat, marrow and the bones are 
Contaminated by the Do^as* 

59. The Caturthaka fever confined to marrow alone 
manifests twice a day. Due to Kapha aflfection there is pain in 
the knee*joint, and calves, while affected by Vayu the head 
also aches in the beginning. 

60. The Caturthaka*viparyaya fever confined to bones 
and marrow continues for three days and subsides on the 
fourth day. 

61. The derangement of the humours aggravated by 
unsuitable diet and activities being matured due to non* 
elimination) the patient must be compelled to fast for seven 
days. 

62. The mind and the bodily functions of the patient 
are affected by the fever. This Caturthaka fever is incurable 
because it has entered deep into the ducts of Dhatus (the 
seven primary constituent elements of the body), and the dofas 
have risen up all simultaneously and attained equal heights 
of virulence. 

63-67. In the case of all these subtle attacks of fever 
the deranged humour traverses slowly along the vessels of 
blood, etc and since it takes a long time to cover the whole 
body it does not harass the body much. But if medication 
ceases the fever may be acute and nighty paroxysms of pyrexia 
may be witnessed. As the ph^cal strength of the patient 
becomes las and less, the fever slowly permeates the whole of 
the Rasa constituents of the body. Then the dofa (deranged 
humour or diathesis) becomes aggravated sooner or later 
resulting in high fever. 



432 


Garui^ Affdna 


68. Justasaseed In the soil when watered well does 
not take time to sprout so also the seeds of dosas sprout into 
fever. 

69» Just as poison taken in becomes virulent and fatal 
so also the dofas getting strength from other factors become 
aggravated. 

70. Thus, the fevers Satata, etc> function. The 

characteristic symptoms when the fever is confined to Rasa 
constituent of the body (Lymph):—Disquietude (or sea sick¬ 
ness), heaviness, dejection, shooting pain in the limbs, yawn¬ 
ing, loss of taste, vomiting sensation, difficulty in breathing, etc. 

71. When the fever permeates the blood, the symptoms 
are:—Spitting of blood, excessive thirst, appearance of coarse 
hot eruptions on the skin, red patches, burning sensation, 
vertigo, intoxication and prattUr^ delirium. 

72-74. When the fever is restricted to the flesh, the 
symptoms are thirst, fatigue, defiled splendour, an internal 
burning sensation, dizziness, appearance of darkness, fetidness 
and jerky movements of the limbs. When the fever has per¬ 
meated the fat, the symptoms are penpiration, excessive 
thirst, vomiting, foul smell and irritability. When the fever 
penetrates the bone the symptoms are delirium, exhaustion, 
loss of taste and appetite and pain in the bones. 

75. When the fever permeates the marrow the symptoms 
are the functioning of the do^, dyspnea (difficulty in 
breathing), convulsive movements of the limbs, croaking 
sound in the throat, burning sensation within, chilliness outside, 
deep sighs and hiccough. 

76. When the fever permeates the semen virile, the 
symptoms are appearance of darkness, splitting of the vulner¬ 
able joints, oundiness of the penis, and death when seminal 
egress takes place. 

77. These five types ofCaturthaka Viparyaya fever are 
more and more difficult to treat as enumerated above. The 
Pralepaka type of fever exhibits the symptoms of delirium, 
chilliness, low temperature and heaviness of the limbs. One 
feels as if one’s body is coated with phlegm. 

78. The AAgabalkiaka (Devourer of the strength of 
limbs) type of fever exhibits the symptoms of low temperature, 



M47.86 


433 


coarsencis or stUfnes of Ihe body, numbness of limbs and 
difficulty in walking. Phlegm will be profusely manifested. 

79. If the wine passed is of the colour of the cut piece 
of turmeric the fever is called Haridraka (yellow fever?). It is 
faul. 

80. Where the patient is deficient in Pitta and, Kapha 
and Viyu are equally dominsmt there is no fever during the 
day but there is fever at night. This type is called R&trijvara 
or Paurvaritrika. 

81. The onset of fever is at nightfall since due to the 
action of Vayu the body gets dried up in the Kapha content 
either by means of exercise or due to the action of Sun’s rays. 

82. When Kapha and pitta are in the abdomen the 
upper part of the body remains cold but the lower part remains 
warm. 

83. But when Kapha goes lower down, the Pitta remain* 
ing in the upper region, the body is felt warm and the lower 
part chill (at the hands and feel)* 

84. The fever conBned to the lymph and blood vessels 
can be cured. So also the fever that is restricted to flesh and 
fat. But the fever affecting bones and marrow is incurable. 
At the onset of fever the different limbs are discoloured render¬ 
ed pallid. 

85. The patient attacked by fever sometimes becomes 
unconscious. He has an appearance of an angry man. He 
evacuates hot mucuousand bilious matter very frequently. 

86. The characteristic signs of a patient freed from 
fever arc lightness of body and exhaustion; delusion and 
heat disappear, some eruptions in the mouth, freedom from 
pain, natural functioning of the sense organs, perspiration, 
sneezing, mind at rest, appetite and itching sensation on the 
head. 



434 


Garuia PutS^a 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYEIGHT 

Dismti 


Dhamontari said : 

1-2* I shall explain the pathology of Rakupitta (Bilious 
Haemorrhage). The deranged pitta cootaminates the blood. 
The cause of derangement is the excessive intake of such 
articles of food as are bile-provolung in character e.g. the grains 
of Kodrava and Uddalaka. Too hot» bitter^ pungent, sour, 
saline and thirst—inducing foodstufis alsohave the similar effect. 

3*4. This mixture of bile and blood has the colour, smell 
etc of the blood. Hence, in Ayurvedic parlance it is known as 
Rakta. It comes out of blood vessels, spleen and liver. 

5«7. The onset of this haemorrhage is indicated by 
various symptoms :—Heaviness of the bead, non relish for food, 
desire to eat cold things, a smoky vision, sour vomiting, nausea, 
hiccough, gasping for breath, vertigo, fatigue, allergy to red 
colour, fishy smell in the mouth when the fever abates, reddish, 
yellow and green colour in the eyes, inability to distinguish 
the colours of blue, red and yellow and dreams of madness. 

8. The deranged and contaminated blood comes out 
through nose, eyes, mouth and ears when it flows up or through 
penis, vagina or anus when it Bows down. It comes out of the 
roots of hair also all over the body. 

9. The egress of bilious blood when it flows up can be 
cured by means of purgatives. In the case of pitta also it is 
better to purge it out rather than arrest it with medication. 

10. Purging cleans the system where Kapha persists. 
Astringent, sweet and Kapha producing drugs can be used in 
cleansing the system. 

1 U12. Or drugs of pungent, bitter and astringent nature 
naturally generating phl^m can be used. If the haemorrhage 
takes a downward course and the patient appears to die, 
emetics are to be used. If the patient is given a little medicine 
to curb the pitta and then the emetics are applied he will have 
strength regained. 



M49.6 


435 


13» Astringent and sweet things are alone good for him. 
If there is concerted action of both Kapha and V&yu on the 
deranged pitta it is incurable. 

14. If the flow of blood is upward (regressing) it is un¬ 
bearable and medication is ineffective* Putting then becomes 
impossible in his case. 

15. In Raktapitta cases of Pratiloma type (upward 
flow) f purging and emetic are the only remedies. 

16-17. But when all the humours are deranged emetic 
alone is advisable. It should be known that like Siva*8 dart the 
disease is fatal since many un&vourable symptoms and disorders 
are observed from the beginning. If cure is effected it is good. 

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYNINE 

Disiases 

Dhanvantari said : 

1. Since cough runs its course quickly I shall explain it 
now. There are five types of cough (1) due to Vayu (2) due 
to Pitta (3) due to Kapha (4) due to internal wounds (5) due 
to Consumption. 

2. All these coughs are more and more powerful in the 
order enumerated above. If neglected, they will end in 
consumption. A sure sign of their onset is irritation in the 
throat and allergy to food. 

3-6. The cough generated due to the derangement of 
Vayu exhibits the symptoms of dryness in the ear cavity and 
parchedness of throat and mouth. The wind coursing through 
the lower parts of the body si^denly rushes up, reaches the 
chest and then presses against the larynx. The agitated wind 
filb the ducts and vessels and the limbs are as though thrown 
up. It seems to uproot the eyes from their sockets* With a sub¬ 
dued sound it affects the sides and is passed out of the throat 
with a sound of a broken bcU-metal vesseL It produces pain in 
the chest, sides, thighs and bead. Agitation and fiiinting may be 



Garu^a Pur^ 


436 

seen. Aphonia (inability to ipeak) and dry cough also will be 
observed. While coughing, shooting pain is felt and loud sound 
is heard and the patient’s body has horripitatioo too. By spitting 
out a lump of dry kapha with great deal of difficulty he feels a 
bit relieved. 

7-9. The cough generated by the derangement of pitta 
humour exhibits the following symptoms :—Yellow colour in 
the eyeSj bitter taste in the mouth, rise in temperature, vertigo, 
vomiting of bilious blood, thirst, loss of speech, clouded vision, 
inebriety and appearance of fiery rings at the time of coughing. 

The cough generated by the derangement of Kapha pro¬ 
duces a light pain in the chest, and bead as well as numbness 
and heaviness in the cardiac region : The throat appears to be 
choked with a sticky lump of Kapha. There is cold in the 
nostrils as well as vomiting sensation with distaste for food. 
Horripilation is also observed. 

10-12. Fights, eaerdses, etc, carelessly indulged in, beyond 
one's capacity may cause internal wounds in the chest cavity 
and aggravate the Vayu humour which accompanied by the 
aggravated PittA humour makes the kapha also aggravated. The 
kapha ^ets mixed witli blood and then knotted. It may be 
yellow or dark in colour. The patient coughs and spits out the 
dry Kapha lump with an excruciating pain as if the chest is 
breaking asunder. He feels as if he is being pierced with a 
number of needles. 

13-14. He feels as if he is being speared through. Pain is 
felt.in the joints with fever, thirst, gasping for breathing, loss of 
voice and shivering. Attempting to speak he simply coos like a 
dove feeling pain at the sides. He spits or vomits Kapha. His 
digestion is impaired, strength decreases and pallor sets in. 

15. In the debilitated state he passes urine with blood. 
There is dyspnea (difficulty to breathe) himbago and back pain. 
The deranged Vayu then upsets all the Dhatus and makes a 
K^takasa patient a patient of Raj ayak^a (Phthisis). 

16. He coughs and spits out kapha a fetid pus like yellow 
and greenish red mucous matter. 

17. When he tries to sleep he feels as if he is being 
afflicted with pain. The heart seems to be roasted. Suddenly he 



L 150.8 


437 


evinces a liking for a hot or cold thing by turns. Insatiety 
in meals and debility also ft^low. 

18. The face suddenly becomes bright and glossy with 
eyes shining brilliantly. With this all, the symptoms of the 
wasting disease are manifested. 

19. This is the nature of cough bom of consumption that 
destroys the bodies of already debiiitated persons. In strong 
men thu as well as the cough due to wounds can be cured if 
they are in the preliminary stage. 

20-2 !• By careful treatment these ailments and others in 
the case of old men too can be eradicated. Cough, dyspnea, 
phthisis, nausea, aphonia and other ailments if neglected are 
aggravated and so they must be eradicated quickly. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY 

Diseases 


Dhanuantari said : 

1. I shall now mention the pathology of Svasa Roga 
(Dyspnea) or dilRculty in breathing. When cough becomes 
chronic it becomes dyspnea or it may be due to those factors 
that aggravate the humours. 

2. It may result from AmatUara (mucous dysentery), 
vomiting, toxins, and jaundice fever. Exposure to dust, smoke, 
gusts of wind and snowmelted water and violent attack on 
vulnerable joints may also cause dyspnea. 

3-4. rogaisof five types (1) Ksudraka (minor) 

(2) Tamaka (3) Chinaa (4) Mahan and (5) Crdhva. Vayu 
that spreads all round when prevented by Kapha turns round 
and' courses through the passages of vital airs, water ducts and 
food canals spoiling them. It comes to the cardiac region and 
produces the illness of breath in the abdomen. 

3-8. Its premonitory' symptoms are pain in the chest and 
sides, the adverse direction of the breath, constipation, splitting 
of the temples and exhaustion due to overeating. The aggra* 
vated wind turns back through the ducu aggravating the 
kapha and produces the difficult breathing called K^udra. It 



438 


Goru4s Pitrdna 


grips the head, neck and cardiac region and produces pain at 
the sides. It generates hiccough with a wheezing round attended 
with catarrhal paroxysm. It makes the breath speedily|taken 
distress the vital breath but the patient gets slight relief after 
spitting it out. 

9. Lying down he feels difficulty in breathing but in 
sitting he feels relief. If he looks up he finds the forehead 
perspire and he suffers acute pain. 

10. Gasping frequently and finding the lips parched 
the patient longs for hot drink with slight shivering. This 
(Tamaka) Svasa becomes aggravated when it rains or when chill 
cast wind flows or Kapha-producing food is taken. 

11. Tamaka type of dyspnea is curable only in a strong 
person. If there is acute fever and fainting it will never subside 
by cold application. 

12. The patient of Mahi Svasa breathes hard and feels 
pain due to the splitting of the vulnerable joints. He perspires 
and swoons. He has constipation. Burning sensation is felt in 
the abdomen. 

13. He keeps the eyes facing down. The eyes seem to rove. 
One of the eyes appears tiffed with glossy red glitter. The 
mouth is dry. He prattles dejectedly. He is unconscious and 
there is pallor in the face. 

14. He breathes hard with great noise if lifted up bodily, 
like an ox in rut. 

15. He has no sensation or awareness. The eyes and face 
wear a confused look. Urine and'faeces do not pass out. He is 
speechless. 

16. The patient of Ordhvaivasa is unable to breathe out 
though he takes in long drawn breaths* He has acute pain at 
the temples and the head. His throat is parched. 

17. The mouth and ears appear to be stuffed with mu¬ 
cous Kapha matter. Distressed by the aggravated Vayu he looks 
up rolling it all round as if in confusion. 

18. When the vulnerable joints are being split he groans 
with his speech checked (unable to speak). All these ailments 
can be cured if the symptoms are not very manifest or pro* 
nounced. If they are pronounced they are fatal indeed. 



I.15I.I2 


439 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYONE 

DistasiS 


DhanvMtari said : 

1» O Suiruta, listen, I shall describe the causes of the 
illness Hiccough. Its preliminary stage is due to dyspnea. 
The different types of hiccough have their own nature as the 
differentiating factor. 

2-3. Hiccough is of five types (1) Bha1(9yodbhav& 
(originating from diet) (2) K^udra (InsigniRcant) (3) 
Yamala (The twin*naturcd) (4) Mahatf (great, acute) (5) 
Gambhira (grave). The first type is caused by hasty eating of 
coarse pungent unwholesome food stuffs injudiciously. The 
usual onset is along with the evening meal and beverage when 
the Vayu is aggravated with the food and the drink. A low 
sound is produced. 

4. By exertion the V&yu principle gets excited and 
produces the Ksudra hiccough. 

5. It originates from the root of the clavicle. Its paro¬ 
xysm is not virulent. 

6. The Ksudra hiccough is aggravated by exertion and 
becomes mild on taking food. The next type of hiccough 
(yamala) rises in couples and is slow tn its action. 

7. It culminates in the face shaking the head and neck 
violently. It is called Yamala (Twin-natured) hiccough 

8. Delirium, vomiting, dysentery, distortion of the eyes 
and yawning are the symptoms which are very pronounced 
at the advanced stage. 

9-10. The symptoms in the acute type of hiccough 
(Mahatf) are—the eyebrows droop down and the temples sunk, 
the eyes turn towards the cars, the body is benumbed, speech 
is impaired, power of memory fails and unconsciousness results. 
The vulnerable joints are split, the spinal column is bent down. 

11-12. The Gambhira (grave) type of hiccough rises 
from the abdomen or navel just like the previous one, but is 
attended with great pain, loud sound, severe violence and high 
potency. It induces a wide yawning and jerky movements of 
the limbs. This is curable if carefully treated. 



Garuia 




13*15. The Brst two types shall be avoided as also the 
hiccough where all the symptoms are pronounced. As a general 
rule, in the cases of old mcn» persons of impaired digestion 
and accumulated undigested matter within, persons indulging 
too much in sexual exercise, invalids and starving emaciated 
persons, all ailments are fatal unless attended to quickly. Hic> 
cough and dyspnea are definitely fatal. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYTWO 

Diseosts 

Dhanvaniati said :— 

1. Now I shall explain the pathology of Yak$ma* 
roga (pulmonary consumption). It is a sequel to many ailments 
and precursor to many others. 

2. It is mentioned by many terms RaJayaksmJi (King* 
Consumption), Ksaya (Consumption), Sosa (withering up), 
Rogarat (king of ailments). Stars, Moon, brahmins and kings 
were supposed to have suffered from this formerly. Hence 
it is called Rajayaksma. 

3. It is called Ksaya (wasting disease) because the 
body is wasted, medicine is wasted (ineffective), and it is the 
culmination of Ksaya (consumption). It is called Sosa be¬ 
cause it dries up the lymph and other secretions of the system. 
It is called Rogarat because it is the king of all ailments. 

4. There are four main causes for this; (1) Sahasa, Rash 
feats of strength and overexercise, (2) Vegasahirodha, suppres¬ 
sion of natural propulsions of the bodv such as passing of 
urine, evacuating the bowels, etc., (3) Sukrajab snehasamk- 
sayah, wasting of semen, vitality and albuminous substances in 
the body, (4) Annap^navidhityaga (abandonment of the rules 
of diet and regimen. 

5-6. The principle of Vayu gets aggravated by the causes 
mentioned before, scatters pitta and useless accumulations 
in (he body, kapha, etc. and permeates the ducts, channels and 
joints of the body. Then it affects the nerves either by closing 



1.153.18 


441 


the openings of the ducts or dilating them too much. It then 
produces great pain in the cardiac region in the middle, al>ove» 
below or at the sides. 

7« Many indications of its onset can be obsenTd. Cold, 
high rise in temperature, salivation, sweet taste in the mouthy 
glossiness of the body and loss of appetite. 

8. An eager desire to walk and take food and drink. 
The patient finds impurity even in clean things. He supposes 
that a fiy, a blade of grass, a bit of hair, etc. has fallen in his 
dish or cup. 

9. Hiccough and disquietude, vomitings non^relish of 
food, weakening even without bath. 

10. A bright white colour in the hands, tlilghSi chesty 
feet, face, stomach and the eyes. A shooting pain in the arms 
and the tongue, a feeling of abhorrence over the body. 

11. A liking for women, wine and meat and an unrea* 
sonable disgust immediately and giddiness. 

I2« The nails, hair and bones grow rapidly. The paticju 
dreams of the attack or fall of chameleon, serpent, monkey 
and birds and beasts of prey. 

13. He sees in dreams that he climbs or steps on hair, 
bones, husks, ashes, etc. He sees deserted villages, ponds and 
tanks drying up brilliant comets and stars in the sky or forest 
fire with burning trees. 

14*15. There are eleven specific symptoms in the pul* 
monary consumption :—Catarrh, dyspnea, cough, loss of 
voice, headache, nonrclish for food, updrawn breath, emacia* 
lion, vomiting, fever and pain (in the viscera, while standing, 
at the sides, while getting up from bed, and at the joints. 

16. The distressing features are a breaking pain at the 
throat, yawning, severe pressure felt in the limbs, spitting out 
(bloody mucous subitancei), impaired gastric functions and 
foul smell in the mouth. 

17-18. Due to the aggravation of Vayu there is pain in 
the head and sides with a severe pressure of limbs. Constric* 
tion of the throat and apho.iia are also due to the Vayu. 
The aggfSvated pitta causes a burning sensation int he should- 
en, hands, and feet, dysentery, vomiting of blood, foul smell 
in the mouth, fever and inebriety. The excited kapha produces. 



442 Garu^a Purdifa 

non-relish of food, votniiing, cough and a sense of heaviness in 
one half of the body. 

19-20. Watery discharge from the lips, cold, dyspnea, 
aphonia and impaired gastric function are also due to kapha. 
As a result of impaired digestion, the humours are further 
excited and anasarca (jotha)and a clammy coating of kapha shuts 
up the openings of the ducts* Further production of the dh&tus 
ceases and the burning sensation increases bringing mental 
anguish. There are other distressing features also. 

21. The food taken in by phthisis patient undergoes 
acidity in the stomach along with the lymph and other secre* 
lions), hence the diet does not nourish his limbs. 

22. The lymph does not generate blood in him, al¬ 
though some flesh is put. In this benumbed state he remains 
emaciated. 

23. Evenifall the symptoms are not present, an emaciat¬ 
ed person with his six sense organs impaired must be given 

up as incurable; but if the person is otherwise (i.e not emaciat¬ 
ed) he can be cured. 

24. Due to the several and combined actions of the 
deranged humours the fat becomes wasted and aphonia sets in. 
The voice becomes feeble, coarse and tremulous. 

25. The deranged Vayu makes the body lose its glossi¬ 
ness and warmth as well as produces a colour like that of an 
awn of barley ill the throat. Due to Pitta there is burning 
sensation in the throat and palate. 

26. Due to Rapha there is a peculiar wheezing sound 
in the throat and it seems as if there is some sticky mucuous 
substance there. The consumption starts with all the sym¬ 
ptoms. 

27. Vertigo and darkness of vision and other charact* 
•eristics of kapha also are present. The patients are incurable 
and even if only a few symptoms are present the emaciated 
patient shall be avoided. 



3J53.9 


443 ^ 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYTHREE 

Diseasis 


Dkanvaniari said : 

1. Suiruta, 1 shall now describe the pathology of 
Arocaka (Non-relish for food). Three types of Arocaka are 
caused by the three humours severally situated in the longue 
and the heart. 

2. Fourth typ>e of Arocaka ts caused by all the three 
in combination. Fifth type of Arocaka is caused by the de¬ 
jection of the mind* If wind is the causei the rhouth has an 
astringent taste. If Pitta is the cause, it has a bitter taste. If 
Kapha is the cause, a sweet taste is experienced. 

3. Just as everything is tasteless at the time of sorrow 
and anger so also in all the hve types of Arocaka, food is 
tasteless due to the vomiting sensation on account of the 
deranged humour. 

4. The Udana vayu flings up the deranged humours 
resting beneath the mouth and they give rise to a saline taste 
with watery oozings in the mouth* Hence non relish for food. 

5. It pains the umbilical region and the back; the food 
taken is cast to the tides* The patient vomits, bit by bit, small 
lumps of frothy astringent matter. 

6* Due to the action of vayu there is an eructation with 
loud sound that dries up the mouth* Hiccough with hoarseness 
of voice is also observed. 

7. If the attack is by the deranged pitta the patient 
vomits something like saline water mixed with blood. It is 
sometimes greenish yellow in colour, bitter and pungent in taste* 
Thirst, fainting and a burning sensation in the body are the 
further characteristics. 

8. If kapha is the cause, a thick glcasy yellowish honey¬ 
like mucous of excessively saline taste is vomited with watery 
dischaige and horripilation. 

9. Patients having swelling in the mouth, with sweet 
taste, pain and disquietude in the sinews and hiccough are to 
be conside^d having all symptoms and are to be given up at 
incurable. 



444 


Garuia Purdi?a 


10. To him seeing anything or hearing any sound is 
hateful. If the sickness is due to the food being contaminated 
by germs, the symptoms are colic (lula). shivering and disquie* 
tude aggravated by vayu, etc. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYFOUR 

Diseases 


Dkanvantari said t 

1. O Sujruta, now I shall explain the cause and pathology 
of Hrdroga, (Ailment of the heart) etc. They arc of five 
types, one due to germs and the other four due to the three 
humours severally or in combination. 

2. If the cause is Vayu, a feeling of emptiness is observ¬ 
ed. The patient eats much and cries. The heart* is benumb¬ 
ed, seems to break asunder and dries up; dizziness is ex¬ 
perienced. 

3. Suddenly, the patient is dejected, feels grief and is 
frightened. He cannot bear to hear the least sound. He 
shivers and faints as a result. There is difiiculty in breathing 
and sleeplessness. 

4. As a result of the attack of Pitta the 5)*mptoms are 
thirst, exhaustion, burning sensation, perspiration, eructa¬ 
tion with acidity, vomiting of acid or bilious matter, fever 
and cloudy vision. 

5. If deranged kapha causes Hrdroga the heart becomes 
numbed, the digestion is impaired, the face is distorted; 
hiccough, pain in the bone, spitting of mucous matter, drowsi¬ 
ness, lassitude, fever non relish of food are observed. 

6. If the ailment of the heart is caused by the com¬ 
bined action of all the three do$as all the different symp¬ 
toms are observed. If the ailment is due to germs the symp¬ 
toms are :— blackish yellow colour in the eyes, dizziness and 
dark vision, cardiac oedema, disquietude, itching sensa¬ 
tion in the limbs and exp^toration of kapha* 



M 54.17. 


445 


7. The patieni thinks that his heart is being sawn with 
scissors. This ailment shall be treated in the early stages, ocher* 
wise it is fatal. 

8. Thint may be caused by V'ata, Pitta or Kapha. 
Debility is caused by their combination. A sixth variety of 
Hrdroga is caused by contact with the persons who are sick. 
The exciting facton may be Vata and Pitta. 

9. In all these ailments it is their aggravation that 
brings about spasmodic jerits in all the limbs, palpitation, 
agitation^ and burning sensation in the heart and fainting 
through the withering up of all the dhatus. 

10. Thirst arises as a result of the drying up of the 
root of the tongue, throat, lungs, palate and the water* 
carrying* vessels. This is a common characteristic symptom 
of all kinds of Hrdroga. 

11-12* Parchedness of the mouth, insatiable thirst for water, 
hatred for food, weakness in voice, difliculty in putting out 
the tongue due to the roughness of throat, palate and the lips, 
prattling in delirium, mental aberration and eructation are 
also the symptoms in Hrdroga. 

13-16. The derangement of Vayu causes emaciation, 
dejection of spirit, dizziness of the head, breaking pain at 
the temples, impaired sense of smell, loss of juiciness in the 
mouth, dullness of hearing, insomnia and general debility. 
The derangement of the Pitta brings about slight increase 
in the acidity, fainting, bitterness in the mouth, redness in 
the eyes, perpetual drying up of the body and burning sensa* 
lion and a feeling as of fumes escape through the skin. The 
aggravated Kapha obstructs the V5yu in the water-carrying 
vessels. The ducts with the accumulated Kapha absorb the 
heat as in the case of mud. The throat appears to be pierc¬ 
ed with the awn of barley. Sleepiness with a sweet taste in 
the mouth is experienced. A continuous sluggishness felt in 
the head, lassitude, vomiting, nonrelish for food and indi¬ 
gestion—these symptoms are in brief brought about by all 
humours in combination. 

17. Blood is obstructed due to the accumulation of 
mucous ixid undigested matter thus causing the aggravation of 



Purd^ 


446 

both Vayu and Pitta, So the patient while experiencing in¬ 
tense heat experiences an unbearable chillness. 

18, ir thirst obstructs the humour in the viscera the 
ailment is definitely caused by Pitta. The aching pain caused 
by drinking too much water is due to the digestion and dilu¬ 
tion of albuminous content. 

19, The thirst generated by taking in greasy, pungent, 
acid and saline stufls is due to Kapha* The thirst due to the 
loss of lymph and other secretions is an indication of onset 
of consumption; 

20, The thirst generated by the admixture of atrophy, 
fainting and fever with other chronic ailments is called Up* 
aiargatmika (foreboding evil) 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYFIVE 

Diseases 


Dhanvantari scid : 

1. I shall explain the pathcJogy of Madatyaya (distcm- 
per due to inebriation) as mentioned by sages. Wine is sharp, 
add, dry, parchifying and light and induces quickness in sexual 
intercourse. 

2. It pervades even the minutest capillaries of the sys* 
tern but its effect on the fat is just opposite. The qualities of 
sharpness etc. mentioned by the sages have disturbing effect on 
the mind. 

3. Excessively drunk, wines and spirits arc fatal* With 
their qualities of sharpness^ etc. thty destroy the vitality of the 
addict and bring about alu^sbness. 

4* Exciting the sense organs wine upsets tlic mind. On 
taking it for the fint time or second time it may have an 
exciting and exhilarating effect on the drinker. 

5«6. The fool carried away by indecision and uncertainty 
considers it pleasing. A king who becomes an addict to wine 
becomes unbridled like an unchecked serpent. There is nothing 



1J55.16 


447 


that he will not do in his inebriation : Wine U the source of 
unspeakable mischiefs and supports wickedness. 

7-9. It is the sole guide of wretchedness that has a 
hundred paths leading to it. Bereft of all energetic actions the 
addict in the third stage of inebriety may yearn for wine always. 
The sinful wretch has now come to a stage worse than death. 
He cannot distinguish between righteousness and evil, pleasure 
and pain, honour and dishonour, and wholesome and unwhole* 
some. Withered up and deluded, highly pleased at times and 
dejected at other he loses his power of memory and falls uti* 
conscious. Well built strong persons of gluttonous habits may 
not become loo intoxicated after drinking wine over a heavy 
meal. 

10. The ailment of inebriety may be caused by the three 
humours—V4yu, Pitta and Kapha severally or in combination. 
Unconsciousness and pain in the heart cliaracterize all varieties. 

11*13. Thirst engendered by frequent loose motions, 
mild dejection, fever and nonrelish for food, constipation, dark* 
ness of vision, hiccough, difficulty m breathing sleeplessness, 
excessive p>erspi ration, obstruction of ordure (Visthambha), in* 
tumescence, and mental agitation too characterize all types of 
inebriety. The patient is in a dreamy state and does not speak 
when addressed. Due to the attack of Fktta there is a burning 
sensation, fever and perspiration, fainting and a continuous pal* 
pitation of the heart. Due to the action ofKapha there is vomit* 
Ing, disquietude, sleepiness and Udaragaurava (Tympanites— 
heaviness in the stomach due to gas trouble). 

14*15. In the ailment of inebriation due to the action of 
all humours in combination all the symptoms can be obser¬ 
ved. Those who knowingly take to wine become victims thereof 
and lose the power of thinking and mental disorders set in. 
Everything is pleasing to them whether a chip of wood or an 
article of food. They do not differentiate between them. Due 
to the action of Vayu many of these symptoms occur. The 
patient spits out mucous matters of phlegm and experiences 
parched ness of throat and somnolence. 

16. He does not brook sounds. His sound is distracted. 
He feels Rheumatic pain all over the body. His heart and throat 



448 


Garuia PurStia 


arc cfTcctcd. He falls iiiro fainting fits. He gasps for breath. 
Excessive thint, nausea and fever also oppress him. 

17. A person who controls himself and intelligently re¬ 
frains from drinking wine* is never afflicted by any disorder 
whether physical or mental. 

18-19. Deluded persons of irascible temperament indulg¬ 
ing in injudicious diet suffer from the three disorders of inebria- 
lion> epileptic fits and abject prostration more and more 
powerful in the order of enumeration. This is due to the 
obstruction of ducts carrying fet, blood and other lymphatic 
secretions. Inebriation is caused by the derangement of all the 
hiimourSi impure blood, and presence of wine and toxic 
matter in the system. 

20. In the ailment of inebriation due to the derange¬ 
ment of Viyu, the patient becomes anaemic and all briglitncss 
of complexion vanishes. The body assumes a coarse dark reddish 
hue. The patient becomes deceitful in behaviour and fickle- 
minded. 

21. The intoxicated person l>ecomes irritable and quar¬ 
relsome due to the affliction of Pitta and his body assumes a 
reddish yellow hue. The affliction of Kapha is responsible for 
the symptoms of somnolence, loose irrelevant talks or when the 
patient appears to be in a trance . 

22-26. The combined action of all the do$as brings about 
all the above symptoms as well as obstruction of the circulation 
of blood and paralysis of the limbs. If the patient exhibits a 
loatluome desire or falls to rec<^nize familiar voices it is an 
indication of derangement of Pitta. He may be exhausted 
utterly and go to deep sleep but the body may be shaking 
vigorously : The signs of an affliction of Viyu must be care¬ 
fully noted. The inebriated patient may either see the sky red, 
blue and black or without seeing anything sink in darkness. He 
may regain consciousness immediately out may experience pain 
in the cardiac region, a shivering sensation and veiligo. In 
epileptic fits brought about by derangement of Viyu the patient 
has hiccough and brownish red colour of the skin. AfiTlicted by 
Pitta the patient, seeing the sky red and yellow, may sink into 
swoon. When he wakes up he perspires profusely and is oppres¬ 
sed with excessive thirst and a burning sensation. During the 



M56.3 


449 


Jit a portion of the body may be yellow and the other blue. 
His eyes may be red, yellow or crimson, 

27*28. In Kapha affliction the epileptic patient sees the 
sky enveloped with clouds as it were, sinks into a deep coma 
and regains consciousness very late. He complains of disquiet* 
ness in the cardiac region. There is salivation. Heavy and be* 
numbed in limbs he falls in a thud like a goat in the uncons* 
cious state. In the combined action of all the do$as it appears 
like an Apasmlira (epilepsy). 

29*30. He falls down moiioniessly and does not have 
any frightful convulsive movements of limbs. In the ailment 
of mada, murcchi, the morbid humours spread themselves out 
and become calm without medication when the patient sinks into 
prostration. Speech, body and the mind do not function pro¬ 
perly but he does not lose strength. 

31. Patients who fall downin prostration, fall like logs 
of wood, no better than dead but with risk of death. 

32. If the treatment is not immediately carried out he 
may die like a person in a deep sea full of crocodiles. 

33. A person in prostration (like the person in the sea) 
should be immediately taken out of it. A person suffering from 
inebriation may be irritated or pleased, it is certain. 

34*35. Used judiciously wine relieves persons of worries, 
otherwise leads him to hell. It gives ability to work, helps 
the natural functions, and blesses with beauty. Judicious use of 
wine is like that of nectar. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYSIX 


Distasts 


Dhenvaniari saidi 

1*3. O Susruta, I shall explain the pathology of Arias 
(Piles) ailments. Among the condylomatous (pinlike) growths 
in the fldlh those that obstruct the anus are called Arias. The 
deranged humour defiling the skm, flesh and the fat makes 



450 


Caruda Purd^a 


many shoots of flesh of diverse shapes in the region of the 
rectum. They are called Ar^as (Piles). In brief, they are of 
two types sahaja (congenital) and Anantarottha (postnatal). 

4. The passage of the rectum is five and a half Angulas 
long. There, dry stone^like lumps three and a hatfahgulas 
long grow. 

5*6. Blood vessels passing through the entrails come to 
these lumps and split open. Hence, within an ahgula from 
without, bleeding occurs in the region of these condylomatous 
growths. Hair about one and a half angulas in length grow 
beyond them. In the congenital type of piles the cause is the 
discomfort of the child in the womb. 

7. The creation of the ^eeds of piles is due to the mis¬ 
deeds of the parents. Curse of gods also may be the cause. 
In the piles due to the combined action of the do^as it is the 
food taken in that creates the seeds. 

8. All ailments congenital in nature are incurable. The 
piles of congenital type are rough, ugly looking, pointing in* 
ward and pale, yellow in colour. The disorders brought about 
by them are dreadful. 

9. Piles are of six types when caused by do^as after the 
birth. The three diflerent do^as severally or their combinations 
in twos make up the six varieties. The dry piles are due to 
Vayu and Kapha and the wet ones due to Pitta. 

10. When more and more faces accumulate in the 
gastric fire that reduces the food taken before into faeces, if 
the person indulges in excessive sexual intercourse the dosas 
become aggravated. 

Ii-14. The Apina Vayu (genito-urinary illiac nerve 
force) becomes aggravated due to various such causes as:— 
drinking in a fitful state, taldr^ in hard indigestible foodstuffs, 
frequent rubbing of the belly, eyes and throat with the palms, 
contact with very chill water, continuous riding for a long 
time, suppression of natural urges and evacuating them with 
difficulty, dysentery, constipation, pulling things and in woman 
miscarriage and painful labour. 

15-16. When the Apina becomes excited the faeces get 
obstructed in the flexus of the rectum and condylomatous 
growths occur on their knotty joints. Its indicationi are 



L156.26. 


451 


low gastric function, obstruction to the removal of ordure, 
pain in the bones and calves of the legs, vertigo, burning 
sensation in the eyes, intumascence and either loose motions 
or constipation. 

17. Obstructed from the front, the wind moves about 
below the umbilicus and when the patient breathes with diffi¬ 
culty it comes out with blood. 

18. A rumbling sound in the entrails, eructation, pro¬ 
fuse belching of saline stuff, excessive urination, scanty faeces, 
non-iiiclination to take food, vertigo, sour taste in the mouth. 

19. Pain in the head, back and chest, lassitude, yearning 
for sensuous pleasures, anger due to frustration or neglect of 
service by others are also observed. 

20. Sometimes the symptoms give rise to the suspicion 
of other ailments such as diarrhoea, wasting disease, jaundice, 
enlargement of the spleen and dropsy. All these diseases in* 
crease when piles b^in to grow. 

21. When the Apina returns, it is obstructed by these 
growths and so it aggravates other vital airs moving among 

the sense organs and parts of the whole body. 

22. Then it pr^uces a parched condition in the seats 

of Pitta, Kapha, urine and faeces and obstructs the gastric fire. 
Then usually all the piles grow. 

23. The patient becomes lean, his enthusiasm and jolly 
spirit vanishes; he becomes dgected, emaciated, pallid in face, 
and appean like a worm eaten tree, sapless and devoid of 
shade* 

24-25. All the disorders mentioned in Yak?m4 (Pulmo¬ 
nary consumption) dutress him. They give rue to acute pain 
in the vulnerable joints, Cough, excessive thirst, dryness in the 
mouth, dyspnea, catarrh, lassitude, aching pain in the limbs, 
nausea, sneezing, intumescence, fever, debility, deafness, 
rigidity and the disease gravel—all these torment him. 

26« Completely emaciated, with voice broken, he sinks 
into a trance and frequently spits* He does not show any 
inclination to take food* He has pain in all joints, bones, 
chest, navel, anus and the thigh joints. A kind of bilious 
matter begins to ooze out of the anus. It resembles water with 
which meat has been washed. 



452 


Garuda Putina 


27. Some of these piles are dry but others are found to 
suppurate and burst; they are caused by Pitta and are of the 
colour of turmeric. 

28. These piles generated by aggravated V&yu are dry 
and rough. They are faded, reddish or brownish in colour and 
uneven. 

29. They arc of unequal sizes and shapes, curved, sharp- 
pointed with their external ends cracked and severed. They 
resemble the fruits of Bimba Kharjura^, Karkandhu^ and 
Karpasa^ seed. 

30. Some of them resemble Kadamba flowen, and some 
those of the white mustard. Acute pain in the head, sides, 
shoulders, calves, thighs, thigh joints, etc. is felt 

31. Sneezing, eructation, obstruction to the removal of 
ordure, catching pain in the heart and non relish for food, 
cough, dryspnea, impaired function of the digestive system, 
ringing noise in the ears and vertigo are further symptoms. 

32. A patient distressed with these disorders passes 
.stools with great difficulty. It is scanty. A loud sound is pro¬ 
duced while evacuating the slimy frothy stuff. 

33. The skin, nail, faeces, urine^ eyes and face are black 
in colour. Chronic enlargement of the spleen, drooping and 
globular tumours (Asthll4) occur. 

34* The condylomatous growths of piles due to the 
derangement of Pitta are bluish in colour at the opening and 
red, yellow and black otherwise. They etude bloody, watery 
stuff through their small tips. They smell like raw meat. They 
are soft to the touch and hang loosely. 

33. Some of them resemble the tongue of a parrot, 
split liver or the mouth of a leech. Burning sensation, fever 
and perspiration, thirst, epileptic fits, zKm-relish for food and 
loss of sense are the symptoms at the time of suppuration. 

36. The faeces are hot, liquid in form^ bluish, reddish 
and yellow in colour and undigested. Tbe piles are thick 
in the middle like barley grain. The skin, nail etc are green 
or yellow in colour. 

1. Phoenii dactyiiier or p. icaulit (Rdo GVDB p. S3l). 

2. Zisyphus nummularis. 

9. Glottypiuin barbadena. 



1.156.47 


453 


37. If Kapha be the cause the piles are deep rooted, 
thick, less painful, white in colour, of decaying appearance, 
glossy, globular in shape and unyielding. 

38. Lubricious, rigid, smooth and mild they produce an 
itching sensation and the patient finds it pleasant to handle 
them and scratch them. Some of them are like the bamboo 
shoots or the seed of the jack fruit or the teat of a cow. 

39. There is catching pain at the thigh joints, rectum, 
bladder and navel. Dyspnea, cough, disquietude in the 
cardiac region, salivatiou non*reli$h of food and catarrh are 
the symptoms. 

40. Strangury (difficulty in passing urine), sluggishness 
of head, shivering chilliness are experienced. Impotency, im* 
paired gastric function, vomiting and all the disorders in 
undigested state are also found in the patient. 

41. The faeces come out in profusion. They have the 
colour of suet. They contain mucous kapha matter. The piles 
do not cracknor do they bleed. Skin, etc., have grey colour and 
are glossy. 

42. In the piles caused by the combined action of all 
dosas all the symptoms can be observed. If they* are caused by 
the impurity of blood such symptoms as are in the Pittaja 
type can be observed. 

43. They resemble the shoots of Vata or GuAja berries 
or coral. The faeces are hard and hot and contaminated. 

44. If the motions are many the blood gushes out 
suddenly. The skin of the patient is like that of a frog. He 
suffers all disorders due to the deficiency of blood. 

45*47. The patient loses the colour of his complexion, 
strength and mental gaiety. His vitality is impaired. His sense 
organs do not function properly. By taking hard foodstuffs 
dehydrating the faeces, like Mudga^, Kodrava’, Jambira^, 
bamboo shoots, Bengal gram, etc., the wind becomes aggravated 
in the region of the rectum and obstructs the ducts flowing 
down and dries up the waste matter. 

1. PlMseolus radiatus 

2. Paapalum icrebieulatum. 

3. An AUium species (Refer GVDB» p. 164). 



45 * 


Garu4^ Purina 


48. It absorbs the moisture of faeces and urine and 
makes them thick with disastrous consequences. As a result of 

it acute pain in the viscera, back, cardiac region and the sides 
results. 

49. Tympanites, Ascites, accumulation of faeces, colic, 
pain in the bladder and intumescence in the cheeks are likely 
to follow. 

50. The deranged Vayu taking an upward course 
causes vomiting, non-relish for food and fever. Palpitation of 
the heart, diarrhoea, suppression of urine and dysentery are 
also caused. 

51. Deafness, dyspnea, acute headache, consumption, 
catarrh, faecal disorder, thirst, enlargement of the spleen 
dropsy, etc., follow. 

52. All these caused by the derangement of Vayu are 
terrific. Piles bring about even death. 

53. Piles grow in the rectum of those persons whose 
viscera are attacked by Vayu even without the exciting factors. 
The congenital piles as well as those that grow in the inner 
grove of the rectum arc incurable. If the digestive power is 
maintained palliation is the only alternative. 

54. Growths of condyloroatous nature caused by any 
two of the doias in combination and those in the second flexus 
are incurable if left untreated for a year. 

55. Those piles that grow in the external groove as 
well as those caused by a single do?a can be easily cured if 
they are of recent origin. 

56. Condylomatous growths are said to grow on the 
penis, etc., as well as in the navel too. They are like the Gandu* 
pada (the pillow footed worm or Earthworm) and are lubri¬ 
cious and soft. 

57. The wind Vyana in combination with Kapha brings 
about growth of piles on the outer skin like nails rough to the 
touch and firm. They are called Carmaklla. 

58. The roughness and piercing nature of the piles is 
due to Viyu; the blackness at the top is due to Pitta; and their 
glossiness, knotty nature and colouration are due to Kapha. 



1.157J 


455 


59. An intelligent man must exert himself in quelling 
the piles quickly. Otherwise they may lead to graver disorders 
and asitis* 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYSEVEN 

niseasis 

^honvaniari said: 

1. O Sujruta» I shall explain the pathology of dysentery 
and diarrhoea. They are of six types> die dosas severally and 
in combination produce ibur varieties and fear and sorrow 
produce two types. 

2«3. Dysentery is usually earned by drinking too much 
of water. The Vayu becomes aggravated due to the injudicious 
intake of dry foods, {ally stuHs, fried things, gingelly seed cakes, 
shoots and germinated sprouts and inordinate quantities of 
wine, day-sleep, worms and suppression of natural urges for 
excretion# 

4. The aggravated Vkyu causes the downward rush of 
the blood extinguishing the gastric fire. Then it permeates 
the inner chamber of food and faeces and liquefies the waste 
matter. 

5. The indication of its imminent onset is an acute pain 
in the chest, rectum and viscera, perspiration all over the body 
and constipation# 

6. Distention of the abdoiMn, indigestion and absence 
of fever are due to Vayu# The patient passes scanty faeces 
without any sound but with constant interruptions. 

7. The waste matter is hard, turbid, frothy and knotty. 
A burning sensation in the fleshy region of the rectum is felt. 
The lubricious surface is cut up. There is a prolapse in the 
constricted anus. The patient gasps for breath and has horri* 
pUation aQ^over the body. 



456 


CaTu4(i Puriifa 


8-10. In the pittaja type diarrhoea the waste matter is 
yellow, black, turmeric coloured and grass coloured with 
blood mixed with it. It has a fetid smell. The patient has a 
burning sensation, excessive thirst and epileptic hcs. If the 
cause is kapha there is an acute pain in the anus with burning 
sensation. The waste matter is thick, slimy and scanty in a 
continuous flow. If the three dosas in combination cause 
diarrhoea, all the symptoms and particularly horripilation, 
severe pain, and heaviness in bladder, belly and anus are 
observed. The patient loses sense and Chinks what he has done 
as not done. 

11. If extreme fright agitates the mind the patient 
passes stool even as he lies down. The Viyu liquefies it and it 
passes out in warm jets. 

12. If extreme agony causes diarrhoea the symptoms 
arc as in Vataja and Pittaja types. In brief, diarrhoea can be 
divided into two (1) Sama or with mucous and (2) Nirama 
or without mucous. 

13. In the Sama type the waste matter emits fetid smell. 
There is swelling, obstruction to the passage of ordure, and 
salivation. The opposite characteristics are observed in Nirama 
type. Due to Kapha none sinks. 

14. Atisara (diarrhoea) not given careful attention 
may lead to GrahanI (acute dysentery) by taking in articles 
of food bringing about the quenching ofgestric fire. 

15. Atisara is so called because there is plenty (Ati) of 
evacuation (Sara) of digested Sama or Nirama waste matter. 
Hence, it is very active and virulent naturally. If Sama is 
undigested it becomes shattered; if digested it does not become 
Pakva (fully ripe and digested). 

16. A chronic Atisara with the accumulations leads 
to Grahaol disorder which is of four types, the three do^as 
severally and collectively being the cause. 

17-21. The general symptoms of the onset of GrahanI 
are :—exhaustion of the limbs, purification of the body with 
delay (delayed evacuation), a little salivation, draught in the 
mouth, non relish for food, thirst, vertigo, binding pain in the 
abdomen, vomiting and ringing in the ears. Some of these 
symptoms are also seen :~Weakness and emaciation of the 



1 . 157.29 


457 


body, acute Tamaka fever, epileptic fits, numbness in the head 
and thighs, intumescence in hands and feet, drowsiness, par* 
chedness of the palate due to the action of the wind, darkness 
of vision, noisy echo in the ears, pain in the sides, thighs, 
thigh joints, neck, etc. and acute cholera. 

22. In weak patients the symptoms are very pronounced, 
hunger and thirst greatly oppressing them. There is inflation 
of belly during the process of digestion or on the completion 
of the same. After taking meal the patient gets some relief. 

23. In the Vataja type ofGrahani the following indica* 
tlons can be seen. Palpitation of the heart, enlargement of the 
spleen, piles, jaundice, loss of sense, passing of either loose or 
hard lumpy dry waste matter with froth and loud report, 
gasping for breath and hiccough. The motion is frequent. 

24. In the Pittaja type of GrahaQi the waste matter is 
either yellow or bluish yellow and liquid in nature. Acid 
eruptions, burning sensation in the heart and throat, nonrelish 
for food and excessive thirst are also seen.- 

25*27. DifHculty in digestion, painful motion, vomiting, 
non relish for food, burning sensation in the mouth, frequent 
spitting, cough, disquietude and catarrh, sensation of bulki¬ 
ness in the heart, distension and heaviness of abdomen, eruc¬ 
tation with defiled sweetness, lasutude, horripilation, etc, are 
the specific features of the Kaphaja type. The waste matter is 
thick split up and charged with mucous matter. Even if the 
patient is not lean he feels weak. In the Sannipataja Grahani 
all the symptoms are observed. 

28*29. The first three types are very disorderly. All the 
symptoms mentioned before arc observed in GrahapI too* 
Eight ailments are called Maharogas (great illnesses). They are 
incurable. They are :—Rheumating gravel in urine (or stone 
in bladder), leprosy^ epilepsy, dropsy, gonorrhoea, piles and 
Graham. 



458 


CaTu4o Purdna 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYEIGHT 

Diseases 


Dhanvantari said : 

1*3. Now I shall explain the pathology of Mutraghnta 
{suppression of urine or strangury), Susruta, please listen. The 
urinary bladder, its top or outlet, the penis, the hip, the scro¬ 
tum and the rectum, all these are covered by a single 
peritoneum and are situated in the pelvic cavity. Though the 
bladder is placed with its face down it is continuously hlted 
with urinary secretions through the ducts carrying them 
and always exuding them. Dosas entering these secretions 
produce twenty diseases. 

4-J. Strangury and diabetes affect the vulnerable joints 
of the pelvis containing the bladder, thigh Joints and the 
penis. In the V&taja type the urine is scanty and emitted 
constantly with the gi'eatest pain. In the Pittaja type it is 
yello\^ giving rise to pain and burning sensation. In the 
Kaphaja type it is red. The patient feels heaviness in the 
bladder and penis. Intumescence is also found there. 

6-7. The urinary discharge is lubricious or tawny in 
colour in a combined action of all dosas. When the deranged 
V&yu turns the face of the bladder and dries it up the urine 
is charged with Pitta, Kapha or semen and a terrible gravel 
is formed like a lump of Gorocana which is a limb of the pitta 
matter. 

8. In all cases the deranged Kapha is an exciting factor 
in Asmar!. Its premonitory symptoms are :—Inflammation of 
the urinary bladder and excruciating pain all round it in that 
region. 

9. The urine gets obstructed in the bladder. There is 
difficulty in passing urine. There is fever and nonrelish for 
food. The general indications are pain in the umbilical 
region, foreskin of the prepuce and the lop of the urinary 
bladder, etc. 

10. When there is obstruction in the passage by the 
gravel the micturition is delayed and painful. If the patient 



1 . 158.22 


459 


passes uriae after a long retention the urine is clear and crys¬ 
tal coloured and he feels great pain. 

11. If it is excited it comes out with blood and Beshy 
matter. There is pain in the passage. In the Vayuja concretion 
of urine the patient grinds his teeth and shakes violently. 

12. The patient feels that something stops the urine 
and afflicts the navel, he evacuates (he bowel with a gaseous 
discharge and urinates in drops frequently. 

13. The Aimari is tough and dark ia colour4 It ap¬ 
pears Co be studded with thorns. Pitta brings about a burn¬ 
ing sensation in the bladder. It appears hot as if being cooked. 

14. The concretions appear like the stones of Bhallataka 
fruit red, yellow and white in colour. Due to the affliction of 
Kapha the bladder appears to be inflicted upon and is heavy 
and cool to the touch. 

15. In infants the Aimari is large, glossy and honey- 
coloured or white. Many children arc affected by it. 

16-17. Since they have not grown large or fully deve¬ 
loped they can be extracted easily. The Sukrasmar! or con¬ 
cretion in semen is generated by suppression of emission and 
it is dreadful. The aggravated vayu collects and dries up the 
semen unrcleased or dislodged from itsoriginal seat within the 
scrotum. It is then called Sukrasmarl. 

18. It produces a painful swelling in the bladder and 
micturition b very painful. The semen secreted becomes 
dry if there are Sukraimarl formations. 

19. An attack of fever or chronic cough makes the 
urinary concretions into Sarkara (gravel). The internal Vayu 
splits and crushes these concretions and sends them out along 
with the urine. If the Vayu takes an averse course they lie 
within the bladder and mature. 

20. The aggravated Vayu may make the top of the 
bladder let out urine. Sometimes it may obstruct the flow of 
urine and from its seat it may generate pain. 

21. It may cover up the bladder or lifting it, it may 
scatter it about, then a great pain is felt with throbbings and 
irritation. 

22. When the bladder is thus afflicted the urine may 



460 Garu^a Purd^a 

come out in drops. The continuous flow is obstructed; this 
disease is called Vatavasti. 

23. It is difficult to be cured. The second one is stili 
more difficult Co be cured. The powerful Vayu comes in bet* 
ween the path of faeces and the bladder. 

24. It generates a kind of thick knotty round raised 
concretions called V&tisthiUi (Globular seed like concretions 
caused by V&yu.) They are found both in the faeces and in the 
urine. 

25*26. A sickness called Vatakundalika is produced 
when semen is retained for a long time without emission. 
The deranged Vayu lies within the bladder in a coil and gives 
great pain. It whirb after obstructing the urine. There is rigi- 
dity» heaviness and convolution in the bladder. Urine is passed 
out bit by bit. 

27*28. The urine being obstructed docs not pass out 
completely. After the passage of urine there is a slight pain. 
When the Vayu is obstructed by the collection of urine it 
returns to the umbilical region or lower abdomen and produces 
pain. There is no distension but due to loss of strength faeces 
are collected and obstructed. 

29*30. Urine may enter the abdominal passage by the 
pressure of wind and stay in the bladder or umbilical region 
and flow out gradually. It may or may not be painful. It is 
without cessation. Its residue is dried up. 

31. Inside the bladder near its entrance there is a knotty 
small firm concretion like gravel. It is called Mutragranthi. 

32. Sometimes a man in his sexual intercourse may 
not discharge semen immediately although it might have been 
dislodged from its seat. This is due to the action of Viyu. 
But when he begins to urinate the semen may come out either 
before or after urination. 

S3. The urine then appears like water washing down 
ashes. The stuff ts called Mutrasukram (Spermatorrhoea) 
Sometimes weak persons or those of harsh nature are afflicted 
by Vayu when passing stools. 

34. The faecal matter may get into the urinary tract and 
hence the urine drop may have the smell of faeces. This is 
called Mutravighata. 



LI 59.5 


461 


35*36. The Viyu aggravated by Pitta, physical exercises, 
excessive intake of sharp acid food stuffs and inflammation 
may generate a burning sensation in the urinary bladder and 
urine mixed with blood or blood alone comes out in hot jets. 
It is called U^Mv&ta. 

37. Pitta and Vayu in the urinary bladder of a consti¬ 
tutionally parched up person or thoroughly weary man may 
cause deficiency of urine accompanied by pain and burning 
sensation. The ailment is called Mutrakfaya. 

38-40. If either kapha or pitta or both are affected by 
Vayu the passage of urine is very painful^ It is a thick fluid 
yellow, red or white in colour. There is a burning sensation. 
It may have the colour of bile or powdered conch shell. It may 
be dry in some cases. It may have all the colours too. The 
ailment is called Mutrasada. Thus all ailments in the context of 
urination have been explained in detail. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYNINE 

DUwfs 

Dhanvantari said : 

1. 1 shall now explain the pathology of Pramehas 
(Diabetes), please listen O Susruta. Diabetes consists of twenty 
varieties. Ten are caused by Kapha, six are caused by Pitta and 
four are caused by Vayu. Fat, urine and phlegm are the seats 
of disorders. 

2. A patient of Haridrameha passes hot faeces and urine 
having the colour of turmeric and smelling like saw flesh. A 
patient of Mafiji^thameha passes urine like the water with 
which Indian madder is washed (yellowish red). 

3. A patient of Raktameha discharges flesh smelling hot 
saline red urine. A patient of Vas&meba frequently discharges 
urine mixed with fat and having the colour of fat. 

4-5. 'A patient of Majj&meha passess urine charged with 
marrow and resembling marrow. A patient of Hastimeba 



462 Garu4^ PurdM 

dUcharges a continuous copious flow of urine containing slimy 
mucous matter* 

6. A patient ofMadhumeha discharges urine like honey. 
It is of two types. 

7*9. When the V&yu gets aggravated due to deficiency of 
dh&tus and its path is obstructed by the do^ the patient be*' 
gins to exhibit the symptoms and without any apparent reason 
he shows signs of amelioration and aggravation by turns* It then 
becomes incurable. All pramchas, neglected at the outset, turn 
into Madhumeha in course of time. 

All those cases of Prameha where the excretions are 
sweet like honey can be classified under Madhumeha. 

10. The common disorders in the Pramchas caused by 
Kapha are indigestion, nonrelish for food, vomiting, somno* 
lence, cough and catarrh. 

IL The characteristic symptoms in Meha caused by 
deranged Pitta arc:—Pricking pain in the bladder and urethra, 
bursting of the scrotum, fever, burning sensation in the body, 
thirst, sour eructations, epilepsy and loose boweb. 

12. The Vayu afflicted person exhibits the following 
symptoms \—Udivarta (Prolapsus of the anus), shivering, pain 
in the heart, morbid longing (for bitter and astringent food*stuffs), 
Colic, sleeplessness withering up, dyspnea and cough. 

13. Ten types of abscesses caused by the neglect of 
Prameha are :—(1) Saraviki (2) Kacchapika (3) JvSlinl 
(4) Vinata (5) AlajI (6) Masurika (7) Sarjapika (8) Putrini 
(9) Vidiriki and (10) Vidradhi. 

14. The main cause is food stuff, sweat, sour, saline, oily, 
heavy, lubricious and cold in combination with Kapha. 

15. Newly harvested grains, wine, dal soup, gravy, 
jaggery and milkproducts in excess cause sharing the bed or 
seat as a patient may also cause the same. 

16. The defiled Kapha located in the urinary bladder 
first defiles the body, secretions like sweat, and the fat and flesh. 
Then it produces Framehas. 

17. The Kapha makes the blood mixed with urine when 
Kapha etc. are exhausted. When Kapha subsides V4yu brings 
the dhatus to the bladder. 



1 . 159.28 


465 


18. The curability or otherwise and the necessity to wait 
in the rase of Pramehas shall be decided by understanding the 
underlying cause. If the dosas are eliminated the disease can 
be cured, if they are aggravated the sickness penists. 

19. The general characteristic of all Pramehas is copious 
urination turbid in nature. By the combination of dosas diflferent 
disorders are observed. The different types of Prameha are 
classified according to the colour of the urine. 

20. The patient of Udakameha (Polyuria) passes clear 
copiouscool odourless urine like water. It is slightly lubricious 
and turbid. 

2N22. The patient of Ik$umeha discharges excessively 
sweet wine, like sugar*cane juice. The patient of S&ndrameha 
(Chyluria) passes thick urine resembling state rice gruel. 

23. The patient of Surameha passes urine like wine 
transparent at the surface but leaving a sediment at the 
bottom. The patient of Pi^fameha passes copious urine 
white-like pasted rice. He has horripilation at the time of 
urination. 

24. The patient of Sukrameha (Spermatorrhoea) passes 
une highly charged with semen resembling it in colour. The 
patient of Sikatameha passes urine with sediments like grains of 
sand. 

25. The patient of Sitameha passes copious utine cold 
and sweet. The patient of 8anairmeha passes urine slowly in 
broken jets. The patient of L&Iameha passes slimy, shreddy 
urine like saliva. 

26. The patient of Ksarameha passes urine alkaline in 
character in smell, colotir, taste and touch. The patient of 
Nllamcha pa^es bluish urine and the patient of KHlameha 
passes urine black like ink. 

27. Abscesses usually occur in vulnerable joints and 
fleshy portions in the body. An abscess elevated at the extre¬ 
mities and dipped in the centre, producing no discharges nor 
giving ariypain ts called Saravika since it resembles a saucer in 
shape. 

2^ An abscess giving a burning sensation and resembl¬ 
ing the back of a tortoise shall be known Kacchapika by 



Gdru4^ PufS^a 

scholars. The abscess large in siae and blue in colour is called 
Vinata. 

29. At the time of its incubation the abscess Jvalin! gives 
excruciating pain and a burning sensation. The abscess Alaj! 
is terrible. It is either red or white and is surrounded by 
blisters. 

30. An abscess resembling a Masura dala (lentil seed) 
is called Masurika. Small clusters of abscesses resembling 
mustard seeds in the tongue are called Sar^pika. They are 
very painful. They suppurate too. 

31. The abscess Putriju is of various sizes. Some are 
large, some small and some very minute. The abscess Vida* 
rika it hard and round like the bulbous root of Vidarl (an 
esculent tuber). 

32. An abscess with the characteristics of Vidradhi 
(Erysipelas) is called Vidradhiki. The abscesses PutrinI and 
Vidirika give intolerable pain and are fatty. 

33. Many other abscesses occurring suddenly due to the 
deranged Pitta are less fatty. Their virulence is in accordance 
with the aggravation of the do^. 

34. In a patient of defiled fat these abscesses occur even 
without Prameha. They are not recognized as long as the 
colour is not clearly developed* 

35. Without the characteristic symptoms of Prameha 
if a patient passes urine red in colour or resembling the wash* 
ings of tiumeric he is a victim of Raktapitta (urethral 
haemorrhage) • 

36-37. Perspiration, foul smell in the limbs, lassitude 
and looseness in the limbs, inclination to lie down, sleep, or 
take food, burning sensation in the chest, eyes, tongue and 
ears, thickness of the tips hair and nails and their profuse 
growth, fondness for cool things, parchedness in the throat and 
palate, taste of sweetness in the mouth, bumii^ sensation in 
hands and feet, all these are the symptoms indicating the 
onset of Prameha. Ants move about in the urine of the patient. 

38. Thirst and sweetness of urine and similar disorders 
of various forms occur when the illness pit^esses. When the 
symptoms are foil the type occurs. When the other dosas sub¬ 
side the Vltaja type may occur. 



M60.8 


465 


39. Prameha caused by Pitta and Kapha exhibits the 
entire symptoms simultaneously and that caused by sexual in** 
dulgence exhibits them gradually. Pittaja Prameha can be 
checked or alleviated. If the Prameha is not fully developed it 
can be cured. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY 

Duties 


Dkdnoantari said: 

]«3. I shall now describe the pathology of Vidradhi 
(Erysipelas) and Gulma (Intumescence), please listen O 
Sulruta. If stale or very hot, dry, coarse and parchifying food¬ 
stuffs are taken, or if abnormal activities are indulged in, if 
hard and uneven beds are used the blood becomes vitiated. 
Then it vitiates the skin, flesh, fat and bones and takes refuge 
in the abdominal cavity and produces intumescence inside and 
outside the body. It gives excruciating pain. It may be elongat¬ 
ed or circular in shape. This is called Vidradhi. 

4. The do^as either severally or in combination produce 
on the surface of the body on different limbs knotty intumes¬ 
cences due to exuding contaminated blood. 

5. Inside, they are in the form of inflammations very 
terrible, deep seated and exuding. They grow like anthills. 
They impair digestion. 

6. They usually occur in the umbilical region, urinary 
bladder, liver, spleen lungs, heart, abdomen and the thigh 
joints. When there is palpication of the heart they give excru¬ 
ciating pain. 

7. Ac the time of incubation it is black in colour and at 
the time of ripening or suppurating it b^omes red. It is iiTc- 
gular information: It brings in loss of consciousness, vertigo, 
constipation, suppression of urine and noisiness in movement. 

8. In the pituja type it is red, copper coloured or black 
producing thirst, fainting, fever and burning sensation. In the 



466 Gant4a Purina 

kaphaja type it quickJy incubates and suppurates. A little 
greyish in colour it gives an itching sensation. 

9. Shivering, chill ness to touch, numbness of the affect* 
ed part, yawning, nonrelish for food and heaviness are the 
symptoms. The Sannipataja type is slow in growth and does 
not suppurate. It is irregular in formation. 

10 Looseness of the bowels is the common character*' 
istic of both the external and the internal vidradhi. It assumes 
a black colour, surrounded by blisters and is attended with an 
intolerable burning pain and fever. 

11. The external abscess due to contaminated blood is 
a sign of Pitta. Such abscess in the uuemal regions is peculiar 
to women. There is another V'idradhi due to wounds with a 
weapon, or hitting with something. 

12. The blood originating from the wound is tossed by 
the Viyu and it aggravates pitta and produces a vtdradhi of 
grave disorders exhibiting the symptoms of both Pitta and 
contaminated blood. 

] 3. Difference in the disorder is due to the difference in 
the seat of the abscess. If pufHng up is the disorder in an 
abscess in the umbilical region that in the bladder is strangury. 

14. An abscess in the spleen will cause difficulty in in* 
haling and exhaling and excessive thirst. An abscess In the 
lungs produces constriction in the throat. An abscess in the 
heart produces pain all over the body. 

15. An abscess in the abdomen or its side produces 

loss of sense, Tamaka (a peculiar dyspnea) and digging 

pain in the heart. 

16. If there is an abscess in the thigh joints internally 
or externally or in the hips or on the back the pain will be in 
the sides and the vdnd will be obstructed at the rectum. 

17. The state of incubation, that of ripening and that 
of fully ripened tumour in the inside arc to be known as very 
like those of any swelling. An internal abscess occurring above 
the umbilical r^on sends out the exudation after suppuration 
through the mouth and the others through the anus. 

18. In a vidradht formation in rectum mouth or uiii* 
bilical region the dou can be known from its suppuration. A 
sannipataja vidradhi shows alteration from its seat. 



1.160.30 


467 


19. The Vidradhi ia the umbilical region or in the 
urinary bladder, externally or internally when ripe, bunU. 
That which U fully grown suppurates but under-developed is 
infested with disorders. 

20. Sinful wicked women suffer from internal abscesses 
when the child in the womb dies; an inflammation occurs 
there very thick. 

21. An abscess on the breasts of women has all the 
characteristics of an external abscess. The blood in women is 
very subtle. Hence small girls do not suffer from internal 
abscess. 

22-23. An ag^travated but obstructed Viyu in its path 
generally causes swellings. From the region between scrotum 
and the thigh joints it reaches the nerve vessel passing beyond 
the testicles and oppresses it. Thus it causes its swelling and a 
vitiation of the fat in the locality. It is called Vrddhi (Hydro- 
cela). It is of seven typ>es. 

24. Due to the affliction of Vayu, in the case of Vrddhi 
whether external or totemal there is excessive micturition. 
The swelling becomes inflated, parched and rough to the 
touch accompanied by a burning sensation. 

25. Due to the affliction of Pitta the swelling resembles 
a ripe Udumbara fruit (Fiats Jndica) attended with heat, 
burning sensation and suppuration. Due to the affliction of 
Kapha the swelling is heavy, glossy and slightly painful. It 
produces an itching sensation. 

26. Due to the affliction of contaminated blood, the 
swelling becomes compact, dark in colour and covered with 
bulbous eruptions on its sur&cc. All the symptoms of Pittaja 
Vrddhi arc present. Due to the action of fat defiled by Kapha 
the Vfddhi is soft and rounded like a palm fruit. 

27. This ailment is called Mutraja Vrddhi as the 
patient habitually suppresses the passage of urine. There are 
no hair on the swelling. It is soft and quiet but is disturbed 
on movement. 

28. Plunging into chill water, and taking in food* 
stulTs aggravating the V&yu produces strangury and ringlike 
markings beneath the scrotum. 

29-30. Suppression of faeces and passage of urine and 



Garu4A 


468 

abnormal activities of the limbs causes the aggravation of the 
Viyu that affects the virility of the patient and takes the 
blood downwards. This causes knotty swelling in the thigh 
joints. 

31. Neglected at the outset this Vrddhi turns into 
Gulma (enlarged spleen, etc.) and produces in its wake many 
disorders like distension, etc. Firmly pressed it goes in with a 
sound but comes out swelling again. 

32. The Rakta Vrddhi is incurable. Vita Vrddhi con* 
tinues in the same size with a network of coarse blue and red 
veins like a window covered with a woollen net. 

33. There are seven types of Vrddhi due to the do^as 
severally and combined in diverse ways and the eighth one 
happens in women due to the c<mtamination of menstrual 
blood. 

34. Fever, dysentery, fainting, vomiting, chillneis and 
hunger make even a strong man emaciated. 

35. The patient who takes boiled rice and drinks too 
much or fasts or takei bath is soon overwhelmed with fits of 
fainting. 

36. Without resorting to emollient or diaphoretic 
measures, drying up measures shall be used or those measures 
provoking free flow of blood shall be used whether the patient 
is free from defiled do^ or not. 

37*38. In the case of the Vitaja Vidradhi the wind and 
the defiled matter can be eliminated separately or collectively. 
The Viyu mixed with blood passing through the ducts obs* 
tructs their upward or downward passage and produces pain. 
The swelling Gulma can be fdt by the hand in a knotty 
globular shape. It feels a little hot. 

39. The Vayu lodged in the abdomen becomes hard 
and coarse due to fastii^ or obstruction to the passage by 
ICapha and waste matter* 

40. The aggravated Vkyu continuing in its own locatious 
acts independently, while located in the seat of any other 
do}a it is dependent on that do9a. The consolidated lump of 
kapha in combination with dirt occupying the bladder, urn* 
bilical region, thoracic cavity and sides is called Gulma. 



M 60.53 


469 


4L In the Vataja type of gulma» headache, fever, in« 
flammation of the spleen, nimbling sound in the entrails, a 
pricking pain in the limbs, loose motions, and difficult painful 
urination are the symptoms. 

42. There is swelling (Sotha or Anasarca) in the limbs, 
mouth or in the feet, impaired gastric function, parchedness 
and black colour of the skin etc. due to the fickleness of Vayu. 

43» Like a blind man groping about rolling his eye- 
bails without realising the place where he is, the gulma rolls 
about as if a number of ants have covered it« It throbs. 

44. Due to Pitta, burning sensation is felt. There are 
acid eructations, epileptic fits, loose motions, sweating thirst, 
chlorosis (Haridrya) and swellings all over the body. 

45. The deranged kapha is aggravated or diminishes and 
scorches its seat. There is rigidity due to kapha, non relish for 
food, a feeling of exhaustion, heaviness of head and fever. 

46. Obesity, lassitude, disquietude whiteness or black¬ 
ness of skin etc. are observed. The swelling becomes hard 
and fixed and the patient has steady sleep for a short while. 

47. Inflammations caused by two do^as in combination 
affecting their own respective seats and exhibiting their own 
symptoms prove fatal. 

48-49. Rakta gulma (ovarian tumour) found only in 
women is caused by all dosas and exhibits severe pain and 
burning sensation. It suppurates quickly. It is hard and raised 
and is incurable. If a woman suffering from uterine trouble 
exposes herself to gusts of vnnd during her menstrual period 
the Vayu principle gets aggravated. 

50. It obstructs the passage of menstrual flow of blood 
which collecting in the abdominal cavity produces symptoms 
of pregnancy. 

51. Disquietude, milk in the breasts, craving desire for 
various foodstuffs etc. as in pregnancy and waywardness are 
also seen. In combination with Viyu, Pitta accumulates in 
the vagina] passage. 

52. The blood is too collected there. All the symptoms 
of Vataja and Pittaja gulmas are observed. In the womb the 
seat of blood there is acute pain* 

53. There is vaginal discharge with fetid smell and 



470 


Garu^a Purd^a 


lencorrhoea with pain« Enlarged spleen adso appears like preg* 
nancy sometimes. All these are due to unnatural desire for 
sexual intercourse. 

54. It suppurates slowly and the vidradhi does not 
grow again. If that is contaminated with impure blood it 
suppurates quickly. 

55-56. Since it gives a burning sensation quickly it is 
called Vidradhi. If a gulma occurs on another gulma there is 
burning sensation and pain in the spleen. Digestion is im¬ 
paired, colour of complexion is faded and strength diminishes. 
The natural urges are suppressed. If the previous symptoms 
are not present the symptoms of an external abscess are present. 
There is not much pain in the viscera or the limbs. 

57. Pallour, cough, bulging out of the abdomen, rumb¬ 
ling sound in the abdomen with excruciating pain and dis¬ 
tension are also present. 

58. The wind is obstructed above and below. It is 
called Anaha. If there is the outcome of thick seed-like tiling 
with knotty grips it is called Aitbila. 

59. When the Vayu originating from the stomach gives 
rise to an excruciating pain and all other symptoms too are 
present it is called Piatya$^!la. 

60-61. Profuse eructation, suppression of faeces, insatia¬ 
tion, rumbling sound in the entrails, severe distension, inability 
to digest, etc. are the symptoms of an imminent Gubna. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYONE 

Diseases 


Dhanvanlari said 

1. I shall explain the pathology of Udara (Ascites, 
dropsy, flatulence) O Suiruta, please listen. All ailments 
afTect the man of impaired digestion. The more so in the 
case of Udaras. 



1.161.12 


471 


2. Due to the accumulation of waste matter many aiU 
nient^ such as indigestton etc. are produced. The V&yus going 
up or down when obstructed make the Pravahi^i (the ducts 
of the digestive system) in-operacivc. 

3 The Pra^ia vayus defile the Apana vayus and incar¬ 
cerate them in the inter spaces of flesh and skin after produc* 
ing the inflammation of the abdomen. Udara ailment is of 
eight types. 

4. The different do$a$ severally and in combination 
give rise to four. The spleen^ the thigh joints, wounds and 
fluid watery substances are the four other causes giving rise to 
four types of Udara. People affected by Udara have dry palate 
and lips. The hands, feet and the abdomen pain very much. 

5. Inability to move about, deficiency in strength, inability 
to eat, distension of the abdomen^all these are symptoms of the 
onset. Patients look like ghost. 

6. Appetite is lost, distaste for everything is experienced. 
At the lime of digestion a burning sensation is felt. He who is 
not particularly mindful of taking food after digestion is 
injudicious in his diet. 

7. His strength diminishes, limbs become emaciated, 
even a slight activity makes him breathe hard, he shirks work; 
he is dejected; he becomes lean. 

8. Pain in the bladder joints always, fever and indiges¬ 
tion even after a light meal, loss of strength etc. occur in a 
Jathararogin (a patient of Ascites). 

9. Free somnolence and lassitude, loose motions bit by 
bit, burning sensation, intumescence, distension in the 
entrails — all these are to be found in an Udara roga due to 
watery accumulation (serous fluid). 

10. Patients of Ascites due to serous fluid definitely die 
and they need not be bewailed. A rumbling sound is heard 
inside the belly. The external surface is charged with a net¬ 
work of veins like a window. 

11. When Vayu subsides after exciting the navel and 
the entrails and producing disorders, pain is felt in the chest, 
hips, navel, anus and the thigh joints. 

12. The Vayu comes out with a loud report (breaking 



472 Garuja Purina 

the wind) the patient passes a little urine. He is not eager 
for anything; the mouth is devoid of taste. 

13. In the Vitodara there is intermescence in hands» 
feet, face and stomach and pain in the sides of the stomach, 
abdomen, hips and the back. The joints seem to break. 

14. Dry cough, pain in the limbs, heaviness of the nether 
regions of the body, suppression of stool, blackness or reddish 
colour in the skin etc. and varied tastes in the mouth—these 
are the symptoms of V&taja types of Ascites. 

15. A breaking piercing pain is experienced in the 
abdomen. The surface is covered with a network of blue 
or black veins. The abdomen becomes distended and wonder* 
ful sounds are heard from within« 

16. It is the Vayu that makes the sound and produces 
the pain as it courses all about. In the Pittaja type of Ascites, 
fever, epileptic fits, burning sensation and bitter taste in the 
mouth are the symptoms. 

17, (Other symptoms arc) Vertigo, dysentery, yellow 
colour in the skin etc., greenish hue in the abdomen, having 
yellow or copper coloured network of veins on the surface 
of the abdomen, profuse perspiration and burning sensation. 

18. The person feels that fumes escape from his stomach 
that is sof^ for the touch. He complains of pain as digestion 
takes place quickly. In the ailment of Ascites due to kapha 
excessive lassitude, perspiration, oedematous swelling of limbs 
and heaviness are experienced. 

19. Moreover somnolence or painful sleep, nonrelish 
for food, dyspnea, cough, white colour in the skin etc. are 
also observed. The stomach is glossy and covered with net 
work of veins black and white in colour. 

20. If the serous fluid increases the abdomen becomes 
hard, cool to the touch, Arm and heavy. If the cause is the 
combined action of all the humours all the symptoms are 
present. 

21-22. Defiled by all humours (dofas) the waste matter 
with the contaminated blood comes to the abdomen and 
begins to putrefy. It produces an ailment of Ascites which is 
rapid in suppurating and very terrible. It produces emaciation 



M6I.34. 


473 


epileptic iits and vertigo : During cold and windy days 
the ailment exhibits signs of aggravation. 

23*26. Due to excessive intake of food, agitation, 
excessive travelling or drinking, injudicious use of beverages, 
misuse of emetics etc. the spleen which is on the left side gets 
dislodged and becomes cnlaiged. Or its enlargement may 
be caused by the obstruction of blood through fatty substances. 
This Asthita (scedlike growth) is very hard and raised like 
the back of a tortoise. While growing gradually it spreads all 
over the abdominal cavity and is attended with dyspnea, 
cough, thirst, dryness of the mouth, distension of the abdomen, 
fever, yellowness of skin, epileptic 6t$, vomiting, burning 
sensation and fainting. 

27-28. The network of veins is crimson, blue or yellow 
colour or it may have various colours. Tympanites with sup* 
pression of stools, fainting, burning sensation in the chest and 
fever may supervene. Heaviness (of other organs), taking of 
food without appetite or hardness (of itself) may cause the 
dislodgement of the Yakrt (Liver) from the right side of the 
body as in the case of spleen. 

29. When the liver suppurates and when the faecal 
matter accumulates in the rectum the patient will be afflicted 
by piles, tympanites and other sorts of disorders. 

30-31. The aggravated Vayu obstructs faecal matter, 
pitta and kapha. When Apana is also similarly obstructed 
by it there is pain and fever. Moreover, cough, dyspnea^ 
severe pain in the thigh pain in the head, limbs, umbilical 
region and sides, non-evacuation of bowels, nonrelish for 
food, vomiting and permeation of the abdominal cavity by 
defiled wind are observed. 

32. A permanent network of blue or red veins covers the 
outer surface of the stomach. Above the navel, generally, it 
takes the shape of a coin’s tail. 

33. When wounded by bones or weapons in the stomach 
the liver begins to suppurate emitting much pus through the 
wound. 

34. Only the unripe ones having mucous come through 
the anus which is little by little. Although it has a fetid 
smell it is lubricious and yellowish red in colour. 



474 


PurA^ 


35. What remains fills the abdominal cavity and begins 
to work diaorden. It increases beneath the umbilical region 
and assumes the form of serous fluid. 

36. When the do>as get aggravated and all the symptoms 
such as dyspnea, thirst and vertigo appear the ailment is called 
Chidrodara by some and Parisr&vyudara by others. 

37. This happens in an emaciated person of impaired 
digestion by drinking too much of water, or drinking with 
great deal of joy. 

38. The V&yu and Kapha become aggravated through 
such injudicious conduct and obstruct the path of acid secre¬ 
tions of the stomach and it increases to the extent of water 
taken in even if it be a drop. 

39. Due to its aggravation the Udara roga is accom¬ 
panied by thiist and pain in the anus and the ears. There is 
cough, dyspnea and non relish for food. The surface is 
covered with a network of veins of various colours. 

40. Because the abdomen is full of water, it is soft to 
the touch. There is agitation and shivering in the Dakodara. 
The abdomen is firm and glossy. It covers the nerves. 

41. If neglected, all types of Ascites lead to further 
liquefactions of the serous accumulations and even the outlets 
of the ducts and joints* 

42. If perspiration is obstructed the internal contents 
grow further. That serous fluid filling the stomach causes 
K^atodara ailment* 

43. The dropsy becomes firm, heavy and spherical and 
does not produce any sound when pressed* The patient gets 
weaker every day. When the nerve is touched it moves. 

44-45. The disappearance of the veins is an indication 
of Sannipataja type. All the different types of Udara exhibit 
the symptoms of serous fluid within a fortnight and are 
incurable from their very inception. 



1.162.10. 


475 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYTWO 

Disioses 


Dhanvantari said :— 

1. O Suiruta, I shall tell you the pathology of Pipiju 
(Chlorosis and Jaundice) and that of Sotha (Oedema and 
Anasarca). All the morbid humours with Pitta as their 
leader become aggravated due to various exciting factors 
mentioned before. 

2. The more powerful of the do^as lead (hem on and 
tou them about all over the body* Finally when they come to 
rest they permeate alPthe ten Dhamanls (Nerves). 

3. The kapha, skin, blood and the flesh are defiled* 
Different colours are given to the slun. 

4. Among the colours the colour of yellow*Hke tur* 
meric is predominant* Hence the ailment is called P&ndu. 
A sort of heaviness of the body is caused by V&yu. 

5. In the Amaja type (where much matter is present) 
the main constituents, Dhatus of the body, lose their conastency 
and become lighter. The patient becomes deficient in blood 
(Anaemic). The quantity of fat is diminished. The bones 
are not substantial. The sense organs do not function properly. 

6. The limbs get thinner and thinner; clammy sweats 
exude in the cardiac region. Pain in the eyes, rigidity in the 
face and salivation are observed. 

7. The patient does not feel much thirst. He abhors 
dullness . With his dishevelled hair fluttering in the air he 
patiently suffers from fever of equal intensity. He coughs, 
has pain in the ears and has vertigo. 

8*10. The ailment is of five types, four of them being 
caused by the dofas severally and in combination and the fifth 
by eating earth. The premonitory signs are perspiration in the 
region of the heart, dryness of the skin, nonrelish for food, 
scanty yellow urine and absence of perspiration. The Viyu 
causes a stupor, excruciating pain, wetness all over the body, 
a sort of black or vermiUion colour and dryness in the vdns, 
nails, eyes, faeces and urine, intumescence dryness of mouth 
and nostrils, scantum of faeces and numbness in the sides. 



476 


Garu4a Purd^a 


11. The Pitta cames greenish or yellow colour in the 
vein, etc., fever, vanish of vision of light (darkness), thirst, 
emaciation of the body, swooning, foul smell, fondness for 
cold things and bitter taste in the mouth. 

12. The Kapha causes diarrhoea, acid erectations, burn* 
ing sensation, clamminess of the cardiac region, lethargy, 
saline taste in the mouth, horripilation and aphonia. 

13. Cough and Vomiting the symptoms of a combination 
arc very unbearable. The mucous expectorated is either 
bitter or sweet due to the prevalent Vayu or Pitta. 

14i The defiled kapha vitiates the fat and other vital 
constituents of the body and generating a condition of parched* 
ness causes even haemorrhage. As said before, it may obstruct 
the various ducts and vessels of the body resulting in general 
debility. 

15. In Jaundice the navel, feet, face and the penis become 
thinner and thinner; the faeces are infested with germs, loose 
and mixed with blood and mucous matter. 

16. A patient affected by jaundice continuing to cat 
pitta-generating foodstuffs is afflicted by Kamala (chlorois). 
The pitta, coming of its seat in the abdominal cavity scorches 
up the blood and the flesh. 

17. The colour of the urine, faeces, eyes, mouth and the 
face becomes yellow; the patient feels a burning sensation; 
indigestion sets in and the patient lies like a bloated toad weak 
in all his limbs and organs of sense. 

18. The unabsorbed pitta of a jaundice patient gives 
rise to a kind of swelling and when these swellings are neglect* 
ed, the dreadful ailment of Kumbha Kamala sets in. 

19. The unassimilated Pitta produces greenness of com¬ 
plexion. The Vayu and Pitta in combination produce vertigo, 
thirst, desire for the company of women and slight rise in 
temperature. 

20. Moreover, there nu^y be somnolence and impaired 
digestion. Sages call it Halimaka. A great lassitude is also 
observed. All these are the premonitory symptoms of this 
disease. 

21*22. Sotha (oedema) has already been mentioned as 
a grave ailment. Hence, it U being explained. The defiled 



M 62.32* 


477 


Vayu takes the contaminated blood, pitta and kapha to the 
external vessels and gets obstructed in its path generating a 
raised and compact swelling in the local flesh and skin. This 
is called Sotha. 

23*24. This ailment is divided into nine according to 
the causes—the three dosas separately, in combination of twos, 
all combined, due to attack and due to poison* It is divided 
into three in accordance with their shapes (I) large, (2) 
raised and pointed, (3) knotty. They may be congenital or 
acquired. If they spread all over the body they are necessarily 
generated by over lust fulness. 

25* A common cause for all types of §othas is the 
deranged morbid humour* They are found in persons emaciat¬ 
ed due to sickness, overwork, fasting, etc. rapidly growing. 

26. In the case of othen the intake of foodstuffs in 
large quantities especially such as are heavy, too cold, saline, 
acid or alkaline, green vegetables and water or excessive sleep 
or wakefulness may cause Sotha. 

27*28* The voluntary suppression of natural urges, 
eating dried flesh, indigestion, exhaustion, sexual intercourse, 
travelling by foot or in a jolting vehicle—all these aggravate 
these diseases:—dyspnea, cough, dysentery, piles, ascites, 
leucorrhoea, fever, tympanites, flatulence, vomiting, hiccough, 
erysipelas and jaundice. 

29. The morbid humours lodged in the upper, middle 
or lower parts of the body generate Sotha (oedematous swell* 
ing) in their seat or in the urinary bladder* 

30* Its premonitory symptoms are burning pain in the 
nerves and heaviness of limbs. In the Vataja type of swellings, 
they are found to be shifting in their character, rough, blackish 
or reddish in colour and have rough hair round their base. 

31* The patient complains of breaking pain in the 
temples, bladder, entrails, etc. Due to the pain he is unable 
to sleep* The swelling grows rapidly and the whole body is 
painful. 

32. The swelling is small during nights and grows large 
during the day. It is glossy* By pressure it may subside. If 
mustard is applied over the swelling a tingling sensation is 
experienced. 



478 


Coruna PurAtts 


33. The pittaja type of swelling is black, red or yellow 

in colour; it pi'oduccs (emaciation); it does not subside 

quickly. Before the advent and in the middle, it gives a burning 
sensation all o^er the body. 

34. Fever with thirst, burning sensation and perspira¬ 
tion, vertigo, pain, stupor, yearning for things, loose hiotion, 
foul smell and softness to the touch are characteristic 
symptoms. 

35. In the kaphaja type the swelling gives an itching 
sensation, has yellow and gray hairs, is hardskinned, cold, 
firm, glossy, smooth and painful; it produces sleep, vomiting,, 
sensation and indigestion. 

36-37. A blow, a cut from any weapon or any hard 
thing, exposure to chill winds or sea breezes or the juice of 
Bhallataka^ or Kapikacchu* fruits may produce a swelling with 
erysipelas. It is marked by extreme heat and exhibits symptoms 
common to Pittaja type. It is red in colour. 

38. Swelling due to poison is caused by poisonous in¬ 
sects and reptiles when they pass over the body or urinate 
there. Even when nonpoisonoos insects and animals bite or 
Kratch swelling may occur. 

39-40. When one comes into contact with a cloth con* 
taminated by faeces, urine, or semen or vAitn one comes into 
contact with breeze coming from poisonous trees or when one 
grinds a poisonous medicine, a swelling may occur that is soft 
shifting, hanging loose and extremely painful and burning. A 
fresh swelling without disorders can be cured but not a chronic 
one. 


1. Somecsrptu snscardium. 

2. Perhspi the same ai 8v«ymitifuptAMMueuna prurieop. 



1.163.10, 


47 » 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYTHREE 

Diiiasis 


DhanvMUtfi said: 

1. O Su^ruta, I shall explain the pathology orvisarpa 
(Erysipelas—dry spreading itch)» please listen. Visarpa may 
be caused by defiled morbid humours in the same way as swell* 
ings (^tha). The humours are defiled either by the obstruc¬ 
tion of the vessels or prevention of the outlet of excreta. 

2*4. This is an external ailment. It may be caused by 
fright or overwork. These ailments are more and more difficult 
of cure in the order of enumeration. When the dofas are 
aggravated by the usual exciting factors especially those 
parchifying foodstuffs they come out from within due to exces¬ 
sive thint, or irregular functions of the excretory system or the 
impairment of the digestive system or physical strength. This 
brings on an attack of dry spreading itch. 

5. In the Vitaja type the pain and disorders are the same 
as in Vataja fever. A throbbing sensation is experiencedj an 
aching piercing pain and misery of utter exhaustion is felu 
It is attended wich horripilation too. 

6 . In the pittaja type it spreads very rapidly; it is bright^ 
red in colour and exhibits ail symptoms of a Pittajvara (fever). 
In the kaphaja type of dry itch, it is very irritating^ glossy and 
exhibits the symptoms of kaphaja fever and its pain. 

7 . Erysipelas of the Sannipataja type exhibit all the 
symptoms. When neglected it flourishes with all sorts of 
eruptions. 

8 . Due to the combined action of Vayu and Pitta» there 
is fever vomitings fainting, diarrhoea, thirst, vertigo^ breaking 
pain in the joints, the gastric Are becomes defunct, nonrelish 
for food and tamaka Svasa—all these manifest themseives. 

9. All the body appears to be covered with burning 
charcoal. Wherever the itch spreads it gives the burning 
sensation* 

10. The place from where the itch has shifted appears 
black or blue like the burnt cinders or becomes red and grows 
with eruptions as in the case of a bum. It is very rapid. 



480 


Garuia PurHw 


11. Hence, it Invades the vital principles since the Vayn 
is very powerful and produces pain all over the body, removes 
sensibility and sleep and makes him gasp for breath. 

]2. The patient has hiccough and does not get any 
permanent relief on the ground or bed or in seat, since he 
becomes insatiable. 

13. Turning over sides he endures a lot of pain> ex¬ 
periences stupor and delusion mentally and physically and 
enters a sleep from which it becomes difficult to wake him up. 
This is called Agnivisarpa. 

14-16. Viyu obstructed by Kapha, shatters it into 
pieces. It then vitiates the blood in the vessels in the 
skin, sinews and flesh of a sanguinous person. A knotty 
garland (series) of a number of erysipelatic eruptions elongat¬ 
ed or round in shape is produced by it. This exudes blood and 
gives excruciating pain. Dyspnea, cough, dysentery, parched- 
ness of the mouth, hiccough, vomiting, vertigo, fainting, 
pallor, epileptic fits, breaking pain in the limbs and impaired 
digestive function—all these accompany it. This is called 
Granthivisarpa caused by the derangement of Kapha and 
Vayu. 

17-21. The derangement of Kapha and Pitta produce 
these—fever, numbness, somnolence, lassitude, headache, 
weakness and Jerky movements of the limbs, delirium, repug¬ 
nance for food, vertigo, epileptic fits, impaired gastric Are, 
breaking pain in the bones, thirst, dullness of the sense organs, 
undigested excreta and smearing of the ducts with slimy 
mucous. The itch usually starts from any part of the stomach 
and spreads. It does not pain much. It is surrounded by 
pustules deep, yellow, red or gray in colour. The main itch is 
glossy, black or blue in colour, dirty, heavy and has a swelling 
with liot grave suppurations. When it breaks, the fleshy por¬ 
tion is severed up making the sinews and nerves clearly visible. 
It emits the foul smell of a dead body. This is called Kardama 
Visarpa (Miry Visarpa). 

22-23. When a blow or cut affects the body the Vayu 
becomes aggravated and vitiates the blood and the Pitta, It 
then produces itches and etuptions resembling the pulse 



1.164^6. 


481 


Kulattha^ (Horse gram). There is swelliugi fever» pain and 
burning sensation. The blood is blackish^red in colour. The 
erysipelas caused by the dosas severally can be cured. That 
caused by the dosas in twos can be cured if disorders are not 
many. 

24. Those itches caused by all the hiunourt in combi* 
nation, those affecting the vulnerable joints, those in which 
the sinews, nerves and flesh are shattered and those with pus 
emitting the foul smell of dead bodies are incurable. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYFOUR 

DUtans 


Dhanvawicri iaid\ 

1*3. Injudicious diet and conduct, sinful actions, ridi* 
culing or killing good people, sinful fights, abductions, 
accumulated evils of the previous births—all these in combi* 
nation aggravate the morbid principles Vayu, Pitta and Kapha. 
They permeate the various ducts and vessels of the body and 
contaminate the skin, the fat, the blood and the flesh. After 
drying them up when the do^ come out they discolour the 
entire skin. Authorities call this Kus|ha (cutaneous affections, 
leprosy etc,). 

4. When neglected at the outset these Ku^^has spread 
all over the body and vitiate the fundamental principles and 
constituents of the organism external and internal. 

5. The affected part gets contracted or covered with 
perspiration and clammy discharges. Minute terrible germs 
infest the region. The hair, the skin, the sinews, and the 
vessels of various secretions are infested by them. 

6 . The body of the patient appears to be covered with 
ashes. Kus^has are of seven types being caused by the do$as 
severally and in twos or all combined together. 


1. ^lichot bifionus. 



Garu^a PurS^ 




7-10. Although all the dofas are present in every case 
the prevalent dosa is to be considered as the main cause. The 
Kuifha Klipala is due to V&yu. Audumbara is due to Pitta 
and Mapdala is due to Kapha. Vicard and Rs>*ajihva are 
due to Vita and Pitta. Carmaikaku$fha (Prurigo) and Ki^ima 
(Keloid tumour), Sidbrna^ Alasa and Vipidika are due to 
Viyu and Kapha; Oadru (Ring worm) and Satirus are due to 

Pitta and Kapha. Pupda^ika^ Visphota, Kuni, Carmadala and 
Kika^a arc due to the combined action of all the three do$as. 
The first three(i.e. Kipila, Audumbara andMa^ dala), Dadru^ 
Kikana, Pundarika and R^'ajihva are the seven Mahiku^fhas. 

11*14. Some of the affected patches are soft and some 
are rough; in some cases there is perspiration, in some cases 
there is no pertpiration; Pallor, burning and itchii^ sens* 
ationSf somnolence (loss of feeling), pricking pain, affection of 
the optic nerves, darkness of vision, excessive pain in the limbs, 
rapid appearance and permanent stay of the patches, roughness 
to the touch, aggravation when the slightest cause is present, 
horripilation and dark black colour of the blood—all these 
are the preliminary symptoms of Ku^^ha. The patches in the 
Kapala type of Kusfha resemble a black and reddish skulls 
are attended with excruciating pain. They are dry and rough, 
of irregular formation and arc covered over with dirty hair. 
This Kusfha is highly dreadful. 

15-17. The patch in the Audumbara type ofKuftha 
has the colour of the Udumbara fniit (ficus Indica); it is cir* 
cular in shape; it Exudes copious discharge of pus; it is 
attended with excessive pmn and a burning sensation. The 
patches are not contiguous nor do they burst. Many germs are 
(bund in them. In the Mat^alakusfha (Erythema) the patches 
are firm, thick, glossy^ exuding white and red discharge, 
congested and overlapping one anoth^, raised, excessively 
irritating, of copious discharge and infested with parasites. 
They are of glossy yellow colour. 

18. The Vicareiki type of Ku|(ha is irritating, black in 
colour and covered with exuding poitules. Rough to the touch 
they are red in the extremities and black within and slightly 



1.164.30. 


483 

19. The Kuftha known as ^fyajihva b infested with a 
number of germs. It reMmbles the tongue of the deer R^ya. 
In the Gannikhya Kuffha the patch is rough to the touch 
like the skin of an elephant. 

20. In the Kitima type ofKuftha the patch b dry and 
resembles the scales of a fish. It is hard and shining and has 
the colour of fire. It irritates. 

21 •22. A kind of patch rough within and glossy outside 
by rubbing which dust b scattered ii smooth to the touch. 
There b no perspiration. It resembles a flower without dew 
drops. It is usually formed in thin layers at its upper ends. 
It is characterised by itching sensation and red marks. Thb 
is called Vip&dikfi and usually affects hands and feet. 

23*24. In the type of Kuftha called Dadru (ring worm) 
the ulcer fpvts excruciating pain and itching sensation. The 
eruptioxu are red. They spread like the Dfirva grass tinged 
with a colour like that of an Atari flower (linseed). It has an 
elevated ring-like groove. It produces itching sensation. Its 
roots are thick. It b characterised by burning sensation. It 
emits blood and it full of wounds. 

25*26. It gives a burning semation and is generally caused 
by all the humours in combination. The surrounding zone is 
red or tawny coloured. It gives an itching sensation and 
excruciating pain. The pustules are white or red and the patch 
appears like leaves of lotus covered with drops of water. Thb 
Kuy^ha b called Putid^iika. 

27. In the type Kuffha called Pkmk the ulcers exude 
discharges and give itching sensation and excruciaring pmn. 
They have a dusky or reddbh hue and are very rough. Gene* 
rally they appear in elbo%vs and buttocks. 

28. An excruciating pain and burning sensation charac¬ 
terise the Ku^thas Carmadala and Kfikana where the eruptions 
can be touched but emit blood when scratched. 

29. The Kakapa type u at first red but turns into black, 
resembling the washings of Triphala. All ulcers in all types of 
ku$tha become black due to their own respective reasons. 

30. The different types of kuffha must be understood 
through thdr symptoms and actions. That which b caused by 
all thedoias shall be abandoned (as incurable). 



484 


Garuia Furdi^ 


31. The Kusfha that affects the boaes, marrows and 
semen is incurable, that which affects the fat Yipya (treated by 
palliatives) and that which affects our bones or flesh can be 
cured. 

32. The Kustha produced by Kapha and Vayu in com* 
bination is not very difflcult to cure. So also is the case of a 
ku^tha that has affected only the skin and does not secrete any 
discharge. When the kustha has affected only the skin, dis¬ 
coloration and roughness in the skin is observed. 

33*34. Perspiration, heat and swelling, eruptions in hands 
and feet and in the joints, extreme pressure as if the fat is 
being crushed on account of the do^as—all these symptoms 
characterise the kustha attacking the blood and flesh. The 
ability of the patient to feel sensations is impaired slightly. 
Voice becomes sunk and hollow, eyesight is affected, fat and 
marrow in the bones are destroyed. 

35. When the germs affect the semen the patient trans¬ 
mits the disease to his wife and children. All these ailments 
with the characteristic symptoms affect even animals. 

36. Svitra (Leucodevma) and the dreadful disease Kilasa 
have the same exciting factors as Kustha. They are not of 
the bleeding type. All the three dhatus are affected by them. 
All the dosas cause them. 

37*38. Svitra caused by Vayu is rough and red, that of 
pittaja type is copper-coloured and shaped like lotus leaves. 
It gives a burning sensation and the hair in the affected 
part fall off. The kaphaja type of Svitra is thick and white 
and gives an itching sensation. It gradually affects the blood, 
flesh and fat. Both these arc incurable. 

39. Aivitra with plenty of hair not turned white, not 
contiguous and of recent origin, can be cured, if it is not 
caused by scalds or bums. Other types are to be abandoned 
as incurable. 

40. A Kilasa (Psoriasis) in the private parts, Ups or on 
the paltns, even of recent origin has to be avoided as incur* 
able by persons wishing for success. 



M65.8. 


485 


41. All diseases are transmitted from person to person by 
touching, taking food together, sexual intercoume, sharing the 
same bed or seat or by using the same clothes, garlands, 
unguents, etc. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYFIVE 

Diseases 


Dhanvantari said : 

1. Krmis (bodily germs) are of two types: the external 
and the internal. The external ones are of four types being 
caused by 1) faecal matter 2) mucous matter 3) blood and 
4) other discharges of waste matter. 

2. The external parasites born of the waste matter are 
enumerated as twenty in number. They are of the shape and 
colour of gingelly seeds and take refuge in hair or garments. 

3. Though they are very minute they have many feet. 
Two principal classes of these named Yukas (lice) and Lik^as 
(nits or ticks) bring about Kotha (Urticaria) and Kan<juganda 
(itches in the neck). 

4*6. The internal parasites cause kus(ha. The external 
ones are caused by deranged kapha by the intake of sweet 
rice, jaggery, milk, curds, fish and newly harvested grains. 
From the abdomen they spread all over the body. Some are 
potshaped and some are like earthworms. Some are like the 
germinating seeds of grains, some slender and long, some are 
like specks, some are white and some are copper coloured. 
They are seven with seven names. 

7-8. They are Antradas (gnawers of entrails), Udara- 
vestas (permeating the abdomen) Hrdayadas (eating the heart), 
Mahagudas (rectal mousters) Cyurus (falling off), Darbhaku* 
sumas (like darbha flowers) and Sugandhas (sweet smelling). 
They cause disquietude, water discharge from mouth, indiges* 
tion, nonrelish for food, epilepsy, vomiting, fever, tympanites, 
emaciation, sneezing and Catarrh. 



Gufu4a 


486 

9. There are some parasites in the blood and the blood 
vessels. They have no feet. They are copper coloured and 

circular in shape. Some of them are so minute that they can 

not be seen by the naked eye. 

10. They are Kettdas (eating the hair) Romavidhva* 
ihsas (destroyers of hair) Romadvipas (hair-islanded), Udum- 
baras, Aurasas and Mitfs and these produce Ku$tha quickly. 

11-12. Some parasites grow in the abdomen originating 
from faeces. They take a downward course. But when they 
are fully grown they proceed towards the abdomen. Then they 
produce a foul faecal smell in the mouth, breath and eructa* 
tions. They are like big circles, some small, some stout, tawny, 
yellow, white or black in colour. 

13-14. They are five in number named Kakeruka, Make- 
ruka, Sausurada, Salula, and Leliha. They produce loose 
motions, acute pain, obstruction to excretion, emaciation, 
pallor, horripiladon, impaired digestion and itching sensation 
in the anus by travelling in wrong directions. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND 8IXTYS1X 

DisM$$s 

Dhanvanlari scid : 

1-3. O Suinita» I shall explain the pathol^y of Vata- 
vyadhi (disease of the nervous system). If we are to speak of 
•disorders the reason thereof is an obstruction to the natural flow 
{of the wind). The V&yu element in the body is actually the 
Viivakarmft (the architect of the universe), Vijvatmft (the 
soul of the universe) Vihrarupa (having all forms), Prajipati 
(lord of the created beings) Sra^lf (creator) Dbatf (the origi- 
iiator) Vibfau (all pervading) Viypu, Sathhartr (Annihilator) 
Mrtyu (Death) Antaka (Finisher). Hence one should 
endeavour to preserve it in equilibrium. 



1.166.14 




4. A correct knowledge of Prakfta (phyiiological) and 
Vaikrta (pathological) aspects with the diverse actions of the 
morbid principles in combination and severally must be had. 

5. The vaikrta actions are of five types. They are being 
mentioned along with their pathology and characteristic signs. 

6 . Vayu is aggravated by the defiling factors of the 
seven fundamental elements of the system. Such things shall 
not be used by the patient too much. The V&yu obstructs the 
fourfold passages (ducts or vessels). 

7-6. When these vessels are filled with the aggravated 
do$as the vitiated Viyu produces acute pain, tympanites, rumbl¬ 
ing sound in the intestines, supfmition of the stools, loss of 
voice, impaired sight, grip in the buttocks and the back and 
other similar grave disorden. 

9. The Vatavy&dhi originating from the abdomen gives 
rise to vomiting, dyspnea, cough, cholera, itching sensation and 
other ailments above the nave! whose main characteristics will 
be some sort of obstruction. 

10. The Viyu located in the ducU produces ill function¬ 
ing of the sense organs, roughness of the skin, eruptions, acute 
pain, dyspnea and symptoms of poisoning with discoloration. 

11. The Vayu located inside the entrails produces 
obstruction to evacuation, nonrelish for food leanness and vertigo 
knotty eruptions in the flesh and fat and roughness of the skin 
too are caused. 


12. The body appears to be heavy and pains as if hit 
with the fist or a baton. The Vayu located in the bone pro¬ 
duces severe pain in the thighs and bones. 

13. The Viyu located in the marrow produces loss of 
firmness in the bones, loss of sleep and severe pain. A rapid 
emission of the semen and other disorden too are produced. 


14. If the Vayu is located in the semen or in the womb 
(in women) involuntary emission of semen or miscarriage 
produced. The Viyu located in the head produces scantness 
faeces. The Viyu located in any place produces intumescence 
when aggravated, which cannot be cured. 

15. If the ViyuU located in the joinu, the abdomen to the 
touch feels like a leatherbag fuU of water and located atrophy U 


S.B- 



468 


G<iru4d PuT&i^Q 


generated. If it is located in diflerent limbs a piercing pain, a 
breaking ache, throbbing, etc. in the limbs are felt. 

16. Numbness, convulsive jerky movements, somnolence^ 
breaking and shaking of joints are observed. When the excited 
Vayu permeates the nerves it produces constant convulsive 
movements of the limbs. The ailment is called Akfcpana 
(convulsion). 

17. The enraged Vayu when obstructed from below 
courses upwards and presses against the heart. It then generates 
pain in the head and the temples. 

18. It may toss up the whole body and bend down his 
cheek bone. The victim then breathes hard closing both the 
eyes. 

19^20. He may coo like a dove without any attachment 
to anything (unconscious). This ailment is called Apatantraka. 
When the enraged Viyu mo%'C8 on to the heart and the left 
nostril he may feel some slight relief and there may be relapse 
immediately. This and similar ailment caused by a violent flow 
cannot be cured easily. 

21. When the body is severed by the wind the patient 
perspires and his body becomes rigid. When the body is stretch* 
ed again the wind pervades the whole body. 

22*23. The Viyu lodged inside the vital constituents of 
the body produces the obstruction to the locomotion of the 
eyes, yawning, loss of energy and pain in the teeth: excruciating 
pain in the sides, grips in the cheek, back and the head, exter* 
nal curvature of the body at the back and a sense of heaviness 
in the heart and the head. 

24. The chest is thrown up or the shoulders droop down. 
There is discoloration in the teeth and face. There is no pers* 
piration in the limbs. 

25*26. The external curvature and rigidity of the cheek¬ 
bone indicate that the man is a victim of Vatavyadhi. The 
morbid principles after permeating the^ faeces urine and blood 
and being incited by the Vayu bend the whole body from head 
to foot. The victim standing with the pale body finds the 
wound and curvature increased. 

27-28« In its impetuosity the patient does not get any 
relief due to the ailment of Aksep^^ (convolusion). Scraping 



1.166.39 


489 


the tongue, intake of hot food, and opening the mouth beyond 
measure enrages the Vayu located at the root of the cheek¬ 
bone which makes the mandible ripd thus causing the mouth 
to be permanently gaping or firmly closed. 

29. The above ailment is called Hanustambha (rigidity 
of the mandible). Due to this the victim will find it very difficult 
to chaw or speak. The nerve carrying the faculty or force of 
speech becomes rigid and Vayu benumbs the tongue. 

39-31. This is called Jihvastambha (Rigidity of the 
tongue). Due to this the patient becomes incompetent to eat, 
drink or speak. Carrying heavy loads on the head, boisterous 
laughter and loud talks, resting the head on uneven or rough 
pillows and chewing hard foodstuffs aggravates the Vayu lodg¬ 
ed in the upper.regions of the body. 

32*34. Loud laughter and sudden glancing to the sides 
makes the face permanently distorted. Then the power of 
speech becomes lower and the eyes become numbed and 
motionless. Gnashing of the teeth, aphonia, impaired hearing, 
blurring of vision, loss of the power of smell, loss of memory, 
fright, dyspnea, Ni^ihiva (Ptyalism—frequent spitting) pricking 
pain in the sides, permanent closure of an eye, severe pain 
above the clavicle and hemipl^ia are the disorders in the wake 
of Vatavyadhi. 

35. This ailment is called Ardita (Facial Paralysis) by 
some and Lkahga (Hemiplegia) by others. The blood flowing 
in the Vessels, especially those that traverse the head are 
affected. 

36-37. The nerves become rough and black and produce 
severe pain and a sort of hemicrania which is incurable. The 
Vayu affects a part of the body with all the nerves there. It is 
called Paksaghata (Partial paralysis). One half of the entire 
body becomes inoperative and insensible. 

38. Some call this Ekahgaroga by the name Kak^ruk. 
If the Vayu affects the entire body there is obstruction and 
rigidity in all the limbs. 

39. The Paksa ailment caused by deranged Vayu alone 
is curable though difficult. In conjunction with other morbid 
principlerit is incurable as it b aggravated and hence causes 
debility. ^ 



490 


Garui^ Purd^ 


40. The Viyu in combination with Kapha with its path 
obstructed by mucous lecredons rigidifiea the limbs causing the 
ailment Dandh Patinaka which is incurable. 

41. The V&yu located at the root of the shoulder blades 
contracts all the veins in the locality and prevents the circula* 
lion of blood there. The Ailment of Avabahuka is caused. 

42« The V&yu located in the fingers and palms affecting 
the sinews in the back arm renders the arms inoperative. This 
ailment is called Vilv&d 

43. When the Vayu located in the hips draws up the 
sinews in the thighs, the victim becomes lame due to the para* 
lysis of both the thighs. The ailment is called Khafija v&ta. 

44. The victim begins to totter when he starts walking 
and goes like a lame man. The joints seem to be very loose. 
The ailment is called KaliyakbaAja. 

45-48. When one takes too hot or too cold watery or 
dry heavy and emulsive foodstuffs injudiciously^ when one in* 
dulges in extremely fatiguing physical labour immediately after 
the meal or after digestion or keeps awake till very late in the 
night, the fat with deranged Kapha gets accumulated and 
attacks the other principles too. The Kapha gets stuffed about 
the thigh bones and numbs the locality. The bones of the thighs 
become loose. The complexion assumes a dull tawny colour; 
Fever, somnolence, non relish for food and lassitude are the 
disorders that arise. This is called Urustambha which some 
call Bahya vata. 

49. A swelling in the middle of the knee caused by 
Vayu in combination with contaminated blood is called 
Kroftukaffr^ since it is like the head of a jackal. It is big and 
produces acute pain. 

50. The Vayu located in the heels causes an ailment 
called Vataka^taka. After exhaustion when one takes a false 
step severe pain is felt in that locality. 

51. Vayu located in the heels, toes, umbilicus and 
throat violently tosses the locality and grips at them. This 
ailment is called Grdbrasi (Sciatica). 

32*53. When the foot becomes insensible and horripila* 
tion is present, the ailment is called Padaharsa. It is caused 



1.167.8 


491 


by the deranged Viyu and Kapha. Vayu in combinalion with 
Pitta and contaminated blood causes burning sensation espe* 
cially when one walks. It is called Padadaha. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYSEVEN 

D is tests 

Xihanvantcfi scid: 

1-2. O Suiruta, I shall tell you about the pathology of 
Vitarakta. Incompatible articles of fare, injudicious eating^ 
anger, sleeping during the day, keeping awake at night, etc. 
cause the derangement of Vayu and blood, generally in persons 
of easy going temperament and delicate body and those who 
are extremely obese and indulge in injudicious eating and 
conduct. 

3. When the blood in the body is contaminated by a 
blow or due to the impurities injected by cool things or Vayu 
generating stuffs the aggravated Vayu proceeds along a devia* 
ting path. 

4. When obstructed by the blood of such a nature the 
Vayu of the first variety (Prapa) vitiates the same blood and 
then produces foul wind through the antis or coos like a cuckoo 
and generates Vatarakta. 

3. When piles grow due to the vitiated blood the Vayu 
courses through the body and generates vomiting and other 
symptoms slowly. 

6«7. An affection like Ku$tha or Arbuda (carbuncle, 
swelling) shall then rise. There may be itching sensation, 
throbbing, excruciating pain, breaking pain, heaviness and 
insensibility in knees, calves, thighs, hips, shoulders, bands, 
feet and the joints of limbs: The symptoms occur and vanish, 
recur again sometimes. 

8. Sometimes it starts from the root of the feet and 
sometimes from the hands and getting aggravated courses 
through the-whole body like the poison of a mouse. 



492 


Garuia Purdffa 


9. The Vayu (and the vitiated blood) located in the 
skin and the flesh tuts up and after some time becomes grave 
and acute and attacks all the fundamental constituents of the 
body (Dhatus). 

10. The Vayu located at the bones and marrow produces 
intumescence, knotty eruptions and suppurations. The Vayu 
located in the narrow constricted places like hips produces 
copper coloured or tawny or red colour in the skin. 

IL Sometimes the Vayu courses in the body as if 
piercing everything within. Sometimes it courses like a 
whirlwind in circuits and makes the body lame or limping. 

12. When Viyu is prevalent the pricking pain, throbb* 
ing and breaking pain is very much. The swelling is hard and 
rough and black in colour or tawny. Sometimes it increases. 
Sometimes it subsides. 

I3« Constriction of the nerves and junctions of the 
fingen, gripping pain tn the limbs, excruciating pain; abhor* 
rence of dullness, non contiguity; rigidity, shivering and 
insensibility (in limbs)* 

14. The Viyu located with blood produces tumour 
giving great pain and a piercing achu. It is copper coloured. 
It gives a very peculiar irritating sensation. Whether glossy or 
rough it never subsides. It is as it were like a bowl full of 
mucous substance. 

15. When Pitta too is aggravated the following sym* 
ptoms are observed:—A burning sensation, swooning, perspira¬ 
tion, epileptic fits, inebriety, thirst, not yielding to the touch, 
painful dischaige, drying up, suppuration and excessive heat. 

16. When Kapha is aggravated the following symptoms 
are observed:—rigidity, heaving, insensibility, glossiness, 
(numbness), chillness, itchness and slight pain: When two or 
more dosas combine the symptoms of cither occur. 

17. Ailments caused by a single mcH*bid principle can 
be cured; those caused by two dosas can be alleviated by rnedi* 
cation though not cured completely A Kakta pitta caused by 
three dofas is terrible and should be avoided. 

18. The Vayu located In the extremities and joints 
attacks the blood and both permeating each other generate 
excruciating pain and take away the life. 



L167.30 


493 

19*20. Vayu is of five types. Prin^ (one of them) is 
hard and rough. Hence, when it gets aggravated by injudiciom 
conduct (of the patient), fasting, excessive eating, hint from 
a blow, suppression or rapid egress of the natural urges, it 
produces affliction to the eyes, etc, and catarrh, burning sensa* 
tion, thirst, cough, dyspnea etc. (oHow. 

21. Prana located on the top of the clavicle produces 
constriction of the throat, loose motions, vomiting, nonrelish 
for food, flowing of the nose and such diseases as goitre 
(Galaga^da), etc. 

22. Vyana (second type ofViyu) becomes vitiated and 
aggravated by too much of walking, bathing, playing, sexual 
exeicises, coarse and incompatible (foodstuffs) fright, delight, 
sorrow, etc. 

23. It then impairs manliness, enthusiasm and strength, 
grief, confusion in the mind, fever, piercing pain all over the 
^dy, horripilation, insensibility (somnolence), etc. 

24. (Vyina produces) Ku^tha, Erysipelas, exhaustion of 
the whole body and other disorders. Samana (Third type of 
Viyu) is defiled by incompatible and undigested foodstuffs 
that are too cold and of assorted nature. 

25. It is defiled by untimely sleeping and waking up 
and produces pain, enlargement of the spleen, diarrhoea and 
diseases of liver and lungs. 

26-27. Apana (fourth type of Vayu) is aggravated by 
the intake of coarse and heavy cooked rice, forcible blow, 
suppression of natural urges, too much of travelling, getting 
up and going round, etc. and produces disorders int he digestive 
organs and their seats, defects in urine and semen, piles, pro¬ 
lapse in the rectum and other places. 

28*29. Due to lassitude, rigidity and heaviness, the Sama 
(undigested mucous matter) pervades all the limbs. Due to 
its glossiness the disorders are lethargy, chillness, swelling and 
impaired digestion. I'he itching sensation is due to the loss of 
roughness and similar palliative measures. The Nirama (free 
from mucous) shall be known by the opposites ofTandra 
(lassitude), etc. 

30. They mention many enveloping factors for the Vkyu» 
If it is enveloped by pitta and its symptoms, the disorders 



494 


Garu4a Purd^ 


are:—Burning sensation, thirst, pain, vertigo, darkness of 
vision and desire for pungent, hot, acid, saiinci parchifyii^ 
food and cool things. 

31. If it is enveloped by Kapha too much of yearning 
and craving is evinced for fasting, labour, hard and coarse 
things and hotness. Chillness and heaviness are felt. Pain is 
experienced. Butter and milk are desired much. Pungent things 
are liked. 

32. If Vlyu is enveloped by Kapha, the disorders are 
pressure felt on limbs, disquietude, heaviness and non relish 
for food. If Vayu is enveloped by blood acute pain and burn* 
ing sensation in the skin and flesh is experienced. 

33. A red intumescence is found to occur with ringlike 
grooves all round. The swelling is hard with flesh. Disquietude 
and eruptions are also observed. 

34. If the V&yu is enveloped by fat it is called Acjhya- 
vSta. The swelling produced by it is incurable. It is either 
shifting or fixed; soft to the touch and pleasing to the eyes. 

35. If it is covered it feels hot to the touch; it is cool 
to the touch when not covered. If the Viyu is enveloped by 
Majja (marrow) the swelling grows irregularly with surround* 
ing eruptions. The patient feels pleasure in rubbing it with 
the hand otherwise it is painful. 

36. When the Vayu is enveloped by Semen, there is no 
rapidity or force in the swelling. When what is taken in is 
digested there is surely some relief. 

37. If the Viyu is enveloped *by urine, urination takes 
place with the distension of the urinary bladder. If the Vayu 
is enveloped by pores there is constrictim and it splits the 
place of its seat. 

38. The patient falls down with an attack of fever and 
the food taken is assimilated. The defiled semen further afflict¬ 
ed by food is discharged slowly. 

39. If the V4yu is enveloped by all the dhatus (seven 
fundamental constituents of the body) there is pain in the 
buttocks, thigh joints and the back. When the Viyu counes 
in the opposite direction the heart is aflfticted. 

40. When the is enveloped by Pitta the diiordei's 

are vert^o, fainting pain and burning sensation. When Vy&na 



IJ67,51 


495 


is enveloped all round by Pitta the disorders are pain, lassitude 
aphome and burning sensation. 

41. When Samana is enveloped by Pitta the disorders 
are exhaustion, obstruction to the activities of the limbs, dis* 
tress of mind with pain, loa of heat, perspiration, disinclination 
(towards everything) and thirst. 

42. When Apana is enveloped by Pitta the disorders are 
burning sensation, yellow colour m the faecal matter, increase 
of Rajas (quality of passion, etc.)» heat, and urination with 
distension. 

43. When Pra^Mt is enveloped by Kapha the disorders 
are (rumbling) sound, obstruction to the ducts, ptyalism 
(excessive salivation), perspiration and difficulty in inhaling 
and exhaling. 

44. When Udana is enveloped by Kapha the disorders 
are heaviness of limbs, non*reltsh for food, aphasia (loss of 
speech) and aphonia (loss of Voice) • When Vyana is enveloped 
by Kapha the disorders are loss of strength and colour and 
constriction of bones in the joints. 

45. When Samana b enveloped by Kapha the disorders 
are heaviness of limbs, obesity, loss of awareness of many 
functions, non perspiration and impaired digestion. 

46. If Apana b enveloped by Kapha the disorders are 
mucous discharges along with urine and faeces. Thus Vatarakta 
ailments are of twenty two types. 

47. Each of the 6ve types of V'ayu can be enveloped by 
the other four. Thus twenty different enveloping factors are 
obtained. 

48. When Apana is enveloped by Pra^ the disorders 
are disquietude, dyspnea, cold, headache, palpitation of the 
heart and dryness of the mouth. 

49. When Prana is enveloped by Ud^na, debility b 
the result. All the other Avaranas (enveloping factors) must be 
carefully observed by the physician and understood. 

50. The increase and decrease of the activities of the 
Vayus are based on their seats. Pitta can be the enveloping 
factor of all the live (Prina, etc). 

51. When Pitta and other do^as are in combination, 



496 

their seat is along with the Pra^ and others in combination. 
There are many such combinations of Pitta etc* 

52« (The physician) shall observe them attentively from 
the symptoms shown. Their buying together is gradual* Even 
the firm ones recur again and again* 

53. Life and longevity depend on the Prua and 
strength depends on Ud&na* If the two are afflicted there is 
loss of life and strength. 

54. If the Vayus with their enveloping factors^ or their 
dislodgement from their seats are understood then even in¬ 
curable ailments can with effort be made harmless. 

55. By n^lecting the Viyus when enveloped these dis¬ 
orders occur:—Abscesses, enlarged spleen, palpitation of the 
heart, tumoun, impaired digestion, etc* 

56. O Suiruta, the pathology of the different ailments 
as narrated by the sage Atreya has been explained by me to 
distinguish the different ailments and to know the means of 
increasing the longevity of men* 

57* Thus diagnosing the different ailments one should 
proceed ahead with the treatment. 

Triphali^ (Three kinds of myrobalan) is the panacea for 
all ailments when used in conjunction with honey, ghee and 
jaggery. 

58* Triphali used in conjunction with Vyo^a,* Satavari’ 
GuducI^, Agnividanga* removes all sickness. 

59-60. Satavarl, GuducI, Agni* Su9thP» Mu^alikk^, 


1. Three fruits, viz., Terminslia Ghebula. T. BcUoriks and Emblics 
Oflicinalu. 

2. Combination of Zingiber officinale^ Piper longuoip F. nigrum. 

3. Asparagus racemosus. 

4. Cocculus oordifolius. 

5. Identity not clear. 

6. Perhaps citraka*plumbago aeyluiica or P. r«ea. {GVOB^ pp. 4, 

156). 

7. Zingiber officinale. 

6. A ^ecies of cblorophytum or curcieligo orchioides (OVDB^ pp. 
312,176}* 



1.168.5 


497 


Punarnava^y BfhatP Nirgu^^I^ Nimbapatra* fihfngarija*^ 
Amalaia’, and V&saka^ shall be soaked in V&iaka juice along 
with Triphali aod purified seven times or once. 

61. The above medicine can be used in powder form, 
or in pills or in the form of Vajikis (tablets) or prepared in 
ghee or squeezed into oil or in decoction. The same removes 
every illness especially emaciaticm. The dosage is one pala, or 
half a paU» one Karfa or half a Karsa. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND 8IXTYEIGHT* 

Diswa 

Dhanoantari said: 

1 » O Suiruta^ I shall succinctly explain the recipes of 
medicinal compounds removing all ailments for the sake of 
longevity of all living beings. 

2*3. By the intake of astringent, pungent, bitter, acid or 
parchifying foodstuffs, anxiety, iocMdinate sexual intercourse, 
physical fatigue, fright, grief, keeping awake at night, loud talk* 
ing, carrying heavy loads, undue exertions and pulling hard, 
Viyu gets aggravated during the rainy season, when the food 
is digested or at the close of the day. 

4*5. By the intake of hot acid, saline, alkaline and 
pungent foodstuffs, by taking food before perfect digestion. 


1. Crstsevs Rcxbur^iii. 

2* Boerbavia ProcumbcDs 
3^ SoUnuxn iDdicum. 

4. Vitex negundo. 

5. Leaf of Assdirschots Indies. 

6. Edipta proeirau or E. Erecta. 

7. Emblica offidanaUs. 

8. Lippia Nodiflora. 

*Tht chapter dncribei the three humours, their disruption ae the 
cause of diKSses, the seven ingredients of the body, the three humours with 
cbeir character istics. 



Garu4A Purai^a 

exposure to sunshinei warmth of fire, drinking of spirituous 
liquors and anger, Pitu gets aggravated. When the food is in the 
process of digestion, in the midday, after the rainy season, in 
summer and at midnight, 

6-7, By the intake of sweet, acid, saiine, fatty, heavy 
and very cold articles of food, by taking in newly harvested rice, 
flesh of animals living in marshy places and lubricious stufis, 
want of sufficient exercise, sleep during the day, and luxurious 
easy going habits, Kapha gets aggravated immediately after 
food, or at dusk or in the sprir^ season. 

8«9, The symptoms of aggravation of Vayu arc these 
Roughness of the body, contraction of limbs, aching pain, 
obstruction to the passage of waste matter, insensibility, horri* 
pilation, rigidity, emaciation, a dark brown complexion, loose- 
ness of limbs, increase in exertion, etc. Hence ailmenu in which 
these symptoms are seen arc those produced by Viyu 
aggravation. 

10. Burning sensation, heat, wetness effect, anger with¬ 
out reason, lustfldness, exhaustion, pungent and acid (eructa¬ 
tion) , foul smell in the sweat like that of a dead body, fainting, 
excessive thirst, vertig, yellow and green colour—these are the 
symptoms of Pitta affliction in men. 

11-12. Glossiness of the body, sweet taatc in the mouth, 
delayed execution of things, obstruction, paralysed numbness, 
satiation, amassedness, anasarca, chillness, heaviness, itching 
sensation, and overwhelming attack of sleep are the symptoms 
of Kapha aggravation. Ailments caused by twodo^as in com¬ 
bination must be known by the combination of symptoms. 

13. A Sannipataja ailment exhibits all the symptoms as 
it is caused by all the do^as in combination. The body is the 
receptacle and base for all the doyas, dhitus (fundamental 
constituents of the body) and waste matter. 

14. Equilibrium of do9a5 indicates nonnal health; if any 
of them increases or decreases it indicates sickness. Fat, blood, 
flesh, suet, bones, marrow and semen are the seven Dhatus. 

15. V^yu, Pitta, and Kapha are the three do^as. Faeces, 
urine etc. are called Malas (Waste matter). Vkyu is cool, 
light, subtle, cause of lots of voice, strong and unsteady. 

16. Pitta is acid, pungent, hot; unripeness, undigested- 



M 68.26 


49 » 


ness is the cause of sickness. Kapha is sweet, saline, glossy,, 
heavy and lubricious. 

17« Viyu is seated in rectum and buttocks; Pitta is 
located in the digestive cavity; Kapha is located in the abdo¬ 
men, throat and joints of the cranium. 

18. Things of pungent, bitter and stringent taste 
aggravate V8yu; things pungent, acid and saline in taste 
a^ravate Pitta; Things sweet, hot and saline aggravate 
Kapha. 

19. These are administered in reverse order to quell the 

aggravated Do^as coming back to thdr normal seats 

quell the ailment and bring relief. 

20. Sweet taste improves the power of vinon and in* 
creases lymph secretions and the Dhitus. An acid taste at the 
end is relishing, appetising and digestant. 

21. A bitter taste is appetising, curative of fever, 
remover of thirst, laxative and cause of emaciation. An 
astringent taste excites pitta, is scraping, rigidifier and 
absorbant. 

22. A drug is good if it is the receptacle of tastes, 
potency and relieving after-effects. A drug consistent in taste 
and after-effects has all properties. 

23. The potency of a drug is twofold: !$ita (cooling) 
U$na (Heating). The Paka or digestive transformation of the 
tastes is twofold sweet and pungent. 

24. Physician, Medicine, Patient and plenty of nurses— 
these four are the impoitant constituents in the process of 
treatment. Any deficiency in them renders the process 
unfiniitful. 

25. A physician shall start his work after thoroughly 
understanding the habitation, season, age (of the patient), 
digestive power, physical temperament, nature of his constitu¬ 
tion, drug, physical strength and the ailment. 

26. That country is called Sadhara^ia (common or 
ordinary) which has both the characteristics [of Jangala (hilly 
forest) and Anupa (marshy lands}]. A patient is a Bala 
(child) till the sixteenth year, fill the seventieth year Madhya 
(middle aged) and Vfddha (old) thereafter. 



500 




11. Kapha, Pitta and Viyu reipectively predominate 
in the three stages of life. All modes of treatment except those 
involving alkaline, surgical and fire operations are to be followed 
in a debilitated or aged person. 

IS. A lean person must be given Brihha^ (treatment 
making one stout) and to a corpulent man the treatment is 
Kaiianam (reducing bulk). A body of medium structure should 
be maintained as it is. Thus three kinds of bodies shall be 
known. 

29. The strength of a patient should be understood 
from his steadiness, exercises, and gaiety of mind. An enthusi* 
aitic adventuresome man does not show signs of decline or 
decay. 

30. Drink and diet though opposed to his temperament 
yet giving him relief and pleasure sire termed his Satmya or 
second nature. 

31. If the pregnant woman takes Kapha*generating 
Xoodstufis the child will be Kapha prakfti (Kapha*temperamen* 
ted). The same is the case with Viyu generating and Pitta 
generating foodstuffs. If a balanced diet is maintained the 
child shall be Samadhatu (having all fundamental constituents 
in proper proportion). 

32. A Vita temperamented person is lean, harsh and 
volatile. He has few hair and he prattles in dream. 

33. A pitta-temperamented person is irritable, scholar* 
ly and perspiring too much. His hair turn prematurely grey. 
He dreams of fiery blazing things. 

34. A Kapha temperamented person is of steady mind, 
subtle in speech and of gay dispoation. He has glossy hair. 
In dreams he sees water and rocks. 

35. If a person exhibits the traits peculiar to two or 
three dofas he must be considered mixed*temperamented. The 
predominant traits will be those of the predominant do$a. 

36. The digestive power is sluggish, sharp, irregular or 
normal if Kapha or Pitta or Viyu predominates or remains in 
equilibrium* 

37. The normal one should be preserved; the irregular 
one is to be remedied by curbing Viyu; the sharp one by 
antidotes to Pitta and the sluggish one by eliminating Kapha. 



1.168*46 


501 


38. The root cause of all ailmenti is indigestion resulting 
in the annihilation of the gastric fire; Indigestion is of four 
types—Ama, Amla* Rasa and Viftambha* 

39. The Area sort of indigestion causes cholera, sluggish* 
ness of the heart, etc. The antidote for this is the ademnistra*^ 
tion of an emetic with the washings of the drug Vac&^ with 
salt. 

40. Due to Amla (acidity) the disorden, non secretion 
of semen, vertigo, Minting fits and excessive thirst are obierv<> 
ed. The remedy there, is drinking of unboiled cold water and 
inhaling chill air. 

4K In the Rasa type of indigestion (affecting lymph 
secretion) the symptoms are breaking pain in the limbs, 
sluggishness of the head and repugnance for food. The remedy 
in this case is complete abstention from food and drink and 
sleep during the day. 

42. The two symptoms of acute pain and enlarged 
spleen indicate the Viytambha form of indigestion marked by 
suppression of faeces and urine. Diaphoretic measures and salt 
water for drinking are the antidote in this case. 

43*44. The types of indigestion Ama, Amia, and Vi^fam* 
bha are respectively caused by Kapha, Pitta and Viyu. A 
sensible man (sufiering from any of these) shall plaster bis 
stomach with a paste of Hingu,* Tryusana* and Salt and take 
a nap in the day time. All sorts of indigestion will be dispelled. 
Hosts of illness result from unwholesome articles and hence 
one should forsake all unwholesome articles. 

45. Hot water taken after honey is a good digestant. 
Milk is incompatible with bamboo shoots, curd and fish. 

46. The big five root drugs (Mahat Paftcamula) are 

Bilva,^ Gambhirl*, Pa tala*', and Ganikarika*. They are 

appetising and they dispel excess of Kapha and V&yu. 

1. Acoruf calaxnuj. 

2. Asfoetida. 

3. Also called Trikatu. It is a combination of Black Pepper, long 
Pepper and dry Ginger. 

4. Aegle Marmeloa. 

5. Bignonia indica. 

6. Gendina srborea. 

7. Bignonia suaveoleoffs 

8. Premna tpinosa. 



302 


Garu4<i Purdija 


47. The small Paficamuta drugs are Salapar^P, Print* 
parn!^, two types of BfhatP^ and Goksura^ and they dispel 
excess of Vayu and Pitta. They are aphrodisiac in character. 

48. Both these two groups together are called Daiamula^ 
drugs. They cure all fevers of Sannip&taja type. They are very 
good in cough, asthma, tonmolence and pain in the sides. 

49-50. Madicinal oib, ghees and pastes prepared with 
these are very good in Alaka ailments (Sannip&taja). Drugs 
with four times water shall be boiled and reduced to one- 
fourth. Add four times of butter or oil to this with equal quantity 
of milk. The Kalka or residue will be one fourth of the oil or 
butter. This medicated butter of good paka (proper cooking) is 
a good clyster in troubles with urinary bladder. The hard 
kalka can be applied over the body and the soft dust can be 
used as an errhine. 

51. The gross body and the sense organs must be well 
thought of. If they are in their proper function that is called 
normalcy of health. A person destined for longevity must be 
properly attended to. 

52. A person whose activities of the sense organs are 
perverted hasten towards deaths door. A person who hates 
the physician friends and elders and he who loves enemies too 
follows suit. 

53. He whose heel bones, knees, forehead, jaw bones, 
cheek bones suffer from prolapsus, dies ere long. 

54. Left eye sinking in the socket; dark tongue, deranged 
nose, black lips dislodged from their seats, and a face turned 
black—all these indicate death and hence those patients must 
'be given up. 


1. Desmodium Gaogeticum or Hedyiarum G. 

2. Flemionitii cordi^ia. 

3. Solanum Indicura. 

4. Tribulus Lanuginotus. 

Ten roots. 



IJ69.8 


503 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SDCTYNINE 

Diseasts 

Dhanvanian sald\ 

1. In order to distinguish between what it wholesome 
and what is not, I shall tell you the rules of proper food and 
drink. The red species of (paddy) dispels the excess of 
all the three do^as. It removes thirst and fat. 

2. Mah&iili is a good aphrodisiac. Kalama dispels 
both Kapha and Pitta. The Gaura^^fika generally dispels the 
three do^as and is heavy. It is 3ita in potency (cooling). 

3. Syamaka is absorbant» parchifying and productive of 
V&yu principle. It dispels Kapha and Pitta. Similar properties 
are observed in Priyangu^ Nlvara and Koradu$a species of food 
grains. 

4. Yava (barley) taken frequently generates Viyu, 
Sita in potency and dispels Kapha and pitta. Godhuma 
(wheat) b an aphrodisiac and cooling in potency. It dispels 
Viyu. It is sweet and heavy. 

5. Mudga^ pulse dispeb excess of Kapha, Pitta and 
blood. It is astringent, sweet and light. Ma$a< (Black gram) is 
strengthening, aphrodisiac and heavy. It dispels Pitta and 
Kapha. 

6. The Rajamasa’ is not an aphrodisiac. It dispels 
excess of Kapha and Pitta and removes disorders due to Vayu. 
Kulattha(Horse gram), dispels Kapha aitd Vayu and removes 
the disorders of dyspnea, hiccough and enlarged spleen. 

7. Makusthaka^ dispels the fever due to Raktapitta, it 
is cooling in potency and astringent. Ganaka (gram) generates 
Vayu, dispels Kapha and Pitta, destroys manly virility. It 
is styptic. 

8. Masura^ (lentil) is sweet, cooling in potency, astrin- 

1. Fhaseolus mungo. 

2. Phaseolut radiaiut. 

3. Dolichos catjsng. 

4. Phateolus Acoritifbliui ? 

5. A variety of Lem e. 



5 04 Garu^a Purina 

gent and it dispeh Kapha and Pitta. Kalfcya^ too has all these 
properties. It generates Vayu cacesstveiy. 

9. Adhald* dispels Kapha and Pitta and is conducive to 
the generation of semen. AtasI* is Pitta Producing and 
Siddhartha^ dispels Kapha and Vayu. 

10. Tila* (gingelly seed) is alkaline, sweet, oily, strong* 
thening, heat producii^ and pitta generating. The different 
minor seeds destroy strength, parchify and are cooling in 
potency. 

11-12. Citraka^, Ihgudi^, NalIka^ Pippali^, Madhu^^ 
Sigru^^, Cavya^*, Carai^a^^, Nirgutidi^^» Tarkkrt^, Kaiamardaka^*, 
and Bilva destroy Kapha and Pitta; remove germs and are light 
and appetising. Varfibhu^^ and Mirkara^* destroy Vkyu and 
Kapha and remove all defects and disorders. 

13. bitter in taste. K&kamkcP^ destroys excess 
of the three do$as. Ganger!*^ removes Kapha and Vkta. Sar$apa** 
(mustard) generates all do|as. 

14. Kausumbha^ is similar to Sar^pa; Rkjika^ generates 

1. Piium trveiue. 

2. Cigsnus indteus. 

3. Linum alsUatiiiicnuin. 

4. Perbspi white veriety oT Braatica campestna. (GVDB, pp. 433, 
426-7). 

5. Seaamuin indicum. 

6. Plumbago Zeylamica or p. rosea. 

7. Terminalia catappa. 

8. Perhaps a tpedea of Ipomoca {GVDB, pp. 223-4). 

9. Piper longum. 

10. Honey. 

11. Moringu Pttrygosperma 

12. Perhaps Piper chaba (GVDBt p. 155). 

13. Identity not clear. 

14. Vitex negundo. 

15. Seabania a^ypUaca. 

16. Identity not clear. 

17» Boeriiavia Procumbena. 

18. Identity not dear. The name Mirkava U used for Bhr^i^^adlja. 

19. Ricinus communia. 

20. Solanum nigrum (CKDB, p. 86.) 

21. OxalU comiculata. 

22* Brauica caenpeatris. 

2S« Identity not dear. 

24. Braaaica juncea or B. nigra. 



IJ69.20 


505 


Vayu and Pitta. Nidlca^ destroys Kaplia and Pitta. Cucu is 
sweet and cooling in potency. 

15. Padmapatra (Lotus leaf) destroys do?a$. Tripufa^ 
is extremely Viyu-generating. Kaksara’ destroys all do^as. 
Vistuka* is highly appealing. 

16. TaodulIyaS Pilahkya* and others are anti-toxic. 
Raw Mulaka^ (radish) generates dosas, but cooked in steam 
dispels Viyu and Kapha. 

17. Karko{aka*» Virtaka^ Patolaka^^ and Kiravellaka^^ 
when cooked and eaten destroy all do fas and are good for 
heart and throat. 

18. ts diuretiCi relishing and destroys all 
do^as. It is highly efficacious in Ku$tha» urinary diseases, 
fever, dyspnea and asthma as well as the disorders due to the 
derangement of Pitta and Kapha. 

19. Kalinga^^ and Alibu^ destroy Pitta and produce 
Viyu. Trapufa** and Irvaruka** generate Vita and Kapha and 
ward oflT Pitta. 

20. Vrk^imla'’ destroys Kapha and Vayu; Jamblra 
destroys Kapha and Vayu, Dadima^* (Pomegranate) is astrin¬ 
gent and destroys V&yu. Nagarangaphala** (orange) is heavy. 


1. Identity not cle»r. 

2. Perhaps Piium arvense or l^adbyrus sativus {CVDB p. 194). 

3. Identity not clear. 

4. Chenopodium alloum. 

5. Aroaramhua apinosua. 

6. Spinacia oleracca. 

7. Raphanui aativus. 

8. Motnordica dioica. 

9. Solanum melongena. 

10. Trichoaa n thes d ioica. 

11. Momordica charancia. 

12. Cucorbiiapepo. 

13. Flolarrhena aotidyscnterica {CVDB^ p. 64). 

14. Lagenaria siceraria. 

15. Cucamla aatjvua. . 

16. Identity not clear. Tlic name Urviruka u for cucunui melo. 

17. Qarcinia indict. 

IB. Punica granatum. 

19. Citrua reticulata. 



506 


Garuia Purdna 


21. Kesara and Matulimga^ are appetising and destroy 
Kapha and Viyu. Ma^a removes Vayu and Pitta and destroys 
the glossiness of the skin, heat and disorders of Vayu. 

22. All varieties of Amalaka are sweet, relishing and 
aphrodisia but produce Amla type of indigestion. Harltak! 
induces taste for food, is holy and nectarlike. 

23. Lakuca* is sweet and generates all Dofas; Vakula* 
destroys Kapha and Vayu; Bijapuraka* is efficacious in enlarged 
spleen, dyspnea and asthma and removes the duorders due to 
V&yu and Kapha. 

24. Haritaki is a laxative; destroys Kapha and Vayu 
as well as three do^as. The fruit of Tintidi^ is laxative, acid, 
and removes Viyu and Kapha. 

25. Kapittha (horse apple) is astiingent and dispels 
doias; when ripe it is heavy and antitoxic; when unripe it 
produces Kapha and Pitta but ripe it increases Pitta. 

26. Ripe Antra (mango) generates Viyu and produces 
flesh,semen and strength and heightens colour (of the skin). 
Jambu fruit destroys Viyu, Kapha and Pitta and produces 
Vi^fambha form of indigestion as it is astringent. 

27. Tinduka* fruit destroys Kapha and Vayu; Badara 
destroys Viyu and Pitta. Bilva generates Vayu and causes 
Vi^t^mbha. Priyala^ dispels Viyy. 

28. Rijadana^ fruit, banana, jack fruit and coconut 
generate semen and flesh. They are sweet, emolient and 
heavy. 

29. Driksi (grapes) Madhuka and Kharjura(dates) and 
Kumkuma* dispel disorders in blood and Vayu. The ripe 
MagadhP^ is sweet and destroys Pitta and disorders due to 
dyspnea. 

K Citrui medics. 

2. Artoesrpus lakoochs. 

3. Identity not cle^r. 

4. See fn. 1. 

5. Rhui pftrviflor4. 

6. Di^yroi tomeniou. 

7. Buchnnsnia lanssn. 

8. Perhaps Mimusopt bexandra (GVDB^ p. 3S6)« 

9. Crocus sativus 

10. A synonym of ^ippali, CYDB^ p. 303. 



1.169.41 


507 


30-32. Ardraka' is relishing, appetising aphrodisiac and 
Kapha-Vayu-dcsiroying. So also Su^thi, Marica, and Pippali. 
Physicians say that pepper is non aphrodisiac. Hiriga (Asafoe- 
tida) dispels enlarged spleen, pain and constipation and dis¬ 
orders of Vayu and Kapha. YavanP, Coriander and Cummin 
seeds destroy V^yu and Kapha. Rock sale improves eyesight 
and destroys all do^as. It is an aphrodisiac. 

33. Sauvarcala (Sechal) salt is purgatlvci heating in 
potency and it dispels acute pain in the cardiac region. The 
Vida Salt is heating in potency, removes pain, dispels Vayu 
and is sharp. 

34. Romaka salt generates Vkyu> b sweet, heavy, lique- 
flicient and relishing. Yavaksara (Nitrate of potash) is an 
appetiser and is efiicacious in* all disorders of < the heart, 
throat and jaundice. 

35. SarjikH^'a (Barilla) is caustic, appetiser, sharp and 
tearing (used to make abscess burst). Nibhasa (Rainwater) 
dispels all do^ and poison. It is light and relishing. 

36. Nadeya (River water) is parchifying and generates 
Vayu; The Sirasa water (of the lake) is sweet and light; the 
water of Va^ (natural tank) dispels Vayu and Kapha and that 
of Tadaga (artiAcial tank) generates Vayu. 

37. The Nairjhara (fountain) water is relishing, 
sharp, light and dupeii Kapha. It induces digestion. The 
well water is appetising and generates Pitta. The Audbhida 
(Artesian well) water dispels Pitta. 

38. The water where sun’s rays fall during the day and 
the moon’s beams at night is free from all defects and is equal 
to rain water (sky-water). 

39. Hot water dispels fever, bronchitis, corpulence, Vayu 
and Kapha. Boiled and cooled water dispels three do$as but 
kept overnight increases do 9 as. 

40. Cow’s milk dbpels Vayu and Pitta and is emulsive, 
heavy and rejuvinating. Buffalo's milk is heavier than cow*s 
milk, emulsive and impain digestive fire. 

41. The milk of a goat dispels blood dysentery, asthma. 


1. Ginger. 

2. The lame as>Bif4w’»TrschyspcmHiin smmi. GVDB, p. S2B. 



508 Gcruia FurdM 

dyspnea and Kapha. Women^s (breast) milk improves eye9ight> 
cures Rakta Pitta and is saline. 

42. Curd generates Pitta and Kapha and dispels Vayu 
and is an aphrodbiac. Churned sour cream dispels all do^as 
and cleanses all vessels of the system. 

43. Fresh butter dispels diarrhoea, piles, etc; Pro* 
ducts of milk turned tour like Kila|a (the solid residue of sour 
milk) are heavy and cause Ku^fha. 

44. Butter milk, according to the former writers, dispels 
the three do$as and is very efficacious in diarrhoea, tumour, 
piles, jaundice, dysentery and enlarged spleen. 

45. Glu is an aphrodisiac and sweet. It dispels Vayu, 
Pitta and Kapha. Cow^s ghi improves intellect, eyesight and 
after medication and purification dispels dosas. (Vkyu, Pitta 
and Kapha). 

46. Medicated and purified ghI dispels loss of memory, 
epileptic fits^ insanity, fainting and other disorders. The ghee 
5 )repared from the milk of goat and other animals has the same 
good properties as cow’s milk. Goat’s urine dispeb Kapha and 
Viyu, germs and poison. 

47. Gingelly oil is extremely efficacious in jaundice, 
dropsy, cutaneous afflictions, piles, tumour, enlarged spleen 
and diabetes. It destroys Vayu and Kapha and is conducive to 
the growth of hair and strengthening of the body. 

48. Mustard oil dispels worms and jaundice, Vayu and 
Kapha and disorders due to corpulence. The linseed oil affects 
the eyes but dispels Pitta and V&yu. 

49. The oil extracted from Ak$a (the seed of the bead 
of rosaries) dispels Kapha and Pitta. It is conducive to the 
growth of hair. It soothes the skin and blood vessels. Honey 
is exalted as the remover of the excess of the three dosas as 
well as generator of Vayu. 

50. (Honey)dispels iuccough, dyspnea, worms, vomiting 
urinary disorders, poison and thirst. Sugarcane dispels Rakta- 
pitta. It is conducive to strength, growth of Kapha and is an 
aphrodisiac. 

51. Molasses produce Pitta and are sharp. The spirituous 
extract of jaggery unrefined sugar is light. Candy is an 



M69.63 


509 

aphrodisiac, emoUent, sweet and is efficacious in disorders of 
bloody Pitta and Vayu. 

52. Jaggery dispels Vayu and PitU, and produces 
Kapha. Old treacle is very wholesome and is a purifier of 
blood. 

53. Treacle sugar along with ghee is an aphrodisiac and 
dispels Rakta Pitta. All kinds of wine produce Pitta due Co 
their acidity and dispel Kapha and Vkyu. 

54. Sauviraja wine is sharp and generates Rakta Pitta. 
Manda (gruel) made of fried rice is appetising and digestive. 
It is wholesome. 

55-56. Pey4 (gruel with plenty of water) is light diuretic 
and restores deranged Viyu. Pe>'i with butter milk, pome¬ 
granate, Vyofi, jaggery, honey and Pippali dispels cough, 
bronchiris and diarrhoea. Payasa (Milk pudding) produces 
Kapha and is conducive to strength. Kriara (rice, gingelly 
seeds and black gram cooked together) destroys Viyu. 

S7-58. A soup of watery nature is an emolient. Taken 
lukewarm it is relishing and light. Soup with bulbous roots, 
radish and fruits well cooked with gh! or oil is heavy and 
rejuvinating. In lukewarm state it is light Vegetables cooked 
in steam and well seasoned after squeezing out water are 
wholesome. 

59. AYu^a (soup without salt) made ofDadimaand 
Amalaka generates gastric fire and dispels Vayu and Pitta. A 
yu$a prepared with redish dispels coughs breathing disorders, 
cold and Kapha. 

60. A Yu^ made with Yava, Kola and Kulattha dispels 
Vayu and is beneficial to the voice. That prepaied with Mudga 
and Amalaka is astringent and des roys Kapha and Pitta. 

61. Curd with jaggery dispels Vayu. Saktu (flour of 
fried grain) is sharp and generates Vayu. Sa^kuli (Coiled fried 
Jaleb!) fried in ghi is an aphrodisi 2 ic and generates gastric 
fire. 

62. Foodstuffs with cooked meat are rejuvinating; cakes 
are heavy; things fried in oil impair eyesight; those cooked in 
water or steam are difficult to be digested. 

63. Hot mandakas (gruel) arc wholesome, cooling in 



510 Garu^a Purdna 

potency and heavy. After food, water is to be taken. It is 
destructive of thirst and exhaustion. 

64*65; A person careful about Anupana shall be free 
from poison and illness. Poison resembling the neck of a 
peacock brings about discoloration. Even the smell, touch or 
taste of poison brings great anguish to those who swallow it. 
If it is smelt an ailment of the eyes which cannot be cured 
even by great physicians results. The characteristic symptoms 
of poisoning are shivering, yawning, etc. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY 

Disfoses 


Dhanvantari said: 

1. Fever is of eight types inasmuch as it is produced 
by the do^as severally or in twos or in combination or by 
external casual factors. Water boiled with these drugs:— 
Musta^, Parpataka*, Uiira^, Candana*, Udteya^ and Nagara^ 
and then cooled should be given to the patient to quench hts 
thirst and rise in temperature. 

2. A decoction made of Nagara, Devakas^a^, Dhanyaka^ 
and the two Bfhatis should be given to a fever patient. It is 
digestive and dispels fever. 

3. A Ka$aya or as trigen t decoction made of Aragvadha^ 
Abhaya^^, Musta, Rikta^^ and Granthika^^ is digestive and 

1. Gypenis rotjndus or C. Kariesus. 

2. Perhaps the Fumaris species. {GVDB, p. 299-40. 

9. Veciveria zizanioides. 

4* StAUlum alloum. 

5. Identity not clear. 

6. A synonym of drdreid. 

7. A synonym of dr««dfrv»Gedruf deodara. 

8. Coriandrum utivum. 

9. Cassia fiihila. 

10. A synonym of harfiakt, 

n. Identity not dear. 

12. A tyaonym of p^pclim Qla. 



L170J1 


5lt 


very efficacious in an Amajvara (fever with mucous secretions) 
attended with colic. 

4. Madhukasara, Sindhuttha^, Vaca, Csana* and Kana^ 
must be taken in equal parts and ^ound into fine powder. 
This, mixed with water, is a good medicine to restore a person 
from an unconscious state. 

5. A decoction made of Trvrt\ Viiala*, Triphali, 
Kafuka and Aragvadha along with Ksara (Alkali) is a good 
purgative. When drunk it dispels fever of all varieties. 

6. A decoction made of Mahau^adha^^ Amrta^ Musti, 
Candana, Uilra and Dhanyaka taken with sugar and honey 
dispels Trtlyaka (Tertian) fever, 

7. Strips of Apamarga, Jata tied round the waist with 
seven red threads on a Sunday cure the Trtlyaka fever. 

8. If one performs Tarpapa with gingelly seeds to a 
sonless ascetic who has passed away in the nothern bank of the 
river Gahga he will be cured of Aikahika (intermittent) 
fever. 

9. A decoction of Gu^uci, Triphala^ Vasaka, Rjvlka^ 
and Bala along with its rudiment cooked with ghee removes 
fever. 

10. A decoction of Dhatri®, Siva^®, Kaiia and Vahni^^ 
dispels all sorts of fevers* 

I shall now explain the various remedial measures for 
dysentery attended with fever. 

11. A decoction prepared with Priniparni^^ Bala, Bilva, 
Negara, Utpala, Dhanyaka, P&that% indrayavai Bhunimba^ 

1. Identity not clear. 

2. Any one of the p^fU^la group of drugs. [CVDB, p. 55). 

3. Identity not clear. 

4. OperenUna turpethum. 

5. Trichoianihes bracteata. 

6. A synonym of 

7. Either gudief or hsritidd, 

6. Identity not clear. 

9. A synonym of dniAlakl. 

10. Perhaps karfMl {GVDBy p. 409) 

U, A synonym of Wtra4a. 

12. U (aria pic I a. 

) 3. CUiampelos parkra. 



512 


Garu4a Putd^a 


Mustij Parpa(aka and Mahaufadha cures dysentery with fever 
and mucous discharge. 

12. A decoction with Nagara, Ativi^a^, Musti, Bhuni* 
mba, Amfta and Vatsaka^ cures all kinds of fever and all sorts 
of dysentery. 

13*14. Water boiled with Musia, Parpataka> Udicya 
and Srngavera^ can be given to an Atisira (dysentery) patient. 
Along with his food he must take ^lapari>H, Primparni. 
Brhatl, KaQiakAriki, Bali, Svadaihftra*, Visvadi^ Pitha, 
Nigara and Dhanyaka. It is efficacious. 

15. A decoction made of Viiva and the seed of mango 
fruit taken with unrefined sugar and honey is a cure for Atlsara. 
Similarly, Kufaja bark with Kaoa balso efficacious. 

16. A decoction of Vatsaka, Ativisa, Tilva, Kani and 
Kanda is very efficacious in Atlsara with blood, colic and 
mucous discharge. 

17. Now the treatment of Grahanl (diarrhoea) is ex¬ 
plained. Grahatii is the result of impaired digestion. Gh! with 
the decoction and residue of Citraka dispels diarrhoea. It is 
appetising and efficacious in disorders of enlarged spleen, 
tumour, Ascites, colic and piles. 

18*19. Five kinds of salt viz. Sauvarcala, Saitidhava, 
VidaAga, Audbhida and S&mudra (of sea water) shall be used 
here. Three ways of the treatment of piles arc : sitrgical opera¬ 
tions, cauterisation and alkaline remedies. Buttermilk freshly 
made is also efficacious in piles. 

20. Guducl with PippaB, Abhaya fried in ghee or Tfvrt 
with Amlaloniki^ can be taken for destroying piles. 

21. A mixture of gingelJy seeds with sugarcane juice 
dispels piles and Ku^d^a. PaficakoU (five spices), Marica and 
Tryu^ana improve digestion. 


1. Aconitum hcicrophyllvim. 

2. A synonym of kut<4^, 

3. A synonym of 

4. Desmodium eageticum. 

5. A synonym of G9kpira, 

6. A synonym of &uo4hi. 

7. Identity not clear. 



M70.32 


513 


22. HariukI taken frequently with Nigara» jaf^ry or 
rocksalt is an appetiser. 

23. A decoction of Triphala, Vksk, Tikti, 

Bhunimba and Nimba taken in with honey quells jaundice and 
chlorosis. 

24. A confection made ofTfvft, Triphalk, 3y&mi and 
Pippall with honey and sugar is very efficacious in Sannipitaja 
fevers and Haemoptysis. 

25. As long as Vksi is available and there is hope to 
live why should patients of Haemoptysis, Pthysis and cough 
despair. 

26. A decoction of Atanifaka’, Mrdvlki and pathyk 
taken with sugar and honey quells cough, bronchitis and 
haemoptysis. 

27. The juice of VAsk with candy and honey when drunk 
arrests bleeding. Milk dnink with the juice of Sallakl» Badarl, 
Jambu, Priykla, Amra, Arjuna^ or Dhava^ has styptic power. 

28. A patient prostrated by chronic consumption be* 
comes free from all ailments and shines like a Deva if he drinks 
ghl medicated and purified with the jtiice of Nirguti^i roots, 
fruits and leaves. 

29. A confection made of Harltakl, Kani, 3ui>{hi and 
Marica witli jaggery destroys cough and quells thirst and re* 
pugnance for food. 

30. GhI, a Prastha by volume cooked with thirty i^las 
(weight) of each of the juices of Kantakari and Guduci quells 
cough and improves digestion. 

31. A decoction of Dhatrl, Sita and Sutifhl 

taken with honey destroys hiccough. A patient of Asthma 
shall drink the juice of Bhki^^ and Viiva with hot water. 

32. A person suffering from hoarse voice shall keep in 
his mouth catechu soaked in oil or Pathya with Pippall or 
Pathya with Nagara. 


1 * A lynoaycn of vdrakc, 

2. Terminalii 
3« Anogewus taltfolia. 

4. A lynonym of 

5. CHerodondom fetratun. 



514 


Garu4^ Purd^a 


33. Powdered Vid^nga^ and Triphali powder taken with 
honey removes vomiting. A decoction of Amra and Jambu can 
also be taken with Maksika (honey). 

34. Triphalk is a cure for vertigo amd epileptic fits 
when drunk with honey. It removes all sorts of vomiting and 
quenches thirst. 

354 Paficagavya drunk quells hysteria and disorders due 
to adverse planets. Kusmand aka juice with Yas^ika^ also serves 
the same purpose. 

36. Old ght cooked with Brkhm! juice, Vack» iCu^tha^ 
and Sankhapu^pP shall be taken in for quelling insanity and 
Grahapsmira. 

37. Medicated GhI cooked with Aivagandhk^ decoction 
and residue in milk four times as much is an aphrodisiac. It in- 
creases flesh and quells sterility. 

38. A decoction of*cchinn& with the powder of NfiP 
and Mu^diriki with honey and ghee when drunk, quells Vata- 
rakta of Che worst type* 

39. Five Harltakls taken with jaggery quell Ku^fha, 
piles and disorders due to Vayu. The juice of Guduc!» its 
powder, decoction or its residue too has the same power. 

40. GhI cooked vnth milk and the decoction of Kail 
and Guduct and their residue quell Vatarakta, Kustha and 
Vranas (Abrasions). 

41. Triphala taken with Guggulu removes Vatarakta 
and epileptic fits. Gu^ulu taken with cow’s urine removes 
Urustambha (paralysis of the thighs). 

42*43. A decoction of Su^^ and Gokfuraka removes 
disorders and pains due to Satna Vkta. A decoction of Daia- 
mula, Amrta, Eranda, Risna^, Nagara and Daru^ taken with 
Marica (pepper) and jaggery removes great tumours. A con- 

t. Embelia ribea. 

2. A lynonym ot madhuka. 

3. Sautturea lappa. 

4. Convolvul ui pluncaulu. 

5. Withania fomnifen. 

6. Indifofera tinctona. 

7. Pluehea lanceolata. 

8. A synonym of dfwidiru 



1.170.54 


515 


fection made of them removes cough and quells thint and 
repugnance for food. 

44. Take thirty palais of the juice of each of Kantakari 
and GuducI and cook it >vith a prastha of ghi. It removes 
cough and paun in the heart. It is an appetiser. 

45. The decoction of Krsni, Dhatri, Sit& andSunthi with 
Marica and rock salt taken with castor oil removes even acute 
Sama V&ta. 

46. A decoction of BaU» Punarnava, Eranda, two types 
of Brhati and Gok^ura drunk with salt and asafoetida destroys 
V&ta Sula (flatulent colic). 

47. The boiled decoction of Triphalft, Nimba, Ya^tika, 
Ka^uka and Aragvadha drunk with honey removes burning 
sensation and colic. 

46. Triphala water with Yaitlka quelb Pario^tn&rti (a 
variety of colic). Dross (Maod^ta) purified in cow’s urine 
mixed with Triphala powder and licked with honey and ghee 
removes colic arising from the three dosas. 

49. Two parts of Trivft, four parts of Krini and five 
parts of Haritak! mixed with equal quantity of jaggery and 
made into pills remove constipation in the bowels. 

50. Powdered Haritak!, Yavaksara, Pippall and Trivet 
taken with ghl remove Udavrala (tympanites with 
constipation). 

51. Trivrt, Haritakl and &ykmk soaked and purified in 
SnuhP juice must be dried (in the sun) and formed into 
Vapka (tablets). These Va^kas taken with cow’s urine destroy 
Anaha (constipation). 

52. Tryusana, Triphali, Dhanya, Vidanga, Cavya and 
Citraka boiled and made into Kalka (residue) shall be puri* 
Bed with ghi. Taken in, this quells all disorders of Vayu and 
enlarged spleen. 

53. Roots of Nagara taken with milk or Sauvarcala with 
Sivaghfta (ghl from the milk of she-jackal, half its quantity 
drunk) quell palpitation of the heart* 

54. Powdered Ka^a, Pa^ubheda^, Eli and Silajatuka 

fr A tpeciei of Euphorbia. (GVDB^ p. 459). 

2. Bergenia liguUta. 



316 Goru4a Purd$A 

drunk with the washings of rice and jaggery gives hope of life 
to a patient of strangury. 

55. A decoctiem of N&gart, Dh&tri, Vajigandbi 

and TrikaQtaka shall be drunk in all ailments of V&yu, colic 
and strangury. 

56. Yavakf&ra (carbonate of potash) with an equal 
quantity of sugar removes all kinds of strangury. Nidigdhika^ 
juice with honey quells difficulty in passing urine. 

57. Salt with TiiphaU kalka (residue or paste) gives 
relief in suppression of urine. Powdered Karcura also can be 
inserted into the urethra of the penis (to induce flow of urine). 

58. A decoction of the root of Stgru drunk lukewarm 
quells heat (white urinating). Juice of Dhiktri and Nila with 
honey removes all sorts of urinary ailments. The decoction of 
Triphali, Diru, DirvI and Abja taken with honey removes 
urinary troubles. 

59. A person wishing to be stout shall avoid keeping 
awake, sexual intercourse, physical exercise and worries. 
Obesity should be gradual. 

60. A person accustomed to eat Yava and Sy&mika and 

to drink sweet water will become stout. Hot boiled rice with 
maod^ makes one lean. 

61. Fried barley powder with honey, or a compound of 
Cavya, Jlraka, Vyo^a, Hihgu, Sauvarcala and Amala is appetis¬ 
ing and destructive of fat. 

62. A prastha of ghi with equal quantity of milk shall 
be cooked with Kalka of Citraka and Utpala twice in quantity 
soaked in four times water and twice (cow*s) urine. This is an 
antidote for all types of Ascites. 

63*64. Starting with ten pieces of pipp)ali and increasing 
it by ten every day the adniinutration shall be continued for 
ten days. Then it shall be reduced by ten every day. Milk 
shall be taken along with it. The diet on these days shall be 
milk and Yaffika. Ihe same can be practised with Kfs^a or 
Mudga. If a thousand pieces of KffO^ or other drugs are thus 
taken in all one shall be stout, live long and be free from 
dropsy andAsdtes. 


1. A fynonym ef 



M 70.76 


517 


65. Gh! cooked and purified in the reriduc (Kalka) of 
the decoction of Punamavi U a remedy for Anasarca. A patient 
of Anasarca, tumour, etc. shall take pippall with milk in cow’s 
urine or jaggery with equal quantity of Abhaya or Viivfi. 

66. Oastor oil taken in with a decoction of Bali with 
milk is a sure remedy for distension^ hernia, colic, etc. 

67. Pathya residue mixed with Krspi and Saindhava 
and the oil extracted from roasted castor seeds is a sure 
remedy of Hydrocela. 

68. Scrofula is cured by the administration of the root 
of Nirgundl as an errhine. Fomentations with the decoction 
of Snuhl and Gapdttika^ remove tumours. 

69-70. Goitre can be cured by plastering with the paste 
of Ha$tikan;ia^ and Pal&ia. Plastering witlt the paste of 
Dhattura, Eranda, Nirgu^dl^ Var^&bbu, Sigru and Sar^apa 
dispels terrible long standing ejlephantiasis. Plastering with 
Sobh&ftjanaka, Sindhuttha and HiAgu makes abscess subside. 

71. Plastering with ^rapunkha’ with honey heals all 
sorts of ulcers. Smearing with the paste of Nimba leaves makes 
ulcers non-scptic. 

72*73. A paste of Triphala, Khadira,Darvl and Nyagro* 
dha cleanses ulcers and wounds. A physician shall wash and 
clean a fresh wound giving much pain with warm ghee with 
Ya^ti^Madhuka. An inteUigent physician shall cure fresh 
wounds by casual factors by means of plastering. 


74*76. The physician shall resort to cooling processes 
for subduing Pitta and the heat of the blood. A decoction of 
Bamboo bark, Eranda bark and Svadaxhftra bark drunk with 
honey, Hiftgu and rock salt will let out the dislodged !blood in¬ 
side the viscera. For the sake of maintaining normal health 
rice shall be taken or Yavigu (gruel) drunk with rock salt and 
along with the juice of Yava, Kola and Kulattha. The juice 
of Karafljariita and Nirguodl destroys worms to the ulcers. 


1. P«rhapt Atblnia julibrisiin or Dalberfia serlcea(GFD6. p. ISS).. 

2. Leca mcrophyUa {GVDB, p. 469). 

3. Tepbreiia purpurea. 



518 


Garu4d Purdna 


77« Guggulu with Triphala powder made into Vatakas 
{tablets) relieves pain> dispels constipation and purifies ulcers* 
They become non-septic. 

78. A medicated oil cooked with the juice of Durv^, 
and Kampilla with the kalkaof the bark ofDarvi is an impor-' 
tant remedy in cases of ulcers. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYONE 

Diseases 


Dhanvantari said: 

1. O Suiruta, please listen. I shall explain the remedial 
measures for fistula sinus and other disorders. A sinus should 
first be surgically operated and treatment proceeded with as 
in other wounds. 

2. A fistula, sinus, colic etc. can be cured by the medi- 
cated ghee with equal quantities of Guggulu, Triphala and 

3. The oil extracted from the juice of Nirgundl is a cure 
for sinuses and malignant ulcers. By drinking, smearing or 
administering as errhine this oil is efficacious in Pama 
Scabies. 

4. Pills made of Guggulu, Triphala and Kfsna in the 
proportion of 3:5:1 are wholesome for those who suffer from 
oldema, enlarged spleen, piles and fistula in ano. 

5. In the cutting of veins in the middle of the penis the 
purity of the locality and in syphilis avoidance of suppuration 
should be maintained carefully—otherwise the penis may 
slough off. 

6. A decoction of Pa(ola, Nimba, Bhunimba and^Gui^ucI 
drunk with Guggulu and Khadira dispels syphilis. 

7. Charred ashes of Triphala burnt in an ironpan made 
into a paste with honey must be smeared on the sores in 
syphilis. The sores will heal instantaneously. 




1.171.19 


519 


8. A medicated ghee cooked with decoction and residue 
of Triphala, Nimba, Bhunimba, Karafija, Khadira, etc. is highly 
efficacious in syphilis. 

9->10. On locating the fracture of a bone it shall be first 
washed with cold water. Then it must be plastered with clay 
and bound with Darbha grass. The diet of the patient must be 
black gram meat, ghee, milk and a soup of gingelly seeds. 
Restorative and constructive diet and drink should be given to 
him. 

11. Let the patient be on a diet of garlic, honey, fried 
grain water and sugar residue. Broken, cut or dislodged bones 
will be set right instantaneously. 

12. Equal parts of Aivattha, Triphala and Vyo^ should 
be added to Guggulu of the same quantity in the aggregate. 
Application of this heals fractures of bones and joints. 

13-14. Emetics, purgatives and bleeding are to be em* 
ployed in all forms of Ku$tha. A decoction of Vac&, Vasi, 
Panola and the barks of Nimba and Phali^ should be drunk 
with honey as it is constructive and dispels Vayii. The purga* 
tive is by means of Trivrt, Danti and Triphala. 

15. Oil medicated with Manahiila and Marica dispels 
Kustha. In all forms of Ku^fha the above oil should be 
applied. The patient must take five kinds of myrobalans 
and rice with treacle. 

16. Plastering with Karaftja and Tagara soaked in 
cow's urine as well as rubbing with Karavira after applying 
oil dispels Kusjha. 

17. A paste of Haridra» Malaya, Rasna, GuducI, Tagara 
Aragvadha and Karafija applied over the body removes all 
kinds of Kusthas. 

18. A paste of Manatiiila, Vidanga, VagujI, Sarsapa 
and Karafljl soaked in cow’s urine removes Kusfha and the 
body shines like the sun. 

19. Plastering with Vidahga, Aidavaca*, Ku^tha, Nija, 
Sindhuttha and Sarfapa soaked in water and cow’s urine 
removes ring worm and other cutaneous affections* 

1, ^ A synonym of p-iy^Agu. 

2. *'Perhsps Air4P4tit said to be a synonym of nigaboU (GVDB) 

p.60). 



Gmi4a 




20. PrapunnA(aka^ %t€d% DhitrT» Saijarasa^ and 
Snuh! soaked in Sauvira urine can be applied as an unguent 
in ring worm. 

21. Aragvadha leaves are to be ground into paste with 
Aranala. This removes ring worm, Ki^fima, Kustha and 
Psoriasis. 

22. V&guji taken hot with milk dispels Kuftha. GingeU 
ly seedSf ghi, Triphala, honey, Vyosa, Bhallita and sugar 
taken in equal parts act as aphrodisiac. They are conducive 
Co increase brain power and dispel Kustha of persons who err 
due to lust. 

23. Powdered Vid^^i Triphala and Krt^a with honey 
will be a good leha (lambative) in these ailments:—Kut^ha, 
worms, Diabetes, sinuses and fistula in ano. 

24. He who eats for a month Niii and Amalakawith 
Abhay&ri^ta will conquer Kustha thereafter. There is no 
doubt. 

25. Ashes of Mango and Khadira sprouts burnt in a 
pot and pasted with Ak^ juice, Dhatrl juice, and honey is re* 
juvinating and dispels Kustha. 

26. By drinking the decoction of Dhatrl and Khadira 
aloi^ with VagujI one can remove quickly leucoderma as white 
as conch and the moon. There is no doubt. 

27. The patient will conquer leprosy by drinking the 
oil extracted from Bhallataka within a month. Khadira water 
taken with other beverages conquers Kustha. 

28-30. The medicated ghi cooked with Vasa, Gu<jucl, 
Triphala, Panola, KaraAjaka, Nimba, Aiana^ and Kr$ 9 a— 
Vetra decoction and residue dispels Kusfha like Vajra the 
thunderbolt of Indra. The patient lives for a hundred years. 

31. Juice of Durva grass is to be cooked with four times 
of oil. Taking bath after smearing with this oil removes all 
skin diseases such as itches, Pama, Vicareika and Kacchu. 

32. Oil duly cooked with the drugs, bark of Druma, 
Arka, Kustha, Lavana, Citraka and Gandirika with cow's 
urine removes Kustha and all sorts of ulcers. 

1. Perhsps propuw^ft^ a synonym of 

2. A synonym of diwulh . 

3. Identity not clear. 



1.171.43 


321 


33. Dhatri» Nimbaphala and Gitraka soaked in cow’a 
urine removes itches. A decoction of Vasa, Amrta, Parpafika, 
Nimba, Bhunimba, Markara, Triphala and Kulattha taken 
with honey cure Amlapitta (Acidity). 

34. Triphala, Pafola and Tikta cooked into a decoction 
and drunk with sugar and Ya^timadhu is a sure remedy for 
fever, vomiting and acidity. 

35. GhI cooked duly with any of the drugs: Vasa, Tikta, 
or Pippall or Guda-kuymat^da can be used to remove acidity.* 

36. Pippall with honey dispels acidity. A confection 
made of Pathya, Pippall and jaggery dispeb disorders of Kapha 
and impaired digestion. 

37. Grind together AJajP and Dhanyaka and cook them 
well in a prsistha of ghi. Duly taken, tJtis removes disorders 
of Kapha and Pitta, non relish for food, impaired digestion and 
vomiting. 

38. A decoction made of Pippall, Amrta, Bhunimba, 
V&sak&ri$^a, Parpa)a, and Khadidinsia removes fever with 
acute pain and carbuncle. 

39. Ghi cooked with Triphala juice and Trivrti shall 
be administered as a purgative to quell fever with erysipelas. 

40. A decoction known as Asfaka^kvatha (Eight dnigg* 
ed) is prepared with the eight drugs : Khadira the three 
myrobalans, Ariffa, Panola, Amrta and Vasaka, and it 
conquers Romantika (Measles) and Masurika (small pox). 

41. The above decoction dispeb Kus{ha, Visarpa 
(Erysipelas), Visphota (carbuncle) and scratching sensation. 
Dusting the powder of Lasuna cures the skin disease called 
Masaka. 

42. In case Carmakila begins to fade and decay and in 
Masaka and Tilakalaka (dark spots and sabaceoiu growths) 
first scarify them with the surreal knife and cauterise with fire 
or alkalis without leaving even a bit. 

43. A paste of Patola and Nil! dispels the ailment Jala- 
gardabha. Oil cooked with GuAja fruits and juice of Bhrnga* 
raja removes itches and Kapltlaku$(ha. 


1. A synonym oijirak^. 



522 


Gar Mia Pur ana 


44. The pulp of the seed of mango fruits cooked with 
Triphala, Nila, Bhrhgari^jaka, Lauhacurna and Kahjika turns 
the hair deep black. 

45 Take two prasthas of kslri» !^a and Arka leaves well 
squeezed into juice with a pala of Madhuka. Cook all well in 
a Kudava of oil. This is efficacious in preventing hair from 
turning grey due to old age« 

46-47. In stomatitis^ gargling with Triphali is very 
efTective. Chamber soot nitrate of potash^ Pith&, Vyo^a and 
Rasahjana too can be used for such gargles. Well powdered 
Lodhra, Triphala and Citrak should be held in the mouth with 
honey for dispelling ailments of throat and teeth. 

48. An astringent decoction named Pahcapallavaka 
is very efficacious in diseases of the mouth. They are the 
sprouts of Patola» Nimba, Jamblra, Amra and Malati. 

49. The juice of Laiuna> Ardraka, Sigru, Parull, Mutaka 
and Kadall made lukewarm forms a good eardrop in ear 
troubles. 

50. In Otorrhoea with acute pain and a humming 
soundi powdered rock salt dissolved in the juice of the leaves 
of Snuhi and made slightly warm is very eRective. 

51. In acute otitis, oil cooked in the juice of the leaves 
of JitI is efficacious. In ear-ache Sunthi oil or mustard oil, 
slightly warm, shall be poured into the ears. 

52- Milk cooked in Paheamuli juice, Citraka, HaritakI, 
Ghi and jaggery. This soup called Sadahga (Six ingredients) 
Yu$a quells catarrh. 

53. Diseases of the eyes, diseases of the stomach, cold 
(catarrh), ulcers, and fever—these five ailments subside in five 
days by fasting. 

54. The juice of Dhatri poured into the eyes cures the 
inflammation in the area. A paste of Sigru^ Darvi, Rasafijana 
and rocksalt in honey w'hen applied over the eyes also serves 
the purpose. 

55. Powdered Haridra, Dam, Sindhuttha, Rasafijana 
and Gairika applied round the eyes removes eye troubles. 

56. Abhaya fried in ghi and Triphala soaked in water 
when applied around the eyes removes eye troubles. Supth!, 
Nimbadala powdered with very litfle rock salt can be applied 



L171.68 


523 


to the eyes to remove small eruptions, itching sensations and 
pain. 

57. One part of Abhaya with two parts of Ak§a and 
four parts of Amrta welt boiled can be used as decoction or 
pasted with honey and ghee can be used as a lambative 
(Avaleha) to cure eye pains. 

58. Sticks or wicks made of Candana^ Triphala, Puga^ 

Palaia and Tarumulaka dissolved in water cure all types of 
• 

Ilmira. 

59. Marica ground to paste in curd, forms a good 
collyrium to cure night blindness. Gh! with milk well cooked 
with Triphala decoction and residue when drunk at night fall 
will cure Timira quickly. 

60*61. Pippali, Triphali, Kf&ra» Irondust, rocksalt and 
juice of Bhrhgaraja is called GudikaAjana. It removes piles, 
Timira, kotha and eye ailments. 

62-63. Vatikis or tablets made of Trika^u, Triphali, 
Saindhava, Manahsila, Ketaka, ^ajikhahabhi, J&ti flowers, 
Nimbaka, Rasafijana, Bhrhgaraja, ghee, honey and milk well 
pasted together cure all sorts of eye ailments. 

64. Burnt roots of Erarid^ka or the flower of Mucukun* 
daka’ ground with KaAjika applied over the forehead cure 
headache. 

65. Oil cooked with one pala each ofSatamull, £rap« 
damula, Gakra and Vyaghri can be used as errhine in curing 
disorders of Vkyu and Kapha as well as Timira and diseases 
of super clavicular regions. 

66. Lavana, Viiva and jaggery or Pippali with rock salt 
is very effective in Bhujastambha (paralysis of the arms) and 
in all super clavicular afflictions. 

67. In the migraine called Suryavarta the treatment is 
the application of errhines. Astringent decoction of Daia- 
mula drugs with ghee and rock salt can be used as an errhine 
also. It cures aching pain of the limbs as well as Suryavarta 
and headache* 

68. A compound of Suvarcala, AjajI, Madhuka and 


1. Areea cstechu. 

2. Pcert>iperinum ocerifolium. 



524 


Garu4a Purina 


Nllotpala fttirred in curd and drunk with honey shall save a 
woman afflicted with leucorrhea of the Vitaja variety. 

69-70. In the Pittaja type of leucorrhea the juice of 
Vaaaka, or that of Gu^ucishould be sulminbtered with Amalak! 
Uja soaked in water and sweetened with honey and sugar. 
For the alleviation of Pandu type (jaundice) of leucorrhea a 
woman should take the juice of AmalakI and honey or the juice 
of the root of K&rpasa with the water with which rice has 
been washed. 

71. A paste ofTanduByaka roots and Rasaftjana taken 
through the medium of water with which rice has been washed 
and honey cure all forms of leucorrhea. Roots of Kuia grass 
pasted with water with which rice has been washed and drunk 
will cure alt sorts of leucorrhea. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYTWO 

Distasis 

Dhanvaniari said\ 

1. O Suiruta, I shall explain the mode of treatment for 
the peculiar disorders women, please listen. In all Yoni- 
vyapat (Vaginitis, etc.) types of disorders, measures to quell 
Viyu are recommended. 

2-3. Vac&» Upakufteika^ Jati, Vasaka, Rocksalt, Ajaji, 
Yavik^ara, and Citraka shall be fried in ghi and then dissolved 
in water. Sugar shall be added. If this is taken the pain 
around the vagina, palpitation of the heart, piles and enlarged 
spleen get subdued. 

4. By applying the paste of the leaves of Badarl the 
rupture of the Vagina can be cured. An application of the 
paste of Lodhra and Tumblphala gives firmneit to the muscles 
round the vagina. 


]. NigelUsalivA. 



L172.15 


525 


5. Ghl medicated with Paficapallavaa (Bve sprouts) i 
Arka and Malatl flowers and cooked in sunshine is a 
sure remedy in leucorrhea. It removes foul smell from the 
vagina] passage. 

6*7. Japs flowers with Kifljika and a prastha of Jyoti)- 
matldala^ pasted with Durvi shall be taken. Citraka with 
sugar and powdered Dhitrf, Afljana and Abhayi shall be 
drunk with water. This arrests excess of menstrual flow. 
Etrhines or potions of Laksmai;ia with milk taken in enables 
conception. 

8. Aivagandhi taken with ghee and half an Adhaka of 
milk enables conception. Even a sterile woman taking ghee 
medicated with Vyofa and Kesara is sure to conceive* 

9. Milk well boiled with the roots of Kuia» Kala, 
Urubuka and Gokfuraka taken with sugar by a pregnant 
woman removes her pain in the wombp uterus, etc. 

10. Application of the pastes of Pa|hip Langall, Api« 
marga or ku^aja separately to the navel, lower abdomen and 
vagina of a woman in her labour ensures easy delivery. 

11. The pain that a woman experiences after delivery, 
in the heart, head, urinary bladder, etc. is called Arkanda. 
Then she must take sour cream with Yavak^ara dissolved in 
lukewarm water. 

12* A decoction of Dalamula drugs taken with ghee 
quells all post-parturient pains. Powdered Sill rice taken with 
milk will increase her breast milk. 

13. Hie juice of Vidkri flowers and the root of Karp&sa 
also has the same property. A soup of Mudga is rejuvinating. 
It purifies the breast milk of a wet nurse. 

14. A lambative (Avaleha) made of Kuf(ha, Vaca, 

Abhayk, Madhuka honey and ghee shall be given to 

the infant as it heightens the colour of the complexion, splen* 
dour and longevity. 

15. If the breasts of the mother are deficient in milk, 
the child can be fed on gear’s milk or cow’s milk of the same 
quality. The swelling on the navel of the child subsides by 
means of fomentation with heated day. 


]. Gdssiruf psniculatus. 



526 


Garu4a Fta^Sna 


16. If the child has vomitings cough and fever^ a com* 

pound of Lauha, Muitaka and Ativisa shall be taken. If the 
child has dysentery Musta, Sunthl, Aru^a and ku^ja 

shall be taken. 

17. A compound of Vyofa, Honey and M&tuluAga 
removes hiccough and vomiting. Kuyfha, Indrayava, Siddhi* 
rtha» NiHt and DQrvft remove Ku|fha. 

18. Bathing (the infant) with a decoction ofMaha- 
mux^^itika^ and Udicya wards off the malignant influences of 
planetSt It may be smeared with a paste of Saptacchada» 
AbhayA, Nii& and candana. 

19. Amulets with Sadkha, Abjab!ja» Rudrik$a» Vac&» 
Lauha, etc. shall be worn. Om karh iarh garft gam obiisawi ia 
Vaina^a, Orh Horh HM Ha^. With this mantra Santi (cere* 
monies for peace) shall be made for the sake of children. 
M&tjana and Balidina also for the same purpose. 

Otft Hrim (ak4 Te Tottr Bali fmm the Boiagraha (the planet 
afflicting the child) but spore the child — SvShd. 

20. The root of Sirica drunk with the water with which 
rice is washed removes poison. The root of white Var$&bhu 
drunk with rice washings cures snake bite* 

21. Tapd^llya, chamber soot, Niia rock salt, curd, ghee 
and honey pasted together and drunk remove poison. 

22. A decoction of the root of Ankofa drunk with ghee 
removes poison. That which dispels old age and sickness is a 
rejuvinating medicine. 

23. Abhayi should be taken (in the six seasons) be¬ 
ginning with the rainy season along mth rock salt, sugar, 
SuothI, KaQ&i honey and jaggery respectively by a person 
wishing for the benefits of the rguvinating medicines. 

24. At the end of fever (convalescing after fever) one 
shall take a single Abfaay^ or two Vibhftakas or four Dhatrls 
in honey and ghl, one shall recover soon and live for a hundred 
years. 

25*28. Aivagandhk ttecoction drunk with milk and ghee 
dispels all i>ody ailments. Juice of MapdOkaparrd, the nectar¬ 
like juice of Vidari, TUa, Dhitri and Bhtfigarija taken in 


1. Identity not dear. 



1.172.40 


527 


enablei one to live for a hundred yean. A compound of 
Trikatu, Trtphala, Vahni, Guducl> Sativarl, wd 

oxide of iron taken with honey quells a number of diseases. 
Triphala, Ka^ii, Su^fhl, Gudud» Satavarl, Vidahga, Bhfpga- 
raja etc purified and regularly taken dispel all illness. Powder¬ 
ed Vidiri taken with honey and ghee increases sexual virility 
enabling one to conquer ten women. 

29. GhI should be* cooked with Satavari residue with 
ten times milk and taken in with honey» sugar and Pippall. It 
is a good digestant. 

30. Massage, application oil, errhine, emetics and 
purgatives sire mentioned as PaAcakarma (five activities). 

31. There are six seasons in the year beginning with 
Migha (Dec«Jan.) and each consists of two months. In them 
one shall rseort to warning oneself with fire, or take honey, 
milk or milk products (as ordained). 

32'*34. In Sintra and vasanta the company of women is 
recommended. But one shall not sleep during the day. In the 
rainy season too day sleep must be avoided. Moon beams in 
Sarat, S^li, Mudga, Rain-water, boiled water—all these are 
wholesome. Oil extracted from Nimba, AtasI, Kusumbha 
Sigru, Sar^apa, Jyoti^mati, Mulaka, etc dispels worms, Kuifha, 
diabetes, and headache due to deranged Viyu and Kapha. 

35-33. The drugs D&ijima, Amalakl, Kola, Karamarda, 
Priyalaka, Jambira, Nagaranga, Amrataka and Kapitthaka 
generate Pitta, subdue Whyu and bring about derangement of 
Kapha. Jala, Jlmutaka, Iksvaku, Ku^aja, Kft^bandhana and 
Dhamargava shall be used in all sorts of emetics. In the morn¬ 
ing Madana, Indrayava and Vaca can be used as an emetic. 

A person has lobse bowels due Co Pitta, constipation due to 
Vayu and Kapha and normal state when all the do;as are in 
equilibrium. When Pitta is deranged Trivet is a good 
purgative. 

39. Nigara, Trivft and rocksalt taken with sugar and 
honey Is a purgative. Haritakl and Vi^ahga with cow’s urine 
is also a purgative. 

40*. Oil extracted from Eraqda and decoction ofTriphaU 
twice in quantity can be used as purgative. In disorders due 



528 Garu4a Pufd^a 

to exceuive action of Vayu the patient must be fed before 
applying emetics* 

41. For the application of eneznate hollow bamboo sticks 
six, eight or twelve ahgulas in length with the cavity as large 
as a Karkandhu fhiit shall be used. The patient lies in a 
supine position. 

42. In NirOha (enema without oil) also this is the 
process. The dosage of clysters in the small one is half a pala» 
that in the middle is three palas and that in the full one is six 
palas. 

43. One part of Pathya, two parts of Ak$a and four 
parts of Dhltil purified with the juice of Satavari, Amfta, 
Bhrnga, Sindhuvira, etc., cures all sorts of pains. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYTHREE 

Diseases 

Dhanvantari saidx 

N4* I shall enumerate the drugs coming under the 
classes Madhuridij etc., which dispel various ailments. The chief 
drugs in Madhura (tweet) class are:—Sdli, $a8ttka, Godhuma 
(wheat), milk> ghi, Rasa (jtuce), honey, Majji, SrAga^aka, 
Kaieru, Irvaru, Gokfura Gambhiri, lotus seed, grapes, dates 
Bali, coconut, sugarcane, Atmagtipta, Vidail, Priy&laka, 
Madhuka, Tila and Ku^ma^da. Each of these is curative of 
epileptic fits and burning sensation. It soothes the sense organs. 
If taken in excess it produces worms and disorders of Kapha. 

5. Drugs of Madhura type produce dyspnea, cough, 
sweet taste in the mouth. Aphonia, tumours, goitre, elephant* 
iasii, Gudalepa, etc. 

6-7. D&d^ma, Amalaka, Amra, Kapittha, Karamardaka, 
MituluAga, Amritaka, Badara, Tintidl fnut, Curd, Buttermilk 
Kiftjika, Lakuca, AmUvetasa and Lo^a are Amla varieties 
(Add) of drugs. These with SupthI are great digeatant and 
appetising medidnes. 



1.173.20 


529 


8. These AmU drugs generate V&yu and mucous te« 
cretions. They have aphrodisiac properties. They give a burn- 
ing sensation. They soothe the system. If they are taken in 
excess they may sour the teeth. 

9. (Excessive intake of Amla) causes looseness of limbs, 
burning sensation and coarseness in the voice» throat, mouth 
and heart. Excited by the gastric Bre it makes wounds and 
ulcers suppurate. 

10. The salts are Yavaksira, Sarjika, etc. The saline 
group acts as a laxative, liquefacient, digestant and generator 
of mucous secretions. Its potency permeates the whole system 
rapidly. 

11. Exclusive and excessive intake of saline articles 
tends to obstruct the ducts of the system and produces itching 
sensation in the limbs, Ko)ha, tumours and discoloration of 
the skin. It aggravates Rakuviia, Pittarakta, loti of manliness 
and pain in the sense organs. 

12-13. Vyo^a, Sigru, Mulaka, Devadiru, Kus^haka, 
Lacuna, Valgujiphala, Musta, Guggulu, LahgaO. These drugs 
form the Pungent group. They are appetising, purifying and 
anti-Kapha. They subdue Kuslha and itching sensation. They 
remove corpulency, lassitude and worm infections. They 
reduce secretion of semen and fat. Exclusively and excessively 
taken they produce vertigo, burning sensation, etc. 

14-17. Krtamala, Kadra, Haridri, Indrayava, sweet 
Kaptaka, sweet Vetra, the two varieties of Bfhat!, 8aAkhinl, 
Gu^ud, DravantI, Trivrt, Man^ukaparpI, Kiravellaka, Virtaku 
Kdra\iraka. Vuaka, Rohini, SahkhapuspI, Karko^, Jayaniiki, 
Jatl, Va run aka, Nimba, Jyoti|matI and Punamav& form the 
bitter group of drugs. They set the secretions of serum, lymph, 
etc flow. They are relishing and appetising. They purify the 
ducts, remove fever and thirst, prevent fainting and reduce 
itching sensation. 

18. Excessive intake of bitter drugs dries up faeces, 
urine and mucous secretions. It removes paralysis of the man¬ 
dible, wry neck, convulsive pain, headache aird ulcers. 

19*20. Triphali, SallakI, JambO, Amrhtaka, Vata and 
kindred tlrugs, Tinduka, Vakula, iSila, PUaihka, Mudga and 
Cillaka form the astringent group of drugs. They are absorbent. 



530 


Garuia PurS^^ 


They produce granulation in ulcers. They arrest and dry up 
mucous secretions. Exclusively and excessively taken they give 
rise to pain in the chest and generate parchedness of the 
mouthy fever, distension of the abdomen and paralysis of the 
mandible (wry mouth). 

2i-22» Haridri, Kuftha, Lavana^ Mefaifiigl, the two 
types of Bala, Kacchuri, Sallaki» Punarnavi, Satavar!, Agni- 
mantha, Brahniada^dli Svadamtt^a, Era^d^a, Yava, Kola, 
Kulattha, etc., Karfifi, DafamOla (ten drugs) : these drugs 
severally and in combination remove excess of Vayu, Pitta and 
Kapha. 

23*25. Sativarl, Vidirl, B&Iaka, Ujira, Candana, 
DOrvi, Vafa, Pippall, Badart, Sallaki, Kadall, Utpala, Padma, 
Udumbara, Patolaka, Hartdri, Guda, Ku9tb^d» Satapu^pi, 
J&tl, Vyofa, Aragvadha andLingalt are called Kapha*subdu* 
ing group of drugs. Among lardaceous substances, ghi, oil, fat 
and marrow are the most excellent. 

26*29. Those who like to improve intelligence, memory, 
understanding power and digestive faculty must take ghee 
regularly. In a Pitta patient ghee alone should be administered. 
In a Vata patient it is administered with salt. In a patient of 
excess of Kapha it shall be administered with Vyo^a and 
alkalis. Similarly, in the case of patients of glandular tumour, 
sinus, worms, obeuty and deranged Kapha and Vayu also. 
Oil is administered to the patients of hardened bowels for the 
sake of lightness and firmness. So also in persons whose funda* 
mental constituents have been weakened by exposure to gusts 
of wind, sunshine and rain, bearing of burden, excessive sexual 
indulgence and physical exercises. In persons who have coarse* 
ness of the skin, pain, debility, quick digestion and constric* 
tion of vessels due to Vayu (oil can be administered). Now (I 
shall expliun) Yonikanna in chronic headache. The vein is first 
cauterised before edemata is used. 

30. A full dose of clyster is one pala, three Akfas in the 
middle one, and half a pala in the small one, in the case of oil, 
decoction and medication. 

31. In Sneha Karmas (administering oil or ghee) 
hot water is given along with ghee but separately in the case 



LI74J 


53t 


of oiL A pitta patient undergoing Sneba treatment shall drink 
over hot water if he feels thinty. 

32. A person who has been made Diptigni (of good 
digestive power) and vareasoigdha (motion^oily) must be 
given such treatment as cnaurea pacifying the deranged V&yu. 
Persons suffering from coarseness mutt be given Sneha treat* 
ment and those of extreme glossiness^ parchifying treatment. 

33. In the cate of ditorders due to Viyu and Kapha in 
combination or teparately diaphoratic meaiures are to be uted 
with a compound of Syam&ka, Korado^, Anna, buttermilk, 
Pipyaka and fried grain flour. These measures are not for 
excessively corpulent, coarse, weak or swooning persons. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTrFOUR 

Diseasis 


Dhdnvaniari said: 

N3. O Suiruta, I shall enumerate some medicated 
ghees and oils quelling ailments. A prastha of ghee must be 
cooked with an Ak|a of each of the drugs $ahkhapu;pl» Vaci 
Brahml, Somi, Brahma, Suvarcala, Abhayft, GudOcI, Afarufaka 
and Vaguji, a prastha of the juice of Ka^^akiri and a prastha 
of milk. This is called Brihml ghfta. It heightens memory, 
power and intellect. 

4. GhI is to be cooked with the following drugs in full 
or as many as are available:—Triphali, Citraka, Bal&^ 
Nirgundl, Nimba, Vasaka, Punanava, GuducI, Brhatl and 
Satavarl. This medicated ghi quells all ailments. 

5-7. Half an Adhaka of oil is to be cooked in the decoo 
tion of a hundred balks along with the residue of Madhflka, 
Mafljif^, Candana, Utpala, Padmaka, Sukfmaila, Pippall, 
Kuftha, Tvagela, Aguru, Kesara, Aivagandhi, JIvanlya drugs 
and an Adhaka of milk. After this is well cooked in low Are it 
roust be'kept in a silver vessel. This oil is called Balya and 



332 Garv(b Purdf^a 

it a favourite of kings. It removei all disorders of V&yu and 
all Dh&tu derangemenu. 

8*13. A prastba of Sat&varl juice^ a prastha of milk, a 
kar^a eacli of the drugs Satapufpai Devadiru, Maihd^> Saile* 
yaka> Bala, Candana, Tagara, Kuytha, Manabfila and Jyoti?* 
mad and a praatba of glu or oil must be cooked well. This is 
called Narayapa Ghrta or Taila (as the case may be). Viypu 
Himself has given this recipe. It is highly efficadut in hunch- 
backs, dwarfi, lame persons, deaf persons, persons of defective 
limbs, lepers, those affected by Viyu, those who are unable to 
satisfy their partners in sexual intercourse, those whose limbs 
have been weakened by old age and debility. Diseases affect¬ 
ing the skin, veins, sinews, etc. are quelled by this m^icated oil 
or Ghrta. 

14-16. (Oil or ghee can be used in the following medical 
preparations) (1) Sativari and Gudud, (2) Citraka, Vyo^a, 
Kimbaka and Nirgu^, (3) Juice ofPrasarap! and Ka^fakari, 
(4) Varfabhu and Bala, (5) V&saka, Triphala Brahmika, 
Erapd^ka, Bhrhgarija, Yasd, Mu$ali, Daiamula, Khadira and 
Vafa. Tablets, confections or powders of the above drugs too 
are efficacious in all sorts of ailments. 

17. The powders, etc, can be taken with ghee, hooey, 
water, candy, jaggery etc., salt or pungent things. They cure 
all ailments. 

18-19. An intelligent man shall cook oil with Gitraka, 
Arka, Trivft, Yav&nl, Hayamaraka, Sudhi, Balk, Ganika, 
Saptapar^a, Suvareikk and Jyotifmad. This is called N4ya- 
ndana Taila and is very efficacious in fistula in smo. 

20. This efficacious oil, consisting of drt^, CUraka, etc 
suppresses all ailments. It purifi^, enables tissues to grow and 
gives good colour to the akin. 

21-23. Cook mustard oil in combination with Ajamoda 
Sindura, Haritkla, the two sorts of Niik, two Kfkras, Fhena, 
Ardraka, Sarala, lodravkru^l, Apkmkrga, Kadala, Syandaoa 
and goat’s urine in low fire and add cow’s milk. This Ajamodi- 
dika taila it very effective in goitre. 


1. NsrdotUcbyt jifiniiihd. 



1.175,11 


533 


24. A skilful physician shall cook to the correct point, 
shall purify the ripened suppurating sores, and shall use this 
Taila for the growth of the tissues and smoothness of skin. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND 8EVENTYFIVE 

Dueasis 


Rudra said: 

1. Thus Dhanvantari who is Vif^u Himself, explained 
to Su^ruta and others. Hart then said to Kara explaining 
different medical preparations quelling ailments. 

said: 

2. O Sahkara, in all fevers the hrst process is to make 
the patient fast. Then he must be kept in a place where gusts 
of wind do not blow. Only boiled water should be given for 
drinking. 

3. All fevers are subdued by dry fomentations, O livara. 
The decoction of Gudud and Mustaka removes V&cajvara. 

4*6. Lb ten, the decoction of Duralabha^ removes 
pittajvara. A decoction of SunthI, Parpa(a, Musta, Balaka, 
U2ra, Candana, Ghi and Duralabha removes the fever of 
Kaphaja type. A decoction of Balaka, Sup^hl and Parpafa 
cures all types of fever. A decoction of Tiktaka, Era^d^, Guduci 
■§un{hl and Mustaka removes Pitta jvara. Now hear other 
types of medical compounds. 

7-8. A <^oction of Balaka, Uflra, Path5, Kanfakar! and 
Mustaka and ^rad&ru removes fevers if cooked with Dhanyaka, 
Nimba and Musta and taken with honey. A decoction df 
Triphala, Pafolapatra and Gud&ci removes all kinds of fever. 
This increases appetite and dispeb disorders due to Viyu. 

9*11. Harltaki, Pippall, Amali and CHtraka powdered 
together b a remedy for fever. The above boiled with Dhao- 
yika, Uiira and Parpafa or AmalakI, Gudiicii and Candana. 

1. Jsgeola credci. 



5S4 Garu4^ Pur^ 

and taken with honey cures fever of every type. Now listen to 
the compounds removing Sannipataja fever, 

12. An astringent decoction of Haridra, Nimba^ Triphali 
Mustaka and Devadaru with Kapirohi^i^i leaves of Panola 
when drunk removes fever arising from the three do^as. 

13, N&gabalk powder taken with powdered Kaofakaii, 
N&gar&» Guduci and Pufkara removes coughs asthma»etc. 

14«I5, In fever due to Kapha and Vayu the thirsty 
patient should be given hot water. Water boiled with Viiva, 
Parpatakaj Uiira, Musta and Candana and cooled later can be 
given to quell thirst, vomiting, fever and burning sensation. 
In Vitaja fever, a decoction of Bilva and other drugs of 
Paflcam&la group is very effective, 

16. The root of Pippall is appetising. In V&tajvara a 
•decoction of GudflcI and Viiva gives great relief. A decoction 
of Parpa(a and Nimba taken with honey removes Pitta jvara. 

17. Even afterremedial measures if the patient does not 
regain consciousness, his legs or forehead must be cauterised 
with an ironrod. 

18. A puigative decoction of Tikt^« Pa^a, Pafoli, 
Vii&la, Triphala and Trivft taken with milk removes all kinds 
of fever. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND 8EVENTYS1X 

Dis 0 ases 


Lord said : 

1. Within seven nights even a bald man will grow his 
hair if a plaster of burnt ashes of elephant^ tusk%ith Ras&fijana 
and goat’s milk is applied. 

2. Oil cooked with the juice of Bhrhgarija one fourth 
in volume and mixed with Gufijk powder enables the growth 
of hair. 

3. Rub the bald head with Ela, Madul, Ku;tha and 
Mura and plaster it with Gunjiphala. This will cure Candra* 
lupta (baldness). 

I. Pkrorbiza kurroA. 



1.176,17 


535 


4. By plastering with powdered stones of mango fruit 
hair become fine. Application of Karafljat Ama]aka» £U and 
Lakfa cures Aruna (redness). 

5. Application of plaster of the powdered pulp or 
mango stones gives the hair a thickness and silky gloss. They 
grow with firm roots very long and glossy. They never fall 
oflT. 

6. Anointment of the head with a medicinal oil cooked 
with Vidahga, Gandhapi^na and Manal>iiU with four times 
cow*s urine destroys lice and dandruff. 

7. O Vrsabhadhvaja, (Siva whose banner has the em¬ 
blem of a bull) if fresh burnt conch ashes mixed with filings of 
lead are applied as a paste, hair turns darkblack and glossy. 

8-9. Equal parts of Bhrhgaraja, iroD-filings, Triphali, 
Bijapuraka» NIII and KaraWra cooked with an equal quantity 
of jaggery constitute a powerful hatrdye that can turn white 
hair black. 

10. Pulps of the seeds of mango fruits Triphali, NIII, 
Bhfngaraja, burnt Lohacurna and Kafljika constitute a good 
hair dye turning it black. 

11. Seeds of Cakramardaka, Kuftha, and roots of 
Eranda ground into a good paste in hot sour gruel (Kaftjika) 
and applied on the head or forehead cure every sort of 
headache. 

12*13. Oil is to be cooked with rock, salt, Vaca, Hingu, 
Kusfha, N5geivara, Sacapu$pa and Devadaru. In this medicat* 
ed oil mix the watery portion squeezed out ofcowdung, one 
fourth of it in volume. This compound is very effective as an 
eardrop for all sorts of earache. 

14. O Siva, rodt salt dissolved in sheep’s urine poured 
into the ears removes fetid smell, foul discharges and worms 
in the ears. 

15. Pouring the juice of Malati flowers and leaves into 
the ears or pouring cow’s urine alone into the ears arrests fetid 
discharges from the ears. 

16-17. A paste prepared from Kusiha, M&sa, Marica, 
Tagaia, Kppall, Apimii^k, Aivagandhk, Brhatl, white mus* 
Card, Yava and Tila with honey and rock salt applied over the 



536 Gatuia Pufdifa 

penis removes its numbnesi» over the arms their paralysis and 
over the ears makes them grow larger. 

18. Mustard oil cooked well with Bhallataka^ Brhad^ 
D^dhn^ bark can be applied to the penis to make it 
longer. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYSEVEN 


Hati said\ 

I. There is no doubt in thU that the eye salve prepared 
from the juice of the leaves ofi^obhafijana with honey cures alt 
ocular affections. 

2-3. Eighty flowers of Tila and Jiti mixed with 
Upanimba, Amala, Suc{hl| Pippall and Tandullyaka must be 
dried in shade and prepared in the form of Va^Is. These Va^Is 
can be pasted in rice washings and applied to the eyes like 
collyrium. It removes all Timira defects. 

4. The pulp of the stones of Vibhitaka Sankhanibhi, 
Manahiilil, leaves of Nimba, and Marlca must be ground into 
paste in goat’s urine. As an eye salve this compound removes 
the troubles of the wall-eyed and the night-blinded. Timira 
and afflictions of the coat of the eyes are also quelled. 

5-6. Four parts of Sankha, two parts of Manahiila 
(realgar) and one part of rock salt are to be ground into paste 
and dried in shade and formed into Vatika. This can be appli¬ 
ed like coUyrium: It cures Timira and Patala and is very 
effective in Plfijafa (mucus excretion of the eyes). 

7-8. Trikafu, Triphali> frui^ of KaraAja^ rock salt and 
the two kinds of RajanP are to be ground in the juice of Bhrn- 
garftja and applied as collyrium. It cures Timira^ etc. 

9. Roots of Afarusaka ground into paste in sour gruel 
and applied thickly over the eyes remove all sorts of pain in 
the eyes. 


1, Hiridrft and DSm-haridri. 



M77.22 


537 


10-12. A decoctioD of Satadru and the root of Badari 
taken in gives relief from aching sensation in the eyes. Mustard 
oil cooked with the root of Apamarga and ground into paste 
with rock salt, milk and sour gruel in a copper vessel can be 
used as a collyrium. O Ankara, PiAjata (accumulation of 
mucus in the eyes) is r emoved by this while applying this 
collyrium one shall reapeat this mantra:— 

Orh Dadru S<ir<x Krorh HrUfi DddfU Sara 

Hrirh Hrim Orh Urh Urh Sara ICrirh Krim Tf^ah. The nine 

Durgas called Adyas can be brought under one's control* 

13. An eyesalve prepared with Bilvaka and roots of 
Nil! quells Timira instantaneously. 

14. A stick or a wick prepared with Pippall, Tagara, 
Haridrii, Amalaka, Vaca and Khadira ground well can be 
applied as collyrium in all eyesores. 

15. A person who holds water in his mouth and washes 
his face and eyes regularly in the morning every day can keep 
himself free from eyesores perpetually. 

16. Roots of white Brands ^nd its leaves cooked with 
goat's milk can be used for fomentation in Vataja eyesores. 

17. Candana, rocksalt, Vrddhapalasa, Hart taki, Pat ala 
Bowel'S, Nlll and Cakrika made into a collyrium remove eyesores. 
GuBji roots ground into a paste in gr>at'5 urine quell Timira. 

18. The body of a jaundice patient must be rubbed with 
rods of silver, copper and gold and the above paste applied 
as a plaster. He will get relief, O Rudra. 

19-20. Smelling or drinking the decoction of Ghosa 
fruit dispels chlorosis and jaundice. The juice of Dadimapuspa, 
Durva, Alaktaka and Hantaki used as an errhine removes 
haemorrhoid growths in the nose and Vatarakta. 

21. O Vr^bhadhvaja, Nllalohita, (both mean Siva) 
Roots of JingtnP ground into paste in its own juice can be 
used as an errhine in Nasarias (haemorrhoid growths in the 
nose). 

22. GhI from cow's milk, Sarjarasa, Dhanyaka, ^ocksalt, 
Dhatturaka and Gairika must be cooked well and ground into 

I. Lahnea grandis. 



938 G<ifu4<i Pur ana 

paste with cooked rice and oil* This can be applied if there is 
an ulcer In the lips or if they are split. 

23. Jati leaves must be chewed well and kept in the 
mouth for some time. This cures sores in the mouth. By 
chewing and eating seeds of koia> teeth shaking in their roots 
become steady. 

24. Chewing Mu^^aka, Ku${ha» Eli Ya^fika^ Balaka and 
Dhanyaka with honey removes bad odour from the mouth, 
O Kara. 

25-26. Daily intake of astringenti pungent and bitter 
vegetables fried in oil removes fetid smell from the mouth and 
all ulcers of the gum and teeth arc removed by this. 

27. Gargling with sour gruel mixed with oil removes the 
pain due to the burning of the mouth on account of lime 
while chewing betel, O $iva. 

28-29. Just as mucous secretions of Kapha are generat¬ 
ed by chewing Sui^thi so also the application of the lambative 
prepared with leaves of Matulunga, Ela, Yafll, Madhu, Pippali 
and the leaves of Jiti, cause the same. Chewing the sprouts 
of Sephaliki proves effective in curing goitre. 

30-31. O Sankanii by extractiogi the impure blood from 
the veins of the nostril Jihvika is quelled. The juice of the seeds 
of Sin^a cooked with fourtimes that of Haridra can be used as 
an errhine, O Bhuteia, for removing headache. An ins tan 
taneous relief from sore throat also is possible. 

32. By chewing the root of Guiija all the worms in the 
teeth perish. An astringent decoction of Kakajangha, Snuhl, 
and NIlI mixed with honey» O. Siva, destioys worms originating 
in and affecting the teeth. 

33. Rubbed with the gbi cooked in milk with Karkata, 
feet as well as teeth do not produce a coarse sound in gnashing. 

34*37. O Siva, (in the above case) it is enough if teeth 
are rubbed with Karka|apkda alone. Fruits of Jyotifmail must 
be soaked in water for twentyone days and ground into paste 
with the pulp of white Abhayk. If this compound is used for 
rubbing the teeth it removes dark spoa and tartar in the* teeth. 
A compound of powdered Lodhra, Kumkuma, Mafljifthi, Loha 
Kaleyaka, Yava, rice grain and Yaf(imadhu with water can 



L177.51 


539 


be applied over the face by ladies for making it br^ht and 
shining* 

38. A prastha of Taila (oil) U to be cooked with two 
parts of goat’s milk and kar^a each of Raktacandana Mafl- 
j 2 $(ha and Likk^ or Ya^tlmadhu and Kuihkuma. This gives 
bright lustre to the &ce in seven days. 

39*41. Water boiled with SuQthi» powdered Pippali» 
GuducI and Katit^kkrika when drunk improves digestion. O 
3iva (Pramathejvara—lord of spirits) it removes the ache due 
to the deranged Viyu* A decoction of Karaftja, Karka(a, 
U^ira, Brhati» Ka|urohit^!, and Gokyura when drunk quells 
vertigo» burning sensation^ PitCajvara, emaciation and fainting. 

42. A decoction of powdered Pippall with milk, honey 
and ghee when drunk quells palpitation of the heart, cough, 
and chronic intermittent fever. 

43. The usual dosage for all drugs in decoction is half a 
Karia. O Vrsabhadhvaja, according to the age of the patient 
slight alteration is also recommended. 

44. Watery portion squeezed* out of cowdung mixed 
with the juice of Kakajahgha and drunk with milk quells 
Vi 9 majvara (chronic intermittent fever). 

45*46. Milk boiled with 8u]>|hl also cures visama jvara. 
Ya^timadhu, Mur'n, rock salt, Bfhadphaia used as errhine 
induces sleep. The above compound can be mixed with Marica 
and honey, O 8iva, to make them more soporific. 

47*48. Band'* ^ing the head with the roots of Kakajanghk 
induces sleep. Oil cooked with sour gruel and Saijarasa and 
applied with cold water allays heat and burning sensation due 
to fever with contamination of blood. 

49*50. A decoction of 8ai]P, Saiv&la, Agnimantha, 
Su^thr, Pa^Oabhedaka ^bha&Jana or GoMura, Varu^a^, 
Ghanna*, and the root of 8obhafijana %vith Hingu and Yava* 
ksara removes Pitta and Vayu. 

51. Water boiled with Pippali, root of Pippall and 
Bhallataka when drunk qtiells colic epileptic fits. 

1. Identity not ekir. 

2. Grttseva nurvala. 

9. Identity not dear. 



540 


GaTu4(i 


52. A^vagandha» Mulaka and the clay from anthill 
applied as a plaster, O Rudra, quelb Urustambha (paralysis of 
the thighs). 

53« The root of Brhatika ground into paste with water 
and drunk quells Sahghitavata. 

54. The root of Ardraka and Tagara drunk with butter 

milk dispels Jhiftjinlvkta like the thunderbolt felling a tree. 

55* The drug Asthisazhhara taken with a single meal 
everyday^ or drunk with gravy dispels deranged Viyu and sets 
broken bones right. 

56. Powdered fried grain mixed with goat’s milk and 
ghee can be applied to the feet to relieve them of aching sen* 
sat ion. There is no doubt. 

57. A compound of honey, ghee, rock salt, Siktha 
(cooked rice), jaggery, Gairika, Guggula and Sarjarasa when 
applied as plaster gives relief to affected lungs. 

58. O Vfsabhadhvaja, c)ay*eaten soles of the feet 
smeared with mustard oil must bo warmed over a smokeless 
fire for quick relief. 

59. Ghi medicated with Sarjarasa, Jiraka, and Haritaki 
and pasted with cooked rice can be applied over scalds and 
burns for instantaneous relief. 

60. Heated oil mixed with ashes of Yava frequently 
applied over scalds and blisters heals them. 

61. Fried and powdered Tila mixed with butter from 
buffalo’s milk and Bhallata applied as an errhine removes 
cardiac colic, and applied as a plaster heals ulcers. 

62. Karpura and butter from cow’s milk must be applied 
over a cut from any weapon and bandaged with a white cloth, 
O i^ahkara. O Vrsabbadhvaja, it will cease to give pain and 
will not suppurate. 

63. A sword cut hcab when the juice of the root of 
Amra is applied. When smeared with ghee it does not begin to 
turn into an ulcer. 

64. Sarapufikhi, Lajjiluka. Pathi and their roots 
ground into paste in water and applied to sword-cuts heal 
them. 



I.177,77 


541 


65. Root of K&kajangha applied to ulcerating wounds 
for three days removes their suppuration^ pain and fetid odour. 

66. Pain caused by a blow can be quelled by fomenta* 
tion with the root of Apini4rga cooked in water and oil. 

67. O Sahkara, Abhayi, rock salt and SunthT ground 
Into paste with water when taken in quells indigestion. 

68. Roots of Nimba worn round the waist remove ex* 
cruciating pain in the eyes. If the root of Satia is eaten with 
Tambula it removes the disorder of urination with semen 
discharge. 

69. Haridri cooked in steam with rice, root of white 
mustard and seeds of Matuiuhga applied over the body for 
seven days give it a bright hue. 

70. O Vfiabhadhvaja, the juice of the leaves of white 
Apar&jita and Nimba or the juice of Madhuka pith used as an 
errhine removes the evil influence of Dakinls, manes and 
Brahmaraksasas. 

71. When moon enters the star Pusya cull the roots of 
white JayantP, white Apar&jita, Arka and Citraka, grind all 
these into paste and prepare, Vatikas thereof. If a man marks 
his forehead in the form of a Tilaka with these Vatlkas, women 
will be under his control. 

72*73. O Rudra, Pippali, iron Blings, Sunthl, Amalaka, 
rocksalc, honey and sugar taken in equal quantities must be 
ground into paste. A daily dose of this compound, of the size 
of an Udumbara fruit for seven days makes the man strong and 
longlived. He may live even up to two hundred years. The 
mantra, Orh T'Atf employed in all activities involving 

charms blesses one with everything one wishes for. 

74-77. Take a crow’s nest from the tree and burn it over 
the funeral pyre. If the ashes are cast on the head of the 
enemy, O Sankara, the enemy will be driven from his place of 
rest. O Rudra» hear some more such black devices of high 
potency. If a man places the faeces of his enemy on the hide 
of a wild rat and ties it round his waist band the enemy will 
suffer from suppression of stools. O Kara, if the name of any 
man is written on a mango leaf with the blood of a black crow 

1. h synonym of agnimanthu. 



542 


Garu4a Pur4M 


and that leaf is cast among filthy substances he » sure to be 
eaten by crows. A woman also can be killed like this. 

78. Sugar, honey, goat*s milk and equal quantities of 
Tila and Gok^uraka must be cast off (with the desire for the 
extinction of the enemy). It is sure to destroy him^ O Hara. 

79. Hundred twigs of Bilva dripping with the blood of 
an owl and a black crow must be put into the sacrificial fire by 
reciting the names of two enemies. These two persons are sure 
to be bitter enemies. 

80. Oil cooked in the milk of a bear with the flesh of 
the fish Rohita if applied over the body cures all ailments. The 
washings of sandalwood used as an errhine facilitates the 
reappearance of fallen hair. 

81. He who holds a l*ingaliki^ bulb in his hand and 
rubs it over his body, removes the arrogance of Hydrocele (he 
will be cured of it). 

82. O livara, O Siva, one can take away the life of 
blazing (poisonous) serpents even if they are in their holes, 
by means of the blood of a peacock. 

83. If a serpent Ajagara (Boa constrictor) is burnt to 
ashes in a funeral pyre and the ashes are cast off in front of 
the enemies they will be struck down. 

84. If they are cast oiT with the following mantra their 
destruction will be more terrible:— 

Orh T'Ac T'Aa CdhUii Cdhikt SvdhS, Orh Udararh Pdhihi 
Pdhiki SvdAa. 

85. When the moon enters the asterism Pu$yd cull 
the root of Sudaidani and keep it in the middle of the house; 
Serpents will avoid that house. 

86. Roots of Arka plant soaked in the oil of Siddhartha 
and dried in the sun and made into wicks remove the serpents 
on the way. 

87*89. The flesh of a cat, its excreta and Harit&la well 
cooked in goat’s milk should be smeared over the body of a rat. 
The rat thrown into a bouse will drive away other rats from 
the place. O Rudra, there is no doubt about it. Funugating 
with the vapours of a compound consisting of Triphali, Aijuna 


1. Glonoss superbs. 



I.178.9, 


543 


flowers, Bhallataka, ^irfsaka, Lak^a Sarjarasa, Vi^ai^a and 
Guggula destroys all flies and mosquitoes. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYEIGHT 

Diseases 


Hnri said: 

1*2. A woman shall repeat the nxMtr^ Om MrSjf/myai 
Svdhd and give the man she loves Tambula medicated with 
a compound of Brahmada^dh Vaca, Kus^ha^ Priyangu and 
Nagakesara. After giving the beteMeaf she must repeat the 
Orh Harift H'trifi Svdhd. The man to whom it is given will 
surely be under her control. 

3. Cow's tooth) Haritila^ and crow's tongue powdered 
together and deposited on the head of a man will make him be 
under the control of the person w'ho deposits it. But if the 
victim had kept a garland of white mustard flowers in his 
house this will not be eflective. 

4. There will be perpetual quarrel in the house at the 
threshold of which Vaibhitaka and Sakhotaka with the roots 
and leaves are deposited. 

5. A woman shall grind the flesh of KhaAjarI(a bird with 
honey and apply the compound to her vaginal passage during 
the period of menstruation. Her husband will be her slave. 

6. Fumigating one's body with a compound of Aguru^ 
GuggulU) Nilotpala and ja^cry one shall be a great favourite 
in the Royal threshold. 

7. ATilaka (mark on the forehead) with the root of 
white Aparajita ground with Rocana will enable one to capti^ 
vate anyone he sees in the royal palace. 

8. Kikajangha, Vaca, Kustha, leaves of Niroba, Kum- 
kuma and one's own blood compounded together will enable 
any one to control others. 

Take the blood of a wild cat and puriiy it by cooking 
it in the oil of Karaflja. Smear a lotus leaf with this and 



544 


Garu^a Purina 


holding this above RudrAgni (funeral pyre) take the root 
as well and make a collyrium of all together. If this is applied 
to the eyes one can be invisible. 

10. The mantra to be recited is as follows:— Orh namaii 
Kha^ffivcjfdpd^yi Mdhd^Tnk^asenSpciayt Svdhd Orh Rudr^uft 
Hfdfh Hfirh VdraiaktatVAfitdmdyd, Ofh i'Idtnrah Siambhayata 
Sudkd. The root of Mahasugandhika kept round the hips arrests 
the rapid emission of semen. 

11. Reciting the following mantra 

Orh Xamali Sarvasaltvebkyah /famah Siddkirh Kuru ICuru 

SodhJ 

seven times, the man should whirl the flowers of Karavlra in 
front of women. He can bring under his control whomsoever 
he wishes. 

12. BrahmadandU Vaca and Patra should be ground 
into paste with honey and applied over the organ (of genera* 
tion). The woman will never wish for another husband. 

13. Clumps of Brahmadandi kept in the mouth at the 
time of sexual intercourse will arrest the rapid emission of 
semen. Roots of Jayant! kept in the mouth will give the man 
splendid victory in cohabitation. 

14. Roots of Bhrngaraja ground into paste with semen 
and applied to the eyes like collyrium will enable any woman 
to captivate her lover. 

15. Handing over betel leaves with clumps of Aparajita 
with NUotpala is an eflective means of captivating others. 

16*18. The regions where Candrakalas (erotic centres) 
are located in men and women are Big toes« fcet> heels, knees, 
pelvis^ navel, chest, abdomen, armpits, throat, cheeks, lips, 
eyes, forehead and head. In men they arc in the right side 
and in women they are in the left side. By tickling these centres 
love can be aroused. Different centres from the head to the toe 
should be tickled in the bright half and from toe to head in 
the dark half. In the KAma^astra (Science of Erotics) sixty 
four arts and measures of fascination have been fully explained 
by which man and wife can enamour mutually. Girls and 
women are charmed by close embraces. 

19. Rocani, fragrant flowen, Nimba flowers, Priyangu, 
Kuxhkuma and Candana marking the forehead can keep the 



T.178.28 


545 


whole world captivated. The mantra to be recited in this 
process of fascinacion is:— 

20. Ojh Hiirh Garni Div\ SaubhSgymh Puru^avaiy&di 
Dehi Me, 

Orh Hririi Laksmi Devi Saubhdgyath Sarvarh Trailckya- 
Mohanam 

[O Goddess Gauri, give unto me all fortunes and amia* 
bility of children. O goddess Laksmi, give unto me the fortune 
that charms the three worlds]* 

21. O Rudra^ sweet scents, turmeric, saffron, etc. applied 
over the body, fumigations, flowers, incense, etc, are things that 
charm others. 

22. By applying a plaster ofEKiralabhk, Vaca, Ku^haf 
Kurhkuma and Sat&varl ground into paste in oil, to the 
vaginal passage, a woman can charm her lover. 

23. Fumigating her vaginal canal with the smoke of 
Nimba twigs a woman will become fortunate enslaving her 
husband. 

24. Butter taken from buffalo's milk, Ku^tha, Madhu- 
yas)ika, etc applied to the vagina makes a woman fortunate in 
conjugal bliss and her husband her slave. 

25. Cook Madhuya^i, Kap^ikariki and cow’s milk 
taken in equal quantities in water and reduce the entire thing 
to onefourth* This decoction drunk hot enables a woman to 
conceive quickly. 

26. Seeds of Matuluhga should be purified and cooked 
in milk. Drinking this a woman will be able to conceive. There 
is no doubt in this. 

27. A woman desiring to beget a male child must drink 
ghee medicated with seeds of Matulunga and roots of Eranda. 

28. Asvagandha cooked in milk and mixed with ghee 
is a good medicine enabling conception. Seeds ofPalaia ground 
into paste with honey when drunk by a woman in menses stop 
the menstrual flow as well as conception. 



546 


Garu4^ PurSxia 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY NINE 

Diseases 

Hari said : 

1-2. O Rudra, after cleaning ihc teeth with an astringent 
decoction of Haritak! apply a paste of Hari tala, Yavak$ara, 
Patr&nga, Raktachandana, Jatl, Hingulaka and Laksa well 
cooked, over the teeth. O Rudra, by this means teeth will turn 
red. There is no doubt. 

3. Cook Mulaka in low fire by steaming and then 
squeeze out its juice« This is a good ear drop arresting the 
fetid discharge from the ears. 

4. Take leaves of Arka and heat them in low fire. The 
juice squeezed out of these leaves is a good remedy for earache. 

5. Oil cooked and medicated with Priyangu, Madhuki, 
Ya$(i, DhitakI, Utpala leaves, Mafijistha, Lodhra, Laksa and 
the juice of Kapittha when applied to the vaginal passage 
removes fetid leucorrbic discharges. 

6. A medicated compound of dry Mulaka and Sunthf 
burnt to ashes, Hingu, Mahausadha, Satapuspa, Vac a, Ku^ha 
Daru and Sigru is a great rejuvinating elixir. 

7-8. Oil medicated and cooked with Sauvarcala> 
Yavakfara, Sarjaka, Saindhava, Granthi, Vi dam, Musta, four 
lines of Madhu, juice of Matulunga and juice of Kadali, un* 
doubtedly arrests all sorts of foul discharges. 

9«10. Mustard oil poured into the ears destroys all 
worms. 

O Hara, these seven drugs:— 

Haridra, Nimba leaves, Pippali, Marica, Vidangabhadra,. 
Musta and Viivabhe$aja ground into paste with cow's urine and 
made into pills constitute a great medicine. Even a single pill 
dispels indigestion, two pills will cure cholera. 

11. Tliese pills mixed with honey remove Pafala (coating 
in the eye) taken in with cow’s urine remove tumours. Wicks* 
thus made are* called ^fikarl X^arti and are called efficacious 
in all sorts of eyesores. 



1.180.11 


547 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY 

Disec^fs 


Hari said 

1. Equal parts of Vaca, Marhsi, Bilva, Tagara, Padma- 
ke^ara, Nagapuspa and Priyangu powdered together and used 
for fumigating the body enables the man to become as hand¬ 
some as Cupid himself. 

2. A paste of Karpura and Devadaru with honey applied 
ovci' the penis enables a man to enamour any woman. 

3* After sexual intercourse a man should take the dis¬ 
charged semen with his left hand and apply the same to the 
left hand of the woman whom he wants to keep under his 
power. She will never wish the company of any other man. 

4. Orh Raktac^unif^ Amukarh Mt VaSatn Anaya Anaya 
Orft Hflrh Hrurh Htah Phal Repeat this mantra ten thousand 
limes and apply a tilaka mark on the forehead with your 
own blood and Gorocana. You can keep everyone under your 
control, O Sankara. 

5-8, Saindhava> Krsnalavana, Sauvira» Matsyapitta, 
honey, glil and sugar pasted together should be applied to the 
Vaginal passage. A man having sexual intercourse with that 
woman will never approach another woman. A compound of 
Sankhapu$pl, Vaca, Maihsi, Somaraji and Phalguka' pasted 
with butter taken out of buflalo’s milk must be formed into 
pills. Lotus with its stalk should be pasted with milk and ghee. 
The pills arc to be purified with this juice and inser(cd into 
the vagina] passage of a wcMnan. Even if she had given birth 
to ten children the local muscles will be so toned as to make 
her seem a viig;in. 

9-11. A compound of Saisapa, Vaca, fruits of Madana, 
Cat’s faeces, Dhattura and the hair of a woman when fumi* 
ated destroys catuithaka fever (quotidian fever) and the fever 
due to the malignant influence of Daktnis. A compound of 
flowers of Aijuna, Bhallataka, Vi4angaka, Bala, Sarjatas, 


1.. hipida. 



548 G<jru4o Pur Ana 

Sauvira and Sarsapa when fum^ated drives out serpents, fleas, 
lice, flics and mosquitoes. 

12. Powdered Bhulata inserted into the vaginal passage 
induces numbness of the local muscles. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYONE 

Diseases 


Hart said : 

1. Tambula pasted with ghi> honey, salt and milk in a 
copper vessel removes pain in the eyes. 

2. A lambative made of Haritaki, Vaca, Ku^ha, Vyo;a, 
Hihgu and Manabsila taken with honey and ghi dispels cough, 
hiccough and Asthma. 

3. Powdered Pippall and Triphala shall be licked with 
honey, Catarrh, cough and chronic acute dyspnea will be 
removed. 

4. The aches of Citraka along with its roots and the 
powder of Pippali shall be licked with honey. O Vrssidhvaja, 
dyspnea, cough and Iliccoiigh shall subside, 

5. Equal quantities of NUotpala, Madhuka and Padmaka 
taken with sugar and washings of rice quell all disorders in the 
blood. 

6. Powdered Suofhl mixed with sugar and honey and 
taken in makes the voice as sweet as that of a cuckoo. 

7. A compound of Haritala, Sai^dba, and ashes of plan¬ 
tain leaves all pounded well and rubbed over the body is a 
great depilatory. 

8. Lavana, Haritala, fruits of TumbinI pasted with the 
juice of Laks& is also a fine depilatory. 

9. Sudha Harit&la, Ash of ^ahkha, ManahsiU and Rock 
salt must be ground into paste with goat^i urine. This removes 
all unwanted hair immediately after application. 



1 . 182.8 


549 


lO-ll. Sankba, Amalaka Patra and flowers of Dhatakl 
ground into paste with milk and kept in the mouth for a week 
gives a shining glossy lustre to the teeth. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIG^TYTWO 

Diseases 


Hari taxi 

1. In the seasons ofVasanca (spring) Grlsma (summer) 
and Sarad (Autumn) use of curd is not recommended. It is 
very good in Hemanta, Siiira and the rainy season. 

2. Sugar taken with butter makes the intellect keen. 
Daily intake of old jaggery, about a paid per dose, makes the 
man so strong that he can satisfy a thousand women, O Kara. 

3. Ku^}ha powdered well and ground into paste with 
ghl and honey must be taken at bed*time. It dispels wrinkles 
and greying hair. 

4. O Sankara, Atas!, Ma^ and Godhuma ground into 
paste with ghl and powdered Pippali when applied over the 
body make it shine with lustre like that of Kandarpa (Cupid). 

5. Yava, Tila, Ajvagandha, Musali and Sarala^ ground 
into paste with jaggery and taken in regularly make the man 
young and strong. 

6. A decoction of Hihgu, Sauvarcala, and Su^tb^ when 
drunk dispels Pari^ma ^ula (a type of Gastralgia) and 
impaired digestion. 

7. Dhatakl and Somaraj! ground and cooked with milk 
and taken regularly, make the weakest man the stoutest. There 
is no doubt. 

8. Sugar taken with honey and butter makes one strong. 
A consumptive patient taking to a diet of milk can nourish 
himself and become intelligent. 


1. A synonym of trivrt. 



550 


Garuda Purdna 


9*10. Powdered Kulira^ drunic with milk dispels tubercu* 
losis Bhallataka, Vidanga, Yavak^ra, Saindhava, Manahiila 
and Sankhacurna powdered and cooked with oil is a great 
depilatory. There is no doubt about it. 

11. Leech ground into paste with the juice of Malura 
and applied to the palm gives it the power to hold fire. 

12. The juice of ^Imali mixed with urine of a mule and 
thrown into fire extinguishes it immediately. 

13. Take the abdomen of the she crow and paste it with 
the suet of a frog. Pills made of this compound cast into 6re 
can extinguish fire immediately. 

14. Muodttvak, Vaca^ Musta, Marica and Tagara 
chewed well give the power to lick even fire immediately. 

15. Gorocana and Bhfngaraja powdered and pasted with 
ghi act as a protection against rain with this mantra Offi 
Agcnistambhcncrh Kuru Kuru. 

16. Orti /famo Bbag<waU Jalartt Stamhhofa Sarfi Sarh Sarii 

Ktka Keka Cara Cara 0 This is the mantra to numbify 

water. It benumbs water. 

17. If a person buries the bones of a vulture and a cow 
along with Puja garlands at the threshold of the enemy’s 

house he is sure to die. 

18-19. If a man or woman squeezes red flowers of five 
diflerent species of plants and mixes the juice of the same 
with KuTTikuma^ his or her own blood and a pala of Kocana 
and marks his forehead he or she can captivate any one. 

20-21. Brahmadandl administered in food or drink'on 
a day when moon enters the Pu^astar is a captivating charm. 
A pala of Yaspmadhu cooked in water, O Mahesvara, and 
drunk dbpek suppression of faeces and urine and cardiac colic. 
The mantra Orh Hrurh Jah removes the poison of a scorpion^ 
O Rudra. 

22. Pippali, ^rngavera, Saindhava, Marica and Ku^tha 
ground into paste with butter and curd is an antitoxic remedy 
whether used as an errhine or a beverage. 

23. O Siva, Triphala, Ardraka^ Kustha and Candana 
cooked with ghi and drunk or applied as a plaster removes 
poison. 

]. A lynonym ofkarkanasr^. 



L183.7 


551 


24. A compound of the eyes of’ dove, Haritala and 
Manahiila removes poison as Garuda kills serpents. 

25. O Vr^abhadhvaja, Satndhava, Tryu^na powder, 
curdand gh! pasted together when applied over the body 
remove the poison of scorpion. 

26. A decoction of Brahmada^I and Tila drunk with 
Traikatuka removes Gulmas, O Rudra, and obstructed blood, 

27. Milk taken with honey prevents haemorrhage. The 
navel and the Vaginal canal must be smeared with the root of 
Ataru^aka. A woman in labour easily delivers of her child. 

28. O Vf^adhvaja, sugar, honey and rice washings drunk 
quells Raktatisara (blood dysentery). 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYTHREE 

Diseases 


Hart said :— 

1. A decoction of Marica, ^imgavera, Rutaja and Tvaca 
when drunk removes Graba^ (diarrhoea) O Siva, with the 
crescent moon for crest. 

2*3. Pippall, Pippalimula, Maricdi Tagara, Vaca, 
Devadaru juice, and Pat^a must be ground into paste with 
milk. When druidt, this removes dysentery. A collyrium made 
of Marica and Tila flower removes chlorosis. 

4. O Rudra, Equal quantity of Hantaki and jaggery 
taken with honey is a good laxative, there is no doubt about it. 

5. Triphala, Citraka, Citra* and Kafukarohi^i constitute 
a good purgative and a remedy for Grustambha (paral)'sis of 
the thighs). 

6. A decoction of Hantaki, Srhgavera, Devadaru and 
Candana cooked with goat's milk and root of Apamarga or 
Jayanti remove Orustambha in seven days. 

7. .*Pills made of a compound of Ananti, Srngavera 
(finely powdered) and equal quantities of Guggula and jaggery 



552 


GaTu4<i Purina 


are very effective in all disorders of Vayu, nerves and sincwr» 
and impaired digestion. 

8. Cull the Sankhapusp! plant with roots and leaves when 
Pu^ya star is in conjunction with moon and cook it in goat's 
milk. It is a good remedy for hysteric fits. 

9. A decoction of Asvagandha and Abhaya in equal 
quantities is a sure remedy for Raktapitta (Haemorrhage). 

10. Take a mouthful of powdered Kuftha and HaritakI 
and wash it down the throat with cold water. All sorts of 
vomiting vanish. 

11-12. A decoction of Guduci» Padinaka, Arista, 
Dhanyaka and Raktacandana removes fevers due to Pitta and 
Kapha, vomiting, burning sensation, and thirst and improves 
digestion. With the mantra 0th Hurh Ncmah Sahkhapu^pT 
is to be tied to the ears. Then recite the following mantra. All 
fevers will be dispelled — 0th Jamb hint Stamhhini Mohnya 
Safvavyddkln \U Vajrerta T^ah {hah Satvatyddhin Me Vajrenn Phat. 


13. Take the flower and recite the above mantra eight 
hundred times and hand it over to the patient and touch his 
nail. O Rudra, the Caturthaka and other types of fever calm 
down immediately. 

14. A compound of Jambuphala, Haridra and theslough 
of a serpent fumigated removes ail fevers and especially the 
quotidian. 


15. Oil should be cooked with Karavira, Bhrngapaira, 
Lavana, Kustha and Karkata in four times cow's urine. This 
removes itches, Vicareika and Kustha. By anointing this all 
ulcers heal. 


16. Pippali and honey or sweet diet or the bulbous root 
Surana cure enlarged spleen. 

17. Pippali and Haridra pasted with cow's urine must 
be inserted into the rectum. It removes piles. 

18-19. An oral administering of Ardraka with goat’s 
milk is a cure for enlarged spleen. Saindhava, Vi^ahga, 
SomarajI, Sarsapa, the two types of RajanI and Vi;a must be 
ground into paste with cow’s urine and applied with leaves of 
Nimba, etc. This removes Kustha. 



1.184.12 


553 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYFOUR 

Dis4aus 


Han said : 

1. RajanI aad the ashes ofiCadal! when pasted remove 
blotches and scabs. A decoction of one part of Ku?tha and two 
parts of Pathyii if drunk removes all aches of the pelvic region. 

2. Abhaya taken with butter, sugar and Pippali removes 
piles; there is no doubt in this. 

3. Cook powdered Afaruuika leaves in butter over a 
low Hre. Plastering with this cures piles eflfectively. 

4*5. A decoction of Guggulu and Triphala removes 
fistula in ano. Cook AjijI and Sfngavera in curd and gruel. 
This taken with salt cures strangury. Yavak^&ra taken with 
sugar is also a remedy for strangury. 

6. The excreta of Khahjarl^a and the foam of a horse 
mixed with Sobhahjana fumigated or applied to the eyes as a 
collyrium makes the man invisible even to the gods. O Siva 
what then about mere mortals ? 

7. Burn Yava and paste it with gingelly oil. An appli¬ 
cation of this is a sure remedy for burns and scalds. An appli¬ 
cation of the paste of Lajjalu and ^rapunkha with butler is 
also similarly effective. 

8. This mantra is to be recited—“Om Name Bhaga- 
vatc tha {ha cchindhi cchindhi. Jvalaiiam Prajvalitarh Nasaya 
Na^aya Hurh Phat**. 

9-10. Roots of Nirgundl tied round the wrist cure all 
types of fever. Roots of white Guftja must be cut into seven 
pieces and lied to the wrists remove piles. There is no doubt 
in this. Vi|i>ukranta pasted with goats* urine and applied over 
the body affords a great protection from thieves and tigers. 

11. Roots of Brahmadandf enable one to do many 

wonderful acts. Powdered Triphala taken with butter removes 
Kustha. 

12. Butter cooked and medicated with Ptinarnava, Bilva 
and PippaU removes hiccough» cough, Asthma and bronchitis. 
Internally administered to women, it facilitates conception. 



554 


Garu4a Purdt^ 


13-15. The drugs mentioned before are to be cooked 
with milk and butter and daily taken with honey and Sugar. 
They secrete semen profusely. Vidanga» Madhuka, P^tha, 
Mams!, Sarjapasa» Haridri, TriphaU^ Apamargaj Manahiil^, 
Udumbara and Dhatakl must be ground to paste in gingelly 
oil. This applied over the penis and vaginal passage gives very 
great pleasure to the man and woman in their sexual embrace. 

16. **Namaste lla Varadaya Akarsini Vikarfim Mug- 
dhe Svnha.’* The man and woman must rub the vaginal passage 
and penis with the oil after repeating this mantra^ O 
Sankara. 

17«18. Mercury must be mixed with the juice ofj^tika 
and the seeds of Punarnav^ Amrti Durvi, Kanaka and Indra- 
virunP. This compound must be put in a crucible. This Rasa 
is a great death-giving agent. Milk taken with honey and 
butter removes wrinkles and greying it hair. 

19. Copper burnt with the compound of honey, butter, 
jaggery, and juice of Karaveila becomes silver. Now hear me 
explain the process of converting it into gold. 

20. A Pala of lead, yellow Dhattura flower and a twig of 
Lahgalika burnt together makes it converted into Gold. 

21. A yogin seated in Samadhi posture with a lamp 
burning with the oil of Dhattura, cannot be seen even by 
those who arc in heaven. 

22. A clay model of a bull grappling a frc^ shall be 
fumigated with the smoke of this Dhattura oil lamp. The clay 
frog will bellow like a living bull, O Sankara. 

23. An oil lamp burns down the insect Khadyota. Both 
burning together produce a great conflagration. 

24. O Rudra, bum the dead body of a rat. The ashes 
when rubbed over the body produce a severe burning sensation. 
When sandal wood is applied or drunk he will be free from the 
distress. 

25. Apply the ichor of an elephant in rut to its own 
eyes, O Siva. The elephant will be victorious in battles. The 
man also becomes a great hero. 

26. Keep a piece of iv<Hy in the mouth of water snake 


]. Gitrullus colocynthis. 



1.184.37 


555 


and throw it in water. It will stay steady in water as 
on land. 

27. A compound of the cyc%, teeth, bones, blood and 
suet in oil must be smeared over the body. The man can stay 
under water for three days. 

28. The eyes of crocodile, the heart of a tortoise, the 
suet and bones of a rat and the suet of a 8iiumara (porpoise) 
pasted together and applied over the body enable a man to 
stay under water as in his own house. 

29-30. Iron filings drunk with butter milk cure jaun¬ 
dice. Roots of Tandullyaka and Goksuraka drunk with milk 
remove chlorosis and all ailments of the mouth. The roots of 
JktT and Kola drunk with buttermilk cure impaired digestion. 

31. The roots of Ku$a or BakucI taken with buttermilk 
cure indigestion. Roots of BakucI taken with sour gruel dispel 
diseases of the teeth. 

32. O Siva, roots of Indra-Varuiji drunk with water 
remove poison of drinking. The roots ofSurabhik^ cure disorders 
due to the derangement of Vayu. 

33-35. Powdered Guflja plastered on the head with sour 
gruel cures headache. Powdered Bala, Atibala and Yasti 
mixed with honey and sugar taken by even a sterile woman 
enables her to conceive. There is no doubt. Roots of white 
Aparajita, ground together with Pippali andSunthI and applied 
over the head remove acute headache. Drinking clusters of 
Nirgundika removes goitre. 

36-37. Ashes of the leaves of KeiakI taken with jaggery 
or Sarapuhkha taken with butter milk cures enlarged spleen. 
Juice of Matuluhga taken with jaggery and butter remove dis¬ 
orders due to V^yu and Pitta. Drinking Sunthi, Sauvarcala 
and Hihgu removes all heart pains. 



556 


Gamia PurS^a 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYFIVE 

DUiusts 


Hari Said : 

1. Om Namo Oa^apataye (obeisance unto the Lord of 
Gan as). This is the mantra of Lord of Ganas that gives wealth 
and learning. 

2. Af^er reciting this eight thousand times a man shall 
tie his tuft and enter litigation. He is sure to win. By repeat* 
ing this a hundred times he will be a favourite of all men. 

3. O Rudra, Repeating this mantra a thousand and 
eight times the devotee shall offer a thousand and eight liba* 
tions of black gingelly seeds soaked in butter. The king will be 
under his control in three days. 

4. The devotee shall observe fast on the eighth and 
fourteenth days of the lunar fortnight and worship Vighnarar 
(Ganeia). Thereafter he shall offer a thousand and eight 
libations of gingelly seeds and raw rice grains. He shall be 
invincible in battle. All people are bound to serve him. 

5. Having repeated this mantra for eight thousand times 
and then for eight hundred times the devotee shall tie his 
tuft and then enter the Royal court or the court of litigation. 
He is sure to win. 

6. He who repeats this mantra after placing Htimkara 
and Visarga (mystically) on the forehead of women is sure to 
keep them under his control. 

7. With great concentration he shall place the Nyasa 
mantras mystically in the organ of reproduction in the maid¬ 
ens and repeat the mantras. There is no doubt in this that he 
will be able to make the maidens swell with love. 

8. Pure in body and mind he who gflers ten thousand 
libations will be able to keep women under his control by 
merely looking at them. 

9. He who puts on his forehead a Tilaka with pasted 
Gorocana Patra, Manahlila and Kuhkuma keeps women under 
his control. 



M85.22 


557 


10. He who puts on his forehead a tilaka with pasted 
Sahadevi Bhfngaraja^ 8veta Parajita and Vaca keeps the three 
worlds under bis control. 

11. He who puts on his forehead a Tilaka by means of 
sticks made of Gorocana and Minapitta (gall offish) with the 
little 6nger of hti left hand keeps the three worlds under his 
control. There is no doubt. 

12» She who puts on her forehead Tilaka with Goro> 
cana treated with her own mensirual blood keeps under he 
control any man whom the sees. There is no doubt. 

13-15. O Hara» O Ilvara, fumigatir^ with a compound 
of Nagejvara, Saileya, Tvak» Patra, Harltakl^ Candana, 
Ku^fha, Suk^ma Atli and Raktaiili is a great instrument of 
fascination through the arrows of Kamadeva (Cupid) O 
Mahideva. O Sankara beloved of P&rvat{» he who after his 
sexual intercourse takes his semen with his left hand and 
smean the left leg of his beloved with it becomes her favou¬ 
rite lover. 

16. Smearing the penis with Saindhava, excreta of a 
pigeon and honey, O Mahideva, a man can satisfy any woman. 

17. Take five red flowers of any species and equal quan¬ 
tity (by weight) of Priyangu and grind them into a paste. He 
who smean his penis with this, gives thrilling pleasure to his 
partner whom be can enslave. 

18 He who smears his penis with a compound of Aiva- 
gandha, Mafiji^hi, flowers of Mdlati and white mustard is loved 
by women. 

19. The root of Kakajahghi drunk with milk removes 
pulmonary consumption. They who regularly take a compound 
of Aivagandha, Naga Bala, jaggery and Ma^a retain the same 
health and vivacity of young men. 

20. O Rudra, powdered Triphala alone or with Loha- 
cur^a taken with honey removes Parinamaiula. (Gastralgra) • 

21. Drinking of boiled water with 8ambukak^raka too 
serves the same purpose. O Siva, the horn of a deer burnt in 
fire taken with cow*s butter removes cardiac and back pain. 

22. Vffadhvaja Hidgu, Sauvarcala and Suntld boiled m 
water wilL Mahau^adha and dniok removes all colics* 



5 So Garu4^ htri/fa 

23. Root of Apamarga taken with tea-salt removes im* 
paired digestion and colic. 

24. Sprouts of VaU washed with water with which rice 
has been washed should be drunk O Rudra^ with butter milk. 
O Sankara^ it disp>eb dysentery. 

25. O Bhutapa, (Siva) Half Kar^of the roots of Anko(a^ 
ground into paste with rice washings axHl drunk removes all 
sorts of dysentery and diarrhoea. 

26. Marica, Supthii powdered barks of Kufaja and jag¬ 
gery taken in increased proportion of twice the former and 
drunk removes all sorts of diarrhoea. 

27. O Sivdi pills made of a compound of the roots of 
white Aparajita, Haridri, cooked rice» Apamarga and Trika(uka 
pasted well undoubtedly remove the great sickness of cholera. 

28. O BhQteia, Triphala, Aguru, SiUjatu and Haritakl 
powdered separately and taken with honey, O Sankara, destroys 
all sorts of urinary complaints. 

29-30. A Pala each of Manahiila, Marfca and Sindura 
ground into powder and cooked in a copper vessel with exuda¬ 
tions of Arka and gingelly oil and dried in sunshine and drunk 
with exudations of Snuhi and Saindhava removes colic. 

31-33. Trikatu, Triphala, Alakta gingelly oil, Manahiila, 
leaves of Nimba, flowen of Jatl, &tnkhanabhi and Gandana 
cooked well in goat's milk and urine and made into sticks 
should be used as coUyrium for the eyes. Wall-eyes, eyecoatings, 
night-blindness etc. heal. Powdered Vibhitaka taken with honey 
removes dyspnea. 

34* Pippail, powdered Triphala, honey and Saindhava 
cure all types of fever, cough, consumption, and catarrh. 

35. Devad^ru powder soaked and purified in goats* urine 
twentyone times and applied as coUyrium to the eyes cures 
n^bt blindness, eyecoatiogs and depiladons of eyelashes. 

36. O Rudra, a compound of Pippall, Ketaka,* Haridra, 
Amalaka and Vac& cooked in milk and applied as a coUyrium 
to the eyes cures all ocular affiictions. 

37* O Siva, O Hara, Roots of KikajaAgha and Signs kept 
in the mouth and chewed weU remove all germs in the teeth. 


1. Altnfium lalvifoltum. 

2. Psndanus tectorias. 



M86ai 


559 


CaiAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYSIX 

Distasts 


H^H said : 

1«2. The essence of Gu^uci taken with honey removes 
Prameha (diabetes and urinary complatnli). Roots ofGohalika 
mixed with gingelly seeds, curd and butter cooked well dispeJs 
strangury, O Sankara. The same taken with sauvarcala removes 
hiccough. 

3. O Rudra, powdered Gorak^a and roots of Karka(i 
drunk with washings of Vasya for three days dispel gravel and 
similar urinary complaints. 

4. Roots of Milatl collected in summer and cooked in 
goats’ milk when drunk with sugar cure strangury gravel and 
jaundice. 

5. Roots of Dvijaya^d ground into paste in water with 
which rice has been washed when applied as a plaster cure 
scrofula, hydrocele and goitre. 

6. The above compound with the admixture of RasaA* 
Jana and powdered HaritakI when applied to the penis cures 
loss of manhood and virility, there is no doubt. 

7. By applying the paste of the roots of Karavlra or 
Pugaphala to the genitals, loss of sexual vigour can be cured. 
O Rudra, I shall mention another medical compound. 

8. By applying the paste of the roots of Dantt, Haridra 
and Gitraka, fistula in ano is cured. I shall mention another 
treatment. If the blood b sucked off by leeches, fistula in ano 
can be cured. 

9* Washed with the water ofTriphala the locality should 
be smeared with the paste of cat’s bone. Then bleeding ceases. 
There b no doubt in thb. 

10. Haridra should be purified many times with the 
exudations of Snuhl and formed into Vatikis. O Vr^bliadhvaja, 
an application of thb cures f’iles. Gho^phala and Saindhava 
ground into paste together U a sure remedy for Piles. 

IL Butter made from the cow’s milk cooked witli 
TrUutnka and drunk with the washings of Paliia and Kfira, 
three times in Volume cures Piles. 



560 


Gafu4^ 

12. By eating Bilvaphala, or black gingelly tttds with 
butter> bleedir^ piles can be cured. 

13. O Vffabhadhvaja^ equal quantities of Yavakfara, 
powdered Sun^hl and jaggery early in the morning improves 
digestive power. 

14-15. Water boiled with and drunk improves 

digestion. O Rudra, ptowdered Hadtak!, Saindhava, Citraka 
and Pippall drunk with hot water increases appetite and hunger. 
Pig's fle^ taken \^ith butter increases appetite and hunger. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYSEVEN 

Disea its 


Hari said : 

1. O Sankara, pound the leaves of Hastikaroapalaia. O 
Siva, a hundred PaUs of this powder is a great cure for all 
ailments. 

2. If the above powder is taken with milk O Vf^abha* 
dhvaja, for seven days the man gains the power of memory, O 
Rudra, and becomes as powerful and valorous as a lion. 

3. If the powder is taken with milk for sixteen days, O 
Rudra, the body begins to glow like a ruby, the sltape and 
features become brilliant and he can live even for a thousand 
years. 

4. Taken with honey and butter it is conducive to 
longevity. Taken with honey it enables one to live even for ten 
thousand years. 

5. Taken daily with curd it builds up the body as strong 
as adamant and makes the man endowed with keen power of 
memory and a great favourite young maidens. 

6. Taken with sour gruel it enables a man to live even 
for a thousand years with thickly grown glossy hair. 

7. Taken with Triphala it enables the man to live for a 
hundred years with a divme body free from wrinkles and grey 
hair and without any defect in the eyes. 



1.188.2 


561 


8*9. If the powder is taken with butter even a blind man 
begins to see. When applied over the head with buffalo’s milk 
it turns grey hair black. O Vr^bhadhvaja, hair begin to 
grow even on a bald head. The powder used for massage with 
oil removes wrinkles and grey hair. 

10. By using it as an unguent one is freed from all 
ailments. If it is applied as a collyrium with goat’s milk for a 
month, the lost eyesight can be regained. 

11-I2. Seeds of Paliia are to be gathered in the month 
of Sravana and dehusked. Powder them well and take half a 
Kar^a of it daily with butter after due worship of Lord Hari. 
The diet is to be restricted to old rice of the $ay^ variety. 
Water is to be abjured. The man can live for a thousand years 
free from wrinkles and grey hair. 

13-14. Cull the roots ofBhrhgarija when the moon is in 
Pu$ya star. Powder them well. The powder is to be taken daily 
with Sauvira for a month. The man becopies free from wrinkles 
and grey hair. He will be endowed with the strength of an 
elephant. He can live even for five hundred years with the 
power of hearing unimpaired. O Rudrai the course must be 
started on the day when the moon enters the asterismof Puiya. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYEIGHT 

Dxswts 


Hari said: 

1. A cut from a sharp instrument, filled with butter 
immediately gets healed without inflammation and pus-forma¬ 
tion. To stop excessive bleeding, roots of Apamarga must be 
squeezed with hands and the juice must be poured into tlie 
wound. 

2. O Rudra, if the lip of any weapon or any other 
foreign matter gets embedded in any wound, roots of L&ngalikrl 
and Hijjala must be squeezed and poured over the wound. O 



562 (?arti(b Purdw 

Sankara, even if the foreign matter had been there for a long 
time it comes out instantaneously. 

3. Roots of Bala or of Mcfa^fh^ ground into paste with 
water and applied over sinuses make them subside even if they 
be of long duradon. 

4. Powdered roots of Ka^u applied over sinuses quell 
them. The diet of the padent must be restricted to co^ed 
Kodrava rice with curd from buffaloes milk. 

5* Brahmaya^p fruits ground into paste with water and 
applied over the skin remove the disorder due to impurity in 
the blood. There is no doubt in this. 

6*8. Ashes of Yava, Vidahga, Gandhapaiapa and 
6un(hl treated with chameleon*! blood and applied cures 
carbuncles and tumours, O 6iva. Root of ^bhUjana and 
burnt linseed mixed with white mustard and applied over 
knotty tumours with buttermilk not turned sour, cures it. 

9. Root of white Aparajita ground into paste in water 
with which rice has been washed can be used as an errhine to 
drive away malignant hosts of Bhutas (evil ghosts). 

10. An errhine prepared with the flower of Agastya with 
Maiica removes colic, O 6iva. A paste with the slough of a 
serpent, Hingu, leaves of Nimba, Yava and white mustard 
removes malignant spin. 

11. A coUyrium prepared with Gorocana, Marica, 
Pippall, Saindhava and honey wards oS the evil influences of 
planets and Bhutas, O Biva. 

12. Fumigating with Guggulu and the tail of the owl 
wards off the influence of evil planets. A patient of Caturthaka 
fever shall be wrapped with a black cloth and fumigated thus. 
He will be cured. 



tJ89.I0 


563 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYNINE 

Disiasts 


Hart said : 

L Dropping the juice of the flower of white AparijitI 
flowers in the eyes heab the coating of the eyes. There is no 
doubt in this. 

2. O Niialohita> O Sur^uravimardana (Siva the des¬ 
troyer of Devas and Asuras)^ by chewing the roots of Goktura 
one is relieved of the pain due to germs in the teeth. 

3. A woman patient of enlarged spleen must apply the 
paste of the root of white Arka in cow*s milk to her vagina! 
passage, afler fasting during the menstrual period. She will be 
freed of the pain due to the tumour. 

4. The flower of Che white Arka should be culled after 
duly reciting the mantras before. After the purificatory bath at 
the cessation of the flow of blood duringmenses she must tie it 
round her hips. This will facilitate her conception and delivery 
(in the natural course)« 

5. O Hara, the root of Palaia or Apamarga tied round 
the wrist dispels all sorts of fever and wards oflf the evil in¬ 
fluence of Bhutas and ghosts. 

6. O Paramesvara, the root of Vpscika drunk with water 
kept overnight, removes the burning sensation due to fever. 

7. The same tied round the tuA removes intermittent 
fever. When drunk with the washings of Vasya it quells all 
poisons. 

8. A man is sure to be inimical with any one, man or 
woman, to whom he hands over the root of Lajjaluka soaked in 
his own semen. 

9. He who drinks cow’s butter medicated with the roots 
of Pi^hi surely mitigates the baneAil influences of all kinds of 
poisons. There is no doubt in this. 

10. If the ears are filled with the juice of the root of 
Raktacitr»ka as well as 3iri|a along with V&sya water, jaundice 
and chlorosis are sure to be dispelled. 



564 Gam^a 

11 • Tho root of white Kokilak^a^ cooked with goal^i milk 
when drunk for three days cures Consumption. 

12. The flower of coconut palm drunk with the goat’s 
milk dispels the three types of Vatarakia. 

13. Roots of Sudariana must be wreathed into a garland. 
Worn round the neck it dispels the fever ’^Tryahika’’ (Tertian) 
and wards off advene planets and ghosts. 

14. The excellent root of white GuAji must be gathered 
when the moon enters Pu^ya star. This kept in the mouth 
removes several kinds of poison* 

15. The same root along with stems tied round the wrist 
or the neck wards of evil planets. Culled and tied round the 
waist on the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight it removes the 
fear of lions and other beasts of prey» O Nllalohita (Siva). 

16. O BhOteia the root of Vi^Qukranta tied round the 
ears with a silken cord removes the fear of crocodiles^ O If a. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY 

Diseases 


Hari said : 

1. The root of Aparajita drunk with cow’s urine removes 
goitre. There is no doubt in this. 

2. A decoction of the root of lndra*varuQi taken duly or 
an errhine with the paste of the juice of Jiagii;il with Suka* 
Simbi grains and cold water removes many kinds of pain in 
arms or neck. 

3. Aivagandha, Pippali and the two drugs Vaca and 
KuHha ground into paste with butter from bufl[alo’s milk when 
applied to the penis or chest alleviate the pain in the ducts of 
penis and the cardiac region. 


1. Astereaotba laofiiclia. 



1.190.18 


565 


4. Powdered Ku^^ha and NagabaU pasted with butter 
and applied over the breasts of young women give them a 
shapely beauty. 

5. Indravarunika must be uprooted and cast ofTfar away 
shouting the name of the patient d splenic enlargement. He is 
relieved of the ailment. 

6. Root of Panamava of the white variety drunk with 
rice washings removes abscesses. There is no doubt in this. 

7. Ashes of burnt Kadall leaves boiled in water and 
drunk quell all sorts of dropsy and Ascites. 

8. Roots of Kadali cooked well in butter and jaggery and 
swallowed destroy the worms in the abdomen. 

9. Daily intake of powdered Nimba leaves and Amalaka 
early in the morning quells Ku^tha and similar cutaneous afflic* 
tions. 

10. A compound of Haritaki, Vidahga, Haridrai white 
mustard, Roots of Somarija and Karahja, and Saindhava 
ground into paste in cow*s urine removes Kustha. 

11. One part of Triphala and two parts of the seeds of 
Somaraja taken in along with the observation of strictness in 
diet cure ring wormi O Siva. 

V.l. Sour butter milk boiled with cow^s urine with salt in 
a vessel of bell metel thickly applied removes Kusfha. 

13. A plaster ofHaridra, Haritala, Durva and rock salt 
pasted with cow's urine removes ring worm Pama and skin 
poisons. 

14. Seeds of Somaraja pasted with butter and honey 
taken in remove white leprosy. O Rudra, butter milk must be 
taken as Anupana (subsequent drink). There is no doubt in this. 

15. Root of white Aparajita purified recurrently in its 
own washings applied for a mouth, O Rudra, quells leuco* 
derma. 

16. Butter from buffalo's milk, Sindura and Maricaka 
applied over the afTecced part removes Pama (scabies) aud 
Piles, O Vnabha-Dhvaja (Siva). 

17. O Isvara, Dry roots ofGambhiri cooked and taken 
with milk is a remedy for Suklapitta. 

16. '^Seeds of Mulaka ground with the juice of Ap&m&rga 
and applied over the body, O Rudra, quell Silhiki. 



566 


Garu^a Purdt^c 


4 

19. Hartdri mixed with the ashes of Kadali quells 
Siihik^. Ashes of Rambh^^ and Apamarga mixed with Eranda 
if applied over the body, O Mahiideva, remove scabs 
immediately. 

20-21. Burnt ashes of Kusmanda creeper mixed with 
cow*s urine and Haridra pasted with water must be cooked in 
a crucible lutoed with buflalo dung over a low fire, O 
Vr^bhadhvaja. An unguent of this compound, O livara 
produces shapeliness and beauty of limbs. 

22. A compound of gingelly seeds, mustard, two sorts of 
Haridra and Kusthaka applied over the body as an unguent 
turns body odour into a sweet fragrance. 

23. Application of DurvJi and Kikajahgha too similarly 
increases the beauty day by day. An application of the paste 
of flowers of Arjuna leaves of Jambu and Lodhra removes the 
bad odour of the body. 

24. A penon who smears his body with a solution of 
Lodhra water and powdered Kanaka is never affected by the 
rigours of summer. 

25. Sprinkling profusely with milk relieves the body of 
the defects of heat. An unguent of Kakajahgha is a good cos- 
metic. 

26. A decoction of Yastimadhu and juice of Vasaka drunk 
with sugar and honey is a curative for Raktapitta (Haemoptysis) 
chlorosis and Jaundice. 

2?. Mere juice of Vasaka taken with honey quells Haemo¬ 
ptysis. Taking in cold water in the morning quells even acute 
catarrh. 

28. O Maheivara, powdered Vibhitaka, Pip pall and 
Saindhava taken with sour gruel cures the hoarseness of voice 
(Aphonia). 

29-30. In cases of Asthma the patient takes a decoction 
of powdered Amalaka, Manahsila, root of Bala, leaves of Kola 
and Guggulu with cow*a milk; and smokes a Varti in Badari 
fire, prepared with Jatlpatra, Kolapatra, and Manah$il&. Un¬ 
doubtedly he will be cured. 


1. A synonym of itfds/f 



LI9K9 


567 


31. Powdered Tripluli and Pippali taken with honey 
before the meal relieve thirst and fever. 

324 A decoction of Bilvamula, and Gu^uci drunk with 
honey removes three types of vcmitin^ undoubtedly. Durva 
ground into paste with rice washings removes vomiting. 


CaiAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYONE 

Disiaus 

Hm said : 

1. Roots of white Punamava must be taken out on a day 
when the moon enters the Pu^ya star and should be drunk with 
water. No serpent wilt ever come near him nor infest hb house. 

2. O Vrsadhvaja^ he who wears as an amulet the image 
of Garuda made of bear’s teeth, will never be bitten by a serpent 
in his life. 

3. O Rudra^ Serpents will find their fangs ineffective in 
him who drinks a decoction of the root of S&lmall in water. 

4. If the rootLajjiluka u culled on a day when the moon 
enters the Pu^ya star and tied round the wrist or its paste b 
smeared over the body be will undoubtedly be able to catch 
hold of a serpent with impurity. 

5. If the root of white Arka culled under the auspices of 
the asterism Pusya is drunk with cold water» the poison due to 
the bites of insects or the sepsis due to sword cut etc. b quelled. 

6. Smearing with (he paste of the root of Mah&kila in 
sour gruel quelb the pobonofVodras and Dundubhas ^different 
kinds of water snakes). 

7. Roots of Tai;t4unyaka soaked in rice washings and 
pasted, taken with clarified butter remove all kinds of pobons. 

8. Roots of either Nil! or Lajialuki but not both, pasted 
with rice washings, if drunk, remove the poison due to insect bite. 

9. «Jhe expressed juke of Kufm&pdai taken with jag¬ 
gery or sugar and milk is an antidote for the poison due to in¬ 
sect bite. 



568 


Garuda Purdf^a 


10-12. The expressed juice of Kodrava root taken simi* 
larly removes loss of sense. Yas^imadhu taken with sugar and milk 
removes the poison of a rat in three days. If the mouth is 
burnt due to excess of lime while chewing betel leaves, 
three mouthfuls of cold water drunk will stop salivation. 
GhI taken with sugar arrests intoxication and inebriety. 

13. O Maheivara, boiled water drunk with the roots of 
black Ankota destroys undigested poison within three days. 

14. O Mahideva, the cow^s fresh butter mixed with 
Saindhava quells the pain due to scorpion bite. 

15*16. O Siva, swallowing the compound of Kusumbha, 
Kumkuma, Haritala, Mana^lila, KaraAja, and ground root of 
Arka removes human bite poison, O Sankara. Applying the oil 
from an oil lamp the poison of insects and Kharjuraka (scor* 
pion) is removed. There is no doubt in this. 

17. The place of bite must be smeared with a paste of 
Suofhl and Tagarapadtka. By smearing these the poison of the 
sting of a honey bee is quelled. 

18*19. In the above case a paste of Satapuspa, Saindhava 
and butter does great good. O Mahadeva, an application of a 
paste of the seed of Sirl^ cooked in milk removes the poison 
of dog bite. Frog bite is to be treated by burning the site of bite 
and pouring water there. 

20. O Siva with moon for crest, rat poison is quelled by 
drinking the juice of Dhatturaka mixed with milk, butter and 
jaggery. 

21. Gargling with water boiled with the barks of Va^a 
Nimba and $am! removes the pain due to poison in mouth or 
teeth. 

22. O Lord of Uma, application of a paste of Devadaru 
and Gairika or a compound of Nagesvara, the two varieties of 
Haridri, and Majithika^ quelh the poison of spider. 

23. There is no doubt in this that a compound of the 
seeds of Karaftja, barks of Vanina, Tita and Sarsapa qu::ll$ 
poison. 


I. Perhspi the isme as MafljisfhiiSarubia eordifolia. 



1.192.10 


569 


24. The itching sensation of the horse can be removed 
in ten days, O Hara, by applying the paste of Kumari patra 
with butter and salt. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDR 


> ft 


AND NINETYTWO 


Dlswes 


Hari said : 

1*3. Take eight parts of Citraka, sixteen parts of Suratia’ 
four parts of two parts of Marica» three parts of 

Pippallmtlla, four parts of Vi4a^a» eight parts af Mu^aliki, 
and four parts of Triphala* Take jaggery double the quantity 
of these drugs and prepare a Modaka (sweet meat) of them. 
This is a sure remedy for impaired digestion» jaundice^ 
chlorosis, dysentery, indigestion and enlarged spleen. 

4-7. Take these drugs each weighing ten palas :—Bilva», 
Agnimantha, Syonaka, Pi|aUi, P&ribhadraka, PrasaranI, Ajva- 
gandha, Bfhad, Ka^^kariki, Bala, Atibala, Risna, Svadari^^ri, 
Punarnava, Eranda, Sariba*, Guducl and Kapikacchuka. 

They are to be boiled in pure water. When reduced to one 
fourth pour the decoction into an oil vessel and cook again. 
Four times this quantity of cow*s or goat’s milk must be poured 
and Satavar! and Saindhava equal to the oil must be added. 

8*9. I shall mention the names of the drugs the residence 
of which is to be added :—Satapu^pa, Devadaru, Bala, Parnl, 
Vaca, Aguni, Kusfha MamsI, Saindhava and Punarnava. Each 
of these must be a pala in weight. The oil thus prepared can be 
used for anointing or as an errbine or as a potion. 

10. This oil is a cure for cardiac pain, pleurodynia, 
goitrei hysteria and Vatarakta. The man shall regain lost man-^ 
hood. 

1. AmorphophsUus csa^ftSAuunit. 

7, ^rbaps S4rjv&«{)) Hcnidcsmui iodicus (U) Cryptelepis btcbs- 
n»mi (GVDB, p. 429-30). 



570 


Caru4d Purina 


11. By taking in this oil even the she-mule can conceive 
without risk to liTe. O Kara, what then about woman ? Horses 
and elephants affected by deranged Vayu can be cured with 
this. Man afflicted by deranged Vayu should be given this oil. 

12. Mustard oil cooked with Hihgu, Tumburu and 
Sun{hi is an efficacious ear drop for pain in the ear (otalgia). 

13*14. Oil cooked in a decoction of dry Mulaka and 
SunthI reduced to ashes, Hihgula and Negara with four times 
of butter milk is a sure remedy for deafness, otalgia, and fetid 
discharges from ears. By pouring this oil into the ears all geims 
can be killed. 

15*17. Oil cooked with the following drugs is a sure re¬ 
medy for all sortsofearache. The ashes of dry Mulaka and SuQ|hI, 
Hihgula, Nagara, Satapu^pli, Vaca, Kus^ha, Diru, Sigru, Ras* 
ifljana, Sauvarcala, Yavakf&ra, sea salt, Granthika, Vida 
Musta, Madhu (honey) and Sukta four times in quantity, juice 
of Matuluhga and Kadall. 

18. Deafness, rumbling sound in the ears, fetid dis¬ 
charges and germs in the ean can be cured by pouring this oil 
into the cars. 

19. The germs are killed instantaneously, O Siva, with 
the moon for crest. This taila or oil is called Ksarataila and 
it removes all sorts of impurities in mouth and teeth. 

20-22. The Candanadi oil Oil is cooked with these 
drugs :—Candana, Kuhkuma, M&msi, Karpura, Jatipatrika, 
fruits of Jatl, Kakkola, Puga and Lavahga, Aguru, Kustha, 
Kasturi, Tagarapadiga, Gorocana, Priyahgu, Bala, Nakh!, 
Sarala, Saptaparna, L^a, Amalaki and Padmaka. 

23. It cures excessive perspiration, bad odour, itching 
sensation and skin diseases. Internally administered it gives the 
man the virility to have sexual intercourse w'ith a hundred 
women, and the women the ability to conceive though dis¬ 
carded as a sterile woman before. 

24-25. Cicr^aghfta :—Butter a prastha in volume with 
water eight prasthas in volume should be cooked with these 
drugs :—Citraka, Yamini, Ohanya, TrayOsa^ta, Jlraka, Sauvar¬ 
cala, Vi^ahga, Pippaltmula and Rijika. This butter cures piles, 
enlarged spleen, tumour, etc. and improves digestive power. 



I.I92.41 


571 


26*29. A prastha of mustard oil should be cooked in 
eight prasthas of cow's urine in a mud pot or iron cauldron 
slowly in low fire, with the following drugs each weighing a 
Kar^ :—Marica, Trivrt, Kustha, Haritala Manahsila, Deva* 
daru, the two kinds of Haridra, M^msi, Candana, ViiSla» Kara* 
vira, milky exudations from the Arka plant, watery serum ex* 
tracted from cowdung and half a pala of Vi^a. This oil exter* 
nally applied cures P4ini, Vicarcika, ring wprm, and all foul 
sores. It gives a smoothness to the skin. 

30. Many kinds of skin diseases like Svitra can be cured 
with this oil. Even a chronic leucoderma gets cured instantly. 

31-34. Butter should be cooked with Pa{oIapatra, Kafuki, 
Matijif^hi, Sirib^, Niii, jAti, Sami, Nimbapatra and Madhuka. 
O Siva, external application of this mitigates the pain of 
suppurating ulcers. 

Brahml Ghrta:—A prastha of butter, juice ofKaotakiiri and 
milk should be cooked with an Aksa weight of these drugs :— 
Brahml, SahkhapuspI, Vaca, Soma, Vrksasuvarcala, Abhayaj 
GuducI, Afarusaka and Vaguji. This is called Brahmi ghrta. 
It increases power of memory and intellect. 

35. A compound of Agnimantha, Vaca, Vasa and Pip- 
pali taken with honey and Saindhava for seven days enables 
one to sing as sweetly as the Kinnaras. 

36. A three-day course of the compound of Apamarga, 
Gu<juci, Ku$tha, Satavari, Vaca, Sankhapuspa, Abhaya and 
Vid^hga with butter enables a man to retain in his memory the 
contents of eight hundred books. 

37. Vaca taken with mere water, milk or butter daily for 
a month makes a man so intelligent as to grasp anything as soon 
as it is heard. 

38. A pala of Vaca drunk with milk during lunar or 
solar eclipse makes a man highly gifted with intelligence 

instantly. 

39-41. Water boiled with Bhunimba, Nimba, Triphala, 
Parpafa, Paioll, Mustaka, and V^ka cures carbuncles and im¬ 
pure blood. There is no doubt about this. Sticks prepared from 
Kcuka fruit, Sahkha, Vaci, Saindhava, Tryu?ai^, Phena, 



572 Garu4^ Pur^ 

Ras&Sjana, Vi^ahga, Mana^iila and honey cure Kica (opaque 
eyes)| blindness, and coatings in the eyelids. 

42-44. A drot^ of water boiled two prasthas of M&iaka 
musf be reduced to one fourth. Pour a prastha of oil and cook 
with an Adhaka of sour gruel. Then add the following drugs 
well ground :—Punamava, Goksuraka, Saindhava, Tryu^d^a, 
Vaci, Lavaca, Suradani, MaAjistha auid Kaptakarika. Inter¬ 
nally administered or used as an errhine this oil cures acute 
earache. 

45-46. O Maheivara, the preceding oil anointed over the 
body quells deafness and many other ailments. Cook a prastha 
of oil with two palas of Saindhava, five palas each of SuttthI 
and Qtraka with five prasthas of Sau>dra. This is a sure remedy 
for leucorrhoea, Aphoniai enlarged spleen and all types of 
disorders due to deranged Viyu. 

47-48. Oil cooked in a decoction of Udumbara, Vata» 
Plak^, the two varieties of Jambu> Aijuna, Pippala, Kadamba, 
Pal&ia, Lodhra, Tinduka, Madhuka, Amra, Sarja, Badara, 
Padmakciara, Sirl^blja and Ketaka quells all sorts of sores and 
ulcers though long standing, by means of an external 
application. 


CHAPTER ONE HXINDRED AND NINETYTHREE 

Distases 


Hari Sind : 

1-2. A compound consisting of Palandu, Jlraka, Kustha^ 
Aivagandha, Ajamodaka, Vaci, Trikafuka and salt powdered 
tc^ether must be treated with the juice of Brahm!. Taken with 
honey and butter for seven days, it makes a man’s intellect pure 
and keen. 

3-5. A compound of Siddhirthaka, Vack, Hingu, Kar- 
aftja, Devadaru, Maflji^thi, Triphati Vifva, the two 

varieties of RajanI, PriyaAgu, Nimba and Trikafu ground with 
cow’s urine can be used as an errhine, a plaster or as an 



L193.17 


573 


unguent. It cures hysteria, poisoning, insanity, emaciation, fever 
and discoloration of the skin. It removes the fear from evil 
spirits and affords honour in the royal palace. 

6-7, Nimba, Kuf(ha, two varieties of Haridri, Sigru, 
Sar^paja, Devad&ru, Pafola and Dhanya must be pasted 
gether wjth buttermilk. The patient must be anointed with oil 
and the above medicated compound must be applied as an un« 
guent. All sorts of Pamas (scabs), Kuithai and itches are 
certainly removed. 

8*10. Equal quantities of sea salt,* rock salt, K^ra, 
Rajika, Vidalava^ Kafu, iron filings, Trivrt and Suvan^aka 
must be cooked over low fire with cxird, cow^i urine and miUu 
This is called Agnibalacur^a. It roust be taken with hot water 
after food or after digestion. The patient can have as his 
diet Mi$a and butter. It cures all sorts of colic of the 
umbilicus, urinary tracts and those due to enlarged spleen. 

11, A compound of Abhayi, Amalaka, Drak^a, Pippall, 
Ka^takarika, $rngi, Punamava and 6u]^(h! cures Asthma and 
cough. 

12, Abhaya, Amalaka, Drak^, Patha. Vibhitaka and 
sugar taken in equal quantities is a sure remedy for fever. 

13, Triplmli, Badara, Drak$a, and Pippal! is a good 
purgative. Haritakl taken in hot water with salt is a good 
purgative. 

14«15. Fumigating with the excreta, blood, hair or flesh 
of tortoise, fish, hone, buffalo, cow, jackal, monkey, cat, pea¬ 
cock, crow, boar, owl, fouls and swan is useful for the alleviation 
of the pain and disorder of the patients of fever and insanity. 

16. O Bhavelvara, all these medicines quell the ailments 
like the thunderbolt of Indra felling down trees. 

17. When a medicine is being administered Lord VifOU 
should necessarily be remembered. Thought of, worshipped or 
praised, He quells all ailments. There is no doubt in this. 



574 


Caruso Purdna 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYPOtnt 

Vaifn avd^Kavaca 

Hafi Said : 

I. O Sambhu (Siva), I »hall explain the Vai^nava 
Kavaca (the mystical Coat of mail of Visnu) by means of which 
protection is afforded and which removes all ailments. 

2*3« Having bowed to the divine Lord, the unborn, the 
eternal, the unsick lord of all the all pervading, omnipresent 
Jan&rdana I am tying this (Kavacam) which will never be in 
vain, which is incomparable and which wards off all miseries. 

4. May Vif^u protect me in the front* May Kr$oa 
protect me from behind. May Hari protect my head and 
Janardana my heart. 

5. May Hf^Ikeia protect my mind. May Keiava protect 
my tongue. May V&sudeva protect my eyes. May the all 
pervading Sankarsatia protect my ears, 

6. May Pradyumna protect my nose. May Aniruddha 
protect my skin. May Vanamali protect my inner throat. 
May Srivatsa protect the lower portion, 

7. May the divine Discus, the destroyer of demons, 
protect my left side. May the divine Gada (club) the 
destroyer of all demons protect my right side. 

8. May the divine threshing rod protect my stomach; 
may the divine ploughshare protect my back* May the divine 
Sirhga (bow) protect the upptr part of my body. May the 
divine Nandaka (sword) protect my calves. 

9. May the divine Sahkha (conch) protect my heel. 
May the divine Padma (lotus) protect my feet. May Garuda 
protect me for the fulfilment of all my activities. 

10. May the divine Boar protect me in the waten. May 
Vamana protect me in all difficult situations. May the 
Narasirhha protect mein the forest. MayKciava protect mr 
from all sides. 

11. May Lord Hiia^yagarbha grant me gold. May 
Kapila the propounder of the S&fikhya system cause the 
equilibrium of alt my vital constituents. 



1.194.24 


575 


12. May Aja (the unborn) the resident of Sveta Dvipa 
(the white continent) lead me to Svetadvipa. May the slayer 
of Madhu and Kaitabha destroy alt enemies. 

13. May Visnu extract for ever the sin from my body. 
May the divine Swan» Fish and Tortoise protect me on alt 
sides. 

14. May lord Trivikrama curb all my dns. May lord 
Narayana t^iiard my intellect. 

15. May Sesa make my wisdom perfect and destroy 
ignorance. May Lord with the submarine fire for his 
mouth destroy whatever sin I may have committed. 

16. Mav Lord V&mana place on my head all bliss by 
means of his feet. May Dattitreya endow me with aon$» cattle 
and kinsmen. 

17. May Paralur&ma destroy all my enemies with his 
divine axe. May R&ma, the son of Daiaratha the powerful slayer 
of Raksasas protect me. 

18. May Balarama, the scion of Yidava family destroy 
mv enemies by means of his divine ploughshare. May the infancy 
of Lord Krsna marked by the annihilation of Pralamba, Keii^ 
Cdnura. Putana and Karhsa, grant me all I desire. 

19. I see a Being more terrible than pitch darkness, 
dark and tawny resembling the God of death with the noose in 
his hands and am terrified. 

20. Hence^ I sought refuge in Acyuta the lotus^eyed. I 
am fortunate and fearless in having for ever the lord Hari (at 
my side)» 

21. Contemplating on the Lord N&rayatta, the destroyer 
of all harassments I have tied this Kavaca and am roaming 
over the Earth. 

22. I am invincible to all living beings^ for verily I 
identify myself with all devas inasmuch as I remember the 
lord of lords Visnu of unlimited splendour. 

23. Mav success befall me for ever as indicated in the 
Mantra. He who sees me with wicked eyes, whom I see (with 
contempt) in the eyes, let him be bound and hit in the eyes, the 
sinner and the vicious that he is. 

24. Let the spokes of the divine discus of Visudeva cho]> 
off my sins, let them hit those who perpetrate violence on me. 



576 


Garui^ PufitfA 


25«27r Thu above mantra is to be recited when Rikfasas 
and Pij&cas attack, while one is in the wild woods and forests* 
when there is an argument* in the high ways, at the gaining 
table, during quarrels, while crossing a river, when a danger 
faces one, when there is a conflagration, when thieves attack 
in a body, when all the planets (or any of them) are adverse, 
when lightning strikes, when the fury of the poison of serpents 
spreads, in sickness, when there is distress due to obstacles, in 
fact whenever tiiere is something to fear from. 

28. This is Lord’s own mantra, the most sacred of all 
mantras. This famous Kavaca is an esoteric secret. It destroys 
all sins. It has created and destroyed everything by means of 
the Mkyi that originates from it. It is the Great, It is 
inscrutable. 

29. Oift Padman&bha, the beginningless, the endless, the 
seed of the Universe, obeisance unto thee, Oih Sv&hfc to Time. 
Oih Svaha to the personified Being of Time. Oifa Svihi to 
Knina(the black), Orii Sv&hk to Knnarupa(black in form). Om.. 
Svih& to Ca^da (the fierce). Om Sv&ha to Ca^darupa (the 
fierce in form), Orti Svihi to Pracanda. Oih Svihi to Pra- 
caodarupa. Orfa Svihi to Sarva. Ozh Svaha to Sarvarupa. Oih 
obeisance to the lord of the universe, to the creator of the three 
worlds. Here, Viti Siviti Siviti Svihi. Oth obeisance to Ayokheti 
to the divinity called “Ye ye“. 

This body of mine is subject to the attacks of undeserving 
persons, Daily as, Danavas, Yaksas, Rak^asas, Bhutas, Piiacas 
and KQ^mindas and such vile ailments as hysteria, vomiting, the 
unbearable fevers as the intermittent* diurnal, tertian, quotidian, 
nocturnal* dusk fevers etc and the injection of poison from 
spiders, insects, thorns* Putani spirits* and serpents. Poisoning 
agents may be mobile or immobile* it be kept sound. 
Tumburu Sphufa Sphufa Prakofa Laphapi. May Vikafada* 
mstra* (of crool^ teeth) protect me fi^m the East, Om Hai 
Hai Hai Hai Hai, O you the deity endowed with ten thousand 
suns and Kala be victorious and protect me from the west. 
Om Nivi Nivi O MahikapUa, resplendent like the flame of the 
glowing fire protect me from the north. Om Vili VUi Mill Mill 
Garudi Garudi* May Gaud and G&ndhirt delude with the 
upsetting swoons of poison Svihi; protect me from the south. 



L195.6. 


577 


Turn your glance towards me; save, save me from the harass¬ 
ment of the terrific onslaught of all living beings* Be victorious; 
be victorious. Let the enemy dwindle by that. Let the rays as 
multitudinous as the turns of Yugas afford protection and 
fearlessness. Let them enter the abdomen as they set. May the 
different manifestations of Lord Haxi-^V&sudeva, Sankar;at)a« 
Pradyumna and Aniruddha, Vif^u and N^r&yapa destroy all 
my fevers. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYFIVE 


A Lou for fulfiUxni a disin m stven nights 


Hari said : 

1 *2. Listen to that Lore which fulfils all desires in seven 
nights—*^Obeisance unto Lord Visudeva whom we meditate 
upon. Obeisance unto Pradyumna and Aniruddha. Obeisance 
unto Sankarsa^a. Obeisance unco the giver of wisdom, the 
embodied form of perfect Bliss. 

3. Obeisance to Thee that rcsteth in the soul, the quiets 
free from dualistic vision. Thou art all the forms. Obeisance 
unto thee. 

4 Obeisance unto Thee the great Hr$!keia, of endless 
manifestation, in whom all these visible creations stay and from 
whom other forms of creation emerge. 

5. Thou bearest this terrestrial sphere. Obeisance unto 
Thee the Brahman, whom the mind, the intellect, the sense 
organs and the vital airs touch not nor know. Thou movesc 
both within and without like the expansive fimmment. I bow 
unto Thee . 

6. Oth obeisance to the Lord the great Puru^a, the lord 
of the gfcat Bhutas, having two locus like feet in the form of 
all Sittvika qualities manifested in arts and Dhinoika activities. 



578 


Gary da Purdna 


O Paramefthin obeisance unto Thee. Citraketu attained 
the status of a Vidyadhara by means of this Vidya (Esoteric 
mystic knowledge). 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY8IX 

Visnu^dkarma 

Hari said : 

1 . lodra was reinstated in his position by reciting the 
Vi 9 i;iu DharmavidyS after defeating his enemies. O Mahelvara, 
I shall mention it. 

2. The syllables Om etc. must be psychically located in 
the feet, knees, thighs, belly, heart, chest, mouth and th head 
in order. 

3. (The eight syllabled mantra). ^'Oih Name 
Nariyanaya’’ can be located in the inverse order as well. Then 
Karanyasa can be made with the twelve syllabled mantra : Orh 
Name Bhagavate Visudevaya). 

4. Beginning with Pranava and ending with they are 
to be located in the knots of the fingers including the thumbs 
and the Ofikara in the chest (heart) and the entire mantra 
on the head. 

5. The Onkara of the mantra ^Orh Vi^O^ve' is to be 
located between the eyebrows and the other syllables in the 
tuft, eyes and head. This is called Mantrany&sa. 

6 . The devotee should then meditate on the great Atman 

with whose power Sesa is endowed. Hari protect me. 

May the fish manifestation protect me in waters. 

7 . May Trivikrama protect me in the sky. May Vamana 
protect me on land. May Narasirhha protect me in the 
forest. May Rama protect me on the mountain. 

8 . May the Boar manifestation protect me on the Earth* 
May N&riyaQa protect me in the firmament. May Kapila save 
me from the bondage of Karma. May Datta guard my Yogas. 



1.197.1 


579 


9« May Hayagrfva, Kumara (Xx>rd K&rttikeya) the 
protector of deities and Makaradhvaja save me. May Narada 
distract me from the worship of another deity. May Lord 
Kurma protect me in the south-west always. 

10. May Dhanvantari save me from incompatible diet. 
May Naga save me from the clutches of anger. May Yajfta 
save me from all ailments. May Vyasa protect me from the 
pitfalls of ignorance. 

11. May Buddha save me from the heretic multitude. 
May Kalki save me from sins. May Vi^nu protect me at mid* 
day. May Narayaost protect me in the morning. 

12. May the slayer of Madhu save me tn the afternoon. 
May Madhava save me in the evening. May H^tkeia protect 
me at dusk. May Janirdana protect me at dawn. 

15. May Sridhara protect me at midnight. May 
Padmanabha protect me in the small houn of the night. May 
the divine discus^ Kaumodaki (the club) and the arrows 
destroy my enemies and Rlk^asas. 

14-15. May the Sahkha and Padma protect me from 
the enemies. May Sarhga (the bow) and Garuda protect my 
intellect, sense organs, mind and vital airs. May the side orna* 
ments of the lord and the remaining form of the lord protect 
me everywhere and at all times. May Narasiihha protect me 
in the quarters and the interstices always. 

16. Whomsoever the wearer of this divine mantra sees 
with his eyes, shall be under his control, free from sins and 
ailments. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYSEVEN 

Dharwantari said: 

1. I shall explain the Giruda mantra first mentioned 
to Kafyapa by his great friend Garuda whereby this great 
Garudi ^ya dispeb poison. 



380 


Garu4^ PuribfQ 


2-3. The &ve elements of Earth, Water Fire, Wind and 
Ether are presided over by the deities* They are the presiding 
deities of the mystical diagrams* They are attained by the 
devotees of Vi^QU. The letters other than long vowels represent 
them. The deities are other than the Napuzhsakas. 

4. The six parts of the body include two calves, two arms, 
the navel and the head* The Kavaca covers the heart, head and 
the tuft with the eyes. The Astra mantra is used for Ny&sa 
which is the location in their respective seats* 

5. At the end of the realisation of every thing the K&Ia 
Vahni (Death fire) and Vayu (wind) are represented beneath. 
The sixth vowel in conjunction with the crescent moon (C and 
Anus vara) is the mystic great syllable* 

6 . The Pari and the Apari are said to be above and 
below* In all the Angas the Nyisa is to be made duly with 
Repha (the letter 'RA*) * 

7. The Nyisa is made in the heart, palms, body, ears 
and the eyes. By means of the Japa al) success can be achieved* 
The Mandala (mystical diagram) has four faces. 

8 . The Earth must be meditated upon as a spacious 
square yellow in colour and presided over by Indra* The 
zone of Vanina is in the middle. 

9*1 h At its centre is the lotus with the semicircular 
moon with sapphire splendour* This is gentle. Or an Agneya- 
roan^ala (a fiery zone) triangular in shape can be contemplated 
upon* A flaming fire with Svastika shall then be meditated 
over. Beyond tlut, a circle decorated with the central Bindu 
(point) and resembling a cut block of antimony is to be con¬ 
templated upon. Beyond this, the Vyomimrta ma^d^A to be 
thought of* It resembles waves of milk and has the splendour 
of pure crystal* It sweeps the entire universe. 

12* V&suki and SaAkhapala are stationed in the mandala 
of the Earth. Karko^a and Padmanitbba are stationed in 
the Varutia mand^ft* 

13-14* Kulika is stationed in the Agneya mapd&ld* 
Tak^ka and Mahabjaka are stationed in Vayumapd^ld- 
The five elements are to be located in the fingen beginning with 
thumb and ending with the little finger; in the usual order 



1.197.28 


581 


and in the inverse order. In the joints of fingers Jaya and 
Vijaya are to be located. 

15. The Sivasadanga mantra is to be located in the 
mouth, etc. The Hrd-mantra is to be located in the arms or 
in the fingers or in the tuft. 

16-17. The Vy&paka mantra is to be located bdbre that 
in the knotty joints of the fingers. The Bhutany&sa and other 
rites should be performed as well as Sivanga mantras located 
with Pra^ava in the beginning and Nama^ in the end. Thus 
the rule for establishing and worshipping has been explained* 

18. The mantra of the eight varieties of serpents consists 
of the first letters of their respective names, by invoking which 
they can be drawn to one's vicinity. 

19. The Paficabhuta mantras duly preceded by Oth 
Svihi when recited will draw T4rkfya to one’s presence 
fulfilling all activities. 

20-22. After performing the Karanyasa with the vowels» 
Sarira Nyisa must be performed again. He must think of Prana 
as blazing and purifying the Atman. The Blja mantra is to be 
contemplated in the act of showering nectarine downpour. 
Thus invigorating oneself and contemplating on the head the 
earth is to be located at the feet—the earth shining like molten 
gold> surrounded by the entire universe and guarded by the 
Lokapalas. 

23. The intelligent scholar shall locate this divine earth 
in his body. Beyond that the region is twice that of the Earth 
and is dark blue in colour. 

24-25. Ravi’s mandala is triangular in shape and is to be 
located between the navel and the neck. The entire Brahm&nda 
is illuminated by clusters of flames. Beyond that is the flerce 
ma^^ala of Vayu that should be contemplated havii^ the 
colour of a block of antimony and ensconced in the image 
of Self. 

26. The Vyoma (Ether) ma^d^l^ is to be contemplated 
as situated over the tuft. It is of pure crystal splendour, unlimit¬ 
ed, all pervasive and nectarine. 

27-28. After performing the Bhuta Nyasa and that of the 
N4gas witlT the mantras ending with the letter and coupl¬ 
ed with the Bindu (Nasal sound *M’}, Siva Blja must be given 



582 


Garu4c Purd^ 


and the ma^^ala muse be contemplated. The clever devotee 
must strictly follow the order in the case of the Mand^las and 
the colour should be meditated upon at the time of the rite. 

29«30. In the cases of poisoning due to stationary and 
mobile factors (animals and vegetables) Tark$ya should be con¬ 
templated as ornamented with black serpents in the feet, wings 
and beak. In the case of the malignant attack of evil planets, 
Bhutas, Pi^acas, D&kinls, Yaksas and R^ksasas, Siva should be 
located in the body after making him encircled by serpents. 

31. Thus the twofold Nyllsas have been explained for 
the serpents and the five elements. After contemplating thus 
the practice of the charm should be commenced in due order. 

32. After giving the Tritattva, the Sivatattva must be 
given above it. The Nyasa is the same in Deva and joints of 
fingers as in the body, 

33*34. After performing Deha*Nyasa fiist in the usual 
and inverse orders, the Kanda, Nala, Padma, Dharma and 
Jfiana should be worshipped with the final letters of the diffe¬ 
rent Vargas (gutturals etc.) appended with the second vowel. 
The mantra Ksaum should be located in the pericarp with 
Repha appended on the head. 

35. The Vargas arc—A*, Ka,- Ca-, Ta-, Ta-, Pa-, Ya-, 

and They are to be placed in the east, west, etc. 

Two letters each should be placed in leaves and petals, 

36. The vowels are to be located in the petals where six¬ 
teen principles ending with I^a are to be worshipped : The 
Saktis are Vama and others. The three Tattvas are to be 
located therein. 

37. The auspicious limb (Sivam Angam) should be in¬ 
voked on the head. Thereafter the Deva shall be located in the 
pericarp with all attendants and followers. 

38. The Prthiw principle shall be worshipped in the 
western leaf; the Apah (water) principles are located in the 
northern leaf; Tejas principle is to be worshipped in the southern 
leaf and Viyu principle is to be worshipped in the eastern leaf. 

39. The respective Bija as mentioned before shall be duly 
assigned in the Murtirupa (in the form of idol). ^Yam* is the 



I.197.54 


583 


Mula (root) of Vayu and should be placed in south west. The 
Bija ^Ra’ is located in the south east. 

40. The bIja *Vam’ is located in the north east and 
worshipped always. Om should be worshipped located in the 
heart. The Tanmatrils (material principles) and Bhutamatr^ 
(gross matter) are to be worshipped (Hitside the occult diagram. 

4!. The Sivahgas are to be contemplated thereafter and 
worshipped. The heart is to be worshipped in the south east 
and the head in north east. 

42. The tuft ts lobe located in the south west. The Ka» 
vaca is to be located in the north west. The Astra is to be given 
outside the diagram. The Netra (eye) is located in the north. 

43-45. The devotee shall worship the Bijas at the tip of 
the petals and the pericarp. The eight Nigas beginning with 
Ananta and ending with Kullra are located from the cast to the 
north east in order. The devotee repeating the mantras shall 
worship using the procedure separately either in the heartdotusor 
in the diagram drawn on the $late> etc. This procedure is to be 
adopted in all Nitya and Naimittika rites [Rites enjoined as 
daily duty are Nityas and special rites for special occasions are 
Naimitcikas]. 

46. The devotee shall constantly think of the Ataman as 
Kamasupa (able to assume any form he wishes), pleasing to the 
mind and sweeping the entire universe which it creates and 
annihilates. 

47*48. He must remember Bhairava who illuminates 
the entire cosmos beginning with Brahman and ending with 
the world, by means of clusters of flames, who has ten arms, 
four faces, tawny eyes, three eyes and the moon lor his crest, 
who wields the trident and who is terrific on account of the 
Curved teeth for the purpose of achievement. He must 
remember Garuda too in all activities. 

49-54. For the destruction of snakes and serpents Garud^ 
the terrible is to be remembered. His feet are placed on the 
leaves. His wings rest in the quarters. The seven heavens touch 
his chest. The cosmos comes upto his throat. All the Rudras 
ending with Isa are to be contemplated as stationed in his head. 
The three Saktii located in the matted hair of Sadiiiva identi¬ 
fied with Oaruda must be thought of. Tark^ya is the great 



584 Garu^a Purina 

Siva himself greater than the greatest and lord of the 
universe : He has therefore three cyes« He is terrific in appear* 
ance. He destroys poisonous serpents. His mouth devours every* 
thing. Garuda’s body is constituted with mantras. He is 
as blaaing as the K^ligni (Death fire) In every activity he must 
be remembered. After performing this Nyasa duly whatever 
the devotee thinks in his mind becomes possible for achievement. 
The devotee becomes Garuda himself. Ghosts, Bhutas, Yak^as, 
Nagas, Gandharvat, Rik^asas, etc. die at his very sight. Catur* 
thika and other fevers get quelled. 

Dharwantari said : 

55. X^ord Siva himself told thus to Garud^ ^nd Garud^ 
narrated this to Kajyapa. Now listen to the Vidya which 
Maheivara explained to Gaurl. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYEIGHT 

Eulogy of Tripura 

Bhairavasaid : 

1. I shall explain the Tripura Vidya, (otherwise known 
as) Nityaklinna, that accords worldy enjoyment as well as salva^* 
tion. 

OiD Hrlm come thou, O Goddess. Aiixi Hnih Hriih Rekha* 
kara^am (the delineation) Oih Hrim Kledini Bharii obeisance; 
so also with the exciter of lust. Aim Yaih YamKrlrh Va Ganare* 
khaya Hrixh Madanintare Ca (in the midst of cupid's activity} 
Aixh Hrfm Hnm Ca Niraftjaoi Vagati Madanantarekhe Khane* 
travallti Ca. Vegavati Mahfi Pretisang is to be worshipped. Oth 
Hilm Kraiih Naim Krairn Nityarii Madadrave Krlm obeisance. 
Aim Hiiih obeisance to Tripura. Orii Hrlm Krim Paicimavakt- 
ram (Western face). Oih Aim Hrixh Hririi Ca Tathottaram (the 
northern) Aiih Hrlnt Dakiipain (southern) Cordhvam Vaktram 
Tu Paicimam. Oxh Hrlm Papaya (to the noose), krirh AAku- 



L199J 


585 


iiya (to the goad). Aim Kapilaya Namah (obeisance to the 
skull). Adyam Bhayam Aim HrTrii Hrirh Ca Tathi Sirah Tathi 
Sikhiyai Kavace Aim Hrfih Kriih Astriya Pha{ (These are 
the Nyisa mantras). 

2. In the east obeisance to Kamarupa AsitAhga Bhairava. 
Obeisance to Brahmi^!. In the south obeisance to Kanda. 
Invocation to Rurubhairava and Mahcivan. 

3. Similarly, in the west obdsance to Can<;la, to KaumarT» 
In the north obeisance to Ulka and Krodha (anger), obeisance 
to Vai^o^vi. 

4. In the south east obeisance to Aghora, to Unmatta* 
bhairava, to V&rihi. In the south west obeisance to S&ra, to 
Kapalin, to Bhairava, to Mahendil. 

5. In the north west obeisance to J&Iandhara, to Bhisana, 
to Bhairava to C&mun4&. In the north-east obeisance to 
Vatuka. Sarhhara and Can^ika are to be worshipped. 

6 . Rati, Priti and Kamadeva i.e. Paheaba^a should be 
worshipped then. Devi is propitiated by contemplation, wor¬ 
ship, recitation and sacrificial offerings. 

7. The eternal Tripura worshipped in the JvalamukhT 
order removes all ailments. I shall explain the Jvalamukht 
order. She is to be worshipped at the centre. She is auspicious. 

8-10. These are to be worshipped outside the diagram:— 
Niiy^, Aruna, Madanatura, Maha Moha, Prakrti, Kalan&, Sri, 
Bharati, AkarsanI, Mahendrani, BrahmanI, Mahesi, Kaumarl, 
Vaisnavj, Varahl, Mahendn, Camunda, Aparajita, Vijaya, 
AJita, Mohinl, Tvariia, Stambhini, Jrmbhiril Kalika are to 
be worshipped outside the mystical Padma. By worshipping iti 
the Jvalamuklu order poisons will be removed. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYNINE 

Ctlifdmani 

Bhairava said : 

1. I shall explain the process of Cudima^i for the 
discrimination of go^ and bad omens* The soothsayer shall 



586 


Garv^a PurAna 


write after remembering Sun» goddess, Ga^anatha^ and 
Somadeva (Siva). 

2. As soon as he hears the Prajna Vikya (the question 
put by the consultant) he shall draw three lines horizontally, 
vertically in the form of an idol or eight separate chambers 
in the eight quarters wherein he shall indicate the symbols 
banner, etc. 

3. He shall write these in Nimamantra form (the initial 
letters) :— (1) banner (2) smoke (3) lion (4) dog (5) bull 
(6) mule (7) elephant and (8) crow. 

4. Seeing banner in the chamber of the banner prognos* 
ticates anxiety over kingdom, wealth etc. Smoke situated in the 
chamber of the banner presages anxious thought about metals 
and gain. 

5. If lion is stationed in the chamber of the banner 
acquisition of wealth, etc. is the result. Dog stationed in the 
chamber of the banner indicates worries over maid*servants, 
pleasure, etc. 

6 . Bull seen in the chamber of the banner indicates 
worries over position and gain. Seeing a mule in the chamber 
of the banner indicates misery^ pain, etc. 

7. An elephant seen in the chamber of the banner pre¬ 
sages worry over position, victory, etc. A crow stationed in the 
chamber of the banner indicates worries over pain and loss of 
wealth. 

8 . Seeing a banner in the chamber of smoke indicates 
misery first and then wealth. Seeing smoke in the chamber of 
the smoke presages quarreb and miseries. 

9. If lion is stationed in the chamber of the smoke it 
indicates mental worries and acquisition of wealth. Dog 
stationed in the chamber of smoke prognosticates victory and 
gain. 

10. Seeing a bull in the chamber of smoke presages 
acquisition of women, cows, horses, wealth etc. Seeing a mule 
in the chamber of smoke indicatessickneas and loss of wealth. 

K Gaoeia, Lord Gapai, the younger 9oa of Lord Siva. He ii 
represented In iconofraphy with the head of an elephant possessed of a single 
tusk. 



I.I99.21 


587 


11 . If elephant is seen in the chamber of smoke it indi* 
cates acquisition of kingdom, victory etc. If crow it stationed in 
the chamber of smoke it presages destruction of wealth and 
lei ngdom. 

12 Seeing banner in the chamber of the lion one can 
prognosticate acquisition of kingdom, etc. If smoke is stationed 
in the chamber of the lion it indicates acquisition of virgin^s 
wealth. 

13. If lion is stationed in the chamber of Hon it indicates 
victory and meeting with friends. Dog stationed in the chamber 
of the lion indicates worries about women and acquisition of 
village. 

14. Seeing a bull in the chamber of the lion indicates 
acquisition of house, field and gain. Seeing elephant in the 
chamber of the lion indicates ownership of a village. 

15. Seeing an elephant in the chamber of the lion indi¬ 
cates health, longevity, happiness, etc. If crow is stationed In 
the chamber of the lion it indicates acquisition of virgin’s grains, 
good qualities. 

16. Seeing a banner in the chamber of a dog indicates 
worries of the position, pleasure, etc. Smoke stationed in the 
chamber of the dog iiidicates quarrels and failure in business. 

17. If lion is stationed in the chamber of the dog it indi¬ 
cates successful achievement in business. If dog is stationed in 
the chamber of the dog it will result in loss of wealth. 

18. Seeing a bull in the chamber of the dog the patient 
will be free from sickness. Seeing a mule in the chamber of the 
dog there is fear of quarrel 

19. Seeing an elephant in the chamber of the dog 
indicates a re^union with sons and wife. If a crow is stationed 
in the chamber of the dog it indicates affliction and ruin of the 
family. 

20. Seeing a banner in the chamber of the bull indicates 
honour in the royal court, pleasure etc. If smoke is stationed 
in the chamber of the bull it indicates royal favour and 
happiness. 

21. If the Hon is stationed in the chamber of the bull it 
indicate all round fortune, wealth, etc. If dog is stationed in the 
chamber of the bull it augun strength, splendour and love* 



588 


Garu^a PurSija 


22 • Seeing a bull in the chamber of the bull indicates 
fame, satisfaction, pleasure, etc* Seeing a mule in the chamber 
of the bull indicates great gain, etc. 

23. Seeing an elephant in the chamber of the bull 
indicates acquisition of women and elephants. If a crow is 
stationed in the chamber of the bull it indicates gain of good 
position and honour. 

24. Seeing banner in the chamber of the mule indicates 
illness, sorrow, etc« If smoke is stationed in the chamber of the 
mule it indicates fear from thieves. 

25. If Kon is stationed in the chamber of the mule it 
indicates honour, fame, vicKory, etc. If dog is stationed in the 
chamber of the mule, it indicates torment and loss of wealth. 

26* Seeing a bull in the chamber of the mule indicates 
pleasure and reunion with the beloved. Seeing a mule in the 
chamber of the misery, affliction can be prognosticated. 

27* Seeing an elephant in the chamber of the mule 
indicates pleasure, acquisition of sons, etc. If crow is stationed 
in the chamber of the mule it indicates quarrel and sickness. 

28. Seeing a banner in the chamber of the elephant 
indicates acquisition of women, victory, splendour, happiness, 
etc. If smoke is stationed in (he chamber of the elephant it 
indicates acquisition of wealth and grain. 

29* If lion is stationed in the chamber of the elephant it 
indicates victory and achievement of success. If dog is station¬ 
ed in the chamber of the elephant it indicates health, happiness 
and prosperity. 

30. Seeing a bull in the chamber of the elephant 
indicates royal honour, wealth, etc. Seeing a mule in the 
chamber of the elephant indicates misery first and pleasure 
afterwards. 

31. Seeing elephant in the chamber of the elephapt 
indicates fields, grains, happiness etc. If crow is stationed in 
the chamber of the elephant it indicates acquisition of wealth 
and grains. 

32. Seeing banner in the chamber of the crow indicates 
failure in ventures. If smoke is stationed in the chamber of 
the crow it indicates involvement in quarrels and misery. 



1.200.5 


589 


33. If lion is stationed in the chamber of the crow it 
indicates quart els and misery. If dog is stationed in the 
chamber of the crow it indicates great fear and split in the 
house. 

34. Seeing a bull in the chamber of the crow indicates 
fall from position, terror, etc. Seeing a mule in the chamber of 
the crow indicates loss of wealth and defeat. 

35. Seeing an elephant in the chamber of the crow, 
indicates wealth, fame, etc. If a crow is stationed in the 
chamber of the crow it indicates a visit to a foreign land. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED 

Distases 


Bhairava said : 

1. O Goddess ! I shall explain the subjugation of V^yu. 
This will indicate success or failure as the case may be. Vayu, 
Agni, Jala and Sakra^ are the four auspicious things. 

2. Vayu stationed in the right and left sides flows in 
various directions. If it takes an upward course it is designated 
Agni. If it takes a downward course it is designated 
Varui^ (or Jala). 

3. Mahendra (or Sakia) is the stationary Vayu 
taking the middle course. In the bright half of the lunar 
month it is stationed in the left side. In the dark half it is 
stationed in the right side. Once it rises it follows the same 
course for three days and changes thereafter. 

4-5. At the beginning of a fortnight It flows upwards 
and then comes down. If iu rise is along the sun’s path and 
its setting is along the moon’s, all the good qualities increase, 
otherwise there is obstruction. There are sixteen periods of 
transit in the course of a day and night, O bright-faced lady ! 

1. Indra, lord of the gods but here U means wrind. 



590 


Garuia Pwrina 


6. At the close of a period of an hour and a half when 
the V&yu changes its course there is a likelihood of a man 
losing his normal health. 

7*9. If the course of the Vayu is in the right side that 
period is good for taking food or indulging in sexual intercourse 
Wielding a sword, going to the battle out of one’s own will, etc. 
are to be undertaken when Viyu is taking its leftward course. 
When Viyu is stationary or the course is favourable asking 
questions (study, seeking knowledge, etc.) is good. When the 
VAyu is in the Mihendra state, no evil befalls him. In the 
atmosphere if the V&yu takes a right hand course there is 
drought. If it takes a leftward course there will be rain. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND ONE 

Midxcal trealment of korsos and tUphants 

Dhanvantari said : 

* 

1-4. I shall explain the Ayurveda of horses wherein all 
things connected with them and their treatment arc mentioned 
in detail. There are many types of horses fit only to be set aside 
They are :—^K&katuod^ (crow-lipped), (black- 

tongued), Rlqisya (bear-faced), U?nataluka (hot-palated), 
Kar&la (fierce looking) Ifinadanta (Deficient or lacking in 
teeth), Srngi, (horned), Viraladantaka (few-toothed), Ekanda 
(single -testicled), jatindakaftcuka (Born with Scrotal tumour), 
Dvikhuri-clcft hoofed), Stani (Tcated), Maijirapida (cat-foot¬ 
ed),Vyaghribha (resembling tigers), Kufthavidradhisannibha 
appearing as if affected by Kus(ha and tumours), Yamaja 
(Twin-bom), Vamana (diminutive in size), MArjara- 
loana (cat-eyed) and Kapilocaiui (monkey-eyed). The first 
horse is the Turkish (Turu^kaja). The middling is five 
hastas tall and the lowest, three hastas tall. 

5. Those horses whose limbs are not short, whose ears 
are short and whose hue is of a mixture of many colours lightly 
shaded live long and are not afflicted. 



I.I01.17 


591 


6*7, Ways of guarding against evil are the worship of 
Revanta, sacrificial offerings and feeding of brahmins. A com* 
pound of Sarala, leaves ofNimba, Guggulu, Sar?apa» Tila, Vac*, 
and Hingu with butter should be tied round the neck of a horse* 
Ulcers affecting horses are of two types (1) due to extraneous 
causes (2) due to derangement of humours. 

8. Vataja type of ulcers is marked by delayed suppura* 
tion, the Kaphaja ulcen suppurate quickly, the piltaja type of 
ulcers gives a burning sensation at the throat and ulcers due 
to impure blood do not pain much. 

9-10, What we call due to extraneous causes is the 
wound caused by weapons, elc. In order to wash off the impu-^ 
rjtiesin the wounds and ulcers the following compound tsused: 
Roots of Eranda, two shoots of Haridr*, Citraka, Viivabhejaja^ 
and Rasona^ or Saindhava well ground with butter milk and 
sour gruel. Tila, fried grain flour pasted with curd and salt or a 
paste of Nimba leaves and ball of rice applied over a wound 
purifles and heals it. 

11-13. A compound of powdered Patola, Nimba leaves, 
Vaca, Citraka, Pippall SfAgavera given to the horse with water 
for a drink destroys worms, mucous discharges, intoxication and 
deranged V*yu. If there is cutaneous affection the hone must 
be bled and a decoction of PAmba leaves, Panola, Triphala and 
Khadira m\'4t be given to the horse. 

14. Application of mustard oil is effective in Kusthaswiih 
ulcers. A decoction of Laiuna, etc. administered as a drink 
alleviates it. 

In certain afflictions when errhines become neces¬ 
sary either the juice of Matuluhga or that of Maths! should be 
used for that purpose. The first day’s dosage is two Palam 
weight. Every day it has to be increased by a Pala. The maxi¬ 
mum for a first class hone is dghteen Palas. In the middling it 
is fourteen and for the lowest class of horse it is eight 
Pala weight. Errhines are not to be administered in Autumn or 
summer. 

1. Zirqpber ofBcinsle. 

2. AIQum lativum. 



592 


Gatu^c Puf&f^a 


18. In aVataja type of disease the medium is oil in com* 
bination with sugar, butter and milk. In a Kaphaja type Vyofa 
with mustard oil must be the medium. In a pittaja ailment 
with water Triphala can be used as the medium. 

19. A horse regularly fed on $a^pka Salt grains and milk 
will never come to a state of being condemned. A go!den 
coloured horse or one of the complexion of ripe Jambu fruit is 
never to be condemned. 

20. A horse slightly injured should be given Guggulu 
and fed on milk pudding. It will be immediately relieved and 
be normal. 

21. In a V&taja ailment the diet of a horse is Sali grains 
and milk. In a Pittaja ailment a Kar>a of gravy with Mudga 
soup, honey and butter shall be given. 

22. In Kaphaja diseases mudga or Kulattha can be given. 
If the horse is atfected with deafness and deranged kapha 
it should be fed with pungent and bitter articles of diet. If the 
ailment is of Trido^ origin Guggulu is to be administered 
along with its mouthfuls (of grass, etc). 

23-24. In all ailments Durvi should be given along with 
other grasses. On the first day a Pala weight of it is to be given. 
Increasing it by a Kai>a every day, up to five Palas per day can 
be given. In drinks or diet eight Palas should be the maximum 
limit, in the middling it is sixty and in the lowest type it 
is forty. 

25-26. If the horse is affected by Ku^^ha, ulcers, or lame¬ 
ness it shall be administered with the decoction of Triphala; 
if it is affected by impaired digestion or tumour it shall be ad¬ 
ministered with cow’s urine. If it is affected by Vatapiua or 
ulcers it is administered with cow’s milk and butter; for lean 
horses the diet shall be supplemented by meat. 

27. In the mornings during Autumn and summer horses 
should be given five Palas of well powdered Guducl with butter. 

28. This quells ailment, nourishes, increases strength and 
splendour. It can be given alone or in combination with some 
Alkali. 

29. Along with the administration of Gudud, four palas (in 
the case of the middling) and three palas (in the case of lowest 
type of horse) of^tavart and Aivagandha also must be given. 



M01.39 


593 


30. When suddenly the horses assume uniformity in 
colour and features or die together it must be immediately con* 
sidered as an epidemic. 

31. Sacrificing Horses, giving oblations or feeding of 
Brahmins may cause their suppression. Or Harltakikalpa can 
be resorted to. 

32. HaritakI is soaked in cow's urine and Taila (oil) and 
salt is added. On the first day, five such Haritakls are given. 
Every day the dosage is increased by five Haritakis till the maxi* 
mum of hundred in the case of the best horse, eighty in middling 
and sixty in the least one is reached. 

33. 1 shall now explain Gajiyurveda (treatment etc. of 
elephanu). The medical decoctions etc. mentioned before arc 
efficacious in elephants too. The dosage is four times of that of 
a horse. All ailments can thus be cured. 

34. In an epidemic among elephants the alleviation i»by 
means of a pacifying rite (Santi Karma)' by the worship of 
gods and brahmins and the gift of a Kapila (pale*brown or 
tawny) cow. 

35. The physician must observe fast and tic a consecrat¬ 
ed garland round the tusks of ibc elephant along with Vac4 
and Siddirthaka drugs equally consecrated. 

36. The worship of Sun, Siva, Durga, Sri and Vin>n 
protects the elephant. Oblations must be given to Bhutas. The 
elephant must be bathed with four pilchcrfuls of water. 

37. The diet of the elephant must be consecrated with 
mantras. The elephant must be smeared with holy ashes. The 
pure auspicious propitiation of the Bhutas will protect the 
elephant. 

38-39. A pungent decoction of Triphala, Paficakola, 
Dasamula, Vidangaka, Sativari, Nimba, Vasaka, and 

Kim^uka* is very efficacious in quelling all ailments of an ele¬ 
phant. Thus I have summarised what is mentioned in the two 
Ayuiveda treatises (that of horses and that of elephants). 


1. 0^rvanc«3 or crremonici calculated <0 remove caJimiucs. 

2. Bute* monotperma. 



594 


Garu4^ Purdna 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWO 

Dtsi4isis 


Hart said: 

L O Siva, a single fresh root of punarnava or api*' 
m&rga, when inserted into the vagina of a womaiii is capable 
of removing the local pain. It can also alleviate the young 
mother's pain experienced during delivery. 

2. The roots of Bhumi^Kti^mioda alongwith the powder 
of SilP/ if taken with miik for a week, increase the milk in 
women’s breasts. 

3« O Siva, the paste of roots of Indra-varuoi* removes 
the pain in female*breasts. It may be cooked in butter and a 
bread be prepared out of it which, when eaten, will remove 
the vaginal pains, O Siva. 

4. If the vagina has come out, then apply to it the paste 
of K&raveila’ roots; it will attain its natural position, there is 
no doubt about it. 

5. The roots of NilP and Pofola* when pasted into a 
solution of tila and butter and applied to (the patient), remove 
the Jv&]&*gardabha* disease. 

6. O Rudra, the roots of PaflUi,^ when ground in the 
scum of boiled rice and drunk, remove papa*roga.^ Kustha. 
roots taken in the same way also act likewise* 

7. The solution of Vksya, when drunk with honey, 
relieves the internal itching pain experienced during the papa« 
roga, O Siva* 

8. Equal quantity of butter and lak^a, when drunk with 
milk, cure pradara,^ there is no doubt in this. 

3 • Vjiriant 

2. Citrullui'colocynthif. 

3. Mocn^dica chartAtia. 

4. lodiao. 

5. Tricbotasithcs Diecca. 

8. A skin diseattf. 

7. Clypea HernamdifoUa. 

8. ^rhapi small ^>oz {SSBD p. 381) 

9. Leucorrboea. 



1.202.23 


595 


9-10» O Sivd, the powder of Dvijaya$ti and Trikatuka 
when drunk with the decoction of sesame^ removes women’s 
Raktagulma; and U a good emana^ogue for young ladies O 
Siva. 


11. The bulbs of Red Lotus, when drunk with sugar and 
sesame, cure abortion in women. The flow of blood can be 
stopped with the help of cold water. 

12-13. O Rudra, a decoction ofKaftjiki, Sarapunkha, 
Hihgu and rock-salt hastens the delivery in women. If the roots 
of Mituluhga arc tied to the waistt they quicken the delivery. 

14. If, after pronouncing the name of the pregnant 
woman, the roots of Apimarga arc taken out fully, then a 
son will be bom. If broken, a daughter will be born. 

15. If the roots of Apamirga are placed on the head ot 
the pregnant woman; the pain in her embryo will disappear, 
there is no doubt about it. 

16. O Siva, if the vagina is fllled with Karpura, Madana- 
phala and Madhuka, it will be good even for that of an old 
woman, what to speak of the young ladies. 

17. If a tilaka of Gorocana is applied on the forehead 
of a child and he is made to drink kuftha with sugar, he will 
be free from the fear of poison, ghosts, planets and diseases, 
O Siva. 


18 Constant wearing of Sankhanabhi, Vaci, Kustha 
and iron by children, protects them against children’s ailments, 
O Siva. 


19*20. If a man drinks the powders of Pald^a, Vidahga 
and Amalaka with honey and cow’s butter, he %viU instantly be¬ 
come highly intelligent and if he drinks the same continuously 
for a month, he may even win old age and death, Q 
Mahadeva. 


21. O Rudra, if one takes the seeds of Paliia alongwith 
butter, sesame and honey for one full week, then old age 
disappears. 

22. If a man takes the powder of Amalaka alongwith 
honey, oil and butter continuously for one month, he will 
become young and master of speech, O Rudra. 

23. O Siva, if the powders of Siva and Amalaka are 


1. Perhapi haritM ( CVDB, p. 400). 



596 Garu4^ PuriUui 

taken alongwith honey or water every morning, they give 
strength to the nasal parti, 

24. If a man takes every morning the powder of Kusjha 
alongwith butter and honey, he will possess virtually a fragrant 
body and may live for one thousand years. 

25-26. When the seeds of Maia, split and without husk, 
are soaked dry in butter and boiled in milk, and are taken by a 
man alongwith honey, butter and milk, he will be able tosatisfy 
hundred women from that very moment, O Mahideva, there 
is no doubt about it. 

27. Mercury is made suitable with the help of sulphur 
and castor oil. This mercury gives strength when taken. 

28. When milk, in which the seeds of huskless Ma$a and 
£imbl have been cooked, is drunk alongwith the oil of Apa- 
m&rga, it makes one capable of satisfying a hundred women. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THREE 

Diswes 


Hari said : 

1. To a cow, who is not fond of her calf, her own milk 
should be given mixed with salt^ the calf will be loved by her. 

2. If a dog’s bone is tied to the neck of a cow or a 
buffalo; the germs from their bodies will be shed off, there is 
no doubt about it 

3. By making the cattle eat the roots of Guhja, their 
horns are cast ofL 

4. The juice of V^u^-phala.^ pressed with hands and 
applied to the biped or the quadruped makes their germs 
shed off, O Siva. 

5. O Rudra, if the powder of Jaya is filled in the 
wounds, they are healed up. If the urine of elephant is drunk 
by cows or bufialoet, their ailments are cured. 


1. Crataeva ourvaU. 



L204.5 


597 


6. If the oxen drink the powders of Masura and ^\i 
pounded in whey and mixed in the milk of a cow or a buffalo^ 
it will be beneficent to them. 

7. If the leaves of Sarapunkha are administered with 
salt, they cure the disease called Vari-sphota in the manes 
of horses* 

8. O Hara, when the leaves of Ghrta-kumari are admi* 
nistered alongwith salt^ they cure the itches in the manes of 
horses. 

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FOUR 

Me{lmncl dmgs 

S&ta said: 

h Thus Dhanvantari explained to Suiruta the science of 
Ayurveda (medicine). I shall now mention the diflTerent names 
of drugs in brief. 

2. Sthira, Vidwgandha, Salapart^I and Aihfumati are 
the names of Desmodium Gangeticbm. lahgali, Kalasi, Krosju- 
puccha and Guhi (MucunaPruriens). 

3. Varsabhu and Punamava—[Spreading hogweed— 
Boerhnaria Diffusa] Kathilya and Karu^ (Hairy mordica 
Momardica Charantea) 

Eranda, Urubuka, Amarda, ) Castor seed Riconus comam- 
Vardhamanaka ) nb. 

4. Jha$a, Nagabali — Sida Spinosa. 

Svadaih?{rai Gok|ura — Tygo phylleac Tribulus 

terestris. 

Satavaii, Vara, Bhiru ) As paragus Racemosus. 
Pivari, Indivari, Van ) 

5. Vyaghrij Brhatl, Kr$pa, ) Solanum Janthocarpum 
Ha ihsapadl, Madhuirava } 

Dhamani, KaQtakiri, SimhI ) 

K$udrap.Nidigdhik& ) 



598 


Caruia 


6. Vr^ciki, Tryanirti, Kill 
VUaghm, Sarpadam^jrtka, 
Marka (I, Atmagu pta, 
Ar$eyl» Kapikacchuk^ 

7. Mudgaparm, K^udrasahii 
Mk^apar^l, Mahisah^ 
Nyagrodha, Va^a 
Aivattha» Kapila 

8. Plak^a, Gardabhipd^ 

Parkapf Kapitana 
Partha, Kakubha^ Dhanvi 
Arjuna and ail Arjuna’s 
names 

9. Nandivfk^ai PrarohT, Pusti< 
kari Vaftjula, Vetasa 
Bhall&taka, Avu^kara 

10. Lodhra, Saravaka, 
Dhfsia, Tirifa 

Mahijambu, Brhacphala 
Balaphala (Second Variety) 

11. Niideyi, Jalajambu 
(Third Variety) 

Kana, Kfsnopaloifid Saundl, 
Magadhika, 

12. Pippal! PippaBmula, 

Granthika Osapa, Marica 
Sunthi, Visva, Mahati^dha 

13. Vyo$a, Katutraya, 

Tryusa^a Langall^ Halini, 

Sreyasi, Gajapippali 

14. Trayantl, Trayama^ 

Uua, Suvaha 

Gitraka^ Sikhi, Vahni all 

names of fire 

15 $a4grantha, Ugr&, Vaca 
Sveta, Haimavatf 
Ku^ja» Sakra 

Vattaka, Girimalliki 


) Mucuna Pruriens. 

) 

) 

) 

— Phaseolas Trilobus. 

— Ternamuns Labialis. 

— Banyan Tree. 

— Ficus Religiosa. 

) Thaspesia Pa hulnea. 

) 

) Farroinalia Arjuna. 

) 

) 

— a species of Fig. 

— Calamus rotong. 

— Semecarpus Anacardium. 

) Symplocas Racemosa. 

) 

) Euginea Jambolana. 

) 

) Wild Jamboline. 

) 

) I^per Longum. 

) 

— I^per officinaruim. 

— Piper Nigrum. 

— dry ginger. 

— (The three above together), 
) Pothes officinalis. 

) 

) Thalictrum Faliolosum a 
} variety of the above. 

) Plumbago Zeylanica. 

) 

) Sweet flag. 

) 

) Wrightia Anti*dytenterica 

) 



1.204.26 


399 


16. Kalinga, Indrayava, 
Aris^ 

Mustaka, KauncI, Hare^uka 
and all names of cloud 

17. Eli. Bahula 
Suk$maUa, Trufi 

Padma, Bharhp, KanjI, Bra- 
hmanaya9(tki 

18. Murva, Madhurasa, 
Tejanl, Tiktavalliki 

Mahanimba, Bfhannimba 
Dipyaka, Yamanika 

19. Vi^anga, Krimiiatru^ 
Rimat^a, Hingu 

Ajiji, Jlraka 
Kiravi) Upakuficiki 

20. Katuka, Tikta, Katuka 
rohi^ Tagara, Nata, Vabra> 

Coca, Tvaca, VariAgaka 

21. U(Ucya, Bilaka, Hribera 
and all names of water 

Patraka and names of leaves 
Coraka and names of thieves 

22. Hemabha, Nagakesara 
atid all names of elephants 

Asrk, Kuihkuma, Kaimira, 
Vahlika 

23. Aya]>, Loha 

Pura, Kutanafa, Mahi^k^a, 
Palanka^i 

24. Raimari, Ka^phala^ Bri- 
pari^ Sallaki, Gajabhak^ya, 

Patn, Surabhii Bravas 

25. Dhitri, AmalakI 
Ak^, Vibhitaka 

Paihyi, Abbay a, Pu tana 

Harltald 

20* Triphala, Phalatrika 


) seeds of the above. 

) 

) Mariscus'Cyprus. 

) 

— Cardamom 

— Smaller Cardamom. 

) C lerodendr on, Siphonan* 

) thus. 

) Sanseveria Zeylanica. 

) 

) Ptychotis. 

) 

) Embelia Ribus. 

) 

— Cummin Seeds. 

— Nigella Sativa 

— Black Hellibore. 

) Cinnamon bark* 

) 

) Pavonia Odorata. 

) 

} Lour us Cassia. 

) 

) Mesua Ferrea. 

) 

) Saffron. 

) 

— Iron filings. 

) Kutannat. 

) 

— Myrica Sapida. 

) Bos Wellia Serrata. 

) 

— Emblic Myrobalans* 

— Terminalia Belirica. 

) Indian Myrobalani. 

) 

The three above together. 



Gcrud^ Pur^iiyi 


600 

Udaklrya» Dlrghvrnta ) KarafljL 

KaraAja ) Liquorice root. 

27. Ya»ti» Ya?fy4hvaya, ) 

Madhuka, Madhuyasjika ) Woodfordia floribondia. 
Dhatakf, Tamraparp!^ ) 

SamaAgdi Kufljara ) White Sandalwood. 

28. Sita, Malayaja, Sita } 

Goflrsa, Sitacandana ) Red Sandal wood. 
Raktacandana ) 

29. Kakoll, Vira» Vayasya ) 

Arkapufpika ) Rhus Succedania. 

Sfngl, Karkafairngl, Mahi* ) 

ghofi ) Manna of Bamboo. 

30. Tugak^lri, Snbh4, Virhn ) 

Vaihialocana ) Vitii Vinifera (grapes) 

Mrdvlka, Drak^, Gostanika — 

31. Uilra, Mrnala, Sevya^ ) Juncus odoratus. 

Lamajjaka ) 

S4ra, Gopavalll, Gopi, Bhadra — Hemidesmui Indicus. 

32. DantI, Ka)ahka{cri — Gascinium Fenestratum. 
Daruniii Haridra, Rajani, ) Turmeric* 

Pitikaand all names of night) 

33. VrksadanI, Chinnaruha, ) Tinaspora Cordifolia. 

Nilavalll, Rasamrta ) 

Vasuko^a, Vajira^ Kampilla — Polanisia Icosundra. 

34. Pasanabhedaka, Arista ) Coleus Amboinicus. 
Ajmabhit> Kuttabhedaka ) 

Ghanfaka, Suskaka, Vaca, ) Pentaptera tomentosa. 
Sucaka } 

35. Surasa, Bijaka, Pitasala — Indian Kinotree. 
Vajravfksa, Mahavrksa ) Uphorbia Neralfolia. 

Snuh!^ Sruk, Sudha, Guda } 

36. Tulaai, Surasa, Upastha — Holy basil 
Kutheraka, Arjunaka, Par^^ ) Assinium BajiUcum 

Saugandhiparnika ) 

37. NIla» Sindhuvara, Nir* ) Vitex trifolium, 
gundl Sugandhkia, Sugan* ) 

dhiparni Vksanth Kulaja ) 

38. Killyaka, PitakifthaKataka— Yellow Sandalwood. 



L204.48 


601 


Gayatn, Khadira, Kandara — Acacia Catechu* 

39. Indivara, KuvalayaPadma, ) Lotus* 
hniotpala, Saugaodhika, ) 

Satadala, Abja, Kamata ) 

40. AjavarM, Uija — Shoria Robusta. 

Vajikarna, ASvakarna — Indian Sal tree. 

Sle^mataka, $elu» Bahuvara ) Cordya Myxa with narrow 

) leaves* 

41. Sunandaka, Kakud, ) Andropogon citratus. 
Bhadra Chatriki^ Cha- ) 

trasaihjftaka, all names of ) 
umbrella ) 

Kabari, Kumbhaka, Dhr^ta, ) 

K?udvidha, Dhanakn* ) 

42. Kr$n&rjaka Kar&la^ ) 

Kitmamana ) 

PracI, Bala» Nadtkrinta ) Leea Hvha. 

Kakajadgha, V&yau ) 

43. Musikapan^i, Bhramant!, ) Croton Polyandrum. 

Akhuparniki ) 

Visamu^ti, Dravanam, Kesa* ) Melia Asendarach. 

mu9ti ) 

44. Kirrilth!» Ka^ukl — Black hellebore. 

Dantaka^ Amlavetasa — Sorrcl-Acido Zeyfolia. 

Aivattha» Bahupacra Bhu- ) Phyllanthus hiruri. 

Amalak! ) 

45. Arusaka, Patrasuka, Kslri, ) Minronsopia Hexenbra. 

Rajadana ) 

Mahapatra, Dadima, Karaka — Pomegranate, 

46. Masuri, Vidali, Saspa ) Ipomca Tarpethuro. 
Kantakakhya, Mafaas- ) 

yama Vfksapadi ) 

47. Vidya, Kumblii, Nikum- ) 
bha, Tribhangi, Triputf ) 

Trivft. ) 

Saptali, Yavatikta, Carma, ) Origaum Vulgaris. 

Carijiakasa ) 

48. SahkhinL Sukumari, ) Kalmegh. 

Tiktaksi Aksiplluka ) 



602 


Garuifa Purd$a 


GavAksI, Amfta, Sveta Giri- 
karni, Gavadam 
49. KampUlaka, Raktanga, 
Gu^d^i Rocantka 
Hemak$!rl 

Oaun» Kaladugdhika 
50*51. Gangeruki, Nagabala 
Vi^ala, Indravarum 
Tarksya Sail a, AAjana Rasifl* 
jana 

Mocarasa, S al maiiniry asa 

Pratyak - pu$pi, Khari, 
Apamirga, Mayuraka 

52. Sidihksya, Vr^^i Va$ik 
Ataru$aka 

Jlvaka, JIvaiaka, Sa)! 
Karbura 

53. Ka(phala, Somavrk^t» 
Agnigandha, Sugandhiki 

Satanga» Satapuspa, Misi 
Madhurika 

54. Pu^kara, Puskaramula 
Yasa, Dhanvayiisa, Dub* 

sparia^ Duratabha 

55. Vakud, SoznarajI 

Somavalli 

Markara^ Kejaraja Bhr^arija 
56<*57. Edagaja, Cakramarda 
Surangi, Tagara, Soay u 
Kalanaia, VayasI, Maha- 
kala» Vela, Tandullya, 
Ghanastana 

Ik^vaku, Tiktatumbi Tikta* 
labu 

58-59. Dhamargava, Ko^takli 
Y&minl 

Vidyut, Krtabhedana, Jimu* 
taka, Khuddaka, D^ati- 
daka 


) Colocynth. 

) 

) Melloctus Philliplnesis. 

) 

— Yellow variety Phillipinesis. 

— Black Phillipinesis. 

— Side Spinosa. 

— Colocynth. 

) Extract of Indian Barbary. 

) 

— Bonabax Malabaricum. 

) Achyranthus Aspera. 

) 

) Adhatoda Vasaca. 

) 

) Curcoma Gedoavia. 

) 

) Myrica Sapida. 

) 

) Dill seed Aurthum gravey- 
) leus. 

— Alpotaxis auriculata. 

) Alhagimaurorun Fc^onia 
) Arabica. 

— Serratula Anthelmintlca. 

) Wedelia Calendulacea. 

— Cassiatora. 

) Leeia Hista (?) 

) 

) 

) 

) Bottle gourd. 

) 

} LaSu Aegyptiaca. 

) 

) A variety of the above. 

) 

) 



L204.70 


603 


Grdhradana, Grdhranakh! 
H iiigu kikada nl 

60. A^variy Asvamaraka 
Kara VI ra 

Sindhu» Saindhava, SindhuU 
tha^ Mapimantlia 

6U62. Ksara, Yavagraja 
Yavak^ra 

Sarjika, Sarjikik^ara, Kiiaia, 
Pu$pakansa Netrabhe^aja 
DhalukaS, Tsakali 

63. Sauri^fHmrttikikfirai 
Kik^, Pankaparpafi, 
Sam&k^i kidh4tU|T&pya, 
T&pyu(thasambhava 

64. Sila, ManatilUa, Natpal! 
kulafl 

A Earn, Manas talaka» Harit&U 

65. Gandhaka^Gandhapa^ana, 
Rasa, Parada 

Tamra, Aud umbara, 1 va 

Mlecchamukha 

66*67. Adrisara, Ayas, Tik$Qa 
Lohaka 

Maksika, Madhu, Ksaudra 
Pu$parasa 

Jycstha 

KaAjika, Sauwaka Sita, 
Sitopala, Mats) a^d^ ^ar- 
kara 

68. Trisugandhi, Trijataka 

Caturjataka 

69. PaAcakola 

70. Priyangu, Kanguka 

Xoradu^, Kodrava 


) Caparis Sepiaria. 

) 

) Sweet Scented Oleander 
) Nerrium Odorum. 

) Rock Salt. 

) 

— Carbonate of Potash Barilla. 

) 

) Green Sulphate of iron, 

) 

) 

) Iron pyrites. 

) 

) 

) 

) Red sulphate of Arsenic. 

) 

— Tri-sulphide of Arsenic. 

) Sulpher. 

) 

) Mercury Copper; 

) 

} Iron» steel. 

) 

) Honey. 

) 

— Watery gruel. 

— Sour gruel. 

) Sugar. 

) 

) Cinnamon, Cardamom and 
) Cassia (equal parts). 

) The above with Mtsua 
) FeiTea« 

) Five drugs Pippali, Pippall- 
) mula, Cavya, Citraka 

} and Nagara. 

— Panicum Stalicum. 

— Paspalum Scroltculatuxp* 



604 


GaTu4a PurSfj^a 


Tripura, Kalapa 

Xidi^aka 

71-72. Sadna, Vartula, Venu 
Picuka, Pit tala» Ak^ Vt^la- 
padaka^ Kar^a Suvari[ia^ 
Kavalagraha 
Pal&rdha, Sukti 

73. Pala, Bilva, Mu^fi 
Prasrii 

Aftjali^ Kudava 

74. As(ainana, Mana 
Prastha 

Adhaka 

75. Kaiiisyapitra, Dropa 
TuU 

Bhara 

76. The measurements and 
for solid matters. In liquids thi 
double. 


) Lathyrus Sativus. 

) 

— Pisum Sativium. 

) A weight of sixteen Ma^as. 

) 

) 

— Half a Pala. 

— One Pala. 

) Two Palas. 

— Four Palas. 

— Eight Palas. 

) Four Kudavas. 

) Four Prasthas. 

) Four Adhakas. 

) Hundred Palas. 

— Twenty Palas. 

weights thus mentioned are 
se measures should be taken as 


77. Bhadradaru^ Devak^|ha ) Pinus Deodara. 

Daru» Devadaruka ) 

KuHha, Amaya — Drug Ku$tha. 

Marhsi, Naiad amfana — 

78. Sahkha, Suktinakha, Sahkhi — Couch. 


Vyaghri, Vyaghranaklia — Tiger’s claw. 

Pura^ Palahkasa, Mahlsak^, ) Bdellium. 

Guggulu ) 

79. Rasa, Gandharasa, Vola — Myrrh. 
Saija, Sarjarasa — Resin. 

Priyangu, Phalini Syama; } See ante. 
Gaurikanta ) 


80. Karafija, Naktamala, } Pongamia glabra. 
Putika, Cirabilvaka 

Sigru, Sobhahjana Jflana- } Horse-radish. 
xnkndi ) 

81. Jaya» Jayanti, SaranI Nir- ) See before; 

gundi) Sindh uviraka ) 

Morafa, Plluparpi — See before. 

Tundi) Tupdikerika — See before* 



1.205.4 


60S 


82. Madaoa, G&lava, Bodha, 
Gho^, Gho{! 

Caturai^la, Samp&ka Vya- 
dhighata 

83. Aragvadha, Rijavrk^ 
Raivata Daa^aki^ Adtikti, 

Karifaki Vikanka^ 

84*85. Nimba^ Arista 
Pa^la, Ko]aka 
Vayastha^ VUva, Chinni 
Cbinnarubi, Amrti 
Vatskdani, Gudud 
Kiri tat iktaka, Bhuntmba 
K&odatiktaka 


) Randia Denmetorum« 

) 

) Kamila. 

} 

— Cassia Fistula 

) Flacourtia Romon tchi. 

) 

— Mclio Azadirachta. 

} Tinaspora Cordifolia. 

) 

) 

) Agrathotes Chirayta. 

)• 


S&ta said x 

86. O Hari» these are the names of drugs obtained in 
the forest, O Saunaka» now 1 shall mention Grammar as 
narrated by Kumira Kirttikeya. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIVE 


GranmaT 

KtanAra said : 

!. O Katyayana, I shall explain grammar in brief for a 
proper understanding of the formation of words (from bases) 
and to help children to learn the derivatives. 

2, Words are either Subantaa or Tihantas. (Substan¬ 
tives or verbs). *Sups* are the seven case endings. Su, Au, 
Jas are the terminations in the nominative and vocative. The 
base is called Pritipadika. 

3, A Pratipadika must be a meaningful word devoid of 
Dhatu and Pratyaya (root and termination). 

4, *Am, AU| ^ are the terminadons in the Accusative 
case. What is done as Karma (object). In the object 



606 Garu^a Purd$a 

Accusative case is to be xised. So also when the words Antara 
and Antare^a are used. 

5. Ti, Bhyim, Bhis are the terminations in the Instru* 
mental case. They are to be added to the instrument or agent. 
That through which something is done is called Karapa, Karta 
is he who does it. 

6. Ne, Bhyim, Bhyas are the terminations in the Dative 
case. They are to be used to Samprad&na Kiraka. Sampra* 
d&na is he to whom something is desired to be given, something 
is owed or something it appealing. 

7. Nasi, Bhyam, Bhyas are the terminations in the 
Ablative case. They are to be used with ApidinaK&raka. 
That from which something moves a%vay, or is taken off, or 
drawn, something is feared is called Apid&na. 

8. Nas, 0$, Am are the terminations in the Genitive 
case. They are to be added to the chief in the relationship of 
possession. Ni, Os, Sup are the terminations in the locative 
case. They are to be added to the Adhikarana (the base). 

9. Adhkra (support) is Adhikarana. When verbs 
implying protection are used, Ablative is used. What is desired 
and what is disliked are abo called Ap&dinaka (i.e. Ablative 
is used). 

10. Ablative is to be used when Pari, Apa and An, Itara 
and ^te are used so also with the words denoting quarters. 
When Ena u used Accusative terminations are to be added 
to 'Karmapravacaniyas*^ 

11. In VTpsa* and Itthambhiva* the symbolusedin Abhi; 
in severance the symbols are Pari and Prati. Anu b used in 
these senses and also in the tense of Saha (with). In Hlnar* 
tba (without) Anu and Upa are tised. 

12. When going or attempt at it is implied Accusative 
or dative can be used. In the case of inanimate object of the 
root *Man’ when disrespect u implied both the cases are used. 

13. In combination with Nama^ (obeisance), Svasti 
(Hail), Svadha, Svahi, Vayaf (sacrificial offerings), Alam 

1. A term for certain prepotttiooi, partidet or adverbs when they are 
not connected with verbs and foyem a noun in some case. 

2. Repetition of words to Imply oandnuous or successive action. 

9. Mng in a certain state. 



1.205.26 


607 


(competant) and Tidarthya (for that purpose) Tumarthit (in 
order to) dative case is used. 

14. Instrumental case is used with ‘Saha* (accompanied 
by), in an attribute and a defective limb. While denoting 
time and abstract notions both Locative and Genitive are used. 

15. Both of these are used in denoting ownership, lord- 
ship, chieftaincy, kinship, “bom oT* and “Nirdh&rai^** (tpeci* 
heating one from many). Only Genitive in *Hetuprayoga* 
(for that reason]. 

16. In the objects of verbs implying memory, doing, 
exertions for, violence to, and in subjects of derivative verbs. 

17. In the use of Past Participles ‘Nifthi* Genitive is 
not used. There are two kinds of bases substantives and roots. 

18»19. Bhu, Va and other roots take Tih terminations. 
La means Laldra t.e* tenses and moods which are ten in num¬ 
ber Tip, Tas, Anti are the terminations in the third person. 
Sipi Thas, Tha are the termixutions in the second person. Mip, 
Vasi Mas are the terminations in the 6rst person. These above 
terminations are in the Parasmaipada. In the Atmanepada, 
Te, Ate, Ante are the terminatious in the third person and Se, 
Athe, Dhve are the terminations in the second person. 

20. E, Vahe, Mahe arc the terminations in the first 
person. Even if the names are used the terminations of the 
third persons are appended. 

21. In denoting ‘You*, Kcond person and in denoting 
‘r, fint person is used. Bhu etc. are the roots. Similarly 
Sannantas etc. are also called roots. 

22-23. When the present tense or past tense with the 
use of ‘Sma’ is to be implied Lat is to be used. In denoting 
the past, not of the same day, Lan or Luh can be used. In 
denoting benediction, injunction, permission, etc. IjoJ is to be 
used. It can be used in advice, invitation, enquiring after 
health, prayer and blessings. 

24. Lit is to be used for all past not observed personally 
by the speaker. Luf signifies futurity. In denoting condi¬ 
tional, Lfn is used. Sometimes Lo( is used in the sense of Lit* 

25*26. Krt suiHxes can be used in Impersonal Passive 
and Active voices. They are Tfii, Tavya, Anlya, Satf etc. 



«06 


Garuia Puri^ 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIX 

Gfommar 


Sita said — 

NIO. Now I ihall give the ready made examples in 


accordance with the Samhitis— 

Vipra+Agram 


Vipragram * 

Si+Agat4 


Sigata 

Vi+Idam 


Vidam 

Su+Uttamam 

— 

Suttamam 

Pitt'+^abha 

as 

Pitn'^abha 

Langala+I^i 

s 

Langalifi 

Manas+I^ii 

A 

Man!$i 

GaAgi+Udakam 

A 

Gangodakam 

Tava+Lakara 

8 

Tavalkara 

Rpa+Roa 

8 


Pra+^AA 

s 

Prarna 

Sita+Ana 

8 

Sit&rta 

Sa-j-Aindrl 

8 

Saindri 

Sa-f-Ukira 


Sokara 

Vadhu+Asana 

s 

Vadhvasana 

Pitr+Artha 

-> 

Piirartha 

L+Anubandha 

s 

Lanubandha 

Nc+E 

• 

Naye 

Jc+Et 

S 

Jayet 

Nai+Aka 


Nayaka 

Lo+A^a 

8 

Lavana 

Gau-I-Ab 

8 

Gava^ 

Te+Ete 

8 

TaEte 

Tc+Iivarati 

8 

Ta Ilvarati 

Devi+Gfha 

8 

Dcvigrha 

Atho+Atra 

8 

Atho Atra 

A+Avehi 

8 

A Avehi 

Patu+lniau 

8 

Patu Imau 

Amt+A^vah 

- 

Ami Aiv&^ 

5ai+Asya 

- 

$a4asya 

Tat+Na 

• 

Tanna 

Vic+S 


V4k 



1.206.1.10 

Tat+Carci 
Tat+Lunati 
Tat+Jalam 
Tat+Smaianaka 
Sugan+Atra 
Paean 4-Atra 
Bhavan+Chadayati 
Bhavan+Jhanatkara 
Bhavan+Tarati 
Sam+Sitiftam 
Bhavan+Likhati 
Tftm+Cakre 
Bhavan+Setc 
Api-j-Aml 
Ami+ldrsam 
Bhavan-[- Pinam 
Tvam+Tarasi 
Tvam+Karo?i 
Sat+Arcanam 
Ka^-|-Caret 
Kab+Takareoa 
Kah+Kuryat 
Kah+Phale sthUa^ 
Kah+Sete 
Kai>+$andai^ 
Kah+Artha^ 
Ka^+Y&ti gauravam 
Ka^+Iha+Aira 
Kah+Eva 
Ahub+Devah 
Dev41>4"Ahuh 
Ahuh+Ca 
Bhos-f-Vraja 
S vapub+V 4n ub+ 
vr^ti 

<3oti+Pati 

Dhu^+pati 

B^ab+Vrajet 


* $a4daUni 
^ Taccaret 
-> Tallunati 

— Tajjalam 

s Tacchmaianaka 
» Sugapnatra 
^ Pacannatra 
a Bha vain scchaday ati 
» Bhava Aj han atkar a 
s Bhavaihstarati 
9 Saihsmrtam 
^ Bhav4llikhati 

• TaAcakrc 
•• BhaviA^ete 
^ ApyamI 

Amldfiam 
a BhaviAdinam 
•• Tvantarasi 
s Tvankaro^i 
s Sadarcanam 
^ Kaicaret 
= Kamkirena 
» Kahkuryat 
=: Ka bphal esthi ta]? 
rs Kaiicte 
= Kafsanda^ 

— Korchati 

s Koyatigauravatn 
sft Ka Ihatra 
s Ka Eva 
Ahurdeva^ 

— Deva Ahut^ 

^ Ahuica 

= Bho Vraja 
V S vapprvijnurvraj a ti 

SB Go$pati 
» Dhu^pati 
A E^a Vrajet 





610 


Cwiia 


Sal^+Syat » Sa Syat 

Sab+Ga » Sa Ca 

Kut!+Ch4yi b KuflccUyi 

Tath&-|-Cb&y& » Tath&cchiyi 

Other SandhiJ are to be uoderstocd aimiUrly. 

11*26. Cmipoundi are six in number 
Sadtlvija^A good brahmin (Karmadh&raya) 
TrivedlBA group of three platforms (Dvigu) 
Tatk|ta» Tadartham ) 

Vrkabhiti; Jflinadakfa ) 

TAlvajfte ) 

Yaiodhana 
Adhiitri, Yathoktam 
De van iminavi^i 


Tatpurufa 

Bahuvilhi 

Avyayibh&va 

Dvandva 


Pipcjava, Saiva, Br&hmyam, Brahmat&. These are examples of 
Taddhitas. Deva» Agni, Sakhi^ Pati, Aihiu» Kro9(r» 
Svayambhfi, Ktr, Np, Prattstp—All these are Masculine. The 
Halantas (Consonant ending) Aspk, Kfm&bhpt* Kravyat, Mpgi- 
vidb^R&jan, yuvan, Pathin, PuyaOi Bramhahan, Ahan, Vid» 
Vedhas, Ufanas, Anadvah, Madhulif Kaf^tak^ are also 
masculine. Vana^ Vari, Asthi, Vaitu, Jagat^ S&man, Ahan^ 
Kannan> Sarpis and Tgas are neuter. 

Jiyl» Nadlj iri, Stii, Bhu^ Vadhu» Bhru, Punar* 

bhu» Dhenu^ Svasp, Gamu—These are feminine. Similarly 

Vkk, Srak, Diki Kradh, Yuvati, Kakup, Dyau> Up&vpt, Sum- 
anabi U?pik are also faminine. Qpalities can be used in any 
gender according to the substantives SuUa, Kil&la> Sucib. 

Grkma^it Sudhib* 

B4hu, Kamalabhub) Kartp^ Svam&tp Svanaubi Satya—alt 
these are Masculine. Dirghapit—mesculine. 

The Sarvaniznans (Pronouns) are Sarva, Viiva^ Ubhaya^ Ubha^ 
Anya Anyatara (suffixes Patara, Patsuiia)^ Purvai Apara^ Adhara^ 
Y&vat, Kim^ Yu^mat, Asmat—These are AliAgai and used ia 
all genders* Sppoti, Juhoti, Jahiti» Dadhiti, Dipyati, StOyatu 
Putiiyatif DhanAyati^ Trutyad^ Mriyate, Cicifatip Ninl$ati. 
These are examples of verbs. 

The special declensional forms of Sarva are Sarve^ 
Sarvasmai^ Sarvasmit, Survatab Sarveyim, Sarvasmin. Similarly 



1.207.3 


611 


Viiva is to be declined. In Purva, allemative forms Pitrvasm&V 
Purvat; Purve, Purvib* Purvasmin, Purve are to be noted. 

27. The readymade examples of subantas and tiAantaa 
are simply noted only in a &w cases. KAty&yana has mentioned 
eveiytUng in detail after hearing the same from Kum&ra. 


CaiAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVEN 

Pfasodf 

SQtasaid : 

1. With an obeisance td Visudeva, the preceptor 
Ga^eia,^ Siva and Sarasvati I shall tell the ignorant about the 
metres which are classified according to mitrSt* or vart&as.* 

2. According to the position of Guru^ or Laghu^ in the 
beginning, in the middle or in the end; there are eight Gapas* 
namely, Ma-gana^ Naga^a^ Bha-ga^ia*, Ya*gaQa'S 
Ra^gana^*, Sa-ga^a^, and Ta«gaj^^^. 

3. A vowel is Guru when it is followed by a consonant, 
Visai^a, or a conjunct. A Dirgha** vowel is always Guru. A 


1. Gavd^Gaoeia {SSED, p. 176). 

2. SyllsUc ioiunti. 

3. SyiUbles. 

4. Long lylUble 

5. Short lyQsble (w^). 

6. Syll4b«c fe« Mch coowouf of three *yH«ble» we dijtinguiiheJ 
from one mother accor<d^ to the position of long and short syUahies (in the* 
beginning, in the middle, in the end). 

a w w 

9. — ^ 

10. - 

11 . 

12, — - 

13. ^ — 

14. -i* — 

15. s, f, s, 7, •• “• 



€12 Garu^a Purdifa 

vowel which is followed by Anusv&ra or which comes in the end 
is also Guru. It is of two Mfitr&s. 

4« When the order of Laghu and Guru varies, it is called 
^loka. When there is pause, it is called Yati. 

5. A quarter is called a P&da* When the quartan are 
equal, it is called Santa. When the quarten are un«equal, it is 
called Vi^ama. Hence the metres are of three typ>eft—Sama^i 
Ardha-sama’, and Vifama^ 


CHAPTER TWO HU?H>R£D AND EIGHT 

Prosody 

StUa said : 

1. Ary& is of eight Gaitas out of which the odds should 
not have Ja-gana. The sixth one may be Ja*gapa or Na*gana 
with Laghu, and the foot'should end with it (the sixth Gana)| 
after the second Laghu. 

I 2. The seventh Gana from the beginning consuls of 
Laghu. In the second half of Ary&, the foot ends with the fifth 
Ga^a. When the foot ends with the first three Gai;^ in each 
half, it Is called Pathyd. When the foot ends after the first three 
Ganas in each half, it is called Vipula. 

3. When the second and the fourth ones are Ja-gapas 
flanked by two Gurus, it is called Gapala. When the first half 
is like Capala and the second half like Aryk or Pathyk or 
Vjpulk, it is called Mukha-Capala* When the first half is like 
Ary a and the second half like Capalk, it is called Sajaghana. 

4. When the first half and the second half both are like 
the first half of Ary&, it is called GIti. When the first half and 
the second half both are like the second half of Aryi, it is called 
Upapti. When the first half is like the second half of Aryk and 
the second half is like the first half of Arya, it is called Udgiti. 


1. Equal. 

2. Half-equal. 

3. Unequ^. 



L208.1S 


613 


5. When one more Guru U added after the first half of 
Ary& it is called Ary&giti. When there are six Mitris in the 
odds and eight Mitrlis in the even feet and after each feet there 
is Raga^, Laghu and Guru, it is called Vait&llya. 

6. When after each feet of Vaitallya, there is Ragaoa 
and Yagapa, it is called Aupachandasika. 

7. When Bha-gapa is followed by two Gurus, it is called 
Apataliki. When the second Mitra is dependent and there is 
Laghu in all the feet, it is called Daksitiintika. 

8. When the second is dependent in the odd feet, it is 
called Udicyavrtti< When the fourth and the fifth Matras are 
dependent in the even feet, it is called Pracyavftti. When both 
the characteristics are these, it is called Pravfttaka. 

9. When all the feet arc even like the even feet of Pravrt- 
taka it Is called Ekapadiki. When all the feet are like the odd 
feet of Pravfttaka, it is called Caruhasinl. The aforesaid metres 
come under the category of Vait&liya. 

10. When N^ga^a and Sa»ga^ do not come after the 
first syllable, and Ya^gapa comes after the fourth syllable, it is 
called Vaktra. When there is Ja^gana after the fourth syllable 
in the even feet, it is called, Pathya^vaktra. If it is so in the 
odd feet, it is called Viparita*pathya-vaktra. 

11. When there is Na^a^ after the fourth syllable in 
the odd feet, it is called Capala^vaktra. When the seventh 
syllable is Laghu in the odd feet, it is called Vipula. In the 
opinion of Saitava, it is so in all the feet. If there is Ma-gana 
after the fourth syllable it is called Ma^vipula; if Ra-ga^a, 
Ra*vipula; if Na-ga^a, Na*vipula and ifTa^na, Ta-vipula. 

12-13. When these are sixteen Laghus in each feet, it is 
called Acala«dhiti. When the ninth syllable is Laghu and the 
last one Guru, it is called Matra-sama. If there is Ja-gana or 
Na-ga^a with Laghu after the fourth Matra, it is called Vilioka, 
When these are four Laghus in feet, it is called Vanavasiki. 

14. When the fifth, the eighth and the ninth Matri in 
each foot is Laghu, it is called Citra of sixteen M&trks. A mix* 
ture of the metres of even M&tr&s is called Padakulaka. 

15. When the number of Vardas is deducted from the 
total number of Mitris in the metre we get the number of 
Gurus* When the number of Gurus is deducted from total 



«14 


G^ruia Pur^ 


number of Mitral in the metre, we get the number of Laghus. 
When the number of the Laghui ii deducted from the total 
number of Matrai in the metre and the reiultant is divided by 
two, we get the number of Gunu. 

16» When there are twenty eight Laghui in the first half 
^d tlurty Laghui in the second half, it is called Sikha. The 
Tevene of this is KhaAja. 

17. When there are sixteen Gurus in the first half and 
thirty-two Laghui in the second half, it is called Anaiiga*kii^. 
When there are twenty-seven Laghui in both the halves, it is 
oalled Ruciri. 

18» Thus I have cold about the metres based on Mitrii* 
Mow I shall tell you about those based on Vardas. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINE 

Prosodjf 

Sdta said t 

L When there is one Guru in each foot, it is Sri Ukthi. 
When there are two Gurus in each foot, it is called Strl-Atyu- 
kthi. The metre which has Ma-gapa in each foot is called Niil; 
which has Ra-gana likewise is Mrg^—Maghy!. When Ma«ga^ 
is followed by a Guru, it is called Kany&-Prat4|h&» 

2, When the same is followed by two Gurus, it is called 
PaAkti-Supratiffh&» When there is one Ta-ga^ia and one Va- 
gatui in each foot, it is called Tanu-madhyi. When there is one 
Na-ga^ and one Ya-gapa, it is called Bala-laliti—Gayatn. 

3, In Madalekhfi, there is Ma-gai^a and Sa-gapa follow¬ 
ed by Guru—Uftuk. In Citrapadi two Bha-ga^as are followed 
by two Gurus, In VidyunmJdi, two Ma-f a^as are followed by 
two Gurus. 

4, In Ma^avaka, there are Bha-gapa, Ta-ga^a, Laghu 
and Guru. In Hamiaiuta, there are Ma-ga^a, Na-ga^Mt and 
two Gurus, In Samiidki, there are Ra-ga^a, Ja-ga^a, Guru 
and Laghu. In Pramipika. there are Ja-gapa, Ra-ga^a, Laghu 



I.209.I5 


615 


and Guru. Vitina u dissimilar to these two. So these are the 
Anu itup-me tres. 

5. HalamukhI has Ra^gapa. Na^gana and Sa-ga^a. Si^u* 
bhfCi has two Na-ga^as and one Ma-gana—Bfbatl. Virajita 
has Sa*ga];ia, Ma-ga^ta, Ja-ga^ and Guru. 

6. Paiuva has Ma-na-ya-ga^as and one Guru. Mayura- 
siri^ has ra-ja-ra-ga^as and one guru. Rukmavatl has 
fiha-ma-sa-gaw and one Guru. 

7. Mattl has Ma^bha^sa^ganas and Guru. ManoramA 
has na-ra«ja«gai>as and Guru. Upasthita has Ja»ga^, Sa*ga;>a 
and Ta-ga^ followed by a Guru. Pahkd has been told. 

8. Indravajri has two Ta^^gapas^ Ja«ga^^ and two 

Gurus. Upendravajri has Ja-ta-ja^ga^as and two Gurus. 

9. Upajiti begins or ends with any one of the above two 
metres (i.e. it is a mixture of Indravajri and Upendravajra). 
Sumukhi has Na^ja^ja^ganas and Laghu and Guru. Dodbaka 
has thrae Bha^ga^ and two Gurus. Silini has Ma«ja*ta gapas 
and two Gurus. 

10. Vitormi has ma^bha^ta-gapas and two Gurus and 
Yati is after the fourth and the seventh lyllables. Sd has 
bba-ia*zia*ganas and two Gurus with yati on the fifth and the 
sixth syllables. 

1 ]. Bhramara^vilasita has xna*bha*na«gapas and Xaghu- 
guru. Rathoddhata has ra-oa*ra-ganas and Laghu*guru. 
Svagati has ra-na*bha^anas and five Gurus. 

12 Vftta has na*na*sa«ganas and two Gurus. Smadrika 
(Bbadriki) has na-na*ra*gapa8 and Laghu-guru. Syeniki has 
ra-ja«ra-ganas and Laghu*guru. Sikhapdita has ja-sa-ta-gapai 
and two Gurus. Thus Tristup^melrc has been stated by 
Mahktma Pihgala. 

13-14. Candravartma has ra-na-bha-sa-gapas. Vaihia- 
stha has ja-ta-ja-ra-ganas. Indravajpia has ta-ta-ja*ra-gapas. 
Tojaka has four Sa-gapas. Drutavilambita has na*bha-bha-ra- 
gapas. Pu(a has na-na-ma-ya-gapas with Yati after the eighth 
and fourth syllables. Mudiu Vadana has na-na-ra-ra-gapaa 
Kusuma-vicitrk hat na-ya-na-ya-gapa4. 

15« Jaloddhatagati has ja*sa-ja-sa-gapas (with Yati after 
every six syllable). Sragvini has four ra-gapas. 



616 


Garu4^ PurStfa 


16. Bhujangapray&ta has four ya^ga^as. Priyarhvadi 
has na-bha-ja-ra-ganas. Manimala ta*ya-ta*ya*ganas. 

17. Lalita has ta*bha-ja-gartas. Pramitak^ara has sa-ja* 
sa-^sa-ganas. UjjvaU has na*na-bha^raganas. 

18. Vai$vadevl has ina*ma*ya*ya*ganas with yati on 
fifth and seventh varpas. Jaladharamali has ma-bha-sa-ma- 
ganas with Yati on the fourth and eighth varnas. 

19. K^ami has na*na*ta*ca*ganas and Guru with Yati on 
the seventh and sixth var^s. Prahar^ioi has ma-na*ja-ra*gacLas 
and guru with yati on the third and tenth varnas. 

20. Rucir^ has ja*bha-sa*ja-ga]>as and guru with yati 
on the fourth and ninth varnas. Mattamayura has ma-ta«ya-8a« 
ganas and Guru with Yati on the fourth and ninth varnas. 

21. Maftjubhi^^l has 8a-ja*sa*sa'*gat>as and Guru. 
SunandinI has sa*ja*8a-ma-ganas and Guru. Candriki has 
na*na*ta-ta-ganas and Guru with Yati on the seventh and 
sixth varnas. 

22. Asambadhi has ma-ta*na-sa ga^as and two gurus 
with yati on the fifth and ninth varnas. Aparajita has na-na-ra'* 
sa-ganas and Laghu-guru. 

23. Praharana*kalika has na-na-bha*na-ganas and 
1 aghu^guru. Vas a n ta» til aka (Simhonnat a) has ta-bha*j a*j a- 
gapas and two Gurus. 

24. Indu*vadana has bha*ja*sa-na*ga^as and two Gurus, 
Sukejara has na-ra*na-ra«ga^ias and I^ghu*guru. Thus Sarkarl- 
(Sakvan 7] has been described. 

25. Saiikali has fourteen X^ghus and one Guru. If Yati 
is on sixth and ninth varnas, it is called Srak. If Yati is on 
the eighth and seventh varpas, it is called Ma^i-gu^a-nikara. 

26. M^lini has na-na'*ma-ya-ya»ganas with Yati on 
the eighth,^and seventh Van^. Prabhadraka has na-ja-bha- 
ja-ra-gapas, 

27. £la has sa*ja-na-na*ya-ga^s. Chitralekha has xna- 
ra-ma-ya-ya-ganas with Yati on the seventh and eighth 
Varij^as. Thm AtUarkaii has been described. 

28. Vfsabha-gaja^jrmbhita has bha-ra*na«na-na-gapas 
and Guru with Yati on the seventh and ninth varpas. V&pinl has 
na^ja^bha-ja^ra^gapas and Guru. Thus Affi has been defined by 
Pihgala. 



1 . 209.39 


617 


29. Sikharipi hds Ya-ma-na-sa-bha-ganas and Laghu- 
Guru with Yati on the sixth and eleventh varnas. Pfthvi has 
Ja-sa>ja-sa*ya«gana$ and Laghu-Guni with Yati on the eighth 
and ninth varnas. 

30. Vamla-patra-patita has Bha-ra*na-bha-na*ganas 
and liaghu-Guru with Yati on the tenth and seventh Var^. 
Haripi has Na^sa^ma-ra^sa^ga^as and Laghu-Guru with Yati on 
the sixth, fourth and seventh Vardas. 

31. Mandakr&nUt has Ma«bha*na*ta-ta*gands and two 
Gurus with Yati on, the fourth, sixth and seventh var^s. 
Narttataka has Na*ja-bha-ja*ja*ganas and Laghu-Guru with 
Yati on the seventh and the tenth Varnas. 

32. If the Yati is on the seventh, sixth and fourth Vardas, 
it is called Kokilaka. So for Atya^fi. Kusumitalati has Ma*ta> 
na-ya-ya-ya-ga^as with Yati on the fifth, sixth and seventh 
Vari>as* So for Dhfti. 

33. Meghavisphurjita has Ya-ma-na-sa-ra-ra-gapas and 
Guru with Yati on the sixth and seventh Varnas. Sardulavi- 
krldita has Ma-ja-ja-sa-ta*ta-gatias and Guru with Yati on 
the twelfth and seventh Van^. 

34. So far Atidhfti metre has been told. Now will come 
Krti. Suvadana has Ma-ra-bha-na-ya-bha-ganas and Laghu- 
Guru with Yati on seventh, seventh and sixth Var^ias. 

35. Vftta has Ra-ja-ra-ja-ra-ja-ganas and Guni-Laghu. 
So far Krti. Sragdhara has Ma-ra-bha-na-ya-ya-ya-gaMS with 
Yati on the seventh, seventh and seventh Varnas. So far Prakrti, 

36. Bhadraka, has Bha-ra-na-ra-na-ra-na-gapas and 
Guru with Yati on the tenth and twelfth Varnas. So far Akfti. 
Asvalalita has Na-ja-bha-ja-bha-ja-bha-gaMS and Laghu-Guru 
with Yati on eleventh and twelfth Varnas. 

37. Mattakfida has Ma-ma-U-na-na-na-na-ganas and 
Laghu Guru with Yati on the eighth and fifteenth Varnas. So 
for Vikrti. Now Sahkrti is told. 

38. Tan>d has Bha-ta-na-sa-bha-bha-na-ya-gaMs with 
Yati on the fifth and seventh Var^ias. Krauficapadi has Bha-ma- 
sa-bha*na-na-na-na*ganas and Guru with Yati on the fifth, fifth, 
eighth and eighth Vardas. 

39. So far Atikrti metre has been told. Now Utkrti U 
being told. Bhujai^avijrmbhita has Ma-ma-ta-na-na-na-ra*sa- 



€18 Garuda Purdt^a 

ganas and Laghu-Guru with Yati on the eighth, eleventh and 
seventh Vamas. 

40. Apavaha has Ma*na*na«na^iia-iia-na-sa-gana$ and 
two Gurus with Yati on 9, 6, 6,5 Var^. 

41. Ca^t^avrttiprapata has Na*na«ra-ra«ra-ra-ra-ra-ra> 
ganas. Many varieties of this Dan^aka^metre are formed by the 
addition of one Ra*gana in each of them. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TEN 

Prosody 

SUtd said : 

U2. Upacitraka has Sa*sa*sa-ganas and Laghu^Guru in 
odd feet, and Bha-bha*bha-ganas and Guru^Guru in even feet. 
Drutamadhya has bha-bha*bha*ganas and two Gurus in odd feet 
and Na-ja-ja*ya*ganas in even feet. 

3'4. VegavaU has Sa-sa*sa-ganas and Guru in odd feet and 
Bha^bha-bha^igatias and two Gurus in even feet. Bhadravira| 
has Ta«ja*ra«ga 9 as and Guru in odd feet and Ma^sa-ja^gapas 
and two Gurus in even feet* Ketumad has Sa-ja-sa-ga^as and 
Guru in odd feet and Bha-ra-oa-ganas and two Gurus in even 
feet. Akhyinaki has Ta-ta*ja-gaiw and two Gurus in odd feet 
and Ja»ta»ja*ganas and two Gurus in even feet. 

5. The opposite to the same is Viparitakhyanaka as 
illustrated by Pihgala. 

6. Pufpitagra has Na-na-ra-ya^gat^s in odd feet and Na» 
ja-ja-ra-gaoas and Guru in even feet. Aparavaktra is called 
Vaitiliya and Pufpit4gra is called Aupaccbandasika. 

7. V4hmatS has Ra*ja>ra.>ya-ga 9 as in odd feet and Ja-ra- 
ja-ra-ga^as and Gurus in even feet. 



1 . 111.9 


619 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND ELEVEN 

Prosody 

Sdta said : 

1. Padacatururdhva has 8 Yar^ in the first foot^ 
12 in the second, 16 in the third and 20 in the fourth. 

2. When in a Pidacatururdhva all the Varus are Laghu 
except the last two which are Guru, it is called Apld^- 

• 3. Kalika has 12,8, 16 and 20 Var^ in each foot res¬ 
pectively, Lavali has 12, 16, 8 and 20 Yarn as in respective feet. 
Aniftadhar^ has 12, 16, 20 and 8 Varnas in its feet. 

4. Udgati has Sa*ja-sa-ganas and Laghu in the first foot, 
Na-sa-ja-ga^as and Guru in the second, Bha*na-ja«ganas and 
Laghu-Guru in the third and Sa-ja-sa-ja-gaijas and Guru in the 
fourth. 

5. Saurabhaka has Ra-na»bha-gao^s and Guru in the 
third feet and other feet arc like those of Udgat&. Similarly. 
Lalita hasNa*na-sa-garuis in the third feet, the rest being like 
Udgata. 

6. Upasthitapracupita has Ma-sa-ja-bha-ganas and two 
Gurus in the first foot, Sa-na-ja-ra-ganas and Guru in the second, 
Na«na-sa-ganas in the third and Na-na-na-ja-ya-gapas in the 

fourth. 

7. Vise$a has Na-na-$a-na-na-sa in the third foot, the rest 
being like Upasthiupracupita. 

8. Similarly, Suddhaviradt Ar^abha has Ta-ja-ra-gapas m 
the third foot and the rest like Upasthitapracupita. 

9. If there are odd syllables or odd feet like five or six in 
a metre, it is known as Gatha like ‘DaSadharmam (Mbh 5* 

33. 82). 



620 


Garu^a Purdi^ 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWELVE 

Prosodjf 

Sota said : 

1. In Prastara first all Gurus should be noted down; 
Then Laghu should be noted down below the first Guru and the 
rest should be done as before. In Na$ta Laghu should be written 
for even numben and Guru should be written for odd nunabers. 
The same holds good about the half of numbers. 

2. In Uddi${aka upon each Varna numbers beginning 
from one should be written respectively multiplied by two. The 
numbers of Laghu should be added and then one should again* 
be added. 

3-5. [Being not clear are left untranslated] 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTEEN 

Dkarma-^dstra 


SiUasaid : 

1. The conduct of Brahmins and others which Brahma 
heard from Hari and explained to Vyasa, I shall explain to you, 
O Saunaka. 

2» After knowing fully the Vedic Texts and Smfti Texts 
one shall perform what is enjoined in the Vedas. If that is not 
possible one shall do what is mentioned in the Smrti texts. 

3. If he is unable to perform even that an intelligent 
man shall perform acts of good conduct. Sruti and Smrti are the 
two eyes of Brahmins for the proper understanding of duties. 

4) What is mentioned in the ^ruti is the greatest virtue; 
the next one is what is mentioned in the Smrti texts. Activities 
of the virtuous are the next ones. All the three are eternal 
virtues. 



1 . 213.18 


621 


5. Truthfulness, gifts> sympathy^ noncovetousness, learn¬ 
ing, sacrifice, worship and restraint are the eight holy charac¬ 
teristics of the virtuous. 

The brilliant sense oi^ans of the virtuous and their 
physical bodies never get tainted with sin like the lotus with 
water. 

7. For all castes virtuous actions are very important; 
truthfulness, sacrifice, austerities and gifts are the symbols of 
Dharma. 

8-9. Not taking back what is given, gifts, study of Vedas, 
austerities, learning wealth, penance, valour, nobility of birth, 
health, annihilation of worldly bondage, happiness, knowledge 
~all these result from Dharma. One gets salvation due to 
knowledge. 

10. Sacrifices, study of Vodas and gifts in accordance 
with the instructions in the Sastras constitute the common 
virtue of Brahma^as, K^atriyas and VaUyas. 

11. Sages say that presiding over othen’ sacrifices, 
teaching of Vedas and acceptance of Pratigraha (money gifts 
etc.) constitute the extra activity of the highest class. 

12. The duty of the kings is to live with weapons and 
protect all living beings. Rearing of cattle, agriculture, trading 
and business are the ways of sustenance for Vaiiyas. 

13. The duty of the Sudra is to serve all other twice- 
born people. The duty of a student is residence in the precept¬ 
or's house, maintenance of the sacrificial fire and self-study 
of Vedas. 

14. The student must have three ablutions every day, 
taking alms, and living in the house of the Guru till his death. 
While yet a student he must wear jnekhalas (girdles of Kusa 
grass) matted hair or shave off the hair entirely. 

15-16. The duties of a householder are the maintenance 
of Agnihotra, practice of hereditary duties, indulgence in sexual 
inter-course with only his wife avoiding the Parva days, the 
wonhip of Gods, manes and guests and the grasping of the 
import of Srutis and Smrtis. 

17-18. The duties of a V^navisin (in the stage of Retire¬ 
ment) are : conquest of senses, maintenance of Agnihotra, 
wearing of deer-skin lying on the bare ground, residence in a 



622 


Oaru4^ 


secluded spot, living on milk« bulbous roots, fruits and ^nv&ra 
grains^ avoidance of prohibited activities, thrice ablutions^ 
continuance of rites and worship of gods •nd guests. 

19-21. The duties of a Parivr&f (complete renouncer) 
Avoidance of all worldly enterprises, begging of alms, residence 
at the roots of trees, non-acceptance of any gift whatsoever, 
non ii^ury to othersi equality of vision towards all living beings, 
bearing of both pleasant and unpleasant, viewing of happiness 
and sorrow equally, purity internally and externally, restraint 
on speech, contemplation, curbix^ of all sense organs, per¬ 
petual grasping of the fundamental principle of life and a pure 
volition. 

22. The common characteristics of all walks and stages 
of life are non-violence, truthftil and pleasing words, truthful¬ 
ness and purity, forgiveness and mercy. 

23. Those who strictly adhere to these injunctions attain 
the greatest goal. I shall now explain the duties of a house¬ 
holder from getting up in the morning to going to bed at night. 

24. He must get up in the Brihma h&hOrta (An hour 
and a half before dawn) Think about his Dharma and Artha. 
By the end of the night be must finish answering calls of nature 
and purify himself in mind and body. 

25. He must clean his teeth, take his bath and perform 
Sandhya prayers. 

26. Evacuation of the bowels and urination during the 
day must be done sitting facing the north. During the nights 
by sitting facing the south. At dusk and dawn he must do as 
during the day. 

27. In shade, darkness, during night or day, if there 
is any commotion endangering life, a brahmin can sit facing 
kny quarter convenient, while passing urine or stoob. 

28. Neither faeces nor urine shall be passed on cowdung, 
burning charcoal, anthill, a ploughed field, pure* water, and 
under way ride trees. 

29. Earth for purificatory purposes, shall not be taken 
from under water, templcsi anthills, rat holes, faeces of others, 
or from burning gbitas. 

30. The penis must be cleaned once with earth. The 
left hand must be cleaned twice with earth and both the feet 



1 . 213.41 


623 


twice with the e&rth« This is the purificatory wish after 
passing urine. 

3L After passing stools, the penis must be cleaned with 
earth once, the anus three times, the left palm ten times and 
the feet ten times (each foot five times). Both the hands must 
be cleaned with the earth then seven times. 

32. The first application of the earth must be half a 
handful. The second and third ones half of the previous. 

33. He who is unable to urinate or evacuate in a sitting 
posture need do only half of this purificatory proceu. 

34. The purificatory process during the night is either 
half or one^fourth of the foregoing. This elaborate process it for 
the hale and hearty. The sick man can do as suits his strength. 

35. The twelve types of dirt from human body are—Fat, 
semen, blood, marrow, saliva, iaeces, urine, ear wax, phlegm, 
tears, grit in the eyes and sweat. 

36. Purificatory process is to be continued till full purity 
is achieved. There is no limit to the number of times of the 
cleansing process. 

37. Purification is twofold ~the external and the inter- 
nal. The external purification is with earth and water. Purity 
of feelings and volition is the internal cleansing. 

38. He shall perform Acamana three times, then he 
must wipe bis face twice. After nibbing with the root of the 
thumb the mouth shall be touched thrice. 

39. The nostril shall be nibbed with the thumb and the 
index finger. Eyes and ears must be touched frequently with 
the ring finger and the thumb. 

40. The navel shall be rubbed with the little finger 
and the thumb and the chest with the palm. The head must 
be touched with all the fingers. The arms shall be rubbed with 
the tips. 

41. By taking the Acamanas the brahmin propitiates 
?Lk$, Yajus and Samans. By wiping off twice he pleases 
Atharvangiras and ^a^mukha. 

42. He propitiates Itihisas, Purlnas and the rix Vedan- 
gas. By toucUng the mouth he propitiates the Ether, nostrils 
—the V&yu, eyes^the sun, and the ears^the quarters. 



€24 


Goxuia 


43. By touching the navel he propitiates the Pranagran* 
this and touching the heart he propitiates the Brahman; the 
head—Rudra and the tuft—the sages. 

44-45* By touching the arms Yama* Indraj Varupa) 
Kubera» Vasudhi and Anala are propitiated. By washing his 
feet he pleases VifQU and by washing hands he pleases Indra and 
Vilpu; by touching the joints of Angers he pleases Agni» Vayu, 
Surya, Indu and the mountains. The lines in the palms 
represent the riven, Gahga, etc. 

46. Early in the morning after duly performing ;§auca 
he must clean his teeth and take his bath. 

47. A man becomes impure if the mouth is not washed 
after the night. Hence, a man must cleanse his teeth carefully. 

48^9. Twigs of Kadaniba, Biiva, Khadira, Karavlra» 
Va(a, Arjuna, Yuthti Bfhat!,^ J&ti, KaraAja, Arka, Atimuktaka, 
Jambii, Madhuka, Apamirga, €iri», Udumbara and Asana 
are good tooth brushes. Trees exuding milk juices, and thorny 
trees are very good for cleansing teeth. 

50. Pungent^ bitter and astringent twigs increase wealth, 
health and happiness* After cleansing the teeth, the twig must 
be cast off in a pure place. He must then perform Acamana. 

51. On new moon days, the sixth day and the ninth day 
and the first day of the lunar fortnight, twigs must be avoided. 
On Sundays too they shall be avoided. 

52. If the twigs are not used the cleansing can be done 
by gargling with water twelve times* 

53. By taking bath early in the morning he achieves 
visible and invisible merits. A person who regularly bathes in 
the morning and purifies himself deserves the performance of 
Japa, etc. 

54* A man with many pores all over his body exudes 
dirt always by day and by night. He is extremely dirty. The 
morning bath purifies him. 

55. Like a dip in the holy Ganges the morning ablu¬ 
tions give pleasures to the mind, increase beauty and fortune 
and remove sorrow and misery. 


1. Jftsininum surialetum. 



1 , 213.67 


625 


56-56. While taking bath he shall recite this Mantra^ 
am taking my bath as it were in the Ganges to remove ten 
sins of mine viz* —(1) Sin of not giving a gift on days when 
moon enters Hasta star, on the tenth day in the bright half of 
the month of Jyeffha and ten other auspicious occasions, (2) 
doing forbidden things, (3) violence, (4) committing adultery, 
(5) speaking harsh words, (6) uttering falsehood, (7) scanda¬ 
lising words, (8) nonsensical words, (9) coveting another 
man’s wealth (10) wishing evil of others/’ 

59. Thus I have explained briefly the process of ablution 
of a householder and a Vanaprastha (a man who retires from 
life). 

60. A Yati (or an ascetic) takes three baths during the 
day, but a student (Brahmacarin) only once. Whenever one 
takes bath, one shall invoke holy rivers after performing 
Acamana and meditating on eternal Hari. 

61. There are three and half crores of demons named 
Mandehas. These wicked spirits desire to swallow the rising 
sun. 

62. These demons can be burnt by means of the water 
sanctified by Mantras which act as Arc. Hence, he who does 
not perform Sandhya prayers actually commits the murder of 
the sun. 

63. The junction of night and day is called Sandhyk. 
Its duration is for two Nadikas till the appearance of the sun or 
the stars. 

64. Ac the end of the Sandhyil prayers sacrificial offer* 
ings of butter must be made personally. What is acquired by 
performing Homa, by him, cannot be acquired by performing 
it through others. 

65. A Homa done through a ^tvik, Preceptor, one’s 
own son, brother, nephew or the Vitpati (the king or the leader 
of society) is as good as a Homa performed by oneself. 

66. The Garhapatya fire is Brahma, the Dak^ina Are is 

Siva and the Ahavanlya fire is Kumara (Lord 

Kirttikeya) b truth personified. 

67. After the timely performance of Homa the brahmin 
shall recite the Mantras pertaining to the sun. Then with his 



Garu4<iPurd^ 


626 

mind fully concentrated be must repeat the Savitil^ and 
Pra^ava &^tras» 

68. There is absolutely no danger for the person who 
perpetually repeats the Prattava, the seven Vy&hrtis and the 
Sivitci Mantra cmatsting of three metrical feet. 

69* If a repeats the Giyatri* every day after getting 
up early in the morning he will never be tainted by sin like the 
leaf of the lotus by drops of water. 

70* The auspicious goddess Giyatrl is described white 
complexioned, shearing dlk garments and having the rosary 
garland of AkiasQtra. She is seated in a lotus* 

71«72. The Devas desirous of seeing the goddess seated 
in the midst of solar aotie in the Brahmaloka invoked Her with 
the Yajus Mantras *Tgoti*^ etc* [Thou art the light]* The 
brahmin too shall invoke Her with the tame Mantra and after 
bowing to Her he shall discharge Her (mystically). 

73* The worship of all deities must be performed in the 
forenoon itself* There is no deity greater than Vi| 9 u and 
hence, He must be worshipped always* 

74*75. An intelligent devotee shall not differentiate 
among Brahmk, Vif 9 U and Siva* There are eight very auspi¬ 
cious things in this %vorld :—brahmins, cow, fire, gold, butter, 
the sun, water and eighth the king* Hence, everyone shall 
view, worship and go round these always. 

76. The practice of Vedas is in five ways: Reading 
them, understanding them, transcribing them, deliberating over 
their import and teaching them to disciples* 

77* Those who write the meanings of vedic passages, 
tlie Yajfiaiistras and the Dharmaiastras for remuneration for 
the sake of others will obtain the fniits of vedic practice* 

78* He who gives to others manuscripts of Itihisas and 
PurkQas is twice blessed with the merit of making a gift of 
Vedas. 

79-80* In the third part of tljc day one shall be engaged 
in earning the wherewithals for the sake of maintaining 
the dependants. The dependants are mother, father, 
preceptor, brother, poor people who seek refuge, casual visitors 

1* Giyatrt ItV. 3*02*10; VS* 3*35. 

2. VS* 1*31; 18* M.10*3 



1.213.91 


627 


ftnd specially invited guests. The sacrificial fire must be 
included among them as worthy of nourished and 

nurtured. 

8!. It is the duty of everyone to sustain the dependants 
by every means. Hit is the true life who looks after many. 

82. Other pen<tfis who fill their own bellies are as good 
as dead» though they live. Even a dog fills its belly. 

83. It is from die accumulated and flourishing wealth 
that all activities (sacred or profane) emerge even as rivers 
originate from mountains. 

84. The earthi the mine of all precious gems, grainsi 
cattle, womenfolk all these can be termed wealth inasmuch 
as they serve the purpose of wealth. 

85. When there is no danger threatening, a brahmin 
must maintain himself by choosing such a profession as does 
not entangle him in injury or harm to any living being; if that 
is not possible, the least form of injury is to be perpetrated. 

86. The wealth of a brahmin is of three types the 
white, the black and the variegated, each again classified into 
seven sub«divitions. 

87. The wealth of others irrespective of their caste is of 
three types: the inherited, the wealth given out of love and the 
wealth acquired through the wife (as dowry, etc). 

88. The special wealth of a brahmin is of three types 
that earned as fees for officiating in sacrifices, the fees received: 
for teaching and the gift received from good people. 

89. The special wealth of a Ksatriya is mentiond to be 
of three types :—the pure wealth acquired by way of revenue, 
the fines realised and all that which is seized after victory in 
battle. 

90. The special wealth of a Vaiiya is also of three types:— 
that acquired through agricultural activities, that received from 
cattle and cattle products and that from trading activities. 
That of a Sudra is the wealth he acquires due to the favour of 
the other people. 

91. Usury, agriculture and trading activities can be pur* 
sued by a brahmin. Doing these himself in times of danger (i.e*. 



■628 Gafu4a Purdi^a 

when no other source is available) a brahznin ia not tainted by 
sin. 

92. Many means of livelihood have been enumerated by 
sages. Among them all usury yields the most profit. 

93. In the pursuit of agriculture there are dangers due 
to drought, due to king^s tyrannical activities and due to 
rodents. But in usury none of these causes any risk. 

94. Prosperity does not subside even in bright half or 
daik half, night or day, summer, rains'or winter 

95. The prosperity achieved by those who thrive on 
merchandise by going to different countries can be realised by 
a man practising usury staying at home. 

96. Gaining much (in usury) he must propitiate the 
manes, the gods and the Brahmins. Propitiated thus, they 
quell the evil effects (of usury) undoubtedly. 

97*99. A usurer who donates cloth, cow^ gold, etc, and 
brahmin practising as a husbandman gets absolved from the inci« 
dental sin by making gifts of drink and food, vehicles, beds or 
seats and handing over twenty heads of cattle or a hundred 
pieces of gold to the king. One fourth, he should keep as reserve; 
by half, he should sustain himself and by one fourth he should 
increase the capital. 

100. (Thus inbrief) there are ten main ways of suste* 
nance, vi^x —learning, arts and crafts, salaried profession, service 
rendered to rich people, cattle breeding, trading activities, agri* 
culture, brokerage and liaison activities, begging alms and 
usury. 

101. Wealth accumulated by brahmins by accepting gifts, 
by Ksatriyas acquired through weapons, by Vaiiyas earned 
through lawful means and by ^udras by serving others—that 
wealth is (honourable). 

102. The commendable possessions of a brahmin:—a 
river with plenty of water, vegetables and leaves, sacrificial 
twigs and Kuia grass, the sacrificial fire and the reverberating 
sounds of Vedic mantras. 

103. There is no harm in accepting an unsolicited gift. 
Oods consider it on par with the nectar. Hence, it should not 
be refused. 



1 . 213.113 


629 

104. A man desiring to %vorship goda and guests may even 
forcibly take wealth from his preceptor. Hence, one shall accept 
from anywhere anything that makes them (gods and guests) 
contented. 

105* A meritorious brahmin with few blemishes can 
accept gifts from good or bad people. A man who is utterly 
devoid of good qualities sinks in sin if he accepts gifts. 

106. Thus (in the third part of the day) a brahmin may 
pursue any of the above mentioned activities for the sake of 
sustenance. But immediately thereafter he must perform 
expiatory rites. 

107. In the fourth part of the day he must keep ready 
clods of earth for the ablution as well as gingelly seed$» Ku$a 
grass and flowers. The bath must be taken in natural water. 

108. Baths are of eight types: (1) the daily bath) (2) bath 
on special occasion, (3) bath for the realisation of desires, (4) 
bath as an ancillary for a sacred rite, (5) bath for removal of 
dirt) (6) rubbing and scrabbing, (7) Acamanaand (8) plunging 
into a river. 

109. A man who has not taken his bath is unfit for 
performing Japas, sacriiictal offerings, etc. The morning bath is 
for that purpose. It is called theNitya Snana (the daily bath). 

110. The Naimittika Snana (or the bath on special 
occasions) is the bath taken to wipe off the impurity on account 
of touching a Cindala, corpse, faeces, etc. or a woman in her 
menses. 

111. The Kamya Snana (bath for the realisation of 
desires) is the bath taken in holy rivers, etc., when the moon enters 
Pusya star and on similar occasions in accordance with the 
instructions of an astrologer. A man free from such desires 
need not take this bath. 

112. The Kriyahga Snftna (bath as an ancillary rite in 
the course of a religious ceremony) is the bath taken by a man 
on the occasion of wonhips of gods and guests for the recital 
of special Mantras. 

113. Malapakar^atia Snina U the bath taken for the 
removal of bodily impurities and not for any other purpose. It 
can be taken in ordinary tanks, natural puddles, holy tanks, 
rivers, etc. 



Garu44i 




1 14. This bath U only a natural activity of a man. The 
%vaters make the body clean and if it is taken in waters special 
merits also do accrue. 

115. Marjana or nibbing and wiping the body with 
water repeating Mirjana mantra removes sin quickly. T^e 
Nttya» Naimittika» Kriyaoga and Malipakarsapa baths are to 
be perfmned in hot or cold water in case there is no holy tank 
or river nearby. 

116. Water taken out (from well) is better than sur&ce 
water; still better is the water from springs and fountains; still 
better is the lake water and still better is the river water* 

117* The water in a holy place is still better and the 
Ganges water is the holiest of all. The Gaiigi water removes 
all sins committed dll death. 

118« The Ganges water is better than the water in Gayk 
or Kuruk^etra. It is the holiest. 

119* Baths in the ni^t are recommended on the occa* 
sions of birth of a soa» the special conjunctions of planets and 
stars, the transit of the sun from one zodiacal sign to another 
and at*the sight ofRdhu (i*e. during lunar eclipse) and not 
otherwise* 

120. The bath early in the morning, at dawn or imme¬ 
diately after sunrise removes even MahApatakas (deadly sins) 
since it is on a par with the Prajipatya rite. 

121* A person who takes early morning bath regularly 
for a year with great faith acquires the merit accruing from the 
performance of Prijapatya for twelve years. 

122* He who wishes toe worldly enjoyment as expansive 
as the moon and the sun shall regularly take the early morning 
bath for the two months Migha and Pbalguna (Mid*Jan. to 
Mid-March). 

123* He who takes the early morning bath and takes 
only Havisya food in the month ot Migha quelb all cruel sins 
witlun a month. 

124. If the devotee takes the bath recalling any one, his 
mother, father, brother, friend or preceptor he shall receive a 
twelfth of his meric. 

125. Amalaka (BcnlylicMyrobalam) fruits appeal to Lord 



L213.138 


631 


especially on the eleventh day of the lunar fortnight. A 
person desiring prosperity shall always take bath with the 
Amalaka fruits. 

126. Distress, fiune, shortage of life, wealth, death, health 
and achievement of all deures are the cflects of taking oil bath 
on the seven days from Sunday to Saturday respecdvely. 

127. A person who observes &st, a person observing rites 
and a person who has got his hair cropp^ by a barber shall 
not take oil bath. He will be blessed by the Goddess of Fortune 
if he does not touch <ul. 

128. After performing the bath (in the manner mention* 
ed before), the devotee sh^l perfmn Tarpa^a to the manes, 
gods and human beings. Standing in water navel-deep he 
shall raise his head up and cratemplate on the manes, etc. 

129. **May my manes come and accept my handful 
water libation.” Saying this he shall offer three ^ndfuls each of 
libation Cowards the sky and towards his right side. 

. 130. After wearing dry clothes and sitting on a dry place 
where Kuia grass has been spread, the devotee conscious of the 
rules shall perform Tarpai^ and never in a vessel. 

131*133. ^Whatever is crud and impure in this water 
that has not subsided so far shall be removed by this*, reciting 
this Mantra he shall tsJte water in his left hand and sprinkle it 
towards the south west. This will ward off the malignant 
demons. 

134*136. ‘May Indra, Varuna, Bfhaspati, Savitf, Bhaga, 
and the ^es Sanaka and others sanctify me and quell the sins 
committed by me by words, mind, body or acting and the tins 
due to taking prohibited food, and acceptance of gifts from 
sinners and let everything in the world from Brahmi to a blade 
of grass be pleased*, saying this he shall sprinkle three handfuls 
of water. This is SanilQepatarpaQa (Tarpa^a in brief). 

137. He shall then worship gods without Iiaving any 
distinction among Brahma and others with the Mantras per* 
taining to Brahmk, VifQu, Rudr^ Savitr and Mitri-Varupa. 

138. He shall bow to all Devas with their respective 
Mantras and place Bower offerings separately for them saying 
*Namab’« 



632 


Garu4c Pur^a 


139-140. He shall worship Vis^u who incorporates in 
Himself all the deities and also Bh^kara (the sun). He who 
ofTcrs flowers or water reciting the Purusa Sukta Mantra 
has actually wonhipped the whole world, the movable as well 
as the immovable. The devotee shall wonhip Janardana with 
other Tantrika Mantras too. 

141. Arghya offering must be made at first. The appli¬ 
cation of unguents, offerings of flowers, incenses and the fruits 
as Naivedya must be performed in due order. 

142. The Marjana and Acamana types of Snana is only 
with water inside the house. The water is invoked with 
Mantras and holy waters are psychically invoked with the 
Aghamar^ana Sukta. Everyday this must be done thrice. 

143. The procedure of bach has been laid down thus by 
great men. While taking bath Brahmins, K^atriyas and VaUyas 
have to repeat Mantras. A Sudra has to observe silence during 
bath and perform Namaskara also silently. 

144. Teaching of Vedas is called Brahmayajfia; Tarpapa 
is called Picryajfia; performance of Homa is Devayajfla; 
offering of oblations is Bhutayajfia and the hospitality to guests 
is Nryajfia. 

145-146. If these religious rites are performed in a cow¬ 
shed, tenfold merits accrue; if performed in the chamber of 
sacrificial fire hundredfold merits accrue; if performed in the 
abode and presence of enlightened persons thousandfold merits 
accrue; if performed in holy places hundred thousandfold 
merits accrue; if performed in temples crorefold merits accrue 
and if performed in the presence of Vi^^u endless merits accrue. 

147. In the fifth part of the day man must distribute 
foodstuffs among the Pitn» gods, human beings and insects. 

148. He who first gives excellent food to a brahmin and 
then shares his food with friends attains Svarga (Heaven).. 
Hence, one must make gifts of food. 

149< One should take s%veet things first. Savouries and 
cooked rice must be taken in the middle. Pui^ent, bitter and 
astringent things must be taken in the end with water and milk. 

150. During nights, green vegetables must be completely 
or to a great degree abjured. Never should a man take a food 
stuff exclusively of one taste. 



L214.2 


633 


151. The sumptuous food rice, etc of a brahmin is on a 
par with nectar; that of a Kyatriya is like milk; that of a Vai<ya 
is real food and that of a Sudra is like blood. 

152. Goddess of Fortune and wealth resides in the place 
where people observe fast on new moon day for at least a year. 

153. The G&rhapatya ftre is located in the belly; the 
Dakrit^a fire is located in the back; the Ahavanlya fire is locaN 
ed in the mouth and the Satya fire along with all others is 
located in the head. 

154. He who understands the five types of fires is called 
Ahit&gni. The body, the water, the Soma all these are differ* 
ent types of food. 

155-156. The Prana, the fire, and the Sun—these three 
are the selfsame enjoyers. Reciting the Mantra» ‘Xet food be 
for my strength. Let there be happineo to the earth, to the 
waters, to the fire, to the wind atMl to me also after the food 
has been digested fully.*’ Having rubbed belly with the hand 
the betel leaf should be chewed. 

157*159. The »xth and seventh parts of the day shall be 
spent listening to Itihisas, Purizias etc. attentively. Then after 
taking bath the evening prayers should be offered. Thus I have 
mentioned the daily rites, O brahmin. He who reads this or 
hears it will attain heaven. Keiava is the author of all these 
rules of conduct. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND 


FOURTEEN 


Dharm^dstra 


Brakmd said: 

1*2. Now, 1 shall explain the rules and rites regarding 
bath since all other rites are based on bath. The person who 
wishes to take bath shaU bring earth, cowdung, gingelly seeds, 
Kuia grass jgnd fr^gcmi flowers at the time of bath. He must 
place all them on the bank in a secluded place along 
with the scented water. 



634 


Garu4a Purina 


3-8. The earth and the cowdung should be divided into 
three parts. With water and earth he should wash his hands and 
feet. With the sacred thread worn as usual (Upaviti) and the tuft 
tied he should perform Acamana silently with the mantra “Om 
ururh hi raja Varupo^ Vanipiya namah” he must propitiate 
the water and circumambulate. With the mantra ‘*Om ye te 
latam*.... svarkah sv&ha” he must whir) the water all round. 
With the ^ “Oih sumitriyi na*.... yafica vayam dvi^mah'* 
he shall take two handfuls of water and scatter it to the north 
and he shall then wash his feet, calves and hips three times. 

9-11. He shall wash bis bands and perform Acamana 
and then bow to the water. With the seven Vykb|rti mantras 
he shall perform Acamaiu again. He shall then rub his limbs 
with earth repeating the mantra “Idsuh VifQuh*....paihsure.’* 
Then he shall lace the sun and take his dip repeating the mantra 
—“Om &po asman matarah*-*'- hiciri pQtaemi". 

12-13. Then he shall clean the vessels, dip and dip 
again himself slowly. Repeating the mantra “Oih raa nastoke*.... 
sadasi tva havamahe*' be shall rub cowdung over the limbs. 

14-16. Then he shall dip himself into the water repeat¬ 
ing the various Varupa mantras such as “Imath me^.... satyk- 
iQCUyah” “Tattvk y&nu.... pramotih”. etc. 

17. After plunging again and standing up he shall drink 
the water from Kuia grass. 

18-19. The nine Rks, viz—“Apo hi sthk and the two 
following ones, “Devirkpa”* and the next, “Apo dcvi”; the Rk 
“Drupadadiva”*, the ^ “Sanno dctd”“ the Rk “Apo deW” the 
Rks called “Pkvamanyah”—all these nine Rks must be repeated. 

20-21. Repeating the mantra ‘Gitpatirmk’^ he shall 
slowly plunge again. He shall then repeat the other mantras of 
Varupa according to hit ability. 

1. ftV. 1.24.8. 

2. KS. 23.1.11. 

3. VS. 6. 22. 

4. RV. 1.22.17. 

3. Uid. 10.17.10. 

6. IM. 1.114.8. 

7. Ibid. 1.2S.19. 

8. MS. i.1.11. 

9. AV. 6.11S.S. 

10. RV. 10.9.4. 

11. VS. 4.4. 



1 . 214.39 


635 


22. The first dip and the last dip should be accompanied 
by the repetition of Pranava^ the seven Vyahftis and the 
Giyatzl. 

23. The Marjana should be done inside watefv The 
Aghamar$a^^ mantra should be repeated thrice. 

24. Other Mantras that he remembers correctly can be 
repeated with great devotion and concentration. 

25. He can repeat Pranava and Gayatrl as many times 
as possible. Or he can remember Vi^^u the imperishable. 

26. Apa^ (waters) constitute the residence of Viipu. He 
is called Appati, hence Lord V4nu and the waters should be 
remembered. [For Mantras see Teat] 

27-29. With the Mantra‘Tad Vias 

many plunges as possible. G&yatri is the Mantra for the re¬ 
membrance of Vt$i>u. Various mantras should be repeated in the 
course of the bath. 

30. After the bath is over he should wear clean dry 
cloth. He should wash his hands and feet with earth. 

31. He must perform Acamana repeatedly. Bath and 
Meal are to be taken with mantras repeated. Drupada* mantra 
should be repeated three times. Aghamarsapa Mantra^ is also to 
be repeated. 

32. After Acamana he should repeat the Asu mantra. Then 
he should worship the sun with flower offerings above the head# 

33-34. After scattering water he should repeat the mantra 
Udu tyam^, Gitram* etc« Then be should look at the sun and 
repeat the mantras ^‘Taccdkfuh'’^ ctc» and ^‘Harhsah 3ucisad'^ 
etc. and worship the sun with Gayatri. 

35-36. The Anuvaka ^^Vibbrat” etc. and Puru^ Sukta, 
$iva Saiikalpa and Man^ala Brahma^ should be repeated and 
Japayajfia performed duly. 

37-39. Adhyatmavidya should be practised for the fulfil¬ 
ment of Japa. Medb&, Dhrti» Vik, V&^ivara, 

1. BV. 10.190. 

2 . JM. 1 . 22 . 20 . 

9. AV. 6.115.3. 

4. EV. 10.190. 

5. IM. 1.50.1. 

6. 115.1. 

7. /(M;-7.66.16. 

8. /M. 4.40.5. 



636 


Garuia Purdi^ 


Tuftii Umi, Anindhati^ Sad, the Mitrs (mothers) Jaya, Vija- 
yi, Sivitri^ Sant), Svihi, Svadhi, Dh^ti and Aditi shall be 
duly worshipped. 

40. The wives of sages, the Virgins and the Kamya* 
devatia should be propitiated. He who wishes for everythi^r 
auspicious should propitiate the goddess Sarvamangala. 

4L **May the whole universe beginning with Brahxn** 
and ending with a blade of grass be propitiated/* saying thus 
three handfuls of water should be sprinkled. Tarpa^ is thus 
duly performed* 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTEEN 

Dhamaidsira 


Brakmd said : 

1-2. I shall explain Tarpapa which propitiates the gods 
and the manes. Om, may the spirits Modasbe propitiated. Om, 
may Praniodas be propitiated. Om, may Sumukhas be pro¬ 
pitiated. Om, may Durmukhis be propitiated. Om, may 
Vighnai be propitiated. Om, may Vighnakart&rah (those 
who hinder) be propitiated. Om, may the metres be propitiated. 
Om, may the Vedas be propitiated. Om, may the medicinal 
herbs be propitiated. Om, may the San&tana (the Eternal) be 
propitiated. Om, may the other Acaryas be propitiated. Om, 
may the parts of the year be pre^itiated. Om, may the gods be 
propitiated. Om> may the celestial damsels be propitiated. Om, 
may the Devindhakas be propitiated. Om, may the oceans be 
propitiated. Om, may the serpents be propitiated. Om, may the 
mountains be propitiated. Om, may the rivers, men and Yaksas 
be proptiated. Om, may the maiignant spiriu be propitiated. 
Om, may the Piiacas (the ghosts) be propitiated. Om, may the 
Supsuipas be propitiated. Om, may the Bhuta be propitiated. 
Om, may the four kinds of living beings be propitiated. Om, 
mayDakya be propitiated. Om, may ^cetas propitiated.. 



1.215.6. 


637 


OfU} may Marld be propitiated. Om» may Atri be pro|atiated. 
Om^ may AngiraB be propitiated. Om, may Pulastya be propU 
dated. Om, may Pulaha be propitiated. Om, may Kratu be 
propitiated. Om« may N&rada be propitiated. Ozn, may Bhfgu 
be propitiated. Om, may Vilv&mitra be propitiated. Om, may 
Kaiyapa be propitiated. Om, may Jamadagni be propitiated. 
Om, may Vaditha be propitiated. Om^ may Sviyambhuva be 
propitiated. Om, may Svaroct$a be propitiated. Om^may Tamasi^ 
be propitiated. Om, may Raivau ht propitiated. Om, may 
Callus be propitiated. Om, may Mahatejas be propitiated. 
Om, may VaivaBvata be propitiated. Om» may Dhniva be 
propitiated. Om, may Dhava be propitiated. Om, may Anila 
be propitiated. Om, may Prabhi$a be propitiated. 

3. Wearing the sacred thread in the Torm of a garland 
Om, may Sanaka be propitiated. Om, may Sanandana 

be propitiated. Om, may Sanicana be propitiated. Om, may 
Kapila be propitiated. Om, may Asuri be propitiated. Om, may 
Vodhu be propitiated. Om, may the Kavyaviti of men be pro¬ 
pitiated. Om, may Soma be propitiated. Om, may Yama be 
propitiated. Om, may Aryama be propitiated. 

4. Wearing the sacred thread over the right shoulder and 
under the left arm (Pr&clnivltl) • 

Om, may the manes Agnisvattas be propitiated. Om, may 
the manes Somasthas (Saumyisa^) be propitiated. Om, may the 
manes Barhifads be propitiated. Obeisance toYama. Obeisance to 
Dharmaraja. Obeisance to Mrtyu. Obeisance to Antaka. Obeis¬ 
ance to Vaivasvata. Obeisance to Kala. Obeisance to the slayer 
of all living beings. Obeisance to Audumbara. Obeisance to 
Dadhna. Obeisance to Nila. Obeisance to Parame$(hin. Obeisance 
to Vrkodara (Brahman). Obeisance to Citra. Obeisance to 
Citragupta. 

5. May the universe from Br&ihma to a blade of grass be 
propitiated. Obeisance and Svadhi to the manes, Obeisance and 
Svadha to the grandfathers. May our Pitp of gentle face, the 
Agnif vattas come unto this sacrifice through the paths of gods, 
elated with Svadha; let them protect us and speak within me* 

6. Omi repeating the mantra Orjam vahantl^^ etc. may 
the Pitfs be propitiated* Obeisance to Pitfs and Svadha, Obeis- 

1. VS .2.51 



638 


Gafu4^ Puriifa 


Ance to Pitamahas (grandfathert) and Svadha. Obeisance to 
M&timahas (maternal grandiathers) and Svadha. Obeisance to 
Pramitimahas (maternal great grandfathen) and Svadha. 
Obeisance to Vrddhapramit&mahas (maternal great-great* 
grandfathers) and Svadha. I^t the imperishable Pitfs of Kta* 
mahaa be propitiated. These Pitfs within me be propitiated. 
Then repeat the mantras ^^Pilarah Svadhadhvam** etc. and 
**Madhu vita rtiyate*’,^ etc. 

7. Then Aftjali (jcMned palms) be offered to great grand¬ 
father. Obeisance unto ye, O Ktrs. Obeisance to Rasa. Obeis¬ 
ance to ye, O PitfS. Obeisance to Sofa. Obeisance to ye O Pitfs. 
Obeisance to Jiva. Obeisance to ye O Pitrs. Obeisance to 
Svadhi. Obeisance to ye O Pitrs. Obeisance to Manyu. 
Obeisance to ye O Pitri« Our homes are your residence, 
O ye Pitfs. Three Ahjalis are offered to maternal grand¬ 
fathers. Then to mothers and others. 

8. Those who are bom in our family, those who died 
isiuclesa, let those be propitiated. I have offered water by 
squeezing this cloth. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTEEN 

DharmMitra 

Brahm&said : 

1. I shall explain the characteristics of the Homa called 
Vaijvadeva. First repeat the mantra ^^Kravyidam Agnim^^*^ etc 
af^er kindling the fire and performing ParyuksaM (Sprinkling 
of water) Om, O P&vaka (6re god) Vailvanara, here is a seat 
unto you sanctified by Aranigarbha. 

O Mah& Brahman ! I am wakening up Vaiiv&nara. Then 
repeat the mantra *^Oni Vaifvanare^a*** etc. 

2. Oxh Sv&hk to Prajipati. Oih Svaha to Soma. Oih 
SvihA to Bfhaspati. Oih Svihi to Agni and Soma. Oih Svahi 
to Indra and Agni. Oih Svaha to Earth and Heaven. Om 
Sviha to Indra, Oih Sv&hi to all Devas. Oxh Svahi to Brahman. 
Oih Svkhi to waters, to herbs and plants, to the planets, to the 


I. RV. 1.90.6 



L2I7,7 


639 

deities, to Indra, to Indra’s officers, to Yama, to the officer of 
Yama, to all beings roaming the firmament, to Vasudhi Pitfs. 
I offer oblation to those beings which, in their woe, roam in 
the mid-world and desire all round nourishment. May Pu 9 }ipad 
grant me nourishment. May he grant everything even to 
Can^aias and crows. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN 

DhatTnaSAstra 

BrchmA said : 

1. I shall mention, in brief, the process of Sandhy& for 
the twice-bom. Whether he is pure or impure, whether he is in 
any plight or not, whoever rememben the lotus*eyed Lord 
Vifpu is pure internally and externally. 

2«6. Om, the metre is Giyatrl. The sage is Viivlmitra. 
It has three feet. The ocean is its belly. The moon and the 
sun are its eyes. The fire is its mouth, Vi}nu is its heart, 
Brahma is its head. Rudra is its tufl. Its use is in the Lnvesti* 
ture of sacred thread. Om Bhul> Nyasa on the foot, Bhuvah on 
the knees, Svah on the chest, Mahah on the head, Janab on the 
tuft, Tapah on the throat, Satyam on the forehead. Om 
obeisance to the heart. Oih Bhub Sv&ha to the head. Oih 
Bhuvab Vausa{ to the tuft. Oih Svab Hum to the Kavaca. Orii 
Bhurbhuvab Svab Pha| to the Astra. Om Bhub Om Bhuvab 
Om Svah Om Mahab Oih Janab Om Tapab Om Satyam. 
Then the three-footed Gayatri Mantra Apo Jyotiraso ’mrtam 
Brahma Bhurbhuvasvar Om.*’* Then the Mantras “Suryaica*” 
in the morning *‘Apah punantu*” etc. in the midday and 
“Agnisca^” etc. in the cvemng. 

7. O you, the grantress of Boons, you are of white hue in 
the forenoon. You the great goddess of Gay atr! wearing white 
cloth, You are seated on the shoulders of a bull. You hold the 
excellent trident. 

1, TA. 10.15.1. 

2. /A/. 10.25<l. 

S. IHdu 10.23.1. 

4. IM. 10.24.1. 



Garu^a Puri$a 




8« May the goddess of Gayatr! of dark hue come at 
midday» like the flower of Ata^ deity seated on 

Garudaj wearing yellow cloth and holding ^ahkha, Cakra, 
Gadii and Padma. 

9. She is of white hue, seated in the solar sphere on a 
white Iptus. She is decorated with white flowers. May Sarasvatl 
the form of G&yatil in the evening, the goddess granting boons 
come hither. 

10-11* The various mantras—**Orii Apohii^ha”* ctc.“Oih 
Tastna aranga mam avo*** etc. *‘Ora sumitriyk na** etc. “Om 
Drupadidiva*’* etc ‘‘Ofh rtaflea satyafica*'^ etc arc to be 
repeated duly. 

12. The Mantras to be repeated thereafler—Orti»the sage 
of G&yatrl is Viivimitra; the metre is G&yatri. Savitr is the 
deity. Its use is in Japa ^‘Om udu tyam.’* etc, **Om citraih 
dev4nam^’» etc. “Oih uccakM’** etc. “Om Vi<vaU8Cak?ub^’^ 
etc. are to be repeated. 

13. Born of the excellent summit, residing on the moun¬ 
tain ou the surface of the Earth and permitted by Brahma O 
Goddess I be pleased to depart according to convenience. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTEEN 

Dharmaidstra 

Brahntd said : 

!• O Vyasa, I shall explain the procedure of Sraddha 
which yields worldly enjoyments and salvation to men. The 
performer of Sriddba shall in>dte Brahmins particularly 
Brabmacarim (unmarried students). 

2. For the worship of devas, the sacred thread should be 
in the normal way and for the worship of Pitfs, the sacred thread 
should be in the Praclnavita form (on the right shoulder and 
under the leA arm), when the worship of feet is to be performed 
‘Saxhyoga' mantra is to be used. 

1. RV. 10.&.1 

2. ibid. I0.9.S 

3. AV. 6.115.3 

4. RV. 10.190 

5. JbU. 1.115.1 

6. /W. 7.66.16 

7. Ibid. 10.81.3 



I,2i8J 


641 

3. The hoiuebolder asks—Om^ you all have come ?’* 
When they reply—well. Wcll| we have come** the house* 
holder says—**Om, To Viivedevas (to all Devas) ^ here is the 
water ofiering and Ai^hya—Svihi** and offers the sacred deity 
water through the bent Kuia grass on the feet of the brahmin 
intended to be (the representative of) Viivedevas. 

4. The householder faces the south. He wears the 
sacred thread in the opposite way and repeats the names and 
Gotra of the person to whom he performs Srkddha and says 
^^here is the offering of water to the feet and Arghya, SvadhA.’* 
He takes the sacred Pitr water and pours it through the bent 
Kuja grass alongwith flowers over the feet of the brahmin 
intended to represent the PitfS. 

5. Similarly, for maternal grandfather and others. 
*Here is the Acamaolya water, Svihi, Svadbi*, Saying to it u 
poured into the hand of the brahmin. *Here is Arghya,* saying 
so» the flower is handed to the brahmin. 

S'?. The householder then says that in such and such 
a placcj in such and such a month, in such and such transit of 
the sun, in such and such Tithi (day of the lunar fortnight he 
is preparing to perform the Vaifvadeva Sraddha of hU father, 
grandfather and great grandfather of such and such gotra and 
named such and such. 

He asks the brahmins Ts the seat ready ?* When they 
say 'Yes, ic is ready* he begins Orb Bhu^, Oih Bhuvab, Orb 
Sva^, Om Mahab, Om Janab, Om Tapab> Otb Satyam—These 
are the seven Vy&hrtis. With these he makes the brahmin 
representing gods sit facing the east. Then he makes the other 
brahmin representing the Pitrs sic facing the north. Then he 
goes round them saying—* ^Obeisance, obeisance, always obeis¬ 
ance to the deities, to the Pitfs of great Yogic power, obeisance 
to Svadha and Svahi** He repeats this thrice. 

Again, he takes the Sankalpa as mentioned in the first 
paragraph of this section. Om Svaha unto the Viive Devas. I 
shall invoke the Viive De\*as. When they give permission 
saying ^Yes Invoke*, he repeats the Mantra *Orii Viive devib 
irputemam* etc. upto ^Rajaoam parayamasi* and invokes 
^May the powerful Viive Devas of noble dignity come. Those 
who are engaged in this Sriddba shall be cautious. Om, may 



642 Garuia 

the platform be free from Asuras and Rakfasas. After this, he 
icattert barley graint thrice. 

8. The houieholder then lays:* Oih, I shall prepare 
the Pktra (the vessel) when they permit saying ^es do’ he 
takes the blades of Kula grass and tmsts them in the form of 
Trivft Pavitra repeating the Mantras ‘Pavitre stho vaifnavyan’ 
and ^Oih Vilpurmanasi pute sthab’ and places the Pavitra 
inside the vessel 

9. Repeating the mantra *Oih ianno devib’ he pours 
water in the vessel. Repeating the mantra ^Om yavosi’ etc. he 
puts the yava grains. Repeating the mantra *Gandha Dvirkm 
etc* he offers the Kents. Repeating the mantra ‘Oih yi divyi 
ipah* etc. he offers water to the brahmin and places the Sarhirava 
and Pavitra near the brahmin. Then pouring the Saihirava 
water in the former vessel he places it over the Kuia grass 
upright and places a blade of Kula over it also. 

10. Here are these scents, flowers, incense, lamp, a pair 
of garments and Sacred Thread to the VUve Devas. Obeisance. 
liCt this offer of Kents, etc., be unimpaired. The brahmins say 
*Be it k’. 

11. Then he seeks permusion saying *ShaIl I perform 
the Sr&ddha of Pitrs, grandfather, great grandfather, maternal 
grandfather, maternal great grandfather and maternal great 
great grandfather ?'* When the brahmins say ^Yes, do\ he 
repeats 'Orii Devatabhyab’ etc thrice. 

12. Here is the seat and Svadhi unto our father, grand¬ 
father, etc. of such and such nsunes accompanied by their wives. 
Saying so, he places the seat towards the left of the brahmin. 
Om, I invoke the Pitfs. The brahmin says ^yes invoke’. He 
repeats the mantra ^Oro ayantu nah pi tar ah’, etc. Thus the 
invocation. Then 'Orii may the Asuras and Rak^sas clear 
away from the platform.’ He scatters Tila grains. Repeating 
the mantra ^Tilosi Somadaivatyo’ etc and bands over Tila 
seeds to the brahmin. 

13. After giving scents and flowers to the brahmin he 
takes the Pitip&tra and repeats *Yi divyk’ etc ‘Om. My father 
of such and such gotra and such and such a name accompanied 
by thy wife, here is Arghya and Svadha unto thee. The vesKl 

I. RV. 10.9.4 



L218.18 


643 

with Pavitra is then placed on the left side of the brahmin 
over the Kuia grass. Repeating the Mantra ‘Om Pitfbhyab 
stha namasi* he places the vessel face down. 

14. ‘Om, may the worlds occupied by the Pitrs be 
sanctified. Thou art the seat of the Pitrs/ he touches the 
vessel face down. Thou art the ball of rice soaked in gM. He 
asks the Pitrbrahmin *ShaIl I place it on fire ? then he says» 
*Yes do* Oni Svaha unto Agni the bearer of Kavya and 
sprinkles two drops of ghi in the hands of Deva brahmin and 
gives a portion of the ball of rice in his hand. A portion of the 
rice is kept for the ball of rice (p]Qda)and the remaining is put 
in the vessel of Pitfs and that of maternal gnndfather. 

15. He covers the vessel with Kuia grass and lifts it 
with both the hands kept prone. Repeats the mantra *Om 
Prthivi te patram* etc and invokes the vessel. Repeating the 
mantra *Idam VUpuh* etc, the thumb of the brahmin is placed 
in the middle of the rice. 

16. Repeating the mantra *Apa hata' he scatters Yava 
grains thrice. Reaping the mantra ‘Oth Nihanmi* etc. he scatter 
the sum of money intended. 

17. Odi Svihi, here is the rice with ghI, pickles and 
drinking water to the gods named ‘Madbuvilocana* and with 
water and Kuia the same is contemplated as such. Om, may 
this rice be unimpaired. Om, may the contemplated be realued. 

18. Then wearing the sacred thread in the opposite 
direction be places all foodituf&, side-dishes, ghi, etc in a vessel in 
front of the Pitrbrahmin and places a blade of grass half cover* 
ing the vessel and half over the ground. Then lifts the vessel 
with his palms supine repeating the mantra ^Orii Prthivi* etc. 
Repeating the mantra *Idam Vis^ob' he places the thumb of 
the brahmin in supine position ov^ the foodstuff. Then he 
repeats the Mantra ^Apabata’ etc and scatten giogelly seeds. 
He then kneels with his left knee touching the ground. Here is 
the foodstuff with side dishes, drinking water and ghi, devoid 
of forbidden food, and Svadhi unto roy Pitn, Pitamaha, etc. 
accompanied by their wives and named such and such 
belonging to such and such Gotra. The Sahkalpa (contem¬ 
plation) ibr the food is the mantra *Om Orjam Vahantib* 
etc. He then pours a few drops of water facing the South. 



Garuia Pur^^a 


644 

19. Otii, may this Sriddha be unbnpaired* Orii» may 
the contemplated be realised. Odx BhO Bhuva^ Sva^, and 
after that he recites the mantra *Om Madhu etc. 

20-21. He shall then say—be pleased to take food 
conveniently and refraining from speech/ He shall then repeat 
the Piff Stotra beginning with *Sapla Vyadhi^t* ‘Seven 
hunters are in the Dai&rna lands. The deer are in the mountain 
KiUafijara. The Cakravika birds are in the Saradvlpa and the 
Swans are in the Minasa lake. Those brahmins of noble iamily 
and the extensive knowledge of the Vedas are in Kuruk^etra. You 
have started on a long journey and are likely to be tired out by 
them/^ 

22. Then he shall say ‘Be satiated/ With the sacred 
thread worn left-ways and facing souths the mantra ‘Om 
Agnidagdhk^* etc shall be repeated. “May the Pitys who were 
duly cremated and those who were not, in our family be pleased 
with what I offer on the Earth and becoming satiat^ may 
they attain the highest goal/’ Saying so he shall place the rice 
soaked in ghi on the Kuia grass on the ground pouring water 
over it. 

23. Then water is to be offered to the brahmins in 
order as the last mouthful. He then repeats Gayatxl with the 
Vyahrtis and the mantra ‘Madhuv&ti* etc. He then asks the 
Deva brahmin ‘The food appealed to you, I hope^ When he 
says ‘Yes very much’, he asks—‘Om, what shall I do with the 
remaining food ?’ The brahmin replies ‘Let it be partaken by 
you along with your near and dear’. Then he asks the Pitf 
brahmin wearing the sacred thread left ways. ‘Om I hope you 
are satiated?’ He replies ‘Om we are satiat^’. Thereafter the 
ground is sprinkled with water, a circle and a square are 
drawn and gingelly seeds are scattered. 

24. O my father ! of this name, of this gotra, accom¬ 
panied by thy wife, here is the seat for the Pi^a unto thee 
and Svadhi. Similarly, for grandfather too in the middle of the 
line. Then Giyatri with Vy&hrtis is repeated and the Mantra 
‘Madhu Vhtk* etc is repeated thrice. The ball of rice soaked 
in ghl is placed on the blade of Kufa grass involung father and 
grandfather with respective names Gotra, etc, saying ‘Here is 
the PiQ^a unto Thee and Svadhh. Then with the Mantras as 



L218.27 


64 & 


before, the piiyiA is scattered. Near the *Om may the 

Lepabhuks (those who take lambatives) be pleased/ Then 
he wipes his baud on the Kuia grass. With the water washing 
the pii^da he repeats the mantra and says my father (name 
Gotra, etc.) accompanied by thy mfe, I am making this water 
libation unto thee and to those that are after thee. Svadhi 
unto thee.” Thus the ^ sprinkled. Then he places 

the Pi^dapatra face down. With hands joined together be 
repeats the Mantra—Oih Pilar Midayadhvam’ etc. Touching 
water he turns about on the left and faces the north. He then 
takes Praniyama thrice and says obeisance unto the six seasons. 

25. Turning again to the left a flower is handed over. 
May this rite be unimpaired and unbothered. May merit 
accrue. Facing the south he repeats the Mantra *And madanta 
Pitarah’ etc. Untying the upper cloth, and joining palms he 
says ^Obeisance unto ye, obeisance unto ye. O Pitfs, rice or 
the house is given.” Saying this he looks at the house (all 
round). **Herc is your cloth, O Pitfs of this Gotra and 
Svadhi.” Then the thread is given. He lifts the water pitcher 
with the left hand. Repeating the Mantra ^Urjarh vahantlh* 
the water is poured over the piod&< 

26. From the water pitcher placed before, the remaining 
water is taken and the pind^^ are sprinkled. Invoking the 
pind&i scents etc are given. Kuia grass and a leaf is placed 
over the pii^a. Then he repeats the Mantra—”Ak?anoamI”— 
etc, three times. 

27. Similarly, everything is performed for the brahmins 
representing maternal grandfather and others—Acamana ^*Om, 
may the sprinkling be excellent.” He sprinkles the water. 
^Om, Gods are stationed in the middle water. Everything is 
founded in the water. May the water placed in the hand of the 
brahmin be holy into us all.’ Then he hands over the water to the 
brahmin, **Lak^ini is stationed in the lotus. Lak^i stays in 
the cowshed always. X«et there be good will of thine for ever.’ 
He repeats the Mantra ^Somasya’ etc. 'Whatever is progres* 
sive and conducive to the wet&re in the world shall be mine 
forever. Om, may this be unimpaired and unbothered.’ Then 
Yava grains are given. 



646 


Garu4^ Purina 


28. ^May the food and drink offered to my father, 
grandfather and great grandfather with their wive&, belonging 
to such and such gotra, be everlasting/ He then hands over 
the gingelly seeds. The brahmin says ^Be it so* ^May the 
benediction of maternal grandfather and others be unending. 
Om, may the Pitfs be non cniel. May our gotra flourish. May 
our donors flourish. May Vedas and progeny flourish. May 
not our faith recede. May there be much for us to give. May 
cur foodstuffs increase. May we get guests. May there be 
mendicants flocking to us. Let us not beg of anyone. May 
these blessings be given. 

29. May there be good will.* When the brahmin 
^ays—^Be it so* in the place where pi^d^ given he drops the 
Pavitra for the sake of Arghya. He then takes up the Pavitra 
and Kuia and with it he touches the brahmin. 

He asks—'Shall I recite the Svadhi*. He replies 
let it be recited*. 'Orh, let the Svadhi be announced to father, 
grandfather and greatgrandfather of such and such names 
along with their wives.’ When the brahmin says—’Liet the 

Svadha be presented* he shall repeat Ute Mantra 'Urjaih 
Vahantib*' and pour water. 

30. ^Om. May Viivedevas be pleased in this Yajfla’ 
saying thus he places Yava grains in the hand of the brahmin. 
When he says 'Om, let them be pleased* he shall repeat 'Oih 
devatibhyali’ etc. three times. 

31. Looking down he moves the Pinda Patras to and fro 
and performs Acamana. He wears the sacred thread in the 
' normal way and faces the east 'Orh, I offer unto thee of such 
and such gotra, nauned so and so, of brahmanical clan and 
accompanied by thy wife, this silver piece as Dakfi^a for the 
fulfilment of this Sraddha.* Saying so the Dak 9 ii;i& is handed 
over. Similarly, theOak^inais given to the Devabrahmana also. 

32. Then facing the Pitf Brahmin Che question is put 
^Are the Pi^das ready*. He replies *Yes very well.’ He poun the 
milk over the Pinda. Then the Pi^da is moved to and fro. The 
guest brahmin keeps the Pipda Pitra in supine position. The 
Mantra 'Om Vije vaje’ etc is repeated and Pi^da is cast. 
Then the mantra ‘Amavijaiya* etc U repeated and the Devas 
are bid farewell to. 



1.219.3 


647 


'With the Mantra 'Onii Abhiramyatam’ the PiCf brahmin is bid 
farewell to. The householder returns without the brahmins 
following. The Pindas are then given to cows, etc. 

33*34. This is the rule of procedure in a Sraddha. If 
this is read it quells sins. Wherever Sriddha is performed 
according to these rules the ancestors are everlastingly propitiat¬ 
ed. The performer is sure to attain heaven. Thus I have ex¬ 
plained the Parvapa Sraddha which helps the manes attain 
Brahmaloka. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETEEN 

DharmaSdstra 


Brahmd s<iid\ 

l« I shall explain the Nityajr&ddha (the daily Sraddha). 
As the previous one> this too has a special variety. 

Om, I shall perform the Sriddha of my fatheti grand¬ 
father and great grandfather of such and such names» such and 
such Gotra and accompanied by their wives by means of cook¬ 
ed rice offered to you,. 

The procedure of seating^ etc has to be followed (at 
before) except that of Viive devas. 

2. I shall explain Vrddhiiriddha (i.e. Sraddha on special 
joyous occasions). As before everything is followed and its 
special variety too. On the joyous occasions of seeing the new 
bom son’s face, etc, Vrddbi Sriddha has to be performed. The 
brahmins face the east while sitting. The householder wean 
the sacred thread in the normal way. Yava leedi and Badara 
fruits ara used with Kuia grass. Devatirtha (holy water conse¬ 
crated), Namaakira and the offering of Dakyii^ everything 
as usual. 

S. The householder touches his right knee and says 
*Orti, today on this joyous occasion, when the Sriddha of our 
grandmot&r and mother of such and such Gotra and of such 



Garu^a Pardna 


648 

and luch name has to be performed. 'I have first to perform 
the ^r&ddha of Viivedevas named Vasus and Satyas by means 
of cooked rice offered to you.* Saying thb be invites the Deva 
brahmin; When he says ^Ofn you shall perform it* he pro* 
cceds to invite the other brahmin. 

4. Thereafter it the procedure of Nindi Mukha Sr&ddha 
of the greatgrandmother mentioning the name, Gotra etc. 
followed by the invitation of the brahmin representing great 
grandmother, his formal permission, etc. Thereafter the same 
procedure for maternal great grandmother and the brahmin 
representing her. 

5. The items of seating the brahmins representing the 
principal deity, PitfS and all Devai and the other usual an¬ 
cillary rites are performed duly. He then repeats the Mantra 
*Orh Viive Devi^i IrQtitem&m* etc. This is the invocation of 
Viivedevas. Scents etc. are given. Statements about the 
Sraddha being unimpaired. 

6. Similar items concerning activities and statements 
with regard to great grandmother, grandmother, mother, great 
grandfather great great maternal grandfather etc. Then food 
is placed and offered to the Devas named Vasus and Satyas 
along with the side dishes, Badara fruit, curd and devoid of 
forbidden foodstuffs. **Om, O Nandimukhi, of such and such 
Gotra, my grandmother, named so and so here is the food 
unto you alongwith Badara fruit and curd. Obeisance.** 
Similarly for maternal grandfather and great grandfather. 

7. Ekoddifta (The Sr&ddha for a single mane) is also 
performed as before. I shall explain its special variety, listen. 
First the invitation. Then washing of the feet, seating. 'Today 
1 shall perform the Ekoddi^fa Sraddha, the annually recurring 
one, of my father of such and such a name and of such and 
such a Gotra, by means of cooked rice offered through you. 
Permission is formally sought and given. Scat, scents etc. arc 
given. The food is placed and contemplated. Japas are per¬ 
formed with the sacred thread worn in the opposite direction. 
Facing the north he performs the Atithi Srkddha. 

8. He then enquires about their being satiated. He 
ftices the south with the sacred thread worn in the opposite 



L220.3 


649 

direction. He stands near the pUce where they had taken food 
and repeats the Mantra ‘Agnidagdha’ (duly cremated with 
fire). Then the pin^knna is scattered. my father ! of such 
and such a name, of such and such a Gotra, I offer this water 
libation to thee as well as to those that follow thee. Svadbi 
unto thee. Water is poured over the line. All other things as 
before. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY 

Dkarmaidstra 


Brahmd 

1. I shall mention the rite of Sapin^lkarana (Joining the 
pinda of the recently dead father %vith that of the other an* 
cestors) which, if performed on the day of the 6rst anniversary 
of the death, duly enables the dead father to attain the Pitr* 
loka (the region of the manes). 

2. The Sapipdlkarai;ia has to be performed in the af\er* 
noon. The other rites are the same as before. The brahmins 
representing grandfather, etc, are invited. Om, obeisance, here 
is the seat unto the deities named Pururava and Adrava. 
The seat is offered on the left side. Then the invocation is 
done. Permission is formally sought for the performance of the 
Sraddha of grandfather and great grandfather accompanied 
by their wives. Three separate vessels are placed. Kuia grass 
is placed over the vessels. They are covered with other vessels. 
All the items are duly performed till the request for t^e 
Sraddha being unimpaired. Then all these items for the re* 
cently dead father and mother mentioning names, etc, till the 
request for its being unimpaired. 

3« After concluding that, the covering vesielr^e taken 
off. The three vessels representing grandfather, great grand* 
father antf great gr^t grandfather are slightly shaken in the 
due order* *Om, those that are similar and similar*minded. 



650 


PurO^ 


the Pitfs in the region of Yamai—to them we offer Svadhi^ and 
obeisance. Let this Yajfta be of the same efficacy as in the case 
of the Devas*’ 

May the splendour of those living beings who are 
mine^ similar to me and similar-minded among other living 
beings^ be efficacious tome fora hundred years.* Repeating 
the above two Mantras^ he pours the water from the vessel of 
grandfather into that of great grandfather and the water from 
both these vessels as well as Pavitra is kept in the vessel re¬ 
presenting the recently dead father* The vessel of great great 
grand-father is left off*. 

i. The Pavitra in the vessel is handed over to the 
brahmin representing Pitf (father). With the flower in the 
vessel, his head, hands and feet are wonhipped. Water from 
another vessel is slightly poured into the hand of the Pitr 
brahmin. The vessel is then held in both the hands and the 
Mantra *Yi divy&lt)’ etc is repeated. Then he invokes the 
grandfather along with his wife mentioning their name and gotra 
and says *here is Svadhi and Arghya unto you.’ He then 
pours water from Pitf vessel for Arghya into the hand of the 
brahmin representing grandfather. Some water is taken for 
sprinkling the Pi^da. On the left side, the vessel is placed 
prone on a Kuia grass the tip of which is turned towards the 
South. He says *Thou art the seat of the Piti^.’ 

5. Scents are offered to grandfather, great grandfather 
and great great grandfather. Then Agnikarana (offerings in the 
Are) is performed. The remaining cooked rice is put in the 
vessel of grandfather. All other rites upto invoking the Mantra 
of the vessel of grandfather are concluded. Then the vessel of 
Pitr (father) and the brahmin representing him are touched. 
The thumb is placed over the food. Gingelly seeds are scattered. 
‘Om, here is thy food with gh!, drinking water and side-dishes 
devoid of forbidden foodstuff. The same unto those that follow 
thee. Svadlu unto thee.’ 

6. Then food and water are offered to Deva brahmin. 
If there is a guest as well, his ;§r&ddha too is performed. But 
no grain is scattered on this occasion. The householder then 
asks Pitr brahmin ^Om, is it tasted by your holiness?’ PiQd^ 
is then offered with necessary ancillary questions and split into 



1 * 220.10 


651 


two. The two Mantras ‘Ye samanah samanasah* are repeated. 
The pind^ put in the vessels of great great grandfather and 
grand*father. Scents are offered to pindas. Pinda is slightly stirred. 
The Atithi Brahmin is asked ‘Is it tasted by your holiness?’ 
The brahmins are given Acamana water and betel leaf in due 
order. May the sprinkling be in order. May the waters be 
holy and beneficent. Water is handed to the brahmin repre¬ 
senting great great grandfather and others in due order. May 
the gotra enjoy unending bliss. Water with gingelly seeds is 
given to the Pitf brahmin saying, ‘may this stay by.’ 

7. ‘May the manes be non-fierce’. When the brahmin 
says ‘be it so’, he says ‘Shall I repeat Svadha?’ When the 
grandfather brahmin replies ‘Om, let it be repeated’. This is 
frequently asked and permission is given. 

8. The mantra ‘Oijam vahantih* is repeated. The 
householder faces south and pours water. ‘Om may Viive 
Devas be satiated with this Yajfta* Barley and water is given to 
the Oeva brahmin. The Mantra ‘Devatabhyab’» etc is repeated 
thrice. 

9. Pinda pitras are stirred. Acamana is performed. 
Dak^iM is offered to the grand lather brahmin. The Pitr 
brahmin is requested for blesrings. Then he blesses the house¬ 
holder repeating the mantra ‘Datiro Dobhivardhantam’ etc. 
The vessel is then placed supine. The brahmins are bid adieu 
with ‘Vlije Vaje’ Mantra. The Pitf brahmin is bid farewell to 
by saying ‘may you rejoice.’ 

10. O Vyasa I have thus explained to you the ‘Sapin- 
dlkaratiairaddha.’ The Sr^dha, the performer ofSriddha 
and the fruit thereof is Hari Himself. 



652 


Garu4a Pura^a 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYONE 

Dhamasdra 


Brahmd said: 

1. I shall briefly mention the essence of Dharma 
(Virtue and Righteousness)» please listen, O Sankara. It is 
subtle. It quells all sins. It yields worldly enjoyment and 
salvation. 

2. It is grief that destroys learning, righteousness, 
strength, courage, happiness and zeal of every man. Hence, 
grief must be eschewed. 

3. One gets a wife according to one's actions. One finds 
one's surroundings according to one’s actions. His kinsmen 
and relatives behave in accordance with his actions. It is the 
action of a man that prompts him to activities generating 
happiness and misery. 

4. Giving of gifts is the greatest virtue. Everything good 
is secured by making gifts. It is charity that enables one to 
attain heavenly kingdom. Hence, a man must make liberal 
gifts. 

Making of gifts with excellent and entire money gifts 
(dak$lQk) is on par with the saving of life of a terrified being. 

6. Dharma is acquired by means of austerities, practising 
celibacy, sacrifices and holy ablutions. Those who destroy the 
same go to hell. 

7. Persons desirous of performing Homas, Japas, holy 
ablutions and worship of deities and those who possess truth- 
fulness, forgiveness and mercy attain heaven. 

8. There is no one making a gift of happiness or misery 
and there is no one who removes the same. Men experience 
happiness or misery brought about by his own actions. 

9. He who dedicates his life for the sake of virtue crosses 
all difficulties. If there is contentment, who is he who cannot 
sustain himself by means of fruits and roots? 

10. Every one sinks into misery due to association and 
intimacies* The same is caused by greed which cannot be 
warded off. 



I.22I.22 


653 


11« Greed generates anger, malice results from greed; 
greed begets delusion, iliuiion, iaise prestige and rivalry. 

12. He who is free from lust, hatred, falsehood, anger, 
greed, delusion and haughtiness becomes calm and tranquil and 
he attains the highest region divested of sins. 

13. O Kara, the detdes, the sages, the serpents, the 
Gandharvas and the Guhyakas honour a virtuous man and not 
a rich or lustful man. 

14. By means of unlimited valour, intelligence or manli* 
ness a man secures even things difficult to get. Hence, there 
is nothing to grieve over. 

15. This is the highest achievement that a man is mercU 
ful to all living beings, is able to curb all sense organs and has 
the notion that everything is transitory. 

16. If a man does not p>erform meritorious actions al¬ 
though he sees Death staring at him face to face, his life is as 
worthless as the teatUke sebaceous growth under the chin of 
a goat. 

17. The slayer of a child in the womb, the murderer of 
a brahmin, he who kills a cow or his own father and the wretch 
who defiles his own preceptor’s bed can get rid of the sin by 
making a gift of a land possessing all good features. 

18. In ray view, there is no other gift surpassing the gift 
of a cow. A cow acquired by lawful means, ifhanded over as 
a gift, makes the entire family cross all difficulties. 

19. O Vrsadhvaja, there is no gift better than the gift 
of food. It is food that sustains the world of mobile and im* 
mobile beings. 

20-21. The gift of a vii^in, the gift of a bull, pilgrimage, 
high erudition, the gift of an elephant, horse and chariot or 
that of gems, jewels and lands—none of these is equal to even 
a sixteenth part of the gift of food. Vital airs, strengt^ 
splendour, valour, fortitude and power of memory take their 

origin from food. 

22. If a person digs wells, unks and lakes or lays parks 
for the sake of the public, he raises the members of his family 
even to ^ twentyfirst remove and himself revels m the region 
of Vi»^iu. 



654 


Garuia 


23. Even the very sight of good men purifies one* It is 
better than the holy places of pilgrimage. Tlie benefit from a 
*holy place is derived later but that from the contact of good 
men is immediately effective. 

24. Truthfulness, restraint, penance, purity, content* 
ment, forgiveness, itrai^tforwardness, wisdom, tranquillity, 
mercy and charity—these arc etemsd virtues. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-TWO 

Expiatim 

BrahmAs^id : 

1. I shall explain the rites of atonement quelling sins 
conducive to being confined in bell* Flies, sprays of water, 
woman, water on the surface of the earth, fire, cat and mun- 
goose are always pure. 

2« If inadvertently a brahmin takes food defiled by the 
Ucchi^fa (residual of food partaken) of a Sudra he should fast 
for a day and night and drink Paficagavya. He shall be 
purified. 

3. If a brahmin and another brahmin are mutually 
defiled by their Ucchi^fa, the expiatory rite is taking a bath and 
Japa* They shall take food only at the end of the day. 

4-5. If anyone takes food containing flies or bits of 
hair he shall immediately vomit it out for purity. He who 
takes foodstuffs keeping them in the palms, or licks the finger 
or eats food placed on the arms shall be purified after the 
expiry of a day and night Or be shall drink water poured out 
to him. Water drunk with the left hand, or water drunk by 
others partially is like toddy and so shall not be drunk or if 
drunk one incurs the sin of drinking toddy. 

6-7. Water taken in a leather bag is impure. If a low 
Caste person resides in the house of any one of other castes, 
without declaring that he is of low caste, the expiatory rite for 
the twice-bom is Cindrkya^ or Par&ka. That for a Sudra is 



1^.17 


655 

the PrijipaCya rite. If the person resides kaowingty» other 
types of expiatory rites are to be performed. 

8. He who takes cooked food there shall perform half of 
a Krcchra penance. Those who take the food of these people 
shall perform a fourth of the Krcehra penance. 

9. The brahmin who takes food of a washennan» an 
actor» a bamboo worker or a cobbler has to perform Cindrk- 
yapa penance. 

10. If inadvertentiy he drinb water from a well or 
waterpot belonging to a Ck^dkla he shall perform the 
S&ntapana penance. A Vaiiya shall perform half of that. 

11. A Sudra in the circumstances shall perform a 
quarter of that. For inadvertently taking food in the house of 
a lowcaste, the atonement is three Krccbrai* For approaching 
an Antyaji (tow caste) woman, the expiatory rite is a Parkka. 

12. A brihmaoa taking the Ucchiffa of a low caste man 
becomes pure by performing Ckndrayapa. If ioadvertendy he 
takes a C&t>dkla’s food he should |>erfonn Aindhana (a variety 
ofS&ntapana) form of an expiatory rite. 

13. A K^triya shall perform Skntapana and the 
others shall perform Japa YajAa for a night. If a brahmin eats 
the fruit from the same tree as a Ca^d^U inadvertently he 
becomes pure after the lapse of a day and a night. 

14. By eating Ucchi|(a impurity is incurred which shall 
be removed by vomitting it off. If he touches a Ca^dkla he 
shall repeat Gayatil eight thousand times or Drupadk Mantra 
a hundred times. 

15. The atonement for taking the food of a C&^dkla or 
a Svapaca (those who cook dogs) or taking food after eva* 
cuating the boweb or urination (without the customary 
washing) is fasting for three nights. The expiation for 
approaching an Antyajk woman is Parika penance. 

16. Expiation for indulging in sexual intercourse with 
an unwilling woman is Parika. There is no expiation for a 
low caste man in a similar context. 

17. If a brahmin drinks water in a vessel that had 
contained wine and hence had been defiled, he is purified by a 
quarter of Krcehra penance and by undergoing all the Sariukkras 
(investiture with sacred thread and other rites) all over again. 



656 


Garu^a Purfy^a 


18-19. Brahmins who had once renounced the world 
but are desirous of starting the life of a householder again, 
after gathering food and drink, shall perform three Kfcchras 
and three Candriyai^as. The Sage Vasis^ha has laid down all 
the Sarhskaras beginning with post-natal rites. 

20-21. A defiled woman shall become pure again by 
Prajapatya and other rites or by feeding two brahmins. A brahmin 
defiled by the touch of a dog or a Sudra defiled by Ucchista 
shall fast for a night and drink Paficagavya. He shall become 
pure. Touched by an outcaste he shall &sc for five nights. 

22. A continuous stream of water is never defiled; dust 
blown out by wind is pure; women, children and old men are 
never polluted. 

23. The mouth of women is always pure; the fruit 
struck down by birds is pure; a calf at the coming out of its 
mother animars womb is pure; a dog in the act of seiaing a 
beast of game is pure. 

24. Aquatic animals while in water and surface and Oon« 
aquatic animals in the ground are pure. A person standing 
in water and performing Acamana shall attain purity. 

25. A vessel of bell metal not defiled by wine becomes 
pure by the application of ashes. If defiled by wine, it becomes 
pure by cow*s urine or by heating. 

26. Bell-metal vessels smelt by cows, or containing the 
Ucch4^ of a Sudra or struck by crow or a dog become pure 
by rubbing them with ash ten times. 

27-29. A brahmin taking food in the vessel of a Sudra 
should fast and then take Paficagavya. A brahmin who has not 
rinsed his mouth after taking food becomes impure when 
touched by a dog or a Sudra or others of a higher caste. He 
shall fast for regaining purity. Defiled by the touch of a woman 
in her menses he shall take Paficagavya for purity. If a person 
evacuates his bowels or urinates in a dry place or in u road 
infested by thieves and tigers he is not defiled if he holds some 
coins in his hand. While taking ^uca he shall place the coins 
on the ground. 

30. Gruel; curd, milk, buttermilk and Kriara (mixture 
of jaggery, rice and gingelly seeds) can be uken even from a 



1.222.42 


657 


Sudra. These together with pulse and honey can be taken 
from a low caste person. 

31. If a brahmin or other castes drink Gau^I, Pai}}i or 
Madhvika type of wine they shall expiate by drinking red-hot 
wine. 

32. Dehled by taking food or drinking water in a house 
defiled by the impurity of death or birth of a child> a brahmin 
should repeat Gayatri five hundred tiroes. A Kfatriya and a 
Vaiiya in similar circumstances shall repeat Gayatri a hundred 
times. 

33. When someone dies in the family, a brahmin re¬ 
mains impure for ten days and a K^atriya for twelve days. A 
Vaiiya becomes pure after fifteen days and a Sudra in a month. 

34. If a king dies in battle, or while performing a 
sacrifice or during a sojourn in a foreign land, if a child less 
than a month old dies, the purity is mscantaneous (there is no 
impurity). 

35-36. An unmarried girl, a brahmin boy not yet invest¬ 
ed with the sacred thread, a boy who has cut his first tooth, 
and a three year old girl, if these die the impurity is for three 
days. If there is abortion the impurity is for as many days 
as the number of months of conception. A woman in her men¬ 
ses becomes pure on the fourth day. 

37-38. In times of famine, civil commotion, etc., during 
the days of initiation, in the practice of a religious rite, mar¬ 
riage preparation, invitation to a brahmin for a Sraddha, etc. 
impurities due to birth or death do not act as obstacles. Nor 
can the regular charity, etc. be disturbed. 

39-40. A brahmin becomes impure by touching his wife 
in confinement. There is no impurity due to birth where sacri¬ 
ficial fires are daily nurtured, Vedas arc regularly recited, or 
Vaisva Deva Sraddha is constantly performed. If a brahmin 
takes food in a house where the impurities are present he be¬ 
comes pure after three days. 

41-42. Women of four castes in their menses become 
impure again due to mutual touch. The brahmin woman 
becomes pure after three days, the K»atriya woman after two 
days, theVaijya woman after fasting for a day and the Sudra 



658 

woman aAer taking a bath. Things measured in DroQas are not 
to be cast off as defiled by them. 

43. Cooked food touched by dogs ot crows becomes de* 
filed. The upper layer of such food should be thrown away. For 
the purification of the remaining food, it should be sprinkled 
%vith water from a vessel in which a piece of gold is kept and 
heated over fire (6t a short while. 

44. If any one happens to drink water from a well 
where the dead body of a dog, jackal or a monkey has fallen, 
the expation for a brahmin is fasting for three days, for a 
Kiatriya two days and for a Vaiiya a single day. 

45. If bones, hides, faeces or the dead body of a mouse 
fall into a well, the %rater shall be drained off and the well 
should be sprinkled %vitb Pafleagavya. It becomes pure again. 

46. If a tank or a lake is defiled as above, holy ashes 
should be sprayed over it and six potfuls of water should bet aken 
out. If Pafleagavya is poured thereafter it becomes pure again. 

47-48. The menstrual blood flowing into a tank con¬ 
taminates it. Thirty potfuls of water sliould be taken out of the 
tank for purification. If any one indulges in sexual inter¬ 
course with a forbidden woman, drinks wine or eats beef he 
becomes impure. The atonement for a brahmin then is Candra- 
ya^ia penance, for a king it is Prkjapatya penance, for a Vaiiya 
it is S&ntapana and for a Sudra it is fasting for five days. 

49. After performing the expiatory rite they should make 
gifts of cows and feed brahmins. During sports wearing of 
blue cloth is not forbidden. Nor is it forbidden as a bedsheet. 
An indigo dyed cloth should not be touched otherwise. Persons 
regularly using blue cloth will fall into hell. 

50-53. The slayer of a brahmin, the wine addict, the 
thief, the defiler of a preceptor's bed and those who associate 
with such sinners become pure after seeing the ^Great Beari. 
Then he should make a gift of a hundred cows and feed 
brahmins. The slayer of a brahmin muse stay in a cottage in 
a forest for twelve years. The mne-addict should fall into fire. 
The thief should hand over everything he possesses to a 
brahmin. The defiler of a preceptor*! bed shall make the gift of 
a bull or a thousand cows. 

54. Binding the two legs of a cow, tying it illegally, and 



1 . 222.66 


659 


allowing il to die in conflagration or in a forest makes one a 
sinner and he should perform the complete Kfcchra penance. 

55*56. If a cow dies due to the defect in tying the bell 
round its neck, if one breaks its bones or horns, if one strips its 
skin, if one cuts its tail or wounds its nose, one shall expiate by 
taking over barley water for a fortnight. Injuring elephants or 
horses by means of weapons is also sinful and should be atoned 
for by performing the complete Krcchra penance. 

57. Inadvertently taldng in faeces or urine or touching 
wine the twice-bom becomes sinful and should undergo all the 
Sazhskaras all over again. 

58. While undergoing the Sajhskiras all over again, the 
items of tonsure, wearing of Kufa girdle, holding of the staff, 
and the rites of begging alms can be omitted. 

59. Raw flesh, ghi, honey and oil kept for a long time 
when taken out of the vesKl of an Antyaja become automati* 
cally pure. 

60*61. The onefourtfaKfCchra consists of taking a single 
food for the fint day, a single night food for the second day, and 
unsolicited food for the third day. The same with a fast for 
the fourth day is half a Kycchra. Twice that is Pr&japatya 
which atones for all sins. A Krcchra with seven days* fast is 
called Mahasintapana. 

62. Taking hot water alone for three days, then taking 
hot milk alone for three days and then taking hot ghI alone for 
three days, is called a Taptakrcchra. It quelb all sins. 

63. A Paraka penance that quells all sins consists of fast* 
ing for twelve days. In the expiatory rites morsels of food must 
be increased by one each in the bright half and decreased by 
one each in the dark half. 

64-66. The constituents of Paftcagavya are as follows:— 
Milk taken from a gold-coloured cow; the cow dung of a 
white cow; urine of a copper coloured cow; clarified butter 
of the milk of a blue cow and the curd of the milk of a 
black cow. Water added should be consecrated by Kuia grass. 
Eight M&ias of cow's urine, four Miias of dung, twelve 
Mi^as o£milk, ten Miias of curd and flvemiias of ghi form 
the correct proportion. This Pafleagavya removes all impurities. 



€60 


Garu4a Puti^ 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYTHREE 

Yuga-dharma 

Brahmd said: 

1 • O Vyisa, I have narrated with devotion the various 
acts of piety practised by the sages, llirough them Vi$ou can 
be propitiated. They are conducive to happiness. 

2-3. Lord Vi^nu who dispenses virtue, love, wealth and 
salvation can be attained by Tarpapa, Homa and Sandhya 
prayers. Virtue is Lord Vi|nu Himself; worship is Vi?nu; per¬ 
formance of Tarpa^a, Homa, Sandhya prayers, contemplation, 
everything is Lord Hari Himself. 

Suta said: 

4. I shall explain, O Saunaka^ the Pralaya (dissolution) 
of the universe. Please listen to everything. A thousand sets of 
the four Yugas constitute a Kalpa which is one day for 
Brahmi, the lotus born deity. 

5. Know the characteristic features of the four Yugas 
viz Kfta, Treta, Dvipara and Kali. In Krta age virtue rests 
on its four feet, viz. Truth, Gift» Pertance and Mercy. 

6 . Hari protects Dhanna then. All the wise men are 
contented. Men lived for four thousand years then. 

7. At the end of Krta, brahmins were conquered by 
K^atriyas and Vai^yas and Sudras remained submissive to the 
twice-born. The powerful Visnu, the valorous, killed the 
Raksasas. 

8 . In the Treta age, virtue stands on three feet, viz. Truth, 
Gift and Mercy. Men are devoted to Yajftas (sacrihees) then. 
The universe takes its origin (sustenance) from K^atriyas. 

9 . Hari of the red hue is worshipped by men who live 
for a thousand years, Vi^nu has a mighty chariot in this age. 
K^atriyas killed RaksasaS. [Or Visi^u who incarnated as 
Bhlmaratha of the K^atriya caste killed the Raksasas]. 

10. In the Dvipara age, when Vi^pu takes the yellow 
hue, virtue stands on two legs. People live for four hundred 
years and take their origin and sustenance from bralunins and 
Kfatriyas, 



1.223.22 


661 


11. On seeing people deficient in intellect, Liord Vi^nu 
incarnating as Vy&sa divided the Vedas into four books. 

12«13. He taught the Vedas to his disciples. Please 
know the details. Disciple Pailawas taught ^Lgveda; Jaimini 
was taught Samaveda; Sumantu wsu taught Atharvaveda and 
Mahamuni was taught Yajurveda. Suta in the company of 
Vaifampayana was taught the Puranas. He who knows the 
eighteen Puratias is Lord Hari himself. 

14. The five topics dealt with in a Pur&^a are ( 1 ) 
creation (2) subsidiary creation (3) genealogy (4) Man« 
vantaras and (S) the detailed description of the exploits of 
various kings. 

15*16. The eighteen Puranas are—(1) Brahma (2) Padma 
(3) Vai$Qava (4) ^iva^ (5) Bhagavata ( 6 ) Bhavi^ya 
( 7 ) NUradiya ( 8 ) Skanda ( 9 ) Lihga (10) Var^ha (11) 
Marka];i^eya (12) Agneya (13) Brahmavaivarta (14) Kaurma 
(15) Matsya (16) Garuda (17) Vayaviya and (18) 
Brahmanda. 

17. Many U pap u ran as have been mentioned by sages. 
The first one is narrated by Sanatkumara. The next one is 
that of Narasimha. 

18. The third one is Skanda as narrated by Kumara. 
The fourth one is Sivadharma as narrated by Nandiivara. 

19. The next one is the one of wonderful features nar¬ 
rated by Durvasas. The next one is narrated by Narada. Then 
come those narrated by Kapila, Vamaria and Ufanas. 

20. The other ones are Brahmand^* Varupa, Kalika, 
Maheivara, Samba, SarvarthasaAcaya, Para^arokta, Marlca 
and Bhargava. 

21. The eighteen Vidyas are :—(l)Puranas (2) Dharma- 
iastras (3-6) the four Vedas (7-12) the six Vedangas 
(13) Nyaya (14) Mimarhsa (15) Ayurveda (16) Arthaiastra 
(17) the Gandharva vidya (Science of Music) and (18) 
Dhanurveda the Science of Archery, O S^c Saunaka. 

22. By the end of Dvapara, Lord Hari had already re¬ 
moved the weighty burden of the earth. Then Lord Hari 

1. Sometimes Viju U inserted in place of Siat PufSfta In the 

lift of eighteen MoMfiurjfuu. 



662 


Garud^ PurS^a 


incarnated as (the black) when virtue began to stand 

On a single foot. 

23. Then (in the Kali age)men will become vicious^ 
ruthless and evilminded. There are three qualities in a man 
viz. Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. Actuated by Kali (Kala) these 
qualities undergo various changes in the Atman. 

24. When the Sattva quality is predominant in the mind, 
the intellect and the sense organs know that to be the Kfta 
Yuga when people are devoted to knowledge and penance. 

25. O Saunaka^ when the energy of people is turned 
towards the fulfilment of their desires and Rajas predominates, 
know that to be Treti Yuga. 

26. When Rajas and Tamas are equally powerful giving 
rite to greed, discontent, false prestige, haughtiness, rivalry and 
eager pursuit of desired objects, know that to be Dvipara. 

27. When Tamas alone is predominant, the people utter 
falsehood always, are lethargic, somnolent, seeking violent 
means and overwhelmed by grief, delusion, terror and wretch* 
edness, know that to be Kali age. 

28. Then people are lustful and harsh in speech. Country 
is overrun by thieves and robbers. Vedas are spoiled by 

(misinterpretcrs). 

29. Kings will be begging of the subjects. People will be 
overpowered by their penises and bellies. [They will be carnal 
minded and gluttonous). The religious students will be divest* 
ed of their rites and impure. Mendicants will turn householders. 

30. Ascetics will begin'to stay in villages. Depositors 
will be covetous of wealth. People will be short in stature but 
very gluttonous. Thieves and robbers will be considered holy. 

31. Servants will leave their masters in the lurch; the 
ascetics will cast off their religious rite; Sudras will begin to re¬ 
ceive Dakfi^as and Vaiiyas will turn to austerities. 

32*33. All people will be disgruntled appearing like 
Ki&cas. They will be wonbipping fire, deities and guests by 
means of unjustifiable means of feeding. When Kali age sets in, 
people will never offer water libations to their Pitfs. They will 
be devoted to womenfolk and for all appearance they will not 
be different from Sfldras, O, Saunaka. 



1^24.5 


663 


34. Women will give binh Co xnany children. Their good 
fortune will decline. If they are rebuked they will simply 
scratch their heads and defy all orders. 

35. Overwhelmed by heretics people will cease to 
worship Vi^nu. But, O Brahmins, though the Kali age is full of 
defects there is a great virtue in it. 

36-37. In Kali, by singing songs in praise of Lord Kr^^a 
one can free oneself from the great bondage. In Krtaage 
people have to perform sacrifices and in the Treta they have to 
recite Japas. In the Dvipara age, by serving the lord they can 
attain salvation but in Kali that is possibe only by singing 
songs in praise of the Lord. Hence, Hari is to be contemplated 
upon for ever and worshipped, O Saunaka. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYFOUR 

Dissolution 

SQta said : 

1. At the end of a thousand sets of four Yugas there 
will be a cavjal dissolution of all created beings called Brahma 
laya or Naimittika laya. At the end of [ a Kalpa there will be a 
drought extending over a hundred years. 

2. Then seven fierce suns will blaze in the sky. Drying 
up every drop of water they will wither up the three 
worlds. 

3. The earth, Bhuvab* Svab and Mahar Lokaa with 
all their inmates mobile and immobile will be completely 
dried up. Lord Vispu in the form of Rudra, will burn 
nether worlds as well. 

4. First burning up the three worlds, Lord Vi?riu will 
begin creating clouds from his mouth. These clouds of various 
delusive nature will shower water for a hundred years. 

5. whole world will appear like a vast ocean of 
water. All mobile and immobile beings will be destroyed. 



664 Ga>fu4a hiroa^a 

Vi^QU will then lie down on the back of the serpent Ananta 
assuming the form of the Supreme Brahman. 

6. After sleeping for a thousand years he will begin 
creating the universe again. Now I shall explain the disso* 
lution called Prakftika Praia y a (Natural dissolution), 
O Saunaka, please listen. 

7. When a hundred years (of Brahma) are completed, 
Lord Hari with has yogic powers destroys the whole universe 
after absorbing within himself the deity Brahma. 

8. A long period of drought and blazing sun will be 
followed by the formation of cioaids that will pour heavy 
showers for a hundred yean and fill the cosmos with water. 

9. With water within, the Ai^da (the Cosmic Egg) 
will burst when the life span of Brahm& is over and dissolve 
in water. 

10. The whole Earth sustaining the world will dissolve 
in water. Tne waters will merge in fire and the fire will merge 
in wind. 

11. The wind will merge in Ether and the Ether in Ehu- 
tadi (the essential matter). This essential matter merges into 
Mahan (the Cosmic Intellect). The Mahan merges into 
Avyakta Prakfti (the uodifTerentiated Nature) which loses itself 
into the Purusa (the eternal subjectivity). 

12. Hari sleeps for a hundred years and then creates 
on the onset of day in the same order manifesting finally into 
the world. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYFIVE 

Results of good and bad acts 

Sdta said : 

I. After knowing the three types of misery such as the 
Adhyatmika (physiological) etc. the wise man conscious of the 
Saihsira cakra (the wheel of worldly existence) will become 
possessed of wisdom and non«attachment (to things 



1.225.13 


665 


mundane) and then merge into Atyantika Laya (Psychic 
annihilation). 

2. I shall mention the wheel of worldly Existence from 
the lime of death without knowing which the individual self 
(Purusirtha) cannot become sub-merged in the supreme self 
(Paramatman). 

3. Afcer casting off the outer garment (i.e. the gross 
body) the man takes another body (the subtle one). In twelve 
dayS) he is led by the attendants ofYama. 

4. The water libations with gtngelly seeds offered by 
the kinsmen in the world as well as the ball of rice (pinda) 
offered by them is partaken of by him in the region of 
Yama. 

5. From there the meritorious man goes to heaven 
and the sinner to hell. 

6. After experiencing the benefits or torture of heaven 
and hell, (he individual enters the womb of women. First 
nucleus is formed in the umbilical region which splits into 
bifurcated seed. 

7. The foetus is then evolved with frothy exudations. 
Blood and muscles are formed thereafter when the lump may 
weigh a Pala in weight. Then it is said to sprout. 

8. Limbs begin to grow; fingers are developed; eyes, nose, 
nails, etc are formulated. 

9. Hairs begin to grow on the body and the head; the 
child is placed in a topsyturvy position and is born in the 
tenth month. 

10. Then the most delusive Mayi (Illusory Power) of 
Vi^nu begins to envelop him as he proceeds from infancy to 
childhood, youth and old age. 

11. Then he dies and reaps the fruit of his different acu- 
vities of virtue or otherwise. Thus man is caught in the cogs 
of the wheel of worldly existence that continues to turn like the 
water wheel. 

12. A life coming back from hell becomes bom of linfUl 
wombs. O wise scholar, a man accepting gifts from a fallen 
man takes.birth in a lower stratum. 

13. A beggar, on returning from hell is bom as a worm* 
A brahmin defrauding his preceptor is bom as a dog. 



€66 


Garu4a PurS^^a 


14. Mentally coveting hia (preceptor’s) wife or riches 
he undoubtedly is born aa a dog. Alike dishonouring friends 
he is reborn as an au. 

15»16. A person harassing the parents is reborn as a 
tortoise. If a servant trusted by his master and partaking of 
his food deceives him out of delusion he is reborn as a monkey 
after death. A misappropriator of trust property after experi¬ 
encing the hardships of hell is reborn as a worm. 

17. A person always envio it of others goes to hell and 
is born again as a R^sasa. A man committing breach of 
trust it reborn as a Ash. 

18. A person hoarding barley grains is reborn as a 
mouse after death. A person committing rape on other men’s 
wives is reborn as a vile wolf. 

19. A person pursuing an affair with his brother’s wife 
is reborn as a cuckoo. A man indulging in sexual intercourse 
with the wife of a preceptor or other elders is reborn as a pig. 

20-21. If a penon causes any impediment^o a sacrifice, 
act of charity or performance of a marriage he shall be reborn 
as a worm. If a person takes food without first offering the 
same to deities, manes or brahmins he is reborn as a crow after 
undergoing the hardships of bell. A man insulting his elder 
brother is bom again as a crane. 

22. A 8udra ravishing a brahmin women is born again 
as a worm. If he makes her pregnant as a result of hrs vile 
act he is reborn as a white ant eating away wood and trees. 

23. An ungrateful wretch is bom successively as bacteria 
worm, locust and scorpion. A person abducting an unarmed 
person is reborn as a mule. 

24. A slayer of women and infants is reborn as a worm. 
A person stealing cooked food is bom again as a fly. 

25. A stealer of cooked rice is bom as a cat, that of 
gingelly seeds a mouse, that of ghi a mungoose and a stealer 
of sheat-fish and flesh is born as a crow. 

26. A man stealing honey is reborn as a gnat. A thief 
of fried pie is bom as an ant. Tht sinner of illegal theft of 
(irrigation) water is reborn as a crow. 

27. A stealer of timber is born as a HkrKa bird or a 
jdgeon. The stealer of a gold vessel is rtbom as a worm. 



1.225*37 


667 


28. A stealer of cotton garments is born as a ci*ane ; a 
fire-thief becomes a stork; a thief of paints and vegetables is 
born as a peacock. 

29. If a person steals any red object he is born as a 
Jivaftjlvaka bird (acakora). If a man steals auspicious scents 
he is born as a mole. A thief of rabbits is reborn as a rabbit. 

30. A thief of kal&pa (peacock*! plumes or a woman’s 
girdle or any other ornament) is reborn as a eunuch. A stealer 
of wooden pieces is born again as a grass worm. If a person 
steals flowers he is born as a poor beggar. If a person steals 
lac-juice he is born again as a lame man. 

31. A thief of greens is reborn as a Hirita bird; a 
person stealing stored water is reborn as a Cataka bird. A 
person illegally occupying another man's house undergoes 
hardships in fierce hells Raurava etc. and is born again. 

32. A person stealing grasses, hedges, creepers and barks 
of these is born again as a tree. This U the same in the case 
of the stealers of cow, gold, etc. 

33. A stealer of knowledge (a person who does not pay 
for instructions received) undergoes hardships in many hells 
and is born again as a dumb man. If a person casts ghi and 
other ofTerings in unkindled fire he is reborn as a man suffering 
from chronic impairment of digestion. 

34-35. The characteristic features of those who had had 
their hardships in hell and are reborn are: scandalising others, 
ingratitude, outraging the limits of decency, ruthlessness, 
cruelty, attachment to other men's wives, stealing other men's 
property, blasphemy, harassing and deceiving others, and 
miserliness. 

3607. The characteristic features of those who had had 
a happy sojourn in heaven and arc reborn arc :—Sympathy 
towards all living beings, pleasant conversation, belief in a 
supreme region, helping in return, truthfulness, whole-some 
advice to others, belief in the authority of Vedas; devotion to 
preceptors, Devas, divine sages, enlightened sages, etc, association 
with good men, cagcmesi in performing noble deeds and 
friendship. 



668 


Garu4<^ Purina 


A man attains Atyantika Laya (Anal emancipation of the 
soul) by a thorough comprehension of the Yogavidya along* 
with iu eight subsidiary components. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYSIX 

Yoga and its Components 

SQta said : 

1. I shall explain the great Yoga with its component 
parts, that yields worldly enjoyments and salvation. It quells 
all sins if read with devotion. Please listen to it. 

2. The feeling of ^ My •ness* is the root cause of all miser* 
ics which can be removed by a feeling of ‘Not-minc*. The 
noble*micded Dattatrcya mentioned the same to Alarka. 

3-5. The tree of Ignorance sought by the worldly 
minded ibr the sake of happiness and peace has the great basin 
round it in the form of riches and foodgrains. Its root is Sin. 
The germinating sprout is the feeling of Egoism. The great 
main trunk is the feeling of *My*ness\ Houses, fields etc. are 
its branches. Wives, sons, etc are the tender leaves. Those who 
imbibe the divine Brahmarasa Cctc from dusts (of RaJogui>a) 
and are thornless hew it down with the axe of learning and 
merge themselves in the Supreme God. 

6*7. Intellectually efficient persons thus attain the 
highest bliss. O king (Alarka) the self in which the sense* 
organs get merged is neither your physical body nor mine. It is 
not what you see and feci as important. Nor is it the 
Tanmatra (essential matter) nor the speech nor the mind (the 
internal sense organ). • 

8*9. The self identified witli the body dies today and 
is bom again tomorrow. It is due to the three Gupas. Though 
the body and the soul seem to be one, there is actually the dis¬ 
tinction between the two. A Yogin who knows this distinction 



I.226.I8 


669 


attains salvation which i$ the Identity with the supreme soul. 
O son, it is due to the Trigu^as thatthis identity is not realised. 

10. That is called house where one stays; that is diet 
whereby one sustains oneself. Similarly, that is real knowledge 
which is conducive to salvation. Ignorance brings about 
adverse results. 

11. Merits and demerits, O king, can be exhausted by 
duly experiencing the fruits thereof. The annihilation of the 
activities yet to be performed is possible by non-performance. 

12. The Yamas or Niyamas (Restraints) nrt of five 
types, vU :—Non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy 
<)nd non-acceptance of gifts. &iucaor purity is of two varieties 
(the internal and the external). 

13. Dama (Suppression) is contentment, quiescence due 
to austerities and the worsliipofVasudeva. By Asana we mean 
the different postures such as Padmaka, etc. Pranayltma means 
full control of breath. 

14-15. It is of three types—Puraka,^ Kumbhaka* and 
Recaka^ each of which is again subdivided into three. The 
Laghu (of short duration) consists of ten macras (periods of 
time less than a second); the Madhyama is of twenty matras 
and the Uttama consists of thirty matras. A Pranayama with 
Japa and Dhyana (contemplation) is called Sagarbha 
Pranay&ma, opposite of which is Agarbha Pranayama. 

16. One shall conquer the various defects in the body 
by means of Pra^yama. By Puraka (inhalation), somnolence 
is to be conquered. By Kumbhaka (Retention of breath), one 
can conquer the shivering sensation. By Recaka (Exhalation), 
one can conquer the augmentation or excess of heat in the 
body. 

17. Seated in a comfortable Yogic posture pressing the 
penis and the testicles with the heels one shall keep the 
Prai^ava in the heart and practise Prajiayama. 

16. The function of the Tamt^na must be suppressed 
by means ofRajogui^ and that of Rajoguria is to be suppressed 

1. Iiffialing the bmuh. 

2. ReUming the breath. 

3. Exhaling the breath. 



670 


Gam^a Purina 


by means of Sattvaguna and ultimately the practiser of Yoga 
should maintain himself ih Nilcalavftti (unruffled serene state). 

19. The sense organs, the vital air, and the mind should 
be withdrawn from the sensual objects. This complete abstrac¬ 
tion is called Pratyihara which should be constantly 
practised. 

20. Taking eight or ten Pri^y&mas is called Dharana. 
Persons who are able to see the truth have thus spoken of two 
types of Dhiranis. 

21-22. There are ten points of concentration for the 
practice of Dhiratii. First in the Nidi (nerves) [or Nabhi 
the umbilicus] then in order in the heart, throat, mouth, 
tip of the nose, middle of the eyebrows, head and then finally 
in the supreme soul After practising these ten Dh&ia^as 
successfully one attains the imperishable status. 

23. As one fire gets merged in another fire, so the in* 
dividual soul gets merged in the supreme soul The single sylla¬ 
ble Om, which is the symbol of Brahman and very holy 
should be repeated frequently. 

24. The three letters A, U and M together constitute 
the mystic syllable Om which symbolises the imperishable 
Brahman. 

25. I am Brahman the greatest effulgence divested of 
the gross body. I am Brahman the greatest effulgence devoid 
of old age and death. 

26. I am Brahman the greatest effulgence untainted by 
the dirts of the Principle of Earth. I am Brahman the 
greatest effulgence free from the principles of Vayu and 
Ether. 

27. lam Brahman the greatest effulgence divested of 
the subtle body. I am Brahman the greatest effulgence 
unlimited by space or absence of space. 

28. I am Brahman the greatest efFu^nce free from the 
essential principle of smell I am Brahman the greatest efful¬ 
gence free from the principles of ear and sku\ (sound and 

touch). 

29. I am Brahman the greatest eflfiilgence free from 
tongue and nose. I am Brahman the greatest effulgence free 
from Praoft Apina. 



1 . 226.40 


671 


30. I am Brahman the greatest effulgence free from 
Vyana and Udana. I am Brahman the greatest effulgence 
devoid of the influence of Nescience. 

31. lam Brahman the greatest effulgence, the greatest 
of the three Padas devoid of body, sense Cleans, mind, 
intellect, Prina and the ego. 

32. I am the Brahman the eternal, the pure, the enlight* 
ened, the conjoined, the bliss, the non •bifurcated. I am 
Brahman the greatest effulgence, of the form of supreme 
knowledge for salvation. 


SCia said : 

33*34. O Saunaka, I have thus explained to you the 
science of Yoga with its eight components, that yields salva* 
tion. Those who are bound by the fetters of Natural evolu* 
lion arc definitely reborn after the Nitya and Naimittika Layas 
(the permanent and the causal dissolutions). But not so after 
attaining the supreme soul. A man deludedly ignorant 
becomes free due to knowledge and emancipates himself. 

35. Thereafter, he does not die. He it not miserable. 
He is not sick. He is not fettered. A cnithfu! person b untainted 
by sins. He is never tortured in hell. 

36. He has no misery of being in the womb. He 
becomes one with Nfiriya^ the unchangeable. With single 
minded devotion alone he has to be attained, the Lord who 
accords worldly enjoyments and salvation. 

37. By nfeans of contemplation, worship, Japas, cor¬ 
rectly sung songs of praise, duly performed rites, sacrifices and 
gifts the mind becomes pure and true knowledge is obtained 
thereby. 

38-40. Brahmins (in day's of yore) have attained 
salvation by repetitions of Franava and other Mantras. Indra 
attained the greatest region due lo it. The Gandharvas, the 
celestial damsels and the Devas attained Deva*hood due to 
it. The^sages gained their sagehood, the Gandharvas their 
Gandharvahood and the kings their kingship due to this 
alone. 



672 


Garu4a Purai:ta 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYSEVEN 

Toga and its Components 

SQta said : 

1. I shall explain devotion to Visi;iu whereby every¬ 
thing can be secured. Han is not pleased by anything else so 
much as by devotion. 

2. A regular remembrance of Hari is the root cause 
of great welfare, the source of origin of the stream of merits 
and the most tasteful fruit of life. 

3«4. Intelligent scholars have mentioned that service 
unto God is the best of the various means of devotion. 
Those who shed tears of Joy, with hair standing on their ends 
while the names of the Lord of the world are being sung along 
with His activities are the real devotees. The gain of feet of 
the great Lord, the support and creator of the universe, accords 
true wisdom. 

5-6. Those who are affectionate and carry out the per¬ 
petual service of God are the real Vaisnavas. Even without 
hearing the words of the Vedas or the discourse of the Lord 
(Theology and Philosophy) he who bows with great devotion 
and adores and commends the sympathy and favouritism of the 
Lord to His dcvotec.<< is a real Vaisnava. 

7-8. If there is delight in hearing His stories, the ears 
become fruitful. He who has dedicated all his feelings unto 
God Vi$nu with great devotion through a learned br.ihmin 
devoted to Lord Vifveivara, is a Mahabhigavata (a great 
devotee). He who himself worships the Lord by flower offerings, 
or he who takes to worship for sustenance is also a Bhagavata. 

9. Hwre are eight types of devotion. Even a Mleccha 
(outcaste) who is a great devotee b on a par with the greatest 
of brahmins and sages. He attains the greatest of goals. 

10. Exchange of articles with him is allowed. He can 
be worshipped like Lord Hari Himself. A Candklx becoming a 
devotee casually sanctifles everything. 

11. This is the rite of Lord Hari :~that he accords 
freedom from fear of all living beings to him who says 'Please 



1 - 227.22 


673 


be merciful to me who have nought refuge in you. I am 
Thine.’* 

12. A person who has mastered all the systems of 

vedanta is better than thousands of Manirayajins (those who 
perform sacrifice reciting Mantras). A devotee of Lord Vi?^u 

is better than ten millions of such Vedantins. 

13- Ekantins (those who are single-minded in Lords 
devotion) attain the greatest region even with their gross body. 
This i4n$werving faith in Vi?ot* makes them identical with Him 
and He is ibndly attached to them also. 

14. Those who are thus single-minded in their devotion 
to Lord are great favourites unto Him though he impartially 
loves everyone. 

15-17. His Bhaku does not go astray even in times of 
danger. Remembering Lord Vij^u my great devotion docs not 
go away from my heart (I am always attached to Him) as it 
is the greatest love that suffers no adverse effects from worldly 
objects. Even if a man has mastered the Vedas and Sastras he 
should be considered the vilest among men if he is not devoted 
to Lord. Even if a man has not learned Veda^ and Skstras, 
even if he has not performed any sacrifice, it must be deemed 
that he has done everything if he is devoted to Lord Vispu. 

18. O great sages, even those who perform great sacri¬ 
fices, even those who have learned the Vedas do not attain that 
goal which devotees attain. 

19. A person reckless about his conduct of life and duties 
according to the stage of his life is able to sanctify the entire 
world if he becomes a Vaifpava in the same way as the rising 
sun does. 

20. Even ruthless wicked persons bent upon sinful acti¬ 
vities attain the greatest region on being devoted to Lord 
Narayana. 

21. If there is firm and uofiinching devotion to Lord 
Janardana that alone will give one exircroc pleasure. Heavenly 
bliss is nothing in comparison to it. 

22. To those men who roam about the world that U 
impassable due to diversified actions, the sole support is 
Janardam who is propitiated. 



674 


G<ffu4a PuT<ii}d 


23. He who does not Hsten to the songs of praise of the 
divine qualities of the discus«beartng lord of lords (Vif^u)^ is 
no better than a deaf man. He is to be banished from al! 
religious activities. 

24. If any one's body is not thrilled with horripilation 
when the name of ViRtu is sung, it is no better than a corpse. 

25. If there is annihilation of all sins when the mind it 
directed towards the Lord the devotion to Him will necessari* 
ly usher in salvation even long. 

26. They say that Yama, on seeing his attendant with 
the noose in his hand whispers into his cars^^Avoid those men 
who have sought refuge tn Madhusudana (slayer of the demon 
Madhu). I am lord of other men not of Vaifnavas.' 

27. The lord has said—'Even if the vilest of penons 
were to be devoted to me to the exclusion of others he must be 
considered a saint. He is of the right and perfect enterprise.’ 

28. O Excellent brahmin, you can even swear that a 
devotee ofViy^u will become rightMus quickly and attain 
permanent peace. He never perishes. 

29. Not only virtue, wealth and love but even salvation 
is easily accessible to him whose devotion is firm towards Hari, 
the root cause of all worlds. 

30. Hari's Miyi (Nescience, Illusion) is divine and 
insurmountable composed as it is of the three Gunas. Only they 
who resort to Him can cross it. 

31. If a person has his intellect concentrated on Hari of 
what use are sacrifices and worships to him ? ^^$l;lu can be 
propitiated by devotion alone. There is no other cause 
thereof. 

32. The noble-souled Jsmardana cannot be so much 
propitiated by gifts of various kinds distributed by persons, or 
flowers or unguents as by single-minded devotion. 

33. The worldly existence is a poisonous tree but two of 
its fruits are comparable even to nectar, one is devotion to 
Lord Re java and the other is a chance association with His 
devotees. 

34. Leaves, flowers, fruits and water arc easily available 
always. Hence, by devotion alone the eternal being can be 
attained. Still people strive after ssdvation. 



1.226.3 


675 


35. TKe manes jump with joy» the grandfathers dance 
in gaiety in view of the iact that vaisi;iava is born in our 
family. He is sure to enable us to surmount all difficulties.* 

36. When such ignorant sinnen cavilling at Indra and 
Lord Vi^Qu like SUuplUa, Suyodhana and others have attained 
salvation shaking off their sins by means of constant memory 
(of the Lord) what doubt is there in the case of persons of 
great devotion ? 

37. Even if they are devoid of contemplation and yogic 
practice people who have sought shelter in Him will cross the 
sea of death and attain the Vai^nava r^ion. 

38. O Madhava> he horse of my mind is bedevilled by 
hundreds of painful experiences arising from the world of 
existence. It is faltering in the pores of sense organs. May it 
be tethered to the peg of Thy foot with 6rm devotion as the 
cord. 

39. Visi;iu is the supreme Brahman, devoid of difference 
and difierenciation. Although this is known from the Vedas, 
principles (enunciated by sages) and actual experience, those 
who are deluded know it not. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYEIGHT 

Dtvoiion to Vif^u 

SiJta said: 

1. The man who bows to Aja (the Unborn deity) the 
cause of salvation, free from beginoii^ and end, the unchange* 
able and the imperishable, becomes worthy of being revered 
by the whole world. 

2. With great devotion for ever I bow down to Visnu, 
Bliss personified, the unbifurcated, perfect knowledge, the 
omnipresent and the lord who resides in the hearts of men. 

3. I bow down to the great lord Vi^pu the immanent 
soul that-sers the auspicious and the inauspicious in every one 
and bears witness to everything. 



676 


Garu4a PurAf^ 


4. He who, though competent, does not bow down to 
Gakrapani (the discus^wielding LordVi^pu) is a mere destroyer 
of the grassy growth in the world (is a beast grazing grass). 

5. Even a single bow firm and full of good feelings 
directed towards Kr^^a handsomely dark in colour like the 
interior of the glistening cloud, the immeasurable overlord of 
all the worlds, is competent to sanctify immediately even a 
Gandala who cooks dog’s Besh. 

6. Even by means of a hundred sacrifices it is impossible 
to attain that goal which a man who worships (Lord Vi^^u) 
by means of a Namask^a (kneeling down) done by falling 
down on the ground like a staff, attains. 

7. A single Namaskara directed towards is con* 

ducive to save by according salvation to those who wander in 
the impassable woods of worldly existence which seems (to 
some) like a well in a pleasure grove. 

8» Seated, lying down or standing whether it be here or 
there one shall always take refuge in the mantra ‘Namo 
Narayai^aya’ (obeisance to Narayana). 

9. The word ^Narayarta’ exists. The faculty of speech 
is under their control, still the ignorant fools fall into hell. How 
surprising is it? 

10. A man may have four mouths or even a crore of 
them and he may be pure in mind. It may or may not be 
possible for him to narrate even a ten thousandth part of the 
good qualities ofVi$nu the lord of deities. 

11. Sages like Vyasa and others in worshipping the 
slayer of Madhu stop in the middle because they have exhaust¬ 
ed their mental faculties and not because the qualities of 
Govinda are exhausted. 

12. Even if due to sheer helplessness a man calls out 
the name of the lord he is immediately freed from all sins like 
the deer saved from the claws of the Ii<m. Surely, he has girt 
up his loins for his journey towards salvation. 

13. If a man calls out the name of the lord even in his 
dream it destroys his all sins. Then what doubt is there that 
the sins will be removed when the name of Janardana is 
openly repeated. 

14. O Brahmin, they by whom the words ^Obeisance, 



Xl.229.2 


677 


O Kr$M, Acyuta, Ananta, Va$udeva’ have been uttered with 
great feelings of devotion will never go to Yama’s city. 

15. Just as a blazing fire becomes dim or dailtness fs 
completely dispelled when the sun rises, so also the heap of 
sin is dissipated when Hari*s name is sung. 

16-17. Surely, a sojourn in heaven comes to an end. To 
persons who undertake a long journey with the memory of 
Kr^na filling their minds the food to be taken while in transit is 
the frequent repetition of the names of Pundarlkak^a (Lord 
Visnu). The Vaisnava name of Krsna is the only panacea for 
the removal of the effects the poisonous bite of the serpent 
of worldly existence. By reciting it the man becomes free. 

18. What is obtained by means of contemplation in the 

Yuga, reciting mantras in the Treta Yuga and worshipp¬ 
ing in Dvipara is obtained in Kali Yuga by constantly remem¬ 
bering Lord Kejava< 

19. He the tip of whose tongue bears the two syllables 
Ha and ri crosses the ocean of worldly existence and goes to 
the region of Vispu. 

20. A man who has realised thousands of wicked 
actions with which he is surrounded but who sincerely yearns for 
welfare and purity and therefore takes active interest in sing¬ 
ing the praise of Narayana does not see even in his dream a 
rebirth. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYNINE 

Devotion to Vif^u 


SUta said: 

1-2. T^e propitiation ofHari the lord of the entire uni¬ 
verse is essential. He who makes flower•ofiertngs or libations 
of water after reciting the Purufa SOkta has actually worshipp¬ 
ed the entire universe consisting of the mobile and immobile 
beings. He who does not worship Lord Vifpu should be deemed 
to have committed the murder of a brahmin. 



678 


G^ru^a PtP’d^ 


3. He who does not meditate upon Visnu from whom 
the living beings take their origin and spread everywhere 
shall be reborn as a worm in the faeces. 

4*5. A life undergoing tortures in the hell will be 
addressed thus by Yama:—^*Hasn*t the lord Keiava the des¬ 
troyer of all pains been worshipped by you? Why is it that you 
have not worshipped the lord who gives residence in His 
region to the votary who offers even libations of water in 
the absence of other articles? 

6. Neither one’s own mother nor father nor other kins* 
men can ever do unto one what Hnikeia (Vifnu) does when 
propitiated and worshipped faithfully. 

7. Vito^ great Lord is to be worshipped by a person 
strictly adhering to the rules of conduct of life befftting his 
caste and stage of life. There is no other means of propitiating 
Him* 

8. Neither by different kinds of gifts distributed (by 
the devotee) nor by flowers or unguents offered by him can the 
noble*soulcd Janardana be propitiated as by devotion. 

9. Salvation or identity (with the Supreme Soul) can¬ 
not be secured through riches, affluence or greatness or by a 
series of religious rites* The root cause for the same is the 
worship of Hari. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND Tt 


It 


\TY 


Diooticn to Vi;nu 

SSiasaid : 

1* After going through all sacred literature and deliberat¬ 
ing fraquently this is the only conclusion arrived at that Niri* 
ya^a is to be meditated upon constantly. 

2* If a man meditates on Lord constantly with 

single-minded devotion, of what use to him are tht making of 
gifts, pilgrimages, atisterities and sacrifices ? 



L2S0J5 


679 


3. Sixty thousand holy centres and six thousand sacred 
rivers do not merit comparison with even a sixteenth part of 
the act of kneeling before the deity Niirayai^a. 

4. Constant remembrance ofKripa is far superior to all 
kinds of expiatory rites and practices of austerities. 

5. Tf a person performing ordinary rites of expiation 
begins CO love the sin committed, no other atonement is possible 
except hearty remembrance of Hari. 

6. If a person meditates upon Niriyapa even for a few 
minutes without any lassitude he attains heaven. What doubt 
is then about one who Is always engrossed in it ? 

7. The stale of the mind of a Yogin in the various stages 
of walking, dreaming slumbering and trance is similar to that of 
the mind directed towards Acyuta. 

8. It is the duty of the devotee to remember Govinda, 
the lord of Laksmi, whether standing, falling, prattling, entering 
the chamber, taking food or just waking up. 

9. Assiduously engaged in one’s own duty one shall fix 
one’s mind in Janardana. This.statement is in accordance with 
the sacred literature. There is no use in calking much. 

10. Meditation is the greatest virtue, meditation is the 
greatest penance, meditation is the greatest purificatory rite. 
Hence, one shall be devoted to me4itation. 

11. There is no greater object of meditation than Vispu. 
There is no greater penance than fasting (on Ekidal! day). Even 
more important than that is the constant thought of Vasudeva* 

12. Madhusudana when meditated upon, gives the 
devotee, unsolicited, what is difficult to get and what cannot be 
even comprehended. 

13. If inadvertently a slip occurs while one is performing 
a sacrifice a mere remembrance of Vifnu fills the void. This is 
what is laid down in the Vedas. 

14. There is no other way of atoning for sins, comparable 
to meditation. The fire of Yogic jmedees (with the meditation 
on Vi$qu) bums away the causes bringing about the birth of 
the future body. 

15. A Yogin competent to practise the sute of trance 
attains salvation in this very birth by burning all Karmans 
in the fire^f Yoga without delay. 



680 


Garu^o Purd^a 


16. Just as a blazing fire with leaping fiames consumes 
the heap of dried straw so also the fire of Yoga consumes all sins 
when Lord Visxtu is fixed in the mind. 

17. Just as gold is freed of its impurities due to its con¬ 
tact with fire so also all the impurities of men are disprlled by 
Vasudeva. 

18. When Hari is remembered so much sin is quelled 
as can be quelled by thousands of ablutions in the Gangetic 
waters and the holy ablutions taken for millions of times in the 
holy tank of Puskara. 

19. Within a moment after the contemplation of Hari so 
much sin is dissolved as is wiped off by means of thousands of 
Pr&riayamas. 

20. Evil influence of the Kali age, wicked statements, vile 
utterances of heretics—none of these affect the mind of the 
person in whose mind Lord Keiava finds a place. 

21. The moment in which Lord Hari is remembered has 
the auspicious properties of the holy Tilhis (days of the lunar 
month), days, nights, beneficent lunar conjunctions and holy 
lagnas (units of time). 

22. If a moment passes without remembering VSsudeva, 
it is a great loss, a great void—a blindness, a sluggishness, a 
dumb-found edness. 

23. If Govinda is fixed in the mind, the vile Age of Kali 
is transformed into Kit^- If Acyuta is not fixed in the mind even 
Krta Yuga is transformed into Kali age. 

24. He, whose mind is fixed on Govinda while going 
ahead or retreating or standing atone, is always contented. 

25. O Maitreya, even if there is any obstacle in Japa, 
Homa or worship, the desired fruits thereof as Devendrahood 
etc. can be attained if the mind is fixed in Vasudeva. 

26. A person with his miud dedicated to Kc^ava chops 
off the Maya of the ParuM without forsaking the duties of a 
householder and without performing great penance. 

27. If Govinda is stationed in the heart, people readily 
forgive angry persons and sympathise with fools. They are 
joyous in the company of virtuous people. 

28. While performing the various holy rites of ablutions. 



1 . 230.39 


681 


making gifts, etc.,orexpiatory rites especially after sinful actions, 
Lord Niraya^a should be meditated upon. 

29. They gain much, they achieve great success, they 
arc not affected by failure, they in whose hearts is stationed 
Lord Janardana dark in colour like the blue lotus. 

30. Even worms, birds, etc., with their minds, fixed on 
Hari progress upwards. Then what doubt is there in the case of 
the wise ? 

31. Why don't people seek refuge under the shade of 
the tree Visudeva which accords no excessive chillness or heat 
and which closes the doorway to hell ? 

32. O friend, if Madhusudana is Axed in the heart 
neither the curse of the sage Durvibas nor the overlordship 
of Indracan effect the people. 

33. Dhara^ (fixation of the heart) is perfect when the 
mind does not go astray (from Lord Viipu), whether he is talk¬ 
ing or standing or whether he is engaged in some activity of his 
choice. 

34. One shall always meditate upon Narayai;ia, stationed 
in the middle of the solar zone, seated on the holy lotus scat, 
bedecked in bracelets, golden ear-rings, crown and necklaces, 
with a golden complexion and wielding Sankha and Cakra. 

35. There is nothing so holy as meditation. Even the sin 
of taking food from the hands of a Svapaca (a Ca^dala) does 
not taint him. 

36. The mind of a wretch is always attached to worldly 
objects. If one's mind were that much attached to Naraya^a 
how could he not be released from bondage ? 

Sdta said : 

37. How can he who is devoted to Vi^nu bow to 
anyone ? He can enable himself to cross the ocean of sins. 

38. That is perfect knowledge where Govinda presides 
That is true holy discourse where Keiava is disc;i$sed. That 
u the holy rite which is performed for Hb sake* Of what use 
are othec^profuse discussions ? 

39. ' That is the true tongue which utters the praise ol 
Lord Hari* That is the true miod which is dedicated to Him* 



682 


Garu4^ PuTd^ 


Only those hands which perform His adoration are worthy 
of praise. 

40. That head aione is fruitful which bows to the Lord. 
The success of hand lies in adoring the Lord stationed in 
heaven. The mind that always dwells on His qualities and 
exploits is successful. The speech extolling the qualities of 
Govinda is all-successful. 

41. Sinful actions so huge as mountain Meru or the 
mountain Mandara are dissipated entirely by merely 
remembering Lord Keiava. 

42. Whatever man does, good or bad, should be dedi¬ 
cated to Narayaoa. Then he is not aflected adversely. 

43. The living beings beginning with a blade of grass 
and ending with Brahmi are fourfold. All the universe 
mobile or immobile lies asleep due to thy M&y& O Hari. 

44. The person whose mind is dedicated to the Lord 
never goes to hell.; the person who thinks of the Lord attains 
heaven; if the mind rests in the Lord heu never faced with 
obstacles. The region of Brahma is a mere trifle. The im¬ 
perishable lord accords salvation to the sluggish minded persons 
if he is thought of4 Tho fact that a person dissolves himself 
when the Lord Acyuta is sung is only a small matter. 

45. Those who wish lo cross the ocean of misery shall 
perform the rites in fire, Japa, ablution and meditation and 
adoration of Vi$nu. They are sure to cross it. 

46. The king is the refuge of the Nation, the parents 
that of the child, virtue is the refuge of all men and Lord 
Hari is the refuge of every one. 

47. O excellent sage, there is no greater hoiy centre 
than those who bow to the eternal Vasudeva, the source of the 
universe. 

48. One can meditate on Govinda without lassitude 
with the same purpose in view as in observing the worship of 
valuable gems or the study of the Vedas. 

49. I consider a Sudra, Niuda, a ^vapaca or a brahmin 
equal to one another if they are devotees of the Lord. None 
of these goes to hell. 

50. People praise a rich man with great respect wishing 
for some monetary benefit. If they %vere to praise the creator 



L231.1 


683 


of the world with the same zeal is there any doubt that they 
would be released from bondage ? (Who is not released from 
bondage ?) 

31. A powerful forest hre burns even a wet fuel. Vi^nu 
so stationed in the heart bums all sins of yogins. 

52. Deer and other creatures never stay on in a moun* 
tain forest that burns* SiroUarly« all sorts of sins never stay on 
in a person engaged in yogic practice. 

53. The benefit that accrues to one is in proportion to 
one’s faith. If at all there is any limitation in the influence of 
Lord Knna, it is this. 

54. Sijupala^, the son of Damagbo$a| remembering 
Lord Govinda with hatred attained salvation. What doubt is 
there about a person who is engrossed completely in Him ? 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYONE 

Hymn to J^arasirfiha 


SUta said : 

1. O SauDaka, I shall now mention the Hymn of prayer 
to Narasimha sung by Siva. Formerly^ the Mothers (MatfgaQa)* 
told Sankara thus 

1. According to Che Puriaa this coonarch was, in a previous 

existence, the unrighteous Hirai;iyakaiipu» king of the aritrar, who was killed 
by Vifpu in the form of Narasiihha. He was next bom as tbe ten*beaded 
Rhvaba who was killed by Rlxna. Then be was born as the son of Dama* 
ghoH and continued his enxnity to the eighth incarnation of Vi|pu, 

with even greater implacability. He denounced Krioa when they met at 
the RSjasCya sacrifice of Yudbifthira, but his head was cut off by KrSo a 
with his discus. His deaUi forms the sublet of a celebrated poem by Mfigha. 

2. These appear to have been originally the female energies of the 
great gods, as BrahmfiQl of Brahml, Mibefvari of Siva, VaiiQavI of Vifnu, 
Indripi or AmdrI of Indrt, etc. Tbe number of them %vas seven or eight 
or sixteen, but in the later mythology, they have increased out of number. 
They are t!bnnected with tbe Tantra •worship, and are represented as 
worshiping Siva and attending upon his son KArttikeya.[CDHM, p. 206]. 



684 


Garuia ^rltna 


2. O Lord, we wish to devour the entire universe along 
with deities* demons and human beings with your favour. Please 
permit us. 

&Qiikara iaid : 

3. Certainly, all these people are to be protected by 
you all. Hence* this ruthless mentality may soon be diverted. 

4. Disregarding the advice thus tendered by Sankara* 
they began to devour the three worlds, inclusive of all mobile 
and immobile creatures, with impurity. 

5. When the three worlds were being thus eaten by the 
Mothers* Lord §iva meditated on the Lord in the form of 
Nfsidiha (the man*lion). 

6-9. Lord Sahkara’s conception of Nrsirhha was thus:— 
^‘He has no beginning or death; He is the originator of all 
living beings; His tongue blazes like lightning. He has great 
curved teeth; the manes blaze like a garland; He has bracelets 
studded with gems; He has a good crown; He is bedecked 
with golden manes; with His brilliance he pervades the whole 
Brahma^dd (the Cosmic Egg); the hairs on His body are in 
curls in circlets. He is wearing a great garland consisting of 
many flowers of variegated colours.'* 

10. As soon as He was meditated upon* the Lord appear* 
ed before Sankara assuming the same form as was conceived 
by Rudra with great devotion. 

11. In the same dazzling form unperceivable by the 
.evas He stood there. Sankara thereupon knelt before the 
Lord and prayed. 

&aiikara said : 

12. Obeisance to Thee O Lord of the universe, having 
the body of a Man-Lion, shining with claws* resembling the 
oyster shell, with which the lord of demons (Hiranyakaiipu) 
was killed. 

13. Thou hast the golden and lawny coloured body 
of the giant clinging to Thy lotus-like Nails (claws). 
Obeisance to Padman&bha; obeisance to the suspicious* O 
Preceptor of the world. Thou roarest like the rumbling cloud 



1.231,25 


685 


at the end of the Kalpa, O deity shining with the lustre of ten 
million suns. 

14. O deity tcrriiying like thousand Yamas> valorous 
like thousand Indras, affluent like thousand Dhanadas 
(Kuberas) O deity with a thousand lotus^like feet. 

15. O deity resembling a thousand moons* thousand 
rayed) moving like a lion, resplendent like a thousand Rudras, 
sung in praise by a thousand Brahmas. 

16. Remembered in Japas by a thousand Rudras, 
endowed with a thousand all perceiving eyes, progenitor and 
destroyer of thousands, untier of thousands of bondages. 

17. O Fierce deity, having the velocity of a thousand 
winds, thousand eyes, O Compassionate One V 

Having thus sung the hymn to the lord of lords, Hari in 
the form of Man-lion, Siva in all humility submitted thus 

18. I had created the MalfS (the Mothers) for the des¬ 
truction of the demon Andhaka. Disregarding my advice 
they arc now devouring the wonderful created beings of the 
universe. 

19. Having created them I am incompetent to kill 
them though unvanquished elsewhere. Having evolved them 
first how can I wish for their annihilation. 

20-21. Thus addressed by Rudra, Hari in the form 
of the Man^lion created a thousand goddesses from the 
tip of his tongue. Hari the VagiJvara (Lord of speech) sub¬ 
dued the Mothers, protected the devas. He accorded peace 
and happiness to the world and vanished. 

22. He who recites this Narasiinha hymn in all purity 
and restraint of the sense organs shall be blessed with the 
realisation of all his desires like Rudra. There is no doubt 
in this. 

23. One shall meditate on the deity Narasiinha, with 
eyes shining like the midday sun (for the evil doers) and like 
white lotus (for the devotees), with his fiacc beaming like the 
blazing fire, having neither beginning nor end, the eternal 
(the ancient), the unborn, lord of the great and the small, 

the receptacle of the Universe. 

2^125. If anyone recites this hymn it quells all mise¬ 
ries like the sun dispelling the snow. When he wants to 



686 


Gant4(^ PuriUfa 


perform the worship of the Lord in the form of Narasiihha^ 
Lord Siva, the destroyer of the Tripuras, prep^ares His idol along 
with the Mothers. Then the lord appears before him and 
stands near him. After propitiating the great lord and obtain* 
ing the boon he saved the universe from the Mothers. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYTWO 

KuUUtiT^ crJiiMtmrta Hymn 

SUta saii\ 

1. When he was asked by Sri Nirada, Lord Kara men* 
tioned this hymn called Kulamrt^ (otherwise known as 
Jflinimrta). Please listen to it. 

Jfdradn saidx 

2. He who is fettered by Dvandvas (conflicting factors) 
—Lust and Anger, the aiupicious and the inauspicious and the 
various objects of the sense organs, sound, etc., and is tortured 
by them is necessarily a wretch in this world. 

3. O Lord, the slayer of Tripuras, I wish to hear fh>m 
you the means whereby that creature can be saved quickly 
from the ocean of death and transmigratioD. 

MaheSoara tcid: 

4. On hearing these words of N&rada the three*eyed 
deity 8ambhu (Hara) spoke unto the sage. 

5. O, Excellent sage, I shall tell you the great secret 
mantra and hymn called ^Jfi&nkmrta’ that destroys all miseries 
and removes the fear of bondage of worldly existence. 

6-7. The four types of living beings beginning with the 
Uhde of gran and ending with the four*faccd deity Brafami, 



1.232.16 


687 

contistti^ of the entire univene the mobile and the immobile^ 
sleeps due to the Miya of Vifpu. If due to the p'ace of Lord 
V 49 U any one among them wakes up» he will crosi the ocean 
of worldly existence which is impatf able even to the gods. 

8*9. It is the person who is averse to the acquisition of 
real knowledge that becomes puffed up due to the enjoyments 
and prosperity he possesses. Inebriated creatures get entangled 
in their attachment to sons, %rives and (kmilies like the wild 
elephants sinking below the surface of waters of deluge. 

I do not find any means of salvation even after hundred 
crores of births for that wretch who shuts up his mouth [and 
does not ting the Lord*i Prayer] like the silk worm in the 
cocoon. 

10. Hence, O N&rada, one shall propitiate the imperirit* 
able lord of all gods. One shall take delight in meditating on 
Vifpu. 

11. [The hymn begins here and ends in the eighteenth 
verse] He who meditates constantly on Lord Vifpu, the unU 
verse-formed, devoid of beginning and end, the unborn, station-' 
ed in His own self and the omniscient becomes free. 

12. A person mediuting constantly on Vi^pu holding 
devas (and others) within Himself becomes free. He who per« 
petually meditates on Vifpu, devoid of bodies, the creator^ 
possessed of all knowledge and mental proclivities, the immov» 
able and all-pervading becomes free. 

13. He who constantly meditates on LordVifnu, free 
from doubts and contradictions, devoid of specific manifest* 
atioQS, divested of the created groups, free from ailments and 
afflictions, Visudeva Che preceptor of all, becomes free. 

14. He isrho meditates on all manifestations of the 
sentient soul of the all pervading, on Vispu the auspicious, the 
single, the imperishable, becomes free. 

15. He who meditates constantly on Vispu, who Is be¬ 
yond the pale of all statements, «riio knows the three uni s of 
time (the past, present and future) who is lord of the 
universe, who bean witness to everything and who is more 
excellent fflan all the others, becomes fkee. 

16. He who constantly medicates on Vi iqu served by 



688 G<xru4o PuT^a 

Brahmi and other gods, Gandharvai, Sages, Siddhas, Cara^as^, 
and Yogi ns becomes free. 

17. All the people wishing for release from the bondage 
of worldly existence become free on singing thus the prayer of 
Vist;iu the granter of boons. 

18. Whoever wishes to get release from the bondage of 
worldly existeece shall with concentration meditate on Vifou. 
He who contemplates on the endless^ imperishable lord Vi$nu, 
established in'the universe, the unborn and the lord of worlds, 
becomes free. 

SHia said: 

19. What the Bull*etnblemed deity Siva narrated to 
Nirada on being requested by him I have now told you. 

20. My dear Sir, meditating on the supreme Brahman, 
the unwasting, the spotless, you shall obtain certainly the 
eternal and unchanging region. 

21. Thousands of horse sacrifices, and hundreds of 
Vijapeya sacrifices do not merit even a sixteenth part of ex* 
tremely concentrated devotion even for a moment. 

22. After hearing the importance of Lord Vi^nu from 
Siva the divine sage propitiated Lord Visnu devotedly and 
attained the status of achievement. 

23. The sin committed in the course of millions of lives 
of the person who reads or hears this excellent hymn, perishes. 

24. He who assiduously reads this hymn constantly of 
Lord Vi^nu, recited by Lord 8iva at first, attains immortality. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND H 


II 


ITYTHREE 


Mftyaa^tcka Hymn 

Suta said : 

1. I shall mention the Hymn sung by Mirka^eya. (The 
hymn begins) I have sought refuge in Dimodara. What can 
Mftyu (God of Death) do untome ? 


1. A wandering actor or nnaer: 1 bant* 



1.233.11 


689 

2. I have sought refuge in the deity bearing ^hkha and 
Gakra, the unchanging, whose form is manifest and who is 
called Adhokiaja. What can Mftyu do unto me? 

3. I have sought refuge in the Divine Varaha (Boar), 
Vamana(dwarf), VifQU, Nirasimha, Janardana andM&dhava. 
What can Mftyu do unto me? 

4. I have sought refuge in the great Puru^a, the seed of 
Puskarak^tra, the holy lord of the univene and the master of 
the worlds. What can Mftyu do unto me? 

5. I have sought refuge in the thou sand-headed deity, 
the manifest and the unmanilcst, (he eternal and the great 
Yogi. What can Mftyu do unto me? 

6. I have sought refuge in tlte deity who is the inner 
soul of all living beings, the noble soul, the source of sacrifices, 
not born of any womb, and the niulti*formed. What can 
Mftyu do unto me? (The hymn ends). 

7. On hearing (his hymn sung by the noble soul 
(Mkrkat^deya), the god of Death left the place repulsed by the 
emissaries of Vi|ou- 

8. Thus, the god of Death was conquered by Markandcya 
the intelligent. There is nothing impossible of realisation if the 
lotus^eyed Nfsiihha is delighted. 

9. These eight stanzas are of holy potentialities and 
quell death. the sake of the benefit of Markandcya, Vi?pu 
Himself mentioned this. 

10. He who reads this hymn thrice a day, with great 
devotion regularly and pure-minded will never have a pre¬ 
mature death. Hts mind is fixed in Acyuta. 

11. That Yogin defied Mftyu by contemplating within 
himself in the lotus of his heart the ancient Puru^a Narayaoa, 
(he permanent and the immeasurable. 



Gafujd 




CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTTFOUR 

A^ia or Cakradhara Hymn 

SUia said: 

1 • O ^unaka» please listen. I shall narrate the hymn 
ofAcyuta which Brahmi had narrated to Narada on being 
requested by him. 

Ndroda $oid\ 

2« Be pleased to tell me how the imperishable and un¬ 
changing VifQU has to be eulogised by me, Vifpu the granter 
of boons, every day at the time of adoration. 

3. Those who eulogise Acyuia constantly are the blessed. 
Their life is excellent. They enjoy all happiness. Their life ii 
fruitful. 

Bfohnd said: 

4. O Sage, I shall tell you the hymn of Vasudeva, that 
yields salvation. At the time of worship, if the lord is eulogised 
with this hymn He will be propitiated. 

5*10. OM, obeisance to lord V&sudeva, obeisance to the 
dissipater of all sins. Obeisance to Him who is of pure body, 
knowledge embodied. Lord of all deities, bearing Srlvatsa, 
having sword in hb hand, bearing garland of lotuses, the base 
of the entire world, wearing yellow garment Nfriniha, Vaikuotha^ 
lotus-navelled, lying in the ocean of milk, having thousand 
heads, lyingupon the serpent, bearing axe in hb hand, destroying 
the warriors, of true vows, unconquerable, lord of the three 
worlds, bearing discus, btteficent, the minutest, the oldest, 
usurper of Bali’s kingdom as Vimana. 

11. Obeisance to the sacrificial Boar. Obeisance, obei¬ 
sance to Govinda. Obeisance to Thee, O ffiiasful one, obeisance 
to Thee the great Imperishable. 

12. Obeisance to Thee the Knowledge-Exbtence; Obei¬ 
sance to Thee the dispenser of knowledge; Obeisance to Thee 
the great unbifurcated; Obeisance to Thee the best amongmen. 

13. Obeisance to Thee the creator-deity of the imivene: 



1.234.15 


691 


Obeisance to Thee the concriver of the universe; obeisance to 
Thee the lord of the universe; obeisance to Thee the cause of 
the universe. 

14. Obeisance to Thee the slayer of the demon Madhu;^ 
obeisance to Thee the slayer of Rava^; obeisance to Thee 
the slayer of Kamsa and Keiin;* obeisance to Thee the sup* 
pressor of Kaifabha.^ 

15. Obeisance to Thee the lotus-eyed, obeisance to Thee, 
the Garu4^-emblemed, obeisance to Thee the slayer of 
Kalanemi^, obeisance to Thee, seated on Garu^A. 


1. Madhu And KAlfabha wtrt two borrible demont, vrho, aeeordi&f to 
the MshSbbSrats and the Purias** iprsnf from the ear of while he 
wai asleep at the end of a and were about to kill BrahmS, who was 
lying oo the lotus springing from Mfou’s navel. Viiou kiilod them, and 
hence he obtained the names of Kaitabbajit and Madbutfrdana. The 
Mirkaod^’PurSoa attributes (be death of Kaitabba to UnS, and she bean 
the title of KaitabhS. The Hari«vaibfa stats that the earth received its 
name of MedinI from the marrow (vwdei) of these demons. In one passage 
it says that their bodies, being thrown into the sea, produced an immense 
quantity of marrow or fat, which NSrIyana used in fermlng the earth. In 
another place it says that the swda/ quite covered (be earth, and so gave it 
the name of Medini. [CDHM, p. 139]. 

2. In the MahSbhSnita, a demon who fought with and was defeated 
by Indra. In the Pur&nas a dis^n who took the form of a horse and attack¬ 
ed Krina, but was killed by that hero's thrusting bis arm into bis jaws and 
rending him asunder [CDHM, p. 156). 

3. See fn. 1. 

4. (1) In theRAmiyaqa, ademon, unde of lUvaoa. At the solicita¬ 
tion of Rkvapa, and with the promise of half his kingdom, he endeavoured to 
kill HanumSn. Atfuming the form of a bermiC-devoM, he went to the 
GandhamAdana mountain and when Hanumka proceeded thither in search of 
the medicinal drugs, the disguised demon invited him to has heimiuige and 
offered him food. HanunsAn refused, but went to bathe in the neighbouring 
paid. Upon his placing his foot in the water it was seiaed by a crocodile, 
but he dragged the creature out and killed it. From the dead body there 
arose a lovely aps»as who bad been cursed by Dakta to live as a crocodile 
till she should be released by Haaumln. She told her deliverer to be beware 
of KAIanenu. so Hanumin went back to that deceiver, told him that he 
knew him, and taking him by the fret, smt whiriiag through the 
air to LaAki, where he fril before the throne of Rkvana in the council- 
room. In the Purioas a great dem<», son of Wocaoa, the grandson of 
Hiraqyakafipu. He was killed by Vi|QU [CDHMt p. 141]. 



692 


Garuia Pur&^a 


16*17. Obeisance to Thee, son of Dcvaki; obeisance to 
Thee, scion of the family of Vfs^is; obeisance to Thee, Lord of 
Rukmi]^;^ obeisance to Thee son of Aditi; obeisance to Thee, 
resident of cowherds* colony; obeisance to Thee fond of cow* 
herds* colony. 

18. Victory to t>f (wm of a cowherd; Victory 
to the beloved of cowherd classes; Victory to the supporter of 
'Govardhana;S Victory to the promoter of cowherds* colonVi 

19. Hail lliee, the slayer of the powerful Ravapa; Hail 
thee the slayer of Cipura*, Hail Thee the illuminater of the 
family of Vn^is; Hail Thee, the suppressor of Kaliya* serpent. 

20. Hail Thee, the true %vitness of the universe; Hail 
Thee the achiever of all riches; Hail Thee the comprehensible 
to the knowen ofVed&nta; Hail Thee the giver of every thing 
Midhava. 

1. Dsugblcr of BhlimsU, king of Vidftrbhs. According to the 
Hirivsrbis she was Mugfat in marnsge by Krfns, with whom »he fell in love. 
But her brother Ruknun w»i a friend of Ktrtua whom KrSQa had killed. 
He, therefore, opposed him and thwarted the match. Rukmid was then be¬ 
trothed to SiiiipAU, king of Cedi, but on her wedding day, at the was 
going CO the temple, Kno* “w her, took her by the hand, and carried her 
away in his chariot. They were pumied by her intended husband and by 
her brother RuJunin, but Kfipa defeated them both, and took her safe to 
DvirakS, where he married her. She was his principal wife who bore him a 
•on Pradyumiia. By him also she had nine other sons and one daughter. 
[CDHMp. 270]. 

2. A mountain in VindSvana, which Rftpa induced the cowherds 
and cowherdesMi to wonhip instead of Indra. This enraged the god, who 
sent a deluge of rain Co wash away the mountain and all the people of the 
country, but Kffya held up the mountain on bis little finger for seven days 
to shelter tbe peo^ ofVrnd&vana. Indra retired balTled. [CDHM, p. 114]. 

3. A wrestler in the service of Karhsa who was blled by Krtoa. 

4. A serpent king who had five beads, and dwelt in the deep pool of 

YamunS, with numefous attendant serpents. His mouths vomited fire and 
smoke, and he laid waste all the country round. while yet a child, 

jumped into his pool, when be was quickly laced and entwined in the coil* of 
the snakes. Hit eoopanioni and frie&dt were horrified, but Balar&ma called 
upon him to eiercise his divine power. He did so and tbe serpents were 
soon overcome. Pladng hii foot on the mundane bead of Kfihya be compelled 
higw and hisi<41owers to implofe mercy. He spared them, but bade Kaliya 
and his followers to free the earth from their presence, and to move to the 
ocean. [COHM, p. 144]. 



1.234.30 


693 


21« Hail Thee> the supporter of all, the unmanifest. Hail 
Thee, the giver of everything O Madhava; Hail Thee, the 
unsullied in the mind. 

22. Victory be thine, the unsupported; Be victorious O 
quiescent eternal. Be victorious O Lord, the nourisher of the 
universe, Be victorions O Vis^u; obeisance to Thee. 

23. Thou art the preceptor O Hari, thou art the disciple. 
Thou art the initiation and the group of mantras. Thou art 
the Ny&sa, the Mudri (gestures). Thou art the School of 
theology. Thou art the flowen and other ingredients. 

24. Thou art the base; Thou art Ananta (the 
serpent); Thou art the tortoise; Thou art the earth and the 
lotus; Thou art virtue, knowledge etc. Thou art the 
potentialitiei of the altar and mystic diagrams. 

25. O Lord, thou art Rama the wielder of ploughshare 
Thou art the destroyer of Sambara;^ Thou art the Brahmanical 
Sage; Thou art the lord Vi^nu. Thou art true of exploits. 

26. Thou art Nfsuhha, the ultimate bliss, lord of the 
earth Supar^ia, discus, ciub and cooeb. 

27. Thou art Sri, Thou art Pufti (nourishment) • Thou 
art the permanent Miya, Thou art Srtvatsa, Kaustubha; 
Thou art Sarhgl and the quiver. 

28. Thou art the sword along with the leather buckler; 
Thou art the guardian deity; O Lord, Thou art the lord of 
Rak^as; Thou art Sadhya; Thou art the wind and the moon. 

29. Thou art the lord of wealth, liana, Indra, Vanina, 
lord of the demons, Sadhya, Vayu, and the man. 

30. Thou art the Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, the Aivins, 
the Maruts; Thou art the Daityas, Danavas, Nagas; Thou art 
Yaksas and the Khagas (Skyroamers). 


\. In the VedM s demoQ, also called a daow, who fought against 
king DivodSta, but was defeated and bad his many castles destroyed by 
Indra. He appears to be a mythical personification of drought, of a kindred 
character to Vftra, or identical with him. In the PurSou a who carried 
off PradyuTnna*Snd threw him Into the well. 



694 


G<ttu4^ 


31. Thou art the Gandharvas, Apsaras, Siddhas, Pitfa; 
thou art the great immortal devas: Thou art the living beings, 
thou art the objects of the sense^rgans; thou art the Avyakta 
(the unmaniiest) to the sense-organs. 

32. Thou art the mind, the mtellect, the ego, the soul, 
Thou art the lord in the heart. Thou art the sacrifice, Thou 
art the Va^atkira, Thou art OnkJa'a, the sacrificial twig and 
the Kuia grass. 

33. Thou art the altar, O Hari, Thou art the initiation; 
Thou art the sacrificial post; Thou art the sacrificial fire, Thou 
art the Hotr (the priest making the offerings in fire), Thou art 
the Yajamina (the officiating priest); Thou art the grain. 
Thou art the saciiiiciat animal, the Y&jaka (the house* 
holder requesting the priests to perform the sacrifice). 

34. Thou art the Adhvafyu (the presiding priest), Thou 
art the Udgitk (the singer of Siman hymns). Thou art the 
sacrifice. Thou art the Puni^ottama (the best arnoi^^ men) • 
Thou art the quarten, the nether worlds, the earth, the sky, 
the heaven, Thou art the creator Stars. 

35-37. Whatever mobile or immobile in the universe is 
seen among the Devas^ beasts or mankind, O Lord, the 
Cosmic egg, the entire universe—all these are only Thy forms, 
they are manifest to the eyes, O Lord, the supreme Brahman, 
you are inaccessible even to gods. 

38. Who is competent to comprehend that pure imperi¬ 
shable Puru^, accessible to Yogins, the unznantfest, the unborn, 
the unchanging ? 

39. He is devoid of annihilation and oripn. He is all- 
pervading, he is the lord, he is omniscient, he is divested of 
three Gu^ias, he is pure Bliss, he is unageing, he is the greatest. 

40-42. O Lord, Thou art Consciousness, the permanent, 
the quiescent, the complete, the unbifurcated, the unwasting. 
In Thy incarnations many of Thy forms are secoi but unable to 
comprehend Thy real greatness the heavenKlwellers go on 
adoring thee (in whatever znanner they conceive). O Puni- 
yottama, how can I know such a subtle being as Thou art. 

43-45. Thy vibhOtii (the various manifestations) such 
as saAkaryapa, etc. have been adored by me by means of flowers, 
inceme, etc. If there is any defect in it, be pleased to forgive 



L2S4.57 


695 


my omissions and commissions. I am incompetent to perform 
Thy Puja as laid down (in iibtras) in an orderly manner. 

46. Whatever Japa, homa, etc, have been performed by 
me^ O Puru^ottama, cannot be successfully concluded with true 
devotion. Hence, I crave Thy pardon. 

47. By day or night, during dusk and dawn, in all states, 
whatever I do, may my devotion be steady, O Hari in Thy feet. 

48. I have no such love towards the physical body or 
ritualistic activities as I have, in an exclusive form, towards 
Thee, O Lord of the Universe. 

49. What sacred rite conducive to Heaven and salvation 
has not been performed by him who has firm devotion towards 
VifQu, the dispenser of fruits of all cherbhed desires, 

50. O Acyuta, who is cap>able of performiag Thy worship 
or eulogising Thee properly ? (Anyhow) I have eulogised and 
adored you. Please forgive. Obeisance to Thee. 

51. Thus I have narrated to you the hymn of Cakradhara, 
O sage, if you wish to attain the great status, eulogise Vifpu 
with devotion. 

52. He who eul<^ises the preceptor of the universe by 
means of this hymn at the time of adoration attains salvation 
ere long breaking oflf the fetten of worldly existence. 

53. Even in the age of Kali, he who recites this hymn 
with great devotion thrice every^ day with physical and mental 
purity shall realise all his desires. 

54. The devotee desirous of sons shall beget sms, the 
imprisoned shall be freed fr<mi bondage, the sick devotee shall 
be cured of his ailments; the indigent shall be affluent. 

55. The seeker of Icamiag shall acquire knowledge, fame 
and renown. The intelligent shall be able to remember his 
previous birth and shall get whatever be thinks of. 

56. He who eulogises Puru^ttama shall be truthful in 
his statements, pure and liberal-minded. The unblessed shall 
turn out to be omnisci^it and intelligent; the indecent shall 
be transformed into one who performs ail holy rites. 

57. Those who do not engage themselves in holy rites 
with Hari as the object of devotion can never be pure in con* 
duct. They are to be banished from all religious rites. 



Gqtu4a PunXpff 




56« He who has no unflinching devotion to Vi^Qu who 
grants all riches sbali never benefit from purificatory rites of 
mind and speech. He is wicked. 

59. A man who propitiates the lord Hari duly, who 
grants all happiness, shall obtain whatever he wishes for. 

60. He is the Primordial deity the Siddha (who has 
achieved everything) who is meditated upon by all sages. He 
is the witness into all who knows whatever there is in any heart. 
He it unborn. He is nectar. He is free from fear and death. 
He is eternal. He b Bliss. 1 bow unto that V&sudeva. 

61. I adore with the flowers of mental conception the 

lord of all worlds, the eternal, the delighted, the pure, the un« 
tarnished, devoid of the three Gu^s and the delighter of 
every one. the Sentient Soul, the witness of ever\'thing 

enter the lotus of my heart, the inner feelings of my soul. 

62. Thus I have narrated the greatness of the Supreme 
Vifipu who has neither beginning nor end. Hence, the great 
lord is to be duly meditated upon by a man on the way to 
salvation. 

63. Who is the Yogin who does not merge himself (in 
the Supreme Brahman) after meditating upon Visnu without 
a parallel, the consciousness in form, the ancient Purusa, 
resplendent like the sun, the unsullied, the Pure ? 

64. The man who constantly reads this hymn and re* 
mains pure and quiet can wash off his sins and shall attain the 
extensive region of the Lord with his influence spreading all 
round. 

65. He who seeks wealth, unlimited pleasure, virtue, 
love and salvation can cast off everything and seek refuge in 
Vi^nu the ancient, the excellent. 

66. He who has abjured all association (with worldly 
objects) and seeks refuge in Vasudeva the pure, the allpcrvad- 
ing, the lord, the supporter of the universe, the pure and the 
cause of the destruction of all worldly objects. 



1.235.10 


697 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYFIVE 

VidMu and Sd^hya 


Sdta said : 

1-4. I shall expound the mode of knowing the Brahman 
in accordance with the tenets of the schools of philosophy— 
Vedanta and Sahkhya. Just as the self same principle of Jyoti 
(Brilliance) appears in three different forms of Fire, Sun and 
Moon so also Vi$nu appears as Aham (t, the individual self)« 
Brahman (God, livara) and Pararh Jyotih (the supreme 
Brilliance or soul). This must be meditated upon. The butter 
is actually present in the body of the cows. But it does not 
add to the strength of the cows. When the milk is taken out 
from the body and churned and the ghee is administered to the 
cows it gives them additional strength. So also the all pervad* 
ing Vifiiu though present in the body too docs not grant any 
special benefit to men without being propitiated. The devotee 
desirous of ascending the tree of Yoga must have recourse to 
Karma and Jhana as the steps to achieve the goal. 

5. Those who have already climbed the tree of Yoga 
must also resort to Jftana and renunciation. If a person begins 
to experience sound, etc., he becomes affected by Raga and 
Dve;a (Desire and Hatred). 

6. From them spring Lobha (greed), Moha (delusion) 
and Krodha (anger). A man affected by all these commits sin. 

7. The hands, the generative organ, the belly and speech 
(are at the root of all sins). If they arc brought under control 
a man becomes a wise brahmin. 

8. Hands can be brought under control by desisting 
from taking another man’s wealth, refraining from injuring 
others and not playing at the game of dice. 

9. If a man avoids other women his genitals arc brought 
under control. If he is neither gluttonous nor craves for dclb 
cacies, his belly is brought under control. 

10. If he speaks limited, wholesome and truthful words 
his speech is under control. Of what use arc the austerities and 
sacrifices to the person who has controlled these four ? 



Garu^a Purd^a 

11. Unity ofintellect, mind and the organs, with seed 
or without seed is called meditation. 

12*13. A life in the state of Jagrat (waking) employs hii 
intellect which is situated between the eyebrows, in the direc* 
tion of objects of sense. Scholars say so. 

14-15. When the life (soul) comes to the heart and it 
enveloped by Tanias (darkness) he experiences neither delusion 
nor false perception. In fact, be does not know Vhere' he is 
or Vherefrom’ he has come. That state is called Sufupti 
(Slumber). He is not aware of even his wife nearby. He does 
not perceive the objects of sense organs like a man who has 
controlled his senses. 

16-18. [The Turlya (fourth) state is now described]. 
The sense organs and the mind are diverted (consciously) 
from the objects by means of intellect. The intellect 
and the ego are diverted by means of Prakfii (nature). The 
Prakfti is abstracted by means of Cicchakti (the p>sychic force) • 
He then stations himself in the pure Self alone and sees only 
the soul which is consciousness pure and simple, pure and inerts 
all pervasive and auspicious. Now the soul is in the TuHya 
(fourth) state undoubtedly. 

19-20. Of the lotus called Purya^^aka (the heart) these 
are the petals [i.e. sound, touch, taste, colour, smell and 
the three Gu^ias i.e. Sattva, Rajas and Tamas]. Their equilib¬ 
rium is maintained by the three Gunas. Prakfti is the pericarp 
(Kartuka) of the lotus. The Lord Cidrupa (the conscious prin¬ 
ciple) is stationed in the pericarp. If the life leaves off the 
Purya^laka and the Prakfti consisting of the time Guiias, it is 
called Mukti (absolution, salvatkm). 

21. The six ancillary factors assisting Yc^ic practice arc 
Prk^y&ma, Japa, Pratyahira (Divenion of sense organs), 
Dharana (Retention), Dhyana (meditation) and Samidhi 
(Trance). 

22-24. A perfect control of the sense organs brings 
about the destruction of sins and the favour of gods. A 
Prapiyima accompanied by Japa and Dhy&na is called Sagar- 
bha and the opposite is called Agarbha. 

The excellent Priniyima consists of thirtysix matras; the 



L235.36 


699 

middle one of twentyfour mitrai; and the Uat one of twelve 
matras^ Ohkara is to be added to all Japas. 

25. If the Vlicaka (that which signifies) Pranava is under* 
stood the Vacya (that which is connoted) Brahman b de¬ 
lighted. The six syllabled Mantra *Om Namo Vi^^ave* (obeis¬ 
ance to Vi$nu) must be constantly repeated^ along with Gayatri 
and the twelve syllabled mantra ‘Om Nauno Bhagavate 
Visudcviya*. 

26. The natural urge of the sense organs is towards the 
objects. Their diversion from them along with that of the 
mind is called Pratyihara. 

27. A Yogin who thus diverts the sense organs from the 
objects consciously along with his intellect is said to be in 
Pratyihira state (state of abstraction). 

28*29. The mind must be fixed in Brahman for as much 
time as is necessary to perform twelve Pr&^yamas, each of 
twelve matras. If the Yogin feels sublime bliss in this state and 
continues in it, it is called Sam&dhi (Trance). 

30-31. While meditating one must not stir at all. The 
mind is energetically engaged in it. As long as the mind is in 
its grips the Dbara^ (retentioa) must be maintained. The mind 
is fixed in the object of Dbyana. It sees it alone, nothing else. 
That is called the (perfect) Dhyina (meditation). 

32. When the mind is inert in its grasp of the Dhyeya 
(the object) it is called the perfect Dhyana by the sages who 
have thought over Dhyana. 

33. The Yogin identifies himself with the Dhyeya and 
sees it alone everywhere without any second object. This state 
is called Samadhi. 

34. The mind is without any special conception. The 
objects of the sense organs are not thought of. If it is merged 
thiu completely in Brahman it is called being in Samadhi. 

35. If the Yogin^s mind thinking of Brahman is fixed in 
It and identifies itself with It he is called a person in Sam&dhi| 

36. The defects causing obstacles in the practice of 
Yoga are—tKe unsteadiness of the mind of the Yogin, false 
notions, mental dejection and elatedness. 



700 


Garu4a Purif^a 


37. In order to tleady the mind, the practiser of Yoga 
shall first thizkk of gross objects. This practice coming Jo be 
concentrated on the sun (toUr plexus) steadies the xnind. 

38. There is nothing existing in the world except the 
Param&tman. It is this alone that taltes all forms. A person 
who knows this gets release. 

39. Onkara and the Brahman (supreme) shall be medi* 
tated upon. The lord shall be meditated upon as stationed in 
the lotus (heart) without the distinction of Ksetra (body) and 
KfetrajAa (soul). The two Mantras Onkara and the six- 
syllabled one (Supra Verse 25) must be repeated. 

40-43. At the outset the practber of Yoga must meditate 
upon Pradhina (Principle of nature) as stationed in the lotus. 
Above it are the zones of Tamas, Rajas and Sattva in order. 
Over that is the Puru$a (appearing) black, red and white (due 
to the GuQas) called JIva (the individual soul)* Over that is 
located the mystic lotus with the eight petals of Gupa, etc. 
Knowledge is the pericarp, the Skstraic knowledge is the 
filament. Allergy to worldliness is the stem; the Vai^^ava cult 
is its bulb. The Jiva must be then meditated upon as sta¬ 
tioned in the pericarp motionless and conjoined to Onkara in 
the heart. This meditation is an aid to salvation. 

44. If a Yogin dies white meditating he is sure to attain 
Brahman. A Yogin meditating on Hari after placing Him in 
the lotus of the heart attains devotion. 

45. Some Yogins see the Atman through the eye of medi¬ 
tation; others through Samkhya knowledge and others by means 
of Yoga. 

46. Knowledge clarifying the Brahman chops off the 
fetters of worldly existence. Yoga which is singleminded 
concentration in Brahman yields salvation undoubtedly. 


47. He who is sadated in knowledge and who has con¬ 
quered the sense organs and the Karaiuis (limbs) is said to be 
a liberated soul. The Paramatman is stationed there like one 
blind (i.e. passively). 


48. Asanas (postures), Sthanas (particular places) and 
Vifayas (objects) cannot be called auxiliaries of Yoga. These 



1.236.2 


701 


superfluous things actually delay the successful conclusion of 
yogic practice. 

49. Even SUupala attained salvation on account of cons* 
tant remembrance. Those who practice Yoga see the soul 
through their own souls. 

50. A Yogin who is compassionate towards all living 
beings, who is averse to those who hinder his progress and 
who has subjugated the genitab and the belly becomes 
liberated. 

51. If he does not come into contact with the objects of 
sense organs through them, if he has merged himself completely 
in Brahman and appears senseless like a log of wood he is a 
liberated soul. 

52. Annihilating everything — all the castes, all women 
(objects of sense organs) and all sins by means of the fire of 
meditation the intelligent Yogins attain the highest goal. 

53. By churning, Are is manifested. Similarly, Hari 
manifests Himself through meditations. The highest Yoga is the 
identity of Brahman and Atman. 

54. There is no salvation through external forms. Through 
the internal Yama (rotraint) etc. it can be made possible. The 
realization of the Atman through Sahkhya, Yoga and Vedanta 
is called salvation. The bondage is the perception of non soul 
as soul and the non existent as existent. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYSDC 

ViiUnta and SdMckfa 


The Lord said : 

1. O Narada, I shall explain the knowledge of the soul 
in the proper perspective. Please luten. The Advaita (the un¬ 
bifurcated) itself is called Sinkhya and Yoga is the concentra¬ 
tion cn it... 

2. Those who are endowed with Advaita Yoga are releas¬ 
ed from the bondage. Tht Karmans (results of actions) whether 



702 Garu^a Furdna 

past or beginning to fructify or those yet to come become 
quelled through knowledge. 

3* He who has cut down the tree of worldly existence by 
the axe of right conception and bas taken his plunge 
in the sacred river of jAana (knowledge) and Vair&gya (non 
attachment) attains the status of Visnu. 

4. 'M.iyk is called Tripura inasmuch as the three states 
of waking, dreaming and slumbering are brought about by 
M&ya. This is included in the nondual Brahman. 

5. The great status of Brahman is free from name, form 
and action. After creating the boundless universe, livara enter* 
ed it Himself. 

6. know this Punj$a, whots in the form of Cit (consci* 
ousness) and who is beyond darkness. I am He^ This knowledge 
is conducive to salvation. There is no other means to that. 

7. Srava^ia (listening to noble tenets) Manana (deli* 
beration) and Dhyina (meditation) are the means of knowledge. 
Salvation cannot be secured through sacrifices, gifts, austerities, 
pilgrimages and Vedic recitation. 

8. By some, Dhyina is secured by renunciation as by 
means of worship and sacred rites in the case of others. 
Vedic injunctions are twofold : *Do the rites’ and ^renounce 
the rites in the supreme deity.’ 

9. Sacrifices etc. are not for the liberation of those who 
cherish no desire. They arc for the sake of purification of the 
mind of those who are not liberated. Thb is what some say. 

10. Those who fancy a twofold existence cannot gain 
salvation in the course of a single life even, due to perfect 
knowledge. Those who err from Yogic practices or those 
who do not practise Yoga properly are bom again as brahmins 
in the families of Yogins. 

11. Man is fettered through actions. He is saved from 

worldly existence through knowledge. One shall resort to 
the knowledge of the Soul. What is <^poscd to this is 
ignorance. 

12. When all passions stationed in the heart leave one 
off, one becomes liberated undoubtedly even as one lives. 

13. Since the soul is all pervasive how can he go ? Who 
is it that goes ? \yherc docs he go ? Since he ii unhmited there 



1.236.30 


703 

is no place for him to go« How can there be any movement 
since he is disembodied ? 

14. Since he is without a second there is none for him 
to go to. Since he is knowledge itself how can tliere be slug¬ 
gishness ? Others' going or coming or standing is with some 
one in view. 

15. It is like the firmament and hence its movement is 
like the movement of the firmament i.e. it is stationary. The 
three states of waking, dreaming and slumbering arc fancied 
through ignorance. 

16. The indivisible constituents of the individual soul 
arc the very constituentt of the universal soul. That is why 
each and every individual is attracted to his or her own souK 

17. O Narada, that is why the mind of each and every 
individual is inclined towards his or her own self. 

18*19. It is the $oul| not intellect, that passci through 
the four states of consciousness. It is the soul, not intellect that 
being omniscient knows past, present and future. 

20. If there were no soul in the body of a person he 
would not feel the thrill of pleasure nor the pang of the pain 
in the different states of consciousness. 

21«22. It is the soul, the witness of all activities which 
is truth, intelligence, eternal principle, not distinct from in¬ 
tellect and which is bliss itself. 

23-24. By knowing Brahman one knows every thing, 
just as on knowing a jar of clay one knows all the jars or on 
knowing gold one knows all chat is made of gold. 

25-26. Just as in darkness one cannot cognize the rope, 
similarly through ignorance we cannot perceive the soul. We 
super-impose a snake on what is in fact a rope, we super¬ 
impose the elements, ether, etc. on what i$ in reality the soul. 

27-28. Even the evident reality assumes a different 
form. The rope becomes a snake; the mothcr-of>pcarls b'^comes 
silver. A deer cannot quench its thirst in the mirage; similarly^ 
a man cannot satisfy his desire by indulging in the false 
pleasures of the senses. 

29-30. So long a man has the sense of pleasure, he is 
called a ^scssor. But when possession is lost be remains hb 
true self. The individual soul associated with Maya identifies 



704 Garuid Pur^a 

himself witK the body but when maya withdraws he realizes 
his reality as Brahman. 

3]« Just as a noble person is not eflfected by the loss of 
possession, similarly, the withdrawal of Maya does not eflTect a 
person who has realized Self. 

32. Reality and illusion are both eternal. But Reality is 
an unassailable truth while illusion is a mirage. 

33. Though declared to be unborn he passes through 
a series of birth and death. Though one, he becomes many in 
the form of husbands wife, pleasure, universe, etc. 

34-35« The three Gu^as multiplied by twenty^eight be¬ 
come eighty-four and these contribute to the formation of bodies, 
male and female and the universe with all its parts, names, 
forms, and actions from bqjinningless time to the endless one. 

36-37. The existence of forms, names, etc is assumed and 
not real just as the chariot, etc which exist in the state of dream 
are not real. Similarly, things or objects which exist in the 
state of wakefulness do not exist in reality. 

38-39. By his association with Maya born of ignorance, 
Brahma appears to be dual, while by the withdrawal of lAkyh 
through knowledge he remains non-dual. 

40-41. Thus the non-dual Brahman is as the refulgent 
sun. Reality, Truth, Existence, Knowledge. It is eternal, 
complete, inward bliss. As eternal it U unborn, as non-doer it 
is nectar, as the light of an earthen lamp, it is an inward light. 
The realization that the individual soul is identical with the 
Supreme Soul leads one to release. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYSEVEN 

Essence of the GUd 


The Ijordsaidx 

1. I shall narrate to you the gist of Gita mentioned to 
Aijuna formerly. A person who practises Yoga with its eight 
components has mastered Vedintic iore. 



1.237.12 


705 


2. The realization of Atman is the only great asset, noth¬ 
ing else. The Atman is devoid of physical body. It is also 
divested of form, colour and of the gross body» mind, eyes 
and the rest. 

3. The Prana is devoid of knowledge. In deep slumber 
*V (the knowledge of the self) is seen. This cannot be the 
real Atman, since tlie existing man is in conjunction with 
misery and worldly bondage. 

4. Just like a smokeless blazing fire, just like the light¬ 
ning in the sky, the Atman shines in the inner heart. 

5. The ean, etc, cannot see themselves or the Atman. 
But the soul the omniscient, the onlooker of all aces them. 

6. The Atman is self luminary. Due to its contact the 
sin is dissipated and knowledge arises in the individual soul in 
the manner of the screen that appears to be blazing when a 
light burns nearby. 

7-10. Like the objects reflected in a mirror the soul sees 
things reflected in itself such as the sense organs, the objectSi 
the great elements, the mind, the intellect, theego^ the unmani¬ 
fest and the Puru^a. By pervading the cluster of sense organs 
with the mind and by fixing the mind in the ego, O P&nd^va, 
the ego in the intellect and the intellect in Prakiti, the Prakrti 
in the Purusa and the Purusa in Brahman, one realises ‘I am 
Brahman the great Light' and rcaUsir^ this one becomes 
liberated. 

11. The body is a house with nine doorways (the ex¬ 
ternal apertures), three presiding deities (the three Gupas) 
and five witnesses (the five sense organs). The supreme presid* 
ing officer is the KsetrajAa (the soul). He who knows this 
thoroughly is the excellent poet (Kavi or Krintadariin i.e. a 
seer). 

12. Thousands of horse sacrifices, and hundreds of 
Vajapeya sacrifices do not merit even a sixteenth part of Jflana 
yajfla (the sacrifice of knowledge). 



706 


FurSffa 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THDlTYEIGirr 


Essinci cf the GUd 


T/u Lord saidx 

1« O P&rtha, th« eight components of Yoga are Yama 
(restraint), Niyama (ritualistic observances), Asana (the Yogic 
Posture), Prio^y^a (breath<ontrol), Pratyahara (abstraction)» 
Dhyina (meditation), DhiraQa (retention) and Samadhi 
(trance). These are conducive to salvation. 

2. Ahiih8& (non-violence) u the virtue of refraining 
from inflicting injury upon living beings by actions, thoughts 
and speech at all times. It accords happiness. 

3. Even an injury inflicted in accordance with Vedic 
injunctions is also Ahiihsi. The eternal virtue is the telling 
of truth, the telling of the pleasant. One shall not tell even 
truths which are unpleasant and untruths which may be 
pleasant. 

4. Seizing of another man's wealth by stealth or by 
force is called Steya (theft). Not doing it is called Asteya. It 
is a righteous thing. 

5. Abjuring sexual intercourse by actions, thoughts and 
speech in all states, at all times and everywhere is called 
Brahmacarya (celibacy). 

6. Acceptance of wealth must be avoided carefully. 
Non acceptance of the same willingly even in danger is called 
Aparigraha* 

7. Sauca or purification is of two varieties : the external 
one by means of earth and water and the internal one by means 
of good feelings and thoughts. Santosa (contentment) is the 
sense of satiety over what is casually secured. It gives everlast¬ 
ing happiness. 

8. Tapas or austerity U the concentration of mind and 
the sense organs. It is also the voluntary withering up of the 
body by holy rites-Kfcchra, Candrayana, etc. 

9. Learned men call the recital of Vcdic passages, 
^tarudilya, Prai^va, etc which purify the soul Sv&dhyiya. 

10. livaracintana is the unflinching devotion to Hari 



1.239,2- 


707 


by means of eulogy, remembrance and adoration as well at by 
speeches, thoughts and actions. 

I!. Asana is the posture such as Svastika, Padma and 
Ardhisana. Pri^ is the air within the body. Ay&ma is the 
suppression of the same. 

12. O Pandava, the restraint and diversion of the sense 
organs that stray into evil objects, b called Pratyih&ra. 

13. Dhyina (meditation) is the cohtemplation of the 
embodied or disembodied Brahman, At the beginning of the 
practice of Yoga, Haii can be meditated upon in the embodied 
or disembodied form. 

14* The deity ofViyu must be contemplated upon as 
stationed in the middle of the zone of Agni. The four armed 
deity (Vi?nu) must be meditated upon as bearing SaAkha, 
Cakra, Gadi and Padma and also as having Kaustubha. 

15. I, endowed with Kaustubha and known as Brahman 
and Vanamalin shall be meditated upon as such. This is 
called Dharank because the deity is retained in the mind. 

16. The state in which one b conscious *I am Brahman’ 
b called Samadhi. Men get salvation through the knowledge 
generated by the Vedic statement *I am Brahman*. 

The two words ‘I* and ^Brahman’ must be taken to 
mean the implied sense and the feeling of identity realised. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYNINE 

Brahmd said : 

1. I shall now tell you of Brahmagita, the knowledge 
of whidi will release you from the bond of activities. The 
knowledge derived from the aupanlsadic text / am Brahma 
releases one from the tangle (of the senses). 

2. The knowledge of aham and Brahma leads to the 
knowledge of the meaning of aham and Brahma and it leads to the 
knowledge of the sentence aham Brahmdsmi. The sense of the 
two words.: aham and Brahma b twofold : denotative and 





708 


Garuda Purdffn 


3. The denotative sense of the sentence ahom Brckmdmx 
is not so clear as the indicative one. The relationship between 
the two is like that between the body and the soul. 

4. The Iruti declares that denotatively the word aham 
refers to the personal self while indicatively it refers to the non- 
dual Brahman. 

5. Indeclinable, blissful and unmanifested consciousness 
is denotated by the word Brahma while the personal self 
manifested in the body is denotated by the word aham. 

6. Indicatively the word oham refers to Brahma, while 
the word Brahma refers to the soul in the body. (The two are 
identical). 

7-10. The word aham refers to the perceptible entity 
{JivdUnan) and the word Brakma refers to the imperceptible 
{Brahma). By adopting the Indicatory process ()ak$ana) the 
penen arrives at the meaning of ahoHi Brahma which leads him 
to realize the non-dual supreme Self. The knowledge of the 
meaning of the Mahavakya aham Brahmdsmi removes ignorance, 
enlightens the path and effects release. 

Lord Hart said : 

1N16. From the eternal Brahma was originated the 
ether, from ether the fire, from fire the earth. The subtle body 
consisting of seventeen parts came into being; viz the five 
organs of action, viz. hands, feet, mouth, the generating organ, 
the organ of evacuation, five organs of intellect, viz. ears, skin, 
eyes, tongue, organ of smell, and five winds viz Prapa^ Apana, 
Samana, Vy&na, Udana, and mind of which the nature is 
doubting and intellect of which the nattxre is ascertainment. This 
is the subtle creation. Hiraiiyagarbha is an individual soul 
which is ascertainable only by its actions* From the five subtle 
elements originated the five gross elements : earth, water, fire, 
wind and ether, from the five gross elements originated the 
universe. 

17. The body consists of feet, hands, etc is known as the 
gross body. It originates from five elements and functions as 
the base of all activities* 

18. The body consbttng of organs of action b called 
gross but has its basis in the Supreme Self. 



L239.34 


709 


19. The individual self pervades the subtle as well as 
the gross body; as the Srucis declare, the very Brahma has 
entered the bodies. 

20. Like the Sun in the water, the higher self reflected 
in the intellect is called JIva (the personal self) which sustains 
life and functions as the witness of three states, viz, the state of 
wakefulness, of dream and sound sleep. 

21«22. The supreme self is not associated with attributes, 
is distinct from three states of consciousness, viz, the state of 
wakefulness, dream and sound sleep. It is not divided in parts, 
is non^lual, is of eternally pure nature. Seated inside the 
body and characterized by three states of consciousness, the 
individual self is no other than the higher self. 

63. A person who is ever intent on three states, viz., the 
state of wakefulness, of dream and of sound sleep can never 
realize Brahma. I shall now tell you something about those 
activities which are undertaken for the attainment of fruits and 
about the three states of consciousness jagrat etc. 

24-25. The knowledge of an object through the organ of 
senses is called jagrat. The seeker for the knowledge of an 
object goes in contact with that very object through the medium 
of senses. The same is repeated in dream (svapna). In sound 
sleep there is a total withdrawal of senses. The mind and 
intellect are concentrated in Brahman. 

26-31. Serially or non-serially, the individual soul passes 
through the three states. In the preliminary state of meditation 
he is aware of the objective world. As soon as the desire for 
liberation is created in him he withdraws hia senses from the 
outside world which being emanated from the creator himself 
appears to be distinct as the jar appears distinct from clay. 
The universe constituted of the five-fold elements is nothing 
but an aggregate of five subtle elements which again are nothing 
but the indivisible Brahma itself. 

The earth as the substratum of all stationary and living 
beings has also a substratum in Brahma. There is no fire with¬ 
out wind, no wind without ether, no ether without Brahma and 
no Brahma without ether. 

32*34. In pure consciousness there is no awareness of 
the states jagrat, svapna etc. and no sense of separateness. The 



710 


Garu^a Purt^a 


personal soul loses its identitf and merges into tlie eternally 
pure^ intelligent, awakened and non-dual Brahma. Then 'thou* 
and 'that* are dropped and what remains is pure Brahma 
{indicated by asi)* 

Just as in Om, the syllables a, ii> m, are merged, losing 
their identity, similarly all appendages that create a feeling of 
separateness are merged into the Brahman. The expressions 
Prafondkamami^ aham Brahma serve merely to create confusion. 

35. The self is the supreme light, supreme consciousness, 
supreme joy, supreme truth, eternal knowledge, expressed by 
the word tvam. So declares the Sruti. 

36. 1 am Brahma, pure and simple. I am omniscient. 
That one is seen in the orb of the sun, that one I am, eternally. 
The lord conveyed this essence of Giti to Arjuna who realized 
the Seif. 


CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY 

Lord Hatisaid : 

1. O Rudra, I have narrated to you the Garuda Purana, 
the essence of all knowledge. It brings joy to the listener and 
brings about his release. 

2. It confers learning, fame, glory, wealth, victory and 
health. O Rudra, he who reads or hears the Purana becomes 
omniscient and goes to heaven. 

BrahmA said : 

3. O Vyasa, I have heard this Purana from the mouth 
of Vif^u. It surely bringSNabout liberation to the hearer, 

Vyisa said : 

Thus Brahma who had heard the Purau from the mouth 
of Vi$Qu related it to Dak^a, Narada and others including 
myself. 



I.240a6 


711 


4. I had gone to ViiQu^loka with my mind set on 
Brahman. I heard this Purina and later on» imparted the 
same to Suta. Now you have heard the same from the mouth 
of Suta. 

5. On hearing the Purina the person attains omniscience 
satiates his desire, reaps the fruits in the form of realizing the 
self. This Purina, the essence of all knowledge, Vif^u related 
to Garuda. 

Sula said : 

6. This Purina contains the essence of all knowledge 
and confers Dharma, Artha, Kama and Mok^a. 

7. In olden days, Vyisa narrated to me this Puraij^ 
which he had heard from Brahmi—Vyisa who had divided 
a single Veda into four Vedas. 

8. He divided the single Purii^a saihhiti into eighteen 
samhitas. Suka, the son of Vyisa, has narrated to me this 
fact. And I have related to you this Purii^a O Saunaka. 

9«11. Since you have asked me to narrate the Purina to 
the sages (1 have done so). One who reads or hears or hires 
the services of a Pandit to recite It to others, or writes it himself 
or hires the services of a scribe to write it out or keeps the 
Purina at home, attains Dharma, Artha, Kama or Mok;a| 
whatever may be the choice. He satiates his desire by listening 
to this Purina. 

12. Ifhc is a Brahman he attains the knowledge of the 
Vedas; if a Ksatriya he is conferred the strength of protectiom 

13. None of the other classes (Vaisya or Sudra) U 
authorized to hear the Puraria. If, by mistake, he narrates it 
to an unworthy person, he becomes the object of censure. 

14. But, if he narrates the Purina from behind the 
screen, then both the deserving and the undeserving person 
become worthy to hear. 

15. As V4htiis a celebrated deity, Garuda is a vener* 
able celebrity. In praising Garuda we praise Vi^nu. By singing 
praise for Garuda, formerly King Vasu satiated his desires* 

King Vasu said : 

16. Jiomage to Garuda, of irresistible might, the Velucle 



712 Garuia 

of the emblem in the banner of Visnu and a terror to 

the Asuras. 

17. Homage to you, the destroyer of the pride of the 
Nagas, the nourisher of joy to his mother Vinata, possessed 
of beautiful wings, guileless, refuge of the piteous asuras. 

18. [Now listen to a story]. Once Supratika and Vibha* 
vasu, the two brothers, cursed each other and as a result of 
curses they were born as the elephant and tortoise. 

19*20. They had immense bodily height as well as 
breadth. In their struggle for superiority over each other, you 
acted as a judge. You released them from the accursed curse 
which they had inflicted upon each other. 

21. You swallowed the Niiadas in large pro}>ortion. 
When by mistake you swallowed a pious Br&hma^a, you 
vomited him alive, immediately on knowing that he was a 
brahmana. 

22. You broke the bough of a Banian tree spread over a 
hundred yojanas, regardless of the fact that it supported the 
Baiakhilyas. 

23. With mighty eSbrt you seized the elephant and the 
tortoise, put them in the navel of your thumb, while they were 
fighting in the supportless sky. 

24. You Conquered the gods, together with their leader 
Indra. O son of Kaiyapa, you extinguished the sacrificial Are 
and carried away the Soma forcibly. 

25. There were two poisonous serpents who could inject 
poison by their very sight. You made them sightless by your 
magical skill. 

26. Out of devotion for Vis^u you brought Soma from 
heaven. You did not partake of it yourself. You therefore got 
a place of honour in the banner of Vi$nu and became his 
vehicle. 

27. You concealed Soma in the Darbha grass and 
deceived the Nagas. You carried nectar to the abode of Brahma 
[and distributed the same among the gods]. 

28. O best of birds, by you the tonque of the N&gas was 
split into two* You released your mother from Kadru, the 
mother of the Nigas who had made her a slave* 



L240.40 


715 


29*31. They say that the hane UccaiUravas is white ia 
complexion but I believe he is dark (for his glory is dimi¬ 
nished). In the interest of your mother you had cut off his 
wings with the stroke of Indra*$ thunderbolt. When god Indra 
saw your mighty deed he bestowed upon you the title of 
honour—Suparna. 

32. By merely meditating on you, one destroys the 
effect of poison of whatsoever iort. One who hears or reads the 
pura^ia gets sensuous pleasure and release. 

Sata said : 


33. King Vaju heard the Gani^a Pur&na and satiated 
his desire* The venerable Garu^a meditated on Visriu and 
obtained the objecu of his desire. 

$Gta said : 

34. I have narrated to you the sacred treatise^ viz, the 
Garuda Purina. He who reads this Purina achieves the objects 
of his desire, and ultimately reaches the supreme goal. 

35. By reciting even a quarter of vei’se, one destroys 
sins. He who keeps the treatise at home obtains everything in 
this world. 

36. He who possesses this Purina attains all that is just* 
He who reads and hears this Purina enjoys sensuous pleasures 
and gets also release. 

37-38 By listening to this Purina he attains Dharma, 
Artha, Kima and Mok^. Desiring a son, he obtains son. 
Desiring an object he obtains the object. Desiring knowledge 
he obtains knowledge. Desiring Victory he obtains Victory. If 
he has killed a brahmin he is absolved of that sin. 

39. A barren woman obtains Son; a girl a good husband. 
Deri ring welfare he obtains welfare. Seeking plcassurc he obtains 
pleasure. 

40. Desiring auspiciousness, he obtains auspiciousness. 
Desiring merit, he receives merit. Desiring to be a poet, he be* 
comes a poet. Desiring to learn the secret of kixowledge he 
obtains the -secret of knowledge. 



714 


Gqtu 4^ PurS9}A 


41. Desirous of knowledge, he obtains knowledge that 
puts an end to bis cycle of birth. This auspicious narrative of 
the Garuda Parana narrated by Garu^a himself is associated 
with bliss. 

42. By reading even a single verse one escapes an un* 
timely death. If he reads half a verse he achieves the end of his 
wicked foes. 

43. At Naimiya, at the Sacrifice of sages^ Saunaka heard 
the Parana from Suta. He meditated upon Brahman identifying 
his self with the Supreme Self and got release. 



DHARMA (PRETA) KAl^DA 




ILMO 


717 


CHAPTER ONE 

qutiy 

L One should begin the recital of Jaya (this holy 
Pura^) after bowing to Nara the most excellent 

among men, Goddess Sarasvati and Vyasa. The renowned 
VifQu shines victoriously like the wish^iving Kalpa tree with 
Dharma (virtue) for its firmly fixed roots^ the Vedas for its 
main stem, the Purk^as for ita branches, the sacrifice for its 
flames and salvation for its fruits. 

2. In Naimifa forest, the solitary region, the sages 
3aunaka and othen asked Suta who was sitting comfortably on 
his seat after going through bis daily rites. 

3. O Suta, you possess perfect knowledge (of the Purat^ic 
lore) through sage Vyksa^s favour. Hence, you can clear off 
our doubts we have in our mind. 

4*5. Following the maxim of caterpillar, some sages say 
that the soul attains another body after leaving the previous 
one. Othen hold that the soul enters smother body after going 
through Yama*s torture. What is true ? 

Suta said : 

6. Gentlemen, you have put the right question. Now 
hear. To allay your doubts* 

7. I shall take recourse to a dialogue between Kr^pa 
and Garu<^a. I shall try to remove your doubts thereby. 

8. Obeisance to sage Knoa. They who take recourse 
to him can easily cross the ocean of the world as it were a small 
river. 

9. Once upon a time, Garuda desired to go round the 
world. He started on journey, wandered all over, muttering the 
tht name Hari. 

10. He wandered over the earth, in hell and heaven but 
could not get peace. He returned to Vaikui^jha, more distressed 
by the sight of people^s sorrows. 



718 


Garu^a Purdi^^ 


n. There in Vaikup^, neither Jiajas exists, nor Tamar, 
nor SatUfa mixed with either of these two. Saitva alone exists 
there. 

12. Neither M&ya nor destruction nor the evils like 
anger, attachment etc. exist there. 

13. There dwell glorious Vi$nu*8 ga^ds dark and fair, 
bright, lotus*eyed, worshipped by deities and demons, clad in 
tawny robes and adorned with ornaments, bedecked with gar* 
lands of gold coins set up with jewels. 

14. Possessed of four arms and tufVsof hair, wearing ear* 
rings and garland, they shone by the rows of resplendent aerial 
cars. 

13. There Lak^mi gladly adorns Lord Vi^pu^s feet by 
offering many precious gems. Herself surrounded by the rows 
of beautiful damsels and friendly associates she sits in a moving 
swing and praises Hari. 

16*21. There he saw Hari AII*powerful, Lord of Lak^ml, 
Lord of the good. Lord of the world, lord of the sacrifices, 
surrounded by the courtiers : Sunanda, Nanda^ Prabalarhapa, 
chief among them possessing a face delightful to the servants, 
possessing big reddish eyes, bearing crest and ear*rings, being 
looked at the chest by Laksml, wearing yellow garment; possess* 
ing four arms, and a delightful smiling face, sitting on a costly 
seat surrounded by the powers, Pradhana^, Puni^,* Mahat,^ 
Aham^, the eleven organs, the five elements and delighting in 
Self. Garuda was pleased to see the Lord. His hair thrilled with 
joy and with tears coming out of his eyes he bowed to him with 
the feeling of love. 

1. The first evolver, originator, or source of the material world, the 

primary germ out of which all material appearances are evolved, according 
CO the philosophy. 

2. The soul. According to the SiiUifya it is neither a production nor 
productive: it b paiiive and a loAcr-oo of the Prakrti. 

3. The great principle, the intellect. The second of the twenty five 
elements or Uutim rect^nised by the Sdikfyds. 

4. In 5iatih'8-philosophy, the third of the eight producers or elements 
of creation, i.e., cooedt or conceptioa of individuality. In F#dMa*phi1osophy 
egotaim ii considered to be spiritual ignoeaDce. 



II.1.31 


719 


22. Vi| 9 u spoke to Garu^a who had cume to see him 

and who had bowed to him: Garuda, tell us how much 

of this earth you have wandered over and within such a 
short time.’’ 

Ganiia said : 

23. My Lord^ by your grace, I have visited the three 
worlds and seen all beings — the movable and the immov¬ 
able. 

24. From bhuloka^ to^ satyaloka, I have visited 
all regions, except the region of Yama, O tny lord. 

25. Among all the worlds, the bhCiloka is thickly 
populated by various kinds of creatures. This region is the 
most auspicious of all inasmuch as it affords a place* of enjoy* 
meat to all and is celebrated as the place where they can 
strive for salvation. 

26. A region better than thb for those who perform 
good actions has neither been before nor will there ever be. 

27. It seems that the gods sing songs to this purport. 
Those who live in this part of the world called Bh^ala are in 
fact blessed. In order to enjoy the fruits of heaven and 
salvation they are born as human beings, casting off their 
deity-hood. 

28. Why is the corpse tied to the bamboo-sticks ? Why are 
the five jewels kept in the mouth ? Why is the grass placed 
beneath ? Why are the feet kept southward ? 

29. Why do the sons and grandsons walk ahead ? 
Why are the gifts given, including the gift of a cow, O Keiava ? 

30-31. Why do the relatives, the friends, and even the 
foes forgive him. Why are the gingelly seeds, iron, gold, 
cotton, salt, seven types of grains, land (or house) and cow are 
given ? How does a creature die ? Having died, where does 
he go ? 

1. Hindu mythology accepts fourteen or worlds. Seven higher 
regions rising from the earth one above the other are. bhirMa, bhtwarUka, 
tvarUka, maharUks, UipMtd and or brdhitiaUkt; and seven 

lower regions, descending from the eanh one below the other are auic, piiaUi^ 
Mala, raMalmf taUtala, and mahdtala or p6t4U. 



720 


Gcru4^ Pur/i^a 


32. How doos he take shelter in the body being carried ? 
Why does the son carry the corpse on his shoulders and the 
grandson lights the lire ? 

33. Why is the anointment done with the butter? 
Wherefrom is the gkdhuti^kriyd ? Why is Vasudhdrd performed 
and wherefrom the lamentations from women ? 

34. Why is the Tama-sdkta recited? Why is water carried 
to the north ? Why is the sun looked through a cloth ? 

33. Why barley^ mustard^ed, durva, the two stones, 
the leaves of margosa ? Why do men and women wear one 
lower and one upper garment. 

36. Why should the meals, etc. be not taken alongwith 
other persons after returning home ? Why do the sons give 
nine pip^as^ 

37. Why is the milk in an earthern pot placed on 
tatvara Why are the three wooden sticks tied together and 
placed on the cross-roads in the night ? 

38. Why is a lamp placed every night for one year ? 
Why should the water be offered in the name of the deceased by 
the relatives and other people ? 

39. Why should the nine pii^dds be offered ? How is the 
gift to be given to the manes ? Why is the call for the bearers 
of the corpse ? 

40. When this is done> O lord I then why is the rite of 
pin^a repeated ? What should be given next after the gift of 
pinda is made ? 

41. Why are the bones collected? Why is the earthen pot 
broken ? Why is a bath taken on the second day ? Why on 
the fourth day ? 

42. Why is it taken on die tenth day alongwith the 
other mourners ? Why the anointment with oil ? 

43*44. The pi^ifa given on the tenth day is done so with 
meat, why ? Why is the pinda on the eleventh day given after 
releasing the bull ? 


1. Bslli of rke offered to the Manci at obsequial ceremonies. 

2. , A quadranguisr place or courtyard : a place where many roads 

meet. 



II.L59 


721 


45-46. Why are vesseb, shoes, umbrella, clothes and ring 
given on the thirteenth day. Why the sixteen <r4ddhas Why 
are food, water, etc. given everyday for three*hundred and 
sixty days of the year ? Why is the food put in a vessel for 
satiating the deceased ? 

47*48. O lord, the mortal man dies at the appointed time. 
I do not see an outlet^ then from where docs the soul go away ? 
From where do the elements—earth, water, mind, fire, air and 
sky pass away; tell me, O lord ? 

49. From where do the five organs of action^ the five 
organs of perception and the five vital airs go away and how ? 

50. From where do the five thieves of the body—greed 
affection, desire, love and pride go away, O Jankrdana ? 

51. Whatever little action has been done, whether good 
or bad or whatever gifts have been tendered which procure 
merit where do these go away after the body has decayed ? 

52. Why is the rite of sapi^ana^ done within the year 
of death ? With whom is the union of the deceased sought 
and how ? 

53-54. What docs in^thc end happen to the people who 
pass away, in conscious or unconscious state, burnt or unbumt 
or who have been sinners or bad-charactered. 

55*56. O lord, what is the end of those who commit sui* 
cide, murder a brahma^, or happen to be thieves or deceivers 
by nature ? What happens to that Sudra who drinks the milk 
of a kapita cow, who reads the Kdptures, who wears the sacred 
thread or who possesses a brahmin wife ? 

57. O lord, you tell me all this, for I am terribly afraid 
of the sinner. Hear something more, O soul of the universe. 
While wandering with curiosity, I saw the entire world. 

58*59. After seeing people merged In sorrows, a great 
pain arose in my heart. The affliction on the earth caused by 

1. Funeral rites performed in honour of the departed spin ta of desd 
reUtivn. 

2. The performance of a particular StAddka in honour of the deceaied*s 

relatives is called to be performed at the end of foil one year aAer 

the death of a relative, but now usually performed on the 12th day after 
death as pafTof the funeral rite. 



722 Coru4^ Purina 

death and disease is greater than affliction from the sight of 
asuras in paradise. 

60. I had the fear of losing my desired object in helL 
There is no other place safer than your feet, O Lord. 

61. Time has consumed the unreality as it has consumed 
the dream-world. Still, I saw a number of people suffering 
from sorrows in the land of Bharata. 

62^3. They were mei^ed deep in attachment, envy, 
affection, etc. Some were blind, some squint-eyed, some dumb, 
some lame, some one^yed, some deaf, some suffering from lep¬ 
rosy and other diseases and some from pride as false as the sky«^ 
flower.* 

64. After seeing the strangeness of their faults in the 
face of death. I have come to you with a mind to ask what is 
death ? Why is this strangeness ? 

65. How does death occur ? How is it that even after 
death, if rites are performed for one year one does not fall in 
the bad state ? 

66. Formerly, I had heard from the sages in general; 
now I ask you specifically on these points, O lord. 

67. O Vi^^u, what shall a dying man do? What shall 
he give in charity? After death, what is the method of 
cremation? 

68. Does he languish or obtain another body? When 
he lives in Yama’s city, what are the rites to be performed by 
bis descendants in the year of his death? 

69*70. What are the rites of propitiation for the common 
ignorant deceased? For one dead in paiicaka ? Be pleased, dis¬ 
pel my ignorance, t have asked all that I wanted to ask only 
for the welfare of the world. Please answer my queries. 


1. Used figuratively to denote nnythiog impossible. 



II .2.10 


723 


CHAPTER TWO 

Results of actions 

Lord /CffM said: 

1. O gentle one, you have put up the right question, 
that too for the general good of the people. Now hear atten* 
tively. [ shall tell you about the rite to be performed after 
death. 

2. It is without any controveny quoted by Srutis and 
smrtis. It has not been heard by the gods including Indra, nor 
by yogins absorbed in yoga. Being the secret of secrets, it has 
not been conveyed to anyone, anywhere. 

3. O Garu^a of great accomplishment, I shall tell you 
about this since you are my devotee. 

4. There is no place for a sonless person. The heaven 
is not for him. One must have a son by any means whatsoever. 

5. The son can take his father out of hell, if he cannot 
get him salvation. The son puts hu shoulder to coffin and tht 
grandson lights the fire. 

6. A woman in her menses shall stay in the hut anc 
lie on the bed bestrewed with sesame and darbha grass, on the 
ground. She shall put five gems in the mouth. Thus her foetu* 
attains growth. 

7-8. If the seed^ is destroyed then whereat the concept 
tion? Hence, for the protection of the foetus she shall lie on 
the ground, as enjoined in the Sistras. Similarly, in regard to 
the dying person he is laid on the ground besmeared with 
cowdur^ and bestrewed with the darbha grass. Thus the ailing 
person is released of sins which do not cling to him any more. 

9. A bunch of darbha for his bed takes him to heaven 
no doubt. Darbha should be thrown off after the corpse is 
removed from the place. 

I0» Where there is no besmearing, the ground remains 
impure. Where the earth is already besmeared it should be 
smeared again for the sake of purification. 


I« l^ciiitrual dbcharfc. 



724 Garu4^ Pura^a 

11. If the corpse is kept on the unsmeared ground, the 
foul spirits enter the corpse. 

12. A circle^ should be drawn around the corpse (to 
fix up the circumference); ^riddha shall be performed where 
the feet of the Brahmanas should be washed. All these would 
not serve the corpse, if the same is not placed on the ground. 

13. Brahma, Vifnu, Rudra, Lakml and Fire stay within 
the circle. Hence a circle is drawn around the corpse. 

14. If a circle is not drawn, the deceased person whether 
a child, youth or old does not get a womb’ but remains in the 
air, O Ganida ! 

15. He may not be bom soon but live in the air for 
some time. He receives no irliddha^ no libation of water from his 
relatives. 

16. O Garuda ! Sesame is held sacred, for it is produc¬ 
ed from my perspiration. The sesame can destroy the evil 
spirits. 

17. The sesame is white, black or of the colour of the 
cow’s urine. They can burn all sins committed by the deceased. 

18. A single grain of sesame offered with the libation 
of water to the deceased or an article given in charity or a 
sacrifice held for his welfare becomes fruitful as drona-kalaia 
does in rewards. 

19. Darbhas are bom from my hair and sesame from 
my perspiration. By performing hiddha one can please deities, 
asuras and the manes. 

20. The Universe and the creator of the universe live 
by the ceremonial form. By wearing the secred thread over the 
right shoulder, one can please the creator, the manes and the 
deities. 

21*23. When the sacred thread is worn over the right 
shoulder the manes are pleased. Brahmi stays at the root of 
darbha, Janardana in its middle and Sankara at the point of 
darbha. Thus the three deities are said to be stationed in 
darbha. The brahma^, mantns, sacred grass, fire and TulasI are 


1. A kind of s mystical ditfram. 

2. Form of estistcace. 



IL2.35 


725 


never spoiled though used again and again. Tulatf, brahmana^ 
Cows, Vifnu and Ekadail— 

24. These five are the protection boats for the people 
drowning in the ocean of worldly existence. Visnu, Ekada^i, 
Gita, Tulasi, Brahma^, and the Cow— 

25. These are the six steps to salvation in this 
universal fortress of little use. Sesame and darbhas are sacred 
and so is Tulasi. 

26. These guard the deceased against misfortune. 
Darbhas should be taken out with hands. The earth should be 
sprinkled over with water. 

27. As the hour of death approacheSi darbhas should 
be placed in the hands of the deceased. He whose body is 
spread over by darbhas goes toVi8Qu*Ioka> no matter if he is 
not initiated in the Vedic lore. 

28*29. The feet of the deceased person are kept on the 
ground and the toe raised upward. In this ocean of universal 
existence, which is practically of little use, the atonement of the 
sin is made by sacrificing the body in the holy fire. Having 
smeared the ground with the cowdung, they should spread 
the mattress of darbha for the dying person. 

30-31. Salt is very muchefieedve for the destruction of 
sins. Let them donate salt for the manes, for it suits their taste 
and takes them to heaven. As for the men in general, it fulfils 
their desires. 

32. Salt has come out from the body of Vi^u, hence 
yogins recommend a gift of salt placing the same over 
other gifts. 

33-34. When at the time of death, the soul does not 
depart but lingers on to the body^ no matter whether the dying 
person is a brahmatia, ksatriya, vaiiya or ludra of either sex, 
they should donate salt for him whereby the soul leaves the 
mortal body and enters the doors of heaven which open imme-^ 
diately for him. O king of birds, now hear from me in detail, 
the various forms of death. 

35. It is Kala which detaches soul from body. It causea 
death of the person, at the appointed hour, without a single 
exception. 



726 


Caru4a PurSna 


36. Just as the wind scatters clouds here and there, just 
like that Kala> the Destroyer, floats people from one end of the 
shore to another. 

37. Whether they be sattvika or rajasa or tamasa—all 
these bhdvas operate in man due to the influence of Kala. 

36-39. Sun, Moon, Siva, water, air, Indra, Are, sky, 
earth, herbs, Vasus, riven, seas, existent or non-existent, O 
Garu^a, all these are created and destroyed by Kala in due 
course of time. 

40. Indeed, O Garu^a, when the hour of death appro¬ 
aches, then by chance, a certain disease'raises up its head. 

41. The Organs grow weak. Troubles start showing 
their powers, as if all of a sudden, millions of scorpions have 
stung the person. 

42. O bird, then the person begins to feel the peng of 
death. At the very hour his consciousness is replaced by un¬ 
consciousness. 

43. The breath is pushed by Yama*s messengers stand¬ 
ing nearby. The person assumes a terrible form and the breath 
lingers to stay in the throat. 

44-45. Froth comes out of the mouth full of saliva. 
Just at the moment when every body is lamenting, the soul, as 
big as a thumb* is carried away by Yama’s messengers, even 
as it looks towards its home. Now hear about the state of death. 

46. The heat in the body is disturbed due to sudden 
commotion of winds. Though without fuel, it breaks up the 
vital points. 

47. The Udana-wind moves upward. It stops the down¬ 
ward movement of the deceased who in his life-time had full 
devotion for the lord but no desire in return. 

48. He who has never spoken fabehood, nor has any 
partiality in devotion but believes in God, obtains death 
peacefully. 

49. He who does not stray fromDharma, due to pleasure, 
wrath or envy but does what he says and is gentle obtains 
death peacefully. 

50«52. Those who preach ignorance pass through dark¬ 
ness. Those who are fabc witnesses, liers and deceitful obtain 
death unconsciously, just as those who abuse the Vedas. 



II.2.65 


727 


The ferocious, foul •smelling messengers of Yama, witt\ 
clubs and sticks in their hands, come and seize this wicked 
person. Having reached a ferocious path he begins Co shiver. 

53. He cfies for his father, mother and sons. His indis* 
tinct voice, spoken with effort, appears to be single-lettered. 

54. Due to terrible suffering his looks waver and his 
mouth gets dry due to hard breath. Then wrapped up in 
suffering, the Jiva departs from the body. 

55. Since that very moment the body becomes untouch¬ 
able and despicable. 

Thus I have spoken to you about the form of death of 
the mortal man. 

56. Now I shall answer your query about the peculiari¬ 
ties of form the body takes in different births. 

57*58. Due to different actions performed in the pre* 
vious births, the wandering yiw attain different forms, as of a 
deity, a demon, a yak^a, man, beast bird, etc. O lord of birds, 
these are due to the chain of actions, performed in different 
ages. 

59. Now, I shall tell you about the results of actions 
which a person obtains, so that the strangeness involved is 
explained clearly. 

60. When the sinners have exhausted the fruits of their 
actions in dreadful hells, they are born on the earth. 

61. Now, hear about their characteristics. The killer of 
a brahmana attains the form of a deer, horse, pig or camel. 

62. The stealer of gold becomes a worm or a germ or a 
fly. He who lies on the bed of a teacher becomes grass, plant 
or vine. 

63. The stayer of a brahmaM suffers from consumption. 
A drunkard possesses brown teeth. A gold stealer has bad nails. 
The defiler of the teacher's bed possesses bad skin. 

64. That very thing becomes his mark with which he 
was associated in the previous birth. If he moves with (he 
wretched people he himself becomes wretched within a year. 

65. The sins of the people spread by talk, touch, brea* 
thing, going together, eatii^ togetheri sitting together, worship¬ 
ping together, by teaching and sex usd union. 



728 


Garuda Purdt^a 


66. After having sexual intercourse with the wives of 
other men or after killing a brahmana, one becomes a brahma* 
rak^asa, in a lonely place. 

67. The stealer of a jewel is born in a low caste. A man 
who steals plants becomes a shrew. 

68. The thief of corn becomes a rat; that of vehicle, 
a camel and that of fruit a monkey. He who takes meals un* 
invited becomes a crow. He who steals utensils becomes a 
vulture. 

69. The stealer of fruit becomes a honey-bee; that of a 
cow, a vulture; that of a woman*s clothes, a white leper and 
that of juice, possesses no taste at all. 

70. The stealer of bronze becomes a swan; so also the 
stealer of other’s possessions. The slayer of his teacher becomes 
epileptic and the performer of cruel deeds becomes a dwarf. 

71-72« He who dUcards his wife becomes an animal to 
be killed by a hunter. He who snatches the possessions of a 
deity or a brahmana suffers from jaundice. He who eats 
meat becomes a leper. He who does not return the deposit 
becomes one-eyed. He who lives on the earning of his wife be- 
cames lame. 

73. He who discards progeny and wife encounters ill- 
luck. He who eats sweets only becomes rheumatic. He who 
has sexual union with a brahmana’s wife becomes a jackal. 

74. A stealer of bed becomes k^pa^akaS and that of 
clothes becomes a moth. He who envies is bom blind. He who 
steals a lamp becomes a beggar. 

75. He who kills a friend becomes an owl. He who 
abuses the ancestors suffers from consumption. He who speaks 
lies cannot spesJt properly. He who gives false witness suffers 
from dropsy. 

76. He who disturbs a marru^ is bom as a mosquito. 
He who eases'himself on crossroads is born as a bull. 

77. He who spoils a young girl becomes a eunuch. He 
who sells the Vedas becomes a leopard. He who performs a 
sacrifice but not in the prescribed manner becomes a pig. 


1. A Bauddbs or Jain mmdiesat* 



II.2.90 


729 


78. He who eats here and there becomes a cat. He who 
sets fire to a forest becomes a glow-worm. He who eats the stale 
food becomes a worm. He who envies others becomes a bee. 

79. He who sets fire becomes a leper. He who does not 
give gifts becomes a bull. A stealer of cows becomes a serpent; 
that of food suffers from dyspepsia. 

80. A stealer of water becomes a fish, that of milk a 
crane. He who gives stale food to a brahmana becomes 
hunch-backed. 

81. If he steals fruits> his progeny dies, O bird. If he 
eats alone without giving a morsel of it to anyone else, he be¬ 
comes issueless. 

82. If he does not opt for Sannyasa he becomes an evil 
spirit in the desert. A stealer of water becomes a Cdlakai that 
of book is born blind. 

83. He who promises but does not give it to the brdhma^ 
becomes a jackal. He who earns the blame of the people be¬ 
comes a tortoise. 

84. A seller of fruits meets with bad luck. He who 
marries a Sudra woman, becomes a wolf. He who touches (ire 
with foot becomes a cat. He who eats another’s meat suffers 
from diseases. 

85. He who breaks a water-reservoir becomes a fish. 
He who hears neither Hari's tale, nor the praise of the good 
suffen from ear disease. 

86-87. He who takes out a morsel from another's mouth 
becomes a blockhead. He who steab the deityb utensils suffers 
from gan^am^lS^. He who observes religion without sincerity 
suffen from a skin disease. 

88. A treacherous fellow suffers from head-ache. He 
who b against $iva suffers from the disease of genital organ. 

89. And the women too who commit these sins suffer 
in the similar way or they become wives of penons suffering 
in the aforesaid manner. 

90. After their present life they reach hell. Knofw that I 
have told you all thb in short, O bird ! Just as there are many 
kinds of disease so also there are many kinds of man. 

1. faflammstion of the glsodt ^ the neck. 







91. In this way, due to the variety of their actions, 
men attain happinea or grief. Thus, I have told you about the 
icrangenett of human nature. Good actions give good results 
and bad actions give bad results. 

92. In this way your queries are answered completely. 


CHAPTER THREE 

Description of Hell 

Suta said: 

1. Thus encouraged, Ganida asked about the descrip¬ 
tion of Hells, being curious to know about tbeir nature and 
function. 

•Garudo said: 

2. O Lord, tell me about the nature and division of hells 
where the evil-doers are thrown mercilessly. 

Lord said: 

3. O younger brother of Aruna, there are thousands of 
hells. It is not possible to describe all of them in detail. I 
shall tell you about the principal hells thoroughly. 

4. The principal hcU is Raarava* The person who tells 
lies and gives false evidence goes to this hell. 

5. Raurava is two thousand yojanas in measurement. 
There is a knee-deep pit, difficult to cross. 

6. It is levelled upto the ground by a heap of burning 
coal. And the ground there is well-heated by hre. 

7. The servants of Yama leave the sinner there in the 
middle. Burnt by burning fire he runs helter-skelter. 

8. At every step his foot is burnt. Day and night he 
moves here and there lifting and putting his feet. 



n.S.25 


731 


9. There be i$ left along a thousand Yojanas« Then for 
the purgation of remaining sins he goes to other hells. 

10. Thus I have told you about the first hell named 
Raurava. Now, O bird^ bear about the hell called Mahdraurava. 

11. It is five thousand Yojanas in measurement. It lias 
copper-coloured earth scorched below. 

12. When heated by it, the earth shines like lightning. 
It appears extremely fierce to the sinner. 

13. The servants of Yama tie hands and feet of the 
sinner and throw him in this hell where he goes down rolling. 

14. While rolling down in the way he is bit by fearful 
crowsi cranes^ ants, mosquitoes and scorpions. 

15. Thus being burnt, he loses his wits and cries rest¬ 
lessly, *0 father, O father/again and again, but attains no peace. 

16. The persons who have committed sins with bad 
intentions are thrown into this hell and get release from there 
only from myriads of years. 

17. Then there is another hell by name and nature 
AtUita {very cold). It is as big as Mah&raurava and full of 
dense darkness. 

18. There in the fierce darkness, the sinners are tied and 
left, suffering from cold* Meeting each other they clasp lightly. 

19. Shivering with cold their teeth sound loudly. Even 
there the overpowering trouble of hunger and thirst exists, O 
Garuda. 

20. The fierce wind blowing over the blocks of ice 
pierces the bones. The hungry men consume decayed marrow, 
blood and bones. 

21. Meeting together and clasping each other they 
wander here and there. The persons who had been hoarding 
wealth suffer too much in that darkness, O the best of birds. 

22. Then there is another hell called Nrkrntma, 

23. A series of potter’s wheel is moving round and round 
there, O bird. There the sinners, whose feet and bead are tied 
by a string are held by Ysuna’s servants in their fingers. 

24-25. O bird, their life is not destroyed but their 
organs are cut into hundred pieces and restored again to their 
original position. Thus for thousands of years, the sinners rotate 
till their sins are exhausted completely. 



732 


G<tru4a 


26-27. Now hear» I shall tcU you about the hell named 
Aprati?;ha» The people who go to this hell suffer intensely. 
There too the potter’s wheeb and the ghatiyaotra operate 
constantly. 

28. Those unnen who had caused untold sufferings to 
men are placed there on the potter’s wheeb and rotate 
incessantly. 

29. They remain there for thousands of years^ tied as 
they are to ghatijHintro} like the water-pots. 

30. The sinners rotate there vomitting blood again and 
again. Their intestines come out through mouth and their eyes 
are suspended by intestines. 

31. Now hear about another hell named Aaipatravana» 
where the sinners suffer unbearable miseries. 

32-33. There over a thousand Tojanas a fierce fire burns 
with seven fierce rays. The sinners thrown in this hell feel 
burnt without recess. In the midst is seen a tree with a big 
trunk, overgrown with cool and smooth leaves which are torn 
here and there, O Garuda. 

34-36. There powerful dogs roam about, always eager to 
eat meat. They have fierce jaws, fierce mouths and are power¬ 
ful like tigers. Then seeing in front, the forest with cool shade, 
the miserable sinners suffer from hunger and heat, run to it, 
crying mother, O brother, O father.* 

37-38. Then their feet burn by the ground-fire. Still 
then, a very cool wind blows forcefully which makes those sharp 
blades fall upon them* Cut into pieces they fall in the burning 
fire. 

39-40. Then the licking dogs tear their bodies into pieces 
even as they weep woefully. Thus I have told you about the 
Asipoiratma. 

41. Now hear about a more fierce hell called Tapta- 
kumbha, where all around are kept heated pitchers full of 
burning fiames. 

42. The pitchers are full of burning fire, hot oil and iron 
filings. Therein are thrown the tinners by the attendants of 
Yama. 


I. A machiae ibr rsiiiiif wsier. 



IL3.60 


733 


43. They (the attendants ofYama) boil their bodies 
disintegrating, marrow flowing out, heads, eyes and bones 
breaking. 

44. Fierce vultures tear them taking them out and again 
throwing them in. They boil there dil they are merged into oil. 

45. When their head, limbs, sinews, flesh, skin and 
bones are liquefled, then Yama’s servants stir them with a 
ladle. 

46. The sinners are boiled in oil in Yama*$ abode. Thus 
I have narrated to you in detail about Tapta*Kumbha, O bird. 

47*48. So the first hell is Raurava, the second AfoAd- 
rauraviti the third the fourth yifkmtcna^ the fifth Aprati^fha 

and the sixth AsitapairavandAnd the %cvenihTdpldkumbha, These 
are the seven hells. 

49. We hear about some other hells also where the 
sinners fall according to their sins. 

50«53. They are Rodha^ Tdla, Taptakimbha^ Mahd^ 

ji'dlOf Gabalat Vimehana, ATrimt, Xrmibhakfap Lildbhakfdp Vifdf{}anap 
AdhafiiiraSp P (yfavaha, Rudhirdndhap Vidbhujp Vaitara^ip Sumdf 
Asipdtrd Agnijvdla, Mahdghofd, Sandarfiia, AbhojanCp TamaSp 
/Cdlasutrdp Loha^ Abhiddp Apratifth^^ Avki. 

54. These dark hells are situated in Yama’s country. 
Herein fall the sinners in the order of their sins. 

55. These hells, Raurava, etc, lie below the earth. Now 
hear about the sins which drive the sinners to particular hells. 

56. A man who kills a cow, a foetus or indulges in 
arson, falls in Rodha. A killer of brahma^a falls in Sukara. So 
also a drunkard, a stealer of gold, a killer of k»triya or vaiiya 
falls in Tala. 

57. He who kills a brahma^a or defiles his teacher's bed 
or has sexual union with his sister falls in Taptakumbha. So 
also a soldier who speaks lies. 

58. In the similar way, he who sells liquor or he who 
discards a devotee also falls there. 

59. He who co-habits with his daughter or daughter-in- 
law, he who sells Veda, or he who blames the Vedas falls into 
Mahajvftla. 

flO. ^He who insults his teacher or abuses him or he who 
co-habits with an unworthy woman falls into Sabala. 



734 


Garu4<^ Put^t^ 


61. He who transgresses codes of moral conduct prescrib¬ 
ed for the conduct of war falb into Vimohana. He who does am 
undesirable act falls into Kfmibhak^t* 

62-63• He who holds no honour for deities or the twice* 
bom brihma^aj falb into L&libhaksa. A potter who digs pits 
or a physician who flouts trust or a person who seb Are to 
parks, falb into Vi^fijana. So also a brahma^a who receives 
prohibited gifts or performs sacrifice for a wrong person. 

64*65. Or a Kfatriya who does not live by valour falb 
into Adhomukha. He who lelb milk, liquor, meat or cuts wood 
Kx deab in scents, juices, pngelly seeds, falls into fierce 
PQyav^a. He who catches cocks, eats pigs, birds, deer and 
goats falb into thu hell. 

66-67. He who deab in buffaloes, or a juggler or he who 
sells liquor, an actor, or brihmana who u a bird-hunter or a 
village-priest who indulges in arson or he who adminbters 
poison or he who it a pump or he who sells soma, or a 
drunkard, a meat-eater or a killer of animals— 

68« All these fall into Rudhir&ndha. Those who admi¬ 
nister poison to their guests, sitting in a row, fall into the 
fierce hell Vidbhuj. There is no doubt in this. 

69. He who drinks wine falb into Vaitaranl. He who 
calb others by bad names falb into Mutra. 

70. He who has not lived a pious life falls into Asica- 
patravana* So also he who b hot-tempered. A deer-hunter falls 
into Agnijv&Ia where he b eaten by the crows. 

71. The person who breaks bis vow during the course 
of sacrifice &)ls into Sandvhia. So sJso brahmac&rins who 
discharge their semen in dream. 

72« The fathers who are taught by their sons or who 
receive orders frinn them fall into Abbojana. 

73. Those who perform acts ricdadng the rules of their 
Varpa and Airamai on account anger or pleasure go to hell. 

74* There is the hot Raurava above and the cold Timasa 
below* 

75. In tbU way, the helb are situated one below the 
other. The climax of misery b due to bad acts. 

76, And the climax id joy accrues from good acts. The 
gods look down and see the fierce heUs. 



n.3.93 


7S5 

77. The sinners of hell also look up and see the gods 
above. There are thus hundreds of heUs» O bird. 

78*79. Daily in the hell» the sinners are cooked^ bumt^ 
tom» broken, pounded, moistened, boiled, heated and blown 
by winds. A day in belt is equal to one hundred yean of the 
mortal. 

80*82. Having crossed these, the sinner is reborn as a 
worm, a germ, a fly, a one*hoofed creature, a wild elephant, 
a cow, an ass, a hone, a mule, a buffalo, jarabha, a camari, 
a six*hoofed animal or one having five nails. In these and other 
yoms he takes birth. 

83. If born as a human being he becomes hunch*backed 
or a dwarf or a cindkla in wretched yonis. 

84. The sinner is bom again and again and dies again 
and again till he has exhausted his sin and acquired virtue. 

85. Then some time he steps into the yont of Sfidra or 
VaUya or Ksatriya or Brlthmana or a deity. 

86. Thus I have told you how a sinner falls into hell. 
Now I shall tell you how and where the virtuous go after 
death. 

87. The virtuous obtain good yonis as directed by Yama. 
Immediately after the soul leaves the body, the Gandharvas 
come singing and dancing, adorned with garlands and anklets. 

88. And then appear splendid aerial cars decorated 
widi sweet smelling garlands (which take the virtuous souls 
to heaven). 

89*90. When their merits are exhausted, the virtuous 
souls fall from heaven and are bom in the houses of kings or 
nobles of illustrious character, where they enjoy various 
pleasures. Thus men go up and down the ladder as stated 
before. 

91. Death is certain for the mortals who are born on this 
earth. The soul of the sinner leaves the bpdy from the down* 
ward path, undoubtedly. 

92. Earth mingles with earth, water with water, fire 
with fire, air with air. 

99. ^Sky mingles with sky, pervading all around. In the 
body there exist love, anger and five organs* 



736 


GaTu4^ Pufi^ 


94. O Garu^a, there abide thieves in the body in the 
form of lovei anger and pride. Mind is the leader T>f all these. 

95. Death is temporal. The jiva along with sins, virtues 
and five subtle organs enters into new body just as a house¬ 
holder enters into a new house when the old one is burnt. 

96-98. In the body exist se%xn elements and seven 
Koias. All these exist in the body—urine, waste, allied matter, 
bile, cough, marrow, flesh, fat, bones, semen, sinews which are 
destroyed along with the body (when the soul departs). 

99» Thus I have told you, O bird, about the end of all 
bodies. Now I shall tell you, O bird, how their body looks like. 

100*102. It is a shrub of sinews adorned with three 
trunks, combined with organs and having nine openings. Full 
of sensual pleasures, love, anger, desire and envy, possessing 
a high way robber in the form of greed, caught in the net of 
avarice and covered by the cloth of affection. It is bound by 
illusion and inhabited by greed. 

103. These qualities inhere in the bodies of all creatures. 
Those who do not realize their self are nothing more than 
beasts. 

104. Thus I have told you about the fourfold body. 
Formerly, eightyfour yonis were created [for the jiva to pass 
through]. 

105. While narrating about the hell I told you about 
all these—that are born from the earth, from the sweat, from 
the eggs and from the embryo. 

106. I shall tell you more as and when necessary or do 
you possess a desire to ask more? 


CHAPTER FOUR 

Lord said\ 

1. Whatever sin a man commits consciously or uncons¬ 
ciously stands in need of puriiicaiion by means of atonement. 

2» The wise one should fint perform ten types of baths 



11AM 


737 


beginning with bhama. These should be observed ms as 
possible for six years repeatedly. 

3. Or half of that or half of th^t or half of the half of 
that. Then as far as he can he should donate ten gifts. Now 
hear about them. 

4. Cow, earth, gingeily seeds, gold, butter, cloth, grains^ 
sugar, silver and salt--these are known as ten gifts. 

5. He should make these gifu to those who have coroe 
during atonement. Then to cross the river Voitara^fl full of pus 
and blood, at Yaina*s door he should donate the Vaitarai;^ cow. 

6. A black cow with black udders is called Vaitarat^l. 

7«8. Gingeily seeds, iron, gold, cotton, salt, seven grains, 

earth and cow—these are all pure. These eight precious gifts 
should be given to a learned brihroana by the dying person. I 
shall now tell you about the form of pada. 

9. Umbrella, shoes, clothes, ring, gourd, seat, vessel and 
food—these are the eight kinds of pada. 

10. A vessel full of gingeily seeds or butter and a bed 
with all its epuipment should be gifted or all those articles 
which are liked by the donor. 

11. Horse, chariot, she-buffalo, fan and cloth—-all these 
should be given to the brahmanas. 

12-14. O Lord, these gifts and others should be given as far 
as possible. He who has done atonement, given ten gifts on this 
earth, or the gift of Vaitarani cow or eight gifts or the gifts of 
a vessel full of gingeily seeds or clarified butter or the gift of 
bed or of pada, as prescribed in the S&atras does not go hell. 
The wise have prescribed the gift of salt to be given freely. 

15. The salt is produced from the body ofVifpu. When 
the soul of the dying person does not leave the body but lingers 
on, the salt should be gifted as it opens the door of the heaven. 

16. Whatever gifts a man has given himself they all 
stand in his favour (at the hour of death). 

17. O bird, the man who has completed atonement In 
all its parts is placed in heaven, after all his sins arc washed 
away. 


I. Name oC the river of bell. 



798 


Garuia Purd^a. 


18. O noble bird, since the cow’s milk is nectar, who¬ 
soever gifts a cow attains tmm<Mlality. 

19. Whosoever gives the eight gifts lives in the abode 
of the Gandharvas. 

20. He gets shelter even in the tortuous hell named 
Raudra where the sinners are burnt. If he gifct an umbrella, 
he encounters the comforting shade in the way. 

21. So also he passes comfortably through the fierce 
Aiipacravana. If he gifts sho^ he moves there too mounting a 
hone. 

22. If be gifts food and seat he eats sitting comfortably 
in the way. If he gifts a waier*jar he feels comfortable even 
in the waterless region. 

23. He who gifts clothes and ornaments liberally is not 
tortured by the fierce messengers of Yama who are black and 
ydlow in colour. 

24. O bird, if a vessel full of gingelly seeds is donated 
to a Brihmana it destroys all the three types of sins bom out of 
his voice, body and mind. 

25-26. If he gifts a vessel iUH of clarified butter he stays 
in Rudraloka. If he glfu a bed along with all its equipment 
he rides an aerial car in the company of fairies and enjoys in 
the abode of Indra for sixty-thousand years. 

27-28. After falling down from Indraloka he becomes a 
monarch in this world. He who gifts a young faultless horse 
along with all equipment to a Brahmana lives if> heaven, O 
bird, for years, equal to the number of hair on the body of a 
horse. 

29-SO. If he gifts a dmiot drawn by four horses along 
Yfitb the contiguous equipment to a learned BrMimana he reaps 
the benefit of pefforming a RajasQya.^ 

31. If be donates to a BMhma^ % milk-yielding buffalo 
with her plump hind pacts, and a golden ornament cm her 
forehea4i accompanied by her satiated cMf» whpt wonder 
there that he attains heaven. 

1. Afreet sacrifice perfixmed by a u&ivenal monarch (in which 
Ibe tributvy pHnow also wok part) at the time of hU corooaiion at a mark 
of his uadiqailed soeerd f aty. 



IU.44 


7S9 


32. If he donates a fan {Tdliwrfiia)^ be is fanned by air 
in the way. If he donates cloth he becomes fullofluslrei wealdi 
and prosperity. 

S3. If he donates a horse along with salt» food and other 
ingredients to a Brahmapa, his family does not suffer a break 
and he goes to heaven after death. 

34. O birdt there is a difference in result according to 
faith and gifts. 

35. He who donates water and salt gels enjoyment in 
distress. 

36. He who donates food with a heart purified by faith 
is satiated even without food. 

37. If he accepts saonyisa as prescribed in the sacred 
texts he is not reborn but is merged into Brahma itself. 

36. If he dies at a sacred place he attains mok^a (release 
from re-birth] after dying there. If he dies in the way, 
each and every step he has taken in reaching this place procures 
for him the fruit of performing a sacrifice. There it no doubt 
in this. 

39. If he undertakes a fast unto death he does not 
return to this world, O bird. 

40. I have given the answer to your queries about 
gifts. Now, I shall tell you about the obsequies and the funeral 
rites of the deceased. 

41. When it is ascertained that life has gone out of 
the body, the son should bathe and wash the corpse with pure 
water without delay. 

42. Having clothed it afresh they should smear the body 
with the sandaj-paste. The son or the successor should perfonn 
the dcoddUUi^ rite afterwards. 

43. Then the arraagement for cremating the corpse 
should be made as far as the means allow. 

44. The following four should not be undertaken to the 
cremation rite: avihaoa^ arcana, patrilambha and avagihana. 

I. Funeral rite perforaed tor one definite lodividuaJ draased, oei 
iadudini eiber mnceiton. 



740 Garu4ii PKTdpa 

Lee there be la^alpa for each gift and let there be a 
pi^dadana. 

45. The fiveart ides common to every sacrifice should not 
be there. The libation of water should be given but not the trio: 

46. Svadh&-Vicana» Aiis and Tilaka> O bird. A vessel 
full of mustard should be given. Iron should also be gifted. 

47. The pittda*calana rite is followed but not the following 
three, pracchadana, visarga and svastivacana. 

48«49. Procedure has been laid down for six ^riddhas^ 
at six places; at the place of death, at the door, at the 
crossroads, at the place of rest, on the wood-pile and at the 
collection rite. The dead body is called Sava at the place of 
death. The deity Earth is pleased thereby. 

50. It is called pantba at the door; the deity Vastu is 
pleased. It is, called khecara at the crossroads; the deity 
Bhuta is pleased. 

51. It is called bhuta in the resting place. The ten 
quarters are satisfied thereby. It is called sadhaka on the pyre 
and preta at the collectioo-rite. 

52. Holding gingelly seeds, darbha, clarified butter, the 
sons and other relatives go round the pyre reciting gatha or 
the sukta of Yama. 

53. Taking cow, horse, man and bull everyday Yama is 
not satiated just as a wicked person is not satiated with wine. 

54. They should recite the gdthd!^ or the hymn apeta^ 
in the way. The relatives accompany the corpse to a forest in 
the southern direction. 

55. O bird, in the aforesaid manner the two iraddhas 
should be perfoitned in the way. 

56. Then the corpse should be laid lightly on the earth 
with its head to the south and the aforesaid sraddha should be 
performed. The sons should fetch dry grass, dry pieces of wood 
and gingelly seeds. 

57. If these are fetched by a Sudra each and every act 
done in favour of the deceased would go futile. The performer 
of the funeral rite should wear the sacred thread over the right 

1. A f^fioui WM iMt not belongiag to sny oct of the Vedis, 

2. RV. 10.14.9. 



II.4.7I 


741 


shoulder and should sit^ along with the mourners, facing the 
south. 

58. O bird, an altar should be made there as prescribed. 
The cloth for the corpse should be torn into twofold pieces 
and the corpse should be covered with the one-half. 

59. The other half should be spread over the earth. 
The pipdd should be kept in the hand of the deceased as stated 
before. 

60. The corpse should be anointed with the clarified 
butter. Now hear about the pi^4<i*vidki for the deceased prior 
to his cremation. 

61. By virtue of the aforesaid five pi^d^s, the departed 
soul attains fitness for becoming a mane {pit^) • Or else, it 
attains the form of a demon. 

62. Having cleansed and smeared the ground at the 
altar, the fire should be lit as prescribed. 

63*64. Having worshipped the deity named Kratydda 
with flowers and grains of rice, the wise man should lighten 
fire according to the Vedic rites, but avoid candala, citi or 
patita fires* 

65. ‘^You are the creator of creatures, the birth-place 
of the world, the protector of the people. Please therefore, 
consume the corpse and carry the soul to the heaven*’—having 
thus worshipped the deity the meat-devouring fire- 

god, he should set fire to the corpse. 

66«68. When the body is half^bumt, a quantity of clari¬ 
fied butter should be poured over it with the mantra: ‘You 
are born from it, you be bom again. Let this be for heaven, 
Svfiha*. He should recite this mantra announcing the name 
of the deceased and pour forth butter alor^ with the gingelly 
seeds while the relatives weep loudly. This gives comfort to the 
departed soul (still wandering in the air). After cremating the 
corpse the rite of collection should be done there. 

69-70. O bird, Preta-pi^d^ is given in order to comfort 
the deceased. Then having circumambulated the pyre and 
casting a mournful look at it, the mourners should go for bath 
muttering the hymn, with the youth marching ahead. 

71. Then having reached water and washed cloth, they 
should wAr the same saying for the deceased—we are taking bath. 



742 


Garu^a Puri^ 


72-73« Then they all^ each wearing one cloth only, with 
ehaven heads, wearing the sacred thread over the right shoulder 
should enter water silently. 

74-76. The bathers should not agitate water. Then 
coming out of the water to the bank, tying their Sikha (knot 
of hair in the centre of the head) they should take in their 
right hand Kuias and water with the gingelly seeds and offer 
the same in the southern direction, pouring it from the paitfka- 
tirtha over the earth silently once, thrice or ten times. 

77. gratified, be gratified with this pinda, O preta 
of such and such gotra. Let thb water reach you,* reciting 
this formula he should let the water go down. 

76. After giving the water offerings he should cleanse his 
teeth, 0 bird. The water-offering shall be done regularly for 
nine days by all Ms kith and kin. 

79. Then coming out of water, they wear the same 
clothes as before, while they wrinse the bathing dress which 
they spread over the clean earth (for drying). 

80. They should abstain from shedding tears while giving 
the water-offerings after cremation. But if they shed tears and 
vomit cough, the departed spirit consumes the same helplessly. 

81. Hence, they should neither weep nor cou^. The 
entire ritual should be performed according to the means. 

62«85. And when they have sat quietly, a learned person 
well versed in the Purina should alleviate their sorrow dis¬ 
coursing on the temporality of time and the unsubstantial 
nature of the universe. He should tell them about the hollow¬ 
ness of life and if anybody searches substance inside the human 
body resembling the trunk of a banana plant he is a perfect fool; 
for it is like the water bubble. The body is constituted of five 
elements and if it goes back to the elements by virtue of bodily 
actions what is there to be lamented for ? The earth, ocean and 
even deities are bound to be destroyed. The same fate awaits 
the universe which has arisen like a bubble. How at can escape 
destruction ? Thus, he should speak to them about the tran¬ 
sient nature of life, while they all sit on the soft grass in the 
courtyard of the cremation groimd. 

86-87. Having beard this, the mourners should return 
home with the youngsters walking in front At the door of 



UAAOO 


743 


their house they should chew the roargosa leaves, wrinse their 
mouths with water and touching cowdung, giogelly seeds, 
durva grass, coral, bull or any other auspicious thing and 
keeping their feet lightly on the stone should enter the house. 

88'»90. Ahitagni^ should kindle the sacred fire accor* 
ding to the Vedic rites. He should not dig up the earth for less 
than two years. The water^oflering should be made (on return 
to the house). 

A woman who has been chaste and faithful to her hus¬ 
band should mount on the pyre after bowing to her (deceased) 
husband before the funeral riles start. One who gets away 
from the pyre due to fainting should observe the vow named 
prajipatya. 

91. One who ascends the pyre and follows up her hus¬ 
band stays in heaven for a period equal to the number of hair 
on the body, three amd a half crore. 

92. Just as the snake-charmer takes out the snake from 
the hole so also she takes out her husband from hell and 
enjoys with him in paradise. 

93. She who ascends the pyre goes to heaven. She is 
praised by the celestial nymphs and enjoys with her husband so 
long as the fourteen Indras rule in heaven successively. 

94. Even if the man has killed a brahma^a or a 
friend or any other person of noble conduct he is purified of 
sins by his wife who ascends his pyre. 

93. A woman who enters fire after the death Of her 
husband prospers in the heaven like Arundhati. 

96. Until and unless the woman burns herself after her 
husband’s death she is never released from the bond of her sex. 

97. A woman who follows her husband purifies the three 
families on her mother’s side, the three families on her father’s 
side and the three families on her husband’s side. 

98-100. That woman is chaste who is sad when her 
husband is sad, who is glad when her husband is glad and who 
pines when he is out of station and dies when he is dead. 
Common rites are enjoined for all women right from brahmaol 


]« Ajwice-boro who consecnites the sacred hre. 



744 


Garuda Purina 


to Ca^^all except for those who are pregnant or who have 
young children. 

101. O bird, I have told you in general about the 
method of cremating the corpse. Do you want to hear some« 
thing more with reference to ii. 

Garudo said: 

102. If a man dies out of station and his bones too are 
destroyed, then how should the rite of cremation be performed. 
Tell me, O lord of the world! 

Lord lif^a said: 

103. If the bones of a person who died abroad are not 
available, I shall tell you about the procedure of rites of his 
death. 

104-109. O Garuda, hear. I shall now tell you the great 
secret about the rite of death for those who die through serpent, 
tiger, toothed, head-breaking homed animals, disease, stone, 
water, brahmana, dog, nails, iron; those who die of hunger, 
poison, lire and cholerii; those who are killed by a bull, a 
thief, a candala, a woman in her menses, iunakl, sudra, 
washerman; those who commit suicide or die by fall from a tree, 
hill, wall or precipice; those who die in water, on cot, in 
firmament, in bondage; those who are killed by Crdhyocchis^a, 
Ardhocchistha or Ubhayocchis^a; those who die of wounds by 
weapon on horseback. 

110-112. All these deaths are known as bad deaths where 
no rite of Aurdhvadehika or pinda-dana is performed. If the 
same is done by mistake it is all destroyed in the air. 

113. But desiring welfare of the deceased and out of 
fear of the peoplereproach his sons or grandsons or sapi^d^s 
should perform Xdrdya^ Bali, O bird. 

114. By that the relatives of the deceased are purified. 
This is stated by Yama. There are no other means. When 
Nkriya^a Bali is performed they become fit for aurdhvadehika. 

115-116. Except Nar^yana Bali, there is no rite for 
their purification. The Narayaijia Bali should be performed in 
some holy place, through the Brahmanas, preferably in the 
temple of lord Kr^pa for the sake of purification. At first. 



11.4.129 


74S 


wacer-ofTering should be made by the Brahmanas well versed 
in the Veda and the Purina. 

117. This should be done for lord Visiiu with herbs and 
aksatas mingled with water by reciting the Purusa-sQkta or the 
mantras of Visnu, facing south and lemembering Vis^u as well 
as the deceased. 

118. Vi$nu should be thought of as beginningless, 
bearing conch> discus and mace, who is immortal, who has eyes 
as lovely as a lotus and who renders nioksa to the preta. 

119. At the end of water^oATering he should remain calm, 
desireless and free from envy. 

120. Having controlled his seiue*organs and mind and 
being full of devotion he should devoutly perform the eleven 
iraddhas. 

121. Performing all rites with concentrated mind he 
should give water, rice, barley, wheat and long pepper» 

122. He should give ablation, coins, umbrella, turban^ 
milk with honey. 

123. Eight types of pada should also be given along 
with clothes and shoes. These should be given essentially for 
all sins without break. 

124. The pindas should be placed on the earth together 
with incense, flowers aud ak^ta and be gifted to Brahmanas 
as prescribed for the ritual. 

125. Water-offering should be made by conch, sword, 
or copper, by each separately. 

126. He should meditate while kneeling on the earth 
on Brahma, Vis^u, Rudra, Yama and the deceased who is the 
fifth. 

127. Then in separate pitchers he should keep five jewels, 
cloth, sacred thread ^ndMudga, 

126. Five jraddhas should be done for deities as pres¬ 
cribed in the ritual. Then on each pinda, separately, water 
should be poured. 

129.' In conch or in a vessel of copper and if that is not 
available, in an earthen pitcher he should keep water full of 
gingelly seeds^ and containing specified herbs. 

1. Water with sesamum seed offered to the dead ai'libation. 



746 


Garuia Pufda^a 


130-132. The copper^vesse! with gold and dak^it^d should 
be given to a learned brahman. For Yama iron with gingclly 
aeeds should be given together with daksina. 

Thus by giving Vi$nu«bali according to the procedure 
and his means he can secure the release of the deceased very 
quickly. Tliere is no doubt in this. If a person dies of snake¬ 
bite, theie is a specific rite to be performed for him. 

133. A serpent made of gold and a milch cow 
should be given to a brahmana in the prescribed way. Thereby 
he becomes free from the debt which he owes to the manes. 

134« By giving snake-ablation thus, he becomes free from 
Sarpadofa. 

133. Then he should make an efBgy of the deceased out 
ofOfadhis^ and the stalks ofpalaia. O bird, I shall now tell you 
about the details: Black-deer-skin should be spread and the 
effigy should be made of grass. 

136. Three hundred and sutty stalks should be spread 
over his limbs separately* 

137. Forty represent the bones on the head, ten on neck, 
twenty on chest, twenty on stomach, 

136. A hundred on both the hands, twenty on waist, 
a hundred on both thighs, three hundred on both shanks. 

139. Four on the generating organ, six on both scro- 
tums, ten on the toes. 

140. Coconut on the head, tumba for palate, five jewels 
for mouth and plantain for tongue. 

141. Nalika for intestine, valuka for nose, earth for 
marrow, so for all haritala and manjiila. 

142. Mercury for semen, brass for the waist, Manai^Ua 
for all limbs, tilapakva for the joints. 

143. Yava-pi^fd for meat, honey for blood, jafa-jusa for 
hair and deer-skin for skin. 

144-146. Talapatra for cars, guAjas for breasts, iatapatra 
for nose, locus for navel, Brfijala for scrotums, grfijana 
for penis, clarified butter for the nave) and trapu for kaupina, 

1. Herbs or plsnti in general. 



IM.161 


747 


pearls (mauktika) for the breasts^ saffroa, camphor, aguru, 
incense for the forehead and scented garlands for the neck. 

147-148. Thus the garment and the silk-thread on the 
chest, rddhi-vrddhi for the arms, Kapardikas for eyes, 
seeds of pomegranate for teeth, campaka for fingers, sindhura 
for eye-corners and t&mbula for the gift. 

149. Thus the efHgy of the deceased should be made of 
O^adhU. Worship should be performed as prescribed, before 
the sacrificial fire with the sacrificial vessels if the deceased 
person kept fire in the house. 

150» Reciting the mantra punantu me Sirah or imam 
mi Varuna^ he should sprinkle water made pure by contact with 
the ^lagrama rili. He should gift a gentle milch cow to a 

Brihmana for the propitiation of god Visnu. 

151-252. Gingeily seeds, iron, gold, cotton, salt, seven 
grains, earth,—all these are called purificatory. Then a vessel 
full of gingeily seeds should be given as also the gift of pad a. 

153. A Vais^ava jrSddba should be performed for the 
release of the deceased from pretahood* Thus thinking about 
Vist^uin the heart one can get the deceased released immediately 
from Pretahood. 

154. Having made the effigy of the deceased in this way, 
he should burn the same in the prescribed way. As for the 
purification of the deceased he should obseive atonement* 

155. Three kreebras should be performed, or six, or 
twelve, or fifteen, for the sake of atonement as prescribed for 
a Br&hmana. 

156. If one cannot do so, one should donate a milch cow 
or gold. If he cannot do that, he should perform a sort of 
purification. 

157. That which is performed without purification, 
does not stay. It is all destroyed in the air. 

158-161. After purification the rite of aurdhvadehika 
should be performed for the deceased. 

If a person performs obsequies without doing atonement 
consciously or unconsciously in favour of the deceased, he incurs 


1. ftV: 1.25.19. 



748 


Gatuia Purina 


sin. I shall now tell you hcjw he can eliminate the sins of 
omission and commission. If one has set hrc to the corpse or 
taken bath in watcr» touched or carried the corpse, cut the 
ropes binding the corpse, or shed tears after cremation or 
delivered funeral ovation, he is purified by taptakrcchra. Anyone 
of those who carry the corpse or cremate the dead may 
do katodaka-kriyi^ and perform krcchra santapana. A little 
should be done if the cause be small and much should be done 
if the cause be big. 

Garuia said \ 

162. O lord observing good vows, please explain to me 
the details of krcchra, Tapta^krcchra and Santaplna. 

Lori said : 

163-164. O bird, hear. If he eats for three days in the 
morning and for three days in the evening and observes fast 
for three days, the Vrata is called Krcchra. If he drinks hot 
milk, clarified butter and once water in a day and observes 
fast for one night, the Vrata is called Taptakrechra. 

165. For one day, each one should take cow^s urine, 
cow-dung, milk, curd, clarified butter and water purified by 
the holy grass and observe fast the next day, the Vrata is 
called* Krcchra santapana. 

166. O bird, thus I have told you the rites to be 
performed for durmrta^. He b known mrta if they perform for 
him the rite of dlpa-nirvana. 

167. Then they should perform cremation and observe 
impurity for three days. Then for ten days the rite of garta- 
pin^a should be performed for the deceased. 

168. All these rites should be performed for the person 
who died abroad. However, if the person concerned returns 
home, after hb effigy has been burnt thinking him to be 
dead. 

1. Offehag water for a funeral libation. 

2. One dyina an unnatural death. 



II.4J82 


749 


169. Then the person thought to be dead should take 
bath in the ghrtakunda and go through all the rites from 
Jitakaman onward. 

170*71. He should marry his wife again» O bird. If one 
remains out of station for fifteen or twelve years and his where* 
abouts remain unknown^ his effigy should be burnt. Now hear 
specially about the death of rajasvala' and sutiki.* 

172. When a ^utika is dead, the performers of obsequy 
do thus: Water Is taken in the pitcher. So also paftcagavya*. 

173. Then water is purified by reciting pufffdha mantras. 
Then the bathing is done by the water cooled by hundred 
winnowing fans. 

174* When the bathing is done they should start the 
rite of cremation, O lord of birds. The deceased rajosvaUi is 
bathed by paficagavya. 

175. Her worn clothes are changed for the fresh ones 
and the cremation is done as prescribed. Now hear, I shall tell 
you about the rites to be performed for those who die during 
the paficaka. 

176-177. The five constellations from Dhanistha to 
Revati are always inauspicious. Cremation should not be done 
on these days. It is tortuous to all creatures. Water-offering 
should also be avoided, for it is inauspicious on these days. 

178« All rites should be performed after the Paficaka is 
ovei. If done otherwise, sons or close relatives are affected 
thereby. 

179. If one dies during these constellations and his 
cremation is performed during this period his family suflers 
tremendously. 

180. Cremation is harmless during the period if the 
following injunctions are observed strictly. Brahma^as should 
perform sacrifice along with ahuti mantras. 

18I-182« Close to the place of corpse, four effigies made of 
grass should be raised and then thrown into the pyre while the 
Brahma^as recite the mantras of constellations. Then after 

1. A woman during moues. 

2. A woman recenuy delivered, a lying-in woman. 

3. Xhe five products of cow taken together—milk, curd, ikl, urine 
and cowdung. 



750 Garu^ Purdi/a 

completing the days ef impurity» the rite Jdntih^auffika should 
be performed by the sons of the deceased* 

183. For the deceased to obtain heaven^ cow, gold^ 
butter and gingelly seeds should be gifted. 

184. To the Brahmatias should be given gifts to quell 
all obstacles. Food^ shoes, umbrella, gold'^in and clothes 
should be given as gifts to get release from sin. 

185. Thus I have told you all about the riles for the 
deceased, how the dead goes to Yama’s abode and what are 
the post-death rites over a year for him. 


CaiAPTER FIVE 

The Annual Rite 


The lord said : 

1. Thus having burnt the corpse, having taken bath and 
offered sesame-water, they should return home, with woman- 
folk proceeding ahead. 

2. In the way, they should consume leaves of margosa 
tree and rinse their mouths while sitting on stone. 

3. Then having entered the house, the sons and relatives 
of the deceased should observe ASauca for ten nights. 

4*5. Having brought food from the market, they should 
take meals. During the days of impurity, they should not take 
saline and pungent food. They should take bath thrice a day 
and abstain from taking meat. 7*be couples should observe 
celibacy and sleep on the ground separately without touching 
each other. They should abstain from study as well charity. 

6-7. They should wear dirty clothes, move with downward 
faces and avoid all pleasures. They should leave shampooing of 
body, hair, etc. They should eat in earthen pots or in those 
made of dry leaves. They should observe £ut on the cremation 
day or for more number of days during impurity. 



II.5J9 


751 


Garuia nnd\ 

8. Sir, you hai^e just stated that they should observe 
ai&uca. Now please tell us what is this aiauca ? What is its 
period ? 

LofdKrp^a jai^: 

9-10. The ten-day-period of isauca is prescribed for 
the relatives of the deceased on the father’s side. This 
commences from the hour of birth, also with a view to obtain 
purity. 

11. Since the time of birch, purity can be had after 
three nights. After death, purity is attained after three days. 

12. After teething immediately, after caula overnight, 
after Vratadc^a for three nights, and for ten nights in other 
cases. 

13. Thus I have told you about Now I shall tell 

you in brief how purity is achievable. Water in the open and 
milk in an earthen pot should be kept for three days* 

14. *Bathe here, drink here’, this mantra should be 
recited, O K&jyapa. The sticks bound with a string should be 
placed on the crossroads in the night in order to propitiate the 
dead person. 

15. Bones should be gathered on the hrst, third, seventh 
or the ninth day by the relatives. 

16. The relatives* should touch the body of one another 
as prescribed, perform actions as far as they can and share in 
the common water-offerings. 

17. Preta-pinda (an offering to the mane) should be 
given outside, leaving aside grass. Guru* should be given in 
the north-eastern direction, after bath and with calm mind. 

18. For the non-purified on the ground, for die purified 
on the kuia grass, he should offer nine pi^as in nine days i.e. 
one pinda on each day. 

19. After giving the tenth pirida, one becomes pure after 

1. Impurity. 

2. Kirumen of the same family, connected by funeral oblaiions of 
food and water. 

3. An oblation of rice, barley and pulse boiled fot presentation to 
the deities and manes. 



752 Garu^a Purina 

the night expires. One may be asagotra (indirect relation), 
sagotra (direct relation], man or woman. 

20. That which is given on the hist day should be 
continued for ten days. It may be rice, saktu^ or saka^. 

21. So far as there is dlau/:a, a gift of one aftjali should 
be made, i.c. so much of gift as joined hands can contain. 

22. Or else, the number should be equal to the number 
of days on which the gift is given, O bird, and the number on 
the last day should be iifty^five. 

23. Or these doubled shall be hundred anjalis. When 
there is diauca for three days anjalis shall be ten. 

24. These shall be three on the first day, four on the 
second day and three on the third day. 

23. If one hundred aftjalis are given, then thirty should 
be given on the first day, forty on the second day and thirty 
on the third day. 

26. O bird, tlms the water-offering is divided. For 
performing the rites of the manes, the son is the proper person. 

27. Pift^a-prastka shall be done in silence and with 
flowers, incense, etc. On the tenth day, bath should be taken 
outside the village. 

28-29. Then they should leave their old clothes, hair, 
beard and nails. Brahmana is purified by touching water, 
K^triya by touching Vehicle, VaiSya by touching a goad (or a 
whip) or reins, and Sudra by touching stick after performing 
the rites. The relatives, younger in age, should undcigo shave. 

30. §odaii should be performed b> offering sixteen 

31. O bird, the pindas given for ten days—one pi^d^ 
on each day regularly, by sons, etc. arc divided, each one into 
four. 

32. Two parts for the body, the third one for Yama’s 
servants and by the fourth he lives. 

33. During nine days and nights, the body is formed. 
By offering the first pinda, the head of the Preu is formed. 

1. The flour of barley flm fried and then ground. 

2. Any edible leaf, fruit or root used ua vegeuUe. 



II.5.48 


753 


34. By the second, ears, eyes and nose. By the third, 
neck, shoulder, arms and chest. 

35. By the fourth piod^, navel and private parts. By 
the Afth thighs, calves. 

36. By the sixth ail vital organs, by the seventh nerves, 
by the eighth teeth and hair, by the ninth semen. 

37. By the tenth fulness is achieved, hunger is satisAed. 
Now, I shall tell you, O Garuda, about Madhya*sodaiI. 

38. The eleven beginning with Vi9t;iu and ending with 
Vi^nu. Then Ave iraddhas for the deities. This is called 
madhya^sodasl, O bird. 

39. If Narayai^a^bali is to be performed for the atone* 
ment of bad death, it should be done on the eleventh day. 
Vrsotsarga^ rite is also prescribed for such a deceased. 

40. If the bull is not released on the eleventh day in 
favour of the deceased he remains ghost eternally, even if 
hundred iraddhas are performed ibr hb sake. 

41. If the rite of is done without Vr^otsarga 

then all rites will go in vain. 

42. No rite is superior to Vf^otsarga. It b prescribed 
for the deceased and performed by his Son, wife, grandson, 
father or daughter. 

43. Vrsotsarga is performed only after death. If the 
bull is released along with four she^calves duly decorated the 
deceased does not turn into ghost. 

44. If the actual bull is not available on the eleventh 
day, a bull of darbhas and pbta should be made. 

45-46. If that too is not available, a bull made of mud 
and grass should be released. If an alive bull is desired to be 
released, it should be done on the eleventh day. 

47. They should give bed, cow, etc. to the br^hma^as 
in favour of the deceased. Brahmanas should be fed to satisfy 
the hunger of the departed soul. 

48. Now, O Vainateya, I shall tell you about the third 
Soijasi. Twelve for the twelve months and the half yearly one, 
and sapipdikarana*. These are called third fodail. 

1. Setting free a bull on (he occaiioo of a funeral rite. 

2. A rite the performance of which 4)uaU6es the deceased to share 
^fTeringt with the Pitrt. 



Gafuia Pi<r29ft 

49» Od the tweifUi day for the three fortnights^ haJf* 
yearly» monthly and yearly. 

50. lUi too is called third todail according to another 
opinion. If these sixteen prcta4riddhas are not given, 

51. Then his ghosthood becomes permanent, even if 
hundred triddhas are performed for his beneht. 

52*53. SrAddhas are performed on the eleventh or 
twelfth day, at the beginning of the month, every month, on 
the date of death, one day or three days, O son of Vinata, 
every month, every sit months, yearly, or on three fortnights. 
The rite of stpi^ida^ it performed after a year or six months. 

54. Or after three fortnights, at the rise of a planet or 
within twelve days, for, the family traditions are many and. 
human life is short. 

55. Human life is transitory. It is better therefore to 
perform the rite of sapi^dl^karaua within twelve days. O bird, 
Dow, I shall tell you about the method of spindlkarai^a. 

56. O KUyapa, it should be done by the process of 
ekodditfa. Four vessels should be made ready along with 
sesame, incense and water. 

57. Out of these one is the vessel for the preta, the other 
three arc for the manes. O bird, the performer should sprinkle 
the three pitfpatras with the water from the pretap&tra. 

58. Then four pipd^s should be offered and libations be 
made. Thereafter, the preta becomes one with the manes. 

59. Then, O bird, when the preta has become one with 
the manes, the manes should be worshipped along with him. 

60. If the woman ascends the pyre of her husband on the 
same day, then no separate s&pindyD is prescribed for her. 

61. If husband and urife are cremated together, there is 
one pdfto*, one kdUf and one k4irtr^ O bird, you need not enter¬ 
tain any doubt in this. 

62. If she ascends the pyre on a different date, she 
should be offered a separate pinda on the separate date of 
death. 

1. Ootiotc6oa by the offeriag of rice^Mlls to the manei. 

2. Goobfif. 

S. Time. 



11*5.75 755 

63. Every year^ nioc iriddhas $houId be performed 
t<^ether. 

64. If the sapii^karaQa it done before a year hat 
passed^ then a monthly offerii^ of a water-jar should be made 
for one year. 

65. Nine iriddhat, tapt^dlhara^a and sixteen ir&ddhas 
should be done by the eldest ton, even though the inheritors 
have divided property. 

66. Women’s sipindya may be done with the paternal 
grandmother, or maternal grandmother or with husband^ 
according to the tradition prevailing in different regions. 

67. Now, I shall tell you about the time of nine iraddhsts 
O K&lyapa bird. The first Sr&ddha should be performed on 
the day of death near the corpse. 

68. The second on the same date on the way to cemetery 
where the mourners take rest; the third on the day at the 
place when or where they collect the bones. 

69. The rest of the irkddhas on the fifth, seventh, eighth 
ninth, tenth and eleventh day. These are nine iraddhas, O 
bird. 

70. The third one is called ^odaii wherein the procedure 
is the same as in ekoddi^ta. 

71. The six ir^dhas are performed on the first, thirds 
fifth, seventh, ninth and eleventh day. 

72. These six are told but they may be nine by addition. 
I have stated six according to different traditions of the sages. 

73. I have preferred tradition but practice is not al* 
together ruled out. On each of the first and second days a 
sacred thread should be gifted. 

74. &o, when the br&hxnai^as are feasting, pipda should 
be offered to the preta. Then tiie host and the brahmau 
should indulge in question*answer dialogue. 

75. When the same is completed then ^*such and such 
(N. of the preta) should become perenniar’ is to be uttered. 
The tkoddiffa is perennial, please note. 



756 


Garu4a PurSi^A 


76. The sixteen Iraddhas after sapindlkarana should be 
ekoddi^fa except those performed on festival days. 

77. He who performs them annually should perform 
them in that manner. The preta eats twice in a day on the 
eleventh and the twelfth day. 

78. To each—husband and wife—a pinda should be 
offered. Once sapindya is completed, the pretahood ends. 

79. For one year, a lamp should be kept burning at 
the door of the house. Food, lamp, water, cloth, or whatever 
else is given, the same gives satisfaction to the preta. 

80. In brief, I have told you the period of sapindlkarana 
as one year. 

81*82. Now, I shall tell you how people go to Yamaha 
abode. On the thirteenth day, after iravatta*karma, he is 
captured by Yama’s attendents, just as you capture the serpents 
by neck, O Gamda. He is led in the way like the caught*up 
monkey. 

83. The body attains a form like air. Born out of pi^d^ 
it assumes a shape different from the one born from the womb 
of the mother. 

84-89. According to age, state, etc it differs. Eightysix 
thousand yojanas long is the distance between the mortal’s and 
Yama’s worlds. Two hundred and a half yojanas and forty- 
seven kroias he covers daily. So in forty^eight and thirty days 
he reaches Yama’s city, being dragged by Yama’s servants. 
Thus when the way is being covered by the sinner, what 
happens then, you hear, O Garuda. For thirteen days, he is 
tied with fierce nooses, by YamaU servants with goad in 
hand, with looks frowning and the hand engaged in striking 
with sticks. Thus, he is dragged towards the south. 

90. There, on the fierce way, full of thorny grass, thorns, 
anthills, sharp stones, which contains burning fires as well as 
hundreds of charms. 

91. Which is heated by a burning sun, is infested by 
^ogs or flies, which echoes with the howling sounds of jackals, 
he is dragged by Yama*s meisengen. 

92. The sinner perishes when his body is burnt in 
Yama^s abode. 



ILS.106 


757 


93. Thus as his body U eaten, torn asunder, pierced^ 
he sufTers immenaely. 

94. On account of his own deeds, though he is dead* 
There are sixteen cities in this way. Now hear about them. 

95. Yiniya, Sauripura, Nageiidrabhavana, Gandharva, 
Sailagama, Krauftca, Krurapura, Vicitra-bhavana, fiahvSp* 
ada, Duhkhada, Nanakrandapura, Sutaptabhavana, Raudra, 
Payovarsana, Sltadhya, and Bahubhiti — these are the sixteen 
cities not seen bv you. 

96. Then he goes to Ykmya saying, son, O son’ he 
cries painfully remembering his own misdeeds. 

97. He reaches that city on the eighteenth day, O 
Tarkhya# There is Pu^pabhadra river and a good*looktng tree. 

98. He wants to take rest there but Yama’s servants do 
not bid him do so. 

99. Here, on the earth, whatever is given by his sons 
every month, rice«ball, etc. due to affection or kindness he eats 
the same and then he goes to Sauripura. As he goes he 
cries being beaten with clubs. 

100. did not construct a tank for satiating thirsty 
people, beasts and birds. I did not make a pasture for satisfying 
cattle. Now, O body, suffer for whatever you have done”. 

101. King Jahgama rules in that city who can 
assume any shape at will. Out of fear of that king’s frowns 
he eats the rice-ball. 

102. Whatever is offered to him in the three fortnights 
together with the oblation of water, he eats and drinks. He is 
then struck with clubs* 

103. Neither daily gifts were given nor pastures made, 
nor the sacred books such as the Vedas and Dharma-^istras 
offered in charity nor Pur^as heard. Now, O body, you 
suffer for your acts of omission. 

104. Having reached Nagendra nagar and having eaten 
the riceballs offered by the relatives in the second month, he 
moves further. 

103. As he goes onward he laments being struck with the 
sword. fool that I am, I have lost everything to others. 

106. I obtained manhood by virtue of accumulated 
merit” Then he reaches Gandbainadana in the third month. 



758 


Garu4c Puriffa 


107. There he eats the rice*ball. Then he goes further 
As he goes further he laments being beaten by Yama’s 
emissary 

108. I neither gave gifts nor poured oblations into fire 
nor undertook penance in the caves of the Himalayas nor bathed 
into Gangi's water. Hence^ O body, suffer for whatever you 
have done. 

109. He reaches Sailagama in the fourth month. There 
stones rain upon him continuously, O bird. 

110. Having eaten the fourth monthly oblation he 
moves. As he moves, he is struck again with the stones by the 
messengers. 

111. followed neither Jflanam&rga^ nor Yogam&rga* 
nor Karma*marga^ nor Bhaktimarga^. Nor did I remain in the 
company of saints. O body, now suffer for whatever you have 
done**. 

112. Then in the fifth month, he goes to Krurapura, 
O Kafyapa. Having eaten the rice^ball and drunk water by liis 
relauves he goes to Krurapura. 

113. As he goes, he laments, being struck with spears. 

mother, O father, O brother, O sons, O my wives. 

114. I was not advised by you. I have reached this 
state.** As he laments thus Yama*s messengers say to him. 

115. "Where is the mother? Where the father? O fool, 
Where is the wife ? Where the sons ? Where the friends ? 
O fool. Now suffer the results of your evil activities. All sinners 
go by this ancient path**. 

116. As you know, the provisions are the only strength of 
the traveller. So none without provision can venture to travel 
over this path. For the path is such where no selling and 
purchasing system exists. 

117. Id less than six months he reaches Krauftca and 
having eaten the rice*ball and drunk water he rests there for a 
while and then leaves for Viextra nagara. 

1 • Pt<h of knowledge. 

2. Path of mediuiioo. 

S. Path of acdoo. 

4. Path of devotion. 



II.5.133 


759 


118. As he goes, he laments being struck off with spear« 
heads by Yama^s emissaries. 

119. ‘*Whcre do I go, O my life, a dead man cannot 
revive again. Thus lamenting he goes in the way, his body 
being captured by tortures’*. 

120« Vicitranagara is ruled by king Vicitra. Being 
satiated with the six monthly rice-ball he moves further. 

121. As he goes, he laments being struck with the club. 

122. '^Do my brother, son, parents or any one exist who 
may take out a sinner like me falling in the ocean of distress. 

123. As he goes, there in the way is VaitaranI* hundred 
yojanas long, full of pus and blood. 

124. There are seen boatmen, fishermen. They say, if 
he has gifted Vaitara^t cow, he can get into the boat and cross 
the river. 

125. But if he has not gifted the cow, he is brushed 
aside by the boatmen. 

126. He is bit by the birds with sharp beaks, like crows, 
cranes, ants, etc., O bird, the gift of cow at the time of death 
serves for the relief of the deceased. 

127. The gift of cow destroys all sins and affords all 
facilities. The deceased goes to Bahv&pada in the seventh 
month. 

128. After partaking the seventh^monthly offering made 
by the relatives he reaches Bahvapada, where he laments being 
struck with the iron club. 

129. Neither you offered gifts nor gave oblations nor per¬ 
formed penance nor undertook bath nor rendered a goexi act. So 
O foolish creature, now suffer for whatever act you have done. 

130. In the eighth month, after eating the rxce-ball and 
drunk water, he goes to Nanakrandapura, O Tarkhya. 

131-132. Being struck with pebbles there, he says : 
‘‘Where arc those sweet dishes offered with sweet tit-tat by my 
wife, and where this beating with the pestles.” In the ninth 
month he eats his rice-ball in Nanakrandapura. 

133. Then he latnenu in many ways. In the tenth month 
he reaches Sutaptabhavana. 


1. A fiver in th* way to Pitdoka. 



760 


Garuia Pufdna 


134*135. Thus nioving» he laments in the way being 
struck with ploughs. ^Where the massaging of my feet by my 
sons and where the dragging of my legs by the thunderlike 
hands of messengers'*. He then eats the rice-ball given in the 
tenth month together with the offerings of water-oblation. 

136. At the end of the eleventh month he goes to 
Raudra-pura. As he goes toRaudrapura he laments being struck 
in the back. 

137. ^'Where the cotton-bed I used to roll in and where 
this rigid place where I am beaten by the messengers’*. 

138. There he eats the rice-ball etc. given by his 
relatives and then he goes to the city called Payo-Var$apa. 

139. While going he laments, as he is struck at the 
head. *'Where the servants who with soft hands used to massage 
oil in my head. 

140. Where my head being struck by Yarna’s servants**. 
At the end of the year he eats the annual iraddha offered by 
his relatives. 

14L Then at the end of the year he goes to Srotriya. 
He weeps while his tongue is cut out with the knife. 

142. ''Where that sweet feeling of rasa and where this 
cutting of my tongue with the knife." 

143. Having partaken of the annual iraddha there, he 
goes to Bahubhuti. He has assumed by this time a body 
composed of the essence of his merit accruing from the gift of 
rice-balls. 

144. The sinner abuses his own self. He also abuses his 
wife and thus laments in the way. 

145. Then he reaches the city of Yama nearby. It is 
forty yojanas in measurement. 

146. There are fourteen door-keepers called ^ravat^. 
They are pleased with the Sravd^ karma performed by his rela¬ 
tives or else .they get angry. 

147-149. There very soon among Death, Time, etc he 
sees Yama with red eyes, looking fierce and dark like a heap of 
collyrium, with fierce jaws and frowning fiercely, chosen as their 
lord by many ugly, iierce-faced hundreds of diseases, posses.'dng 
an iron*rod in his hand and also a noose»The creature goes either 
to good or to bad state as directed by him* 



150. A timier goe» to bftd state, as I have told you 
before. 

151. Those who give umbrella, shoes and shelter see 
Yama as gentle*faced with ear*riDgs and a shining crest. 

152. In the Sr&ddha of the dcventh or twelfth month 
many brihma^as should be feasted because then the deceased 
is very hungry. 

153. He who does not peHbrm the needful while alive 
being instructed by sons, wife and others sufTcrs afterwards. 

154. Thus I have told you how one goes to Yama^s 
abode; what shall be done in his favour for one year by his 
relatives. Do you wish to ask anything more. 


CHAPTER SIX 

Th0 gl9ry 9 / VrfoUvgo 

Garu4a said : 

1. Even if he has the means and is fond of pilgrimage 
and offering gifts he cannot reach the splendid world if he 
does not perform a Vrfotsarga. 

2*3. Hence, Vfyotsarga shall be performed, O Kr^^a; 
this I have heard. Now tell me what type of bull shall be 
chosen. At what time shall the bull be released. What is the 
method ? Please tell me everything. 

4. O lord of birds, I rixall tell you the past history 
which was told to king Wavihana by N&radsL» the ton of 
Brahma. 

5. A king, VIravahana by name» reigned in the Virkdha 
city. He was pious, truthful, generous as well as heroic. He 
used Co satiate the brihroao^ with sumptuous meals. 

6. With a mind to satisfy his curiosity he went to 
Vasiytha's hermitage. 

7. He saw the sage surrounded by the munis, bowed to 
him putting his problems before him. 

Tha Kwg said : 

• O tfge, I have performed religious duties to the 
best of my capacity. I am terribly afraid in my heart, O ocean of 



762 


Garuja Purd^ 


mercy. Now tell me the way that I may not see Yama and his 
fierce-looking messengen. 

FdLfv/Aa said : 

10. O king» the sages who are well versed in scriptures 
have prescribed many religioua rites. But due to their subtlety 
people attached to Karma^yoga do not know them. 

11. Gifts, pilgrimage, penance, sacri6ce, saihny&sa and 
pitryajfia—all these come under religion, specially the Vffot- 
sarga. 

12. A man should desire many sons, because even if one 
of them goes to Gay&, he may perform a horse sacrifice or 
release a bull. 

13. All heinous sins like the Brahmajia slaughter, done 
knowingly, or unknowingly, are purified by releasing a bull or 
by swimming in the ocean. 

14. O king, if the bull is not released on the eleventh 
day, the ghost hood of the deceased person becomes eternal. 
Then what is the use of performing a iraddha ? 

15. Somehow or other, in the holy place or in the town^ 
a Vrya*yajfta should be done, O bird. 

16-17. A young Paftca-kalyau bull, moving among the 
cows should be wedded to the four she-calvesor two or even one, 
reciting the wedding mantras accompanied by the auspicious rites. 

18. An offering should be made to God Fire reciting the 
six fks Iha rati^ etc. It is specially recommended on the full 
moon day of Karttika, M&gha, Vaiiakha or on Sankranti days 
or on Sampata days, in the Pitf-tirtha or on Ak^ya day^ 

19*21. A bull red in colour, white in the tail, yellow in 
hoofs and horns is called Nila, that of white colour is Vipra, 
that of red colour is K^atra, that of yellow is Vaiiya, and that 
of blaudc is Sudra, just as the colours of four castes have been 
prescribed by the wise ones. 

22*26. A bull of red colour is preferred. Father, grand¬ 
father, and great-grandfather hop>e that the son will perform 
a Vtsotsarga. *^You are Dfaarma in the form of a bull, the 

1. Perhapi cbe lamc ti Akssym tftiyA, i.e., the thinl day of the brifht 
halfofVaUlkha. 



IL6.40 


763 


deUghterof the whole world. You are as^a-murti^^ hcnce» give 
me peace. Drink and eat grass in the antarvedi of Gahga and 
Yamuna. O bull, you should speak about my good deeds, 
before Dharma raja.’* Thus praising and marking him with the 
sign of Tri/fi/a in the right shoulder and with the sign of Cakra 
in the left thighs and worshipping the bull with incense, flowers, 
uncooked rice, etc., he should release the same along with 
the she^calf. 

27. Hence, O king, perform Vrsotsarga as prescribed 
in the Dharina-iastras. You possess all the virtues for under 
taking the rite. There is no other way for you. 

28-29. Long, long ago, in the Tretayuga, there lived a 
brkhmai>a Dharma-vatsa by name, in the city of Vaideha. He 
was learned, dutiful, lustrous and devoted to Vi^QU. He 
remained satisfied with whatever he could get. When the pity- 
paksa came he went to the forest for collecting the Kuia grass. 

30. When he was moving here and there, picking the 
sacred grass and leaves, four good-looking persons came all of 
a sudden. 

31-33 They caught hold of him while he was perplexed. 
They carried him forcibly into the sky. Crossing fierce 
mountains and forests, rivers and rivulets, they reached a c ity 
of huge dimension, with gopura doors, adorned with palaces, 
cross-roads, markets and shops crowded with men and women, 
resounding with the noise of trumpets, lutes and drums. 

34-36. There he saw persons—some poor, some rich, 
some hungry, some good, some bad some ill clad, some 
dressed in golden clothes like the deities. He thought within 
himself. Is this a dream or an illusion or a fancy. 

37-38. They took the surprised Br&bmana to the king. 
There he saw in a golden palace a divine throne fanned 
with Camara and Chatra and the king sitting there with a 
shining golden crest. 

39-40. The king possessed great lustre and was praised 
by the singing bards. On seeing that brihmana come, the king 


1. Tks dgbt-fgrraed otm. The ei^l forms bemgr the 6ve elements 
(earth, water, fir^ air, and ether), the sun and the moon, and the sacriftcial 
priest. 



764 


Gafu4d 


stood up with folded hands, honoured him in the tradi* 
tionally prescribed way with Madhuparka, seat, etc. Then 
with joy and delight he praised the Bribrna^a who was fuUy 
satisfied. 

41. ToKlay, my birth has been successful and my family 
purified, O lord, as I see today a religious devotee of Vi^^u. 

42. Having bowed to the Brahmat^a and praised him in 
many ways, the king said: ‘*you will be taken back to the place 
whence you have come here.” 

43-44. On hearing the king’s words the Brihmatna said : 
”What is this land ? Who are the people ? the noble, the 
middle, and the base ones ? By what good deeds have you 
obtained the lordship of this region ? What for was I brought 
here and why am I being carried away ?*’ 

45. see many things unseen before. To me every* 
thing seems to be a dream.” 

Tb king said : 

46. **As you have been always devoted to religion and 
have been a devotee ofVisnu disinterested in any other thing I 
respect you. You have always been on the pilgrimage and have 
performed V^otsarga to the deserving. 

47. As you always speak truth and give gifts, you 
are bowed to by the deities. O Parantapa, you have been 
brought for a glimpse of this land» as you are worthy of this 
honour. 

48. Be pleased with me, O Lord, and excuse my rash 
act.” Having said thus he presented his ministers by name 
by hint of brows. 

49. will tell you everything. It is not proper for 
me to speak more.” Thus he introduced S&manta who knew 
the Vedas, and understood their meaning, and asked him to 
speak. The Samanta spoke: 

50. ^’This man was a Vaiiya, Vilvambhara by name, in 
his previous birth, in the dty named Viradha, adored by 
Brihmapas and deities. 

51. He lived by the profession of his caste and maintain¬ 
ed his family. He served the cows and worshipped the 

BrihmaoM. 



11^.76 


765 

52. He offered giAs to the deserving, welcomed the guests 
and poured obtatcons into the fire. He performed the duties 
of his profession together with this truthful wife. 

53-54. By his righteous conduct be won bis people; by 
his gifts of oblationa he won the deities. Once, when after 
completing his pilgrimage togetba* with his relatives, be was 
returning home, he saw Sage Lomaia in the way. He bowed 
to him immediately,, fell prostrate and then stood up with 
joined hands. 

55*57. The pious sage who was the ocean of pity said 
to him : 

Tkt jaid: 

fSentleman, from where do you come together with your 
reladves and Brihmaoas. On seeing you, a religioxu penon 
that you are, my heart has mehed. 

VUvambhara said : 

After seeing the decaying body and the death standing 
before, I went to pilgrimage together with my wife. 

58*76. I am returning home when 1 happen to see you 
Just now. 

Lomaia said : 

There are many holy places in this sacred region. Tell me 
those which you have visited now. 

Vai^ said : 

I have visited Gaftgi, the daughter of the suo^, holy 
SaraivaU where Brahmi performed ten horse-sacrifices; KU, 
the best of holy places where the kind Mahadeva recites Tdraka 
in the ears of dead creatures; the holy hermitage ofPulaha; 
Fhalgudrtha; Ga^dnkP; Cakratlitha; Naimisa; Sivadrtha; 
Goprathraka; Ndgeia; Ayodhyh where the lotus-eyed Rhma 
liv^ to confer mttkii (salvation); Madhuri where Hari always 
stayed; Pufkara; Satyadrtha; Jvili-ilrtha; Dineivara; Indra- 


1. The Vamuii^ 

2. Oaed^ ia Uttaia Ptateh- 



766 


Garuia Pur^ 


drtha; Kuruk^etra where flows the ancient Sarasvati; TapP; 
Payo^Qp; Nirvindhya; Malaya; Veliki*; Godavari; 

Da^aka; Tamracuda; Sadodaka; Dyivabhumflvara; SrUaila^» 
the best of mountains where many Lihgadrthas exist; 
Venkafa, a mountam where god Hari SriraAga, lives, and 
also the goddess Venka|i» the slayer of Mahifa lives, 
Candra ti rtha, Bhadrava(a> Kiverf; Kulilacala; Avatoda; 
T&mraparpi, Trikuta; Kollaka mount; Vasiffha Brahmatlrtha 
and Jfl&natirtha ocean;* Hfrikeia; Viraja; the huge Nila 
mountain; Bhima Kufa; Sveta^giri; Rudra*drtha; Um&vana 
where Goddess Girija obtained SaAkara by performing penance; 
VAru^a; Surya^tlrtha; Hamsa tirtha; Mahodaya* where ravens 
become royal geese after having a dip and where the demons be* 
came deities after bathing; ViivapQpa; Bandl-tirtha; Ratneia; 
Kuhakicala where one is released from crores of sins after 
seeing Nara*N&riyana; Sarasvatl; Dr^advad; Narmada that 
grants happiness to kings; Nilakaotha; Mahakila;^ holy 
Amaraka^taka; CandrabhagA; VetravatP; Virabhadra; 
Ga^eivara; Gokarna, Vilvatlrtha; SatAraka*; Karmakupd^ 
where one is immedialely released from the bondage of 
Karinas by taking a dip; and so many other holy places I 
have visited by your grace. 

77. Whenever the saints take piiy there dawn upon the 
visitor so many good thoughts. Hence, all sacred places are on 
the one side and the compassionate saints on the other. 

78. These men of character are moved to pity all 
creatures. By knowledge and by age you are the instructor of 
all Vart^s. 

79. Hence, I shall ask you the secret about the spiritual 
eternal. Wl^at shall 1 do and whom shall I i^proach ? Tell me 
O sage, my mind is wavering. 

1. Modero TipU. 

2. Modern PQr^ in Central India. 

3. The riven Krto* and Veopi. 

4. A mount near Kamool in South India. 

5. The modern Tirupati in Andhra. 

6. Modem Kaonaid ia Uttara Pradesh. 

7. AtUijayinl. 

B. Betwa in Central India. 

9. Perhaps modem Satara in Maharashtra 



II.6.92 


767 


80. It has no desire for attaining Brahma. It is very 
much fond of worldly objects and it cannot stand their lepara* 
tion even for a moment, nor can it consider them to be illusory. 

81. Infatuated by various bhavas it thinks the field of 
Karmai to be the best. O Brahmatia, now tell me how it may 
obtain peace. 

82. How it may incline towards good thought and how 
it may become pure. Now enlighten me on thif point, please. 

TJu Sag4 sai<i : 

83. The mind is always very pos^rful and naturally 
inclined to error. 

84*85. As the elephant keepers can bring under control 
even an uncontrollable riephantp similarly by association with 
the saints, by constant application of proper means, by adopting 
the path of devotion and virtue, the mind can be controlled. 
I shall now tell you an old history to make you believe it. 

86«87. Now, hear what Nirada had told me about the 
history of his previous life. 

said : 

In my previous birth, 1 was the maid's ton of a Brkhma^. 
In my childhood, I was taught continuously and I remained 
in the company of pious people who stayed by good luck, in 
my house during the rainy season. Once, interested in their 
talk and wholesome precepts I was greatly delighted. I 
approached them with extreme politeneu and due reverence 
and addressed them thus: 

88. I said : O noble sages, be pleased to purify my 
thoughts so that my intellect may get pure and seek the good 
only, seeing everything full of Vi^nu. 

Thg Sagis said : 

89-'92. O child, hear. We shsdl tell you something for 
your benefit, by understanding which you will achieve happiness 
here and hereafter. Different types of creatures of the world— 
deities, animals, men are tied with the noose o( Kamos and 
experience different types of enjoyment. By satho they attain 
deityhood; by rajas they attain manhood; by tamas they attain 



GmiaPwti^ 


768 

anhnalhood* A crtature b led by dedres and is ignonut. He 
is born again nod agnio out of the womb of his mother and 
dies ^taln and in different birtfas. 

9S-84. They pam through several bhths as the result of 
dieir activities* Sometimes^ they are bom as men by virtue 
of their previous actions. It happexu that they come in contact 
wfeh the pioui people and by their good will and blesung they 
come to realise the Supreme Self and aobieve liberation. 

95-96. This vut ocean of Existence abounds in 
crocodiles, overspread with the network of illutioni. Any person 
who withes to cross tfiU ocean has no means other than the 
recitation of the name Rhma. 

97*98. As we get butter by churning the curd, fire by 
rubbing the two pieces of wood» so by constant and conccn- 
crated meditation we can realize the Self and obtain peace. The 
Self is eternal, indeclinable, truth, omnipresent, all-supporting, 
great, non*compreheasible, self-refulgent, non-appreheniible 
even to the mind. In the form of Existence, Consciousness 
and Bliss, the self is stationed in the heart of all creatures. 
While all other things are mortal, the Self alone is immortal. 
The Self is present in ail beings as the ether in fire and water. 

99. The Supreme Self, like the fire, is not attached to 
any one. It is compassionate to the devotees and for their 
protection it assumes human form but the ignorant regardit 
as man. 

100. If a person, poBeesed of differential knowledge 
meditates on him in the heart, the Unborn Self is pleased by 
his devotion and appears to him in his true form. 

101. It makes the seeker ever gratified >^eD all sons of 
detires forsake him for ever. 

102. Hence, leaving your ego and attachment for this 
mortal frame you should move all alone in this dream land 
without imbibing any sense of desire. 

103. Where is stability in dream, truth in magic, 
eternity in the autumnai cloud and reality in the body. 

104. Rnotving that the world is bom of igruxance, you 
should restrain your sensei and control your mind, thereby 
you will obtain peace. 



11^.117 


769 

105* Having laid chu» the a£Eectionace samU went 
away and 1 followed the path shown by them. 

106. Then very soon, I saw within myself a wonderful 
ever-joyful Atman pure like the autumnal moon. 

107. Sprinkling me with happiDOi asKl making me 
more inclined^ the dazzling light hid itself inside like lightning 
in the sky. 

108. Realizing the same in my mind through devotion» 

I left my mortal coil in due course and went to the eternal 
abode of Hari. 

109. Then by His desire, O Brkbma^a, I %vas born 
again through the grace of God. I had no attachment in the 
world. 

110. Playing on my lute and singing I moved firom 
place to place. Thus telling me bis experience, the self* 
willed sage went away. 

111-114. I was surprised and satisfied. Thus, indeed, in 
the company of virtuous men and by God's grace, a person 
becomes pure and calm in mind auid aitaini perfect peace. O 
Knower of Virtue, even the sin inherited from previous births 
disappears immediately in the company of go<^ men like the 
water of the autumnal clouds. 

Vaifjfa said : 

Drinking the nectar of your words, my soul has obtained 
peace. I have received the fruit of all pilgrimages at the very 
sight of yours. Having heard the words of the king the sage 
said unto him. 

115. O mighty monarch, who desire the result of 
Trivarga^, this is for your benefit. Whatever good you have 
done is, in my opinion, rendered fruitless because it is done 
without Vffotsarga. 

116. Hence, it is like a dew-drop. There is no other 
ffseans of accomplishment in this world except the performance 
ofVr^otsarga. 

117. Know that the two can easily obtain the status of 
pious perf9na—One who perfonns Vrsotsarga and the other 
who performs the horse^sacrifice. 

1. The three objects of worldly enstcnce, i.e., dUrwa , erSb and hhM. 



770 


Gam^a Purina 


118. I have leen the two ttanding side by tide near 
the Great God Indra. Hence, go to Puskara and perform a 
Vrv>tsarga* 

119. Then go home, O gentleman, and do the needful. 
For what it to be done should be done immediately. 

Vipaicit said: 

120. Then in the month of Karttika come to the Puskara 
lake where god in the form of boar himself performs a 
lacrifice. Thus told he performed Vfiotsarga as prescribed by 
the best of the sages. 

121*122. He visited holy places in the company ofLomaia 
and his merit was increased by performing Vr^otsarga. After 
death he went to heaven, enjoyed heavenly pleasures, travelling 
in magnificent can (and after the exhaustion of merit) was 
bom in the royal family of VIrasena. 

123*130. He was known as VirapaSeknana. When he 
performed Vryotsarga that obtains for the performer the fruits 
of Trivarga he was assisted by a number of attendants. These 
were sprinkled over by the drops of water from the bulTs tail 
and as a result got divine forms. These were the persons who 
looked strong, stout and beautiful. Then there were the persons 
who out of jealousy did not cherish the performance ofVf^ot- 
sarga. They were born lean, remained naked and dirty. This, 
in brief, is the record of the past life of the king. This strange 
story I have heard from ParUara. Having heard this story 
you may go home immediately. 

On hearing the words of Vipaicit the Brahmana was 
very much sur|vised. He went home escorted by the King*s 
servants. 

VasUt/^ said: 

Therefore, O Ung, perform Vfsotsarga, the best of all 
pious acts, if you are afraid of Yazna. 

There is no other means better thsuQ VfSotsarga, O Kii^, 

I have told you the secret ofDbanna to-day. 

131-132. If a woman whose husband and son are alive 
dies in the presence of her husband, Vffotsarga should not be 
performed and as an alternative a milch cow should be given 
to a Brihroapa 



11.6.144 


771 


Th$ lord said : 

133. On hearing the words of Vasit^ha, the king went 
to Madhupuri and performed Vrfotsarga and was gratified at 
heart. When in due course of time he passed away he was 
carried by Yama*s messengers. 

134-135. He passed by the city of Yama in the way. He 
asked the escorting messengers about the city of Sr add hade va 
where the sinnen were let down by Yama*i servants for the 
purgation of their soul* and where the lord who knows dharma 
and adharma resides. 

136. Thereupon the messengers told him that they had 
passed by the city of Sinners which was not to be seen by 
persons like him. They then escorted him to the city of 
Dharmaraja and standing before Dharma^raja informed Him 
about the history of the monarch. 

137-140. The lord who stood along with the deities and 
gandharvas showed His divine form. The king bowed prostrate 
and then stood with hands joined in reverence. Delighted in 
mind, he praised the lord in many ways. Then Dharmarija 
praised ihe king and asked the messengers to take him to 
Devaloka where many delights exist. 

VIravahana was surprised. He asked Dharmaraja to tell 
him what merit he had performed in life that he was brought 
to heaven by the messengers. 

Dkarmardja said : 

141. You have done several pious deeds, given gifts and 
performed sacrifices and accomplished Vnotsarga in Mathura 
at the instance of Vasiftha. 

142. O King, even a little dharma if done properly 
multiplies, due to the favotir of br&hma^as and deities. 

143. Having said thus, Yama disappeared at once. 
Virabkhu went to heaven and enjoyed there in the company of 
deities. 

Ths hrd said : 

144. Obird, I have told you in detail all about Vf^ot- 
sarga.*^Q hearing this, the people get released from sins which 
they incur as the resuU of their bad activities. 



772 


G(tru4^ 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

Th$ SlOQ 9f fio$ ghcsU 


Gmt4^said : 

1. 1 have liftard Ait fttory relatii^g co die rite of 
Vnociargm. I wish to be eolighteDed &rther upon this topk:* 
for your knowledge ■ very grsat 

Tin lord said : 

2. Now I shall tell you a wonderful dialogue between 
Santapana and the ghosts on this very point. 

3. There was a brihmapaAantapana by name whose sins 
had been destroyed by penance. Knowing the fiuUity of the 
world he left home and %vem to the forest. 

4. Whenever Vatkhinasas« sages and Vr&tas saw him 
they bowed to him with respect. Once be went on a pilgrimage. 

5. Though he controlled the outer senses and acted in 
the prescribed way, he was still dragged by the organs and he 
slipped in his path. 

6-7. Once in the mom while he was taking bath, he 
opened his eyes and looked around. He saw a forest lull of 
shrubs, creepers, trees, barks, branches, etc. 

8-9. He saw tilas^, tamilas*, p^^yklas^ panasas^, 
iupar^^, sklas^, iakho(as’, syandanas*, tindukas*, saijas^^, 

1. Bonunis FlabeillAr. 

2. CinnimeBiuin 

S. IsBan. 

4. Artoevpus heter^bsilui. 

5. Gmelins srboro. 

6. Shores robuscs. 

7. Strebhu s^mt. 

9. Dioipyrcs comeoicse. 


10. Vatcfls iodica. 



117.21 


77S 


picuimrdas*» 

OificiinaAl Karkandhus* and Raiadakaraa^. 

10. All these and other trees were there amon^ whidi 
the way could not be seen even by the birds, not to say of men. 

11-12. There in that fierce forest, full of lions, tigers, 
hyenas, wild oxen, bears, buffaloes, elephants, deer, cobras, 
monkeys and other animals and also demons and goblins, 

13. Santapana was teni fi ed in his heart and could not 
decide where to go. Then thinking *Come what may*, be went 
further. 

14. Hearing the singing of crickets and the booting of 
owls, he moved forward about five steps. 

15. There be saw a corpee tied to a banyan tree and 
five fierce ghosts eating the same. 

16-17. They were rgoicing over their feast by relishing 
the head-bones, stomach attached to the back, fallen bones of 
the body, marrow, brain, etc. 

18. Seeing the ghosts who were loudly cracking the 
bones with their fierce jaws, he was awe-struck in his heart 
and stopped at once. 

19. When they saw that brfihma^a in that lonely forest, 
they ran towards him saying *I first, I first’. 

20. Two of them caught hold of his two arms, two 
caught hold of his legs and the fifth one caught hold of 
his head. 

21. Speaking loudly in their own language, shall eat 
first, I shall eat first’, they got busy in dragging him. 

1. Tenninsiia 

2. jmWra. 

3. Cordis oiixs. 

4. Termmalia bdcrics. 

5. Assdirasbta indiea. 

6. ZlsypUunaBimilaM. 

7. Cmsis fistula. 


aijusas^, amrasf, ilcfcnktakai^, bibhltakas^. 



774 


Gatnia 


22. Then, all of a sudden, they went up in the sky. 
From there they looked down how much flesh was left in the 
corpse. 

23. They saw the corpse bitten by their jaws. Then 
they got down and caught hold of the corpse by legs. 

24*2€. Thus taking hold of the body cut by themselves, 
they went up again in the sky. Then seeing himself being 
borne in the heaven, the brahmapa praised the lord in his mind. 

bow to lord Vispu, the holder of discus who is supreme 
consciousness, who kept away the crocodile by throwing his 
discus and released the elephant from the noose of crocodile. 
May he release me from the noose of my actions. 

27. When the kings were captured by Migadha Bhima, 
the lord got them released so that they might visit Bharga’s 
sacriflee. May he release me from the noose of my activities.*' 

28. He praised me in hit mind and being praised I got 
up all of a sudden and I went to the place where he was being 
carried by the ghosts. 

29. Seeing him thus carried away by the ghosts I was 
surprised and without speaking anything I followed them 
a while. 

30. Simply by the dint of my presence, O bird, that 
Briihmana felt the pleasure of riding a palanquin. 

3L Then in the way, I saw Mapibhadra going to Meru 
and winking at him I took the king of Yaksas by my side. 

32. I said to the lord of Yaksas to be active and destroy 
the ghosts and take away the corpse. 

33. Being instructed thus he took the form of a ghost 
terrific even to those ghosts. 

34. He stretched his arms besmeared with blood and 
appeared before the ghosts challenging them. 

35. He struck two with arms, two with legs and one 
with head and beat the ghosts with severe blows. 

36. They held that corpse bound by hands and legs and 
began to fight. 

37. They attacked the Yak$a lord with naib, feet and 

jaws. 

38. But avoiding their attacks, the Yakya^Iord snatched 
the corpse, as death takes away the breath. 



n.7.52 


775 


39. When (he corpse wm snatched by YakM they ran 
towards him. 

40. As soon as they reached the Yak^a moving in air, 
the Yak^a vanished immediately. In utter dejection they went 
to (he Brkhmana. 

41. As they were goiny to kill that Brihmaoa on the 
mountain they remembered their previous birth. It happened 
by the glory of my position and by the nobility of the brahmaoa. 

42. Then they encircled the brkhmai>a and spoke to 
him reverentially. 

43. Please excuse us to day. They spoke like the echo of 
the mountain or the turmoil of the stormy tea. 

44. Hearing their words he saked : ‘Who are you ? 
Is it simply an illusion^ a dream, or a fancy ? 

Tht ChUJ ghost said : 

45. Hear, O brahmapa, we shall tell you what you have 
asked us, O Mahayogin. We are absolved of our sins by seeing 
you. My name is Paryufica. He b S^mukha. 

46. The third one is Sighra and the fourth one is Rodha 
and the iiflh one is Lekhaka. 

The Br^ihmnna said : 

47^8. Why are these meaningless names borne out by 
you ? Can they be derived from actions performed by you ? O 
ghosts, now tell us the meanings of these names. 

The lord said : 

49. Being thus addressed by the brahmaoa, they replied 
separately. 

Pofyufita said : 

50. Once, in a month, when Sriddba is performed for 
the manes, I invited a br&hma^a to my house. He arrived 
after I had eaten the part of ibod out of hunger. 

5It 52. Then I gave sule food to thatBrihma^ when he 
came. On account of that sin, when I died I became a ghost and 
got the name Paryufita since I had given him the stale food. 



776 




SOcimukha said : 

53. Once an aged woman of the Brahma^a caste went 
to the holy place Bhadravafa. 

34^6. The old woman lived with her son aged five yean. 

I being a k9atnya pretender stopped her in wilderness^ became 
a wayside robber and I took her viaticum %vith clothes along 
with the dress of her son. I wrapped them around my head 
and wanted to leave. 

57. I saw the little boy drinking water from a jar. In 
that wilderness, only that much water was there. I frightoaed 
the boy from drinking water and being thirsty myself began 
to drink from the jar. 

58. The boy died of thirst and the mother who was 
struck with grief died too, bythrowing herself into a dry well. 

59. O Brkhmatia, by that sin I became a ghost with 
mouth as small as the hole of a needle and body as huge as a 
mountain. 

60. Although 1 get food 1 cannot eat. Although I burn 
with hunger my mouth is contracted. 

61. Since in my mouth I have a hole cquai to that of a 
needle I am known as Sudmukha. 

^ighra said : 

62. Formerly I was a rich Vaiiya and went to a distant 
country for business. 

63. I was accompanied by a friend who was a partner in 
business. He was rich but greedy. Then due to bad luck we fared 
badly in business to the extent that even our capital was lost. 

64. Then we started from there, travelling in a boat. 
Just as the sun reddened, we began to cross the river. 

65. My friend was tired due to labour, slept in my lap. 
Then a cruel thought entered into my mind. 

66. I threw my friend sleeping in my lap into the river. 
Nobody in the boat knew anything about my act. 

67. I got hold of his belongings, jewels, rubies, gold, etc. 
and returned home. 

68. I kept that all in my house and told wife: ‘^My 



IL7.84 


777 


brother has been taken away by robbers in the way and 
robbed of his wealth. 

69«7I. I ran away and escaped. Do not weep She waa 
overwhelmed with grief and burnt herself into the fire. Then 
seeing my path was without obstruction I returned home 
gladly. I enjoyed my friend^s wealth to my heart’s content. 
Since throwing my friend into the river I returned home 
quickly, I am called Sighraga. 

Rodhaka said ; 

72*73. O Brihma^a, formerly I was a Sudra. By the 
king’s favour I owned a hundred villages. I had old parents 
and a young brother. 

74. Very soon my brother was estranged from me by a 
greedy person. I stopped giving hun food and clothes. He 
suffered too much at my hands. 

7S*79. My parents gave him something secretly. 
Whatever they gave him I learnt from my close confidants. 
Then I bound my parents with iron chains in a deserted 
temple. Being miserable they ended their life by drinking 
poison. The boy who was left all alone wandered here and 
there and expired ultimately. By thb sin» O Brahmana I have 
become ghost. Smee I chained my parents I was called 
Rodhaka. 

Likhoka said\ 

80. Formerly I was a brahmana in Avanti. I was 
authorised to worship the deities of Bhadra king. There were 
many images with different names. 

81. On their bodies they wore gold and jewels. While 
worshipping them an evil thought entered me 

82. Piercing their bodies with an iron-rod I took out 
jewels from their eyes. 

83. When the king saw the images in that state and 
their eyes without jewels, he became inflamed like fire. 

84. Then he vowed, O Briihmana and said : ^^Who* 
soever has stolen gold and jewels from these images, if known 
will be killed”. 



778 


Garu4<i PufSna 


85^6. Knowing all that, one night, with a sword in 
hand, I entered the king's p>alace and struck him dead. I then 
took jewels and gold and went away at midnight. 

87-88. Then in' the deep forest, a tiger put on me his 
nails. Since I had incised the images with iron-rod I was 
known as Lekhaka. 

Thi BrAhmcu^a said : 

89. You have told us (acts about your names; now let 
us know about your way of life as ghosts as well as your food. 

The Ghosts saidx 

90-91. We stay where people do not follow the Vedas, 
where there is no feeling of shame for falsehood, no faith in 
religion, no sense of discipline, no inclination for foi^iveness, no 
patience and no knowledge. 

92-95. We trouble the person who does not perform 
Sr&ddha or Tarpa^a. 

We cat his flesh and suck his blood. Now hear about 
our food which is most despicable in the world. Something of 
this you have already seen. We shall now tell you something 
unknown to you. Vomiting, waste, cough, urine, and tears— 
these we eat and drink. Do not ask us further, O Brahmana, 
we are ashamed to tell you about our food. We are ignorant, 
in dark, fools and puzzled. Suddenly have we remembered 
about our previous births. 

96. We are neither humble, nor wild and we know 
nothing. 

The lord said : 

97. When the ghosts were speaking thus and the 
Brahmapa was hearing. 

98-99. I showed my form, O Tirkhya. When that 
BrSihmaoa saw before him the Pumsa of his heart, he praised 
zne with hymns and fell prostrate before me. Those ghosts too 
trembled with eyes wide open in surprise. 

100. Their voice muttered with aflection, still they 
could not speak. ^'Bow to you who release the cruel from rajas 
and the stupid from tasnas.** This being uttered by the 



n.8.7 


779 


brahmai^a that mountain was adorned with six shining aerial 
Cars moving at my will and attended by celestial beings. 

101. By that Vimaoa the Br^mana went to my abode 
along with the five ghosts. The ghosts went to heaven by 
virtue of their association with the Brahma^a. 

102* Living in heaven along with the ghosts that 
Br&lima^ Santapana became my famous gana called 
Visvaksena* Thus I have told you everything, O bird. Who* 
ever tells or hears this narrative^ O bird, does not become a 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

Person aulhorised to perform obsequies 

Garuda said : 

K O Lord, now tell me who are authorised to perform 
obsequies and what are the methods of performance prescribed 
in the Sastras. 

7he lord said : 

2. Son, grandson, great^^grand-sony his brother and 
brother’s progeny, so also sapinda-progcny—all these are 
authorized to perform the obsequies. In their absence, 
samatiodaka-progeny of all these can perform the rite. 

3-4. If both the families are maleless, the women should 
perform the obsequies. Or the king may perform all the rites— 
the preliminary, the middling and the final, O bird, the 
Ekoddi^ta jraddha should be p^formed every year* 

5-6. Now hear about the fruit accruing from the perfor¬ 
mance of this sacrifice* 

7. When Brahma, Indra, Rudra, Nasatyis, Surya,Agni, 
Vasu, MarutJ, Viivedcvas, manes, birds, men, animak, 
serpents, the Mother deities and other divine beings are given 
^raddha with faith, there is rejoicing in the whole world. 



Garu4<i Purii^ 




8. When they are satisfied they satisfy the performer with 
sons, wife and wealth. Thus t have told you, in brief, about the 
rites and the persons authorized to perform them. 

Cartt^a said : 

9. O Lord, now tell me when no authorized person is 
alive, who should conduct the obsequious rites. 

The Lard said : 

10. If no authorized person is alive to conduct the 
obsequious rites after death, one should perform the rites in his 
life time. 

11. After fasting and bathing he should along with his 
wife worship Vii^u, the lord of all, the Creator as well as the 
Enjoyer. 

12. With Svadha he should ofler Jaladhenus to the 
manes along with Daksi^a and gingelly seeds. 

13. Reciting the mantra Agnays Kavyavdhandya svadhd^ 
namafyy Somdya tvd piipnaU svadhd namah> 

14. With right hand he should donate the third one with 
daksin^ reciting Tamdyddgirase edtha svadhd namah. 

15-16. In between he should invite the brahmanas and 
feast them. The first should be stationed in north and the 
second one in the south, the third one in the middle. Befoi^ 
he invokes the other deities, he should worship the Visvedevas. 

17. He should then tell the Brahma^. Brahmana, 
I am feeding you for the propitiation of Vasus, Rudras and 
Suryas.** He should thus tell all the Brahmanas. 

18. He should then perform dr(invocation), etc, 
as it is performed in the case of manes. He should give Saumya 
cow to the Brahmana for the propitiation of Vasus. 

19. He should give Agneya cow for the propitiation of 
Rudra and Yamya cow for the propitiation of Surya. He 
should give a vessel full of gingelly see^ for the propitiation of 
VUvedevas. 

20. Then uttering svasti and giving sacred water (as 
that of the Ganges) he should dismiss the Br&hmat^s (i.e. 
ask them to go away as they liked)» while he himself should 
set his heart on the eight-syllabled Vif^u. 



II.8.33 


781 


2L Then he should think of Kama, Kuleiinl, Siva and 
Narayapa. He should go to the nearest river on Caturdail. 

22. Muttering the mantra Vastrini lohakhan^dni jihfh ti 
he should light fire facing the south. 

23. Then making a Brahmi image with fifty Kuias he 
should burn the same in fire. He should perform the sacrifice 
usually done in the crematorium and oflfer the final oblation 
(Purnahuii). 

24. Or he should not kindle fire but simply propitiate 
Earth» Yama and Rudra. He should invoke each one of them 
separately and give offering at the appropriate place. 

25. He should sacrifice caru mixed with mudga into the 
fire. He should offer sacred thread, rice and gingelly seeds to 
a Brahmana. 

26. He should say; *Otb homage to Earlh\ Orii homage 
to Yama. 

27. Om homage to Rudra, lord of cemetery. Then in 
the fire lit on the earth 

28-29. He should give handful of water to Yama, one 
to each of the seven names of Yama, viz, Yama, Dharma*rSja, 
Mrtyu, Antaka, Vaivasvata, Kala, Sarva-pranahara, muttering 
svadhay nama^ and Om seven times, i.e. with each of the seven 
names of Yama. 

30-31. O you of such and such gotra, this water with 
gingelly seeds is for you. Ten pindas (rice-balls) should be given 
along with argha, flowers, incense, lamp, bali and gandha. He 
should then say: Let everyone be prosperous. After giving the 
ten pindas he should remember the gentle face of Visnu. 

32-33. He should perform this rite spread over for a 
month. He should do supindikarana for himself or others at the 
end of aiauca within a month but not later than that knowing 
fully well the transitorinca of vitality, health, wealth and age. 
Thus I have told you all about Jivat-iraddha, O bird. 



782 


Garu4a Puf6f^o 


CHAPTER NINE 

Thi king authorized U> perform rites 

Garuda said ; 

L O sinless one, you have just said that a king may also 
perform the aforesaid rites. Did any king in the past perform 
such rites for any one? 

The Lord said : 

2. Hear, O bird, I shall tell you how a king performed 
such rites (for an issueless deceased). In the Kftayuga, there 
was a king BabhruvShana by name, in the country of Ahgas.^ 

3. O King of birds, He protected the earth on all sides. 
Following the laws of the land> he enjoyed the earth, having 
four divisions.’ 

4*6. During his reign, there was no sinner. Fear of thieves 
or evil-doers did not exist. During bis reign there was no 
fear of any epidemic : He followed the path of religion for the 
welfare of his people. In lustre he resembled the sun, the earth 
in stability and the mountain in forbearance. Once, he of long 
arms, with his ample army and armaments went to a great 
forest. 

7. He was surrounded by hundreds of hones, roars of 
warriors, sounding of conches and beating of drums. 

8. As the king proceeded on journey he was praised by 
the brihmanas and other learned people on the way. 

9. He went to the (brest with great pleasure for hunting. 
He was delighted to see the forest which resembled the Pfandand^ 
garden of Indra. 

10. It was full of BilvBf Khadira, and Kapithadhvaja. 
It was surrounded by the mountains on all sides. 

1. AOgdS^-^ country and the people inhabiting it, Identifiable with 
the region about the modem Bhagalpur in Bengal. 

2. four dinriMr—compriniig dephaacs, chariots, cavalry and infantry. 
These make a complete army capable of subjugating the entire world i 

3. /imdana^A divine park in the world ofgods. 



II.9.26 


783 


11. It was devoid of water, devoid of human beings. 
It spread over many yojansts and abounded in deer, lion, and 
other fierce wild animals. 

12. Accompanied by his attendants and surrounded by 
his army he walked into the interior of the forest, killing diffe¬ 
rent animals. 

13» Leisurely, he struck a deer in the stomach with his 
arrow. The deer ran helter-skelter with pain, followed by the 
monarch. 

14. While his army was left behind, he wandered all 
alone, hungry and thirsty and entered another forest. 

15. Then suffering from thirst and seeking for water 
here and there, he got the indication of a lake from the noise 
of geese and cranes. 

16-17. At last he found a lake where he immersed for 
bath together with his horse. Mixed with the filament of the 
lotuses, tlie water was fragrant, clear and cooh As he was tired 
of travelling a long way he rested beneath a ffg tree on the 
bank of the lake. 

16. He fastened his horse to the branches of the tree, 
spread the coverlet and used the clubs as pillows. 

19-20. He slept there for a moment being fanned by air* 
Even as he slept for a moment a certain kingly ghost came 
there along with hundreds of attendant ghosts. It was a rem¬ 
nant of bones, skin and sinews. 

21. He was moving here and there, in search of food 
and drink. He did not rest even for a while. On seeing such a 
terrible ghost, the kic^ put an arrow on his bow. 

22*24. The ghost looked at the king for a long time and 
stood before him like a branchless post. The king got curious 
at the sight of the ghost and put the question to him thus : 
Who are you ? How did you get this deformity ? The ghost 
replied : I have just left my gbosthood and attained a diff¬ 
erent form, Just at the sight of you, O long-armed one. None 
is more fortunate than myself. 

BMfu^Sikana said : 

2S-J6. In this fierce forest, shaken with wind and cyclone^ 
full of fUes and mosquitoes, trunks and bead, fish^ tortoise. 



784 Gamda Pur^a 

lizards, scorpions, bees, serpents arc seen with their mouth bent 
downwards and their feet raised upwards. 

27. Dry winds are blowing ; lightning is flashing ; grass 
is scattered here and there. 

28. I see many creatures — N.igas and Salabhas. I 
hear many sounds at some places and at some places I have no 
sounds at all. At the sight of all this deformity my heart trem* 
bles overwhelmingly. 

The ghost said : 

29-32. Those for whom the rites of cremation, funeral 
offering, such as the offering of rice-ball, giiigelly-water are not 
performed nor the rites of dasa-pii^d^s, daiaguiras nor sapi^- 
dlkarana, who daring their life were ungrateful, drunkards 
gold-itealers. who died by accident, who were envious, without 
atonement, attached to women of ill repute, take tiie form of 
gho!t and suffer for their bad actions ilirough want of food and 
water. 

33. O king, please perform their funeral rites since they 
do not have mother, father, sous and relations. 

34*35. O king, you perform this good deed for their 
welfare, so that they may be released from misery and may cross 
the ocean of distress, Of wftat avail are the brothers and sons ? 
One should not rely on women for they are expert in selfish¬ 
ness. 

36< A person reaps what he sows. All objects or belong¬ 
ings remain at home. The relatives turn back from the ceme* 
tcry. 

37. Body is consumed by fire; good and evil deeds alone 
accompany the deceased. 

38. Therefore, for your welfare, you perform immedia¬ 
tely the funeral rites of the kinless deceased, a$ you are mortal 
yourself. 

The king said : 

39. With your emaciated fotm and fierce book, you seem 
to be a ghost O king of ghosts, now tell me all about 
yourself in order to relieve my anxiety. 



II.9.53 


785 


Thus asked> the king of ghosts began to tell all about 
himself. 

The Ghost said\ 

40. O best of kings^ I shall tell you all about myself 
from the very start. After hearing the causes that obtained 
ghosthood for me, you will have sympathy for me. 

41. There is a city Vidisa* by name, full of pleasure 
and prosperity. It has many jannpadas and abounds in abun¬ 
dant treasure. 

42. It has forests of flowers where dwell the holy sages. 
I too lived there, O king, engaged in the worship of gods. 

43. I belong to the Vaisya caste, and my name is Sudeva. 
I propitiated the deities with oblations and the manes with 
iraddhas. 

44. I presented gifts to the Brahmanas and donated food. 

45. I gave money and |)recious articles to the poor and 
the needy. But by bad luck all that went in vain. 

46. I had no progeny, no friends, no kins and no 
friends who could perform my funeral rites. 

47-49. For that reason, my ghosthood became perpetual. 
Now hear, O king, there are sixteen principal Sraddhas— the 
eleventh day, monthly, half-quarterly, six-monthly, etc. The 
dead who do not receive these 8ritddhas turn into ghosts perpe¬ 
tually even though hundreds of other Sraddhas are performed for 
them. Knowing this, O king, you perform Sraddhas and release 
me from ghosthood. 

50. For, a king is the relative of all castes. Therefore, 
I request you to release me from ghosthood. I give you the best 
of Jewels in my custody. 

51. Taking pity on me, O king, you act in such a way 
that I may be released from ghosthood. 

52-53. (Moreover, I may tell you why 1 became a ghost). 

My kins being disinterested in me did not perform Vrsotsarga* 
in my favour. Hence, I was transformed into ghost. I feel con* 

1. Vidisi —the eapiial of the dill rice called Dit^rT>s ixi Milsva ; Cp. 
MeghadOts 1. 24 : 

2. leetinf free a bull oa the occsiion of a fiinersl rile or a 
religious act generally. 



766 


Garu4^ Purd^a 


staatly hungry andihirtty, for want of food and drink. Hence, 
this deformity and leanness without food. 

54. I suffer pain due to hunger and thirsty for this ghosu 
hood is malevolent. 

53. I, therefore, pray you, O king, for, you arc the ocean, 
of pity. 

Th$ king said : 

56. Tell me, O ghost, how one is released from 
ghosthood. 


Thi ghost said : 

The people can infer about the present of a ghost at 

home by signs and tormentations. 

57. I shall now tell you about tormentations given by the 

ghost to the people on earth. When the menses of the women 
go in vain and the family does not multiply. 

58-^2. When men die young it is tormentation by ghost. 
Sudden loss in profession and insult among the people, sudden 
setting of house on fire, permanent quarrelling at home, false 
praise, suffering from consumption and foul diseases are due to 
tormentation by ghost« When the money invested in the 
customary way bears no fruit but is destroyed, it is due to 
tormentation by ghost. When crops are ruined even after proper 
rains, when commerce is unsuccessful, when wife creates tension, 
it is due to tormentation by ghosts. By these tormentations, O 
king, people can know about the presence of ghost at home. 

63. IfVrsotsarga is done properly, one is released from 
ghosthood. Hence, O king, I pray you to perform Vr?otsarga 
in my favour. 

64 1 authorise you to perform this rite for me. Once, 

I killed a certain prince and as a result thereof I became ghost. 

65. O king please take this precious-gem froii me and 
with the money received through it, perform Vf^tsarga for me* 
on the fulimoon day in the month of Karttika or Aivayuj or on 
the day conjunct with Revati^ For perfoming Vr$otsarga you 
invite the learned brahmaoas and set up fire as prescribed in the 
■Astras. 


1. On« of the 27 constdlstioni which contsins 32 tun. 



II.10.1 


787 


66-67. Then perform sacrifice, reciting the prescribed 
mantras. You shall feast (he brahmanas, spending the money 
obtained by the sale of this jewel. When this is done, I shall 
be released from ghosthood, O king. 

The lord said : 

68. The king took the jewel, saying, ‘be it so’. 

69-71. He had no atternalivc but to perform the rite, for 
he had taken the gem from the ghost. When the ghost and the 
king were talking together, there was heard a resounding 
noise of bells and trumpets. At the indication that the king’s 
caturanga army was close by, the ghost disappeared. The king 
too left the forest for the capital. 

72. Then on the Karttikl Pur^ima with the money 
rcaliacd from the sale of the jewel, the king performed Vr?ot* 
sarga for the ghost. 

73. The ghost obuined a new body as splendid as gold, 
at the end of the rite. He approached the king in the new 
splendid body and eulogized him. Attributing his release from 
ghosthood to the pious deed of the king he was grateful to him 
for the obsequies he had made in hb favour. 

74. Thus, I have told you how the ghost was released. 

What else do you desire to hear ? 

CHAPTER TEN 

Tht Gratifying ffaturs of irdddha 
Garudn said : 

1. After sapmdlkarana^ has been done and the annual 
rites performed, the deceased may obuin godhood, manhood 
or birdhood as the case may be. 

1. A rite of esuWiihing kinship by offering libations of 

water, rice-ball etc. to the manes. This relationship exlcndtfrom the leventh 
or the eleventh to the thirteeoch or the fourteenth degree. Cf. M.S. 5.60. 
According to certain iinrtiUrss it is performed at the end of a year after the 
death of weUtive but now usually performed on the twelfih day ai part of 
the funeral ribscquies. 



788 


Garu^c Purdi^^a 


2. But they eat diflerent types of food. How can irdddha 
satiate them ? The irUddha food is eaten by the brahma^as 
or given as oblation into the fire. 

3. The is given by the good as well as the bad 

relative. How can the ghost discriminate ? Why should the 
iraddha be performed on a partkulai day ? 

Tht Lord said : 

4. O bird, hear,is gratifying to ghosts. There is 
no restriction on a person if he becomes a deity or a man or 
an animal according to the actions of his previous life. 

5-7. If he becomes a deity, the food turns into 

nectar ; an article of enjoyment if he becomes a gandharva; 
a grass if he becomes an animal ; an air if he becomes a naga ; 
fruit in case of a bird ; meat in case of a demon; blood in case 
of a ghost ; grain in case of a man and an article of enjoyment 
in case of a child. 

Garud^ said : 

8. How kavya* and havya* given by men reach pilj*loka 
and devaloka and who takes them there ? 

9. How can a kaddha gratify the dead ? Can oil in a 
blown-out lamp light the wick? 

10. Tell me, OLord ! How does the deceased enjoy the 
fruits of the deeds such as rites of obsequy performed by his son. 

Th$ lord said : 

11. The validity of tradition, O lord, is more powerful 
than the validity of direct perception. The Sruti declares that 
the food served to tlte brahmanas in the Sraddha turns into 
nectar, etc. for the departed souls. 

12. By their names and gotras the manes receive the 
offerings made by the relatives. The mantras carry the same 
when they are recited with devotion and faith. 

13. How the articles reach the manes should not be 
doubted, O bird. I tell you how the articles of gift can reach 
die manes. 

1. oblanoo of food to deceased ancesion. 

2. Hwyft^an offeriag to the gods or oblation in general. 



11.10.30 


789 


14-15. The A^nisvatta pitr$(the manes who are cremated 
in fire) remain in chaise of the departed. When food is offered 
to the departed souls in the appropriate manner, at the appro* 
priatc time and place, as prescribed in the Sastras, they carry 
the same to the manes in their path. 

16. Even though they assume different species and reach 
different worlds, with different names and gotras, they receive 
the offering made in their favour by their kins. 

17. The three pindas given on Darbha or spread over 
the earth, by the nearest relative of the deceased, with his 
sacred thread worne over the left shoulder, gratify the manes 
even in their ghost hood. 

18-19. Those who have been pious on the earth in all 
ways do not go to the torture^place. These as well as others 
who have assumed multifarious forms and those who are born 
in low species obtain whatever food they eat in those species. 

20. Just as when the cow is lost in the herd of cattle, 
the calf searches for her and ultimately finds her, so the sraddha 
food searches the deceased person, though he is set on journey 
(or has, assumed a different form). 

21-22. The manes consume the sraddha victuals in the 
company of Vaiivedevas, Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, ancestors, 
Sraddha devas. When gratified they gratify the deceased person. 

23. Just as a pregnant woman gratifies herself and her 
foetus by satiating her desire, so also the deities gratify them* 
selves and the manes by partaking the jraddhas. 

24. They feel elated at the approach of Sraddha time. 
Thus thinking in Aeir mind they reach the sraddha-place with 
the spread of imagination. 

25. Staying in the hortaen they eat with the brahmanas. 
In their aerial form they eat with pleasure. 

26. Whosoever be the brahmana invited for the feast, 
they enter hb body, cat and return to their abode. 

27-30. If the performer of Sriddha (such as the son of 
the decreased) has invited a single brihmana for sraddha, the 
father stays in his stomach, the grandfather on his left side, the 
greatgrandfather on the right and the consumer of 
the backr During the period of iraddha Yama releases even 
the ghosts and the manes staying in hell who being hungry run 



790 


Garu4<k Pur^ 


to the world of mortals to receive the ofTering made by their 
relatives. They repent for their misdeeds while they desire to be 
served with the milk-rice mixed with honey by their sons and 
grandsons. Therefore^ the descendent should gratify them with 
the milk-rice. 

Garu4a iaid : 

31. O Lord, now tell me, has any one seen the manes 
descending from the other world and partaking ^raddlia on 
this earth ? 

Tks lord said : 

32. Hear, O Garu^^* I shall tell you how once Sita saw 
in the body of a brahmai^a the manes, the father-in-law, 
grand-father-in-law and the great-grand-father-in-Iaw, 

33-34. At the behest of his father, Rama went to the 
forest. When he reached Pu9kara,the holy centre, together with 
his consort Sita he performed iraddha with the ripe fruits SIta 
collected from the trees. 

35-36. When the sun reached the middle of the sky 
the sages who had been invited by R&ma presented themselves. 
When Sita saw the sages she was extremely delighted. 

37. By the instructions of Rama she served them with 
food. Then, all of a sudden, she got away from among the 
brahmapas. 

38-40. Covering herself t^hind the bushes she hid herself. 
Then having le«rnt that Sita had gone all alone, Rama was 
anxious and lost in thought. He wondered why she had gone 
away so soon without feasting the brahma^as. He thought to 
himself. May be she felt shy. I shall search for her. Thinking 
this way or that he himself feasted the brahmanas. 

41. When the brahmanas went away Sta returned. Then 
R&ma spoke to her : *‘Why did you leave when the sages came 
here to the forest. Let me know the reason of your abrupt 
departure. 

42. Then addressed by the lord, Sita stood with her face 
cast dawn. With tears flowing down from her eyes site spoke 
thus to her lord. 



n.10.65 


791 


•SUd said : 

43*44. O lord, hear, I saw a wonder here. I saw your 
father in front of the brahmanas* dressed 211 royal costume. I 
saw two elderly folk doning the similar garb. 

45*46. On seeing your father I moved away from his 
presence. Attired in bark and hide, how could I serve him with 
ibod ? 

47. How could I offer him food in a vessel of grass in 
which even slaves would not eat ? 

48. How could I, full of perspiration and dirt, go before 
him knowing that he had never seen me before in that misera¬ 
ble state. I felt shy and moved away from his presence, O 
Rama. 

49. On hearing these words of his beloved, Rima was 
surprised at heart, thinking that it was a miracle never witnessed 
before. 

50*51. Thus I have cold you how Sita saw the manes. 
Now, here in short is another account of Sraddha. On the day 
of Amavasya, the airy manes stand at the threshold of their 
decendants in order to receive iiraddha. 

52*53. They remain there till Sun-set. When they do 
not receive iraddha they fall in despair and out of suffering 
heave long sighs and go back cursing the descendents. 

54-53. *rhereforc, one should carefully perform iraddha 
on the amavasya day. If sons or relatives perform iraddha 
at Gay4, they uplift their ancestors from lower regions and 
themselves enjoy brahma I oka together with the manes. They 
never suffer from thirst and hunger. 

56-38. Therefore, the wise should perform iraddha im¬ 
peratively. If no other article of food is available even vegetable 
ifoifered with devotion would suffice. If iraddha is done in time 
the lamily would never perish. Age, sons, fame, heaven, glory, 
health, strength, splendour, cattle, happiness, wealth and 
grain — all these can be procured by worshipping the manes. 
The rites performed in favour of the manes are more beneficial 
than the rites performed for the deities. 

59*65. Gratification of the manes in proportion to that 
of the deities is more beneficial. Those who worship manes, 
deities, br&hmaw and fire, in (act, worship me who am the 



792 


Garu^a Purina 


soul of all beings. By peribrming jraddha according to the 
mean^ and method, the man pleases the universe as far above 
as brahmaloka. Whatever food is spread over the earth by the 
performer, the same gratifies them, though they have become 
ghosts. Whatever water falls on the ground dripping fiom the 
bathing clothes of the performer thesame gratifies them, though 
they may have become trees. Whatever scents fall on the ground 
the same gratifies them though they may have obtained deity- 
hood. Those who arc outside the caste groups, unfit for rites or 
averse to ritest consume water scattered after washing. 

66. Whatever water is revised in the day by the brah* 
manas and others, the same gratifies those who have become 
piiaca, worms and germs. 

67. Whatever pio^as arc left on the earth the same 
gratify those who have become men. 

68-69. Thus when all this is being done by the twice- 
born, whatever water and food is left, good or bad, the same 
gratifies those who have opted for another caste, in case the 
jraddha is done properly. 

70. When men perform irWdha with ill-gotten wealth, 
the same gratifies candalas and others of low species. 

71. Thus, O bird, whatever is given to the manes, by 
their relatives while doing iraddha, they receive the same 
and remain gratified with food, water and vegetable. 

72-73. Thus, I have told you alt what you had asked me 
for. Now that you have queried me whether the soul obtains 
body immediately or after some time I shall tell you about 
the same in short. Body is obtained both immediately and late. 

74. How the soul gets a new body, hear from me. The 
soul without body is like a flame without fire. It is about a 
thumb in size*. 

75-77. After leaving the earthly body, the soul obtains 
an airy body. Like a caterpillar who lifts up the back feet only 
when the position of the front feet becomes firm, the soul leaves 
the previous body only when the airy body is available to enjoy. 

78. In that actionless body he moves in air only. What« 
ever body he has obtained, the same he himself leaves. 

Accor ding to Vtdk Tradition, (the personal loul) 
I of the tirr of thumb ; 10.S8.1. 



11.10.96 


793 


79. He leaves the body just as the child leaves the womb. 
He may come out, stay and enjoy. 

80. The fools do not see him, only those who possess 
the vision of knowledge can see him in that state. 

81. O hird, this type of body the deceased can have 
out of the pinda (rice^baU) offered to him. 

62. Whatever pi ode the sons or kins give him during the 
ten days, the same unites the Vayuja body with the pii^d^j^ body* 

83. If the pind^ja body be not there, the Vayuja body 
suffers. Just as in his body a man has childhood, youth and old 
age, so also he obtains another body*, this you already know, O 
king of birds. 

84. Just as men wear new clothes casting off old ones, so 
also the soul obtains another body leaving the old one.* 

83. Neither the weapons cut it nor the Are bums it nor 
die water wets it nor the wind dries it.* 

86. Just now, I have told you that it obtains the airy body 
immediately. Now, hear about the body it obtains belatedly. 

87. After sometime, thejiva when he reaches Yamaloka. 

obtains the body. 

88-89. As directed by Citragupla, he suffers in hell. 
Having suffered tortures there, he is bom in the low species as 
an animal, a bird, etc. There too, very full of attachment, he 
suffers from the result of good and bad actions, O king of birds. 

Garuia iaid : 

90. O Treasure of pity, please tell me how even though 
full of sins, a Jiva may obtain you, after crossing ihcoccean of 
worldly existence. 

91. Please also tell me, O lord, how a man can avoid 
suffering ? 

TAs ktd said : 

92. Man obtains success being busy in the performance 
of assigned acts. Now, hear how he can get success while he is 
engaged in doing acts. 

1. Dh.GUiU. 15. 

2 . IM., 11 . 22 . 

3. 23. 



794 


G<tru4^ Purd^a 


93-96» By taking shelter in Visudeva, possessing pure 
intellect, controliing the self with fortitude, discarding the objects 
of enjoyment and leaving attachment and envy, serving without 
expecting reward, controlling speech, body and mind, practis* 
ing meditation and Yoga, taking recourse to detachment, leaving 
pride, force, desire, anger, thus calm and serene he attains 
brahma. Afler this, he has to do nothing, O son of Kaiyapa. 


CaiAPmt ELEVEN 

Dcofi for Deporturt : 

Curu^a said : 

1. How does a person obtain Dftanhood and how does he 
attain death ? O best of deities, when be dies where does his 
body go ? 

2. Where do the organs of sense repair ? How does the 
body become untouchable ? How and where docs he suffer the 
fruits of his actions ? 

3* Be pleased, for you alone can remove my ignorance. 
O best of deities, I amGaruda, son of Kaiyapa from Vinata. 
Please tell me how do men go to Yamaloka or Visouloka. 

Ths Lord said : 

4*5. By kidnapping another man*swife and stealing the 
property of abrahmaQa, one becomes brahmar^asa in wilder¬ 
ness. The thief of jewels is born in a low caste. 

6. Whatsoever one desires one is born, having the symbol 
of the same. The weapons do not cut his soul nor fire can 
burn it. 

7-8. Nor water wets it nor wind dries it.^ Mouth, eyes, 
nose, ears, anus and penis—these are the holes in all animals 
born of egg, etc. There are eight upper holes frmn navel up to 
the head. 

9-10. If men have done good deeds, they depart from 
the upper holes, O bird. Whatever rita are prescribe for the 
deceased irom the day of his death to the end of the year 
(of his death) shall be performed even by the poor. As for the 


1. AA. GM II. 23. 



IL12.7 


795 


place of enjoyment in whatever body the jiva has entered he 
reaps the fruits of his actions therein, no matter whether the 
actions be good or bad. 

11. In this way» O king of birds, a person sufTen from 
the faults of body, mind and speech. After his death, he obtains 
happiness when he has suffered the results of his actions. He is 
released from the noose of Maya and he is not likely to be born 
again to indulge in evil acts. 

CHAPTER TWELVE 

Importance of Dhama 

The lord said : 

1. O Garu^a I have thus explained to you the various 
proclivities of life for the beneiit of men and to ward off the 
stalemate in which the dead may find themselves. 

2. There are eight million four hundred thousand spec* 
ics of creatures divided into four main classes. They are (1} ar^dyas 
(born of egg), (2) soedi^as (sweaUborn like bugs, etc. (3) 
udhhijjas (born of seeds), (4) Jartyujas (the viviparous.) 

S'4. The at^r^as are of two million one hundred thou* 
sand varieties. Similarly, the Svedajas, Udbhijjas and the 
Jarayujas in the last of which are included human beings 
are also enumerated. It is very difficult for the lower 
animals to get manhood* 

5. The receptacle of the set of five sense-organs 
can be acquired through great merits. Mankind is divided 
into four var^s—Brahmins, K^triyas, Vaiiyas, Sodras and 
also Antyajas (the lowest class). 

6. The Antyajas are divided into seven groups 
Viz, ~ Washermen, Cobblen, Actors, Varudas^ Kawartas^ Bhidas 
and Bkillas. 

7. Addir^ the Mlecchas and Dumbas there are 
thirteen groups of people. The species of lower strata of animals 
are thouAnds* 



796 


G(tru4A Purd^a 


8. Taking food, indulging in sexual intercourse* 
sleeping, fearing and becoming angry—these are found in all 
living beings. Here the distinction is impossible. 

9. Bodies are of ten varieties in view of the divisi¬ 
ons such as single-footed, etc. Where the dtcr Kfpjosdra^ is found 
in plenty that r^ion is called DharmadeSa (the land of virtue) 

10. O Bird* the deities Brahmd and others, the 
sages and the Pitrs, virtue^ truthfulness and learning are 
always present in that land of virtue. 

11. Among livir^ beings, the animals are the best; 
among the animals, the intelligent are the best; among the 
intelligent, men are the best and among men, the brahmins arc 
the best. 

12. Among the brahmins the scholara, among the 
scholars those who cultivate Vedtc studies, among them those 
who act according to the injunction and among them the 
Brahmavadins^ are the best. 

13. One is guilty of self-deception who does not 
strive to gain either heaven or salvation after being born as a 
man whereby he could gain either. 

14. A man who has hundred (silver pieces) craves 
for a thousand; a man who has a thousand, yearns for a lac; a 
person who has a lac, wishes to rule over a kingdom; a man 
who rules over a kingdom pines away to become an emperor. 

15. An emperor wishes to become a d€va (god) and on 
getting godhood he wishes to be the lord of gods. The lord of 
gods wishes to go still further and still bis thirst for power does 
not recede. 

16. A person afBicted by covetous thirst falls into hell. 
Those who are freed of undue thirst secure a residence iu 
heaven» 

17. A man depending upon his own selfissureto be 
happy. The qualities of sound, touch, colour, taste and smell 
make one dependent on the objects of sense and hence one is 
sure to be unhappy. 

18. The deer, the elephant, the moth, the honeybee and 

1. ipoued antelope. The idea it found in M.S. II. 23. 

2t Brohtnavddins —those who diicuai and deUberace on Vedic topics. 



IL12.33 


797 


the fish — these five are destroyed due to addiction to their 
five sense-organs^. 

19. In infancy one is extremely obsessed with one's 
parents > in youth, one is obsessed with one's wife ; later in life 
one becomes obsessed unth one's sons and grandsons. Never is 
one obsessed with the Atman. 

20. It is easy for one bound with iron fetters to wooden 
pegs to get oneself released. But one bound with the nooses of 
children and wives is never released. 

21. It is impossible to escape death whether one is a fool 
or a scholar^ a child or an old man, young (or old and 
infirm), extremely happy or excessively dejected. He comes and 
goes. (He dies and is bom again.) 

22. Man is born alone; man dies alone; he enjoys his 
merits by himself; he reaps the bitter fruits of his sins by himself. 

23*25. Even as every one is watching, one leaves off 
everything and dies. Casting off the dead body along with 
logs of wood or clods of earth the kinsmen turn Hway (from the 
cremation or burial ground) but the dead man's virtue or evil 
definitely follows him. His riches recede from him in the house 
itself and his kinsmen turn away at the cremation grounds 
with friends. 

26-27. The fire consumes the body but the merit and 
demerit accompany him. The body is burnt by fire but the 
actions perpetrated by him keep his company. 

28-33. Auspicious or otherwise, a man has to experience 
the fruits of his action. If before sunset wealth is not distributed 
among the suppliants, I do not know towhom it will go in the 
morning that follows. If some wealth is not handed over to 

1. The foUowiog table will elucidate ihepwnt very clearly. 

Victim Sense-Organ Object 

Deer Ear Liitem to rweet music aud gets caught 

by the hunter. 

Elephant Sense of touch It is caught through shMlephants. 

Moth Eyet It it attracted by the colour of tbe 

flame and is burnt. 

Honey bee Nose Attracted by tbe fragrance of lotus It gets 

caught %iritbs&« 

Fish Sente of taste It nibtdee at the bait and gets caught. 

Even one of the sense-organs it destructive. How is it possible that man 
who uses all the five will excape deatniction ? 



798 




brahmins and friends or spent in holy rites or pilgrimages, the 
wealth begins to cry 'who shall be my lord ?’ Whether plenti* 
ful or scanty whatever wealth one has, is due to one's previous 
merits. Realizing this, one has to spend it away in virtuous 
rites. It is by wealth that virtue is sustained if the mind is 
8ancti6ed by faith. A sacred rite devoid of faith is neither fruit* 
ful here nor there. It does not flourish. Virtue is the cause of 
wealth, love and salvation. Hence, one shall be virtuous. It 
is by faith that virtue is sustained and not by heaps of riches. 
Indigent sages endowed with faith have attained heaven. 
HomaSy gifts, penances and actions without faith are base, O 
bird, and they are not found fruitful, here or in the life after 
death. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

Obsequial RiUs 

Garuia said : 

1. O J>>rd of gods, please tell me by means of what rite 
can one prevent a stalemate after death. (What are the rites that 
men should do in the world to forestall the state of being a 
ghost for ever ? ) 

Tht lord said : 

2. Please listen, I shall explain briefly the obsequious 
rites. If one desires to attain salvation, one has to perform them 
oneself. 

3*4. Even in regard to women, and children above the 
of five, this is specially insisted on. The rices of Vffotsarga 
(gifting away a bull calf) are for forestalling the continuance 
of ghosthood. There is no other rite in the world except 
Vf^oisarga (for that purpose). While during his life or after 
death if Vjfotsvga is performed he will never continue for long 
ai a ghost. There is no necesuty for other gifts or sacrifices. 



II. 13.16 


799 

Garuia saii : 

5-6. If VrfoUarga is to the performed duriog life or after 
death, at what time has it to be performed, O foremost among 
gods, Madhusudana, please tell me. If the sixteen types of 
Srdddha are performed what are their effects on the dead man ? 

Thi lord said : 

7. KPtiftdas are offered without performing Vffotsarga 
no benefit accrues. Every thing given unto the dead is fruitless. 

8. If Vfsotsarga is not carried out on the eleventh day 
after death, the ghosthood of the dead becomes eternal 
even if hundreds oiSrdddhas are performed in his favour. 

Garuda said ; 

9«10. If a person dies of snake-bite, no funeral rite, such 
as cremation takes place. Similarly, if he dies by drowning or 
being struck by a horned animal or through weapons or an 
accident for how many days do the relatives remain impure ? 
O lord, please remove my doubts on this point. 

Thi lord said : 

11. If he is a Brahmin, impurity lasts for six months; if a 
Kfatriya, two months and a half; if a Vaifya, one month and 
a half, and if a Sudra it lasts for a month. 

12. If a person has giAed some precious articles of 
different soru to a worthy receiver and lus lived a celibate life 
when alive, he does not go to a wretched state (even if he dies 
an unnatural death). 

13* If a person has performed the rite of Vryotsarga and 
has lived a celibate life, he goes to Brahmaloka, even if he 
dies an unnatural death. 

14. If a penon has lived an unrighteous life devoid of 
good conduct, has performed Vnotsarga, he docs not go 
to the world of Yama after death. 

15. When a person dies, his son, brother, grandson, 
relative, caste*man or the successor should perform Vnotsarga. 

16. If there be no son, the wife can per fo r m Yffouarga; 
if no wife, the daughter’s son or the daughter herself can do 
the same. But, in case, he has tons, none else should perform 
Vffotsarga. 



GaTu4^ Pur4^a 


800 

Garu4c said : 

17. If one hai no kinsmen such as sons, mother^ relatives, 
wife or husband, how are the obsequial rites to be performed ? 
By what rite are men and women to attain salvation warding 
off miseries. O lord, please dispel this doubt of mine 
entirely. 

Thi lord said : 

18. There is no salvation for a man without a son. He 
can never hope to attain heaven. Hence, somehow a man must 
strive to get a ion. 

19. Whatever gifts are made by one during the life time, 
become beneficial later. 

20. DifTerent sorts of delicacies and foodstuff given by 
one*s hand stand in good stead after death. 

21. Cot^s, plots of land, gold, clothes, foodstuffs, good 
posts (positions), etci offered to the needy succour a man wher¬ 
ever he is. 

22. One dial! perform sacred rices as long as the body 
is hale and hearty. Falling sick, one may not feel enthusiastic 
to do anything even if prompted by others. 

23. Until the rites of obsequies are performed the dead 
man, ever hungry, roams about day and night in the form 
of airy matter. 

24. He is likely to be born again, a worm or an insect or 
a locust or in the womb of an evil-minded base woman. He 
may die immediately after rebirth. 

25. As long as the body is healthy, free from sickness, 
as long as old age has not set in, as long as the power of sense- 
organs is not impaired, as lox^ as there is no risk to life, an 
intelligent man should endeavour for the welfare of the soul. 
It is foolishness to begin to dig a well when the house has 
caught fire. 



CHAPTER FOURTEEN 


Mirits of gifts 

Caruia said : 

1. O lord, please teil me what is the effect if one offers 
things oneself or through others, if one offers things when one 
is hale and hearty or when one is tick ; or if things are offered 
when one is unconscious or without reference to the injunctions 
in the sacred texts ? 


Thi lord sold : 

2-3. One cow, offered when one's mind it at rest and 
peaceful, is on a par with hundred cows offered when it is not, 
or a thousand cows given at the time of his death when it is 
doubtful whether he is conscious of it at all, or a hundred 
thousand cows after his death. If it is given without reference 
to the injunctions in the sacred texts it is fruitless. Even a single 
cow offered to a deserving person at a holy centre is on a par 
with a gift of a hundred thousand cows elsewhere in yielding 
merit. 

4*5. O foremost among birds, anything given to a deserv¬ 
ing person flourishes day by day. A gift wipes off the sin of the 
giver and the acceptance of the same by a person of good wis* 
dom does not affect him. The mantra quells person and the 
fire chillness. Are they affected by the same ? 

6. Every day something must be given to deserving 
persons, particularly so on special occasions. If one wishes for 
one's own weal, one shall be sane enough not to give anything 
to the undeserving. 

7. A cow gifted to an undeserving causes the downfall 
of the giver into hcH. The receiver too falls into hell 
along with the members of his family for twenty one 
generations. If on being born again he performs some meritor¬ 
ious deeds, ihe effect there-of is also wiped off 

8< O lord of birds, I affirm that just as seeds and other 
valuable things invested or sown in the ground offer fruitful 



802 Garuia Purd^- 

results $0 also things offered by one's own hands yield fruitful 
results. 

9. Psuticularly, a man having no son shall perform the 
funeral rites in his Iiie*time and the same is true with those 
who crave for salvation and even indigent persons. 

10. Any sacred rite performed by ourselves even with 
very little wealth accords undying resulti^just like drops of 
clarified butter offered into the fire with sacred mntras. 

11. A gift of a tingle bed, a virgin, and a cow. if sold 
or shared bums the members of the family till the seventh 
generation. 

12. Therefore, life being unsteady it is incumbent on 
everyone to do every thing beforehand. With the food for the 
journey in the ibrm of gifts oflTered to the deserving, one is able 
to travel with comfort in the Great Highway in the journey 
after death. 

IS. Otherwise, the %vretcb undergoes great' hardships 
without the food to subsist on, on the way. O foremost among 
birds, after realising this, one shall perform 

14. Even a man having sons, dying without the performa¬ 
nce of these rites, does not attain salvation. A man without 
sons by doing these rites beforehand shall have a happy 
journey on the Great Highway. 

15. The goal that is reached by Vr;oisarga cannot be 
attained by the performance of sacrifices like Agnihoiraf etc« or by 
various kinds of gifts. 

16. Amwg all sacrifices the Vr^afajila is the best. Hence, 
it must be performed with redoubled efforts. 

Garu4^ said x 

17. Please tell me the details of Vrf^ajha when, on what 
7f lAi, by what rites shall it be performed ? 

18. What is the ftuic that he reaps after performing the 
same ? Now please tell me this. 

Th$ loti said x 

I9«21. When the sun is in (northern Transit 

i.e. proceeding away from the tropic of capricorn) in the months 



IM4.30 


803 

of KdfUika^ etc., on the twelfth day of either the bright or darit 
lunar fortnight, on an auspicious hour, in a clean place, he shall 
perform the rites of and Homa after inviting a pioua 

brahmin conversant with the rites. 

22. On a holy day in conjunction with an auspicious 
star he shall worship the planets and deities. He shall perform 
Homa according to his capacity with various auspicious mantras^ 

23. He shall fix the planets mystically and worship, 
O lord of birds. He shall then perform the worship of the 
Motherland KarudAdrd (offerings of gold or other coins in a 
stream) • 

24. After kindling the fire he shall perform the Wrptf 
Homa. Then he shall instal Sdlagr^a and perform Vaifi^ava 
SfUddha. 

25. The Vrfa (bull calf) must be bedecked with good 
clothes and ornaments. Four heifers must be kept in front. 

26. At the end of the Homa the householder shall 
circumambulate the bull and let it loose reciting the following 
mantra and facing the north. 

27. ‘‘O Bull, thou art Dharma (virtue) created by 
Brahmd in the form of a bull. Please raise one up from the 
ocean of worldly existence by means of the power of this setting 
free.’’ 

28. With this mantra and along with the holy water from 
Rudrahtmhha (the water pot sanctified by Rudra mantras) poured 
over its head, the Visarga^ . rite is performed. The water pot is 
then placed on Datbha grass. 

29-30. After duly pouring the water with due recital 
of mantras in accordance with the injunctions in the sacred 
texts, he recites the mantra 7#«<i Krida etc and finally 
releases the bull. He shall then perform Atmairdddha and feed 
a pious brahmin and offer water unto him. 

31. What he liked most in his Ufe«time must be made 
over as a gift in accordance %ritb one’s capacity. Then after 

death he shall be able to go along the rugged path {to the 
city of Yama) without any difficulty. 

]. The rite of setting the bull st liberty. Usually, it a called vUarjana. 



804 


G<tru4a 


32« If the SrUddha is not performed on the eleventh day, 
neither what is offered by himself here nor what is offered 
by others reaches him in the other world. 

33. He shall then make over Padaddnas thirteen, seven, 
five or three with great faith. 

34. Three, five or seven pots of gingelly seeds shall be 
gifted away and brahmins must be fed. He shall then offer a 
cow as a gift* 

35-36. If a bull calf is gifted a Cakra shall be placed on 
its left side, a trident on its right and a garland round its neck. 

37. The eleventh day rites are to be performed like the 
Ekoddifia rite and the twelfth day rites are performed with 
Svdhdkdra. 

36. Before the sixteen Srdddhas have to be 

performed. After feeding the brahmins Padaddna must be made. 

39. A cloth is spread on the ground and a copper vessel 
is kept over it. The idol of A^uta is kept in it and covered 
with a cloth. This is given along with Arghya and good fruits 
as gifts. 

40. A boat is to be made with sugar cane stems and 
covered with a cloth. Clarified butter is kept in a bell metal 
vessel. This is the symbolic offering to enable him to cross 
the Vaitarajii river. 

41. The boat is offered for crossing. Garudadhvaja^ is then 
worshipped. In accordance with one’s own wealth many such 
gifts can be given. 

42. Jandrdana is the god who saves people who are sunk 
in the ocean of worldly existence, who are dejected due to its 
waves of sorrow and distress and who arc devoid of the boat of 
Dhama (virtue). 

43. Gingelly seeds, metallic substances, gold, cloth, salt, 
seven grains, plots of land and cows—any of these can be given 
as Ddna. It is holy. 

44. Vesseb full of gingelly seeds or beds can be gitted. 
According to one’s capacity, Dakftnd can be given to poor 
people, orphans or noble and pious persons. 

!• A dug tuff, bearing ihe pcrtrail ofGanida painted on it. 



n. 14.59 


805 


45, O Tdrkfj/a he who performs thus, whether he has a 
son or no son. obtains great siddhis (achievements) like one who 
has realised Brahma, 

46. As long as one livcs> one shall perform J/Uya and 
J/aimittika rites. Whatever one does righteously shall yield him 
good results. 

47-49. In the rites concerning pilgrimages to holy 
centres, in the annual irdddha^ etc, and in those of gods, prece* 
ptors^ mother or father^ gifts made thus are holy. He who makes 
gifts in xhi$ yajna^ O bird, flourishes every day. 

50-51. It yields undying results as the rites performed 
in altars. Just Brahmaedrins arc worthy of worship those who 
give gifts ai'e also worshipped. I grant boon unto them. 
Similarly, thefourfaced god BrahmdMd ^iva too grant boons. 

52. Wherever in the tank, the offered bull drinks water 
or digs the earth with horns, there enough food and water for 
the manes exist. 

53*54. This is my affirmed truth that they go to great 
regions. On full moon days or in conjunction with Rtvati star a 
blue calf is to be set free. In setting free a blue bull calf, the 
merit accrued is the same as in performing thousands of 
Sarhkrdnti rites or hundreds of rites of solar eclipse. 

55* Heifer must be given to a brahmin. PadaSt vessels of 
gingelly seeds, etc. must be given to the brahmin devotees of 
Siva. 

56*57. After worshipping Umd and Mahsivara, Aeyuta, 
dark as the Atasi flower and robed in yellow garments, must be 
worshipped. Those who do so need not be afraid of anyone. 
Those who desire to escape ghosthood shall perform their respec* 
live rites. 

58-59. I have thus mentioned everything connected with 
the rites of obsequies. On hearing this, one freed from sins 
goes to Vi^u^s region. On hearing this glory of performing 
rites and the merits of gifts expounded by the lord, (?aru(/e was 
delighted. He bowed his head down and asked the lord again. 



606 


Garuda Purd^ 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 

Observances immediate ajUr death 

Caruda said 

1. O lord, please give me a decisive description oiTama's 
region, iu dimension, extent and greatness. 

The lard said ; 

2. O Tdrkfya^ listen. I shall describe the region of Tama. 
All the sixteen v/orlds are very extensive. 

3. The distance between the Earth and Tama's region is 
more than a million and thirtytwo thousand kilometers. 

4. O ^ird, after enjoying the fruits of his merits and 
<lemerits in the world, a man fails sick due to the effect of some 
previous action. 

5. This sickness is due to a chance cause. Death occurs 
to a man in accordance with his actions taking their own 
'deftnite course. 

6. The individual casts off his body and dies due to the 
effects of his actions. Hb dead body must be kept on the 
ground after purifying it with cowdung. 

7. Gingelly seeds and Kuia grass must be scattered. A 
piece of gold is placed in the mouth of the dead man. Tulasi 
leaves and the Salagrdma rock are placed near it. 

8. SdmasQktas are recited near him. This is conducive 
to his salvation. Rods or pieces of gold are to be placed for 
the benefit of the dead man in his vital opertures. 

9. One piece in the mouth, one in each ofthe nostrils, 
eyes and ears are to be placed in this order of enumeration. 

10. One piece in the operture of the genitals and one 
piece in the rectum. Tulasi leaves are placed in both the hands 
and the neck. 

11. The dead body u to be covered with two clothes. 
Saffron and raw rice grains are strewn. It is then decorated 
with flower garlands. The body b to be taken out through the 
back doorway. 



11.15.24 


807 


12-13. The son with his relatives and the Brahma^as of 
the town should carry the corpse on the shoulder to the cre« 
ination ground. The corpse should be placed on the pyre with 
the face of the dead to the North, while the son should sit 
on the ground with his lace turned to the east. The pyre should 
be made on the ground on which no other dead body has been 
cremated presently. 

14-15. The pyre should be made of woods of sandal, 
TulasI, and Palaja. .When (he organs lose their functioning 
power, consciousness is benumbed and the messengers of Yama 
are near at hand, the breath leaves the body. The departed 
soul attains divine vision and can see the universe at a glance. 

16-17. He observes the dreadful form crf'Yama even when 
he is on the verge of death. He sees Yama*s servants beating 
the wicked with the cane. He sees the attendants of Vi^nu 
cheering the good. 

18-19. The path of Yamaloka is hard to pass. The 
sinners traverse the path in discomfort. Yama assumes a form 
of body with four arms, holding conch, discus, bow and mace. 
He treats the pious with amity and accord and chastises the 
sinful with the rod of iron. 

20-24. He thunders like clouds^ at the time of dissolution* 
He looks as dreadful and dark as a mount of collyrium. He is 
seated on a buffalo*. He can be easily propitiated or appeased 
by the devotee. His body shines as the lustre of lightning. It is 
as long as the three Yojanas in dimension. He is terrible to look 
at, wields an iron-rod and noose in his hands. His bodily 
appearance and eyes are dreadful to the iioners. 


1. The cloud Sathvarts or Samvartaks OT the rest are extremely dark 
ai thev are thick %nch water at the dissolution of the universe. 

2. A popular mantra whereby Yama is invoked in a rite has reference 
to Mahisa (bufialo) as his vebick. 

Mahifastba Yamigaccha 
dandahaita mahibala I 
rakia tvarb dakfiaa^dviraih 
^ivasvata namostu (e // 

AfeSifo-Vshana is an oft-occurring epithet of Yama* 



808 


Garuia Pur^i^a 


The soul in human body is of the size of a thumb.^ When 
it is dragged out of the body by the messengers of Yama, it 
cries painfully looking wistfully at his erstwhile home. The 
disgustful body without life and breath becomes untouchable 
suddenly, smells foul and is disliked by all. 

The body suffers in three ways : Either it is eaten by 
worms or transformed to feces or reduced to ashes. 

25-29. O Garuda, Body is liable to destruction in an 
instant. How can a man boast of it ? 

The purpose of wealth is charity* that of speech is truth* 
that of life is fame and spirituality, that of body is benevolence. 
In this way, one can gain something substantial out of the 
things unsubstantial. 

When the departed soul is being carried away, the 
messengers chastise him in the way. They describe the dreadful 
fate that awaits him in hell. 

They tell him thus : wicked soul, walk quickly. 

You are being taken to hell. We carry you to KumbklpaJ^a^ and 
kindred hells. Make haste and do not delay.** 

Thus hearing the words of messengers and the lamenta¬ 
tions of his relatives he cries aloud and is carried by Yama's 
messengers. 

30-31. The son should perform Sraddha at the appro¬ 
priate place. He should offer six pindas, on the day of death 
in the serial order : (1) at the place where the person breathes 
his last (2) at the door-way, (3) at the courtyard, (4) at 
the resting place, (5) by the pyre and (6) at the collection 
of bones. 

O Garuda, I shall now tell you the purpose why the six 
pindas are offered to the dead. 

32-33. The pinda that is offered to the dead at the place 
of death pleases the household deities. This pinda satiates 

t. A^gufihamdtrafi This snili citation recurs} in treatises on 

philosophy and ia corroborated by the statement of the Mah^bhirata when 
Yama is said to have forcibly dragged the thucnb^ized soul out of the body 
of Satyavin. 

Ahgutthamitram puru>arti nlicakaria balSd Yamah 11 

2« Kumhhipgka^^ hell. The cruel folk who kill animals and birds for 
food are roasted in Kumbhl Ive. For details see DM BhAgevata^ SkandhQ 8 



11.15.45 


809 


both—the earth and the presiding deity. The doorway pinda 
should be given addressing the departed soul as p&ntha 
(passenger). 

34. The gift of this pi^da pleases the household deities 
that abide at the door. In the courtyard lives the Khecara. A 
pi^d^ should be given in his name. 

35. At the resting place, he should offer a pit^da to the 
Bhuta categoriaed as Deva. This pinda is, therefore, called 
bhuia. The gift of this piijda to the Bhuta makes him genial to 
the dead. 

36. Piiacas, Raksasas, Yaksas and the rest preserve the 
sanctity of the body which is sacrificed in the fire. 

37. When the Pinda is offered by the side of the pyre, 
the dead is designated as preta. But, O Garuda, instead of 
calling him preta, some call him Sidbaka. 

36. But, generally, he is called preta. Henceforth, the 
offerings are made to him in the name of preta. 

39. By gifting away the five pindas, the body achieves 
sanctity and fitness to be sacrificed in the fire. Otherwise, the 
presiding deities, as stated above, cause large-scale destruction* 

40. Three pindas are necessary : (I) one at the time 
of death, (2) another in the half-way from the place of death 
to the cremation ground and still another by the side of the 
pyre. 

41. The pind^s are associated in their serial order with 
their presiding deities, viz., Brahma, Vi^u, and the messengers 
of Yama. 

42. When the third pipd^ iS offered, the dead body is 
relieved of impurity. The son or the nearest relative should 
set fire to the pyre. 

43. He should cleanse, besmear* dig up, extract the place 
of altar and after sprinkling the same with water, he should 
arrange sticks in the prescribed way and light the fire. 

44-45. After worshipping the deity Kravy&da^ with 
^*owen and rice be should recite the following formula : 
ravy&da, the originator of beings, the source of the universe, 


fiesli. 


1 messenger of Yama, so called because be eaU raw 



810 


Caru^a Purdna 


thou art the originator, taviour and the destroyer of the people. 
Take this dead person to heaven/* Thus worshipping the deity 
Kravyicla, he should sacrifice the dead* body. 

46. When the body is half*burnt he should pour ghee 
into the pyre reciting the formula : Lomabhyah svdhd. 

47. Putting dead body on the pyre he should pour ghee 
over the pyre with the formula : Yam^a Aniakdya Svdhd. 

48. A single offering should be made to each of the 
deities—Mrtyu, Brahma, Jatavedas (fire) as well as in the 
mouth of the puta. Then he should light the fire from the 
eastern direction. 

49. He should recite the mantra (addressed to the 
dead); thou art born of this hre; (addressed to the Bre) : 
May he be bom of you again. May thou take him to 
the worid of heaven> please. 

50. Reciting this mantra he should pour ghee mixed 

with gingelly seeds. Thus, he should cremate the body as 
dictated by the funeral code peddhati). 

51. He should weep aloud at this juncture. For this 
would assuredly give pleasure to the deceased. The rite of 
cremation is followed by the rite of collecting bones. 

52. The preta^pipdd forestalls the pain due to cremation. 
The Bhutas (who share the pindawith the deceased) allow the 
preta to wait till he receives the pinda from his relatives. 

53. After the corpse is cremated, the sons or the descen* 
dents should bathe in dress. They should offer libations of 
water mixed with gingelly seeds by his penonal name or by 
the appellation of his lineage. 

54. The people of the town who have assembled for 

morning should applaud the dead by reciting the formula 
Vi^Uf They should accompany the relatives back to the 

house (as a token of sympathy for the relatives). 

55«56. At the southern part of the house he should put 
cow-dung and the white mustard. He shoxild set up an icon of 
Varuna in the house, eat the leaves of the Nimba^ and partake 
of the ghee. 

1. tree with bitter fruits. 



II.15.71 


811 


57. O lord of birds, some sprinkle milk over the pyre. 
He should not shedtean but offer libations of water to the dead. 

58. They should not weep. If they weep and spit 
phlegm the soul of the dead person is compelled to eat that. 

59. The son should perform the obsequial rites as his 
means can afford. O Garud^> he should pour milk or water by 
the ear them jar, in favour of the deceased, over the sloping 
roof or the courtyard. 

60. The soul of the deceased held fast by his previous 
actions and terribly bewildered, desires for another body. While 
he is being taken to the abode of Yama by his messengers he 
casts a mournful look at the cemetery and the courtyard of 
his house. 

61 •62. For ten days, without intermittence, the son 
should offer piQ^a an the pit and pour handful of water in 
favour of the deceased. If he has no son, his wife should per¬ 
form the obsequial rites. 

63. If he has no wife, his disciple should perform the 
same. If no disciple* his brother should do that. The libations 
of pipda and water should be given either at the cremation 
ground or at the place of pilgrimage. 

64. Whatever the descendent offers—boiled rice, barley- 
meal, vegetables, fruits, etc.—on the day of death, he should 
partake of the same on successive day^. 

65. The son or the descendent offers Pinda for ten 
days consecutively. The pinda is divided every day into four 
parts, O lord of birds. 

66. Two parts of the pi^da go to the building of new 
body. The third part goes to the messengers of Yama. The 
fourth be partakes of himself. 

67. Within three days and nights the soul assunfes a 
new body. On the tenth day the embodied soul longs for food. 

68. No procedure, no mantra and no rites are prescrib¬ 
ed. He should offer gifts to the deceased Just by his personal 
name or by the appellation of bis lineage. 

69-71. O bird, when the dead body is cremated, the 
joul that has gone out of the body takes a new body.^ With 

K A^popular idea conuined in the Bhagavad giti, II. 22 



812 


Garu^a Purdna 


the pin^a of the first day ht$ head comes into being; with the 
pinda of the second day his neck and shoulders; with that on 
the third day his heart; with that on the fourth day his back; 
with that on the fifth day his navel; with those on the sixth 
and seventh days his waist and private parts; with that on the 
eighth his thighs; with that on the ninth hb palate and feet; 
with that On the tenth a feeling of hunger comes into being. 

72. Having assumed a new body tormented by hunger 
he stands at the threshold of his house. The tenth day pind^ 
should be accompanied with the offering of fiesh* 

73. The soul of the deceased when he had assumed a 
new body feels extremely hungry. His hunger is not appeased 
if an offering without flesh is made to him. 

74-75. On the eleventh day and the twelfth, the soul of 
the dead eats to his fill. While offering gifts of lamp, food, 
water etc. to the male or the female deceased one should mutter 
the name preta. Whatever is offered to the deceased, should 
be done by the name preta, for, doing so gives delight to the 
deceased. 

76. On the thirteenth day, the soul of the dead is taken 
to the High Way. Now, he assumes a body born of the pin^a 
and feels hungry by day and night. 

77. The sinners travel by the path of extreme cold and 
heat—the path which is beset with nails, infested with demons 
and spread over with fire. Hunger and thirst await the sinner 
but the good escape torments. 

78. In the path beset with trees, with their leaves as 
sharp as swords, such tortures are usual. He suffers from hunger 
and thirst, tortured by the messengers of Yama. 

79. The departed soul traverses two hundred and forty 
seven Yojanas in twentyfour hours. 

80. He is bound by the noose of Yama. He weeps as 
he leaves the house for the city of Yama. 

81. The departed soul goes to the city of Yama which 
the pious souls find comfortable and where the sinners feel 
dbtressed. 

82-63. In hit upward journey he passes over the best of 
cides via, Yimya, Sauripura, Nagendrabhavana, Gandharva, 



II. 15.94 


813 


Sail&gama, Kraunca, Krwapura, Vichrabhavana, Bahv&pada, 
Duhkbada, Nanikrandapura» Sutaptabhavana, Raudra, 
Payovar^i^, Sltadhya and Bahubhiti. Yama’i city heads the 
list. 

84. On the thirteenth day seized by the servants of 
Yama, and all alonci the departed soul traverses the path like 
a monkey led by the juggler. 

85-86. As he goes along the path, he cries aloud repeat¬ 
ing: my son, O my son, I am undone, alas, I am undone. 

I did not act well*** He laments, crying over and over again : 
Human body is rare to get. I got it by my accumulated merit. 

87«88. I earned sufficient wealth but gave nothing to 
the poor. Alas ! that wealth has gone to others (in spite of 
hoarding it). Thus he speaks in the choked voice. He is 
severely tortured by the servants of Yama while he remembers 
his past. 

89. None gives him pleasure or pain. This is wrong to 
presume that pleasures or pains are caused by others. The 
soul suffers for all that he performs in his life. O soul, now 
suffer the consequences of your past activities. 

90. [He laments : ] I neither gave gifts to the needy 
nor poured oblations into the fire. I neither practised penance 
in the caves of the Himalayas nor bathed in the Ganges. O 
soul, now suffer the cotiscquences of your activities. 

91. I neither gave r^lar gifts nor made any pastures 
nor offered sacred books : the Vedas and the Dharmaiastras 
to the learned Brahmins in charity nor heard the Puranas. 
Now, O soul, suffer for your activities. 

92. I did not construct a tank for satiating thirsty 
people, beasts or birds. I did not make a pasture for the 
cattle to graze. Now, O soul, suffer for your activities. 

93. I neither enjoyed the pleasures of my husband’s 
company, nor did I enter the pyre of my husband. Nor did 
I ob^rve the vow of charity after his death. O soul, now 
suffer for your activities. 

04. I did not reduce my body by keeping monthly fasti 
or C^ndr&ya^a vow or observances of like nature. I derived 



814 Garu4a Purih^ 

womanhood—the cause of multiple sorrows^ from unholy 
activities of my former Itfe« 

95« O bird^ you think attentively on what I have said 
about the lamentations of men and women for their acts of 
omission and commission done in their previous life. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

lAf4 aft^r Diatk 

Thi Ufd said 

1 >2. O lord of birds, when the departed soul laments 
thus, he cries being struck by Yama*s servants who drag him 
for seventeen days in the firmament. On the eighteenth day 
he reaches the city of Yama. 

3. In that beautiful city there abides a group of depart* 
ed souls. The river Pufpabhadrd Sows there and a big fig tree 
grows up there. 

4-6. There in that city, the servants of Yama bid him 
take rest. In utter distress he remembers pleasures he enjoyed 
in the company of his wife and sons. Thirsty and distressed 
he weeps bitterly and laments over the entwhile comforts of 
his wealth, wife, house, sons, servants, friends and comforts of 
life. He is extremely distressed with hunger. As he laments 
the servants of Yama speak to him. 

The S4rv0its of Yama said : 

7. Where is your wealth ? Where are your sons 7 Where 
is your wife ? Where are you in this wretched state ? Now 
suffer for your past evil actions and go by this ancient path. 

8. O traveller in this foreign world, do you not know 
th^ power of Yama who is the lord of us all—^hts messengers. 
Assuredly, you have to travel over that path where there is no 
provision for barter in virtue or vice. 

9. Obird, hear attentively what the messengers of 
Yama speak to the departed soul. They strike him with the 
rod of iron. 



IM6.24 


815 


10. Here, on the earth, whatever U given by hb sons 
every month, rice-^ball, etc., due to aflcction or kindness, he 
eats the same and then he goes to Sauripara. 

11« King Jahgama rules in that city who can assume any 
shape at will. He b frightened by his looks. He feels the urge 
of taking rest. 

12-13. Whatever is oRered to him in the three fortnights 
together with the oblations of water he eats and drinks. He 
passes over that city and reaches the beautiful town Nagcndra 
by name. He has to travel day and night for two months for 
reaching that city. He passes over dreadful forests in the way 
and cries aloud. 

14«15. He is beaten by the cruel and merciless 
messengers of Yama and weeps over and over again. Having 
eaten the rice*ball$ and drunk the libation of water offered by 
the relatives in the second month, he moves further. He is 
tied with the noose and dragged by the messengers of Yama. 

16. He reaches Gandharva nagara (or Gandha-m&dana) 
in the third month. Here, he eats the quarterly rice-ball offered 
by the relations. Then he moves further. 

17. He reaches the city SaiUgama in the fourth month. 
The stones rain upon him continuously, O lord. 

18. There he eats the fourth monthly oblation and feels 
satisfied. 

19. In the fifth month, he goes to Krurapura. There he 
eats the rice ball offered by his relatives. In the sixth month 
he reaches the Krauftcapura. 

20. There he feeds upon the rice-ball offered by his 
relatives in the sixth month. He takes rest for a while but all 
the time he remains frightened and distressed. 

21. He passes over that town being struck and dragged 
by the messengers of Yama. He reaches Citranagara where 
rules King Vicitra. 

22-23. He b the younger brother of Yama. There he 
eats the sixth monthly rice-ball but u not satiated fully. Then 
he moves further; he suffers again and again for want of food. 

24. ^*Do my sons, brothers, parents or relatives exist 
who may take me out of the ocean of distress wherein I have 
fallen.*'- 



816 


Garuia Purd^ 


25-28. He laments in the way and is warned by the 
messengen of Yama. He chen^ reaches the V'aitarapl^ that 
flows over hundred Yojanas* It is full of pus and blood, 
abounds in fish and vultures. Here the fishermen approach 
him sayings travellefi give us liberal fee; we shall row you 
acrou the river/’ 

If he has gifted the Vsdtarai^ cow he is rowed across the 
river. The gift of a cow at the time of death is called Vaitaranx 
which gives relief to the departed soul. 

29. The gift of Vaitaraoi cow destroys his sins and takes 
him to the region of Visnu. O best of birds, if the Vaitaranl 
cow is not giftedi the departed soul is drowned in that stream. 

30. When a person is in good health he should gift a 
cow to a learned person* 

31*32. While drowning he reproaches himself : T gave 
no food to a brahmin traveller nor poured oblations in the fire 
nor performed jepa nor undercook bath nor prayed to the gods. 
Nowi let me suffer for the acts I did in my life. 

33. The messengers of Yama strike him again. He 
repeats those words but in silence this time. 

34. He eats the sixth monthly offering made by the 
relatives and proceeds further. O Garuda, the gift of food to 
the pious brahmins gives relief to the donor in distress. 

35. O bird, the departed soul covers two hundred and 
forty seven Yojanas every day. Thereafter he is completely 
exhausted. 

36. In the seventh month he reaches the city Bahvapada. 
He eats the rice-ball offered by his relatives. 

37. In the dghth month he reaches Nanakrandapura* 
There he sees people crying bitterly aloud. 

38. Himself in utter distress, he cries in pain. He cats 
the eighth-monthly rice-ball and feels cmifortable. 

39. He, then, leaves for Taptapura. Having reached 
Taptapura in the ninth month he eats the rice-ball and the 
SrSidhd which his son or relatives have gifted in his favour. 

40. In the tenth month he reaches Raudrapura. He 
eats whatever his son or relatives give in his favour. 

1. Vaiian^S : Name of m river in bell. 



IM6.53 


817 


41« After eating the tenth monthly rice-ball in Raudra* 
pura he goes to Payovai^a^a where the clouds rain heavily and 
cause distress to the departed* 

42* Then suffering from heat and thirst he partakes of 
the eleventh*monthly meal giAed by his relatives, 

43. A little before a year has passed or at the end of 
eleven and a half month he reaches a Sitapmra—city of extreme 
cold and distress. 

44. Tormented by cold and hunger be looks in all 

directions and speeks : wish I had a relative who would 

have removed my distress/’ 

45. The attendants of Yama speak to him thus : **Where 
is thy holy merit that it may give relief to thee.’* On hearing 
their words he cries : ’O my fate.’ 

46. Fate is nothing but a result of accumulated merit or 
sin. ‘I did no good acts^ hence this trouble’—pondering over 
the matter thus, he takes up courage for the time being. 

47. At the distance of forty four Yojanas from Sitapura, 
there is a beautiful city of Dharmaraja (Yama) where live the 
celestial musicians and the heavenly nymphs. 

48. There live eighty four lacs of people in human and 
divine forms. The guards are put at the thirteen gates of the 
city. 

49*o2. There abide honourable and respectable 8rava^, 
the sons of Brahma who know and report to Citragupta what* 
ever good or bad actions are performed by the mortals. 

The Sravanas are eight in number. They move about in 
heaven, hell and on earth. They can see and hear from afar. 
Their women are known as 8rava^ who are identifiable by 
their individual names. They are the presiding deities of 
mortals and have full knowledge of their activities. 

53. A morral should worship them with vows, gifts and 
prayen. They become cordial to him and cause death in an 
easy manner. 



818 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 

Glo^ of Srava^ 


Gcru4(i Purina 


Garu4o said : 

1*2. O lord» I want to know about the parenta)^ of 
Sravapas. How are they stationed in the city of Yama ? How 
do they know about the activities of mortals ? How do they 
hear what the petite talk about among themselves ? From 
what source is that knowledge derived by them ? 

3. O lord, where do they eat ? Favour me with your 
answers to my queries. On hearing the words of the king of 
birds, the lord spoke. 

The lord said : 

4. Now hear, what I am going to speak about 8rava^as 
is both truthful and pleasant. I shall tell you about the 
activities of Sravanas. 

5. When the entire world of moveables and immoveables 
became one uniform whole and I, the lord of beings, was 
reposing in sleep in the milky ocean. 

6*7. The self-born Brahma seated in my navel-lotus 
{practised penance for many years. The universe consisting of 
fourfold creation was reduced to a single entity—the universe 
which is created by Brahma, preserved by Vi^nu and annihi¬ 
lated by Rudra. 

8. Brahma created the all-pervading wind. He created 
the refulgent sun. He created Yama along with Citragupta. 

9. He created the universe afterwards, and practised 
penance for many years, sitting in the navel-lotus of Visnu. 

10-11. He created the universe and assigned duties. The 
gods were anxious to know what time the creator created the 
universe, how Rudra, Vipiu and Dharma ruled over the earth. 

12. Thus lost in anxiety, the gods pondered over the 
problem. They discussed the matter with Brahma. 

1344. Brahmi who was urged by the gods created 
twelve lons^ by the chemical process out of flowers and leaves* 



IL17.24 


81» 


They possess lustrous, wide eyes. At the behest of BrahmA^ 
they carry all tidings of Man’s activities whether good or bad 
to the ears of Brahmi. 

15. They can hear from afar and see far*off things. O 
bird, they are, therefore, called Sravapas. 

16. They roam about in the firmament and watch the 
activities of the people which they reveal to Yama at the time 
of their death. 

17. They also declare on the fitness of the departed soul 
for a particular goal, due to bis activities. 

18. There are four paths in man’s life, viz, paths of 
Dharma, Artha, Kama and Mokfa. O son of Vinati,^ a man 
can go by any one of these paths, superior or inferior. 

19. One who bestows riches goes by a celestial car. One 
who fulfils wishes rides the horse. One who desires liberation 
travels by swan-vehicles. 

20. A sinful person walks bare*footed on rows of sword- 
edged leaves. He is struck with stones, pierced with thorns 
and bound by nooses. 

21*22. He who in the world of mortals propitiates 
Sravanai, offering them water from a jar and food cooked in 
a vessel, worships &avatMts and me. 

O lord of birds, I shall grant him that position which is 
inaccessible even to the immortals. 

23. With devotion he should feed eleven Brahmanas 
who are pious and virtuous and the twelfth together with his 
wife, just for my propitiation. 

24. Men should worship Sravanas together with the 
gods. By doing so, they who seek for pleasure can get to 
heaven* By worshipping Srava^ they propitiate me, Citra- 
gupta and Yama. 


1. AnoTlier tradition ascribea 12 tons to Katyapa and hU wife Aditi 
who are known at (he twelve Adityai. 

2. wife of Kalyapa and daughter of Dakfa. Two sent Aruoa 
and Garuda and a daughter Sumati were born ro her. For dettiU tee 
Purloin Enpyciopaedia, under Canida. 



Garuia Purd^ 




25*26. With Sravapas pleased^ the pioas people go to 
Vi^^uloka. O best of birdi^ whosoever hears about the glory 
of Srava^S) their origin and pious activities is not covered up 
by sins. He enjoys pleasures of this world and attains glory 
hereafter. 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 

Lifi nfUr Death 

The lord said : 

1-2. On hearing the words of Sravapas and thinking 
about the problem for a while, Cicragupta informs about all 
those actions pious or impious performed by the people. He 
repeats them also to the person concerned. 

3. Whatever action a person undertakes, by word of 
mouth, body or mind, whether good or bad, he reaps the 
fruits thereof. 

4. O lord, thus I have told you about the path which 
the departed soul has to traverse. I have also told you about 
the places of rest for the departed soui. 

5. If food is gifted in his favour he travels in comfort 
on the High Way. To illuminate the path, an earthen lamp 
should be kindled, put in the appropriate place and kept 
burning by day and night. 

6. The path, though dark, dreadful, dog-infested and 
void of resting*place, becomes luminous and pleasant for those 
who have gifted an earthen lamp. 

7. If an earthen jar is gifted on the fourteenth day or 
the month of K&rttika, it gives comfort to the deceased. Now, 
I shall tell you in brief about the path of Yama for the depart¬ 
ed soul. 

8* He goes to the world of manes as a result of the 
merit accruing from the performance of Vrtotsarga. By the 
rice*ball offered on the eleventh, he attains physical purity. 



11.18.21 


821 


9. The servants of Yama arc satiated by the gift of 
water^jar* 

10. By gifting bed the deceased goes to heaven by the 
aerial car. The gift of bed can be made on any day or on the 
twelfth day from death. 

11. On the 13th day he should give precious articles of 
diflferent varieties in favour of the deceased or the person him* 
self, when alive, should gift these articles for himself. 

12*13. O Garu^, by the merit accruing from these 
gifts he goes comfortably on that path. O lord of birds, there 
prevails a uniform law for all : the higher, lower and the 
middling classes. O bird, you should know that a person reaps 
the fruits, sour or sweet, in proportion to the nature and extent 
of actions done by him. 

14. Whatever gifts he or his relatives make in his favour 
stand in good stead while he is on journey to the world of 
Yama. 

Garu4<i said : 

15. O lord, why should they give padas and of what 
nature. Who shall receive the gifts ? O god of gods, let me 
know the facts. 

The lord said ; 

16* An umbrella, ahoes^ clothes, a ring, a water*jar, a 
chair or stool and a vessel—these seven are called padas. 

17. There is a terrible heat in the way which scorches 
the departed soul. By the gift of umbrella, the deceased 
receives shelter of shade and feels comfortable. 

18. By the gift of shoes the deceased passes over the 
sword-edged forest, mounted on the horse. 

19. By the gift of a scat (dfflwj) to a Brahmin, the de¬ 
ceased obtains tasty meals in the interval of time while he 
walks over the path at his leisure. 

20. By the gift of a water-jar, he gets enough water on 
the way which is full of heat, devoid of air and water. 

2L A person, gifting a water^jar made of copper, 
receive8,*«ssuredly, the merit of constructing a thousand wells. 



822 


Goruia Air^M 


22. The messengers of Yama are dreadful to look at, 
datic and yellow is appearance. They are courteous too» if 
propitiated by the gift of clothes and ornaments. When satisfied 
they do not torment the deceased. 

23. They wield terrible weapons, run here and there. By 
the gift of a ring they vanish from the presence of the deceased. 

24. The pada is completed by the gift of a vessel, a seat, 
raw food, clarified butter and a sacred thread. 

25. Tired and thirsty, the traveller feels comfortable if* 
he has gifted the buffalo's milk in his life-time. 

Ganiia said : 

26. O lord, things are gifted by the relatives at home in 
favour of the deceased. How do they reach the deceased and 
who receives them ? 

Ths hrd said : 

27. God Varui}a receives those gifts and hands them over 
to me. I give them to god Bh^ara (the sun), from Bhaskara 
the deceased person obtains them. 

28. As a result of sinful activities when no descendant is 
left on the earth, the deceased person goes to hell until his sin 
is exhausted. 

29-33. After his term has expired, the pious soul is 
allowed by Yama, the lord ofeigbtyfour lacs of hells, to have 
a look at hells and hear the cries of pretas (the departed souls). 
In the midst of hells, there are 21 notorious hells, viz. Tamisra, 
Loha^ahku, Maharaurava, Salmali, Raurava, Kudvala, Kalasut- 
raka, Putimfttika, Saugata, Lohatoda, Savisa, Pretapana, Mahi- 
naraka, Kalola, Sajivana, Mahapatha, Avici, Andhatamisra, 
Kumbhipaka, Asipatravana and Patana. 

34. Those who have passed several yean in the dreadful 
hell and have no descendants (to offer gifts) in their favour 
become messengers of Yama. 

35. Yama sends them on errand and they share with the 
dead the food and drink which their relatives offer them from 
time to time. 

36-37. Being extremely hungry they seize the dead man’s 
gifts on the way and eat them. A rice-ball gifted as food to the 
dead at the end of a month satiates them for a year. 



11.19.4 


823 


38. By such deeds of merits gradually he reaches 
Sauripura. Then by the end of a year» he reaches the vicinity 
of dreadful Yamaloka. 

39. Here, he gives up his dreadful body, of the measure 
of arm, which he derived within ten days from the ten pindas 
gifted to him by his descendants. His spirits droop at the 
sight of Yama as the spirit of Paraiurama at the sight of Rama 
(Daiarathi). 

40. He gives up his previous body for the one derived 
from his actions. He receives an airy body of the size of a 
thumb and reaches the sword-edged hell. 

41. Here, he walks on single foot bound helplessly by his 
actions as a caterpillar by reeds. 

42. Just as a person casts off his old dress and puts on a 
new one, so the soul gives up his old body and assumes a new 
onc.^ 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 

Lif€ afUr Diath 


Th< lord said : 

1. Assuming an airy form derived from his previous 
actions and suRTering from hunger be moves along with Yama. 

2. There is a town of Citragupta covering twenty 
yojanas. There the embodied beings observe their virtue and 
sin all around. 

3. If he had made substantial gifts in his life-time he 
derives pleasure therefrom. From here Vaivasvata town of 
Yama is situated at the distance of twentyfovr Yojanas. 

4. The residents of Vaivasvatapura are satiated by the 
gifts of iron, salt, cotton and a vessel of gingelly seeds, offered 
by the relatives of the deceased. 

1. A popular theme occurring in the Bhoioood git&f 11. 22. 



824 


(7ani</a PurS^a 


5. The dead repair to Vaivasvata town and inform 
Dharmadhvaja, the keeper at Yama’s gate (about the gifts). 
Dharmadhvaja is always present at the gate of Yama. 

6. Dharmadhvaja is pleased with the gif^ of seven grains. 
Propitiated by that^ he tells the dead about their virtues and 
8tn8« 

7. Holy and pious people see Dharmaraja as a god of 
noble countenance^ while the sinful and the wicked see him as 
a god of dreadful and terrible aspect. 

8. The deceased person is terribly afraid at his sight and 
laments bitterly. Those who have offered gifts in their life*time 
should entertain no fear. 

9. Yama moves from his seat as soon as he sees a holy 
man. He thinks that he will supersede him in status and reach 
Brahmaloka. 

10. Virtue can easily be procured by offering gifts. The 
path to Yama’s region can easily be traversed by acts of Charity. 
This High Way Cannot be easily covered otherwise. O dear» 
none can reach the city of Yama without doing charitable acts. 

11. That dreadful path is full of terror^striking servants 
of Yama. Each of the cities is guarded by a thousand of these 
servants. 

12. The messengers of Yama torture the sinner in (hot) 
waters and take off his skin till he becomes a skeleton. 

13. The deceased for whom no obsequial rites have been 
made traverse the path with great difficulty. They are led like 
animals bound with ropes. 

14-15. The person may become a god, a marc, a man of 
low species, or as Yama ordains he may attain salvation or be 
bom as a human beii^ as a son to his father. 

16. He obtains birth according to his activities. He 
passes through a series of births in this world. 

17. Knowing that even the highest happiness is non 
eternal, he should perform acts of righteousness when he has 
received a human body. 

18. Human body is either reduced to worms, ashes, or 
feces. Hiough he carries a lantern in hand, he may fall in a 
dreadful hell full of darkness. 

19. He can acquire human body as a result of his pious 



II.20.8 


825 


acts. He who performs holy deeds id human body acquires 
supreme position. 

20. If he neglects Dbarma, he comes to grief. 

21. The soul obtains human body after passing through 
series of births. O bird, in human body too, his birth as a 
Brahmana is a rare event. He who observes vows natural to 
his caste becomes immortal after death by the blessing of God. 


CHAPTER TWENTY 

Functicns of (hi Departed Soul 

Garuda said : 

1. Having obtained a new body where does a preta 
shelter ? Released from pretahood, where does he go to live in? 

2-3. Passing through torments in hells which number 
eighty four lacs and guarded by Varna and his thousand atten¬ 
dants how do the pretas get release and how do they roam 
about in this mortal world ? 

The lord said : 

4. O king of birds, hear. I shall tell you about the 
region where the pretas live. Men attain pretahood by stealing 
other man*s ricbes» by indulging in sexual intercourse with 
other man’s wife or by doing acts of treachery. 

5. Having incurred sins, they seek for redemption in 
4heir progeny. Being bodiless as well as suffering from hunger 
and thirst they roam about here and there. 

6. Evr ^ the captives released from prison are frightened 
at their sight. They se^ for means to kill their kith and kin. 

7. They bolt doors on their ancestors, put obstacles in 
the way of manes. Like thieves, they snatch the mane's food in 
the way before it reaches them. 

8. They return home, stay on the roof and watch the 
activities bf their kins. They cause disease and grief to their 
reU fives. 



826 


Gamier Acrdpa 


9*11. Having assumed the form of tertian and such-like 
fevers they cause diseases due to cold or wind like head-ache or 
cholera. They stay at the place of leavings or refuse^ in the 
company of other ghosts and partake of food and drink left 
over by their relatives. 

12. In this way, the sinning pretas move about freely. 
Garuia said : 

13-14. How do the pretas behave and in what form ? 
How is it possible to know t^ir attitude, since the pretas do 
not speak to us ? If you are pleased to do me a favour, you clear 
off my doubts. O lord, I hear that in the Kali Age many 
people become ghosts. 

Cemia said : 

15. The ghost torments bis family people through the 
enemy. While he was inhuman body be was affectionate to his 
people, now that he is dead be becomes hostile to them. 

16. He who is devoted to Rudra, follows the path of 
righteousness, propitiates gods, satiates guests, speaks truth and 
pleasant words, is not tormented by the pretas. 

17. He who does not observe rites, has no faith in the 

sanctity of the Vedas, hates rjgbteous acts and indulges in 
falsehood, is tormented by the pretas. By doing unrighteous 
acts, O Garu^a, he becomes a preta in this Kali age. 

18. From the beginning of Satya yuga to the end of 
Dvipara, nobody became a preta and nobody suffered from 
preta. 

19-20. It is oi^rved that of the many children bom of 
one and the same mother, one is happy, one is addicted to 
bad habits, one is blessed with progeny, one is tormented by 
pretas, one abounds in wealth, one gets sons who die young, 
one is burdened with the offspring of daughters, one is at 
daggers-drawn with his relatives. This all is due to the bad 
intentions of the preta, O Garu^a. 

21. A woman becomes barren in life or if she gives 
Inrth to children they die at an early age. There is a loss of 
wealth and cattle. These sufferings are caused by preta. 



IL20.35 


827 


22. If there is a sudden change in his nature or an 
enmity with his relatives or an unexpected calamity, the suffer* 
ing is due to preta. 

23. If a person loses faith in religion or if he loses the 
means of his livelihood or if he feels greedy in excess or if there 
is a regular quarrel at home^ that suffering is due to preta. 

24-25. Ifhe slays his parents or reproaches gods and 
Brahmins and is found guilty of murder that suffering is due to 
preta. 

26. When crops do not grow up, though the rains are 
abundant; when the expenditure goes up and income is reduc¬ 
ed; when quarrels rise in gravity, that suffering is due to preta. 

27. When, on travel to a foreign land, he is distressed by 
the onrush of wind, O lord of birds, that suffering is due to preta. 

28. When he associates with the people of low caste or 
when be performs disreputable acts or when he is interested in 
acts of unrighteousness, that suffering is due to preta. 

29. When the hoarded wealth is destroyed by misfortune 
or when the work in operation bears no fruit or when there is 
loss of wealth due to undue taxation or due to fire or theft, that 
suffering is due to preta. 

30. When an incurable disease sets in, or when children 
suffer from pain or when wife suffers immensely, that suffering 
is due to preta. 

31. When one loses faith in the Vedas, Smrtis, Puripas, 
and Dharmaiistras, that suffering is due to preta. 

32. When one abuses gods, gurus and Brahmins in their 
presence or absence, that aberration of nature is due to preta. 

33. This is due to preta and to no other course when a 
person suffers from loss of livelihood or break in social position 
or break in the continuity of lineage. 

34. When women suffer from abortion or do not con¬ 
ceive or when children die at an early age that suffering is due 
to preta. 

35. When he does not perform the annual iriddha in 
sincerity and has no ioclination either—that suffering is due to 
preta. 

36^ When on pilgrimage he indulges in sexukl inter¬ 
course w neglects his duties or when he fails to prosper though 



828 Garv(fa Purdf^a 

he has done acts of piety—that suffering is due to prcta. 

37« When both husband and wife quarrel at meaU» when 
there is a strong inclination to harm others tliat suffering is due 
to preta. 

38. When trade does not prosper though he has gone 
abroad where he lives in separation from wife, that suffering is 
due to preta. 

39. When he lives in foreign lands or when he loses 
position at home, that suffering is due to preta. 

40. When he is inimical to his people, regards his son 

as his enemy, when he has no interest in home and feels un¬ 
comfortable there, that suffering is due to preta. * 

41. When he refuses to obey his parents and has no 
love for his wife, is of cruel nature, is lost in his own affairs, 
that suffering is due to preta 

42. If the funeral rites are not performed in the pres¬ 
cribed way, the soul of the deceased (in rebirth) deviates from 
the righteous path and falb in the company of the wicked. 
Then Vnotsarga is the only rite to redeem him. 

43. O Garuda, a person becomes a ghost and under¬ 
goes sufferings if he dies an accidental death or if his body is 
not cremated properly. 

44. O best of birds, when the descendent knows all this, 
he should conduct those rites which may release the deceased 
from ghosthood. If he does not perform rites for the ghost he 
himself turns a ghost after death. 

45. The person whose house is haunted by a ghost does 
not feel happy or comfortable. He loses faith, pleasure, devo< 
tioD, discrimination as well as wealth. 

46. His lineage breaks either at the third or at the fifth 
generation. In each and every birth he lives a wretched, poor 
and sinful life. 

47. There are people who have fierce, dreadful, db* 
figured and ghostly appearance, who have no regard or honour 
for their caste, progeny, parents, or womanfolk, who put on 
fashions, go an unpleasant way and talk loosely. Alas, it is 
painful to see them suffer, under the force of late, &om the 
recollection of their past sinful deeds. 










