ANCIENT INDIAN 
tradition & MYTHOLOGY 


TRANSLATED BY 

A BOARD OF SCHOLARS 


AND EDITED BY 

Prof. J. L. SHASTRI 


Volume 20 



ANCIENT INDIAN TRADITION & MYTHOLOGY 
SERIES 

Puranas Translated, Released or in Press 


VOLS : 

1,2,3,4 Siva PURANA (Complete) 

5,6 LINGA PURANA (Complete) 

7,8,9,10,11 BHAGAVATA PURANA (Complete) 
12,13,14 GARUDA PURANA (Complete) 
15,16,17,18,19 NARADA PURANA (complete) 
20.21 KURMA PURANA (complete) 

Puranas under Translation 

AGNI 

BHAVISYA 

BRAHMA 

BRAHMANDA 

BRAHMA VAIVARTA 

DEVI BHAGAVATA 

KALIKA 

MARKANDEYA 

MATSYA 

PADMA 

SKANDA 

vAmana 

VARAHA 

VAYU 

VISNU 



THE 

KURMA-PURANA 


TRANSLATED AND ANNOTATED BY 

GANESH VASUDEO TAGARE 


Part I 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
Delhi :: Varanasi Patna 



©MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
Indological Publishers & Booksellers 
Head Office ; Bungalow Road, Delhi-110 007 
Branches : 1. Chowk, Varanasi-1 (u.p.) 

2. Ashok Rajpath, Patna-4 (bihar) 


Unesco Collection of Representative Works—Indian Series 
The book has been accepted in the Indian Series of the Translation 
Collection of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) 


First Edition, Delhi 1981 


Printed in India 

By Shantilal Jain, at Shri Jainendra Press, 

A-45, Phase I, Industrial Area, Naraina, New Delhi-110 028 
Published by Narendra Prakash Jain, for Motilal Banarsidass, 
Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi-l 10 007. 



PUBLISHER’S NOTE 


The purest gems lie hidden in the bottom of the ocean 
or in the depth of rocks. One has to dive into the ocean or 
delve into the rocks to find them out. Similarly, truth lies 
concealed in the language which with the passage of time has 
become obsolete. Man has to learn that language before he 
discovers that truth. 

But he has neither the means nor the leisure to embark on 
that course. We have, therefore, planned to help him acquire 
knowledge by an easier course. We have started the series of 
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology in English Translation. 
Our goal is to universalize knowledge through the most popular 
international medium of expression. The publication of the 
Puranas in English translation is a step towards that goal. 



PREFACE 


The present volume contains the Kurma Parana part I 
(Chapters 1—53) completing the first half {purvardha) of the 
text in English translation.This is the Twentieth Volume in the 
series of fifty Volumes which we have planned on Ancient Indian 
Tradition and Mythology. 

The project of the series was envisaged and financed in 
1970 by late Lala Sunderlal Jain of Messrs Motilal Banarsidass. 
Hitherto nineteen volumes of the series (comprising English 
translation of Siva, Lihga, Bhagavata, Garuda and Narada 
Puranas) have been published and released for sale. 

The present volume, like all other volumes, is encyclo¬ 
paedic in character. It deals with the miscellaneous topics such 
as Cosmogony, Religion, Philosophy, History, Geography and 
Astronomy. In Religion and Ethics it places emphasis on the 
performance of duties of one’s own profession (Varna-dharma) 
in relation to one’s own stage of life (asrama). It also recounts 
the glory and greatness of the holy places of pilgrimage— 
Varanasi and Prayaga in particular. In philosophy it follows 
the Sahkhya system of thought in regard to the creation, 
sustenance and dissolution of the universe. In History it describes 
the genealogies of the solar and lunar races and the episodes of 
illustrated kings. In Geography it describes Bhuvanakosa, 
seven Dvipas, their flora and fauna, their mountain and river- 
systems. In Astronomy it describes the planetary system, the 
solar chariot, the chariots of planets, the funct'on of the twelve 
adityas, the seven rays of the sun. 

In the sectarian grouping of the Puranas, the Kurma 
comes under the Saiva Puranas. The author of the Padma- 
purana (Uttarakhanda 262. 81-4) classifies Karma as Tamasa 
together with Lihga, Siva, Agni and Skanda. But scholars 
like S. K. De think that Kurma was originally a Vaisnava 
Parana which was Pasupatized later on. However, we 
have tried to show in the footnotes that the Purana-writer was 
a non sectarian person neither pro-Visnu nor pro-Siva. He 
wanted to emphasize that as manifestations of the supreme 
Brahma both Siva and Visnu are the same. There is an 



( viii 


) 


obvious tendency towards compromise between Vaisnavism, 
Saivism and other isms of the Puranic Period. To Illustrate : 
Compare Part 1, Ch. 10 where Brahma is praising Siva, the 
oneness of (he family of gods—Brahma, Visnu and Siva is 
emphasized. Part 1, Ch. 12 enumerates one thousand epithets of 
the Goddess Uma and glorifies her different aspects; Parti, 
Ch. 16 eulogizes Nrsirhha, the Man-Lion incarnation of Visnu 
against whom the Pasupata missile discharged by Hiranyaksa 
had no effects. In Part 1, Ch. 16 Siva is said to have 
sought refuge in lord Visnu; Part 1, Ch. 17 contains a 
hymn to Visnu. On the other hand, in Part 1, Ch. 26. 
Srikrsna, a full-fledged incarnation of Visnu performs penance 
and propitiates Siva for getting a son from Jambavati. 

The foregoing illustrations and more reveal a clear attempt to 
amalgamate the different deities, especially the trinity of gods to 
counteract the divine tendencies in different sects in those times. 
The Kurma Purma in English Translation 

The translation of the Kurma Purana is already published 
by the Kasiraja Trust, Varanasi. But the present translation 
contains some special features which may be noted here : 

(i) The present translation is based on the standard 
edition of the Vehkatesvara press. 

(ii) In the translation a number of Vis are incorporated 
which are not included in the Varanasi edition. 

(iii) As a text-critic, the translator has discussed a few 
readings of the critical edition and has given reasons why he 
has accepted a particular reading. 

(iv) The present edition gives the English translation of 
practically every epithet in the one thousand names (Sahasra- 
nama) of the goddess Uma. The Varanasi edition of trans¬ 
lation gives merely a transliteration in Roman script of the 
Sanskrit words used as epithets in the Sahasranama. 

The annotations have the following new features. 

(v) Annotations include ample material on the Pasupati- 
zation problem of the Kurma Purana. The annotator has shown 
that the Kurma Purana is textually more indebted to the Visnu 
Purana and not so much to the Lihga Purana as Dr. Gupta 
tries to show in his critical notes of the critical edition of the 
Kurma Purana. 



( ix ) 


(vi) The annotator has compared each and every mytho¬ 
logical episode with the same in other Puranas. He has put 
elaborate notes on the topics ofDharmasastra and the references 
of philosophy. The comparative table of common verses in the 
Kiirma Parana and other Puranas is also a new feature. 

Introduction 

The critical introduction needs no comment in the preface. 
It is hoped that the investigations of the learned author will be 
utilized with advantage by the research scholars in their studies 
of the Puranas. 

Abbreviations and Index 

We have included abbreviations in this part. They will 
be repeated in the next part with such additions as are inserted 
in the notes in that part. The General Index will be appended 
to the second part. 

Ackmwledgment of Obligation 

It is our pleasant duty to put on record our sincere thanks 
to Dr. R. N. Dandekar and the UNESCO authorities for their 
kind encouragement and valuable help which render this work 
very useful. We are extremely grateful to Dr. G. V. Tagare 
who has meticulously and delightfully accomplished this onerous 
task. The critical Introduction, the lucid translation and expla¬ 
natory notes are, in fact, his monumental contributions to the 
studies in Indology. We must also thank Shri T. V. Parame- 
shwara Iyer for his valuable assistance in the preparation of 
translation. We express our gratitude to all those who have 
offered suggestions for improving the same. 


—Editor 



ABBREVIATIONS 


Common 
chapter (s), p— 
footnote, Hist, 
not included in 

ABORI 

AGP 

AIHT 


AITM 

AP 

Arch. S. Rep 

AV 

Bd. P. 

BG 
Bh. P. 

Br. 

Bs. P. 

Bv. P. 

GC 

DB 

De or GDAMI 


Dh. S. 
ERE 


and Self-evident abbreviations such as ch(s)— 
page, pp—pages, v—verse, vv—verses, Ftn— 
Ind. Philo—History of Indian Philosophy are 
this list. 

Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute, Poona. 

S. M. Ali’s The Geography of Purdnas, PPH, 
New Delhi, 1973. 

Ancient Indian Historical Tradition F. E. 
Pargiter, Motilal Banarsidass (MLBD), 
Delhi. 

Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology 
Series, MLBD, Delhi. 

Agni Pur arm. Guru Mandal Edition (GM), 
Calcutta, 1957. 

Archaeological Survey Report. 

Atharva Veda, Svadhyaya Mandal Aundh. 

Bhdgavata Purdria, MLBD, Delhi 1973. 

Bhagavadgita. 

Bhdgavata Purdria, Bhagavat Vidyapeeth, 
Ahmedabad. 

Brdhirmna (preceded by name such as 
^atapatha). 

Bhavisya Purdria, Vishnu Shastri Bapat, Wai. 

Brahma Vaivarta Purdria, GM, 1955-57. 

Caturvarga Cintdmarii by Hemadri. 

Devi Bhdgavata, GM, 1960-61. 

The Geographical Dictiormry of Ancient and 
Mediaeval India —N. L. De, Orienta 
Reprint Delhi, 1971. 

Dharma Sutra (preceded by the author’s 
name such as Gautama). 

Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics —Hastings. 



( xii 


) 


GP. 

GS 

HD 

lA 

IHQ. 

KA 

KP 


LP. 

Manu 

Mbh. 

MKP. 

MN. 

Mt. P. 

MW 

NP 

PCK 

Pd. P. 

PE 

PJ 

PR or PRHRC 
RV 

SC or SMC 
SEP. 


Garuda Purdna, Ed. R. S. Bhattacharya, 
Chowkhamba, Varanasi, 1964. 

Grhya Sutra (Preceded by the name of the 
author such as Apastamba). 

History of Dharma Sdstra by P. V. Kane, 
G.O.S. 

The Indian Antiquary. 

The Indian Historical Quarterly. 

Kautiliya Arthaidstra. 

Kurma Purdna, Venkateshwar Press Edt. 
Bombay; also Kashiraj Trust Edt., 
Varanasi 1971. 

Liftga Purdna, MLBD, Delhi, 1981. 

Manu Smrti 

Mahdbhdrata, Gita Press, Gorakhpur, V. S. 
2014. 

Mdrkandeya Purdna. 

Mahdbhdrata Ndmdnukramani, Gita Press, 
Gorakhpur, V.S. 2016, 

Matsya Purdna, GM, 1954. 

Monier Williams — Sk.-English Dictionary, 
MLBD, Delhi, 1976. 

Ndradiya or Ndrada Purdria, Venkateshwar 
Press, Bombay. 

Bhdratavarfiya Prdcina Caritra Kola — 
Siddheshwar Shastri, Poona, 1968. 

Padma Purdna, GM. 1957-1959. 

Purdmc Encyclopaedia V. Mani, English, 
MLBD, Delhi, 1975. 

Purdna (Journal of the Kashiraj Trust) 
Varanasi. 

Purdnic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs — 
R. G. Hazra, Calcutta, 1948. 

RG Veda, Svadhyaya Mandala, Aundh. 

Smfi Candnkd —Devanna Bhatta. 

Studies in Epics and Purdnas by A.D. Pusalkar 

Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, (BVB), Bombay. 



( xiii ) 


SG or SGAMI 

SKD 

Sk. P. 

Smr 


§P or Siva P. 


Studies in the Geography of Ancient and 
Mediaeval India —D. G. Sircar MLBD, 
Delhi, 1971. 

Sabda-Kalpa-Druma —Raja R. K. Dev.,, 
Ghowkhamba, Varanasi. 

Skanda Pur ana, GM. 1960-65. 

Smrti (preceded by the author’s name or 
simply the author’s name e.g. Manu Smrti 
or Manu. All GM editions in the Smrti- 
Sandarbha. 1952-57. 

Siva Purina, Pandit Pustakalaya, Kashi (V.S. 

2020 ) 



CONTENTS 


A. PREFACE vii 

B. ABBREVIATIONS xi 

C. INTRODUCTION 

(i) The title Kaurma xix 

(ii) The Rank and extent of KP. xx 

(iii) The Kurma as a Mahapurana xxi 

(iv) The KP. and the Narada Purana xxix 

(v) Religious Sects in the KP. xxxii 

(vi) Philosophy in the KP. xl 

(vii) Pasupatisation of the KP. xli 

(viii) Dharmasastra in the KP. xliv 

(ix) The Date of KP. xliv 

D. TRANSLATION AND NOTES 

Chapters Part I Page 

1. Salvation of Indradyumna 1 

2. Duties of Castes and Stages of life 21 

3. The Order of Stages of life and the four Castes 33 

4. Creation of Prakrti 39 

5. Calculation of Time 47 

fi. Lifting the Earth by Visnu-Varaha 52 

7. Creation 56 

8. Mukhyadi Creation, Progeny of Svayambhuva 

Manu and Daksa 68 

9. Manifestation of the lotus-Born Deity —Brahma 68 

10. Creation of Rudra 76 

11. Incarnation of the Goddess 84 

12. Glory of the Goddess Parvati 86 

13. Progeny of Daksa’s daughters 124 

14. The race of Svayambhuva Manu 126 



( xvi ) 


15. Destruction of Daksa’s sacrifice 132 

16. The families of Daksa’s daughters 142 

17. The story of Trivikrama 165 

18. The Race of Kasyapa 173 

19. The Dynasties of Sages 175 

20. Glory of Royal Dynasties 178 

21. The Race ofiksvaku 186 

22. The Lunar Race 191 

23. The Race of Jayadhvaja 198 

24. The Dynasty of Yadu. The Race of Krostu 203 

25. Krsna’s Panance 210 

26. Krsna’s stay at Kailasa : The Origin of the 

Lihga 220 

27. Royal Dynasties 230 

28. Arjuna meets Vyasa 232 

29. Yugas, their nature 232 

30. The Kali Age 237 

31. Glory of Varanasi 243 

32. Greatness of Varanasi, Glory of Ohkaresvara 

and Krttikesvara 251 

33. Greatness of Kapardisvara 254 

34. Gloryof Varanasi, Greatness of Madhyamesvara 259 

35. Places of Pilgrimage. Glory of Varanasi 

(concluded) 262 

36. Prayaga, its Greatness 266 

37. Glory of Prayaga, Procedure of Pilgrimage 270 

38. Greatness of the holy place Rnamocana 274 

39. Glory of Prayaga and other Tirthas 276 

40. Arrangement of the Universe 277 

41. Seven Worlds; Planetary System; Solar Chariot 282 

42. Functions of the Twelve Adityas 286 

43. Bhuvana Kosas; Functions of the seven rays of 

the sun; Chariots of Planets 289 



( xvii ) 


44. Arrangement of the Universe; Description of 


the Upper and Nether worlds 293 

45. Bhuvana Kosa : Seven Dvipas and Mountain 

Ranges 296 

46. The abodes of Guardians of Worlds 300 

47. Ketumala and other sub-continents 303 

48. Jambu-dvipa 309 

49. Plaksa and other continents 314 

50. Puskaradvipa 321 

51. Manvantaras, lord Visnu’s glory; his four mani¬ 
festations 324 

52. Branches of the Vedas 329 

53. Incarnations of Siva in the Vaivasvata Man- 

vantara 332 



INTRODUCTION 


1. TTu Title Kaurma 

The Kurma Purana(KP.) in its list of (Maha-) Puranas^ 
and elsewhere (e.g. 1.1.127, 130) callsitself asKaurma'A Purana 
pertaining to Kurma’, a title confirmed by other (Maha-) 
Puranas in their lists of Puranas.® This Purana is called Kaurma 
as it was first narrated by god Visnu in his tortoise incarnation 
to King Indradyumna (KP.I. 1. 42-49). 

It was again retold completely by him to Indradyumna® 
who, by the grace of Visnu, was bom as a pious Brahmana of 
the same name. (KP.I. 1.97-103). This ‘story’ as told to the 
Brahmana Indradyumna was renarrated by Lord Kurma* in 
the nether-world called Rasatala, to great sages like Narada 
and gods like Indra at their insistence (KP. I.l. 123b-127). 


1. Brahmam Pura^am prathamam Padmaih Vaisnavam eva ca/ 

Saivam Bhagavataih caiva, Bhavisyam Naradiyakam// 

Markandeyam athagneyam Brahma-vaivartam eva ca/ 

Laingaih tatha ca Varahaih Skandam Vamanam eva ca// 

Kaurmam Matsyaih Garudam ca Vayaviyam anantaram/ 
astadasaih samuddiHam Brahmandam iti saihjnitam// KP.I. 1.13-15 

The list consists of 19 (Maha-) Puranas, though it Claims the tradi¬ 
tional figure 18 of (Maha-) Puranas (vide Note No 3. KP. p.6) 

KP. and a number of other Puranas do not call themselves to be 
Mahapurapas, as the term Upa-Purapa is enough to show their superiority. 

2. With a slight difference this list is repeated in a number of Purapas 
like VP. III. 6. 21-24, BH. P. XII. 13-4-8, LP. I. 39. 61-63, Mt. P. 
53. 12 ff., SK. P. VII. 2. 5-7, NP. I. 1921-28. 

It is immaterial what order is followed in the enumeration of 
Purapas—whether according to the VP., KP or LP. There is con¬ 
sensus among the Purapa-writers about the number of Purapas (viz. 
18) and about most of the titles of Purapas and they unanimously 
include KP. in their lists. 

3. evam ukto’tha tenaham bhaktanugraha-kamyaya// 

Yatnavad akhilam samyag avocam muni-puhgavah/ 
Vyakhyayasesam evedara yat prsto’haih dvijena tu// 

4. This is conBrmed in the NP. I. 106. 2-3 and Mt. P. 53. 46-47. 



( XX ) 


Suta recounted the same to the sages at the sacrificial session 
in the Naimisa forest and he designates this Purana as 
‘Kaurma’ as it was narrated by the God of gods in his Kurma 
(Tortoise) Form.^ 

The title in vogue is ‘Kurma Purana’ and is used here. 

2. The Rank and Extent of the KP. 

In the list of Puranas given above, the KP. occupies die 
15th rank and is accepted as such by the KP. itself.^ This rank 
is confirmed in the lists of pther Puranas such as VP., Bh. P., 
LP. and others mentioned in the Ft. Note 2 of the 1st section. 
What is more interesting is the mention of the four Sarhhitas of 
the KP. viz. Brahmi, Bhagavati, Sauri and Vaisnavi.® Out of 
these Brahmi Sarhhita is so designated as this Sarhhita correctly 
and precisely communicates the nature of the Supreme 
Brahman.* But Suta is silent about the derivations or specialities 
of other Sarhhitas. KP. gives the total number of verses 
viz. six thousand, in the Brahmi,® but is silent about the 
number of verses in other Sarhhitas. Curiously enough Vayu,‘ 
pp. 104-9, Bh. P. XII. 138 and NP.I. 106. 3 state that the total 
number of verses in the KP. is 17,000. The last i.e. NP. gives 
the Sarhhita-wise break-up of the verses as follows: 


1. Idam Puranam paramaih Kaurmaih Kurma-svarupina/ 

Uktaih vai deva-devena . . . 

—KP. I. 1. 130b-131a. 

2. Idaih tu panca-dasakarh Puranam Kaurmam uttamam/ 

—KP. I. 1. 21 

3. Idam.... Puranaih Kaurmam uttamam/ 

Caturdha samsthitaih punyaih Saihhitanaih prabhedatah// 

Catasrah Sainhitah Punya dharma-kamartha-moksadah// 

—ibid. I. 1. 21-22. 

4. Brahmi Pauraniki ceyaih Samhita papa-nasani/ 
atra tat paramam Brahma kirtyate hi yatharthatah// 

—KP. II. 46. 131 b—132 a 

5. lyaih tu Samhita Brahmi catur-vedais-tu sammita/ 
bhavanti sat sahasrani slokanam atra sahkhyaya// 


—KP. I. 1. 23. 



( xxi ) 


Name of the Samhita 

(1) Brahmi 

(2) Bhagavati 

(3) Sauri 

(4) Vaisnavi 


Total No. of Verses 

6000 

4000 

2000 

5000 

17000 


The NP. tells us not only the names of the four Saihhitas 
of KP. but mentions the main topics described in each of them. 
Thus the Bhagavati Saihhita consists of five sections ( Paficapadi). 
The first four sections describe the duties of Brahman as, 
Ksattriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras respectively and the fifth section 
enjoins the duties and functions of the mixed castes (NP. I. 
106.13-19). 

The third Sarhhita viz. Sauri lays down the various 
duties of men, the six Karmans and their Siddhis, while the 
last (Vaisnavi) Saihhita is glorified as bestower of Moksa. It 
consists of four sections (Ca<M^/)a(/i) and is veritable Brahman 
i.e. Veda incarnate to the twice-born. (NP. I. 106.20.21) 

The detailed comparison of the contents of the Brahmi 
Saihhita in the NP. I. 106.3-13 and those in the KP. (see 
below) shows that the author of the NP. knew the extant text 
of the KP. except interpolations of Dharma-Sastras and other 
materials) and he has only some vague hearsay information 
about the main topics and the extent of the remaining Saihhitas. 


3. The Kurma as a (Mahd-) Purana 

The KP. defines a Purana as having the following five 
characteristics^ : 

1. (creation) : 2. Prati-sarga (re-creation after the 

dissolution of the universe) : 3. Varfiia (genealogies of gods, 
the sun, the moon and patriarchs) : 4. Marwantara (periods of 
times under the control of Manus) and 5. Varhianucarita 
(accounts of the different dynasties). 

It calls itself as a heavenly sacred narrative having the 
above-mentioned five characteristics.^ These characteristics 


1. Sargasca Prati-sargasca Vaihso Manvantarani ca // 

Varhsanucaritam caiva Puranam pancalasanam // —KP. I. 1-12 

2. KP. I. 1.25; 1.5.20; In KP. II. 45.4, the term Prati-Sancara is 
used for Prati-sarga. 



( xxii ) 

were regarded as essential in a Purana as can be seen from the 
repetition of the above (KP. I. 1.12) verse in a number of 
Puranas like Vayu P. 4.10-11, Varaha P.2.4, MK. P.134.13-14, 
AP. 1.14, VP. III. 6.25 to mention a few. 

It will be interesting to test the extant K.P. on the above 
Ponca-Laksma criterion. 

1. Sorgo ( The Creation of the Universe) 

Like other Puranas, the KP. is strongly influenced by the 
Sahkhya theory of the evolution of the universe. It may be 
due to some later modifications or interpolations that we find 
the following different theories regarding the creation or 
evolution of the universe : 

a. The Puranic Theory 

At the beginning of a Kalpa (-period) god Visnu who 
had been asleep on the coils of the serpent Sesa on a vast 
ocean of primeval cosmic waters gets up and he wills to create 
the universe and god Brahma is born of him. Brahma creates 
nine mind-born sons and consequently the whole world of 
beings. The classes of people called Brahmanas, Ksattriyas, 
Vaisyas and Sudras are born respectively from Brahma’s 
mouth, arms, thighs and feet (KP. 1.2.1-26). Here the vast 
ocean probably signifies the Avyakta (un-manifest) principle of 
Sankhyas. The influence of the Purusa sukta (RV. X. 90) is 
obvious on the origination of classes of men from different 
parts of Brahma’s person. 

b. The Saiva-Sdnkhya Theory 

At the beginning, there was the Avyakta called Pradhana 
and Prakrti by philosophical thinkers. It was the Prdkrta Pralaya 
as all Gunas were in a state of equilibrium. At the end of this 
Pralaya (called god Brahma’s night), the supreme Lord (Siva) 
quickly enters both Prakrti and Purusa and agitates them 
through his highest Yoga. When Pradhana is thus agitated, 
Mahat, the seed (of the universe), is evolved and in its turn it 
evolves the universe through its successive evolutes viz. 
Buddhi, Aharhkara, Tanmatras (subtle elements), Indriyas 
(sense-organs) and the gross-elements. About the evolution of 
the gross-elements two sub-theories are postulated : (i) Accord- 



( xxiii ) 

ing to the first theory, the subtle-qualities (tan-matras) were 
first evolved from which were created the gross elements, each 
characterised by the respective gross quality. Thus from Sabdamatra 
was evolved AkdSa (The space or Ether) with Sabda (sound) 
as its quality. In this way were created from their respective 
subtle-forms ( mdtrds) the elements called Vdyu (wind), Agra 
(Fire), Ap (waters) and Prthvi (earth) with their charac¬ 
teristic qualities, namely, (touch), rupa (colour, form), 

rasa (taste) and gandha (smell). 

c. The other theory believes that Akd§a (the space) with 
its quality &abda-mdtrd covered up the SparSa-mdtrd (subtle 
quality of touch) and the Vdyu with two qualities viz. Sabda 
(sound) and Sparse (touch) was evolved. Thus each evolving 
element inherited the qualities of its preceding elements in 
addition to its own special quality. So fire has Sabda, Sparse and 
rupa-, water {Ap) inherits these in addition to its special quality 
rasa and the earth, all the five gurias viz. iabda, sparSa, rupa, rasa 
and gandha. Thus Mahat, Aharnkdra and five Tan-mdtrds form the 
source of the Brahmanda (the cosmic egg) (KP. 1.4.24-38) 

d. More Theories regarding the creation : There are a 
few more Puranic theories attributing the creation of various 
species etc. to god Brahma, as follows : 

(i) The nine creations : (KP.I.7) 

While Brahma was contemplating about creation, there 
appeared out of the fivefold ignorance (namely tamos, moha, 
mahdmoha) andha-tdmisra and Avidyd* five creations cumulatively 
c?L\\e.d Mukhya sarga. Of these reptiles {nagas) were prominent. 
The next creation was that of Tiryaksrotas or animals. 

Noting its defects, Brahma created gods full of light and 
delight, characterised by Sattva guna. This creation came to be 
known as Ordhoa-srotas. 

Next to gods, he created human beings which though, 
dominated by and have the luminous (5'attoa) guna. 

This is called Arvdk-srotas. This creation was followed by Bhuta- 
sarga (creation of Bhutas). KP. gives another order of these nine: 


•For details vide note No. 1 on KP. I. 7. 2. 



( xxiv ) 


The Prakrta sarga consisting of the creation of Brahma or 
Mahat, of Bhutadi or Tmmatra, Vaikdrika (or sense-organs), the 
Mukhya sarga (creation of immovables), the Tiryak-Srotas (The 
animal-world) ; of Urdhvasrotas (divine beings); of Arvdksrotas 
(mankind), the Bhautika sarga, the ninth sarga is Kaumdra. 

The discrepancy in these two lists especially with reference 
to the position of the creation of element ( bhutddi) is probably 
due to some interpolation. (KP. 1.7.14 and 11). 

(ii) There is still another account of creation: God Brahma 
at first created five sons through his mind (volition). But they 
refused to procreate and took to asceticism. Tear-drops fell from 
Brahma’s eyes and Mahadeva was born. In compliance of 
Brahma’s command, Mahadeva procreated a number of Rudras 
all his equals and immortals and refused to procreate mortals as 
desired by Brahma. Then Brahma himself created the five gross 
elements, measures of time, rivers, seas etc and also eleven 
Sadhakaslike Marici, Bhrguand others from his limbs, vital airs. 
These assumed human forms and proclaimed Dharma (KP.I.7. 
1-39). 

(iii) Another version describes how Brahma created the 
four orders of beings viz. gods, demons, pitrs (progenitors) and 
human beings from his body (from) abandoning it after creating 
each in that order. KP. describes how different species of 
animals were created from different parts of his body and the 
Vedas and Vedie metres like Gayatri, Tristubh from each of his 
mouth. Thus the whole creation movable and immovable was 
created by god Brahma (KP. 1.7.40-66). 

The above version with special emphasis on and 
enumeration of Rudras, their wives and progeny is given later 
(KP. I. 10). Rudra, being propitiated by Brahma, blessed him 
and Brahma created the universe through nine Sadhakas or 
mind-born sons. 

In the process of creation, Brahma ‘created’ virtues and 
vices which multiplied. He split up himself as man and woman 
(Manu and Satarupa) from whom the human race was born. 
This concept of Ardha-ndrUvara has basis in Upanisads (e.g. 
Bfhad Ar.Up.lA.Z). 

KP. has devoted chapters 1.4-10 for describing Sarga 
(creation of the universe) including the lineage of some kings, 



( XXV ) 


sages as well as of some gods like the fire-god. The philosophic 
and other concepts underlying these accounts are embedded in 
older works like Brahmanasand Upanisads {vide V.S. Agarwal — 
Ml P.—a study, pp-158-170 etc.). 

II. Prati-Sarga or Prati-Sancara {Dissolution of the Universe) 

KP. gives two versions of this, one showing Vaisnava and 
the other Saiva influence. Out of the four kinds of layas { dissolu¬ 
tions) viz. Mitya, Maimittika, Prakrta and Atyantika, Nitya is the 
daily disappearance of the world into darkness and Atyantika is 
the ultimate merger of the individual soul into Visnu through 
spiritual knowledge. In this type of Pralaya, the individual soul 
never returns to Sarhsara thereafter. The Maimittika Pralaya 
takes place at the end of a Kalpa. At that time, there is a 
terrible draught for a hundred years and all oceans are evapor¬ 
ated due to the fiery heat of the sun. The fire of destruction 
breaks out and burns down everything and Lord Visnu (Pra- 
japati) assumes Yogic sleep {Yoga-nidra) for a Kalpa-period. 
There have been many such Kalpas (KP. II. 45). The Prakrta- 
Pralaya takes place after two parardha years. Lord Mahadeva 
becomes the fire of destruction and burns down, the whole of the 
universe including gods Brahma, Visnu and Siva (this trinity is 
on a lower level than that of the great God). Wearing a garland 
of skulls, Mahadeva performs his Tandava dance. Devi (his 
spouse) enters the person of Mahadeva and the process of 
involution — the element PrfAw (the earth) along with its Guna 
(viz. smell) gets absorbed into the element water and so on till 
everything is merged into Mahat which, in its turn is absorbed 
into Mahadeva. Pradhana and Purusa are separated and there 
is equilibrium of Gunas of Prakrti. (KP. I. 5. 19. 23. 11.45 
and 46,1-25). 

III. Manvantaras 

Description of Manvantaras or epochs of time presided 
over by Manus is an accepted characteristic of a (Maha-) 
Purana. We find such descriptions in various Puranas like 
Bh. P. VIII. 1. 1-29, NP. 1. 40. 17-37, VP. III. 1. 1-9. The 
KP. regards Kala (Time) as beginningless and endless. He 
creates and destroys universes including the trinity of gods and 



( xxvi ) 


dominates overall^ (KP. I. 5.21-24, II. 3. 16). An empirical 
attempt is made to measure time as follows: 

15 Nimesas = 1 Kastha 

30 Kasthas = 1 Kala 

30 Kalas = 1 Muhurta 

30 Muhurtas= 1 Complete day {ahoratra) of 24 
hours. 

30 days = 1 Month 

6 Months = 1 Ayana^ 

2 Ayanas = 1 (human) year=l day of gods 
12000 Years of = 4 Yugas, viz. Krta, Treta, Dvapara. 
gods and Kali (KP.I.5.5-9) 

These Yuga periods are preceded by a ‘Twilight period' 
( Sandhya) and are followed by a ‘semi-twilight-period’ Sandhyamsa. 
The Yugas, Krta, Treta, Dvapara and Kali extend over 4000, 
3000, 2000 and 1000 divine years and are preceded and 
followed by the Sandhya and Sandtyamia period, each extending 
400, 300, 200 and 100 divine years. Seventyone cycles of four 
Yugas make one Manvantara; one thousand cycles of these four 
Yugas constitute a Kalpa — the period of day of god Brahma 
whose night is also of the same duration. (KP. 1.5.9-18). 

The Krta was the Golden Age. All people were happy and 
they engaged themselves in meditation and penance. Its presid¬ 
ing deity was Brahma. In Treta, the needs of men were 
supplied by trees. Though the Chief deity was the Sun-god, 
god Brahma introduced the system of castes {Varnas) and their 
duties at different stages in life (aSramas) and also the fire-wor¬ 
ship without animal-sacrifice (KP.1.29.14-41). 

In Dvapara (though Visnu is its presiding god) people 
were dominated by rajas and Tamas. Due to deterioration in 
mental capacity of men, Vyasa divided the Veda into four 
Saihhitas. The Vedic literature—Brahmanas, Kalpasutras, 

1. Kalah srjati bhutani Kalah saihharate prajah// 

Sarve KMasya vasaga na Kalah kasyacid vase// 

—KP. II. 3. 16 

2. The Daksim Ayana is the night of gods and the Uttara Ayana is the 
day of gods. 



( xxvii ) 


Itihasa and Puranas and also Dharma-Sastra were being com¬ 
posed in Dvapara. (KP.1.29.42-50). 

It appears that pydsa (The arranger) is the designation of 
a person who arranged the floating Vedie suktas in Samhitds or 
compilations and this is presumed to be taking place in every 
Dvapara Age. So the KP. (1.52.1-11) has given the following 
25 ‘incarnations’ of Vyasa. 

(1) Svayambhuva Manu, (2) Veda-Vyasa, (3) Usanas, 
(4) Brhaspati, (5) Savita, (6) Mrtyu, (7) Indra, (8) Vasistha, 
(9) Sarasvata, (ii./. Vaivasvata), (10) Tridhaman, (11) Rsabha, 
(12) Sutejas, (13) Dharma, (14) Sucaksu, (15) Trayyaruni, 
(16) Dhananjaya, (17) Krtanjaya, (18) Rtanjaya (19) Bhara- 
dvaja, (20) Gautama, (21) Vacasrava, (22) Narayana {v.l. 
Susmayana), (23) Trnabindu, (24) Valmiki, (25) Krsna- 
dvaipayana Vyasa, the son of Parasara. 

We find similar lists in other Puranas like Vp. III.3, Vayu 
23.107-213, with a slight variation in names. 

The dismal description of the Kali age as a prediction 
in KP.1.30.1-33 is common to the MBh. Santi. 69.80-97 and to 
many other Puranas like VP. VI. 1, Vayu 58 and 99.391-428, 
Mt.P. 143.32-78. The textual similarity in these indicates a 
common source, probably in the C/r-Purana. Conditions ‘predict¬ 
ed’ therein e.g. — Sudras ruling as Kings, Brahmanas selling 
the Vedas and serving the Sudras, their conversion by hundreds 
and thousands to wandering mendicants etc. were real. As R.C. 
Hazra points out such was the actual condition of the Hindu 
society after Asoka and before 200 A.D. (Vide PRHRC II. 
Ch. I). 

As Siva is the presiding deity of the Kali Age, KP. gives 
a list of 28 incarnations of Siva, each incarnation with a set of 
four disciples (KP. 1.53.1-25). Apart from mythological persons, 
we have Na(La)kulisa (a historical person) recorded as an 
incarnation. The list of Siva’s disciples contains some historical 
persons like Asuri, Panca-sikha, Aksapada. 

We have seen above that 71 cycles of the Catur-yuga (a 
group of four yugas) makes a Manvantara of Manu-epoch. Each 



( xxviii ) 


period is controlled by a Manu. Their number is 14. Out of 
these, six Manus viz. Svayambhuva, Svarocisa, Uttama, Tamasa, 
Raivata and Caksusa are past while Vaivasvata is the present 
Manu. The future Manus are : 

Savarna, Daksa-savarna, Brahma-savarna, Dharma-savarna, 
Rudra-savarna, Rocya and Bhautya (KP. 1.51.4-5, 1.53.29-31). 
The Puranas agree on the names of the first seven Manus and 
there are some changes in the list of the future Manus though 
other Puranas like'VP. Vayu state the names of the sons of 
that Manu, the gods, Indra, seven sages in each of the 14 Manu 
epochs. KP. like Mt. P., limits this information about the first 
seven Manus* and gives only a list of Seven Manus. 

The period of fourteen Manvantaras makes a Kalpa — a 
day in god Brahma’s life, at the end of which is the naimittika 
(periodical) deluge. The present Kalpa is Varaha and the 
previous one was padma. (KP.I.5.26). 

IV, V. Varhsa and Varfddnucarita 

KP.1.14-24 deal with Varhsa and Varhsanucarita. Out of 
these, chapters 14-18 describe the solar dynasty and the genea¬ 
logies of Yadava and Haihaya families. Chapter 19 deals with 
the lineage of Sages. Chapters 20-24 deal with Varhsanucarita. 
Under these, KP. treats mainly the solar (Iksvaku) dynasty— 
the Yadavas and Haihayas. Its account is a late composite 
production mainly based on the Mt. P. with occasional textual 
borrowals from the Vayu (Pargiter —AIHT, p. 81). The treat¬ 
ment is rather scrappy. KP. deals with 78 kings from the solar 
dynasty, 47 from the Yadava family and 26 from the Haihaya 
one, as against 93, 93 and 40 kings noted by Pargiter in AIHT. 
Such lists given in different Puranas differ from each other in 
genealogies and spellings of the names of kings. There are some 
mistakes in KP.’s information. For example, Krsna’s father 
Vasudeva is shown to be the grandson of Krtavarma. (vide BH. 
P. IX. 24. 26-27, AIHT., p. 104. ft. note 6). But as the genea¬ 
logies in KP. do not mention ‘future’ kings, these do not matter 
much historically. Nor do they shed any light on the date of KP. 


*For the lists of the sons, gods, Seven sages of each Manu see KP.I.51. 

5-35. 



( xxix ) 


Thus KP. fulfils its own definition of a Purana, viz. 
Puranam panca-laksamm. ‘But in addition to the pancalak^anas, 
KP. gives mythological geography — Bhuvanakosa in I. 
40-50. It also claims to cater to the need of four Purusarthas — 
dharma, artha, kdma arid moksa (KP.11.46.142). The dharma- 
duties of Varnas and Asramas (castes and stages in life), Sraddha, 
Prayaicittas (expiatory rites), dana (gifts), pilgrimage etc.—is 
described in KP.I. 1-3, II. 12-34. It describes various 
sects, cults and gods {vide section 5 below). The Artha 
may be claimed to have been described in KP. 11.25 where 
means of livelihood of various Varnas are given. Kama can be 
broadly taken as a house-holder’s life for which KP.II. 
12, 15 and 16 may be referred. Mok^a or rather the path to 
liberation is described in details inthe Isvara-gUd (KP. II. 1-11). 

But all these are extraneous matters. R.C. Hazra* calls 
the Smrti-chapters and the Saiva glorifications as graftings on 
the original Purana for the revival of Brahmanism as sectarian 
Hinduism and the Pasupatisation of an original Vaisnava text. 

4. The KP. and the Ndrada Purdna (KP.) 

The NP. in chapters 92-109 (both inclusive), briefly gives 
the main topics or table of contents of each of the 18 Maha- 
Puranas. It deals with the KP. in chapter 106. The word ‘table 
of contents’ is not to be taken in the modern sense. The topics 
or contents are found described at different places in the KP. and 
not exactly according to the order mentioned in the verses of 
the NP. Many of the topics have their ‘Paddings’ the Puranic 
way of bringing in different —at times extraneous — ma terials 
adding to the bulk of the topic. Puranas have been a literature 
of growth as different redactors have tried to introduce the 
importance of their favourite deity, sage, topics etc. in it and to 
modify the text by interpolating a number of verses. 

Hence the comparative table given below indicates what 
portion of the KP. is recorded in the NP. — “paddings” are 
obviously deleted : 


*P R K R C, pp. 58-75; also IHQ_xi, pp. 265-286, 1935. 



( XXX ) 



^P. Chapter 106 

KP. 

V.4 

‘Usual beginning of a 



Paurana’ 

{Purampakramah) 

I.l. 1-26. 

V.5 

(i) Dialogue between 
Laksmi and Indra- 



dyumna 

(ii) Conversation be¬ 
tween Lord Kurma 

1.1.56-61 


and Sages 

1.1.32 ff 


(iii) Duties of Varnas, 

I.1.86-97a, 

2.31-1 ll;chapter 


ASramas 

3 (complete) 


(iv) Description of the 

I.2.3-10a, 22-27 


Creation of the 
Universe 

I.ch.4 (complete) 

V.6 

(i) Calculation of 



Time 

(ii) Eulogy of Varaha 
(Visnu) for lifting 
the earth after the 

I.Ch.5 


deluge 

1.6.1-22 


(iii) Description of the 

I.Chs. 7; 8; 


creation of the 

ch. 10.11-39; 


Universe 

87b-90 


(iv) Story (carita) of 

I.Ch.9; 10.22-87a 


Sankara 

11.1-6 

V.7 

(i) Thousand names 

1.12.1 -61 great¬ 


of Parvatl 

(ii) Exposition of Yoga 

ness of Parvati 
1.12.62-199a 
(Names of Parvati) 


Philosophy 

1.12.247-310 


(iii) Description of the 

1.13; 1.19. These 


family of Bhrgu 

chapters describe 


and his Saptarfi 

the progeny of 


group) 

the group of 
Saptarfis indiffer¬ 
ent Manvantaras 



( xxxi ) 


NP KP 

(iv) The genealogy of 

Svayambhuva 1.14. (includes 

Manu curse on Daksa) 

V.8 (i) The origin of I.16.8-20a (1.16. 

Devas and others 20b-238; ch. 17 

& ch. 18.1-8 des¬ 
cribe Daitya 
Kings like Hira- 
nyakasipu, Bali 
and Ba^. 

(ii) Destruction of 

Daksa’s Tajna 
(sacrifice) i.eh. 15-1-70 

(iii) The story of crea¬ 
tion by Daksa I.16.1-8a 

(iv) Lineage of Kas- 1.18.8-16; chs. 

yapa (The solar & 20-24, ch. 27. 

Lunar dynasties) 

V.9 (i) The Lineage of 1.13.7b-8; 

Sage Atri 19.18-19 

(ii) The auspicious 1.24.80-86; 

story of Krsna chs. 25, 26, 27. 

(iii) Dialogue between 
Krsna & Markan- 

deya 1.26.52-106 

(iv) Conversation bet¬ 
ween Vyasa and 1.28 (&the follow- 

Pandavas (Arjuna) ing chs.) 

V.IO (i) Nature of different 

Yugas {Tuga- 1.29.6-51; 

Dharmd) 30.1-32 

(ii) Dialogue between 

Vyasa and Jaimini 1.31.7-80 

(iii) Greatness of Vara- I.chs. 32,33,34,35 

nasi (also 31.21-79) 

(iv) The glory of I.chs. 36, 37, 38, 

Prayaga 39. 



( xxxii ) 


NP KP 

Verses 11-12 (i) Description of I.chs. 40-50 (40, 

three worlds Bhu- 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 

vana-koSa 46, 47, 48, 49, 50) 

(ii) Branches of Vedas 

reviewed I.ch.52.11-26 

(iii) Isvara Gita Il.chs. 1-11 

(iv) Vyasa Gita Il.chs. 12-34 

(v) Glorification of 

different holy cen¬ 
tres Il.chs. 35-44 

V.13 Description of Pratisarga 

(Dissolution of the Uni- Il.chs. 45-46.1.25 

verse) 

The NP. further notes the names of other Samhitas of KP. 
and the broad sections and topics mentioned in them (vide 
Sect. 2 above) and does not mention the concluding Table of 
contents and Phalasruti etc. given in KP. 11.46. 67-147. It is 
quite clear that the detailed comparison of the KP. and ch. 106 
of NP. shows that it is only the Brahmi Samhita of KP.- that was 
known to the author of the NP. This is significant in deter¬ 
mining the date of the extant KP. And the author of KP. also 
believes that this Brahmi Sarhhita narrated by him is the whole 
of the KP. (11.46.122)* 

5 . Religious Sects in the KP. 

Traditionally, Puranas are classified as (1) Sdttvika, 
(2) Rajasa and (3) Tamasa according as they mainly glorify the 
deities Visnu, Brahma and Siva respectively (Mt.P.53.67-68). 
They, however, differ in some respects in labelling some 
Puranas this way. Thus the Pd.P. (11.263.81-84) claims the KP. 
as a Tamasa Purana while Bs.P.III.28.12-13 states that it is 
Rajasa as it is full of Karma-Kanda** (i.e. VarnaSrama-dharma) 
while R. G. Hazra states that KP. was originally a Vaisnava 

•etat Puranaih sakalam bhasitarh Kurma-rupina / 

**niatsyah Kurmo Nrsirhhas ca . . . . 
rajasah sat smrta vipra karmakanda-maya bhuvi // 

BSP.III.iii.28.12-13 



( xxxiii ) 

{Sattvika) text but was Pasupatised later (PRHRC, pp. 58-66). 
As will be shown later, the KP. — though prima facie the extant 
text appears to be Saivite—in its concept of the Deity transcends 
the Trinity of gods, viz. Brahma, Visnu and Siva and applies 
all the epithets of Upanisadic Brahman to it. (For details vide 
section 7 —the philosophy in KP.) 

Whatever be the lable of the KP., it presents the teaching 
of the following religious sects — Saivism, Vaisnavism, Saktism 
and to a lesser extent Tantrism and the sun-worship. 

( 1 ) Saivism 

Siva is the supreme deity : the trinity of gods Brahma, 
Visnu and Rudra, characterised by the gunas rajas, sattva and 
Tamas respectively and entrusted with the functions of creating, 
maintaining and annihilating the world, are born from Siva’s 
right side, left flank and the region of the heart respectively 
(KP.I.10.77-81; 22.27-28; II.4.21-23). All gods, demi-gods. 
Time (Kdla) function under his command (KP.II.6.13-15). As 
in BG X {Vibhuti-Toga) Siva claims to be the best one among 
all objects or beings (KP.II.7.3-16). The Pasupata influence on 
the list of vibhutis is evident as Sambhu is regarded as the best 
Yogi, Satarudriya as the best Yajusand Avimuktaka (Varanasi) 
as the supermost among holy places. 

Siva is the presiding deity of the Kali age. He takes 28 
incarnations in the Kali Yuga with the four disciples in each 
incarnation (KP.1.53.1-27) Some of these e.g. Na(La) Kulisa, 
Asvalayana, Aksapada, Kapila, Asuri, Pancasikha are histo¬ 
rical persons. 

In the mythological stories about Siva, KP. shows him as 
the highest god even whose deputies like Virabhadra defeat god 
Visnu in Daksa’s sacriflce (KP.1.15.1-80). But this euphoria is 
sobered by Siva’s statement about his identity with Visnu. 
Brahmavadins realize their oneness. Visnu and Siva should be 
worshipped without denigrating the other—Siva never exone¬ 
rates the slanderer of Narayana (KP.I.9.86, 15.82-93; II.4.26; 
11 117-119a). 


*yo Vis^iuh sa svayaih Rudro 
yo Rudrah sa Janardanah // —KP.1.15.90 



( xxxiv ) 


About the Lihga worship, KP. gives two versions viz. 
Sivalinga as a manifestation of Siva as divine-fire (KP.1.26.66- 
99) and as Siva’s penis thrown on the ground by him due to 
persecution by sages. (KP.II. chs. 38-39). These versions are 
mutually irrelevant and must have been assimilated at different 
periods. In the second story about Siva-Lihga, Siva asks the 
sages to abide by Pasupata vows which consist of besmearing 
the body with bhasman (ashes), nudity or wearing only a loin¬ 
cloth, Vedic studies (svadhyaya) and celibacy. 

PaSupatism : 

KP. records two forms of Pasupatism, one approved by 
Vedic tradition and the other condemned so much that sect is 
not only classed with non-Vedic heretic sects like Varna (‘left 
hand’ type of Tantrism) and Arhata (Jainas) created for the 
delusion of non-believers (KP.I.12 261-63) but the believers are 
prohibited from even speaking with those heretics (KP.II.16.15). 
Very little is told about the philosophy of‘heretic’ Pasupatas. 
From the description of Siva who propagated that heretic sect 
‘to delude’ the cursed people, it appears that they wore a gar¬ 
land of skullbones, covered their bodies with ashes from Smaiana 
(burning-ground of the dead) and wore matted hair — practices 
‘ordained’ in PMupata sutras (1.2.3, V.9.30 etc.) * 

The Pasupata practices of the Veda-approved were not 
much different. They shaved their head or had matted hair or 
a tuft of hair on the crown of their head; they besmeared 
the whole of their body with ashes; they were engaged in Rudra- 
japa (KP.I.25.11). Even Krsna got his head shaven and put on 
barkgarments and besmeared his body with ashes (KP.I.25.49), 
when he adopted the Pasupata Yoga for propitiating Siva. 

We have a glimpse of their philosophical tenets in Uvara- 
Gitd (KP.II.7.18-32) : 

Siva says : 

Individual souls wandering in Sarhsara are called PaSus, 
while I (Siva), their Lord, am Paiupati. Out of sportiveness, I 


•Edt. by R. Ananthakrishna Shastri, Trivandrum 1940. 



( XXXV ) 


bind these Pafus (souls) and there is none else who can liberate 
them from the bonds of Maya. The noose of Pasupati are 
the twentyfour principles, Maya, Karma and Gunas. And the 
Kleias are the fetters of Jivas. The twentyfour Principles are as 
follows : 

(i) Eight Prakrtis : Mind, intelligence, egotism and the five 
elements (the Ether, Wind, Fire, Water and the Earth). 

(ii) Fifteen products {of Prakrtis) : Five sense-organs, of percep¬ 
tion (viz. ears, skin, eyes, tongue and the nose) -|-five organs of 
actions (viz. the organ of generation, the anus, hands, feet and 
the vocal organ) -|-five objects of senses (viz. sound, touch, 
form or colour, taste and smell). 

(iii) Pradhana : The unmanifest, characterised by gunas—the 
sole cause of the (creation of) the universe. 

Sattva, Rajas and Tamas are the gunas, the equilibrium of 
which is the unmanifest Prakrti. The two Pa^as (bonds or nooses) 
are Dharma and Adharma. (As these are due to Karman), all 
actions surrendered to the Lord do not result in bondage. 

The Klesas {anguishes) are Avidya, (Nescience), 

(Ego, I-ness), Raga (attachment), (aversion) dead Abhi- 

niveSa (instinctive clinging to worldly life). These are called 
‘bondages’ as they bind down the soul. Maya, the unmanifest 
primordial Prakrti, which causes these Paias (bondages) 
abides in me. The eternal God of gods is primordial Nature 
{Prakrti) , Pradhana and Purusa. He is both the bondage and 
the binder. He is both Paia (bondage) and PaSu (the soul that 
is bound). Though none knows him, he is omniscient, the First 
Eternal Purusa (KP.II.7.18-31). 

(2) The path of realizing God is described in details in KP. 

II. 11.1.118. It consists of eight stages (a/zgoj) of Yoga like Tama, 
Miyama etc—the same as those of Patanjali’s and 

emphasizes Bhakti for liberation. 

(3) As the above-mentioned philosophy and the path-way 
to God are based on the orthodox Saiikhya, Yoga and Vedanta 
(including BG), this type of Pasupatism is naturally supported 
by the orthodox Brahmanism. 



Vaifnavism : 

KP. begins with an obeisance to Visnu in the Tortoise 
form (I-l-l;9). Though the Pauranika from ofVisnu with 
four hands holding Sankha (conch), Cakra (disc) etc. in each, is 
described (1.17.42, 25.4; II.1.29-30 etc), Visnu is identified 
with the supreme Brahman (I. chs.1,2; 1.16.220-21). Gods 
Brahma and Rudra were born of him (1.2.2-13). These two 
gods are the two forms of Visnu with Rajas and Tamos as their 
special attributes (1.17-38). The trinity—Brahma, Visnu and 
Hara who create, protect and destroy the universe are at a 
lower level than the Deity Visnu and these gods are His forms 
(1.22.26-28) and many times the credit of these three functions 
(e.g. creation, protection, destruction) is attributed to Visnu 
(1.1-96; 16-30; 51-37-38). Ascetics realize Him through Yoga 
(H. 45.56-61). 

The various legends about Visnu extol his greatness and 
efficacy of devotion to Him. Sages Visvamitra and Bharadvaja 
advise Kings Jayadhvaja and Vasuman respectively to propitiate 
Visnu. King Indradyumna worshipped Visnu, as he realized 
that gods Brahma, Mahadeva and others depended on Visnu 
for their powers (1.1.49-50). Though Visnu is described in 
glowing terms, his association and identification with god Siva 
(even in composing misleading Sastras like Varna, Bhairava, 
(non-Vedic) Pancaratra and Pasupata for the Brahmanas 
cursed by Gautama (as in KP.1.16.117-119) is remarkable. 
Statements like, ‘Those who do not respect Visnu, never reach 
Siva’ (1.9.82-86), ‘Those who distinguish between Siva and 
Visnu go to hell’ (1.15.87-91), Kfsna’s declaration that he and 
Siva are not different but he is another form of Siva (1.26.60) 
— all these go to show that the author of KP. is trying to bring 
together the two (probably antagonistic) sects on a single, 
higher Upanisadic platform implying that Siva and Visnu are 
the names of one and the same 'Roing — Brahman. 

The incarnations of Visnu recorded in KP. are : Kurma, 
Varaha (1.6.3-24) Nrsirhha, (1-16.20-74), Vamana (I.ch.l7), 
Rama upto his return from Lanka (1.21.16-55) and Kfsna 
(I.chs. 25,26). About the abduction of Sita, KP. as against 
\almWii Ramdyam HI.49, puts forth the theory of‘Chaya-Sita’ 
i.e. the shadow Sita was taken away by Ravaria while real 



( xxxvii ) 

Sita took refuge in Avasathya Fire of the Asrama. This real 
Sita emerged from the fire when the shadow Sita entered fire 
to prove her chastity. 

The Vyuha theory in KP. states the following four forms : 

(1) Vasudeva — Pure attributeless form. 

(2) Kala or Siva; (attribute—Ta/naj-) destroys the world. 

(3) Pradyumna (attribute——protects the world. 

(4) Aniruddha or Brahma (attribute —creates the world. 

The highest position or Vasudeva—Visnu and the lower 
status given to Rudra and Brahma may appear sectarian. But 
the author of KP. regards the trinity—Brahma, Visnu, Siva —on 
a lower plane than the supreme Brahman which he calls at 
times Siva, Visnu and even Brahma. 

Saktism : 

Chapters 11 and 12 in the 1st part of KP. show the influ¬ 
ence of Saktism both in its auspicious and terrible forms : 

( 1 ) Sri or Laksmv. Her auspicious form Sri or Laksmi came 

out while the ocean was being churned for Amrta (I. 1, 30*). 
She had four arms like Visnu with conch, disc and lotus in her 
hands (I. 1. 39). She was formerly produced from Visnu in 

Srikalpa. She is the Maya (illusive power) of Visnu. She 

deluded gods and sages; none could ever cross her. She accepted 
Visnu as her Lord—Visnu called her the supreme power, 
the form of Brahman and told that through her agency, the 
creation, protection and destruction of the universe takes 

place (I. 1. 34-36). 

(2) Parvati: In fact, Sakti is associated with all gods who 

become possessors of Sakti {Sakti-man) but the Yogins know the 
identity between and Saktiman 12.27-28). Sakti, born 

as Uma to the mountain Himavan, had four faces, matted hair, 
three large eyes and eight hands holding Sankha, Cakra, gada, 
triiula etc. in each (I. 12. 53-4y 54, 57). But her real form 
when viewed through divine eyes was terrible and unapproach¬ 
able. Her epithets—Mahamaya, Gandi, Virupaksi, Mahakali, 
slayer of demons like Sumbha, Nisumbha, Mahisasura — describe 
her prowess and exploits (I. 12. 148, 111, 136, 150 etc.). 


'Unless specified separately, all such references are to KP, 



( xxxviii ) 


She is associated with mountains like Vindhya, Himalayas, 
Meru (I. 12. 178-180). She uses birds like Peacock, Garuda, 
animals like a bull, a lion and even human beings for con¬ 
veyance (I. 21. 96, 100, 101, 127 etc). 

Corresponding to four forms of Siva, she has the four 
forms viz. Santi, Vidya, Pratistha and Nivrtti (I. 12. 11-12). 
All gods worship her. She is the origin of Panca-brahma or 
Pancayatana i.e. gods Ganesa, Surya, Siva, Visnu and Sakti 
(I. 12. 135). In fact the Sahasra-nama of Parvati (as a matter 
of that those of Visnu or Sankara) shows how the author of 
Puranas tried to unify and integrate the followers of different 
sects. 

On the lines of BG. X, the KP. gives the lists of Vibhutis 
of goddess Parvati (I. 12. 215-225) andofgod Siva (II. 7. 3-16). 

(3) Sarasvati: Though Sarasvati, the goddess of speech 
is eulogised in the usual glorificatory terms (I. 24. 17-20) and 
is shown to have killed a demon to save king Navaratha 
(K. II. 14. 51-95), KP. does not give much space to this 
goddess. 

(4) Savitri: The Gayatri Mantra (RV. III. 62. 10) 
preceded by OM and three Vyahrtis {bhur, bhuvah, soar) is 
deified by KP. as the mother of Vedas, the essence of Yoga and 
the three Vyahrtis are identified with the trinity of gods and 
three gunas. Savitri is the sacredmost Mantra for Japa (II. 
14. 51-90). 

Brahma— Worship 

It appears that the influence of the first god of the Trinity — 
Brahma —was fading away at the time of KP. even though 
legends connected with him show his (embarrassing) power of 
giving boons — He is the creator of the universe. The close of 
one day of his life brings about the dissolution of the universe 
(I. 5). He is said to be both Visnu and Siva (I. 44. 7). Jama- 
dagni advocated the worship of Brahma as most efficacious 
(I. 20. 38). But as god Brahma was born out of Visnu’s navel 
(according to KP. and other Puranas) any-how he came to 
occupy a somewhat lower status. 



The Sun-God 

The Sun-god had an important place in the religious 
life of Indo-Iranians. Since pre-Vedic period Vedic mitra 
(Iranian —has an important place in the religious life 
of Hindus. The Gayatri-Mantra mentioned above is the 
prayer of the Sun-god. We do not know anything about the 
Sauri Sarhhita of KP. but the present Brahmi Sarhhita enjoins 
compulsorily the Sandhya (which is prayer to the Sun-god), 
the Japa of the hymn called Surya-hrdaya (KP. II. 18. 34-44) 
both morning and evening and Saura hymns at mid-day. 
People of Sakadvipa (Scythia, Sogdiana—De, p. 172) worship 
the sun and gain salvation and association with that god (I. 49. 
38-39). 

The mythological information about the sun, its posi¬ 
tion, dimensions etc. given in the chapters on Bhuvanakosa 
is not supported by modern Astronomy. KP. (like other puranas 
like Bh. P.) advances a theory according to which every month 
has a new presiding sun-god who with his paraphernalia of 
gods, sages, Gandharvas, celestial damsels, serpents and demons 
supplies certain amount of rays at the command of the premier 
sun-god. His chariot has one wheel and the seven Vedic metres 
such as Gayatri, Brhati, Jagati and others are the seven 
horses yoked to his chariot (I. chs. 42. 43) Seasonal changes in 
the ‘colour’ of the sun are noted as follows: 

Vasanta (Spring) — Brown 

Grisma (Summer) — Golden 

Varsa (Rainy season) — White 

Sarad (Autumn) — Pale 

Hemanta (Winter) — Copper-like red 

Sisira (cold season 

Magha and Phalguna) — Reddish 

- KP. I. 43.26-27). 

The above brief discussion will show that though KP. 
eulogizes all gods in exaggeratingly glorious terms, the common 
epithets of glorification, suggestions nay positive statements 
about the identities of the different deities go to show that the 



( xl ) 


author of the KP. was aware of and wanted to emphasize and 
preach the Vedic observation — 

ekarh sad viprd bahudha vadanti 

RV. I. 164. 46. 


6 Philosophy in the KP. 

The above discussion sheds light on the philosophical 
systems that influenced KP. These may be briefly reviewed as 
follows: 

Sankhya:The. Theories of the involution of the universe and 
Sarga and Prati-sarga or Prati-sahcara) show that the Sahkhya 
theory has been mostly followed in KP. The twenty-four prin¬ 
ciples of Sahkhyas are regarded as the Pasas (nooses) of Pasupati 
in the orthodox Pa supatism explained in Isvara Gita(II. 7.18-32). 
But the two theories of evolutions in the KP. (as noted above) 
are different and must have been assimilated at different periods. 
The Sahkhya in KP. is theistic and gives the credit of creating 
the Primordial matter, Time etc. to god Siva (orVisnu) who 
stands for the Upanisadic concept of Brahman. Consequently, 
the idea of Liberation of the Sahkhyas viz. Alone-ness {Kaivalya) 
is substituted by the four types of muktis (Liberation) such as 
Salokata, Samipatd, Sarupatd and Sayujyatd. KP. asserts that the 
whole universe — mobiles andimmobiles—depends just on the will 
of God (II. ch.6). In the chapter titled Sdhkhya Siddhdnta 
(II. ch. 8), God is equated with eternal Brahman and is the 
Father of the Universe. For attainment of Brahman or Mahes- 
vara, knowledge of seven subtle principles (five tan-matras, 
manas and atman) and of the six characteristics or components 
of Lord Siva (viz. omniscience, contentment, perception of his 
beginninglessness or eternity, freedom, undiminishing strength 
and infinite power) is necessary. 

The chapter shows how great KP. differs from Sdnkhya 
Kdrikds of Isvara Krsna. 

Toga'. Next to Sahkhya, Yoga, as a science of God-reali¬ 
zation exerted a powerful influence on the KP. It is not simply 
the acceptance of five Klesas (mentioned in YSP ii. 3: iii. 12: 
in-28-30) as the ‘bondages’ of the soul but as noted above, we 
find that the whole of asfdnga Toga (from Tama, Niyama upto 



( ) 


Samadhi) is accepted as the path of attaining to Siva in the 
orthodox Pasupatism (II. 11. 1-118). 

Vedanta: The. Uvara Gita (II. 1-11) is so much full of quota¬ 
tions from the BG. and from Upanisads like Svetasvatara, 
Katha, that the author of the KP. only echoes these Vedantic 
works when explaining the ‘Pasupata’ concepts about atman, 
Brahman (the impersonalized Siva), Maya (also called Prakrti) 
etc. The personal god Siva also appears occasionally. 

The Atman indicates both god-head and individual soul. 
It is pure consciousness {cinmdtra), pure, subtle, eternal unmani¬ 
fest. He is also called Prana (vital breath), Mahesvara (the 
great god) and Kdla (Time) (II. 2. 4-5). Though the Lord of 
Maya (Mayin), he appears to be bound by Maya and takes 
diverse forms — but this diversity is apparent due to Maya. 

Prapanca (the visible world) and Paramatman are distinct 
and different. Prapanca is unreal. Atman is one, unaffected by 
feelings or sufferings. Hence, he is called Advaita (II. 2. 14-25). 
The influence of Sahkaradvaita is felt at every step when one 
reads about the concept of Atman, Brahman, Maya etc. The 
Puranic element — Saivism — is obvious as the unmanifest Atman 
is regarded as Siva. When a Yogi (by the path described above 
in II. 11. 1-118) identifies his soul with Siva, he is liberated 
from Sarhsara (II. 2. 25-51). 

7. Pdsupatisation of the KP. 

It may not be out of place to consider here R. C. Hazra’s 
view about the Pasupatisation of the KP. He advanced a theory 
that KP. was originally a Vaisnavite Purana like VP or Bh. P., 
but was later Pasupatised (PRHRC, pp. 57-66). The following 
is the evidence adduced by him: 

1. KP. I. chs. 1 and 2 strike the Key-note of the whole 
work: They state characteristics of Puranas, names of eighteen 
Puranas and Upa-Puranas, the four Sarhhitas of KP.; the 
churning out of Sri, the Sakti (power) ofVisnu, story of Indra- 
dyumna, the narration of KP. to Indradyumna with instruction 
on Karman (Varnasrama-dharma), need of jndna (spiritual 
knowledge) and Bhakti (Devotion) The renarration of KP. to 
sages included the origin of Brahma, Rudra and Sri from 
Visnu; Sri commissioned to delude people; creation of four 



( xlii ) 


Vedas and four castes and establishment of Varnasrama-dharma 
(rules of dharma for different castes and stages of life). 

The theology o f these chapters equates Visnu with Para 
Brahman—The Visnu of the Trinity (Brahma, Visnu and Siva) 
is on a lower plane. Sri, Maya—Sakti (Deluding potency) of 
Visnu, is the source of all the specific potencies of various gods. 
This Sakta element is found in KP.I.12 as well. 

The theology of this old portion of KP. is comparable to 
the Pancaratra system found in Ahirbudhnya Samhita. 

2. ‘Jnana’ or ‘Jnana-Yoga’ mentioned in many places in 
Uvara Gild (II.l.ll) as it sets forth Vimuktidarh 

knowledge that gives Liberation’ (II. 1.13). It is also called 
Vijnana (II.2.1, 38, 39 etc.). By the word Vijnana, KP. means 
Isvara Gita in 11.45.1, the narrator of which is Narayana and 
not Siva : 

etad akarnya vijnanarh Ndrayammukheritam 

The author of KP. became aware that one of the Panca- 
lakfanas of a mahdpurdna viz. Pratisarga (Dissolution of the uni¬ 
verse) was not described in the KP. and so he makes sages to 
request the description of that characteristic (II. 45. 2) : “you 
have told us dharma (i.e. Dharma Sastra), knowledge leading 
to Moksa (i.e. Uvara Gitd), Sarga (creation of the universe), 
Varh§a (genealogies) and Manvantaras. Please describe to us 
Pralaya (dissolution of the world)”. Dr. Hazra infers from this 
that KP. II. 45 was the next chapter after Uvara Gitd (II. 1-11) 
and the Vydsa Gitd and chapters describing Tirtha-Tdtrd are 
grafted on old KP. 

3. The so-called Vydsa-Gitd is Usanas Sarnhitd with a few 
additional chapters (R. G. ’iAa.zrn —Indian Culture, Vol. I. pp. 
587-614). 

It must be admitted that Itihasas and Puranas being a 
literature of growth, additions, modifications, interpolations etc. 
have taken place before their final redaction. A comparison of 
the critical edition and the vulgate of the Mbh. is a glaring 
instance of it. So it is not improbable that Pasupatas tried to 
insert the glory of their god in KP. 



( xliii ) 


Let us take the instance of livara Gita. It was at first 
taught by Vyasa to Suta as the narration of Kurma to sages. 
(II. 1. 3-5). But when Suta was about to recount it to Naimi- 
saranya sages, Vyasa appeared there and told them that it was 
first Lord Siva who narrated that knowledge to Yogis like Sanat- 
kumara and Visnu was a member of the audience (11. 1. 6-51), 
the implication being that the real author (of Uvara Gita) was 
Siva and not Visnu. Here two questions arise: 

1. What business had Siva to come uninvited when 
Narayana was about to give discourse to sages? (11. 6-31) 

The subsequent request by Narayana to Siva to preach 
that knowledge, is both courtesy and formality. 

2. Why did not Vyasa tell his disciple Suta that the Gita 
taught to him was first taught by Siva and then recounted by 
Visnu (Kurma) to other sages like Narada? 

The whole episode smacks of Saiva propaganda. But this 
orientation took place so long ago (circa A.D. 650-800 accord¬ 
ing to Hazra) that it got recorded in most of the Mss. of KP.* 
The introduction of one more pair of interlocutors in Isvara- 
Gitd was unnecessary except for propaganda purpose. A. S. 
Gupta’s defence in this point (intro, to KP., p. viii. Footnote 
11) is unconvincing. 

As the text stands to-day, it is predominantly Saivite. 
But both Siva and Visnu (and even god Brahma) are the names 
of the Para Brahman and their identity is accepted by specific 
statements, use of common epithets (applicable to the Supreme 
Brahman also). In fact, the breadth of outlook expressed in 
allowing Propitiation of any god according of the devotee’s 
choice, (1.22-40)** shows the attempt of the KP. to reduce 
sectarian differences and conflicts and to achieve social 


*The criterion of Mss. evidence is valuable in determining the spurious¬ 
ness of a verse or an episode. The critical edition of the Mbh. has used it. 
A. S. Gupta is also justified in deleting KP.1.22.86 as spurious and record it 
in the Footnote of his critical edition (p. 201). 

**Td yasyabhimata pumsah sd hi tasyaiva devoid / This is in spite of the 
sectarian propaganda as in I.2.90ff—6aiva sect mark (Tripupdra)—most 
effective. 



( xliv ) 


integration that was necessary in that period, (vide above 
‘Religious Sects in the KP.’). 

8. DharmaSdstra in KP. 

Puranas have been considered as authoritative as Smrtis 
and have been quoted by Nibandha-writers. KP. has thus been 
quoted by 39 Nibandhakaras from Jimutavahana (in Kalavi- 
veka A. D. 1090-92) to Tryambaka Sastri Oka {in Acdra-bhufana 
A. D. 1819).* KP. deals with the following topics of Dharma- 
Sastra VarndJrama-dharma (I. chs. 2, 3, II. chs. 11-19. 24-25, 
27-29) : ^rdddha (II. chs 20-22); liauca (II. 23); Ddna (II- 26); 
Prdyaicitta (II. chs. 30. 32-34): Tirtha-ydtrd (I. chs. 31-35. 36-39 
II. chs. 35-44. 

Though KP. is quoted as an authority in the above topics 
of dharma-Mstra, KP. also profusely quotes correctly (and some¬ 
times from memory) from Manu and Yajnavalkya, Usanas. The 
extent of the quotations can be imagined when one hnds 82 
actual quotations and about 70 quotations showing textual 
similarities with Manu#** 

Scholars like Dr. HazraJ are inclined to believe that 
these smrti-quotations were later accepted or inserted in KP. for 
the revival of Brahmanism. 

9. The date of KP. 

Due to the composite nature of KP., it is difficult to deter¬ 
mine the exact date of the work. But as KP. is quoted by 
Jimutavahana in(Circa A. D. 1090-92) and Laksmi- 
dhara Bhatta in Krlyakalpa-taru (Circa A.D. 1100-1154), the 
date of the KP. must be before A.D. 1000. 

2. Naradapurana I. 106 gives the table of contents of the 
KP. which tallies with the extant KP. The NP. is regarded as 
composed between Circa A.D. 900-950. KP. § therefore must 
have been composed earlier than A.D. 900. KP. quotes a number 


*A.S. Gupta— KP. Appendix No. 1, pp. 691-745; unident 

tied quotations are excluded. 

**G. K. Pai —Cultural History from the KP., pp. 271-75 Cochin, 1975. 

JR. C. Hazra : /HQ, XI. pp. 265-286, 1935. 

§G. V. Tagare—Introduction to NP, pp. 19-20. 



( xlv ) 


of verses from Manusmrti, Yajnavalkya smrti (vide notes to 
the text), though KP. emphasizes the importance of bath and 
dcamana, worship of the sun and the sectarian deities. As KP. 
quotes from Manu (A.D. 100) and Yajnavalkya (A.D. 300), 
it is obviously later than those Smrtis. Kurma, though originally 
a Pancaratra work shows Sakta influence (I. 12). Jayakhya 
Samhitd (A.D. 350), a Pancaratra work is free from that influ¬ 
ence. So Hazra assigns (A.D. 550 as the probable date to the 
Visnuite KP). 

KP. consists of some Pasupatised chapters, some purely 
Saiva ones and some non-descript. The dates of these groups of 
chapters being composed at different times must be separately 
located. The task has become a complicated one, as the chapters 
which Hazra regards as ‘Pasupatised’ and hence later than 
A.D. 800 (as the Pasupatised chs. in KP. know only Varna 
Saktism and are not familiar with Agamas), A. S. Gupta regards 
as belonging to the older (Visnuite) stratum as the topics con¬ 
tained in those chapters are of Dharma-Sdstra mentioned as 
dharma in I. 2. 3: “There is nothing to exclude Vydsa Gild which 
contains purely Dharma-Sastra topics such as the dcdra, diauca, 
ddna, dharma and prdyaScitta (II. chs. 12-33) and Tirthas (II. chs. 
34-42) from the scope of {Intro. toKP. ix). 

He however admits thal these chapters may have been 
revised later on by the Pasupatas {ibid., p. ix). I regard it as an 
open question and tentatively propose the dates of these chapters 
on considering the evidence of both the above-mentioned 


scholars: 

Chapters and Verse No. 

Topic 

Probable date 

I. Chs. 1-3: 

Usual introduction of 

A.D. 


Puranas, Varndhama dha¬ 
rma (Duties of castes and 
stages in life) The 
oldest Visnuite Part 

550-600 

II. Chs. 12.30 

DharmaSdstra in Vydsa- 


and 32-34 

Gitd 

before 800 


(Pasupatas in KP. show 
no knowledge of 

Agamas) 




( xlvi ) 


I. 30 and I. 29 Tugadharmas 800 

I. Chs. 31-39 Tirthas (Sacred place) c 800 

II. 35-44 Tirthas (excluding 

Pasupatised section) ” 

In my opinion, despite the revision by Pasupatas and other 
interpolations, we have to assign the KP. to the 9th Cent. A.D. 
as NP. records its Table of contents in its Ch. 106. Further 
investigation, however, is necessary. 



KURMA PURAI^A 



BRAHMI SAP^IHITA 


CHAPTER ONE 

Salvation of Indradyumna 

1. After making obeisance to the inscrutable Lord 
Visnu who has assumed the form of Kurma'^ (a divine tortoise), 
I shall recount that Purina^ narrated by the Creator of the 
Universe. 


1. Kfirma —The Divine Tortoise is normally regarded as the second 
incarnation of god Visnu but Bh. P. 1.3.16 states it to be the eleventh. In 
Bh. P. VIII. 5.8-10, we are told that in the sixth [cdksusa) Manvantara, 
Lord Visnu ‘by a ray of his essential nature, appeared as Ajita, the son of 
Vairaja and Sambhuti* and supported mount Mandara, while gods and 
demons were churning the sea of milk for extracting nectar. The Bh. P. 
gives the credit of churning the ocean to Lord Visnu (VIIL 7.16). 

The Divine Tortoise still resides in the Hiranmaya continent, where 
Aryama, the ruler of the manes, worships him. His mantra is : 
om namo bhagavate akupardya 
sarva-sattva-guna-viiesandy^nupalaksita- 
sthandyCi namo varsmane bhumne namo 
namo*vasthdndya namaste j 

Bh. P.V. 18.30 

AP. does not give the parentage of Kurma^ but states that when due to 
the curse of sage Durvasas, gods lost their glory, Visnu advised them to 
churn out the nectar from the sea, and at that time, when the supportless 
churning-rod—mount Mandara—began to sink into the water, god Visnu 
assumed the form of a divine tortoise and supported Mandara (AP. 3.1.8), 
Even KP. merely states in verse 28 below : 

“When it (the sea) was being churned, god Janardana who had 
assumed the form of a tortoise, bore (on its back) mount Mandara (the 
churning rod) to achieve the good of gods.” 

Thus Bh. P. shows a developed stage of the Kurma-legend. 

2. Purd^a —‘A tract of literature recording ancient events.* The terms 
itihdsa and Purdria overlap, as both deal with ancient events. Amarasimha 
(5th Cent A.D.) distinguishes Purd^a as ‘a work characterised by five topics 
viz. Sarga (creation), Pratisarga (re-creation after the dissolution of the 
universe), variiia (dynasties of gods, Prajapatis etc.), Manvantara (aeons pre¬ 
sided over by Manus), Varhsdnucarita {history of descendants of the solar 



2 


Kurma Pur ana 


2. At the end of their sacrificial session, the great 
sages staying in the Naimisa*^ forest enquired the sinless 


and lunar and other dynasties), while Itihdsa is ‘the record of past-events* 
(Purd’-vrtta) . As a section of literature Purd^as existed in Vedic times and are 
mentioned as such along with Brdhmattas, Itihdsa and Ndrdiarhii gdthd in the 
Atharva Veda (AV. XI.7.24; XV. 6.11). Probably at that time, there might 
have been one tract of literature called Purdtias —a tradition recorded in the 
Alatsya (MP. 53.45), Skatida (SKP. Revd Mdhdtmya I, 23.30) also Patahjali 
{Mahdbhdsya I. p. 9). In the Sutra period, different Purd^a works came into 
existence and Apastamba quotes two verses from a Purdt^a and summarizes 
the view of a then Bhavisyat Purd^a {Ap, Dharma Sutra 1.6.19.13; 11.9,23.3; 
JI. 9.24.6). Their number multiplied in the early Smrti period, as Manu 
(III. 232) and Yajhavalkya (III. 189) use the plural Purditdni. The eighteen 
Tiumber of Purdtias is mentioned in the Mahdbhdrata and later works {Svarga 
5.46.4) (For details vide Intro.). 

1. Naimiseydh —‘Residing in the Naimisa forest*. 

Naimisa forest is the conventional venue of the recital of Purdnas. It is 
modern Nimsar, at a distance of 20 miles from Sitapur and 45 miles to the 
North-West of Lucknow. Nimsar is a railway station on the former Oudh- 
Rohilkhand Railway. 

This Naimisaranya is on the banks of the Gomati i.e. in the U.P. Here 
Dasarathi Rama performed his Horse-sacrifice {Aiva^medha) vide VR. VII. 
'91.15 and it is here that Q,ueen Sita disappeared into the earth at the time 
of her second ordeal (VR. VII. 97). 

The name “Naimisa** has two popular etymologies, one connected 
■with nimi^a ‘‘winking of eyelids” and the other with nemi ‘‘the felly of a 
wheel’*. 

^ridhara, the oldest and respectable commentator on Bh. P. 1.1.4 
states that the forest is so-called as Lord Visnu destroyed the Asura army 
within one winking of eye-lids and he quotes the authority of VR. P. on 
this as follows : 

evarh krtvd tato devo munirh Gauramukharh tadd / 
uvdea nimise^edarh niliatarh Ddnavarh balam // 
aratiye'smirks tatas tvetan Naimisdratiyasarhjnitam / 
bhavisycti yathdrtharh vai Brdhmattdndrh liiesakam // 

The other popular etymology connects this name with nemi or ‘the 
felly of a wheel !* God Brahma wanted to recommend a holy place where 
sacrifices or penance or religious observances could be fruitfully performed. 
He created mentally a wheel and it was at this place that the felly of that 
wheel fell off, and this site came to be known as “Naimisa**. As VA. P.I.2.8 
states it : 

bhramato dharma-cakrasya yatra nemir aiiryata / 
karmat).d tena vikhydtarh Naimisarh muni-pujitam fj 



1.1.2 


3 


Suta*^ Romaharsana,^ about the holy compilation of the Puranc? 
(called the Kurma). 

This verse is quoted verbatim in Bh. P, I. 1.2.8. The DB. 1.2.28-32 
confirms the same etymology and adds that Kali, the presiding deity of this 
Iron Age, has no entry i.e. influence in that forest. 

But before the Aryans migrated towards the east, there seems to be 
2 Lnot\\QT Naimisdranya in the Kuru region mentioned in the Chandogya Upa. 

I. 2.13, also in the Kdthaka Samhitd 10.6, the Tandya Mahdbrdhmana 25.6.4. It 
is to this Naimisaranya on the bank of the Sarasvati that MBH Vana 83.109 
refers and an explanation of the change in the course of the Sarasvati to the 
eastern direction is given. MBH ^alya 37.35-57. 

But by the time of the Purd^aSt Aryans were already settled in eastern 
India, hence the Puranic Naimisaranya is accepted as Nimsar in the U.P, 

1. Siita —According to a .Sw/a is the offspring of a Brahmana 

woman from a Ksattriya male (Manu X. 71; Yajnavalkya I. 93-94). 
Gautama regards Suta as a Pratiloma (Dharma Sutra —Dh. S. 15-16). 
Kautilya, however, notes that the Suta mentioned in the Purdnas is to be 
distinguished from ordinary Brahmanas and Ksattriyas ( Paurd^ikas tvanyah 
suto Magadhasca Brafima^Ksattrdd miesatahjArtha Sdstra III. 7 p. 165). He 
implies that though Sutas of his times, being a pratiloma caste, were inferior 
to Brahmanas and Ksattriyas, the Suta narrator of the Purdnas was different 
i.e. was a great sage or a semi-divine person—a view endorsed by KP. 1.1.6 
which states “The Supreme Person (Lord Visnu) has incarnated himself in 
your(Suta*s) form**. The same verse gives a popular etymology of Suta from 
su —‘to extract juice’and that in the sacrifice of god Brahma, Suta was 
born on the day of the extraction of the soma juice {Sutydha) for recounting 
the (Purdna) Samhitd —a legend supported by VAP. I. 26-33 and 62-147. Pd.P 

II. 27.65-87, V. 1.29-32, Bd, P, II. 36.158-173, SKP, Prabhasa 1.8. 

2. Roma (Loma-) harsana —As verse 6 below explains, the Suta is 
called Romaharsana as all the hairs on his body stood on their ends, 
*thanks to the delight on hearing the words of Dvaipayana (Vyasa)’. A 
view supported by SK. P. Prabhasa 1.6. But Va. P. 1.16 states that 
he was so designated as he made the hair of his audience bristle by his 
eloquent elucidation : 

lomdni harsaydneakre irotrndm yat subhdsitaih / 

Karmartd prathitas tena loke*smillomaharsa^ah 11 

Romaharsana had six disciples : Sumati, Agnivarcas, Mitrayus, 
Saihsapayana, Akrtavrana and Savarni. Unfortunately the hot-headed 
Balarama who was misled by his designation Suta killed Romaharsana 
when he found him occupying a higher seat in the assembly of Brahmanas, 
at the time of his visit to the great sacrificial session at Naimisaranya 
(Bh. P. X. 78.28). His ignorance of Suta’s special status becomes evident 
when he demanded why a child of irregular marriage (pratilomajah) was pre¬ 
siding over (from a higher seat). This was the end of that great scholar sage. 

3. Vydsa —The “arranger” of the Vedic Samhitds in their present form 



4 


Kurma Pur ana 


3. O highly intelligent Suta ! The worshipful sage 
Vyasa, the most excellent among the knowers of the Brahman had 
been served and worshipped devoutly by you with the object of 
(understanding) the meanings of(Historical work viz. 
the Mahdbhdrata) and the Purdnas. 

4. You are called Romaharsana as all your hairs stood on 
their ends, thanks to the delight on hearing the words of Dvai- 
payana (Vyasa). 

5. Formerly, it was your worship alone whom the holy 
sage Vyasa himself directed to narrate all the compilations of 
Puranas to the sages. 


and the author of the Mahabharata and 18 Maha-Puranas. He was the son 
ofSatyavati, born from sage Parasara but before her marriage with ^antanu. 
The Karavira Mdhdtmya, a glorificatory work {Tirtha Mdhdtmyd) which claims 
to be a part of the Padma Purd^a states that in the previous birth Parasara and 
Satyavati were a duly married couple, and Satyavati saved Parasara from 
the amorous distractions of the celestial nymph Rambha, while he was 
performing the penance for having Lord Visnu as his son. Visnu gave him 
the boon and promised to be born as his son. Soon afterwards Satyavati 
was late to return from bath, as her mind was attracted by the family-life of 
fishes in the river water. He cursed her to be a fisherwoman. She prayed 
that Lord Visnu who promised him to be his son, should be from her. The 
sage agreed and thus Vyasa was born from an unmarried Satyavati (Karavira 
Mdhdtmya Chs. IX, X and XVI). 

Vyasa was called Krsna Dvaipayana as he was dark in complexion 
and was given birth by Satyavati on an islet in the river. 

He was the progenitor of Dhrtarastra, Pandu (and Vidura also) from 
the queens of Vicitravirya who died issueless. He is believed to be a person 
with a very long (deathless) life (cira-jivin). 

1. lUhdsa —Originally it indicated a legend with a Vedic hymn. Yaska 
recounts a few such legends and presents earliest prose versions of itihdsa 
legends e.g. the story ofDevapi and ^antanu. The Brhaddevatd (5th Cent. 
B.C. acc. to Macdonell, Intro, p. XXIII) in several places, points out what 
Vedic hymns are regarded as or contain Itihdsa (VI. 107, 109; VII. 7.153). 
Later on the connotation of Itihdsa changed and it came to be looked upon 
as a distinct branch of literature since the time of Atharva Veda(K.V. 6.4 etc.), 
and was given the status of the fifth Veda (Chdndogya Up. VIII. 1.2.4). 
The Mahdbhdrata —an itihdsa par excellence —shows how legend, history, 
philosophy, religion, etc. are synthesized under the term Itihdsa. 



1.1.6-10 


5 


6. The Supreme Person (Lord Visnu) has incarnated 
himself in your form, with a ray of his own Self, at the time of 
the sacrificial session of god Svayambhu (the Self-born god 
Brahma)—a session which extended (over many days). It was 
on the day of the extraction of the Soma juice {sutyaha)'^ 
that you were born in order to recount the Samhita (the 
sacred text of Pur anas). 

7. Hence, O holy Sir, proficient in the interpretation of 
Puranic lore, we request your worship to narrate the excellent 
Kurma Purdna.^ It behoves you to narrate it to us. 

8. On hearing the words of the sages, Suta, the most 
excellent among the knowers of Purams, bowed mentally to his 
preceptor Vyasa, the son of Satyavati and said: 

Romaharfana Said : 

9. After bowing down to Hari who is the source (i.e. 
the Creator) of the universe and has assumed the form of the 
divine Tortoise, I shall narrate that divine story of the Kurma 
Parana that destroys sins. 

10. On hearing it (the divine story) even a sinner attains 
the highest state of existence. No one should recount this holy 
story at any time to an atheist or a non-believer. 


1. Sutyaha —The day (generally the 5th day) on which Soma in the 
Agnistoma sacrifice is extracted. The day is called Sutyc. 

2. Purariarh Kaurmam —It is called the Kurma {Malta) Parana as it was 
related by Lord Visnu in the form of a divine tortoise (Kurma) first to 
Indradyumna, and then to sages and gods in the form of his previous 
dialogue with Indradyumna. (see below verses 43 onwards and especially 
verses 123-27) The Narada Parana (NP) I. 106.1-3 states : 

Sriju vatsa Marice Warn puranarh Kurma-sarhjhakam / 
Laksmi-Kalpanucaritarh yatra Kurmavapur Harih II I II 
dharmartha-kama-moksanam mdhalmyarh ca prthak prthak / 
Indradyumna-prasangena praharsibhyo dayancitah // 2 // 

The same verses are practically repeated in the Malsya Parana (Mt. P. 
53.46-47) but it adds that it was narrated at the subterranean region called 
fiaja/u/a to sages in the presence (lit. vicinity) ofindra, as a dialogue bet¬ 
ween Kurma and Indradyumna. This portion, narrated by the Suta to the 
sages in Naimisa forest, is the oldest portion. 



6 


Kurma Pur ana 


11. One should tell this story narrated by Narayana 
himself to a righteous twice-born (i.e. Brahmana, Ksattriya or 
a Vaisya) who is faithful and quiescent.^ 

12. A Purana has five characteristics^ viz. Sarga (Crea¬ 
tion), (Re-creation after deluge or destruction), Vcm^a 

(the genealogy of Kings), Manvantara (the great aeons presided 
over by Manus) and Varhsdnucarita (the detailed description of 
the race of sages and Kings both of solar and lunar races). 

13-15. The first Parana isBrd/ima; then is the Pddma; the 
Vaisnava; then the Saiva, the Bhdgavata, the Bhavifja, the Ndradija, 
the Markandeya, the Agneya, the Brahmavaivarta, the Linga, the 
Vdrdha, the Skanda, the Vdmana, the Kurma, the Mdtsya, the 
Gdruda, and then the Vdyaviya. The eighteenth Purana is called 
Brahmdnda PurdnaA 


1. Verses lOandll ' enumerate the qualities of a person eligible to 
listen to this Purana. Cf. BG. 18.67 

idam te ndtapaskdya ndhhaktdya kadacana / 
na cdiuirusave vdcyam na ca mdm yo'bhyasuyati // 

2. These five characteristics or enumeration of the main five topics of 
Furdvias are mentioned in AP. 1.14, BS. P. 1.2.4-5, Bd. P. I. 1.37.8, BVP IV. 
133.6, GP. I. 21.5,14, SK. P. VII. 2.84, VP III. 6.25. Amara Sirhiia 
(5th Cent. A.D.) has recorded them in his lexicon— Amara Kosa 1.6.5. 
Though these topics formed an integral part of a Furdria^ “The {Purdna) texts 
that have come down to us hardly conform to this definition, since they 
contain either something more or something less than the limitations set by 
it*’ ij'he History and Culture of Indian People, Vol.IlI The Classical Age, p- 292). 
For example the Ndrada Purdna gives practically nothing about Vamia and 
Vamidnucarita. It contains very little about Sarga (NP. I. 3.1-36 and 
1.42), Piatisarga (NP. 1.5) but adrJs extra materials on Dharma-Sdstra, 
Tirtha Mdhdtmya, Veddngas etc. Ifit is assumed that the definition was based 
on the contents of actual texts, then the present texts of the Purdnas must 
presumably be revised or mutilated versions of the older Purdrias. 

It may however be noted that here the word Purdna stands for Mahd^ 
Purdna a term used in the Bh. P. XII. 7,10 (as mahat Purdnam), in BVP. 
IV. 133.7 { 2 is mahatdm purd^dndm) and VP. III.6.24 {mahdpurdndnyetdni). 

3. It is noteworthy that although KP. states that it is enumerating 
the list of eighteen Mahdpurdnas, actually the list given here (in KP. I. 1.13-15) 
contains Nineteen Mahdpurdrias. The list of the Mahdpurdnas given here is 
repeated in Bh. P.XII. 13.4-8, BSP. I.. {Brahma Parva) 1.61-64, AP.272.1-23, 
BVP IV. 133. 11-21, Mt. P. 53.12.57, NP. I. 19.21-28, SK. P. Prabhdsa 
Khanda 2.28-77, VP.III.6.21-24. As VP. is earlier than most of these it is 
possible that other purdnas adopted its list. 



1 . 1 . 16-20 


7 


16. O Brahmanas, after hearing the eighteen Furanas 
other Upa^Purdms^ have been briefly narrated by the sages. 

17-20. The first [Upa-Purdna) is mentioned as Sanatkumdra. 
Thereafter, the second is the Ndrasimha. The third one is known 
as the Skdnda and it has been recounted by Kumara (Skanda). 
The fourth is what is called Siva-Dharma and it has been 
recounted by Nandisa himself. Then there is the wonderful 


As P. V, Kane notes there is a considerable divergence about the 
names of the 18 Mahd-Purdms. For example the VP. HI- 6.21-24 drops 
the Vdyu P. from the list and adds Siva. The BS.P. list omits the Ndradiya 
and Brahmavaivarta purdtias, while the Vdyu (II. 42.1-11) deletes the 

Agni and Liiiga Purdnas. 

These Mahdpurdnas are further classified by the Pd P. {Utiara Khanda 
263.81-4) into Sdltvika^ Rdjasa and Tdmasa groups. The Visnu. Ndraduy 
Bhdgavata^ Garuda^ Padma and Vardha Purdnas are Sdttvika. The Brahmanda, 
Brahmay Brahmavaivarta^ Vdmana and Bhavisya are Rdjasa. The Matsya, Kwfrta, 
Lifiga, Siva, Agni and Skanda are Pdmasa. It appears that the author of the 
Pd. P. classified these according to the three Gods Visnu, Brahma and 
6iva, whom these Purdnas are supposed to extol mainly. But all Purdnas do 
not agree with this classification. For example, Mt. P. 53.68-69 regards the 
Agni Parana as Rdjasa. To reconcile the number nineteen in the list of 
Mahdpurdtias, in KP. it has tried to explain that the Vdyu and Brahmdnda 
Purdnas are one and the same, but anyone who reads those two Purdnas will 
find that they are different texts. 

1. Upa-P'irdnas —The list of Upa-Purdtias given below is reproduced 
on the authority of KP. by Narasiriiha Vajapeyin in Nitydedra-Pradipa (p.l9), 
Raghunandana in Smrti-tattva I (p. 79.'-3), Mitra Misra in Viramitrodaya — 
Parihhdsd Prakdsay pp. 13-14, Hemadri’s Caturvarga Cintdmani I, pp. 
13-14 and SK. P. under Upa-purdxtay in different contexts in SK. P. 
(e.g. Revd Kharida —1,46,52, Prabhdsa Khanda 1.2.11-15), DB I. 3.13.16, 
BVP quoted in Viramitrodaya, Parihhdsd Prakdia, p. 14, anonymously in 
Prasthana Bheda, p. 10 of Madhusudana Sarasvati. 

As R.C. Hazra in the Upa-Purdnas (ABORI XXL i-ii p. 50) shows that 
the date of formation of the group of‘eighteen* as found in the 

above verses of KP., is earlier than 850 A.D., and that the age of the Upa~ 
Purdnas should be traced approximately to the Gupta period. Mitra Misra, 
in Viramiirodayn—Parihhdsd Prakdia, p. 15 assigns them a much earlier period 
as he claims Yajnavalkya (of the Brhaddrariyaka fame) to have recognised 
their status as Purdtias. To quote etdny upa-purdridni purdriebhya eva nirgatdniti 
Tdjnavalkyena Purdriatvena sangrhUdni / 

Lastly, it may be noted that the following names are common to the 
lists of Purdrias and Upa-purdrias: Skanda, JVaradiya, Vdmana, Brahmdnda. 



8 


Kurma Pur ana 


(Upa-Puram) recounted by Durvasas. Thereafter it is the 
JVaradiya. Then come the Kapila, Vdmana and those narrated by 
Usanas. Then there are the Brahmdnda, Vdruna, Kdlikd, Mdhesvara, 
Sdmba and Saura containing the essence of everything, and those 
narrated by Parasara, Mdrica as well as the one known as the 
Bhdrgava. 

21-22. This excellent Kurma Purdna is the fifteenth Purdria. 
It is a holy story that consists of four different Samhitds^ ( Com¬ 
pendia ). The four sacred Samhitds which lead to the attainment 
of Dharma (Righteousness), Aama (Love), (Wealth) and 

Moksa (Salvation) are Brdhmi, Bkdgavati, Sauri and Vaisnavi. 

23. This Brdhmi Sarnhitd^ is on a par with the four Vedas. 
In it there are six thousand verses in number. 

24. O great sages, the greatness of Dharma, Artha, 
Kama and Moksa is completely known from it. The Supreme 
Controller, the Brahman is also known from this. 

25. This divine sanctifying story consisting of Sarga (crea¬ 
tion), Fra/fw^j( secondary creation), Varhsa (dynasties), Alanvan- 
tara (Manu-Ages), and Varhsdmicarita (accounts of the dynasties 
and the meritorious accounts relating to gods) ® was narrated on 
a certain occasion. 


1. Catasrah Samhitdh etc. —The .statement that KP. consists of four 
Sarhhiias viz. Brdhmi, Bkdgavati, Sauri and Vaispavi agrees with the statement 
in NP. I. 106 which gives the break-up of the total number of .S/oi.-i.t as 
follows ; Brdhmi Sam (6000 verses), Bkdgavati Sam. {4000 verses), Sauri Sath 
(2000 verses), and Vaisnavi Sarh (5000 verses). The present KP. is not aware 
of the contents of other Samhitds, though it records the names of the 
Samhitds. 

2. Brdhmi Sarhkitd —.\s KP. explains both in the next verse and 
infra II. 44.132, this Samhita is called Brdhmi as it explains and extols 
the real nature of the Supreme Brahman : 

atra tat paramarh Brahma 

Kirtyate hi yathdrthatah 11 

It is a moot point whether the KP. had at any time four Samhitds as 
Suta Remaharsana concludes the Brdhmi Samhitd by stating it to be the 
whole KP.: 

eted vah kathitarh viprd . . . 

Kaurmarii purdriam akhilam 

Taj jagdda Gadddharah ( 

3. This is a standard definition repeated in a number of Pmdijas them¬ 
selves (eg. AP. 1.14, GP. 1.2.27, Mt. P. 53,64, SVP. Vdyavijia Sam. 1.41, VP. 



1.1.26-30 


9 


26. This story should be retained in memory by virtuous 
Brahmanas and others who have mastered the Vedas. I shall tell in 
details that story which had been formerly narrated by Vyasa. 

27. In days of yore, the gods in co-operation with Dai- 
tyas and Danavas, made the mountain Mandara their churning 
rod and churned the milk-ocean,^ Tor obtaining the nectar. 

28. While it was being churned. Lord Janardana assumed 
the form of a divine Tortoise^ and bore the mountain Mandara 
on his back with the desire for the welfare of the gods. 

29. On seeing the imperishable Visnu, the cosmic witness 
(Saksin) assuming the form of a Tortoise, Narada and other 
great sages along with the gods eulogised the Lord. 

30. In the mean time, goddess Sri, the beloved of Nara- 
yana, emerged (out of the sea ) there while churning. Lord 
Visnu, the Supreme Person, took possession of her (as his 
consort). 


III.6.25 etc.) and recorded in the Amara Koia 1.6.5. Scholars like M. Winter- 
nitz presume the existence oi Suta Sarhhitd (like the Vedic which 

formed ‘a part of religious ceremonies at the sacrificial and domestic festi¬ 
vals.* (HIL. Vol. I. 311-13). This sacrificial milieu of the Brahmana period 
led to the formation of an encyclopaedic literature which was broadly 
classified under five topics mentioned in this verse. But ‘The texts that 
have come down to us under the title Parana hardly conform to this defini¬ 
tion* (The Classical Age, p. 292). It was due to the process of Aryanisation of 
pre-Aryan masses and assimilation of foreign invaders like Greeks, Sakas 
etc. that there is a conglomeration of Aryan and non-Aryan legends of gods, 
demons, snake deities, old sages, kings etc. Some Purdnas like AP., GP., NP. 
are ancient encyclopaedias. Most of them are rich in Dharma Sdstra 
material (Kane—HD Vol. I. 164-67). Many amalgamated Agamic Vaisna- 
vism, ^aivism etc. with the Vedic tradition. Thus Puranas form a popular 
encyclopaedia of ancient and mediaeval Hinduism (ERE X. p. 448), though 
they violate the socalled definition Ptirdnam paiicalaksai^am KP. however 
conforms to this description to a great extent. 

1. Churning of the Milky ocean for obtaining the immortalising 
beverage— Amrta —is one of the most popular legends in Purdnas found also 

in theMbh. I. 17, VR. 1.45.17-18, 38, Bh. P. VIII.5.11-18, AP. 152 etc. 

This background story is essential to describe the Tortoise incarnation 
of Visnu who had to support the churning rod of mount Mandara on his 
back to enable gods and demons to extract Amrta from the ocean. 

2. Vide Note 1. 



10 


Kurma Pur ana 


31. Accompanied by Indra, Narada and other great 
sages who were fascinated by the brilliance ofVisnu addressed 
these words conducive to their welfare to Visnu, the 
unmanifest. 

32. O Lord Narayana, Lord of the Lords of Devas, 
who have assumed the form of the Universe, be pleased to tell 
us, the suppliant enquirers, who is this goddess of wide eyes. 
Be pleased to explain this precisely to us. 

33. On hearing their words, Visnu, the suppressor of the 
Danavas, spoke thus to the sinless Narada and others after cast¬ 
ing a glance at the goddess. 

34. This is that great Sakti (potency) of my form and 
the embodiment of Brahman. She is my beloved Maya,^ the 
Infinite, by whom this Universe is sustained. 

35. O excellent Brahmanas, it is through her that I 
fascinate this entire Universe including gods, Asuras and human 
beings. I withdraw them within me and create them again. 

36. Those who, through their spiritual wisdom com¬ 
prehend the evolution and dissolution of the living beings as 
well as their arrival i.e. birth and departure i.e. death, realise 
their Atman and cross this vast Maya. 


The Kurma-incarnation of god \^isnu is one of the most popular 
legends of ancient India as it is recorded in a number of Purdrias like AP* 
3.1-3, Bh. P. VTII.7.1-16, GR I. 142.2-4, Mt. P. 243.27-54, VP. 1.9.75-91. 

It is interesting to note that the origin of the Kurma legend is found 
in the Satapatha Br. VII.5.1.5 where it is not connected with Visnu but with 
Prajapati. Some Purd^as like AP. Pd. P. (Vl. 232. 1-4) state that due to the 
curse of the sage Durvasas, gods lost their virility and were defeated by 
Asuras and according to Visnu’s advice, they secured the co-operation of 
Asuras and churned out Amrta for regaining their power. Apart from the 
illogical nature of this innovation, it may be stated that older texts like 
Mbh., VR. do not mention any curse as an antidote against which Amrta 
was extracted. KP. follows the older version showing the joint desire of gods 
and demons to secure Amrta and their co-operation in the matter. 

1. The identification of Sri (Laksmi), Maya and Prakrti is a later 
development under the influence of Sankhya and Advaita schools. 
The older versions in the Satapatha and both in Mbh. and VR. do not 
show it. 



1.1.37-45 


ir 


37. It is by basing themselves for their support on a 
particle or a ray of hers that gods Brahma, Isana and all other 
gods become powerful. She is my entire Sakti. 

38. She is the mother of all the Universe. She is Prakrit 
consisting of three Gums (viz. Saliva, Rajas and Tamas). Even in 
the previous Kalpa, she is born of me already. She is Sri, the 
lotus-dweller. 

39. She is endowed with four arms bearing in each of 
her hands the conch, the discus and the lotus. She wears a gar¬ 
land. She is brilliant like a crore of suns and she deludes all 
embodied beings. 

40. Neither the gods nor the manes (Pilrs) nor human 
beings nor even Indra, the king of gods, nor any other embodied 
being in the world, is capable of crossing (surmounting) this 
Maya. 

41. The sages who were thus addressed by Vasudeva^ 
spoke to god Visnu: “O lotus-eyed God, say what is it that 
exists when even the time is terminated {v.L survives in the 
past, present and future).” 

42. Thereupon Hrsikesa (God Visnu), worshipped by 
the groups of sages, spoke unto them: “There is the most pro¬ 
minent twice-born well known by the name Indradyumna.^ 

43-45. In his previous birth, he had been a king who 
could not be thwarted even by gods like Sankara and others. 
He saw me when I had assumed the form of a Tortoise. From 
my mouth he heard the divine compilation of the Kurma Parana 
with leading sages ahead of him. On realising that gods Brahma, 


1. This Indradyumna is a Brahmin. That he was a Ksattriya 
king of the same name who secured the grace of Visnu is a history 
of his past birth. It may be noted that he is different from Indra¬ 
dyumna, King of Pandyas who became Gajendra (Bh.P. VIII. 4.6-13). 
KP. I. 38 also mentions another king of the same name. It was a popular 
name among the Ksattriyas of the age, as some kings bearing this name are 
mentioned in other Purdnas e.g. one Indradyumna was Krsna’s enemy 
(Mbh. Vana. 12, 32), another belonged to Iksvaku dynasty, the SK. P. 
mentions another Indradyumna as the founder of the Jagannatha temple 
in Orissa. 

The identification of ^iva and Visnu is due to the synthetic tendency 
of the Puranic age. 



12 


Kurma Pur ana 


Mahadeva and other gods along with their Saktis (potencies) 
are supported by and established in my Divine Potency, he 
sought refuge in me. Then I told him, “You will take birth as a 
Brahmana. 

46-47. You will be well-known by the name Indradyumna 
and you will be able to remember your previous birth. I shall 
impart to you, O sinless one, that secretmost knowledge which 
is inaccessible to all living beings including even the gods. 
Attaining that perfect knowledge of mine, you will ultimately 
enter unto me. 

48. Continue to survive on this earth with another par¬ 
ticle of yours, in your highly blissful state. When the Vaivasvata 
Manvantard}- elapses, you will enter into me for the sake of 
creation.” 

49-50. He bowed to me, went back to his capital city 
and protected the earth. In due course, he passed away. In the 
Sveta Dvipa,^ he along with me, enjoyed all pleasures special to 
Visnu but which are not available even to Yogins. O excellent 
sages, he was born again in the family of a Brahmana at my 
behest. 

51. He realised that I am the deity called Vasudeva in 
whom the two eternals Vidya and Avidya are lying unmanifest 


1. (I. \A1) Vaivasvata Manvantara—Manvantara is a period of 71 cycles 
of Caturyugas, each Ca'.uryiiga consisting of thirty six lakhs of human years. 
Each Manvantara is ruled by a Manu and his paraphernalia of gods, sages 
etc. There are fourteen Manus. Vaivasvata, the present ruling Manu, is the 
seventh Manu. He is called Vaivasvata, because he was born from the Sun, 
and was the founder of the Solar race. His personal name is Sraddha- 
deva. Bh. P. (VHI. 13) gives the details ofhis sons, the set of the gods and 
seven sages, etc. 

2. (1.1.49)— Sveta-dvipa is a. mythicaX land to the north of the Milk- 
ocean {Kfirabdhi). At the centre of this rfot/ia god Visnu sleeps on the couch 
of the serpent Sesa’s body, his feet being kneaded by the goddess Laksmi 
born of that ocean. The details given infra (KP.I. 49.40-71) show that only 
the righteous can reach there. These persons are fair complexioned devotees 
of Narayana. They are free from sorrow, worry, fear of old age and death. 
King Indradyumna, after his death, attained to this region due to his extreme 
devotion to Visnu and in the company of Visnu, enjoyed all the pleasures 
special toHari’s devotees, (m'i/c also Bh.P. VHI. 4.18, Mbh. Santi 322.8-10) 



1.1.52-61 


13 


and whom the spiritually wise know to be the Supreme 
Brahman. 

52. He worshipped the Supreme Lord, the support of all 
living beings, by means of the observance of sacred vows, fasts, 
rules of spiritual discipline, worship of sacrificial fires and pro¬ 
pitiation of Brahmanas. 

53. He worshipped the great God abiding in the hearts 
of Yogins, turning to him for benediction, making obeisance to 
him remaining exclusively attached to him and realising him 
as the greatest goal. 

54. As he was practising this (course of observance) 
the Supreme digit (ray) of the Lord once manifested herself 
to him in the divine form belonging to Visnu. 

55. On seeing the beloved of Lord Visnu, he bowed 
down his head. He eulogised her with various hymns. With 
palms folded in reverence, he addressed her as follows: 

Indradyumna submitted : 

56. O goddess of wide eyes, who are you ? O auspi¬ 
cious lady characterised by emblems of Visnu, be pleased to 
explain precisely the reality about you now. 

57. On hearing his speech, the auspicious lady was 
delighted. She smilingly remembered Visnu and spoke the 
following pleasing words to the Brahmana. 

Sri said : 

58. Neither the sages nor the gods with Indra as their 
leader, can see me who am the same as Narayana. I am 
the Supreme Maya and I am absolutely identical with him. 

59. I am not different from Narayana. If pondered pro¬ 
perly, (you will find that) there is no difference between us. 
I am identical with Visnu, the Supreme Brahman. He is the 
highest Lord and Controller. 

60. I have no power over those persons who worship 
the Supreme Person {Puru?ottama), the support of all living 
beings, by means of perfect knowledge and the path of (disin¬ 
terested) Karman. 

61. Hence, you worship the infinite Lord who has neither 
beginning nor end. By means of the path of disinterested action 



14 


K urma Pur ana 


{ Karman ), as well as by means of your spiritual knowledge, you 
worship him whereby you will attain the final emancipation 
from Sarhsara. 

62. On being addressed thus, Indradyumna the promi¬ 
nent sage of great intellect, bowed down his head to the 
goddess. With palms folded in reverence, he submitted to her 
again. 

Indradyumna submitted : 

63. O Goddess, the Supreme Ruler of the Universe, 
tell me how Lord Acyuta, the unsullied eternal Ruler of the 
universe, can be realised. 

64. Thus requested by the Brahmana, the lotus-wearing 
goddess told that sage that Narayana himself would impart 
to him that spiritual knowledge. 

65. After touching with both of her hands the sage who 
was bowing to her, she remembered the transcendental Lord 
Visnu and vanished at that very spot. 

66. In order to visualize Narayana, he too propitiated 
by transcendental meditation Lord Hrsikesa (Visnu), the des¬ 
troyer of the distress of those who bow down to him. 

67. Then after lapse of a pretty long period, Narayana 
the great Yogin, the wearer of yellow garments, the Deity who 
permeates the universe, manifested himself to him. 

68. On perceiving Lord Visnu, the imperishable Atman 
(of the universe), approaching him, he knelt on the ground 

and eulogised the Garuda-bannered God. 

Indradyumna prayed : 

69. O Lord of sacrifices, O imperishable Lord, O 
Govinda, O consort of Goddess Laksmi, O Kesava the 
Infinite, O Krsna, O Visnu, O Hrsikesa, obeisance to you, 
the soul of the universe. 

70. Salute to you, the ancient one, to Hari the embodi¬ 
ment of the universe, to the Cause of creation, maintenance and 
dissolution of the universe, to the Deity of infinite powers. 

71. Bow to you who are devoid of the gunas (viz. 
Sattva, Rajas ?Lnd Tamas). I bow again and again to the purest 



1.1.72-80 


15 


Principle, obeisance to you, the Supreme Person, who are the 
embodiment of the universe. 

72. Salute to you the son of Vasudeva (or the Principle 
immanent in the universe) ; bow to Visnu, the Cause of the 
universe. Obeisance to you who are devoid of beginning, 
xniddle and end. I bow to you who are knowable only through 
perfect knowledge. 

73. Bow to you, who are devoid of modifications; salute 
to you who are without diversity. Obeisance be to the Deity 
devoid of difference and non-difference and who are the very 
embodiment of spiritual bliss. 

74. I bow to the saviour, the quiescent. Salute to the 
■obstructionless Atman. Obeisance to you, O God of infinite 
forms, I bow again and again to the unembodied one. 

75. Obeisance to you the highest Reality; bow to you 
who transcend the Maya. Obeisance to the highest Ruler, the 
Brahman, the Supreme Self. 

76. Obeisance be to you the subtlest one; salute to you 
the great God. Obeisance to §iva the auspicious one, to Buddha 
(the Pure one). I bow to You, the Supreme Being {Parame- 
sfhin).^ 

77. It was by you that all these worlds were created. 
You alone are the highest goal. You are both the father and 
the mother unto all living beings, O Purusottama. 

78. You are the imperishable highest abode. You are the 
pure consciousness unsullied like the firmament. You are the 
support of all. You are the unmanifest, the infinite, beyond 
the darkness of ignorance. 

79. People perceive the great Atman only in the light of 
the lamp of knowledge. I resort unto your form—a form which 
is the highest abode of Visnu. 

80. The Lord, the Atman of all living beings and the 
creator of them all, smilingly touched (Indradyumna) with 
both o h if hands while he was eulogising him thus. 


1. As noted above in this Purana (and in others as well) the authors 
now and then emphasize the identity of or non-difference in the Trinity of 
gods Brahma, Visnu and Siva, as they are manifestations of the sole Reality, 
the Brahman. 



16 


Kurma Pur ana 


81. Even as he was touched by the glorious Lord Visnu 
the prominent sage realised properly and precisely the Supreme 
Reality, thanks to his Grace. 

82. Therefore, with a delighted mind, he fell at the feet 
of Janardana. He spoke thus to the yellow-garmented Acyuta, 
whose eyes were like the full-blown lotus. 

83. Thanks to yourGrace, the perfect knowledge pertain¬ 
ing to the. Brahman alone, as its object—the knowledge that yields 
the highest bliss—has been engendered in me dispelling all 
doubts. 

84. Obeisance to you Lord Vasudeva, the creator of 
the universe. O Lord of Yoga, be pleased to enlighten me as 
to what I should do, O pervader of the universe. 

85. On hearing the words of Indradyumna, Narayana 
the Consort of goddess LaksmI smilingly said these words which 
were conducive to the welfare of this entire universe. 

The glorious Lord replied : 

86. The Supreme Ruler (Mahesvara) should be wor¬ 
shipped by the paths of devotion and knowledge, by men 
abiding by the code of conduct prescribed for the four castes 
and stages of life, and not otherwise. 

87. After knowing perfectly that great truth about him 
as well as his magnificence, the causal relation as well as my 
functions, he who seeks emancipation should worship the Lord 
of the universe (Isvara). 

88. Eschewing all attachment and realising that the uni¬ 
verse is illusory, comprehend the identity between the Cosmic 
soul and individual soul. Thereby you will visualize the 
Supreme Ruler {Paramehara). 

89-90. O Brahmana, understand the three types of 
meditations'^ as they are being recounted by Me: One of them 


1. Bhavana —Transcendental Meditation. The gradation of these 
meditations is :(i) Visnu (ii) Avyakta or Siva and (iii) Para-Brahman. These 
are mentioned again vide infra I. 2.86-87 and 93 and II. 46.45-46. 

But VP. (VI. 7.48-49) gives a different set of Bhdvanas viz. Brahma, Karma 
and Ubhaydtmaka (i.e. a synthesis of the first two ), 

trividhd bhdvand bhupa viSvam elan nibodhaldm / 

Brahmdkhyd, Karma-Samjnd ca tathd caivobhaydtmikd // 



1.1.91-95 


17 


has me for its object; the second is that which rests on the 
Avyakta^ (the unmanifest i.e. Siva), and the third type of 
meditation should be known as Brahmi, which transcends all 
the Gunas. A spiritually wise person should adopt one of these 
Bhdvands (Meditations). 

91-92. According to the scriptural (Vedic) authority, 
weaklings should resort to the first one of these. Hence, without 
any worldly attachment and exerting all endeavours, you should 
be exclusively devoted to him as your ultimate goal and pro¬ 
pitiate the Lord of the Universe. Thereby, you will attain 
salvation. 

Indradyumna submitted : 

93. What is that transcendental Truth, OJanardana? 
What is that magnificence? What is called the effect ? What 
is the Cause? Who are you ? What is your function ? 

The Lord replied : 

The highest truth is the Supreme Brahman which is one 
and without modifications or changes. 

94. It is of the nature of eternal Bliss. It is the imperish¬ 
able light beyond the darkness (of ignorance or nescience). 
Its eternal glory and rulership is called its magnificence 
[Vibhuti). 

95. The effect is the universe. The cause is the unmani¬ 
fest, pure and imperishable {^Brahman). I am indeed the 
Immanent Soul [Antarydmin), the great controller of all beings. 


He further explains that Sanaka Sanandana and others are united 
with Brahmabhdvand while Karmabhdvand is found in gods, the mobile and 
immobile creation. While in god Brahma who passes both spiritual knowl¬ 
edge and power (over the universe) we find the synthesis of Brahma-karmdt^ 
mikd Bhdvand. 

This set of Bhavanas viz. Brahma, Karma and Brahma Karmdtmikd and 
the persons in whom they are found is repeated verbatim in NP. 1.47.24-27. 

1. Although Avyakta is translated here as ‘The unmanifest’, 
the verse indicates that the Bhdvands pertain to the Pauranika trinity 
Brahma, Visnu and 5iva. Here ‘Siva* is implied by the word Avyakta. The 
v.l. tryaksa indicates the same. In the Kosas, Avyakta is the epithet of both 
Visnu and Siva as in the Aiedini Kosa^ though it also means Prakrti etc. (vide 
S.K,D. I. 135). 



J8 


Kurma Pur dm 


96-97. To be the cause of creation, sustenance and 
dissolution of the universe, is described as my function. O 
Brahmana, understand all this rightly and precisely and then 
worship properly the Eternal One by means of the path of action 
(without any wishful expectation in return). 

Indradyumna said : 

What are the codes of righteous conduct prescribed for 
the four castes and stages of life, by observing which the Supreme 
Lord is propitiated. 

98. Of what nature is the divine knowledge which is 
based on the three types of Bhdvands (meditations) ? How is 
this universe created formerly and how is it withdrawn again ? 

99-102. How many creations are there in the world ? 
How many dynasties and Manvantaras are there ? What are 
their magnitudes ? What holy rites are observed in them ? What 
are the holy centres (of pilgrimage) ? What is the status of the 
solar (and stellar) systems ? What is the length and extent of 
the earth ? How many continents, oceans, mountains, small 
and big rivers are there ? O Lord of lotus eyes, be pleased to 
narrate all this to me precisely now. 

^ri Kurma said : 

On being requested thus by him, O leading sages, I, 
with a desire to shower my grace on my votaries, recounted 
everything in details. Whatever I had been asked by the 
Brahmana, I explained to him in details. 

103-104. After blessing that Brahmana, I vanished then 
and there. O excellent Brahmanas, eschewing attachment to 
his sons and other relations, he propitiated the Supreme Brahman 
according to the spiritual path expounded to him by me. He 
became pure in emotions and mentally concentrated. He was 
above mutually clashing opposites (like pleasure and pain) and 
was devoid of property and other belongings (Parigraha). 

105-108. He renounced all ritualistic rites. He took 
recourse to absolute detachment. He realised his own self with¬ 
in himself, and the entire universe within his soul. Attaining 
the ultimate BAayana (Transcendental meditation) pertaining to 



I.1.109-116a 


19 


the Brahman and with the imperishable Brahman as the basis,^ 
(or: preceded by contemplation on the mystic syllable —aksaraox 
bija) he accomplished the greatest Yoga through which he saw 
the one Reality—the Reality which Yogins overcoming their 
sleep and attaining mastery over their vital breath, seek and 
aspire after Mokfa (emancipation from Sarhsara). Thereafter, the 
leading Yogin went to the northern mountain beyond the 
Manasa lake in order to see the eternal Brahma. He was guided 
by the sun God (Aditya). That prominent Bra hmana went 
through the firmament, by dint of his Yogic influence and power. 

109. An aerial car of excellent refulgence like the sun 
appeared in front and it was followed by groups of gods, celes¬ 
tial singers and bevies of heavenly dancing girls. 

110-113. Others—Siddhas and Brahmana sages—saw him 
on the way and followed him. Then he approached the moun¬ 
tain and entered the abode honoured by gods and resorted to 
by Yogins. There the greatest person i.e. god Brahma resides. 
After reaching that greatest region having brilliance resembling 
that of ten thousand suns, he entered the inner apartment in¬ 
accessible even to gods. He then contemplated on god Brahma, 
the grand-sire of the universe, the Lord of gods and the highest 
refuge to all embodied beings, who was free from birth and 
death. Then, an extremely miraculous light appeared in front 
of him. 

114. In the middle of that light, he saw the Ancient 
Being, the highest goal (to be reached). It was a great mass of 
splendour, incomprehensible and unapproachable to those who 
hate Brahma. 

115-116a. He had four faces and magnificent limbs. He 
was shining with a halo (of rays and flames) of light. On seeing 
the Yogin who was standing there in bowing position, the God, 
himself the very soul of the universe, advanced to receive him 
and embraced him. 


1. aksarapurvikam —Before attaining which he meditated on tlie 
mystic syllables called ii/a. Theja-Aya and nir-bija Yoga is discussed infra 

II. 46.46-48. 



20 


Kurma Pur am 


116b-117. When he was embraced by the God, a great 
resplendent beam of moonlight emanated from his body, and 
entered the solar sphere. That is the pure and sacred region 
termed as the Rk, Tajus and Saman. 

118. It is the place where Lord Hiranyagarbha, the 
partaker of oblations offered to gods and the spirits of the 
deceased ancestors, abides. That is the primary entrance of the 
Yogins as established in the Vedanta. 

119-120. It is a glorious spot full of the splendour of Brah¬ 
man. He is the seer {v.l. Controller) of all learned persons. As 
soon as he was seen by Lord Brahma, the sage with the lustrous 
halo (of dazzling rays and flames), saw the auspicious splendour 
of Isvara penetrating everywhere and illumining it—the lustre 
that was his own Atman. He saw the highest imperishable ethereal 
region of Visnu. 

121. Becoming identical with the cosmic soul, the soul of 
all beings. He ascended (and abided) in the blissful, unshakable 
abode of Brahma, the Supreme Lord endowed with the highest 
power and glory. 

122-123a. He attained to his own (i.e. o{ his Atman’s) 
abode which is called Mok^a, the flnal beatitude which is im¬ 
perishable. Hence a sensible person should endeavour whole¬ 
heartedly to abide by the righteous code of conduct prescribed 
for the four castes and stages of life. He should resort to 
the ultimate meditation and cross the barrier of Maya, 
Laksmi. 

Suta said : 

123b-124a. Narada and other great sages were address¬ 
ed thus by Hari. All of them accompanied by Indra submitted 
to Visnu, the Garuda-bannered God. 

The sages submitted : 

124b-125. O God of gods, Hrsikesa, O eternal .Lord 
Narayana, be pleased to recount completely to us the knowl¬ 
edge regarding Dharma [Artha and other objectives of life) 
which had been formerly imparted by you to Indradyumna. 

126-127. This Indra, your friend, is also desirous of 
hearing, O pervader of the universe. 



1.1.128-2.2 


21 


On being so enquired by Narada and other great sages, 
Lord Visnu who had assumed the form of the Tortoise, Lord 
Janardana who had been in the nether world, recounted the 
entire and excellent Kurma Purdna. 

128. He narrated it in the presence of the King of Devas. 
I shall recite it to you all. It is conducive to wealth, fame and 
longevity. It is sacred and it yields Mok^a to men. 

129. The listening to and narration of the Purdna is 
excellent, O Brahmanas. Hearing even a single chapter, one 
becomes absolved of all sins. 

130-131. Even if a single anecdote {Updkhjdna) is heard, 
he is honoured in Brahmaloka. This great Kurma Purdna, narrated 
by the Lord of gods in the form of a divine Tortoise should be 
devoutly believed by all twice-borns (Brahmanas, Ksattriyas and 
Vaisyas). 


CHAPTER TWO 

The Righteous Duties of Castes and Stages in Life 
Lord Kurma said : 

1. O sages, all of you listen to what has been enquired 
of me by you, for the welfare of the Universe. It has already 
been narrated by me to Indradyumna, when I had been asked 
by him. 

2. This Purdna is enriched with anecdotes of the past, the 
present^ and the future. It is conducive to the merits of all 
men. It glorifies duties leading to the attainment of salvation. 


1. bhavya —As explained in the footnote of the text, although the 
word bhavya is used in the sense of ‘the future’, here it signifies ‘the present’ 
(bhavanti iti bhavdh, bhavd eva bhavydh—vartamdndh / yadyapi bhavya-Sabdah 
bhavisyadarthe rudhas tathdpyatra taddhita-ya-pratyaya-siddhataya na tadartka- 
bodhakah) 



22 


Kurma Pur ana 


3. Originally I, God Narayana (God reposing on cosmic 
waters) alone existed there was nothing else except me. Lying 
on the coils of serpent Sesa’s body as a couch, I resorted to ex¬ 
tensive deep slumber. 

4. At the close of the night, I woke up and began to 
think of the creation of the universe once again. O leading 
sages, thereafter there dawned in me, all of a sudden, a sense of 
serenity and composure. 

5. Therefrom was born the four-faced deity Brahma, 
the grand-father of the worlds. In the meanwhile, for some 
unknown reason, wrath was provoked in me. 

6. From my own self was born, O leading sages, the three¬ 
eyed great god Rudra of furious temperament wielding a trident 
in his hand. 

7. By his brilliance he resembled the sun, appearing as 
though he would burn down the three worlds. Then there ap¬ 
peared goddess Sri with large eyes resembling lotus. 

8. She was extremely beautiful and had a gentle coun¬ 
tenance. She fascinated all embodied beings. Beaming with a 
radiant smile, ■ she possessed composure and dignity. She was 
auspicious and an abode of greatness. 

9. Endowed with divine lustre and beautified with divine 
garlands, she was the great Maya (deluding Potency) belonging 
to Narayana. She was the eternal primordial nature {Mula 
prakrti). 

10. Filling the entire universe with her lustre she sat by 
my side. On seeing her. Lord Brahma submitted to me, the 
Lord of the universe. 

11. O Madhava (consort of Laksmi), employ this 
Maya of beautiful form for fascinating all living beings so that 
my extensive creation will flourish thereby. 

12-14. Thus requested (by god Brahma), I spoke to the 
goddess smilingly: O goddess, fascinate and delude this entire 
universe consisting of gods, Asuras and human beings, at my 


1. aham purvam dsam —He implies that there was nothing else except 
me. An echo of Upanisadic ekam evd^dvitiyam / 



1.2.15-25a 


25 


behest, and drag them into (the ocean of worldly existence). Please 
keep yourself far off from persons possessing good self-control, 
who are engaged in the path of knowledge, meditate on Brahman 
and who expound the Vedas—(be away at a longdistance from) 
persons who are devoid of anger and are devoted to the truth. 
Avoid those serene-minded pious persons who have mastered the 
Vedas, who regularly meditate on me, and are free from the 
feelings of‘myness.’ 

15-17. Please keep far away from those Brahmanas whet 
regularly perform sacrifices, who are ascetics and have cleared 
all their doubts through perfect knowledge of the Vedas and 
Vedantas (Upanifads). Keep aloof from a distance those Brah¬ 
manas who are devoted to the performance of great sacrifices, 
who worship Lord Mahesvara, the Lord of Devas, by means 
of Japa (repetition of God’s name) and sacrificial offerings 
to fire, and Vedic studies. Scrupulously avoid persons who are 
engaged in the path of devotion and who have dedicated their 
minds to Isvara (the Supreme Lord). 

18. Be far away from those persons who are free from 
sins and dirt, who are devoted to Prdndydma (breath control) 
etc., who are attached to Pranava (OM) and who regularly 
repeat silently the name of Rudra. 

19-20. Keep off from those who know the Atharva-nras^ 
and holy rites and are righteous. What more need be 
said ? .\t my behest, please do not delude those persons who 
regularly perform their prescribed duties and are engaged in 
propitiating the Ruler of the world. In this way, the great 
Maya, the beloved of Hari, was urged by me. 

21-22. She did everything in accordance with that man¬ 
date. Hence, one should worship goddess Laksmi, the consort of 
the Lord. If duly worshipped she grants prosperity, extensive 
nourishment, intellect, fame and strength. Hence one should 
worship the goddess Laksmi. Thereafter, Brahma the grand-sire 
of the worlds began his process of creation. 

23-25a. At my behest, (he created) the mobile and im¬ 
mobile living beings as they had been created before (in the 


1. v.l. Atharna Siraso 'dhyetjn —Those who study the Atharva 6iras. 



24 


Kurma Pur ana 


previous Kalpa). By means of his Yogic power he created (the 
nine sons) viz. Marici, Bhrgu, Ahgiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, 
Kratu, Daksa, Atri and Vasistha. By virtue of their penance 
these nine sons of Brahma are excellent Brahmanas. These 
expounders of Brahman (Veda), Marici and others are great 
Sadhakas (Householders or Followers of the path of spiritual 
perfection). 

25b-26. The Almighty Lord created Brahmanas from his 
mouth and the Ksattriyas from his arms. The Lord created 
Vaisyas from both of his thighs. The grand-sire of the universe 
created Sudras from the pair of his feet. Brahma created all 
castes excepting the Sudras, for the purpose of (performance 
of) sacrifices.^ 

27. Tajfia (the institution of sacrifice) came out of them 
and shone for the purpose of the protection of all Devas. So 
also did the Mantras of the ^.gveda, the Yajurveda, the Samaveda 
and the Atharva-veda. 

28. This eternal and immutable Potency {£akli) is the 
natural form of Brahma. The Divine speech ( Vdk) which has no 
beginning or end, was created by the Self-born deity (Brahma). 

29-30. In the beginning, it assumed the form of theVedas. 
It is from this that all activities emerge. Whatever scriptures 
there are, other than this, which are in vogue in this world, 
the intelligent man does not revel in them; only the heretic, 
though he is learned, takes delight in them.^ But what has 
been or stated in Smrtis by the sages of old should be 
followed by those who fully understand the meaning of the 
Vedas. 

31-32a. That (which has been stated in the Smrti texts) 
should be regarded as the highest form of righteousness and not 
■what is contained in other scriptures. (As the Smrti writers were 
great experts in the interpretation of the Vedas.) The law codes 


1. This is the Puranic paraphrase of the famous Ptiriisa Sukta 
(RV. X. 90). 

2. v.\. pasapdi tenajdyate —One becomes a heretic thereby (by reading 
those non-Vedic scriptures), another v.l. pasatido jdyate punah —He relapses 
again in heresy. 



I.2.32b-39 


25 


(Smrtis) outside the pale of the Vedas and heretic views, are 
of no avail after death. They are remembered as based on- 
darkness (Ignorance). 

32b-33. In the previous Kalpa, people were (since their 
birth) unaffected by any obstacles or harassment. They were of 
pure heart. All of them abided by their respective duties. 
Then due to (changes inevitable) in course of time, passions, 
hatred and other similar evil tendencies possessed them. 

34. Adharma (unrighteousness) acts as an obstacle in the 
observance of duties prescribed for one’s caste and stage in life, 
O leading sages, thereby (spiritual) perfection and powers 
natural to them are not achieved easily by them. 

35-36. Then they accomplish other Siddhis (powers) of 
purely Rdjasic nature. When in course of time, though Siddhis 
became completely extinct, they began to take recourse to 
agriculture, trade and technology (lit. skill of hand achieved 
through practice). Therefore, the all-powerful god Brahma 
assigned to them work as the means of livelihood. 

37. Formerly Manu, son of the self-born deity (Brahma), 
enunciated the righteous duties of all persons as he was omnis¬ 
cient (lit. observer of everything). O Brahmanas, he was the 
very embodiment of Prajapati created by god Brahma himself. 

38-39. Bhrgu and others heard the Dharma Sastra from 
his mouth, as proclaimed by him and promulgated them 
(Dharmas) again as follows: O excellent Brahmanas, there 
are six duties of Brahmanas^ viz. performance of sacrifices, pre¬ 
siding over the sacrifices of others, giving of charitable gifts, 
acceptance of charitable donations, Vedic studies and teaching 


1. These are the traditional duties recorded in the Sutra period. 

For example 

dvijdtlndm adhyayanam ijyd ddnam / 

BrdhmaiiLasyd 'dhikah pravacana-ydjana-pratigrahdh / 
rdjfio ^dhikam rakfa^am sarvabhutdndrh / 

Vmsyasyadhikam krsi-vai^ik-pasupdlya-kusidam / 

—Gautama Dh, S.X. 1-3, 7,50 

For Smrtis ; 

vide Manu I. 88-90, Yajnavalkya 1. 118-119 



26 


Kurma Pur ana 


of the Vedas. The Dharma of a Ksattriya and a Vaisya consists of 
giving charitable gifts, self study of the Vedas and performance 
of Tajnas (sacrifices). 

40. Chastisement of the subjects (i.e. the maintenance 
of law and order) and fighting with the enemies constitute the 
special Dharma of a Ksattriya while agriculture is the special 
occupation of a Vaisya. Rendering services to the twice-born 
castes (Brahmanas, Ksattriyas and Vaisyas) is the means of 
acquiring Dharma by Sudras. 

41. Their means of livelihood is artisanship; their Tajha 
is whatever they cook righteously.^ Having established firmly 
the four classes of the society, he i.e. god Brahma established 
the four stages of life (Asramas) as well. 

42-43a. The four stages of life {Akamas) are those of 
the householder, the forest dweller, the mendicant and the 
religious student, O excellent sages, the following briefiy com¬ 
prise the duties of a house-holder: viz. maintenance of sacri¬ 
ficial fire, hospitality to guests, performance of sacrifices, charit¬ 
able gifts and the worship of gods. 

43b-44a. The following are the duties of the forest hermits: 
performance of Homas, subsistence on fruits, roots and herbs, 
self-study of the Vedas, practising of penance and due sharing^ 
of articles received (with one’s neighbours). 

44b-47a. It is considered that righteous duties of a Bhiksu 
(recluse) consist of partaking of food received as alms, observ¬ 
ance of silence, performance of penance, meditation, correct 
knowledge and renunciation. The following are the duties of a 
Brahmacdrin (a religious student): Begging of alms, service to the 
preceptor, self study of the Vedas, performance of twilight prayers 


1. This can be interpreted as Sudras having the right to perform 
domestic sacrifices. Bharadmja Srauta Sutra V. 2.8 and Katyayana Srauta 
Sutra 1.4.5 do support the privilege of Sudras to perform Vedic sacrifices, though 
Jaimini (1.3.25-38) after elaborate discussion denies them the right to do so. 
But as KP. in verse 26 above clearly states that ‘with the exception of Sudras 
god Brahma created the three castes for sacrifice {yajha-nispattaye Brahma 
Sudra-varjarh sasarja ha /), it will be inconsistent to interpret paka-yajnadi- 
dharmatah as allowing the Sudras to perform domestic sacrifice according to- 
dharma. 



I.2.47b-56a. 


27 


{Sandhya), worship of sacrificial fires. O excellent Brahmanas, 
the lotus-born deity, Brahma has ordained that observance of 
celibacy is the common, general characteristic of the religious 
student, the forest dweller and the recluse. 

47b-48. If a house-holder approaches only his wife and 
not any other woman, at the prescribed time after menses, and 
avoids doing so on certain periodic changes of the moon or 
festive occasions, it is as good as continence. He must practise 
this without fail till his wife conceives. 

49-50. If he fails to do so, O excellent Brahmanas, he 
becomes a slayer of a child in the foetus (Bhrumhd). The most 
important duties of a house-holder are—repetition ofVedic 
Mantras every day, performance of Sraddha (Worship of the 
manes) according to his capacity, due reception of surprise 
guests {Atithis) and worship of (family) gods. He shall maintain 
Vaivdhya fire (fire kindled for performing the holy rites of 
one’s marriage) by kindling it in the morning and in the 
evening. 

51. He (a householder) is exempted from the above, 
only if he goes out to another land or when his wife dies. The 
householder is regarded as the source i. e. the supporter of the 
other Asramas. 

52. All the other Asramas depend upon him for their 
subsistence. Hence the stage of a house-holder is regarded as 
the best of all. As indicated by Srutis, the house-holder’s stage 
of life combines all the four Asramas in one. 

53. Hence, the stage of a householder alone should be 
known as the only means of acquiring Dharma. One should 
eschew the.Artha (pursuit of wealth) and Kama (love making) 
that are devoid of righteousness. 

54. If a holy act is against the interest of other members 
of the society, it should not be practised. It is Dharma which is 
the source of Artha and even of Kama. 

55-56a. Righteous conduct [Dharma) is conducive to 
emancipation from Samsdra. Hence one should resort to Dharma. 
Dharma, Artha and Kama are together called Trivarga (the three 
main objectives of worldly life). They consist of the three 
Gums viz. Sattva, Rajas and Tamos. Hence one should resort to 
Dharma. 



28 


Kurma Pur ana 


56b-57a. Those who adhere to Sattva-guria go to higher 
regions, those who have Rdjasic qualities stay in the middle, 
those who possess Tamasa qualities go down to lower regions, as 
they indulge in mean type of activities.^ 

57b-58. A person, in whom and A'ama live side by 

side supported by Dharma, becomes happy in this world and be¬ 
comes entitled for infinite nature (eternal salvation) after death. 
Dharma is thus the source of salvation and Kama originates from 
wealth. 

59-60. Thus in the fourfold objectives of life,^ mutual 
inter-dependence has been demonstrated, since those objectives 
are both the ends and the means. The man who knows thus all 
about Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksa and maintains their 
greatness, becomes entitled for eternity. Hence one should 
eschew .drt/ta and Kama and resort to Dharma. 

61. The expounders of the Veda state that everything 
accrues from Dharma. The whole universe consisting of the 
mobile and immobile beings is sustained by Dharma. 

62. Such is the Potency or Sakti called Brdhmi, O 

excellent Brahmanas. It has neither beginning nor end. There 
is no doubt in this that Dharma is achieved by prescribed 

holy rites) as well as by perfect knowledge. 

63. Hence, one should resort XaKarmayoga (the path of 
disinterested action) accompanied by Jndna (spiritual knowledge). 
The Vedic Karma is of two types, viz. the Praurtta [Karma that 
causes continuation in Sarhsdra) and the Nivrtta (Aama causing 
cessation of mundane existence). 

64. The act which is based on spiritual knowledge is the 
Nivrtta Karma and that which is other than this, is called 
Pravrtta Karma. He who resorts to the Nivrtta type of Karma 
attains to the highest region viz. Moksa. 

65-68a. Hence one should follow the Nivrtta type of 
.Karma, otherwise one shall have to undergo the sufferings of 
worldly existences again and again. 


1. Cf. BG. XIV. 18. 

2. v.l. catur-vidye —The four lores or sciences viz. Logic, three Vedas, 
agriculture and politics (administration). 



I.2.68b-75a 


29- 


Manu has declared briefly the following as the main 
duties constituting the Dharrm of all the four castes: Forgive¬ 
ness, self-control, mercy, charitable gifts, absence of greed, 
renunciation, straight-forwardness, absence of jealousy, pilgrim¬ 
ages to sacred places, truthfulness, contentment, faith and 
respect for the authority of the Vedas, faith, restraint over one’s- 
senseorgans, worship of deities, reverence for Brahmanas in 
particular, non-violence, pleasantness in speech, abstention 
from slandering, and freedom from impurity and sins. 

68b-69. The abode of Brahmanas who regularly perform 
the righteous duties prescribed for them, is the region ofPra- 
japati. The abode of Ksattriyas who do not run away from 
the battlefield is the region of Indra. The abode of Vaisyas 
who observe their duties, is the region of Maruts (The wind 
gods). 

70-71. The abode of the Sudras who maintain them¬ 
selves by serving (the three upper castes) is the Gandharva 
region. The abode of those who stay with their preceptors (as 
life-long students) is the same as the abode of eighty eight 
thousand sages of sublimated sexuality. The abode of the 
forest dewellers {Vana prasthas) is the same as the abode of 
Seven Sages {Ursa Major). 

(72-73a). The Prdjdpatya region has been proclaimed by 
the Self-born deity (Svayambhu) as the abode for the house¬ 
holders. The Hiranya-garbha region is the abode of the ascetics 
who have conquered their minds, have renounced the world as 
Sannydsins and who have sublimated their sex instinct. From 
this region no one ever returns. 

(73b-74a). The abode of the Yogins is the immortal re¬ 
gion called Vyoman —the greatest, imperishable, eternal and blissful 
abode of Isvara. It is the highest point, the Supreme goal to 
be achieved. 

The sages submitted : 

74b-75a. “O Lord, O destroyer of the enemies of 
gods, O slayer of Hiranyaksa ! Four diramas (stages in life) 
have been proclaimed by you, and (how is it that) a separate 
one has been declared for Yogins ?” 



30 


Kurma Pur ana 


Lord Kunna said : 

75b-76. A Yogin who has eschewed all activities and 
has resorted to motionless trance, and remains steady in medi¬ 
tation, is the Sannyasin. His is the fifth asrama {v.l. A Yogin 
who having renounced all activities has resorted to steady 
motionless meditation is the Sannyasin. There is no fifth 
■dirama (vide verse 88 below). As pointed in Srutis, there are 
two types in each of dSramas (stages in life).^ 

77-78a. The Brahmacdrin is of two types viz. (1) Upakur- 
vdria and (2) Nai^thika. He who duly studies the Vedas and at 
its conclusion, enters the life of a house-holder, is called Upakur- 
vdna. He who observes continence till death and prosecutes his 
Vedic studies called Naisthika. 

78b-80a. The house-holder is of two types: (1) Udasina 
and (2) Sddhaka. The house-holder who earnestly exerts himself 
to maintain his family, is called Sddhaka. The House-holder who 
has paid all the three debts (viz. to the gods, departed ancestors 
and sages) and who, thereafter, abandons wealth, wife etc., and 
roams about alone seeking salvation from Sarhsdra, is called 
Uddsina. 

80b-81a. The forest dweller who performs penance in 
the forest, worships gods, performs Homa (Fire-worship) and is 
devoted to the study of the Vedas is considered a Tdpasa. 

81b-82a. He who is in the stage of a forest-dweller, has 
emaciated himself extremely through penance, and is completely 
devoted to spiritual meditation is called Sannydsika. 

82b-84a. The recluse who is deeply engaged in the prac¬ 
tice of Yoga, is ever aspiring to climb up i.e. advance spiritual¬ 
ly, who has conquered the sense organs and awaits the dawn¬ 
ing of perfect knowledge is called Pdramefthika. He who revels 
in the Atman, is ever contented, is a great sage and is endowed 
with the correct vision is called a recluse. 

84b-85a. The are of three types: (1) Some 

tire the renouncers by Jhdna {Jhdna sannydsin) , (2) Others 


1. For the two classes of each of the aframas vide GP. I.49.6fr. 



I.2.85b-96 


31 


are the renouncers (after the mastery of) the Vedas {Veda- 
sannydsin) and (3) some are the renouncers of Karmans {Karma- 
sannydsins). 

85b-86a. The Yogin should be classified in three types: 
The-Y a.re the. Bhautikas (v. 1. Vaidikas), Sdnkhyas dind the Aha- 
mins. The third one (consists of those) who have resorted to the 
excellent Yoga. 

86b-87. In the first type of Yogins, the Bhdvand (Medita¬ 
tion) is of the first type. In regard to the Sdnkhyas, it is the 
Akfara-Bhdvand (contemplation of the Imperishable). In the 
third type it is the ultimate Paramesvari Bhdvand. (The medita¬ 
tion on the Supreme Lord.): These have been proclaimed and 
in this way understand well the four Ahamas. 

88-90. In all the Vedas and Sdstras no fifth Asrama is 
mentioned. After creating Vamas (castes) and Asramas (stages 
of life) thus, the pure unsullied Lord of gods, the Soul of the 
universe, commanded Daksa and others, “All of you pocreate 
different species of beings.” At the instance of God Brahma, 
his sons Daksa and other excellent sages created the subjects 
beginning with gods and human beings. Thus, Lord Brahma 
engaged himself in the creative activity. 

91. I am protecting this universe, the trident-bearing 
Lord (Siva) will annihilate it. Brahma, Visnu and Mahesvara 
are mentioned as three Murtis (forms of the Supreme Self). 

92. Due to their being characterised by the Gums — Rajas, 
Sattva and Tamas, they are mutually affectionate and inter-depen¬ 
dent. All of them are but the manifestation of the great Supreme 
Atman. 

93-96. All these great gods pay respects to one another 
in the course of Lilds (sportive activities). There are three 
Bhdvands (meditation) viz. Brdkmi (pertaining to Brahma), 
MaAefz;an(concerning god Mahesvara)and Akfara-Bhdvand{medi- 
tation on the Eternal). O Brahmanas, all these three Bhdvands 
are always present in Rudra. In me, the first Akfara-Bhdvand 
functions perpetually* (». 1. Akfara-Bhdvand and other types of 
meditations function incessantly within me.) The second 
Akfara-Bhdvand is mentioned as that of god Brahma. As a matter 
of fact, Mahadeva and I are not different from each other. In 
the ultimate reality he, the immanent Lord out of his own 



32 


Kurma Purdna 


will divided himself and abided in all beings as indwelling soul. 
He stood ready to create the entire three worlds including 
Devas, Asuras and Human beings. 

97-98. The Supreme Person who is beyond the unmani¬ 
fest {Avyakta or Prakrti) assumed the form of god Brahma. 
Hence Brahma is Mahadeva and Visnu is Visvesvara (Lord 
of the universe, Siva) the great. All these three are declared 
as the forms of one Being alone in accordance with the different 
functions of the Lord. Hence, they should be revered most 
respectfully and worshipped specially. 

99-100. If one wishes to attain ere long, that abode 
which is called the Moksa (eternal salvation) one should 
mentally worship as long as one lives, and follow the duties 
prescribed for (their respective) different castes and stages of 
life, with delight. O Brahmanas, the four A^ramas are duly 
mentioned thus in accordance with renunciation. 

101. There are three ASramas^ called Vaisnava, (per¬ 
taining to Visnu), Brahma (pertaining to Brahma) and Hard§- 
rama (pertaining to Siva). He who wears the various symbols 
(pertaining to a particular god) invariably endears himself to 
his devotees. 

102. One who is devoted to Brahma-vidya should meditate 
and worship these. The Linga of Sambhu is the most excellent 
for all devotees. 

103-104a. Triputidraka^ (three horizontal parallel lines 
on the forehead) should be made with white Bhasma (Ashes 
from a sacrificial place). He who has resorted to Narayana and 
his great region shall always wear on his forehead the mark of 
the Trident with scented water. 


1. The three diramaj mentioned here are the cults of Visnu, Brahma 
and ^iva. 

2. The Tripuridra markofSaivas are the three horizontal lines of 
bhasma (ashes) each line representing the past, present and future (Division 
of Time that is probably implied here in kdldt mdsau dhrto bhavet / 
uparyadhobhdvayogdt tripu^drasya /) 

The sula or Triiula is the vertical trident type mark of the forehead of 
Vaisnavas. Verses 105 and 106 form one unit 



I.2.104b-I.3.1 


33 


104b-105. Those who have resorted to god Brahma the 
Paramesthin, the seed (creator) of the universe, shall always 
wear the Tilaka (a circular mark) on the forehead. Thereby it 
is as though the beginningless (eternal), Supreme spirit, Kalat- 
md (the deity in the form of Time), is worn. 

106. By wearing the Tripundra mark with its upper and 
lower parallels what is Pradhana is worn—the Pradhana that 
consists of three Gums in the form of Brahma, Visnu and Siva. 
There is no doubt that they are so worn by the mark of trident. 

107-108. When the Tilaka mark is made the sphere of 
the sun, white and resplendent with brilliance of Brahma it is 
undoubtedly worn by having the Trident mark on the forehead. 

If the Tilaka mark is made (on the forehead it is as good 
as) the abode of Isvara being held. Hence the mark of the 
Trident and the auscipious Tilakashould be worn on the fore¬ 
head. 

109-111. It is conducive to the longevity of the three 
types of devotees mentioned above. One who has conquered 
the sense organs should worship the deity, offer oblations in 
the sacred fire {Homa), repeat the name of his God and 
make charitable gifts. He should be quiescent, subdue his sense 
organs, control his anger, and should know the rules of righteous 
discipline of the four castes and stages of life. As long as one 
lives, one should, with concentrated mind, serve Devas in this 
way and thereby attain, ere long, their eternal abode. 


CHAPTER THREE 

The Order of Stages of Life and the Four Castes. 

The sages requested : 

1. O Lord, the castes have been enumerated as four 
by your holy Lordship, so also the stages of life. Be pleased now 
to elucidate the order of the stages of life^ {asramas) to us. 


1. Catvaro’pyaSramah —The word aSrama is derived from Sram —to 
exert and means a stage of life in which one exerts oneself- The word 



34 


Kurma Pur ana 


Lord Kurma replied : 

2. The Asramas have been proclaimed in their serial 
order as follows^ : Brahmacdrin (the religious student), Grhastha 
(the house-holder), Vdnaprastha (the forest hermit), and Tati (the 
Recluse). 2 This serial order may be otherwise for special 
reasons.^ 


is not traced in the Vedic Samhitds or Brdhmana texts, but that does not 
mean that the dirama system was non-existent in those limes. For we find 
the v^ord Brahmacdrin \i\ RV.X. 109.5 and in AV.V. 17.5 Brahmacdri carati 
vevisad visah sa devdndrh bhavatyekam angam / 

‘O gods 1 He (Brhaspati) is all-pervasiv'e and moves as a Brahmacdri 
pervading all sacrifices. The word grhapati —‘House-holder* is used for Agni 
in RV. II. 1.2 Tavd'gne hotram . . . Brahmd cdsi grhapatiica no dame / 

1. Brahmacdri ,,, Kramenaiva —From the times of the most ancient 

dharma-sutras, four diramas have been mentioned. Apastamha Dharma 
Sutra (Dh. S.) II.9.21.1 states : “There are four diramas viz. the stage 
of the householder^ stay in the preceptor’s house, the stage of muni- 
hood and that of being a forest dweller” (catvdra diramd gdrhajtham 
dcdryakularh maunarh vdnaprasthyam iti /). Gautama Dh. S. (III.2) 

enumerates diramas as Brahmacdri, Grhastha, Bhiksu {Sannydsin) and 

Vaikhdnasa ( Vdna-prastha ). 

It is from the time of Vasisfha Dh. S. (VII.1-2) that we find the order 
of diramas as follows : Brahmacdri, Grhastha, Vdnaprastha and Parivrdjaka 
i^Sannydsa) —an order confirmed by Baudhdyana Dh. S. (IT.6.17). 

Manu VI. 87 confirms this order of diramas : 

Brahmacdri grhasthaica 
Vdnaprastho yatis tathd / 

This is quoted by KP. here. 

It will be found that although there was some difference in the 
nomenclature and order of the diramas in the Dharma Sutras, in the Smrtis, 
the order is as given by Manu and it is’followed in this Purana. Even in 
Jdbdla Up. we are told : after finishing the stage of studentship, one should 
become a householder, then a forest-dweller and ultimately renounce the 
world 

{Brahmacaryam parisamdpya grhi bhavet, grhi bhutvd vanl bhaved, vani bhutvd 
pravrajet j 

—Jdbdla Up. 4. 

2. Quoted in GG Kdla-nirmyn, p. 783. 

3. KP. 3.2. KdraiTidd anyathd bhavet : An echo of Jdbdla Up. : ‘A 
person may renounce the world after the stage of student-hood or after 



1.3.3-7 


35 


■3. One who has attained knowledge of Brahman and has 
realised it, one who has reached the ultimate stage ofdetachment 
can renounce (i.e. enter the fourth stage of life as a Sannyasin), 
even from the stage of a religious student, if he wishes for the 
highest goal ( Mok?a). 

4. A religious student (at the close of the period of his 
studies) should duly marry a woman, if he is not detached, and 
procreate sons. He should also perform different kinds of sacri¬ 
fices. But, if he is really unattached to worldly life, he should 
renounce the world (even without duly performing sacrifices 
etc.).^ 

5. But normally an intelligent Brahmana house-holder 
shall not renounce by eschewing house-holder’s life without 
duly performing sacrifices, and without procreating sons. 

6. But, however, if due to the force of growing sense of 
detachment, he does not feel inclined to lead the life of the 
house-holder, the spiritually wise excellent Brahmana should 
renounce then and there his house-holdership, even without 
performing sacrifices. 

7. Still (the best course is) after performing various 
kinds of sacrifices, one should take to the life of a forest hermit 
and perform penance. Thereafter, becoming completely 
detached by virtue of his penance, he should renounce (as a 
Tati) .2 


being a house-holder etc. The very day on which detachment for the 
world dawns in him, he should renounce the world and become a 
sannaydsin : 

{^yadi vetarathd brahmacaryddeva parivrajedy • . . 

. . ,Yadahareva virajet tadahareva pravrajet / 

1. a. Jdbdla Up. 4 quoted above, 

2. With reference to the order oft he ijramoj, there are three opinions 
(Paksas) viz. samuccaya (orderly co-ordination), Vikalpa (option), badha 
(annulment or contradiction). After quoting the Vikalpa point of view 
which permits a brahmacdri to adopt the last dhama ( sannydsa) directly (in 
V. 4 above), KP. states its preference to the samuccaya point of view which 
recommends transition from the first dsrama {Brahmacarya) to the second, 
after which as a last stage he can become a sannyasin— 3l point of view 
strongly advocated by Manu (IV. 1, VI. 1, 33-37, 87-88), 

This verse is quoted \n CC Kdla-nir^aya, p. 810. 



36 


Kurma Pur ana 


8. Once a householder goes out of his household 
(renouncing his stage of life as a householder) and resorts to 
the stage of a forest-dweller {Vdnaprastha) , he shall not re-enter 
the house-holder’s stage, nor an ascetic {Sannyasin) go back to 
the life of a forest-hermit, nor should a Sadhaka householder 
revert to the life of a religious student.^ 

9. A Brahmana should complete the sacrifice called 
Prdjdpatya or Agneyi and then renounce.^ The scholarly house¬ 
holder should renounce through the stage of a forest dweller, 
in accordance with the injunctions of the Sruti. 

10. One who is incapable of performing a //bma and 
sacrificial rites, physically handicapped persons like a blind 
man or a lame man, or an indigent Brahmana, if detached, 
should renounce as a Sannydsin.^ 

11. In the matter of renouncing by any one, the main 
reason should be Vairdgya (dispassion). Ifone wishes to renounce 
without being detached, he falls indeed.* 

12. Or, if a faithful person continues to remain in one 
ASrama (throughout his life) till death, he is entitled for eternity 
or Mok?a. 


1. The reversion from sannydsa to the previous HSrama is strongly 
condemned. For example, Atri (VIII. 16) declares that there is no expia¬ 
tion for a person who, having taken to celibacy (Sannydsa or Vdnaprastha 
dSrama), reverses to the previous (grhasthd) dSrama. 

This verse (KP. 8) is quoted in CC Kdla-nirriaya, p. 783. 

2. For qualifying oneself for Sannydsa, a person has to perform 
Prdjdpatya sacrifice in which all the property is to be distributed to Brahmanas 
etc. 

Prdjdpatyarh nirupyestirh sarva-vedasa-daksimm / 

Manu VI. 38, Yajn. III. 56. 

3. Quoted in Hemadri’s CC Kdla-nirnaya, p. 810. 

This view of the KP. that physically handicapped persons can adopt 
the sannydsa dirama is strongly criticised by Sankara in his Bhdsya on Br.S. 
III.4.2. Suresvara in his Vdrttika on Sdnkara Bhdsya on Brhd. Up. (verse 1144) 
refutes strongly the eligibility of the physically handicapped for sannydsa. 
kdrta-kurtlhddi-visaye yat tu kaiScit prakalpyate / 
pdrivrdjyarh na tadyuktam ananuffheya-rSpatah 11 

Medhatithi (on Manu VI. 36) and the Mitdksard (on Yajnavalkya 
III. 56) endorse the same view. 

4. Quoted with some changes in CC Kdla-nirnaya, p. 810. 



1.3.13-21 


37 


13. A person who earns wealth by honest, justifiable 
means {v.l. one who has given away all his wealth in charity), 
a quiescent person devoted to Brahma-vidya and the person who 
strictly observes his religious duties, becomes entitled to attain 
identity with the Brahman. 

14. A person who resigns all his actions to the Brahman, 
who is free from attachment, who is devoid of passion of love 
and who performs his essential righteous duties with a delighted 
heart, shall attain to the region oiBrahman.^ 

15. Whatever is there to be given is given by Brahman, 
everything that is donated is also the Brahman, and it is the 
Brahman that is given—this is called the highest type of dedica¬ 
tion unto Brahman {Brahmdrpana) 

16. “I am not the agent or the doer, it is the Brahman 
alone that makes everything”—this attitude is called Brahmdrpana 
by sages who visualise the reality. 

17. “May the eternal Lord Isa be pleased by means of 
this rite.” He who thinks like this, makes the great dedication 
of Brahmdrparia. 

18. Or, the dedication of fruits of all actions unto the 
Supreme Lord is called the greatest dedication of Karmas. It is 
the excellent Brahmdrpana. 

19. An action performed by a discriminating learned 
person may be even the bestower of salvation, if it is performed 
regularly without attachment with the belief that it is binding 
upon him that he should do it. 

20. Or, if a Brahmana performs even his daily prescribed 
righteous duties (like the daily Sandhyd prayers etc.) without 
dedicating the fruit thereof to the Lord, he is fettered by its 
fruit. 

21. Hence, even if a person who is not learned were 
to put forth all efforts and resign to the Lord the fruits of all 


1. Quoted in the SC in Ahnika prakaratria, p. 164 and in the 
Viramitrodaya (VM) Tirtha-prakaia, p. 98. 

2. Quoted in VM. Tirtha., p. 98. 

This is an echo of the BG. In fact the niskama-karma-marga the 
path of dcsireless action described in the BG. is reproduced in vv. 16-21, 
here. 



38 


K urma Purdna 


his actions, and perform his duties, he would after a long time 
attain to the highest region. 

22. The sin both of this birth as well as that of the 
previous births is wiped off by the Karman. The doer of the 
Karman attains serenity of mind and becomes a knower of the 
Brahman. 

23. The Toga becomes perfect through Jhdna (spiritual 
knowledge) accompanied by Karman and the. Jhdnam. association 
with Karman, becomes free from defects. 

24. Hence, by every means should a man, whatever be the 
stage of life he is engaged in, do the Karman for the satisfaction 
of Isvara (the Ruler of the universe). He shall then attain 
salvation, or the state of inactivity {Naiskarmya). 

25. After attaining the great spiritual knowledge and the 
state of inactivity or freedom from Karman through His grace, 
the man, remaining single, quiescent and free from the sense of 
‘my-ness’ becomes released from Sarnsdra even as he is alive. 

26. He visualizes the great Atman, the Supreme Brahman, 
and the great Isvara. Possessing perpetual bliss and free from 
fallacious semblance, he shall become merged unto that Brahman 
alone. 

27. Hence, one should resort to the path of action 
incessantly with a serene mind, for the satisfaction and pleasure 
of the Supreme Lord, and he shall attain his eternal region. 

28. Thus, the excellent arrangement of the four stages of 
life in their serial order has been completely recounted to you. 
No man attains emancipation from Sarnsdra by transgressing 
this. 



1.4.1-5 


39 


CHAPTER FOUR 

Description of Creation by Means of Prakrti.^ 

Suta said : 

1. After hearing the whole procedure regarding the 
stages in life, the sages were delighted in their heart. After paying 
obeisance to Hrsikesa (Lord Kurma), they spoke these words. 

The sages submitted : 

2. The excellent arrangement of the four stages of life 
has been narrated by you. Now, we desire to hear from you 
how the universe originates. 

3. From whence was all this universe born ? Wherein it 
will get dissolved ? Who is the controller of all these things ? 
O Purusottama (Supreme Person), be pleased to recount this 
to us. 

4. On hearing the query submitted by the sages, 
Narayana who assumed the form of a Tortoise, the imperishable 
source of all living beings, spoke in a deep majestic tone. 

Lord Kurma said : 

5. The Supreme Lord (Mahesvara) is transcendental, 
unmanifest,- eternal, the Lord of four manifestations^ (yyuhas viz. 


1. Prdkrta sarga —This chapter deals with the creation of the universe 
by means of Prakrti (Primordial matter) and may be translated as 
‘material’ or ‘subtle’ creation. Compare AITM Vol. 1 Bh. P. Part I. 
pp. 274-275 where the three types of creation viz. Prakrta (material), Vaikrta 
(elemental) and Mixed (Prdkrta-Vaikrta) and the doctrine of transformation 
{Paririamavada) of Safikhyas to explain the evolutionary process of the subtle 
(or Prdkrta) creation are discussed. The influence of VP. on the Bh. P. is 
undeniable but as pointed below, KP. quotes verse after verse from VP. 
I. 2. Both VP. and Bh. P. owe the concept of evolution of the universe 
to the Sahkhya system (if not to Isvarakrsna’s Sdnkhyakdrikd which is older 
than the present editions of Mahapuranas). 

*The critical Ed. (of KP) reads : 

bhutdndm prabhavdpyayau / 

“The creation and destruction of all beings.’’ 

2. CatuT-vyuha—Vyuha is a technical term in the Pancaratra system, 
meaning ‘the manifestation of the Lord. ‘The four Vyuhas according to 
them are Vasudeva, Sahkarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. It appears 
that despite the Pasupatisation of the KP, a number of terms and pro- 



40 


Kurma Purana 


Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha). He is 
infinite and inscrutable. He is the Controller (of the universe) 
and omnifaced. 

6. To him philosophers (or contemplators of Reality) 
designate as unmanifest, the cause which is eternal and compris¬ 
ing of the being and non-being as well as the Pradhana and 
the Prakrti. 

I. It is devoid of smell, colour and taste; it is without 
sound and touch. It is non-ageing, stable, inexhaustible or im¬ 
perishable and eternal. It is established in its own Self. 

8. The Supreme Brahman is the source of the universe 
and the Primary element. It is the cosmic body of all living 
beings, self-dependent and the Mahat presided over by the 
Atman. 

9. Only the Brahman was in existence in the beginning. 
It has neither beginning nor end; it is unborn and subtle, and 
consisting of three Gums. It is the source {v.l. the origin and 
the end) of the universe. It is unknowable, eternal (extending 
over the past, present and future). 

10. When there is complete equilibrium of Gums, and 
the Purusa abides in his own blissful state, one should know 
that it is the original state of Prakrti or the dissolution pertain¬ 
ing to Prakrti till the creation of the Universe. 

II. This period is called the night of god Brahma. The 
creation of the universe is called his day. Really, there is neither 
day nor night of Brahma. This is used in a figurative sense. 

12. At the close of Brahma’s night wakes up the Supreme 
Lord, who (though) himself beginningless, is the origin of the 
world. Due to his being unmanifest, he is the immanent Lord 
abiding in all {v.l. avyakto hyantaryami —the unmanifest in¬ 
dwelling soul). 

13. Promptly entering both Prakrti and Purusa, the great 
God, the Supreme Deity, agitated them by his highest Toga. 


Visnu passages remained as before. The footnote No. 7 of Venkateshvara 
Ed. tries to give the Saivite explanation : 

catvdrah vyuhd adhasthana-bheda yasya tathoktah / 

Also Mahesvara being all-pervading constitutes all stages (avastkd), 
hence he is called caturvyuha. 



1.4.14-19 


41 


14. Just as lust enters women or the wind in the spring 
entering them stirs (passionate) agitations in them, the same 
way did the Lord, the Toga incarnate. 

15. O Brahmanas, the same Supreme Lord is both the 
agitator and the agitated (i.e. the subject and object of agita¬ 
tion). By means of the withdrawal and development. He stabi¬ 
lises himself in the state of being Pradhana. 

16. The great seed called Mahat, consisting of both 
Pradhana and Purusa, appeared when Pradhana and the ancient 
Purusa were being agitated. 

17. It is stated in the scriptures that the Mahat, the Atman, 
the intellect, Brahma, Prabuddhi, Khydti (Faculty of discrimina¬ 
tion), isoar a, Prajhd (intelligence), DArti, Smrti (memory) and 
Sarhvit (knowledge)—all these originate from it.‘ 

18. It is traditionally reported that this three-fold Ego 
viz. Vaikdrika (product of the Sattva Guria), Taijasa (born of 
Rajas) and Bhutddi (the origin of all elements), the product of 
Tamas, is evolved from Mahat?' 

19. Aharfikdra is m.e.nnone.A (in scriptures) as Abhimdna 
(self-conceit or self-love), the Agent, the thinker, the Supreme 
Soul and the individual soul abiding in every one, and from 
whom all actions arise. 


1. Cf. LP. 1.70.12 where these are treated as synonyms : 
mano mahdn matir brahma pur buddhih khydtir livarah / 
prajnd citik smrtih sathvid Visvesas ceti sa smrtah j j 

These synonyms of Mahat are explained in LP. in the following verses. 
For example : This principle is called mahat 2 is it evolved the earliest (and 
as such is the senior-most). Its extent is the widest—far greater than that 
of the special gunas (ibid. 1.70.14). 

2. VV. 18-33 deal with the evolution of the universe as given in 
Is'varakrsna’s Sdhkhyakdrikd. KP. has incorporated here a number of 
verses and lines from VP.1.2.34-46. Compare for example 

bhutadis tu vikurvdi^ah Sabda’-tanmdtrakam tatah // 37 
sasarja iabda-tanmdtrad dkdiarh iabdalaksanam USSa, 

KP. 

bhutddis tu vikurvdriah sabda-mdtram sasarja ha / 
dkdso jdyate tasmdt tasya iabdo eu^o matah 11 24 
cf. Bh. P. III.5.22 ff. 

All these Puranas have adopted the Sahkhya theory of evolution and 
its Pari^dma-vdda (The theory of transformation). Hence the close textual 
similarity. 



42 


Kurma Purana- 


20. The five elements, the subtle potentials of elements 
{Tanmatras) and all the sense organs (y./. and gods presiding- 
over them) were evolved out of Ahamkara (the Ego). All the 
universe is thus born of it. 

21. The mind is said to be born of Avyakta and is 
mentioned as the first product whereby it becomes the doer 
and sees the Bh utadi and other types of Ahamkara. 

22. The creation from the Aharhkdra of the Vaikdrika type 
(which is evolved out of Sattva Gum) was also Vaikdrika. The 
sense organs are the products of Rajoguna and are called Taijasa, 
while the Vaikdrikas are the ten Devas presiding over the sense 
organs. 

23. The eleventh (sense organ (viz. the mind is of the 
nature of both by means of its own qualities. O Brahmanas, 
this creation of gross and subtle elements is evolved out of the 
Bhutddi (the TdrmsicVgo). 

24. It is traditionally said that when the Bhutddi under¬ 
goes modifications, it creates the subtle element of sound {Sabda- 
tanmdtra). The ether is born thereof and Sabda (Sound) is con-- 
sidered to be its quality. 

25. When the ether undergoes transformation, it evolves 
the subtle element of tangibility {Sparsa-tanmdtra). The wind is 
born therefrom and they know that its characteristic quality is 
touch. 

26. When the wind undergoes transformation, it creates 
the Tanmdtra of Rupa (form). The fire is born of Vdyu and 
possession o{Rupa (form or colour) is said to be its characteristic. 

27. When the fire undergoes modification, it creates the 
subtle Tanmdtra oiRasa (taste or fiuidity). Therefrom the waters 
originate and are the receptacle of taste {Rasa). 

28. When waters underwent modification, they created the 
tanmdtra of smell {Gandha). The mass of earth is born therefrom,, 
and smell is considered to be its specific quality. 

29. Akdsa (Ether), which has only the Tanmdtras of Sabda 
enveloped the Sparsa-Tanmdtra. Hence. Vdyu has two qualities viz. 
Sabda and Sparsa (sound and touch). 

30. The two Gunas —6'aWa and SparSa enter Rupa. There¬ 
fore, Vahni (Fire) shall have three Gums viz. Sabda, SparSa and 
Rupa (Sound, touch and colour). 



1.4,31-41 


45 


31. Sound, touch and colour enter Rasa-tanmdtra. Hence 
waters characterised by taste should be known consisting of four 
Gvaias. 

32. Sound, touch, colour and taste enveloped Gandha 
(smell). Hence the earth has five Gums. Among the elements, 
the earth is mentioned to be the grossest. 

33. Tranquillity, terribleness and dullness have been 
stated as their special characteristics and they (i.e. these 
elements) sustain each other by their inter-penetrability. 

34. These noblesouled (mighty) elements, though mutu¬ 
ally resorting were incapable of creating subjects (the universe) 
without complete union among all of them. 

35. It is due to their being presided over by Purusa and 
the blessing of Avyakla that these beginning with Mahat and 
ending with Viiesa create the cosmic egg.^ 

36. Like bubbles in the water forming simultaneously 
the (cosmic) egg originated from the simultaneously cumulative 
effect of ViSesas. It was very huge and it rested on the cosmic 
waters. 

37. When the Egg born of developed, the produc¬ 

tive activities of Parame^thin (god Brahma) were achieved therein. 
The presiding soul {ksetrajna ) is termed as Brahma. 

38. He is the first embodied Being. He is called Purusa. 
Brahma, the first creator of living beings, existed at the begin¬ 
ning of the universe. 

39. Him the sages call Purusa (one abiding in the body), 
Swan, Hiranya-garbha (one born of a golden egg), transcendental 
to Pradhana, of tawny-colour, the embodiment of the Vedas, the 
eternal. 

40. Mount Meru became his foetus and mountains, the 
embryo. The oceans became the foetal fiuid of that great soul.^ 

41. Within that cosmic Egg evolved the universe consist¬ 
ing of Devas, Asuras and human beings, the Moon, the Sun, the 
constellations, the planets and the wind. 


1. VV. 35 and 36 echo VP. 1.2.53. 

2. The same as VP. 1.2.57. 



44 


Kurma Pur ana 


42. The Egg is externally encircled by waters ten times 
in magnitude. The waters are externally wrapped up by fire ten 
times in magnitude. 

43. The enveloping fires themselves are externally 
surrounded by the Vdyu (wind) ten times in magnitude. The 
Vdyu is enveloped by Akdsa (ether) and the ether is encircled 
by Bhutddi ( Tdmasic Ego). 

44-45. The Bhutddi {Tdmasic Ego) is enveloped by the 
principle called Mahat, which, in turn, is surrounded by the 
Unmanifest {Avyakta). These are the divisions of the universe. 
Noble-souled persons, all conversant with the Supreme Principle, 
inhabit them. They have their souls devoted (to the Lord) and 
are well established in him. Those Masters of Yoga are 
devoted to spiritual meditation, while others are the contempla- 
tors of Reality. 

46. They are omniscient and have their qualities of 
Rajas subsided. They are perpetually delighted in their minds. 
The Cosmic Egg is surrounded by these seven sheaths originat¬ 
ing from Prakrtiy 

47. This much can be explained, O Brahmanas. This 
Mdyd is very mysterious. What has been mentioned asBija 
(seed) 2 by me, is the working of Pradhdna (the primordial 
nature). 

48. That Pradhdna is the first, primordial body of god 
Prajapati; it is known through the Vedic tradition. The entire 
Brahmdnda is endowed with the strength* of the seven spheres. 


1. This theory of seven sheaths round the universe meant for its 
protection as given in the above verses was popular in Puranas. Cf. VP. I. 
2.59-60. The river Gahga is said to be the water from the watery outer 
sheath, which rushed in when the upper crust of the egg of the universe was 
cracked by the touch of the toe-nail of the left foot of Visnu in his Trivi- 
krama form (in his incarnation as Vamana, vide Bh. P.V. 17.1. also NP.— 
the descent of the Gahga). 

2. Cf. V. 16 above. As stated therein ‘The great seed* {mahad- 
bija) mentioned therein is the principle called Mahat which is an evolute of 
Pradhdna. Though it is called ‘‘The effect of Pradhana” (Pradhanikam 
kdryam), the influence of Purusa explicitly stated in V. 16 above should be 
taken as implicit here. 

* A better v l. : sapta-loka-kuldnvitam —‘The aggregate of seven spheres, 

Grit. Ed. reads : sapta-loka-taldnvitam and translates, attended by the 
might of seven spheres^ vide p. 30 verse No. 48. 



1.4.49-57 


45 


49-50. That is the second body of godBrahma {Paramesthin). 
Lord Hiranyagarbha i.e. Brahma, born of the golden Egg, is the 
third form of the Lord. Those who are experts in the inter¬ 
pretation of the Vedas state so. There is another form of that 
intelligent one which is constituted of Rajo-gum. 

51a. The four-faced Lord functions in the creation of the 
universe. 

51b-52a. Resorting to Sattva-guna, Visnu himself who is 
the Lord of this Universe, the Soul of the Universe, with faces 
all round, protects everything that is created. 

52b-53a. At the time of dissolution of the universe 
Lord Rudra, the Soul of all and the Supreme Ruler resorts to 
Tamo-gum and withdraws (i.e. annihilates) all the universe. 

53b-54. The Great God,^ though one, abides in three 
forms through his functions of creation, maintenance and an¬ 
nihilation (of the universe). Though he is devoid of ^ny gums 
and unsullied, and of a single form, he becomes two-formed, 
three-formed and many-formed according to the difference of 
gunas. 

55. By means of Lilas (sportive activity) the Lord of 
Yoga creates and dissolves bodies of diverse shapes, activities, 
features and names. 

56. For the welfare of the devotees, he devours them 
again. He divides himself into three and functions in the three 
worlds. 

57. He creates and swallows them. He particularly pro¬ 
tects them, because after creating the subjects, he blesses them 
and swallows them again. 


1. Vide Supra 1.2.91-92 where god Brahma, Visriu and Mahesvara 
are said to be the forms of the Supreme Soul Paramatman. Puranas 
always emphasize that it is the one. Supreme Reality who as Brahma, Visnu 
and Rudra characterised with the gunas — Rajas, Sattva and Tamas, creates, 
protects and withdraws (i.e. destroys) the universe. Here the Reality is 
called Mahadeva (the Great God) while in VP. 1.2.61-70, he is called Visnu. 
VP.I.2.70 sums up : 

sa eva srjyah sa ca sarga-kartd 
sa eva patyatti ca palyate ca j 
Brahmddyavasthabhir aSesa-m urtir 
Visriur varisfho varado varertyah // 



46 


Kurma Parana 


58. Hence (due to his persistent existence) in all the 
three periods of time, he is called one, in view of his being 
endowed with Gums. At the outset, he manifested himself as the 
eternal Hiranyagarbha. 

59. He is called Adideva (the primordial god) because he 
is the first one in the beginning; since he is not born, he is 
called Aja. Since he protects all the subjects, he is called 
Prajdpati. 

60. Since he is the greatest Deity among gods, he is 
designated as Mahadeva\ in view of his vastness, he is called 
Brahma,', in view of his supreme nature, he is called Paramesvara 
(the Supreme Ruler). 

61. He is technically termed ISvara because he is Vasin 
(full of self-control) and Ava^j/a (not liable to be subjected 
to any one else’s control). He is called because he is omni¬ 
present or capable of going everywhere. He is Hari because he 
is the remover of every thing. 

62. He is remembered as Svayambhu because he is 
unborn and is prior to all. Since he is the goal ( Ay and) of men 
{Nard) he is called Ndrdyana. {v.l. ndrdndm ayanarn —As 
his abode is the Cosmic waters). 

63. He is called Hara, because he removes the (bondage 
of) worldly existence. He is called Vism because of his omni¬ 
presence iyibhutva). He is called Bhagavdn, becasuse he 
knows everything perfectly; he is called OM because he 
protects {avandt) all. 

64. He is Sarvajna, because he knows everything. He is 
Sarva because he is identical with all; since he is free from 
impurities, he is known as Siva) since he is present everywhere 
he is called Vibhu. 

65. Since he saves (beings) from all miseries, he is ex¬ 
tolled as Tdraka. Of what avail is much talk? The entire universe 
is full Brahma^ (i.e. identical with Brahman), {v.l. full of i.e. 
thoroughly pervaded by Visnu) 


1. Puranas are full of echoes from Vedic and Upanisadic texts. 
Thus sarvarh brahma^mayam jagat is a paraphrase of sarvam khalvidath BrahmOy 
the next verse echoes ekarh sad viprd bahudhd vadanti. 



1.4.66-1.5.3a 


47 


66. The Supreme Lord differentiating himself in his 
multiformity, sports about. 

Thus the creation starting from Prakrti has been briefly 
narrated by me. O Brahmanas, now listen and understand the 
creation of Brahma, prior to MahaP (the principle of Cosmic 
intelligence). 


CHAPTER FIVE 

Calculation ofTime.^ 


Lord Kurma said ; 

1. Because he is not born out of any prior person he is 
called Svayambhu (self-born). 

2-3a. Since he is the goal of men, he is called 
J^drdyana. Because he is remover of Saifisdra, he is Hara. He is 


1. Here the Brihrrd Srsti —creation by Brahma is called abuddhi- 
purziikd, because in Prdkria sarga we have evolution from {Prakrti) Mahat, 
aharhkdra etc. but in Brahma’s creation buddhi i.e. mahat-tattva is absent. As 
the foot note 3 in the Venk. Ed. clarifies : 

abuddlii-purvikdrh ndsti buddhih mahat-tattvam purvd prathamd tathoktdm j 
The MS. evidence does not justify the emendation abuddhi-purvaka to 
make it qualify prdkrtah sargah though Dr. A.S. Gupta tries to defend it. 
And when abuddhi-purvikdm —the reading supported by good MSS can 
satisfactorily be explained when taken as qualifying Brdhmi Srsfi, there is no 
need of any emendation as per canons of textual criticism. 

2. The calculation of Time is a topic common to most of the 

Puranas vide Bh. P. III. 11.6-38, NP. 1.5.21-31, VP. I. 3.5.28, II.8.60-83, 
AP. 122.1-24. In KP. itself it is discussed again in 1.29-31, 52 

and some in portion of II. 46. The concept of Time as the all-powerful, 
beginningless, eternal God, creator and destroyer of the Trinity of gods 
(Brahma, Visnu and Rudra) is really majestic. It is a supra-phenomenal 
reality. Bh. P. looks upon Time as God, his power (III. 26.15,16) and the 
Time-sequence (III. 21.18). All these aspects of Kala are reflected in KP. 



48 


Kurma Purdna 


called Vi^nu, because of his all pervasiveness. He is called 
Bhagavdn, because of his perfect knowledge of everything. He is- 
called OM, because of his protectiveness of all. He is Sarvajna 
(omniscient) because of his knowledge of everything. He is 
Sarva, because he is identical with everyone.'^ 

3b-4. The calculation of time since coming in existence 
of the self-born god Brahma,^ cannot be recounted even by him, 
in great many years, O excellent Brahmanas. In brief, the 
calculation of time is presumed to be of two Parardhas. 

5. That alone will be the greatest span of time. At the 
close of it, creation of the universe is carried out again. In 
accordance with his measures, his {Brahma's) duration of life is 
regarded as of one hundred years. 

6. That is called Parardha (v.l. Para). Or (according to 
some) half of that is called Parardha. 

O excellent Brahmanas, fifteen Nime^as constitute the 
Kdfthd.^ 


1. VV. l = 3a are not accepted as genuine by R. S. Bhattacharya and 
A. S. Gupta in their editions and hence they have dropped them. The Venk. 
Press ed. brackets them expressing the suspicion of the editors about their 
being spurious. 


2. The reading 
The verse is found in LP, 
as ‘Present’ Vartamdna by 

3. VV. 6-9 give 
Time as follows : 

15 nimesas 
30 Kasthas 
30 Kalas 
30 muhurtas 
30 days 
6 months 
2 Ayanas 

The Bh. P. (III. 11. 

2 paramanus (of 
time) 

3 arms 

3 trasarerms 
100 traps 
3 Vedhas 
3 lavas 


in the footnote svayambhuvo’pi vrttasya is better. 
70.107 where v.l. vivrtta appears and is explained 
the Com. 

the computation table of the (empirical aspect of) 

= 1 kasthd 

= 1 kald 

= 1 muhurta 

= 1 Day [Ahordtra) 

= 1 month (2 Formights) 

= 1 ayana 

= 1 (complete) year. 

5-8) gives the following computation : 

1 anu 

1 trasarerm 
1 tru(i 
1 vedha 
1 lava 
1 nimisa 



1.5.7-10 


49 


7. Thirty Kasthds make a Kola, and thirty A'a/aj make the 
duration of a Muhurta. With as many (i.e. thirty) Muhurtas, the 
period of a human day and night is constituted. 

8. A month consists of as many (i.e. thirty) days and 
nights. It (a month) is comprised of two Paksas (fortnights). 
Six months make an Ayana and the two Ayanas, the Daksina 
and Uttar a (Southern and the Northern), make a year. 

9-10. The. Daksina Ayana is the night of Devas, and the 
Uttara Ayana is their day. The four named Krta, Treta 

etc., are made up of twelve thou.sand divine years. Understand 
their division. Four thousand divine years make the Krta 
yuga.i 


3 nimisas 

5 ksanas (i.e. 15 
nimisas) 

15 kdsthds 
15 laghus 
2 nddikds 

6 or 7 nddikds 


1 ksaria 

1 kdsfhd 
1 laghu 
1 nddikd 
1 muhurta 
1 ydma or Prahara 


KP. however is closer to Manu I. 64 with the exception of the 1st 
unit of time viz. Kdsthd which consists of 18 nimesas {nimesd daia cdsfau ca 
kdsthdh). 


1. 

VV. 10-15 

give the following 

durations of Yugas : 

The years 

noted are 

celestial years. 



Tuga 

Years of 

Regular 

Years of 

Total 


Sandhya 

duration 

Sandhydihsa 

No. of 



in years 



Krta 

400 

4000 

400 

4800 

Tretd 

300 

3000 

300 

3600 

Dvdpara 

200 

2000 

200 

2400 

Kali 

100 

1000 

100 

1200 

Caturyuga : (The 

total No. of years in 

a cycle of 4 yugas) 

12000 


1 1 catiiryugas —One Manvantara 

1000 cycles of 4 yugas=One Brahma’s day. 

KP. closely follows Manu I. 69-72. 

catvdrydhuh sahasrdni varsdr^dm tat krtarh yugam / 
tasya tdvac cliati sandhyd sandhyamsai ca tathdvidhah / / 69 // 
itaresu sasandhyesu sasandhydrhiesu ca trisu / 
ekdpdyena vartante sahasrdni iatdni ca jj 70 // 



50 


Kurma Pur ana 


11-12. Its Sandhya (Twilight) and Sandhyariiia consist of 
as many hundred years (i.e. four hundred) while for the other 
viz. Treta, Dvapara and Kali Tugas, this period of Sandhya is in 
the order: three hundred, two hundred and one hundred years. 
Except the Krtayuga the of other Yugas is six hundred 

years. For the other Yugas, the duration without Sandhya, and 
Sandhyanisa is three thousand, two thousand and one thousand 
divine years respectively. 

13. In knowing the duration of Treta, Dvapara and Tisya 
(i.e. Kali), the above is to be reckoned. Thus, the entire period 
consists of twelve thousand and some more divine years. 

14. Seventyone such sets of four Yugas constitute a 
Mamanlarad There are fourteen Manus, O Brahmanas. in one 
day of god Brahma. 

15-16a. The Manus axe Svayambhuva and others.^ Then 


yadetat parisankhydtam adaveva caiuryugam / 

etad dvadaSa sahasram devanarh yugam ucyate // 71 // 

daivikdndm yugdndm tu sahasram parisaiikhyaya / 

Brahmamekam ahar jdeyarh tavatim ratrim eva ca 11 72 // 

1. Arithmetically 1 Manvantara is more than 71 cycles of caturyugas 
as can be seen below : 


1 Adaniantara= 


1000 cycles of caturyugas 
14 Manvantaras 


= 71 ■ caturyugas 

Though Puranas are vague about the duration of this period, Sridhara 
commenting on Sadhikd in 

caturyugdnarh sankhydtd sadhikd hyeka-saplatihI VP.I.3.I7 

points out that every Manvantara is 71+ caturyugas. 


[Pratimanvantaram eka-saptater adhikam ityarthah )—But none helps us to 
determine precisely this extra period. The Surya Siddhdnta I. 10-19 tells us 
that there were fifteen sandhi-kdlas, one before the beginning of the first 
Manvantara and the rest of the fourteen at the end of each Manvantara and 
Sandki-kdla covered the period of deluge between two Manvantaras. Mt. P. 
supports the theory that there was a deluge before the 1st Manvantara. It 
appears that the Puranas accommodated this extra period in i'and/iya and 
Sandhydrhsa. 

2. The seven Manus implied here are : 

Svayambhuva, Svarocisa, Uttama, Tamasa. Raivata, Caksusa and 
'Vaivasvata (vide Infra I. 51.1-26). 



I.5.16b-24 


51 


Sdvarnika and othersd This entire Earth consisting of seven 
continents and their mountains, is to be protected by those kings, 
for full thousand Yugas. 

16b-17a. By means of (describing in details) one 
tara, all the Alanvantaras are explained. There is no doubt about 
this (that when oneis described, in the different A'a/paj 
too there is no difference). 

17b- One day of god Brahma is called a Kalpa and his 
night is of the same duration. 

18-19. Learned men say that a thousand sets of four 
Tugas constitute one Kalpa. Three hundred and sixty KaLpas 
make one year of god Brahma, O excellent Brahmanas. 
Hundred times of that period is called a Parardha by them. 

20. At the close of that period, all living beings get 
dissolved in Prakrti, their source. Hence, this is called the reabsorp¬ 
tion into Prakrti {Prdkrta Pratisahcdra) by wise men. 

21. It is said that in due course of time,^ Brahma, 
Narayana and Isa (Rudra), all the three, become merged in 
Prakrti and their remanifestation also is to take place. 

22. Thus, Brahma, the elements (or all living beings)and 
even Vasudeva and Sankara are created by A'a/a (time). He 
alone devours them again. 

23. This Lord Kdla is beginningless, endless, free from 
old age or decay and immortal. He is the Supreme Ruler be¬ 
cause of his omnipresence, independence and his state of being 
the soul of all. 

24. There have been many Brahmas, Rudras, Narayanas 
and others, but there is one Lord controller of all viz. Kdla. He 
is omniscient. So states the Sruti (Vedas). 


1. All these Manus are grouped under the name ‘Savarni’ as the 
epithet ‘Savarni’ is common to them all viz. Savarni Manu, Daksa S. 
(Savarni), Brahma S., Dharma S., Rudra S., Raucya S. and Bhautya S. 

(but Bhaumya in VP). Cf. Mk. P. 94-99. 

2. VV. 21-24 are quoted in CCKdla (p. 6), Kdla-mddhava (p. 39) and 
PuTusartha-cintamani (p. 1). The verses are important as here Time is equated 
with the Almighty eternal God—the Supra-phenomenal Reality. 



52 


KUrma Pur ana 


25. O Brahmanas, now the first Parardha of Brahma 
has elapsed. Now the second half continues and the present 
Kalpa is the first^ therein. 

26. The Kalpa that has expired is called Padma Kalpa 

by scholars. Now the current Aa//>a is I shall ex¬ 

plain that in detail now. 


CHAPTER SIX 

The Uplift of the Earth by Vism-Vardha. 

Lord Kurma said : 

1. Formerly, there was nothing but one single vast sheet 
of water,2 a terrible ocean full of darkness, without any divi¬ 
sion and devoid of wind. Nothing was known at that time. 

2-3. When all living beings, the mobile and the immo¬ 
bile had perished in that vast sheet of water, there appeared 
Brahma of thousand eyes and thousand feet,® the Puru^a of 


1. VV. 25 & 26 are practically quoted from VP. 1.2.27-28. 

The emendation astama in the Crt. Ed. for agraja hereof and adima 
in the Mss. seems unnecessary as agraja or adima means the 1st Marwan- 
tara of the 2nd half {parardha) of Brahma’s life and is quite clear in the 
context. 

2. ekarxtava —The doctrine of Ekdrtfova with which the incarnation or 
concept of Varaha is connected in most of the Puranas (vide Bh. P. III. 
13.16-19.38, Mt. P. 246.1. 247.76, VP. 1.4.1.52), is found in the Vedas as 
Apah Ambhah, Samudrah {videKV. X. 82.5-6,121.7-9). The basic idea is 
that within the womb of the Primeval Waters, the cosmos existed somewhere 
in an unmanifest form (vide V.S. Agrawal— Purina II. 285-306). 

3. Brahma sahasrdksah etc. ‘Thousand-headed, thousand-footed’ etc. are 
the epithets of the Cosmic Man in the Purusa Sukta (RV.X.90). KP. wants 
to identify Brahma with the Cosmic Man here, but these very epithets are 
used for Visnu {infra 1.9.8). and for Siva (t^ra II. 35.52) who (in stead 



I.6.4-8 


53 


thousand heads and of golden colour. He was beyond the scope 
of sense-organs. Brahma called Narayana^ lay asleep on the 
cosmic waters at that time. 

4. They cite this verse in this context, regarding Naraya na, 
the very embodiment of Brahman (or the Veda) and who is the 
Lord and the origin of the world and the cause of dissolu¬ 
tion of the universe ! 

5. The waters are called Mdrdh} since the waters are 
born of Nara (The cosmic Man) and since waters constitute 
his abode {^Ayana), he is called as Narayana.* 

6. After spending the nocturnal period equal to a thou¬ 
sand Tugas and at the end of that night, he assumes the func¬ 
tions of Brahma for the purpose of creation. 

7. By inference, he understood that the earth was 
submerged under water. The Lord of creation® (Prajapati) 
then became desirous of lifting it up. 

8. He assumed the refulgent form of the divine Boar for 
sports within the waters. It was unthwartable, even mentally. 


of resting on Cosmic Waters like Brahma and Visnu) was dancing to bring 
the ecstatic and excited sage Mahkana to senses. It clearly shows that KP. 
emphasized the identity of the Trinity of gods—Brahma, Visnu and Siva— 
with the Cosmic Man. 

1. In 1.9.2-10 we are told that after killing the demons Madhu and 
Kaitabha of whom Brahma was afraid. Lord Visnu who was reclining on the 
Cosmic Waters asked god Brahma to climb down from the Lotus in his 
navel. God Brahma obeyed and then entered Visnu’s body and became 
identical with Visnu and hence came to be designated as ‘Narayana*. 

saha tena tathdvisya iankha-cakra-gadddharah / 

Brahmd Ndrdyand'khyo'sau susvdpa salile tadd // 

The epithet “Narayana”, as V. 5 below tells us, means “one having 
waters as his abode”. Hence when Brahma like Visnu slept over the 
Cosmic Waters, he came to be designated as “Narayana”. 

2. VV. 4 and 5 are quoted from VP. 1.4.5 and 6. 

3. Prajapati—Though translated as “Lord of creation” KP. echoes 
this from 7at7. 5r. 1.1.3.6 where the Vedic god Prajapati is credited with 
the assumption of the Boar form. The line 7b 

anumdndt tad uddhdram kartukdmah prajdpatih / 

is a quotation from VP. I. 4.7 while 7a is a paraphrase of the 
corresponding line 7a from VP. 

*v.l. Ndmnd purvam iti irutam “as they were so termed in the days of 
yore.” 



54 


Kurma Pur ana 


by others. He then becomes known by the term vdfimaya 
Brahman {Brahman in the form of speech or the Vedas). 

9. In order to lift up the earth, he entered the nether¬ 
world. The upholder of the earth, the self-supporting God, 
lifted up the earth by means of his tusks.^ 

10. Having observed that the earth is held up on the tips 
of his tusks, the Siddhas and Brahmana sages stationed in the 
Janaloka eulogised Hari of celebrated manliness and might. 

The sages said : 

11. “Obeisance to you, the Lord of gods, to Brahman, 
Paramefthin, to the ancient Purusa, to the Eternal, to the Victo¬ 
rious one. 

12. Bow to you the self-born God, to the Creator, to 
the Omniscient. Salutations to Vedhas born of the Golden Egg, 
the Supreme Atman. 

13. Obeisance to you, to Vasudeva, the all-pervader 
{Visnu), to the source of the universe, to Lord Narayana, to the 
benefactor ofDevas. 

14. Salutations to you O four-faced Lord, the Wielder 
of the Sarhga bow, the discus and the sword. Repeated bows to 
the soul of all living beings who is immovable, unchangeable 
and the Eternal. 

15. Salutations to the secret of the Vedas; obeisance to 
the source of the Vedas. Bow to the Enlightened and to the 
pure one; obeisance to you the very embodiment of knowledge. 

16. Glory to the Bliss incarnate. Salutations to the Wit¬ 
ness ( Sakfin) of the worlds. Obeisance to the Infinite, to the 
unmeasurable, to one who is both the Cause as well as the 
Effect. 

17. Salutations to you, who constitute the five elements. 
Obeisance to the soul of the five elements. Bow to the origin 
of the Primordial Nature {Prakrti). Obeisance to you of the 
Maya form. 

1. In this version of Varaha-incarnation, the demon Hiranyaksa 
does not figure. In V.P. 1.4 also Hiranyaksa is absent. But KP. records an - 
other version in mjra 1. 16.81-83 in which Visnu assumed the Boar 
incarnation to kill the demon Hiranyaksa. Bh. P. III. 17-19 however 
synthesises these two versions. 



1.6.18-25 


55 


18. Obeisance to you the Divine Boar. Obeisance to you 
who incarnated in the form of a fish. Salutations to you who 
are comprehensible through Yoga. Obeisance to you, O 
Sankarsana. 

19. Salutations to you trinity in form, to one possessed 
of three refulgent abodes, to one of divine lustre. Obeisance 
to the Siddha, to the Praiseworthy, to him who divided Gunas 
into three. 

20. Salutations be to you whose form is the sun. Obei¬ 
sance to you the Lotus-born God. Bow to the unembodied as 
well as the embodied one. Salutations to Madhava (the consort 
of Laksmi). 

21. Everything has been created by you alone. Every¬ 
thing has been comprised in you only. Be pleased to protect all 
this universe. You are the saviour, the refuge and the goal.” 

22. Thus Lord Visnu was eulogised by Sanaka and 
others. The Lord having the form of a Boar, conferred his 
grace on them. 

23. Then the Supporter of the earth brought the earth to 
its original position, and gave up his Boar form Vv^hich he con¬ 
ceived of mentally. 

24. The earth stationed like a boat above the vast 
expanse ofwater, did not sink becauseof the vastness ofits extent 
all round.^ 

25. He levelled the earth and gathered the mountains 
together on it — mountains which had been burnt in the destruc¬ 
tion of the previous creation. He then applied his mind to 
creation. 


1. Cf. VP. 1.3.46-47 the probable source of KP. 



56 


Kurma Pur ana 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

The Description of Creation,^ 

Lord Kurma said : 

1. While he (god Brahma) was pondering over 
the creation at the beginning of the Kalpa, as before, the 
creation without the antecedence of Buddki (intellect) ^ manifested 
itself. It was full of darkness. 


1. This chapter gives the account of nine creations of Brahma. In 
addition to nipra ch. 2, we have another description of the creation of the 
world in infra. I. 10. As expected, there is much common in these accounts 
of creation given in LP. 1.70, VP.1.5 and Bh.P. 111.6.6-18, III. 10. III.12 
and others. But KP. quotes verbatim a number of verses from the VP. as 
can be seen from the following comparative table: 


KP.I. 7 

1 

VP.L 5 

4 

KP.I. 7 

VPJ. 5 

2 

5 

57-61 

54-58 

3 a? 



59 b 

4a5 

6 

62a 

4b 

7 

63 h\ 

64 a^ ' 

60 

5 a 

8 

65 a 

61 

5 b? 

6a< 

9 

65 b? 

66 a^ 

62 

eb'^ 

10 



8 

13 

67 b? 

63 j 

64 

9 

16 



10a 

17 

69 b? 

70 ( 

66 

13 b 

19 b 

j 


14-46 

20-22 




The use of phrases and paraphrase of the many of the remaining verses 
show a close affinity between this chapter and VP. I. 5. 

2. abuddfdpurvaka occurs also in VP. I. 5.4. (as this verse is common 
to KP. and VP.). Sridhara interprets as anavadhdna^mula (caused through 
inadvertence). A.S. Gupta quotes LP. I. 5.1-2 where this very word occurs 
and is explained as anavadhdna-mula by the Com. Ganesa. Relying on the 
word cintayatah (Srstirh cintayatah ), Gupta thinks that this creation is 
buddhi’purvaka. I think that Sridhara is correct. In experimentation or 
planning one considers different alternatives before deliberately arriving at 
Che final conclusion. In the case of Brahma, the creation being on his 



r.7.2-4 


57 


2. Five types of darkness came out of the great-souled 
Deity. They were : Tamasa (Ignorance), Moha (Delusion), 
Mahdmoha (great delusion), Andhatamisra (blinding darkness) 
and the fifth one among them was the Avidya}- (Nescience). 

3. The creation remained five-fold (as Avidya is of five 
kinds), even as he was meditating and identifying himself with 
it. It was enveloped by darkness and lay covered like a pot 
of seeds (P)^. {y.l. i.e. buried under ground like seeds and 
roots.) 

4. It was devoid of light both within and without. It 
was rigid and devoid of contact. As the immovables (such as 


mental plane i.e. creation took place as per development of his thoughts or 
mental planning, the first creation which was not a systematically planned 
one^ is called abuddhi-purvaka. SP. Vdyavlya I. 12.18 states that the three 
Piakrta Sargas are abuddfd-purvaka while Vaikrta creations are buddhi- 
purvaka (deliberately planned). 

Prdkrtdica traye purve sargds te*buddlu~purvakdh / 

1. TamaSj moha etc. are the synonyms of Kleias (hindrances) 
enumerated as avidydy asmitd, rdga, dvesa and abhiniveia. In commenting on 
YS. 11.3, Vacaspati states that these are the five ‘joints* i.e. aspects 
of Avidyd : Se'yam panca-parvd bhavatyavidyd : avidyd'smitd-rdga-dve^d'bhinivesdh 
Kleid iti eta eva sva-sarhjndbhis tamo moho mahd-mohas tdmisro'ndha^tdmisra iti / 

Vacaspati on YS. I. 24 explains that they are Kleias because they afflict 
men plunged in Samsdra with several kinds of sufferings {avidyadayah kleidh 
kliinanti khalvami purusam sdThsdrikam vividha-duhkha.prahdreneUi / Asvaghosa was 
familiar with these terms— tamasy moha etc. as the five knots of Avidya. Cf. 
Buddha-carita XII. 33. 

ityavidyd hi vidvdrhsah pahca-part'd samihate / 
tamo moharh mahd-moham tamisra-dvoyam eva ca jj 

In view of the above discussion the v.l. avidyd paiica-parvaisd for avidyd 
pahcami tesdm is better. If it is accepted the translation will be : “From 
that great-souled Deity came out Nescience of five aspects or knots’* 
etc. 

2. Bija-kumbhavad dvrtah —The idea is vague. The emendation in 
the Crt. Ed. : bija-kambhu-vandiritah is good and means ‘like a forest i.e. a 
cluster of Kambhu [Andropogon Muridtus) hidden in darkness under ground.* 
The reading in the Venk. Text has the ring of Va. P. I. 6.38 dipah Kumbha- 
vad dvrtah “like a lamp in a pot the light of which is surrounded and shut 
out on all sides with walls of a pitcher.” LP. 70 vv. 139 ff are quite similar 
to the KP. 1.7.1.66 and it uses bijdhkuravad dvrtdh (1.70.142) which is also an 
equally vague expression. 



58 


Kurma Purana 


mountains, trees etc.) were the first creation, this creation was- 
known as the first or Aiukhyo} creation. 

5. Having observed that this creation is not accomplishing 
his object, the Lord thought of another creation. Even as he 
was pondering, the Tiryak-srotas (oblique currented creation 
i.e. the animal world) appeared. 

6. Since it functioned in non-straight ways, it is known 
as Tiryak-srotas. O Brahmanas, they are well-known as beasts, 
etc. as those tread the wrong path and go astray. 

7. Realising that that creation did not accomplish its 
purpose and hence was incomplete, he created another set of 
creation. That is called the upward currented [Urdhva-srotas). 
It v/as the creation of gods, endowed with the quality of' 
Sattva. 

8. They were blessed with abundant happiness and plea¬ 
sure. They are uncovered i.e. unburdened within and without. 
They are full of light internally and externally. Naturally they 
are termed as Devos, the luminous. 

9. Thereafter, he, of truthful (effective) meditation began 
to contemplate further. Then from the unmanifest appeared 
the downward currented {Arvak-srotas) creation, competent of 
accomplishing his purpose (all goals of life). 

10. There, they came to be known as human beings — 
illuminated with the light of knowledge, endowed with the 
quality of Sattva, contaminated and afflicted with Tamas and 
dominated Vv'ith Rajas. 

11. On seeing it, the unborn god Brahma thought of 
another creation. As he was meditating on the creation, the 
creation of elements etc. ( theBhutadika) took place. 

12. All of them were possessors of property or house¬ 
hold, engaged in sharing, swallowers or grabbers and even, 
lacking in character. 

13. Thus, O leading Brahmanas, the following five 


1. VP. 1.5.7 explains that this inert, immovable creation like- 
mountains were first established by Lord Varaha, hence it came to be called 
Mukhya. 



1.7.14-19 


59- 


creations arc recounted — the first one should be considered as 
the creation of the principle of Mahat from Brahma. 

14. The second creation is that of the Tanmatras (subtle 
elements). It is called Bhutasarga^ (creation by the Bhutas 
i.e. elements). The third creation is Vaikdrika. It is called 
Aindriyaka^ (pertaining to the sense organs), also. 

15. Thus there is the Prdkrtasarga which took place with¬ 
out the antecedence of the Buddhi (intellect). The fourth one is 
Mukhyasarga. The immobile beings are meant by the term 
Mukhya. 

16. The creation of Tiryaksrotas i.e. of the beasts and 
animals, is the fifth creation. The sixth creation is that of the 
Urdhva-srotas. It is called Devasarga. 

17. Then the creation of the Arvdk-srotas is the seventh 
one. That is the creation of the human beings. The eighth 
creation is Bhautika i. e. of the Bhutas* (elements) etc. 

18-19. The ninth creation is that of the Kumar as (of 
Sanatkumara etc.). (The eight creations mentioned before are) 
Prdkrtas and Vcdkrtas. The first three are the Prdkrtas. They 


1. According to Sankhyas, Mahat or Buddhi is the first evolute from 
Prakrti. Hence the association of Brahma with the creation of Mahat. 

2. Tanmatras or subtle elements are according to Sankhyas the 
products of the Tamasa aspect of Aharhkara and as gross elements evolve out 
of Tanmatras-, this Sarga came to be called Bhuia Sarga or elemental ereation. 

3. According to Sankhyas, from the vaikarika or sattvika aspect of 
Aharhkara are evolved the cognitive and conative senses and the internal 
organ (the mind). Hence this is designated as ‘‘creation pertaining to 
sense-organs’ (Aindriyakas). 

4. One wonders why the elemental-creation {Bhautika sarga) is 
repeated again here when verse 14 above states that the Sarga of Tanmatras is 
the elemental creation. The difference being that that creation is abuddhi- 
purvaka and this is buddM-purvaka. VP. I. 5.24 states instead that the 
eighth creation is Anugraha 

Astamo’nugrahah sargah sattvikas tdmasasca sah / 

Mk. P. 47.28 and Va. P. 6.57 call this as Anugraha as it consists of 
reversal, accomplishment (siddhi) , quiescence and contentment : 
paheamo'nugrahah sargaS caturdha sa vyavasthitah / 
viparyayena iaktya ca tustya siddhya tathaiva ca 11 

Mk. P. 47.26 



€0 


Kurma Pur am 


are without the antecedence of the intellect. O leading sages, 
the creations beginning with the Mukhya (immovable) one 
function through the antecedence of the Buddhi. At the outset 
Brahma created these mental sons on a par with himself. 

20-21. Prajapati had already created the five sons 
Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanandana, Kratu {v.l. Rbhu) and Sanat- 
kumara. O Brahmanas, these five were Yogins with their 
minds drawn towards Isvara (the Supreme Ruler). They did 
not turn their mind towards creative activity. 

22. When they were indifferent towards the creation of 
the worlds, Prajapati fainted suddenly by the deluding potency 
(Maya) of Paramesthin, the master of Maya. 

23. The great ascetic and yogin, Narayana, who is the 
creator of the worlds through Maya and who pleases the minds 
of yogins wakened him [v.l. wakened up his son). 

24. Aroused by him, the soul of the universe [Vihatman 
i.e. Brahma) performed great penance. Even after performing 
austere, penance, the Lord did not receive anything. 

25. Then after a long time he became angry due to his 
mental anguish. When he was overwhelmed with anger, drops of 
tears fell from his eyes. 

26. From the forehead of the frowning Paramesthin 
endowed with crooked eyebrows, the great god Siva of dark- 
blue complexion, a worthy protector, manifested himself. 

27. He himself was Lord Isa, the eternal one, the mass 
of splendour, whom (spiritually) learned men observe as Para- 
mesvara (The Supreme Lord) abiding in their souls. 

28. Recollecting Orhkdra and bowing down with palms 
joined in reverence, Lord Brahma spoke to him: “create these 
various subjects.” 

29. On hearing the words of the Lord, Sankara, the 
transmitter of piety, the auspicious (Siva) mentally created 
these sons similar to him viz. Rudras—all with matted hair, 
possessing three eyes, of dark-blue complexion and free from 
fear. 

30-32. Lord Brahma spoke to him: “create such subjects 
as are liable to birth and death.” Isa replied; “O Lord of 
the universe, I will not create such subjects as are susceptible 



1.7.33-42 


61 


to old age and death. You may, if you please, create such 
inauspicious subjects.” Then the lotus-born deity prevented 
Rudra and began to create himself. 

33-34. Understand that all these are deities presiding 
over their respective abodes. Even as I recount them, they 
are: Apah (waters), Agni (fire), Antariksa (ether), Dyaus 
(heaven), Vayu (wind), Prthivi (earth), rivers, oceans, 
mountains, trees, creepers. Lavas, Kdslhas, Raids, Muhurtas, 

(all these being units of time'^), days, nights, fortnights, months, 
Ayanas, years, Tugas etc. After creating the deities presiding 
over their positions, he created the Sddhakas, who accomplished 
his purpose. 

35. He created Marici, Bhrgu, Ahgiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, 
Kratu, Daksa, Atri, Vasistha, Dharma and Sarhkalpa. 

36. Brahma, created Daksa out of his vital airs; he 
created Marici out of his eyes; the Lord created Ahgiras out 
of his head and Bhrgu from his heart. 

37. He created Atri from his eyes, Dharma out of his 
energetic exertion; the grand-father of all the worlds created 
Sarhkalpa out of his conception. 

38. He created Pulastya out of his vital breath Uddna; he 
created sage Pulaha out of Vydna', he created the unbewilder- 
able Kratu out of Apdna and Vasistha out of Samdna. 

39. Thus these (S'at/Aa^a) house-holder sages were created 
by Brahma. Assuming human form, activities of piety or religion 
were initiated by them. 

40. Then the holy lord desirous of creating the four viz. 
Devas, Asuras, Pitrs and human beings, engaged himself 
therein. 

41. When the Atman (soul) of Prajapati was united in 
yogic trance, the Tamomdtrd (the essence of dark traits) became 
increased. Then from his loins, the Asuras were born as his sons, 
at the^outset. 

42. The exalted person cast off that physical body, after 


1. Out of the units of time Lava is rather vague, as according to 
Bh.P. Ill 11.3-10, 3 lavas=nimesa while Kautiliya Arthaiastra II, 20.30-37 
gives 2 lavas= nimesa. For other terms, vide Note 1, p. 48. 



€2 


Kurma Pur ana 


•creating the Asuras. Immediately after he had cast off that 
body, the night was created from it. 

43. Since that period was abundant in darkness, the 
created beings sleep during night. The Lord then assumed an¬ 
other body mainly consisting of Sattva Gum. 

44. Then from his face (mouth) that was refulgent, gods 
were born. That body was also cast off by him and the day, 
mainly of Sattvika nature, was created out of it. 

45. Hence religious minded persons worship Devas 
endowed with the characteristic of Sattva, during the day time. 
Then he took up another body endowed mainly of Sattvika 
nature. 

46. The manes who considered him like a father were 
born from him. After creating the manes (Pitrs) the god who 
sees everything in the universe, abandoned that body also. 

47-48a. As soon as that body was cast off by him, it 
became the dusk ( Sandhya ); hence the day time is for Devas; 
the night time is for the enemies of Devas. In between them the 
great Sandhya i.e. the evening twilight is the time for Pitrs. 

48b-49. Hence all Devas, Asuras, Sages and the 
human beings worship with concentration, in the middle period 
between the night and the day. Thereafter, god Brahma created 
another body, mainly of Rajas a nature. 

50. Then the human beings enveloped by the quality 
called Rajas were born to him as his sons. Prajapati (the creator) 
then immediately abandoned that body. 

51-52. That body became the dawn, O Brahmanas. It is 
also termed as morning-twilight. O leading Brahmanas, then 
Lord Brahma attained the body of Tarmsic and Rajasic nature 
{v.l. He assumed it). In the darkness were born Raksasas over¬ 
whelmed with hunger. 

53. The demonic night wanderers {Nisacaras) mostly of 
Tdmasa and Rajasa nature were born as his sons. Similarly, 
serpents, Yaksas, goblins and celestial singers were born. 

54. The Lord created other beings too, possessed of Rajasic 
and Tarmsic qualities. After creating the winged tribe (birds) 
from his vigour and age, he created sheep out of his chest. 

55. From his mouth, he created other animals such as 
the goats and from his belly, the cows. From his feet, he created 



1.7.56-57 


63 


horses, elephants, donkeys, Gay.'yw (aspecies ofox—bos gravaeus) 
and deer. 

56. From his fore-hand (extending from his elbow to 
the little finger tip), Prajapati created camels and mules, 
medicinal herbs, fruits and roots were born of the hair on his 
body. 

57. From his first (eastern) face he created the Gayatra 
{°tri) metre, the Rks (Rgveda), the Tri-vrt-stoma mantras, the 
collection of Sdinan Mantras called Rathantara and Agniftoma 
among all sacrifices.^ 

1. VV. 57-60 which are the same as VP. 1.5.54-57 describe what 
was created from the four faces of God Brahma. 

Brahmas Face : Creations from Brahma’s face 



Veda 

Metre 
( Chandas) 

Stomas 

Samans 

Sacrifice 
( Tajda) 

Eastern 

■■ Rg 

Gayatri 

Trivrt 

Rathan¬ 

tara 

Agni- 

Sfoma 

Southern 

: Tajus 

Tristubh 

Pafica- 

dasa 

Brhat and 
Uktha 

Uktha 

Western 

: Saman 

Jagati 

Sapta 

dasa 

Vairupa 

Ati- 

rdtra 

Northern 

Atharvan 

Anus- 

tubh 

Eka- 

virhsa 

Vairdja 

Aptor — 
ydman 


It will be seen from the above table that the Vedas, metres, stomas 
(collection of hymns), certain groups of Saman hymns and certain sacrifices 
were created from each of the mouth of god Brahma. As each face of 
Brahma created a Stoina; the reading Trivrl-sama even though found in the 
J..P. I. 70.243 need not be accepted. VP.I. 5.54 supports the reading Triort 
soma and this whole passage in KP. is from VP. vide Note 1, p. 56. 

The groups of saman hymns specified here are as follows :— 

(1) Rathantara (Sdma ) viz the mantra 

Abhi tvd sura — RV. VII. 32.22, Sdma V. 233; 630 

(2) Brhat-Sdma — viz. The mantra : tvamiddhi 

havdmahe — RV. VT.46.1; Sdma V. 234; 809 

(3) Uktha or Uklhya is the third variety of 

(for details vide HD. II. ii-1204. 

Some of the Uktha mantras are : 

(1) Uktham indrdya Sarhsyam / 

—RV.I. 10.5, Sdma V. 363 

(2) Uktharh ca na sasyamdnam / 

—RV. VIII.2.14; Sdma V. 225 

(3) Ukthdni ca bravitana 

—RV.I.84.5b; Sdma 2.301. 



64 


Kurma Purana 


58. From his right (southern) face, he created the 
Tajur Mantras, the Trai^tubha metre, the collection of Mantras 
called Pancadasa stoma, and Brhatsdma and Uktha portion of the 
Samaveda. 

59. He created from the western face, the Sdman-mantras 
( Sdmaveda), the hymns called the Sapta-daia stoma, the Jagati 
metre, a group of Sdmans called Vairupa and the Atirdtra sacrifice. 

60. From his northern face he created the collection of 
Mantras called Eka-virhia, the Atharva-mantras, the Aptorydma 
sacrifice, the Anuftubh metre, and Vairdja portion of the Sdmaveda. 

61. The diverse, high and low living beings were born of 
his limbs, even as god Brahma, in the capacity of the creator, 
was engaged in his creative activities. 

62-64a. After creating the Tak?as, goblins, the heavenly 
singers and the beautiful divine damsels and the four sets of 
creations such as gods, sages, manes {Pitrs) and human beings, 
he created the living beings both mobile and immobile. He 
created human beings, Kinnaras, Raksasas, birds, animals, deer, 
serpents and other creatures and things both mobile and immo¬ 
bile, permanent and temporary. 

64b-66a. Whatever activities had been taken by 
these creatures in their previous creations and births, they 
assume those very functions when created again and again. 
(The temperament) violence or non-violence, gentleness and. 
cruelty, righteousness or unrighteousness, truthfulness or false¬ 
hood, urges them [v.l. arises in them), as in the previous birth, 
and hence these appeal to them. 

66b-67a. It was the creator who made the arrangements 
for diversity in the great elements and in their objects of senses 
and variety of forms. 

67b-69a. That great God [Maheivara) himself created 
the names and forms oi the. Bhutas (living beings) as authorised 
by the Vedic words at the beginning of the creation. That un¬ 
born deity gave the names of the sages to those who were born 
at the close of his night. 

69b-70. Whatever forms and functions are seen in the 
beginnings of the Yugas are definitely the same as are seen in 
the various cycles of ages. 



1.8.1-10 


65 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

The Mukhyddi Creation : Progeny of Svdyambhuva Manu and Daksdk 
Lord Kurma said : 

1-2. Thus, the living beings, both mobile and immobile 
were created. But they, the created beings, did not multiply, 
in spite of his intelligent activity. God Brahma became enve¬ 
loped in gloom and he was extremely miserable and sorry. 
Thereupon he applied his intellect for deciding the real cause 
of the matter (of their failure). 

3. He found within himself the Tamasa element as the 
main factor controlling everything. The Rajas and the Sattoa 
gwjtas though present with their own activities, were enveloped 
by Tamos. 

4. The Tomas along with Rajas and Sattoa (enveloped 
by it) was subsequently abandoned by him. But that Tamos, 
when thus repulsed, became a couple (a pair of living beings). 

5. The male member was Adharmacarana (practice of evU) 
and the female member was Hirhsd (violence) of inauspicious 
characteristics. Then god Brahma cast off that refulgent body of 
himself. 

6. He then split his body. With one half he became a 
man. With another half, he became a woman. Thus the Lord 
created the man Virdt. 

7-8a. He created a beautiful auspicious woman, a YoginI, 
named Satarupa. She pervaded heaven and earth with her 
grandeur and remained steady. 

8b-10. She was endowed with Yogic power and prosperity, 
and was blessed with knowledge and spiritual enlightenment. 
The son born of the male Virdt whose origin was from the 
unmanifest, was Lord Svayambhuva Manu. That male member 
became a sage. The goddess Satarupa, performed a very 
difficult penance and obtained Manu himself of bright fame as 
her husband. Satarupa bore him two sons. 

1. The progeny of Svayambhuva Manu and Daksa is given in this 
chapter as well as t^nz 1.11, 1.13. This part of creation is common to all 
Puranas e.g. AP. 18. 1-26, Bh. P. III.12.53-56, Mt. P. 3.1-27, VP. I. 7-16 H. 
It is noteworthy that KP. agrees with VP. even in details but not with LP. 



66 


Kurma Pur ana 


11. Priyavrata and Uttanapada were those sons. He had 
two excellent daughters^ also. Manu gave his daughter called 
Prasuti to Daksa. 

12. The mind-born son of Brahma called Ruci, the 
creater of beings, took (the other daughter of Manu called) 
Akuti (as his wife). That mind-born son of Brahma, Ruci, begot 
twin children of Akuti. They were splendid. 

13. They were Yajna and Daksina. Through them the 
Universe flourished in population. Twelve sons were born to 
Yajna and Daksina. 

14a. They were Devas in Svayambhuva Manvantara 
and were called Yamas. 

14b-16. Daksa begot of Prasuti twentyfour daughters.^ 
Attentively listen to their names : They are Sraddha (Faith), 
Laksmi (Prosperity), DArft’ (Fortitude), Tusti (Satisfaction), Pusti 
(Nourishment), (Retentiveness), A'ry'a (Activity), 

(Intelligence), Lajja (Bashfulness), Fo/imA (Body), (Peace), 
Siddhi (Accomplishment), Kirti (Fame),—Dharma took these 
thirteen auspicious and good-looking daughters of Daksa as his 
wives. 

17-20a. The other eleven bright-eyed girls were the 
younger sisters viz. Khydti (Renown), Sati^ (Virtuosity), Sambhuti 
(Suitability), Smrti (Memory), Priti (Love), A'tama (Forgive¬ 
ness), Santati (Progeny), AnasSyd (Non-enviousness), Urja 
(Energy), SvaM (Oblations to god) and Svadhd (Offerings to 
ancestors). The sages of excellent knowledge viz. Bhrgu, Bhava, 
Marici, Ahgiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, the knower of 
the highest Dharma, Atri, Vasistha, Vahni and the Pitrs, took 
these girls Khyati and others as their wives in this order. 


1. Kanyadvayam anuttamam —Here K.P. follows VP.1.7.19. But Bh.P. 
Til.12.54 credits him with three daughters: Akuti, Devahuti and Prasuti. 
“When such differences between Puranas are found, they are attributed to 
different Kalpa-periods. 

2. From KP. 13b to 20a is a quotation from VP.1.7.21-27. The 
names of these daughters represent virtues. 

3. KP. and VP. (1.7.25) regard Sati as Daksa’s daughter, but in LP. 
1.5.27 she is mind-born from Siva but was adopted by Daksa and given in 
marriage to god Siva. 



I.8.20b-30 


67 


20b-21. Sraddha’s son was Kama (Desire) and Laksmi’s 
son was Darpa {VriAe). JViyama (Restraint) was the son of 
Dhrti (Fortitude), Santosa (Contentment) was the son of 
Tusti (Satisfaction), Labha (Gain) was the son of Pusti 
(Nourishment) and Sama (Self-control) was the son of Medha 
(Retentiveness). 

22. Danda (Punishment) and Naya (Polity) were the 
sons ofKriya (Action). Bodha (Enlightenment) and Apramada 
(Vigilance) were the sons ofBuddhi (Intelligence). 

23-25a. Vinaya (Humility) was the son of Lajja (Bash¬ 
fulness) and Vyavasdya (Endeavour) was the son of Vapus 
(body). Ksema (well-being) was the son of Santi (Peace) and 
Siddha was born of Siddhi (Accomplishment). Tasas (Fame) 
was the son of Kirti. These foregoing are the sons of Dharma. 
Harfd}- (Joy), the delight of gods (heavenly delight) was the 
son of Kama. Thus the progeny of Dharma leading to happi¬ 
ness as a result has been recounted. 

25b-30. Hirhsa (Violence) bore to Adharma (two sons) 
viz. Nikrti (Wickedness) and (a son) Anrta (Falsehood). 
Nikrti bore two twins, viz. Bhaya and Maya (Fear and Illusion) 
and Naraka and Vedana (Hell and Pain). Maya bore to Bhaya 
the son Mrlyu (Death), the remover of living beings. Vedana 
gave birth to Duhkha (Misery) as the son of Raurava (name 
of a hell). From Mrtyu were born Vyadhi (Sickness), Jard (Old 
Age), Soka (Grief), TJ'jna (Thirst, Greed) and (Fury) 

All these are mentioned as giving rise to misery in the end. 
They are characterised by Adharma (impiety, evilness). All of 
them are Urdhavaretas (of sublimated sexuality). Thus the 
Tdmasa creation guiding and governing Dharma was born. O 
leading sages, Visrsti (Secondary creation) has been narrated 
By me briefly. 


1. I have taken devananda as an adj. qualifying Harsa as VP. 
1.7.31 records only one son viz. Harsa : 

Kamad ratih sutarh Harsam 
dharma-pautram asuyala / 

2. KP. 26-29a is a quotation from VP. 1.7.33-35. 

The progeny of adharma symbolizes human vices. 



68 


Kurma Pur dm 


CHAPTER NINE 

Manifestation of the Lotus-Bom Deity — Brahma^ 


Suta said : 

!• On hearing these words, Narada and other great 
sages bowed to Visnu, the bestower of boons, and submitted to 
him (because) they were overwhelmed with doubts. 

The sages submitted : 

2. O Janardana, the creation of Mukhya etc. has been 
described by you. Now, it behoves you to dispel our doubts. 

3. How did the Lord Sambhu, the wielder of the Pindka 
bow, though born earlier than Brahma attain the son-hood of 
Brahma, born of the unmanifest ? 

4. How was Lord Brahma, the grand-father of the 
worlds, the controller of the universe, born from Cosmic Egg ? 
It behoves you to explain to us these. 

Lord Kurma replied ; 

5. O sages, listen all of you, how Sankara of unmeasur¬ 
ed prowess attained the state of being the son of Brahma, and 
how god Brahma had the lotus as the source of his origin- 

6. At the close of the previous Kalpa, the three worlds, 
Bhu, Bhuvar and Soar sank into complete darkness.^ There was 
one great terrible vast sheet of water. There were neither 
Devas and others nor the sages. 

7. There, in that isolated place free from disturbance and 
trouble. Lord Narayana, the Supreme Person, resorted to the 
Couch of Sesa and slumbered. 

8-9. He assumed the form of one with thousand heads, 
thousand eyes, thousand feet, and thousand arms. He was 


1. The birth of god Brahma from the lotus grown out of the eai- 
bilical region of god Visnu is common to many Puranas e.g. Bh. P. III. 
8.1-23, LP. 1.20, Va. P.1.24. 

2. This sort of Pralaya involving the dissolution of only three worlds 
(bhu, bhuvar and svar) takes place at the end of a Kalpa or Brahma’s day. It 
is called the Naimittika Pralaya. 



1.9.10-21 


69 


omniscient and was contemplated upon by enlightened persons. 
He had yellow garments and large eyes. He resembled the blue 
cloud in complexion. He was the great Yogic Soul of Super 
human power and dignity. He was compassionate to Yogins. 

10. Once, when he was asleep, a divine and wonderful 
lotus that was the quintessence of the three worlds, shone in 
his umbilical region, for the sake of his diversion. 

11. It extended to a hundred Yojanas (1 Yojana= 12 
Kilometres). It resembled the morning sun. It had divine fra¬ 
grance. It was meritorious and endowed with Karnika (pericarp) 
and Kesaras (filaments). 

12. While Sarhgin (god Visnu) was staying like this for 
a long time. Lord Hiranyagarbha (Brahma) came to that place. 

13. That Visvatman (the Soul of the universe) roused up 
the eternal deity with his hand. Deluded by his Maya he spoke 
these sweet words. 

14. O excellent person, tell me who are staying alone 
in this terrible vast sheet of water, isolated and enveloped in 
darkness. 

15. On hearing his words the Garuda-bannered Lord 
laughed and replied to lord Brahma in a voice as majestic as 
the sound of a cloud. 

16. O, know me as the Supreme Person, Lord Nara- 
yana, the source of origin of and the seat of dissolution of the 
worlds and Mahdyogisvara (great lord of the Yogins). 

17. O grandfather of the worlds, within me you see the 
entire universe including the mountains and the great continents 
surrounded by seven oceans. 

18. After addressing that person (Brahma) thus, Hari, 
the soul of the universe, asked Brahma—“who are you ?”, 
though he knew it. 

19. Then lord Brahma, the storehouse of Vedas laughed 
and replied with a smile to the deity whose eyes resembled the 
lotus, in words gentle and charming. 

20. I am the creator and dispenser of destiny. I am 
the self-born deity. I am the great grandfather. The universe is 
stationed in me alone. I am Brahma, with faces all round. 

21. On hearing those words, Visnu of truthful exploits 



70 KurmaPurana 

and genuine power, took his permission and entered the body 
of Brahma, by means of Yogic power. 

22. He became surprised on seeing this entire set of the 
three worlds, including Devas, Asuras and human beings in the 
abdomen of that god (Brahma). 

23. Thereafter Visnu, the deity with the Lord of serpents, 
Sesa as his abode, came out of his mouth and spoke to Pitdmaha 
(god Brahma, the grand-sire of the world). 

24. O excellent Purusa, in this manner you too enter 
my eternal abdomen and see all these wonderful worlds. 

25. After hearing the pleasing words of the Lord of 
Laksmi (i.e. Visnu) and approving of them, Kusadhvaja 
(i.e. Brahma) entered his belly once again. 

26. Brahma, of truthful exploit, saw the self-same worlds 
stationed in the womb of the Lord. Ranging about, he did not 
see any limit of Hari. 

27. Then all the other openings were closed by the 
noble-souled Janardana and Brahma found an opening in the 
umbilical region. 

28. The deity born of Golden Egg entered it through his 
Yogic power. The four-faced Lord manifested himself out of 
the lotus. 

29. The self-born God Brahma who is lustrous like the 
interior of the lotus, the grand-sire and the source of the origin 
of the Universe, shone resplendent while seated in the lotus. 

30. Considering himself the lord of the universe and the 
highest seat—the goal to be reached—he spoke to Visnu, the 
excellent Purusa, with words as majestic as the rumbling sound 
of the cloud. 

31. “What is this that has been done by you, desirous of 
your own victory? I am the only powerful one and no one else. 
Who will dare attack me ?” 

32. On hearing the words uttered by Brahma, Hari who 
was reposing on the cosmic waters as his abode and who was 
ever wakeful, spoke the following sweet words in a conciliatory 
tone. 

33. You are the creator and the dispenser of destiny. 
You are the self-born great grand-father. It was not out of 
malice that the openings were closed by me. 



1.9.34-45 


71 


34. It was only for fun. It was not with a desire to harass 
you. Who would wish to trouble the grandfather, the Lord of 
Devas? 

35. O Brahma, you are not harassed.* In every respect 
you are worthy of being honoured. O auspicious one, please 
forgive me the offence committed against you (i.e. if I have 
offended you), [v.l. whatever has been done by me to you is in the 
interest of your progeny. ] 

36. O Brahma, for this very same reason be a son unto 
me. O deity in the form of the universe, be famous by the name 
Padmayoni (having lotus as the source of origin) for the sake 
of my love. 

37. Then that Lord conferred the boon to the crowned 
one (i.e. Visnu). Deriving unparalleled delight, he spoke to 
Visnu again. 

38. You are identical with everything. You are infinite. 
You are the greatest Isvara of all. You are the immanent soul 
of all living beings. You are the greatest and eternal Brahman. 

39. I too am the great Isvara, the bright light of the 
Atman of all the worlds. All the worlds are pervaded by me. I 
am the Brahman, the transcendental Purusa. 

40. There is no superior ruler of the worlds other 
than we two. We, Narayana and Brahma (the grand-sire of the 
universe) are but one single body divided into two. 

41. On being addressed thus by him, Vasudeva spoke to 
Brahma, “This enunciation may lead to your destruction. 

42. Don’t you see by means of Yogic power, the un¬ 
changing Lord and master of Brahma, the Lord of Purusa and 
Prakrti and whom I know as the Supreme Lord ( Parameivara). 

43. Seek refuge with that Brahman, devoid of beginning 
and end, the great ruler of the Universe whom neither pro¬ 
minent Yogins nor Sahkhyas (philosophers or the followers of 
the school of Kapila) perceive.” 

44-45. Then, the infuriated Brahma spoke to Kesava 
(Visnu) of lotus eyes, ‘‘O Lord, certainly I know myself as 
that Supreme imperishable Brahman, the sole of all the 


'v.l. It may not please be misunderstood by you. 



72 


Kurma Pur ana 


worlds, the highest region. There exists no other Supreme 
Ruler of the worlds other than we both. 

46. Cast off your long slumber and observe your own 

self”. 

Even after hearing those wrathful words, the Lord said 
(only this much). 

47-48. “O auspicious one, do not talk like this. Do not 
denigrate the great Isvara of noble soul. There is nothing un¬ 
known to me, O Brahma, nor do I say otherwise (which is not 
true). But O Brahma, it is the Maya of the Supreme Ruler 
who is infinite and the cause of all particularities, born of Atman, 
that deludes all.” 

49. After saying this much Lord Visnu remained silent. 
After knov/ing that great principle, his own Atman, (v.l. Mahe- 
svara), the Lord of Devas i.e. Visnu did not think of saying 
anything. 

50. God Kara of immeasurable soul, the Supreme Ruler 
of all beings manifested himself from somewhere to confer grace 
on god Brahma. 

51. The Lord had an eye in his forehead. He was em¬ 
bellished with clusters of matted hair. He wielded the trident in 
his hand. He was the reservoir of great splendour. 

52. He was wearing a garland of wonderful shape sus¬ 
pended upto the foot. It was wreathed with planets including 
the sun, the moon and the stars with utmost skilful scholarship.'^' 

53. On seeing Lord Siva, god Brahma, the grand-sire of 
the worlds was completely deluded by his Maya. He addressed 
Visnu, the yellow-robed deity. 

54. “O Janardana, who is this three-eyed person of 
blue complexion, with the trident in his hand coming this side? 
He is a mass of splendour and of an immeasurable spirit (Soul).” 

55. After hearing his words, Visnu, the suppressor of 
Danavas, saw Lord Isvara (Siva) shining brilliantly in the trans¬ 
lucent water. 


*The foot note (Venk. Edt.) records a better reading : 
divydm visdldm grathitdm —a heavenly big garland wreathed with planets^ 
the sun^ and the moon etc. 



1.9.56-66 


73 


56. Realising that he was the Supreme Reality, the Con- 
ceiver of Brahma, Visnu stood up and said to god Brahma, the 
grand-sire of the world and the Lord of Devas. 

57. “This is Lord Mahadeva, the eternal self-luminous 
deity, having neither the beginning nor the end, the inconceiv¬ 
able great Ruler of all the worlds. 

58. He is Sankara (the benefactor), Sambhu (Bestower 
of welfare) Isana (the Ruler), Paramesvara, (the highest Con¬ 
troller), the soul of all, the Lord of human beings, the great 
meditator and the Supreme Isa, the pure and Siva, the 
auspicious. 

59. He is the creator and dispenser of destiny. He is 
the chief immutable Lord. {v.l. the Lord of Prakrti and Purusa). 
Only those ascetics who meditate upon him as Brahman, can 
perceive him. 

60-61. By becoming (Time), this absolute, unsullied 
great god Siva creates the entire Universe, protects it and des¬ 
troys it. This eternal one created you Brahma and gave the 
Vedas unto you. It is that Sankara who comes here. 

62. O great-grand-sire of the universe, understand me 
to be only another form of his—the form that is eternal, the 
source of origin of the universe and is designated as Vasudeva. 

63. Gan you not see that Lord of Yoga the immutable 
Lord, Brahman? May your eyes be divine, whereby you will be 
able to see that great Being.” 

64. After securing thus the divine vision from Visnu, 
Brahma, the grand-father of the world, realised that the highest 
knowledge incarnate is present in front of him. 

65. Deriving the Supreme knowledge about Siva, the 
great-grand-father sought refuge in Lord Siva himself (his 
father). 

66. Recollecting Onkdra and concentrating his mind in 
his own soul, he, with folded palms in reverence, eulogised the 
Lord by means of the Aiharvasiras Mantras} 


1. Atharva-Siras is an Upanisad. It begins with 

Devd ha vat svargam lokamdyamste Rudram aprcchan ho bhavdniti / 

It is printed in the Upanisat-Safigrahay pp. 170-174 (Motilal Banarsidass 
Delhi, 1970.) 



74 


Kurma Purdnct. 


67. On being eulogised by Brahma, Lord Siva, the Sup¬ 
reme Ruler felt great affection and pleasure. Smilingly he ad¬ 
dressed to him. 

68. O dear child, there is no doubt that you are equal 
to me, as you are my devotee as well. It was by me alone that 
you, the Eternal One, were created formerly, for bringing- 
worlds into being. You are the unchanging one. 

69. You are the Atman, the Primordial Purusa born of my 
body. O soul of the universe, seek your boon. I am the bes- 
tower of boons unto you, O sinless one. 

70. After hearing the words of the Lord of Devas, the 
lotus-born deity glanced at the Purusa, Visnu, bowed to San¬ 
kara and said: 

71. O holy Lord, Lord of the past and future, O 
Mahadeva. O consort of Ambika, I wish, that you or some one 
equal to you, be born as my son. 

72. O Mahadeva, I have been deluded by you, through 
your subtle Maya. O Siva, I do not know your real nature 
precisely. 

73. O Lord, you alone are the mother, father, brother 
and friend of your devotees. Be pleased. I have sought refuge in 
you. I bow unto your lotus-like feet. 

74. On hearing his words, the bull-bannered Lord of 
the universe spoke to his son, after glancing at Janardana: 

75. “O son, I will do whatever has been requested for- 
by your Lordship. Sinless, divine, perfect knowledge pertain¬ 
ing to Isvara shall dawn unto you. 

76. O Lord of Devas, grand-sire of the worlds, you 
alone have been appointed as the primordial maker of all living 
beings. Create your Maya for them. 

77. This Narayana is born of me. He is the Supreme 
form of mine alone. O Isana (Brahma), Hari will be the- 
bestower of security and prosperity unto you. 

78. After saying this. Lord Siva, the Supreme god who 
was pleased with Brahma, gently touched him with both the 
hands and spoke these words to Hari: 

79. O pervader of the world, I am thoroughly pleased 
with you as you are my devotee. Choose your boon though really 



1.9.80-87 


75- 


there is no one other than the two of us. {v. 1. though both of us 
are non different).” 

80. On hearing the word of Lord Siva, Visnu the 
permeater of the universe spoke with delighted voice, looking 
him in his face. 

81. “This alone is the most praiseworthy boon that I 
shall be able to see you, the Supreme Ruler and the great Atman. 
May I be blessed with constant devotion unto you.” 

82. Saying ‘‘so be it”, Mahadeva spoke to Visnu again; 
“You are the doer of all actions, while I am the presiding 
deity. 

83. There is no doubt that everything is identical with 
you as well as with me. You are the moon, while I am the sun. 
You are the night and I am the day. 

84. You are the unmanifest Prakrti while I am the' 
Purusa. You are the knowledge and I am the knower. You are 
the Maya, while I am the Is vara. 

85. You are the power born of knowledge, while I am 
the master of that power. I who am that unsullied Lord so you 
are the same such Lord Narayana. 

86. Yogins, expounders of Brahman, see through unity. 
O Atman of the universe, without resorting to you the Yogin 
will not attain me. Do you protect the entire universe including 
Devas, Asuras and human beings.” 

87. After saying this, the Lord who has no beginning, 
who deludes the different living beings by means of his own 
Maya and whose power is unlimited went to his one and only 
abode which is unmanifest and which is devoid of birth, growth 
and destruction.” 



76 


Kurma Purina 


CHAPTER TEN 

The Creation by Rudra)- 

Lord Kurma said : 

1. When Mahesvara departed, god Brahma, the grand- 
sire of the world, once again resorted to the self-same lotus grow¬ 
ing out of the umbilical region of Lord Visnu. 

2. After a long time, the two great Asura brothers 
Madhu and Kaitabha, of unequalled valour, happened to come 
there. 

3. They were born out of the ear-cavities of god Visnu^ 
the wielder of the Sarhga bow, the Lord of Devas. They had 
bodies as huge as a great mountain and they were over-powered 
with great fury. 

4. On seeing them arrived, the un-born Lord Brahma 
requested Narayana, “It behoves you to slay these Asuras, the 
thorns in the three worlds.” 

5. On hearing his words. Lord Hari who abides in the 
cosmic waters (Narayana) ordered two persons to kill those two 
Asuras. 

6. At his behest, O Brahmanas, great battle of those 
two persons with the two Asuras ensued, Jisnu conquered 
Kaitabha while Visnu vanquished Madhu. 

7. Then Hari the Lord of the universe, with his mind 
overwhelmed with affection, spoke these sweet words to god 
Brahma, the grand-sire of the worlds, who was seated in the 
lotus. 


1. Creation ofRudra is another topic common to many Puranas 
such as VP. 1.8.14 ff, Bh. P. III.12.7-20, VA. P. I. 27.1-60 but KP. shares 
more verses common with VP. (such as Rudra’s names, places, the names of 
his spouses, etc.) cf. KP.I. 10.24-30 and VP. I. 8.6-12. 

2. The birth of demons Madhu and Kaitabha is from Visnu’s ears 
here (and from the ear-wax oozing out of Visnu’s ears in the DeviBhdgavata). 
KP. gives the credit of killing Madhu to Jisnu and Kaifabha to Visnu 
(both creations of Narayana). The more popular version of the story is 
that Visnu got a boon from them for killing and killed them on his lap 
(vide the Devi Bhdgavata Skandha I) is not accepted in KP. 



1.10.8-18 


77 


8. “O Lord, you are being borne by me; you are 
brilliant and weighty; I am unable to bear you. Hence, please 
get down from this lotus.” 

9. Then the soul of the universe, (god Brahma) got 
down and entered the person of Visnu, the wielder of the discus 
(Sudarsana). He became united with Visnu and was overcome 
with the special type of slumber of Visnu. 

10. God Brahma, designated as Narayana, and wielding 
a conch, a discus and a mace {Gada), becoming possessed of 
him that way, slumbered within the watery expanse, {v.l. 
possessed of a thousand heads and eyes.) 

11. Fora long time, he enjoyed the bliss of identity 
with that great soul, devoid of beginning and end and having no 
second. It was his own Atman. 

12. Then in the morning, the Yogic soul termed as 
Brahman, became the four-faced deity. Resorting to the dispo¬ 
sition of Visnu, he created beings of the same type. 

13. The Lord created at the outset Sananda and Sanaka, 
Rbhu, Sanatkumara and the elder one Sanatana. 

14. They were free from delusion and mutually clashing 
opposites such as pleasure and pain. They possessed the greatest 
detachment. Having realised the highest reality, they directed 
their attention towards knowledge, {v.l. na srffau dadhire matim 
“They did not take interest in creation.”) 

15. When they were thus indifferent towards the crea¬ 
tion of the worlds, god Brahma, the grand-father of the world 
became despaired due to the Maya of Parameffhin. 

16. Then the ancient Purusa, the eternal, the embodi¬ 
ment of the universe, spoke to his son, the lotus-born god in 
order to destroy his delusion. 

God Vifnu said: 

17. “Has this been forgotten that the trident-bearing 
eternal Lord, Sambhu was requested by you formerly “O 
Sankara, do you be my son.” 

18. Sankara had urged his mind in the guise of his son. 
The lotus-born god the grand-sire of the world, regained en¬ 
lightenment through Govinda. 



78 


Kurma Pur ana 


19. As he was inclined to create beings, he performed a 
very difficult penance. But even though he performed that 
penance nothing transpired. 

20. Then after the lapse of a long time, his grief created 
wrath in him. From both of his eyes overwhelmed with anger, 
drops of tears fell down. 

21. From them goblins and ghosts cropped up. On 
seeing all of them in front of him, Brahma censured himself 

22. Lord Prajapati (Brahma) overcome with wrath 
gave up his life. Then Rudra, of the nature of Prana (vital 
air), manifested himself from the mouth of the Lord (god 
Brahma). 

23. Lord Siva, the god of gods, with the brilliance of a 
thousand suns and comparable to the cosmic fire ablaze at the 
end of the Yugas, cried out loudly and terribly. 

24. Brahma spoke to him as he cried, “O don’t cry. 
You will become well-known in the world as ‘Rudra’, because 
of your crying.” 

25. The grand-father of the world gave him seven other 
names. He gave him wives and eternal sons. To those eight 
persons, the grand-sire of the world gave abodes as well.*^ 

26. Those seven names are—(1) Bhava, (2) Sarva, (3) 
Isana (4) Pasunampati (5) Bhima, (6) Ugra and (7) 
Mahadeva. 

27. The eight Murtis (cosmic forms of this god) areas 
follows:— (1) sun, (2) water, (3) earth, (4) fire, (5) wind, 
(6) ether, (7) initiated Brahmanas and (8) moon. 

28. The lord endowed with eight bodies bestows the 
highest region (Mokfa) on those who meditate on him, and bow 
down to Rudras in these bodies. 

29. The eight wives are:—Suvarcala, Uma, Vikesi, 
Siva, Svaha, Disah, Diksa and Rohini. 

30. The sons of these are—Sanaiscara. (the Saturn), 
Sukra (the Venus), Lohitahga (the Mars), Manojava, Skanda 
Sarga, Santana and Budha (the Mercury). 


1. VV. 24-30 are practically the same as VP. 1.8.6-12. 



J.10.31-44 


79 


31. Lord Mahesvara, Lord of Devas, who was of 
this nature, eschewed his duty of procreation and desire, and 
resorted to renunciation. 

32. Fixing his individual soul into the Supreme Soul and 
having drunk deep the eternal Supreme Nectar called the 
imperishable Brahman, he established himself in the divine 
nature. 

33. When Siva, the god of blue-red complexion, was 
commanded by Brahma to procreate progeny, he mentally 
created Rudras, equal and similar to himself. 

34-35. They were with matted hair, free from distress, 
blue-necked, wielding the Pinaka bow, holding the trident in 
their hands, of ever blissful nature and having three eyes, free 
from old age and death. They had great bulls as their vehicles. 
They were devoid of passions, and were omniscient. The Lord 
thus created crores and hundred of crores of such beings. 

36. On seeing those various Rudras, pure, blue-red in 
complexion, immune from death and old age, the preceptor 
Brahma spoke to Kara. 

37. O god, do not create such progeny devoid of 
■death. O Lord of goblins, create other types of subjects suscep¬ 
tible to births and deaths. 

38. Then the god with matted hair, the chastiser of 
Kama, replied, “I don’t have such creation. You create such 
various types of creation.” {v.l. Such inauspicious progeny). 

39. Thereafter, this God does not create auspicious 
progeny. He remains with his mind withdrawn from activi¬ 
ties of procreation, and stays with his own sons. 

40-42a. Hence the attribute of Sthdnu (immoveable 
like a branchless tree) was applied to the trident-bearing god 
who is the god of Devas. 

The following ten undiminishing attributes always abide 
in Sankara;— Jndna (perfect knowledge), Vairdgya (detachment), 
Aisvarya (divine faculties of omnipotence, omnipresence etc.), 
Tapas (penance), Satyam (truth), Ksamd [{orheaxance), Dhrti 
(courage), Z)ra,f/.rtoa (state of being the seer), Atma-sambodha 
(Soul-enlightenment) and Adhifthdtrtva (presiding-ness). 

42b-44. Thus is Sankara, the Pinaka-bearingRaram^iyara. 
Thereafter, on seeing the three-eyed lord along with the Rudras, 



80 


Kurma Pur ana 


his mental creations, lord Brahma was highly delighted. Due to 
pleasure, his eyes became enlarged. After knowing his lordly 
nature by means of his vision of knowledge, he eulogised the 
lord of the worlds with the hands reverentially placed on the 
head. 

Brahma said : 

Obeisance be to you, O great god, salute to you, O 
Supreme Lord. 

45. Bow to god Siva. Obeisance to you, the embodi¬ 
ment of Brahman, to Lord Mahesa, to the quiescent, to the 
cause of the universe. 

46. Salutations to the Lord of Prakrti and Purusa, to the 
chief of Yoga, to Kala (time or god of death), to Rudra, to the 
bearer of the trident and to one making a huge mouthful of the 
universe. 

47. Obeisance to the wielder of Pinaka bow in the hand. 
Salutations again and again to the three-eyed god with three¬ 
fold forms. Bow to you Brahman, the father of god Brahma. 

48. Obeisance to the master of the knowledge of Brah¬ 
man and to one imparter of the knowledge of Brahman. Salu¬ 
tation to the secret of the Vedas (or the knower of the secret of 
the Vedas) and to the destroyer of Kala. 

49. Obeisance to the essential substance of Vedanta, 
to the embodiment of Vedas [v.l. the Vedanta incarnate.) Bow 
to the enlightened Rudra, the preceptor ofYogins. 

50. Obeisance to you who are surrounded by goblins, or 
beings of various kinds, devoid of sorrows. Salutations to the 
deity favourable to Brahmanas and to the lord of Brahma. 

51. Obeisance to the three-eyed primordial deity, to 
Paramefthin, the quarter-clad (naked), to the staff-bearing 
recluse. 

52. Salutations to you untouched by the beginning-less 
impurity of Avidya, to one knowable through perfect enlighten¬ 
ment. Bow to the saviour, the sanctifier, to the cause 
of the progress of Yoga. 

53. Salutations to one knowable through Dharma 
(Piety) etc. Obeisance to you approachable through Yogic 



I.10.54-64a 


81 


meditation, to one devoid of diversity or illusion; bow to you, 
bereft of reflection and semblance. 

54. Obeisance to Brahman, the embodiment of the uni¬ 
verse, to you the supreme Atman. Everything in the universe has 
been created by you alone and everything abides in you only. 

55. O deity identical with the universe, the universe 
beginning -wixhPrakrti is withdrawn by you. You are the control¬ 
ler (of the world), the great god, the Supreme Brahman, the 
great Ruler of the world. 

56. You are the Paramesthin, the auspicious, the quiesc¬ 
ent, the perfect being, Hara. You are the great imperishable 
spiritual light, you are Kdla and Paramesvara. 

57. You alone are the inflnite person, the Pradhana and 
the Prakrli as well. You are the earth, the waters, the Are, the 
wind, the ether and the ego.^ 

58-60a. I bow unto that Bhava whose form is termed 
as Brahman. I bow unto that Cosmic Person, whose head is the 
heaven, feet the earth, arms the quarters, and abdomen 
the Armament. I bow unto him who always imparts heat by 
illuminating the quarters with his own brilliant lustre. Obei¬ 
sance to him, the embodiment of the sun, full of the brilliance 
of Brahman. 

60b-61a. Salutation to him who being the fire incarnate 
and having Rudra-like terrific body full of light and energy, 
carries oblations offered to gods and those offered to manes. 

61b-62a. Bow to him, the embodiment of the moon who 
gives delight to the whole of the world by his own radiance and 
who is being drunk by groups of gods. 

62b-63a. Obeisance to him of the Vayu (wind) -form 
which is the energy of the great god, which always moves about 
within all living beings (as vital airs) and sustains them. 

63b-64a. Obeisance to that form of four-faced deity* who 
is abiding within the Atman and who creates everything accor¬ 
ding to one’s previous Karmans. 


1. Cf. BG. VII.4. 

2. The one-ness of the Trinity of gods (Brahma, Visnu and Siva) 
and its identification with the Brahman is, as usual, emphasized in these- 
verses. 



82 


Kurma Pur ana 


64b-65a. Obeisance to the all-pervading Lord Visnu^^ 
who, enveloping and deluding the universe by Maya, reposes 
on the couch of Serpent Sesa and experiences the bliss of his 
soul through Yoga. 

65b-66a. Obeisance to that form of Sesa, who is the 
support of all and who always holds on his head the whole of 
the universe consisting of fourteen worlds. 

66b-67. Salutations to him who, embodied as Rudra of 
infinite greatness, dances at the end of the world, drinking 
deeply the Supreme joy with the goddess Parvati as the only 
witness. The god abides within all beings and is their Controller. 

68. Obeisance to him, the embodiment of waters whose 
tresses contained the clouds and in whose limb joints are the 
rivers and in whose belly are the four oceans. 

69-70a. I salute to that deity, who having bodies all 
round (that is eight forms) is witness unto all. Bow to the soul 
•of Yoga whom Yogins who are devoid of (i.e. have mastery 
over) their sleep, who have conquered (i.e. controlled) their 
breath, who are contented and who cherish an impartial outlook 
visualise as the spiritual light. 

70b-71a. Obeisance to him the embodiment of spiritual 
knowledge whereby, a Yogin, with his sins exhausted, crosses 
the ocean in the form of Maya, which is (boundless and 
hence )uncrossable and unfathomable. 

71b-72a. I resort to that great Reality, to that form of 
the Supreme Lord by whose lustre the sun shines, the lustre 
which lies beyond darkness. 

72b-73a. I resort to you, the great Siva the unsullied, 
the perfect eternal bliss and one who is not supported by others. 
I resort to you, O Supreme Lord, the great Atman. 

73b-74a. After eulogising Mahadeva thus, god Brahma 
became sanctified by meditating on him. He joined his palms 
in reverence and stood there praying the eternal Brahman. 

1. The v.l. Viivdtmane noted in Ft. Note 1 (of the Venk. Ed.) is equally 
good. For Viiva is one of the thousand names of Visnu. 

The Visnu sahasrandma in the Mbh. Anuidsana 149.14 begins with it ; 

ViivamVisrtur Vasafkdro bhuta-bhavya-bhavat-prabhuh / 



I.10.74b-86a 


83 


74b-75a. Thereafter, the great god Kara granted unto 
him the divine and excellent Yoga and the divine state of being 
in communion with Brahman as well as the Vairagya (detach¬ 
ment) . 

75b-77. The remover of the distress of those who bow 
down to him, stroked Brahma the grand-sire of the world, with 
his tender hands and blessed him. Smilingly he spoke thus: “O 
Brahma, I have been requested by you to become your son. I 
have made all arrangements for that. You create the world of 
diverse nature. O Brahma, I have divided myself in the three 
forms under the name Brahma, Visnu and Kara. 

78. Though I am the perfect Supreme Ruler, I have 
divided myself unto three with the attributes (i.e. functions) 
of creation, protection and annihilation. You are my eldest son 
created for the purpose of carrying on the activity of creation. 

79-80. You have been produced from the right side of 
my body, while Purusottama (Visnu) is created from the left. 
Rudra was born from the region of the heart of Sambhu, 
the over-Lord of the gods. I am his great person or body. 
Brahma, Visnu and Siva are respectively the causes of creation, 
sustenance and dissolution of the universe, O Brahma. 

81. Though Sankara stays as the absolute one, it is out 
of his own will that he had divided himself. I have other forms 
as well effected by my Maya. 

82. By nature, the great God Siva is formless, absolute, 
abiding in his own state or soul. The god who is transcendental 
to these is the Tri-murti, the triple-formed one, which is the 
Supreme Person of the Lord. 

83. O grand-sire of the world, know me to be that 
great form, that special personality of Mahesvara with three 
eyes which always bestow peace unto the Yogins. 

84-85a. Endowed with eternal rulership (prosperity), 
enlightenment and possessed of divine lustre and Yoga (Yogic 
power), I swallow everything (i.e. the whole of the universe) 
by presiding over the quality called Tamas and by becoming 
Kala. Nobody else can dare to confront me even mentally. 

85b-86a. O Lotus-born god, whenever you remember 
of me, O sinless one, you will have (the privilege of) my 
presence then and there. 



84 


K urma Pur ana 


86b-87a. After speaking this much to god Brahma and 
bowing to the preceptor (Brahma), Hara vanished in a moment 
along with his mind-born sons. 

87b-88a. Brahma too resorted to Yoga and created the 
world of different varieties. The worshipful creator, known as 
Narayana, resorted to Yogic meditation and created the diverse 
world as before. 

88b-89. He created by means of Yogic lore and power 
the progenitors (of the world viz.) Marici, Bhrgu, Ahgiras 
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu Daksa, Atri, and Vasistha. They are 
decisively regarded in the Purdnas as nine Brahmas. All of them 
are equal to god Brahma, are householders and expounders of 
Brahman or the Veda.^ 

90. I have already narrated to you the resolution {san- 
kalpa), Dharma, various duties special to different Yugas and 
the deities identifying themselves with the abodes ( sthdnas). 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 

The Incarnation of the Goddess 


Lord Kurma said : 

1. After creating Marici and others, god Brahma the 
grand-sire of the world and the Lord of Devas performed very 
severe penance, along with his mind-born sons. 

2. Even as he was performing the penance, the three¬ 
eyed, trident-bearing Isana, Rudra, born of the world-destruc¬ 
tive fire, manifested himself from his mouth. 

3. His body was half-male and half-female and was too 
terrible to behold. “Divide yourself,” saying this Brahma 
vanished out of fear. 


1. The same is Supra 2.23b-25a. 



I.11.4-13a 


85 


4. When addressed thus, Rudra separated the male being 
into ten plus one (eleven) forms. 

5. These eleven are called Rudras. They are the Lords of 
the three worlds. O Brahmanas, these Rudras, known as 
Kapalisa and others, were entrusted with the affairs ofDevas. 

6. The Lord divided his female form too into many 
beings, such as beautiful and ugly, quiet and turbulent, white 
and black in complexion etc. 

7. Those forms, Laksmi and others are the Vibhutis 
(magnificent excellences) and well-known as Saktis (super¬ 
human powers) on the earth, O Brahmanas, Goddess Sahkari 
pervades the whole universe through their forms. 

8. O Brahmanas, Isani split herself into many more 
forms {v.l. separated herself from god Siva). At the behest of 
the great god Sankara, she went and stood near god Brahma, 
the grand-sire. 

9. Lord Brahma told her, “Become the daughter of 
Daksa.” At his behest, she too manifested herself from Daksa, 
the progenitor of the world. 

10. He gave goddess Sati (former Isani) to Rudra in 
marriage, at the bidding of god Brahma. Rudra the trident¬ 
bearing deity too accepted the daughter of Daksa who was his 
own. 

11-13a. After sometime at the direction of Prajapati^ 
{v.l. in her wrath against Daksa) Isani, the Supreme goddess, 
separated herself from Lord Sankara. Then Sati became the 
daughter of Mena and Himavan. That prominent mountain 


1. Prajapati-vinirdeiat —This reading is supported by a majority of 
good MSS. cmcndaXion X.O Prajapatim vinindyaisa in the Crt. Ed. because 
it conforms to the story of Sati’s incarnation as the daughter of Himavan and Mend 
contained in several Purdttas but has little support in the MSS of KP., is rather 
strange, when prajdpatir vinirdeldt is given in a number of good MSS (and 
printed editions) and conforms to the preceding Slokas. To change such a 
valid reading strongly supported by a majority of good MSS, simply because 
it is not supported by other Puranas is, from the point of Text criticism, 
rather awkward as we constitute the text mainly on the basis of the critical 
apparatus. We should not deny the right of giving a different version of an 
episode to the author of KP. 



86 


Kurma Pur ana 


gave Parvati to Rudra for the welfare of all Devas of the 
three worlds and of himself. 

13b-14a. She is the great Goddess Mahesvari, the part¬ 
ner of half of the body of Sankara, Siva, Sati, Haimavati who 
is revered and bowed to by both Devas and Asuras. 

14b-15a. All Devas including (their king) Indra extol 
her unequalled prowess. So do all the sages. It is only Sankara 
or Hari who understands her real greatness. 

15b-16. O Brahmanas, thus I have recounted to you 
the son-hood of Sankara of unmeasured splendour and prowess 
and birth of god Brahma, the Paramesthin from the lotus. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 

The glory of the Goddess Parvati 
{One Thousand Epithets of the Goddess)^ 

Suta said : 

1. On hearing what had been related by Visnu in the 
form of a Tortoise, the sages bowed down again to Hari and 
asked. 


1. The practice of weaving together a number of epithets in 
glorification of the deity is as old as the Vedas. We find in the most popular 
Rudra hymns in Tait. S. IV. 5.2 (called Rudyadhyaya) , a number of epithets 
strung together in praise of god Rudra. The famous Vismisahasranama in 
the Mbh. AnuSasana Ch. 149 has set a model as it were to different Puratfos 
to emulate. The Sahasra-Ndma of Parvati in this chapter is thus a eulogy 
(stotra) expressed in one thousand epithets glorifying the different aspects 
and deeds of the deity. In these Sahasra-ndmas^ we have a number of 
epithets common to all these deities male or female. The general tenor is to 
exalt that particular deity to the position of the Supreme Brahman and a 
mix of Upanisadic thought and Puranic episodes or deeds attributed to the 
deity is presented to us. 



1.12.2-9 


87 


The sages submitted : 

2. Who is this blessed Goddess sharing half the person 
of Sankara, the daughter of the Himalaya, the auspicious Sati ? 
Pray tell us (the reality) precisely as we ask. 

3. On hearing these words of the sages, Visnu the Supreme 
Person, the great Yogin, meditated on his own Supreme state 
and replied. 

Lord Kurma said: 

4. “This mysterious knowledge which is to be closely 
guarded as a secret, was formerly explained by the grand-sire 
Brahma on the beautiful plateau of the mountain Meru. 

5. It is the essence of the Sahkhya philosophy to the 
followers of the Sahkhya system. It is the excellent, perfect 
knowledge of Brahman. It is the only saviour of the living be¬ 
ings immersed in the ocean of worldly existence. 

6. This Haimavati (daughter of mount Himvan) is 
considered as the highest point of perfection termed as Vyoman 
(the firmament), the potency of god Mahesvara, the embodi¬ 
ment of knowledge and ardent desire for it. 

7. She is auspicious (or the consort of god Siva), all 
pervading, infinite, beyond all gunas, perfect (or the purest). 
Though absolutely one (undivided), she is abiding in one or 
more divisions. She is knowledge incarnate and has excessive 
longing. 

8. She is non-different, stationed in the perfect Reality, 
thanks to its splendour. Due to that very reason, her lustre is 
as pure and dazzling as that of the sun. 

9. The Potency of god Mahesvara is one (by herself), 


The extension of the Sahasranamas to local deities like Sakambhari or 
Bana-Sahkari of Badami (Dist. Bijapur), Mahalaksmi of Kolhapur and 
others expresses our faith in the Vedic maxim 

ekarh sad vipra bahudha vadanti j —RV.I.164.46. 

As most of the epithets are translated, no special explanation is 
necessary. A number of epithets are repeated and are tautologous as is 
inevitable in such lists of epithets and this repetition is found in other 
Sahasranamas also. 



88 Kurma Pur ana 

but due to conditioning factors, she assumes greater and lesser 
forms and sports about in his presence. 

10. It is she who does everything. This universe is the 
effect of her activity. The wise sages state that Isvara has 
neither any act to execute nor is he an instrument of anything. 

11. Four potencies of the Goddess abide in their own 
forms in her, due to the presence (abidance) of the Goddess. 
Listen to their names, O excellent sages. 

12. It is stated that they (the potencies) are Santi 
(peace), Vidya (knowledge), Pratiftha (stability), and Nivrtti 
(renunciation). Hence Lord Paramesvara is called as having 
four manifestations. (Catur-vyuha). 

13. The Lord enjoys the greatest bliss (of communion 
with his Atman) through this great potency. Mahesvara has 
four forms corresponding to the four Vedas. 

14. Her prosperity and glory is great and unequalled, and 
is fully accomplished from times immemorial. She is infinite in 
view of her contact with Rudra, the Supreme Soul. 

15. This Goddess is the sovereign ruler of all. She makes 
all living beings function. Lord Hari (v.l. Hara) is called 
Kala, Prana (vital airs) and the Supreme Ruler. 

16. This entire universe is warp and woof in him as it , 
were. That Lord Hara is being extolled as Kalagni (the des¬ 
tructive fire of the universe) by the expounders of the Vedas. 

17. It IS Kola (Time) that creates the living beings. It is 
he who annihilates the subjects. Everything is subservient to 
Kala, but Kala is not subordinate to any one. 

18. The principles called Pradham, Purufa, Mahat, Atman, 
Aharnkdra (ego) and others are all pervaded by Kala, the Yogin. 

19. His potency is well known as Maya. It has the 
whole universe for its form. Isa, the wielder of Maya, the 
excellent Purusa deludes (whirls) this world by means of that 
(Maya). 

20. This potency in the form of Maya assumes all forms. 

It is eternal and it ever reveals the universal form of Mahesa 
the great God. 

21. There are three other important powers, evolved by 
the Lord viz. the power of knowledge, the power of activity and 
the power of vital airs (Prana Sakti). 



1.12.22-32 


89 


22. For all these powers, the possessors of each of these 
powers have been created by the Maya alone, O prominent 
Brahmanas, but she (Maya) is without beginning and 
imperishable. 

23. Maya who embodied all these potencies, is invincible 
and unsurmountable. Kala, the wielder of Maya, is the Lord of 
all these potencies, the lord of destruction (and creation). 

24. Kola does everything. It is K^a alone that annihilates 
everything. Kola establishes the Universe. This whole Universe 
is dependent on Kdla. 

25-26. After securing the proximity of Paramesthin, 
the over-Lord of Devas, the infinite Lord of all. Lord Sam- 
bhu of the form of Kdla, She, the Maya assumed the forms 
called Pradhdna and Purusa. She herself is absolutely one. She 
pervades all and is endless and the partless spouse of Siva. 

27. The Sakti is one, Siva is also one. Siva is called the 
possessor of Sakti. There are many other minor powers and 
possessors of those potencies born of the original Sakti. 

28. They (i. e. wise men) declare that from the realistic 
point of view there is a difference between Saktis and those 
endowed with them. But Yogins who meditate on Reality, 
realise non-difference between them. 

29. The goddess Parvati, born of the mountain (Hima¬ 
laya), comprises all these powers, while the master of these 
powers is Sankara. The special difference is mentioned in the 
Purana by the expounders of Brahman or Veda. 

30. The goddess of the universe, the chaste spouse of god 
Mahesvara is the object worthy of being enjoyed, while Siva 
the Lord with matted locks of hair and blue-red in complexion 
is proclaimed as the enjoyer. 

31. God Sankara, the Lord of the universe, the destroyer 
of the god of love, is the thinker (the subject), while goddess 
Isani (Parvati) is proclaimed by the knowers, to be the intellect, 
the object of thought to be pondered over. 

32. O Brahmanas, that all this universe is the manifest¬ 
ation of Sakti and Siva (the possessor of Sakti) has been declared 
in the four Vedas by Sages who visualise Reality. 



90 


Kurma Pur ana 


33. This divine and excellent glory of the goddess has 
been thus declared. It is so decided by the knowers of Brah¬ 
man (or the Vedas), in all schools of Vedantic philosophy. 

34. Yogins observed the great abode of Mahadevi 
which is single, all-pervading, subtle, occupying the highest 
place, and certainly steady, immovable and eternal. 

35. Yogins perceive the Supreme State of the goddess 
as the imperishable Brahman, blissful, pure and perfect. 

36. That great region of the goddess is greater than the 
greatest. It is the eternal Reality unswerving auspicious, merged 
within the infinite Prakrti. 

37. It is auspicious, untainted, pure, devoid of gutias and 
free from duality. That great region of the goddess is achievable 
through realization of Atman. 

38. She is Dhdtri (the creator), and Vidhatri (dispenser of 
destiny). She dispels with the support of Isvara all the distresses 
of the worldly existence of those who wish for supreme bliss. 

39. Hence, one who seeks salvation should resort toi 
Parvati, the supreme Goddess, the Atman of all living beings, 
of the nature of Siva (i.e. one with him). 

40. Securing Sarvani as his daughter after performing 
severe penance, Himavan, accompanied by his wife sought refuge 
in the great Goddess Parvati. 

41. On seeing that splendid-faced lady(Uma) being 
born out of her own free will, Mena, the spouse of Himavan^ 
said to the King of mountains. 

Mena said: 

42. “O king, have a look at your daughter with a 
face resembling the lotus. As a result of our penance, she is born 
for the welfare of all living beings.” 

43-45. On seeing the Goddess resembling the mid-day 
sun with matted locks of hair—the Goddess who had four faces, 
three eyes, eight hands and was extremely solicitous, who had 
wide eyes and was ornamented with the crescent of the moon; 
who is much devoted and is both endowed with and devoid 
of gums, who is devoid of the manifestation of both Sat and 
Asat, he bowed down to her. He was as if extremely agitated 



1.12.46-55 


91 


due to her splendour. Struck with awe, he spoke to that supreme 
Goddess with his palm joined in reverence. 

Himavan said : 

46. “O Goddess of wide eyes, ornamented with the 
crescents of the moon, who are you ? O dear child, I do not 
know you precisely. Please tell me that even as I asked.” 

47. On hearing the words of the king of mountains, 
the supreme Goddess, the bestower of fearlessness {Mokfd) 
unto the Yogins, addressed the great mountain Himavan thus. 

£ri Devi said : 

48. Know me to be the Supreme Potency abiding in the 
great god Mahesvara. 

49. I am non-different from him, unchanging and the 
absolute, whom those desirous of salvation perceive. I am the 
Atman of all conceived beings. I am Siva, the auspicious spouse 
of God Siva in all respects. 

50. I am the embodiment of permanent prosperity and 
perfect knowledge. I am the prime mover of everything and I 
am endless. My greatness is infinite. I enable people to cross 
the ocean of worldly existence. 

51-52. I shall give you divine eyes. See my lordly form. 
After saying this much, she granted perfect knowledge to Hima¬ 
van and showed to him her divine form—the form associated 
with the great God Siva. It was resembling a crore suns in 
brilliance and it bore an image of splendour, quiet and serene. 

53. It was ablaze with thousands of flames in clusters 
resembling hundreds of world-destructive conflagrations (at 
the end of the world). It was terrible due to its curved fangs 
and was irresistible. It was embellished with clustres of matted 
hair. 

54. It wore a crown and was holding a mace, a conch, 
a discus and an excellent trident in its hands. The terrible form 
was frightening everyone. 

55. (Simultaneously) it was tranquil, charming-faced and 
gentle and possessed of infinite wonders. It was bedecked with. 



92 


K urma Pur ana 


the limbs (crescents of the moon) and lustrous like a crore of 
moons. 

56. It was bedecked in coronets, it wielded a mace in its 
hands and was ornamented with anklets. It wore divine gar¬ 
lands, garments and was besmeared with divine scents and 
unguents. 

57. It held a conch and discus. It had a pleasing appear¬ 
ance with three eyes and it wore the elephant’s hide as its robe. 
It was stationed both within and without the Cosmic Egg. It 
was both inside and outside of everything. 

58. It was endowed with all Saktis, was extremely pure 
(white), omniformed, eternal, its lotus-like feet were revered 
by gods Brahma, Indra, Upendra (Visnu) and prominent 
Yogins. 

59. It had hands and feet all round, had eyes, heads 
and faces in all directions. He saw that Supreme Goddess stand¬ 
ing before enveloping the universe. 

60. On seeing such a form of the Goddess, the form 
associated with Mahesvara, that king was overwhelmed with 
awe and was yet delighted at heart. 

61. Concentrating his mind in his Atman and remem¬ 
bering Onkara, he eulogised the Supreme Goddess with a thou¬ 
sand and eight epithets. 

Himavdn Said : 

62. ‘O Siva, Uma, the great Sakti, Ananta, (Endless) 
J^ifkala (perfect), Amala (the pure), Santa (the quiescent), 
Mahesvari, NUya (eternal), Sasvatl (permanent). Paramo, (the 
supreme), Ak^ara (the imperishable). 

63. Acintya (Incomprehensible), Kevald (Absolute) An- 

antyd (devoid of end), Sivdtmd, Paramdtmikd, beginningless), 

Avyayd (unchanging), Suddhd (pure), Devdtmd (the Soul of the 
devas), Sarvagd (All-pervading), Acald (the immovable). 

64. Ekdnekavibhdgasthd* (stationed in one as well as in 
many divisions). Mdydtitd (transcending Maya), Sunirmald (ex¬ 
tremely pure), Mahd-Maheivari, Satyd, Mahddevi, Nirarijand (the 
untainted). 


*Eka (one)j Anekavibhagasthd (stationed i n innumerable divisions.) 



1.12.65-70 


93 


65. Ka}(ha (the highest point), Sarvantarastha (abiding 
in the hearts of all), Cicchakti (the power of conscious¬ 
ness) , Atilalasd highly solicitous, Nanda (delightful one) 
Sarvdtmika (of the soul of all), Vidyd (learning), Jyoti-rupd (the 
embodiment of brilliance), Amrtd (immortal), Akfard (imperish¬ 
able ). 

66. Sdnti (peace), Pratifthd {the stability), JVivrtti (renun¬ 
ciation), Amrtapradd (bestower of immortality), Vyomamurti 
(having ether as her form), Vyomdlayd (the seat of dissolution 
of the firmament), Vyomddhdrd (support of the firmament), 
Acyutd (the unswerving), Amard (the immortal). 

67. Anddinidhand (having neither beginning nor destruc¬ 
tion), Amoghd (un-failing), Kdrandtmd (the Soul of the cause), 
Akuldkuld (much agitated), Svatah* prathamajd (self-born at the 
outset), Amrtasya JVdbhi (navel of immortality), Atmasarhsrayd 
(the self-supporting or abiding in the self). 

68. Prdne^varapriyd (beloved of her loving husband), 
Mdtd (the mother), Makd-Mahi}avdhinP (riding on the great 
Buffalo) (v.l. Ghdtini the’kiWer oi the great buffalo), Prdneivari 
(goddess of the vital breath), Prdnarupd (embodiment of vital 
breath) Pradhdnapuru^eSvari (the controller of Pradhdna and 
Purufa ). 

69. Mahamaya, Sudufpura (very difficult to be filled up), 
Mulaprakrti (the original) Prakrti, Iharl, SarvaJaktikaldkdrd^ 
(possessing all potencies, arts or Kalds and shapes), Jyotsnd 
(moon-light), Dyau (the firmament of moonlight), Mahimdspadd 
(the cause of grandeur). 

70. Sarvakdyaniyantri (the controller of all bodies) Sana 
bhutehareivari (the goddess of the Lord of all living beings). 


*v.l. hratu (a sacrifice) for svatah 

1. Maha-mahisa-vahim —With the exception of goddess Varahi no 
other goddess is described as riding a buffalo. I would prefer the v.L mahd- 
mahisa-ghdtini recorded as ft. note. 10. in KP. p. 17 (Venk. Ed.) as 
mahisdsura-mardini The killer of the demon-Mahisasura’ is quite popular. 
vide Maha-mahisa-mardini in V. 98 below. 

2. As recorded in MSS B 2.3. De 1.4 etc., the reading might be 
Sarva-Saktih (Omnipotent) and Kaldkard (the embodiment or mine of 
arts). 



94 


Kurma Pur am 


Sarhsdrayoni (the source of origin of all the worlds), Sakala (hav¬ 
ing the due digits), SarvaSaktisarmdbhava (born of the source of 
all Saktis). 

71. Sarhsdrapota (a raft for crossing the ocean o f worldly 
existence), Durvdrd (unthwartable), Durniriksyd (difficult to 
be seen), Z)«raj< 2 (fa (inaccessible), Prdnahkti (the vital energy 
and power), Prdnavidyd (lore of vital breath), Yogini, Paramd 
kald (the Supreme art). 

72. Mahdvibhuti (the great magnificence), Durdhard (un- 
slightdihle.), Mulaprakrtisambhavd (born of the primordial nature), 
Anddyanantavibhavd (having beginningless and endless prosperity), 
Paramddyd (the earliest one), Apakarsini (who removes away). 

73. Sargasthityantakdrani {the. cdMse. oi creation, sustenance 
and annihilation of the universe), Sudurvdcyd (very difficult to be 
described), Duratyayd (very difficult to be surmounted), Sabda- 
yoni (the source of origin of words and sounds), Sabdamayi (of 
the form of sounds), Ndddkhyd (Having the epithet ‘sound’), 
Nddamgrahd (having Ndda as the physical body, an embodiment 
of sound). 

74. Anddi (beginningless), Avyaktagund (having unmani¬ 

fest Gums), Mahdmndd (having ecstatic delight), Sandtani (eter¬ 
nal), (source of origin of the ether), Togasthd (estab¬ 

lished in Yoga), Mahdyogesvare§vari (Goddess of the great lords, 
of Yogas). 

75. Mahamaya, Suduspdrd (very difficult to cross), Mula- 
prakrti, Ihari, Pradhdmpurusdtitd (beyond Pradhdna and Purufa), 
Pradhdnapuru.sdtmikd (the soul of Prakrti and Purufa). 

76. Purdnd (the ancient one), Cinrmyi (of the form of 
consciousness), Purfisdm Adi Purufa Rupini (of the form of the 
primeval Person)^, Bhutdntarasthd (stationed in the heart ofliving 
beings), Kutasthd (abiding in the soul oi ?l\\), Mahdpur^asarh- 
jnitd (termed as a great Purusa). 

77. Janana-mrtyu-jardtitd (who is beyond birth, old age 
and death), SarvaSakti-samnvitd (endowed with all ^aktis), Vydpini 
(All-pervasive), Anavacchinna (who is not restricted), Pradh- 
dndmproveSini) (who permeates into Pradhdna). 


1. Probably these are two epithets Purhsdm ddih, the source of 
men and Purusa-rupim (of the form of Purusa ). 



1.12.78-85 


95 


78. KfetrajfiaJakti (Potency of the soul), Avyaktalak^ana 
(of unmanifest characteristics), Malavarjita (Devoid of dirt or 
impurities), Anadimayasambhinna (who is distinct from the primor¬ 
dial Maya), Tritattva (having three principles), Prakrtigrahd 
(having a grasp on Prakrti). 

79. MahamayasamutpannS (Born of great Maya), Tdmasi 

(of Tdmasa nature), Paurufi (of the nature of Purusa), Dhruvd 
(steady), Vyaktdvyaktdtmikd (of the nature of both manifest and 
unmanifest), Krsm (of dark colour), Raktd (of red complexion), 
£ukld (of white complexion), (Mother). 

80. Akdryd (non-effect), Kdryajanani (cause of effect), 
J\fityam prasavadharmini (having the attribute of continuous 
procreation), Sargapralayanirmuktd (free from the creation and 
dissolution), Sr^tisthityantadharminl (having the attributes of 
creation, sustenance and annihilation). 

81. Brahmagarbhd (having Brahman in the womb), Catur- 

mridd (being characterised by the twentyfour principles), 
Padmandbhd (Lotus-navelled), Acyutdtmikd (of the nature of 
Acyuta), Vaidyuti (of the nature of lightning), (Eternal), 

Toni (source of origin), Jaganmdtd (mother of the universe), 
Isvarapriyd (Beloved of Isvara). 

82. Sarvddhdrd (support of everything), (having 

huge form), SarvaUvaryasamanvitd (endowed with all kinds of 
prosperity), VUvarupd (embodiment of the universal form), 
Mahdgarbhd (of huge embryo), ViSveSecchdnuvartini (following the 
wish of the lord of universe). 

83. Mahiyasi (very great), Brahmayoni (source of origin of 
Brahma), Mahdlakfmi-samudbhavd (born of MahalaksmI), Mahd- 
mmdna-madhyasthd (stationed in the middle of the great Vimdna 

(Aerial chariot), Mahdnidrd {oi long slumhex), Atmahetukd (cause 
of Atman). v.l. mahd-nidrdrtha-hetukd (The cause of the great 
sleep). 

84. Sarvasddhdrani (common to all), Suksmd (subtle), 
Avidyd (nescience), Paramdrtkikd (the real entity), Anantarupd (of 
infinite form), Anantasthd (stationed in the infinite), Devi (Lumi¬ 
nous), Puru^amohini (fascinator of the Purusa), 

85. Anekdkdra-samsthdnd (remaining in various shapes), 
Kdlatraya-vivarjitd (devoid of the three units of time), 5raA77za- 
janmd (giving birth to Brahma), Rarer Murti (the Image of 



96 


Kurma Pur ana 


Hari), Brahmavifmiivdtmikd (of the nature of Brahma, Visnu 
and Siva). 

86. BrahmeSa-Visnujanani {the mother oiBrahmk, Isa and 
Visnu), Brahmdkhyd (of the epithet of Brahman), Brahmasarnhayd 
(residing within Brahman), Vyaktd (the m.a.rnkst), Prathamajd 
(Born at the outset), Brdhmi (pertaining to Brahman), Makati 
(very big), Brahmarupini (of the form of Brahman). 

87. Vairdgyaiharyadharmdtmd (of the nature of detach¬ 

ment, prosperity and piety), Brahmamurti (of the form of Brah¬ 
man) , Hrdisthitd (stationed within the heart), Apamyoni (source 
of origin of the waters), Svayambhuti (self-born), (Men¬ 

tally conceived), Tattvasambhavd (the origin of the Principles). 

88. Hvardni (the consort of Isvara), Sarvdni (wife of 
Sarva), ^ankardrdhasaririni (forming half the person of Sankara), 
Bhavdni, Rudrdni, Mahdlaksmi, Ambikd. 

89. MaheSvarasamutpannd (Born of Mahesvara), 
ktiphalapradd (yielder of the fruits of enjoyment and salvation), 
Sarvehari (Goddess of all), Sarvavandyd (worthy of being bowed 
to by all), Nityarh muditamdnasd (Ever delighted in the mind). 

90. Brahmendropendranamitd (Bowed to by Brahma, Indra 
and Upendra (Visnu), ^ankarecchdnuvartini (abiding by the wish 
of Sankara), livardrddhdsanarngatd (Occupant of half the seat 
of Isvara), MaheSvara-pativratd (The chaste wife of Mahesvara). 

91. Sakrdvibkdtd (dawning but once), Sarvdrti-samudraparU- 
ofini (the drier-up of the ocean of everyone’s distress), Pdrvati, 
Himavatputrl) Daughter of Himavan), Paramdnandaddyini (the 
bestower of highest bliss). 

92. Gunddhyd (richiy ondo-wod with good qualities), Togaja 
(born of Yoga), Yogyd (worthy), Jndnamurti (embodiment of 
knowledge), VihaHni (expanding and developing), Sduitri, 
Kamald, Lak^mi, §ri, Anantorasisthitd (stationed in the bosom 
of Ananta). 

93. Sarojanilayd (having lotus as her abode), Gangd, Toga- 
nidrd (Yogic slumber), Asurdrdini (destroyer of the Asuras), 
Sarasvati, Sarvavidyd (all loros), Jagajjye^thd (the eldest in the 
universe); Sumangald (Highly auspicious), 

94. Vdgdevi (Goddess of speech), Varadd (granter of 
boons), Avdcyd (Inexpressible), Kirti (fame), Sarvdrthasddkikd 



1.12.95-101 


97 


(accomplisher of all affairs), Togihari (goddess of Yogins), 
Brahmavidya (the lore of Brahman), Mahavidya {great lore), Suio- 
bhand (highly auspicious). 

95. Guhyavidyd (having the secret lore), Atmavidya (the 
lore of Atman) Dharmavidya (the lore of piety), Atmabhdvitd (puri¬ 
fied byAtman), Svdhd, Vihambhard (theearth), Siddhi (super-nor¬ 
mal power or achievement), Svadhd, Medhd (intellect), Dhrti 
(fortitude), Sruti. 

96. Niti (policy), Suniti (good policy), Sukrti (good 
action), Mddhavi, Naravdhinf (having men as vehicle), Pujyd 
(worthy of being worshipped), Vibhdvati (lustrous), Saumyd 
(gentle), Bhogini (enjoyer), BhogaSdyini {lying on the body of 
the serpent). 

97. ^obhd (beauty), Sankari, Laid (oscillating), Mdlint 
(wearing the garlands), Parame^thini, Trailokyasundari (the most 
beautiful lady in the three worlds), Namyd (worthy of being 
bowed to), Sundari (charming), Kdmacdrini (moving about as she 
pleases). 

98. Mahdnubhdvd (highly dignified), Sattvasthd (estab¬ 
lished in the Sattvagma), Mahdmahi^amardird (suppressor of the 
great buffalo), Padmandbhd (lotus-naveiled), Pdpahard (dispeller 
of sins), Vicitramukutdngadd (having wonderful coronet and 
bracelets). 

99. Kdntd (shining), Citrdmbaradhard {-wearing clothes o£ 
variegated colours), Divydbharana-bhu^itd (bedecked in divine 
ornaments), Hamsdkhyd (bearing the appellation swan), 
Vyomanilayd (having the firmament as the abode), Jagatsrstivivar- 
dhini (increaser of the creation of the universe). 

100. Niyantri (the controller), Yantramadhyasthd (stationed 
in the middle of the mystic diagram), Nandini (delighter), 
Bhadrakdlikd, Adityavarnd (having the lustre of the sun), Kauberi 
(goddess of Kubera). 

Mayuravaravdhand (having the excellent vehicle of the 
peacock). 

101. Vrsdsanagatd (going about, seated on the bull), Gauri, 
Mahdkdli, Surdrcitd, (worshipped by Devas), Aditi, Niyatd 

1. Naravahana is an epithet of Kubera. Here the Kaubsri form of 
the goddess is implied, vide Kauberi in V. 100. 



98 


Kurma Pur ana 


(well-restrained), Raudra (terrible), Padmagarbha (having lotus 
for the womb), Vivdhana (having a bird for vehicle). 

102. Virupak^i (with odd number of (i.e. three) eyes), 
Lelihana (licking up), MahdsuravindUni (destroyer of the great 
Asura), Mahdphald (bestowing great fruits), Anavadydngi (having 
faultless, limbs), Kdmarupd (having pleasing features), Vibhdvari 
(night). 

103. Vkitraratnamukutd (having wonderful jewelled coro¬ 
net), Prariatdrtiprabhanjani (the breaker of the distress of those 
who bow down), KauHki, Kar^anl (the dragger), Ratri {night), 
'Trida^drtivindiini (destroyer of the distress of Devas). 

104. Bahurdpd (having many forms), Surupd (having 
good forms), Virupd (having hideous forms), Rupavarjitd (devoid 
of iorms), Bhaktdrtiiamani (suppressor of distress of the devotee), 
Bhavjd (beautiful), BhavatdpavindSini (destroyer of the distress 
due to worldly existence). 

105. Nirgund (devoid of Gums), Nityavibhavd (having 
perpetual wealth), Nihsara (of topmost excellence), Nirapatrapd 
(devoid of bashfulness), Tapasvini (female ascetic), Sdmagiti 
( Sdman songs), Bhavdnkanilaydlayd (having the lap of Bhava as 
abode and residence). 

106. Dikid (initiation), Vidyddhari, Diptd (illuminated), 
Mahendravinipdtini (bringing about the downfall of Mahendra), 
SarvdtUdyini{enceWing everyone), ViSvd (universe), Sarvasiddhipra- 
ddyini (bestower of all Siddhis). 

107. Sarveivara-priyd bhdryd (the beloved wife of the lord 
of all), Samudrdntaravdsini (resident in the midst of ocean), 
Akalahkd (devoid of blemish) Nirddhdrd (devoid i.e. independent 
of support), JVityasiddha (eternal attainer of Siddhis), Nirdrmyd 
(devoid of ailments). 

108. Kdmadhem (the wish-yielding divine cow), Brhad- 
garbhd (having a huge womb), Zl/iiOTati(intelligent), Mohandiini 
(destroyer of delusion). Nihsahkalpd (devoid of conception) 
Nirdtahkd (devoid of agony), Vinayd (having humility), Vinaya- 
priyd (fond of modesty). 

109. Jvdldmdldsahasrddhyd (richly endowed with thousands 
of clusters of flames), Devadevi ^(goddess of Devas), Mano- 
mayd (constituted of the mind), {v.l. manomani : the exciter of 



1.12.110-115 


99 


minds), Mahdbhagavati (great goddess), Bharga, Vasudevasamud- 
bhavd (born ofVasudeva). 

110. Mahendropendrabhagini (sister ofMahendraand Upen- 

dra), Bhaktigamyd (accessible only through devotion), Pardvard 
(the greatest and the most excellent), (being both 

the knowledge and the knowable), Jardtitd (beyond old age), 
Veddntavisayd (the field or the object of Veddnta), Gafi (the 
final goal). 

111. Dak^ind (dexterous, amiable), Dahati (self-immo¬ 
lation into fire), Dirghd (long), Sarvabhutanamaskrtd (bowed to 
by all living beings), Togamdyd, Vibhdgajm (knower of the divi¬ 
sions), Mahdmohd (great delusion), Gariyasi (very great). 

112. Sandhyd (twilight), Sarvasamudbh uti (cause of the 
origin of everything through the support etc. to Brahma Vidyd^ 
i.e. doctrine of Brahman), Bijdnkurasamudbhuti (cause of the 
origin of seeds and shoots), Mahdsakti, Mahdmati (of great 
intellect). 

113. (forgiveness), PrajiM (intellect), Citi (knowl¬ 
edge), Sat-cit (existence and consciousness), MahdbhogindraSdyini 
{lying on the couch of the body of the leader of serpents), 
Vikrti (aberration or change), ^dfikarl (belonging to Sankara), 
Sdsti (the rule), Ganagandharvasevitd (served by groups of Ganas 
and Gandharvas). 

114. VaUvdnari (the cosmic fire), MahdSdld (the great 
hall of the divine fire Vaiivdnara) , Mahdsend (having great army), 
Guhapriyd {ionAoi Guha), Mahdrdtri (the great night), Shidnandd 
(bestower of bliss on Siva), SaciduhsvdpandHni (destroyer of 
the bad dream of (Saci —Indra’s spouse). 

115. Ijyd (sacrifice), Pujyd (worthy of being worshipped), 
Jagaddhdtri (the nursing mother of the universe), Durvijneyd 


1. A better v.l. recorded in Ft. note 4 (p. 19 of our Venketesvara) 

text of KP is Brahma-vrksdiraya ‘one supported by the tree in the form of 
Brahman’ and the next epithet is bfati. The other v.l. is Brahma-vrksa- 
sraydt where °vidyd- is substituted by °-vrksa. 

2. This is a better interpretation than splitting it into Saci as a 
separate epithet and duhsvapna-ndiini ‘the dispeller of bad dreams.’ The 
compliment to the goddess is ‘whenever Saci—Indra’s spouse, sees bad 
dreams, when her husband Indra is defeated or harassed by Asuras, goddess 
Uma advances, destroys the Asuras and relieves Indra from danger. This 
prompt help of goddess Uma to gods is implied in this epithet. 



100 


Kurma Pur ana 


(very difficult to be comprehended), Surupini (having a be¬ 
autiful form), Tapasvini (a female ascetic), Samadhistha (absorbed 
in trance), Trinetrd (having three eyes), Divi samsthita 
(stationed in the heaven). 

116. Guhdmbikd (the Mother of Guha or Karttikeya), 
Gunotpatti (the cause of origin of all qualities), Mahdpithd (hav¬ 
ing a highly exalted seat), Marutsutd (daughter of the Maruts), 
Havyavdhdntardgddi (having fondness etc. for the sacrificial fire), 
Havyavdhasamudbhavd (born of sacrificial fire). 

117. Jagadyoni (the source of origin of the universe), 
Jaganmdtd (mother of the universe), Janma-mrtyu-jardtigd (going 
beyond the barriers of birth, death and old age), Buddhi 
(intellect), Mahdbuddhimati (possessing great intellect), Purufdnt- 
ara-vdsini (staying within Picru^a). 

118. Tarasvini (of great velocity), Samddhisthd (absorbed 
in a trance), Trinetrd (having three eyes), Divi samsthitd (station¬ 
ed into heaven), Sarvendriyamanomdtd (the mother of all sense 
organs and minds), Sarvabhutahrdisthitd (stationed in the hearts 
of all living beings). 

119. Sards dr atdrini (she who enables everyone to cross 
the ocean of worldly existence), Vidyd (learning), Brahmavddi- 
manolayd (residing in the minds of the expounders of Brahman) 
Brahmdnl, Brhati, Brdhmi, Brahmabhutd, Bhavdrani. 

120. Hirarmayi (of golden form), Maharatri (great 
night), Sarhsdraparivartikd (the transformer of the Sarhsdra), 
Sumdlini (having good garlands, Surupd (having good forms), 
Bhdvini (purified), Hdrini (wearing necklace), Prabhd (lustre). 

121. Unmilani (the eye-opener), Sarva-sahd (endurer of 
everything), Sarva-piratyaya-sdk^iniiy/ivatssoi allnotions), Susaumyd 
(very gentle), Candravadand (Moon-faced), Tdniavdsakta-mdnasd 
(whose mind is interested in the Tdn^ava dance). 

122. Sattvasuddhikari (the purifier of the mind), Suddhi 

(purity), Malatrayavindsini (destroyer of the three types of im¬ 
purities), (fond of the universe), Jaganmurti (of uni¬ 

versal form), Trimurti (the triple formed one), Amratdhayd 
(receptacle of the nectar). 

123. JVirdsrayd (having no support), Nirdhdrd (having no 
food), Nirankusapadodbhavd (born of that free curbless region). 



1.12.124-129 


101 


Candrakasta (holding the moon in the hand), Vicitrdngi (having 
limbs of variegated colours), Sragvinl (having garlands), 
dharini (wearing lotuses). 

124. Paravara-vidhdnajna (knower of the greater and the 
smaller procedures), Mahdpuruia-Purvajd (bornprior to the great 
purusa), Viheivarapriyd (beloved of the lord of the Universe), 
Vidyut (lightning), Vidyujjihvd (having lightning for her 
tongue), Jitdhamd (who has conquered exhaustion). 

125. Vidydmayi (learning incarnate), Sahasrdkfi (having a 
thousand eyes), Sahasravadandtmajd (daughter of the thousand¬ 
faced), SahasraraSmi (having a thousand rays), Sattvasthd 
(stationed in the Sattva-guna ), Maheivarapaddhayd (resorted to 
or supported by the feet of Mahesvara). 

126. KsalinI (one who washes), Mrnmayi (of the nature 
of earth), Vydptd (pervaded), Taz/ojt (lustrous), Padmabodhikd 
(opener of the lotus), Mahdmdydsrayd (having the support of 
the great Maya), Mdnyd (worthy of honour), Mahddevamanoramd 
(pleasing to the mind of Mahadeva). 

127. Vyomalakfmi (splendour of the firmament), 

(having a lion-yoked chariot), Cekitdnd (conscious), Amitaprabhd 
(of unmeasured lustre), Viresvari (goddess of heroes), Vimdnasthd 
(stationed in the aerial chariot), ViSokd (devoid of sorrow). 

128. Andhatd (non-struck spiritual sound), Kundalini (deco¬ 
rated with ear-rings or having spiral coils of the Yogic from), 
JValini, Padmabhdsini (shining through the lotus) Padma-vdsini 
(dweller in a lotus), Saddnandd(having perpetual bliss), Saddkirti 
(of perpetual fame), Sarvabhutdhayasthitd^ (stationed in support 
of all living beings). 

129. Vdgdevatd (the deity of speech), Brahmakald (the 
digit oi Brahman), Kaldtltd (going beyond the digit), Kaldrani 
(the Arani oi Kala), BrahmaSri (the splendour of Brahman), 
Brahmahrdayd (the heart of Brahman), Bramha-Vi^riu-Sivapriyd 
(beloved of Brahma, Visnu and Siva). 


1. The v.l. in our text is as follows : 

Satanandd satdrh kirtih sarva-bhutdiaya-sthita / 

Satananda (of hundredfold immense h\hs) ^ satdm kirtih (The fame or 
the glory of the saintly persons), sarva-bhutdiaya-sthitd (enshrined in the 
hearts of all beings.) 



102 


Kurma Pur ana 


130. Vyomaiakti {the. Sakti of the firmament), Kriyaiakti 
(the motive force of activity), JnanaJakti (the power of knowl¬ 
edge) , Pardgati (the greatest goal), Kfobhikd (agitator), BandhikS 
(she who binds), Bhedyd (she who can be differentiated), Bkedd- 
bhedavivarjitd (devoid of difference and non-difference). 

131. Abhinnd (non-different), Bhinnasarnsthdnd (having 
different resting places), VaSini (submissive), VathSahdrini 
(captivater of the race), Guhyaiakti (having concealed power), 
Gundtitd (transcender oiGunas), Sarvadd (bestower of everything), 
Sarvatomukhi (having faces all round). 

132. Bhagini (fortunate woman), Bhagavatpatni (consort 
of the lord), Sakald (entire, perfect), Kdlahdrini (remover of 
Kdla), Sarvavit (knower of all), Sarvatobhadrd (having welfare 
all round), Guhydtitd (going beyond the hidden), Guhdvali 
(having groups of caves). 

133. Prakriyd (procedure of a rite), Yogamdtd (mother 
of Yoga), Gangd, Viheivarehari, Kalild (impervious), Kapild 
(tawny coloured), Kdntd (shining), Kamaldbhd (shining like 
lotus), Kaldntard (the heart of fine arts). 

134. Punyd (meritorious), Pu^karini (having the sacred 

lotus pond), Bhoktri (the enjoyer), Purandarapurassard (going 
ahead of Indra), (nourisher), Paramaiivarya-bhutidd (bes¬ 
tower of supreme power and prosperity), (having 

holy ashes as ornament). 

135. Pancabrahmasamutpatti (born of five Brahmans viz. 
Ganesa, Surya, Siva, Visnu and Sakti), Paramdrthdrthavigrahd 
(embodiment of reality), Dharmodayd (rise of piety), Bhdnumati 
(possessing rays), Yogijneyd (knowable by Yogins), Manojavd 
(having the speed of the mind). 

136. Manoramd (delightful to the mind), Manoraskd 
(having mind in the chest), Tdpasi (an ascetic woman), Vedaru- 
pini (having the form of Veda), Vedaiakti (having the power of 
Vedas), Veda-mdtd (mother of the Vedas), Vedavidydprakdiini 
(revealer of the Vedic Lore). 

137. Goddess of the lords of Yoga, Mdtd (mother), 
Mahdiakti, Manomayi (of the nature of the mind), Viivdvasthd 
(stationed in the universe), Viyanmurti (having the form of the 
firmament), Vidyunmdld (with lightning as garland), Vihdyasi 
(of the nature of the sky). 



1.12.138-145 


103 


138. Kinnari, Surabhi, Vidya, Nandini, (delighter), Mandi- 
vallabhd (beloved of Nandin), Bhdrati, (goddess of speech), 
Paramdnandd (of great bliss), Pardparavibhedikd (distinguisher 
between the greater and the smaller). 

139. Sarvapraharanopetd (equipped with all weapons), Kdmyd 
(desirable), Kdmeivaresvari (goddess of Kamesvara), Acintyd 
(inconceivable), Anantavibhavd (having infinite riches), 
Bhulekhd (line on the ground), Kanakaprabhd (having golden 
lustre). 

140. Kusmdndi, Dhanaratnd^hyd (endowed with riches and 
jewels), Sugandhd (sweet smelling), Gandhaddyini (bestower of 
scents), Trivikramapadodbhutd (born of the feet of Trivikrama 
{Wisnu), Dhanuspdni (having the bow in the hand), Sivodayd 
(of auspicious rise). 

141. Sudurlabhd (very rare), Dhanddhyakfd (presiding 
deity over riches), Z)A<j7y>a (blessed), Pingalalocand (of reddish 
brown eyes), Sdnti (peace), Prabhdvati (possessing lustre), 
Dipti {i\[\immaX.ion), Pankajdyatalocand (having eyes as wide as 
the lotus). 

142. Adyd (the first), Bhuh (the earth), Kamalodbhutd 
(born of the lotus), Gavdm mdlini (mother of cows), Ranapriyd 
(fond of battle), Satkriyd (good ritual), GirUd (consort of 
Girisa), Suddhi (purity), Nityapustd (perpetually nourished), 
Nirantard (having no weak points). 

143. Durgd, Kdtydyani, Candi, Carcitdngd (having the limbs 
besmeared), Suvigrakd (having good body), Hiranya-varnd (of 
golden colour), Jagati (the ’E.a.rth), Jagad-yantra-pravarttikd (Maker 
of the machine of this universe function). 

144. Mandarddri-nivdsa (dweller on mount Mandara), 
Garahd (Destroyer of poisons), Svarna-mdlini (having golden 
necklaces), Ratna-mdld (wearing a jewelled necklace), Ratnagar- 
bhd (with jewels in the womb), Pusti (nourishment), VUva- 
pramdthini (Destroyer of the universe). 

145. Padmanabhd (having a lotus in the navel), Padmard-- 
bhd (resembling a lotus), Nityaru^td (perpetually angry), 
Amrtodbhavd (born of the nectar), Dhunvati (shaking), Duspra- 



104 Kurma Pur am 

kampa (difficult to be shaken), Suryamata (mother of the Sun), 
Drsadvati (N. of a Vedic river)4 

146. Mahendrabhagini (sister of Indra), (gentle), 

Varenyd (excellent), Varadayika (bestower of boons), Kalydm 
(ofgood weal), Kamalavdsa (residing in the lotus), Panca-cuda 
(having five locks of hair), Varaprada. (granter of boons). 

147. Vacya (expressible), Armreivari (goddess of Devas), 
Vidya (learning), Durjayd (invincible), Duratikrama (one who 
cannot be transgressed), Kdlaralri (night of the destruction of 
the world: identified with Durga), Mahdvegd (of great velocity), 
Virabhadra-priyd (beloved of Virabhadra), Hitd (benefactress) 

148. Bhadrakdli, Jaganmdtd, Bhaktdndrfi bhadra-dayini (bes¬ 
tower of welfare on devotees), Kardld (terrible), Pingaldkdrd 
(of tawny features), Kamabheda (prob. a misprint for JVdmabliedd 
— ‘having different names, as in the Crt. Ed.), Mahdsvand (of 
loud voice). 

149. Taiasvini (famous), Tasodd, Sa^adhva-parivartika}- 
(revolving through the six paths), Sankhini (variety of woman 
of that name), Padmini (a woman type), Sdrhkhyd, Sdthkhyayoga- 
pravartikd^ (promulgator of Sarhkhya and Yoga systems). 

150. Caitrd^ (of the Caitra month), Sarhvatsardrudhd (rid¬ 
ing on the year), Jagatsampurani (the filler of universe), Dhvaja 
(the banner), Sumbhdri (enemy of Sumbha), Khecari (moving 
in the firmament), Svasthd (stationed in heaven), Kambugrivd 
(conch-necked), Kalipriyd (fond of quarrel). 

151. Khagadhuajd (Bird-bannered), Khagdruihd (riding on 
a bird), Vdrdhi (of the boar incarnation), Pugamdlini (having 

1. A river famous in Vedic and epic times. It formed the Southern 
boundary of Kuruksetra. It is variously identified with the Gaggar (JASB 
VI. 181), the Raksi (Cunningham— Arch. S. Rep. Vol. XIV) and the 
Chitrang. or Chitang {Imperial Gazetteer of India P. 26). De approves of the 
last identification (DEP. 57-58). 

2. This Pancaratra term is used for Uma. In the case of Uma 
the six paths probably refer to the six systems of Indian Philosophy. If 
the reading °-pari vadirn—parivartika (which is not much credible) be 
accepted, the epithet means ‘the promulgator of the six systems; out of which 
Sahkhya and Yoga are specifically mentioned in the last epithet. The 
Pancaratra significance is different {vide Introduction) 

2. v.l. (Ft. Note 2 in our Text). 

caitra sarhvatsari Rudrajagat-sampuranindrajd jcaitrd, sarhvatsari (the year), 
Riidrd, Jagat-sampura(d (who has filled the whole world), Indrajd (one born 
of Indra). 



1.12.152-157 


105 


Areca palms as garlands), Aiivarya-Padma-Milaya (having riches 
as the lotus abode), Viraktd (detached), Garu^dsand (seated on 
Garuda). 

152. Jayanti (victorious), Hrdguhdgamyd (comprehen¬ 
sible in the cavity of the heart), Gahvaresthd (stationed in the 
cavity), Gandgrani (chief of the groups), Sarfikalpasiddhd {possess¬ 
ing achievements by mere conception), Sdmyasthd (stationed in 
similarity), Sarvavijndnaddyini (bestowerof all perfect enlighten¬ 
ment). 

153. Kdli Kalkavihantri (destroyer of dirt and hypocrisy), 
Guhyopanifadultamd (having the excellent secret well guarded), 
Nisthd (stability), Dr^ti (vision), Smrti (memory), Vydpti (per¬ 
vasion), Pu^ti (nourishment), Tu^ti (contentment), Kriydvati 
(possessing rites). 

154. Viivdmareivaresdnd, (controller of the rulers of God), 
Bhukti (enjoyment), Mukti (liberation), Sivd (auspiciousness), 
Amrtd (immortality), ZoAi/a (red), S’flr/'ama/a(serpent garlanded), 
Bhisani (terrible), Vanamdlini (having garlands of sylvan 
flowers). 

155. AnantaSayand (lying on the serpent Ananta), Anantd 
(infinite), Marandrdyanodbhavd (born of Nara and Narayana), 
Nrsimhi (man-lion-formed), Daityamathani (suppressor of the 
Daityas), Sankhacakragadddhard (wielder of conch, discus and 
the iron-club). 

156. Samkar$ani (of the form of Sahkarsana or squeezing 
and dragging), Samutpatti (origin), Ambikdpddasarhsrayd* (having 
the feet of Ambika for support), Mahdjvdld (of great flames), 
Mahdbhuti (of great prosperity), Sumurti (of excellent form), 
Sarvakdmadhuk (yielding all desires). 

157. Subhrd (white in complexion), Sustand (having 

good breasts), (of Solar lustre), Dharma-kdmdrthamok$add 

(bestower of the four Purufdrthas viz. Dharma, love, wealth 
and salvation), Bhrumadhyanilayd (residing in the middle of the 
eyebrows), Apurvd (unprecedented), Purdnapuru^drani (having 
Visnu as the consort Arani i.e. the wood from which fire is 


*Our printed text shows two epithets ambika (Mother) and Padasam- 
Jrayd (one whose feet are resorted to) —this is a better reading. 



106 


Kurma Pur ana 


produced by attrition), {v.l. °rati —Lover of Visnu, the Ancient 
person). 

158. Mahavibhutida (bestower of great prosperity), Madhya 
(the middling), Sarojanayana (lotus-eyed), Asamd (unequalled), 
Aftadaiabhuja (having eighteen arms), Anadya (having no 
beginning), Nilotpaladalaprabha (having the lustre of the petals- 
of a blue lotus). 

159. Sarvasaktydsandru4hd (riding on the seat of all 

Saktis), Dharmddharmavivarjitd (transcendental to both piety- 
and impiety), (absorbed in perfect knowledge 

and detachment), Nirdlokd (devoid of light), Nirindriyd (devoid 
of sense organs). 

160. Vicitragahanddhdrd (support of deep and wonderful 
things), Sdivatasthdnavdsini (resident of the permanent abobe), 
Sthdneivari (goddess of the proper abode), Nirdnandd (devoid 
of bliss), TrUulavaradhdrini (holder of the excellent Trident). 

161. Aie$adevatdmurti (having the form of the entire group 
of Devas), Devatdvaradevatd* (the excellent among the deities), 
Gandmbikd (mother of the gams ), Gireh putri (daughter of the 
mountain), Nihtmbhavinipdtini (the overthrower of Nisumbha). 

162. Avarnd (devoid of castes), Varnarahitd (devoid of 
colour), Trivarnd (having three castes or colours), Jivasambhavd 
(cause of birth of the living beings), Amntavarnd (of infinite 
colours), Ananyasthd (not stationed elsewhere except in the 
lord), Bankart, Sdntamdnasd (of quiet mind). 

163. Agotrd {heiYing no spiritual lineage), Gomati (posse¬ 
ssing cows or words), Goptri (protectress), Guhyarupd (of secret 
form), Gunottard (foremost in attributes), Gauh (cow), Gih 
(word), Gavyapriyd (fond of milk products), Gauni (of Guna 
traits), Ganeharanamaskrtd (bowed down by the leader of the 
Gams). 

164. Satyabhdmd, Satyasandhd (Strictly adhering to truth), 
Trisandhyd (having three junctions), Sandhivarjitd (devoid of 
joints), Sarvavdddirayd (support of all schools of philosphers), 
Sankhyd (reason), Sdnkhyayogasarmdbhavd (born of the schools, 
of philosophy —Sdrhkhya and Toga). 


*The text has two separate epithets : Devatd Goddess and Varadevatd- 
Excellent goddess. 



1.12.165-171 


107 


165. Asarfikhyeydprameyakhya (having innumerable and 
immeasurable names), Sunyd (void), Suddhakulodbhava (born of 
pure family), Bindunadasamutpatti (cause of the origin of 

and Mdda ), Sambhuvdmd (wife of Sambhu), Saiiprabhd (having 
the lustre of the moon). 

166. Piiangd (tawnycoloured), Bhedarahitd (devoid of 

differences). Manojnd (Beautiful), Madhusudani (destroying 
Madhu), (Great Sri), Srisamutpatti (origin of Sri), 

Tamahpdre pratifthitd (established beyond darkness). 

167. Tritattvamdtd (mother of the three principles),. 
Trividhd (of three types, Susuksmapadasarhirayd (resorting to 
very subtle position), Sdntd{qm&sc&nt),Bhitd (of fearing nature), 
Maldtitd (going beyond dirt), JVirvikdrd (without aberration or 
change), Sivdirayd (having the support of Siva). 

168. Sivdkhyd (of auspicious name), Cittanilayd (having' 
the mind as the abode), SivajndnasvarUpnni (of the form of Siva’s 
perfect knowledge), Dailyaddnavanirmdthi (suppressor of the 
Daityas and Danavas), Kdsyapi (of the family of Kasyapa), 
Kdlakarnikd (the pericarp of Kala (Time) ). 

169. Sdstrayoni (the source of origin of the scripture), 
Kriydmurti (having activity as form), Catur-varga-Pradariikd (the 
revealer of the four types of human aims), Ndrdyani, Narotpatti 
(cause of Nara), Kaumudilingadhdrini (wearing the symbols of 
moonlight) {v.l. Kaumudi axiA Lingadhdrim). 

170. Kdmuki-kalitdbhdvd (possessing the traits of a loving 
women) {v.L Lalitd and Bhdvd), Pardvaravibhutidd (bestowerof 
the greater and smaller riches), Pardngajdtamahimdk (having the 
greatness arising out of the great limbs), Badavd (mare), Vdma- 
locand (having beautiful eyes). 

171. Subhadrd, Devaki, Slid, Vedaveddngapdragd (one who 

had mastered the Vedas and Vedahgas), Manasvini (High- 
minded), (mother of anger), Mahdmanyusamudbhavd' 

(born of great Manyu or Maharudra) 


1. A better v.l. pardtma-Jndna-mahimd—recorded in the Ft. Note 1, 

p. 20. 

2. Manyu signifies the presiding deities of or personifications of 
fury or wrath viz. Agni or Rudra vide MW (Monier-Williams-5 A". Dictionary- 
p. 786. Col. 3). 



108 


Kurma Pur ana 


172. Amanyu (devoid of anger), Amrtasvada (tasting 
nectar), Puruhuta (one who is often invoked), Puru^tuta (much 
eulogised), .dfoiyia (not pitiable), fiAmraawVqya (having different 
objects), Hiranyarajatapriya (fond of gold and silver). 

173. Hiranyarajani (golden night),Haima {go\den),Hema- 
hharanabhiifita (bedecked in golden ornaments), Vibhrajamana 
(shining), Durjneya (incomprehensible), Jyotiftomaphalaprada 
(bestower of the fruits of sacrifice Jyotistoma). 

174. Mahanidrasamudbhuti (born of great slumber), .dm'rfra 
(having no slumber), Satyadevata (a true deity), Dirgha (long), 
Kakudmini (lofty), Hrdya (hearty), Santida (bestower of peace), 
Santivardhini (increaserof peace). 

175. Lak?myadiiaktijanani (mother of Laksmi and other 
Saktis ), Sakticakrapravartika (the cause or mover of the cycle or 
a group of Saktis), Triiakti-Janani (mother of the three Saktis), 
Janya (A bride’s maid or a mother’s friend), Sadurmiparivarjita 
(devoid of the six waves viz. sorrow, delusion, hunger, thirst, 
old age and death). 

176. Sudhauta (well washed), Karmakarani (performer of 
activities), Tuganta-dahanatmika (of the nature of the fire at the 
close of the Yugas), Sarhkar^ani (dragging and seizing), 
Jagaddhatri (mother of the universe) Kdmayoni (source of origin 
of Kama), Kiritini (wearing the crown). 

177. Aindri (belonging to Indra), Trailokyanamitd (bowed 
to by the three worlds), Vaisnavi, Paramesvari, Pradyumna-dayitd 
(beloved of Pradyumna), Ddtri (donor), Yugmadr^ti (having a 
■pair of visions), Trilocand (three-eyed). 

178. Madotkatd (excessively rapturous), Hamsagati 
(having the gait of a swan), Pracandd (very fierce), Candavikramd 
(of fierce exploits), Vr^dvesd} (having enthudasm for piety), 
Viyanmdtd (mother of the firmament), Vindhyaparvatavdsini 
(residing on the Vindhya Mountains). 

179. Himavanmerunilayd (having her abode in mountains 
Himavat and Meru), Kaildsagirivdsini (residing on the Mountain 
Kailasa), Cdnurahantrtanayd (daughter of the slayer of Ganura), 


1 . Vrse dharme dveSo yasydh. 



1.12.180-186 


109 


Xitijna (knower of the right policy), Komarupini (assuming 
any from at will). 

180. Vedavidya (Vedic Lore), Vratasnata (one who has 
performed the holy ablution after observance of holy vows), 
Brahmaiailanivdsini * (residing on i he Mountain Brahmasaila), 
Virabhadrapraja (progeny of Virabhadra), v.l. Vira-bhadra-Priya 
(beloved of vira bhava)Vira (heroic) Mahakamasamudbhava{horn 
of great love). 

181. Vidyadharapriya (beloved o f the Vidyadharas), .JtWffAa 
(of achievement), Vidyadharanirakrti (refutation of the Vidya- 
dhara), Apyayani (developer and nourisher), Haranti (captiva¬ 
ting), Pdvani (sanctifier), Pojani (nourisher),/fa/a (arts, digits). 

182. Mdtrkd (a divine mother), Manmathodbhutd (born 
of Kama), Vdrijd (born of water), Vdhanapriyd (fond of the 
vehicle), Kari^ini (goddess of wealth), Sudhavdm (nectar-speech- 
ed), Vindvddanatatpard (exclusively devoted to playing the lute). 

183. Sevitd (one who is served), Sevikd (nurse), Sevyd 
(worthy of being served), Sinivdli (new moon night with the moon 
slightly visible), Garutmati (having Garuda), Armdhati, Hiranyd- 

(golden eyed), Mrgdnkd (deer-marked), Mdnaddyini {host- 
ower of honour). 

184. Vasupradd (bestower of wealth), Vasumati{the earth), 
Vasordhdrd (continuous flow of riches), Vasundhard (earth holding 
riches), Dhdrd-dhard (holding continuous current), Vardrohd 
(possessing excellent waist), Pardvdsasahasradd (bestower of thous¬ 
ands of great residences). 

185. Sriphald (having fortune as fruits), Srirrmti (possess¬ 
ing fortune and glory), Sriid (goddess of glory), Srinivdsd 
(residence of glory), Sivapriyd (beloved of Siva), Sridhard 
(holder of fortune), Srikari (maker of fortune), Katyd (Healthy, 
auspicious), Sridhardrdhaiaririni {sheLter oi haXi oi the body of 
Sridhara). 

186. Anantadrfti (of infinite vision), Ak^udrd (not insigni¬ 
ficant) , Dhdtriid (goddess of the earth), Dhanadapriyd (beloved 
ofKubera), JVihantri Daityasanghdndm {the slayer of multitudes 
of Daityas), Sirnhikd (lioness), Sirhhavdhand (having a lion 
for her vehicle). 


V.l. Dharma-iildy Anild^and (subsisting on the wind) 



110 


Kurma Pur ana 


187. Suvarcala (shining brilliantly), (having good 

buttocks), (having-good fame), Chinnasarh^aja (with all 

doubts cleared), iJaj-q/na (knower of the rasas or XasKe.), Rasada 
(bestower of taste), Rama (a good looking woman), Lelihdnd 
(licking), Amrtasravd (giving out continuous flow of nectar). 

188. (risingperpetually), Svayarhjyotih {self-lumin¬ 

ous), Utsukd (eager), Amrtajivand (having nectarine life), Vajra- 
dan4d (having thunderbolt as staff), (having adaman¬ 

tine tongue), Yaidehi, Vajra-Vigrahd (having adamantine physical 
body). 

189. Mafigalyd (auspicious), Mangaldmdld* (wearing 
auspicious garland), Nirmald (free from impurities), Malahdrini 
(dispeller of dirts), Gdndharvi (a Gandharva lady), Karund** 
(Mercy), Cdndri (belonging to the moon), KambaldSvatarapriyd 
(fond of blanket and mule). 

190. Sauddmini (lightning), Jandnandd (giving delight or 
pleasure to people), Bhrukufikufildnand (having a face with 
crooked eyebrows), Karnikdrakard (having the Karnikdra flower in 
the hand), Kakfd (Room), Kariisaprdndpahdrini (remover of 
Kaihsa’s ife). 

191. Tugandhard (bearer ofthe yoke), Yugdvartd (repeating 
in every Yuga), Trisandhyd {the three twilights or junctions), 
Harsavardhani (increaserof the joy), Pratyak^adevatd (visible 
deitsf), Divyd {dWme), Divyagandhd (having divine fragrance), 
Divahpard {heyond heaven) (f./. Divdkard —the sun-goddess). 

192. ^akrdsanagald {seated in Indr a’s seat), Sukari, Sddhyd, 
Cdru-Sardsand (wielder of beautiful bow), I^td (desirable), 
Viiiftd (specialized), §isfe?td (desirable or favourable to Sistas), 
SUtdsi$ta-Prapujitd (honoured both by the good and the wicked). 

193. Satarupd (hundred-formed), Satdvartd (hundred 
times repeated), Vinatd (humble), Surabhi (fragrant). Surd 
(wine), Surendramdtd (mother of the ruler of Devas), Sudyumna 
(having good energy and splendour), Susumnd (the Nadi called 
Susumna), Suryasarfisthitd (stationed in the sun). 


*v.l. Mangold, Mala. 

**v.l. Garudi. My text reads karukd which is probably a misprint for 
Karutid —^The Editor. 



1.12.194-20 la 


111 


194. Samikfj/d (worthy of being seen), Satpratifthd (esta¬ 
blished in the Sat (existent)), Mivrtti (renunciaton), Jndmpdragd 

(going beyond the shares of knowledge), Dharmasdstrdrthakusald 
(efficient in the interpretation of scriptures on Dharma), 
Dharmajnd {knower of Dharma), Dharmavdhand (having Dharma 
as the vehicle). 

195. Dharmddharmavinirmdtri (maker of Dharma and 
Adharma), Dhdrmikdndm Sivapradd (bestower of weal on the vir¬ 
tuous), Dharmaiakti {Sakti or Potency of Dharma), Dharmamayi 
(full of piety), Vidharmd {of special virtue), Visvadharmini {of 
universal virtue). 

196. Dharmdntard (having another Dharma) Dharmamayi 
(full of virtue), Dharmapurvd (having Dharma as the antecedent), 
Dhandvahd (bestower of wealth), Dharrrwpade^lri (instructress in 
virtue), Dharmdtmd (soul of virtue), Dharmagamyd (approachable 
through virtue), Dharddhard (support of the earth). 

197. Kdpdlisakald (the digit of the lord Kapalin)^, Murti 
(form), Kaldkalitavigrahd (having the body constructed of the 
Kolas (digits)), Sarvasaktivinirmuktd (free from all Saktis), Sarvas- 
aktydsraydlrayd (the supporter of the supporter of all the Saktis ). 

198. Sarvd (all), Sarvesvari (goddess of all), Suk^rtid 
(subtle), Sukfmajndnasvarupini (having the subtle knowledge as 
the form), Pradhdnapurufefd (goddess of Pradhana and Purusa), 
Isa (Controller), Mahddevaikasdk^im (the sole witness of 
Mahadeva). 

199. Saddsivd {Perpetually auspicious), Viyanm urti (having 
the ether as the form), Vedamurti (having the Vedas for her 
form) Amurtikd (Formless). 

Thus with these thousand names, the mountain Himavan 
eulogised her. 

200-20la. He bowed down to her again and again, because 
he was frightened and struck with awe. With palms joined 
in reverence, he said :—“O Paramesvari, on seeing this terrible 
lordly form of yours I am now frightened. Please reveal another 
form.” 


1. v.\. Kapdlisakard —The digit of the lord Kapalin or Siva. 

The v.l. is better and hence accepted. 



112 


Kurma Pur ana 


20lb-202. On being thus requested by the mountain, 
goddess Parvati withdrew her form and showed another form. It 
was as shining and lustrous as the blue lotus. It had the frag¬ 
rance of a blue lotus. 

203. It had only two eyes and arms. It was gentle. It 
was embellished with blue forelocks. The soles of the feet were 
red like lotus. The hands resembling the tender sprouts were 
very red. 

204. It was endowed with the glorious display of delicacy. 
The Tilaka on the forehead was bright. All the limbs bedecked 
with ornaments were very tender and beautiful. 

205. The form was wearing a garland round its bosom. 
The garland was big and golden; light smile flickered on the 
bimba fruit like lips.'The anklets produced a tinkling sound. 

206-207a. Its countenance was gracious-looking, divine 
and a receptacle of infinite grandeur. On seeing such a beauti¬ 
ful form, the excellent mountain shed off his fears. Delighted at 
heart, he addressed the Supreme Goddess: 

Himavdn said : 

207b-208a. Fruitful has been my life to-day. My penance 
has accomplished its purpose to-day, as you, the unmanifest 
have manifested yourself directly in person before my view. 

208b-210a. It was by you that all the universe has been 
created. The world of which Pradhana is the first principle, is 
stationed in you. It merges itself into you again, as you alone 
are the ultimate goal. Some opine that none but you are the 
Prakrti while others aver that you are transcendental to Prakrti, 
others who know the reality, call you Siva as you resort to 
Siva. 

21 Ob-211. In you have originated (the principles) known 
as) the Pradhana, Puru^a, Mahat, Brahma, Isvara (Siva), Avidya 
(Nescience), Miyati (destiny), Maya, Kala and hundreds of 
other things. Indeed, you are the Supreme Power, the infinite 
and Paramesthini. 

212-213. You are devoid of all sorts of differences and 
are the support of all differences. O Goddess of Yoga, depend¬ 
ing on you, Mahadeva (the great god) Mahesvara, creates the 



1.12.214-221 


113 


entire Universe beginning with Pradhana and dissolves it. It is 
in association with you that the lord derives the bliss of his 
own Atman. 

214. You alone are the supreme bliss. You alone are the 
bestower of the greatest bliss. You are the imperishable firma¬ 
ment, the unsullied ethereal light. 

215. You are the auspicious, subtle, eternal, omnipresent, 
great Brahman. You are Indra among all gods. You are 
Brahma among the knower of Brahman. 

216. O Goddess, you are Vayu (the wind god), among 
the powerful ones. You are Kumara (lord Karttikeya), 
among Yogins; among the sages, you are Vasistha and among 
the knowers of the Vedas, you are Vyasa. 

217. Among the followers of the system of Saihkhya, you 
are lord Kapila; among the Rudras, you are Sankara; among 
the Adityas (sons of Aditi), you are Upendra (Visnu); among 
the Vasus, you are Pavaka (fire-god). 

218. Among the Vedas, you are the Samaveda; among 
the metres, you are Gayatri; among lores, you are the spiritual 
science, (Adhyatma Vidya); among the goals, you are the 
ultimate goal (i.e. Salvation). 

219. Among all the Saktis (Potencies), you are Maya; 
among the calculators, you zx&Kala (Time); among all mystic 
secrets, you are Orhkdra and among the castes, the excellent 
Brahmana. 

220. Among the Akamas (stages in life), you are the 
status called the householder; among Isvaras (deities) you are 
Mahesvara; among men, you are the on\y Purusa —male, abiding 

in the heart of all living beings. 

221. O Goddess, among all the Upanisads, you are 
called Guhyopanisad, (v.l. Brahmopanisad)*; among the 
Kalpas, you are Isana and among the Yugas you are the Krta 
Yuga. 


1. There is no Upanisad called Guhya. In the Sakta Upanisads, 
we have Guhya~Kdli (pp. 410-419) and Guhya-sodhdnydsa (p. 421) in the 
Upanisatsangraha. The v.\. Brahmopanisad is Upanisad No. 21 (pp. 167-69) in 
the Upanisat-sangraha. 



114 


Kurma Purina 


222. Among all the paths, you are the solar path; among 
all the words (speeches), you are the goddess Sarasvati; among 
those of comely forms, you are Laksmi; among the wielders of 
Maya, you are Visnu. 

223. Among the chaste women, you are Arundhati; 
among those who fly, you are Suparna (Garuda); among the 
hymns, you are the Puru$a Sukta and among Samans, you are 
the Jye$tha Soman. 

224. You are the Savitri Mantra, among all Japyas 
{Mantras to be repeated); among the Yajur Mantras, you are 
^atamdriya', among the mountains you are the great Meru and 
among serpents, you are Ananta {Se$a). 

225-226. Among all objects you are the Supreme Brah¬ 
man. Everything is pervaded by you. 

I bow unto your form that is devoid of all modifications 
and aberrations; that is beyond the ken of sense-organs, invisible, 
pure and of a single unparallel form, that is without beginning, 
middle or end, infinite, the first and the reality beyond the 
darkness of Avidya. 

227. I seek refuge in that form alone which, those people, 
who have come to a definite conclusion by means of the perfect 
knowledge of Vedanta, observed as a source of the origin of the 
universe, and which is absolute bliss and is called Pranava 
(Om). 

228. I am bowing to that form which has entered the 
inner core of all living beings, which is the cause of the union and 
separation of the Pradhana and Puru$a, which is resplendent, 
which is devoid of birth and destruction and which is termed as 
Prana (vital breath). 

229. I pay obeisance unto the form designated as Puru$a 
—a form which has neither beginning nor end, which is the soul 
of the universe and which is stationed separately and beyond 
Prakrti, which is the supreme soul and of unmanifest body. 

230. I salute to your form which has no difference of 
colour or form, which is the support of everything; which fashions 
the entire universe, which is omnipresent, devoid of birth or 
death; which is subtle, variegated, and which possesses three 
gunas and is called Pradhana. 



1 . 12 . 231-239 


115 


231. O Goddess, I bow unto your form which is the 
first great one, called Purufa, which is stationed in Prakrti, which 
is a seed with the three gums of the Atman, which is endowed 
with all contradictory attributes like prosperity and perfect 
knowledge (v.l. detachment and Dharma). 

232. I pay respect unto your form which is termed as 
■“the Cosmic Egg” which consists of twice seven (i.e. fourteen) 
worlds, and is stationed in waters, which consists of wonderful 
varieties, the only Lord of which is Purusa and which is occu¬ 
pied by different (v.l. innumerable beings). 

233. I bow unto your form named Paramesthin which 
it stationed in the solar sphere, is the cause of the three units of 
time (the past, the present and the future), which is theembodi- 
ment of all the Vedas, which is the only one and the earliest 
and which has fully enveloped all the different worlds by your 
brilliance. 

234. I bow unto the form of yours termed as Narayana 
which has a thousand heads and thousand arms, which is of 
infinite power, which is the ancient Purufa reposing within the 
cosmic waters. 

235. I pay my respects unto your form designated as 
Kdla (death or time), which is terrible due to its curved fangs, 
which is worthy of being worshipped by gods, which has the 
form of the world-destructive fire at the close ofYugas and 
which is the cause of destruction of the entire universe. 

236. I bow unto your form called Sesa which shines with 
its thousand hoods, which is being worshipped even by the 
chiefs of serpents and on which sleeping Janardana is reposing. 

237. I bow down to your form termed Rudra which 
possesses unobstructed glory, which has the odd number (i.e. 
three) of eyes, which is the sole knower of the taste of 
nectar of the bliss of Brahman and which surviving even after 
the end of Yugas, dances in the heavens. 

238. O Bhavani, I bow unto this delicate, white-com- 
plexioned form of yours, devoid of sorrow and without any 
definite shape (v.l. free from impurities and sanctifying). O 
Goddess with lotus-like tender feet worshipped by gods and 
Asuras, you shine in your purity and tenderness. 

239. Obeisance be to you, O great Goddess. Saluta- 



116 


Kurma Parana 


tions to you, O Paramesvari. Bow to goddess Isani. Obei¬ 
sance to you, Siva, again and again. 

240. I am identical with you, and I am having you as 
my support. You alone are my goal. I seek refuge in you alone. 
O Supreme Goddess, be gracious unto me. 

241. In this world, neither Devas nor Danavas are 
equal to me since, thanks to my penance, the mother of the 
universe herself has been born as my daughter. 

242. O Goddess, this Mena, the daughter of the Pitrs, 
has become your mother, although you are the mother of the 
entire universe. O how glorious is my merit !* 

243. O Goddess of the immortal Devas, protect me for 
ever, along with Mena. I bow unto your lotus-like feet. I seek 
refuge in Siva (v.l. Sivam i.e. in you who are the consort of 
Siva). 

244. Ah ! This is my great fortune due to my association 
with the great Goddess. O Mahadevi, command me what I 
should do, O Sahkari (consort of Sankara). 

245. After speaking these words, the Lord of mountains, 
Himavan stood by the side of Girija (Parvati) looking at her 
with palms joined in reverence. 

246. Then, on hearing his words and remembering her 
consort Pasupati (God Sankara) Parvati the Arani (the kindling 
piece of wood i.e. the cause of the origin) of the universe, 
smilingly spoke to her father. 

The Glorious Goddess said : 

247. “O excellent one among the mountains, at the 
outset, listen to this secret instruction regarding Isvara, It is 
resorted to by the expounders of Brahman. 

248-249. My wonderful lordly form has been directly 
perceived by you. It is infinite and endowed with all Saktis 
(potencies). It is highly stimulating. Seek refuge only in it 
with calmness and concentration of mind. Be free from false 
prestige and arrogance. You should establish yourself in that 
form and be devoted to that. 

250. O father, with unswerving single-minded devotion, 
you resort only to that form (of mine) and worship it 

•v.l. aho punyasya gauravam : How great is the glory of merit (virtues). 



1.12.251-258 


117 


perpetually by means of performing sacrifices, penance and 
charitable gifts. 

251. Visualise only that one (form) mentally. Meditate 
on it, worship that, according to my instructions. I shall relieve 
you of your worldly existence {Sarhsara) and sufferings, O sin¬ 
less one. 

252. Ere long I shall lift you up from the ocean ofworldly 
existence—you who have resorted to the divine Yoga by means 
of deep devotion.* 

253. O excellent mountain, I am attainable to you only 
through meditation, the path of desireless action, of devotion 
and of spiritual knowledge, but not otherwise through crores of 
ritualistic acts. 

254. For the sake of liberation for Sarhsara, carry out 
properly forever all the duties prescribed in Srutis and Smrtis. 
Do them well—the rites and duties meant for the four castes 
and stages of life, in combination with spiritual knowledge. 

255. It is from Dharma that Bhakti {devotion) is generated. 
The supreme goal viz. Brahman is attained through Bhakti. 
Dharma is the activity like the performance of sacrifices and 
other duties prescribed in the Srutis and Smrtis. 

256. Dharma does not arise out of anything else. It is 
from the Vedas that the Dharma shines forth. Hence, one who is 
desirous ofliberation and who seeks Dharma should resort to the 
Vedas^^ which are my embodiment. 

257. It is my own ancient and supreme potency that 
is termed as the Vedas. That potency arises and functions at 
the beginning of creation, in the forms of Rk, Tajus and Sdman. 

258. It is in order to protect those Vedas that the birth¬ 
less Lord Brahma created Brahmanas and others, and engaged 
them in their respective duties. 


*v.l. aharh vai mat-par an bhaktan aiSvararh yogam asthitan ‘I shall verily 
lift up from Sarhsara my devotees deeply attached to and dependent on 
me and who have established themselves in divine Yoga.’ 

1. v.l. dharmdrtharh Sraddhayd Vedam dirayet / 

‘For the sake of achieving dharma, one should resort to the Veda. 



118 


Kurma Purdna 


259. The hells such as Tamisra and others were created 
beneath the earth by god Brahma for those people who do not 
practise the duties prescribed in my Dharma. 

260. There is no scripture other than the Vedas which 
lays down what is Dharma. A person who takes delight in 
other things (not sanctioned by the Vedas), should not be even 
talked to by twice-born persons viz. Brahmanas, Ksatriyas and 
Vaisyas. 

261. Those various scriptures which are contrary to 
Srutis and Smrtis seen in this world, are based on Tamo-gum or 
ignorance. Belief in them or practising in accordance with them 
is a Tdmasa activity. 

262. They i.e. those contrary to Vedas are the cults of 
Kapala, Bhairava, (v.l. Pancaratras), Yamala, Varna, and 
Arhata and others similar to these also. 

263. In another incarnation of mine, these scriptureshaving 
been promulgated by me to delude the people who themselves 
try to mislead other persons by propagating their false scrip¬ 
tures. 

264. What is prescribed inthe^mrftjas activity belonging 
to the Vedas, should be pursued by those who are the most 
excellent ones among the knowers of meaning and the 
significance of the Vedas. Those men who strenuously pursue 
those activities are liked by me. 

265. It is out of compassion (and for the welfare of) all 
the four castes that the great personality Svayambhuva Manu 
himself formerly promulgated the Code of Dharma to the sages, 
at my behest. 

266. After hearing the excellent Dharmas from his mouth 
(as propounded by him), other sages also composed other 
scriptures as codes of Dharmas or pious behaviour, for establish¬ 
ing the Dharma. 

267. When at the end of Yugas, these codes vanish, the 
sages would compose them in every Yuga at the instance of god 
Brahma. 

268. O King, at the behest of god Brahma, eighteen 
major Purdms have been recounted by Vyasa and others. Dharma 
is well established (and expounded) in them. 



1.12.269-278 


119 


269. Other minor Puranas have been narrated by his 
(Vyasa’s) disciples. The author of each of these treatises is the 
knowerof the Dhaxma-Sdstras, in every Yuga. 

270. Sik?a (phonetics), (the rules regarding holy 

rites), Vyakarana (Grammar), Nirukta (Etymology), Chandas 
(Prosody), Jyoti^a (Astronomy) and Nyaya Vidya (Logic) (v. 1. 
Mimarhsa'^) all these are for the promotion of the study of all 
scriptures. 

271. Thus there are fourteen^ lores which have been 
promulgated along with the four Vedas. Dharma does not exist 
elsewhere outside these texts, O excellent Brahmanas. 

272. Thus, it is at my behest that Manu, Vyasa and 
others established Dharma as expounded by god Brahma, till 
the dissolution of the world of living beings takes place. 

273. When the time of the dissolution of the world 
arrives, all these great-souled ones, after attaining realization of 
the Atman, enter the great region along with Brahma. 

274. Hence, for thesake of carrying out duties prescribed 
by Dharma, one should resort to the Vedas in every possible 
way. Knowledge accompanied by Dharma shall reveal the great 
Brahman. 

275-278. Persons who eschew unholy attachment and 
seek refuge only in me, who worship me exclusively forever 
with devotion, are established in the divine Yoga of Isvara, 
are merciful towards all living beings, are quiescent, full of self- 
control, devoid of malice and false prestige, are intelligent 


1. Although Mimdmsd is given as a v.l. for Sarvesam, the term 
Upabrrhharta can be taken as including both Purarta and Mlmamsa to make up 
the number fourteen of Vidyds. 

2. KP’s list of fourteen vidyds is : 4 Vedas, 6 Ahgas, Dharma- 
Sastra, Purana, Nyaya, Mimarhsa. The fourteen lores are enumerated in 
VP. III.6.28 as follows : 

angdni Vedds catvdro mimdmsd nydya-vistarah / 
purdnarh dharma-sdstram ca vidyd hyetds caturdasa 11 
But in the next verse, the following four ‘lores’ or ‘sciences’ are added: 

(1) Ayur-veda (science of medicine). 

(2) Dhanur-veda (military science), 

(3) Gdndharva (science of Music) and 

(4) Arthasdstra (Political economy or Economics and Politics) . 

Thus the number of lores is stated to be eighteen. 



120 


K urma Pur ana 


ascetics observing praiseworthy vows and penance with their 
minds fixed on me and their souls concentrated in me, are 
interested in expounding spiritual knowledge about me—In case 
of such persons whether they are recluses, forest-hermits, house¬ 
holders or religious students ere long, I dispel the entire darkness 
(of Avidya) from their sphere, by means of the lamp of spiritual 
knowledge and destroy the delusion that rises up in them, as 
they are intelligent and persevering. 

279. By shaking off their darkness (of ignorance) by 
means of perfect knowledge, they enjoy (spiritual) bliss perpe¬ 
tually, inasmuch as they are fully identical .with me. They are 
not bom again and again in the Sarhsara (as they are liberated). 

280. Therefore, devoting yourself to me in every way 
and being fully absorbed in me, worship me exclusively, seek¬ 
ing me mentally as your refuge, (v.l. along with Mena). 

281. If you are incapable of meditating on my unchanging 
lordly form, seek refuge in my great form beginning with Kala 
(Time), (v.l. kaladhyam —perfect-form). 

282. Hence, O my father, stabilise yourself in that form 
of mine which comes within the ken of your mind. Be devoted 
to that and be engaged in worshipping it. 

283-284. My perfect form which is pure consciousness, 
entire auspiciousness, devoid of all conditioning factors, the 
imperishable (or nectarine), the supreme goal, can be secured 
with difficulty, by making assiduous efforts for spiritual knowl¬ 
edge. Only those who comprehend that spiritual knowledge can 
enter into me. 

285. With the intellect concentrated on it, with the 
Atman dwelling on it and stabilised therein, and having that as 
the ultimate resort, they shake off all their sins, by means of 
perfect knowledge and attain that stage from which there is no 
return to Sarhsara. 

286. O Lord of Kings, without resorting to me, that 
great state of bliss, the region devoid of impurities, is not 
attained. Hence, seek refuge in me. 

287. O protector of the earth, by worshipping me in 
identity or in separateness, or in both ways, you will attain that 
region, (v.l. my region). 



1.12.288-299 


121 


288. O leader of Kings, without resorting to me that 
Reality which is pure by nature and auspicious, is not compre¬ 
hended. Hence, seek refuge in me. 

289. You should hence propitiate strenuously the im¬ 
perishable and eternal divine form. Thereafter, you will eschew 
the blindness of ignorance (v.l. bondage). 

290. Worship devotedly Siva everywhere and forever, 
physically, mentally and verbally. Thereafter, due to that purity, 
you will attain to his region. 

291-293. Those who are deluded by my Maya do not 
attain that Siva, devoid of beginning and end, the great Mahes- 
vara, the unborn, who abides as the Atman of all living beings, 
is the support of all, unsullied, perpetual bliss, without any 
phantoms and semblance, attributeless, beyond darkness of igno¬ 
rance, not dualistic, steady, perfect and undiversified Brahman. 
He is both self-comprehensible and incomprehensible and sta¬ 
tioned in the highest firmament. 

294. Those who are always enveloped by my Maya with 
the subtle darkness of ignorance, are born again and again in 
the terrible ocean in the worldly existence. 

295. O King, it is with single-minded devotion and 
perfect knowledge that the Brahman should besought, for warding 
off the bondage of birth. 

296-297. One should eschew egotism, malice, passion, 
fury, covetousness and inclination towards evil. One should 
adopt detachment and should perceive his Atman in all living 
beings and all living beings within own his Atman. By Seeing the 
universal Atman within the individual Atman, one becomes com¬ 
petent to attain Brahman. 

298. One who has become one with the Brahman revels in 
his own soul, bestows fearlessness on all living beings. He attains 
spiritual powers and prosperity and great devotion, not 
conceiving anyone else (i.e. is exclusively devoted to me). 

299. That Supreme Reality, the lordly, unsullied, per¬ 
fect Brahman is perceived by him. Becoming free from all ties of 
all worldly existence, he stays established only in the Brahman 
itself. 



122 


Kurma Purdna^ 


300. The great Siva is the receptacle of the Supreme- 
Brahman. That great lord is non-different, unchanging and the 
support of the Atman. 

301. O King, either through the path of perfect knowl¬ 
edge, or through the path of action or through that of devotion 
or through Yogic practice, seek asylum in ISvara for the purpose 
of liberation from all worldly existence. 

302. O Lord of mountains, this is the secret instruction 
that is imparted unto you by me. After pondering over this, it 
behoves you to do as you please. 

303-304. Sprung really from the great lord, on being 
prayed for by gods, I censured Dak}a, my father, who despised 
Mahesvara and for the purpose of establishing Dharma and. 
urged by your propitiation, I am now born of the body of Mena 
after resorting to you as my father. 

305. At the bidding of the great-souled god Brahma, the 
universal Atman, you will give me to Rudra in the Svayarhvara 
type of marriage with him (where the bride selects her partner 
for life from among the suitors). 

306. O King, on account that alliance, all Devos 
(gods) including Indra, will bow unto you. O father, god Sankara 
will become pleased thereby. 

307. Making all possible efforts, realise me who am a 
close companion of lord Siva. After worshipping lord Isana 
(Siva), seek refuge in him who is worthy of being the resort. 

308. Thus addressed by the goddess of Devas, 
Himavan, the king of mountains, bowed down his head before 
the goddess. With palms joined in reverence, he spoke again: 

309. “O Consort of the Supreme Ruler ! Be pleased m 
expound to me the Yoga pertaining to Mahesvara, the knowl¬ 
edge of the soul and the means of meditating on him.” 

310. The great goddess narrated in details and in pre¬ 
cision to him, the great knowledge, the excellent Yoga of Atman 
and the means thereof. 

311. On hearing that great perfect knowledge from the 
lotus-like face of the mother of the worlds, the Lord of mountains 
who was worshipped by the entire world, became interested in 
Yogic meditation. 



1.12.312-323 


123 


312. As a result of the greatness of his great fortune and 
at the behest of god Brahma, he gave Parvatl, the chaste lady, 
unto Mahesvara (Siva), in the presence of all Devas. 

313-314. He who with devotion reads this chapter re¬ 
counting the greatness of goddess Parvatl in the presence 
of Siva, becomes pure by the merger of his heart in the goddess 
and shall be free from all sins. He will be endowed with divine 
Yoga. He will go beyond the world of Brahma and shall attain 
the abode of the goddess. 

315. He who reads this Hymn near Brahmanas with con¬ 
centration of mind and mental purity becomes free from all sins. 

316-318. Having understood (the correct significance 
of) the thousand and eight names of the goddess enumerated 
above and contemplating her as abiding in the sphere of the 
sun and worshipping her with scents, flowers and other objects, 
a twice-born person should properly remember the Supreme 
state of the goddess and her position with Mahesvara and with 
mind concentrated exclusively in her should constantly mutter 
these epithets. Thereby, at the time of his death, he will 
regain his memory and attain to the highest Brahman. 

319. Or the Brahmana shall be reborn in the pure 
family of a Brahmana and thanks to the greatness of the pre¬ 
vious impressions, he shall attain the spiritual lore about the 
Brahman {Brahma-Vidya). 

320. After attaining the great divine Yoga of Parames- 
vara, he becomes quiescent and fully controlled and attains. 
Sdyujya (identity) with Siva. 

321. He who, at each of three (morning, midday and 
evening) sessions of Homa, oblates offerings one per each name 
(v.l. epithet of the goddess mentioned above) becomes free 
from the evil effects of epidemics (like cholera) and malefic 
planets. 

322. One who is desirous of attaining prosperity shall 
duly perform the worship of the goddess Parvatl and repeat 
Japa every day for a year, with great attention. 

323. After worshipping the three-eyed Sambhu with 
great devotion side by side with her, the devotee derives great 
fortune, thanks to the grace of Mahadeva. 



124 


Kurma Purana 


324. Hence, in order to ward ofT all sins, the thousand 
names of the goddess should be recited as used for Japa, by the 
twice-born ones in all earnestness. 

Suta said : 

325. “O Brahmanas, (as a casual reference) the 
excellent greatness of the goddess has been recounted incidently. 
Henceforth, listen and understand the creation of subjects 
by Bhrgu and others.” 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

The Progeny of Dakfa's Daughters^ {Khyati and others) 

Suta said : 

1. Laksmi, the beloved of Narayana, was born of 
Khyati and Bhrgu. Their sons Lords Dhatr and Vidhatr were 
the auspicious (blessed) sons-in-law of Meru. 

2. Ayati and Niyati were the daughters of the noble- 
souled Meru. They married Dhatr and Vidhatr and two sons 
were born to them. 

3. They were Prana and Mrkandu. Markandeya was 
Mrkandu’s son. Vedasiras was the brilliant son of Prana. 

4. Sambhuti bore the son Purnamasa to Marici as well 
as four daughters endowed with all auspicious characteristics. 

5. Tusti was the eldest. Then came Vrsti, Krsti and 
Apaciti. The two sons of Purnamasa were Virajas and Parvata. 

6-10. Ksama bore the following sons to Prajapati 
Pulaha viz. Kardama, the greates t of them, Sahisnu an excellent 


1. This,topic has been described in KP elsewhere also, vide supra 
Ch. 8. 11-30, and infra 1.14.54-64, 1.16. This part of creation is found 
(sometimes practically in the same words, in various Puranas e.g. VP. I. 
15.9-154, Bh.P. VI. 6.1-45, AP. 18.27 ff and ch. 19 to mention a few. 



1.13.11-20 


125 


sage. The younger of them was also an ascetic who wiped off 
all sins through penance. 

Anasuya gave birth to sinless sons to Atri. They were 
Soma, Durvasas and the Yogin Dattatreya. 

Smrti, endowed with all good and auspicious characteris¬ 
tics, gave birth to Sinivall, Kuhu, Raka and Anumati from 
Ahgiras—Holy lord Pulastya begot Dambhoji of Priti. 

In the previous birth, in Svayambhuva Manvantara, he 
was Agastya and was remembered as such, as well as another 
son Devabahu. He had a daughter named Dvitlya (or v.l. 
Sannati but referred to as ‘Santati’ in the next verse). 

11. Santati gave birth to sixty thousand sons from Kratu. 
All of them were of sublimated sexuality and are called 
Ba (Va) lakhilyas. 

12-13. Vasistha procreated seven sons of his wife 
Orja, as well as a daughter named Pundarlkaksa endowed with 
every elegance of beauty. The seven sons of great prowess were 
Rajas, Matra (v.l. Uha), Urdhvabahu, Savana, Anahga, Sutapas 
and Sukra. 

14. Svaha bore three dignified sons of great prowess, O 
Brahmanas, to Vahni (fire), the son ofBrahma and of the form 
of Rudra. 

15. They were Pavaka, Pavamana and Suciragni or 
Suci. The fire produced by attrition is called Pavamana; the fire 
from lightning is called as Pavaka. 

16-17. What burns and shines in the Sun is called Suciragni. 
Their further progeny were forty-five in number. They, along 
with Pavamana, Pavaka, Suci and he who was the father of 
these three, are glorified as the “Forty-nine Fires.” 

18. All of them are said to be ascetics. All have shares 
in the oblations offered in sacrifices. All are stated to be of 
the nature of Rudra, with the forehead marked by the three 
Tripundra lines. 

19-20. Manes {Pitrs) viz. Ayajvana (non-performers of 
sacrifices) and Yajvana (performers of sacrifices) are the sons 
of god Brahma. They are respectively classed as Agni^vdttas 
(non-possessors of fire) and Barhisads (possessors of fire). Svadha 
bore them two daughters Mena and DharinI (v.l. VaitarinI). 



126 


Kurma Pur ana 


Both of them were expounders of Brahman (or the Vedas) and 
experts in Yogic meditation. 

21. Mena gave birth to Mainaka and Kraunca his 
younger brother. Gahga the sole sanctifier of all the worlds, was 
born of Himavan. 

22. Through the power of the fire of his Yoga, he obtain¬ 
ed Goddess Mahesvari as his daughter. The excellent great 
glory of the goddess has been precisely described before. 

23. Dharini, with face resembling a lotus, was the wife 
of king Meru. The lords Dhatrand Vidhatrwere both the sons- 
in-law of Meru. 

24. This lineage of the daughters of Daksa has been re¬ 
counted to you by me just now. Now listen to and understand 
the creation of Manu. 


CHAPTEK FOURTEEN 

The Race of Svayambhuva MamP 


Suta said : 

1. “Satarupa bore to Svayambhuva Manu two sons of 
great prowess and the knowers of dharma. Th&y v/ere Priyavrata 
and Uttana-Pada. 

2. Uttana-Pada had a son named Dhruva. Thanks to his 
devotion to Narayana the Lord of the universe, he attained an 
excellent abode. 

3. Sisti and Bhavya were born of Dhruva and Sambhu 
was born of Bhavya. 

Succhaya bore five sinless sons to Sisti. 


1. The genealogy of Svayambhuva Manu has been described 
previously in Ch. 8.1-13. Like the progeny of Daksa, this topic is found in 
most other such as VP.1.7.16-38j Va. P.I. 1-7-23, Mt. P. Ch. 3, 

Bh.P. Ill, 12.53-56 (to mention a few). 



1.14.4-16a 


127 


4-5. At the instance ofVasistha, that gentle lady had 
performed a severe penance and propitiated Visnu, Janardana, 
the Purusa embodied in Salagrama stone. The five sons were 
Hipu, Ripunjaya, Vipra, Kapila (v.l. Vrkala) and Vrsatejas. 
They were all pure, devoted to Narayana and the protectors of 
their duties. 

6-9a. Ripu’s queen gave birth to the mighty Caksusa of 
■every brilliance. He begot on Puskarini, the daughter of the 
great-souled progenitor [Prajdpati) Virana, an extremely hand¬ 
some son Caksusa Manu. To (Nadvala) the daughter of the 
progenitor Vairaja, ten mightily valorous sons were born to 
Manu. They were Uru, Puru, Satadyumna, Tapasvin, Satyavak, 
Suci, Agnistut, Atiratra, Sudyumna and Abhimanyu. 

9b. Agneyi bore six very powerful sons to Uru. 

10. They were—Anga, Sumanas, Khyati, Kratu, Angirasa 
and Siva. Afterwards Vena was born of Anga. Vainya (alias 
Prthu) was born of Vena. 

1 l-12a. He became famous by the name of Prthu. He 
-was a very powerful protector of subjects. With a desire 
for the benefit of subjects, the earth was milked by him 
formerly. 

It was at the behest of Brahma tha the milked the Earth 
along with the very powerful Lord of Devas. 

12b-13. \n the. Paitdmaha (pertaining to Brahma) sacrifice 
of Vena’s son that was performed formerly, Suta the knower of 
Puranas was born^. He was Hari himself who had assumed that 
form, by means of his Maya. He is the expounder of all sacred 
lores and the knower of Dharma and lovingly respectful to his 
preceptor. 

14-15a. O excellent sages, know me to be that person, 
the eternal being born formerly. In this Manvantara, Hari, 
the ancient Purusa who became Vyasa, Krsna Dvaipayana, 
narrated (the Puranas) to me. 

15b-16a. At the bidding of Aja (Brahma) all the Sutas 
born in my family and deprived of their eligibility to use Vedas, 
adopted expounding of the Puranas as their avocation. 


1. For Suta being an incarnation of Visnu vide supra 1.6. 



128 


Kurma Pur ana 


16b-17. Prthu, the son of Vena, was intelligent and 
truthful. He had conquered his sense-organs. He was an em¬ 
peror of great splendour. He protected his Dharma. Even from 
his childhood, he cherished devotion to Narayana. 

18. Going up to the mountain Govardhana,^ he perform¬ 
ed a penance after subduing the sense-organs. Lord Visnu the 
wielder of a conch, a discus and the iron club was delighted at 
his penance. 

19-20. Coming to the King, Lord Damodara himself said 
thus : ‘‘Undoubtedly, thanks to my grace, two righteous sons 
will be born to you. They will be handsome and be the most 
excellent of all wielders of weapons.” After saying this Hrsikesa 
(i.e. Visnu) regained his own nature (i.e. vanished). 

21. The son of Vena had unswerving devotion. He 
ruled over his kingdom in accordance with the injunctions of 
the Vedas constantly thinking over and remembering 
Madhusudana (or Visnu). 

22. Ere long, his wife (Antardhana) of slender limbs 
and pure smiles gave birth to Sikhandin and Havirdhana 
through Antardhana (internal meditation). 

23. A son who became famous by the name Susila was 
born to Sikhandin. He was righteous, endowed with beauty and 
a master of the Vedas and the Vedahgas. 

24. He studied the Vedas duly and virtuously and was 
established in penance. As good luck would have it, that knower 
of Dharma became inclined towards renunciation. 

25. Eager that he was in the Self study (of the Vedas) 
and the performance of penance he resorted to holy centres. 

Once he went to the higher plateau of the Himavan frequented 
by the Siddhas. 


1. Govardhana is a hill, eighteen miles from Vrndavana in 
Mathura district. It was in the village ‘Paitho’ that Krsna is said to have 
held up that ‘mountain’ on his little finger and protected cows and cowherds 
against Indra’s wrathful showers (Bh. P. X.25.19-28) VP.V. 11 and KV 2 
Ch. 18). 



1.14.26-35 


129 


26. There he saw a holy forest named Dhamnavana^ which 
affords the achievement of Dharma—a place accessible to the 
Yogins and inaccessible to the haters of Brahman. 

27. A very holy and pure river named Mandakini 
flowed there. It was endowed with clusterous growth of red 
and blue lotuses and was bedecked with the hermitages of the 
Siddhas. 

28. On its southern bank, he saw a beautiful and very 
holy hermitage occupied by leading sages and Yogins and felt 
delighted. 

29-30. He took his holy dip in the water of Manda¬ 
kini. He propitiated the god-like Pitrs: (manes). He worshipped 
Mahadeva with red and blue lotuses and other flowers. He 
meditated on Isana stationed in the orb of the Sun, after join¬ 
ing his hands together in reverence over his head. Looking at 
the radiant Sun, he eulogised the Supreme Ruler. 

31. He propitiated Girisa (god Siva) by means of 
(reciting) Rudradhyaya and the CanVa (narrative) of Rudra, as 
well as by many different kinds of hymns of Sambhu, taken 
from the Vedas. 

32. In the meantime (while praying) he saw the great 
sage named Svetasvatara^ coming. He was the most excellent 
among the great devotees of Pasupati (god Siva). 

33. He had applied Bhasma (ashes) all over his limbs. 
The loin cloth was the only covering garment he had. His body 
was emaciated due to the performance of penance. He was 
wearing a white sacred thread. 

34. After concluding his eulogy of Sambhu, he bowed 
down his head at his feet. His eyes were rendered dim due to 
tears (ofjoy). With palms joined in reverence, he spoke these 
words. 

35. “I am contented, blessed. Since the leading sage and 
Yogin, the holy Lord, the most excellent among the knowers of 
Yoga has been personally seen by me. 


1. It is on the Southern bank of the river Mandakini on the 
Himalayas—De., pp. 56-57. 

2. SvetdSvatara —Probably the author of the Upanisad known after 
him. Here he is represented as a great Pasupata teacher {mahapaiiipatottama) 
and may be perhaps the same as the disciple of Siva in infra I. 52. 



130 


Kurma Pur dm 


36. Ah ! My good luck is indeed great. My penances 
have become fruitful. What shall I do ? O sinless one, I am 
your disciple. Save me.” 

37. He blessed the King of very good conduct and 
■gentle behaviour. He accepted him as his disciple, for he had 
■wiped off all his sins, thanks to his penance. 

38. The clever sage made him perform all rites 
pertaining to sannjdsa and then bestowed on him the divine 
knowledge (about Siva) for which the holy rites had been laid 
down in his own branch of the Vedas. 

39. He gave him the entire essence of the Vedas, that 
secures the release of the Pasu (Individual soul) from the Pdia 
(the binding noose of Avidyd). It is famous as the Antydiramd}- 
(the last stage of life). It has been performed by Brahma and 
others. 

40. Glancing at all his disciples, those who resided in 
that hermitage viz. Brahmanas, Ksattriyas and Vaisyas who 
were all interested in maintaining celibacy, he said thus: 

41. “It is only after studying the branch of knowledge 
initiated by me that the Yogins attain Mahadeva after medi¬ 
tating on the universe as the creation of the Lord.^ 

42. It is here that the Lord Mahadeva sporting along 
with his consort Uma, occupies the place, with a desire to 
bless the devotees. 

43. Formerly, Narayana himself, the creator of the entire 
universe, propitiated Mahadeva here with a desire for the welfare 
of the worlds. 

44. It is after propitiating Lord Isana (Siva) the deity 
of even Devas, that Devas and Danavas attained great mira¬ 
culous powers here. 

45. It was here itself that Marici and all other sages 
perceived Mahesvara through the power of their penance and 
attained eternal perfect knowledge. 


1. It is probably Samyasa. HD. II. 1. 417 gives a number of 
synonyms for sannydsin viz. parivrdf, parivrdjaka, bhiksu, muni, yati but this des¬ 
criptive name of dSrama is not given in it. 

2. Instead of this reading {dhydyanto) viSvam aiSvaram^ the Ft. Note 
(p. 25 in our Vehkatesvara Press—Text) gives a better reading : mskalam 
divam I “meditating on the perfect, indivisible Siva”. 



1.14.46-57 


131 


46. Hence, O leading king, you too stay here practis¬ 
ing penance and Yoga. You stay with me permanently and 
thereby you will attain Siddhi.” 

47. After addressing thus, the leading Brahmana meditat¬ 
ed on Lord Siva, the wielder of the Pinaka bow. He then 
imparted precisely the great Mantra for the achievement of 
every thing ( v.l. of his objectives). 

48. That Mantra suppresses all sins. It is the essence 
of the Vedas. It yields liberation. It is the holy Mantra begin¬ 
ning with the word Agni. It has been initiated (made to 
function) by the sages. 

49. At his instance King Susila, endowed with faith, 
became a devotee of Pasupati and was engaged in the study of 
the Vedas. 

50. He applied the sacred ashes (^Aorma) all over his 
body. He lived on roots, fruits and bulbous roots. He was quie¬ 
scent and had full self-control. He subdued his anger and resorted 
to the procedure of renunciation. 

51. Havirdhana begot a son named Pracinabarhis in 
Agneyi. He was a master of the science of archery. 

52. Lord Pracinabarhis, who was the most excellent among 
the wielders of all sorts of weapons, begot of the daughter of 
the ocean, ten sons. 

53. They were well known as Pracetasas. They were 
kings of reputed power. Devoted to Narayana, they studied 
their respective Vedas. 

54. Daksa who had been the blessed son of Brahma 
formerly and a progenitor as well, was reborn of Marisa and 
the ten Pracetas collectively. 

55. That Daksa carried on a verbal dispute with the 
intelligent Rudra, the great Isa. He was cursed by Rudra and 
he thereby became the son of Pracetas. 

56. Seeing that Daksa was coming to his residence, he 
along with his consort personally accorded him befitting worship. 

57. Then the son of Brahma (Daksa) who had been 
infested with the Tamo-Guna yearned for more worship than he 
deserved. He became infuriated and went away to his house (in 
a huff). 



132 


Kurma Pur ana 


58. Once, when Sati had come to her own house, the 
evil-minded Daksa used word of abuse to her and angrily scolded 
her along with her husband. 

59. ‘‘All my other sons-in-law are superior to your hus¬ 
band the wielder of the Pinaka bow. You too are an evil 
daughter among my good daughters. Hence go away from this 
house (back to your place) in the manner you had come. 

60. On hearing his words, the goddess, the beloved of 
Sankara censured her father, Daksa, and burned herself by 
means of her own self (by Yogic process). 

61. After bowing to her husband Pasupati, the wearer of 
elephant’s hide, she became the daughter of Himavan, being 
delighted at his penance. 

62. On knowing her (dead in this manner) Lord Rudra, 
Kara, the dispeller of dejectedness of those who resort to him, 
became infuriated and after coming to his house, cursed Daksa. 

63. ‘After abandoning this body, born of Brahma, be 
born in the family of Ksattriyas. You will be a foolish-minded 
person and will beget a son of your own daughter.’ 

64. Imprecating him thus, Mahadeva went to the moun¬ 
tain Kailasa. Daksa too, the son of the self-bom deity (Brahma) 
became Pracetasa (son of the Pracetasas) in due course. 

65. Thus all details of creation of Svayambhuva Manu, 
upto Daksa have been narrated to you. This story dispels the 
sins of those who hear this.” 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 

Destruction of Dak$a's Sacrifice 

MaimUeyas ( The residents of Naimi^a forest) said : 

1. “O Suta, narrate in detail the origin of Devas, 
Danavas, Gandharvas, serpents and the Raksasas in Vaivasvata 
Manvantara. 



1.15.2-9 


133 


2. O highly intelligent one, what did Daksa, the royal 
son of Pracetas, who had been cursed formerly by Sambhu, do? 
We wish to hear it now.” 

Suta said : 

3. I shall recount the creation of the subjects in con¬ 
tinuity with the previous kalpa as mentioned by Narayana. 
The story dispels sins and it will be sustained in all the three 
units of Time (i.e. the past, present and future). 

4. On being cursed by Sambhu, Daksa, the Royal son of 
Pracetas, censured Bhava due to the previous enmity and 
performed a Tdjna (sacrifice) at Gangadvara (i.e. near the source 
of the river Ganga). 

5. All Devas were invoked along with Visnu in order to 
receive their respective shares. All leading sages came there 
along with all other sages. 

6. On seeing the entire host of Devas arrived, except¬ 
ing Sankara, the Brahmana sage named Dadhica spoke thus to 
Pracetasa (Daksa) . 

Dadhica said : 

7. “How is it that Rudra is not being worshipped now 
duly—Rudra, the lord, whose behests every one beginning with 
Brahma and ending with the Pisacas (Ghosts), carries out?” 

Dakfa said : 

8. “In all Tajhas the share to Sankara is not allotted. 
Sankara is not being worshipped because there are no Mantras 
of Sankara along with his wife.”^ 

9. The infuriated great sage laughed at Daksa derisively 
and said these words even as all Devas were listening. The 
sage possessed all types of knowledge himself. He was as if an 
embodiment of knowledge). 


1. This legend recording a struggle between the followers of 
TajHa-cult and the Saivites and the successful assertion of Rudra’s claim in 
the institution of sacrifice, is found in the Mbh. Sdnti. 283 and a number of 
Puranas such as Bh. P. IV 5, Vayu 1.30.74-174, NP. II .66.5-17 and 
others. It is probable that there may be some historical basis to this inci¬ 
dent which is mythologically represented in these ancient works. 



134 


Kurma Pur ana 


Dadhica said : 

10. “How is it that Sankara is not known well and 
hence not worshipped by means of all Tajnas ? It is he who 
is known as Parameivara and it is from him, the soul of the 
universe that every thing begins to function, {v.l. He is the 
source of every thing). 

Daksa said : 

11. “Indeed he is not Sankara (benefactor), but is 
Rudra, the annihilator. He is only the Tamasa (possessor of 
Tamo-gam) Hara. He is known as a naked mendicant holding 
the human skull. It is not proper to call him the soul of the 
universe. 

12. Indeed Isvara, the lord and creator of the universe 
is Lord Narayana, Hari. This glorions Lord of Sattvic nature is 
worshipped in all holy rites.” 

Dadhica said ; 

13. “Is not this lord of a thousand rays (the sun-god) 
seen by you ? He is the sole annihilator of worlds. He is 
Paramesvara in the form of Kala. 

14. It is him that the righteous scholars, the expounders 
of the Brahman, pray to. He is the witness of everything. He is 
the body of Sankara of intense brilliance and he is of the form of 
Kala. 

15. He is Rudra, the great god. He is the kind-hearted 
Hara, Kapalin {v. 1. of matted hair). He is the lord Aditya, 
the sun-god. He is the blue-necked and Vilohita (very ruddy). 

16. He is eulogised as one of a thousand rays by the 
singers of Saman hymns, the Hotrs and the Adhvaryus. See 
him. ols Rudramurti (one of the terrible form), of the creator of 
the universe and an embodiment of three Vedas.” 

Dakfa said ; 

17. “The twelve Adityas have come here as the sharers 
in the Tajha. All of them should be known as suns. There is 
no other Sun.” 



1.15.18-32 


135 


18. When he said thus, the sages who had come to assist 
him as well as to witness the rajna said to Daksa, “That is 
exactly so.” 

19-20. Their minds were overwhelmed with Tamas. 
They could not see the Bull-bannered deity. They were in thou¬ 
sands, in hundreds. Most of them again and again censured 
Hara, the lord of living beings. They denounced thus even 
the Vedic Mantras. They honoured the statement of Daksa, 
because they had been deluded by Visnu’s Maya. 

21. Vasava (Indra) and all other Devas came there for 
their shares. They did not see Lord Isana (Siva) except Nara- 
yana, Hari. 

22. Even as all of them were watching. Lord Hiranya- 
garbha (born out of a golden egg) Brahma, the most excellent 
among the knowers of Brahman vanished, in a moment. 

23. When lord Brahma vanished, Daksa personally sought 
refuge in Narayana, Hari, the saviour of the worlds. 

24. Then the fearless Daksa resumed the Tajna. Lord 
Visnu, the protector of those who seek refuge, was his patron 
deity (the saviour). 

25. Observing that all Devas and sages were antagonistic 
to Rudra, the holy sage Dadhica spoke thus to Daksa: 

26. “There is no doubt in this that a man incurs great 
sin in worshipping one who is not worthy of worship and in not 
worshipping those who deserve worship. 

27. The terrible punishment meted out by divine interces¬ 
sion is sudden and terrible in that place where bad men are 
received well and good men are slighted.” 

28. After saying thus, the Brahmana sage cursed those 
Brahmanas who were antagonistic to Isvara (Siva) and who 
had come there to render assistance to Daksa. 

29-32. “Since you have excluded the Supreme Lord (Siva) 
from the Vedas, since the great god honoured in all the worlds 
has been censured, all of you, those who are antagonistic to 
Isvara, ••.ill be excluded from the Trayi (three Vedas). Those 
who cansure the path of the Lord with the minds viciously 
inclined towards bad scriptures, will be harassed by the defects. 



136 


Kurma Pur ana 


of Kali, after the advent of the Kali age. Your learning is 
false; your conduct of life is false. You swagger about your own 
false knowledge. You will be forced to abandon your entire 
power of penance and go to Naraka (Hell). Even though you 
take refuge in him, Hrsikesa (Visnu) will turn his face against 
you”.i 

33. After saying thus, the Brahmana sage, the storehouse 
of penance ceased (to speak). He mentally thought of Rudra, 
the destroyer of all sins. 

34. In the meantime, the all-knowing goddess learnt this 
and spoke to the great god, Mahesvara, her husband as the 
lord of Pasus. 

Sri Devi said : 

35. O Sankara, Daksa who had been my father in the 
previous birth is performing a Tajna after censuring your status 
and your own self^ 

36. The gods and the great sages are assembled there 
rendering him assistance. Please destroy that sacrifice immediaely. 
I am choosing this boon. 

37. Thus implored by the goddess, the great Lord, the 
Lord of Devas, created Rudra immediately with a desire to 
destroy the Yajha of Daksa. 


1. This protest against non-inclusion of god Siva'in the invitees of 
the sacrifice by sage Dadhica is not in the Bh. P. or NP. (both Vaisnava 
Puranas) but is found in the Vdyu 1.30.103-106 (but Dadhica’s curse to all 
sages is not intheVayu), in SK. P. MaheSvara Kkapda 1.2.14-32 (but no 
curse by Dadhica but a simple walk-out), in SP. Rudra Samhitd 27.26-50 too, 
Dadhica protests and walks away. Dadhica’s curse to all the sacrificial 
priests appears to be KP’s contribution. KP, however, shares some verses 
with the Vayu e.g. 

ap ujya-p iijane caiva p ujydndrh cdpyap ujane / 
narah pdpamavdpnoti mahad vai ndtra sarhsayah // 

—(Vayu I.30.103 = KP.I.15.26.) 

2. In the Bh. P. and other Puranas, Siva, as a revenge of the self- 
immolation of his consort Sati, destroyed the sacrifice of Daksa. In KP., 
however, the goddess (the daughter of Himavan) remembers her i-.sult in 
the previous birth by Daksa, when in his previous birth, he was her father, 
and in order to wreak revenge of her insult in that birth by her then father, 
she urges god Siva to destroy his sacrifice in this new incarnation ! 



1.15.38-48 


137 


38-40. He was highly infuriated. He had a thousand heads, 
a thousand eyes and huge arms, a thousand in number. He 
was invincible. He resembled the fire at the close of the 
Yugas. He was terrible due to his curved fangs. He could not be 
seen (directly) due to his glaring brilliance. He held a conch and 
a discus. He had a staff in his hand. He roared loudly. He held 
a horn in his hand and was beautified With Bhasma (ashes). He 
became famous as Virabhadra. He was accompanied by the 
Lords of Devas. Immediately after being born, he stood praying 
unto the Lord of Devas with palms joined in reverence. 

41. Siva spoke to him thus: “O Ganesvara (leader 
of the attendants). Blessings unto you. After censuring 
me, Daksa is performing a Tajna, at Gahgadvara, (near 
the source of the river Gahga). Destroy that sacrifice of 
Daksa.” 

42. Then the sacrifice of Daksa was destroyed by Vira¬ 
bhadra playfully like a single lion released from bondage. 

43. Bhadrakali, Mahesvari was created angrily by Uma. 
Gana (the attendant Virabhadra) rode on the bull and went 
along with her. 

44. Thousands of other Rudras, who became famous as 
Romajas (born of hair) were created by that intelligent being 
in order to assist him (Virabhadra). 

45. They wielded tridents, Saktis and iron clubs in their 
hands. They had sticks, pebbles and stones in their hands. 
They resembled Rudra and the Kalagni (terrible fire of dissolu¬ 
tion of the universe). They made the ten quarters reverberate 
with their shouts and sounds. 

46. All of them were very terrible. Accompanied by 
their wives, they rode on the bulls. They went thus towards 
the place of sacrifice of Daksa, surrounded the leading Gana 
(i.e. Virabhadra). 

47-48. All of them reached the place that was well known 
as Gahgadvara. They saw the place of sacrifice of Daksa of 
unmeasured splendour. There were thousands of celestial women. 
It was reverberating as apsaras were singing to the rich tunes 
and sounds of flutes and lutes. It was resounded with the 
chanting sound of the Vedic mantras. 



138 


Kurma Puranct 


49-50. On seeing Prajapati seated along with the sages 
and Devas, Virabhadra, beloved of Rudra, said smilingly: 

51. “All of us are the followers of Sarva (Siva) of 
immeasurable brilliance. We have come here desirous of receiv¬ 
ing our shares. Give the desired shares to us.* 

52. O excellent sages, if this is some one’s deception,** 
let this be told that the shares are to be given to you and not to 
us.” 

53. Inform him, who commands you thus. We shall 
know from him. Devas the foremost among whom was 
Prajapati Daksa on being addressed thus, by the leader of 
Ganas, spoke: 

54-56a. They said to the lord, “We do not know that the 
Mantras authorise your share.” The Mantras retaliated “You 
Devas are confounded in your minds by Tamas, because you do 
not worship Mahesvara, the king of the (sacrifice). 

Hara is the lord of all living beings. Devas constitute his body. 
He is worshipped in the Tajnas. He bestows prosperities and 
achievements.” 

56b-57a. Though addressed thus by the Mantras gods 
whose minds were lost by the deluding potency of the great god 
(Siva) did not pay any heed. Hence the hymns {Mantras) left 
the gods and returned to their own abodes. 

57b-58a. Then, lord Virabhadra, the destroyer of gods 
who was accompanied by his spouse and lords of gams touched 
lovingly the sage Dadhica with both of his hands and said 
(to Daksa and other gods) : 

58b-59a. “You had been arrogant due to your strength. 
Hence you did not recognise the authority of the Mantras. So 
today I am forcibly destroying you who had been proud and 


*v.l. bhagdbhilipsayd prdpta bhagan yacchadhvam ipsitan / 

We have arrived here with the desire to receive our share in the Tajha, 
Give unto us our share (in the Tajiia) as desired by us. 

•• v.l. kasyacid iyam ajhd muni-surottamdh j 

O excellent sages and gods ! (Please tell us) whose order is this (that: 

the shares . . .) 



I.15.59b-79a 


139 


arrogant”. After saying this the leading Ganas burned the 
sacrificial hall. 

59b-61a. The leaders of Ganas became infuriated. They 
uprooted the sacrificial posts and threw them here and there. 
The Ganesvaras, all of whom were terrible ones, took the 
sacrificial horse along with the Prastotr and Hotr (the priests) 
and hurled them into the currents of Ganga. 

61b-62a. Even Virabhadra whose mind was ablaze with 
wrath, paralysed the hand of Indra as he raised it to strike 
and did the same to other gods. 

62b-67a. Sportively he plucked out the eyes of Bhaga 
by the tip of his finger nails. Hitting with his fist he felled down 
the teeth of Pusan. The mighty leader of Ganas sportively 
and smilingly kicked Lord Moon with the big toe of his leg. O 
excellent sages, he cut off the pair of hands of fire and 
playfully plucked out his tongue. Then he kicked sages on 
their heads. The mighty one then pierced Visnu, who had been 
coming thither on his Garuda with sharp arrows after stunning 
Sudariana. The powerful Garuda stared at the Gana and 
suddenly hit him with his wings and roared like the ocean. 

67b-68. Then Rudra himself created thousands of 
Garudas more powerful than Garuda, the son of Vinata. They 
rushed against Garuda. On seeing them, the intelligent Garuda 
of great velocity fled away. 

69-79a. That he left Visnu and fled quickly was surpris¬ 
ing. When Garuda had disappeared, the lotus-born deity 
(Brahma) came there and intercepted Virabhadra and Visnu. 
Thanks to the great glory of Paramesthin (i. e. Brahma) he 
eulogised Isa. Lord Sambhu himself came there. On seeing 
that lord of Devas and Uma endowed with all attributes. Lord 
Brahma, Daksa and the heaven-dwellers eulogised them. 
Daksa in particular bowed to goddess Parvati, the sharer of half 
the body of Isvara. With palms joined in reverence he eulogised 
her with various hymns. Then the goddess, the store¬ 
house of kindness, said smilingly to Rudra, the great god Mahes- 
vara, with a delighted mind,—“You alone are the creator of 
the universe, its ruler and protector. Daksa and the heaven- 
dwellers should be blessed by your lordship.” 



140 


K urma Pur dm 


Then the Lord with matted hair and blue-red complexion 
spoke to Devas and Pracetasa Daksa who had bowed down: 
“O Devas, all of you may go. I am delighted with you. I should 
be worshipped in all Ydjnas. I shall not be denigrated on 
any account. O Daksa, you too listen to my words that protect 
all. Eschew all worldly desires and strenuously become my 
devotee. At the end of a kalpa, thanks to my grace, you will 
become the chief of Ganas. Till then you continue (in your 
present position) abiding by my directive remaining contented 
in what you are authorised.” 

79b-80a. After saying this. Lord Siva along with his 
consort and gams (followers) immediately vanished from the 
sight ofDaksa of immeasurable splendour. 

80b-81a. When Sankara the great Lord vanished, the 
lotus-born deity Brahma himself spoke to Daksa what was 
conducive to the welfare of the world. 

Brahma said : 

81b-82. What is your delusion* when the bull-bannered 
deity is pleased with you? When the lord himself protects you 
alertly (why should you be agitated?). This great god is in the 
heart of all living beings. 

83. It is him that the learned persons who have become 
merged in Brahman and who expound Vedas realise. He is the 
Atman of all living beings. He is the seed (cause) and the 
ultimate goal. 

84-85a. Mahesvara the lord of Devas is eulogised by the 
Vedic Mantras. They who worship the eternal Rudra by means 
of their own soul and mind endowed with earnest devotion, 
attain the greatest region. 

85b-86. Hence, knowing the Supreme Lord to be devoid 
of beginning, middle or end propitiate him strenuously, mentally, 
verbally and physically. Assiduously avoid the hatred of Siva 
that will cause only your own destruction. 


*v.l. [kith tavdpagato mohah etc.) Is your delusion dispelled ? (now that 
the bull-bannered god) is pleased with you, alertly abide by what the god 
himself commanded you to do (Crt. Ed.). Ft. Note 11 p. 27 adopted in the 
Crt. Ed.of KP. 1.14.80. 



I.15.87a-98 


141 


87a. The activities of a hater (of Siva) become only- 
defective in every respect. 

87b-88a. There is absolutely no doubt that the great 
Yogin, the immutable Visnu who is your protector is no one 
else than the great god, the glorious god Rudra. 

88b-89a. Those men who consider Visnu the source of 
origin of the universe, different from Isvara due to delusion, go 
to hell because they do not adhere to the Vedas. 

89b-90a. Those who follow Vedas look upon Lord Rudra 
and Lord Narayana identical and they attain liberation. 

90b-91a. “He who is Visnu is Rudra himeslf. He who 
is Rudra is Visnu.” If one comprehends this and worships the 
lord, one attains the ultimate goal. 

91b-92a. It is Visnu who creates the entire world and 
it is Lord Siva who surveys and protects it. In this way, the 
whole universe originates from Rudra-Narayana together. 

92b-93a. Hence eschew the hatred of lord Visnu and con¬ 
centrate your mind on him. Resort to Mahadeva, worthy of 
being the refuge of the expounders of Brahman.” 

93b-94a. After listening to the words of Brahma, 
Prajapati Daksa sought refuge in the lord of the earth, god 
Siva, the wearer of elephant’s hide. 

94b-96a. Great sages who were burnt down by the 
fire of Dadhica’s curse became haters of god Siva due to 
delusion. In due course, in the Kali age, they, being entirely 
bereft of the power of their penance, came to be born again in 
the families of Brahmanas merely, thanks to the impressions 
in their previous life and the command of god Brahma. 

96b-97a. Being made to fall in hells like Raurava and 
others till the end of the kalpa, all of them being absolved 
from the effects of the curse would, in due course of time, attain 
the brilliance of the Sun. 

97b-98. Prompted at the instance of the self-born god, 
they would propitiate through penance and Yoga Lord Siva, 
the controller of the universe and the Lord of Devas and 
will regain their previous status through the grace of 
Sankara. 



142 


Kurma Pur ana 


99. Thus, the entire story of destruction of Daksa’s 
sacrifice has been recounted to you. Now listen to the progeny 
of the daughters of Daksa.” 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

Description of the Families of Dakfa’s Daughters^ 

Suta said : 

1. Formerly Daksa was directed by the self-born lord 
thus, “Create the subjects”. He then created Devas, Gandharvas, 
sages, Asuras and serpents. 


1. The following comparative table of verses common to this 
chapter and VP. 1.15 will show how both these Puranas are close textually. 


KP.XVI 


VP.I. 15 


Verse No. 


1 

87 

(2 

89a and 90) 

(3 

91 and 97b) 

4b 

103b 

5 

104 

6 

105 

7 

106 

8 

107 

9 

108 

10 & 11a 

109 

11b & 12a 

no 

12b, 13a 

111 

13b-14a 

112 

14b 

113 

15 

115 (closely similar) 

17 

126b, 127a 

18a 

127b 

18b-19a 

132a, 133 

19b-20a 

134 



1.16.2-13a 


143 


2. When the subjects created by him at the outset did 
not flourish, he created living beings by the act of copu¬ 
lation. 

3. A thousand sons he begot of Asikni,'^ the righteous 
daughter of Prajapati Virana. 

4. When those sons were lost through the deception of 
Narada,^ Prajapati Daksa, begot sixty daughters of Virini.® 

5-6. He gave ten daughters to Dharma, thirteen to 
Kasyapa, twentyseven to Soma, four to Aristanemi, two to 
Bahuputra, two to the intelligent Krsasva and two to Ahgiras. 
Similarly I shall recount their expansion. 

7-1 la. These are the ten wives of Dharma: Marutvati, 
Vasu, Yami, Lamba, Bhanu, Arundhati, Saihkalpa, Muhurta, 
Sadhya and the beautiful lady Visva. Listen and understand 
their sons. The Visve-devas were born to Visva and Sadhya 
gave birth to Sadhyas. The Marutvants were born to Marutvati. 
The Vasus were born to Vasu. The Bhanus were born to Bhanu 
and the Muhurtas are the sons of Muhurta, Ghosa was born of 
Lamba and Nagavithas were born of Yami. All the objects of 
the Earth were born of Arundhati. Sankalpa (conception) was 
bom of Sankalpa. Ten are known as the sons of Dharma. 

11b-13a. I shall recount to you the family extension of 
those well-known eight Vasu-gods whose very life is (different 
kind of) wealth and who are the forerunners of luminaries. 
The Vasus are mentioned to be eight in number. I shall mention 
their details. The eight Vasus are : 


Most of these are quoted verbatim from the VP and the remaining are 
substantially the same and have phrases and parts of verses common to VP. 

1. The correct form is Asiktu and is so used in the VP, Bh. P. and 
other Puranas. 

2. These sons were known as ‘Haryasvas’. Narada dissuaded them 
from procreation by advising them to find out the limits of the universe 

which they were to populate. They dispersed on that mission and never 
returned (VP.I. 15.92-96). This is the mqya practised by Narada on Daksa’s 
Sons. 

Here KP. omits how Daksa again created one thousand sons 
called ‘Sabalasvas’ and how they too were sent the way of their brothers 
Haryasvas by Narada. It is after this failure that Daksa procreated these 
sixty daughters (VP. I. 15.97-102). 



* Kurma Pur ana 

Apa, Dhruva, Soma, Dhara, Anala, Anila, Pratyusa and 
Prabhasa. 

13b-16. Apa’s sons were Vaitandya, Srama, Santa and 
Dhvani. Dhruva’s son was lord Kala, the calculator of the 
worlds. Lord Varcas was the son of Soma. Dravina was the son 
of Dhara. Anala’s sons were Manojava and Avijnatagati. 
Kumara was the son of Anila. He is known as Senapati. 
Lord Devala, the Yogin, was the son of Pratyusa. Visvakarman 
was the son of Prabhasa. He is the creative Artist and a 
Prajapati. 

17-22. The thirteen wives of Kasyapa were—Aditi, Diti, 
Danu, Arista, Surasa, Surabhi, Vinata, Tamra, Krodhavasa, 
Ira, Kadru, Muni and Dharmajna. Know their sons. The follow¬ 
ing were the sons of Aditi viz. Arhsa, Dhatr, Bhaga, Tvastr, 
Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman, Vivasvan, Savitr, Pusan, Aihsuman 
and Visnu. In the Caksusa Manvantara, formerly, they were 
named Tusitas. In the Vaivasvata Manvantara, they are called 
Adityas (as they were Aditi’s sons). From Kasyapa, Diti got 
two sons who were haughty due to their physical strength. The 
elder was Hiranyakasipu and the younger was Hiranyaksa. 
Hiranyakasipu, the Daitya of great strength and exploit pro¬ 
pitiated the great lord Brahma by means of penance. He saw 
the lord and eulogised him with various hymns. He thus 
secured divine boons. 

23-28. Devas and sages were harassed by his army 
(or strong actions). When they were beaten, they went to 
Brahma and sought refuge in him. Brahma, the creator of 
the worlds, the protector, the great being, the motionless 
unchangeable Supreme Soul, and the sole Purusottama of 
the world. O sages, implored by the excellent Devas and 
sages, eulogised and bowed to by the leading sages and the 
immortal beings, the lotus-seated deity went to the northern 
shore of milk ocean where Lord Visnu was seated. On 
seeing Lord Visnu, the source of origin of the universe, the 
auspicious preceptor of the universe, he saluted his pair of 
feet with his bent head. With palms joined in reverence 
bespoke : 



1.16.29-41 


145 


Brahma said : 

You are the goal unto all living beings. You are infinite 
and the soul of the universe. 

29. You are all-pervading. All immortal Devas cons¬ 
titute your physical body. You are the eternal great Yogin. 
You are the Atman of all living beings. You are the Chief and 
great Prakrti. 

30. You are interested and engaged in detachment and 
prosperity. You are beyond the scope of speech. You are 
pure. You are the maker and the sustainer. You are the 
annihilator of the enemies of gods. 

31-34. O infinite Lord, it behoves you to protect us. 
You are the protector and the great Isvara. Lord Visnu the 
yellow-robed lord possessing eyes like a lotus in full bloom, 
who was thus enlightened by Brahma said to Devas:—“Why 
have you, O Devas of great prowess, come to this region, accom¬ 
panied by Prajapati ? What work shall I do unto you?” 

Devas said : 

35-36. O lord, a Daitya named Hiranyakasipu, who is 
arrogant due to the boons he had secured from Brahma, harasses 
all Devas, along with the sages. He cannot be killed by any 
other living being except you, the excellent Purusa. 

It behoves you to kill him. O embodiment of the 
universe (one identical with the universe) since you are the 
protector of everyone. 

On hearing what was said by Devas, Visnu the con- 
ceiver of the worlds, created a being like himself, in order to kill 
the chief of Daityas. The Being had a huge body like the 
mountain Meru. He was terrible and his form was frightening. 

37-39. He held a conch, a discus and an iron club in 
his hands. The Garuda-bannered deity said to him, ... “It 
behoves you to kill that king of Daityas, Hiranyakasipu. 
Kill him and come to this place exerting all your manliness.” 
The Being holding Sankha, Cakra 3.nd listened to the words 
of Visnu, bowed to Purusottama, the great unmanifest Purusa, 
and went to the great city of Daitya, roaring terribly. 

40-41. The lord rode on the vehicle Garuda and 
appeared like another Maha-Meru. On hearing his voice. 



146 


Kurma Pur ana 


resembling the rumbling sound of a great cloud, the leaders of 
Daityas too gave out simultaneous shouts,^ due to their 
fear of the king of Daityas. 

The Asuras said : 

“A certain great Purusa, urged by Devas, is coming, 
giving out terrible shouts. 

42a. We know him to be Janardana.” 

42b-43a. Then accompanied by all excellent Asuras 
and by Prahlada^ and other sons well equipped with weapons 
Hiranyakasipu himself marched. 

43b-44. On seeing that Purusa, as huge as the mountain, 
seated on Garuda and having the lustre of a crore of suns, like 
another Narayana, some of them (Daityas) fled away (here and 
there) while others, with their eyes indicating their confusion 
and agitation, spoke to one another. 

45. ‘‘This is that lord Narayana, the protector of Devas 
and our immutable enemy, or definitely his son.” 

46. After saying this, they showered a volley of arrows 
and other weapons on that Male being. That lord sportively 
destroyed them (the weapons). He was not wounded. 

47-48a. The four sons of Hiranyakasipu of well-known 
prowess and thunder-like voice fought with the son born of 
Narayana. The four sons were Prahrada, Anuhrada, Sarhhrada 
and Hrada. 

48b-49a. Prahrada discharged the Brahma-missile; 
Anuhrada threw the Vaisnava one, Sarhhrada hurled the 
Kaumara (belonging to Karttikeya) missile while Hrada dis¬ 
charged the Agneya (fiery) weapon. 

49b-50a. These four weapons reached that being born 
of Visnu, but could not shake that Vasudeva who stood firm as 
he was standing before. 


1. V. D. Samdcacaksire —‘Reported the oncoming sound to the 

Daitya King^ out of fear.’ 

The episode of Prahrada marching against the Male being sent 
against Hiranyakasipu by Visnu is a contribution by the KP. Here Prahrada 
fights against that son of Visnu. This fight is not recorded in Vaisnava 
Puranas like VP.,Bh.P. 



I.16.50b-60a 


147 


50b-51a. Then the lord of huge arms and great strength 
caught hold of the four sons by their legs, hurled them and 
roared. 

5lb-53. When the sons were released the valiant 
Hiranyakasipu kicked him on his chest with great force. Afflict¬ 
ed much by it, the follower of Visnu along with Garuda 
assumed an invisible form and quickly went to the place 
where lord Narayana was present. After going unto him, he 
reported to him everything that had happened. 

54-55. The pure lord possessing all perfect knowledge, 
pondered well in his mind. He created the half-body of a man 
and the half body of a lion. The unmanifest lord in the 
physical form of a man-lion appeared in the city of Hiranya¬ 
kasipu suddenly deluding Daityas and Danavas.^ 

56-57a. The lord was terrible with his curved fangs. 
The Yogic soul resembled the fire at the close of the 
yugas. Mustering his own §akti capable of annihilating 
everything, the infinite Narayana shone like the sun in the 
mid-day. 

57b-59a. On seeing the being of the form of man- 
lion, the demon ordered his eldest son Prahrada to slay 
Narasiihha (man-lion). “This Being of the form of man-lion 
is of deficient strength ( ♦v.l. more powerful) when compared 
to the previous one. Dispatched by me, you accompanied by 
your younger brothers destroy him immediately.” 

59b-60a. At his behest, Prahrada, the Asura, fought 
strenuously with the unchanging Visnu, but was conquered 
by him. 


1. This story of incarnation of the Man-Lion (Nrsiihha) 
by Visnu is different from all Vaisnava Puranas wherein he manifests 
himself out of a column to protect his devotee, Prince Prahlada from 
his father Hiranyakasipu. Here Prahrada, at the behest of his father, 
fights against the Man-Lion. When he was discomfited and found that the 
Pasupata missile discharged by Hiranyaksa had no effect on the Man-Lion, 
he came to know that he was Visnu and dissuaded in vain his father and 
other people to desist from fighting against Visnu. It was in the ensuing 
fight between Nrsirhha and Hiranyakasipu that the latter was killed with 
his claws by Nrsirhha. 



148 


Kurma Pur dm 


60b-63a. Then the Daitya fainted. He then dispatched 
his younger brother, the Daitya Hiranyaksa. At that time the 
younger brother Hiranyaksa meditated and discharged the 
miraculous weapon of Pasupati and roared. The miraculous 
weapon of the Trident-bearing lord did not harm at all, the 
deity of Devas viz. Visnu of unmeasured splendour. On 
seeing the miraculous weapon struck back, Prahrada due to his 
very great fortune considered the eternal lord Visnu the 
Atrmn of all. 

63b-65. He then abandoned all weapons. With the mind 
endowed with Sattva Guria, he bent down his head before the 
lord stationed in the hearts of Yogins. He eulogised 
Narayana by means of hymns of the Rk, Yajus and Saman. 
He prevented his father, brothers and Hiranyaksa and spoke 
thus :—“This is the infinite Narayana, the unborn eternal Lord. 

66-68a. He is the ancient Purusa, the great Yogin, the 
lord, embodiment of the universe. He is the creator and the 
dispenser of destiny, the unsullied self-luminary, the prin¬ 
ciple of Pradham as well as Purusa, the unchanging Mulaprakrti 
(primordial nature). He is the lord of all beings, the immanent 
Soul, beyond the reach of Gums. Seek refuge in Visnu, the 
unmanifest and Immutable lord. 

68b-70a. When this was spoken by Prahrada the evil- 
minded Hiranyakasipu, deluded much by Visnu’s Maya, spoke 
to his son, “This Man-lion of little prowess should by all 
means be killed; urged by the god of death he has come to our 
house now. 

70b-72a. The son of great intellect laughed at this and 
spoke to his father, “Do not censure this controller of 
living beings, the sole unchanging Lord. How can this eternal 
great god. Lord Visnu, devoid of (unaffected by) Kala, nay, 
the very Soul of Kala and its very embodiment be killed 
by Kala. 

72b-73a. Then the wicked-souled Suvarnakasipu (i.e. 
Hiranyakasipu) urged by Kala, fought with the unchanging 
Lord Hari, although prevented by his son. 

73b-74a. Even as Prahrada was observing, the infinite 
lord with reddened eyes tore the elder brother of Hiranyaksa 
(i.e. Hiranyakasipu) by means of his claws. 



I.16.74b-84a 


149 


74b-75a. When Hiranyakasipu was killed, Hiranyaksa^ 
who boasted of his great strength left his son (i.e. nephew) 
Prahrada in the lurch and fled in great fright and agitation. 

75b-76a. Anuhrada and other sons, and hundreds of 
other Asuras were taken to Yama’s abode (i.e. were killed) by 
the lions created from the body of the Man-lion. 

76b-77a. Thereafter, Lord Hari, Narayana, withdrew 
that terrible form and assumed his own real majestic form 
named Narayana. 

77b-78. When Narayana had gone, Prahrada the excel¬ 
lent Asura, crowned Hiranyaksa^ (as the king of Asuras). He 
conquered Devas and sages in the battle and harassed them. 

79-80a. He propitiated Sankara by means of his penance 
and obtained a great son named Andhaka. He conquered 
Devas including Devendra, and agitated the whole of the Earth. 
He took it to the nether-worlds. He made the Vedas lustreless, 
(v.l. made the earth shining like a lotus, his captive). 

80b-81a. Then Devas, along with Brahma, went to 
Hari’s abode with their faces bereft of splendour. They intimat¬ 
ed everything to Visnu. 

81 b-82a. The unchanging Atman of the universe thought 
of the way of killing him. For that purpose he assumed the 
form of a white Varaha (Boar) embodying within it the power 
of all devas. 

82b-83a. In the beginning of this Kalpa, Purusottama 
went and killed Hiranyaksa. He lifted up this Earth by means 
of his curved tusk. 

83b-84a. After stabilising (i.e. annihilating the enemies 
of Devas i.e. Asuras thus and abandoning the form of a Boar, 
Visnu reassumed his own nature and returned to his Supreme 
region, greater than the greatest. 


1. According to Bh.P. (III. 13 and III 19.29) Hiranyaksa was 
killed earlier by the Boar-incarnation of Visnu, while he was lifting up the 
earth from the seas of the nether world. KP. gives a new and uncompli¬ 
mentary version about Hiranyaksa. 

2. According to the Bh. P. VII.10.23, Nrsimha commanded 
Prahrada to occupy the throne of his father. VP.1.23.32 endorses the same. 
But here Prahrada crowned his uncle Hiranyaksa as the Daitya chief. 



150 


Kurma Pur ana 


84b-85. When the enemy of the immortal beings (i.e. 
Daitya) had been killed, Prahrada, a devout follower of Visnu, 
ruled over his own kingdom eschewing all kinds of demoniac 
tendencies. Engaged in the propitiation of Visnu he duly per¬ 
formed the worship of Devas. 

86-87. Thanks to the greatness of Visnu his kingdom 
was always free from enemies. Once, as a result of the Maya 
of Devas, the Asura did not speak properly to a Brahmana 
who had visited his abode. 

88-89. Thus the Brahmana ascetic was disrespected by 
the deluded Asura. He cursed the king of Asuras thus— “You are 
disregarding and dishonouring the Brahmanas by resorting to your 
Vaisnavi Sakti. That power of yours will be destroyed.” After 
saying this, the Brahmana hurried out of the abode of Prahrada.* 

90. Because he was eagerly attached to the kingdom he 
was deluded due to the force of the curse. He began to harass 
the leading Brahmanas. He did not understand Visnu. 

91-92. Remembering the killing of his father, he became 
infuriated against Visnu. A terrible fight took place between 
Lord Visnu and Prahrada, the enemy of immortal beings. 

After fighting a great battle, he was defeated by Visnu. 

93. Due to the greatness of the previous impressions and 
culture, he regained his perfect knowledge of Visnu the great 
Purusa. He sought shelter in him, as he was worthy of being 
the refuge. 

94. Thereafter, the leading Daitya had undeflected 
devotion to Visnu the most excellent of all Purufas and attained 
Yoga. 

95. When the son of Hiranyakasipu became eagerly 
attached to Yoga, the leading Asura, Andhaka obtained (i.e. 
succeeded to) that kingdom. 

96. (The Raksasa) the son of Hiranyaksa born of Siva’s 
body, loved goddess Uma, the daughter of the mountain, 
stationed on Mandara. 


1. The Brahmanical curse to King Prahrada^ his subsequent 
tyranny, fight with Visnu and discomfiture form a contribution of KP. to 
the story of Prahrada. 



1.16.97-105 


151 


97. Formerly, thousands of householder saints performed 
penance in order to propitiate Isvara, in the holy forest of 
Daruvana^ (Pine forest). 

98. Then, once upon a time, a great drought insurmount¬ 
able due to its being of a long duration befell that country. It 
was very fierce and destructive of all living beings. 

99. The sages who were overwhelmed with hunger, 
approached in a body to Gautama the storehouse of penance, 
and requested him for food for the sustenance of their lives. 

100. That sensible sage gave them ample sweet cooked 
food of various kind. The Brahmanas partook of the food 
with their minds free from hesitatiori. 

101. When the twelfth year elapsed as if the end of the 
world was over (and new order prevailed) bringing happiness 
and welfare to the world, the whole of the universe became as 
it was before (regained its previous stage). 

102. Then all those leading sages took leave of one 
another. They said to the great sage Gautama—“We are going 
quickly.” 

103. He prevented them by saying thus, “O Scholars 1 
Be pleased to stay comfortably at your pleasure in my house 
for some more time and you may go at your leisure.” 

104. Then all of them created an illusory black cow 
and took it near the noble-souled Gautama. 

105. On observing it, the sage was overwhelmed with 


1. Daru OT Daruka Vana with its temple of Nagesa (SivaP. I. 38) is 
identified with Avandhya Naganath in the Marathwada region of Maha¬ 
rashtra. It is one of the twelve jyotir-lingas .—De 53-54. 

The following episode (vv. 98-107) how the sage Gautama fed the 
famished sages throughout the drought of twelve years and in order to 
escape his insistent hospitality even after the famine was oveq the sages 
created an illusory cow which died despite Gautama’s careful nursing and 
the sages ungratefully excommunicated him as a cow-slaughterer and left 
him^ seems to have taken place in Maharashtra; for sage Gautama per¬ 
formed austere penance and brought Gahga to this region and it is known 
as the Godavari. The places of Gautama’s penance, the source of the 
Godavari and the story regarding Gautama’s cow-killing are said to have 
taken place in Maharashtra. 



152 


Kurma Pur ana 


mercy. He became eager to tend it well. He tethered the cow 
in the cowpen, but as soon as it was touched the cow died. 

106. Extremely distressed with grief, the great sage could 
not understand what should be done and what should not be 
done. The other sages spoke to that sage. 

107. O excellent Brahmana, as long as the sin of 
the slaughter of the cow sticks to your person, food served by 
you should not be eaten. We are, therefore, going away. 

108. On being permitted by him, they, being subject to 
this sin, went to the auspicious Devadaru Vana^ (Pine forest) 
in order perform penance as before. 

109. By some reason the sage Gautama came to know 
of their fraud of imputing the sin of killing the illusory cow 
and cursed them in great anger. 

110. “They will be ineligible for the study of the three 
Vedas and be on a par with the great sinners. As a result of 
this curse, they will be born again and again.” 

111-112a. The sages who were thus cursed and were 
like ucchista (unacceptable like leavings of food after meals) 
approached Sankara, the Lord of gods and Visnu, the immut¬ 
able deity, and eulogised him with the usual conventional (lit. 
worldly) hymns, both all-pervading gods. 

112b. O god of gods, the great deities, the destroyers 
of the miseries of devotees and great Yogins, it behoves you to 
save us by absolving us from the sin of doing as we pleased 
(viz. the imputation of illusory-cow-slaughter to Gautama).” 

113. Then, glancing a t Visnu who was staying by his side, 
the bull-bannered lord said—“What is to be done in regard to 
those people who desire to acquire merit?”. 

114. After looking at the leading Brahmanas who had 
bowed down, lord Visnu, Hari, favourably disposed towards 
his devotees and worthy of being the refuge, spoke to Gopati 
(Lord of the Bull i.e. Siva). 


1. KP distinguishes between Daruvana and Devadaruvana. From 
its description here and in infra 11.38.53-60 Devadaruvana is to be 
identified with the area in Garhwal on the banks of Ganga near Kedar 
(De. 54). 



1.16.115-121 


153 


115. “O Sankara ! Not even particle of merit can 
go with (i.e. will be found in) a person excluded from the 
Vedas. For Dharma comes shining out of the Vedas. 

116. Still, O Mahesvara, all these people, though they 
head on to hells, should be saved by us, in view of our affection 
towards our devotees. 

117. Hence, O Bull-bannered lord, we shall compose 
scriptures for deluding the sinners and for saving those who are 
out of the pale of the Vedas.” 

118. Thus addressed by Visnu, the slayer of Mura, 
Rudra composed, deluding Scriptures and Kesava too did the 
same, on being urged by Siva. 

119. They were the treatises of the cults of Kapala, 
Nakula, Varna, Bhairava, both of Western and Eastern variety, 
Pancaratra, Pasupata and thousands of other cults as well.^ 

120-121. After composing them, he spoke to them,—“O 
sages excluded from Vedic studies, you go on carrying out what 
is laid down in these Scriptures. You will be falling again and 
again into the terrible hell for many kalpas. Then you will 
be born into the world of human beings. Thanks to the power 
of propitiation of Isvara, your sins will be wiped off. Attain, 
then, the salvation of the meritorious. 


1. The list shows what sects were regarded as being out of the pale 
of Vedic religion in KP. Out of these^ Kapalas or Kapalikas whether 
Brahmanic or non-BrahmaniCj ate and drank in human skulls^ wore 
garlands of skulls and indulged in horrid practices of wine-drinking, in 
Sexual orgies and living in unclean manner (S. N. Dasgupta Ind. Phil, V. P. 
2, 3). Nakuias are the followers of Nakula or Lakulisa, a semi-historical 
founder of a sect of ^aivism. In the Vayu P. 23.2.17-23 and the LP .1. 24, he 
is said to be an incarnation of Siva in a cemetery at Kayavarohana in 
Bhrgu ksetra, in Dabhoi Tehsil in Gujarat. Famfl is a general term for the 
(Sakta ?) observers of socially disapproved practices, the group being 
designated as Five Ma-kdras. Bhairavas are also Saivites who worshipped 
Bhairava form of Siva. Bhairava-worship has been very popular among the 
masses in Maharashtra. Pancaratras, the Vasudeva worshippers who were 
later accommodated by the followers of Veda, held the famous Catur-vyuka 
(the four manifestations of Vasudeva) doctrine and had their own way of 
worship, are quite famous. Pasupatas are the followers of the system founded 
by Umapati Srikantha (or Siva) and they are mentioned in Mbh. $dnti, 
337.62 and Jainas (For more discussion vide Introduction—together 

with “Sects in the KP.). 



154 


Kurma Purancc 


122-123a. Do you obey my command it will be due 
to my grace, otherwise there is no salvation for all of you.” 
Urged thus by Isvara and Visnu, those great sages accepted the 
behest of Siva, the enemy of Asura. 

123b-124a. They composed other scriptures. Engaged in. 
the study of these scriptures, they taught their disciples demons¬ 
trating the fruits thereof. 

I24b-125a. For the delusion of the world* Sankara 
descended on to the Earth and begged for alms along with the 
Brahmanas, for their benefit. 

125b-126a. Wearing a garland of human skulls as an 
ornament and smeared all over with the ashes of the cremated 
dead bodies and embellished with a mass of matted hair, he 
set out deluding the entire world. 

126b-128a. Lord Rudra had entrusted goddess Parvati to 
the care of Visnu of unmeasured splendour and had engaged 
Bhairava in the activity of restraining the wicked. Handing 
over the charge of the son, the delighter of the goddess, to 
Narayana and placing his attendants and Indra and other Devas 
there itself, Mahadeva started from there. 

128b-130a. Then Visnu the embodiment of the universe 
assumed the form of a woman and served Mahesvari (the great 
goddess) regularly. Brahma, the Fire-god, Indra, Yama and 
other leading gods served the great goddess after assuming- 
splendid forms of women. 

130b-131a. LordNandisvara, a very close beloved (atten¬ 
dant) of Siva stood at the portals as before as the Presiding 
Officer of the Ganas (attendants). 

13lb-132a. In the meantime, the evil-minded Daitya 
named Andhaka came to Mandara, desirous of abducting 
Girija. 

132b-133. On seeing Andhaka arrived Sankara, Kala- 
bhairava, Hara who had assumed the form of Kala and whose 
Atman could not be measured, forbade him when a very 
terrible fight that caused hairs to stand on their ends, took 
place between them. 


* Instead of mohapasanam of the text v.l. mohaya sa imam lokam is. 
accepted. 



I.16.134-145a 


155 


134-136. The bull-bannered deity hit that Daitya on the 
chest with his trident. Thereafter, thousands of Daityas (appear¬ 
ed there) in the name of Sahasrandhakas (the thousands of 
Andhakas), Nandisvara and others were defeated by the 
Daityas i.e. Andhakas. (Eight of them were very prominent 
viz.) Ghantakarna, Meghanada, Gandesa, Candatapana, 
Vinayaka, Meghavaha, Somanandi and Vaidyuta. All of them 
became very powerful by the support of Andhaka, the most 
excellent Daitya. 

137-138a. They fought with spears, Saktis, double- 
edged swords, peaks of mountains and axes. The Chief of 
Daityas of great strength caught hold of their pair of feet with 
his hands and hurled them a hundred Yojanas (1 Yojana = 

12 Kms.) away. 

138b-139a. Then hundreds and thousands of Daityas^ 
were sent by Andhaka. They who resembled destructive suns 
(at the end of the world) rushed against Bhairava. 

139b-140a. There arose a loud and extremely terrible 
sound “Alas ! Alas !” as Lord Bhairava took up his trident and 
fought terribly. 

140b-141. On seeing the great and invincible army of 
Andhakas, the defeated Kara sought refuge in Lord Visnu 
(Vasudeva), the unborn lord.^ Lord Visnu then created an 
excellent group of a hundred goddesses. 

142-143a. In order to bring about the destruction of the 
enemies of Devas, the lord remained at the side of the goddess. 
Then the thousand Andhakas were led to the abode of Yama 
playfully by the goddesses in the course of the battle, thanks to 
the greatness of Visnu. 

143b-144a. On seeing his army beaten back, the great 
Asura, Andhaka turned his face back on the battle-field and fled 
in great speed. 

144b-145a. Then concluding his divine sport of twelve 
years’ duration for the benefit of devotees, Mahadeva came- 
back to mount Mandara. 


1. It is strange that a so-called Saiva Purana should now and then 
glorify Visnu as a last resort. There are many such loop-holes in the 
Pasupatisation of an original Panca-ratra text. 



156 


Kurma Pur dm 


145b-146a. On realising that Isvara had come back, all 
the Ganesvaras gathered there and worshipped him like the 
Brahmanas worshipping the sun-god. 

146b-147a. After entering the place which is holy and 
unaccessible to non-Yogins, Siva saw lord Nandin, Bhairava and 
Kesava. 

147b-148a. He blessed lord Nandin who was inclined to 
make obeisance. Isana lovingly embraced him first (and then) 
Kesava. 

148b-149*. On seeing the great goddess with eyes wide 
with the feeling of pleasure and love, he bent down his head at 
her feet as well as at the feet of Isvara. Then Sankara** (the 
benefactor) intimated the victory of Sankara. 

150-15la. Believing in the greatness of Visnu, Bhairava 
remained at his side. On hearing of the victory and the exploit 
of Kesava, Lord Sambhu, Isa seated himself on an excellent seat 
along with the goddess. 

151b-152a. Then Devas and Brahmanas, the chief of 
whom was Marici, came to Mandara in order to see the three¬ 
eyed deity, the lord of Devas. 

152b-153a. That excellent group of hundred goddesses 
who have formerly overthrown, the army of Daityas came 
there with a desire to see Lord Siva. 

153b-154. On seeing the moon-bedecked (Lord Siva) 
seated on an excellent seat along with the goddess (Parvati), 
the goddesses bowed to him with great respect. With great 
eagerness they began to sing. They bowed to goddess Girija, 
occupying the left side of the Pinaka-bearing lord Siva. 


♦The Venkteshvara text is obviously incorrect. 

The v.l. recorded in the foot-notes gives better reading. Reconstructed 
accordingly, the verse would read : 

drsfvd devi Mahadevam priti-visphdriteksand // 48 
nandma Sirasd tasya pddayor Uvarasya ca 11 

When the goddess (Parvati) saw god 8iva, her eyes became wide with 
the feeling of pleasure and love and with her head she bowed down to the 
feet of the Lord (Sankara). 

♦♦Probably a misprint in the text for Sdnkari, which emendation if 
accepted means, ‘‘The goddess Parvati reported the victory (the account of 
the victory)” etc. 



1.16.155-165 


157 


155-156. On seeing the goddess identical with Narayana’s 
mind*, seated in the throne of the lord and Narayana occupy¬ 
ing a throne (-like exalted seat), the excellent women asked 
Lord Isa, after bowing to him:— 

The girls said : 

Who are you shining with brilliance ? Who is this girl 
lustrous like the sun ? 

157a. Who is this person of eyes large like lotus and shin¬ 
ing with his radiant body ?” 

15 7b-158a. On hearing their words the great Yogin, the 
unchanging overlord of the living beings, having the excellent 
bull for his vehicle, spoke thus 

158b-159. “This is Narayana, the eternal lord. This is 
Gauri, ‘the mother of the universe’. Lord Isvara has divided 
himself into many and is stationed here. Neither Devas 
nor the great sages know the Supreme Reality about me or 
about the goddess Parvati. 

160. Only this Soul of the universe (Lord Siva), goddess 
Bhavani and Visnu know the Supreme Reality. I am verily 
desireless, quiescent, absolute and devoid of possession. 

161. They call me Kesava and goddess Ambika as 
Laksmi. He is the creator and the dispenser of destiny. He 
is the cause as well as the effect. 

162. Visnu does himself and makes others do. He is the 
bestower of worldly pleasures and liberation as the fruits (of 
actions). He is the enjoyer and the incomprehensible and 
unmeasurable Purusa. He is the annihilator, assuming the form 
of Kala. 

163. He is the creator, protector, the pervading God, 
the soul of the universe, with faces in all directions. He is the 
indwelling soul of all, the immutable, all-pervader Yogin, 
Narayana, the undecaying Being. 

164-165. He is the Purusa enabling all to cross (the 
ocean of worldly existence). He is the Atman, the absolute great 


*A better v.l. devdsanagatam devam Ndrdyatjiam andmayam / 

‘Having seen Lord Narayana untouched by any ailment, seated on a 
celestial seat, the goddess bowed down to Narayana occupying a throne. 



158 


Kurma Pur am 


Supreme region. This Gauri, Mahesyari is my pure potency. 
She is quiescent, truthful, perpetually blissful, the ultimate goal— 
so says the Sruti. Everything is born of her and everything gets 
dissolved in her. 

166-167a. She alone is the excellent goal of goals of all 
living beings. Being united with that goddess, I, the absolute. 
Supreme, unsullied Lord, perceive everything including the 
great changeless Atrmn. 

167b-168a. Hence know that Visnu is beginningless and 
non-dualistic Atrmn, one with Isvara (i.e. myself) the controller 
as the only one. Then shall you attain bliss. 

168b-169a. Those who consider Visnu as the unmanifest 
Atman and who are endowed with faith, but who worship Isana 
with a different vision (i.e. regard him as different from Visnu) 
are not my beloved ones. 

169b-170a. Those deluded persons who hate the creator 
of the world are roasted and cooked in Raurava and other 
hells and are not released there from even after hundreds and 
crores ofkalpas. 

170b-l 71a. Hence, knowing precisely that Visnu is the un¬ 
changing protector of all living beings, that Lord should be 
meditated upon on all occasions of danger and adversity.” 

171b-173a. On hearing the statement of the Lord, 
Devas and leaders of the Ganas bowed to Lord Nara- 
yana and the goddess bom of the Himalaya mountain. They 
prayed for devotion towards Isana, the beloved of all devotees 
and towards the pair of feet of Bhavani and the lotus-like feet 
of Narayana. 

173b-174a. Then neither the leaders of Ganas nor 
the mothers could see Lord Narayana, the source of origin of the 
universe. It was very astonishing. 

174b-175a. In the meanwhile, Andhaka, the great Daitya 
blinded with passion became deluded much and came to 
that mountain in order to abduct the goddess Uma. 

175b. Then the glorious Yogin, the infinite-formed, 
pure Narayana, the most excellent of all Purusas, manifested 
himself there to fight with Daityas. 



1.16.176-185 


159 


176. Lord Visnu by his side and accompanied by the 
Chief leaders of Ganas, the son of Silada (i.e. Nandisvara) 
and the mothers, Lord Isa, Kala-Rudra went to fight. 

17 7-178a. Taking the trident resembling the fire, the lord 
of Devas went ahead. All those excellent rulers of Ganas 
followed him. The thousand-armed lord also went with them. 
The Lord, having Garuda for his vehicle, and possessing the 
colour of the leaves of the lotus shone in the middle of Devas. 

178b-179. Then the incomprehensible lord Siva having a 
thousand shapes who was like the sungod viewing the three 
worlds from the top of Sumeru, manifested himself. He was the 
victorious, beginningless lord, with the trident in his hand and 
resonant in his loud voice in the sky. Shower of flowers fell over 
the God. 

180. * Seeing that the king of the chiefs of Ganas sur¬ 
rounded by the Lords of Ganas, had arrived, the enemy of gods 
(Andhaka) fought with god Indra, the ‘mothers’ and with the 
whole of army of Ganas as well as prominent immortals. 

181. After defeating all by means of the prowess of his 
arms in the battle, he (i.e. Andhaka), riding his own aerial car, 
came to the place where Siva of infinite splendour and Kalarudra 

who had lost his inherent strength were standing. 

182. On seeing Andhaka approaching, the Garuda-ban- 
nered Lord spoke to Bhairava, the great Lord besmeared with 
ashes as adornment. 

183. “O Lord, it behoves you to slay Andhaka the 
lord of Daityas and a thorn unto the worlds. Excepting you there 
is no one else who can kill him. 

184. You are the annihilator of all worlds, the lordly 
person, the embodiment of Kala. You are being eulogised by 
means of various Mantras by those persons who know the Vedas.” 

185. On hearing the words of Vasudeva, Lord Siva 
looked meaningfully at Visnu and determined in his mind to 
kill the lord of Daityas. 


•The word daitya-ripum in the verse needs be emended as deva-ripur. 
Otherwise there is no subject to the finite verb —yuyodka and daitya-ripum does 
not give satisfactory meaning. 



160 


Kurma Pur ana 


186. He went to the army of Devas which increased 
the delight of the Ganas. All beings moving about in the 
firmament eulogised lord Bhairava thus. 

187. “Bevictorious O infinite Mahadeva, the embodiment 
of the eternal Kala. You are fire. You are omnipresent. You 
stay within all living beings. 

188. You are the annihilator as well as the maker of the 
worlds (v.l. you are the sacrifice and the Va$at-kard ). You are 
the creator. You are the unchanging Visnu, god Brahma and 
Mahadeva. You are the Supreme lustre and the greatest 
abode. 

189. You are OmAara incarnate, the Soul of Yoga, with 
three Vedas as your three eyes. You are the Lord of the universe 
endowed with Supreme potency. Be victorious, O infinite 
master of the world.” 

190. Thereafter, this controller of the world Kalagni- 
rudra, the goal of the good, pierced Andhaka with the tips of 
his trident and danced. 

191. On seeing Andhaka transfixed to the trident, god 
Brahma and the groups of Devas bowed to Lord Bhairava, 
the releaser from worldly bondage. 

192. The sages and siddhas eulogised him. The 
Gandharvas and Kinnaras sang. The charming groups of celes¬ 
tial damsels danced in the sky. 

193. Fixed to the tip of the trident, the demon Andhaka 
had all his sins burned down. He gained perfect knowledge of 

everything and hence eulogised Paramesvara (Siva). 

Andhaka said : 

194. “I bow down my head to the only lord with great 
concentration. I bow down to the ancient holy one whom they 
know as the Principle of Isa. He is the Kala of infinite form. 
He is the poet, the cause of Toga (union) and Viyoga (separa¬ 
tion) . 

195. I bow unto you the absolute Rudra, who are terrible 
due to the curved fangs, who dance in the firmament, giving 
out fire from your mouth, whose form is that of the blazing sun 
and who are endowed with a thousand feet, eyes and heads. 



1.16.196-203 


161 


196. Victory to you, the primordial deity whose feet are 
worshipped by the immortals. You are indivisible, a personifica¬ 
tion of the pure spirit. You are the one (sacrificial) fire worship¬ 
ped in various ways; you abide in all souls through external 
differences. 

197. They call you the only ancient Purusa, with the 
brilliance of the sun and beyond darkness. You observe all 
this and protect it eternally. You are the annihilator, who are 
served by the groups of Yogins. 

198. You are the only inner soul and conscience placed 
in many ways in the different bodies, but you are devoid of 
peculiarities of the bodies, etc. 

You are the Principle of Atman. You are conveyed by 
the word Paramatman. Some call you Siva. 

199. You are the imperishable Brahman, the most sacred 
form, embodiment of bliss called Pranava (Om). You are the 
wellknown Self-born Isvara, ths master of those who know 
Vedas, devoid of all special characteristics. 

200. You are of the form of Indra, Varuna and Agni. 
You are haihsa (swan), prana (the vital breath), death and final 
destruction. You are Yajna, Lord Prajapati. You are eulogised 
as the unique blue-necked god, by those who know the 
Vedas. 

201. You are Narayana, the beginningless cause of the 
world. You are Pitamaha (grandfather) and Prapitamaha 
(great-grandfather) [of the universe]. You are sung about in the 
occult passages of Vedanta and the mystic Upanisads. You are 
the ever-auspicious (Sadasiva), Supreme Ruler (Paramesvara). 

202. Obeisance to the greatest Being beyond darkness 
(of ignorance), the great Atman pervading the fourteen 
worlds. Salute to one who has excelled the three Saktis, to the 
unsullied one stationed in the seat of thousand Saktis (poten¬ 
cies) . 

203. Obeisance to the triple-formed deity whose personal 
form comprises infinite region, who is the receptacle of the 
world and its embodiment. Salute to you who are stationed in. 
the heart of the people. Bow to you the wearer of the great serpent 
as a necklace. 



162 


Kurma Pur ana 


204. O lord, whose lotus-like feet are worshipped by 
the leading sages and siddhas ! Obeisance to one who is firmly 
seated in the seat of prosperity and piety; Obeisance to the 
ultimate end, to the source of origin of the worldly existence, the 
embodiment of a thousand moons and a thousand suns. 

205. Obeisance to one who is accompanied by Uma, 
of beautiful waist. Golden-armed Lord, obeisance to you. Salute 
to one with the fire, the moon and the sun as eyes. Bow to the 
gracious consort of Ambika. 

206. Obeisance to the mysterious Lord concealed within 
the inmost cavity of the heart. Salute to the Lord who can be 
properly comprehended by the perfect knowledge of Vedanta. 
Bow to the great God Siva who is (transcendental to and there¬ 
fore) devoid of the three times (past, present and future), 
whose abode (or lustre) is o f spotless splendour. 

207. Thus eulogised, the glorious lord set him down from 
the tip of his trident. Being pleased with him, he touched him 
with both of his hands and spoke thus :— 

208. “O Daitya, in every respect I am pleased with 
this eulogy now. After attaining the status of the leader of 
Ganas, stay forever in my vicinity. 

209. You shall be free from ailments. All your doubts 
will be cleared. You will be worshipped well, even by Devas. 
Be the follower of Nandisvara; be devoid of all miseries”. 

210-211. Hardly was this spoken by the God of gods, 
when the deities, to their delight and astonishment, saw Andhaka, 
the great Daitya in the vicinity of the Lord, transformed into 
the Lord of Ganas,i resembling a thousand suns in brilliance, en¬ 
dowed with three eyes and marked (i.e. ornamented) with 
the crescent moon, blue-throated, with matted hair on the head, 
holding a spear in his mighty arm. 

212. On seeing him thus, they were surprised much; 
they eulogised the Daitya. Lord Visnu smilingly said to the 
lord of Devas. 

1. According to Vamana P. Gh. 63, the demon Andhaka was 
Siva’s son entrusted as a foster-child to Hiranyaksa. Andhaka entertained 
erotic passion for his mother Parvati and demanded her of Siva. In response 
to Siva’s challenge, he fought with Siva who discomfiting him transformed 
him into his Ga^a chief called Bhrngi. 



1.16.213-220 


163 


213. “O Mahadeva, your greatness is but meet and 
proper. A really great man does not take cognizance of 
defects due to one’s caste ( v.l. ignorance). He takes in account 
their good attributes. 

214. On being addressed thus, Bhairava, the leading 
Deva and Chief of the Ganas, went near Sankara accompanied 
by Kesava and the Daitya Andhaka. 

On seeing the lord arrived along with Andhaka, Madhava 
and the mothers, Sankara attained great pleasure. 

215. Isvara (Sankara) grasped the son of Hiranyaksa 
(Andhaka) with his hand and went to the place where there stood 
the aerial chariot of the daughter of the mountain. On seeing 
her husband, the remover of worldly distress arrived along with 
Andhaka, the beloved of Isa expressed happiness and pleasure 
on behalf of Andhaka. 

216. When Andhaka saw Mahesvari at the side of the 
lord, he fell on the ground like a staff; he bowed down at the 
lotus-like feet of the goddess—“I bow down to the beloved of 
the lord, the beginningless one, the daughter of the mountain 
from whom Pradhana and Purusa originate and who destroys 
the entire universe. 

217. I bow unto that daughter of Himalaya mountain, 
who is unchanging and who shines in the purest golden seat 
of Siva along with him, within whom the entire universe is 
held and wherein all the worlds undergo dissolution. I bow 
down to that Uma who is devoid of all defects, (v.l. One who 
is adored by god as well as by demons). 

218. She is not born, she does not become decreased, 
she does not increase. I bow down to that Uma who transcends 
all Gunas. I bow down to the daughter of the lord of 
mountains. O Goddess, O daughter of the mountain, forgive 
what has been committed by me out of delusion. I bow down 
to your lotus-like feet saluted by Devas and Asuras. 

219. Thus eulogised by the lord of Daityas, humble 
with devotion, the blessed goddess Parvati accepted Andhaka 
as her son. 

220. Then at the behest of Sambhu, the great lord 
Bhairava, born of Rudra, went to Patala along with the 
matriarchs. 



164 


Kurma Pur ana 


221. It was here that the Tamasa form of Visnu, the 
cause of annihilation of the world existed. The unmanifest 
lord Hari remains there in the form of Nrsirhha (Man-lion). 

222. Then Sambhu of the form of Ananta (the infinite) 
was well worshipped by even Sesa; Lord Kalagni Rudra united 
his own Atman to the Supreme Soul. 

223. Even as the lord was in the Yogic unison, the 
hungry mothers bowed down to the three-eyed Mahadeva and 
said to him: 

The Mothers said : 

224. “O Mahadeva, we are hungry. It behoves you to 
permit us. We shall eat up the three worlds. We will have 
no satisfaction otherwise.” 

225. After saying this much, the Mothersborn of Visnu, 
devoured the three worlds including the mobile and immobile 
beings. 

226. Then lord Bhairava meditated on lord Narayana, 
Hari with the physical form of Man-lion and bowed down to 
him with palms joined in reverence. 

227-228. On realising that he was being thought of by 
Umesa (Lord of Uma), Hari, instantaneously appeared before 
him (Umesa) and informed him thus. “O lord, these Mothers 
are eating up the three worlds. They are your own creations. 
Prevent them quickly.” When they were remembered by the 
lord of the form of Man-lion, the goddesses (Mothers) 
approached the great lord of the form of Man-lion. 

229. After reaching the vicinity of Visnu, all those des¬ 
tructive deities transferred their powers unto Sambhu, Bhairava, 
of excessive refulgence. 

230. The mothers then saw the most terrible Man-lion, 
the source of origin of the universe, and the serpent Sesa attain¬ 
ing unity instantaneously. 

Hr^ikesa [Lord Vifnu) said : 

231. “Those who are the devotees of the trident-wielding 
lord and those who remember me should be assiduously 
protected. 



I.16.232-I.17.1 


165 


232. This unequalled form that destroys everything is 
my own, and is born of Mahesvara’s person. It bestows worldly 
pleasures and liberation. 

233. Lord Kala, the infinite and the four-faced Brahma, 
the god of gods are but two aspects viz. Tamasa and Rajasa, 
of mine, (the former being characterised by the Tamasa and 
the latter by the Rajasa aspect). 

234. It is I that utterly unthwartable god Kala, the 
calculator of the universe, who, at the end of the kalpa, will 
devour the entire universe by assuming the form of Rudra. 

235. That fascinating form of mine which abounds in 
Sattva gum and is called Narayana, stabilises and protects the 
universe for ever. 

236. That Visnu, the greatest Brahman, the Supreme 
Atman, the ultimate goal, the unmanifest primordial nature, is 
mentioned as Sadananda (ever blissful).” 

237. The goddesses, the Vaisnavite matriarchs who were 
thus enlightened by Visnu sought ultimate refuge in that great 
lord alone. 

238 Thus, the whole story of curbing Andhaka 
has been narrated to you. The great glory of the lord of 
Devas, Bhairava of unmeasured splendour has also been 
recounted. 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 

The Story of Trivikrama} 


Suta said : 

1. When Andhaka was curbed and restrained, the power¬ 
ful son of the noble-souled Prahlada, named Virocana, became 
the king. 

1. Trivikrama : Literally : one who strides over (the three worlds) in 
three steps : The epithet which was originally and appropriately applied to 
the Sun in the Vedic period was naturally transferred to Visnu ‘the all- 



166 


Kurma Pur ana 


2. After conquering Devas including Devendra, the 
great Asura righteously protected the three worlds including 
the mobile and immobile beings, for many years. 

3. While he was reigning thus, once, the holy lord, the 
great sage, Sanatkumara came to his city at the instance of Visnu. 

4. The great Asura who had been seated on the throne, 
got up and went near the son of Brahma. He bent down his 
head and with palms joined in reverence, spoke these words. 

5. “Blessed I am and favoured with grace, since the 
glorious Lord of Yogins, the expert knower of the Vedas or 
Brahman, has today personally visited my excellent town. 

6. O scholarly Brahmana, why have you come ? You 
are the lord Pitamaha himself. O son of Brahma, tell me, what 
behest shall I carry out for you ? 

7. The holy lord spoke to the great Asura endowed with 
piety : I have come here to see you. You are very fortunate. 

8. O excellent Daitya, this sort of policy is very rare 
among Daityas. There is certainly no other righteous person 
like you in the three worlds. 

9. The king of Asuras who had been addressed thus, 
spoke again to the great sage—O holy one, the most excel¬ 
lent among the knowers of Brahman, elucidate unto me the 
greatest of all virtues. 

10. The glorious Yogi imparted to the noble-sou led king 
of Daityas the secret-most perfect knowledge of the Atman which 
is the highest Dharma. 

11. Having obtained the greatest knowledge and given 
Dakfina (money by way of fees) unto the preceptor, he 
entrusted the burden of kingdom to his son and he became 
interested in the regular practice of Yoga^. 

pervader* who was then identified with the sun-god. The legend of Bali and 
Vamana which developed out of this (as will be seen later) is not creditable 
to Visnu despite the defence of Purana-writers as is found in the Bh. P. 
8.15.1-23, Brahma 73.1-69, Pd. p. i. 30.1-203 (to mention a few). By his 
generosity and truthfulness Bali proved to be higher in stature and the great 
Visnu, a pigmy Vdfnana as he came to be called aptly. 

2. The KP. differs from the NP. about the end of Virocana. Here he 
is said to have abdicated the throne in favour of his son Bali and have 
resorted to the path of Yoga, while in the NP he, at the request of his queen, 
gave up his life as a price for the water used for washing the feet of the old 
Brahmin (god Visnu in disguise). 



1.17.12-20 


167 


12. That son of his was the great and intelligent Asura 
named Bali. He was favourably disposed towards Brahmanas. 
He was extremely virtuous. Then he conquered Purandara. 

13. Indra, surrounded by all Devas fought a great 
battle with him. On being defeated, he sought refuge in lord 
Visnu, Acyuta (the infallible). 

14-15. In the meanwhile, the gentle lady Aditi, the 
extremely distressed mother of Devas, performed a very 
severe penance thinking like this—“May a son be born to me 
for slaying the leading Daityas”. She resorted to the unmanifest 
Visnu, Hari, the most worthy of being the refuge. 

16. In the filament of the lotus of her heart, she con¬ 
centrated her mind on Vasudeva, the unsullied great 
region, devoid of beginning and end, the blissful, unique 
firmament. 

17. The delighted lord Visnu, Hari the wielder of a 
conch, a discus and a mace {Sankha, Cakra and Gada), the 
Yogic Atman appeared in front of the mother of Devas. 

18. On seeing Visnu arrived, Aditi endowed with devotion 
considered herself as having attained her objects. She propitiated 
Kesava with the following eulogy. 

Aditi said^: 

19. Be victorious, O sole cause of destruction of all 
(lit. the floods of) miseries; Hail to you. Hail to you, O Lord, 
endowed with the advent of infinite greatness, glory to you. 
O Lord, with perfect knowledge as your physical form, O Lord 
devoid of beginning, middle and end. Victory to you, O 
one resembling the Ether; O one with unsullied bliss as your 
form 

20. Obeisance to Visnu of the from of Kala. Salutations 
to you the Man-lion. Bow to you, to Sesa, Obeisance to 
Kalarudra, the cause of annihilation; Obeisance to you 
Vasudeva, salutations to you. 


1. This hymn of Visnu and Prahlada’s advice to Bali ( VV. 32-39) 
shows that no Pasupatisation has been attempted in this legend. 



168 


Kurma Pur ana 


21. Obeisance to you, the wielder of Universal Maya. 
Obeisance to you, the Reality, comprehensible only through 
Yoga. Obeisance to you, founded in virtue and perfect knowledge. 
Obeisance to you, Varaha (the divine Boar) ; Obeisance to you 
again and again. 

22. Obeisance to you, O Lord with form resembling (re¬ 
fulgent like) a thousand suns and moons. Obeisance to you, O 
Lord, accessible only through perfect Vedic knowledge and 
piety. Obeisance to the upholder of the Earth. Obeisance to the 
unmeasurable. Obeisance to you, O Lord, the source of the 
origin of the Universe. Obeisance again and again unto you. 

23. Obeisance to you, Sambhu^ founded in truth. Salu¬ 
tations to you, the cause of and embodiment for the form of the 
universe. Obeisance to you stationed in the middle of Yogic 
seat (meditation). Obeisance to you, the auspicious one of 
single form. Salutations to you again and again. 

24. Lord Visnu, identical with the universe, who was 
thus propitiated by the mother of Devas, laughingly told 
her to choose the boon she wished. 

25. Bowing down her head on the ground, she chose the 
excellent boon—“For the welfare of Devas, I choose this boon 
that pray, you be my son.” 

26. The Lord favourably disposed towards those who 
resort to him said, “So be it.” The incomprehensible Lord 
vanished there itself, after granting the boon. 

27. After a lapse of time the mother of Devas conceived 
Janardana, Lord Narayana himself, in her womb. 

28. When Hrsikesa occupied the womb of the mother 
of Devas, evil portents of terrible nature happened in the 
city of Bali, the son of Virocana. 


1. KP. always emphasizes the identity of Siva and Visnu. Though the 
Puranas have later been classified as Saivite, Vaisnavite, etc., they have 
taught oneness of these deities as they are the various manifestations of the 
Brahman, the one Reality {ekamsat). Unfortunately, despite the attempts of 
the Purana-writers to bring about a sort of unification or samanvaya in these 
sects [sampradayas), their followers continued to quarrel about the superiority 
of their own sect. 



1.17.29-40 


169 


29. On seeing the evil portents, the leader of the Daityas 
became agitated due to fear. He bowed to Prahlada, the aged 
Asura and his grandfather, and said to him :— 

Bali said : 

30. “O grandfather of great intelligence, why does this 
portentous phenomena happen in this city of ours. What may 
be the reason thereof ? What should be done now” ? 

31. After hearing his words, and meditating for a long 
time, the great Asura bowed down to Hrsikesa and spoke these 
words ; 

Prahlada said : 

32. “For the purpose of slaying the Asuras, the mother 
of the heaven-dwellers has conceived in her womb that Visnu 
who is v/orshipped by means of Tajhas and to whom belongs this 
entire universe. 

33. That Vasudeva from whom everything is non-differ- 
ent and who differs from everything, has entered the womb 
of the mother of Devas. 

34. That Lord Visnu whose form even Devas do not 
know precisely, has entered today the body of Aditi by his own 
wish. 

35. That Hari, the ancient Purusa, the great Yogin 
from whom the living beings originate, and wherein they attain 
dissolution, has now incarnated. 

36. That Visnu, wherein the conception of name, caste, 
etc. has no place and who is of the mere form of existence, is 
being born with a portion of himself. 

37. That Janardana, whose power is the mother of the 
Universe, Maya, goddess Laksmi, who is the sustainer of the 
Dharma, has incarnated. 

38. He whose form constituted of Tamas is Rudra and 
whose body is formed of the Rajo-gma is Brahma and whose 
form sustained by Sattva-guna is Visnu. 

39. Thinking thus about Govinda, with a mind humble 
due to devotion, seek shelter in him alone. Thereby, you will 
attain great bliss.” 

40. Thereafter, at the instance of Prahlada, Bali, the son 



170 


Kurma Purana 


of Virocana, sought refuge in Hari. He, the knower of piety 
and virtue, protected the Universe righteously. 

41. When the proper time arrived, Aditi, the mother of 
Devas, bore to Kasyapa, the son, Mahavisnu himself, the 
increaser of the delight of Devas. 

42. (She gave birth to Vi?nu) who had four arms and 
large eyes, whose chest is marked by Srivatsa emblem, who 
resembles the blue cloud (in complexion), who was resplendent 
and surrounded by glorious halo (Sri—or goddess of wealth). 

43. Devas, Siddhas, Sadhyas, Garanas, of whom Indra 
was the head and Brahma surrounded by the groups of 
sages approached Upendra* (god Visnu) (for worshipping 
him). 

44. Lord Hari, whose investiture with the sacred thread 
was performed, studied the Vedas and the code of good con¬ 
duct from Sage Bharadvaja holding it as a model for the people 
in the three worlds. 

45. Thus the Lord points out the worldly course of con¬ 
duct. The common people follow what he does as they consider 
him the authority. 

46. Then, in course of time, the intelligent Bali, son of 
Virocana, worshipped Visnu, the all-pervading Lord of Yajnas 
by performance of Yajnas. 

47. He worshipped Brahmanas after giving them abun¬ 
dant wealth. Brahmana sages came to the sacrificial hall of the 
noble soul. 


1. The episode of the incarnation of Mahavisnu as the son of Aditi- 
Kasyapa and his subsequent assumption of the cosmic form, etc. as given here 
closely follows the version in the Bh. P. VIII skandha & not the one in Pd. 
P. wherein he (Mahavisnu) pushes the demon Dhundhu the same way. 
The significant difference between the Vamana episode in the KP & Bh. P. 
is that in the KP. Sukra does not come in the way of Bali while he was 
about to donate three paces of land, and Visnu does not push Bali down to 
the nether world. Bali saw the transformation of the dwarf Vamana into 
the cosmic figure and occupying the three worlds with three steps and his re¬ 
assumption of a dwarf (Vamana) form. He completes the formality of gift 
by pouring water on his hand and as p)er his advice enters Patala to lead a 
life devoted to Visnu. 

*Upendra in the nom. being meaningless (and prob. a misprint) is 
emended as Upendram as the acc. sg. and so translated. 



1.17.48-58 


171 


48. Lord Vi?nu came to know of this and urged by 
Bharadvaja, he came to the place of Yajna assuming the form 
of a Vamana (Dwarf). 

49. With the hide of a black antelope and the sacred 
thread (as the upper garment) and shining with the sacred staff 
of a Palasa tree in his hand, the extremely brilliant Brahmana 
(Visnu, the Dwarf) with matted hair, came there reciting the 
Vedas. 

50. Coming near the king of Asuras, Hari the mendicant 
begged him for the space traversed by three steps of his own feet. 

51-52. Bali endowed with pious emotions washed the 
feet of Visnu and sipped that water. He took up the pitcher 
made of gold and thought thus “I shall give unto you the space 
covered by three steps. May Lord Hari of unchanging shape 
be pleased.” After contemplating thus he poured the very 
cool water on the sprout-like hands of the Lord. 

53. The Lord of the Daityas had sought refuge in him. 
Desirous of making him free from covetousness and other 
passions, the primordial Lord covered, in his strides, the Earth, 
firmament and heaven. 

54. The foot of the Lord traversed the three worlds, 
and went to the Brahmaloka from the region of Prajapati. The 
leading gods, the chief of whom were the Adityas, and the 
Siddhas who stayed there bowed unto him [v.l. who was 
refulgent like a thousand suns.] 

55. The Primordial Lord, the beginningless grandsire 
of the world, offered worship to him and propitiated him. 
After cracking the Upper crest of the Cosmic egg, he em¬ 
bellished with divine ornaments went again. 

56. Thanks to the breaking of the Egg, the great cool 
water resorted to by the meritorious, flowed over. The excellent 
river was designated as Ganga by god Brahma. It was stationed 
in the sky. 

57. After reaching the great Prakrti, Pradhana, the 
source of Brahman and then the sole Purusa, the seed (origin) 
of the universe, he stabilised his foot at the unchanging region 
of I sa. Seeing it, the gods eulogised it at those different places. 

58. On seeing that Purusa with the universe for his 
physical body, Bali the great, bowed to Visnu with devotion. 



172 


Kurma Parana 


He bowed to Narayana, the one and only unchanging deity 
whom the Vedas pay obeisance and revere with their minds. 

59. Lord Vasudeva, the primordial creator became a 
Dwarf once again and said to him—“O Lord of Daityas, in 
effect, the three worlds have been given over to me by you 
yourself.” 

60. Bowing down again his head, the Daitya poured 
water at the tip of his hand (and said), “I shall offer myself 
unto you of infinite splendour and abode, to Trivikrama of 
unmeasured stride.” 

61. After accepting dana (lit. what has been offered) 
from Bali, the son of Prahlada’s son, Sahkha-pani (i.e. the conch¬ 
armed deity Visnu), the immanent soul of the universe spoke 
again to Daitya : “Enter the root (the downmost part) of the 
nether world. 

62. Enjoying pleasures unavailable even to gods, 
stay there permanently. By the path of devotion, meditate 
on me continuously. At the close of the Kalpa, you will enter 
me once again.” 

63. After advising this to that lion-like Daitya, Visnu of 
great strides and of truthful exploits, gave the three worlds 
unto Indra. 

64. Siddhas, Devas, sages, Kinnaras, gods Brahma, 
Indra, Lord Rudra and Adityas (the sun-gods) and the group 
of Maruts eulogised the Deity of great Yoga. 

65. After performing that miraculous feat, Visnu who 
had assumed the form of a dwarf (Vamana) vanished there itself 
even as all of them were watching. 

66. Being urged by Prahlada and other leading Asuras, 
the excellent Daitya Bali, the glorious devotee of Visnu went 
to Patala. 

67. He asked Prahlada about the greatness of Visnu, the 
excellent path of devotion and the procedure of his worship. 
He (Prahlada) explained all these and he (Bali) did in accord¬ 
ance with it. 

68. With great emotional attachment, he sought refuge 
in the Deity holding a discus and a conch in hand—the 



1.18.1-6 


173 


incoprehensible Lord with lotus-like eyes. He concentrated 
his mind with love in him, and followed the path of Karman. 

69. O Brahmanas, the exploits of Vamana have been thus 
described to you. That Purusottama accomplishes the tasks of 
Devas. 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 

Description of the race of KaSyapa}- 

Suta said : 

1. Bali had a hundred sons of great strength and 
exploits. The chief among them was one of great strength and 
brilliance named Bana. 

2. That king was a great devotee of Sankara. He ruled 
over the kingdom. After subjugating the three worlds, he 
harassed Indra. 

3. Then Indra and other Devas went to Krttivasas 
(Elephant-hide-robed god Siva) and said to him, “The great 
Asura named Bana who is your protege, is harassing us.” 

4. Thus addressed by Devas, Lord Mahesvara, Lord 
of Devas, burned Bana’s city sportively with a single arrow. 

5. When the city was being burned, Bana sought refuge 
in the Trident-bearing Lord Rudra, the Lord of the Bull, Is^a, 
Nila-lohita (of blue-red complexion). 

6. Bearing thatLihga of Sambhu over his head, he came 
out of the city and devoid of passion (v.l. fear) eulogised the 
Supreme Ruler. 


1. Puranas generally trace the parentage of all sentient beings to 
Kasyapa and the variety such as gods, demons, and other movable and 
immovable {sthdnujangamdh) beings (V. 16) are due to the different wives of 
the sage (cf. AP. 19-1-29, Bh.P. VI. 6.25fr, Mt. P. 6.1-47). Was it an attempt 
to emphasize a sort of universal brotherhood ? 



174 


Kurma Pur ana 


7. Lord Isa, Sankara, Nilalohita, on being eulogised, 
(and propitiated) lovingly engaged Bana in the chieftancy of 
the Ganasd 

8. Similarly, the terrible sons of Danu were Tara and 
others. Out of them Tara, Sambara, Kapila, Sankara (?) (a 
better v.l. Sancara), Svarbhanu, and Vrsaparvan have been 
glorified as the prominent ones. 

9. O Brahmanas, Surasa gave birth to a thousand 
serpents as well as to thousands of noble-souled, multi-headed, 
heaven-wanderers. 

10. Arista gave birth to a thousand Gandharvas. Ananta 
and other great serpents are glorified as the sons of Kadru. 

11. O leading Brahmanas, Tamra gave birth to six 
daughters Suki, Syeni, Bhasi, Sugriva, Granthika (v.l. Grdh- 
rika) and Suci. 

12. Surabhi gave birth to the cows and buffaloes. Ira 
gave birth to trees, creepers, vines and grasses of all kinds. 

13. Similarly, Muni gave birth to Yaksas, Raksasas, and 
Apsaras. O excellent saints, it was out of anger that she gave 
birth to the groups of Raksasas. 

14. The two famous sons of Vinata were Garuda and 
Aruna. Out of them, intelligent Garuda performed a very 
difficult penance. Thanks to the favour of the Trident-bearing 
deity, he attained the status of the vehicle of Hari. 

15. Aruna propitiated Lord Mahadeva by means of 
penance. He was engaged in the charioteer-hood of the Sun- 
god by Sambhu who was pleased with him. 

16. These mobile and immobile beings are the des¬ 
cendants of Kasyapa born in the Vaivasvata Manvantara 
which have been described to you. It destroys the sins of those 
who hear. 

17. O man of holy vows, the twenty-seven daughters 
of Daksa are said to be the wives of the Moon. There were 
many (v.l. sixteen) children born to the wives of Aristanemi. 

18-19. The four lightnings were born of the scholar 
Bahuputra (of many sons). The excellent sages Ahgirasas were 


1. It appears that with the exception of Prahlada, the Asuras were 
pro-Siva & some of their chiefs were absorbed as chief attendants of Siva. 



1.19.1-4 


175 


honoured due to their piety. Lord Praharana was the son of 
celestial sage Krsasva. All these are born again at the end of a 
thousand Yugas during (different) Manvantaras with similar 
achievements and with their own designations.^ 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 

The narrative of the dynasties of sages'^ 

Suta said : 

1. After begetting these sons, Kasyapadesirous of (more) 
sons, performed an austere penance for the continuity of 
progeny. 

2. Even as he was performing the penance energetically, 
these two sons were born viz. Vatsara and Asita. Both of them 
were expounders of Brahman. 

3. From Vatsara were born Naidhruva and Raibhya of 
very great fame. The sons born of Raibhya were Sudras (?) 
(v.l. Vaidyas) ♦ who were the most excellent among the 
learned ones (or knowers of Veda). 

4. The daughter of Gyavana named Sumedhawas the 
wife of the noble-souled Naidhruva. She gave birth to the sons 
called Kundapayins. 


1. This is a Puranic paraphrase oi dhdta yathapiirvam akalpayat. The 
idea that the same persons are born again with the same name and repeat 
the same pattern of life—nay all the acts—has been popular in the Puranic 
age and is still lingering in Indian masses. Some adjustment is supposed to 
have been made in the case of individuals who attain Moksa and who are 
never born again. 

2. Although there are some differences about names, etc. in the des¬ 
cendants of sages in different Puranas, the KP. seems closer to the Vayu P. 
70.22ff. The sages, the patriarchs—are the saptarsis of the present Manvan- 
tara viz. Marici, Ahgiras, Atri, Pulastya Vasistha, Pulaha and Kratu. These 
are regarded as the ‘mental sons’ of god Brahma. 

*Naibhyas as it is supported in the Vayu P. 70.26. 



176 


Kurma Purdna 


5. A son called Devala who was devoted to the Brahman 
(or expert in the Vedas) was born of Asita and Ekaparna. He 
was a preceptor of Yoga and performed great penance. 

6. Sandilyawas extremely glorious, pure and a knower of 
the true principles. By the grace of the Lord of Parvati, he 
attained the Yogic liberation (v.l. attained excellent Yoga). 

7. O Brahmanas, the three sons, viz. Sandilya, Naidhruva 
and Raibhya of the family of Kasyapa had human tempera¬ 
ment (or are the sources or patriarchs of human beings). I 
shall now mention the children of Pulastya. 

8. O Brahmanas, the daughter of Trnabindu was 
named Ailavila. The royal sage gave that daughter in 
marriage to sage Pulastya. 

9. The son of Ailavila was the sage Visravas. He had 
four wives who made the family of Pulastya flourish. 

10. They were Puspotkata, Vaka, Kaikasi and Deva- 
varnini. Listen to the progeny of these who were richly en¬ 
dowed with comely features and beauty. 

11-12. Devavarnini gave birth to the eldest of the sons 
viz. Vaisravana; Kaikasi gave birth to the son Ravana, the 
king of Raksasas and Kumbhakarna, daughter Surpanakha and 
(son) Vibhisana. 

13. The children begot of Vaka were Mahodara, Pra- 
hasta, Mahaparsva, Khara and the daughter Kumbhinasi. 

14. Trisiras, Dusana and Vidyujjihva of great strength 
were also his sons. Thus there were these ten Raksasas of 
cruel actions in the family of Pulastya. All of them were endowed 
with the power of penance and physical strength. They were the 
devotees of Rudra and were extremely terrible. 

15. Pulaha’s sons were the deer, serpent, fanged beasts, 
Bhutas (goblins), PiMcas, bears, boars and elephants. 

16. In the Vaivasvata Manvantara, Kratu was 
childless. Kasyapa who himself was a Prajapati, was the son of 
Marici. 

17. Sukra the preceptor of the Daityas and a sage of 
great penance was born of Bhrgu. He was engaged in selfstudy 
of Vedas and the practice of Yoga. He was a devotee of Hara 
and was excessively brilliant. 



1.19.18-26 


177 


18. Atri’s son was Vahni and his uterine-brother was 
Naidhruva. It is heard by us that sons were born of GhrtacI 
from Krsasva, the Brahmana sage. 

19. He begot of her Svastyatreyas'^ of great prowess. 
They were devoted to Vedas and Vedahgas and had destroyed 
thei r sins through penance. 

20. Narada gave the gentle lady Arundhatl to Vasistha. 
As a result of the curse of Daksa, Narada led a celibate life. 

21. When Haryasvas (the sons of Daksa) were lost due 
to the Maya (delusive advice) of Narada, Daksa with eyes red 
shot with anger cursed Narada. 

22. “O Brahmana, since all my sons were destroyed by 
you through deceitfulness, you will be devoid of issues.” 

23. Vasistha begot of Arundhatl the son Sakti. From 
Sakti was born the glorious Parasara, the omniscient and the 
most excellent among the performers of penance. 

24. After propitiating the Lord of the chief of Devas, 
Isana, the slayer of the Tripuras, he obtained the unrivalled 
son—the holy Lord Krsnadvaipayana. 

25. §uka was born of Dvaipayana. It was Lord Sankara 
himself who incarnated on the Earth with a part of his personality 
and then attained his own great region. This Suka had five 
sons who were great ascetics. They were Bhurisravas, Prabhu, 
Sambhu, Krsna and Gaura, the fifth.^ 

26. He had daughters ako viz. Kirtimatl, Yogamata and 
Dhrtavrata. These persons of the family of Atri, the expounders 
of Brahman, have been narrated by Brahma. Henceforth (listen 
to) and understand the royal progeny (born) from Kasyapa. 


1. Svastyatreya is the seer of two sOktas of the RV—V. 50, 51. It is; 
reasonable to assume that he was the son of Atri and Svastyatreyas are his 
descendants. 

2. Suka is a celibate recluse in the Bh. P. The Devi Bhagavata 
(Skandha I) credits him with a wife, Pivari, daughter of Pitrs and four 
sons—Krsna, Gauraprabha, Bhuri, Devasruta and a daughter, Kirti who 
was given in marriage to Anu, the son of King Vibhraja. The information 
in KP. about the sons and daughters of Suka is different though both 
agree that Suka raised a family. 



178 


Kurma Puram 


CHAPTER TWENTY 

The glorification of the Royal Dynasties^ 

Suta said: 

1 . Aditi gave birth to her son Lord Aditya (the sun-god) 
from Kasyapa. This Aditya had four wives.^ 

2. They were Sarhjna, Rajni, Prabha, and Ghaya. Now 
know (the names of) sons. Sarhjna, the daughter of Tvastr, 
bore to the Sun-god the excellent Manu. 

3-4. She gave birth to Yama and Yamuna also. Rajni 
gave birth to Revanta,® Prabha bore to Aditya, the “dawn” and 
Ghaya gave birth to sons Savarni, Sani (Saturn), Tapati and 
Visti in the same order. The first Manu had nine sons equal 
to himself. 

5-6. They were: Iksvaku, Nabhaga,* Dhrsta, Saryati, 
Narisyanta, Nabhaga, Arista, Karusa and Prsadhra of great 
splendour. All these nine were glorious like Indra. Ila the 
eldest and the most excellent made the race of the moon 
flourish. 

7-8a. After going to the abode of Budha (Mercury), she 
had the union with the son of the moon. The gentle lady bore 
to the son of the moon, the excellent (son) Pururavas who—as 
this has been heard by us—was the propitiator of the Pitrs. 


1. Recording the legendary history of ancient royal dynasties is a 
characteristic of a Mahapurana. KP. describes here mainly the solar 
dynasty—especially the race of King Iksvaku. This topic (with due allowance 
to variety in some names) has been treated in a number of Puranas like 
the Bh. P. IX. 6, VP. 4. 1 and 2, and others. Vide F.E. Pargiter*s AIHT for 
their comparison. 

2. Aditya had three wives only, the fourth wife viz. Chaya mentioned 
here was the shadow of his wife Sarhjna. Being afraid of the refulgence of 
Aditya, Sarhjna left behind her own shadow and assuming the form of a 
mare she escaped to a jungle to perform penance. The Sun-god, being 
in a passionate mood, mistook Chaya for Sarhjna and had from Chaya 
Savarni, 6ani, Tapati and Visfi* Cf. VP. 3.2.3-13. 

Probably ‘Raivata’, as Revanta is the son of Sarhjna in her mare- 
form from the Sun-god who assumed the form of a horse on that occasion. 
Cf. VP. 3.2.3-13. Revanta, thus is a brother of Asvini Kumaras. 

^Nabhaga is repeated twice in this verse. The first is presumably a 
misprint for Nabhaga. 



1.20. 8b-19 


179 


8b-9. After attaining the extremely pure son* well-known 
as Sudyumna, Ila obtained three sons viz.: Utkala, Gaya and 
Vinata and regained womanhood. 

10. All these were of un-paralleled glory. They sought 
refuge in the lotus-born deity. From Iksvaku was born the 
heroic king named Vikuksi. 

11. He was his eldest son. He had fifteen sons. The 
eldest of them was Kakutstha. Kakutstha’s son was Suyodhana. 

12. The glorious Prthu was born of Suyodhana. Visvaka 
was Prthu’s son. From Visvaka was born the intelligent 
Ardraka, Yuvanasva was his son. 

13-14. The valorous king Yuvanasva was desirous of 
(begetting) a son. He went to Gokarna^ and there he saw the 
Brahmana sage Gautama, resplendent like fire, performing a 
penance. He prostrated himself at his feet to bow and asked 
him by what holy rite he could obtain a righteous son. 

Gautama said : 

15. “After propitiating the primordial person Narayana, 
free from ailments, the Lord without beginning or destruction, 
one shall obtain a righteous son. 

16. By propitiating the ruler of the Universe, the pri¬ 
mordial Kr?na whose son is Brahma himself and whose grandson 
is Nilalohita (i.e. Siva), one begets a good son. 

17. By propitiating Hrsikesa, whose power and influence 
even Lord Brahma does not comprehend factually, one shall have 
a righteous son.” 

18-19. On hearing the words ofGautama, King Yuvanasva 
propitiated Hrsikesa, the eternal Vasudeva. His son was a great 
hero and was famous by the name of Savasti. It was by him 


*The reading Pumstva is more acceptable, as Ila after recovering her 
original manhood as Sudyumna procreated then three sons. If that v.l. is 
adopted the verse means, ‘After attaining defectless manhood, it is well- 
known that Ila obtained three sons.’ 

1. As these kings ruled in the north and north-west of India, this 
Gokarna is most probably the holy place on the confluence of Sarasvati 
mentioned in the Vardha P. 170 and not the holy place in Karwar district of 
Karnataka. 



180 Kurma Purdna 

that the great city of Savasti'^ (v.l. Sravasti) in the land of 
Gauda was built. 

20. From him was born Brhadasva and from him was born 
Kuvalayasva. He became known as Dhundhumara by killing 
the great Asura Dhundhu. 

21. O excellent Brahmanas, it is said that Dhundhu¬ 
mara had three sons. They were Drdhasva, Dandasva and 
Kapilasva. 

22. Pramoda was the son of Drdhasva, his son was 
Haryasva, Nikumbha was the son of Haryasva and from 
Nikumbha was born Sarhhatasva. 

23. Krtasva and Ranasva were the sons of Sarhhitasva; 
Yuvanasva whose strength in battle was equal to that of Indra 
was the son of Ranasva. 

24. By performing the (sacrifice) of Varuna and 

through the grace of the sages, he obtained an excellent son 
who had no equals and who was a devotee of Visnu. 

25-26. (that son was) Mandhatr of very great intellect, 
who was the most excellent of all those who wield weapons. 
From Mandhatr were bom Purukutsa and the valorous Amba- 
risa and the meritorious-souled Mucukunda. All of them were 
equal to god Indra on the battle-field. Ambarisa’s successor was 
another Yuvanasva. 

27. Harita was the son of Yuvanasva and Harita was 
his son. Purukutsa’s successor was Trasadasyu of great fame. 

28. Sambhuti, bom of Narmada, is known as his 
son. His son was Visnuvrddha and his son was Anaranya. 
Brhadasva was the son of Anaranya and Haryasva was his son. 

29. He was an extremely righteous king. By the grace of 
Kardama, the Prajapati, he begota virtuous son devoted to theSun. 

30. That son, king Vasumanas, worshipped the sun-god 
and obtained the blessed son Tridhanvan who was without an 
equal and who had suppressed his enemies. 


1. v.l. Sravasti is more probable as no place called Savasti is found in 
the Puranic list of ancient towns. Sravasti is Sahet-Mahet on the Rapti in the 
U.P. The VP. 4.2.13 states Sravasta (and not Savasta or Osti) as the 
founder of this city. Pasenadi (Prasenajit), a contemporary of Gautama 
Buddha ruled at sravasti (Savatthi in Pali records). 



1.20.31-37 


181 


31. O excellent Brahmanas, after conquering his enemies, 
he performed a horse-sacrifice. The king practised self-study 
of the Vedas, was liberal-minded and desirous of crossing the 
ocean of worldly existence (v.l. forbearing) and devoted to 
piety. 

32. The sages, the chief of whom were Vasistha and 
Kasyapa, and devas headed by Indra came to the sacrificial 
hall of the noble-souled king. 

33. After duly concluding the Taj ha, the great king 
endowed with humility bowed down to Vasistha and other 
excellent Brahmanas and asked them: 

Vasumanas said : 

34. O leading Brahmanas, which is more conducive to 
welfare in this world ? Is it sacrifice, penance or renunciation^ 
Be pleased to tell me, O knowers of everything. 

Vasistha said : 

35. After studying the Vedas duly, after begetting and 

assiduously bringing them up, one should perform the worship 
ofYajnesvara (the Lord of sacrifices) by performing and 

realising the Atman should repair to the forest. 

Pulastya said : 

36. Having at first performed sacrifices for excellent gods 
according to proper procedure (& formalities) and having 
propitiated the Supreme Lord, the Yogin, one should take to 
renunciation.2 

Pulaha said : 

37. By means of penance, one shall propitiate that 
thousand-rayed deity whom they call the sole ancient Person and 
the Supreme Lord, and shall obtain liberation. 


1. The replies to this query of Vasumanas record the thought- 
currents then prevalent in the society. The tendency towards a compromise 
or samanvayam different cults (e.g. Vaisnavism, Saivism) is clear. 

2. Quoted in CG. Kdla nirnaya^ p. 809. 



182 


K urma Pur ana 


Jamadagni said : 

38. The Lord who is unborn, the maker of the Universe, 
the eternal seed of the Universe, and the immanent soul of all 
living beings, is worshipped by means of penance. 

Visvdmitra said : 

39. That Rudra, who is the Fire-god, the soul of all, who 
is infinite, who is self-born, and who has faces all round is wor¬ 
shipped by means of severe penance and not through other 
sacrifices. 

Bharadvdja said : 

40. That eternal Vasudeva, the lord who is worshipped 
by means of Tajnas and whose form is constituted of all deities, 
is the Supreme Lord; he should be worshipped. 

Atri said : 

41. That great Supreme Ruler from whom all this 
Universe is born and whose offspring is god Brahma (the 
progenitor of the world) is worshipped only by taking recourse 
to austere penance. 

Gautama said : 

42. That eternal Lord of gods, the lord from whom 

Pradhana and Purusa originate, and whose energy is this 

universe, should be worshipped through penance. 

KaSyapa said : 

43. The lord of thousand eye, Sambhu, the cosmic 

witness, Prajapati the creator of Prajas, the great Yogin, be¬ 
comes delighted when worshipped by means of penance. 

Kratu said : 

44. To a person who has concluded Vedic study and per¬ 

formed Tajnas, and has begotten sons, no other holy duty, 
excepting the performance of penance, is advised in the- 

scriptures.” 

45. On hearing these statements that saintly king be¬ 
came highly delighted in his mind. He bowed to and worshipped 
them. After bidding farewell to them, he spoke to Tridhanvan. 



1.20.46-57 


183 


46. “By means of penance I shall propitiate the Lord 
designated with the single syllable OM, the great Purusa, the 
vital spirit stationed in the middle of Aditya. 

47. But you should be devoted to Dharma forever. 
Eternally vigilant, protect the entire earthly realm consisting of 
the four castes of people.” 

48. After saying so, the sinless king entrusted the king¬ 
dom to the care of his son. In order to perform the excellent 
penance, he went to the forest. 

49. Resorting to the forest of Devadaru {Pinus Devadaru) 
trees on the beautiful peaks of the Himalaya, he worshipped 
gods with bulbous and other roots and fmits grown in the forest 
and subsisted on them. 

50. Shaking off his sins by means of penance, he mentally 
repeated the Mantra of goddess Savitri, the mother of the 
Vedas, for a hundred years and more. 

51. While he was performing penance like this, the self- 
born lord, the great Isvara, Hiranyagarbha, the Atman of the 
Universe came to that spot himself 

52. On seeing Lord Brahma with faces all round, coming 
there, the king bowed down his head at his feet and glorified 
his name. 

53. “Obeisance to you O Brahman, the supreme God, 
the Supreme Soul, the gold-complexioned creator with a 
thousand eyes. 

54. Salutations to the creator and the dispenser of destiny. 
Hail to you the embodiment of all gods. Obeisance to you, the 
embodiment of spiritual knowledge, comprehensible through the 
knowledge and practice of Sarhkhya and Yoga. 

55. Obeisance to you, the Trinity, the Creator, the 
Omniscient One. Hail to the ancient Purusa, the preceptor of 
the Yogins.” 

56. Then, lord Brahma, the creator of the Universe, be¬ 
came delighted and said,—“Welfare unto you. Choose the boon. 
I am the granter of boons.” 

The King said : 

57. “O lord of the lords of Devas, I wish to perform 
the Japa of Gayatri, the mother of the Vedas, once again. May 



184 K urma Pur ana 

I have the longevity for the period of a hundred years and 
more.” 

58. Glancing at the king, the Atman of the Universe (i.e. 
Brahma) said—“So be it”. Stroking him gently with his hands, 
the delighted Lord vanished there itself. 

59. The glorious king on securing the boon was much 
delighted, and he repeated the Japa. He was tranquil. He used 
to take his holy ablution thrice a day and he subsisted on fruits, 
roots and bulbous roots. 

60. When hundred years were completed, the lord of 
fierce-rays (the Sun-god), the great Yogin, appeared in front of 
him from the middle of the Solar sphere. 

61. On seeing the eternal Lord stationed in the solar 
sphere, the self-born lord Brahma, the embodiment of the Vedas, 
he was surprised. 

62-64. He eulogised him through the Vedic Mantras and 
particularly through the Savitri Mantra. In a moment, he saw 
the same Purusa, the Supreme God Siva with four faces, eight 
hands and three eyes. Matted hair constituted his coronet. He 
was marked with the moon’s digits; he was Hara with half 
male and half female body. He was illuminating the entire 
universe by means of his rays. His neck was blue in colour. He 
was wearing red garments, garlands and unguents. He himself 
was red in colour 

65. With his mind overwhelmed with great emotion and 
with extremely deep devotion, he bowed down his head and 
eulogised him with the Savitri Mantra. 

66. “Obeisance to you the blue-throated Lord, the 
brilliant Paramesthin. Salutations to Rudra of the form of the 
three Vedas {Trayi). Obeisance to the embodiment ofKala, the 
cause of all.” 

67. Then the great lord delighted in his mind, said to the 

king. 

“O sinless one, listen. These are my secret names: 


1. These verses emphasize the identity of the sun-god, Siva, Brahma 
as they are the forms of one Reality [ekath sat), the Para-brahman. 



1.20.68-76 


185 


68. They are sung about in all the Vedas. They subdue 
and suppress the worldly existence. O king, with purity make 
obeisance to me through these. 

69. Recite the ^aiarudriya Mantra which is the quintes¬ 
sence of the Yajur Mantras. O king, perform Japa with your 
mind not dwelling on any one else but attached to me. 

70. Maintaining celibacy, observing fast, with concentra¬ 
tion of mind and attachment to Bhasma (holy ashes), one 
should perform the Japa of Rudra till the time of death. He 
then attains the great region.” 

71. After saying this. Lord Rudra, with a desire of 
blessing his devotee, granted a further lease of life to the king 
for a hundred years. 

72. After granting him the great perfect knowledge and 
detachment, Rudra, Paiamesvara, vanished instantaneously. 
That was very wonderful. 

73. The king also performed the Japa of Rudra with a 
concentrated mind. He smeared ashes over his body, performed 
holy ablution three times (per day). He was tranquil and 
had full concentration of mind. 

74-75. When the king continued the Japa for a period 
nf full hundred years, the Yogic activity began to function 
(resulting in deeper meditation). In due course of time, he 
attained the great region, the abode of Paramesthin, the essence 
of the Vedas. He then attained the splendid sphere of the sun, 
whence he went over to Mahesvara. 

76. Whoever reads or even listens to the excellent life- 
story of this king, is absolved of all sins and is worshipped in 
the region of Brahma. 



186 


K urma Pur dm- 


CHAPTER TWENTYONE 

Description of the race of Iksvdku^ 

Suta said : 

1. The son of the king viz.—^Tridhanvan protected the 
country righteously. His son was a scholar well known as Tray- 
yaruna. 

2. A very powerful son named Satyavrata was born to 
him. His wife Satyadhana gave birth to Hariscandra. 

3. Hariscandra had a valorous son known as Rohita. 
Rohita’s son was Vrka from whom was born Bahu. 

4. Harita was Rohita’s son. Dhundhu was his son.. 
Vijaya and Sudeva were the two sons of Dhundhu. 

*5. Vijaya’s son was a powerful king named Karuka. 
Sagara, his son, was an extremely virtuous king. Sagara had two 
wives named Prabha and Bhanumatl. 

6-7. Vahni (the fire-god) propitiated by both of them 
granted them (one) excellent boon (to each). Bhanumati 
accepted (the gift of) one son and that was Asamanjasa. The 
auspicious Prabha accepted sixty thousand sons. Asamanjasa’s 
son was the king named Arhsuman. 

8-9a. His sonwasDillpa. From Dillpa was bornBhagiratha 
by whom Gahga was brought down after performing pen¬ 
ance (and Gahga, thereafter came to be called BhagIrathI). It 
was due to the favour of the intelligent Mahadeva, the lord of 
Devas. 

9b-10. Lord Siva was so pleased in his mind due 
to the penance of king Bhagiratha that the moon-bedecked 


I. This chapter records mainly the story of Rama, the hero of the 
Ramayana. The introductory verses (1-15) mention some important kings 
preceding Rama like Bhagiratha and their exploits. Cf. Bh.P. IX.6.1-9-31, VR 
2.110.1-36. The remaining verses deal with the exploits of Rama. It is 
interesting to compare this portion with the Rama episode as given in the 
M. Bh. and in the NP. 1.79-1-26, 2.75.1-79, VP. 4.4.87-104, Bh. P. IX. 
lO.Ull (to mention a few). Not only the facts ofhis life (but some of the 
verses also have textual similarity. 

* The Vehk. Press edition has wrongly numbered 4 and 5 as 4. The 
mistake in numbering is corrected. 



I.21.11-21a 


187 


god bore Ganga on his head near the moon (crest) [or 
in accompaniment of Uma i.e. goddess Parvatl]. It is reported 
that Bhagiratha had a son called king Sruta. 

11-12. His successor was Nabhaga. Thereafter was born 
Sindhudvipa. Ayutayu was his son and his son was Rtuparna of 
great strength. Rtuparna’s son was the virtuous king named 
Sudasa. His son Saudasa became well-known by the name 
Kalmasapada. 

13. Vasistha of great splendour begot of the wife of 
Kalmasapada the son, Asmaka who became a noble scion of 
the Iksvaku dynasty. 

14-15. Asmaka begot of Utkala a son named king 
Nakula. Afraid of Parasurama, the king went to a forest in 
great distress being protected on all sides like an armour by 
women.* From him was born Sataratha. From him was born, 
the glorious son Bilibili. Vrddhasarma was his son. From him 
was born Visvasaha. From him was born the well-known son 
Khatvahga. Dirghabahu was his son. Raghu was born ofhim. 

16. From Raghu was born Aja and king Dasaratha was 
born of him. The heroic Rama, the world famous knower of 
Dharma, was the son of Dasaratha. 

17. Bharata, Laksmana, and Satrughna of great strength 
also were his sons. All of them were equal to Indra on the 
battle-field. They were endowed with Visnu’s Sakti. 

18. Visnu, the enjoyer of the whole universe, was born 
with a part of his personality for the destruction of Ravana. 
The blessed wife of Rama was the beautiful daughter of Janaka. 

19-20a. Sita was well known in the three worlds; she was 
endowed with liberal-mindedness, good conduct, and other 
attributes. Goddess Parvatl (the daughter of the lord of 
mountains)was propitiated by Janaka through penance and 
she gave Janaka the daughter Sita who had the support of' 
Rama as her husband. 

20b-2la. Being pleased with him (Janaka), Lord Siva 
(the Ruler of the world), the trident-bearing Lord of Bluish-red 
complexion, gave to Janaka a wonderful bow to destroy his 
enemies. 


*vide Bh.P. IX. 9.40 for a similar explanation of Mdrl-Kavaca. 



188 


Kurma Purana 


21b-22a. O leading Brahmanas, the intelligent king 
Janaka, the destroyer of enemies, desirous of giving away his 
daughter proclaimed thus in this world: “He who is able to 
wield this bow—whoever he may be in the three worlds whether 
a Deva or a Danava—deserves to get Sita.” 

22b-25a. The powerful Lord Rama came to know this. 
He went to Janaka’s abode. Playfully he lifted the bow and 
broke it. Rama, the highly virtuous soul, married that girl like 
god Sankara marrying Parvatl and the sixheaded god Karttikeya 
marrying Sena.'^ 

25b-26a. After the lapse of many days, king Dasaratha 
began to make arrangements for crowning the heroic eldest son 
Rama as the king. 

26b-27. His beautiful wife Kaikeyl, the lady of sweet 
smiles, prevented him. Agitated in her mind she said to her 
husband. —“It behoves you to make my heroic son Bharata the 
king. 

28a. You had already given me two boons long back.” 

28b-31a. On hearing her words, the king who was dejec¬ 
ted in his mind uttered these words—“So be it.” Accordingly 
the un-wavering Rama, the knower of Dharma, bowed down at 
the feet of his father, and went to the forest alongwith his wife 
and Laksmana. The self-possessed powerful one made the vow 
of staying for fourteen years in the forest and the mighty Lord 
stayed in the forest for fourteen years alongwith Laksmana. 

31b-33a. While he was staying in the forest, the Raksasa 
named Ravana, abducted Sita in the guise of an ascetic and 
went away to his city. Not being able to see Sita, Laksmana 
and Rama became extremely distressed. 

33b-34a. Both the suppressors of enemies became over¬ 
whelmed with anguish and sorrow. Then in course of time, there 
came about an alliance between Rama of indefatigable energy 
and action and the monkeys through the monkey (chief) 
Sugriva. 

34b-35a. Sugriva’s follower, a valorous monkey called 
Hanuman, the son of the wind-god, who was endowed with great 
splendour, ever became very dear to Rama. 

1. This contradicts the belief prevailing in Maharasfra and adjacent 
parts about the celibacy of Skanda. 



I.21.35b-49a 


189 


35b-36. With firm resolve he promised to Rama, “I will 
bring Sita.” After saying this, he wandered over the earth girt 
by the ocean, intent as he was on finding out Sita. 

37-38a. He went to Lanka, the city of Ravana situated 
in the ocean. There in a secluded spot, at the foot of a tree, he 
saw the pure lady Sita of sweet smiles, surrounded by the 
Raksasis (demonesses). 

38b-39a. Her eyes were full of tears; she was charming 
and uncensurable (praiseworthy). She was brooding in her 
heart on Rama of dark blue complexion like a (blue) lotus and 
the self-possessed Laksmana. 

39b-41a. The Lordly monkey revealed himself to Sita 
in secret. To remove her suspicion, he gave her the ring of 
Rama. On seeing the excellent ring of her husband, Sita thought 
that Rama had as if come to her personally. Out of love her 
eyes began to throb. 

41b. Heconsoled Sita saying—“I shall take you toRama” 

42a. After telling her thus, he returned to the mighty- 
armed Rama. 

42b-43a. The self-possessed Hanuman reported to Rama 
the fact of his seeing Sita. He then stood by, after being honour¬ 
ed by Rama and Laksmana. 

43b-44a. Then the mighty Rama decided to fight with the 
Raksasa, with the support of Hanuman and Laksmana. 

44b-46a. The highly virtuous religious-minded Rama 
caused a bridge to be built with the help of hundreds of 
monkeys, over the ocean, constructing a bridge to Lanka. 
The lord, the suppressor of enemies, then killed Ravana 
alongwith his brothers, sons and wives(?). With the son of Vayu 
as his assistant, he brought back Sita. 

46b-48a. In the middle of the Bridge, Rama, the des¬ 
cendant of Raghu, installed the Lihga of Mahadeva, I Sana 
the elephant-hide-robed-god and worshipped him. Lord Maha¬ 
deva, Sankara, directly appeared before him alongwith Parvati 
and bestowed on him an excellent boon. 

48b-49a. “O twice-born ones, if people were to see this 
Linga installed by you, their sins will be destroyed even if 
they are the committers of great sins. 



190 


Kurma Parana 


49b-50a. There is no doubt in this that other sins of 
those who take their holy ablution in this great ocean, will be 
destroyed by the mere vision of this Linga. 

50b-51. I will be staying invisibly here as long as the 
mountains stand, as long as this Earth stays and as long as this 
bridge holds good. Holy dip, charitable gift, penance and Sraddha, 
everything that is performed here shall be of everlasting 
benefit. 

52-53. By the mere recollection of the Linga, the daily 
sin is dispelled.” After saying this. Lord Sambhu embraced 
Rama. Alongwith Nandin and all his attendants he vanished 
then and there.^ Rama ruled over the kingdom with due devo¬ 
tion to piety. 

54. After being crowned by Bharata, the powerful and 
highly splendoured Rama duly honoured the Brahmanas 
and worshipped Isvara. 

55. He worshipped god Sankara the destroyer of 
Daksa’s Tajna, by performing a horse-sacrifice. Rama begot a 
son who was well-known by the name Kusa. 

56. Lava also, the highly fortunate and intelligent one 
knowing all principles and topics, was his son. Atithi was born 
of Kusa and Nisadha was his son. 

57. Nala was the son of Nisadha. Nabhas was born of 
him. Pundarikaksa was born of Nabhas and Ksemadhanvan was 
his son. 

58. His son was the heroic Devanika of great valour. 
Ahinagu was his son and had Mahasvan as his son. 

59. From him was born Gandravaloka. Taradhisa was 
his son. Gandragiri was born of Taradhisa. Then was born 
Bhanuvitta. 

60. Srutayu was born of him. These are the descendants 
born in the race of Iksvaku. O excellent Brahmanas the im¬ 
portant ones have been narrated in brief. 

61. He who listens to this excellent race of Iksvaku 
everyday shall be freed from all sins. He is honoured in the 
heavenly region. 


1. VV. 48b-53a quoted in Dalapatiraja’s Nrsijhha-prasada Tirtha-sdra 
(Varanasi 1936) p. 6. 



1.22.1-9 


191 


CHAPTER TWENTYTWO 

Description of the Lunar Race^ 

Suta said : 

1. King Pururavas, the son of Ila, ruled over the king¬ 
dom. He had six sons whose brilliance was equal to thatof Indra. 

2. These were the divine sons of UrvasI: Ayu, Mayu, 
Amayu, Visvayu the valorous, Satayu and Srutayu. 

3. We have heard the report that five heroic sons of 
great prowess were born to Ayus from Prabha, the daughter of 
Svarbhanu. 

4-5. Nahusa was the eldest among them. He was aknower 
of Dharma and famous in all the worlds. Nahusa’s successors 
were five and in splendour they were comparable to Indra. 
Those highly powerful sons were born to Viraja, the daughter 
of Pitrs (Manes). They were Yati, Yayati, Sarhyati, Ayati and 
the fifth one Asvaka. 

6. Among those five, Yayati was the strongest and most 
valiant. He married DevayanI, the daughter of Usanas (Sukra). 

7. He married Sarmistha also, the Asura lady, the daughter 
of Vrsaparvan. DevayanI gave birth to Yadu and Turvasu. 

8-9. Sarmistha gave birth to Druhyu, Anu and Puru. 
Superseding the eldest son Yadu though blameless, he 
crowned his youngest son Puru as he carried out the behests of 
his father.2 He directed his son Turvasu to rule over the South- 
Eastern part of his kingdom. 


1. Descriptions of the legends of kings belonging to the Lunar race con¬ 
stitute an integral part in the description of dynasties in the Puranas. The com¬ 
mon elements in these legends show that there must be a core of historicity 
as their substratum. A comparison of Chs. 22 and 23 inKP. with the Bh. P. 
IX.14.1-22, VP. 4.6.1-20 or Chs. 28-36 in the Vayu P. II (to mention a few) 
will bear out the close similarity in their legends. I however doubt 
Pargiter’s view about the so-called migration of this race from Ilavarta as 
Puranic evidence is not clear or conclusive on this point. 

2. This was in recognition of the goodness of Puru in transferring his 
youth when his father Yayati became prematurely decrepit due to the 
curse of Sukra. It was after enjoying life for one thousand years from the 
borrowed youth of his son Puru, that Yayati is credited to have uttered 
the famous verse : 



192 


K urma Pur ana 


10. The king entrusted the South-western territory to the 
care of the eldest son Yadu. He appointed Druhyu and Anu tn 
rule over the western and northern territories respectively. 

11. The whole of this Earth was righteously ruled by 
them. The king of great fame, thereafter, went to the forest 
accompanied by his wife. 

12. Yadu too had five sons comparable to the sons of 
Devas. They were Sahasrajit, the most excellent Krostii, Nila, 
Jina and Raghu. 

13. The son of Sahasrajit was the king Satajit. Satajit 
too had three highly virtuous sons. 

14. They were Haihaya, Haya, and the King Venuhaya. 
Haihaya had a son who became well-known as Dharma. 

15. O Brahmanas, his son was Dharmanetra the valor¬ 
ous. Dharmanetra’s son was Kirti and Sanjita was his son. 

16. Mahisma was the son of Sanjita whose descendant 
son was Bhadrasrenya. Bhadrasrenya’s successor was the 
king called Durdama. 

17. Durdama’s son was the intelligent and valiant king 
named Andhaka. Andhaka’s four successors were highly res¬ 
pected by the public. 

18-19. They were Krtavirya, Krtagni, Krtavarma and the 
fourth (son) Krtaujas. Arjuna, the son of Krtavirya, had a 
thousand arms. He was very brilliant and the most excellent 
among the knowers of Dhanurveda (Science of Archery). He met 
death at the hands of Rama, the son of Jamadagni and the 
incarnation of Janardana (Visnu). 

20. He had hundreds of sons. But five of them were 
great heroes. They were well-versed in the use of miraculous 
missiles, heroic, strong, virtuous and learned. 

21. They were Sura, Surasena, Krsna and Dhrsna, as 
well as Jayadhvaja, the powerful king who was devoted to 
Narayana. 


na jatu kdtnah kdmanam upabhogena Samyati / 
kavifd krspavartmeva bhiiya evdbhivardhate // 

Yayati, however, did give the due share of his kingdom to other sons 
though the ancestral throne was a special gift to Puru. 



1.22.22-33 


193 


22. The first four sons viz. Sura and others were well- 
known for their prowess. They were noble souls, devoted to 
Rudra, used to worship god Sankara. 

23. Jayadhvaja was intelligent and devoted to religion. 
He sought shelter under Narayana, Visnu, Hari. 

24. The other sons told him—“O sinless one, this is not 
your Dharma as it is well-known that our father was engaged 
in the propitiation of Isvara (Siva).” 

25. The highly brilliant son (Jayadhvaja) replied to 
them: “This is my highest holy duty as all the kings in the 
world have been born through the parts of Visnu. 

26. The protector of a kingdom is certainly the Lord 
Purusottama. The unconquered Visnu, Hari, the protector of 
the worlds, should be worshipped. 

27. It has been proclaimed that the self-born deity has 
three forms—constituted of Sattva, Rajas and TomaJ respectively 
and they are the causes of creation, sustenance and destruction 
of the universe. 

28. Lord Visnu, the Sattvic soul forever sustains (the 
universe). The Rajasaic form Brahma creates and the Tamasa 
form Rudra annihilates it. 

29. Hence, Lord Visnu, Kesava the suppressor of Kesin, 
is the deity worthy of being propitiated by kings who protect 
their respective kingdoms.” 

30. On hearing his words, the other steady-minded bro¬ 
thers said,—“Rudra, the annihilator should be worshipped by 
those who seek liberation. 

31. This Rudra is verily the Supreme Deity. At the end 
of the Kalpa period. Lord Siva, resorting to the Tamo-guna, 
will annihilate the whole of this world. 

32. The trident-bearing lord dissolves the world by means 
of Vidya at the outset* and then by means of his Supremely 
terrible and the most refulgent form.” 

33. Then pondering over it, king Jayadhvaja spoke to- 
them—“The creature is liberated through Sattva Gum and Lord 
Hari is constituted of Sattva Guna.” 


* (a better v.l. Sarvam if accepted means : By means of most refulgent; 
form . . . The Lord annihilates the entire Universe with his Vidya-power. 



194 


Kurma Purar.a 


34. The brothers replied to him—“If Rudra is served by 
the Sattvika people he liberates them. One who is endowed 
with Sattva Guna shall always worship Siva.” 

35. Then prince Jayadhvaja laughingly remarked:—“It 
is proper that one’s own Dharma should be followed for salva¬ 
tion. No other method is prescribed by sages. 

36. So the propitiation of Visnu of unmeasured prowess 
is the greatest Dharma of kings who always uphold the 
power derived from him.” 

37. Another son of the king, Kfsna the most excellent 
among the intelligent ones, spoke to him—“What our father 
Arjuna has done is the holy dharma.'’ 

38. When the dispute thus continued Surasena spoke 
these words—“In this matter the sages are our authority. 
What they say in this matter must be correct.” 

39. Then all those prominent among kings being ex¬ 
tremely agitated in mind, went to the hermitage of Seven sages 
who were the expounders of the Brahman (or the Vedas) and 
usked them. 

40. Those sages headed by Vasistha and others conveyed 
to them the truth in matter:—“Whatever deity appeals to a 
man is his deity.^ 

41. But if the deity is worshipped for a specific purpose 
it bestows what is liked by men. By special worship it bestows 
everything. O kings, this principle or rule cannot be other¬ 
wise. 

42. The deities of kings are:— Visnu as well as Isa 
(Siva) and Purandara (Indra). The deities of Brahmanas 
are:—Agni (the fire-god), Aditya (the sun-god), Brahma and the 
Pinaka-wielding deity (Siva). 

43. The deity of Devas is Visnu, of Danavas is 
the Trident-bearing lord; Soma (moon) is said to be the deity of 
Gandharvas and Yaksas. 


1. Quoted in Nitydcarapaddhatiy p.,47. This discussion shows the 
tolerant attitude and an attempt to amalgamate the Vedic and Puranic 
deities. The evolution of Hinduism from Vedism becomes clear through 
such passages which show a transition towards all-comprehensive Puranic 
re igion. 



1.22.44-55 


195 


44. The deity of Vidyadharas is the goddess of speech; 
of Siddhasis Lord Hari; of Raksasas is Sankara, Rudra and 
of Kinnaras is Parvatl. 

45. The deity of sages is, Lord Brahma as well as 
Mahadeva, the wielder of the trident. Goddess Uma is worthy 
of being respected by women, so also are Visnu, Isa and Bhas- 
kara (the sun-god). 

46. All these are the deities of householders. The 
Brahman shall be the deity of Brahmacarins (religious students 
under the vow of celibacy). The deity of Vaikhdnasas (recluses) 
shall be Arka (the sun-god) and the deity of ascetics 
{Sannyasins) shall be Mahesvara. 

47. The god of goblins is Lord Rudra, that of 
Kusrnandas is Vinayaka, and the deity of every one is Lord 
Brahma, the progenitor and the lord of devas. 

48. Lord Brahma himself has proclaimed thus. Hence 
Jayadhvaja certainly deserves the propitiation of Visnu. 

49. But Hari should be worshipped by men after 
realising his identity with Rudra. Otherwise Hari may not 
annihilate the enemy of the king.” 

50. Thereafter, they bowed to them and returned to 
their extremely splendid city. After conquering the enemies 
in the battle, they protected the Earth. 

51. O Brahmanas, then, on one occasion ^ a certain 
Danava named Videha who terrified all beings, came to their 
city. 

52. He was terrible due to his fangs; his body was 
blazing (i.e. he had a resplendent personality) like fire at 
the world-destruction, at the close of Tugas. He was wielding 
a spear sparkling like the sun. His roaring sound reverberated 
in the ten quarters. 

53. Men who lived there lost their lives on hearing that 
shout; others became frightened and fled. 

54-55. The sons of Karttavirya, the five powerful 
kings, Surasena and others, equipped themselves well and 
fought Danava with Saktis, peaks of mountains, swords and 
iron clubs. O leading Brahmanas, with his trident he single- 
handedly fought all of them laughingly. 



196 


K urma Pur ana 


56. With great determination they rushed at Videha. 
Sura discharged the miraculous weapon of Rudra; Surasena 
hurled the missile of Varuna. 

57. Krsna discharged the missile of Prajapati {Brahmas- 
tra) and Dhrsna discharged that of Vayu. Jayadhvaja dis¬ 
charged the miraculous weapons of Kubera, Indra and Agni. 

58-60. That Danava split the miraculous weapons by 
means of his trident. Then Krsna of great virility wielded his 
terrible iron club. He hurled it at him; as soon as it touched 
him, he roared loudly. The iron club hit the chest of Videha 
which was like a rock. It could not make Danava, who 
was like the god of Death, move at all. On seeing his extra¬ 
ordinary manliness, they were terrified and they fled from there. 

61-62. The intelligent Jayadhvaja remembered Visnu, 
the lord of the universe, the victorious, the first cause of the 
worlds, the incomprehensible, the protector devoid of ailments, 
the ancient Purufa, the consort of Sri and the yellow-robed deity. 
Then the discus having the lustre of ten thousand suns appeared 
in front of them. 

63-64a. At the behest of Vasudeva (Visnu) and thanks 
to his readiness to bless the devotees, (the discus appeared). 
After remembering Lord Narayana, the source of origin of the 
worlds, the king caught hold of it and hurled it against Videha 
like Hari hurling it against Danavas. 

64b-65a. The discus Sudarsana reached the neck of that 
terrible demon and felled to the ground his head, huge like the 
peak of a mountain. 

65b-67a. It was after propitiating Sankara by means of 
penance that Visnu obtained that discus formerly. Hence it 
had the power to destroy the Asuras. When that enemy of 
Devas had been killed, the kings and brothers, Sura and others 
returned to their beautiful city. They honoured their brother. 

67b-68a. After hearing about the exploit of Jayadhvaja, 
the great sage Visvamitra, the holy lord, came there to see the 
son of Karttavirya. 

68b-69a. On seeing him come, the agitated king made 
him sit on a beautiful seat and worshipped him with great 
emotion. 



I.22.69b-81 


197 


69b-71. He said—“O holy lord, itis due to your grace 
that the terrible Asura Videha, the lord of Danavas, has been 
killed by me. My doubts were cleared by your words and I 
sought refuge in Visnu of truthful exploits. Hence, I have been 
blessed. I shall worship Visnu whose eyes resemble the petals 
of the lotus. 

72-73a. How and in accordance with what procedure 
should Hari, the Lord, be worshipped ? Who is this Narayana, 
the lord ? O sage of holy rites, what is his power ? Please explain 
all these to me who am much eager.” 

73b. On hearing the words of Jayadhvaja, the tranquil 
sage Visvamitra observed his great devotion to Hari and said 
to him: 

VUvamitra said : 

74-76. “That is Visnu from whom the living beings are 
created and in whom the whole world gets merged. He is the 
Atman of all living beings. By resorting to him one is liberated. 
They call him the greatest deity beyond the imperishable and 
the deity resting in the cavity of the heart. It is the highest 
Bliss; the great firmament. He is remembered as Narayana. He 
is ever risen, unrestricted by conditions, perpetual bliss and 
absolutely pure. 

77. He is Visnu having the four manifestations [Vyuhas) 
but he himself is said to be devoid of Vyuha. He is the great 
Atman, the Supreme abode, the highest firmament. He is the 
ultimate highest region. 

78. Expounders of Brahman call him the Brahman of 
three syllables OM. He is Vasudeva, the soul of the universe, 
the Yogic Atman and the Supreme person. 

79-81. God Brahma and even the great Lord Rudra, are 
born from a portion of his personality. This Purusottama should 
be propitiated by a man in accordance with the holy duties 
of his own Varna and Asrama (caste and stage of life). He should 
be propitiated without cherishing any desire in return and as 
a sacred vow and not in any other way.” After saying this 
Visvamitra of great penance was duly worshipped by 



198 


Kurma Pur ana 


Sura and others. The Brahmana then returned to his own 
hermitage. Then Sura and others worshipped Mahesvara.*- 

82. Devoid of passion, they worshipped the unchanging 
Rudra accessible through Tajna, through the performance of 
Yajna. The holy sage, venerable Vasistha, the knowerof Dharma, 
presided over their Tajna. 

83-85. Gautama, Agasti and Atri were also present. 
All of them realised the exploit of Rudra (v.l. devotees of 
Rudra). Visvamitra, the holy sage, made Jayadhvaja, the 
suppressor of enemies, perform the Yajna of the primordial god 
Janardana (Visnu) , the first cause of all living beings. In his 
Yajna, god Hari himself, the great Yogin, manifested himself. 
It was something miraculous. 

86. After realising Visnu as the greatest form of Rudra, 
Jayadhvaja performed the worship of Visnu assiduously. 

87. He who always listens to this story of exploits of 
Jayadhvaja shall be freed from all sins. He goes to the region of 
Visnu. 


CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE 

The Narrative of the race of Jayadhvaja 


Suta said : 

1. Jayadhvaja’s son was Talajangha. He had a hundred 
sons. They were also called Talajanghas. 


1. It is strange that after Visvamitra’s exhortation about the greatness 
of Visnu (and his four Vyuhas according to Pancaratra system) VV 81b-86 
be grafted to eulogize the greatness of Siva. Passages like these led scholars 
like S.K. De to suspect the Pasupatisation of KP. which was originally a 
Vaisnava Purana. I however feel that the Purana writer wanted to em¬ 
phasize that as manifestations of or designations for the Supreme Brahman^ 
Siva and Visnu are the same. It is the tendency towards samanvaya bet¬ 
ween Vaisnavism, Saivism and other isms of the Puranic period that such 
passages occur side by side in this Purana. 



1.23.2-12 


199 


2. Among them, the eldest was king Vitihotra of 
great prowess. Other descendants of Yadu beginning with Vr?a- 
were of meritorious rites. 

3. Vr?a was the founder of their family. His son was 
Madhu. Madhu had a hundred sons, but Vrsana only had 
continued his race.^ 

4. Vitihotra’s son was well-known as Ananta. Durjaya 
who was an expert in all sacred lores, was his son. 

5. His wife was very beautiful and endowed with all 
good virtues. She was chaste, devoted to her husband, and she 
assiduously performed her religious duty, alongwith her 
husband. 

6. Once, that great king saw the celestial damsel UrvasI 
seated on the banks of Yamuna singing in sweet tone.^ 

7. With his mind struck by the cupid, he approached her 
and said :—“O celestial lady, it behoves you to indulge in 
sexual intercourse with me for a long time.” 

8. On seeing the king endowed with comely features 
and beauty like another god of love, the celestial lady indulged 
in amorous sports with him for a long time. 

9. Becoming enlightened after a long time, the king 
said to the charming Urvasi—“I shall go to my beautiful city.” 
She then laughingly said these words: 

10. “O charming king, I am not fully satisfied with this 
much of enjoyment with you. You must stay one more 
year.” 

11. The intelligent king told her, “I shall go to the city 
and shall come back immediately. It behoves you to permit 
me. 

12. That beautiful lady spoke to him,—“My dear king 
I agree. But you must not indulge in sexual intercourse with 
any other celestial lady.” 


1. Cf. VP. 4.11.26-30. 

2. This romantic dalliance between king Durjaya and heavenly 
damsel Urvasi seems to be the special contribution of the KP., as PE. is 
silent about it despite the seven Dur jayas mentioned on P. 255. The source 
of this legend is obviously the Vedic dialogue between Pururavas and 
Urvasi. 



200 


Kurma Pur ana 


13. ‘Amen’ said he, and immediately went to his ex¬ 
cellent city. After returning there, he saw his chaste wife and 
became extremely frightened. 

14. On seeing him alarmed, his chaste wife of good 
qualities, the lady with plump breasts, spoke to him with pleas¬ 
ing words. 

15. “O Lord, why are you under the spell of fear. 
Such fear is not conducive to the enhancement of your reputa¬ 
tion as a king.” 

16. On hearing her words, the king was overwhelmed 
with shame in his mind. He did not speak anything. But she 
knew everything through her vision of knowledge. 

17. “O king, you need not be afraid. Atonement must 
be made by you for your sin. O great king, if you are afraid, 
your kingdom will go to ruins.” 

18-19. Thereafter, that brilliant king went out of his 
city to the holy hermitage of Kanva. He saw the great sage. 
He heard from sage Kanva the excellent procedure for expiation 
of sin. The highly powerful king went to the ridge of the 
Himalaya as directed. 

20. On the way, the leading king saw in the sky, a very 
excellent Gandharva bedecked in a divine garland, shining 
gloriously. 

21-22. On seeing the garland, the king, the slayer of his 
enemies, remembered UrvasI, the excellent celestial lady. He 
thought in his mind—“This garland befits her only.” Deter¬ 
mined to secure the garland, the passionate king fought a fierce 
battle with that Gandharva. 

23. O Brahmanas, the invincible king defeated him in 
the battle and seized the garland. Eager to see that celestial 
damsel, he went to Yamuna. 

24. Unable to see her there and afflicted by the arrows 
of the god of love, Kama, he wandered all over the Earth con¬ 
sisting of seven continents. 

25. It is heard that in his eagerness to see UrvaH, he 
crossed the ridges of the Himalayas and scaled Hemakuta, the 
most excellent mountain. 



3.23.26-37 


201 


26. In all these difiFerent places, excellent celestial ladies 
saw him, the king of brave exploits, bedecked in the wonder¬ 
ful garland. They were smitten with violent love for him. 

27. Remembering the warning (lit. words) of UrvasI and 
with his mind exclusively attached to her, he did not care to 
glance at any of them at all, and he climbed the peaks of the 
mountain. 

28. Not seeing the celestial damsel there also, he became 
all the more afflicted by passion. Endowed with divine exploits, 
he went to the great Meru, the region of Devas. 

29. Facilitated by the strength of his arms, he crossed 
over the peak and reached the lake Manasa well known 
in the three worlds. 

30. He saw the lady of spotless limbs on its banks. The 
blessed lady was playfully moving about there and he gave her 
the garland. 

31. On seeing her bedecked in the garland, he was much 
fascinated.Realising that he was the most blessed, he had sexual 
dalliance with her for a long time. 

32. At the end of the sexual intercourse, UrvasI enquir¬ 
ed of the leading king,—“O heroic king, what was done by you 
after going to the city ?” 

33. He told her everything that had been advised to by 
his wife, his meeting with Kanva and the seizing of the garland. 

34. On hearing what had been mentioned by him, the 
celestial lady, his well-wisher, spoke to him—“Go. Otherwise 
Kanva will curse you and your beloved wife will curse me.” 

35. Though entreated by her thus repeatedly, the great 
king was so much fascinated by her charms and was so comp¬ 
letely attached to her in his mind, that he refused to comply 
with her request. 

36. Then UrvasI who could assume any form as she 
pleased, always exhibited to the king her hideous form, which 
was very ugly, full of hair and with tawny coloured eyes. 

3 7. He became disgusted with her mentally. Remember¬ 
ing the speech of Kanva, he said to himself—“Fie upon me.” 
He decided to perform penance and began to do so. 



202 


Kurma Pur am- 


38. For twelve years, he restricted his diet to fruits, 
roots and bulbous roots. Then the king spent another twelve 
years subsisting on the air only. 

39. He went to Kanva’s hermitage and out of fear, told 
him everything, his cohabitation with the celestial lady and his 
performance of excellent penance, once again. 

40. On seeing that tiger-like (great) king, the holy sage 
became delighted. Desirous of eradicating even the seeds of 
his sins, he advised thus : 

Kanva said : 

41. “Go to Varanasi, the divine city inhabited bylsvara. 
Lord Mahesvara resides there in order to liberate the whole- 
world. 

42. By taking holy ablution in Gahga, by propiti¬ 
ating the deities and Pitrs duly and by seeing the Lihga of 
Visvesvara, you will be liberated from sins instantaneously.” 

43. He bowed down to Kanva with his head, and received 
his permission. The invincible king had the vision of Hara 
at Varanasi and became absolved of all sins. 

44. He went back to his splendid city and performed a 
sacrifice on the Earth. On being requested, the sage Kanva, 
out of compassion, presided over the sacrifice. 

45. His son was the intelligent Supratika. People acclaim¬ 
ed him as their king since his very birth. 

46. From Urvasi, he had seven sons, comparable to- 
Devas and endowed with great prowess. All of them took 
daughters of Gandharvas as their wives, O Brahmanas. 

47. Thus, the excellent race of Sahasrajit has been re¬ 
counted to you. It is a race that dispels sins of men. Now 
hear and understand the dynasty of Krostu too.” 



1 . 24 . 1-10 


203 


CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR 

The Description of the Dynasty of Tadu^ —the Race of Kro}tu 
S uta said : 

1. “Krostu had an only son who was well-known as. 
Vajravan. His son was Santi whose son was Kusika. 

2. From Kusika was born the powerful son Gitraratha. 
The son of Gitraratha is known all over the world as Sasabindu. 

3. His son, Prthuyasas was a pious and virtuous king. 
His son was Prthukarman; from him was born Prthujaya. 

4. From him was born Prthuklrti, whose son was 
Prthudana. His (Prthudana’s) son was Prthusravas and his son 
was Prthusattama.2 

5. Usanas was his son. His son was Satesu. From him 
was born Rukmakavaca whose son was Paravrtta. 

6. Yamagha (Jyamagha) well known all over the world 
was born as his son. From him was born Vidarbha. Kratha and 
Kausika were born of Vidarbha. 

7. Lomapada was his third son. King Babhru was his 
(Lomapada’s) son. His* son was Dhrti whose son was Sveta. 

8. The powerful son of Sveta is called by the name 
Visvasaha. His son Kausika of great virility is known for his 
prowess. 

g. The intelligent Sumanta was his son. From him was 
bornAnala. Anala’s son was Sveni. Many sons were born 
to Sveni (or there were sons other than Sveni) .* 

10. The chief among them was Dyutiman. His son was 
Vapusman. Brhanmedhas was Vapusman’s son whose son was 
Srideva. 


1. For the description of the dynasty of Yadu vide Bh. P. IX. 23 ff; 
Pd. P.I. 13.1-66; VP. IV. 11 ff. KP. starts with the race of Krosfu. 

2. According to VP. 4.12.4-6 Prthuyasas, Prthukarman, Prthujaya, 
Prthuklrti, Prthudana and Prthusravas are the sons of Sasabindu. 

*v.l. His son was Prajavan whose son was Kausika. 

3. For V. 9 (b) here of the Crt. edt. reads 
Kaiiikasya sutaS Cedis Caidyas tasydbhavan sutdh / 

I have followed the Venkafesvara edt. for my translation. 



204 


Kurma Parana 


11. O Brahmanas, his son was Vitaratha. He was very 
powerful. He was a devotee of Rudra. Kratha’s son was Kunti 
and Vr?ni was his son. 

12-16. From him was born a very mighty person named 
Navaratha.^ Once he had gone a-hunting. Seeing a very power¬ 
ful Raksasa, O leading sages, he was overwhelmed with great 
fright and he fled. The infuriated Raksasa of extraordinary 
might who was invincible in fight and who resembled a blazing 
fire in brilliance clutched his spear in his mighty hand and 
pursued him. The terrified king Navaratha saw the great shrine 
of Sarasvatl situated not far from there. The intelligent king 
reached that well-protected shrine with great speed. He bowed 
to goddess Sarasvati. With his palms joined in reverence, 
the conqueror of enemies eulogised her with pleasing words. 

17-18. He prostrated himself on the ground like a 
straight staff,—“I seek refuge in you. I bow down to the great 
deity, the gentle goddess Sarasvati herself, who is the presiding 
deity of speech, who is devoid of beginning and end, a celibate 
divinity. I bow down to the source of origin of all worlds, 
the Yogini, the highest digit or Art. 

19. I pay obeisance to the three-eyed, moon-crested 
■goddess born of Hiranyagarbha (god Brahma) who is the 
Supreme Bliss, the digit of Cit (the consciousness aspect of 
the Brahman, nay) the very embodiment of the Brahman 
itself. 

20-22a. Protect me, O great Isani, I am frightened and 
I have sought shelter in you.”^ In the meantime, the infuriated 


1. This genealogy viz. Kratha—►Kunti—^Vrsni—^Navaratha represents 
the shorter version. The crt. edt. of the KP. (1.23.11-13) accepts the longer 
version adding a few more generations shown in the brackets as follows : 
Kratha^Kunti—►Vrsni—►(Nivrtti—►Dasarha—s-Aroha ^Jimuta Vikrti —► 
Bhimaratha)—►Navaratha. 

2. Apart from the uncomplimentary flight of the ‘highly mighty’ 
{sttmahabala) king Navaratha from a demon and seeking refuge in the temple 
of goddess Sarasvati, the concept of Sarasvati as delineated in these eulogis¬ 
tic verses shows a fusion of Parvati and Sarasvati. Though Sarasvati is called 
■the daughter of Brahma, and is credited to have created a superior spirit to 



I.24.22b-31 


205 


king of Raksasas came to that place where goddess Sarasvatl 
was enshrined, in order to kill the king. Proud of his strength, 
he lifted up his spear and entered the shrine of the mother of 
the three worlds, resembling the moon and the sun. 

22b-23a. In the meanwhile, a great spirit resembling the 
sun at the end of Yugas, pierced the Raksasa in his heart 
with his spear and felled him on the ground. 

23b-24a. He then said—“O great king, do you go now 
fearlessly. You need not stay in this place now as the Raksasa 
has been killed. 

24b-25. O leading Brahmanas, thereafter, the delighted 
king Navaratha returned to his city which was comparable to 
the city of Purandara (the king of gods). Full of devotion, he 
installed the goddess of devas there. 

26. He worshipped goddess Sarasvati by means of differ¬ 
ent Tajnas and Homos (sacrificial offerings). His son was 
Dasaratha who was extremely virtuous. 

27. He was a devotee of the goddess Sarasvati and was 
endowed with great splendour. Sakuni was his son. From him 
was born Karambha. His son was Devarata. 

28. He performed a horse-sacrifice. Devaksatra was his 
son. His successor was Madhu and from him was born Kuru. 

29. He had two sons viz. Sutraman and Anu. Ann’s son 
was Priyagotra. The inheritor of his riches was Aihsu. 

30. Aihsu’s son was a valorous devotee of Visnu, 
Andhaka (v.l. satvata"") byname. He was a noble soul, engaged 
in charitable gifts. He was the foremost among those who 
know Dhanurveda (the science of Archery). 

31. At the instance of Narada, he, engaged in worship¬ 
ping Vasudeva, composed the sacred scripture (usually) listened 
to by Kunda (son born of an adulterous woman), Gola (widow’s 
son) and others.^ 

kill the demon She is described as possessing three eyes and being decorated 
with a crescent-moon on her head. 

The episode (a contribution of the KP.) testifies to the existence of 
the cult of Sarasvati-worship at that time. 

* (A better v.l. in view of the name Sdtvata Sastra in V. 32 
below. Out of the two v.ls. ‘Satvata’ and ‘Satvata’, I prefer Satvata as the 
name of this king as hb son is named ‘Satvata’ in V. 33. 

1. This indicates the lower social status of the Satvata Sastra in its 
early stage. 



206 


Kurma Puram 


32. A great scripture well known after his name, auspi¬ 
cious to Satvatas and conducive to the welfare of Kunda and 
others has been still current. 

33. Satvata was his son. He was expert in all scriptures 
(or branches of knowledge) and a great king of meritorious 
reputation. They say that sacred lore (viz. Satvata Sastra) 
was founded by him. 

34-35. Kausalya gave birth to these sons—the Satvatas 
endowed with Sattvagma^ viz. Andhaka, Mahabhoja, Vr?ni, king 
Devavrdha and the eldest named Bhajamana who was the fore¬ 
most among the knowers of Dhanurveda. Among them king 
Devavrdha performed austere penance. 

36. While performing penance he wished thus : May 
a son endowed with good qualities be born to me.” A king 
of auspicious fame, and a sovereign ruler over all, well known 
as Babhru was his son. 

37. He was virtuous, endowed with beauty and 
always engaged in attaining the knowledge of Truth. From 
Bhajamana were born Bhajamanas who resorted to divine Sri 
(glory).* 

38. Nimi and Krkana were the most well-known and 
the most important among them. Bhojas and Vaimatrkas were 
born in the family of Mahabhoja. 

39. From Vrsni were born Sumitra, the powerful, as 
well as Anamitra and Timi. From Anamitra was bom Nighna. 
Nighna had two sons. 

40. They were the highly fortunate Prasena and the 
excellent one named Satrajit. From Anamitra, the son of Vrsni, 
was born Sini (rather ‘Sini’) as the youngest son. 

41. He was truthful in speech. He was richly endowed 
with fidelity. Satyaka was his son. Satyaka’s son was Yuyudhana. 
His son was Asahga. 

42-43. Kuni was his intelligent son. His son was Yugand- 
dhara. A son called Vrsni H** was bornofMadri from Vrsni 
who became a scion of the Yadu race. Svaphalka and Gitraka 


*A better v.l. Samjftdydm; ‘from Bhajamana were bom Bhajamanas, of 
Queen Samjna. 

* *Prsni in other Purd^as. 



1-24.44-56 


207 


Avere the sons of Vrsni. Svaphalka married the daughter of the 
king of Kasi. 

44. He begot of her a virtuous son named Akrura. He 
had many other sons Upamahgu, Mahgu and others. 

45. Akrura’s son was well known as Devavan and the 
divine-souled Upadeva who had sons called Visva and Prama- 
thin. 

46. Citraka’s sons were Prthu, Viprthu, Asvagriva, Subahu, 
Sudhasvaka (v.l. Suparsvaka) and Gaveksaka (v.l. Gavesana). 

47. He begot of the daughter of Andhaka, four sons, viz. 
Kukura, Bhajamana, Samika and Balagarvita. 

48. Kukura’s son was Vrsni and Vrsni’s son was 
Kapotaroman and his son was Vilomaka. 

49. The scholarly Tama (v.l. Nala) a friend of Tum- 
buru was his son. The son of Tama was Anakadundubhi. 

50. He went to Govardhana and performed extensive 
penance. Lord Brahma, the supreme Ruler of the worlds, grant¬ 
ed a boon to him. 

51-52. O Brahmana, he secured these boons viz. an 
everlasting family and reputation as well as proficiency in 
the excellent path of knowledge. He also secured the ability to 
assume any form as he pleased, even more than his preceptor. 

After securing boons from that excellent deity, he 
propitiated with music unagitatedly with a composed, 
concentrated mind the bull-vehicled deity. Lord Siva, adored 
by Devas. 

53. To him who was engaged in music. Lord Siva, the 
consort of Parvatl, gave the jewel of a girl inaccessible even to 
Devas. 

54-55. United with her, the king, the destroyer of 
his enemies, taught his beloved wife of tremulous eye, the 
excellent art of music. In her he begot splendid son named 
Subhuja, and a daughter endowed with comely features and 
beauty, named Hrimatl. 

56. Thereafter, the mother taught that beautiful son in 
his childhood as well as the daughter, the art of music 
systematically. 



208 


Kurma Pur ana 


57. After the investiture with the sacred thread, he 
learned the Vedas from a preceptor. He married the mental 
daughter of the Gandharvas (or a Gandharva girl called 
Manasi). 

58. In her he begot five excellent sons, who knew the 
technique of playing on the Vina and were experts in the 
science of music. 

59. Accompanied by his sons, grandsons and wife, the 
king, a wise and expert musician, worshipped the lord (Siva), 
destroyer ofTripuras, by means of music. 

60. A Gandharva named Subahu took Hrimati who was 
beautiful in all limbs, with large eyes like Sri, to his city. 

61. To that Gandharva of good refulgence, these sons 
were born of her—viz. Susena, Dhira, Sugriva, Subhoja and 
Naravahana. 

62. Abhijit was the son of Candanodakadundubhi* (?) 
Punarvasu was born of Abhijit. Ahuka was born thereafter. 

63. O excellent Brahmanas, Ahuka had two sons, viz- 
Ugrasena and Devaka. Devaka’s sons were born heroes com¬ 
parable to Devas. 

64. They were Devavan, Upadeva, Sudeva and 
Devaraksita. They had seven sisters. He gave them to Vasudeva. 

65-66. They were Dhrtadeva, Upadeva, Devaraksita, 
Srideva, Santideva, Sahadeva of holy rites and Devaki. 
Devaki, of beautiful waist, was the most excellent among them. 
Ugrasena’s sons were Nyagrodha and Karhsa. 

67. Subhumi, Rastrapala, Tustiman and Sanku (also 
were his sons). The well-known son Viduratha was born of 
Bhajamana. 

68. His son was Surasama (equal to the Sun) and from 
him was born Pratiksatra. From him was born Svayambhoja. 
From him was born Dhatrika, the chastiser of his enemies. 

69. Krtavarma was his son. Surasena was his son. 
Vasudeva was his son who was engaged in religious rites. 

70. From Vasudeva was born the powerful-armed Vasu¬ 
deva, the preceptor of the universe. Hari (Visnu), on being 
requested by Devas, became the son of Devaki. 

*This reading is unintelligible and the footnote records a better v.l. 
Viras tvanaka-dundubhih. It means, “a valiant son called Abhijit was bom to 
Anaka-dundubhi.” 



1.24.71-84 


209 


71. The blessed lady Rohini, the splendid wife of Vasu- 
deva, gave birth to Sahkarsana, the eldest son known as 
Rama, with a plough as his special weapon. 

72. Vasudeva, pervading the universe was the 
supreme Atman himself. Lord Sarhkarsana, the wielder of the 
plough as his weapon was Sesa himself 

73. Under the pretext of Bhrgu’s curse, he honoured 
a human body. Madhava was born of DevakI as well as of 
Rohini. 

74. Kausiki, the Yogic-slumber born of Uma’s body, 
became the daughter of Yasoda, at the behest of Vasudeva. 

75. O excellent sages, the sons born to Vasudeva as 
elder brothers of Vasudeva had been killed by Karhsa already 
before. 

76-77. They were Susena, Dayin, Madrasena (v.l. 
Bhadrasena), Mahabala, Vajradambha, Bhadrasena, and the 
honoured Kirtiman. When they had all been killed, Rohini 
bore to Vasudeva the son Rama, the lord of the worlds (also 
known as) Balabhadra, Halayudha. 

78. When Rama was born, Devaki gave birth to Krsna, 
Acyuta, the first among Devas, the Atman whose chest had 
been marked by the curl of golden hair called Srivatsa. 

79. Rama’s wifewas Revati by name. Shewas endowed 
with good qualities. He begot of her two sons Nisita and 
Ulmuka. 

80. Srikrsna, of indefatigable activities had sixteen 
thousand wives. The sons born to them were hundreds and 
thousands. 

81-82. Vasudeva begot ofRukmini, the following sons 
of great strength and exploits viz. :—Carudesna, Sucaru, 
Caruvesa, Yasodhara, Carusravas, Gafuyasas, Pradyumna and 
Samba. They were the best among all sons. 

83. On seeing the heroic sons born to Rukmini from 
Janardana, Jambavati, his wife of pure smiles, said to Krsna. 

84. “O slayer of Danavas, O lotus-eyed one, please 
grant me a son of excellent qualities, who will be honoured by- 
lord of Devas.” 



210 


Kurma Purana 


85. On hearing the words of Jambavati, Jagannatha, 
Hari, himself a store of penance, the suppressor of enemies, 
began to perform a penance. 

86. O excellent sages, listen how the son of Devaki per¬ 
formed a severe and great penance, saw Rudra and obtained a 
son. 


CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE 

Krsna’s Performance of Penance^ 


Suta said: 

1. For the sake of a son, the holy lord Purusottama, the 
ruler of sense organs, the storehouse of penance, performed a 
severe penance. 

2. Though he had incarnated out of his own free-will, 
though the creator of the universe and though fully contented , 
he moved about (or performed penance) indicating that 
Paramesvara was his own root (the original cause). 

3. He went to the hermitage of the leading sage, the 
noble-souledUpamanyu. The hermitage was inhabited by Yogins. 
It was full of birds of various kinds. 

4-10. He mounted Suparna (Garuda) of great brilliance, 
the king of birds. The lord wielding a conch, a discus and an 


1. Description of Krsna’s life is a topic favourite with the Puranas. The 
story of Krsna is treated in a number of Puranas like AP. 12.1-56, Bh. P. 
Skandha X, VP.5.1 1-38 etc. Though Krsna, an incarnation of Visnu, 
is shown to have performed penance and propitiated Siva for getting a son 
from Jambavati, Krsna’s sojourn to Kailasa at Siva’s request and his 
dalliance with heavenly ladies in the different rendezvous on Kailasa des¬ 
cribed in this and the next chapter shows the special status of Visnu- 
Krsna in the KP. The emphasis on the equality of Siva and Visnu is a 
special feature of the Puranas in general and KP. in particular. 

As contrasted with the NP., Radha is conspicuous by her absence in 

KP. 



1.25.1 l-15a 


211 


iron club in his hands, marked with the emblem (viz. the curl of 
golden hair) called Srivatsa, went to the hermitage. It was full 
of trees and creepers of various kinds.^ It shone with various 
kinds of flowers. It contained the hermitage of the sages and 
echoed with the sound of the Vedas. It was full of lions, bears 
and Sarabhas, (the fabulous animals having eight feet). It 
contained tigers and elephants. It was bedecked with lakes 
containing pure and sweet water. There were various parks 
and groves and auspicious temples for deities. It was resorted to 
by the sages, sons of sages as well as groups of great sages. It 
was inhabited by the performers of Agnihotras (fire-worship) 
richly endowed with and highly proficient in the study of the 
Vedas, as well as by Yogins engaged in meditation with their 
gaze fixed on the tips of their noses. It contained many wise 
seers of the truth and was meritorious. All round it was sur¬ 
rounded by rivers. It was occupied by holy ascetics, who 
expounded the Brahman, performed Japas, and were interested in 
the propitiation of Isa. They were tranquil, of firm resolve in 
truthfulness, devoid of grief; they were perfectly undisturbed by 
trouble. 

ll-14a. It was inhabited by ascetics whose entire person 
appeared white due to smearing over with ashes, and who 
were absorbed in performing the Japa of Rudra. Of those holy 
ascetics, some had shaven heads, some matted hair, some 
had tufts as well as matted hair. The place was resorted to 
always by wise ascetics and expounders of the Brahman. 
Ganga, the holy river, the destroyer of all sins, flowed 
in that beautiful hermitage decorated with the cottages of 
Siddhas. On seeing the ascetics devoid of sins, there, 
Madhava, the Atman of the universe, bowed to them and 
worshipped them. 

14b-15a. On seeing the deity wielding a conch, a discus 
and an iron club, the source of origin of the universe, they too 
bowed to him with great devotion as he was the greatest 
preceptor of Yogins. 


1. This beautiful description of an ideal penance-grove is traditional 
as it is found in many other Puranas. 



212 


Kurma Pur dm 


15b. They began to eulogise him with the Mantras of 
Vedic origin, after retaining the eternal deity in the heart. 

16-19a. They spoke to one another about the unmanifest 
primordial lord who was a great sage. “This is that only supreme 
lord, the great Narayana, the cosmic witness. Presently the 
lord, the Supreme Person himself, is coming. He alone is the 
unchanging creator, the protector and the annihilator of the 
universe. Really though unembodied, he has become invested 
with a body and has come to see the ascetics. He is the creator 
and the dispenser of destiny. He is omnipresent and is coming 
here. He is without a beginning and without an end, the ever¬ 
lasting, the Mahabhuta (the great spirit), the great Ruler 
(of the Universe). 

19b-20a. Hari, Govinda, who is beyond the scope of 
words, heard and understood their words. He hastened to the 
abode of that noble soul. 

20b-22a. The son of Devaki, the scion of the family of 
Yadu, performed the holy rite of Tarpana for Devas, sages 
and Pitrs in the various sacred waters. He worshipped the 
Lingas of Sambhu of unmeasured brilliance, installed by the 
leading sages on the river banks. 

22b-23a. Wherever the residents of that place saw 
Janardana coming, they worshipped him with flowers and 
Akfatas (unbroken rice-grains). 

23b-24a. On seeing Vasudeva, the wielder of the Sarhga 
bow, a conch and a sword, all those people stood there motion¬ 
less with controlled minds and splendid limbs.* 

24b-25a. The minds of those Yogins who wished to 
ascend (to Hari) became concentrated on seeing him. They 
came out of their residence before Hari. 

25b-27a. After taking bath into Ganga, he performed 
Tarpana to Devas, sages and the Pitrs. Then he gathered 
excellent flowers and entered the house of the leading sage. 

27b-28a. On seeing that excellent Yogin whose body had 
been besmeared with the holy ashes, who was wearing bark 
garments, who had matted hair and who was tranquil, he bowed 


'v.l. Subhangam (Vasudeva—of splendid limbs or handsome body). 



I.25.28b-39a 


213 


down his head before the sage. The sage, the knower of 
truth, saw Kr?na coming and worshipped him. 

28b-29. He made the principal guest of Yogins sit on a 
high seat. He spoke to the source of origin of words—“We 
know you the greatest god, Visnu of unmanifest form, seated 
in the capacity of a disciple (?) O Hrslkesa, welcome to you. 
Our penance is fruitful. 

30-31. Since you the Atman of the universe, Visnu 
himself have come to my house we are glad. In spite of their 
best effort, the Yogins, the sages, do not visualize you. What 
then is the purpose of visit of yours of such a nature.” On 
hearing that statement of Upamanyu, the son of DevakI, the 
great Yogin, the lord, said to him after bowing down to him 
(Upamanyu). 

Kr^na said : 

32-33. “O holy lord, I wish to see Girisa who wears ele¬ 
phant-hide for his robes. I have come to your abode because I 
am desirous of seeing the Lord. How can Lord Isa, the most 
excellent among the knowers of Yoga, be seen by me ere long ? 

34-35a. Where will I be able to see the consort of 
Uma ?” The holy lord who was addressed thus, replied—“Para- 
mesvara is seen only through devotion and severe penance. 
Perform that penance here with full self-control. 

35b-36a. The leading sages, the expounders of Brahman, 
meditate on and propitiate Isvara, the lord of Devas, here. The 
Yogins and the ascetics do so. 

36b-37a. It is here that the bull-bannered holy Lord 
sports in the company of his consort and surrounded by different 
kinds of goblins and Yogins. 

37b-38a. Formerly, in this very hermitage, the blessed 
sage Vasistha, performed a very severe penance aiming at Rudra 
and secured the Yogic power (or proficiency in Yoga) from 
Mahesvara. 

38b-39a. It was here only that the blessed Kfsna Dvaipa- 
yana himself visualised the Supreme Lord Siva and obtained 
knowledge about Isvara. 



214 


Kurma Pur ana 


39b-40a. Here in the penance grove, sages endowed with 
devotion, performed penance and secured sons from Rudra 
having matted hair. 

40b-4la. Eulogising Mahadevi, Bhavani (Uma) the great 
goddess and Mahadeva, Devas freed from fear attained ecstatic 
pleasure.* ** 

4lb-42. Savarni, the most excellent among the performers 
of penance, propitiated Mahadeva here and secured the greatest 
Yoga and the excellent authorship. He composed the splendid 
Sarhhita of Puranas'^ for the good people. 

42-1. (Defective verse) ♦ * It was here that Kama saw 
Mahadeva and composed the Sarhhita (compendium) of 
Sasipayins based on Puranas at his behest.^ O Purusottama, it 
consists of twelve thousand verses. 

42-2. The Purana named Vayaviyottara, acceptable to 
the Vedas, a Sarhhita containing more than sixteen thousand 
verses was enunciated here. 

43. (Defective) The Brahmana popularised the meritori¬ 
ous Purana-sarhhita by the favour of excellent Brahmanas (?). 
Here the Purana narration of Vaisampayana® was proclaimed 
by his disciples. 

44. Yajhavalkya, ihe great Yogin, perceived Hara here 
by means of his penance and composed the excellent Yogasastra 
as directed by him. 


*v.l. Verily it is here that formerly all divinities, being afraid of Kala 
(destruction) saw Mahesvara and being freed from fear etc. 

1. Savarni of Somadatta clan was one of the six disciples of Roma- 
harsana. He is credited to have composed a Purana Samhita of his own 
vide VP. III. 6 16-18, Bh. P. XII. 7.5-7. 

**Two additional versesin Vehk.edt. 42.1 and 42.2. 

Due to misprints this verse is defective : Kamo yah SaHpayinah / is 
misleading. Gupta on the basis of MSS. emends this as : Kapeyo Samiapaya- 
nah. It means ; At this very place Kapeya of Saihsapayana gotra visualized 
the great god Siva and in compliance of his behest composed this Purana- 
samhita of 12000 verses. 

2. Though A.S. Gupta emends this verse as kapeyo samsapayanah Vayu 
II. 61.56-58 mentions ‘Susarma of Saihsapayana Gotra’ as the disciple of 
Romaharsana. He is said to have composed a Purana Sarhhita of 8600 
verses vide my Intro, to the A'P p. 3. 

3. The correct reading appears to be “Saihsapayana.’ 



1 . 25 . 45-54 


215 


45. 11 was here that Bhrgu performed an unprecedented 
great penance formerly and obtained from Mahesvara, the son 
Sukra who was the most excellent among the knowers of Yoga. 

46. Hence O, lord of Devas, perform a very severe 
penance here itself. You really deserve to visualize the terrible 
fierce Kapardin, the lord of the universe.” 

47. After saying thus, the great sage Upamanyu granted 
the perfect knowledge, the holy rite pertaining to Pasupata 
doctrine and its yogic practice to Krsna of indefatigable 
activity. 

48. Advised thus by the excellent sage. Lord Madhu- 
sudana (the slayer of Madhu) propitiated lord Rudra there 
itself, by means of penance. 

49. He smeared Bhasma (ashes) all over his body. He 
tonsured his head and wore bark garments. With his mind 
exclusively dedicated to Siva, he performed Japa (muttering 
the mantra) of Rudra continuously. 

50. Then after a lapse of a long period, the great god 
Mahesvara (Siva) accompanied by Uma and decorated with a 
half-moon on his crest was seen by him in the sky. 

51. He saw Mahadeva alongwith the goddess. He had a 
crown, he wielded the iron club. He wore garlands of variegated 
colours. He held the Pinaka bow and the trident. The lord of 
Devas had covered all his limbs by means of a tiger-skin 
garment. 

52. He saw in front of him Sambhu, the lord of the vital 
airs {Prams) —the lord, the ancient Purusa who is eternal and 
who is a Yogin and the overlord of infinite power who is minuter 
than the minutest. 

53. He saw the three-eyed lord whose hand wielded an 
axe, whose body was smeared with ashes and who was covered 
with the hide of a man-lion; who was uttering the Pramva OM, 
who was huge in size and (in resplendence) who resembled a 
thousand suns. 

54. He saw in front of him Rudra, the primordial deity 
whose prowess neither Devas nor god Brahma, the grandsire 
of the world, nor Indra, nor fire-god, nor Varuna, nor the god 
of Death could describe in full, even to this day. 



216 


Kurma Pur ana 


55. Then he observed on the left of Girisa his self, the 
unmanifest form of infinite, who was eulogising the lord by means 
of many words of praise and who was the primordial deity 
whose hands held conch, sword and discus. 

56. On his right side, he saw a Puru$a (Being) with 
palms folded in reverence and seated on a swan. He was the 
Lord of Devas, the grandsire of the Universe, the preceptor of 
the world, stationed in heaven. He was eulogizing the great 
prowess of Isa (God Siva). 

57. He saw in front of the ruler of the three worlds the 
chieftains of the Ganas (attendants) resembling a thousand 
suns (in brilliance), Nandisvara and others of immeasurable 
prowess, Kumara, as refulgent as the fire and Ganesa as well. 

58. In front of him, he saw sages Marici, Atri, Pulaha, 
Pulastya, Pracetas, Daksa, Kanva, Parasara, Vasistha and 
Svayambhuva Manu. 

59. Then contemplating over the universal Atman 
within his self {Atman), the noble-minded Visnu, with his palms 
folded bowed down with devotion to god Siva alongwith his 
heavenly consort Parvati and eulogised the chief of all gods 
(viz. Siva) with sacred hymns. 

Kr^na said : 

60. “Obeisance be to you, O eternal one ! O, posses¬ 
sor of all Yogas (v.l. source of the universe) ! Brahma and 
other sages regard you as Tamas, Sattva, Rajas and the mixture of 
all these three. Saintly people call you alone as ‘All’ (identical 
with everything) (or embodiment of everything like sattva, 
rajas and tamas. 

61. O Rudra, you are Brahma and Hari. You are the 
maker of the Universe and its annihilator. You reside in the orb 
of the sun. You are the Prana (vital breath), the fire-god, Indra 
and other different beings. I seek refuge in you alone, the God 
and the Lord. 

62. The Sarhkhyas (the followers of the Saihkhya school 
ofPhilosophy) say that you are one (the invaritable form),devoid 
ofGunas. Those who abide by Yoga system of philosophy always 
worship you as enthroned in the heart. The Vedas mention you 



1.25.63-71 


217 


as Rudra, the praiseworthy deity; I seek refuge in you alone, the 
lord of the universe. 

63. By offering a single flower or leaf at your foot, one 
becomes released from the bondage of the world. By remem¬ 
bering the pair of your feet served by Siddhas and Yogins, one 
dispels all sins by means of your grace. 

*64-65. I approach you (for asylum) —You (who are) 
that auspicious Ruler of the Universe, of real exalted position 
(or prosperity) whom the sages call entire, divisionless, 
stainless {Brahman) enthroned in the heart, the source (of the 
Universe), infinite, one (without a second) immovable, the 
omnipresent, the highest reality, the place which has no beginning, 
middle or the end and the eternity from which this universe is 
evolved. 

66. OM, Obeisance to the blue-throated, three-eyed 
(Siva, the velocity incarnate). Obeisance, again and again to 
you forever, O Mahadeva, Isana. 

67. Obeisance to you the wielder of the Pinaka bow. 
Salutations to the staff-bearer of tonsured head. Bow to you, the 
wielder of thunderbolt in the hand, to god with matted 
hair {Kapardin) and with the quarters for your robes. 

68. Obeisance to you of terrible roar, to the fanged one, 
the embodiment of Kala. Bow to one with the serpent for your 
sacred thread; salutation to you with fire for your semen. 

69. Obeisance to you, Girisa, to you Svahakara (the 
consecrator by the utterance of Svahd). Salutations to you who 
laugh boisterously. Obeisance again and again to the terrible 
one. 

70. Obeisance to you, the destroyer of Kama. Bow to the 
Suppressor of Kala. Salutation to Hara of terrible apparel, to 
Hara, the archer. 

71. Obeisance to you the three-eyed, the elephant- 
hide-robed one; salutation to the lord of Parvati. Bow to the 
lord of Pasus (Individual souls). 


*vv64and65 really form one verse. But Venk. Edition split this 
verse in two. I have followed the numbering of the Vehk. edition here. 



218 


K urma Pur dm- 


72. Obeisance to you of the form of the firmament; obei¬ 
sance to the lord of the firmament; to the one with a body half 
female and half male; obeisance to the promulgator of Sarhkhya 
and Yoga systems of philosophy. 

73. Bow to the ruler of Bhairavas. Obeisance to one 
whose Lihga is worshipped by Devas. Salutation to the father 
of Kumara. Obeisance to you, the lord of Devas. 

74. Obeisance to the lord of Yajnas, the ideal celibate. 
Obeisance to the great hunter of deer. Salutation to the overlord 
of Brahma. 

75. Obeisance to Hama (the Swan), to the universe; 
salutations again and again to the fascinating one. Obeisance to 
you, the Yogin, to one accessible through Yoga, the master of 
Yogic Maya. 

76. Obeisance to you, the protector of life, to one fond 
of the sound of bells; obeisance to you, bearer of the skull; obei¬ 
sance to the lord of luminaries. 

77. Obeisance, again and again be to you. Salutations, 
again and again, O Paramesvara, grant unto me all of my 
desires.” 

Siita said : 

78. O Brahmanas, after eulogising the lord of Devas 
thus with devotion, (Krsna) Madhava fell at the feet of the lord 
and the goddess (Uma) prostrate like a staff. 

79. After lifting up Kr?na, the slayer of Kesin, the lord 
accompanied by Uma spoke these sweet words with the majestic- 
rumbling sound of a cloud. 

80. “O Lotus-eyed Krsna, why is this penance being 
performed by you ? You alone are the bestower of all desires and 
holy rites. 

81. Indeed you alone are that great form of mine named 
Narayana. O Purusottama, the entire universe, cannot exist 
without you. 

82. O Narayana, you know the infinite Atman, the Supreme 
Lord, Mahadeva, the master of great Yoga, by means of your 
own Yoga, O Kesava.” 



1.25.83-92 


219 


83. On hearing his words, Krsna laughingly gazed at the 
bull-bannered lord of the universe, and the goddess, the daughter 
of the mountain Himavan and addressed: 

84. “O Sankara, everything has been understood by you 
by means of your own Yoga. O bestower of bliss, I wish to have 
a son equal to me. Grant unto me a son who will be your 
devotee.” 

85. “So be it” said the Atman of the universe, Kara with 
a delighted mind. Looking at the goddess, the daughter of the 
mountain, he embraced Kesava. 

86. Thereafter, that goddess, the mother of the worlds, 
the sharer of half the body of Sankara, the daughter of the 
mountain Himavan, spoke to Hfslkesa (Krsna). 

87. “O infinite one, I know the unflinching exclusive 
devotion you always cherish towards Mahesvara and also towards 
me, O Kesava. 

88. You are Narayana, the Supreme Person, the veritable 
Atman of all. You were born as Devaki’s son as you had been 
entreated to do so by gods formerly. 

89. See Atman through your own Atman now. There is no 
difference between us. Sages know us to be identical. 

90. O Kesava, accept these desired boons from me viz. 
Omniscience, prosperity and the knowledge pertaining to the 
Supreme Lord. 

91-92. Have unswerving devotion to Isvara and the 
supreme power unto you Krsna, Janardana.” Thus addressed by 
the great goddess he received her behest with bent head. God 
Siva expressed his assent to that boon. He took Krsna by hand 
and accompanied by the goddess Parvatl, Girlsa (Siva) proceeded 
to mount Kailasa while being adored devoutly by sages and lords 
of Devas. 



220 


Kurma Pur ana 


CHAPTER TWENTYSK 

Krstia's Stay at Kailasa : Origin of the Lihga 

Suta said : 

1. After entering on the peak of Meru, Kailasa, having 
the lustre of gold. Lord Mahesvara sported along with Kesava. 
The lord was accompanied by Uma too. 

2. The residents of Kailasa mountain saw that noble- 
souled Krsna. They worshipped Acyuta in the same manner as 
the lord of Devas. 

3-5. He had four arms, splendid limbs and lustre like a 
black cloud. He was wearing a coronet. He held the bow Sarhga 
in his hand. His chest was marked with the line of golden 
hair called Srivatsa. He had long arms, large eyes and yellow 
garments. Acyuta wore the excellent Vaijayanti garland round 
his chest. He was in the prime of youth, very charming and 
delicate; he shone resplendent in the company of goddess Sri. 
His feet and eyes were resembling lotuses. He was sweet-smiling 
and the bestower of liberation from saihsara. 

6. On one occasion, Krsna the increaser of the delight 
ofDevakI, roamed about in the mountain caves for the purpose 
of sport. 

7-8. On seeing lord Krsna fthe pervader of the Uni¬ 
verse, the Gandharvas, the chief of Apsaras, the Naga girls, 
Siddhas, Yaksas, Gandharvas and Devas were greatly sur¬ 
prised. With their eyes blooming like flowers out of great joy, 
they showered flowers on the head of that noble soul. 

9. On seeing Krsna who was eulogised well, the 
Gandharva girls as well as the excellent divine Apsaras with 
brilliant ornaments* (*v.l. with their garments and ornaments 
slipping down) loved him (passionately). 

10. Some of them who were skilled musicians were 
fascinated and overwhelmed with lust, on seeing the handsome 
son of Devaki and began to sing different songs. 

11. Some of the girls full of amorous diversion danced 
in front of him. Some of them looked at him smilingly imbibing 
the nectar-like beauty of his face. 



1.26.12-26 


221 


12. Some of the girls took off the excellent ornaments 
from their limbs and embellished Krsna with due respect— 
Krsna who himself was an ornament of the worlds. 

13. Some of them took off the excellent ornaments from 
his body and bedecked themselves, and adorned Madhava with 
their own ornaments. 

14. A certain fawn-eyed damsel, fascinated by passionate 
love, approached Krsna and kissed his lotus-like face. 

15. Catching hold of the hand of Govinda, the first 
cause of the worlds, a certain girl who was deluded by his 
Maya, took him to her own house. 

16. Assuming multifarious forms sportively, the lotus-eyed 
Lord Krsna fulfilled their desires. 

17. Thus, for a long time, the glorious Hari, Narayana 
sported in the city of the lord of Devas, fascinating the whole 
universe with his Maya. 

18. When a great deal of time elapsed, the residents of 
Dvaravati became weakened and dispirited as well as frightened 
on being separated from Govinda. 

19. Then the powerful Garuda who had been dispatched 
at the outset, went to the mountain Himavan searching 
for Krsna everywhere. 

20. Unable to see Govinda there, he bowed down his 
head to the sage Upamanyu and came back to Dvaravati again. 

21. In the meanwhile, thousands of terrible Raksasas 
came to the splendid city of Dvaraka and threatened it. 

22. The powerful Garuda whose exploit was similar to 
that of Krsna killed them in a great battle and saved the 
splendid city. 

23. At that time, Narada, the holy sage, who happened 
to see Kfsna on the peak ofKailasa, went to Dvaravati. 

24. On seeing the sage Narada, all those residents spoke 
to him—“Where is the lord and master Narayana Hari ?” 

25. He told them—“Lord Hari, the great Yogin, is 
sporting about on the peak of Kailasa. I have come here after 
seeing him.” 

26. O Brahmanas, on hearing his words, Garuda, the 
most excellent among the fliers (birds), went to the excellent 
mountain Kailasa through the sky. 



222 


Kurma Purana 


27. In a mansion embellished with jewels, he sawGovinda 
the son of Devaki. Lord Hari was seated near the lord of 
Devas. 

28. He was surrounded and served by the immortals and 
the celestial women. The attendants of Mahadeva, Siddhas, 
and Yogins stood round him. 

29. Prostrating himself like a staff on the ground and 
honouring auspicious Sankara, Suparna intimated to Hari what 
was happening at the city of Dvaraka. 

30-31. Kfsna bowed down his head to Sankara, 
Nilalohita. Being permitted by Hara, he came back to the city 
seated on Garuda the son of Kasyapa. He was duly honoured 
by the womenfolk. Madhusudana was respected through words 
as tasty as nectar. 

32. On seeing Krsna the destroyer of enemies depart¬ 
ing, the excellent-most Gandharvas (Divine musicians) and 
Apsaras (celestial ladies) followed that great Yogin, the wielder 
of conch, discus and mace. 

33. Hari the Atman of the Universe bade farewell to 
the ladies. Govinda hastened to the heaven-like splendid city of 
Dvaravati. 

34. O leading sages, when the lord, the enemy of the 
Asuras, went away, the passionately loving women became pale 
like the night devoid of the moon. 

35. On hearing about the excellent arrival of Krsna, 
the citizens immediately decorated the splendid city of 
Dvaravati. 

36. The people adorned and embellished the beautiful 
city with garlands, fastoons, etc., with large banners and by 
means of flag-staffs both within and without. 

37. They played on different musical instruments of 
sweet tone. They blew thousands of conches and broadcast 
notes of lute all round. 

38. No sooner did Govinda enter the splendid city of 
Dvaravati than the women, resplendent in their youthful charms, 
sang sweet songs. 

39. Standing on the tops of the mansions, they espied 
the great lord and began to dance and showered the son of 
Vasudeva with flowers. 



1 . 26 . 40-52 


223 


40. After entering the city lord Krsna was highly 
blessed with benedictions. The great Yogin, attended by the 
gentle ladies, shone in the excellent seat. 

41-42. In a beautiful ceremonial hall, Acyuta, surround¬ 
ed by attendants like Sahkha and others as also by his sons and 
thousands of prominent ladies, sat on a beautiful exalted seat 
alongwith Jambavati, and appeared resplendent like god Siva 
with his divine consort Uma. 

43. O Brahmanas, in order to pay visit to Krsna the 
immutable cause of the world, gods, Gandharvas and great 
elderly sages like Markandeya and others, came there. 

44. Then Lord Krsna, Hari, got up and bowed down his 
head to Markandeya who had come there. He offered him his 
own seat. 

45. After honouring those sages with his head bent down, 
Hari, in the company of his followers, bestowed on them what 
they desired and bade them farewell. 

46. Then at midday. Lord Hari himself, the lord of 
Devas, had his ablution, wore white garments and prayed to 
the sun with palms joined in reverence. 

47. With his gaze fixed on the sun-god, he duly per¬ 
formed Japa (repetition) of the holy mantras which are to be 
muttered. The lord of Devas performed Tarpana for Devas, 
Pitrsdind sages. 

48. Entering the temple of the lord in the company of 
Markandeya, he worshipped the lord of Bhutas (Siva) adorned 
with Bhasma, (who was) embodied in the Linga. 

49-50. After concluding the observarxes himself, the 
restrainer of men fed the e.' cellent sage and worshipped the 
Brahmanas. O Brahmanas, he performed the practice of 
Atmayoga. Acyuta, surrounded by his sons and others discussed 
the holy Puranic stories, with Markandeya. 

51. On observing all these rites (performed by Krsna) 
Markandeya, the great sage, laughingly addressed these sweet 
words to Krsna. 

Markandeya said : 

52. “Who is the lord propitiated by you by means of 
these auspicious rites, when you yourself are worthy of being 



224 


Kurma Pur ana 


worshipped by means of holy rites, and deserve to be meditat¬ 
ed upon by the Yogins ? 

53. You are that Supreme Brahman, the final liberation, 
the pure one, the highest region (or goal of all). It is for 
lightening the burden of the earth that you have taken birth 
in the family of Vrsnis.” 

54. The mighty-armed Krsna, the foremost among the 
knowers of Brahman, laughingly spoke to him even as all his 
sons were listening. 

Quoth the Lord : 

55. “Undoubtedly everything spoken by you is true. 
Still, I am worshipping the eternal lord Isana (Siva). 

56. Undoubtedly there is no obligation on me to do 
anything. Nor there is anything not obtained by me. Realizing 
as I do the Supreme Lord Siva, I worship the Lord. 

57. Those people deluded by Maya do not visualize the 
lord. I, therefore, worship indicating him to be my original 
cause. 

58. There is nothing more meritorious than the worship 
of Linga in the world. Nothing else is destructive of misfortune. 
So one should worship Siva embodied in Linga for the benefit 
of all these people (in the world). 

59. People expert in the Vedic lore say that what I am, 
is (God Siva’s) symbol (i.e. I am identical with Linga ). 
I, therefore, worship Lord Siva who is my own pure Atman, by 
means of my own self. 

60. There is no doubt that I am his highest form and 
that I am identical with him. The Vedas declare that 
undoubtedly there is no difference between both of us at all.'- 

61. This Lord Mahadeva who is the Supreme Ruler 
should always be offered sacrifices, worshipped, respected and 
realized in the Linga form by those who are afraid of the 
miseries of worldly existence.” 


1. This is the main teaching of the KP. (and many other Puranas). If 
at all some attempt had been made at the Pasupatisation of this Parana, it 
was superficial and perfunctory. 



1.26.62-69 


225 


Markandeya said : 

62. “O excellent god, what is that Linga ? Who is being 
worshipped in the Linga ? O Krsna of wide eyes, explain it, as 
this is an excellent and profound mystery.” 

Sri Bhagavdn said : 

63-64. “They call the Avyaita (the unmanifest) as the 
Linga?- It is the bliss, the eternal splendour. The Vedas call im¬ 
perishable Lord Mahesvara as the possessor of the Linga. Form¬ 
erly, when the mobile and immobile creation was destroyed 
in the vast sheet of water of the deluge, Mahasiva manifested 
himself for the enlightenment of Brahma and myself. Ever since 
that time, Brahma and I worship Mahadeva forever, with a 
desire for the welfare of the world.” 

Markandeya enquired : 

65. “How did the Linga, the highest region of Isvara, 
originate formerly to rouse you ? O Krsna, it behoves you to 
explain this now, for the purpose of my enlightenment.” 

Sri Bhagavdn said : 

66-69. “There was a vast sheet of water (of deluge). It 
was terrible, undemarcated and full of darkness. In the middle 


1. The importance of Linga worship and its origin is found in many 
other Puranas like the NP.I.79, LP.I.17, Vayu. Ch. 55. A different version 
of the origin of Linga worship is given in fra II. Chs. 38-39. The inclusion of 
such strange versions shows an uncritical tendency towards compilation by 
the author of KP. For the criticism of the latter version mde V.S. Agrawal 
VdmanaPurdva—-a Study, pp. 86 ff. I, however, doubt whether that version 
(which is given in more details in the LP. Chs 29-34) can be regarded as a 
satire upon the hypocrisy of Buddhist bhikfus. If at all, it may be called a 
criticism of the way of life of sham ascetics. 

The story of the origin o f Linga as given here may possibly be an 
attempt to denigrate Visnu and Brahma as some think. But I think it is an 
attempt to emphasize the sacrificial origin of Siva-liiiga—The steady flame 
of fire being represented by the symbol of Siva- linga (I have dealt with the 
problem elsewhere). But in the joint eulogy by Visnu and Brahma in vv. 
78-85, the burden of the song is “obeisance to Siva, the quiescent Brahman 
of the form of Linga.” Siva-linga thus is the symbol of Upanisadic Para- 
Brahman (vide V. 100) and not of phallus as western-oriented scholars believe. 



226 


Kurma Pur ana 


of that vast sheet of water, I, the eternal Man, wielding a conch, 
a discus and an iron club, lay down assuming a form with thou¬ 
sand heads, thousand eyes, thousands of arms and feet. 
In the meanwhile, I saw, not far away, the lord of 
unmeasured splendour, who shone resembling a crore of suns in 
brilliance, enveloped by splendour and glory, The four-faced 
Person, possessed of great Yoga, the cause of the Universe and 
Master was a god wearing the hide of a black antelope and 
was being eulogized by the Rg, Sama and Tajur Vedas. In a trice 
that lord, the excellent one among the knowers of the Yoga, 
came near me. God Brahma, endowed with high splendour, of 
his own accord asked me smilingly. 

70. “O [Lord ! Please tell me : Who are you ? Whence 
have you come ? Why do you stand here ? I am the creator of 
the worlds. I am the self-born Prapitamaha (the great grand¬ 
father) of the Universe.” 

71. Thus addressed by Brahma I spoke to him : “I am 
the creator and the annihilator of worlds again and again.” 

72. When the dispute increased due to the deluding 
power of Paramesthin (Siva), the great Linga, constituting the 
nature of Siva, manifested itself before us to enlighten us. 

73. It was dazzlingly lustrous like the fire at the time 
•of world destruction, ablaze with wreaths of fire, devoid of any 
•decrease or increase and without any beginning, middle or end. 

74. Then the Unborn lord (i.e. Brahma) said to me— 
“Let us find out its limits. You go quickly beneath it (to its 
bottom) and I shall go up.” 

75. Making such an agreement quickly, they (we both) 
went down and up (of the Linga). But neither the grandsire 
{ of the world Brahma nor I did know the limit (of the Linga). 
(v.l. even after a hundred years). And they (both of us) came 
together. 

76. Thereafter, we were surprised, we got afraid of the 
Trideni-bearing lord, as we were deluded by his Maya. We 
began to meditate on the universe and its Lord. 

77. Uttering Oihkara, the greatest syllable (sound) in 
a loud tone, and with palms joined in reverence, we eulogised 
^ambhu, the great lord. 



1.26.78-88 


227 


Brahma and Visnu said : 

78. “Obeisance to Sambhu, the physician for the ailment 
of worldly existence, the root-cause of which is the beginning¬ 
less Avidya (Maya). Hail to Siva the quiescent Brahman of 
the form of Lihga. 

79. Obeisance to one who is stationed in the vast ocean 
of dissolution and is the cause of dissolution and creation 
of the universe. Obeisance to Siva, the quiescent Brahman, of 
the form of Lihga. 

80. Obeisance to Siva, the quiescent Brahman in the 
form of Lihga whose symbol is wreaths of flames and is of the 
form of a column of Are. 

81. Obeisance to the deity devoid of beginning, middle 
and end, to one who by nature is spotless refulgence. Obeisance 
to Siva, the quiescent, infinite Brahman of the form of 
Lihga. 

82. Obeisance to the lord of Pradhana and Purusa. 
Obeisance to the Vedhas (Creator), of the form of the firma¬ 
ment. Obeisance to Siva, the quiescent Brahman of the form of 
Lihga. 

83. Hail to you the immutable, eternal Reality of in¬ 
comparable splendour, the embodiment of the essence of 
Vedanta and of the form of Kala (Time or Death). 

84-85. Obeisance to Siva, the quiescent Brahman of the 
form of Lihga.” On being eulogised like this, Mahesvara became 
manifest and the Lord, the great Yogin, shone with the lustre 
similar to that of a crore of suns and appeared to devour the sky 
with thousands and crores of mouths. 

86-87. The lord had a thousand hands and feet; the sun, 
the moon and the fire constituted his eyes; the lord with the 
Pinaka bow in his hand held the trident. He had the 
elephant’s hide for his garments; a serpent constituted his sacred 
thread; his voice resembled the sound of the cloud and 
Dundubhi (Divine drum). Then the great god said—“O excel¬ 
lent gods, I am delighted. 

88. Have a look at me, the great Deva; may all your 
fears be eschewed. Formerly, both of you, the eternal ones, 
were born of my limbs. 



228 


Kurma Purana 


89. This Brahma, the grandfather of the worlds is in my 
right side; Visnu, Hari the protector of the worlds is in the 
left side, and Kara resides in the heart. 

90-91. I am much pleased with you both. I shall grant 
you the boon you desire.” After saying this, Mahadeva, Siva 
himself, embraced me and lord Brahma and became disposed 
to shower his grace on us. 

92-94a. Then both Narayanaand Pitamaha, with delight¬ 
ed minds, bowed down to Mahesvara. Gazing at his counten¬ 
ance they submitted thus—“If you are pleased with us and if 
the boon is to be granted to us, O Lord, may our devotion to 
you, the great Lord, be eternal.” Then, Lord Isa, Paramesvara, 
laughingly told me with a delighted mind. 

The God said : 

94b. “O Lord of the Earth, you are the cause of dis¬ 
solution, sustenance and creation of the universe. 

95. O my dearly beloved Hari, protect this universe 
consisting of the mobile and immobile beings. O Visnu, I am 
in the three different forms with the names Brahma, Visnu and 
Hara.i 

96. Though I am devoid of Gunas and unsullied, I am 
threefold due to the attributes for the function of creation, 
sustenance and dissolution. O Visnu, eschew your delusion 
and protect this god Brahma, the grand-sire of the worlds. 

97-98a. The eternal Lord will definitely be your son. At 
the beginning of the Kalpa, I, assuming a divine form (v.l. 
terrible form) with a trident in my hand shall come out of your 
mouth and be your son, born of your rage.” 

98b-99. Addressing thus, O excellent-most sage, god 
Mahadeva showered his grace on me and god Brahma, and 
vanished then and there. It was since that time the worship of the 
Lihga had been well-established in this world. 

100. It is called Linga, O Brahmana, because it is the 
Supreme form of the Brahman. O sinless one, thus the glory of 
Linga has been narrated to you by me. 

1. The KP. tries to emphasize the oneness of the trinity of gods in so 
many places in order to counteract the divisive tendencies in different sects 
in those times. 



1.26.101-109 


229 


101. Only those who know Yoga, but neither Devas nor 
Danavas, can understand this. This is the greatest knowledge 
unrevealed and designated as Siva-lore. 

102. We pay obeisance to that lord forever whereby 
those who are endowed with the vision of knowledge see that 
Lord, subtle and incomprehensible. 

103. Obeisance to lord Mahadeva, the lord of Devas, 
to Bhrhgin. Salutations to the blue-throated one, to the mystic 
secret of the Vedas. 

104. Hail to the terrible one, to the quiescent Sthanu, 
to the cause of the Universe, the Brahman, to Vamadeva, to 
the three-eyed greatest Lord. 

105. Always pay obeisance to Sankara, Mahesa, Girisa, 
Siva. Ever meditate on Mahesvara. Ere longyou will be liberat¬ 
ed from this ocean of worldly existence.” Thus the leading 
sage was advised by Vasudeva. 

106-107a. He mentally hastened to Lord Isana, the all 
pervading (lit. with faces all round) Lord. On being permitted, 
the great sage bowed down his head before Krsna, approached 
Sambhu, the desired Lord* of Devas, the trident-bearing 
lord. 

107b-109. He who narrates this excellent chapter on 
Lihga, listens to or reads it regularly, becomes absolved of all 
sins. After hearing even for once it becomes the performance 
of the penance of Vasudeva. O leading Brahmanas, the man is 
absolved of all sins. If one were to repeat this day after day, 
one is honoured in the Brahmaloka.” Thus spoke the great 
Yogin, lord Krsna Dvaipayana. 


(v.l.) went to the region dear to the trident-wielding lord of Devas. 



230 


Kurma Pur ana 


CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN 

Kr^ria's Return to His Abode—Description of the Royal Dynasties 

Concluded 

Suta said : 

1. Thereafter, Krsna who secured boons from Mahesvara, 
begot of Jambavatl his excellent son Samba^ of noble soul. 

2. Aniruddha ofgreat strength was the son of Pradyuma. 
Both of them were richly endowed with good qualities; they 
were as if the other two bodies of Krsna himself. 

3-4. After slaying Karhsa, Naraka and hundreds of other 
Asuras, after playfully conquering Indra and the great Asura 
Bana and stabilising the entire universe and after re-establish- 
ment of the eternal Dharma in the world, Narayana made up 
his mind to return to his own abode. 

5. In the meanwhile, Bhrgu, and other Brahmanas came 
to Dvaraka in order to see the eternal lord Krsna who had 
accomplished his mission. 

6. After bowing to and worshipping them and when they 
had been comfortably seated alongwith the intelligent Rama, 
the Atman of the universe (i.e. Krsna) said to them. 

7. “O great sages, I shall now go to my Supreme abode 
known as “Visnu’s region.” All the tasks of my mission have 
been fulfilled. Be pleased to permit me. 

8. Now, the inauspicious and terrible Kali Age has set in. 
In this Age the people will become the followers of sinful 
activities. 

9. O excellent Brahmanas, you propagate that perfect 
knowledge which is beneficial to the ignorant and whereby these 
will be absolved of the sins of Kali Age. 

10. Those persons who remember me, the Supreme Lord, 
even once, in this Kali age, their sins perish. 

11. Those twice-born ones who worship me everyday 
with great devotion in the Kali Age, in accordance with the 
injunction prescribed in the Vedas, will go to my region. 


1. Rukmini had a son called Samba (vide supra 24.81-82) but 
Jambavati*s Samba is different. He was famous few his personal charms 
and was much more famous than his namesake (Rukmini*s son). 



1.27.12-22 


231 


12. Thousands of Brahmanas, born of your family, will 
cherish devotion towards Narayana, in the Kali Age. 

13. The people who are devoted to Narayana attain the 
deity that is greater than the greatest. Those who hate Mahes- 
vara will not attain it. 

14. The meditation, the Yogic practice, the penance 
performed, the knowledge obtained, the Yajna and other rites 
of those people who hate Mahesvara, perish immediately. 

15. Even he who worships me everyday with single- 
minded devotion but speaks ill of god Siva, falls into ten 
thousand hells for ten thousand years. 

16. Hence, O Brahmanas, the censuring of godofPasupati 
should be avoided mentally, physically and verbally, by my 
devotees, by all means. 

17. Those excellent Brahmanas who had been cursed by 
Dadhica in the course of the sacrifice performed by Daksa, should 
be shunned carefully by the devotees in the Kali Age. 

18. Your descendants on the earth who censure lord 
I Sana and who have been cursed by Gautama,^ are not worthy 
of being conversed with by the excellent Brahmanas.” 

19. All those great sages who were thus addressed by 
Krsna said Orh (i.e. Amen). Those excellent men hastened to 
their respective abodes. 

20. Thereafter, Narayana, Krsna, the pervader of the 
world, sportingly dissolved his own race and attained that 
Supreme region. 

21. Thus the race of kings has been succinctly recoun¬ 
ted to you. It is impossible to describe it in detail. What is it 
that you wish to hear further ? 

22. He who reads or listens to the auspicious narration 
of the races shall be freed from all sins. He is honoured in the 
heavenly world. 


1. This refers to Gautama’s curse to Brahmanas who with a desire to 
return to their hermitages after 12 years’ famine were not allowed to do so 
through persuasion by Gautama. They created a fake cow which died at the 
prohibitive word of Gautama and thus left him as he was the killer of a cow. 



232 


Kurma Pur ana 


CHAPTER TWENTYEIGHTi 

ArjuncHs meeting with Vydsa 

The sages said : 

1. O Suta, do narrate succinctly to us, the power (v.l. 
nature) of the four Yugas viz. ;—Krta, Treta, Dvapara and 
Kali. 

Suta said : 

2-3. When Narayana, Krsna, had retired to his great 
region, Partha, the son of Pandu, the tormentor of his enemies, 
the highly virtuous soul, performed the subsequent obsequies. 
He was overwhelmed with great grief On the way he saw sage 
Krsnadvaipayana passing by. 

4. The expounder of Brahman was followed and surround¬ 
ed by his disciples and their disciples. Then Arjuna eschewed 
his grief and prostrated himself on the ground like a staff. 

5-6. With very great pleasure he enquired : “O great 
sage whence are you coming ? O holy lord, to which place do 
you wish to go so hurriedly ? By seeing you my profound grief 
has disappeared. O lotus-petal-eyed one ! Counsel now what I 
have to do.” 

7. Sitting on the banks of the river and surrounded by 
his disciples, the sage, the great Yogin Krsnadvaipayana said 
to him. 


CHAPTER TWENTYNBVE 

Narration of the Nature of Tugas^ 


Vydsa said : 

1. “O son of Pandu, this terrible Kali Age has set in. 
Hence I am going to Varanasi, the auspicious city of the Lord. 

1. Ch. 28 is merely a background for the description of the way of 
behaviour of people and social conditions presumed to have prevailed (and 
prevailing) in different Yugas. This topic is popular with and hence 
common to most of the Puranas as we find it in Bh. P. xii.3.18-52, NP.I. 
41-1-123, VP. VI. 3.9-60 (to mention a few). 



1.29.2-11 


233 


2. O mighty-armed one, in this terrible Kali Age, all the 
people will be the pursuers of sinful activities. They will be 
devoid of religious discipline of the four castes ( Varnas) and 
stages of life ( Ahamas). 

3. In the Kali Age, I do not see any other atonement 
capable of absolving the sins of creatures except staying at 
Varanasi.i 

4. In all the three Yugas viz. Kfta, Treta and Dvapara, 
men will be noble-souled, virtuous and truthful in speech. 

5. You are famous in the three worlds as one endowed 
with fortitude and endearing to the people. Observe your own 
great duty now in this age. You will be thereby free from 
fear.” 

6. O excellent Brahmanas, on being advised thus by the 
holy sage, Partha, the conqueror of cities of enemies, bowed 
to him and asked him about the respective duties in the 
different Yugas. 

7. After bowing down to lord Isana, the son of Satyavati 
expounded to him everything about the eternal Tugadharmas 
(the duties in the respective Ages). 

Vydsa said : 

8. O lord of men, I shall tell you the Tugadharmas succi¬ 
nctly, as it is not possible to explain them in detail by me. 

9. O Partha, the first Yuga is said to be Krta by 
scholars, then comes Treta-, the third Yuga is Dvapara and Kali 
is the fourth. 

10. It is said that meditation and penance are enjoined 
(as the important dharma) in the Krta Age, attainment of 
perfect knowledge in the Treta Age, performance of sacrifices 
in the Dvapara Age and charitable gifts in the Kali Age.^ 

11. Brahma is the deity in the Krta Yuga, in Treta, 
it is lord Ravi (sun), the deity in Dvapara is Visnu and 
Mahesvara is the lord in Kali Age. 


1. W 2 and 3 quoted in ParaSara-madhava, Prayasdtta VV. 9 and 10. 

2. Quoted from Manu I. 86. Cf. Mbh. Santi 23.28, Vdyu. 8.65-66. 



234 


Kurma Purdncr 


12. Brahma, Visnu and the sun-god, all these are wor¬ 
shipped in the Kali Age too. But the Pinaka-bearing lord 
Rudra is worshipped in all the four Yugas. 

13. In the first Krtayuga, Dharma is glorified as having 
full four feet. In Treta it becomes three-footed while it is 
two-footed in Dvapara. 

14-15. In Tisya (Kali age) it stands devoid of three 
feet; it merely exists. In Krta Yuga the origin of subjects 
was through religiously sanctioned copulation. The livelihood 
was direct and devoid of greediness; the subjects were always 
contented; they had all pleasures and enjoyments. O conqueror 
of cities, there was no inferiority and superiority among them.. 
They were devoid of all distinctions. 

16-17. In Krta Yuga, they had equal longevity and 
pleasure as well as beauty. They were free from grief 
Adherence to truth and remaining in solitude was mainly- 
practised (?) People were engrossed in meditation and penance. 
They were devoted to Mahadeva. They moved about here and 
there without any specific desire. They were always delighted- 
in their minds. 

18. O scorcher of enemies, the people stayed on moun¬ 
tains and in the ocean (or on the seashore). They had no fixed 
abode. O Brahmanas, in due course of time, in the Yuga called 
Treta, their taste and pleasure disappeared. 

19-20a. When that Siddhi perished, another type of 
Siddhi appeared. When the happiness of (getting flowing) 
waters was obstructed, then shower of rain (carried by clouds 
began to fall on the earth from thundering clouds. 

20b-21. Even as the rainfall contacted but once the sur¬ 
face of the Earth, trees, that could be called abodes, appeared. 
The purpose of subjects was served by the trees. 

22-23a. In the beginning of Treta Yuga, the subjects 
maintained themselves through them. After the lapse of a great 
deal of time, because of their aberration, the attitude of passion 
and greed set in suddenly. 

23b-24a. It was due to their contrariety (aberrations) 
through the influence of Kala (time) that all the trees that had 
been their habitation perished. 



I.29.24b-36 


235 


24b-25. When the trees perished, the subjects born of 
legal copulation became confused and perplexed. They began 
to meditate on their Siddhi. Since they had the truthful medi¬ 
tation there appeared before them the trees that could be called 
their abodes. 

26-27. They yielded garments, fmits and ornaments for 
them. In them alone was born the honey, not originating from 
the bees, but endowed with fragrance, colour and taste. The 
honey of great virility was found in every leafy cup or cavity 
of the trees. The subjects in the beginning of Treta Yuga 
maintained themselves with that. 

28. All of them were delighted and contented and 
free from ailments, thanks to that Siddhi. Again after the lapse 
of some more time, they were overcome by their greed. 

29-30. They seized trees and took away honey 
forcibly. As a result of their misdeed caused by their covetous¬ 
ness, the wish-yielding Kalpa-trees at some places became des¬ 
troyed alongwith honey. The subjects, therefore, were 
extremely distressed due to severe cold, heat and heavy 
rains. 

31. Being afflicted by mutually opposite types of climates, 
they made coverings (shelters) and clothes. After devising 
means that counteracted the contradictory climatic changes, 
they began to think of agriculture and trade. 

32. When the Kalpa trees were lost alongwith honey 
in the Treta Yuga, further Siddhis appeared before them. 

33-34a. Their Siddhi facilitating agriculture or trade was 
something different. They too had sufficient rain; The rain¬ 
water flowing to the lower level became streams of water 
and rivers. 

34b-35a. Thus when there was plenty of water on the 
surface of the Earth, medicinal herbs grew, thanks to the con¬ 
tact of water and Earth. 

35b-36. Though uncultivated by ploughing and unsown, 
fourteen types of trees—both of rural and forest types and 
shrubs grew up putting forth seasonal flowers and fruits. It was^ 
then that their passion and covetousness spread everywhere. 



236 


Kurma Purdna 


37. Due to the inevitability of the course of events and 
as it was the effect of Treta Yuga, people forcibly occupied the 
river banks and fields as well as mountains. 

38. They seized trees, hedges and medicinal herbs 
forcibly. Due to this misdemeanour and aberration of theirs, 
the medicinal herbs entered Earth. 

39. Later, king Prthu milked these out of Earth 
at the behest of Pitamaha, god Brahma, grabbed them all in 
their senseless fury against each other. 

40-41. Good conduct became lost due to application 
of force as well as the influence of times. On knowing this, lord 
Brahma created the Ksatriyas for the establishment of 
disciplined behaviour and for the welfare of Brahmanas. 
The lord created discipline of the four castes and stages of 
life in the Treta Yuga. 

42-43. He established the institution of sacrifice without 
the slaughter of animals. Even in the Dvapara Yuga difference 
of opinion set in among men. Considering the passion, covetous¬ 
ness, mutual fight and wrong conclusions in the mind (among 
the people) one Veda of four feet appeared as three different 
Vedas.* 

44. In the beginning of all Dvapara Yugas, they (i.e. 
the Vedas )are divided into four by Vedavyasas. (They are many 
because they are different in the different sets of four Yugas). 
The Vedas differ due to the difference (or delusion) in the 
visions among the sons of sages or altered visions. 

45. The Saihhitas of RK, Yajus and Saman are being 
recited by the great sages by introducing Mantras and 
Brahmanas with due changes in accents and syllables. 

46-47a. O observer of good vows ! Due to general and 
specialised methods and difference of views,** Brahmanas, 
Kalpasutras, discussion on Brahman (Aranyakas & 
Upanisads), Itihasa, Purana and Dharmasastra came to be 
composed. 

*a better v.l. : In the treta age, one veda consisted of four feet 
(parts). 

**v.l. different interpretations due to general and special outlook 
{samdnya vaikrtaS caiva ). 



I.29.47b-30.3 


237 


47b-48. People become detached due to various calami¬ 
ties such as drought, death and other mishaps. They become 
depressed due to defects in speech, mind or body. Due to 
detachment, they begin to ponder over the means of liberation 
from misery. 

49. After reflection and investigation they become free 
from attachment. Then, they begin to see defects. It is due 
to realisation of defects that knowledge becomes possible 
in Dvapara. 

50. O Brahmanas, the behaviour in Dvapara is due to 
mixture of Rajas and Tamos. The Dharma that prevailed in 
the first (i.e. Krta) Yuga continued in Treta Age. 

51. It becomes agitated in Dvapara Yuga and it is 
destroyed in Kali Age. 


CHAPTER THIRTY 

The Nature of Kali Yuga 

Vyasa said : 

1. In Kali age,'^ men who are always agitated by the 
attribute of Tamas, commit delusion, malice and destruction 
of saintly men and ascetics. 

2. Epidemics of fatal disease, perpetual fear of hunger 
and starvation, fear of droughts and destruction of countries 
prevail in Kali Age. 

3. Utterly bad subjects born in Kali Yuga are im¬ 
pious, deficient in food and highly furious but lacking in brilli¬ 
ance, liars and greedy. 


1. A pessimistic picture of Kaliyuga is another feature of Puranic 
predictions. Cf. Mbh. Vana Chs. 188, 190; Br. P. Chs 229-30; Mt. P. 144. 
32-47; Bh. P. xii-1-2; VP. VI. 1; probably those must be the social conditions 
when Puranas came to be written. 



238 


Kurma Pur dm 


4. The fear of subjects is heightened due to ill per¬ 
formance of Yajnas, faulty study of the Vedas, evil conducts 
and misleading heretical scriptures and defects in the rites 
of Brahmanas. 

5. In this age, twice-born persons do not study the 
Vedas or perform sacrifices (or worship). People of low intellec¬ 
tual capacity will perform sacrifices and study the Vedas. 

6. In Kaliyuga, the Sudras will have close association 
with the Brahmanas by the use of spells and incantations as well 
as through the sharing of beds, seats and food. 

7. The kings who will be mostly Sudras will harass the 
Brahmanas. Killing of the foetus and heroes will be of 
common practice among kings. 

8. The twice-born people will not perform ablutions. 
Harms, Japas, offer of charitable gifts, worship of deities and 
other holy rites. 

9. In Kali age, the people censure Mahadeva, 
Purusottama, Brahmanas, Vedas, Dharmasastras and 
Puranas. 

10. People perform various rites not found in the Vedas. 
The Bralunanas would not have any interest in their prescribed 
pious rites and duties. 

11. People will have evil activities and conduct of 
life. They will be surrounded by useless dissembling heretics. 
They will be begging one another on many occasions. 

12. In Kali age, common people will begin to sell 
cooked food. The Vedas will be sold on the cross-roads, and 
youthful maidens will sell their bodies. 

13. When the close of Yuga is imminent, Sudras 
calling themselves Jims (subduers of sense organs) will perform 
holy rites by shaving off their heads, wearing ochre robes and 
black-antelope skins and keeping their teeth white.^ 

14. People will be plunderers of crops of others and- 
deprivers of (other people’s) clothes. Thieves will be robbers 


1. This refers to Buddhist Bhiksus. The term ‘jina’ means ‘the 
subduer of sense organs’and b applied to the Buddha. Jainas (especially 
Digambaras) are mentioned in V. 16 below. 



1.30.15-24 


239 


of other thieves and there will be another killer of such 
snatchers. 

15. It is stated in Smrtis that in the Kali age 
there will be prevalence of extreme misery, shortness of life-span, 
•exhaustion of physical bodies, spread of sickness, sinful activi¬ 
ties arising from attachment to Adharma. 

16. There will be some people wearing ochre-coloured 
robes, some going naked (Jainas), some bearing skulls (Kapali- 
kas), some will sell Vedas while others will sell sacred 
places. 

17. Seeing the Brahmanas seated, people of petty intellect 
will make them move; Sudras depending upon kings may 
even strike the leading Brahmanas. 

18. O tormentor of enemies, Sudras will be occupying 
lofty seats in the middle of Brahmanas. In Kali age, as a 
result of the influence of times, the king will dishonour the 
Brahmins. 

19. Brahmanas, of insufficient learning, possessing ill-luck 
and no great strength will begin to serve Sudras with flowers, 
ornaments and other auspicious articles. 

20. O king, Sudras will not cast a glance at the 
Brahmanas, worthy of respect and worship. It is the Brahmanas 
who would stand at their threshold awaiting an opportunity for 
service. 

21. In Kaliyuga, the Brahmanas, dependent on the 
Sudras, hover round and serve the Sudras seated in their vehicles 
and eulogise them by songs of praise and prayer. 

22. Dependent on Sudras, they teach them Vedas. Due 
to the calamity of appeasing those without Vedas, they resort 
to terrible atheism. 

23. Even the excellent ones among Brahmanas will 
sell the merit of penance, sacrifices and arts. As to Sannyasins, 
there will be hundreds and thousands. 

24. O ruler of men, destroying their own pious rites, they 
•do not attain that region. They sing about deities with worldly 
songs. 

25. In Kali age, there will be Brahmanas as well as 



240 K urma Pur ana 

Ksattxiyas who follow the course of conduct prescribed for 
Varna Tantrikas, Pasupatas and Pancaratrikas.^ 

26. When perfect knowledge and the holy rites are lost, 
when the whole world has become inactive, insects, mice, and 
serpents will harass human beings. 

27. Those Brahmanas who had been burnt completely 
in the fire of the curse of goddess Sati formerly during 
Daksa’s sacrifice, will be reborn in the families of Brahmanas. 

28. In the Kaliyuga, towards the close of that age, they, 
with their mind overwhelmed by Tamas, will censure Mahadeva. 
Theirs will be a futile pursuit of Dharma. 

29-30. The Brahmanas and others will be considered 
heroes in their own communities. Those who had been cursed 
by the noble Gautama, will incarnate in those wombs (families) 
and they will revile god Hrsikesa, Brahmanas and expounders 
of Brahman (or the Vedas). 

31-32a. Persons practising vows not sanctioned by the 
Vedas, of wicked behaviour and of futile efforts, will be deluding 
all other people by exhibiting the fruits thereof. Their minds 
are enveloped and vitiated with ignorance and these base people 
follow feline tricks. 

32b-33a. In Kali age, Rudra, Mahadeva is the great¬ 
est lord of the worlds. He is the deity of deities and he shall 
achieve the welfare of all men. 

33b-34. Sankara, Nilalohita, will take up incarnations for 
the purpose of establishing the Srauta (Vedic) and Smarta 
(belonging to the Smrtis) rites, with a desire for the welfare of 
his devotees. He will teach his disciples the knowledge pertaining 
to the Brahman. 

35-36. Those who resort to the essence of Vedantas 
(Upanisads) and follow the holy rites indicated in the Vedas 
and such of those holy rites as are pointed out with special 
reference to the people of all castes, serve him in whatever man¬ 
ner they can. They overcome defects or sins of Kali Age and 
attain the greatest region. 


1. Although the doctrine of four Vyuhas repeatedly occurs in the 
KP., the sect was not much respected and is grouped herein with the Varna 
(‘left-handed’ practitioners of Tantrism) and Pasupatas. 



1.30.37-51 


241 


37. Although the Kali age is defective in many respects, 
there is one great good point in it viz. a man derives very great 
merit without any great strain. 

38. Hence, after reaching the Yuga belonging to Mches- 
vara, a Brahmana shall, by all means and with special care, seek 
refuge in Rudra, I Sana. 

39. Those who bow down to Isana of three eyes and 
wearing the elephant’s hide, shall become delighted in their 
minds and attain to Rudra and his greatest region. 

40. Just as the obeisance paid to Rudra certainly yields 
all desired fmits, one shall not derive that benefit by making 
salutations to other deities. 

41. In the Kali Yuga of such a nature, the only means 
of purifying defects is the obeisance rendered to Mahadeva, 
meditating on him and offering charitable gifts—So says the 
Sruti. 

42. Hence, if one wishes to attain the highest beatitude 
one should eschew all gods other than god Siva and resort to the 
three-eyed Mahesvara. 

43. Futile indeed is the very life, the charitable gifts, the 
penance and the performance of sacrifice of those people who 
do not worship Rudra, Siva, who is saluted by Devas. 

44. Obeisance to Rudra the great God of gods, Mahadeva, 
to the trident-bearing Tryambaka, Trinetra (the three-eyed 
god). Salutations to the preceptor of Yogins. 

45. Hail to the lord of Devas, to Mahadeva, to 
Vedhas (creator), to Sambhu. Obeisance forever to Sthanu, to 
Siva the Paramesthin. 

46. Salutations to Rudra accompaniedjby Uma, to Maha- 
grasa (devouring all in a mouthful), the cause of the universe. 
I resort to the three-eyed celibate worthy of being a refuge. 

47-51. I bow down to Mahadeva, Mahayoga (the great 
Yogin) Isana, the consort of Ambika, the bestower of Yoga to 
Yogins, to one enveloped by Yogamaya, the preceptor and the 
venerable teacher of Yogins, to one who is accessible to the 
Yogins, the Pinaka-bearing lord, one who enables people to cross 
the ocean of worldly existence, to Rudra, to Brahma, to the 
overlord of Brahma, to the eternal, omnipresent, quiescent 
one, identical with Brahma, to one fond of Brahmanas, to one of 



242 


Kurma Pur ana 


matted hair, the embodiment of Kala, the formless one. Supreme 
Huler, to one who though multiform appears as of one form, to 
one knowable through the Vedas, to the Lord of heaven, the blue- 
throated embodiment of the Universe and the pervader of all, 
the seed of the universe, the fire (destroying the universe 
at the time) of world annihilation, the fire of death, to the bes- 
tower of desires and destroyer of Kama, to Lord Girisa whose 
forehead is decked with a digit of the moon. 

52. I bow to the extremely red god, who puts forth his 
tongue, to the sungod, Paramesthin, the fierce Pasupati, to the 
terrible deity, to the refulgent sun, to the Supreme penance 
(v.l. beyond darkness). 

53. Thus the characteristics of the Yugas have been 
■succinctly recounted as also of the Yugas that have gone by and 
that are yet to come until the end of the Manvantara. 

54. There is no doubt in this that all the Manvantaras 
are explained when one Manvantara is explained; all the Kalpas 
•are explained through the explanation of one. 

55. In the Manvantaras, both past and the future, all 
people are of identical names and forms and they identify 
themselves with the same.’’^ 

56. Thus advised by the holy sage, Svetavahana (Arjuna) 
•cherished in himself the greatest and unswerving devotion 
to Isana. 

57. He made obeisance to the holy sage Krsnadvaipayana 
who was omniscient, the creator of all, who was established as 
Visnu himself. 

58. Stroking Partha, the conqueror of enemies’ cities who 
bowed to him, by means of his splendid hands, sage Vyasa spoke 
to him again. 

59. “You are blessed, favourite with the Lord. In all the 
three worlds there is certainly no other person like you who is a 
devotee of Sankara, and the conqueror of enemies’ cities. 

60. You have directly perceived that lord Rudra who has 
tiniversal vision, has faces all round, who is the very embodi¬ 
ment of the imiverse. 


1. VV. 54-55 constitute an explanatory paraphrase of dhata yathapirvam 
akalpayat / 



3.30.61-31.1 


243 


61. That divine lordly knowledge has been precisely 
understood by you. The eternal Hrsikesa (Vyasa, his incarna¬ 
tion) himself has recounted it to you, out of delight. 

62. Do you go to your own abode. It does not behove 
you to grieve over it. With the greatest devotion seek refuge in 
5iva worthy of being the refuge.” 

63. After saying this and having blessed Arjuna, the holy 
sage went to Sankara’s city in order to propitiate Siva. 

64. At his instance, Pandu’s son Arjuna sought refuge 
in Siva. He eschewed all karmas. He became devoted to him 
through spiritual knowledge. 

65. Excepting the son of Satyavati (Vyasa) and Krsna, 
the son of Devaki, neither anyone has been, nor will be born 
who is equal to Arjuna in the matter of devotion to Sambhu. 

66. Obeisance forever, to the holy sage Vyasa son of 
Parasara, who is quiescent, intelligent and of unmeasured 
splendour, 

67. Krsnadvaip ayana is the eternal Visnu incar¬ 
nate. Who else can know in reality Rudra Paramesvara (the 
Supreme Lord). 

68. “Pay obeisance to that sage Krsnadvaipayana 
(Vyasa), the son of Satyavati and of Parasara, who was a Yogin 
of noble soul, the immutable Visnu himself.” 

69. Thus addressed, the sages bowed to the noble 
Vyasa, the son of Satyavati, with the concentration of mind. 


CHAPTER THIRTYONE 

The Glory of Varanasi'- 

The sages said : 

1. We are eager to hear what the highly intelligent sage 
Krsna Dvaipayana did after arriving at the divine city of 
Varanasi. 


1. This is the holiest place for Hindus. As a birth-place of Parsva- 
nath a. the 23rd Tirthahkara of Jainas and that of Kasyapa Buddha and the 



244 


K urma Puranxt 


Suta said : 

2. After reaching the divine city Varanasi and perform¬ 
ing ablution in Gahga, he worshipped Lord Siva, Visvesvara. 

3. On seeing that the sage Vyasa had come there, the 
sages who resided there, worshipped that leading sage. 

4. Bowing down to him all of them requested him to 
relate the meritorious story with reference to Mahadeva, that 
destroyed all sins. They asked him about the eternal holy rites 
leading to salvation. 

5. The omniscient, great and holy sage recounted to 
them the greatness of the Lord of Devas—the greatness based 
on piety as pointed out by the Vedas.* 

6. Among those leading sages Jaimini, the great sage and 
disciple of Vyasa, asked Vyasa about the eternal and mystic 
significance of those religious duties. 

Jaimini said : 

7. O holy sage, it behoves you, the omniscient one, to 
dispel one of our doubts. There is nothing which is unknown to 
you, the great sage, 

8-11. Some persons praise meditation. Others extol only 
Dharma (piety), some other people praise Sarhkhya as well as 
Yoga, while other great sages emphasize penance. Certainly 
other great sages speak in praise about Brahmacarya (celibacy). 
Others speak highly of non-violence and yet others extol re¬ 
nunciation. Some praise mercifulness, charitable gifts and study 
of the Vedas. Others speak highly of pilgrimage to holy places 


place of Dharma-cakra-pravartana by Gautama Buddha, it is sacred both to 
Jainas and Buddhists. It was the capital of the kingdom of Kasis— 
probably the same Aryan tribe mentioned as Kasrites in Central Asian 
inscriptions. The Kasis are mentioned in the Br. XIII. 5.4.21. The 

town is called Varanasi as it is situated between two ‘rivers’ Varana 
(mod. Barna) and Asi (rirfe V. 63 below). Being a highly sacred place, it 
has been eulogised and described in details in various Puranas such as the 
Mt. P. Chs. 180-185, NP. II. Chs. 48-51, Pd. P.I. Chs. 33-37, SK. P. IV 
(Kasi Khanda) and others. The KP. has devoted five chapters (Chs. 31-35) 
for describing the glory of Varanasi. 

*v.l. dharman veda-nidarSitan ‘‘religious duties ordained in the Vedas.” 



1.31.12-21 


245 


and yet others praise the restraint of sense-organs. O leading 
sage, be pleased to explain to us which of them is preferable and 
most excellent. If at all there is anything else, it behoves you to 
tell even if it is a great secret. 

12. On hearing the words of Jaimini, Sage Krsnadvai- 
payana bowed down to the bull-bannered deity (Siva) and said 
in a majestic tone. 

The revered Vydsa said : 

13. O excessively blessed one, excellent, very nice. O 
sage, I shall explain what has been asked by you. It is the 
secret of secrets. May the other sages too hear it. 

14. This eternal perfect knowledge was explained by 
Isvara formerly. It is a great secret disliked by non-intelligent 
persons but resorted to by men of subtle vision. 

15. This excellent knowledge, the best among all types of 
knowledge, should not be imparted to one who has no faith, 
nor to one who is not a devotee of Paramesthin; nor should it 
be given to one who is not the knower of Vedas. 

16. The goddess, seated on her divine seat on the peak of 
Aleru asked Mahadeva, Isana, the enemy of the Tripuras. 

The glorious Goddess said : 

17. O Mahadeva, O lord of Devas, O destroyer of the 
distress of devotees, how can a man perceive you, the lord, in a 
short while ? 

18. O Sankara, the systems of Sarhkhya and Yoga, the 
penance, the meditation, the Vedic path of action and other 
things as well, they say, are very strenuous and tedious. 

19-20. O destroyer of Kama’s body, for the welfare of 
all devotees, please expound that secret-most knowledge, resorted 
to by Brahma and others, whereby the subtle lord will be visible 
to all embodied beings whether Yogins of great knowledge or 
men of confused minds. 

Hvara said : 

21. This knowledge, excluded by (i.e. incomprehensible 
to) the ignorant, is of great mysterious meaning and is not to be 
revealed to anybody else. I shall explain it to you, precisely, 
as mentioned by great sages. 



246 


K urma Pur ana 


22. The city of Varanasi is my secret-most holy centre. 
It is the cause that enables all living beings to cross the 
ocean of worldly existence. 

23. The great-souled devotees of mine who have taken 
to the observance of my vows and who adhere to those great 
observances, stay at that place. 

24. It is the most excellent of all holy centres; the best 
of all abodes; the most excellent of all types of knowledge; it is 
my sacred place Avimukta.^ 

25. The holy centres and shrines situated in other places, 
in heaven, on earth and in cremation grounds are all found 
here. 

26. My abode is not in contact with the earth, it is in the 
firmament. Those who are not liberated do not perceive it; the 
liberated ones observe it through the mind. 

27. This city is known as Avimukta (not deserted 
by me). It is the well-known cremation ground.^ O beautiful 
women; it is here that I annihilate this universe after becoming 
Kala. 

28. O goddess, of all my secret abodes, this is the most 
lovable to me. Whenever my devotees go here, they enter me 
alone. 

29. What is offered there as a charitable gift, the Japa 
performed there, the Homas, the Yajhas and the penances 
performed there, the meditation, the study of the Vedas and 
the knowledge pursued there—all these shall be inexhaustible in 
benefit here. 

30. All sins accumulated previously in the course of 
thousands of births are annihilated, the moment one enters 
the holy centre of Avimukta. 

31-33. Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, Sudras, those of 
mixed castes, women, people of alien outcaste origin, sinners of 

1. According to NP. II. 48, LP. 92.45-46, SK.P.IV. 26.27, this place 
(Varanasi) was never vacated (even during Pralaya or the Deluge) by god 
Siva and is hence called A-vimukta. LP.1.92.143 gives another strange deri¬ 
vation : aBi=sin, mukta=iree from. ‘A place free from sins’. 

2. Smaidna is another name of Varanasi, the explanation of which is 
given here. The verse is repeated in Pd. P. I. 33.14. This explanation is 
repeated in SK. P. IV. 30.103-4. 



1.31.34-43 


247 


mixed castes, insects, ants, and all other animals and birds, O 
lady of excellent face, assume the form with the moon for crest- 
jewel, the great bull for vehicle and possessing three eyes, if 
they die in Avimukta in due course of time.^ O goddess, they 
will be born as human beings in my auspicious city. 

34. A sinner dying in Avimukta never goes to hell. 
All of them blessed by Isvara, attain the great goal. 

35. Realising that salvation is very difficult to achieve 
and the world is very terrible, a man should strike his feet with 
stone and stay on in Varanasi. 

36. O Paramesvarl, it is very rare that a living being 
attains penance * there, but to him who dies there, the goal is 
conducive to liberation from worldly existence. 

37. O daughter of the lord of mountains, thanks to my 
grace, sin perishes here. But insensible men, deluded by my 
Maya do not perceive it. 

38. Those who are deluded and enveloped by darkness 
do not perceive Avimukta. They enter in the midst of faeces, 
urine and semen again and again. 

39. If buffeted by hundreds of calamities, a person enters 
and stays at my city, he attains the highest beatitude from which 
there is no return. 

40. He enters the abode of Siva that is free from births, 
deaths and old age. That is the goal of those who seek salvation, 
who have no further fear of death. 

41-43. After attaining it a learned man shall feel that 
they have attained their objective in life and are contented. The 
excellent goal that is attained in Avimukta is not attained by 
means of charitable gifts, or by penances, or by Tajhas or even 
by learning. Learned men know that Avimukta is the specific 
and efficacious greatest penacea for those people of different 
castes, the casteless, the hated ones, the Candalas and others, 
those who are full of serious and intense sins. 


1. VV. Repeated in Mt. P. 181.17-21; Pd. P.I. 33.17-20. Cf. NP. II. 
48.51-52. 

*v.l. tapasa capi putasya (to a person who though purified with penance, 
attainment of liberation f rom Saihsara is not easy if he dies at any other 
place except Varanasi). 



248 


Kurma Pur ana 


44. Avitnukta is the greatest knowledge, Avimukta is the 
greatest region, Avimukta is the greatest principle, Avimukta is 
the greatest and the most auspicious Bliss. 

45. At the end I bestow the greatest knowledge and the 
greatest region, on those who take an irrevocable vow of 
staying in Avimukta. 

46-48. These following holy and sacred places are well- 
known in the three worlds—viz. Prayaga, the holy Naimisa 
forest, Srisaila, the Himalaya, Kedara, Bhadrakarna, Gaya, 
Puskara, Kuruksetra, Rudrakoti, Narmada, Hatakesvara, Salig- 
rama, Puspagra, (v. 1. Kubjamra) Vaihsa (?), Kokamukha, 
Prabhasa, Vijayesana, Gokarna and Sahkukarna.^ 

49-50a. Those who die at Varanasi attain the greatest 
salvation. If one plunges in Gahga of triple streams (in 
heaven. Earth and Patala) especially at Varanasi, the sins 
committed in hundreds of births are eliminated. 

50b-51a. Although Gahga and the performance of 
Sraddha, charitable gifts, Japa, and other religious rites can be 
easily done at other places, it is rare that one gets the opportu¬ 
nity to do so at Varanasi. 

51b-52a. A man staying at Varanasi should perform 
Tajna and Homa everyday, offer charitable gifts and worship 
other deities and perform penance subsisting on the air only. 

52b-53a. Even if a sinner, a rogue and an impious man 


1. Most of these holy places are known by their old names. Those 
which have changed their names or are less familiar are noted below : 

Bhadrakarna : (1) Karnali, on the south bank of Narmada, famous for 
its Siva shrine vide KP. II. 20-35 —De 31 

(ii) Rudrakoti: a sacred place (1) in Kuruksetra or (2) on the Narmada 
near its source at Amarakantaka —De 171 

Hdfakeivara : A sacred place seventy miles to the south-east of Sidhpur 
in Ahmedabad district—De 71. Kdmana A (37.78) locates it at Sapta-goda- 
vari in Andhra Pradesh. 

Kokamukha : Varaha ksetra in Purnea district of Bengal, on the 
Triveni (confluenceof Kosis) above Nathpur—De. 191. 

VijayeSana : Probably the same as Vijayesa i n Kasmira. 11 is one of the 
most famous Tirthas in Kasmira near Cakradhara (HD IV. 821) inWular 
Pargana (?) 

Sahkukarna —^The Southern part of Varanasi—De 177 



I.31.53b-63a 


249 


(were to visit Varanasi), his arrival at Varanasi will sanctify 
three generations of his family. 

53b-54a. Those who eulogise and worship Mahadeva at 
Varanasi should be known as freed from all sins. They will 
become Ganeivaras, (the heads of Ganas or attendants of Siva). 

54b-56a. At other holy centres, the greatest abode 
(Moksa) is attained by means of a thousand births, through 
Yoga or knowledge or renunciation or through other means. But 
those devotees of the lord of the chief of Devas who stay at 
Varanasi, attain the great salvation even in a single birth. 

56b-57. One need not go to any other penance grove 
after reaching Avimukta where Yoga, perfect knowledge and 
salvation, are acquired in a single birth. It is called Avimukat 
because it is not deserted by me. 

58-59a. That is the secret of secrets. After knowing this 
one is liberated. O lady of fine eyebrows. The goal that is 
assigned for those who seek the greatest bliss and those who 
adhere to perfect knowledge and meditation, is attained by one 
who dies at Avimukta. 

59b-61a. All sorts of Avimuktas are mentioned by 
Devas forever. But the city of Varanasi is more auspicious than 
all those abodes. It is here that Mahadeva, Isvara himself 
explains the Tdrakabrahman (i.e. Brahman that enables one to 
cross the ocean of worldly existence). 

61b-62a. That great principle which is greater than the 
greatest is obtained in a single birth at Varanasi, O goddess. 

62b-63a. Just as Avimukta is stationed in between eye- 
brows,^ in the middle of the umbilical region, in the heart and 
in the head and in the sun itself, is situated at Varanasi. 

1. In Yoga, certain parts of the body are believed to be locations 
■of certain holy centres. For example Sri-parvata at the crest (head), 
Kedara at the forehead, Varanasi between the eyebrows. The Jdbala- 
• darianopanisad gives the list as follows : 

Sri-parvatarh Siras-sthane Keddram tu laldfake / 

Vdrdrtdsi mahdprdjnd bhruvor ghrdriasya madhyame 11 
Kvruksetrarh Kuca-sthdne, Praydgam hrt-saroruhe / 

Cidambaram tu hrn-madhya ddhdre kamaldlayam // 

Saints of Maharashtra like Ekanath, Tukaram look upon the body as 
the holy place called Pandharpura and the soul as Vitthala, the presiding 
deity thereof. 



250 


Kurma Purana- 


63b-64. The city of Varanasi is located in between the 
rivers Varana and Asi. The principle of Avitnuktaka is always 
present. In the past or future there never has been or will ever 
be a place greater than Varanasi. 

65-66a. Just as god Narayana, Mahadeva and Sun- 
god* abide there, so do other gods along with Gandharvas, Yaksas, 
serpents and Raksasas. God Brahma, the grand-sire of the world 
and the god of gods always propitiates me there. 

66b-68. Those who have committed the Mahapatakas 
(the great sins) and those who are greater sinners than they, 
attain the greatest goal after reaching Varanasi. Hence, O 
Mahadevi, he who seeks liberation should invariably reside in 
Varanasi till death. After securing perfect knowledge he is 
liberated. But there will be obstacles in the case of those whose 
minds are vitiated by sins. 

69. Therefore, one shall not commit sins physically, 
mentally or verbally. O excellent Brahmanas, this is the secret 
of the Vedas and the Puranas. 

70-7la. Perfect knowledge is dependent on Avimukta. I 
do'not know anything greater than it. Even as Devas, the 
sages and Paramesthin were listening, this has been recounted 
to the goddess by the Lord. It is destructive of all sins. 

71b-72a. Just as Narayana, the Supreme Person, is the 
most excellent of all Devas, just as Girisa is the most excellent of 
all Isvaras, so also this (Varanasi) is the most excellent of all 
sacred places. 

72b-73a. Only those persons who had propitiated Rudra 
in their previous births do obtain the greatest holy centre 
Avimukta, the abode of Siva. 

73b-74a. Those whose minds are vitiated by the sins of 
Kali age cannot perceive the abode of Paramesthin. 

74b-75a. Those who always remember Kala and have 
access to this city, get their sins of here and hereafter, destroyed 
quickly. 

75b-76a. If those who settle here commit sins, Siva the 
embodiment of Kala, shall destroy them. 


* mahadevadiveivarat is meaningless. It is emended as mahadevo diveSvarah f 



I.31.76b-32.3 


251 


76b-77a. Those who come to resort to this place, those 
who seek liberation, are not born again after death. They do not 
get submerged in the ocean of worldly existence. 

77b-78a. Hence, everyone should exert all means to 
stay at Varanasi whether he is a Yogin or a non-Yogin, whether 
he is a sinner or the most meritorious person. 

78b-79. If the mind is inclined towards Avimukta that 
should not be thwarted either due to the words of the public 
or of the parents or through the arguments of elderly persons.” 

Suta said: 

80. After saying this, the holy lord Vyasa, the most 
excellent among the knowers of the Vedas, went to Varanasi along 
with his excellent disciples. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTWO 

The greatness of Varanasi — The Glory of Orhkarehara and 
Krttivdseivara Lingas^ 

S uta said : 

1. The intelligent preceptor, sage Dvaipayana, surrounded, 
by his disciples, went over to the splendid and huge Lihga 
Othkara that bestows salvation. 

2. After worshipping Mahadeva, there, alongwith his 
disciples, the great sage recounted its greatness to the sages whose 
souls are purified by meditation. 

3. This is that stainless Linga Othkara by name. It is 
very splendid. By its sheer memory, one is released from all 
sins. 


1. There are hundreds of Lihgas at Varanasi. But SK. P. lY 
(Kasikhanda) 73.32-36 enumerates 14 out of these as Mahalingas. 
Oihkaresvara and Krttivasesvara are included in that and Tatra to them, 
every month is recommended (SK. P. IV. 73.39). 



252 


Kurma Parana 


4. It is here that the excellent supreme knowledge of five 
Ayatanas (five-faced Siva ?), capable of granting absolute 
emancipation from Saihsara, has been always worshipped by 
the sages. 

5. Here the glorious Lord Rudra, god Mahadeva himself 
who has assumed five-bodied {Pancayatand) form and who bes¬ 
tows Moksa on living beings, sports. 

6. What is mentioned as the knowledge pertaining to 
Pasupati and which has five topics or imports is this stainless 
Linga situated at Oihkara. 

7. The five topics are super-quiescence, supreme peace, 
knowledge, stability and cessation. These five are the five aspects 
of the Linga of Isvara. 

8. The Linga designated as Oihkara is called Pancaya- 
tana (having five abodes) as it is the support of the five deities 
viz. Brahma and others. 

9. If at the time of death, one remembers the Linga 
pertaining to Isvara, the unchanging Pancayatana Linga, one 
enters the Supreme light and bliss. 

10. Formerly, the celestial sages, the Siddhas and the 
Brahmanical sages had worshipped Lord Is ana here and had 
attained thereby the greatest region (viz. Moksa). 

11. O prominent Brahmanas, on the bank of Matsyodari, 
there is an excellent place, the secretmost, auspicious spot of the 
extent of a Gocarma known as the excellent Oihkara. 

12-13. O excellent Brahmanas ! In Varanasi the follow¬ 
ing are the secret Lihgas viz. Krttivasa, excellent Madhyames- 
vara, Visvesvara, Oihkara and the fine Kapardisvara. Nobody 
can know the secret (Lihgas) except through the grace of 
Sambhu.” 

14. After saying this, the great sage, Krsna, the son of 
Parasara, went to see the Krttivasesvara Linga of the Trident¬ 
bearing Lord. 

15. After worshipping it along with his disciples, the holy 
sage, the most excellent among the knowers of Brahman, men¬ 
tioned the greatness of Krttivasas^ (the deity wearing elephant 
hide) to the Brahmanas. 

1. For derivation see the legend in VV. 16-18. For its glory cf. 
NP. II. 49.6-10, Pd. P. I. 34.10. In fact KP. VV. 3-29 in this chapter are 
practically the same as Pd. P. I. 34.1-25. 



1.32.16-28 


253 


16. “Formerly aDaitya assumed the form of an elephant 
in this place and came near Bhava (Siva) to kill those Brahmanas 
who worship the lord here everyday. 

17. O Excellent Brahmanas, in order to protect those 
devotees, the three-eyed Mahadeva, favourably disposed to 
the devotees, appeared out of the Lihga. 

18. Contemptuously Kara killed the Daitya of the form 
of an elephant with his trident. Its hide he made his robe. Hence 
the lord is Krtti vases vara. 

19. O leading sages, the sages attained the greatest Siddhi 
here. They attained the greatest region with their own body. 

20. Those who are glorified as Vidya, Vidyesvaras, 
Rudras and Sivas surround the Krttivasesvara Linga forever, and 
abide here. 

21. There is no doubt about this that those persons who 
realize that this Kaliyuga is terrible and full of evil do not 
leave Krttivasa and achieve their highest object in life. 

22. In other places, salvation may or may not be attained 
in the course of a thousand births. But at the shrine of Krt- 
tiv^a, salvation is obtained in the course of a single birth. 

23. They say that this abode is the place of residence of 
all Siddhas. It is protected by MahMeva, Sambhu, the lord of 
Devas. 

24. In every Yuga, the Brahmanas of self-control, 
the masters of the Vedas, worship Mahadeva. They perform the 
japa of the Satarudriya Mantra. 

25. Meditating in their hearts on Sthanu, Siva, who is 
present within everyone, they forever eulogize the three-eyed 
Mahadeva. 

26. Siddhas verily sang songs to those Brahmanas who 
have resided in Varanasi and seek refuge in Krttivasa. 

27. After securing the birth in the families of the Brah¬ 
manas very rare in the world and liked by all the worlds, the 
ascetics have recourse to meditation, perform the Japa of 
Rudra and meditate on Mahesa in their minds. 

28. The leading sages in Varanasi propitiate the lord and 
the Ruler. Without attachment and desire, they perform 
Yajnas, eulogise Rudra and bow down to Sambhu. 



254 


Kurma Purdna 


29. Obeisance to Bhava of pure emotions and splendour; 
I resort to Sthanu, Girisa, the ancient deity. I remember 
Rudra who has entered my heart. I know that Mahadeva of 
many forms.” 


CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE 

The greatness of KapardUvara 

Suta said : 

1. After addressing the sages, the intelligent sage Vyasa 
went to see Kapardisvara, that unchanging Lihga of the trident¬ 
bearing lord. 

2. O Brahmanas, he took his bath in the holy centre 
Pi^camocana, performed the Tarpana rite for the Pitrs in 
accordance with the injunctions and worshipped Sulin (the 
trident-bearing deity). 

3. Those sages saw a wonderful event there in the 
company of their preceptor, whereby they accepted the great¬ 
ness of the shrine and bowed down to Hara, Girisa. 

4. A certain tiger of hideous features approached the 
excellent Kapardisvara shrine in order to devour a hind. 

5. The hind was much frightened in her mind. In her 
agitation,' she ran round and round the shrine and ultimately 
submitted to the tiger. 

6. The tiger of very great strength tore the hind with 
its sharp claws and on seeing the leading sages, it went away 
to another isolated forest. 

7. When that hind fell dead in front of Kapardisvara 
a great flame of fire lustrous like the sun was seen in the 
sky. 

8. (The flame of Are) had three eyes. It was blue¬ 
necked and the crest was marked by the moon. It was seated on 



1.33.9-15 


255 


•a bull and was surrounded by similar men (i.e. seated on the 
bulls). 

9. The firmament-dwellers showered flowers on his head. 
He became the Ganesvara himself and vanished at the same 
instant. 

10. On seeing this wonderful event, (the disciples) the 
-chief of whom was Jaimini asked the infallible preceptor about 
the greatness of Kapardisvara. 

11. After bowing down to the bull-bannered deity and 
sitting in front of the lord, the holy sage recounted the greatness 
■of Kapardisa. 

Verses in Brackets 

1 lA. By sheer remembrance of the Lord Kapardisvara, 
the entire series of sins and passions, anger and other defects of 
the residents of Varanasi perish. 

IIB. All obstacles are dispelled by worshipping Kapar¬ 
disvara. Hence, the excellent Kapardisvara should be visited 
■constantly. 

12. This excellent Lihga of Lord Kapardisvara should 
be worshipped assiduously and with care and eulogised by the 
Vedic hymns. 

13. To the Yogins of quiescent minds, who regularly 
meditate here, the accomplishment of Yogic Siddhi occurs 
■within six months. There is no doubt about it. 

14. If one takes one’s bath in the holy tankofPisa- 
camocana^ near this place and worships this lord, the sins like 
Brahmana-slaughter and other similar sins perish. 

15. O Brahmanas, formerly a great ascetic of praiseworthy 
holy rites, well-known as Sahkukarna, worshipped the trident¬ 
bearing lord. 


1. The legend explaining the name Piidca-mocana (deliverer from the 
joni of Pisacas or goblins) is given below in VV. 15-35. The legend is 
repeated in Pd. P.I. 34. 

There are many verses common to Pd. P.I. 35 and this chapter. 



256 


K urma Pur ana 


16. He performed the Japa of the Pramva (Orh) having' 
the form of Rudra. He ■worshipped Rudra constantly by means 
of flowers, incense etc. and hymns, obeisances and circumambula- 
tions, 

17. Taking up a perpetual initiation and celibacy the 
Yogic soul stayed there. Once he saw a very hungry ghost who 
had arrived there. 

18. He was a mere skeleton of bones covered with bare 
skin and was heaving deep sighs again and again. On seeing 
him, the leading sage was overwhelmed with great sympathy. 

19. He said—“who are you, sir ? From which land have 
you come over to this place?” The ghost who was being afflicted 
by hunger spoke these words to him. 

20. “I was a Brahmana in my previous birth. I was 
endowed with plenty of wealth and foodgrains. I was blessed 
with sons, grandsons, etc. I was eager to maintain the family. 

21. Neither Devas, nor cows nor guests were 
worshipped by me. Even a minor meritorious deed, even the 
slightest of good action was not performed by me. 

22. Once Lord Rudra, with the lordly bull for his vehicle, 
the lord of the universe was seen at Varanasi. He was touched 
and bowed to by me. 

23. Then, ere long, I passed away. O sage but the 
terrible face of Yama was not seen. 

24. Having fallen into this ghoulish form of existence, I 
am so much afflicted by hunger and so much overwhelmed 
with thirst that I do not know what is beneficial or detrimental 
to me. 

25. O holy lord, if you see any remedy for uplifting me 
from this ghostly type of existence please do it. I bow down 
to you. I seek refuge in you.” 

26. Sahkukarna who was addressed thus, said to the 
ghost:—“There is none else in this world like you, who is of the 
greatest meritorious deeds. 

27. Since, formerly. Lord Siva, the Lord of the universe, 
was seen, touched and saluted by you, who else can be equal to 
you in this world ? 

28-29. As a result of that holy action, you have come to 



1.33.30-37 


257 


this place. Take your bath in this holy pond quickly and with 
mental purity, so that you will be able to cast off this despicable 
form instantaneously.” 

30. That Piiaca (ghost) who had been thus advised by 
the merciful sage, remembered the three-eyed excellent lord 
Kapardlsvara, the ruler of the universe, concentrated his mind 
and took his ablution into the holy pond. 

31. As a result of the plunge, he died in the vicinity 
of the sage. He was then seen in an aerial chariot that resembled 
the sun himself,bedecked with divine ornaments with his beauti¬ 
ful crest marked by the moon. 

32. Rising up and surrounded by Rudras stationed in 
heaven and by incomprehensible Yogins, he shone like the rising 
sun, the lord of all, surrounded by Valakhilya sages and others. 

33. In heaven, Siddhas and Devas began to eulogise; 
the charming celestial Apsaras danced; the Gandharvas, 
Vidyadharas, Kinnaras and others showered flowers with bees 
hovering round them.* 

34. After attaining spiritual enlightenment through the 
grace of divine Lord, he, being eulogised by groups of 
eminent sages, entered the foremost sphere of the sun consisting 
of three Vedas where Rudra himself shines. 

35. On seeing the goblin-like ghost liberated, the sage 
was delighted. He mentally thought of Mahesa, Rudra, the 
foremost of the wise. He bowed down to and eulogised 
Kapardin. 

Sankukarna said ; 

36. “I bow down to the eternal ancient Purusa, the sole 
protector, greater than the greatest. I go unto the master of Yoga, 
the ruler, the sun, the fire, mounted on the large mass, (a better 
v.l. beyond Kapila). 

37. I seek refuge in you, the Brahman, (i.e. Vedas), the 
golden one, abiding in the hearts of Yogins, devoid of beginning. 
I seek refuge in you stationed in heaven, the holy great sage, 
composed of Brahman. 


*v.l. with water mixed with them. 



258 


K urma Pur ana 


38. I bow unto you, beyond Brahman, Sambhu endowed 
with a thousand feet, eyes and heads, having a thousand arms, 

the lord of Hiranyagarbha (god Brahma), the three-eyed deity, 
beyond darkness. 

39. For ever I bow down to and seek refuge in Siva, Lord 
Isa, the other shore of Brahman, from whom the universe origi¬ 
nates and by whom the auspicious one, the universe is dissolved 
and all these have been brought up. 

40. I bov/ down to you, the Sole Rudra, beyond all 
■symbols, of unmanifest form, self-luminous, the Lord of con¬ 
sciousness, the Supreme Lord who is beyond Brahman and 
beyond whom nothing exists. 

41. I bow unto your form which is beyond Brahman 
{Brahmapara) , the lord whom the Yogins visualize after attaining 
Samadhi (the trance) wherein the Sabija form is eschewed (i.e. 
in the nirvikalpa samadhi) when the Yogins become one with the 
Supreme Atman. 

42. I bow forever to you who are the ultimate form of 
BTzhmdin {Brahma-para) which transcends names and which has no 
special gratifications and whose form is beyond the ken of sight. 

I take eternal refuge in you, the self-born god. 

43. I pay obeisance for ever to that ultimate shore of 
Brahman whom those who are absorbed in Vedic discussion 
realise to be formless, the very embodiment of knowl¬ 
edge about Brahman, undifferentiated, one without a second 
yet they perceive it in multifarious form. 

44. I bow for ever to your huge form called Kala from 
which the Pradhana and Ancient Purusa have come out as a 
Vivaria (illusion), to whom Devas pay respects, which is en¬ 
veloped in brilliance. 

45. Forever, I seek refuge in Mahesa, I resort to Sthanu, 
Girisa, the ancient deity. I resort to Siva, the moon-crested 
Hara, the wielder of the Pinaka bo'w.” 

46. After eulogising Lord Kapardin thus, Sankukarna 
fell on the ground like a staff, repeating the auspicious Pranava 
Mantra ( Orti). 

47. At the same instant the greatest Linga of the nature 
•of Siva manifested itself there; it was of the nature of knowledge 



1.33.48-34.2 


259 


and bliss; it was non-dualistic and equal to a crore of fires 
annihilating the universe. 

48. That pure spotless sage Sahkukarna, of the nature of 
the soul of all, became merged in the stainless Linga; It was 
something miraculous. 

49. This great secret, the greatness of Kapardin has been 
narrated. Due to Tamas Guna no one understands it, even a 
scholar becomes deluded in this regard. 

50. The devotee who listens to this sin-destroying episode 
will be absolved of all sins and shall attain forever the proximity 
to Rudra. 

51. The pure-hearted person who always reads the great 
hymn called Brahmapara both in the morning and at midday 
shall attain Yoga. 

52-53. “We shall permanently stay here and see Kapar¬ 
din, the lord of Devas for ever. We shall constantly worship 
the three-eyed deity.” Saying thus, the highly refulgent holy 
sage Vyasa stayed there along with his disciples, worshipping 
Kapardin with concentrated mind. 


CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR 

The glory of Varanasi'. The Greatness of Madhyame^vard?- 
SSta said : 

1. After staying near Kapardisa for many years, the holy 
sage went to see Madhyamesa. 

2. * There he saw the river Mandakini of translucent, 
sanctifying waters, served by groups of sages. On seeing it, the 
sage became glad. 


1. This chapter deals mainly with the Madhyamesvara linga at Varanasi. 
It need not be confused with the one in Panca Kedara for which vide De 145. 
*VV. 2-16 in this chapter are the same as Pd. P.I.37.1-19. 



260 


Kurma Pur ana 


3. Beholding intently (at the river), the holy sage Dvai- 
payana whose mind was purified with deep devotional feelings 
and who was himself the knower of the rites of ablutions, 
took his holy bath along with sages. 

Bracketed verse : 

3A. He the son of Satyavati, worshipped Bhava (Siva), 
the first cause of the worlds, with different kinds of flowers, after 
entering the shrine alongwith the leading disciples. 

4. After duly performing Tarpana rites to Devas, to 
the sages, to the PUrs, he performed the worship of trident-bearing 
Madhyamesvara, I Sana god Siva. 

5. Then the tranquil devotees of Pasupati who had 
besmeared their bodies with Bhasma (sacred ashes) came to see 
Madhyamesvara, Isvara, Rudra. 

6-7. Their minds were attached to Orhkara. They were 
engrossed in the study of the Vedas. Some had matted hair. 
Some had tonsured heads; they had pure sacred thread; some 
had only the loin cloth, while others did not have any cloth. They 
were quiescent and devoted to the discipline of celibacy. They 
had full self control and were interested in perfect knowledge.* 

8. On seeing sage Dvaipayana surrounded by his disciples, 
the Brahmanas worshipped him suitably and spoke these words. 

9. “Who are you, O great sage ? Whence have you 
come along with your disciples ?” Paila and other disciples 
spoke to those sages purified by means of piety. 

10. “This is the son of Satyavati, the holy sage Krsna- 
dvaipayana. He is Vyasa and Hrsikesa (Visnu) himself by 
whom the Vedas have been classified.” 

11. To him, god Mahadeva, the Pinaka-bearing lord 
himself, became the son named Suka, with a portion of his 
part. 

12. He has resorted to Mahadeva, Sankara, with heart 
and soul and the greatest devotion and has attained that perfect 
divine knowledge.” 

13. Thereafter, all those devotees of Pasupati, with hairs 
standing on end due to excessive delight, spoke to Vy^a, the 
son of Satyavati, with a quiescent mind. 

*v.l. expert in meditation and Vedanta. 



1.34.14-26 


261 


14. “O holy lord, the knowledge of Paramesthin has 
been acquired by you by the grace of the lord of Devas. It is 
the greatest knowledge pertaining to Mahesvara. 

15. Hence, expound this excellent, unrevealed mystic 
secret to us without any agitation. May we see the lord quickly 
after hearing about him through your oral utterance.” 

16. After dismissing those disciples the chief of whom 
was sage Sumantu, the most excellent among the knowers of Yoga 
explained to the Yogins that great knowledge. 

17. At that same instant a pure and excellent mass of 
brilliant light manifested itself there. Those Brahmanas got 
themselves merged there and vanished in a moment. 

18. Thereafter, the revered sage, the most excellent one 
among the knowers of Brahman, recalled Paila and all other 
disciples and recounted the greatness of Madhyamesa. 

19. It is here that the supreme lord Siva indulges in sport 
alongwith his consort Parvati, in the company of ganas. 

20. It is here that formerly Krsna, son of DevakI, 
Hrsikesa stayed continuously for one year, surrounded by 
Pasupatas. 

21. Besmearing his body entirely with Bhasma, and devot¬ 
ed to the propitiation of Rudra, Hari performed the holy vow 
pertaining to Pasupati and propitiated Sambhu. 

22. Many of his disciples devoted to the vow of celibacy 
attained perfect knowledge, through his advice and perceived 
Mahesvara. 

23. Lord Mahadeva, the blue-red complexioned God 
appeared directly before Krsna. The bestower of boons that he 
is, the lord conferred upon him excellent boons. 

24. “O embodiment of the Universe ! Those of my devo¬ 
tees who worship Govinda with due rites and formalities, will 
have engendered in them this divine knowledge pertaining to 
Isvara (Siva). 

25. There is no doubt in this that you will be the Isa, 
worthy of being worshipped and meditated by the twice-born 
people devoted to me, thanks to my grace.” 

26. The sins due to Brahmana-slaughter, etc. of those 
people who visit the lord of Devas and who meditate on Pinaka- 
bearing lord, perish quickly. 



262 


Kurma Pur ana 


27. Those of Brahmanas who, though engaged in sinful 
activities, give up their life (at this sacred place) will attain to 
that Supreme abode. No doubt need be entertained in this 
respect. 

28. O Brahmanas ! They are verily the blessed ones 
who take a holy dip in MandakinI and worship the great God, 
the excellent Madhyamesvara (Lihga). 

29. O Brahmanas, anyone of these rites, viz. ablution, 
charitable gifts, penance, Sraddha and offering of the balls of 
rice (as pinda) performed duly at this place sanctifies upto the 
seventh generation. 

30. If they are performed at Kuruksetra when the sun 
is devoured by Rahu (at the time of solar eclipse), the benefit 
that a man derives therefrom is tenfold.” 

31. After saying thus, the great Yogin stayed fora long 
time in the vicinity of Madhyamesa, worshipping Mahesvara. 


CHAPTER THIRTYFIVE 

Description of Various Tirlhas^ : The glory of Varanasi concluded 
Suta said : 

1. Thereafter, the holy sage Vy^a, accompanied by his 
disciples, the chief of whom was Jaimini, went to all these secret 
holy places and shrines (as mentioned below). 

2. The highly sacred place Prayaga, Visvarupa (which 
is) more auspicious than Prayaga, the unsurpassable sacred 
pond Kalatirtha. 


1. There are a number of sacred places and lingas at Varanasi. In 
the SK.P. IV (Kasi Khanda) 10.86-97, Chs. 33, 53, 55, 58 we meet with 
numerous such shrines and tirthas. L.P. and Pd. P.I are mentioned in previous 
chapters. It is not possible here to deal with each of the sacred places 
mentioned herein for want of space. Modem works like Altekar’s History of 
Benares or a handbook for visitors to Varanasi is recommended for further 
details. It may, however, be noted that every sacred place tries to show that 
all holy places in the world are concentrated in it. Hence the claim of the 
KP. to have Gaya or Prayaga at Varanasi. 



1.35.3-11 


263 


3. The extremely holy place called Akasa and the 
excellent sacred pond Anusa (v.l. Rsabha), the great TIrtha 
Svarlina and Gauri TIrtha that surpasses all. 

4. The excellent sacred places Prajapatya as well as 
Svargadvara and what is called Jambukesvara and the excellent 
TIrtha known as Garma (Dharma ?). 

5. The great TIrtha Gaya and the MahanadI TIrtha, the 
highly sacred Narayana TIrtha and the unsurpassable Vayu 
TIrtha. 

6. Supremely sacred but hidden Jnanatirtha and the 
excellent TIrtha Varaha; the highly meritorious Yama TIrtha 
and the great Sarhvartaka TIrtha. 

7. O excellent Brahmanas ! He visited Agni TIrtha 
and the excellent Kalakesvara TIrtha, Naga TIrtha, Soma 
Tirtha and Surya TIrtha. 

8. The excellent meritorious Tirtha Parvata, the excel¬ 
lent Manikarna, the prominent sacred place Ghatotkaca Tirtha, 
Sri Tirtha and Pitamaha Tirtha. 

9. (Vyasa visited) Gahga Tirtha, the excellent sacred 
place Devesa, Kapila, Somesa as well as the unsurpassable 
Brahma Tirtha. 

9A. ( Verses in brackets) 

The Lihga (at Brahmatirtha) should be worshipped. 
Visnu installed that Lihga of Isvara while Brahma had gone to 
take his bath. 

9B. When Brahma returned after his bath, he asked 
Hari—‘‘This Lihga had been brought by me. Wherefore did you 
instal it ?” 

9G. Visnu replied to him—“Since my devotion to Rudra 
is greater than yours, the Lihga has been installed by me. 
But it will be known after your name (i.e. Brahma Tirtha).” 

10. (Vyasa visited the following sacred places) : The 
sacred place Bhutesvara, and the Dharma-samudbhava (born 
of Dharma) Tirtha, extremely auspicious Gandharva Tirtha 
and excellent Vahneya Tirtha (pertaining to the Fire-God). 

11. O excellent Brahmanas ! (He then visited) the holy 
centre pertaining to sage Durvasas, Homa Tirtha (v.l. vyoma- 



264 


Kurma Pur ana 


tirtha), Candra-Tirtha, the holy Citrahgadesvara and the 
sacred Vidyadharesvara. 

12. Kedara, known as the most prominent holy place, 
the unsurpassable Kalanjara, Sarasvata, Prabhasa, Khetakarna 
and the auspicious Hara Tirtha. 

13. The great Tirtha called Laukika and the sacred 
Himalaya, Hiranyagarbha, the sacred place famous as Go (or 
Gopreksya) and Vrsadhvaja. 

14. (He visited Tirthas called) Upasanta, Siva, the 
excellent Vyaghresvara, the great Tirtha Trilocana, Lolarka and 
the one called Uttara. 

15. Kapala-mocana, the sacred place destroying the sin 
of murdering Brahmanas, the highly meritorious Sukresvara 
and the excellent Anandapura. 

16. These holy centres have been mentioned in view of 
their importance. It is impossible to enumerate all these Tirthas 
in detail, O excellent Brahmanas. 

17-18. The great sage, son of Parasara took his bath in 
these different holy centres and worshipped the eternal deity. 
He observed fasts (and other observances) there, performed 
Tarpana rites to the Pitrs, and Devas, offered balls of rice 
(Pindas) and went again to the shrine where Visvesvara Siva 
was stationed. 

19. The great sage took holy bath and worshipped 
Mahalihga along with his disciples and told them—‘‘You may 
go as you please.” 

20. After bowing down to the noble soul, Paila and other 
Brahmanas went away. But he (Vyasa) made his permanent 
abode at Varanasi. 

21. He was quiescent, self-controlled. He took bath three 
times a day and worshipped the Pinaka-bearing deity. He main¬ 
tained his livelihood on alms. He remained a purihed soul 
devoted to the vow of celibacy. 

22. O excellent Brahmanas, on one occasion while he 
stayed there, Vyasa, of unmeasured splendour wandered for the 
sake of alms but he did not get anything.^ 


1. The story of Vyasa’s stay at Varanasi, his curse to the town and 
expulsion from the place and permission for entry on the 8th and the l4th 



1.35.23-33 


265 


23. Then the sage was overwhelmed by great anger. 
He said “I shall create obstacles for all men staying here 
whereby their achievement will become deficient.” 

24. At the very same instant, the great goddess, the 
sharer of half the body of Sankara, assumed human form 
and appeared there out of affection. 

25. “O Vyasa, of great intellect, the city should not be 
cursed by you. You take the alms from me.” After saying this, 
Siva gave him the alms. 

26. Then the great goddess told him again—“O sage, 
since you are irascible, you must not stay here as you are 
always ungrateful.” 

27. Thus addressed, the holy lord realised the great 
goddess Siva through meditation. With humility he bowed down, 
eulogised her with excellent hymns and said : 

28. O Sankari, be pleased to permit me to enter the city 
on the Astami and Caturdasi (eighth and the fourteenth) day.” 
saying ‘so be it’, the goddess permitted him and disappeared. 

29. Thus the holy sage Vyasa, the ancient great 
Yogi realised the good points of the holy centre, and stayed 
near it. 

30. It is after knowing that Vyasa was stationed in the 
holy centre, that the learned men resorted to it. Hence a man 
should by all means, reside in Varanasi. 

Sutasaid : 

31. He who reads the greatness of Avimukta, listens to 
it or narrates it to the quiescent Brahmanas, attains the Supreme 
goal. 

32-33. One who reads or narrates this in the course 
of a Sraddha or a rite pertaining to Devas, at the time of 
day or night, on the bank of a river or in the temple of gods 
(attains the same). The devotee, after taking bath and with 
mental concentration and remaining free from passion and anger 
should perform the Japa of Isa and make obeisance to him. 
He then attains the greatest goal. 

tithi described in vv 22-29, is repeated in Mt. P. 185.17-45 and SK. P. iv.96 
the only difference being that there Siva gives him the alms while here in 
KP. it is his consort Mahadevi. 



266 


Kurma Purarur. 


CHAPTER THIRTYSIX 

Description of the greatness of Prayaga 

The sages said : 

1. The greatness of Avimukta has been precisely recount¬ 
ed by you. O sage of holy vows, narrate now the greatness of 
Prayaga^ to us. 

2. O Suta ! Knower of all such topics as you are, be 
pleased to relate to us the great and well-known sacred, 
places that are there (at Prayaga). 

Suta said : 

3. O sages, listen all of you. I shall narrate in details 
the greatness o f Prayaga where the deity god Brahma abides. 

4. To you all I shall relate it, as it had been narrated 
to the noble-souled Yudhisthira, son of KuntI, by Markandeya. 

5. After killing the Kauravas, king Yudhisthira, along- 
with his brothers, was overwhelmed with deep sorrow and. 
became deluded. 

6. Not long after that. Sage Markandeya of great penance, 
came to Hastinapura and stood at the entrance-gate of the 
palace. 

7. On seeing him, the gatekeeper reported immediately- 
to the king : “Desirous of seeing you. Sage Markandeya is 
waiting at the gate.” 

8. Yudhisthira, the son of Dharma, rushed hurriedly to- 
the gate and greeted him. “O great sage, welcome to you who 
have come to our door. 


1. Prayaga (mod. Allahabad) was the ancient capital of Aila kings 
beginning from Pururavas. Great Kings like Nahusa, Yayati, Puru and 
Bharata ruled here. The site of their capital, Pratisthana, is atjhusi just near 
Allahabad. It is one of the three holiest places of Hindus, the other two 
being Varanasi and Gaya. Puranas have eulogised these three places in 
hundreds of verses (many of which are common). We find Prayaga glori¬ 
fied in the A/M Kona. 85.69-97, jlnufdsana 25.36-38; Mt. P. Chs. 103-112, 
Pd. P.I. Chs. 40-49, SK.P. IV. 7.45-65. KP. shares many of these verses as, 
can be seen later. 



1.36.9-19 


267 


9. Fruitful has been my life today; my family has been 
emancipated from Samsara; O Sage, when you are pleased with, 
me, my ancestors will ever feel contented.” 

10. Thus, the noble-souled Yudhisthira worshipped that 
sage by seating him on the throne, offering him water for wash¬ 
ing his feet and by duly honouring him. 

11. On being asked, Markandeya enquired of Yudhisthira 
“Why do you get bewildered ? It is after knowing everything 
that I have come.” 

12. Then king Yudhisthira bowed down his head and 
said : “Tell succinctly those things whereby I shall get rid of 
my sin. 

13. O excellent sage, in the battle where we clashed with 
the Kauravas, many innocent persons have been killed by us. 

14. It behoves you to recount that remedy whereby we 
shall be relieved of sin brought about by violence as well as 
accumulated in the course of several previous births.” 

Markandeya said : 

15. O highly blessed king, listen. O scion of the family 
of Bharata, what you ask me shall be explained. Visiting 
Prayaga is excellent as it is destructive of the sins of men.” 

16. O ruler of men, lord Mahadeva, Rudra, stayed there. 
Lord Brahma, the self-born deity, abides there alongwith other 
Devas. 

Yudhisthira submitted : 

17. “O holy lord, I wish to hear about the fruit of 
pilgrimage to Prayaga. What is the goal attained by the persons 
who die there ? What is the merit that accrues to those who 
take their ablutions there ? 

18. Mention the benefit derived by those who reside in 
Prayaga. Indeed this is known to you. Please relate it to me. 
Obeisance be to you.” 

Markandeya said : 

19. “O dear one, I shall recount to you the fruit of 
ablutions in Prayaga. It was heard by me as it was being recount¬ 
ed by great sages formerly. 



268 


Kurma Pur ana 


20. This is the holy place sacred to Prajapati. It is well- 
known in the three worlds. By taking their bath here, people 
attain heaven. Those who die here are not reborn.^ 

21. Brahma and other Devas gathering together at that 
place afford protection. There are many other holy places there, 
that dispel sins. 

22. I cannot recount it in even hundreds of years. I 
shall succinctly narrate to you the glory of Prayaga. 

23. Prayaga extends over an area of sixty thousand 
Dhanus—that includes Gahga. The sun-god with seven horses 
to his chariots always protects Yamuna.^ 

24. Indra himself abides in Prayaga. Hari protects this 
zone which is revered by all Devas. 

25. Mahesvara, armed with the trident, protects the 
Myagrodha (holy fig tree) for ever. Devas protect the holy place 
that is auspicious and dispels all sins. 

26-28. Persons enveloped by their own Karman never 
attain to that place. O king, whatever slightest sin a person 
has incurred is totally destroyed by the remembrance of 
Prayaga—nay even by the sight of that sacred place or by the 
utterance of its name, or by the application of clay (from 
that tirtha).^ O leader of kings, there are five sacred tanks, in 
the middle of which Gahga flows. 

29-30. The sins of the person who enters Prayaga perish 
at the very same instant. He who remembers Gahga even 
from thousands of Yojanas attains the greatest goal even 
if he be a man of evil deeds. One who glorifies it, is released 
from sins. Thanks to its vision he meets with good fortune or 
prosperity. 

31. By touching or being sprinkled with its water, a 
person is honoured in the region of gods, even if such a man be 
sickly, indigent or infuriated. 


1. Cf. Mt. P. 104.5, 111.14, NP. II. 63.127-28. 

2. For the abidance of deities protecting different parts of Prayaga 
Cf. Mt. P. 111.4-10 Pd. P. I. 41 6-10. 

3. Cf. Mt. P. 104.12 and with slight variations AP. 111.6-7 and Mbh. 
Vana 85.80. 



1.36.32-45 


269 


32. It is the redeemer of Pitrs and destructive of sins. 
The ocean of worldly existence is crossed by those who take 
up residence at Prayaga. 

33. Leading sages say that one derives desired pleasures 
if one casts off one’s life with special efforts after reaching the 
confluence ofGahga and Yamuna. 

34-35. He enjoys himself with aerial cars, lustrous 
like radiant gold, stationed on the sphere of the sun (v.l. 
luminous like the sun), splendidly brilliant with all sorts of 
precious stones, flying a variety of colourful banners, possess¬ 
ing auspicious characteristics and thronged with excellent dam¬ 
sels. He is wakened up from sleep by the sound of vocal music 
and musical instruments. 

36-37. Even before he remembers his birth, he is honour¬ 
ed in heaven. When all his meritorious Karmas are exhausted 
and the excellent person is dropped down from heaven, he is 
born in a flourishing family richly abounding in gold and pre¬ 
cious stones. He remembers that very Tirtha (viz. Prayaga) and 
goes there thanks to that remembrance. 

38-41. Prominent sages proclaim^ that whether it may be 
in his native land, a forest, a foreign country or his own house, 
one who abandons life remembering Prayaga attains Brahmaloka. 
He goes to Brahmaloka where there are sages, ascetics and 
siddhas and where the Earth is golden and contains trees yield¬ 
ing all desires. He rejoices on the beautiful and auspicious banks 
of the river Mandakini full of thousands of women. As a result 
of the acts performed by him here (on the earth), he rejoices in 
the company of sages and is worshipped by Siddhas, Caranas, 
Gandharvas, gods and demons. 

42-43. Falling off the heaven, he may become the ruler 
of Jambudvipa. Then, remembering his auspicious deeds 
frequently, he becomes meritorious and well behaved—so we have 
heard. Physically, mentally and verbally, he is well-founded in 
truth and piety. 

44-45. If anyone casts off a mouthful of food in the 
middle of Gahga and Yamuna (he derives the benefit thereof). 


I. Cf. Mt. P. 105.8-11. 



270 


Kurma Pur ana 


If a man receives, as charitable gift, a piece of gold or a pearl or 
any other thing in his own rite or during the obsequial rites of 
Pitrs, his visit to the Tirtha is fmitless as long as |the benefit is 
enjoyed by the receiver of those gifts. 

46. Hence, one should not receive gifts in Tirthas or holy 
shrines. A Brahmana should be alert in the case ofall conditions. 

47-48. If a man makes a gift of tawny or red cow or a 
black milch cow with its horns adorned with gold and its hoofs 
adorned with silver and ears covered with garments, he is 
honoured in Rudra-loka for as many thousand years as there are 
hairs on (the cow’s) body. O excellent man. 


CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN 

Glory of Praydga : The Procedure of Pilgrimage 
Markatideya said : 

1. O dear one, I shall tell you the order and procedure 
of pilgrimage to the holy centres according to the injunctions of 
sages. I shall tell you according to what I have seen and 
heard. 

2. Listen to the result if a man, desirous of making a 
pilgrimage to Prayaga, rides on a bullock at any place.^ 

3-4. He stays in a terrible hell for many years, nay, for 
ten thousand or hundred thousand kalpas. After his return from 
there, he will face the terrible fury of cows and bulls. If a man 
leaves off his sons in their childhood without food to eat, the 
Pitrs do not accept the water libations offered by him. 

5-6a. In accordance with one’s own self, one shall make 
arrangements for gifts to Brahmanas. If any one undertakes the 
pilgrimage in a vehicle in view of his riches or due to greed or 


1. W. 2-4 the same as Mt. P. 106.4-5. 



3.37.6b-17 


271 


■delusion, his pilgrimage shall be fruitless. Hence, one should 
.avoid vehicles.^ 

6b-7. He who gives his virgin daughter in marriage at 
the confluence of Gahga and Yamuna in accordance with the 
Arfa procedure (i.e. pertaining to sages) and befitting his afflu¬ 
ence, does not perceive the terrible hell as a result of that holy 
rite. 

8. He who resorts to the root of the holy Banyan tree and 
abandons his life there, goes to the northern Kurus and rejoices 
for endless time.^ 

9-11. Grossing heavens he goes to the region of Rudra 
where Brahma and otherDevas are present. So also the (guardi¬ 
ans of the) quarters, the rulers of the worlds, all Pitrs, those 
■who inhabit in these worlds and also the other Brahmana sages, 
the chief of whom is Sanatkumara, Nagas (Serpents), Suparnas 
and Siddhas are seated permanently. Lord Hari too stays there 
honoured by Prajapati. 

12. O tiger among kings, Prayaga is well-known in the 
three worlds. The middle of Gahga and Yamuna is known as the 
‘loin-region’ of the Earth.® 

13. A person of praiseworthy religious vows, who per¬ 
forms ablutions in the confluence attains the benefit equal to 
that of performing the Rajasuya and the horse-sacrifice. 

14. O dear one, neither at the instance of the mother 
nor at the report of the common people should your mind to 
perform pilgrimage to Prayaga, be dissuaded. 

15. O scion of the family of Kurus, sixty thousand Tirthas 
and other sixty crores of sacred places are present here (at 
Prayaga). 

16. The goal attained by one who gives up his life at the 
confluence of Gahga and Yamuna is the same as obtained by a 
learned man who has renounced the world as a Sannyasin 
and who is endowed with Yogic power. 

17. O Yudhisthira ! People staying in different parts of 
the world do not live a real life in this world (if they do not 


1. Cf. Mt. P. 106.7. 

VV. 8-9 the same as Pd. P. 1.43.11. 

3. Cf. Mbh. Vana 85.75, Pd. P. 1. 39.60, Mt. P. 106.19. 



272 


Kurma Pur ana 


visit Prayaga). Those who have not reached Prayaga (for pilgri¬ 
mage) are the most deceived ones in the three worlds. 

18. Thus on seeing the holy place Prayaga, the greatest 
region, one is absolved of all sins like the moon from the clutches 
of Rahu. 

19. Kambala and Asvatara are the two Nagas on the 
southern bank of Yamuna. By taking ablution there and 
drinking the waters thereof, one is relieved of all sins. 

20. If an intelligent man goes there and takes his bath 
there*, he will redeem ten previous generations and ten future 
generations by the grace of Mahadeva. 

21. By performing ablutions, a man obtains the fruit of a 
horse sacrifice. He attains the heavenly world (and stays there) 
till the dissolution of all living beings (at the time of 
Pralaya). 

22. On the eastern side of Ganga a man** becomes 
famous in the three worlds (if he dies there). There is a famous 
cavity in the earth called Sarva-Samudra and the well-known 
(township called) Pratisthana (mod. Jhusi, near Allahabad, 
across Ganga). 

23. If a person stays there for three nights observing 
celibacy and with his anger controlled, he being absolved of 
all sins and of .pure soul gets the fruit of performing a horse- 
sacrifice. 

24. To the north of Pratisthana and to the left hand side 
of Ganga, there is a Tirtha Haihsaprapatana. It is wellknown 
in the three worlds.^ 

25. By its mere remembrance the fruit of a horse sacrifice 
accrues to one. He is honoured in heaven as long as the 
moon and the sun shine. 


*v.l. sthanam : If a person visits the shrine of Mahadeva after going 
there. 

**The reading mdnava in the Vehk. text cannot be satisfactorily 
translated (as can be seen from this), the v.l. ITA^h'nidR nr pa (given in the 
footnote) is better. It means, “O king, on the eastern side of Ganga 
there is a cavity in the earth famous in the three worlds as Sarva-Samudra 
and also (the township called) Pratisthana. 

1. Cf. Mt, P. 106.32; AP. 111.10. 



1.37.26-36 


273 


26. Listen to the fruit that one attains if one casts off 
one’s life in the wide beautiful sand bank of Gahga named 
Urvasipulina which is white like swans or which appears white 
due to the swarms of swans. 

27. O ruler of men, he stays along with the Pitrs in the 
heavenly world for sixtysix thousand (lit. sixty thousand and 
sixty hundred) years. 

28. If a man remains celibate and pure and performs 
worship with concentration of the mind, in the beautiful 
Sandhyavata, he shall attain Brahmaloka.^ 

29. He who casts off his life after reaching Koti-tirtha, 
is honoured in the heavenly world for a thousand crores 
of years. 

30. No doubt need be entertained about the fact that 
the area through which the highly blessed Gahga which has 
many sacred places and penance groves on its bank, flows is 
known as a Siddhi Ksetra. 

31. Gahga is called Tripatha (having triple paths) because 
it redeems human beings on the Earth, serpents in the nether- 
worlds and Devas in the heaven. 

32. As long as the bones of a man lie in Gahga, he 
is honoured in the heavenly world for so many thousand years.® 

33. Gahga is the sacred-most of the sacred places. It 
is the holiest of holy rivers. It is the bestower of salvation for 
all living beings, even to the great sinners. 

34. Gahga is easy of access everywhere but is of difficult 
access in three places viz. at Gahgadvara (place of source), at 
Prayaga and at its confluence with the ocean.* 

35. There is no goal (means of salvation) on a par with 
Gahga to the living beings whose minds are overwhelmed by 
sins and who are in search of way of deliverance from sins. 

36. It is the most sacred of all sacred things. It is the 
most auspicious of all auspicious things. It has fallen off from 


1. W. 26-27 Cf. Mt. P. 106. 34-42; Pd. P. 1.43.34-42; NP. 11.63. 
140-149. The textual similarity is worth noting. 

2. Cf. Mt. P. 106.43; AP. 111.13. 

3. Cf. Mt. P. 106.52; NP. II. 43.109; 62.51. 

4. Cf. Mt. P. 106.54, Garuda I. 81.1-2. 



274 


Kurma Pur ana 


the matted hair of Mahesvara. It dispels sins and is 
auspicious. 

37. The best Tirtha in the Krta Yuga is Naimisa 
forest; in the Treta, the Puskara lake is the most excellent; 
in the Dvapara, Kuruksetra is the most excellent and in the 
Kali age, Gahga is of special efficacy in washing off sins.^ 

38. People resort to Gahga alone and that too 
especially at Prayaga. O king, there is no other antidote for the 
terrible Kaliyuga ♦. 

39. I f a man dies in Gahga whether willingly or without 
any desire, goes straight to Heaven and does not see hell. 


CHAPTER THIRTYEIGHT 

Glory of the holy Rnamocana 
Markandeya continued : 

1. In the month of Magha (Jan-Feb.), sixty six thousand 
Tirthas go over to the confluence of Gahga and Yamuna.^ 

2. A man who takes bath in Prayaga for three days in 
the month of Magha, attains that fruit which a religious gift of 
a hundred thousand cows yields.® 

3-4. If a person who has the full complement of the flve 
sense organs, who has no deflciency in any limb and who has 
no ailment performs the rite of Karisagni* (i.e. immolation of 


*v.l. There is no other remedy to wash off sins incurred in the Kali 

Age. 

1. Cf. Mbk Vana. 85.89; also Pd. P. I. 39.81-90. 

2. Verbatim the same as Mt. P. 107.7. Cf. Mbh. Anusasana 25.36-37. 

3. Cf. Pd. P. I. 44.8. 

4. For suicide by self-immolation to cow-dung fire, this text is similar 
to Mt. P. 107.9, NP. 11.63.154, Pd. P. I. 44.3. Vide Prof. K.C. Chatto- 
padhyaya’s Paper on ‘Suicide at Prayaga’ (Journal U.P. Hist. Society 
X. 65ff). The practice became outdated even before the advent of the 
British as Kalivarjya, vide HD. III. pp. 939, 958-59. 



1.38.5-16 


275 


the body in the cowdung fire) at the confluence of Ganga and 
Yamuna, O ruler of the Earth, he is honoured in the heavenly 
world as many thousand years as there are pores of hairs in his 
body. 

5. After enjoying extensive pleasures, he falls off from 
heaven and becomes the lord of Jambudvipa. He attains the 
same Tirtha once again. 

6. If (in order to cast off his body) a person enters 
water at the world famous confluence (at Prayaga), he becomes 
liberated from all sins, as the moon devoured by Rahu 
becomes completely brilliant after the eclipse. 

7. He attains Somaloka (region of the moon) and he 
rejoices with Soma (the moon) for sixty-six thousand years. 

8. From heaven he rejoices in Indra’s world resorted 
to by sages and Gandharvas. O leader of kings, falling off from 
that place, he is born in a prosperous family. 

9. If a man stands topsyturvy with the legs up and the 
head below and drinks water from the current of Ganga 
he is honoured in the heavenly world for seven thousand 
years. 

10. O leader of kings, fallen off from that place, the man 
becomes the performer of the rite of Agnihotra. Enjoying 
extensive pleasures, he resorts to that Tirtha once again. 

11-12. Listen to the benefit attained by one who severs 
his limbs and offers pieces to birds and who is devoured by 
the birds. He is honoured in the Soma-loka for a hundred thou¬ 
sand years. 

13-14a. Falling off from that place, he becomes a pious 
king. He will be endowed with all good qualities and handsome¬ 
ness. He will be a great scholar and of pleasing words. After 
making charitable gifts and enjoying pleasures, he resorts to 
that Tirtha once again. 

14b-16. On the northern bank of Yamuna and to the 
South of Prayaga, there is the greatest Tirtha as known 
Rnapramocana. If he spends a night there and takes a bath, he 
becomes relieved of the burden of debts. He attains heavenly 
world. He becomes free from debts permanently.^ 

1. For Rffamocana Tirtha Gf. Pd. P. I. 44.20. 



276 


Kurma Pur ana 


CHAPTER THIRTYNINE 

The Glorification of Prayaga : Yamuna and the Tirthas thereof 
Markandeya said : 

1. Here flows along the highly blessed Yamuna, the 
goddess, daughter of the Sun-god, the most famous river in the 
three worlds. 

2. Yamuna goes along the same path through which 
Gahga flows, glorifying the name of which thousands of 
Yojanas away, is destructive of sins. 

3-4a. By taking bath and drinking water at the place 
where Yamuna flows, one becomes free from sins and sanctifies 
his family upto the seventh generation. He who abandons his 
life there attains the highest destination. 

4b-5. On the southern bank of Yamuna is the holy 
place known as Agnitirtha.^ To the west is the sacred spot 
of Dharmaraja which is known as Anaraka (Non-hell). Those 
who take bath there go to heaven. Those who die there are 
not reborn. 

6. There is no doubt in this that a pure person who takes 
his bath there on the fourteenth day in the dark half of the 
lunar month and propitiates Dharmaraja, becomes free from 
great sins. 

7. The learned men have proclaimed thus that there 
are ten thousand holy places and there are ten crores of other 
sacred spots also abiding in Prayaga. 

8. Vayu has mentioned of three and a half crores of 
Tirthas in heaven, in the firmament and on the Earth. Gahga is 
stated to be on par with all these. 

9. The region through which the highly blessed Gahga 
flows is itself a penance-grove, the tract of land which resorts 
to the banks of Gahga is known as Siddhi-ksetra. 

10. That is a holy place, that is the penance-grove, where 
god Mahesvara, Mahadeva, the overlord of Devas resides 
alongwith Madhava. 


1. Cf. Mt. P. 108.27; Pd. P. 1.45.27. 



1.39.11-40.1 


277 


11. This truth has to be repeatedly communicated into 
the ears of twice-borns, of good men, of the son, of the 
friends as well as into the ears of the closely following (i.e. 
devoted) disciple: 

12. “This {Tirtha) is blissful or conducive to wealth 
and attainment of heaven; it is pure, meritorious, beautiful, 
sacred, excellent and it heightens piety. 

13. This is destructive of all sins; this is a great secret of 
the great sages. A Brahmana who pursues his self-study of the 
Vedas here shall attain purity. 

14. The pure man who always listens to this holy centre 
of great merit, always derives ability to recollect previous 
birth. He rejoices in heaven. 

15. Those Tirtkas are attained by good men, who guide 
disciplined persons. O scion of the family of Kurus, perform 
ablution in the Tirthas. Do not be of crooked intellect.” 

16. After saying thus, the holy and great sage 
Markandeya recounted to him the Tirthas that are on the earth. 

1 7. On being asked, the sage recounted to him in details 
the structure and the positions of Lands and the seas and 
the position of planets and other luminaries. After describing 
everything, the sage went away. 

Suta said : 

18. He who gets up early in the morning, listens to or 
recites this is released from all sins. He goes to Rudraloka. 


CHAPTER FORTY 

The arrangement of the Universe 

The sages said : 

1. The sages of the Naimisa forest who were thus 
addressed, asked Suta, the great sage, about the definite theories 
on the position of the Earth^ (planets, etc.) 


1. According to Puranas, the world comprises of seven dvlpas which 
means ‘land between two arms of water’ and may include an island, a 



278 


Kurma Pur ana 


The ascetics said : 

2. The auspicious creation of the Svayambhuva Manu 
has been recounted by you. Now we wish to hear about the 
spheres of the three worlds. 

3-4. It behoves you to recount here everything succinct¬ 
ly regarding matters such as—how many are the oceans and 
islands, continents, sub-continents, mountains, forests, rivers as 
well as the situation of the sun and planets, the details of 
the earth on which everything depends and about the kings 
to whom the earth belonged since ancient times. 


Suta said : 

5. After making obeisance to Visnu, the mighty, incom¬ 
prehensible, overlord of Devas, I shall report to you what 
has been formerly narrated by that intelligent one. 

6. Priyavrata who has been mentioned before as the son 
of Svayambhuva Manu had ten sons who were on par with 
Prajapatis. 


peninsula or a doab. These are named after tlie seven sons of Priyavrata who 
were the pioneers or founders of colonies in those ‘dvipas’. The idea of seven 
dvipas or seven ‘climates’ or empires is commonly held by ancient peoples 
(Greeks, Persians, Arabs) but it appears for the first time in the Mbh. 
Scholars differ about the identification of these dvipas. Prof. S. M. Ali, 
in his The Geography of the Pwatfas has discussed these theories and 
tentatively proposed the following identifications: 

(1) Saka-dvipa : South-East Asia comprising of Malaya, Siam, Indo- 
China and Southern China. 

(2) KuSa-dvipa : Iran, Iraq and the fringing lands of the hot desert— 
to which Ali adds Ethiopia as well. 

(3) Plakfa-dvipa : Placia and Pelagsia. Ali approves of V.V. Iyer’s 
identification of Plaksa with Greece and adjoining lands. 

(4) Puykara-dvipa : North-eastern seaboard of Asia i.e. Japan, 
Manchuria and S.E. Siberia. 

(5) Salmala (_li)-doipa : Tropical part of Africa bordering the Indian 
Ocean on the west and it includes Madagasgar as well. 

(6) Kraunca-dvipa : The basin of the Black Sea. 

(7) Janibu-dvipa : Prepartition India (pp. 26-46) 



I.40.7-19a 


279 


7-8. They were Agnidhra, Agnibahu, Vapusman, Dyuti- 
man, Medha, Medhatithi, Havya, Savana, Putra and Jyotisman 
the tenth among them who was endowed with great strength and 
prowess. He was pious, engaged in charitable gifts and sympa¬ 
thetic with all living beings. 

9. The three sons viz. Medha, Agnibahu and Putra were 
devoted to Yoga. Those highly blessed ones, who were capable 
of remembering their previous births, did not feel inclined to 
rule over the kingdom. 

10. King Priyavrata crowned the other seven sons to 
rule over the seven continents. He made his son Agnidhra the 
ruler of Jambudvipa. 

11. Medhatithi was made the ruler of Plaksadvipa by 
him. He crowned Vapusman as the ruler of Salmalidvipa. 

12. The lord appointed Jyotisman as the king of Kusa- 
dvipa. He ordered Dyuti to be the king of Krauncadvipa. 

13. Priyavrata made Havya the monarch of Sakadvipa. 
Prajapati Priyavrata installed Savana the ruler of Puskara. 

14-15. Mahavita and Dhataki, these two were the sons 
of the ruler of Puskara.^ These were the most excellent of those 
who have sons. The sub-continent of that noble soul is known 
as Mahavitavarsa. The sub-continent of Dhataki is called 
Dhatakikhanda. 

16-17a. Havya, the ruler of Sakadvipa, had the follow¬ 
ing sons viz. Jalada, Kumara, Sukumara, Manicaka, Kusottara, 
Modaki and the seventh was Mahadruma. 

17b-19a. Jalada, the sub-continent ruled over by Jalada,. 
is said to be the first Varsa. The Varsa ofKumara is Kaumara 
and the third one is Sukumaraka. The fourth one is Manicaka 
and the fifth is Kusottara. The sixth Varsa is said to be Modaka 
and the seventh is Mahadruma. 


1. From VV 14 ff we are told how the subdivisions of Dvipas were 
divided among the sons of the original founder-rulers. These subdivisions 
were named after the Princes to whom that particular sub-division was 
allotted by his father. Thus the sub-continent given to Mahavita came to be 
known as Mahavita-Varsa and the one given to Prince Dhataki as Dhataki- 
Khanda. A Dvipa is generally divided into seven sub-continents or Varsas. 



280 


Kurma Pur ana 


19b-21. Dyutiman, the overlord of Krauncadvipa, too 
had seven sons. Kusala was the first among them, the second 
was Manohara. Usna is said to be the third and the fourth is 
named as Pivara. The other sons were Andhakara, Muni 
and Dundubhi. Thus they were seven in all. The lands (sub¬ 
continents) named after them, situated in Krauncadvipa, are 
very auspicious. 

22-23. In Kusadvipa, seven sons endowed with great 
prowess, were born tojyotisman. They were: Udbheda, Venuman, 
Asvaratha, Lambana, Dhrti, the sixth one Prabhakara and the 
seventh one known as Kapila. O sages of good vows, sub¬ 
continents under their rule bore their names as the characteris¬ 
tic feature. 

24-25. In the other Dvipas, the Varsas should be known 
thus: The method of naming them is considered to be the 
same. Vapusman the ruler of Salmalidvipa also had (the follow¬ 
ing) sons. They were: Sveta, Harita, Jimuta, Rohita, Vaidyuta, 
Manasa and the seventh one is considered to be Suprabha. 

26-2 7a. Medhatithi, the ruler of Plaksadvipa had seven 
sons. The eldest among them was Santamaya. The others were 
—Sisira, Sukhodaya, Ananda, Siva, Ksemaka and Dhruva. 

27b-28a. In all Dvipas beginning with Plaksa and 
ending with Saka-dvipa, the performance of one’s own duty in 
accordance with the division of the castes is considered to be 
conducive to liberation. 

28b-30a. O excellent Brahmanas, the sons of Agnidhra, 
the ruler of Jambudvipa, too had sons of great strength. Please 
know their names. They were Nabhi, Kimpurusa, Hari, Ilavrta, 
Ramya, Hiranvan, Kuru, Bhadrasva, and Ketumala. 

30b-35. Agnidhra, the king of great intellect, the ruler 
of Jambudvipa, divided his kingdom into nine parts and handed 
over to them in the legally right manner. The father gave 
Nabhi the southern Varsa called Hima. He assigned the Hema- 
kuta Varsa to Kimpurusa. The father entrusted Hari the third 
Varsa (called) Naisadha. He conferred on Ilavrta, the Varsa 
known as Ilavrta which is situated in the middle of Meru. 
The father gave Ramya the Varsa surrounding Niladri (the Blue 
Mountain). The northern Varsa which was Sveta was assigned 



1.40.36-48 


281 


to Hiranvan by the father. He gave Kuru the Varsa lying to 
the north of Srhgavan mount. 

He handed over to Bhadrasva the Varsa that was to the 
east of Meru. He gave Ketumala the Gandhamadanavarsa. 

36. The overlord of men crowned those sons as Kings of 
these Varsas (sub-continents). After realising the worthlessness 
of the world, he went to the forest for performing penance. 

37. The noble-souled Nabhi whose sub-continent was 
named Hima, begot of Merudevi the highly brilliant son 
Rsabha.i 

38-40. Rsabha had a hundred sons, the eldest of whom 
was the heroic Bharata. The Lord of the Earth—Rsabha—crowned 
his son Bharata and entering Vanaprastha stage of life (i.e. 
forest hermit’s life), he performed penance in accordance 
with injunctions. He became very much emaciated due to 
penance. He was continuously engaged in the path of knowledge. 
He became a great devotee of Pasupati. Sumati was the 
extremely virtuous son of Bharata. 

41. Taijasa was the off-spring of Sumati. From him was 
born Indradyumna of great brilliance. From him was born the 
son Paramesthin and Pratihara was a scion of his family. 

42. The son born to him became well-known as Prati- 
harta. From him was born Bhava whose son was Udgitha. 
Prastavi was his son. 

43. From him was born Prthu, whose son was Nakta; 
Nakta’s son is known as Gaya; Nara was Gaya’s son; his son 
was Viraj. 

44-48. His son was Mahavirya from whom was bom 
Dhiman. Then from Dhiman was born Rauvana whose off¬ 
spring was Tvastr. Tvastr’s son was Viraja whose son was 
Raja. His son was Satajit from whom was born Rathajit. O 
Brahmanas, Rathajit gave birth to one hundred sons. Of 
these Visvajyoti is known as the most important and 
the mighty one. After propitiating god Brahma, he begot 


1. B^abha is the first Tirthankara of Jainas. Puranas try to assimilate 
even non-Vedic sects such as Pahcaratra, Pasupata, Jainism, Buddhism and 
others and try to create one homogeneous Indian society out of diverse 
elements, faiths and sects. 



282 


Kurma Purana 


a son called Ksemaka, a virtuous and mighty king, the con¬ 
queror of enemies. These were the early kings of great might 
and prowess. Formerly, this Earth was enjoyed by the kings 
born in the family of these kings. 


CHAPTER FORTYONE 

The Seven Worlds : The Planetary System : The Solar 
CharioP 


Suta said : 

1. O excellent Brahmanas, henceforth, I shall briefly 
relate the magnitude of this set of three worlds. It is impossible 
to describe it in detail. 

2. The following are the worlds originating from the- 
Cosmic Egg viz. Bhurloka, Bhuvarloka, Svarloka, Maharloka, 
Janaloka, Tapoloka, and Satyaloka. 

3. O leading Brahmanas, the extent of space illuminated 
by the rays of the sun and the moon is called Bhurloka in 
the Puranas. 

4. Bhuvarloka is of the same extent in area and circum¬ 
ference as the Bhurloka and is above it upto the sphere of the 
sun. 

5-7. The spherical space extending up from the sun’s 
orb upto Dhruva (the Polar star) in the Armament is called 
Svargaloka (heaven) where are the circumferential fellies of 
Vayu. The fellies of Vayu are seven viz. Avaha, Pravaha, 
Anuvaha, Sarhvaha, Vivaha, Paravaha and Parivaha. The 


1. The chapter deals with ancient Indian astronomy which according 
to modern advances in that science is outdated—especially the distances and 
positions and dimensions of planets mentioned appear to be rather imaginary. 
The credit of creating the world is given to the sun and god Mahadeva is- 
identified with him (v. 27) . 



1.41.8-17 


283 


sphere of the sun is stationed at a distance of a hundred 
thousand Yojanas (one Yojana= 12 km) from the Earth. 

8. The sphere of the moon is stationed at a distance of a 
hundred thousand Yojanas from the sphere of the sun. The 
entire stellar sphere shines at a distance of a hundred thousand 
Yojanas above the moon. 

9. O Brahmanas, Budha (the Mercury) is at a distance 
of two hundred thousand Yojanas from the stellar sphere. 
Usanas (the Venus) is stationed at the same distance from the 
Mercury. 

10. Ahgaraka (the Mars) is stationed at the same dis¬ 
tance from Sukra (the Venus). The preceptor of Devas, 
Brhaspati (i.e. the Jupiter) is stationed at a distance of two 
hundred thousand Yojanas fromBhauma (i.e. the Mars). 

11. Sauri (i.e. the Saturn) is stationed at a distance of 
two hundred thousand Yojanas from the Jupiter. The sphere of 
the seven sages (i.e. the Great Bear) shines at a distance of a 
hundred thousand Yojanas from the sphere of the planets. 

12. Above the sphere of the seven sages, at a distance 
of a hundred Yojanas is stationed Dhruva (the Pole star) * 
Dhruva is verily the pivot or the axis of the stellar system. 
Lord Visnu, Narayana, Dharma himself is abiding there. 

13. The diameter of the sun’s sphere is known as nine 
thousand Yojanas. The circumference is three times that. 

14. The extent of the moon is known as twice the 
extent of the sun. Svarbhanu (i.e. the evil planet Rahu) 
assumes a size equal to them and approaches them. 

15. He is created with a .spherical shape after extracting 
the shadow of the earth. The extensive third abode of Rahu is 
full of darkness. 

16. Sukra (the Venus) is one-sixteenth of the dimension 
of the moon in extent. Brhaspati (the Jupiter) should be 
known as one-fourth less than the dimension of the Venus. 

17. Both Bhauma (the Mars) and Saura (the Saturn) 
are known as being a one-fourth less than Brhaspati (the 
Jupiter). In extent and circumference, Budha (the Mercury) is 
one-fourth less than the above two. 


'v.l. accepted here : medhibhutah samastnsya, jyotidcakrasya vai Dhruvah. 



284 


Kurma Purana 


18. The forms of the stars and the constellations taken 
together in a body are equal to Budha in extent as well as in 
circumference. 

19. The stars and constellations are smaller or larger in 
mutual comparison by five hundred, four hundred, three hundred 
or two hundred Yojanas (in extent). 

20. The stellar spheres are lesser in extent (nikrstani). * 
Their dimensions are only half a Yo\zxa,{Tojananyardha-rnatrani*). 
None (no heavenly body) is smaller than they. 

21. The three planets stationed above traverse the 
greatest distance. The planets Saturn, Jupiter and Mars should 
be known as moving slowly. 

22. Four great planets are beneath them: the Sun, the 
moon, the Mercury and the Venus have fast movements. 

23. When the sun moves in Daksinayana (southern 
transit) it traverses far below the previous planets. 

24. Enlarging its sphere the moon traverses above it. 
The entire stellar sphere moves above the moon. 

25. Budha (the Mercury) is above the star, the Venus 
is above the Mercury, Vakra (the Mars) is above the Venus 
and the Jupiter is above the Mars. 

26. The Saturn is above that (the Jupiter) and further 
above is the sphere of the seven Sages (Great Bear). Dhruva 
(Pole star) is stationed above the seven sages. 

27. O excellent Brahmanas, the chariot of the sun is 
nine thousand Yojanas long. The length of the shafts is twice 
that. 

28. Its axle is one crore and a half and seven million 
{niyuta) Yojanas and the wheel is fixed there. 

29. The entire Kalacakra (wheel of time) is fixed there 
in the form of the year having three times seven (v.l. three) 
Nabhis (i.e. naives), five spokes and six rims. 

30. ** O excellent Brahmanas, the second axle of the 

♦These words are emended according to the Skt. Text of the critical 
edition as this verse in Vehk. edt. is not clear (and coherent) in meaning. 

♦♦The verse is defective as the 2nd half of the Vehk. edit. PaiUaiayani 
sdrdhdniyojandni dvijottamdh. cannot be consistently construed with the first 
half. Hence the v.l. in the foot-note pancdnydni tu sdrdhdni syandanasya 
dvijottamdh. is accepted for translation. 



1.41.31-41 


285 


chariot is fortyfive thousand and five hundred Yojanas in 
length. 

31. The length of both the axles is half that of both the 
yokes. The short axle with the short pole of the chariot has the 
Polar star as its support. 

32. The second axle to which the wheel of the chariot 
is fixed is on the Manasa mountain. His seven horses are the 
seven metres. Understand their names. 

33. The horses of the sun are the metres viz. Gayatri (It 
has 6 syllables in a quarter) ; Brhati (9 syllables in a quarter or 
foot); Usnik (7 syllables in a foot); Jagati (12 syllables in a 
foot), Pankti (10 syllables in a foot) ; Anustup (8 syllables in a 
foot) and Tristup (11 syllables in a foot). 

34-35. The great city of Mahendra is to the east and it 
is above Manasa. Yama’s city is to the south; that of Varuna is 
to the West; that of Soma is to the north (ofmount Manasa). 
Understand their names: They are respectively Amaravati, 
Saihyamani, Sukha and Vibhavari. 

36. Taking with him the constellations of the Zodiac, 
Pitamaha (i.e. the sun-god), the lord of gods, moves rapidly to 
the Southern direction like a discharged shaft. 

37. O leading Brahmantis ! In the seven continents, the 
sun at mid-day and at middle of the night always stands face to 
face (i.e. faces opposite directions). 

38. The rising and the setting of the sun are always 
opposed (to each other comparatively) in different directions 
as well as in the intermediate quarters, O prominent Brahmanas. 

39. While this Lord (the sun-god) moves like the rotating 
wheel of a potter, he makes the night* as he leaves the earth, 
O Brahmanas. 

40. The three worlds are illuminated by the rays of the 
sun; that has been declared £is Trailokya (a triple world) by 
good persons, to the people, O Brahmanas. 

41. There is no doubt in this that the three worlds have 
their original source in the Aditya (the sun god). The entire 
universe including Devas, Asuras and human beings originates 
from it. 


* (v.l.) He makes day as well as night. 



286 


Kurma Pur ana 


42. The lustrous sun conquered the worlds of Rudra, 
Indra, Upendra (Visnu), Candra (the moon), of the leading 
Brahmanas and the heaven dwellers. ♦He conquered the 
worlds. 

43. This sun is the Atman of all; is the lord of the 
worlds; he is the great Deva and Prajapati; he is the root of this 
world; he is the greatest deity. 

44. There are other twelve Adityas (sons of Aditi) ; they 
are Devas who are authorised and who fulfil their duties. 
They are the parts of Visnu; they are the different forms of 
Visnu. 

45. All including Gandharvas, Yaksas, serpents, 
Kinnaras and others make obeisance to the thousand armed 
deity; the leading sages worship the ancient deity the embodi¬ 
ment of the Chandas (vedic metre) and the eternal Brahman, by 
means of different Yajnas. 


CHAPTER FORTYTWO 

Functions o f Twelve Adityas 

Suta said : 

1. The lord’s chariot is occupied by Devas, Adityas, 
sages, Gandharvas, heavenly nymphs, Yaksas, serpents and 
Raksasas. 

2-3. Dhatr, Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna, Sakra, Vivasvan, 
Pusan, Parjanya, Aihsu, Bhaga, Tvastr and Visnu—these are 
the twelve sun-gods (Adityas) The sun develops (everyone of 


*v.\. dyutir dyutimatam krtsnarhyalteja etc. the entire lustre or energy of 
the luminaries is his (the sun’s). 

1. These twelve Adityas (Sun-gods) are supposed to be the portions 
or amSas of the sun-god and the twelve forms of Visnu. The provision of 
ages, Gandharvas, celestial damsels, etc. to each (minor) sun-god is a 
Puranic concept of solar paraphernalia. The deities of these attendants 
(Gandharvas, Apsaras, Yaksas, sages, etc.) are detailed in this chapter. 



1.42.4-18 


287 


Adityas) in the seasons like Vasanta (spring) etc. in due 
order. 

4-5. The sages, expounders of Brahman are—Pulastya, 
Pulaha, Atri, Vasistha, Ahgiras, Bhrgu, Bharadvaja, Gautama, 
Xasyapa, Kratu, Jamadagni and Kausika. They, in due order, 
eulogise the lord (with diverse Vedic mantras, composed) in 
various metres. 

6-7. The Yaksas are—Rathakrt, Rathaujas, Rathacitra, 
Subahu, Rathasvana, Varuna, Susena, Senajit, Tarksya, 
Aristanemi, Krtajit and Satyajit. These Yaksas of the lord of 
Devas hold the reins of the solar chariot. 

8-9. O leading Brahmanas, the excellent Raksasas, who 
go in front (of the sun-god are in serial order:)—Heti, Praheti, 
Pauruseya, Vadha, Sarpa, Vyaghra, Apa, VataVidyut, Divakara, 
Brahmopeta and Yajnopeta. 

10-11. O Brahmanas, the following serpents bear him 
in due order viz. — Vasuki, Kahkanila, Taksaka, Sarvapuhgava, 
Elapatra, Sahkhapala, Airavata, Dhananjaya, Mahapadma, 
Karkotaka, Kambala and Asvatara. 

12-14a. O excellent Brahmanas ! the following twelve 
Gandharvas are the master musicians : viz. Tumburu, Narada, 
Haha, Huhu, Visvavasu, Ugrasena, Suruci, Arvavasu, Citrasena, 
Urnayu, Dhrtarastra and Suryavarcas. With various songs 
(sung) in the notes of musical gamut such as of Sadja (Rsabha), 
etc., they duly sing about the sun-god. 

14b-17a. Rtusthala (v.l. Kratusthala) is the most excel¬ 
lent of heavenly damsels. Another one is Punjikasthala. O 
excellent Brahmanas other celestial ladies like Menaka, 
Sahajanya, Pramloca, Anumloca, Visvaci, Ghrtaci, Urvasi, 
Purvacitti, Rambha and Tilottama—all these propitiate the 
great lord Bhanu, the eternal immutable Atman, by different 
kinds of Tandava dance in the Vasanta and other seasons 
indue order. 

17b-18. Similarly, Devas reside in the sun each devo¬ 
ting (a period of) two months in due order. They nourish 
the sun, the storehouse of splendour, by their brilliance. 
With words of prayer composed by them, the sages eulogise the 
sun-god. 



288 


Kurma Pur ana 


19. The Gandharvas and Apsaras worship him by singing 
songs and performing dances. The presiding deities of villages 
— (Gramanis), Yaksas and Bhutas hold the reins. 

20. The serpents bear the lord of Devas; the 
Yatudhanas go ahead of him. The Valakhilyas (thumb-sized 
sages) surround the rising sun and go along with him till sunset. 

21. They are glorified as those who give heat, shower 
rain, shine, blow, create, and annihilate the inauspicious 
activities of living beings. 

22. These followers of the sun accompany the sun as he 
moves on in heaven. They are always seated in the aerial 
chariot that has the velocity of wind and that can go wherever 
it wishes to go. 

23. They protect all living beings in due order of Yugas 
(v.l. end of Yugas) by showering rains, giving heat and by 
delighting the people. 

24. Lord sun gives heat in accordance with the 
virility, penance, yogic power and the inherent vigour of 
Devas. 

25. That Prajapati (Lord of subjects) is the cause of 
demarcation of night and day. The sun nourishes perpetually 
the Pitrs, Devas, human beings and others. 

26. The great lord, the radiant sun, is Lord Mahesvara 
himself. The eternal blue-necked lord (Siva) of those who know 
the Vedas, shines forth. 

27. It is this god who is the progenitor of the world, 
Paramesthin. The knowers of the Vedas, the embodiments of the 
Vedas know that his abode is in the Sun-god Aditya. 



289 


CHAPTER FORTYTHREE 

Bhuvana Koia?- The functions of the Seven Rays of the Sun ; 
The chariots of Planets 


Suta said : 

1. Thus Mahadeva, the grandsire of the universe, the 
lord of Devas, the embodiment of Time and the Supreme Ruler 
controls time. 

2. O Brahmanas, out of his rays which are the illuminators 
of the worlds, the most excellent among them are the seven rays, 
the purifiers of the houses (v.l. graha-yonayah —“sources of 
planets”). 

3-4. Susumla, Harikesa, Visvakarman, Visvasravas, 
Sarhyadvasu, Arvavasu and Svaraka. These are the glorified 
seven rays. The ray of the sun named Susumla develops the 
light of the cool-lustred (i.e. the moon). 

5. This Susumla is described to be moving sideways 
(horizontally) and upwards. The ray that is said to be Harikesa 
is the nourisher of the lustre of the stars. 

6. The ray Visvakarman perpetually nurtures Budha (the 
Mercury). The ray that is named Visvasravas always nourishes 
Sukra (the Venus). 

7. The ray which is well-known as Sarhyadvasu, 
develops the Mars. The lordly ray Arvavasu affords nourishment 
to the Jupiter very well. 

8-9a. The seventh ray Svaraka gives succour to Sanaiscara 
(the Saturn). Thus, thanks to the power of the Sun the 
stars and constellations are nurtured. Being thus developed 
perpetually they bring nourishment and delight to everyone. 


1. Puranas evince great interest in cosmogony, cosmology and cosmo¬ 
graphy as an area lying between philosophy and theology. They are more 
interested in trying to solve the mysteries of the supreme soul and the 
universe rather than the matter-of-fact world around them. This topic has 
been discussed practically in all Puranas like the Bh.P. (V. 16.1-25), NP. 
(1.3.37-49). Though the imaginary nature of their concepts is obvious, we 
may, however, suggest that the idea of the planets receiving their power and 
existence from the rays of the sun might be the Puranic way of suggesting 
that all planets are born from the sun. 



290 


Kurma Purana 


9b-ll. In view of its taking up {Adana) of the splendour 
from the heavenly and the earthly objects and of the nocturnal 
darkness, it is called Aditya. With its thousand Nadis (i.e. rays), 
the thousand-eyed lord sun-god takes up the waters of the 
rivers, oceans, wells and canals and also from the mobile and 
immobile beings. 

12. He has a thousand rays exuding chillness, rain and 
heat. Among them four hundred Nadis (i.e. rays) of the 
variegated forms shower rains. 

13. The rays called Candragas, Gahas, Kancanas, 
Satanas* which are called Nectarine {Amrta) create showers. 

14-15a. Again the excessively cold Nadis are the rays 
emanated from the sun. They are Resya, Mesya and Vasya, 
Hradini and Sarjana. All these rays are yellow in colour 
and are termed as Candras. 

15b-16a. The rays called Sukla, Kuhkuma, Go and 
Visvabhrt are designated Sukla and they create three types of 
heat. 

16b-17. The sun sustains human beings, Pitrs and 
deities by these rays—human beings through the medicinal 
herbs, Pitrs through Svadha and Devas through Nectar. He 
propitiates the three through the three articles. 

18-19a. The lord gives heat during Vasanta (the spring) 
and Grisma (the summer) through six rays; he sends forth 
showers during Autumn and the rainy season through four of his 
rays, he sends forth cold in Hemanta and Sisira (early and 
late Winter) through three rays. 

19b-22a. Varuna is the sun-god who presides and 
functions in the month of Magha; Pusan does so in Phalguna; 
Devesa, in the month of Gaitra; Tapana in Vaisakha; Indra 
in the month of Jyestha while Ravi gives heat in Asadha, 
Vivasvan in the month of Sravana; Bhaga officiates in 
Bhadrapada, Parjanya in the month of Asvina; Bhaskara 


*v.l. : The alternate lists of rays (1) Candrajas, Yamyas, Ketagas and 
Ptitanas. 

(ii) Candanas, Jaksas, ICotalas and BhutalSs. 



I.43.22b-33 


291 


in the month of Karttika; Mitra in the month of Margasirsa 
and the eternal Visnu in Pausa. 

22b-25. Varuna has five thousand rays, in his activity as 
the sun; Pusan works with six thousand rays; Devesa with seven 
thousand rays; Dhatr with eight thousand rays; Satakratu 
(Indra) with nine thousand rays; Vivasvan protects with ten 
thousand rays; Bhaga protects with eleven thousand rays; Mitra 
blazes with seven thousand rays; Tvastr illuminates with eight 
thousand rays; Aryaman protects with ten thousand rays; 
Parjanya protects with nine thousand rays and Visnu the suppor¬ 
ter of the universe blazes with six thousand rays. 

26-27. During Vasanta (the spring-time) the sun is 
tawny-coloured; during the summer it has the lustre like that of 
gold; it is white during the rainy season; the lord should be 
known as pale, whitish in colour during the Autumn; during 
Hemanta (early winter) he is copper-coloured; and during 
Sisira (late winter) the sun is red in colour. The sun deposits 
Kala (digit?) (v.l. power and energy) in the medicinal herbs and 
Svadha in Pitrs. 

28. The sun deposits Amrta (nectar) in the immortal 
beings. Thus in the three beings he deposits the three articles. 
O Brahmanas, there are eight other planets which are 
presided over by the sun. 

29. They are: the Moon, Mercury, Venus, Jupiter, 
Mars, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu. 

30. The planets are fixed to the Pole star {Dhruva) by 
the wind-rays whirling in their own orbit, they follow the 
sun. 

31. They move about like the firebrand in a circle, when 
urged by the whirlwind. Since the wind propels and bears them, 
it is named Pravaha. 

32-33. The chariot of the moon has three wheels. His 
horses have the lustre of Kunda (white jasmine) flowers. 
They are yoked to the left as well as to the right and are ten 
in number. In that chariot, the moon traverses the constel¬ 
lations supported in Vithi (the path of the firmament) 
like the sun (traversing the planets). O leading Brahmanas, its 
increase and decrease are ever dependent on Dhruva. (v.l. are 
remembered in the same manner as the rays of the sun.) 



292 


Kurma Pur ana 


34. In the bright half of the month, when the sun is in 
the opposite direction of the moon, the other (back) side of the 
moon is always filled up with those brilliant rays. (v.l. ever 
according to the order of the days.) 

35. (In the dark half) when the moon is emaciated and 
drunk by Devas, the sun nourishes it forever, O Brahmanas, 
by a single ray called Susumla. 

36. This body of the moon is developed by the prowess 
of the sun. By gradually becoming bigger everyday, it is seen 
complete and full on the Full Moon day. 

37. O Brahmanas, the deities drink the full moon consist¬ 
ing of Amrta in the course of half a month. This is so because 
their diet consists of Nectar. 

38. When a fifteenth of it remains, consisting of a single 
digit, the groups of Pitrs drink the last portion in the afternoon. 

39. They drink for the period of two Lavas, * the Kala 
of the moon that remains. The digit of the moon is constituted 
of nectar and is auspicious. 

40. By imbibing the nectar called Svadha oozing out of 
the rays on the new Moon day, the Pitrs become satisfied for the 
period of a month. 

41. O excellent one, the moon is not destroyed but only 
the nectar is drunk to the fill. Thus the decrease and increase 
of the moon are dependent on the sun. 

42. The chariot of the son of the moon (i.e. Budha—the 
Mercury) is yoked to eight horses that have the velocity of the 
wind and that are born of water. He moves about all round in 
that chariot. 

43. The chariot of Sukra (the Venus) is yoked to ten 
horses bom of the Earth. The beautiful golden chariot of Bhauma 
(the Mars) is yoked to eight horses. 

44-45. The chariot of Jupiter is made of gold and eight 
horses are yoked to it. The chariot of Saturn is made of 
silver and it is drawn by eight horses. The chariot of Svarbhanu 
(Rahu) and Bhaskarari (i.e. Ketu) are made of iron. Each of 


*Lava —the 60th part of the twinkling of the eye. 



1.43.46—44-6 


293 


them is drawn by eight horses. Thus the chariots of the great 
planets have been recounted. 

46. All these blessed ones are fixed to Dhruva by the 
strings of wind. The planets, stars, constellations and other 
abodes are entirely fixed to Dhruva. They whirl and cause 
others to whirl by the wind-made reins. 


CHAPTER FORTYFOUR 

Arrangement of the Universe '.Descriptions of the Upper worlds 
and the nether worlds 


Suta said : 

1. Maharloka is above the Pole Star. It extends to 
a crore of Yojanas. O leading Brahmanas, the persons inhabiting 
there are entitled to the life span of a Kalpa. 

2. Janaloka is above Maharloka. Its spatial magnitude 
is two crores of Yojanas. Sanaka and other sons of Brahma are 
stationed there. 

3. Tapoloka is above Janaloka. It extends to three 
crores of Yojanas. Devas called Virajas who live there are 
immune from consumption by fire. 

4. Satyaloka is above the world of Prajapatis. It extends 
to six crores of Yojanas. It is a region where there is no death 
again. It is also named as Brahmaloka. 

5. Here in the Satyaloka god Brahma, the preceptor 
of the world, the soul and the efficient cause of the Universe ever 
abides in the company of Yogis by drinking the Supreme nectar 
of Yoga. 

6. Quiescent recluses, the perpetual Brahmacarins (celi¬ 
bates), Yogins, Siddhas, ascetics and performers of the Japa 
of Paramesthin reside there. 



294 


Kurma Pur ana 


I. It is the sole entrance of Yogins while they attain 
the greatest region. After going there they are free from grief. 
He (the entrant) is verily Visnu and Sankara. 

8. His (Brahma’s) city which is very difficult to attain 
resembles one crore of suns in brilliance and is emblazoned 
with clusters of fiery flames and as such it is impossible for me 
to describe it. 

9. There in the city of Brahma is the abode of Narayana 
also. The glorious Hari, the wielder ofMaya lies down there. 

10. It is called Visnuloka. There is no return from there 
to Sarhsara. The noble-souled people who have resorted to 
Janardana can go there. 

II. There is an auspicious refulgent city above the abode 
of Brahma. It is encircled by fire. Lord Hara stays there. 

12. The great lord is accompanied by the goddess. He is 
being meditated upon by the learned men. He is surrounded 
by hundreds and thousands of Bhutas, Yogins and Rudras. 

13. Those who are devoted to Mahadeva, the quiescent, 
truthful ascetics who observe celibacy, go there. 

14. Only those who are devoid of Mamatva (the feeling 
of my-ness), those who are not egotistic, those who are devoid 
of passion and fury will see the lord. It is verily named as 
Rudraloka. 

15-16. Thus, the seven great worlds above the earth 
have been glorified. O Brahmana, the lower Patato (nether 
worlds) beginning with Mahatala and others do also exist. The 
nether world called Mahatala is bedecked in all jewels, endowed 
with palaces and splendid shrines of deities. 

17. That Patala is associated with Sesa and the intelli¬ 
gent Mucakunda as well as inhabited by king Balin, resident 
of heavenly region (in that Patala). 

18. O Brahmanas, the Rasatala is full of rocks, Talatala 
is full of gravel, Sutala is yellow and Vitala has the lustre of 
coral. 

19. Vitala is white. Tala is black. O excellent sages, 
it is auspicious, thanks to Vasuki of good colour. 



1.44.20-29 


295 


20. What is known as Rasatala is resorted to by 
Virocana, Hiranyaksa, and Taraka. It is inhabited by others 
as well. 

21-23. What is known as Talatala is endowed with 
beauty. Sutala is resided by Garuda, the son of Vinata and 
others as well as the enemies of gods (Asuras), the chief of whom 
is Kalanemi. Vitalais resorted to by Yavanas and others and by 
demons such as Taraka, Agnimukha, etc., by serpents the fore¬ 
most of whom is Jambhaka and by Prahlada, the Asura, 
Vitala is famous as being inhabited by Kambala, the chief of 
serpents. 

24. It is inhabited by the heroic Mahajambha, the 
intelligent Hayagriva, Sahkukarna, Namuci and others. 

25. Tala is beautiful through the residence of other 
serpents. Below Patalas are the hells, Kurma and others, which 
are oft mentioned. 

26. The sinners are ‘cooked’ there which cannot be des¬ 
cribed adequately. The form of Visnu, called Sesa is lying 
beneath Patala. 

27. He is Rudra, the fire of world destruction, the Yogic 
Atman, Narasiihha and Madhava. He is Janardana in the form 
of a serpent who is said to be lord Ananta. All this has him for 
support and he has the fire of destruction for support. 

28. Having entered him (Visnu), the great Yogin, Kala 
who resides in his mouth (v.l. who comes out of his mouth at 
the time of world-destruction) and who is the Ruler becomes full 
of poisonous flames and annihilates the whole universe. 

29. Kala, comparable to a thousand destructive forces, 
(v.l. who is incomparable and is the master of a thousand 
mayas), the annihilator, Sankara and Bhava, the Tamasa form 
of god Sambhu is the reckoner of the world. 



296 


Kumna Pur ana 


CHAPTER FORTYFIVE 

Bhuvana Koia : Description of Seven Dvipas : Mountain ranges 
Suta said : 

1. This extensive cosmic egg consisting of fourteen parts 
has been described to you so far. Henceforth, I shall describe 
to you in detail the complete account of this earth. 

2. There are seven continents of which Jambudvipa is 
the most important. (The other continents are: Plaksa, Salmali, 
Kusa, Kraunca, Saka and Puskara.^ 

3. These seven great continents are encircled by seven 
oceans. The latter the continent, the greater it is in extent 
than the previous one, the latter ocean is said to be greater than 
the former. 

4. The seven oceans are : K^aroda (ocean of salt water). 
Iksurasoda (ocean of sugar-cane juice), Suroda (ocean of wine), 
Ghrtoda (ocean of ghee), Dadhyoda (ocean of curd) Kslra- 
salila (ocean milk), svaduda (ocean of Sweetwater). 

5. The earth alongwith the oceans and seven con¬ 
tinents extends to fifty crores of Yojanas all round. 

6. Jambudvipa is situated in the middle of conti¬ 
nents. In its centre is the well-known mountain Mahameru 
that has the golden lustre.^ 

7. Its height is eightyfour thousand Yojanas. It has gone 
sixteen thousand Yojanas down below. On the top it extends 
to thirtytwo thousand Yojanas. 

8. Its extent at its root (i.e. base) is sixteen thousand 
Yojanas all round. This mountain resembles the pericarp of 
the lotus of the Earth. 


1. For their geographical location vide supra Ch. 40 Note 1. 

2. Jambudvipa is much bigger than the present India which may be 
identified with Puranic Bharata-Varsa. As M. Ali, in the Geographj of the 
Puranas, shows Mt. Meru is the Pamirs and the Puranic description Meru 

‘the pericarp of the earth’ etc. fits in well with the modern Pamirs. 



1.45.9-15 


297 


9. To its south are the mountains Himavan, Hemakuta 
and Nisadha. The Varsa (boundary) mountains to the north 
are Nila, Sveta and Srhgin.^ 

10. The two middle ranges of mountains are a hundred 
thousand Yojanas in extent. The others are each ten thousand 
Yojanas less in order. Their height is two thousand Yojanas and 
the length is as much. 

11. Bharata is the first Varsa (sub-continent) ; then is the 
Kimpurusa Varsa, the other one is Harivarsa. O Brahmanas, 
All these are to the South of Meru.^ 

12-13. Beyond Meru Ramyaka is the northern sub¬ 
continent. Behind it is the Hiranmaya Varsa. Beyond it is the 
northern Kurus. These are in their order like the Bharata 
Varsa. O excellent Brahmanas, each of these is nine thousand 
Yojanas in extent. In their middle is Ilavrta Varsa and the 
Meru rises above in its middle. 

14. On four sides of Mt. Meru, there is Ilavrta which is 
nine thousand Yojanas in extent (on all sides of Meru). There 
are four mountains in Ilavfta, O highly fortunate ones. 

15. They are as if constructed as the support of Mt Meru 
and they are ten thousand Yojanas in height. The mountain 
to the east is Mandara and that to the south is Gandhamadana. 


1. M. Ali identifies the Puranic mountains as follows : Himavan (the 
f Himalayas), Hemakuta (Kailasa Trans-Himalayan range), Nisadha 
(Hindu Kush-Kunlun chain), Nila (Zarafshan-Trans-Alai-Tien Shan chain), 
Sveta (Nur Tau-Turkistan-Atbashi Chain), Srngin or Srngavan (Kara 
Tau-Kirghiz-Ketman chain). For details vide that great geographer’s 
Geog. of the Puraijas Ch. HI (the mountain system of the Puranas), pp. 
47-59 and the diagrams therein. 

2. For the locations of these regions (varsas) round Mt. Meru and 
other details vide M. Ali Ibid Chs. V-VIH. “Purana-writers are not geogra¬ 
phers in the modern sense of the term. They recorded the old traditional 
information of the world known to their forefathers.” As remarked by 
M. Ali : “It is creditable that within a few paragraphs (the Puranic) authors 
have compressed much relevant information about practically unknown and 
very difficult lands without losing precision or proportion”.—( Ibid., p. 87). 
This remark is applicable to the description of all the Varsas of Jambu-dvipa 
despite the immense changes that have taken place during the last 2000 
years. 



298 


Kurma Purina 


16. The mountain Vipula is on the western side and 
Suparsva is on the northern mountain. On each of the 
mountains stands a Kadamba, a Jambu, a Pippala and a Vata 
(banyan) tree respectively. 

17. O great sages, the Jambu tree is the cause of the 
name of the continent, Jambudvipa. The fruits of the Jambu 
tree are of the size of a huge elephant. 

18. They fall on the top of the mountain all round and 
they are shattered and strewn about. With the juice thereof the 
well-known Jambu river flows on the mountain. 

19. The river flows and it is drunk by the residents of 
the place whereby they have no perspiration, no bad 
odour, no old age nor any disability of sense-organs. 

20-21. Those pure-minded people do not get distressed. 
When the juice mixes up with the soil on its banks and gets 
completely dried up by wind it turns into gold called Jambunada 
of which Siddhas make their ornaments. The sub-continent 
called Bhadrasva is to the east of Meru and Ketumala is to its 
west. 

22-24a. These two are sub-continents, O excellent sages, 
in between them is the sub-continent Ilavrta. The forest to the 
east is Gaitraratha, the forest to the south is Gandhamadana. 
The western forest should be known as Vaibhraja, the northern 
forest is the forest of Savitr. The four lakes always worthy of 
being enjoyed by Devas are—Arunoda, Mahabhadra, Asitoda 
and Manasa.i 

24b-26. The following mountains are the residences of 
Siddhas. They are constructed by Devas viz. Sitanta, 
Kumudvan, Kururi, Malyavan, Vaikahka, Manisaila, the 
excellent mountains Vrksavan, Mahanila, Rucaka, Sasibindu, 
Mandara, Venuman, Megha, Nisadha and Deva. 

27-30. To the east of the lake Arunoda is the Kesara 
mountain.2 So also are Trikuta, Sasiras. Patahga, Rucaka 


1. These lakes are around Mt. Meru as follows : Arunoda in the east,^ 
Mahabhadra in the north, Asitoda (rather ‘Sitoda’ as in the Vdyii P.) in the 
west and Manasa in the south. 

2. The Purana-writer gives a poetic description of the mountain 
ranges that branch off from Mt. Meru (the Pamirs) in four directions. Meru 



1.45.31-41 


299 


Nisadha, Vasudhara, Kalinga, Trisikha, Samula, Vasuvedi, 
Kururu Sanuman, Tamrata, Visala, Kumuda, Venuparvata, 
Ekasrnga, Mahasaila, Gajasaila, Pinjaka, Pancasaila, Kailasa 
and Himavan, the most excellent among the mountains. These 
are the prominent and excellent mountains frequented by 
Devas. 

31-35. To the south of the lake Mahabhadra is the 
Kesara, mountain. So, also are the mountains Sikhivasas, 
Vaidurya, Kapila, Gandhamadana, Jarudhi, Surambu, the ex¬ 
cellent mountain Sarvagandha, Suparsva, Supaksa, Kahka, 
Kapila, Viraja, Bhadrajala, Susaka, Mahabala, Anjana, Madhu- 
man, Citrasrhga, Mahalaya, Kumuda, Mukuta, Pandura, 
Krsna, Parijata, Mahasaila, Kapilacala, Susena, Pundarlka and 
Mahamegha—All these are the kings of mountains resorted to 
by Siddhas and Gandharvas. 

36-39. To the west of the lake Asitoda is the Kesara 
mountain. So also are Sahkhakuta, Vrsabha, Harhsa, Naga, 
Kalanjana, Sukrasaila, Nilakamala, Parijata, Mahasaila 
Kanakhala, Puspaka, Sumegha, Varaha, Virajas, Mayura, 
Kapila and Mahakapila. These are resorted to by Devas, 
Gandharvas, Siddhas and Yaksas. To the north of the lake 
Manasa lies mount Kesara. 

40. In between these important mountains, there are 
inner water reservoirs, lakes and forests. 

41. Sages, Siddhas and ascetics sanctified by meditation 
on Brahman inhabit there. They are delighted, free from all 
distresses and sorrows and have their Rajas attribute subdued. 


is regarded as the pericarp of the lotus in the form of the earth and the 
mountain-ranges as the filaments. M. Ali locates most of them and shows 
that the information of the Puranic-writer is fairly accurate and not 
imaginary {Vide—The Geog. of the Puranas Chs. v-viii). 



300 


Kurma Purana 


CHAPTER FORTYSIX 

The abodes of Guardians of the world 


Suta said : 

1. On the mountain Meru, there is the well-known great 
city of Brahma, the lord of Devas. It is fourteen thousand 
Yojanas in extent. 

2. There resides lord Brahma, the soul of the Universe, 
the creator of the universe. He is being worshipped by leading 
Yogins, prominent sages as well as by Indra, Visnu and 
Sankara. 

3. Holy lord Sanatkumara perpetually adores Prajapati, 
I Sana (the Lord), the chief of Devas, the soul of the 
universe. 

4. With his soul absorbed in Yoga he drinks the excellent 
nectar. He stays there while being worshipped by Siddhas, sages, 
Gandharvas and gods. 

5. The splendid and brilliant abode of Sambhu of 
immeasurable splendour, the overlord of Devas, is situated 
there in front of the abode of god Brahma. 

6. It is endowed with divine splendour. It is very 
splendid and it has four doors. It is full of great sages. It is 
resorted to by the knowers of Brahman. 

7. God Mahadeva, the ruler of the universe and the lord 
of Pramathas (goblins, ghosts and other attendants of Siva) with 
the sun, moon and fire as his eyes, sports there with the goddess 
Uma while accompanied by Pramathas. 

8. The knowers of the Vedas, the quiescent truthful 
sages observing celibacy adore Mahadeva by means of their 
penance. 

9. Accompanied byParvati, lord Mahadeva, the Supreme 
Lord, directly accepts with his head the worship of those sages 
of devoted and purified Atman. 

10. There, on the excellent mountain itself but to its 
east is situated the greatest city of Indra called Amaravati. It is 
endowed with all splendour and beauty. 



1.46.11-23 


301 


11. The heavenly ladies, Siddhas, Gandharvas, and 
Caranas and gods in thousands, worship the deity of a 
thousand-eyed Indra there. 

12. That is the highest abode of those who are virtuous, 
the knowers of the Vedas and devoted to the performance of 
sacrifices and Homas. It is inaccessible even to Devas. 

13. To the south of it is the city of the Fire-god of bound¬ 
less splendour. It is named Tejovati and it is full of divine 
miracles. 

14. There stays lord Agni the fire-god shining with 
his brilliance. It is the abode of the performers of Japas and 
Homas. It is difficult of access to the sons of Danu. 

15. The great city of Yama is on the southern mountain. 
It is named Sarhyamani. It is divine and endowed with all 
types of splendour. 

16. There Devas and others adore lord Vaivasvata 
(i.e. Yama). It is the abode of those who adhere to truth, and of 
those who perform meritorious deeds in the world. 

17. To the west of that is the city of the noble-souled 
Nirrti. It is named Raksovati and it is encircled by Raksasas. 

18. There the Raksasas worship lord Nairrta. Those who 
are devoted to piety but whose activities are urged by Tamas 
go to that city. 

19. On the western mountain is the great city of Varuna 
known by the name of Suddhavatl. It is meritorious and it is 
endowed with all desirable objects and affluence. 

20. There stays king Varuna. The king is served by Siddhas, 
bevies of celestial damsels and the lords of immortal beings. 
Those who make gifts of water go there. 

21. To the north of that city is the great and sacred 
city of Vayu known by the name Gandhavati. There stays 
the Wind-god. 

22. The great lord is served by the celestial ladies and 
Gandharvas. Brahmanas devoted to Pranayamas (restraint over 
breath) attain that eternal abode. 

23. To the east of that city is the great city of Soma. 
It is the splendid city known by the name Kantimati wherein 
shines the Moon-god. 



302 


Kurma Pur ana 


24. That abode which is abounding in various objects of 
pleasure is the proper place for those who are devoted to virtuous 
activities and who worshipfully take up their respective religious 
duties. 

25. To the east of that city is the great city of Sankara. 
It is a meritorious city known as Yasovati. It is difficult of 
access to all. 

26. The auspicious abode of Isana, the overlord of the 
Ganas, which is very large and presided over by Rudra is there. 
He stays there surrounded by the Ganas. 

27. It was there that the residence of the devotees of 
Paramesthin who are desirous of enjoyment of pleasures has 
been assigned by the trident-bearing lord of Devas. 

28. Flowing out from Visnu’s feet and flooding the sphere 
of the Moon, Gahga falls all round the city of god Brahma. 

29. O Brahmanas, after falling there it became divided 
into four branches in accordance with the four quarters. The 
branches are called : Sita, Alakananda, Sucaksu and Bhadra.^ 

30. Sita flows through the aerial path from mountain 
to mountain along the east of Meru. Flowing through 
the eastern sub-continent across Bhadrasva, it falls into the sea. 

31. O excellent Brahmanas ! Similarly, Alakananda, 
entering the Bharata Varsa from the south of Meru splits 
itself into seven branches and falls into the ocean. 

32. The Sucaksu crosses the western mountains, 
enters the western Varsa called Ketumala and flows into the 
ocean. 

33. O great sages, the Bhadra traverses through the 
chain of northern mountains and the northern Kurus and falls 
into the northern ocean. 

34. The mountain Malyavan and Gandhamadana extend 
upto Nila and Nisadha. In the middle of the two chains of 
mountains Mt. Meru stands like the pericarp of a lotus. 


1. De identifies Sita with the jaxartes (sir-Daria), Sucaksu with the 
Oxus, and Bhadra with the Yarkand or Zarafshan. M. ^Ali differs but 
the description of the rivers and the regions watered by them tallies more 
with M. Ali’s description in Op. Cit. Ch. IV (and also Chs. V-VIII). 



1.46.35—47.1 


303 


35. The sub-continents Bharata, Ketumala, Bhadrasva 
and the Kurus are the petals of the lotus of the universe outside 
the Border-mountains. 

36. Jathara and Devakuta^ are the two boundary moun¬ 
tains extending from the south to the north as far as Nila and 
Nisadha mountains. 

37. Gandhamadana and Kailasa extend from east to west. 
They go deep within the ocean to the extent of eighty Yojanas. 

38. Nisadha and Pariyatra are the two border-mountains 
situated as before to the west of Meru. 

39. Trisrhga and Jarudhi^ are the Varsa mountains in 
the north. They run east and west between the two oceans. 

40. O Brahmanas ! O great sages ! The eight border- 
mountains have been described by me. Jathara and other 
mountains are stationed all round the Meru. 


CHAPTER FORTYSEVEN 

Ketumala and other sub-continents 


Suta said : 

1. In the sub-continent Ketumala,® men are (black 
like) crows and have Jackfruit for their diet. Women have 
the lustre of the petals of the lotus. They live for ten thousand 
years. 

1. M. Ali identifies Devakuta with modern Altin Tagh-Nan-Shan- 
Tsing-Ling and Jathara with Kuruk-Tagh (O/i. Cit. p. 100). Devakuta 
thus fulfils all conditions; along with Jathara (Kuruk-Tagh), it joins 
the Nila (Tien-Shan) and the Nisadha (Kunlun). 

2. M. Ali identifies the Jarudhi range of mountains with Kirghiz- 
Zailai Ala-Tau, Ketmen chain. Its twin, the Kara Tau, Talars, Kungei, 
Ketmin chain which extends westwards is the Trisrhga or Srhgivan mountain 
of the Puranas (Op. Cit. p. 83). 

The chapter shows the acquaintance of the author of KP. with the 
main mountain systems and river-systems in Asia. 

3. Ketumala signified the whole of ancient Bactria i.e. mod. Afghan 
Turkistan, the lower Hari Rud Valley, the basin of Murghal Kashka 



304 


K urma Pur am 


2. In the sub-continent Bhadrasva,^ men are white in 
complexion and women resemble the rays of the moon. They 
live for ten thousand years and cooked food constitutes their 
diet. 

3-4a. In the sub-continent Ramyaka,^ men and women 
have complexion lustrous like silver. They live for eleven 
thousand five hundred years. 

They live on Nyagrodha fruits as their food. They adhere 
to Sattvaguna. 

4b-5. In the Hiranmaya,® sub-continent, the people 
have complexion of golden lustre. They live on Sriphalas 
(coconuts). Both men and women live for twelve thousand and 
five hundred years like those residing in Devaloka. 

6. People in the Kuruvarsa,* live for fourteen thousand 
and five hundred years. Their bodies are dark in colour and 
they regularly take in milk as their diet. 

7. In the continent Candradvipa, people are born of 
legal cohabitation. They are perpetually happy. They always 
worship Siva, the great lord. 

8. O Brahmanas, men in the Kimpurusa® continent 
resemble gold in complex. With Plaksa (fruits) for their food, 
they live for ten thousand years. 


system and the basins of the Surkhan, Kahringan, Vakhsh and Vaksu rivers 
(For details BiVfe M. Ali—O/i. Cit., pp. 88-98). It is significant that many 
of the Puranic names of Principalities or sub-regions were used in mediaeval 
times as well. 

1. M. Ali identifies Bhadrasva with North China {Op. Cit., p. 108). 

2. Ramyaka or Ramanaka Varsa is the same as ancient Sogdiana 
(M. Ali—Op. Cit., p. 83). 

3. Hirnmaya Varsa lies between the Sveta (Nur-Tau-Turkistan- 
Atbashi chain) and Srhgavan (Kara Tau-Kirghiz-Ketman chain)—M. Ali 
Op. Cit., p. 73. 

4 . Kuru-Varsa or Uttara Kuru was the region between Srfigavan and 
the Northern Arctic Ocean or ‘in other words the Western Siberian Region 
(M. Ali— Op. Cit., p. 85). With respect to the Puranic description of these 
northern regions, M. Ali remarks : “In fact this is a major contribution of 
the Puranas to the knowledge of these lands which were either unknown or 
imperfectly known till the 16th cent. A.D.” {Op. Cit., p. 85). 

5. Nepal (De., p. 100). 



1.47.9-20 


305 


9. Endowed with reverential devotion and with their 
mind concentrated on meditation, they always worship the four¬ 
armed lord with four heads. 

10. In the continent Harivarsa,'^ the people resemble 
Maharajata (i.e. gold). Imbibing sugarcane juice, they live for 
ten thousand years. 

11. There, the people always worship with devotion god 
Visnu, Lord Narayana, the eternal source of the origin of the 
universe. 

12. There, in the grove of Parijata trees is a splendid 
palace of Lord Vasudeva. It is white, brilliant like the moon 
and it resembles pure crystal. 

13. With its four entrances with four arched door-ways 
and its ten surrounding ramparts, it is incomparable, impassable 
and invincible. 

14. It is provided with a crystal hall adorned all round 
with thousands of golden columns. It stands comparison with 
the residential palace of the king of gods. 

15. It is fitted with golden stairs and is beautified with 
various kinds of jewels. It is furnished with a celestial throne 
and it is endowed with all brilliance and beauty. 

16-17. Its beauty is enhanced by the lakes of sweet water 
and by rivers. The place abounds in Yogins devoted to Narayana, 
pure persons devoted to the study of the Vedas, persons meditat¬ 
ing on Hari, the Purusa, and persons eulogising and making 
obeisance to Madhava by means of Mantras. 

18. There, on all occasions, the kings eulogise the 
greatness of Visnu of unmeasured splendour, the overlord of 
Devas. 

19. Charming young ladies always interested in bedecking 
themselves sing and dance there. 

20. In the sub-continent Ilavrta,^ the people have the 
colour of the lotus. They drink the juice of Jambu fruits 


1. Harivarsa included the western portion of Tibet (De., p. 74). 

2. Ilavrta is the region round Meru and bounded by Malyavan on 
the east and Gandha-madana on the west. The Puranic statements about 
the locations of these mountains are conflicting. After closely scrutinising 



306 


Kurma Purina 


which they consume regularly. They have the steady (fixed) 
longevity of thirteen thousand years. 

21. In the Bharata^ sub-continent, the women and men 
are of various complexions. They are engaged in the worship 
of many gods, and they perform different kinds of holy rites 
and professions. 

22. O sages of holy vows, their maximum expectation of 
life is a hundred years. This sub-continent is reported as extend¬ 
ing to nine thousand Yojanas. 

23-25. O Brahmanas, this is the land of holy rites of those 
men who are eligible. There are seven important mountain 
ranges viz. Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya, Saktiman,^ Rksaparvata, 
Vindhya and Pariyatra. There are eight other continents viz. 
Indradvipa, Kaserukman, Tamraparna, Gabhastiman, Nagadvipa 
Saumya, Gandharva, Varuna. This continent (Bharata Varsa) 
■situated in the sea is the ninth one. 

26. This continent extends from the south to the north 
for a thousand Yojanas. To the east of it there are Kiratas 
and to the west are Yavanas. 

27. The people who live herein are the Brahmanas, 
Xsatriyas and Vaisyas who maintain themselves with Yajnas, 
lighting and trading activities. The Sudras stay amongst them 
{ serving them). 

28-31. Many holy rivers originating from various moun¬ 
tains flow here. They are : Those originating from the ridges or 


the Puranic evidence, M. Ali concludes that Gandhamadana is the northern 
ridge of the Hindukush arch with its northern extension, the Khwaja 
Mohammad range while Malyavan is the Sarikot range to the east of 
Pamirs. (Op. Cit., pp. 58-59) 

1. This is obviously pre-Partition India. The description of variety in 
complexions of men, their modes of worship, etc. is found applicable even 
today. 

2. §u (§a) ktiman is the portion of the Vindhya range joining 
Pariyatra and Rksa mountains, including the hills of Gondwana and Chhota 
Nagpur (De., p. 1961). M. Ali, in the topographical map of Bharata, shows 
it as a ring of ranges encircling the Mahanadi basin, very nearly coinciding 
the present Mahakosala (the Puranic Daksina-Kosala) region. 



1.47.32-35 


307 


foot-hills of the Himalaya^ mountains are : the Satadru, Candra- 
bhaga, Sarayu, Yamuna, Iravati, Vitasta, Vipasa, Devika, 
Kuhu, Gomati, Dhutapapa, Bahuda, Drsadvati, Kausiki, and 
Lohini (v.l. Lohita). Those originating from Pariyatra mountain* 
are : Vedasmrti, Vedavati, Vrataghni, Tridiva, Varnasa, 
Candana, Garmanvati, Sura, Vidisa and Vetravati. 

32-33. The sacred rivers flowing from the mountain 
Rksavan* are : Narmada, Surasa, Sona, Dasarna, Mahanadi, 
Mandakini, Citrakuta, Tamasi, Pisacika, Citrotpala Visala, 
Manjula and Valuvahini. They dispel all sins of men. 

34-35. The following rivers originate from the Vindhya 
mountains:* Tapi, Payosni, Nirvindhya, Mahanadi, 
Sighroda, Vinna (v.l. Venya), Vaitarani, Balaka, Kumudvati, 
Mahagauri, Durga and Antahsila. They dispel sins of men 
instantaneously. 


1. The modern names of the rivers are given in brackets : Sutadru 
(Sutlej), Gandrabhaga (Chenab), Iravati (Ravi), Vitasta (Jhelum), 
Vipasa (Beas), Devika (Deeg—a tributary of the Ravi-right bank), Kuhu 
(Kabul), Dhuta-papa (Sarada with its head-streams), Bahuda (Rapti). 
Drsadvati (Chitang, a tributary of the Ghaggar) Kausiki (Kosi with its 
three head-waters, Dudh Kosi, Sun Kosi and Tamba Kosi), Lohini or 
Lohita (Brahma-Putra). 

(M. Ali— Op. Cit., pp. 114-115) 

2. Modern names are bracketed : Vedasmrti (Banas), Vedavati 
(Berach), Vrataghni (Banganga-utangan), these were big, perennial rivers 
in ancient Matsya country (now a part of Madhya Pradesh), Tridiva 
(Kali Sindh), Varnasa (W. Banas which flows west of Aravallis), Candana 
(Sabarmati), Garmanvavati (Chambal), Sura (Gambhira, also mentioned 
as Rupa in the Mt. P.), Vidisa (Bes, on its bank is Besnagar), Vetravati 
(Betwa). 

(M. Ali— Op. Cit., pp. 116-117) 

3. The following revers are in the Bundelkhand Region : Darsana 
(Dhasan), Gitrakuta, Tamasi or (Osa (Tons), Gitropala (Citopala)— 
probably due to coloured stones or gravel in its bed. 

The other rivers are : Visala (Betwa—near Sagar ?), Vanjula (Jamni- 
a tributary of the Betwa). The ranges of ^ksa and Vidhya'mountains are so 
much mixed up that some rivers (e.g. the Narmada) are attributed to either 
of them. 

4. Modern names are bracketed : Payosni (Pain-Gahga—De 150), 
Nirvindhya (Newuj—between Ujjain and Veitravati), Vinna or Venya 
(Wain-Gahga), Vaitarani (Baitarani), Kumudvati (Suvarnarekha). 



308 


Kurma Pur dm 


36-38. O excellent Brahmanas, the rivers of the southern 
land (Deccan) originating from the ridges of the Sahya moun¬ 
tain are : Godavari, Bhimarathi, Kr?na, Vena, Vasyata, 
Tungabhadra, Suprayoga and Kaveri. The rivers originating 
from the Malaya mountain are Rtumala,*^ Tamraparni, Punya- 
vati and Utpalavati. All of them contain cool water. The rivers 
Rsikulya and Trisama flow down from the Gandhamadana.^ 

39. The rivers originating from Saktiman (Suktiman) 
mountain® are Ksipra, Palasini, Rsika and Varhsadharini. They 
dispel all sins of men. 

40. O leading Brahmanas, the branches and tributaries 
of these rivers are in hundreds. For ablution, charitable gifts 
and other rites (on their banks), these rivers are meritorious 
and destructive of all sins. 

41-44. The people of the middle country etc. are the 
Kurus and Pancalas. The people of the eastern territories 
are the residents of Kamarupa. So also of the Pundras, the 
Kalihgas, the Magadhas the people of the southern Deccan 
region, the people of the western territories, the Saurastras, the 
Sudras, the Hinas (indigent ones), the Arbudas, the Malakas, 
the Malapas, the residents of Pariyatra, the Sauviras, the 
Saindhavas, the Hunas, the Malyas (v.l. Salvas), the residents 
of Balya, the Madras, the Ramas, the Andhras and the Para- 
sikas.* These people always stay near these rivers and drink 
their waters. 

45. Wise men have said that there are four Yugasin the 
Bharata sub-continent and not anywhere else. They are Krta, 
Treta, Dvapara and Kali. 


1. Rtumala or Krtamala (Vaigai which rises in Kottai-Malai Peak 
of Cardamom Hills ?) 

2. M. Ali attributes the sources of the river to the Mahendra Parvata 
and not to Gandha-madana. But one wonders why other rivers of ( Op. Cit., 
p. 124) the Mahendra Parvata are not given when Vayu and Mt.P. mention 
them. 

3. The rivers from mt. Sa (Su-) ktiman : Palasini (Jonk—Raipur 
Dist., M. P.),Rsika (Rsikulya, according to M. Ali — Op, Cit., p. 125). 

4. The list of peoples and their provinces in Bharata is illustrative 
and not exhaustive. Cf. Mt.P. 113.34 ff. 



1.47.46—48.7 


309 


46. O great sages, in the eight sub-continents such as 
Kiihpurusa and others there is neither sorrow nor dispiritedness, 
neither the fear of hunger nor any sort of exertion. 

47. The subjects are happy and comfortable. They are 
devoid of agony; they are free from all sorts of misery. All of 
them enjoy steady and perpetual youth and sport themselves in 
various ways. 


CHAPTER FORTYEIGHT 

The description of JambudmpcP 


Silt a said : 

1. The crystalline mansion of Paramesthin the lord of 
Devas, is on the beautiful great peak of the mountain 
Hemakuta. 

2. There, Devas and Siddhas alongwith the sages, always 
perform the worship of the Trident-bearing overlord of Devas, 
the ruler of living beings. 

3. Mahadeva, the Pinaka-bearing lord, Mahesvara, 
Girisa, accompanied by the goddess, shines there forever, 
surrounded by his goblins. 

4. Mount Kailasa with its beautiful and separate peaks 
stands there. It is the residence of a crore of Yaksas and of the 
intelligent Kubera. 

5-7. There too stands the great abode of lord Siva, the 
overlord of Devas. The holy river Mandakini, beautiful 
with its translucent waters is embellished with many and various 
kinds of lotuses. Waters of the highly sacred and beautiful 


1. This chapter gives a mythological description of the abodes of 
gods etc. in Jambudvipa. M. Ali in The Geog. of the Purdrias has located 
some of these mountains. It appears that Jambudvipa covered practically 
the major part of Eurasia (and probably some part ofN. Africa also). 



310 


Kurma Pur ana 


river are always drunk by Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Yaksas, 
Raksasas and Kinnaras. They are holy and very beautiful. 
There are many other rivers, hundreds of them, bedecked with 
golden lotuses. 

8. On the banks of those rivers are the abodes of Lord 
Paramesthin as well as of Narayana. They are resorted to by 
Devas and sages. 

9-10a. On its peak (?) is the splendid and auspicious 
grove of Parijata trees. The large abode of Indra adorned with 
jewels is also there. It contains crystal columns, and is be¬ 
decked in golden domes and ornamental gateways. 

10b-12a. The holy abode of lord Visnu, the Atman of the 
Universe, the lord of Devas, is situated thus. It is beautiful 
and bedecked with all kinds of jewels. The glorious Narayana, 
the lord of the Universe, the excellent lord of everyone, the 
eternal deity, abides there. 

12b-13a. Similarly, on the mountain peak called Vasu- 
dhara, there stands the holy abode of Vasus, the most excellent 
of all abodes. It is bedecked in jewels and is unthwartable by 
the enemies of gods. 

13b-14a. The seven sacred hermitages of the noble-souled 
seven sages are on the excellent mountain Ratnadhara. The 
hermitages are sacred and are joined to the residences of the 
Siddhas. 

14b-15a. The highly auspicious and pure abode of god 
Brahma, born of the Unmanifest, is also there. It is built of 
gold and is embellished with diamonds, sapphire and other 
precious gems, and it has four doorways. 

15b-16a. O Brahmanas, Devas and sages, Siddhas and 
other Brahmanical ascetics worship the unborn Pitamaha, 
the great lord of Devas, there. 

16b-17a. The four-faced deity is always worshipped 
alongwith the goddess Savitri by everyone. He is the greatest 
goal of all quiescent ones. For the welfare of the world he stays 
there. 

17b-18. On one of its summits, which is decorated with 
great lotuses, there is a great sacred lake which is very fragrant 
with nectar-like pure water. Near that is the holy hermitage 
of Jaigisavya which is frequented by leading Yogins. 



1.48.19-30 


311 


19. It is here that the venerable sage stays always 
surrounded by all his distinguished disciples who are noble- 
souled, devoid of faults and sins, and knowers of Brahman. 

20-21. His disciples are Sahkha, Manohara, Kausika, 
Krsna, Sumanas and Vedavada. Thanks to his grace, they are 
engaged in all yogic activities and are quiescent. With their 
bodies dusted with Bhasma (ashes), those preceptors, engrossed 
in the Brahmavidya (Learning of the Brahman), worship him 
(Jaigisavya). 

22. In order to bless the recluses of tranquil minds, 
Mahesvara remains near them there along with the goddess. 

23. On that excellent mountain, there are many her¬ 
mitages of sages whose minds are absorbed in Yoga. There are 
many lakes and rivers too. 

24. In those hermitages blissfully live Brahmanas engaged 
in Yoga, the performers of Japa, of fully controlled sense-organs 
and of minds attached to and absorbed in the Brahman, 
and devoted to spiritual knowledge. 

25. With their Atman (individual soul) fixed on the 
Cosmic soul, they meditate on the lord Isana stationed on the 
peak of the mountain but pervading the universe. 

26. There is Sumegha, the abode of Indra, resembling 
a thousand suns in brilliance. There abides Lord Indra, the 
overlord of gods, alongwith his consort Saci. 

27. The abode of Durga is on the mountain Gajasaila. 
It has jewelled portals. Goddess Durga, the great Isvari herself 
stays there. 

28. Waited upon and served everywhere by different 
Saktis (divine powers), she drinks the Yogic nectar pertaining 
to Lord Siva, after obtaining it directly from him. 

29. O Brahmanas, on the summit of the mountain 
Sunila, shining brilliantly, thanks to the various kinds of mine¬ 
rals, are the cities of Raksasas as well as hundreds of lakes. 

30. O Brahmanas, similarly, on the mountain Mahacala 
that has a hundred (beautified) peaks, there are hundreds of 
cities with crystal columns. They are inhabited by Yaksas of 
boundless prowess. 



312 


Kurma Pur ana 


31. On the summit of the mountain Svetodara is the city 
of the noble-souled Suparna (Garuda). It has ramparts and 
arched gateways and is embellished with jewelled portals. 

32. The glorious Garuda stays there like another 
Visnu incarnate. He meditates upon the Supreme, immutable 
refulgence, within his Atman. 

33. O leading sages, there is another holy abode of 
Goddess Sri on the peak called Srisrhga. It is of gold, richly 
endowed with jewels and fitted with portals studded with 
jewels. 

34-35. The greatest Sakti of Visnu, Laksmi of infinite 
prosperity, very charming and eager to fascinate the whole 
universe, occupies that abode. She is revered by the Gan- 
dharvas, Siddhas and Caranas. The goddess should be contem¬ 
plated upon as the source of origin of the universe and refulgent 
with the rays of her own divine power. 

36. At that very place is the great abode of Visnu, 
the lord of Devas. There are four lakes there, containing 
beautiful lotuses of variegated colours. 

37. On the mountain Sahasrasikhara (having a thousand 
peaks), there are eight cities of the Vidyadharas, which are 
fitted with jewelled staircases and are embellished with lakes. 

38. The rivers hereof contain pure (crystal clear) 
water and are the receptacles of very wonderful blue lotuses. 
There is a divine grove of Karnikara flowers where Sankara 
himself (v.l. with Amba) stays. 

39. The auspicious city of Mahalaksmi is on the moun¬ 
tain Parijata (v.l. Pari-patra). It is endowed with beautiful 
palaces and is decorated with bells and chowries. 

40. It is beautified by the troupes of celestial damsels 

dancing here and there, and is filled with the sound of tabors 
(Mrdahgas) and Panavas and resonant with the notes of flutes 
and lutes everywhere. 

41. It is crowded with Gandharvas and Kinnaras and 

encircled by extremely brilliant Siddhas. It is teeming with 

great palatial buildings. 

42. It is resorted to by the lords of Ganas .ind is 

extremely attractive to look at for the virtuous. It is there that 
the goddess, engaged in Yoga abides forever. 



T.48.43-56a 


313 


43-44a. Only the sages who have accomplished Siddhis 
and are expounders of Brahman (or Veda) can visualize there 
the three-eyed great goddess MahalaksmI, the wielder of an 
excellent trident and surrounded by all divine powers and iden¬ 
tical with them. 

44b-45a. The excellent city of Sarasvati is on the nor¬ 
thern side of Suparsva. O excellent ones, the lakes thereof are 
frequented by the Siddhas. They are worthy of being enjoyed 
by Devas. 

45b-46a. On the summit of the mount Pandura which 
abounds in wonderful trees, there are hundreds of cities of 
Gandharvas teeming with celestial women. 

46b-47a. In them, proud and inebriated men and women, 
full of charms, eager after enjoyment of pleasure, joyfully sport 
forever. 

47b-49a. On the summit of the mount Anjana is the 
excellent city of celestial ladies. Rambha and other Apsaras 
stay there eager in their sexual dalliance. Citrasena and other 
suppliants come there (as Suitors) forever. O excellent ones 
that city is rich in all kinds of precious stones. 

49b-51a. O excellent ones ! On the Kaumuda (moun¬ 
tain top) there are many cities of Rudras whose rajo-gum (or 
passion) is subsided and whose minds are attached to Isvara 
(Siva). Those Rudras of great Yogic power and (capable of) 
moving in the inner circle of god Siva and occupying the 
position of god Siva’s lustre abide in that city. 

51b-52a. On the summit of mountain Pinjara, there are 
three cities of the lords of gams (Siva’s attendants). In the city 
called Kapila of Nandisvara, that highly intelligent Gana-chief 
Nandisvara stays. 

52b-53a. On the summit of Jarudhi is the shining holy 
abode of Bhaskara (the Sun-god) of unmeasured splendour, the 
intelligent lord of Devas. 

53b-54a. To the northern side of the same is the excellent 
abode of the moon-god. It is there that the lord of cool rays 
a nd beautiful soul stays. 

54b-56a. O great sages, on the mount Haihsa there 
is a divine abode. It extends to a thousand Yojanas. It is fitted 
with golden portals studded with jewels. Lord Brahma, 



314 


Kurma Pur ana 


the soul of the Universe, praised by groups of Siddhas and 
accompanied by Vasudeva (v.l. Vamadeva) and others stays 
there in the company of his consort Savitri. 

56b-57a. To the southern side of the same is the excellent 
city of the Siddhas where leading sages headed by Sanandana 
and others dwell quietly. 

57b. The three cities of Danavas are on the summit of 
the mountain Panca-Saila. 

58-59a. Not far from it is the abode of the intelligent 
preceptor of Daityas (viz. Sukra). The holy hermitage of 
Kardama is on the peak of the mountain Sugandha, the beauty 
of which is heightened by rivers. The holy sage stays there. 

59b-60a. To the eastern side of the same, a little to the 
south stays Sanatkumara, the holy sage, the greatest among the 
knowers of Brahman. 

60b-61. O leading sages, on all these mountains and 
others there are lakes, rivers of translucent waters and the 
shrines of deities. There are sacred Siddhalihgas installed by the 
sages. 

62. It is impossible to enumerate those shrines. Thus 
the description of Jambudvipa is given in brief. It is impossible 
for me to recount it in detail even in hundreds of years. 


CHAPTER FORTYNINE 

The description of Plakfa and other continents 


Suta said : 

1. The island-continent called Plaksa,^ twice in extent 
to that of Jambudvipa, stands surrounding the milky ocean 
(rather—thebrimy sea).* 


1. The older view dismissing the Puranic Dvipas (continents) as 
fanciful fables is itself dismissed by later researchers. They try to identify 
these continents on the basis of the climatic and vegetational data. Thus 
the Plaksa tree is regarded as the main feature of the land called Ptaksa diipa 
*Ksiroda : a misprint for Ksaroda 



1.49.2-10 


315 


2. O leading Brahmanas, there are seven Kulaparvatas 
(ranges of border Mountains) in the Plaksa Dvipa. They have 
thousands ofSiddhas* inhabiting them and are well-divided. 

3-5. Gomeda is the first among them (i.e. Kulaparvatas). 
The second is called Candra. The others are Narada, Dundu- 
bhi, Maniman and Meghanisvana. Vaibhraja is the seventh 
among them. It is the most beloved of Brahma. The unborn 
god Brahma, the Atman of the Universe, the perceiver of the 
Universe, (the omniscient) deity, the cosmic witness of all, is 
worshipped by Devas, sages, Gandharvas and Siddhas. The 
countries therein are holy. There are no ailments or mental 
agonies. 

6-8. There are no persons committing sins in any way. 
The rivers in those sub-continents are seven and they fall into 
the sea. In them the Brahmanical sages always worship Pitamaha 
(God Brahma). The well-known names of these rivers are 
Anutapta, Sikha, Vipapa, Tridiva, Krta, Amrta and Sukrta. 
There are many well-known small rivers and many lakes as 
well. 

9-10. In these continents, there is no revolution of the 
cycle of the different Yugas. Men are long-lived. They are 
classified as Aryakas, Kururas, Videhas, Bhavins, etc., and 
are said to be the four castes viz. the Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, 


and it indicates the land of warm temperate climate of the mediterranean 
basin (M. Ali— Geog. of the Piirdnas, pp. 39-42). F. Wilford shows how the 
name Plaksa still persists in Placia, a town in Mysia. The inhabitants speak a 
peculiar dialect spoken by Pelagsi of Cristone—spoken by the Pelagsis who 
lived on the shores of Hellespont at the time of Herodotus {Asiatic Researches 
VlII. 267-346). The close similarity in the names Plaksa, Pelagsi is 
significant. V. V. Iyer, in ‘The Seven Dvipas of the Puranas’ locates 
Plaksa dvipa in Greece and adjoining lands i.e. the climatically Mediterra¬ 
nean belt. 

The above approach of identifying these dvipas or ‘human regions’ by 
their climate and vegetation is saner than speculating their identity on the 
basis of the mountains or rivers as the names of these can be distorted to 
suit one’s theory. 

"‘The reading should be : rjvdyatdh as in V. 14 below. It means : ‘‘The 
mountains are broad and straight.” 



316 Kurma Purana 

Vaisyas and Sudras in this continent. Lord Isa is worshipped 
by the people of all castes residing there. 

11. O leading sages, they have the Empire of Soma (v.l. 
intimate union with) and similarity of form of Soma. All of 
them are engaged in pious duties. All of them are delighted in 
their minds. 

12-13. They live without any ailment for five thousand 
years. The island continent Salmali^ is twice the Plaksadvipa in 
extent and is encircled by the sea of sugarcane juice. There 
are seven Varsas (sub-continents) and seven dividing ranges of 
mountains there also. 

14-16. O observers of good vows, the mountains are long 
and straight with excellent knots (and ridges). The rivers are 
also seven in number. The names of the mountains are Kumuda, 
Annada, Balahaka, Drona, Kaihsa, Mahisa and Kakudman. 
The rivers that dispel the sins of the people are—Yoni, 
Toya, Vitrsna, Gandra, Sukla, Vimocani and Nivrtti. O excellent 
Brahmanas, there is no avarice or anger among the people. 

17. There is no fixation of the period for the different 
Yugas. People live without ailment. The people of all castes 
worship the eternal Vayu there. 

18-19a. It is but proper that they achieve this (v.l. they 
realize Sayujya VfY>e. of salvation with him (i.e. Vayu). They 
realise the Sarupyaand Salokatd forms of salvation (with Vayu). 
Brahmanas are mentioned to be tawny coloured. The kings are 
pink in complexion. O Brahmanas, in this continent the Vaisyas 
are yellow-coloured and the Sudras are black. 

19b-22. Kusa-dvipa which is twice the extent of Salamali- 
dvipa stands encircling Suroda (the ocean of wine). The 
seven mountains (thereof) are: Vidruma, Homa, (v.l. Hema) 
Dyutiman, Puspavan, Kusesaya, Hari and Mandara. The 
seven great rivers are Dhutapapa, Siva, Pavitra, Sammita, 
Vidyut, Prabha and Rama. O Brahmanas, there are hundreds 
of other auspicious rivers with crystal-like water. 


1. ‘The land of silk-cotton tree’. The name indicates warm equa¬ 
torial region. M. Ali identihes it with the tropical part of Africa bordering 
the Indian ocean on the west including Madagasgar. 



1.49.23-33 


317 


23-24a. Devas and others worship Isana. Brahmanas 
there are called Dravinas; Ksatriyas are known as Susmins, 
Vaisyas, Stobhas (v.l. Snehas) and Sudras, Mandehas. 

24b-26a. Men are endowed with perfect knowledge and 
possess friendliness and other attributes. They keep their word 
or perform religious activities as prescribed in the Sastras. They 
are engaged in the welfare of all living beings. By performance 
of various sacrifices, they worship the highest god Brahma. 
They attain Sa.yu.jya (absorption in the deity), Sarupya (simi¬ 
larity with the form of the deity) and Salokya (residence in the 
region of the deity) types of Muktis with god Brahma. 

26b-27a. Kraunca-dvipa^ which is twice the extent of 
Kusadvipa in area stands encircling the ocean of clarified 
butter, O Brahmanas. 

27b-28. The Border-mountains are: Kraunca, Vamanaka, 
Adhikarika, Devabda, Viveda, Pundarika and Dundubhisvana. 

29. The following are the main rivers viz. Gauri, Kumu- 
dvati, Sandhya, Ratri, Manojava, Kobhi and Pundarikaksa. 

30. O excellent Brahmanas, the four castes are Puskala, 
Puskara, Dhanya and Tisya respectively (in the places of) 
Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras. 

31. They worship Mahadeva by the performance of 
sacrifices, charitable gifts, self-control, etc., holy vows, fasts, 
Homas, and Tarpana rites of the Pitrs. 

32. Thanks to the grace of Rudra, they attain Rudra- 
Sayujya, the rarest Sarupya (with Rudra), Salokata (co-residence 
with Rudra in his region) and Samipya (nearness). 

33. Saka-dvipa^ is twice the extent of Kraunca- 


1. M. Ali decides it to be the basin of the Black Sea {Op. CiU, pp. 
45-46) while V. V. Iyer identifies it with Asia Minor (Quarterly Journal of 
Mythical Society XV. 119-127). 

2. Its description in Puranas shows it to be a Monsoon land with 
teak-wood forest and heavy rainfall. M. Ali identifies it with the region 
now known as Malaya, Thailand, Indo-China and Southern China—The 
ocean of Milk mentioned in V. 40, is probably the turbulent and foamy 
South China Sea. 



318 K urma Pur ana 

dvipa in area and it is situated encompassing the ocean of 
curds. 

34. The mountains thereof are, Udaya, Raivata, 
Syama, Kasthagiri (v.l. syamaka, Astagiri), Ambikeya, Ramya 
and Kesarin. 

35. The main rivers are—Sukumari, Kumari, Nalini, 
Venuka, Iksuka, Dhenuka and Gabhasti. 

36. Men who drink waters of these rivers live there 
free from ailments, sorrow, passion and hatred. 

37. The Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras 
are respectively called Mrga, Magadha, Manasa and 
Mandagas. 

38. By performing holy rites and observances of various 
sorts, they perpetually worship Divakara (the sun-god) the lord 
of Devas, the sole witness of all worlds. 

39. O Brahmanas, thanks to the favour of the Sun, they 
attain Sayujya (identity) with the sun, Samipya (nearness), 
Sarupata (similarity in appearance) and Salokata (residence 
in the solar region). 

40. Encircling the Saka Dvipa is the ocean of milk, and 
in its middle is Sveta dvipa. The people thereof are devoted 
to Narayana. 

41. The territories thereof are meritorious and full of 
miracles. Men born there are white in complexion. They are 
devoted to Visnu. 

42. There is neither mental agony nor physical illness; 
there is no fear of old age or death. People are devoid of anger 
and covetousness, delusion and mutual rivalry. 

43. They are forever magnificently provided and thriving. 
They are devoid of dispiritedness and awe; they are perpetually 
delighted and they enjoy pleasures forever. They are 
equal to (or look like) Narayana and are devotedly attached to 
Narayana. 

44. Some of them, Yogins of fully controlled sense-organs 
are always devoted to meditation. Some perform Japas. Some 
perform penance; while others are endowed with perfect spiri¬ 
tual wisdom. 



1.49.45-61 


319 


45. Others are purified by meditating upon Brahman 
and by observing jVtVfeja (“seedless”) yoga. They meditate on 
the great Brahman, the eternal Vasudeva. 

46. Others are Ekantins (followers of Ekanti-dharma) 
without support (solely depending on him). They are great 
•devotees of the lord. They see the great Brahman called Visnu 
beyond Tamas (of ignorance). 

47. All of them have the four-armed form; They are the 
wielders of Sankha, Gakra and Gada (mace); all of them wear 
good yellow robes; their chests are marked by the line of golden 
liair called Srivatsa. 

48. Others are devoted to Mahesvara. Their foreheads, 
are marked by Tripundras (three lines of ashes on the forehead), 
refulgence emanating through practice of excellent Yoga. They 
have great Garudas as their vehicles. 

49. All are endowed with Sakti; they have perpetual 
bliss and they are pure. Persons who closely move with Visnu 
stay there. 

50. The city of Narayana named Narayanapura is also 
there. It is impassable to others; it cannot be assailed or trans¬ 
gressed ; it is heightened in beauty by means of palaces. 

51. It is fitted with golden ramparts and crystal pandals 
and halls, the lustre of which is diffused in a thousand ways; it 
is splendid and unthwartable. 

52-54. It has mansions and palaces full of great apart¬ 
ments. It has thousands of golden archways shining with 
different jewels. It contains splendid sheets and covers; it is 
■embellished with wonderful articles; its beauty is enhanced by 
delightful parks of various shapes and flowing rivulets; there are 
lakes all round; many banners of variegated colours beautify it. 

55. Everywhere it has streets; the steps and staircases 
are bedecked in jewels; it has hundreds and thousands of rivers; 
it is reverberating with divine songs and music. 

56. It abounds in swans, ducks and ruddy geese; it has 
four main gateways; it is incomparable and inaccessible to the 
•enemies ofDevas. 

57-61. Its beauty is enhanced by bevies of divine damsels 
who dance and who know the technique of different kinds 
of music difficult of access even to Devas; who are richly 



320 Kurina Pur ana 

endowed with different modes and ways of dalliance; who are 
very tender and passionate; whose faces resemble the moon; 
whose anklets jingle and tinkle; who smile slightly; whose lips 
are like the red cherry [Bimba) fruits; whose eyes resemble the 
beautiful eyes of tender fawns; who possess all types of riches; 
who are graced with slender waists; whose gait resembles the- 
movements of the royal swans; whose dress and features are 
fine; whose voice is sweet; who are efficient in conversations and 
pleasing talks; who are richly adorned with divine ornaments 
and who are stooping down with the weight of their breasts; 
whose eyes roll about due to the intake of wine; whose limbs are 
of variegated colours and who are fond of different pleasures 
and sexual dalliance. 

62. The city is beautified with parks and gardens with 
full blown flowers and hundreds of living beings. Innumer¬ 
able Devas also beautify it. It has numerous attributes. 

63. The city of the Lord and the consort of Sri, of un¬ 
measured splendour is very sacred and glorious. In its middle is 
a highly-splendid spot of lofty ramparts and arched ornamental 
gateways. 

64-65. It is the divine abode of Visnu, the bestower of 
Siddhis on the Yogins. In it, the sole lord having the lustre of 
lotus petals, lord Hari from whom the entire Universe is born 
lies down on Sesa his serpent-couch. He is being meditated over 
by the leading Yogins, the chief of whom is Sanandana. 

66-68. He drinks in the nectar of the bliss of his own 
Atman. He is the deity beyond darkness; he is the yellow-robed 
large-eyed deity of great Maya and mighty arms. His pair of 
feet is stroked forever by the daughter of the milk-ocean; that 
goddess, the beloved of Hari, worthy of being worshipped by the 
Universe, stays at his feet for ever with her mind resting on 
him imbibing the nectar of Narayana. Evil men of impious 
activities do not go there; nor those who dwell in the abodes of 
other Devas. 

69. It is the abode named Vaikuntha. It is revered even 
by Devas. My intellect is not competent to describe the entire 
region. 

70. Only this much can be said: it is indeed the city of 



1.49.71-50.6 


321 


Narayana. He alone is the great Brahman; He is the eternal 
Vasudeva. 

71-72. The glorious Narayana, deluding the Universe 
with his Maya, lies down there; this Universe is born of 
Narayana; it is stabilised in him alone. At the end of the 
Kalpa period, the world resorts to him. He is the ultimate 
goal. 


CHAPTER FIFTY 

The description of Pufkaradvipa 


Siita said : 

1. The milk ocean extending to twice the size of Saka- 
dvipa encircles it. The continent Puskaradvipa^ rests in it. 

2. O leading Brahmanas, there is only one mountain viz. 
Manasottara. It rises up to fifty thousand Yojanas in height. 

3. Its girth is also that much. It is globular all round. 
The mountain Manasottara is stationed exactly in the middle 
of the continent (v.l. sarhjnita —Half of the continent is called 
Manasottara). 

4. The same blessed tract of land is divided into two. 
In that continent, two holy and splendid territories are situated. 

5. They are on either side of the mountain Manasa. 
They are as Mahavita Varsa and Dhataki khanda. 

6. The island continent Puskara is encircled by the 
ocean of sweet water. There is a great tree in that island 
(continent). It is the Nyagrodha (Holy Banyan) tree wor¬ 
shipped by the immortal. 


1. The description of Puskaradvipa in the KP. and other Puranas 
indicates that it is the tract of land including Japan, Manchuria and the 
South-eastern Siberia (M. Ali —The Geog. of the Purarias, pp. 43-44). 



322 


Kurma Pur ana 


7. O tiger of a sage, (i.e. leading sage), Brahma, the 
Atman of the universe, the creator of the universe stays on it. At 
that very spot are the abodes of Siva and Narayana. 

8-9. Mahadeva, Kara, resides in one half of this con¬ 
tinent. The unchanging Hari resides in the other half. They are 
worshipped by Brahma and others as well as by Kumara and 
other Yogins. Is vara who is Krsna (black) and Pihgala (brown) 
is worshipped by Gandharvas, Kinnaras and Yaksas. The 
subjects are healthy and normal and the Brahmanas are hundred 
times more brilliant, (v.l. lustrous like god Brahma.) 

10. They are devoid of ailments and sorrow; they are 
free from passion and hatred; neither truth nor falsehood finds 
a place there; there is neither excellent, nor base nor middling 
there. 

11-12. They do not follow the rules and rites of the 
different castes and stages of life; there is no river, no mountain. 
The ocean of sweet water encircles the great Puskara continent 
all round. O excellent Brahmanas, its situation in the world is 
beyond (everything and every world). 

13. The ground, comparable to a single golden rock, and 
twice its size, extends everywhere. Beyond that, is the mountain, 
the line of demarcation of the sphere of the sun. 

14. It is partly illuminated and partly dark. It is called 
the Lokaloka mountain. Its height is ten thousand Yojanas. 

15-16. The extent of the great mountain Lokaloka is 
also that much. Enveloping that mountain beyond (on its other 
side) is eternal darkness which in its turn is encircled by the 
shell of the Cosmic Egg. Thus the seven great worlds and 
the Patalas have been recounted. 

17-18a. The detailed description of the entire Cosmic Egg 
has been succinctly narrated by me. It should be known that 
there are thousands of crores of Cosmic Eggs like this. The 
PradharuP is present everywhere since it is the primary 
eause and is of unchanging nature. 


1. The remaining portion of this chapter tries to synthesize the 
Sahkhya theory with the Puranic tlieory of creation. 



I.50.18b-26 


323 


18b-19a. There are fourteen worlds in all these Cosmic 
Eggs. There are fourfaced deities, Rudras, Narayanas and 
others in their respective places. 

19b-20a. Each Cosmic Egg has seven out-sheaths envelo¬ 
ping it, each sheath being ten times in extent than the former. 
It is only the spiritually wise who can go there. 

20b-21a. Transcending this all exists the source (Prakrti) 
of the universe which is great {mahat ), infinite, unmanifest, with¬ 
out beginning and without end. 

21b-22a. It is infinite and endless as it is beyond calcula¬ 
tion. It should be known as this unmanifest, eternal. Supreme 
Brahman. 

22b-23a. It is said to be infinite everywhere in all places. 
Its excellent majesty and greatness has been formerly glorified 
by me. 

23b-24. It is present everywhere and it has been in all 
places on the earth, in the nether worlds, in the firmament, in 
the wind, in the fire, in the oceans and in the heaven. There 
is no doubt about it. 

25. This highly resplendent deity himself is even in 
the principle called tamas (v.l. in both tamas and Sattva gums). 
This Supreme Person dividing himself in various bodies sports 
in them. 

26. Lord Mahesvara is beyond that unmanifest from which 
this Cosmic Egg has been produced. God Brahma has sprung 
from the Cosmic world. This Universe is created by him. 



324 


K urma Pur am 


CHAPTER FIFTYONE 

The description of Marwantaras: Lord Visnu’s glory 
{his four manifestations) 

The sages requested : 

1-3. O Suta, tell us about all Manvantaras,^ both 
past and future. Mention about Vyasa (the arranger of 
the Vedas) in the Dvapara Yuga. In the Kali age, how many 
were the disciples, the expounders of Dharma (Virtue) and 
Artha, of this intelligent Lord, the god of gods who arranged 
the branches of the Vedas, (v.l. the incarnations of god Siva, 
the god of gods, for the establishment of Dharma in the Kali 
age). How many disciples did the Lord of Devas (i.e. Vyasa) 
have in the Kali age ? O Suta, it behoves you to recount all 
these things succinctly. 

Suta said : 

4-5. Six Manus have gone by. At the outset it was 
Svayambhuva Manu; thereafter, it was Svarocisa Manu; the 
others were Uttama, Tamasa, Raivata and Caksusa. The pre¬ 
sent Manu is the son of the sun-god. He is called Vaivasvata 
Manu. It is the seventh Manvantara that is current now. 

6. Svayambhuva Manvantara at the beginning of the 
Kalpa has been recounted by me. Henceforth, understand the 
Manvantara of Svarocisa Manu. 

7. In the Svarocisa Manvantara, Devas were Para- 
vatas and Tusitas. The Suppressor of Asuras i.e. Indra named 
Vipascit became the ruler of Devas. 

1. Description of Manvantaras or Manu-epochs is an accepted charac¬ 
teristic of the Puranas. One Manu presides over an epoch of seventyone 
cycles of Yugas and every Manu has his sets of Indra, gods, seven sages, etc. 
We have a description of these Manvantaras in various Puranas such as 
Bh.P. VIII.1.1-29, NP I. 40.17-37 VP. III. 1.1-9 and others. Manus are 
fourteen in number. The reign of six Manus is over. The present Manu is 
Vaivasvata, after whom the present Manvantara is named “Vaivasvata 
Manvantara”. 

There is a general consensus among the Puranas about the names and 
other details of the first seven Manus, but not so in the case of the future 
Manus (For example, contrast Mt. P. 9.30-38 with Brahma P. 5.5-6). But 
as admitted by Kane historical explanation of the theory of Kalpas and 
Manvantaras is not stated anywhere ( HD. V. 4. p. 688). 



1.51.8-17 


325 


8. The following seven were the seven sages (saptar^is) 
viz. : tJrja, Stambha, Prana, Danta, Rsabha, Timira and 
Arvarivan. 

9. Caitra, Kimpurusa and others were the sons of 
Svarocisa Manu.^ Thus the second Manvantara has been re¬ 
counted. Now listen to Uttama Manvantara. 

10. In the third Manvantara, the Manu was named 
Uttama. Susanti, the suppressor of enemies, was the ruler of 
Devas. 

11. There were five sets of twelve Devas namely—Sudha- 
mans, Satya, Siva, Pratardana and Vasavartins. 

12. The following seven were the Saptarfis (seven sages) 
viz. Rajas, Gatra, Urdhvabahu, Savana, Anagha, Sutapas and 
Sakra. 

13. In the Tamasa Manvantara, the classes of gods 
were Surayasahara*, Satyasand Sudhis. And there were twenty- 
seven groups [gams) in these divinities. 

14. Sibi who had the characteristic feature of having 
performed a hundred Yajnas, was the Indra. He was a devotee 
of Sankara and he was engaged in the worship of Mahadeva.^ 

15. In that Manvantara also there were saven sages 
(saptarfis) viz. Jyotis, Dhaman, Prthak, Kalpa, Caitra, 
Agnivasana, and Pivara (v.L Jyotis, Dharman, Prthu, Kavya, 
Caitra, Agni and Varuna). 

16. O leading Brahmanas, the Manu of the fifth Man¬ 
vantara was Raivata by name. Vibhu who was the suppressor 
of Asuras was Indra there (then). 

17. The excellent Devas (divinities) were Amitas, Bhutis 
and Vaikunthas. These were the groups of Devas consisting of 
fourteen each. 


1. It is not understood why the sons of Svarocisa Manu are 
enumerated and those of other Manus are not mentioned in the KP. while 
other Puranas such as VP. III. 1 detail them. 

2. This information about this Indra is given to glorify Siva. It is not 
found in VP. and other Puranas. 

‘This is a misprint for Supara Harayastatha as this whole verse is the 
same as VP. III.1-16. 



326 


K urma Pur ana 


18-20a. O Brahmanas, in the Raivata Manvantara, the 
following were the seven sages : viz. Hiranyaroman, Vedasri, 
Urdhvabahu, Vedabahu, Subahu, Saparjanya and Mahamuni. 
Thus the four Manus—Svarocisa, Uttama, Tamasa and Raivata 
are recorded as belonging to the line of Priyavrata. 

20b. O Brahmanas, in the sixth Manvantara, Caksusa 
was the Manu. 

21-23a. Manojava was Indra. Now listen to the list 
of Devas. There were five groups of Devas, the heaven- 
dwellers viz. : Adyas, Prabhutabhavyas, Prathanas, Mahanu- 
bhavas and Lekhyas (v.l. Adyas, Prasutas, Bhavyas, Prthugas,... 
each consisting of eight groups*). The following were among the 
seven splendid sages viz. : Virajas, Havisman, Soma, Manusama 
(? equal to Manu), Avinaman and Savisnu (v.l. Sumedha, 
Virajas, Havisman, Uttama, Madhu) .** 

23b-24. O Brahmanas, Sraddhadeva of great splendour 
was the son of Vivasvan (sun). O Brahmanas, the present Manu 
in the seventh Manvantara is Sarhvartana.*** Devas are 
Adityas, Vasus, Rudras and Maruts. 

25-26. Purandara, the slayer of heroic enemies, was 
Indra. The following seven sages make up the group of 
Saptarfis : Vasistha, Kasyapa, Atri, Jamadagni, Gautama, 
Visvamitra and Bharadvaja. The incomparable ^akti of Visnu, 
wherein Sattva is predominant was stationed for the continuous 
sustenance of the Universe. 

27a. All kings and dwellers ofheaven were born of his 
rays. [It is reported that the incarnations of Visnu in the seven 
Manvantaras were as follows :] 

27b-28a. O Brahmanas, by a ray (part) of him, he was 
born ofPrakrti. (Akuti) and Ruci, the Prajapati, as their 
mental son in the Svayambhuva Manvantara. 


*Pahcaite hyslakd gariah 

**The Venkafesvara edt. and the v.l. recorded in it do not give the 
list of seven sages but of six only. The list in the Crt. ed. of the KP. is as 
follows : Sumedhas, Virajas, Havisman, Uttama, Madhu, Atinama and 
Sahisnu. 

*** Probably a misprint for Sa variate there rules Sraddhadeva, 
etc.). 23b-24a form one sentence. 



I.51.28b-39a 


327 


28b-29a. When the Svarocisa Manvantara arrived, the 
lord was born of Tusita along with the deities Tusitas. 

29b-30a. In the Uttama Manvantara, Visnu, Janardana, 
the excellent among Devas (the Truth incarnate) was born of 
Satya along with Satyas [Devas oi thax name). He was also 
called Satya. 

30b-31a. When the Tamasa Manvantara arrived, Hari 
was born of Harya as Hari, alongwith Devas called Haris. 

31b-32a. In the Raivata Manvantara, Hari was born as 
the highly splendoured mental son of Sarhkalpa alongwith 
Devas called Manasas. 

32b-33a. In the Caksusa Manvantara, Purusottama was 
born of Vikuntha as Vaikuntha, alongwith Devas (known 
as) Vaikunthas. 

33b-35. When the Vaivasvata Manvantara arrived, Visnu 
was born of Aditi and Kasyapa as Vamana (the Dwarf). 
Measuring these worlds with three paces and conquering the 
three worlds and uprooting the thorns (i.e. enemies) the noble- 
souled lord gave those worlds to Purandara. These are the 
incarnations of that lord in the seven Manvantaras. 

36. O Brahmanas, seven have been the bodies (incarna¬ 
tions) with which the subjects and the entire universe had 
been protected by the noble-souled Vamana. 

37. Hence, in all incarnations he is praised by 
all gods as the slayer of Daityas. Kesava creates everything in 
the beginning, then protects and destroys it. 

38-39a. Sruti says that lord Narayana is the immanent 
soul of all living beings. With a particle (ray) of his, Narayana 
pervades the entire universe and is stationed in it. The 
pervading deity is manifested in four forms both endowed with 
attributes and bereft of them.^ 


1. VV. 39-43a give a synthesis of the Vyuha theory of the Panca- 
rtoins with the Puranic trinity Brahma, Visnu and Siva, identifying Siva 
with Sahkarsana and Brahma with Aniruddha and Visnu with Pradyumna. 
It appears that as Vasudeva—the first Vyuha is specifically stated as 
gurtatita (V. 40), the remaining Vyuhas are regarded as saguna (endowed with 
attributes). 



328 


Kurma Pur ana 


39b-40a. The first form of the Lord is the auspicious, 
blemishless embodiment of knowledge. It is termed Vasudeva. 
It is beyond all Gunas. It is Niskala or indivisible and unsullied. 

40b-41a. The second form is termed Kala. It is charac¬ 
terised by tamas and is designated as Siva (Sesa or Sahkarsana). 
It is the highest form of Visnu, the destroyer of everything in 
the end. 

41b-42a. The third form is that in which Sattvaguna 
is predominant. It is termed Pradyumna. It sustains the entire 
universe. It is the permanent nature of Visnu. 

42b-43a. The fourth form of Vasudeva is termed Brahma. 
It is the Rajasa form termed as Aniruddha. It is the cause of 
creation. 

43b-44a. It is the Lord who having annihilated every¬ 
thing sleeps alongwith his manifestation called Pradyumna. 
He is god Brahma designated as Narayana. He brings forth the 
creation of progeny. 

44b-45a. By what is declared in scriptures as the auspi¬ 
cious personality of Narayana which is called Pradyumna, the 
whole universe consisting of gods, Asuras and human beings 
is fascinated and deluded. 

45b-46a. Hence, it is glorified as Prakrti, the embodiment 
of the Universe, while Vasudeva, the absolute, infinite soul, is 
attributeless. 

46b-47a. He is Pradhana, Purusa and Kala.'^ He is the 
excellent Trio of Sattva and other attributes. All this is eternally 
constituted of Lord Vasudeva. It is by realizing this that one 
is liberated from Sarhsara. 

47b-48a. It is this glorious Lord Vasudeva, Acyuta who 
is also Pradyumna and Hari, divided (classified) the one (Vedic 
Sarhhita) consisting of four parts into four Vedas. 

48b-49a. Lord Hari the all-pervading Visnu Narayana 
out of his complete free will, incarnated himself as Krsna- 
dvaipayana Vyasa (the arranger).* 

1. The three saguna vyuhas are identified with three Sankhya prin¬ 
ciples as follows : Pradhana (Pradyumna), Purusa (Aniruddhr.), Kala 
(Sahkarsana, §esa or Siva). 

2. This shows the great veneration of the Purana-writer to Vyasa— 
Krsna Dvaipayana. 



I.51.49b-52.2 


329 


49b-50a. Neither gods nor sages could realise this 
Supreme Brahman which is beginningless and endless. It is only 
this one venerable Vyasa, the master who knows it fully. 

50b. O excellent sages, thus the greatness of Visnu has 
been recounted. This is the truth. Again I assert that it is the 
truth. After realizing like this, one is not deluded. 


CHAPTER FIFTYTWO 

Branches of the Vedas 

Suta said : 

1. Formerly, in the present Manvantara, in the first 
Dvapara yuga, the great lord Svayambhuva Manu himself is 
considered to be Vyasa.^ 

2. At the behest of lord Brahma, he divided the Vedas 
into many branches. In the second Dvapara, Prajapati was 
Vedavyasa. 

I. Vyasa or the arranger (of the Vedas and the Puranas) is the 
designation of the person or office-bearer whose job is to classify the mass of 
Vedic Mantras and divide them into Vedas. This person in-charge carries 
out this job at the end of each Dvapara Yuga. This sage is regarded as an 
“incarnation” of Vyasa and the list of such Vyasas is repeated in VP. III. 3. 
Vayu P. 1.23.109-214, Bh. P. I. 4.14-25 and others. 

The Kurma gives the list of the following 25 persons who carried out 
the job of Vyasa and came to be considered as the “incarnations” of Vyasa: 

(1) Svayambhuva Manu (But god Brahma according to VP. III. 
3.11 and LP. I. 24.12). (2) Prajapati (His name was Satya according to 
LP and Vayu P.), (3) Usanas, (4) Brhaspati, (5) Savitr, (6) Mrtyu, (7) 
Indra, (8) Vasistha, (9) Sarasvata, (10) Tridhaman, (11) Rsabha, (12) 
Sutejas, (13) Dharma, (14) Sucaksus, (15) Trayyaruni, (16) Dhananjaya 
(17) Krtanjaya, (18) Rtanjaya, (19) Bharadvaja, (20) Gautama, (21) 
Vacasravas, (22) Narayana, (23) Trnabindu, (24) Valmiki, (25) Krsna- 
dvaipayana. (It is noteworthy that the names of Vyasas in the 25th and 26th 
Dvapara Yuga are not mentioned in the Vehk. edt. of KP. Varanasi edition 
names them as Sakti and Parasara who—if similarity in names be not decep¬ 
tive—may be presumed to be the grandfather and father of Krsna-dvaipa- 
yana Vyasa). Venk. edt. brackets a half-verse and mentions the great 
sage Jatukarnya as the Vyasa in the 27th Dvapara. Other Puranas (and the 
Varanasi edt. of KP.) mention 28 avataras of Vyasa. 



330 


Kurrm Pur ana 


3. Vyasa in the third Dvapara was Usanas; in the 
fourth Dvapara, Brhaspati; in the fifth Dvapara Savitr; in 
the sixth Dvapara, Mrtyu. 

4. Indra was V>asa in the seventh Dvapara; Vasistha 
in the eighth Dvapara; in the ninth Dvapara, Sarasvata was 
Vyasa and Tridhaman was Vyasa in the tenth Dvapara. 

5. The Vyasas were Rsabha in the eleventh, Sutejas in 
the twelfth, Dharma in the thirteenth and Sucaksus in the four¬ 
teenth Dvapara. 

6. Trayyaruni in the fifteenth; Dhananjaya in the six¬ 
teenth; Krtanjaya in the seventeenth and Rtanjaya in the eigh¬ 
teenth Dvapara. 

7. Bharadvaja was Vyasa in the nineteenth; Gautama 
thereafter; Vacasravas in the twentyfirst and thereafter Nara- 
yana, the great. 

8-10. Trnabindu, in the twentythird, Valmiki there¬ 
after; when the twentyfifth Dvapara arrived (there was a Vyasa. 
In the twentysixth Dvapara there was another Vyasa—*These 
two are omitted in the text). The great sage Jatukarna was 
Vyasa in the tv/entyseventh Dvapara. (In the twentyeighth 
Dvapara) Vyasa was Krsna Dvaipayana, son of Parasara. He 
alone was the demonstrator (propounder) of the Vedas and 
Puranas. 

11. The great Yogin Krsna-Dvaipayana, Hari, the son of 
Parasara propitiated, realised and eulogised the three-eyed 
lord Isana and thanks to his grace,^ the holy sage classified the 
Vedas. 

12-13. He accepted four disciples who were the 
masters of the Vedas“ viz; Jaimini, Sumantu, Vaisampayana 


*The critical edition of KP reads: Pancaoithse tatha Sakiih Sadvimsc tu 
PardSarah. Sakti was Vyasa in the twentyfifth and Parasara in the Twenty- 
sixth. 

1. The KP. gives the credit of Krsna-Dvaipayana’s contribution to 
Siva’s grace— (a Puranic propaganda of Siva ?) 

2. The following verses give the names of the disciples of Vyasa and 
their expertise in particular Veda : 



1 . 52 . 14-20 


331 


and the fourth sage Paila. I was also his disciple, the fifth one. 
The great sage made Paila as the reciter of the Rgveda. 

14. He enjoined Vaisampayana as the expounder of 
the Yajurveda and Jaimini as the expounder of Samaveda. 

15. He accepted the excellent sage Sumantu as the 
expounder of Atharvaveda. He appointed me to narrate 
Itihasas and Puranas. 

16. Originally, the Yajurveda was one, but he divided it 
into four. There are four sacrificial priests who are to perform 
the Yajnas thereby. 

17. O excellent Brahmanas, it is the work of Adhvaryu 
to repeat the mantras of the Yajurveda, of the Hotr to recite the 
mantras of the Rgveda,* of the Udgatr to sing theSamanand 
of Brahma to accomplish yajna by mantras of the Atharvan. 

18. Then the holy sage composed the Rgveda after 
extracting it from the Tajna; through the Yajur Mantras he 
composed Yajurveda and the Samaveda through Saman verses. 

19. Formerly, he divided the Rgveda in twentyone bran¬ 
ches. He composed Yajurveda with a hundred Sakhas (Branches 
or Sections). 

20. He divided the Samaveda into a thousand branches. 
Kusaketana (Sage Kusadhvaja?) divided Atharvaveda (v.l. He 
divided the Atharva in nine branches.) 


Name of the disciple 

Name of the Veda mastered 

1. 

Paila 

1. 

Rgveda (21 branches) 

2. 

Vaisampayana 

2. 

Yajurveda (101 branches) 

3. 

Jaimini 

3. 

Samaveda (1000 branches) 

4. 

Sumantu 

4. 

Atharva (9 branches) 

5. 

Romaharsana 

5. 

Puranas (18 works) 


In concluding the chapter, the author identifies Omkara with the Vedas. 
In passing, it may be pointed out that the classification of the Vedas given 
here is found in other Puranas such as Bh. P. 1.4.14-25, VP. III. 3.2-31 
and in the Mbh. 11.63.85-90. 

*Sydd agfiikotram in the printed text is probably sydd rgbhir hotram as 
the context shows. 



332 


Kurma Purina 


21. The Holy sage Vyasa composed Puranas with eighteen 
different volumes. Thus the original ancient Veda which 
was one whole became of four parts. 

22. Oriikara was born of Brahman, it wipes off all sins 
and defects. The eternal Vasudeva, the lord, can be known 
only through the Vedas. 

23. He, the greatest one, is sung by the Vedas; he who 
knows him is the knower of Vedas; this Vasudeva is the great¬ 
est Brahman, the excellent brilliance and bliss. 

24. Vasudeva is Reality, expounded by the words of 
the Vedas. He is the highest region (goal to be reached). This 
knowledge is known through the Vedas and it is a sage devot¬ 
ed to the Vedas who knows the Vedas and consequently 
Vasudeva. 

25. The Supreme Lord who breathed out the Vedas 
knows the highest unknowable {avedam). The glorious Lord 
Mahesvara, the embodiment of the Vedas, is realised through 
the Vedas. 

26. He alone is the object of knowledge and the Veda 
itself. One is released from Sarhsara by resorting to him. 

27. The great sage, son of Parasara knows thoroughly 
this imperishable Veda, Orhkara the undecaying Veda, the 
knowable and the unknowable. 


CHAPTER FIFTYTHREE 

The incarnations of Siva in the Vaivasvata Manvantara 
Suta said : 

1. O sages, observers of good vows, the incarnations of 
Veda-Vyasa in the Dvaparayuga have been recounted; now 
listen to the incarnations of Mahadeva^ in the Kaliyuga. 


1. In the previous chapter the 28 ‘incarnations’ of Vyasa in the 
Dvapara Yuga are enumerated. This chapter gives the list of corresponding 



1.53.2-9 


333 


2. In the first Kaliyuga of the Vaivasvata Manvantara, 
the lord of Devas of great brilliance, incarnated as Sveta 
for the welfare of the Brahmanas. 

3. He was born on the beautiful peak of the Himavan, 
the most excellent of all mountains. His disciples and their 
disciples were of immeasurable lustre. 

4. They were four Brahmanas of noble souls viz. Sveta, 
Svetafikha, Svetasya and Svetalohita. They were all masters of 
the Vedas. 

5. The incarnations of Siva in the first seven Kaliyugas 
were: Sutara, Madana, Suhotra, Kankana, Lokaksi, Yogindra 
and Jaigisavya in the seventh Kaliyuga. 

6-7. Dadhivaha was the incarnation in the eighth; 
lord Rsabha in the ninth; Bhrgu in the tenth and thereafter 
Ugra; Pura in the twelfth Kaliyuga,* Bali (a misprint for 
Bali) in the thirteenth; Gautama in the fourteenth and 
Vedadarsin thereafter. 

8-9. The other incarnations (in succeeding Kaliyugas) 
are Gokarna, Guhavasa, Sikhandadhrk, Yajamalin (v.l. 
Jatamalin) Attahasa (v.l. Gandahasa), Daruka, Langalin, 


twenty-eight incarnations of god Mahadeva in Kaliyuga (V V. 2-9) and the 
names of their disciples as each incarnation had four disciples (VV. 10-25). 
VP. III. 3.11-20 and Brahmanda P. 1.2.35.116-125 give a similar list of 
incarnations of Vyasa with Drauni as the 29th Vyasa but not those of god 
Siva. Vayu P. 1.23.114-255 and Siva P.—Satarudra—Ghs. 4 and 5 give the 
list of Vyasa’s incarnations, Mahadeva’s incarnation and the disciples of each 
together as distinct from the lists in the KP. 

It is worth noting that the lists of Siva’s incarnations and their disciples 
included the names of some ancient Saivite teachers like Nakulisvara. 

For ready reference, the list of Siva’s incarnation is given below : 

1. Sveta, 2. Sutara, 3. Madana (v.l. Damana), 4. Suhotra, 5. Kankana 
6. Lokaksi 7. Jaigisavya, 8. Dadhivaha 9. Rsabha, 10. Bhrgu, 11. Ugra 
12. Atisamakhyata, 13. Bali (or Vali), 14. Gautama, 15. Vedadarsi, 16. 
Gokarna 17. Guhavasa 18. Sikhanda-dhrk, 19. Yajamalin (Jafamatya), 
20. Attahasa, 21. Daruka, .22. Lahgali, 28. Mahayama, 24. Suli, 25. 
Dindamundisvara, 26. Sahisnu, 27. Soma-sarma, 28. Nakulisvara. 

*The critical edt. reads Para for Pura (in v. 6) and atri, for ati 
(in V. 7). It means : “thereafter Ugra in the 11th and Atri in the 12th 
Kaliyuga were Siva’s incarnations. 



334 Kurtna Purdna 

Mahavama, Muni, Sulin, Dindamundisvara, Sahisnu, Soma- 
sarman and Nakullsvara. 

9a. In the Vaivasvata Manvantara the incarnations of 
iSambhu, the trident-bearing deity are said to be twenty- 
eight in number. 

9b. In the end of the Kaliyuga the lord incarnates in a 
holy centre as (v.l. in a holy place called Karyavatara) 
Nakullsvara. 

10-11. There (i.e. in each of these incarnations) the 
overlord of Devas had four disciples who were good (and 
famous) ascetics. O leading sages, each one of them had as 
their disciples eminent sages who had good self-control, were 
serenely delighted in their minds, and had cherished devotion to 
Isvara. I shall enumerate in due order, those Yogins who were 
the most excellent among the knowers of Yoga. 

12. They were Sveta, Svetasikha, Svetasya, Svetalohita* 
(*the line 12a. is bracketed in the Vehk. Text), Dundubhi, 
Satarupa, Rcika, Ketuman, Visoka, (v.l. Visvakesa), Vikesa, 
Visakha, Sapanasana. 

13. Sumukha, Durmukha, Durdama, Duratikrama, 
Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanandana. 

14. Dalabhya (v.l. Baskala) the great Yogin, all pious 
souls (Dharmatman,) and endowed with great (spiritual) power 
{Mahaujas) Sudhaman, Virajas, Sahkhavani, Aja. 

15. Sarasvata, Mogha, Dhanavaha, Suvahana, Kapila, 
Asuri, Vodhu, Pancasikha. 

16. Parasara, Garga, Bhargava, Ahgiras, Balabandhu, 
Niramitra, Ketusrhga, Tapodhana. 

17. Lambodara, Lamba, Vikrosa, Lambaka, Suka, 
Sarvajna, Samabuddhi, Sadhya, Asadhya (v.l. Sadhya, Satya). 

18. Sudhaman, Kasyapa, Vasistha, Varijas, Atri, Ugra, 
Sravana, Suvaidyaka. 

19. Kuni, Kunibahu, Kusarira, Kunetra, Kasyapa, 
Usanas, Cyavana, Brhaspati. 

20. Uccasya (v.l. Utathya), Vamadeva, Mahakala, 
Mahanila, Vajasravas, Sukesa, Syavasva, Supathlsvara. 



I.53.21-33a 


335 


21. Hiranyanabha, Kausilya, Akaksu, Kuthubhidha 
(v.l. Lokaksi, Kuthumi) Sumantavarcas, the learned, 
Xabandha, Kusi-kandhara. 

22. Plaksa, Darvayani, Ketuman, Gautama, Bhallaci, 
Madhupihga, Svetaketu, Tapodhana (Ascetic). 

23. Usidha, Brhadraksa, Devala, Kavi, Salahotra, Agni- 
vesya, Yuvanasva, Saradvasu. 

24. Chagala, Kundakarna, Kunta, Pravahaka, Uluka, 
Vidyuta, Sadraka, Asvalayana. 

25. Aksapada, Kumara, Uluka, Vasuvahana, Kunika, 
Garga, Mitraka and Ruru. 

26. These noblesouled ones were theYogic disciples in 
different incarnations.^ They were free from impurities, ever 
engrossed in the Brahman, and greatly devoted to the path of 
knowledge. 

27. At the behest of Siva the Lord of Yoga, they 
incarnate frequently for the welfare of the Brahmanas and for 
the establishment of the Vedas. 

28. Those Brahmanas who remember and bow down to 
them perpetually, who propitiate and worship these, will 
attain Brahmavidya (the lore of Brahman). 

29-3la. Thus the Vaivasvata Manvantara has been re¬ 
counted in detail. The eighth Manvantara is Savarna, 
the ninth is Daksasavarna; the tenth is Brahmasavarna, the 
eleventh is Dharma Savarna. Rudrasavarna is the twelfth 
and Raucya is the thirteenth. Bhautya is the fourteenth. Thus, 
the future Manvantaras have been enumerated in serial order. 

31b-33a. Thus the first half of the Purana as related 
by Narayana has been recounted. The story is developed 
further by past, present and future events.^ He who listens 


1. As noted above, the list of siva’s disciples contains great teachers 
belonging to different schools of philosophy e.g. Kapila, Asuri and Panca- 
sikha are Sahkhyas; Aksapada, Uluka (repeated twice viz. VV. 24 and 25) 
are logicians. 

2. This is the PhalaSruti of fruits accruing from hearing the KP. 
1st half. The last verse shows its original Vaisnava form. 



336 


Kurma Pur ana 


to, reads or narrates it to excellent Brahmanas becomes free 
from all sins. He is honoured in the Brahmaloka. 

33b-34. One should read this in a temple or on the bank 
of a river after taking bath in the river. With devotion he 
should bow down to Narayana the Supreme Person. Obeisance 
to the overlord of Devas, to the Supreme soul of Devas. 
Obeisance to the ancient Purusa, the powerful Visnu (v.l. of 
the Tortoise form). 




ANCIENT INDIAN 
TRADITION & MYTHOLOGY 


TRANSLATED BY 

A BOARD OF SCHOLARS 


AND EDITED BY 

Prof. J. L. SHASTRI 


Volume 21 



ANCIENT INDIAN TRADITION & MYTHOLOGY 
SERIES 

Puranas Translated, Released or in Press 


VOLS : 

1,2,3,4 Siva PURANA (Complete) 

5,6 LINGA PUR Ana (Complete) 

7,8,9,10,11 BHAGAVATA PURA1)IA (Complete) 
12,13,14 GARUDA PURAI;IA (Complete) 
15,16,17,18,19 NARADA PURANA (Complete) 
20,21 KORMA PURAIJIA (Complete) 

Puranas under Translation 

AGNI 

BHAVI§YA 

BRAHMA 

brahmAivida 

BRAHMA VAIVARTA 
DEVI BHAGAVATA 
KALIKA 
mArkandeya 

MATSYA 

PADMA 

SKANDA 

VAMANA 

VARAHA 

VAYU 

VI§NU 



THE 

KURMA-PURANA 

♦ 


TRANSLATED AND ANNOTATED BY 

GANESH VASUDEO TAGARE 


Part II 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
Delhi :: Varanasi :: Patna 



©MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
Indological Publishers & Booksellers 
Head Office : Bungalow Road, Delhi-110007 
Branches : 1. Chowk, Varanasi-1 (u.p.) 

2. Ashok Rajpath, Patna-4 (bihar) 


Unesco Collection of Representative Works—Indian Series 
The book has been accepted in the Indian Series of the Translation 
Collection of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) 


First Edition, Delhi 1982 


Printed in India 

By Shantilal Jain, at Shri Jainendra Press, 

A-45, Phase I, Industrial Area, Naraina, New Delhi-110 028 
Published by Narendra Prakash Jain, for Motilal Banarsidass, 
Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi-110 007. 



PUBLISHER’S NOTE 


The purest gems lie hidden in the bottom of the ocean 
or in the depth of rocks. One has to dive into the ocean or 
delve into the rocks to find them out. Similarly, truth lies 
concealed in the language which with the passage of time has 
become obsolete. 

But he has neither the means nor the leisure to embark on 
that course. We have, therefore, planned to help him acquire 
knowledge by an easier course. We have started the series of 
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology in English Translation. 
Our goal is to universalize knowledge through the most popular 
international medium of expression. The publication of the 
Puranas in English translation is a step towards that goal. 




PREFACE 


The present volume contains the Kurmai Purdm, Part II 
(Chapters 1-46) completing the second half {Uttarardha) of the 
text in English translation. This is the Twenty first Volume in 
the series of fifty volumes which we have planned on Ancient 
Indian Tradition and Mythology. 

The project of the series was envisaged and financed 
in 1970 by Lala Sundar Lai Jain of Messrs Motilal 
Banarsidass. Hitherto twenty volumes of the series, (comprising 
English translation of Siva, Linga, Bhagavata, Garucla, JVarada 
and Kurma have been published and released for sale. 

This volume,(Aarma pt. II,)like all other volumes, is encycl¬ 
opaedic in character. It deals with miscellaneous topics such as 
the Pasupata Yoga, the Vibhuti Yoga, the Yoga of Isvara as 
the means of crossing the ocean of Worldly existence. In 
Religion and Ethics, it places emphasis on the performance 
of duties of one’s own profession ( Varna-dharma) in relation to 
one’s stage of life [Asrama). In Philosophy it follows the 
Sahkhya system of thought in regard to the concept of Purusa 
and Prakrti and the evolution of Universe by the union of both. 
In Geography it describes the holy centres situated in the 
different parts of the country, on the Narmada river in parti¬ 
cular. It comments upon the topics of creation, sustenance 
and dissolution. As a special feature, the present part mentions 
some expiatory rites for the person who fails to observe duties 
prescribed for him in the Dharma-sastra. For further specialities 
of this Purana, the reader is referred to Introduction prefixed 
to Part I of this Purana. 

The present translation is based on the Sanskrit text of the 
Kurma Parana as published by Messrs Ksemaraja Srikrsnadasa, 
Vehkatesvara Press, Bombay. This text constructed on the colla¬ 
tion of mss. and supported by the evidence of citations found in 
the Smrti granthas, is fairly accurate. 

The present Part, the second half includes besides trans¬ 
lation and notes of Kurma, the Preface, Abbreviations, 
Contents and the General Index to the complete Purana. 



Acknowledgment of Obligation 

It is our pleasant duty to put on record our sincere thanks 
to Dr. R. N. Dandekar and the UNESCO authorities for their 
kind encouragement and valuable help which render this work 
very useful. We arfe'''Extremely grateful to Dr. G. V. Tagare 
who has meticulously and delightfully accomplished this onerous 
task. The critical Introduction, the lucid translation and expla¬ 
natory notes are, in fact, his monumental contributions to the 
studies in Indology. We must also thank Shri T. V. Parame- 
shwara Iyer for his valuable assistance in the preparation of 
translation. We express our gratitude to all those who have 
offered suggestions for improving the same. 


— Editor 



CONTENTS 


A. PREFACE vii 

B. ABBREVIATIONS xi 

C. TRANSLATION AND NOTES 

Chapters Part II Pages 

1. The Dialogue between Sages and Vyasa 337 

2. The Yoga of Isvara 342 

3. Prakrti and Purusa 348 

4. The Glory of Siva 350 

5. Siva’s Dance—Siva eulogised by Sages 354 

6. The Glory of Siva 359 

7. The Vibhuti-Yoga of Siva : Fundamentals of 

Pasupatispi 364 

8. The Means of Crossing the ocean of Worldly 

Existence 367 

9. The unsullied form of Siva 370 

10. The form of the Supreme Brahman Siva —the 

Parabrahman 372 

11. The Path of liberation of the individual soul 

from bondage 374 

12. The Path of Action—Duties of celibate 

students 388 

13. The Usages ofSistas. Good Conduct 395 

14. Duties of Brahmacarins 400 

15. The Duties of the Householder 410 

16. The Duties of the Householder. Rules of 

Good Conduct 415 

17. Decision about Acceptable and Prohibited Food 424 

18. Daily Duties of a Householder 430 

19. Daily Duties of a Householder : Mode of 

taking meals 443 

20. Procedure of Performance of Sraddha 447 

21. Rules governing Sraddha 453 



( X ) 


22. Rules for performance ofSraddha 460 

23. Rules regarding Impurities caused by Birth or 

Death 471 

24. The Duties of Agni-hotrin 482 

25. The Means of Livelihood of a Brahmana 

Householder 485 

26. Rules of offering religious gifts 487 

27. Duties in Vanaprastha (Hermit’s) Stage 495 

28. Duties of Yatis (recluses) 500 

29. Duties of an Ascetic 504 

30. Rules of Expiation 509 

31. Importance of Kapala-mocana Tirtha 512 

32. Expiatory rites 522 

33. Expiatory rites (continued) 524 

34. Expiatory rites (continued) 529 

35. Greatness of Gaya and other sacred places 544 

36. Glory of Sacred Places ; the death of Kali 551 

37. Glory of Mahalaya and other holy centres 555 

38. The Description of Daruvana 562 

39. The Entry into the forest of Devadaru 570 

40. The Glory of Narmada 577 

41. Glory of different sacred places on the Narmada 

river 581 

42. Greatness of holy centres on the Narmada 

river 591 

43. Greatness of Naimisaranya and Japyesvara 596 

44. Description of sacred places (continued) 599 

45. Description of four types of Dissolution 602 

46. Dissolution of subsidiary creation 608 

INDEX 623 



ABBREVIATIONS 


Common 
chapter (s), p— 
footnote, Hist, 
not included in 

ABORI 

AGP 

AIHT 


AP 

AV 

Bha. P. 

Bh. P. 

Bm. P. 

Brn. 

Bs. P. 

Bv. P. 

GC 

DB 

De or GDAMI 


Dh. S. 

ERE 

GP 

GS 


and Self-evident abbreviations such as ch(s)— 
page, pp—pages, v—verse, vv—verses, Ftn— 
Ind. Philo—History of Indian Philosophy are 
this list. 

Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute, Poona. 

S. M. Ali’s The Geography of Purdnas, PPH, 
New Delhi, 1973. 

Ancient Indian Historical Tradition F. E. 
Pargiter, Motilal Banarsidass (MLBD), 
Delhi. 

Agni Purdm, Guru Mandal Edition (GM), 
Calcutta, 1957. 

Atharva Veda, Svadhyaya Mandal Aundh. 

Bhdgavata Purdm, MLBD, Delhi 1973. 

Bhdgavata Purdm, Bhagavat Vidyapeeth, 
Ahmedabad. 

Brahma Purdm, GM. 1954. 

Brhanndradiya Pt. Hrishikesh Shastri, Chow- 
khamba, 1975. 

Bhavisya Purdm, Vishnu Shastri Bapat, Wai. 

Brahma Vaivarta Purdm, GM, 1955-57. 

Caturvarga Cintdmani by Hemadri. 

Devi Bhdgavata, GM, 1960-61. 

The Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and 
Mediaeval India —^N. L. De, Orienta 
Reprint Delhi, 1971. 

Dharma Sutra (preceded by the author’s 
name such as Gautama). 

Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics —Hastings. 

Garu4a Purdna, Ed. R. S. Bhattacharya, 
Chowkhamba, Varanasi, 1964. 

Grhya Sutra (Preceded by the name of the 
author such as Apastamba) 



HD 

lA 

IHQ, 

KP 


LP 

Mbh. 

MK 

MN 

Mt. P. 

MW 

NP 

PCK 

Pd. P. 

PE 

PJ- 

PR or PRHRC 

RV 
Sat. Br 
SEP 

SG or SGAMI 


SKD 
Sk. P. 


( xii ) 

History of Dharma Sastra by P. V. tane, 

G.O.S. 

The Indian Antiquary. 

The Indian Historical Quarterly. 

Kurma Purdna, Venkateshwara Press Edt. 
Bombay, also Kashiraj Trust Edt., 
Varanasi 1971. 

Linga Purdna, GM, 1960. 

Mahdbhdrata, Gita Press, Gorakhpur Vs. 
2014. 

Mdrkandieya Purdna. 

Mahdbhdrata Mdmdnukramani, Gita Press, 
Gorakhpur VS 2016. 

Matsya Purdna, GM, 1954. 

Monier Williams Sk. English Dictionary, 
MLBD, Delhi, 1976. 

Ndradiya or Ndrada Purdna, Venkateshwar 
Press, Bombay. 

BhdrataoarsiyaPrdcina CaritraKoSa, Siddheshwar 
Shastri, Poona, 1968. 

Padma Purdna, GM., 1957-2959. 

Puranic Encyclopaedia by V. Mani, English, 
MLBD Delhi, 1975. 

Purdna (Journal of the Kashiraj Trust) 
Varanasi. 

Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs 
R. C. Hazra, Calcutta, 1948. 

Rg Veda, Svadhyaya Mandal, Aundh 
Satapatha Brahmana. 

Studies in Epics and Purdnas by A.D. Pusalkar 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan(BVB), Bombay. 
Studies in the Geography of Ancient and 
Mediaeval India —D. C. Sircar MLBD, 
Delhi, 1971. 

Sabda-Kalpa-Druma —-Raja R. K. Dev., 
Chowkhamba, Varanasi. 

Skanda Purdna, GM. 1960-65. 



( xiii ) 


SM 

SMC 

Smr 


Sv. P. 

Va. P. 
VP. 

VR 

VRK 

Yaj 

YSP 


Sddhana Mala —B. Bhattacharya, GOS, 
Baroda, 1928. 

Smrti Candrika —Devanna Bhatta. 

Smrti (preceded by the author’s name or 
simply the author’s name e.g. Manu Smrti 
or Manu. All GM editions in the Smrti- 
Sandarbha.1952-57. 

Siva Pur ana. Pandit Pustakalaya Kashi, 
V.S. 2020. 

Vdyu Purana, GM, 1959. 

Vism Purana, Gita Press, Gorakhpur, V.S. 
2026. 

Valmiki Ramayana, Gita Press, V.S. 2020. 
Vdlmiki Ramayana Ko.(a —Ramkumar Rai, 
(Chowkhamba Varanasi.) 

Tdjnavalkya (Smrti), etc. 

The Yoga System of Patanjali —J. H. Wood. 
(MLBD) 



CHAPTER ONEi 


The Dialogue Between Sages and Vydsa 
The Sages said : 

1. O holy Lord ! The creative activity of the self-born 
god Brahma has been duly recounted by you; so also the earlier 
extent of the Cosmic Egg and the ascertainment of (the nature 
and extent of) the Manvantaras (periods of different Manus). 

2. It has been mentioned by you in that connection 
that the Lord of Lords, the Supreme god, should be propitiated 
by persons of all castes who are exclusively devoted to Dharma 
and are always engaged in the paths of knowledge and Yoga. 

3. You have expounded to us the excellent knowledge 
which has Brahman as its only object and which leads to 
the complete annihilation of all the miseries of Saihsara 
(worldly existence) and where-with we can perceive that 
Supreme Brahman. 

4. O holy lord, indeed you have acquired the entire 
perfect wisdom from Krsna Dvaipayana who is Narayana him¬ 
self. Hence we ask you again. 

5 On hearing that request of the sages, the holy lord 
Suta who had heard the Puranas from Krsna Dvaipayana, 
just began to narrate. 

6. In the meanwhile, at that juncture, Vyasa, Krsna 
Dvaipayana, himself, arrived there where the excellent sages 
were performing the satra (sacrificial session). 

7. On seeing Vyasa tyho was a deep scholar of the Vedas, 
whose lustre was like that of a black cloud and whose eyes 


1. Chapters 1 to 11 of this part (Uttarardha) of KP. constitute/sWa- 
gitd —the song of Is'vara (god &va) just as the BG (Bhagavadgita) is “the 
song of the Lord (Krsna) ”. The similarity is not merely in titles but in the 
contents as well. The Uvaragiia has incorporated a number., of verses mainly 
from the BG. and next to that from Upanisads like Kajha, Svetasvatara.. , 



338 


Kurma Pur ana 


were like the petals of a lotus, the leading Brahmanas bowed to 
him (out of respect). 

8. On seeing him, Lomaharsana fell on the ground like a 
staff. After bending down the head, he dedicated himself unto 
him {v.l. circumambulated Vyasa and sat by his side) with the 
palms joined in reverence. 

9. Saunaka and other Brahmanas were duly enquired 
after their health. T1 ereupon they assured the great sage 
(about their health) and offered him a befitting seat. 

10. Then the holy lord, the son of Parasara, addressed 
these words to them, “I hope there is no deficiency or difficulty 
in your penance, in your learning and in your practice of the 
self-study of the Vedas”. 

11-13. After bowing down to his preceptor, the great 
sage Suta said:—“It behoves you to recount to the sages the 
perfect knowledge pertaining to Brahman. Indeed, these sages 
are quiescent. They are ascetics solely devoted to Dharma. 
They have the keen desire to hear. It behoves you to explain 
(everything) precisely, the divine knowledge that bestows 
liberation, that has been directly taught to me by you and that 
had been formerly narrated to the sages by Visnu in the form 
(incarnation) of Kurma (Tortoise)”. 

14. On hearing the words of Suta, the saintly son of 
Satyavati, bowed down his head to Rudra and spoke these 
pleasing words of discourse. 


This chapter presents the setting for the proposed dialogue. The 
sages in the Naimisaranya wanted to get from Suta, the supreme 
knowledge of the Brahman which leads to the annihilation of Saihsara. Suta 
was about to tell when his preceptor Vyasa came there. Suta requested him 
to explain to the sages the knowledge about Brahma which Vyasa taught him 
as it was explained by Lord Kurma to the sages of old (Verse 12.) 

Vyasa now attributes the knowledge to Siva who explained it to ten 
sages like Sanatkumara and others (V. 15), who at Badarikasrama appealed 
to Narayana for this spiritual knowledge (w. 16-30). While Narayana was 
about to speak god Siva came there (v. 31). Narayana conveyed the 
request of the sages to him (v. 40) and god Siva co-seated with Narayana 
began to speak. The Pasupata twist in this episode is obvious. 



II.l.15-25 


339 


lydsa said : 

15. I shall now narrate to you what formerly Lord 
Mahadeva was asked by the leading Yogins, the chief of whom 
was Sanatkumara and what hehimsalfhas expounded it.^ 

16-18. The following sages viz. Sanatkumara, Sanaka, 
Sanandana (and Sanatana), Ahgiras, Bhrgu, the knower of 
the supreme Dharma and accompanied by Rudra, Kanada, 
Kapila, Garga, the great sage Vamadeva, Sukra and lord 
Vasistha—all of them had perfectly controlled their minds. They 
consulted one another. *With full self-control on their minds, 
they performed terrible penance in the holy Badarikasrama. 

19. They saw the sage Narayana of great Yogic power, 
the son of sage Dharma, devoid of beginning and end, and 
accompanied by Nara. 

20. They eulogised him with various hymns taken from 
the Vedas. The Yogins, endowed with devotion, bowed down 
to the deity, the most excellent among the knowers of Yoga. 

21. After knowing their desire, the omniscient lord spoke 
in a majestic tone : “Why is this penance being performed by 
you ?” 

22. With delighted minds, they bowed to the eternal 
(lord), the Atman of the universe, lord Narayana himself who 
had arrived, indicating the Siddhi (achievement of their desires). 

23. “We have adopted the attitude of self-control** 
even though all of us are expounders of the Brahman. We 
have sought refuge in you, the only Purusottama. 

24. You are Lord Narayana, the ancient sage, the un¬ 
manifest Being. You know the entire Supreme esoteric doctrine. 

25. Excepting you, the great Isvara, there is no other 
knower. It behoves you, of such a nature, to dispel our 
formidable doubts. 


1. As Hazra points out, this irrelevance of Vyasa’s answer is a 
Pasupata interpolation (PRHRC pp. 62.63) Suta has requested Vyasa to 
narrate the spiritual knowledge which he (Vyasa) heard from Lord Kurma 
and taught him (Suta). 

*In view of V. 25 below, a better v.l. is Sathiaya instead of Samyata. v.l. 
means, ‘but had their minds engrossed in doubt.’ 

**v.l. samiayam apamah (Although all of us are expounders of Brahman) 
we are entangled in a doubt. 



340 


Kurma Purdna 


26. What is the cause of all these (things in the 
world) ?* Who undergoes worldly existence for ever ? What is 
the Atman ? What is salvation ? What causes the rebirth or 
recurring worldly existence ? 

27. What is (the nature of this) worldly existence ? 
Who is I Sana, who perceives everything? What is the supreme 
Brahman ? It behoves you to explain everything”. 

28. After saying this, the sages stood looking at 
Purusottama, who shedding off his guise as an ascetic, was 
stationed there in his own brilliance. 

29-30. He was shining free from impurity. He was 
embellished with a halo of brilliant splendour. He was the lord 
having the lustre of molten gold. He was marked by the Srivatsa 
mark on his chest. He was holding Saiikha, Gakra, mace and 
the Sarhga bow in his hands. He was enveloped by glory and 
splendour. Thanks to his brilliance, Nara was not even seen, 
from that moment. 

31. In the meanwhile, Mahesvara, the great lord, whose 
coronet was marked with the (crescent of the) moon, Rudra 
(the deity) appeared before them disposed to bestow Grace 
upon them.i 

32. On seeing the three-eyed moon-bedecked lord of 
the universe, Paramesvara (Siva), they were delighted in their 
minds. With devotion they eulogised the great lord : 

33. “O Isvara, be victorious, O Mahadeva, O Siva, the 
lord of the goblins, be victorious; Glory unto you, O Lord of 
the sages, O lord worshipped by means of penance. 

34. O Atman of the universe, O God of thousands of 
forms, O activiser of the machine of the universe, O Infinite 
one, be victorious. Glory to you, O cause of the origin,, 
sustenance and annihilation of the universe. 

35. Be victorious O Isana, O Sambhu, O thousand¬ 
footed one, O deity bowed down by leading Yogins, O consort 
of Ambika. O lord Paramesvara, obeisance to you.” 


*or ‘What is the (nature of this) entire cause ? 

1. This uninvited entry of Siva is a fuse to Pasupatise this text. 



II. 1.36-48 


341 


36. On being thus eulogised, the three-eyed lord Isa, 
favourably disposed towards the devotees, embraced Hrsikesa 
(lord Visnu) and addressed him in a majestic tone : 

37. “O Pundarlkaksa (lotus-eyed god), why have these 
leading sages, the expounders of Brahman, come to this place. 
O Acyuta, what is to be done for them by me ?” 

38. On hearing those words of his, Janardana, the 
lord of Devas, spoke to Mahadeva who was standing there well- 
disposed to confer grace. 

39-40 “O lord, these sages and ascetics have shed off 
their sins. If the lord be delighted with the sages who have 
sought refuge in you, who are desirous of your perfect vision 
and whose Atmans are purified, it behoves you to impart to 
them that divine wisdom in my presence. 

41. O Siva, indeed, you know your own Atman. No one 
else does so. You explain your own Atman yourself. Reveal 
your Atman to the leading sages”. 

42. After saying thus, Hrsikesa (Narayana) looked at the 
bull-bannered Deity (Siva) and exhibiting his accomplishments 
in Yoga, instructed the great sages (as follows) : 

43. “It behoves you to realise precisely that you are all 
blessed by the vision of the Trident-bearing Sankara, the great 
Isa. You now deserve to know precisely (the divine knowledge). 

44. It behoves you to see the lord of devas who 
stands in front and who is visible in form. He alone is capable to 
say precisely everything in my presence”. 

45. After hearing the words of Visnu and bowing down 
to the bull-bannered deity, those sages the chief of whom was 
Sanatkumara, asked Mahesvara : 

46. In the meanwhile, a holy auspicious divine seat 
shone there for the sake of Isvara. It appeared from the sky in 
an unimaginable way (lit. was beyond the ken of imagination). 

47. The creator of the universe, the Yogic Atman, 
occupied it along with Visnu. Lord Mahesvara shone there 
filling the universe with his brilliance. 

48. Then the expounders of the Brahman saw Sankara, 
the overlord of the chiefs of Devas, shining brilliantly on the 
faultlessly pure seat. 



342 Kurma Purdna 

49-50. They saw the lord of the Bhutas (goblins or 
living beings) seated on the throne, the lord, within whom all the 
universe exists, and from whom the universe does not exist 
separately. They saw Isana, the great Isa accompanied by 
Vasudeva. On being asked, Paramesvara spoke to the sages 
about the excellent Yoga of the Atman, after glancing at 
Pundarikaksa. ‘‘O sinless ones ! Listen ye all, with calm minds 
the knowledge (as it is) recounted by me. It is the pure know¬ 
ledge pertaining to Isvara. Be ye all calm in minds.” 


CHAPTER TWO 

The Toga of Isvara. 

Isvara said : 

1. This perfect knowledge of mine is an eternal mystery 
and secret. It cannot be adequately expressed. Devas do not 
know it even though they strive for it, O twiceborn ones. 

2. Resorting to this perfect knowledge, excellent Brah- 
manas have become identical with Brahman. They, the earlier 
expounders of Brahman, do not undergo worldly existence i. e. 
Sarhsara (cycle of births & deaths consequent to sufferings). 

3. It is the secret of secrets. It must be strenuously 
guarded. I shall explain it to you who are expounders of 
Brahman and endowed with devotion. 

4. This Atman is absolute, pure, clean (v. 1. quiescent) 
subtle and eternal. It exists within everything. It is the pure 
consciousness itself. It exists beyond the darkness of ignorance. 

5. According to Vedas He is the immanent Being, the 
Purusa, the vital Breath, Mahesvara, Kala (Time). Here he is 
unmanifest but He knows. 

6. The universe is born of him. In him alone it gets 
dissolved. He is the master of the Maya but unfettered by it 
(the Maya), he assumes various bodies (or forms). 



II.2.7-16a 


343 


7. He does not undergo the process of worldly existence 
(i. e. birth and death). The lord is not identical with the phy¬ 
sical world, He is neither the Earth nor the water nor the 
fire nor the wind nor the Ether. 

8. He is not the Vital breath, nor the mind nor the 
Pradhana nor the unmanifest. It is neither the sound nor the 
touch nor the colour nor the form nor the taste nor the smell 
nor the ego nor the Agent of an act or speech. 

9. O excellent Brahmanas, the Atman is (not a sense 
organ as he is) nor the foot, neither the anus nor the genitals. 
He is neither the doer (the agent of an action) nor the enjoyer, 
neither the Prakrti nor the Purusa. 

10-11. As a matter of fact, Caitanya* (consciousness) or 
the Atman is neither Maya nor the Vital Breath. Just as the 
relation between light and darkness cannot be deemed possible, 
so is the relation between Prapanca (the visual illusory world of 
diversity) and the supreme Soul. 

1 lb-12a. Just as shade and the sunlight are mutually 
distinct and different in this world, in the same manner, the 
world and the purusa are intrinsically and factually different. 

12b-13a. Should it be argued that the Atman is innately 
soiled or dirty, created and changeable, it can never be liberat¬ 
ed even in hundreds of births. 

13b-14a. The liberated sages visualize that their Atman 
is intrinsically devoid of aberrations or change, free from Dvan- 
dvas (mutually chasing opposites). They realise that the Atman 
is blissful in form and unchanging. 

14b-15a. The ideas that “I am the doer”, ‘T am happy”, 
“I am unhappy”, “I am lean”, “I am stout” etc. are caused 
by the ego. They are superimposed on the Atman by the people. 

15b-16a. Vedic scholars assert that the Atman is the 
witness, beyond the range of Prakrti. It is the enjoyer, imperi¬ 
shable, enlightened and permeating everything. Hence, the 
worldly existence or Saihsara of all embodied beings originates 
from ignorance. 


♦v.l. accepted as ma caiva of the venkt. Edt. gives no subject to the 
predicate. 



344 


Kurma Pur am 


17-19. Due to ignorance and erroneous conception the 
reality gets mingled with Prakrti. The ever-rising self-luminous 
Purusa is the greatest and omnipresent. Due to the thoughtless¬ 
ness, non-discrimination of the ego, one considers himself, “I 
am the doer”. But the sages realize the unmanifest soul as 
eternal and Prakrti of the nature of sat and asat (existence 
and non-existence). He takes Pradhana to be Purusa and 
begins to argue that it is the Brahman that is the cause. 
Thereby the Atman, though steady and unsullied becomes 
(associated with it) by contact. 

20. He (therefore) does not comprehend that his own 
Atman is in reality the imperishable Brahman. (What he has 
then) is the (erroneous) notion of the Atman in what is the 
non-Atman. Hence it is misery. 

21. All defects such as passion, hatred etc., are 
brought about due to wrong notions. Its greatest defect is per¬ 
formance of actions meritorious or otherwise. This is the state. 

22. It is due to that cause that everyone is invested with 
different kinds of physical bodies. The soul, however, lies con¬ 
cealed within, yet it is everywhere, eternal and free from 
blemishes. 

23. It stands* single by his Maya power and not by 
its nature. Hence the sages say that non-dualism is the 
ultimate truth. 

24-25a. The difference is due to the nature oiAvyakta 
(the unmanifest). That Maya has the Atman for its support. 
Just as the sky does not become dirty or soiled due to the con¬ 
tact with smoke, so also the Atman is not vitiated due to the 
effusions of the Antahkaram (the inner sense-organ or mind). 

25b-26a. The unattached (pure) crystal piece shines by 
dint of its own lustre, without any conditioning cause, so also 
does the pure Atman shine untouched by any conditioning 
causes. 

26b-27a. Clever people call this universe as being of the 


*As this statement is contradictory, the other reading ekah sa bhidyate is 
preferable. It means “Although the Atman is one, it appears as many through 
his Maya Power and not due to his inherent nature”. 



II.2.27b-35a 


345 


form of knowledge. Other people with vitiated vision* (followers 
of heretic paths) see it in the form of matter or the objects. 

27b-28a. The Atman or spirit is by nature steady, devoid 
of Gun as, omnipresent and of the nature of consciousness. But 
it is looked upon as matter by men of wrong (heretical) outlook. 

28b-29a. Just as the pure crystal when in contact with a 
red object like Gunja seeds appears to be red, so also the great 
Being is seen (in the form of the objects or Gunas). 

29b-30a. Hence the Atman should be worshipped, pon¬ 
dered over and heard by the seekers of liberation, as being in 
the form that is imperishable, pure, eternal, omnipresent and 
unchanging. 

30b-31a. When consciousness ever appears everywhere in 
the mind of a faithful Yogin, he attains the knowledge of the 
self. 

31b-32a. ** When [one observes all living beings as 
abiding in the Atman and the Atman in all living beings, the 
Brahman is realised. 

32b-33a. When the Atman is in the state of Samadhi 
(Trance), he does not perceive the living beings. Then he has 
become one with the Supreme Soul. The Atman is absolute 
then. 

33b-34a. When all the passions that stick to the heart, 
drop off, the scholar becomes immortalised and attains welfare 
{mok^a)'\. 

34b-35a. When he realizes the whole variety or the 
separate states of the living beings as stationed in the One and 
as evolved from just that One—he attains the Brahman. 


*The word jnana-drsfibhih in the text is unsuitable. It should be 
jqjnana-drs libhih) 

**BG. 6.29 

1. The Yoga of Isvara is based on Sahkhya philosophy. Isvara 
explains the nature of Atman (vv. 3-29) and exhorts that Atman should be 
meditated upon. He (Atman) is in all beings. When this specialised 
knowledge is realized, one becomes identical with Siva. This is the Sahkhya 
Philosophy (vv. 30-41). Concentration on this knowledge is Yoga. Yoga and 
knowledge are interdependent. 
fBG. 13.30 



346 


Kurma Purina 


35b-36. When he observes the absolute Atman factually, 
and the entire universe only an illusion, he experiences the 
greatest bliss. 

37. When one derives the perfect knowledge of the abso¬ 
lute Brahman, the sole panacea for the miseries of births and 
old age as well as ailments, he becomes Siva. 

38. Just as the rivers and rivulets get mingled with the 
ocean and become one, so also the Atman becomes one with the 
imperishable and the unsullied Brahman. 

39. Hence perfect knowledge alone exists. Neither the 
universe nor its existence is real. Perfect knowledge is enveloped 
by ignorance in this world, thereby the world gets deluded. 

40. Perfect knowledge is blemishless, subtle, free from 
doubts and unchanging. Everything else is AjMna (Ignorance). 
This entire (thorough) realisation is considered Vijhana (perfect 
knowledge). 

41. Thus the Sahkhya which is called excellent know¬ 
ledge has been recounted unto you. It is certainly the essence 
of all Vedanta (Upanisads). Yoga is the single-minded con¬ 
centration on this knowledge. 

42. Knowledge originates from Yoga and Yoga functions 
due to knowledge. There remains nothing unaccomplishable 
to one endowed with both Yoga and Knowledge. 

43. That which the Yogins attain is also attained by 
Sahkhyas. He who sees Sahkhya and the Yoga as one, is the 
knower of the real principle*. 

44. O Brahmanas, other Yogins, very much attached 
to Aisvarja (prosperity and glory), get submerged in those 
different activities. So also those whose intellects are impeded 
and blunted. 

45. At the end of the body (i. e. on death), one who is 
endowed with JMna and Toga shall attain the great, pure and 
divine Aisvarya ( prosperity and glory of Brahmahood) which 
is approved by all. 

46. This Atman is I myself, the unmanifest Master of 


♦BG. 5.5. 



II.2.47-56 


347 


Maya, the great Is vara. I am glorified in the Vedas, as being 
the Atman of all and having faces in all directions. 

47. I (i. e. the Atman) have within me all forms, tastes 
fragrances. I am free from old age and death. I have hands and 
feet all round. I am the eternal immanent soul. 

48. Though handless and feetless I am the speediest 
grasper, and am stationed in the heart of all. (Though) 
eyeless I observe and (even if) earless, I do hear.* 

49. I know all these. No one knows me. Persons of truth¬ 
ful vision call me as being one, the only great Purusa. 

50. Sages of subtle visions see the cause of the Atman 
(?) They see the excellent Aisvarya of the Nirguna form which 
is blemishless. 

51. I shall mention to you what Devas, deluded by 
my Maya, do not know. Ye all the expounders of Brahman, 
listen with concentration of your minds. 

52. I am by nature beyond the ken of Maya. Hence I 
cannot be praised** (?) by all. I, however, urge it the reason 
of which the wise sages know. 

53. Hence, the Yogins who have visualised Reality 
get into my secretmost (inner) personaliy which is omnipre¬ 
sent, and attain complete identity with me. 

54. Those who have crossed my Maya which is of uni¬ 
versal forms, attain the great and pure Nirvana (beatitude) 
along with me. 

55. They have no return (to saihsara) even in hundreds 
and crores of Kalpas, thanks to my favour. O leading Yogins, 
this is the injunction of the Vedas. 

56. The (perfect knowledge) should be imparted (only) 
to sons, disciples and Yogins. Thus the perfect knowledge which 
is a synthesis of Saiikhya and Yoga (lit. Sahkhya based on 
Yoga) has been expounded by me. 


*§vet. Up. 3.19 : apanipado javano grahita pasyatyacaksuh sa. 
srnotyakarnah. 

**If’ Prasastah in the text is amended as PraSastd (as in the Grt. Ed.) it 
means, “I am not the ruler of all the world)”. 



348 


Kurma Pur dm 


CHAPTER THREE 

Prakrti and Puru^a 

Ikara said : 

1. Kala (Time), Pradhana or Prakrti and the supreme 
Purusa originated from the unmanifest (Brahman). All these 
(objects of the universe) were born of them. Hence the universe 

is identical with Brahman. 

2. All round it has (the extremities of) hands and 
feet; it has eyes, heads and mouths on all sides; all round, it has 
€ars; it exists enveloping the world*. 

3. It appears to possess the attributes of the sense or¬ 
gans but it. is devoid of all sense-organs. It is the support of all; 
it is perpetual bliss, unmanifest and devoid of duality. * * 

4-5. It is non-comparable. It is beyond all means of valid 
knowledge and is yet comprehensible; it is devoid of all alterna¬ 
tives; it is free from appearances (?); it is the abode of all; it is 
the supreme deathless one. It is non-different (from the universe) 
yet it is stationed separately on a different footing). It is con¬ 
stant, unchanging and eternal. It is devoid of Gunas. It is the 
highest brilliance. Sages know that to be perfect knowledge. 

6. It is the Atman of all living beings; he is both within 
and without; he is the supreme (beyond all). I am that Atman, 
the omnipresent, quiescent, the great Isvara and the embodi¬ 
ment of knowledge (consciousness). 

7. All this universe consisting of the mobiles and immo- 
biles has been pervaded by me. All beings exist in me.j" He 
who has realized this knowledge is the real knower of the 
Vedas. 

8. That entity is said to be both Pradhana and 
Purusa. Kala, manifesting through their union, is said to be the 
greatest and beginningless. 

9. All these three are devoid of beginning and end; they 
are stationed in the Unmanifest Brahman, but the wise sages 


♦BG. 13.13, Svet. 3.16. 
**BG. 13.14, Svet. 3.17. 
fBG. ix. 4. 



II.3.10-19 


349 


knew that my form (person) is both identical with as well as 
different from them. 

10. That which is said to be Prakrti gives birth to 
the entire universe beginning with Mahat and ending with 
Visesas {the particularised forms). It deludes all embodied 
beings. 

11. Stationed in the Prakrti, the Purusa enjoys the attri¬ 
butes of Prakrti.* Since it is devoid of the ego, it is called 
Pancavimsaka (the total of twenty-five Principles or the twenty- 
fifth Principle). 

12. The first evolute of Prakrti is called Mahat. 
Through its knowledge of being endowed with knowledge, 
Ahamkara (ego) was evolved out of it. 

13. The principle called Mahat is one and it is (also 
known as) Atman. He is also called Aharhkara (the principle 
individuation). It is called jiva (the individual self) and the 
inner soul by the thinkers of the real principles. 

14. It is through it (ego) that (the soul) experiences 
pleasure and misery in the (various) births. It is of the nature 
of Vijhana (knowledge) and the Manas (mind) is its accessory. 

15. Purusa identifies himself (with the world) even due 
to that (ego) and is involved in Sarhsara. That ignorance 
originates due to the union of Prakrti and Kala. 

16. Kala (Time) creates the living beings, Kala annihi¬ 
lates the subjects. Everything is dependent on Kala; Kala is 
not under the control of anyone. 

17. He is eternal and restrains everything from within. 
He is called Prana (the vital breath), omniscient, Lord Purusot- 
tama (The Supreme Purusa). 

18. Learned men say that Manas (mind) is superior to 
and beyond the sense-organs. Aharhkara is greater than and 
beyond Manor, and the principle Mahat is greater than 
Aharhkara.** 

19. Avyakta {the unmanikst Prakrti) is greater than and 
beyond Mahat, Purusa is Superior to and beyond Avjakta; Lord 


♦BGi xiii. 2r 

♦*BG. in. 42; also Kafha Up. VI. 7, 8 and III. 10-, 11; 



350 


Kurtna Pur ana 


Prdria, the vital breath, is greater than and beyond Purusa; all 
this universe belongs to and is controlled by him. 

20. Vyoman (the ether) is greater than and beyond Prana; 
the fire-god is beyond Vyoman; I am that unchanging Brahman; 
the quiescent one. This universe is beyond Maya (v.l. I am 
the embodiment of knowledge, the supreme lord). 

21-22. There is no other living being greater than I. By 
realising me, one is liberated. The living beings including the 
mobile and the immobile ones in the universe are not eternal 
with the exception of me, the unmanifest, Mahesvara of the 
form of the Vyoman, (the universe has no separate existence). I 
create everything; I annihilate the universe for ever. 

23. The lord, master of Maya and identical with it, is 
united with Kala. Due to my presence this Kala, the infinite 
Atman, creates the entire universe and controls it (by propel¬ 
ling it to work). This is the injunction (teaching) of the 
Vedas. 


CHAPTER FOURi 

The Glory of Siva 

ISvara said : 

1. I shall recount the greatness of the God of the gods 
from whom everything is produced (or functions). Ye, expoun¬ 
ders of the Brahman, listen with concentration of the mind. 


I. In this chapter full of quotations from the BG., the author describes 
the greatness of Siva in Vedantic epithets emphasising the path of Bhakti for 
god-realisation. The description of his own self by Isvara constantly reminds 
one of Krsna’s discourse in the BG. He explains how the process of this 
universe goes on due to his potencies called Maya, Vidya, and Tamasi or 
KMa (18-23). He classifies the devotees according to the path of Karma, 
Jnana, Bhakti and Dhyana (meditation or Yoga ?) followed by jhem 
(24-26). He proclaims his identity with Hari by stating that devotees of 
Hari also propitiate him.. 



II.4.2-11 


351 


2. I cannot be realised by men, by means of the various 
kinds of penances or by means of charitable gifts or by means 
of sacrifices. * Without ardent and excellent devotion it is im¬ 
possible to know me. 

3. Indeed I abide within all living beings, all round. 
But the leading sages, people do not know me, the cosmic 
witness. 

4. I am the Dhdtr (creator) and Vidhatr (the dispenser of 
destiny), Kala (Time), the Fire-god with faces all round. All 
this universe exists in me and I am the transcendental anni- 
hilator of all (v. 1. and 1, the supreme deity inherent in all). 

5. The sages, the Pitrs and the heaven-dwellers do not 
see me. Nor do the others of well-known prowess such as 
Brahma, the Manus, and Sakra (the king of gods) know me. 

6. The Vedas perpetually eulogise me as the only 
Supreme Lord [Paramesvara). The Brahmanas worship me with 
various kinds of Yajnas and Vedic Makhas (sacrifices). 

7. All the worlds, god Brahma, the grand-sire of the 
world, do not perceive me. The Yogins (however) meditate 
on me, the luminous God, the lord of all creatures. 

8. As everything' gets submerged in me and as I am the 
Atman of all, I assume the bodies of all the gods and become the 
enjoyer (recepient) of all Havis (sacrificial offerings §) and 
the dispenser of the fruits thereof. 

9- Pious scholars, the expounders of the Vedas see me 
here itself. I am always present near them who always worship 
me devoutly. 

10. Virtuous Brahmanas, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas worship 
me. On them I bestow that supreme abode that is the bliss of 
Atman itself. 

11. Even the others (such as) Sudras, other persons of 
low birth, who observe duties and are endowed with devotion 
are liberated even though they are united with Kala (v. 1. liber¬ 
ated in due course and become one with me). 


♦BG. 11.48. 
G. 9.24. 



352 


Kurma Pur ana 


12. My devotees do not perish. My devotees are devoid 
of sins. It has been promised by me at the very outset that my 
devotees do not perish.* ** 

13. The fool who censures my devotee actually censures 
me the lord of Devas. He who worships him with devotion, 
perpetually worships me. 

14. Whether it be a leaf, a flower or a fruit or mere 
water, if any devotee of mine regularly offers it by way of pro¬ 
pitiating me, is beloved of me. * * 

15. At the beginning of universe, I created Brahma, 
Paramesthin and handed over to him the Vedas that came out 
of myself. 

16. I alone am the unchanging (eternal) preceptor of all 
Yogins; I am the protector of the virtuous and the slayer of 
those who hate the Vedas. 

17. I am the liberator of Yogins here from all worldly 
bondage. I am the cause as well of worldly existence though I 
am bereft of all worldly ties. 

18. I alone am the annihilator, the creator and the pro¬ 
tector of the universe. Maya, the enchantress of the worlds, is 
my own potency. 

19. What is called as Vidya (knowledge) is my own trans¬ 
cendental power. Stationed in the hearts of Yogins, I annihi¬ 
late that Maya. 

20. I am the originator and restrainer of all powers. I 
am the support of all potencies. I am the storehouse of nectar 
(or immortality). 

21. Presided over by me, one of my powers which inheres 
in all and is identical with me assumes the form of god Brahma 
and creates this world which is full of variety and diversity (O 
Brahmanas who have resorted to the supreme Yoga, I am not 
the prime mover or propeller (of the universe). 

22. Another immense power of mine becomes Narayana, 
the infinite, the Lord of and the pervader of the world, and sus¬ 
tains (with stability) the universe. 


*BG. 9.31. 

**BG. 9.26. 



11.4.23-33 


353 


23. The third great annihilates the entire universe. 

It is mine and is'-called as well sas Kala. It is in the 

form of Rudra. - 

24. Some perceive me through meditation, others through 
the path of spiritual knowledge; others through the path of 
devotion and still others through the path of action. 

25. Among the devotees, he who always propitiates 
me through spiritual knowledge and not otherwise, is my most 
beloved devotee. 

26. Others who are the devotees of Hari but who (there¬ 
by) propitiate me also, attain to me. They do not return again 
to Sarhsdra. 

27. This entire universe constituted of Prakrti and Purusa 
is pervaded by me.^ The Citta or mind (v.l. Visva or the uni¬ 
verse) is stationed in me alone. The universe is impelled on 
(or directed) by me. 

28. O Brahmanas ! I am not the (direct) impeller but 
by adopting the highest Yoga, I urge on the entire universe. He 
who realizes this is immortal (i.e. is liberated from Sarhsara) 

29. I (hereby) observe this entire universe as if existing 
of itself (naturally). It is Lord Kala, the master of great Yogiris 
who creates, maintains and destroys it. 

30. It is I who am mentioned as Yogin and Mayin 
(Master of Maya) in the scriptures by wise sages; (I am) He, 
the master of Yogins, Lord Isvara of the great Yoga himself. 

31. The greatness of paramesthin is due to his being the 
most excellent of all Sattvas (living beings). Lord Brahma is 
mentioned as identical with the great Brahman. He is free from 
blemish. 

32. There is no doubt in this that he who knows me 
like this as the overlord of all the masters of Yoga is united with 
me through the sure path of Yoga (or by nirvikalpa meditation). 

33. Such am I the impelling God. Resorting to the sup¬ 
reme bliss, I, the Yogin, dance on for ever. He who knows it is 
the knower of Yoga*. 

1. BG. 9.4; 18.46. 

2. Svet. Up. 3.1; 3.13. 

♦v.l. I impel the entire universe. He who knows it, is the knower of 
the Vedas). 



354 


Kurma Purina 


34. This secret-most knowledge is the decision enshrined 
in the Vedas. This should be imparted to one of pure mind, to 
one who is virtuous, and to one who maintains the sacrificial 
fires (as an Ahitagni). 


CHAPTER FTVEi 

Siva’s Dance—Siva eulogised by Sages 


Vyasa said : 

1. After saying this much to the Yogins, Lord Parames- 
vara began to dance demonstrating his supreme divine nature. 

2. They saw Isana, the greatest treasure-house of splend¬ 
our, the sovereign lord, dancing along with Visnu in the clear 
firmament. 

3. In the firmament, they saw that lord of all living 
beings whom the Yogins, the knowers of the principles of Yoga 
who have their minds under control, realize. 

4. The sovereign Lord of the universe who impels the 
world into action which is the creation of his Maya, was verily 
seen dancing by Brahmanas. 

5. They saw the lord oiBhutas (creatures or elements) 
dancing, the lord by remembering whose lotus-like feet a man 
can eschew the fear originating from ignorance. 

6. Those who have conquered their sleep and controlled 
their breath, who are quiescent and endowed with devotion, see 
him as full of brilliance, that is how Siva the Yogin was seen. 

7. In the firmament, they saw the great Rudra, the 
liberator, the delighted lord, favourably disposed to his devotees 
and who instantaneously liberates the devotees from ignorance. 

8. They saw the lord with a thousand (i.e. innumerable) 
heads, a thousand feet, a thousand shapes, and a thousand arms. 


1. This chapter describes the Cosmic dance of Siva but takes care to 
emphasize the identity of Siva and Visnu (V. 17). 



II.5.9-20 


355 


with matted hair and with his coronet embellished with the 
crescent Moon. 

9. The lord was wearing the tiger’s hide; his mighty 
hand was holding the trident; he had a staff" in his hand; he 
had the sun, the moon and the fire as three eyes. 

10. By his brilliance he had enveloped the whole of the 
cosmic egg; he was standing with a refulgence equal to that 
of a crore of suns; he appeared terrible due to his fearful 
large teeth and was unthwartable. 

11. They saw the Lord, the creator of the universe 
dancing and emitting flames of fire and thereby burning (as 
it were) the entire universe. 

12. They visualised the great God, the veritable great 
Yoga incarnate, the divinity of celestial beings, the lord of all 
Pasus (individual souls), the supreme Ruler, the imperishable 
bliss and Light. 

13. They saw the Pinaka-bearing Lord of large eyes : the 
antidote for those who ail from worldly existence (saihsara), the 
lord who was the soul of Kala, the lord of Devas; the slayer of 
Kala. 

14. They saw the consort of Uma, the great deity of 
large eyes and full of Yogic bliss; the lord who is the abode of 
knowledge and detachment; the eternal lord of the path of 
knowledge. 

15-17a. The sages who were well-versed in Vedas, saw 
the lord of eternal prosperity and glory; the lord who is diffi¬ 
cult to approach yet is the support ofDharma; who is bowed 
to by Upendra (Visnu) and Mahendra who is honoured by 
groups of great sages; who abides in the hearts of Yogins who 
become united with Isvara in a trice; and was enveloped by 
Yogic Maya; who was the source of the origin of the universe; 
who was identical with Narayana and free from all ailments. 

17b-d. Having seen that Lordly form in which Rudra 
was identical with Narayana (or which showed the identity of 
gods Siva and Visnu), the sages who were the propounders 
of the Vedas felt that they had achieved their ultimate goal in 
life. 

18-20. Sanatkumara, Sanaka, Bhrgu, Sanatana, Sanan- 



K urma Pur ana 


JaS 

daria', Angiras.'Vamadeva; Sukraj Atri. the great sage, Kapila 
and Marici saw Rudra, the lord of the universe with his left side- 
beingoccupied by Padmanabha (Visnu). They meditated on him 
who was enshrined in their hearts. With palms joined in reverence, 
they bent down their heads again and again. Having uttered 
the sacred syllable OM, they saw the lord abiding in the cavity 
of the heart. Their minds were filled with bliss. They eulogised 
the lord in the words of Vedic Suktas. 

The Sages extolled : Eulogy of Siva 

21. All of us bow down to you, the only supreme Ruler, 
the ancient Purusa, the lord of the Pranas (vital breaths), 
RUDRA of infinite Yogic Power. You are stationed in the 
cavity of the heart, you are Pracetas (of lofty mind), holy 
and identical with Brahman. 

22. After meditating within their self in their (physical) 
bodies on the absolutely immovable or unagitated Kavi (the seer 
or the wise) who is supremely superior to the greatest, the 
quiescent sages of perfect self-control perceive you, the pure, 
gold-complexioned God originating from the Brahman (or 
the creator of God Brahma). 

23. The mother of the universe [Prakrti) is born of you- 
though minute like the atom, you experience (perceive) every¬ 
thing. You are minuter than the minute atom and greater than 
the greatest being. * Sages say that you alone are all. 

24. Hiranya-garbha, the inner soul of the universe, the 
ancient Purusa was born of you; even as he was being born, he 
was immediately enjoined by you to create everything in ac¬ 
cordance with the injunctions. 

25. The Vedas are born of you; and ultimately they 
find stability in you alone. We see that you are the cause of the 
universe. We see that you who abide in our own hearts, are 
dancing. 

26. This wheel of Brahman (the creation etc. of Brah- 
manda) is made to revolve by you alone. You are the master of 
Maya and the only lord of the worlds . We seek refuge in you 
and bow into you; the very soul of Yoga, who dance the divine 
dance. 


*Katha Up. 2.20; Sveta. Up. 3.20 



II.5.27-35 ■ 


357 


27. We perceive you who '-dance dn the rhiddle of the 
highest firmament and we remember your grandeur. Experienc¬ 
ing constantly the supreme bliss of the Brahman, youwho abide 
in the souls of all, permeate the universe on all sides. 

28. The syllable OM, the seed of liberation, is your 
(expressive) symbol. Imperishable though you are, you lie 
concealed in the primordial Nature (Prakrti). Such as you are, 
saints here aver that you, the self-luminous one of such prowess 
are the Reality. 

29. The Vedas perpetually eulogise you. The sages 
whose blemishes have been wiped off, bow unto you. Ascetics 
engrossed in Brahman, with quiescent souls and truthful as well 
enter unto you, the excellent one. 

30. You are the destroyer of the earth; you are without 
beginning. You have the universal form. You are Brahma the 
Paramesthin and Visnu the most excellent. Those who are not 
unsteady and those who are ever liberated, experience the bliss 
of their Atman and enter into you, the self-luminous one. 

31. Though one as Rudra you are, you create the 
universe; you protect the entire universe; with all its forms;all 
these (visible worlds) attain to you as their ultimate abode. We 
seek refuge in you and make obeisance unto you. 

32. The Veda which has many branches and is infinite is 
one. It reveals you alone who are of a single form. Those 
Brahmanas who seek refuge in you who are worthy of being 
respected, cross the Maya in this very world. 

33. They call you the only poet (kavi), the Supreme 
Rudra, eulogising the Veda, Hari, fire and Isa; they call you 
the eternal Rudra, the wind-god; the consciousness, the creator, 
the sun-god of many forms. 

34. You are the supreme imperishable one that should 
be realised, You are the ultimate receptable of this universe. 
You are the unchanging one, protecting the eternal Law 
(dharma). You are the most excellent Purusa, the eternal one. 

35. You alone are Visnu; you are the four-faced deity 
(Brahma); you alone are Rudra, the lord Isa as well; you are 
verily the lord of the universe; you are Prakrti, the basis of all. 
You are the lord of all, the supreme Isvara. 



358 


Kurma Purana 


36. The sages say that you are the ancient Purusa, 
one without a second, of the brillance of the sun beyond the 
darkness (of ignorance). They call you, the consciousness itself 
the unmanifest, of infinite forms, the void, the firmament, the 
Brahman, the Prakrti and the Gunas (v. 1. above i. e. transcen¬ 
dental to the Gunas). 

37. This form of yours is something that cannot be con¬ 
ceived of; within it all these (visible worlds) appear; it is un¬ 
changing and blemishless, but is one single form; it is beyond 
the ken of thought and indescribable; all that appears within it 
is you alone, (or ; your form is so wonderfully indescribable 
that the Reality shines in it). 

38. Seeking refuge in you, all of us make obeisance to 
you, the gracious lord of Yogas, the greatest goal of infinite 
power, the ancient one with the body of Brahman, O Lord of 
Bhutas, O Mahesa, be gracious unto us 

39. By remembering your lotus-like feet, the seed (cause) 
of the entire worldly existence becomes dissolved. After con¬ 
trolling the body and concentrating the mind, we propitiate 
you, the only Supreme Lord. 

40. Obeisance to Bhava, the source of origin of the worlds; 
to Kala,to Sarva, to you the annihilator; obeisance be to Rudra 
with matted hair. Obeisance to you. O Lord, who are the fire; 
obeisance to Siva.” 

41. Thereafter, the bull-vehicled Lord with matted hair 
delightedly withdrew his great cosmic form. Bhava (Siva) 
manifested his normal (usual) form. 

42. On seeing Bhava, the lord of everything past and 
future, remaining as before and lord Narayana (also in that 
state), the sages were struck with wonder and they spoke these 
words. 

43. “O eternal lord, O lord of the past and future, O 
deity marked by the emblem of the bull ! On seeing your grand 
form we are delighted, (v. 1. attained quiescence). 

44. Thanks to your grace, there is born our unswerving 
devotion to you, the great Supreme lord, the blemishless one. 

45. O Sankara, now we wish to hear about your greatness 
as well as the eternal reality about Paramesthin”. 



II.5.46—6.8 


359 


46. On hearing their words the lord, the bestower of 
Yogic siddhi on the Yogins, glanced at Madhava and said in 
a majestic voice. 


CHAPTER SIXi 

The Glory of Siva 

Isvara Said : 

1. O Ye sages, listen all of you, I shall recount the 
greatness of the supreme Lord (Paramesthin) precisely as it 
is known by those who know the Vedas. 

2. 1 am the sole creator of the entire universe, the sole 
protector of all peoples and the sole annihilator of all worlds. 
I am the eternal universal Atman. 

3. I, Mahesvara, am the Antaryamin (the Immanent soul) 
of all subjects. Everything is stationed within me, but I am not 
everywhere in the universe. 

4. A wonderful form of mine which has been seen by you 
is my similitude. O. Brahmanas, verily my Maya has been 
demonstrated by me. 

5. Stationed within all beings, 1 propel the entire 
universe. This is my Kriy as akti (the power of action). 

6. This universe stirs and moves due to me. That follows 
my will. I am Kala and I urge the entire universe consisting of 
the elements.* 

7. O leading sages, with one single part of mine, 1 
create the entire universe; by another form I annihilate, 
neverthless, my sameness (stability) is unchanged. 

8. 1 am devoid of beginning, middle and the end; I am 
the activisor of the principle of Maya; at the beginning of 
creation, I make both Pradhana and Puru^a co-agitate.^ 

1. Isvara explains his immanence and describes the working of his 
Kriya Sakti (Power of action). 

♦According to Pasupatas, Kala signifies the elements of the gross or 
material world fvide Sarva-darSana-Sangraha) 

2. KP. subscribes to theistic Sankhya. 



360 


Karma Purdna 


9. When the pair of xhem become mutually united, the 
universe is born in th^ order oT Mahat etc. My splendour and 
glory become menifested therein. 

10. Hiranya-garbha, the Sun-god, who is the witness unto 
all worlds and who makes the wheel of Time function, is 
also born of my body. 

11. O Brahmanas, in the beginning of the Kalpa, I who 
am perfectly self-possessed, gave- unto him the four Vedas, my 
own divine glory and the eternal path of knowledge. 

12. It is at my behest that god Brahma who has been 
created out of me permanently understood ( v.l. always carries) 
my sovereign divine glory. 

13. That self-born ornniscient god, the Creator of all the 
worlds, becomes a four-faced deity and brings forth the creation 
(of the universe) as per my command.^ 

14. He who is called Narayana, the infinite one, the 
immutable source of all worlds and who is only another 
form of mine, performs the duty of protection. 

15. Lord Rudra, of the nature of Kala (Death), who is 
the annihilator of all living beings (is also) a manifestation of 
mine. At my behest, he will annihilate the universe for ever.^ 

16.. It is due to his being charged with my divine energy 
that the Fire (god) carries (sacrificial) oblations to gods and 
food (Kavya) etc. to its consumers (viz. Pitrs) and carries out the 
function of cooking etc. 

17. At the behest of Isvara the firegod Vailvanara 
(the fire of digestion) digests the food eaten by day or by 
night. 

18. The leading god Varuna, who is the source of origin 
of all waters shall enliven everyone at the bidding of Isvara. 

19. Lord Prabhanjana , (Wind god) who stays within 
and without the bodies of living beings, sustains the physical 
bodies of all living beings at my command; 


1. VV. 13-15 describe how creation, maintenance and destruction of 
the universe is due to Siva. 

2. In the remaining portion of the Chapter, Isvara tells that all 
deities function in their respective spheres due to his energy and at his 
behest. Nay everything that happens is at his command. 



II.6;20-31 


361 


20. Soma (the Moon god) who is the enlivener of men 
and the storehouse of nectar for Devas, is activated through 
my bidding. 

21. ' The sun who illuminates the entire universe every¬ 
where through his own refulgence, brings about the rainfall 
through his own rays (at the bidding) of the self-bom deity. 

22. God Sakra,. the lord of all. immortal beings, who 
rules over the entire universe and who is the bestower of fruits 
on those who perform sacrifices, functions at my bidding. 

23. Yama, the son ofVivasvan, the god who chastises the 
wicked ones, abides regularly at the bidding of the Lord of 
Devas. 

24. Even Kubera, who is the presiding deity of all riches 
and who is the distributor of all wealth, behaves so at the 
behest of Isvara. 

25. God Nirrti who is the lord of all Raksasas and who 
is the bestower of benefits on those who are Tamasaic by nature, 
always behaves so at my command. 

26. Isana who is the lord of the groups of Vetalas 
(ghosts) and Bhutas (goblins) and who is the bestower of the 
fmits of enjoyment of pleasures on his devotees, also abides at 
my bidding. 

27. Vamadeva who is the disciple of Angiras, who is the 
leader of groups of Rudra and who is the protector of Yogins 
does so far ever through my behest. 

28. Vinayaka who is worthy of the worship of all the 
worlds and who is the leader of obstacles (i.e. one who dispels 
them) is engaged in piety evidently at my instance. 

29. The self-born-^gbd Skanda who is the mpst excellent 
among the knowers of tfie Brahman, and who is the lord of 
Devasena (Goddess of that name or the army of Devas) 
behaves so always, oh being urged by my command. 

30. Marici and other great sages who are progenitors of 
the world create different kinds of worlds, only through the 
bidding of the supreme Deity. 

31. Sri the Goddess of Wealth who is the spouse of 
Xarayana and who bestows large fortune on all living beings, 
behaves so through my blessings. 



362 


Kurma Pur ana 


32. Goddess Sarasvati who bestows ample fluency^ 
functions, so, on being urged by the bidding of Isvara. 

33. Savitrl,! who, on being remembered will redeem all 
men from the terrible hell, is one who carries out my behests. 

34. The supreme goddess Parvati who, on being specially 
meditated upon, is the bestower of the spiritual love (Brahma- 
vidya) is also one who follows my utterances. 

35. Ananta, the serpent Sesa who has infinite greatness, 
and is the lord of all immortal beings and who holds the worlds 
on his hoods does so at the bidding of the lord. 

36. The Fire-god Saihvartaka (destroyer of the universe 
at the time of dissolution of the worlds) who is stationed in the 
form of submarine fire eternally drinks up the entire ocean at 
the order of Isvara. 

37. The fourteen Manus whose prowess is well-known, 
protect all subjects at his bidding. 

38. Adityas (sons of Aditi or the sun-god), Vasus, 
Rudras, Maruts and two Asvini-Kumaras and all other 
divinities are created (v.l. are appointed) at my command. 

39. Gandharvas, Garuda and others, Siddhas, Sadhyas 
Caranas, Yaksas, Raksasas and Pisacas are created by and 
established there as per order of the self-born deity. 

40. The (divisions of Time such as) Kalas, Kasthas, 
Nimesas, Muhurtas, days, nights, seasons, fortnights and months 
abide by the commandment of Prajapati. 

41. The Yugas and the Manvantaras remain within my 
control. So also the Paras, Parardhas and other varieties of 
time-units. 

42. The four categories of living beings, both mobile and 
immobile, do abide by the bidding of the lord, the supreme 
Atman. 

43. All the nether worlds, the upper worlds and the 
Brahmandas do follow the injunctions of the self-born deity. 

44. The innumerable universes of the past which were 
all over endowed with floods (multitudes) of objects functioned 
at my command. 


♦Known popularly as Gayatri Mantra (RV. III. 62.10). 



II.6.45-52 


365 


45. The future Brahmandas, along with the Atmans^ 
present in them, will carry out the injunctions of the greatest 
Atman. 

46. The Earth, the Waters, the Fire, the Wind, the 
Ether, the mind, the intellect, the Ahankara and the primordial 
Prakrti stay within my injunction.* 

47. Maya which is the source of origin of the entire 
universe and which fascinates all embodied beings, transforms 
itself for ever at the bidding of Isvara. 

48. Purusa who is the lord of all embodied beings, and 
who is cited as the supreme Atman, eternally exists and. 
functions as per instruction of Isvara. 

49. The intellect too, through which one observes that, 
region, (i.e. the supreme self), after eschewing all the confused- 
delusions, invariably abides by the will of the great god 
(Mahesa). 

50. What need there is of prolixity, the entire universe 
is constituted of my potency {Sakti). The whole of the universe 
is urged on by me and in me does it dissolve in the end. 

51. I am the lord Isa, the eternal entity that is self- 
luminous. I am the great Atman, the supreme Brahman. There 
is nothing other than I. 

52. Thus, this greatest knowledge has been communicated 
to you by me. Afterknowing this, a creature is liberated from 
the bondage of births and worldly existence. 



364 


Kurma Pur ana 


CHAPTER SEVENi 

The Vibhuti-Toga of Siva : Fundamentals of Pasupatism 
Isvara Said : 

1. Ye Sages, listen all of you to the prowess of Paramds- 
thin on realising which man becomes liberated and does not fall 
into the worldly existence again. 

2. That is my greatest abode, the Brahman, which is 
greater than the greatest, eternal, steady and immutable, of 
perpetual bliss, devoid of doubts and alternatives. 

3. Among the knower of Brahman, I am god Brahma 
the self-born deity with face all round. Among the wielders 
of Maya, I am the ancient, imperishable god Hari. 

4. Among Yogins, I am Sambhu, among ladies I am god¬ 
dess (Parvati ), the daughter of the lord of mountains. I am 
Visnu among sun-gods and am the fire-god among Vasus. 

5. Among Rudras, I am Sankara; among those who fly 
(i.e. birds), I am Garuda; among the leading elephants, I am 
Airavata and among those who bear weapons (warriors), I am 
Rama. 

6. Among the sages, I am Vasistha; among Devas, I 
am Satakratu (one who has performed a hundred sacrifices i.e. 
Devendra) ; among craftsmen I am Visvakarman and among 
the enemies ofDevas, I am Prahlada. 

7. Among ascetics I am Vyasa; among the Ganas (at¬ 
tendants of Siva) I am Vinayaka; among heroes, I am Vlra- 
Bhadra; and among the Siddhas, I am ascetic Kapila. 

8. Among the mountains, I am Meru; among constella¬ 
tions, I am the Moon; among the weapons of striking potentiality 
I am the thunderbolt; and among holy rites, I am truthfulness. 


1. This chapter corresponds to Ch. X of the BG. The list of the best 
person, deity or thing is claimed to be Himself by ^iva here, as was done by 
Lord Krsna in BG. X. 

This chapter includes also the fundamentals of Pasupatism. The 
explanations of the technical terms like Pasu, Pasa, Klesa are given in the 
latter part of the chapter. 

As most of the Vibhutis are practically borrowed from the BG., it is 
not necessary to give reference to their parallels in the BG. 



11.7.9-16 


365 


9. Among serpents, I am Ananta (§esa); among generals- 
of armies, I am lord Pavaki (son of the firegod.i.e. Skanda) t 
among the stages of life, I am the householder’s stage and 
among Isvaras (Rulers) I am. Mahesvara. 

10. Among Kalpas, I am Mahakalpa (the greatest' 
Kalpa); among the Yugas, I am Krtayuga; among the Ya- 
ksas, I am Kubera and among grasses, I am Virudha (plant 
which grows after being cut) (v.l. am Viruka among Ganesas) 

11. Among the Prajapatis (progenitors of the world), I 
am Daksa; among the Raksasas I am Nirrti; among power¬ 
ful persons, I am Vayu, and among the continents, I am 
Puskaia.^ 

12. Among the leaders of beasts, I am the lion; among 
mechanical devices (weapons), I am the bow; among the Vedas, 

I am Samaveda and among Yajur Mantras I am Satarudriya 
(Vaj. Sam. XVI. 1-66). 

13. Among the Japyas (Mantras for the purpose of 
Japa), lam Savitrl, (RV. III. 62. 10); among mystic secret 
Mantras, I am Pranava {Om ), among the hymns, I am the 
Purusasukta (RV. X. 90) and among the Saman Mantras 
I am Jyestha Saman. 

14. Among the scholars of Vedic topics, I am Svayam- 
bhuva Manu; among territories, I am Brahmavarta^ and 
among holy centres, I am Avimuktaka (Varanasi). 

15. Among Vidyas (lores), I am the Atmavidya (spiri¬ 
tual science, leading to realization of Atman). Among types of 
knowledge, I am the greatest knowledge pertaining to Isvara; 
among the elements, I am the Ether, and among the entities 
(or realities) I am Mrtyu (Death). 

16. Among the nooses and fetters, I am Maya, and 
among the Calculators, I am Kala (Time), among goals I am 


1. M. All identifies Puskara dvipa with the region now called Japan, 
Manchuria and South-eastern Siberia [The Geography of the Puranas^ p. 44), 
while De (p. 163) locates it in Central Asia commencing from the north of 
the Oxus including Western Tartary. He believes Puskara is derived from 
Bhushkara (Bokhara). 

2. Brahrhavarta—The country between the Sarasvati and Drsadvafi 
later on known as Kuruksetra (DC. p. 40). KP. does not imply Brahma- 
varta Tirtha near Bithur Cawnpur Dist. (U.P.) 



366 


Kurma Pur ana 


liberation (from sarhsara) and among the greatest ones, lam 
Paramesvara (the supreme) God. 

17. Whatever else be in the world that stands most pro¬ 
minent by means of Sattvaguna, brilliance of power, you can 
vouchsafe for it that it is a manifestation of brilliance.* 

18. All the Atmans existing in the world are said to be 
Paius. I am remembered as their lord, Pasupati by the wise 
sages.^ 

19. In my sportive activity, I bind all these Pasus by 
means of the noose of the Maya. Expounders of the Vedas say 
that I am the liberator of the Pasus (Individual souls). 

20. Excepting me, the great Atman, the unchanging 
overlord of the Bhutas, there is no other liberator of those who 
are bound with the noose of the Maya. 

21. The twenty-four principles, the Maya, the Karman 
and the three Gunas—these are the nooses (in the hands) of 
Pasupati; and distresses are the bondages of individual souls 
(Pasus). 

22. The mind, the intellect, the ego, the firmament, the 
wind, the Hre, the water, and the Earth—these eight are Prakrtis 
(causes) and the other things are Vikaras (effects). 

23-24. The ears, the sense of touch, the eyes, the tongue 
and the fifth one the nose (these are the sense-organs of know¬ 
ledge ), the anus, the genitals, the hands, the feet and the organ 
of speech (these are the organs of activity), sound, touch, colour, 
taste and smell (these are the five objects of pleasure)—these 
fifteen together with the eight objects mentioned before (Verse 
22) constitute the twenty-three Prakrtas or Products of 
Prakrti. 

25. The twenty-fourth principle is the Avyakta (unmani¬ 
fest), Pradhana characterised by its Gunas. It has neither 
beginning nor middle nor destruction. It is the supreme cause of 
the universe. 


♦BG. X. 41. 

1. From V. 18 to the end is the discussion on Pasupatism. Though the 
sect poses to be independent, the influence of the Sahkhyas is obvious (vide 
w. 18-27). 



II.7.26—8.1 


367 


26. Sattva, Rajas and Tamas—these are called the three 
Gunas. The state of equilibrium of these, they know to be the 
Avyakta Prakrti (the unmanifest Prakrti). 

27. Sattva is knowledge; the Rajas and the Tamas are 
ignorance (Ajndna) (v.l. Rajas is) a mixture of knowledge and 
ignorance. The wise sages know that the inequality of the Gunas 
is due to the disequilibrium in intellect. 

28. What are called Dharma and Adharma (Virtue and 
Evil) are the binding nooses called Karmans. But those Karmans 
dedicated unto me are conducive to liberation and not to 
bondage. 

29. Avidya (Ignorance); (Egotism), (Passion) 

Dve?a (hatred) z.ndi Abhiniveia (attachment) are called the Kleia 
(miseries) They are themselves the bonds that fetter the 
Atman. 

30. Maya alone is called the cause of these Pasas. It is 
the original unmanifest Prakrti. That Sakti (divine power) 
stays in me. 

31. He alone is the primordial nature or Pradhana as 
well as Purusa and the product such as Mahat etc. He is the 
eternal God of gods. 

32. He alone is the bondage and the maker of bondage; 
He alone is the Pasa and the sustainer of the Pasus. He knows 
everything but no one knows him. They call him the Primordial 
and ancient Purusa. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

The Means of Crossing the Ocean of Worldly Existence. 

Isvara said : 

1. O leading Brahmanas I shall tell you another esoteric 
knowledge whereby the creature (the Jiva) can cross the terri¬ 
ble ocean of worldly existence. 

1. The same as in the Fatahjala Yoga Sutra II. 3. They are regarded 
as ‘bonds’ or‘fetters’ (Pasa) in Pasupatism. 



368 


Kurmd Fur ana 


2. This Brahma is quiescent thanks to penance(v. 1 lam 
the same as the Brahman, eternal etc.). He is eternal unchang¬ 
ing and blemishless. He is one without a second and is the 
absolute supreme Lord. 

3. My womb is the great Brahman (Prakrti). I sow my 
seed therein and that is named Mulamaya (Original Maya). 
This universe is born thereof, 

4. All these were born viz. Pradhana, Purusa, Atman, 
Mahat, Bhutadi (aharhkara) the Tanmatras (subtle elements), 
the mind, the (gross) elements and the sense organs—all these 
were born from it viz. (Mulamaya). 

5. Thence a golden Egg having the luster of a crore of 
suns was born; the great Brahma was born of it. He was 
invigorated through my Sakti. 

6. Innumerable other Jivas are all identical with him. 
Deluded by my Maya they do not perceive me their father. 

7. The sages know that (Maya) is the supreme source 
(Mother) and I alone am the father of the various species in 
which all those forms (creatures) are born in this world. 

8. He who thus knows me as the sower of the seed, the 
lordly father, is a hero in all the worlds and he does not get 
deluded. 

9. I am the lord of all lores, the supreme controller of 
all creatures, the veritable Pranava (the sacred syllable OM) in¬ 
carnate, the master endowed with six divine powers, god Brahma, 
the lord protector of all beings. 

10. He who perceives Paramesvara present equally in all 
living beings, but as imperishable when they perish, perceives 
factually.1 

11. Inasmuch as he perceives the lord equally present 
everywhere, does not injure his real self (Atman by his (lower) 
self, he therefore attains the greatest goal.^ 

12. He who, having realized the seven subtle principles® 
and the great God with his six limbs* (potencies), knows the role 


1. The same as BG,, XIII. 27. 

2. BG. XIII. 28. 

3. vide V, 13 below. 

4. vide V, 14 below. 



II.8.13-18 


369 


assigned to Pradhana (understands the distinction between the 
material principles and the self) reaches the highest Brahman. 

13. Omniscience, joy of satiety, eternal knowledge, inde¬ 
pendence, ever-inexhaustible power and infinite strength— 
these are the six ‘limbs’ of the great God for realization. 

14. They (the knowers) call the following as seven 
subtle principles viz. the five subtle elements, mind and the soul. 
That which is the cause (of this creation) is the Primordial 
Matter (Prakrti). It is also called Pradhana, the bondage by 
moral discipline (a better v. 1. viniyoga- application). 

15. There is a Sakti (power) latent in form in the Prakrti. 
It is mentioned in the Vedas as the cause (of the world) and 
the source of origin of Brahma. In front of her is her Purusa, 
Paramesthi, the great God, the very embodiment of the 
Reality. 

16. He alone is Brahma, the great Yogin, the supreme 
Atman, the huge one pervading the sky, the ancient one com¬ 
prehensible only through the Vedas. He alone is the only 
Rudra, the cause of annihilation, the unmanifest, the sole seed, 
the universe itself. 

17. Some say he is one ; Others say that he is many. 
Some say that you are the self. Some say that he is another. 
The great God (Mahadeva) is proclaimed as minuter than an 
atom and greater than the greatest and omniformed (with the 
universe as his form). 

18. The intelligent person who realizes that supreme 
Master, immanent in the cavity of the heart, that ancient 
Purusa, whose form is the manifested universe and is the 
highest goal of the wise and the intelligent, transcends the sphere 
of Buddhi (intelligence). 



370 


Kurma Pur ana 


CHAPTER NINE 

The unsullied {Ni^kala) form of Siva 


The Sages said : 

1. O Mahadeva, the Supreme God is unsullied, pure, 
eternal and devoid of activities. Hence, explain to us how you 
become identical with universe in form. 

Isvara replied : 

2. O Brahmanas, I am not the Universe (in reality). 
Nor does the universe exist without me. In this respect Maya is 
the cause and she is supported by me in my Atman. 

3. Maya is a Sakti (a potency) which has neither begin¬ 
ning nor destruction. It is supported in the Avyakta (the unmani¬ 
fest). This world is caused by it and is indeed born of Avyakta. 

4. They (the sages) say that the unmanifest which is 
bliss luminous and imperishable is the cause. I am the Supreme 
Brahman and nothing else exists without me. 

5. In my unity and diversity (or apparent identity and 
separateness from the universe) the expounders of the Vedas 
have decisively concluded my being universe-formed. 

6. I am that greatest Brahman, the eternal supreme 
Atman. O Brahmanas. As I am said to be the non-cause, no 
fault can be attributed to Atman. 

7. The divine powers are infinite, unmanifest, permanent 
and established by Maya. The absolute Avyakta (unmanifest) 
which is abiding in the heavenly region (beyond the reach of 
this world) shines eternally. 

8. The unmanifest eternal Brahman which is without any 
beginning or end and which is permanent is united with 
Maya and thereby is called diverse and divided though it is an 
undivided whole. 

9. Just as the manifestation of the Purusa’s one power is 
not concealed or obscured by another, he functions through 
the power of knowledge without beginning, middle and the end. 

10. That is the supreme unmanifest, embellished with a 
halo of lustre. That is the imperishable light. That is the supreme 
abode ofVisnu. 



II.9.11-19 


371 


11. Therein the entire universe is woven as if i n the 
warp and woof of cloth. That alone is the entire universe. 
Having realised this, one is liberated. 

12. Brahman is that entity from which words along with 
mind recede due to their inability to reach it. He who has 
realized the joy of the Brahman entertains no fear from any¬ 
where at any time.^ 

13. I know this supreme Purusa with the refulgence of 
the sun in front of me (v.l. beyond the darkness of ignorance). 
Having realized him as such, the knower is liberated (from 
Saihsara). Becoming identical with the Brahman, he enjoys 
perpetual bliss.^ 

14. Realizing that is his self from which there is nothing 
that is greater, and that is the supreme light of the luminaries 
stationed in the heaven, the knower becomes identical with the 
Brahman and attains perpetual bliss. 

15. Knowers of the Brahman (or Brahmanas) who are 
established in the Brahman, proclaim that I am however 
impenetrable, subtle-bodied, joy of the Brahman and the immor¬ 
tal abode of the universe, and after attaining whom one never 
reverts to Saihsara. 

16. The lustre that appears to shine in heaven is the 
principle of the highest firmament of golden colour. The sages 
visualize it in their own supreme knowledge as the resplen¬ 
dent, pure (spotless) abode of heaven. 

17. Thereafter, the bold (self-possessed) men observe 
it, after experiencing the (cosmic) Atman directly in their 
individual Atman. Paramesthin, the lord himself, is the greatest 
one. The Lord has the bliss of Brahman. 

18. That one Lord is lying hidden in all living beings. 
He is omnipresent, the immanent soul of all living beings. 
The self-possessed men who see him as one (without a second) 
enjoy permanent bliss and not the others. 

19. He has heads and necks on all sides. He is the 
ultimate goal of all. He abides in the cavity of the heart of all 


1. Taittiriya Up. II. 9. 

2. Svetasvatara Up. III. 8 also, III. 21. 



372 


Kurma Purana 


living beings. That lord is omnipresent. There is nothing other 
than he. 

20. O leading sages, thus the knowledge pertaining to 
Isvara has been related to you. It should be particularly 
guarded, as it is very difficult even for Yogis to attain. 


CHAPTER TEN 

The form of the Supreme Brahman Siva—the Parabrahman 
livara said : 

1. It has been concluded definitely that Brahman is 
Lifigas (Symbols) ; it is one (without a second) and unmanifest 
is its characteristic feature. It is self-luminous, supreme, 
premier. It is established in the sky (transcending the pheno¬ 
menal world). 

2. The unmanifest which is the cause (of the phenomenal 
world) is the imperishable supreme region. Learned men perceive 
it as devoid of Gunas and perfect knowledge. 

3. The Vedas declare that to be the Lifiga viz. the 
supreme Brahman which is perceived by the sages whose 
concept of egotism (and other doubts) is resolved (destroyed) 
and who are perpetually merged in its meditation. 

4. O leading sages, it is not possible to see me otherwise* 
There is no knowledge whereby that great Atman is realized. 

5. Only sages can know this supreme abode (v.l. knowl¬ 
edge ). Since the universe is the product of Maya, knowledge 
about it is enveloped by the darkness of ignorance.^ 


1. v.l. ajnanam itaraj jfidnam for ajndna-timiram jndnam is better. 
Combined with the previous v.l. jnanam for rtAanam in the Vehk. Text, the 
verse would mean : “This is the supreme knowledge which only sages knew. 
The other knowledge (about the phenomenal world etc.) is really ignorance, 
as this world is composed of illusion (Maya). 



II.10.6-15 


373 


6. The knowledge that is immaculate, pure, free from 
doubts, and unsullied is my soul. The sages declare that (supreme 
knowledge) to be this (my soul). 

7. Even those who see that greatest region as multifarious 
understand the unity of the unchanging principle after resorting 
to the greatest adherence to principles. 

8. Those devotees who perceive me, the greatest principle, 
the Isvara either as one or many, should be known as identical 
with that (Principle). 

9. They directly perceive their own soul (Atman), the 
supreme lord full of perpetual bliss, above doubt. Reality 
incarnate. This is the exact position (truth). 

10. They who are established i n their own self which is 
beyond Avyakta, are quiescent, resort to enjoy the supreme 
bliss which permeates everything and is identical with the 
universe. 

11. This is the greatest liberation. This is my excellent 
Sayujya (Identity with me). Poets know this as Nirvana, identity 
with Brahman and Kaivalya (absolute oneness) 

12. Hence, the only entity devoid of beginning, middle 
and end and the supremely auspicious one, is Lord Mahadeva. 
After realising him, one is liberated. 

13. The sun does not shine there, nor does the moon, 
nor the group of stars nor the lightning. Illuminated by it the 
entire universe shines. It shines with great refulgence and is 
devoid of impurities. * 

14. That which is called ‘The All’ (or universe) which 
is indivisible, immutable, pure, great, shines (brilliantly). The 
immovable principle which the knowers of the Brahman (or the 
Vedas) permanently visualize within themselves is the Isa (the 
Lord). 

15. All the Vedas say that the Purusa is pure, nectarean, 
perpetual bliss and embodiment of truth. Those who have come 
to a definite conclusion through the study of the Vedas 


1. This is a synthesis of Sahkhya, Bauddha and Vedantic concept of 
Liberation. 

♦Katha Up. iv. 15; Svetasvatara Up. vi. 14. 



374 


Kurma Purana 


meditate on the lord by means of the Pranava, as their vital 
breath. 

16. Neither the Earth, nor the waters, nor the mind, nor 
the fire, nor the vital breath, nor the wind, nor the sky, nor the 
intellect, nor the consciousness, nor does anything else shine 
in the firmament. Only the Lord Siva alone shines in the 
great sky. 

17. Thus has been communicated to you this topmost 
supreme secret, the knowledge that is sung in all the Vedas. 
The Yogi alone knows this. One should incessantly practise Yoga 
in a secluded place. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN! 

The Path of liberation of the individual soul from bondage. 

Isvara said : 

1. Henceforth, I shall explain a Yoga that is very diffi¬ 
cult of access and whereby the devotees visualize the Atman, the 
Isvara (brilliant) like the sun. 

2. The fire of Yoga quickly burns the entire cage of sins. 
Pure and perspicuous knowledge which directly accords the 
attainment of Liberation (from Sarhsara) arises thereby. 

3. Knowledge originates through Yoga; Yoga functions 
through knowledge. The great God (Mahesvara) is delighted 
with one devoted to the practice of Yoga and knowledge. 

4. Those who practise the great Yoga once, twice or 
thrice everyday or continuously should be known as Mahesvaras. 

5. Yoga should be known as one of two kinds. The first 
one is called as Abhava Yoga. The other one is known as 
the Mahayoga (the great Yoga). It is the most excellent among 
all Yogas. 

6. The Yoga wherein one’s own soul is meditated upon 


1. This chapter deals with Pasupata Yoga(for details vide Introduction: 
Section on Pasupatism). 



II.11.7-15 


375 


as void and devoid of all false appearances is proclaimed as 
Abhava Yoga whereby one realizes thoroughly one’s own self. 

7. The Yoga wherein one sees one’s own self as imma¬ 
culate, eternal bliss and identical with me is called by me as the 
highest Yoga. 

8. Those other paths of Yogas practised by other 
Yogins and those Yogas which are heard (described) in other 
extensive works (on Yoga) do not deserve to be even one-six¬ 
teenth part of the Brahma-Yoga (Yoga leading to the realiz¬ 
ation of the Brahman). 

9. The Yoga in which the liberated souls directly 
perceive the universe as one with Isvara, that Yoga is 
considered to be the greatest of all Yogas. 

10. Thousands and numerous Yogins of controlled minds 
who consider themselves as excluded or different from Isvara do 
not perceive me as one without a second. 

11. O excellent sages, (the following are the essential 
adjuncts of Yoga) viz. Pranayama, Dhyana (meditation), 
Pratyahara (withdrawal of the sense-organs), Dharana (reten¬ 
tion), Samadhi (trance), Yama (control), Niyama (Restraint 
and observance), Asana (posture). 

12. The adjuncts of the same Yoga have been narrated 
to you. Yoga is the concentration! of the mind in me alone along 
with control of the intermediary urges. 

13. Ahimsd (non-violence), Satya (truth), Asteya (non¬ 
stealth), (celibacy) and (non-possession 

or non-acceptance of monetary gifts). These are the Yamas 
(controls). They have been succinctly mentioned. They 
bestow purity of mind upon men. 

14. It has been declared by the great sages that Ahirhsa 
(non-violence) is non-causation of distress to any living being 
at any time physically, mentally and verbally. 

15. There is no greater Virtue than Ahirhsa; there is 
nothing more conducive to happiness than Ahirhsa. The Hiihsa 
(violence) that is committed according to the injunctions (of the 
Vedas) is indeed glorified as Ahirhsa.^ 


1. This exception in the case of animal sacrifices is stoutly defended by 
Mimariisakas. 



376 


K urma Pur am 


16. The act of stating precisely in conformity to what 
is factual is called Salya (truthfulness) by the twice-born ones. 
One obtains everything through Satya. Everything is founded 
on Satya. 

17. Removal of another man’s wealth or property either 
by stealth or through force is called Steya, (stealth). Refrain¬ 
ing from doing it is Asteya. It is a means of Virtue of merit. 

18. Eschewing copulation either physically, mentally 
and orally in all stages, at times, and in all places is called 
Brahmacarya (celibacy) . 

19. Nontaking of monetary gifts voluntarily even during 
adversity is called Aparigraha. One should maintain it strenu¬ 
ously. 

20. Tapas (penance), SvMhyaya (self-study of Vedas), 
Santosa (contentment), Sauca {-pwcity), livara-Pujam (worship of 
God) these are mentioned as Niyamas (observances) succinctly. 
They are the bestowers of Yogic perfection {Siddhis). 

21. Ascetics call it the excellent penance if the body is 
dessicated by means of fasts and observances of religious vows 
like Paraka, Krcchra, Candrayana etc. 

22. Learned men say that this is Svadhyaya if one per¬ 
forms the Japa of the Vedantic passages, Satarudriya (Vaj. 
Sarhhita XVI. 1-66), Pranava (Om) etc. It brings about the 
achievement of Sattva Guna in men. 

23. There are. three types of Svadhyayas viz. Vacika 
(verbal), Uparhsu (inaudible muttering) axid Mdnasa (mental), 

those who know the meanings of the Vedas say that the latter 
ones are better than the earlier ones. 

24. The Svadhyaya (recitation or study of the Vedas) 
the words of which are clearly audible (understandable) to other 
listeners is called Vacika (vocal). 

Now the characteristic of Uparhsu (inaudible) Svadhyaya is 
as follows : 

25. That which involves only the throbbing of lips but 
the words of which are inaudible to others is designated as 
Uparhsu (inaudible Svadhyaya). It is better (more efficacious) 
than vocal Japa. 

26. The contemplation of all the words (of the text of 
(prayer) in the proper sequence of words and syllables 



11.11.27-34 


377 


without throbbing of the lips, is called Manasa Japa (mental 
Japa). 

27. Sages say that the praise-worthy attitude of the man 
who regards whatever wealth is acquired through luck (without 
striving for it)as sufficient (to him), is called contentment and it 
is characterised by a feeling of happiness. 

28. O excellent Brahmanas, Sauca (cleanliness) is said to 
be twofold—the external and the internal. The external clean¬ 
liness is by means of clay and water, while the internal one con¬ 
sists of the purity of the mind. 

29. The extremely steady devotion to Siva through the 
Verbal, mental and physical activities such as singing eulogy, 
recollection (of His Name etc.) and worship (of Siva) is called 
Isa Pujana (Worship of God). 

30. The Tamas and the Niyamas have been expounded. 
Now understand the Prandydma. Prana is the air circulating with¬ 
in one’s own body. Its restraint is called Ayama. 

31. Pranayama is three-fold, the Uttama (excellent), 
Madhyama (the middling) znAthc Adhama (lowly). Another two¬ 
fold classification of Pranayama is Sagarbha and Agarbha (i.e. 
Pranayama with the repetition of Om or any other Mantra bija 
is Sagarbha and without it is called Agarbha). 

32-33. The lowly type of Pranayama is Manda and the 
duration (of retention of breath) is twelve Matras; the middl¬ 
ing is of the duration of twenty-four Matras while the last type 
of restraint of Prana is of thirtysix Matras. In these three types, 
perspiration, shivering and gasping are generated in due order. 
This is the most excellent of the Yogas to even ordinary men 
due to bliss) [v. 1. The excellence of these should be judged 
by the bliss caused thereby]. 

34. That Yoga is called Sunapha^ and is the triumph of 
Sagarbha type of Pranayama. O learned ones, the sages say 
that this is the characteristic of the breath-control of Yogins. 

1. Sunapha is a particular configuration of the planets (when any one 
of the planets except the Sun, occupies a secondary position to the moon). 
This configuration is called Sunaphd-Toga. But it is not clear why this 
astronomical term is brought in here. The crt. Edt. reads : Sagarbham ahuti 
sajapam agarbham vijapam budhah ‘the Pranayama which is accompanied by 
muttering (of bija mantras) is called sagarbha and that which is devoid of japa 
(muttering of mantras) is known as agarbha, O learned ones’. 



378 


Kurma Pur ana 


35. Controlling one’s breath, one should repeat three 
times the Gayatrl Mantra along with its Vyahrtis (OM Bhuh, 
Bhuvah, Svah) and its head. This is called the breath-control. 

36. It is mentioned in all scriptures by Yogins of fully 
controlled minds, that the Pranayama consists of three stages 
Recaka, Puraka and Kumbhaka. 

37. Recaka is exhalation of breath while its retention (in¬ 
halation) is called Puraka. The state of equilibrium (between 
the two) is spoken of as Kujnbhaka. 

38. O excellent men, it is said by good men that the res¬ 
traint of the sense-organs which are naturally straying over the 
pleasurable objects is called Pratyahara. 

39. Dharana is the fixation of the mind in the lotus of the 
heart, umbilical region, cerebral region limbs, forehead and such 
other spots. 

40. Learned men called Dhyana (contemplation) as the 
continuous concentration of mind which is fixed on particular 
spot (part of the body) and is undistracted by any other object 
nearby. 

41. The perception of one form (object of contemplation) 
alone is Samadhi (trance) wherein the awareness ofthe surround¬ 
ing place is absent. Only the object is perceived. This is the 
excellent injunction in the Yoga. 

42. Twelve Pranayamas lead up to the Dharana; twelve 
Dharanas lead into Dhyana. Twelve such Dhyanas are said to 
constitute a Samadhi. 

43. Asanas (bodily postures) are (mainly three) Svastika, 
Padma and Ardha. This is the most excellent of all means. 

44. O leading Brahmanas, the soles of both the feet are 
placed over the thighs. Sitting thus is called the excellent 
Padma posture. 

45. Both the soles of the feet are placed in between the 
knees and the things; seating oneself in this excellent posture is 
called Svastika. 

46. O excellent Brahmanas, when one sits placing one’s 
foot on the other thigh (e.g. right foot on the left thigh), it 
becomes Ardhasana. It is an excellent posture for the 
accomplishment of Yoga. 



11.11.47-56 


379 


47. Yoga is not seen practised at in the improper time or 
in an unsuitable place; nor should it be practised near fire^ 
in water or on dried leaf-stack. 

48-49. The following places are also to be avoided for 
YogicPractice: places where vermins abound, cremation ground, 
dilapidated cowpen, the quadrangle or place where four roads 
meet, a crowded noisy place or where there is an ant-hill or 
a (Buddhist place of worship), an unauspicious place 

full of wicked men, and places where mosquitoes are in plenty. 
Nor should one practise Yoga when the body is ailing or when 
the mind is dispirited. 

50-51. With his mind devoted to Him (Lord Siva), one 
should always practise Yoga* in a secluded place in an 
auspicious well-guarded place, in the cave of a mountain, on the 
banks of a river, in holy place, in a temple or in a clean place- 
in the house, or in an isolated place devoid of worms or 
vermins. 

52. After bowing down to leading Yogins,i their disciples. 
Lord Vinayaka, his own preceptor and me, the Yogin shall begin 
the practice of Yoga with full concentration of the mind. 

53-54. He should sit in any of the postures—Svastika** 
Padma or Ardhasana with his equi-poised gaze fixed on the tip 
of his nose and eyes partially opened. He shall be free from fear 
and calm; the illusory worries of worldly nature should be 
eschewed. One should then meditate on Paramesvara abiding 
in one’s own soul. 

55-56. The mystic lotus should be conceived at the tip of 
the tuft of hair (on the crown of one’s head) twelve Angulas in 
length. Dharma is its bulbous root from which it is originated. 
It is extremely beautiful and has spiritual knowledge as its stalk 
and eight divine potencies as its petals. It is white and has 
Vairdgya (Detachment) for its pericarp. One should contemplate 


*BG. VI. 10. 

1. Possibly a reference to 5u/>ra I. Ch. 53 where the incarnations of 
Siva (all yogindras) and their disciples are listed. A bow to these at the 
beginning of the practice of Yoga is probably advised. 

**BG. VI. 13-14. 



380 


Kurma Purana 


^old-coloured calyx (the greatest Kosa) in the pericarp of that 
lotus. 

57-59. Within it one should meditate on the Lord whom 
they call divine and unchanging, the Lord who is endowed with 
all Saktis (divine potencies), who is directly expressed by Oih- 
kara, is unmanifest, enveloped in flames of rays (v. 1. full of bril¬ 
liance) ; one should meditate on the great brilliance, the im¬ 
perishable one. He should deposit the bliss in that brilliance.^ 
He should meditate on Isa the great cause stationed in the 
middle of the Koia (heart). Having become (identical) with its 
Atman which is omnipresent, one should not think of any¬ 
thing else. 

60-61. This is the secret-most knowledge. Now another 
type of meditation is described. After having contemplated as 
before on the excellent lotus in the heart, the Atman should be 
thought of as a doer,^ with the lustre equal to that of fire. In 
■the middle of that lotus, Purusa, the twentyfifth principle should 
be thought of as being of the form of the flame of fire. 

62-63, He should meditate upon the supreme Atman in 
its middle—^The Paramatman as the supreme firmament, the 
principle expressed by Oihkara and called eternal, auspicious, 
the unmanifest, latent in Prakrti and the supreme light, the 
inner highest principle, the basis of Atman and unsullied. 

64. One should meditate on it with concentration and 
think of Mahesvara as a single form, after purifying all the 
principles through Pranava. 

65. Or the Atman should be fixed in the greatest region 
which is free from impurity, after purifying one’s own body 
with the self-same water of perfect knowledge. 

66. One should dedicate one’s soul unto me and 
concentrate one’s mind in me and take up the Bhasma from the 


1. v.I. In meditation he Should establish his own soul in that brilliance 
.as being perfectly identical with that lustre. 

2. Kdntaram in Vehkt. Ed. is obviously unacceptable. 



11.11.67-73 


381 


Agnihotra fire. He should then dust all his limbs with it 
repeating the mantras of Agni^ etc. and Aditya. 

67. Then one should meditate upon Lord Isana in the 
form of the supreme light within one’s own Atman. This is the 
Yoga, pertaining to Pasupati. It is conducive to the liberation 
of the Fasu from the Pasa. 

68. This is the path of all the Vedantas. The Sruti says 
that it is beyond all Asramas (stages of life). This is the greatest 
esoteric truth that should be concealed as it bestows Sayujya with 
absorption in me. 

69-70. The observances for the twice-born celibate de¬ 
votees have been recounted.^ (Now I shall mention the obser¬ 
vances) : Celibacy, non-violence, forgiveness, cleanliness 
penance, self-control, contentment, truthfulness, faith in Vedas, 
etc. These are the special ancillaries of the religious vows. 
Even if one of the holy vows is lacking it does not® affect it.* 

71-72a Hence, one endowed with the attributes of the 
Atman deserves to take up my Vrata (holy vow)—Many people 
who are devoid of lust, fear and anger have identified them¬ 
selves with me, have resorted to me and have been purified by 
this Yoga and have reached my state of being.** 

72b As men approach me, so do I accept them.J 
73. Hence, you all should worship me, the supreme Lord, 
by means of the path of knowledge or the path of devotion or 
by means of the greatest Vmagya (detachment). 


1. agmr ddilya-mantratah —no such mantra is traced in Bloomfield’s 
Vedk Concordance. It may be in some Agama. I feel it is better to take it as 
agnir ityadi mantratah as in the crt. ed. of the Kp. the MS. evidence supports 
that reading. 

2. Though I have followed Vehk. Edt., I think it better to take this 
line along with the above verse (no. 68). It would then mean : ‘ (This 
esoteric doctrine) has been conveyed to the twice-born, devotees and 
Brahma-carins.’ 

3. w. 70-90 are borrowed from the BG., as can be seen from the 
footnotes. 

♦This is obviously a mistake v. 1. the lupyate ‘is lost or violated’ is better 
than na in Vehkt. Edt. 

♦♦BG. IV. 10. 

JBG. IV. 11. 



382 


Kurma Purina 


74. Ever pure, one should worship me with the mind 
endowed with enlightenment. He should renounce all Karmas, 
accept no monetary gift and should partake of the alms (volun¬ 
tarily given). 

75-76a. He then attains identity with me. This secret has 
been communicated by me. He who does not hate any living 
being, who is friendly and sympathetic with all beings, who is 
devoid of myness and egotism and who is my devotee, is beloved 
to me.* 

76b-77a. ** A Yogin who is ever contented, is always 
endowed with self-control, is firm in his resolution, who is my 
devotee, who has dedicated his mind and intellect unto me, is 
my beloved. 

77b-78a. He, by whom the world is not afflicted, he, who 
is not afflicted by the world, and he who is devoid of gaiety, 
anger, fear and anxiety is dear to me. 

78b-79a. He who has no expectations, is pure, prompt 
and efficient, unconcerned and devoid of troubles and who has 
renounced all undertakings and is thus devoted to me is my 
beloved.*** 

79b-80a. One who equally reacts to censure and praise, 
who is silent, who is contented with whatever comes to him (he 
gets), who has no fixed abode, whose mind is steady and who is 
my devotee willattain me.| 

80b-81a. One who performs all rites always doing conti¬ 
nually all action but taking refuge in me, he reaches by my 
grace the eternal supreme abode.J 

81b-82a. One should seek refuge in me alone after men¬ 
tally dedicating all actions unto me, after becoming devoid of 
hopes and myness (?) and considering me as the ultimate 
goal.§ 

82b-83a. By eschewing over-attachment to the fruits of 
actions and being ever contented and depending on nothing, one 
is enlightened by the action in which he is engaged. 

*BG. xii. 13. 

**BG. xii. 14-16 
***BG. xii. 14-19. 

■fBG. xviii. 56. 

JBG. xviii. 57 ab III. 30. 

§BG. IV. 20 and 22. 



II.11.83b-93a 


383 


83b.-84a. One who is devoid of hopes, has his mind and 
self controlled and has abandoned all possession, attains to that 
■supreme region by performing Karma by the body alone. 

84b-85a. If one is contented with what he obtains* with¬ 
out efforts, if one is beyond the scope of mutually opposed 
pairs, the action performed by him for propitiating me is destruc¬ 
tive of worldly existence. 

85b-86a. ‘Fix your mind on me; be devoted to me;** 
offer sacrifice to me; be solely absorbed in me, knowing me as 
the supreme Deity, the Lord of Yoga, propitiate me. 

86b-87a. They call me the supreme Light. Thus enlight¬ 
ening each other and always speaking about me, they attain 
Sdyujya (union with me). 

87b-88a. By means of the shining lamp of knowledge I 
■destroy the entire darkness of those who are continuously attached 
to me.*** 

88b-89a. Those who have concentrated their mindf in 
me and are always worshipping me, I supply them what they 
need and preserve what is already possessed by them.J 

89b-90a. Others seeking enjoyment of pleasures may wor¬ 
ship other deities. Their fruit should be known to that extent 
according to the capacity and power of that deity. § 

90b-91a. Those who are devoted to other deities but are 
endowed with conceptions of me, are also liberated. 

91b-92a. Hence, after abandoning all other transient 
deities, one should resort to me, the Lord. He attains the 
greatest region. 

92b-93a. One must abandon love for sons and others. 
One should be devoid of sorrow and possessions. One should be 
detached and worship the Lihga of Paramesvara until death. 


*BG. IV. 22. 

**BG. xviii.l5. 

***BG. x.10-11. 
tBG. ix. 22. 
JBG. vii. 20. 
§BG.ix. 23. 



384 


Kurma Pur ana 


93b-94a. I give unto them the greatest region within a 
single birth, if they worship the Lihga always, after eschewing 
all sensual pleasures. 

94b-95a. The Lihga of the great Atman is the only 
Real (?) silver-line in lustre (v.l. stainless). The Lihga is 
spiritual knowledge and is stationed in the hearts of Yogins. 

95b-96. Regular devotees worship Mahesvara in the 
Lihga anywhere, after sanctifying it duly. They may worship it 
in water, in the middle of fire, in the sky, in the sun or in 
other places. 

97. Lihga pertaining to Isvara must be conceived of in 
jewels etc., and the Lord may be worshipped. All this is one 
with Lihga and everything is within Lihga. 

98-99a. Hence one should worship the Eternal Lord 
anywhere in the Lihga. The performers (of sacrifices and 
rituals) regard it as existing in the fire, the wise ones in water, 
the sky and in the sun, the fools in wood (i.e. idols made of 
wood) but with Yogins the Lihga is in their hearts. 

99b-100a. Even if the spiritual knowledge has not 
dawned, if one is detached, if one has sufficient love, one should 
perform the Japa of Pranava as long as one lives. Since it is 
Brahma’s physical body. 

lOOb-lOla. Or a Brahmana should perform the Japa of 
Satarudriya until death. He should have full control over the 
mind and remain single. He attains the greatest region. 

101b-103a. O Brahmanas, one should remain at Varanasi 
with full concentration until death. By means of the grace of 
god Siva, he attains the greatest region. There, the lord 
grants the greatest knowledge to all the embodied beings at the 
time of departure (passing away.) Thereby they are liberated 
from bondage. 

103b-104a. If a devotee fully dedicates himself unto me 
and performs the entire duties of the four castes and stages of 
life, he obtains perfect knowledge in the very same birth and 
attains the auspicious region. 

104b-105. O Brahmanas, all those people of lowly birth 
and sinful origin who reside there, cross the ocean of worldly 
existence, thanks to the grace of Isvara. But obstacles befall 
those persons whose minds are affected by sins. 



II.ll.106-117a 


385 


106. Hence, O Brahmanas, one should always resort to 
virtuous activities for the sake of liberation. This is the secret 
of the Vedas. It should not be given (indiscriminately) to any 
one and everyone. 

107-108. It should be given only to a virtuous one who is 
a devotee observing the vow of celibacy. 

pydsa Said : 

After imparting this excellent Yoga, the eternal Lord 
spoke to Narayana who was seated there and who was free 
from ailments. “This knowledge has been explained by me for 
the welfare of the expounders of Brahman. 

109. This auspicious knowledge of Brahman should be 
imparted by you to the disciples of quiescent minds”. After 
mentioning this matter, the unborn Lord spoke to the leading 
Yogins. 

110-111. “O excellent Brahmanas, for the sake of the 
welfare of devotees of the twice-born caste, you too should im¬ 
part to all devoted disciples, my perfect knowledge at my 
instance. There is no doubt in this that he who is Isvara (Siva) 
is Narayana. This greatest knowledge should be imparted to 
those who do not see any difference (between the two) viz. Siva 
and Visnu. 

112-113a. He who is called Narayana is my Supreme 
personality. It abides in the soul of all beings, is quiescent and 
established imperishably. 

113b-114a. The people who see difference (in me and 
Visnu) and perceive me otherwise, do not see liberation. They 
are born again and again in the world. 

114b-115a. Those who see this unmanifest Visnu and 
me. Lord Mahesvara as identical are not born again (in 
Saihsara). 

115b-116a. Hence observe and worship Visnu, the 
unchanging Atman without beginning and end as the same as 
me. 

116b-117a. Those who see otherwise and think about the 
difference in the deities pass on to terrible hells. I am not 
present in them. 



386 


Kurma Pur ana 


117b-118a. I liberate the person who does not censure 
Narayana whether he is a fool or a scholar, or a Candala or a 
Brahmana depending on me. 

118b-119a. Hence this great Yogin, the supreme person 
(Visnu) should be worshipped and bowed to by my devotees 
in order to generate my pleasure.” 

119b-120a. After saying this and embracing Vasudeva, 
the Pinaka-bearing Lord vanished even as all were observing. 

120b-121a. Lord Narayana eschewed his excellent body 
and took up the excellent guise of an ascetic. 

121b-122a. He said to the Yogins — “By the grace 
ofParamesthin (Siva) the blemishless perfect knowledge has 
been acquired by you all. The perfect knowledge of Lord 
Mahesa is destructive of worldly existence. 

122b-123a. O Lordly sages, go forth without mental 
affection. All of you propagate the perfect knowledge of 
Paramesthin to virtuous disciples. 

123b-124a. This perfect knowledge pertaining to Isvara 
should be given to a quiescent devotee, the virtuous one who 
maintains the sacrificial fire and particularly to a Brahmana.” 

124b-125a. After saying this, Narayana, the great Yogin, 
the Atman of the universe, the most excellent among the 
knowers of Yoga and Yogins, vanished from the scene. 

125b-126a. Those sages bowed to Mahesvara, the Lord 
of Devas and Narayana, the cause of the Bhutas and went 
to their respective abodes. 

126b-128. Holy lord the great sage Sanatkumara gave 
the perfect knowledge pertaining to Isvara to Saihvarta. Who 
imparted it to Satya-Vrata. The leading Yogin Sanandana gave 
it to the great sage Pulaha. Pulaha gave it to Gautama. 
Prajapati Ahgiras gave it to Bharadvaja, learned in the Vedas. 

129-130a. Kapila gave it to Jaigisavya and pancasikha. 
My father Parasara, the seer of all principles, acquired that 
great perfect knowledge from Sanaka. Valmikigot it from him. 

130b-131a. The great Yogi Vamadeva, Rudra, the 
controller of Kala and wielder of Pinaka, the offspring of Sati 
and Siva imparted this knowledge to me formerly. 

131b-132a. Lord Narayana, Hari, the son of Devaki, 
himself gave this excellent knowledge to Arjuna. 



II.11.132b-145a 


387 


132b-134a. Ever since I acquired this excellent (perfect 
knowledge) from Rudra Vamadeva, I have had a special 
devotion to Girisa (Siva, the Lord of mountains). I have sought 
special refuge in Girisa worthy of being the shelter, Girisa the 
Lord of the Bhutas (goblins), the trident-bearing Sthanu, the 
Lord of Devas. 

134b-136a. Accompanied by your wives and sons, O 
Gentle Sirs, you too resort to Lord Sambhu, Siva the bull- 
vehicled deity. Exist by means of his grace. Worship Sankara 
through the path of activity, worship Mahadeva, the Lord of 
bulls (lord of speech) having serpents for his ornament.” 

136b-138a. When this was narrated, Saunaka and others 
bowed to Mahesvara, eternal Sthanu. Delighted in their minds 
they spoke to Vyasa, the son of Satyavati the holy Lord 
Krsnadvaipayana, who was Lord Hrsikesa himself and Siva, 
the Isvara of the worlds. 

138b-140a. By your favour, steady devotion to the bull- 
bannered deity worthy of being a refuge, has arisen. This is 
inaccessible even to Devas. O excellent sage, please narrate 
the excellent path of action (Karma-Yoga)^ whereby Lord 
Isa has to be propitiated by those who seek salvation. In your 
presence, Suta may hear the words of the holy Lord. 

141b-143a. Hence, mention the epitome of virtue 
(Dharma) capable of protecting the entire worlds. This is what 
has been narrated by Visnu the Lord of Devas, who had assumed 
the form of a tortoise, when he had been requested by Sakra 
along with the sages at the churning of the Nectar. 

On hearing the words of the sages, the son of Satyavati, 
explained the whole of the eternal path of Action. 

143b-144a. He who always reads this dialogue of the 
deity clad in Elephant-hide with the sages the Chief of whom 
was Sanatkumara shall be liberated from all sins. 

144b-145a. He who narrates this to pure Brahmanas 
devoted to celibacy and he who ponders over the meaning 
attains the greatest goal. 


1. This is how lydsa-gitd, the next section is introduced. 



388 


KurmaPurana 


145b-147. He who listens to this always with great devo¬ 
tion and steady adherence to holy rites shall be freed from all 
sins and honoured in the Brahmaloka. Hence, this must be read 
with all efforts by learned men. It must be heard and 
subsequently pondered over particularly in the company of 
Brahmanas. 


CHAPTER TWELVEi 

The Path of Action Duties of celibate students 


Vydsa said : 

1. All of you, sages, listen to the eternal Karmayoga 
(Path of action) that brings about the everlasting benefit to the 
Brahmanas. It is being narrated now. 

2. To sages listening attentively to him, Manu, the 
progenitor of the world formerly explained this (path of Karma) 
that has been established in the Vedas and all the details of 
which were taught to Brahmanas. 


1. The present chapter is the first in the Vyasa Gita which forms a 
part of KP. (II chs. 12-24). In this section, Vyasa explains the duties of all 
Varoas diXid ASramas (the four main divisions of the society and the four 
stages in the life of an individual). About its interpolatory nature vide Intro.. 
—Pasupatisation of the KP. 

This chapter describes mainly the duties of a religious student 
{Brahmacari). The description of the duties of a Brahmacarin are detailed in 
Smrtis like Manu II. 36-249, Yaj. I. 10-50 & Puranas like AP. 153. 1-16, 
Bh. P. VII.12.1-16, VP. Ill 9.1-6 and a number of verses are common to 
them and the KP. But the special feature of KP. is that it has incorporated 
practically the whole of this chapter from AuSanasa Smr. ch. I. Hence there is no 
propriety (as A.S. Gupta does it in his Edt of KP. p. 824) in referring to 
Manu simply because Vyasa is made to state that he is reporting what 
Manu expounded to sages in the days of yore. 

KP. however, had the status of a Smrti and many verses from this- 
chapter are quoted as authority in respectable works on Dharma-S^tra, like 
SMC, CC, Vira-mitrodaya, Nirnaya Sindhu and others. 



II.12.3-11 


389 


3. As this path dispels all sins and is meritorious and 
as it is resorted to by multitudes of sages, listen to it with 
attentive mind, even as I narrate it to all of you. 

4. O excellent Brahmanas, in the eighth year of his life 
from the day of conception or from the day of birth^ one should 
be invested with the sacred thread in accordance with the injunc¬ 
tions of one’s own Sutra. He should then study the Vedas. 

5. He should have a ritualistic staff, wear a girdle and 
a secred thread and the skin of a black antelope, subsist on alms, 
observe celibacy and should stay happily in his hermitage (or 
stage of life). 

6. Cotton thread was created formerly by Brahma 
for the purpose of Upavita (sacred thread). It consists of thrice- 
spun yarn. It should be made of Kusa grass or cotton. 

7. A Brahmana should always wear the sacred thread 
and keep his tuft of hair (on the head) tied into a knot. 
Otherwise, whatever rite he performs shall be futile. 

8. He should wear unmutilated (unsewn ?) cloth of cotton 
(which may be) ochre-coloured. White cloth without holes (i.e. 
not torn) is the excellent wearing apparel. 

9. The skin of the black antelope makes an excellent 
upper cloth. It is auspicious. If the hide of the antelope is not 
available, that of Ruru deer is prescribed. 

10. If the thread is placed over the left arm and under the 
right arm it is called Upavita.'^ This is the way in which it is 
always worn. If it is worn round the neck (like a garland) it is 
called JVivita. 

11. O Brahmanas, if the thread is worn over the right 
arm and under the left arm it is called Pracindvita. It should be 
followed at the time of the performance of the rites for the Pitrs. 


1. Vide Asvalayana Gr. S. I. 19.1-6. This is endorsed by Apastamba 
(10.2-3) and even Patanjali (Mababhasya Up. 57). 

2. W 10-13 explain the three methods of wearing the sacred thread 
and the occasions on which they are to be so worn. This practice is as old 
as Tait. Samhita (II.5.11.1) which states : 

nivitam manmyavam pracindvUam fntrrtam pavitam devanam 
The method of wearing the thread as upavita^ pradnamta is given in 
Gobhila Gr. S.I. 2.2-4. KP. endorses the same. 



390 


Kurma Pur ana 


12-13. One should always wear the sacred thread as 
Upavita in the following instances viz.—in the chamber of sacri¬ 
ficial fires, in the cowpen, while Homa is performed or Japa is 
undertaken, during the recitation of the Vedic Mantras, while 
taking food always in the presence of Brahmanas, while respect¬ 
fully worshipping the preceptors, at the two junctions (i.e. 
performing sandhya--pT 2 iyeT at dawn and at dusk) and while 
meeting saintly men. This is the eternal injunction. 

14. The girdle^ of the Brahmana should be made of the 
Munja grass twisted three times. It shall be soft and of equal 
thickness throughout. There may be one or three knots. O 
Brahmanas, (if Munja grass is unavailable), it may be made of 
Kusa grass as well. 

15. A Brahmana should hold a staffs made ofBilva or 
Palasa tree. It should come up to his head (in height). It can 
be made of any other tree (prescribed as being) worthy of being 
used for sacrifices. It should be soft and devoid of crack in the 
middle. 

16. A should perform the 5a«(f4)'«-Prayers with 

full concentration in the morning as well as in the evening. By 
failure to perform it due to passion, covetousness, fear or delu¬ 
sion, he shall become fallen. 

17. Thereafter, he should perform the rites of the fire- 
worship in accordance with the injunctions, both in the morning 
and in the evening. He should propitiate Devas, the sages as 
well as the Pitrs only after taking bath. 

18. He should worship the deities with flowers, leaves and 
water. He should invariably revere the elders, according to the 
prescription in dharma. 

19. Desirous of* longevity and health but, excluding 
(request for) wealth, he should humbly bow down respectfully 
saying (atthe same time his name). “Sir, this I am (so and so) 
by name”. 


1. Asvalayana Gr. S. 1.19.11, Manu 11.42; 11.43 allows one, three 
or five which Kulluka attributes to family usage. 

2. Baudhayana Dh. S.II.5.17 is accepted here. 

*amicchan is a better v.l. than sarmidhyam (vicinity to longevity and 
health) adopted in the Vehkt. Text. 



11.12.20-30 


391 


20. At the time of obeisance, the Brahmam should be told: 
O be longlived, O gentle one, at the end of his name, the 
long letter A should be added with the Pluta accent (of three 
mores) on the penultimate syllable (i.e. the vowel is prolated). 

21. If a Brahmana does not salute in return when 
saluted, he shall not be honoured by learned men he isjust like 
a Sudra.^ 

22. The hands should be cross-wise when touching the 
feet of a preceptor. His left foot should be touched with the 
left hand and the right foot should be touched with the right 
hand.^ 

23. One should in the first instance make obeisance to 
that gentleman from whom one has acquired regular, Vedic or 
spiritual knowledge. 

24. (While paying obeisance) one should carry in 
one’s hands, water, alms, flowers, sacrificial twigs and such other 
things. Now (should he do so ?) when performing the rites of 
gods. 

25. On meeting a Brahmana, one shall ask him about 
Kusda (welfare), a Ksatriya should be asked Anamaya ( non¬ 
ailment) ; Vaisya should be asked about his K^ema (prosperity 
and security) and Sudra should be asked about his health. 

26-28. The preceptor, father, eldest brother, king, 
maternal uncle, father-in-law, maternal grandfather, paternal 
grandfather, one belonging to a superior caste and paternal 
uncle—all these are remembered as Gurus (superiors). Mother, 
maternal grand-mother, teacher’s wife, sisters of father and 
mother, the mother-in law, paternal grandmother and elder 
brother’s wife—these are elderly ladies. Thus the elder ones on 
the side of mother and that of the father have been detailed. 

29. Mentally, Verbally and Physically one should obey 
these. On seeing the preceptor, one shall get up and make obeis¬ 
ance with palms joined in reverence. 

30. One should not sit along with these; one should not 
argue with these for the sake of money (over money matters). 


1. Manu II. 126. 

2. This method of clasping the feet of the preceptor is prescribed in 
Dh. S. of Visnu (28.15), Baudhayana (1.2.24) and Manu 11.72. 



392 


Kurma Pur ana 


Even for the sake of remaining alive, no one should speak harsh¬ 
ly to these out of hatred. 

31. Even a person who has risen up by dint of other good 
qualities, incurs downfall if he hates elders. Among all these 
elders, five are particularly to be revered.^ 

32. Among them the first three are the most excellent, 
(viz.) he who procreates, she who gives birth to and he by whom 
learning is imparted and among these three (at first) the mother 
(should be) highly respected. 

33-36. (The three mentioned before and) the eldest 
brother and husband—these five are remembered as Gurus. 
These five must be specially worshipped through every effort of 
oneself or even by sacrificing one’s life, by one who wishes for 
prosperity. As long as the parents are devoid of observations 
the son should abandon everything else and should be solely 
devoted to them. If the mother and the father are very well 
pleased with the good qualities of the son, that son shall attain 
all dharma (religious merits) due to that holy rite. There is no 
deity equal to the mother; there is no preceptor equal to the 
father. 

37. There is no way of fully repaying their debts (by 
helping them in return). One should continuously do everything 
physically, mentally and verbally that pleases them. 

38. Without being permitted by these two, the son should 
not perform any other holy rite excepting what yields salvation 
as well as the Nitya and Naimittika rites. 

39-40a. The essence of dharma that yields infinite benefit 
after death, has been related. After propitiating the expounder 
duly and dismissed by him with due permission, the disciple 
enjoys the benefit of learning. After death he is respected in 
the heaven. 

40b-41a. The foolish person who disrespects the eldest 
brother who is on a par with his father, falls into a terrible hell 
after death, as a result of that sin. 

41b. If one is to follow the path (of religion) the master 
(husband) should always be honoured. 


1. VV. 31-37 enumerate the persons who are to be respected as gurus 
(preceptors). Manu II. 221-2Z1 and Devala quoted in SMC I. p. 35. 



II.12.42a-52a 


393 


42a. Even if service is rendered to one’s mother, one 
attains greatness in the world. 

42b-43a. Holy sage Manu has said that those men who 
lay down their lives for the sake of the master’s doles attain ever¬ 
lasting worlds. 

43b-44. The younger people should stand up and greet^ 
the followidg by saying Asau Aham (this I) —the people, viz.— 
uncles both maternal and paternal, fathers-in-law, sacrificial 
priests and preceptors. The initiated, though he be younger 
shall not be addressed by name. 

45-46. The knower of virtue should address him with the 
prefix bho bhavan. The Brahmana shall be honoured, wor¬ 
shipped and bowed to by Ksatriyas and others, seeking 
fortune. They must be honoured with due respect. The Ksatri¬ 
yas and others are not to be greeted first by a Brahmana. 

47. Those who have vast learning and are endowed with 
perfect knowledge, holy rites and good attributes, do worship. 
The Sruti says that the Brahmana should offer Svasti (Blessings, 
may it be well with you) to people of all castes. 

48-49a. Between people of the same caste greeting and 
saluting is desirable. Fire-god is the preceptor unto the twice- 
born; a Brahmana is the preceptor unto the people of all castes. 
The husband is the preceptor unto the women and the guest 
is the preceptor unto all. 

49b-50a. Learning, holy rites, penance, kinsmen and 
wealth the fifth in the series—they say that these five are things 
worthy of honour. The earlier one is better than the latter one. 

50b-51a. Any man of three castes who possesses these 
both in number and superiority, is worthy of being recepient of 
honour. A Sudra in the tenth decade of life is also worthy of 
respect. 

51 b-52a. Way should be given( priority should be accord¬ 
ed) to the Brahmana, to a woman, to the king, to the blind, 
to the aged one, to one bending down with burden, to the sick 
and to the weak. 


1. VV. 43b-50 deal with the etiquettes of paying respects by a junior 
to a senior. It consists of declaration of one’s name etc. {upasangraharia and 
Abhivadana) 



394 


Kurma Pur ana 


52b-53a. (The religious student) should, with purity of 
body and mind, bring alms everyday from the houses of decent 
people, offer it first to the preceptor and then partake of it 
silently with his permission. 

53b-55. The excellent Brahmana who has been invested 
with the sacred thread should beg for alms with the word Bhavati 
in the beginning— {i.e. Bhavati Bhiksatfi dehi —O gentle lady give 
the alms) ; the Ksatriya should use the word Bhavati in the 
middle (i.e. Bhiksam bhavati dehi —AlmsO gentle lady, give) and 
a Vaisya should use the word Bhavati in the end (i.e Bhiksaih 
dehi Bhavati—give alms O gentle lady) One should beg for 
alms, at the outset, of his mother, sister, mother’s sister or one 
who does not disrespect him. He should go to the houses of the 
people of his own caste for begging or indiscriminately to the 
houses of any person of any caste taking care to avoid the 
house of the fallen man. 

56. A Brahmacarin (a religious student) should beg for 
alms everyday from the houses of persons not devoid of Vedas 
and Yajnas and those who strictly adhere to their duties. He 
should be pure in mind and body. 

57-58a. One should not beg for alms at the house of the 
preceptor or a cousin or near kinsman. If the other houses are 
not available, he should avoid the earlier houses, i.e. taking the 
last named first. 

58b. Or if the houses mentioned before are impossible, 
he should roam the whole village with self control, exercising 
restraints over speech and not glancing at various quarters. 

59-60a. Collecting the alms without any deceit, he 
should cook it (v.l. collecting alms just sufficient for his need) 
he should eat it always with self restraint, control over speech 
(i.e. silently) and with proper attention. 

60b-61. An observer of the vow (of celibacy) should 
always subsist on alms and take food once a day. The subsistence 
of one who maintains himself on alms is remembered to be on 
a par with fast. He should honour the cooked food always 
and eat without despising it. 


1. Baudhayana Gr. S. II.5.47-53, also Manu II. 49-50. 



11.12.62—13.10 


395 


62. Looking at it, he should be delighted and contented. 

63. Gluttonous eating is ill for health and destructive of 
longevity, and it does not secure heaven. It is non-meritorious 
and reproached by the world. Hence, one should avoid it. 

64-65. One should eat food facing the east or the sun. 
He should not take food facing the north. This is the eternal 
injunction. After washing the hands and feet he should perform 
Acamana rite^ twice. He should sit in a clean place and take food- 
After taking food he should perform Acamana twice. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

The usages of §i}tas. Good Conduct. 


Vydsa said : 

1-3. An excellent Brahmana should perform the Acamana* 
rite (sipping water) in these circumstances (even though he had 
done so previously) : after taking food, after drinking any beverage, 
after sleeping, after bath, after walking in a street, on touching 
the lips without the hair, after wearing garments, after the dis¬ 
charge of semen, urine or faeces, on uttering an improper word, 
after spitting, at the beginning ofVedic study, at the time of 
hiccough or sigh, on coming from a quadrangle or a cremation 
ground and at the time of the two Sandhyas i.e. dawn and dusk. 
In the last case, he shall perform the Acamana twice. 

4-10. The Acamana rite is to be performed in the following- 
circumstances also :- After talking to a Candala or a Mleccha; 


1. Since ancient times Acamana or sipping of -water before, in and 
after certain acts, occasions etc. was regarded essential from the purificatory 
point of view. Elaborate rules for Acamana rite are prescribed in Dharma 
Sutras e.g. Apastamba 1.5.15.2-11; 16.1-16) and Smrtis like Manu II. 58-62, 
Yaj. I. 18-21. The occasions for draTnana detailed here, were already pres¬ 
cribed in Apastamba Dh. S. 1.5.16.15-16, Manu V. 138 & 145 & Yajna- 
valkya 1.196. 



396 


Kurma Purana 


after conversing with women, Sudra and a person defiled by 
Ucchi^ta (stale leaving), after touching a person who is defiled 
by Ucchi^ta as well as food-stuff of that sort. When one sheds 
tears or spills blood, after taking food, performance of the sandhya 
prayer at dawn and dusk, after taking a bath, after discharging 
urine and faeces and shall perform Acamana twice; after 
sleeping, he should perform the rite only once; after touching 
fire, or cows. After touching women or after binding the knot 
of the waist-cloth, he should perform Acamana. He should touch 
the grass, water or the earth, when he touches his hair or touches 
a cloth that is not washed; for the purpose of Acamana the water 
should not be hot nor shall it contain foam. It should be pure. 
He should be silent at that time. A person seeking purity shall 
sit facing the east or the north at the time of Acamana. If one 
performs Acamana covering his head or neck with dhoti (waist- 
cloth) worn loosely without knot or tucking and the knot of the 
tuft of the hair united and without washing feet, one remains im¬ 
pure despite Acamana. A wise person should not perform Acamana 
with shoes on, standing in water, wearing a turban. 

11 -15a. No sensible man should perform Acamana when the 
hand is defiled by Ucchifta (leavings of food) nor should he per¬ 
form the Acamana with the water by means of the shower, nor 
should he perform Acamana with water supplied by a single hand. 
It should not be without the sacred thread. He should not be 
seated with shoes on (?) or on the knees. The hand shall not reach 
outside the knees. The water shall not be poured out by Vaisya 
Sudra etc. by means of their hands. Nor should they be defiled 
by Ucchi^ta. Acamana should not be performed by touching water 
with fingers. One should not produce sounds (at the time of Aca¬ 
mana) . His mind should not be dwelling on other topics. The 
water should not be defective in colour or taste. The water should 
not be in short supply. The water should not be agitated with 
the hands. It should not be performed outside the room (?). A 
Brahmana is sanctified when the water (of the Acamana rite) 
reaches his heart. A Ksatriya is sanctified when the water 
reaches the throat. A Vaisya is purified as soon as the water is 
drunk. A woman and a Sudra are purified by merely touching 
the water. 



II.13.15b-24 


397 


15b-18. The (holy place) on the line at the root of 

the thumb is called Brahmya (Brahma Tirtha) (i.e. Brahma Tirtha 
is presumed to exist there). The root of the index finger is the 
excellent Pitrtirtha. The space after (beyond) the root of small 
finger is called Prajapatya (Tirtha). At the tip of the fingers is 
remembered Daiva Tirtha. It is glorified for the sake of the 
Deva (?). Or it is enjoined at the root (of the fingers) that per¬ 
taining to Agni is remembered in the middle finger. The same 
itself is the Saumika (pertaining to Soma) Tirtha. Realising 
thus one is not deluded. A Brahmana should always perform 
the Acamana rite through the Brahma Tirtha. 

19. He shall be pure if he performs the .ifcamaraa rite by 
means of the body belonging to the divinity (i.e. Daiva Tirtha) 
Pure at the outset, a Bramana should perform Acamana three 
times. 

20. He should touch the mouth with the root of the 
thumb well-covered.* (?) He should then touch the eyes by 
means of the thumb and the ring finger. 

21. He should touch both the nostrils by joining together 
the tips of the index finger and the thumb. He should touch the 
ears by joining together the tips of the small finger and the 
thumb. 

22. He should touch the arms with all fingers and the 
heart with palm. He should touch the umbilical region and the 
head, with all fingers. Or he shall touch both of them by 
means of the thumb. 

23. He should drink water three times. Thereby the 
deities are well delighted. We have heard that Brahma, 
Visnu and Mahesa are delighted thereby. 

24. By the wiping off (Parimarjana) of mouth the 
Gaiiga and the Yamuna are pleased. When the eyes are wiped 
the moon and the sun are delighted. 

1. The right hand (palm) used for holding water for Acamana is 
regarded as a congregation of holy Tirthas as given in VV. 15-18 here. The 
idea that holy Tirthas are located at the roots and or tips of fingers is as 
old as Dharma Sutras (e.g. Visnu 62.1-4, Baudhayana 5.14-18), though they 
differ regarding the location of certain Tirthas. 

♦The Venk. Text reads Sarhvria hut Sammrjya ‘having wiped out) will 
be a better reading. 



398 


Kurma Parana 


25. When the two nostrils are touched, the Asvin gods 
(Nasatya and Basra) are delighted. Similarly, when the two 
ears are touched the wind god and the fire god are delighted. 

26. When the heart is touched, the deities are pleased. 
By touching the head, Purusa becomes delighted. 

27. (While performing Acamana) when the sprays (of 
water) touch the limbs they do not defile by means of Ucchista. 
One shall be impure by touching the space between the teeth, 
when teeth are touched as well by means of the tongue and the 
lips. 

28. If the drops of water touch on the feet when one per¬ 
forms the Acamana rite, they are not defiled. They should be 
known as Bhumikas (v.l. Bhumiga - existent in the earth). 

29. Manu says that there is no defect (of Ucchifta) when 
Madhuparka (mixture of honey) or Soma is taken or when one 
chews the betel leaves. Nor is one defiled like this, when one 
eats fmits, roots or sugarcane. 

30. If a Brahmana becomes defiled (while eating and 
drinking) food and water in plenty,* he should keep down on 
the ground the material (that he is carrying), perform Acamana 
(after eating) and (then purify that material) by sprinkling 
water over it. 

31. While taking with him a bright metallic thing (such 
as a Pot), if Brahmana becomes defiled by Ucchista, he should 
place that article on the ground. He should then perform Aca¬ 
mana and take up that again. 

32. If he takes anything without chanting the Mantras 
and then becomes defiled by Ucchista, he should become pure on 
performing Acamana even without placing that article (on the 
ground). 

33-34a. It is optional in the case of wearing apparel etc. 
where it is not touched (?).** At night, in the forest-path 
infested with thieves and tigers, if anyone discharges urine and 
faeces with some article in his hands, he is not defiled. 


*v.l. Pracaran—whUe walking. 

♦*v.l. tat samsprfyacamed i/in should perform Acamana after touching it 
{cloth, etc.) 



II.13.34b-43 


399 


34b-35a. During the day time, one should face the north 
and during the night he should face the south and discharge 
urine and faeces, after placing the sacred thread on the right 
card 

35b-36a. He should cover the ground with wooden pieces, 
leaves, grass or lumps of clay before passing urine and faeces. 
He should cover the head at that time. 

36b-37. One should not evacuate the bowels or pass 
urine in shady place, near the wells or rivers, cowpens or mon¬ 
asteries, in the middle of the path, on ashes, in burning fire, 
within the house or in the cremation ground. He shall not do so 
in the path traversed by cows, in a ploughed field, in a place 
abounding in great trees, in a grassy meadow nor on the top of 
a mountain. 

38-39. While answering the calls of nature one should not 
remain standing nor shall he be in the nude nor on a moun¬ 
tain peak. He shall never pass urine etc. in a dilapidated tem¬ 
ple or an ant hill. He shall not do so in pits and ditches where 
there are animals. He shall not do so while passing through the 
the Royal road. He shall not discharge odour on husks, char¬ 
coal or broken pots. 

40. One shall not do so in a holy centre nor in the sac¬ 
red water nor in a quadrangle. He shall not discharge faeces in 
a garden or a nearby place; nor in a barren land nor in a very 
dirty place. 

41-42. One shall not discharge faeces etc. with shoes on. 
While going in an aerial chariot (v.l. while holding an um¬ 
brella) or standing face to face with a woman, elders or Brah- 
manas one shall not evacuate bowels. Neither in front of a 
shrine nor that of an idol shall one discharge urine or faeces. 
One shall not do so facing the luminaries or water nor in front 
of the sun, moon and the fire. 

43. The purificatory rite shall be performed with clay 
brought from the banks. The stickiness and the odour shall be 


1. Rules regarding answering calls of nature should be a part of 
hygiene. But Dharma Sutras (e.g. Apastamba 1.11.30, 15-30, Vasistha 
VI. 10-19) and Smrtis like Manu (IV. 45-52, 56), Yaj. (I. 16-17) and 

Puranas like Vayu (78.59-64) have dealt with this topic in details. KP. or 
rather Auianasa Smrti. has summarised them here concisely. 



400 


Kurma Purdna 


removed. He shall perform carefully the purifacatory rite with 
water taken out from it (before hand ?). 

44. A Brahmana should not bring clay from a dusty 
place, or a marshy place. He shall not bring it from the high 
way nor from barren land. Nor from the soil defiled by Ucchifta 
of some one else performing ^auca (the purificatory rite.) 

45. He should not bring the clay from a temple nor from 
a well nor from the open village nor from the waterbed. In 
accordance with the injunction mentioned before, he should 
always perform the Acamana rite as well. 


CHAPTER FOURTEENi 

Duties of Brahmacarins 

Vydsa said : 

1. Thus (the Brahmacarin) equipped with the staff etc. 

and strictly adhering to (cleanliness) and Acdra (good 

conduct) should start the study of the Vedas when called upon 
for it. He should look at his Guru’s face and start his study. 

2. He should continuously keep the hands lifted (in 
reverence) and should strictly abide by the rules of conduct 
at the time of dusk (?).* When permitted (by the preceptor) 
saying, “be seated”, he shall sit facing the preceptor.^ 

3-4. The disciple should not remain lying down when he 
listens to or converses (with the preceptor). While sitting or 
standing or getting up near the preceptor, the disciple should 
not keep his face averted from his guru. At no time should the 


1. Most of the verses in this chapter are the same as those in Ch. Ill 
of Ausanasa Smrti. 

* Sandhydedra but a better v.l. is Sddhvdcdra, ‘good conduct’. 

2. VV. 2-37 give the code of conduct to be followed by a pupil during 
his stay at Guru’s hermitage. These are based on Dharma Sutras (e.g. 
Gautama II. 13-25) & Smrtis like Manu (II. 177-179.) 



II.14.5-16a 


401 


disciple be seated on a couch in the preceptor’s presence. With¬ 
in the range of the vision of the preceptor, the disciple should 
not sit as he pleases. 

5. Even when not seen by him (i.e. in the absence of his 
guru), the preceptor’s name should not be directly mentioned 
by the disciple. Nor should he mimic the preceptor’s mode of 
walking or behaviour. 

6. If, at any place, the preceptor is found to be censured 
or refuted in argument, the disciple should close his ears or walk 
out of that place to another place. 

7. When standing far away, the disciple need not worship 
the preceptor. He shall not revere him angrily or (while 
he is) in the vicinity of a woman. The preceptor should not be 
answered gruffly. He should not be retorted. While the 
teacher is standing, the disciple should not remain seated. 

8. For the sake of the teacher, the disciple should fetch 
potfulls of water, Kusa grass, flowers and sacrificial twigs. He 
should anoint, wipe off or massage his limbs fiequently. 

9. He should neither tread over nor step across the 
garland previously worn by the teacher, his bedstead, his 
(wooden)sandals and (leather) shoes, seat, shadow and his oblong 
chair. 

10. He should gather tooth-pick etc. for the sake of the 
preceptor. He should duly inform the preceptor about the 
duties carried out by himself. Without taking leave of the 
preceptor, he should not go anywhere. The disciple shall be 
engaged in activities pleasing and beneficial to the preceptor. 

11-12. In his presence, the disciple should never stretch 
his legs. In the presence of the preceptor, the disciple should 
avoid yawning, loud laughter, covering of the neck etc. He should 
not speak words while cracking the joints of fingers. He shall 
study the Vedas at the proper time, as long as the preceptor is 
not dispirited. 

13. At the preceptor’s instance, he may sit on a plank 
with mental concentration. He should not by himself ever 
remain in the seat, bed or a vehicle (along with the preceptor ?). 

14-16a. He should run after the preceptor, should he 
be running and follow him when he goes. He should not sit 



402 


Kurma Pur am 


along with the preceptor in a bullock-cart, horse-carriage, 
camel-cart, top portions of mansions, mats, rock, planks and 
boats. He should always keep subdued the sense organs. He 
should not be angry, be pure, and should speak sweet and whole¬ 
some words. 

16b-18. The religious student should avoid using fragrant 
garlands of white flowers and sweet beverages. He should refrain 
from injuring living beings. He should not take oil-bath or apply 
collyrium to the eyes, nor should he hold umbrellas. The follow¬ 
ing should be avoided very scrupulously by him : passion, 
covetousness, fear, slumber (during day time), songs musical 
instruments and dancing, gambling, spreading of false remours, 
glancing at or seizing women, attacking others and calumny. 

19. He should collect and fetch the following things as 
much as necessary, viz., water pots, flowers, cowdung, clay 
and the Kusa grass. Everyday, he should go begging for alms. 

20. He should not witness dance-programmes. He should 
always be disinterested in songs etc. Artiflcial salt and all stale 
things shall be avoided. (All salted preparations, when stale, 
shall be avoided). 

21. He shall not look at the sun (at the sunrise or sunset). 
He should not use tooth brush twigs. He should not go to a 
lonely spot in the company of unclean women nor should he 
have lengthy conversation with low castes and Sudras. 

22. He should do everything to please the preceptor and 
not out of passion or his sweet will. He should perform ablution 
somehow to remove impurities. 

23. A Brahmana should not even think ofabandoning his 
preceptor. If out of delusion or covetousness, he abandons (the 
preceptor), he shall be fallen. 

24. He should never antagonise that person from whom 
he receives knowledge, whether secular, Vedic or spiritual. 

25. Manu, however, has laid down that even a Guru 
(preceptor) can be abandoned, should he take to wrong paths, 
be arrogant or not know what should be done and what should 
not be done. 

26. When the preceptor of the preceptor is nearby, the 
disciple should show as much devotion as towards the preceptor; 



11.14.27-36 


403 


unless specifically allowed by his preceptor, he should not pay 
obeisance to his own elders. 

27. This very behaviour should be constant in regard to 
the preceptors of other lores to one’s kith and kin, to those who 
prevent one from Adharmas and who give instructions in bene¬ 
ficial things. 

28. It is better that one should always behave towards 
the sons, wives and kinsmen of the preceptors as though towards 
the preceptors. 

29. A young disciple should honour all persons worthy 
of honour (or shall help them) in the Tajna rite. The son of 
the preceptor deserves honour like him (the preceptor), if he 
also begins to teach. 

30. The disciple should neither bathe the son of the pre¬ 
ceptor nor apply cosmetics over his body. He should not partake 
of his leavings, nor should he clean his feet. 

31. The wives of the preceptors should be honoured and 
respected like the preceptor, if they are of his own caste. But if 
they belong to lower castes, they are to be honoured only by 
greetings and standing up (when they come). 

32. The disciple should not perform the following 
personal services to the wives of the preceptors, viz. : bathing 
them, anointing their bodies with oil, application of cosmetics 
over their bodies, and beautifying their tresses. 

33. If the wife of the preceptor be a youthful maiden, 
she should not be bowed to by touching her feet. The disciple 
should touch the ground and make obeisance saying asau 
aham (This I am). 

34. After return from a journey abroad, the disciple 
should pay respect by touching the feet of the wives of his pre¬ 
ceptor (on the first day but afterwards) on every day, he should 
bow by touching the ground, remembering the duty (of good 
men). 

35. Mother’s sister, maternal uncle’s wife, mother-in-law, 
father’s sister and the wife of the preceptor—all these are to be 
fespected equally like his preceptor’s wife. They are equal to the 
wife of the preceptor. 

36. Brother’s wife of the same caste deserves greeting 
by touching the feet every day. The women folk of the 



404 


Kurma Purana 


kinsmen and relatives are to be similarly worshipped by every 
Brahma na. 

37. One should behave towards the sisters of one’s father 
and mother and his own elder sister as though towards his 
mother. Of course the mother is greater than all of them. 

38. The preceptor shall teach such a self-possessed, 
modest (non-arrogant) disciple, endowed with decency of 
conduct. He should continuously teach him the Vedas, the 
Dharmas (Dharma-lSastra or smrtis), the Puranas and the 
Ahgas (Ancillary subjects like Siksa, grammar etc.) 

39. If the disciple has lived a disciplined life (at his 
residence) for a full year but the preceptor fails to impart per¬ 
fect knowledge to him, the preceptor incurs all the sins of the 
disciple. 

40. As prescribed in the dharma-sastra, a preceptor 
should teach the following ten persons : the preceptor’s son, a 
person desirous of learning or one who serves the teacher, a person 
of the teaching profession, an abider by dharma, a (mentally and 
physically ?) pure person, the explainer of suktas {subhdfitas ?), 
one disinterested in erotics and a saintly person. 

41. The following six should be duly instructed viz. : A 
grateful person, a non-malicious one, an intelligent one, a man 
who has rendered help, a trustworthy person and a beloved one. 

42. The Brahman (Vedas) should be gifted to these and 
to others together what has already been mentioned (viz. Purana 
etc. Facing the north, one should begin the Vedic study after 
performing Acamana and remaining self-controlled.^ 

43. After touching his feet and glancing at the face of 
the preceptor, the disciple shall say adMsva bho (Recite, O 
sir). He shall indicate “cessation” by using the word iti and 
should stop there. 

44. When the disciple is favourably seated, sanctified 
by Pavitras and rendered holy through three Pranayamas, he 
deserves the Orhkara. 

45. A Brahmana should duly repeat the Pranava at the 
end. A Brahmana should always perform the Vedic study with, 
the palms joined in reverence. 

1. VV. 42 ff. describe how the teaching work was done in those days. 



11.14.46-52 


405 


46. The Vedas constitute the eternal ‘Eye’ of all living 
beings. (The Brahmana should recite the Vedas everyday. 
Otherwise he slips and falls off from Brahminhood. 

47. He who recites the rk Mantras everyday, pro¬ 
pitiates the deities as if by the offerings of milk Ahutis. The 
contented Devas delight him for ever by granting him his 
wishes. 

48-49. He who regularly recites Yajus Mantras pro¬ 
pitiates the deities as if by means of offering of curds. He who 
recites Saman verses, everyday, propitiates (the deities as if) by 
means of the Ahutis of clariHed butter. He who recites the 
Atharvahgiras verses, propitiates the deities everyday as if by 
means of oblations of honey. He who reads the Vedahgas 
and the Puranas, propitiates devas through meat. 

50. A self-controlled person following the injunctions 
regarding daily religious duties should, after goingto the forest 
and in the vicinity of water (a river, lake etc.), continuously, 
recite the Gayatri Mantra with concentration of mind.^ 

*51. Recitation of the Gayatri Mantra for one thousand 
times is the most excellent, for one hundred times is the 
medium and for ten times is the minimum. One should always 
mutter Gayatri. This is declared as the Japa-Tajha (sacrifice 
in the form of Japa). 

52. The lord weighed once the Gayatri Mantra and 
the Vedas by means of a balance. On one side was the Gayatri 
Mantra and on the other side were the four Vedas. 


1. VV. 50-58 contain instructions about the Japa of the Gayatri 
Mantra and its importance. Why this particular verse in RV (III. 62.10) 
came to be valued so much even before the Brahmana period, is anybody’s 
guess. But even the Atharva Veda (XIX. 71-1) calls it mother of the Vedas 
(Vedamata). Naturally Brahmana, Sutra, Smrti and Purana works are as if 
competing with each other in eulogising it. The KP regards : om bhuh 
bhuvah svah {suvah) om tat savitur vare^yam etc. as the Gayatri Mantra for 
Japa and not the other combinations of vyahrtis and padas given by Apas- 
tamba and others. 

♦Due to oversight of the Printer, the Vehkt. Text has omitted the No. 
51 and has printed Verse No 51 as 52 and the mistake is carried on to the 
end. 



406 


Kurma Pur ana 


53. He shall first recite Orhkara and thereafter the 
Vyahrtis. Thereafter, he shall recite the Gayatrl Mantra with 
full faith and great concentration. 

54. The three eternal great Vyahrtis, “Bhuh, Bhuvah, 
Svah” originated in the former Kalpa. They quell all inaus¬ 
piciousness. 

55. The three Vyahrtis in their order are regarded as 
follows : 

(a) the Pradhana, Purusa and Kala. 

(b) Visnu, Brahma and Mahesvara, 

(c) Sattva, Rajas and Tamas Gunas. 

56. Orhkara is that great Brahman, Savitri (i.e. Gayatrl) 
is the imperishable one. This Mantra is of great potentiality. It 
is cited to be the essence of all essences. 

57. Strictly observing the vow of celibacy, he who under¬ 
standing the meaning of the Mantra, repeats Savitri (the 
Gayatrl Mantra) attains the greatest of goals. 

58. Gayatrl is the mother of the Vedas. Gayatrl is the 
sanctifier of the worlds. There is no greater Japa (Mantra for 
the purpose of repetition) than the Gayatrl. After realising 
this, one is liberated. 

59. The rite of Vedopakarman (inaugural ceremony of 
the academic year) is to be performed on the full Moon day of 
the month of Sravana. Excellent Brahmanas, it may be 
performed on the full moon day in the month of Asadha or 
Bhadrapada as well. 

60. A Brahmana should abandon the village and the 
city for a period of two and a half months. Observing celibacy 
he should study the Vedas, seated in a clean place, with full 
concentration and purity of the mind. 

61-62. (?) O Brahmanas, the external utsarjana(ritualistic 

conclusion) of the Chandas (Vedas and metres) should be 
performed in the month of Pausa. Or it may be performed on 
the first day of the bright half of the month of Magha in the 
forenoon. O Brahmanas, the Vedas and the metres are to be 
propitiated in their respective constellations. A man shall 
propitiate the Vedahgas and the Puranas in the dark half of 
the month. 

63. Persons studying the Vedas as well as those who 



II.14.64-71a 


407 


teach them should avoid the Anadhyaya?- day (holidays) (i.e. they 
shall not recite the Vedas on those days) as follows. 

64-66a. Prajapati has mentioned that the following 
occasions must be considered untimely for studies (till the next 
day) viz. at night if the wind blows with audible sound 
and during the day if columns of dust are raised : if there is 
lightning, thunder and rainfall, if there is subversion of great 
comets. 

66b-67a. If there is the loud sound of hurricane, if there 
is an earthquake and when the luminaries are eclipsed, one 
should know that these occasions are for discontinuation (i.e. 
Vedic studies should be stopped) till the next day even in the 
rainy season. 

67b-68a. If, after (sacrificial) fires have been kindled, 
there is the (roaring sound of) thunder and flashes of the 
lightning, there will be cessation of the Vedic studies till 
there is light (visibility). If this occurs out of season [anrtau ), 
there should be complete stoppage of studies that day (?). 

68b-69a. For those who are desirous of religious merits 
and expertise (mastery over the subject), complete cessation of 
studies, both in the villages and towns, is advised when putrid 
smell prevails. 

69b-70a. (The discontinuation of Vedic studies is 
prescribed) when a dead body lies in the village, in the vicinity 
of a Vrsala (an outcaste), during the (public) feasting (v.l. 
wailing) and in a crowd of people. 

70b-71a. One should not even mentally think of (Vedic 
studies) in water, at dead of night, while discharging urine. 


1. VV. 63-84 discuss the anadhydya days i.e. the days on which new 
portion of the Veda should not be taught. This restriction does not apply to 
non-Vedic texts like Vedahgas, Itihasa, Puranas and Dharraa-sastra (verse 
82b-83a below) 

The subject is discussed extensively in the Dharma (e.g. Apastamba 
1.3.94 to 1.3.11), Grhya (e.g. Sahkhayana IV. 7) Sutras, Smrtis e.g. Manu 
IV. 102-128) and Puranas (e.g. NP. I. 25.45-57). The list of holidays is 
pretty long. This cessation of Vedic studies was due to personal impurity 
(Asauca) and impurity of the place (Tait. Ar. II. 15) and time like certain 
tithis, occasions like eclipse, natural disturbances like storms. But they did 
not affect much the progress of studies as the restrictions were not applicable 
to non-Vedic studies. 



408 


K urma Pur ana 


and faeces, one is defiled by remnants of food and one who has 
partaken ofSraddha food. 

71b-72a. A learned Brahmana should not repeat Vedic 
Mantras for these days. After accepting the invitation for the 
Ekoddi^tairaddha (funeral dinner), when the king has Sutaka (i.e. 
impurity due to birth or death of relatives) and when there is 
Rahu’s Sutaka (i.e. Eclipse), he shall not recite Vedic passages 
for three days. 

72b-73a. As long as the viscidity and smell of the 
Ekoddi?ta Sraddha (the funeral dinner for one forbear) in the big 
body of the (v.l. learned) Brahmana remains, he shall not recite 
Vedic mantras. A person lying down or keeping the legs lifted 
up or sitting down with a cloth girt round the knees shall not 
repeat the Vedas. 

73b. A Brahmana should not study the Vedas in a 
supine position or sitting with feet raised or sitting with a cloth 
girt round the knees. 

74-75a. One shall not study the Vedas after eating meat 
or the food offered by persons with impurity. When there is 
fog, when the arrows are discharged and during the two 
Sandhyas (dawn and dusk), on the new moon day, full moon 
day, Caturdasi (fourteenth) and Astami (eighth) days, Vedic 
Mantras are not repeated (for study purpose). 

75b-76a. The cessation of Vedic studies for three days is 
prescribed at the time of Upakarma (beginning of the academic 
session) and Utsarga, and for one day on the Astakd days and 
last day (lit. night) of the seasons. 

76b-77a. There are three A^taka days mentioned by 
learned men. They fall on the eighth day during the dark half 
of the months of Margasirsa, Pausa and Magha. (The Astaka 
days are Anadkyaya days). 

77b-78a. One should not carry on Vedic study in the 
shade of the following trees viz. : {cordia Latifolia), 

Salmali (silk-cotton), Madhuka {Baslia Latifolia), Kovidara 
{Bauhinia Variegula) and Kapittha (Feronia Elepthantum). 

78b-79a. There is impurity for three days when a 
colleague or a fellow student or the preceptor dies. These days 
that are called Anadhyayas are holes (vulnerable points) for 
Brahmanas. 



II.14.79b-89 


409 


79b-81a. TheRaksasas attack at those points. Hence, one 
shall avoid these (Anadhyayas). In regard to Nitya rites and 
the worship of the Sandhyas, Upakarma (initial ceremony 
of Vedic studies after the monsoon), for completing a 
performance already commenced and Homa recitals, there is no 
Anadhyaya. 

81b-82a. When the wind is very strongly blowing on the 
Astaka days, one may recite one Mantra out of the Rgveda or 
Yajurveda or Samaveda. 

82b-83. There is no Anadhyaya in the case of the study 
of Vedahgas, Itihasas, Puranas and other Dharma Sastras. But 
Parvan days should be avoided. Thus the holy rites and duties 
of the religious students have been succinctly explained. 

84a. Formerly, this had been recounted by god Brahma 
to the sages of purified souls. 

84b-85a. O Brahmana, a person who does not learn the 
Vedas but continues his efforts in other fields in foolish. He is 
out of the Vedic fold. He should not be talked to by the twice- 
born people. 

85b-86a. An excellent Brahmana will not be contented 
merely by reading the Vedic texts. One who is devoid of 
practice (in accordance with the tenets of the Vedas) becomes 
dejected and dispirited like a cow stuck up in mud. 

86b-87a. If the disciple wishes to remain with his teacher 
for ever, he should practise Yoga and serve him till the death, 
for he may go to the forest and perform Homa into the fire, as 
per prescribed method.^ 

87b-88. He who has duly learned the Vedic texts but 
does not ponder over the meanings of the passage, is blind. He 
is like a Sudra. He does not understand the real meanings of 
the words. 

89. With absolute faith in the Veda, he should always 
study Veda with concentration of mind. Strictly adhering to 


1. VV. 86-89 refer to life-long celibates. Sahara on Jaimini 1.3.3 
remarks that such perpetual celibacy is not approved by Sruti. But Visnu as 
(quoted by SMC I. P. 63) allows it to abnormal people who are not 
entitled to Vedic rites. 



410 K urma Pur ana 

(the procedure of) Bhasma-Sndna (smearing of the holy ashes all 
over the body), he should be always self controlled and study 
especially Savitri (the Gayatrl Mantra) Satarudriya and the 
ancillaries of the Veda (like phonetics, prosody, grammar and 
others). 

90. These injuctions are great and ancient ones. They- 
have been well recounted in the Vedic treatises. This procedure 
is ancient and is in perfect accord with what is given in the 
Vedas. This is what lord Svayambhuva Manu explained in days 
of old, when he was requested by great and excellent sages. 

91. He who dedicates himself to Isvara and performs all 
duties in accordance with the injunctions shall ward off all the 
shackles of delusion and attain immortality. He shall attain the 
auspicious region devoid of ailment. 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 

The Duties of The Householder''- 


Vyasa said : 

I. O excellent Brahmanas, a Brahmana should obtain 
(i.e. learn well), one, two or all the four Vedas. After studying 
them and comprehending the meanings, he should perform the 
ablution (signifying the conclusion of the period of religious 
studentship). 


1. The stage of householder being the main stay of the subsistence of 
other asramas (stages) in life, has been considered as the best Asrama at 
least since the old Sutra period (Gautama III. 3, Manu III. 77-78, Mbh. 
Santi. 270.6-7). Hence the duties (dharmas) of householders are discussed in 
details in Smrtis, Puranas and digests on Dharma-sastra. For example vide 
Manu IV. 33 ff. Yajna-Valkya 1.96-127, NP. I. 26.3-27, VP. III. 9.7-16, 
Pd. P. Svarga 54.2-42, SMC, Parasara-Madhava (acarakanda) and others. 



II.15.2-10 


411 


2. After giving the fees to the preceptor, he should perform 
the (concluding) ablution with his (guru’s) permission.^ One 
who is self-possessed and has performed all the rites (prescribed 
vows of Brahmacarya) becomes capable and hence deserves the 
the holy ablution. 

3. He should hold the staff of bamboo. He should wear 
the undercloth and the upper garment. He should have two 
sacred threads, a water-pot (Kamandalu) with water.^ 

4. He should have an umbrella, an immaculately clean 
turban, sandals and shoes and golden earing and the Veda. He 
should be cleanly shaven, with nails clipped and thus shall be 
scrupulously clean. 

5. He should continuously be engaged in the self-study of 
the Vedas. He should not wear garland outside. A Brahmana 
shall not wear a red garland except that of Kancana flowers. 

6. He should wear white garments every day. He should 
use perfumes and appear neat and pleasing. If he has enough 
means, he should not wear old dirty clothes. 

7. He should not wear red clothes or those of gaudy 
colours. Nor should he use the following things used by others : 
The cloth, the water-pot, leather shoes, garland sandals. 

8. (He should not wear the following used by others, viz.: 
the sacred thread, ornaments as well as the skin of a black 
antelope. He should not wear the garment in the apasavya way 
(on the right shoulder and below the left arm) nor should he 
wear a loathsome garments. 

9. He should duly marry a girl similar to him (in caste?) 
of auspicious characteristics, beauty and features and suitable to 
him, she should not have any defect in her reproductory organs. 

10. A Brahmana should accept as wife a girl who is not 


The highest compliment paid to this Asrama is by the ancient Sutra- 
karas Gautama III.1 & 35 and Baudhayana (Dh. S. II.6.29.42-43) who 
emphatically state that this is the only one real Asrama [aikasramyam 
tvacdryah) 

1. Asvalayana Gr. S. III. 9.4. 

2. VV. 3-8 deal with Sndtaka-dharmas (duties of those who completed 
their studies and desire to be householders vide Manu IV 34 ff. 



412 


Kurma Pur ana 


born in the gotra of his mother^ and should be born in the gotra 
dissimilar to his sage (his gotra) and who is endowed with 
purity (cleanliness) and good character. 

11. He should go unto his wife only on those nights 
(sanctioned by scripture) after the monthly menses till the 
conception of a son. He shall scrupulously avoid the forbidden 
days. 

12. He shall observe the vow of celibacy and control over 
his senses on the sixth, eighth, twelfth, fourteenth and fifteenth 
days of the lunar fortnight. 

13. He should maintain the Avasathya fire (i.e. one of 
the five sacred fires to be kept in the house and used in 
sacrifices). He shall perform Homa in the sacrificial fire. A 
Snataka (house-holder) should observe all holy vows. 

14. He should actively perform everyday his duty as 
ordained by the Vedas. By not doing so, he immediately becomes 
fallen and goes to terrible hells. 

15. Pure in body and mind, he should daily practise 
the recitation of the Vedas. He should perform the holy rites 
as mentioned in the Grhyasutras as well as the Sandhya worship. 

16. He should cultivate friendship with persons of equal 
and superior status. He should always worship Isvara. He shall 
attain the blessings of deities. He should bedeck his wife with 
ornaments. 

17. He should not loudly proclaim his religious acts nor 
should he conceal his sinful activities; he should always do those 
things that increase his welfare and be sympathetic towards all 
living beings.^ 

18. He should always perform activities and speech 
suitable to and becoming in accordance with his age, duties, 
learning, nobility of birth, intellect and the Vedic injunctions. 

19. He should resort to that way of life which has been 
invariably followed by good men, and ordained by the Srutis 
and the Smrtis. He should not wish for anything contrary to it. 

20. That path through which one’s fathers and grand¬ 
fathers have gone should be followed by one. That is the path 

1. This shows that the author is probably a north-Indian or a 
Madhyandin. 

2. In fact Vv. 17 onward form a part of Sadacara, 



11.15.21-29 


413 


of the good. Going by that path, one shall cross the ocean of 
worldly existence. 

21. He should regularly recite passages from (one’s 
branch of) the Vedas. He should always wear the sacred thread. 
One who is truthful in speech and who has conquered anger, 
deserves to realise Brahman. 

22. He who is interested in the performance of ablutions 
and Sandhya-prayers everyday, who is devoted to Brahma- 
Yajna rite; the householder who is not malicious, who is soft 
and self-controlled, flourishes in heaven after death. 

23. A householder devoid of passion, fear and fury, who 
is free from covetousness and delusion, who performs Sraddhas 
and who is always engaged in the Japa of the Savitri Mantra, is 
liberated. 

24. He who is engaged in the welfare of his parents, is 
interested in the well-being of cows and Brahmanas, has his sen¬ 
ses subjected, performs Yajnas and is a devotee of Devas, is 
honoured in the Brahmaloka. 

25. He should always be engaged in the realisation of 
the three aims of life (Virtue, love and wealth), should perform 
worship of the deities; he shall be pure in the mind and 
body and bow to the gods everyday. 

26. Onecannot be called a Grhastha (householder) merely 
because one has a house to live in. He who temperamentally 
always shares everything with others, is endowed with forgive¬ 
ness and mercy, deserves to be called a householder. 

27. These are the characteristic features of a Brahmana 
viz: forbearance, mercy, perfect knowledge, truthfulness, mental 
control and control over the sense-organs and interest in the 
spiritual knowledge. 

28. An excellent Brahmana specially shall not err from all 
these. He should perform his duties in accordance with his 
capacity; and shall avoid all prohibited and censured activities. 

29. No one need entertain any doubt for the fact that if 
a householder, eschewing the confused state of delusion, attains 
the excellent Yoga, he is liberated from the bondage of 
Samsara. 



414 


Kurma Pur ana 


30. Forbearance is the ability to endure the defects 
originating from others’ anger, such as censure, transgression, 
defiance, violence, imprisonment and killing. 

31. The sages say that kindness is that mercifulness due 
to friendship (gentleness of heart) in regard to miseries of others 
in the same way as (in the case of) one’s own miseries. It is a 
direct means ofDharma (piety). 

32. The actual retention in memory of the fourteen 
lores should be known as Vijnana (perfect knowledge. It is there¬ 
by that Dharma flourishes. 

33. If, after duly studing the Vedas and comprehending 
the meanings, one is averse to religious activities, that 
(which he has acquired) is not considered to be Vijnana (perfect 
knowledge). 

34. One conquers the worlds through Satya (Truth); 
Truth is the excellent region. Learned men explain that the 
narration in the same order in which something has happened is 
truthfulness. 

35. Dama is the subjugation of the body. Sama originates 
from the clarity of intellect. Adhyatma (spirituality should be 
known as that imperishable attainment which one does not 
regret. 

36. That learning whereby the supreme lord Mahadeva 
himself is known, is glorified as Jnana (knowledge). 

37. The learned person who is absolutely devoted to him, 
wise, always free from anger and pure, is interested in (the 
five) “great sacrifices, becomes one with that supreme Deity. 

38. One should maintain one’s physical body with great 
effort as it is the abode of Dharma. Without one’s physical 
body, Rudra, the greatest lord, cannot be known by men. 

39. A Brahmana should invariably be engaged inDharma 
(Virtue), Artha (Wealth) and Kama (Love). He should never 
mentally conceive of that type of love or wealth which is devoid 
of Dharma. 

40. Even if one perishes due to practice of Virtue, one 
should never take to Adharma. Dharma is the Lord himself. It 
is the goal of all creatures. 

41. One shall always be pleasing to all living beings, he 
should never think of doing acts of injury against others. One 



11.15.42—16.4 


415 


should never censure the Vedas nor the deities. One should not 
even associate with those people (who do so). 

42. The pure Brahmana who invariably reads this chap¬ 
ter on Dharma, teaches it or narrates it (to others) is honoured 
in the Brahmaloka. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

The Duties of the House Holder^ 

Rules of Good Conduct 

Vyasa said : 

1. One should not injure any living being. On no 
occasion should he speak falsehood. One shall not speak un¬ 
palatable and unwholesome things. One should by no means be a 
thief. 

2. The person who steals properties of others even if 
they be a blade of grass, a lump of clay, a plant or water, 
falls into the hell. 

3. One should not accept monetary gifts from a fallen 
king, Sudra or any other person. A learned man should avoid 
being a suppliant in front of a blameworthy person. 

4. One should never be a beggar; (if one has to beg) one 
should not beg the same person twice. This evil-minded beggar 
will deprive him of his life there-by. 


1. The ‘duties’ of householders are described in numerous works on 
Dharma-Sastra—Dharma Sutras (e.g. Apastamba II. 1-11, Vasistha VIII. 
1-17, XI. 1-48), Smrtis (e.g. Manu IV, Yajnavalkya 1.96-127), Mbk-Anu- 
Sdsana ch. 97, Puranas (e.g. Bh. P. VII. Ch. 11, XI. Ch. 17, NP. I. Ch. 43) 
and digests (e. g. SMC-I. pp. 88-282, Smrtyarthasara, pp. 18-48). A number 
of these verses prescribing ‘Do’s’ and ‘Don’ts’ are actually subhdsitds current 
among the ancient Indians as a number of these are common to Pali and 
Prakrits. These verses shed light on the customs, manners, prejudices etc. 
of the people of those times. 

The Daily duties {Ahnika) of a householder are described in Ch. 
XVIII. 



416 


Kurma Parana 


5. O excellent Brahmanas, he should not be one who 
misappropriates especially the properties of the deity. Even 
in emergency, he should never take away the wealth of a 
Brahmana. 

6. They say that poison is not dangerous but the property 
of a Brahmana or that of the deity is the real poison. Hence 
one should scrupulously avoid these assets. 

7. Manu, the Prajapati, has said that the taking of any 
of these things, though not handed over to one (by the owner), 
is not stealing viz. flowers, greens, water, firewood, roots, fruits 
and grass. 

8-9. Flowers can be taken by Brahmanas at the time of 
the worship of the Lord. If they are taken without permission, 
they should not be taken from one single person. A sensible man 
should take away grass, firewood, fruits and flowers openly. 
They must be taken only for the purpose of a religious rite. 
Otherwise he will face downfall. 

10. O Brahmanas, if deeply afflicted by hunger on the 
way while travelling, a handful of gingelly seeds, green gram, 
barley and other articles may be taken (even without the per¬ 
mission of the owner) by persons knowing Dharma. They 
should not do so otherwise. This is the established conventional 
practice. 

11-12. Under the pretext of a holy vow, one should not 
commit sins and perform holy rites. A Brahmana who conceals 
his sins by means of holy rites and depends on womenfolk and 
Sudras is despised here and hereafter by the expounders of the 
Brahman. A Vrata (holy rite) performed under a false pretext 
goes to the Raksasas. 

13. If a non-lihgin (a person who is not a Sannyasin 
or Brahmacarin) maintains himself in the guise of a lihgin 
(ascetic) he shall incur the sins of those persons and shall be 
born as a lower animal. 

! 4. The religious hypocrites and impostors are the worst 
sinners in the world. They are the destroyers of Dharma. The 
fruit of their action is that they sink into sins immediately. 

1.0. One should not even verbally revere and honour the 
heretics, those who indulge in wrong actions, those who per¬ 
form black magic the Pancaratras and the Pasupatas. 



11.16.16-27 


417 


16. One should not even mentally think of those people 
who censure the Vedas, Devas and the Brahmanas. 

17. The creature (person) who officiates in their sacrifice, 
has matrimonial alliance with them, who talks to them and who 
stays along with them faces downfall. Hence, he should avoid 
it scrupulously. 

18. Incurring the displeasure of the preceptor is a crore 
of times worse than incurring the displeasure of Devas. 
Censuring of perfect knowledge and atheism is a crore of times 
worse than that. 

19. Those families which become devoid of Dharma 
through (sale-purchase of) cows, (paid service of) deities, and 
priesthood, agriculture, king’s service sink to a lower status. 

20. Families decline in prosperity through these evil 
activities viz.—contracting despicable marriages, non-perform¬ 
ance of holy rites, non-study of the Vedas as well as by slighting 
the Brahmanas. 

21. A family perishes immediately due to uttering false¬ 
hoods, committing adultery, eating forbidden foodstuffs and by 
not performing the holy rites enjoined by the Srutis. 

22. Indeed, a family perishes quickly by making chari¬ 
table gifts to those who are not well-read (in the Vedas) as well 
as to Vrsalas (Sudras), who do not strictly follow the regu¬ 
lations of the conduct of life. 

23. One shall never stay in a village surrounded by 
unrighteous persons or afflicted by many pestilences. One shall 
never stay in the kingdom of a Sudra, or in a place inhabited 
by heretics. 

24. A Brahmana should not stay in any other place except 
in the land between the mountains Himavan and the Vindhya 
and between the Eastern and Western oceans. 

2.5. A Brahmana may reside in a land naturally frequent¬ 
ed by black-antelope or inundated by holy and well-known 
rivers. 

26. An excellent Brahmana shall not stay anywhere else 
except within half a Krosa of the holy river (1 Krosa = 3 Km). 
He shall not stay near the village of the Sudras. 

27. He should not live in the same place with that of 
fallen castes, Candalas, Pukkasas, foolish fellows, arrogant 



418 


Kurma Pur ana 


persons, Sudras and the people of the lowliest castes called 
Antydvasdyins. 

28-29. The following eleven defects caused by mingling 
of the castes are called sins of intermixture ( Sdthkarya Dosas) 
viz.—sharing the same bed, sharing a common seat, sitting in 
the same row, sharing of the same vessel, partaking of the 
cooked food together, presiding over the sacrifices, teaching, 
marriage alliance, taking of food together, studying together, 
and jointly presiding over the sacrifices. 

30. Even by staying near-by the sin is transmitted from 
one man to another. Hence a sensible man shall scrupulously 
avoid intermingling of the castes. 

31. If the people sitting in the same row do not touch 
one another and if ashes mark their boundary, there is no 
Sarhkara defect. 

32. The row can be separated by means of these six ;— 
fire, ashes, water, door, pillar and a pathway. 

33. One should not pursue enmity that ends in sorrow, 
nor indulge in argument, nor in back-biting. Nor should one 
communicate to others if a cow is grazing in another man’s 
field ( !) 

34. One shall not have social intercourse with a person 
having the impurity due to birth. One shall not touch the vulner¬ 
able points of others. One shall not indicate and mention to 
others the eclipse of the sun nor the rainbow nor the fire (con¬ 
suming) the dead body. 

35. A learned man shall never indicate and mention the 
moon. No man should ever incur the antagonism of the 
majority at the same time. 

36. One should not do unto others what is unfavourable 
(or displeasing) to himself. He should not mention the Tithi (the 
serial number of that day in a lunar fortnight) of the fortnight 
nor should he point out the constellations (?) 

37. An excellent Brahmana should not speak to a woman 
in her monthly course or to an unclean person. No one should 
prevent anything from being given to Devas, preceptors or 
Brahmanas. 



11.16.38-49 


419 


38. No one should praise himself. One should avoid 
censuring others. One should scrupulously avoid blaspheming 
Devas and the Vedas. 

39. O great sages, no atonement is seen ordained in the 
scriptures in the case of a Brahmana who censures Devas, sages, 
Brahmanas or the Vedas. 

40. If a man loudly decries or censures the preceptors, 
Devas or the Vedas, he shall be cooked in the hell Raurava for 
hundreds of crores of Kalpas and even more. 

41. If anyone rebukes or censures, it is better that one 
keeps quiet without saying anything by way of reply (and still 
better) he should close his ears and go away. He should not 
stop even to glance at them. 

42. A sensible man should guard the secrets of others 
and refrain from divulging them. He should never enter into 
argument with his own kinsmen. 

43. O excellent Brahmanas, no one should call a sinner 
either a sinner or a sinless person. (In either case) he will be 
equally guilty of sins such as that of uttering falsehood. 

44. The tears shed by those (innocent) persons who are 
falsely accused and so cry, destroy the sons and animals of those 
false accusers. 

45. A way of expiation is mentioned by good men in the 
cases of Brahmana slaughter, addiction to wine, stealing and 
committing adultery with the preceptor’s wife. But there is no 
atonement for false accusation. 

46. One should not see the rising sun or the moon with¬ 
out cause. He should not see them setting, reflected in the 
water, stationed in the middle of the sky or under eclipse. 

47. He should not see (the sun or the moon) covered 
with a cloth (i.e. screened by a cloth), nor reflected in a mirror. 
No one should even see a naked woman or a man. 

48. No one should see anyone passing urine or discharg¬ 
ing faeces or a couple in the act of copulation. No sensible man 
shall glance at the planets, the sun, the moon etc. while he is 
unclean. 

49. One should not glance at a fallen person (outcaste) 
a maimed person, a Candala or a Person defiled by ucchifta. If 



420 


Kurma Pur ana 


one is defiled by Ucchifpa (or veiled) one should not glance at 
others arrogantly. * 

50. One should not touch a person who has touched a 
dead body. One should not look at the face of the angry pre¬ 
ceptor. One should not see one’s reflection in oil or water; one 
should not touch one’s wife during dinner or while her limbs 
are exposed due to untying of knot; one should not look at a 
mad and elated person. 

51. One should not take food along with one’s wife. Nor 
should one look at one’s own wife urinating, sneezing or yawning,, 
nor shall one see her cosily seated at ease. 

52. One should not look out one’s own reflection in water; 
one should not jump from one bank to another; one should not 
jump across a deep pit; one should never tread over urine or 
stand on it. 

53. One should not impart intellect (i.e. topics of lore) 
to a Sudra. Nor shall these things be given to him viz.—The 
Kriara (rice cooked with gingelly seeds), the milk-pudding, 
curds; nor the leavings Ucchi}fa)^ ghee, honey, black-antelope 
hide or Havis (sacrificial offerings). 

54. Instructions regarding observance of holy vows should 
not be given to a Sudra: a learned man should not expound 
Dharma unto him. No one should submit to anger and avoid 
hatred and passion. 

55. Covetousness and arrogance should be avoided. One 
should avoid ridiculing religious travels and scorning perfect 
knowledge. One should desist from haughtiness and delusion, 
fury and hatred. 

56. One should not inflict pain on anyone : one may 
however beat his son and disciple. One should never serve the 
mean and the base nor should he serve sharp-witted persons. 

57. One should not dishonour oneself (the Atman) ; one 
should scrupulously avoid dejectedness, (or should try to conceal 
one’s miserable condition), one should not fail to honour one 
who is not one’s disciple (?), a learned man should not praise 
himself. 


♦v.I. avagufthitah Veiled’. 



11.16.58-68 


421 


58. One should not scribble on the ground with the 
nails; one shall not cohabit (or lie) with a cow (?) ; one 
should not speak of (another river while bathing in one) river 
nor should he speak (in praise of) other mountains while resting 
on one mountain (?) 

59. One should not abandon a fellow traveller whether 
one stays with him overnight or not; one should not enter 
water in the nude state; nor should he walk over fire. 

60. One should not anoint the limbs with the oil leftover 
after applying it over the head; one should not play with 
weapons or serpents; one should not touch (i.e. scrape) the 
private parts of one’s body (with a weapon). 

61-62. (One shall not touch) the hairs on the private 
parts; one should not travel in the company of an uncultured 
fellow; one should not (warm) hands and feet in the fire, one 
should not indulge in unsteady act of the penis, belly and ears. 
One should not scratch oneself with nails. One should not 
drink water with palms joined together. 

63. One should not keep water (in tanks or rivers) 
with the leg or strike it with the hand; one should not fell down 
fruits by hurling bricks or other fruits at them. 

64-65. One should not learn the language (mode of 
speech) of the alien tribe; one should not drag a seat by means 
of the leg; one should not create dissension (among friends). One 
should not crack the finger joints or snap the fingers; one should 
not cut or scrape aimlessly. The sensible man should not thrash 
suddenly or aimlessly. One should not keep food on the lap 
while eating; one should not indulge in purposeless movements 
of the limbs. 

66. One should neither dance, nor sing, nor play on mu¬ 
sical instruments. One should not scratch one’s head with all the 
fingers joined together. 

67. One should not try to propitiate the deities with 
worldly hymns or medicine; one should not play with dice; one 
should not rush against others for assaulting them (?) ; one should 
not urinate or discharge faeces into water. 

68. One should not cohabit when defiled by Ucchi^ta; 
one should not bathe in the nude: one should not read or touch 
one’s head, while walking. 



422 


Kurma Purdna 


69. One should not cut the hairs or nails by means of the 
teeth; one should not waken the sleeper. One should not bask in 
the early morning sun; one should avoid smoke arising from the 
dead body. 

70. One should not sleep alone in an empty abode; one 
should not bring shoes by oneself (with the hands ?). One 
should not spit without reason; one should not cross the river by 
means of the arms. 

71. A learned man should not wash legs with the legs; one 
should not warm legs in the fire; one should not wash (his feet) 
in a bellmetal vessel. 

72. One should not extend his feet towards the idols of 
gods, the Brahmanas or the cow, the wind, the fire, the precep¬ 
tor, the Brahmins, the sun or the moon. 

73. By no means should an unclean person go to bed, 
travel, study the Vedas, take food without bathing or set out 
from the house. 

74. One should avoid the following during the two San- 
dhyds (dawn and dusk) as well as at midday :—sleeping, study of 
the Vedas, travelling, excrement, taking food and walking. 

75. A Brahmana defiled by Ucchi^ta shall not touch cows, 
Brahmanas and the fire, with the hand, nor should he touch 
cooked rice or the divine idol with the foot. 

76. No unclean person should circumambulate the fire: 
nor should he glorify the gods or the sages; one should not enter 
deep waters; one shall not hold fire on one side (?) 

77. One should not drink water by lifting it up with the 
left hand and nor shall he drink with the mouth directly; one 
shall not reply (when impure) without performing the Acamana 
rite; nor should one discharge semen virile into the water. 

78. One should not cast into water any other thing sme¬ 
ared with Amedhya (filth, rubbish), blood or poisons. One should 
not cross a river; one should not indulge in sexual intercourse 
in water. 

79. One should not chop off the trees in a monastery; 
one should not spit into water; one should not tread on bone, 
ashes, skulls, hair, thorn, burning charcoal or dry balls of 
cowdung. 



11 . 16 . 80-89 


423 


80. No sensible man should cross the burning fire, nor 
should he keep it anywhere beneath; No sensible man should 
kick it with the leg nor blow it with the mouth. 

81. One should not descend into the well; an unclean 
person should never look into a well; one should not throw fire 
into fire, nor extinguish it with water. 

82. No one should himself tell others about the distress 
or death of a friend; one should not utilise for sale any article 
or merchandise which is unsaleable (due to its quality). 

83. No sensible man, if unclean, should kindle fire by 
means of wind blown from the mouth; He should plough 
(i.e. transgress*) a land in a holy centre, near water or on the 
border (of a village ?). 

84. One shall not break an earlier agreement accom¬ 
panied by a promise; no one should rouse up animals, serpents 
or birds (?) 

85. One should not inconvenience others through water¬ 
sheds etc., one should not cause the artisans etc. to do great 
jobs and then forsake them. One should keep the doors of the 
house shut in the morning and in the evening to prevent the 
beggars. 

86. One should avoid outside (over his dress) garland, 
alien scents, dining in the company of one’s wife, argument with 
quarrels and entry by the bad way ? 

87. A Brahmana should not stand up while eating. A 
sensible man should not spend much time prattling and laugh¬ 
ing. One should not touch the fire with the hand; one should 
not stay too long under water. 

88. One should not kindle the fire by generating the wind 
with a wing, a winnowing basket or the hand. He should blow 
the air with his mouth and kindle the fire. (It is said in the 
Vedas) that Agni was born of his mouth. 

89. One shall not speak to another man’s wife. No 
Brahmana should perform the Yajna on behalfofone not worthy 
of it. One should not enter an assembly singly. One should 
avoid a crowd of Brahmanas; one should never go to the shrine 
of a deity in an anti-clockwise direction. 


*Ft. note 7 in the Venk. Text. 




424 


Kurma Pur ana 


90. One should not fan with the cloth, one should not 
sleep in a temple; one should not undertake a journey alone; nor 
should he travel with unrighteous people. 

91. One should not undertake a journey in the company 
of persons defiled by sickness, or of Sudras or of fallen men (out- 
caste) . One should never travel without shoes or without taking 
water and other requisites. 

92. At night one should not travel in the company of 
one’s enemy. One should not travel without a waterpot. One 
should not go between fires, Brahmanas, cows etc. 

93. O excellent Brahmanas, one should not transgress a 
woman longing for sexual intercourse. One should not censure 
Siddhas, Yogins and ascetics of good qualities. 

94. In the temple and in the presence of devas, one 
should not wantonly tread on the shadow of the Brahmanas and 
the cows. 

95. One should not let one’s own shadow to be tread on 
by sick persons^ fallen people or others. One should never stand 
on burning coal or ashes or hair or similar things. 

96. O Brahmanas, one should avoid the dust particles 
rising from the broom and the water that remains in a pot after 
washing clothes or taking bath. Forbidden foodstuffs should not 
be eaten nor should one drink impotable water. 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 

Decision about Acceptable and Prohibited Food^ 

Vyasa said : 

1. A Brahmana should not eat food offered by a Sudra 
whether out of delusion or otherwise. He who eats it, except in 
an emergency, is born as a Sudra. 


1. Great importance has been attached to purity of food since ancient 
times. Chandogya Up. (vii. 26.2) emphasizes the parity of food as it is 
conducive to the remembrance or meditation of the Atman. The Smrtis deal 
extensively with this topic. So do Mbh. AnuSdsana chs. 135 and 136 and 
Puranas likeBm. P. 221-109-112 Bv. P. I. 27. 3-45 and others. 



II. 17.2-6 


425 


2. The Brahmana who partakes of the condemned food 
of a Sudra for six months becomes a Sudra even while he is 
alive, and after death he becomes a dog {v.l. as a Sudra). 

3. O leading sages, a person is reborn as a Brahmana, 
a Ksatriya, a Vaisya or a Sudra according as the food offered 
by these is still in his belly when he dies, (e.g. he dies with the 
food of a Brahmana in his stomach, he is reborn as a 
Brahmana, so on). 

4. One should avoid the cooked food of six groups of 
people viz. : the actor, the dancer, the carpenter, the smith, a 
gang of rogues and the prostitute.^ 

5. One should avoid food offered by an oil-monger, 
washerman, thief and the vendor of spirituous liquors. He 
should avoid the food of a minstrel, a blacksmith or an impure 
person. 

6. He should avoid the food offered by a potter, a painter, 
a usurer, a fallen man, a goldsmith, a dancer, a hunter, an 
imprisoned fellow or an ailing person. 


Vrddha-Harita XI. 122-123 and Bs. P. as quoted by Apararka 
(P. 241) give the following classification of “pollutions" and hence prohi¬ 
bition of food articles: 

1. Jati-dusta ‘inherently or by nature polluted’ e.g. onions, garlic. 

2. Krijd-dusfa ‘polluted by action’ e.g. served with bare hands, seen 
by a dog or an out-caste. 

3. Kala-dusfa —‘polluted by passage of or inappropriateness of time.” 
e.g. stale food, eating during solar or lunar eclipse. 

4. Sariisarga-dusja ‘polluted by contact’ e.g. contacted with a dog, 
insects or wine. 

5. Sahrllekha ‘disgusting to the mind’ e.g. faeces. 

6. Parigraha-dusta ‘polluted due to its belonging to an undesirable 
person’ e.g. an out-caste. 

The intake of ‘polluted’ food being a sin, the topic is treated in details 
by Dharma-Sastra-writers of old. (vide KP. 17-15b and 16a below). 

The KP does not deal exhaustively with this topic. 

1. V V. 4-15 give the list of persons food from whom is not acceptable. 
That food is Parigraha-dusta as explained above. The belief was that the 
eater of that food eats up the sins also of the giver (vide v. 16a below). 

We find this belief and the list of such polluters in the Dharma 
Sutras of Apastamba (I. 6. 18. 16-33), Vasistha 14. 2-11 and in old Smrtis 
like Manu IV 205-220 Yaj. I. 160-165. 



426 


Kurma Purdna 


7. He should avoid the food offered by a physician, an 
unchaste woman, a staff-bearer (a police-man ?), a thief, an 
atheist or a person who blasphemes gods. 

8. One should avoid the food offered by a person who 
sells Soma juice and especially of Candala. He should avoid 
food offered by one who is hen-pecked or one who allows the 
paramour of his wife to remain in his house. 

9. One should avoid taking these cooked-stuff, viz.; 
that of one who is defiled by Ucchifta, that of miser, that of one 
who partakes of the leaving of others’ food-stuffs, the cooked 
food of a person who is inferior—not worth allowing to sit in row 
for dinner, the cooked food meant for a multitude and that of 
one who maintains himself by means of weapons. 

10. One should avoid food offered by an ascetic, by 
a eunuch, the food of an insane or a drunkard fellow, of a fright¬ 
ened one or a crying person, the food that is of inferior quality 
and that offered as charitable gift. 

11. One should avoid food offered in Sraddha or, 
offered by an hater of Brahmanas, one who is interested in sins 
and a man who is defiled by the impurity of birth (sutaka, the. 
food of one who cooks in vain (?) the food of a rogue and that 
of the shrewd fellow, (v.l. father-in-law). 

12. One should avoid the cooked food of all these:—viz: 
women without children, a servant, a mason and one who sells 
weapons. 

13. The cooked food served by these should be avoided- 
one who is addicted to drinking wine, a murderer, the physi¬ 
cian, one whose organ of generation is mutilated and person 
who, though a younger brother, married earlier than the elder 
brother. 

14. One should particularly avoid the food served by a 
widowed woman who has remarried, nor should he partake of 
the food served by one who carnally enjoys the wife of his dead 
brother. Similarly, he should avoid partaking of the food served 
with contempt or anger, spurning, dislike or arrogance or 
astonishment. 

15. Even the cooked food served by the preceptor should 
not be eaten if it is devoid of due consecration. All the evil 
deeds of man are stabilised in his food. 



11.17.16-23 


427 


16-17. If a person partakes of the food of anyone he 
shares his sins too. The following persons viz. : A farm-labourer, 
a friend of the family, cowherd, barber, musician, potter, 
ploughman of the fields. After eating food among these Sudras, 
some money is given to them by the wise. The following 
things can be taken on payment, from a Sudra^ viz.:—Milk 
pudding, articles fried in oil. Milk products, Saktu (Powdered 
fried grain), oilcake and oil. 

18-23. One should avoid these plants:^ Vrntaka (a kind 
of Brinjal), JdlikdSdka (a kind of green), the Safflower, the 
Asmantaka (the plant) the fibres of which are used to make the 
girdle (Mekhald) of a Brahmana. He should avoid onion, garlic, 
sour articles and thick exudations from trees. He should avoid 
Chatraka (Mushroom), Vidvaraha (a plant growing in filth), 
saila (Slesmantaka fruit ?), beestings, Vilaya (a milk product ? 
Simukha and Kavaka (Mushrooms). A Brahmana eating Grnjana 
(the meat of an animal killed by a poisoned arrow), a fowl, the 
gourds, the Kirnsuka, the Udumbara etc. undergoes downfall. 
One must scrupulously avoid (purposelessly prepared i.e. not 
for offering to deity), the Krsara (rice cooked with gingelly seeds), 
the wheatcake. Milk pudding, pie, cooked meat but not conse¬ 
crated, food offerings to gods, Yavdgu (rice gruel), Mdtulinga 
(Citrons), non-consecrated fish, the Kadamba tree, wood-apple 
and Plaksa (Indian fig tree). During daytime* he should avoid. 


*divadhana is probably a mistake for deva-dhanya ‘God’s grain’, recorded 
as v.l. 

1. VV. 16-17 give the list of Sudras whose food was acceptable to 
Brahmanas, cf. 

su (sva-) daso napito gopafi kumbhakdrah krsivalah / 

Brdhmajtairapi bhojydnndh pancaite Judra-yonayah // 

—Devala Smr. 

also Cf. Parasara Smr. XI. 20-24 

In fact realities of life forced the Dharma-sastra to accept these excep¬ 
tions. 

2. VV. 18-23 contains the list of articles of food, vegetables, herbs etc. 
which were by their nature regarded as ‘polluted’ and are known as Jdti- 
dusta. 

The list of ‘polluted’ herbs, vegetables etc. is found in old works like 
the Dh. s. of Apastamba (I. 5. 17.25-27) Vasistha 14.33. KP. assimilated 
the following verses from Manu V. 5-7, 12, 14, 19. 



428 


Kurma Purdm 


the oilcake from which oil has been extracted as well as fried 
barley. 

24. During night, he should scrupulously avoid every¬ 
thing connected with gingelly seeds as well as curds. One should 
not take in milk and butter milk together. 

25. One should avoid food polluted by action, served 
indifferently (bhava-dusta) and polluted by bad contact (as 
with dogs) and by falling therein of hair, insects and dis¬ 
respectfully given. 

26. One shall avoid an article once smelt by a dog and 
cooked again. So also the article seen by a Candala, or a 
woman in her menses, or smelt by a cow, or seen by fallen men, 
shall be avoided. 

27-28a. He should avoid these articles as well—that with 
which no worship has been performed, that which is stale, that 
which has been touched by crows and fowls, that which is 
infested by germs, that which is smelt by men or touched by a 
leper. 

28b-30a. One should not make use of any article given by 
a women in her menses, or by an unchaste woman, or by a 
woman angrily. Manu has said that the milk of a cow whose 
calf has died should not be drunk. Similarly, the milk of a 
camel, within ten days of her calving, shall not be drunk. So 
also the milk of a ewe and that of a cow milked unseasonably.^ 

30b-33. The following birds and animals shall not be eaten 
viz.® the crane, the swan, the watercrow, the sparrow, the 
parrot, the osprey, the tusk of a hog, the webfooted birds, the 
cuckoo, the Cafa (blue jay), the Khanjarita (the wag-tail), the 
falcon, the vulture, the owl^ the ruddy goose, the cock, the 
dove, the pigeons, the Tittibha (lapwing), the village fowl, the 


1. VV. 25 ff give the list of Krijia-dusta foods. 

2. Sandhini —Mitaksara on Yaj. I. 17—explains it as (i) a cow in heat 
(2) a cow that gives milk once a day (3) a cow which yields milk on account 
of another calf brought to it, its own being dead. 

3. Dharma Sutras give a number of rules about the flesh of beasts, 
birds and fish^ vide. Gautama 17. 27-31, 34-35 Visnu 51.6, 29-31. Smrtis like 
Manu V. 12-14 Yaj. I. 172-175 give long lists of such birds etc. fit to be 
eaten. KP based its list on the Smrtis. 



II.18.34a-41 


429 


lion, the tiger, the cat, the dog, the hound, the jackal, the 
monkey and the donkey. 

34a. All types of deer should not be eaten nor should 
wild birds be eaten whether the living beings move about in the 
water or on the land. This is the established convention. 

34b-35a- Manu the Prajapati has said that these five- 
clawed animals^ may be eaten viz. Godha (alligator), Kurma 
(tortoise), Sasa (hare), Svavitand Sallaki (the small and the 
big porcupine). 

35b-36a. O excellent men, one may eat those fish with 
thorny scales. (?) and the fiash of the deer Ruru. They can be 
eaten after offering them to the deities and the Brahmanas and 
not otherwise. 

36b-37a. The Prajapati has said that the peacock, the 
francoline partridge, the Kapinjala (a variety of the ruddy 
goose), the rhenocero and the panther can be eaten. 

37b-38. O leading sages, among fishes, these are mentioned 
as worthy of being eaten, viz. : the Rajivas (lotus-like ones) the 
Siihhatundas (lion-snouted), the Pathlnas and the Rohitas.* 
The flesh of these must be sprinkled with holy water and conse¬ 
crated before eating if the Brahmana so desires. 

39. One shall eat meat in accordance with the injunc¬ 
tions or as enjoined at a time when life is in danger. One who 
eats the remainder (i.e. what is left after worship) or as a medi¬ 
cine or when one is powerless or is deputed, he is not affected 
by sin. 

40. If a person invited for the Sraddha or the worship of 
a deity eschews meat he may have to be in the hell as many 
years as there are hairs on the body of the animal.® 

41. The established rule is that, wine should not be 
drunk, should not be touched and should never be thought of 
by the twice-born. 

1. This injunction about the eatability of five-clawed animals appears 
in VR, Kiskindha 17.39, cf. MK. P. 35. 2-4 which shows a common source 
of KP. and MK. 

2. Cf. Manu V. 16 

3. Although KP insists on acceptance of non-vegetarian food when 
served in a Sraddha, it staunchly prohibits wine under all circumstances. 
Dh. S. of Apastamba 1.7.21.8, Visnu 35.1 and Manu XI. 54 and Yaj. III. 
227 hold that wine-drinking is a very grave sin. 



430 


Kurma Pur ana 


42. Hence, one shall scrupulously avoid wine which is 
despicable. By drinking it, one incurs downfall and loses his 
merits (good acts) nor should he be talked to by Brahmin. 

43-44. (Partly defective) By eating foodstuffs that should 
not be eaten and drinking that should not be drunk, a Brah- 
mana loses his rights. He then faces downfall. 

45. Hence, one should scrupulously avoid forbidden food¬ 
stuffs. He goes alone after elevation* (?). And after death goes 
to the hell Raurava. 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 

Daily Duties of a Householder 


The Sages said : 

1. O Great sage, please describe all the duties of a Brah- 
mana, which have to be performed every day and whereby one 
is liberated from bondage of Sarhsara. 

Vyasa said : 

2. Listen attentively all of you, while I recount the daily 
duties of Brahmanas and the order of their performance. 

3. Getting up in the Brahma Muhurta (the closing part 
of the night just before dawn), one should think about one’s 
duties and monetary affairs wherefore he has to exert his body. 
He should then meditate on Isvara in his mind. 

4. When the dawn sets in, the learned man should per¬ 
form all requisite activities (answer the call of nature) and 
then carry out the purificatory rites duly. He should then take 
his bath in the pure (holy) rivers.^ 


*Venk. Text, aropya yati caiveko is not satisfactory as the text reads : 
Apeyani ca vipro . . . the Brahmana avoids forbidden drinks. 

1. VV. 4-16 describe the importance of morning-bath in cold water. 
The six types of baths described in vv. 12-16 and its emphasis of Taagtia 
bath in Atma-tirtha is signihcant. 



II.18.5-13 


431 


5. Even those peoplewho commit sins are purified, thanks 
to the morning ablution. Hence, one should assiduously 
perform the morning ablution. 

6. They praise the early morning ablution which brings 
forth visible and invisible benefits; there is no doubt in this that 
the sagehood of the sages is due to their daily ablution in the 
early morning. 

7. When a man is asleep, the saliva drips constantly from 
his mouth. Hence, no one should perform any holy rite without 
taking bath at the outset. 

8. There is no doubt about it that poverty [alakfml'), a 
misfortune {Kdlakarni) an inauspicious dream and evil 
thoughts—all these and sins are purified by means of a morning 
bath. 

9. Hence, without the morning ablution, no morning 
duty is prescribed, especially in Homa and Japa activities. So 
one shall take morning bath regularly. 

10. In case of inability, a bath keeping the head dry is 
enjoined. Wipping off with a wet cloth is remembered as sancti¬ 
fying. * * This is called Kdpila bath. 

11. When Ayatya*** (Dependence?) is generated, one 
should perform ablution like this Learned men have mentioned 
these ablutions (viz.) Brahma etc. in case of inability (to 
bathe). 

12. Ablution can be briefly divided into six types viz. : 
1) Brahma, 2) Agneya, 3) Vayavya, 4) Divya, 5) Varuna and 
6) Yaugika. 

13. Sprinkling with the Kusa grass dripping with water 
while repeating the Mantras, is called the Brahma ablution. 
Dusting of the whole body from foot to head with Bhasma is 
called Agneya ablution. 


*alaksmako jalarh kiRcit in Venk. text, is confusing. Hence the v.l. 
alakfmi Kdlakartn ca is accepted. 

**v. 1. Pavanam'No other act is regarded (lit. remembered) as sanctify¬ 
ing than the morning bath.’ 

♦**v. 1. asamarthye ‘in case of inability’. 



432 


Kurma Pur ana 


14. The excellent bath by means of the dust particles 
raised by the kine is called Vayavya ablution. The bath in the 
rain accompanied by sunshine is called Divya ablution. 

15. Plunging into the water is the “Varuna” ablution. 
The dedication of the mind by the Yogins is called Yaugika 
ablution, as the Yogins think about Vis va (the universe, Godin 
the Cosmic form) etc. in the course of the practice of Yoga. 

16. That is called Atma-tirtha and it is resorted to by the 
expounders of the Veda (or knowers of Brahman). It is purifier 
of the minds of men. One should always perform his ablution 
(there-in). 

17-18a. If he is competent, the learned man should 
perform Varuna ablution, and the act of atonement also. He 
should wash the tooth brush twig and then chew it duly. There¬ 
after he should perform the Acamana rite, and perform the early 
morning ablution every day. 

18b-19a. The toothbrush twig shall be as thick as the 
middle finger. It shall be twelve Angulas long. The tooth brush 
twig shall have its bark in tact. One should clean (the teeth) 
with its tip.^ 

19b. It must be cut out from a tree of milky exudation. 
The twigs of the Malati tree are auspicious. Apamarga, * Bilva 
and Karavira are particularly good. 

20. He should avoid the forbidden (trees). He should 
avoid the sinful (forbidden) days also. In the manner 
mentioned, he should chew the twig. The knower of the pro¬ 
cedure of (washing the teeth) should do this. 

21. One should not split the toothbrush twig, nor should 
clean the teeth with the tips of the fingers. After cleaning (the 
teeth), he should break it and cast it carefully in a clean place. 


1. There seems no regular arrangement of duties in KP. Hence 
the topic of‘brushing the teeth’ in w. 18-21 comes after bath. Sm tis have 
laid down detailed rules about the names of trees the twig of which it so be 
selected, the length of the twig etc. But the view of KP is generally accepted. 

♦Apamarga (the plant Achyranthes Aspera), Bilva Acgle marmelos and 
Karvira (Oleander, Nerium odorum). 



11 . 18 . 22-31 


433 


22-24. After taking bath, he should perform Tarpana^ 
rites to Devas, sages and the groups of the Pitrs. The 
knower of the Mantra should perform Acamana twice silently. 
He should repeat the Mantras and sprinkle his body 
with Kusa grass dripping with water. He should repeat the 
auspicious Mantras of Lord Varuna beginning with Apo hi fthd 
and the Savitrl Mantra along with the Vyahrtis. He should 
perform the Japa of Gayatrl, the mother of the Vedas. The 
Savitrl Mantra should be prefixed with the Orhkara, Vyahrti. 
With the mind fixed on the sun he should offer a handful of 
water to the sun. 

25. Smrti has prescribed that he should then be seated 
on the Darbha grass with the concentration of mind and he 
should then perform three Pranayamas and meditate on the 
Sandhya. 

26. What is termed Sandhya is the source of origin of 
the universe. It is beyond Maya, entire and absolute power of 
God, originating from the three Tattvas (principles). 

27. The learned devotee should meditate on Savitri 
stationed in the solar sphere and repeat the Mantra of Savitri. 
A Brahmana should always perform the worship of Sandhya, 
facing the East. 

28. A Brahmana devoid of (the worship of) Sandhya is 
impure. He docs not deserve performance of any of the rites. 
Even if he does anything else, he shall not derive the benefit 
thereof. 

29 Quiescent Brahmanas of yore who were masters of 
ten Vedas and who did not think of anything else, duly wor¬ 
shipped the Sandhya and attained the greatest goal. 

30. If an excellent Brahmana eschews the worship of the 
Sandhyas and puts in his effort in other religious activities, attains 
Naraka (Hell) and remains there for ten thousand years. 

31. Hence, one should assiduously perform the worship 
of Sandhya. The greatest Deity, the Yoga incarnate, would be 
worshipped by him in that case. 

1. 7'ar/)ana (satiation by offering water) of gods, sages and ancestors 
(Pitrs) is obligatory to all. For more instructions vide vv. 85-88 below. So is 
the sandhya-prayer (both in the morning and evening). VV. 22-32 emphasize 
the supreme importance of the sandhya-prayer the sine qua non of Brahminhood, 
the most essential part of it is the Japa of Savitri. 



434 


Kurma Pur dm 


32. The learned man should with perfect purity, be 
seated facing the east and perform the Japa of Savitri of 
which the repetition for one thousand times are regarded as 
the maximum and best, one hundred times as average and ten 
times as the minimum. 

33. He should then, with concentration and mental 
purity worship the sun, repeating the various kinds of Mantras 
pertaining to the sun and taken from the Rgveda, Yajurveda 
and the Samaveda.^ 

34. After respectfully approaching the sun, the lord of 
Devas of great Yoga, one shall make a great bow touching 
the ground with the head repeating those Mantras. 

Surya-hrdaya Hymn ; 

35. Om obeisance unto you Khakholka (the sky-meteor), 
the quiescent, the source of the three causes. I dedicate myself 
unto you; the embodiment of the universe I bow to you. 

36. Obeisance unto you, the compassionate one; salute 
to you the Sun the manifest form of Brahman. You alone are the 
greatest Brahman, the waters, the Brilliance, the essence, the 
nectar or immortal; you are the Vyahrtis Bhuh, Bhuvah, 
Svah. You are Oihkara, Sarva, Rudra, the eternal great god. 

37. You are Purufa of glory and brilliance. I bow unto 
Kapardin (god of matted hair), the immanent soul. You alone 
are the universe, that had originated in many ways and that is 
yet originating. Obeisance, to you, Rudra, the sun. I seek refuge 
in you. 

38. Obeisance to you Pracetas; salutation to the most 
bountilful god. Obeisance, obeisance to you, Rudra. I seek 
refuge in you. Obeisance to you Hiranyabahu (of golden 
arms); obeisance to Hiranyapati (the lord of gold). 


1. The worship of the Sun is to be immediately done after Sandhya. 
It appears that the cult of solar-worship has become popular, or was being 
popularisfd at the time of KP. Hence this special hymn called Surya-hrdaya. 
In this hymn the identification of the sun mainly with god Siva is significant. 

In the compulsory six duties of a Brahmana as given by Parasara I. 39, 
this worship is not mentioned specifically unless we extend the meaning of 
jkvalatithi-pujanam to cover this worship. 



II.18.39-47 


435 


39. Bow to you the lord of .'\mbika; obeisance to the 
consort of Uma; salutation to the blue-necked. Obeisance 
to you, the holder of the Pinaka Bow. 

40. Hail to you Vilohita (very ruddy), Bharga (Brilliant) 
obeisance to you the thousand-eyed one. Obeisance to you for 
ever, to the dispeller of darkness, obeisance be to you Aditya. 

41. Obeisance to you Vajrahasta (one with the thunder¬ 
bolt in the hand). Obeisance, again and again toTryambaka 
(the three-eyed god). I resort unto you, Virupaksa, the great 
supreme Lord. 

42. I bow to the Atman well-preserved in the golden 
abode. I bow down to the supreme brilliance, to you, Brahma, 
the great and the immortal one. 

43. I bow to Pasupati (the master of individual souls), 
the universe, the terrible one, having (simulaneously) the 
male and female forms. Obeisance to the sun, to Rudra, the 
shining one, to Paramesthin (the highest deity). 

44-46. Obeisance to Ugra, the destroyer of all. I resort 
to you for ever. After performing the Japa (the repetition) of 
this excellent Surya-Hrdaya hymn, one should bow down to 
the sun both in the morning and at Midday. This hymn to 
Surya-Hrdaya, (as) pointed out by Brahma, should be im¬ 
parted to one’s own son, disciple and to a virtuous twice- 
born. It subdues all sins; it has originated as the essence of 
the Vedas. It is meritorious and beneficial unto the Brahmanas, 
and is resorted to by the multitudes of great men. 

47. Thereafter, the Brahmana should return home, 
perform the Acamana rite in accordance with the injunctions, 
kindle the fire duly and perform the Homa in the fire.^ 


But this worship of the sun is to be performed at the place of bath 
which is presumed to be out of the house. Hence the words “after returning 
home” [athdgamya grham) in v. 47 vide also vv. 56-57 below. 

1. Homa or Fire-worship and offering oblations into the fire was 
essential to pay off the debt of gods. Daksa (II. 28) prescribes that Home is 
to be performed after completing the Sandhya-worship (Sandhya-karmdvasane), 
but KP advises it after the worship of the sun. VV. 47-50 give general instruc¬ 
tion about the worship of deities, recitation of Vedic passages and Japa. This 
is the order presribed in KP. 



436 


Kurma Pur ana 


48. The Homa can be performed by the Rtvik’s son, 
wife, disciple or brother after obtaining the permission. It can 
particularly be performed by the Adhvaryu in accordance with 
the injunction. 

49. (Whoever performs it) he should wear Pavitra 
(Kusa grass made in the form of a ring with a tail) in his hand, 
wear white cloth, be pure in mind and body and have full 
control over the sense-organs. He should perform the Homa 
with full concentration of the mind (which does not wander 
elsewhere). 

50. The rite that is performed without the Darbha grass 
or without the Sutra (sacred thread) shall be demonic. It 
does not yield any benefit either here or hereafter. 

51. He should make obeisance to all deities, should 
offer presents; flowers etc. should be given. He should then 
prostrate before elders. 

52. He should then honour and revere his preceptor; he 
should do what is beneficent unto him; O Brahmanas, he should 
then recite the Vedic passages as much as he can, with 
assiduity. 

53. He should perform the Japa; he should teach his 
disciples; retain everything in memory and ponder over every¬ 
thing; O excellent Brahmanas, he should view Dharma etc. in 
the light of the scriptures. 

54. He should go through the Vedic Nigamas and all 
Vedahgas (Ancillary subjects of the Vedas). For the ac¬ 
hievement of Togaksema {Toga —attaining what has not been 
attained; K^ema —preserving what has been attained) he should 
resort to Isvara. 

55. Thereafter, the Brahmana should gather together 
the various articles for his household. Then at midday, he 
should fetch clay for the bath. 

56. He should also fetch flowers, raw rice grains, 
Kusa grass, gingelly seeds as well as pure cowdung. He should 
always perform his ablution in rivers, in tanks, dug up by gods 
(i.e. natural), in lakes, in puddles or in fountains. 

57. One should never take bath in a water reservoir 



11.18.58-67 


437 


belonging to others. In emergency, he should take out at least 
five lumps of mud from it, before bath. 

58. (He should divide the clay into many small lumps). 
With one of the lumps of the clay, the head is to be cleaned, 
with two (such lumps) he should clean the portion above the 
umbilical region and with three lumps he should clean the lower 
region. The legs and the feet shall be cleaned with six lumps 
of clay. 

59. It is enjoined that the clay should be wet and of the 
size of a big myrobalan. The size of the cowdung is also 
that much. One should smear it over one’s limps. 

60. While standing on the bank, he should first smear 
the body chanting the relevant Mantras. After washing his 
hand and performing Acamana, he should then carefully take 
his bath. 

61. Sanctifying the water with auspicious Mantras per¬ 
taining to Varuna and symbolic of water, he should meditate 
upon the unmanifest eternal Visnu and get purified at heart 
while bathing. 

62. The waters have been originated from Narayana. 
Waters alone constitute his Ayana (receptacle). Hence a 
learned man should remember lord Narayana at the time of 
ablution. 

63. After glancing at the sun with the repetitions of the 
Orhkara, he should dip himself in the water three times. 

64. After performing the Acamana rite twice, the knower 
of the Mantras should repeat the following Mantra. 

65. “You move about within the living beings, in the 
cavity of the heart, you have faces all round. You are Yajna; 
you are Vasatkara; O waters, you are the brilliance, the 
nectarine juice”. 

66. He should then repeat the Drupada Mantra three 
times, or he sha'l repeat the Vyahrtis along with the Pranava. 
The learned man should repeat the Savitrl Mantra or the 
Aghamarfana mantra. 

67. Then he should perform the Sammarjana rite (wip¬ 
ing off) by repeating the Mantra, Apo hi fthd mayo bhuvak 



438 


Kurma Purdna 


(RV. X.9.1) or the Mantra,/ifoTn dpah Pravahato” (RV.I.23. 
22), or by means of the Vyahrtis. 

68. With the three Mantras beginning with “Apo hi stha” 
RV.X. 9.1) etc. he should sanctify the water and then dip him¬ 
selfunder. He should then repeat the Aghamarsana Mantra (RV. 
X. 190-3) three times. 

69. He should also repeat the Drupadd (Vaj. Saih. 20. 20) 
or the Savitri Mantra. That is the greatest world of Visnu. Or 
he should repeat the Pranava or remember Lord Hari. 

70. (Defective) After repeating three times the Mantra 
established in the Yajurveda like Drupaddiva (Vaj. Saih-20.20) 
under the water, one is liberated from all sins. 

71. He should take water in the palm, perform Japa 
and the MdrjancP rite and place that water (sprinkle it over the 
head. He is liberated from all sins. 

72. Just as the horse-sacrihce is the king of all sacrifices 
and dispels all sins, so also the Mantra Aghamarsana is said to be 
destructive of all sins. 

73. He should then pray unto the sun^. He should throw 
up flowers along with the Aksatas (raw rice grains) and glance 
at the lord who is above and beyond darkness. 

74-75. Any of these Mantras pertaining to the sun and 
destructive of sins can be repeated® :—Mantras beginning with 
Udu tyam (RV. I. 150.1) and Citram (RV.I.l 15.1.) Taccaksuh 
(RV. VH.66.16) the Mantra ending with Hamsah Sucifat, 
(RV. IV. 40. 5) particularly the Savitri Mantra and other 
Vedic Mantras addressed to the Sun. Afterwards, he should 
repeat the Savitri Mantra. This is remembered as Japayajna 
(The sacrifice called Japa). 

76-77. He should repeat various other holy Mantras as 
well, such as the esoteric Vidyas, Satarudriya, Atharvasiras and 
all solar Mantras. He should be seated on the Darbha grass with 
their tips towards the east. He should be pure and he should face 


1. marjana —sprinkling of water with Kusa grass and repeating the 
three RV verses apo hi ffha (Rv. X. 9. 1-3). 

2. The second (mid-day) bath is also followed by the sun-worship. 

3. VV. 74-83 give instruction about the performance of Japa which is 
mentioned by the glorificatory term Japa-yajha. 



11.18.78-87 


439 


the east himself. He should repeat the Japya with great con¬ 
centration and glance at the sun. 

78. He should make the rosary with crystal beads, Indra- 
ksas, Rudraksas or Putrajivas (Putranjiva ; Rox burghii). The 
later ones are better than the earlier ones. 

79. (Defective) while repeating Japa, the sensible 
man should not speak, not look at any external thing, not 
shake the head or the neck, nor show the teeth outside. 

80. Since theGuhyakas, Raksasas and the Siddhas remove 
the benefit, one should perform the Japa-rite in an isolated, 
pure place. 

81. On seeing a Candala or a fallen man or one with 
Asauca (impurity), one shall perform the Japa once again. If 
he talks to them, he should bathe again and perform the Japa 
once again. 

82. If one sees anything impure, one should immediately 
perform the Acamana rite and perform the Japa with purity. 
He should repeat Mantras pertaining to the sun in accordance 
to his capacity and the “Pavamani” hymns as he likes. 

83. If he happens to wear wet cloth, he can perform the 
Japa in the middle of water. Otherwise he should sit in a pure, 
clean place on the Darbha grass with great concentration. 

84. He should circumambulate, prostrate on the ground, 
perform the Acamaria rite in accordance with the scripture and 
then begin his self-study of the Vedas with devotion. 

85-86. Thereafter, he should perform Tarpana rite for 
Devas, sages and the groups of the pitrs. He should utter 
Oriikara at the outset and then the name. At the end he should 
s&y Taraydm valiR propitiate you). The Tarpana rite for 
Devas and the Brahminical sages shall be performed with raw 
rice grains and water. The Tarpana rite for the Pitrs shall 
be performed with gingelly seeds and water. The Tarpana rites 
should be performed with great devotion in accordance with 
his Grhyasutra. 

87. While performing the rite of Tarpana to Devas 
and the sages, he should do so with his right hand supported 
by the left hand (below). The intelligent man should perform 
Tarpana rite of the Pitrs with handfuls of water. While per¬ 
forming Deva-Tarpana the sacred thread is worn (savja) as usual; 



440 


Kurma Purdna 


during the R^i-Tarpana (to the sages), he should wear the sacred 
thread like a garland. 

88. During the Pitrtarpana, he should wear the sacred 
thread on the right shoulder and under the left arm. After 
squeezing out the water from the cloth with which he takes 
bath, he should perform Acamana silently. He should worship 
Devas with their own Mantras by means of flowers, leaves and 
water. 

89. An excellent man with good conduct and devotion 
should worship Brahma, Sankara, Visnu (the slayer of Madhu) 
and the sun. He should worship other deities also according to 
his desire. 

90. He should offer them flowers with the Pum^a Sukta. 
All the deities are well worshipped with water, as waters are all 
deities. 

91. One should meditate on the deities along with the 
Pranava, with great concentration : Repeating the word Namah 
(obeisance), he should offer the flowers one by one. 

92. The holiness of all Vedic rites is due to the propitia¬ 
tion of Visnu. Hence, one should propitiate for ever Hari, the 
deity without beginning, middle, or end. 

93. (One should propitiate Hari) with the Mantra 
beginning with the words Tad Visnoh (RV.I.22.20 or with the 
Purusa Sukta). He should do so with great concentration 
of mind. There is no other mantra mentioned in the four Vedas, 
which can be equal to these two. His soul and mind should be 
dedicated unto the lord. He will be calm (in mind) by (the 
power of) the Mantra Tad Vifnoh. 

94. Or he should propitiate the eternal Lord Isana, 
Mahadeva, Mahesvara. He shall be sanctified by means of good 
feelings and thoughts. 

95. With great concentration he should propitiate 
Mahesvara by means of the Pranava Mantra, Rudragayatri, 
Isana Mantra, Tryambaka Mantra or Rudra Mantras. 

96. He should worship Mahesvara with flowers, leaves, 
water or sandal-paste and other articles. Or he should perform 
Japa by means of this Mantra Namah Sivdya (Obeisance to 



11.18.97-107 


441 


97. One should make obeisance unto Mahadeva, Isvara, 
the conqueror of Death. He should dedicate his own self unto 
Isvara with the Mantra To Brahmanam. (AV. 5.18.49). 

98. ABrahmana should circumambulate for five years (?) * 
He should meditate on god I Sana, Siva who is in the middle of 
the firmament. 

99. Afterwards, he should repeat the RK Haxhsah, 
Suci^at (RV.IV.40.5) and look at the sun, etc.. After going 
home, he should perform the five great Yajna with great 
attention. 

100. They are Deva yajna, Pitr yajna, Bhuta yajna, 
Manusya-yajna (human beings i.e. guests) and Brahma yajna 
(study of the Vedas). 

101. If, after the tarpana rite Brahma yajna rite is not 
performed, he should begin self-study of Vedas after performing 
Manusya yajna (hospitality to guests). 

102. At the end of Bhuta Yajna, he should sit on a heap 
of Kusa grass in a spot to the west of the fire. He should be 
pure in mind and body and hold Kusa grass in his hand. 

103. The Vaisvadeva rite must be performed in the 
sacrificial or secular fire or in water or on the ground. This 
is remembered as Deva Yajna. 

104. If the rice to be offered as oblation is cooked on 
secular fire, it (the oblations) be offered to that fire. If one 
were to cook that on sacrificial fire, that food is oblated to that 
sacrificial fire. This is the eternal procedure. 

105. With the cooked food that remains after the offering 
unto Devas, one should offer Bhuta Bali. This should be known 
as Bhuta Yajna. It is the bestower of prosperity unto all 

embodied beings. 

106. O excellent Brahmanas, the cooked food should be 
given to dogs, cookers of dogs (i.e. Candalas), fallen persons 
(i.e. outcastes) and birds, on the ground outside. 

107. In the evening, his wife shall offer cooked food 
as Bali (offering to all beings) without uttering any Mantras. 
This is the Bhuta-Yajna to be performed both in the morning 
and in the evening. 

*v.l. Panca-brahmdni vai japan ‘muttering five Brahmans (Vedic Mantras)’. 



442 


Kurma Pur dm 


108. With the Pitrs in view, one should feed one Brah- 
mana daily. This Niiya Sraddha (with respect to manes) is 
called Pitr yajna. It is the bestower of good goals. 

109. One should take up some cooked rice according to 
his capacity and offer it to a Brahmana scholar who knows the 
meanings of Vedic passages. 

110. One should honour one’s guest verbally, mentally 
and physically. The lord (guest) should be bowed to and wors¬ 
hipped. He should be calm and should welcome the guest 
who has come to his house. 

111. A Brahmana should offer the alms of any of the 
three types.^ Hantakdra, Agra or Bhiksd by means of his right 
hand supported by the left (below), in accordance with his 
capacity. 

112-113. He should give this unto the guest every day. 
He should consider him (the guest) as the great god. If one 
mouthful is given as alms it is called Bhiksd. Four times that 
quantity is called Agra. Four times that which is a considerable 
quantity, is called Hantakdra. The guest should be awaited up 
to the time of milking a cow. 

114. One should always honour and worship the guests 
coming to his house, in accordance with his capacity. One 
should give Bhiksa unto the mandicant and the Brahmacarin 
duly. One should be devoid of covetousness and give as much 
food as he can, unto the suppliants. 

115. If no guest is available, he should offer food unto 
the cows. One should be silent, while taking food. One should 
not find fault with the food served. One should take food along 
with many persons (v.l. with relatives). 

116. O excellent Brahmanas, if a Brahmana takes food 
without performing the five great Yajnas, the foolish soul shall 
be reborn among the animals. 

117. Daily study of the Vedas, the performance of Maha- 
Yajnas (the above-mentioned five great sacrifices)—an imperi¬ 
shable act—and the worship of gods quickly dispel all sins. 


1. The three types of alms are described below in (vv. 112-113). The 
importance of feeding the hungry before one takes one’s meals—one of the 
great sacrifices ‘Maha-yajna’—was a commendable feature of the old tradition. 



11.18.118—19.4 


443 


118. There is no doubt in this that a person who, out of 
delusion or ignorance takes food without performing the wor¬ 
ship of the deities, attains the hell called Sukara (Boar). 

119. Hence, O Brahmana, one should assiduously per¬ 
form all rites and take food along with his own kinsmen and he 
attains the greatest goal. 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 

Daily Duties of a Householder ; Mode of taking meals'^ 

Vydsa said : 

1. Facing the east or the sun, one should be seated on a 
good clean seat with his feet resting on the ground and take 
food. 

2. One who takes food facing the east, enjoys longevity; 
facing the south, one enjoys good fame; facing the west, one 
enjoys glory and prosperity and facing the north, one enjoys 
truth and orderliness.^ 

3. One should take food with five things wet. The plate 
should be placed on the ground. Manu, the Prajapati, says that 
it (such manner of eating) is on a par with the observance of 
fasts. 

4. One should take food with five things wet as follows : 
the place should be well smeared (with cowdung) and clean; 
the hands and the feet should be washed; he should perform 
Acamana and keep the face wet, and he should not be furious.® 


1. As purity of mind depends on the purity of food consumed (Chan- 
dogya Up. VII. 26. 2), Bhojana or meals has been one of the most important 
subject in Dharma Sastra. 

2. Mbh. Anusasana 104.57 and Manu II. 52. 

3. Paiicdrdra —One whose five limbs (viz. hands, feet and mouth) are 
wet. This instruction is found in Mbh. Santi 193-6, Vyasa quoted in SMC. 
I. p. 221. 



444 


Kurma Pur ana 


5. He should sprinkle food with water repeating the 
great Vjdhrtis. He should sip water^ ritualistically repeating the 
'M.z.ntTS. Amrtopastaranamasi (you are the seat of Amrta) 

6-7. He should then take in particle by particle as 
oblations repeating (therewith) the Oihkara Svaha (as Orh 
Prdndya Svdhd). This is the Ahuti of Prana etc. He should 
then say Apdndya Svdhd, Vydndya Svdhd, Uddndya Svdha and finally 
Samdndya Svdhd as the fifth one.^ The Brahmana should know 
the reality of these and perform Homa offering oblations to 
the Atman. 

8. He should eat the remaining food as he pleases, mixing 
it with side dishes, pickles etc. After meditating on the Devas 
with full concentration, he should meditate on Atman, the 
Prajapati. 

9. He should then sip water ritualistically repeating the 
Mantra Amrtdpidhdnam asi. You are the cover of the Nectar). 
After performing Acamana rite, he should perform the rite once 
again, repeating the Mantra Ayarh gauh etc. 

10. Or he should repeat the Drupada Mantra three times. 
It is destructive of all sins. He should then stroke his belly 
repeating the Mantra Prdtidndrh granthirasi (you are the knot of 
vital airs). 

11. (Defective verse). After performing the rite, 

he should let go some water on the toe of the right foot from 
the thumb of the right hand held up. (He should do this) with 
concentration. 

*12. With the yi.anX.Ta Sandhydydmhe should perform the 
the Krtdnumantrana rite. He should then unite his self with the 
imperishable Brahman with the Mantra Brahmdna. 


1. This sipping of water is called aposana (Yaj. Smr. I. 106) and its 
purpose is to make food beneficial as nectar and this sipping is taken at the 
beginning and the end of the dinner. 

2. These five morsels taken in for different vital airs (like prana, Apana 
etc.) are called Pranahutis ‘oblations to Pranas’ KP. does not mention that 
the 6th morsel is taken for Brahman [Brahmane svaha). 

■"The Vehkt. Text is corrupt. The verse in the Crt. Text reads : 
hutanumantranam kurydt Sraddhayam iti mantratahj 

‘With the mantra ‘Sraddhayam’ one should perform the post sacrificial 
recitation.’ 



11.19.13-21 


44S 


13. Among all Yogas, Atmayoga is the greatest. He 
who shall perform everything in accordance with these 
injunctions is himself a wise sage.* 

14. One shall take food with the sacred thread on (his 
left shoulder— Upavita fashion) and embellished with scented 
garlands. He should not take food in the twilights of the 
morning and evening especially at dusk. 

15. One should not take food immediately before the 
Solar eclipse.1 If there is a lunar eclipse, he should not take food 
in that evening. In the course of the duration of the eclipse 
also, one should not take food. After the liberation (i.e. close 
of the eclipse), he should (first) take bath and take food. 

16. When the moon is liberated, one may take food un¬ 
less it happens in the second or the third watch of the night. 
If the sun or the moon sets before liberation (i.e. if the eclipse 
is not over when they set), he should take food only the next 
day after seeing (the liberated sun or the moon as the case may 
be). 

17. One should not be wicked-minded enough to 
take foodwithout giving anything to the lookers-on. He should 
partake of the remainder after the Yajna. One should not take 
food while one is angry or when the mind is elsewhere. 

18. Indeed, one’s life is in vain, if the food is solely taken 
only by oneself, if the intercourse is solely for sexual pleasure, if 
the sole purpose of learning is to take up an avocation. 

19. If one takes food with the head covered with a cloth, 
or facing the north or with the shoes on, it is an Asuraic 
(demonic) practice. 

20. One should not take food at midnight or midday or 
when the food taken before is not digested. One should not eat 
food wearing a wet cloth, or sitting in a moving vehicle 

21. One shall not take food from a broken vessel or from 
the ground or in the hands (keeping the foodstuffs in the hands). 


*v.l. saydti Brahma^ah ksayam ‘He goes to the abode of Brahma.’ 

1. VV. 15-23 give a number of rules about taking food. We find 
similar rules in Smrtis like Manu VI. 207-223, Yajnavalkya I. 167-181. 



446 


Kurma Pur an a 


If one is defiled by Ucchista one should not take in ghee, nor 
should he touch his own head then. 

22. (If one is defiled by Ucchista) one should not glorify 
(repeat) the Vedic passages. One should not take food with¬ 
out leaving something behind. One should not take food along 
with one’s wife. One should not take food in darkness, or in 
the twilight periods or in temples (and similar places). 

23. One should not take food with a single garment on; 
one should not take food in a moving vehicle or lying down in 
the couch; one should not take food without slipping off the 
sandals nor one should take food while laughing or crying. 

24. After taking food, one should rest comfortable so that 
the food is well digested. One should elaborately ascertain 
further the meanings of the Vedic passages through (or with the 
help of) Itihasas (Epics) and Puranas. 

25. Then he should perform the worship of the Sandhya 
in accordance with the procedure mentioned before. He should 
be pure. Seated and facing the west, one should perform 
Japa of the goddess Gayatri. 

26. He who does not worship either the morning Sandhya 
or the evening Sandhya is on a par with a Sudra in this world. 
He is devoid of all holy rites. 

27. After performing the Homa duly, repeating the 
requisite Mantras after partaking of the remainder of the Yajna, 
one shall retire to sleep along with the attendents and kinsman. 
At that time his feet should be dry. 

28. One should not sleep facing (i.e. with the head in 
that direction) the north or the west.^ Nor should he lie under 
the open sky. One should not sleep in the nude, nor unclean 
(in body), nor should one sleep on a seat. 

29. One should not sleep in a tottering cot nor in a 
deserted house; one should never lie down on a bed of Palasa 
(wood) or of bamboos. 

30. Thus the various daily activities and duties of the 
Brahmanas have been wholly described by me. They bestow the 
benefit of Apavarga (salvation). 


1. Visnu Dh.S. ch. 70; Manu IV, 175-176; VP. III. II. 107-109. 



II.19.31—20.1 


447 


31. If any Brahmana does not practise his duty 
either due to atheism or due to lethargy, he falls into the terrible 
hells and is reborn as a crow. 

32. There is no other way for liberation excepting perfor¬ 
mance of the duties of one’s own Asrama (stage of life). Hence 
one should perform the holy rites for the satisfaction of 
Paramesthin (god Brahma). 


CHAPTER TWENTY! 

Procedure of Performance of Sraddho} 


Vydsa said : 

1. When it is the New Moon day, the Sraddha called 
Piriddnvaharyaka^ should be devotedly performed by excellent 
Brahmanas. This bestows worldly pleasures and salvation (as its 
fruit). 


1. Chapters 20-22 constitute the Sraddha Kalpa or the procedure of 
performing a Sraddha. It is based on the belief of after-death survival of 
deceased forefathers and the existence of a separate world of manes ( Pitr-loka) 
This belief is current since the Indo-Iranian period and hence pre-Vedic (vide 
S. B. E. IV-p. 262 for the Iranian belief). Rgvedic people believed in and 
performed ancestor-worship for prosperity and continuity of one*s race. As this 
topic forms an integral part of Hindu Dharma-^astra, we find it discussed in 
a number of Puranas also e. g. Ap. 163. 2-42, GP. I. 210, NP. I. 28, Pd. p 
(Srsti-Khanda) 9. 140-106, V. P. III. 15. 13-49. 

Most of these prescribe the same procedure as prescribed in Grhya 
Sutras and old Smrtis like Manu, Yajnavalkya and others; thus there is a 
repetition of common verses in variovs Smrtis and Puranas. 

But in the case of KP., the author has borrowed en mass practically the whole 
of Sraddha Kalpa from the Auianasa Smrti (ch. III. 110 to the end of the Chap¬ 
ter and chs. IV and V. 

2. Piri ddnvdhdryaka : 

Anvdhdrya or Pir^ddnvdhdryaka ( = that which is performed after Pinda- 
offerings) Medhatithi. 



448 


Kurma Purdna 


2. The Sraddha called Pindanvaharyaka is recommended 
when it is the dark half of the month (lit. the moon is on the 
wane). To the twice-born it is better if it is performed in the 
afternoon with meat. 

3. All other tithis in the dark half of the month beginn¬ 
ing from the first, except the fourteenth day, are excellent but 
the later Tithi is more commendable than the former. 

4. The three new-moon days and the eighth day in the 
dark half of the three months beginning with Pausa are good 
days. The three Astakas are holy as well as the fifteenth day (the 
new moon day) in the month of Magha. 

5. Particularly in the rainy season, the TrayodasI (thir¬ 
teenth day) united with the Magha constellation is good when 
the corn is ripe. These are prescribed as suitable for obligatory 
{Nitya) Sraddha. 

6. During the eclipse of the moon and the sun, the 
Naimiitika (occasional) ^raddha must be performed extensively 
among relatives. Otherwise, one is likely to be consigned to 
hell. 

7. The Kdmya (urged by a desire for benefit) Sraddhas 
are recommended during eclipse etc. and during the Vernal 
and equinotical transit of the sun and during Vyatipata the last 
giving infinite merit. 

8. The Sraddha at the time of Sariikranti (tropical 
transit of the sun) as well as on birthdays is of everlasting 
benefit. It is so particularly in all the Naksatras (constella¬ 
tions) and must be performed at the proper time.^ 


Itwas to be performed after Pitr~ya}ha by an Agni-hotrin on the Amavasya 
day(ManuIII. 122-123). This funeral sacrifice is not now in vogue among^ 
the Agnihotris in the Deccan. 

1. After describing the three varieties of ^raddha —Nitya (daily), 
Naimittika {occ2is\om\) Kdmya (for attaining a desired object), for such 
^raddhas vv. 9-15 enumerate the fruit one derives by performing a ^raddha 
on a particular constellation {Naksatra), 

It is Visnu Dh. S. 78. 8-15 first, which mentions what rewards follow 
from the performance of^raddhaon 28 Naksattras from Krttika to Bharani. 
KP follows the same order though not always with the same rewards. Cf. 
Bd. P. upodgkata-pada 18. 1 ff, Bm. P. 220.33-42, 



II.20.9-18 


449 


9. By performing the Sraddha in the constellation 
Krttika the excellent Brahmana attains heaven; by performing 
it in RohinI, he obtains progeny; by performing it in Mrgasiras 
constellation, he obtains Brahminical splendour. 

10. By performing the Sraddha in the Ardra constel¬ 
lation, one attains the benefits of the holy rites pertaining 
to Rudra as well as heroism; by performing it in the Punarvasu 
star, he attains lands, and by performing it in Pusya he obtains 
glory and prosperity. 

11-12. By performing the Sraddha in the Aslesa constella¬ 
tion, one attains all desires; in the constellation pertaining to 
the Pitrs (i.e. Magha), one attains good fortune. In the conste¬ 
llation to Aryaman (Uttara PhalgunI) one attains wealth; 
in the (Purva) PhalgunI star, the sins are quelled; if the 
Sraddha is performed in Hasta, one attains excellence among 
Kinsmen; by performing Sraddha in the Citra constellation, 
one attains many sons. \i Sraddha is performed in Svati conste¬ 
llation one attains the greatest achievement in trading trans¬ 
actions; by performing Sraddha in the Visakha star one obtains 
gold. 

13. By performing Sraddha in the constellation Anuradha, 
one attains many friends; in the constellation Jyestha, one 
attains kingdom; by performing Sraddha in Mula, one attains 
(flourishing) cultivation; by performing Sraddha inPurvasadha, 
one attains perfect knowledge and achievement. 

14. By performing Sraddha, in Vaisvadeva (Uttarasadha) 
constellation one attains all desires; in the Sravana constellation, 
one attains excellence; by performing Sraddha in Dhanistha one 
attains all desires; and in Satabhisak star, one attains the 
greatest strength. 

15. By performing Sraddha in the Purvabhadrapada 
constellation, one shall obtain the base metals; in the conste¬ 
llation of Uttara Bhadrapada, one attains excellent house; by 
performing Sraddha in the Revatl constellation, one attains 
many cows; and in the constellation Asvini one attains horses. If 
one offers Sraddha in the Bharanl constellation, one’s life 
becomes perfect. 

16-18. By performing Sraddha on Sunday, one attains 
health; on Monday, good fortune; on Tuesday, success every- 



450 


Kurma Pur ana 


where and by performing ^raddha on Wednesday, one attains 
all desires; by performing Sraddha on Friday, one attains 
wealth and by performing Sraddha on Saturday, one attains 
longevity.'^ By performing Sraddha on the Pratipat^ (i.e. first 
day in the lunar fortnight), one attains auspicious sons. On 
the second day, one begets daughters; and on the third day, one 
gets animals, on the fourth day, he attains small animals or 
things and by performing Sraddha on the fifth day, one attains 
splendid sons. 

19. A person performing Sraddha on the sixth day, attains 
lustre as well as good cultivation; the man who gives Sraddha 
on the seventh day, attains wealth; \\fwh.o oilers Sraddha on 
the eighth day, obtains good trading transactions. 

20. He who performs Sraddha on the ninth day, obtains 
single-hoofed animals; he who performs Sraddha on the tenth 
day, obtains double-hoofed animals in plenty. One who per¬ 
forms Sraddha on the eleventh day, obtains silver and sons of 
Brahmanical splendour. 

21. One who performs Sraddha on the twelfth day, 
obtains gold, silver and base metals. One who performs 
Sraddha on the thirteenth day, obtains excellent kinsmen 
and one who performs Sraddha on the fourteenth day, obtains 
ignoble progeny. One who performs Sraddha on the fifteenth 
day (i.e. on the new moon day), always obtains all desires. 

22. Hence Sraddha should not be performed by the twice- 
borns on the fourteenth day. The Sraddha pertaining to those 
killed by means of weapons should be assigned to that day. 

23. There is no restriction as to the time, if Brahmanas 
and the materials are available. Hence, the twice-borns should 
perform Sraddha for the purpose of worldly enjoyment as well 
as salvation. 


1. VV. 16-17 mention the reward for performing Sraddha on several 
week-days. Gf. Visnu Dh. s. 71. 1. 7. 

2. VV. 18-21 state the fruit of performing Sraddha on each day from 
the 1st to the 15th day of the dark half. Apastamba Dh. S. II. 7. 16. 8-22. 
Mbh. Anusasana 87, Vayu P. 81. 10-19, Bd. P. Ill, 17. 10-22, Bm. P. 220. 
15-21 deal with same topic, though with some difference about the rewards. 



I [.20.24-36 


451 


24. The Sraddha should be performed at the beginning of 
all noble enterprises. It should again be performed on the 
achievement of prosperity, or when a son is born and in similar 
instances. The Pdrvana Sraddha is to be performed in Parvans 
(particular holy days). 

25-26. Sraddha that is to be performed every day is the 
J^itya Sraddha] that which is performed for achieving a desirable 
object is occasional {Maimittika). There is Ekoddista-^raddha 
(intended for one forebear) and others Bahuddista (?) (v.l. 
Vrddhi-sraddha) Sraddha and Pdrvana-Sraddha. These five kinds of 
Srdddha are glorified by Manu. In the course of journey, the 
sixth kind is prescribed and it should be performed assiduously 
(or regularly). 

27. A seventh Srdddha has been enunciated by Brahma 
for the achievement of purity. The eighth Srdddha is Daivika 
(divine) by the performance of which, one is liberated from 
fear. 

28. A Srdddha is not to be performed either in the 
evening or at night except at the time of eclipse. 

The merit of performing Srdddha at particular (holy) place 
is infinite.^ 

29. The Srdddha on the Ganga, at Prayaga and at 
Amarakantaka is of everlasting benefit. The Pitrs sing the 
religious verse and the learned men dance. 

30. “Many sons of good conduct endowed with attributes 
should be sought by one. Perhaps (at least) one among all 
those may go to Gaya. 

31. After reaching Gaya if one performs Srdddha 
incidentally, the Pitps are redeemed by him. He attains the 
greatest goal”. 

32-36. In the following holy centres, the Pitrs are per¬ 
petually delighted, viz.:—Varaha mountain, Gaya in particular, 
in Varanasi where lord Kara himself is present, at the source 


1. As KP. (infra II. 22. 17) states, holy places are no one’s private 
property. Hence, vv. 28-36 recommend a list of holy places (rivers, forests, 
mountains, etc) where performance of sraddha is more efficacious. Vide aXso 
Visnu Dh. S. ch. 85, Sahkha Smr. 14. 27-29, Vayu P. Ch. 77 and Ma. P. ch. 
22 for the lists of such holy places for §raddha. 



452 


Kurma Pur ana 


of Ganga, Prabhasa, Bilvaka, on the Nila mountain, Kuruksetra, 
Kubjamra, Bhrgutuhga, Mahalaya, Kedara, Phalgu tirtha, in 
the Naimisa forest, particularly in Sarasvati and Puskara, in the 
Narmada, at Kusavarta, Srisaila, Bhadrakarnaka in the 
Vetravati, (the Betwa in M.P.) the Visakha (v.l. Vipasa i.e. 
the Beas), particularly in the Godavari and on the banks of 
the other holy rivers. 

37. One propitiates the Pitrs for a month, if the Sraddha 
is offered with grains, barleys, pulses, water, fruits and roots, 
Syamaka grains, Kasas, Nivaras, Priyahgus, wheat, gingelly 
seeds and green gram.i 

38. At the time of the Sraddha, one should offer the 
juice of mango, sugarcane, bunches of grapes and pomegranates. 
He shall also give Vidalvas and Kurandas* (different kinds of 
grass). 

39. He should give fried grains with honey, powdered 
2 )ed grains with sugar, assiduously at the time of the Sraddha. 

He should give water caltrops and water chestunt {Srfigataka 
kaserukas (?) ). 

40. Manes are satisfied with the meat of fish for two 
months; with Venison for three months; with the meat of the 
ram for four months; with the meat of birds for five months; 
with the meat of goats for six months and with the meat of the 
spotted antelope for seven months. 

41. The Pitrs are propitiated for eight months, if Sraddha 
is offered with the meat ofp^m (deer) and for nine months with 
the meat of Ruru deer. With the meat of the boar and the 
buffalo they are propitiated for ten months. 

42. With the flesh of rabbit and tortoise, he should 
propitiate them for eleven months. With the cow’s milk and 


I. VV. 37-39 show that Pitrs are satisfied for a month by articles of 
vegetarian food and fruit but vv. 40-45 state the periods of time for which 
Pitrs are gratified when the flesh of certain animals is served to Brahmanas 
at the time of Sraddha. We have similar list of this type in Manu III. 267- 
272, Yaj. 258-260, Vayu P. 83. 3-9, Mt. P. 17. 31-35, Bm. P. 220. 23-29 
though there is some divergence in some details. Refusal to eat flesh would 
punish the refuser by birth as a beast in the next birth, stay in the hell for as 
many years as the killed animal had hair on its body {supra 1. 18-40)—A 
relic of an old non-vegetarian age. 

*v.l. viddrinca bharandam (?) 



11.20.43—21.2 


453 


milk pudding he shall propitiate them for a year. The satisfac¬ 
tion due to the Sraddha with the meat of Vardhrinasa 
(rhinoceros or old white goat) extends to twelve years. 

43. The Kalasaka, (?) the Mahasalka (sea-crab), 
the meat of rhinoceros and the red goat and the honey, 
—the food-stuffs of the sages are capable of being beneficent 
endlessly. 

44. Whether by buying or securing oneself or bringing 
the dead body (of the animal), the Brahmana should assi¬ 
duously offer it in the Sraddha. It is called everlasting for him. 

45-47. The following articles are used in the Sraddha, 
viz. :—(long pepper) Pippali, Rucaka, Musuraka (lentil), 
Kusmanda (pumpkin) Alabu (gourd), Vartaka, Bhutrna (a 
fragrant grass), the juicy root of Kusumbha Pinda and 
Tandullyaka. At the time of the Sraddha, an excellent 
Brahmana should avoid seven articles assiduously, viz. :— 
Rajamasa pulse, buffalo’s milk, goat’s milk, Adhakis, Kovidaras, 
Palakis and Maricas (chillis). 


CHAPTER TWENTYONE 

Rides governing Sraddha {contd.) 

Vydsa said : 

1. On the new moon day, a Brahmana should take his 
bath and propitiate the Pitrs as mentiond before. With purity 
and gentlemanliness, he should perform the Sraddha called 
Pin^ anvdhdryaka. 

2. At the very outset, he should look up for a Brahmana 
who is a master of the Vedas.^ He is the holy centre (deserves 


1. These verses describe tlie qualifications of the Brahmana to be 
invited for the Sraddha. Heredity, personality, learning, character are some 
of the main considerations of such an invitee. Gf. Mt. P. 16. 8-10, NP. I. 
28-6-10; also Smr. C. {Smrti Candrika) III [Sraddha Kd^^da) pp. 389-394. An¬ 
cient Smrtis insist on purity of Character. Says Manu (II. 118). “Better a 
Brahmana who knows only the Gayatri Mantra but is self-controlled, than a 
knower of three Vedas but lacking in self-control, eats everything and sells 
anything (despite the prohibition of dharma^^). 



454 


Kurma Pur ana 


to be the recepient of offerings meant for gods and Pitrs). 

3. The Brahmanas to be invited must be Soma-imbibers, 
(in Yajnas), free from passion (Rajas quality), knowers of 
Dharma, of calm mind, performing holy rites, observers of rules 
restraining the mind, those who approach unto their wives only 
on the prescribed days after menstruation. 

4. The Brahmana must be one who maintains the five 
(sacrificial) fires. He must be a student of the Vedas, a 
knower of Yajurveda, conversant with many Rk mantras 
Trisauparria}- and Trimadhus.^ 

5. He must know the mantras of Trindciketas,^ be a 
chanter of the Sama-veda and must know the Jyestha Samans* 
He must have studied Atharvafiras® especially the section called 
Rudra Adhyaya mantras. 

6. He must be devoted to the performance of Agnihotra. 
He must be a scholar knowing Nyayas and the six Angas 


1. Trisuparna —The three Anuvdkas beginning from Brahmametu mam 
(tait. Ar. X. 41-50) 

2. Tri-madhu —Three Vedic verses (RV. I. 90. 6-9, Vaj. S. 13. 27-29. 
Tait. S. IV'. 2. 9. 3.) in which the word Madhu occurs thrice. 

3. Tri-mciketas —variously explained as; 

1. A person who knows the Naciketa fire 

2. A person who has thrice kindled the Naciketa fire. 

3. One who has studied the Anuvaka called Virajas, Tait. Br. III. 
11. 7-8 which describes the Naciketa fire and the story of 
Naciketas. 

4. Jyestha-sdman —Two interpretations according to the branches of 
the Sama-veda. 

i. Talavakdra Sdkhd'. Sdman sung on Udu tvam (Rv. I. 50. 1) 
Citram devdndm (Rv. I. 115. 1) 

ii. Chdndoga Sdkhd: Three sdmans sung on murdhdnam divo (Rv. 
VI. 7. 1, Sam. V. Purvarcika 67, iiid uttararcika 1140). vv. 4 
and 5 of KP repeat Apa. Dh. S. [Apastamba-Dharma Sutra) II. 
7. 17-22 where it is regarded as a qualification of a ‘Pankti- 
pdvana’ (purifier of a row of ‘fallen’ persons by sitting in their 
row for meals). 

5. N. of an Upanisad. 



11.21.7-11 


455 


(auxiliary studies of the Veda). He must be a knower of the 
Mantra Brahmanas and a reciter of Dharma Sastra. 

7. He must be observing vows of sages and a (lit. a 
minor sage) prospective sage of calm mind who has subdued 
sense-organs. He must belong to family of hereditary Vedic 
Teachers. He must be pure ever since the conception. He 
must be a bestower of a thousand cows. 

8. He must regularly perform the Candrayana rite. He 
must be truthful in speech, a knower of the Puranas, devoted to 
the worship of the preceptor, Devas and the fire-god. He 
must be devoted to the perfect knowledge. 

9. One liberated from all sides, of firm mind, an excellent 
Brahmana who has realised the Brahman, and who is self- 
possessed, a devotee of Visnu, engaged in the worship of Maha- 
deva and one called Pahktipavana^ (one who sanctifies the row 
in which he sits for meals.) 

10. A person who is as follows, should be known as a 
Paiiktipavana; one who is engaged in non-violence, one who 
never accepts monetary gifts; one who performs Satra 
(sacrificial se.ssions) and one who is engaged in charitable gifts. 

Additional Verses in Brackets 

A. Brahmanas who are young and healthy and well versed 
in Srutis or Vedas, devoted to the performance of great 
Yajnas and those Brahmanas who are engaged in the Japa 
of the Saviiri Mantra are Paiikti-Pavanas. 

B. Those who belong to good families, are endowed with Vedic 
learning, those who are of good conduct, performers 
of Penance, a Brahmana householder who maintains 
(sacrifical) fires—these should be known as Pahktipavanas. 

11. A Brahmana who is engaged in what is beneficial to 
his parents, who regularly takes his bath early in the morning, 
a sage knowing spiritual topics and a person of self control 
should be known as Pahkti-Pavana. 


1. Pankti-pdvana: Persons who sanctify others by their presence in the 
row of diners (even at funeral repast). This belief is pretty old, vide Baudh. 
Dh. S. {Baudhayana Dharma Sutra) II. 8. 2. Manu III 185-186. The list of 
such Brahmanas given here (vv. 1-14) is found in the Mbh. Anu. 90-25-31, 
also cf. Mt. P. 16. 7-13, Vayu p. 79. 56-59. 



456 


Kurma Purina 


12. A great Yogin, well-stabilised in perfect knowledge, 
one who ponders over the meanings of Vedantas; one who 
has faith, one who is engaged in Sraddha—such a Brahmana 
is Pahkti-Pavana. 

13. A Brahmana who is engaged in the Vedic lore, one 
always devoted to celibacy, who is well versed in the Atharva- 
veda and who desires liberation is a Pahkti-Pavana. 

14. A Brahmana who has no common Pravaras (with the 
performer of the Sraddha) and who belongs to a different Gotra^ 
and who is thus unrelated, should be regarded as Pahktipavana. 

15. One shall feed a quiescent Yogin^ engaged in the 
perfect knowledge of the reality. In his absence, he may feed a 
Naisthika (perpetual) celibate sage or a religious student who 
has completed his religious studentship and who takes to the 
life of a householder. 

16. In his absence, he shall feed a householder who is 
desirous of salvation and who has no attachment. If all these 
are not available, one shall feed a householder who is an 
aspirant. 

17. If an ascetic who knows the Gunas of the Prakrti and 
all the principles (tattvas) partakes of one’s Hauls, the merit 
that one attains exceeds feeding even a thousand knowers of 
Vedanta. 

18. Hence, with great effort, one should feed a leading 
Yogin engaged in the pursuit of perfect knowledge of Isvara 
(in rites pertaining to gods and Pitrs) by means of Havyas and 
Kauyas. In case he be not available, he should feed other 
Brahmanas. 

19. This is the best alternative in the matter of giving 
Havya and Kmya. The Anukalpc? (next alternative) which 
is always practised by pious men should be known as follows : 


1. Cf. Bsudh Dh. S. II. 2. 7. 

2. VV. 15-18 cf. Visnu Dh. S. 83. 19-20. It specially recommends 
Yogins as invitees to Sraddha and quotes a Gatha in which Pitrs express 
their yearning fora Brahmana Yogin fed at their ^raddha. Puranas vie with 
each other in describing the quantitative and qualitative efficacy in feed¬ 
ing a Yogin at a Sraddha than other Brahmanas in different dsramas (stages 
of life). Cf. Bd. P. III. 9. 70 Mk. P. 29. 29. 

3. Medhatithi on Manu III 147 explains this as the second best 
course: mukhydbhdveyo 'nustiyate pratinidhi-nydyena 



11.21.20-27 


457 


20. One should (then) feed (one’s) maternal grandfather/ 
maternal uncle, sisters’ son, father-in-law, preceptor, daughter’s 
son, a king, a kinsman, as well as a Rtvik and a Yajya (one on 
whose behalf a Yajna can be performed) 

21. One should not feed a friend^ in the Sraddha. He 
should be pleased with wealth(?).Desire for Daksinasis demonic 
and is not conducive to any benefit either here or hereafter. 

22. In case of non-availability of a suitable Brahmana 
one may very well feed and honour a friend but not an enemy, 
even though he may be learned and enlightened. The Havis 
partaken of by an enemy becomes futile after death. 

23. A Brahmana who has not learned the Vedas becomes 
extinct like the fire of (dry) grass. Havya shall not be given 
unto him, ior Homa is not performed in the ashes indeed. 

24. Just as by sowing seeds in a barren land, the sower 
does not reap any fruit thereof, similarly, by offering Havis to 
one without Rk mantras (i.e. one who has not learned Rk 
mantras) one does not reap the fruit of that offer. 

25. If a non-knower of Mantras partakes of food- 
oblations in Havya and Kavya (offered to gods and Pitfs), the 
performer of that Sraddhais compelled to swallow after death 
as many burning thick balls of iron (in number) as the rice- 
balls swallowed by that non-knower® (of mantras). 

26. O Brahmana, that abode (place of sacrifice) becomes 
Asura (unholy and demonaic) where these base men of evil 
conduct partake of the Havya, though they may be endowed 
with the knowledge and birth in noble family. 

27. * If the Vedas and Vedis (sacrificial platforms)are in 
disuse upto three generations, that person becomes an evil 
Brahmana; He never deserves invitation to feeding in Sraddhas* 
etc. 


1. Yaj. Smr. I. 220, Mt. P. 16. 10-11. 

2. VV. 21-22. Cf. Manu III. 138-139 but hemodifies his view and 
allows invitation to a friend in emergency but not an enemy however learned 
III. 144. 

3. Manu III. 133. 

*Ausanasa Smi th 

4. VV. 27-47 describe the disqualifications for invitation to a Sraddha. 
Most of these verses are common to Manu III. 151-166 Cf. Yaj. Smr. I. 222- 



458 


Kurma Pur ana 


28. The person mentioned above, a servant of a Sudra,. 
a salaried attendant of the king, the sacrificial priest of Sudras, 
a person who sustains himself by killing and a person whose 
livelihood is imprisoning others—-these six are Brahmabandhus 
(not true Brahmanas—nominal Brahmanas). 

29. (Defective verse) Manu says that they are fallen for 
the sake of wealth. These sellers of Vedas are not approved of 
for the Sraddha. 

30. Those who sell their sons, those who are born as sons 
of a remarried widow, those who perform the Yajnas of even 
ordinary persons—all these are spoken of as fallen ones. 

31. Those teachers who are not cultured, those who read 
and teach Vedas for salary—are called fallen ones. 

32-33. That Sraddha wherein the wicked Tamasikas such. 
as old Sravakas (Buddhists), Jainas, knowers of Pancaratra, 
followers of Kapalika and Pasupata sects, atheists, and others, 
like them eat food offered to gods, does not bestow excellent 
benefit here and hereafter 

34. A Brahmana not belonging to any Asrama, or a non¬ 
performer of the prescribed duties of his own Asrama (stage of 
life) and who falsely poses as belonging to a particular Asrama— 
all these should be known as defilers of rows of people participat¬ 
ing in a feast. 


224, Brhad-Yama Smr. III. 34-38, Mbh. Anuidsana 90. 6-11, Mt. P. 16. 14-17, 
Bm. P. 220. 127-135. Bd. P. Upodghata 15. 39-43, 19. 39-41, NP. I. 30-41. 
The textual similarity between these verses from different works is signihcant. 
Out of these, Manu’s list of disqualifications is the most comprehensive one. 
A reference to Smr. Candrika III, pp. 394-403 shows how writers on Dharma 
Sutras, Smrtis and Puranas attached great importance to the selection of 
Brahmanas for ^raddha. As Manu III 149. puts it, one may not put Brah¬ 
manas to test for work pertaining to gods, but in the case of Pitrs (i. e. for 
^raddha) one must be scrupulously careful—a view endorsed by most other 
writers on Dharma ^astra. 

1. Here the followers of Pahca-ratra, Kapalika and Pasupata sects 
are disqualified as these sects were regarded to have been outside the vedic 
fold due to their recognition of their sectarian Agamas as against the Vedas. 
Pasupatas of the vedic fold described so elaborately in this Purana are 
different. 

Gf. Bd. P. III. 14. 38-39, Vayu 78. 30-31 



II.2I.35-45 


459 


35-42. The following persons are shunned in Sraddha and 
similar rites : A person with a hideous skin; one with ill-formed 
rotten nails, a leper, one with white leprosy, one with black teeth, 
one whose penis is mutilated, a thief, an impotent person, an 
atheist, a drink-addict, a paramour of a Sudra woman, a 
murderer of a hero, one who indulges in sexual intercourse with 
one’s brother’s widow,^ one who commits arson, a pimp, the 
seller of Soma, the young brother who marries before the elder 
brother,^ the violent man, the elder brother who remains unmar¬ 
ried when the younger brother has married, non-performer of 
Maha-yajnas, an expelled one, a widow’s son, a usurer, a star¬ 
gazer) one indulging in songs and musical instruments, a sickly 
person, a one-eyed fellow, one deficient in any limb, an Avakirnin 
(a religious student who breaks his vow), one who has an addi¬ 
tional limb, a person who defiles food, bastard, a person accused 
of a crime, a Devala (a person maintaining himself by worshipping 
idols) ; a person who injures his friend; a back-biter, a henpeck¬ 
ed husband; a person who has abandoned his parents and the 
preceptor, a wife-forsaker, the creator of discord in one’s clan, 
one who is impure, a worthless fellow; an issueless person, a 
perjuror, a beggar, a person living by means of dramas, a sea¬ 
farer, an ungrateful person, a person committing breach of 
promise, and one who censures Vedas, Devas and the Brahmanas. 
All these should be avoided in a Sraddha. 

43. The following are defilers of rows :—an ungrateful 
person, a back-biter, a ruthless person, an atheist, a person who 
censures the Vedas, a person injuring friends and a cheat. 

44. All these should not be fed (in a Sraddha). They 
cannot be given any gift in holy rites A murderer of a Brah- 
mana and a person who is accused should be avoided 
scrupulously. 

45. A Brahmana who has fattened himself on the food and 
drink offered py Sudras and a person not performing Sandnya 

1. didhisupati —one who lasciviously dallies with the widow of his 
deceased brother even though he be appointed to procreate a son from her 
as per law (^/Aarmc), Manu III. 173. 

2. Parivettd —a younger brother who marries or kindles sacred fires 
before his elder brother—Manu III. 171. 



460 Kurma Purana 

prayers and five great Tajhas —are the defilers of the rows (in 
feasts). 

46. ABrahmana who destroys what he has learned, one 
devoid of an ablution and charitable gifts and a Brahmana with 
predominance of Tamas and Rajas Gunas—all of these are 
defilers of rows.^ 

47. Of what use is an expiation beyond limit. Those who 
do not perform the enjoined duties but perform those acts 
which are forbidden are to be scrupulously avoided in the 
Sraddha. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO 

Rules for performance of Sraddha^ {contd.) 

Vydsa said : 

1-2. Having purified the ground with cowdung and 
water on the day previous to that of Sraddha, the performer of 
iSraddha should invite the Brahmanas with the above-mentioned 
quilifications, through good persons with the invitation : 
“Tomorrow there will be Sraddka at my place.” If this is not 
possible, he may invite on the next day® (i.e, on the day of 
Sraddha. 

3. Hearing that the time of Sraddha has arrived, his 
manes will mentally communicate with each other and with 
the speed of the mind, they gather near him. 


1. Though KP. does not explicitly discuss it there is a distinction bet¬ 
ween one who should not be invited as a Brahmana for Sraddha because 
being Sagotra and those who are apdnkleyas or Pankti-diisakas i. e. whose presence 
defiles the row of diners. The list of such defilers (Pahkti-dusakas) is given 
above in this chapter. 

2. As this chapter is verbatim the same as Ausanasa Smrti ch. V, para¬ 
llels for comparison from this Smrti are not cited. 

3. Cf. Mt. P. 16. 17-20; Prajapati Smr. 63. 



4. The Pitrs take food along with those Brahmanas, 
though they (themselves) are in firmament.^ They remain in 
their airy state. After taking food, they attain their greatest goal. 

5. The Brahmanas who have been invited shall invariab¬ 
ly observe celibacy, be self-controlled when the time for the 
Sraddha has arrived.^ 

6. The person who performs Sraddha must certainly avoid 
anger, hurry, carelessness; should speak the truth and have 
concentration ofthe mind, refrain from carrying heavy weight, 
sexual intercourse and long journey. 

7. If a Brahmana, invited by one accepts the invitation 
of another, he falls into the terrible hell and becomes a pig. 

8. If the Brahmana (householder), after inviting one 
Brahmana for the Sraddha invites another also out of delusion 
he is a greater sinner. He is reborn as a worm in the faeces. 

9. If a Brahmana invited for partaking of the Sraddha 
indulges in sexual intercourse, he incurs the sin of a Brahmana- 
slaughter. He is reborn as an animal. 

10. If a Brahmana invited for a Sraddha (accepts the 
invitation and) goes on a journey, the Pitrs of the wicked 
Brahmana subsist on sinful food that month. 

11. If a Brahmana, invited for a Sraddha were to 
quarrel, the Pitrs of that Brahmana become the eaters of filth 
that month. 

12. Hence, the Brahmana invitee for a Sraddha should 
control himself, be free from anger and devoted to cleanliness. 
The performer (of the Sraddhd) also shall be one who has 
conquered his sense-organs. 

13. (Defective verse). On the morning of the next day 
(i.e. on the Sraddha day) he should go in the southern direction 
and with great concentration bring the Kusa grass alongwith 
their roots, and (he shall place them) with their tips to the 
South and water (?). They shall be clean. 


1. The idea of ancestors hovering in the sky for participation of food 
on the Sraddha day and entering the body of Brahmanas invited for Sraddha 
is found elsewhere also,vide Pd. P. Srsti Khanda 9. 85-86, Vayu P. Tj. 13-15. 

2. About the religious restrictions on the inviter and the invitee to 
Sraddha cf. Laghu Sankha Smr. 



462 


Kurma Pur am 


14. He shall select a clean isolated spot of all auspici¬ 
ous characteristics. It shall be smooth and sloping towards the 
South. He shall scrub it and smear cowdung over it.^ 

15. The Pitrs are always delighted with the Sraddha 
offered in holy centres, on the banks of the rivers, on his plot 
of land in isolated places but not in waters. 

16. One shall never perform Sraddhas in a plot of land 
belonging to others. What is done by men may be obstructed 
by the owner out of delusion. 

17. Forests, mountains, sacred holy centres and shrines 
—they say that these are without owners. No one can claim 
these as theirs. 

18. (Defective verse). He shall scatter gingelly seeds 
there all round, but see that theydo not grow (i.e. germinate ?) 
A Sraddha affected by the Asuras becomes purified through the 
gingelly seeds if they do not germinate. 

19. He shall then prepare various kinds of cooked food 
with diverse pickles and side dishes. In accordance with his 
ability, he should prepare lambatives, beverages and cooked 
food. 

20. (Defective verse). Then, after midday, he should 
approach the Brahmanas who have shaved their hairs and pared 
their nails and give unto them the tooth-brush twig. 

21. When requested “Ye be seated”, they will sit 
separately. He should give them oil for anointing themselves 
with as well as water for bath, and various other necessary 
requisites. These shall be given in vessels made ofUdumbara 
wood. Everything shall be given with Vaisvadaivatya rites (i.e. 
uttering VaiWadeva hymns). 

22. When they return after taking bath, he should 
greet them with palms joined in reverence. He should offer them 
Padya and Acamaniya, (water for washing the feet and the 
Acamana) sipping water-rite in due order. 


1. For the selection of a spot for Sraddha, cf. Manu III 206-207, Yaj, 

I. 227. 



11.22.23-33 


463 


23. The seats of those Brahmanas who had been pre¬ 
viously invited on behalf of Visve-Devas, are covered with 
three blades(?) of Darbha grass with their tips towards the East. 

24. The seats of the Brahmanas on behalf of the Pitrs 
are the Darbha grasses facing the South. They must be sprin- 
Med with water and gingelly seeds. 

25. He should make them sit on these. Touching the 
seat he should request : “Ye be seated”, They shall seat 
separately. 

26. Two (Brahmanas) shall represent Visvedevas (?) 
They shall face the east. Three Brahmanas represent the Pitrs 
They face the north. One shall represent PitamaAd (grandfather) 
and one shall represent Matamaha (maternal grandfather) Or 
one Brahmana represents gods and one paternal and maternal 
grandfather. 

27. Five things are spoiled if performed elaborately in a 
crowd, viz.-hospitality, purity of the place (of respect), the 
time of respect, cleanliness, and the selection of a Brahmana. 
Hence one shall not wish for elaborateness and a big gathering. 

28. Or one shall feed only one Brahmana who is a 
master of the Vedas, endowed with learning, good conduct etc. 
and devoid of evil characteristics. 

29. Out of all articles of food thereof, he should take a 
portion (in a vessel and offer it to the Brahmana representing 
gods, in the shrine, and then pass it to others. 

30. He shall consign that cooked food to the fire. He 
should give that to a Brahmacarin. Hence, one shall feed only 
one Brahmana but he should be an excellent scholar. 

31. If a mendicant or a Brahmacarin be present for the 
purpose of food and he seats himself in the ^raddha, one should 
feed him also. 

32. Sraddha wherein the guest does not partake of the 
food, is not praised. Hence, guests should be worshipped in the 
Sraddhas by the Brahmanas. 

33. Those twice-born ones who partake of the food in a 
Sraddha devoid of hospitality (to a guest), are reborn as crows. 
There is no doubt about this. The performer of the Sraddha too 
(is reborn as a crow). 



464 


Kurma Prauna 


34. The following shall be shunned and kept at a great 
distance from Sraddhas viz. one who is deficient in any limb, 
a fallen one, a leper, one with running sores, an atheist, a 
cock, a pig and a dog. 

35. One shall avoid a loathsome fellow, an unclean 
fellow, the naked one, the intoxicated one, the rogue, a women in 
her monthly course, the blue-garmented, the ochre-garmented 
and the heretic. 

36. Whatever rite is performed in a Sraddha towards the 
Brahmanas shall be performed alongwith Vaisvadeva rites or 
invoking Visvedevas. 

37. Even as they are seated, one should bedeck them in 
ornaments, garlands, coronets, fumigating incenses and unguents. 

38. Then with the permission of the Brahmanas, he should 
invoke Devas by means of the Rk Visvedevdsah (RV. II, 41. 13) 
etc. H e shall duly recite it and face the north. 

39-40. He shall wear two Pavitras (the Darbha grass 
made to resemble a ring with a tail). Repeating the mantra 
Sanno devih, etc. he shall (RV.X. 9.4) pour water in the 
cleaned vessel. Repeating the mantra Tavosi (Vaja V. 26) 
etc. he should place Yavas (barley grains) there. Repeating the 
mantra “Ya Divya” (Tait. Br. II. 7. 15. 4) he should pour the 
Arghya on to the hand. He should then offer scents and 
garlands, incense etc. according to his ability. 

41. He shall then turn round anticlockwise and face the 
south, repeating the Rk. Usantas Tvd (RV. X. 16. 12) etc. the 
learned man shall invoke the Pitrs, 

42-43. After invoking the Pitrs and being permitted by 
the Brahmanas he shall perform the Japa of the Mantra Ayantu 
nah: Pitarah (Vaj. Sarh 19. 58) etc. Repeating the Mantra 
Sanno Devih etc. he should pour water in the vessel and place 
gingelly seed, repeating the mantra Tilosi etc. Pouring Arghya 
on the hands as before, he should, with concentration, put the 
Sarhsravas (mixing of waters from the Argha-vessel and vessel for 
Pitrs). 

44-45. At the seat of the Pitrs, he should place the vessel 
face downwards. He should take the cooked rice soaked in ghee. 
Desirous of consigning it into the fire, he shall ask the Brahmanas’ 
permission for the same. On being permitted by them saying 



11.22.45-53 


465 


“Do so”, he should perform Homa, wearing the sacred thread in 
the usual manner. 

45. Homa should be performed by one with the Kusa 
grass in the hand, wearing the sacred thread in the normal 
manner. All the rites of the Pitrs should be performed with the 
sacred thread worn over the right shoulder and under the left 
arm. The Vaisvadeva rite is performed like Homa. 

46. While rendering homage to Devas, one shall 
always kneel upon the right knee; and during the obeisance 
and service to the Pitrs one shall kneel upon the other knee. 

47. At the time he should repeat the Mantra Somaya 
vai pitrmate svadha namah [svadha and obeisance into Soma 
(the deity) with the Pitps]. Then he shall perform Homa by 
saying Agnaye kavya-vahdya svadha [svadha unto Agni (fire- 
god) the bearer of Kavyas]. 

48. In case fire is not available one should make use of 
the right hand of the Brahmanas. Or he shall perform it near 
god Mahadeva or in a cowshed with due concentration. 

49-51. Thereafter, on being permitted by them he should 
go to the southern direction. After cleaning and smearing the 
place with cowdung, he should cover it with sand. It shall be 
inclined towards the South and be auspicious. With a Darbha 
grass he shall scratch and scrape its middle thrice. On that spot 
he should strew Darbha grass, the tips of which are turned 
to the south. With the remainder of the Havis he shall 
make three Pindas there and offer them with great concentration. 

52. After placing the Pindas he shall wipe off the 
hand on the Darbha grass to remove the greasiness to Pitrs who 
partake of the Lepa?- He should then perform the Acamana 
rite thrice. He shall smell the cooked rice thrice slowly. The 
knowerof the Mantras then shall make obeisance unto the 
Pitrs. 

53. The remainder of the holy water, he should pour 
round and near the Pindas. After offering the Pindas he shall 
smell the Pindas with great concentration. 


1. Manu III 216 Mt. P. 18. 29 state that ancestors from the 
fourth are entitled to this lepa (food stuck to the hand of the performer of 
Sraddha). 



466 


Kurma Purina 


54. He shall then feed the Brahmanas duly with the rice 
other than that of the Pindas. He should also offer them meat, 
pies, etc. of various kinds, auspiciously prepared in accordance 
with the Sraddha Kalpa. 

55-56. After they have started taking food, he should 
strew the cooked rice of the Pindas in front of them on the 
ground. He should ask them “What shall I do with this rice ? 
(?) When they are satisfied, he should make them perform the 
Acamana rite. After they have performed the Acamana, he should 
urge them saying ‘‘Be diverted all round”. The Brahmanas will 
say then Svadha be to you. 

57. Then when they have finished taking food, he should 
inquire of them about the remainder of the food. On being per¬ 
mitted by those Brahmanas he shall do so as they say. 

58. In the Pitr rite one shall say Svaditam (May it be 
well tasted). In the cow-sheds it shall be mentioned thus— SuSrtam 
(well-cooked). In [prosperity it shall be mentioned thus ; 
Sampannam —well endowed. In regard to a Deva iSewitoOT (served) 
should be mentioned. 

59. After bidding farewell to the Brahmanas he should 
stand before the Pitrs silently facing the southern direction. He 
shall then beg of the Pitrs the following boons : 

60. “May the liberal person flourish. May the Vedas and 
our progeny flourish. May not our faith slip off. May there be 
much with us for giving.” 

61. The Pindas may be given to cows, goats, or Brahmanas 
or cast into fire or water. The wife, desirous of a son, may eat the 
middle Pinda.^ 

62-64. He shall wash his hands and perform Acamana. 
With the remainder of the foodstuff, he should propitiate 
kinsmen. He shall give unto the Brahmanas whatever is liked by 
them viz: cereals, vegetables, fruits, sugarcane, milk, curds, ghee, 
honey, cooked rice as much as they want and various kinds of 
edibles and beverages. He should give them various kinds of 
grains and gingelly seeds of all kinds and different kinds of 
sugar. Except in the case of fmits, roots and Panakas (sweetened 


1. Manu III. 260-261, Yaj. I. 257, Mt. P, 16. 52-53. 



11.22.65-73 


467 


cold water), hot food should be given to the twice-born by 
one who wishes for welfare. 

65. One shall not rest the knee on the ground nor shall 
be furious. He shall not utter a falsehood. He shall not touch 
food with the foot. Nor shall he shun and reject it. 

66. The demons take away the benefit of what is partaken 
of in fury or against the conventional procedure or when served 
by one who prattles. 

67. O excellent Brahmanas one should not stand near 
if one perspires profusely, he should not see* the crows and 
other birds going contrary to the natural order. The Pitrs 
desirous of eating, come there assuming those forms. 

68. He should not directly give salt into the hand. Nor 
should the food be served in an iron vessel. It should never be 
served with carelessness. 

69. What is offered in the following types of vessels 
yields everlasting benefit viz.—golden, silvery, made of 
Udumbara wood or made of horn of rhenoceros. 

70. He who feeds Brahmanas in mud pots at the time of 
of the Sraddha falls into the terrible hell. He who partakes of 
the offerings too falls into the hell. 

71. One should not discriminate between persons sitting 
in the same row and serve irregularly. One shall not beg nor 
force anyone to give (?). He who begs, who forces anyone to 
give and who serves with partiality falls into the terrible 
hells. 

72. They should eat the most excellent things prior to 
others, (v. 1. vagyatah ‘observing silence’). But they should 
not speak out their material good qualities (?). The Pitrs 
partake of food only as long as the qualities of the Havis are 
not mentioned. 

73. The Brahmana occupying the seat of priority should 
not eat it at the very outset. If he eats while many look on, he 
will incur the sin of all sitting in the row. 


*‘pasyet’ in this instruction is unsuitable as it stands. The v.l. na pratife- 
dhayet, one should not drive away crows etc. is better.” 



468 


Kurma Pur ana 


, 74. An excellent Brahmana engaged in the Sraddha 

should not avoid anything served. He should not refuse even 
the meat offered. One should not look at the food served to 
another person. 

75. If the Brahmana who engaged in the Pitr rite, does 
not partake of the meat served, he is reborn as an animal for 
twenty-one births. 

76. One shall read or narrate unto these Vedic passages 
of self-study, the Dharmasastras, Itihasas, Puranas and the 
auspicious Sraddhakalpas. 

77. Then the partaker of the food should strew the 
cooked food in front on the ground. He shall ask them Svaditam ? 
“Well tasted ?”. If they are satisfied, he should make them 
perform the Acamana rite. 

78. If they have performed the Acamana rite, he should 
permit them saying ‘Be diverted’. Thereafter, the Brahmanas- 
shall say to him—“May Svadha be unto you.” 

79. When they have partaken of the food he should 
inform them about remaining cooked food. On being permitted 
by those Brahmanas, he should do as they mention. 

80. In the Pitr rite, the wordSvaditam is to be mentioned,, 

in the gostha-Sraddha word, it shall be mentioned thus Susrtam. In 
Abhyudayika Sraddha,^ Sampannam is mentioned and in regard to- 
Deva, shall be mentioned. 

81. After eulogising and bidding farewell to the Bramanas, 
he should stand silently before the Pitrs facing the southern 
direction and beg of the Pitrs these boons. 

82. “May those charitable donors around flourish. May 
the Vedas and progeny flourish. May not our faith decrease. 
May there be much with us to be given.” 

83. He shall give the Pindasto the cows, goats or Brah¬ 
manas. Or he should consign them to the fire or to the water. 
The wife who is desirous of a son shall partake of the middle 
Pinda. 


1. Abhyudayika or Vrddhi Sraddha is performed in recognition of 
prosperity or good luck e.g. birth of a son, marriage of a son or daughter. 
The Pitrs are called here Nandimukhas. It is also called Nandi-Sraddha. 



11.22.84-93 


469 


84. He should then wash his hands and perform the 
Acamana rite. With the food that remains, he shall feed his own 
servants. 

85. Afterwards he himself should take the remaining 
food alongwith the womenfolk. One should not remove their 
leavings before sunset. 

86-87. The husband and wife should observe celibacy on 
the night. After performing the Sraddha or partaking of it, he 
who indulges in sexual intercourse falls into the hell Maharaurava 
and then attains the birth of a worm. 

88. He should be pure and clean; quiescent and truth¬ 
ful. He should not be furious. He shall have good concentration. 
The performer and the partaker should avoid self-study and 
travel. 

89. The Brahmanas, who partake of another Sraddha 
(immediately) after partaking of a Sraddha, are on a par with the 
great sinners. They fall into many hells. 

90. Thus the Sraddhakalpa has been explained briefly but 
clearly to you. A Brahmana in difficulties shall prosper by 
performing it. 

91. When he performs Amairaddha (i.e. sraddha without 
cooked food) the knower of the procedure endowed with faith 
should perform the Agnaukarana?- rite (consigning offerings 
into the Are) as well as the offerings of Pindas with that alone 
(i.e. the material used). 

92. He whose mind is quiet, who is devoid of sins, and 
who performs Sraddha in accordance with this procedure shall 
attain the region of ascetics. 

93. Hence, an excellent Brahmana should assiduously 
perform the Sraddha rite. Thereby the eternal Isvara would be 
well-propitiated by him. 

1. Agnaukarana literally means offering unto the fire. Mitaksara on 
Yaj. I. 236 quotes Markandeya’s decision that if the performer of Sraddha 
is an Agnihotri, he should oblate the offerings in Daksinagni; if he does not 
keep Srauta fire but only Aupasana fire {grhyagni) he should oblate in that 
fire; if the performer keeps neither (as in the case with most of us), the 
offering is to be made in the right hand of the Brahmana (invited for 
Sraddha). 

—Visnudharmottara I. 140. 18 



470 


Kurrm Pur ana 


94. An indigent Brahmana may perform Sraddha even 
with fruits and roots after taking the ablution, with great 
concentration and performing the Pitr-Tarpana rites with water 
and gingelly seeds. 

95. A person whose father is alive should not perform 
Sraddha. Some say that he can perform Sraddha to those Pitrs 
to whom his father offers Sraddha. Or he can perform those 
rites upto the Homa. 

96. One can offer Sraddha unto one’s father, grandfather 
and great grandfather. He should offer Sraddha unto him who 
is his beloved* and not to anyone else. 

97. One must feed him with devotion who is alive and 
to his satisfaction. One who is pure and self-controlled does not 
give unto the dead by transgressing the living one. 

98. Dvyamu^yayamka?- son of two fathers i.e. natural as 
well as father by adoption) shall offer Sraddha to both. Similarly 
a son born of the Niyoga rite should perform Sraddha to 
his progenitor as well as the dead husband of his mother. Then 
he shall be the true heir. 

99. If a son is born out of the semen virile without the 
sanction of Niyoga, the son should offer Pindas to the 
progenitor. However, he may perform Sraddha to the K;etrin 
(mother’s husband). 

100. He should prepare two separate Pindas to the K^etrin 
(mother’s husband) and to the Bijin (progenitor). He should 
proclaim the Kfetrin and the Bijin in the course of the rite.^ The 
Ekoddista type of Sraddha is to be performed on the (anni¬ 
versary) day of the death in accordance with the procedure. 
When the Asauca (impurity) period is over, he can perform any 
Kamya rite as he pleases. 


*v.l. mryate ‘is dead’, is better as Sraddha is to be offered to the dead. 

1. VV. 98-100 refer to sons having two fathers: 'Though Niyoga is now 
an obsolete custom, the injunction regarding Pinda-dana giving priority to the 
procreator (4yin) first and to the Ksetrin (mother’s husband) next is supported 
by Harita: 

tesdm utpadayituli prathamah pravarah bhavatij 
quoted in Madana-Parijata, pp. 607-608. 



11 . 22 . 101 - 23.1 


471 


10l-103a. 'The. Abhyudayika Sraddha should be performed 
in the forenoon by one who seeks prosperity. All the rites 
should be performed as though towards Devas. No rites 
should be performed with gingelly seeds. The Darbhas shall be 
made straight. He should feed the Brahmanas in even number. 
As an auspicious beginning, he should recite — ‘‘May the Pitrs 
be pleased.” 

103b. The Sraddha to the mothers should be performed 
at the outset. That to the Pitrs should be performed thereafter. 

104. Thereafter, the Sraddha to the maternal grandfather 
shall be performed. These three Sraddhas are to be performed 
when there is a prosperous occasion in the family, such as a 
birth of a son. This shall be offered along with Vaisvadeva rites. 
The anti-clockwise circumambulation is not performed. 

105-107. The scholar should sit facing the east and wear 
the sacred thread in the normal manner with good concentration 
and then perform Sraddha. The mothers alongwith the 
Ganesvaras should be worshipped at the outset, with devotion, 
either on the ground coloured in diverse ways or in idols or in 
Brahmanas. One should worship with incense, food offerings and 
ornaments. A Brahmana should perform the three Sraddhas after 
worshipping the groups of Matrs (mothers). If anyone performs 
Sraddhas without the worship of the Matrs, they become 
infuriated and cause injuries. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE 

Rules regarding Impurities caused by 
Birth or DeathI 

Vydsa said : 

1. O excellent Brahmanas ! They (the authorities) 
enjoined that if Sapindas (to whom Pindas are to be offerd—six 


1. Asauca or the impurity caused by birth [Sutaka) or death of a close 
relative. It is a sort of untouchability entailing a temporary loss of privilege 



472 


Kurma Pur ana 


generations) are born or die, Brahmanas have to observe 
impurity for ten days. 

2. Neither the Nitya (daily) rites nor the Kamya rites 
(for attaining desired ends) shall be performed, nor shall 
any other prescribed duty be done. As to Svadhyaya (Vedic 
recitation), it should not be even mentally attempted during 
this period. 1 

3. One shall appoint pure, unragable (quiescent) 
Brahmanas of the earth (local area), for offering oblations in 
the fire in the sacrificial hall, (or) he should perform 
Homa in the sacrificial fire by means of dry rice-grains or dry 
fruits. 

4. During the days of impurity others should not touch 
these. Nor should they take their food along with them. Since 
the fourth or fifth day, touching them is permitted by learned 
men. 

5. In the case of Sutaka (impurity due to birth) ex¬ 
cepting the woman who has given birth and her child (?), there 
is no harm in touching each other among the Sapinda members. 

6. If the father be teaching the Vedas and be the knower 
of the Vedas, all these may be touched after they have performed 
a bath. The mother (who has delivered the child) however, 
becomes so after bathing after the period of ten days. 

7. The Aiauca is said to be for ten days in the case of 
Nirguna (devoid of qualities) and Atinirgum (extremly devoid of 
qualities). One who is endowed with one, two or three gunas 
becomes pure in four, two or one days respectively. 


to perform religious acts, to prosecute Vedic study and to participate freely 
in social functions like dinners etc. 

There is a distinction about the periods of Asauca and the persons 
affected by them. Asauca on death has many distinctions e.g. after abortion 
before the 4th month and after that, death of a child before and after cutting 
the teeth, before or after performance of Upanayana or marriage. The dura¬ 
tion of diauca depended upon the nearness of blood relation, place of death 
and the time-limit of being informed about it. 

KP deals with these topics in a loose Puranic way. 

1. VV. 2-5 describe the loss of privileges during the Aiauca period. 



II.23.8-15 


473 


8. After ten days, one can very well pursue the study 
of the Vedas and perform Homas. Manu the Prajapati says 
that he can be touched on the fourth day. 

9. In the case of the following, the impurity ends with 
the death of the person concerned :—one who is devoid of 
holy rites, a fool, a person attacked by a grave ailment (foul 
disease), and one who does as he pleases. 

10. Asauca, in the case of Brahmanas is for three 
days or ten days. If the dead one is less than a year in age, the 
impurity is for three days. If the age is beyond one year, the 
impurity is for ten days.^ 

Extra verse in brackets : 

A. When the dead one is less that two years old, the Asauca 

is (for ten days) to the parents. Others become clean in 

three days, if the dead one is extremely devoid of qualities. 

If the child dies before cutting the teeth, the parents have 

Asauca for one day. 

11. If the child has cut teeth, the Asauca is for three 
days, if both of the parents are Nirgunas (?). 

12. As for the Sapindakas (kinsmen), the impurity is 
only for that nonce, if the dead child has not cut teeth; the 
impurity is for one day, if the tonsure ceremony has not been 
performed. It is for three days, if the Upanayana (sacred thread 
investiture) rite has not been performed. 

13. If the child dies immediately after the birth, the 
impurity is limited only for the father and the mother. But 
the father may be touched. 

14. In the case ofa brother, the Sapindas (near kinsmen) 
should always observe Asauca (for the prescribed period). If 
the brother is (not qualified) (?), the impurity is for one more 
day after ten days. 

15. After the cutting of teeth, the impurity of the 
Sapindas is for one day if they are Nirgunas. After the tonsure 
ceremony, the impurity is for three days. 


1. VV. 10-17 deal mainly with the ASauca after abortion, death of an 
infant, etc. 



474 


Kurma Pur ana 


16. O excellent ones, if the death of the child before the 
cutting of teeth takes place, the impurity for the Sapindas is 
for one day, if they are extremely Nirgunas (?) 

Verses in Brackets : 

B. If there is abortion in the first four months {srava) or 
miscarriage in the 5th or 6th month (pata), Vrata is 
enjoined on the Sapindas. In the case of all Gunins,. 
the contrariness is beyond that. (?) 

C. If the miscarriage is before six months of pregnancy, 
the Asauca is for as many days as the number of months 
that have gone by. 

D. If the miscarriage is after that (i.e. after six months) the 
Asauca for women is for twelve days. In the case of ( Srava- 
abortion upto the fourth month) the Sapindas get purity 
instantaneously. 

1 7. If the Sapinda is extremely Nirgwia, the impurity is 
for one day and one night as a result of miscarriage. If the 
kinsman is one who does as he pleases, the impurity is for three 
days. This is the conclusion. 

18. In the case of Asauca-sannipata —that is if there is 
another impurity due to birth when already one is current or if 
there is another death when already one impurity due to death 
is current, the purity is after the remaining impurity is over. 
If the remainder is only a day, the impurity continues for three 
days. 

19. When death and birth overlap, the conclusion (of 
that period) is with the end of the death impurity. If the first 
Aiauca is with Vrddhi (birth of a son), it becomes clean by means 
of the previous one (? )^ 

Verse in the Bracket : 

E. Then the impurity may go beyond the fifth day. 

20. A man is impure after hearing the birth or death 
occurring in another land as long as the remainder of that 
period is to be concluded. 


1. Regarding or cf. Gautama Dh. S. 14.5-6, 

Manu V. 79 also Laghu-Harita verse 80. 



11.23.21-26 


47S 


Verse in Bracket (4 verses) 

F. to If the period of Sutaka (birth impurity) is over it is said 
I. that the Sapindakas must observe it for three days. 

If the death is of one above one year in age only a bath is 
needed. 

One shall be immediately pure if one is a knower of the 
meanings of the Vedas, or is a student of the Vedas, or 
maintains fires (sacrificial fires) or is emaciated due to 
livelihood. It shall be so in all states and for ever. 

If the daughters are not married, the Asauca for the 
Sapindakas is for three days; if they are married, the 
impurity is for the husband alone. It is also said that the 
impurity due to the death of girls not given in marriage 
is for a day. On the death of a girl less than two years, the 
purity is instantaneous after bath. Upto the cutting of 
teeth, no impurity even to the brother, upto the tonsure 
ceremony the impurity is for a day. 

21. Upto the marriage, the impurity is for three days- 
and beyond that it is for ten days. 

22. On the death of maternal grandfather, the Asauca 
is for three days. In the case of Sutaka (birth) impurity to the 
same is the case. 

23. In the case of relatives through marriage, the pre¬ 
ceptor and a classmate (i.e. disciple of the same preceptor), the 
impurity is said to be for one PaksinI i.e. two days with a night 
between or vice versa . 

24. When the king dies, everyone in the kingdom observes 
impurity till the coming of the day or night next to that on 
which the king dies.^ If the daughters die in his house, the father 
observes impurity for three days. 

25-26. If the wife who had previously married another, 
dies or if an adopted son dies, the impurity is for three days. If 
the wife of the preceptor, whether of the same caste or of 
another caste dies, if the son of the preceptor dies, the impurity 

I. Vide Manu V. 82. Yaj. III. 25, Mitaksara explains sa-jyotih as 
follows: If the king’s death takes place at day, then the asauca is till the 
next sunrise; if at night, till the stars appear next night [ahni cedyavat surya- 
darsanam, ratrau ced ydvan naksatra-darsanam). 



476 


Kurma Pur ana 


is for a day and a night. If a priest, or a learned Pandita dies 
in one’s own village, the impurity is for one day. 

27. If the Asapindas die in one’s own house, the impurity 
to be observed is for three days only. 

28. On the death of the mother-in-law or the father- 
in-law, the impurity is for three days. If any one belonging to 
one’s own Gotra dies, the impurity is only for the moment 
(after bath). 

29. A Brahmana becomes free from impurity within ten 
days, a king within twelve days, a Vaisya within fifteen days 
and a Sudra becomes free from impurity within a month.^ 

30. If a Brahmana were to have a Ksatriya, a Vaisya or 
■a Sudra as his kinsman and if he were to die, the Brahmana 
becomes free from impurity in ten days.^ 

31. A Ksatriya as well as a Vaisya should observe 
impurity in the case of the death of kinsmen of the lower castes 
and should certainly perform the rites prescribed (for their 
respective caste) for purification. 

32. All people should observe impurity for the death of 
a higher caste man with respect, in accordance with the rules 
governing that caste. In regard to people of his own caste, he 
should observe his own purity according to rules of their caste. 

33. The impurity to be observed in the case of (birth or 
death) of a Sapinda (?) Sudra kinsman, for Vaisyas, Ksatriyas 
and Brahmanas is for six nights, three nights, and one night 
respectively. 

34. The impurity to be observed in the case of a Sapinda 
Vaisya, O excellent leading Brahmanas, by Sudras, Ksatriyas 
and Brahmanas is for half a month, six nights and three nights 
respectively. 

35. O leading Brahmanas, the impurity to be observed 
in the case of (birth or death of) Brahmana kinsman by 
Ksattriyas and Vaisya is six nights (i.e. days) and ten days 
respectively. 


1. Manu V. 83, Yaj. III. 23, Mt. P. 18. 2-3. 

2. VV. 30-36 record the period of aSauca to be observed in the case of 
Anuloma and Pratiloma marriages. Cf. Daksa Smr. VI. 12, Visnu Dh. S. 
22. 22-24. 



11.23.36-45 


477 


36. The consort of Kamala (i.e. Visnu) ordains that a 
Brahmana becomes pure within ten days from the impurity of a. 
Sudra, a Vaisya and a Ksatriya. * 

37. ^ If a Brahmana carries the dead body of a Brahmana 
who is not his Sapinda, to the burning ghat like one of his 
kinsmen, and takes food as well as stays with them (the kinsmen 
of the dead man), he shall become pure within ten days. 

38. If he takes their food, he becomes pure in three 
nights. If he does not take food (he becomes purified in one day 
but) he should not stay in that house. 

39. The same thing shall be in the case of the samanodakas 
and the kinsmen of the mother and other close relatives. The 
person—a sapinda—who touches the dead body becomes pure 
within ten days. 

40-41. If one (belonging to Brahmana, Ksattriya, 
Vaisya or Sudra caste) carries the dead body out of covetous¬ 
ness, the Brahmana becomes pure within ten days and the king 
or Ksattriya within twelve days. The Vaisya becomes free with¬ 
in half a month and the Sudra within a month. Or all of them 
become pure in six days, or they shall be pure in three days. 

42. If Brahmanas and others carry the dead body of an 
orphan or a helpless Brahmana devoid of wealth, they become 
pure by taking bath and drinking ghee. 

43. If a man of the lower caste touches one of the upper 
caste or if a man of the upper caste touches one of the lower 
caste during impurity, and if he does so out of friendship, he 
becomes pure by ordinary purificatory procedure (bath, etc.) 

44. If a Brahmana were to follow the dead body of a 
Brahmana out of his own will, he becomes pure by taking bath 
alongwith the clothes he wears at the time, touching the fire 
and taking in ghee. 

45. (If one follows the dead body) the purity in follow¬ 
ing the corpse of a Ksattriya is within a day; that in the case 


*but the v.l. brahma^ sarhsthite sati changes the whole verse : It means, 
‘In the case of (the birth or death of) a Brahmana (Sapinda kinsman), the 
impurity to be observed by Sudra, Vaisya and Ksattriya is for ten nights 
(days). 

1. VV. 37-42 deal with asauca by carrying a dead body. Cf. Manu V. 
101-102. 



478 


Kiirma Pur dm 


of a Vaisya shall be within two days; it is said that three days 
impurity should be observed if the dead body of a Sudra is 
followed. But one must perform a hundred prdndydmas (breath- 
control exercises) (in addition to all these cases) . 

46. When the bones of the dead Sudra have not been 
collected and if the Brahmapa cries along with his own people 
over the death of the Sudra, the impurity shall be for three 
nights. Otherwise, it is only a single day. 

47. (Under the same circumstances) if he laments the 
death of a Ksattriyaor a Vaisya before the bones are collected, 
the impurity is observed for one day; otherwise it is till the 
rise of the sun or of stars (as the case may be). In the case of 
(lamentation on) the death of a Brahmana (before bone-collec¬ 
tion), the impurity lasts till the performance of bath. 

48. If a Brahmana cries over the death of a Brahmana 
before his bones are collected, he becomes pure by means of an 
ablution alongwith the clothes worn. There is no doubt about 
this. 

49. He who takes food alongwith them and associates 
closely with them by sharing their bed, seat etc., he becomes 
pure in ten days irrespective of his being a kinsman. 

50. He who takes food alongwith them even once, out 
of his own free will, becomes free from impurity by taking bath 
when the period of impurity ceases. 

51. If a man overwhelmed by famine, takes their food, 
he should observe impurity for as many days as he had taken 
their food. Thereafter, he should observe religious atonement. 

52. In the case of the Brahmana who maintained 
Hotra (a sacred fire), the impurity is to be observed from the 
time of his cremation. In the case of Sapindas the impurity 
begins at death and in cases other than death (i.e. birth). 

53. Sapinda relationship ceases from the seventh genera¬ 
tion. The. Samanodakabhava {sX.3Xe, of offering water oblation) 
ceases if the birth and the names are not known. 

54. The father, the grandfather and the great-grand 
father—these three should be known as Lepabhdks (enjoyers of 
the portion of Pindas sticking to the hand of the performer of 
Sraddha). (Actually the ancestors of fourth, fifth and sixth 



11.23.55-63 


479 


generations are the Lepabhdks. The Sapinda relationship lasts till 
the seventh generation. 

55. The Sapinda relationship of women not given in 
marriage extends to seven generations of the family of their 
birth. Lord Pitamaha says that the Sapinda relationship of 
those (married) women is the same* as that of their husbands. 

56. Among the many descendants of the same man but 
of different castes (through mothers of different castes), the 
Sapinda relationship extends upto the third generation in 
descent. 

57. In the case of artisans, craftsmen, physicians, servant- 
maids and attendants, regular donors, the knowers of the 
Brahman, the Brahmacarins (celibates), the Sattrins (performers 
ofYajnas) of long-durations) and the Vratins (those who have 
regular observance of holy rites), the purity is instantaneous.^ 

58. In the case of a crowned king, and the performers of 
Annasatras (?) at the time of Yajnas and marriage as well as 
during divine intercession (?) during famine and chaotic 
upheavals, the purity is instantaneous. 

59-60. In the case of those who are killed in Dimbahava 
(petty warfare and skirmishes), in the case of the death of 
jMtis (near cousins) due to serpent bite etc., the purity is 
instantaneous. (Defective verse) If any one dies in fire or 
whirlwind, if any one dies in an unforgettable (lit. imperishable) 
heroic path; if one dies for the sake of cows or Brahmanas or 
if one dies after renunciation, the purity is instantaneous. 

61. In the case oi JVaifthikas (life-long celibates), forest 
dwellers, ascetics and religious students, no impurity is enjoined 
by good men. When a fallen man dies, there is no impurity. 

62. In the case of fallen men there is no cremation, no 
obsequies, no collection of bones; no tear is shed, no Pinda is 
offered and no Sraddha or similar rite is performed. 

63. If a man kills himself by means of fire, poison etc., 
no impurity is to be observed, no cremation is performed, no 
water libation is offered to him. 


*vide Mt. P. 13-29 : Lepa-bhajas caturthadyah pitradyali pinda-bhdginahl 
1. VV. 57-62 enumerate the cases of Sadyah-sauca i.e. those after 
whose death purification is on the same day after bath. 



480 


Kurma Pur ana 


64. If one dies through fire, poison etc. due to over¬ 
sight, impurity should be observed and water libation should be 
offered to him. 

65-66. (?) When a son is born, one may very well accept 

the following as gifts viz. gold, cereals, cow, cloth, gingelly 
seeds alongwith jaggery and ghee, fruits, flowers, vegetables, 
salt, firewood, buttermilk, curds, ghee, oil, medicine and milk. 
One may take raw grains every day from the house of one who 
has impurity. 

67. A person who maintains the three sacrificial fires 
duly, should be cremated by means of the three fires. A person 
who has not maintained the three fires shall be cremated by 
the Grhya (household) fire and the other people shall be crema¬ 
ted by means of the secular fire. 

68. If the dead body is not available, a representative 
figure should be made by means of Palasa leaves and twigs and 
the cremation shall be duly performed by Sapihda relations 
endowed with faith. 

69. He should sprinkle the figure with water utter¬ 
ing the name and Gotra (of the dead man). He shall not 
speak unnecessarily. All the kinsmen should exercise self-control 
and should perform Sraddha for ten days. 

70. Everyday, they should offer the Pinda both in the 
morning as well as in the evening to the dead man at the 
entrance to the house. On the fourth day, they shall feed the 
Brahmanas. 

71. On the second day, the shaving rite should be 
performed alongwith the kinsmen. On the fourth day, the 
bones should be collected, (?) by all the kinsmen. With great 
faith, they should employ pure Brahmanas (as priests) in even 
numbers (v.l. feed Brahmanas). 

72. Brahmanas should be fed in even (?) numbers on 
the fifth, ninth and eleventh days. O Brahmanas, this is called 
Navasraddha. 

73. This rite shall be performed on behalf of the dead 
one, on the eleventh, twelfth or the ninth day. The rite shall 
be performed with great faith. One Pavitr a (Kusa-grass ring), 
one Argha (vessel of offerings), and one vessel for the Pindas 
should be used. 



11.23.74-82 


481 


74. This rite shall be performed every month for a 
year on the day of death, at the end of which should be per¬ 
formed the rite called Sapindikarana.^ 

75. O excellent Brahmanas, four vessels should be 
assigned to the four ancestors from the dead person. On behalf 
of the dead one, water shall be poured in the vessels of 
the Pitrs. 

76. While the Pindas are joined together, the mantras 
recited are the two stanzas beginning with Te samdnd (Vaj. 
Sarii. 19.45) etc. The Sraddha of Sapindikarana is performed after 
the Sraddha meant for gods. 

77. He should invoke the Pitrs there. Then he should 
point out the dead man (?) There are no separate rites 
{Sraddha) in the case of those dead whose Sapindikarana rite has 
been performed. He who separates the Pindas (i.e. offers 
separate ones) becomes the slayer of the Pitrs. 

78. When the father dies, the son should offer the 
Pindas for a year. He should offer food and the pot with water 
every day, in accordance with the rites of the dead. 

79. Every year this should be performed in accordance 
with the injunctions governing Pdrvana Sraddhas. This is the 
eternal traditional rite. 

80. The offering of Pindas and other rites to parents 
should be performed by the son. If there is no son, the wife 
should perform these rites. If there is no wife, the co-uterine 
brother should perform it. 

81. One should with great faith and concentration 
perform the rites of Dana etc. and perform the Sraddha in 
accordance with this procedure. 

82. Thus, the procedure for the rites of householders has 
been clearly explained to you. As for women, their holy rite is 
rendering of service to their husbands. No other holy rite is 
prescribed for them. 


1. VV.74-77 Sapindikarana is a symbolic process of uniting the deceased 
person with his Pitrs, Four Pindas are prepared, one for the Preta (deceased 
person) and three for his deceased paternal ancestors. Then the performer of 
Sraddha divides the preta-pnnda in three parts and puts each third into each of 
the three Pindas with the two mantras ye samdnd (Yaj. sam. 19. 45). 



482 


Kurma Pur ana 


83. They should be devoted to their duties for ever. 
They should dedicate their minds unto God. Thus they 
attain the greatest abode that has been described by the 
expounders of the Vedas. 


CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR 

The Duties of Agnihotrin 

Vydsa said : 

1. One should perform the Agnihotra rite both in the 
morning and the evening. On Darsa (the new moon) days after 
the conclusion of a beneficial rite and on reaping the harvest 
afresh this rite shall be performed. * 

2. At the close of a season, the Brahmana should duly 
perform sacrifices. At the close of an Ayana, he should perform 
an animal sacrifice. At the end of a year he should perform the 
sacrifices in the fires (?) (v.l. the Soma sacrifice). 

3. A Brahmana maintaining sacred fires and desirous of 
living for a long time should not eat cooked food or meat with¬ 
out performing the Yajna of fresh harvest and the animal 
sacrifice. 

4. Without performing the sacrifice with fresh grains or 
with animals as Havyas (oblations), those people who are 
desirous of fresh grains and meat, actually desire to eat their 
own vital airs. 

5. He should always perform the Santihomas (pro¬ 
pitiatory Homos) for peace pertaining to Savitr (the sun-god) 
during the Parvans. During the Astaka and Anvastaka days, he 
should worship the pitrs. 

*A better v.l. darSena caiva paksante paurnamdsena caiva hij'Yic should per¬ 
form the Agnihotra rite on the new moon and full moon day at the end of 
a fortnight.’ 



II.24.6-14 


483 


6. This is th3 greatest Dharma of three higher castes, in 
the stage of householders. All other rites are called Apaddharmas, 
(non-righteous). 

7. Either due to atheistic feelings or due to lethargy, if 
anyone does not wish to maintain sacrificial fires, nor does he 
perform Yajnas, he falls into many hells. 

Verses in Brackets : 

A-B). The evil-minded person falls into the following 
hells viz. :—Tamisra, Andhatamisra, Raurava, Maharau- 
rava, Kumbhipaka VaitaranI, Asipatravana and many 
other terrible hells as well. O Brahmanas, he is reborn 
in the families of outcastes or as a Sudra. 

8. Hence, a Brahmana should particularly maintain 
the sacrificial fire very assiduously. With his soul sanctified, he 
should worship Paramesvara. 

9. There is no greater Dharma than Agnihotra in the case 
of Brahmanas. Hence, one should always worship by means of 
Agnihotra. 

10. He who is one who maintains sacrificial fires but 
does not wish to perform sacrifice to the lord by means of 
meditation, is a confused person. He should not be conversed 
with. What more (need be said) that man is an atheist. 

11. He who possesses enough foodstuff to maintain his 
servants for three years or more, deserves to drink Soma juice. 

12. The Soma sacrifice is considered first among all 
Yajnas. One should propitiate lord Mahesvara of the Region 
of Soma, through Soma. 

13. There is no sacrifice equal to or greater than the 
Soma sacrifice that propitiates Mahesa. Hence, one should 
propitiate the greatest one through Soma* (sacrifice). 

14. The sacrificial animal has been taken and enjoined 
on the Brahmanas by Pitamaha (god Brahma). There are two 
types of Dharma conducive to salvation—the Srauta and the 
Smarta. 


*Due to oversight the Vehkt. Text has given one and the same num¬ 
ber to two verses. Hence verse No. 14 is included under 13 there. The 
mistake is rectified here. 



484 


Kurma Pur ana 


15. Srauta is that rite which is connected with the three 
fires. Smarta has been mentioned by me before. The Srauta is 
more beneficial. Hence, one should perform the Srauta rite. 

16. Both of them are beneficial. They are holy rites 
prescribed in the Vedas. SUtacdra (the conduct of good men) 
shall be the third source of religion^ when Sruti and Smrti are 
not available. 

17. They by whom the Vedas have been acquired along 
with their supplementary works, are Si$tas (good men). They 
are so called because they are always endowed with the 
qualities of the Atman. 

18. What is approved by them for ever is called Dharma 
by good men. And not the behaviour of anyone else. This is 
what should be retained in the mind. 

19. The Puranas and the Dharjnasastras augment the 
Vedas (as amplification). From one the Brahman is realised. 
From the other Dharma (rituals of religion) is realised. 

20-21.* They have been mentioned as the greatest 
authority by those who wish to know more of Dharma. They 
are the Dharmasastras and the Puranas. The knowledge of 
Brahman is from the other. Dharma is not born of anything 
else. The knowledge of Brahman is from the Vedas. Hence, the 
Dharma and Purana should be believed (as divine revelation) 
by the learned men. 


1. VV. 16-19 Cf. Manu XII. 108-109 where in matters not decided in 
Dharma-Sastra texts the opinion of Sistas is regarded as Dharma. 

♦vide ft. note on verse 13. The total No. of verses is 21 though the 
Vehk. Text, gives No. 20 to the last verse. 



11.25.1-7 


485 


CHAPTER TWENTYFTVEi 

The Means of Livelihood of a Brdhmana 
Householder 

Vydsa said : 

1. Thus the entire great Dharma of a Brahjnana house¬ 
holder has been described to you. (Now listen and) understand 
the means of livelihood (of a Brahmana householder). 

2. The householder is of two types. One is to be known 
as Sddhaka (one who works and achieves) and the other as 

(non-worker). They say that the means of livelihood 
of the former is teaching, presiding over Yajna or acceptance 
of monetary gifts. He can practise usury and look after agri¬ 
culture or trading activities himself or through agents. 

3. If agriculture is not possible, trading activity be 
undertaken. In its absence usury may be pursued. This is the 
arrangement in time of emergency. What has been mentioned 
before (viz. teaching, priesthood and acceptance of <ia«a) is 
desired to be the main occupation. 

4. He should himself pursue cultivation, business, 
activities or usury. Usury (of course) is a sinful activity 
involving pain and strain. One should (if possible) avoid it. 

5. Some say that martial activity as the greatest 
(occupation) and cultivation of the field by the Brahmanas 
themselves should be avoided. A Brahmana can pursue martial 
activity even when there is no emergency (?) 

6. If the Brahmana does not maintain himself by that 
(i.e. martial activity), he should pursue the means of livelihood 
of a Vaisya. But a Brahmana should by no means plough or 
till himself. 

7. Acquiring profit in these activities, he should worship 
and propitiate the Pitrs, Devas and the Brahmanas. 


1. This chapter describes the means of livelihood of both types of 
Brahmanas —Sadhakas and Asadhakas which correspond to the classification 
into Salim and Taydvara given in Baudhayana Dh. S. III. 1.1. 3-5. 

The verses in this chapter are quoted in SMC. pp. 454-56, and 
Parasara Madhava —Acara Kanda, p. 309. 



486 


Kurma Pur ana 


There is no doubt in this that if they are satisfied they will 
quell his defects. 

8. A Brahmana who pursues agricultural occupation 
should offer one-twentieth of the produce to Devas and the 
Pitrs and one thirtieth to the Brahmanas. He shall then incur 
no sin. 

9. If he is engaged in trading activities, he should offer 
twice the previous offerings and one who practises usury should 
offer three times of what an agriculturist offers. He shall then 
be not involved in sin. There is no doubt about this. 

10. A Sadhaka householder may also live on gleanings of 
corns or by irregular occupations. There are many other means 
of livelihood like learning, craftsmanship, etc. 

11. Two means of livelihood have been prescribed by 
the great sages in regard to that type of householder who is 
mentioned as Asadhaka. They are gleaning of corns and irregular 
occupations. 

12. Or he should maintain himself by Amrta or Mrta. 
What he gets without begging is called Amrta and the alms 
received by begging is Mrta. 

13-14. There are four types of Asadhaka Brahmanas^ 
who gather grain thus : 

\. Kusuladhdnyaka (i.e. one who has hoarded grain enough 
for three years (Medhatithi) in his granary. 

2. Kumbhidhanyaka (i.e. one who has hoarded grain sufficient 
for six days—for one year (according to the Medhatithi). 

3. Trydhnika (i.e. one who has food-grains for three days, 
and 

4. Asvastanika (i.e. one who has the grain sufficient for the 
day but not for the morrow). 

The later ones are better than the earlier ones among 
these Brahmana householders. By means of piety he conquers 
the worlds (i.e. the last one). 

15. The first one shall be Satkarman (i.e. one who 
performs all the six duties viz. study of Vedas, teachings of the 


1. The same as Manu IV. 7. The explanation of the terms herein are 
based on Medhatithi’s com. of Manu. 



11.25.16—26.1 


487 


Vedas, performance of the Yajnas, presiding over the Yajnas of 
others, gifts and acceptance of gifts). The second one shall 
perform three of them, the third, two of them and the fourth, 
one. He should maintain himself by Brahmasatra (study of the 
Vedas). 

16. He who maintains himself by gleaning corn (and 
such other irregular professions) and is devoted to Agnihotra 
should perform ordinary sacrifices ending with these on the New 
Moon and Full Moon day. 

17. A Brahmana should not pursue ordinary worldly 
professions. He should not pursue agriculture for livelihood. He 
should maintain himself with non-cooked, non-roguish (straight¬ 
forward, honest) pure Brahmana-like profession. 

18. After begging of moneyed good persons for alms, he 
should propitiate the Pitrs and Devas. Or he should beg of 
pure person with self-control. He should be himself satisfied 
thereby. 

19. He who after earning sufficient wealth does not duly 
propitiate Devas and the Pitrs, is reborn as a lower animal 
such as a dog etc. 

20-21. The four things—virtue, wealth, love and salvation- 
are beneficial. In the case of Brahmana, the love shall not be 
against Dharma and not the other. That wealth which is for the 
propagation of Dharma is real wealth and not one which is 
used for the self. Hence after attaining wealth a Brahmana 
should offer it to others and perform sacrifices to gods. 


CHAPTER TWENTYSIX 

Rules of offering religious gifts 

Vydsa said : 

1. Now I shall recount the excellent dharma of charit¬ 
able gifts,1 formerly narrated by Brahma to the sages, 
expounders of Brahman. 

1. Apart from the Ddna-stutis in RV (I. 125, V. 61, VII 18 etc) Dana- 
dharma (offering of religious gifts) is regarded as the principal aspect o 



488 


Kurma Purina 


2. The handing over of riches with faith to the deserv¬ 
ing persons is pointed out as Dana (charitable gift). It yields 
worldly pleasures and salvation.^ 

3. I consider that as a wonderful (gift)^ which is given 
with great faith to good men of distinction. What he keeps 
without giving is protected (saved) for others. 

4. There are three types of charitable gifts the Nitya, the 
Naimittika and the Kamya. A fourth type of charitable gift is also 
mentioned viz. Vimala^ (the pure one) which is the most 
excellent of all the charitable gifts. 

5. The Nitya charitable gift is as follows : Everday some¬ 
thing is given to a Brahmana who does not give anything in 
return. Nor does the donor expect any fruit thereof. 

6. The Naimittika (occasional) charitable gift is that 
which is given to scholars for the purpose of wiping off one’s 
sins. This h Dana (charitable gift) practised by good men. 

7. What is given for the purpose of obtaining child ern, 
success, prosperity and heaven is called a Kamyadana (charitable 
gift for the achievement of the desired object) by sages who 
have pondered over topics of piety. 

8. What is handed over to the knowers of the Brahman 
for the propitiation of Isvara, with a righteous mind, is called 
the auspicious Vimala (pure) Dana. 

9. One should resort to the dharma of charitable gifts in 
accordance with one’s capacity, after getting the deserving 
persons. Indeed, a deserving person will be available and he will 
enable one to cross the entire ocean of Existence. 


religious life in the Kali age (Manu I. 96, Mbh. Santi. 232. 28, Vayu P. 8. 
65-66). Naturally, this topic is discussed in details in Smrtis and Puranas, such 
as rajnavalkyal. \98-2\6, Vydsa IW 17-23, d>. chs. 209-213, JVP. I. Ch. 12, 

31. 

1. Cf. Devala quoted by Apararka, p. 287. 

2. Cf ( Veda) Vyasa-smr. IV. 16. The reading tac ca vittam aham manye 
‘that is what I regard is his real wealth or property’ is better than tad 
mcilram in Vehk. text. 

3. VV. 4-8 give the classification of Danas as JJ'itya (daily), naimittika 
(occasional), Kamya {dana for obtaining a desirable object) and Vimala (pure) 
the last is a special class specified in the KP. 



11.26.10-20 


489 


10. What remains after providing food, clothing etc. to 
the family should be given as charitable gift. If it is given 
otherwise, that charitable gift does not yield any fruit. 

11. Dana should be given to a noble-born Brahmana 
well-versed in the Vedas. He should be humble and performer of 
penance. He shall be indigent and one who maintains holy 
rites. Everything given shall be offered with due devotion. 

12. He who gives with great devotion a plot of land^ to 
a Brahmana who maintains the sacrificial fires, attains that 
great abode after reaching which one has no cause for sorrow. 

13. He who gives to a great scholar of Vedas a very 
fertile land producing barley and wheat and overgrown with 
sugar cane plants, is not born again. 

14. He who gives at least a plot of land extending to a 
Gocarman* (cow’s hide) to an indigent Brahmana is liberated 
from all sins. 

15. There is no other gift greater than the gift of lands 
here. The gift of cooked food is on a par with it. The gift of 
learning excels it. 

16. He who duly imparts learning to a Brahmana of 
pure, pious conduct and excellent character, is honoured in 
Brahmaloka. 

17. If one gives cooked food with due faith everyday 
to a Brahmacarin (religious student), one shall be freed from 
all sins and shall attain the abode of Brahma. 

18. A man obtains great benefit by giving cooked food 
to a householder. It must be given unto him (immediately) on 
arrival. After giving thus one attains the greatest goal. 

19-20. One should observe fast on the full moon day in the 
month of Vaisakha^. He should then duly worship seven or five 
Brahmanas of clean habits, quiet temper and pure minds. He 


1. VV. 12-15 describe the greatness of land-grant though Brahmanas 
like Aitareya {39-7), Satapatha (XIII. 7. 1. 15) prohibit kings from such 
grants, Vasistha smrti. (29. 20) and Mbh. Amsasana (62. 2) eulogise it as ati- 
Aana (superior gift). 

♦According to Vasistha Gocarman is that plot of land which extends 
to hundred and fifty Hastas (hands) all round. 

2. VV. 19-34 describe the reward from dam on particular days. 



490 


Kurma Purana 


should propitiate them with black gingelly seeds and honey in 
particular. He shall honour them with the application of sweet 
scents and unguent and make them spell out (blessings) or shall 
say oneself. 

21. “O Dharmaraja be pleased.” Whatever is in one’s 
mind (shall be realised). Every sin committed in the course 
of whole life shall perish at that very moment. 

22. He who places gold, honey and ghee, gingelly seeds 
on the hide of a black antelope and gives it to a Brahmana, 
surmounts all evils. 

23. Particularly on the full moon day in the month of 
Vaisakha, one should ritualistically offer cooked food and water 
pot to Dharmaraja and hand it over to Brahmanas. He shall 
be relieved of fear. 

24. One shall propitiate seven or five Brahmanas with 
water-pots accompanied by gold and gingelly seeds. One can 
thereby expell the sin of even Brahmana slaughter. 

25. On the Dvadasi (twelfth) day in the month of Magha 
a Brahmana should observe fast. He should wear white garments. 
He should perform Homa with black gingelly seeds in the holy 
fire. With great concentration he should offer gifts to the Brah¬ 
manas well-versed in the Vedas. Whatever sin he might 
have committed ever since his birth, the Brahmana shall 
surmount it. 

26-27. On the New Moon Day, one should offer anything 
unto a saintly Brahmana after dedicating the same to Sankara, 
lord of Devas and their chiefs, by saying—“May the eternal 
Mahadeva, the lord accompanied by Uma, be pleased.” The sin 
accumulated in the course of seven births perishes at the same 
moment. 

28. He who takes his holy dip on the fourteenth day in 
the dark half of the month and propitiates the Pinaka bearing 
lord Siva through Brahmanas is not reborn again in the 
world. 

29-30. Particularly on the eighth day in the dark half of 
the month, one should take ablution and honour a righteous 
Brahmana duly by means of washing the feet etc. He should 



11.26.31-41. 


491 


then say “May Mahadeva be pleased with me.” He should then 
hand over his own wealth to him. He shall be relieved of all 
sins. 

31. The three-eyed deity is to be particularly worshipped 
by Brahmana devotees on the fourteenth and eighth of the dark 
half and on the new moon day. 

32. One should observe fast on the eleventh day and wor¬ 
ship Purusottama on the twelfth day through a Brahmana. He 
shall attain the greatest region. 

33. The twelfth day in the bright half is a Tithi belong¬ 
ing to Visnu. One should assiduously propitiate lord 
Janardana on that day. 

34. Whatever is offered to a pure Brahmana after dedi¬ 
cating the same to lord Isana or Visnu yields endless (i.e. 
eternal) benefits. 

35. A man may wish to propitiate any deity. If he is a 
wise scholar he should worship Brahmanas in order to satisfy 
that deity. 

36. All deities assume the forms of the Brahmanas; 
they always exist. If Brahmanas are not available, they are- 
worshipped in idols etc. in some places. 

37. Hence, the deities must be particularly worshipped in 
the Brahmanas always and very assiduously by those who wish 
to attain the different kinds of benefits. 

38. A person desirous of prosperity should always wor¬ 
ship Purandara (god Indra). A person desirous of attaining 
Brahman and Brahmanical splendour should worship Brahma. 

39. A person desirous of good health shall worship the- 
sun god; one who is desirous of cows shall worship fire and one 
who is desirous of the fruition of holy rites shall worship- 
Vinayaka. 

40. One who is desirous of worldly pleasures should wor¬ 
ship the moon; a person desirous of power and strength should 
worship the wind-god and a person desirous of being liberated 
from the entire worldly existence shall worship Hari. 

41. He who wishes for Yoga, salvation and that perfect 
knowledge of Isvara shall assiduously worship Virupaksa 
Mahesvara. 



492 


K urma Pur ana 


42. He who wishes for perfect knowledge through the 
the great Yoga should worship Mahesvara. They shall become 
enjoyers of pleasures, they who worship Bhutesa and Kesava. 

43. A person who freely gives water attains satisfac¬ 
tion,^ a person who gives cooked food attains inexhaustible 
happiness; a person who gives gingelly seeds obtains desirable 
progeny and a person who gives lamps attains excellent vision. 

44. A person who gifts away lands obtains everything, a 
giver of gold attains longevity; a giver of a house attains excel¬ 
lent abodes and a person who gives silver attains excellent 
comeliness. 

45. A person who gives clothes, attains the same world as 
the Moon; a person who gives horses, attains the same world as 
that of the Asvins; a person who gives oxen, attains well nour¬ 
ished glory and riches and a giver of cows attains the world of 
Bradhna (the sun). 

46. A person who gives vehicles and coaches attains a 
good wife; a person who offers relief from fear, attains pros¬ 
perity; a person who offers food grains, obtains perpetual 
happiness and a person who gives Brahman (Vedas), attains 
identity with Brahman. 

47. One should give food-grains to the Brahmanas in 
accordance with one’s capacity and especially to excellent ones 
knowing the Vedas. After death, he shall attain heaven. 

48. By giving away cows one is relieved of all sins ; by 
the gift of fuel, a man becomes like a blazing fire. 

49. One should give fruits, roots, vegetables and food¬ 
stuffs of various kinds to the Brahmnas, he shall himself be 
happy and rejoicing. 

50. A person who gives medicine, diets, oil, ghee etc. to 
a sick person in order to cure him of it, shall himself be free 
from ailments. He shall enjoy longevity and be happy. 

51. A man who makes gifts of umbrellas and shoes 
escapes the path to hell called Asipatravana (full of edges as 
sharp as the edge of a razor) and surmounts severe scorching 
pain. 


1. VV. 43-51. Fruits accruing from particular danas. 



11.26.52-63 


495 


52. Whatever is most pleasing to him in the world and 
whatever is excessively cherished by one in the house, should 
be given to a meritorious person by one who wishes the same 
for himself to be inexhaustible. 

53. Whatever is given during the equinotical or tropical 
transit of the sun or during the eclipse of the sun or the moon 
or during the time of the transit of the sun from one zodiac to 
another, shall become everlasting. 

54. By making gifts in the holy centres such as Prayaga 
etc. in the sacred shrines and near the holy rivers and forests, 
one obtains everlasting benefits. 

55. There is no greater or meritorious act than that of 
making gifts in the case of any living being. Hence gifts should 
be made over to a Brahmana well-versed in the Vedas, by the 
twice-born. 

56. Gifts should be made by one who wishes for 
heaven, longevity and prosperity and for subduing sins. Everday 
charitable gifts should be made unto Brahmanas by one who 
wishes for salvation. 

57. If out of delusion, any sinful soul prevents the gift 
from being given to the Brahmanas, fire-god or the Devas, shall 
be reborn as an animal. 

58. If after earning much wealth, anyone does not wor¬ 
ship Brahmanas and Devas, he must be banished from the 
kingdom after confiscating his property. 

59. A Brahmana who does not give cooked food etc. 
during famines when animals die, is a despicable person. 

60. No one should accept monetary gifts from him nor 
should anything be given unto him. The king should stamp his 
seal on him and banish him from his kingdom. 

61. The man who does not give wealth to good persons 
nor means of piety, is a greater sinner and he is cooked in the 
hell. 

62. O excellent Brahmanas, gifts must be made to those 
Brahmanas who regularly study the Vedas, who are endowed with 
learning, who have conquered their sense-organs and who are 
endowed with full self-control. 

63. One shall feed a learned and righteous Brahmana 
again even if he has already taken a hearty meal; one should not 



494 


Kurma Purdna 


feed a fool who has no good conduct even if he is starving for 
ten days. 

64. If any one makes any gift overlooking the learned 
Brahmana of the locality, he becomes a sinner by means of that 
action. He burns his family upto the seventh generation. 

65. If the Brahmana outsider were to be superior in 
conduct, learning etc., gifts must be made over to him even by 
overlooking the man at hand. 

66 . The person who accepts what is offered with due 
respect and the person who offers with due respect—both of them 
go to heaven. If it is the contrary, both of them go to hell. 

67. A person who knows Dharma should not offer even 
water to an atheist or a heretic or to a sceptic or to a person 
who does not know the Vedas. 

68 . If a person who is not learned accepts the gifts of 
sweet pies, gold, cow, horse, land or gingelly seeds, he is reduced 
to ashes like a log of wood.^ 

69 . An excellent Brahmana shall wish to receive wealth 
only from high class praise-worthy Brahmanas or from all twice 
born persons but by no means from a Sudra. 

70. A Brahmana should try dimunition of his expenditure 
for livelihood but should not wish for the expansion of wealth. 
One who is in the clutches of covetousness for wealth falls off 
from Brahmanahood. 

71. Even after studying the Vedas and after perfor¬ 
ming 11 Yajnas, one does not attain that goal which one attains 
by means of diminution of avocatipn (i.e. curtailment of 
expenses). 

72. No Brahmana shall be excessively interested in mone¬ 
tary gifts; one may accept the amount required for a religious 
journey. A Brahmana accepting more than what is required for 
sustenance faces downfall. 

73. One who perpetually begs cannot attain heaven. 
Just as a thief annoys all living beings, so also the perpetual 
beggar. 

74. A person desirous of uplifting preceptors, elders or 
servants, a person desirous of worshipping deities and guests, can 


1. Manu IV. 188. 



11.26.75—27.1 


495 


accept gifts from everywhere. He should not be satiated in this 
respect by himself. 

75. A householder with his soul absorbed in meditation, 
who worships deities and guests and who remains endowed with 
self-control, attains the greatest region. 

76. Or he should entrust everything to his son and go to 
the forest. As a knower of reality, he should wander alone. He 
should be indifferent to worldly affairs and endowed with 
great concentration (in spiritual activities). 

77. O excellent Brahmanas, the duty of the householders 
has been expounded to you thus. One should abide by these 
after knowing them and shall make other Brahmanas follow the 
same. 

78. Thus, one should always worship the only primordial 
lord by following the duties of the householder. He shall sur¬ 
mount the Prakrti, the source of origin of all living beings and he 
does not take another birth. 


CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN 

Duties in Vdnaprastha (Hermit’s) Stage'- 

Vydsa said : 

1. After staying in the householder’s stage of life thus in 
the second part of life, one should pass on to the stage of the 
forest hermit, accompanied by his wife or (alone but) 
maintaining the sacrificial fires. 


1. This is normally the third stage in life and the rules etc. pertaining 
to it are given in the Dharma Sutras of Apastamba (IJ. 9. 21. 18), Baudha- 
yana (III. 3), Visnu (95) and Smrtis like Manu VI. 1-32, Yajnavalkya III. 
45-35, in Mahabharata Sdnti 245-1-14, Anusasana 142 and Puranas like AP. 
ch. 160., Bh. P. VII. 12. 17-31, jVP. I. 27 . 85-106. Many verses are common 
to Smrtis and Puranas inter se but that is inevitable in such works dealing 
with the same topic. 



496 


K urma Pur ana 


2-3. Or he should go to the forest after entrusting his 
wife to the care of the sons.^ After seeing his grandchild, the old 
man with his body weak and shattered should go to the forest 
in the course of Uttarayana (Northern transit of the sun) on 
any auspicious morning in the bright half of the month. After 
going to the forest, he should observe all regulations and per¬ 
form penance with great concentration. 

4. He should take to a fruit diet after collecting holy 
fruits and roots. He should worship the Pitrs and the deities 
with what constitutes his controlled diet. 

5. He should always worship the guests; after taking bath 
he should worship the gods. With great composure, he should 
eat only eight mouthfuls out of what he brings from the house. 

6. He should always wear the matted hair. He should 
not cast off (i.e. pare off) nails and hairs. He should always 
maintain (continue) the study of the Vedas; on other occasions 
he should observe restraint on his speech. 

7. It is with food proper for sages, with various vege¬ 
tables, fruits and roots grown in the forest that he should 
perform his daily fire-worship and also the five (great) sacrifices 
{panca-mahd-yajnas ). 

8. He should always wear bark-garments. He should be 
pure, taking bath three times a day. He should be kind and 
considerate towards all living beings. He should avoid taking 
Pratigrahas (monetary gifts) 

9-10a. The Brahmana should perform regularly the 
sacrifices (specifically meant for) on Darsa and Paurnima (New 
Moon and Full Moon) days, on the proper Naksatra, as also 
the Agrayana iffi Caturmasya sacrifices. He should observe (the 
holy rites) in the period of summer and winter solstices. 

1 Ob-12a. He should prepare separately Purorfafar (sacri¬ 
ficial offerings of ground rice offered in earthen dishes— 
Kapalas) and Caru (oblation of boiled rice and barley) with pure 
(offerable as oblations in sacrifice) wild grains (rice grown 
naturally in spring and Autumn) and gathered by himself. 


1. Cf. Manu VI. 3, Yajnavalkya III. 45. 

2. Cf. Manu VI. 5 and 7, Yaj. III. 46. 



11.27.12b.20 


497 


Having offered those highly sacred Havis (oblations) of the 
products of the forest to the deities, he should partake of the 
remainder for himself with the salt prepared by himself.^ 

12b-13. He should avoid wine and meat and the mush¬ 
rooms growing on the Earth; ‘earth-grass’ i.e. Andropogon 
Schoenanthus; the fruit of the trees Sisuka (Sigruka and Slesma- 
taka (Cordia Latifolia) ; he shall never eat anything cultivated 
(after ploughing the earth) with the ploughshare. Nor shall he 
eat anything abandoned by anyone. 

14. Even when distressed, he should not make use of the 
flowers and fruits produced in the villages.* He should maintain 
and venerate the holy fire as per injunctions in the Vaikhanasa 
Sutra. 

15. He should not cause injury to any living being. He 
should be free from Dvandvas (mutually clashing opposites 
like pleasure and pain) and be free from fear as well. He should 
not take food during the night and be engaged in meditation 
during the night. 

16. He should be onewhohas conquered the sense-organs 
and restrained anger. He should ponder over the perfect know¬ 
ledge of Reality. He should always be celibate and not approach 
carnally even his wife. 

17. The Brahmana, who, after going to the forest 
indulges in sexual intercourse with his wife passionately, violates 
his holy vow and has to perform expiation. 

18. The child born thereby cannot be touchable by 
Brahmanas. He is not authorised in the study of the Vedas. All 
the persons born in his family shall also be so. 

19. He should invariably sleep on the ground below. He 
should be devoted to the Japa of the Savitri Mantra. He 
should afford shelter unto all living beings and share things 
with others. 

20. He should avoid slandering and falsely accusing 
others; he should avoid (too much of) sleep and lethargy; he 
should maintain one single fire. He should have no fixed 
abode; he shall resort to a ground purified by sprinkling water. 

I. Manu VI. 14 
2. W. 13-14; cf. Manu VI. 16. 



498 


Kurma Purdna 


21. One should freely roam about alongwith the deer 
or take rest alongwith them. With very great concentration, he 
should lie down on a slab of stone or on the gravels. 

22. He should be one who washes off immediately (i.e. 
one who does not hoard anything) or he can hoard things 
necessary for a month; or he can have all the requisite things 
for six months or he may be one who hoards things necessary for 
a year. 

23. In the month of Asvayuja (September-October) one 
should throw away all one’s hoarded things.He should also 
discard the old worn clothes, vegetables, roots and fmits. 

24. He should be a Dantolukhalika (one who uses the 
teeth as mortar for chewing the grains and eating them). He 
should follow the practice of a pigeon. He should be an 
Afmakutta breaking or pounding corns etc. on stones) or he 
should be one who eats only what is ripened in the course of 
time. 

25. He should eat food at night what he gathered during 
the day, in accordance with his capacity. He should be a 
Caturthakdlika (i.e. one who eats after missing three meal-times) 
or he shall be an Aftamakdlika (one who eats after missing 
seven meal-times.) 

26. He should perform expiatory rites in accordance with 
the Candrayana rites during the bright and dark halves 
of the month. He should take once in a fortnight boiled rice 
(or barley) gruel).^** 

27. Established in the doctrine of Vaikhanasas one 
should always subsist on merely flowers, roots or fruits which 
have naturally fallen and withered. 

28. One should roll on the ground or stand on the fore 
part of the foot (i.e. tip-toe) throughout the day. One should 


1. VV. 22-23, Manu VI. 15, Yaj. III. 47 

*v.l. Purva-sancitam is better and hence accepted. Vehkt. Press reading 
puTva-cintitam ‘as thought of before* does not give the proper sense. 

2. Manu VI. 20-21 and 31 

**Vehkt. text : dvijagran kathUdn ‘reporting to foremost Brahmanas* is 
irrelevant. Hence the v.l. Tavdguh kvathitah is accepted. 



II.27.29-38a 


499 


be continuously engaged in standing or sitting but should not 
lose courage on any account. 

29. Gradually increasing his intensity in austere 
penance, he should get himself scorched in five fires; in the 
rainy season he should expose himself to showering clouds 
(for his shelter). He should put on wet clothes during the 
winter.! 

30. He should take ablutions thrice a day and propitiate 
the Pitrs and Devas or he should stand on a single foot and 
imbibe the rays then. 

31. He should get himself surrounded by five fires. He 
should be an imbiber of smoke, heat or Soma juice. He should 
drink milk (or water) in the bright half znA Pancagavya (cow- 
dung, urine etc. of cows) during the dark half of the month. 

32. Or he should eat fallen and withered dry leaves or 
observe penance called Krcchra. He should always practise 
Yoga and recite Rudra (Sukta). 

33. He should study Atharvasiras and be interested in 
practising the principles of Vedanta:^ he should resort 
restraints {Tamas) continuously; and he should alertly practise 
Niyarms (observances and rites). 

34-35. He should wear the skin of a black-antelope, the 
upper garment and the white sacred thread. He should then 
impose sacred fires on his Atman; and be devoted to 
meditation. He should be devoid of fire (i.e. give up fire-wor¬ 
ship etc.) and a fixed abode; he should be a silent sage engaged 
in endeavour for salvation. He should take alms necessary for 
his journey from saintly Brahmanas. 

36. He should receive the same from other Brahmana 
householders residing in the forest. Himself residing in the forest, 
he should eat eight mouthfuls of what he brings from the 
village. 

37-38a. In a cup of leaves or holding the palms like a 
cup or on a potsherd {Sakala) (he should receive those things). 
For the realisation of the Atman, he should perform Japa of 
the different Upanisads, different Mantras, the Savitrl Mantra or 


1. Manu VI. 23-24, Yaj. III. 52. 

2. Manu VI. 29-30. 



500 


Kurma Purana 


Rudra Adhyaya. 

38b-39. He should resort to the great Departure {maha- 
prasthana) or observe fast unto death. He should abide by the 
procedure of dedication unto the Brahman, and may enter fire.^ 
Those who resort to this stage of life duly, this state of life that 
destroys unholy things, attain the region of Isvara; they go to 
that region after their death. 


CHAPTER TWENTYEIGHT 

Duties of Tatis [recluses) 

Vyasa said : 

1. After staying in the stage of life as the forest-hermit 
during the third period of his life, thus, he should spend the 
fourth period of his life by renunciation. 

2. After having established the fires in the Atjnan, the 
Brahmana should renounce and go away as an anchorite. He 
should be engaged in the practice of Yoga, be quiescent and be 
devoted to Brahmavidya (the lore of the Brahman). 

3. People wish for Sannyasa(renunciation)when Vaitr^nya 
(absence of thirst i.e. attachment) towards all worldly objects 
surges up in the mind. Otherwise one would be a fallen fellow. 

4. After performing the Isti of pertaining to Prajapati 
or Agneya* (pertaining to the fire god), he should become a 
Danta (one with self control.) His passions and sins get perished. 
He should then resort to the Brahmasrama (the stage of ren¬ 
unciation i.e. Sannyasa) 


1. Manu VI 31. Yaj III. 55. But the writers on Dharmasastra 
do not favour such suicides. Also Mbh. Adi 779. 20. 

2. Manu VI. 38, Yaj III. 56 require the performance of Prajapatyesti, 
while Jabalopanisad 4 recommends Agneyi isli. KP synthesized both the views 
by giving an option. 



II.28.5-14a 


501 


5. Various types of Sannyasins are mentioned : some of 
them are Jriana-sannyasins, others are Veda-sannyasins while some 
others are Karma-sannyasins.^ 

6. He who is free from all attachments, devoid of 
Dvandvas (mutually clashing opposites) and who is fearless is 
called the renouncer of Jnana type {Jndnasannydsin). He is 
stabilised in his own Atjnan. 

7. He who studies the Vedas solely every day, is devoid 
of Dvandvas and who accepts nothing (or is propertyless or has 
nothing) is called the renouncer of the Veda type ( Veda-Sannydsin). 
He is one who has conquered the sense organs and i s desirous of 
liberation. 

8. The Brahmana who absorbs the sacrificial fires into 
the Atman and who is interested in dedicating everything to 
Brahman, should be known as the renouncer of Karmans—as 
one devoted to great Tajnas. 

9. Among these three, the Jnanin is considered to be the 
superior-most. He is a scholar who has no function to be per¬ 
formed nor has he any symbol. 

10. He would be devoid of myness; should be fearless and 
quiscent; he should be above Dvandvas and free from acceptance 
(of gifts) (or possession-less). He should wear only a ragged 
loin cloth or he may be naked, but he is devoted to meditation. 

11. He should be a celibate; take in only limited mouth¬ 
fuls of food. He should get his food from the village. He should 
be engaged in reflecting on the spirit. He should not have 
worldly attachments. Nor does he take meat. 

12. He should seek happiness and move about here with 
only the Atman to assist him. He should not speak in 
appreciation of either death or life. 

13-14a. He should wait only forthe time of his death just 
as a servant waits for (his master’s) order. He has never any¬ 
thing worth studying or hearing. He thus qualifies himself to 
be identical with Brahman. 


1. VV. 3-9 KP gives a different classification of Sannyasins. Mbh. 
AnuSdsana 141. 89 followed by AP. 161. 18 give (1) Kuticaka, (2) Bahudaka 
(3) Haihsa and (4) Paramahathsa as the Usual classification of Sannyasins. 



502 


Kurma Pur ana 


14b-16. Either he may wear a single cloth or he may 
wear a loin cloth. The scholar may have either a tonsured head 
or a tuft of hair on the head. He should have three staffs. 
He should be free from acceptance of gifts. He should always 
wear ochre-robes. He should be engaged in the path of medita¬ 
tion. He should stay at the outskirts of the village or at the 
root of a tree or in the temple. He should view the enemy and 
the friend alike. He should face both honour and disrespect 
equally. 

17-18a. He should maintain himself on alms. He should 
not take the food of only one man at any place. If, out of 
delusion or for any other reason, the ascetic takes the food from 
one person, no expiation has been mentioned for him in the 
Dharmasastras. 

18b-19a. He should consider a lump of clay, a stone and 
a piece of gold (of the same value) equally. His soul should 
be free from passion and hatred. He should desist from injuring 
living beings and observe silence. He should be devoid of desires. 

19. One should set foot after purifying the place with 
the vision (look carefully before treading on a place) ; he should 
drink water purified by means of a cloth; he should speak words 
purified by a knowledge of the scriptures; he should act with 
a pure conscience. 

20. Except during the rainy season, a mendicant should 
not stay for long in a single place. He should take ablutions 
regularly and observe cleanliness. He should always have the 
waterpot in the hand. He should be clean. 

21. He should perpetually be devoted to celibacy and 
should always stay in the forest. He should be devoted to the 
scriptures on salvation. He should be celibate and should keep 
his sense-organs fully conquered. 

22. He should be free from haughtiness and egotism; he 
should be devoid of censure and backbiting. An ascetic endowed 
with the quality of the (realization of) knowledge of the Atman 
shall attain salvation. 

23. After taking bath he should perform the Acamana rite 
according to injunctions. Thus purified he should always study 
(ponder over) the eternal Veda called Pranava i.e. OM (sitting) 
in a temple, etc. 



11.28.24-31 


503 


24-25. Wearing a sacred thread, with the Kusa grass in 
his hand, wearing a clean washed ochre-coloured garment 
and his body smeared with ashes covering the hairs and with a 
quiescent soul and concentrated mind, he should continuously 
perform Japa of Brahman (Veda) pertaining to Yajna (sacri¬ 
fice) or pertaining to divinity or concerning the soul described 
in the Upanisads. 

26. The ascetic observing silence and celibacy may stay 
with his sons*^ also. If he practises the study of Vedas always, 
he shall attain the greatest goal. 

27. These are particularly his vows viz. : non-violence, 
truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, greatest penance; (austere- 
most) forbearance, mercifulness and contenment. 

28. He should adhere to the Vedantic knowledge with 
great concentration; he should perform the five Yajnas (Panca- 
maha Yajnas) It is not for the sake of alms that he should be 
endowed with Jnana and meditation. 

29. He should always perform the Japa of the Homa 
mantras at the proper time with great concentration. He should 
read the Vedic passage every day. He should repeat the 
Savitri Mantra at the junctions (morning and evening). 

30. Thereafter he should meditate on Lord Paramesvara 
in a secluded spot. During secluded life one should avoid passion, 
fury and acceptance of monetary gifts. 

31. The scholar who wears one or two garments, a tuft 
of hair (on the head), a sacred thread and holding a Kaman- 
dalu (water-pot) in hand and three staffs attains the greatest 
Being. 


1. This is strange. The recluse has to leave home, wife, children, 
property etc. vide Manu VI-41, 43-42. 



504 


K urma Pur am 


CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE 

Duties of an Ascetic 


Vyasa said : 

1. In this way the sustenance of ascetics of restrained 
soul (mind) who strictly adhere to the stage of their life, has 
been declared to be on begging alms or on fruits, roots etc. 

2. He should beg for alms only for once. He should not 
indulge in it for long. Since, if an ascetic is attached to alms, 
he becomes involved in worldly affairs. 

3. He should beg for alms only at seven houses.^ If 
nothing is received he should begin begging for alms once 
again. He should wash the vessel and take food in it. Then 
once again, he should wash it with water. 

4. Or he should take another vessel for collecting the 
alms and another for taking food everyday. After taking food 
he should wipe off that vessel and take food only to facilitate 
the journey of life. He should not be covetous. 

5. The ascetic should go to collect alms when there is 
no smoke or burning coal, at a house where all the people 
have taken food and where the threshing rod is kept resting 
and the potsherds are disposed off.^ 

6. After saying “Bhiksa” (alms) once, the mendicant 
ascetic should stand with the head bent (facing down) for a 
period of a Godoha (i.e. the time taken to milk a cow). (After 
receiving the alms) he should eat it silently. He should be pure 
and restrained in speech. 

7. He should wash his hands and feet and perform the 
Acamana rites in accordance with the injunctions. He should 
show food to the sun-god and partake of it facing the east. 
He should remain pure. 

8. He should take in the five Prandhutis (i.e. take the 
five particles of food while uttering Prdmya svdhd etc.). With 
concentration he should take in only eight mouthfuls of food. 


1. Vasistha Dh. S. X. 7, Sankha Smr. VII. 3 

2. Manu VI. 56, Sankha VII. 2 



II.29.9-18 


505 


After performing the Acamana rite he should meditate on Lord 
Brahma, the great Is vara. 

9. Manu, the Prajapati, says that the following four 
types of vessels may be used (for begging alms) by ascetics 
viz. : a gourd, a wooden vessel, a mud-pot or a bamboo pot.^ 

10. He should think of Isvara always early in the night, 
in the middle of the night, at the close of the night and 
during the Sandhyas (i.e. dawn and dusk). During the 
Sandhyas, he should particularly make use of sacrificial fires. * 

11-13. He should keep within the abode of the lotus of 
his heart, the deity named Visva who is the cause of the birth 
of the Universe. He should remember the Atman of all living 
beings—that which is stationed beyond darkness, the Atman 
that is the support of all the brilliance, the unchanging bliss, 
that which is beyond Pradhana and Purusa, Siva (stationed in 
the) cavity of the sky, Isvara of the form of Brahman, present 
within all beings. He should meditate on the lord devoid of 
beginning, middle and the end, the abode of the qualities such 
as bliss, etc. 

14-15. He should meditate on the great Purusa, the 
Brahman, Brahma, the unchanging truth, the universal formed 
Mahesa resembling the mid-day sun. He should stabilise the 
Atman in the Supreme Atman through Oihkara. He should 
meditate on Lord I Sana present in the middle of the Akasa 
(firmament). 

16. One meditating on the ancient pure Purusa, the 
cause of all beings, the only receptacle of bliss, shall be released 
from bondage. 

17-18. Or he should ponder over the great firmament, 
the sole cause of all living beings, that which is present in the 
cavity of the heart, the abode of illusion for the universe; he 
should meditate on the enlivening force of all living beings, 
where the world gets dissolved; which, those desirous of 
liberation, see as the subtle bliss of Brahman. 


1. Manu VI. 54 but there it is attributed to Svayambhuva Manu 
*v.l. Sandhydsvahni ‘(especially) in the dawn, the dusk and at day’ is 
better. 



506 


Kurma Purana 


19. After pondering over the infinite real, Isana, the 
Brahman that is lying hidden in its middle, the Brahman 
characterised by perfect knowledge, he should sit with perfect 
self-control. 

20. This is the greatest secret of all secrets imparted to 
ascetics by Mahesa. He who brings into practice the perfect 
knowledge, shall experience Yoga pertaining to Isvara. 

21. Hence, he should always be devoted to meditation; 
he should be devoted to the Atmavidya (knowledge of the 
soul). He should resort to the perfect knowledge of Brahman, 
whereby he shall be released from bondage. 

22. Realising the non-identity of the self from all other 
things, and that the self is pure bliss, devoid of old age, one 
should meditate again on that Supreme knowledge. 

23. He is, therefore, the Supreme Lord as from him all 
beings originate, by attaining him one is not born again. He is 
the God who transcends and rules over all. 

24. That Lord is Mahesvara, the journey unto whom is 
mentioned to be perpetual and auspicious, and whom they call 
as the greatest. 

25. Whatever holy main vows and subsidiary vows of 
the mendicant ascetics have been mentioned, if any of these are 
transgressed, expiatory rites are enjoined.^ 

26. After approaching a woman carnally, he should 
make amends as follows : He should control his mind, remain 
pure and perform Pranayama. He should then perform the 
expiatory rites called Krcchra* and Santapana. 

27. Thereafter he should remain with perfect mental 
control and regularly perform the Krcchra (expiatory) rite 
according to injunctions. The mendicant should come to the 
hermitage again and perform his regular duties with alertness. 

28. Learned men say that a falsehood uttered for fun 
does not affect one adversely. Still it should not be pursued, as 
this is a serious incident. 


1. VV. 25-36 enumerate the atonements or expiations for transgression 
of rules by a Sannyasin, 

*a better v.I. is prayascittam samahitah with concentrated mind lake the 
prayaScitla, as this avoids the duplication of Krcchra prayascitta in the next verse. 



11.29.29-38 


507 


29. (If one speaks a lie even in joke) an ascetic desirous 
of piety should fast for one night and perform one hundred 
Pranayamas. 

30. One should not commit theft even if one loses one’s 
interest* (?). The Smrti states that there is no other act of 
irreligion than theft. 

31. It is spoken of as another kind of violence. 
It deprives one of the knowledge of the self. What is called 
wealth is the externally wandering life of man. 

32. He who deprives a man of his wealth, deprives him 
of his life. If one commits it, that extremely wicked person, 
fallen from his pious way of life, gets his sacred vow violated. 
(Repenting again if) he feels despondent, he should perform 
Candrayana vow. 

33. Sruti says that he should perform (the Candrayana rite) 
for a year in accordance with the injunctions in the scriptures. 
If the mendicant ascetic should repent again, he should 
perform his vow alertfully. 

34. If the mendicant ascetic commits violence acciden¬ 
tally he should perform the expiatory rite of Krcchratikrcchra or 
Candrayana. 

35. If, on seeing a woman, an ascetic involuntarily 
discharges his semen virile due to his weakness, he should 
perform sixteen Pranayamas. 

36. If the involuntary emission of the semen takes place 
during the day time, he should perform hundred Pranayamas 
every day for three days. If one takes to wine and flesh in 
secret, or takes salt openly during Navasraddha (first Sraddha 
after a person’s death) Prdjapatya vow is the expiatory rite. 

37. All the sins of a person engaged always in meditation 
perish. Hence, one should be engrossed in meditation on 
Mahesvara after realising him. 

38. That which is the greatest Brahman, the brilliantmost 
light, the imperishable and unchanging support of all and is 
immanent in everything, should be known as Mahesvara. 


*A better v.l, is param apadgatenapi na kdryam steyam anyatah One- 
should not perform theft from others even if he is in extreme difficulty*. 



508 


Kurma Purana 


39. This lord Mahadeva is the pure and the greatest 
■^iva. He alone is the non-dualistic imperishable deity within the 
orb of the sun. 

40. * (Defective verse) Since the lord is very great and is 

•stationed in the principle called Atmayoga and termed Svadha, 
Agni (fire) and (knowledge) Jnana, he is known as 
Mahadeva. 

41. He who does not see any other lord than Mahadeva, 
he who realises him as the Atman, attains the greatest region. 

42. Those who consider their own Atman different from 
Paramesvara do not realise tne lord. Their effort is futile. 

43. The only Brahman is the supreme Brahman. That 
should be known as the unchanging principle. That lord is 
Mahadeva. By not realising this, one is fettered. 

44. Hence, an ascetic of controlled mind should worship 
invariably. He should be quiescent, devoted to Mahadeva and 
■engaged in the path of knowledge. 

45. O Brahmanas, thus the auspicious stage of life of the 
ascetics has been detailed to you. This has been formerly 
expounded to the sages by lord Pitamaha (god Brahma). 

46. This excellent knowledge, the auspicious thing based 
•on the duties of the ascetics, imparted by the self-bom deity, 
shall not be given to anyone else except to sons, disciples and 
Yogins. 

47. Thus the rules governing the rites of the ascetics have 
been described. It shall be the sole cause of the propitiation of 
Pasupati. Those who practise this every day with concentration 
■of the mind are not reborn nor shall they face destruction. 


*Venkt. Press text is full of misprints : The Crt. edition reads : yasman 
mahiyaU devah Svadhamni jnana-sanjhini atma-yogahvaye tattve Mahadevas tatah 
jmrtah ‘Inasmuch as the lord enjoys in his abode called (spiritual) know¬ 
ledge and the reality called the Yoga of Atman, he is said to be 
■“great God”. 



II.30.1-7 


509 


CHAPTER THIRTY 

Rules of expiation 

Vyasa said : 

1. Henceforth I shall expound auspicious procedure of 
expiation^ for the welfare of all Brahmanas (v.l. people) and 
for dispelling sins. 

2. By not doing the enjoined holy rite and by doing 
what is prohibited, a person incurs sin. The expiatory rite is 
the way of absolvement from sin. 

3. No Brahmana should ever remain (anywhere) without 
performing the expiatory rite. He should perform what 
quiescent, scholarly Brahmanas advise.^ 

4. What a quiescent Brahmana, who is the most excel¬ 
lent among the knowers of the meanings of the Vedas, who 
loves dharma (virtue) and who maintains (sacrificial) fires, 
does, shall be the greatest virtue even if it be that he alone 
performs it. 

5. If there are three Brahmanas who though they do not 
maintain sacrificial fire are but past-masters of Vedic inter¬ 
pretation and love Dharma, what they say should be ragarded 
as means of Dharma. 

6-7. If there is a group of seven Brahmanas who arc 
experts in many scriptures on Dharma-sastra and are proficient 


1. Chs. XXX—XXXIV of KP deal with rules of Prayatcitta or expia¬ 
tion from sin. The concept of sin is beyond the scope of annotations (For the 
concept of sin vide Hasting’s Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics vol. XI article 
on “sin”). The concept of sin was well-developed in g.gvedic times (vide A- 
B. Keath— The Religion and Philosoyhy of the Veda and Upanishads, pp. 245-9, 
264-8, 310-12 etc.). 

The term PrdyaScitta means 'that whereby the citta (the mind) of the 
repentant is generally [prayah) free (from the oppressive sense of guilt) by 
the Parsad assembly of Brahmin Pandits; a smrti quotation in Parasara 
Madhava II. 1. p. 3) 

The idea that a sin can be wiped out by PrdyaScitta gave rise to a vast 
literature from the time of ancient Dharma-sutras down to mediaeval writers 
of digests {Nibandhas). Purapas as a part of Dharma-s^tra had dealt with 
them in details vide AP chs. 169-174, VP. I. chs. 14, 15 and 30. 

2. VV. 3-8 state who should be regarded as authority in religious 
matter (as to what atonement be made etc.) 



5i0 Kurma Pur ana 

in logical reasoning of pros and cons and endowed with Vedic 
studies, these seven are glorified as authority on Dharma- 
Sastra. 

8. If there be twenty-one Brahmanas who know the 
truth about the knowledge of MImaihsa and are experts in 
Vedanta, can lay down the expiatory rite. 

9. He who associates with the fallen sinners for one 
year by sharing their vehicles, beds and seats, with full 
knowledge thereof, shall also become fallen^ 

10. A Brahmana who officiates as a priest contracts a 
marriage with the fallen out-caste and teaches them Veda or 
dines with them, instantly becomes fallen. 

11. The Brahmana who teaches them out of delusion or 
not knowing (their sins) or learns alongwith them shall become 
fallen in the course of a year. 

12. The slayer of a Brahmana^ should construct a hut 
in the forest and live therein for twelve years. For self-purifi¬ 
cation, he should beg alms with the skull of the dead as a symbol 
on the flag. 

13. He should avoid the abodes of the Brahmanas and 
the shrines of deities. He should remember that Brahmana 
constantly and censure himself. 

14. He should quietly and slowly enter seven houses 
(for begging) the worthiness of which was not (previously) con¬ 
sidered and which are free from smoke and fire (extinguished) 
and inmates whereof have taken their meals. 

15. He should beg for alms only once. He should pro¬ 
claim his sin to all men. Or he should maintain himself with 
fruits and roots obtained from the forest and subsist on them. 

16. He should hold the skull and the Khatvahga (a 
staff with a skull at the top) in his hands. He should observe 
celibacy. When the twelfth year is completed in this manner, he 
shall become free from the sin of Brahmana-slaughter. 


1. VV. 9-11 state the conditions under which even an innocent man 
is treated as ‘falllen’. 

2. Slaying of a Brahmana was regarded as a serious sin ( mahd-papa). 
VV. 12-26 describe different atonements for this great sin. 



11.30.17-26 


511 


17. When the sin has been committed unintentionally, 
this is the auspicious expiation. It should be remembered that 
if the sin is done intentionally, the purification is only after death, 
and not by any other means. 

18. He should observe Anasana (fast unto death) or 
Bhrgupatana (fall off from a precipice) or he shall enter the 
burning 6re or water. 

19. In order to wipe off the sin of Brahmana-slaughter, 
he should discard his life for the sake of a Brahmana or a cow 
or for the sake of the dead. 

20. The sin of Brahmana-slaughter is dispelled by curing 
a Brahmana of his chronic illness or by giving food to a very 
learned person. 

21. Or a Brahmana is absolved of the sin of Brahmana- 
slaughter by taking the concluding ablutions of a horse sacri¬ 
fice or by giving all his possessions to a Brahmana who has 
mastered the Vedas. 

22. A Brahmana should observe fast for three nights and 
then take three baths in the world-famous confluence of the 
river Sarasvati with the Aruna and he shall be purified. 

23. By going to the holy place Ramesvara, and by taking 
bath in the great ocean or by seeing Rudra, he shall be rid of 
the sin if he observes celibacy. 

24. There is the holy centre of lord Sulin (Siva) named 
Kapalamocana. By taking bath and propitiating the Pitrs and 
Devas, one dispels the sin of Brahmana-slaughter. 

25. It was there that the skull of ParamesthinBrahma was 
formerly deposited by Bhairava, the overlord of Devas, of 
unmeasured splendour. 

26. By worshiping Mahadeva there, in the form of 
Bhairava, after the bath and after performing the Tarpana rites 
to the Pitrs one is freed from the sin of Brahmana slaughter. 



512 


Kurma Purana 


CHAPTER THIRTYONE 

Importance of Kapala-mocana Tirtha 
Emplacement of God Brahma’s Skull 


The sages said : 

1. Formerly, how was the skull severed from the body 
of Brahma, placed on the Earth by Lord Rudra, Sankara, of 
excessive brilliance ? 

Suta narrated : 

2. O sages, listen ye all to the meritorious story that dis¬ 
pels sins, and the greatness of the intelligent Mahadeva, the lord 
of Devas. 

3. Formerly, on the peak of Meru, the great sages bowed 
to the lord Pitamaha, the primordial cause of the worlds, and 
said “What is that one immutable Principle ?” 

4. The deity from whom the worlds originated was delud¬ 
ed by the Maya ofMahesa. Not realising the greatest Being, 
he was over-bearing (enough) to say that he was (the 
unchanging principle). 

5. “I am the Creator, the source of the origin of the 
Universe. I am the single self-bom Isvara. I am the beginning¬ 
less greatest Brahman. By worshipping me, one is liberated. 

6. I am the deity who makes all Devas function as 
well as desist (from functioning). There is no one in the worlds 
superior to me.” 

7-8. While he was professing like this, a portion of Nara- 
yana was born and spoke these words laughingly- “The three¬ 
eyed lord is annoyed. O Brahma, what is the reason for this ? 


1. That U’aia Gf<d b an interpolation by Pasupatas becomes evident 
when in place and out of place they bring their favourite Deity. This chapter 
illustrates how the sin of Brahma-hatya (killing a Brahmana) was absolved by 
taking a bath in a holy centre (Tirtha) at Varanasi and why it came to be 
named as Kapala-mocana (reliever from the contact of a skull). The glorifi¬ 
cation of Siva by embodiments of Vedas and amputation of the arrogant 
head of god Brahma and the final emancipation from that sin of beheading 
Brahma and physical separation of Brahma’s skull from Bhairava’s hand— 
all is for the glorification of Siva. 



II.31.9-17 


513 


You are overpowered with ignorance. The qualities you have 
been boasting are not present in you. (v.l. This is not 
proper). 

9-10. I am lord Narayana, the primordial maker of the 
worlds, the Yajna incarnate. Without me, the whole universe 
cannot exist at all anywhere. I alone am the Supreme brilliance. 
I alone am the greatest goal. It was after being urged by me 
that the sphere of the Universe has been created by you. 

11. While these two deities were arguing with a desire to 
subdue the other, the four Vedas came to the place where these 
two deities were present. 

12. On seeing lord Brahma and the lord identical with 
Yajna (i.e. Narayana) seated (there), (the Vedas) with a pain¬ 
ful heart declared the reality of the Supreme Lord. 

ftgveda said : 

13. It is lord Mahesvara, within whom are stationed all 
living beings from whom everything functions and which they 
call the Supreme principle. 

Tajurveda said : 

14. It is the Pinaka-bearing deity Siva who is worshipped 
by means of all the Yajnas and the Yoga and whom they call 
Lord Isvara. 

Samaveda said : 

15. That great Deva is Sankara by whom this Universe 
revolves, who is the auspicious deity within the firmament and 
who is the principle Reality known and realised by the Yogins. 

Atharvaveda said : 

16. That is lord Bhava whom the ascetics visualize and 
worship as the great lord of Devas, as the great Purusa, as 
the great Ruler Rudra. 

17. On hearing this auspicious utterance of the Vedas, 
lord Brahma laughed utterly deluded, the Atman of the 
Universe (i.e. Brahma) then said : 



514 


Kurma Parana 


18. “Why does that great Brahman who ought to be 
devoid of all attachments, sport about alongwith his wife and 
the excessively arrogant Pramathas (attendants) ?” 

19. When this was uttered, the eternal lord, of the nature 
of Pramva (OM), who is really formless, became embodied 
and spoke these words to Pitamaha (god Brahma). 

Pranava said : 

20-21. “Indeed this lord Isa, Rudra never sports about 
with a goddess who is different from himself. Mahesvara is 
of that sort. He is that lord Isa, the eternal and the self-lumi¬ 
nous. The goddess Siva is one who has become his Bliss (i.e. his 
aspect called blissfulness) and not extraneous (coming from 
outside).” 

22. Even when this was explained, the ignorance of Aja 
(Brahma) whose body is Yajna, was not dispelled due to the 
Maya of Isvara. 

23. In the meanwhile Virinca (i.e. god Brahma) the 
conceiver of the universe saw a divine wonderful and great 
brilliance filling up the space of the sky. 

24. In the middle of it (that light) was stationed a sphere 
of brilliance shining with splendour. O excellent Brahmanas, 
a divine splendour in the middle of the firmament appeared in 
front of him. 

25. On seeing that divine face over his head, the grand¬ 
father of the worlds saw a sphere of splendour spotless 
and terrible. 

26-27. The fifth head of Brahma blazed with great fury. 
Instantaneously the great Purusa, Nilalohita, the tawny coloured 
trident-bearing lord, having the serpents for his sacred thread 
was seen. Lord Brahma spoke to Sankara, Nilalohita. 

28. (Defective verse) * O Sankara, you are bom of my 
forehead formerly for the sake of knowledge (?) You are called 
Mahesana. Hence, seek refuge in me.” 

29. On hearing the arrogant words of the lotus-born 
deity, Isvara depatched his man Kalabhairava, the burner of 
worlds 

♦KP. Crt. ed. reads jartami bhavatah pirvath laldtad eva Aankara pradm- 
ihavam / “O Sankara, I know your birth from my forehead formerly.” 



11.31.30-40 


515 


30. After fighting a great battle with Brahma, Kala- 
Bhairava slit the fifth face of Virinca (Brahma.) 

31. Brahma whose face was cut by lord Sambhu, died; 
but by means of the Yogic power of Isa, the holder of the 
universe (Brahma) regained his life. 

32. Then he saw Isana, the eternal Mahadeva seated 
alongwith the great goddess and stationed in an other sphere of 
light. 

33. He had the royal serpents for his bracelet; the cre¬ 
scent-moon as an ornament; he resembled a crore of suns (in 
brilliance), he shone with his matted hair. 

34. He was clad in the hide of a tiger; he was bedecked 
in divine garlands; he held the trident in his hand; he was a 
Yogin who could not be looked at (due to his brilliance.) 

35. He saw the primordial deity, the first deity, great 
lord whom those who are stabilised in Yoga see within their 
hearts as Is vara and Brahman. 

36. Verily, the great Lord whose supreme power, the god¬ 
dess, is designated as the sky (v.l. established in the firmament) 
and whose Yogic soul (?) infinite mfcayia (divine potencies like 
■omniscience, omnipresence etc.) is seen indeed. 

37. That Rudra, on merely bowing to whom once, the 
deluding seed of the entire universe gets dissolved, is seen 
indeed. 

38. (Defective Verse). Those who do not strictly abide by 
rules of good conduct but who are only great devotees of him 
are liberated by the Atman of the worlds. That Lord is now 
seen, indeed. 

39. That Siva whose Linga is always worshipped by 
Brahma and other Devas as well as by the sages, the expoun¬ 
ders of Brahman, has indeed become visible. 

40. That Sankara is seen whose side (i.e. proximity) is 
never left off by Isvara*, the cause of origin of the entire 
universe and whose body is Vijndna (Perfect knowledge). 

*Isvara not leaving the side or proximity of Sankara is confusing. 
livari would be a better reading as that would qualify tanu ‘body’ and mean 
"whose divine body.’ 



516 


Kurma Purdna 


41. That Isvara is indeed seen—Isvara, the son of 
Hiranyagarbha, in whose circular halo of light is seen the 
Lord who is accompanied by Vidya. 

42. Indeed that Rudra is seen—Rudra atwhose feet (if) 
anyone were to pour water or place a flower or a leaf, he crosses 
the ocean of existence. 

43. Due to his presence, the eternal Time controls 
the entire universe (and Time-units ?). The god whose soul is 
Yoga and who is the governor ofKala* 

44. That Soma (god Siva who is accompanied by Uma) 
is seen—the god whose ornament is Soma (the moon)—the life 
of all the worlds and an ornament unto the three worlds. 

45. The great God (Mahadeva) whose natural eternal 
union with goddess Uma is ever seen and the great liberation 
(on seeing hirri) is extolled (as being attained) is now seen. 

46. (Defective) Yogins, well-versed in the principles of 
Yoga, always meditate upon his union with the goddess, though 
he always faces separation** from the world (?) That Yogin 
is indeed seen. 

47. On seeing the eternal Mahadeva seated in an excel¬ 
lent seat along with the great goddess, he attained the greatest 
perfect recollection. 

48. Gaining the divine recollection pertaining to Mahes- 
vara, lord Aja (Brahma) propitiated the moonbedecked lord,, 
the bestower of boons who was accompanied by Uma. 

Brahma said : 

49. Obeisance|[to the great God. Repeated bows to the 
great goddess. Hail to Siva the quiescent; perpetual obeisance 
unto Siva (goddess Uma). 

50. Om bow unto you the Brahman, obeisance, obeis¬ 
ance to you who are the Vidya (Maya), Obeisance to you 


*Kalah Kalo in Venkt. Edt. is rather obscure. If emended as Kala-kalo 
it means “God who is the Kala (destroyer and hence controller) of kdla (of 
time or god of death.) ’ 

**viyogabhirmtkho'niSam (Venk. Text). If emended as viyogabhimukha 
aniSam will mean ‘yogins who set their face against (the world)’. The 
metrical defect can be condoned by a double-sandhi mukhaniSam. 



11.31.51-60 


517 


the great Isa. Hail to the Primordial Prakrti^the root cause of 
the universe. 

51. Salutation to one whose body is Vijnana; obeisance, 
obeisance to you Cinta (goddess of contemplation) ; Hail to the 
destroyer of Kala; obeisance again and again to Isvara (the 
goddess). 

52. Obeisance, again and again to Rudra; salutations 
again and again to RudranI; obeisance, obeisance to you, Kala 
(Time or Death); Repeated bows to you, the Maya (the 
Deluding Potency). 

53. Obeisance to the controller of all effects; obeisance 
to her who agitates. Hail to you, the Prakrti and obeisance to 
Narayana. 

54. - Obeisance to you the bestower of Yoga. Salutations 
to the preceptor of Yogins; obeisance to one abiding in the 
world* (?). Bow to the source of origin of the world. 

55. Obeisance be to the lord of perpetual Bliss; Hail to 
one whose very form is Bliss; obeisance to one devoid of 
actions; salutation to the material cause of the universe. 

56. Obeisance to you whose body is Oihkara; obeisance 
to you stationed therein. Hail to you stationed in the firma¬ 
ment ; obeisance, again and again to the Sakti (potency) of the 
firmament. 

57. Making obeisance thus to Isa by means of “Somas- 
taka” (eight verses eulogising the lord accompanied by Uma) 
god Brahma fell on the ground like a piece of log, repeating 
the mantras of Satarudriya. 

58. Then Lord Mahadeva, Hara, the remover of the 
distress of those who bow to him, raised him by means of his 
hands and said : “I am now pleased with you.” 

59. After bestowing great Yoga and the great unequalled 
AiSvarya (prowess) on him (Brahma) he (god Siva) spoke to' 
Rudra, Lord Nilalohita who was standing in front of him. 

60. This is god Brahma. He is the most venerable one 
unto this universe. He is the first one to stay in this universe; He 
is elder to you by means of the Guna; He is to be protected by 
you. He is your father. 


*v.l. samsdra-ndsaka ‘destroyer ofsaiiisaia). 



518 


K urma Purdna 


61. He is the ancient Purusa; O sinless one, he should 
not be killed by you. Thanks to the greatness of his Yoga and 
Aiivarya (divine powers and faculties), he has sought refuge in 
me alone. 

62. And he is sacrifice and that is his pride (v.l. He is 
the venerable sacrifice himself). His pride is to be chastened by 
you. You have to carry with you Brahma’s head. 

63. Demonstrating to the world the expiatory rite for 
dispelling the sin of the slaughter of a Brahmana, go abegging. 
You should establish Devas and the Brahmanas.” 

64. After addressing these words to Paramesvara (i.e. 
Rudra), the supreme lord went to his divine natural abode, the 
greatest region. 

65. Thereafter, lord Isa, Nilalohita of matted hairmade 
Kalabhairava hold god Brahma’s head. 

66. For the purpose of quelling the sin (of Brahmana- 
slaughter) you perform the beneficial holy rite in the world. 
With the skull in the hand, you beg for alms all round.” 

67. After saying thus, he sent his daughter well known 
as Brahmahatya whose face was terrible due to the curved fangs 
and who had clusters of flames for ornaments. 

68. Assuming a terribly hideous form follow the trident¬ 
bearing deity as long as he enters the divine city of Varanasi.” 

69. After saying this, he spoke to Kalagni (Kala bhairava) 
the great Isvara of the worlds—“At my behest, wander over 
all the worlds seeking alms. 

70. When you will meet Narayana, the lord of Devas, 
free from ailments, he will tell you clearly the means of expiation 
for the sin.” 

71. On hearing the statement of the Lord of the deities. 
Lord Hara, the Atman of the universe wandered over the three 
worlds with the skull in his hand. 

72. He assumed a hideous dress and form. He shone by 
means of his own brillance. His form was holy, comely and 
endowed with glory. He had three eyes. 

73. That great god with eyes like the fire of universal 
destruction, who was surrounded by Siddhas and the leaders 
of Pramathas (attendants) shines (shone dazzling) like crore 
of suns. 



11.31.74-85 


519 


74. After imbibing the divine nectar, the bliss of Para- 
mesthin, the lord full of shining sports and pastimes, came 
down to the world. 

75. On seeing Sankara, the black-faced Kala Bhairava, 
endowed with beauty and comely form, hosts of women followed 
him. 

76. They began to sing different kinds of songs; they 
began to dance in front of the lord; looking at his smiling face, 
they knitted their eyebrows. 

77. After passing through the lands of Devas, Danavas 
and others, the trident-bearing lord went to the region ofVisnu 
where Purusottama stayed. 

78. After reaching the divine abode, Sankara, the bene¬ 
factor of the worlds, began to enter it along with the 
Prominent Bhutas. 

79. Without knowing the divine and great being of 
Paramesvara, the powerful gatekeeper prevented the trident¬ 
bearing lord. 

80. He was famous by the name of Visvaksena. He was 
born of a part of Visnu. He held conch, discus and the mace 
in his hands; he was mighty armed and clad in yellow robes. 
(Verse in the bracket) 

Then the gatekeeper, born of Visnu fought with the terrible- 
looking attendant of Siva, called Kalavega (who attacked him) 
by the order of Bhairava. 

81. After routing Kalavega, the gatekeeper with his eyes 
turned red due to fury, rushed against Rudra and hurled the 
Sudarsana disc against him. 

82. Lord Mahadeva, the conqueror of foes, the trident¬ 
bearing god, the destroyer of the Tripuras, contemptuously 
looked at him, as he rushed against him 

83. In the meanwhile, a great goblin comparable to the 
fire at the end of the Yugas, pierced his heart by means of the 
trident and felled him to the ground. 

84. Mortally struck down by the trident (the gatekeeper) 
lost all his great strength and abandoned his life like persons 
afflicted by sickness on seeing death. 

85. After killing the servant of Visnu and taking his 



520 


Kurma Fur ana 


body with him, Rudra entered the inner apartment alongwith 
the leading Pramathas. 

86. On seeing Isvara, the cause of the universe, Lord 
Hari broke a vein in his forehead and let the blood flow out. 

87. “O suppressor of the Tripuras, O excessive splend- 
oured,(0 deity of unmeasured splendour), accept alms (offered) 
by me. No other kind of alms is worthy of you.” 

88. The blood continued to flow out in a continuous 
stream for a thousand divine years. Still that skull of Brahma, 
Paramesthin could not be filled up. 

89. After eulogising him with different emotional ways 

(?) (v.l. with various Vedic mantras) and great respect, lord 

Hari Narayana spoke to Kalarudra. 

90. “Why are you carrying this skull of Brahma ?” 
Mahesvara, the lord of Devas, recounted everything that 
happened. 

91. Acyuta (Visnu), Hrsikesa (Lord of senses) called 
Brahmahatya (the evil spirit of the slaughter of a Brahmana) 
and requested her “Please let go the trident-bearing deity.” 

92. Though requested by the enemy of Mura (i.e. 
Visnu), she did not leave off his (Rudra’s) side. After 
meditating on the source of origin of the universe, the omniscient 
Lord spoke to Sankara. 

93. “O lord, go unto the auspicious divine city of 
Varanasi where Isvara (god Siva) quickly destroys the sins of 
the worlds.” 

94. Thereafter, the lord sportively went to the holy 
centres and shrines with a desire for the welfare of all the worlds. 

95. Here and there, he was eulogised by the Pramathas 
of great Yogic power. The great Yogin with the dead body on 
his hands danced. 

96. Assuming another form, lord Hari, Narayana followed 
him, desirous of seeing his dance. 

97. On seeing Govinda, the bull-bannered lord of infinite 
Yogic soul, danced again and again smilingly. 

98. Following Rudra, Hari with the Dharma as his 
carrier, reached the city of Mahadeva, well-known as Varanasi. 

99. As soon as the lord of the universe with matted hair 



11.31.100-108 


521 


entered the city, Brahmahatya cried out, “Alas, Alas !” loudly, 
and entered the nether-worlds highly distressed. 

100. After entering the greatest abode, lord Kara, 
Sankara, placed the skull of Brahma in front of the attendants. 

101. After placing it (the skull), Mahadeva, the ocean 
of mercy, handed over the dead body to Visnu with the words 
“May this come to life.” 

102. “Those who always remember this Kapala dress of 
mine find their sin here and hereafter perish quickly. 

103. After coming to the excellent holy centre and 
performing the ablutions duly, one should propitiate the Pitrs, 
manes and Devas after which one is liberated from the sin 
of slaughter of Brahmana. 

104. Realising that the world is transient, ye all go to 
the greatest city. At the time of death the perfect knowledge 
imparted by me yields the highest region.” 

105. After saying this and embracing Janardana 
(Visnu), the lord instantaneously vanished alongwith the 
leading attendants. 

106. After regaining his servant Visvaksena from the 
trident-bearing lord, the lord Krsna silently went back to his 
land. (?) 

107. Thus the meritorious story that quells great sins has 
been recounted to you. The holy centre Kapalamocana is very 
auspicious and is extremely liked by Sthanu. 

108. He who reads this chapter in the presence of 
Brahmanas is released from all sins mental, verbal and 
physical. 



522 


Kurma Pur ana 


CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO 

Expiatory rites 

Vyasa said : 

1. An (otherwise) excellent Brahmana taking to wine- 
drinkingi should drink it fiery-red (i.e. red hot). His body 
being scorched with the same, he shall be liberated (from that 
sin). 

2. He should drink cow’s urine of the colour of fire or 
the diluted cow’s dung or milk, water or ghee. Then he shall 
be liberated from the sin. 

3. Clad in a wet cloth, he should meditate on Narayana, 
Hari, with great (mental and physical) purity. For the 
absolvement of sin, he should perform the holy rite in expiation 
for the sin of Brahmahatya (Brahmana-slaughter). 

4. A Brahmana stealing gold^ should approach the king 
and confess his guilt. He should request, “Your Majesty should 
chastise me.” 

5. The king should take a threshing rod and should him¬ 
self strike him with it once. Ordinary thief becomes pure on 
being killed and a Brahmana by means of penance. 

6-7. He should take a threshing rod or a staff of Khadira 
wood, or a sharp pointed Sakti (spear) or an iron club on his 
shoulders. He should then rush to the king with dishevelled 
hair. He should confess that sin of his saying “I have committed 
such and such a sin. Chastise me.” 

8. Either by chastisement or through release the thief is 
liberated of the sin of theft. By not chastising him, the king- 
incurs the sin of the thief. 

9. A Brahmana desirous of wiping off the sin incurred 
from the theft of gold by means of penance should wear bark- 
garments and perform the expiatory rite of a slayer of a 
Brahmana. 


1. VV. 1-3 wine-drinking is another great sin {mahapdpa), its expia' 
tion being by the same rite as of Brahma-hatya. 

2. V V. 4-11 deal with the expiation for the third great sin—stealth. 



11.32.10-18 


523 


10. Or the Brahmana should become purified by taking- 
bath in the Avabhrtha (concluding ablution) of the horse-sacrifice. 
Or he should give his own weight in gold to Brahmanas. 

11. The Brahmana who has stolen gold should observe 
celibacy and perform the Krcchra'- rite for a year, in order to 
quell that sin. 

12. If a Brahmana being infatuated with lust commits 
adultery with the wife of his preceptor,^ he should embrace a 
red hot and fiery image of a woman made of black iron. 

13. Or he should himself cut off his penis and scrotum, 
hold them in his palms and walk straight towards the southern 
direction till he falls down dead. 

14-15. The defiler of a preceptor’s bed should perform 
the expiatory rite of a slayer of a Brahmana for the purpose of 
purification; or he should lie on the ground for a year embracing 
the thorny branch of any tree with mental purity. The defiler 
of the preceptor’s bed is then absolved of the sin. Or the 
Brahmana should wear bark-garments and with great concen¬ 
tration, he should perform the Krcchra rite for a year. 

16-17. Or having taken the. Avabhrtha bath in a horse- 
sacrifice, the Brahmana becomes pure. He should take his meal 
on the eighth occasion after missing seven meals. He should 
observe celibacy and perform Sadavrata (perpetual rite). *He 
should pass three days by standing and sitting strenuously. He- 
should then lie down on the bare ground. Within three years, 
the sin is dispelled. 

18. Or he should observe four or five Candrayana® vows. 


1. Krcchra or Prajdpatya is a general term for several kinds of expiations. 
It has about 12 varieties. (For details vide Kane—H. D. Vol. IV, pp. 120, 
132-133). 

2. Adultery (esp. with one’s preceptor’s wife) was another great sin. 
VV. 12-18 give various expiations of unequal intensity for it. 

3. In this expiation the intake of food—one morsel on the 1st tithi 
(lunar day) increases every day by one morsel upto 15 morsels on the full- 

moon day and decreases by one morsel every day in the dark half with com¬ 
plete fast on amavasya (the new moon) day. As this expiation depends on 
the increase or decrease of the digits of the moon it is called Candrayana. 

*Vehk. text reads : Sthanasandbhydm viharanstrirahno'bhyupa yatnatah f 
asana is emended as dsana (Crt. ed. supports this reading). 



524 


K urma Pur ana 


I shall now mention the expiation fora person who is in intimate 
contact with fallen persons^ (or out-castes). 

19. If a Brahmana has close intimacy with a fallen fellow, 
he should perform the expiatory rite enjoined for that person, 
for the purpose of wiping off that sin. 

20. If the close intimacy is of six months duration, he 
should perform Taptahrcchra rite alertfully for a year, as an 
expiatory rite. 

21. The great sinners, wipe off their sins and impurities 
by means of these holy rites. Or the expiation on the Earth (can 
be achieved) by visiting holy centres. 

22-24. A Brahmana who commits heinous sins like 
Brahmana-slaughter, drinking of wine, theft of gold, sexual 
intercourse with the wife of the preceptor or contact with the 
sinners of these crimes (will-fully) should observe fast. He should 
then remain in the holy centre with concentration of mind. He 
should meditate on lord Siva (god with matted hair) and enter 
the blazing fire. No other means of expiation is observed by 
sages, the expounders of Dharma. Hence by burning his body in 
holy centres he shall become pure. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE 

Narration of Expiatory rites ( continued) 

Vyasa said : 

1. The definite decision is this that a Brahmana who 
knowingly indulges in sexual intercourse with his daughter, 
sister or daughter-in-law should enter the blazing fire. 

2. If one cohabits with one’s mother’s sister or the wife of 
the maternal uncle, or the sister of one’s father or a niece, one 
should perform the expiatory rites of Krcchra and Atikrcchra. 


1. VV. 19-24 prescribe practically the same rites of expiation for 
those who live in contact with the great sinners and are fallen. 



II.33.3-12 


525 


3. In order to quell that sin, one should observe the 
Candrayana vow meditating on lord Hari, the source of 
origin of the universe, the lord devoid of beginning and end. 

4. For the destruction of the sin of cohabiting with one’s 
own brother’s wife, one should, with great concentration perform 
four or five Candrayana rites. 

5. If one commits adultery with father’s niece or mother’s 
niece or the daughter of the maternal uncle one shall perform 
the Candrayana rite. 

6. If one cohabits with the wife of friend or the sister of 
one’s own wife one should observe fast for a day and a night and 
then perform the Krcchra rite. 

7-8a. If a Brahmana carnally approaches a woman in her 
monthly course, he becomes pure only after three days. Three 
Taptakrcchra rites have been enjoined (as atonement for) sexual 
intercourse with a Candala woman. By observing Sdntapana} vow 
(in addition), he becomes pure. Otherwise no expiation is 
prescribed in Smrtis. 

8b-9. For committing adultery with a woman from 
his maternal gotra (line of ancestors) or one belonging to his own 
Pravara lineage, he becomes pure if he observes with self- 
control and concentrated attention, the Candrayana vow. If a 
Brahmana has sexual intercourse with a Brahmana woman 
(other than his wife), he should perform one Krcchra expiation. 

10-11. After committing the sin of raping a virgin, one 
should perform the Candrayana expiation. For the sin of dis¬ 
charging the semen virile in the lower animals, in a man, in a 
woman in her monthly course, in non-vaginal parts or in the 
water, one should observe the Krcchra rite. If a Brahmana 
ravishes an old woman, he shall be pure only in three days. 

12. If one cohabits with a cow, one should observe the 
Candrayana rite. By cohabiting with a prostitute, a Brahmana 
(incurs sin and), he should perform the Prajapatya vow. 


1. 5anta/iana is generally expiation for acts of Jatibhraihsakara (pollu¬ 
tion of castes). It lasts for two days and one has to take in pancagaiya On 
the first day and observe a fast on the second day. 



526 


Kurma Pur ana 


13. By carnally approaching a fallen woman, one shall 
become sinful and be purified only by three Krcchra rites. 
To wipe off the sin of cohabiting with a Pulkasi (Candala 
woman), one shall observe the vows of Krcchra and 
Candrayana. 

14. By cohabiting with a dancing woman, or an actress, 
or a washer-woman selling bamboos or working in hides for 
livelihood, one should perform Candrayana rite. 

15. If a religious student being deluded by passion indul¬ 
ges in sexual intercourse with a woman, he should wear the skin 
of a donkey and beg for alms at seven houses. 

16. He should perform ablutions three times a day, pro¬ 
claiming his sin. He should be released from that sin in the 
course of a year. 

17. An Avakirnin (a religious student violating the rules 
of chastity) should perform the expiatory rite for Brahmana- 
slaughter for the period of six months. Such a person gets 
relieved of the sin if he abides by the advice of Brahmanas. 

18. One should perform the expiatory rite for the sin of 
discharging semen virile. He should not beg for alms for seven 
days nor should he worship the fire. 

19. He should repeat always (the seven) great Vyahrtis 
beginning with Oihkara, for the period of a year. He should 
take food only at night. He should not be pure and should 
partake of the alms received after begging. 

20. With his anger shed off, he should perform the Japa 
of Savitri (Gayatri, Mantra) rapidly (?) on the bank of the 
river or holy places. He is thereby absolved of his sin. 

21. If a Brahmana unintentionally murders a Ksatriya, 
he should perform the expiatory rite of a Brahmana-slayer for 
six months or make a gift of five hundred cows. 

22. Or he should remain in a forest performing medita¬ 
tion with great concentration and perform Prajapatya,^ 
Santapana or Taptakrcchra rite for a year. 


1. Prdjapatya —the same as Krcchra, but it is normally prescribed for 
unintentional sexual offences. Here it is prescribed for homicide (For details 
vide HD IV, pp. 145-146). 



11 . 33 . 23-31 


527 


23. Either by mistake or wantonly, if he happens to 
kill a Vaisya, he should perform the expiatory rite of a 
Brahmana-slayer and make gifts of a thousand cows and a fourth 
of it (i.e. two hundred and fifty). 

24. After killing a Sudra by mistake, one should perform 
expiatory rites for a year. He should perform the rites Krcchra 
and Atikrcchra or the rite of Candrayana. 

25. For wipping off the sin of killing a Ksatriya, a 
Vaisya or a Sudra, the expiatory rite in order is the gift of a 
thousand or five hundred or two hundred and fifty cows. Or he 
shall perform the expiatory rite of a Brahmana-slayer for eight 
or three years. 

26. After killing a Brahmana woman, aBrahmana should 
perform the expiatory rite for eight years; after killing a Ksa¬ 
triya woman, he should perform the expiatory rite for six years; 
after killing a Vaisya woman, he should perform the expiatory 
rite for three years. 

27. After killing a Sudra woman, an excellent Brahmana 
shall become pure within a year. A twice-born should give 
something as a gift for a twice-born to wipe off the sin of killing 
Vaisya woman. 

28. After the murder of the outcaste also, one should per¬ 
form the Candrayana rite. God Brahma says that he will regain 
purity by means of the expiatory rite called Paraka.^ 

29. After killing a frog, a mungoose, a crow, a cat, a 
mule or a mouse or a dog, a Brahmana should perform a 
sixteenth of the Mahavrata (great vow). 

30. After killing a dog, one should alertfully drink milk 
(or water) for three days (?). After killing a cat or a mungoose, 
one should walk a distance of a Yojana ( = 12 km). 

31. On killing a horse, a Brahmana should perform the 
expiation called Krcchra for twelve nights. On killing a serpent, 
the excellent Brahmana should make a gift of an image made of 
iron. 


1. Pardka is called Krcchra hy some and is said to remove all sins. It 
constitutes of not taking food for twelve days and remaining self-controlled 
and vigilant (Manu XI. 215, AP. 171. 10). 



528 


Kurma Purana 


32. On killing a eunuch one should make a gift of a 
palala (weight) of straw and a Masa weight of lead. On kill¬ 
ing a boar, one should gift away a jar or ghee and on killing a 
Tittira bird, one should make a gift of a Drona measure of 
gingelly seeds. 

33-34. On killing a parrot, a calf of two years, a Kraunca 
bird of three years, a swan, a crane, a stork, a peacock, a monkey, 
a vulture, or the bird Bhasa, one should give away a cow to a 
Brahmana. On killing beasts of prey, one should gift away a 
milch cow. 

35. (Defective) On killing non-meat-eating (herbivorous) 
animals, one should gift away a heifer. On killing a camel one 
should gift away gold weighing a Gunja seed (?). On killing 
animals with bones (? backbones), some gift must he made 
over to a Brahmana. 

36. On causing violent injury to the boneless animals, one 
becomes pure by performing “Pranayama; for wiping off the 
sin of cutting fruit-bearing trees, one should perform the Japa 
of hundred Rks. 

37. Drinking of ghee is the expiatory rite for the sins of 
cutting hedges, creepers and turning plants, flower-laden plants 
and trees, of killing birds of all types and the living beings born 
of sweat and destroying the outcome of fruits and flowers. 

38b-39. On killing elephants, the expiatory rite is 
Taptakrcchra. On killing a cow due to mistake, the expiatory 
rite is Candrayana or Paraka. There is no atonement if the 
cow is killed wantonly. 



11.34.1-lOa 


529 


CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR 

Expiatory rites^ (continued) 

Vyasa said : 

1. For the sin of abducting men or women, of seizing a 
house, well, tank or a water (reservoir), the purificatory rite is 
Candrayana. 

2. After committing the petty theft, of article of no 
great worth from the houses of others, one should perform the 
expiatory rite of Santapana and Krcchra for the purpose of self¬ 
purification, after the restitution of the same (to the owner). 

3. After committing the theft of grains, cooked food and 
cash intentionally from the houses of his fellow-caste men, 
an excellent Brahmana shall become purified by Krcchrardha 
(half a Krcchra) vow. 

4. Drinking the Pancagavya^ is the expiation for the 
theft of food-stuffs and edibles, of vehicles, beds and seats, of 
flowers, roots and fruits. 

5. The expiation for the theft of grass, fuel and timber, of 
raw rice and jaggery, of robes, hides and meat, is fasting for 
three nights. 

6. The expiation for the theft of jewels, pearls and coral, 
of copper and silver and of magnetic stones is eating of food- 
particles for twelve days. 

7. As an expiation for the sinful act of stealing cotton, 
eleven-hoofed or single-hoofed animals, of flowers, scents and 
medicines, one should drink water (or milk) for three days. 

8-9a. After eating human flesh, one should perform the 
expiatory rite of Candrayana. After eating a crow, a dog, an 
elephant, a boar, or a cock, one becomes purified through 
Taptakrcchra. 

9b-10a. After taking in the flesh of beasts (and birds) of 
prey, their faeces or urine, as well as those of cow, jackal and 

1. This chapter prescribes expiation for petty sins. It is interesting as 
it throws a flood of light on what the ancient elites in India regarded as 
unbecoming, offensive or, and sinful, before the 10th cent. A.D. 

2. is a liquid preparation of five products of the cow, viz. 
cow’s urine, dung, milk, curds and ghee. It is to be taken at the end 
of each Prdyascitta. It removes all petty sins (For details vide H. D. Vol. 
II.. pp. 773-774). 



530 


Kurma Pur dm 


monkey one should perform the same (viz. Tapta-krcchra) rite 
of expiation. 

1 Ob-11. After eating the Gangetic porpoise and the blue 
jay as well as fish, one should observe fast for twelve days and 
perform Homa with ghee and Kusmanda (white gourd). 
After eating a mungoose, an owl and a cat, one should perform 
Santapana rite. 

12. After eating a beast of prey, camel or a mule (or 
donkey), one is purified by means of Taptakrcchra vow. He 
shall perform all rites in accordance with the procedure 
mentioned before. 

13. After eating the flesh of a crane, a stork, a swan, the 
Karandava duck and the Cakravaka (ruddy goose) bird, one 
should not take food for twelve days. 

14. After eating the dove, the Tittibha, the parrot, the 
drake, the owl and the web-foot, one should perform the same 
expiatory rite. 

15. After eating the Gangetic porpoise, the blue jay, 
the flesh of fish and Katahara (i.e. a jackal or a crow that is 
feasting on dead bodies), one shall perform this expiatory 
rite alone. 

16. After eating the cuckoo, the fish (animals and 
birds), the frog and the serpent, one shall become pure within 
a month, if one takes in barley boiled in cow’s urine as 
food. 

17. On eating acquatic beings, animals born in water, 
gallinaceous birds (such as domestic owl, porridge etc.) red¬ 
footed parrots, one should observe this vow for seven days. 

18. On eating dog’s flesh and dried meat and on even 
getting them made ready for oneself, one should perform this 
expiatory rite for a month, in order to quell that sin. 

19. On eating brinjals, earth-grass, horse-radish, a tree 
called Kutaka, Gataka (a sparrow), the Khadga (rhinoceros) 
and Kumbhira (a plant Rottleria tinctoria), one shall perform the 
expiatory vow called Prajapatya. 

20. On eating garlic and onion, one should observe the 
Candrayanavow, (on eating) Nalika (lotus-stalk) andTandulia, 
one becomes pure by means of the Prajapatya rite. 



II.34.21-31a 


531 


21. On eating the Asmantaka plant and the young 
shoot of any plant, one becomes pure by means of Taptakrcchra 
rite. On eating safflower, one shall become pure by means of 
the expiatory rite of Prajapatya. 

22-23a. On eating the bottle-gourd and Kirhsuka 
also one should perform the same (above) rite. On drinking the 
squashes and decoctions (?) of these out of delusion, one should 
subsist on barley cooked in cow’s urine for seven days, after which 
one would become pure. On eating Udumbara (Indian fig) at 
will, one becomes purified by means of Taptakrccha. 

23b-24a. After eating in a Sraddha at the end of the 1st 
year or during the period of impurity due to death or birth, a 
Brahmana of great concentration and purity shall become 
purified by means of the Candrayana rite. 

24b-25a. In case a Brahmana eats the food of a person 
who performs Homa everyday but does not make (even the 
slightest) gift of cooked food, he shall perform the Candrayana 
rite neatly. 

25b-26. On eating the cooked food that is forbidden or 
that is served by low-caste fellows), one becomes pure by means 
of Taptakrcchra. On eating the food of a Candala, a Brahmana 
shall observe the Candrayana vow properly. 

27. If he takes that food wantonly and deliberately, he 
should perform the Krcchra rite for a year and he has to 
undergo consecration rites once again. (Defective) After taking 
in an intoxicating drink other than wine, he should perform the 
Candrayana expiation. 

28. On eating forbidden food, one becomes pure by 
means of the Prajapatya vow. If one (unknowingly) drinks 
urine, semen virile or faeces, one shall perform this rite in 
expiation. 

29a. If (the duration of expiation or fast) is not enjoined 
the expiatory rite must really be performed everywhere for one 
day. 

29b-30a. On taking in the faeces and urine of the filthy 
pig, donkey, camel, jackal, monkey and crow, a Brahmana 
should perform the Candrayana expiatory rite. 

30b-31a. The three twice-born castes (i.e. the Brahmana, 
the Ksatriya and the Vaisya) deserve to be consecrated once 



532 


K urma Pur ana 


again, if they unwittingly take in the urine and faeces in contact 
with urine. 

3lb-32. If out of delusion, an excellent Brahmana takes 
in the faeces and urine of the carnivorous birds, he should per¬ 
form the expiatory rite of Mahasantapana. If he takes in the 
urine and faeces of the vulture, frog, sparrow and the domestic 
fowl, he should perform the Krcchra rite. 

33-34a. A person (Brahmana ?) is purified by observing 
the Prajapatya vow, if he happens to eat the leavings of food 
{ucchifta ) of a Brahmana. (In case he eats) the ucchifta of a 
Ksattriya, Tapta-krcchra expiation should be performed, and 
Ati-krccha expiation, after eating a Vaisya’s ucchista. Having 
eaten the leavings of food of a Sudra, a Brahmana should observe 
the Candrayana vow. 

34b. After drinking water from the pot of wine, one 
should perform the vow of Candrayana. 

35. If a Brahmana eats the leavings of the food (of 
unspecified persons), he becomes purified by drinking cow’s urine, 
eating (for food) barley cooked in cow’s urine or by drinking 
the water that remains after cows have drunk. 

36. If one takes in water defiled by urine, faeces etc., the 
expiatory rite for the sin is Santapana or Krcchra. 

37. If a Brahmana, knowingly, drinks water from the 
well of a Candala or his water-pot, he should perform the rite 
of Santapana or Krcchra. That is the way to atone for the sin. 

38. On drinking the water touched by a Candala, an 
excellent Brahmana becomes purified by means of Pancagavya 
(preparation of the five products of cows viz. urine, faeces, milk, 
curds and ghee) as well as the chief expiatory rite for three days. 

39. If a Brahmana knowingly or out of delusion touches 
a great sinner and takes food with him, he should take bath 
and perform Taptakrcchra. 

40. If one touches a great sinner, a Candala, or a woman 
in her monthly courses and unwittingly takes food, he shall 
become pure (after observing fast for) three nights. 

41. If a man fit to take bath (i.e. one who should take 
bath) takes food, without bathing), he shall become pure (by 
observing a fast) in the course of a day and a night. If he does 



11.34.42-51 


533 


so wilfully, the lotus-born lord says that he should perform the 
rite ofKrcchra. 

42. On eating stale food-stuffs or those defiled by cows, 
etc, one should observe fast or perform a fourth of the Krcchra 
expiation. 

43. At the end of every year, a Brahmana should observe 
the Krcchra vow again for the purification of the sin due to the 
eating of forbidden things unwittingly and particularly those 
taken in wantonly. 

44. After performing the Yajnas on behalf of Vratyas 
(the people of the three castes who have become outcaste) 
and the obsequies of others as well as for exorcising (for malicious 
purpose), one becomes purified by means of three Krcchras. 

45. On performing the cremation and other rites for 
Brahmanas and others who are killed, a Brahmana becomes 
pure by means of Prajapatya expiation and eating barley 
cooked in cow’s urine. 

46. A person who has besmeared himself with oil or 
vomitted, passes urine or discharges faeces or shaves himself or 
indulges in sexual intercourse, becomes purified by observing 
a fast for a day and a night (i.e. one full day). 

47. If one abandons fire (worship) or makes another to 
neglect it for one day, he becomes purified (by fasting) for three 
nights. And (for the negligence of fire-worship) for three nights, 
he (should observe fast) for six days. 

48. If out of blunder he forsakes the fire worship for ten 
days or twelve days, he should perform the Krcchra and the 
Candrayana expiatory rites to quell that sin. 

49. On accepting a gift of wealth from a fallen man, one 
will become pure by abandoning the same. But lord Manu says 
that he should observe Krcchra vow duly. 

50. Persons who have desisted from (and hence violated) 
the vow of fasting (before its completion) and those who have 
finished (i.e. abandoned) their order of mendicancy (i.e. 
Sannyasa) should perform three Krcchra and three Candrayana 
vows. 

51. They should again get consecrated by purificatory 
rites beginning with Jdta-karma. Sanctified thus the Brahmanas 



534 


K urma Pur ana 


become purified. Persons knowing Dharma should observe that 
vow properly. 

52. A person who did not perform the Sandhya worship 
should observe fast for the day and remain controlled in 
mind. If he does not perform the Sandhya worship at night 
the same (i.e. fast at night) should be continued for that night. 

53. A person who has not gathered sacrificial twigs and 
performed the Yajna should, for the purpose of purification, 
repeat the Gayatrl Mantra a thousand and eight times taking 
bath and remaining pure, with concentration of mind. 

54. (Defective verse) If out of blunder, a householder 
does not perform the Sandhya prayer he should take bath and 
observe fast. He shall become pure immediately. If he be 
exhausted (and does not perform Sandhya-prayer), he should 
remain perfectly self-controlled. 

55. Having dropped off the daily (sacred) duties prescrib¬ 
ed in the Vedas, a Sndtaka (one who has completed the period 
of studentship and is due for marriage) who (thus) violates his 
vow, should observe fast on that day. 

56. An excellent Brahmana who exterminates another* 
(?) should perform the Krcchra vow for one year. A Vratya 
should observe the Candrayana Vrata and give a cow a gift 
whereby he becomes purified. 

57. If a Brahmana does anything (indicating) atheism, 
he shall perform the Prajapatya rite. If he does anything injurious 
to Devas or the preceptors, he will become pure by means of 
Tapta Krcchra. 

58. If one willingly travels by a camel-cart or a donkey 
cart, or enters water in the nude, he shall become pure only (by 
fasting for) three nights. 

59. The expiatory rite for Apdnktas (outcastes i.e. those 
who are not eligible to sit in the same rows for meals with 
others) is missing five meals and taking meal only on the sixth 
occasion, for one month. The Japa of the Saihhita and the 
Homas as per procedure laid down by Sakala, every day. 


*The reading should be probably agnyutsadi and not anyotsadi as in 
Vehk. Ed. agnyutsadi means ‘one who has destroyed (given up fire worship 
by extinguishing) the sacred fire.*’ 



11.34.60-70 


535 


60. On wearing a blue or red cloth, a Brahmana should 
observe fast for a day and a night and drink Pancagavya. He 
shall then be pure. 

61. If one explains the Vedas, the Dharmasastras and the 
Puranas to a Candala, he shall become pure only by means of 
the Candrayana rite. There is no other means of expiation for 
him. 

62. On touching a Brahmana killed by hanging etc. the 
purity can be regained by Candrayana or Prajapatya vows. 

63. If a Brahmana defiled by Ucchista (i.e. with food 
particles in the mouth and on hands and) has not performed 
Acamana (the concluding sipping of water after meal) touches 
a Candala and others unwittingly, he should take bath and 
repeat the Gayatri Mantra a thousand and eight times. 

64. Or he should repeat the Drupada Mantra a hundred 
times. He should maintain celibacy and good concentration of 
mind. He should observe fast for three nights strictly. He shall 
then become pure by means of the Pancagavya. 

65. A Brahmana, while Ucchista (with particles offood 
in the mouth or on hand) willfully touches Candalas or fallen 
persons (outcastes) should observe the Prajapatya vow for 
purification. 

66. On touching a Candala, a Sutakin (one having the 
impurity due to birth or death of a relative) or a dead body, a 
woman in her monthly course and a fallen fellow a person 
touched by them, one should take bath for the sake of purity. 

67. If one touches a person touched by a Candala, 
Sutakin and a corpse, one should take bath and perform 
Acamana and Japa with great concentration. 

68. An excellent Brahmana who knowingly touches these 
persons or is touched by them, should take bath and perform 
Acamana rite for the sake of purity. So says lord Pitamaha. 

69. If a Brahmana, taking food is accidentally touched, 
he should perform Sauca (purificatory rite) and then observe 
fast. After that he should take bath and perform Homa. This is 
the holy rite. 

70. On touching the dead body and a Candala (v.l. 
dead body of a Candala) one shall perform the Krcchra rite. 



536 


Kurma Pur ana 


one shall becojne pure. On touching a person who has anointed 
his body.* (?) one becomes pure within a day and a night 
(after observing fast). 

71. On touching liquor, a Brahmana should perform 
three Pranayamas and he shall become pure. On touching garlic 
and onion, he should drink ghee and he shall become pure. 

72. If a Brahmana is bitten by a dog, he should drink 
milk for three days in the evening. If he is bitten above the 
umbilical region, he should increase (the quantity of milk) 
twofold. 

73. This quantity of milk shall be increased threefold 
if he is bitten on the arms and if bitten on the head, this shall 
be fourfold. Or an excellent Brahmana bitten by dogs, should 
take bath and perform Japa of the Savitrl Mantra. 

74. If an excellent Brahmana who is not sick and who 
has the means but does not perform great Yajnas but par¬ 
takes of food (and enjoys) he shall become pure by performing 
half of a Krcchra rite. 

75. If a man maintaining sacred fires does not worship 
them on the Parvan days or if a person does not go unto his 
wife during the prescribed days after menstruation, he should 
perform half a Krcchra. 

76. (Defective) If person even though not sick (simply) 
puts his body into the water without using water (for washing 
himself?), he should take a dip into water alongwith clothes 
and touch a cow and then he becomes pure. 

77. (Ifanysinis committed) knowingly, a Brahmana 
should perform the japa after the sun has arisen, remaining 
in the water itself. He should then repeat the Gayatri a 
thousand and eight times. He should observe fast for three days. 

78. On following the dead body of a Sudra out of his 
own free will, an excellent Brahmana should take ablutions, in 
rivers and perform the Japa of a thousand and eight Gayatri 
Mantra. 


*v.l. Sarhsprsyam (after touching) an untouchable (who has besmeared 
himself with oil). 



11.34.79-88 


537 


79. After swearing an oath with the delimitation of 
another Brahmana* (?), a Brahmana should perform the 
Candrayana rite by means of cooked barley food. 

80. After serving food irregularly (partially to persons 
sitting) in the same line, one becomes purified of the sin by 
means of krcchra rites. On treading the shadow of a Candala, 
one shall take bath and drink ghee. 

81. If in the stage of impurity, one looks at the fire or 
the moon he should look at the sun (for expiation). On 
touching a human bone, one should take bath and he becomes 
pure thereby. 

82. Having done a false study, one should beg for alms 
for a year. An ungrateful person should stay in a Brahmana’s 
house and perform sacred rites for five years. 

83. After producing Huth sound against a Brahmana 
and after using Tvam (you in singular) in respect to elderly 
persons (i.e. instead of usmgBhavdn —your ‘honour’), one should 
take bath and spend the remainder of the day without taking 
food. He should then bow down and propitiate those persons. 

84. If one beats (the elders) even with the blade of a 
grass, if one binds their neck with a piece of cloth and if one 
conquers them in an argument, one should propitiate the other 
one. 

85. On intimidating (by threat) a Brahmana with the 
intention of killing him, one should perform the krcchra rite; 
on felling a Brahmana to the ground, one should perform the 
Atikrcchra rite, and on spilling the blood of a Brahmana, one 
shall perform both the expiatory rites of krcchra and Atikrcchra. 

86. After uttering a lie to or for reviling an elderly 
person (or a teacher) one should perform the expiatory rite by 
refraining from taking food for one night (v.l. or three nights) 
for dispelling that sin. 

87. If one spits at or reviles in front of Devas and the 
sages, one should burn one’s tongue by means of a firebrand. 
Gold too should be given as gift 

88. If any Brahmana passes urine in the garden of 
Devas (i.e. in the precincts of shrines) even for once, his penis 


v.l. vadha-samyutam “concerning the murder of. . 



538 


Kumia Pur ana 


should be cut off for the sake of expiation and he should, 
perform Candrayana rite. 

89. If out of delusion, an excellent Brahmana passes 
urine in the sanctum sanctorum of a temple; his penis should be 
cut off. He should perform the Candrayana rite. 

90. After blaspheming and rebuking the deities, Devas 
and the sages, an excellent Brahmana must duly perform the 
Prajapatya vow. 

91. On conversing with them (i.e. such) sinners one incurs 
sins for which he should take bath and worship the Lord. On 
seeing them, he should look at the sun and on remembering 
them he should remember Visvesvara (in order to wipe off' 
the respective sins.) 

92. Even in hundreds of years it is impossible to redeem 
that person from sin who censures god Siva, the ruler of the 
universe, the over-lord of all living beings. 

93. At the outset, he should observe the Candrayana vow,, 
then Krcchra as well as the Atikrcchra. He should then seek, 
refuge in the Lord whereby he shall be released from that sin. 

94. The gift of all (one’s) possessions duly is the means 
of expiation for all sins. He should perform the rites of 
Candrayana duly, as well as those of Krcchra and the 
Atikrcchra. 

95a. The pilgrimage to holy centres is the means of 
expiation for all sins. 

95b-96. The person who propitiates Bhava (Siva) on 
the New Moon day, is released from all sins on worshipping 
the Brahmanas. 

97. By worshipping Mahadeva on the eighth day and 
the fourteenth day in the dark half of a month through a 
Brahmana, one is released from all sins. 

98. By seeing the three-eyed Isa with offerings in the first 
Yama (period of three hours) of the night on the thirteenth day,, 
one is released from all sins. 

99-101 a. One should observe fast on the fourteenth day 
in the dark half. With great concentration, he should then offer 
seven libations of water along with gingelly seeds in each handful 
to Yama, Dharmaraja, Mrtyu, Antaka, 'Vaivasvata, Kala and 



II.34.101b-110 


539 


Sarvapranahara. He should ofTer these libations in the forenoon 
after taking his bath. He is then released from all sins. 

101b-102a. During the performance of all holy rites one- 
should be quiescent -with controlled mind. He should observe 
celibacy and fast. He should worship Brahmanas. He should lie 
down on the ground at night. 

102b-103a. With god Brahma, the grandsire of theworld, 
in view, one should worship three Brahmanas on the new moon 
day. He is released from all sins. 

103b-104a One should observe fast on the sixth Tithi in. 
the bright half of the month, with great concentration and 
worship lord sun on the seventh Titki. He is released from all 
sins. 

104b-105a. One should worship Yama on the fourth day 
{Tithi) or in the constellation Bharani or on Saturday (s) and 
he is released from the (accumulated) sin of seven births. 

105b-106a. One should refrain from taking food on the 
EkadaH (eleventh) Tithi and worship lord Janardana on the 
twelfth day of the bright half. He is released from great sins. 

106b-107a. The following, during eclipse and other 
(auspicious) occasions, is the means of expiation for great sins : 
penance, Japa, visiting holy centres and the worship of Devas 
and the Brahmanas. 

107b-108a. Even though a man be defiled by all sins, if 
he abandons his life after the holy observances in the holy 
centres, he is absolved of all sins. 

108b-109. A woman who enters the funeral pyre along 
with her husband, shall uplift him even if he is a Brahmana- 
slayer, an ungrateful fellow or one defiled by great sins. Learned 
men know this to be the greatest expiation for women. 

110. If a woman is chaste and is engaged in serving her- 
husband, she does not incur any sin either in this world or in 
the other. 

(Verse in brackets) 

No hesitation need be felt in this matter that if a woman, 
is endowed with the quality of chastity and is eager to serve her 
husband, she has no sin either in this world or in the other and 
that, she is relieved of all sins. 



540 


Kurtna Pur ana 


111. A chaste woman devoted to piety {dharma) shall 
always attain welfare and happiness. No man can, by any means, 
create discomfiture for her. 

112. Just as in the case of Sita,^ weU-known in the three 
worlds, as the charming and beloved wife of Rama, the son of 
Dasaratha, she conquered the king of Raksasas. 

113. Urged by Kala (Death), Ravana, the king of 
Raksasas, desired Sita, the wide-eyed beautiful wife of Rama. 

114. It is reported that by means of his Maya, he 
■disguised himself (as) an ascetic and determined to abduct 
that beautiful lady while she was strolling (solitarily) in the 
tenantless forest. 

115. The lady of pure smiles realised his intention. 
Remembering her husband, the son of Dasaratha, she sought 
refuge in the Avasathya (household) fire. 

116. With her palms joined in devotion, Rama’s wife 
worshipped the great Yogi, (the fire-god), the destroyer 
(scorcher) of the worlds^ as if he was her husband Rama 
incarnate (and prayed) ; 

Eulogy of the Fire-god. 

117. I bow unto Krsanu (fire) of the form of Kala, of 
great Yogic power, the greatest riddle, the destroyer of all 
living beings. 

118. I take shelter in lord Pavaka (the purifying deity), 
the eternal deity of universal forms, the Yogin who wears the 
(elephant) hide, the lord of the goblins the Supreme god. 

119. I resort unto the Atman of radiant blazing body 
abiding in the hearts of all living beings. I seek refuge in the 
Lord whose form is the universe, the source of all that fiery, 
brilliant, I resort to the fire-god, the Lord of great Yogins, the 
sun, the supreme god. 


1. VV. 111-140 tell us a different story of the abduction of Sita than 
the one given by Valmiki. According to KP. real Sita was protected by Agni 
(the fire-god) the Avasathya (Household sacrificial) Fire and it was the 
illusory Sita) created by Agni that was abducted by Ravana. The Chaya- 
sita entered the fire for ‘purification’ and real Sita came out of the Fire-god 
and was accepted by Rama. 



II 34.120-131 


541 


120. I seek refuge in Rudra, the great swallower 
(destroyer), the trident-bearing Lord, the fire of the Universal 
destruction, the Lord of Yogins, the dispenser of fruits (in 
the form) of enjoyment and liberation. 

121. I resort unto you the diverse-eyed deity with the 
forms of Bhuh, Bhuvah and Svah, one who is lying hidden in the 
golden abode, the great one of unmeasured splendour. 

122. I resort to Vaisvanara abiding in all living beings, 
the lord who conveys Havyas and Kavyas (i.e. offerings) (to 
gods and Pitrs). I resort to Lord Vahni. 

123. I resort to that Supreme reality, the excellent and 
auspicious principle of the sun. I resort to the Agni ascending 
to heaven, the greatest splendour, the imperishable conveyor of 
oblations to gods. 

124. After repeating (the prayer in) these eight (?) 
verses on Vahni, the famous wife of Rama mentally meditated 
on Rama and remained silent with her eyes closed. 

125. Then out of the Avasathya (household) fire, Lord 
Mahesvara (the great god), the bearer of sacrificial oblations, 
of resplendent soul manifested himself as if burning with his 
own refulgence. 

126. Desirous of getting Ravana killed he created an 
illusory Sita. Taking the real Sita the beloved of Rama, the 
fire-god vanished there. 

127. On seeing such a Sita (i.e. the illusory one) Ravana 
the lord of Raksasas, took her and went to Lanka situated with¬ 
in the ocean. 

128. After killing Ravana, Rama took Sita and (came 
back) accompanied by Laksmana. His mind became agitated 
due to suspicion. 

129. For convincing the living beings, the illusory Sita 
entered the fire; immediately she was consumed by the fire. 

130. After burning the illusory Sita, the lord fire-god 
of hot rays, showed the real Sita to Rama. The fire-god 
(the purifier) became a beloved of Devas. 

131. Catching hold of the feet of her husband, the 
daughter of Janaka the lady of beautiful middle, made 
obeisance to Rama on the ground. 



542 


Kurma Pur ana 


132. On seeing it Rama was delighted in mind. Surprise 
was evident in his eyes. After bowing to the Vahni with bent 
head, Raghava propitiated him. 

133. The lord spoke to Vahni; Was this fair-complexion- 
ed lady burned by you before, as she has been seen come to 
my side again ? 

134. Lord Fire-god, the scorcher of the worlds, spoke to 
the son of Dasaratha, telling him everything as it had 
happened in the presence of all living beings. 

135. “This beloved of yours is highly chaste as goddess 
Parvati. She is the greatest favourite of the goddess whom she 
had propitiated by means of penance (?) 

136. This chaste lady of good conduct is endowed with 
the readiness to serve her husband like Bhavani in regard to 
Isvara. She was protected by me because she was desired by 
Ravana. 

137. But Sita who was abducted by the lord of Raksasas 
was the illusory Sita created by me with a desire to get Ravana 
killed. 

138. On that account, Ravana, the wicked king of the 
Raksasas and the destroyer of the worlds, had been killed. The 
Maya has also been withdrawn. 

139. ‘‘Accept this pure Janaki at my instance. See lord 
Narayana your own self the source of origin and the place of 
everything”. 

140. After saying this, the fierce lord fire-god whose 
flames spread everywhere and who had faces on all sides was 
duly honoured by Raghava and the other people and he 
vanished. 

141. Thus the greatness of chaste ladies has been described 
by me. This (narrative) is remembered to be the expiatory rite 
for ladies. It absolves one from all sins. 

142. Even a person full of all sins shall be released from 
sin, if he controls himself well and abandons his body in the 
holy centres. 

143. A Brahmana or any man is released from all sins 
accumulated by him by taking bath in all holy centres in the 
world. 



31.34.144-152 


543 


lySsa said ; 

144. Thus, the Dharma propounded by Manu has been 
propounded to you by me. The eternal path of knowledge (has 
also been narrated) for propitiating Mahesa. 

145. One should pursue the path of knowledge with the 
assistance of Yogic practice. He then sees Mahadeva. No one 
else can see Him even in hundreds of Kalpas. 

146. A person who establishes the great Dharma and 
that Jnana (knowledge) pertaining to Paramesvara (Supreme 
God Siva) is considered to be the greatest Yogin and there is no 
one in the world superior to him. 

147. If a person is competent to establish both Dharma 
and Jnana, but does not do so out of delusion, he is not a great 
favourite with the Lord, though he may be endowed with Yoga 
(Yogic Powers). 

148. Hence gifts should always be given to Brahmanas 
particularly to those who are endowed with piety and faith and 
those who are quiescent. 

149. He who reads this dialogue between you all and me 
shall be free from all sins and shall attain the greatest goal. 

150. A wise and intelligent person should read this in the 
presence of Brahmanas during Sraddhas and during rites con¬ 
cerned with gods. It should be listened to by all twice-born ones. 

151. A person who ponders over the meaning and nar¬ 
rates this with concentrated mind to pure Brahmanas shall be 
released from the coverings of sins and faults and attains 
Lord Mahesvara. 

152. After saying this much, the holy son of Satyavati, 
sage Vyasa, consoled the sages and Suta and went away in the 
same manner as he had arrived. 



544 


Kurma Pur ana 


CHAPTER THIRTYTTVE 

The Greatness of Gaya and other sacred places^ 

The sages requested : 

1. O Romaharsana, now please recount to us the great 
Tirthas (sacred places) that are well-known in the world. 

Romaharsana narrated : 

2. Ye all listen. I shall recount the different kinds of holy 
centres described in the Puranas by sages, the expounders of 
Brahman. 

3. O excellent sages, every one of these holy rites, viz. 
Ablution, Japa, Homa, Sraddha, Dana (charitable gift) etc. per¬ 
formed (at these places) sanctifies the family upto the seventh 
generation. 

4. The well-known holy place of Brahma the Supreme 
god Paramesthin viz Prayaga extends to five Yojanas (1 Yojana 
= 12 kms). Its greatness has already been described (vide Supra 
I. chs 36-39). 

5. Another excellent TIrtha is that of the Kurus (i.e. 
Kuruksetra). It is respected by Devas. It is spotted with the 
hermitages of the sages and it dispels all sins. 

6. After performing ablution therein, one becomes pure- 
souled, devoid of arrogance and rivalry. Whatever little he gives 
as gift, sanctifies both (paternal and maternal) families. 

7. The holy centre of Gaya^ is highly mysterious. It 
is a rare spot for the rites of the Pitrs. A man who 
offers Pindas there is not born again. 


1. After the section called Vyasa-Gita (chs. 12-34), KP. describes 
various holy places and Tirthas. Visit to Tirthas is a way of expiation of sins, 
hence this section. All these Tirthas belong to North or rather Aryan¬ 
speaking area in India. In Part I chs. 30-39 KP describes mainly Varanasi 
and secondarily other holy places like Prayaga. 

2. VV. 7-15 describe Gaya. By Gaya, KP. implies the area between 
Ramasila hill on the North and Brahmayoni hill on the south and on the 
bank of the Phalgu. The ancient town of Gaya is on the southern side. Visnu- 
pada (which is called Rudrapada here) is in the ancient part. The present 
temple was built some two centuries ago by the Maratha queen Ahalyabai 
Holkar of Indore. 



II.35.8-17 


545 


8. All the Pitrs are redeemed by him who goes to Gaya 
and offers Pindas even once. They will attain the greatest goal. 

9. For the welfare of the worlds, his foot had been 
imprinted by Rudra^ the great Atman. One shall propitiate 
the Pitrs there. 

10. If a person who is competent to go to Gaya does 
not go there, the Pitrs bewail him because all his efforts 
will be in vain. 

11. The Pitrs sing songs and the great sages glorify— 
‘‘Whoever goes to Gaya will redeem us.” 

12. “Even if he is endowed with sins, even if he is devoid 
of adherence to his own duties, if anyone goes to Gaya, he will 
redeem us. 

13. Many sons endowed with good behaviour and virtues 
should be sought after so that at least one in that group may go 
to Gaya.”* 

14. Hence one, especially a Brahmana, shall assiduously 
and duly offer Pindas with great concentration, after going to 
Gaya. 

15. Blessed are those men who offer Pindas at Gaya. 
They shall uplift seven generations of both the families (i.e. of 
the father and of the mother) and shall attain the greatest goal. 

16. There is another excellent Tirtha which is called the 
residence of the Siddhas. It is well known as Prabhasa^ and 
Lord Siva abides there. 

17. By performing ablutions there and thereafter Sraddha 
and the worship of the Brahmanas, a Brahmana attains the 

ever-lasting and excellent world. 


1. KP cannot be charged with Brahmanising an ancient Buddhist 
locality, as it was already Brahmanised before the Chinese traveller Hiuen 
Tsiang visited it in A.D. 637. But vicinity of Bodh-gaya, Asoka’s dedication 
of caves in Barabar Hill to Ajivakas and the caves in Nagarjuni hills to 
Sramanic Asoka*s grandson Dasaratha show that formerly it was a centre of 
Ajivakas by religion. 

It is, however, called Visnupada for the last many centuries. 

*The same as Yama quoted in Tristhalisetu, p. 330. 

2. Prabhasa (Devapattana, Verwal) in Saurastra (Gujarat) has the 
famous shrine of Somanatha, one of the twelve jyotir-lihgas. The shrine 
which was demolished by Mahmud of Gazni in A.D. 1025 was reconstructed 
again after Indian Independence. 



546 


Kurma Pur ana 


18. There is the holy place named Traiyambaka^ which is 
bowed to by all Devas. After worshipping Rudra there, one 
shall get the fruit of the Jyotistoma sacrifice. 

19. After worshipping the golden-eyed Mahadeva, the 
god with matted hair, and honouring Brahmanas, he will obtain 
the chieftainship of the attendants of Siva. 

20. Somesvara is the excellent holy Tirtha of Rudra, the 
Paramesthin. On seeing Rudra, the ultimate cause,* it shall 
remove all ailments. 

21. There is an auspicious sacred place, the holiest among 
all other holy places, known as Vijaya. There is a famous 
Linga of the great Lord, known as Vijaya. 

22. O excellent Brahmanas, having stayed there for six 
months on regulated abstemious diet, observing celibacy and 
with great concentration of mind, the person goes to the 
supreme position (viz. liberation). 

23. There is another auspicious excellent Tirtha in the 
eastern lands. It is the solitary (v.l. Ekamra) ^ holy centre of the 
lord of Devas. It bestows the benefit of chieftainship of 
Siva’s attendants. 

24. By giving some auspicious plot of land to the devotees 
of Siva at this place, a king shall become an emperor. One who 
is desirous of liberation, shall attain salvation. 

25. The waters of Mahanadi arc holy and destructive of 
all sins. By plunging therein at the time of eclipse, one is 
released from all sins. 

26. There is another river named Viraja.® It is well known 
in the three worlds. By taking bath there, a Brahmana or any 
man, is honoured in the Brahmaloka. 


1. Tryambakesvara near Nasik at the'source of Godavari. This is 
one of twelve Jyotirlihgas in India. 

*v.1. rudra-sayiijya-karapam ‘the cause of giving the identity with god 
Rudra.) 

The site of Krsna’s death is near here. 

2. Ekamra—the same as modern. 

Bhuvaneshwar in Orissa. It is a Rudra Tirtha also called Krttivasa 
(Bm. p. 34. 6). This place, equal to Varanasi in sanctity, came to be called 
Ekdmra[ka) due to a famous mango tree in the previous kalpa. BM. P. 41. 12. 

3. A river in Orissa. 



11.35.27-35 


547 


27. There is another holy centre of Narayana named 
Purusottama.^ It is there that Narayana the glorious and great 
Purusa resides. 

28. By taking bath there and worshipping the great Visnu 
as well as by worshipping Brahmanas, an excellent Brahpiana 
shall attain Visnu’s region. 

29. The holy centre named Gokarna^ is the greatest of 
all holy centres and is well-known. It is destructive of all sins. 
It is the abode of Sambhu, Paramesthin. 

30. On seeing the greatest and excellent Lihga Gokarna 
of the lord, one shall attain all cherished desires and shall be a 
favourite of Rudra. 

31. By worshipping the Lihga of the trident-bearing lord 
Mahadeva in the northern Gokarna, one shall attain Sayujya 
(identity) with Siva. 

32. Lord Mahadeva there, is well known as Sthanu. On 
seeing him, a man is released from all sins instantaneously. 

33. Another holy centre of Visnu, the great Atman, is 
Kubjasrama.3 By worshipping the Purusa, Visnu, one is honoured 
in the Sveta Dvipa. 

34. It was here that Lord Narayana was let off by Rudra, 
the enemy of the Tripuras, after destroying theYajna of Daksa. 

35. All around it, within the radius of one Yojana, is a 
sacred place resorted to by multitudes of Siddhas and sages. 
There is a holy shrine of Visnu where the Supreme Person 
resides. 


1. Jagannatha Puri in Orissa. Its glory is described in Bm. P. Chs. 
45-51, 69, 177. 

2. A place sacred to Siva on the West-coast in Kumta Tehsil of 
North Kanara Dist. (Karnataka). This is the .^tma-lihga of god Siva which 
while being taken away by Ravana, was duped away by Ganesa and estab¬ 
lished here. 

There are two Gokarnas—Northern and Southern (LP. I. 92-134-135). 
KP. mentions northern Gokarna in v. 31 below. 

3. The mention of the destruction of Daksa’s sacrifice shows that this 
must be Kanakhala near Haridwar. 



548 


Kurma Pur ana 


36. At Kokamukha^ there is another holy centre of 
Visnu of miraculous activities. If a person dies here* a man is 
freed from sins, and he attains the Sarupya (similarity in form) 
of Visnu. 

37. Saligrama^ is a great holy centre that increases the 
pleasure of Visnu. A man abandoning his life there, observes 
Hrsikesa (the lord ofsense-organs). 

38' There is an auspicious and beautiful abode of the 
Siddhas, well-known as Asvatirtha. Lord Narayana himself 
stays there always as Horse-headed deity. 

39. There is a holy centre well known in the three 
worlds. It is a very auspicious abode of the Siddhas. That merit 
bestowing holy place of Brahma, the Paramesthin is there. 

40-41a. (the holy centre) Puskara® is destructive of all 
sins. It accords Brahmaloka to persons who die here. The 
excellent Brahmana who mentally remembers Puskara is purified 
of all sins. He rejoices alongwith god Indra. 

41b-42a. There, Devas, Gandharvas, Yaksas, serpents, 
Raksasas and Siddhas worship the lotus-born deity viz. Brahma. 

42b-43a. Having performed ablution, one should become 
pure and after worshipping god Brahma, the highest deity and 
also an excellent Brahmana, he sees god Brahma. 

43b-44a. Approaching lord of Devas, Indra, the 
blameless one, a man assumes his (Indra’s) form and attains 
all desires. 

44b-45a. The Saptasarasvata* holy centre is the greatest 
one, resorted to by Brahma and others. By worshipping Rudra 
there, one derives the fruit of a horse-sacrifice. 


1. Varaha-Ksetra in the district of Pumea in Bengal on the Triveni 
(the confluence of Tambar, the Aruna and Suna) above Nathpur. 

*the v.l. mrto’tra patakair muktah is preferred here to muktotra martyah / 

2. A sacred place near the source of the Gandaka river. Sages Bharata 
and Pulaha practised penance here. The sacred pebbles called Salagramas 
are obtained here. 

3. A lake, sacred to god Brahma. It is six miles from Ajmer (Rajas¬ 
than) . 

4. In Kuruksetra, the story of Mahkanaka is repeated in Mbh. Vana. 
83-115, Salya 38. 4-13. The collective name seven Sarasvatis is given in 
Mbh. ibid as follows: Suprabha, Kancanaksi, Visala, Manorama, Oghavati, 



II.35.45b-59 


549 


45b-46. It was here that (sage Mahkanaka propitiated 
the bull-bannered Siva, Rudra, the Supreme Lord, by means of 
penance. Thereafter, sage Mankanaka blazed by means of his 
penance. 

47. On knowing that Rudra had come, he danced due 
to ecstatic delight. Lord Rudra spoke to him—“Why did you 
dance ?” 

48-49. Even after seeing the god I Sana (Siva), he danced 
again and again. On seeing him puffed with pride Lord Isa, 
in order to subdue his arrogance, slit open his own body and 
pointed out the heap ofBhasma and said “O excellent Brahmana, 
see this heap of Bhasma originating from my body.” 

50. “O leading sage, this is the greatness of penance, 
there is also another person like you, wherefore did you dance ? 

51-53a. This is not proper in an ascetic. I am even 
superior to you.” After saying this to the excellent sage Rudra, 
the seer of the entire universe, narrated to him the great reality 
of the universe. Hara then danced, taking up a form with a 
thousand (i.e. innumerable) heads, a thousand eyes and a 
thousand feet. His face was terrible due to the curved fangs. 
He appeared ferocious with wreaths of flames. 

53b-54. Then he saw by the side of that Trident-bearing 
Lord, a gracious-looking, wide-eyed auspicious goddess Siva 
with resplendent charming sportfulness, comparable in size (v.l. 
brilliance) to crores of suns. 

55. On seeing the lord of the Universe smiling and 
standing there resplendently, the heart of the leading sage 
became agitated due to fright and he trembled. 

56. He bent down his head before Rudra and with self- 
control he repeated the verses of Rudradhyaya. The three-eyed 
lord Isa, favourably disposed towards his devotees, became 
delighted. 

57-59. He assumed his previous form. The goddess dis¬ 
appeared. Embracing the devotee who was bowing to him. 


Surenu, and Vimalodaka. These are sacred rivers in different parts of the 
country viz. Pushkar, Naimisaranya, Gaya, Kosala Kuruksetra Haridvara and 
the Himalayas respectively but the Sarasvati is supposed to have been there 
in that river-form. 



550 


Kurma Purina 


Siva, the lord of Devas himself, said ‘‘O dear one, do not be 
afraid. What shall I give unto you ? Then the delighted sage 
desirous of asking him bowed down his head before god Kara, 
the Lord of mountains, and the slayer of the Tripuras, and sub¬ 
mitted “Obeisance be to you O Mahadeva; salutations to you 
O Mahesvara. 

60-61. What is this lordly form with faces all round, yet 
very terrible ? Who has that lady who stood shining by your 
side and who vanished very suddenly. I wish to know every¬ 
thing.” When this was enquired of. Lord Kara spoke to 
Mahkanaka : 

62. The great Lord, the fire (the destroyer) of the three 
cities, explained to him (Mahkanaka) his own (path of) Yoga 
and about the goddess : 

‘‘I am the thousand (innumerable)-eyed god, the soul 
of all and have faces on all sides. 

63. I am the scorcher of all bonds. I am Kala (Time, 
Death), Kara and the cause of Kala. Everything consisting of 
the sentient and the non-sentient is urged by myself. 

64. I am that Person (soul) who is immanent in all and 
I am verily the Supreme Person. The deluding Potency 
(Greatest Maya) is the Prakrti consisting of the three Gunas. 

65. She is described by the sages as Sakti (Potency), the 
eternal source of origin of the universe. The creator of the 
universe enchants the universe by means of the Maya. 

66. The Sruti states that the Supreme, unmanifest 
Narayana is of the form of Maya. In this way, I always 
establish the entire world. 

67-68. I Unite with Prakrti, the twentyfifth Principle 
known as Purusa. That pure, omnipresent, immovable un¬ 
born god in union with her Prakrti creates this whole universe 
from Prakrti which is his own form. 

He is the illustrious god Brahma, of the form of the 
Universe, the grandsire of the world. 

69. This creatorship of the great Atman has been clearly 
narrated to you. I am the sole lord, beginningless, the primordial 
Kala. the all-pervading lord, the destroyer (of the Universe). 



II.35.70-36.1 


551 


70. (While creating and destroying) I assume the 
greatest form. I am mentioned as Rudra by the learned men. 
That supreme Potency (Para Sakti), well-known as goddess 
Vidya, belongs to me alone. 

71. The person of Vidya has indeed been visualised by 
you. So also these principles the Pradhana, the Purusa and 
Isvara. 

72. The Sruti says ; Visnu, Brahma and lord Rudra 
(are) Kala (?). These three deities are beginningless and end¬ 
less. They are stabilised in the Brahman alone. 

73. The Sruti says that it is unmanifest, imperishable 
and everything has that as its soul. The great principle is 
Atman and Bliss. It is consciousness alone, the greatest region. 

74-75. It is the entire firmament, the Brahma, nothing is 
other than it. After realising this and resorting to the path of 
devotion, I should be honoured and worshipped. Thereafter you 
will see Isvara.” After saying this much. Lord Kara disappeared. 

76. The sage propitiated Rudra in that very same place 
by means of the path of devotion. This holy centre is un¬ 
equalled, sacred and resorted to by Brahmarsis. By resort¬ 
ing to this, a scholarly Brahmana is released from all sins. 


[CHAPTER THIRTYSIX 

Glory of Sacred Places : the death of Kala 

Suta said : 

1. There is another large and highly sacred place of the 
Supreme deity Rudra. It is famous as Rudrakoti^, in all the 
three worlds. 


1. A sacred place of this name is found under Kuruksetra, Varanasi 
and the Narmada. It is probably the one at Kuruksetra. That is implied 
here as §iva assumed one crore forms for sages. This is mentioned in Mbh. 
vana. 82. 118-124, Pd. P. 1. 25. 25-30. 



552 


Kurma Purdna 


2. Formerly, in the holiest of the times, a crore Brahma- 
nical sages of great self-control (desirous of seeing the lord) 
came to that great land. 

3. “I will see the Pinaka-bearing lord Girisa at first” 
(Thus they vied with one another). A great dispute arose thus 
among them who were endowed with devotion. 

4. On seeing their devotion, Rudra, the Lord of moun¬ 
tain, the preceptor of Yogins, assumed a crore forms. Thus he 
became Rudrakoti (A crore of Rudras). 

5. All of them saw the consort of Parvati, the great god 
Kara, resident in the mountain cavity. They became delighted 
and well-nourished in their minds. 

6. With the devotional feeling : “O I have seen at the 
outset the Lord, the great god devoid of beginning and end” 
all of them dedicated their minds unto Rudra with devotion. 

7. Then they saw a mass of brilliance in the firmament. 
They were desirous of attaining the greatest region. 

8. Where the lord thus revealed himself and stayed, it 
is considered to be an auspicious and very holy centre. After 
visiting this and worshipping the Rudra the devotees shall 
attain the Samipya (nearness) of Rudra. 

9. There is another auspicious and excellent Tirtha by 
the name of Madhuvana.^ A person who observes rules and 
regulations after going there, shall attain half the throne of 
Indra. 

10. There is another city named Padmanagari. The land 
is auspicious and highly meritorious. .A.fter going there and 
worshipping the Pitrs, one will redeem a hundred members of 
his family. 

11. Kalanjara^ is a great holy centre in the Rudraloka* 
Mahesvara is the deity, Kara is fond of the devotees who 
worship lord Kalanjara. 

1. Near Mathura, so called as it was once the haunt of demon Madhu. 
It is identified with present Maholi five miles to the south-west of Mathura. 

2. A hill and a fort in Bundelkhand, the capital of Chandellas. If 
the temple of Kala Bhairava in the fort be related to the story of King §veta 
given here, this identification is probable. Kane includes this Tirtha under 
Varanasi (HD IV. 766) The story of Sveta is narrated i n LP. chs, I. 30-34 
but he is a sage there. 

*Venkt. text reads: rudra-loke mahesvarah\\{ emended loke rudro mahei- 
varah in the world where Rudra is the great god.’ 



11.36.12-22 


553 


12. Formerly there was an excellent saintly king named 
Sveta. He was a devotee of Siva. He worshipped the trident¬ 
bearing lord with obeisances unto him and expecting his 
blessings. 

13. He installed Rudra in accordance with the injunc¬ 
tions, given priority to the path of devotion. With his mind 
dedicated unto Rudra, he performed the Japa of Rudra always. 

14. Seizing a dazzling terrible trident made of steel, 
Kala came to that spot where the king was standing, in order 
to take him away. 

15. On seeing the terrible and ferocious Kala, the des¬ 
troyer of all, approaching with the trident in his hand, the 
king was overwhelmed with fear. 

16. With both of his hands the King caught hold of 
the excellent Lihga and bowed down to Rudra with his bent 
head. He repeated the Satarudriya Mantra. 

17. Standing in front of the King, Krtanta (God of 
Death) laughingly said to the king who was bowing down and 
performing the Japa of Bhava mentally “Come away, come 
away.” 

18. The king who was terribly afraid but was devoted 
to Rudra requested him, ‘‘Kill others after leaving off one who 
is engaged in the worship of Isa.” 

19. The lord (i.e. Kala here) said to him who was 
frightened and spoke as mentioned above—“Who is there who 
does not stand under my control whether he is engaged in 
worshipping Rudra or not? 

20. After saying thus, Kala, the destroyer of the worlds, 
bound that king by means of nooses. The king on his part 
continued the Japa of Satarudriya. 

21. Then he saw in the Firmament the enormous and 
brillant ancient mass of splendour of the lord of goblins. It was 
surrounded with clusters of flames and pervaded the universe. 

22. In the middle thereof he saw a brilliant form a 
Purusa of golden colour. The lord was accompanied by the 
goddess. His body shone with the digit of the moon. He 
became much delighted. He thought that the Lord was 
coming to him. 



554 


Kurma Parana 


23. On seeing Rudra, the great Lord, the lord of every¬ 
thing, coming at not a great distance, accompanied by the 
goddess, the royal sage became free from fear. Kala rushed at 
the saintly king to take him away. 

24. (Defective verse) On seeing him. Lord Rudra, the 
ancient leader of the goblins, of fierce activities said to Kala— 
“Give unto me my devotee quickly, the devotee who remembers 
me, O Kala. He remembers my form (?)” 

25. On hearing the statement of Siva (lord of the Bull), 
the Atman of Kala of the form of Rudra* (?) considered (his 
nature (himself) too high. He bound the devotee again by 
means of nooses. Then Rudra** rushed at him with great 
velocity. 

26. On seeing him (Kala) coming towards (himself to 
attack), the Lord then glanced at Uma, the daughter of the 
mountain (Himalaya). The knower of the procedure of all 
Mayas (Siva) contemptuously struck Kala with his left foot, 
while he (King Sveta) was looking on. 

27. That extremely terrible fellow died on being struck 
by the foot of Mahesa. The Pinaka-bearing great God stood 
shining alongwith Uma. 

28. On seeing the Lord Isvara, Hara, the imperishable 
deity, the prominent saintly king became delighted in his mind 
then and bowed unto him. 

Eulogy of Siva 

29. “Obeisance to Bhava, the cause (of the universe) to 
Hara, who wishes for the welfare of the whole universe. 
Salutation to Siva, the intelligent one. Obeisance to 
the bestower of Salvation. 

30. Obeisance again and again (innumerable times) to 
the great superhuman power and prosperity. Obeisance to you, 
the overlord of men, of the form that is devoid of division. 

31. O lord of Ganas, obeisance be to you. Hail to you, 
O deity that dispel the misery of those who resort to you, 
salutation to you of eternal (primordial) beginningless prosperity, 
to one that holds the horn of a boar. 

*v. 1. ugro’bhdvah ‘of terrible intention.’ 

**If emended 2 is Rudram ‘Kala rushed at Rudra’, it will suit the next 
verse and obviate the contradiction therewith. 



11.36.32—37.1 


555 


32. Obeisance to you the bull-bannered Lord, bow to 
one that has a wreath of skulls. Salutation to you of great 
mountain (v.l. great actor); obeisance to you auspicious 
Sankara.” 

33. Sankara then blessed the king engaged in obeisance; 
then he bestowed on him the chieftain-ship of his own Ganas 
and then (finally) his own form (identity with him). 

34. Instantaneously Kara who was saluted by the leading- 
ascetics and the Siddhas became invisible along with Uma, his 
attendants and the leading king. 

35. When Kala was killed by Mahesa, god Brahma the 
lord of the worlds, begged ofRudrathe boon—“May he (Kala) 
come back to life. 

36. O bull-bannered Isana, it is not the slightest fault 
of Krtanta the god of Death. He was appointed on that job (of 
taking away the lives of beings) by you.” 

37. At the instance of the lord of Devas, Hara, the lord 
of the chief of Devas, the Atman of the universe said—“So be 
it.” He (Kala) too became like that (i.e. revived). 

38. Thus is the holy centre well known as Kalanjara. On. 
going there and worshipping Mahadeva one attains the chief¬ 
tain-ship of the Ganas. 


CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN 

The Glory of Mahalaya and other holy centres 

Suta said : 

1. This is another holy spot that is very great and very- 
mysterious and full of miracles, pertaining to Lord Mahadeva. 
It is well known as Mahalaya.^ 


1. Mahalaya—The same as Omkaranatha. 2 in Varanasi, De (p. 117).. 



556 


Kurma Purana 


2. There, on a rocky surface, his footstep was imparted 
by Rudra, the enemy of the Tripuras, the primordial lord of 
Devas. It is a proof pointed to the atheists. 

3. The quiescent devotees of Pasupati, with their bodies 
dusted with holy ashes and engaged in the study of the 
Vedas, worship Mahadeva there. 

4. One who takes his bath, sees the foot-print of god 
Siva with great devotion and makes obeisance with bowing 
head, shall attain Rudra’s proximity (i.e. liberation called 
Samipata). 

5. There is another abode of Sambhu, the great Atman 
the lord of Devas. It is very auspicious and is well known 
as Kedara.^ It is the home of Siddhas. 

6. One who takes bath there, worships the bull-bannered 
Mahadeva and drinks the pure water, shall attain the chief¬ 
tainship of the Ganas. 

7-8. After performing Sraddha, Dana (religious gifts) and 
other rites, one attains everlasting benefit. There is a holy 
centre called Plaksavatarana^ that destroys all sins. It is resorted 
to by excellent twice-born ones and the Yogins who have sub¬ 
dued their minds. By performing the worship of god Visnu, 
one is worshipped in Visnu’s region. 

9. Another holy spot is Magadharanya. It bestows good 
goal on all the people (v.l. giving access to heavenly region). 
On going there, an excellent Brahmana attains everlasting 
heavenly pleasures. 

10. The meritorious holy centre Kanakhala® is destructive 
of great sins. It was here that the sacrifice of Daksa was 
destroyed by Rudra. 


1. Kedaranatha, a Jyotir-linga in the district of Garhwal in U. P. and 
on the southern side of the Mandakini and Dudhagahga—De. p. 97. 

2. Plaksavatarana—the source of the river Sarasvati, in Sirmur hills of 
Sewalik range of the Himalayas. The fountain from which the river takes 
its rise was at the foot of a Plaksa tree, hence it is called Plaksavatarana or 
Plaksa-prasra van a. 

3. Kanakhala—the place of Daksa’s sacrifice destroyed by Rudra. It 
is at a distance of two miles to the east of Hardwar on the confluence of the 
Gahga and Niladhara. 



II.37.11-21a 


557 


11. By bathing in the river Gahga there, a pure man 
endowed with noble feelings, is freed from all sins and he shall 
stay in the region of god Brahma. 

12. The holy centre well-known as Mahatirtha is sacred 
and a favourite of Narayana. One who worships Hrsikesa 
(Visnu) there goes so Svetadvipa (the abode of Narayana). 

13. Another excellent holy centre is the auspicious one 
by the name Sriparvata.^ On abandoning the vital airs here, 
one shall become the beloved of Rudra. 

14. Rudra, Mahesvara, is ever present there accom¬ 
panied by the goddess. Bathing there and offering Pindas etc. 
shall be excellent and everlasting. 

15-16a. The river Godavari is holy and destructive of 
all sins. On bathing there and duly performing Tarpana 
rites to the Pitrs and Devas, one shall purify one’s soul of 
all sins and shall attain the benefit of the gift of a thousand 
cows. 

16b-17. The sacred river Kaveri has holy waters and is 
very large. After observing fast for three days or (at least) one 
day, one should bathe there and offer water libations. One is 
released from all sins. 

18-19a. The mode of resorting to holy centres by the 
twice-born is now narrated. He whose mind and speech are 
pure and whose hands and feet are stabilised (i.e. do their 
respective functions,) is non-greedy and celibate shall attain 
the benefit of holy centres. 

19b-21a. The great holy centre called Svamitirtha^ is 
well-known in the three worlds. Skanda respectfully bowed to 
by the immortal beings, is ever present there. On bathing in 
the Kumaradhara and performing the Tarpana rites for Devas 
and others, and one propitiating lord Sanmukha (the six-faced 
deity), one rejoices with Skanda. 


1. Sriparvata or Srisaila—A hill in Kamool district on the southern side 
of the river Krsna which makes her way through a gorge in Eastern ghats. 
It is the site of Mallikarjuna, a famous Jyotir-lihga. It was once a centre of 
Tantrikas. 

2. Svami-tirtha. De (p. 107) identifies it with the temple of Kumara- 
svami situated about a mile from tiruttani on the Southern Railway. 



558 


Kurma Pur ana 


2lb-22. The river named Tamraparni is well-known in 
the three worlds. There is no doubt in this that on taking bath 
there and on performing the Tarpana rites to the Pitrs in 
accordance with the injunctions, one shall redeem even those 
Pitrs who had committed sins. 

23. At the source-place of Kaveri, there is a well-known 
holy centre named Candratirtha. What is given in that holy 
centre is of ever-lasting benefit. It yields good goal i.e. the 
heaven to those who die there. 

24. O Brahmana, those devotees who see Sadasiva the 
lord of Devas at the foot of the Vindhyas, do not see the face 
of Yama (the god of Death). 

25. At Devika^ (?), there is the holy centre named Vrsa. 
It is resorted to by Siddhas. One who takes bath there and 
libation, attains perfection in Yoga. 

26. The holy centre Dasasvamedhika is destructive of 
allusions. A man obtains the benefit of performing ten Asvamed- 
has (horse-sacrifices) therein. 

27. The holy centre named Pundarika is beautified by 
the Brahmanas. A person of self-control approaching it, shall 
obtain the benefit of Pundarika (sacrifice). 

28. The grestest among the holy centres is named 
Brahmatirtha.^ On worshipping god Brahma here, one is 
honoured in the world of Brahma. 

29. There are some holy centres as these: The Vinasana® 
where the river Sarasvatl lost itself in the sand, the auspicious 
Plaksa-prasravana (the source of the Sarasvatl), that which is 
known as Vyasatlrtha^ and the excellent mountain Mainaka.® 


1. Devika—Modem Deig, a tributary of the Ravi in Punjab (HD IV 
p. 746, De. p. 55). 

2. It is mentioned as a sub-tirtha under various holy places and rivers 
like Varanasi, Gaya, Narmada (KP. II 41. 56) Godavari, Sarasvali. De. 
(p. 40) identihes it with Puskara lake in Rajasthan. 

3. Vinasana—the spot in the sandy desert of Ambala and Sirhind 
district of Punjab. The exact location of Vinasana is presumed to be near 
Sirsa. 

4. Vyasa-tirtha—Kane locates this in Kuruksetra HD IV. 824. It is 
under the Narmada infra ch. 41. 25-27. 

5. Mainaka is located at Badari, west of Gujarat and near the Sara- 
svati. Dey (p. 121) regards the range of Sewalik hills from the Gahga to the 
Beas. 



II.37.30-39a 


559 


30-3 la. The source of origin of Yamuna is destructive 
of all sins. The river, the daughter of the Pitrs, is well known 
as goddess Gandhakall. He who bathes in it goes to heaven, 
after death. He will be able to remember his previous birth. 

31 b-32a. The holy centre of Kuberatuhga^ is resorted to 
by the Siddhas and the Caranas. One who abandons his life 
therein, shall become a follower of Kubera. 

32b-33a. The holy centre well known as Umatuhga is 
the place where the beloved of Rudra (performed her penance) . 
On worshipping the great goddess there, one shall attain the 
benefit of the gift of a thousand cows. 

33b-34a. It is my opinion that the penance or Sraddha 
performed in Bhrgutuhga, or the charitable gifts made there 
sanctifies seven generations in both the families (i.e. that of the 
father and that of the mother). 

34b-35a. The great holy centre of Kasyapa is well known 
as Kalasarpis. With the desire for the diminution of sins, one 
should offer Sraddhas there every day. 

35b-36a. The Sraddha, Dana, Homa, Japa and penance 
performed in Dasarna are of everlasting benefit and inexhaustible 
for ever. 

36b-37a. The Tirtha named Kurujahgala^ resorted to by 
the twice-born is famous. On making charitable gifts there in 
accordance with the injunctions, one is honoured in the 
Brahmaloka. 

37b-39a. Whatever is offered in the great Tirtha, in 
Vaitarani,® in the Svarnavedi, in the Dharmaprstha,* in the 
great and auspicious head of Brahma, in the holy hermitage 
of Bharata, in the auspicious and sacred Grdhravana, in 


1. KP. and Vayu mention Kubertunga, Umatuhga, Bhrgu-tuhga as 
the best places for Sraddha but their location is uncertain. 

2. It is between the Sarasvati and Drsadvati, Sirhind in Punjab 
(HD IV. 773). 

3. Vaitarani—A river in Orissa rising in the Vindbya-mountain 
Jaipur stands on this river. 

4. Dbarma-prstha, the same as Dharmaranya of Buddhists—4 miles 
from Bodba Gaya, De. p. 56. 



560 


Kurma Pur ana 


Mahahrada^ and in the Kausiki^—-whatever is offered in these 
places—is of everlasting benefit. 

39b-41a. His footstep was imprinted on Mundaprstha,® 
by the intelligent Mahadeva, for the welfare of all living beings 
and as a proof to be pointed out to the non-believers. A man 
devoted to Dharma shall within a short time, abandon his sin 
like the serpent casting off its slough. 

4lb-42. The holy centre named Kanakananda^ is well- 
known in the three worlds. It is to the North of Brahmaprstha 
and is resorted to by groups of Brahmana sages. On taking 
holy dip there, the twice-borns go to heaven along with their 
physical bodies. 

43. The Sraddha offered there is cited to be everlasting. 
On taking the bath, a man reduces his sins and he is freed 
from the threefold indebtedness to god, sages and manes. 

44. By means of ablution in the Manasa-lake one shall 
obtain half the throne of god Indra. On going to the Uttara- 
manasa one achieves very excellent Siddhis (mystic powers). 

45. Hence, one should perform Sraddha in accordance 
with one’s capacity and physical strength, thereby he obtains 
divine pleasures and attains the means of salvation. 

46. The mountain named Himavan is bedecked with 
different kinds of minerals. That mountain is eighty thousand 
Yojanas in length. 

47. Siddhas and Caranas live therein and the mountain 
is resorted to by the groups of Devas and sages. There is a 
beautiful Puskarini (holy lake) there named Susumna. 

48. On going there, a scholarly Brahmana leaves off 
(is relieved of the sin of) Brahmana slaughter. The Sraddha 
offered there is inexhaustible and highly flourishing. 

49. He shall redeem the Pitrs of ten previous generations 
and ten later generations. The Himavan is sacred everywhere. 
TheGahga is sacred all round. 


1. Maha-hrada—near Badrinath (also Mbh. AnuSdsana 25.18). 

2. Kausiki, Mod. Kusi (Kosi) which flows through Nepal, Tirhut and 
joins the Gahga below Patna. 

3. Munda-prstha—A hill situated on the Western bank of the Phalgu 
river at Gaya. 

4. Kanakananda—a river to the north of Munda-prstha at Gaya. 



11.37.50-59 


561 


50. All the rivers flowing into the ocean are sacred and 
those oceans are particularly holy. On reaching the hermitage 
—Badaryasrama,^ one is released from all sins. 

51. There stays the eternal lord Narayana along with 
Nara. The charitable gift as well as the Sraddha offered there, 
is of everlasting benefit. 

52. That is a holy centre liked by Mahadeva. It is 
particularly sanctifying. On offering Sraddha with great 
concentration, one shall redeem the Pitrs. 

53. The holy centre Devadaruvana^ is sacred. It is 
resorted to by the Siddhas and the Gandharvas as well as by 
the great lord of Devas. What is offered there is highly 
flourishing. * 

54. After fascinating the sages and on being worship¬ 
ped by everyone, the delighted lord Isa spoke to the leading 
sages who had been sanctified. 

55. “You all shall always stay here in this beautiful and 
excellent hermitage, with the devotion centering on me. There¬ 
by you shall obtain Siddhi. 

56. Those who are devoted to Dharma in the world 
worship me. I grant unto them the eternal great chieftainship 
of the Ganas. 

57. I will stay here for ever alongwith Narayana. A 
man abandoning his life here, is not reborn. 

58. O excellent Brahmanas, those people who have gone 
to the other lands but who remember this holy centre, will have 
all their sins dispelled by me. 

59. Here all these holy rites are to be performed. If 
performed, Sraddha, Dana, Tapes (penance), Home, Pinzas, 
meditation, Japa and other observances are of everlasting 
benefit. 


1. Badaryasrama—The same as Badrinath in Garhwal, U.P. 

2. Devadaruvana—Kane regards this in the Himalayas near Badri¬ 
nath. (HD IV p. 745). De (p. 54) thinks it to be the same as Daruvana in 
which Badarikasrama is situated. The story about the introduction of 
Phallus-worship in the next two chapters shows that this Daruvana must be 
in the Himalayas. 

*a better v.l. mahad-varam ‘a great boon was given by the great god.’ 



562 


K urma Pur ana 


60. Hence the holy Devadaruvana, resorted to by 
Mahadeva should be visited by the twice-born by every means. 

61. Wherever there is Mahadeva or Visnu, the Supreme 
Person, the Gahga, the holy centres and the shrines are present 
there. 


CHAPTER THIRTYEIGHTi 

The description of Daruvana 

The sages said : 

1. O Suta, how did the bull-bannered lord reach 
Daruvana and how did he fascinate the leading Brahmanas ? 
It behoves you to narrate it. 

Suta said : 

2. Formerly, in the beautiful Daruvana resorted to by 
Devas and Siddhas, thousands of sages performed penance and 
lived along with their wives, sons, and other kinsmen. 

3. They were engaged in doing various religious rites in 
accordance with the scriptural injunctions. The great sages 
performed various sacrifices and penances there. 

4. Desirous of pointing out their defects as they were 
attracted to the path of action, the trident-bearing Kara went 
to Daruvana. 

5. In order to establish Nivrttivijnana (the perfect 
knowledge of renunciation), lord, the great god Sankara, went 
there keeping Visnu, the preceptor of the universe, at his side. 


1. This chapter traces how worship of Siva’s Phallus (Lihga) came to 
be established. The story of falling of Siva’s Phallus in Daruvana is found 
in Siva P. IV. 12. 4. 54 and Brahmanda P. ch. 27. 



II.38.6-18 


563 


6-8. The Lord of the Universe disguised himsel as a man 
of twenty years with a majestic (respectable) personality (v.l. 
mysterious disguise), sportive languidness (?), big arms, stout 
(muscular) limbs, beautiful eyes, golden complexion, glory and 
face like the full moon. His gait was like an intoxicated ele¬ 
phant. The naked Lord of the world was wearing gold necklace 
embellished with all kinds of precious stones. Lord Isa (Siva) 
arrived there smilingly. 

9. Hari, the infinite Purusa, the unchanging source of 
origin of the worlds, Visnu, assumed the guise of a lady and 
followed the trident-bearing lord. 

10-12. The female form (disguise) had the face 
resembling the full moon, the breasts plump and elevated, face lit 
up with bright smiles. The two anklets produced tinkling sound. 
It was clothed in Divine yellow garment. It was dark com- 
plexioned and beautiful-eyed; the gait resembled that of the ele¬ 
gant swan. It was very charming and coquettish. Thus the lord 
Kara, Isa roamed about the forest of Devadarus alongwith 
Hari fascinating the universe by means of his Maya. 

13. On seeing the Pinaka-bearing lord of the universe 
walking here and there, the women were deluded by his Maya. 
They followed the lord of Devas. 

14. All those chaste ladies being afflicted with passion, 
abandoned their sense of bashfulness and with their ornaments 
slipping down, those coquettish women began to go with him. 

15. The sons of sages, the youngsters who had not 
yet subdued their minds, followed Hrsikesa (who was dressed 
like a woman), afflicted by passionate love. 

16. On seeing the sole hero Isa, very comely and love¬ 
able, accompanied by his wife, the groups of women began to 
sing and dance in their sportive dalliance. They embraced him 
too. 

17. The sons of sages too coming in groups began to 
singsongs smilingly; on observing the consort of Padma, of 
auspicious limbs, the primordial God, others in a group began 
to walk around with him. 

18. Visnu (the slayer of Mura), the son of Vasudeva, 
the master of Maya (illusive potency) entered their minds. 



564 


Kurma Purdna 


whetted their inclination to enjoyment. They seemed to ex- 
perienee Maya as if it was real. 

19. The lord of the universe and all the immortal beings, 
accompanied by Madhava and seated in the midst of the 
group of women appeared to be accompanied by all Saktis, 
although the lord ofDevas (is usually) accompanied by only 
one Sakti (Uma). 

20. Then again mounting back, he created the permanent 
great principle Pradhana. * ** Lord Visnu also re-assumed his 
original nature (followed ?) such (dancing) primordial Deity. * * 

21. On seeing the groups of women, Rudra, their sons 
and Kesava who fascinated them, the excellent sages became 
excessively angry. 

22. Deluded by his Maya, they spoke extremely harsh 
words to lord Kapardin (Siva), they swore at and cursed him 
with various words. 

23. Just as the stars in the sky remain invisible in the 
presence of the sun, so also when Sankara came there their 
penances were repelled. 

24. After reproaching him, the Brahmana ascetics ap¬ 
proached the bull-bannered deity. Deluded by him they asked 
the lord of Devas—“Who are you. Sir ?” 

25. The lord replied—“O sages of holy rites, I have 
now come here to your land to perform penance alongwith my 
wife.” 

26. On hearing his statement Bhrgu and other leading 
sages said; “Perform penance after putting on a garment and 
after abandoning your wife.” 

27. Thereafter, the Pinaka-bearing lord Siva (Nilalohita) 
smiled. Then looking at Janardana who was sitting by his side 
and who was the source of origin of the worlds, he said: — 

28. “How is i t that you, knowers of religion, quiescent- 
minded sages, are eager to maintain your wives, while you 
advise me that I should abandon my wife ?” 


*v.l. nrtyan parama-prabhavam is better. It means “Again re-gaining his 
original great nature, he began to dance.” 

**v.l. tadisavrttamrtamadidevah “followed the act of dancing of that 
Lord Siva.” 



11.38.29-38 


565 


The sages said : 

29. “This has been stated by us that wives who lead a 
lecherous life should be abandoned by the husbands. Loyal 
wives of good features and behaviour like these (our women) 
do not deserve abandonment.” 

Mahadeva said : 

30. “O Brahmanas, this lady never even mentally wishes 
for anyone else. Nor do I leave her off at any time.” 

The sages said : 

31. “O base man, she was seen by us, behaving in an 
unchaste manner. You have told a lie. Go away quickly.” 

32. When addressed thus, Mahadeva replied: “Only 
truth has been spoken by me. It is your imagination that she 
appears to you.” Leaving them, he moved away. 

33. In the company of Hari, Paramesvara (Siva) who 
sought for alms, went to the holy hermitage of Vasistha, the 
great souled leading sage. 

34. On seeing the lord arrived begging for alms, Arun- 
dhatl, the beloved wife of Vasistha, respectfully welcomed him 
and bowed to him. 

35. She washed his feet and offered him excellent seat. 
On seeing his body languid and enfeebled as a result of the 
thrashing indulged in by the Brahmanas, the chaste lady, with 
countenance cast down (due to dejection) in her face, applied 
medicines and healed his wounds. 

36. She worshipped him richly and imploringly asked 
him,—“Who are you. Sir ? Where did you come from, in the 
company of your wife ? What are your customs and manners ? 
May these things be mentioned.” The Lord replied: T am the 
most excellent among the siddhas. 

37. You see yonder, the pure shining sphere of the Brah¬ 
man. This is my deity. I owe to this always.” 

38. After saying this and blessing the chaste lady, the 
glorious lord to whom the Brahmanas beat with sticks and their 
own fists and lumps of clay, went away. 



566 


Kurma Purina 


39. On seeing Girisa walking about in the nude and 
characterised by hideousness, they said—“O wicked minded 
fellow, uproot this your Lifiga (phallus).” 

40. Saiikara, the great Yogin, said to them—“I will do 
so if you have hatred towards my Linga (phallus).” 

41. After saying so, the lord who had gouged the eyes 
of Bhaga, uprooted the Linga. Instantaneously they could see 
neither the lord nor Kesava nor the Linga. 

42. Evil omens occurred indicating danger and fear to the 
worlds. The thousand-rayed sun did not shine. The earth 
quaked again and again. The planets became lustreless. The 
great ocean was agitated. 

43. Anasuya, the chaste wife of Atri, saw a dream. 
Highly agitated in all her senses, she narrated it to the 
Brahmanas. 

44. “Illuminating everything with his lustre, indeed it 
was Siva who was seen in our abodes begging for alms, 
accompanied by Narayana.” 

45. On hearing her words the sages who became 
terrified, wentupto Brahma ofgreat Yogic power, the creator of 
the universe. 

46. The lord was being worshipped by pure Yogins who 
were the most excellent among the knowers of Brahman. He 
was accompanied by the four Vedas in their embodied form as 
by Savitri. 

47. He was seated on a beautiful seat full of miracles : 
it shed forth myriads of rays and it was associated with Jnana 
(perfect knowledge), Aisvarya (prowess and glory) and other 
qualities. 

48-49. He was shining in his body, with gentle smiles and 
brilliant eyes. On seeing the four-faced, mighty-armed, great 
Aja (unborn) identical with the Vedic metre, possessing divine 
body with delighted face, they knelt on the ground, touching the 
Earth with their heads and propitiated the Lord. 

50. With delighted mind the four-faced deity of four 
forms spoke to them—“O excellent sages, what is the reason for 
your visit ?” 



11.38.51-61 


567 


51. With palms joined in reverence above their heads, 
all intimated to the Supreme-souled Brahma of what happened. 

The sages said : 

52. A certain highly brilliant person has entered the 
holy Daruvana alongwith his wife, who was very beautiful in all 
her limbs. But he was naked. 

53. The Lordly person fascinated our entire women and 
daughters, with his charming personality. While his beloved * 
defiled our sons. 

54. We heaped various imprecations and curses on him 
but they were defied and set at nought. He was beaten soundly 
by us. His Lihga was struck down. 

55. That lord vanished alongwith his wife and the Lihga. 
Terrible omens ensued, terrifying all the living beings. 

56. O excellent among men, who is this lordly person ? 
We are all frightened. O Unerring being, we have sought 
refuge in you. 

57. Indeed, you know whatever happens in this universe. 
Protect and save us with your blessing.” 

58. Thus informed by the groups of sages, the lotus-born 
deity, the Atman of the universe meditated on the trident-bear¬ 
ing lord with palms joined in reverence and said : 

Brahma said : 

59. Alas ! Woe unto you ! What happend today is des¬ 
tructive of everything of yours. Fie upon your strength and 
power. Fie upon your penance. It has become useless and false 
in regard to you in this matter. 

60. After obtaining greatest of all treasures, thanks to the 
favourable impressions (results) of all (previous) merits it has 
been neglected by you all who are deluded and whose practice 
of good conduct has become useless. 

61. It is for this treasure that all yogins seek and desire 
and all the ascetics aspire. Alas ! after obtaining that very 
same treasure, you have neglected and lost it. 


*Priyo in the Text should be Priyd in this context. 



568 


Kurma Pur ana 


62. A great treasure, to acquire which, the propounders 
of the Vedas worship by means of various Yajnas, has been 
neglected and lost by you, after attaining it. 

63. I have acquired this lordship of the universe after 
continuously worshipping the lord. But after seeing that lord 
you have missed him like those who are devoid of good luck 
(who may see) a treasure (but lose it instantaneously.) 

64. You had come across that treasure-BraAman in whom 
divine Supremacy has been vested and who is the imperish¬ 
able deity; but alas you have rendered it futile after 
attaining it. 

65. This god Mahadeva is the great deity who should 
be known and realised. There is no other greater region than 
his that can be attained. 

66-67. He is the most eternal of all deities, sages and 
the Pitrs. At the end of a thousand Yugas, at the time of the 
final dissolution, Mahesvara, assuming the form of Kala, destroys 
all embodied beings. It is he alone who creates the subjects 
by means of his splendour. 

68. He is Cakrin (one armed with the discus); he is the 
Supreme Ruler. He is characterised by the Srivatsa mark. 
This god is a Yogin in Krta-yuga, Yajna (sacrifice) in 
Treta, the Lord Kala in Dvapara and in the Kaliyuga, he is 
the banner of virtue (Dharmaketu). 

69. Rudra has three Murtis (forms) by whom the uni¬ 
verse is pervaded. The Smrti says : “Agni (The fire god) is the 
Tamas form, Brahma is the Rajas form and Visnu is the 
Sattva form. 

70. It is stated in Smrti that he has another eternal aus¬ 
picious form having the quarters for garments(i.e. nude), where 
abides Brahman endowed with Yoga. 

71. The lady, his wife, who was seen by you near his side, 
and who was conversed with (v. 1. seen) by you is lord 
Narayana, the eternal Supreme Atman. 

72. All this is born of him. It shall get dissolved only 
in him. He (alone) can liberate all. He alone is the great 
goal. 

73. The Sruti says that Narayana is the thousand-(i.e. 



11.38.74-83 


569 


innumerable) headed Purusa, with thousand eyes and thousand 
feet. He has one horn and is the great Atman. 

74. The semen virile* becomes the foetus in him. The 
lord is of illusory aquatic body (?). He is being eulogised by 
means of various kinds of Mantras by Brahmanas who seek 
salvation. 

75. At the end of the Kalpa, the Supreme Person with¬ 
draws the entire universe in him and after drinking the 
Yogic nectar, he lies down to sleep in the greatest region of 
Visnu. 

76. Visvadrk (the seer of the universe) is neither born 
nor dies nor increases in size. The unborn deity is sung about 
as the unmanifest original Prakrti, by the followers of the 
Vedas. 

77. When the night passes on, Mahesvara becomes 
desirous of creating the entire universe and then sows the seed 
in the umbilical region of the unborn. 

78. Know me to be the Supreme Atman, Brahma with 
faces on all sides, the great Purusa, Universe, the excellent 
foetus of water. 

79. You had been deluded by his Maya, so you do not 
realise that progenitor, Mahadeva, the lord of Devas, Hara, 
the lord of all living beings. 

80. This lord Mahadeva is the beginningless Lord Hara. 
In association with Visnu, he creates and dissolves the 
Universe. 

81. Actually he has no task to be performed; there is 
no greater being than he. He, of illusory Yogic body, gave the 
Vedas unto me, formerly. 

82. He is the wielder (master) of Maya and through 
Maya, he makes and dissolves everything. Seek refuge in that 
Siva alone; after realising that he alone is conducive to 
salvation.” 

83. On being advised thus by the lord, the sages, the 
chief of whom was Marici, bowed down to lord Brahma and 
asked him with great concentration. 


♦better v.l. : rtasya Then the line means “in the womb of Rta.” 



570 


Kurma Puranct 


CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE 

The Entry into the forest of Devadaru 
The sages said : 

1. O lord of all immortal beings, tell us, how we can 
see that Pinaka-bearing lord once again. You are the saviour of 
of those who seek refuge. 

Brahma said^ ; 

2-3. Make an excellent Lihga of the Lord resembling the 
Lihga which was seen by you all and struck down on to the 
ground, and observing celibacy, worship it with respect along 
with your wives and sons, through the various Vedic 
observances. 

4-5. Instal it with the Mantras pertaining to Sankara 
and taken from Rk, Yajus and Saman Sarhhitas. Undertaking 
great penance and reciting the Satarudriya Mantras, all of you 
worship the trident-bearing deity with great concentration^ 
alongwith your sons and kinsmen. With the palms joined in 
reverence, seek refuge in the trident-bearing lord. 

6. Thereby, you will see the lord of Devas, rarely 
visible to those who are not self-possessed. On seeing him, all 
ignorance and unrighteousness perish.” 

7. Thereafter, they bowed down to Brahma of unmeasured 
prowess and the granter of boons. Delighted in their minds, 
they went to the forest of Daruvana once again. 

8. Although they did not know the great Being, they 
with their passions and jealousy eschewed, began to propitiate 
Siva as instructed by god Brahma. 

9. They (stationed themselves) in the different kinds of 
pieces of grounds, caves of mountains and the auspicious lonely 
banks of the rivers. 

10-11. Some maintained themselves by eating the moss; 
some of them lay beneath the water; some of them exposed 
themselves to the rainy clouds and some stood on the tips of 
their big toes. Some were Dantolukhalins (eaters of food-grains 


1. VV. 2-6 explain briefly the method of the worship of Siva-lihga. 



11.39.12-22 


57i 


using the teeth as mortar). Others were Afmakuttas (who pound 
grains, etc. by means of stones, for eating); some had only 
vegetables and leaves to eat. Some performed prescribed ablu¬ 
tions, while some were drinkers of rays. 

12. Some had their abodes at the roots of trees; others 
used rocky grounds as their beds. Worshipping Mahesvara, they 
spent their days in penance. 

13. Thereafter, the bull-bannered lord Kara felt inclined 
to favour them with enlightenment, since he is one who removes 
the distress of those who seek refuge in him. 

14. In the Krta Age, God Siva the delighted Supreme 
Lord arrived at the forest of Devadaru trees on the auspicious 
peak of the Himalayas. 

15. He was naked and bore hideous marks. He had 
smeared ashes {Bhasma) all over his body. He held firebrands in. 
his hands. His eyes v.'ere red and tawny-coloured. 

16. At some places he used to laugh terribly; in some 
places he used to sing in surprise; sometime he used to dance 
with amorous passion; sometimes he cried frequently. 

17. The mendicant roamed round the hermitages and 
begged for alms frequently; the lord took up an illusoi-y guise and 
came to that forest. 

18. The Pinaka-bearing lord kept Gauri, the daughter- 
of the mountain, by his side. As before, the goddess of Devas, 
came to the forest of Devadarus. 

19. On seeing the lord with matted hair arrived along 
with the goddess, they bowed down their heads to the ground 
and propitiated Isvara. 

20. They worshipped Bhava (Siva) with various Vedic 
Mantras and auspicious hymns pertaining to Mahesvara, as 
other sages propitiated him with Mantras of Atharvasiras : 

Eulogy of Siva 

21. “Obeisance to the overlord of Devas, Hail to you, 
Mahadeva. Salutation to you the three-eyed deity holding the- 
excellent trident. 

22. Obeisance to you having the quarters for clothes, 
Bow to the Pinaka-bearing lord of hideous forms. Obeisance to- 



372 


Kurma Pur ana 


the lord bowed to by all but not bowing down himself to 
anyone. 

23. Obeisance to you the annihilator of the god of death. 
■Hail to you, the destroyer of all. Obeisance to one whose sport 
is dance. Bow to one of terrible forms. 

24. Obeisance to one with the form (body) of a man as 
well as of a woman (i.e. half man and half woman). Obeisance 
to one with self control. Salutations to the quiescent ascetic 
Kara. 

25. Obeisance to you, Rudra, the terrible; obeisance to 

-you clad in elephant hide; salutation to (frequently 

licking the tongue). Obeisance to you Srikantha. 

26. Obeisance to one of Aghora and Ghora (nonterrible 
and terrible) form. Obeisance to Vamadeva; salutation to one 
■of golden necklace; obeisance to one who does things 
pleasing to the goddess. 

27. Obeisance to the highest deity Sambhu, the support- 
ter of the waters of the Gahga; obeisance to the overlord of the 
Yoga and the over-lord of living beings. 

28. Obeisance to the Prana (vital airs), obeisance to one 
who hearsBhasma marks on the body; obeisance to you Havya- 
vaha (the fire-god) with curved fangs; obeisance to Havyaretas 
(having Havya as the semen virile). 

29. Obeisance to one who cutoff the head of Brahma; 
■obeisance to you Kalarupin (having the form of Kala). Never, 
never do we know either your arrival or your departure. 

30. O ! Lord of the Universe, O Mahadeva ! whatever 
you may be, our obeisance be to you. Obeisance to the lord of 
the Pramathas and the bestower of auspicious riches. 

31. Obeisance to you, holding skull in the hand. 
Obeisance to you, the most pleased one. Obeisance to the 
gold-complexioned one. Obeisance to you having the aquatic 
Linga. 

32. Obeisance to one having fire and the sun for his 
Linga. Obeisance to you with JMna Linga ; obeisance to one 
having serpents as garlands; to one who is fond of the Karnikara; 
obeisance to you, wearing crown and earrings; salutation to 
the destroyer of Kala. 



11.39.33-44 


573- 


33. O Mahadeva, O Mahadeva, O three-eyed lord of 
Devas. May what is done due to delusion be forgiven; you 
alone are the refuge unto us. 

34. Your activities are wonderful, mysterious and 
inscrutable. Indeed Sankara is incomprehensible to Brahma and 
all others. 

35. Knowingly or unknowingly whatever a man does is- 
actually done by the lord through his Yogic Maya.” 

36. After eulogising Mahadeva conscientiously and with 
concentration like this, they bowed to Girisa and said—“May 
we see you as before.” 

37. On hearing their eulogy, the moon-bedecked lord 
accompanied by Uma, Sankara himself showed his great form, 
to them. 

38. On seeing the Pinaka-bearing lord alongwith the 
goddess, those Brahmanas stood delighted in their minds as 
before and bowed to him. 

39-40. All those sages viz : —Bhrgu, Ahgiras, Vasistha, 
Visvamitra, Gautama, Atri, Sukesa, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, 
Marici, Kasyapa and Sarhvartaka of great penance bowed to 
the lord of the chief of Devas and spoke these words : 

41. “O Lord of Devas, how shall we worship you 
always, by means of the path of action or by means of the path 
of knowledge ? 

42. By means of what divine path is the lord to be 
worshipped here ? What is it that should be resorted to ? What 
is it that should not be resorted to ? Please mention all these 
to us ; 

^iva said} : 

43. O great sages, I shall expound to you the excellent 
incomprehensible secret formerly narrated by Brahma to 
Mahadeva. 

44. The means of salvation of men should be known. 


1. VV. 43-65 explain the Puranic Pasupata Yoga. KP. disapproves of 
the ‘left’ or ‘non-Vedic Pasupata, and other sects. The influence of Kevala- 
dvaita on KP. is obvious. 



574 


Kurma Purdna 


as two-fold, one ofSarhkhya and the other of Yoga. Sarhkhya 
associated with Yoga is the bestower of liberation on men. 

45. The great Purusa is not seen by Yoga alone. But 
Jnana (knowledge) by itself is the bestower of salvation. 

46. Eschewing the pure Saihkhya and depending solely 
on Yoga, ye all made your attempts for salvation. 

47. For this reason, O Brahmanas, I came here to this 
land to point out the delusion arising in those men who depend 
on Karman alone. 

48. Hence, the perfect knowledge that is devoid of 
impurity and that is the means of salvation should be seen, 
heard and realised assiduously by you all. 

49. The Atman is one and only one, omnipresent. It is 
of the nature of pure consciousness and bliss, free from impurity 
and eternal. This is indeed the Philosophy of the Saihkhyas. 

50. This alone is the greatest knowledge. This is being 
sung about as Liberation. This is described as the pure Kaivalya 
and Brahmabhdva (the state of Brahman). 

51. Resorting to this greatest stand-point, the great- 
souled ascetics strictly adhering to it and holding on to it, see 
me the Visva (the universe), the Isvara. 

52. This is that greatest knowledge, the absolute Sat 
(Reality) that is unsullied. I alone am the lord to be realised. 
This Siva is my form. 

53. O leading Brahmanas, many means to Siddhi 
(realisation) have been mentioned; of them all, my perfect 
knowledge is the most superior. 

54-55. Ascetics strictly adhering to the path of knowledge, 
are quiescent, who sincerely seek refuge in me, who apply the 
sacred Bliasma over them (their bodies) and who always medi¬ 
tate on me in their hearts and who are interested in my devotion 
have exhausted all their sins. Ere long, I annihilate their 
terrible cavity of worldly existence (?) (v.l. ocean of Sarhsara). 

56. Indeed the holy Pasupata vow has been formerly 
designed by me for the achievement of liberation. It is the 
gteatest of all secrets. It is the subtlest essence of the Vedas. 

57. One who performs Pasupata vow, shall be quiescent; 
he must have perfect self-control; he should dust his body with 
sacred ashes; he should observe celibacy and remain naked. 



II.39.58-68a 


575 


58. Or he should wear a loin-cloth or a single garment; 
he should be silent and engaged in the study of Vedas. The 
scholar shall meditate on Siva as Pasupati. 

59. Sruti states that this Pasupata Yoga should be resort¬ 
ed to by the seekers of liberation; that those who maintain 
Pasupata rite should be free from desire. 

60. Freed from passion, fear and anger, filled with me, 
taking refuge in me, purified by penance in the fire of spiritual 
knowledge, many have entered my Being. 

61. There are other scriptures opposed to the Vedic 
view. They have been propounded by me alone and they are 
very fascinating in this world. 

62. Those cults are—Varna, Pasupata, the Soma cult, 
the Lakura (Lakula) and the Bhairava and such other cults 
which are opposed to Veda should not be resorted to. 

63. O Brahmanas, I am the embodiment of Vedas. My 
form cannot be understood by those who know the meanings 
of other scriptures. Except the eternal lord* no one knows it. 

64. Ye all establish this path; worship Mahesvara. 
There is no doubt in this that ere long the perfect knowledge 
will dawn. 

65. O excellent ones, may ye have extensive and deep 
devotion unto me; O excellent sages, I shall grant you my 
presence, the moment I am meditated upon. 

66. Having said this, the lord vanished there itself along 
with Uma. The sages remained in Daruvana and continued 
the worship of Sankara. 

67-68a. (Some) noble-souled sages, engaged in strict 
observance of celibacy, quiescent, interested in the path of 
knowledge, came together and held many discussions concern¬ 
ing the knowledge of the soul : 

What is the cause of this world : Our Soul. 

There must be a cause of creating these things. What 
can it be : God (Isvara). 


*deva ir\ WthV. Text. v.l. is better: It means ‘with the exception 
of the eternal Vedas none knows it’. 



576 


K Urma Pur ana 


68b-69. While they were pondering over this, after 
resorting to the path of meditation, the great goddess, the 
daughter of the most excellent mountain, appeared before 
them. 

70. She resembled a crore suns. She was engulfed in a 
cluster of flames. With her pure brilliance, she filled the whole 
firmament. 

71. They sought and saw the incomprehensible daughter 
of the mountain, encircled in the halo of a thousand flames. 
They bowed to this lady, the wife of the lord of all. They 
knew her as the seed of the Supreme. 

72. “This is the spouse of our Supreme Lord. She is our 
abode (goal) and soul. Her (other) name is Firmament; see¬ 
ing in her their own selves and the entire universe, the sages 
were overjoyed. 

73. They were seen by the wife of the great lords. In the 
meanwhile, they saw the lord, the cause of everything, Sambhu, 
the wise sage Rudra, the lord, the ancient Purusa. 

74. On observing the goddess and the lord Isa they 
bowed down and attained the greatest bliss. Thanks to the 
favour of the lord, the perfect knowledge, the cause of the 
destruction of subsequent births, dawned in them. 

75. This potency of Lord Siva is the only source of the 

universe, is the Atman of all; controller of everything and 
beginningless, she is termed (firmament) and she appears 

to shine in the heaven. 

76. The great Paramesthin, Mahesvara who is beyond 
everything, the sole Siva, Rudra, the lord of Devas created 
the universe in her after mounting over the Maya that is 
existing in the great Sakti. (?) 

77. The Lord is one. He is hidden in all living beings. 
Rudra, the wielder of Maya, is entire and undivided. He and 
the goddess are not different or separate. On realising this, 
people attain immortality. 

78. Lord Mahesa then vanished. The over-lord of the 
Devas vanished alongwith the goddess. The dwellers of the forest 
propitiated again Rudra, the primordial lord. 

79. Thus the story of all the former exploits of the lord 



11.39.80-40.1-4 


577 


Devas in the forest of Deva-Darus has been narrated to you all 
according as I have heard about them in the Puranas. 

80. He who reads or listens to this everyday, is liberated 
from all sins. He who recounts this to quiescent Brahmanas, 
attains the greatest goal. 


CMAPTER FORTY 

The Glory of Narmada 

Suta said : 

1. This highly meritorious river goddess Narmada,* 
resorted to by Devas and Gandharvas, is famous in the worlds. 
It is a river that is the most sacred of all holy rivers. 

2. Listen ye all to its greatness as recounted by Markan- 
^eya to Yudhisthira. It is auspicious and destructive of all 
sins. 

Tudhifthira said : 

3. O sage, thanks to your favour, various items of virtue 
{Dharma) have been heard by me; so also the greatness of 
Prayaga and different kinds of holy centres. 

4. The Narmada has been mentioned by your holiness 
as the most important of all sacred rivers. O excellent sage, it 
behoves you to recount its glory now.” 


1. Next to Ganga, Narmada is a very sacred river, glorified in 
various Puranas like AP. ch. 113, Pd. P. Svarga Khapda ch. 13, Mt. P. chs. 
185-193, NP. II. 77. The Skanda has devoted one book (Part) to its glori¬ 
fication. As compared with Sk. P. or Mt. P. KP. treats it briefly but suc¬ 
cinctly. It is interesting to note that most of the verses on the glory of 
Narmada in Pd. P. are the same as those of Mt. P. Even the KP. has 
borrowed a number of verses from the Mt. P. as shown below. 



578 


Kurtna Pur ana 


Markandeya said : 

5. The Narmada is the most excellent of all rivers; it 
flowed out of Rudra’s body. It shall redeem all living beings 
mobile and immobile.^ 

6. I shall now recount the greatness of Narmada, 
which I have heard from the Puranas. It is auspicious. Listen 
with single-minded attention. 

7. Gahga is auspicious in Kanakhala and Sarasvati 
is meritorious in Kurksetra. But whether in the village or 
in the forest, Narmada is meritorious everywhere.^ 

8. The holy water of Sarasvati sanctifies one in three 
days; the water of Yamuna sanctifies one in seven days; 
the water of Ganga sanctifies immediately; but the water of 
Narmada sanctifies one at its very sight.® 

9. In the western half of Kalinga, on the mountain 
Amarakantaka (it has its source). It is very holy. It is the most 
beautiful and charming in the three worlds.* 

10. O leading king, Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas, saints 
and the ascetics have attained the highest Siddki by performing 
penance on her banks. 

11. O king, a person who takes his bath there, maintains 
all religious observances and has conquered the sense-organs 
shall redeem a hundred members of his family after observing 
fast for a night. 

12. O leading king, it is heard that the excellent river is 
more than hundred Yojanas in length and its width is two 
Yojanas (1 Yojana=12 kms).® 

13. Sixty thousand holy centres and sixty crores of them 
are situated in Amarakantaka all round the mountain.® 


1. The same as Mt. P. 190. 17. 

2. Verse 7 in KP. is the same as Mt. P. 185.10. 

3. This shows how Narmada is superior to Gahga, Yamuna and 
Sarasvati. A borrowal from Mt. P. 185.11. 

4. Mt. P. 185.12. 

5. The same Mt. P. 185. 23b-24a (More’s edt.) Cf. AP 113. 2. Though 
the length of Narmada is correct, its width viz 2 Yojanas, is wrong. 

6. AP. 113. 2 and NP. II. 77. 



11.40.14-24 


579 


14-15. O Sinless King ! Attentively listen to the fruit 
acquired if a person of very pure conduct—celibate, with anger 
controlled and sense-organs subdued, refrained from all types of 
Hiihsa (violence) and engaged in the welfare of all—abandons 
his life (there) in a state of purity.^ 

16. O son of Pandu, he rejoices in heaven for a 
hundred thousand years. He will be surrounded by divine 
damsels, the groups of Apsaras. 

17. He will smear himself with divine scent and unguents. 
He will shine with divine flowers. He sports in the divine 
world and he rejoices alongwith Devas. 

18. After falling off from heaven, he shall be born as 
a righteous king. He will obtain a house embellished in different 
kinds of gems and jewels. 

19. The house shall be shining on being bedecked in 
diamonds and Lapis Lazuli. The columns therein shall be 
made of jewels. It shall be endowed with paintings, vehicles of 
brilliant appearance as well as hundred of maid-servants. 

20. He shall be the emperor ruling over kings. He will 
be elegant and glorious and loved by all women. He will live 
for more than a hundred years enjoying all pleasures. 

21. When (for ending his life ) he enters fire or water or 
when he observes fast, his departure shall be with no return (to 
Sarhsara) like that of the wind absorbed in the sky. 

22. On the ridge of the western mountain, there is a 
lake named Jalesvara. It is well known in the three worlds and 
is destructive of all sins.^ 

23. If one offers Pindas there and performs the Sandhya 
worship, it is asgood as propitiating the (Pitrs) for ten thousand 
years. There is no doubt about this. 

24. On the southern bank of Narmada, there is a 
great river named Kapila. It is stationed not very far. It is 
covered by Juicy Arjuna trees.® 


1. Committing suicide in a holy place was regarded as a means for 
Liberation. Mt. P. 193. 28b-29c. 

2. Mt. P. 185. 50b-51. 

3. Mt. P. 185. 53. 



580 


Kurma Parana 


25. That is meritorious and highly blessed. It is well- 
known in the three worlds. O Yudhisthira, the holy spots 
there number to more than a hundred crore.^ 

26. The trees that fall into the holy river after growing 
for many years, attain great goal due to the contact of waters 
of Narmada.^ 

27. A second holy river is the blessed and auspicious. 
Visalyakarani. A man taking bath in that holy river becomes, 
free from pains, sins and grief.® 

28. Kapila and Visalya are heard as the two excellent 
rivers mentioned by Isvara formerly with a desire for the well¬ 
being of the worlds. 

29. O lord of men, he who gives up food until death 
in that Tlrtha, shall have his soul purified of all sins. He goes 
to the region of Rudra.* 

30. O king, on taking his bath there a man shall attain 
the fruit of a horse-sacrifice. Those who reside on the northern 
bank reside in the region of Rudra.® 

31. As Sankara told me, O Yudhisthira, the bath and. 
the charitable gift at Sarasvatl, Gahga, and Narmada are 
of equal efficacy.® 

32. He who abandons his life -on the mountain Amara- 
kantaka is honoured in the Rudraloka for hundreds of crores 
of years and more.'' 

33. On sprinkling the head with the holy and sacred, 
water of Narmada along with its foam one is relieved of all. 
sins. 


1. Mt. P. 185. 53. 

2. Mt. P. 185- 54b-55a. 

3. Mt. P. 185. 55b-56a. 

4. Mt. P.185. 62. 

5. Mt. P. 185. 63b-64a. 

6. Mt. P. 185. 64b-65a. 

7. Mt. P. 185-65b-66a. 

The above examples are enough to show that KP. has freely borrowed 
from the Mt. P. or both the Puranas had used a common Marmadd-mdhdtmya 
and hence the above textual identity of verses. 



11.40.34-40—41.1 


581 


34. Narmada is holy everywhere. It dispels sins of 
Brahmana-slaughter. By observing fast for a day and a night, 
one is absolved of the sin of Brahmana slaughter. 

35. The most excellent holy centre jalesvara is destruc¬ 
tive of all sins. A man who observes religious regulation and 
restraints on going there, attains all desires. 

36. On going to Amarakantaka during the lunar or 
solar eclipse, a man attains ten times the merit of an Asvamedha 
(horse-sacrifice). 

37. This excellent mountain is meritorious.lt is resorted 
to by Devas and Gandharvas. It is full of various kinds of trees 
and creepers. It shines with different kinds of flowers. 

38. O King, Mahesvara (the great God) is present 
there alongwith the goddess (Uma). Brahma, Visnu, and 
Rudra (Indra?) (are present there) alongwith the groups of 
Vidyadharas. 

39. The man who circumambulates the mountain Amara¬ 
kantaka attains the fruit of Paundarika sacrifice. 

40. The river Kaveri^ is well-known as the destructive of 
sins. One should take bath there and worship the bull-bannered 
Mahadeva. (One who takes bath) at the confluence of Narmada 
is honoured in the Rudraloka. 


CHAPTER FORTYONE 

The Glory of different sacred places 
on the Narmada^ 

Markaiideya said : 

1. It has been told formerly by sages as well as by the 
self-born deity that Narmada, the destroyer of all sins, is the 
best among all rivers. 

1. This Kaveri is the northern branch of the Narmada where the 
island Orhkara is situated (HD IV P. 705 footnote 1604). 

2. This chapter gives only the important sacred places on the Narmada. 
Mt. P. and Pd. P. states that there are ten crores of sacred places on 



582 


Kurma Purana 


2. The excellent river Narmada has been eulogised by 
the sages. It flowed out of the body of Rudra with a desire for 
the well-being of the worlds. 

3. It is destructive of all sins for ever. It is bowed to by 
all Devas and is eulogised by Devas and Gandharvas as well 
as by Apsaras (heavenly ladies). 

4. On the northern bank is the Tirtha well-known in 
the three worlds, by the name Bhadresvara.^ It is holy, 
auspicious and destructive of all sins. 

5. O king, man taking bath there, rejoices with Devas. 
O leading king, thereafter one should go to the excellent sacred 
place Vimalesvara. 

6-7a. O King, a man taking bath there shall attain the 
the benefit of the gift of a thousand cows. Thereafter, with 
self-control and regulated diet, one should go to Ahgaresvara. 
He shall wipe off all sins and be pure. He is honoured in the 
Rudraloka. 

7b-8a. O leading king, thereafter, one should go to the 
meritorious spot named Kedara. On taking bath and drinking 
the water, one shall obtain all desires. 

8b-9a. Thereafter, one should go to Nisphalesa. It is 
destructive of all sins. O great king, on taking bath there, 
one is honoured in the Rudraloka. 

9b-10a. O leading king, one should thereafter go to the 
excellent Banatirtha. One forsaking the life there, shall attain 
Rudraloka. 


Narmada, while AP. (113.2) and KP. supra 40.13 raise the number to sixty 
crores and sixty thousand and the NP. II. 77. 4 and 27-28 limits this number 
to three crores and a half. 

Though many of the verses in this chapter are also common to Mt. P. 
and NP. II. 77, the similarities are not pointed out as this point has been 
proved in the last chapter. 

1. There are a number of Tirthas the geographical location of which 
is as yet to be ascertained and Tirtha of the same name occurs in different 
sacred places like Varanasi, Prayaga, Kuruksetra or Gaya. For example 
Kedara in v. 7b-8a is at Varanasi, Garhwal UP. (the famous Jyotirlihga), in 
Kashmir and at Gaya. Hence only out-standing Tirthas are noted. 



11.41.10b-23a 


583 


10b-11a. Thereafter, one shall go to Puskarini and per¬ 
form the rite of holy ablution there. O king, on taking bath 
there a man shall be the lord of a throne. 

11b-12a. Thereafter, one should go to SakratTrtha on the 
southern bank. Immediately after the bath therein, a man 
shall attain half the seat of Indra. 

12b-13a. O leading king, thereafter, one should go to 
Sulabheda, so says the Sruti. On bathing and drinking water 
there, one shall derive the benefit of a thousand cows. 

13b-14. A pure man should observe fast during the night 
after duly performing the ablution rite. Then he should propi¬ 
tiate the lord of Devas of great Yogic power. After attaining the 
the fruit of a gift of thousand cows, he goes to Visnu’s region. 

15. Thereafter, he should go to Rsitirtha which is des¬ 
tructive of all sins of men. As soon as a man takes his bath 
therein, the man is honoured in Sivaloka. 

16. There itself is the holy centre of Narada. It is very 
auspicious. Immediately after the bath therein, a man obtains 
the fruit of a gift of a thousand cows. 

17. It was here that formerly the divine sage Narada per¬ 
formed penance. Mahesvara, the lord of Devas, became 
delighted and granted him Yoga. 

18. A Lihga installed by Brahma is known as Brahmes- 
vara. O king, a man who takes his holy bath there is honoured 
in the Brahmaloka. 

19. Thereafter, one should go to Rnatirtha (by visiting 
which) the man shall certainly be relieved from indebtedness. 
Thereafter, one should go to Vatesvara. He shall derive 
sufficient benefit of the current life. 

20. Thereafter, one should go to Bhimesvara. It is des¬ 
tructive of all ailments. Immediately after the bath there, a 
man is relieved of all miseries. 

21. O leading king, thereafter one should go to the ex¬ 
cellent Pihgalesvara. By observing fast for a day and night, 
one shall attain the benefit ofTriratra sacrifice. 

22-23a. O leading king, he who makes a gift of a tawny- 
coloured cow, there, is honoured in the Rudra-loka as many 
thousand years as there are hairs on its body and on that of its 
calves. 



584 


Kurma Pur ana 


23b-24a. O ruler of men, he who abandons his life there, 
rejoices indefinitely as long as the moon and the sun shines. 

24b-25a. Those who stay on the banks of Narmada 
go to heaven when they die just like the saintly men of good 
activities. 

25b. Thereafter, one should go to Diptesvara. It is a 
penance grove otherwise called Vyasatirtha. 

26. Formerly, the great river Narmada had become 
afraid of Vyasa. On being rebuked by Hurhkara (i.e. the 
sound Hurh) (by Vyasa), the river receded from that place 
immediately (v.l. dakfinena (flowed) to the South). 

27. O Yudhisthira, if a devotee circumambulates that 
place, Vyasa becomes delighted and he obtains the benefit 
desired. 

28-29a. O leading king, thereafter, one shall go the 
confluence of the river Iksu. It is meritorious and well-known 
in the three worlds. Siva is present there. O king, on taking 
bath there, a man shall obtain the chieftain-ship of Ganas. 

29b-31a. Thereafter, one should go to Skandatirtha that 
dispels all sins.* One who takes bath there dispels sins com¬ 
mitted by him ever since his birth. Devas and Gandharvas wor¬ 
ship lord Skanda, the bearer of Sakti, the noble-souled excellent 
son of Siva. 

31b-33a. Thereafter, one should go to Angirasatirtha 
and perform the rite of ablution there, getting thereby the 
merit of a gift of a thousand cows, he goes to Rudra’s region. It 
was here that Angiras, the son of Brahma, propitiated the bull- 
bannered lord of Devas and the universe by means of penance 
and obtained the excellent Yoga. 

33b-34a. Thereafter, one should go to Kusatirtha that 
dispels all sins. One should take the holy plunge there (where¬ 
by) he will obtain the benefit of a horse-sacrifice. 

34b-35a. Thereafter one should go to Kotitirtha that 
dispels sins committed by him ever since his birth. 


*The Venk. Text has an irrelevant line here : rj^a-tirtham tato gacchet sa 
ttidn mucyate dhruvam “one should go to Rna-tirtha; one definitely gets rid of 
indebtedness.” 



11.41.35b-47 


585 


35b-36a. Thereafter, one should go to Candrabhaga and 
perform the rite of ablution there. Immediately after the bath 
there, the man is honoured in the region of the moon. 

36b-37a. The excellent Tirtha Sahgamesvara is on the 
southern bank of Narmada. O king, on taking bath there, the 
man derives the benefit of all Tajnas. 

37b-40a. On the northern bank of Narmada is the 
extremely splendid Tirtha, the beautiful Adityayatana, as men¬ 
tioned by Isvara. O leading king, on taking bath there, and 
offering Danas religious gifts according to one’s capacity, one 
attains inexhaustible benefit, thanks to the power of the Tirtha. 
Those who are indigent and sickly, those who commit evil deeds, 
are released from all sins. They go to Suryaloka (the world of 
the Sun). 

40b-41a. Thereafter, one should go to Matrtirtha and 
perform the rite of ablution there. Immediately after the bath 
there, the man shall attain the heavenly world. 

41b-43a. Thereafter, one should go westward to the 
excellent holy centre Marutasaya. O leading king, one should 
take bath there and with purity and sound concentration one 
should give gold to an ascetic in accordance with the extent of his 
riches. He goes to Vayuloka by means of the aerial chariot 
Puspaka. 

43b. O leading king, thereafter one should go to the 
excellent Ahalyatirtha. Merely by taking bath there, one 
rejoices with the Apsaras for an indefinite period. 

44-45. On the Kamadeva day which falls on the 
thirteenth day in the bright half of the month Chaitra, one 
should worship Ahalya. Wherever he is born, the man shall be 
excessively loved by all. He shall be endowed with glory and 
will be loved by women like Kamadeva. 

46. Approaching the Saridvara (the excellent river) (?) 
one should go to the well-known Tirtha of Indra. Immediately 
after taking bath there, one attains the benefit of the gift of a 
thousand cows. 

47. Thereafter one should go to Somatirtha and per¬ 
form the rite of ablution there. Immediately after the bath 
therein, the man is freed from all sins. 



586 


Kurma Pur am 


48. During the lunar eclipse, it is destructive of sins. O 
king, the Somatirtha is well known in the three worlds and it 
yields great benefits. 

49. He v.'ho observes the vow of Candrayana with great 
concentration in that holy centre, shall have his soul purified 
of all sins. He shall go to the Somaloka. 

50. O ruler of men, he who immolates himself by 
entering fire at this holy centre; he who drowns himself in the 
water thereof or he who observes fast unto death there, is 
never reborn as a mortal being. 

51. Thereafter, one should go to Stambhatirtha and 
perform the rite of ablution there. Immediately af ter the bath 
there, the man is honoured in the Somaloka. 

52. O king, thereafter one should go to the excellent 
Visnutirtha. That excellent abode of Visnu is called (Yodhi-) 
Yodhanipura. 

53-54a. Crores of Asuras were fought therein by 
Vasudeva (Visnu) and so a sacred place came into being 
there. (One who bathes there) shall have the glory and 
splendour of Visnu. By observing fast for a day and a night, 
one dispels the sin of Brahmana-slaughter. 

54b-56a. On the southern bank of Narmada there is 
an extremely splendid Tirtha well-known as Kamatirtha. It is 
the place where Kama worshipped Hari. A man, taking bath 
in that holy centre and devoutly engaged in observing fast, is 
honoured in the form ofKama. 

56b-57. O leading king thereafter one shall go to the 
excellent Brahmatirtha. It is well-known as Umahaka (?) (v.l. 
Amogha). One should perform a Tarpana rite (offering of 
libations of water) there for Pitrs. One should duly perform 
Sraddha on the full moon day and on the new moon day. 

58. In the middle of the water there is a rock in the 
form of an elephant. One should offer Pindas therein, with 
great concentration (on any day) during the month of 
Vaisakha. 

59. After taking bath, vi^ith concentrated mind and 
being devoid of arrogance and jealonsy (if the above rite is 



11.41.60-70 


587 


performed), his manes are satisfied as long as the earth exists 
(i.e. up to the end of the world). 

60. Thereafter, one should go to the Tirtha called 
Visvesvara and perform the rite of ablution there. Immediately 
after the bath there, the man shall obtain the chieftainship of 
the Ganas (attandants of Siva). 

61. O leading king, thereafter one should go where 
Janardana (Visnu) is (in the form of a) Liiiga. A man who 
takes bath there devotedly is honoured in the Visnuloka. 

62. It is here that Narayana manifested himself to the 
sages of sanctified souls, in the form of a Linga which is the 
highest abode. 

63-64a. Thereafter, one shall go to Akolla which is 
destructive of all sins. The ablution, the Dana rite, the feeding 
of the Brahmanas and the offering of Pindas performed here 
bestow infinite benefit after death. 

64b.65. If a Brahmana prepares Caru with Traiymbaka 
(Narmada) water and offers the Pindas duly at the root 
ofAnkolla plant (Alangium Hexapetalum) the Pitrs shall be 
redeemed. They are satisfied as long as the moon and the 
stars shine. 

66. O leading king, thereafter, one should go to the 
excellent Tirtha Tapasesvara. O leading king, on taking bath 
therein, one shall attain the benefit of penance. 

67. Thereafter, one shall go to Suklatlrtha^ that is 
destructive of all sins. O Yudhisthira, there is no other holy 
centre on a par with it on Narmada. 

68. Its sight, the touching, the ablution (therein), 
Dana, Tapas, Japa, Homa, and observance of fast in the holy 
centre Suklatirtha yield great benefits. 

69. The holy centre well known as Suklatirtha is said 
to be a Yojana in extent. It is resorted to by Devas and 
Gandharvas. It is destructive of all sins. 

70. Even if the holy centre is seen from the top of a 
tree from far, it dispels the sin of Brahmana-slaughter. God 
Sankara, Bharga, stays there always with the goddess. 


1. VV. 67-84 describe the importance of Suklatirtha—on the north 
bank of Narmada about 10 miles north-east of Broach. 



-588 


Kurma Pur ana 


71. O king of holy rites, in the fourteenth day in the 
dark half of the Vaisakha month, Kara comes out of his own 
world to be present here. 

72. The leading gods, demons, divine minstrels, Siddhas, 
Vidyadharas, the attendants of Siva and celestial damsels and 
the leading Nagas stay there. 

73. One dispels sins committed ever since one’s birth in 
the Suklatirtha just as a coloured cloth turns white by 
washing in water. 

74. The ablution, Dana, penance and Sraddha appear 
to be infinite. There will never be a holier Tirtha than the 
Suklatirtha. 

75. A man who commits sinful deeds earlier in his life 
dispels them by observing fast for a day and a night in 
iSuklatirtha. 

76-77a. One should observe fast on the fourteenth day 
in the dark half of the month of Karttika and perform the 
ablution of god, the Supreme deity (Siva) with ghee. He shall 
never fall off from the abode of Isvara in the company of 
twenty one generations of his family. 

77b-78a. One does not obtain by means of penance, 
celibacy or Tajnas or even Danas that goal which one attains in 
the Suklatirtha. 

78b-79a. The Suklatirtha is a great holy centre resorted 
to by the sages and Siddhas. O king, a man who takes bath 
there is not reborn. 

79b-80. During the vernal and equinotical transit of the 
sun and on Caturdaa (fourteenth) days, the devotee should, 
after the bath, observe fast. With good self-control and great 
concentration, he should make charitable gifts in accordance 
with his capacity. Hari and Sankara will become delighted. 

81-83a. By the power of the single Tirtha, every thing 
shall be endless. Listen to the merit accruing to one who helps 
a helpless poor Brahmana or one with kinsmen to celebrate a 
marriage at this holy centre. He is honoured in the Rudraloka 
as many thousand years as there are hairs on his body and in 
those of his progeny. 

83b-84. O leading king, thereafter, one should go to the 
•excellent Yamatirtha. O Yudhisthira, one who takes bath here 



11.41.85-95 


589 ^ 


in the fourteenth day in the dark half of the Magha month and 
takes food only at night, never experiences the pain of being in. 
the womb (i.e. is liberated). 

85-87. O leading king, thereafter one shall go to the- 
excellent Eranditirtha.^ The man (devotee) should take 
bath at the confluence and observe fast. If he should then feed 
a single Brahmana, it has the benefit of feeding a crore men. 
One endowed with the feelings of devotion should take bath 
at Erandi confluence. He should enter the water with clay 
applied to the head. When the waters of Narmada (in the- 
confluence) too touch him, he is freed from all sins. 

88. O leading king, thereafter one should go to the holy 
centre Kallolakesvara. There is no doubt in this that Gahga. 
descends into it on the auspicious days. 

89. After bathing in it and drinking its water, one should 
make charitable gifts in accordance with the injunctions. He 
shall be freed from all sins and be honoured in the Brahmaloka. 

90. Thereafter, one should go to Nanditirtha and per¬ 
form the rite of ablution there. Nandisa is pleased and the 
devotee is honoured in the Somaloka. 

91. O leading king, thereafter one should go to the 
auspicious Tirtha Anaraka. O king, a man taking a bath there 
never sees hell. 

92. O leading king, one shall deposit one’s bones in that 
holy centre. He is born in the world again as a beautiful 
person endowed with riches and worldly pleasures. 

93. O leading king, thereafter one shall go to the 
excellent Kapilatirtha. O king, a man taking bath there shall 
obtain the benefit of the gift of thousand cows. 

94-95. During the month of Jyestha, particularly on the 
fourteenth day, the man devotee should observe fast. He 
should make charitable gifts of lamps, along with ghee. He 
should perform ablution of Rudra with ghee. Then he shall 
attain riches as a benefit thereof. He should make the gift of a 
tawny-coloured cow embellished with bells and ornamens. 


. 1. Erandi is a tributary of Narmada in Baroda Dist. It is now called 
Vri or Or. Its confluence with the Narmada is Erandi-tirtha. 



590 


Kurma Pur dm 


96. He shall himself become endowed with all ornaments, 
and will be respected by all Devas. He shall become strong as 
Siva, and will be sporting always like Siva. 

97. On Tuesdays and CaturthI days in particular, one 
should perform ablution rite of Siva and feed Brahmanas. 

98-99a. In an aerial chariot desired by all, he shall 
travel accompanied by all Devas. He shall go to the abode of 
Indra and rejoice alongwith him. After falling off from 
heaven, he shall be one endowed with fortitude and worldly 
enjoyments. 

99b- 100a. One shall perform the ablution rite of Siva 
on Tuesdays, on the ninth day and on the new moon day 
assiduously. One shall become handsome and endowed with 
comely features. 

lOOb-101. O leading king, thereafter one shall go to the 
excellent Tirtha Ganesvara on the fourteenth day in the dark 
half of the Sravana month. Immediately after the bath, there 
the man is honoured in the Rudr'aloka. 

102-103. After performing the Tarpana rite of the Pitrs, 
he is freed from the three debts. Near Gahgesvara is the excel¬ 
lent Tirtha called Gahgavadana. A man who takes his bath 
there entertaining any desire of fruit or not, is freed from all sins 
committed ever since his birth. 

104. Near it on the western side, not very far from it, 
is the Tirtha Dasasvamedhika which is well-known in the 
three worlds. 

105. After observing fast for a night in the auspicious 
month of Bhadrapada, one should perform the ablution rite and 
the worship of the bull-bannered deity Hara on the new moon 
day. 

106. He shall then go to Rudra’s city by means of golden 
aerial chariot decorated with clusters of tinkling bells. He shall 
then rejoice with Rudra. 

107. He should perform the rite of ablution on any day 
at any place. After performing Tarpana rites for the Pitrs, he 
shall derive the benefit of horse sacrifice. 



II.42.1-10 


591 


CHAPTER FORTYTWO 

The greatness of the various holy centres on Narmada 
Markandeya said : 

1. O leading king, thereafter, one should go to the 
excellent Bhrgutirthad Formerly holy lord Bhrgu propitiated 
Rudra there. 

2. By visiting that lord, one is immediately freed from 
sins. This holy centre is very large and destructive of all sins. 

3-4. Those who take bath there go to heaven. Those who 
die here are not reborn. In accordance with his (donor’s) 
capacity, a pair of shoes, a chariot horse, gold, cooked food and 
full meal should be given. It (the dana given here) is said to be 
everlasting. All (other) danas, offerings, sacrifices and penance 
and rituals perish. 

5-6a. O Yudhisthira, the penance performed in the 
Bhrgutirtha is imperishable. O Yudhisthira, the presence of 
Rudra, the enemy of the Tripuras, there, is due to his Bhrgu’s 
own severe penance. It is said so by Rudra, the enemy of the 
Tripuras. 

6b-8a. O leading king, thereafter one should go to the 
excellent Tirtha Gautamesvara. It was here that Gautama pro¬ 
pitiated the Trident-bearing lord and attained Siddhi. O king, 
a man who takes bath there and is devoted to the observance of 
fast, goes to Brahmaloka by means of a golden aerial chariot. 
He is honoured in the Brahmaloka. 

8b-9a. Thereafter, one should go to the Vrsotsarga 
Tirtha. He shall attain the eternal region. Those foolish men 
deluded by the Maya of Visnu do not know the glory of this 
Tirtha. 

9b-10. Thereafter, one should go to the Dhautapapa 
holy centre where the sins are washed by means of this 
meritorious act. It is situated on Narmada. O king, it is 


1. Bhrgu Tirtha—Bhera-ghat^ 12 miles to the West of Jabalpur (De, 
p. 34). It has now a temple of 64 Yoginis. Here Parasurama regained his 
energy taken away by Rama the son of Dasaratha. 



592 


Kurma Pur ana 


destructive of all sins. A man taking bath in that holy centre,, 
dispels the sin of Brahmana-s laughter. 

11. O leading king, he who abandons his life there in 
that holy centre, shall be blessed with four arms and three eyes. 
He shall be as mighty as Kara. 

12. He shall reside in the Sivaloka for ten thousand 
Kalpas and more with exploits similar to that of Siva. After a 
long time, he is born on the Earth. He shall then be a sole 
Emperor over the world. 

13. O leading king, thereafter, one should go to the 
excellent Tirtha called Hastatirtha (v.l. Harhsa-Tirtha). O 
king, a man who takes bath there, is honoured in the 
Brahmaloka. 

14. O leading king, thereafter, one should go to that 
holy centre where Janardana is settled. It is called Varaha 
tirtha. It yields the capacity to go to Visnuloka. 

15-16a. O leading king, thereafter, one should go to the 
excellent Candratirtha. One should perform the rite of ablution 
there, particularly on the full moon day. Immediately after the 
bath, a man shall be the sole emperor on the Earth. 

16b-17a. Thereafter, one should go to Devatirtha which 
is bowed by all the other holy centres. O leading king, on taking 
bath there, one rejoices alongwith the deities. 

17b-18a. O leading king, thereafter one should go to the 
excellent Sahkhatirtha. What is given as charitable gift there 
shall become a hundred million times (more beneficial). 

18b-19a. O leading king, thereafter one should go to the 
auspicious Paitamahatirtha. The Sraddha offered there shall 
wholly become inexhaustible in merit. 

19b-20a. He who abandons his life after reaching the 
holy centre Savitritirtha shall shake off all sins. He is honoured 
in the Brahmaloka. 

20b-21a. There itself the Manohara (charming) Tirtha 
is extremely splendid. O king, a man taking bath there is 
honoured in the Rudraloka. 

21b-23a. O leading king, thereafter, one should go to the 
excellent Kanyatirtha. O king, a man taking bath there is 
freed from all sins. One shall perform the rite of ablution here 



II.42.23b-33 


593 


on the third day in the bright half of the month. Immediately 
after the bath, the man shall become the sole Sovereign ruler 
over the Earth. 

23b-24a. Thereafter, one should go to the holy centre 
Sarga Bindu which is bowed to by Devas. O king, a man 
who takes bath there, never sees mishaps and ill fortune. 

24b-25a. Thereafter, one should go to Apsaresa. He 
should perform the rite of ablution there. He sports in the 
heavenly world and rejoices alongwith celestial damsels. 

25b-26. O leading king, thereafter one should go to the 
excellent holy centre Bharabhuti. He should worship the lord 
after the observance of fast. He is honoured in the Rudraloka. 
O king, one who dies in this holy centre, shall attain the 
chieftainship of the Ganas. 

27. In the month of Karttika, one shall worship the lord 
of Devas, the consort of Parvatl. Learned men assert that it 
is ten times more beneficial horse-sacrifice. 

28-29. He who gifts away a bull as lustrous (white) as 
the Kunda flower and the moon goes to the Rudraloka by 
means of a vehicle to which a bull is yoked. He who abandons 
his life after reaching the holy centre, shall be freed from all 
sins. He goes to Rudraloka. 

30. O ruler of men, he who enters water (and drowns 
himself) in that holy centre goes to the heavenly world by means 
of a vehicle to which swans are yoked. 

31. The Confluence of the rivers Erandi^ and Narmada 
is well-known in the world. That holy centre is also highly 
meritorious and destructive of all sins. 

32. One who regularly observes fasts and performs holy 
rites devotedly, O king, is freed even from the sin of 
Brahmana-slaughter after taking bath there. 

33. O leading king, thereafter one should go to the con¬ 
fluence of Narmada and the ocean. It is famous as Jamadagni 
and there Janardana is present. 


1. Erandi-sahgama—the confluence of Erandi (mod. Uri) and the 
Narmada near Karnali in former Baroda State (now Gujarat)—De, P. 59. 



594 


Kurma Pur ana 


34. O king, a man who takes bath in the meeting point 
of Narmada and the ocean obtains three times the benefit of 
a horse-sacrifice. 

35. O leading king, thereafter one should go to the 
excellent Pihgalesvara. O king, a man who takes his bath there, 
is honoured in the Brahmaloka. 

36. He who visits Vimalesvara after observing fast there, 
dispels sins committed in seven births and goes to Siva’s 
abode. 

37-38a. O leading king, thereafter, one should go the 
excellent Ali tirtha (v.l. Alaka-tirtha). He should observe fast 
for a night with regulated conduct and diet. Thanks to the 
greatness of this holy centre, he is freed from the sin of 
Brahmana-slaughter. 

38b-39a. These holy centres have been recounted to you 
in brief and in view of their importance. O son of Pandu, the 
number of the holy centres is big. They cannot be narrated in 
detail. 

39b-41a. This large sacred river is well-known in the 
three worlds. Narmada is the most excellent of all rivers. It 
is the beloved of Mahadeva. O Yudhisthira there is no doubt 
in this that he who mentally remembers Narmada, obtains the 
benefit of a hundred Candrayana rites, or even more. 

41b-42a. Those persons who do not have faith, those who 
have resorted to terrible non-belief, do fall in the terrible hell. 
So says Paramesvara, 

42b. Lord Mahesvara himself resorts to Narmada. 
Hence, this river should be known as very meritorious, and 
destructive of the sin of Brahmana-slaughter. 



II.43.1-8 


595 


CHAPTER FORTYTHREE 

Greatness of Naimifdranya} and Japyesvara 

Suta said : 

1. This excellent holy centre Naimisa is well known in the 
three worlds. Being more liked by Mahadeva (than any other 
Tirtha), it is destructive of great sins. 

2. O excellent Brahmanas, it is the place created by the 
highest deity, god Brahma for the performance of penance 
by the sages desirous of seeing Mahadeva. 

3-4. The six Brahmana families viz : the Maricis, the 
Atris, the Vasisthas, the Kratus, the Bhrgus and the Ahgiras 
formerly approached the lotus-born deity Brahma, the four-faced, 
the four-formed god who bestows boons on all (or all boons). 
Bowing down to the unchanging creator of the universe they 
asked him. Satkullyas^ (the sages belonging to the six families) 
said : 

5. (Defective verse) O lord, obeisance to you. Please 
recount, by what means can we see the only lord I Sana, the 
god with matted hair. 

Brahma said ; 

6. “Perform a Satra (a sacrificial session) of the duration 
of one thousand years with your speech and mind free from 
defects. I shall tell you the place where you will perform the 
same.” 

7. He touched the mind-wheel and let it go. Thereafter, 
he told them “This wheel has been discharged by me. Follow 
it. Do not delay. 

8. Where the rim of this wheel gets shattered is the 
auspicious place for the purpose of penance.”® Thereafter he let 
the wheel go and they followed it. 


1. Naimisaranya is in a way ‘the birth-place’ of all Puranas. Its 
importance is described in Bd. P. I. 1. 156-174, Siva Vdyaviya Samhitd 3. 52-63, 
Va. P. 1. 1. 166-167. KP. endorses what other Puranas state about this. 

2. Satkuliyas are Brahmanas belonging to the families of the above- 
mentioned six sages viz. Marici, Atri, Vasistha, Kratu, Bhrgu and Ahgiras. 

3. Here Naimisa h etymologically connected with nemi ‘rim’ of a 
wheel. Bd. P. and other Puranas mentioned above endorse the same. 



596 


Kurma Pur amt 


9. As it rolled on, its rim got shattered at a place which 
came to be remembered by the name Naimisa. It is very holy 
and is honoured everywhere. 

10. It is full of Siddhas and Caranas. It is resorted to by 
Yaksas and Gandharvas. This excellent holy centre Naimisa is 
the abode of lord Sambhu. 

11. Formerly, Devas, alongwith Gandharvas, Yaksas,. 
serpents and the Raksasas performed their penance here and 
attained excellent boons. 

12. Resorting to this place, the Satkullyas (the Brahmanas 
of the six families) propitiated the lord of Devas with 
great concentration, by means of Satra and perceived 
Mahesvara. 

13. Each of the following holy rites here shall destroy 
the sin committed in the course of seven births viz. = the Dana 
rite, the penance performed, the Sraddha offered and the Yajna. 
performed. 

14. Formerly, it was here that the lord, (Brahma) 
recounted the Brahmanda Purana^ purified (sanctified) by the 
(description of the) Brahman, to the sages who were performing 
the Satra. 

15. Even till this day, lord Mahadeva of universal vision 
sports about alongwith his spouse Rudrani, while the Pramathas 
surround him as attendants. 

16. Giving up their lives here by means of obser¬ 
vances, the twice-born will go to the Brahmaloka, after which 
they are not born again. 

17. Another excellent holy centre is what is well-known 


Sridhara on Bh. P. I. 1.4 quotes from Vr. P. and states that here Lord 
Visnu killed the army of Asuras within the twinkling of the eye (nimifa) and 
hence, it came to be called “Naimisa”. 

Geographically it is the area round modem Nimsar at a distance of 20 
miles from Sitapur and 45 miles to the North west of Lucknow. Nimsar is a 
railway station. 

But KP emphasbes its importance as a sacred place proper for 
Penance, performance of yajna and other religious rites. 

1. Obviously KP is composed later than the Brahmanda Purana. 



11.43.18-25 


597 


as Japyesvara.i It was here that Nandin the great Gana 
(attendant) continuously performed the J'a/ia of Rudra. 

18. Mahadeva, the Pinaka-bearing lord, became pleased 
with him alongwith the goddess. He granted him similarity 
with himself and ability to defy death. 

19. There was a virtuous pious-souled sage named 
6ilada. In order to acquire His blessing, he worshipped the 
the bull-bannered Mahadeva. 

20. At the end of a thousand years since (Silada) he 
began his austere penance. Sarva, the sustainer of the universe, 
came to him accompanied by Uma and surrounded by the 
Ganas and spoke—“I am the granter of boons.” 

21. Of I Sana, the foremost deity, the consort of the 
daughter of the mountain, he begged as follows ;—‘I request 
for a son like you who is not born from a womb and who is 
deathless (immortal). 

22. Lord Mahesvara accompanied by the goddess said— 
‘So be it’. Even as the Brahminical sage was looking on, Hara 
vanished from the scene. 

23-25. Silada,^ the most excellent among the knowers of 
Dharma, made use of that land. He ploughed the ground with 
a ploughshare. Breaking open the ground a splendid son with the 
brilliance of Sarhvartaka fire (i.e., the fire at the time of dis¬ 
solution) came into view. He was smiling as it were. With this 
lustre he illuminated the quarters. He was richly endowed with 
handsome features and comeliness. He was on a par with 


1. The location of Japyesvara or Japyesvara is doubtful. According to 
De, P. 81, Japyesvara of the LP I.ch. 43 & Siva P. is the same as Jalpisa of 
the Kalika P. (ch. 77) and is situated to the west of the river Tista in the 
Jalapaiguri dist. of Bengal. Kalika Purana locates it to the northwest of 
Kama-rupa and the five rivers forming Panca-nada are Jatodaka, Trisrota, 
Vrsadvani, Svarnodaka and Jambunadi. But KP. hints (v. 29) that it is 
near the sea. In that case Panca-nada must be taken as the land of five- 
rivers (Punjab) where the five rivers meet. But the Tirtha must be near the 
sea where Sindhu falls in the sea as Nandin went near the sea (v. 29) for his 
Japa. 

2. For the story of Silada cf. L.P. I. chs. 41-44. But according to 
L.P. I. 42. 11-15, it was god Siva who was born as Nandin. 



598 


Kurma Purana 


Kumara (Karttikeya). With a grave tone Nandin repeatedly 
said to Silada “O father, O father.” 

26. On seeing that son born, Silada embraced him. He 
showed him to the sages who resided in the hermitages there. 

27. He performed the post-natal and all other rites for 
him. After investing him with a sacred thread in accordance 
with the Sastras, he taught his son the Vedas himself. 

28. Holy lord Nandin, after the study of the Vedas came 
to an excellent decision. “After seeing lord Mahesvara, I will 
conquer Mrtyu (death).” 

29. Endowed with faith and concentration of the mind, 
he went to the holy ocean and continuously performed the Japa 
of Rudra with his mind attached to Mahesa. 

30. When he had completed a crore of Japas, Sankara, 
favourably disposed to his devotees, came there accompanied by 
all his Ganas and said—“I am the granter of boons.” 

31. He requested lord Mahadeva the supreme God. 
Please grant me the boon. I shall perform again a crore of this 
Japa, which will completely consume worldly existence. 

32. After saying “So be it” the lord vanished from the 
scene. The holy one (i.e. Nandin) performed a crore of Japa 
with his mind centred on him. 

33. When the second crore was completed, the bull- 
bannered lord came there surrounded by the groups of Bhutas 
(goblins) and said—“I am the granter of boons”. 

34. (Nandin said) “O Sankara, I wish to perform the 
third crore of Japa too” The Atman of the universe said—“So 
be it.” and vanished alongwith the goddess. 

35. When the third crore of Japa was completed, the 
lord was much delighted in the mind. He came there surrounded 
by the Bhutas and said—“I am the granter of boons”. 

36. (Nandin said), “I shall perform a crore more of the 
Japa with thy brilliance”. When this was said the lord said :— 
You must not perform the Japa further. 

37-38. You shall be immortal and devoid of old age. You 
shall stay at my side forever. You shall be the great chieftain 
of the Ganas, the son of the goddess. You shall be a great lord, 
the lord of Yoga, a great Yogin and the chief lord of Ganas. 



11.43.39-42—44.1-2 


599 


You shall be glorious and the overlord of the worlds. You 
will be the benefactor, identical with the Yajnas. 

39. The perfect knov/ledge pertaining to me and named 
after me shall be accessible to you as easily as the fruit of the 
myrobalan in the palm. You will be alive till the dissolution 
of all living beings. Thereafter you shall attain my region.” 

40-41. After saying this, Mahadeva Sankara called 
the Ganas together and got Nandlsvara duly crowned and conse¬ 
crated. The Pinaka-bearing lord himself made him marry the 
blessed daughter of the Maruts (Suyasa according to Siva- 
purana). He himself attained Visnuhood. 

42. This Japyesvara is the abode of the trident-bearing 
lord of Devas. The man who dies here is honoured in the 
Rudra-loka. 


CHAPTER FORTYFOUR 

Description of sacred places (contd.) 

Suta said : 

1. Near the holy centre Japyesvara there is another excel¬ 
lent Tirtha named Pancanada.^ It is sacred and destructive of 
all sins. 

2. One who observes fast there for three nights and 
worships Mahesvara gets his soul purified of all sins and is 
honoured in the Rudraloka. 

3. There is another excellent Tirtha pertaining to Indra 
(king of gods) of unmeasured splendour. It is called 
Mahabhairava^ and is destructive of great sins. 


1. Vide note I, p. 597. 

2. Though KP. calls this Tirtha as ‘p-rtaining to Indra*, it is one of 
the eight §iva Ksetras (HD. IV. 775), but Kane’s reference to Mt. 181.29 
is about a Tirtha of the same name at Varanasi. 



600 


Kurma Purana 


4. The great river Vitasta (mod. Jhelum) is the holiest 
of all holy tirthas. It is sacred and it removes all sins. Itself it is 
born of the king of mountains. 

5. There is the Tirtha belonging to Sambhu of unlimited 
splendour. Its name is Pancatapas. It is here that Bhava 
(Siva) was worshipped by the overlord of Devas (?) for the 
purpose of being mighty. 

6. Offering of Pindas etc. at that holy centre is the 
bestower of pleasure and happiness after death. One who dies 
there as a result of observance of holy rites, is honourd in 
the Brahmaloka. 

7. There is a splendid shrine of Mahadeva called Kaya- 
varohana^ where holy dharmas or religious doctrines pertaining 
to god Mahesvara have been promulgated by the sages. 

8. The Sraddha, the charitable gift, the penance, the 
Homa or the fast there is of ever-lasting benefit. He who 
abandons his life there goes to the Rudraloka. 

9. There is another excellent Tirtha called Kanya-Tirtha* 
than which there is no better holy centre. One should abandon 
one’s life after going there, whereby one attains eternal worlds. 

10. There is the splendid holy centre of Rama, the son 
of Jamadagni and of unimpaired activity. On taking bath there 
in the excellent holy centre, one shall attain the benefit of 
gifting away a thousand cows. 

11. The Tirtha well-known as Mahakala® is famous in 
the worlds. After going there and abandoning the life, one 
shall attain the chieftainship of Ganas. 

12. The Tirtha of great mystic efficacy is the excellent 
Nakulisvara* Tirtha. Lord Nakulisvara, the glorious deity is 
present there. 


1. Kayavarohana is modern Karvan, 15 miles South of Baroda in 
the Dabhoi Tehsil. The promulgation of ‘dharma’ special to Mahesvara 
probably refers to the Pasupata doctrines propagated by Na (La) kulisa 
(in the 2nd cent. A.D.). Mathura inscription of Candragupta II dated 
A.D. 38. (Gupta era year 61) mentions Lakuli. 

2. This is near the sea and as such is different from one of the same 
name but under Narmada (Supra II. 42.21). 

3. Probably refers to Mahakalesvara of Ujjayini. 

4. Nakulisa, the founder of the Pasupata sect probably finally 
settled in Himalayas. Hence, his dwelling place came to be regarded as a 
sacred place. Its exact location is uncertain. 



11.44.13-24 


601 


13. On the beautiful peak of Himavan in the splendid 
(spot called) Gahgadvara, lord Mahadeva is present for ever 
along with the goddess and accompanied by his disciples. 

14. On performing the rite of ablution there and after 
worshipping the bull-bannered Mahadeva one is purified of 
of all sins. On death, one shall attain the perfect knowledge. 

15. There is another abode of the lord of Devas. It 
is extremely meritorious and splendid. It is well-known as 
Bhimesvara.i On visiting it one eschews sins. 

16. There is another confluence of river Candavega.^ 

It is destructive of sins. On bathing there and drinking 

the waters, one is freed from the sin of Brahmana-slaughter. 

17. The great city named Varanasi is very divine. It is 
a ten thousand times, nay, a hundred million times more 
auspicious than all these holy centres. 

18. Formerly, its greatness had been narrated to you by 
me. Nowhere else does one attain salvation in a single birth 
even by means of Yoga. 

19. These sacred places that remove sins of men have 
been mentioned in view of their importance. By visiting holy 
centres, one should wash off one’s sin (accumulated) at least in 
hundreds of births (?) 

20. The holy centres are not fruitful to him who forsakes 
his duties and goes on pilgrimage to various holy centres. The 
holy centres do not benefit him either in this world or in the 
other world. 

21. A person performing expiatory rites, a widower, a 
wandering mendicant, or a householder or a person of their ilk 
should go on pilgrimage to holy centres. 

22. One may go on a pilgrimage alongwith one’s wife as 
well as the sacrificial fires. If he assiduously performs the pilgri¬ 
mage, he shall be freed from all sins. He shall attain the goal 
as mentioned before. 

23-24. A person desirous of going on pilgrimage shall 
wipe off the threefold indebtedness (viz. to gods, sages and one’s 


1. One Bhimesvara in mentioned under Narmada [vide Supra 
II. 41.20). This is probably a different Tirtha. 

2. Mt. p. 22.28. There also it is regarded sacred to Pitrs. 



602 


K urma Pur ana 


manes). He shall assign proper means of livelihood for the 
sons and entrust his wife to their care. 

In the context of expiatory rites the greatness of the holy 
centres has been recounted.^ He who reads this or listens to 
this is freed from all sins. 


CHAPTER FORTYFIVE 

The description of four types of 
Dissolution^ 

Suta said : 

1. After hearing these words or wisdom uttered orally by 
Narayana, the sages asked the lord who had assumed the form 
of a Tortoise. 

The sages said : 

2-3. Dharma® has been recounted by you. The perfect 
knowledge (leading to) salvation has been explained in detail. 


1. VV. 20-24 give instructions about eligibility to go on a pilgrimage. 
Pilgrimage to sacred places is a sort of atonement for sins. Hence these 
chapters followed the section of expiation. 

2. Description of the dissolution of the world and recreation 
{Pratisarga) is one of the main characteristics of a Parana. The KP. anyhow 
forgot to include it in previous chapters. So before ending the KP. this 
chapter was included. The description of the dissolution of the universe is 
found in the Mbh. Santi, chs. 233, 312 and most Puranas e.g. AP. 368-1-27, 
Bh. P. XII.4.1.-43, Va. P. 100-118-199. As usual there are common 
descriptions containing some common verses. 

3. The word dharma in this verse implies Smrti chapters in KP. I, 
and Moksa jndna implies the so-callcd livara-gitd according to Hazra, and 
hence Vydsa-gitd is an interpolation by Pasupatas. The topics in the Vyasa-gita 
can be called dharma^ as they deal with i expiatory rites, pilgrimage etc., 
but that does not meet Hazra’s objections. Vydsa-gitd is an interpolation in 
the strict sense of the term. 



II.45.4-12 


603 


The detailed explanation of the worlds, the genealogies of kings 
and sages and the Manvantaras have been explained. O lord 
of the chief of Devas, it behoves you now to describe the 
dissolution of the living beings, as narrated by you 
before. O lord of the past and the future. 

Suta said : 

4. On hearing their words, the lord who had assumed the 
form of a Tortoise, the great Yogin, recounted the Pratisancara 
(dissolution) of all living beings. 

Kurma said : 

5. In this Purana the dissolution mentioned is of four 
types viz.: Nilya, Maimittika, Prdkrta and Atyantika (each type is 
described below). 

6. The destruction of the living beings that is witnessed 
every day in this world is called Nitya dissolution by the sages. 

7. The dissolution of the three worlds at the end of the 
Kalpa (a day of Brahma) caused by Brahma (due to his sleep 
at the end of his day) is called Naimittika dissolution by learned 
men. 

8. When the ultimate causes of the universe (i.e. 
beginning with Mahat and ending with Visesa) undergo 
dissolution it is called Prdkrta Pratisarga (dissolution pertaining 
to Prakrti) by those who ponder over Kala. 

9. The final absorption of the Yogin into the Supreme 
Atman as a result of the realisation {jfndna) is called Atyantika 
Pratisarga (ultimate dissolution) by those Brahmanas who 
ponder over Kala. 

10. The Atyantika Pralaya achieved through Jnana has 
already been recounted. Now I shall tell you the Naimittika 
Pralaya succinctly. 

11. At the end of the thousand sets of four Yugas, when 
the time of dissolution arrives, Prajapati sets about to stabilise 
all subjects within his Atman (i.e. withdrawing them into 
himself). 

12. Then for a period of hundred years, a severe 
absence of rain takes place. This terrible draught destructive 
of beings destroys all living beings. 



€04 


Kurma Purana 


13. O lord of the Earth, those beings of deficient 
strength are dissolved at the outset. They attain the state of 
Bhumi (become one with the Earth). 

14. Then the sun rises up and begins to blaze with 
its seven refulgent rays. His rays become unbearable. Through 
them he drinks up water. 

15. The seven rays of the sun drink up the water from 
the great ocean. Thanks to this intake, they become brilliant 
■and change themselves into seven suns. 

16. Then those seven rays (the seven suns) dry up the 
four quarters. Like the fires, they burn the four worlds entirely. 

17. Those seven brilliant suns spread up and down by 
means of their rays. Brightened up by the fire at the end of 
the Yugas, they blaze forth. 

18. Those suns become illuminated by means of the 
water (sucked up by them). They shed forth thousands of rays 
enveloping the whole sky; they scorch and burn the Earth. 

19. Being burnt by their brilliance, the Earth alongwith 
the mountains, rivers, oceans and continents becomes devoid of 
moisture. 

20-21. These blazing rays which have spread down, 
above and obliquely on all sides so powerfully and envelop 
everything that all these form one mass of flame mixed with 
solar fire and form one fiery unit. 

22. The fire that crops up thus becomes destructive of 
all worlds. The fiery sphere immediately burns up the four 
worlds by its brilliance (burning capacity). 

23. Thus when all things movable and immovable are 
destroyed, the earth being devoid of trees and grass looks like 
the back of a tortoise. 

24. The entire universe appears like a frying pan. The 
rays completely burn everything down again and again. 

25. Thereafter, the animals in the netherworlds as well 
as those in the great oceans become destroyed and dissolved. 
They crumble and get mixed into the earth. 

26. Lord Fire, with seven souls, reduces everything to 
ashes—the continents, the mountains, the Varsas (subconti¬ 
nents) and the great oceans. 



11.45.27-39 


605 


27. The flourishing fire drinks up the waters from the- 
oceans and rivers. It blazes up resting on the Earth. 

28. Then the great Saihvartaka fire being ablaze and 
expanded by the power of the wind {Maruteya)* crossing over 
the mountains burns down the worlds. 

29. After burning the Earth, it burns up Rasatala. After 
burning the Earth down below, it burns the heaven above. 

30. The flames of that Sarhvartaka fire leap up hundreds, 
thousands and ten thousands of Yojanas. 

31. Becoming more brilliant by being urged by Kala- 
rudra^ (Rudra, the destroyer) it burns the Gandharvas, 
Pisacas, Yaksas, serpents and Raksasas. 

32. The Kalagni (the fire of destruction) whose body 
has been pervaded by Kala entirely consumes Bhurloka^ 
Bhuvarloka and Maharloka. 

33-34. When all these worlds are pervaded on the sides 
above by the fire, it shines and illuminates everything hidden. 
It enters the entire Universe. Then the terrible Saihvartaka 
clouds rise up in the sky. They have the shapes of huge 
elephants. They are embellished with lightning. 

35-38. There arise in the sky the terrible Saihvartaka 
clouds of world destruction. Some are dark like the blue-lotus; 
some resemble the water-lilies; some are smoke-coloured; some 
are yellow, some have the colour of donkeys, and others 
resemble the red lac juice. Others are white like conch and 
the Kunda flowers. Some clouds are like the finest variety of 
collyrium. Others are like the red arsenic and a few resemble 
pigeons. Some appear like glow-worms and others resemble 
yellow orpiment. Some are like rainbows. Such clouds rise up in 
the heaven. 

39. Some are like mountains; some are comparable to- 
huge herds of elephants. Others are like heaps of burning coal 
and some like shoals of fishes. 


♦v.l. Tudra-tejo-vijrmbhitah “expanded by the brilliance of Rudra.” 

1. Even in this chapter, the credit of destroying the world is given to 
Rudra, vide the next chapter for Rudra’s Tdtfdava dance. But in V.P. VI. 4, 
it is Visnu who dissolves the world. 



606 


Kurma Pur ana 


40. Then all these types of clouds of terrible form and 
loud report fill up the whole of the firmament. 

41. Then those terrible roaring clouds of seven types 
born of the sun release torrents of water and extinguish the 
fire. 

42. Like a flood water gushes out from them as rain. The 
terrible and inauspicious rain destroys the fire. 

43. The entire universe is filled with water of enormous 
quantities. On being thus overpowered by water the fire merges 
itself into the water. 

44. Due to the waters showered by the clouds the fire is 
subdued in hundreds of years. The flood envelops the entire 
universe with huge currents of water. 

45. Impelled by the self-born deity, these showers fill 
the earth with huge floods of water like the flow-tide of an 
ocean. 

46. The whole Earth alongwith the mountains and 
continents is slowly covered with water. The water drunk by 
the rays of the sun remains in the clouds. 

47. Again it falls on the Earth whereby the oceans are 
filled up. Thereafter the oceans go beyond their shores 
everywhere. 

48-49. The mountains become submerged. The earth 
too sinks under the water. In that vast and terrible sheet of 
water, all the mobile and immobile beings get lost. Lord 
Prajapati adopts the Yogic slumber and lies down therein. 
Learned men say that a Kalpa consists of a thousand cycles of 
four Yugas. 

50. The present Kalpa is the Varaha. Its detailed 
description has been given. There are innumerable Kalpas 
pertaining to Brahma, Visnu and Siva. 

51. These have been recounted in the Puranas by the 
sages who ponder over Kala (Time). The greatness ofHari 
predominates in the Sattvika Kalpas. 

52. It is said that (the greatness) of Hara (predominates) 
in the Tamasa Kalpas and (the greatness) of Prajapati (pre¬ 
dominates) in the Rajasa Kalpa. The Varaha Kalpa that is 
current now is considered to be Sattvika. 



11.45.53-61 


607 


53-54a. There are other Sattvika Kalpas also. I (Lord 
Kurma Visnu) predominate in them. After acquiring medita¬ 
tion, penance and perfect knowledge, the Yogins propitiate 
Girisa and attain that great region. 

54b-55a. I am the wielder (master) of Maya. I adopt 
Maya and Yogic slumber in the whole universe as it submerges 
into the sheet of water. 

55b-56a. At that time, during the period of my sleep the 
great sages of noble souls staying in the Janaloka see me with 
their Yogic vision. 

56b. I am the lord and the ancient Purusa, the origin 
(creator) ofBhuh(the Earth) and Bhuvah (the ether). 

57-58. I am the glorious one with thousand feet, thousand 
«yes and thousand legs. I am the Mantra, the Brahmanas, the 
cows, the sacrificial twigs, the Proksanlya (that which should be 
sprinkled), the Soma, the Vrata, (religious vow) the Saihvartaka 
fire, the great Atman, the great and sacred glory. 

59. I am the intellect, the master of senses (the lord 
protector of cowherds), Brahma’s face, the infinite redeemer, 
the Yogin, the goal, the most excellent among those who afford 
the goal. 

60. I am the Haihsa (swan), the vital breath, Kapila, 
■of universal form, the eternal one, the immanent soul, Prakrti, 
Kala (Time), the seed of the universe, the immortal nectar. 

61. There is no mother, father or great lord other than I. 
Narayana of the colour of the sun is the protector of the 
universe. I am the purusa of Yogic form. The Ascetics who 
abide by the Yogic practice see me. After realising the Atman 
they attain my reality. 



608 


Kurma Pur ana 


CHAPTER FORTYSIX 

Dissolution and subsidiary creation 

Kurma said : 

1. Henceforth, I shall explain the Prakrta dissolution.^ 
It is excellent. Even as I recount it succinctly, listen to it. 

2. When the two Parardha periods pass by (i.e. after 
the life time of god Brahma), Kala, the reckoner of the worlds, 
the dark fire of dissolution, sets out to reduce the entire 
universe to ashes. 

3. After projecting the Atman (his self) into Atman, 
and having become lord Mahesvara, he (Kala) burns the 
entire cosmic egg including Devas, Asuras and human 
beings. 

4. Having entered into him (Kalagni), lord Mahadeva, 
Nilalohita, assumes a terrible form and annihilates the worlds. 

5. Entering the solar sphere and manifesting himself in 
various ways, he assumes the form of the scven-steeded deity 
(i.e. the sun) and burns the entire world. 

6. After burning the entire universe, he d ischarges the 
great miraculous weapon Brahmasiras, that burns everything, 
on the bodies of deities. 

7. When all Devas had been burnt, the goddess, the 
daughter of the most excellent of the mountains, stands by as 
the sole witness of Sambhu. So says the Vedic Srutis. 

8. The lord makes an excellent garland of the skulls of 
the heads of Devas and decorates himself with it. He fills 
the sphere of the firmament by the multitudes of suns and 
moons etc. 


1. This concluding chapter deals with the dissolution of the 
universe after the death of Brahma (Prakrta Pralaya) and the table of 
contents of the Purana. 

The Prakrta Pralaya —^The involution of the universe till all the guoas 
attain equilibrium, is based on the Sahkhya^ all the credit of this Pralaya is 
given to god Siva. 

la. VV. 8-12 describe the Tandava dance of Siva. 



II.46.9-20 


609 


9. The lord has a thousand (i.e. innumerable) eyes and 
a thousand eyelids (v. 1. thousand forms), a thousand hands and 
feet and a thousand rays of splendour. He is mightily-armed. 

10. His face is terrible due to the curved fangs. His 
eyes shine like blazing fires. Holding the trident and wearing 
the elephant hide, he is established in his lordly Yoga. 

11. Imbibing the great Bliss, the prolific effusion of the 
nectar, Isvara glances at the goddess and performs a Tanijava 
dance by himself. 

12. The goddess imbibes the highly auspicious Nectar of 
dances of her lord. She adopts Yoga and becomes one with 
the body of the Trident-bearing Lord. 

13. After burning the sphere of the cosmic egg, which is 
naturally fiery, the Pinaka-bearing Lord enjoys the pleasures of 
Tandava dance out of his own will. 

14. When Devas had been annihilated and Brahma, 
Visnu and the Pinaka-bearing lord Siva (are unified in a resting 
position), the element of earth gets dissolved in the waters 
alongwith its attributes.^ 

15. Havyavahana (Fire) swallows the principle of water 
alongwith its attributes. The element of Tejas (fire) accompa¬ 
nied by all its attributes undergoes dissolution in the element of 
Vayu (wind). 

16. The wind, the sustainer of (livings beings in) the 
universe alongwith (its) attributes gets dissolved in the Ether. 
The Ether accompanied by its attribute gets dissolved in the 
Bhutadi (Tamasa Ahaihkara). 

17. All the sense-organs become dissolved in the Taijasa 
(Rajasa Aharhkara). O excellent ones, the Vaikarika (Sattvika 
Aharhkara) gets dissolved alongwith the groups of Devas. 

18. The three types of Ahaihkara (ego) get dissolved in 
the principle Mahat. The Mahat (Intellect) principle gets 
dissolved in Brahma of unmeasured prowess, alongwith these. 

19-20. The unmanifast imperishable source of origin 
of the universe which is single and unchanging annihilates 


1. VV. 14-21 describe the process of involution, the credit of which is 
ascribed to Siva. 



610 


Kurma Pur ana 


things. After annihilating the living beings and the prin¬ 
ciples thus, Mahesvara separates Pradhana and the great 
Purusa, from each other. This is said to be the annihilation of 
the unborn Pradhana and Purusa. 

21. The dissolution does not exist by itself. It 
originates from the will of Mahesvara. When Pradhana is in a 
state of equilibrium of gunas, it is mentioned as unmanifested 
Prakrti. 

22. Pradhana, the principle of Maya, is insentient and 
the source of origin of the universe. The Atman, the twentyfifth 
(principle) is stationed within the hearts of all. It is the pure 
consciousness and knowledge. 

23. It is sung about by sages as the Saksin (cosmic Wit¬ 
ness), the great Pitamaha (grandfather). The power of 
Annihilation is certainly the Sakti of Mahesvara. 

24a. The Sruti says that everything beginning with Pra¬ 
dhana and ending with Visesa is present* in the physical body 
of Rudra. 

24b-25. God Sankara brings about the eternal Laya (dis¬ 
solution) of all Yogins whose hearts are dedicated to spiritual 
knowledge. In this way this self-controlled (or the controller of 
all) Rudra brings about the annihilation of the Universe. 

26-27a. The Sruti says that the slumbering and the 
enchanting Sakti is Narayana. Lord Hiranyagarbha, the 
twentyfifth principle, creates the entire universe consisting of 
the manifest and the non-manifest, through Prakrti after 
identifying himself with it. 

27b. (Defective) The Saktis of Brahma, Visnu and Isa, 
latent within the Atman itself are weak** (?) [v.l. all-pervading, 
quiescent, and omnipresent. They are the bestowers of worldly 
pleasures and salvation. 

28. They are all powerful, binding everything, (v.l. 
worthy of salute by all) perpetual and infinite in their enjoy¬ 
ments of pleasures. They form one imperishable principle in the 
nature ofLord Purusa, Pradhana. 


*v.I. dahet “will bum down” everything beginning with Mahai and 
ending with ViSesa. 

**obviously a misprint v.l. sarvatah —all-round, all-pervading. 



11.46.29-40 


611 


29-30a. There are thousands of other divine Saktis there¬ 
in. Aditya (Sun) and other immortal beings are worshipped 
through different kinds of Yajnas. For each of these Saktis 
there are thousands and hundreds of physical forms mentioned. 
There is only one attributeless potency described variously due 
to its greatness. 

30b-31a. Lord Mahesvara himself adopts that Sakti (in 
his activities). (With that Sakti) he creates many bodies. He 
is seen sporting about. 

31b-32a. In all the Yajnas it is he who is worshipped by 
the Brahmanas, the expounders of the Vedas. It is heard in the 
Vedas that Rudra is the bestower of all desires. 

32b-33a. Among the Saktis of the great Atman the 
deities of Brahma, Visnu and Mahesvara are remembered as the 
most important. 

33b-34a. It is sung (stated) that the Lord, the eternal 
great Atman, the Atman that wields all Mayas, the trident¬ 
bearing Mahesvara is beyond these three. 

34b-36a. Some speak of Him as Agni (as the sole lord) ; 
others call it Narayana. Some speak of it as Indra. Others 
speak of it as Prana and still others speak of it as Brahma. 
(Really speaking) Brahma, Visnu, Agni, Varuna, all Devas 
as well as sages are glorified as the variants of the same 
single entity viz. Rudra. 

36b-37a. Siva bestows benefits after assuming respect¬ 
ively those forms by resorting to which they worship 
Paramesvara. 

37b-38a. Hence, by resorting to one eternal form, one 
should propitiate Mahadeva. One attains thereby the greatest 
region. 

38b-39. But you propitiate the eternal Lord Maha¬ 
deva, the omnipotent, lord Girisa whether Saguna or Nirguna 
(with or without attributes). The Nirguna (attributeless) form 
of Yoga has already been explained to you by me before. 

40. The devotee desirous of climbing (or attaining) to the 
Yoga of Saguna type should worship paramesvara (the supreme 
Ruler) in the Saguna form—the form with three eyes, bearing 
Pinaka with matted hair and clad in elephant hide. 



612 


K urma Pur ana 


41. Or he should meditate on Rudra with golden lustre 
or shining like a thousand suns : So it is heard (mentioned) 
in the Vedas. O leading sages, this is pointed out as Sabija 
Toga (i.e. the Yoga with the seed). 

42-43a. One who is incompetent to perform this should 
worship Hara as VUva (the universe) or as Brahma. O leading 
sages, if one is incapable of even this, one should devotedly 
worship Vayu (wind), Agni (fire), Indraand others. 

43b-44a. Hence, one should forsake all Devas begin¬ 
ning with Brahma and propitiate Virupaksa (three-eyed) i.e. 
Siva who is present at the beginning, in the middle and the 
end.^ 

44b-46a. He should be pure, devoted to his own Dharma 
or Karman. He should adopt the path of devotion. He shall ulti¬ 
mately approach Siva of such a splendid form. This is pointed 
out as Sabija Toga. It is extremely sanctifying. 

46b-47. One who practises Yoga in accordance with 
the injunctions shall attain the region of Isvara. Two other 
pure(meditations) have been mentioned to you. More¬ 
over, the Nirbija and Sabija Yoga has been mentioned. The 
perfect knowledge which is the Nirbija one has been mentioned 
to you before by me. 

48. A sensible man should practise the worship ofVisnu, 
Rudra and Virinci in the Sabija Toga, or he may worship Vayu 
and other Devas with due attachment to them and with his 
self controlled. 

49. He should worship Visnu, Hari, who assumes the 
four Murtis (vyuhas) who has neither beginning nor destruction 
and who is the eternal lord Vasudeva. 

50. He should worship Narayana who is the source of 
origin of the universe, whose greatest region is in the firmament. 


1. VV. 43b-53 describe the sabija Toga path leading to Brahma-bhavana 
(meditation of Brahman). A synthesis of Vaisnavism and Saivism is 
attempted in this final discourse by Ktirma, as the worship of Visnu, Rudra 
and Brahma in practice of sabija Yoga is exhorted therein (vide vv. 48-50). 
The final Siddhanta of Ktirma Purana is the Upanisadic formula Sarvarh 
khalvidath Brahma paraphrased by KP. : tasmad Brahma-mayarh jagat (V. 53a). 



11.46.51-60 


613 


He should invariably wear his Lihga (symbols), he should be 
devoted to him and resort to him. 

51. The same procedure is to be followed in the final 
Brahma-Bhavana (meditation of Brahman). Thus the perfect 
knowledge related to Bhavana (meditation) has been explained 
by me. 

52-53. It is this that had been narrated formerly by me 
to the sage Indradyumna. This universe of the nature of the 
manifest is born sentient and non-sentient. The Supreme 
Brahman is its Isvara (Lord). Hence, the universe is identical 
with the Brahman. 

Suta said : 

After saying this much Lord Janardana stopped. Accom¬ 
panied by Indra, the sages eulogised Visnu the consort of Ma 
(i.e. LaksmI). 

Eulogy of Vifnu 

The sages said : 

54. Obeisance to you, to Visnu, the great Atman of the 
form of the tortoise. Hail to Vasudeva, to omnipresent 
Narayana. 

55. Obeisance, again and again to you, to Krsna, and to 
Govinda, Obeisance always to you, to Madhava, to the lord of 
Yajnas. 

56. Obeisance to you with a thousand (i.e. innumer¬ 
able) heads. Salutation to you with a thousand eyes. Obeisance 
to one with a thousand hands and to one with a thousand feet. 

57. Om ! Hail to Visnu of the embodiment of perfect 
knowledge, to the great Atman. Obeisance to you, the Bliss. 
Bow to you who are beyond the pale of Maya. 

58. Salutation to you of concealed body (or O Kurma- 
Tortoise), to you the attributeless (Nirguna) one, to the ancient 
Purusa, of the form of only pure Existence. 

59. Obeisance to Sankhya; Bow to the pure Yoga, 
obeisance to you, comprehensible through the meditation on 
Dharma; salutation be to the unsullied one. 

60. Hail to you the principle of Yoga; obeisance to the 
Isvara of great Yoga; obeisance to the lord of the greater and 



614 


Kurma Parana 


the lesser beings. Obeisance to you, comprehensible through 
the Vedas. 

61. Obeisance to the enlightened one,^ to the pure one; 
Bows again and again to you, the wielder of Maya. Obeisance 
to Vedhas. 

62. Hail to you Varaha; obeisance to you Nara- 
simha; bow to you Vamana; obeisance to you Hrsikesa. 

63. Obeisance to the bestower of heavenly pleasures and 
salvation; salutation to one whose Atman is un-obstructed. 
Obeisance to one attainable through Yoga; obeisance to the 
Yogin, to the bestower of Yogas. 

64-65a. Obeisance to the lord of Devas. Hail to you, 
the suppressor of the distress of Devas. O lord, the perfect 
knowledge that is destructive of all worldly existence (Samsara) 
has been acquired by us, thanks to your grace—the perfect 
knowledge on realising which one attains immortality. 

65b-67a. By your grace different kinds of Dharma were 
heard, the detailed narration of the races and the Manvan- 
taras, the Sarga, the Pratisarga and the detailed description of 
this cosmic egg—everything was understood; indeed you are 
the witness of all the universe; you are the cause of the 
universe; you are the great Narayana. It behoves you the 
Infinite Atman, to save us, who have sought refuge in you 
alone.” 

Suta said : 

67b-68a. O Brahmanas, the whole of the Kurma Purana, 
that bestows worldly pleasures and salvation has been related to 
you. It is the same as was narrated by Gadadhara (Visnu). 

68b-69. In this Purana,^ at the outset, the birth of 
Laksmi has been narrated. In order to fascinate the living 


1. namo buddhayOf though translated here as ‘obeisance to the 
enlightened one, it can be taken as ‘obeisance to Buddha*. Puranas did try 
(and successfully so) to accommodate Buddha in Brahmanism by regarding 
him as an incarnation of Visnu. 

2. VV. 69-118 give the main contents of this Purana. It is not a table 
of contents in the modern sense but an enumeration of the main topics in 
this Purana. Even understanding this summary is said to absolve one of all 
sins and secure honour in Brahmaloka (v. 119). 



11.46.70-81 


615 


beings, her birth has been intended by Vasudeva. The crea¬ 
tions of the Prajapatis, the duties of different Varnas 
(castes) and their avocations have been described. 

70-73a. The splendid characteristics ofDliarma, Artha, 
Kama and Moksa have been mentioned. The identity, the 
separateness and the special characteristics of Brahma, Visnu 
and the intelligent Mahesa have been recounted. The charac¬ 
teristics of the Devotees have been mentioned. The behaviour, 
the diet* and the characteristics of the castes and stages of life 
have been narrated precisely. O leading sages, the primordial 
creation, the seven coverings of the Anda (i.e. cosmic Egg) and 
the creation of Hiranyagarbha have been related. 

73b-77. The period and units of time have been enume¬ 
rated, then the greatness of Isvara; the lying down in the 
waters by Brahma; the derivation of the names; the uplift of 
the Earth by Visnu in the form of a Boar; the narration of 
Mukhya and other creations, then the creation of the sages; 
narration of the creation of Rudra and Rsis and of sages; the 
creation of the subjects by Dharma before the Tamasa 
creation; the argument between Brahma and Visnu; the entry 
of Brahma into the body of Visnu the birth from the 
lotus of the intelligent lord and his delusion; the vision of 
Mahesa and the greatness of Mahesa recounted by Visnu. 

78. The granting of divine vision unto Brahma, the 
supreme god (Paramesthin) ; the eulogy of the lord of Devas 
by Brahma, Paramesthin. 

79-80. The grace of Siva and the granting of boons; 
the dialogue between Visnu and Sankara the great Atman; the 
granting of boons at the outset and then the disappearance 
of the Pinaka-bearing lord. O Brahmanas, thereafter, the 
slaying ofMadhu and Kaitabhahas been narrated. 

81. The incarnation of lord Brahma from the 
umbilical lotus of Visnu is described. So also the unification 
of the lord with Brahma formerly has been narrated. 


♦This appears to be a misprint as the strangeness of the meaning 
shows. The v.l. iobkanam for bhojanam is better. With that v.l. the line means 
‘excellent behaviour of the devotees has been described’ 



616 


Kurma Pur ana 


82. The delusion of Brahma and then the recognition of 
Hari has been described; the performance of the penance by 
the intelligent lord of Devas has been narrated. 

83. The appearance of Mahesa from the forehead of 
Brahma is mentioned thereafter; the creative activity of the 
Rudras and its prohibition of the same by Brahma is told. 

84-85. The glory of the lord of Devas, the granting 
of the boons and the instruction, the vanishment of the lord, 
the performance of penance of the egg-born; the appearance 
of the lord of Devas; Rudra’s possession of half-male and 
half-female form; the narration of separation of the goddess 
from the Pinaka-bearing lord of Devas. 

86. Afterwards the daughtership of the goddess of 
Daksa as well as that of Himalaya is described alongwith the 
reality of the goddess. 

87. The manifestation of the divine and the universe- 
form, the thousand names of the goddess are enumerated by 
the father Himavan himself. 

88. The advice given by the great goddess; the grant¬ 
ing of the boons; The creation of subjects by Bhrgu and 
others; the detailed narration of the race of kings. 

89. The Pracetasatva (the state of being the son of 
Pracetas) of Daksa, the destruction of Yajna of Daksa, the 
dispute between Dadhica and Daksa is then narrated. 

90. O leading sages, thereafter the imprecation of the 
sages (by Dadhica) has been mentioned; then the arrival of 
Rudra, his grace and the vanishment of the Pinaka-bearing 
lord. 

91. Then the advice to Pitamaha for the protection is 
described {ranaya* ‘for fighting’), the creation of the subjects 
by Daksa and Kasyapa, the great Atman. 

92. The slaying of Hiranyakasipu and then that of 
Hiranyaksa, thereafter, the curse to the dwellers of the 
Devadaru forest is mentioned. 

93. Then the subjugation ofAndhaka and the (granting 
of) the excellent chieftainship of the Ganas. The curbing of 
Prahlada and the binding over of Bali. 


*v .1. rakfaffdya instead of ‘ranaya’ is accepted. 



ir.46.94-105 


617 


94. The defeat of Bana and the grace shown to him by 
the trident-bearing lord; the detailed narration of the families 
of the sages; the races of the king are glorified. 

95. The birth of Hari, Visnu out of his own free will 
from Vasudeva, visit to Upamanyu and the performance of 
penance. 

96. The acquisition of the boon after seeing the three¬ 
eyed Mahadeva accompanied by Amba; the departure to 
Kailasa and staying there by Sarngin (Krsna). 

97. Then the fear of the dwellers of Dvaravatl, their 
protection by Garuda after conquering the powerful enemies 
are described. 

98. The arrival of Narada and the journey of Garutman 
(Garuda), thereafter the arrival of Krsna to the hermitage of 
the sages. 

99. The daily routine of Vasudeva. His worship of 
Sivalinga. Thereafter, the questions put by the sage Mar- 
kandeya have been mentioned. 

100. The narration of the precise nature of the Linga 
and the Lingin as a sequel to the narration of the worship of 
Linga, the fear arising out of Linga. * 

101. O leading sages, in the middle, the delusion of 
Brahma and Visnu has been described and their departure up 
and down the Linga has been related. 

102. The eulogy of the lord of Devas, the grace of 
supreme deity Siva, vanishment of the Linga and the birth 
of Samba thereafter. 

103. O excellent Brahmanas, thereafter Aniruddha’s 
birth has been glorified, (then) the inclination of Krsna to¬ 
wards departure (thence), and the arrival of the sages. 

104. The laying down of precepts by Krsna; the grant¬ 
ing of the boons by the great Atman, Krsna’s departure and 
visit of Partha (Arjuna). 

105. Narration of the eternal characteristics ofYugasby 
Krsnadvaipayana; the benediction to Partha and his departure 
to Varanasi thence. 


♦Misprint for dvirbhdva ‘manifestation of the Linga.’ 



618 


Kurma Parana 


106. (The departure to Varanasi) by Vyasa the saintly 
son of Parasara, the worker of miracles, the greatness of 
Varanasi and the description of holy centres. 

107. Vyasa’s pilgrimage, vision of the goddess, his 
banishment and granting of the boons (have been mentioned). 

108. The greatness of Prayaga; the narration of various 
holy centres, O Brahmanas, and the enormous benefit therefrom 
and the going away of Markandeya, O Brahmanas. 

109. The nature of the worlds, the arrangement of the 
luminaries, the decisive position of the sub-continents and the 
rivers therein. 

110. The enumeration of the mountains; the abodes of 
heaven-dwellers; the classification of continents and the 
description of Sveta Dvipa. 

111. The lying (sleeping) ofVisnu, the greatness of the 
great Atman; the narration of the Manvantaras and the 
grandeur of Visnu. 

112. The classification of the Vedas into Sakhas 
(branches); the enumeration of Vyasas; O leading sages, (the 
details) of non-vedas (Puranas etc.) and Vedas have been 
mentioned. 

113. The story of Yogesvaras and the glorification 
of their disciples. The various mystic Gitas ofisvara have been 
glorified. 

114. The conduct of life of the castes and stages of 
life; the mode of expiatory rites; the Kdpalitva (the state of 
holding the skull) of Rudra and his begging for alms. 

115. The narration of the chaste ladies and the 
discussion (and decision) about sacred places, the restraint of 
Mahkanaka. All these have been described. 

116. O Brahmanas, the killing of Kala is succinctly 
mentioned. So also the entry of Sambhu as well as of Visnu 
into the forest of Devadaru trees. 

117. The manifestation to the sages of the six clans by 
the intelligent lord of Devas; the granting of boons by the 
lore to Nandin has been glorified. 

118. Thereafter, the Naimittika dissolution has been 
described; subsequently the Prakrta dissolution as well as the 
Sabija yoga has been explained. 



11.46.119-131 


619 


119. He who is glorified in the Purana after understanding 
its summary, thus, becomes freed from all sins and is honoured 
in the Brahmaloka. 

120-121. After saying this and taking goddess Sri (with 
him), Purusottama (lord Visnu) abandoned the form of the 
tortoise and went; and then Hara (also) (v.l. Hari is relevant 
in the context). After saluting Visnu, the Supreme person, and 
drinking the nectar, Devas and sages went over to their 
respective abodes, O Brahmanas. 

122. The whole of this Purana was directly narrated by 
Visnu who had assumed the form of the tortoise, who is the over- 
lord of Devas and the source of origin of the universe. 

123. O Brahmanas, he who regularly reads this (through) 
succinctly becomes freed from all sins and is honoured in the 
Brahmaloka. 

124. Understand the merit accruing to the person who 
copies this and presents it to a Brahmana well versed in the 
Vedas, in the month of Vaisakha or Karttika. 

125-126. He shall be freed from all sins. He will be 
endowed with every type of riches and glory. After enjoying the 
extensive divine and splendid pleasure (in the heaven), when he 
falls off from the heaven, he is born in the family of Brahmanas. 
Thanks to the great efficacy of the previous impression, he 
attains Brahmavidya. 

127. On reading even a single chapter, he is freed from 
all sins. He who ponders over the meaning properly attains 
the greatest region. 

128. This holy text should be studied by the Brahmanas 
at every Parvan (festive occasion). O excellent Brahmanas it 
should be heard also, as it is destructive of great sins. 

129. If all the Puranas and the Itihasas were placed on 
one pan and the greatest Veda* on another pan, the former 
alone is the weightier. 

130-131. If this Purana were to be excluded, there is no 
other means of dispelling sins. O sages of holy rites, in no 


♦This denigration of Vedas is unexpected. The v.l. cedam is better than 
vedam (probably a confusion between c and v in Devanagari script). 



620 


Kurma Pur am 


other Purana is lord Narayana, Hari, Visnu glorified so much 
as in this. The Brahml Saihhita of this Purana is destructive 
of all sins. 

132-133. The greatest Brahman is glorified in this [Purana) 
precisely. The greatest of all holy centres, the greatest of all 
penances, the greatest of all perfect knowledges and the greatest 
of all holy rites are glorified in this. This scripture should not 
be studied in the presence of a Sudra. 

134. If any one of deluded souls studies so, he falls into 
many hells. In the course of a Sraddha or any other rites per¬ 
taining to gods, this scripture must be caused to be read 
by the twice-born. 

135. Especially, at the end of a Yajna (it should be 
read). It wipes off all defects. This scripture must particularly 
be studied by those who seek salvation. 

136-137a. It should be heard and pondered over. It 
explains and supplements the meanings of Vedic passages. 
After understanding it oneself, one should narrate it to the 
leading Brahmanas endowed with devotion. He shall be rid of sins 
and shall attain identity with Brahman. 

13 7b-138a. If anyone were to give it to one who has 
no faith and to one who is sinful, he will fall into hells after 
death. Thereafter, he will be born in the lowly womb of dogs. 

138b-140a. Only after making obeisance to Hari, Visnu 
the eternal source of origin of the universe, should this scripture 
of Krsnadvaipayana be studied. This is the command of Visnu, 
the lord of Devas of unmeasured splendour as well as of 
Vyasa, the noble-souled Brahmana sage, the son of Parasara.^ 

140b-142a. After hearing this from lord Narayana, 
Narada, the holy sage, gave this to Gautama at the outset. 
From him Parasara obtained it. The holy lord Parasara 
recounted this (Purana) that yields the Purusarthas viz 
Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksa, to the sages, at Gaiigadvara, 
O great sages. 

142b-144. At the outset, this was narrated to the in¬ 
telligent Sanaka by Brahma as well as to Sanatkumara. It is 

1. VV. 122-140a give the Phala-Sruti and other instructions regarding 
reading etc. of the Purana. 



11.46.145-147 


621 


destructive of all sins. The holy lord, the foremost among those 
who know Yoga, sage Devala got it from Sanaka. Pancasikha 
obtained this excellent (sacripture) form Devala. The saintly 
son of Satyavatl got this from Sanatakumara. 

145-146a. (From Sanatkumara Vyasa got this Purana 
in which all topics have been brought together. I heard this 
(Purana) that is destructive of sins from him and related it to 
you all. This should be given to the righteous people by you all.^ 

146b-147. Obeisance unto that sage, Vyasa the great 
sage and omniscient son of Parasara, the quiescent sage, a 
form ofNarayana. 

Obeisance unto that Visnu, lord ofDevas, in the form of 
tortoise, from whom everything is born and in whom every¬ 
thing gets dissolved.^ 


1. VV. 140b-146a describe the three oral traditions of the KP as 
follows : 

I Narayana—>-Narada—>Gautama—>-Parasara—>-sages at Gahgadvara. 

II Brahma—>-Sanaka (and Sanat-Kumara)—>-Devala—^-Pancasikha. 

IIA Sanatkumara—>■ Vyasa—>-Suta->Naimisaranya sages. 

2. The concluding verse confirms the original Vaisnavite form of 
this Purana. 




INDEX 


In the following Index, the 1st (Roman) figure indicates the number of 
the part {Ardha), the next (Arabic) figure, the number of the chapter and 
the next (Arabic) figure or figures the number of the verse or verses. In 
case no number is given after the number of the chapter, it shows that the 
whole chapter deals with that topic. For example on p. 623 the entry 
is Aditi 1.17.14-42. It means that the story of Aditi is given in the I Part, 
17th chapter and verses 14-42. Agnihotra 11.24 means the topic of Agnihotra 
is dealt with in the 24th chapter of the II Part. If the topic covers more 
than one chapter, the abbreviation Chs. precedes the numbers denoting the 
chapter. Thus Avimukta I. Chs. 31-35 means the topic is dealt with in 
chapters 31 to 35 in Part I. When the reference belongs to the same Part, 
the repetition of the number of the part is omitted and simply the numbers 
of the chapter and the verse (s)are given. For example (ii) A Tirtha 
(a sacred Pool) 1.35.7; 39.4 means that the second reference belongs to the 
same part (I) but is mentioned in the 4th verse of the 39th chapter. 


A 

Aditi—Mother of gods—performed 
penance to have Visnu as son to 
punish Bali—1.17.14-42; mother 
of the Sun-god—1.20.1 
Aditya—The Sun-god—Born of Ka- 
syapa and Aditi 1.20-1—His pro¬ 
geny, a proginator of the Solar 
race—1.20-4 If.—Description of 
the chariot of the Sun—1.41-27-33, 
—Movements of The Sun—1.41- 
36-41—The Twelve Adityas 1.41- 
44; 42.2-3—Functions of Adity¬ 
as—1.42—Seven rays of the Sun- 
god—1.43.3-4—Functions of the 
Solar rays—1.43.1-27—His Eulogy 
{Surya-hrdaya) —11.18.35-45 
Agni (1) The Fire-god—Identified 
with Rudra—1.13.14—Agni’s pro¬ 
geny—1.13.15-18—Protected Sita 
11.34.125 Eulogized by Sita—11.34. 
116-123—Destroys the universe as 
Sarhvartaka—11.45.27-33 
Agni (ii) A sacred Pool {Tirtha) —I. 
35.7; 39.4 

Agnidhra—Original King of Jambu- 
dvipa—divides Jambudvipa in nine 
Parts {varsas) & gives one to each 
of his sons—1.40.30-35; Retires for 
penance 1.40.36 

Agni-hotra —Fire-worship— Rules and 
duties pertaining to—11.24 
Ahalya (i) Gautama’s wife—11.41.44 
— (ii) A Tirtha 11.41.43-45 
Alakananda—a sacred river—1.46.31 


Amarakanfaka—a mountain 11.20.29 
—H.40-32, 39; 40.9-13 
Amaravati—a celestial city of 
Indra—1.46.10-12 

Anadhyaya days (on which studies 
are prohibited)—11.14. 64-87 
Anakadundubhi—A king proficient in 
music—penance at Govardhana 
1.24.49-62 

Andhaka—a demon 1.16.95-96 
—Fights for Uma 1.16.131-193 
—Surrenders and accepted as a 
Siva-gana—1.16.215—Accepted 
_ as a son by Uma 1.16.219 
Andhras—N. of a people (Tribe)— 
1.47.41-44 

Ahgirasa—(i) Siva’s disciple—1.15- 
16. (ii) A Tirtha—11.41.31-33 
Aparanta—N. of a people—1.47.42 
Arjuna—A Pandava—After Krsna’s 
death meets Vyasa and discusses 1.29 
Aruna—a sacred river—11.30.22 
Arundhati—(i) Vasistha’s wife—I. 
19, 20, 23—an ideal chaste woman 
X:1.12.223 (ii) Wife of Dharma— 
_ 1.16.7-11 

Asauca—Impurity due to birth or 
death—Rules for—11.23.1-68 
Asrama—stage (s) in life—classifica- 
_ tion and duties of—1.3.2-28 
Asuri—Siva’s disciple—1.53-15 
Asva-tirtha—A Tirtha —II.35-38 
Asvina—N. of a twin god—II.7.38 
Asvini—N. of a constellation—11.20.15 
Avimukta (see Varanasi)—I. Chs. 
31-35; II.7.14 



624 


Kurma Pur ana 


B 

Badari, also Badarikasrama—A sacred 
place beloved of Siva—11.37.50-52 
—Siva imparted Isvara-gUa to Sanat 
Kumara and others here—II. 1.18-31 
Bali—A pious Demon-King— Story 
of—1.17 

Bali’s conquests—17.12 ff 
Donates land to Vamana—17.50ff 
Established in the nether-world 
17-63 

Bana(i) A demon-king absorbed as 
Siva’s gana—1.18.1-7 

(ii) A Tirtha under Narmada— 
II.41.9-10 

Bhadra—A branch of divine Gahga 
in Uttara-kuru (Mod. Yarkand— 
De)—1.46.33 

Bhadra-Karna—A Tirtha under Nar¬ 
mada (Mod. Karnali—De)— 1.31. 
46; 11.20.35 

Bhadrasva—A Varsa east of Meru 
1.40.30-35; 45.20-21; 47.2 
Bharata-varsa—India—1.47 Moun¬ 

tain-ranges and river-systems in— 
47.21-40; People in 1.47. 41-44 
Bhavana—A kind of meditation— 
classification of—1.2.93-96 
Bhimarathi or Bhima—a sacred river 
in Maharashtra 1.47.36 
Bhrgu Tirtha—a sacred place, (mod. 

Bhera ghat)—11.42.1-6 
Bhrgu Tunga—A Tirtha specially 
meritorious for Sraddha —11.20.33; 
37. 33-34 

Brahma—^The creator of the universe 
(sometimes identified with Visnu 
and also with Siva) 

—Br. called Narayana sleeps on 
cosmic waters 1.6.1 -5—Uplifts the 
earth as a Divine Boar (Varaha)— 
6.6-25;16.79-84 

—Bom from the lotus in Visnu’s 
navel—1.9.10-36; 9.25-36 
—Eulogised by Vasumanas—E.— 

I. 20.53-55 

—Controversy with Visnu about 
personal greatness—1.9.12-49 
—Created nine Prajapatis for world 
creation—1.10.88-89 
—Proudly criticises Siva—11.31. 
1-22 

—Challenges Siva to fight—11.31. 
23-28 

—Bhairava cuts off Brahma’s 
head—11.31. 29-31—Brahma’s 

head sticks to Bhairava’s hand— 

II. 31. 65ff 


Brahma—Eulogizes Siva—11.31.49-57 
Brahmacarin—a religious (celibate) 
student—Dutiesofll.l4—Duties in 
relation with the preceptor—11.14. 
1-16; 22-27—with preceptor’s 

family—11.14.28-37 
Duties while learning—11.14.42-49 
Japa of Gayatri—11.14.50-59 
Anadhyaya days—11.14.64-87 
Brahma Tirtha ; under various 
important Tirthas e.g. under 
Varanasi—1.35.9; 11.37.28; under 
Narmada—11.41-56 
Brahmavarta—The best (sacred- 
most) —land—11.7.14 

C 

Candra (i) The Moon (See under 
Planetary System in 1.41, 1-43) 

(ii) A Kula-parvata in Plaksa-dvipa— 
—1.49.3 

(iii) A Dvipa—1.47.7 

(iv) Candra-Sthana—1.48.53-54 

(v) N. of a Tirtha under Varanasi 
1.35.11, Kaveri—11.37.23, Nar¬ 
mada—11.42.15-16 

Carmanyavati—River (Mod. Cham- 
bal)—1.47.31 
Chariots of Planets— 

(i) The Moon—1.43.32—41 

(ii) Budha—43.42 
(iii ) Sukra—43.43 

(iv) Brhaspati (Jupiter)—43.44-45 
Creation of the world— 

(i) By Visnu through Brahma 1.2. 

(ii) By Rudra—1.10 

(iii) Through Prakrti—1.4 

(iv) Different creations by Brahma 
1.7 & 8 vide Intro, pp. xxii-xxv 

(v) Mukhyadi creation (By Sva- 
yambhuva Manu and Daksa)-1.8 

Cyavana—(i) a sage—1.19.4 
(ii) Siva’s disciple—1.53-19 

D 

Dadhica—a sage, advocates Siva’s 
presence in Pracetasa Daksa’s sacri¬ 
fice—1.15.6-27—Curses anti-Siva 

Brahmanas I. 15.28-32 
Daksa— (1) Prajapati—God Brahma’s 
son and Sati’s father—Insults Siva 
—Sati’s Yogic self immolation and 
Rudra’s curse—1.14.54-65 
(2 )Second tirtha as son of Pracetas— 
1.14.53—Performs sacrifice at 
Gahgadvara—Quarrel with Da¬ 
dhica on Siva’s Share—1.15.8-27 



Index 


625 


—Daksa’s sacrific£ destroyed 
at Devi’s request—1.15.34-79 
Daksa pardoned by Siva and 
advised by Brahma 1.15.79-98 
Progeny of Daksa’s daughters— 
1.13 and 16 (chs.) 

Daksinatya—People of the Deccan 
(of Bharata varsa)—1.47.42 
Daruvana and Deva-daruvana—II. 
37.53-61; Legend of Siva’s Lihga 
dropping—11. Chs. 38 and 39 
Dana-dharma—Charity—Its four 
varieties defined—II.26.2-8 Quali¬ 
fications of the donee and fruit of 
Dana on specific days—II.26.9-74 
Dasasvamedhika—A Tirtha award¬ 
ing merit of Ten Asvamedhas to 
the bather—mentioned under ; 

Ganga 11.37.26; Narmada—11.41. 
104-107 

Devi [Uma, Parvati ] Siva’s consort 

(i) Birth from Daksa—1.11.8-10 
(For her self-immolation vide 
Daksa 

(ii) Second birth from Himavan— 
1.10.11-13 

One Thousand epithets of—1.12, 
2-324 

Eulogised by Andhaka—1.16. 
216-218 

Devika—a river—1.47.29; 11.37.25 
Dharma-prsfha—A holy place under 
Gaya—li.37.38 
Dhataki-Khanda—1.40.15 
Dhruva—(i) King, Son of Medha- 
tithi—1.38-24 

(ii) King, Son of Uttanapada— 
1.14.2-3 

(iii) a god—1.16. 11-13 

(iv) The Polar star—1.41.5, 26, 31, 
42—1.43. 30, 46 

Drsadvati—River (Mod. Ghaggar?) 
—1.47.29 

Durjaya—King. Descendant of Jaya- 
dhvaja 

—Dalliance withUrvasi—1.123.4-47 
—As per Kanva’s advice expiates 
sins at Varanasi—1.23. 41-44 
Duties (Dharmas)—Cf. different 
Castes {Vanuis) and Stages in life 
( Airamas) —1.2.38-74 
Airamas classified as per Trinity of 
gods—1.2.101-111 

Dvaraka or Dvaravati—Krsna’s capi¬ 
tal city—1.26.18-29; 47-35 
Dynasties of kings 1.20 
of sages 1.19 


E 

Eran^ sangama—Confluence with 
Narmada—11.43.31-32 

F 

Food-articles—Prohibited and per¬ 
mitted for eating—11.17 

G 

Gandha-Madana— 

(1) A division (varsa) of Jambu- 
dvipa—1.40.35 

(2) Forest to the south of Ilavrta— 
1.45.22 

(3) a mountain (a part of Kai- 
lasa-range)—1.45. 15, 31 

Ganga— (heavenly)—1.46.28-33— 
Four streams of—1.36.29-37 
Ganga— A River—1.37.33-36; 1.39. 
8-10; II. 20.29 etc.; confluence with 
Yamuna 1.37.6-8 

Gautama (i) A sage—Protects Brah- 
manas in a draught—1.16. 97-103 
—Death of a fake cow—1.16.104- 
105 

—Curses ungrateful Brahmanas— 
—1.16. 109-110 

Gautama—(2) One of the seven 
sages in Vaivasvata Manvantara— 

1.51.25- 26 

(3) Vyasa in the 19th Dvapara— 
1.52.7 

(4) An incarnation of Siva—1.53.7 
Gaya—(1) A holy place—1.31.36— 

Greatness of—II.35.7-15—Pitrs 
expect Sraddha at—11.20.30-32 
(2) A TfrtAa under Varanasi—1.35.5 
Gayatri—Importance of—11.14.53.59 
Godavari—River—Holy for bath and 
irdddha—lAl.Z&-, 11.37.15-16 
Gokarna (i) A sacred place—1.41.48, 
Uttara Gokarna—11.35.29-32 
(ii) An incarnation of Siva—1.53.8 
Govardhana—a mountain—Place of 
king Prthu’s penance—1.14.18 
H 

Harivarsa—a sub-continent—1.47. 
10-19 

Hastinapura—Capital city of Kurus 
—1.36.6 

Himavat (i) a mountain—1.45, 9, 30 
King Susila met Svetasvatara at— 

1.14.25- 29;—Sveta, an incarna¬ 
tion of Siva, lived on—1.53.1-3 etc. 
(ii) A Tirtha or Sacred place—I. 

35.13 



626 


Kurma Pur ana 


Hiranyakasipu—A Demon king—Prah- 
lada’s father—story of—1.16.21-75 
Hiranyaksa—A demon king—Hiranya- 
kasipu’s brother—killed by Visnu- 
Varaha—1.16.22, 60-63, 77-83 
House-holder {Grhastha) —Duties of— 
11.15 

Householder’s dress—11.15.3-8 
His marital duties—II. 15.9-13 
Other religious duties—11.15. 14-42 
Etiquettes and Rules of Conduct— 
—11.16 

Prescribed daily routine of a grha¬ 
stha —11.18 

Rules regarding taking food—11.19 
Htina—A people in Bharata-Varsa— 
I.'47.43 

I 

Iksvaku—Description of the race of— 

i.21 

Ilavrta—A subcontinent {varsa) 1.40. 

30-35; 45.14-16. 22-24—1.'47.20 
Indra (i) King of gods—1.1.123; 
17.43 etc., 

(ii) Vyasa in the 7th Dvapara yuga 
-1.52-4 

(iii) A Dvipa —1.47.29 
Indradyumna—^The king—story of— 

I. 1.43-48—Born as a Brahmana— 
1.1-50—Propitiates Visnu and is 
enlightened by him—1.1.51-122 

J 

Jaigisavya— (1) A sage—His hermit- 
ag^I.48.17-22 

(2) An incarnation of Siva—1.53.5 
Jambtidvipa—A continent of which 
India—Bharata-Varsa is a part. 
Description (e.g. Varsa-parvatas— 
VV.6-10, people—vv. 13-20 etc) 
in 1.45.6-41. Also 1.46 (for rivers 
etc. VV. 1-33, Boundary-moun¬ 
tains VV. 34-40 etc). See I. 48 
also—Its divisions—1.40. 30-35.— 
Founder king Agnidhra—1.40.10, 
30 

Jayadhvaja—A king, story of—1.22. 
21-87 (e.g. killing of demon Videha— 
VV 51-65, adores Visnu as per 
Visvamitra’s advice—VV.74-87) 

Race of Jayadhvaja—1.29 
Jalesvara or Jalesvara—A Tirtha 
under Narmada—H.40.22-23 
Jamadagni Tirtha—At the confluence 
of Narmada and the Sea—11.43. 
33-34 


Jamadagnya Tirtha—11.44.10 
Japyesvara—Place of Nandi’s penance 
(Story of Silada)—11.43.17-42 

K 

Kailasa—Mountain-abode of Siva— 
1.26.19, 14, 64 (Krsna’s stay at 
K. 1.26) Indra’s mansion on K.— 
1.48.3-12 

Kala—Time-calculation of—1.5 vide 
Intro.pp.xxv-xxvi 

Kalahjara Ksetra—Kala killed by 
Siva (see Sveta) and revival— 

H. 36.11-38 

Kalihga—(i) A desa and people in 
Bharata Varsa—1.47-42; H.40.9 
(ii) A hill east of lake Arunoda— 
1.45.28 

Kamarupa—A people in Bharata 
Var^a—1.47.41 

Kanakhala—A holy place-II.37. 10-12 
Kapala-mocana-tirtha—story how 

Rudra’s hand was freed from god 
Brahma’s skull—11.31.69-103 
Kapardisvara—A Lihga and a Tirtha 
under Varanasi—1.33 
Kasyapa a sage—Description of 
Kasyapa’s race—1.18 
Kaveri—a sacred river—11.37.16-17 
—its source—Candra Tirtha—II. 
37-23 

Kayavarohana—A sacred place— 
(Birth place of Nakulisa)—mod. 
Karvan in Gujarat—II.44.7-8 
Kedara—A holy shrine in the Hima¬ 
layas—II.37.5-6 

Ketumala—N. of a Varsa (sub¬ 
continent)—1.47-1 ff 
Kimpurusa— (1) King of Hema- 
kuta Varsa—1.40.30-35 
(2) N. of a Varsa—1.47.8-9 
Kokamukha—Varaha Tirtha at 
Triveni in Purnea district—1.31- 
47; li.35-36 

Kraunca-dvipa—Founder King— 
Dyutiman—1.40.19-21; Descrip¬ 

tion—1.49.26-32 

Krsna—Visnu’s incarnation—reques¬ 
ted for a son by Jambavati—1.24. 
83-86—Krsna’s penance—1.25.1-50 
(Siva manifested and praised—Krsna 
praised W. 51-7 7—Boon to Krsna 
—VV.78-90—Krsna accompanies 

Siva to Kailasa] Krsna’s stay at 
Kailasa and return to Dvaraka— 

I. 25.92 and Ch.I.26;Krsna explained 
Linga worship 1.26.50—109 
Krsna’s retirement from the world— 
1.27' 



Index 


627 


Krttivasesvara—A Tirtha under Vara¬ 
nasi—1.32-14-29 (named after 

Siva’s killing of an elephant-for¬ 
med demon) 

Kubjasrama—(also Kubjamra as per 
De, p.105)—Sacred place near 
Haridwar—11.20-33,11.35.33-35 
Kurma— (1) Tortoise incarnation of 
Visnu 

—Supported Mt. Mandara while 
churning the Sea—1.1-29 
—Guides spiritually Indradyumna 
—1.1.51-122—Narrates Kurma 
Purana to sage Narada and 
others—1.1.126 ff 
—Eulogized by sages—11.46-54-67 

(2) N. of a Purana narrated by 
Kurma to Indradyumna and 
Narada (vide above)—sections of 
the Kurma Purana.1.1.22-23— 
Contents of the KP.—1.1.23-25; 
11.46.67-119 

Traditional reciters of KP—11.46.140- 
147 

For problems in KP see Introduc¬ 
tion, pp. xix-xxix; xli-xlvi 
Kuru—A Varsa (subcontinent) North 
of mt. Srhgavan 1.40.30-35 ; 47.6 
Kuruksetra—A holy place—Glory of— 
II.35-5-6 

Kuru-jahgala—A Tirtha—11.37-36- 
37 

Kusa-dvipa—Description of—1.49. 

19-26; Ruled by King Jyotisman— 
1.40-12 

L 

Laksmi— (1) A daughter of Bhrgu— 

I. 13-1 

(2) A daughter of Daksa—1.8.15 

(3) Consort of Visnu—1.1-123 etc. 
Lanka—Ravana’s capital (Location 

still uncertain)—1.21-37-38, 44— 

II. 34.127 

Livelihood—the means of: 

—Rules regarding the L. of Twice- 
born house-holders—11.25 
Loka—World (s)—Seven—1.41.2 Lo¬ 
cation of higher worlds—1.44. 1-8 
The World of Visnu—1.44.9-10 
The world of Siva—1.44. 11-14 
Lokaloka—Mt.s demarcating the 
boundary of this world—1.50.14-16 
Lunar race—The description of—1.22 

M 

Madhya-desa (Aryavarta)— N. of a 
region in India (Bharata Varsa)— 
1.47.41 


Madhyamesvara Lihga shrine (un¬ 
der Varanasi)—The glory of—1.34 
Magadha—N. of a people in Bharata 
Varsa—1.47-42 

Mahabhadra—A lake in Ilavrta—I. 
45.23-24; 31-35 

Mahalaya (Ohkara or Amaresvara?) 

-11.37,1-4, 20, 30 
Mahanadi— (1) A Tirtha under 
Varanasi—11.35.25,—1.35.5 

(ii) A river rising from mt. Rksa- 
vat—1.47.32-33 

(iii) A river rising from the Vin- 
dhyas—1.47-34 

Mahatirtha—A Tirtha dear to Nara- 
yana—11.37-12 

Mahendra—A mountain [Kida-par- 
vata) of Bharata Varsa—1.50.5 
Mahesvara Yoga—A special Saiva 
Yoga—11.46.30-51 

Malaya—A mountain (Kula-parvata) 
of India—1.47-23 

Manasa—A lake (in the Himalayas) 
-1.23-29; 45.23-24; 11.37-44 
Mandakini—A sacred river—1.14. 

27-29—1.47.32; 48.4-8 
Mandara (i) A mount used as a 
churning rod for obtaining Amrta 
from the sea—1.1-67; 

(ii) A Kula-parvata in Kusa-dvipa— 
1.49-21 

(iii) A mountain in Ilavrta Varsa 
-1.14-25 

Mahkana—A sage—Danced with 
elation at the achievement of his 
penance—Siva subdued his pride— 
11.35.45-76 

Manu-periods (Manvantaras)—1.51 

(1) Svayambhuva Manu 1.51-6 

(2) Svarocisa (verses)—7-9 

(3) Uttama—10-12 

(4) Tamasa—13-15 

(5) Raivata—16-20 

(6) Caksusa—20-23 

(7) Vaivasvata—23-26 

Manu Periods—(Future) Enume¬ 
rated: (8) Savarna (9) Daksa- 
savarna (10) Brahma-Savarna (11) 
Dharma-Savarna (12) Rudra- 
Savarna (13) Raucya (14) Bhautya 
-1.53.29-31 

Markandeya—a sage—meets Yudhis- 
thira—1.36.6 ff 

—narrates the glory of Prayaga— 
1.36.15-48; Chs. 37 and 38 
Meru (or Maha-meru): a mountain 
(mod. Pamirs as per S.M. Ali)— 
Description—branches, lakes, lands 
around—1.45.6-40; Meru—Like a 



628 


Kurtna Pur ana 


Lotus—Border mountains—1.46. 
34-40; Abodes of guardians of the 
world on Meru e.g. (1) of Brahma- 

I. 46.1-4; (6) of Siva—VV. 5-9. 

In this way of (3) Indra—VV.IO- 
12 (4) Agni (called Tejovati) 

VV. 13-14 (5) Yama (N. of the 
abode—Samyamani) VV. 15-16; 

(6) Nirrti (Named Raksovati)— 
VV. 17-18. Meru (Maha Meru) 

(7) Abode of Varuna (called 
Suddhavati)—VV. 19-20 

(8) ofVayu (called Gandhavati) 

—V. 21-22; (9) of Soma (named 
Kantimati)—VV.23-24; (10) of 

Sankara (V.25) and Isana (V.26) 

N 

Nabhi—King of Hima-varsa, father 
of Rsabha—His descendants—1.40 
30, 37ff 

Naimisaranya—Etymological Story— 

II. 4'3.1-i5 

Naisadha—A Varsa ruled by Hari— 
1.40.30-35 

Nakulisa—An incarnation of Siva— 
1.53-9 

Nakulisvara—A Tirtha sacred to 
Nakulisa Siva—11.44.12-14 
Nandisvara—Story of—11.43.17-42 
(see Japyesvara ako) 

Nara— (1) N. of a king—1.40-43 

(2) N. of a god—11.1-30 

(3) A divine sage—11.38-51 
Narada—(1) A divine sage—1.1-18 

(2) A Gandharva—1.42-12 

(3) A Kula-parvata in Plaksa-dvipa 
—1.49.3 

Narayanapura (also Vaikuntha)— 
city of Narayana in Sveta-dvipa— 
1.49.50-71 

Narmada—(i) A holy river—The 
glory of—II.Chs.40-42;Holy places 
under Narmada are separately 
noted. Many names of such places 
under Narmada e.g. Bhadresvara, 
Banesvara, Kedaresvara etc. are 
common under other places like 
Varanasi, Prayaga etc. 

(ii) Wife of Trasadasyu—1.21-26 
Navaratha—A king—story of—Pro¬ 
tected by Sarasvati (and her Eu¬ 
logy)—!. 24.12-28 

Nila—(i) A mountain North of 
Meru—1. 45-9, 37 
(ii) The Haridwar hills—11.20-33 
Nilacala—A mountain in Ramya 
Varsa—1.40.33 


Nisadha—A mountain south of Meru 
in Ilavrta—1.45-28 
Nrsimha—The incarnation of Visnu 
—His story—1.16.23-77 

O 

Oceans—Seven—Names of—1.45.4 
Ohkaresvara—A Tirtha under Vara¬ 
nasi—1.32.1 

P 

Panca-nada—A Tirtha—near Ja- 
pesvara (near the mouth of the 
Indus?)—II.44.1-2 [See Japye¬ 
svara ] 

Pancala—A people in India (Bharata 
Varsa)—1.47.41 

Panca-sikha— (1) A disciple of one 
of the incarnations of Siva—1.53-15 
(2) A sage in the line of teachers 
(transmitters) of livara Gita — 
11.11-129 and of the Kurma- 
Purdna —11.46-144 

Parasara— (1) A sage—grandson of 
sage Vasistha—I. 19-23 
(ii) A disciple of Siva’s incarna¬ 
tion—1.53.16 

Pariyatra (also Parijata, Paripatra) 
—A Kula-parvata (identified with 
Western Vindhya) in Bharata- 
Varsa—1.47.24; 48.39 
Parvati (see Devi, Uma) 

Patala—the netherworlds—the loca¬ 
tions of—1.44.15-26; 50.15-16 
Pativrata—A chaste lady—greatness 
of a Pativrata—II. 34.110-141 (This 
covers the abduction of Sita’s sha¬ 
dow) 

Payosni—A sacred river rising in the 
Vindhyas—1.47-34 
Phalasruti—The ‘fruit’ of listening to 
—Part I of KP—1.53.31-34—The 
whole of KP—H.46.122-139 
Phalgu (or Phalguni): A river (under 
Gaya)sacred for Sraddhas—11.20-34 
Pisaca-mocana—A Tirtha—1.33-2, 

16 (See Sankukarna) 

Plaksa-dvipa—A continent—Descrip¬ 
tion of the—1.49-1-19—Its king 
Medhatithi, son of Priyavrata— 
1.40.26-27 

Plaksa-Prasravana (On the Saras¬ 
vati)—II.37.2'9 

Plaksavatara—The Source of the 
Sarasvati—II.37.7-8 
(The) Planetary system—The posi¬ 
tion, extent etc. of planets like the 
Sun, the Moon etc.—1.41.5-26 



Index 


629 


Prabhasa(i) (Somanatha, the Jyotir- 
linga in Saurashtra)—Comparable 
to Varanasi—1.31-48; 11.35.16-17 
(ii) A Tirtha under Varanasi— 
1.35-12 

(hi) A Vasu-god—1.16.16 
Prahlada—(also Prahrada)—A saint¬ 
ly demon king—Son of Hiranya- 
Kasipu—hghts against Nrsiihha 
and gets discomfited—1.16.42-63 
Dissuades Hiranya Kasipu from 
fight against Nrsiihha—1.16.65-72 
crowns Hiranyaksa after Hiranya- 
Kasipu— 1.16.77-78 — Prahrada 
rules after Hiranyaksa—1.16.84 

—Prahlada fights against Visnu— 

I. 16.86-90—Converted as Visnu’s 
devotee—Performs Yoga Sadhana 
-1.16.93-94 

Pratisancara (Pralaya)—End of the 
universe—Description of the— 

II. 45; Prakrta Pralaya—II.46.1-65 
(Atyantika—11.46.26) vide Intro. 

p. XXV 

Pray aga— (Allahabad) —A sacred 

place—The glory of I. Chs.36-39— 
II.35-4 

Area 5 Yojanas—II.35.4—Procedure 
of pilgrimage of—1.37; Suicide 
recommended at—I.38.3-14;Tirthas 
under Prayaga—1.39 
Prayascitta—(Expiation for a wrong 
orsinfulacts)—Its need—II.30.1-3 
Thi, deciding authorities—II.30.4-7 
Five great sins—The perpetrators 
and their associates are sinners— 
II.30.8-1I 

Expiation for Killing a Brahmana— 
11.30.12-26 

—for Liquor-drinking—11.32.1-3 
—for Theft—II.32.4-11 

for defiling Teacher’s bed II 
32.12-24 

—for Adultery—II.33.1-20 
—for Killing men of different 
castes—II.33.21-2 
PrdyaScitta (Expiation for Sins)— 

—for killing different animals and 
cutting down trees—11.33.29-39 
—for minor thefts—II.34.1-7 
—for eating forbidden articles of 
food—II.34.8-39 

—for miscellaneous sins—11.34.40- 
109 

R 

Rama (Dasarathi)—Story of—1.21. 
16-55 


Ramesvara—A Tirtha —11.30.23 
Ramyaka—A uarra (Sub-continent) to 
the north of Meru—1.45.12 
Rasatala—Name of a nether-world 
(PdM/a)—1.47.3-4 

Ravana—A demon-King killed by 
Rama—1.21.18-45; 11.34.113-127 
Rksa or Rksavat—A Kula-parvata 
(identified with eastern part of the 
Vindhya mountain) in Bhdrata- 
varsa —1.4.7-23 

Rna-mocana—A Tirtha under Pra¬ 
yaga—1.38.14 

Rsabha—Son of King Nabhi and 
father of Bharata—a devotee of 
Pasupati—1.40.38-40 
Rohini (i) Vasudeva’s wife, Bala- 
rama’s mother—1.24, 71,73, 77 
(ii) A constellation—II.20.9 
Romaharsana—Suta, the narrator 
of the Puranas—recounted the K. 
P.— (1.12-4)—Derivation of the 
name—1.1.5; Born on Sutyaha day 
in god Brahma’s sacrifice. Reques¬ 
ted for [—1.1-6 narrating the 

KP.—1.1.7, 9 ff. ; 1.1.9 ff 
Rudrakoti—A Tirtha equal in merit 
to Varanasi—1.31.47 
Rudra-loka—The region of Rudra— 

1.36.47- 48; 37.9-11; 49-14 
Rudra-savarna (See Manus—future 

Manvantaras) 

S 

Sahya—The Western Ghats in India- 
A Kulaparvata in Bharata Varsa— 

1.47- 23 

Saindhava—A people (on the lower 
Indus)in Bharata Varsa—1.47.43 
Saka-dvipa—one of the Seven island- 
continents (identified with ancient 
Scythia)—1.49. 33-39 
Their founder king Havya—1.40.13 
Salagrama or Saligrama—A sacred 
place equal in merit to Varanasi— 
1.31-47; 11.35.37; Place of Siiccha- 
ya’s penance—1.14.4 
Salmalidvipa—One of Seven island- 
continents—Vapusman, Their 

first king—I.40.li 
Sarhvartaka— 

(1) A Tirtha—1.35.6 

(2) N. of World-destroying fire— 

11.45.28-33 

(3) Clouds deluging the world— 
11.45.34-35 

Sanat Kumara— (1) A divine sage— 
1.7. 20-21; 10.13 etc. 

(2) Name of an Upa-purana—1.1.17 



630 


Kurma Purana 


Sangamesvara—A Tirtha under 
Narmada—11.41.36-37 
Sani—Saturn—I. 43.8-9, 29; 

—1.41.11, 17, 19, 26 
Sahku-karna—A Brahmana devotee 
of Kapardisvara—redeems a ghost 
-1.33.15-49 

A female deer becomes a chief of 
Siva-ganas—1.33.4-6 
Sannyasa Asrama— 

When to adopt—II.28.1-4 
Rules and observances for a San- 
nyasin—1.28.5-31 and Ch. 29 
Sapta-dvipas—Seven Island continents 
of the World (with Priyavrata’s 
sons enthroned on each)—1.40.10-13 
Sapta-Mahalokas—Seven higher sphe¬ 
res or worlds—1.41.2 
Sapta-Sarasvata—A sacred place— 
Place of Mahkanaka’s Penance— 
11.35.44-76 (see Mahkanaka) 
Sarasvati—(i) a godders—Eulogized 
by Navaratha—1.24.17-20 
Protects Navaratha—1.24.20-23 
(ii) A holy river in Kuruksetra— 
II.40.7; 37.29 etc. 

Sarayu—A sacred river—1.47.28 
Satadru—Sutlej—a sacred river—a 
tributary of the Indus—1.47.28 
Satarupa—Wife of Svayambhuva 
Manu—1.8.7-10 

Sauvira—Inhabitants of Bharata Varsa 
(dwelling on the lower Indus)— 
1.47.43 

Savasti (Sravasti)—A king, founder 
of Sravasti—Son of Yuvanasva— 
1.20.18-20 

Setu—at Ramesvara—Rama estab¬ 
lished a Lihga here—1.21.44-49 
Silada—a sage, father of Nandin— 
The story of—11.43.19-27 
Sita—(1) Rama’s spouse—story of 
her protection by the Fire-god, 
sending out her shadow for abduc¬ 
tion—11.34.112-140 
Sita prays to Agni (Vahnyaftaka )— 
11.34.117-124 

(2) The eastern branch of the 
heavenly Gahga—1.46.29-30 
Siva—Born as Brahma’s son—1.9.71- 
87; 10.18-89 
Eulogies of Siva: 

—by god Brahma—1.10.49-73 
—by Sky-dwellers—1.16.186-189 
—by Andhaka—1.16.194-206 
—by Vasumanas—1.20.66 
—by Krsna—1.25.60-77; 26.103- 
105 

—by Brahma & Visnu—1.26.78-87 


—by Vyasa—1.30.44-52 (?) 

—by Sahkukarna—1.33.36-45 
—by sages—11.1-33-35 
—by Vedas—11.31.13-16 
Siva—called Rudra ‘The crier’, after 
birth from Brahma—1.10.22-25 
Seven names of Siva—1.10.26 
Eight forms of Siva—1.10.27 
—Eight wives of Siva—1.10.29 
—Eight sons of Siva—1.10.30 
—Created deathless Progeny— 
I.IO. 31-37 

—Ten undiminishing attributes of 
Siva—1.10.40-42 

Creation of Trinity of gods by 
Siva—1.10.75-87 

Siva incarnates to delude cursed 
Brahmanas—a founder of Pasu- 
patism—1.16.111-125 
—Wanders as a Kapalika—1.16. 
120-128 

—Incarnations of Siva—1.53 
—Fall of Lihga in Daruvana—11.38. 
1-83 

—Repentant sages favoured by 
sages—11.39 

Siva and Parvati—Eulogised by 
Brahma—11.31.49-56 (Somaj- 

taka) 

—Eulogised by Sveta—11.36.29-32 
— ,, by sages—11.39.21-36 

Sraddha-Kalpa—11.20-22 

—Qualifications of invitees—11.21. 
1-47 

—Procedure of Performance—II. 
22.1-107 

—Articles of food and Meat 
—recommended for Sraddha—II. 
20.37-47 

—Fruits of Sraddha performed 
under various constellations and 
days of the Week—11.20.1-17 
—Fruits of Sraddha on various 
Tithis—11.20.18-22 
—Holy places for Sraddha—11.20. 

29- 36 

Sri— ( Generally identified with 
Laksmi) 

—Churned out of the Ocean—I.l. 

30- 40 

—Advises Indradyumna to propi¬ 
tiate Visnu—1.1.58-65 
—Identified with Maya and 
Prakrti—1.1.34-40 

Sri-Parvata or Sri-Saila (Mt. in 
Andhra)—A sacred place equal to 
V aranasi—1.31.46 
—Holy for performance of Sraddha 
—11.20.35; 37.13-14 



Index 


631 


Suka—Son of Krsna-dvaipayana 
Suka’s progeny—1.19.25-26 
Sukla or Sukra—A Siva Tirtha under 
Narmada—11.41-67-83 
Suta—Purana-reciter—The birth of— 
1.14.12-16 

Surya—The Sun-god— Surya-hrdaya 
(Eulogy of—)—11.18.35-45 
Susila—A king—Son of Sikhandin— 
Story of—1.14.23-50 
—Meets Svetasvatara & adopts 
Pasupatism—1.14.32 
Svayambhuva Manu—Creation from 
half the body of Brahma, The 
other half Satarupa, Manu’s wife— 
T 8.6 ff 

—The race of Svayambhuva Manu 
—1.14 

Sveta— (1) A king—Saved from Death 
by Siva—11.36.12-38 

2) N. of a mountain—1.45.9 

3) An incarnation of Siva—1.53.2 
(4) N. of a disciple of an incarna¬ 
tion of Siva—1.53.12 

T 

Tala & Talatala—Two nether worlds 
—1.44.20, 21; 24-25 
Tamraparni—A sacred river—effica¬ 
cious for Tarpana—1.47.37; 11.37. 
21-22 

Tapoloka—One of the seven Maha- 
lokas—1.44.3 

Traiyambaka—A sacred place (mod. 
Trimbak in Nasik Dist.)—11.35. 
18-19 

Trikuta—A mountain east of lake 
Arunoda—1.47.30 

Trivikrama (orVamana)—An incar¬ 
nation of Visnu—1.17 
Tunga-bhadra—A sacred river—A 
tributary of the Krsna —1.47.36 

U 

Udaya—A mountain in Sakadvipa— 
1.49-34 

Upamanyu—A sage—initiated Krsna 
in Pasupatism—1.25.3-49 
Upa-puranas—A list of—1.1.17-20 
Urvafi-pulina—A sacred place under 
Pray aga—1.37.26-27 
Usanas— 

(1) The preceptor of Daityas— 
1.48-58-59 

(2) N. of a king-descendant of 
Krostu—1.25.5 

(3) A Vyasa—1.52.3 


(4) N. of a disciple of one of Siva’s 
incarnations—1.53-19 
Uttanapada—A king in the Solar 
race—Manu’s son and Dhruva’s 
father—1.8.12 
Uttara-Kuru— 

A Varsa (Subcontinent) ofjambu- 
dvipa—1.45.12-13 

V 

Vaikuijtha (See Narayanapura) : 

Visnu’s abode—1.49.64-71 
Vamana—Incarnation of Visnu— 
1.17.46-69 

Vanaprasthasrama : Forest-her- 
mitship—Third stage in Life of a 
twice-bom— 

—When to adopt—II.27.1-3 
—Rules and observances for—II. 
27.4-38 

Varaha—A mountain West of Asi- 
toda—1.45.38, 11.20.32 
Varaha—A Tirtha under Narmada— 
1.35.6; 11.42.14 

Varanasi—The Sacred-most place of 
the Hindus. 

—The glory of—I Chs. 31 to 35 
—Krsna-Dvaipayana’s pilgrimage 
to V. described—1.31. 

—Siva glorifies Varanasi or Avi- 
muktaka—1.3 .22 ff. 

—List cf the sacredmost places 
-1.31.46-48 

—Tirthas under Varapasi—1.35 
(also 1.31.46 ff) 

Vasudeva (Krsna)—Incarnation of 
Visnu—story of—1.24.70 ff. [For 
details, see Krsna] 

Vasisjha—(1) A sage—1.2.22; 14.4 
etc. 

(2) One of the Seven Sages {Sap- 
tarsis) in Vaivasvata Manvan- 
tara—1.51-25 

(3) A Vyasa—1.52-4 

(4) A disciple of one of the incar¬ 
nations of Siva —1.53.18 

Vasisthasrama— Siva kindly treated 
at—11.38.33-38 

Vasumanas—A king—His Asva- 
medha, penance & Sayujya with 
Siva—1.20.29-76 

Vedas—Glassification of—1.52.12-27 
Vinasana—The place of the dis¬ 
appearance of the Sarasvati—Holy 
for Sraddha—11.37.29 
Vindhya—AKula-parvatain India— 
I. 47.24 

Vipasa—The river Beas—1.47.29 



632 Kunma Purana 


Virocana— A demon king—The story 
of 1.17.1-11 

Becomes a Yogi as per Sanat- 
kumara’s advice 
Visnu ; 

—Kills demons Madhu and Kai- 
tabha—1.10.2-6 

—Eulogized by Indradyumna— 
1.1.69-79 

—Uplifts the earth in Varaha 
incarnation—1.6.1-10; 23-25. 
Visnu eulogised by the sages.I.6.11-21 
—God Brahma—1.16.28-31 
—Aditi—1.17.19-23 
—Prahlada—1.17.32-39 
Incarnations of Visnu—1.5 .27-50 

Y 

Yadu—King—Dynasty of—1.24.1 ff 
Yajnavalkya—a sage, composed 
Yoga Sastra as per Siva’s advice 
-1.25-44 

Yama—(1) God of death—1.20.3; 
33.23; 41.34-35 etc. 

(2) A Tirtha under Varanasi— 

I. 35-6 

„ under Narmada— 

II. 41.83-84 


Yamuna—a very sacred river—1.47. 
28 

—Sister of Yama—1.20.3 
—Her importance—1.36.23, 44-48 
—Tirthas under Yamuna—1.38. 
14-15; 39.4-6 (cf. 36. 44-48) 
Yasoda—Nanda’s wife—Krsna’s fos¬ 
ter-mother—1.24.74 
Yavana—A People to the West of 
Bharata Varsa—1.47-26 
Yayati—A king—The story of— 
1.22.6-11 

Yudhisfhira—Pandava king—His dia¬ 
logue with Markandeya about the 
glory of Prayaga—I.Chs. 36-39 
Yuga—Nature of the Yugas—1.29 
—^Yuga-dharmas (Characteristics 
of Yugas)—1.29.8 ff 
—Conditions: in the Krta Yuga— 
1.29.16-18 

—In Treta-Yuga—1.29.19-41 
—In Dvapara Yuga—1.29.42-5 
—Conditions in the Kali Yuga—1.30 
Yogins—Duties of and classification 
of—1.2.75-85 

Yuvanasva—A king — Propitiated 
Narayana for a Son—1.2 .12-19 



