ANCIENT  INDIAN 
TRADITION  & MYTHOLOGY 


TRANSLATED  BY 

A BOARD  OF  SCHOLARS 


and  edited  by 

Prof.  J.  L.  SHASTRI 


VOLVMB  5 


First  Edition  : Delhi,  I960 
Reprint  : Ddhi,  1982 


Printed  in  India 

By  Sbentilal  Mo.  «t  ^ni  Jafawmtai  Prass, 

A^,  Phue  1,  latfaisirial  Arm,  Nanina.  New  DeibMlO  028 
MbBibed  hgr  Nuwtdta  ftakash  lain,  for  Motitad  Bananidass* 
Bontalow  Road,  Jawabar  Nagar,  DeBii-1100Q7, 


PUBUSHER’S  NOTE 


The  purest  gems  lie  hidden  in  the  bottom  of  the  ocean  or  in 
the  depth  of  rocks.  One  has  to  dive  into  the  ocean  or  delve 
into  the  rocks  to  find  them  out.  Similarly  truth  lies  concealed  in 
the  language  that  with  the  lapse  of  time  has  become  obsolete. 
Man  has  to  learn  that  language  before  he  discovers  that  truth. 

But  he  has  neither  the  means  nor  the  leisure  to  embark  on 
that  course.  We  have,  therefore,  planned  to  help  him  acquire 
knowledge  by  an  easier  course.  We  have  started  the  series  of 
Ancient  Indian  Tradition  and  Mythology  in  English  Translation. 
Our  goal  is  to  universalize  knowledge  through  the  most  popular, 
international  medium  of  expression.  The  publication  of  the 
Pur^as  in  English  translation  is  the  step  towards  that  goal. 


Linga 

Lingapura^a 

Mark 

Markan^eyapura^ 

Mbh 

Mahkbh&rata 

Mbh.  Adi.  P. 

Mahabharata  Adiparva 

Mahan.  U. 

Mahlnaraya^a  Upani$ad 

Manu  (MS) 

Manusmrti 

MP 

Matsyapurapa 

MP.  — A Study 

Matsyapura^a— A Study:  V.S.  Agrawal 

Mark. 

Markaodcy^purana 

Matsya 

Matsyapur^a 

N. 

Nirukta 

PE 

Pur&^ic  Encyclopaedia 

PGS 

Paraskara  Grhyasfitra 

Rama 

Ramayana 

RV. 

Btgveda 

SG 

Siva{^ta 

Sk 

Skandapura^a 

SK 

Sadkhya  Karika  of  I^varakr^^a 

Sp 

Siva-Purana 

Srs 

Satarudriyasaihhita  of  Siva-Pura^a 

ST 

Sivato?i9i,  a commentary  on  the  Linga- 
purana 

SV 

Samaveda 

Svct 

Sveta^ivatara  Upanisad 

TA 

Taittiriya  Arai^yaka 

TB 

Tattiriya  Brihma^a 

TS 

Tattiriya  Samhita 

TU 

Taituriya  Upanijad 

Va,  Vamana 

Vamana  pura^^a 

Var&ha 

Varahapura^a 

Vayaviya  (VS) 

Vayaviya  samhita  of  Sivapuraria 

Vayu 

Vayupurwa 

Viiva 

Viivakoia 

Vi$9u 

Viftiiupurapa 

VS 

Vajasaneyisaihhita  of  Suklayajurveda 

GONTENTB 


IntroduetioH  xiv 

lAnga/mri^a  {in  translation) 

Section  I 


1. 

Introductory 

1 

2. 

Index  of  Content 

4 

3. 

Primary  Creation 

8 

4. 

Inauguration  of  Creation 

12 

5. 

Creation 

16 

6. 

Glory  of  Siva 

20 

7. 

Esoteric  secret  of  Siva 

22 

8. 

Yogic  Zones 

27 

9. 

Obstacles  and  Portents 

37 

10. 

Means  of  Direct  Perception 

43 

11. 

Sadyoj&ta 

47 

12. 

Glory  of  Vamadeva 

48 

13. 

Glory  of  Tatpuru$a 

50 

14. 

Origin  of  Aghora 

51 

15. 

Glory  of  Aghoreia 

52 

16. 

Glory  of  Ifana 

55 

17. 

Origin  of  Lihga 

58 

18. 

Vijpu’s  praise  of  Siva 

64 

19. 

Enlightenment  of  Vi$pu 

68 

20. 

Enlightenment  of  Brahma 

69 

21. 

Eulogy  of  Siva 

76 

22. 

Creation  of  RudraS 

84 

23. 

Kalpas 

86 

24. 

Incarnations  of  Siva 

90 

25. 

Method  of  Acamana  and  Ablution 

100 

26. 

Procedure  of  Sacred  Ablution 

103 

27. 

Worship  ofLinga 

107 

28. 

Mental  worship  of  Siva 

111 

29. 

Victory  over  Death 

115 

30. 

Story  of  Sage  Sveta 

122 

31. 

Hymn  to  Siva 

125 

32. 

Hymn  to  Siva 

129 

XU 

33. 

Statement  of  the  sages 

130 

34. 

Praise  of  the  Yogin 

133 

35. 

Defeat  of  K$upa 

136 

36. 

Dialogue  between  K§upa  and  Dadhica 

139 

37. 

Grant  of  boons  to  Brahma 

145 

38. 

Creation  of  Brahma 

148 

39. 

Specific  Dharmas  of  Four  Yugas 

150 

40. 

Extent  of  four  Yugas 

156 

41. 

Nativity  of  Brahma 

164 

42. 

Origin  of  Nandi^vara 

169 

43. 

Coronation  of  Nandi ^vara 

172 

44. 

Coronation  of  NandHvara 

176 

45. 

Description  of  Nether  worlds 

179 

46. 

Dvipas  and  their  lords 

181 

47. 

Bharata  sub-continent 

184 

48. 

The  mountain  Meru 

187 

49. 

llavirta  sub-continent 

190 

50. 

Abodes  of  Dcvas 

195 

51. 

Continents 

197 

52. 

Geography  of  the  World 

200 

53. 

Geography  of  the  World 

205 

54. 

Movements  of  Luminaries 

209 

55. 

The  Sun’s  Chariot 

215 

56. 

Description  of  the  Moon 

221 

57. 

Movements  of  the  planets 

223 

58. 

Coronation  of  the  Sun  and  others 

226 

59. 

The  form  of  Solar  rays 

227 

60. 

The  Solar  Sphere 

231 

61. 

The  situation  of  the  planets 

233 

62. 

Situation  of  Dhruva 

238 

63. 

Origin  of  Devas  and  others 

241 

64. 

Grant  of  boons  by  Pulastya 

248 

65. 

Thousand  names  of  Siva 

258 

66. 

The  narrative  of  Yayaii 

287 

67. 

The  narrative  of  Yayati 

293 

68. 

The  race  of  Jyamagha 

296 

69. 

Srikr$?ia,  his  birth  and  life 

299 

70. 

Various  Creations 

306 

71. 

Statement  of  Nandike^vara 

333 

Kill 

72. 

Cionstruction  of  Rudra’s  Chariot 

347 

73. 

Glory  of  Worshipping  Siva 

364 

74. 

Description  of  Siva  Lihgas 

366 

75. 

Monism  of  Siva 

369 

76. 

Installation  of  Siva’s  image 

373 

77. 

The  Temples  of  Siva 

378 

78. 

Scrubbing  and  cleaning  the  shrink  of  Siva 

387 

79. 

The  mode  of  worship  of  Siva 

389 

80. 

The  holy  Pasupata  rite 

392 

81. 

The  holy  rite  for  the  release  of  Paius 

397 

82. 

Hymn  of  purification 

402 

83. 

The  holy  rites  of  Siva 

411 

84. 

The  holy  rite  of  Uma-Maheivara 

416 

85. 

The  glory  of  the  five-syllabled  Mantra 

422 

86. 

The  sacrifice  of  meditation 

441 

87. 

Suppression  of  delusion 

455 

88. 

Review  of  Pa£upata  yoga 

458 

89. 

Characteristics  of  good  conduct 

466 

90. 

The  expiatory  rites  of  the  ascetics 

478 

91. 

Portentous  phenomena 

480 

92. 

Glory  of  Sriiaila 

486 

93. 

The  narrative  of  the  Asura  Andhaka 

502 

94 

Uplifting  the  Earth 

504 

95. 

The  Exploits  of  Nrsimha  the  Man-lion 

507 

INTRODUCmON 


Pursuits  : Origin  and  Development 

According  to  the  Vif^pUrdpa^  the  sage  Kf^na  Dvaipayana 
Vyasa  compiled  a Purd^arhhitd  from  the  various  ancient 
episodes  and  imparted  it  to  his  disciple  Romahar^atia.  The  latter 
composed  his  own  Pur&Siasarhkitd  and  among  his  disciples 
Kaiyapa,  Savarni  and  Saih^apayana  composed  their  own.  These 
four  were  the  original  Purd^asaihhitSs,  The  Vdyupurat^  speci- 
fies the  number  of  the  Puranas  as  ten.  This  represents  the 
second  stage  in  the  development  of  the  Puranas.  The  traditional 
number  eighteen  is  the  final  stage. 

The  traditional  list  as  given  by  several  Pura:0Las  comprises 
the  following  : (1)  Brahma,  (2)  Padma,  (3)  Vi?nu,  (4)  Vayu, 
(5)  Bhagavata,  (6)  Naradiya,  (7)  Markaticjleya,  (8)  Agni, 
(9)Bhavi§ya,  (10)  Brahmavaivarta,  (11)  Lihga,  (12)  Varaha, 
(13)  Skanda,  (14)  Vamana,  (15)  Kfirma,  (16)  Matsya, 
(17)Garu^a,  (18)  Brahman^a. 

The  Puranic  scholars  are  agreed  upon  the  authenticity  of 
the  seventeen  Puranas  but  in  regard  to  the  eighteenth  there  is 
a difference  of  opinion.  Majority  of  the  Pur^as  include 
^loapurd^  in  the  list  while  a few  others  substitute  Vayu  for 
Siva.* 

The  Lihgapurd^a — Contents 

The  Lihgapurd^  is  divided  into  two  sections  comprising  res- 
pectively 108  and  55  chapters. 

Section  I describes  the  evolution  of  Lifiga,  a phallic  form 
of  Siva.  It  records  traditions  about  the  rise  of  Lihga  cult,  modes 
of  worshipping  Lihga,  principles  of  its  ritual,  efficacy  of  its 
worship  illustrated  by  m^s,  legends  and  anecdotes.  It  provides 
a grapffic  account  of  the  geography  of  , the  earth  mth  seven 
continents,  their  flora  and  fauna,  their  people,  mountains,  oceans 

I.  Ft^^ni.  6. 

8.  For  detail,  see  introduction  to  Siwepmdem  Part  I,  EngUdi  Ikamlation 
P.  xiii. 


XVI 


and  rivers.  It  describes  the  size  of  the, earth,  stars  and  planets, 
their  positions  and  movements  in  the  heavens.  It  recounts  the 
genealogies  of  some  famous  monarchs  of  the  solar  and  lunar 
dynasties.  It  gives  an  account  of  prominent  Asuras,  their  expedi- 
tions and  destruction. 

Section  II  contains  legends  on  the  glorification  of  Linga,  a 
detailed  account  of  the  form,  concept  and  attributes  of  Linga 
and  the  vratas,  gifts  and  mantras  related  to  his  worship.  Finally, 
it  explains  in  detail  the  procedure  of  the  Pa^upata  Yoga  as  the 
means  of  attaining  the  ultimate  goal  viz.,  the  absorption  of  the 
personal  soul  into  the  supreme  soul — Lord  Siva. 

The  Title — Lihgapurdria 

The  LihgapurS^a  is  a Saiva  Parana.  It  derives  its  name  from 
the  fact  that  it  reveals  the  supreme  lord  Siva  in  his  nukala 
(attributeless)  and  sakala  (qualified)  forms,  recounts  his  em- 
blems, qualities,  exploits  and  incarnations,  narrates  legends  on 
the  origin  and  importance  of  Linga— 'his  phallic  idol,  dwells 
upon  the  merit  of  installing  and  consecrating  it,  describes  the 
ritual  and  philosophical  principles  of  the  Linga  cult  and  embo- 
dies sermons  and  dissertations  on  the  glory  of  Linga  image. 

The  author  of  the  purdr^a 

The  authorship  of  the  Puranas  is  attributed  to  the  sage 
Ki:sna  Dvaipayana  hniBhavifye?  speaks  of  separate  authorship 
for  different  Purai^as.  According  to  this  authority  the  Linga  was 
composed  by  the  sage  Tapeji.  But  this  statement  oiBhavUya  is 
not  supported  by  the  interna]  evidence,  although  the  Purapa 
suggests  the  theory  of  separate  authorship.  For  instance,  when 
Bhavifya  states  that  Vif^u  was  composed  by  ParaiSara,  we  find 
that  Linga  had  already  stated  this  fact.^  Besides,  this  voluminous 
set  of  Purfipas  beset  with  differing  strata  of  society  of  different 
times  cannot  be  ascribed  to  a single  author. 

Authenticity  of  the  text 

The  extant  Lihgapuri^fi  is  not  the  same  as  the  original  which 
was  recited  by  Siva  in  the  Agnikalpa  to  Brahma  and  was,  later 

$•  Bhavieyo.  IIL  afi.  10-15. 

4.  Idnee.  I«  64.  i80*iat. 


xvu 

on,  divided  by  Vyasa  into  two  parts.  For  the  Agnikalpa  text, 
according  to  the  Naradiya,^  contained  1 ] ,000  verses — a fact 
acknowledged  by  the  author  of  the  extant  Lingapurdna — while 
actually  the  present  Vehkate^vara  edition  has  only  9,  185  verses. 
Furthermore,  contrary  to  the  statement  of  the  Naradlya,  the 
present  text  deab  with  the  matters  of  the  I^anakalpa*  and  not 
with  those  of  the  Agnikalpa.  It  can,  therefore,  be  presumed  that 
there  was  an  old  Lingapurdna  text  based  upon  the  Agnikalpa  on 
which  the  Naradlya  description  is  based. 

The  above  statement  is  supported  by  the  internal  evidence. 
Linga  (II.  55.  36-37)  states  that  it  is. divided  into  two  sections. 
Section  I contains  one  hundred  and  eight  chapters  while 
Section  II  is  comprised  of  fortysix.  But  as  a matter  of  fact,  the 
extant  second  section  has  fiftyfivc  chapters.  The  author  of  Siva- 
tosinl,^  a commentary  on  this  Purana,  dissolves  the  compound 
^t*catyarimiat  as  sat  nava  ca  catvarirhiac  c^(madhyamapada- 
lopukarmadharaya)  and  by  this  grammatical  device  arrives  at 
the  required  number  55.  But  would  it  not  be  a forced  and  far- 
fetched  interpretation  ? Conversely,  would  it  not  be  rational  to 
suppose  that  the  original  text  of  this  section  contained  fortysix 
chapters  to  which  nine  chapters  were  added  later  on  ? 

Date  of  Composition 

The  Lingapurdna  was  abridged  by  Krsna  Dvaipayana 
Vyasa  in  the  beginning  of  Dvapara  age.®  Originally  it  was 
composed  by  Brahma  with  the  material  derived  from  Isana 
kalpa.®  The  abridgement  was  a natural  course,  for  the  old  con- 
tents ceased  to  appeal  to  the  later  generations.  At  the  same, 
fresh  material  was  available  which  the  new  compilers  inserted  in 
the  old  corpus.  The  process  continued  till  the  beginning  of  the 
fifth  century  A.D.  when  the  bulk  of  this  Pur^a  was  settled  to 
its  present  form. 

5.  Ndtadiya,  I 102. 

6.  Li^ga,  1.  2,  1. 

7.  His  name  was  Gai^ela  Natii.  He  was  the  son  of  Ballala  and  YaiodS 
and  the  diseiple  of  Nllakat^tha.  He  lived  in  1760  (or  1769)  Saka  era»  at 
Poona.  Vide  the  introductory  verses  of  ST, 

8.  Lihga  1.2.3. 

9.  Ibid,,  1.2.1. 


xviii 

There  are  references  in  the  Lingapura^  in  support  of  this 
argument.  Chapter  40  refers  to  king  Pramati  in  the  line  of  king 
Gandramas  who  organized  extensive  military  expeditions 
against  the  Mlecchas.  In  this  inset  of  twentythree  verses^®  we 
find  a powerful  and  historically  true  description  of  the  achieve- 
ments of  Candragupta  Vikramiditya  11.  The  description  tallies 
with  a similar  account  in  the  Matsyapurana  and  seems  to  have 
been  given  by  a person  who  was  an  eye-witness  or  who  had 
heard  from  a direct  source.  Moreover,  in  11.  3.36  there  is  a refe- 
rence to  the  Mlecchas  having  seized  the  idol  of  Visnu.^^  We  learn 
from  history  that  Mlecchas  were  wild  ferocious  tribes,  such  as 
Huns,  whose  violent  activities  caused  vast  devastations  and 
struck  terror  in  the  social  life  of  the  country.  Like  the  cattle-lift- 
ing Panis  of  the  ^Igvedic  age,  these  Mlecchas  were  the  breakers 
or  stealers  of  idols.  The  Purana  is  also  aware  of  the  foreign 
tribes  Kiratas  (Burmese)  in  the  east  and  Mlecchas  in  the  west^* 
As  the  destroyer  of  Mlecchas  King  Pramati  of  this  Pura^ia  can 
only  be  identical  with  King  Candragupta  Vikramaditya  who 
destroyed  the  Mlecchas  during  his  reign  of  twenty  years  by 
engaging  his  army  drawn  mostly  from  Licchavis — a ksatra-brah- 
min  tribe.^®  The  reign  of  Candragupta  Vikramaditya  II  (380- 
412  A.D.)  is  the  lowest  limit  by  which  the  bulk  of  this  Purana 
had  assumed  its  present  shape. 

General  Characteristics  of  the  Lingapurdt^a 

1.  Creation 

The  supreme  lord  Siva  is  represented  by  the  half-male  and 
half-female  form.  At  the  advent  of  Creation,  the  male  form 
enters  ihto  the  womb  of  the  female  form  and  lays  the  golden 
seed  therein.  The  seed  is  of  the  nature  of  fire,  the  creative  force 
and  is  permeated  by  a creative  potency.  According  to  the  Lihga- 
purdna}^  this  creative  energy  is  personified  as  Brahma  ; the  recr- 
pient  of  the  seed,  the  foetus,  is  named  Vitfnu  while  the  sower 


10. 

II* 

3*36* 

12. 

>3* 


LiAga  I.  40.  50-72. 

Ibid,,  pratim&xii  ca  harei  catva  mlecchi  hrtv&  yayuh  punah  H. 

Ibid*,  1. 52.  29;  Mats}>a  50.  75-76;  Marie.  57.  8. 

Cf.  Liiiga  1. 40.  53. 

Liiiga  I.  20*  73  if. 


xix 

df  the  seed  is  Ic^  Siva  himself.  Thu8»  the  haif-man  and  half- 
woman form  of  the  lord  is  both  the  efficient  and  the  material 
cause  of  the  universe. 

The  seed  is  sentient.  When  it  enters  into  the  womb  it  acti- 
vates and  gives  impetus  to  the  insentient  Prakrti.  The  Cosmic 
Egg  is  borui  out  of  which  is  evolved  the  entire  universe.  In  fact, 
both  the  insentient  Prakrti  and  the  sentient  principle  belong  to 
lord  Siva  himself  who  out  of  sheer  will  and  sportively  too  crea- 
tes, dissolves  and  then  re-creates  and  re-dissolves  the  universe- 
In  this  eternal  process  everything  created  in  the  feminine  form 
is  Prakrti  and  everything  masculine  is  Purusa.  The  half-man 
and  half-woman  body (ardhanarfiS vara)  of  iSiva  is  responsible  for 
the  origin  of  creation  by  copulation.  As  seated  above,  the  crea- 
tive force  is  of  the  nature  of  agni(fire)  and  its  fortyninc  forms^® 
constitute  the  different  forms  of  the  supreme  lord  who  in  his 
qualified  {sakala)  state  is  characterized  by  three  functions  viz. 
creation,  sustenance  and  dissolution. 

According  to  the  Buranic  account  of  creation,  in  the  begin- 
ning the  insentient  Prakfti  in  the  form  of  the  Cosmic  Egg  re- 
mained in  the  Cosmic  waters  for  thousands  of  years,  until  it 
was  activated  by  the  sentient  principle  which  entering  divided 
it  into  two  halves.  One  of  the  two  became  the  celestial  and  the 
other  the  terrestrial  sphere  both  constituting  the  fourteen 
worlds. 

The  constituents  of  Prakrti,  the  material  cause  of  the  uni- 
verse, are  twenty  three  in  number.  They  are  : (1)  intellect, 
(2)  ego,  (3-7)  five  subtle  elements,  (8-12)  five  senses  of  action, 
(13-17)  five  senses  of  knowledge,  (18-22)  five  gross  elements 
and  (23)  the  mind.  The  unevolved  Prakrti  is  called  (24) 
Pradhana.  This  set  of  twentyfour  principles  is  insentient  and 
to  this  is  added  a threefold  set  of  sentient  beings  viz.  (25)  Jiva 
(the  individual  soul),  (26)  Purusa  (the  cosmic  soul)  and  (27) 
the  Supreme  soul,  Siva.  In  this  formulation,  Pradhana,  the 
twentyfourth  category,  is  the  source  of  twentythree  principles 
(mentioned  above);  Jiva,  the  twenyfifth,  is  the  knower  of 
Pradhana;  Purusa,  the  twentysixth,  has  the  perception  of  the 
two  lower  categories  viz.  Jiva  and  Pradhana  but  he  cannot 


15.  Lfi^  1. 6. 4;  1.7.105. 


XX 


bestow  gracc.^®  Lord  Mahesvara,  the  twentyseventh,^’  alone  is 
omnipotent  and  is  capable  of  bestowing  grace.  la  this  context, 
Praki-ti  is  apratibuddha,  Jiva  is  buddhiman,  Puru^a  is  buddha 
and  Mahesvara  is  prabuddha.  The  twentysix  principles  emanate 
from  the  saptaviiii^aka  (the  iwcntyscventh)  principle  viz,  lord 
Maheivara. 

The  twenty-sixth  principle  Puru^a  is  represented  as  passive 
and  a spectator  of  the  working  of  Prakfti  He  is  distinguished 
from  the  personal  soul,  Jiva,  as  the  latter  is  the  enjoy er  of 
the  fruits  of  the  world- tree.  Lord  Mahesvara  is  beyond 
Pradhana  and  Puru$a.  In  his  one  half,  i.e.  the  masculine  form, 
he  is  devoid  of  qualities  {m$kala)  but  his  other  half  {sakala)  is 
characterized  by  the  three  attributes  : sattva,  rajas  and  tamas 
which  are  personified  as  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Rudra. 

The  entire  phenomenon  of  creation  is  symbolised  by  the 
phallic  image'®  {lingo)  of  lord  Siva. 

According  to  the  Lingapurdu^^^  Pradhana,  the  primary  unevol- 
ved matter,  the  cause  of  the  universe  is  Linga  itself.  At  the  root 
of  Linga  the  creator  Brahma  is  stationed;  Vi^^u  the  sustainer  of 
the  world  is  stationed  in  the  middle;  Rudra  the  annihilator  is 
stationed  above;  lord  ^iva  is  its  substratum.  He  permeates  and 
imparts  impetus  to  Linga  and  efifects  the  work  of  creation 
in  this  way. 

The  Puranic  ro.smology  divides  creation  into  nine  classes 
arranged  in  three  groups  : (1)  Primary,  (2)  Secondary  and 
Primary-Secondary  as  follows  : 

I Primary  II  Secondary  II  Primary-Secondary 

1.  Intellect  and  Ego  4.  Insentient  9.  Mind-bom  sons 

objects  of  Brahma 

2.  Subtle  elements  5.  Animals 

3.  Gross  elements  6.  Divine  beings 

7.  Human  beings 

8.  Sentient  Feeling 


16.  Sadvixh&akam  anisv*ram  i.  17,  109, 

17.  yah  mtavhhiako  nitya^  paHit  paratarah  prabhub  I-  7t.5i. 
tasm&d  abhedabuddhyaiva  tapuviihiatpr^hedat^  I.  75, 34. 

18.  A lidga  In  the  foim  of  a column,  arising  out  of  a yoni  fvaainal 
Dosage)  IS  set  up  in  temples  dedicated  to  Siva,  Formerly  12  pri^pal 

• which  the  best  known  arc  Soman&tha  in 
Mah&kaia  at  Ujjayuii  and  Vdvesvara  at  Varipasi. 

LiAga,  I.  74.  J9-20. 


xxi 

According  to  the  Lingapuri^  this  set  of  threefold  creation — 
Primary^  Secondary  and  Primary-Secondary — ^was  unable  to 
create.  The  mind-born  sons  of  Brahma  remained  celibate.  Then 
out  of  his  body  Brahma  produced  eleven  sons;  still  the  creation 
made  no  progress.  Then  Brahma  divided  himself  into  two 
forms — one  half  a woman  and  the  other  half  a man.  In  that  half 
form  of  a woman  he  created  a couple-^Manu  and  Satarupa 
who  obeyed  the  creator  and  began  the  work  of  creation. 

2.  Dissolution  and  Rc'^creation  {Pratisarga) 

The  creation  of  the  universe  is  not  a permanent  feature,  for 
all  creations  end  in  dissolutions  which  in  turn  give  place  to  re- 
creation. Thus,  there  are  several  dissolutions — ^minov  and  major. 

As  the  Puranas  relate,  a creation  lasts  for  a day  of  Brahma 
equal  to  a kalpa,  a period  of  four  hundred  thirtytwo  million 
years  of  mortals.  A kalpa  consists  of  fourteen  Manvantaras.  Thus, 
a day  of  Brahma,  equal  to  a kalpa  contains  fourteen  dissolu- 
tions. But  these  arc  partial  dissolutions.  At  the  end  of  fourteen 
manvantaras,  equal  to  a day  of  Brahma  that  lasts  for  a kalpa, 
there  occurs  a great  dissolution.  There  is  also  a complete 
dissolution  when  Brahma  has  completed  his  life-time.  At 
the  advent  of  this  dissolution  (Prakfta  pralaya),  the  mobile  and 
immobile  beings,  Devas,  Asuras,  serpents,  Raki^asas  etc.  are 
all  destroyed.  Everything  dissolves  itself  into  Pralqrti  which 
remains  hidden  in  the  supreme  lord  Siva.  The  lord  alone 
survives ; there  is  no  second  being  anywhere.*® 

At  the  advent  of  re-creation  after  dissolution.  Lord  Siva  is 
present  in  two  forms:  Prakrti  and  Atman.  Lord  Vis^u  adopts 
the  body  ot'  Prakfti  and  lies  on  the  yogic  couch  in  the  midst  of 
waters.  Then  Brahma  is  born  of  his  umbilical  lotus.  Brahma  asks 
Siva  to  grant  Mm  power  to  re-create.*^ 

3.  The  ages  of  Manus  {Marwaniata^s) 

The  creation  is  divided  into  time-units — kalpas,  manvan- 
taras, yugas,  samvatsaras  and  other  relatively  bigger  and 
smaller  units.  When  creation  ceases  to  exist  these  time-units 
disappear  as  a matter  of  course. 

20.  1. 85.  7-B. 

a I.  Ibid,,  I.  85.  lo-t  18*. 


The  description  of  the  time«unity  manvantara,  is  one  of  the 
many  characteristics  of  a Mahapura^a.  A manvantara  comprises 
about  seven tyone  caturyugas  equal  to  1200  years  of  the  gods  or 
l/14th  day  of  Brahma.  The  fourteen  manvantaras  make  up  one 
whole  day  of  Brahma,  equal  to  a kalpa.  After  each  manvantara 
there  is  a minor  dissolution.  Thus,  a day  of  Brahma  has 
fourteen  dissolutions  and  re-creations.  The  scheme  of  fourteen 
dissolutions  repeats  itself  from  one  age  of  Manu  to  another. 

The  pur^as  mention  fourteen  manvantaras.  These  derive 
their  names  from  fourteen  successive  progenitors  and  sovereigns 
of  the  earth.  The  present  Purana  mentions  fourteen  Manus  by 
name.  They  are  (i)  Svayambhuva,  (ii)  Svaroci§a,  (iii)  Uttama, 
(iv)  Tamasa,(v)  Raivata,  (vi)  Cak§u§a,  (vii)  Vaivasvata,  (vii) 
Savar^i,  (ix)  Dharma,  (x)  Savarriika,  (xi)  PiSanga,  (xii) 
Apisahgabha,  (xiii)  Sabala,  (xiv)  Varnaka.  On  their  nomen- 
clature the  Puraijias  are  not  unanimous. 

4-5.  Geruology  and  histofy  of  Royal  Houses  (Fiadi/a  and  Varhidnu- 
carita) 

• Genealogy  and  history  of  kings  and  illustrious  personages 
play  an  important  role  in  the  Mahapuranas.  The  sutas  were  the 
custodians  of  genealogical  records  which  they  learnt  by  rote 
and  which  they  recited  at  sessional  sacrifices.  But  in  the  course 
of  oral  transmission  from  one  generation  to  another  some  varia- 
tions entered  in  these  records.  Moreover,  there  were  traditional 
variations  too,  for  different  versions  existed  in  different  families 
of  sutas.  When  the  records  were  incorporated  in  the  Puranas, 
the  interpolations  and  the  traditional  variations  also  settled 
therein.  This  explains  the  difference  that  exists  in  the  genea- 
logical records  of  the  Puranic  literature.^* 

The  Lingapurds^a  is  not  interested  in  recording  the  genea- 
logies of  ancient  royal  houses  and  illustrious  personages.  Still  it 

insUace,  ( i ) according  to  LtOga  Agnidhjra  was  the  eldest  son 
M rdyavrata.  But  according  to  a V&yu  version  he  was  the  son  oi  Priyavrata’s 
daughter.  pO  ascribes  the  origin  of  the  name  BhSrata  to  king 

Bharata,  the  eldest  of  the  loo  sons  of  Biahha  and  grandson  of  Nhbhi  (cf. 
F4ra  3$,  51-52;  53. 39-40;  BAdisiatiala  11.  2.  15-17;  iS%.  1.11.37. 

55*57 )•  But  according  toddaqra  114.  5-6,  Bharata  is  the  name  of  Manu 
hmiMirwlio  mttosud  nq^porti  the  paqOe  here. 


xxiii 


contains,  in  five  chapters  (I.  65-69) , lists  of  the  solar  and  lunar 
dynasties  of  Ayodhya  and  Prayaga.  Chapters  65-66  deal  with 
the  solar  dynasty  of  Ayodhya  from  Vaivasvata  Manu  to  Satya- 
vrata,  from  Satyavrata  to  Sagara  and  from  Sagara  to  Brhadbala. 
Chapters  67-69  recount  the  lunar  dynasty  of  Prayaga  from 
Aila  Pururavas  to  Yayati,  from  Yayati  to  Jyamagha  and  from 
Jyamagha  to  Srfkirfiia.  As  for  the  history  of  reigning  monarchs 
{varhianucarita)  it  is  interested  mainly  in  the  records  of  the 
solar  and  lunar  dynasties.  It  recounts  the.,  deeds  of  some 
monarchs  of  these  houses.  Amongst  these  Sagara,  Yayati,  Jya- 
magha and  Sri  Krma  figure  prominently,  while  Dhundhumara, 
Babhru,  Satrajit,  Akrura  and  others  occupy  a secondary  place. 

Monism  of  Siva  and  the  means  of  the  souths  release 

The  above  analysis  demonstrates  that  the  LingapurS^ 
possesses  the  conventional  character  of  a MahSpura^ia.  But  its 
real  greatness  lies  in  expounding  the  monistic  background  of 
Saiva  philosophy  especially  in  the  context  of  the  Linga  cult. 

The  Linga  is  described  as  twofold:  gross  and  subtle.  The 
subtle  linga  is  the  fourth  state  of  the  soul  and  beyond  in  which 
the  other  three  states  merge,  losing  their  identity.  The  gross 
Linga,  made  of  clay,  wood,  stone,  crystal  etc.  is  meant  just  to 
create  a feeling  of  devotion  in  the  gross-minded  people.  In  fact 
lord  Siva,  like  the  ether,  is  an  indivisible  centre  whose  division 
into  sakala  and  nifkala  forms  as  of  the  ether  into  ghatakalSa  and 
mathaka£a  is  illusory. Even  the  state  of  being  one  (ekatva)  is 
not  present  there  as  a distinct  attribute.  Similarly,  in  relation 
to  the  tattvas,  he  is  placed  in  the  twentyseventh  category;  but 
the  tattvas  too  emanate  from  him;  they  are  the  products  of  his 
power  of  projection  (PrakfU  or  Maya).**  He  is  related  to  them 
as  the  gold  is  related  to  the  ornaments  or  the  ocean  to  the 
waves.  Their  group  of  twentyfour  forms  a noose  which  binds 
the  individual  and  cosmic  souls,  categorized  as  the  twentyfifth 
and  twentysixth  principles. 

A major  portion  of  this  Purai^  is  concerned  with  the  supp- 
ression of  illusion  through  the  attainment  of  knowledge  by 

83*  I*  75 

84*  Jbid,^  I.  i6«  38*34;  II.  ao.^s 


XXIV 


means  of  Pasupata  yoga,  accompanied  by  purificatory  and  ex- 
piatory rites  and  acts  of  physical  and  mental  worship  with  the 
Tantra,  Mantra  and  Yantra  appliances*  A particular  emphasis 
is  laid  upon  selfpurification.  Along  with  the  purification  of  the 
three  gunas^  viz.  sattva^  rajas  and  tamos ^ the  Purana  enjoins  the 
purification  of  the  fivefold  set  oftattvas^®  viz.  Yauvana{^v^  gross 
elements),  Pada  (five  subtle  elements),  Varna  (five  organs  of 
knowledge),  Mdtrd  (five  organs  of  action)  and  Kdlaihoara  (the 
fourfold  group  consisting  of  intellect,  ego,  consciousness  and 
mind) . These  practices,  accompanied  by  mental  concentration, 
are  said  to  help  the  aspirant  achieve  spiritual  enlightenment 
and  attain  release  from  the  entanglement  of  the  senses  and  his 
absorption  into  the  supreme  soul. 


25.  II.  ao.  44-47 


CHAPTER  ONE 

Introductory 

1.  Obeisance  to  the  Supreme  Soul,  Rudra,  Visnu  and 
Brahma,’  the  lord  of  Pradhana  and  Piirusa*  and  the  cause  of 
creation,  sustenance  and  dissolution. 

2-4.  The  sage  Narada^  went  to  Naimisa^  after  worshipping 
Siva,  in  all  the  holy  centres,^  viz.  Saile^a,  Sahgamcsvara, 
Hiranyagarbha,  Svarlina,  Avimukta,  Mahalaya,  Raudra,  Gopre- 
ksaka,  the  excellent  Pa^upata,  Vighncsvara,  Kedara,  Gomayu- 
keSvara,  Hiranyagarbha,  Candre^a,  Isanya,  Trivistapa  and 
Sukresvara, 

5.  Oil  seeing  Narada,  the  residents  ofNaimisa  were  delight- 
ed in  their  minds.  After  honouring  him  they  offered  him  a 
befitting  seat. 

1.  The  Saiva  Pur^as  trace  the  origin  of  Brahma,  Vi?nu  and  Rudra 
to  the  Supreme  Spirit  (Mahe^vara)  and  assign  the  functions  of  creation 
existence  and  dissolution  of  the  universe  to  each  respectively.  In  fact, 
the  three  gods  represent  the  three  attributes-^sattva,  rajas  and  tamas  which 
together  form  Pradh^a— the  original  source  of  the  universe.  Thus,  the 
trinitarian  pattern  of  the  Cosmos  is  a single  whole  at  its  base.  Gf.  Dev] 
Bhdgo,  1.8.  s-4» 

2.  Pradhana— 'the  primary  or  unevolved  matter,  the  original  source 
of  the  material  world. 

Puru^a— the  twenty-sixth  principle  represented  as  passive  and  a spec- 
tator of  the  working  of  Prakrti— the  creative  force.  He  is  distinguished 
from  the  personal  soul(jiva)  as  the  latter  is  the  enjoycr  of  the  fruits  of  the 
World-Tree.  Gf.  I.  28.7;  II.  17,  26-27. 

3.  N&rada— the  mind-born  son  of  Brahnrk  and  a divine  sage  who 
acts  as  a messenger  between  gods  and  men. 

4.  Naimi^a  or  Naimiia,  mod.  Nimsar.  It  is  situated  in  the  Sitapur 

district  in  the  Uttara  Prade^a,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Goimati  river.  The 
place  is  so  called  because  the  rim  (nimi)  of  the  revolving  wheel  of  virtue 
was  shattered  here  and  virtue  had  to  make  a permanent  abode  in  this 
region  {ySyu  2.7).  Or  the  place  is  so  called  because  here  an  army  of 
asuras  was  destroyed  by  the  sage  Gauramukha  in  a twinkling  of  eye.  (Gf. 
Yar&ha  quoted  in  ST.)  On  the  authority  of  the  Mat^a  A Borooah 

{Aneimt  Geography  of  India)  places  it  about  the  conduence  of  the  Gomatl  and 
the  Ganges.  It  was  sacred  in  the  K|ta  age,  as  Pufkara  in  the  Tretft,  Kuru- 
k^etra  in  the  Dvipara,  the  Ganges  in  the  K^i  age. 

5.  For  detail  about  the  holy  centres,  see  part  1,  Gh.  92. 


2 


Lingapwram 


6-17.  He  too  being  pleased  accepted  the  seat  offered  by 
the  excellent  sages.  Seating  himself  comfortably  on  the  excellent 
seat  and  duly  worshipped  by  the  sages  he  discussed  with  them 
the  holy  narrative  of  the  Lingas,  the  narrative  consisting  of 
wonderful  anecdotes.  At  the  very  same  time,  the  intelligent 
Suta  who  was  well-versed  in  the  Puranas  came  to  Naimisa  for 
offering  homage  to  the  sages.  The  residents  of  Naimisa  greeted 
him  duly  with  holy  songs  and  adorations,  (since)  he  was  the 
disciple  ofKrsna  Dvaipayana,®  On  seeing  the  truly  trustworthy 
and  scholarly  Suta  Romahar§ana^  there  arose  in  them  the  desire 
to  hear  the  Purana.  They,  thereafter,  asked  him  about  the 
meritorious  Purana  that  contained  the  glory  and  greatness  of 
the  Lihgas. 

The  residents  of  Naimi^  said  ; 

“O  Suta,  of  great  intellect,  after  adoring  the  sage  Krsna 
Dvaipayana  for  the  knowledge  of  the  Puranas  you  have  obtained 
the  Puranic  lore  from  him.  Hence,  O Suta,  the  best  among  the 
Pauranikas,  we  desire  to  hear  from  you  that  Puranic  lore 
illustrating  the  glory  of  the  Lihgas.  Narada,  the  glorious  son  of 
Brahma,  after  completing  his  pilgrimage  to  the  holy  centres  of 
the  supreme  lord  Rudra  and  worshipping  the  Lihgas  therein,  has 
arrived  here.  You  are  a devotee  of  lord  Rudra.  So  also  are  we 
and  Narada.  It  behoves  you  to  recount  the  meritorious  Purana 
containing  the  glory  and  greatness  of  the  Lihgas®  in  the 
presence  of  this  sage.  Since,  everything  (relating  to  Dharma) 
has  been  successfully  achieved  by  you,  it  should  all  be  well 
known  to  you.” 

Thus  told,  Suta,  the  most  gifted  among  the  Pauranikas  was 
delighted  in  his  mind.  He,  the  meritorious  one,  made  obeisance 

6,  Krsna  Dvaip&yana  VySsa  was  the  son  of  Para^ara  by  Satyavati 
who  later  on  married  king  Santanu.  He  composed  the  Mah&bhfirata  and 
the  Pur&nas  and  arranged  the  Vedas  into  four  compendiums  (y&yu  i .6o.  i iff) 

7.  Romaharfana  or  Lomahar^a  was  one  of  the  five  disciples  of 

Vy&sa  i,6o,  13;  Sp,  Vidye^tMraSorhhitdf  4.7).  He  was  assigned  the 

duty  of  preserving  Purkciic  tradition  while  the  other  fourPaila,  VaiSampa- 
yana,  Jaimini  and  Sunsanta  were  entrusted  with  the  task  of  preserving  the 
V^.  He  is  called  Suta  but  he  is  a brahmin.  He  should  not  be  confused 
with  the  Sata  of  mixed  caste  who  was  the  offspring  of  a kfatriyx  father  and 
brahmin  woman  as  described  in  MtmuCA/anumrti  X.  1 1.17) 

8*  Repeated  in  verse  lo  of  this  Chapter. 


Introductory  3 

first  to  Narada,  the  son  of  Brahma  and  then  to  the  ascetics  of 
Naimifa  and  began  narrating  the  Purina. 

Suta  said  : — 

18.  After  bowing  to  Siva,  Brahma  and  Vi§nu,  I remember 
the  leading  sage  Vyasa  in  order  to  recount  the  Linga  Purina. 

19-24.  I bow  down  to  the  supreme  lord  whose  body  is 
Sabda-Brahman,  who  is  the  revealer  of  the  Sabda-Brahman, 
whose  limbs  are  the  letters  whose  characteristics  are  unmanifcst, 
but  who  menifests  himself  in  diverse  ways,  who  is  constituted 
by  the  letters  a,  u,  m,  who  is  gross  as  well  as  subtle,  who  is 
greater  than  the  greatest,  who  has  the  form  of  Om,  whose  face  is 
the  Rgveda,  tongue  the  Samaveda,  throat  the  Yajurveda,  and 
heart  the  Atharvaveda,  who  is  the  lord  beyond  Pradhana 
and  Purusa,  who  is  devoid  of  birth  and  death  and  who  is 
called  Kalarudra  when  he  assumes  tamoguna  and  Brahma  when 
he  assumes  rajoguna  and  the  all-pervading  Visnu  when  he 
assumes  sattvaguna,  who  is  Mahesvara  when  devoid  of  all  the 
gunas®,  who  manifests  first  in  seven^®  forms  by  enveloping  the 
body  of  Pradhana,  then  in  sixteen^^  forms,  and  finally  in 
twentysix^-*  forms,  who  is  the  source  of  origin  of  Brahma,  and 
who  assumes  the  form  of  the  Linga  merely  for  the  sport  of 
creation,  sustenance  and  annihilation  (of  the  universe).  After 
bowing  down  faithfully  to  that  supreme  lord,  I begin  recounting 
the  auspicious  narrative  of  the  Lihgapurana. 


9.  Repeated  in  1. 6. 30. 

to.  saptadhfi — a group  of  seven  tattvas  consisting  of  intellect  (buddhi), 
ego  (ahariikara)  and  five  subtle  elements  (tanm&tras). 

It.  ?o4aiadha— five  senses  of  action  (Karmendriyas),  five  senses  of 
knowledge  (jitanendriyas),  five  gross  elements  (mabIbhCitas)  and  mind« 
la.  To  the  twentythree  categories  (supra  Nos.  10,  11)  are  added 
Pradhana  (twentyfourth),  Jiva  (twentyfifth)  and  Punifa  (twentysixth)* 
To  this  group  of  twentysix  is  added  another  (the  twentyseventh)  namely 
the  supreme  lord  (maheivara). 


6 


Lingapurdna 


Vasi^tha  ; the  devouring  of  Sakti  by  a demon-king  due  to  the 
wickedness  of  Vi^vamitra  ; the  capture  of  the  divine  cow 
Surabhi. 

28-29.  Vasistha’s  grief  over  the  loss  of  his  son  ; lamenta- 
tions of  Arundhall;  the  course  of  their  daughtcr-in-law  ; the 
words  of  the  child  in  the  womb  ; the  birth  of  Paraiiara,  Vyasa 
and  Suka  ; the  destruction  of  the  Rak$asas  by  Sakti’s  son  Para- 
^ara. 

30-31.  The  truth  about  the  deities  ; the  perfect  knowledge 
as  the  grace  of  the  lord  ; the  composition  of  the  Puranas  at  the 
behest  of  the  preceptor  Pulastya  ; the  magnitude  of  the  worlds  ; 
the  movement  of  the  planets  and  luminaries  ; rules  of  procedure 
about  Sraddha  for  living  ones  ; those  who  deserve  Sraddhas  ; 
the  description  of  Sraddha. 

32.  Rules  of  procedure  about  Nandiiraddha  ; the  method  of 
studying  the  Vedas  ; the  efficacy  of  the  five  yajnas  and  the 
rules  of  their  performance. 

33.  The  conduct  and  behaviour  of  women  during  their 
menstrual  period ; the  birth  of  excellent  sons  due  to  that  conduct ; 
the  rules  about  sexual  intercourse  in  regard  to  persons  of  diffe- 
rent castes  in  due  order. 

34.  The  injunctions  regarding  what  should  and  what 
should  not  be  eaten  in  respect  of  the  people  of  all  castes  ; the 
expiatory  rites  for  the  general  as  well  as  for  the  particular  sins 
severally  and  in  detail. 

35.  The  form  and  features  of  the  hells  ; crime  and  punish- 
ment; signs  of  men  destined  to  be  heavenly  or  hellish  in  later 
births. 


36.  Kinds  of  charitable  gifts  ; the  city  of  the  King  of  the 
Dead  ; ritualistic  detail  of  the  6ve-syllabled  mantra  : the 
greatness  of  Rudra. 


37.  The  fight  between  Vrtra  and  Indra  ; the  suppression 
of  Vrtra  m his  universal  form;  the  dialogue  between  Sveta  and 
Mrtyu;  the  destruction  of  Kala  on  behalf  of  Sveta. 

38-41.  The  arrival  ofSiva  in  the  forest  of  cider  trees;  the 
narrative  of  Sudarsana;  the  characteristics  of  Krama-saanyasa; 
the  statement  of  Brahmi  that  Rudra  could  be  propitiated  b^ 

devouon  and  faith;  the  incident  of  Brahma  seized  by  Madhu 

and  Kaitabha;  then  m order  to  impart  the  highest  perfect 


Ind$x  of  Content 


7 


knowledge  to  Brahma,  the  story  of  Vis^u  assuming  the  form 
of  a fish;  in  all  conditions  the  incarnation  of  Vi$nu  just  as  a 
matter  of  sport;  the  birth  of  Srikf^^a’s  son  Pradyumna  by  the 
grace  of  Rudra;  Visnu  as  a tortoise  for  holding  the  churning 
rod. 

42.  The  birth  of  Samkar^a^a;  the  rebirth  of  Can^ika;  the 
birth  of  Kjrsna  among  the  Yadus. 

43.  The  wickedness  of  Kamsa,  the  uncle  of  Kr^igia;  Krsna’s 
sporting  activity  during  infancy;  his  worship  of  Siva  for 
obtaining  sons. 

44.  The  origin  of  water  from  the  skull  of  Siva  in  the  form 
of  Visnu;  Visnu’s  propitiation  of  Rudra  for  lessening  the 
burden  of  the  earth. 

45.  The  milking  of  the  earth,  at  the  outset,  by  Prthu  the 
son  of  Vena;  the  curse  of  Bhrgu  incurred  by  Visnu  in  ihc 
course  of  conflict  between  Devas  and  Asuras. 

46-47.  In  his  incarnation  as  K^-sna  his  residence  in 
Dvaraka;  the  curse  of  Durvasas  as  conducive  to  his  welfare; 
the  curse  on  Yadavas  for  their  destruction;  the  growth  of  reeds 
and  javelins. 

48.  The  annihilation  of  the  Yadavas  in  mutual  quarrel  by 
using  reeds  and  Krsna  annihilating  his  tribe  sportively  through 
that  very  reed. 

49.  Krs^’s  voluntary  departure  from  this  world;  the 
perfect  knowledge  of  Brahman  and  salvation  in  detail. 

50-51.  The  subjugation  of  Andhaka,  Agni  and  Dak^  who 
had  assumed  the  forms  of  Indra,  elephant  and  the  deer;  the 
description  of  the  primordial  Brahman;  subjugation  of  Kama 
by  Siva,  and  of  the  enemies  of  devas,  of  the  dailya  Halahaia  in 
particular;  the  destruction  of  Jalandhara  and  the  origin  of 
Sudarsana  discus. 

52-53.  The  acquisition  of  that  excellent  weapon  by  Vi§nu; 
Rudra’s  activities;  thousands  of  his  adventures;  the  activities 
and  the  powers  of  Vi^^u,  Brahma  and  Indra;  the  description 
of  the  world  of  Siva. 

54-56.  Rudra^s  world  on  the  earth;  Hatake^vara  in  the 
nether  worlds;  the  nature  of  austerities;  the  power  of  brahmins; 
Linga's  excellence  over  all  other  images  of  deities — all  these  are 


8 


Lingapurd^ 


recorded  in  their  proper  order  and  in  detail^*  in  this  Purana. 
He  who  after  knowing  the  gist  recites  it,  is  liberated  from  sins. 
He  goes  to  the  world  of  Brahma. 


CHUkPTER  THREE 

Primaiy  Creation 


Sula  said : 

1.  The  non-characterized  is  the  root  of  the  characterized. 
The  manifest  Prakrti  is  the  characterized,  while  Siva  is  the 
non-characterized,  but  the  characterized  (Prakrti ) is  said  to  be 
related  to  Siva. 

2-4.  They  call  the  characterized  by  the  name  Pradhana  or 
Prakrti.  But  the  non-characterized,  devoid  of  smell,  colour, 
taste,  sound,  touch  and  attributes,  is  Siva  who  is  stable  and 
everlasting.  [On  the  contrary]  the  characterized  Pradhiina 
or  Prakrti  is  endowed  with  smell,  colour,  taste,  sound  and 
touch;  it  is  the  source  of  origin  of  the  universe;  it  is  elemental 
both  in  subtle  and  gross  forms,  O excellent  brahmins;  it  is  the 
physical  body  of  the  worlds;  it  has  originated  from  the  non- 
characterized,  of  its  own  accord. 

5.  [Formerly]  it  split  itself  into  seven  as  well  as  eight  and 
then  into  eleven.^"  The  non-characterized,  thus,  becomes  chara- 
cterized through  maya. 

14.  ST.  adds  another  interpretation.  The  order  of  contents  (as 
stated  in  this  chapter  is  not  observed  here  (i.c.  in  this  purana)  nor  are  the 
contento  described  in  detaU*.  gTfT 

?r«TT  snw.  ^ ^ 1 

15.  The  twentysk  principles  emanate  from  the  Saptavimsaka  tattva: 

(i.  71.51).  In  this  formulation,  Pra- 
dhana (the  twentyfourth),  the  source  of  twenty  three  principles  is  insentient; 
Jiva  (the  twentyMth)  is  the  knower  of  Pradhana;  Puru$a  (the  twentysixth) 
has  the  perception  of  the  two  lower  categories — Jiva  and  PradhSna,  but  he 
cannot  bestow  grace  ( 1. 17.109).  Maheivara  (the 


9 


Primary  Creation 

6-9.  From  them  took  shape,  the  trio  of  the  important  deities. 
From  one  of  the  three  the  universe  arose;  it  is  protected  by 
another;  by  one  (i.e.  the  third)  it  is  destroyed.^*  In  this  manner, 
the  universe  is  pervaded  by  Siva.  Thus  the  three  murtics  have 
been  classified  as  alinga,  linga  and  liiigalinga.  Brahman  itself  is 
the  universe.  The  non-characterized  lord  is  the  source  of  the  seed. 
He,  the  Supreme  lord,  is  both  the  seed  and  the  womb  as  well  as 
the  seedless.  Being  seedless  he  becomes  seed,  i.e.  the  cause  of 
the  universe.  The  term  Atman  applies  to  the  seed  (bija), 
womb  (yoni)  and  the  unmanifest  matter  (pradhana). 

10.  He  who  is  Rudra,  Brahma  and  Vi§nu  is  called  Siva 
in  the  Puranas  by  virtue  of  his  eternally  and  intrinsically  enligh- 
tened and  pure  nature. 

11.  Prakrti,  when  observed  by  Siva  became  Saivi.  O 
brahmins,  formerly  it  was  unmanifest,  but  being  intrinsically 
endowed  with  the  attributes  it  became  manifest  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  creation. 

12.  The  entire  universe  beginning  with  the  unmanifest  and 
ending  with  the  gross  elements  originated  from  it.  That  Saivi 
Prakrti,  the  creator  of  the  universe  is  known  as  aja  (the  un- 
born) . 

13-14.  The  individual  soul  is  devotedly  attached  to  that 
aja  (the  unborn  Prakrti)  of  red,  white  and  black  colour — the 
aja  that  is  single,  though  the  mother  of  many.  He  resorts  to  her 
in  her  manifest  form,  and  having  enjoyed  eschews  her  when  he 
becomes  unattached.  This  Prakrti  is  the  creator  of  worlds  when 
she  is  presided  over  by  Purusa. 

15.  At  the  time  of  the  creation,  mahat  was  evolved,  at  the 
behest  of  Purusa,  out  of  Pradhana  consisting  of  the  three  gunas 
and  presided  over  by  Purusa. 

16.  Being  urged  by  the  desire  to  create,  the  mahat  when 

twenty-seventh)  alone  is  capable  of  extending  grace  to  his  devotees.  In  this 
context,  Pradh&na  or  Prakfti  is  apratibuddha,  Jiva  is  buddbiman,  Purufa 
is  buddha  and  Maheivara  is  prabuddha. 

1 6.  Brahma,  Vi?nu  and  Rudra— the  personified  entities  of  the  three 
gUQas — rajas,  sattva  and  tamas  that  constitute  Pradhana  or  Prakfti,  the 
material  cause  of  the  universe — are  responsible  for  the  creation,  sustenance 
and  destruction  of  the  universe.  The  three  emanate  from  the  transcendent 
reality  Maheivara.  Devi Bkdga.  1.8.4;  Brahma^da  1.4.6;  Vi$nu  1.2.66) 

For  detail  see  V.S.  Agrawal  : MF^A  Study , pp,  37-41. 


10 


Ltngapura^ 


presided  over  by  Purusa  enters  the  unchanging,  unmanifest  Pra- 
dhana  and  effects  the  creation  of  the  manifest. 

17-18.  Out  of  mahat  evolved  (1)  sattvika  ahaiiikara  chara- 
cterized by  conception  and  determination,  (also)  (2)  rajasa 
ahamkara  consisting  of  three  gunas  but  with  rajas  as  pro- 
minent, (also)  (3)  tamasa  aharhkara  with  tarnas  as  prominent. 
The  subtle  elements  evolved  out  of  mahat  and  became  the 
nucleus  for  all  creation. 

19.  The  subtle  element-sound  evolved  out  of  ego  and  from 
it  the  unchanging  ether.  Thereafter  the  ego,  the  cause  of  sound 
enveloped  the  ether. 

20.  O brahmins,  the  creation  of  the  gross  elements  from 
the  subtle  elements  is  expounded  in  this  manner.  O great  sages, 
the  subtle  element  ‘touch’  evolved  from  the  ether  and  the  air 
evolved  from  that. 

21.  From  the  air  evolved  the  subtle  element  colour  and 
therefrom  agni  (fire),  whence  evolved  the  subtle  element  taste, 
whence  the  waters.  From  these  evolved  the  subtle  elcmeni 
.smell  and  from  it  the  earth. 

22-23.  O excellent  brahmins,  the  ether  enveloped  the  sub- 
tle element  touch.  The  air  with  the  activity  of  blowing  enve- 
loped the  subtle  element  colour.  The  fire  enveloped  the  subtle 
clement  taste.  'Fhc  waters  having  the  nature  of  taste  enveloped 
the  subtle  element  smell. 

24-25.  Hence  the  earth  has  five  qualities;  the  waters  have 
four;  the  file  has  three;  tL»c  aii  has  two,  the  ether  has  one  qua- 
lity. Thus  the  creation  of  liie  elements  originated  from  the 
subtle  elements  through  their  mutual  interaction. 

2fi.  The  Vaikarika  as  well  as  Sattvika  creation  takes  place 
simultaneously,  yet,  hen  , it  is  explained  as  evolved  gradually  in 
the  manner  described  aLx)vc. 

27.  Jor  the  purpose  of  perceiving  sound  and  the  rest  there 
are  five  organs  of  .sense  and  five  organs  of  action.  Mind  (which 
is  also  a sense)  belongs  to  both  categories.  (These  eleven 
senses  evolve  out  of  ego. ) 

28.  The  constituents  of  creation  beginning  with  mahat 
(intellect)  and  ending  with  Vi^esa*’  (earth)  generate  the  cosmic 


^ beginning  with  mahat  (intellect),  and  ending 

with  viSeja  (bhutas)  constitutes  the  Ckismic  Egg  which  is  material,  though 
It  derives  its  potency  of  consaousness  (cetanata)  from  Purusa. 


Primary  Creation  1 1 

egg,  whence  Brahma  arose  like  a water-bubble. 

29.  He  alone  is  Rudra  and  Visriu  pervading  the  universe. 
These  worlds  are  within  that  cosmic  egg  and  this  universe  is 
within  it, 

30-33.  The  cosmic  egg  is  externally  enveloped  by  water 
ten  times  its  magnitude.  The  water  is  externally  enveloped  by 
fire  ten  times  its  mass.  The  fire  is  externally  enveloped  by  air 
ten  times  its  mass.  The  air  is  externally  enveloped  by  the  ether 
ten  times  its  magnitude.  The  ether  is  enveloped  by  ego  the 
cause  of  sound.  The  ego  is  enveloped  by  intellect  and  intel- 
lect is  enveloped  by  Pradhana.  They  say  that  the  coverings  of 
the  cosmic  egg  are  seven^*.  There  within  is  Brahma  seated  on 
the  lotus.  There  are  crores  and  crores  of  such  eggs  in  exis- 
tence. 

34.  In  all  these  cosmic  eggs  there  arc  four-faced  Brahm^, 
Visnus  and  Rudras.  They  are  all  created  by  Pradhwa  after 
coming  into  contact  with  Siva. 

35.  The  dissolution  is  also  mutual  but  it  begins  from  the 
end  and  goes  up  to  the  beginning.  The  great  lord  is  the  sole 
agent  for  this  creation,  sustenance  and  dissolution. 

36.  In  creation  he  is  endowed  with  rajas,  in  sustenance  with 
sattva  and  with  tamas  in  dissolution.  He  alone  possesses  this 
subtle  nature  in  due  order. 

37-39.  He  is  the  first  creator  of  all  beings,  their  protector 
and  annihilator.  So  lord  MahdSvara  is  the  overlord  of  Brahma. 
He  is  also  known  as  Siva,  Sada^iva,  Bhava,  Vi^nu  and  Brahma 
since  he  is  all.  All  these  worlds  are  in  this  egg,  so  is  the  creator 
Brahma.  Thus  the  elemental  creation  of  Prakrti  has  been  des- 
cribed by  me.  It  is  presided  over  by  Purusa;  O brahmins,  this 
auspicious  creation  with  intellect  (mahat)  at  top  is  primordial. 


i8.  The  Seven  sheaths  of  the  Cosmic  Egg  consist  of  intellect  (mahat), 
ego  (ahaihkara),  and  five  subtle  elements  (tanm&tras).  (VSjm*  4*87.  Karma 
1.4.46). 


12 


Lingapurd^ 


CHAPTER  FOUR 

Inauguration  of  Creation 


SUta  said  : 

1-2.  The  period  of  the  duration  of  the  Prakrita  creation  is 
said  to  be  a day  of  Brahma.  There  is  a similar  period  constitut- 
ing the  night.  The  lord  effects  creation  during  day  time  and 
dissolution  during  the  night.  He  has  neither  a day  nor  a night 
(as  we  understand  the  terms).  The  time-duration  by  day  and 
night  is  used  in  a secondary  sense. 

3-6.  During  the  (so-called)  day  all  the  Vikrtis — the  Vi^- 
vedevas,  the  Prajapatis  and  the  sages  stay  by.  During  the  night 
all  of  them  are  dissolved.  They  are  produced  (again)  at  the  end 
of  the  night.  A day  of  His  constitutes  our  kalpa,  His  night  too 
similarly  another  kalpa.  There  are  fourteen  Manus  by  the  time 
a thousand  sets  of  four  yugas  come  to  a close.  O brahmins,  the 
Krta  yuga  consists  of  four  thousand  years.  Four  hundred,  three 
hundred,  two  hundred  and  hundred  years  respectively  constitute 
the  period  of  transition  both  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  a yuga.^® 

7-9.  The  amsaka,  therefore,  is  one-sixth  of  the  duration  of 
each  yuga.  The  period  of  duration  ofTreta,  Dvapara  and  Kali 
is  respectively  three  thousand,  two  thousand  and  one  thousand 
years  without  their  arhsaka  parts.  That  of  Krta  has  been  men- 
tioned above.  O men  of  holy  rites,  fifteen  winks  in  the  eyes  of  a 
man  of  normal  health  in  normal  condition  constitute  a kastha. 
Thirty  such  kas^has  make  one  kala.  Thirty  such  kalas  make 
one  muhurta. 

10-12.  The  night  contains  fifteen  such  muhurtas  and  the  day 
another  fifteen  muhurtas,  A (lunar)  month  according  to  human 

19.  Each  yuga  is  prefixed  and  suffixed  by  a sandhya  which  specifies 
the  advent  and  culmination  of  a yuga.  The  two  sandhya  s of  a yuga  are  of 
equal  length  though  their  period  of  duration  differs  from  yuga  to  yuga. 
Thus  Krtayuga  lasts  for  four  thousand  divine  years  and  its  sandhyas  for 
eight  hundred  such  years;  Trcta  lasts  for  three  thousand  divine  years  and 
its  sandhySs  for  six  hundred  such  years;  Dvapara  lasts  for  two  thousand  and 
its  sandhyas  for  four  hundred;  Kali  lasts  for  one  thousand  audits  sandhyas 
for  two  hundred  such  years.  The  total  period  of  duration  for  the  four  yugas 
is  ten  thousand  divine  years  and  that  for  their  sandhyas  is  two  thousand 
divine  years. 


Inauguration  of  Creation 


13 


reckoning  constitutes  the  night  and  day  of  the  pitrs.  Divided 
further,  the  dark  half  constitutes  the  day  and  the  bright  half 
constitutes  their  night  when  they  go  to  sleep.  Thirty  human 
months  make  one  month  of  the  Pitfs.  The  period  of  three  hun- 
dred and  sixty  months  calculated  according  to  human  reckon- 
ing makes  one  year  of  the  Pitre. 

13.  A hundred  years  calculated  according  to  human 
reckoning  make  three  years  of  the  Pitrs. 

14.  Twelve  months  according  to  human  calculation  make 
one  year  ( of  the  mortals) ; twelve  months  of  the  manes  (accor- 
ding to  their  own  calculation)  constitute  their  one  year. 

15.  According  to  Lihgapurana  one  human  year  constitutes 
the  period  of  day  and  night  for  the  manes.  Their  days,  nights 
and  years  and  their  further  divisions  are  as  follows : 

16.  The  period  of  Uttarayana  (northern  transit  of  the 
sun)  is  the  day  for  the  manes;  the  period  of  Daksinay  ana  (south- 
ern transit  of  the  sun)  constitutes  their  night.  These  days  and 
nights  arc  calculated  in  accordance  with  the  reckoning  of 
the  devas. 

17-23.  Thirty  human  years  constitute  a divine  month. 
O brahmins,  a hundred  human  years  constitute  three  divine 
months  and  ten  days.  Three  hundred  and  sixty  human  years 
constitute  a divine  year.  Three  thousand  and  thirty  human 
years  constitute  a year  of  the  seven  sages.  Nine  thousand  and 
ninety  years,  according  to  human  calculation  make  a year  of 
Dhruva.  Thirty  six  thousand  human  years  make  a century  of 
divine  years.  The  people  who  know  arithmetic  say  that  the 
three  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  human  years  constitute  the 
period  of  a thousand  divine  years. 

24-35.  The  duration  of  a yuga  is  calculated  according 
to  the  divine  reckoning.  The  first  yuga  is  named  Krta; 
thereafter  comes  Treta  and  then  Dvapara  and  Kali.  O men 
of  holy  rites,  these  are  the  (names  of  the  four)  yugas.  Hence- 
forth the  number  of  years  of  each  yuga  which  have  been 
mentioned  earlier  in  divine  reckoning  arc  now  being  counted 
according  to  human  reckoning.  The  Krta  consists  of  one 
million  four  hundred  and  forty  thousand  human  years;  Treta 
of  one  million  eight  hundred  thousand  years;  Dvapara  of  seven 
hundred  twenty  thousand  years  and  Kali  of  three  hundred  and 


14 


Lingapurdna 


SiXiy  th'rasand  human  years.  Thus  the  duration  of  the  four 
yuj^as,  without  the  period  of  junction  and  transition  totals  to 
three  millirsu  :;ix  hundred  thousand  human  years.  If  Sandhya 
period:  are  im  luded,  the  set  of  four  ages  will  consist  of  four 
million  three  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  years.  A little 
over  -ev'  uty  one  sets  of  four  yugas — Krta,  Treta,  Dvapara  and 
KaU — constitute  a manvantara.^®  The  number  of  human  years 
in.  a marivantara  are  thirty  crores  six  million  and  seven 
huud  'cd  and  twenty  thousand,  O excellent  brahmins.  The 
period  of  :j  inanvantara,  according  to  this  Purana,  is  not  more 
ilian  this. 

The  number  of  years  in  one  set  of  four  yugas  have 
been  mentioned  earlier.  O excellent  brahmins,  a thousand  such 
sets  of  four  yiigas  constitute  a kalpa  (of  Brahma) . 

37.  Uurhig  Brahma's  night  the  creatures  perish;  at  the 
end  O'*  the  nigut  diey  are  created  again.  J here  are  twenty-eight 
cror<f  a of  gods  who  move  in  aerial  chariots. 

iB.  During  the  manv aritaras  and  the  intermedi'^.ry  periods 
their  number  increased  to  three  hundred  and  ninety  two 
ri\.r«'s. 

39-40.  O hraiimms,  during  the  last  kaJpa  their  number 
tarar  to  .s<*v\-ijlv-cight  thousand.  In  all  kalpas  this  is  the  position 
in  onr*  When  the  dis‘chuiori  i.  imminent  pecjple  abandon  the 
persons  sur-iv^ng  the  last  day  of  the  kalpa  and  go  to  Janaloka 
from  the  world  Mahar. 

41-42,  The  number  of  years  in  half  a kalpa  by  divine 
Calculation  is  two  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty  two  crores 
and  seven  millions,  I hc  kalpa  too  shall  be  similarly  calculated. 
A thousand  such  kalpas  make  a year  of  Brahma. 

43.  Kigiit  thousaud  years  of  Brahma  make  his  yuga.  A 
ihout-and  yugas  of  Brahma  constitute  a savana. 

44.  Nine  thousand  such  savanas  constitute  a day  of 
Rud»a. 

4.V49.  O great  sages,  the  following  are  the  names*  of  some 
kalpas  of  Brahma,  viz-~-bhavodbhava,  tapas,  bhavya,  rambha, 

140.  A manvantara  comprises  about  seventyone  mahayugas  which 
are  equal  to  12,000  years  ol  the  gods.  The  PurSnas  mention  fourteen 
manvantaras.  These  derive  their  names  from  fourteen  successive  mythical 
progenitors  and  sovereigns  of  the  earth. 


Inauguration  of  Creation 


15 


kratu,  rtu,  vahni,  havyavaha,  savitra,  Buddha,  majjallya, 
madhyania,  vairaja,  nisada,  mukhya,  meghavahana,  pancama, 
citraka,  akrti,  jfiana,  manas,  sudaria,  brrhha,  bvetalohita, 
rakta,  pitavasas,  asita,  and  sarvarupaka.  O excellent  sages, 
thousands  and  crores  of  such  kalpas  have  already  elapsed. 

50.  At  the  dissolution  of  a kalpa,  whatever  remains  of 
creation  produced  during  day  and  night  is  destroyed. 

51-53.  The  destruction  is  subject  to  the  behest  of  lord  Siva. 
When  the  creation  is  annihilated  and  the  Pradhana  is  stationed 
in  itself,  both  Pradhana  and  Piirusa  come  to  a standstill  or 
remain  inactive.  O brahmins,  it  is  only  when  the  three  gunas 
are  not  in  equilibrium  that  creation  takes  place.  When  they 
are  in  equilibrium  the  creation  is  dissolved.  The  great  lord  is 
the  cause  of  both.  The  creation  is  effected  by  him  sportively 
in  this  manner. 

54-56.  Such  creations,  effected  through  the  agency  of 
Pradhana  arc  innumerable.  The  kalpas  together  with  their 
Brahmas  and  Vi§nus  are  innumerable.  But  lord  Siva  is  only 
one  The  activities  of  Prakrti  emerging  from  Pradhana  are  due 
to  His  sport.  The  activities  as  characterized  by  the  gunas  are 
threefold  and  destructible  but  the  (uncreated)  atman  has 
neither  a beginning  nor  a middle  nor  an  cnd.*^ 

bl . The  life-time  of  Brahma  consists  of  two  halves  called 
parardhas.^^  What  is  created  during  His  day  time  is  destroyed 
during  His  night. 

58-61.  The  worlds  bhur,  bhuvah,  svar  and  mahar  perish; 
only  the  worlds  above  remain  intact.  At  night,  when  the  mobile 
and  immobile  perish  and  a vast  sheet  of  water^®  spreads  like  a 
single  ocean,  Brahma  goes  to  sleep  in  the  water.  He  is  there- 

21.  Creation  is  the  result  of  stimulation  (ksobha)  of  the  gu^as* 
When  there  is  no  stimulation,  creation  docs  not  exist;  consequently,  the  time- 
units-— kalpas,  manvantaras,  yugas,  sarhvatsaras  and  other  relatively  bigger 
and  smaller  units  disappear  as  a matter  of  course. 

22.  A kalpa  (a  period  of  four  thousand  cycles  of  four  yugas)  consti- 
tutes a day  of  BrahmS.  It  is  divided  into  two  halves  ; 2 parardhas.  A half 
kalpa  covers  a cycle  of  two  thousand  caturyugas.  At  the  end  of  a full  kalpa 
a great  fire  consumes  the  world. 

23.  Ekarnava  symbolises  the  state  of  the  universe  during  the  period 
of  dissolution  when  the  divided  units  are  drawn  together  forming  a single 
watery  mass.  For  detail  sec  MP — A Study,  PP.  9-10. 


16 


Lingapurdm 


fore  known  as  Naraya^a.  At  the  end  of  the  night  he  wakes  up 
and  beholds  a void  what  used  to  be  the  world  of  mobile  and 
immobile  beings.  Then  he,  the  most  excellent  among  the 
knowers  of  Brahman  decides  to  create.  He  assumes  the  form  of 
a boar®*  and  lifts  the  earth  submerged  in  the  waters.  He  lifts  it 
up  and  places  it  as  before,  together  with  all  the  rivers,  rivulets 
and  oceans. 

62-63.  With  great  effort  he  makes  the  earth  even.  He 
gathers  together  all  the  mountains  burned  by  fire  on  the  earth. 
He  establishes  the  four  worlds,  bhuh,  etc.  as  before.  He,  the 
lord  creator,  then  decides  to  create  everything  afresh. 


CHAPTER  FIVE 

Creation 


Suta  said  : 

1 . O brahmins,  while  Brahma  of  unknown  origin  pondered 
on  creation  he  became  manifested  as  delusion  enveloped  in 
darkness. 

2.  Ignorance  originated  from  the  self-born  Brahma  in 
five®*  forms: — darkness  (tamas),  infatuation  (moha),  the  great 
infatuation  (mahamoha),  gloominess  (tamisra),  and  blinding 
gloominess  (andhatamisra). 

3-4.  This  creation  of  Brahma  which  is  enveloped  by  igno- 
rance is  declared  to  be  primary.  From  this  creation  emerged  the 
immovables  (plants,  mountains  etc.).  He  considered  this  creation 
incapable  of  causation.  He  thought  of  creating  yet.  While  he 
thus  meditated,  his  neck  turned  horizontally. 

5-8.  At  first  the  horizontal  creation  named  tiryaksrotas 
emerged  from  him;  the  next  was  urdhvasrotas  chiefly  characte- 

24.  The  Pur&iias  often  mention  Varaha  (Boar  incarnation  of  Vifi^u) 
lilting  the  earth  from  the  depth  of  the  Ek&noava  ocean. 

25.  Avidya,  also  designated  as  viparyaya  is  fivefold.  Gf.  II.9.30. 
Its  five  kinds  are  defined  in  the  Devi  Bhdga,  These  are  subdivided  into  sixty- 
two  kinds.  Gf.  II,  9.  34-35. 


Creation 


17 


rized  by  goodness.  Then  came  arv^rotas,  after  that  anugraha, 
and  lastly  bhutadi.  The  first  creation  of  Brahma  is  known  mahat; 
the  second  of  tanmatr^  as  bhautika;  the  third  of  the  sense- 
organs  as  aindriya;  the  fourth  of  the  immovables  as  mukhya; 
the  fifth  of  animals  as  tiryagyoni ; the  sixth  of  gods  as  daivika ; 
the  seventh  of  mankind  as  manusa;  the  eighth  (of  emotions) 
as  anugraha;  the  ninth  of  Kumaras  as  Kaumarya.®*  These  arc 
Prakrta  and  Vaikrta  creations. 

9-11.  Formerly,  O excellent  sages,  Brahma  created  Sananda, 
Sanaka  and  Sanatana.  By  refraining  from  worldly  activities 
they  attained  the  Supreme  Being.  By  his  yogic  accomplishment 
he  created  Marici,  Bhrgu,  Angiras,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu, 
Daksa,  Atri  and  Vasistha.  These  nine  sons  of  Brahma  were  the 
knowers  of  Brahman  and  excellent  brahmins.  They  are  known 
as  expounders  of  brahman  and  were  equal  to  Brahma  himself* 

12.  [He  had  three  more  sons]  Saiikalpa,  Dharma  and 
Adharma.  Adharma  is  always  present  near  Dharma.  Thus  there 
were  twelve  progenies  of  Brahma  of  unknown  origin. 

13-14.  The  eternal  lord  had  at  the  outset  created  j^bhu 
and  Sanatkumara.  These  two  eldest  sons  became  the  divine 
expounders  of  Brahman.  Being  free  from  sexual  desire  they 
remained  bachelors  and  rose  equal  in  wisdom  to  Brahma.  They 
were  omniscient  and  possessed  of  all  merits.  I shall  now  state 
succinctly  the  names  of  the  wives  of  the  brahmanical  sages  and 
the  birth  of  their  progenies,  O excellent  sages. 

15-17.  The  lord  created  Viraja  (Manu)  and  Vairajfli 
Satarupa  who  was  not  born  of  womb.  She  bore  two  sons  and 
two  daughters  to  Manu.  The  elder  was  the  intelligent  Priyavrata 
and  the  younger  Uttanapada.  The  elder  daughter  was  Akuti 
and  the  younger  was  Prasuti. 

18-26.  Prajapati  Ruci  married  Akuti  and  lord  Dak$a  mar- 
ried Prasuti  the  mother  of  the  worlds  and  a great  Yogini.  Akuti 
gave  birth  to  a son  Yajfla  and  a daughter  Daksi^.  Dak§i^ 
gave  birth  to  twelve  illustrious  sons.  Prasuti  of  great  penance 
bore  twentyfour  daughters  to  Dak^  viz., — SraddhE  (faith), 

96.  Ninefold  creation  : The  Pura^ic  cosmology  divides  the  cosmic 
creation  into  nine  classes.  For  detail,  see  SP,  (English  trans.  p.  248  note 
214). 


18 


Lingapura^ 


Lak^i  (good  fortune),  Dhfti,  Pusti,  Tu§ti,  Medha,  Kriya, 
Buddhi  (constancy),  Lajja  (Modesty),  Vapus  (beauty),  Santi 
(tranquillity),  Siddhi  (perfection),  Kirti  (fame),  Khyati  (cele- 
brity), Sati  (truth),  Sambhuti  (fitness),  Smrti  (memory), 
Priti  (affection),  Ksama  (patience),  Sannati  (humility), 
Anasuya  (sincerity),  Orja  (strength),  Svaha  (oblation  to  the 
gods),  Arani  and  the  blessed  Svadha  (oblation  to  the  pitrs). 
He  gave  them  duly  in  marriage.  The  first  thirteen  daughters 
Sraddha  to  Kirti  married  the  patriarch  Dharma.  The  wise  Bhrgu 
married  Khyati;  Bhargava  (Sukra)  married  Arani;  Marici 
(married)  Sambhuti  ; Ahgiras  (married)  Smrti.  The  other 
married  pairs  were  : Priti  and  Pulastya,  Ksama  and  Pulaha, 
Sannati  and  Kratu,  Atri  and  Anasuya,  Crja  and  Vasistha, 
Svaha  and  Vibhavasu,  Svadha  and  the  Pitrs. 

27-28.  Sati  the  mental  creation  of  the  lord  was  adopted  as 
his  daughter  by  Daksa.  She  the  mother  of  the  worlds  attained 
Rudra  as  her  husband.  At  the  beginning  of  the  creation 
Brahma  had  created  a Being  (Rudra)  possessed  of  a body  half 
man’s  and  half  women and  then  the  Creator  said,  “Divide 
thyself.”  And  he  being  accosted  thus,  divided  himself  into  (wo. 
It  was  then  that  she  was  born. 

29.  All  the  women  in  three  worlds  are  born  of  the  female 
part.  Similarly,  all  the  eleven  Rudras^*^  originated  from  his 
male  part. 

30-33.  Everything  feminine  in  gender  is  she  herself  and 
everything  masculine  is  Rudra  himself.  Keeping  Rudra  in  view, 
lord  Brahma  looked  at  Daksa  and  said,  “Worship  her,  she  is  of 
good  holv  rites,  th(i  mother  of  all  the  worlds,  of  mine  as  well  as 
yours,  lithe  word  putri  (daughter)  is  interpreted  as  ‘one  who 


27,  This  half-male  and  half-female  form  of  lord  Siva  is  most  popular 
in  ancient  sculpture.  The  concept  has  its  basis  in  the  Purusa-Prakrti  doctrine 
of  the  S^riikhya  philosophers. 

28.  Eleven  Rudras.  For  the  names  of  eleven  Rudras,  sec  1.  82.  40-41. 
Their  names  arc  variously  mentioned  in  the  PurSnas.  For  instance,  Matsya 
has  two  lists  (5.  29-30;  153.  19)  which  differ  from  each  other.  Vayu  agrees 
with  Matsya  only  in  three  names.  Bhavifya (125.7)  gives  a different  list. 
For  the  interpretation  of  these  names  and  other  detail,  sec  AfP.  A Study 
PP.  65.67. 


Creation 


19 


saves  from  the  hell  “put”  she  will  become  the  excellent  wife  of 
Rudra  and  the  motlier  of  the  Universe.  She  shall  be  your 
daughter  and  known  as  Sati. 

Thus  urged  by  Brahma  Dak|a  obtained  her  as  his  daughter 
and  respectfully  gave  her  to  Rudra  (in  marriage) . 

34.  The  thirteen  wives  of  Dharma,  Sraddha  and  others  have 
already  been  mentioned.  I shall  now  mention  the  prog^niy  of 
Dharma  from  those  wives,  in  due  order. 

35-36.  They  are  Kama  (love),  Darpa  (pride),  Niyama 
(restraint),  Santo§a  (contentment),  Lobha  (covetousness), 
Sruta  (learning),  Danda  (punishment),  Samaya  (agreement), 
Bodha  (wisdom),  Apramada  (non-erring),  Vinaya  (humility), 
Vyavasaya  (industry),  K^ma  (welfare),  Sukha  (happiness) 
and  Ya^as  (fame) . These  are  the  offspring  of  Dharma. 

37-40.  Dharma  begot  of  Kriya  (activity)  and  Buddhi  (in- 
telligence) two  sons  each  viz., — Danda  (punishment)  and 
Samaya  (agreement)  of  the  former,  Apramada  (non-erring)  and 
Bodha  (wisdom)  of  the  latter.  Hence  the  sons  of  Dharma  and 
Adharnia  are  fifteen  in  all.  Bhrgu’s  wife  Khyati  gave  birth  to  Sn, 
(who  became)  the  wife  of  Visnu  and  to  two  sons  Dhatr  and 
Vidhatrwho  later  became  the  sons-in-law  ofMeru.  Prabhuti, 
wife  of  Marici,  gave  birth  to  two  sons:  Purnamasa  and  Marlca 
and  four  daughters  : Tusp,  Drs^i,  Krsi  and  Apaciti. 

41-45.  O great  sages,  Ksama  bore  to  Pulaha  three  sons  : 
Kardama,  Variyas  and  Sahisnu  and  one  daughter  Pivari,  golden 
in  colour  and  stout  as  the  earth.  Pulastya  begot  of  Priti  two 
sonsDattorna  and  Vedabahu  and  a daughter  Dr^dvatl.  Sannati, 
wife  of  Kratu  gave  birth  to  sixty  thousand  sons  who  are  known 
as  Balakhilyas.  Smrti,  wife  of  sage  Angiras,  gave  birth  to  four 
daughters : Sinivall,  Kuhu,  Raka  and  Anumati  after  obtaining 
three  sons : Anubhava,  Agni  and  Kirtiman,  O sages  of  holy 
rites. 

46-50.  Anasuya,  the  wife  of  Atri,  gave  birth  to  six  children, 
a daughter  Sruti  and  five  sons  : Satyanetra,  Bhavyamurti,  Apa, 
Sanaiscara  and  Soma;  the  sixth  was  Sruti  (mentioned  above). 
The  affectionate  mother  Orja  bore  to  Vasistha  seven  handsome 
sons:  Rajas,  Suhotra,  Bahu,  Savana,  Anagha,  Sutapas  and 
Sukra.  To  the  god  of  fire  who  identifies  himself  with  Rudra 
and  is  the  eldest  son  of  Brahma  and  also  the  very  life  of  the 


20  Lihg^rS^a 

people^  Svaha  bore  three  sons,  for  the  welfare  of  the  three 
worlds. 


CHAPTER  SOL 

Glory  of  Siva 

SUla  said  : 

1-3.  The  three  sons  of  Agni^  are  Pavamana,  Pavaka  and 
Suci.  The  fire  produced  by  attrition  is  called  Pavamana;  that 
from  lightning  is  named  Pavaka;  that  from  the  sun  is  known  as 
Suci.  The  three  were  the  sons  of  Svaha.  Together  with  their 
sons  and  grandsons  their  number  goes  upto  fortyninc  (*-7x7). 
The  fires  are  produced  in  sacrifices. 

4.  All  these  are  ascetics  and  observers  of  holy  rites.  All  of 
them  arc  praj&patis  identical  with  Rudra. 

5.  The  Pitfs  are  of  two  categories:  yajvans  and  non-yajvans. 
Yajvans  arc  also  called  Agnisvattas,  the  non-yajvans  as  Barhi- 
^das. 

6.  Sraddh&  gave  birth  to  the  mental  daughter  Mena.  This 
mental  daughter  is  well  known  in  the  world. 

7-8.  Mena  gave  birth  to  Mainaka  Kraufica,  his  (Mainaka’s) 
younger  sisters  Uma  and  Gahga.  The  latter  became  the  holiest 
by  virtue  of  her  contact  with  the  body  of  lord  Siva.  Svadha 
gave  birth  to  a mental  daughter  Dharani  (earth)  who  became 
the  support  of  sacrifices.  That  lady  (Dhara^ii)  of  lotus-face 
became  the  wife  of  Meru,  the  king  of  mountains. 

9-10.  The  Pitrs  are  anirtapas  (imbibers  of  nectar).  Their 
account  in  detail,  together  with  that  of  the  sages  and  their  fami- 
lies I shall  narrate  in  a separate  chapter,  later  on. 

29.  For  agnivazh^a  see  Vdyu  I.  29;  Brahmi^a  I.  i.io;  Mirkaod^a 
52,  20-21,  I.IO.  14-17.  According  to  Likga  (ii*i2.33)  agni  is  the 

creative  force  that  permeates  the  Cosmic  Egg  and  effects  the  work  of  crea- 
tion. 

There  are  fotymne  agnis  (II.12.35)  which  are  the  different  forms 
of  Rudra  (1.6.4),  while  su:cording  to  Harivathia  they  are  the  attendants 
of  Rudra  (2.122.  17-40).  Though  there  is  a general  agreement  in  the 
Purfti[|ias  in  regard  to  the  number  of  agnis  there  is  a wide  disagreement 
about  their  names. 


21 


GUny  of  iiva 

Sati,  the  (adopted)  child  of  Dak^,  the  future  daughter  of 
Himavat,  married  Rudra. 

11.  Later,  she  cursed  her  father  Dak$a  [and  immolated  her- 
self] Rudra  who  thought  on  her  created  many  Rudras. 

12.  He  created  them  in  the  form  of  his  own  person  and 
they  were  honoured  by  all  the  worlds.  O leading  sages,  it  was  at 
the  behest  of  Brahma  that  lord  Rudra  created  them.  The 
lord  had  laughed  and  they  were  created  immediately. 

13-16.  The  fourteen  worlds**  were  completely  covered  by 
them.  They  were  of  different  sort,  devoid  of  impurities,  death- 
less and  ageless.  On  seeing  these  Rudras  in  front  Brahma  spoke 
to  them  : 

“O  Rudras,  obeisance  to  you.  O three-eyed  gods,  you  are 
omniscient,  omnipresent  and  splendid.  Some  of  you  are  long, 
some  short  and  dwarfish.  Your  hair  are  golden.  You  dazzle 
our  eyes  by  your  splendour.  You  are  eternal,  enlightened,  devoid 
of  impurities  and  dvandvas.  You  are  passionless  sons  of  Rudra. 
You  are  the  universal  souls.  Thus,  after  eulogising  Rudras, 
lord  Brahma  circumambulated  them  and  spoke  to  Rudra. 

17.  “O  lord,  obeisance  be  to  you;  O great  Rudra,  it  does 
not  behove  you  to  create  subjects  devoid  of  death.  O lord,  you 
should  create  mortal  subjects.” 

18.  Then  the  great  lord  Rudra  replied  thus,  ‘‘My  position 
is  not  of  such  a nature.  O Brahma,  you  should  create  such  sub* 
jects  endowed  with  death.” 

19.  Thus,  at  the  will  of  Rudra,  the  four-faced  Brahma 
created  the  Universe,  of  the  mobile  and  immobile  beings,  en- 
dowed with  death  and  old  age. 

20-24.  Thus,  as  Rudra  desisted  from  creating  mortal  sub- 
jects he  obtained  the  title  ‘sthanu’.  O Brahmins,  Rudra  alone  is 
capable  of  that.  He  is  the  supreme  and  unsullied  soul  who  can 
assume  physical  bodies  when  he  wills.  The  lord  bestows  happi- 
ness on  all  living  beings  mercifully  and  without  strain.  He  has, 
therefore,  acquired  the  title  Sankara.  He  is  the  all-pervading 

30.  The  universe  is  comprised  of  fourteen  worlds,  seven  rising  above 
the  earth  and  seven  lying  below.  The  seven  upper  regions  are  (i)  bhCir, 
(ii)  bhsHah,  (iii)  svar,  (iv)  mahar,  (v)  janah  (vi)  tapas,  (vii)  satyam 
and  the  seven  lower  are  (i)  atala,.  (ii)  vitala,  (iii)  sutala,  (iv)  rasfttala, 
(v)  tala,  (vi)  tal&tala,  (vii)  p^tala. 


22 


Lingapurd^ 


soul  who  bestows  blessings  upon  the  person  who  out  of  the  fear 
of  worldly  existence  has  resorted  to  yoga  whereby  he  has  become 
detached  eschewing  worldly  activities  and  pleasures.  [It  is  en- 
joined that]  detachment  can  be  produced  by  perfect  knowledge 
as  well.  The  indiscriminate  eschewal  of  this  knowledge  is  mea- 
ningless and  is  contrary  to  the  pmpose.  It  is  through  his  grace 
that  the  confluence  of  knowledge  and  detachment  takes  place. 

25-26.  Virtue,  knowledge,  detachment  and  prosperity  are 
the  result  of  his  blessing.  By  taking  recourse  to  him  one  can  be 
easily  liberated.  Even  if  he  is  engrossed  in  sin  he  does  not  fall 
into  hell. 

27-31.  Hence,  by  resorting  to  him,  people  can  attain 
eternal  release  from  worldly  existence. 

The  Sages  said  : 

There  are  twenty-eight  crores  of  hells  from  ghora  to  mSya 
where  the  sinners  are  tortured,  if  they  do  not  seek  refuge  in  Him. 
He  is  the  support  of  all  living  beings.  He  is  unchanging.  He  is 
the  lord  of  the  worlds.  He  is  Puru^a,  the  great  Atman.  He  is 
often  invoked  and  often  eulogised.  He  is  named  Kala  Rudra 
when  he  assumes  tamogu^ia,  and  Brahma  when  he  assumes 
rajogu^  and  Vi§nu  when  he  assumes  sattvagu^.  When  devoid 
of  attributes  he  is  called  Mahe^vara.  O intelligent  Suta,  now 
tell  us,  by  doing  what  or  by  neglecting  what  do  men  go  to  hell. 
We  arc  eager  to  hear  it. 


CHAPTER  SEVEN 

The  esoteric  secret  of  Siva 


Suta  said  : 

1.  I shall  recount  to  you,  at  the  outset,  the  esoteric  secret, 
in  brief,  of  the  all-knowing  Siva  of  unmeasured  splendo^. 

2-3.  The  yogins  who  are  conversant  with  the  tenera,  who 
have  adopted  great  detachment,  who  are  constantly  associated 


23 


Esoteric  secret  of  Siva 

with  the  eight^^mcans  of  Yoga,  such  as  the  control  of  breath  and 
who  are  endowed  with  the  attributes  of  mercy®*  etc.,  go  either 
to  hell  or  to  heaven  according  to  their  deeds. 

4.  By  virtue  of  his  grace,  knowledge  arises  and  yoga  func- 
tions through  knowledge.  By  dint  of  yoga,  liberation  is  effected, 
and  everything  is  achieved  through  his  grace. 

The  sages  said  : 

5.  O best  ofyogins,  if  perfect  knowledge  comes  through 
grace,  you  shall  tell  us  about  the  form  and  feature  as  well  as  the 
divine  yoga  of  lord  iSiva  (through  which  that  grace  is  attained) . 

6.  How  does  the  lord  devoid  of  anxiety  bestow  his  grace  on 
men  by  means  of  the  yogic  path  and  at  what  time. 

SUta  said  : 

7.  May  you  all  hear  what  had  been  formerly  mentioned 
by  Nandiii  to  Sanat  kumara,  the  son  of  Brahma,  in  the  pre- 
sence of  devas,  sages  and  pitrs. 

8.  O sages  of  good  holy  rites,  listen  to  the  incarnations  of 
Vyasas,  at  the  end  of  Dvapara  and  the  incarnations  of  lord 
Siva  as  Yogacaryas  in  the  kali  age. 

9.  In  different  areas,  the  four  disciples  of  the  lord,  fully 
endowed  with  mental  control  spread  the  doctrines  of  Siva. 
There  grew  up  many  disciples  of  disciples  and  the  lord  was 
pleased  at  this. 

10.  The  perfect  knowledge  of  the  lord  had  been  tradition- 
ally and  gradually  transmitted  orally  to  men  of  the  first  three 
castes  from  brahmins  to  vaisyas  in  the  manner  befitting  them. 
It  was  done  so  out  of  mercy. 

The  sages  said  : — 

11.  It  behoves  you  to  tell  us  who  those  Vyasas  were  who 


31.  The  eight  ancillaries  of  yoga  constitute  (i)  yama,  (2)  niyama, 
(3)  uana,  (4)  pra^&y&ma,  (5)  pimtyah&ra,  (6)  dh&nutia,  (7)  dhyina, 
(8)  sam&^.  Gf  ^P.  Vdyaviya  sathhitd,  ch.  37. 

32.  For  the  eight  virtues  of  the  soul,  compare  Agnipur^a  as  quoted 

in  ST.  ?jtt  apmmnw  *»ipr»r  1 


24  Lingapura^ 

incarnated  during  every  Dvapara  age  and  furthermore,  in  which 
manvantara  and  kalpa  they  incarnated. 

SQia  said  : 

12*13.  O brahmins,  may  you  be  pleased  to  listen.  I shall 
duly  recount  the  Vylbas  in  the  Varaha  kalpa  of  the  Vaivasvata 
manvantara  which  is  still  current.  I shall  recount  the  Rudras  in 
all  the  manvantaras.  They  had  been  the  guides  and  instructors 
of  perfect  knowledge  of  the  Vedas  and  Pur^as  in  all  the  circles 
of  yugas. 

14-18.  O brahmins,  these  are  the  Vyasas:  (1)  Kraiu,®^  (2) 
Satya,  (3)  Bhargava,  (4)  Ahgiras,  (5)  Savitr,  (6)  Mrtyu,  (7) 
l§atakratu,  (8)  Vasi§tha,  (9)  Sarasvata,  (10)  Tridhaman,  (11) 
Trivjrta,  (12)  Satatejas,  (13)  Dharma  who  is  known  as  Nara- 
yana,  (14)  Tarak§u,  (15)  Aruni,  (16)  Kftafijaya,  (17)  Rtafl- 
jaya,  (18)  Bharadvaja,  (19)  Gautama,  (20)  Vacasravas,  (21) 
Sufmayagti,  (22)  Suci,  (23)  Trnavindu,  (24)  Ruk§a,  (25) 
Sakti,  (26)  Parasara  the  son  of  Sakti,  (27)  Jatukarriya,  (28) 
Kr^i^a  Dvaipayana  who  was  Vi§nu  himself. 

Now  listen  to  the  yogesvaras  in  due  order  in  the  Kali  age. 
19-20.  They  are  innumerable  in  the  various  kalpas  and  the 
manvantaras.  Since  the  incarnations  of  Rudras  and  Vyasas  in  the 
Kali  age  are  too  many,  I shall  recount  the  incarnations  in  the 
Vaivasvata  manvantara,  in  the  Varaha  kalpa  and  in  all  the 
other  manvantaras  falling  therein. 

The  sages  said  : 

21.  O Suta,  it  behoves  you  now  to  recount  the  manvan- 
taras in  the  Varaha  kalpa  and  in  all  the  later  kalpas  as  also 
recount  the  Siddhas  in  the  Vaivasvata  manvantara. 

Suta  said 

22-28.  The  first  Manu  was  ( 1 ) Svayambhuva  son  of 
Brahma.  Then,  O brahmins,  was  the  Manu  (2)  Svaroci?a.  The 
subsequent  Manus  were:  (3)Uttama,  (4)  Tamasa,  (5)  Raivata, 
(6)  Cak§u$a,  (7)  Vaivasvata,  (8)  Savar^i,  (9)  Dharma,  (10) 
Savarnika,  (11)  Pisahga,  (12)  Api^ahgabha,  (13)  Sabala,  and 


38.  identical  with  ‘Prabhu*.  Gf.  ST  I 


25 


Esoteric  secret  of  Siva 

(14)  Vari^iaka*  The  Manus  are  also  designated  according  to  the 
vowels  beginning  with  ‘a’  and  ending  with  *au**  O excellent 
brahmins^  they  are  also  classified  according  to  their  colours  as 
(1)  iveta  (white),  (2)painidu  (grey),  (3)  rakta  (reddish),  (4) 
tamra  (copper-hued),  (5)  pita  (yellow),  (6)  kapila  (tawny), 

(7)  ki^a  (black),  (8)  liyama  (dark),  (9)  dhumra  (light->smoke- 
coloured),  (10)  sudhumra  (deep  smoke-coloured),  (11)  api- 
ianga  (non-tawny)  (12)  pLanga  (tawny),  (13)  trivarioui sabala 
(three-coloured)  and  (14)  kalandhura  (extreme  black).  Thus 
all  the  holy  Manus  have  been  mentioned  by  ( 1 ) name,  (2) 
letters,  and  (3)  colour.  Those  identical  with  the  vowels  are,  in 
brief,  mentioned  as  the  leaders  of  the  manvantaras.  Among 
them,  the  seventh  Manu  is  Vaivasvata  represented  by  the  vowel 

and  colour  black.  This  seventh  Manu  is  also  a leader  among 
devas.  I shall  mention  the  yogins  in  this  repeated  cycle  of  yugas 
in  the  kalpas  that  have  passed  by  and  those  that  are  yet  to  come. 

29-35.  The  current  kalpa  in  the  seventh  manvantara  is 
known  as  Varaha.  Now  listen  to  the  yogic  incarnations  of  the 
lord  and  their  line  of  disciples  in  due  order,  in  all  the  kalpas 
and  manvantaras.  In  the  first  Kali  of  Svayambhuva  Manu  they 
were  (1)  Sveta,  (2)  Sutfira,  (3)  Madana,  (4)  Suhotra,  (5) 
Kankana,  (6)  Logak^,  (7)  Jaigi^avya,  (8)  Dadhivahana,  (9) 
]^§abha,  (10)  Ugra,  (11)  Atri,  (12)  Subalaka,  (13)  Gautama, 
(14)  Vedaslr^a.  (15)  Gokarua,  (16)  Guh^vasin,  (17)  Sikhaud^* 
bhrt,  (18)  Jatamalin,  (19)  Attahasa,  (20)  Dimka,  (21)  Languli. 
(22)  Mahakivya,  (23)  Sfilin,  (24)  Da^d^n,  (25)  Mundl^vara, 
(26)  SahisQu,  (27)  Soma^arma,  (28)  LakulHa.  O men  of  holy 
rites,  the  incarnations  as  Yogacaryas  of  the  lord  in  all  the  cycles 
of  four  ages  in  the  Vaivasvata  manvantara  have  been  recounted 
(as  twentyeight) . 

36.  O excellent  sages,  in  every  Dvapara  age,  there  are 
Vyasas  in  the  same  manner.  The  following  are  the  recurring 
disciples  of  these  Yogeivaras,  each  of  whom  had  four  disciples. 

37-51.  They  are; — ( 1)  Sveta,  (2)  Sveta^ikha^dln  (3)  Sveti- 
iva,  (4)  Svetalohita,  (5)  Dundubhi,  (6)  Satarfipa,  (7)  ]^c!ka, 

(8)  Ketuman,  (9)  VHoka,  (10)  Vikeia,  (11)  VipSla,  (12) 
P^anaiana,(13)  Sumukha,  (14)Diurmukha,  (15)  Durdama,  (16) 
Dufatikrama,  (17)  Sanaka,  (18)  Sananda,  (19)  Sanitana,  (20) 
^bhu,  (21)  Sanat,(22)  Sudiman,  (23)  Virajas,  (24)Safikbapada, 


26 


Lingt^i^a 


(25)  Vairuja#,  (26)  Megha,  (27)  Satasvata,  (28)  SuvShana, 
(29)  Mq^viha,  (30)  Kabila,  (31)  Asuri,  (32)  Paficaiikha, 
(33)  Valkala,  (34)  Paraiara,  (35)  Gaiga,  (36)  Bhargava  (37) 
Angiras,  (38)  Balabandhu,  (39)  Niramitra,  (40)  Ketuirhga 
(41)  Lambodara,  (42)  Lamba,  (43)  Lamb&kfa,  (44) 
LambaMaka,  (45)  &urvajfia,  (46)  Samabuddhi,  (47)  Sadhya, 
(48)  Sarva,  (49)  Sudhaman,  (50)  Kaiyapa,  (51)  Vinytha, 
(52)  Virajaa,  (53)  Atri,  (54),  Devatada,  (55)  Sravapa,  (56) 
Sravifthaka,  (57)  Kuni,  (58)  Kui^ibahu,  (59)  Kuiarira, 
(60)  Kimetraka,  (61)  Kalyapa,  (62)  Uianas,  (63)  Cyavana, 
(64)  Byha^ati,  (65)  Utathya,  (66)  Vamadeva,  (67)  Maha* 
yoga,  (68)  Mababala,  (69)  Vacairavas,  (70)  Sudhika, 
(71)  §y&v&sva,  (72)  Yatiivara,  (73)  Hirapyanabha,  (74) 
Kausalya,' (75)  Logak$i,  (76),  Kuthumi,  (77)  Sumantu, 
(78)  &rbaii,  (79)  Kabandha,  (80)  Kusikandhara,  (81) 
Plak$a,  (82)  Dii^yiyani,  (83)  Ketuman,  (84)  Gopana, 
(85),  Bhallavin,  (86)  Madhupinga,  (87)  8vetaketu,  (88) 
Taponidhi,  (89)  U<i^,  (90)  Byhadaiva,  (91)  Devala,  (92) 
Kavi,  (93)  Salibotra,  (94)  Agnivda,  (95)  Yuvanaiva,  (96) 
Saradvasu,  (97)  Chagala,  (98)  Ku^akar^a,  (99)  Kumbha, 
(100)  Pravahaka,  (101),  Uluka,  (102)  Vidyuta,  (103) 
Manduka,  (104)  Aivalayana,  (105)  Ak^pada,  (106) 
Kumara,  (107)  Uluka,  (108)  Vatsa,  (109)  Kirfika,  (110) 
Garbha,  (111)  Mitra,  (112)  Kauru?ya.  These  noble  souls  are 
the  disciples  of  the  yogins  in  all  cycles  of  four  yugas. 

52-55.  They  are  all  devoid  of  impurities,  almost  identical 
with  Brahman,  and  ei^[aged  in  the  path  of  knowledge.  They  are 
devotees  of  Paiupati,  great  Siddhas  and  have  ashes  smeared  on 
their  bodies.  There  are  hundreds  and  thousands  of  disciples 
and  their  disciples.  They  attain  the  Pilupata  yoga  and  Rudra’s 
world.  All  beings  from  Devas  to  Pii&cas  are  said  to  be  Paius. 
Since  Lord  Rudra  it  their  overlord  he  is  called  Pafupati.  O 
Brahmins,  the  yc^a  evolved  by  Rudra,  the  overlmd  of  the 
Plalus  is  known  as  P&jupata  y<^,  which  leads  all  persons  to 
their  l^ful  prosperity. 


27 


CBHAPTBR  EICaiT 

Yogic  zones 

SMia  said : 

1.  I Aall  succinctly  mention  the  yogic  zones  now.  They 
have  been  established  by  iSiva  himself^  O brahmins,  for  the 
welfare  of  men. 

2.  The  portion  covered  by  a vitasti  beneath  the  throat  and 
above  the  umbilicus  is  the  excellent  zone  of  yoga;  so  also  the 
curling  lock  of  hair  below  the  umbilicus  and  middle  portion 
between  the  eye-brows. 

3.  The  knowledge  of  all  topics  that  arises  in  the  soul  is 
called  yoga.*^  The  concentration  of  the  mind  is  possible  only 
through  his  grace. 

4.  O excellent  brahmins,  the  form  of  his  grace  can  be 
realized  by  the  individual  alone.  It  cannot  be  imported  by 
Brahma  or  any  other.  It  arises  itself  in  the  individual  gradually. 

5.  Yoga  indicates  the  region  where  the  Supreme  Lord 
dwells.®*  For  the  attainment  o(  that  region,  knowledge  is  the 
cause,  and  this  knowledge  comes  through  his  grace  alone. 

6.  One  should  abstain  from  sensual  activities  and  burn 
sins  by  means  of  perfect  knowledge.  The  achievement  of  yoga 
shall  be  possible  only  to  one  who  has  restrained  the  activities  of 
his  soise-organs. 

7.  O excellent  brahmins,  yoga  is  restraining  the  function- 
ing of  the  mind.*®  Eight  means  have  been  mentioned  for  the 
achievement  of  yoga. 

8-9.  They  arc(l)  yama  (restraint),  (2)  niyama  (obser- 
vances), (3)  ibana  (a  partiaalar  posture),  (4)  prai^y&ma 
(restraint  of  breath)  (5)  pratyihftra  (withdrawal  of  the  senses) , 
(6)  dhara9&  (retention),  (7)  dhykna  (meditation)  and  (8) 
samiklhi  (ecstatic  trance) . 

10-11.  Abstention  by  way  of  austerity  is  called  restraint 
(yama) ; O foremost  among  those  who  have  restraint,  the  first 

54.  Yoffs  is  defined  as  the  addevement  of  knowledge  of  att  objects 
by  the  penonal  sold  Qlva}. 

35,  K.  leads  fof  1 

36.  Of.  FMaigala  TegasHtra  Pi I i*  i. 


28 


Li^apuri^ 


contributory  cause  of  restraint  is  non-violence  (ahiihsa  ),  truth- 
fulness, non-stealing,  celibacy  and  non-acceptance  of  gifts  are 
the  other  causes  The  root  of  niyama  ( observances  of  vows  ) is 
undoubtedly  yama  alone. 

12.  Considering  all  living  beings  as  one's  own  self  and 
working  for  the  welfare  of  all  living  beings  is  called  non-viol- 
ence. It  helps  in  achieving  the  knowledge  of  self. 

13.  Retelling  precisely  what  has  been  seen,  heard,  inferred 
or  experienced  is  called  truthfulness  (satya).  It  is  devoid  of  in- 
jury or  infliction  of  pain  on  others. 

14.  The  Vedas  declare.  **One  should  not  utter  what  is 
obscene  in  the  presence  of  the  brahmins".  *‘Even  after  knowing 
the  defects  of  others  one  should  not  proclaim  them  to  others" — 
this  is  another  passage  in  the  ^ruti. 

15.  Not  stealing  the  possessions  of  others  purposefully,  even 
in  emergency,  mentally,  physically  and  verbally  is  non-stealing 
in  brief. 

16.  Not  indulging  is  sexual  intercouse,®^  mentally,  verbally 
or  physically  is  the  vow  of  celibacy,  with  reference  to  the  asce- 
tics and  the  religious  students. 

17.  This  holds  good  in  regard  to  the  anchorites,  forest- 
dwellers  and  widowers.  I shall  now  tell  yon  about  the  vow 
of  celibacy  of  the  householders  who  live  with  their  wives. 

18.  In  their  case,  as  prescribed,  indulgence  in  sexual  inter- 
course with  their  own  wives  and  abstention  from  it  with  other 
women  mentally,  physically  and  verbally  should  be  understood 
as  brahmacarya. 

19.  The  householder  shall  take  ablution  after  indulging  in 
sexual  intercourse  with  his  own  wife.  If  he  is  in  yogic  commu- 
nion with  his  self  be  is  undoubtedly  a celibate. 

20.  In  the  case  of  non-violence  (ahiihsa)  too,  the  same 
rule  is  applicable.  Violence  sanctioned  by  §ruti,  in  regard  to 
the  brahmanas,  preceptors  and  sacrifice  comes  under  ahiihsa. 

21.  Women  are  always  to  be  avoided.  One  should  stay 

37.  For  eight  kinds  of  maithuna,  cf.  ST. 

II  I1  Brahmacarya 

(celibacy)  is  defined  as  the  reverse  of  miuthuna  (sexual  indulgenoe)  and 
it  impartt  vigour  and  force  : Cf.  Togasm^  : | 


29 


far  off  from  them.  A shrewd  person  views  them  as  he  views 
the  corpses. 

22.  He  should  have  the  same  attitude  in  the  sexual  inter- 
course with  his  own  wife,  as  when  discharging  the  faeces  and 
urine  on  the  ground.  There  should  be  no  attitude  other  than 
this. 

23.  Woman  is  like  a burning  coal;  man  is  like  a vessel  of 
ghee.  He  should  always  avoid  contact  with  women  therefore. 

24.  If  we  ponder  over  this,  we  shall  know  that  there  is  no 
satiety  in  sexual  pleasures.  Hence,  one  should  practise  detached 
attitude  mentally,  physically  and  verbally. 

25.  Lust  is  never  suppressed  by  indulging  in  sexual  plea- 
sures. Just  as  fire  burns  vigorously  if  ghee  is  poured  in,  so  also 
lust  is  increased  by  means  of  indulgence.** 

26.  Hence  the  yogin  should  always  practise  renunciation 
for  achieving  immortality,  since  he  who  is  not  detached  is  born 
and  re-born  in  different  wombs. 

2 7 . The  V edas**  declare  that  it  is  only  through  renunciation 
that  immortality  is  attained.  O brahmins,  the  most  excellent 
among  the  knowers  of  Sruti  and  Smfti,  it  is  not  possible 
through  rites,  through  progeny  or  through  offerings  of  materials 
of  worship. 

28.  Hence  one  should  practise  detachment,  mentally,  ver- 
bally and  physically.  Abstention  from  sexual  intercourse,  except 
during  the  prescribed  period,  after  menstruation  is  stated  as 
celibacy  in  the  case  of  householders. 

29-31.  Thus  the  restraints  (yamas)  arc  succinctly  men- 
tioned. I shall  now  tdl  you  the  observances  (niyamas).  They 
are  ten  in  number  : (1)  cleanliness  (^auca),  (2)  sacrifice  (ijya), 
(3)  penance  (upas),  (4)  chariuble  gift  (dana),  (5)  study 
of  the  Vedas  (svadhyaya)  (6)  restraint  on  the  organs  of  gener- 
ation (upasthanigraha) , (7)  holy  rites  (vrau),  (8)  fast 
(upavasa),  silence  (mauna),  amd  holy  bath  (snana).  Accor- 
ding to  some,  observances  (niyamai)  mean  (1)  absence  of 
craving  (anlha),  (2)  cleanliness  (sauca),  (3)  satisfaction 
(tu$ti),  (4)  penance  (tapas),  (5)  muttering  of  Siva’s  mantra 

38.  7.  47. 

59.  Na  karma^i  aa  pnyayX  dliaaeoa,  7!4.  10^10.3;  Mahin.  tl,  10.5 


32  Lingapur^ 

vertigo  bom  of  sweating,  fixation,  absence  of  knowledge  and 
unconsdousness. 

51-54,  Pranayima  is  of  two  types:  sagarbhaand  agarbha.^* 
If  it  is  pursued  with  japa,  it  is  sagarbha;  if  without  js^a,  it  is 
agarbha.  It  is  like  an  elephant,  or  an  eight-footed  animal  ilarabha 
or  a formidable  lion.  When  caught  and  tamed  properly  it  becomes 
submissive.  Similarly,  for  the  yogins,  the  wind  which  is  by  nature 
unstable  and  uncontrollable  becomes  normal  and  subservient  by 
proper  practice.  Just  as  the  lion  or  the  elephant  or  the  Sarabha, 
though  ferocious,  is  tamed  after  a while  with  a proper  training, 
so  also  the  wind  attains  normalcy  and  equanimity  due  to  con- 
stant acquaintance  and  practice. 

55-57.  He  who  practises  yoga  never  suffers  calamity.  When 
the  pr^a  is  properly  trained  it  turns  the  defects  of  the  mind, 
speech  or  body,  preserving  the  body  of  the  practiser.  Thus,  if 
the  devotee  perfects  himself  by  taking  recourse  to  the  pranayama 
his  defects  perish;  the  very  breath  is  conquered  by  him,  and  the 
divine  quiescence  etc.  are  achieved. 

58-62.  The  attributes  of  the  pranayama  are  four,  viz,  santi, 
prasanti,  dipti  and  prasada.  They  are  explained  in  order:  O 
brahmins,  the  first  of  these  four  is  santi.  It  means  the  suppres- 
sion of  sins  congenital  or  adventitious,  Prasanti  is  a perfect 
restraint  in  speech."  All  round,  all  time  brilliance,  O brahmins, 
is  called  dipti.  Prasada  is  the  clarity  of  the  mind  which  is  of  four 
types.  It  is  the  clarity  of  the  sense-organs,  of  the  intellect  and  the 
organic  winds.  The  organic  winds— prana,  apana,  samana,  udana 
and  vyana  have  their  functional  names  : Naga,  Kurma,  Krkala, 
Devadatta  and  Dhanahjaya  respectively.  The  clarity  of  these 
winds  is  called  prasada. 

43.  According  to  ST.  sagarbha  is  a variety  of  Kumbhaka  that  includes 
par^  (mhalii^)  and  recaka  (exhaling)  varieties  of  pr&^fiy&ma. 

Snnri  \ Sp.  defines  agarbha  as  the  itind  of 

Prlil^&yftina  wherein  the  breath  is  restrained  without  meditation  and  japa, 
and  sagarbha  as  that  wherein  mediution  and  japa  arc  allowed.  (Vimha 
37-  33,  34)- 

44.  PraOntih—restrained  or  restricted  speech.  ST.  quotes  from 
the  Mah&bh&rata  : 

vf iini^r  oTjifhr  ftpr  snp 


Togic  Z^fus 


33 


63-67.  The  wind  which  traverses  through  the  body  is  called 
prsLigA;  that  which  brings  down  food  and  drink  is  called  apana; 
that  which  enables  the  limbs  of  the  body  to  bend  is  called  vyana 
which  incites  the  ailments  too;  that  which  excites  and  afSicts 
the  vulnerable  points  (in  the  body)  is  called  udana.  That  which 
normalizes  the  functions  of  the  organs  is  called  samana.  Thus 
the  first  set  of  five  winds  has  been  explained  to  you.  The  wind 
Niga  functions  in  the  act  of  belching;  theKfirma  in  the  opening 
of  eyes;  Krkala  in  sneezing;  Devadatta  in  yawning  and  Dhanaft- 
jaya  in  making  a loud  report.  It  is  present  even  in  the  dead 
body.  By  restraining  these  winds,  one  can  attain  prasada.  O 
brahmins,  in  the  fourfold  set  of  attributes,  prasada  figures  as 
the  fourth. 

68-69.  O brahmins,  the  intellect  has  these  synonyms — viz., 
visvara,  mahat,  prajfta,  manas,  brahma,  citi,  smrti,  khyati, 
samvit,  l^vara  and  mati.  It  is  through  pranayama  that  the 
clarity  of  intellect  is  achieved. 

70-74.  O excellent  sages,  Visvara  is  so  called  because  it  com- 
promises between  two  conflicting  opposites.  Since  it  is  the  first 
and  the  greatest  of  all  the  tattvas  arising  out  of  Prakrti  it  is 
called  mahat.  It  is  called  prajfia  because  it  is  the  repository  of 
all  means  of  knowledge.  It  is  manas  because  it  thinks.  It  is 
Brahma  because  it  is  big  and  swells  up.  O most  excellent 
among  the  knowers  of  Brahman,  it  is  called  citi  because  it 
gathers  together  all  activities  for  the  sake  of  enjoyment.  It  is 
called  smrti  because  it  enables  one  to  remember  things.  Since 
it  obtains  everything  it  is  called  Sarhvit.  Because  it  is  known 
everywhere  by  means  of  knowledge  it  is  called  khyati.*®  It  is 
called  I^vara  because  it  is  the  overlord  of  all  elements  and 
comprehends  everything.  O sages,  most  excellent  among  the 
intelligent,  it  is  called  Mati  because  it  is  the  instrument  of 
thought  subjectively  and  objectively.  It  is  called  Buddhi 
because  it  enlightens  things  and  is  itself  the  instrument  of 
enlightenment. 

75,  The  perspicuity  of  this  Buddhi  is  achieved  through 

45.  khy&ti--a  category  of  intellect  (MP.  3.17).  It  if  so  caUed  be- 
cause it  is  the  source  of  the  perceived  creation  or  the  cosmos  which  becomes 
visible  or  the  object  of  pcrcq>tion  by  the  mind  and  the  senses. 


34  Liikge^m^a 

Pranayazna.  By  restraining  himself  one  shall  burn  all  defects 
by  taking  recourse  to  pranayama. 

76.  By  means  of  pratyahara  (withdrawal  of  sense-organs) 
and  Dhara^as  (retentions)  one  shall  destroy  sins.  By  medi- 
tating on  the  mundane  objects  as  if  they  were  poisonous  one 
destroys  all  ungodly  qualities. 

77.  O excellent  ascetics,  one  should  increase  the  power  of 
intellect  by  means  of  samadhi.  The  eight  ancillaries  of  yoga 
should  be  practised  only  after  securing  the  proper  place  for 
yogic  practice. 

78.  The  knower  of  the  Atman  shall  then  duly  secure 
Asanas  (correct  postures)  for  achieving  yogic  results.  If  the 
place  and  time  are  not  suitable  he  cannot  have  even  a glimpse 
of  yoga. 

79-86.  The  yogic  exercises  should  not  be  practised  in  the 
the  following  places  or  circumstances — near  the  fire,  within 
water,  on  a heap  of  dry  leaves,  in  a place  infested  with  crea- 
tures, in  the  cremation  ground,  in  a dilapidated  cowpen,  in 
the  four  crossroads,  in  a place  full  of  noises,  in  a place 
generating  fear,  in  a monastery,  or  the  anthill,  in  an  in- 
auspicious place,  in  a place  inhabited  by  wicked  men  and  in 
a place  infested  with  mosquitoes.  One  should  not  practise 
yogic  exercises  when  there  is  some  ailment  in  the  body  or 
when  the  mind  is  in  dejection. 

The  devotee  shall  delightedly  practise  the  ancillaries  of 
yoga  in  the  following  places.  It  should  be  a well  protected 
place,  auspicious  and  pleasing;  or  a cave  in  a mountain  or 
shrine  of  Siva,  or  a well-guarded  park  or  a forest^  or  a corner 
in  one’s  own  house  devoid  of  people  and  animals.  It  should 
be  scrupulously  clean,  well  scrubbed,  smeared  with  cowdung 
and  rendered  beautiful  in  diverse  ways.  It  shall  be  spotlessly 
clean  like  the  surface  of  a mirror.  It  shall  be  fumigated  with 
black  agallocum.  Different  kinds  of  flowers  should  be  strewn 
all  round,  A canopy  should  adorn  the  whole  place.  It  should 
be  endowed  with  roots,  fruits,  tender  sprouts,  kuia  grass  and 
variegated  flowers.  The  practitioner  of  yoga  should  sit  in  a 
balanced  posture*  He  should  practise  the  ancillaries  of  the  yogic 
exercises  with  delight  in  his  mind.  He  should  pay  reverence  to 
the  preceptor  Lqsrd  Siva,  Goddess  Umg,  Vinftyaka,  the  leading 


Yogic  Z<mis  35 

yogins  and  their  disciples.  He  should  practise  the  posture  of 
svastika*®  padma*’  or  ardhasana." 

87-90,  He  should  sit  with  the  knees  on  a level  or  kneel  on 
one  of  the  knees.  Whatever  the  posture  may  be  he  shall  sit 
steadily  withdrawing  his  feet  He  shall  keep  his  mouth  shut, 
eyes  dosed,  chest  projected  in  front.  With  his  heels  he  should 
cover  the  testicles  and  the  penis.  With  his  head  somewhat 
lifted  up  and  the  rows  of  teeth  not  touching  each  other,  he 
should  observe  the  tip  of  his  nose.  He  shall  not  look  at  the  quar- 
ters, He  shall  cover  up  his  tamas  by  means  of  rajas  and  the 
rajas  by  means  of  sattva.  Then  stationing  himself  in  the 
sattva  he  shall  practise  meditation  of  l§iva. 

91.  With  great  concentration,  he  shall  meditate  in  the 
pericarp  of  the  lotus,  on  the  Supreme  Being  which  is  symbo- 
lised by  Orhkara  and  is  as  pure  as  the  candle  flame. 

92-95.  He  should  meditate  within  three  angulasbelow  the 
umbilicus,  on  the  excellent  lotus  having  (at  its  centre)  an 
octagon,  a pentagon  or  a triangle.  He  should  also  meditate  on 
the  fire,  moon  and  sun  together  with  their  consorts;  or  the  order 
may  be  : first  the  sun,  then  the  moon,  and  then  the  fire.  Or 
the  order  may  be  first  the  fire,  then  the  sun  and  then  the 
moon  as  prescribed  in  the  Sastras.  He  should  conceive  the 
four^®  aims — ^Virtue  etc.  beneath  the  fire  and  ponder  over 

46.  svastika — a posture  of  sitting  practised  by  a yogin  in  which  the 
toes  arc  placed  in  the  inner  hollow  of  the  knees.  SP,  lists  eight  types  of  the 
yogic  pose  ; (i  }svastika,  (ii)  padma,  (iii)  ardhendu  (iv)  vira,  (v)  yoga, 
(vi)  prasadhita,  (vii)  paryadka,  (viii)  yatheita* 

47.  padmSsana-— a particular  posture  of  the  body  in  religious  medi- 
tation. Gf. 

ST.  quotes  from  HTP.  pp.  85-26  : 

48.  Ckmstrue  'aidhftsanam’  with  *padsiiain*  t,e.  the  lotus  half  seat. 

It  ii  f iddh***T*^  - 

49.  Tyterom, irffour oonitittaf  (i)  dtuumi,  C^} jUiia,  (fit)  vafaicya 

aad  C>v)  livin’** 


36 

the  three  guigias  over  the  zone.  He  should  then  think  of  Rudra 
stationed  in  sattva  and  adorned  by  Um§. 

96.  He  should  perform  the  rite  of  meditation  in  the  umbi- 
licus or  the  throat,  or  the  middle  of  the  eye-brows  or  on  the 
forehead  or  on  the  crest  of  the  head  in  accordance  with  the 
injunctions. 

97.  He  should  meditate  on  Siva  (sitting  in  the  lotus  with 
two,  sixteen,  twelve,  ten,  six  or  four  petals  in  due  order) . 

98-100.  He  should  meditate  on  Him  in  a spot  as  lustrous  as 
gold  or  as  splendid  as  burning  coal  or  very  white  or  as  reful- 
gent as  twelve  suns  or  as  brilliant  as  the  disc  of  the  moon  or 
as  flashing  as  millions  of  lightning  streaks  or  as  lustrous  as  fire 
or  as  glittering  as  a circle  of  lightning  or  as  refulgent  as  a crore 
of  diamond  pieces  or  as  brilliant  as  a ruby.  He  should  practise 
meditation  on  the  image  of  blue  and  red  coloured  lord  (Siva). 

101 . He  shall  meditate  on  Mahe^vara  in  the  heart;  on 
Sada^iva  in  the  lotus-like  umbilicus  ; on  Candracu^a  on  the 
forehead  and  on  Sankara  in  the  middle  of  eyebrows. 

102-108.  He  shall  meditate  on  Siva  on  his  forehead;  on 
Mahadeva  ( the  great  lord)  in  his  lotus-like  heart  and  in  the 
mind.  The  great  lord  is  of  the  following  description  : He  is 
devoid  of  impurities.  He  is  unsullied.  He  is  the  quiescent 
Brahman  in  the  form  of  knowledge.  He  has  no  specific  charac- 
teristics. He  cannot  be  particularly  pointed  out.  He  is  minuter 
than  the  atom.  He  is  splendid  and  supportless.  He  cannot  be 
reflected  upon.  He  is  devoid  of  death  and  birth.  He  is  liberation 
itself.  He  is  ambrosial,  imperishable  and  unborn.  He  is  mira- 
culous, the  greatest  and  the  largest  bliss.  He  is  devoid  of 
defects  and  qualities.  He  is  subtler  than  the  subtlest,  auspicious, 
self-cognizable,  incomprehensible.  He  is  the  greatest  lord 
identical  with  perfect  knowledge.  He  is  beyond  the  scope  of 
sense-organs.  He  has  no  semblance.  He  is  the  greatest  prin- 
ciple, greater  than  the  greatest,  devoid  of  conditioning 
adjuncts,  comprehensible  through  meditation,  non-dualistic, 
beyond  all  darkness  and  the  greatest  Being.  The  devotee  should 
meditate  in  the  umbilicus  on  Sadi$iva,  the  lord  identical  with 
devas. 

109-111.  He  shall  meditate  on  lord  Siva  identical  with 


QhiaeUs  and  PorUnis 


37 


pure  knowledge,  in  the  middle  of  the  body  through  su$umna*^ 
pass  or  through  the  Kumbhaka.  He  shall  then  perform  thirty 
two  recakas  (respirations)  concentrating  on  the  heart  and 
umbilicus.  O excellent  brahmins,  then  eschewing  Recaka  and 
Pitraka^^  respirations  and  taking  recourse  only  to  Kumbhaka 
he  shall  meditate  on  iSiva  in  the  middle  of  the  body  with 
normal  elegance. 

112.-116.  After  identifying  with  the  lord  he  will  compre- 
hend the  bliss  of  Brahman  emerging  from  elegance  and  the 
state  of  perfect  equanimity. 

Twelve  prana yamas  make  one  dh&rana ; twelve  dhara^as  make 
one  meditation  and  twelve  meditations  make  one  Samadhi. 
O brahmins,  one  may  attain  yogic  realization  by  contact  with 
wise  men  or  by  his  own  efforts,  gradually.  Of  course,  even  as 
he  practises  yoga,  there  may  be  obstacles  in  this  path.  But 
they  perish  through  constant  practice  by  the  direction  of  the 
preceptor. 


eSHAPTER  NINE 

Obstacles  and  Portents 


Suta  said  : 

1-3.  Obstacles  to  yogic  practice  take  shape  in  ten  different 
ways.  They  are  (1)  lethargy,  (2)  ailment,  (3)  negligence, 
(4)  doubt,  (5)  unsteady  mind,  (6)  lack  of  faith,  (7)  illusion, 
(8)  misery,  (9)  dejection  and  (10)  indulgence  in  sensual 

50.  I Gf.  ^vagita  as  quoted  in 

ST. : i 

II  It  is  a vein  of  the  body  lying  between  those  called  id&  and 
pihgala  and  supposed  to  be  one  of  the  passages  for  the  breath  or  spirit. 

51.  recakam  phtakaih  tyaktva.  Kumbhaka  alone  is  recommended 
for  the  attainment  of  spiritual  goal;  recaka  and  paraka  are  eaeluded.  Cf. 

p.  70 

*r  ?rw  II 


38  Lingapur3i}a 

pleasures.  Of  these  lethargy  means  abstention  from  work  due 
to  the  bulkiiiess  of  the  body  and  mind. 

4.  Ailments  originate  from  the  imbalance  of'  the  consti- 
tuent elements.  They  are  the  outcome  of  the  defective  previous 
schemes  as  well  as  of  bad  habits.  Negligence  constitutes 
omission  to  secure  the  means  of  yoga. 

5-6.  Doubt  is  a double  perception — “this  or  that”.  Un- 
steadiness is  the  instability  to  stabilize  the  mind.  The  mind 
remains  unsteady  due  to  its  engrossment  in  mundane  affairs 
even  when  the  ground  is  achieved.  Lack  of  faith  is  the  un- 
emotional attitude  towards  the  means  of  yoga. 

7*9.  Illusion  is  misconception  of  the  mind  as  regards  one’s 
aim,  the  preceptor,  right  knowledge,  good  conduct  and  lord  Siva 
as  also  in  the  apprehension  of  self  in  non-self  even  when  it 
is  nearby.  Misery  is  threefold  : spiritual, material^*’  and 
divine*^.  There  is  also  a natural  misery  due  to  the  agitation  of 
the  mind  through  the  frustration  of  desires. 

10-12.  When  the  mind  is  affected  by  tamasor  rajas  it  is 
afflicted.  The  state  of  the  mind  at  that  time  is  called  dejection. 
Dejection  should  be  eschewed  by  strict  detachment  from  the 
material  objects.  When  one  can  discriminate  between  what  is 
worthy  and  what  is  not  worthy  but  still  stubbornly  clings  to 
the  unworthy,  engrossed  in  diverse  mundane  affairs  his  mind 
becomes  fickle  then.  These  are  the  impediments  in  the  reali- 
zation of  yoga  for  a yogin. 

13-15.  To  the  devotee  who  practises  yoga  excessively  en- 
dowed with  zeal  the  obstacles  subside  but  other  impediments 
in  the  form  of  siddhis  begin  to  appear.^  The  siddhis  arc  six  : 

52.  &dhyitiiitiui‘--tlui  mifory  proceeds  from  bodily  and 

cmita  within  one*,  lelf.  CS.  Viffm  i ftrPW: 

\ quoted  ia  ST. 

53.  idhibhautlba---tlui  misery  is  psxMitioed  from  external  causes: 

54.  idiiidaivilHir-thitBiiMry  proceeds  the  Mluensc  oflheat. 

ina(tpfaa«<wpljuMtt.fimdhrhworM9eraMiinI  nfenoini: 

ST» 

55.  UiMMf|.^Itisaa«iinMittiBtheMidefnpgg|eiid.trmdiec^ 

it  wili  Under  hit  ptegtett  in  the  pndi  of  HWendiniiaa.  nseodt 

•ixtsfour  upasargas. 


ObstacUs  and  Portints  39 

(I)  pratibha,  (2)  irava^a,  (3)  varta,  (4)  daiiana,  (5) 
isvida,  and  (6)  vcdana. 

16*  These  siddhis  if  avoided  initially  when  their  pot- 
ency is  very  little,  lead  to  better  results.  PratibhS  (keen  intel- 
lect) is  the  disposition  (of  the  mind),  resting  on  one’s  power 
of  understanding. 

17-20.  Buddhi  (intellect)  is  the  faculty  of  discrimination 
by  which  anything  knowablc  is  known.  If  one  has  knowledge  of 
things  subtle  or  hidden  far  or  near,  past  or  future,  at  all  times 
and  places,  that  knowledge  is  called  pratibhS.  If  the  yogin  is 
able  to  grasp  without  effort,  the  import  of  all  words  by  merely 
hearing  a concealed  or  indistinct  syllable,  whether  short,  long 
or  prolated  that  ability  is  called  sravana.  The  perception  of 
touch  without  actual  contact  is  called  Vedana  (awareness). 
The  ability  to  see  divine  forms  without  effort  is  called  dar^ana. 
Asvada  (appreciation)  is  the  ability  to  taste  divine  delicacies 
without  strain. 

21.  Varta  is  the  intellectual  perpeption  of  divine  smells 
and  subtle  elements.  O brahmins,  through  yoga,  the  yogins 
attain  the  knowledge  of  everything  about  the  embodied  beings. 

22-25.  In  this  world  there  are  sixty  four  qualities  present 
in  the  body.  O brahmins,  among  these,  the  aupasargika  quali- 
ties should  be  eschewed.  In  the  region  of  pis^&cas,  O brahmins, 
the  qualities  of  earth  ( should  be  eschewed) ; in  the  region  of 
rak^asas  the  qualities  of  water;  in  the  region  of  Yak$a  the 
qualities  of  fire;  in  the  region  of  Gandharvas  the  qualities  of 
breath;  in  the  region  of  Indra  the  qualities  of  ether;  in  the 
region  of  Soma  the  qualities  of  the  mind;  in  the  region  of 
prajapati  the  qualities  of  ego;  in  the  region  of  brahman  the 
qualities  of  intellect  should  be  eschewed. 

26-29.  In  the  first  rqgioo  (eardi)  thisre  arc  eight  qualities; 
in  the  second  (water)  sixteoa;  in  the  third  (fire)  twenty  four; 
in  the  fourth  (gandharva)  twentytwo;  m the  fifth  (Indra) 
forty.  Each  of  the  five  subtle  taste,  colour, 

touch  and  sound  is  evolved  digb^ld*  O jtxoeQent  brahmins, 
there  are  fortyeight  qualities  k the  rc|^  ai  the  moern,  fifty* 
six  in  the  region  of  Prs^ipad,  and  stxtyfour  k the  ri^ion  of 
Brahman.  In  all  the  regions  ending  with  that  of  Brahman,  the 


40  Uiigapura:^ 

yogin  should  discern  obstacles  through  yoga  and  eschew  them. 
He  can  realize  the  supreme  brahman  thus. 

30-31.  The  yogic  siddhi  p&rthiva (pertaining  to  the  earth) 
is  eight:  (!)  bulkiness,  (2)  leanness^  (3)  infancy  (4)  youthful- 
ness^  (5)  old  age,  (6)  ability  to  assume  different  shapes,  (7) 
ability  to  hold  body  by  means  of  (only)  four  elements  without 
the  part  of  the  earth  and  (8)  having  perpetual  sweet  scent. 

32-35.  The  yogic  siddhi  apya  (pertaining  to  the  water)  is 
sbcteen  : (1)  He  can  stay  under  water  as  long  as  he  wills;  (2) 
he  can  come  out  of  water  whenever  he  wills;  (3)  he  can  drink  up 
even  the  ocean  and  be  none  the  worse  for  it;  (4)  he  can  let  the 
water  spring  up  wherever  he  wills;  (5)  whatever  he  wishes  to 
eat  he  can  transform  it  into  tasty  substance;  (6)  he  can  hold 
body  with  only  three  elements,  viz.  fire,  air  and  ether;  (7)  He 
can  hold  a mass  of  water  by  the  bare  hands  without  any  con- 
tainer; (8)  he  can  have  a body  free  from  cuts  and  wounds. 
These  eight  powers  together  with  the  eight  qualities  of  the  earth 
constitute  ai^varya  pertaining  to  the  water. 

36-38*  The  yogic  siddhi  taijasa  ( pertaining  to  the  fire)  is 
twentyfour  : (1)  ability  to  create  fire  from  the  body;  (2) 
absence  of  fear  from  being  scorched  by  it;  (3)  ability  to  arrange 
something  unburnt  even  when  the  whole  world  is  burnt;  (4) 
ability  to  keep  fire  in  the  water  or  (5)  hold  it  in  palms,  (6) 
ability  to  create  fire  by  merely  remembering  it;  (7)  ability  to 
re-create  at  will  what  is  reduced  to  ashes;  and  (8)  ability  to 
have  the  body  with  two  elements — air  and  ether,  to  the  exclu- 
sion of  the  other  three. 

39-41.  The  yogic  siddhis  pertaining  to  the  air  are  : (1) 
ability  to  move  as  fast  as  the  mind;  (2)  ability  to  enter  the 
bodies  of  living  beings;  (3)  ability  to  hold  weighty  things  like 
mountains  on  shoulders;  (4)  lightness,  (5)  weightiness,  (6) 
holding  the  air  with  palms;  (7)  ability  to  shake  the  earth  with 
the  tip  of  the  finger  and  (8)  to  create  bodies  with  the  air, 

42-43.  Ability  (I)  to  have  no  shadow  of  oneself;  (2)  to 
see  the  subtle  elements;  (3)  to  walk  over  the  ether;  (4)  to  have 
the  objects  of  desire  at  will;  (5)  to  hear  sound  from  a distance, 
(6)  to  comprehend  all  types  of  sounds;  (7)  to  have  a body 
composed  only  of  subtle  elements  and  (8)  to  see  all  living 


Obstacles  and  Portents 


41 


being— these  are  the  powers  pertaining  to  Indra  who  is  so  called 
because  he  creates  bodies  by  means  of  thcsq  powers. 

44-45.  Ability  (to  acquire  whatever  he  desires),  (2)  to 
wander  wherever  he  pleases,  (3)  to  overpower  ali,  (4)  to 
perceive  all  secret  things,  (5)  to  create  according  to  desire, 
(6)  to  bring  others  under  control,  (7)  to  sec  things  at  will,  (8) 
to  perceive  the  whole  world — these  are  the  powcw  pertaining 
to  the  mind  in  the  region  of  the  moon. 

46-47.  Ability  to  cut,  (2)  strike,  (3)  bind,  (4)  create 
and  ( 5)  destroy,  (6)  bless,  (7)  conquer  time  and  (8)  death — 
these  are  the  qualities  pertaining  to  the  ego  in  these  regions  of 
Prajapati. 

48-49,  The  following  powers  pertain  to  Brahma — (1) 
creation  of  the  world  by  mere  conception,  (2 ) protection,  (3 ) 
dissolution,  (4)  exercise  of  authority,  (5)  functioning  the 
world  at  will,  (6)  dissimilarity  with  all,  (7)  creating  separately 
ail  visible  things  and  (8)  the  creatorship  of  the  universe. 

50.  The  power  greater  than  and  beyond  this  is  the  one 
pertaining  to  Vi^nu.  It  is  the  source  of  the  power  of  Brahma. 
It  can  be  understood  by  Brahma  alone  and  not  by  others. 

51.  There  is  another  greater  power  pertaining  to  l§iva.  It 
is  not  understood  even  by  Vi(j9u.  Who  else  can  know  lord 
Siva — the  pure  entity  possessed  of  many  qualities.** 

52.  In  the  course  of  practising  yogic  exercises*^  these  impe- 
diments in  the  form  of  attainments  do  often  take  place.  The 
impediments  should  be  checked  assiduously  by  complete 
detachment. 

53.  Knowing  that  worldly  pleasures  are  highly  ruinous,  the 
detached  yogin  should  eschew  everything  %vithout  the  least 
sense  of  fear. 

54.  Absence  of  desire  is,  indeed,  commendable.  It  is 
through  the  absence  of  yearning  for  the  attainment  of  powers 

56.  It  refers  to  the  eternal  transcendent  spirit  placed,  in  the  twenty- 

seventh  category  beyond  the  influence  of  sattva,  ri^  and  tamas,  and  re^ 
garded  as  higher  than  the  highest.  Gf.  Jf;  PfW:  TOfTOR: 

sr^:  I *.7*.5» 

57.  — sifari|r^l%<n*.Thesixtylburatt^^  (siddhayab) 

aie  useful  fmm  the  materialistic  poittt  of  view  but  they  are  obstaclet  (iq^ 
sargat)  to  yoga. 


42  Liiigapurd{ia 

and  it  is  by  complete  detachment  that  the  calamities  can  be 
eschewed. 

55.  In  all  the  worlds,  upto  the  world  of’  Brahma,  one  should 
avoid  obstacles.  Checking  up  all  desires  one  should  totally 
abandon  them.  The  great  lord  is  delighted  thereby. 

56-61.  When  the  lord  is  delighted  liberation  becomes  easy 
to  attain,  by  virtue  of  complete  detachment.  In  some  cases,  a 
sage  (after  getting  His  grace)  may  roam  about  without 
eschewing  the  Siddhis  for  the  sake  of  blessing  others  or  for  mere 
sport.  Then  also  he  can  be  happy. 

In  some  places  leaving  the  Earth  he  may  sport  in  the  sky 
with  splendour;  in  some  places  he  may  utter  the  Vedas  or  their 
subtle  meamngs  succinctly;  in  some  places  he  may  compose 
verses  based  on  the  meaning  of  the  vcdic  passage;,  in  some 
places  he  may  compose  poems  in  the  Dandaka  or  other  meters 
in  thousand  ways.  He  may  obtain  knowledge  of  the  cries  of 
beasts  and  birds.  Everything  beginning  with  Brahma  and 
ending  with  the  immobile  beings  may  become  perceptible  to 
him  like  myrobalan  fruit  in  the  palm. 

O excellent  sages,  of  what  avail  is  much  talk  ? Knowledge  in 
many  ways  and  forms  will  rise  r.p  within  that  sage  of  great 
soiil.  It  is  only  by  practice  that  j rfect  knowledge  becomes 
pure  and  stable. 

62.  The  knower  of  the  yoga  can  perceive  thousands  of 
images  of  devas  and  their  splendid  aerial  chariots.  Everything 
can  come  within  the  lange  of  his  kcii. 

63.  He  can  see  Brahma,  Visnu,  India,  Yania,  Agni, 
Varuna  and  other  deities.  He  can  see  thousands  of  planets,  stars 
and  luminaries  as  well  as  their  regions. 

64-65.  Entering  the  state  of  ecstatic  trance  he  can  sec  the 
dwellers  of  nether  regions.  He  can  dispel  daikuess  ( ==  igno- 
rance) by  the  steady  influx  of  his  inmost  spiritual  light— glowing 
with  divine  grace  and  characterized  by  goodness— -which  he  can 
sec  within  himself. 

66-67.  No  doubt  need  be  entertained  that  by  virtue  of 
His  grace,  one  can  attain  Dharma,  riches,  knowledge,  detach- 
ment and  salvation*  The  details  of  his  grace,  one  cannot 
descril>c  even  in  ten  thousands  of  years.  O leading  sages,  one 
should  steadily  adhere  to  the  yoga  piertaining  to  lord  Siva. 


43 


CHAPTER  TEN 

Means  of  Direct  Perception 

Sfita  said  : 

I- 9.  O great  brahmins,  lord  Siva  becomes  delighted  with 
all  these  persons  : those  who  desire  to  be  liberated,  who  have 
conquered  self,  the  twice-born,  the  virtuous,  who  have  attained 
sadhanas,  the  noble-souled,  kind  and  merciful,  the  ascetics, 
who  have  renounced  the  world,  who  are  detached  and  endowed 
with  perfect  knowledge,  who  have  self-control,  the  three  kinds 
of  donors,  who  have  subdued  senses,  who  speak  truth,  who  are 
liberal,  endowed  with  yogic  practice,  conversant  with  srutis  and 
smrtis  and  who  do  not  come  into  clash  with  the  s^tric  injunc- 
tions. The  word  ‘sat’*  refers  to  the  Brahman.  Those  who  are 
likely  to  attain  Brahma  in  the  end  are  called  liberated.  They 
who  are  neither  angry  nor  delighted  in  regard  to  the  ten  types 
of  sensuous  objects’’*  and  eight  types  of  means  arc  called 
self-conquerors.  The  brahmins,  ksatriyas  and  vaiiyas  are  called 
twice-born  because  they  have  special  consccratory  rites.  The 
virtuous  is  the  one  who  has  acquired  the  knowledge  of  dharma 
explained  in  sruti  and  smrti  which  is  proper  for  different  castes 
and  stages  of  life  and  which  brings  about  happiness  in  heaven 
and  other  worlds.  One  who  acquires  learning  by  serving  his 
preceptor  is  a sadhu  (among  the  religious  students) . The  house- 
holder is  also  a sadhu  when  he  performs  holy  rites  (ordained 
for  him) . The  forest-dweller  becomes  a sadhu  when  he  achieves 
penances. 

10.  The  striving  ascetic  is  called  a sadhu  when  he 
achieves  yogic  power.  Thus  the  persons  who  achieve  Dharma 
relating  to  ashramas  or  the  various  stages  of  life  arc  called 
sadhus. 

II- 13.  The  persons  in  the  different  stages  of  life  arc:  the 
religious  student,  the  householder,  the  forest  dweller  and  the 
ascetic.  The  two  words  Dharma  and  Adharma  mentioned  here 

58.  dai^tmake  vi^aye — objects  that  can  be  accomplished  through 
ten  organs  of  sense,  i.e.  live  organs  of  action  and  five  organs  of  knowledge. 

59.  This  group  of  eight  is  explained  in  the  preceding  chapter. 


44 


Lingapuri^ 


denote  activities.  Auspicious  activities  constitute  Dharxna  and 
inauspicious  activities  Adharma,  The  word  Dharma  is  explained 
as  that  which  is  great  in  the  task  of  Dharat^a  (holding  up,  or 
uplifting)  and  Adharma  (its  opposite)  as  not  holding  up.  In  this 
context  Dharma  is  instructed  by  the  preceptors  as  one  that 
takes  to  what  is  desired. 

14-16.  Adharma,  as  taught  by  the  preceptors,  is  one  that  has 
as  its  fruit  what  is  not  desired.  They  call  those  persons  Ac^yas 
(preceptors)  who  are  elderly,  not  greedy  and  self-possessed; 
devoid  of  arrogance,  well  disciplined,  and  straight  forward.  He 
who  practises  (Dharma)  himself  who  establishes  others  in 
dharma  and  who  gathers  together  the  meanings  of  the  scrip- 
tural texts  is  called  acarya.  What  should  be  known  or  what  is 
worthy  of  knowledge  is  i^rauta  if  it  is  heard  and  smarta  if  it  is 
remembered. 

17-21.  A sacrifice  when  it  pertains  to  Vedas  is  called  srauta, 
and  when  it  pertains  to  the  varna4ramas  is  called  smarta.  One 
who  has  found  truth  and  does  not  hide  it  when  asked  for,  is  called 
an  acarya.  Truth,  as  defined  in  this  purana,  is  the  statement  of 
facts  exactly  in  the  manner  seen.  Tapas  (penance)  constitutes 
celibacy,  silence,  observance  of  fast,  abstention  from  injury  of 
all  sorts  and  quiescence.  When  a person  behaves  towards  all 
living  beings  like  unto  himself®®  both  for  welfare  or  otherwise 
that  attitude  is  called  kindness.  Whatever  one  has  obtained  by 
justifiable  means,  whatever  one  likes  the  most,  should  be  given 
to  a meritorious  person.  This  is  the  characteristic  feature  of  the 
charitable  gift  of  the  donor.  Charitable  gift  is  of  three  types 
viz. — the  lowliest,  the  highest  and  the  middling. 

22-27.  The  sharing  (of  possessions)  with  all  living  beings, 
out  of  sympathy  is  the  charitable  gift  of  the  middUng  order. 
The  rites  laid  down  by  Srutis  and  Smrtis  in  regard  to  persons 
of  different  stages  in  life  and  castes  constitute  dharma.  Dharma 
that  does  not  come  into  clash  with  the  conduct  of  the  persons  of 
disciplined  life  is  held  to  be  righteous. 

That  person  is  glorified  as  one  of  auspicious  soul  who  escliews 
the  firuits  of  his  illusive  activities. 

One  who  has  refrained  from  all  attachments  is  glorified  as  a 

6o,  This  ethical  code  placet  this  cult  at  par  with  uxitvenal  teltgiom 


Means  qf  Direct  Perception 


45 


Yogin.  He  who  ponders  over  the  risks  involved  in  sensual  plea- 
sures and  remains  unattached  to  them  even  though  pressed 
importunately  from  all  round  is  called  self-controlled. 

The  characteristic  feature  of  perfect  control  constitutes  the 
fact  that  sense  organs  do  not  function  falsely  or  improperly 
whether  for  one’s  sake  or  for  others. 

The  following  is  the  detached  state: — The  person  is  not 
excited  when  calamities  occur  nor  is  he  overjoyed  when  he  has 
pleasant  results.  Absolute  cessation  of  joyousness,  affliction  and 
despondency  is  detachment. 

Renunciation  of  the  fruits  of  all  activities  committed  or 
omitted  is  called  Sannyasa. 

28-31.  The  eschewal  of  both  joy  and  misery  is  called 
Nyasa.  All  created  things  from  the  unmanifcst  to  the  manifest 
gross  elements  are  insentient.  Perfect  Knowledge  is  the 
discrimination  between  the  sentient  and  the  insentient.  Lord 
Siva,  no  doubt,  bestows  his  grace  on  him  who  is  endowed 
with  such  perfect  knowledge.  So  also  dharma  bestows  grace. 
Yet  I shall  tell  you  a great  secret.  One  who  is  endowed  with 
devotion  lo  the  lord  is  undoubtedly  liberated.  It  is  certain  that 
lord  Siva  checks  the  different  sorts  of  delusion  of  the  devotee 
and  is  delighted  with  him  even  if  he  (the  devotee)  lacks  full 
accomplishments  for  yoga. 

32-37.  Perfect  knowledge,  teaching  of  the  Vedas,  offerings 
to  the  gods,  meditation,  sacrifices,  penance,  charitable  gifts, 
study  of  the  Vedas,  all  these  undoubtedly  contribute  to  the 
devotion  of  Lord  Siva.  O excellent  sages,  devotion  results 
from  thousands  of  Gandrayanas,*^  hundreds  of  Pr5japatyas,^^ 
monthly  fasts  and  other  holy  rites.  Those  who  lack  in  devotion 
to  the  lord  fall  into  a mountain  cave  and  undergo  the  results 

61.  CandrSyaiia  : Of.  Y&jiiavaikya  3.  324  ct  ssq;  Manu  11.217,  It 
is  a religious  observance  or  expiatory  penance  regulated  by  the  period  of  the 
moon’s  waxing  and  waning.  Herein  the  daily  quantity  of  fo^  oonsistiiig 
of  fifteen  mouthfuls  at  the  full  moon  is  diminished  by  one  mouthful  every 
day  during  the  dark  fortnight  tilt  It  is  increased  an  like  manner  during  the 
bright  fortnight. 

62.  Prkjkpatya  : It  is  a religious  fiut  or  penance.  Herein  one  shall 
Uke  food  for  three  days  in  the  momiog,  for  three  days  in  the  evening,  and 
thereafter  shall  abstain  from  food  for  three  days. 


46 


Lingapuratia 


of  their  karman.^^  A devotee  is  liberated  through  his  devotional 
emotion.  O brahmins,  there  is  no  doubt  in  this  that  heavenly 
pleasures  arc  not  difRcult  of  access  even  to  ordinary  men,  by 
the  mere  sight  ol  the  devotee;  what  doubt  then  in  regard  to 
the  devotee.  !l  h only  through  devotion  that  Brahma,  Visou, 
gods,  sages,  and  others  stabilise  themselves  and  attain  strength 
and  fortune.  I’his  has  been  stated  by  the  loid  himself  while 
addres.sing  Umfi. 

38-41.  (.)  brahmins,  thetic  words  were  spoken  by  ihe  lord  to 

the  goddess  Urna  at  Varanasi,  in  the  Aviiiiuktaka*^**  region 
While  (he  lord  was  sitting  with  her,  she  addressed  him  tLos: 
“O  great  l.iid  how  can  yon  be  realised  and  w'orshipped.  O 
Lord,  tell  me,  is  it  by  penance,  or  learning,  or  yoga  ? 

iSida  said: 

On  hearing  her  words  and  looking  at  her  with  a face 
resembling  the  lull  moon  the  lord  w'ith  the  crescent  moon  for 
his  ornament  laughed  boisterously  and  recollected  what  had 
been  formerly  mentioned  by  Mena,  the  consort  of  the 
liimMaya  w'hen  .she  saw  that  her  daughter  havl  overstayed  there. 

42-47  The  lord  said:  ‘‘O  gentle  lady,  O sportful  one,  now 
iliat  you  have  obtained  a beautiful  city  for  your  abode,  do  you 
forget  what  was  mentioned  by  your  mother  in  regard  to  the 
selection  ol  a site  for  abode.  O foremost  among  those  wlio  ask 
question?  formerly  1 was  asked  by  Brahma  in  the  same 
manner  as  I have  been  asked  by  you.  O splendid  lady,  in  the 
Sveta  kalpa,  Brahma  saw  me  in  the  white  colour  as  .Sadyojata; 
in  the  Rakta  kalpa  in  the  red  colour  as  V^inadcv  a;  in  the 
Pitakalpa  in  the  yellow  colour  as  Tatpiirusa:  in  the  Aghora- 
kalpa  in  the  black  colour  as  I^vara;  in  the  Viivanqia  kalpa  as 
the  multi-coloured  Isana.  Then  he  said  to  me:  O \’ama,  O 

ST.  in  expectation  of  en- 
joying the  objects  of  senses. 

64.  Avimukta— same  as  Kasi  (Mbh.  III.  Gh.  (54.  79-8;  Visnu  5.34. 
30,  54J  Matsya  180.54,  t>4ff>  Vayu.  106.  89).  For  detail,  vide  P,  V.  Kane, 
History  of  DharmaSastra  (Vol.  iv.  pp.  018-6412).  But  in  the  Kali  age  it 
has  lost  its  original  form.  Gf.  Brahmari<^a  a. 3.67,  60-64,  It  is  called  Avinuikta 

or  Avimuktaka,  for  it  IS  the  permanent  abode  of  l§iva  (1*92.45-46)  t 

’nm  an  i 


Sadyoj&ta 


47 


Tatpurusa,  O,  Aghora,  O Saclyojata,  O Mahe^vara,  O lord 
of  Devas,0  great  lord,  you  have  been  seen  by  me  along  with 
Gayairl.  O great  lord,  by  what  means  and  by  whom  can  you  be 
controlled  ? O storehouse  of  mercy,  wherein  are  you  to  be 
meditated  upon 

48-53  “O  lord,  how  can  we  see  you  along  with  the 
goddess  ? How  can  we  worship  you.  It  behoves  you  to  recount 
it.” 

The  lord  said  to  the  goddess  : 

1 said  (then  to  Brahma),  ‘O  lotus-born  one,  I can  be 
controlled  by  faith  alone.  1 am  to  he  meditated  upon  in  the 
Lihga  which  both  you  and  Visnu  beheld  in  the  ocean.  I am  to 
be  adored  by  the  twicc-born  in  the  form  of  the  fivc-lkced  deity 
with  the  five-syllal)lcd  mantra.  O preceptor  of  the  universe,  born 
of  the  cosmic  egg,  I have  been  seen  by  you  to  day  by  virtue  of 
your  devotion  to  me.'  He  (Brahma)  then  asked  me  to  create 
in  him  a feeling  of  further  devotion  which  I readily  granted. 
O goddess,  with  that  increased  devotion  he  saw  me  clearly  in 
his  heart.  I declare  that  1 am  subject  to  control  by  means  of 
devotion  alone.  I can  indeed  be  seen  thereby,  O daughter  of 
the  Himalaya  ! And,  indeed,  1 am  always  to  be  worshipped  in 
the  lihga  by  the  brahmins  full  of  faith.  Faith  is  the  greatest  and 
the  subtlest  virtue.  It  is  perfect  knowledge  and  sacrifice;  it  is 
penance,  heaven  and  liberation.  I am  always  seen  through 
faith. 


CHAPTER  ELEVEN 

Sadyojata 


The  sages  said  ': 

f-2.  How  did  Brahma  sec  the  great  lord  as  Sadyojata. 
Vamadeva.  Tatpurufia,  Aghora  and  l^ana  ? It  behoves  you  to 
recount  it  precisely. 


48 


LigafmrS^ 


SUta  said  : 

The  twentyninth  kalpa  should  be  known  as  ^vetalohita. 

3.  In  that  (kalpa)  when  Brahma  was  pursuing  intense 
meditation  a son  with  tuft  was  born  unto  him.  He  was 
called  Svetalohita 

4-5.  On  seeing  that  Purusa,  the  glorious  lord  Brahma 
with  faces  all  round,  thought  of  the  noble-souled  lord  in  the 
form  of  Brahman.  Brahma  retained  Sadyojata  in  the  heart  and 
became  engaged  in  meditation.  After  realising  die  greatest  being 
through  meditation  Brahma,  the  lord  of  Dcvas,  saluted  him. 

6-7.  Brahma  contemplated  again  over  Sadyojata.  There- 
upon from  his  sides  were  born  Svetas  (white  ones)  of  great 
fame,  viz.  Sunanda,  Nandana,  Vi^vananda  and  Upanandana; 
these  nobie-souled  ones  were  thedisciples  of  Brahma  by  whom 
he  was  always  surrounded. 

8.  In  front  of  him  the  sage  Sveta,  glittering  in  his  white 
colour,  was  born.  Then  there  was  born  Hara  of  great  splendour. 

9-11.  There  all  the  sages  resorted  to  the  great  lord  Sadyojata 
with  perfect  devotion.  They  praised  the  eternal  Brahman. 
Hence  all  those  persons  O brahmins,  who  resort  to  lord  Vi^ve:  - 
vara  after  being  engrossed  in  breath-control  and  mentally 
devoted  to  Brahman,  become  liberated  from  sins.  They  will 
have  the  splendour  of  brahman  and  be  free  from  impulses. 
They  will  go  beyond  Visnu’s  abode  and  enter  Rudra’s 
world. 


CHAPTER  TWELVE 

Glory  ofVSmadtva 


SSia  said: 

1 . Thereafter  the  thirtieth  kalpa  is  called  Rakta.  In  this 
kalpa,  Brahma  of  great  splendour  had  the  red  colour. 

2-5.  Even  as  Brahma  desirous  of  a son  was  meditating, 
a boy  of  great  splendour  mcnifcsted  himself  : He  was  adorned  In 
red  ornaments.  He  wore  red  garlands  and  clothes.  His  eyes 


Skd/ojdta 


49 


vrere  red.  He  was  valorous.  On  seeing  that  noble  boy  in  red 
clothes,  Brahma  resorted  to  great  meditation  and  understood  him 
to  be  great  Lord.  Brahma,  of  self  control  bowed  to  Vamadeva. 
and  contemplated  on  him.  Thus  eulogised  by  Brahma,  the 
supreme  lord  iSiva  was  delighted  at  heart.  He  addressed 
Brahma  thus. 

6-9.  “Since,  O Brahma,  I have  been  seen  by  you  medita- 
ting on  me  with  the  desire  for  a son,  with  great  devotion,  and 
since  1 was  eulogized  with  the  mantra  beginning  with  “brahmane 
VSmadevaya”  you  will  attain  the  strength  of  meditation  and 
will  realize  me  as  Hvara,  the  assiduous  creator  of  the  worlds, 
in  every  kalpa.  Thereafter  four  sons  were  born  to  him  who 
were  as  pure  and  splendid  as  brahman.  They  were  named  as 
Virajas,  Vibahu,  Vi^oka  and  Visvabhavana. 

10.  They  were  pious  and  on  a par  with  Brahma.  They  were 
heroic  and  enterprising.  They  wore  red  garments  and  red  gar- 
lands and  applied  red  unguents. 

11-13.  Their  bodies  were  smeared  with  red  saffron;  they  had 
applied  red  ashes  over  their  bodies.  At  the  end  of  a thousand 
years  they  re-entered  the  great  eternal  lord.  In  the  mean- 
time they  attempted  to  realize  brahman.  For  blessing  the  worlds 
and  with  a desire  for  the  welfare  of  their  disciples  they  imparted 
instructions  in  dharma  and  became  favourites  of  Brahma. 
Ultimately,  at  the  end  of  a thousand  years,  they  re-entered  the 
great  lord. 

14-15.  Another  brahmins  who  practise  yoga  and  repeat 
the  sacred  formula  ‘namobrahma^ie  Vamadcvaya***and  who  are 
devoted  to  him  as  their  greatest  resort  are  liberated  from  sins. 
They  become  devoid  of  impurities  and  they  attain  the  strength 
of  Brahman.  They  achieve  the  blessed  region  (rudraloka) 
whence  there  is  no  return  to  this  (mortal)  world. 


65.  Vimadeva  form  is  rtpreseated  by  the  back-fkee  of  Siva.  In 
Hindu  Mythology  God  Siva  has  five  faces  named  liSna,  Tatpurusa, 
A^ia,  Vtoadeva  and  Sadyojita,  representing  the  five  aem^ts: 
ether,  air,  fite,  wkter  and  eardi,  Cf.  part  11.  eh.  14.  A stame  of  feva 
in  die  Ele|diania  eaves  represents  this  ftirm  in  wiiidi  the  fiental  view  depicts 
heads  only,  thelburthonecmtlmlwdcbeoneealedfix>mviewaQdthn 
fifih  one  on  the  top  is  dfom^d  out  as  the  symbol  of  Invistbte  ether. 


50 


Lingapura^ 


CHAPTER  THIRTEEN 


Glory  of  Tatpuru^a 

Suta  said: 

1.  The  thirty  first  kalpa  is  known  as  Pitavasas.  Therein, 
the  blessed  Brahma  was  clad  in  yellow  garbs. 

2.  Even  as  Brahma  desirous  of  a son  was  meditating,  a boy 
of  great  splendour,  wearing  yellow  robes,  appeared  before. 

3.  He  was  a youth  with  the  body  smeared  with  yellow 
scents.  He  wore  yellow  garlands  and  dress.  He  had  long  arms, 
a golden  sacred  thread  and  yellow  turban. 

4.  On  seeing  him,  Brahma,  endowed  with  meditation  men- 
tally resorted  to  and  sought  refuge  in  the  overlord,  the  creator 
of  the  worlds. 

5.  Thereafter  Brahma  went  on  meditation.  He  saw  the 
excellent  cow  of  the  great  lord.  In  her  universal  form  it  had 
come  out  of  his  mouth, 

6.  It  had  four  feet,  four  faces,  four  hands,  four  udders, 
four  eyes,  four  horns,  four  teeth  and  four  mouths. 

7-10.  The  cow  was  goddess  herself  who  had  faces  all  round 
and  who  possessed  thirtytwo  qualities.  On  seeing  the  great 
goddess  in  the  form  of  the  cow,  the  great  lord  who  is  wor- 
shipped by  all  devas  said  again  repeating  the  words  : ‘O  great 
goddess,  symbol  of  intellect  and  memory,  come  on,  come  on.* 
[I’lius  addressed]  she  joined  her  palms  in  reverence  to  the  lord 
and  stood  there.  Then  the  lord  of  devas  spoke  to  her.  [O 
goddess,]  enveloping  the  universe  by  your  yogic  power  you 
should  keep  it  under  your  control.  You  will  be  Uma  for  the 
welfare  of  the  brahmins  and  for  the  attainment  of  their  goal 
{ of  liberation) . 

1 1 . The  lord  of  devas,  the  preceptor  of  the  universe  gave 
her  to  Brahma  who  was  meditating  on  the  lord  for  obtaining 
a son. 

12.  By  practising  meditation  Brahma  realized  that  she  was 
the  great  goddess  and  he  accepted  her  from  the  preceptor  of 
the  worlds. 

13-14.  After  meditating  on  Gayatri  pertaining  to  Rudra, 
Brahma  became  self-controlled-  By  performing  the  Japa  of 
Rudra-Gayatri  as  instructed  by  the  lord  and  rjealizing  that  it 


Origin  of  Aghora 


51 


was  Vcdic  knowledge,  Brahma  who  is  worshipped  by  the  whole 
world,  resorted  to  the  great  lord  with  his  mind  fixed  in 
meditation. 

15.  The  lord  then  granted  him  a divine  yoga,  great 
learning,  riches  and  glory,  wealth  of  knowledge  and  detach- 
ment. 

16-21.  Thereafter  from  his  sides  there  emerged  divine 
sons  who  wore  yellow  garlands,  yellow  garbs,  yellow  necklaces. 
They  had  yellow  unguents  on  their  bodies  and  yellow  turbans 
on  their  heads.  Their  faces  and  hair  were  all  yellow.  For  a 
period  of  thousand  years,  these  persons  of  great  power  and 
splendour  who  were  devoid  of  impurities  spent  their  time  for  the 
welfare  of  brahmins.  They  were  yogic  souls  delighting  in  penan- 
ces. They  were  endowed  with  virtue  and  power  of  yoga.  They 
instructed  the  sages  engaged  in  long  sacrifices  in  the  system 
of  great  yoga  and  (finally)  entered  the  body  of  the  lord.  Thus 
others  loo  who  seek  refuge  in  him  in  this  manner,  who  have 
restrained  their  Souls,  who  have  conquered  the  sense  organs 
and  who  are  engaged  in  meditation  will  become  sinless.  They 
will  have  the  splendour  of  Brahman  and  be  free  from 
impurities.  They  will  enter  Rudra  the  great  lord  and  be  relea- 
sed from  rc-birth. 


CHAPTER  FOURTEEN 

Origin  of  Aghora 


Sitta  said: 

1-2.  When  the  kalpa  of  yellow  colour  passed  by  and  an- 
other of  the  self-born  lord  was  ushered  in  by  the  name  of  Asita 
and  when  the  universe  became  a vast  sheet  of  water®®  and  a 
thousand  years  by  the  divine  reckoning  passed  by,  Brahma  be- 
came desirous  of  creating  the  subjects.  He  was  dejected  and 
began  to  ponder. 

3,  Even  as  he  was  meditating  with  the  desire  for  a son, 
his  colour  was  changed  into  black. 

66.  See  note  23  on  p.  15, 


52 


Lingapurd^ 


4-6.  Thcroipon  he,  the  lord  of  great  splendour,  saw  a 
boy  in  front  of  him.  He  had  black  colour  but  he  was  refulgent 
with  his  brilliance.  He  had  great  prowess.  He  wore  black  gar- 
ments, black  turban,  black  sacred  thread,  black  crown  and  black 
garlands.  He  bad  black  unguents  on  his  body.  On  seeing  this 
noble-souled  Aghora  of  terrible  exploits,  Brahma  saluted  the 
miraculous  lord  who  had  the  black  and  tawny  colour. 

7-10.  Then  the  glorious  lord  Brahma  became  engaged 
in  Pra^ayama.  He  thought  of  the  supreme  lord  Siva  within  his 
heart.  With  hb  mind  engaged  in  meditation  he  resorted  to 
lord  Aghora.  He  contemplated  on  him  in  the  form  of  Brahman. 
When  Brahma  was  meditating  thus,  lord  Aghora  of  terrible 
exploits  granted  him  vbion.  Thereupon  four  noble  sons  appeared 
from  his  sides.  They  were  black  in  colour  and  they  wore  black 
garlands  and  unguents.  They  were  Krsna,  Kr^asikha, 
Kr$nasya,  and  Kf^if^avastradhrk. 

11-13.  By  resorting  to  yoga  they  adored  the  great  lord  for 
a thousand  years.  They  imparted  instruction  in  supreme  yoga  to 
their  disciples.  By  resorting  to  yoga  these  persons,  endowed  with 
yogic  powers,  thought  on  Siva.  They  entered  the  region  of  lord 
Siva,  the  region  devoid  of  impurities  and  free  from  attributes. 
Those  others  too,  who  contemplate  on  him  by  resorting  to  yoga 
can  go  unto  the  region  of  that  eternal  lord. 


CHAPTER  FIFTEEN 

Glory  of  Agkoroia 


SUta  said : 

1.  When  the  terrible  kalpa  of  black  colour  passed  by, 
Brahma  eulogised  the  supreme  lord  in  the  form  of  Aghora. 

2-6.  Thereafter  the  delighted  lord  Aghora  blessed  Brahmfi 
and  said  to  him:  ^^Do  not  doubt  that  I,  assiuning  this  form, 
destroy  all  kinds  of  sin,  including  the  terrible  sin  of  brahmin 
slaughter.  O blessed  one,  O deity  of  virtuous  sacred  rites,  I 
destroy  ail  minor  and  miyor  sins  of  small  or  great  power  and 


dwy  of  Aghoroia 


53 


poignancy.  O Brahma,  I destroy  verbal,  physical,  mixed  and 
incidental  sins  committed  wantonly  and  consciously.  I dispel 
the  natural  and  adventitious  sins  inherited  ih>m  either  parent. 
O lord,  do  not  doubt  that  I destroy  all  miseries  originating 
from  sins. 

7-13.  O lord,  by  repeating  one  hundred  thousand  times 
the  mantras  of  Aghora,  even  a brahmin-slayer  is  liberated 
from  sins.  O dear,  for  verbal  sins  half  of  this  number  is  recom- 
mended. For  mental  sins,  ludf  of  the  previous  number.  If  the 
sin  is  committed  consciously  the  japa  shall  be  four  times 
that  number.  If  the  sin  is  committed  out  of  fury,  eight  times 
that  number.  A slayer  of  a hero  shall  repeat  the  mantra  a 
hundred  thousand  times;  the  destroyer  of  a child  in  the  womb 
a crore  times;  a matricide  a hundred  thousand  times;  a 
destroyer  of  cows  and  women  or  an  ungrateful  wretch  by  repeat- 
ing ten  thousand  times;  a willing  or  unwilling  drinker  of 
liquor  by  repeating  a hundred  thousand  times  or  half  that 
number  and  the  partaker  of  meals  before  taking  bath  a thou- 
sand times.  The  brahmin  who  abstains  from  japa  or  who  takes 
meals  before  performing  the  daily  sacrifice  or  abstains  from 
giving  charity  should  repeat  this  mantra  a thousand  times. 
The  base  man  who  steals  the  property  of  a brahmin  or  who 
steals  gold  is  released  from  sin  by  repeating  this  mantra 
mentally  a hundred  thousand  times.  A person  defiling  the 
preceptor’s  bed  or  slaying  his  own  mother  or  a brahmin  shall 
repeat  this  mantra  mentally  the  same  number  of  times,  O 
Brahma. 

14-17.  The  sin  resulting  from  contact  with  the  sinner 
is  equal  to  the  sin  of  the  original  sinner.  Still  by  repeating  the 
mantra  ten  thousand  times  he  is  liberated  from  sin.  The  person 
imbibing  sin  by  the  contact  with  the  sinner  shall  repeat  the 
mantra  a hundred  thousand  times  if  done  mentally;  if  done  in 
low  tones  four  times  that  number  ; if  in  high  tones  eight  times 
that  number.  It  is  enjoined  that  persons  guilty  of  subsidiary 
sins  need  repeat  the  mantra  only  half  the  number  enjoined  for 
the  main  sinner;  half  that  number  if  the  sin  is  committed 
unconsciously.  O brahmins,  if  a brahmin  sinner  commits  the 
sin  of  brahmin  slaughter,  liquor  drinking,  theft  of  gold  or 
defiling  the  preceptor’s  bed  he  ^ould  do  as  fellows: 


54 


LingapurS^a 


18-22.  He  should  gather  together  (i)  urine  of  a tawny 
coloured  cow  repeating  Rudra-Gayatri,*^  (ii)  freshly  laid  dung 
of  the  same  or  similar  cow  repeating  the  mantra  Gandhadvara,** 
(iii  ) ghee  made  from  a similar  cow  repeating  the  mantra 
Tejosi  ^ukram,®*  (iv)  milk  from  the  same  or  similar  cow  repeat^ 
ing  the  mantra  ^Apyayasva’’®  and  (5)  fresh  curds  made  from 
the  milk  of  the  same  or  similar  cow  repeating  the  mantra 
Dadhikrana.^^  To  this  mixture  water  taken  with  a tuft  of 
ku^a  grass  should  be  added  by  repeating  the  mantra  Devasya 
tva,^2  and  the  mixture  should  be  well  stirred  in  a vessel  made 
of  gold,  silver  or  copper,  or  in  a cup  made  of  lotus  or  palasa 
leaf,  repeating  the  aghora  mantra.  In  this  vessel  he  should  place 
(different)  gems  and  a piece  of  gold  along  with  a tuft  of  kusa 
grass. 

23-26.  He  should  repeat  the  mantra  of  Aghora  a hundred 
thousand  times  and  perform  homa  with  ghee,  cooked  rice, 
sacrificial  twigs,  gingelly  seeds,  barley  grains  and  unhusked 
grains.  He  should  perform  homa,  seven  times  separately  with 
each  one  of  these  materials.  If  the  materials  are  not  available  he 
should  perform  homa  with  ghee  alone.  O brahmins,  he  should 
perform  homas  as  well  as  ablution  for  the  lord  with  ghee  while 
repeating  the  Aghora  Mantra.  He  should  bathe  the  lord  with 
eight  drona’®  measures  of  ghee  and  wipe  it  off.  He  should  then 
observe  fast  for  a whole  day  and  night,  take  holy  bath  and 
drink  kurca  before  the  image  of  Siva.  After  performing  the 
rite  of  acamana  he  should  repeat  Gayatrl. 

27-32.  By  performing  this  the  following  sinners  become  libe- 
rated form  sins: — an  ungrateful  person,  a slayer  of  brahmin,  a 
destroyer  of  a child  in  the  womb,  a murderer  of  a warrior,  a slayer 
of  preceptor,  a betrayer  of  faith,  a thief,  a gold-stealer,  a defiler 
of  the  preceptor’s  bed,  a liquor-addict,  a paramour,  a low-caste 
woman,  a ravisher  of  other  men’s  wives,  a destroyer  of  brahmin’s 
property,  a cow-killer,  a matricide,  a patricide,  an  idol-breaker 

67.  Rudra-G&yatr! : TA  1.  10,5  : *tatpuru9Sya  dhimahi  tanno  rudrab 
pra  coday&t. 

68.  TA.  lo.i.io;  MahSn.  U.  4.8. 

69.  VS.  22.1. 

70.  VS.  12.114;  TA,  3.17.1. 

71.  VS.  23.32;  TS.  1.5.11.4 

72.  VS.  2.1  x;  XS.2.6.8,7, 

73.  It  is  a measure  of  four  X^hakas  equal  to  X024  muffis. 


55 


Glory  of  lidna 

and  particularly  the  person  who  destroys  linga  images.  If  one 
who  commits  these  sins  is  a brahmin^  no  matter  if  his  sins  are 
mental,  verbal,  physical  or  of  any  other  type,  even  if  he 
commits  these  a thousand  times  he  is  liberated  from  these 
by  performing  the  aforesaid  rites.  Even  if  the  sins  are  accumu* 
lated  in  hundreds  of  births  he  is  liberated.  This  secret  has  been 
divulged  by  me  in  the  context  of  lord  Aghora.  Hence  a brahmin 
shall  repeat  the  Aghora  mantra  perpetually  for  the  expiation 
of  sins. 


CHAPTER  SIXTEEN 

Glory  ofli&na 


SUta  said: 

1 . O leading  sages,  there  was  a kalpa  of  Brahma  known 
as  Visvarupa.  It  was  exceedingly  wonderful. 

2-7.  When  the  period  of  dissolution  passed  by,  when  again 
the  universe  of  mobile  and  immobile  beings  came  into  existence 
Brahma  began  to  meditate  with  a desire  for  sons.  Then 
Sarasvati  of  universal  form  and  loud  sound  manifested  herself. 
The  universe  constituted  her  garlands,  garments,  sacred  thread 
and  turban.  The  mother  of  the  universe  with  all  universal 
scents  and  long  lips  manifested  herself,  Brahma  meditated  on 
lord  Tirana  resembling  pure  crystal  and  bedecked  in  all  orna- 
ments. With  concentrated  mind,  Brahmi  paid  homage  to  Isma, 
the  omnipresent  lord  of  all— Om  O Ii$ana,  O Mahadeva, 
obeisance  be  to  you.  O lord  of  all  learning,  obeisance  be  to  you. 
O lord,  with  the  bull  as  your  conveyance,  obeisance  be  to  you. 
O lord  of  living  beings,  obeisance  be  to  you. 

8.  O overlord  of  Brahma,  obeisance  be  to  you.  Obeisance 
to  Brahman  in  the  form  of  Brahma.  Obeisance  to  the  overlord 
of  Brahma.  O Sada^iva,  may  auspiciousness  befall  me. 

9.  O lord  representing  oxhktra^in  a physical  form,  O lord  of 
devas,  O Sadyojata,  obeisance  be  to  you,  I resort  to  you.  I have 
resorted  to  SadyojSta.  Obeisance  to  Sadyojata. 


56 


10.  Obeisance  to  you,  the  unborn,  the  source  of  birth  and 
who  are  not  beyond  the  worldly  existence.  O Bhava,  O I^Ina, 
O source  of  the  worlds,  O deity  of  great  lustre,  bless  me. 

11.  O V&madeva,  obeisance  to  you,  the  eldest  being,  the 
granter  of  boons.  Obeisance  to  Rudra,  Kala  the  reckoner  of 
time* 

12.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  as  the  mind,  to  the  lord  black 
in  colour,  to  the  lord  as  a religious  student,  to  the  lord  as  the 
strength  of  the  strong  and  to  the  lord  devoid  of  organs  and 
their  function. 

13.  Obeisance  to  the  suppressor  of  Bala,  to  the  strong,  of 
the  form  of  Brahman.  Obeisance  to  the  overlord,  the  suppressor 
of  living  beings. 

14.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  the  impeller  of  the  mind, 
obeisance  to  the  lord  of  great  lustre,  obeisance  to  the  refulgent 
Vamadeva  and  to  the  supreme  soul. 

15.  Obeisance  to  the  eldest  and  the  greatest  ; obeisance  to 
Rudra  the  bestower  of  boons.  Obeisance  to  you  the  slayer  of 
Kala.  Obeisance  to  you  possessed  of  the  noble  soul. 

16.  With  this  prayer  he  bowed  to  the  lord  of  Devas,  to  the 
God  with  the  Bull  as  his  emblem.  He  who  reads  this  narrative 
even  once  becomes  entitled  to  the  world  of  Brahma. 

1 7-23.  He  who  narrates  this  to  the  brahmins  at  the  time  of 
Sraddha  attains  the  greatest  goal.  When  Brahma  thus  paid 
homage  to  him,  lord  Siva  spoke:  *1  am  delighted  with  you. 
What  favour  do  you  seek  from  me  ?*’ 

Then  Brahma  who  bowed  to  the  delighted  Rudra  said  with 
a delighted  mind  in  clear  words:  know  O lord,  I wish  to  see 
this  universal  form  of  yours.  Here  is  the  universal  cow’* 
Goddess  of  wcl&re.  Who  is  she  possessed  of  four  feet,  four  faces, 
four  horns,  four  mouths,  four  curved  fangs,  four  udders,  four 
hands  and  four  eyes  ? How  is  she  known  as  VKvarupa  (of 
universal  forms)  ? What  is  her  name?  What  is  her  lineage? 
To  whom  docs  she  belong  ? What  is  her  power  of  action  ?’*  On 
hearing  his  words  the  bull-bannered  lord  lltoa  addressed 
Brahma  the  best  of  Devas,  bora  of  himself,  in  words  full  of 


74*  VilvigMih  : She  is  ideatkal  with  Ftakrti  or  BradfaSaa.  C3om- 
pr^  thirty  two  quaUtkss  the  is  described  as  die  source  of  this  universe.  See 
below,  verses  ap.35.  ^ 


57 


Glofy  of  Ifdna 

the  secret  of  all  mantras  which  being  pious  are  conducive  to 
prosperity. 

24-25.  Listen  to  a great  secret.  As  in  the  first  creation,  the 
Jkalpa  that  is  current  now  is  known  as  Vi^variipa.  O lord 
(Brahmfi)  there  Is  the  region  of  Brahma  which  you  have 
attained.  O lord  ! beyond  that  region  there  is  an  auspicious 
region  occupied  by  Vifnu  bom  of  my  left  limb.  Since  that 
time,  this  the  thirtythird  kalpa  has  begun. 

27.  O lord  of  Devas  possessed  of  great  intellect,  before  you, 
hundreds  and  hundred  thousands  of  Brahmis  have  passed 
away.  Now  listen. 

28.  You  who  are  a devotee  of  the  spiritual  lineage  of 
Mandavya  have  attained  the  state  of  my  son  by  practising 
penance.  Stabilised  in  bliss  you  can  realize  the  supreme  bliss, 

29-31.  O lord,  you  are  characterized  by  the  following 
qualities:  (1)  Yoga,  (2)  Sankhya,  (3)  penance,  (4)  learning 
(5)  Sastric  injunctions,  (6)  holy  rites  (7)  pleasant  speech, 
(8)  truth,  (9)  mercifulness,  (10)  Vcdic  knowledge,  (11)  non- 
violence, (12)  wisdom,  (13)  forbearance,  (14)  meditation, 
(15)  proximity  with  the  lord,  (16)control  of  the  senses,  (17) 
quiescence,  (18)  intelligence,  (19)  illusion,  (20)  intellect,  (21) 
fortitude,  (22)  splendour,  (23)  ethics,  (24)  fame,  (25)  intelli- 
gence, (26)  modesty,  (27)  vision,  (28)  auspicious  speech, 
(29)  satisfaction,  (30)  skill  in  the  exercise  of  sense-organs,  (31) 
performance  of  Vedic  rites,  and  (32)  pleasure.  While  she,  the 
goddess,  has  these  thirtytwo  qualities  recognizable  in  her 
appellation  of  thirtytwo  syllables. 

32-34.  O Brahma,  the  goddess  Prakfti,  the  source  of  your 
origin  has  been  created  by  me.  She  is  the  overlord  of  Vi§nu 
and  other  gods.  She  is  my  progeny.  Philosophers  call  her  by 
various  names,  the  four-faced  deity,  the  origin  of  the  universe, 
primordial  nature,  cow  or  speech,  Gauri,  Maya,  Vidya,  Krsna, 
Haimavati,  Pradhana  or  Prakrti. 

35-39.  She  alone  is  unborn.’®  She  is  red,  white  and  black  in 
colour;  She  creates  subjects  in  the  universe  that  arc  of  the  form 
as  she  herself.  I am  unborn,  know  me  to  be  omnipresent  and 
know  her  to  be  Gayatri  of  universal  form. 


75.  TA.io.i;  Mah&n.  U.  9.2,  Svet.  U 4.5, 


58 


Lingapuri^ 


After  saying  this,  the  lord  created  four  sons.  They  were  boys 
of  all  forms,  who  stood  beside  the  Goddess.  They  were  known 
Jati  Mu^iji,  Sikha^d^  Ardhamuigida.  Resorting  to  the  yaugic 
practices  they  of  great  splendour  worshipped  the  lord.  They  carri- 
ed out  their  task  of  instruction  in  dharma.  They  followed  the 
path  of  yogic  practice.  These  controlled  souls  of  good  conduct 
entered  lord  Rudra  at  the  end  of  a thousand  divine  years. 


CHAPTER  SEVENTEEN 

Origin  of  the  Lihga 


S&ta  said  : — 

1-5.  Thus  the  origin  of  Sadyojata  has  been  succinctly 
narrated.  He  who  reads  or  listens  to  or  narrates  this  to  excel- 
lent brahmins  attains  identity  with  brahman  by  the  grace  of  the 
supreme  lord. 

The  sages  said  : 

How  did  Lihga  originate  ? How  should  lord  be  propitiated 
in  Lihga  ? What  is  this  Lihga  ? What  its  substratum  ? O Suta, 
you  should  narrate  all  this  to  us. 

Romaharsa^  said: 

Formerly,  Devas  and  Sages  had,  in  reverence,  asked  Brahma 
thus  : “O  lord,  how  did  Lihga  originate  by  itself?  How  should 
lord  Rudra  be  worshipped  in  the  Lihga.  What  is  Lihga?  What 
its  substratum  ? 

Brahma  said  : 

Pradhana  is  Lihga  and  lord  Siva  is  its  substratum. 

6-13.  O excellent  Devas,  it  was  for  us  both — ^Vi?^u  and 
myself  that  Xihga  manifested  itself  in  the  ocean.  It  was  when 
the  aerial  charioteers  had  gone  to  the  Janaloka  together  with 
the  Sages  and  when  the  period  of  sustenance  being  over  the 
creation  was  withdrawn  and  when  at  the  end  of  a thousand 
sets  of  four  yugas,  they  had  gone  to  Satyaloka  and  in  the  end, 
except  their  overlords,  had  attained  identity  with  me,  then  all 


Origin  of  the  Lihga 


59 


immobile  beings  had  dried  up  due  to  alUround  drought  and 
other  beings  like  men>  animals,  PU5cas,  Rak$asas,  Gandharvas 
including  plant  life  were  scorched  to  death  by  the  rays  of  the 
Sun.  Everything  was  a single  vast  sheet  of  water.  It  was  terribly 
dark  all  round.  In  that  vast  sheet  of  water,  the  lord  devoid  of 
impurities  and  free  from  calamities  had  gone  to  sleep.  He  had 
a thousand  heads, a thousand  eyes,  a thousand  feet  and  a 
thousand  arms.  He,  the  universal  soul,  omniscient,  the  source^ 
of  origin  of  all,  was  characterized  by  the  qualities  of  rajas,  tam^ 
and  sattva  in  the  form  of  Brahma,  Rudra  and  Vi^^u.  He  was 
omnipresent  and  the  supreme  lord  in  view  of  his  being  the 
soul  of  all.  He  was  in  the  form  of  Kala  with  K5la  in  his  lunbi- 
licus.  He  was  white,  black,  pure,  of  huge  arms,  the  soul  of  all 
and  identical  with  Being  and  non-Being. 

14.  On  seeing  the  lotus-eyed  deity  lying  thus,  I was 
deluded  by  his  mdyd.  I asked  him  angrily  : 

15-16.  Who  arc  you?  Tell  me.  Then  with  my  hand  I 
raised  up  the  eternal  lord.  Due  to  the  severe  and  firm  blow  of, 
my  hands  he  woke  up  from  sleep  and  sat  in  his  serpent  couch.^^ 
Within  a moment  he  regained  control  of  himself  and  with  his 
lotus-like  bleary  eyes  he  looked  at  me. 

1 7.  Enveloped  that  he  was  by  a halo  of  brilliance  he  spoke 
to  me  as  I stood  before  him.  He  got  up  from  bed  and  laughing 
awhile  addressed  me  sweetly. 

18-32.  “I  welcome  you,  O dear  Brahma  of  great  bril- 
liance.” O leading  Devas,  when  I heard  his  words  uttered 
smilingly  my  arrogance  was  provoked  by  rajas  and  I spoke  to 
him  thus;  ‘‘With  smiles  within,  you  call  me  by  the  appellation 
‘Dear’  ( as  if  I were  inferior  to  you) . But  know  that  I am  the 
cause  of  creation  and  annihilation  of  the  universe.  O sinless  one, 
you  address  me  as  a preceptor  would  address  his  disciple.  But 
I am  the  creator  of  the  universe,  the  promptor  of  Prakrti,  the 
eternal,  unborn  Brahma,  the  origin  and  soul  of  the  universe.  I 
am  the  lotus-eyed  lord.  Now  tell  me  quickly  why  you  speak 
thus  in  utter  delusion. 

76.  ?.V.  X.  90. 1. 

77.  In  Hindu  Mythology  Vi^ou  is  represented  as  reclining  on  the 

serpent  Se?a.  A vivid  picture  of  Se^ai&yi  is  depicted  on  the  outer 

wall  of  the  Dalgvat&ra  temple  at  Deogarh. 


€0 


LHgapuraa^ 


He  then  replied  to  me — ‘‘See  for  yourself  that  I am  the 
creator,  sustainer  and  destroyer  of  the  universe.  You  are  bom 
of  my  eternal  body.  You  forget  that  I am  the  lord  of  Universe, 
the  Supreme  soul  invoked  and  eulogised.  I am  Vi^u,  Acyuta, 
l^ana,  the  origin  of  the  universe.  It  is  not  your  fault  that  you 
have  forgotten  me.  This  has  been  effected  by  me  through  my 
maya.  Listen  to  the  truth,  O four-faced’®  deity.  Indeed,  I am 
the  lord  of  all  devas.  I am  the  creator,  leader  and  destroyer. 
There  is  no  other  lord  like  me.  I alone  am  the  Supreme 
Brahman.  O Brahma,  I am  the  greatest  principle,  the  greatest 
luminary,  the  supreme  soul.  O four-faced  lord,  whatever  is  seen 
or  heard  in  this  universe — the  mobile  and  immobile,  is 
identical  with  me  and  permeated  by  me.  Formerly  the  unmani- 
fest pradhana  the  twenty-fourth  principle’®  from  the  gross  to 
the  indestructible  atom  was  created  by  me.  Out  of  fury  were 
Rudra  and  others  created.  Out  of  joy  and  sport  you  were  born  as 
also  the  Cosmos:  Intellect,  the  threefold®®  ego,  subtle  elements 
sense-organs  including  the  mind ; and  gross  elements  were  also 
' created  by  me. 

As  he  finished  his  speech,  a terrible,  thrilling  fight  ensued 
between  us.  In  the  middle  of  that  ocean  of  dissolution  we  were 
engaged  in  fight,  instigated  by  rajas. 

33.  In  the  meantime  a brilliant  Linga  appeared  in  front  of 
us  in  order  to  suppress  our  dispute  and  enlighten  us. 

34.  It  had  thousands  of  clusters  of  flames.  It  was  comparable 
to  hundreds  of  ( all-consuming  fires) . It  was  stable,  with  no 
decline  or  increase.  It  had  neither  a beginning  nor  an  end  nor 
a middle. 

35.  It  was  incomparable,  inexplicable,  and  indistinct.  It  was 


78.  Brahmfi  is  four-faced  (Gaturmukha)  • It  is  stated  that  orig^ally 
he  had  five  heads  but  one  was  cut  off  by  Siva  for  telling  a lie.  According  to 
another  version,  the  fifth  head  was  burnt  off  by  the  fire  of  Siva’s  eye  for 
speaking  disrespectfully  of  Siva.  We  read  in  the  Satarudra  samhitk  that 
it  was  Kklabhairava,  a terrible  form  of  Siva  who  cut  off  the  fifth  head. 
Vi9ou  Purina  (ch.8)  however  gives  a different  version.  It  states  that 
Bhairava  attempted  to  cut  off  the  fifth  head  of  Brahmi  at  the  instance  of 
Siva  but  gave  up  the  attempt  when  Siva  intervened  at  the  behest  of  Vlfou. 

79*  It  refers  to  the  invisible  (avyakta)  Pradhina,  the  twentyfourth 
category  in  Siihkhya  philosophy. 

To.  Ahaihkira  (ego)  is  threefold  ; sittvika,  riyasa  and  tftmasa. 


Origin  of  the  Lihga  61 

the  source  of  the  universe.  Lord  Vi^^u  was  deluded  by  its 
thousand  flames. 

36. 1 too  was  deluded.  Then  Vi§nu  said  to  me — “Let  us  test 
this  fiery  Being.  I shall  go  to  the  root  of  this  incomparable 
column  of  fire. 

37-38.  You  should  go  up  assiduously”.  After  saying  this, 
Visnu  assumed  the  form  of  a boar.  O Devas,  I assumed  the 
form  of  a swan.  Ever  since  they  call  me  haihsa  (swan)  or 
Virat  hamsa  (cosmic  swan). 

39-43.  He  who  repeatedly  calls  me  swan^  shall  himself 
become  a swan  of  bright  and  white  colour,  with  fiery  eyes  and 
feathers.  O gods  1 I assumed  the  speed  of  the  wind  and  the 
mind  and  went  higher  and  higher.  Visnu  tbe^  ali-pervading  soul 
assumed  the  form  of  a black  boar  and  went  lower  and  lower. 
The  boar  looked  like  a heap  of  blue  collyrium.  It  was  a hund- 
red Yojanas  in  length,  ten  Yojanas  in  girth.  Its  body  was  huge 
as  the  mount  Mem.  It  had  white  and  curved  teeth.  It  had 
the  refulgence  of  all-consuming  sun  with  long  snout  and  loud 
grunt.  Its  legs  were  short  and  its  body  of  diverse  colours.  It  was 
victorious,  firm  and  incomparable.  Assuming  this  form  of  a 
black  boar,  Vi§nu  went  lower  and  lower,  hurriedly,  for  a period 
of  one  thousand  years. 

44.  Still  he  could  not  reach  the  root  of  the  Linga.  O des- 
troyer of  enemies,  throughout  that  period  of  time  I was  going 
higher  and  higher. 

45.  I hurried  up  my  efforts  to  sec  the  end  of  that  Linga. 

I was  tired.  Arrogant  that  I was  I could  not  see  the  end  and 
returned  to  the  place  of  my  start. 

46.  Similarly,  Lord  Vi^nu  was  also  tired.  His  fear  was 
evident  in  his  eyes.  He,  the  origin  of  all  Devas,  immediately 
came  up  there. 

47.  We  bowed  to  lord  Siva.  The  noble-minded  Vi§nu  was 
deluded  by  Siva’s  Mfiya  and  he  stood  there  in  mental  dejection. 

48.  We  bowed  to  lord  Siva  at  the  sides,  behind  and  in  front 
and  wondered  what  that  was. 

49.  O great  Devas  ! then  a loud  sound  Om^^  issued  ( out 
of  the  column) . It  was  clearly  a prolated  sound. 

8i.  Om  it  a myttic  syllable  consisting  of  three  sounds  a,  U,  m.  It 
is  the  object  of  profotm  r^gious  meditation.  The  highest  spiritual  eflfioacy 
It  attributed  not  only  to  the  whole  word  but  also  to  each  sound  sepasattiy* 


62 


JUAgapurd^ 


5C-5L  Thinking  what  it  could  be,  Visnu  stood  there  together 
with  me.  Then  he  saw  the  eternal  first  letter  ‘a’  on  the  right 
hand  side  of  the  Linga;  then  on  the  left  the  letter  there- 
after^ the  letter  ‘m’  in  the  middle  and  the  vibratory  tone  in 
the  end.  That  tone  was  *Om\ 

52-55.  Vif^u  saw  the  first  syllable  ‘a’  in  the  south,  like  the 
disc  of  the  sun,  the  second  syllable  ‘u*  as  refulgent  as  fire  in  the 
north,  the  third  *m*  in  the  middle  as  refulgent  as  the  sphere  of 
the  moon;  above  it,  he  saw  the  lord  like  the  pure  crystal.  It  was 
the  fourth  entity,  devoid  of  attributes,  nectarine,  unsullied, 
undisturbed,  devoid  of  mutually  clashing  opposites,  unique,  void, 
without  an  exterior  or  interior  but  still  endowed  with  exterior 
and  interior,  as  it  was  stationed  both  without  and  within.  It  was 
devoid  of  beginning,  middle  and  end,  it  was  the  cause  of 
bliss. 

56-62.  The  three  matras  and  half  a matra  called  nada, 
together  constitute  Brahman.  The  three  Vedas  Rk,  Yajus  and 
Saman  are  in  the  form  of  the  three  matr^.  Vision  contemplat- 
ed on  Siva,  the  universal  soul,  through  the  words  of  the  Vedas. 
The  Vedas  became  a sage.  Visnu  understood  the  glorious 
essence  of  the  Vedas — the  supreme  lord  through  that  sage 
alone. 

Brahma  said  : 

Rudra  is  free  from  anxieties  and  worries.  Speech  recedes 
along  with  the  mind  being  unable  to  attain  him.  He  is  ex- 
pressible through  the  single  syllable  (om)®^  which  is  the  Divine 
order,  the  supreme  cause,  truth,  bliss,  nectar,  the  supreme 
Brahman,  greater  than  the  greatest.  Out  of  that  single  syllable 
‘om’,  the  syllable  ‘a’  is  Brahma;  ^u’  Visnu,  and  ‘m’  is  Rudra, 
‘a*  is  the  cause  of  creation,  ‘u*  of  illusion  and  ‘m*  of  bliss. 

63-65.  The  syllable  ‘m*  is  the  sower,  ‘a’  is  the  seed  and  ‘u* 
is  the  womb.  The  three  symbolise  the  lord,  Pradhanaand  Puru^a. 
Thus  the  sower,  the  seed  and  the  womb,  together  with  ntda, 

8a.  Om  is  a symbol  of  Brahma  : Gf.  TogasHtra  : *tasya  vSeakah  pra~ 
Ijavah’.  In  later  times  it  came  to  re{>resent  the  Hindu  triad,  viz. , a (Vifj^u), 
u (Siva),  m (Brahmk).  But  this  order  is  not  followed  in  some  Pur&oas. 
For  instance,  according  to  Lihga  V represents  Brahm&,  *u*  Vifou  and  *m^ 
Rudra. 


Origin  of  the  Liriga 


63 


constitute  lord  Siva.  The  sower  divided  itself  out  of  his  own 
free  will.  Out  of  the  lihga  of  the  lord  the  sower  created  the  seed 
*2L  which  he  discharged  into  the  womb  ^u*  where  it  increased  all 
round. 

66.  It  turned  into  a golden  egg  enveloping  the  first  letter 
^a*.  This  divine  egg  was  ensconced  in  the  water  for  many 
years. 

67-68.  Then  at  the  end  of  a thousand  years  the  egg  that 
had  evolved  out  of  the  unborn  and  stationed  in  the  waters  was 
split  into  two  by  the  primeval  lord  himself.  The  splendid 
golden  skull  of  the  egg  became  heaven  and  the  base  became 
the  earth. 

69.  From  the  egg  the  four-faced  Brahma  was  born.  He  is 
the  creator  of  the  universe,  the  lord  of  three  forms. 

70-72.  The  wise  exponents  of  Yajus  say  that  Om  is  Brah- 
man. Thell^k  and  Saman  lirutis  too  have  declared  similarly.  On 
the  lord  of  Devas  precisely  we  meditated  and  we  eulogised  him 
by  reciting  the  Vedic  mantras.  Delighted  by  our  eulogy  the 
unsullied  lord  delightfully  stationed  himself  into  the  divine 
Lihga  after  assuming  the  form  of  sound. 

73-82.  The  letter  ‘a*  was  his  head;  *a*  the  forehead;  ‘i’  the 
right  eye;  ‘i’  the  left  eye;  V the  right  ear;  u the  left  ear;  the 
right  cheek;  r the  left  cheek,  and  ‘1?  the  pairs  of  his  nostrils; 
*e’  the  upper  lip,  ‘ai’  the  lower  lip;  *o’  and  'au’  the  two  rows  of 
teeth;  ^aih’  and  'ah’  the  palates;  the  five  letters  beginning  with 
^k’  his  five  hands  on  the  right  side;  the  five  letters  beginning 
with  "c”  his  five  hands  on  the  left  side;  the  five  letters  begin- 
ning with  ‘t’  his  right  leg;  the  five  letters  beginning  with  ‘t’  his 
left  leg;  the  letter  *p’  his  belly;  'ph’  his  right  side,  ‘b’  his  left 
side;  ‘bh’  hi t shoulder,  'm’  his  heart;  the  letters  *y’  to  's’  the 
seven  dhatus;  'h’  his  soul  and  'k$’  his  anger.  On  seeing  the 
great  lord  along  with  Uma,  Vi$t3m  bowed  and  then  looked  up 
at  him.  He  saw  a mantra  emerging  from  'Om’  with  five  digits. 
Resembling  pure  crystal  it  contained  thirty  eight  syllables.  It 
was  conducive  to  the  increase  of  knowledge,  and  it  was  the 
means  of  achievement  of  all  righteous  matters.  He  saw  the 
of  twenty  four  syllables  and  four  digits  in  G&yatn  metre  and  in 
green  colour,  with  the  efiScacy  for  gaining  control.  He  saw  the 
Atharvan  mantra  of  thirty  three  syllables,  eight  digits,  black  in 


colour  and  with  its  cfBcacy  of  black  magic.  He  saw  the  Yajus 
mantra  of  thirty  five  syllables,  eight  digits,  white  in  colour,  with 
the  efficacy  for  peace.  He  saw  the  Saman  mantra  of  sixtysix 
syllables,  of  thirteen  digits,  in  the  jagati  metre,  in  the  coral-red 
colour,  with  the  efficacy  for  creation  and  dissolution  of  the 
universe. 

Having  obtained  these  five  mantras,  lord  Vi§nu  performed 
japa.  He  saw  lord  Siva  in  ail  digits  and  syllables  (constituting 
the  limbs)  with  body  consisting  of  Rk,  yajus,  and  s^an,  with 
liana  for  his  coronet,  Tatpuru^a  for  his  face,  Aghora  for  his 
heart,  Vamadeva  for  his  private  parts,  sadyojata  for  his  feet, 
serpents  for  his  ornaments,  with  eyes  and  hands  all  round.  On 
seeing  the  great  lord  (of  above  description)  the  overlord  of 
Brahma,  the  cause  of  creation,  sustenance  and  dissolution  and 
the  gran  ter  of  boons,  Vi$nu  eulogized  him  with  pleasing  words. 


CSHAPTER  EIGHTEEN 

FiVpeiV  praise  of  Siva 


Vismi  said  : 

1 . Obeisance  to  the  single-syllabled  Rudra,  ^a’  in  the  form 
of  Atman;  obeisance  to  the  primordial  deity  whose  physical  body 
is  learning. 

2.  Obeisance  to  lord  Siva,  the  supreme  soul  in  the  form  of 
the  third  syllable  *m’.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  who  is  as  lustrous  as 
the  sun  or  the  fire  or  the  moon.  Obeisance  to  him  in  the  form  of 
yajamana  who  performs  sacrifice. 

3.  Obeisance  to  fire  in  the  form  of  Rudra.  Obeisance  to  the 
lord  of  Rudras.  Obeisance  to  Siva  of  auspicious  mantra.  Obei- 
sance to  Sadyojata.  Obeisance  to  Vedhas,  the  creator. 

4.  Obeisance  to  the  illustrious  Vamadeva,  the  granter  of 
ooons  and  the  unmortal  lord.  Obeisance  to  Aghora,  Atighora, 
SadyojSLta  and  the  deity  of  vehemence  and  impetuosity. 

5.  Obeisance  to  liana,  Smalfina  (i.e.  the  lord  of  crema- 
tion ground) ; obeisance  to  one  of  high  velocity.  Obeisance  to  the 
speedy  lord  whose  foot  is  the  Vedas,  who  has  an  upward  lifiga 
and  who  is  Lifiga  himself. 


Vifnu^s  praise  of  Siva 


65 


6.  Obeisance  to  him  who  has  a golden  Lihgaor  who  is  gold 
himself  or  who  is  of  watery  Lihga  or  who  is  water  himself.  Obei- 
sance to  Siva,  the  Lihga  of  Siva.  Obeisance  to  one  who  per- 
vades all,  including  the  firmament  itself. 

7.  Obeisance  to  the  wind  or  to  one  who  has  the  velocity  of 
the  wind,  and  who  pervades  the  wind.  Obeisance  to  the  fire, 
the  lord  of  all  fiery  articles  and  who  pervades  the  fire. 

8.  Obeisance  to  the  water  and  to  one  who  has  become 
water.  Obeisance  to  one  who  pervades  water.  Obeisance  to  the 
earth  or  the  atmosphere.  Obeisance  to  one  who  pervades  the 
earth. 

9.  Obeisance  to  one,  of  the  form  of  sound  and  touch,  taste 
and  smell  and  to  one  who  has  smell.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  of 
Ganas,  and  to  one  who  is  the  most  secretive. 

10.  Obeisance  to  the  infinite,  devoid  of  forms,  obeisance 
to  the  infinite,  devoid  of  ailments;  obeisance  to  the  permanent, 
the  most  excellent,  who  is  in  the  womb  of  waters,  and  who  is 
the  Yogin. 

1 1 . Obeisance  to  one  who  is  stationed  in  between  Brahma 
and  Vi§nu  in  the  midst  of  waters;  obeisance  to  the  splendour, 
the  protector,  the  destroyer,  the  perpetual  maker  and  the  Death. 
Obeisance  to  lord  Siva. 

12.  Obeisance  to  the  insentient,  worthy  of  contemplation 
who  removes  the  stress  and  strain  of  the  sentient,  who  is  form- 
less or  of  good  forms,  who  has  no  limbs  or  who  is  attractive  with 
limbs. 

13.  Obeisance  to  one  who  has  smeared  ashes  all  over  the 
body;  obeisance  to  the  cause  of  the  sun,  moon  and  fire;  obei- 
sance to  the  white,  of  white  colour;  and  to  one  moving  about  on 
the  mountain  of  snows. 

14.  Obeisance  to  one  of  excessively  white  complexion, 
white  face,  white  tuft,  and  white  blood. 

15.  Obeisance  to  one  who  facilitates  easy  crossing  (of  the 
ocean  of  mundane  existence) , obeisance  to  the  splendid  one, 
obeisance  to  one  having  two  forms,  to  one  of  hundred  forms,  to 
one  devoid  of  forms  and  to  one  holding  a banner. 

16.  Obeisance  to  one  who  has  prosperity,  grief  and  absence 
of  grief;  obeisance  to  the  Pinaka-bearing  lord,  with  matted 
hairs,  devoid  of  noose,  holding  a noose,  the  destroyer  of  noose. 


66 


Lingapur&fjta 


17.  Obeisance  to  one  of  good  sacrifice,  to  one  having  sacri- 
ficial offering,  to  one  favourably  disposed  to  the  Brahmins. 
Obeisance  to  one  who  is  a poet.  Obeisance  to  one  having  good 
face  and  good  mouth;  who  is  difiSicult  to  be  suppressed  and  who 
is  of  good  mental  control. 

18.  Obeisance  to  one  who  assumed  the  form  of  a Brahmin,®^ 
who  is  Yama**  and  who  has  made  serpent  his  bangle.  Obeisance 
to  one  who  is  Sanaka,  Sanatana,  Sanandana  and  Sanat. 

19.  Obeisance  to  one  who  hunts  the  deer, who  is  the  great 
atman,  and  the  eye  of  the  world.  Obeisance  to  one  who  has 
three  abodes  and  to  one  who  is  devoid  of  rajas. 

20.  Obeisance  to  Sarikhapala,  Sankha,  rajas  and  tamas. 
Obeisance  to  Sarasvata,  the  cloud  and  the  cloud- vehicled. 
Obeisance  be  to  you. 

21.  Obeisance  to  one  of  good  vehicle,  devoid  of  vehicle,  the 
bestower  of  boons  to  the  devotee,  to  Siva,  Rudra  and  pradhana. 

22.  Obeisance  to  you,  possessed  of  three  gunas,  having  the 
nature  of  the  four  vyuhas,  the  cause  of  existence  and  dissolution. 

23.  Obeisance  to  you  of  the  form  of  salvation,  the  granter 
of  liberation,  the  supreme  soul,  the  sage  and  the  all-pervader. 

24.  Obeisance  to  you  the  holy  lord,  the  lord  of  serpents, 
of  the  form  of  ‘Om’  and  the  omnipresent  lord. 

25.  Obeisance  to  you  identical  with  all,®®  all-pervader,  and 
the  primordial  lord. 

26.  Obeisance  to  the  unborn,  the  lord  of  subjects,  the  cause 
of  vyuhas  and  the  great  lord  of  Devas. 

27.  Obeisance  to  Sarva,  Satya,  (truth)  and  Saniana  (the 
subduer)  and  Brahma.  Obeisance  to  the  omniscient  deity  of 
living  beings. 

28-29.  Obeisance  to  you,  the  supreme  soul.  Obeisance  to 
one  invested  with  the  form  of  intellect,  consciousness,  memory 
and  knowledge.  Obeisance  to  one  comprehensible  through  know- 
ledge. Obeisance  to  one  in  the  form  of  concord  and  summit. 
Obeisance  to  one  whose  neck  is  blue. 

83.  It  refers  to  Siva  disguised  as  a Br&hmai^ia.  ST. 

84.  i.e.  Yama,  the  god  ^ death  and  destruction.  ST. 

85.  as  a himter  kills  the  birds  and  animals.  ST. 

86.  The  epithet  is  applied  to  Vispu  because  the  waters  (n^ra)  were 
his  first  place  of  motion  (ayana),  (Gf.  Manu  : &po  n&r&  iti  prakt&^),  but 
here,  as  applied  to  Siva  tt  means  *one  who  lives  among  the  people  : 

^ ST. 


67 


praise  of  £iva 

30.  Obeisance  to  one  whose  half  body  is  female®^,  who 
though  unmanifest  has  eleven  forms.  Obeisance  to  one  who  is 
immovable. 

31.  Obeisance  to  the  sun,  the  moon,  who  establishes  and 
destroys  the  universe.  Obeisance  to  one  who  is  the  cause  of 
fame,  who  brings  on  peace  and  is  the  lord  of  all. 

32.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  Ambika,  and  the  lord  of  Uma. 
Obeisance  to  one  of  golden  arms  and  of  golden  semen. 

33.  Obeisance  to  the  blue- tressed  one  who  is  wealth.  Obeis- 
ance to  the  black-necked  deity  with  matted  hairs  Obeisance  to 
one  with  the  serpent  for  his  ornament. 

34.  Obeisance  to  one  riding  the  bull;  obeisance  to  the  creator 
and  destroyer  of  all;  obeisance  to  one  who  excelled  even  the 
heroic  Rama  in  prowess ; obeisance  to  you,  the  lord  of  Rama. 

35.  Obeisance  to  the  Emperor  of  kings,  to  one  attained  by 
kings,  to  the  overlord  of  protectors;  obeisance  to  you,  O Destroyer 
of  demons. 

36.  Obeisance  to  one  bedecked  in  keyuras  (armlets).  O 
lord  of  cows,  obeisance  be  to  you.  Obeisance  to  lord  Srikantha 
holding  a likuca  fruit  in  the  hand. 

37.  Obeisance  to  the  lord,  the  chief  of  the  worlds;  and  to 
one  whose  Scripture  is  the  Veda;  obeisance  to  you,  to  Sarahga 
the  Royal  Swan. 

38.  Obeisance  to  one  with  golden  necklaces  and  shoulder- 
lets;  to  one  with  serpents  for  sacred  thread,  ear-rings  and 
garlands;  obeisance  to  one  who  has  made  a serpent  his  waist- 
band. 

39-42.  O Siva,  obeisance  to  you,  having  the  Vedas  in  the 
womb.  Obeisance  to  the  foetus  containing  the  entire  universe. 

Brahma  said  : 

After  having  eulogised  thus,  Vi^nu  ceased  along  with 
Brahma.  This  excellent  hymn  is  holy,  it  is  destructive  of  all 
sins.  He  who  reads  this  himself  or  narrates  this  to  the  brah- 
mins well  versed  in  the  Vedas  goes  to  Brahma’s  region  though 
he  might  have  incurred  sins.  Hence  one  should  perform  the 
Japa  of  this,  read  this  or  narrate  this  to  splendid  brahmins  for 
washing  off  his  sins.  It  has  been  so  ordained  by  Vi^u. 


87.  Gf.  note  37.  on  p. 


68 


Ltfigapurd^ 


CHAPTER  NINETEEN 

Enlightenment  of 


SHta  said  : 

I.  The  Supreme  Lord  said  : O excellent  among  theDevas, 
I am  delighted  with  you.  On  beholding  me,  the  great  lord,  you 
should  cast  off  all  fear. 

2-3.  Both  of  you  very  powerful  were  born  of  me  formerly. 
Brahma,  the  grandfather  of  the  universe  was  born  from  my 
right  side;  Vi§nu,  the  soul  of  the  universe,  sprang  from  my  left 
side.  I am  extremely  pleased  with  both  of  you.  I shall  grant  you 
the  boon  of  your  choice. 

4.  After  saying  this,  the  lord,  the  storehouse  of  mercy  patted 
Visnu  with  his  gentle  and  smooth  hands  out  of  compassion. 

5.  Then  with  a delightful  mind,  Visnu  bowed  and  spoke 
to  the  great  lord  who  though  devoid  of  Lihga  was  stationed  in 
the  Lihga. 

6.  If  love  has  been  generated  in  you,  if  boon  has  to  be 
granted  to  us,  may  our  devotion  to  you  remain  perpetual  and 
unswerving. 

7.  O Devas.  the  moon-crested  lord  accordingly  granted 
them  an  unswerving  devotidn  and  faith. 

8.  Then  Visnu  knelt  on  the  ground  and  bowed  to  the  lord. 
With  perfect  control  over  himself  he  spoke  to  the  lord  in  low 
tones. 

9.  O lord  of  the  Devas,  our  controversy  has  borne  splendid 
fruits,  since  you  yourself  have  come  over  here  to  remove  the 
same. 

10.  On  hearing  this,  Lord  Siva  again  spoke  smiling  to 
Visriu  who  bowed  to  him  with  his  head  bent  down  and  who 
stood  with  palms  joined  in  reverence. 

Lord  Siva  said  : 

II.  O lord  of  earth,  you  are  the  projector  of  dissolution, 
sustenance  and  creation.  O dear  Visnu,  protect  this  world 
with  all  its  mobile  and  immobile  beings. 

12.  O Vi?pu,  I am  lord  Siva,  the  unsullied,  I divided  my- 


Enlightenmint  of  Brahma 


69 


self  into  three  forms®*  under  the  names  of  Brahma,  Vi§nu  and 
Rudra  with  the  activities  of  creation,  protection  and  dissolution. 

13.  O Vi?9u,  abandon  your  delusion.  Protect  this  Brahma, 
who  in  the  Padmakalpa,  will  become  your  son. 

14.  Then  you  will  see  me  thus,  so  will  the  lotus-born 
Brahmi  too.  Thus  saying  the  lord  vanished  there  itself. 

15.  Ever  since  then  the  worship  of  the  Lihga  was  well 
established  in  the  world.  The  great  goddess  is  the  altar  for  the 
Lihga.  The  Lihga  is  the  great  lord  himself. 

16-17.  Lihga  is  so  called  because,  O gods,  everything  gets 
dissolved  in  it.  The  brahmin  who  reads  this  narrative  of  Lihga, 
in  the  presence  of  the  Lihga  image  attains  Siva-hood.  No 
doubt  need  be  entertained  in  this  respect. 


CHAPTER  TWENTY 

The  enlightenment  of  Brahma 


The  sages  said  : 

1-6.  How  did  Brahma  become  the  lotus-born  (deity), 
formerly,  in  the  Padmakalpa  ? How  did  Visnu  and  Brahma 
see  lord  Siva  ? Please  recount  all  this  particularly  now. 

Sutasaid  : 

It  was  one  vast  sheet  of  water,  terrible,  undivided  and  full 
of  darkness. 

In  the  middle  of  that  vast  sheet  of  water  lay  Lord  Visnu 
holding  the  conch,  discus  and  the  iron  club.  He  had  the  lustre 
of  the  cloud.  His  eyes  resembled  the  lotus.  He  wore  the  coro- 
net. He  was  known  as  Hari,  lord  of  Sri,  Narayana  and 
Puru^ttama.  From  his  mouth  emerged  all  souls,  all  beings.  He 
had  eight  arms  and  a large  chest.  He,  the  source  of  origin  of 
the  universe,  the  yogic  atman,  the  knower  of  the  yoga, 
adopted  an  inconceivable  yoga  and  occupied  the  lofty  body  of 

88.  The  supreme  lord  in  his  qualified  (sakala)  state  is  characterized 
by  three  functions  : viz.  creation,  sustenance  and  destruction.  The  idea 
is  often  repeated  in  the  Pura^as. 


70 


Ling^puran^ 


a huge  serpent  that  had  a thousand  hoods  and  whose  splendour 
was  incomparable.  In  that  vast  sheet  of  water,  the  lord  lay  on 
that  great  couch  of  serpent. 

7-8.  A tall  and  lofty  lotus  was  sportively  created  in  his 
umbilicus  as  he  lay  there  all-powerful  self-contented  but  un- 
wearied in  activities.  It  was  hundred  Yojanas  long.  It  resem- 
bled the  mid-day  sun.  It  had  adamantine  stalk. 

9-11.  Even  as  the  bountiful  lord  was  playing  (with  the 
lotus) , Brahma,  who  was  born  of  the  cosmic  Egg  of  golden 
womb,  who  had  golden  colour,  who  was  beyond  the  pale  of  the 
sense-organs,  who  had  four  faces  and  large  eyes  came  near  the 
lord  casually.  On  seeing  Vi§nu  of  splendid  eyes  sporting  with 
the  lotus  that  was  glorious,  divine,  splendid  and  fragrant, 
Brahma  was  surprised  and  asked  in  a tone  filled  with  gentle- 
ness— 

“Who  are  you  lying  (here)  in  the  middle  of  the  waters?” 

12-16.  On  hearing  the  splendid  words  of  Brahma,  Vi§nu 
got  up  from  his  couch  and  with  his  eyes  beaming  with  surprise 
replied;  — 

“In  every  kalpa  this  is  my  shelter  and  asylum.  What  had 
been  done,  whatever  is  being  done  and  what  would  be  done 
(everything  is  done  here  itself) . The  heaven,  the  atmosphere 
and  the  earth  everything  is  my  region.” 

After  saying  thus,  lord  Vifnu  addressed  him  again— “Who 
are  you  ? Whence  do  you  come  near  me  ? Where  do  you  in- 
tend to  go  ? Where  is  your  abode  ? Who  are  you  that  have  the 
universe  for  your  physical  body?  What  can  1 do  for  you  ?” 

17-24.  Thereupon  Brahma  replied  to  Visnu.  Being  deluded 
by  the  Maya  of  lord  Siva,  he  could  not  fully  comprehend 
Vi§^u  who  himself  was  deluded  by  the  Maya  of  Siva  and 
hence  unknowable. 

Brahma  said  : 

*Just  like  you  I too  am  the  Prajapati,  the  primordial  creator.” 
On  hearing  with  wonder  the  words  of  Brahma  the  creator  of  the 
worlds  and  on  being  permitted  by  him,  the  source  of  origin  of 
the  universe,  the  great  yogin,  Visiiu  entered  through  the  mouth 
of  Brahma,  out  of  curiosity.  Within  the  belly  of  Brahma  he  saw 


Enlightenment  of  Brahma 


71 


the  eighteen  continents®*  together  with  the  oceans  and  moun- 
tains. On  entering  the  belly  of  Brahma,  Vi§nu  of  great  splen- 
dour and  brawny  arms  saw  the  eternal  seven  worlds**  up  to  the 
column  of  BrahmS  in  which  the  people  of  the  four  castes*^ 
stayed.  Then  uttering  repeatedly,  ‘‘How  powerful  is  his 
penance”  he  wandered  through  different  worlds  of  diverse 
creation.  Though  he  wandered  for  a thousand  years,  he  could 
not  reach  the  end.  Then  he  (Visnu)  the  support  of  the  worlds 
who  had  Sesa  the  lord  of  snakes  as  his  bed,  came  out  of 
Brahma’s  mouth,  and  addressed  him  thus: 

25  “O  sinless  one ! You  are  the  beginning,  the  end  and  the 
middle  of  the  universe.  You  are  Time,  the  quarters  and  the 
ether.  O sinless  one,  I do  not  perceive  the  limits  of  your 
belly.” 

26-28.  After  saying  thus,  Visnu  spoke  to  Brahma  again — 
“In  the  same  manner  as  you,  I also  am  a lord.  O illustrious  one, 
please  enter  my  belly  and  see  the  wonderful  worlds  therein.” 
On  hearing  these  pleasant  words  of  Visnu,  Brahma  of  truthful 
exploits  approved  of  them  and  entered  his  belly.  Then  he  saw 
those  very  worlds  stationed  in  his  womb. 

29-30.  He  roamed  about  therein  but  he  could  not  find  the 
end.  Then  on  observing  the  movement  of  Brahma,  lord  Vi§nu 
closed  the  openings  of  the  passage  and  slept  a perfect  sleep. 

On  seeing  the  openings  closed  Brahma  assumed  a subtle 
form  and  found  an  opening  in  the  umbilicus. 

89.  Dvipa  in  the  broader  sense  signifies  a continental  division  of  the 
terrestrial  world.  The  number  of  such  divisions  varies  according  to  diffe- 
rent authorities  being  four,  seven,  nine,  thirteen  or  eighteen.  According 
to  the  Purai^ic  tradition  dvipas  arc  situated  round  the  mountain  Meru  like 
the  petals  of  a lotus  flower  and  separated  from  one  another  by  a distinct 
ocean.  In  the  restricted  sense  dvipa  is  a land  enclosed  between  two  rivers 
(mod.  doab).  The  word  ‘dvipa’  is  used  in  both  these  senses  in  the  Puranas. 

90.  Seven  regions.  Of.  1.23. 53-;, 4.  The  three--- Bhu,  Bhuva  and 
Svar  are  separated  from  the*  four  higher  regions — Mahas,  Jana,  Tapas  and 
Satya  by  a mountain  Lok^oka.  The  light  of  the  luminaries  illumines  the 
three  worlds  but  fails  to  reach  the  four  higher  regions. 

91.  Gaturvarnya.  ‘The  concept  of  fourfold  social  organization  is 
already  found  in  the  fLV,  (x.go.is).  The  idea  is  developed  in  the  Puranas. 
Vdjfu  (Ch.9)  speaks  of  the  cosmic  origin  of  society  (113-114;  139-140). 
Siva  is  the  originator,  Manu  the  founder  and  Bali  the  propagator  of  Varna 
(fiid.  j.So.aiS;  09.  35-3<>:  61-98.  95-Sa)- 


72  lingapurdi^ 

31.  Then  the  four-faced  Brahma  came  out  of  the  stalk  of 
the  lotus  and  assumed  his  own  form. 

32.  The  Self-born  Brahma,  the  source  of  tlie  origin  of  the 
universe  sat  in  the  lotus,  resembling  in  lustre  the  interior  of  the 
lotus  itself. 

33-37.  In  the  meantime,  even  as  either  of  them  was  wholly 
engaged  in  a struggle  with  the  other  in  the  middle  of  the 
ocean,  lord  iSiva  of  immeasurable  soul,  the  lord  of  living  beings 
appeared  there  itself.  Holding  a trident  in  hand  and  clad  in 
garments  of  pure  gold  he  came  to  the  place  where  Visnu  was 
lying  on  l§e§a — the  lord  of  serpents.  As  he  waded  through  the 
waters  quickly,  big  drops  of  water  rose  up  in  the  sky,  kicked  up 
by  his  feet.  The  wind  that  blew  was  very  hot  and  cold.  On 
perceiving  this  wonderful  phenomenon,  Brahma  spoke  to  Vi§nu 
‘‘See  how  hot  and  cold  waters  make  the  lotus  shake. 

38-40.  Clear  this  doubt  of  mine  and  tell  me  what  else 
you  wish  to  do  now.” 

On  hearing  these  words  uttered  by  lord  Vi§nu,  the  destroyer 
of  Asuras  and  of  unequalled  exploits  meditated  thus: — “What? 
Who  is  this  great  being  occupying  my  umbilicus  ?•  He  speaks 
pleasing  words  though  I have  been  angry  with  him.”  After 
thinking  thus,  Visnu  spoke  in  reply: — 

41-48.  “O  Sir,  arc  you  in  a perplexed  state  inside  the 
lotus  ? O lord,  what  is  it  that  1 have  done  wherefore  O excellent 
one  among  men,  you  speak  to  me  thus  : What  is  it  for  ? Tell 
me  factually.”  Lord  Brahma,  the  storehouse  of  the  Vedas, 
replied  to  the  lotus- eyed  lord  of  Devas  who  spoke  thus  in 
accordance  with  the  activities  of  the  world: — “It  was  I who 
formerly  entered  your  belly  in  accordance  with  your  wish.  Just 
as  all  the  worlds  within  my  belly  were  seen  by  you  O lord,  so 
also  all  the  worlds  in  your  belly  are  seen  by  me.  O sinless  one 
after  a thousand  years  I returned.  With  a spirit  of  rivalry  and 
a desire  to  subject  me  to  control,  all  the  openings  were  closed 
suddenly  by  you.  O blessed  one,  I .pondered  over  it.  By  dint  of 
my  own  splendour  I gained  exit  through  the  umbilicus  by  the 
lotus  stalk.  Let  there  be  no  dejection  in  your  mind  : O Vi^^u, 
this  is  the  sequence  of  events  in  their  gradual  advancement. 
What  should  be  done  by  me  hereafter,  kindly  tell  me  : What 
shall  I do?” 


Enlightenment  of  Brahma 


73 


49-51.  On  hearing  these  loving,  pleasing  auspicious  and 
irreproachable  words  of  Brahma,  Vij^iu  the  destroyer  of  Hirainiya- 
kaSipu  and  of  immeasurable  soul,  spoke  sincere  and  simple 
words.  This  type  of  adverse  action  was  not  envisaged  by  me. 

I closed  all  the  openings  sportively  and  casually  out  of  a desire 
for  enlightening  you. 

52.  You  should  not  mis-understand  me.  You  deserve  my 
respect  and  worship.  O auspicious  one,  forgive  if  at  all  1 have 
committed  any  offence  against  you. 

53-58.  You  are  borne  by  me,  O lord,  descend  from  this 
lotus.  I cannot  bear  you.  You  are  refulgent  and  weighty. 
Thereupon  Brahma  said  once  again:  ‘Tell  me,  what  boon  you 
desire  to  have.  O lord,  take  me  down  from  the  lotus\  Then 
Visnu  said  : ‘O  slayer  of  enemies,  you  should  be  my  son.  You 
will  attain  splendid  pleasure.  Speak  agreeable  and  loving  words. 
O lord,  descend  from  the  lotus.  You  are  a great  yogin.  You 
are  worthy  of  our  worship.  You  are  the  Pranava  itself.  Hence- 
forth >ou  will  be  the  lord  of  all;  adorned  with  a white  turban 
you  will  be  known  as  ‘padmayoni’®* — one  whose  source  of  origfti 
is  a lotus.  O Brahma,  O lord,  as  son  to  me,  you  will  be  the 
overlord  of  ven  worlds*. 

Thus  the  lord  granted  him  the  boon  and  Brahma  accepted 
‘he  cheerfully  and  spitelessly.  Just  then  on  seeing  the  mir- 
aculous, huge-faced  Siva  with  the  lustre  of  the  rising  sun, 
Brahma  said  to  Visnu. 

59-62.  ‘T)  Visnu,  who  is  this  incomprehensible  person  with 

a huge  face  and  curved  fangs  ? With  hairs  dishavelled,  with  ten 
urn)'  strctch^'d  and  holding  a trident,  with  all-round  eyes  he 
seeuis  to  be  die  lord  of  the  uiu»?crse.  He  has  a deformed  body 
and  a girdle  of  Munja  grass.  With  huge  penis  lifted  up,  he  is 
roaring  loudly  and  terribly.  With  a mass  of  splendour  and 
lustre  he  has  enveloped  the  quarters  and  the  firmament.  He 
comes  this  way  itself.”  On  being  addressed  thus  by  Brahma,  lord 
Visnu  replied  as  follows: 

9a.  The  Puri^as  describe  the  golden  lotus  flower  of  one  thousand 
petals  sprung  up  from  the  navel  of  Vi^nu  whUe  he  lay  recumbent  in  the 
ocean.  Cf.  Matsya  168.15.  According  to  Harivarhta  (Bhavifya-parva,  chs. 
7-14)  the  golden  lotus  became  the  scat  of  BrahmS  and  also  his  birth-place. 
Hence  Brahma  is  called  padmayoni. 


74 


63-66.  is  mding  through  the  ocean 
When  his  feet  press  the  sur&ce  of  wate»,  aa  he 
Ae  ocean  wiA  great  speedy  masses  of  water  rise  up  even  to  Ac 
sky.  O lotUs^bom  one,  yw  are  being  sprinkled  from  ail  sides 
wiA  a heap  of  water:  By  Ac  wind  coming  out  of  his  nostrils,  this 
great  lotus  ezaergrd  out  of  my  navel  is  being  shaken.  It  is  lord 
Siva  who  has  tw>  origin  and  who  destroys  the  world  that  has 
come.  Let  us  eulogise  the  bull-bannered  lord  with  hymns  of 
prayer.'* 

67-60.  Then  Brahma  who  was  infuriated  spoke  to  Visna 
whose  eyes  resembled  the  lotus: — “Indeed  you  do  not  know 
yourself  as  the  lord  of  all  the  worlds.  You  do  not  know  me  also 
as  Brahma,  the  eternal  creator  of  the  worlds.  Who  is  Ais  Siva 
apart  from  us  both  ?” 

69-7'L  On  hearing  these  words  of  Brahma  uttered  in  rage 
Vi§nu  spoke:  “O  auspicious  one,  bestower  of  welfare,  do  not 
speak  ill  of  the  great  soul.  Here  is  he  who  has  the  lustre  of  the 
splendid  yoga,  who  is  Ac  invincible  bestower  of  boons,  who  is 
Ac  unchanging  ancient  Puru$a,  the  cause  of  this  universe.  He 
is  the  sower  of  seeds  and  the  refulgence  of  seeds,  shining  by  him- 
self. He,  the  lord,  plays  with  toys  as  do  the  childern.  Pradhana, 
the  eternal  womb,  the  unmanifest  Prakrti  and  the  quality 
tamas — darkness — these  are  my  names,  since  I perpetually  give 
birth  to  creation.  The  person  of  your  query  is  lord  Siva  who 
is  the  goal  of  the  ascetics  who,  being  afraid  of  the  pangs  of  birth 
and  death  resort  to  him.  He  is  Ac  sower  of  the  seed;  you  are 
Ae  seed  itself  and  1 am  the  eternal  womb.”®®  On  being  addressed 
thus,  Brahma,  the  soul  of  the  universe  asked  again : 

74.  “How  is  it  thav  you  are  Ac  womb,  I am  Ae  seed  and  he 


93.  According  to  Ae  Pura^ic  account  of  creation  (sarga) , in  Ae  begin- 
ning, Ae  Cosmic  Egg  which  arose  out  of  Ae  waters  was  insentient.  It 
remained  in  this  state  for  Aousands  of  years  until  it  was  activated  by  Ae 
sentient  principle  which  entering  divided  it  into  two  parts.  One  of  Ae  two 
halves  became  the  celestial  and  the  oAer  Ae  terrestrial  sphere. 

The  creation  is  traced  to  the  seed,  personified  as  Brahma,  deposited 
in  the  foetus  personified  as  Vi^t^u,  by  Siva  Ac  sower  of  Ac  seed.  In  fact, 
both  Ae  insentient  egg  and  the  sentient  principle  Aat  activates  it  belong  to 
Siva  himself  who  out  of  Acer  will  and  sportively  too,  creates,  dissolves  and 
Aen  re-creates  and  re-dissolves  Ae  universe. 


EnliglUenment  of  Brahma 


75 


(lord  Siva)  the  sower.  This  is  a puzzle  which  you  alone  can 
solve.” 

75-79.  After  thinking  about  the  multiformed  creation, 
Vi$9u  spoke  in  answer  to  this  specific  query  of  Brahmfi,  the 
creator  of  the  worlds. 

There  is  no  other  greater  living  being  than  him.  He  is  a 
great  mystery,  the  dimensional  abode  of  intellect  and  the 
coveted  goal  of  spiritualists.  He  split  himself  into  two.  His  un- 
qualitative  part  remained  unmeniiest;  the  qualitative  one  came 
into  appearance.  Of  him  who  was  aware  of  activities  of  Prakrti 
and  who  was  inaccessible  and  fathomless,  the  seed  was  bom, 
formerly,  at  the  first  creation.  This  seed  was  laid  into  my  womb 
which,  after  the  lapse  of  some  time,  greW  into  a golden  egg  in 
the  ocean. 

80.  For  a thousand  years  the  Egg  lay  in  the  waters.  There- 
after it  was  split  into  two  by  the  force  of  the  wind. 

81.  The  upper  lid  of  the  Egg  became  the  heaven  and  the 
lower  lid  became  the  earth.  The  foetus  became  the  lofty  golden 
mountain  Meru. 

82.  Then  with  the  soul  entering  the  womb,  you,  the  lord, 
Hiranyagarbha  the  most  excellent  of  the  lords  of  Devas,  and 
of  four  faces  were  born. 

83.  On  seeing  that  the  world  with  stars,  sun  and  moon, 
was  void  you  meditated.  Then  the  kumaras  were  bom  to  you. 

84.  Pleasing  to  look  at,  they  became  ascetics,  the  predece- 
ssors of  yatis.  Thus  at  the  end  of  a thousand  years  they  were 
born  as  your  sons. 

85-87.  They  resembled  the  terrestrial  fire  in  brilliance. 
They  had  eyes  large  as  the  petals  of  a lotus.  Sanat  and 
Rbhu  remained  celibate  having  sublimated  sexuality;  the  other 
three  were  Sanaka,  Sanatana  and  Sanandana  who  were  bom 
simultaneously  and  who  could  visualize  things  even  beyond  the 
scope  of  sense-organs.  They  possessed  great  intellect;  they  were 
the  cause  of  the  sustenance  of  the  worlds.  They  were  devoid 
of  the  three  types  of  miseries  and  they  desisted  from  worldly 
activities. 

88-90.  Seeing  that  life  and  deatli  in  the  world  yield  but 
little  pleasure,  that  it  is  attended  with  great  strain  and  pain, 
that  births  and  deaths  recur  i^in  and  again,  that  there  is  little 


pleasure  in  heaven,  that  miseries  abound  in  hell,  knowing  the 
S^traic  injunctions  about  the  inevitability  of  the  future  as  also 
that  ]^bhu  and  Sanat  were  under  your  control,  the  three — 
Sanaka,  Sanatana  and  Sanandana  of  great  prowess  eschewed 
the  three  gunas  and  took  to  spiritual  life. 

91-94.  Thus  in  the  functioning  of  the  kalpa,  when  the 
three  sons — Sanaka  and  others  took  to  detachment  you  will 
become  confused  and  deluded  through  the  illusory  power  of 
lord  Siva.  Then  O sinless  one,  your  consciousness  will  perish. 
In  the  present  kalpa,  the  elements  both  gross  and  subtle  will 
be  affected  by  his  maya  who,  in  fact,  is  the  activizer  of  these 
elements.  This  great  and  glorious  account  of  the  most  excellent 
of  all  Devas  is  as  famous  as  the  golden  Meru — the  mountain- 
ous abode  of  Devas. 

95-97.  Knowing  him  as  the  great  lord  and  knowing  me 
as  the  lotus-eyed  Visnu,  knowing  also  that  the  lord  is  the 
greatest  of  all  living  beings,  the  bestower  of  boons  and  the 
preceptor  of  the  universe,  you  should  bow  to  him,  uttering  the 
prariava  (omkara)  mantra  and  the  Sanian  verses.  If  he  is 
infuriated  he  will  burn  us  both  by  hi  a very  breath.  After 
realizing  the  lord  of  great  strength  and  yoga,  1 shall  keep 
you  in  front  and  eulogize  him  who  is  of  fiery  and  dazzling 
splendour. 


CHAPTER  TWENTY  ONE 

Eulogy  of  Lord  Siva 

Suta  satd: 

1-3  Thereafter  keeping  Brahma  in  front,  the  Garuda-emble- 
med  deity  Visnu  recited  the  hymn  to  lord  Siva,  containing 
his  past,  present  and  future  names  as  enjoined  by  the  Vedas. 

Vif^  said  : 

Obeisance  to  you,  O deity  of  holy  rites,  of  infinite  splendour, 
the  overlord  of  the  field  (ksetra),  the  sower  of  the  seed,  the 
trident-bearer,  of  excellent  penis  deserving  worship,  the  staff- 
holder  and  of  dry  and  arid  semen. 


77 


Eulogy  of  Lord  Siva 

4.  Obeisance  tg  the  eldest,  the  excellent^  the  foremost 
and  the  first;  Obeisance  to  one  who  is  worthy  of  honour  and 
worship.  Obeisance  to  Sadyojata. 

5.  Obeisance  to  the  unfathomable  and  the  lord  of  jlvas 
(personal  souls).  Obeisance  to  the  naked  and  the  lord  of  all 
created  beings. 

6.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  the  Vedas,  the  Smrtis  and  the 
lord  of  activities,  charities  and  substances. 

7.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  Yoga  and  Saiikhya.  Obeisance 
to  the  lord  of  the  sages  who  are  bound  together  by  the  Polar 
Star. 

8.  Obeisance  to  you,  the  lord  of  stars  and  planets; 
obeisance  to  the  lord  of  thundering  sound  of  lightning,  thun- 
derbolt and  clouds. 

9.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  great  oceans  and  their  islands. 
Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  mountains  and  continents. 

10.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  the  rivers  and  rivulfcts,  to  the 
lord  of  medicinal  herbs  and  plantations. 

1 1 . Obeisance  to  the  cause  of  Dharma,  piety  and  righteous- 
ness, to  the  lord  of  maintenance  (of  all  created  beings),  to  the 
lord  of  ParvatT  and  her  eternal  associate. 

12.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  ‘rasas’,  jewels,  and  the  units 
of  time. 

13.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  day,  night,  fortnights  and 
months;  Obeisance  to  you,  the  lord  of  seasons  and  the  lord  of 
number. 

14  Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  ‘aparardha’  (half  of  Brahma’s 
age)  Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  Parardha  (the  other  half  of 
Brahma’s  age)  ; Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  Puranas  and  to  the  lord 
of  creation. 

15-17.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  the  Vyantaras,  of  yoga, 
and  of  fourfold  creation.  Obeisance  to  one  of  infinite  vision; 
to  the  lord  of  all  occupations  that  have  sprung  up  from  the 
beginning  of  kalpa  (that  is  creation  itself).  Obeisance  to  the 
lord  of  the  universe  and  to  the  overlord  of  Brahma.  Obeisance 
to  the  source  of  origin  of  sacred  lores  and  to  the  overlord  of 
holy  rites. 

18-19,  Obeisance  to  the  source  of  origin  and  the  overlord 
of  mantras,  pitrs  and  the  individual  souls.  Obeisance  to  you. 


78 


UMgapurSoa 


the  deity  of  righteous  speech,  the  ancient  bull  and  the  lord  of 
Souls.  Obeisance  to  the  deity  who  has  Nandin,  the  leader  of 
cows  and  bulls,  as  his  banner. 

20.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  Prajapatis,  to  the  lord  of  the 
Siddhas,  to  the  lord  of  daityas,  danavas  and  rak$asas. 

21.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  gandharvas,  yak^,  garu^a, 
snakes,  serpents  and  birds. 

22.  Obeisance  to  the  overlord  of  the  guhyas  and  pi^acas, 
to  Gokar^,  to  the  protector,  to  Sahkukarna  (one  whose  ears 
resemble  the  pike) . 

23.  Obeisance  to  the  incomprehensible  varaha(boar)  ; to  the 
star  bear,  devoid  of  rajas,  the  lord  of  Devas  and  asuras  and  gai^. 

24.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  the  waters;  the  lord  of  reful- 
gence; the  lord  of  LaksmI  (glory  and  splendour)  and  the  lord 
of  the  earth. 

25.  Obeisance  to  one  who  unifies  the  strong  and  the  weak; 
to  the  agitator  who  cannot  be  ^cited;  to  the  bull  (Nandi) 
who  has  a single  illuminated  horn;  and  a huge  hump. 

26.  Obeisance  to  one  who  is  stable  in  the  body;  to 
one  enveloped  in  halo;  to  one  who  represents  the  past,  future 
and  present. 

27.  Obeisance  to  the  brilliant  and  virile^  to  the  heroic  and 
the  unconquered,  to  the  bestower  of  boons,  to  the  best  of 
persons  of  great  soul. 

28.  Obeisance  to  mahat  ( the  first  evolute  of  Prakrfi)  in  all 
its  3 stages,  past,  present  and  future  ;**  obeisance  to  you  repre- 
senting the  people;  to  penance,  to  the  bestower  of  boons. 

29.  Obeisance  to  the  minute  as  well  as  the  great ; to  the 
all-pervading  lord.  Obeisance  to  bondage  and  liberation;  to 
heaven  and  hell. 

30.  Obeisance  to  lord  8iva,  who  is  worthy  of  worship. 
Obeisance  to  the  sacrifice,  and  to  the  deity  of  effulgent 
brilliance.  Obeisance  to  the  principle  beyond  all  attributes. 

31-32.  Obeisance  to  the  noose,  to  the  weapon,  to  one 
equipped  with  missiles  as  ornaments;  to  one  who  is  the 
material  for  sacrifice;  to  one  invoke^;  to  one  who  partakes  of 
what  is  offered  in  the  sacrifice;  to  one  who  docs  desiiable  acts; 
to  one  ¥fbo  docs  acts  of  charity,  such  as  digging  wells;  to  the 
94.  The  96b,  97  and  28a  aie  repeated  in  34  and  35  of  this  Gh. 


Eulogy  of  Lord  Siva 


79 


brahmin  performing  agni$toma;  to  the  member  of  the  assem- 
bly; to  one  who  does  the  sacrificial  ablution  after  giving 
rewards  to  the  sacrificers. 

33.  Obeisance  to  one  refraining  from  violence,  to  one 
devoid  of  temptations,  to  one  who  is  a redeemer  of  soiils  (Jivas) , 
to  one  who  bestows  nourishment,  to  one  who  habitually  re- 
presents and  practises  good  conduct. 

34-35.  Obeisance  to  one  who  represents  the  past,  future 
and  present.  Obeisance  to  the  brilliant  and  virile,  to  the 
heroic  and  the  unconquered,  to  the  bestower  of  boons  and  to 
the  best  of  persons  of  great  soul.  Obeisance  to  *mahat*  the  first 
evolute  ofPrakrti  in  all  its  three  stages:  past,  present  and 
future.  Obeisance  to  one  without  a fear. 

36.  Obeisance  to  the  ever  young,  of  golden  form,  the 
bestower  of  boons,  the  lower,  the  upper  and  the  lord  of  the 
sleepers-on. 

37-38.  Obeisance  to  the  wearer  of  garlands,  to  the  enjoyer 
of  objects  through  the  vehicle  of  sense-organs.  Obeisance  to  one 
representing  the  Universe,  to  one  who  is  universe-formed  and 
to  one  with  heads,  hands  and  feet  all  round.  Obeisance  toRudra 
the  unsurpassed.  Obeisance  to  one  who  receives  offerings 
poured  into  the  fire.  Obeisance  to  one  who  represents  fire  that 
carries  oblations  to  the  gods. 

39.  Obeisance  to  the  holy  one  who  has  all  aUainments. 
Obeisance  to  the  sacrifice  and  to  one  devoted  to  the  sacrifice, 
to  one  who  is  a good  warrior,  to  one  of  terrible  aspect  and  to 
one  who  agitates  persons  who  cannot  be  easily  excited. 

40.  Obeisance  to  one  of  good  progeny,  to  one  of  good 
intellect  and  to  one  who  is  the  brilliant  sun.  Obeisance  to  the 
enlightened,  pure  and  all-pervasive  and  to  one  who  is  contem- 
plated on  by  all. 

41 . Obeisance  to  one  who  is  both  gross  and  subtle,  to  one 
who  is  both  visible  as  well  as  invisible.  Obeisance  to  one  who 
showers  and  blazesj,  and  who  is  both  the  wind  and  the  winter. 

42.  Obeisance  to  you,  of  curly  hairs,  of  great  chest  and 
tuft,  of  golden  colour,  or  resembling  gold. 

43.  Obeisance  to  one  who  has  odd  eyes,  to  one  assuming 
the  form  of  Lihga,  to  one  of  tawny  colour,  to  one  of  great 
prowess  and  to  the  destroyer  of  rain,  to  one  of  gentle  eyes. 


80 


LingapurSmM 


44.  Obeisance  to  one  of  brown,  white,  black,  red,  tawny 
and  yellow  colours.  Obeisance  to  one  who  is  possessed  of  a 
quiver. 

45.  Obeisance  to  you,  marked  and  not  marked  by  special 
traits;  Obeisance  to  one  worthy  of  worship  and  adornment. 
Obeisance  to  one  who  is  a suitable  patron. 

46.  Obeisance  to  one  befitting  welfare.  Obeisance  to  the 
elderly  one.  Obeisance  to  one  favourably  disposed.  Obeisance 
to  one  representing  the  past,  to  the  truthful  one.  Obeisance  to 
one  who  is  both  true  and  untrue. 

47-48.  Obeisance  to  one  of  lotus  colour,  to  the  destroyer 
of  death,  the  lord  of  death,  to  one  of  white,  dark,  tawny  and 
red  colours  and  to  one  having  the  colour  of  a charmingly 
brilliant  cloud  at  dusk,  to  one  initiated,  to  one  having  lotus- like 
hands;  to  one  without  garments  and  to  one  with  matted  hair. 

49-50.  Obeisance  to  one  without  magnitude;  to  one  iden- 
tical with  all;  to  the  unchanging  and  immortal  one;  to  one 
who  represents  colour  and  smell ; to  the  eternal  and  to  the 
uninjured  one;  to  the  huge  one  in  front;  to  one  without  illusions; 
to  one  full  and  satisfied;  to  one  difficult  of  access;  to  one  re- 
presenting anger  and  to  the  tawny  coloured  one. 

51.  Obeisance  to  one  whose  physical  body  is  capable  of 
being  known  and  (at  the  same  time)  not  known;  obeisance  to 
the  powerful,  to  the  brave;  and  the  speedy  one;  obeisance  to 
the  deity  behind  sandy  soil  and  behind  current  of  water;  to 
one  stationed,  extended  and  stretched. 

52.  Obeisance  to  you  the  intelligent  potter;  obeisance  to 
you,  with  the  crescent  Moon  on  the  forehead.  Obeisance  to 
the  wonderful  one  of  variegated  dress  and  colours  and  of  the 
form  of  intellect. 

53.  Obeisance  to  one,  of  great  consciousness  and  alertness; 
obeisance  to  you,  the  most  satisfied  one  and  the  best  bestower 
of  favours;  obeisance  to  the  forbearing  one,  to  one  having  self- 
control;  and  to  one  of  adamantine  body. 

54-55.  Obeisance  to  the  destroyer  of  the  R^§asas,  to  the 
dispeller  of  poisons,  to  the  bright-necked  one  and  to  one  who  is 
above  anger.  Obeisance  to  the  all  consuming  God  of  Death ; and 
to  one  holding  sharp  weapons,  to  one  endowed  with  great  joy, 
to  one  with  great  gaiety,  to  one  comprehensible  only  to  the 


81 


Eulogy  of  Lord  Siva 

ascetics;  to  one  devoid  of  ailments,  to  one  identical  with  all 
and  to  the  great  god  of  Death. 

56.  Obeisance  to  Pranava;  to  the  lord  of  Prariava;  to  the 
destroyer  of  Bhaganetra;  to  the  hunter  of  deer;  to  the  diligent 
one  and  to  the  destroyer  of  Daksa’s  sacrifice. 

57.  Obeisance  to  one,  the  soul  of  all  creatures,  to  one  who 
excels  all  lords,  to  the  destroyer  of  the  Puras,  to  one  having 
good  weapons  and  to  one  having  bow  and  axe. 

58.  Obeisance  to  one  who  destroyed  Pu^danta  and 
Bhaganetra;  to  the  bestower  of  desires;  to  the  excellent  one; 
to  one  who  burnt  the  body  of  Kama. 

59.  Obeisance  to  one  of  terrible  face  in  the  battlefield;  to 
one  having  face  of  a great  elephant;  obeisance  to  the  lord  who 
destroyed  the  Daityas  and  to  one  who  caused  distress  to  the 
Dailyas. 

60.  Obeisance  to  the  destroyer  of  snow;  to  the  severe  one; 
to  one  wearing  wet  hide;  to  one  having  perpetual  interest  in 
the  cremation  ground;  to  one  holding  the  fire-brand. 

61.  Obeisance  to  you  the  protector  of  lives;  to  the  wearer 
of  skulls  and  to  one  surrounded  by  care-free  goblins  of  different 
classes. 

62.  Obeisance  to  one  having  male-cum-female  body;  to 
one  who  pleases  the  Goddess;  to  one  having  matted  hair;  to  one 
having  tonsured  head  and  to  one  having  the  serpent  for  sacred 
thread. 

63.  Obeisance  to  one  the  habitual  dancer,  to  one  fond  of 
dance  and  music,  to  the  lord  of  anger,  to  one  practising 
music  and  to  one  who  is  sung  about  by  the  sages. 

64.  Obeisance  to  one  in  the  form  of  a lion,  to  one  of  sharp 
nature,  to  one  both  pleasing  and  not  pleasing,  to  the  horrifying 
and  the  terrible  one,  to  the  suppressor  of  Bhaga  demon. 

65.  Obeisance  to  one  praised  and  sung  about  by  the  en- 
lightened souls.  Obeisance  to  the  highly  blessed,  to  one  who 
laughs  boisterously,  who  roars  like  a lion  and  who  flaps  and 
blows. 

66.  Obeisance  to  one  who  roars  and  jumps;  obeisance  to 
the  joyous  soul,  to  the  benevolent,  to  one  who  breathes, 
runs  and  controls  all. 


82 


Lihgapura^ 


67.  Obeisance  to  one  who  mediutes,  yawns,  cries,  runs, 
gallops  and  sports  about;  to  one  who  has  a protruding  belly. 

68.  Obeisance  to  one  who  has  functions  and  no  functions  to 
peribrm,  to  one  who  has  a thousand  heads,  to  one  who  is  poor 
or  miserly,  to  one  who  has  an  impassioned  body,  to  one  who 
has  small  anklet-bells. 

69.  Obeisance  to  one  of  deformed  dress;  to  the  ruthless 
and  unforgiving;  to  one  who  cannot  be  measured;  to  the  pro- 
tector; to  the  illuminated  and  devoid  of  attributes. 

70.  Obeisance  to  one  fond  of  the  elegant,  to  the  beautiful, 
to  one  adorned  with  a crest-jewel,  to  the  minutest  of  the  minute 
and  to  one  who  cannot  be  measured  or  known  by  qualities. 

71-74.  Obeisance  to  one  possessed  of  good  qualities;  to  the 
secret  one,  to  one  who  goes  to  impassable  places.  This  earth  is  the 
mother  of  worlds.  Your  feet  are  resorted  to  by  good  men.  Your 
belly,  the  support  of  all  Siddhis,  contains  the  wide  firmament  be- 
decked in  clusters  of  stars.  Just  like  the  galaxy  of  stars  the  glori- 
ous necklace  shines  on  your  chest.  To  you,  the  ten  quarters 
arc  the  ten  arms  bedecked  in  shoulderlets  and  bracelets.  Your 
neck  has  great  girth  and  extent;  it  is  comparable  to  the  blue 
collyrium;  it  is  adorned  with  golden  threads. 

75.  Your  face  is  irrepressible;  it  is  terrible  due  to  the  cur- 
ved fangs;  it  is  incomparable.  Your  head  which  is  heaven  it- 
self shines  all  the  more  with  its  turban  of  lotus  garlands. 

76-81.  Refulgence  in  the  sun,  brilliance  in  the  moon,  firm- 
ness in  the  mountains,  strength  in  the  wind,  heat  in  the  fire, 
chilliness  in  the  waters  and  sound  in  the  firmament — the  wise 
know  these  qualities  to  be  due  to  the  internal  throbbing  of  the 
imperishable  lord. 

The  following  names  of  lord  Siva  are  to  be  used  for  Japa, 
viz. — Mahadeva,  Mahayoga,  Mahe^vara,  Puri-.  aya  (lying  in 
the  city  of  mind) , Guhavasin  (dweller  in  the  cave),  Khecara 
(moving  about  in  the  sky),  Rajanicara  (walking  at  night), 
Taponidhi  (storehouse  of  penance),  Guhaguru  ( Sire  of  Guha ), 
Nandana(delighler),  Nandavardhana  (the  increascr  of  delight), 
Haya^ir^a- (horse-necked),  Payodhata  (yielder  of  milk),  Vidhata 
(dispenser  of  justice),  Bhutabhavana  (activiser  of  living  be- 
ings), Boddhavya(thc  object  of  knowledge),  Bodhita(thc  subject 
of  knowledge)  Ncta  (leader),  Durdharsa  (invincible),  Duspra- 


83 


Eulogy  of  Lord  JStva 

kampana  (unshakeabie),  Brhadratha  (having  a great  chariot) , 
Bhimakarman  ( of  terrible  activities)  Brhatkirti  (of  great  fame), 
Dhanahjaya  (conqueror  of  wealth),  Ghantapriya  (fond  of  bells), 
Dhvajin  (one  with  a banner), Chatrin  (one  with  an  umbrella), 
Pinakin  (bearer  of  the  bow  Pinaka),  Dhvajanipati  (Lord  of  the 
army)  Kavacin,  (having  armour),  PauUin  (having  the  iron  club) , 
Khadgin  (having  sword) Dhanurhasta  (having  the  bow  in  the 
hand),  Paraivadhin  (having  the  axe),  Aghasmara  (non-des* 
troyer),  Anagha  (sinless),  Sura  (heroic),  Devaraja  (king  of 
Devas),  Arimardana  (Supressor  of  enemies). 

82-83.  Formerly,  after  propitiating  you  the  enemies  were 
slain  by  us  in  the  battle.  You  are  a submarine  fire.  Not  satiated 
by  drinking  all  the  waters  of  the  ocean,  you  are  infuriated  in 
form,  but  delighted  within.  You  are  the  bestower  of  desires; 
you  can  go  as  you  wish ; you  are  fond  (of  us)  ; you  arc  the 
celibate  religious  student.  You  are  unfathomable  and 
favourably  disposed  towards  the  Brahmins;  you  arc  adored 
by  the  society, 

84.  You  have  made  sacrifice  the  everlasting  treasure  of  the 
Devas.  The  fire-god  bears  to  you  the  offering,  as  mentioned  in 
the  Vedas  O supreme  lord,  if  you  are  pleased  we  too  become 
pleased. 

85.  You  are  the  lord  of  Parvati,  you  are  beginningless. 
At  the  time  of  first  creation  you  are  Brahma,  the  maker  of 
worlds.  The  followers  of  the  S^khya  system  realise  you  as 
one  beyond  prakrti  and  at  the  close  of  meditation  they  enter 
you,  devoid  of  death. 

86.  Those  who  meditate  on  you,  understand  you  as 
perpetual  siddha  through  yoga  and  then  eschew  those  yogas. 
Those  enlightened  persons  who  resort  to  you  through  their 
actions  enjoy  divine  bliss. 

87.  The  greatness  of  yours  has  been  glorified  in  accor- 
dance with  what  we  know  according  to  our  capacity.  Your 
reality  and  principles  cannot  be  enumerated;  you  are  the 
supreme  soul  who  cannot  be  easily  crossed. 

88-91 . Be  auspicious  towards  us  everywhere.  As  you  are 
so  you  are;  obeisance  be  to  you. 


84 


Lingapurav^ 


SUta  said: 

He  who  recites  this  prayer  by  Brahma  and  Visnu,  he  who 
narrates  this  to  the  brahmins,  or  he  who  listens  to  this  with 
concentration  shall  obtain  that  benefit  which  one  attains  after 
performing  ten  thousand  horse  sacrifices.  Even  a man  of 
sinful  activity  who  listens  to  this  in  the  temple  of  Siva  or 
respects  this  will  be  liberated  and  will  live  in  Brahma’s  world. 
He  who  recites  this  at  the  time  of  sraddha  or  a divine  rite  or 
during  sacrifice  or  during  the  sacred  ablution  or  in  the  midst 
of  good  men  reaches  the  proximity  of  Brahma. 


CHAPTER  TWENTY  TWO 

Creation  of  Rudras 


SUta  said: 

1-2.  On  seeing  both  of  them  extremely  humble,  the  lord  of 
Uma  with  eyes  tawny  as  honey,  was  much  delighted,  thanks 
to  the  exposition  of  truth.  The  threc-eyed,  the  pinaka-bearing, 
and  the  trident-holder  lord  Siva,  the  destroyer  ofDaksa’s  sacri- 
fice became  very  glad. 

3.  On  hearing  their  nectar  like  words  lord  Siva  sportingly 
asked  them  though  he  knew  their  intentions. 

4-7.  “Who  are  you  noble  souls  eagerly  yearning  for  each 
other’s  welfare?  You  lotus-eyed  ones  have  somehow  met  together 
in  this  terribly  extensive  flood.” 

Glancing  at  each  other,  the  noble  souls  replied:  “O  lord, 
what  is  there  that  remains  unknown  to  you  ? O lord  Rudra  of 
great  ‘Maya’,  we  tw'O  have  been  created  by  you  willingly.” 

On  hearing  their  words  and  having  honoured  and  greeted 
them  the  glorious  lord  spoke  sweetly  in  smooth  words  : — 

“O  Brahma  ! O Visnu  ! I am  speaking  to  you. 

8.  I am  delighted  by  your  devotion  couched  in  words  of 
perpetual  value.  Both  of  you  are  endearing  to  my  heart. 

9.  What  shall  1 give  you  now  ? Which  is  sweeter  boon  you 
desire  ?**  Then  the  blessed  lord  Vi§nu  spoke  to  lord  Siva  : 


Creation  of  Rudras 


85 


10.  O lofd  ! everything  has  been  granted  by  you.  If  you 
are  so  pleased  with  me,  O lord  ! grant  that  my  devotion  for  you 
remains  stable. 

11.  On  being  requested  thus  lord  Siva  realised  it.  He 
honoured  Visnu  and  granted  him  devotion  to  his  lotus-feet. 

12.  “You  are  the  creator  of  this  world.  You  are  its  presi- 
ding deity.  Hail  unto  you,  O dear,  O lotus-eyed  lord,  1 shall  go 
(now) 

13-15.  After  saying  this  the  great  lord  blessed  Brahma  too. 
Greatly  delighted  he  patted  Brahma  with  his  auspicious  hands 
and  said  :--“0  dear,  surely  you  are  equal  to  me.  You  are  my 
devotee  too.  Hail  unto  you.  I shall  leave  now,  O deity  of  good 
rites,  may  there  be  perfect  awareness  in  you.*’ 

16-17.  After  saying  this,  iljclord  of  the  Cianas  bowed  toby 
all  Devas,  vanished  there  itself.  After  attaining  perfect  know- 
ledge from  Visnu,  Brahma  whose  source  of  origin  was  the  lotus, 
perfe'uued  ternlrle  pi  name  wjlh  a desire  to  create.  Even  as  he 
performed  this  penance,  nothing  resulted^ 

18.  After  a great  deal  of  linic  his  misery  turned  into  anger. 
From  the  eyes  overwhelmed  with  anger  drops  of  tears  fell 
down. 

19-20.  From  those  drops  of  tears,  huge  poisonous  snakes 
appeared.  They  had  all  the  three  humours,  the  wind,  bile  and 
phlegm.  They  were  highly  blessed;  they  were  adorned  with 
Svastika  marks.  I'heir  hairs  were  dishevelled  and  scattered. 
On  seeing  the  snakes  born  at  the  outset  Brahma  censured 
himself. 

21.  O fie  upon  the  fruit  of  my  penance  of  this  sort,  if  it 
were  to  be  like  this.  Even  in  the  beginning,  my  progeny  has 
become  the  destroyer  of  the  world. 

22.  Originating  from  anger  and  fury  a severe  loss  of  sense 
overwhelmed  him.  Out  of  the  distress  resulting  from  his  loss  of 
sense,  he  lost  his  life. 

23.  From  the  body  of  Brahma  of  unequalled  valour,  the 
eleven  Rudras^®  sprang  up  crying,  out  of  sympathy  and  mercy. 

95.  The  word  Rudra  is  derivable  from\/ ru  to  cry  and  \/dru  to  move. 
The  Puranas  make  frequent  reference  to  the  crying  of  Rudras.  •fp,  {VSyaviya 
12.  25-30)  identifies  Rudras  with  the  life  principles,  i.e.  the  pranas  that  acti- 
vate the  insentient  matter  for  creation.  As  soon  as  Rudra  or  Prana  becomes 


86 


Lingapura^ 


24.  They  became  known  as  Rudras  due  to  their  crying. 
The  Rudras  and  the  pranas  are  identical  with  each  other. 

25-28.  The  pranas  are  stationed  in  all  living  beings.  The 
trident- bearing  lord  Siva  who  enforces  strict  discipline  granted 
him  life  again.  After  obtaining  life>  lord  Brahma  saluted  lord 
Siva,  the  lord  of  Devas.  By  means  of  Gayatri  he  perceived  him 
as  identical  with  the  universe.  On  seeing  and  eulogizing  him 
as  such,  Brahma  was  struck  with  wonder.  Bowing  to  him  again 
and  again,  he  proclaimed  : “O  lord  ! how  is  it  that  you  have 
assumed  such  forms  as  Sadyojata  and  others.” 


CSIAPTER  TWENTY  THREE 

Various  Kalpas 


SUta  said: 

1 . On  hearing  the  words  of  Brahma,  lord  Siva  in  the 
form  of  Brahman  spoke  to  him  smilingly,  in  order  to  enlighten 
him. 

2-3.  When  the  Sveta  kalpa  was  current,  it  was  I who 
existed  then.  I had  white  turban,  white  garlands  and  white 
garments.  I was  white  myself  with  white  bones,  white 
hairs,  white  blood  and  white  complexion  So  the  kalpa  too  was 
known  as  Svetakalpa. 

4.  Gayatri,  the  goddess  of  Devas,  born  of  me,  had  white 
limbs,  white  colour,  white  blood.  She  was  known  as  Brahmanl. 

5.  O lord  of  Devas,  that  was  why  1 had  been  understood 
by  you  as  the  secret  deity.  By  my  penance  1 had  assumed  the 
form  of  Sadyojata. 

miuufest  in  the  oiganism  it  ertei  for  food.  Gf.  Hartoamia  2.74.22;  3.14.39. 
Another  characteristic  of  the  Rudras  is  their  rhythmic  movement  (drava^a, 
from  \^dru  to  move)  which  is  responsible  for  the  incessant  flow  of 
creation  represented  by  the  Satarudriya  or  Kofinidriya  concept.  CSf. 

JHiiiWiaT  flfVfftr  ^ w arfir  ’jrith  rr.  16.4;  ,0.58. 

g6 . Svt*lohit«ti — nutana-iveta>rQ]>a(t  ST. , of  new  white  complexian. 
For  <Mohita**  as  a synonym  of  ‘new*  see  Viira:  ‘lohataJti  syfoi  nave  bhaume*. 


87 


Vatwus  Kalpas 

title  Sadyojata  is  a seci'et  Brahma  ; the  twicc- 
know  me,  who  have  assumed  secret  nature,  shall 
attain  nearness  to  me  whence  there  is  no  return. 

7*12.  When  the  nex^  kalpa  known  as  lohita,  as  a result  of 
my  colour,  came,  Gayatri  glorified  as  a cow,  born  with  red  flesh, 
red  bone,  red  blood,  red  milk,  red  eyes  and  red  udders  was 
known  as  Brahman!.  Since  the  colour  was  changed  into  red  and 
since  the  lord  was  Vama,  I was  known  as  Vamadeva.  O deity 
of  great  strength,  then  also  I,  who  was  in  a different  colour,  was 
recognised  by  you  who  had  practised  self-control  by  resorting  to 
yoga.  I was  then  known  as  Vamadeva.  The  twice-born  who 
realise  my  Vamadeva  form  shall  go  to  Rudra’s  world  whence 
there  is  no  return. 

13.  When  the  yuga  gradually  changed  and  I became 
yellow  in  colour,  the  kalpa  was  known  as  Pita — the  name 
assigned  by  me. 

14.  Gayatri,  the  goddess  of  Devas  born  of  me  was  named 
Brahmani.  She  was  yellow  in  body,  yellow  in  blood  and 
yellow  in  colour. 

15-17.  O deity  of  great  strength,  there  too,  I was 
realized  by  yogins  devoted  to  the  practice  of  yoga,  through 
your  yogic  mind.  I was  realized  by  you  in  the  form  ofTatpu- 
rusa.  Hence,  it  was,  O deity  born  of  the  golden  egg,  I got  the 
Tatpurusa  form.  Persons  endowed  with  penance,  devoid  of 
impurities,  who  are  in  contact  with  Brahman  and  who  know 
me  as  Rudra,  and  Rudrani  as  Gayatri — the  mother  of  the  Vedas 
go  to  Rudra’s  world  whence  there  is  no  return. 

18-21.  When  I became  terrible  and  black  in  colour 
the  kalpa  was  known  as  Krsna  after  the  colour  assumed  by 
me.  There  I resemble  Kala  (god  of  death) . I amKala  (Time), 
the  reckoner  of  the  worlds.  O Brahma,  I was  then  known  by 
you  as  Ghora  (the  terrible)  with  terrible  exploits.  O lord  of 
Devas,  Gayatri,  born  of  me,  was  black  in  body,  black  in  blood, 
black  in  form  and  was  named  Brahmani.  Hence  to  those 
who  know  me  that  I have  assumed  the  ghora  form,  I,  the 
changeless  one,  shall  be  Aghora  (non-terrible)  and  Santa 
(quiescent) . 

22-25.  O Brahma,  when  I assumed  the  universal  form  I was 
realized  by  you  by  means  of  the  yogic  trance.  Gayatri,  the 


88 


Lingapuram 


sustainer  of  the  worlds®^,  also  assumed  the  universal  form.  To 
those  who  know  me  as  having  assumed  this  universal  form, 
I shall  always  become  auspicious  and  gentle.  That  Kalpa  too 
will  be  known  as  ViiSvarupa  ( «‘of  universal  form). 

26-29.  These  four  who  are  of  all  kinds  of  forms  will  be- 
come popular  as  my  sons.  Since  they  are  of  different  colours, 
their  subjects  too  will  be  of  different  colours  or  castes  ( Varnas) , 
and  allowed  the  use  of  Gayatri.  Man’s  aim  of  life  will  be  four- 
fold: virtue,  wealth,  desire  and  liberation.  All  living  beings 
will  come  under  four  groups®*,  four  stages  of  life.  The  feet  of 
Dharma  will  be  four®®  since  my  sons  are  four  in  number. 

30.  Hence  the  universe  consisting  of  the  mobile  and  im- 
mobile beings  is  stationed  in  the  four  yugas.  Since  it  is  stationed 
in  the  .four  yugas  it  shall  have  four  feet. 

31-32.  There  are  eight  worlds:  Bhuh,  Bhuvah,  Svar,  Mahar, 
Janar,  Tapas,  Satya  and  Visnu.  These  are  established  in  the  eight 
substratums  each  of  which  is  imperishable.  Bhuh,  Bhuvah,  Svar 
and  Mahah  constitute  the  four  substratums. 

33.  The  first  is  Bhuh,  the  second  Biiuvoi  *c  third  ovar 
and  Mahar  is  the  fourth. 

34-35.  The  fifth  is  Janah,  the  sixth  Tapa^  ■ seventh  Satya 
whence  people  do  not  return  to  this  world.  The  world  of  Visnu  is 
the  eighth.  It  is  also  the  spot  whence  a retun  to  this  world  is 
difficult.  Beyond  that  is  the  world  of  Skandha  an  i Uma  endow- 
ed with  all  attainments. 

36-39.  Beyond  that  is  the  world  of  Rudra — the  splendid 
region  of  yogins.  The  twice-born  who  are  dt  v i of  ego,  who 
have  neither  lust  nor  anger  and  whosf  j.iuuls  are  devoted  to 
yoga  alone  can  enter  it.  Si.;«  e (iayatrl  was  seen  by  you  as  four- 
footed,  the  worlds  are  also  four,  viz.  the  world  of  Uma, 
Kumara,  Mahe^^vara  and  Visnu.^®®  Again,  siiu:e  Gayatil  was 

97.  Sarvabhak^a— ‘‘resorted  to  by  all**.  ST,  interprets  dificrcntly; 
sarvam  pat^iajatam  bhak^ayati  na&ayati  sa — one  who  consumes  all  the 
products  of  the  nether  regions. 

98.  catvarah— four  classes  of  living  beings  as  mentioned  by  ST: 
jarayida-ai;)idsUA'‘Svedaja-udbhijjarup^. 

99.  The  four  feet  of  righteousness,  according  to  ST.  comprise  daya 
(compassion) , dSnam  (charity),  tapah  (penance),  satyam  (truth). 

100.  paddnta — the  ultimate  region,  i.e.  the  world  ofVi^t^u. 


Various  Kalpas 


89 


seen  as  four-footed,  the  animals  shall  also  be  four-footed. 
Their  udders  too  will  be  four. 

40-41.  Since  the  Soma-juice,  which  is  the  life  of  living 
beings,  accompanied  by  Vedic  chants,  fell  off  from  my  mouth, 
the  cows  came  to  be  known  as  those  whose  udders  are  sucked. 
Hence  the  nectar  in  the  form  of  the  Soma-juice  is  known  as 
the  life  of  living  beings.  Hence  too,  the  animals  became  quadru- 
peds; the  whiteness  of  their  milk  is  also  due  to  that. 

42-44.  Since  the  great  Goddess  was  seen  as  biped  in  the 
course  of  the  rites,  Gayatri  the  creator  of  the  worlds  is  also  of 
the  same  nature.  Hence  all  human  beings  are  bipeds,  endowed 
with  two  breasts.  Since  the  great  godde.ss,  the  unborn  deity  of 
great  strength,  was  seen  by  you  as  supporting  all  living  beings, 
therefore,  the  subjects  will  have  all  kinds  of  form. 

45-51.  The  unborn  deity  shall  have  great  splendour  and 
universal  form  and  from  his  face  there  will  come  out  the 
fire*God  whose  energy  will  be  unfailing.  Hence,  the  pure  and 
all-pervading  fire-god  has  the  form  of  living  body.  The  pure- 
souled  men  of  two  births  who  see  me  as  endowed  with  the 
faculties  of  overlordship,  sense-control  and  omnipresence 
become  liberated  from  rajas  and  tamas.  Eschewing  physical 
b^dy  they  attain  my  vicinity  and  never  return  to  this  earth. 

O brahmins,  lord  Brahma  who  was  thus  addressed  by  Kudra 
bowed  to  him.  Becoming  purified  in  the  mind  he  spoke  to  him 
again.  “0  lord,  you  are  aware  of  the  greatness  of  Gayatri  as 
well  as  the  glory  of  the  Supreme  lord  (Mahe^vara) . 0 lord, 
may  you  kindly  grant  me  the  highest  abode  of  Gayatri  and 
that  of  yourself".  The  lord  then  granted  the  boon  to  him. 
Hence,  he  who  knows  the  multiformity  or  the  universality  of 
the  supreme  lord  as  abo  of  Gayatri  attains  identity  with 
Brahman,  as  stated  to  Brahma  by  the  lord  himself. 


90 


Lingapura^ 


CHAPTER  TWENTY  FOUR 

Incarnations  of  Siva 


SUia  said  : 

1.  On  hearing  everything  uttered  by  Rudra,  Brahma  the 
Prajapati  bowed  to  Rudra,  lord  of  Devas  and  spoke  thus  : 

2.  “O  lord,  lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas,  O multiformed, 
O Mahcsvara,  O husband  of  Uma,  O great  god,  honoured  by 
all,  obeisance  to  you. 

3-4.  O multiformed,  O highly  blessed  god,  when  and  in 
which  age  (yuga)  will  these  bodies  honoured  by  all  be  seen  by 
the  brahmins  and  by  what  penance  or  meditation  of  yoga  ? 
Obeisance  to  you,  O lord  Mahadeva”. 

5.  On  hearing  his  words  and  seeing  him  in  front,  the  great 
lord  Rudra  revealed  by  Rk,  Yajus  and  Saman  smiled  and 
said: — 

6-9.  Except  through  meditation,  neither  through  penance 
nor  by  conduct  nor  through  gifts  and  holy  rites  nor  by  visits  to 
pilgrim  centres  nor  through  sacrifices  with  ample  monetary  gifts 
nor  through  the  study  of  the  Vedas‘®*  nor  through  wealth  nor 
through  knowledge  of  various  kinds  is  it  possible  for  men  to 
sec  me. 

O Brahma,  in  the  Varaha  kalpa — the  seventh  in  number, 
Varaha,  will  be  the  illuminator  of  the  kalpa  and  your  grandson, 
Vaivasvata,  will  be  the  Manu. 

10-13.  In  the  course  of  that  kalpa  containing  the  four  yugas, 
towards  the  end  of  Kali,  I will  be  born  to  bless  the  worlds  and 
for  the  welfare  of  the  brahmins,  O Brahma.  As  the  yuga 
proceeds  further,  when  the  great  lord  himself  becomes  Vyasa, 
during  the  first  Dvapara  age  I will  be  born  at  the  end  of  Dva- 
para^®^  as  sage  Sveta.  1 will  be  endowed  with  a tuft  and  will 
stay  on  the  excellent  mountain  Ghagala^®*  a beautiful  peak  of 
the  Himalaya  mountain. 

101.  Vedanaih— sastraili  ST,  by  sacred  books. 

102.  Yugantike— dvapara-samaptau  ST, — at  the  end  of  Dvapara 

age. 

103.  Ghagala:  This  peak  of  the  Himalayas  has  not  been  identified  so 

far. 


91 


Incarnations  of  Siva 

14-18.  Then  my  disciples  will  be  four  noble  brahmins,  the 
masters  of  the  V edas  and  having  tufts.  I'hcy  will  be  Sveta, 
Svctasikha,  Svetasyaand  Svela-lohita.  After  attaining  Brahman’s 
goal,  they  will  approach  me  and  will  be  devoted  to  the  path 
of  meditation  and  yoga.  O Brahma,  in  the  second  Dvapara  age 
lord  Prajapati  will  become  Vyasa,  known  as  Sadya.  Then,  in 
the  Kali  age,  1 will  be  born  by  the  name  Sutara  for  the  wel- 
fare of  the  world,  with  a desire  for  blessing  the  disciples.  My 
disciples  then  will  be  known  by  these  names : 

19-24.  Dundhubhi,  Satarupa,  Rcika  and  Ketuman.  After 
attaining  yoga  and  meditation  and  after  establishing  the  Brah- 
ma^®^  on  the  earth  they  will  attain  the  region  and  companion- 
ship ofRudra.  In  the  third  age,  Dvapara,  Bhargava  will  be  the 
Vyasa.  Then,  at  the  end  of  Dvapara  I will  be  born  as  Damana. 
There  too  four  boys  will  be  born  to  me,  namely,  Vikesa,  Vikosa, 
Vipasa  and  Sapanasana.  These  four  of  great  prowess  will  go 
to  the  world  of  Rudra  through  the  same  yogic  path  and  will 
never  return.  In  the  fourth  Dvapara  yuga,  Ahgiras  will  become 
Vyasa.  At  that  time  I shall  be  born  by  the  name  Suhotra. 
There  too,  four  ascetics  will  be  born  as  my  sons. 

25.  They  will  be  excellent  brahmins  of  steadfast  rites  and 
yogic  souls.  They  will  be  known  as  Sumukha,  Durmukha, 
Dardura  and  Dhrtikrama. 

26-28.  By  performing  subtle  yogic  practices  they  will  be- 
come pure  and  shall  wash  off  their  sins  by  taking  recourse  to 
the  subtle  yogic  practice.  Endowed  with  yoga  and  through 
the  same  path  (as  described  above)  these  courageous  souls  will 
go  to  the  world  of  Rudra  and  never  return.  In  the  fifth  Dva- 
para age  Savitr  will  be  the  Vyasa.  At  that  lime,  I shall  be  born 
as  a person  of  great  penance  with  the  name  Kafika  for  blessing 
the  worlds  and  propagating  yoga  among  the  people. 

29-30.  Four  blessed  persons  of  pure  origin  shall  be  my  disci- 
ples. They  will  be  yogic  souls  with  steadfast  rites.  They  will  be 
known  as  Sanaka,  Sanandana^  Sanatana  and  Sanat.  They  will  be 
devoid  of  ego,  altogether. 

31-38.  In  the  end  they  will  come  to  my  abode  and  never 
return.  In  the  sixth  yuga,  Mrtyu  will  be  the  Vyasa  and  1 shall 

104.  Brahma-jnwam  .VT.— knowledge  of  Brahma,  the  impersonal 
spirit,  the  supreme  soul. 


92 


Lingapurdna 


be  known  as  Laugak^i.  Then  also  my  disciples  will  be  four,  all 
yogic  souls  with  steadfast  rites,  all  blessed  and  popular.  They 
will  be  known  as  Sudhama,  Virajas,  Sahkhapada  and  Rajas. 
They  all  will  be  yogic,  noble  souls,  pious  and  sinless,  and  en- 
dowed with  yogic  practices.  Through  the  path  of  meditation 
they  will  come  near  me  and  never  return. 

In  the  seventh  cycle  of  yugas,  Satakratu,  who  was  famous 
in  the  previous  birth  as  Vibhu  the  shining  one,  becomes  the 
Vyasa.  Then  at  the  end  of  Dvapara  and  the  advent  of  Kali  I 
shall  be  born  as  Jaigisavya,  the  omnipresent,  renowned,  and  the 
best  of  yogins.  There  too  four  sons  will  be  born  to  me.  They  will 
be  known  as  Sarasvata,  Megha,  Meghavahana  and  Suvahana. 
Devoted  to  the  path  of  meditation  those  noble  souls  will, 
through  the  very  same  path,  go  to  Rudraloka  devoid  of 
misery. 

39-42.  In  the  eighth  cycle,  Vasis^ha  will  become  the 
Vyasa,  I will  be  born  by  the  name  Dadhivahana.  There  too  my 
sons  will  be  yogic  souls  of  steadfast  rites  and  great  yogic  prac- 
tice. There  will  be  none  equal  to  them.  They  will  be  known  as 
Kapila,  Asuri,  Paftcasikha*®^  and  Ba^kala.  I'hesc  will  be 
righteous  souls  of  great  prowess.  After  attaining  the  yoga  of 
the  lord  they  will  burn  their  sins  and  come  near  me,  never  to 
return. 

43-47.  In  the  ninth  cyelc  when  Sarasvata  will  be  the 
Vyasa  I will  be  born  by  the  name  Rsabha.  There  too,  iny 
sons  will  be  persons  of  great  prowess.  They  will  be  Parasara, 
Garga,  Bhargava  and  Angiras — all  brahmins  well  versed  in  the 
Vedas,  exalted  with  the  strength  of  their  penance,  and  capable 
of  cursing  and  blessing.  Attaining  the  path  of  meditation  in  the 
the  manner  prescribed  in  the  yogic  system  those  ascetics  will 
go  to  Rudraloka  never  to  return. 

48-51 . In  the  tenth  Dvapara  age,  the  sage  Tripada  will  be  the 
Vyasa.  Then  1 will  be  born  as  a brahmin  sage  on  the  excellent 


1 Of)  Kapila  is  considered  as  the  founder  of  the  Saihkhya  system  of 
philosophy.  Asuri  and  his  pupil  Pahea^ikha,  like  the  founder-teacher  Kapila, 
are  known  only  by  their  names.  Perhaps  they  preached  their  cult  by  oral 
transmission.  Their  works,  if  any,  arc  lost  to  us. 


93 


Incarnations  of  Siva 

hill  Bhrgutuhga,^®®  a beautiful  peak  of  the  Himalayas.  That 
peak  adored  by  Devas  is  well  known  through  the  name  of  sage 
Bhrgu.  There  too  my  sons  will  be  steadfast  in  their  holy  rites. 
They  will  be  known  Balabandhu,  Niramitra,  Ketubhrhga  and 
Tapodhana.  They  will  be  yogic  and  noble  souls,  endowed  with 
penance  and  yoga.  With  their  sins  burned  through  penance 
they  will  go  to  Rudraloka. 

52-54,  In  the  eleventh  Dvapara  age,  Trivrata  will  become 
Vyasa.  Then  1 will  be  born  at  Gahgidvara  in^®"^  the  Kali  age 
as  a person  of  great  splendour  named  Ugra,  famous  in  all  the 
worlds.  There  too  I will  have  four  sons  of  great  prowess,  viz. — 
Lambodara,  Larnbaksa,  LambakeSa  and  Pralambaka.  After 
attaining  the  yoga  of  Mahesvara  they  will  go  to  Rudra’s 
world. 

55-58.  In  the  twelfth  cycle  the  sage  Satatejas  of  great  splen- 
dour, the  best  among  the  wise,  will  become  Vyasa.  At  that  time, 
when  Dvapara  ends,  and  Kaliyuga  starts,  I shall  be  known  by 
the  name  Atri  in  the  forest  Haituka^®**.  There  too  will  be  born 
my  sons  who  will  have  ashes  for  ablution  and  unguent,  who  will 
be  such  yogins,  and  who  will  be  devoted  to  Rudra’s  world. 
They  will  be  known  as  Sarvajfta  Samabuddhi,  Sadhya  and 
Sarva,  After  attaining  the  yoga  of  Mahe  vara  they  will  go  to 
Rudraloka. 

59-62.  When  the  thirteenth  cycle  sets  in  due  order,  Dharma 
under  the  name  Narayana  will  be  the  Vyasa.  At  that  time,  I 
will  be  born  as  the  sage  Vali  in  the  holy  penance  grove  of  Vala- 


i(>6.  Bhrgutujfiga  is  one  of  the  peaks  of  the  Himalayas.  According 
io  Vardha  (ch.  146, 45-46)  it  is  a mountain  in  Nepal  on  the  eastern  bank 
of  the  Gatidaka  river  where  the  celebrated  sage  Bhrgu  had  a hermitage.  The 
Vd,  (81, 33)  locates  it  near  the  VitastaQhelum)  and  Himavat.  See  GEAMI 
part  I . p.70. 

107.  Gangadvara  represents  modem  Haradvara.  It  is  also  known 
by  other  names  like  Haridvara,  Mok^advara,  Mayadv&ra.  Gf.  SK  iv. 

1.7.114: 

But  according  to  Sp,  KRS.  (25.3)  Ganga  is  said  to  have  descended  from 
Brahmagiri  situated  in  the  south  {Ihd,  24.  3)  in  the  proximity  of  Nasik 
near  Tryambaka,  This  place  of  Ganga’s  descent  is  said  to  be  GahgUdvira 
{Ibid,  27.  6). 

to8.  Haituka  vana.  It  is  not  identifiable. 


Lidgapurdm 


iHr 

khilya  on  the  niountain  Gandhamadana'®®.  There  loo  those 
asceii^.s  will  be  i>orn  as  my  sons.  They  will  be  known  as 
Ka'^ya]>a,  Vasis^ha  and  Virajas.  They  will  all  he  en- 
dowed v\ iih  the  i^owcr  of  great  yogas,  be  devoid  of  impurities 
and  will  remain  celibate.  After  attaining  the  yoga  of  Mahesvara 
tliey  wib  go  to  the  world  of  Rudra. 

in  the  iourteenth  cycle  Taraksu  will  be  the  Vyasa. 
'I  hen  loo  in  the  final  yuga,  I will  be  born  in  the  excellent  family 
of  Anglia^  under  the  name  Gautama.  Ihat  penance  grove^^® 
too  V ill  I f named  alter  Gautama  There  too  my  sons  will  be 
born  in  the  Kali  age.  They  will  be  known  as  Atri,  Devasada, 
n id  J^ravisthaka.  They  will  be  yogic  noble  souls,  and 
endowt'd  with  yoga.  Alter  attaining  the  yoga  of  Mahesvara  they 
will  go  to  Rudraloka. 

G7-71.  When  (he  fifteenth  cycle  comes  in  due  order,  Tray- 
viinini  becoiTios  the  Vyasa. 

1 wJil  be  Ijorn  as  a brahmin  by  name  Veda  iras.  Then  I 
shad  have  a powerful  missile  known  as  Vedaiiras.  There  will 
be.  a Idll  nam'  d Vedasiras^^  on  the  banks  of  the  Sarasvatl”^ 
behind  the  Himalayan  slopes.  There  also  four  ascetics  will  be 
my  sons,  viz,,  Kuni,  Kunibahu,  Kusarira  and  Kunctra.  All  of 
them  Vd!  he  yogic  and  noble  souls  who  will  remain  ascetics 
throughout.  AftvT  attaining  the  yoga  of  Mahesvara  they  will  go 
i.»  Rudial'dia. 

7^-73.  In  sixteenth  cycle  of  four  yugas  when  Deva  is 
the  1 shall  i)c  born  by  the  name  Gokarna^^'*  in  order  to 

Gandhamadana.  Its  location  is  highly  controversial.  According 
to  the  Pauranir  ac<  cent  this  mountaL,  forms  the  division  between  Ilavita 
and  Bhadrasva  to  the  south  of  Meru  and  is  renowned  for  its  fragrant 
forests - 

1 1 o.  Gauiainavana  can  be  placed  in  the  proximity  of  Brahmagiri  near 
Tryambaka  in  which  Godavari  haa  its  source  where  the  sage  Gautama  had 
Its  hermitage. 

ill.  liimavat  or  Himalaya.  This  most  celebrated  mountain  forms 
the  northern  boundary  of  Bharata  extending  from  the  eastern  to  the  wes- 
tern sea. 

iiii.  Sar£»svatl.  This  sacred  river  rises  in  the  Sirmur  hills  of  the 
Si  valika  range  m the  Himalayas . . 

1 1 Gokarna,  The  Gokari.ia  forest  referred  to  here  is  located  in  the 
Western  Ghat.  This  place  is  sacred  to  Siva  and  is  celebrated  for  a jyotir- 
tiiiga  oi  bi\a.  There  is  also  another  Gokarna  in  Nepal  on  the  Bagamati 


nver. 


95 


Incarnations  of  Sim 

spread  yoga  among  the  devotees  of  restrained  souls.  That 
forest  (where  1 live  and  preach)  will  .become  sacred  and 
famous*  as  Gokarna.  There  too  the  four  yogins  will  be  my  sons 
viz.,  Ka^yapa,  Usanas,  Cyavana  and  Brhaspati.  They  will  be 
endowed  with  meditation  and  yoga.  By  following  the  sam$;  path 
and  attaining  the  yoga  of  Mahesvara  they  will  go  to  Rudra 
Himself. 

76-84.  When  the  seventeenth  cycle  sets  in  duly,  O Lord 
Brahma,  Krtahjaya^'^  will  be  the  Vyasa,  and  I shall  be  born, 
under  the  name  Guhavasa  on  the  lofty  and  beautiful  peak  of 
the  Himalayas,  Mahalaya^^^.  I shall  be  known  as  Guhavasin. 
This  Mahalaya  will  become  a Siddhaksetra  the  place  of 
sanctity.  There  too  my  sons  will  be  conversant  with  yoga  and 
expounders  of  Brahman.  They  will  be  noble  sons  and  devoid 
of  ego.  They  will  be  known  as — Utathya,  Vamadeva,  Maha- 
yoga  and  Mahibala.  At  that  time,  in  the  practice  of  yogic 
meditation,  they  will  have  hundreds  and  thousands  of  disciples. 
Engaged  in  the  practice  of  yoga,  and  meditating  upon  the 
great  lord  within  their  hearts,  they  after  observing  the  foot- 
prints in  the  Mahalaya  will  attain  the  region  of  the  lord.  The 
other  noble  souls  who  engage  their  minds  in  meditation  at  the 
end  of  Dvapara  age  and  the  advent  of  Kali  will  become  sinless 
and  pure  in  intellect.  Devoid  of  distress  they  will  go  to  Rudra- 
loka,  by  my  grace.  By  visiting  the  sacred  Mahalaya,  the 
region  of  the  great  lord,  a devotee  will  cross  the  ocean 
of  worldly  existence  and  redeem  his  ten  previous  and  ten 
future  generations.  Thus,  including  himself,  he  will  redeem 
twenty  one  generations  in  Mahalaya.  These  being  free  from 
fever  will  go  to  Rudraloka,  by  my  grac:c. 

85-89.  O lord,  in  the  eighteenth  cycle  the  sage  Rtaftjaya 
will  become  a Vyasa.  Then  1 shall  be  born  in  the  name  of 
Sikhandin  in  the  most  sacred  region  of  the  Siddhas  which  is 
adored  by  Devas  as  well  as  Danavas.  On  the  beautiful  peak 
of  the  Himalayas  there  is  a hill  named  Sikhandin,”®  wheiein 
is  situated  the  penance  grove  of  the  sage  l^ikhant^in,  resorted 
to  by  the  Siddhas.  There  too  four  ascetics  will  be  born 

114.  Deva-krtaAjayah*  ST,  takes  Deva  in  the  vocative  case  : 

115.  This  peak  of  the  Him&layas  has  not  been  identified  so  far. 

1 16.  Not  identifiable. 


96 


Lingapurdm 


to  me.  They  will  be  known  as  Vaca^ravas,  Rclka,  SyaviiSva 
and  Yatisvara.  They  will  be  yogic  and  noble  sons  and  masters 
of  the  Vedas.  After  attaining  the  yoga  of  Mahesvara  they 
will  go  to  Rudraloka . 

90-93.  When  the  nineteenth  cycle  sets  in  duly,  the  great 
sage  Bharadvaja  will  become  the  VySsa.  Then  I will  be  born 
by  the  name  Jatamalin  on  the  beautiful  peak  of  the  Himala- 
yas where  the  mountain  Jatayu^^’  exists.  There  too  four  sons  of 
great  prowess  will  be  born  to  me.  They  will  be  known  as  Hira- 
nyanabha,  Kausalya,  Laugaksi  and  Kuthumi.  Characterized 
by  yogic  virtues  they  will  remain  celibate.  After  attaining 
the  yoga  of  Mahesvara  they  will  go  to  Rudraloka. 

94-99.  When  the  twentieth  cycle  of  yugas  sets  in,  the 
sage  Gautama  becomes  a Vyasa.  Then  I shall  be  born  by  the 
name  Attahasa,  most  liked  by  the  people.  There  itself  on 
the  ridge  of  the  Himavat  a great  mountain  Attahisa^'**  is  the 
abode  of  Devas,  Danavas,  Yaksas,  Siddhas  and  Caranas. 
There  too,  powerful  sons  will  be  born  to  me.  They  will  be 
yogic  and  noble  souls,  habitually  meditating  and  performing 
the  holy  rites.  They  will  be  known  as  Sumantu,  Barbari, 
Kabandha  and  Ku^ikandhara.  After  attaining  the  Yoga  of 
Maheivara  they  will  go  to  Rudraloka. 

100-102.  When  the  twenty-first  cycle  sets  in  duly,  the  ex- 
cellent sage  Vacasravas  becomes  a Vy^a.  Then  I shall  be  born 
by  the  name  Daruka.  Hence  there  will  be  a splendid  and 
sacred  forest  of  Deodars^^*.  There  too  my  sons  will  be  very 
powerful.  They  will  be  known  as  Plaksa,  Darbhfiyani,  Ketu- 
man  and  Gautama.  They  will  be  yogic  and  great  souls,  well  con- 
trolled and  celibate.  After  practising  the  perpetual  holy  rites 
they  will  go  to  Rudra’s  region. 

103-106.  In  the  twenty-second  cycle  when  Susmayana 
becomes  a Vyasa,  I shall  be  born  as  a great  sage  by  the  name 

1 1 7 . Not  identifiable. 

1 1 8 . Not  identifiable . 

119.  Devadiinivana.  It  is  identical  with  Darn  or  Daruka  vana  and 
is  placed  close  to  the  western  ocean  (SP,  KRS  29.  4) . Another  vana  of  the 
same  name  also  stands  in  theHim&layas  near  Badrinath  (Mbh.  XIII,  25. 
27). 


97 


Incarnations  of  Siva 

of  Langalin  the  terrible,  at  Varanasi^^.  There  the  Dcvas  includ- 
ing lord  Indra  will  see  me  in  the  Kali  age  as  Bhava  and 
Halayudha.  There  too  my  virtuous  sons  will  be  known  as  Bhal- 
lavi,  Madhupihga,  Svetaketu  and  KuSa.  After  attaining  the 
yoga  of  Mahe^vara  they  will  be  engaged  in  meditation.  Free 
from  impurities  and  identical  with  Brahman  they  will  enter 
Rudra's  world. 

107b-llla.  In  the  twenty- third  cycle  of  four  yugas  when 
the  sage  Trnabindu  becomes  a Vyasa  O Brahma,  I shall  be 
born  as  the  virtuous  son  of  a sage  under  the  name  Sveta  with 
a great  body.  At  that  time  I shall  be  spending  my  days  (in 
penance)  on  a mountain  which  will  therefore  be  named  Kala- 
iijara^®^.  There  too  four  ascetics  will  become  my  disciples.  They 
will  be  known  as  Usika,  BrhadaiSva,  Devala  and  Kavi.  After 
attaining  the  yoga  of  Mahesvara  they  will  go  to  Rudraloka. 

11  lb- 114a,  In  the  twenty- fourth  cycle,  O lord,  when  Rksa 
will  be  a Vyasa,  I will  be  born  at  the  end  of  Dvapara,  in  that 
Kali  age  as  a great  yogin  named  Sulin  in  the  Naimisa^^*  forest, 
saluted  by  Devas.  There  too  these  ascetics  will  be  my  disciples 
viz. — Salihotra,  Agnive^a,  Yuvanasva  and  Saradvasu.  They  too 
will  go  to  Rudraloka  by  the  same  path. 

114b-117a.  When  the  twenty-fifth  cycle  of  four  yugas  sets 
in,  the  son  of  Vasis^ha,  Sakti  by  name,  will  become  a Vyasa. 
At  that  time,  I will  be  born  as  Lord  Dandi  MundKvara  with 
shaven  head  and  a staff  in  the  hand.  There  too  these  ascetics 
will  be  my  sons,  viz. — Chagala,  Kundakarna.  Kumbhanda  and 
Prav^aka.  After  attaining  the  yoga  of  Mahesvara  they  will 
attain  immortality. 

117b-120.  In  the  twenty-sixth  cycle  whenParasara  will  be- 
come Vyasa,  at  the  end  of  Dvapara  and  the  advent  of  Kali  age  I 
shall  be  born  by  the  name  Sahi§nu.  I shall  go  to  the  city,  Bhad- 


120.  Vara^asi—ancicnt  Kaii.  It  came  to  be  so  called  because  it  was 
situated  between  the  two  rivers:  Bam&  and  Asi. 

121.  Kalanjara:  The.WM.  (III.  85,  56)  associates  Kalafljara  with 
Gitrakilta.  According  to  this  reference,  it  lies  in  the  Madhya  Bh&rata  terri- 
tory formerly  known  as  Bundelkhart^a.  Cunningham  (A.G.  sec  map  at  the 
end)  places  it  to  the  east  of  Mahoba,  below  GitrakQta. 

122.  See  p.  X.  note  4. 


98 


Lingapurana 


ravata^^®  where  the  four  righteous  sons  will  be  born  to  me.  They 
will  be  Uluka,  Vidyuta,  Sambuka  and  Asvalayana.  After  attain- 
ing yoga  of  Mahc^vara  they  will  go  to  Rudraloka. 

120- 124a.  When  the  twenty-seventh  cycle  of  four  yugas 
arrives  duly,  the  ascetic  Jatukarnya  will  become  a Vyasa. 
Then  I shall  be  born  as  the  brahmin  Somalarman  at  Prabh^a'®* 
TIrtha.  I shall  be  known  as  a yogic  soul  by  taking  resort  to 
yoga.  There  too  four  ascetics  will  be  my  disciples,  viz. 
Ak§apada,  Kumara,  Uluka  and  Vatsa.  They  will  be  great 
yogic  souls,  pure  in  intellect  and  devoid  of  impurities.  After 
attaining  the  yoga  of  Maheivara  they  will  go  to  Rudraloka. 

124b-133.  When  the  twenty-eighth  cycle  of  four  yugas 
occurs  in  due  order,  the  glorious  son  of  ParaiSara  named 
Dvaipayana'®**  will  become  a Vyasa.  He  is  Visnu  himself,  the 
grandfather  of  the  worlds.  At  that  time,  Vasudeva,  black  in  colour 
and  the  best  among  men  and  exalted  among  the  Yadus,  will 
be  born  of  Vasudeva.  At  the  same  time,  by  the  power  of  my  yogic 
illusion  I the  Yogatman  will  be  born  as  Brahmacarin  and  inspire 
awe  among  the  people.  On  seeing  a dead  body  left  in  the 
cremation  ground  without  a claimant,  I shall  be  entering  it 
by  the  yogic  power  for  the  welfare  of  the  brahmins.  Along 
with  you  and  Visnu^*®  I will  enter  the  divine  and  holy  cave  of 
the  Meru.'®’  O Brahma,  at  that  time,  I will  be  known  as 
Lakuli.  That  holy  place  where  I entered  the  dead  body  will 
be  known  as  Kayavatara — a name  that  will  last  as  long  as 
the  earth  lasts.  There  too  the  ascetic  sons  will  be  born  to  me. 

123.  Bhadravata:  Cf.  SP.  SRS.  5. 39.  This  town  has  not  been  identi- 
fied so  far. 

124.  It  is  a celebrated  place  of  pilgrimage  in  Saura^tra,  the  southern 
part  of  Kathiawar. 

125.  Dvaip&yana  Vyasa  : Sec  p.  2.  note  6. 

126.  tvaya  sardham  ca  Visnuna.  ST.  construes  tvaya  with  Visnuna 
(tvaya  Visnuna  sSrdham)  and  thus  excludes  Brahma. 

127.  Meru  : It  is  situated  in  the  centre  of  the  earth.  It  is  described 
in  the  Puratias  as  the  four-armed  svastika,  evolving  in  four  directions,  each 
with  seven  constituent  members.  It  can  be  identified  with  the  highland  of 
Tartary,  north  of  the  Himalayas.  It  is  variously  called  Su-meru,  HemUdri 
(the  golden  mountain),  RatnasSnu  (jewel-peaked),  Karnikacala  (lotus 
mountain),  Amaradri,  Deva-parvata,  'mountain  of  the  Gods’.  On  its  extent 
and  identification  with  the  Great  Pamir  knot  of  Asia,  see  The  Geography  of 
the  Puranas: — S.  M.  ALI.  Ch.  III.  pp.  47-5S. 


99 


Incarnations  of  Siva 

They  will  be  known  as  Kusika,  Garga,  Mitra  and  Kaurusya. 
They  will  be  great  yogic  souls  and  brahmins  who  will  have 
mastered  all  the  Vedas.  They  will  remain  celibate  and  free 
from  impurities.  After  attaining  the  yoga  of  Mahe^vara  they 
will  go  to  Rudra’s  world,  never  to  return. 

134-140.  All  these  enlightened  souls  will  be  the  devotees 
of  Siva  and  will  have  their  bodies  smeared  with  ashes.  They 
will  be  perpetually  engaged  in  worshipping  Lihga.  They  will 
be  steadfast  and  firm  in  body  and  the  mind.  With  devotion 
towards  me  and  by  means  of  yoga  they  will  be  established  in 
meditation  and  acquire  self-control.  The  great  Pai^upata  yoga 
can  snap  worldly  ties  and  illuminate  the  path  of  knowledge. 
It  is  also  conducive  to  Real  knowledge.  There  are  several 
paths  of  yoga  and  several  paths  of  knowledge.  But  without 
taking  recourse  to  the  five-syllabled  Mantra^^®  one  cannot 
attain  eternal  bliss.  When  a person  performs  penance  eschew- 
ing Dvandvas  (mutually  clashing  opposites)  he  can  be- 
come a liberated  soul,  as  one  who  has  attained  the  ripe  fruit. 
Even  if  a man  performs  Pa^upata  rite  for  a single  day  he  can 
obtain  fruits,  the  like  of  which  he  cannot  have  either  by  Panca- 
rat ra^29  Qj.  Saiikhya. 

Thus  I have  narrated  the  characteristics  of  incarnations 
in  the  course  of  twenty-eight  sets  of  four  yugas  in  due  order, 
beginning  with  Manu  and  ending  with  Krsna.  The  classifica- 
tion of  the  Vedas  revealing  Dharma  will  take  place  in  the  kalpa 
when  Krsna  Dvaipayana  becomes  a Vyasa. 

SUta  said  : 

141-144.  On  hearing  about  the  incarnations  of  Rudra 
described  thus  by  the  supreme  lord,  Lord  Brahma,  of  great 
splendour  bowed  to  him  and  eulogised  him  with  pleasing  words. 
Then  he  spoke  to  lord  Siva. 

Brahma  said: 

All  the  Devas  and  all  the  Ganas  are  identical  with  Visnu. 
There  is  no  other  goal  equal  to  the  goal  of  attaining  Visnu. 

128.  The  five-syllabled  mantra  of  Siva  : namal^  Siv&ya. 

129.  Paiicar&tra — a name  of  the  sacred  books  of  the  various  Vai^nava 


sects. 


100 


Lingapurd^a 


Thus  sing  the  Vedas  perpetually.  Then  how  did  this  happen 
that  the  lord  of  Devas  worshipped  you  in  the  Lihga  and 
remained  ever  devoted  to  you  ? 

145-150.  On  hearing  the  words  of  Brahma  lord  Siva  was 
delighted  on  account  of  the  weighty  relevancy  of  the  question. 
He  looked  at  him  as  if  he  would  drink  him  through  his  eyes. 
Facing  him,  he  then  described  the  method  of  worship  of  the 
Lihga.  It  was  after  worshipping  the  Lihga  in  accordance  with 
the  instructions  that  you  (Brahma),  Visnu  and  Indra,  the 
best  of  Devas  and  the  sages,  had  attained  their  respective 
status.  O lord,  hence  they  continue  to  worship  me  further. 
There  cannot  be  steadiness^®®  m piety  without  the  worship  of 
the  Lihga;  hence  lord  Visnu  worships  me  perpetually  with 
due  devotion  and  faith. 

After  saying  this  and  blessing  Brahma  by  glancing  at  him 
once  again,  Siva,  the  lord  of  Devas,  vanished  there  itself. 

After  gaining  enlightenment^®^  from  Siva  to  create  every- 
thing afresh,  Brahma  joined  his  palms  in  reverence  and  bowed 
to  Siva  in  the  direction  where  he  had  vanished. 


CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIVE 

Method  of  Acamana  and  Ablution 


The  sages  said  : 

1.  O Romaharsana,’®®  how  is  the  great  lord  to  be  wor- 
shipped in  his  Lihga-form  ? Please  explain  this  to  us  now. 
Suta  said  : 

2.  At  Kaila^a^®®  the  great  lord  was  asked  the  same  by  the 
Goddess  Parvati,  the  daughter  of  the  lord  of  the  Himalaya, 
who  was  seated  on  his  lap.  The  lord,  then,  described  to  her 
the  procedure  of  worshipping  the  Lihga. 

130.  m$tha — niscala-sth&nam  ST,  a permanent  abode. 

13 1.  labdha-samjhali — prSiptanuj&ah  ST,  sanjfia  here  means  a direc- 
tion, command  or  order.  Ed. 

132.  See  p,  2 note  7. 

133.  Mount  Kailasa  is  a part  of  the  Himalayan  range  lying  to  the 
north  of  M&nasa-sarovara,  not  far  off  from  the  source  of  Ghogra  (Sarayu) 
river.  The  detailed  description  of  the  mount  is  found  in  the  Matsya  P,  Gh.  121. 


Method  of  Acamana  and  Ablution 


101 


3-5.  At  that  time,  Nandin  the  son  of  Salahkayana  was 
standing  nearby.  O sages  of  good  rites,  he  heard  everything 
and  mentioned  it  to  Brahma’s  son  Sanat.  From  him  Vyasa 
of  great  refulgence  received  the  great  discourse  on  the  worship 
of  the  Lihga,  as  also  the  bathing  and  other  rites,  as  declared  in 
the  Vedas.  I shall  recount  the  same  in  the  manner  he  heard  it 
orally  from  Nandin. 

Nandin  said  : 

6.  Henceforth,  for  the  welfare  of  the  brahmins,  1 shall 
recount  the  rules  of  procedure  for  the  sacred  ablution,  which 
is  destructive  of  all  sins.  Formerly  it  was  declared  by  lord  Siva 
himself. 

7.  By  taking  holy  bath  in  accordance  with  this  procedure, 
by  worshipping  lord  !§iva  and  by  observing  Brahmakurca^^^ 
at  a time,  one  is  liberated  from  sins. 

8.  O most  excellent  among  the  sons  of  Brahma,  three  types 
of  ablution  are  enjoined  by  Siva,  the  lord  of  Devas,  for  the  wel- 
fare of  the  brahmins  and  others. 

9-10.  One  shall  at  the  outset  perform  the  watery  bath 
and  then  the  sacred  ash-bath^®^  and  thereafter  the  Mantra 
ablution  and  then  the  worship  of  the  lord.  One  who  is  defiled  in 
emotions  and  feelings  is  not  purified  even  after  taking  bath  in 
water  or  after  applying  ashes.  Only  one  who  is  emotionally 
pure  will  proceed  with  purificatory  rites  and  not  otherwise. 

1 1 . There  is  no  doubt  that  an  emotionally  defiled  man 
does  not  become  pure  even  if  he  takes  bath  in  rivers,  ponds 
and  lakes  till  the  dissolution  of  the  universe. 

12.  The  lotus-like  mind  of  man  is  asleep  due  to  Tamas. 
When  it  is  wakened  up  by  the  refulgence  of  knowledge,  man 
becomes  pure^®*. 

13-14.  The  devotee  shall  take  clay,  cowdung^®’,  gingelly 

134.  It  is  a kind  of  penance  in  the  observance  of  which  the  five  products 
of  the  cow  (paheagavya)  arc  eaten. 

135.  agneyam — It  is  the  bath  of  bhasma  (ashes) — the  product  of 
fire-consumed  cow-dung  or  wooden  sticks. 

136.  This  verse  is  a fine  piece  of  poetical  composition  involving 
metaphor. 

137.  iakft — cow-dung.  It  is  considered  to  be  pure  and  used  in 
religious  rites. 


102 


LxAgapurct^a 


seeds,  flowers  and  ashes  for  bath  and  keep  them  on  the  bank. 
He  shall  then  scatter  Kusa  grass  into  the  holy  water  for  bath. 
After  washing  his  feet,  doing  acamana  and  removing  dirt  from 
the  body  with  the  articles  placed  on  the  bank,  he  shall  per- 
form the  rite  of  ablution. 

15-16.  Repeating  the  Mantra  “Uddhrtasi”^^®  he  shall 
clean  the  body  again  with  a small  quantity  of  clay  and  wearing 
another  cloth  he  shall  bathe.  Repeating  the  Mantra  “Gandha- 
dvaram  Duradharsam”^^®  he  shall  smear  himself  with  the 
cowdung  of  the  tawny  cow  gathered  even  before  it  touches 
the  ground. 

17-20.  Taking  bath  again  he  shall  discard  the  dirty  cloth; 
wear  (fresh)  white  one  and  perform  ablution  again.  For  dis- 
pelling sins  he  shall  invoke  Varuna.  He  shall  then  worship 
the  lord  by  meditation.  He  shall  perform  acamana  thrice, 
and  then  plunge  into  the  holy  waters  (all  the  while)  thinking 
about  Siva.  Again  doing  acamana  he  shall  inspire  the 
holy  water  with  Mantras.  Plunging  again  into  the  water  he 
shall  repeat  the  Aghamarsana^^®  Mantra.  With  great  self- 
control  the  devotee  shall  remember  the  discs  of  the  sun,  moon 
and  fire  in  that  water. 

2 1 -22.  The  knower  of  the  Mantras  shall  perform  Acamana, 
and  rise  up  from  the  waters  and  standing  in  the  middle  of 
holy  waters  he  shall  pour  water  over  his  head  from  cow’s 
horn,^^^  or  by  means  of  cups  made  of  well  washed  Palana  leaf. 
The  water  shall  be  scattered  with  Kusa  grass  and  flowers. 

23-25.  O brahmins,  while  pouring  water  over  his  head, 
he  shall  repeat  these  mantras  remembering  the  forms  of  the 
respective  deities  (invoked  therein)  and  the  sages  concerned  for 
increase  of  his  holiness.  The  mantras  include  Rudra,^^®  Pava- 
mana  what  is  called  Tvarita,  two  Santimantras^*®  and  the  man- 
tra ‘^an  no  devi,^^^  and  the  five  holy  mantras^*^  of  Sadyojata. 

138.  Udhrt^si  Varahena  TA-  10.  1.8;  Mahan  u.  4.5. 

139.  gandhadvaraxh  dur^har^am  TA,  10.  1;  Mahan  u.  4.  8. 

140.  agliamar^ana  : rtaiii  ca  satyam  TA^  xo.  i.  13;  Mahan  u.  3.5. 

14 1.  irhgcna — gosrngena  ST,  with  the  cow’s  horn. 

143.  tvarita — ^yo  rudro  TS.  5.5.9.3. 

143.  ilintidvayena — ^anno  xnitra  /?K.  1.90.9. 10. 

144.  liantidharmena — Sanno  devi  ^V.  10.9.4. 

145.  paiica-brahma-pavitrakaih--xxiantras  beginning  with  sadyojata. 


Procedure  of  Sacred  Ablution 


103 


He  shall  then  meditate  in  his  heart  on  lord  Tryambaka^^* 
having  five  faces. 

26-29.  After  rinsing  his  mouth  and  doing  acamana  as 
prescribed  in  his  own  Sutra  and  wearing  pavitra  in  the  hand, 
he  shall  sit  comfortably  in  a clean  spot,  sprinkle  ku^a  water  on 
his  body  with  his  right  hand  and  perform  acamana  again. 
Then  artfully  he  shall  wheel  water  round  him  and  perform 
circumambulation.  This  will  wipe  off  his  sins  of  violence. 
O virtuous  brahmins,  this  excellent  procedure  of  ablution  and 
acamana  has  been  succinctly  mentioned  for  your  welfare. 


CHAPTER  TWENTY  SIX 

Procedure  of  Sacred  Ablution 


jVandin  said  : 

1.  Thereafter  he  should  invoke  the  glorious  and  great 
goddess  Gayatri  the  mother  of  the  Vedas,  with  the  mantra  ; 
“ayatu  varada  devi”.^^® 

2-3.  He  shall  offer  padya,  acamaniya,  and  arghya.  He 
shall  then  perform  three  pranayamas.  Thereafter,  either  sitting 
or  standing  he  shall  repeat  the  Gayatri  along  with  Pranava 
Om  adopting  one  of  the  three  modes,  viz.,  repeating  it  a thousand 
or  five  hundred  or  hundred  and  eight  times. 

4-6.  He  shall  offer  the  arghya  again  and  worship  the  mother 
Goddess.  He  shall  bow  to  her  and  then  ritualistically  dismiss 
her  by  repeating  the  mantra  “uttame  ^ikhare  devi,’*^**  etc. 
Looking  towards  the  east  and  saluting  the  goddess  Gayatri, 
mother  of  the  Vedas,  he  shall  with  the  palms  joined  in  reverence, 
pray  to  the  Sun  God  repeating  the  Mantras  “Udutyarii 
Jatavedasam”,  “Citram”  and  others.  He  shall  then  salute  the 
sun  and  Brahma  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions. 

140.  tryambakam — threc-cyed  or  three>mothered  Siva. 

147.  paiicasyam — ^fivc-faecd.  Sec  p.  49  note  65. 

148.  ayatu  varada  devi  TA»  10.126.1. 

149.  uttamc  iikhare  devi  ITd.  10. 3.1. 


104 


LiHgapwraifa 


7-10.  He  shall  repeat  the  hymns  to  Surya,  from  RJk, 
Yajus  and  Saman.  He  shall  thereafter  circumambulate  the 
sun^^  thrice.  He  shall  then  bow  to  Atman,  Antaratman  and 
Paramatman  the  sun,  Brahma  and  fire.^®^  Thereafter  he  shall 
invoke  the  sage^  the  Pitrs  and  Devas  with  their  respective  names 
by  saying  “I  am  invoking  alP*.  Then  he  shall  duly  perform  the 
tarpana  rite  facing  either  east  or  north  after  meditating  on 
their  actual  principal  forms  and  saluting  them  in  due  order. 

11.  The  tarpana  to  Devas  shall  be  performed  with  the 
water  inlaid  with  flowers,  the  rites  to  the  sages  with  the  water 
mixed  with  Ku4a  grass  and  the  rites  to  the  Pitrs  with  water 
mixed  with  gingelly  seeds.  Scents  should  be  mixed  in  the  water 
in  all  cases. 

12.  O leading  brahmins,  the  sacred  thread  is  worn  in 
the  usual  manner  (i.e.  over  the  left  shoulder)  when  the  rites 
to  Devas  are  performed;  it  is  worn  like  a garland  when  the 
tarpana  to  the  sages  is  performed;  it  is  worn  from  right  shoulder 
leftward  when  the  tarpana  to  Pitrs  is  performed. 

13-15.  For  procuring  ail  achievements  the  wise  devotee 
who  is  well  versed  in  the  Vedas  shall  perform  tarpana  to  Devas 
with  waters  flowing  down  the  tips  of  all  fingers.  He  shall  per- 
form tarpana  to  the  sages  with  waters  flowing  down  the  tip 
of  the  little  finger.  He  shall  perform  tarpana  to  the  pitrs  with 
waters  flowing  down  the  thumb  of  the  right  hand. 

Similarly,  O leading  sages,  he  shall  perform  the  five  sacri- 
fices, viz., Brahma,  Deva,  ManuSya,  Bhuta  and  Pitr.  He  shall 
be  devotedly  engaged  in  these  rites  and  be  pure  in  soul. 

16-19.  O brahmins,  the  study  of  the  Vedic  texts  of  one’s 
own  branch  is  Brahmayajfia;^®^  the  oflfering  of  cooked  rice 
into  the  sacred  fire  is  Devayajfta;  the  offering  of  oblations  to 
Bhutas  (living  beings)  as  prescribed  in  the  ritual  is  Bhutayajna; 
it  bestows  prosperity  on  all  living  beings.  The  devotee  shall 
bow  to  brahmins  well-versed  in  the  Vedic  rituals  as  well  as 

150.  Vibhavasu — the  sun.  ST,  quotes  Amara  : **vibhavasur  graha- 
patib”. 

1 51.  Vibhavasu — the  fire.  Ibid  : *‘citrabh^u  vibhavasub”. 

152.  brahma-yajha  is  defined  as  sva^^&khSidhyayanain — the  study 
of  particular  recensions  to  which  the  scholar  belongs.  ST,  quotes  from  an 
unknown  source  : **yat  svadhyayam  adhiyita  ek&mapi  ream  yajub  sfima  va 
tad  brahma-yajfiab”* 


Procedure  of  Sacred  Ablution 


105 


feed  them  and  their  wives.  This  is  Manusya  Yajfia.  What 
is  offered  for  the  sake  of  Pitfs  (the  departed  souls)  is  Pitryajfla. 
Thus  he  shall  perform  these  five  Yajnas^®®  for  achieving  Siddhis. 

20.  Listen  O Brahmins  ! Brahmayajfia  is  the  greatest  of 
these  Yajfias.  A man  engaged  in  Brahmayajfia  is  honoured  in 
the  world  of  Brahma. 

21-24.  By  Brahmayajfia  all  the  Devas  including  Indra, 
Lords  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Siva,  all  the  Vedas  and  Pitrs  are 
pleased.  No  doubt  need  be  entertained  in  this  respect.  The 
brahmin  who  is  adept  in  Brahmayajfia  when  he  goes  out  of 
his  village  out  of  sight  of  hundreds  of  huts,  shall  turn  towards 
the  east,  north  or  north-east^®*  and  then  perform  the  sacred  rite 
of  Acamana  for  the  sake  of  Brahmayajfia.  For  propitiating 
the  ]^s,  O brahmins,  he  shall  fill  the  cup  of  his  palm  and 
drink  water  thrice. 

25.  For  propitiating  the  Yajus  he  shall  wash  his  hands, 
and  wipe  off  his  face  twice  with  water.  For  the  propitiation 
of  Samaveda  he  shall  touch  the  head. 

26.  The  brahmin  shall  wash  the  eyes,  nostrils  and  other 
limbs  for  the  propitiation  of  the  Atharvan  and  Angiras  texts. 

For  the  propitiation  of  eighteen^®®  Puranas  beginning  with 
Brahma,  for  the  propitiation  of  eighteen  Upapurai;ias  beginning 
with  Saura,  and  for  the  propitiation  of  holy  Itihasas  beginning 
with  Saiva  he  shall  touch  his  ears  and  the  cardiac  region.  O 
sages,  most  excellent  among  the  knowers  of  the  Kalpa,  for  the 
propitiation  of  the  Kalpa  texts,  he  shall  perform  the  Acamana 
rite.  After  scattering  bundles  of  Darbha  grass,  the  devotee 
shall  sit  down  and  keep  the  right  palm  over  the  left  palm. 
There  must  be  a golden  ring  or  the  Ku^a  loop^®*  round  his 

1 53.  The  five  daily  sacrifices  to  be  performed  by  a householder  consti- 
tute braWa-yajfia,  pitr-yajha,  deva-yajda,  bhuta-yajfia  and  nr-yajda.  These 
are  defined  as  : 

areirm  1 

Lihga  substitutes  a^sqTprnr  for  I 

154.  pragudicyam — isanyam  ST.  in  the  north-eastern  direction. 

*55*  For  the  nomenclature  and  number  of  the  Puranas,  see  Intro- 
duction. 

156.  brahma-bandha  : the  term  is  not  dear. 


106  Lingapurd^ 

finger.  With  great  concentration  and  follovsring  his  own  school 
he  shall  perform  the  Brahmayajha  duly.  Though  an  excellent 
brahmin  or  sage  but  if  he  takes  food  without  performing  the 
five  great  Yajfias,  he  will  be  born  in  the  womb  of  sows.  Hence 
a person  should  assiduously  perform  the  same  seeking  for  auspi- 
ciousness. 

33.  After  Brahmayajha  he  shall  perform  Ablution  for  the 
self,  collect  the  holy  water  duly  and  enter  the  camp  with  per- 
fect self-control. 

34.  Outside  the  house  he  shall  wash  his  hands  and  feet 
with  water.  Thereafter,  for  purity’s  sake  he  shall  perform 
the  sacred  bath  with  ashes  duly. 

35-36.  The  ashes  should  be  perfectly  cleaned  by  means  of 
Pranava  . It  must  be  taken  from  what  remains  after  perform- 
ing Agnihotra.  When  the  sun  has  risen  in  the  morning  the 
Agnihotra  should  be  performed  with  the  Mantra  “Jyotih 
suryab  ”*”  In  the  evening  the  same  should  be  performed  with 
the  Mantra  *‘Jyotir  Agnih”.^®®  If  the  sun  has  not  risen  fully, 
the  performance  of  Agnihotra  is  rendered  ineffective.  The 
ashes  of  the  sacrifice  performed  after  the  sun  has  risen  is  alone 
sacred  and  splendid. 

37-41.  Thepe  is  nothing  holy  like  truth  and  nothing 
sinful  like  untruth.  Repeating  the  Mantra  of  I^ana  he  shall 
smear  ashes  on  the  head;  repeating  the  Mantra  of  Tatpurusa,  he 
shall  smear  ashes  on  his  face ; repeating  the  Mantra  of  Aghora  he 
shall  do  so  over  his  chest;  O men  of  holy  rites  ! he  shall  apply 
ashes  over  the  secret  parts  by  repeating  the  Mantra  of  Vama- 
deva  and  similarly  on  the  feet  by  repeating  the  Mantra 
of  Sadya.  By  repeating  the  Pranava  he  shall  smear  ashes  all 
over  the  body.  Thereafter  he  shall  wash  hands  and  feet.  After 
wasing  them  off  he  shall  take  ashes  with  his  mind  set  on  the 
lord  of  Devas  and  perform  Ablution  repeating  the  Mantras 
viz.,  “Apo  hi  §tha^®*  and  other  sacred  formulas  taken  from  Rk, 
Yajus  and  Saman  texts.  Thus  for  your  welfare  O brahmins, 
the  mode  of  procedure  for  holy  bath  has  been  described  to  you 
succinctly.  He  who  performs  thus  even  for  once  shall  attain 
the  highest  abode  of  God. 


Worship  of  Lihga 


107 


CHAPTER  TWENTY  SEVEN 

Worship  of  Lihga 


Nandin  said  : 

1.  Listen,  I shall  briefly  mention  the  rules  of  procedure  for 
the  worship  of  Lihga.  It  is  not  possible  to  recount  them  in 
detail  even  in  a hundred  years. 

2.  After  bathing  thus^®®  in  a befitting  manner  the  devotee 
shall  enter  the  place  of  worship,  take  three  pra^iay^as  and 
meditate  on  the  three-eyed  lord. 

3-4.  He  shall  resort  to  the  form  of  the  deity  as  follows. 
He  has  five  faces  and  ten  arms.  He  shines  like  pure  crystal. 
He  is  bedecked  in  all  ornaments  and  clothes  of  variegated 
colours.  By  means  of  certain  Tan  trie  practices  such  as  dahana, 
plavana  etc,,  he  shall  transform  himself  into  the  body  of  lord 
Siva  and  begin  to  worship  him. 

5.  After  purifying  the  body  he  shall  perform  the  rite  of 
Nyasa  of  the  mula  mantras.  Everywhere  the  five  Brahmans 
(Sadyojata  etc. ) shall  be  fixed  with  the  Pranava  in  order. 

6-7.  In  the  highly  splendid  aphorism  viz.,  “Namah  Sivaya** 
the  Vedas  are  present  in  subtle  form.  Just  as  the  holy  fig  tree 
is  present  in  the  subtle  seed  of  the  Nyagrodha  so  also  the  great 
Brahman  is  present  in  the  great  and  splendid  aphorism,  all 
by  Himself  in  a subtle  form. 

8,  The  devotee  shall  sprinkle  the  place  of  worship  with 
scented  sandal  water,  and  consecrate  the  materials  of  worship 
either  by  washing  or  by  sprinkling  water. 

9-10.  The  washing  and  sprinkling  is  performed  by  repeat- 
ing the  Pra^va  . The  intelligent  devotee  shall  duly  cover  the 
vessels  with  a cloth;  these  are  the  Proksani  {vessel  containing 
holy  water),  Arghya,  Padya  and  Acamaniya  vessels. 

1 1 . These  shall  be  covered  with  Darbha  grass  and  sprinkled 
with  pure  water.  He  shall  then  pour  cool  water  in  the  diffe- 
rent vessels. 

12.  The  intelligent  devotee  shall  pour  water  in  them  after 
observing  the  materials.  He  shall  place  U^ira  and  sandal  in 
the  Padya. 

i6o.  It  refers  to  the  threefold  bath,  namely  v&rupa,  &gneya  and 
mantra  as  specified  in  Ch.  25.  9. 


108 


Lingapurdna 


13.  He  shall  duly  powder  nutmeg  (Jali),  momordica 
mixta  (Kankola  seed),  the  root  of  Bahumula  (a  herb), 
Xanthocymus  epictorius  (Tamala  seed)  and  camphor  and  put 
the  same  in  the  Acamaniya  vessel. 

14.  Similarly  he  shall  put  camphor,  sandal  and  different 
kinds  of  flowers  in  all  the  vessels. 

15.  He  shall  put  tips  of  Kusa  grass,  unbroken  rice  grains, 
barley  grains,  cereals,  gingelly  seeds,  ghee,  white  mustard, 
flowers  and  ashes  in  the  Arghya  vessel. 

16.  Repeating  the  Pranava  he  shall  put  Kusa  grass,  flowers, 
barley  grains,  bits  of  Bahumula  herb  and  Tamala  root  as  well 
as  ashes  into  the  Prok§anI  vessel. 

17.  He  shall  perform  the  rite  of  Nyasa  of  the  flve-syllabled 
Mantra,  and  of  Rudra  Gayatri  or  only  of  Pranava — the  exc- 
ellent essence  of  the  Vedas. 

18.  Thereafter  he  shall  sprinkle  the  materials  of  worship 
with  water  from  the  Proksanl  vessel,  repeating  Pranava  as 
well  as  the  five  Yajus  beginning  with  Isana. 

19-21.  By  the  (right)  side^*^  the  loid  of  Devas,  Naridin, 
i.e.  myself,  shall  be  worshipped.  1 sha^  have  the  lustre  of 
ten  thousand  blazing  fires,  three  eyes,  the  face  of  a monkey, 
four  arms,  the  crescent  moon  as  coronet,  wearing  flower 
garlands,  gentle,  and  bedecked  in  all  ornaments.  My  wife 
Suya^a  the  auspicious  and  holy  daughter  of  the  Maruts  shall 
be  worshipped  to  the  north  of  Nandin  i.e.  myself.^*^  She  who 
performs  holy  rites  shall  be  engaged  in  embellishing  the  feet 
of  Amba  (Goddess  Parvati). 

22-23.  After  worshipping  thus  he  shall  enter  the  sanctum 
sanctorum  of  lord  Siva.  He  shall  then  offer  handfuls  of  flowers 
on  the  five  heads  of  the  Lord  repeating  the  five  Mantras. 
With  different  kinds  of  incense  and  scented  flowers  he  shall 
worship  Siva,  Skanda,  Gane^a  and  the  goddess,  and  then 
consecrate  the  Linga. 

24.  After  repeating  the  Mantras  b(  ginning  with  Pranava^®^ 

i6i.  parsvatah — dak?ii?a-pnrsve  Sf.  on  the  right  side. 

it)2.  ^tmanah—nandinah  mama  .S'/’,  of  Nandi  the  speaker. 

1G3,  pratjavadi-namontakam  —mantras  bej^imiing  with  “Orii  nidhana- 
pata>c  namah”  and  ending  with  ‘'pararna-lihgaya  namah”. 


Worship  of  Lihga 


109 


and  ending  with  Namas  he  shall  conceive  of  a lotus  seat^®* 
for  the  deity,  by  repeating  the  Pranava. 

25-28.  Its  imperishable  petal  in  the  East  shall  be  Anima; 
Laghima  shall  be  the  petal  in  the  South;  Mahima  the  Western 
petal ; Prapti  the  Northern,  Pr^amyam  the  South-eastern,  Isitva 
the  South-western,  Vasitva  the  North-western,  Omniscience 
the  North-eastern  petal.  The  moon  will  be  the  pericarp.  Beneath 
the  moon  is  the  sun  and  beneath  the  sun  the  fire-god.  Dharma^®® 
and  others  shall  be  installed  in  the  subsidiary  quarters.  He 
shall  then  instal  Ananta.  He  shall  instal  Avyakta  etc.  in  the  four 
quarters^®®  in  order  and  the  three  Gunas  at  the  extremity  of 
Soma. 

29-34.  Above  it  he  shall  instal  the  three  Atmans^®^  and  in 
the  end  Siva’s  pedestal.  Repeating  the  Mantra  “1  resort  to 
Sadyojata”^®®  he  shall  invoke  ' the  supreme  lord.  With 
the  Mantra  of  Vamadeva  he  shall  instal  Him  over  the  seat. 
With  Rudragayatri  he  shall  establish  His  presense  and  with 
Aghora  Mantra  he  shall  stabilise  the  presence  of  deity.  He 
shall  then  worship  with  the  Mantra  “I^anah  Sarvavidyanam.^®® 
He  shall  then  offer  Padya,  Acamaniya  and  Arghya  to  the  lord. 
In  accordance  with  the  injunctions  he  shall  be  the  Rudra 
with  scented  sandal  paste  water.  After  gathering  Paftca 
Gavya  in  a vessel  and  after  inspiring  it  with  Pranava  he  shall 
bathe  the  deity  with  Paficagavya.  Repeating  the  Pranava 
he  shall  perform  the  rite  of  ablution  to  the  deity  (successively) 
with  ghee,  honey,  sugar-cane  juice  and  other  holy  materials 
of  worship.  With  holy'  Mantras,  using  pure  vessels  he  shall 
pour  water  over  the  deity. 

35-39.  The  aspirant  shall  wipe  it  off  with  a white  cloth. 

164.  padmasana  : sec  p.  35  note  47, 

165.  dharmadayah — ^ group  of  four,  viz.,  dharma  (virtue),  jilwa 
(knowledge),  vairagya  (detachment)  and  aiivarya  (supremacy  or  super- 
natural power). 

166.  avyaktadi — a group  of  four,  viz.  pradhana  (invisible  prakrti), 
mahat  (intellect),  ahaihkara  (ego),  and  manas  (mind). 

167.  atma-trayam — a trio  consisting  of  Viiva,  Taijasa  and  Pr&jfta. 

i6d.  **sadyoj&tam  prapadyami**.  Mark  the  use  of  parasmaipada 

in  ‘prapadyami*  for  the  grammatically  correct  form  ‘prapadyc*  in  atmne- 
pada. 


169.  iiSnab  sarvavidy&n&m  Tif . io.47« 


110 


Lingapurd^ 


He  shall  put  Ku^a  grass,  Ap^arga,  camphor,  Jasmine, 
China  rose,  white  jasmines,  lotuses,  lilies,  white  oleanders  and 
other  flowers  into  the  water  along  with  sandal  paste.  He  shall 
inspire  the  water  by  repeating  the  Mantras  of  Sadyojata. 
The  water  may  be  taken  in  a vessel  made  of  gold,  silver  or 
copper.  It  may  be  in  a lotus  cup  or  a cup  of  palai^a.  The  conch 
or  an  earthern  jar  can  be  used.  In  the  latter  case  it  should  be 
fresh  and  well  washed.  Repeating  the  requisite  Mantras  he  shall 
bathe  the  deity  in  the  water  containing  Kuila  grass^’®  or  flowers. 
For  all  achievements  he  shall  repeat  the  Mantras.  Now  I shall 
mention  the  mantras  to  you;  please  listen. 

40-45.  A man  who  worships  the  Lihga  even  once  with  the 
following  Mantras  will  be  liberated.  Those  who  are  conver- 
sant with  the  Mantra  S^tra  use  the  following  Mantras  for 
the  rite  of  Ablution  : Pavamana,^^^  Vama,^’*  Rudra,^’®  Nila^’* 
Rudra,  Srisukta,^^  Ratrisukta,^’*  Camaka  Hotara,  Atharva- 
^iiras,  Santi,  Bharunda,  Aruna,  Varuna,  Jyestha,  Vedavrata, 
Rathantara,  Purusa,  Tvarita,  Rudra,”^  Kapi,  Kapardi, 
the  Saman  A vo  rajanam,^^®  Brhaccandra,  Vi§nu,  Virupaksa 
Mantra,  Skanda,  a group  of  hundred  hymns,  the  hymns  of 
Paflca  Brahmans,  Pailcksara  Mantra  or  Pranava  alone. 

46-48.  The  devotee  shall  bathe  the  lord  of  the  chiefs  of 
Devas  for  the  suppression  of  all  sins.  He  shall  then  offer  the 
following  to  the  deity:  Clothes,  the  sacred  thread,  Acamanlya, 
scents  and  flowers,  incense,  light,  cooked  rice,  scented  water 
and  Acamaniya  once  again.  Thereafter  he  shall  offer  a crown. 


170.  sakurcena— kurca  is  a handful  of  ku$a  grass  used  in  religious 

rites. 

1 71.  pavam&na — a group  of  mantras  designated  after  their  sancti- 
fying efficiency. 

172.  V&miyaka — ^Vama  sukta  beginning  with  ‘asya  vamasya*. 

173.  RudrcQa — Rudra  mantras  of  Rudradhydya  also  called  ^atarudriya. 
ST,  quotes  from  Siva-raha^a  : Vede^u  iatarudriyam  devat^  mahesvarah* 

174.  nllarudrena — ^Atharvavediyaih  tatsamjfiakair  mantraih  ST. 

Rudra  mantras  of  the  Atharvaveda-samhiUl. 

its-  Sri  »fikta  RV. 

176.  Ratri  sClkta  RY. 

177.  tvarita,  sec  p.  102  note.  142 

178.  a VO  r&jknam  TS  1.3.12.1. 


Ill 


Mental  Worship  of  Siva 

an  umbrella  and  ornaments.  Repeating  the  Pranava  alone 
he  shall  offer  the  scented  betel. 

49-54.  On  the  top  of  the  Lihga  he  shall  worship  the 
unsullied,  imperishable  Lord,  shining  like  a crystal  glass,  the 
cause  of  all  Devas,  identical  with  the  universe,  imperceptible 
to  the  sages,  Devas,  Brahma,  Indra,  Visnu,  Rudra  and  others. 
The  Sruti  says  “He  is  imperceptible  through  even  VedSntas, 
to  the  knowers  of  the  Vedas  too”.  He  is  devoid  of  beginning, 
middle  and  end.  He  is  a medicine  unto  those  who  are  afflicted 
by  the  sickness  of  worldliness.'^®  He  is  known  as  Sivatattva 
(Principle  of  iSiva)  and  is  stationed  in  the  Siva  Linga.  He  shall 
duly  repeat  the  prayers  and  make  obeisance.  He  shall 
circumambulate,  offer  Arghya,  scatter  flowers  at  the  feet, 
bow  to  the  lord  of  Devas  and  superimpose  Siva  on  the  Atman. 
This,  in  brief,  is  the  procedure  of  worshipping  Siva  in  Lihga. 
Now  I shall  describe  the  internal  worship  of  Lihga  to  you. 


CHAPTER  TWENTY  EIGHT 

Mental  Worship  of  Siva 


Nandin  said  : 

1-2.  The  fiery,  solar  and  the  lunar^®®disc  shall  be  thought 
of  within  the  heart.  Above  that  the  trio  of  the  Gunas  and  the 
Atmans  shall  be  conceived.  Above  it,  the  devotee  shall 
meditate  upon  and  worship  the  lord  in  both  the  aspects  with 
and  without  attributes  with  half  his  body  taken  over  by  his 
beloved. 

3-4.  Since  there  are  many  objects  to  think  upon,  the  thinker 
shall  not  think  of  anything  except  the  following.  The  medi- 
tator shall  conceive  no  distinction  between  the  object  and  the 
means  of  meditation;  otherwise,  (i.e.  if  he  thinks  of  anything 
other  than  these)  knowledge  does  not  arise  in  him. 

179.  bhefiyam  bhava  rogi^am  Gf.  bhiyaktamam  tviih  bhifiy&m 
i8o«  amftam — somam  candrarupam  ST.  lunar  orb. 


112 


Lingapuraf^ 


5-6.  The  word  Purusa  is  derived  thus  ; puri  i^ctc  (he  who 
lies  in  the  body) . He  who  worships  the  deity,  the  object  of 
worship  by  means  of  meditation,  is  known  as  yajamana.  Dhyeya 
(the  object  of  meditation)  is  the  lord  himself.  Dhyana  is  the 
act  of  thinking.  Nirukti  (bliss)  the  fruit  of  dhyana.  One  who 
knows  about  this  attains  the  ultimate  reality  which  is  the  sub- 
stratum of  Pradhana  and  Puru?a. 

7-10.  Here  the  supreme  lord,  the  object  of  meditation,  is 
the  twenty-sixth  principle, — the  meditator  (jiva)  is  the  twenty- 
fifth,  the  avyakta  or  pradhana  is  the  twenty-fourth.  The  seven 
principles  constitute  mahat,  ahaihkara,  and  five  tanmatras. 
The  organs  of  action  are  five,  as  also  the  organs  of  sense; 
then  there  is  the  mind  and  the  five  elements.  Thus  Siva  is  the 
twenty-sixth  principle.  He  alone  is  the  creator  and  sustainer. 
He  is  greater  than  Brahma.  He  has  created  Brahma.  He  is 
one  who  is  above  and  greater  than  the  universe,  and  is  the 
universe  itself. 

11.  Just  as  children  are  not  born  without  their  parents, 
so  also  the  three  worlds  arc  not  born  without  Siva  and  his 
consort. 

Sanatkumdra  said  : 

12-13.  If  the  great  lord  who  is  the  supreme  power  and  the 
supreme  soul  is  himself  the  doer  how  can  he  be  an  agent  who 
causes  activity  of  the  individual  souls  ? But  the  supreme  lord 
has  been  mentioned  by  you  as  eternal,  enlightened  and  un- 
qualitative.^®*  How  can  he  then  bestow  liberation  ? If  he  is 
without  attributes  how  can  he  function  ? 

Nandin  said  : 

14.  It  is  Kala  (Time)  that  evolves  everything.  Lord  Siva 
evolves  the  Kala  always.  When  the  mind  devoid  of  qualities 

181.  jivatma,  the  individual  soul,  the  enjoyer  of  the  fruits  of  the 
world-tree  (cf.  cbhih  sampaditam  bhunkte  puru^ah  pancavixhSakah.  Matsya 
3.27),  constitutes  the  twenty- fifth  category.  He  is  also  called  *bhokta  puru$ab’> 
‘bhokta  suparnab*  and  he  is  controlled  by  the  will  of  I^vara  (cf.  Lvareccha- 
vaia^i  so’pi  jivktma  kathyate  budhaih).  The  latter  is  called  ^advixhSaka 
Siva — the  twenty-sixth  category  who  though  transcendent  is  not  competent 
to  bestow  grace.  (Cf.  ^adviihiakamanUvaram  1.71.109}. 

182.  niskalab'—dcvoid  of  attributes,  hence  passive  or  inactive,  but 
who  imparts  impetus  to  Time — ^K&la  who  creates  the  universe — | 


113 


Mintal  Worship  of  Siva 

is  set  on  lord  Siva,  lord  Siva  reveals  His  true,  attributeless 
nature.^®* 

15-17.  The  universe  appears  to  be  existent  by  his  very 
activity.  The  eight^®®  forms  of  the  lord  represent  the  empirical 
universe.  Without  the  five  elements — ether,  earth,  wind,  fire 
and  water  and  without  the  priest,  the  sun  and  the  moon,  the 
world  has  no  existence.  On  consideration,  it  is  evident  that 
the  gross  world  consisting  of  the  mobile  and  immobile  beings 
is  the  gross  body  of  Rudra.  These  eight  are  the  cosmic  forms 
of  the  lord. 

18-19.  O excellent  brahmins  the  sages  declare  that  the 
subtle  body  of  the  lord  is  inexpressible.  (The  Vedas  declare) 
“From  him  the  words  recede  after  failing  to  reach  him  along 
with  the  mind.  He  who  realizes  the  bliss  of  the  Brahman 
eschews  fear  from  any  quarter”.^®®  Hence,  after  realizing  the 
bliss  of  the  pinaka-bearing  lord,  no  one  need  be  afraid. 

20.  After  perceiving  through  their  imagination  that  the 
elegances^®®  of  Rudra  are  present  everywhere,  the  images  who 
perceive  the  truth  say,  “Everything  is  Rudra.^* 

21-22.  By  making  incessant  obeisance  to  Brahma  one’s 
prestige  is  increased.  All  this  is  Brahman;  everything  is  lord 
Rudra.  Purusa  is  the  great  lord;  Siva  is  the  supreme  lord*. 
Thus  the  lord  has  been  specified.  Meditation  is  the  sole  thought 
about  him. 

183.  The  mind  too  when  stabilized  by  concentration  becomes  inactive 
(niskriya)  as  this  helps  in  the  emancipation  of  jiva.  Gf.  ST,  : 

»rJT  ’Rrsmi^urr  if'Wtisrjft;  1 

But,  as  a matter  of  fact,  the  terms — ^bondage  and  release  are  illusory 
and  so  are  creation  and  dissolution.  Gf.  Paflcadaii  as  quoted  in  ST  : 

n vi.  35, 

184.  The  eight  forms  of  lord  Shra  constitute  the  five  gross  material 
elements,  the  soul,  the  sun  and  the  moon.  Each  stands  in  relation  to  its 
constituent  as  follows  : 

(i)  Sarva— -earth  (ii)  Bhava — water,  (iii)  Rudra — fire,(iv)  Ugra — ^wind, 
(v)  Bhima—ether,  (vi)  Paiupati— soul,  (vii)  nana->-sun,  and  (viii)  Mah&- 
deva — moon. 

185.  Gf.  TA.  8.4.1 . TU  2.41, 9.1 . Brahman  is  here  identical  with  Siva. 

186.  Rudrasya  vibhutayah*  The  vibhuties  of  Rudra  comprise  rta, 
satya  etc.  Gf.  ftaxh  satyam  param  brahma,  quoted  in  ST, 


114 


Lingapura^a 


23.  O sage  of  good,  holy  rites,  he  should  be  thought  upon 
in  fourfold^®^  manner  and  perceived.  He,  the  cause  of  worldly 
existence,  is  the  world  itself.  He  is  the  cause  of  liberation.  He 
is  the  greatest  ecstasy. 

24-27.  The  four-arrayed  path  is  prescribed  for  a practis- 
ing yogin.  Thought  is  counted  as  manifold.  If  it  is  centred  in 
one  place  it  is  called  Sunistha;^®®  if  centred  inRudra  it  is  called 
Raudri;  if  centred  in  Indra  Aindri;  if  in  Soma  Saumya;  if  in 
Narayana  or  in  the  sun  or  in  the  fire  it  is  called  after  those 
names.  If  the  devotee  fixes  in  his  mind  in  both  ways  that  he 
is  I and  I am  he  that  thought  is  called  Brahmi.  O brahmins, 
thus  should  a devotee  think  of  this  universe — both  mobile 
and  immobile — as  identical  with  Brahman. 

28-29.  Keeping  the  goal  in  his  mind,  the  devotee  shall 
eschew  the  thought  of  division  between  the  mobile  and  imo- 
bile,^®®  as  also  between  what  should  be  eschewed  and  what 
should  not  be  eschewed,  as  also  between  what  is  possible  and 
what  is  not  possible  of  achievement  and  what  should  be  done 
and  what  should  not  be  done.  He  shall  also  remain  satiated 
and  contented.  Such  a man’s  contemplation  is  the  real  one 
, pertaining  to  Brahman  and  not  otherwise.  Thus  in  due  order 
the  mental  worship  of  the  lord  has  been  recounted. 

30-33.  Those  who  carry  out  this  sort  of  mental  worship 
should  also  be  adored  by  means  of  obeisance,  etc.  Even  if  they 
are  hideous  and  deformed,  these  expounders  of  Brahman  should 
not  be  censured.  They  should  not  be  subjected  to  scrutiny  by 
a discerning  person.  Those  who  censure  them  are  narrow- 
minded persons  who  will  become  miserably  unhappy  as  those 
sages  of  old  who  censured  the  lord  in  the  Daruka  forest.  The 


187.  caturvyuha  : Four  vyuhas  constitute  praigia,  manas,  vijiiana 
and  luianda  and  exclude  the  gross  annamaya  koia.  ST,  offers  an  alternative 
explanation  : yad  va  dhyeya-dhyana-yajamana-prayojanarupaih  catur- 
vyuhait.  But  according  to  Lihga  purai?a,  the  caturvyuha  consists  of(i)cxis- 
tence  (sariiskra),  cause  of  existence  (saihsarahetu),  cause  of  emancipation 
(mok^idictu)  and  emancipation  (nirvrti). 

188.  suniftha— knowledge  pertaining  to  Rudra  (raudri  cinta)  that 
releases  jiva  from  the  so-called  bondage  of  birth  and  death. 

189.  esu'acara-vibhagam— Jagadbrahmarupam  ST, — distinction  bet- 
ween Brahma  and  the  mundane  orldw. 


Victory  over  Death 


115 


knowers  of  the  Brahman  who  arc  beyond  the  bounds  of  castes 
and  stages  of  life  should  always  be  served  and  bowed  to  by  the 
persons  devoted  to  the  rigid  discipline  of  castes  and  stages  of 
life. 


CHAPTER  TWENTYNINE 

Victory  over  Death 


Sanatkumdra  said  : 

1-3.  O holy  lord,  now  I wish  to  know  what  was  committed 
by  the  dwellers  of  the  Daruvana,  those  persons  who  had  puri- 
fied their  souls  by  means  of  penance.  How  did  Rudra  the 
naked  lord  of  sublimated  sexuality  assume  a hideous  form  and 
go  to  Daru  forest  ? What  did  that  great  soul  do  there  ? Please 
recount  factually  the  activities  of  that  lord  of  Devas. 

Siita  said: 

4.  On  hearing  his  words  Nandin,  the  most  excellent 
among  the  knowers  of  the  Vedas,  said  after  remembering  Siva 
and  smiling  a little. 

Nandin  said  : 

5.  In  order  to  propitiate  the  lord  of  Devas,  the  sages  per- 
formed a terrible  penance  in  the  Daru  forest.^®®  They  were 
accompanied  by  their  wives,  sons  and  sacrificial  fires. 

6.  Rudra,  the  lord  of  the  universe,  the  bull-emblemed 
omniscient  deity  known  as  Nilalohita,  Dhurjati  and  Parame- 
^ana  was  delighted. 

7-9,  The  lord  of  the  universe,  Rudra,^®^  wanted  to  test  the 
sincerity  of  the  dwellers  of  the  Daru  forest  in  respect  of  their 
sacrificial  rites.  He  wanted  to  turn  their  minds  from  the 
observance  of  sacrificial  rites  to  the  path  of  renunciation.  Thus 
in  order  to  test  their  faith,  and  sportively  too,  he  assumed  a 

190.  See  p.  96  note  1x9. 

191.  Gekitana^ — ^who  creates  doubts  by  his  power  of  creating  illusion, 

ST.  quotes  SivagltS  : ^ ^ I 


116 


LingapurSi(ia 


deformed  but  attractive  appearance.  He  had  three  eyes  and 
two  hands.  He  was  nude,  and  dark  in  complexion. 

10.  Even  in  this  form  he  was  extremely  handsome.  He 
was  smiling  and  singing,  with  seductive  play  of  his  eyebrows, 
thereby  creating  feelings  of  love  in  the  hearts  of  women. 

1 1 . He  the  destroyer  of  cupid,  the  lord  of  extremely  hand- 
some features  increased  their  sexual  feelings. 

12.  On  seeing  a man  of  deformed  features,  black-red  (in 
colour),  even  the  chaste  women  followed  him  with  great 
enthusiasm. 

13.  On  receiving  the  gesture  of  a smile  from  his  lotus- 
like face  the  women  who  had  gathered  at  the  threshold  of 
huts  in  the  forest  or  who  stayed  on  the  huts  above  trees,  stopped 
all  other  activities  and  followed  him  not  caring  for  their 
loosened  garments  and  ornaments. 

14.  Some  of  these  women,  on  seeing  him  felt  their  eyes  reel- 
ing due  to  excitement.  Even  the  old  women  who  were  beyond 
the  age  of  seductive  charms  of  the  eye-brow  began  to  display 
their  amorous  gestures. 

15.  On  seeing  him  some  women  wore  smiling  faces.  With 
their  garments  loosened  a little,  and  with  their  waist  bands 
dislodged  they  began  to  sing. 

16.  Some  brahmin  ladies  on  seeing  him  in  the  forest 
found  that  their  own  fresh  silken  garments  had  got  loosened. 
They  cast  off  their  bangles  of  diverse  colours  and  went  to  their 
kinsmen, 

17.  One  of  them,  on  seeing  him  did  not  know  that  her 
upper  and  lower  garments  had  stripped  off.  Others  in  their 
excitement  could  not  distinguish  between  their  kinsmen  and 
the  multi-branched  trees  though  they  were  familiar. 

18-19.  Some  sang;  some  danced;  some  fell  and  rolled 
down  on  the  ground.  O leading  brahmin,  another  lady  sat 
on  the  ground  like  an  elephant  and  began  to  talk  aloud.  Look- 
ing smilingly  they  began  to  embrace  one  another  all  round. 
After  stopping  Rudra  on  his  way  they  began  to  show  all  shrewd 
gestures. 

20.  They  asked,  “who  arc  you  ?*' 

Others  said,  “Be  seated’’. 


Victory  over  Death 


117 


Delighted  in  their  minds  some  said,  “Where  are  you  going  ? 
Be  pleased  with  us.” 

21.  Due  to  the  Maya  of  Rudra  even  the  chaste  ladies  fell 
down  in  an  awkward  posture  with  their  clothes  loosened  and 
their  tresses  dishevelled,  in  the  very  presence  of  their  husbands. 

22.  Even  after  hearing  their  words  and  seeing  their  diverse 
activities,  the  unchanging  lord  Rudra  did  not  utter  anything, 
good  or  bad. 

23.  On  seeing  the  crowd  of  women  and  Rudra  in  this 
situation  the  brahmins,  the  leading  sages  began  to  say  harsh 
words. 

24.  Their  powers  of  austerity  were  ineffective  against 
Rudra  in  the  same  manner  as  the  lustre  of  the  stars  in  the  sky 
against  the  refulgence  of  the  sun. 

25.  (Such  had  been  the  spiritual  prowess  of  the  sages, 

formerly)  that  the  sacrifice  of  the  great-souled  Brahma 
perished  due  to  the  curse  of  a sage,^®^  even  though  the  sacri- 
fice was  meant  for  general  welfare.  ^ 

26.  Due  to  the  curse  ofBhrgu^®®,  Visnu  of  great  prowess 
was  compelled  to  take  ten  incarnations  and  undergo  suffering 
in  each  incarnation. 

27.  O knower  of  Dharma,  Indra’s  organ  too  was  cut  and 
cast  off  by  the  infuriated  sage  Gautama'®*. 

28.  The  Vasus  had  to  prolong  their  stay  in  the  womb  by 
a brahmin’s  curse.'®®  Nahusa  was  turned  into  a serpent  by  the 
curse  of  sages.'®® 

29.  The  milk  ocean  was  dried  by  the  curse  of  brahmins 
though  it  was  the  perpetual  abode  of  Vi^nu.  The  watery 
ocean  was  made  unfit  for  drinking  by  the  brahmins’  curse. 

30-32.  In  order  to  atone  for  this  Vi§nu  went  to  Varanasi'®^ 
and  resorted  to  the  lord  of  Avimukta.'®®  He  performed  the 
ablution  of  the  three-eyed  lord,  the  lord  of  Devas,  with  milk. 
With  unswerving  devotion,  he,  together  with  Brahma  and  the 

192-106.  The  detail  can  be  traced  to  the  Mbh.  It  shows  how  the 
spiritual  power  possessed  by  the  sages  was  misused  for  worldly  ends. 

197.  See  p.  97  note  120. 

198.  avirnuktesvara,  the  celebrated  lihga  of  Siva  is  placed  in  the  holy 
city  Varana*:!. 


lie 


Lingapura^ 


sageSf  sprinkled  Siva  with  milk  which  coming  in  contact  with 
the  body  of  the  lord  became  nectarlike  and  filled  the  ocean 
wherein  lord  Visnu  made  his  residential  abode. 

33.  Dharma  had  been  cursed  by  the  noble  sage  Man<Javya. 
The  Vrsnis  along  with  KrsigLa  had  been  cursed  by  Durvasas 
and  other  noble  sages. 

34.  Rama  and  his  younger  brother  Laksmana  had  been 
cursed  by  the  noble  sage  Durvasas.  Lord  Vi§nu  was  even  kicked 
by  the  sage  Bhrgu. 

35.  These  and  many  others,  except  the  odd-eyed  lord  of 
Uma,  the  overlord  of  Devas  had  been  made  subservient  by  the 
brahmins. 

36.  Thus  deluded  the  sages  of  Daruvana  did  not  under- 
stand Rudra^®*.  They  spoke  harsh  words  to  Rudra  who 
thereupon  disappeared. 

37-38.  In  the  morning  all  those  sages  with  perplexed 
minds  and  blurred  thinking  went  from  Daruvana  to  Brahma 
of  noble  soul  who  was  seated  in  the  highest  seat.  They  infor- 
med him  about  what  had  happened  in  that  holy  Daru  forest. 

39-40.  Pondering  over  everything  in  his  mind  Brahma 
understood  what  they  did  in  the  holy  Daru  forest.  He  stood 
up  with  palms  joined  in  reverence  and  bowed  to  Rudra.  He 
then  spoke  hurriedly  to  the  sages  who  had  their  abodes  in 
Daru  forest. 

41 . Fie  upon  you  all  who  had  attained  excellent  treasure,^®® 
O brahmins,  but  had  unluckily  wasted  it. 

42.  The  man  with  a Linga  who  had  been  seen  by  you  all 
without  Lingas,  the  person  of  deformed  features  was  the 
supreme  lord  himself. 

43.  O brahmins,  never  should  the  guests  be  dishonoured 
by  the  householder  even  if  they  happen  to  be  deformed,  dirty 
or  illiterate. 

44.  Formerly,  on  this  very  same  earth  even  Kala  the 
God  of  death  was  defeated  by  the  excellent  brahmin  sage 
Sudarlana  through  the  adoration  of  a guest. 

45.  Excepting  the  adoration  of  the  guests  there  is  no 

199.  Daruvana  : See  p.  96  note  119. 

200.  priptanidhan&n  i.e.  though  you  have  obtained  a rich  treasure 
in  the  visit  of  Siva  to  your  hermitage. 


Victory  over  Death 


119 


mode  of  self-expiation  in  this  world,  for  excellent  brahmin 
householders;  there  is  no  other  way  to  cross  the  ocean  of 
worldly  existence. 

46.  Formerly,  a householder  known  as  Sudar^ana,  vowed 
to  conquer  the  God  of  Death.^®^  He  said  to  his  chaste  wife. 

47.  “O  lady  of  good  holy  rites,  fine  eye-brows  and  good 
fortune,  listen  to  what  I say,  assiduously.  Never  should  you 
dishonour  the  guests  who  visit  your  house. 

48.  Since  everyone  of  the  guests  is  the  Pinaka-bearing  lord, 
you  should  dedicate  even  your  self  to  the  guest  and  adore  him. 

49.  That  chaste  lady,  on  being  urged  thus,  became  ex- 
tremely dejected.  Helpless  that  she  was,  she  wept  and  said  to 
her  husband — “O  lord  ! please  explain  what  you  have  just 
said.’’ 

50.  On  hearing  her  words  Sudarsana  said  again — “O 
noble  lady  everything  belongs  to  lord  Siva  and  since  the  Guest 
is  lord  Siva  himself,  everything  is  his.  Hence  the  guest  should 
always  be  adored.” 

On  being  urged  thus  by  her  husband  the  chaste  wife  ac- 
cepted this  behest  (wholeheartedly)  just  as  one  places  on  his 
head  (reverently)  the  flowers  offered  to  God.  Thus  she  went 
on  (attending  to  her  duties). 

O excellent  brahmins,  in  order  to  test  their  devotion, 
Dharma  himself  assumed  the  form  of  a brahmin  and  came  to 
the  house  of  the  sage.  That  sinless  lady  welcomed  the  guest 
and  worshipped  him  with  the  materials  of  worship. 

54.  Thus  worshipped  by  her,  Dharma  disguised  as  a 
brahmin  said — “O  gentle  lady  where  has  your  noble  husband 
Sudarsana  gone  ? 

55-58.  O noble  lady,  enough  of  this  cooked  rice  and  other 
eatables  ! I say,  you  should  dedicate  yourself  (to  me)” 
Remembering  what  had  been  previously  mentioned  by  her  hus- 
band that  chaste  lady  full  of  bashfulness  and  with  closed  eyes, 
began  to  move  (towards  him ) . Again  she  began  saying.  But 
then. . all  the  same,  she  made  up  her  mind  to  dedicate  herself  to 
Dharma*®^  there  itself  at  the  behest  of  her  own  husband.  In  the 

201.  jetum  (mrtyuzn  iti  i.e.  to  conquer  death. 

202.  dharme — dharmarupe  dvije  ST,  in  regard  to  Dharma  who  had 
assumed  the  guise  of  a brahmin.  Or  dharme — dharmvi9aye  ST,  in  regard 
to  virtue. 


120 


Lingapurd^ 


meantime,  Sudar^ana,  the  husband  of  that  lady,  came  to  the 
threshold  and  called  to  her — *‘Come,  come,  O gentle  lady  ? 
Where  have  you  been  ?” 

It  was  the  guest  himself  who  replied  to  him. 

59-64.  “O  Sudarsana,  O highly  blessed  one,  I am  now 
engaged  in  sexual  intercourse  with  this  wife  of  yours.  What 
should  be  done  here  may  kindly  be  mentioned.  O leading 
brahmin,  the  sexual  intercourse  is  concluded.  O excellent 
brahmin,  1 am  satisfied.” 

Sudarsana  the  noble  brahmin  then  said  in  great  delight: — 

“O  excellent  brahmin,  enjoy  her  as  you  please.  I shall  go 
away  now.” 

Thereafter  Dharma  who  was  delighted  (at  this  incident) 
revealed  himself  (in  his  own  form).  He  granted  him  what- 
ever he  desired  and  told  him  again. — 

leading  brahmin,  even  mentally  this  splendid  lady  has 
not  been  enjoyed  by  me.  Undoubtedly,  it  was  to  ascertain 
her  devotion  that  I came  here.  O brahmin  of  good  rites, 
with  this  single  act  of  piety  you  have  conquered  death.  O the 
prowess  of  this  penance  !”  Saying  thus  he  went  away.  Hence 
all  guests  should  be  worshipped  in  the  same  manner.^® 

65.  O unfortunate  noble  brahmins,  of  what  avail  is  much 
talk.  All  of  you  should  seek  refuge  in  the  very  same  Rudra 
immediately. 

66.  On  hearing  the  words  of  Brahma  the  leading  brah- 
mins became  distressed.  With  eyes  blinded  by  tears  they 
saluted  Brahma  and  said : 

The  Brahmins  said  : 

67-69.  O blessed  one,  we  do  not  care  even  slightly  for  our 
lives  or  for  our  woman  folk  who  have  become  deformed.  But 
that  irreproachable  omnipresent  trident-bearing  and  pinaka- 
holding  lord  has  been  censured  and  cursed  by  us  out  of  ignorance, 
though  our  power  to  curse  was  rendered  ineffective  by  his 
mere  looking  at  us.  O lord  of  Devas,  you  should  now  tell  us 
the  procedure  for  renunciation  in  order  to  see  the  terrible  lord, 
the  chief  of  Devas,  the  god  with  the  matted  hair. 

203.  tatha — Sudarianavat  ST.  just  as  Sudarsana  did. 


Victory  over  Death 


121 


Brahma  said  : 

70-74.  O excellent  brahmins,  the  devotee  shall,  at  first, 
learn  the  Vedas  with  great  devotion  from  his  preceptor.  He 
shall  always  ponder  over  their  meanings  and  understand 
Dharma.  He  shall  remain  a disciple  till  he  completes  all  learn- 
ing or  upto  twelve  years. 

He  shall  then  take  the  sacred  ablution  at  the  conclusion 
of  his  student  life.  He  shall  marry  a wife,  and  procreate  there- 
after sons  of  holy  rites.  He  shall  then  allot  befitting  means  of 
livelihood  to  his  sons.  Then  he  shall  perform  the  rites  of  wor- 
ship to  the  lord  by  performing  Agnistoma  and  other  sacrifices. 
After  going  to  forest  he  shall  worship  the  great  soul.  Main- 
taining a diet  of  milk  and  controlling  his  senses  he  shall  worship 
Devas  in  the  fire,  for  a period  of  twelve  years,  or  twelve 
months  or  twelve  fortnights  or  twelve  days. 

75-76.  Then  he  shall  offer  in  the  same  fire  all  vessels 
used  for  the  sacrifice.  He  shall  consign  all  the  earthen  and 
wooden  vessels  to  the  waters  and  the  metallic  ones  to  his  pre- 
ceptor. He  shall  distribute  all  his  belongings  to  the  brahmins 
without  hesitation.  He  shall  prostrate  on  the  ground  and 
make  obeisance  to  the  preceptor.  Becoming  detached  he  shall 
then  renounce  everything  and  become  an  ascetic. 

77.  He  shall  have  off  his  hairs  along  with  the  tuft  and 
cast  off  his  sacred  thread.  He  shall  perform  five  offerings  in 
the  waters  saying  “Bhuh  svaha’*. 

78-80.  Thereafter  he  shall  roam  about  for  attaining  com- 
pleted^ liberation,  observing  the  sacred  rite  of  refraining  from 
taking  food,  and  maintaining  himself  either  on  water,  or 
leaves,  or  milk  or  fruits.  If  living  thus,  the  ascetic  does  not 
die  within  six  months  or  a year  he  shall  strain  his  body  by 
undertaking  hazardous  journeys.  By  these  activities  he  attains 
identity  with  Siva. 

81-83.  O men  of  steadfast  holy  rites,  one  endowed  with 
devotiond®^  may  even  attain  lib  cration  immediately — . Of  what 

204.  Siva-vimuktayc — Sivarupa  vhnuktiti  kaivalyarupa  ityarthah 
ST»  for  absorption  in  Siva;  for  the  total  mergence  of  the  individual  soul  into 
the  supreme  soul. 

2Dj.  Gf.  BhagavadaoUd  • 


122 


Lingapura^ 


avail  are  these  to  a devotee  of  Rudra  ? Neither  the  holy  rites 
nor  renunciation,  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions,  nor 
sacrifices,  nor  charitable  gifts,  nor  the  different  sorts  of  Homas 
nor  the  acquisition  of  all  kinds  of  Sastras  and  Vedas  are  of  any 
avail  to  him.  By  means  of  devotion  to  Rudra,  death  was  con- 
quered by  Sveta.  May  you  too  have  such  devotion  to  the 
great  lord,  the  benefactor  and  the  Supreme  Soul. 


CHAPTER  THlRTy 

The  Story  of  Sage  Sveta 


Naniin  said  : 

1.  On  being  thus  uiged  by  Brahma,  the  leading  brahmins, 
the  great  sages  asked  him  about  the  sacred  story  of  Sveta. 

Brahma  said  : 

2-6.  O brahmins,  there  was  a certain  sage  named  Sveta  in 
the  cave  of  a mountain.  His  span  of  life  was  nearing  its  end. 
Hence  he  worshipped  and  eulogised  the  great  lord  with  devo- 
tion. He  repeated  the  Mantras  of  the  holy  hymn  Rudradhyaya 
beginning  with  “Namaste*'  (Obeisance  so  Th(  Then  the 

god  of  Death,  of  great  splendour  thought  that  the  time  of 
death  had  arrived*®®  for  the  excellent  brahmin.  O leading 
brahmins,  thinking  of  taking  him  away  he  approached  the 
sage.  Sveta  saw  Kala  and  though  the  time  of  his  death  was  im- 
minent he  meditated  upon  the  three- eyed  lord  Rudra  and  wor- 
shipped him: 

worship  the  three-eyed  lord*®®  of  great  fragrance,  who 
increases  prosperity.  What  will  god  of  Death  do  for  me  ? Since 
I am  Death  of  Death.”*^® 

206.  Svetena— by  Sage  Sveta.  For  detail,  read  Ch.  30. 

207.  Namastc  rudra  manyave.  TS,  4.5,!.!. 

208.  Kalapriptam~-gat&y\isam  i«e.  dead. 

209.  Gf,  tryambakaih  yaj&malic  sugandhim  puHivardhanam.  TS, 
I.8.6.2. 

aio.  mftyor  mrtyiib— destroyer  of  death.  Cf. 

Having  fed  on  death  that  feeds  on  men, 

Death  being  dead  there  is  no  dyin  gthen. 


123 


Victory  over  Death 

Looking  at  Sveta,  the  god  of  death  terrifying  to  the  worlds 
said  smilingly: 

7-11.  “Come,  O Sveta.  What  fruit  do  you  gain  by  this  means  ? 
O excellent  brahmin,  who  can  save  one  caught  in  my  clutches 
even  if  he  be  Rudra,  or  Vi^^u  or  Brahma  the  lord  of  the  uni- 
verse ? O brahmin,  how  does  this  procedure  pertaining  to 
Rudra  affect  me.  1 am  bent  upon  taking  you  to  my  world 

0 sage,  since  your  span  of  life  has  come  to  an  end.’* 

On  hearing  these  terrible  words  though  mingled  with 
virtuous  thoughts,  the  leading  sage  cried  out  “Ha  Rudra, 
Rudra,  Rudra.**  Glancing  at  Kala  he  spoke  with  eyes  full  of 
tears,  excitedly,  in  dejected  mood: 

Sveta  said: 

12.  O KLala,  what  can  be  done  by  you  if  our  bull-emble- 
med lord,  Rudra,  the  source  of  origin  of  all  Devas,  is  present 
in  this  Lihga  ? 

13.  O lord  of  great  arms,  of  what  avail  is  this  behest  (of 
yours) to  persons  like  me  who  are  extremely  devoted  to  Rudra  ? 

1 ask  you  to  go  away,  the  way  you  have  come. 

14-15.  On  hearing  this  Kala  of  sharp  fangs  and  terrible  to 
look  at,  became  infuriated.  The  terrible  god  with  the  noose  in 
his  hands  roared  like  a lion  and  clapped  his  hands  again  and 
again.  He  then  bound  the  sage  whose  time  of  death  had  arrived 
and  addressed  him  thus  : 

16.  “O  brahmin  sage,  O Sveta,  you  have  been  bound  by  me 
for  being  taken  to  my  abode.  What  has  been  done  now  by  your 
Rudra  the  lord  of  Devas  ? 

17.  Where  is  Rudra  and  where  your  devotion  ? Where  is 
your  worship  and  where  the  fruit  thereof  ? Where  am  I and 
whence  have  I to  fear  ? O Sveta,  you  have  been  bound  by  me. 

18.  O Sveta,  is  your  Rudra  stationed  in  this  Lihga  ? If  so, 
he  is  utterly  inactive.  How  can  he  be  worshipped  ?** 

19-20.  Then  Rudra,  the  destroyer  of  Kama  and  sacrifice, 
the  three-eyed  lord  came  hurriedly  with  a laugh,  accom- 
panied by  Uma,  Nandin  and  the  leading  ganas  in  order  to 
slay  Yama  who  had  come  to  kill  the  brahmin. 

21.  O brahmins,  then  on  seeing  Rudfa,  the  mighty  Yama*^^ 


211.  bail — ^valorous  (Yama). 


124  Utkgapmi^^ 

abandoned  the  brahmin,  out  of  fear  and  fell  down  near  the 
•age. 

22-23  On  looking  at  lord  Rudra,  the  destroyer  of  death, 
as  also  at  Yama  who  fell  instantaneously  at  the  sight  of  the  lord, 
Sveta  roared  loudly.*^*  O leading  bralunins,  the  gods  too  cried 
loudly,  and  bowed  to  the  lord  as  well  as  UmH.  The  leading 
sages  were  delighted  much. 

24.  Over  the  heads  of  the  sage  and  Rudra,  the  sky-roving 
gods  showered  cool  and  splendid  flowers  from  the  firmament. 

25-26.  On  seeing  Yama  dead,  Nandin  bowed  to  lord  Rudra. 
He  the  leader  of  the  ga^as  and  the  follower  of  lord  Rudra,  spoke 
to  the  lord  in  great  astonishment.  “This  Yama  of  puerile  intelli- 
gence*^^ is  dead.  Now,  be  favourable  to  the  sage.** 

27.  On  seeing  Yama  destroyed  in  a trice,  the  lord  blessed  the 
excellent  brahmin  and  disappeared.*^^ 

28.  Hence,  O brahmins,  One  should  devoutly  worship  the 
lord,  the  conqueror  of  the  god  of  Death.  He  is  the  bestower  of 
liberation  as  well  as  of  worldly  pleasures.  He  is  the  benefactor 
of  all. 

29.  Of  what  avail  is  much  talk?  After  renouncing  and  wor- 
shipping Rudra  with  great  devotion  you  will  all  become  free 
from  grief. 

Nandin  said: 

30-31.  On  being  addressed  thus  by  Brahma,  the  sages,  the 
expounders  of  Brahman  said  once  again  : — O lord,  be  pleased. 
By  what  penance  or  sacrifice  or  holy  rites  can  devotion  to 
Rudra,  the  Pinaka-bearing  lord,  be  acquired  ? How  will  the 
twicebom  become  the  devotee  of  Rudra  ? 

Brahma  said  : 

32-34.  Neither  by  charitable  gifts,  nor  by  learning,  can,  O 
excellent  sages  devotion  to  Siva,  the  great  cause  (of  the 
universe)  be  acquired.  It  cannot  be  acquired  by  long  or  sessional 


212.  uccadhlh — ucca  dhir  yasya  ST, — the  intelligent  (Svtca). 

213.  BaUdhih — the  stupid  (Yama). 

214.  Gud^-^riram — the  invisible  form.  Construe  : kfanad 
gudha^ariram  vivesa. 


Hymn  fo  Siva 


125 


sacrifice^  holy  rites,  vcdic  texts,  yogic  treatises  or  by  restraiats. 
It  is  acquired  only  by  God’s  grace. 

On  hearing  these  words  the  anxious  sages  bowed  to  Brahndl 
along  with  their  wives  and  sons.  Hence,  devotion  to  lord 
Rudra  bestows  virtue,  love  and  wealth.  It  yields  victory  to  the 
sage.  It  grants  him  victory  over  death. 

35-37.  Formerly,  by  means  of  devotion,  Dadhica  conquer- 
ed lord  Vi^nu  and  his  associate  Devas.  He  killed  K^upa  with 
the  tip  of  his  foot.  He  acquired  adamantine  bones.  By  glori- 
fying the  lord,  I too  conquered  death.  Even  by  the  great  sage 
Sveta  who  had  fallen  into  the  ja%vs  of  death,  death  was  con- 
quered by  the  grace  of  the  lord,  in  the  manner  it  was  conque- 
red by  me. 


CHAPTER  THIRTY  ONE 

Hymn  to  Siva 


Sanatkumdra  said: 

1 . O holy  lord,  please  now  recount  to  us  how  the  dwellers 
of  Darn  forest  sought  refuge  in  the  lord,  thanks  to  his  grace. 

Nandin  said: 

2.  The  self-born  deity  (Brahma)  spoke  thus  to  the  blessed 
residents  of  Daru  forest  who  had  the  lustre  of  fire  due  to  their 
penance. 

Brahma  said : 

3.  This  great  lord  should  be  known  as  Mahe^vara.  Greater 
than  him  there  is  no  other  protection  to  be  sought. 

4*5.  He  is  the  lord  of  Devas,  sages  and  pitrs.  During  the 
period  of  dissolution  at  the  end  of  a thousand  sets  of  four 
yugas,***^  the  lord  becomes  Kala  and  destroys  all  living  beings. 
He  alone  creates  subjects  by  his  splendour. 

215.  The  period  of  dissolution  is  equal  to  a kalpa,  or  a night  of  Brahm^, 
equal  to  a period  of  four  hundred  thirty  two  million  years  of  mortals. 


126 


Lingapura^ 


6.  He  is  the  thunder bol inarmed  (Indra)  and  the  discu’- 
bcaring  Vi^nu  marked  by  Srivatsa.  He  is  called  Yogin  in 
the  Kfta  age,  Kratu  in  the  Treta,  Kalagni  in  the  Dvapara  and 
Dharmaketu  in  the  Kali  age.  These  four  are  the  forms  of  Rudra 
which  the  learned  men  meditate  upon. 

8.  The  Lihga  should  be  symmetrical  within  and  without;  at 
the  place  of  support  of  the  swollen  knob  it  should  be  octangu- 
lar. In  other  places  it  should  be  cylindrical  and  of  attractive 
appearance.  One  should  worship  only  such  a fine  Linga. 

9.  Tamas  is  the  fire  god;  Rajas  is  Brahma  and  Sattva  is 
Vii^nu.  Although  there  is  a single  deity  at  the  base  these  are 
glorified  as  its  forms.^^® 

10-11.  The  leading  brahmins  who  have  conquered  their 
anger  and  sense-organs,  make  the  Linga  endowed  with  all  these 
traits.  It  is  there  that  the  Brahman  stays  along  with  all  his 
yogic  powers.  Hence  they  worship  (in  the  lihga)  lord  I^ana  the 
lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas,  the  unchanging  deity. 

12-17.  The  Lihga  should  be  cylindrical,  splendid,  of  the 
size  of  a thumb,  appealing  to  all  and  level  in  the  umbilical 
region.  It  may  have  eight  or  sixteen  equal  angles.  Its  zone  must 
be  well  built  so  that  it  should  yield  all  desires.  The  supporting 
altar  is  twice  its  size  or  equal  in  size,  and  approved  by  all.  The 
cow's  hole  shall  have  all  the  characteristics  of  the  altar  and 
shall  be  a third  of  its  size.  O excellent  brahmins,  the  border  all 
round  shall  be  at  least  one  yava  in  breadth.  The  Lihga  shall  be 
made  of  gold,  silver  or  copper.  The  altar  shall  extend 
up  to  thrice  its  size  all  round.  It  (the  altar)  shall  be  circular, 
triangular,  quadrangular  or  hexagonal  in  shape.  It  shall  be  free 
from  cracks,  and  with  all  characteristics  clearly  defined.  After 
installing  it  duly  in  accordance  with  the  rules  governing  worship, 
O brahmins,  the  Kala^a  (water-pot)  shall  be  placed  in  the 
middle  of  the  altar. 

18.  A piece  of  gold  and  cereals^^’  shall  be  placed  within 
it.  The  holy  water  shall  then  be  inspired  with  the  Mantras  of 


216.  Of.  Devi  Bhaga.  1*8.4;  BrakmSnday  prakriyd,  4.6;  Mar,  40.18;  SP 
VSyaviya  10.27;  LiAga,  1.1.22. 

217.  sabijam — ^paiicak^ara-mantra-sahitam  ST,  including  the  five- 
tyllabled  mantra  *namah  Sivaya*. 


127 


Hymn  to  Siva 

the  five  auspicious  Brahmans*^^  (Sadyoj§ta  etc) . The  devotee 
shall  thereafter  sprinkle  the  Lihga  with  the  holy  water 
repeating  the  sacred  five  mantras. 

19.  If  you  worship  with  such  materials  as  are  available 
you  will  attain  Siddhi.  All  of  you  joined  by  your  sons  and  kins* 
men  shall  worship  him  with  concentration  and  mental  purity. 

20*  All  of  you  with  your  palms  joined  in  reverence  shall 
resort  to  the  trident-bearing  lord.  You  will  then  see  the  lord 
of  Devas  who  is  inaccessible  to  persons  with  no  self-control. 

21-22.  On  seeing  him  your  ignorance  and  sins  will  perish. 

Thereafter  forest-dwellers  circumambulated  Brahma  of 
unmeasured  prowess  and  returned  to  Daruvana.  They  propi- 
tiated the  lord  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  Brahma. 

23-27.  In  the  different  dry  tracts  of  land,  or  in  the  caves  of  the 
mountains  or  in  the  auspicious  but  isolated  banks  of  the  rivers 
they  performed  penances.  Some  stayed  in  water,  looking 
splendid  with  moss  clinging  to  them,  some  were  exposed  to  the 
rain  in  the  course  of  penance  and  some  stood  on  the  tips  of 
their  toes.  Others  lived  on  grains  crushed  by  teeth.  Others  on 
grains  crushed  with  pieces  of  rocks.  Some  adopted  Vfrasana 
postures  and  others  were  engaged  in  the  activities  of  deer. 
Thus  these  wise  devotees  spent  time  in  penance  and  worship. 
When  a year  was  completed  and  Spring  arrived,  in  that  Krta 
age,  the  lord  wanted  to  bless  them  with  his  grace.  With  sym- 
pathy towards  his  devotees,  the  delighted  lord  came  to 
Daru  forest  on  the  splendid  mountain  Himalaya.^^® 

28-32.  The  lord  had  vulgar  traits.  He  was  stark  nude.  He 
had  smeared  his  limbs  with  ashes.  His  hands  were  engaged  in 
whirling  a firebrand.  His  eyes  were  red  and  tawny.  Sometimes 
he  laughed  biosteriously,  sometimes  he  sang  surprisingly. 
Sometimes  he  danced  amorously  and  sometimes  he  cried 
repeatedly.  He  roamed  round  the  hermitages  and  begged  for 
alms.  He  assumed  forms  of  his  choice  by  his  mayil.  When  the 
lord  thus  came  to  the  forest  the  sages  eulogised  him  with 
devotion.  By  their  pleasant  countenance  and  in  the  con  xny 

2x8.  brahmabhih“-^>dycj&tMimantraih****with  maatrat  bqi^iiining 
with  ^sadyoj&t&ya  namab’. 

219.  See  p.  94  note  xii. 


128 


LingapmS^ 


of  their  wives,  sons  and  attendants,  they  greeted  the  lord  with 
waters,  garlands  of  variegated  colour,  incense  and  scents.  They 
spokt*  to  the  lord  thus: 

3j-35.  “O  lord  of  chief  of  Dcvas,  please  forgive  whatever 
fault  has  been  committed  by  us  mentally,  verbally  and  physi* 
calJy,  out  of  our  ignorance.  O Rudra,  your  activities  wonderful 
and  incomprehensible  are  secret  and  unintelligible  even  to 
Brahma  and  other  Devas.  We  do  not  understand  either  your 
progress  or  regress.” 

36.  O lord  of  the  universe,  O supreme  lord,  you  are  as  you 
are.  Obeisance  be  to  you.  The  sages  of  noble  soul  eulogise  you 
as  the  lord  of  Dcvas,  the  supreme  lord. 

37.  Obeisance  to  Bhava,  to  the  splendid  one,  to  the 
coiiceiver  of  all  objects,  to  the  source  of  their  origin,  to  one  of 
infinite  strength  and  prowess  and  to  the  lord  of  all  living 
beings. 

38.  Obeisance  to  the  destroyer,  to  the  tawny-coloured  one, 
to  the  changing  and  the  unchanging  one,  to  one  who  bore  the 
flow  of  the  Gangetic  waters  and  to  the  support  of  all.  Obeisance 
to  one  who  manifests  in  all  the  three  Gunas. 

39.  Obeisance  to  the  Lord  with  three  eyes,  to  the  holder 
of  the  excellent  trident,  the  bestower  of  pleasure^^®  to  the  fire 
god  and  the  great  Atman. 

40.  Obeisance  to  the  bull-emblemed  Siva,  to  the  lord  of 
Ganas ; to  Kala  armed  with  a staff  and  a noose  in  his  hands. 

41-42.  Obeisance  to  one  who  is  the  chief  deity  of  the  Vcdic 
hymns,  and  who  has  hundred  tongues.  O lord,  this  entire  uni- 
verse is  born  out  of  your  body  whether  it  be  of  the  past,  pre- 
sent or  future,  whether  it  be  mobile  or  immobile.  O lord,  wel- 
fa* r ^mto  you.  You  protect  and  destroy  everything.  Hence  be 
pleai  "dwith  us. 

43.  Whatever  man  does  out  of  ignorance  or  knowledge  is 
don-'  by  the  lord  himself  through  his  yogic  Maya. 

220.  kandarpaya — kam  sukham  tena  darpayati  har$ayati,  mohayati 
va  kandarpaf^  taamai  ST,  One  who  delights  his  devotees  by  giving  them 
pleasure. 

221.  bhagavan— It  has  been  defined  as  ^ ^ 

i ^ fansrmr^r^  iT:?r  n 

quoted  in  ST, 


Hymn  to  Lord  Siva 


129 


44-46.  After  eulogising  the  lord  with  delighted  inner  soul, 
the  sages  endowed  with  austerities  requested***  him — ‘‘Let  us 
see  you  in  your  real  form.**  Then  the  delighted  lord  assumed  his 
real  form  of  three  eyes.  To  sec  that  form  the  lord  granted  them 
divine  eyes.  Looking  at  the  three-eyed  lord  of  Devas  by  the 
vision  they  had  acquired,  the  dwellers  of  Daruvana  again 
eulogised  the  lord. 


CHAPTER  THIRTYTWO 

Hymn  to  Lord  Siva 


The  sages  said  : 

1.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  who  is  naked,***  who  bears  the 
trident,  who  dissolves  the  universe,***  who  is  handsome,***  who 
is  an  axe  to  the  tree  of  the  universe,***  to  one  with  terrifying 
face.**’ 

2.  Obeisance  to  formless  one;  to  one  of  handome  form; 
to  one  of  the  form  of  the  universe.  Obeisance  to  one  who  em- 
braces the  elephantine  face  of  his  son  Ganesa  ;***  obeisance  to 
Rudra;  obeisance  to  one  in  the  form  of  yajamana.*** 

3.  Obeisance  to  one  bowed  by  all;  obeisance  to  one  who 
bows  to  his  own  Atman;  obeisance  to  one  with  blue  tuft;***  obei- 
sance to  one  with  poison  in  his  neck. 

4.  Obeisance  to  one  who  is  blue-necked,  to  one  who  applies 
the  ash  from  the  cremation  ground  all  over  the  body.  You  are 
Brahma  among  all  Devas.  You  are  Nilalohita  among  all 
Rudras. 

222.  yacanta — »q  archaic  form  for  ayacanta. 

223  digv^ase — aparichinnarupaya  ST, — not  conditioned  by  limit, 

224  krtantaya — pralayakSrao&ya  ST — the  cause  of  dissolution. 

225  Vikataya — sundarSya  5T,~of  beautiful  form. 

226  karalaya — kuthariiya  5T.— an  axe  to  the  world-tree. 

227  karala-vadanSya — of  terrible  face. 

228  kataAkataya — who  one  touches  lovingly  the  elephantine  face 
of  Gapefa. 

229.  sv&h^kar&ya — one  who  has  a form  of  yajam&na. 

230,  nila-iikhai>45yar-of  dark  hair. 


130 


Lingapurdna 


5-6.  You  are  the  soul  of  all  living  beings.  You  are  known  as 
Purusa  in  the  Sahkhya  system.  You  are  Meru  among  moun- 
tains; moon  among  planets;  Vasi^tba  among  sages;  Indra  among 
Devas;  Om  among  Vedas  and  the  excellent  Saman  among 
Saman  verses. 

7.  You  are  lion  among  beasts;  bull  among  animals  and  lord 
of  all  men. 

8.  In  whatever  form  you  are,  whatever  form  you  may 
assume,  may  we  be  able  to  see  you  there  in  the  manner  mention- 
ed by  Brahma.**^ 

9.  Lust,  anger,  covetousness,  despondency  and  arrogance 
— we  wish  to  know  all  these;  be  pleased,  O supreme  lord. 

10.  When  the  time  of  great  Dissolution  arrived,  O lord,  the 
hand  was  rubbed  against  the  forehead  and  fire  was  generated 
by  you  the  self-possessed  soul. 

11.  Then  the  whole  world  was  enveloped  by  that  fire. 
Hence  these  (lust,  anger  etc. ) are  distorted  fires  equal  to  the 
fire  of  dissolution. 

12-16.  Lust,  fury,  greediness,  delusion,  arrogance  and  harass- 
ment and  all  living  beings  mobile  and  immobile  are  burn- 
ed by  the  fire  originating  from  you.  O lord  of  Devas,  be 
our  protector  even  as  we  are  being  burned.  O highly  blessed 
one,  O supreme  lord,  for  the  welferc  of  the  world  you  sprinkle 
the  living  beings.  O auspicious  observer,  O lord,  command 
us:  we  shall  carry  out  your  behest,  in  thousands  and  crores 
of  living  beings,  in  hundreds  and  crores  of  forms,  we  are  unable 
to  reach  the  extremities.  O lord  of  Devas,  obeisance  be  to  you. 


CaiAPTER  THmTYTHREE 

Statement  of  the  Sages 

J^andin  said: 

1 . Thereafter  the  lord  was  delighted  and  he  blessed  them. 
On  listening  to  their  eulogy  he  spoke  thus: 


23 1 . pa^ytoiah-^tathA  kurv  iti  ST.  Do  so  that  we  may  see  you. 


Statement  of  the  sages 


131 


2.  The  brahmin  who  reads  or  listens  to  the  hymn  glorified 
by  you  all  or  narrates  this  to  the  brahmins  shall  attain  leader- 
ship among  my  attendants. 

3-4.  O leading  sages,  I shall  mention  what  is  conducive  to 
your  welfare  and  sacred  to  the  devotees.  Everything  feminine 
is  goddess  Prakrti  born  of  my  body.  O brahmins,  everything 
masculine  is  Purusa  born  of  my  body.  O brahmins,  undoubt- 
edly my  creation  is  through  both  of  these. 

5.  Hence  no  one  shall  censure  the  naked  ascetic  who  is 
devoted  to  me,  who  expounds  Brahman  but  who  behaves  like 
children  and  mad  people. 

6-8.  Those  devotees  of  Mahadeva  who  are  interested  in 
applying  ashes;  who  burn  their  sins  through  ashes;  who  are 
engaged  in  meditation  and  carry  out  what  has  been  laid  down 
in  the  scriptures;  who  have  perfect  control  over  the  sense- 
organs;  who  have  sublimated  their  sexuality;  who  worship  the 
great  lord  with  perfect  verbal,  mental  and  physical  control; 
reach  Rudra’s  world  and  do  not  return  therefrom.  Hence  this 
secret,  sacred  ar'^  divine  rite  of  the  deity  of  manifest  Lihga. 

9.  The  observers  of  the  above  holy  rite  have  all  t3  pes 
of  forms;  they  shave  off  their  heads  and  they  observe  the  rite  of 
ashes.  No  learned  man  shall  revile  at  them  nor  should  they 
be  transgressed. 

10.  No  one  shall  laugh  derisively  at  them  nor  shall  he 
speak  words  displeasing  to  them  if  he  desires  for  welfare  here 
and  hereafter.  The  stupid  man  who  censures  them,  censures 
the  lord  himself. 

11-12.  He  who  worships  them  worships  Siva.  Thus,  with 
a desire  for  the  welfare  of  the  worlds,  the  great  lord  sports  about 
as  a great  yogin  in  every  yuga,  with  ashes  smeared  all  over 
his  body.^^® 

232.  The  half  man  and  half  woman  form  of  Siva  known  as  *ardha- 

narisvara*.  It  symbolises  the  origin  of  creation  by  copulation.  Cf.  Mbh. 
as  quoted  in  ST,  ^ ^ | ^ 

233.  Cf.  Bhagvadgaiti  : d (\  vpff:  | 

SrWTW  ^ ll  Quoted  in  ST. 


132 

You  too  shall  observe  all  the  rites.  Then  vrdiiim  will  be 
yours  and  you  will  attain  perfectioii. 

13.  Grasping  the  great  knowledge  impasted  by  Siva»  which 
being  incomparable  is  the  destroyer  of  the  sages  bent 
their  heads  and  made  obeisance  to  Siva  with  their  minds  clear- 
ed of  fear,  greed  and  delusion  immediately. 

14-15.  On  hearing  what  was  recounted  thus,  the  delighted 
brahmins,  began  the  ablution  of  lord  Siva  with  pure  scented 
waters  with  Ku^a  grass  and  flowers  scattered  therein.  They 
poured  water  out  of  water  jars.  They  sang  various  songs  of 
esoteric  meaning  and  produced  huihkaras  with  sweet  tones. 

16.  Obeisance  to  the  overlord  of  Devas;  obeisance  to  the 
great  lord,  obebance  to  one  who  shares  half  of  body  with  hb 
consort;*^  obeisance  to  the  initiator  of  S^khya  and  Yoga. 

17.  Obeisance  to  one  who  is  black  as  a cluster  of  clouds. 
Obeisance  to  one  wearing  elephant’s  hide.  Obeisance  to  one 
having  deerskin  for  the  upper  garment;  obeisance  to  one  hav- 
ing serpent  for  the  sacred  thread. 

18.  Obeisance  to  Siva  with  wonderful  well-arranged 
car-rings;  with  well  knit  garlands  and  ornaments;  to  one  with 
the  fine  lion  skin  as  garb;  obeisance  to  one  of  extensive 
reputation. 

19.  Then  the  delighted  lord  spoke  to  the  sages — ‘*0  ye 
of  good  rites,  I am  delighted  with  your  penance.  Choose  your 
boons.” 

20-24.  All  those  sages  bowed  to  the  lord.  TTicn  Bhrgu^ 
Angiras,  Vasi^tha,  Vi^vamitra,  Gautama,  Atri,  SukcfiSa,  Pula- 
stya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  Maiici,  Ka^yapa,  Kanva  and  Samvarta 
of  great  penance,  spoke  to  the  lord  after  paying  due  homage: 
‘‘We  wish  to  know  the  mystic  secret  behind  the  smearing  of 
ashes,  nudity,  indirectness  (in  worship)  contrariety  in  the 
natural  order,*®®  the  propriety  of  service  or  otherwise.”  On 
hearing  their  words  the  great  lord  looked  at  the  excellent  sages 
and  said  smilingly. 


234.  See  p.  18.  note  27. 

235.  VSmMvam’---»avyi^mS^  ST.  the  left-hand  ritual 

or  doctrine  of  the  Tantras.  pradlomatS — the  opposite  of  V&ma.m&rga,  i.e. 
a lantric  ritual  in  which  left  hand  practices  find  no  place. 


CSAPTIBR  THIRTYFOUR 

Praise  of  the  Yogin 


133 


The  lord  said  : 

1.  I shall  recount  to  you  the  whole  story  in  a nutshell. 
I am  Agni  (Fire  god)  the  creator  of  Soma  and  I am  Soma  that 
resorts  to  Agni. 

2.  Agni  carries  what  is  consigned  to  it  by  way  of  Homa. 
Since  it  rests  in  the  world,  the  universe  consisting  of  the  mobile 
and  immobile  beings  is  often  burned  by  it. 

3.  Everything  reduced  to  ashes  becomes  excellent  and 
sacred.  With  ashes  Soma  attains  power  and  rejuvenates  living 
beings. 

4.  He  who  performs  the  rite  of  oblation  into  the  firc^** 
as  also  the  rite  of  ‘Tryayusa’*®’  is  liberated  from  sins  due  to 
the  virtue  of  ashes  which  constitute  power. 

5.  The  word  Bhasman  is  derived  from  *bhas’  to  shine, 

bhasate-shines  or  from  causal  of ‘bhu’  to  cause  to  reach,  HT^ir^or 
from  ‘bhaks’  to  eat,  since  it  devours  all  sins  it  is  called 

Bhasman. 

6.  The  Pitrs  drink  fire;  Devas  drink  Soma.  The 
entire  universe  of  the  mobile  and  immobile  beings  is  of  the 
nature  of  Agni  and  Soma. 

7.  I am  Agni  of  great  splendour.  This  great  Uma  is 
Soma.  I am  Agni  and  Soma  together.  I am  Purusa  as  well  as 
Prakrti. 

8.  Hence,  O blessed  ones  ! the  ashes  constitute  my 
virility.  I hold  my  virility  by  my  physical  body.  This  is 
the  fact, 

9.  Ever  since  then,  protection  is  afforded  by  the  ashes. 
At  times  of  inauspicious  events  and  even  in  lying-in  chambers 
it  is  resorted  to  for  securing  protection. 

10.  One  whose  soul  is  purified  by  applying  ashes  over  the 
body,  one  who  has  conquered  anger  and  the  sense-organs,  never 
returns  after  coming  near  me. 

236.  agnikaryam — ^sacrificial  rite. 

237*  tryayu^am — ^asb-hath  by  rc»  the  mantra  *tryayu§aih 

jamadagne’  VS»  3. 62, 


1 1.  The  holy  P&^opata  yoga  and  Ihe  Sihhhya  of  KApila**^ 
have  been  evolved  by  me.  It  was  the  excellent  Pa^upata  rite 
that  was  evolved  at  the  outset. 

12.  Persons  occupying  different  stages  of  life  have  been 
created  by  Brahma  afterwards.  This  creation  involving  bash- 
fulness, delusion  and  fear  has  been  evolved  by  me. 

13.  Devas  and  sages  are  verily  born  nude.  The  other 
human  beings  are  also  born  nude. 

14.  A man  may  be  clad  in  silken  garments.  But  if  his 
sense-organs  are  not  in  control  he  is  naked.  But  if  his  sense- 
organs  are  subdued  he  himself  is  well  covered  ( even  if  he  does 
not  put  on  clothes) . The  cloth  is  not  regarded  as  the  specific 
cause  in  these  cases.*** 

15.  Forgiveness,  fortitude,  non-violence,  detachment,  equal 
reaction  in  regard  to  honour  and  dishonour — all  these  consti- 
tute excellent  covering  for  the  body. 

16-17.  One  who  has  taken  holy  bath  of  ashes,  one  who 
after  smearing  ashes  over  the  body,  mentally  meditates  on 
Siva,  even  if  he  has  committed  thousands  of  faults  gets  all  his 
sins  washed  by  the  ash-bath  in  the  manner  as  the  fire  burns  the 
forest.  He  who  strenuously  takes  holy  bath  of  ashes  thrice  a day 
would  attain  the  status  of  the  lord  of  Ganas. 

18-21.  Those  who  perform  sacrifices,**®  observe  holy  rites 
and  meditate  on  the  great  lord  with  devout  feelings  about  the 
divine  sports  of  the  lord,  attain  immortality  by  passing  through 
the  noble  northern  path.  Those  who  resort  to  the  cremation 
ground,  by  means  of  the  southern  path,  attain  the  eight 
perfections  : A^ima:  Garima,  Laghima,  Prapti,  Kfimavasayita, 
Prakamya,  liSitva  Vaiitva  and  also  immortality  (in  the  end).**^ 


238.  KSpilam -SSihldhya-^SstrSm  ST,  a system  of  philosophy 
founded  by  Kapila  and  known  after  his  name. 

239.  Mark  the  contribution  of  ethics  to  the  Saivite  cult* 

240.  kratCin — five  great  sacrifices  (mahoyajfias)  described  in  Gh.  26, 
Verses  14-19  (p.  104) 

241.  The  eight  siddhis  (attainments  of  supernatural  power)  comprise 
(i)apim&  (the  power  of  becoming  as  small  as  an  atom),  (ii)  laghimfi  (the 
faculty  of  assuming  excessive  lightness  at  will),  (iii)  prapti  (the  power  of 
obtaining  everything),  (iv)  priUdlmya  (irresistible  will)  (v)  mahimfi  (the 
power  of  increasing  one’s  size  as  will),  \yi)  liitva  (supremacy),  (vii)  va^itva 
(the  power  of  subduing  all  to  one’s  own  will)  and  (viii)  kfimftvas&yitft  (th^ 


Praise  of  the  Togin 


135 


22.  Indra  and  other  Devas  who  had  adopted  the  holy 
rite  conducive  to  the  realisation  of  all  desires  attained  the 
greatest  power  and  prosperity;  ail  of  them  are  well  known  for 
their  splendour  and  refulgence. 

23.  One  shall  be  devoid  of  delusion,  arrogance,  passion 
and  the  defects  of  tamas  and  rajas  in  his  character.  Under- 
standing that  things  of  the  world  arc  subject  to  decay  and  dest- 
ruction one  shall  always  be  devoted  to  the  yoga  of  Pa^upati.*** 

24-26.  He  should  meditate  on  the  vrata  of  Pa^upati  (Siva) 
that  is  destructive  of  all  sins. 

He  who  reads  this,  being  pure  and  faithful,  having  conque- 
red the  sense-organs,  shall  become  purified  of  all  sins  and 
shall  go  to  Rudra's  world.  On  hearing  this  all  those  sages, 
Vasistha  and  others  and  all  the  excellent  brahmins  smeared 
their  bodies  with  ashes  and  became  freed  of  all  desires.  At  the 
end  of  the  kalpa  they  started  towards  the  world  of  Rudra. 

27.  Hence  even  the  deformed  and  dirty  persons  are 
worthy  of  worship  and  should  not  be  censured.  Leading 
brahmins  whether  handsome  or  dirty  should  also  be  worshipped. 
They  may  be  leading  yogins. 

28.  Of  what  avail  is  much  talk  ? Excellent  brahmin  devo- 
tees of  Siva  should  be  worshipped  by  all  means  like  Siva 
himself. 

29-31.  Even  dirty  leading  brahmins  may  be  devotees  of 
Siva  and  steady  in  their  rites.  By  devotion  to  Siva  much  can 
be  achieved  in  the  world  in  the  manner  of  Dadhica  who  could 
conquer  even  Visnu  the  lord  of  Devas.  Hence  by  all  means,  those 
devotees  with  matted  hair  or  tonsured  head,  or  naked  anchori- 

power  of  suppressing  desire).  The  last  one  is  sometimes  substituted  by 
sarvs^fiatva.  LiAga  reads  icchS-k&m&vas&yitvam  for  k&mXvasSyitvam. 

Some  other  siddhis  such  as  dura-irava^a  (hearing  from  a distance), 
agnistambha  (checking  the  heat  of  the  fire)  etc.  are  also  added  to  these.  For 
detail,  see  V&caspati’s  Taitoa^Kaumudl  on  Iivarakr9na*s  S&ihkhya-Karik&.} 

2242.  Pa^upatl-yoga — a concentrated  devotion  in  lord  Siva,  who  is 
called  pasupati,  the  lord  of  the  pahis  (jivas)  whom  he  binds  with  the  pftlas 
(strings)  of  vifayas  (objects  of  senses).  Cf.  Rttdra-bhcfya  of  Ahobala  cited  in 
ST*  **Brahm&dyih  paiavas  te^&m  patib  paiupatih  smrtah***  Jivas  in  different 
strata  of  life  from  Brahm&  to  man  are  paius,  bound  with  the  noose  of 
vi$ayas— H>bjects  of  worldly  pleasure.  But  each  paiu  can  get  release  by 
eschewing  these  vi9ayas  and  by  his  concentrated  meditation  on  Siva. 


136 


lihgapmadM 


tes,  who  have  smeared  their  bodies  with  ashes  should  be 
worshipped  always  like  Siva  himself  mentally,  verbally  and 
physically. 


CHAPTER  THIRTTFIVB 

Defeat  of 


Sanatkumdra  said: 

1-2.  O sage  of  holy  rites,  how  did  Dadhica  strike  king 
Ksupa  with  his  foot  after  conquering  Vi^pu,  the  lord  of  Dcvas 
in  battle  ? How  did  that  skge  of  great  penance  attain  adaman* 
tine  bones  from  lord  Siva  ? O Nandin,  please  recount  how 
Death  was  conquered  by  you. 

J\fandin  said: 

3.  There  was  a king  of  great  splendour  known  as  K$upa. 
He  was  the  son  of  Brahma.  He,  the  lord  of  the  people,  was  the 
friend  of  Dadhica,  a leading  sage. 

4.  In  course  of  time,  incidentally  a dispute  arose  between 
Ksupa  and  'Dadhica  as  to  who  was  the  better — a K^atriya  or 
a Brahmin. 

5-6.  (K§upa  said)  The  king  holds  the  physical  body  of 
the  eight  guardians  of  the  quarters.*^®  Hence  I am  Indra, 
Agni,  Yama,  Nirfti,  Varuna,  Vayu,  Soma  (Moon) , and  Dhanada 
(Kubera,  the  lord  of  wealth).  I am  I^vara  (overlord) . I should 
not  be  dishonoured. 

7-9.  O sage  of  holy  rites,  that  deity  (i.  e.  the  king)  is 


343.  The  king  embodies  the  essence  of  eight  lokap&las — the  guardian 
deities  presiding  over  the  quarters,  via.  (i)  Indra,  cast;  (2)  Agni,  south- 
east; (3)  Yama,  south;  (4)  SUrya — south-west;  (5)  Varupa,  west;  (6) 
“Vayu,  north-west;  (7)  Kuvera,  north;  (8)  Soma,  north-east.  As  such,  he 
is  a divine  being.  He  is  authorized  to  maintain  the  system  of  four  varpas 
and  A dramas.  But  none  of  the  sacred  texts — irutis  and  smrti^^empowers 
him  to  rule  over  the  Br&hmana  varna.  Cf.  G.  Dh.  S.  rajS  sarvasye^te  brSh- 
ma^a-varjam. 


Defeat  of  K^pa 


137 


greater  than  the  greatest.***  Hence,  O blessed  one,  O son  of 
Cyavana,  I must  never  be  insulted  by  you.  I must  always  be 
honoured. 

On  hearing  that  opinion  of  K^upa  the  great  sage  Dadhica, 
son  of  Cyavana,  struck  K^upa  on  the  head  with  his  left  fist, 
believing  in  his  own  supremacy  as  a brahmin.  But  the  jjowcr- 
ful  Ksupa  hit  Dadhica  widi  his  thunderbolt. 

10-12.  Formerly,  he  was  bom  in  the  world  of  Brahma 
when  Brahma  sneezed.  He  was  urged  by  the  thunderbolt- 
wielding  Indra  to  perform  a task.  He  obtained  the  thunderbolt 
as  a reward  for  his  task.  Out  of  his  own  will,  he  became  a 
human,  being  and  afterwards  a king.  The  powerful  king 
then  conquered  the  leading  brahmin  like  the  powerful  Indra 
himself,  full  of  tamas  qualities.  When  struck  by  the  thunderbolt 
the  leading  brahmin  fell  on  ihe  ground. 

13-14.  Out  of  sorrow  he  remembered  sage  Bhfirgava. 
Bhargava,  the  best  among  the  embodied  beings,  came  there 
and  by  his  yogic  power  he  stitched  the  body  of  Dadhica  who 
had  been  struck  by  the  thunderbolt.  After  stitching  the 
severed  body  Bhargava  said: 

15-16.  O highly  blessed  Dadhica,  worship  Siva,  the  un- 
sullied lord  of  Devas,  worthy  of  worship  by  Brahma  and  others* 
O brahmin  sage  ! by  the  grace  of  the  threc-cyed  lord,  you 
become  immortal.  O brahmin,  this  power  of  resuscitating  one 
to  life  has  been  obtained  from  him  by  me. 

17.  There  is  no  fear,  anywhere,  from  death  for  the  devo- 
tees of  Siva.  I shall  now  tell  you  Siva’s  Mantra  that  revivoi 
one  to  life. 

18-2 la  “We  worship  the  lord,  father  of  the  three  worlds,**® 
the  lord  of  the  three  deities,  three  Gu^as,  three  principles, 
three  sacred  fires,  of  three  Vedas,  of  everything  splitin  to  three. 
He  is  the  scented  one,  the  increaser  of  nourishment  in  all  living 
beings  in  all  places:  in  the  Prakrti  having  the  three  Gut^as,  in 
the  sensc-oigans  and  their  objects,  in  Devas  and  Gat)as.  The 
fragrant  lord  is  as  subtle  as  fragrance  in  the  flowers. 


244.  Gf.  Manu  : 1 78. 

245.  triyambakam-^tryamhakasn.  Gf.  TS*  1. 8.6.2. 


138 


LiiigapuraJia 


2 lb-25.  O excellent  brahmin  of  holy  rites,  O great  sage, 
because  pu^ti  (nourishment)  is  the  very  name  of  Purusa, 
He  is  the  increaser  of  nourishment  (pustivardhana)  of  all  the 
divine  creations  beginning  with  Mahat  and  ending  with  Visesa, 
of  Vi?9u,  of  Brahma,  of  sages,  of  Indra,  and  of  Devas.  Hence, 
we  do  worship  Aat  immortal  nectarine  lord  Rudra  by  means  of 
actions,  by  penance,  by  study  of  the  VedaL,  by  yoga  and  by 
meditation.  By  this  truth,  Siva  himself  shall  liberate  us  from 
the  bondage  of  Death.  The  lord  is  the  cause  of  bondage  and 
liberation  like  the  cucumber  fruit. This  Mantra  that  resus- 
citates life  has  been  acquired  by  me  from  Siva. 

26.  By  repeating  this  Mantra,  by  doing  sacrifice  with  this,  by 
drinking  water  inspired  by  this  mantra,  by  meditating  on  this 
Mantra  in  the  presence  of  the  Linga,  O brahmin,  one  shall 
not  have  any  fear  of  death. 

27.  After  hearing  his  words  Dadhica  propitiated  Siva  by 
means  of  penance  and  attained  adamantine  bones,  indestructi- 
bility and  absence  of  affliction. 

28-30.  Having  obtained  indestructibility  and  adamantine 
bones  Dadhica  hit  the  king  severely  on  the  head  with  the  tip 
of  his  foot.  King  Ksupa,  in  return,  hit  Dadhica  in  his  chest 
with  his  thunderbolt.  But  by  the  grace  of  lord  Siva  the  thun- 
derbolt was  rendered  ineffective.  It  could  not  injure 
Dadhica  the  great  soul  of  adamantine  body. 

3 1 . On  seeing  the  greatness  and  power  of  Dadhica  by  way 
of  indestructibility  and  unafflicted  sta^^c,  Ksupa  propitiated  the 
iotus-eyed  lord  the  younger  brother  of  Indra. 


246.  ry.  i.9.6.2.Gf.  I 

Sivagfta  quoted  in  ST. 


139 


CHAPTER  THIRTYSIX 

Dialogue  between  Kfupa  and  Dadkica 


said  : 

1-3.  Lord  Vwpx  was  pleased  hisf  wf>rship. 

Accompanied  by  Sn  and  Bhumi  (his  consorts),  holding  the 
conch,  the  discus,  the  iron  club  and  lotus  in  his  hands,  wearing 
crown,  bedecked  in  all  ornaments,  clad  in  yellow  robes,  sur- 
rounded by  Devas  and  asuras,  the  Garu^a-bannered  glorious 
lord  Vi^u  granted  him  divine  vision.  Seeing  him  by  his  divine 
vision,  K$upa  bowed  to  the  Garuda-bannered  deity  and  eulogi- 
sed him  with  pleasing  words. 

4-B.  You  are  the  primordial  deity  with  no  origin.  You 
arc  Prakfti,  you  are  Purusa,  the  protector  of  the  world.  You 
are  Vi§riu  the  lord  of  the  universe.  You  are  Brahma,  with  the 
universe  for  your  body.  You  are  the  first  principle.  O Visnu, 
you  alone  arc  the  greatest  luminary.  You  are  the  supreme 
soul,  O lord  of  Sri,  you  are  the  greatest  abode.  O lord  of  the 
earth,  Rudra  enveloped  by  tamas  originated  from  your  fury. 
Brahma,  the  creator  of  the  universe  enveloped  by  rajas  was 
born  of  your  grace.  The  lord  enveloped  by  sattva,  was  born  of 
your  grace*  O Vi§nu,  O Rudra,  you  arc  idenUcal  with  the 
universe. 

9.  The  principles  of  intellect,  ego,  the  subtle  elements  and 
the  sense-organs  O lord,  omniformed,  are  all  presided  over  by 
you  alone. 

10.  O great  lord,  O lord  of  the  universe,  O Brahma,  O 
preceptor  of  the  universe,  be  pleased,  O lord  of  the  chiefs  of 
Devas,  be  pleased. 

11.  O Lord  of  the  universe,  be  pleased.  I seek  refuge  in 
you,  worthy  of  being  sought  refuge  in.  O omniscient  lord  of 
long  arms. 

12.  O liberator  of  mankind,  O highly  blessed  one!  O lord 
of  great  strength  1 O best  of  souls  I O unopposed  ! O great 
Vi§9u  ! perpetual  obeisance  be  to  you. 

13-14.  O Vif^u  your  divine  invisible  seat  in  the  midst  of 
the  ocean  is  the  thousand-hooded  ^$a  enveloped  in  tamas. 


140 


Lingapurox^a 


O lord  of  Devas,  O deity  of  holy  rites,  beneath  this  seat,  virtue, 
knowledge,  prosperity  and  detachment  form  the  four  feet. 

15-18.  The  seven  nether  worlds  are  your  feet;  the  earth 
constitutes  your  loins;  the  seven  oceans**^  arc  your  clothes;  the 
four  quarters  arc  your  great  arms.  O lord,  the  heaven  is  your 
head;  the  sky  is  your  umbilicus;  the  wind  is  your  nose;  the 
sun  and  the  moon  arc  your  eyes,  Pu$kara  and  others  consti- 
tute your  tresses.  The  stars,  constellations  and  firmament  are 
the  ornaments  round  your  neck.  How  shall  I eulogise  you  the 
lord  of  Devas  ? You  are  worthy  of  worship.  Whatever  was 
done,  heard  and  glorified  faithfully  as  divine,  whatever  was 
sacrificed  by  me  O Lord  ! you  shall  bear  all.  Obeisance  be 
to  you. 

Nandin  said  : 

19-21.  This  hymn  of  Visnu  is  destructive  of  all  sins.  He 
who  reads  or  listens  to  this  hymn  uttered  by  Ksupa,  he  who 
narrates  this  to  the  brahmins  with  devotion,  goes  to  the  world 
of  Visnu.  After  worshipping  thus  and  eulogising  the  invinci- 
ble lord  who  is  eulogised  by  the  lord  of  Devas  and  others  and 
after  bowing  to  him  with  bent  head,  Ksupa  spoke  in 
submission. 

The  King  said  : 

22.  O lord,  long  before,  a certain  Brahmin,  known  as 
Dadhica  became  a friend  of  mine.  He  is  the  knower  of 
Dharma  and  a humble  soul. 

23-25.  He  is  engaged  in  worshipping  Siva  always.  He 
cannot  be  killed  by  anyone  at  all  times.  O lord  of  Devas,  he 
struck  me  on  the  head  with  his  left  foot,  in  the  open  assembly 
with  great  contempt.  O Visnu,  O Visva,  O lord  of  the 
Universe,  arrogantly  he  said:  ‘T  am  not  afraid  of  any  body 
anywhere”.  O lord  of  universe,  I wish  to  defeat  that 
brahmin  Dadhica.  O Visnu,  please,  help  me  to  my  welfare. 


247.  fapta  slgara^.  The  pur&t^as  mention  seven  oceans,  viz.,  of  salt, 
sugarcane,  wine,  ghee,  curd,  milk  and  water  ^hieh  surround  Jambu,  Plak|a, 
8ftlmali,  Kuia,  Krauikea,  iS&ka  and  Pufkara  continents  respectively. 


Dialogue  between  Kse^a  and  Dadhua 


141 


Nandin  said: 

26.  Vi^^u  understood  that  Dadhica  was  indestructible. 
Visnu  then  remembered  the  incomparable  prowess  of  Siva. 

27.  After  remembering  thus,  Vifnu  said  to  Ksupa^  bom 
of  the  sneeze  of  Brahma — leading  king,  after  attaining  lord 
Siva,  brahmins  have  nothing  to  fear. 

28.  Particularly  O king,  the  devotees  of  Rudra  are  free 
from  fear  always.  If  this  be  true  in  every  respect  in  regard  to 
base  men  what  then  in  the  case  of  Dadhica  ? 

29.  Hence,  O blessed  one,  O king,  you  have  no  hope  of 
victory.  Of  course  I shall  give  a slight  pain  to  the  bralunin 
inviting  a curse  on  me  along  with  Devas. 

30.  O leading  king,  at  Dak^a’s  sacrifice  due  to  Dadhica’s 
curse  I and  other  Devas  will  be  destroyed  but  revived  again. 

31.  Hence,  O king,  coming  into  contact  with  the  leading 
brahmin  I shall  endeavour  for  your  victory  over  Dadhica. 

Nandin  said  : 

32.  On  hearing  these  words  K^pa  said  to  Vi$igiu — ‘*So  be 
it”  The  lord  too  went  to  the  hermitage  of  the  brahmin 
Dadhica. 

33.  The  lord,  favourably  disposed  to  his  devotees,  assumed 
the  form  of  a brahmin.  The  preceptor  of  the  universe  con^ 
gratulated  the  brahmin  sage  Dadhica  and  said: — 

The  lord  said  : 

34.  '*0  Dadldca,  O brahminical  sage,  O unchanging  one 
engaged  in  the  worship  of  Siva,  I desire  to  dioose  a boon  firom 
you.  You  diould  grant  the  ssune”. 

35.  On  being  requested  by  Vif^u,  the  lord  of  Devas, 
Dadhica  said:— ** All  that  you  desire  has  been  understood.  I am 
not  afraid  of  you. 

36-37.  O Vi$9u,  you  have  come  to  me  in  the  guise  of  a 
brahmin.  By  the  grace  of  Rudra,  I can  understand  everything 
the  past,  future  and  present.  O Vi^igiu,  O lord  of  Devas,  O 
deity  of  good  rites,  leave  off  this  guise  of  a brahmin.  O des* 
troyer  of  Madhu,  O lord  of  Devas  you  have  been  propitiated 
by  K^upa. 

38.  O lord  Vi^t^u,  I know  you  are  favourably  disposed 
towards  your  devotees.  O lord  Vifi^u,  your  fiivouritism  to  your 
devotees  is  but  proper. 


142 


Lingapurana 


39.  O lord,  O lotus-eyed,  bestower  of  boons»  it  behoves  you 
to  say  frankly  if  you  are  afraid  of  me  engaged  that  I am  in  the 
worship  of  Siva. 

40.  G Visnu,  1 do  not  speak  in  vain.  I am  not  afraid.  In 
this  world  I am  not  afraid  of  Devas,  Daityes  or  brahmins. 

Nandin  said: 

41.  On  hearing  the  words  of  Dadhica  Vi§nu  in  a moment 
cast  off  his  guise  of  a brahmin.  He  assumed  his  own  form  and 
said  smilingly. 

The  Lord  said: 

42.  O Dadhica  of  good  holy  rites  ! You  have  no  fear  any- 
where since  you  are  engaged  in  the  worship  of  Siva.  Indeed  you 
are  omniscient. 

43.  O leading  brahmin,  at  my  behest  you  should  say  at 
least  once  **I  am  afraid**.  Obeisance  to  you.  Please  say  to 
Ksupa  in  the  open  assembly  that  you  are  afraid. 

44.  Even  after  heating  the  appeasing  words  of  Vi?nu,  the 
great  sage  did  not  say  that  he  was  afraid. 

45.  It  was  due  to  the  prowess  of  the  Pinaka-bearing  Siva, 
the  lord  of  Devas,  the  benefactor  and  omniscient  lord  that  the 
great  sage  did  not  say  he  was  afraid. 

46.  Then  the  infuriated  lord  Vi|nu  desired  to  bum  the  sage 
and  so  raised  his  discus. 

47.  By  the  power  of  Dadhica  even  in  the  presence  of 
K$upa,  the  discus  Sudarsana  became  blunted. 

48.  On  seeing  the  discus  with  blunted  tip,  Dadhica  said  to 
the  Discus-bearing  lord,  who  is  the  cause  of  manifesting  dis- 
tinction between  the  existent  and  non-existent. 

49.  O lord  Visnu,  formerly,  the  terrible  discus,  Sudariana 
was  assiduously  got  by  you  from  Siva. 

50.  That  discus  can  never  kill  me.  You  now  try  with  the 
missile  of  Brahma  or  other  similar  weapons. 

Jfandin  said. 

51.  On  hearing  his  words  and  on  seeing  bis  own  weapon 
powerless,  lord  Vi^u  discharged  all  missiles  from  all  directions 
towards  him. 


Dialogue  between  K^upa  and  Dadhxca 


143 


52.  The  powerful  Devas  thereafter  rendered  help  to  Vi§nu 
who  was  engaged  in  fighting  against  a single  brahmin. 

53.  Then  Dadhica  who  had  adamantine  bones  and  who 
had  perfect  all-round  self  control  took  up  a handful  of  ku^a 
grass.  Remembering  Siva  he  discharged  it  against  Devas. 

54.  It  became  a divine  trident  as  lustrous  as  fire  of  dissolu- 
tion. Like  fire  at  the  close  of  a yuga  it  felt  inclined  to  burn 
all  Devas. 

55.  O sage,  all  those  weapons  which  were  discharged  by 
Indra,  and  other  Devas  bot^ed  to  the  trident. 

56-57.  O excellent  brahmin,  Devas  whose  strength  was  dis- 
sipated fled  from  the  scene.  Then  lord  Vi§riu,  created  out  of  his 
body  millions  and  millions  of  divine  attendants  resembling 
himself.  The  excellent  sage  burnt  all  of  them  immediately. 

58-60.  Thereafter,  Visnu  became  Universe-formed  in  order 
to  instil  awe  in  Dadhica.  The  excellent  brahmin  saw  several 
groups  of  Devas  distinctly,  as  also  crores  of  Rudras,  crorei 
of  Ganas,  crores  of  Cosmic  Eggs  in  the  body  of  Vi§iriu. 
On  seeing  all  these  therein,  the  son  of  Cyavana  was  surprised. 

61.  The  great  sage  sprinkled  the  universe-formed  Visnu 
with  water.  He  spoke  to  Visnu,  the  unborn  lord  of  the  universe, 
identical  with  the  universe. 

62.  O mighty-armed  one,  eschew  this  deception.  O Visnu, 
there  are  thousands  of  skills  (or  tricks ) with  me  also  which  are 
difficult  to  comprehend,  and  which  come  handy  by  mere  thin- 
king.**® 

63.  O uncensured  one,  you  can  sec  within  me  the  entire 
universe  along  with  yourself,  Brahma  and  Rudra.  I shall  give 
you  divine  vision. 

64.  After  saying  this,  the  sage  showed  everything  in  his  own 
body.  He  spoke  again  to  lord  Vifnu,  the  source  of  origin  of  all 
Devas. 

65.  ^‘Of  what  use  is  this  deception  ? O lord,  of  what  avail 
is  the  power  of  magic  ? O Vi?nu,  w'hat  purpose  is  served  by 
the  intrinsic  power  of  objects  or  by  the  power  of  meditation  ? 

66-67.  Hence,  eschewing  this  deception  you  should  fight 
against  me  strenuously.” 


248,  Vijliinam  •— m&ya . 


144  Lingapuroofia 

On  hearing  these  words  and  on  seeing  his  miraculous 
power  Devas  ran  away  once  again.  The  lotus-bom  preceptor 
of  the  universe  Brahma  restrained  lord  Vi§nu  who  had 
become  inactive. 

68.  On  hearing  the  words  of  Brahma^  lord  Vi§nu  who  was 
defeated  bowed  to  the  sage  and  went  away. 

69.  K^upa  was  extremely  aiflicted  and  dejected.  He  honour- 
ed and  adored  Dadhica  the  leading  sage  and  prayed  thus  : 

70.  O Lord  and  friend  Dadhica,  what  has  been  commi- 
tted by  me  due  to  ignorance  may  be  excused.  What  can  be 
affected  by  Vi§i^u  or  Devas  in  your  case  since  you  are  a devo- 
tee of  Rudra  ? 

71.  O great  Lord,  be  pleased.  O brahmin,  the  most 
excellent  among  men  of  devotion,  devotion  of  this  type  is 
difficult  of  access  to  wicked  persons,  to  base  K^atriyas  like  me. 

72.  On  hearing  the  words  of  the  king  the  brahmin  Dadhi- 
ca, the  most  excellent  of  those  who  perform  penances  blessed 
the  king  . The  leading  sage  then  cursed  Devas. 

73-74.  May  you  including  Indra  and  lord  Vi$nu  and  all 
great  sages  be  destroyed  by  the  fire  of  fury  of  Rudra  in  the 
holy  sacrifice  of  the  patriarch  Dak^. 

After  cursing  thus  and  glancing  at  K^upa  the  brahmin  said 
again. 

75.  O leading  king,  brahmins  should  be  worshipped  by 
Devas,  kings  and  by  the  different  groups  of  people.  O leading 
king,  the  brahmins  alone  are  strong  and  powerful. 

76.  After  saying  this  the  brahmin  of  great  lustre  entered 
his  own  hut. 

After  saluting  Dadhica  the  king  too  went  tohisownabode.^^* 

77.  The  place  of  this  event  is  known  as  the  holy  centre. 
Stha^ivi^vara.^  After  reaching  Sthanvilivara  one  shall  attain 
identity  with  Siva. 

249.  ksayam— grham  ST,  abode. 

250.  Sth&neivara  or  Sth^vlivara  ii  mentioned  by  Banabhatta 
in  his  historical  prose  kSvya  Har^arita  written  in  the  first  half  of  the  seventh 
century  A.D.  The  earliest  notice  of  this  place  by  a foreigner  is  found  in  the 
record  of  the  Chinese  pilgrim  Hieun  Thsang , the  contemporary  of  Harsa> 
vardhana,  the  king  of  Bth&neivara  and  Kannauj. 

The  city  is  identified  with  the  modem  to%m  Thanesar,  near  Kuni- 
kfetra,  Haryana  State.  It  derives  its  name  from  an  ancient  temple  dedicated 
to  lord  Siva. 


145 


Grant  of  boons  to  Brahma 

78.  O great  sage,  the  dispute  between  K^upa  and  Dadhica 
has  been  briefly  recounted  to  you,  as  also  the  power  of  Siva 
and  his  protege  Dadhica. 

79.  He  who  reads  this  divine  dispute  between  Ksupa  and 
Dadhica  will  conquer  premature  death.  After  Death  he  will 
go  to  the  region  of  Brahma. 

80.  He  who  enters  the  battlefield  after  repeating  this  story 
need  not  be  afraid  of  death.  He  will  always  come  out  Victoria 
ous. 


CHAPTER  THIRTYSEVEN 

Grant  of  boons  to  Brahma 


Sanatkumdra  said: 

1 . How  did  you  attain  Mahadeva  the  lord  of  Uma  ? O 
holy  lord,  it  behoves  you  to  narrate  everything.  I wish  to 
hear. 

Sailddi  said: 

2.  O great  sage,  my  blind  father  Silada  was  desirous  of 
a progeny.  For  a long  time  he  performed  a penance  very 
difficult  to  be  performed  by  others. 

3.  The  thunderbolt-wielding  lord  Indra  was  pleased  with 
his  penance.  He  said  to  Silada — ‘‘I  am  pleased.  Choose  your 
boons”. 

4.  O leading  sage,  he  bowed  down  to  the  thousand-eyed 
lord  of  Devas  along  with  Devas.  With  palms  joined  in 
reverence  he  spoke  to  him. 

Silada  said: 

5.  O lord  of  good  holy  rites,  O destroyer  of  the  enemies 
of  Devas,  O bestower  of  boons,  I wish  for  a son  devoid  of 
death  and  not  born  of  a womb. 

Indra  said : 

6.  O brahmin  sage,  I shall  give  you  a son  born  of  a 


146  Lingapurairia 

wromb  and  liable  to  die.  I will  not  give  you  anyone  otherwise. 
There  are  no  persons  without  death. 

7.  O great  sage,  even  lord  Brahma  will  not  grant  you  a 
son  without  death  or  not  bom  of  a womb.  Then  what  about 
others  ? 

8.  Even  that  lord  Brahma  is  not  devoid  of  death  himself. 
The  lord  himself  is  bom  of  a womb.  The  lotus-born  deity  of 
great  splendour  is  born  of  an  egg. 

9.  The  lord  is  born  of  Mahei^vara.  He  is  the  son  of  Uma. 
His  span  of  life  is  limited  to  two  Parardhas. 

10.  Thousands  and  crores  of  kalpas  that  constitute  his 
day  have  passed  by.  So  many  yet  remain. 

1 1 . Hence  O leading  brahmin,  eschew  your  ardent  desire  for 
a son  devoid  of  death  or  not  bom  of  a womb.  Accept  a son  like 
yourself. 

Sailddi  said: 

12.  On  hearing  his  words  my  meritorious  father  well- 
known  in  the  world  as  Silada  again  spoke  to  the  husband  of 
Saci  (i.e.  Indra) . 

Sildda  said : 

13.  O lord,  I have  already  heard  that  Brahma  was  born 
of  an  Egg,  was  born  of  a lotus  and  also  was  bom  of  Mahe^vara. 

14-15.  Formerly  O Mahendra,  of  great  arms,  Narada 
my  elder  brother,  had  been  saying  this  and  I have  heard  it 
from  him.  But  tell  me,  how  this  can  be  ? Dak^ayani  was  the 
grand-daughter  of  Brahma  since  Daksa  was  the  son  of  the  lotus- 
born  deity  ? How  then  can  Brahma  be  her  son  ? 

Indra  said: 

16-18.  O brahmin,  your  doubt  is  reasonable.  I shall  tell 
you  the  cause  of  the  same  that  happened  to  Brahma  in  the 
Tatpurusa  kalpa.  After  pondering  over  all  things  the  supreme 
lord  created  Brahma.  In  the  Meghavahana  kalpa,  Visnu,  the 
lord  of  the  universe,  became  a cloud  and  bore  the  supreme 
lord  Siva  for  a thousand  years  with  ease  and  comfort. 

19.  On  seeing  the  devotional  feeling  of  Visnu  towards  him- 


Grant  of  boons  to  Brahmd 


147 


self  the  great  lord  entrusted  to  him  everything  alongwith 
Brahma  with  instnictions  to  create  further. 

20-2 1 . Then  they  call  that  kalpa  by  the  name  Megha- 
vahana.  On  seeing  him  born  of  His  body  Brahma  approached 
Siva  and  said:  “O  lord,  Visnu  was  born  of  your  left  and  I am 
born  of  your  right  side.** 

22-26.  ‘‘Still  Visnu  created  the  entire  universe  along  with 
me.  Taking  the  form  of  a cloud  identical  with  the  world  he 
bore  you  the  lord  of  Devas,  preceptor  of  the  universe,  day  and 
night.  O lord,  I am  a better  devotee  of  yours  than  him.  Be 
pleased  with  me,  O lord,  grant  me  omniscience.’* 

Then  Brahma  attained  omniscience  in  a trice.  He  then 
hurried  out  and  met  Vi§nu  in  the  vast  ocean*®^  enveloped  by 
darkness.  He  saw  Visnu  in  an  illustrious  spot  studded  with 
gold  and  jewels  which  was  mentally  created  by  Visnu  himself. 
It  was  inaccessible  to  wicked  persons,  invisible  even  to  the 
pious  like  Indra  and  others. 

27-32.  Brahma  saw  the  Purusa  in  whose  heart  the  entire 
universe  rested.  He  was  lying  down  on  the  couch  constituted 
by  the  body  of  the  serpent  Sesa.***  He  had  lotus-like  eyes 
and  four  arms  holding  the  conch,  dicus,  iron  club,  and  the 
lotus.  He  was  wearing  ornaments  and  in  that  form  he  resem- 
bled the  orb  of  the  moon.  He  bore  the  mark  iSrivatsa  over  his 
breast.  Brahma  beheld  him  with  pleasure  evident  in  his  face. 
His  lotus-like  feet  had  turned  red  due  to  the  contact  with  the 
lotus-like  soft  hands  of  Laksmf.  He  was  Isana  the  greatest 
Atman.  By  tamas  he  was  in  the  form  of  K^a.  By  rajas  he 
was  the  initiator  of  creation  of  the  world.  By  sattva  he  was 
the  sustainer  of  all.  He  was  Paramesvara,  the  soul  of  all,  the 
noble  Atman,  the  supreme  soul.  Brahma  saw  him  lying  down 
in  his  yogic  slumber  in  the  milky  ocean  full  of  nectar.  On 
seeing  him  he  spoke  to  him  thus: 

33-35.  “Just  as  you  liad  swallowed  me  before,  so  also  I 
shall  swallow  you  now  by  the  grace  of  Siva.  The  lord  with 
great  arms  woke  up  a little  surprised  and  looking  at  him  smiled 
slightly.  Swallowed  by  that  noble  soul,  he  entered  the  body 

251.  See  p.  15  note  22. 

252.  Sec  p,  15  note  23. 


148 


IdngapurSiUa 


of  that  deity  born  of  the  Egg.  Then  Brahma  created  Vi^nu 
through  the  middle  of  the  eye-brows.  Created  by  him  Vi^nu 
stood  near  him  observing. 

36-40.  In  the  meantime  Rudra>  the  source  of  origin  of 
all  Devas,  who  had  granted  boons  to  both,  assumed  an 
uncivil  form  and  came  to  the  place  where  Visnu  stood.  Lord 
Parame^vara,  the  soul  of  the  universe,  wanted  to  bless  both 
with  great  favour.  Both  of  them  simultaneously  saw  the  lord 
resembling  the  fire  of  Death.  They  eulogised  the  terrible  lord 
with  matted  hair.  They  bowed  to  the  lord,  the  bestower  of 
boons,  standing  far  away  out  of  respect.  The  great  lord, 
the  protector  of  the  universe  blessed  Brahma  and  Visnu  and 
vanished  there  itself. 


CHAPTER  THmTYEIGIlT 

Creation  ofBrahmd 

Sailadi  said: 

1 . When  lord  Siva  had  gone,  lord  Vi§nu,  the  origin  of 
Brahma,  bowed  down  in  that  direction  and  said  to  the  lotus- 
born  deity. 

Sri  Vifnu  said: 

2.  The  supreme  god  Siva,  the  lord  of  the  universe,  is  omni- 
present. He  is  the  lord  and  refuge  of  us  both  as  well  as  of  the 
entire  universe. 

3.  O Brahma,  I am  born  of  the  left  side  of  Siva  the  supreme 
soul.  You  are  bom  of  his  right  side. 

4.  The  sages  observe  me  and  say  that  I am  Pradhana,  the 
Prakrti,  the  Avyakta  (unmanifest)  and  the  Aja  (unborn).  They 
call  you  Puru$a. 

5.  They  call  the  supreme  lord  the  cause  of  us  both,  as  lord 
of  the  universe.  He  is  the  unchanging  lord  livara. 

6.  At  the  instance  of  the  lord  of  the  immortals,  the  lotus- 
born  deity  eulogised  and  bowed  to  Rudra  the  most  excellent 
one  and  the  bestower  of  boons. 


Creation  of  Brahma 


149 


7.  Then  assumed  the  form  of  a Boar  and  lifted  up 

the  earth  submerged  under  the  water.  He  re-established  it  as 
it  was  originally. 

8.  With  great  effort  he  made  the  earth  even,  without  ups 
and  downs.  The  lord  created  the  rivulets,  rivers  and  the  oceans 
as  before. 

9.  The  lord  having  the  form  of  a boar***  the  uplifter  of  the 
earth,  gathered  all  the  mountains  together.  As  before  he  created 
the  four  worlds  beginning  with  Bhuh. 

10.  The  lord  who  was  the  most  excellent  of  all  intelligent 
persons  became  inclined  to  create  the  chief  creation,  the  animal 
creation,  and  then  the  divine  and  human  creations. 

11-16.  With  the  intellect  free  from  wretchedness  the  lord 
at  the  outset  created  Sananda,  Sanaka  and  Sanatana  the  most 
excellent  among  the  good.  All  these  practised  Naiskarmya  and 
attained  the  greatest  being.  By  his  yogic  learning  he  created 
Marici,  Bhrgu,  Ahgiras,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  Dak$a,  Atri, 
VaSi§tha,  Sahkalpa,  Dharma  and  Adharma.  Thus  there  are 
twelve  sons  to  Brahma  born  of  the  unmanifest. 

At  the  outset  the  eternal  lord  had  created  ^bhu  and 
Sanatkumara.  These  two  fresh  born  sons  had  sublimated  their 
sexuality,  and  were  divine  expounders  of  Brahman.  They  were 
bachelors,  omniscient,  conceivers  of  everything  and  equal  to 
Brahma  himself.  After  creating  the  sargas — Mukhya  etc.  O 
iSila^ana,  the  lotus-bom  deity,  the  creator  of  the  universe, 
evolved  all  the  special  characteristics  of  the  different  ages. 


253*  bhudhar&krti — in  the  person  of  King  Prthu,  son  of  Vena.  BhSga. 
ascribes  the  levelling  of  the  earth  to  King  Pfthu. 

VWUZ  I wi  Prj:— cited  in  ST. 

which  offers  also  another  interin^tation  : 

in  the  form  of  boar,  uplifting  the  earth 

submerged  in  waters. 


150 


CHAPTER  THIRTYNINE 

Specific  Dharmas  of  Four  Tugas 


Sailddi  said: 

1.  On  hearing  the  narration  of  Indra»  my  father,  the  great 
sage,  bowed  to  the  lord  of  Dcvas,  and  with  the  palms  joined  in 
reverence  he  asked  him  again. 

Silada  said: 

2-3,  O lord  Indra,  O omniscient  one,  bowed  down  by  the 
chiefs  of  Devas  O lord  of  Sac!,  O thousand-eyed  lord  of  the 
universe,  O MahdSvara,  how  did  the  lotus-bom  deity  Brahma 
evolve  the  specific  dharmas  of  the  yugas  ? It  behoves  you  now 
to  recount  it  to  me  who  have  bowed  down  to  you. 

Sailadi  said: 

4.  On  hearing  the  words  of  SillUia,  the  noble-souled  Indra 
recounted  the  dharmas  of  the  yugas  in  detail  in  the  manner 
seen  by  him. 

Indra  said: 

5.  Knov/  that  first  comes  Kftayuga.  O sage,  TreUL  comes 
next.  Thereafter  Dvfipara  and  Ti§ya  (Kali)  yugas.  These  arc 
the  four  yugas  in  brief. 

6.  Sattvagu^a  signifies  Kfta  yuga;  rajas  signifies  Treta; 
rajas-cum-tamas  signifies  DvEpara.  Tamas  signifies  Kali. 
These  should  be  known  as  the  special  characterisdcs  in  each  of 
the  different  yugas. 

7.  Meditation  is  the  greatest  activity  in  Kt^ta  yuga;  yajfla 
(sacrifice)  in  Treta;  worship  is  the  main  activity  in  Dvfipara 
and  pure  charitable  gift  in  the  Kali  age. 

8.  Four  thousand  divine  years  constitute  Kfta  yuga.  So 
many  hundred  years  (i.e  four  hundred)  constitute  the  preceding 
transition  period  (sandhya).  The  following  transition  period 
(sandhyam^a)  is  also  of  the  same  duration. 

9.  O Silfi^ana,  O man  of  good  holy  rites,  know  that  the 
longevity  of  the  subjects  in  Krta  is  foiur  thousand  human  years^ 


specific  Dhamrns  of  Four  Tugas 


151 


10.  When  the  Krtayuga  together  with  its  sandhyam^a 
passes  off,  the  yuga  dhzuma  becomes  reduced  by  a quarter  all 
round. 

1 1 . The  excellent  Treta  yuga  extends  to  a period  one  fourth 
less  than  Kyta.  Know  that  Dvapara  extends  to  half  of  the  dura- 
tion of  Krta.  Kaliyuga  is  still  half  of  it. 

12.  O sage,  the  Sandhya  periods  are  respectively  three 
hundred,  two  hundred  and  one  hundred  years.  The  sandhyaih^a 
periods  are  also  the  same.  The  same  thing  holds  good  in  all  the 
kalpas,  and  yugas. 

13-14.  In  Krta,  the  eternal  dharma  has  all  the  four  feet; 
in  Treta  it  has  three  feet;  it  stays  on  two  feet  in  Dvapara;  in 
Kali,  it  is  devoid  of  three  feet  and  is  stationed  by  its  mere  exis- 
tence. In  Krta,  the  subjects  are  born  in  twins;  their  avocation 
abounds  in  taste  and  happiness. 

15.  They  are  always  satisfied.  They  enjoy  all  pleasures  and 
bliss.  There  is  no  inferiority  or  superiority  among  them;  there 
are  no  special  characteristics  among  subjects;  they  are  all 
auspicious. 

16.  Longevity,  happiness  and  features  among  the  people  in 
Krta  are  the  same  for  all;  they  have  no  special  liking;  they  have 
no  Dvandvas  (mutually  opposing  pairs),  no  hatred,  no  fatigue. 

17-19.  Those  who  have  no  abodes  live  on  mountains  and  in 
the  oceans.  Even  then  they  are  devoid  of  misery.  They  have  mostly 
sattva  gunas  and  are  mostly  isolated.  They  move  about  without 
specific  desires;  they  are  perpetually  delighted  in  their  minds. 
They  refrain  from  virtuous  and  sinful  activities. 

At  that  time  there  was  a well-defined  arrangement  of  castes 
and  stages  of  life;  but  there  was  no  intermingling  of  castes. 
O brahmin,  by  cflSux  of  time,  in  Tret&  yuga  their  tastes  and 
happiness  perish. 

20-22.  When  that  Siddhi  has  perished  another  is  generated. 
When  water  attains  subtlety  it  gets  transformed  into  clouds. 
From  the  thundering  clouds  rainfall  proceeds.  As  soon  as  the 
surface  of  the  earth  comes  into  contact  with  rain,  trees  appear. 
These  trees  form  their  abodes.  The  subjects  have  their  susten- 
ance and  pleasures  out  of  these  trees. 

23-26.  In  the  beginning  of  Treta  the  subjects  sustained 
themselves  through  them.  Then  after  the  lapse  of  a great  deal 


152 


LiAgapur&a^a 


of  time,  when  there  was  a change,  the  feeling  of  lust  and  cove- 
tousness was  sudden.  The  trees  which  formed  their  abodes 
began  to  perish.  When  they  perished  the  twin-born  subjects 
at  that  time  were  bewildered.  Thereafter  they  began  to 
ponder  over  the  matter.  Since  they  were  truthful  in  their 
thought  the  trees  reappeared. 

27-28.  They  used  to  produce  clothes,  fruits  and  ornaments. 
On  the  very  same  trees  honey  of  great  potency  but  not  genera- 
ted by  bees,  got  evolved  in  every  leafy  cup.  This  honey  had 
great  fragrance,  good  colour  and  sweet  taste  The  subjects 
always  sustained  themselves  thereby  and  passed  their  days 
comfortably  at  all  times. 

29.  They  were  delighted  and  well-nourished.  Through 
this  achievement  they  were  free  from  ailments.  Then  after  the 
lapse  of  some  time,  they  became  greedy. 

30-32.  They  began  to  chop  off  the  trees  and  take  the 
honey  forcibly.  Due  to  their  misdemeanour  as  well  as  their 
greed  the  kalpa  trees  perished  in  certain  places  along  with 
honey.  As  time  rolled  on  only  a little  of  this  perfection  surviv- 
ed. As  Trcta  was  repeated  in  every  cycle  the  Dvandvas 
(mutually  conflicting  pairs)  cropped  up.  Then  the  subjects 
became  very  miserable  due  to  the  chilly  rain  and  scorching  sun. 

33.  When  they  were  harassed  by  Dvandvas  they  began  to 
make  clothes  and  garments  for  covering  themselves.  They 
made  abodes  on  the  mountains  in  order  to  ward  off  Dvandvas. 

34.  Formerly  they  roamed  about  as  they  pleased.  They 
had  no  fixed  abodes.  Now  they  began  to  stay  in  bouses  in 
accordance  with  their  availability  and  pleasure. 

33-36,  After  taking  preventive  measures  against  the  Dvan- 
dvas they  began  to  think  about  their  mesons  of  sustenance. 
When  the  kalpa  trees  had  perished  along  with  honey,  the  sub- 
jects  became  confounded  and  agitated  due  to  disputes.  They 
were  harassed  by  thirst  and  hunger.  Then,  again  in  Treti, 
new  perfections  came  in  sight. 

37.  They  had  more  rains  than  they  desired  or  needed  for 
production.  Heavy  downpour  of  waters  flowed  down  the  slopes. 

38.  Due  to  continuous  rain  sources  of  water  currents  arose. 
Thus  in  the  course  of  second  creation  of  rains,  streams  and 
rivers  began  to  function. 


specific  Dkarrrrs  cf  Four  Tugas 


153 


39.  Small  collection  of  those  waters  fell  on  the  earth. 
Due  to  the  mingling  of  waters  and  the  earth,  plants  and  herbs 
came  into  being. 

40-41.  Then  trees  and  hedges  grew  up.  Very  few  of 
them  were  cultivated.  They  were  not  sown.  Fourteen*®^ 
types  of  trees  and  grasses  grew  up  in  the  rural  and  forest 
areas.  They  put  forth  flowers  and  fruits  in  accordance  with 
the  season.  Diflferent  types  of  trees  and  medicinal  herbs  also 
appeared.  The  subjects  sustained  themselves  with  these  at 
that  time  of  Treta. 

42.  Thereafter  the  subjects  became  lustful  and  greedy  in 
every  respect  on  account  of  what  is  destined  to  happen 
inevitably  in  Treta  age. 

43.  Then  the  subjects  forcibly  occupied  the  fields  near  the 
rivers  and  on  the  mountains.  They  seized  the  trees,  hedges 
and  herbs  as  much  as  they  could. 

44-45.  On  account  of  this  perversity  the  fourteen  types  of 
medicinal  herbs  perished.  Thinking  that  these  plants  and 
herbs  have  entered  the  earth,  Brahma  milked  the  earth  assidu- 
ously for  the  welfare  of  living  beings.  Ever  since,  the  plants 
are  ploughed  by  ploughshares  here  and  there. 

46.  Those  who  were  desirous  of  sustaining  themselves 
assiduously  took  to  agriculture.  The  word  Varta  means 
avocation  and  the  avocation  in  this  context  is  the  endeavour 
and  desire  for  agriculture. 

47.  Otherwise,  towards  the  close  of  Treta,  the  subjects 
have  no  means  of  livelihood.  Then  water  has  to  be  lifted  by 
hand  in  general. 

48.  In  that  Treta  the  subjects  in  their  fury  seized  one 
another,  even  their  sons,  wives,  riches  etc.,  forcibly.  Such  was 
the  characteristic  of  that  yuga. 

254*  The  Pur&pas  divide  the  vegetation  life  into  three  clattes,  viz. 
(t)  gr&mya,  (2)  gr&mSraoya,  (3}  yajfliya  (cf.  Vftyu)  but  this  classification 
is  very  obscure. 

Manu  classifies  the  plant-world  into  (1}  Vanaspati  (trees  not  having 
flowers,  (a)  V&naspatya  trees  bearing  fruits  and  flowers},  (3}  O^adhi 
(plants  such  as  grass)  and  (4)  latS,  valli  (creepers).  Further,  Vist^u  (cited 
in  ST.)  mentions  fourteen  osadhis  by  name.  They  are  vrfhi,  yava,  m&sa, 
godhfima,  a^u,  tila,  priyafigu,  kulittha,  fy&mfika,  nlvSra,  jartila,  gavedhuka, 
Veouyava,  and  markataka. 


154 


LingapwraKga^ 


49.  Knowing  aU  this,  the  lotus-bom  lord  created  K$atri- 
yas,  to  protect  people  from  wounds  and  injuries  and  also  for 
establishing  the  rules  of  conduct. 

50.  Characterised  by  his  own  splendour  the  lord  establish- 
ed castes  and  stages  of  life.  The  lord  of  the  universe  then 
created  avocation  and  conduct  of  life  for  respective  castes  of 
people. 

51.  The  avocation  of  sacrifices  was  evolved  in  Treta  gradu- 
ally. But  persons  of  good  holy  rites  did  not  resort  to  animal 
sacrifice  even  then. 

52.  It  was  then  that  the  seer  Vi$nu  performed  sacrifices 
forcefully.  That  is  why  the  brahmins  praise  a non-violent 
sacrifice. 

53.  In  the  Dvapara  too,  men  have  different  inclinations 
mentally,  verbally  and  physically.  It  is  with  great  difficulty 
that  agriculture  proceeds  in  that  age. 

54-55.  Then  all  living  beings  exert  gradually  and  strain 
their  bodies.  Covetousness,  service  on  wage  basis,  business, 
fighting,  indecision  about  principles,  division  of  Vedas,  confusion 
of  dharmas,  destruction  of  discipline  among  the  four  castes  and 
stages  of  life,  lust  and  hatred — these  are  the  specifics  pertain- 
ing to  that  age. 

56.  It  is  in  this  Dvapara  that  the  following  begin  to 
function,  viz — ^passion,  covetousness,  arrogance,  etc.  In  the 
beginnings  of  Dvapara  the  Vedas  are  classified  into  four  by 
Vyasa. 

57.  It  is  laid  down  that  during  Treta  the  Vedas  constituted 
one  single  whole  with  four  sections.  Since  the  span  of  life  be- 
comes less  and  less  the  Vedas  are  classified  in  Dvfipara. 

58-59.  They  are  further  differentiated  through  the  whims 
of  the  sons  of  sages,  when  the  order  of  Mantra  and  Brahmana 
texts  is  altered  and  the  accents  and  letters  are  changed.  The 
compendiums  of  Rk  Yajus  and  Samans  are  compiled  by  the 
learned  men.  Although  the  texts  are  common,  they  are  differ* 
entiated  due  to  different  view-points. 

60.  The  different  sections  to  the  Vedas  are  evolved,  viz.,—* 


specific  Dharmas  of  Four  Tugas 


155 


Brahniailias*^  Kalpasiitras***  and  Mantrapravacanas.^^^  Some 
departed  from  them  and  some  abided  by  them. 

61-63.  The  Itih^as  and  Puranas**®  differ  from  time  to 
time.  They  are  Brahma,  Padma,  Vai^nava,  Saiva,  Bhagavata, 
Bhavi$ya,  Nluadiya,  Markan(jeya,  Agneya,  Brahmavaivarta, 
Laihga,  Varaha,  Vamana,  Kurma,  Matsya,  G^c^a,  Sk^da 
and  Brahm&n<jUi — these  are  the  eighteen  Pura^as. 

64-65.  The  eleventh  Lihga  Puraxta  was  classified  in 
Dvapara.  The  following  sages,  thousands  in  number,  wrote 
Smrtis  etc. — Manu,  Atri,Vi$nu,  Hwta,  Yajfiavalkya,  U^anas, 
Ahgiras,  Yama,  Apastamba,  Samvarta,  Katyayana  Brhaspati,. 
Para^ara,  Vyasa,  Sahkha,  Likhita,  Dak?a,  Gautama,  Satatapa, 
Vasi^tha  and  others. 

66-70.  Absence  of  rain,  death,  the  harassments  of  pestilence 
etc.  occur.  Indifference  to  worldly  affairs  results  from  various 
miseries,  mental,  verbal  and  physical.  From  this  indifference 
they  begin  to  think  about  their  liberation  from  pain  and 
misery.  This  process  of  thinking  leads  to  detachment  and 
from  deUchment  they  begin  to  realize  the  deformities  and 
defects  in  the  world.  Thanks  to  this  perception,  perfect  know- 
ledge becomes  possible  in  Dvapara.  This  is  due  to  the  behavi- 
our of  mixed  rajas  and  tamas.  In  the  first  yuga  viz.  Krta 
yuga  dharma  originates.  In  Treta  it  begins  to  function.  In 
Dvapara  it  becomes  distracted  gradually  and  in  Kali  it  perishes 
altogether. 


2^5.  Brfihxnavam.  Br&hma9a  literature  compriies  treatises  such  as 
Aitareya,  Taittiriya,  Gopatha,  Satapatha,  etc,  and  their  ancillaries  Arai^yakas 
and  Upanifads  which  together  with  the  mantra  portion,  called  SathhitS 
constitute  the  Vedas.  Gf.  mantra-brShmapayor  Veda-nSmadheyam . 

256.  K^pas(itras--«kriy&-pratip&daka8utr&oi  ST.  ritual  treatises— 
Ar^eya,  etc. 

257.  Mantra-pravacanlUu— m1mSzfis&-ny^yasutri9i  ST.,  philoso- 
phical treatises  such  as  mlmkihBfk  and  ny&ya. 

258.  On  the  authenticity,  extent  tuid  number  of  the  Purft^as,  see  In- 
troduction. 


156 


Lingapurdna 


CHAPTER  FORTY 

Extent  of  four  Tugas 

Indr  a said: 

1 . In  Kali  age  men  excited  by  tamoguna  adopt  Maya 
(deception)  and  jealousy.  They  do  not  hesitate  to  kill  ascetics. 
They  are  always  tormented  by  jealousy. 

2.  In  Kali  age  there  is  always  carelessness^  illness,  hunger, 
fear,  and  terrible  suffering  from  drought.  There  is  also  opposi- 
tion from  and  among  the  different  parts  of  the  country. 

3.  Sruti  (i.  c.  Vedas)  is  not  considered  an  authority.  Men 
resort  to  sinful  activity.  People  are  sinful,  irritable  and  narrow- 
minded. They  misbehave. 

4.  Greedy  and  wicked  subjects,  born  in  Kali  utter  false- 
hood. They  are  engaged  in  evil  desires,  evil  study,  misbehaviour 
and  misleading  scriptural  texts. 

5.  Due  to  defects  in  the  activities  of  the  brahmins  fear  arises 
in  the  subjects.  The  twice-bom  neglect  the  study  of  Vedas  and 
do  not  sacrifice  as  prescribed. 

6-7.  Men  perish.  Ksatriyas  and  Vaisyas  decline  gradually. 
In  Kali  Sudras  claim  kinship  with  brahmins  through  their 
learning  through  interdining  and  sharing  scats  and  beds. 
Kings  become  mostly.  Sudras  and  they  harass  brahmins. 

8.  Killing  of  foetus  and  murder  of  heroes  become  preva- 
lent. I^udras  adopt  the  conduct  of  life  prescribed  for  the 
brahmins  and  the  brahmins  adopt  the  ways  of  Sddras.  * 

9.  Thieves  function  as  kings  and  kings  function  as  thieves. 
The  chaste  ladies  cease  to  exist  and  wanton  sluts  increase  in 
number. 

10.  Stability  and  discipline  of  four  castes  and  stages  of 
life  disappear  from  all  places.  At  that  time  the  earth  yields 
very  little  fruit  in  one  place  and  great  fruits  in  another. 

11.  O Silasana,  the  kings  confiscate  and  misappropriate 
public  property.  They  cease  to  be  protectors.  Sodras  acquire 
knowledge  and  are  honoured  by  the  brahmins. 

12.  Non-k§atriyas  become  rulers.  Brahmins  depend  on 
Sudras.  Sodras  proud  of  their  intellect  remain  sitting  in 
their  seats  and  do  not  stir  on  seeing  brahmins. 


Extent  of  four  Tugas 


157 


13-18  Petty-minded  Sudras  strike  the  leading  brahmins. 
Out  of  humility,  brahmins  keep  their  hand  over  their  mouth 
and  whisper  into  the  ears  of  base  Sudras.  O noble  Brahmins, 
knowing  that  Sudras  are  seated  on  lofty  seats  amidst  brahmins, 
the  king  does  not  punish  them.  People  of  meagre  learning,  for* 
tune  and  strength  worship  Sudras  with  flowers,  scents  and 
other  auspicious  things.  O brahmin,  arrogant  Sudras  do  not 
even  glance  at  the  excellent  brahmins.  Waiting  for  their 
opportunity  to  serve  them,  the  brahmins  stand  at  their 
thresholds:  The  brahmins  depending  upon  Sudras  serve  them 
when  they  return  seated  in  their  vehicles  and  eulogise  them 
by  means  of  eulogies  and  prayers.  In  Kali,  even  the  excellent 
brahmins  demean  themselves  by  selling  the  fruits  of  their 
austerities  and  sacrifices. 

19-25.  In  Kali  there  will  be  many  ascetics.  As  the  yuga 
draws  to  a close,  men  become  reduced  in  number  while  women 
increase  in  proportion.  In  Kali  even  the  brahmins  censure 
V'edic  learning  and  holy  rites.  In  Kali  lord  Mahadeva, 
Sankara,  Nilalohita  reveals  himself  as  one  of  deformed  features, 
for  the  establishment  of  righteousness.  The  brahmins  who 
resort  to  him  by  any  means  conquer  the  evils  of  Kali  and 
attain  the  highest  abode. 

It  should  be  known  that  towards  the  close  of  yuga,  the 
beasts  of  prey  will  be  very  violent.  Cows  will  decline  and  good 
men  will  recede  from  active  spheres.  Their  Dharma  which  is 
subtle,  conducive  to  good  results  and  difficult  of  access,  which 
has  its  roots  in  charitable  gifts,  becomes  shaky  due  to  in- 
stability in  the  four  stages  of  life.  The  kings  misappropriate 
shares  from  the  oblations  offered  to  God.  They  do  not  protect 
the  people.  Towards  the  close  of  yuga,  they  wall  be  more 
interested  in  protecting  themselves.  In  Kali  cooked  food 
will  be  kept  for  sale  in  living  places.  The  selling  of  Vedas  and 
other  sacred  literature  will  occur  in  cross  streets;  young 
women  will  sell  even  their  honour.*®* 

259.  atta^fllai>-~attam  kanySdravyam  iulo  ST. — those  who 

indulge  in  the  barter  of  girls.  Or  atta — cooked  food.  SwasGl&h — those  who 
indulge  in  the  sale  of  Vedas.  GatuspathSh — brShmaii^u  (Medini  cited  in 
ST.}Ke^a^{Ugh — tyaktalidjfth  ST.  Or  those  who  have  bartered  their 
chastity.  * mukta-keii^ — ^apagatahr!k%.  Gf.  Viiva  cited  in  ST. 


158 


Lingapura^ 


26*31.  The  lord  of  rain  will  be  wayward  in  making 
showers  at  the  close  of  yuga.  Merchants  will  resort  to  malpra- 
ctices. They  will  be  surrounded  by  heretics  indulging  in  vain 
outward  show.  There  will  be  many  beggars  and  petitioners 
among  the  people  soliciting  one  another.  There  will  be  no 
one  not  indulging  in  harsh  words;  there  will  not  be  any 
straightforward  man;  there  will  hardly  be  anyone  who  is  not 
jealous;  when  the  yuga  comes  to  a close,  there  will  scarcely 
be  any  man  readily  willing  to  return  the  help  rendered.  Fallen 
people  and  censurers  characterise  this  closing  period  of  yuga. 
The  earth  will  be  devoid  of  kings,  riches  and  foodgrains  will 
not  flourish;  groups  of  conspirators  will  be  formed  in  the 
cities  and  countries.  The  earth  will  have  short  supply  of  water 
and  will  be  deBcient  in  fruits.  Those  assigned  to  be  protectors 
will  not  be  so.  They  will  not  be  subject  to  discipline. 

32-33.  Men  will  rob  others  of  their  wealth  and  violate  the 
chastity  of  other  men’s  wives.  They  will  be  lustful,  wicked  at 
heart,  base  and  foolhardy.  They  will  lose  proper  perspective  of 
things.  Suffering  from  colic  they  will  have  their  hairs  disheve- 
lled. Towards  the  close  of  the  yuga  people  will  be  born  whose 
age  will  be  only  sixteen  years. 

34.  When  the  end  of  the  yuga  is  imminent  Sudras  will 
begin  the  practice  of  dharma  with  white  teeth,  deerskin  and 
Rudraksa  beads,  with  shaven  heads  and  ochre-coloured 
robes. 

35.  Men  will  steal  plants  and  grains.  They  will  covet  the 
clothes  they  see;  thieves  will  rob  other  thieves  of  their  wealth; 
one  robber  will  rob  another. 

36-37.  When  noble  and  befitting  holy  rites  are  no  longer 
performed;  when  all  the  people  become  inactive  and  lethargic, 
germs,  mice  and  serpents  will  torment  men.  Prosperity,  welfare, 
health  and  efficiency  will  be  difficult  to  attain.  People  afflicted 
by  hunger  and  fear  will  resort  to  the  lands  near  the  KauiSiki^®® 
river. 


260.  Kau&ikl.  It  is  the  modem  Kosi  that  issues  from  the  Him&layas, 
flows  through  Nepal  and  Tirhut  and  joins  the  Ganges  below  Patna.  But 
originally  the  river  passed  through  North  Bengal  and  fell  into  the  Brahma- 
putra. See  Sircar,  GAMI  p.  42. 


Extent  of  four  Tugas 


159 


38-39.  People  overwhelmed  by  misery  will  never  see  the 
maximum  span  of  life  of  hundred  years.  In  Kali  all  the  Vedas 
will  not  be  available.  Yajfias  perish  afflicted  by  people  of  no 
virtue.  Ochre-robed  and  naked  anchorites  will  be  wandering 
and  many  Kapalikas  (ascetics  holding  skulls  as  their  begging 
bowls)  will  infest  the  territories. 

40-41.  Some  sell  Vedas  and  others  sell  Tirthas  (holy  waters) 
i.e.  make  illegal  gain  out  of  these.  When  Kali  yuga  begins 
heretics  will  be  born  who  will  be  opposed  to  the  system  of  four 
castes  and  stages  of  life.  Sudras  will  learn  the  Vedas  and  will 
become  experts  in  the  meaning  of  dharma. 

42-44.  Kings  born  of  Sudra  wombs  will  perform  horse- 
sacrifice.  People  begin  to  harass  one  another  by  killing  women, 
children,  cows  and  one  another. 

Since  people  are  inclined  towards  evil,  their  behaviour 
will  be  wrought  by  tamoguna.  At  that  time  the  crimes  such  as 
the  slaughter  of  a brahmin  begin  to  appear. 

45.  Hence  during  Kali,  longevity  strength  and  features 
become  less  and  less.  Men  attain  perfection  within  a short  while. 

46-47.  Excellent  brahmins  of  blessed  nature  will  still 
practise  dharma  without  malice  towards  the  end  of  yuga  as 
laid  down  in  the  Srutis  and  Smrtis.  What  is  gained  by  the 
practice  of  dharma  for  a year  in  Treta  is  attained  by  the  prac- 
tice of  it  for  a month  in  Dvapara.  In  Kali  an  intelligent  devotee 
attains  the  same  in  a day  by  practising  Dharma  strenuously.**^ 

48.  This  is  the  state  of  affairs  in  the  Kali  yuga.  Under- 
stand the  situation  in  the  period  of  ending  junction  (sandh- 
yaih^a)  from  me.  In  every  yuga  the  Siddhis  are  reduced  to 
three-fourths  of  what  they  were  in  the  beginning. 

49.  Only  a quarter  of  the  features  of  the  yugas  remains  in 
their  sandhyas  (preceding  transition  periods).  Similarly  only 
a quarter  of  the  features  of  the  sandhyas  abides  in  the  san- 
dhyamsas  (succeeding  transition  periods)  (i.e.  during  the 
sandhyam^a period  only  l/6th  of  the  yuga  Dharma  will  prevail) . 


261.  Of.  Visou  as  cited  in  ST.  ^ 1 

snt  3r?>Tnr»r  11 

fbrr;  1 5nwft%  ^5r:  ?rrf«»f?r  wftRnr  11 


160 


Lingapurd(ia 


50*53.  When  the  yuga  has  come  to  a close  and  the  period 
of  junction  too  has  arrived,  the  chastiser  of  the  wicked  people 
will  rise  up  in  order  to  kill  all  the  bad  living  beings.  He  will  be 
born  in  Uie  family  of  the  Moon.  He  will  be  called  Prainiti  by 
name.  Previously  in  the  Svayambhuva  manvantara,  he  i.ad 
been  born  oi'  the  parts  of  Manu  (i.e.  in  the  family  of  then 
Manu ) ; for  full  twenty  years  he  will  be  roaming  about  on  the 
earth.  He  will  be  taking  along  with  him  a big  army  consisting 
of  horses,  chariots  and  elephants.  He  will  be  surrounded  by 
hundreds  and  thousands  of  brahmins  wielding  weapons.  He 
will  kill  the  Mlccchas  (alien  outcaste  people)  in  thousands. 

51r-55.  After  killing  the  kings  of  Sudra  wombs  he  will  exter* 
minate  the  heretics  completely.  He  will  kill  those  who  are  not 
pious  and  virtuous.  He  will  kill  those  who  are  born  of  diffe- 
rent castes  and  those  who  depend  upon  them  . 

56,  Thus  making  himself  powerful  with  an  active  army 
under  hb  control,  he  the  destroyer  of  the  Mlecchas,  invincible 
to  all  living  beings,  will  roam  about  the  world. 

57-58.  In  the  previous  birth  he  was  born  in  the  family 
of  Manu  who  himself  was  a part  incarnation  of  Vispu.  When 
the  Kali  yuga  is  complete  (i.e.  coming  to  an  end)  he  will  be 
born  in  the  line  of  the  Moon  as  the  powerful  Pramiti.^®^ 
will  start  his  campaign  in  his  thirty  second  year  and  continue 
it  for  twenty  years. 

59,  He  will  be  killing  hundreds  and  thousands  of  living 
beings.  By  means  of  this  cruel  act  be  will  reduce  the  entire 
earth  to  the  seeds. 

60-69.  Getting  infuriated  mutually  (the  people  will  attack 
one  another) . Pramiti  will  defeat  all  those  alien  outcastes  and 
all  unrighteous  persons  and  ultimately  rest  in  the  middle  land 
between  the  Gahga  and  Yamuna  along  with  his  ministers  and 
followers,  after  killing  all  the  kings  and  alien  outcastes  in 
thousands.  When  the  sandhyaihsa  period  sets  in  at  the  end  of 
the  yuga  there  will  be  groups  of  people  among  the  subjects  left 
behind  here  and  there.  Getting  unrestrained  and  covetous  they 
will  be  attacking  and  killing  one  another.  When  anarchy 

262.  Pramiti — Gandragupta  VikramfUiitya  II,  son  of  Samudragupta. 
A similar  account  is  found  in  Mat^a,  Gh.  144.  For  detail,  see  MP — A Study, 
by  V.S.  Agrawal,  pp.  228-231. 


Extent  of  four  Tugas 


161 


spreads  in  view  of  the  series  of  affairs  in  the  yuga,  when  people 
begin  to  suspect  one  another,  all  those  people  will  be  afflicted 
by  fear.  Agitated  and  bewildered  they  will  leave  off  their  wives 
and  houses.  They  will  not  care  even  for  their  own  lives. 
Though  themselves  miserable  yet  they  will  be  worthless.  When 
the  holy  i ites  laid  down  in  the  Srutis  and  Smrtis  perish,  these 
people  will  attack  and  kill  one  another.  When  Dharma  is  des- 
troyed they  will  become  mannerless,  unbounded,  shameless  and 
unloving.  Ihey  will  not  hesitate  to  attack  one  another.  They 
will  be  stunted  in  growth  and  live  as  far  as  twentyfive  years. 
Getting  involved  in  disputes  they  will  abandon  wives  and  sons. 
When  lack  of  nain  affects  them  they  will,  abandon  agriculture. 
They  will  leave  off  their  land  and  resort  to  frontiers. 2®^  They 

will  resort  to  rivers,  oceans,  mountains  and  wells. 

70.  In  their  misery  they  will  sustain  themselves  on  wine, 
meat,  roofs  and  fruits.  They  will  wear  barks  of  trees,  leaves  or 
deer  skin.  They  will  not  perform  holy  rites  or  accept  monetary 
gifts. 

71.  They  will  fall  off  from  the  rigid  discipline  of  four 
castes  and  stages  of  life.  They  will  be  involved  in  a terrible 
calamity.  Thus  the  few  remaining  subjects  at  the  end  of  Kali- 
yuga  will  be  in  miserable  circumstances. 

72-73.  They  will  be  afflicted  by  old  age,  sickness  and  hunger. 
Due  to  sorrow  their  minds  will  become  dejected.  Through  dejec- 
tion thinking  sets  in.  An  even  attitude  of  the  mind  is  wnat  is 
called  vicarana  (thinking).  This  attitude  leads  to  knowledge. 
Through  true  knowledge  arises  pious  nature.  The  subjects  who 
survive  the  concluding  years  of  Kaliyuga  will  be  devoid  of 
physical  features  and  mental  peace. 

74-73.  At  that  time,  the  yuga  changes  for  them  overnight, 
after  creating  illusion  in  their  minds  as  in  the  case  of  a sleeping 
or  mad  man.  Thanks  to  the  inevitability  and  force  of  future 
events  Krtayuga  will  set  in.  When  thus  the  Krtayuga  is  ushered 
in,  the  subjects  surviving  from  the  Kaliyuga,  become  those 

263.  pancavixhSakab  i.c.  with  their  span  of  life  extending  only  to 
twentyfive  years  or  whose  gross  and  subtle  bodies  constitute  twentyfive 
tattvas. 

264.  pratyantan— mlecchadeian  ST.  C3f*  pratyanto  mlecchadeiab 
syat — Amara, 


162 


LingapurU^ 


belonging  to  the  Krtayuga.  Those  Siddhas**^ (enlightened  souls) 
who  still  remain  and  move  about  invisibly,  will  be  made  mani- 
fest then  alongwith  the  sleeping  Saptar^is.  (seven  sages).**® 
There  will  be  some  brahmins,  k§atriyas,  vai^yas  and  ^udras 
for  the  purpose  of  seeds  [i.e.  as  nucleus  for  the  subsequent 
generation.  They  will  get  mixed  with  the  people  surviving 
from  the  Kaliyuga.  The  seven  sages  and  others  will  teach  these 
people  their  Dharma. 

79.  They  will  teach  them  the  two-fold  Dharma  of  the  Sruti 
and  Smrti*®®^  alongwith  the  conduct  of  life  peculiar  to  the  four 
castes  and  stages  of  life. 

Thereafter  when  they  begin  to  perform  holy  rites,  the  subjects 
flourish  in  the  Krtayuga. 

80-83.  When  the  Dharmas  have  been  propounded  by  the 
seven  sages,  other  sages  promulgate  them  (among  the  people) 
by  differentiating  them  between  those  pertaining  to  Sruti  and 
Smrti.  Some  of  these  sages  stay  even  at  the  time  of  dissolution 
for  the  purpose  of  establishing  Dharma.  The  sages  indeed  stay 
in  office  throughout  the  manvantara,  just  as  trees  remain 
(unaffected)  when  the  forest  fire  consumes  the  grass.  But  when 
rain  falls  this  grows  up  again.  In  the  same  manner,  after  the 
people  of  Kali  die  the  people  of  Krta  yuga  come  up.  The 
continuity  from  one  yuga  to  another  goes  on  without  break  in 
this  manner  till  the  manvantara  comes  to  a close. 

84.  Happiness,  longevity,  strength,  beauty  (or  physical 
features) , virtue,  wealth  and  love  become  reduced  to  three- 
fourths  from  yuga  to  yuga  gradually. 

85.  The  Siddhis  of  Dharma  become  (proportionately) 


265.  Siddhas — a class  of  human  beings  of  great  purity,  holiness  and 
divine  power.  They  are  said  to  be  seven,  Cf.  mantrajiio  mantravit  prajiio 
mantrarat  siddhapujita]t;i  siddhavat  parama^  siddha^  sarvasiddhipradayina^i 
—cited  in  ST. 

266.  seven  sages,  viz,  Marici,  Atri,  Ahgiras,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu 
and  Vasistha.  They  are  represented  by  a group  of  seven  stars  called  Ursa 
Major.  ST.  cites  a verse  with  a few  variations  in  names  : Kasyapo’  trir 
bharadvajo  VUvamitro’  tha  Gautama^  Vasi^tho  JamadagniS  ca  saptar^aya 
ud&hrtab 

266a,  iSrauta  and  Smarta  dharma  : norms  of  righteousness  derived 
from  the  authority  of  iSiuti  (Vedas)  and  Sm^tis  (1^^  treatises). 


Extent  of  four  Tugas 


163 


reduced  in  the  parts  of  the  junctions  of  yugas.  Thus  the  mode 
of  achievement  in  order  has  been  recounted. 

86-92.  In  the  same  manner  all  the  four  yugas  must  be 
understood.  A thousand  such  cycles  of  four  yugas  are  said  to 
constitute  one  day  of  Brahma.  The  night  too  consists  of  as  many 
yugas.  By  the  time  the  yuga  comes  to  a close  the  living  beings 
lose  their  straightforward  and  sentient  feelings.  This  is  the 
characteristic  feature  of  all  the  yugas.  Seventyone  cycles  of 
four  yugas  constitute  a manvantara.  What  happens  in  one  set  of 
four  yugas  is  repeated  in  the  other  cycles  of  four  yugas  in  the 
same  manner  and  at  the  same  time  as  well  as  in  the  same  order. 
The  differences  that  occur  from  creation  to  creation  are  limited 
to  twentyfive,  neither  more  nor  less.  The  kalpas  too  have  the 
same  characteristics  as  the  yugas.  The  same  characteristics 
mark  all  the  manvantaras  also. 

93.  Just  as  the  changes  and  alterations  in  the  yugas  have 
happened  from  early  days  (and  have  continued  for  a long  time) 
in  view  of  the  nature  of  the  yugas,  so  also  the  world  of  living 
beings  goes  round  and  round  alternating  between  death  and 
birth. 

94.  Thus  the  characteristic  feature  of  the  yugas  of  the 
past  and  future  in  all  the  manvantaras  has  been  recorded  in 
brief. 

95.  With  the  explanation  of  one  manvantara  all  the  man- 
vantaras have  been  undoubtedly  explained;  similarly  with  one 
kalpa  and  other  kalpas  too. 

96-100.  In  regard  to  the  future  kalpas  the  same  argument 
should  be  continued  by  one  who  knows.  In  all  the  manvantaras 
past  and  future,  the  eight^®’  classes  of  Devas,  the  ruling  lords  of 
manvantaras,  Manus  and  sages  will  have  the  same  status 
through  their  names  and  forms,  as  also  the  same  purpose  and 
intention.  The  same  is  the  case  with  the  division  of  castes  and 
stages  of  life  in  every  yuga.  It  is  the  lord  who  lays  down  the 
nature  and  characteristics  of  the  yugas,  the  divisions  of  castes 
and  stages  of  life,  the  yugas  and  the  Siddhis  of  the  yugas.  Inci- 
dentally, the  magnitude  of  the  yugas  was  mentioned  to  you.  I 
shall  now  recount  to  you  how  the  lotus-born  deity  became 
Brahma  the  son  of  the  goddess. 

267.  Eight  classes  of  Devas  : Gf.  Aditya-viiva-vasavas-tu$ita>bh&B- 
varanil^  maharak^ika-sadhyas  ca  rudris  ca  ganadevat^ — dted  in  ST, 


164 


Lingapurana 


CHAPTER  FORTYONE 

Nativity  of  Brahma 

1.  When  the  period  of  a thousand  yugas  lapsed  and  it  was 
morning  for  him,  lord  Brahma  created  once  again  the  subjects 
who  had  fallen  off,  in  the  same  manner  as  they  were  before. 

2-6.  O leading  brahmin,  when  thus  the  period  of  twice 
Parardha  lapsed,  the  earth  merged  into  the  water,  the  water  into 
the  fire,  the  fire  into  the  wind,  the  wind  into  the  ether  along 
with  the  tanmatras.  O excellent  brahmin,  eleven  sense-organs 
and  the  tanmatras  merged  into  the  ego  lo  ! in  a trice.  Ego 
merged  into  intellect  (mahat)  in  a moment.  O brahmin,  the 
intellect  also  attained  the  unmanifest (avyakta)  and  merged  into 
it.  The  unmanifest  became  merged  into  the  lord  along  with  its 
Gunas.  Thereafter  creation  took  place  as  before  from  Purusa 
§iva.268  Then  the  mental  sons  were  created  by  him  by  mere 
thinking. 

7-9.  The  subjects  thus  created  by  the  lotus-born  deity  did 
not  flourish  in  this  world.  For  the  purpose  of  increase,  lord 
Brahma  performed  a penance  with  the  supreme  lord  in  view,  in 
the  company  of  his  mental  sons.  The  great  lord  was  pleased 
by  their  penance.  Realising  Brahma’s  desire,  the  lord  pierced 
through  the  middle  of  Brahma’s  forehead.  Saying  ‘T  am  your 
son”  he  then  became  male-cum-  female  in  his  form. 

10-14.  The  lord  with  half-female  body  became  his  son.  Then 
the  lord  burnt  Brahma,  the  preceptor  of  the  universe.  Thereafter 
for  the  purpose  of  the  flourishing  increase  of  the  worlds  the  lord 
adopted  the  yogic  path  and  enjoyed  his  own  prosperous  semi- 
Matra,  ParameSvari.  He  created  Visnu  and  Brahma  in  her.  The 
lord  of  the  universe,  the  soul  of  the  universe,  created  the  Pasupata 
missile  too.  Hence  Vi§nu  and  Brahma  were  born  of  the  part  of 
Mahadevl.  Thus  Brahma  who  was  the  Egg-born,  and  the  lotus- 
born  was  born  also  of  the  body  of  the  lord.^®®  Thus,  in  brief,  the 

268.  At  first  there  was  nothing  except  Prakrti  and  Puru$a  (i.e.  Siva 
and  Maya).  Then  Siva  created  twcntyfive  tattvas  out  of  hknself.  Gf, 

ftrjfsrrarfsT  I Lingo,  part  II;  and  SP 

cited  in  5r.j  gw  1 

269.  Brahma  is  bom  of  (i)  the  Cosmic  Egg,  (ii)  the  lotus,  as  well 
as  (iii)  the  body  of  Siva. 


Nativity  of  Brahma 


165 


entire  anecdote  has  been  mentioned  to  you,  as  also  what 
happened  during  the  first  Parardha  of  Brahma. 

1 5-2 1 . I shall  now  briefly  mention  the  detachment  of  Brahma 
born  of  tamogu^a.  Lord  Visnu  split  his  body  into  two  and 
created  universe  consisting  of  the  mobile  and  immobile  beings. 
He  then  created  Brahma  who  in  turn  created  Rudra.  O sage,  in 
another  kalpa,  Rudra  created  Brahma,  Then  O sage,  in  an- 
other kalpa,  Vi§nu  created  Brahma,  then  Brahma  created 
Vi§nu,  then  the  lord  created  Brahma.  Then  Brahma  thought 
that  the  world  was  full  of  misery  and  he  abandoned  the  activity 
of  creation.  He  engaged  his  soul  in  the  higher  soul.  He  restrained 
the  movement  of  the  vital  breaths  and  remained  motionless  like  a 
rock.  He  remained  in  Samadhi  (ecstasy)  for  ten  thousand  years. 
The  splendid  lotus  that  faced  downwards  and  was  stationed  in 
the  heart  was  filled  with  inhalation.  It  became  blossomed  out. 
When  by  means  of  retention  of  breath  it  was  restrained  that 
lotus  became  urdhva-vaktra  (with  face  lifted  upwards). 

22-27.  In  the  middle  of  its  pericarp  he  installed  the  lord. 
Then  Brahma,  the  self-controlled  who  had  purified  his  soul  by 
perfect  restraint  of  his  senses  installed  the  great  lord  Siva  in  his 
heart.  The  lord  was  situated  there  in  a space  as  small  as  the 
hundred  part  of  the  thread  of  the  lotus  stalk**^®  by  repeating  *om’ 
in  a series  of  half  measures  of  time.  He  who  was  worthy  of  wor- 
ship himself, then  propitiated  the  unchanging  lord(i.e.  Siva) 
by  means  of  flowers  of  restraint  etc.*’*  Then  at  the  behest 
of  the  I^vara  situated  in  the  heart-lotus  (of  Brahma)  the  all- 
pervading  lord  bom  of  the  body  of  Bhava  came  out  of  Brahma 
by  piercing  through  his  forehead. 

That  lord  born  from  Siva’s  heart  was  blue  originally  but 
became  red  by  contact  with  fire.  Because  that  Puru^  was  both 
Nila  (blue)  and  Lohita(red)  just  like  the  form  of  Kala,  the  God 


2270.  mrinala-tanu-bbaga  : Gf.  nlvUraiukavat  tanvi  pfU  bhasvatya- 
a(lpam&  tasySh  madhye  hi  param&tmS  vyavasthitab;  alio 

B&Ulgramfitraiii  hrdayasya  madhye... dted  in  ST. 

271.  yl^yahr— yajanayogyab  ST.  worthy  of  worship. 

272.  yama-puspadibhih  : in  the  form  of  observances  such  as  yama, 
niyama,  fisana,  pr&gi&y&ma,  praty&h&ra,  dh&rai^ft,  dhyana  and  sam&dhi. 


166  LiAgapwri/fa 

of  Death,  he  was  named  Nilalohita  by  I^vara  and  lord  Kala  by 
Brahma.  The  all-pervading  one  (i.e.  Kala)  became  pleased 
thereby. 

28.  O great  sage,  Brahma,  the  soul  of  the  universe  eulogised 
the  lord  who  was  delighted  in  his  mind  and  who  had  the  uni- 
verse as  his  form  by  means  of  the  N^^t^ka — the  set  of  eight 
names. 

Brahma  said  : 

29-32.  O lord  Rudray  obeisance  to  you  of  unmeasured 
splendour  like  the  sun.  Obeisance  to  you  lord  Bhava  identical 
with  water  and  taste.  Perpetual  obeisance  to  &afva  who  has 
the  form  of  earth  and  smell.  Obeisance  to  you,  Uky  identical 
with  air  and  the  quality  of  touch.  Obeisance  to  Paiupati  the 
lord  of  individual  souls,  identical  with  fire  of  excessive  splendour. 
Obeisance  to  you,  Bhimay  identical  with  ether  having  the  quality 
of  sound.  Obeisance  to  Mahadevay  identical  with  the  moon — the 
abode  of  nectar.  Obeisance  to  you,  Ugray  theYajamana  (one 
who  performs  sacrifice)  who  is  the  agent  for  all  actions.*^* 

33-34.  He  who  reads  this  hymn  sung  by  Brahma  unto 
Rudra,  he  who  listens  to  this  or  he  who  narrates  this  to 
brahmins  with  great  concentration  will  attain  identity  with  the 
lord  of  eight  cosmic  bodies,  within  a year.  After  eulogising  thus, 
Brahma  looked  at  the  great  lord. 

35-36.  The  great  lord  stood  with  the  eight  forms  spread 
all  round.  The  sun  shone.  So  also  the  fire  and  the  moon.  There 
were  earth,  wind,  water,  ether  and  yajamana — the  sacrificcr. 
Ever  since  that  time  they  call  Isvara,  Astamurti. 

37-38,  Thanks  to  the  grace  of  Astamurti,  Brahma  created 
again.  After  creating  the  world  of  mobile  and  immobile  beings, 
he  fell  asleep  for  the  period  of  a thousand  yugas.  In  the  next 
kalpa  when  he  woke  up  he  became  desirous  of  creating  the 
subjects,  and  so  he  performed  great  and  severe  penance. 

273.  Eight  names  of  Siva.  SP.  Vi<fy$ivara-samhitd  (Gh.  20.  47}  mentions 
eight  names  as  Hara,  Maheivara,  Sambhu,  iSulapHi^i,  Pin&kadhrk,  Siva, 
Paiupati  and  Mah&deva.  But  Lihga  has  a different  list,  represented  by  the 
the  eight  forms  of  $iva. 

274.  karma-yogine : karma-yogin  is  the  eighth  form  of  Siva  called 
yajam&na  (a  sacrlficer)  and  Ugra.  According  to  ST . karnmyogineMbutoa- 
phala-bhoktre— one  who  enjoys  the  fruits  of  his  actions  i.e.  Jlva. 


Nativity  of  Brakmd 


167 


39.  Even  when  he  performed  the  penance  thus,  nothing^ 
happened.  After  a great  deal  of  time  he  became  miserable  and 
his  sorrow  turned  into  anger. 

40.  When  he  was  overwhelmed  with  anger,  drops  of  tears 
fell  from  his  eyes.  From  those  drops  of  tears  goblins  and  ghosts 
originated. 

41 . On  seeing  this  first-born  creation  consisting  of  goblins, 
ghosts  and  demons,  the  unborn  deity  lord  Brahma  censured 
himself. 

42.  Thereupon,  the  infuriated  lord  Brahma,  abandoned 
his  life.  Thereafter,  Rudra  in  the  form  of  Prana  ( vital  breath) 
appeared  through  the  mouth  of  lord  Brahma. 

43.  The  lord,  having  a lustre  resembling  that  of  the  rising 
sun  became  Ardhanarisvara  ( male-cum-female  form)..  He 
divided  himself  into  eleven^’^  parts  and  settled  down  there. 

44.  With  half  a portion  of  himself  Ardhanarisvara,  the 
soul  of  all,  created  Uma.  She  created  Laksmi,  Durga  and  Saras- 
vati. 

45-48.  (She  further  created)  Varna,  Raudri,  Mahamaya, 
Vaisnavi  the  lotus-eyed  goddess,  Kalavikarim,  Kali  residing  in 
the  lotu.s,  goddess  Balavikarini,  Balapramathinf,  Sarvabhuatada- 
man!,  (the  suppressor  of  all  living  beings)  and  Manonmani. 
Similarly  thousands  of  other  women  were  created  by  her.  Accom- 
panied by  those  ladies  and  the  Rudras,  Mahadeva,ParameSvara 
the  lord  of  the  three  worlds  stood  in  front  of  lord  Brahma^ 
Paramesthin  who  was  the  soul  of  all  but  was  now  lying  dead. 

49.  Lord  MaheSvara,  the  sympathetic  son  of  Brahma, 
granted  him  vital  airs. 

50.  Then  Rudra  the  lord  of  Devas  was  delighted  and  he 
spoke  these  pleasant  words  to  Brahma  who  regained  his  life 
a little. 

51.  O highly  blessed  lord  Brahma,  O preceptor  of  the  worlds^ 
do  not  be  afraid  ; the  vital  airs  have  been  established  here  in 
your  heart.  Hence,  O lord  get  up. 


275.  ek&(iaiadh&  : in  eleven  forms,  as  stated  in  Vifnu  (dted  in  ST) . 
They  are  named  Aja-ekapad,  Ahirbudhnya,  Tva^tr*  Rudra,  Hara,  Tryam- 
baka,  Aparijita,  Vr^akapi,  Sambhu,  Kapardin  and  Raivata.  Other  PuraijAa 
give  different  lists.  For  detail,  see  Mat^purdioa — A study,  pp.  65-67* 


168 


Lhlgapiir^iu 


52-54.  On  hearing  his  words  as  though  in  dreams  passing 
through  his  mind^  Brahma  bc;:ame  delighted  in  his  heart.  With 
the  vital  airs  coming  back  to  him,  he  looked  at  Mahe^vara  with 
his  eyes  that  had  the  lustre  of  full  blown  lotus.  After  glancing 
up  at  him  for  a long  time,  lord  Brahma  got  up  and  said  with 
palms  joined  in  reverence  in  a tone  affectionate  and  majestic. 

'‘O  highly  blessed  one,  tell  me.  You  are  delighting  my 
mind : Who  are  you  standing  with  eight  cosmic  bodies  and  in 
eleven  forms?*’ 

Indra  said: 


55-58.  On  hearing  his  words,  Mahe^vara  the  slayer  of  the 
enemies  of  Devas  spoke  through  all  his  mouths. 

The  lord  said: 

‘^Know  me  the  great  soul  and  know  her  the  birthless  MSya. 
These  standing  by  are  the  Rudras,  who  have  come  here  to 
protect  you”. 

Thereafter  Brahma  bowed  down  to  the  lord  of  Devas  and 
said  with  palms  joined  in  reverence.  His  words  were  choked 
with  delight. 

“O  lord,  O lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas,  I am  agitated  and 
excited  due  to  mberies. 

59-60,  O liSana,  O Sankara,  it  behoves  you  to  release  me 
from  the  bondage  of  worldly  existence. 

Thereupon  the  lord  of  Uma  laughed  at  Brahma.  Then  the 
lord  of  the  universe  vanished  from  there  along  with  Uma  and 
the  Rudras. 

Indra  said: 

61-64.  Hence  O Sil&da,  understand  that  in  all  the  worlds 
it  is  difficult  to  get  a person  who  is  not  born  of  a womb  and 
who  is  deathless.  Even  the  lotus-born  deity  has  death.  But 
if  Rudra  the  lord  of  Devas  is  pleased,  a son  not  born  of  a 
womb  and  devoid  of  death  is  not  difficult  for  you  to  get.  It  is 
not  possible  for  me,  for  Vi§9u  and  for  Brahma  to  offer  you  a 
son  not  born  of  a womb  and  devoid  of  death. 


169 


Origin  of  Jfanditvara 
SailMi  said: 

After  speaking  thus  to  the  leading  brahmin  and  blessing 
him,  the  kind  lord  accompanied  by  Devas  went  away  riding 
on  his  white  elephant. 


CHAPTER  FORTYTWO 

The  origin  of  NandUvara 


SUta  said: 

1 . When  the  thousand-eyed  meritorious  bestower  of  boons 
had  gone,  Silada  propitiated  Mahadeva.  He  delighted  the 
lord  by  means  of  penance. 

2.  Even  as  the  brahmin  ptursued  the  penance  eagerly  and 
perpetually,  a thousand  divine  years  surprisingly  passed  off 
like  a moment. 

3.  The  sage  was  completely  enveloped  by  an  anthill. 
He  became  the  victim  of  torture  by  groups  of  worms  and 
blood-sucking  insects  with  their  mouths  pointed  like  diamond 
needles. 

4.  With  skin  alone,  devoid  of  flesh  and  blood  he  stood 
there  like  a wall  unaffected.  He  was  a mere  skeleton  then. 
The  auspicious  lord  thought  of  him  then. 

5.  When  the  sage  was  touched  with  hand  by  the  lord, 
the  enemy  of  the  Cupid,  the  leading  Brahmin  sage  eschewed 
all  his  fatigue  and  strain. 

6.  Lord  Siva  was  delighted  at  the  penance  of  the  sage. 
(Approaching  him)  along  mth  his  Ga^  and  Uma  he  said  to 
him,  “I  am  delighted  with  your  penance**. 

7.  highly  intelligent  one,  what  with  this  penance  ? I 
shall  give  you  an  omniscient  son  who  has  mastered  all  the 
Scriptural  topics**. 

8.  Thereafter  bowing  down  to  the  lord  of  Devas  and 
eulogising  him  Silada  spoke  to  the  moon-bedecked  lord,  accom- 
panied by  Uml,^  widi  words  choked  with  great  pleasure. 

276.  somam— UmayA  laha,  accompanied  fay  UmA. 


170 


Lingapuri^ 


Sildda  said: 

9.  lord,  O Sankara  the  most  excellent  among  the  good» 

0 lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas,  O destroyer  of  Tripuras, 

1 wish  for  a son  not  born  of  a womb  and  devoid  of  death”* 

SUta  said: 

10.  Rudra,  Parame^vara  who  had  already  been  propitiated 
by  his  penance  by  Brahma  spoke  thus  again  to  Silada  with 
very  great  pleasure. 

The  lord  said: 

11.  O brahmin,  O ascetic,  formerly  I had  been  propitiated 
by  Brahma,  sages  and  Devas  by  penance,  for  the  sake  of  my 
incarnation. 

12.  I shall  become  your  son,  not  born  of  a womb,  by  the 
name  Nandin.  O sage,  I am  the  father  of  worlds  and  you  will 
become  my  father. 

13.  After  saying  thus  to  the  sage  who  was  standing  there 
after  bowing  to  him  and  looking  up  to  him,  the  delighted 
merciful  lord  who  was  accompanied  by  Uma  and  who  was 
comparable  to  the  Moon  vanished  there  itself. 

14-15.  O great  sage,  having  obtained  the  assurance  of  a 
son  from  Rudra,  my  father  was  delighted.  He  was  the  most 
excellent  among  the  knowers  of  sacrifice.  For  the  purpose  of 
sacrifice  he  came  to  the  courtyard  of  a great  sacrificial  cham- 
ber. Formerly  I was  born  in  that  courtyard  as  his  son,  at  the 
behest  of  lord  Siva.  I had  the  lustre  of  fire  at  the  closing  of 
a yuga. 

16.  When  I was  born  as  the  son  of  Silada,  the  clouds 
Pu^ara,  Avartaka  and  others  showered  rain.  The  heaven- 
walkers — Kinnaras,  Sadhyas  and  Siddhas  sang  songs.  Vi^^u 
showered  fragrant  flowers. 

17-19.  I had  then  the  lustre  of  Kalasurya  (sun  at  the 
time  of  pralaya  or  dissolution).  I was  having  matted  hair  and 
coronet.  In  the  form  of  an  infant  I had  three  eyes,  four  arms 
holding  the  trident,  axe,  iron  club  and  thunderbolt.  My  curved 
fangs  were  adamantine.  I was  the  infant  adored  by  the  thunder- 
bolt-wielding Indra.  I was  terrible  in  appearance  with  diamond 
ear-rin^.  My  voice  was  comparable  to  the  thundering  sound  of 


Origin  of  NandtSvara 


171 


the  clouds.  On  seeing  me  Brahma,  Indra  and  all  other  gods  and 
leading  sages  eulogised  me.  The  groups  of  celestial  damsels 
shouted  and  danced  all  round. 

20.  O leading  sage,  with  mantras  pertaining  to  MaheiSvara 
as  well  as  those  taken  from  5^,  Yajus  and  S^an,  the  over- 
joyed sages  eulogised  and  bowed  down  to  me. 

21-25.  The  following  stood  all  around  me: — Brahma, 
Vi§nu,  Rudra,  Indra,  Siva,  Ambika  herself,  Jupiter,  the  moon, 
the  sun  of  great  splendour,  wind  god,  fire  god,  Isana,  Nirrti, 
Yaksa,  Yama,  Varuna,  Visve  Devas,  Rudras,  Vasus  of  great 
strength,  Lak$nu  herself,  Saci,  Jye9tha,  goddess  Sarasvati, 
Aditi,  Diti,  Sraddha,  Lajja,  Dhrti,  Nanda,  Bhadra,  Surabhi, 
SuiSila,  Sumanas,  the  lord  of  bulls,  Dharma  of  great  splendour 
and  the  sons  of  Dharma.  They  surrounded  me,  embraced  me 
and  eulogised  me.  O excellent  sage,  even  Silada  my  father, 
the  sage,  on  seeing  me  like  that  bowed  to  me  with  love.  The 
meritorious  soul  eulogised  his  son  who  gave  him  what  he 
liked. 

Silada  said: 

26-31.  O lord,  O lord  of  the  chief  of  Devas,  O thrcc-eycd 
one,  O unchanging  one,  you  arc  my  son  since  you  are  my 
protector  and  the  protector  of  worlds  from  misery.  Since  you 
arc  the  protector  of  worlds,  O son,  you  arc  my  father.  You  are 
omnipresent.  O son,  not  bom  of  a womb,  obeisance  to  you,  O 
source  of  origin  of  the  universe,  O grand  father,  O father,  O son, 
O MaheiSana,  O preceptor  of  the  universe,  O dear  one,  O 
highly  blessed  one,  O Parame^vara  protect  me.  O lord  of 
Devas,  since  I am  delighted  by  you,  you  are  to  be  known  by 
the  name  Nandin.  Hence  O Nandin,  delight  me.  I bow  down 
to  you,  the  lord  of  the  universe,  O lord,  delight  my  parents 
who  have  gone  to  Rudra’s  world.  O lord,  my  grandfather 
too  has  gone  to  the  world  of  Rudra.  O Nandin,  when 
Maheivara  has  incarnated  my  birth  in  the  world  is  fruitful.  O 
lord,  the  birth  of  the  worlds  too  is  fruitful. 

32.  When  you  have  incarnated  as  my  son  for  my  protection 
O IiSvara,  O Nandin,  O lord  of  Devas,  obeisance  to  you.  O 
NandHvara,  obeisance  to  you. 

33-38.  O son  of  mighty  arms,  protect  me.  O lord  of  Devas, 


172 


LifigapuriJ^ 


O preceptor  of  the  worlds,  O dear  one,  please  forgive  what 
was  said  by  me  considering  you  as  my  son.  You  are  worthy  of 
being  eulogised  by  means  of  hymns  by  Devas  and  Asuras. 

Whoever  reads  or  listens  to  this  speech  addressed  to  my 
son,  whoever  narrates  this  to  brahmins  with  devotion,  rejoices 
along  with  me.  After  eulogising  the  boy  his  son,  after  bowing 
down  to  him  with  respect  and  looking  at  the  leading  sages 
iSilada  of  good  holy  rites  said: — 

“O  ye  sages,  see  my  great  fortune,  since  the  unchanging 
lord  has  incarnated  as  Nandin  in  the  courtyard  of  the  sacri- 
ficial hall.  Which  man  is  like  me  in  this  world  ? Neither  Devas 
nor  Danavas  are  equal  to  me  since  this  Nandin  is  born  in  the 
sacrificial  ground  for  the  sake  of  my  welfare. 


CHAPTER  FORTYTHREE 

Coronation  of  Nandiivara 


JfandUvara  said : 

1 . After  bowing  down  to  Mahe^vara,  my  delighted  father 
immediately  went  back  to  his  hut  along  with  me  like  an 
indigent  man  after  obtaining  a treasure-trove. 

2.  O great  sage,  when  I went  to  the  hut  of  Silada  I esche- 
wed my  divine  form  and  assumed  a human  shape. 

3-4.  My  divine  memory  was  obliterated  for  some  unknown 
reason.  On  seeing  that  I had  assumed  human  form,  my  father, 
worshipped  by  all  the  worlds,  became  extremely  miserable 
and  he  lamented.  Surrounded  by  his  kinsmen,  he,  the  knower 
of  everything,  performed  my  postnatal  and  other  holy  rites. 

5-8.  Silada  son  of  Salankayana  was  highly  fond  of  me 
his  son.  It  was  he  who  taught  me  all  these: — ^viz,  the  recensions 
ofRgveda,  Yajurveda  and  the  thousand  branches  of  Samaveda 
with  their  ancillaries  and  subdivisions.  He  taught  me 
Ayurveda  (science  of  medicine),  Dhanurveda  (science  of 
archery) , Gandharva  (musicology),  A^valak§a:gia  (characteris- 
tics of  horses) , the  details  of  elephants  and  also  the  characteri- 


Coronation  of  NanSivara 


17S 


sties  of  men.  When  I completed  my  seventh  year  two  excellent 
divine  sages  Mitra  and  VaruiUia^  who  were  equipped  with 
penance,  and  yogic  power  came  to  his  hermitage  to  see  me. 
It  was  at  the  behest  of  the  lord  that  they  had  come  there. 

9-11.  On  seeing  me  repeatedly  the  two  noble  sages  said: 

dear  one,  though  this  Nandin  has  mastered  all  the  scriptu- 
ral topics,  he  is  shortlived.  This  type  of  wonder  has  not  been 
seen  before.  His  life  does  not  extend  beyond  a year. 

When  they  said  thus  Silada  the  leading  brahmin,  extremely 
fond  of  his  son,  embraced  me.  Excessively  dejected  he  lamen- 
ted with  a highly  discordant  voice,  **alas  my  son!  my  son,  my  son’’ 
He  then  fell  down  fiat. 

12-13.  He  was  sad  and  he  said — Alas!  the  power  of  the 
adverse  fate  and  of  the  creator  I”  On  hearing  his  lamentation 
the  residents  of  the  hermitage  gathered  there  in  great  bewil- 
derment. They  evolved  amulets  and  observed  auspicious  rites 
to  ward  off  the  evil.  They  eulogised  Mah&deva,  the  three-eyed 
lord  of  Uma. 

14.  They  performed  homa  repeating  the  mantra  of  Tri- 
yambaka,  offering  ten  thousand  times  DQrva  (Darbha  grass) 
soaked  in  honey,  and  accompanied  by  other  materials  of 
worship. 

15.  My  father  and  grandfather  lost  consciousness.  With  all 
their  activities  ceased,  they  lamented,  fell  down  as  though  dead. 

16-19.  I was  affaid  of  death.  Ere  long  I bowed  down  to 
my  father  and  grandfather  who  were  lying  down  as  though  they 
were  dead.  1 circumambulated  them.  I was  then  engaged  in  the 
repetition  of  Rudra  mantra.  I meditated  on  the  three-eyed  lord 
in  the  lotus  cavity  of  my  heart,  the  quiescent  lord  Sad&tiva 
with  ten  arms  and  five  faces.  Even  as  I was  standing  in  the 
middle  of  the  holy  river  the  delighted  lord  Mahideva  accomp- 
anied by  Uma,  and  adorned  by  the  crescent  moon  appear^ 
and  said — O dear  Nandin  of  great  arms,  whence  is  fear  from 
death  for  you  ? 

20-24.  Those  two  brahmins  had  been  sent  by  me  akme* 
There  is  no  doubt  that  you  are  like  myself.  O dear,  this  body 
of  yours  is  factually  worldly.  It  is  not  divine.  O dear,  what 
was  formerly  seen  and  worshipped  by  Sil&da,  Devas,  sages,,  Sid- 
dhas,  Gandharvas  and  Dinavas  was  divine.  O Nandi^vara. 


174 


LiAgapura^ 


this  is  the  nature  of  the  world  that  happiness  and  misery  be- 
fall repeatedly  one  after  the  other.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  discri- 
minating man  to  avoid  birth  through  the  womb.^’'^  After  saying 
thus  to  me,  Paramesvara,  lord  Rudra,  Hara,  the  great  lord 
of  all  Dcvas,  the  destroyer  of  distress  touched  me  with  his 
splendid  hands. 

25-28.  After  glancing  at  the  goddess,  Uma  the  daughter  of  the 
Himavat,  and  at  the  chieftains  of  the  Ganas,  the  bull-emblemed 
Mahadeva,  Lord  of  Devas,  said  with  satisfaction  in  his  heart, 
*‘Along  with  your  father  and  friends  you  will  be  unageing  and 
deathless.  You  will  be  devoid  of  pain  and  misery.  You  will  be 
imperishable  and  unchanging.  You  will  have  my  virility  and 
exploit.  You  will  be  my  favourite  chief  of  Ganas.  I will  be  al- 
ways fond  of  you.  You  will  be  at  my  side  for  ever.  You  will 
have  my  strength.  You  will  be  endowed  with  great  yogic  power.*’ 

29-31.  After  saying  this  to  me  the  lord  accompanied  by 
his  attendants,  took  off  his  lotus  garland.  The  bull-emblemed 
lord  of  great  splendour  tied  it  on  me.  With  that  splendid  gar- 
land clinging  to  my  neck  I became  as  though  a second  Sankara 
with  three  eyes  and  ten  arms.  Then  Paramesvara  took  me  by 
the  hand  and  said — ‘‘Tell  me.  What  excellent  boon  shall  I give 
you  now  ?” 

32-35.  The  bull-emblemed  lord  then  took  the  pure  water 
embedded  in  his  matted  hairs.  Saying  ‘‘Be  a river”  he  cast  it 
down.  Then  it  began  to  flow  as  a great  river  full  of  splendid, 
divine,  white  (shining)  water  with  lots  of  lotuses  and  lilies  in  it. 
Mahadeva  said  to  that  extremely  splendid  river — “Since  you 
began  to  flow  as  a great  river  from  the  waters  of  my  matted 
hairs  you  will  be  an  excellent  holy  river  named  Jatodaka.” 

36-39.  “Any  man  will  be  liberated  from  all  sins  by  tak- 
ing bath  in  you.”  Then  lord  Mahadeva  said  to  the  goddess 
“This  is  your  son”  and  made  me  the  son  of  Silada,  fall  at 
her  feet.  She  kissed  me  on  the  head  and  stroked  me  with  her 
hands.  With  three  pourings  of  water  as  white  as  the  conch, 
with  three  sons  she  bathed  me  with  the  affection  due  to  a son 
all  the  while  glancing  at  the  lord  of  Devas.  These  three  pour- 

277.  NrQ&xh  yoniparityagah  : release  from  the  bondage  of  Birth  and 
Death,  which  it  the  goal  of  man’s  life.  According  to  ST,  yoni-parity&gah» 
ftrl-sam&gama-tyagih*  ST,  cites  Bh^gavata  in  support  of  this  meaning. 


Coronation  of  NanStvara 


175 


ings  flowed  down  to  become  a river  with  three  branches.  The 
lord  Bhava  therefore  called  it  Trisrotas  (river  with  three 
tributaries) . 

40-43.  On  seeing  the  river  Trisrotas  the  bull  (vehicle  of 
Siva)  was  extremely  delighted.  It  bellowed.  From  that  bellowing 
sound  another  river  originated.  That  river  was  called  *‘Vj*§adh- 
vani’’  by  the  lord  of  Dcvas.  The  bull-emblemed  lord  placed  on 
my  head  his  divine  golden  crown  that  was  made  by  ViiSvakar- 
man,  studded  with  all  jewels,  and  that  was  variegated  au- 
spicious and  wonderful.  MahiUleva,  MaheS^^ara  himself  fitted  in 
my  ears  his  splendid  divine  ear-rings  bedecked  with  diamonds 
and  Lapis  Lazuli. 

44-47.  O sage,  on  seeing  me  honoured  thus,  the  sun  in  the 
sky  showered  Siladana  with  waters  from  the  clouds.  When  he  was 
thus  showered,  those  waters  flowed  as  a stream.  Since  this  river 
originated  from  gold,  the  three-eyed  lord  of  Devas  called  her 
SvatTLodaka.  Since  another  splendid  river  originated  from  the 
crown  made  of  gold  they  call  that  river  Jambunadl.  Thus  the 
set  of  five  rivers  flowed  near  the  lord  Japye^vara. 

48.  He  who  visits  Paflcanada,*’®  takes  the  holy  dip  there  and 
worships  Lord  JapyeSvara  shall  undoubtedly  attain  identity 
with  Siva. 

49.  Then  lord  Mahadeva,  Bhava,  the  lord  of  all  living 
beings  said  to  goddess  Sarva^u,  Uma,  the  unborn,  and  daughter 
of  the  mountain. 

50.  O goddess,  I am  going  to  crown  lord  Nandiiivara  as 
the  lord  of  goblins.  I shtiU  call  him  the  leader  of  the  Ganas.  O 
unchanging  goddess,  what  do  you  think  ? 

51-53.  On  hearing  his  words  the  delight  of  Bhavani  was 
evident  in  her  face.  Smilingly  she  said  to  Bhava  her  lord,  the 
lotd  of  goblins,  and  the  bestower  of  boons,  ^ lord  of  Devas,  it 
behoves  you  to  grant  him  the  overlordship  of  the  worlds  as 
also  the  leadership  of  the  Garias,  Sailadi  is  my  own  son.” 

Thereafter  lord  Sarva,  the  lord  of  the  chiefs  of  the  world, 
the  bull-emblemed  lord,  remembered  all  the  divine  chiefs  of 
the  Garias. 

278.  paftcanadam  : a confluence  of  five  rivers,  viz.  Jafodaki,  Tri« 
srotas,  Vrsadhvani,  SvarvodakS,  and  JfimbOaadl. 


176 


lingopwrUifa 


OHAPTBR  F0RTTF01IR 

Coronation  of  NaniUvara 

SailSdi  said: 

1.  As  soon  as  Rudra  remembered  them,  the  leaders  of 
Ga^as  came  there.  All  of  them  had  a thousand  arms  with 
weapons  in  all  their  thousand  hands. 

2.  They  had  three  eyes.  These  noble  ga^as  were  saluted 
even  by  Devas.  They  resembled  crorcs  of  fires  that  bum  at  the 
time  of  dissolution.  They  had  matted  hairs  and  crowns. 

3.  Innumerable  lords  of  Ga^as  of  noble  souls  came  there  with 
jubilation.  They  were  accompanied  by  crores  and  crores  of 
Ga^as  all  equal  in  exploits  to  the  chief.  Their  faces  were  terri- 
ble due  to  the  curved  fangs.  They  were  eternal,  enlightened 
and  devoid  of  impurities. 

4.  Those  strong  ones  were  singing,  running,  dancing  and 
playing  on  various  instruments  with  facial  gestures. 

5.  These  Ga^as  rode  in  chariots,  on  elephants,  horses,  lions 
and  monkeys.  They  were  seated  in  aerial  chariots  decorated  in 
gold. 

6-8.  The  Ga^as  of  great  yogic  power  came  to  the  assembly 
of  the  lord,  playing  on  drums  and  other  musical  instruments 
such  as  Bheri,  M^dangaka,  Pa^ava,  Anaka,  Gomukha, 
Pataha,  Ekapu^kara,  Adambaraka,  Muraja,  Pi^duna,  Mardala, 
Veipiu (flute),  (lute),  different  kinds  of  cymbals,  Dardura, 
TalaghUta,  Kacchapa  and  Pa^ava. 

9.  Those  lords  of  Ga^as  of  great  strength  and  stamina, 
the  lords  of  the  chiefi  of  Devas  bowed  down  to  the  lord  and 
the  goddess  and  spoke  these  words: 

10.  O blessed  lord,  O lord  of  the  clue&  of  Devas,  O 
three-eyed  lord,  O bull*emblemed  lord,  why  are  we  summon- 
ed ? O lord  of  great  qdendour,  command  us. 

1 1 . Shall  we  dry  up  the  oceans  ? Shall  we  kill  Yama  along 
with  his  servants?  Shall  we  kill  Mftyu,  the  daughter  of  God  of 
Death  ? Shall  we  kill  the  lotus-bom  deity  as  an  insignificant 
animal? 

12.  Infuriated  that  we  are,  shall  we  bind  up  Indra  along 
with  Devas  or  Vi^u  along  vnik  VUyu  or  Daityas  along  with 
Dfinavas  and  bring  them  here  ? 


Coronation  of  NaniUvara 


177 


13.  Olord,  at  your  beh^it,  to  whom  shall  we  bring  about 
destruction  and  distress  today  ? Who  has  great  festivities  today 
for  the  prosperity  and  increase  of  his  desires  ?’* 

14.  The  lord  honoured  crores  and  hundred  crores  of  those 
chieftains  of  Ga^as.  Even  as  they  earnestly  spoke  to  him  thus, 
he  replied  as  follows: 

15.  ^*You  are  all  persons  striving  for  the  welfare  of  the  uni* 
verse.  Listen  why  you  have  been  called.  O noble  ones  of  pure 
souls,  on  hearing  it  do  accordingly  without  hesitation. 

16.  This  Nandf^vara  is  our  son.  He  is  the  lord  of  all  chiefs. 
He  is  a prosperous  brahmin,  your  leader  and  coxnmander-in* 
chief. 

17.  Hence  at  my  bidding,  you  all,  highly  respected  ones, 
crown  him  as  your  lord  and  commander-in*chief,  as  the  great 
lord  of  yogas” 

18.  Thus  directed  by  the  lord,  the  chieftains  of  the  Ga^as 
agreed  to  the  same,  by  saying  ”so  be  it”  and  thereafter  began 
to  gather  all  the  requisites. 

19-23.  They  brought  the  usual  divine  seat  of  Sarva,  the 
splendid  seat  made  of  gold,  the  beautiful  one  resembling  Meru 
to  be  offered  as  seat  for  him  (Nandin) . They  made  a Ma^- 
dapa  with  many  pillars  shining  with  golden  lustre.  Pearl  pen* 
dants  were  suspended  and  they  were  studded  with  gems  and 
jewels.  There  were  columns  of  Lapis  Lazuli  covered  with  small 
tinkling  bells.  The  Ma^d^pa  had  doors  on  all  sides  bedecked 
in  beautiful  gems  and  jewels.  After  making  the  MaigidApa  they 
placed  a splendid  seat  in  the  middle.  In  front  of  it  was  the 
foot-stool  shining  with  blue  stones.  Fot  the  installation  of  the 
pedestal  they  kept  two  water  jars  nearby.  They  were  filled  with 
sweet  waters  and  covered  with  lotus  flowers. 

24.  There  were  ^ thousand  Jars  of  gold,  silver,  copper  and 
clay.  They  were  filled  with  waters  from  ail  Urthas. 

25*26.  Brahma,  Paramesthin  the  noble  soul, « offered  these 
things,  viz: — a pair  of  cloths,  divine  scents,  shoulderlets,  ear* 
rings,  crown,  necklace,  hundred-ribbed  umbrella  and  the  chow- 
ries. 

27.  There  was  a fine  Camara  (bushy  tail  of  deer  used  as  a 
flyflap  or  fan)  with  gold  shaft.  The  &n  was  as  pure  as  the  moon. 
It  shone  with  its  back  as  white  as  conch  or  pearl  necklace. 


178 


Likgapurdi$a 


28.  The  divine  elephants  Airavata  and  Supratlka  were 
fully  caparisoned.  A gold  crown  was  made  by  Visvakarman. 

29-30.  There  were  two  pure  and  divine  ear-rings.  The  ex- 
cellent weapon  thunderbolt  was  kept  there.  There  was  a golden 
thread  and  two  bracelets.  The  unexcited  leaders  of  Ganas  highly 
honoured  by  Devas  brought  many  requisite  materials  from  all 
round. 

31-34.  Then  all  these  assembled  there  joyously : ~ Devas 
along  with  Indra,  Vi^^u  and  others,  the  sages,  Brahma  and 
nine  Brahmas*^®.  When  all  of  them  had  come,  lord  Parame- 
^vara  directed  Brahma  to  perform  the  rite.  At  the  behest  of 
the  lord,  Brahma  performed  the  rite  of  ablution  with  great 
attention.  After  worshipping  him  Brahma  himself  poured  the 
water. 

35.  At  the  behest  of  Siva,  Vi§nu,  Indra  and  the  guardians 
of  quarters  bathed  the  leaders  of  Ganas  in  succession. 

36-37  The  sages  with  Brahma  at  their  head  eulogised  him. 
While  they  eulogised,  Vi§nu  the  lord  of  the  universe  kept  his 
joined  palms  over  the  head  and  eulogised  with  great  attention. 
With  palms  joined  in  reverence  he  bowed  down  and  cried  out 
ahouts  of  victory. 

38-39.  Then  the  commandants  of  Ganas,  Devas  and  Asuras 
one  after  the  other,  eulogised  and  bathed  him.  Thus  after 
being  eulogised  and  bathed  by  Devas  along  with  Brahma,  his 
marriage  too  was  performed  at  the  behest  of  Parame^thin.  His 
wife  was  the  gentle  lady  named  Suya^a,  the  daughter  of 
the  Maruts. 

40-41.  A well-decorated  umbrella  having  the  lustre  of  the 
moon  was  offered  to  her.  She  had  Camaras  also  and  she  was 
accompanied  by  groups  of  women  holding  Camara  in  their 
hands.  Along  with  me,  "tlie  most  excellent  throne  was  occupied 
by  her.  She  was  adorned  by  Mahalaksmi  with  coronet  and 
other  ornaments. 

42-43.  The  excellent  necklace  from  the  neck  of  the  goddess 
was  gifted  to  her.  The  leading  bull,  the  white  elephant^  the 
lion,  the  lion-emblem,  the  chariot,  the  golden  umbrella  with 

279*  ^*  Gh.  70,  81-89.  They  are  called  Marici,  Bhrgu. 

AAgiras,  Pulaha,  Pulattya,  Kratu,  Dakfa,  Atri  and  Vaii^dia. 


Description  of  Nether  Worlds 


179 


the  lustre  like  that  of  the  disc  of  the  moon — all  these  were 
there.  Till  now  no  other  lord  was  equal  to  me. 

44-45.  The  great  lord  moimted  the  bull  after  taking  me 
on,  along  with  all  the  members  of  my  family,  kinsmen  and 
relatives.  He  set  off  with  the  goddess.  On  seeing  the  goddess 
and  the  lord  along  with  me,  the  sages,  Devas,  Siddhas  and 
brahmins  requested  for  the  lord’s  order. 

46-49.  At  the  behest  of  the  lord,  the  husband  of  the  daugh- 
ter of  the  mountain,  Nandi  granted  those  who  deserved  the 
splendid  behest  of  the  lord.  On  receiving  the  order  from  the 
leading  sage  they  became  great  devotees  of  Siva.  Hence  one 
should  worship  the  lord. 

If  a person  utters  the  name  of  the  lord  without  obeisance  he 
will  incur  great  sin  on  a par  with  that  of  ten  brahmin-slayers. 
Hence  by  all  means,  one  shall  utter  words  of  obeisance.  At  the 
outset  one  shall  make  obeisance  and  at  the  end  utter  the 
name  Siva.^®® 


CHAPTER  FORTYFIVE 

Description  of  Nether  Worlds 


The  sages  said : 

1 . O Suta,  everything  pertaining  to  Lord  Siva  has  been 
clearly  stated.  It  behoves  you  to  narrate  the  form  of  the  lord 
as  the  soul  of  all. 

Suta  said  : 

2-3.  Bbuh,  Bhuvah,  Svah,  Mahah,  Jana,  Tapas,  Satya, 
PataJa,  the  crores  of  hellish  seas,  stars,  planets,  the  sun,  the 
moon,  the  polar  star,  the  seven  sages  (Great  Bear)  and 
those  going  about  in  aerial  chariots — all  these  abide  by  his 
grace. 

4.  All  these  are  created  by  him.  O excellent  brahmins, 
s8o.  It  refers  to  the  five-syllabled  mantra  of  Siva — ^^namab  iivftya/* 


180 


they  have  him  as  their  soul.  Siva  is  always  stationed  in  the  form 
of  samasti  (the  collective  whole).  He  is  the  soul  of  all. 

5.  Those  who  are  confounded^  those  who  are  deluded  by 
his  Maya  do  not  know  the  great  lord  Mahe^vara  the  noble  soul, 
the  Atman  of  all. 

6.  Indeed  the  three  worlds  constitute  his  body.  Hence 
after  bowing  to  him  1 shall  recowt  the  splendid  detail  of  the 
worlds. 

7.  Formerly,  1 had  mentioned  to  you  about  the  shape  and 
features  of  the  Cosmic  Egg.  I shall  now  describe  die  features 
of  the  worlds  in  the  cosmic  Egg. 

8.  The  Earth,  the  firmament,  Svah,  Mahal)i,  Jana,  Tapas 
and  Satya — these  seven  are  the  splendid  worlds  originating  from 
the  Cosmic  Egg. 

9.  O brahmins,  beneath  these  are  the  seven  worlds  begin- 
ning with  Mahfitala.  Beneath  them  are  the  hells  one  by  one. 

10.  Mahatala  has  the  golden  ground  surface,  which  is  ren- 
dered splendid  by  jewels,  mansions  and  shrines  dedicated  to 
lord  Siva. 

11.  It  is  occupied  by  Ananta,  Mucukunda  and  king  Bali 
who  is  the  resident  of  Patala  and  Svarga. 

12.  O br&hmina,  Rasatala  is  rocky,  Talatala  is  full  of 
gravels,  Sutala  is  yellow  and  Vitala  has  the  lustre  of  coral. 

13-15.  Atala  is  white.  Tala  is  black.  O men  of  good  holy 
rites,  the  extent  of  all  the  Talas  below  is  as  much  as  that  of  the 
earth,  viz.,  1000  yojanas  each.  The  sky  above  each  Tala  extends 
to  ten  thousand  yojanas.  The  magnitude  of  all  the  seven  along 
with  the  clduds  is  seven  thousand  lakhs  cX  yojanas.  The  root 
(i.e.  the  space  below  the  last  world  Patala)  is  thirty  thousand 
yojanas. 

16.  O excellent  sages,  the  splendid  Rasatala  is  frequented 
by  Suvan^a,  Vfisuki  and  by  others  as  well. 

17.  What  is  famous  as  Talatala  is  endowed  with  all  splen- 
dours and  is  frequented  by  Virocana,  Hirax^yak^a,  Naraka  and 
others. 

18.  Sutala  is  occupied  by  Vainayaka  and  others,  by 
Pilrvadevas  (demons)  with  Kalanemi  at  the  head  and  by 
others  too. 

19.  Vitala  is  occupied  by  Dfinavas  and  others  beginning 


Dvtpas  and  their  lords 


181 


with  Tarakagni,  serpents  Mahantaka  and  others  and  by  the 
Asura  Prahlada. 

20.  Atala  is  occupied  by  Kambaiiiiva,  by  the  heroic 
Mahakumbha  and  the  intelligent  Hayagriva. 

21.  Tala  (i.e.  Mahatala)  is  rendered  splendid  and  occu- 
pied by  Sahkukarna  and  other  heroes  beginning  with  Namuci. 

22-23.  In  all  these  nether  worlds  the  great  lord  is  present 
along  with  Uma,  Skanda^  Nandin  and  all  the  chieftains  of 
Ganas.  O excellent  ones,  above  all  these  seven  Talas  are  the 
earth  and  other  worlds.  The  earth  too  is  of  seven  divisions 
about  which  I shall  tell  you  now. 


CHAPTER  FORTYSIX 

Dvipas  and  their  lords 

SUta  said: 

1 . The  Earth  consists  of  seven  continents.**^  It  is  full  of 
rivers  and  mountains.  It  is  surrounded  by  seven  oceans***  all 
round  and  embellished  by  them. 

2.  The  seven  continents  beginning  with  the  inner  one  are 
Jambu,  Plaksa,  Salmali,  Ku^a,  Kraufica,  Saka  and  Pu^kara. 

3.  Lord  Siva  is  present  in  all  the  seven  continents,  accom- 
panied by  Uma  (his  consort),  surrounded  by  the  Ganas,  and 
assuming  different  guises. 

4-5.  The  seven  oceans  in  order  are  those  having,  (1)  briny 
water,  (2)  sugercane  juice,  (3)  wine,  (4)  ghee,  (5)  curds, 
(6)  milk  and  (7)  sweet  water.  In  all  these  oceans  the  glorious 
lord  Siva  assumes  the  form  of  water  and  sports  with  the 
waves  along  with  the  Gax>as. 

28x  • seven  continents:  p.  71,  note  89.  The  verse  2 of  this  ch.  mentions 
their  names.  On  the  identification  of  these  dvipas  on  the  basis  of  climatic 
and  vegetation  data  available  in  the  Pur^^ai,  see  S.  M.  Ali.  op.  cit. 
Gh.  II. 

282.  samndratlL  saptabhib—by  seven  seas.  According  to  S.  M.  Ali, 
^^samudta  does  not  necessaxily  mean  *a  watery  sea*.  The  Pur&^ic  sea  can  be 
a large  expanse  of  sand  as  well  as  water.  The  sea  of  sand  and  that  of  water 
as  barriers  to  human  settlement  and  movement  are  synonymous  when  con- 
sidering the  geography  of  the  inhabited  world.*’ 


182 


lingapufSn^ 


6.  Lord  Vi$nu  always  sleeps  in  yogic  slumber  in  the  milky 
ocean  as  though  he  were  the  nectar  from  that,  with  his  intellect 
concentrated  on  the  knowledge  of  Siva. 

7.  When  the  lord  wakes  up,  the  entire  universe  wakes  up; 
when  he  is  asleep  it  is  also  asleep;  the  mobile  and  immobile 
beings  are  identical  with  him. 

8.  With  the  favour  of  Paramesthin  lord  of  Devas,  every- 
thing was  created,  held,  protected  and  annihilated  by  him 
alone. 

9.  O excellent  sages,  those  who  are  well  known  as  su^enas 
worship  Aniruddha  the  leading  Puru$a  holding  conch,  discus 
and  iron  club. 

10-14.  O sages,  most  excellent  among  the  knowers  of 
Atman  ! those  who  meditate  on  Aniruddha  Purusa  are  all 
similar  to  Vi$nu  and  become  endowed  with  all  riches.  Sanandana, 
Sanaka,  Sanatana,  Valakhilyas,  Siddhas,  Mitra  and  Varuna 
these  all  worship  Visnu  who  is  the  origin  of  the  universe.  In 
all  the  seven  continents  there  are  lofty  mountains,  some  rising 
to  great  heights,  some  extending  as  far  as  the  oceans,  others 
having  many  peaks  and  caves.  There  were  many  kings  in 
these  continents  who  were  overlords  and  who  ruled  with 
efficiency  according  to  the  demands  of  the  period.*  They  were 
powerful,  thanks  to  the  lord  (Siva) , the  father  of  the  enemy  of 
Kraufica®®*  (i.  e.  K^ttikeya) . 

15-18.  I shall  mention  the  kings  in  all  the  manvantaras 
past  and  future,  beginning  with  those  in  the  Svayambhuva 
rnanvantara.  The  grandsons  of  Svayambhuva  Manu  were  all 
very  strong,  with  similar  status,  honour  and  identical  pur- 
poses. They  were  the  heroic  sons  of  Priyavrata*®®  and  they 
are  reputed  to  be  ten,*®®  viz.,  Agnidhra,  Agnibahu,  Medha, 
Medh&tithi,  Vasu,  Jyotisman,  Dyutiman,  Havya,  Savana  and 
Putra.  Priyavrata  crowned  seven  of  them  as  kings  over  the 
seven  continents. 

283,  Krauflc&rih  : the  enemy  of  Krauiica,  i.e.  K&rttikeya,  so  called 
because  he  split  the  Him&laya  range  Krauiica,  situated  in  the  eastern  part 
of  the  chain  on  the  north  of  Assam. 

284,  Priyavrata,  son  of  Sv&yambhuva  Manu  and  8atarQp&. 

285,  Though  the  number  is  the  same,  their  names  differ  in  the 
Purftpas. 


Dvipas  and  their  lords 


183 


19-24.  He  made  Agnidhra  the  lord  of  Jambudvipa  and 
Medhatithi  the  king  of  Plaksadvipa.  He  crowned  Vapusman 
the  king  of  8&lmali,  Jyoti§man  the  king  of  Ku^advipa,  Dyutiman 
the  king  of  Krauficadvipa^  Havya  the  lord  of  Sakadvfpa.  O 
sages  of  good  holy  rites,  he  made  Savana  the  overlord  of 
Pu$kara.  Savana  had  two  sons  Mahavira  and  Dhatakl.  They 
were  most  excellent  that  men  could  have.  The  kingdom  of 
Mahavira  is  known  as  Mahavira  Var§a  after  the  name  of  that 
noble  soul.  The  kingdom  ofDhataki  is  called  Dhatakikhanda.^®^ 
Havya  the  lord  of  Sakadvipa  procreated  seven  sons, 

25.  They  were  Jalada,  Kumara,  Sukumara,  Manicaka^ 
Kusumottara,  Modaki  and  Mahadruma. 

26-29.  The  Var§a  continent  of  Talada  is  called  ( 1 ) Tala- 
da;  the  Varsa  of  Kumara  is  called  (2)  Kaum^a;  that  of  Suku- 
mara is  glorified  as  (3)  Sukumara;  the  Vari^  of  Ma^icaka  is 
called  (4)  Manicaka;  the  Var^  of  Kusumottara  is  (5)  Kusu- 
mottara, the  Varsa  of  Modaki  is  glorified  as  (6)  Modaka; 
after  the  name  of  Mahadruma,  the  next  Varsa  is  (7)  Maha- 
druma; all  the  seven  Var$as  are  thus  named  after  their  rulers. 

30-34.  Dyutiman,  the  lord  of  Krauilca  Dvipa  had  seven 
sons  named  KuiSala,  Manuga,  U$na,  Pivara,  Andhakaraka, 
Muni  and  Dundubhi  who  had  splendid  sub-continents  named 
after  them,  in  the  Kraufica  Dvipa.  The  sub-continent  of 
Kusala  isKu^ala;  that  of  Manuga  is  Manonuga;  that  of  U$na 
is  Usna;  that  of  Pivara  is  Pivara;  the  land  of  Andhakara  is 
Andhakaraka;  the  land  of  Muni  is  called  Muni  auid  that  of 
Dundubhi  is  Dundubhi.  These  seven  shining  countries  are  in 
Kraufica  Dvipa. 

In  the  Kusadvipa,  Jyotisman  had  seven  powerful  sons. 

35.  They  were  Udbhida,  Ve^uman,  Dvairatha,  Lavai^ia, 
Dhrti,  Prabhakara  and  Kapila. 

36-37.  The  first  Varsa  is  Udbhida;  the  second  is  Venu- 
mandatla;  the  third  is  Dvairatha;  the  fourth  is  Lavana; 
the  fifth  isDhrtimat;  the  sixth  is  Prabhakara,  and  the  seventh 
is  Kapila. 

38-41 . The  seven  sons  of  Vapusman  were  the  rulers  of 

s86.  Dh&takl  Khap^a.  Prof.  Ali  identifies  this  with  the  Gobi  desert 
on  the  west  of  Khingan  range  in  the  Japanese  Highlands.  See  Tite  Geogra^ 
oj  the  PurSoas,  p.  287. 


184 


Unga/mri^ 

various  countries  of  S&Imali  IMjpa.  They  were  Sveta,  Hsgrita, 
JImiita,  R<^ta,  Vaidyuta,  Manasa  and  Suprabha;  The  land 
of  Sveta  n Sveta;  that  of  Harita,  Harita;  that  of  JlmCita  is 
Jimfita;  that  of  Rohita  isRohita;  that  of  Vaidyuta  is  Vaidyuta; 
that  of  Manasa  is  Manasa  and  that  of  Suprabha  is  Suprabha; 
thus  there  arc  seven  countries  marked  after  the  names  of 
their  rulers.  I shall  mention  the  divisions  in  the  Plaksadvipa 
that  is  beyond  Jambiidvipa. 

42-45.  Medfa&tithi  had  seven  sons;  they  were  the  kings  of 
Plaksa  Dvipa  which  consists  of  seven  Var§as.  The  eldest 
among  the  sons  was  Santabhaya.  After  him  were  Sirira; 
Sukhodaya,  Ananda;  Siva,  K^emaka  and  Dhruva.  The  conti- 
nent was  divided  into  seven  Var§as  and  named  after  these  sons. 
Formerly  in  the  Svayambhuva  manvantara  these  Var?as  were 
colonised  by  them.  Subjects  endowed  with  the  discipline  of 
four  castes  and  four  stages  of  life  were  colonised  in  the  Varsas 
by  those  sons  of  Medhatithi,  the  residents  of  Plaksadvipa. 

46-47.  In  the  five  continents  begirming  with  Plaksadvipa 
and  ending  with  Sakadvipa,  the  Dharma,  was  promulgated 
in  accordance  with  the  divirion  of  four  castes  and  four  stages 
of  life.  O excellent  brahmins;,  in  these  five  Dvipras,  happiness, 
span  of  life,  handsome  features,  strength  and  Dharma  were 
their  individual  characteristics  respectively. 

48-49.  The  characteristic  common  to  all  the  five  continents 
was  that  the  subjects  there  were  all  perpetually  engaged 
in  the  worship  of  Rudra  and  devoted  to  Mahesvara.  The  kings 
born  in  the  Puskaradvipa  enjoy  the  nectar  of  their  devout 
feelings  towards  Prajapati  and  Rudra. 


CHAPTER  FORTYSEVEN 

Bhdrata  sub-continent 

SUta  Said  : ^ 

1.  King  Priyavrata  crowned  his  eldest  son  Agnidhra  who 
was  the  eldest  inheritor  and  who  was  a loveable  son  of  great 
strength,  as  the  king  of  Jambild\npa.*^'^ 


287.  For  detail,  Ibid»  p.  64  Si. 


Bharata  sub^conHnent 


185 


i 

li 


2.  O leading  brahmins,  he  was  an  ascetic  and  a great 
devotee  of  Siva.  He  was  a young  man  engaged  in  the  worship 
of  Siva.  He  was  prosperous  and  intelligent  and  he  possessed 
many  cows. 

3.  He  had  nine  sons  at  par  with  Prajapatis.  All  of  them 
were  followers  of  Mahe^vara  and  devoted  to  Mahadeva. 

4.  His  eldest  son  was  known  as  Nabhi.  Kimpurusa  was 
his  (Nabhi’s)  younger  brother.  The  third  son  was  Harivar?a. 
The  fourth  son  was  Ilavrta. 

5.  Ramya  was  the  fifth;  the  sixth  was  Hiramnan.  Kuru 
was  the  seventh.  Bhadra^va  was  the  eighth. 

6.  The  ninth  was  Ketumala.  Understand  their  lands  now. 
The  subcontinent  of  Nabhi  inherited  from  his  father  is  called 
Hema  which  lies  in  the  south. 

7.  He  gave  Kimpurusa  the  subcontinent  Hemakuta.  He 
gave  the  subcontinent  called  Naisadha  to  Hari. 

8.  To  Ilavrta  he  gave  the  midlands  encircling  the  moun- 
tain Meru.  He  gave  Ramya  the  subcontinent  around  Nllacala. 

9.  The  subcontinent  Sveta  to  the  north  of  it  was  given  to 
Hiranman.  He  gave  Kuru  the  subcontinent  Smga  Var?a  which 
is  to  the  north  of  it. 

10.  He  gave  the  subcontinent  round  about  Malyavan  to 
Bhadra^va.  He  gave  Gandhamadana  to  Ketumala. 

11-12.  These  are  the  nine  great  subcontinents  in  brief. 
After  crowning  his  sons  as  the  kings  in  those  subcontinents, 
Agmdhra*®®  the  virtuous  became  engaged  in  penance.  After 
purifying  himself  by  penance  he  became  engaged  in  the  study 
of  the  Vedas. 

13-15.  After  being  engaged  in  the  study  of  the  Vedas  he 
became  engaged  in  meditation  on  Siva.  There  is  natural  per- 
fection in  all  the  eight  excellent  subcontinents  beginning  with 
Kimpurusa.  Without  any  strain  the  subjects  are  always  happy. 
The  opposite  of  joy  is  not  seen  in  them.  They  have  no  fear  from 
death  or  old  age.  They  have  neither  Dharma  nor  Adharma. 
There  is  no  distinction  such  as  the  excellent,  the  middling  and 
the  base.  In  all  these  eight  subcontinents  there  are  no  subdivi- 
sions of  yugas. 


288.  According  to  Agnldhra  was  the  eldest  ion  of  Priyavrata. 
But  according  to  a Viyu  venion  he  was  the  son  of  Priyavrata*!  daughter. 


186 


Lingapura^ 


16.  Those  who  die  in  a holy  centre  of  Rudra  whether 
mobile  or  immobile  whether  devotees  or  casual  visitors  are 
reborn  there. 

17.  For  their  benefit  eight  holy  centres  were  created  by 
Rudra.  In  all  those  places  Mahadeva  was  always  present. 

18.  By  seeing  Mahadeva  in  their  hearts  the  residents  of 
the  eight  holy  centres  were  always  happy.  He  alone  was  the 
greatest  goal  unto  them  all. 

19-20.  I shall  now  recount  tiic  country  of  Nabhi  marked 
by  *hima’  (snow;  i.c.  Bharatavarsa  as  mentioned  below) . The 
intelligent  Nabhi  begot  a son  of  Merude\d,  R^abha  by  name 
who  was  a great  king  adored  by  all  ksatriyas.  A heroic  son 
Bharata  was  born  to  Rsabha.  He  was  the  eldest  among  his 
hundred  sons. 

21-25.  ^$abha  who  was  fond  of  his  son  Bharata  crowned 
him  as  king.  By  adopting  the  path  of  knowledge  and  detach- 
ment he  conquered  the  serpents  of  his  sense-organs;  by  all 
means  he  stabilised  Is  vara,  the  supreme  Atman,  within  his  own 
heart;  he  was  immersed  in  devout  feelings ; he  observed  fasts ; 
he  wore  bark  garments  and  matted  hair.  He  retired  into  dark- 
ness (i.e.  solitary  place) . Devoid  of  all  desires  and  his  doubts 
all  cleared,  (in  the  end)  he  attained  the  great  region  of  Siva. 
He  gave  the  subcontinent  to  the  south  of  the  mountain 
Himavat  to  Bharata.  Hence  learned  men  call  that  subcontinent 
as  Bharata  Var^a*®®  after  his  name.  Bharata’s  son  was  the 
virtuous  Sumati.  Bharata  entrusted  the  kingdom  to  his  care. 
After  transferring  the  royal  glory  to  his  son  the  king  entered 
the  forest  for  penance. 


289.  Bh&rata.  LiAga  ascribes  the  origin  of  the  name  to  King 
Bharata,  the  eldest  of  the  hundred  sons  of  B>$abha  and  grandson  of 
Nftbhi.  Of.  Vftyu  33.  51-52;  Marka  53.  39-40.  For  detail  see  Bhaga  11.2.  15- 
17  andSk  I.  ii.  37.  55-57.  But  according  to  Matsya  114-5-6,  Bharata  is 
the  name  of  Manu  himself  who  creates  smd  supports  the  people  here.  For 
further  detail,  see  Avasthi : StudUs  in  SkandapurS^,  pp,  17-23.  Formerly 
Bh&rata  was  known  as  Hima-vars&  or  Haimavata  Varfa. 


187 


CHAPTER  FORTYEIGHT 

The  Mountain  Meru 


SUta  said: 

1.  In  the  middle  of  this  Jambu  Dvipa  is  the  great  moun- 
tain Meru*®®.  It  is  the  most  excellent  among  the  mountains^ 
having  many  peaks  full  of  jewels. 

2.  It  is  reputed  to  be  eightyfour  thousand  yojanas  in 
height.  It  has  entered  sixteen  thousand  yojanas  beneath  the 
ground  and  it  extends  to  sixteen  thousand  yojanas. 

3.  Since  it  is  stationed  like  a shallow  plate  the  extent  on 
the  top  is  thirty-two  thousand  yojanas.  Three  times  its  width  is 
its  girth  at  the  ridges. 

4.  It  is  rendered  golden  due  to  the  auspicious  contact  with 
the  body  of  Mahe4a.  It  resembles  the  flower  of  the  Dhattura 
plant  (thorn  apple) . It  is  the  abode  of  all  Devas. 

5.  It  is  the  sporting  ground  for  Devas.  It  is  full  of  miracles. 
The  total  width  and  extent  of  this  mountain  is  a hundred 
thousand  yojanas. 

6-7.  O leading  brahmins,  beneath  the  earth  its  extent  is 
sixteen  thousand  yojanas.  The  remaining  part  of  that  moun- 
tain is  above  the  earth.  The  extent  at  the  root  is  thus  sixteen 
thousand  yojanas  and  the  extent  above,  they  say,  is  twice  the 
extent  at  the  root. 

8.  In  the  east  it  has  the  lustre  of  the  ruby;  in  the  south  it 
resembles  gold;  in  the  west  it  shines  like  the  blue  stone  and  in 
the  north  it  has  the  coral  lustre. 

9.  In  the  eastern  side  of  this  mountain  is  Amaravati 
(the  city  of  Indra).  It  is  full  of  mansions  of  different  kinds.  It 
is  thronged  by  different  groups  of  Devas.  It  is  surrounded  by 
clusters  of  jewels. 

10-14.  It  has  many  ornamental  gateways  of  different  shapes 
bedecked  in  gold  and  jewels.  The  arches  at  the  gateways  are 
rendered  wonderful  with  gold,  with  jewels  set  in.  Thousands  of 
women  throng  the  roadways.  They  are  clever  in  conversation 
and  elocution.  They  are  bedecked  in  all  ornaments.  They  stoop 
down  due  to  the  weight  of  their  heavy  breasts  and  their  eyes 

2go.  P.  98,  note 


190 


LiAgapurdr^a 


CHAPTER  FORTYNINE 

lldvrta  sub-continent 


S&ta  said: 

1.  The  first  Dvipa,  it  is  said,  extends  to  a thousand 
yojanas.  The  other  Dvipas  successively  extend  to  twice  the 
previous  one. 

2-3.  The  earth  along  with  all  the  oceans  is  stated  as  ex- 
tending to  fifty  crores  of  yojanas.  It  consists  of  seven  Dvipas. 
It  is  splendid  and  is  surrounded  by  the  Lokaloka  mountain.^®® 
The  mountain  Nila  is  to  the  north  of  the  Meru.  The  Sveta  is 
to  the  north  of  this  and  the  Srngi  is  still  further  north  of  Sveta. 
O brahmins,  these  three  are  the  mountains  of  the  sub-con- 
tinents in  the  north. 

4.  The  Jathara^®^  and  the  Devakuta^®^  are  the  mountains 
in  the  eastern  quarter.  The  Nisadha*®®  is  to  the  south  of  the 
Meru.  Still  south  of  it  is  the  mountain  Hemakuta.^®’  The 
Himavat  is  to  its  south. 

5.  To  the  west  of  the  Meru  there  are  two  mountains:  Mal- 
yavan®*®  and  Gandhamadana.^®®  These  two  extend  towards  the 
north. 


293.  Lokaloka — a belt  of  mountains  bounding  the  outer-most  of  the 
seven  seas  and  dividing  the  visible  world  from  the  regions  of  darkness. 

294-295.  On  the  eastern  side  of  Meru  there  are  two  mountains, 
namely  the  Jath^a  &nd  the  Devakuta  which  run  north  to  south  and 
stretch  up  to  the  Nila  (Tien  Shan)  and  Nifadha  mountains  (Fayu  35.8). 
Jathara  is  identified  with  Kuruk-Tagh  and  Devakuta  with  Altin  Tagh — Nan 
Shan  Tsing-ling  of  Sinkiang  and  Northern  China.  The  Geography  qf  the 
Pufdoas*  PP»  99-100. 

296.  Ni^adha:  Sp.  places  it  to  Che  south  of  the  Meru,  along  with  the 
Himavat  and  Hemakilta.  It  represents  Hindukush  Kunlun  chain. 

297.  Hemakfita  : a sacred  hill  situated  to  the  north  of  M&nasacovara 
It  represents  Ladakh-Kailash-Trans-Himalayan  chain. 

2 98.  M&lyavan  : This  mountain  boimds  llAvrta  Var$a  on  the  east. 

299*  Gandhamtdana  : It  is  placed  to  the  south  of  Meru. 


IldVTta  sub-continent 


191 


6.  All  these  leading  mountains  are  frequented  by  the 
Siddhas  and  Caranas.  The  inter>space  between  two  mountains 
is  nine  thousand  yojanas  in  each  case. 

7-10.  This  sub-continent  south  of  the  Himavat  is  known 
as  Bharata.  Hemakuta  is  beyond  that,  llie  sub-continent  within 
it  is  Kimpuru§a.  Ni$adha  is  beyond  HemakQti^.  Its  sub-conti- 
nent is  called  Harivar§a.  Beyond  Harivar§a  and  Meru  is  the 
splendid  Ilavrta.  Beyond  Ilavrta  is  Nila  and  the  sub-continent 
Ramyaka.  Beyond  Ramyaka  is  Sveta  and  the  sub-continent 
known  as  Hira^aya.  The  mountain  beyond  Hira^maya  is 
known  as  Srhgi  and  sub-continent  beyond  it  is  JCuru.  The  two 
Var§as  one  in  the  south  and  one  in  the  north  (i.e.  Himavarsa 
and  Ramyaka)  are  stationed  like  an  arch. 

11.  The  other  four  are  horizontal  in  shape.  Ilavrta  is  in  the 
middle;  to  the  west  and  east  of  the  Meru  there  are  two  sub- 
continents and  they  are  smaller  ( than  the  four  mentioned 
before). 

12.  The  area  above  Nisadha  is  known  as  the  northern 
Vedyardha  (half  of  the  whole  Dvipa  which  is  conceived  as  a 
sacrificial  altar).  Thus  there  are  three  Var§as  in  the  southern 
half  and  three  Varsas  in  the  northern  half. 

13.  Ilavirta  with  the  Meru  in  the  middle  is  in  the  midst  of 
the  two  halves. 

14-15  The  great  mountain  Malyavan  extends  towards  the 
north.  Its  width  above  is  two  thousand  yojanas.  Its  length 
is  stated  to  be  thirtyfour  thousand  yojanas.  The  mountain 
Gandhamadana  is  to  the  west  of  it. 

16-17.  Its  length  and  width  is  similar  to  that  of  Malyavan. 
These  six  Var§a  mountains  of  good  ridges  extend  to  the  east 
and  are  bounded  on  both  sides  by  the  Eastern  and  Western 
seas. 

18.  Himavat  is  full  of  snow.  The  Hemakilta  contains  gold. 
The  Nisadha  is  also  golden  resembling  the  morning  sun. 

19.  The  golden  Meru  which  extends  upwards  has  four 
colours.  Its  girth  is  symmetrical  and  cylindrical.  It  rises  high. 

20.  The  mountain  Nila  is  full  of  Lapis  Lazuli  stones.  The 
«§veta  is  white  in  colour  and  full  of  gold.  The  three-peaked 
mountain  Srngi  has  the  colour  of  the  feathers  of  the  peacock 
and  contains  gold. 


21 -25a*  Thus  the  mountains  have  been  succinctly  recounted. 
Again  listen  to  the  description  of  the  leading  hills  or  peaks. 

Mandara  and  Devakuta  are  the  mountains  in  the  eastern 
quarter.  Kailisa  and  golden  Gandhamadana  extend  from  the  east 
towards  south  and  end  within  the  ocean.  The  excellent  moun- 
tains Ni^adha  and  Pariyatra  are  stationed  in  the  west,  like  those 
in  the  east.  Tri^fhga  and  Jarudhi  are  the  excellent  mountains 
in  the  north.  They  are  embedded  within  the  ocean  and  they 
also  extend  towards  the  East.  Learned  men  call  these  mountains 
‘^Maryadaparvatas*’  (mountains  of  the  boundary). 

25b-27.  O excellent  brahmins  there  are  foot  ranges  to  the 
lofty  golden  mountain  Meru,  extending  to  the  four  quarters. 
Supported  by  these,  the  earth  consisting  of  the  seven  Dvipas, 
does  not  move.  Their  length  is  mentioned  to  be  ten  thousand 
yojanas.  In  the  east  it  is  Mandara;  in  the  south  it  is  Gandha- 
madana, in  the  west  it  is  Vipula  and  in  the  north  it  is  Supar§va. 

28-34.  Four  lofty  trees  grow  on  these  as  though  they  are  the 
flagstaffs  of  the  Dvipas.  The  great  tree  on  the  peak  of  the  moun- 
tain Mandara  is  the  Kadamba,  the  king  of  flagstaffs.  It  has 
long  hanging  branches.  It  acts  as  a caityapadapa  (holy  big  tree 
in  a sacred  temple) . 

On  the  peak  of  the  mountain  in  south  (i.e.  Gandhamadana) 
there  is  a Jambu  tree  (Rose  Apple)  with  holy  fruits  and  flowers 
hanging  in  garlands.  The  Jambti  tree  is  known  in  all  the  worlds 
as  the  flagstaff  in  the  southern  region. 

On  the  peak  of  the  lofty  mountain  Vipula,  in  the  west,  a 
great  A^vattha  tree  (holy  fig  tree)  grows  like  a great  Caitya- 
padapa (a  sacred  tree  in  a holy  temple) . On  the  peak  of  the 
mountain  Supar^va  in  the  north  grows  the  big  Nyagrodha 
(Indian  fig  tree),  with  a huge  trunk  extending  to  many 
yojanas  in  circumference. 

I shall  now  mention  the  four  sporting  grounds  of  Devas  on 
the  leading  mountains.  They  are  devoid  of  human  beings  and 
have  trees  and  plants  that  bloom  in  all  the  seasons. 

35-57.  There  are  groves  in  the  four  directions.  Understand 
them  by  their  names.  The  forest  grove  in  the  east  is  Caitraratha; 
in  the  south  it  is  Gandhamadana;  it  is  Vaibhraja  in  the  west; 
in  the  north  it  is  the  garden  of  Savitr  (sun). 

(The  holy  shrine)  in  the  east  is  Mitre^vara.  Thereafter 


Ildufta  sub-continent 


193 


(i.c.  in  the  south)  it  is  §a$theSvara.  In  the  west  it  is  Varyeivara 
and  in  the  north  it  is  Amrake^vara. 

Similarly,  O leading  sages,  there  are  four  great  lakes  also. 

38-40.  The  sages  sport  about  there  on  the  mountains  and 
in  the  gardens. 

The  lake  in  the  east  is  Arunoda;*®®  that  in  the  south  is 
Manasa ; in  the  west  Sitoda  and  in  the  north  Mahabhadra. 

In  the  south  there  is  the  holy  centre  of  Sakha,  in  the  west 
it  is  of  Visakha;  in  the  north  of  Naigameya  and  in  the  east  of 
Kumara.  I shall  mention  briefly  the  leading  peaks  beginning 
from  the  eastern  lake  Arunoda  only  by  their  names.  It  is 
not  possible  to  describe  them  in  detail. 

41 -45a.  These  are  the  great  mountains,  viz: — Sitfoita, 
Kuranda,  Kurara,  Vikara,  Manisaila,  Vrksavan,  Mahanila, 
Rucaka,  Savindu,  Dardura,  Venuman,  Samegha,  Nisadha  and 
Devaparvata.  These  and  other  mountains  are  the  abodes  of 
Siddhas  in  the  cast  of  Mandara.  There  are  divine  shrines  of 
Rudra,  Vi§nu  and  Naraya^a  on  all  these  hills,  their  caves  and 
forests. 

45b-49.  I shall  now  mention  the  great  hills  to  the  south  of 
the  lake  Manasa  in  brief.  Saila,  Visiras,  Sikhara,  Eka^rhga, 
Mahaiula,  Gaja^aila,  Pi^acaka,  Paflca^aila,  Kailua,  and 
Himavat.  These  arc  all  lofty  excellent  hills  frequented  by  Devas. 
On  all  these  different  mountains  and  forests  divine  shrines  of 
Rudra  have  been  installed  by  Devas.  The  mountains  in  the 
southern  direction  are  thus  mentioned  to  you.  I shall  now  tell 
you  about  the  hills  in  the  west. 

50-52.  To  the  west  of  the  lake  Sitoda  there  stand  Surapa, 
Mahabala,  Kumuda,  Madhuman,  Aiijana,  Mukuta.  Krs^a, 
Pandura,  Sahasra^ikhara,  the  leading  hills  Parijata  andSri^rhga. 
These  are  the  prominent  excellent  mountains  frequented  by 
Devas  in  the  western  quarter  and  they  contain  shrines  of 
Rudra. 

53.  The  extremely  powerful  mountains  to  the  north  of  the 
lake  Mahabhadra  are  being  stated  now  succinctly. 


$00.  Aruooda.  It  lid  to  the  east  of  Meru. 


194 


Lingapurd^a 


54-56.  They  are: — Sahkhakuta,  Maha^aila,  Vr^abha, 
Haihsaparvata,  Naga,  Kapila,  Indrasaila,  Sanuman,  Nila, 
Kantaka^fhga,  Satai^hga,  Pufpako^a,  Pra^aila,  Virajas, 
Varahaparvata,  Mayura  and  Jarudhi.^®^  All  these  are  stationed 
in  the  north. 

57.  There  are  thousands  of  divine  palaces  of  the  trident- 
bearing  lord  on  those  divine  hills. 

58.  In  the  interstices  of  these  leading  hills  there  arc  many 
internal  water  reservoirs,  lakes  and  parks. 

59.  Thanks  to  the  favour  of  Paramesthin,  Devas,  sages, 
Siddhas  purified  by  their  devotional  thoughts  of  Siva  reside 
here  along  with  their  families  in  their  respective  abodes. 

60-69.  The  different  deities  reside  in  the  various  forests  as 
follows: — 

The  residence  of  Laksmi  is  in  the  Bilva  grove;  Kasyapa 
and  others  stay  in  the  Kakubha  grove;  the  residence  of  Indra, 
Upendra  and  of  the  snake  gods  is  in  the  Talavana  (forest  of 
palm  trees ) ; the  residence  of  Kardama  and  his  tribe  is  in  the 
Udumbara  grove;  the  residence  of  the  Vidyadharas  and 
Siddhas  is  in  the  holy  and  splendid  mango-grove;  the  abode  of 
the  Nagas  and  Siddhas  is  in  the  forest  of  Nimba  (Margosa) , 
that  of  the  sun  and  Rudra  is  in  the  Kim:§uka;  the  precep- 
tor of  Devas  is  stationed  in  the  holy  forest  of  Bijapura; 
the  abode  of  the  noble  lords  beginning  with  Visnu  is  in  the 
forest  of  lilies;  the  serpents  stay  on  the  Nyagrodha  within  the 
clusters  of  Sthalapadma  (land  lotuses).  It  is  here  that  Sesa  the 
lord  of  the  nether  worlds  stays.  He  alone  is  the  god  of  Death  unto 
all.  The  ploughshare-armed  lord  is  only  a form  of  Visnu  him- 
self, the  preceptor  of  the  universe;  he  is  the  leaning  couch  of 
Vi§iTiu;heis  the  bangle  of  the  lord  (Siva).  Danavas  including 
their  preceptor  Sukra  stay  in  the  forest  of  jack  trees.  The 
serpents  are  stationed  in  the  Vi^akhaka  forest  along  with  the 
Kinnaras;  there  are  innumerable  trees  of  all  kinds  in  this  beau- 
tiful forest.  NandHvara  is  also  stationed  there  and  is  being 
eulogised  by  the  leading  Ganas.  Goddess  Sarasvati  stays  in  the 
middle  of  the  region  full  of  Santanaka  (wish-yielding)  trees. 


301.  J&nidhi  : This  range  is  identified  with  the  Kirghiz-ZaUai 
Al-Tau,  Ketmen  chain.  GF.  p.  82. 


The  abodes  of  Devos 


195 


Thus  are  the  residents  of  these  forests  recounted  in  brief.  It  is 
not  possible  to  describe  them  in  detail. 


CSHAPTER  FIFTY 

The  abodes  of  Devos 


Suta  said: 

la.  Indra  stays  in  the  auspicious  forest  of  Parijata^®-  (wish- 
yielding  tree)  on  the  peak  called  Sitanta.^®® 

lb-2a.  To  the  east  of  it  is  the  extensive  peak  of  Kumuda®®^ 
mountain.  O excellent  brahmins,  on  it  are  the  eight  cities  of 
Danavas. 

2b-3a.  In  the  holy  Suvarnakotara,  O excellent  brahmins, 
they  say,  are  the  sixty-eight  cities  of  the  noble-souled  Raksasas 
called  Nilakas. 

3b-4a.  There  are  fifteen  cities  on  the  leading  mountain 
Mahanila  which  are  the  abodes  of  the  horse-faced  Kinnaras, 

4b.  O men  of  good  holy  rites,  there  are  three  cities  of  the 
Vidyadharas  on  Venusaudha,  the  great  mountain. 

5.  The  glorious  Garuda  stays  in  Vaikuntha.  The  prosperous 
Nilalohita  stays  in  Karaftja.®®®  The  Vasus  live  in  Vasudhara. 

30a.  Parijata-vana— forest  of  coral  trees  (Erythrina  Indica)  which  lose 
their  leaves  in  June  and  are  then  covered  with  large  crimson  flowers. 

303.  Sitanta  : It  means  *end  of  cold’,  i.e.  ‘‘a  range  which  marks  the 
dividing  line  between  the  cold  and  hot  regions.  If  the  river  Kizil-Su  repre- 
sents the  head  waters  of  the  Pura^ic  river  Sita,  Sitanta  is  obviously  the 
Kashghar  range,  i.e.  the  last  longitudinal  range  of  the  Pamir  region  facing 
the  Tarim  basin,  on  the  east.  It  is  a range  which,  to  a traveller  coming  from 
the  east  across  the  hot  and  sandy  Tarim  Basin,  stands  athwart  the  route  to- 
wards the  west  and  promises  a cool  climate  beyond.  It  is  an  effective  climatic 
barrier  which  separates  a hot  and  dry  desert  on  the  east  from  the  cold  pla- 
teau on  the  west.  Coming  from  the  west  it  literally  marks  the  *end  of  cold* 
and  is  thereCore  rightly  qualified  for  its  name,  Sitanta”.  GP.  pp.  100-101. 

304.  Kumuda  : Peak  Barzengi  (16,456  feet)  beyond  the  Pakshif 
Pass. 

305.  Most  of  the  mountains  mentioned  in  this  chapter  are  not 
Identifiable. 


196 


Lingapurd^ 


6.  There  are  seven  holy  spots  on  the  mountain  Ratnadhara^ 
belonging  to  the  noble  seven  sages.  They  contain  the  abodes 
of  the  Siddhas  as  well. 

7.  The  great  abode  of  Prajapati  is  on  the  mountain 
eka^rhga.  Durga  and  others  stay  on  the  Gajaiiaila  and  the 
Vasus  on  the  Sumedha. 

8.  The  Adityas,  Rudras  and  Asvins  have  their  abodes  in 
eighty  divine  cities  on  the  mountain  Hemakak^a. 

9.  There  are  five  hundred  crores  of  abodes  of  the  Raki^asas 
on  the  Sunila  mountain  which  has  five  peaks  with  five  crores 
of  cities  in  each. 

10.  The  hundred  cities  of  the  Yak^as  of  unmeasured  pro- 
wess are  on  the  Sata^rnga;  the  cities  of  Kadraveyas  are  on 
the  mountain  Tamrabha;  the  city  of  Guha  is  on  the  Vi^^ha 
hill. 

11.  O excellent  sages,  the  abode  of  Suparna  is  on  the 
Svetodara;  the  abode  of  Kubera  is  on  the  Pisacaka  and  that  of 
Vi§nu  is  on  the  Harikuta. 

12- 14a.  The  residence  of  the  Kinnaras  is  on  the  Kumuda; 
that  of  Caranas  is  on  the  Afijana;  Krsna  has  the  abode  in  the 
mansions  of  the  Gandharvas;  there  are  seven  cities  of  Vidya- 
dharas  on  the  Pan<}ura  and  they  contain  all  the  means  of 
pleasures,  O Brahmins.  There  are  seven  thousand  cities  of  the 
Daityas  of  terrible  activities,  the  enemies  of  Indra,  on  the  moun- 
tain Sahasra^ikhara. 

14b- 16.  The  residence  of  the  Pannagas  (serpents)  O 
Leading  sages,  is  on  the  Mukuta,  full  of  flowers.  The  resi- 
dences of  Vaivasvata,  Soma,  Vayu  and  the  overlord  of  serpents 
are  in  four  abodes  on  the  Tak^aka  mountain.  The  abodes  of 
Brahma,  Indra,  Vi^u,  Rudra,  Guha,  Kubera,  Soma  and  other 
noble  persons  are  on  the  Boundary  mountains. 

17-19.  The  residence  of  lord  Siva*®*  along  with  Uma  is  in 
the  cave  of  mountain  Srikaiatha.  Srika^tha  is  the  overlord  of 
all  the  chiefs  of  Devas*  Undoubtedly  the  Cosmic  Egg  functions 
by  the  grace  of  Srikai^tl^a.  Ananta,  1^’a  and  others  are  severally 
the  protectors  of  the  Cosmic  Egg.  They  are  called  Vidyc^varas 
as  well  as  Cakravartins  (Emperors). 


306.  SarvftvftiaU— i.c.  Siva,  sarvaih  viiivam  ftvSso  yaiya  tab.  ST. 


Various  Continents 


197 


20-21.  Now,  I shall  briefly  describe  all  the  abodes  presided 
over  by  Srikantha  on  the  border  mountains.  The  universe  con- 
sisting of  the  mobile  and  immobile  beings  is  presided  over  by 
5rikantha.  How  can  I recount  all  in  detail  upto  Kal^ni — Siva  ? 


CHAPTER  FIFTYONE 

Various  Continents 


Suta  said: 

1-7.  The  beautiful  forest  Bhutavana,  the  residence  of  the 
different  groups  of  Bhutas  (goblins),  is  on  the  highly  splendid 
mountain  Devakuta.  This  mountain  has  great  peaks.  It  is 
splendid  and  devoid  of  impurities.  It  is  made  up  by  gold,  Lapis 
Lazuli,  rubies,  emeralds,  lustrous  Gomeda  (onyx)  and  other 
precious  stones.  It  ranges  in  a number  of  branches  on  all  sides. 
It  is  adorned  with  all  kinds  of  trees  such  as  Campaka,  A^oka, 
Punnaga,  Bakula,  Asana  and  Parijata.  It  contains  many  flocks 
of  birds  and  herds  of  elephants.  It  is  variegated  in  colour  with 
hundreds  of  minerals.  It  abounds  in  wonderful  specimens  of 
flowers.  Its  ridges  are  covered  with  bunches  of  flowers  hanging 
down.  Various  kinds  of  animals  live  therein.  It  contains  many 
springs  and  fountains  with  pure  and  sweet  water.  It  is  adorned 
with  many  waterfalls  and  cascades  strewn  with  flowers.  It  is 
beautified  by  running  streams  with  rafts  of  flowers  floating  on 
them.  This  Bhutavana®®’  has  pleasing  colours.  It  contains  many 
trees  with  great  roots  and  stems.  The  thick  shade  of  these  trees 
spreads  to  ten  yojanas  all-round. 

8,  The  bright  and  well-lit  abode  of  lord  Mahadeva,  the 
noble-souled  Sankara,  is  there.  It  is  beautified  by  means  of 
great  jewels. 

9-10.  It  has  ornamental  gateways  made  of  crystal  and 
shaped  in  different  wonderful  forms.  It  has  golden  rampart 
walls.  It  is  well  adorned  with  festoons  of  jewels.  There  arc 

307.  Bhutavana  : BhUta  is  a name  of  Siva;  BhUta-vana— Siva’s  forest. 


many  splendid  gem-set  thrones  covered  with  five  cloths  placed 
here  and  there  on  the  ground  and  occupied  by  Lord  Siva 
now  and  then. 

11-16.  In  that  mansion  of  Siva  there  are  many  apart- 
ments decorated  with  garlands  of  never-fading  flowers  of  dif- 
ferent colours.  There  are  many  raised  platforms  (Mantjapas) 
of  different  shapes  and  sizes  with  crystal  columns.  The  leading 
goblins  (Bhutas)  adored  by  Brahma,  Indra  and  Upendra  stay 
there.  There  are  many  Pramathas  with  their  faces  resembling 
those  of  boars,  elephants,  lions,  bears,  tigers,  camels,  vultures, 
owls,  deer,  humped  bulls  and  goats.  They  are  stout  and  huge 
like  great  mountain  peaks.  They  are  terrible  with  having  huge 
arms.  Some  have  green  hairs  on  their  heads.  They  are  of  dif- 
ferent shapes  and  sizes.  They  are  seated  in  all  possible  pos- 
tures and  positions.  There  arc  splendid  Ganas  such  as  Nan- 
diivara,  with  bright  beaming  faces  and  spotless  character. 
They  possess  supernatural  qualities  and  they  resemble  Brahma, 
Indra  and  Visnu.  The  place  is  never  devoid  of  crowds  of  im- 
mortal beings,  (i.e.  Devas)  who  worship  the  lord  of  Bhutas  (i.e. 
Siva)  there,  always. 

17-19.  Sankara,  Mahadeva,  the  lord  of  Pramhathas  is 
worshipped  by  the  Siddhas,  Devas,  Gandharvas,  Brahma,  and 
others  such  as  Upendra.  They  use  these  musical  instruments 
(drums,  etc.)  in  the  course  of  their  worship— Jharj haras  (cym- 
bals) conches,  Patahas,  Bhcris,  Dii^dimas,  Gomukhasw  During 
their  worship  they  sing  in  low,  middle  and  high  pitches;  they 
also  jump,  dance  and  shout  in  joy.  Sankara  when  being 
worshipped  thus  appears  as  though  he  has  divided  into  two 
the  beautiful  peak  (Kailasa)  having  the  lustre  of  the  conch. 

20.  Kailasa^®®  is  the  abode  of  Kubera,  the  king  of  Yaksas 
as  well  as  other  noble  beings. 

21.  There  too,  Siva  the  lord  of  Devas  has  a great 
abode.  He  stays  there  always  accompanied  by  Uma  and  the 
chiefs  of  Ganas. 

22-25.  The  holy  river  Mandakini  with  plenty  of  water 
and  abounding  in  lotuses  flows  over  the  splendid  peak  Kubera 
Sikhara;  the  steps  leading  to  its  waters  are  built  of  gold  and  set 


308.  Kail&sa  : p.  100  note  133 


Various  Continents 


199 


with  gems.  There  are  golden  lotuses  with  fragrance,  very  soft 
to  the  touch.  There  are  great  lilies  with  sweet  smells  and  leaves 
resembling  blue  lapis  lazuli.  The  river  is  beautifully  adorned 
with  big  lotuses  and  lilies.  It  is  frequented  by  the  womenfolk 
of  the  Yaksas  and  Gandharvas.  The  waters  of  the  holy  and 
splendid  river  Mandakini^®*  are  used  by  Devas,  D^navas,  Gan- 
dharvas, Yaksas,  Raksasas  and  Kinnaras  for  bathing  and  drink- 
ing purposes. 

26.  On  its  northern  bank  is  the  splendid  abode  of  Lord 
Siva,  finished  with  lapis  lazuli  and  other  gems.  He,  the  unchang- 
ing lord,  stays  there. 

27.  O brahmins,  on  the  eastern  and  southern  banks  of  the 
river  Kanakananda  there  is  a forest  with  thousands  of  Brah- 
mins,animals  and  birds. 

26-31.  There-  also  the  lord  sports  in  a mansion  similar  to 
the  one  on  the  mountain  (Kailasa ) along  with  Uma  and  chief 
Ganas.  On  the  western  bank  of  the  Nanda®^^,  a little  towards 
the  South  there  is  the  city  Rudrapuri.  It  is  full  of  many  man- 
sions. In  these  also  Lord  Siva  assuming  hundreds  of  forms  sports 
about  along  with  Uma  and  the  Ganas  It  is  called  Sivalaya 
(abode  of  Siva).  Thus  there  are  hundreds  and  thousands  of 
shrines  of  Siva  in  every  Dvipa,  O excellent  sages,  on  the  moun- 
tains, in  the  forests,  on  the  banks  of  rivers,  lakes  and  on  the 
junctions  of  waters. 


30g.  Maadakin!  : identical  with  Svargahga.  For  detail,  see  Gahgava- 
tdxa-varnana  (Vilyu,  ch.  47;  Matsyach.  124).  According  to  this  description 
''cold  and  fresh  water  from  the  springs  of  the  Kailasa  mountain  flows  into 
a lake  from  which  issues  river  MandakinI  around  which  stands  the  pictures- 
que Nandana  forest  of  vast  dimensions.**  S.M.  Ali  holds  that  the  river 
MandakinI  probably  refers  to  the  river  Uma  and  the  Zhong  Ghhu,  which 
flow  through  Gauri  Kup<ja  (lying  on  the  eastern  flank  of  Mount  Kaillsa)  in 
the  Rakeasa  Tal  (the  twin  lake  of  Manasarovar] 

31 D.  dvija  here  means  ‘ascetic  br^ma^as*. 

311.  Nandi  : Nand&,  Alakanandi  and  Bhiglrath!  are  three  &mous 
branches  of  Gahgi  in  the  upper  course  in  the  Pauri-Garhwal  region.  Accor- 
ding to  Pargiter  (Mark.  p.  383),  the  nrivers  andi  and  Apara-oanda  are 
often  mentioned  as  situated  in  the  north  between  the  Ganges  and  KauiikI 
or  Kosi,  and  near  the  river  B&hudi  and  mount  Hemakilbt. 


200  Lirigaputdna 

CHAPTER  FIFTYTWO 

Geography  of  the  World 


Suta  said  : 

1-2.  O best  of  Brahmins,  on  every  sub-continent  there 
are  many  holy  rivers  always  full  of  water  and  originating  from 
great  lakes.  They  flow  in  all  four  directions  : east,  south, 
north  and  west. 

3.  The  storehouse  of  water  in  the  sky  which  is  called  Soma 
(moon)  is  the  support  of  all  living  beings.  To  Devas,  it  is 
the  receptacle  of  nectar. 

4-8.  From  this  has  originated  the  river  of  auspicious 
waters  and  it  flows  in  the  firmament.  With  nectarine  waters 
it  functions  through  the  seventh  path  of  the  wind.  This  river 
follows  the  path  of  the  luminaries.  It  is  frequented  by 
groups  of  luminaries,  and  by  thousands  and  crores  of  stars  of 
the  sky.®^®  Just  like  the  moon  it  also  goes  round  and  round 
every  day. 

Mahameru,  the  tender  sporting  ground  of  l§rika:ntha  is  eighty 
four  thousand  yojanas  high.  Lord  Siva  is  seated  there  together 
with  Uma  and  the  chiefs  of  his  Ganas  and  also  sports®^*  about 
there  for  a long  time.  This  auspicious  river  of  holy  waters 
circumambulates  the  mountain  Meru. 

9:  With  its  waters  agitated  by  the  wind  and  by  its  own 
velocity,  the  river  flows  down  on  all  the  four  inner  peaks  of 
the  Meru. 

31a.  The  Puri^as  describe  the  three  stages  in  the  evolution  of 
Gahg&:  (i)  It  is  a starry  river  (i.e.  &k&ia-Gahg&  the  Milky  Way)  in  the 
form  of  snow*  (ii)  As  the  snow  falls  on  the  high  plateau  of  the  Pamir 
(Meru)  (v.y)  and  also  on  the  high  ridges  and  ranges  which  surround  and 
radiate  from  the  P&mir  region,  it  is  still  *snowy  Gahgli*  (»hima-Gahg&)* 
(iii)  As  snow  melts,  it  divides  into  the  four  main  rivers  (v.  o)  of  Asia 
which  radiate  in  different  directions.  The  Gahgft  at  this  stage  b^mes  a 
stream,  or  rather  streams  of  water.  After  passing  through  thousands  of 
mountains,  valleys,  forests  and  caves,  it  falls  into  the  southern  sea  (v.  10) 

313*  Mark  the  archaic  form  *krld*tc*  In  the  &tman^ada  for  'kridati* 
in  the  parasmaipada. 


Gtography  of  the  World 


201 


10.  After  going  beyond  all  the  mountains  partially  it 
enters  the  great  sea  at  the  behest  of  lord  Siva. 

1 1 . There  are  hundreds  and  thousands  of  rivers  branching 
out  from  this,  which  flow  through  all  the  sub-continents  and 
continents  as  well  as  the  mountains  therein. 

12a.  Since  the  Gahga  has  gone  to  the  earth  from  the  firma- 
ment, there  are  innumerable  small  rivers. 

12b-13a.  In  the  Ketumala  subcontinent  men  are  dark- 
coloured.^^^  They  subsist  on  jack  fruits.  Their  women  have 
the  lustre  of  blue  lotuses.  Their  life  span  is  ten  thousand  years. 

13b- 15a.  In  the  BhadraiSva  sub-continent  women  are 
white-coloured,  resembling  the  rays  of  the  moon.  They  have 
their  staple  diet  of  black  mangoes.  They  are  devoid  of  anguish 
and  agony  and  fond  of  sexual  pleasures.  Mentally  meditating 
on  Siva  they  live  upto  ten  thousand  years.  Like  the  Hiranmayas®^® 
they  have  freely  dedicated  their  minds  to  livara. 

15b- 18.  In  the  sub-continent  Ramanaka,  the  living  beings 
subsist  on  the  fruits  of  the  Nyagrodha  (the  holy  fig  tree). 
They  live  up  to  eleven  thousand  five  hundred  years.  They 
are  all  white-complexioned  and  engrossed  in  the  meditation 
on  Siva.  The  highly  blessed  Hairanamayas  are  those  dwelling 
in  the  forest  of  Hiranmaya.  They  live  upto  twelve  thousand  five 
hundred  years  mainly  subsisting  on  the  A^vattha  (holy  fig 
tree)  fruits.  They  have  also  dedicated  their  minds  freely  to 
the  lord  like  the  Hiranmayas. 

19.  The  Kurus  in  Kuruvar?a  are  those  who  have  fallen 
down  there  from  the  heavenly  world.  All  of  them  are  bom 
by  copulation.  They  are  fond  of  milk®^®  and  live  on  milk 
diet. 

20.  They  love  one  another  and  have  qualities  simillar  to 
those  of  the  Cakravaka  birds.  They  are  devoid  of  ailments 
and  sorrow  and  perpetually  seek  happiness. 

21.  They  live  up  to  fourteen  thousand  five  hundred  years. 
They  have  great  virility,  but  do  not  associate  with  other  women. 


314.  ST.  of  dark  complexion. 

315.  Kaira^may&b— retideiits  of  Htrmomaya  Varfa. 

316.  K|lri9a|}t*--<>fiiiflk-white  complexion.  Contrast  with  KAl&h  V.  12. 


202 


Lingapuroffa 


22.  All  the  residents  of  the  Kunivarsa  like  the  heaven- 
dwellers  die  simultaneously.  They  are  delighted  and  flouri* 
shing.  They  take  in  all  kinds  of  cooked  rice  and  nectar. 

23.  They  shine  always  like  the  moon;  they  have  perpetual 
youth;  they  are  dark  in  colour  in  their  bodies  and  always 
wear  ornaments. 

24.  Among  all  the  sub-continents  in  the  Jambudvipa  the 
sub-continent  of  Kuruvarsa  is  extremely  splendid.  There  is  a 
magnificent  palace  of  the  moon-crested  lord  l^iva.  It  has  the 
lustre  of  the  moon. 

25.  In  the  sub-continent  Bharatavarsa*^^  men  are  auspi- 
cious and  their  longevity  depends  on  their  Karmans.  They 
are  said  to  live  for  a hundred  years.  They  are  of  different 
colours  and  their  bodies  are  small. 

26.  They  are  engaged  in  the  worship  of  different  Devas; 
they  experience  the  fruits  of  different  kinds  of  Karmans;  they 
are  richly  endowed  with  knowledge  and  with  different  mate- 
rials. They  are  weak  and  have  ver  .'  little  pleasures. 

27-28.  Some  of  them  have  gone  to  Indradvipa®^*  and 
some  to  Kaseruka.  Others  have  gone  to  Tamradvipa  and  some 
to  the  country  Gabhastimat.  Some  have  gone  to  Naga- 
dvlpa,  some  to  Saumyadvipa,  and  others  to  the  Dvipa  of 
Gandharvas  as  well  as  of  Varuna.  Some  of  them  are  Mlecchas 
and  Pulindas  born  of  different  castes. 

29.  In  the  Eastern  parts  of  the  Dvipa  are  the  Kiratas;  in 
the  western  extremities  the  Yavanas;  in  the  middle  the  Brahmins 
Ksatriyas  and  Vaiiyas.  The  Sudras  are  everywhere.®^® 


317.  The  glorification  of  Bh^rata  is  one  of  the  common  topics  in  the 
PurS^as. 

318.  Bh&rata  is  one  of  the  nine  khan^as  of  Jambudvipa;  the  other 
eight  being  Indradvlpa,  Kaserumim,  Tamra-varna,  Gabhastiman,  Naga, 
Saumya,  Gandharva,  and  Varuna. 

319.  The  Puranas  are  conscious  of  the  foreign  tribes  that  surrounded 
Bharata  (cf.  Mat^a,  50.  75-76;  Mark,  57,8.).  The  Kiratas  mentioned  along 
the  eastern  limits  are  probably  the  uncivilized  tribes  of  the  forests  and 
mountains  with  the  Burmese  type  of  features.  The  Yavanas  in  the  virest  are 
Greeks  originally  and  afterwards  the  Mohammedans. 


Geography  of  the  World 


205 


30-31.  They  are  established  there  maintaining  themselves 
by  worship,  warfare  and  business  dealings  (respectively). 
Mutual  dealings  in  connection  with  the  activities  of  the  dif- 
ferent castes  are  related  only  to  virtue,  wealth  and  love.  They 
are  interested  in  their  own  duties.  The  conception  and  pride  in 
performing  the  duties  of  the  various  stages  of  life  are  maintained 
properly. 

32.  It  is  only  here  that  human  beings  endeavour  for  hea- 
venly pleasures  and  salvation.  O leading  sages,  only  here 
they  pursue  the  duties  specified  for  each  yuga,®*®  not  elsewhere. 

33.  In  the  sub-continent  Kimpurusa  men  live  up  to  ten 
thousand  years.  Men  are  golden-complexioned  and  women 
resemble  the  celestial  damsels. 

34.  They  are  devoid  of  ailments  and  sorrow.  They  are  all 
purified  by  meditations  on  Siva.  They  have  Sattva  qualities 
and  the  lustre  of  gold.  They  live  on  Plaksa  fruits  along  with  their 
wives, 

35-37a.  Men  in  the  sub-continent  Harivar^  have  com- 
plexion resembling  gold.  They  are  persons  fallen  from  the  world  of 
Devas.  They  have  divine  forms  and  features  in  every  respect. 
They  worship  lord  Siva.  They  imbibe  the  auspicious  sugarcane- 
juice.  Hence  old  age  does  not  afflict  them  and  they  do  not 
decay.  They  live  upto  ten  thousand  years. 

37b-38.  In  the  sub-continent  Ilavrta  that  was  mentioned 
by  me  as  situated  in  the  middle  of  the  Dvipa,  the  sun  does  not 
dlaze  and  men  do  not  become  old.  There  is  no  light  in  Ilavrta, 
neither  the  sun  nor  the  moon  nor  the  stars. 

39.  The  people  there  have  the  lustre  of  lotuses.  Their  faces 
resemble  the  lotus.  Their  eyes  are  like  the  petals  of  the  lotus. 
They  have  the  fragrance  of  the  petals  of  the  lotus.  They  are 
purified  by  their  meditation  on  Siva. 

40.  The  juice  of  the  Jambu  fruits  constitutes  their  diet. 
They  are  sweet-scented.  They  have  no  duties  to  perform.®®^  They 
have  come  there  from  the  world  of  Devas  and  have  neither 
death  nor  old  age. 

320.  Since  Bharata  alone  it  Karma-Bhumi  (land  for  performing 
action) » the  yuga-dharmas  (duties  pertaining  to  yugas)  prevail  only  here. 
Of.  Vifiju  cited  in  ST, 

321 . agnispand&ti.  N.S.  reads  ani|pandS(i  ( aedharmSdiiCUiy&l^  ST), 


204  LihgapurSsQA 

41.  In  the  divine  sub-continent  Ilavrta,  the  excellent  men 
live  their  full  span  of  life  which  is  thirteen  thousand  years. 

42.  By  drinking  the  juice  of  the  Jambu  fruits  they  are  not 
afflicted  by  old  age.  They  have  neither  hunger  nor  fatigue. 
They  do  not  die  a premature  death. 

43.  The  gold  found  there  is  called  Jambunada.  It  is  the 
divine  metal.  It  shines  and  resembles  a glow-worm, 

44.  Thus  the  persons  occupying  the  nine  sub-continents 
have  been  recounted  by  me.  Their  colour,  span  of  life,  diet  and 
other  things  have  been  succinctly  mentioned  and  not  in  detail. 

45-46.  It  should  be  known  that  the  Gandharvas,  and 
celestial  nymphs  reside  in  Hemakuta.  Sesa,  Vasuki,  Taksaka 
and  all  others  live  in  Nisadha.  The  very  strong  Brahmanas 
called  Yajftikas  live  on  sacrifices.  They  number  thirty  three 
thousands  and  they  live  happily  on  the  mountain  Nila,  full  of 
lapis  lazuli,  the  Siddhas  and  Brahmarsis  devoid  of  impurities. 

47-51 . The  mountain  Sveta  is  the  homeland  of  the  Daityas 
and  Danavas.  The  mountain  Srngavan  (Srngi)  is  the  abode 
of  Pitrs.  The  Himavat  is  the  abode  of  Yaksas,  goblins  and  lord 
Siva,  The  lord  is  seen  in  all  the  mountains  and  forests.  He  is 
accompanied  by  Visnu,  Brahma,  Uma,  Nandin  and  Ganas. 
In  particular,  lord  Nilalohita  is  seen  on  the  mountains  Nila, 
Sveta,  and  TrijSrnga*^*  perpetually  together  with  the  Siddhas, 
Devas  and  Pitrs. 

The  Nila  is  of  the  colour  of  lapis  lazuli.  The  Sveta  is  white. 
The  Hiranmaya  has  the  colour  of  the  feather  of  the  peacock. 
The  Triirnga  is  golden  in  colour.  All  these  lofty  mountains 
are  in  the  Jambudvipa. 


322.  Nila-Sveta-Tri^rAge:  i.e.  on  the  mountains  of  JambO,  viz.,  Nila. 
Sveta  and  Triirhga. 


205 


CHAPTER  FIFTYTHREE 

Geography  of  the  World 


Suta  said  : — 

1.  There  are  seven  important  mountains  in  each  of  the 
seven  Dvipas  beginning  with  Plaksa.  They  extend  straight  in 
all  directions  and  form  the  boundaries  of  the  great  continents, 

2-4.  I shall  mention  the  seven  great  mountains  in  the 
Plaksadvipa.  The  first  mountain  is  Gomedaka;  the  second 
is  Candra;  the  third  is  Narada;  the  fourth  is  Dundubhi;  the 
fifth  is  Somaka;  the  sixth  Sumanas,  the  same  is  called  Vaibhava; 
the  seventh  is  Vaibhraja.  These  are  the  seven  important  moun-- 
tains  in  the  Plaksa  Dvipa. 

5-9.  There  are  only  seven  important  mountains  in  the 
Salmalidvipa.  I shall  mention  them  in  order.  They  arc 
Kumuda,  Uttama,  Balahaka  Drona,  Kanka,  Mahisa  and 
Kakudman. 

In  the  Ku^advlpa  there  are  seven  sub-continents  and  seven 
Kulaparvatas.  I shall  mention  them  by  name,  in  brief.  The 
first  mountain  is  Vidruma,  the  second  is  Hemaparvata  the 
third  is  Dyutiman,  the  fourth  is  Puspita,  the  fifth  is  Ku:§e4aya, 
the  sixth  Harigiri,  the  seventh  is  the  glorious  mountain 
Mandara.  It  is  the  abode  of  the  great  lord.  The  word  Manda 
denotes  the  waters.  Since  the  mountain  holds  the  waters,  it  is 
called  Mandara. 

10.  The  bull-emblemed  lord  of  the  universe  Siva,  the  deity 
without  impurities,  stays  there  in  person  in  an  excellent  golden 
palace  accompanied  by  Uma  and  Nandin. 

11 -13a  Formerly  the  lord  was  propitiated  in  the  great 
holy  centre,  Avimukta,  by  the  mountain  Mandara.  He  then 
obtained  a great  boon.  Mahadeva  was  requested  by  him  for 
his  stay  there  along  with  Uma.  The  lord  left  Avimukta 
and  stayed  on  the  Mandara  along  with  his  Ganas,  Nandin 
and  Uma.  Therefore,  he  does  not  leave  this  mountain. 

13b- 1 6.  The  Kula  Parvatas  in  the  Krautica  Dvipa  are 
seven.  They  are  Krauilca,  Vamanaka,  Andhakaraka  Divavft, 
Vivinda,  Pundarika.  and  Dundubhisvana.  These  seven 
mountains  in  the  Krauhea  Dvipa  are  full  of  gems. 


206 


Lingapurib^ 


17-19a.  There  are  seven  mountains  in  the  S^advlpa. 
They  are  Udaya,  Raivata,  Syamaka  Rajata,  Ambikeya,  Ramya 
containing  all  medicinal  herbs  and  Kesarl.  It  is  from  this 
Kesari  that  wind  is  generated. 

19b-24.  In  the  Pu$kara  Dvipa  there  is  only  one  glorious 
mountain  named  Maha^aila.  It  has  wonderful  peaks  full  of 
jewels.  The  rocky  ridges  are  lofty.  In  the  eastern  half  of  the 
Dvipa  it  rises  very  high  with  ridges  of  variegated  colours.  Above 
the  ground  level  it  is  fifty  thousand  yojanas  high.  The  great 
mountain  goes  deep  below  the  ground  level  thirty  four  thousand 
yojanas.  This  mountain  stretches  over  half  of  the  Dvipa  with 
the  Manasa  range  to  the  north  of  it.  Situated  near  the  sea 
shore  it  appears  like  the  newly  rising  moon. 

Above  the  ground  level  it  rises  fifty  thousand  yojanas 
high.  Its  total  width  and  girth  is  also  that  much.  The  same 
is  called  Manasa  in  the  western  portion  of  the  Dvipa.  The 
same  mountain  of  great  ridges  appears  split  into  two  due  to  its 
position. 

25-26.  There  are  two  meritorious  and  splendid  Janapadas 
on  either  side  of  the  Manasa  mountain,  and  shining  like  silver. 
The  sub-continent  Mahavita^*®  is  on  the  exterior  of  the  Manasa. 
The  Janapada  in  the  interior  is  called  Dhatakikhanda.*^^ 

27-28.  The  Puskara  Dvipa  is  surrounded  by  the  ocean 
of  sweet  water.  All  round  this  ocean  extends  to  as  much  area 
as  the  Puskara  Dvipa.  In  girth  and  extent  it  is  equal  to  Puskara. 

In  the  same  manner  all  the  seven  Dvipas  are  surrounded  by 
oceans  severally  and  there  are  seven  oceans  in  all. 

29.  The  seventh  ocean  is  beyond  all  Dvipas.  Thus  the 
comparative  sizes  of  dvipas  and  oceans  are  stated. 

30.  The  great  ocean  of  sweet  waters  is  stationed  envelop- 
ing the  Puskara. 

31.  Beyond  that  is  the  situation  of  the  world.  The  earth 
is  golden  and  twice  in  extent.  The  entire  thing  is  comparable 
to  a single  rock. 

32.  Beyond  it  is  the  globular  mountain  of  delimitation. 

323-324.  Mah&vlta  and  Dbatakikha]?^^.  These  are  the  two  provinces 
of  Pufksura-dvipa  (identified  with  Japan,  Manchuria  and  SB  Siberia).  The 
mountain  M&nasa  runs  in  a circle  like  a full  moon  and  divides  the  two 
provinces.  The  exterior  province  is  Mahavita  and  the  interior  is  Dhktakl. 


Geography  of  the  World 


207 


It  is  partially  dim  and  partially  bright.  It  is  called  Lokaloka. 

33.  O brahmins,  this  earth  abides,  as  long  as  this  visible- 
cum-invisible  mountain  exists.  Its  height  is  stated  to  be  ten 
thousand  yojanas. 

34.  The  extent  of  the  great  mountain  Lokaloka  is  also 
that  much.  The  rays  of  the  sun  pass  over  its  inner  and  nether 
half, 

35.  In  its  other  half  there  is  perpetual  darkness.  Hence 
it  is  called  Lokaloka.  Thus,  the  world  Bhur  is  explained  succin- 
ctly. 

36-39.  The  Bhuvarloka  is  upto  the  sun.  O excellent  sages, 
the  Svarloka  is  upto  Dhruva  (pole  star).  There  are  seven 
wheels  of  the  wind,^^  viz.,  Avaha,  Pravaha,  Anuvaha,  Sam- 
vaha,  Vivaha,  Paravaha  and  Parivaha,  O brahmins,  these  arc 
the  seven  wheels  of  the  wind. 

O brahmins,  the  clouds,  sun,  moon,  stars,  planets,  seven 
sages  (Great  Bear)  are  one  above  the  other.  The  distance  from 
the  surface  of  the  earth  up  to  pole  star  is  fifteen  hundred  thou- 
sand yojanas. 

40-43.  The  solar  sphere  is  one  hundred  thousand  yojanas 
above  the  surface  of  the  earth.  Above  it  the  chariot  of  the  sun 
is  sixteen  thousand  yojanas.  The  Meru  is  eighty-four  thousand 
yojanas  above  the  surface  of  the  earth.  The  Maharloka  extends 
to  a crore  of  yojanas  above  Dhruva.  O brahmins,  the  Janaloka 
extends  to  two  crores  of  yojanas  beyond  Maharloka.  Tapo- 
loka  extends  to  four  crores  of  yojanas  beyond  Jamaloka.  Beyond 
that  the  Brahmaloka  extends  to  six  crores  of  yojanas.  O 
brahmins,  the  holy  worlds  in  this  Cosmic  Egg  are  thus  seven. 

44.  Beneath  the  seven  nether  worlds  are  the  crores  of 
hells.  They  are  twentyeight  in  number  beginning  with  Ghora 
and  ending  with  Maya. 

45-46a.  The  sinnefs  are  cooked  in  them  in  accordance 
v/ith  their  past  activities.  They  say  that  in  each  of  them  there 
are  five  hells  beginning  with  Raurava  and  ending  with  Avici. 

46b-47.  The  Cosmic  Egg  has  been  mentioned  by  me  at  the 
outset.  So  also  the  sheaths  of  the  Cosmic  Egg.  Incidentally  the 
creation  of  Brahma  too  was  mentioned  in  great  detail.  It  should 

325.  All  the  Pur&^as  mentioa  seven  divisions  of  the  strato -sphere. 


208 


Liiigapur&iiA 


be  known  that  there  are  thousands  and  crores.  of  Eggs  like  these. 

48-52.  Since  Pradhana  is  present  everywhere  within  each 
of  these  Cosmic  Eggs  there  are  fourteen  worlds  in  all  sides  as 
well  as  above  and  below.  O leading  brahmins,  the  cause  of  their 
creation  is  lord  Siva  himself.  The  eight-bodied  Siva  is  present 
in  all  the  Eggs,  in  the  exterior  of  the  Eggs,  in  the  coverings  of 
the  Eggs,  in  the  extremities  of  the  darkness  and  beyond  dark- 
ness. Wonderful  it  is,  every  thing  in  the  universe  is  the  body 
of  the  unembodied  great  Atman,  of  Mahesa,  of  the  intelligent 
Mahadeva. 

The  mistress  of  the  eight-bodied  Siva  is  the  divine  Prakrti. 
Mahat  etc.  are  his  progeny;  all  the  Pas  us  (Individual  Souls) 
who  identify  themselves  with  their  bodies  are  His  servants.^*^ 

53.  The  lord  Siva  is  infinite.  He  is  devoid  of  beginning 
and  end.  He  is  the  Purusa.  He  is  identical  with  the  seven 
principles^*’  beginning  from  Pradhana.  His  body  is  Pradhana 
itself,  having  sixteen  limbs.***  (i.e.  the  organs  of  knowledge, 
organs  of  action,  elements  and  mind).  He  himself  is 
Mahe^vara  and  Astatanu  (eight-bodied ) . 

54.  It  is  due  to  the  power  of  His  command  that  the 
earth  is  held  steady.  So  also  the  mountains,  clouds,  oceans, 
luminaries,  Devas  beginning  with  Indra,  those  who  go  about  in 
the  aerial  chariots  as  well  as  the  mobile  and  immobile  beings. 

55.  Devas  including  Indra  saw  the  lord  devoid  of  specific 
characteristics  in  the  guise  of  a Yaksa.**®On  seeing  him  they 
wondered  “What  is  this?”  They  went  to  the  Yaksa.  Unable 
to  come  to  any  conclusion,  fire  and  others  exerted  themselves 
but  became  weak  and  inefficient. 

56.  O brahmins,  in  front  of  that  Yaksa  the  fire-god  could 
not  burn  even  a blade  of  grass;  the  wind-God  could  not  shake 
a blade  of  grass;  all  the  leading  immortal  beings  failed  to  exer- 
cise their  respective  powers  over  him. 

57.  At  that  time,  the  enemy  of  Vrtra  (i.e.  Indra),  the  lord 

326-328.  The  astamilrti  (eight-formed,  p.  166)  Siva  is  the  house- 
holder whose  mistress  is  Prakrti,  whose  subjects  are  intellect,  ego  and  five 
subtle  elements.  His  eight-formed  body  has  sixteen  parts,  viz.,  five  gross 
elements,  five  organs  of  action,  five  organs  of  knowledge  and  the  mind. 

329.  Yak^a — Siva  in  the  form  of  Yakfa — a semidivine  being,  cf.  Brahma- 

Gita  cited  in  ST.:  ^ II 

I 11 


Movements  of  Luminaries  209 

of  Devas,  the  cause  of  all  prosperity,  approached  him  along 
with  the  leading  Devas.  He  said  to  the  Yaksa,  the  lord  of  Devas, 
with  great  curiosity  in  his  mind,  “Who  are  you,  Sir  ?” 

58.  At  that  time  the  Yaksa  vanished.  Then  the  splendid- 
faced daughter  of  Himavat,  Uma,  shining  gloriously 
with  many  auspicious  ornaments  appeared  in  front  of  him. 

59.  Indra  and  others  asked  that  unborn  daughter  of 
Himavat,  Uma,  the  intensely  bright  one; — “O  Goddess,  O 
excessively  refulgent,  what  is  this  ? O Uma,  who  was  this 
shining  one  in  the  body  of  Yaksa  ?” 

60.  On  hearing  it,  Uma  said  : “the  Yaksa  is  invisible.*’ 
Devas  including  Indra  bowed  down  to  that  deity  having  the 
gait  of  a lion,  and  to  Uma  unborn  and  of  red,  white  and  black 
colour. 

6 1 . On  being  honoured  by  all  the  leading  immortal  beings, 
the  deity,  the  cause  of  the  activity  of  Devas  and  Asuras,  said: — 
Formerly  1 was  Prakrti  subservient  to  the  behests  of  the  Purusa 
the  Yaksa. 

62.  Hence,  O brahmins,  the  entire  Egg  originated  from 
the  unborn  at  his  behest  and  from  the  Egg  originated  Brahma. 
The  entire  world  originated  from  him  along  with  the  lumina- 
ries. Thus  the  universe  is  identical  with  the  Unborn  (aja). 


CHAPTER  FBFTYFOUR 

Movements  of  Luminaries 


Suta  said  : 

1 . In  order  to  comprehend  the  movements  of  the  planets®®® 
after  observing  the  holy  centres  of  the  lord  I shall  mention  the 
movements  of  luminaries  within  the  Cosmic  Egg  succinctly. 

3^0.  The  system  of  stars,  planets  and  constellations  known  as 
iSiihSumara-cakra  is  conceived  as  rotating  like  the  potter’s  wheel.  In  the 
vast  space  the  stars  are  arranged  like  the  body  of  an  alligator.  They 
move  around  Dhruva  (i.e.  the  fixed  centre).  But  it  should  be  known  that 
Ohruva  is  relatively  fixed,  for,  in  fact,  it  itself  moves  in  the  heavens.  (Gf. 
Litiga.  55.  10;  Matsya  125.6}  For  detail,  Matsya.  Ghs.  X24-X28. 


210 


Lingafmrd^a 


2-3.  In  the  cast  of  the  Mem,  the  city  of  Mahendra  is  situa- 
ted on  the  mountain  Manasa;  in  the  south  the  city  of  the  son 
of  the  sun  (i.e.  Yama);  in  the  west  is  the  city  of  Varuna  and 
in  the  north  the  city  of  Soma  (Moon ) . In  all  these  directions, 
the  deities  of  the  quarters  are  stationed.  They  are  the  cities 
of  Amaravatl,  Samyamanl,  Sukha  and  Vibha  in  order. 

4.  Understand  the  movement  of  the  sun  when  he  has 
reached  quarter  over  and  above  the  guardians  of  the  quarters 
in  the  course  of  his  southern  transit. 

5.  In  his  southern  transit  the  sun  rushes  on  like  an  arrow 
that  is  shot.  Taking  the  multitude  of  luminaries  with  him  he 
revolves  perpetually. 

6.  O brahmins,  when  the  lordly  sun  comes  to  the  extremity 
of  the  city  of  Indra  the  sunrise  is  seen  by  all  the  people  in  Sam- 
yamanl. 

7.  At  the  same  time  in  Sukha  vat!  the  sun  is  seen  as  at  the 
close  of  the  night.  But  in  Vibha.  the  lord,  the  eye  of  the  universe, 
i.e.  the  Sun  sets. 

8.  It  has  been  mentioned  by  me  that  just  as  he  absorbs 
waters  in  Amaravatl  so  also  he,  the  traverser  of  the  firmament, 
after  reaching  Samyamanl,  Sukha**^  and  Vibha,  absorbs 
waters. 

9-11.  When  there  is  afternoon  in  Agneyl  (i.e.  south-east), 
O brahmins,  it  is  forenoon  in  the  south-west.  When  it  is  terrible 
latter  half  of  the  night  in  the  north-west,  it  is  the  earlier  part 
of  the  night  in  the  north-east.  Similarly,  when  the  sucker  of 
waters  (i.e.  the  sun)  moves  about  in  the  middle  of  Puskara®®* 
the  mountain  to  the  north  of  Manasa,  he  traverses  a thirtieth 
part  of  the  earth  in  a Muhurta  (48  mts).  Understand  this 
number  in  yojanas  travelled  in  a Muhurta. 

12-17.  The  speed  of  the  noble-souled  sun  per  Muhurta  is 
three  million  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  yojanas.  When 
the  sun  moves  to  the  southern  quarter  with  this  speed  from 
the  north  through  the  middle  of  Puskara  during  his  northern 
transit  and  when  he  moves  into  the  northern  direction  (from 

331.  Sukh&  or  Su9&.  It  la  the  capital  of  Varuna  in  the  western  direc- 
tion and  it  the  tame  as  Sus&  of  the  ancient  Achemenian  empire  in  Iran. 

332.  Pufkara  or  sky,  atmospheric  region.  Cf.  Vilva  cited  in  ST. 
«<Pu|karam  pahkid^  vyomni**. 


MotfemrUs  of  Luminaries 


211 


the  south)  through  the  Manasa  hill  in  the  course  of  his  southern 
transit,  he,  of  great  splendour,  passes  over  one  hundred  and 
eighty  (degrees  of  space).  The  northern  and  southern 

transits  are  called  the  exterior  and  interior  (parts  of  the  celes- 
tial sphere).  The  sun  traverses  through  these  (180)  mandalas 
everyday  (both  ways).  Just  as  the  end  of  the  potters’  wheel 
whirls,  more  quickly  (than  its  middle  part),  the  lord  (sun)  tra- 
verses quickly  in  his  southern  transit.*®^ 

18-19  Hence  he  traverses  a greater  area  in  a short  time. 
In  the  course  of  Daksinayana  (southern  transit)  the  sun  traver- 
ses to  the  extent  of  thirteen  and  a half  stars  (i.e.  star  spaces) 
during  the  day  time  in  only  twelve  muhurtas;  while  during 
the  night  time  of  eighteen  muhurtas  he  covers  as  many  stars 
(star  spaces).*®* 

20.  Just  as  the  middle  of  the  potter’s  wheel  moves  more 
slowly  (than  the  end  part)  so  also  in  the  Uttarayana  (northern 
transit)  the  sun  moves  slowly. 

21-25.  Hence  he  traverses  a smaller  area  in  the  course  of  a 
longer  time.  That  chariot  of  the  sun  is  occupied  by  Adityas, 
sages,  Gandharvas,  Apsarases,  Gramanis,  Serpents,  and  Rak- 
sasas.  The  thousand-rayed  sun  emits  his  rays  in  front,  behind, 
below  and  above.  Thereby  he  illuminates  the  excellent 
assembly  of  Brahma.  During  the  sandhyas  (dawn  and  dusk) 
the  brahmins  and  sages  offer  water-libations.  With  these 
waters,  the  sun  kills  the  demons  as  and  when  they  come  near 
him  and  then  goes  ahead. 

333*  The  text  here  appears  highly  defective.  Uttarayana  or  northern 
transit  is  the  period  from  22nd  Dec.  to  21st  June  and  Daksinayana  or  southern 
transit  is  from  22nd  June  to  21st  Dec.  During  the  former,  the  sun  appears  to 
travel  from  Capricorn  to  Cancer  (through  Aquanus,  Pisces  etc.)  and  during 
the  latter  from  Cancer  to  Capricorn.  But  as  the  earth  revolves  round  all  the 
signs  of  the  Zodiac  once  a day,  the  sun  is  said  to  travel  over  these,  every 
day.  The  word  mandala  is  used  in  the  peculiar  sense  of  degree  as  no  other 
meaning  will  suit  the  context. 

334.  A star  space  is  360^27  or  13^®  i3*i  Star  space  is  thus  equal  to 
180^.  In  other  words  the  whole  consists  of  360*^  which  is  the  space  of 
the  27  constellations  Afvini  etc.  The  sun  is  visible  at  any  time  only  on 
half  of  the  sphere  (called  day).  Hence  half  of  the  sphere  is  180°  or 
star  spaces.  The  reference  here  is  to  that  day  when  the  day  time  is  shortest 
(i.e.  9 hours  36  minutes)  and  night  longest  (14  hours  24  minutes)  which 
occurs  in  India  in  Kashmir. 


212 


Lingapurit^a 


During  the  latter  part  of  the  uttarayana  the  day  extends  to 
eighteen  muhurtas,  during  which  the  sun  moves  slowly. 
He  covers  the  extent  of  thirteen  and  a half  stars  during  the  night 
consisting  of  twelve  muhurtas  and  as  many  stars  during  the 
day  consisting  of  eighteen  muhurtas. 

26.  Just  as  the  wheel  whirls  slowly  at  the  nave,  so  also 
Dhruva  whirls  like  the  lump  of  clay  in  the  middle. 

27-28.  Those  who  know  the  ancient  lore,  say  that  thirty 
muhurtas  constitute  a day  and  a night  during  which  the  sun 
traverses  the  space  in  between  the  two  limits  (i.e.  the  solstitial 
points).  Just  as  the  nave  of  the  wheel  of  the  porter  remains 
there  alone  (i.e.  without  moving)  so  also  Auttanapada  (i.e. 
Dhruva)  rotates  (without  moving)  as  the  leader  of  the  lumina- 
ries along  with  the  planets. 

29-33.  The  group  of  the  sages  and  the  luminaries  moves 
in  accordance  with  his  will  (mind).  Presided  over  by  him  the 
sun,  along  with  the  wind,  takes  up  water  from  everywhere. 

The  son  of  Uttanapada  attained  the  state  of  Dhruva,  thanks 
to  the  favour  of  Visnu.  It  was  obtained  by  Auttanapada  on 
account  of  his  father. 

The  waters  drunk  by  the  sun  penetrate  the  moon  gradually 
and  from  the  moon  they  drip  down  to  the  clouds.  On  being 
tossed  about  by  the  wind,  the  cluster  of  clouds  causes  shower 
on  the  earth.  The  word  bhaskara  (sun)  is  derived  as  follows: — 
Bhasayet  tena  bhaskarah — (He  who  illuminates  is  bhaskara). 
There  is  no  destruction  of  water.  The  same  water  revolves. 

34-38.  For  the  welfare  of  creatures,  the  waters  have  been 
evolved  by  lord  Siva  as  their  ultimate  resort.  The  waters  alone 
constitute  Bhu,  Bhuvah,  Svah,  anna  (cooked  rice)  as  well  as 
nectar.  The  waters  are  the  vital  breaths  of  the  worlds,  the 
living  beings,  the  worlds  themselves.  Of  what  avail  is  much 
talk  ? The  world  of  mobile  and  immobile  beings  is  constituted 
by  the  waters. 

Lord  Siva  is  the  overlord  of  the  waters.  He  is  glorified  as 
such.  The  universe  is  identical  with  him.  What  is  there  to 
wonder  at  in  this  ? The  designation  Narayana  was  acquired  by 
Vi^tiu  by  the  grace  of  the  waters.  Visnu  is  the  abode  of  worlds 
and  the  waters  constitute  his  abode.  When  the  mobile  and 
immobile  beings  are  being  burned  by  the  fire  and  tossed  up 


Movement  af  Luminaries 


213 


as  smoke  by  the  wind,  the  vapours  that  go  up  urged  by  the 
wind  form  the  clouds. 

39-40,  Hence  the  mixture  of  smoke,  fire  and  wind  is 
called  cloud.  The  word  abhra  (cloud)  is  derived  as  follows; 
“that  which  showers  water.”  The  lord  of  the  clouds  is  the 
thousand-eyed  Indra.  The  cloud  originating  from  sacrificial 
smoke  is  conducive  to  the  welfare  of  the  twice-born.  The  cloud 
originating  from  the  smoke  of  the  forest  fires,  is  conducive  to 
the  welfare  of  the  forests. 

41.  O brahmins,  the  cloud  originating  from  the  smoke 
of  the  dead  bodies  brings  about  evil.  The  cloud  originating 
from  the  smoke  of  the  fire  during  magic  rites  brings  about  the 
destruction  of  living  beings. 

42.  Thus  there  is  weal  or  woe  unto  the  worlds  due  to  diffe- 
rent kinds  of  smokes.  Hence  a man  shall  stifle  the  smoke 
arising  from  the  black  magic  rites. 

43.  If  a brahmin  were  to  perform  black  magic  rites  with- 
out covering  up  the  smoke  thereof,  he  will  wantonly  become 
the  cause  of  destruction  of  the  world. 

44.  O men  of  holy  rites,  the  clouds  that  are  receptacles 
of  waters  shower  waters  at  the  behest  of  the  wind  for  six  months 
for  the  welfare  of  the  worlds. 

45.  The  thunder  pertains  to  the  wind;  the  lightning  arises 
from  fire.  O leading  sages,  the  origin  of  snow  from  those  clouds 
is  in  three  ways. 

46-48.  The  word  abhra  is  derived  thus: — na  bhra^yanti 
yatah  (since  they  do  not  become  destroyed). 

The  word  megha  is  derived  as  mehanat  meghah — It  is  called 
megha  because  it  makes  waters. 

The  clouds  are  of  different  kinds,  viz., — Kasthavahas,  Vai- 
r in  eyas  and  Paksas. 

When  ka^thas  (sacrificial  wigs)  soaked  in  ghee  come  into 
contact  with  fire,  smoke  is  generated  (and  this  smoke  forms  the 
clouds).  The  origin  of  the  second  type  of  clouds  is  from  the 
exhaled  breath  of  Brahma.  The  origin  of  the  third  type  of 
clouds  is  from  the  wings  of  mountains  chopped  off  by  Indra, 

The  clouds  arising  from  fires  arc  auspicious  and  their  place 
of  resort  is  Avaha  (a  particular  region  of  wind). 

49-53a.  All  those  clouds  arising  from  the  breath  of  Brahma 


are  in  the  layer  of  the  wind  Pravaha,  while  the  clouds  origi- 
nating from  Paksa  (wings)**®  — Puskara  and  others  — shower 
water.  They  are  respectively  silent,  noisy  and  destructive**** 
The  different  clouds  behave  differently — Some  rain  in  showers; 
some  have  cool  winds  blowing  for  a long  time,  some  are  en- 
liveners;  some  are  weak  being  devoid  of  lightning  and  thunder. 
Some  stay  here  and  there  in  the  sky  within  a kro^a  (3  kms) 
from  thfc  surface  of  the  earth.  All  the  clouds  clinging  to  the 
mountains  are  within  half  a kro^a.  The  clouds  (called) 
meghas  stay  within  a yojana  from  the  surface  of  the  earth. 
They  shower  much  water  on  the  earth  because  it  is  possible 
for  them  to  do  so.  They  are  equipped  with  lightning. 

53b-56.  Their  way  of  making  downpours  of  three  types 
has  thus  been  narrated  to  you.  The  clouds  of  the  Paksaja 
type  originate  from  the  clipped  wings  of  the  mountains.  They 
are  called  kalpajas  (born  in  the  kalpas).  These  autumnal 
clouds  shower  at  night  towards  the  close  of  the  kalpa  bringing 
about  destruction. 

When  the  Paksaja,  Puskara  and  other  clouds  shower  water, 
everything  becomes  a vast  sea  of  water.  During  the  night,  the 
lord  lies  down  there. 

O leading  brahmins,  the  smoke  of  the  clouds  arising  from 
fire,  from  the  exhaled  breath  and  from  the  clipped  wings,  is 
refreshingly  enlivening. 

57.  The  showers  of  the  clouds  Paundras,  (i.e.,  those  falling 
in  the  land  of  Pundra)  are  accompanied  by  lightning,  arc  cool 
and  hence  conducive  to  plant  (growth).  They  are  ice-cool  and 
look  like  the  spray  of  waters  from  elephants’  trunks. 

58.  The  clouds  called  Gangas  originate  from  the  waters 
of  Ganga.  Through  the  wind  in  the  Paravaha  region  these 
agitate  the  mountains,  rivers  and  elephants  of  the  quarters. 

39.  The  water  separated  from  the  clouds  goes  from  one 
mountain  to  another.  The  wind  Paravaha  takes  the  cloud  to 
the  Himavat  mountain. 

60.  O brahmins,  the  remaining  shower  after  crossing  the 

335.  Pufkar^dyit^ : Puskara,  Avarta,  etc.  coinprise  a class  of  clouds 
that  rain  in  torrents  at  the  dissolution  of  the  world. 

336,  du9Ul^&b*<Su9t&  ^ yc?am,  pralayakarSh  ST.  of  wicked  inten- 
tion since  they  cause  destruction  of  the  world. 


ThesuiCs  chariot 


215 


Himavat  approaches  the  sub-continent  Bharata  in  order  to 
make  the  other  side  flourish. 

61.  The  showers  have  been  recounted  now.  They  are  of 
two  types  being  conducive  to  the  increase  of  two  types  of  vege- 
tation. I shall  mention  them  briefly  according  to  my  knowledge. 

62.  The  sun  of  great  splendour,  the  lord  with  the  eye  of 
the  universe  is  the  creator  of  rains.  O excellent  brahmins,  he 
is  the  great  I^ana,  Siva  himself. 

63-64.  He  alone  is  the  splendour,  power  and  strength, 
O brahmins.  He  is  fame  himself.  He  is  the  eye,  ear,  mind, 
Mrtyu,  soul,  Manyu,  the  quarters  and  the  interstices,  truth, 
order,  discipline,  wind,  firmament,  planets,  the  guardians  of 
the  quarters,  Visnu,  Brahma,  Rudra  and  Mahe^vara  himself. 

65-68.  This  glorious  thousand-rayed  deity  lord  Siva  is 
very  auspicious.  He  has  eight  hands,  a body  semi-female  and 
three  eyes.  He  is  the  overlord  of  Devas.  O brahmins,  it  is  due 
to  his  favour  alone  that  rain  of  various  kinds  occurs.  The  sun 
takes  up  water  by  his  rays  in  order  to  give  it  back  thousandfold. 
There  is  neither  increase  nor  decrease  of  water,  if  we  consider 
it  duly.  The  wind  presided  over  by  Dhruva  withdraws  the 
rain.  It  falls  off  the  planet  sun  and  spreads  through  the  sphere 
of  the  stars.  At  the  close  of  the  movement,  it  re-enters  the  sun 
and  is  presided  over  by  Dhruva. 


CHAPTER  FIFTYFIVE 

The  suns  chariot^^’^ 

1-2.  I shall  briefly  describe  the  chariot  of  the  sun,  moon 
and  other  planets  as  also  how  the  sun  traverses  drinking  up  the 
waters. 

337.  The  solar  car.  Cf.  Matsya,  Ch.  125.  For  the  12  Heptads  of  the 
solar  system  Gf.  MP,—A  Study  pp.  21 1-212.  The  solar  system  with  the 
sun  as  the  centrel  point  is  conceived  as  a chariot  which  moves  upto  180 
degrees  both  north  and  south  of  the  equator  (V.  14;  also 
*23‘57). 


216 


LUgapurd^a 


The  chariot  of  the  sun  has  been  created  by  Brahm&  for  a 
specific  purpose.  O leading  brahmins,  it  is  conceived  through 
the  parts  of  the  year. 

3.  The  golden  chariot  of  the  sun  is  the  abode  of  all  Devas. 
It  has  a single  wheel  with  five  spokes  and  three  naves, 

4.  Its  length  and  breadth  is  nine  thousand  yojanas.  Twice 
that  length  is  the  distance  between  the  driver’s  box  and  the 
poleshaft. 

5.  The  horses  are  stationed  on  the  side  where  the  wheel  is. 
They  are  unattached*®®  but  appear  to  be  yoked.  There  are 
seven  horses.  They  are  evolved  out  of  the  vedic  passages 
and  metres.®*® 

6.  The  horses  are  bound  to  the  side  of  the  wheel.  The 
axle  is  fitted  to  the  poleshaft.  The  chariot  revolves  along  with 
the  wheel  and  the  horses,  and  the  poleshaft  revolves  along 
with  the  axle. 

7.  The  axle  prompted  by  the  poleshaft  whirls  along  with 
the  single  wheel.  It  is  the  intelligent  Dhruva  (Pole  star) 
that  urges  the  luminaries  by  means  of  the  wind  and  the  rays 
(or  by  the  wind  which  acts  as  reins) . 

8.  There  are  two  reins  in  the  chariot.  They  are  united  to 
the  extremities  of  the  yoke  and  the  axle.  The  chariot  tied  by 
means  of  the  reins  to  the  yoke  and  the  axle  revolves  by  the  grace 
of  Dhruva. 

9.  As  the  chariot  whirls  and  moves  along  the  firmament 
there  shall  be  circles  of  bright  lustre.  The  extremities  of  the 
yoke  and  the  axle  are  to  the  right  of  the  chariot. 

10.  When  the  horses  beyond  the  wheel®*®  are  pulled  by 
Dhruva  by  means  of  reins,  both  of  them  (the  yoke  and  axle) 
as  also  the  reins  follow  the  poleshaft  that  whirls. 

11-13.  The  extremity  of  the  yoke  and  the  axle  of  this 
chariot  which  has  the  steed  of  wind  whirls  in  all  directions  like 
a rope  fixed  to  a nail.  In  the  course  of  Uttarayana  as  the  chariot 
moves  about  in  the  manqlalas  the  reins  increase  in  size  (i.c. 

338.  asadgaih««intarik9agaih  ST.  those  that  move  in  the  void. 

339.  The  seven  horses  of  the  solar  car  are  the  seven  metres,  via., 
g&yatri,  ufQtk,  anuftup,  brhatl,  paAkti,  triftup  and  jagatl. 

340.  Vicakr&ive — when  tho  horses,  wheel  and  Aru^a  the  driver  (are 
secured  by  Dhruva). 


The  sun^s  chariot 


217 


are  let  loose).  In  the  course  of  the  Daksinayana^  when  the 
chariot  moves  about  in  the  mancjialas  the  reins  are  pulled 
inwards.  In  either  case,  the  reins  are  operated  by  Dhruva 
and  then  the  sun  seated  within,  moves  about  in  the  mandalas. 

14-15.  The  distEince  between  the  two  solstices  consists 
of  one  hundred  and  eighty  degrees.  The  sun  moves  about  the 
mandalas  externally  as  the  reins  are  being  released  by  Dhruva. 
He  then  encircles  the  mandalas  and  moves  quickly. 

1 6 . Devas  and  sages  perpetually  worship  lord  Bhaskara,  who 
is  himself  Bhava  and  Is  vara  day  and  night. 

17.  That  chariot  is  occupied  by  Devas,  Adityas  sages, 
Gandharvas,  Apsarases  as  well  as  serpents,  Raksasas,  and 
Gramanis. 

18.  These  reside  within  the  sun  for  two  months  in  succession 
and  develop  and  nourish  the  auspicious  sun  by  means  of  their 
splendour. 

19.  The  sages  eulogise  the  sun  by  means  of  hymns.  The 
Gandharvas  and  Apsarases  worship  him  by  music  and  dance. 

20.  The  Gramanis,  Yaksas  and  Bhutas  hold  the  reins. 
The  serpents  bear  the  sun  and  Yatudhanas  (Raksasas)  follow 
him. 

21.  The  Valakhilyas  surround  the  sun  from  his  rise  to 
his  setting  and  accompany  him.  In  this  manner  these  reside 
in  the  sun  for  two  months  in  succession. 

22-23.  O leading  brahmins,  the  following  twelve  months 
constitute  the  human  year: — Madhu  (Gaitra),  Madhava 
(VaKakha),  Sukra  (Jyestha),  Suci  (Asa<Jha),  Nabhas  (Sra- 
vana),  Nabhasya  (Bhadrapada),  Isa  (Alvina)  Crja  (Karttika), 
Sahas  (Marga^ir?a)  Sahasya  (Pau?a),  Tapas  (Magha) 
and  Tapasya  (Phalguna). 

24.  The  (six)  Rtus  (seasons)  are  Vasantika  (Spring), 
Grai^ma,  (summer)  Var^ika  (rainy  season)  Sarad  (autumn), 
Hima  (early  Winter)  and  SHira  (late  Winter) 

25.44 

The  seven  groups  accompany  and  abide  in  the  sun,  as  follows: — 

1 . Devas  are  twelve  in  number.  They  nourish  the  sun  by 
means  of  lustre.  They  are: — ^Dhatr,  Aryaman,  Mitra,  Varu^a, 


218  Lingapurai^ 

Indra,  Vivasvan,  Pu§an,  Parjanya,  Aih^u,  Bhaga,  Tva§tr 
and  Visnu. 

2.  The  sages  are  twelve  in  number.  They  eulogise  the 
sun  by  means  of  hymns.  They  are: — Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Atri, 
Vasistha,  Ahgiras,  Bhrgu,  Bharadvaja,  Gautama,  Ka^yapa, 
Kratu,  Jamadagni  and  Visvamitra. 

3.  The  serpents  are  twelve  in  number.  They  bear  the  great 
lord  Sun.  They  are  : — Vasuki,  Kahkanikara,  Taksaka, 
Naga,  Elapatra,  l^ahkhapala,  Airavata  (Iravan),  Dhanafijaya 
Mahapadma,  Karkotaka,  Kambala  and  A^vatara. 

4.  The  twelve  excellent  Gandharvas  worship  the  sun 
that  takes  in  water  by  means  of  Songs.  They  are: — Tumburu, 
Narada,  Haha,  Huhu,  Visvavasu,  Ugrasena,  Surugi,  Paravasu 
Citrasena,  Orriayu,  Dhrtara^tra  and  Suryavarcas. 

5.  The  twelve  Apsarases  worship  the  sun  by  their  charming 
Tandava  dance.  They  are: — Krtasthala  of  splendid  face, 
the  divine  lady  Puhjikasthall  of  splendid  hips,  Menaka,  Saha- 
janya,  Pramloca  of  sweet  smiles,  Anumloca,  Ghrtacl,  VisvacI, 
UrvasI  also  known  as  Purvacitti,  the  gentle  lady  Tilottama 
and  Rambha  of  lotus-like  face. 

6.  The  twelve  Gramanls  hold  the  reins.  They  are:  — 
Rathakrt,  Rathaujas,  Rathacitra,  Subahu,  Rathasvana, 
Varuna,  Su§ena,  Senajit,  Tarksya,  Ari§tanemi,  Ksatajit  and 
Satyajit. 

7.  Then  there  are  twelve  Yatudhanas.  Wielding  their 
weapons  they  accompany  the  sun.  They  are: — Raksoheti, 
Praheti,  Pauru^eya,  Badha,  Sarpa,  Vyaghra,  Apa,  Vata, 
Vidyut,  Divakara,  Brahmopeia  the  leading  Raksasa  and 
Yajhopcta. 

These  seven  groups  of  twelve  members  in  each  are  proud 
of  their  position. 

Two  from  each  of  these  seven  groups  occupy  the  sun  for 
two  months.  The  details  are  given  below: 

45-48, 

During  the  Months  of  Caitra-VaUdkha 


1.  Twelve  Devos 

2.  Twelve  Sages 

3.  Twelve  Serpents 


Dhatr  and  Aryaman 
Pulastya  and  Pulaha 
Vasuki  and  Kahkanikara 


The  sun's  chariot 


219 


4. 

5. 

6. 


7. 


1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 
7. 


Twelve  Gandharvas 
Twelve  Apsarases 
Twelve  Gramanis 
Twelve  Yatudhanas 
49-51. 


Tumburu  and  Narada 
Krtasthala  and  Pufijikasthala 
Rathakrt  and  Rathaujas 
Raksoheti  and  Praheti 


During  the  Months  ofjyestha  and  Afddha 


Dev  as 
Sages 
Serpents 
Gandharvas 
Apsarases 
Gramanis 
Yatudhanas 
52-54. 


Mitra  and  Varuna 
Atri  and  Vasistha 
Taksaka  and  Naga 
Haha  and  Huhu 
Menaka  and  Sahajanya 
Subahu  and  Rathacitra 
Pauruseya  and  Badha 


During  &r&vana  and  Bhddrapada 

1 . Devas 

2.  Sages 

3.  Serpents 

4.  Gandharvas 

5.  Apsarases 

6.  Gramanis 

7.  Yatudhanas 
55-57. 

During  Afvina  and  Kdrttika 

1 . Devas  Pusa  and  Parjanya 

2.  Sages  BharadvSja  and  Gautama 

3.  Serpents  Iravan  and  Dhanahjaya 

4.  Gandharvas  Suruci  and  Paravasu 

5.  Apsarases  Ghrtaci  and  ViivSci 

6.  Gramanis  Susena  and  Senajit 

7.  Yatudhanas  Apa  and  Vata 

58-61. 

During  Mdrgaiirsa  and  Pausa 


Indra  and  Vivasvan 
Ahgiras  and  Bhrgu 
Elapatra  and  Sahkhapala 
VHvavasu  and  Ugrasena 
Pramloca  and  Anumloca. 
Rathasvana  and  Varui^a 
Sarpa  and  Vyaghra 


1 . Devas 

2.  Sages 


Amsu  and  Bhaga 
Kalyapa  and  Kratu 


220 


LingapurdJdM 


3.  Serpents  Mahapadma  and  Karkotaka 

4.  Gandharvas  Citrasena  and  Urnayu 

5.  Apsarascs  Urvasi  and  Purvacitti 

6.  Gramanis  Tarksya  and  Ari§tanemi 

7.  Yatudhanas  Vidyut  and  Divakara. 

>2-65 

During  Mdgha  and  Phdlguna 

1.  Devas  Tvas^r  and  Visnu 

2.  Sages  Jamadagni  and  Visvamitra 

3.  Serpents  Kambala  and  Asvatara 

4.  Gandharvas  Dhrtarastra  and  Suryavarcas 

5.  Apsarases  Tilottama  and  Rambha 

6.  Gramanis  Rathajit  and  Satyajit 

7.  Yatudhanas  Brahmopeta  and  Yajhopeta 

66.  These  deities  occupy  the  sun  for  two  months  (in  diffe- 
rent groups  as  mentioned  above).  These  twelve  Hep  tads  are 
the  governing  forces  during  the  twelve  months  of  the  solar 
year. 

67-69.  The  deities  nourish  and  develop  the  sun  by  their 
splendour.  The  sages  eulogise  the  sun  by  the  hymns  of  the 
Vedas.  The  Gandharvas  and  the  Apsarases  worship  him  by 
their  music  and  dance.  The  Gramanis,  Yaksas  and  Bhutas 
hold  the  reins;  the  serpents  bear  the  sun,  and  Yatudhanas 
follow  him;  Valakhilyas  lead  the  sun  to  his  setting  place  after 
surrounding  him  at  the  time  of  his  rise. 

70-71.  The  sun  is  nourished  by  the  splendour  of  all  these. 
The  sun  blazes  in  accordance  with  their  splendour,  penance, 
yogic  power,  Mantras,  Dharmas  and  strength.  These  stay 
in  the  sun  in  groups,  for  two  months  each. 

72-73.  The  sages,  Devas,  Gandharvas,  Serpents,  groups 
of  Apsarases,  Gramanis,  Yak§as,  and  Yatudhanas  mainly — these 
blaze,  shower  rain,  illuminate,  blow,  create  and  remove  the 
evil  activities  of  living  beings.  They  are  glorified  as  such. 

74.  They  destroy  the  merits  of  the  wicked  and  the  sins 
of  good  persons  in  certain  cases. 

75.  They  arc  seated  in  an  aerial  chariot  that  is  divine, 
that  has  the  speed  of  the  wind  and  that  can  go  wherever  it  wills. 
These  move  ahead  along  with  the  sun  throughout  the  day. 


Dtscrlpiion  of  the  Moon 


221 


76.  They  shower  rain.  They  blaze,  they  delight.  O Sages, 
they  protect  all  the  living  beings  and  firmament  from  destruc- 
tion. 

77.  They  take  pride  and  identify  themselves  with  their 
positions  in  all  the  manvantaras  of  the  past,  present  and  future. 

78.  These  seven  groups  live  in  the  sun  in  groups  of  fourteen 
in  all  the  fourteen  manvantaras. 

79.  O leading  sages,  the  activities  of  the  intelligent 
lord  of  Devas  have  been  recounted,  some  in  brief  and  some  in 
detail,  in  accordance  with  what  I have  heard  and  how  they  had 
happened. 

80.  These  seven  groups  of  twelve  deities  in  each  are  those 
who  take  pride  in  their  positions  and  identify  themselves  with 
them.  They  reside  in  the  sun  for  two  months  in  the  above 
order. 

81.  Thus  the  sun,  the  harbinger  of  the  day  moves  ahead 
quickly  in  a single-wheeled  chariot^^^  drawn  by  seven  green 
imperishable  horses. 

82.  He  whirls  day  and  night  in  his  chariot  which  has  a 
single  wheel.  He  traverses  in  heaven  over  the  seven  continents 
and  oceans  with  the  help  of  seven  groups. 


CHAPTER  FIFTYSIX 

Description  of  the  Moon 

S&ta  said  : — 

1.  The  Moon  traverses  the  stars  stationed  in  its  orbit. 
His  chariot  has  three  wheels  and  the  horses  are  on  either  side. 

2.  The  chariot  is  fitted  with  three  wheels,  each  with  hund- 
red spokes.  The  horses  are  white  in  colour  and  ten  in  number* 
They  are  divine  and  stout.  They  are  not  connected  with  the 
yoke.  They  have  the  speed  of  the  mind. 

3.  The  moon  traverses  in  this  chariot  along  with  Devas 

341.  ekacakra—The  single  wheel  of  the  solar  chariot  is  lepresented 
by  the  year  (samvatsara) , 


222  Lihgapurd^a 

and  Pitfs.  It  has  white  rays  in  the  form  of  sparkling  water 
particles, 

4-6.  The  moon  increases  in  force  in  the  beginning  of  the 
bright  half  and  is  stationed  in  the  way  of  the  sun.  Day  by  day 
it  gets  refilled  till  the  end  of  that  half.  The  sun  develops 
and  nourishes  it.  It  is  drunk  up  bv  Devas  during  the  dark 
half.®^^  It  is  being  drunk  in  continuity  for  fifteen  days  by  Devas. 
The  sun  refills  it  part  by  part  by  his  single  ray  Susumna  : 
Thus  the  physical  body  of  the  moon  is  developed  and  nourished 
by  the  vigour  of  the  sun. 

7- 10a.  On  the  full  moon  day  it  appears  with  its  full  white 
disc.  Beginning  with  the  second  and  ending  with  the  fourteenth 
day  in  the  dark  half,  Devas  drink  up  the  moon  that  was  nouri- 
shed and  developed  day  by  day  during  the  bright  half.  They 
drink  the  watery  honey  and  nectar  that  had  been  accumula- 
ted in  the  course  of  half  a month,  thanks  to  the  splendour  of  the 
sun.  They  sit  near  the  moon  for  a single  night  on  the  full 
moon  day  for  drinking  up  the  nectar  from  the  moon,  along 
with  the  sages  and  Pitrs. 

10b- 13.  The  digits  of  the  moon  facing  the  sun  get  dimi- 
nished daily,  being  drunk  up  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of 
the  dark  half.  Thirtysix  thousand  three  hundred  and  thirty 
three  Devas  drink  the  moon.  After  the  moon  has  been  drunk 
for  half  a month,  day  by  day  by  them,  those  excellent  Devas 
go  away  on  the  new  moon  day.  On  the  new  moon  day  the 
Pitrs  occupy  the  Moon. 

14-18.  When  the  fifteenth  part  remains  as  the  last  digit, 
the  groups  of  Pitrs  occupy  this  in  the  afternoon.  For  the  dura- 
tion of  two  kalas  (units  of  time)  they  drink  up  the  remaining 
digit — the  nectar  of  svadha  that  has  oozed  out  of  the  rays  on 
the  Amavasya  day.  After  drinking  the  nectar  they  attain  full 
satiety  for  the  whole  of  month  and  then  go  away.  By  the  time 
the  remaining  digit  of  the  moon  drunk  by  the  Pitrs  gets  dissol- 
ved, a fifteenth  part  is  replenished.  The  increase  and  the 
decrease  of  the  moon  in  the  beginning  of  each  fortnight  is  on 
the  sixteenth  day.®*’  The  increase  in  the  moon  is  thus  due  to 
the  sun. 


34«.  Cf.  sufiimnah  aOryaraimU  candram&  gandharvahy  .TS  3.4,7. i . 
343«  9odaiy&m«Qn  the  sixteenth,  i.e.  on  the  new-moon  day. 


223 


CHAPTER  FIFTYSEVEN 

Movements  of  the  Planets^** 


Suta  said  : — 

1-5.  The  chariot  of  the  son  of  the  Moon  (i.e.  Budha — 
Mercury)  is  fitted  with  eight  horses,  tawny-coloured  and  very 
Splendid.  It  has  the  characteristics  of  water  and  fire. 

The  chariot  of  Sukra  (Venus)  the  preceptor  of  Daityas  is 
fitted  with  ten  stout  horses  of  different  colours.  It  is  earthen  in 
nature. 

The  chariot  of  Bhauma  (Mars)  is  golden,  splendid  and 
fitted  with  eight  horses. 

The  horse  of  Jiva  (Jupiter)  is  also  golden  and  fitted  with 
eight  horses. 

The  chariot  of  Manda®^®  (Saturn)  is  made  of  iron.  It  is 
fitted  with  ten  black  horses  and  is  watery  in  nature. 

rhe  chariots  of  Rahu  and  Ketu  are  fitted  with  eight  horses 
each.  All  these  planets  are  bound  to  Dhruva  (Pole  Star) 
by  reins  which  are  of  the  form  of  wind.  Mad.e  to  whirl  by 
the  Pole  star  they  move  ahead. 

6.  There  are  as  many  rays  as  there  are  stars.  All  of  them 
are  bound  to  the  Pole  star.  While  revolving  (round  it)  they 
make  it  revolve  also. 

7.  The  stars  and  the  luminaries,  urged  by  the  circular 
gusts  of  wind,  move  like  fire  brands.  Since  the  wind  bears 
the  luminaries,  it  is  called  Pravaha. 

8.  Along  with  the  planets  and  constellations,  the  sun  and 
stars  occupy  the  firmament  in  a circle  looking  upwards  and 
sideways. 

9.  Presided  over  (i.e.  controlled)  by  Dhruva  they  circum- 
ambulate Dhruva.  They  move  on  in  the  firmament  to  see 
Lord  Dhruva  that  acts  like  the  pivot. 

344.  Chapters  56-57  describe  the  movement  of  the  planets  ^Soma, 
Budha,  Mahgala,  Brhaspati,  Sukra,  Sani  and  Rihu. 

345.  alata-cakra-vat  : The  imagery  of  the  wheel  implies  a fixed 
centre  (medhibhutam  dhruvaih  divi,  ch.  57.9)  to  which  the  whole 
system  of  moving  stars  is  secured  by  certain  pulls,  spoken  of  as  winds. 
(vSta-raimibhib,  ibid,  V.  5;  Matsya  125.7;  vatinlkamayair  bandhaib.) 


224  Lingapurdna 

10.  The  diameter  of  the  sun  is  nine  thousand  Yojanas. 
Its  circular  area  is  three  times  this. 

1 1 . The  extent  of  the  moon  is  twice  that  of  the  Sun.  Rahu 
assumes  a size  equal  to  them  and  moves  ahead  beneath  them. 

12.  The  abode  of  Rahu  is  full  of  darkness  and  is  the  third 
(one  in  size)  because  it  is  evolved  out  of  the  circular  shadow 
of  the  earth. 

13.  The  diameter,  the  circumference  and  the  distance  in 
yojanas  of  Bhargava  (Venus)  is  a sixteenth  part  of  that  of 
the  moon. 

14-18.  Brhaspati  (Jupiter)  is  of  three-fourths  of  the  size 
of  Venus.  Mars  and  Saturn  are  three-fourths  of  the  size  of 
Brhaspati.  Budha  (Mercury)  is  three-fourths  of  their  size  in 
extent  and  circumference.  The  stars  and  constellations,  that 
have  a body  are  equal  to  Budha  in  extent  and  circumference. 
The  knower  of  truth  must  note  that  the  stars  that  are  in  conjun- 
ction with  the  moon  are  ordinarily  known  as  Rksas.  The  spheres 
of  the  comparatively  smaller  stars  extend  to  five,  four,  three  or 
two  yojanas.  Over  all  these  there  are  still  clusters  of  smaller 
stars  which  extend  only  to  two  hundred  yojanas.  There  is 
none  smaller  than  this. 

19-20.  Over  and  above  these  starry  spheres  are  the  three 
planets  viz.,  Saturn,  Jupiter  and  Mars,  which  travel  at  a great 
distance  from  them.  They  should  be  known  as  slow-moving 
ones. 

There  are  four  other  great  planets  beneath  them,  viz. 
the  Sun,  Moon,  Mercury  and  Venus.  They  traverse  quickly. 

21.  Altogether  there  are  as  many  crores  of  stars  as  there 
are  constellations.  They  too  are  stationed  in  the  orbit  of  con- 
stellations due  to  the  restraining  force  of  Dhruva, 

22-26.  The  sun  that  has  seven  horses  has  an  upper  and  a 
lower  position  by  turns.  When  the  sun  is  in  his  northern  transit 
and  when  the  moon  on  the  full  moon  nights,  appears  quickly 
because  its  position  is  above,  but  the  rays  are  not  very  clear, 
the  moon  (?)  then  is  in  the  southern  orbit  that  is  lower. 
The  sun  covered  by  the  line  of  the  earth  on  Full  moon  and 
New  Moon  days  is  seen  at  the  usual  time,  but  it  sets  quickly. 
Hence  on  the  New-Moon  day  the  moon  is  in  the  northern  orbit. 
It  is  invariably  not  seen  in  the  southern  path  on  account  of 


Movements  of  the  Planets  225 

the  movement  of  the  planets  and  because  it  is  enveloped  by 
the  shadow  of  the  sun.  On  the  equinotical  days  the  sun  and 
the  moon  rise  and  set  simultaneously.^^® 

27-28.  In  the  northern  orbits  they  rise  and  set  without 
any  difference  in  time  on  new  moon  and  full  moon  days.  They 
should  then  be  known  as  following  the  groups  of  luminaries. 
When  the  sun  is  in  the  southern  transit,  it  moves  ahead  beneath 
all  other  planets. 

29.  Keeping  his  sphere  wider  the  moon  revolves  above  it 
(the  sun) . All  the  groups  of  constellations  move  above  the  moon. 

30.  Mercury  is  above  all  constellations;  Venus  is  above 
Mercury.  Mars  is  above  Venus  and  Jupiter  is  above  Mars. 

31.  Saturn  is  above  it.  Above  Saturn  is  the  sphere  of 
seven  sages  (Great  Bear)  and  Dhruva(Polc  Star)  is  stationed 
above  the  seven  sages. 

32-39.  By  knowing  the  region  ofVisnu,  beyond  all  these, 
one  is  liberated  from  sin.  Two  hundred  thousand  Yojanas 
above  constellations,  stars,  the  planets — Sun  and  Moon  which  are 
united  with  divine  refulgence,  move  ahead  day  and  night  in 
due  order.  They  come  into  contact  with  the  constellations 
everyday.  Hence  they  are  sometimes  stationed  below,  some- 
times above  and  sometimes  in  u straight  line.  They  glance  at 
the  subjects  (below)  simultaneously  when  in  conjunction  or 
when  separated. 

There  are  six  seasons  but  of  five  distinct  features.  They 
overlap  one  another  and  their  combination  should  be  under- 
stood by  learned  men  without  overlapping.  O brahmins,  thus 
the  movement  of  planets  has  been  succinctly  mentioned  in 
the  case  of  the  sun  and  other  planets  as  I have  heard  and  obser- 
ved. The  thousand-rayed  lord  Sun  was  crowned  as  the  over- 
lord  of  planets  by  the  lotus-born  Brahma,  like  Guha  who  was 
crowned  by  Rudra. 

Hence,  for  the  realization  of  purpose  and  (to  ward  off 
evils)  at  the  time  of  harassment  of  the  planets  and  the  sun, 
the  worship  of  the  planets  should  be  pursued  by  good  men, 
Offerings  should  be  made  to  fire  in  accordance  with  the  in- 
junctions of  the  Sistras. 

346.  Gf.  Vi§nu,  cited  in  ST.  ^ I 


226 


LingapurS^a 


CHAPTER  FIFTYEIGHT 

Coronation  of  the  Sun  and  others 

The  sages  said  : 

1.  Tell  us  now  how  Brahma  Prajapati,  who  is  the  soul  of 
all,  crowned  as  overlords,  Devas,  Daityas  and  others. 

S&ta  said: 

2.  Lord  Brahma  crowned  the  Sun  as  the  overlord  of 
planets.  Brahma,  Prajapati,  crowned  Soma  (Moon)  as  the 
lord  of  constellations  and  medicinal  herbs. 

3.  (He  crowned)  Varuna  as  the  lord  of  the  Waters; 
the  leading  Yaksa*^^(Kubera)as  the  lord  of  riches;  Visnu  as 
the  lord  of  Adityas;  and  Pavaka  (fire)  as  the  lord  of  Vasus. 

4.  (He  crowned)  Dak$a  as  the  lord  of  Prajapatis;  Indra  as 
the  lord  of  Maruts;  Prahlada,  the  leading  Daitya  as  the  over- 
lord  of  Daityas  and  Danavas. 

5.  (He  crowned)  Dharma  as  the  overlord  of  the  Pitrs; 
Nirrti  as  the  overlord  of  Raksasas;  Rudra  as  the  overlord  of 
Pa^us  (Individual  Souls)  and  Nandin,  the  leader  ofGanas,®^® 
as  the  overlord  of  Bhutas  (goblins). 

6.  (He  crowned)  Virabhadra  as  the  overlord  of  heroes; 
Bhayahkara  (the  terrible  one)  as  the  overlord  of  Pisacas 
(ghosts) ; Camunda  who  is  bowed  to  by  Devas  as  the  sovereign 
of  Mothers. 

7.  (He  crowned)  lord  Nllalohita,  lord  of  the  chiefs  of 
Devas,  as  the  overlord  of  Rudras;  the  elephant-faced  lord 
Vinayaka,  born  of  Vyoman^*  as  the  overlord  of  obstacles. 

8.  (He  crowned ) goddess  Uma  as  the  sovereign  of  women; 
goddess  Sarasvati  as  the  sovereign  of  speech;  Visnu  as  the 
overlord  of  the  wielders  of  Maya  and  himself^®®  as  the  overlord 
of  the  worlds. 

9.  (He  crowned)  Himavat  as  the  overlord  of  the  moun- 
tains; the  Ganges  (born  of  sage  Jahnu)  as  the  sovereign  of  the 
rivers;  and  ocean  the  storehouse  of  the  waters  as  the  lord  of 
all  seas. 

347.  yak^a-piiAgavam  : chief  of  the  Yak^as,  i.e.  Kubera. 

3.^.  gaoa-o&yakam  : read  nandinam  gapa  for  nandin&iii  ga^a, 

349.  vyomajam  : son  of  Siva,  i.e.  Ga^eia. 

350.  sv&tm&nam  : his  own  self,  i.e.  Brahm&, 


Form  of  solar  rays 


227 


10-12.  Brahma  crowned  the  Plaksa  and  A^vattha  as  the 
lords  of  trees,*  he  made  Citraratha  the  lord  of  Gahdharvas, 
Vidyadharas  and  Kinnaras;  Vasuki  of  terrible  vigour  as  the 
lord  of  Serpents  and  Taksaka  of  terrible  vigour  as  the  lord  of 
Safpas  (Cobras).  He  made  the  leading  elephant  Airavata  of 
terrible  valour  the  lord  of  elephants.  He  made  Garuda  the  lord 
of  birds.  He  made  UccaiiS^ravas  (the  horse  of  Indra)  the  king 
of  horses. 

13.  He  made  the  lion  the  lord  of  animals;  the  bull  the  lord 
of  the  kine  and  Sarabha  (the  fabulous  eight-footed  beast)  the 
lord  of  lions;  the  incomprehensible  Guha  the  lord  of  all  com- 
manders-in-chief  and  Lakulisa  the  lord  of  Srutis  and  Smrtis. 

14.  He  made  Sudharman,  Sahkhapala,  Ketuman  and 
Hemaroman  the  overlords  of  all  quarters  in  order. 

15.  (He  crowned)  Prthu  as  the  lord  of  the  earth; 
Mahesvara  as  the  lord  of  all;  the  bull-bannered  omniscient 
lord  Sankara  as  the  overlord  among  the  four  deities. 

16.  By  the  grace  of  Siva,  the  lord  crowned  these  in  due 
order.  After  crowning  them  at  first  the  lord  of  the  worlds 
felt  fully  satisfied. 

17.  O leading  sages,  this  has  been  mentioned  to  you  in 
detail : These  persons  of  special  characteristics  were  all  crown- 
ed by  Lord  Brahma  the  source  of  origin  of  the  universe. 


CHAPTER  FIFTYNINE 

The  form  of  solar  rays 


Suta  said  : 

1,  On  hearing  this,  the  sages  became  overwhelmed  with 
doubts  and  again  asked  Romaharsana. 

351.  The  four  guardian  deities,  viz.  Sudharman,  Sahkhapala,  Ketu- 
man , Hemaroman  were  consecrated  in  their  respective  quarters.  Gf.  Vi?i>u 

I fsrcqfrirfr.- 1 f?«?crr 

II  cited  in  ST. 

352.  caturmurti^u  ; in  four  forms,  viz.  Visva,  Prajna,  Taijasa,  and 
Turiya. 


228 


Lingapurdr^ 


The  sages  said  : 

2.  O Suta,  most  excellent  among  the  speakers,  kindly  tell 
us  in  detail  the  exact  nature  of  the  luminaries  briefly. 

3.  On  hearing  their  words,  Suta  of  great  concentration 
and  purity  spoke  these  weighty  words  in  order  to  clear  their 
doubts. 

4.  In  this  matter  I shall  tell  you  what  has  already  been 
stated  by  highly  intelligent  persons^^^  with  tranquil  wisdom.  I 
shall  recount  the  movement  of  the  sun  and  the  moon. 

5.  I shall  tell  you  how  the  sun,  the  moon  and  other  planets 
arc  the  abodes  of  Devas.  Thereafter,  I shall  mention  the  three®^^ 
types  of  fires  and  their  origin. 

6-9.  The  three  types  of  fire  are  : the  divine  fire,  the  ele- 
mental fire  and  the  terrestrial  fire. 

When  the  night  of  Brahma  born  of  the  unmanifest  reached 
the  stage  of  dawn,  this  visible  universe  was  one  that  had  not  been 
analyzed.  It  was  still  enveloped  in  the  nocturnal  darkness. 
When  the  worlds  were  still  in  the  state  of  destruction,  when  a 
fourth  of  the  period  still  remained,  the  self-born  lord,  he  who 
achieves  all  the  affairs  of  the  worlds,  moved  about  like  a glow- 
worm, with  a desire  to  manifest.  At  the  beginning  of  the  world, 
he  created  Agni  (heat)  in  combination  with  earth  and  water. 
The  Lord  gathered  these  together  to  make  it  shine  and  then 
divided  it  into  three. 

10-11.  The  fire  in  the  world  of  mankind  is  called  Parthiva. 
The  fire  that  blazes  in  the  sun  is  called  iSuci.  The  fire  born  of 
lightning  is  known  as  Abja  (i.e.  originating  from  the  water 
portion).  I shall  now  mention  their  characteristics.  7'here  are 
three  types  of  fires  with  water  within,  viz.,  Vaidyuta,  Jathara 
(gastric)  and  Saura  (Solar). 

12-13.  Hence,  imbibing  water  through  his  rays  the  sun 
blazes  ( further) . The  Abja  (waterborn — lightning)  fire  even 
when  immersed  in  water  is  not  quenched  by  it.  The  fire  that  is 

333.  mah&pr&jnaih  : by  the  most  intelligent  men,  i.e.  by  Vyasa  and 
others. 

354.  Threefold  fire  : (i)  celestial,  as  rep]:esented  by  the  sun,  (ii) 
atmospheric,  as  s^mboUzed  by  the  lightning,  (iii)  terrestrial,  which  is 
used  for  the  sacrificial  and  household  purpose.  Fire  is  called  Pavaka  on 
earth,  Suci  in  heaven  and  Vaidyuta  in  firmament. 


Form  of  solar  rays 


229 


within  the  stomach  of  men  is  not  put  out  by  water.  The  gastric 
fire  emits  flames  (i.e.  heat) , but  is  devoid  of  lustre.®^ 

14-19.  When  the  sun  is  setting,  the  solar  lustre  becomes 
a circular  mass  without  heat  and  enters  the  fire  at  night  through 
his  rays.  Hence  the  light  of  fire  is  seen  even  from  a distance  at 
night.  The  heat  is  transmitted  to  the  sun  from  fire,  when  the 
sun  rises.  Only  partially  does  the  terrestrial  fire  enter  the  sun. 
Hence  the  fire  continues  to  blaze.  Thus  the  fire  element  in  both 
terrestrial  and  solar  fires  contains  heat  and  light.  They  penetrate 
mutually  and  develop  each  other.  In  the  northern  and  south- 
ern hemispheres  of  the  earth,  the  fire  and  the  sun  thus  develop 
each  other.  The  sun  rises  up  from  the  waters  and  re-enters  them. 
Therefore,  due  to  this  exit  (from  and  into  waters)  by  day  and  by 
night,  the  waters  become  copper-coloured.  Again  when  the  sun 
sets,  the  day  (i.e.  daylight)  enters  the  waters.  Hence  at  night, 
the  waters  are  seen  shining  white. 

20.  By  means  of  this  activity  he  enters  waters  perpetually, 
during  day  and  night  at  the  time  of  rising  and  setting  both  in 
the  southern  and  northern  hemispheres. 

21.  The  sun  who  blazes,  imbibing  the  waters  through  his 
rays  has  the  mixture  of  earthly  and  fiery  particles  within  it.  It 
is  called  divine  fire, 

22-23  This  fire  (i.e.  sun)  has  a thousand  feet  (i.e.  rays). 
It  is  like  a circular  pot.  It  takes  up  waters  from  various  water- 
resorts  through  the  thousand  tubular  rays.  It  takes  waters 
from  the  rivers,  seas,  wells,  clouds  etc.  It  takes  up  both  mobile 
and  immobile  w^aters  i.e.  those  of  the  canals  and  tanks. 

24-25.  He  has  a thousand  rays  emitting  snow,  rain  and 
heat.  Of  them  four  hundred  tubular  rays  have  forms  of  variegated 
colours.  They  shower  rain.  Their  collective  name  is  Amrta  and 
the  several  individual  names  are  Bhajanas,  Malyas,  Ketanas 
and  Patanas. 

26-2 7a.  The  tubular  rays  carrying  and  emitting  snow  are 
three  hundred  in  number.  The  several  names  of  these  rays 
emitting  snow  are  Re^as,  Meghas,  Vatsyas  and  Hladinis.  Their 
collective  name  is  Candrabha  and  they  are  yellow  in  lustre. 


355.  Fire  on  earth  is  the  symbol  of  heat  and  fire  in  heaven  is  the  symbol 
of  light  and  both  are  interdependent.  Cf.  Matsya.  128.12.  STT^W  ^ 


II 


230 


Lingapura^ 


27b-28a.  Suklalt^,  Kakubhah  and  Viivabhrt  are  the  indivi- 
dual names  of  the  rays  emitting  heat;  their  collective  name 
is  also  Sukla. 

2db-29.  The  moon  sustains  human  beings^  Pitrs  and  Devas 
through  them  ( the  above  rays) 

He  propitiates  human  beings  through  the  medicinal  herbs ; 
the  Pitrs  with  Svadha  and  Devas  through  nectar. 

30-3 la.  During  spring  and  summer  the  sun  blazes  by  his 
three  hundred  rays.  During  the  rainy  season  and  Autumn  he 
showers  rains  through  the  four  hundred  tubular  rays.  During 
the  early  and  the  late  winter  he  discharges  snow  through  his 
three  hundred  rays. 

31b-35a.  The  twelve  suns  are  Indra,  Dhatr,  Bhaga,  Pusan, 
Mitra  , Varuna,  Aryaman,  Am4u,  Vivasvan,  Tvastr,  Parjanya 
and  Vi$]^u. 

Varu^a  is  the  sun  in  M^ha;  Pu^an  in  the  Phalguna.  In 
the  month  of  Caitra,  Am^u  is  the  sun.  Dhatf  is  the  sun  in 
Vail^akha,  In  Jye§tha  Indra  is  the  sun.  In  Asa^ha,  the  sun  is 
Aryaman.  Vivasvan  is  the  sun  in  Sravana.  In  Bhadra  the  sun 
is  Bhaga.  Parjanya  is  the  sun  in  Asvina.  Tvastr  is  the  sun  in 
Karttika.  In  Margasir^a  Mitra  is  the  sun  and  Visnu  is  the  sun 
in  Pau^a. 

35b-38.  While  performing  the  duty  of  the  sun,  Varuna  has 
five  thousand  rays;  Pu§an  six  thousand  rays;  Am^u  seven 
thousand  rays;  Dhatr  eight  thousand  rays;  Indra  nine  thousand 
rays;  Vivasvan  ten  thousand  rays;  Bhaga  eleven  thousand  rays; 
Mitra  seven  thousand  rays;  Tvartr  eight  thousand  rays;  Arya- 
man ten  thousand  rays;  Parjanya  nine  thousand  rays;  Vi§nu 
scorches  the  earth  with  six  thousand  rays. 

39-40.  In  the  spring  the  sun  is  tawny  coloured;  in  the 
summer  he  has  the  lustre  of  gold.  During  the  rainy  season  the 
colour  of  the  sun  is  white.  In  the  autumn  the  sun  is  grey- 
coloured.  In  the  early  winter  the  sun  is  copper-coloured  and  in 
the  late  winter  he  is  red  in  colour. 

356.  The  numerous  solar  rays  have  their  functional  division.  For 
instance,  four  hundred  of  them  funcdon  for  creating  rain  (V.24-36),  three 
hundred  for  heat  (V.a8)  and  three  hundred  for  cold  ^V.26).  These  rays 
are  distributed  over  the  seasons  and  bring  about  the  changes  of  cold, 
heat  and  rain. 


Solar  Sphere 


231 


41-45.  The  sun  infuses  strength  into  the  medicinal  herbs; 
he  propitiates  the  Pitrs  by  means  of  Svadha  rays;  he  instils 
nectar  into  the  immortal  beings.  Thus,  he  imparts  three  things 
to  the  three  groups. 

The  thousand  rays  of  the  sun  serve  the  purpose  of  the  world. 
Reaching  the  earth  they  assume  different  forms  by  emitting 
snow,  rain  and  heat.  Thus  the  sphere  of  the  sun  is  white  and 
is  named  after  him.  He  is  the  support  and  source  of  origin  of 
the  stars,  planets  and  the  moon. 

It  should  be  known  that  the  moon,  stars  and  planets  are  all 
born  of  the  sun.  The  moon  is  the  lord  of  constellations  and  the 
left  eye  of  the  lord.  The  right  eye  of  the  lord  is  the  sun  himself. 
The  word  nayana  (eye)  is  derived  from  -y/ni — “that  which  leads 
(nayati)  the  people  to  this  world.” 


CHAPTER  SIXTY 

The  Solar  Sphere 


Suta  said: 

1.  It  is  cited^^’  that  the  sun  is  fire  and  the  moon  is  water. 
The  other  five  planets  are  known  as  lords  who  move  about  as 
they  please. 

2.  Understand  the  source  of  origin  of  the  remaining  planets 
which  is  clearly  being  recounted  now.  It  is  cited  that  the  planet 
Mars  is  Skanda  (Karttikeya)  the  commander-in-chief  of  the 
army  of  Devas. 

3-5.  People  of  perfect  knowledge  say  that  Mercury  is  lord 
Narayana.  O excellent  brahmins,  the  great  planet  Sanaiicara, 
the  slow-moving  Saturn  is  Yama,  the  lord  of  the  worlds.  The 
preceptors  of  Devas  and  Asuras  are  the  great  planets  Venus 
and  Jupiter  with  (refulgent)  rays.  They  are  mentioned  as  the 
sons  of  Prajapati.®^® 

357.  For  the  celestial  fire  as  identical  with  the  sun,  cf.  SpT  ^ 
ted  in  ST. 

and  Brhaspati  (Jupiter) , the  preceptors  of  DSna- 
vas  and  Devas  are  respectively  the  sons  of  patriarchs  Bhfgu  and  Ahgiras. 


358.  Sukra  (Venus 


232  Lingapur^ 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  three  worlds  have  their  source 
in  the  sun. 

6-8.  The  entire  universe  including  Devas,  Asuras  and 
human  beings  originates  from  him.  He  is  the  lustre  of  all  lumi- 
naries and  the  universal  refulgence.  The  refulgence  of  Rudra, 
Indra,  Upendra,  the  moon,  the  leading  brahmins,  the  fire  and 
the  heaven-dwellers  comes  from  the  sun.  He  is  the  soul  of 
all.  He  is  the  lord  of  all  worlds.  He  alone  is  Mahadeva,  PrajS- 
pati  and  the  lord  of  the  three  worlds.  He  is  the  originai  great 
deity.  Everything  originates  from  him  and  dissolves  in  him. 

9.  The  existence  and  non-existence  of  the  worlds  origi- 
nated from  the  sun  formerly.  O brahmins,  this  refulgent  sun 
of  great  lustre  is  an  incomprehensible  planet. 

10-11.  All  these  units  of  time  begin  from  him  and  end  in 
him  again  and  again,  viz.,  k§anas  (moments),  muhurtas  . a unit 
of  48  mts.),  days,  nights,  fortnights,  months,  years,  seasons  and 
yugas.  Hence  without  the  sun  there  is  no  reckoning  of  time. 

12-15.  Without  Kaia  (time)  there  is  no  order,  no  initia- 
tion, no  daily  ritual.  How  can  there  be  the  division  of  the  sea- 
sons ? Whence  afe  these  flowers,  roots  and  fruits  ? Whence  is 
the  outcome  of  plants  ? How  can  there  be  the  different  kinds 
of  grass  and  medicinal  plants  ? The  dealings  of  the  creatures  in 
heaven  and  here  too  will  be  non-existent  without  the  sun  who  is 
the  form  of  Rudra,  the  scorcher  of  the  universe.  He  alone  is 
time,  fire,  Dvadasatman  (one  having  twelve  forms)  and  Praja- 
pati.  O excellent  brahmins,  he  scorches  the  three  worlds  includ- 
ing the  mobile  and  immobile  beings.  He  is  the  mine  of  splend- 
our. He  is  all  in  all,  the  whole  set  of  worlds. 

16.  Adopting  the  excellent  path,  he  scorches  the  entire 
universe  from  the  sides,  from  above  and  from  below  in  the 
course  of  nights  and  days. 

17.  If  a bright  lamp  is  hung  in  the  middle  of  the  house, 
it  dispels  darkness  from  the  sides,  the  portion  above  and  the 
portion  below,  at  the  same  time. 

18.  In  the  same  manner  the  thousand-rayed  sun,  the  king  of 
planets,  the  lord  of  the*universe,  illuminates  the  entire  universe 
by  means  of  his  rays. 

19.  Seven  rays,  that  are  the  source  of  origin  of  the  planets 


SiUtation  of  Uie  planets  233 

are  the  most  excellent  ones  among  the  thousand  rays  mention- 
ed by  me  before.*** 

20-21.  They  are  Su^umna,  HarikeSa^  VKvakarman,  ViiSva- 
vyacas,  Sannaddha,  Sarvavasu  and  Svarat* 

The  sun’s  ray  Susumna  makes  the  southern  region  flour- 
ish.**® Su§umna  is  glorified  as  the  ray  that  moves  about  above, 
below  and  on  the  sides. 

22-26.  Harike^a  which  is  in  front  (in  the  cast)  is  glorified 
as  the  source  of  origin  of  constellations.**®®  In  the  south,  the  ray 
Vi^vakarma  develops  Budha  (Mercury) . The  ray  Vi§vavyacas 
which  is  in  the  west  (behind)  is  the  source  of  origin  of  Sukra 
(Venus).  The  ray  Sannaddha  is  the  source  of  origin  of  Mars. 
The  ray  Sarvavasu  is  the  source  of  origin  of  Brhaspati  (Jupiter). 
The  ray  Svarat  nourishes  !§anai^cara  (Saturn) . Thus  it  is  due  to 
the  power  of  the  sun  that  the  constellations,  planets  and  stars 
are  seen  in  the  heaven.  This  entire  universe  is  sustained  by  him. 
The  constellations  are  called  Nak^atras.  The  word  is  derived 
from  -^/ksi  with  the  prohibitive  particle  ‘na’  i.c.  na  k^lyante 
(i.c.  those  which  do  not  perish). 


CHAPTER  SIXTYONE 

The  situation  of  the  planets 

1-2.  All  these  are  the  abodes  which  blaze  by  means  of 
solar  rays.  The  constellations  and  stars  are  the  abodes  to  be 
attained  by  merits.  They  arc  called  Tarakas  because  they 
enable  people  to  cross  the  ocean  of  worldly  existence  and 
also  because  they  arc  white. 

3.  The  sun  is  called  Aditya  because  he  takes  up  the  divine 
and  terrestrial  splendours  as  well  as  the  nocturnal  darkness. 

359.  The  principal  seven  rays,  Susumna  etc.,  of  the  thousand-rayed 
tun  are  the  source  of  energy  and  movement  of  stars,  planets  and  constella- 
tions. For  instance,  the  solar  ray,  called  Susumna,  causes  the  movement  of 
the  moon. 

360.  dakfi^Sm  rfilim  i.e.  the  moon.  The  LiAgapur^a  describes  vividly 
the  respective  fimedons  of  the  seven  solar  rays. 

360a.  Each  planet  or  star  has  its  respeedve  sphere  (deva-sth&na)  in 
which  its  influence  reigns  supreme.  These  spheres  are  established  by  the 
Creator  in  the  beginning  of  a kalpa  and  they  last  dll  the  dissoludon  of  that 
kalpa. 


234 


4.  The  root  is  used  in  two  meanings  to  extract  juice 
or  to  flow.  Since  the  sun  extracts  refulgence  and  makes  water 
flow»  it  is  called  Savitr. 

5.  The  root  *cadi’  from  which  the  word  Gandra  is  derived 
means  *to  delight’.  It  implies  whiteness,  chillness,  and  nectarine 
nature  of  the  moon  (Gandra). 

6.  The  divine  discs  of  the  sun  and  the  moon  are  refulgent. 
They  move  in  the  sky.  They  are  white  and  arc  of  the  nature  of 
fire  and  water.  They  arc  splendid  and  they  resemble  a circular 
pot. 

7.  The  disc  of  the  moon  is  of  the  nature  of  dense  water. 
The  disc  of  the  sun  is  white  and  is  of  the  nature  of  dense  fire. 

8.  Devas  reside  in  constellations,  sun  and  planets.  They 
live  everywhere  in  these  abodes  in  all  the  manvantaras. 

9.  Hence  the  planets  arc  abodes  named  after  their  respec- 
tive planets.  The  Sun  entered  the  abode  Saura.  The  Moon 
entered  the  abode  Saumya. 

10.  Venus  entered  the  abode  Saukra.  Jupiter,  the  valorous^ 
with  sixteen  rays  entered  the  abode  Bfhad  (big).  The  Mars 
entered  the  abode  Lohita  pertaining  to  Mars. 

11.  The  Saturn  entered  the  abode  Sanai^cara.  The  Mer- 
cury entered  the  abode  Baudha.  The  evil  planet  Rahu  entered 
the  abode  Svarbhwu  (named  after  him) . 

12.  The  deities  of  constellations  entered  all  these  abodes. 
These  luminaries  are  the  abodes  of  meritorious  souls. 

13.  These  abodes  have  been  created  by  the  self  born  deity. 
They  began  to  function  at  the  beginning  of  kalpa  and  they 
stay  until  all  the  living  beings  are  dissolved. 

14.  In  all  the  manvantaras  they  alone  are  the  abodes  of 
Devas.  These  deities  who  have  identified  themselves  with  the 
abodes  occupy  these  divine  abodes  again  and  again. 

15-20.  They  occupy  these  abodes  along  with  Devas  of  the 
past,  present  and  future.  In  this  current  manvantara  the 
planets  are  moving  about  in  aerial  chariots. 

In  the  Vaivasvata  manvantara  the  sun  is  Vivasvw  the  son 
ofAditi;  the  lustrous  lord  Moon  the  son  of  sage  Atri;  lord 
3ukra,  Bhargava,  is  known  as  the  priest  of  Asuras. 

The  preceptor  of  Devas,  the  shining  one  of  massive  splen-  . 
dour,  is  the  son  of  Angiras  (Brhaspati).  Budha  (Mercury)  is 


Siiuaim  0f  thi  planets  235 

the  charming  son  of  a sage.  Saturn  is  the  ugly  son  of  Vivasvan 
born  of  Samjfta.  Agni  was  born  of  Vikesi®*'  as  the  youthful  son 
of  Lohitirchis.  The  constellations  named  Nak^itra  and 
are  Dak^aya^is  (daughters  of  Dak$a).  Rahu  is  the  son  of 
Simhika.  He  is  an  Asura  causing  distress  to  living  beings. 

21.  Thus  the  constellations  and  planets  in  the  sim  and  the 
moon  as  also  their  abodes  and  the  various  deities  occupying 
them  have  all  been  mentioned. 

22.  The  fiery  abode  Saura  belongs  to  the  thousand-rayed 
Vivasvan.  The  abode  of  the  snow-rayed  moon  is  watery  and 
white. 

23.  The  abode  of  Budha  (mercury)  is  watery,  dark- 
coloured  and  charming.  The  region  of  Sukra  (Venus)  is  also 
watery  but  white  with  sixteen  rays. 

24.  The  abode  of  Bhauma  (Mars)  is  reddish  and  it  has 
nine  rays.  The  abode  of  Bfhaspati  (Jupiter)  is  yellow  with 
sixteen  rays  and  is  very  large. 

25.  The  abode  Sani  (Saturn)  is  black  with  eight  rays.  The 
abode  of  Svarbhanu  (Rahu)  is  gloomy  and  is  a place  of  great 
distress  to  living  beings. 

26.  All  the  stars  should  be  known  as  the  abodes  of  sages 
with  one  ray  each.  They  arc  the  resorts  of  men  of  meritorious 
renown  and  are  white  in  colour. 

27.  They  are  of  the  nature  of  dense  water  (snow).  They 
were  created  in  the  beginning  of  the  kalpa.  Thanks  to  the 
contact  with  the  rays  of  the  sun  they  have  a shining  appear- 
ance. 

28.  The  diameter  of  the  sun  is  nine  thousand  yojanas. 
The  extent  of  its  circular  surface  is  three  times  that. 

29.  The  extent  of  the  moon  is  twice  that  of  the  sun.  Rfihu 
assumes  a form  equal  to  both  of  them  and  moves  about  beneath 
them. 

30*  The  third  massive  abode  of  Rahu  is  dark  and  dreary. 
It  is  created  in  the  form  of  a circle  out  of  the  shadow  of  the 
earth. 

361.  Vikeil*:  The  graha  Bhauma  (Mahgala)  bom  of  Vikeilis  here 
called  agni  (fire).  Gf.  agnir  niardba{RV.  8.44.16)  wherein  Bhauma  if  called 
agni.  Vikel!  it  one  of  the  eigdit  wivci  of  the  eight-fixrmed  (aftamurti) 
Rudra,  others  becali,  Svavarcalft 'Um&,  Sivi,  SvShft,  Dik,  Dikfft  and 
Rohinl. 


236 


LxAgapurSi^ 


31-3  2a.  Setting  out  from  the  sun  during  the  parvan  days 
it  goes  to  the  moon.®®*  Again  during  the  solar  parvan  days  it 
goes  to  the  sun  from  the  moon.  Since  Rahu  pushes  and  prompts 
the  sun  in  the  heaven  it  is  called  Svarbhanu. 

32b-33.  The  diameter,  circumference  and  distance  in  terms 
of  yojanas  of  Venus  is  a sixteenth  part  of  that  of  the  moon. 
Jupiter  is  three-fourths  of  the  size  of  Venus. 

34.  Mars  and  Saturn  are  a fourth  less  than  Jupiter.  In 
extent  and  width  Mercury  is  a fourth  less  than  these  two. 

35.  The  forms  of  those  constellations  and  stars  that  are 
embodied  are  equal  to  Mercury  in  width  and  circular  area. 

36-39.  The  constellations  that  are  in  conjunction  with  the 
moon  are  ordinarily  known  as  Rksas.  The  spheres  of  the  com- 
paratively smaller  stars  are  five,  four,  three  or  two  yojanas. 
Over  all  these  there  are  clusters  of  still  smaller  stars  which  extend 
to  only  half  a yojana  in  width.  There  is  none  smaller  than  this. 
Over  and  above  these  starry  spheres  are  the  three  planets  which 
move  at  a great  distance  from  them.  They  should  be  known 
as  slow  moving  ones.  The  speed  of  these  has  already  been 
mentioned  in  due  order. 

40-45.  All  the  planets  are  born  of  constellations.  O excellent 
sages,  the  sun,  the  son  of  Aditi,  the  first  among  the  planets,  is 
born  of  the  constellation  Vi^akha.  The  lustrous  son  of  Dharma, 
lord  Vasu,  Soma  (moon) , the  cool-rayed  lord  of  the  night,  is 
born  of  the  constellation  Krttika.  The  sixteen-rayed  son  of 
Bhrgu,  Sukra  (Venus)  who  is  the  most  excellent  among  the 
stars  and  planets  after  the  sun,  is  born  of  the  constellation 
Tisya.  The  planet  Brhaspati  (Jupiter) , the  twelve-rayed  son  of 
Angiras,  the  preceptor  of  the  universe,  is  born  of  the  cons- 
tellation Purvaphalguni. 

The  planet  (Mars)  son  of  Prajapati,  the  nine-rayed  red 
bodied  planet  is  born  of  the  constellation  Purvasadha. 

The  son  of  sun,  the  seven-rayed  Saturn,  was  born  of  the 
constellation  Revati. 

46-47.  The  five-rayed  planet  Budha  (Mercury)  the  son  of 
the  moon  is  born  of  the  constellation  Dhanistha. 

Sikhi  (Kctu)  the  great  planet  that  destroys  all,  who  is  dark 
in  nature,  who  is  the  son  of  Mrtyu  the  god  of  Death  and  who  is 

362.  Read  Somam  for  samaxn. 


Situation  of  the  planets 


237 


the  cause  of  destruction  of  the  subjects^  is  born  of  the  constel- 
lation Asle^i.  Dak^a’s  daughters  were  bom  of  the  comtellations 
which  have  their  own  names. 

48.  Dark-sphered  Rahu  who  is  full  of  Tamasaic  vigour, 
is  the  planet  that  suppresses  the  moon  and  the  sun.  He  is  born 
of  the  constellation  Bharani 

49-50.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  planets  beginning  with 
Bhargava  (Venus)  are  known  as  star-planets  (i.e  planets  re- 
sembling stars).  Persons  who  are  affected  by  afflictions  from  their 
birthday  stars  are  liberated  from  that  defect  by  devotion  to  their 
respective  planets.  Ainong  all  the  planets  the  first  one,  it  is  said, 
is  Aditya  (Sun). 

51  54:  Among  all  the  star-planets  Sukra  is  the  first.  Among 
all  the  Ketus  (flaglike  Meteors)  the  smoky  one  is  the  first.  (It 
is  usually  called  Dhumaketu) . Dhruva  is  the  first  among  the 
planets  distributed  in  all  the  four  quarters.  Among  /cons- 
tellations the  first  is  Sravi^ha**®.  Among  the  Ayanas  (transits) 
the  Uttaraya^  (northern  transit)  is  the  fint.  Among  the  five*** 
years  the  first  is  Sazhvatsara.  Among  the  seasons  it  is  the  late 
winter  (iSiSira) . Among  the  months  it  is  Magha.  Among  the 
fortnights  it  is  the  bright  half  and  among  Tithis  it  is  Pratipat 
(first  day).  Among  the  division  of  days  and  nights,  the  day  is 
the  first.  The  first  of  the  muhurtas  is  that  the  deity  of  which 
is  Rudra. 

55-58.  K^atia  has  the  nimesa  as  its  first  unit  of  tkoe,  O 
excellent  ones  among  the  knowers  of  time.  Beginning  with  the 
constellation  Dhanistha  and  ending  with  Srava^a  shall  be  a 
yuga  comprising  of  five  years.  The  universe  whirls  like  a wheel 
due  to  the  movement  of  the  sun.  Hence  the  sun  is  the  lord  and 
deity  delimiting  time.  He  is  the  instigator  and  castigator  of  tha 
four  types  of  living  beings.  Rudra,  the  lord  himself,  is  the  inducer 


363.  Sraviftha^DhaniftM. 

364.  A group  of  five  yean  constitutei  a yuga  which  should  not  be 
confused  with  the  cycle  of  four  yugas.  This  five-yearly  cycle  laming  a 
yuga  corresponds  to  the  Vedic  doctrine  of  paftca-devati  or  five  deities 
who  have  entered  the  Purusa.  Cf.  TB  i. 4.^0. i.  The  five  yean  with  their 
presiding  deities  are  named  (i)  saihvatsara — agni;  (ii)  parivatsara— fiirya; 
(iii)  i^ivatsara-aoma;  (iv)  anuvatsara--vhyu;  (v)  vatiarar-rudra.  Of. 
Klhtsya.  141. 


238  LiAgapur&(^ 

of  that  sun’^.  Thus  specific  and  fixed  establishment  of  the 
luminaries  and  planets  has  been  evolved  by  the  great  lord  for 
the  working  of  the  world. 

59*63.  It  has  been  made  to  function  intelligently  by  the 
lord  at  the  beginning  of  the  kalpa.  The  lord  is  the  support  of 
all  luminaries  and  he  identifies  himself  with  them.  This  is  a 
wonderful  phenomenon  that  is  caused  by  the  unique  Pradhana 
and  is  incomprehensible.  The  movement  of  the  luminaries  can* 
not  be  understood  by  the  man  with  his  physical  eye.  It  can  be 
understood  by  the  learned  man  only  through  Vedic  treatises,  by 
inference  and  direct  perception,  by  cogent  arrangements  and 
careful  analysis  in  his  mind. 

O excellent  sages,  the  causes  for  the  decision  in  regard  to 
the  validity  concerning  the  luminaries  are  five  viz  : — the  eye, 
scripture,  water,  the  written  document  and  calculation. 


CHAPTER  SIXTYTWO 

Situation  of  Dhruua 


Sages  said : 

1 . O foremost  among  the  intelligent,  it  behoves  you  now  to 
recount  how,  due  to  the  grace  of  Visnu,  Dhruva  became  the 
central  pivot  of  the  planets,*** 

S&ta  said  : 

2.  O brahmins,  when  he  was  asked  about  this  matter  by 
me  in  former  time,  Markaiitjieya  who  is  an  expert  in  different 
sciences  said  to  me  as  I was  desirous  of  hearing. 

Mgrk€mi4^ya  said  : 

3.  An  emperor  of  great  splendour,  the  best  among  all  those 
who  wield  weapons,  king  Uttanapada,  ruled  over  the  earth. 

365.  For  Rudra  as  the  life-principle  of  the  sun  compare  : *bh!yodeti 
«{lryab***-^ted  in  ST. 

3j66,  The  Sdta  narrates  the  legend  of  Dhruva,  son  of  UttSnapSda 
and  Sunlti,  how  Dhruva  became  the  pole  star,  the  pivot  of  the  s<dar 
system.  Here,  the  astronomical  phenomenon  is  sought  to  be  explained 
on  the  basis  of  a legend. 


SituaAcn  qf  Dhrma 


239 


4»5.  He  had  two  wives,  Suniti  and  Suruci.  A highly  intelli- 
gent son  of  great  renown,  named  Dhruva  was  bom  of  Suniti 
the  elder  wife.  He  had  great  understanding  and  was  the  light 
of  the  family.  When  he  was  seven  years  old,  once  he  sat  in  the 
lap  of  his  father. 

6.  O leading  brahmins,  Suruci  who  was  proud  of  her 
beauty  pushed  him  away.  Delighted  in  her  mind  she  placed 
her  own  son  on  the  lap  of  his  father. 

7.  The  intelligent  boy  Dhruva  became  dejected  in  his  mind 
because  he  was  unable  to  occupy  the  lap  of  his  father.  He  went 
to  his  mother  and  lamented. 

8.  Overwhelmed  by  her  grief  the  mother  said  to  her  weep- 
ing son  : — “Sumci  is  the  most  beloved  of  her  husband.  Her 
son  too  is  likewise. 

9.  You,  a son  bom  of  me,  a very  unfortunate  woman,  arc 
also  equally  unfortunate.  Why  do  you  bewail  ? What  for  do 
you  weep  again  and  again  ? 

10.  If  you  are  distressed  in  heart  you  will  increase  my 
sorrow.  My  dear  son,  you  shall  by  your  own  power  attain  a 
more  comfortable  and  stable  abode.’’ 

11-12.  On  being  advised  thus  by  his  mother  he  set  out 
towards  the  forest.  On  meeting  Vilv^itra,  he  bowed  to  him 
duly  and  spoke  with  his  palms  joined  in  reverence: — 

^*0  holy  sir,  foremost  among  the  pious  sages,  it  behoves  you 
to  tell  me  how  I shall  obtain  a place  above  everyone. 

13.  O sage,  I was  seated  on  the  lap  of  my  father.  My 
step-mother  Suruci  pushed  me  aside.  My  father,  the  king,  did 
not  protest. 

14-16.  For  this  very  reason,  O brahmin,  I went  to  my 
mother  in  fright.  My  mother  said  to  me  : — son,  do  not  be 
sorry.  You  deserve  to  attain  a far  greater  abode  by  your  own 
endeavour”.  On  hearing  her  words,  O great  sage,  I have  come 
to  you  for  shelter  in  this  forest.  O holy  sir,  O brahmin,  I have 
now  met  you.  By  your  grace  I shall  attain  the  wonderful  and 
excellent  abode. 

17-18.  On  being  requested  thus,  the  glorious  sage  said 
laughingly  *^0  Prince,  listen  to  this.  You  will  attain  an  excel- 
lent abode  by  propitiating  Ke^ava  the  lord  of  the  worl<b,  and 


the  destroyer  of  dbtress.  He  is  born  of  the  right  limb  of 
6iva  the  intelligent  great  lord.**^ 

19.  O highly  intelligent  one,  repeat  the  Mantra  of  the 
lord  continuously.  It  is  great,  pure  and  holy,  it  destroys  all  sins 
and  yields  all  desires. 

20.  Repeat  this  divine  Mantra  controlling  your  sense,  with 
the  Prai^ava  : — '^Namostu  Vwudevaya**  [Obeisance  be  to  Vasu- 
deva].  Meditate  on  the  eternal  Vi^pu.  Be  interested  in  japa  and 
homa. 

21-24.  On  being  advised  thus,  the  boy  of  great  renown 
bowed  to  Vi^vamitra  and  began  his  japa  facing  the  east  He 
restrained  himself  and  was  delighted  in  his  mind.  Alertfully 
he  repeated  the  mantra  continuously  without  break  for  a year, 
sustaining  himself  on  vegetables,  roots  and  fruits.  Terrible 
vampires  and  demons,  large  fierce  beasts  like  lions  rushed  at  him 
in  order  to  tonfound  his  wits.  But,  repeating  the  name  Vasu- 
deva  he  did  not  take  notice  of  anything  else. 

25.  A female  ghost  assuming  the  form  of  his  mother  Suniti 
came  pear  him  and  wept  bitterly  and  miserably. 

26-27.  “O  you  are  my  only  son.  Why  do  you  torture  your- 
self ? Leaving  me  helpless,  you  have  taken  to  penance”. 

The  boy  continued  his  great  penance  and  did  not  even 
glance  at  the  lady  who  spoke  thus.  With  delight  in  his 
heart  he  repeated  the  name  Hari. 

28-29.  Then  all  the  forms  of  impediment  and  harassment 
subsided  from  ail  sides.  Seated  on  Garuda  lord  Visnu  who 
resembled  the  black  cloud  in  lustre,  who  is  the  destroyer  of 
enemies,  who  was  surrounded  by  Devas  and  who  was  being 
eulogised  by  great  sages,  came  there  before  Dhruva. 

30-31.  On  seeing  the  lord  come  near,  he  simply  thought 
within  his  mind  *‘who  is  this  ?”  Drinking  as  it  were  Hr|ike^ 
the  lord  of  the  Universe,  by  his  eyes  the  boy  of  great  lustre, 
seated  himself  and  repeated  ^^Vasudeva”.  With  the  tip  of  his 
conch  the  lord  touched  his  face. 

32.  Thereupon  he  attained  the  highest  knowledge.  With  his 
palms  joined  in  reverence  he  eulogised  the  lord  the  most 
excellent  of  all  divine  beings. 

367.  is  born  of  the  light  side  of  Siva,  while  Brahin&  is  bom 

of  the  left. 


Origin  of  Devos  and  others  241 

33.  Be  favourable,  O lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas,  O wielder 
of  conch,  discus  and  iron  club  ! O soul  of  the  worlds  ! O soul 
of  all,  O soul  of  all  secrets  of  the  Vedas,  O Keiiava,  I 
have  sought  refuge  in  you. 

34.  Even  the  great  sages  Sanaka  and  others  have  not  com* 
prehended  you,  the  great  Atman.  Then  how  can  I know  you  ? 
O lord  of  the  worlds,  obeisance  to  you. 

35.  Then  Visnu  said  to  him  smiling  : — dear  one,  come 
on.  You  are  Dhruva  (steady).  Attaining  a fixed  and  steady 
abode  be  the  first  among  all  luminaries. 

36.  You  along  with  your  mother  shall  attain  the  abode  of 
luminaries.  This  abode  is  mine,  the  greatest,  the  steady  splen- 
did abode. 

37-38.  It  was  acquired  by  me  from  lord  Siva  formerly 
after  propitiating  him  by  penance.  The  devotee  who  repeats 
continuously  the  name  Vasudeva  along  with  the  Pranava  ‘om* 
the  word  ‘Bhagavat’  and  the  word  ‘namas*  denoting  obeisance 
attains  the  fixed  abode  of  Dhruva.” 

39-42.  Then  all  Devas,  Siddhas,  sages  and  Gan- 
dharvas  installed  Dhruva  in  that  abode  along  with  his  mother. 
Thus,  at  the  behest  of  Visnu  he  attained  the  abode  of  lumi- 
naries. By  means  of  the  twelve-syllabled  mantra®*®,  Dhruva  of 
great  splendour  attained  the  highest  perfection. 

Suta  said: 

Hence,  the  man  who  makes  obeisance  to  Vasudeva  attains  the 
world  of  Dhruva  and  achieves  steadiness. 


CHAPTER  SIXTYTHREE 


Origin  of  Devas  and  others 


The  sages  said: 

1.  O Suta,  recount  the  origin  of  Devas,  Danavas,  Gan- 
dharvas.  Serpents  and  Rak^asas,  in  an  excellent  way  and  in  due 
order. 

36d.  The  twelve-syllabled  mantra  of  Vifvu  is  : Oih  namo  bhagavate 
Vftsudev&ya. 


242 


LiAgajmrS^ 


SUla  said  : 

2.  The  creation  of  ancient  people  was  by  means  of  mental 
conception,  direct  perception  or  touch.  Subsequent  to  Dak$a 
the  son  of  Pracetas,  creation  is  by  means  of  sexual  intercourse. 

3-6.  When  he  began  to  create  the  group  of  Devas,  sages 
and  serpents,  the  world  did  not  increase.  Thereupon,  by 
means  of  sexual  intercourse,  Dak^a  begot  of  Siiti,  five  thousand 
sons. 

On  seeing  those  blessed  ones  who  were  desirous  of  creating 
different  kinds  of  progeny,  Nfirada  spbke  to  Haryaivas,  the 
sons  of  Dak^a  who  had  assembled  together. 

“Understand  the  extent  of  the  earth***  from  above  and 
below,  O excellent  sages,  and  then  proceed  ahead  with  your 
special  creation.” 

On  hearing  his  words  they  went  away  in  all  directions. 

7-10.  Even  today  they  have  not  returned  like  the  rivers 
after  joining  the  ocean. 

When  Haryaivas  vanishr.d,  lord  Daki^a  Prajapati  begot  of 
Sfiti  herself  another  thousand  sons.  O brahmins,  they  were 
named  iSabalas  and  they  assembled  together  for  the  purpose  of 
creation. 

N&rada  spoke  to  those  persons  of  solar  splendour,  who  had 
assembled  before  him — “You  should  proceed  with  your  special 
creation  after  understanding  the  full  extent  of  the  earth,  or  on 
return  after  finding  out  what  has  happened  to  your  brothers. 

They  too  followed  their  brothers  and  attained  the  same 
goal  as  their  brothers  before. 

1 1 When  they  too  vanished  the  Prajapati  Dak§a  the  son 
of  Pracetas,  begot  sixty  daughters  ofViri^I. 

12-15.  He  gave  ten  of  them  in  marriage  to  Dharma,  thir- 
teen to  Ka£yapa,  twentyseven  to  the  moon,  four  to  Aristanemi, 
two  to  the  son  of  Bhrgu,  two  to  the  intelligent  Kf^aiva  and  two 
to  Afigiras.  Now  listen  to  the  names  of  the  mothers  of  Devas 
and  the  details  of  their  progeny  from  the  very  beginning. 

The  ten  wives  of  Dharma  were  : — Marutvati,  Vasfi^ 

369.  or  after  knowing  the  extent  of  the  field  (i.e.  the  subtle  body) 
as  also  its  capacity  for  creating  the  living  beings.  ST.  cites  Bhftga.  in 
*aKwrtoftlii.iiittcpretMion:  I 


Origin  qf  Deoas  and  others 


243 


Yami»  Lamba,  Bhanu,  Arundbat!,  Sabkalpa,  Muhurta,  Sadhya 
and  Vi^va. 

1 shall  tell  you  the  names  of  their  sons. 

16-20a.  The  ViSvedevas  were  bom  to  Vi5va.  Sadhya 
bore  the  Sadhyas.  Marutvats  were  bom  of  Marutvad.  Vasus 
were  bom  of  Vasu.  The  Bhanus  were  bom  of  Bhanu;  the 
Muhurtakas  were  born  of  Muhurta;  the  Ghosas  were  bom  of 
Lamba.  Nagavithi  was  born  of  Yluni.  Sahkalpa  was  bom  of 
Sahkalpa.  I shall  tell  you  the  creation  of  the  Vasus.  Devas 
who  are  luminous  and  who  pervade  all  the  quarters  are  called 
Vasus.®’®  They  are  the  well  wishers  of  all  living  beings.  They 
are  reputed  to  be  eight,  viz. — Apa,  Dhruva,  Soma,  Dhara, 
Anila,  Anala,  Pratyu^a  and  Prabh^a. 

20b-22a.  The  eleven  Rudras,®’i  the  leaders  of  the  Ganas 
are  : — ^Ajaikapad,  Ahirbudhnya,  Virupak§a,  Bhairava,  Hara, 
Bahurupa,  Tryambaka  the  lord  of  Devas,  Savitra,  Jayanta, 
Pinakin  and  Aparajita. 

22b-26.  I shall  mention  the  sons  and  grandsons  of  Ka- 
iyapa  from  his  thirteen  wives  Aditi,  Diti„  Arista,  Surasa, 
Muni,  Surabhi,  Vinata,  Tamra,  KrodhavaiSa,  Ila,  Kadru, 
Tvisa  and  Danu. 

I shall  tell  you  the  names  of  the  jons  of  these. 

Devas  who  were  known  as  Tu§itas  in  the  Gak?usa  man- 
van  tara  are  spoken  of  as  the  twelve  Adityas  in  the  Vaivasvata 
manvantara.  The  following  twelve  are  the  thousand-rayed 
Adityas  ; — 

Indra,  Dhaty,  Bhaga,  Tva^tf,  Mitra,  Varii^a,  Aryaman, 
Vivasvan,  Savity,  Pu$an,  Am^umat  and  Vis^u. 

27.  We  have  heard  that  Diti  had  two  sons  from  Ka^yapa 
viz.  Hirai^yaka^ipu  and  Hira^yak^a 

28.  Danu  bore  a hundred  sons  to  KaiSyapa.  They  were 
mighty  and  arrogant.  O excellent  brahmins,  among  them 
Vipracitti  was  the  chief. 

370.  Vasus  are  a class  of  deities,  eight  in  number.  They  seem  to 
have  been  personifications  of  natural  phenomena.  They  are  Apa  (water), 
Dhruva  (Pole  sUr),  Soma  (moon),  Dhari  (earth),  Anila  (wi^),  Anala 
(fire),  Frabhisa  (dawn)  and  Pratyfifa  (light). 

371.  In  regard  to  the  names  of  the  eleven  Rudras  the  Purfiljias  are  not 
Qoanimous. 


244 


U^gapwri^ 


29.  O leading  brahmins,  Ttoira  bore  six  daughters^* 
viz. — iSuki,  Sycni,  Bh^f,  Sugrivi,  Gfdhrika  and  Suci. 

30-31.  Suki  duly  gave  birth  to  parrots  and  owls.  Syeni 
gave  birth  to  hawks  (falcons) , etc.  Bhw  gave  birth  to  deers. 
Gfdhri  bore  the  vultures,  doves,  pigeons  and  other  birds. 
Suci  gave  birth  to  swans,  cranes  and  other  aquatic  birds  such 
as  Kara^^a,  Plava. 

32-34.  Sugrivi  gave  birth  to  goats,  horses,  sheep,  camels 
and  donkeys.  Vinata  gave  birth  to  Garuda  and  Aruna,  ( two 
sons)  and  then  a daughter  Saudamini  (lightning)  terrible 
unto  all  the  worlds. 

A thousand  cobras  were  born  to  Surasa.  Kadru  gave  birth 
to  a thousand  thousand-hooded  serpents.  Twenty-six  excellent 
ones  among  them  are  well  known  as  their  chiefs. 

35-37.  They  are  : — §esa,  V^uki,  Karkota,  l§ahkha, 
Airavata,  Kambala,  Dhanafljaya,  Mahanila,  Padma,  Asvatara, 
Tak^aka,  Elapatra,  Mahapadma,  Dhrtara$tra,  Balahaka,  Sah* 
khapala,  Mahaiankha,  Pu^padaxiiftra,  iSubhanana,  Sahkhalo- 
man,  Nahu^a,  Vamana,  Phai^ita,  Kapila,  Durmukha  and 
Patafijali. 

38-41.  KrodhavaSa  gave  birth  to  the  Rak?asas  wielding  great 
power  of  deception  and  also  the  group  of  Rudras.  The  excellent 
lady  Surabhi,  gave  birth  to  cows  and  buffaloes  as  'the  children 
of  Ka^yapa.  Muni  gave  birth  to  the  group  of  sages  and  Apsaras. 
Arista  gave  birth  to  Kinnaras  and  Gandharvas.  Ila  gave  birth 
to  grasses,  trees,  creepers  and  hedges.  Tvi$a  gave  birth  to  crores 
and  crores  of  Yak^as  and  Rldt^asas 

These  are  the  immediate  descendants  of  KaSyapa,  narrated 
succinctly. 

42-45.  These  had  their  own  numerous  sonis,  grandsons  etc. 
Their  races  are  inany.  After  the  children  had  been  procreated 
by  the  noble  KaiSyapa,  after  all  the  mobile  and  immobile 
beings  had  been  well  established,  Prajapati  crowned  the  chief 
ones  among  each  of  them  as  overlords.  He  made  Vaivasvata 
Manu  the  overlord  of  human  beings.  Those  who  were 
crowned  by  Brahma  in  the  Svayambhuva  manvantara,  even 

972.  Kaiyapa’f  wives  and  children  are  given  differently  in  other 
authorities,  e.g.  Mbh.  Adi  p.  xvi.  Ixv  and  Ixvi;  Kurma  xvtii;  Agni  sdx; 
Bd.  V.  i43-*46. 


Ofipn  of  Devos  and  others 


245 


now  protect  and  rule  over  the  earth  with  its  seven  continents 
and  mountains.  They  rule  virtuously  in  accordance  with  the 
instructions  of  the  lord. 

46.  Only  those  who  had  been  crowned  formerly  in  the 
Svayambhuva  manvantara  by  Brahma  arc  crowned  now.  They 
become  the  Manus. 

47-49.  In  the  past  manvantaras  these  had  been  the  kings. 
Others  arc  being  crowned  when  a new  manvantara  arrives. 
All  the  kings  of  the  past  and  future  manvantaras  are  mention- 
ed in  detail. 

After  procreating  these  sons  for  the  continuity  of  the  race 
Kasyapa  performed  penance  once  again  with  the  desire  to  have 
a son  who  will  preserve  the  spiritual  line. 

50-51.  Even  as  KaiSyapa  was  meditating  thus,  two  son's  of 
great  prowess  manifested  themselves  by  the  grace  of  Brahman. 
Those  two  Vatsara  and  Asita  were  expounders  of  Brahman. 
Naidhruva  and  Raibhya  were  bom  of  Vatsara. 

52-54.  The  sons  of  Raibhya  are  known  as  Raibhyas.  I 
shall  mention  those  of  Naidhruva.  Sumedhas  was  born  of  the 
daughter  of  Cyavana.  She  became  the  wife  of  Naidhruva 
and  the  mother  of  Ku^dapayins. 

The  glorious  son  Devala  was  born  of  Ekaparna  and  Asita. 
He  was  a knower  of  Brahman,  the  best  of  all  the  Sandilyas 
and  one  possessing  great  penance.  Thus  the  descendants  of 
Ka^yapa  became  three  branches;  Sandilyas,  Naidhruvas  and 
Raibhyas. 

55-58.  Devas  had  nine  sources  of  origin.  I shall  mention 
the  line  of  Pulastya. 

After  eleven  cycles  of  four  yugas  have  practically  passed  by 
when  Manu  was  the  lord  and  half  the  period  of  Dvapara  had 
passed  by,  Dama  was  bom  as  the  son  of  Narisyanta,  a descend- 
ant of  Manu.  Dama’s  descendant  known  as  Trnabindu  became 
king  in  the  third  quarter  of  Tretayuga.  His  daughter  llavila 
was  unrivalled  in  beauty  and  the  king  gave  her  in  marriage  to 
Pulastya. 

59.  Vi^ravas  the  great  sngt  was  bom  of  llavila.  His  four 
wives  are  the  progenitors  of  the  famity  of  Pulastya. 

60-65.  The  first  wife  Devavarnini  was  the  splendid  daugh- 
ter of  Bfhaspati.  The  second  and  third  wives  were  the  two 


246  UfigapurSiia. 

daughters  of  M^lyavan^  viz.  Pu$potkata  and  Balak&  and  the 
fourth  wife  Kaikasi  was  the  daughter  of  Malin. 

Now  listen  to  the  children  of  these  ladies.  Dcvavariiini 
bore  the  eldest  son  Vaiirava^  to  him.  Kaikasi  gave  birth  to 
R&vana,  the  king  of  Rak^asas,  Kumbhakar^a,  Surpa^akha  and 
Vibhisana.  O excellent  brahmins,  Pu^potkafa  bore  him  Maho- 
dara,  Prahasta,  Mahapliiva,  Khara  and  the  daughter  Kum- 
bhinasi.  Now  listen  to  the  childem  of  Bala  [i.  e.  Balaka],  They 
were  Tri^iras,  Du^ana,  Vidyujjihva  and  the  daughter  Malika. 
Thus  the  Rak^as  of  ruthless  activities  belonging  to  the  family 
of  Pulastya  are  nine. 

66-68.  Vibhi9a9a  is  glorified  as  the  knower  of  Dharma.  He 
was  a highly  pure  soul. 

The  deer,  the  fanged  animals,  tigers,  goblins,  ghosts, 
serpents,  boars,  elephants,  monkeys,  Kinnaras  and  Kimpuru^as 
were  the  sons  of  Pulastya. 

In  the  Vaivasvata  manvantara  Kiatu  is  said  to  be  issueless. 
Atri  bad  ten  beautiful  and  chaste  wives. 

69-70.  BhadrMva  begot  of  the  celestial  damsel  Ghftaci 
ten  children  viz  Bhadra,  Abhadra,  Jalad^,  Manda,  Analnda 
(or  Nanda),  Bala,  Abala,  Gk>pabala,  Tamarasa  and  Vara- 
krida 

71-73.  These  arc  the  progenitors  of  the  family  of  Atreya. 
Their  husband  is  Prabhakara.  When  the  sun  was  swallowed  by 
Rahu  and  he  fell  down  towards  the  earth  from  the  heavens 
the  whole  world  was  enveloped  in  darkness.  At  that  time  Atri 
spread  lustre  everywhere.  He  said  *‘Hail  to  Thee*’  and  then  the 
falling  sun  ceased  to  fall  at  the  instance  of  the  brahmi  n sage. 
Then  Atri  was  called  Prabhakara  by  the  great  sages. 

74.  He  b^ot  of  Bhadr&  the  renowned  son  Soma  (Moon) . 
The  sage  procreated  more  sons  of  those  wives. 

75.  TTiey  arc  well  known  as  Svastyatreyas.  They  were 
sages  and  masters  of  the  Vedas.  Two  of  them  became  well  reno- 
wned. They  had  realised  Brahman.  They  were  very  powerful. 

76.  Datta  was  the  eldest  son  of  Atri.  Durvasas  was  his 
younger  brother.  The  youngest  sister  was  Amala,  an  expounder 
of  the  Brahman. 

77.  Four  of  them  bom  of  two  Gotras  are  well  known  in 
the  world,  viz.  Syava,  Pratvasa,  Vavalgu  and  Gahvara. 


247 


Orifin  of  Devos  and  Others 

78.  Four  lines  of  the  spiritual  family  of  Atreyas  of  noble 
souls  are  known  as  Ka^yapa^  N&rada,  Parvata  and  Anudd- 
hata. 

79.  These  were  born  as  mental  sons.  Now  understand  the 
children  of  Arundhati.  It  was  Narada  who  gave  Arundhati  to 
Vasi^thit* 

80-82.  Due  to  a curse  of  Dak$a,  Narada  of  great  splendour 
became  a bachelor  by  compulsion. 

Formerly,  when  a terrible  war  between  Devas  and  Asuras, 
on  account  of  the  demon  Taraka,  took  place,  the  world  was 
oppressed  due  to  drought.  Along  with  the  guardians  of  the 
quarters,  the  intelligent  sage  Vasi^tha  sustained  the  subjects  by 
means  of  his  penance.  He  made  water,  cooked  rice,  roots,  fruits 
and  medicinal  herbs  and  out  of  mercy  he  enlivened  the  people 
with  medicines. 

83.  Vasi^tha  begot  hundred  sons  of  Arundhati.  Adfiyantl 
bore  to  Sakti,  the  eldest  of  those  hundred,  the  son  Parai^ara. 

84-88.  Sakti  was  swallowed  by  the  demon  Rudhira  (along 
with  his  brothers).  Kali  bore  to  Par^ara  the  son  K|r$i^a 
Dvaipayana. 

Dvaipayana  begot  of  Arai^  the  son  Suka  and  the  son 
Upamanyu  ofRvari. 

Know  that  the  following  are  the  sons  of  Suka  viz.  Bhuri^ra- 
vas,  Prabhu,  Sambhu,  Kr^na  and  Gaura.  There  was  a daughter 
Kirtimatl.  She  was  a yogic  mother,  performing  holy  rites.  She 
was  the  wife  of  A^uha  and  mother  of  Brahmadatta.  The  follow- 
ing are  the  descendants  of  Paraiara  viz  Sveta,  Kr^inia, 
Gaura,  Sy^a,  Dhumra,  Arut^ia,  Nila  and  BMarika.  Thus 
there  are  eight  lines  of  these  noble-souled  Para^aras. 

89-91.  Henceforth  understand  the  descendants  of  Indrapra^ 
miti.  Vasi$tha  begot  of  Ghrtaci  the  son  Kapiftjalya.  He  who  is 
known  as  Trimtitri  is  called  Indrapramiti.  Bhadra  was  born  of 
Pfthu’s  daughter.  His  son  was  Vasu  whose  son  was  Upamanyu. 
There  are  many  descendants  of  Upamanyu,  Mitra  and  Vanity. 
Those  who  are  known  as  Kau^di^y^  the  descendants  of 
Mitra  and  Varuinui.*^* 

37$.  iCau](^dlnyas  and  V&sistkas  have  a common  ancestry  in  Mitrft- 
Vanma.  Hence  the  matrimonial  alliances  do  not  take  place  between 
them. 


248 


litigapurd^ 


92*95.  There  are  others  of  single  sage-head,  who  are  well 
known  as  Vasifthas.  There  are  ten  lines  of  the  noble  descendants 
ofVasistha. 

Thus  these  mental  sons  of  Brahma  are  known  on  the  earth. 
These  blessed  ones  are  the  supporters  of  the  spiritual  legacy. 
Their  descendants  are  well  known.  They  arc  competent  to 
support  even  the  three  worlds.  They  are  born  of  the  families  of 
divine  sages.  Their  sons  and  grandsons  are  hundreds  and 
thousands.  The  three  worlds  are  pervaded  by  them  in  the 
same  manner  as  by  the  rays  of  the  sun. 


CiHAPTER  SnCTYFOUl^ 

Grant  of  boons  by  Pulastya 


The  sages  said: 

1.  O Suta,  O best  speaker,  it  behoves  you  to  recount  how 
Sakti  the  son  of  Vasi§tha  was  devoured  by  a demon  along  with 
his  younger  brothers. 

Suta  said: 

2-3.  The  demon  Rudhira*’*  devoured  Sakti  the  son  of 
Vasi§tha  along  with  his  younger  brothers  due  to  a curse  by 
iSakti  on  king  Kalmasapada.  O leading  brahmins,  urged  by 
ViSvamitra,  Rudhira  haunted  the  king  Kalmasapada  for  whom 

374,  There  arc  different  versions  of  this  legend  in  the 
Mah&bhSrata  and  Vi^pupur^a.  According  to  Mbh,  Kalm&fap&da,  king  of 
the  solar  race,  was  the  son  of  Sud&s  and  a descendant  of  Ik$v&ku.  While 
he  was  out  hunting  in  the  forest  he  met  Sakti,  the  eldest  son  of  Vasi^tha.  Since 
Sakti  refused  to  get  out  of  his  way,  Kalmii$ap&da  was  enraged.  He  then 
struck  &d[ti  with  the  whip.  Thereupon,  Sakti  cursed  him  to  become  a r&k^asa. 
Thus,  Kalm&fap&da  was  turned  into  a r&k$asa  Rudhira  by  name  and  he  de- 
voured Sakti  together  with  his  brothers.  But  according  to  Lihga,  the  rS,k$asa 
Rudhira  entered  the  body  of  King  Kalm&fap&da  when  the  latter  was  engaged 
in  sa)crifice,  under  the  leadership  of  Vasiftha.  Instigated  by  Viivamitra, 
who  was  a rival  priest,  Rudhira  devoured  Sakti  as  well  as  his  ninety-nine 
brothers. 

lidga  refers  to  the  legend  of  Viivftmitra.  According  to  Valmlki*s 
RAmiyaoa,  Sakti  was  cursed  by  Viiv&ttitra  in  the  context  of  king  Tri4aAku*s 
sacrifice. 


Grant  of  boons  by  Pulastya 


249 


a sacrifice  was  being  performed  by  Vasisfha  and  swallowed 
iSakti. 

4-5.  On  hearing  that  the  most  powerful  Sakti  had  been 
devoured  by  that  demon  along  with  his  brothers,  Vasistha 
repeatedly  lamented  ‘‘ha  (my)  son,  ha  (my) son”.  The  wailing 
sage  fell  down  on  the  ground  along  with  Arundhatl. 

6-10.  Remembering  his  hundred  sons,  the  eldest  of  whom 
was  Sakti,  and  knowing  that  the  family  was  extinct,  the  power- 
ful sage  decided  to  die.  Coming  to  this  conclusion  that  he  will 
not  remain  alive  without  his  sons,  he  felt  all  the  more  miser- 
able. Vasi§tha  the  son  of  Brahma,  theknower  of  everything,  the 
self-possessed  sage  who  had  realized  the  Atman,  climbed 
to  the  top  of  a mountain  along  with  his  wife.  With  tears  welling 
up  in  the  eyes  he  suddenly  fell  down  on  the  ground.  As 
he  fell  down  on  the  ground,  the  earth  (assuming  the  form 
of  a lady)  who  had  a wonderful  necklace  and  the  sportive 
gait  of  an  elephant,  caught  him  up  with  her  lotus-like 
hands  and  as  he  cried  she  too  bewailed  with  him.  At  that 
time,  his  daughter-in-law,  the  wife  of  Sakti,  cried  in  great 
fright  and  spoke  thus  to  Vasistha,  the  great  sage  and  the  best 
among  the  eloquent  sages. 

11.  “O  lord,  O excellent  brahmin,  O powerful  sage,  pre- 
serve this  excellent  body  of  yours  to  see  your  grandson,  that  is 
my  son. 

12.  O leading  brahmin,  this  splendid  body  should  not  be 
discarded  by  you,  since  the  child  that  is  born  of  Sakti  and 
that  is  bound  to  be  one  who  realises  all  objects,  is  within  my 
womb.” 

13-14.  After  saying  thus,  that  lady  who  was  conversant 
with  Dharma  and  whose  eyes  resembled  lotus  flowers  lifted  up 
her  father-in-law  by  her  hands  and  wiped  his  eyes  with  water. 
Although  she  was  herself  miserable  she  requested  the  dejected 
Arundhati  to  save  her  father-in-law. 

15-16.  On  hearing  the  words  of  his  daughter-in-law 
Vasistha  got  up  from  the  ground  after  regaining  consciousness. 
Arundhati  embraced  him  in  great  distress  and  fell  down.  The 
leading  sage  touched  Arundhati,  in  whose  eyes  tears  had  welled 
up  and  cried  along  with  her. 


250 


Lingapurdsaa 


17-18.  Thereafter  the  son  seated  in  the  couch  of  the  womb 
of  his  mother,  like  the  four-faced  lord  Brahma  in  the  umbilical 
lotus  of  Visnu  repeated  a sacred  verse.  The  holy  sage  Vasis^ha 
listened  enthusiastically  to  the  sacred  verse  wondering,  by  whom 
could  it  have  been  repeated.  He  then  meditated  with  great  con- 
centration. 

19.  Thereupon  Vi^^u  whose  eyes  resemble  the  lotus  petals, 
who  had  been  stationed  in  the  courtyard  of  the  firmament,  who 
is  the  soul  of  the  universe  and  who  is  the  storehouse  of  mercy 
spoke  to  Vasistha  mercifully. 

20.  O dear  one,  O dear  one,  O Vasi§tha  the  leading  brah- 
min, fond  of  his  son,  this  sacred  verse  has  emanated  from 
the  lotuslike  face  of  your  grandson. 

21.  O sage,  this  grandson  of  yours,  the  powerful  one  born 
of  Sakti  is  on  a par  with  me.  Hence,  O most  excellent  sage  and 
son  of  Brahma,  diicafd  your  grief  and  rise  up. 

22.  The  child  ffii  the  womb  is  a devotee  of  Rudra.  He  is 
engaged  in  the  worship  of  Rudra.  Thanks  to  the  power  of 
Rudra  he  will  redeem  your  family. 

23.  After  saying  thus  to  Vasi^tha,  the  leading  Brahmin 
sage,  the  merciful  lord  vanished  there  itself. 

24.  Vasi^tha  of  great  splendour  bowed  his  head  to  the  lotus- 
eyed lord  and  then  stroked  the  belly  of  Adjr^yanti  with  great 
respect. 

25-27.  O brahmins,  he  cried  out  *‘ha  my  son,  ha  my  son”, 
and  fell  down  extremely  depressed.  Glancing  at  Arundhati 
who  was  also  crying  and  rememberii^  his  own  son  he  cried 
out  in  misery — son,  come  again,  come  again.  O Sakti,  after 
the  birth  of  your  son  who  will  sustain  this  family.  I shall  undou- 
btedly come  near  you  along  with  your  mother”. 

SUta  said  : 

After  saying  this,  the  crying  brahmin  embraced  Arundhati. 
Beating  her  belly  she  was  about  to  fall. 

28-32.  The  auspicious  lady  Ad]:iyanti  who  was  distressed 
beat  her  belly — the  abode  of  the  child  in  womb.  She  cried  out 
in  distress  and  fell  down.  Arundhad  and  Vasi^tha,  both  of  them 
were  extremely  frightened.  They  lifted  up  the  young  woman 
their  dxa|^ter-in-law  and  said  thus: — 


Grant  of  boons  by  Pulastya 


251 


silly  woman,  tell  us  how  you  have  attempted  to  destroy 
the  family  of  Vasi$tha  by  striking  at  the  region  of  womb.  For 
seeing  your  son,  the  child  bom  to  Sakti  and  for  tasting  the 
nectar  of  the  boyish  face  of  the  noble  son,  the  leading  sage  has 
decided  to  preserve  his  body.  Hence  protect  your  body*’. 

Suta  said: 


33-34,  After  pulling  up  her  daughter-in-law  and  the  sage, 
Arundhati  the  wife  of  Vasis^ha  stood  up  and  said  though 
highly  distressed  and  agitated. 

lady  of  good  holy  rites,  since  the  life  of  this  sage,  and 
that  of  mine  depend  on  you,  you  should  preserve  your  life.  As 
a nurse  do  what  is  beneficial  to  us.” 

Adrty anti  said: 

35.  “If  the  excellent  saRe  ha-»  to  preserve  his  life 

I !h«ll  Muienow  preserve  my  body  pure  or  impure. 

36-37.  It  is  because  of  my  sin  that  I have  to  bear  the 
sorrow  of  separation  firom  my  husband.  O sage,  I am  burnt 
‘vy'ith  Rricf,  even  though  I am  your  daughter-in-law,  O sage. 
Alas,  a miracle  been  seen  by  me.  O lord,  I am  the  victim 
of  grief.  O brahmin,  be  my  silTO’ir  from  raiser/,  O sen  of 
Brahma,  O preceptor  of  the  universe. 

38.  Still,  a woman  without  a husband  shall  be  miserable. 

0 noble  lord  (sage) , save  me  from  that  situation. 

39.  The  father,  mother,  sons,  grandsons,  even  the  father-in- 
law,  all  arc  helpless  to  such  a woman.  None  of  them  can  be 
a real  kinsman  unto  women.  It  is  the  husband  alone  who  is 
her  real  kinsman,  her  greatest  salvation. 

40.  What  has  been  mentioned  by  the  learned  men  ! viz.  the 
wife  is  half  of  the  husband,  has  turned  out  to  be  not  true  in 
my  case.  Sakti  has  gone.  But  I still  survive. 

41 . O leading  sage,  alas ! the  hardness  of  my  mind  ! even 
after  leaving  oflf  my  husband  who  is  like  my  own  vital  breath, 

1 could  live  for  even  a moment. 

42.  O Vasi^tha,  just  as  a creeper  climbing  on  the  holy  fig 
tree,,  survives  even  after  being  cut  off  from  its  roots,  I too  survive 


252 


Lingapurd^ 


even  after  I have  become  miserable  on  being  abandoned  by 
my  husband”. 

43.  On  hearing  these  words  of  his  daughter-in-law,  the 
intelligent  Vasistha  who  observed  the  duties  of  his  stage  of 
life  decided  to  go  to  his  hermitage  along  with  his  wife. 

44.  The  meritorious-souled  holy  lord  Vasistha  though 
suffering  badly,  entered  his  hermitage  quickly,  accompanied  by 
his  wife  and  Adr^yanti,  and  began  to  ponder. 

45.  O leading  sages,  that  chaste  wife  of  Sakti  preserved 
the  child  in  the  womb  with  great  difficulty  for  the  continuity  of 
the  family  line. 

46.  In  the  tenth  month  the  wife  of  Sakti  gave  birth  to  a 
lustrous  son  in  the  same  manner  as  Arundhati  had  previously 
given  birth  to  Sakti. 

47.  Sakti’s  wife  gave  birth  to  Parasara  like  Aditi  who  gave 
birin  lo  > uva  Rvaha  who  gave  birth  to  Guha  and  like 
Arani  who  gave  birth  to  Agni. 

48.  When  the  son  of  Sakti  incarnated  on  the  earth,  Sakti, 
abandoned  his  sorrow  and  attained  equality  with  the  Pitrs. 

49.  O leading  sages,  that  meritorious  son  of 
stationed  in  the  world  of  the  Pitrs  alon'* 
shone  like  the  si^n  along  wi^^  '' 

O leading  brahmins,  when  Parasara  incarnated,  the 
departed  father  sang,  the  grand-fathers  and  great-grand-fathers 
danced. 

51.  The  Pitrs  who  previously  expounded  the  Brahman  on 
the  earth  and  the  deities  in  heaven  danced.  Puskara  and  others 
moved  about  in  the  firmament  showering  flowers. 

52.  O brahmins,  in  the  cities  of  the  Raki^asas  there  were 
odd  and  painful  shouts.  The  sages  in  their  hermitage  applauded 
continuously  with  delightful  experiences. 

53.  Just  as  the  four-faced  lord  incarnated  from  the  Cosmic 

^ sun  emerges  from  the  clusters  of  clouds,  so  also 
Parasara  was  born  of  Adr^yanti. 

54.  On  seeing  the  son  and  remembering  her  husband,  O 
brahmins,  even  Adrsyanti  felt  both  joy  and  grief.  So  was  the 
case  with  Arundhati  and  sage  Vasistha. 


nis  Drothers 


Grant  of  boons  by  Pulastya 


253 


55.  On  seeing  her  son,  the  highly  refulgent  Par5£ara,  the 
agitated  lady  lamented.  With  her  throat  choked  she  fell  down. 

56.  Even  as  her  sinless  son  adored  by  the  groups  of  Devas 
and  Danavas,  was  born  the  mother  realized  that  he  was  highly 
intelligent.  With  tears  in  her  eyes  she  lamented. 

57.  “Ha,  son  of  Vasi§tha,  you  have  gone  somewhere  after 
abandoning  me  whose  wretchedness  is  visible  in  the  face.  You 
have  left  me  in  the  middle  of  the  forest  as  one  desirous  of  see- 
ing her  son.  O lord,  you  too,  sec  your  bosom-born,  sinless  son. 

58.  O Sakti,  with  his  delight  evident  in  his  face  MaheiSvara 
saw  his  six-faced  son  along  with  his  Ga^s.  Similarly,  you  too 
see  your  son  in  the  company  of  your  brothers”. 

59.  On  hearing  her  lamentation,  the  excellent  sage  Vasistha 
became  miserable  and  said  to  his  daughter-in-law,  “Do  not 
cry. 

60.  At  the  behest  of  Vasistha,  that  noble  lady  eschewed 
her  sorrow.  That  lady  with  roving  eyes  like  the  fawn  nursed 
and  nurtured  her  son. 

61.  On  seeing  his  chaste  mother  as  a weak  lady,  devoid 
of  ornaments,  sitting  down  dejectedly,  with  tears  agitating  the 
eyes,  the  boy  said  to  her. 

SaktVs  son  said  : 

62.  ‘*0  mother,  O sinless  one,  your  slender  body  docs 
not  appear  to  be  splendid  without  ornaments.  It  is  like  the 
night  bereft  of  the  disc  of  the  moon. 

63.  O my  mother,  O my  mother,  O splendid  lady,  it 
behoves  you  to  recount  to  me  why  you  are  sitting  here  setting 
aside  your  auspicious  marks  as  a woman  without  her  husband.” 

64.  On  hearing  the  words  of  her  son,  Adi^yanti  did  not 
tell  her  son  anything,  good  or  bad. 

65.  The  son  of  Sakti  said  to  Adrsyanti  again,  “O  mother 
where  is  my  holy  father  of  great  refulgence  ? Tell  me,  tell 
me. 

66.  On  hearing  the  words  of  her  son,  she  became  extremely 
agitated  and  wept.  Saying  “your  father  was  devoured  by  a 
Raksasa”  she  fell  down  unconscious. 

67.  On  hearing  the  words  of  his  grandson,  the  kind-hearted 


l|tS4  Utigapurai^a 

cried  and  fell  down.  So  also  Arundhat!  and  the  lead- 

sages,  the  residents  of  the  hermitage. 

68.  On  hearing  directly  from  his  mother — ‘^Your  father 
was  devoured  by  a demon”,  the  intelligent  Para^ara  spoke  thus 
with  his  eyes  dimmed  and  darkened  by  tears, 

Pard^ara  said  : 

69.  O mother,  I think  I will  be  able  to  show  my  father  in 
a moment  by  worshipping  the  lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas  and  of 
the  three  worlds  including  the  mobile  and  immobile  beings.®’^ 

70.  On  hearing  these  splendid  words  she  was  surprised. 
Smilingly  she  looked  at  him  and  said: — “O  son,  this  is  true. 
Worship  the  lord.” 

71.  On  understanding  the  proposal  and  decision  of  the 
son  of  l§akti,  Vasis^ha  the  holy  lord,  the  intelligent  leading 
sage,  and  the  storehouse  of  mercy,  spoke  to  his  grandson  as 
follows  : — 

72-74.  “O  my  grandson,  O excellent  sage  of  good  holy 
rites,  your  proposal  is  proper  and  suitable.  Still,  listen,  it  does 
not  behove  you  to  destroy  the  world.  You  can  worship  the 
lord  for  exterminating  Raksasas.  But,  O son  of  Sakti,  what  is 
the  harm  done  to  you  by  the  world  that  you  need  destroy 
it  ?” 

Thereafter  at  the  behest  of  the  Vasistha  the  extremely  in- 
telligent son  of  Sakti  directed  his  mind  towards  the  extermina- 
tion of  Raksasas. 

75-78.  Para^ara  bowed  down  to  Adrsyanti,  Vasistha  and 
Arundhati.  In  the  presence  of  the  sage  he  made  a single  Lihga, 
in  a trice,  out  of  dust.  Repeating  the  following  Mantras  from 
the  Vedas  he  worshipped  it.  The  mantras  were  Sivasukta, 
Tryambakasukta,  Tvaritarudra,  Siva  Sahkalpa,  Nilarudra, 
Rudra,  Vamiya,  Pavamana,  Paftca  Brahman,  Hotrsukta,  Lihga- 
sdkta  and  Atharvasiras.  After  worshipping  duly  he  offered  the 
eightfold  Arghya  to  Rudra. 

375,  trailokyaih  sacaracaraxn:  Change  the  accusative  case  into  the 
genitive  case  and  supply  to  obtain  the  required  meaning.  The  ex- 

pression Hrailokyasya  sacarScarasya  item*  would  mean  *lord  of  the  three 
worlds  including  the  mobile  and  immobile  beings*.  ST.  is  not  in  favour  of 
this  change.  It  supplies  *dagdhv&’  which  it  construes  with  ‘trailokyam  sacar&- 
caram;  i.e.  *having  burnt  the  three  worlds  including  the  mobile  and  immobile 
beings’. 


Grunt  of  boons  by  Pulastya  255 

Paraiara  said  : — 

79.  “O  lord  Rudra,  O Sankara,  my  father  of  great 
refulgence  was  swallowed  by  the  demon  Rudhira  along  with 
his  brothers. 

80-81.  O lord,  I wish  to  see  my  father  along  with  his 
brothers.” 

Submitting  thus  he  bowed  down  to  the  Lihga  again  and 
again,  cried  *‘ha  Rudra,  ha  Rudra”  and  prostrated  before  him. 

On  seeing  him,  lord  Rudra  said  to  the  goddess. 

82.  “O  highly  blessed  lady,  see  this  boy  whose  eyes  are 
dimmed  and  darkened  with  tears.  He  is  engaged  in  propitiating 
me.** 

83-84.  The  spotless  great  goddess  saw  Para:§ara,  his  eyes 
dimmed  and  his  body  drenched  by  tears  due  to  misery.  He  was 
interested  only  in  the  act  of  worshipping  the  Lihga.  He 
repeated  the  names  ‘‘Hara”,  ‘‘K.udra”  etc.  Uma  then  spoke  to 
5iva  her  husband  and  the  lord  of  the  worlds. 

85-86.  O supreme  lord,  be  pleased,  grant  him  all  his  desires. 
On  hearing  her  words,  Sankara  Parame^vara,  the  swallower  of 
halahala  poison,  spoke  to  his  noble  consort  Uma — I shall 
save  this  brahmin  boy  whose  eyes  resemble  full  blown  blue 
lotus. 

87-88.  I shall  give  him  divine  vision  and  enable  him  to 
see  my  form.”  After  saying  this,  lord  Nilalohita,  Parame^vara, 
surrounded  by  the  divine  Ganas — Brahma,  Indra,  Vi§nu,  Rudra, 
and  others  granted  vision  to  that  intelligent  son  of  the  sage. 

89.  On  seeing  Mahadeva,  his  eyes  became  dimmed  with 
tears  of  delight.  Delighted  in  his  heart  he  fell  at  his  feet  with 
great  respect. 

90.  Thereafter  he  grasped  the  feet  of  Uma  and  the  noble 
Nandin  and  then  spoke  to  Brahma,  and  others — “My  life  is 
fruitful  today. 

91.  Today  the  crescent  moon-bedecked  diety  has  come  for 
my  protection.  Who  else  can  compare  with  me  in  this  world, 
whether  a Deva  or  a Danava  ?” 

92.  Thereafter  in  a moment,  Paraiara  the  son  of  Sakti  saw 
his  father  standing  in  heaven  along  with  his  brothers. 

93.  On  seeing  him  accompanied  by  his  brothers  in  an 


256 


LingapurS^ 


aerial  chariot  that  resembled  the  solar  sphere  and  was  open  on 
all  sides,  he  was  delighted.  He  bowed  down  to  his  father. 

94.  Then  the  bull-bannered  lord  who  was  accompanied  by 
his  wife  and  the  leading  Ganas  spoke  thus  to  Sakti,  the  son  of 
Vasi^tha  who  was  eager  to  see  his  son. 

The  glorious  lord  said: — 

95-96.  O Sakti,  see  your  son,  the  boy  whose  eyes  are 
dimmed  with  tears  of  delight.  O leading  brahmin,  see  Adr^yanti, 
Vasi^t^a  your  father,  Arundhat!  your  mother,  the  highly  blessed 
auspicious  lady  comparable  to  goddess.  O highly  intelligent  one, 
make  obeisance  to  both  your  father  and  your  mother. 

97-98.  At  the  behest  of  Sankara,  Sakti  immediately,  at 
first,  bowed  down  to  the  lord  of  Devas  and  to  Uma.  He  then 
bowed  to  the  excellent  Vasifjha  and  to  Arundhati  his  highly 
blessed  mother,  the  auspicious  lady  who  considered  her  husband 
her  god.  At  the  behest  of  the  lord  of  the  Universe  the  power- 
ful Sakti  said 

The  son  of  Vasistha  said  : — 

99.  O dear  son,  O leading  brahmin,  Para^ara  of  great 
refulgence,  I have  been  saved  by  you  who  had  been  in  the 
womb  when  I died  and  who  are  a noble  soul. 

100-101.  O dear  son,  Para^ara  the  attributes  and  the 
prosperities  Anima®^®  etc.  have  been  attained  by  me,  on  seeing 
your  face  today.  O dear  one,  of  great  intellect,  at  my  behest®’^ 
protect  Adfsyanti  the  highly  blessed  lady  and  Arundhati, 
as  also  my  father  Vasi^^ha. 

102.  O dear  son,  our  entire  family' has  been  redeemed  by 
you.  This  has  always®’®  been  said  by  the  learned  that  one 
conquers  the  worlds  through  one’s  son. 

103.  Choose  the  desired®’®  boon  from  the  lord  who  is 
source  of  origin  of  the  worlds.  After  bowing  down  to  the  lord 
I shall  go  along  with  my  brothers. 

376.  See  P 134  note  241 

377.  Construe ‘mamajftaya*  (v- 100)  with  ‘AdrSyantim  rak$a*  (v-ioi), 
i.e,  ‘at  my  behest  you  shall  take  care  of  Adriyanti.* 

378.  sadaiva — always,  or  read  sadeva— ucitam  eva  ST:  ‘it  is  proper 

or  truuiful  that * 

379.  ipsitam  varay  eilUiam:  take  recourse  to  Siva  for  obtaining  your 
desire,  viz,  the  destruction  of  R&k$asas. 


Orant  of  boons  by  Pulastya 


257 


104-106.  Thus  taking  leave  of  his  son  after  bowing  down 
to  Mahc^vara  and  after  seeing  his  wife  in  the  assembly,  the 
sage  of  perfect  control  over  the  senses  went  away  to  his  father- 
land.  On  seeing  his  father  gone  after  worshipping  the  lord,  the 
son  of  Sakti  eulogised  him  with  pleasing  words.  Thereafter  the 
delighted  Klahadeva,  the  suppressor  of  the  Cupid  andof  Andha- 
ka,  blessed  the  son  of  Sakti  and  vanished  there  itself. 

107.  After  Mahe^vara  had  gone  away  accompanied  by 
Uma,  the  son  of  5akti,  the  knower  of  charms,  burned  the  race 
of  Raksasas  by  means  of  Mantras. 

108.  Then  Vasistha  the  knower  of  Dharma,  surrounded  by 
the  sages,  said  to  his  grandson,  ‘‘O  dear  son,  stop  this  excess 
of  fury.  Eschew  your  anger. 

109.  The  Raksasas  are  not  guilty.  It  had  been  so  ordain- 
ed38o  in  your  father’s  case.  Anger  provokes  only  the  fools  and 
not  the  intelligent  people. 

110-111.  O dear  son,  who  is  killed  by  whom  ? Man  is  but 
the  partaker  of  fruits  of  his  own  activities. 

O dear  son,  fury  is  but  the  destroyer  of  fame  and  penance 
which  men  accumulate  after  a great  deal  of  stress  and  strain. 
Enough  of  these  Rajasaic  activities  of  burning  innocent  people. 

112-113.  Let  your  sacrifice  cease.  Indeed,  good  men  have 
forbearance  as  their  strong  point.”  Thus  at  the  instance  of 
Vasis^ha,  the  leading  sage,  the  son  of  l§akti  woimd  up  his 
sacrifice  immediately  after  giving  due  deference  to  his  words. 
Therefore  holy  lord  Vasi^^ha,  the  excellent  sage  was  delight- 
ed. 

114-117.  Pulastya  the  son  of  Brahma  had  attended  the 
Satra.  Vasis^ha  duly  offered  him  worship  and  the  sage  Pulastya 
was  duly  honoured.  He  then  spoke  to  ParalSara  who  was 
standing  by  after  due  obeisance. 

“In  the  course  of  this  great  enmity  you  have  adopted 
forbearance  at  the  instance  of  your  preceptor.  Hence  you  will 
understand  all  the  scriptural  texts.  My  line  of  descendants  has 
not  been  broken  by  you  even  though  you  were  infuriated. 
Hence,  O blessed  one,  I am  giving  you  another  great  boon.  O 


380.  vihitam— destined. 


258  Lingapurd^ 

dear  one,  you  will  be  the  compiler  of  the  Purana  Samhita  (the 
compendium  of  ancient  lore). 

118-1 19a. You  will  understand  precisely  the  real  nature  of 
the  deities.®®^  Due  to  my  blessing  your  intellect  will  be  devoid 
of  impurities  of  activities,  whether  of  active  or  absentious  type 
and  free  from  doubts.” 

II  9b- 120a.  Thereafter  the  holy  sage  Vasistha  the  most 
excellent  of  all  eloquent  ones  said: — “Whatever  has  been  said 
by  Pulastya  will  take  place  wholly.” 

120b-121.  Then  by  the  grace  of  Pulastya  and  the  intelli- 
gent Vasi§tha,  Parasara  composed  the  Vai§nava  Purana.  By 
means  of  six  modes*®^  (i.e.parts)  it  expounds  all  the  topics.  It  is 
a mine  of  knowledge. 

122-123.  It  extends  to  six  thousand  verses,  and  contains 
Vedic  topics.  It  is  the  fourth®®®  among  the  Purana  collections 
and  a splendid  one.  Thus  O leading  sages,  the  origin  of  the 
descendants  of  Vasistha  and  the  prowess  of  the  son  of  Sakti 
has  been  succinctly  recounted  to  you. 


CHAPTER  SIXTYFIVE 

Thousand  names  of  Siva 


The  sages  said: 

1 . O Romaharsana,  the  best  among  the  knowers  of  races, 
it  behoves  you  to  recount  succinctly  to  us  the  solar  race  and 
the  lunar  race. 

SUta  said: 

2.  O brahmins,  Aditi  bore  to  Kasyapa  the  son  Aditya. 
Aditya  had  a chief  wife  and  three  others. 

3-5.  They  were  Qjueen  Samjfta,  Rajhi,  Prabha  and  Chiya. 
I shall  mention  their  sons  to  you.  Queen  Sarhjna  the  daughter 

381.  devata-paramartham — vastava-svarupam  ST.  i.e.  facts. 

382.  fa4-prakaram — ^d-axhiarGpam  'consisting  of  six  parts*. 

383.  caturtham.  But  according  to  the  serial  order  (of.  LiAga  39. 

61— 63 ) Siva,  and  not  is  the  fourth. 


259 


Thousand  Names  of  Siva 

of  Tva§tr  bore  to  the  Sun  the  excellent  Manu.  Rajhi  gave  birth 
to  Yama,  Yamuna  and  Revata.  Prabha  bore  to  the  sun  the  son 
Prabhata.  Sarhjfia  gave  birth  to  Ghaya.  O brahmins^  Chaya 
bore  to  Savarni,  Sani,  Tapati  and  Visti  in  due  order. 

6-7.  More  than  her  own  sons  Ghaya  loved  Manu.^®^ 
Yama  could  not  brook  this.  He  became  exceedingly  infuriated. 
Lifting  up  his  right  foot  he  kicked  her  furiously.  Assaulted  by 
Yama,  Ghaya  became  very  miserable. 

8.  Due*  to  the  curse  of  Ghaya  one  healthy  foot  of  Yama 
became  watery  i.e.  covered  with  eczematic  eruptions  and  full  of 
foetid  blood  and  swarms  of  germs. 

9.  He  went  to  Gokarna  travelling  on  a plank,  and  propitia- 
ted Mahadeva  there  for  millions  of  years  living  only  on  air. 

10-1  la.  By  the  grace  of  Bhava  he  attained  the  excellent 
guardianship  of  the  Southern  quarter,  the  overlordship  of  the 
Pitrs  and  freedom  from  the  curse.  He  attained  these  by  the 
power  of  the  trident-armed  lord  of  Devas. 

1 lb- 12.  Formerly  the  spotless  daughter  of  Tvastr,  unable  to 
bear  the  excess  of  refulgence  of  the  sun,  created  out  of  her  own 
body  another  lady  called  Chaya. 

The  lady  of  good  holy  rites  assumed  the  form  of  a mare  and 
performed  penance. 

13.  In  course  of  time  lord  sun  the  husband  of  Chaya 
realised  after  a great  effort  that  she  was  only  a shadow.  Assum- 
ing the  form  of  a horse  he  indulged  in  sexual  intercourse 
with  Sarhjfia  who  had  adopted  the  form  of  a mare. 

14.  Thus  Sarhjfia  the  daughter  of  Tvastr  who  was  in  the 
guise  of  a mare  bore  to  him  the  twin  lords  Alvins,  the  exce- 
llent physicians  of  Devas. 

15- 16a.  Later,  the  sun  was  ground  down®®®  by  the  noble- 
fouled  father  of  Samjria.  It  was  from  the  disc  of  the  sun  (i.  e. 
the  ground  portion)  that  the  terrible  discus  of  Visnu  his  chief 
divine  weapon  was  evolved  by  lord  Tvastr, 

16b-17a.  Lord  Krsna  obtained  this  famous  Sudar:§ana 
discus  that  shone  like  the  fire  at  the  time  of  dissolution,  thanks 
to  the  grace  of  Rudra. 

384.  Pflrvo  Manu:  i.c,  Vaivasvata.  Construe:  purvo  Manu  cak- 
fama,  Manus  tu  na  (Cak^ama). 

385.  For  detail  about  the  paring  of  glory  of  the  sun,  see  Mdrka,  Ch« 

108. 


17b- 19a.  The  first  Manu  (i.  e.  bom  of  Samjfia)  had  nine 
sons  all  equal  to  him.  They  were: — Ik§vaku,  Nabhaga,  Dhf^nu, 
Saryiti,  Nari§yanta,  Nabhaga,  Arista,  Karfi^a  and  Pf^adhra. 
These  nine  are  known  as  Manavas  (sons  of  Manu). 

19b-21.  Ila  his  eldest  daughter  and  the  most  excellent  one 
had  formerly  attained  the  state  of  a man.  O leading  sages,  it 
was  due  to  the  grace  of  Mitra  and  Varuna  that  she  attained  the 
state  of  a man  when  she  was  known  as  Sudyumna.  Again  she 
went  to  Sarava^a^®®  and  regained  the  state  of  a woman  at  the 
behest  of  Bhava.  Sudyumna  the  glorious  son  of  Manu  became 
a woman  for  the  increase  of  the  lunar  race. 

22.  It  was  at  the  time  of  the  horse-sacrifice  of  Ik^vaku 
that  Ila  became  a Kimpurusa.  During  the  state  of  Kimpurusa, 
also  Ila  is  called  Sudyumna. 

23-24.  Then  it  chanced  she  was  a woman  for  one  month 
and  a man  for  another.  Ila  resorted  to  the  house  of  Budha,  the 
son  of  Soma.  Finding  an  opportunity  she  was  made  to  indulge 
in  sexual  intercourse  by  Budha.  Pururavas  was  born  as  the 
son  of  Ila  and  Budha. 

25.  He  was  intelligent  and  the  first-born  in  the  line  of  Soma. 
He  was  a devotee  of  Siva  and  very  valorous.  O ascetics,  I shall 
dilate  later  on  the  extent  of  expansion  of  Iksvaku  race. 

26.  O excellent  brahmins,  Sudyumna  had  three  sons 
viz.  : — Utkala,  Gaya  and  VinataSva. 

27.  The  land  of  Utkala  was  assigned  to  Utkala,  the 
western  land  was  given  to  Vinatai^va.  Gaya  is  said  to  be  the 
excellent  city  of  Gaya. 

28.  In  Gaya  Devas  and  the  Pitrs  are  stationed  always. 

The  eldest  of  brothers,  viz.  Iksvaku  obtained  the  Madhya 

dda  (Middle  land) 

29-32.  In  view  of  his  feminine  nature  Sudyumna  did  not  get 
his  share  but  at  the  instance  of  Vasi^tha,  Sudyumna  was  installed 
in  Pratisthana,  as  its  glorious  and  righteous  king.  After  attaining 
kingdom,  the  highly  blessed  son  of  Manu  equipped  with  the 
characteristics  of  both  man  and  woman,  the  king  of  great 
renown  gave  that  kingdom  to  Pururavas. 

386.  Sarava^a:  a Hizn&layan  forest  where  K^ttikeya,  the  ddest 
ton  of  &va,  was  bom.  Lord  Siva  bad  pronounced  a curse  that  a man  entering 
this  forest  would  turn  into  a woman. 


261 


Thousand  Names  of  Siva 

The  heroic  son  of  Ik^vaku  was  Vikuksi  who  was  the  best 
among  the  knowers  of  Dharma  as  also  the  eldest  of  Ik§vaku’s 
hundred  sons.  He  had  fifteen  sons.  The  eldest  was  Kakutstha. 
From  Kakutstha  was  born  Suyodhana. 

33.  O excellent  sages,  thereafter  were  born  Prthu,  Visvaka 
and  Parthiva.  ViSvaka’s  son  was  Ardraka  ; YuvanSt^va  was 
his  son. 

34 . Thereafter  were  born  Sravastl^®®a  of  great  splendour  and 
then  Vaihsaka.  O excellent  brahmins,  it  was  by  the  former  that 
Sravasti  city  was  built  in  the  Gauda  Desa. 

35.  Vaihsa’s  son  was  Brhadasva.  Kuvalahva  was  his  son. 
By  killing  Dhundhu  of  great  strength  he  acquired  the  name  of 
Dhundhumara. 

36.  Dhundhumara  had  three  sons  well  known  in  the  three 
worlds.  They  were  Drdhasva,  Canda^va  and  Kapila^va. 

37.  Pramoda  was  the  son  of  Drdhasva.  Haryasva  was  his 
son.  Nikumbha  was  the  son  of  Haryai^va.  Samhatasva 

Kr^a^v;»  — ’ were  the  two  sons  ofSarhhata^va. 

xr  . wtiiasva  was  the  son  of  Rana^va  and  his  son  was  Mandhata. 

39.  Mandhata  had  three  sons  well  known  in  the  three 
worlds.  They  were  Purukutsa,  Anibarisa  and  Mucukunda. 

40-42.  Yuvana,<va  the  second  is  said  to  be  the  heir  to 
Ambarisa.  Harita  was  the  son  of  Yuvana;§va  and  from  him 
began  the  line  of  Haritas.  These  were  brahmins  in  the  line 
of  Afigiras,  but  Ksatriyas  in  temperament. 

Purukulsa’s  successor  was  Trasadasyu  of  great  renown. 
Sambhuti  born  of  Narmada  was  his  son.  Visnuvrddha  was  his 
son  and  after  him  his  descendants  are  known  as  Visnuvrddhas. 

43.  These  also  resorted  to  the  line  of  Ahgiras  and  were 
equipped  with  the  characteristics  of  Ksatriyas.  Sambhuti 
procreated  another  son  named  Anaranya. 

44.  O brahmins,  in  the  course  of  his  conquest  of  the 
three  worlds,  Anaranya  was  killed  by  Ravana.  Brhadasva 
was  the  son  of  Anaranya  and  Haryasva  was  his  son. 

45.  King  Vasumanas  was  born  of  Drsadvati  and  Haryasva. 
His  son  was  the  king  Tridhanvan  a great  devotee  of  Siva. 

46-51  a.  He  became  the  disciple  of  Tantjin,  the  son  of 
Brahma.  By  his  grace  he  attained  the  fruit  of  a thousand 

386a*  a city  in  ancknt  Oudh. 


262  LiHgapura^ 

horse-sacrifices.  At  his  behest  he  became  a valorous  devotee  of 
l^iva  and  attained  the  lordship  of  Gai^as. 

At  the  outset  he  had  no  money  with  him.  The  righteous 
soul  pondered  over  this  : — How  shall  I perform  the  horse-sacri- 
fice ?”  O excellent  brahmins,  it  was  then  that  he  met  the  son 
of  Brahma,  the  brahmin  Tat^din  and  acquired  from  him  the 
thousand  names  of  Rudra,  formerly  mentioned  by  Brahma. 
Tandin  eulogised  the  great  lord  Siva  by  means  of  these  thou- 
sand names.  The  excellent  brahmin  born  of  Brahma  thereby 
acquired  the  lordship  of  Ganas.  Thereafter  the  king  too  obtain- 
ed the  thousand  names  mentioned  by  Tandin  formerly.  By 
repeating  them  he  too  acquired  the  lordship  of  Ganas. 

The  sages  said  : — 

51b-52a.  O Suta,  of  good  holy  rites,  the  thousand  names®®’' 
of  Rudra  had  been  repeated  by  Tandin  bom  of  Brahma. 
They  contain  a good  lot  of  the  meanings  of  all  Vedic  texts.  It 

behoves  you  to  mmuou  tllCJC  names  to  us 

Suta  said: — 

52b-54a  O sages  of  good  holy  rites,  listen  to  the  thousand 
and  eight  names  of  Siva  who  is  the  soul  of  all  living  beings  and 
whose  splendour  is  unmeasured.  It  was  by  repeating  these 
that  he  attained  the  lordship  of  Gaintas. 

387.  In  fact,  the  text  records  less  than  one  thousand  names,  unless  we 
include  *matah*  (repeated  thrice,  cf,  verses  61,  75,  87)  etc.  as  proper  names. 
It  may  also  be  observed  that  some  names  are  identical  in  form:  Nilab  (105, 
116),  Aninditab  (laz,  124),  GuhSvfisi  (131,  138},  Vifnu  (126,  162),  Jafi 
(55>  Bx),  Dh^tft  (126,  141},  Balab  (99,  122),  Mumb  (9l^  90>  Lambitofthab 
(109,  123;,  MahAka^tbab  (108,  147},  Vrkfab  (85,  132);  others  are  rq>eti- 
tive  in  sense:  SmaiAnavAsI  (57),  iSmaiAnavAn  (108};  Narab  (59) ^ Kara, 
Vigrahab  (105);  MahArdmA  (no),  MahAkeiab  (no);  Candrab  (6x) 
Indub  (150);  Others  are  the  names  of  gods  and  sages:  VAsudevab  (92), 
Adhok^iyab  (loi),  Vi99U  (126, 162)  (ofY^u);  DhAtA  (126)  (of  BrahmA); 
Devendra  (155),  &xkra  (126),  Amareia  (122),  Vajri  (154)  (of  Indra); 
VAmadeva  (92),  Kapila  (1x9)  (of  sagea)* 

ST.  explains  these  anomalies  in  the  following  way:  (1)  Identical 
fiHrms  ate  intapietable  differently.  (2)  Siva  is  omni-formed  and  hence 
can  be  identical  with  VmUf  BrabmA,  Indra,  fire,  air,  etc.  (3)  Originally, 
there  were  ten  thousand  names  whose  authorship  was  assigned  to  BrahmA. 
They  were  reduced  to  one  thousand  and  eight  numbers  by  BrahmA  himself 
and  handed  down  to  Tand>>t  for  propagation  among  the  worshippers. 


263 


Thousand  Names  of  Siva 

54b-60.  Rudra^s  thousand  names : ( 1 ) Sthira  (steady ) (2 ) Sthanu*®^ 
(fixed  as  a stump)  (3)  Prabhu  (lord)  (4)  Bhanu*®®  (sun)  (5) 
Pravara  (very  good  one)  (6)  Varada®®®  (one  who  grants  boons) 
(7)  Vara  (excellent)  (8^  Sarvatman  (soul  of  all)  (9)  Sarvavi- 
khyata  (well  known  to  all)  (10)  Sarva  (identical  with  all) 
(11)  Sarvakara®®^  (doing  everything)  (12)  Bhava  (source  of 
all)  (ISjJatin  (having  matted  hair)  (14)  Daridin  (having  the 
staff)  (15)  Sikhandin®®®  (having  the  tuft)  (16)  Sarvaga  (reach- 
ing everything)  (17)  Sarvabhavana  (conceiver  and  creator 
of  all)  (18)  Hari  (identical  withHari)  (19)  Hari](i^$a  (deer- 
eyed) (20)  Sarvabhutahara  (destroyer  of  all  living  beings) 
(21)  Smrta  (remembered)  (22)  Pravrtti  (activity)  (23) 
Nivrtti  (withdrawal  of  worldly  activity)  (24)  Santatman®®® 
(of  quiescent  soul)  (25)  l^a^vata  (permanent)  (26)  Dhruva 
(steady)  (27)  Sma^anavasin®®^  (residing  in  the  cremation 
ground)  (28)  Bhagavan®®®  (lord)  (29)  Khecara  (one  walking 
over  the  sky)  (30)  Gocara  (one  walking  over  the  earth)  (31) 
Ardana®®®  (one  who  harasses)  (32)  Abhivadya  (one  who  is 
worthy  of  being  saluted)  (33)  Mahakarman  (one  of  great 
tasks)  (34)  Tapasvin  (ascetic)  (35)  Bhutadharana  (one 


388.  Sthanub —ti^thanty  asmin  ST.  : the  abode  of  the  universe.  Gf. 
*8amsaramaiidapasyasya  mdlastambh&ya  iambhave*— cited  in  ST. 

389.  Bh^u — the  sun  or  the  illuminator  of  the  universe.  Gf.  *ya8ya 
bhasa  sarvam  idaih  vibhilti’— cited  in  ST. 

390 . Varadab — one  who  grants  boons  or  one  who  destroys  the  covering 
of  illusion  (maya-vilis&n  dyad  khandayati)  ST. 

397.  Sarvakarab — the  material  cause  of  the  universe.  Gf.  *yato  vk 
imani  bhutkni  jayante* — cited  in  ST. 

392.  Sikhaodl—  In  the  form  of  a hunter  adorned  with  the  peacock 
feathers. 

393.  Skntktmk— identical  vnth  the  persons  devoid  of  desires.  Gf. 
yaceksya  santato  bhavas  tasmadktmeti  giyate — cited  in  ST. 

394.  Smaikna-vksi— one  who  hi  sufumnk  artery.  For  this 

meaning  su^umna  ST.  quotes  Hatha-yoga^^’fadipika:  fdnya- 

p&dav!  brahmarandhram  mabi^iathab  / f maiknaifi  limbbavl  madhya- 
mkigafcctyc2L*^vkcakkb. 

395#  bhagav£n~*9adguoaiivary»-viii9tbab  ST.  Gf.  'ut- 

pnetha  pralaymii  catva  bhutankm  kgatfzh  gatim  vetti  vidykm  avidykih  ea 
sa  vkcyb  Magav^iu  id. 

396;  Afidfitti^'*on>c  who  causes  distms  to  the  tteser  (ardayatinpida- 
jmti)  or  ddfc  Who  llWr  «lnu  (bhaiMyani^ttyayk  carad)  ST, 


264 


Lingapurd^a 


who  sustains  the  living  beings)  (36)  Unmattavesa®*’  (one  who 
appears  in  the  guise  of  a mad  man)  (37)  Pracchanna  (one  who 
is  in  disguise)  (38)  Sarvaloka  (omni-seer),  (39 ) Prajapati (lord 
of  subjects)  (40)  Maharupa®®®  (one  MS ving  great  forms)  (41) 
Mahakaya  (one  of  great  body)  (42)  Sivarupa®®®  (one  of 
auspicious  forms)  (43)  Mahayasas  (one  whose  fame  is  great) 
(44)  Mahatman  (Great  soul)  (45)  Sarvabhuta  (one  who  has 
become  all)  (46)  Virupa^®®  (deformed)  (47)  Vamana  (dwarf) 
(48)  Nara^®^  (man)  (49)  Lokapala  (the  protector  of  the 
worlds)  (50)  Antarhitatman  (one  whose  soul  is  hidden) 
(51)  Prasada  (pleasure)  (52)  Abhayada*®^  (bestower  of  fear- 
lessness) (53)  Vibhu^®^  (all-pervading)  (54)  ) Pavitra  (holy) 
(55)  Mahan  (great)  (56)  Niyata  (restrained)  (57)  Niyata- 
sraya  (invariable  support)  (58)  Svayambhu  (self-born)  (59) 
Sarvakarman  (one  performing  all  holy  rites)  (60)  Adi^®^  (the 
first  one)  (61)  Adikara^®®  (one  who  creates  the  first)  (62) 
Nldhi  (^i^easure  for  all). 

61-70  (63)  Sahasraksa  (thousand-eyed)  (64)  Visalaksa 
(wide-eyed)  (65)  Soma  (accompanied  by  Uma)  (66) 
Naksatra  Sadhaka  (the  creator  of  stars)  (67)  Candra 
(identical  with  the  moon)  (68)  Surya  (identical  with  the 
sun)  (69)  Sani  (identical  with  saturn)  (70)  Ketu  (identical 
with  Ketu)  (71)  Graha®®®  (planet)  (72)  Grahapati^®"^  (the  lord 

397.  Unmatta-Ve^at^ — this  refers  to  his  abnormal  behaviour  in 

Daru  forest  (Gh.  ). 

398.  Maharupah — of  great  dimension.  Cf  'mahato  mahiyin’-- cited 
in  ST. 

399 • N.S.  Text  reads  sarvarupah  for  §ivarupah  or  Savarupah, 

400.  Virupab — iarabha-pak^irupah  ST  . one  who  has  the  form  of  a 
bird  (~vi).  Sec  ch.  31. 

401.  Narah — one  who  assumed  a human  shape. 

402 . Abhayadah — abhayam  svatmaikyam  dadati  ST.  one  who  identi- 
fies himself  with  his  devotees  and  thus  makes  them  fearless.  Cf.  ‘bhayaih 
dvitlyabhinivcsatah  syat-  cited  in  ST 

403.  Vibhuh— omnipresent.  jCf.^eiKfdam  purnam  puru$ena  sarvam* 

cited  in  ST^  - 

404.  Adih—primcval  being.  Cf.  devanSm  pratbamam  purast;^^. 
cited"  in  ST. 

405.  Adikarah —the  creator  of  the  creator.  Cf.,/yo  brahm$]?am 
vidadhati  purvam* — cited  in  ST. 

406.  Grahah  — Vrftyavagrahakarako  bhaumah  ST.  Mms  who  with- 
holds rains. 

407.  Grahapati(i— lord  of  planets (grahas),  i.e.  Jupiter  (Bfhaspati). 


265 


Thousand  Nams  of  Siva 

of  planets)  (73)  Mata^®®  (identical  with  Budha  (74)  Rajan^®® 
(king)  (75)  Rajyodaya®^®  (cause  of  the  rise  of  kingdoms)  (76)  Karta 
(the  doer)  (77)  Mi-gab^arpana®^^  (one  who  discharges  arrows 
on  the  deer)  (78)  Ghana  (solid,  cloud)  (79)  Mahatapas  (of 
great  penance)  (80)  Dirghatapas  (of  long  penance)  (81) 
Adr^ya  (invisible)  (82)  Dhanasadhaka  (realiser  of  riches) 
(83)  Samvatsara  (vear)  (84)  Krti®^®  (one  who  has  fulfilled 
duties)  (85)  Mantra  (identical  with  mantra)  (86)  Pra^ia- 
yama,  (87)  Parantapa  (one  who  scorches  enemies)  (88) 
Yogin  (89)  Yoga  (90)  Mahabija  (having  great  seed)  (91) 
Maharetas  (one  whose  semen  virile  is  great)  (92)  Mahabala 
(one  of  great  strength)  (93)  Suvarnaretas  (having  golden 
semen)  (94)  Sarvajna  (omniscient)  (95)  Subija^^®  (having 
good  seed)  (96)  Vrsavahana  (bull- vehicled)  (97)  Dasabahu 
(having  ten  arms)  (98)  Animisa  (winkless)  (99)  Nilakantha 
(blue-necked)  (100)  Umapati^^  (lord  of  Uma)  (101)  Vi^va- 
rupa  (universal  formed)  (102)  Svayamsrestha  (one  who  is 
the  most  excellent  oneself)  (103)  Balavira  (strong  and  heroic) 
(104)  Balagrani  (leader  of  the  army)  (105)  Gaiaakarta  (creator 
of  ganas)  (106)  Ganapati  (lord  of  the  ganas)  (107)  Digvasas 
(naked)  (108)  Kamya  (one  worthy  of  being  loved)  (109) 
Mantravit  (knower  of  the  mantras)  (110)  Parama  (greatest) 
(111)  Mantra  (112)  Sarvabhavakara  (inducer  of  all  emotions) 
(113)  Kara  (destroyer)  (114)  Kamandaludhara  (holding  the 
water-pot)  (115)  Dhanvin  (holding  the  bow)  (116)  Banahasta 
(having  arrows  in  the  hand)  (117)  Kapalavan  (having  the 
skull)  (118)  Sari  (having  the  arrows)  (119)  SataghnI  (having 
the  hundred-killer  weapon)  (120)  Khadgin  (having  the  sword) 
(121)  Patti^^in  (having  the  iron  club)  (122)  Ayudhin  (having 

408.  Matal)i — the  planet  mercury  (budha). 

409.  Raja— the  planet  Venus. 

410.  Rajyodayah — ^RShu  ST. 

41 1.  Mrgabai^Srpana^.  ST*  cites  Mahimna  stotia  to  explain  the 
legend  of  Br^mi  becoming  a deer  and  of  iSiva,  an  arrow. 

412.  KrtI=N.S.  text  reads  krtab^krta-yugarupab  ST. 

413.  Subijab —whose  semen  virile  is  infallibly  productive.  It  refers 
to  the  birth  of  K&rttikeya,  the  son  of  iSiva,  out  of  the  fire.  The  fire  could  not 
destroy  the  semen  of  3iva. 

414.  Umk-patib — ^lord  of  Energy  in  the  form  of  Om,  or  the  master 
of  Brahma-vidy&*  Of.  iToia-^^Brahma-vidyaiva  om — cited  in  ST. 


266 


Lingapurd^ 


weapons)  (123)  Mahan  (great)  (124)  Aja  (Unborn)  (125) 
Mrgarupa  (having  the  form  of  the  deer)  (126)  Tejas  (splen- 
dour)  (127)  Tejadcara  (creator  of  splendour)  (128)  Vidhi 
(precept)  (129)  U$n4in  ("having  turban)  (130)  Suvaktra 
(having  good  face)  (131)  Udagra  (exalted)  (132)  Vinata 
(humble)  (133)  Dirgha  (long)  (134)  Karikefia^^®  (green- 
haired) (135)  Sutirtha  (having  good  holy  centres)  (136) 
Kr?na*^*  (black  or  identical  with  Kr$na,  the  son  of  Vasudeva) 
(137)  Srgalarupa*^’  (one  having  the  form  of  a jackal)  (138) 
Sarvartha  (having  all  riches)  (139)  Munda  (one  with  ton- 
sured head)  (140)  Sarvai^ubhamkara  (one  who  does  good  to 
all)  (141)  Simhailardularupa  (one  having  the  forms  of  lion 
and  tiger)  (142)  Gandhakari  (one  causing  fragrance)  (143) 
Kapardin  (one  having  matted  hair)  (144)  Ordhvaretas  (one 
of  sublimated  sexuality)  (145)  Urdhvalihgin  (one  having  the 
penis  lifted  up)  (146)  Urdhva^ayin*^*  (one  lying  upwards) 
(147)  Nabhas  (one  abiding  in  the  sky)  (148)  Tala  (of  the 
form  of  patala — nether  world),  (149)  Trijatin^^*  (one  having 
three  locks  of  matted  hair)  (150)  Ciravasas  (one  wearing 
bark  garments)  (151)  Rudra  (of  tearful  form)  (152)  Sena  (in 
the  form  of  army  of  Devas)  (153)Pati  (sustainer  of  the  people) 
(154)  Vibhu  (lord). 

71-80.  (155)  Ahoratram  (of  the  forrr  of  day  and  night) 

(156)  Naktam  (of  the  form  of  night)  (157)  Tigmamanyu 
(of  fierce  anger)  (158)  Suvarcas  (having  good  refulgence) 
(159)  Gajaha  (slayer  of  the  t!’ 'phani)  (160)  Daityaha  (slayer 
of  the  daityas)  (161)  Kala  (deal  ume)  (162)  Lokadhata^^o 
(creator  of  the  worlds)  (163)  Gunakara**^  (mine  of  good 
qualities)  (164)  Siihhaiardularupanam  ardra-carmambara- 
dhara  (one  who  wears  the  fresh  Jiide  of  the  lion  and  tiger  as  his 
cloth)  (165)  Kalayogin  (one  who  connects  everything  with 


415.  ilarikriah-'lord  ofVi^nu  (Hari)  and  Brahma  (k). 

416.  — in  ♦he  form  of  Aghora. 

417.  Srgidanlpatt — See  ch.  92. 

418.  Urdhvai&yl— one  who  sleeps  in  the  firmament  ST. 

419*  Tri-jafi— having  Prakfti  of  three  gunas  as  his  consort. 

420.  Loka*dh&t& — support  of  the  fourteen  worlds. 

421.  Ott^&karah — ^mine  or  the  recq>tacle  of  yogic  gunas  (ch.i6}  or 
of  the  24  gut>as  admitted  by  the  Nyiya  philosophy. 


Thousand  Names  oj  iiva  20/ 

time  or  death)  (166)  Mahanada  (having  great  sound)  (167) 
Sarvavasa  (abode  of  all)  (168)  Caluspatha^**  (one  who  goes 
in  all  four  ways  at  the  same  time)  (169)  Ni^acara  (one  walking 
at  night)  (170)  Pretacarin^*®  (walking  among  the  ghosts) 
(171)  SarvadartSin  (seeing  all)  (172)  Mahesvara  (great  lord) 
(173)  Bahu  (omni-lbrmed)  (174)  Bhuta  (of  the  form  of  the  past) 
(175)  Bahudhana  (one  having  much  wealth)  (176)  Sarva* 
sara  (essence  of  all)  (177)  MrteSvara  (lord  of  the  dead)  (178) 
Nrtyapriya  (one  who  is  fond  of  dances  (179)  Nityanrtya  (one 
who  dances  perpetually)  (180)  Nartana***  (one  who  makea 
others  dance)  (181)  Sarvasadhaka  (achiever  of  all)  (182) 
Sakarmuka  (one  who  has  a bow)  (183)  Mahabahu  (large-armed) 
(184)  Mahaghora  (extremely  terrible)  (185)  Mahatapas 
(of  great  penance)  (186)  Mahalara*®®  (of  great  arrows)  (187) 
Mahapaia  (having  a great  noose)  (188)  Nitya  (permanent) 
(189)  Giricara  (walking  over  the  mountains)  (190)  Amatal^^ 
(not  recognizable)^*®  (191)  Sahasrahasta  (thousand-armed) 
(192)  Vijaya  (victorious)  (193)  Vyavasaya  (enterprise) 
(194)  Anindita  (uncensured)  (195)  Amarsana  (angry) 
(196)  Marsanatma  (one  who  endures  and  excuses)  (197) 
Yajfiaha®**  Destroyer  of  the  sacrifice)  (198)  Kamanaiana 
(destroyer  of  Kama)  (199)  Daksaha  (slayer  of  Daksa) 
(200)  Paricarin  (one  who  walks  all  round)  (201) 


422.  Gatufpathak — the  path  of  the  four  goals  of  life,  viz,  (i)  dharma, 
(ii)  artha,  (iii)  kima,  mok^a.  Or  the  originator  of  four  stages  of  life, 
viz.  (i)  brahma-carya  (stage  of  celibacy)  (iii)  grbastha  (stage  of  a house- 
holder;, (iii)  Vkna|X‘astha  (stage  of  a forester),  (iv)  sannyasa  (stage  of  a 
renouncer). 

423.  Preta-viUianab— ^ne  who  has  a preta  (a  departed  being)  as 
his  vehicle.  Gf.  G&inui.idfi  iava-vSbank^  cited  in  ST. 

424.  Nartanab — sarva-prerakab.  ST.  one  who  instigates  all  to 
activity. 

423.  Mah&iarab— one  who  has  a powerful  missile.  ST.  refers  to 
Siva’s  destruction  of  Tripuri. 

426.  ST.  dissolves  *giricaro  matab’  as  ‘giricarab  amatah*;  amatab 
— ^unknown  or  unrecognized.  ST  refers  to  the  event  of  Daru  forest  when  the 
sages  could  not  recognize  him  dressed  in  strange  guise. 

427.  Yajftahi—destrp)^'  of  sacrifice.  It  refers  to  the  legend  of  Siva 
who  destroyed  Dak^a’s  sfteiifiipe. 


268 


Lingapurdna 


(201)  Prahasa^*®  (one  who  laughs  aloud)  (202)  Madhyama^®® 
(Middling)  (203)  Tejsas®®®  (of  the  form  of  fire)  (204) 
apaharin  (destroyer  of  the  universe)  (205)  Balavan  (strong) 
(206)  Vidita^®^  (known)  (207)  Abhyudita  (one  who  has  risen 
up)  (208)  Bahu^®*  (many)  (209)  Gambhiraghosa  (one 
whose  voice  is  profound)  (210)  Yoga tman  of  yogic  soul  (211) 
Yajitaha  (i.e.  destroyer  of  the  sacrifice)  (212)  Kamana  (of  the 
form  of  desire  for  release)  (213)  A^ana  (Destroyer)  (214) 
Gambhirarosa  (one  whose  fury  is  profound)  (215)  Gambhira 
(majestic)  (216)  Gambhira  Balavahana  (one  whose  strength 
and  vehicle  are  profound)  (217)  Nyagrodharupa  (one  who  has 
the  form  of  the  holy  fig  tree)  (218)  Nyagrodha  (identical 
with  the  holy  fig  tree)  (219)  Vi^vakarman  (one  of  universal 
activities)  (220)  Viivabhuk  (swallower  of  the  universe)  (221) 
Tikfna  (one  having  fierce  form)  (222)  Apaya  (one  who  does 
not  take  the  riches  of  his  devotees)  (223)  Haryasva®®^  (having 
green  horses)  (224)  Sahaya  (help)  (225)  Karma^®^  (of  the 
form  of  sacrificial  ritual)  (226)  Kalavid"^*®  (one  who  knows  the 
time)  (227)  Visnu  (pevading  all)  (228)  Prasadita  (one  who 
has  been  propitiated)  (229)  Yajfia  (230)  Samudra  (ocean) 
(231)  Badavamukha  (mouth  of  the  submarine  fire)  (232) 
Hutalanasahaya  (one  who  is  helped  (assisted)  by  fire)  (233) 
Praiantatman  (quiescent  soul)  (234)  Hutasana  (fire)  (235) 
Ugratejas  (one  whose  refulgence  is  fierce)  (236)  Mahatejas 
(of  great  splendour)  (237)  Jaya  (victory)  (238)  Vijayakalavid 
(one  who  knows  the  time  of  victory ) . 


428*  Prahasah — who  is  prone  to  laughter.  Gf.  'sphutattah^o- 
ccalit&ndakosah* — Siva  Kavaca  as  cited  in  ST. 

429.  Madhyamah  the  middling.  It  refers  to  the  Rudra  form  of  iSiva. 
Cf.  ''madhyato  Rudram  H&nam" — cited  in  ST. 

430.  Tejas — in  the  form  of  fire.  Cf.  “Rudro  v&  e|a  yad  agnih” — cited 
in  ST. 

431.  Viditah — brahmavid-rupab*  ST,  one  who  has  identified  him- 
self who  those  with  have  realized  Brahman,  “brahma-vid  brahmaiva 
bhavati’*— cited  in  ST. 

432.  Bahuh — ST,  dissolves  as  *a-bahuh*’~one,  not  many.  **ekam 
•ad  viprft  bahudhft  Vadanti”  -cited  in  ST, 

433*  Harya4vah-~one  who  has  for  his  vehicle  ST, 

434.  Karma — one  who  symbolises  pious  or  diaritable  deeds. 

435.  K&lavid-H>ne  who  knows  auspicious  or  inauspicious  times  ST, 


269 


Thousand  Namos  of  Siva 

81-100.  (239)  Jyotisamayanam  (the  cause  of  the  transit 

of  the  luminaries)  (240)  Siddhi  (Achievement)  (241)  Sandhi 
(alliance)  (242)  Vigraha  (clash)  (243)  Khadgin  (one  who  has 
a sword)  (244)  Sankhin  (one  who  has  a conch)  (245)  Jatin^®* 
(one  who  has  matted  hair)  (246)  Jvalin  (one  who  has  flames) 
(247)  Khecara  (one  moving  about  in  the  firmament)  (248) 
Dyucara  (one  moving  about  in  the  heaven)  (249)  fialin 
(strong)  (250)  Vainavin  (one  having  the  lute)  (251)  Paigiavin 
(one  having  the  Panava  drum)  (252)  Kala  (Death,  Time) 
(253  j Kalakan^ha  (dark-necked)  (254)  Katahkata  (one  who 
lovingly  touches  the  elephantine  face  of  his' son  Ga^e^a)  (255) 
Naksatravigraha^^’  (one  having  the  stellar  body)  (256)  Bhava 
(emotion)  (257)  Vibhava  (friend)  (258)  Sarvatomukha*®® 
(having faces  all  round)  (259)  Vimochana*®*  (one  who  releases 
(260)  Sarana  (refuge)  (261)  Hiranyakavacodbhava  (born  of 
golden  armour  )*(262)  Mekhala(one  in  the  form  of  yoni — ^womb) 
(263)  Krtirupa  (one  in  the  form  of  effort)  (264)  Jalacara®®® 
(one  having  actions  similar  to  those  of  senseless  persons)  (265) 
Stuta  (one  who  is  eulogised)  (266)  Vi^i  (one  having  the  lute 
Vina)  (267)  Panavin  (one  having  the  drum  Panava)  (268) 
Talin^*^  (one  having  the  Tala  (beating  of  the  time)  (269) 
Nalin^^^  (one  having  the  tube)  (270)  Kalikatu  (one  who 
is  harsh  to  Kali)  (271)  Sarvaturyanin^in  (one  who  sounds 
his  instruments)  (272)  Sarvavyapyaparigraha®®®  (one  who  is 
omnipresent  and  does  not  accept  gifts)  (273)  Vyalarupin 
(one  having  the  form  of  a tiger)  (274)  Bilavasa  (one  residing 
in  a hollow)  (275)  Guhavasa*®®  (one  whose  residence  is 


436.  Jati — one  who  is  the  base  of  the  universe  ST. 

437.  Nakfatravigrahab— one  who  is  the  abode  (vigraha)  of  cons- 
tellations. 

438.  Sarvatomukhab — Shaving  face  in  all  directions.  ***VUvatai 
cakfur  uta  vi&vatomukbab’**--cited  in  ST. 

439.  Vinoiocanab — one  who  releases  jlvas  from  the  net  of  twentyfour 
tattvas. 

440.  Jalkcfirab  or  Jalkdhftrab~^ne  who  is  the  support  or  the  cause 
of  movement  for  watery  reservoirs,  rivers,  streams  and  oceans. 

441.  TiUl — one  who  has  a t&la — a musical  instrument. 

442.  NSli— one  who  holds  a lotus  in  his  hand  or  is  bom  of  a lotus.  ST* 

443.  Sarva^vy&pl — one  who  has  an  sAl-pervadve  subtle  body. 

444.  Guhk-v&sid^  -one  who  abides  in  guhft  (intellect) 


270 


Lingapurd^ 


cave)  (276)  Tarangavid  (one  who  knows  the  innermost  idea) 
(277)  Vfk^a  (kalpavrksa)  (278)  Srimalakarmin*^®  (one  who 
has  Sriksctra  as  the  sphere  of  his  worship)  (279)  Sarvabandha- 
vimocana  (one  who  releases  (devotees  from  all  bondages) 
(280)  Bandhatia  (one  w^ho  binds  the  non-devotees)  (281) 
Surendra^am  yudhi  satruvina^ana  (one  who  destroys  the 
enemies  of  Devas  in  the  battle)  (282)  Sakha^^®  (friend)  (283) 
Prav^a^^’  (shelter  for  all  j (284)  Durapa  (unattainable)  (285) 
Sarvasadhunisevita  (one  who  is  resorted  to  by  all  good  men) 

(286)  Praskanda  (one  who  is  drying  up  and  moving  ahead) 

(287)  Avibhava  (one  who  is  not  comprehended)  (288)  fulya 
(equal  )^^®  (289)  Yajnavibhagavid  (one  who  knows  the  divi- 
sions of  yajfias)  (290)  Sar/avasa**®  (one  who  abides  in  all) 
(291 ) Sarvacarin  (one  who  goes  everywhere ) (292)  Durvasas 
Identical  with  the  sage  of  that  name)  (293)  Vasava  (Indra) 
(294)  Mata"®  (non-dual)  (295)  Haima  (pertaining  to  gold  or 
snow)  (296)  Hemakara  (one  who  has  gold  in  his  hands)  (297) 
Yajfta  (sacrifice)  (298)  Sarvadhari  (holding  all)  (299)  Dharot- 
tama  (best  among  the  supporters)  (300)  Akaia"^  (firmament) 
(301)  Nirvirupa"*  (having  no  form)  (302)  Vivasas"^  (one 
who  has  no  clothes)  (303)  Uraga  (serpent)  (304)  Khaga 
(going  in  the  sky)  (305)  Bhiksu  (beggar,  mendicant)  (306) 
Bhiksumpin  (one  who  is  in  the  guise  of  a mendicant)  (307) 
Raudrarupa  (one  who  has  a terrible  form)  (308)  Surupavan"* 

445.  Sr hnalakanmin--  one  who  resorts  to  the  abode  of  Lak$ml  (Srl- 
ZD&la)  for  yogic  trance. 

446.  One  who  is  the  friend  of  Jiva  (i.e,  the  individual  soul)  “suparnav 
aitau  sadr^au  sakhfiyau**.  -cited  in  ST, 

447.  Pravitsah'—ooe  who  is  the  eternal  abode  of  all  mobile  and  immo- 
bile beings. 

44.8.  Tulyah— unprejudiced. 

449*  Sarva-viisah  —one  who  is  the  sheath  of  all.  “ii&v&syam  idam 
sarvam*’  cited  in  ST, 

450.  Matah — advaita-mata-rupah  ST.  of  non-dual  form 

451.  Ak&iah — one  who  shines  splendidly. 

452.  Nirvirupah— nirgataih  virQparo  iarabha-paksirfipam  yasmSt 
ST,  the  source  of  origin  of  iSarabha.  It  refers  to  the  narrative  of  Sarabha 
occurring  in  this  puratia. 

453*  Vivask — one  who  has  no  covering  over  his  body.  i.e.  naked. 

454.  Surapav&n— of  auspicious  form:  **tasyaite  tanuvau  ghoraanya 
4ivaiflp§**---ciled  in  ST* 


271 


Thousand  Names  of  Siva 

(one  who  has  good  forms)  (309)  Vasurctas  (one  whose  semen 
virile  causes  riches)  (310)  Suvarcasvin  (having  good  refulgence) 
(311)  Vasuvega  (one  who  has  the  velocity  of  the  Vasus)  (312) 
Mahabala  (one  who  has  great  strength)  (313)  Manas  (mind) 
(314)  Vega  (one  who  has  velocity)  (315)  Nisa  (night)  (316) 
Cara  (a  spy)  (317)  Sarvalokai^ubhaprada  (one  who  grants 
auspicious  things  to  all  the  worlds)  (318)  Sarvavasin^^®  (one 
whose  residence  is  in  everything)  (319)  Trayivasin®^®  (one 
who  resides  in  the  three  Vedas)  (320)  UpadeiSakara  (one  who 
gives  instructions)  (321)  Adhara  (one  having  no  support) 
(322)  Muni®®^  (sage)  (323)  Atman  (soul)  (324)  Muni 
(sagacious)  (325)  Loka  (world)  (326)  Sabhagya  (Fortunate) 

(327)  Sahasrabhuk®®®  (one  who  enjoys  thousand  things) 

(328)  Paksin®®®  (bird)  (329)  Paksarupa®®®  (having  the  form 
of  the  wing)  (330)  Atidipta  (highly  illuminated)  (331)  Nifa- 
kara  (moon)  (332)  Samira  (wind)  (333)  Damanakara  (one 
who  has  the  form  of  a suppressor)  (334)  Artha  (wealth,  meaning 
purpose)  (335)  Arthakara  (serving  the  purpose)  (336)  Avaj^a®®^ 
(uncontrolled  by  another)  (337)  Vasudeva®®*  (identical  with 
that  god)  (338)  Deva  (lord)  (339)  Vamadeva  .(lord  of  oppo- 
sites) (340)  Vamana  (Dwarf)  (341)  Siddhiyogapaharin 
(one  who  removes  Siddhi  and  Yoga)  (342)  Siddha  ®®®  (self  pro- 
ved) (343)  Sarvarthasadhaka  (one  who  realises  all  purposes ) 
(344)  Aksunna  (undefeated)  (345)  Ksunnarupa  (one  who  has 
the  form  of  the  defeated)  (346)  Vrsana  (one  who  extends 


455.  SarvavasI—  all-pcrvasivc, 

456.  TraylvasI— -one  who  abides  in  the  three  Vedas. 

457.  Munih— in  the  form  of  sacred  tree  agasti.  ST,  cites  Viiva  in 
support  of  this  meaning. 

458.  Sahasrabhuk-— one  who  destroys  (bhuAkte) or  protects  (bhunakti) 
people. 

459.  Pak?i~>one  who  has  two  wings:  Jlk  and  Saman.  ‘*|tk 
daksiiiah  pak^ab  samottarab  pak^ab**.  ST. 

460.  Paksarupab — in  the  form  of  two  fortnights:  white  and  dark. 

461.  Vaiab — amenable  to  the  wishes  of  his  devotees.  Or  dissolve 
‘ava^ab’ — free. 

462.  VSsudevab — ST,  offers  afar-fetched  explanation:  one  who  sports 
in  disguise. 

463.  Siddhab-^Kapila:  **sUdh§n&iii  Kapilo  munib**  Bhagavad-Gitg 
cited  in  ST, 


212 


LingapwroJ^ 


morality)  (347)  Mrdu*®*  (soft)  (348)  Avyaya  (unchanging) 
(349)  Mahasena  (one  who  has  a big  army)  (350)  Vii^akha*®* 
(Karttikeya)  (351)  Sastibhaga^®*  (one-sixtieth  part)  (352) 
Gavarn  pati®®^  (lord  of  the  line)  (353)  Cakrahasta  (having 
discus  in  the  hands)  (354)  Vis^ambhi®®®  (impending)  (355) 
Mulastambhana®®®  (one  who  steadies  the  root)  (356)  Rtu 
(season)  (357)  Rtukara  (one  who  causes  the  seasons)  (358) 
Tala  (palmyra  tree)  (359)  Madhu  (honey)  (360)  Madhukara 
(bee)  (361)  Vara  (excellent  one)  (362)  Vanaspatya  (belonging 
to  a tree)  (363)  VSjasana®’®  (one  loving  clarified  butter)  (364) 
Nitya  (eternal)  (365)  A^ramapujita  (worshipped  by  people 
in  all  stages  of  life)  (366)  Brahmacarin  (religious  student) 
(367)  Lokacarin  (one  who  walks  over  the  world)  (368)  Sarva- 
cdrin  (moving  about  on  everything)  (369)  Sucaravit  (one  who 
knows  good  conduct)  (370)  I^ana^^^  (371  )I^vara®’2  (lord)  (372) 
Kala  (time,  death)  (373)  Nisacarin  (one  moving  about  at 
night)  (374)  Anekadrk*’®  (having  many  eyes)  (375)  Nimit- 
tastha  (one  stationed  in  the  cause)  (376)  Nimittam  (cause) 
(377)  Nandi  (delighted  and  delighter)  (378)  Nandikara  (one 
causing  others  to  be  delighted)  (379)  Hara (destroyer)  (380) 
Nandi  (Nandin)  (381 ) Isvara®’®  (382 ) Sunandin  (383 ) Nandana 
(delightful)  (384)  Visamardana  (one  suppressing  poison) 

464.  Mrduh—of  soft  nature.  **akr^ta«sapta-patala-kuharopi  maha 
balalti  prapte  Kaliyugc  ghore  mrdutam  upay^syati”— <ited  in  ST, 

465.  VUakbab — of  the  form  of  K^ttikeya. 

466.  Sa^tibhlLgab— one  who  has  sixty  tattvas  at  his  command.  See 
Mafjd  ukyopanifad, 

467  Gavarn  pat^ll— lord  of  the  sacred  hymns.  ST,  quotes  Siva  Gita: 
**Chandas&m  yastu  dhenunam  r^abhatvena  Kirtitab”. 

468.  Viftsunbhi — one  who  makes  others  motionless. 

469.  Mulastambhanab— CiontroUcr  of  Prakrti  (milla) . 

470.  Vi^asanab — of  the  form  of  V^asaneyi  &&kh&  of  the  Sukla  Yajur- 

veda. 

471.  Isanab  -lord  of  all  knowledge:  **banab  sarva-vidy&nam*'. 

47a.  livarab —controller  of  all  beings.  **!ivarah  sarva-bhut^am” — 

cited  in  ST, 

473.  Aneka  tfk  -multi-eyed.  Cf.  **namo  astu  nilagrv^ya  saha- 
sr&kskya  midbu^e**— cited  in  ST, 

474.  iivarab— abolmding  in  weakh  or  prosoerity.  Gf  **iivaro  vibha- 
vair  adhyab**— Viiva  cited  in  ST, 


273 


Thousand  Xames  of  Siva 

(385)  Bhagaharin  (remover  of  Bhaga ) (386)  Niyantr^’®  (one 
who  restrains,  a charioteer)  (387)  Kala  (388)  Lokapitamaha 
(grandfather  of  the  worlds)  (389)  Caturmukha^’*  (four-faced) 
(390)  Mahalihga  (having  great  lihga)  (391)  Carulinga 
(having  charming  lihga)  (392)  Lihgadhyaksa*’^  (presiding 
deity  of  the  lihgas)  (393)  Suradhyaksa  (presiding  deity  of 
Devas)  (394)  Kaladhyaksa  (presiding  deity  of  time)  (395) 
YugSvaha  (bringing  about  the  yuga)  (396)  Bijadhyaksa^’® 
(presiding  deity  of  the  seeds  or  corns)  (397)  Bijakarta  (the 
maker  of  the  seeds)  (398)  Adhyatma  (self-centred)  (399) 
Anugata  (one  with  the  followers  in  spiritual  line)  (40^0)  Bala^’® 
(strength)  (401)  Itihasa^®®  (Mythological  text)  (402)  Kalpa 
(ritualistic  text)  (403)  Damana  (suppressor)  (404)  Jagadi^- 
vara  (lord  of  the  universe)  (405)  Dambha  (arrogance)  (406) 
Dambhakara  (one  causing  arrogance)  (407)  Datr  (donor) 
(408)  Vaih^a  (race)  (409)  Vaihsakara  (one  who  maintains 
the  family)  (410)  Kali  (identical  with  the  yuga  Kali). 

101-110.  (411)  Lokakarta  (maker  of  the  worlds ) (412) 

Pasupati  (lord  of  the  Pa^us  or  individual  souls)  (413)  Maha- 
karta  (the  great  maker)  (414)  Adhoksaja^®^  (Visnu,  identical 
withVisiiu)  (415)  Aksaram  (imperishable)  (416)  Paramam 
(great)  (417)  Brahman  (brahman)  (41 8) Balavan  (strong)  (419) 
8ukra  (Venus)  (420)  Nitya  (permanent)  (421)  Anita  (having 
no  lord  above  him)  (422)  Suddhatma^*®  (Pure  soul)  (423) 
Suddha  (pure)  (424)  Mana  (measure)  (425)  Gati  (goal) 
(426)  Havis  (rice  and  ghee  offering)  (427)  Prasada  (mansion) 
(428)  Bala^®®  (strength)  (429)  Darpa  (arrogance)  (430) 


475.  Niyanta — charioteer.  **jagad-yantra-svarupasya  rathasya  iri- 
mahesvarah/niyanta  tata  cvesah  suta  ityabhidhiyate**— Ahobala  cited  in 

sr, 

476.  Gaturmukhah— of  the  form  of  four>faced  Brahm^. 

477.  Lingadhyak§a^^ — lord  of  unmanifest  Prakfti  (liAga). 

47ti.  Bijadhyak^ — dispenser  of  the  fruits  of  dharma  and  adharma. 
479.  Balah— strong  one.  Gf.  “balaya  namah**  -cited  in  ST, 

4B0.  Itih^ah-  of  the  form  of  tradition. 

481.  Adhok^ajal^ — not  realiaable  by  the  organs  of  sense. 

482.  SuddhUtma — of  pure  mind.  For  *Stman’  in  the  sense  of  *mind^ 
see  Viiva:  *^tmi  deha-mano-buddhi^u*— cited  in  $T. 

483.  Bala— one  who  has  an  abode  in  the  form  ot  KaiUsa).  ST, 
cites  VUva:  ‘balaiii  ftbane’. 


274 


Lingapura^a 


Darpana  (mirror)  (431)  Havya  (offering  consigned  to  the 
fire)  (432)  Indrajit  (conqueror  of  Indra)  (433)  Vcdakara 
(maker  of  the  Vedas)  (434)  Sutrakara  (compiler  of  the  Apho- 
risms) (435)  Vidvan  (scholar)  (436)  Paramardana  (suppres- 
sor of  enemies)  (437)  Mahameghanivasin^®^  (resident  of 
the  great  cloud)  (438)  Mahaghora  (extremely  terrible;  (439) 
Vasin^®^  (one  who  keeps  persons  under  control)  (440)  Kara 
(the  destroyer  ol  the  universe)  (441 ) Agnijvala  (flame  of  the  fire) 
(442)  Mahajvala  (having  great  flame)  (443)  Paridhumravrta 
(one  surrounded  by  smoke)  (444)  Ravi  (sun)  (445)  Dhi- 
sana  (intelligent  one)  (446)  l^ahkara  (447)  Anitya  (non- 
eternal  in  the  form  of  the  universe)  (448)  Varcasvin  (refulgent) 
(449)  Dhumralocana  (having  smoke-coloured  eyes)  (450) 
Nila^ss  (blue-coloured)  (451 ) Ahgalupta*®’  (one  deficient  in  a 
limb)  (452)  Sobhana  (splendid  one)  (453)  Naravigraha^®® 
(one  having  human  body)  ,(454)  Svasti  (hail)  (455)  Svasti- 
svabhava  (naturally  faring  well)  (456)  Bhogin  (enjoying 
pleasures)  (457)  Bhogakara  (causing  pleasures)  (458)  Laghu 
(light)  (459)  Utsanga  (lap,  devoid  of  attachment)  (460) 
Mahahga  (having  great  limbs)  (461)  Mahagarbha  ^having 
great  womb)  (462)  Pratapavan  (valorous)  (463)  Krsnavarna 
(black  in  colour)  (464)  Suvarna  (having  good  colour)  (465) 
Indriya  (sense-organ)  (466)  Sarvavarnika  [of  all  castes  (colours)] 
(467)  Mahapada  (having  big  feet)  (468)  Mahahasta  (having 
big  hands)  (469)  Mahakaya  (of  great  body)  (470)  Mahayasas 
(having  great  fame)  (471)  Mahamurdha  (having  great  head) 
(472)  Mahamatra^®®  (having  great  Matras  (units  of  time)  (473) 
Mahamitra  (Great  friend  (474 ) Nagalaya^®®  (having  mountain 
as  residence)  (475)  Mahaskandha (having  great  shoulder)  (476) 
Mahakarna  (having  great  ears)  (477)  Mahostha  (having 

484.  Mah&mcgha-nivasin — one  who  ha$  Vi?nu  (mahamegha)  for  his 
abode; 

485 . Vai  i — controller . 

486.  Nilah — blue  or  dark.  It  refers  to  his  aghoia  form. 

487.  Ahga-luptali—part  of  whose  body  is  possessed  by  Uma. 

488.  Nara-vigrahah— one  who  had  a battle  with  Arjuna. 

489.  Mahamatiab — controller  of  elephants  in  the  form  of  death. 

490.  Nag^layah— one  who  lives  on  mountains. 

490a.  iSmaiiSnav&n — imanaih  sarlr&^lUii  4^am  tanu-karanam  punar* 
janma-nivSUraijaih  Kii^ipuraih  yasya-— one  who  saves  men  who  live  m Kasi 
from  the  circle  of  birth  and  death. 


275 


Thousand  Names  of  Siva 

great  lips)  (478 j Mahahanu  (having  great  jaws)  (479) 
Mahanasa  (having  great  nose)  (480)  Mahakantha  (having 
great  neck)  (481)  Mah^riva  (having  great  cervix) 

(482)  Smasanavan^^oa  (having  the  cremation  ground) 

(483)  Mahabala  (having  great  strength)  (484)  Mahatcjas 
(having  great  splendour)  (485)  Aniar  (omnipresent )^^^  (486) 
Atman  (immanent  soul)  (487)  MrgaJaya  fabode  of  the  deer) 
(488)  Lambitostha^®^  (liaviug  suspended  lips)  (489)  Nistha 
(steady)  (490)  Mahamaya  (having  or  wielding  great  M4ya)^ 
(491 ) Payonidhi  (storehouse  of  water,  milk)  (492  ) Mahadanta 
(having  great  teeth)  (493)  Mahadarhstra  (having  great  cur- 
ved fangs)  (494)  Mahajihva  (having  great  tongue)  (495) 
Mahamukha  (having  great  face)  (496)  Mahanakha  (having 
great  nail)  (497)  Maharoman  (having  great  hairs)  (498) 
Mahakesa  (having  great  tresses  of  hair)  (499)  Mahajata 
(having  great  matted  hair). 

1 11-120.  (500)  Asapatna^®^  (having  no  rivals  or  enemies) 

(501)  Prasada’*-'^  (grace)  (502 y Pratyaya  (belief)  (503) 
Gita-sadhaka  (one  who  practises  music)  (504)  Prasvedana 
(one  who  sweats  y (505)  Asvedana^®^  (one  who  does  not  pers- 
pire) (506)  Adika^®®  (one  who  is  the  first  of  all)  (507)  Maha- 
muni*®^  (great  sage)  (508)  Vj-saka'*®**  (dharma)  (509)  Vrsa- 
(the  bull-bannered)  (510)  Anala  (fire)  (511)  Vayu- 
vahana"'®®  (wind-vchicled)  (512)  Mandalin  (one  having  halo) 
(513)  Mcruvasa  (one  having  the  Meru  as  residence)  (514) 
Devavahana  (deva- vehicled)  (515)  Atharvasirsa  (the  name 
of  the  Vedic  Text;  having  that  as  the  head)  (516)  Samasya 
(having  Saman  as  the  face)  (517)  Rksahasrorjiteksana  (having 


491 . Antar — one  who  abides  in  all. 

492.  Lambito?thah—It  refers  to  Ganesa. 

493.  Asapatnah — ^without  a foe  or  a co-wife. 

494.  Prasadal;^ — one  who  destroys  (prakar^e^a  sadayati ) asuras. 

495.  Asvahenah  (a-su-aha-inab)— ‘lord  of  Vi?^u.  ST, 

496.  Adikah-— the  primeval  (patriarch).  “prajapatinSm  prathamam” 
Mbh.  (Drona  parva) — cited  in  ST. 

497.  Mahamunih— in  the  form  of  Nirada. 

49B.  Vr§akab — ^in  the  form  of  Dharma. 

499.  Vr§akctub — one  who  has  Vr§a  (Nand  ikes  vara)  on  his  jSagstaff. 
Vayu-vahanab— one  who  has  wind  as  his  Vehicle,  Of.  “Marun- 
maya-rathab  iambhub**. — Siva-rahasya  cited  in  •ST’. 


276 


Lihgapurd:i(^a 


the  thousand  verses  as  eyes  of  great  power)  (518)  Yaju^i- 
padabhuja  (having  the  Yajur  mantras  as  feet  and  arms)  (519) 
Guhya  (worthy  to  be  secret)  (520)  Praka^aujas  (of  manifest 
power)  (521)  Amogharthaprasada  (one  whose  grace  is  never 
futile)  (522)  Antarbhavya (one  who  should  be  meditated  upon, 
within  the  heart)  (523)Sudarsana  (good  to  look  at)  (524) Upa- 
hara®*^^  (one  to  whom  gifts  are  presented)  (525)  Priya  (loving 
(526)  Sarvd  (All-in  all)  (527)  Kanaka  (gold)  (528)  Kahcana- 
sthita  (one  stationed  in  gold)  (529)  Nabhi  (the  nave)  (530) 
Nandikara  (one  who  causes  delight)  (531)  Harmya^®^  (having 
a mansion)  (532)  Puskara^®^  (having  a lotus  as  [residence]) 
(533)  Sthapali  (monarch,  architect)  (534)  Sthita  (stationed) 
(535)  Sarvasastra  (having  all  sacred  scriptures)  (536) 
Sarva-dhana  (having  all  riches)  (537)  Sarvadya  (first 
among  all)  (538)  Sarvayajfia  (having  all  Yajnas)  (539) 
Yajva  (performer  of  sacrifices)  (540)  Samahita  (one  who  has 
concentration  and  mental  purity)  (541)  Naga  (having  moun- 
tain as  home)  (542)  Nila®^*  (blue)  (543)  Kavi  (poet)  (544) 
Kala  (time,  death)  (545)  Makara  (crocodile)  (546)  Kala- 
pfijita  (one  who  is  worshipped  by  kala)  (547)  Sagana  (having 
attendants)  (548)  Ganakara  (Maker  of  the  ganas)  (549) 
Bhutabhavanasarathi  (one  who  has  Brahma  as  his  charioteer) 
(550)  Bhasma^ayin  (one  who  lies  in  Bhasma)  (551)  Bhasma- 
goptf®®*  (protector  of  bhasman)  (552)  Bhasmabhutatanu^^® 
(one  whose  body  is  fully  covered  with  ash)  (553)  Gana  (atten- 
dant) (554)  Agama (sacred  literature)  (555)  Vilopa  (one  who 
dissolves)  (556)  Mahatman  (noble  soul)  (557)  Sarvapujita 
(adored  by  all),  (558)  Sukla  (white)  (559)  Strirupasampanna 

501.  UpahSrah — one  to  whom  ofierings  are  made.  Gf.  **sarve 
asmai  balim  ^haranti” — cited  in  ST, 

502.  Harmyah — one  who  has  got  a palace  for  his  abode. 

503.  Pui^karah — one  who  abides  in  Pu^kara.  Puskara  is  a sacred 
place  where  Brahma  is  stated  to  have  set  up  Nllalohita  (Siva*lihga}  (Sk.  I. 
ii.  45*  105).  It  lies  near  Ajmer. 

504.  Nilah — one  who  has  some  peculiar  marks  on  his  body  . Gf. 
Viiva  as  cited  in  ST, 

505.  Bhas«na-gopt&-— one  who  protects  through  ashes.  ST,  quotes 
Mbh.  : **rak$§rthaiii  mahgaUrthaih  ca  pavitrartham  ca  bhimini  l^cha- 
u&fthaj&L  ca  bhakt&n&m  bhasma  dattaxh  may&  puri  // 

506.  Bhasma-bhilta-tanub— who  is  the  source  of  the  origin  of  ashes. 
ST,  refers  to  a legend  in  this  context. 


277 


Thousand  Names  of  Siva 

(equipped  with  the  form  of  a lady)  (560)  Suci  (pure)  (561) 
Bhutanisevita  (resorted  to  by  the  goblins)  (562)  Asramastha 
(one  stationed  in  the  hermitage)  (563)  Kapotastha^®*^  (one 
stationed  in  die  dove)  (564)  Vi§vakarma  (doing  everything) 
(565)  Pad  (lord)  (566)  Virat  (huge  massive  one)  (567) 
VBala-^akha^®®  (having  wide  branches)  (568)  Tamros^ha 
(having  copper-coloured  lips)  (569)  Ambujala  (having 
collection  of  waters)  (570)  Suniscita  (well  decided  ) (571) 
Kapila  (tawny-coloured)  (572)  Kala^a  (water  pot)  (573) 
Sthula  (stout)  (574)  Ayudha  (weapon)  (575)  Romasa 
(hairy)  (576)  Gandharva  (577)  Aditi  (578)  Tarksya  (579) 
Avijneya  (incomprehensible)  (580)  Susarada  (very  young 
and  fresh)  (581)  Parasvadhayudha  (axe-armed)  (582)  Deva 
(illustrious  deity)  (583)  Arthakarin  (creator  of  wealth)  (584) 
Subandhava  (good  kinsman). 

121-140.  (585)  Tumbavina  (having  the  lute  made  of 

Tumba  (a  kind  of  gourd)  (586)  Mahakopa®®®  (having  great 
wrath)  (587)  Ordhvaretas  (one  who  has  sublimated  sexuality) 
(588)  Jalesaya  (one  lying  down  in  the  waters)  (589)  Ugra 
(fierce)  (590)  Varhiakara  (sustainer  of  the  families)  (591) 
Varhla  (race,  bamboo)  (592)  Vaihsavadin  (one  who  ex- 
pounds races)  (593)  Anindita®^® (uncensured)  (594)  Sarvanga- 
rupin  (one  who  assumes  the  form  of  the  part  of  all)  (595) 
MaySvin  (wielding  Maya)  (596)  Suhrda  (friend,  having  good 
heart)  (597 ) Anila^'^^  (wind)  (598)  Bala  (strength)  (598) 
Bandhana  (binding)  (600)  Bandhakarta  (cause  of  bondage) 
(601)  Subandhanavimocana  (one  who  liberates  people  from 
bondages  easily)  (602)  Raksasaghna  (slayer  of  Raksasas) 
(603)  Kamari  (enemy  of  kama)  (604)  Mahadarhstra®^*  (one 

507.  Kapotasthah — one  who  assumed  the  form  of  a pigeon.  ST, 
refers  to  the  legend  of  Sibi  in  the  Aiahabhdrata, 

308.  Visala-iakhah  -Veda-drumarupab  in  the  form  of  the  tree 
of  knowledge. 

509.  Mahakopab-- mahan  pQjyab  kopo  yasya — one  whose  wrath 
is  worshipped.  Cf.  *'namaste  rudra  manyave*’  cited  in  ST. 

510.  Aninditab — ab  Vi?nu  nindito  yasmSt,  through  whom  Visiju 
was  humiliated.  It  refers  to  the  legend  of  Dadhlci. 

51 1.  Anilab — one  who  is  distinct  from  Jiva  ( «nila),  the  latter  being 
attached  to  the  objects  of  senses, 

512.  MahUdaihftrab— one  who  has  projected  tusks.  This  refers  to 
his  boar-form. 


278 


lAngapurS^a 


who  has  large  curved  fangs)  (605)  Mahayudha (having  great 
weapons)  (606)  Lambita  (one  w'ho  is  suspended  down)  (607) 
I.ambito§tha  (one  whose  lips  hang  down  suspended)  (608) 
Lambaha^ta  (one  whose  hands  hane  down)  (609)  Varaprada 
(one  who  grants  the  boon)  (610)  Bahu  farm)  (611)  Anin- 
dita®"^  (uncensured)  (612)  Sarva  (all)  (613)  Sankara  (614) 
Akopana  (having  no  work)  (615)  Amarcia  (lord  of  the 
immortal  beings)  (616)  Mahaghora  (extremely  terrible) 
(617)  VHvedeva  (lord  of  the  universe)  (618)  Surariha 
(destroyer  of  the  enemies  of  Devas)  (619)  Ahirbudhnyad^^* 
(620)  Nirrti  (621)  Cekitana  (knowing  and  conversant)  (622) 
Halin  (balarama  with  the  ploughshare)  (623)  Ajaikapad®^®" 
(the  single-footed  unborn)  (624)  Kapalin^^®  (having  the  skull 
for  rituals)  (625)  Sam  (one  who  renders  joy)  (626)  Kumara 
(one  who  kills  with  spikes)  (627)  Mahagiri^^’  (great  mountain) 
(628)  Dhanvantari®^®  (629)  Dhumaketu  (comet)  (630) 
Surya  (sun)  (631)  Vaiiravana®^®  (632)  Dhatr  (633)  Visnu 
(634)  Sakra  (635)  Mitra  (636)  Tvastf  (637)  Dhara  (moun- 
tain) (638)  Dhruva  (steady)  (639)  Prabhasa  (640)  Parvata 
(641 ) Vayu  (642)  Aryaman  (643)  Savitr  (644)  Ravi  (645) 
Dhrti  (courage)  (646)  Vidhatr  (Creator)  (647)  Mandhatr 
(648)  Bhutabhavana  (purifier  of  the  living  beings)  (649) 
Nira  (water)  (650)  Tirtha  (holy  centre)  (651)  Bhima 
(terrible)  (652)  Sarvakarman  (performing  all  duties)  (653) 
Gunodvaha  (one  who  lifts  up  the  good  attributes)  (654) 


513.  Aninditah — nasti  inditam  paramaisvaryam  yasmat  ST.  the 
most  prosperous  lord. 

514.  Ahirbudhnyah — Se§a-rupah  ST.  the  Dragon  of  the  Deep,  one 
who  has  monopolized  all  powers  and  forms  within  himself  and  lies  concealed 
in  the  region  of  primeval  darkness. 

5 If)*  Aja-ekapad — one-footed  goat,  one  who  is  devoid  of  motion  prior 
to  creation.  According  to  iST.  it  refers  to  his  half  man  and  half  woman 
( ardhan&risvara)  form. 

516.  Kapali — one  who  has  created  this  universe  consisting  of  heaven 
and  earth  ST. 

517.  Mahagiri^,  i.e.  HimlUaya.  Cf.  Bhagamd-Gitd.  'sthavar&i:k&m 
mahagirih*’ — cited  in  ST. 

518.  Dhanvantari  : the  physician.  Gf.  *'bhi^ktamam  tv&  bhi^ajfim 
^rtiomi** — cited  in  ST, 

519.  VaiSravapa — son  of  Viiravatia,  i*c.  Kubera. 


279 


Thousand  Names  of  Siva 

Padmagarbha  (one  who  has  lotus  within)  (655)  Mahagarbha 
(having  a large  womb)  (656)  Candravaktra  (moon-faced) 
(657)  Nabhas  (sky)  (658)  Anagha  (sinless)  (659)  Balavan 
(powerful)  (660)  Upa^anta  (quiescent)  (661)  Pur^a  (ancient 
one  (662)  Punyakrt)  (meritorious)  (663)  Tamas  (characteri- 
zed by  tamas  quality)  (664)  Krurakartr  (Ruthless  maker) 
(665)  Kruravasin  (ruthless  dweller)  (666)  Tanu  (slender) 
(667)  Atman  (668)  Mahausadha  (great  medicine)  (669) 
Sarvaiaya®*®  (Asylum  of  all)  (670)  Sarvacarin  (moving  in 
everything)  (671)  Prane^a  (lord  of  the  vital  breaths)  (672) 
Praninam  pati  (lord  of  the  living  beings)  (673)  Devadeva 
( lord  of  Devas ) (674)  Sukhotsikta^'^^  (proud  due  to  happiness) 
(67 j - Sat  (existent)  (676)  Asat  (non-existent)  (677)  Sarva- 
ratnavid  (know er  of  all  jewels)  (678)  Kailasastha  (stationed  in 
Kailasa)  (679)  Guhavasin®^*  (residing  in  a cave)  (680)  Hima- 
vad  (snowy)  (681)  Girisami^raya  (one  who  has  resorted  to 
the  mountain  Himalaya)  (682)  Kulaharin  (one  who  removes 
the  families)  (683)  Kulakarta  (one  who  does  not  shape  the 
race)  (684)  Bahuvitta  (one  having  much  wealth)  (685) 
Bahupraja  (one  who  has  many  children)  (686)  Prane^a 
(lord  of  the  vital  breaths)  (687)  BandhakI®*®  (of  the  form  of 
maya;  (688)  Vrksa®®^  (the  destroyer  of  xnaya  (689)  Nakula 
(mangoose)  (690)  Adrika  (mountaineer)  (691)  Hrasvagriva 
(one  M'ith  a short  neck)  (692)  Mahasanu  (one  with  large  knees) 
(693)  Alola  (not  hckle)  (694)  Mahau^adhi  (great  medicine) 

(695)  Siddhantakarin  (one  w'ho  gets  according  to  principles) 

(696)  Siddhartha  (one  who  has  achieved  the  purpose)  (697) 
Chandas(of  the  form  of  chhandas,  Gayatri  etc.)  (698)Vyakara- 
nodbhava(  one  originating  from  prosody  and  grammar)  (699) 
Siihhanada  (one  whose  sound  is  like  the  roaring  sound  of  the 
lion)  (700)  Siihhadamstra  (one  having  the  curved  fangs  of 
a lion)  (701)  Siihhasya  (leonine  faced)  (702)  Sidahavahana 
(lion  vehicled)  (703)  Prabhavatman  (one  who  has  prowess 

520.  SarvSiayah — the  resting  place  for  all.  ST, 

521.  Sukhotsiktah — the  source  of  pleasure.  Gf.  **tasyaiva  Snandasya 
mStrSm  upajivanti*'-— cited  in  ST, 

522.  Guhkvasi-^nc  who  abides  in  Meru-guh&  (the  cavity  of  the 
heart) . 

523.  Bandhakl-^-in  the  form  of  allusion  (m&yA). 

524.  Vrksab — destroyer  of  MSyS. 


280 


Lingapurania 


in  the  Atman)  (704)  Jagatkala  (death  unto  the  Universe) 
(705)  Kala  (706)  Kampin  (shaking)  (707)  Taru®-®  (tree) 
(708)  Tanu  (slender)  (709)  Sarahga  (Deer)  (710)  Bhuta- 
cakrahka^2®  (one  marked  with  the  multitudes  of  goblins)  (71 1 ) 
Ketumalin  (one  having  garlands  of  banners)  (712)  Suvedhaka 
(one  who  pierces  well)  (713  Bhutalaya  (one  who  is  the  abode 
of  living  beings)  (714)  Bhutapati  (lord  of  the  goblins)  (715) 
Ahoratra  (day  and  night)  (716)  Mala®^’  (dirt)  717)  Arnala^-* 
(devoid  of  dirt)  (718)  Vasubhrt  (one  holding  riches)  (719) 
Sarvabhutatman  (the  Atman,  soul  of  all  living  beings)  (720) 
NiScala  (non-moving)  (721)  Subudha  (good  scholar)  (722) 
Vibudha  (deva)  (723)  Durbudha  (very  difficult  to  compre- 
hend) (724)  Sarva  bhutanam  asuhrt  (he  who  takes  away  the 
life  of  all  living  beings)  (725)  Ni^cala  (unmoving)  (726) 
Calavid  (one  who  knows  the  mobile  beings  (727 ) Budha 
(scholar)  (728)  Amoghasarhyama  (one  whose  restraint  is 
never  futile)  (729)  Hrsta  (delighted)  730)  Bhojana  (of  the 
form  of  food)  (731)  Pranadharana  (one  who  sustains  life) 
(732)  Dhrtiman  (courageous)  (733)  Maliman  (inteliigenl) 
(734)  Tryaksa^^®  (three-eyed)  (735)  Sukrta  (well  conducted) 
(736)  Yudhampati  (lord  of  battles)  (737)  Gopala  pro- 
tector of  the  kine)  (738)  Gopati  (lord  of  the  kine)  (739)  Grama 
(village)  (740)  Gocarmavasana  (one  wearing  the  leather  of 
the  bull)  (741)  Hara^"'®  (742)  Hiranyabahu  (one  who  has 
gloden  arms)  (743)  Guhavasa®^^  (resident  of  the  cave) 
(744)  Prave^ana  (one  who  enters  the  cavity)  (745)  Maha- 


525.  Taruh — in  the  form  of  tree,  i.c.  creation. 

526.  Bhuta-cakr^nkah  -one  is  the  source  of  the  origin  of  beings.  Cf. 
“yato  va  imani  bhutani  jayantc** — cited  in  ST, 

527.  Malab  -not  benevolent  towards  the  heretics. 

528.  Amalah  -sinless. 

529.  Tryaksab — three-eyed,  so  called  because  a third  eye  burst  from 
his  forehead  with  a great  flame  when  Uma,  playfully  placed  her  hands  over 
his  eyes  after  he  had  been  engaged  in  austerities  in  the  Himlllayas.  This 
eye  has  been  very  destructive.  It  rendered  KSma,  the  God  of  Love,  to  ashes; 
Dowson,  //.  M,  See  under  Trilocana. 

530.  Harab  -one  who  destroys  all  at  the  time  of  dissolution.  Gf« 
**brahmanam  indraih  varu^am  yamam  dbanadaih  eva  ca  / nigfhya  barate 
yasmat  tasmUd  dhara  iti  smrtab”  Mbh,  (Dropa  p.)  cited  in  ST. 

531.  Guh&v&sab  -one  who  has  an  abode  in  intellect. 


281 


Thousand  Names  of  Siva 

manas  (lofty-minded)  (746)  Mahakama  (one  who  has  great 
love)  (747)  Cittakama  (one  who  has  kept  Kama  within  the 
mind)  (748)  Jitendriya  (one  who  has  conquered  the  sense- 
organs)  (749)  Gandhara  (750)Surapa®**  (one  who  drinks  wine) 

(751 ) Tapakarmarata  (one  who  is  engaged  in  beating  activity) 

(752)  Hita  (Beneficent)  (753)  Mahabhuta®®^  (great  goblin) 
(754)  Bhutavrta  (surrounded  by  goblins)  (755)  Apsaras®**^ 
(having  a watery  pond  in  the  form  of  the  moon)  (756)  Gana- 
sevita  (one  who  is  resorted  to  by  the  Ganas)  (757)  Mahaketu 
(big-bannered)  (758)  Dharadhata  (creator  of  the  earth)  (759) 
Naikatanarata  (one  who  does  not  concentrate  on  a single  notcj 
(760)  Svara  (one  in  the  form  of  Tone)  (761)  Avedaniya  (one 
who  cannot  be  understood)  (762)  Avedya  (one  who  cannot 
be  informed)  (763)  Sarvaga®®^  (omnipresent)  (764)  Sukhavaha 
(one  who  causes  happiness). 

141-150.  (765)  Tarana (redeemer)  (766)  Carana  (walking) 

(767)  Dhatr  (creator)  (768)  Paridha®*®  (in  the  form  of  earth) 
(769)  Paripiijita  (one  who  is  worshipped  all  round)  (770) 
Samyogin^®®  (united)  (771)  Vardhana  (one  who  increases) 
(772)  Vrddha  (old)  (773)  Ganika  (A  member  of  the  Ga^as) 
(774)  Ga^iadhipa  (overlord  of  the  Ganas)  (775)  Nitya  (eternal ) 
(776)  Dhatr  (creator)  (777)  Sahaya  (assistant)  (778)  Devasura- 
pati  (lord  of  Devas  and  asuras)  (779)  Pati  (lord)  (780) 
Yukta^®^  (united)  (781)  Yuktabahu  (of  united  arms)  (782) 
Sudeva  (good  deva)  (783)  Suparvana  (of  good  joints)  (784) 
Susadha  (785)  (one  who  helps  to  calmly  bear  pain)  (786) 
Skandhada®®®  (one  who  pacifies  Karttikeya)  (787)  Harita 
(green)  (788)  Kara  (789)  Vapus®®®  (sower  of  seed)  (790) 

532.  Surapah — one  who  drinks  Sura  (a  kind  of  wine),  Cf.  “Jivhvk- 
praveia-sambhOta-valininotpkditah  khalu  / candrkt  sravati  yah  *firah  sk 
syad  amara-vanini  //  cited  in  ST, 

533*  Mahabhutah —designated  as  a great  being.  Of.  “Jyc$tham 
bhQtaih  vadanty  enam”.  Mhh,  (Dropa  p,)  cited  in  ST. 

533*^»  Apsarah — a reservoir  of  water. 

534.  Sarvi^ah— sung  by  all. 

585.  Paridhk — in  the  form  of  earth  ST, 

536,  Saihyogl>-^ted  with  Prak^ti. 

537,  Yuktah*— united  with  Umk. 

538,  Sufkdhah~^no  who  makes  pains  bearable. 

539*  Skandhadah — one  who  removes  the  anger  of  Kfirtdkeya, 

540.  Vapuh — the  sower  of  seeds. 


282 


Lihgapura^ 


Avartamana  (one  who  turns  round  and  round)  (791)  Anya®^^ 
(Another)  (792)  Vapuh.^restha  (one  who  has  excellent  body) 
(793)  Mahavapuh  (one  who  has  great  body)  (794)  Siras®**(in 
the  form  of  Yajus)  (795)  Vimarsana  (one  who  examines  the 
head)  (796)  Sarvalaksyalaksanabhusita  (one  who  is  adorned 
by  all  examples  and  characteristics  (797)  Aksaya  (one  who  is 
imperishable)  (798)  Rathagita  (one  who  has  music  in  the 
chariot)  (799)  Sarvabhogin  (one  who  enjoys  all  pleasures) 
(800)  Mahabala  (one  who  has  great  strength)  (801)  SSmnaya 
(one  who  has  the  Vedas)  (802)  Mahamnaya  (one  whose  Vedas 
are  great)  (803)  Tirthadeva  (lord  of  the  holy  centres)  (804) 
Mahayasas  (having  great  fame)  (805)  Nirjiva  (one  from 
whom  emanates  all  life)  (806)  Jivaiia  (one  who  enlivens) 
(807)  Mantra  (808)  Subhaga  (fortunate)  (809)  Bahukarka^a 
(excessively  hard)  (810)  Ratnabhuta  (one  who  has  become 
precious)  (811)  Ratnahga  (one  who  is  part  of  a jewel)  (812) 
Maharnavanipatavid  (one  who  knows  the  fall  into  a great  sea) 
(813)  Mulam (root)  (814)Vi^ala(wide)  (815)  Amrtam  (nectar) 
(816 ) V’^yaktavyakta  (one  who  is  clear  and  not  clear ) (81 7 )Taponi- 
dhi (storehouse  of  austerities)  (818)  Arohana(onc  that  ascends) 
(819)  Adhiroha  (one  who  rides)  (820)  Siladharin  (one  who 
holds  good  conduct)  (821)  Mahatapas  (one  of  great  penance) 
(822 ) Mahakantha  (one  who  has  a great  neck)  (823 ) Mahay ogin 
(great  Yogin)  (824)  Yuga  (825)  Yugakara  (creator  ofyugas) 
(826)  Hari  (827)  Yugarupa  (having  the  form  of  the  yuga) 
(828)  Maharupa  (one  who  has  great  forms)  (829)  Vahana 
(bearing)  (830)  Gahana  (inaccessible)  (831)Naga  (mountain) 
(832)  Nyaya  (logic,  justice)  (833)  Nirvapana^^^  (alleviating, 
pacifying)  (834)  Apada  (footless)  (835)  Pandita  (scholar) 
(636)  Acalopama  (comparable  to  a mountain)  (837)  Bahumala 
(haying  many  garlands)  (838)  Mahamala  (having  great  gar- 
land) (839)  Sipivista®^^  (one  who  has  penetrated  the  rays) 
(840)  Sulocana  (having  good  eyes)  (841)  Vistara  (extension) 


541.  Anyah — distinct  from  Prakyti. 

542.  Yajuh — in  the  form  of  Yajur-veda,  Cf.  “tasya  yajur  eva  ^irah** — 
ciCtd  in  ST, 

543.  NirvUpajciah — the  eternal  sower  of  seeds. 

544.  Sipivi^t^ — the  form  of  Vi9?iu.  Cf.  Visnuh  Sipivi§tah — 
cited  in  ST, 


283 


Thousand  Names  of  Siva 

(842)  Lavana  (salty  ocean)  (843)  Kupa  (well)  (844)  Kusuma- 
hga  (one  whose  limbs  are  flower-like)  (845)  Phalodava  (one 
who  acts  well  till  the  fruit  is  reaped)  (846)  Rsabha(bull)  (847) 
Vrsabha  (taurus)  (848)  Bhahga  (breaking)  (849)  Mani- 
bimbajatadhara  (one  who  holds  jewelled  image  and  matted 
hair)  (850)  Indu  (moon)  (851)  Visarga  (discharge)  (852) 
Sumukha  (having  good  face)  (853)  Sura  (heroic)  (854) 
Sarvayudha  (one  who  has  all  weapons)  (855)  Saha  (one  who 
endures). 

151-168.  (856)  Nivedana  (one  who  informs)  (857 ) Sudhajata 
(one  born  of  nectar)  (858)Svargadvara^*®  (one  who  is  the  gate- 
way to  the  heaven)  (859)  Mahadhanus  (one  who  has  great  bow) 
(860)  Giravasa  (one  who  resides  in  speech)  (861)  Visarga 
(subsidiary  creation)  (862)  Sarvalaksanalaksyavid  (knower 
of  all  characteristics  and  examples)  (863)  Gandhamalin  (one 
who  has  sweet  smelling  garlands)  (864)  Bhagavan®**  (lord) 
(865)  Ananta  (endless)  (866)  Sarvalaksana  (one  who  has  all 
characteristics)  (867)  Santana  (series)  (868)  Bahula  (a  bes- 
tower  of  riches)  (869)  Bahu  (one  having  long  arms)  (870) 
Sakala  (having  the  digits)  (871)  Sarvapavana  (sanctifier 
of  all)  (872)  KarasthalP^^  (having  the  pot  in  the  hand)  (873) 
Kapalin^^®  (having  the  skull ) (874)  Urdhvasarnhanana  (having 
the  body  lifted  up)  (875)  Yuvan  (youthful)  (876)  Yantra- 
tantra-suvikhyata  (one  who  is  well  known  for  his  yantras 
and  tantras)  (877)  Loka  (world)  (878)  Sarva§raya  (one  who 
is  the  support  of  all)  (879)  Mrdu  (soft)  (880)  Munda  (one 
with  shaven  head)  (881)  Virupa  (deformed)  (882)  Vikrta 
(spoiled)  (883)  Dandin  (one  having  the  staff)  (884)  Kundin®*® 
(one  having  the  sacrificial  pit)  (885)  Vikurvana®^®  (one  who 
alters  and  affects)  (886)  Varyaksa  (one  who  has  the  eyes  in 


545.  Svarga-dvarah — the  door  to  happiness.  For  the  definition  of 

Svarga  compare:  <ta  du^khena  sambhinnam  na  ca  grastam  anantaram 

abhiU^opanltam  ca  tat  sukhaxh  svahpadaspadam. 

546.  Bhagav&n — aUvaryav&n  ST,  glorious  or  prosperous. 

547.  Karasth&li  -one  who  eats  in  the  palm  of  his  hands.  Cf.  ‘^tatalgi 
karatalikrtya  vyapi  hftlShalaih  Vi$am*’,  Bh&g.«— cited  in  ST, 

348»  Kap&li— one  who  sustains  or  nourishes  Brahmi  (ka). 

549.  Kuod^'-^ne  who  carries  Ganges  over  his  forehead. 

550.  Vikurva^ah-- one  who  is  not  accessible  through  activities. 


284 


LiAgapura^ 


water?)  (887)  Kakubha*®^  (prominent)  (888)  Vajrin  (having 
the  thunderbolt)  (889)  Diptatejas  (one  of  illuminated  splen* 
dour)  (890)  Sahasrapad  (thousand-footed)  (891)  Sahasra- 
murdhan  (thousand-headed)  (892)  Devendra  (lord  of 
Devas)  (893)  Sarvadevamaya  (identical  with  all  Devas) 
(894)  Guru  (preceptor)  (895)  Sahasrabahu  (thousand-armed) 
(896)  Sarvahga  (having  all  limbs)  (897)  Saranya  (worthy  of 
being  sought  refuge  in)  (898)  Saiyalokakrt  (maker  of  all  the 
worlds)  (899)  Pavitra  (holy)  (900)  Trimadhu  (having  three- 
fold honey)  (901)  Mantra  (in  the  form  of  the  sacred  hymns 
of  the  V^as(902)  Kani§tha®®® (youngest)  (903)  Krsnapihgala 
(dark  and  tawny-coloured)  (904)  Brahmadanda-vinirmati: 
(maker  of  the  staff  of  Brahma)  (905)  Sataghna  (one  who 
kills  a hundred)  (906)  Satapaladhrk  (one  who  wears  a hun- 
dred nooses)  (907)  (identical  with  the  units  of  time®®®  such  as 
Kala  (908)  Ka^ha  (909)  Lava  (910)  Matra  (911)  Muhurta 
(912)  Ahah  (day)  (913)  K?apa  (night)  (914)  Ksana  (915) 
Vi^vaksetraprada  (one  who  grants  the  holy  centres  of  the 
universe)  (916)  Bija  (seed)  (917)  Lihgam  (918  Adya 
(primeval'being)  (919)Nirmukha  (one  whose  face  has  vanished) 
(920 ) Sadasad  (exis ten t-cum-non-existent ) (921)  V yak ta 
(visible)  (922)  Avyakta  (invisible)  (923)Pitr  (father)  (924) 
Matr  (mother)  (925)  Pitamaha  (grandfather)  (926)  Svarga- 
dvaram  (the  gateway  of  the  heaven)  (927)  Mokfadvaram 
(gateway  of  the  salvation)  (928)  Prajadvara  (one  who  is  the 
arch -door  for  his  devotee)  (929)  Trivistapa  (heaven)  (930) 
Nirvanara  (salvation)  (931)  Hrdaya  (heart)  (932)  Brahma- 
loka  (the  world  of  Brahma)  (933)  Paragati  (the  greatest  goal) 
(934)  Devasuravinirmatr  (one  who  creates  Devas  and  the 
Asuras)  (935)  Dcvasurapariyana  (one  who  is  interested  in 
Devas  and  Asuras)  (936)  Dcvasuraguru  (the  preceptor 
of  Devas  and  Asuras)  (937)Dcva  (the  lord)  (938)  Dcvasura- 
namaskrta  (one  who  is  bowed  to  by  Devas  and  the  Asuras) 
(939)  Devasuramahamatra  (high  official  and  minister  unto 
Devas  and  Asuras)  (940)  Devasuraganafiraya  (one  who 

551.  Kikubhsh--<»ne  who  carries  triiOla  in  his  lap  iST. 

559,  Kanistlmh— -ever  youthful  or  of  unmanifest  form*  Of.  “nity»» 
yiinc  kaniftbtya  yadvft  ’vudeya-martaye** — Ahobala  cited  in  ST. 

553*  Kalh  -who  symbolises  units  of  tim^  such  as  Ka]A»  etc. 


285 


Thousand  Names  of  Siva 

is  the  support  of  the  groups  of  all  Devas  and  Asuras  (941 ) 
Devasuraganadhyak$a  (the  presiding  officer  of  the  groups 
of  all  Devas  and  Asuras)  (942)  Devasuraganagrani  (the 
leader  of  the  groups  of  all  Devas  and  Asuras ) (943 ) Devadhi- 
deva  (the  overlord  of  all  Devas)  (944)  Devarsi  (the  divine 
sage)  (945)  Devasuravaraprada  (one  who  grants  boons  to  all 
Devas  and  Asuras)  (946)  Devasure^vara  (lord  of  all  Devas 
and  the  Asuras)  (947)  Visiniu  (948)  Devasuramahe^vara 
(great  lord  of  all  Devas  and  Asuras)  (949)  Sarvadevamaya 
(identical  with  all  Devas)  (950)  Acintya  (unthinkable) 
(951)  Devatatman  (the  Atman  of  the  deities)  (952)  Svayam- 
bhava  (tlie  self-born)  (953)  Udgata  (one  who  has  come  up) 
(954)  Trikrama  (one  who  has  taken  three  steps)  (955)  Vaidya 
(physician)  (956)  Varada  (granter  of  boons)  (957)  Varaja®®* 
(born  of  Visnu)  (958)  Ambara  (in  the  form  of  firmament) 
(959)  Ijya  (worthy  of  being  worshipped)  (960)  Hastin  (ele- 
phant) (961)  Vyaghra  (tiger)  (962)  Devasimha  (lion  among 
Devas)  (963)  Mahar$abha  (great  bull)  (964)  Vibudhagrya 
(leader  among  Devas)  (965)  Sura  (god)  (966)  Srestha 
(excellent)  (967)  Svargadeva  (lord  of  the  heaven)  (968) 
Uttama^^®  (the  most  excellent  one)  (969)  Saihyukta  (united) 
(970)  Sobhana  (splendid)  (971)  Vakta®®®  (eloquent  speaker) 
(972)  A^aprabhava  (source  of  all  hopes)  (973)  Avyaya  (the 
unchanging  one)  (974)  Guru  (preceptor)  (975)  Kanta  (splen- 
did) (976)  Nija  (one’s  own)  (977)  Sarga  (creation)  (978) 
Pavitra  (holy)  (979)  Sarvavahana  (having  all  vehicles) 
(980)  Srngin  (having  bom)  (981)  Srngapriya  (fond  of  horn 
peaks)  (982)  Babhru  (tawny  coloured)  (983)  Rajaraja  (king 
of  kings)  (984)  Niramaya]  (free  from  ailments)  (985)  Abhirama 
(beautiful)  (986)  Suiarana  (a  good  refuge)  (987)  Nirama 
(devoid  of  unripe  things)  (988)  Sarvasadhana  (having  all 
means)  (989)  Lala^aksa  (having  an  eye  in  the  forehead)  (990) 
Vi^vadeha  (having  the  universe  as  the  body)  (991)  Harina 


554*  Varajafi — bom  in  the  form  of  *samba-Siva*  at  the  behest  of 
Viftiu.  Or  dissolve  *avara-jah*  bom  in  the  form  of  fire  at  the  time  of  disso- 
lution. 

555.  Uttamah — ^the  supreme  soul.  Cf.  **uttamaf^  psini^as  tvanyab 
panun&tmetyudahrtah  //  Bhagaoai^Gltd  cited  in  ST, 

556.  Vakt&— -the  best  speaker.  Gf.  **adhivakt&**-^ited  in  ST, 


286 


Lingapurdiia 


(deer)  (992)  Brahmavarcasa  (having  the  refulgence  of  the 
brahman)  (993)  Sthavara  pati  (lord  of  the  immobile  things) 
(994)  Niyatendriyavartana  (one  who  remains  with  restraints 
on  the  sense-organs)  (995)  Siddhartha  (one  who  has  achieved 
the  purpose)  (996)  Sarvabhutartha  (one  who  has  all  realities) 
(997)  Acintya  (unthinkable)  (998)  Satya  (true)  (999)  Suci- 
vrata  (one  of  pure  holy  rites)  (1000)  Vratadhipa  (the  lord  of 
holy  rites)  (lOOl)Param  (the  highest  being)  (1002) Brahma  (the 
brahman)  (1003)  Muktanam  parama  gati  (the  greatest  goal 
of  the  liberated  souls)  (1004)  Vimukta  (the  liberated  one) 
(1005)  Muktakesa*®^  (one  whose  tresses  are  loosened)  (1006) 
Sriman  (glorious)  (1007)  Srivardhana  (one  who  increases 
prosperity  and  glory)  (1008)  Js^at  (universe). 

169.  In  accordance  with  the  importance  of  the  name,^^® 
the  lord  of  sacrifices  was  eulogized  by  me  with  devotion  and 
attention. 

170-171.  Then  the  king  who  was  well  known  in  the  three 
worlds  obtained  the  hymn  of  Siva  from  Tandin.  He  eulogized 
the  lord,  the  goal  of  the  devotees,  after  the  approval  of  Tannin. 
By  the  grace  of  holy  lord — Tanejin,  the  king  Tridhanva  of  great 
fame  attained  the  merit  of  a thousand  horse-sacrifices  and  also 
the  overlordship  of  Ganas. 

172-175.  O Brahmins,  he  who  reads  this  or  listens  to  it  or 
narrates  this  to  the  Brahmins,  attains  the  merit  of  a thousand 
horse-sacrifices.  In  order  to  obtain  release,  the  following  sinners 
should  repeat  for  a year  these  names,  during  the  three  Sandhyas 
(morning,  midday  and  dusk)  in  the  temple  of  Siva  or  in  the 
region  sacred  to  Siva  and  they  should  also  worship  the  lord. 
They  are  : — the  slayer  of  a Brahmin,  the  wine  addict,  the  thief, 
the  defiler  of  the  preceptor’s  bed,  the  murderer  of  a refugee, 
and  the  one  who  commits  breach  of  faith  with  his  friends.  So 
also  the  slayer  of  mother,  father,  warrior  and  the  child  in  the 
womb. 


557.  Muktftkeiah— lord  of  the  released  souls, 

558.  Yath&-praclh&nam>--the  principal  name  Siva  (not  mentioned 
in  the  above  list),  with  the  ending  in  the  dative  case,  is  to  be  added  to  each 
of  the  names  which  are  also  to  be  put  in  the  dative  case.  e.g.  Oxh  mukta- 
kei&ya  Sivftya  naxnah. 


287 


CHAPTER  SIXTYSEK 

The  narrative  of  Yaydti 

Suta  said: 

1-2.  By  the  grace  of  the  lord  of  Devas  as  well  as  of 
Tannin,  Tridhanvan  attained  assiduously  the  benefit  of 
a thousand  horse-sacrifices.  Thereafter  he  gained  the  lordship 
of  Siva’s  attendants.  He  was  bowed  to  by  all  Devas.  The 
scholarly  king  Trayyaruna  was  the  successor  to  Tridhanvan. 

3-4.  He  had  an  extremely  powerful  son  named  Satyavrata. 
He  killed  the  king  of  Vidarbha®“a  of  unmeasured  prowess®®®  and 
abducted  his  wife  before  the  mantras  of  the  wedding  cele- 
brations were  brought  to  a close.  The  king  Trayyaruna 
abandoned  him  because  he  was  defiled  by  that  evil. 

5.  When  abandoned,  he  said  to  his  father  “Where  shall  I 
go  ?”  O brahmins,  the  father  replied  to  him  “Go  and  live 
among  the  Candalas. 

6-11.  On  being  ordered  thus,  he  went  out  of  the  city.  At 
the  instance  of  his  father,  the  intelligent  Satyavrata  went  to  the 
Canijiala  colony.  On  being  abandoned  by  his  father  thus  he 
stayed  near  the  slum  while  his  father  went  to  the  forest. 
The  valiant  (son)  and  meritorious  king  Satyavrata  became 
famous  in  all  the  worlds  under  the  name  Triianku.  Once 
Vasistha  pronounced  on  him  a curse.  Vi^vamitra  of  great 
splendour  granted  him  boons  and  crowned  him  king 
in  the  hereditary  kingdom.  The  sage  performed  a sacrifice  on 
his  behalf.  Even  as  Devas  and  Vasistha  were  watching,  the 
holy  lord  Viivamitra  raised  him  up  to  heaven  in  his  human 
form.®®®  His  wife,  Satyavrata  born  of  theKekaya  family®®^ 
gave  birth  to  a spotless  son  Hari^candra.  Hari^candra’s  son 
Rohita  was  very  powerful. 

12.  Harita  was  the  son  of  Rohita.  Dhundhu  was  the  son 
of  Harita.  Vijaya  and  Sutejas  were  the  sons  of  Dhimdhu. 

558a.  Vidarbha — l.e.  the  king  of  Vidarbha,  mod.  Berar,  now  placed 
under  the  administration  of  MahSrlt^tra  province. 

559.  Amitaujas—according  to  ST.  it  is  the  name  of  a king. 

560.  For  detail,  DawsoU  : ffindu  Mythology , pp.  288-289. 

561.  Kdcaya— Kqkayas  lived  between  the^elum  and  the  Beas  and  had 
their  capital  at  Girivraja  (Girijak  modem  JaUlpur)  on  ttiojhdum  river. 


288 


Lingapurdiia 


13.  Vijaya  was  so  called  because  he  conquered  the  kings  of 
the  Ksatriyavarna.  His  son  Rucaka  was  a righteous  king. 

14.  Vrka  was  the  son  of  Rucaka.  From  him  was  bom 
Bahu.  Sagara,  au  extremely  virtuous  king  was  his  son. 

15.  Sagara  had  two  wives.  Prabha  and  Bh^umati.  The 
fiery  sage  Aurva®«2  was  propitiated  by  both  of  them,  with  a 
desire  for  sons, 

16-17.  The  delighted  Aurva  asked  them  to  choose  a boon  of 
their  liking  out  of  the  two,  viz.  one  would  have  sixty  thousand 
sons  and  the  other  a single  son,  who  would  continue  the  family 
line.  Prabha  chose  to  have  many  sons  and  Bhanumati  one  son 
who  was  Asamafijasa. 

18.  Thereafter  Prabha  gave  bii^th  to  sixty  thousand  sons. 
While  digging  the  earth,  they  were  burned  by  the  angry  out- 
bursts of  Visnu^®®  in  the  guise  of  Kapila  as  if  through  arrows. 

19-20,  Asamafijasa’s  son  is  well  known  as  Am^uman.  His 
.son  WAS  Dillpa.  From  Dilipa  was  born  Bhagiratha  who  per- 
formed penance  and  brought  the  Ganges  to  the  earth.  So  it  is 
called  Bhagirathi,  Bhaglratha’s  son  was  J^ruta. 

2 1 . Nabhaga  was  his  successor.  He  was  a valorous  devotee 
of  Siva.  His  son  was  Ambari§a,  from  whom  was  born  Sindhu- 
dvipa, 

22.  The  earth,  ruled  over  by  Nabhaga  Ambarisa  with  the 
power  of  his  arms  became  entirely  devoid  of  the  three-fold 
distress. 

23.  The  valorous  son  of  Sindhudvipa  was  Ayutayus. 
Rtuparna  of  great  fame  was  the  son  of  Ayutayus. 

24-25.  This  powerful  king  was  a friend  of  Nala.  He  was 
conversant  with  the  secret  of  dice.  In  the  Puranas,  two  Nalas 
of  stable  holy  rites  are  well  known.  One  was  the  son  of  Vlra- 
$ena  and  the  other  born  in  the  family  of  Ik§vaku.  Sarvabhaurna 
the  lord  of  the  subjects  was  the  son  of  PLtuparna. 

26,  K.ing  Sud^  was  his  son.  He  was  equal  to  Indra.  King 
SaudSsa  was  the  son  of  Sud^. 

562.  Aurvo  agnih—^agnisadriah  Aurvo  r^ifr  the  fiery  sage  Aurva, 
the  son  of  Urva  and  the  grandson  of  the  famous  sage  Bhfgu. 

5^3*  Vi^^u  ^i.c.  the  sage  Kapila  who  destroyed  the  sons  of  king 
Sagara  by  uttering  “hum”.  For  detail,  see  Sp.  (UnOsamhitfi,  p.  i6io).  Also 
HM.  pp. 


289 


Narratw  of  TaySti 

27-28.  His  actual  name  was  Mitrasaha  but  he  was  more 
famous  as  Kalmasapada.®®^  Vasis^ha  of  great  splendour  begot 
of  the  wife  of  Kalmasapada  the  son  A^maka  who  continued  the 
line  of  Iksvaku.  Mulaka  was  the  son  of  A^maka  and  Uttara 
(his  wife). 

29-30.  That  king  was  always  surrounded  by  women  due  to 
his  fear  of  Paras urama.  Desirous  of  protection  he  had  recourse 
to  the  excellent  shield  in  the  form  of  women.  The  virtuous  king 
l§ataratha  was  the  son  of  Mulaka.  The  powerful  king  Ilabila 
was  bom  of  Sataratha. 

31.  The  valorous  Vrddha  Sarma  was  the  son  of  Ilabila. 
The  daughter  of  the  Pitrs  bore  him  the  son  ViSvasaha. 

32-33.  Dilipa  was  his  son.  He  was  famous  by  the  name 
Khatvahga.  He  obtained  a life  for  the  duration  of  a Muhurta. 
From  heaven  he  came  to  this  world  for  this  period  and  conque- 
red the  three  fires  and  the  three  worlds  by  means  of  his 
intellect  and  truthfulness.  His  son  was  DIrghabahu  and  Raghu 
was  born  of  him. 

34.  The  powerful  and  valiant  Aja  was  born  of  Raghu. 
From  him  was  ^>orn  the  glorious  Da^aratha,  the  sustainer  of  the 
family  of  Iksvaku. 

35.  The  heroic  Rama  who  was  conversant  with  Dharma 
and  who  was  well  known  in  all  the  worlds  was  born  of  Da^a- 
ratha.  So  also  were  Bharata,  Laksmana  and  Satrughna. 

36-38.  Rama,  the  best  among  them,  had  great  splendour 
and  excellent  valour.  After  killing  Ravana  in  battle  and 
performing  sacrifices  Rama  who  was  conversant  with  Dharma 
ruled  over  the  kingdom  for  ten  thousand  years.  A son  well 
known  as  Ku!§a  was  born  to  Rama.  His  other  son  Lava  was 
highly  blessed,  truthful  and  intelligent.  Atithi  was  born  to 
Ku^a  and  his  son  was  Nisadha. 

39.  Nala  was  born  of  Nisadha  and  Nabhas  was  his  son. 
A son  called  Pundarika  was  born  to  Nabhas,  and  Ksema 
Dhanvam  was  his  son. 

40-41.  His  son  was  the  heroic  and  valorous  Devanika. 
Ahinara  was  his  son  and  thereafter  was  Sahasra^va.  From  him 
were  bom  Candravaloka  and  Tarapl^a.  His  son  was  Chandra- 
giri.  Bhanucandra  was  his  son. 

564.  Kalma^ap&da^ — the  same  as  Mitrasaha,  a king  of  Ik$v&ku 
dynasty.  For  detail,  Dawson  /if.  A/,  pp,  I44-I45‘ 


290 


Lingapurd^ 


42.  His  son  was  Srutayu  who  was  also  known  as  Brhadbala. 
This  powerful  king  was  killed  by  Saubhadra  ( son  of  Subhadra 
i.  c.  Abhimanyu)  in  the  Bh^ata  war. 

43.  These  are  the  successor  kings  of  Iksvaku.  In  general 
only  the  more  important  ones  in  the  dynasty  are  mentioned 
here  in  order  of  their  importance. 

44-45.  All  of  them  had  realized  Siva.  In  accordance 
with  their  knowledge®®^  they  had  worshipped  tlie  lord  and  per- 
formed sacrifices  according  to  the  rules.  The  noble  souls  had 
all  attained  heaven.  Some  of  them  were  liberated  souls  and 
yogins.  As  the  result  of  the  curse  of  a brahmin,  Nrga  attain- 
ed the  state  of  a chameleon. 

46.  Dhrsta  had  three  virtuous  sons,  viz.,  Dhrs^aketu,  Yama- 
bala  and  Ranadhrsfa. 

47.  Saryati  had  a son  Anarta  and  a daughter  SukanyS. 
Anarta’s  son  was  Rocamana. 

48-49a.  Rocamana  had  a son  Reva.  From  Reva  were 
born  Raivata  and  Kakudmin.  Reva  was  the  eldest  of  a 
hundred  sons.  His  daughter  Revati  was  the  wife  of  Balarama. 

49b  Narisyanta’s  son  was  Jitatman. 

50-5 la  From  Nabhaga  was  born  Ambarisa,  the  devotee  of 
Visnu.  Rta  was  his  glorious  son.  He  was  the  best  among  those 
conversant  with  Dharma.  Kf ta  was  his  virtuous  son  also  known 
as  Prsita. 

51a.  The  sons  of  Karusa  were  known  as  K^ru^as. 

52.  Prsita  incurred  great  sin  by  killing  the  cow  of  his 
preceptor.***  It  is  well  known  that  he  was  degraded  as  a Sudra 
due  to  the  curse  of  Gyavana,  his  preceptor. 

53.  Dicta’s  son  was  Nabhaga  and  from  him  was  bom 
Bhalandana.  His  son  Ajavahana  was  a king  of  great  exploits. 

54.  Thus  (the  successors  of)  the  mighty  sons  of  Manu  are  told 
briefly  and  the  dynasty  of  Ikfvaku  (in  some  detail).  Now  I 
shall  recount  to  you  the  dynasty  of  Aila. 

565.  p&^upataih  jftanam— yogic  practices  as  enjoined  in  Saiva  cult. 
Gf.  p.  135  note  242. 

566.  Pr$ata  killed,  in  ignorance,  the  cow  of  his  preceptor:  Gyavana, 
mistaking  it  for  a tiger  in  the  darkness  of  night. 


Narrative  of  Taydti 


291 


Suia  said: 

55-56.  O brahmins,  Pururavas  a valorous  son  of  11a  and  a 
devotee  of  Rudra,  held  an  unhindered  sway  in  the  holy  land 
Prayaga®®’  which  is.  situated  on  the  northern  bank  of  the 
Yamuna®®®  frequented  by  sages.  He  was  the  glorious  lord  of 
Pratisthana®®®  (Prayaga),  and  well  established  there. 

57-58.  He  had  six  powerful  glorious  sons,  well  known  in 
the  region  of  the  Gandharvas  and  devoted  to  Siva.  All  of 
them  were  divine,  being  the  sons  of  Urva^i.®’®  They  were: — 
Ayu,  Mayu,  Amayu,  Visvayu,  Srutayu  and  Satayu. 

59.  Ayu  had  five  sons  of  great  power.  They  were  kings 
born  of  Prabha  the  daughter  of  Svarbhanu. 

60.  Nahusa  the  first  among  them  was  known  in  all  the 
worlds  and  conversant  with  Dharma.  Nahusa’s  successors  were 
six  and  they  were  comparable  to  Indra  in  splendour. 

61-62.  Those  (kings)  of  great  power  were  born  of  Viraja 
the  daughter  of  the  Pitrs.  They  were  Yati,  Yayati,  Saihyati, 
Ayati,  Andhaka  and  Vijati.  All  these  six  were  well  renowned. 
Yati  was  the  eldest  of  them  and  Yayati  was  junior  to  him. 

63.  The  eldest  royal  son  Yati  seeking  salvation,  was 
united  with  Brahman.  Among  the  other  five  Yayati  was  the 
strongest  and  most  valorous. 

64.  He  married  Devayani  the  daughter  of  Sukra.  She  be- 
came the  demoness  Sarmistha  the  daughter  of  Vrsaparvan. 

65.  Devayani  gave  birth  to  two  sons  Yadu  and  Turvasu. 
Both  of  them  performed  sacrificial  rites.  They  were  highly 
spoken  and  were  experts  in  all  lores. 

567.  Prayaga — this  is  a celebrated  place  of  pilgrimage  at  the  con- 
fluence of  the  Ganges  and  Jumna  in  the  Naimisa  forest  (Sp,  Vs.  1.4).  It  is 
situated  on  the  northern  bank  of  the  Ganges  (•S'A;  II.  11.12.36).  The  name 
Prayaga  is  recorded  by  Huen  Tsang  in  the  seventh  century  and  is  as  old  as 
the  reign  of  Atoka  who  set  up  the  stone  pillar  about  235  B.G.  The  Gupta 
emperors  regarded  the  place  as  the  capital  of  Madhyadeia. 

568.  Yamuni — this  river  rises  in  the  Him^ya  mountains  among  the 
Jumnotri  peaks.  Hows  for  860  miles  on  the  plains  before  it  joins  the  Ganges 
at  Pray&ga. 

569.  Pratifthana---The  Purito^  not  agreed  upon  its  locus.  Some 
place  it  on  the  north  and  some  on  the  east  side  of  the  Ganges.  Others  place 
it  on  the  north  bank  of  the  YamunS. 

570.  Urva^— a celebrated  celstial  nymph. 


292 


Lingapurdtfa 


66-67.  Sarmi$th§  the  daughter  of  Vf ^aparvan  gave  birth  to 
Druhyu,  Anu  and  Puru.  Propitiated  by  Yayati,  Sukra  ,the 
leading  brahmin  gave  him  a shining  well-built  golden  car  and 
two  everlasting  great  quivers. 

68.  The  chariot  was  yoked  to  horses  as  quick  as  the  mind. 
It  was  in  this  chariot  that  he  brought  home  his  bride.  With 
that  excellent  chariot  he  conquered  the  earth  within  six 
months. 

69-71.  Yayati  was  invincible  to  Devas,  D^avas  and  mortals. 
He  was  a devotee  of  Siva,  a meritorious  soul  abiding  by  Dhar- 
ma.  He  performed  sacrifices.  He  conquered  anger.  He  was 
sympatlietic  to  all  living  beings.  That  excellent  chariot  was 
inherited  by  all  the  descendants  of  Kuru  until  Janamejaya  the 
son  of  Paiik^it  the  king  in  the  line  of  Puru.  As  a result  of  the 
curse  of  the  sage  Garga*’^  that  chariot  was  destroyed. 

72-76.  The  king  Janamejaya  harassed  the  son  of  Garga, 
the  boy  Akrura,  and  hence  attained  the  sin  of  brahmin  slaugh- 
ter. The  king  began  to  emit  the  odour  of  rusting  iron.  He  ran 
about  helterskelter.  Since  he  was  boycotted  by  the  citizens 
and  the  people  of  the  land  he  did  not  obtain  happiness. 
Dejected,  he  did  not  even  have  perfect  knowledge  anywhere. 
In  his  anguish  he  went  to  sage  iSaunaka  and  sought  refuge 
in  him.  The  liberal-minded  sage  who  was  known  as  Indreti 
performed  sacrifice  on  his  behalf.  O excellent  brahmins,  for 
the  sake  of  purification  he  made  the  king  Janamejaya  perform 
a horse  sacrifice. 

77-79.  That  king  of  great  renown  was  relieved  of  the 
bad  odour  of  iron  as  well  as  of  his  sin.  In  the  middle  of  the 
Avabhftha  ablution  the  divine  and  splendid  chariot  vanished. 
Lost  from  that  family  it  was  given  to  Vasu  king  of  Cedi*’*  by 
the  delighted  Indra.  From  him  Brhadratha  acquired  the  chariot. 
Thereafter,  killing  Jarasandha  (a  successor  of  Brhadratha)  Bhima, 
the  scion  of  the  family  of  Kurus,  gave  that  excellent  chariot 
to  Srikr§na  out  of  love. 

571.  gaigatyar—by  the  curse  of  the  sage  Gaiga.  The  legend  ts 
not  traceable. 

572.  Gedi-patelljL — of  the  king  of  Cedi  tribe  or  clan.  Haimakosa 
identifies  Gedi-nmgarl  with  Tripurl  (modem  Tewar),  situated  on  the 
Narmadh  river  near  Jabalpur. 


Jfarrative  ofTqydti  293 

Sutasaid: 

80-83.  King  Yayati  son  of  Nahu^a  crowned  his  son  Puru 
(as  king) . O excellent  brahmins,  it  was  by  that  Puru  alone  that 
he  had  been  helped  before.  People  of  all  castes  including  the 
leading  brahmins  spoke  to  the  king  who  was  desirous  of  crown- 
ing his  youngest  son: — O lord,  how  does  the  youngest  son 
deserve  the  kingdom  after  overlooking  the  claims  of  the  eldest 
son  Yadu,  the  son  of  Devay^  and  the  grandson  of  Sukra  ? 
We  are  addressing  you  to  keep  up  the  traditional  Dharma.” 


CHAPTER  SIXTTSEVEN 

The  Narrative  of  Taydti 

Yaydtisaid\ 

1.  Let  the  members  of  all  castes  beginning  with  the  brah- 
mins listen  to  my  words  in  regard  to  this  why  I have  decided 
that  the  kingdom  should  in  no  way  be  given  to  the  eldest  son 
Yadu. 

2.  My  behest  was  not  carried  out  by  Yadu  my  eldest  son. 
The  son  who  is  mentally  opposed  to  his  father  is  not  approved 
of  by  good  men. 

3.  The  son  who  acts  according  to  the  instructions  of  his 
parents  is  praised  by  good  men.  He  is  the  real  son  who  behaves 
towards  his  parents  in  a manner  befitting  a son. 

4.  I have  been  treated  with  disrespect  by  Yadu,  Tnrvasu, 
Druhyu  and  Anu. 

5.  My  instructions  were  particularly  honoured  and  carried 
out  by  Pfiru.  He  is  my  youngest  son  by  whom  my  old  age  had 
been  taken  over. 

6.  Because  of  Devayani,  Sukra  had  ordained  that  I would 
be  attacked  by  old  age.  When  he  was  requested,  my  old  age  was 
made  transferable  by  him. 

7-10.  This  boon  was  given  by  8ukra  himself— **The  son 
who  favours  you  shall  be  your  heir  to  the  kingdom.’’  May  ye 
all,  O sires,  approve  of  it.  Puru  shall  then  be  crowned 
king.” 


294 


Lingapura^ 


The  Sages  said : 

‘‘The  son  who  is  endowed  with  good  qualities  and  who  is 
always  beneficent  to  his  parentsdeserves  all  welfare,  although 
he  may  be  the  younger  son.  Lord  Puru  deserves  this  kingdom 
since  he  is  the  son  who  has  carried  out  your  instructions.  Because 
of  the  boon  granted  by  Sukra  this  cannot  be  made  other- 
wise.” 

Suta  said: 

The  son  of  Nahusa  was  told  thus  by  the  delighted  people  of 
the  land. 

11*  After  crowning  his  son  Puru  in  his  own  kingdom  he 
directed  Turvasu  his  son  to  be  the  southern  border  chief. 

12.  Similarly  the  king  employed  the  eldest  son  Yadu  in  the 
southern  frontier  and  Druhyu  and  Anu  in  the  west  and  in  the 
north  respectively. 

13.  After  conquering  the  earth  including  the  seven  islands 
and  seven  oceans,  the  son  of  Nahuga  divided  the  kingdom  into 
three  parts  among  his  sons. 

14.  With  the  royal  glory  transferred  to  his  sons  and  with 
the  burden  placed  on  his  kins,  the  king  became  pleased.  His 
mind  was  filled  with  delight. 

15-24.  In  this  context  the  following  song  was  formerly  sung 
by  the  great  king  Yayati  : — 

A man  shall  be  glorious  if  only  he  withdraws  all  his  desires 
like  the  tortoise  withdrawing  all  its  limbs^  otherwise  not,  even 
if  he  performs  a crore  of  holy  rites. 

Lust  is  never  quelled  by  the  enjoyment  of  desires.  Just  as 
the  fire  becomes  all  the  more  blazing  with  oil  poured  into  it  so 
also  it  is  heightened  by  the  same.®’® 

Whatever  grain  or  barley  the  earth  contains,  the  entire 
gold  it  has,  and  all  the  animals  and  women  of  the  earth  are  not 
enough  for  the  insatiable  desire  of  even  a single  individual. 
Considering  this  fact,  man  should  remain  tranquil  (i.e.  free 
from  desires) . 

When  man  has  no  sinful  motives  towards  any  living  being 
mentally,  verbally  or  physically  he  attains  Brahman. 

573.  This  vcric  is  repeated  (1.8.25}.  B is  the  same  as  Palm- 

dal!  (7.47)* 


Narrative  of  Yaydti 


295 


When  man  is  not  afraid  of  others,  when  others  are  not  afraid 
of  him,  when  he  neither  despises  nor  hates,  he  attains  Brahman. 

Happiness  is  attained  by  one  who  eschews  covetousness 
which  is  difficult  to  avoid  by  wicked  men,  which  does  not 
age  even  if  he  ages  and  which  is  an  ailment  that  ends  only  with 
his  life. 

When  one  ages,  his  hairs,  his  teeth,  his  eyes,  his  ears  all  do 
age.  But  greed  alone  remains  free  from  old  age®^^ 

Everything  in  respect  of  a person  does  age  of  its  own  accord, 
not  otherwise.  But  the  yearning  for  life  and  the  craving  for 
riches  do  not  age  even  if  the  person  ages. 

The  happiness  arising  from  the  fulfilment  of  desires  in  the 
world,  and  the  great  divine  happiness  of  heaven  do  not  merit 
even  a sixteenth  part  of  that  happiness  which  one  has  when 
thirst  for  objects  is  dispelled. 

After  saying  this  that  saintly  king  entered  the  forest  acc- 
ompanied by  his  wives. 

25-28.  He  performed  penance  on  the  peak  Bhrgutuhga.'*^® 
I'here  the  renowned  king  practised  fast  and  attained  heaven  along 
with  his  wives.  His  line  of  successors  consisted  of  five  holy  kings 
who  were  honoured  even  by  divine  sages.  The  entire  earth  is 
pervaded  by  these  descendants  like  the  rays  of  the  sun.  By 
reading  or  listening  to  the  holy  narrative  of  Yayati  a man 
becomes  intelligent,  rich,  long  lived,  famous  and  blessed  with 
issues.  Liberated  from  all  sins  he  shall  be  honoured  in  the  world 
of  Siva. 


574.  This  is  an  oft-quoted  verse. 

575.  This  is  an  oft-quoted  verse. 

576.  Bhrgu-tuhga — this  is  a peak  of  the  HimSilayas.  Varaha  (ch.146. 
45-46)  places  it  in  Nepal  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Ga^d^l^  where  the  sage 
Bhrgu  had  a hermitage.  Fomoiia.  (3 1-33} locates  it  near  Vitasta  andHimavat. 
GEAMJ,  part  I.  p.70. 


CHAPTER  SIXTYEIGHT 

The  race  of  Jydmagha 

SUta  Said  : 

1 . I shall  enumerate  the  members  of  the  family  of  the 
glorious  Yadu,  the  eldest  son  of  Yayati.  Even  as  I narrate 
them  succinctly  and  in  the  proper  order  listen  to  it  and  under- 
stand. 

2.  Yadu  had  five  sons  comparable  to  the  sons  of  Devas. 
Sahasrajit  was  the  eldest.  The  others  were  Kro§tu,  Nila,  Ajaka 
and  Laghu. 

3.  The  king  Satajit  was  the  son  of  Sahasrajit.  Satajit  had 
three  renowned  sons. 

4.  They  were  Haihaya,  Haya  and  the  king  Venuhaya. 
The  successor  of  Haihaya  was  the  well  known  Dharma. 

5.  O brahmins,  his  son  was  Dharmanetra.  Kirti  was  the 
son  of  Dharmanetra  and  his  son  was  Sailjaya. 

6.  The  virtuous  Mahisman  was  the  heir  and  successor  of 
Safijaya.  The  valorous  BhadraiSrenya  was  the  son  of  Mahisman. 

7.  Bhadra^renya’s  legal  heir  was  the  king  named  Durdama 
who  had  an  intelligent  son  known  as  Dhanaka. 

8-9.  The  sons  of  Dhanaka  were  four  and  they  were  very 
popular.  They  were — Krtavirya,  Krtagni,  Krtavarma  and 
Kftaujas.  Arjuna  was  the  son  of  Kytavirya.  He  was  born  with 
thousand  arms  and  became  the  best  of  the  lords  of  the  seven 
islands. 

10-12.  Rama  who  was  identical  with  Nariyana  was  the 
cause  of  his  death.  He  had  a hundred  sons.  Five  of  them  were 
great  heroes.  They  were  strong,  heroic,  virtuous  and  learned. 
They  had  good  practice  in  the  use  of  all  missiles.  They  were 
Sura,  Silrsena,  Dhr^ta,  Kf^na  and  Jayadhvaja  the  king  of 
Avanti.  Jayadhvaja’s  son  Talajangha  was  very  powerful. 

13.  He  had  a hundred  sons.  They  were  known  as  Tala- 
janghas.  The  eldest  of  them  the  powerful  Vitihotra  was  the  ruler. 

14.  Vf?a  and  others  too  were  his  sons  of  meritorious  deeds. 
Vr$a  was  the  founder  of  a dynasty.  His  son  was  Madhu. 

15-18.  Madhu  had  hundred  sons  and  V|*?ni  the  eldest 
was  the  founder  of  a dynasty.  Vr?9i*s  descendants  were  also 
called  Vf^tikis  and  those  of  Madhu  are  known  as  M^dhavas. 


Rac$  of  Jydmagha 


297 


Since  the  Haihayas  belonged  to  the  family  of  Yadu  they  are  also 
designated  as  Yadavas.  There  were  five  groups  or  families  of  the 
Haihayas  of  noble  souls.  They  were — Vitihotras,  Haryatas, 
Bhojas,  Avantis  and  Surasenas.  The  last  were  known  as 
Talajanghas  also.  The  most  famous  kings  among  the  Haihayas 
were  Sura,  Surasena,  Vr§a,  Kr§i^i,  and  Jayadhvaja. 

19.  Sura  and  Suravira  were  the  pious  descendants  of  Sura- 
sena. The  land  of  these  noble  souls  is  known  as  Surasenas. 

20.  The  son  of  Vitihotra  was  the  well  known  Narta.  Dur- 
jaya  the  son  of  Kr$na  was  a destroyer  of  his  enemies. 

21.  Listen  to  the  race  of  the  saintly  king  Kro^tu.  It  con- 
sisted of  excellent  men.  Vis^u  the  scion  of  the  family  of  V^sni 
was  born  of  this  race. 

22.  Krostu  had  a son  of  great  renown  named  Vrjini van. 
His  son  was  Svati  and  KuiSanku  was  his  son. 

23.  Desirous  of  progeny,  the  extremely  powerful  king 
Kusanku  performed  great  sacrifices  of  various  kinds  with  the 
requisite  gifts. 

24-25.  Citraratha  his  son  did  glorious  deeds.  The  heroic  son 
of  Citraratha  was  king  Sa^abindu  who  performed  sacrifices 
giving  large  sums  as  gifts.  He  observed  excellent  holy  rites,  and 
was  an  Emperor  of  great  strength  and  valour  over  a large  num- 
ber of  subjects. 

26.  Sa^abindu  had  twenty  thousand  sons.  They  specifically 
praise  Anantaka  as  the  most  excellent  of  all  of  them. 

27-28.  The  son  Yajfia  was  born  to  Anantaka.  Yajfia’s  son 
was  Dhrti.  His  son  was  U^anas.  That  most  virtuous  king  after 
obtaining  the  kingdom,  performed  a hundred  horse  sacrifices. 
The  king  named  Site^u  is  known  as  the  son  of  Uianas. 

29.  Marutta,  the  saintly  king  who  made  his  family  flourish, 
was  his  son.  The  heroic  Kambalabarhis  was  the  son  of  Marutta. 

30-31.  Rukmakavaca,  a learned  king  was  the  son  of 
Kambalabarhis.  This  Rukmakavaca  had  killed  in  battle  many 
heroic  archers  wearing  coats  of  mail  with  sharp  arrows  and 
attained  great  glory.  The  pious  soul  gave  land  to  the  B^tviks 
(Brahmins  oflBciating)  in  the  Horse-sacrifice. 

32.  Paravrt,  the  slayer  of  heroic  enemies,  was  bom  of 
Rukmakavaca.  Five  sons  of  great  strength  were  bom  to  PafSvrt« 


298 


Lingapura^ 


33.  They  were  Rukmesu,  Prthurukma,  Jyamagha,  Parigha 
and  Hari.  The  father  fixed  Parigha  and  Hari  in  Videha. 

34.  Rukmesu  became  the  king  and  Prthurukma  was  depen- 
dent on  him.  Compelled  by  them,  king  Jyamagha  abdicated  the 
throne  and  stayed  in  the  hermitage. 

35-36.  He  remained  quiescent  while  he  stayed  in  the  forest. 
He  received  enlightenment  from  the  brahmins.  Then  he  took 
up  his  bow  and  went  to  another  land  in  his  chariot  decorated 
with  flags.  He  went  to  the  Narmada^^’  river  accompanied  by 
his  wife.  He  went  to  the  mountain  Rksavan®^®  and  passed  his 
days. 

37-39.  iSaibya  the  chaste  woman  of  good  conduct  was  the 
wife  of  Jyamagha.  After  observing  severe  penance  that  fortu- 
nate lady,  in  her  advanced  age,  gave  birth  to  Sruta  and  Vidar- 
bha.  King  Sruta  had  no  son.  Two  scholarly  sons  Kratha  and 
Kai^ika  were  born  to  Vidarbha.  They  were  heroic  and  very 
efficient  in  battle.  A third  son  was  Romapada  and  Babhru  was 
his  son. 

40.  Sudhrti  a learned  and  very  pious  king  was  his  son.  His 
son  was  Ku^ika  who  was  the  originator  of  the  family  of  Caidya. 

41-42.  Kratha  was  the  son  of  Vidarbha.  His  son  was 
Kunti.  Kunti’s  son  was  Vrta  and  from  him  was  born  the  valo- 
rous Ranadhrsta.  His  son  Nidhrti  was  a slayer  of  enemies.  The 
son  of  Nidhrti  was  Dasarha,  the  destroyer  of  his  foes. 

43.  Vyapta  was  the  son  of  Dasarha,  and  Jimuta  his  son. 
Vikrti  was  the  son  of  Jimuta.  His  son  was  Bhimaratha. 

44.  Navaratha  was  the  son  of  Bhimaratha.  He  was  per- 
petually engaged  in  charitable  gifts  and  holy  rites.  He  was 
devoted  to  truthfulness  and  good  conduct. 

45.  His  son  was  Dfdharatha.  Sakuni  was  his  son.  Karam- 
bha  was  born  of  him.  Devarata  was  his  son. 

46.  From  Devarata  was  born  king  Devarati  of  great  re- 
nown. He  was  equal  to  the  son  of  Devas.  From  him  was  born 
Devaksatra. 

577.  Narmada — this  river  rises  in  the  Vindhya  mountain  and  foils 
into  the  gulf  of  Cambay.  It  flows  in  a wide  flood-plain  and  is  fairly  deep.  It 
forms  a suitable  boundary  between  the  political  units  north  and  south  of  it. 

578.  ?.k?avan—Ramayaoa  places  it  on  the  Narmada  river,  “fkja- 
vantam  ginire^tham  adhy&ste  Narmad&m  piban — Rama, 


Srikrsnay  his  birth  and  life 


299 


47.  Devaksatra’s  son  was  Madhu  of  great  renown.  He  was 
the  founder  of  the  line  of  Madhus.  From  Madhu  was  born 
Kuruvarii^aka. 

48.  After  Kuruvam^a  was  Anu  and  from  him  was  born 
Purutvan,  the  best  among  men.  From  him  Aihsu  was  born  to 
queen  Bhadravati  of  Vidarbha. 

49-51,  Arhsu  married  Aiksvaki  and  Sattva  was  born  of 
him.  From  Sattva  was  born  Sattva ta,  endowed  with  good 
qualities  who  enabled  the  family  to  flourish.  The  dynasty  of 
Jyamagha  has  thus,  been  narrated  to  you  in  detail.  He  who 
reads  or  listens  to  this  lineage  of  Jyamagha  lives  for  a long 
time  and  attains  heavenly  kingdom  and  happiness. 


CHAPTER  SKTYNINE 

Srikrsrta,  his  birth  and  life. 


Suta  said  : 

1-2.  Sattvata  endowed  with  the  sattva  guna  begot  four  sons: 
Bhajana  the  bi'illiant,  the  divine  king  Dovavrdha,  Andhaka  the 
highly  blessed  one  and  Vrsni  the  delighter  of  all  the  descen- 
dants of  Yadu.  Hear  in  detail  the  families  of  these  four. 

3.  Ayutayus,  Satayus  and  the  powerful  Har^akrt  were 
born  to  Srnjayi  and  Bhajana  the  brilliant. 

4.  Among  the  four  sons  of  Sattvata,  king  Devavrdha  per- 
formed a great  penance  desiring,  shall  have  a son  endowed 
with  good  qualities.” 

5.  It  is  heard  that  those  who  are  conversant  with  the 
mythology  of  the  race  of  Anu  sing  that  his  son  was  known  as 
Babhru.  He  was  an  excellent  king  of  meritorious  renown. 

6.  Noble  men  glorify  the  qualities  of  Devavrdha  the  great 
soul.  Just  as  we  hear  about  them  from  far  we  see  them  from 
near. 

7-9.  Babhru  is  the  best  among  men  and  Devavrdha  was 
equal  to  Devas.  Fourteen  thousand  and  sixty  five  persons  had 
attained  immortality,  thanks  to  Babhru  and  Devavrdha.  He 
performed  sacrifices.  He  was  charitably  inclined.  He  was  a 


300  Lingapuran^ 

hero  favourably  disposed  towards  brahmins.  He  was  steady  in 
holy  rites.  He  was  famous.  He  had  great  splendour.  Among  the 
Sattvatas  he  was  a great  hero.  It  was  in  his  family  that  the 
Bhojas  equal  to  Devas  were  bom. 

10.  Gwdhar!  and  Madn  were  the  wives  of  Vr?^i.  Gand- 
hari  gave  birth  to  Sumitra  and  Mitranandana. 

11.  MadrI  obtained  from  him  the  son  Devamidhu^a  at 
first  and  then  two  excellent  heroes  Anamitra  and  Sini. 

12.  Anamitra’s  son  was  Nighna.  Nighna  had  two  sons  the 
highly  blessed  Prasena  and  Satrajit. 

13.  The  sun  was  an  intimate  friend  of  Satrajit.  He  gave  him 
the  jewel  Syamantaka.®’® 

14-16.  This  jewel  was  the  best  among  all  the  jewels  in  the 
world.  Once  he  went  for  hunting  along  with  Prasena.  He  was 
killed  there  by  a terrible  lion  as  he  was  helpless.  From  Sini  the 
youngest  son  of  Vf^^i  a son  Satyaka  was  born.  He  was  faithful 
in  words  and  was  richly  endowed  with  truthfulness.  His  son  was 
the  valorous  Yuyudhana,  the  grandson  of  Sini. 

17.  Asahga  was  the  son  of  Yuyudhana.  Kuni  was  his  son. 
The  son  of  Ku^  was  Yugandhara.  Thus  the  descendants  of 
Sini  (Saincyas)  have  been  described. 

18.  A son  was  born  to  Yudhajit  the  son  of  Vrsni  and 
Madri.  He  was  known  as  Svaphalka.  He  was  the  benefactor  of 
the  three  worlds. 

19.  Wherever  the  pious  king  Svaphalka  was  present,  there 
was  no  fear  of  either  ailment  or  of  drought. 

20.  Svaphalka  took  as  his  wife,  Gandin!  the  daughter  of 
the  king  of  Ka^i,  who  gave  him  his  daughter. 

21-24.  For  many  years  she  remained  in  the  womb  of  her 
mother  without  being  born.  The  father  spoke  to  her  even  as 
she  was  within  the  womb.  “Be  born  quickly.  Welfare  unto 
thee.  Why  dost  thou  tarry.”  Then  the  girl  Gaiidini  stationed 
within  the  womb  replied  to  him — “O  father,  everyday  you 
must  give  a cow  to  a brahmin.  If  you  give  thus  for  three  years 
I will  come  out  of  the  womb  of  my  mother.” 

The  father  said,  “So  be  it”  and  he  fulfilled  her  desire.  Her 
son  from  Svaphalka  is  said  to  be  Akrura.  He  was  charitable, 


579.  Syamaataka.  Sit  H.M.  p.167. 


iSrikr^y  his  birth  and  life 


301 


heroic,  a performer  of  sacrifices,  learned,  and  fond  of  guests* 
During  sacrifices  he  distributed  wealth  as  gift. 

25-29.  Akrura  married  Ratna  the  daughter  of  Saiva.  He 
begot  of  her  Upamanyu,  Mangii,  Vjrta,  Janamejaya,  Girirak$a, 
Upek§a,  Satrughna,  Arimardana,  Dharmabhit,  Vf^tadharma, 
Godhana,  Vara,  Avidia  and  Prativaha.  He  had  also  an  excel** 
lent  daughter  Sudhara.  Two  sons  who  delighted  the  faitiily 
were  born  of  UgrasenI  (daughter  of  Ugrasena)  to  Akrdra* 
They  were  Devavan  and  Upadeva  equal  to  Devas. 

The  renowned  Citraka  was  born  as  the  son  of  Sumitra. 

30-31.  The  following  were  the  sons  of  Citraka — ^Vipfthu, 
Prthu,  Asvagrlva.  Subahu,  Sudhasuka,  Gavek^ai^i,  Ari$tanemi» 
Asva,  Dharma,  Adharmabhft,  Subhumi  and  Bahubhumi.  He 
had  two  daughters  Sravis^ha  and  Sravana. 

32.  To  Andhaka  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  Kasi  bore 
four  sons  viz:— Kukura,  Bhajamana,  Suci  and  Kambala- 
barhis. 

33.  Vr^i(U  was  the  son  of  Kukura.  Sura  was  the  son  of 
Vf^ijii.  The  highly  powerful  Kapotaroma  was  his  son  and  his 
son  was  Vilomaka. 

34.  He  had  a scholarly  son  Nala  who  was  a comrade  of 
Tumburu.  He  is  known  by  the  name  Candananaka  Dundubhi. 

35.  From  him  was  born  the  son  Abhijit.  His  son  was 
Punarvasu.  That  king  performed  a horse  sacrifice  for  obtaining 
a son. 

36.  In  the  course  of  that  sacrifice  when  Atiratra  mantras 
were  being  chanted  in  the  middle  of  the  assembly  of  priests  the 
child  Punarvasu  was  bom.  Later  on  he  became  a scholar,  omnis- 
cient, charitable  and  a performer  of  sacrifices. 

37.  Twins  were  born  to  Abhijit  also.  They  were  well 
known  as  Ahuka  and  Ahuld.  They  were  the  best  among  renow- 
ned people. 

38.  Two  sons  were  bom  to  the  daughter  of  the  king  of 
Ka^I  and  Ahuka: — ^viz.  Devaka  and  Ugrasena.  Both  of  them 
were  equal  to  the  sons  of  Devas. 

39.  Childern  equal  to  Devas  were  bom  to  Devaka.  They 
were  Devavan,  Upadeva,  Sudeva  and  Devarakfita. 

40-41.  They  had  seven  sisters.  The  kii^g  gave  them  to 
Vasudeva.  They  were  Vnadevi,  Upadevft,  Devarakfitfi,  Sridevfi 


SOS  Lingafnad^ 

S&ntideva,  SahadevI  and  Devak!  of  slender  waist  and  the 
best  among  them, 

42.  Ugrasena  had  nine  sons.  Kamsa  was  the  eldest  among 
them.  Their  sons  and  grandsons  were  hundreds  and  thousands. 

43.  The  daughter  of  Devaka  and  the  wife  of  Vasudeva 
was  worthy  of  being  honoured  and  worshipped  even  by 
Devas. 

44.  The  other  two  wives  of  Anakadundubhi,  (Vasudeva) 
viz.  the  blessed  Rohini  and  Pauravi  the  daughter  of  Bahlika 
were  also  worthy  of  being  worshipped  by  Devas. 

45.  Rohini  gave  birth  to  Rama  who  wielded  the  plough- 
share as  his  weapon  and  had  great  strength.  Due  to  the  fear  of 
Kamsa  he  had  resorted  to  his  own  tranquil  self. 

46.  After  the  six  innocent  childern  had  been  killed,  and 
after  Balarama  had  been  bom  the  intelligent  Vasudeva, 
begot  Kr^na  of  Devaki. 

47.  He  alone  is  the  supreme  soul.  He  is  Visnu  the  lord 
of  Devas,  Balarama  was  the  lord  Sesa  with  silver  lustre. 

48.  Under  the  pretext  of  the  curse  of  Bhrgu,  Visnu  agreed 
to  take  a human  body  and  was  bom  of  Devaki  as  the  son  of 
Vasudeva. 

49.  At  the  same  time  the  Yogicslumber  Kau^iki 
originating  from  the  body  of  Uma  became  the  daughter  of 
Yasoda  at  the  behest  of  the  lord  of  Devas. 

50.  She  alone  is  the  Prakrti  bowed  to  by  all  Devas.  Lord 
Kr^na  is  Puru^a  the  bestower  of  the  fruit  of  virtue  and  salva- 
tion. 

51-52.  Saving  his  own  son  from  Kaihsa,  Vasudeva  took 
the  daughter  of  Yasoda  and  instead  gave  her  his  own  four- 
armed, wide-eyed  son  who  was  marked  by  the  scar  Srivatsa 
and  who  held  the  conch,  discus,  iron  club  and  lotus. 

53.  After  giving  to  Nanda  (the  husband  of  Yasoda)  his 
son  Vi§nu  the  protector  of  the  worlds  who  had  taken  up  a 
physical  form  out  of  his  own  will,  he  said  to  Nanda — ‘‘May  he 
be  protected.’’ 

54-55.  It  was  due  to  the  grace  of  Siva  the  lord  of  Devas 
of  immense  splendour  that  Vif^u  assumed  the  physical  body. 
Along  widi  R^a  he  handed  over  the  lord  the  bestower  of 
boons,  the  great  livara,  the  preceptor  of  the  universe,  who  had 


Srikrfnay  his  birth  and  life  - " * 303  ” 

incarnated  for  dispelling  the  burden  of  the  eartb,  saying  ‘*Here-  \ 
by  the  Y^avas  will  attain  all  auspicious  results.  This  child 
of  Devaki  will  remove  all  our  distresses.’* 

56*59.  Anakadundubhi  then  intimated  to  Kamsa  the  son 
of  Ugrasena  that  a daughter  endowed  with  good  signs  had  been 
born.  There  had  been  an  aerial  announcement — ‘‘O  Kamsa  of 
good  holy  rites  the  eighth  child  of  Devaki  will  no  doubt  be  the 
cause  of  your  death.”  Hence,  Kamsa  attempted  to  kill  the 
child.  But  that  child  (of  Nanda)  the  goddess  of  eight  arms 
slipped  from  his  hands  and  crossed  to  the  sky.  She  said  in  a 
voice  as  majestic  as  the  rumbling  sound  of  the  cloud. ‘‘Save 
your  own  skin.  Your  death  has  come. 

60.  O foolish  Kaihsa,  even  as  you  were  guarding  your 
own  body  you  have  committed  sins.  Indeed  your  destroyer  is 
already  born.” 

61.  It  is  said  that  due  to  his  fear  of  Devaki,  Kariisa  killed 
the  eighth  child.  But  the  eighth  son  of  Devaki  was  really  the 
cause  of  his  death. 

62.  O leading  sages,  all  attempts  of  Bhoja  to  take  revenge 
on  him  became  futile  due  to  Krsna’s  power.  Moreover  he  was 
rendered  insentient  by  the  Maya  Kausiki. 

63.  Thus  Kamsa  was  killed  by  Krsna  of  unimpeded  acti- 
vity. Many  other  destroyers  of  Devas  and  brahmins  too  were 
killed. 

64.  Krsna’s  sons  Pradyumna  and  others  have  already  been 
enumerated.  They  were  many  and  all  of  them  were  experts  in 
battle. 

65-69.  Krsna’s  sons  were  equal  to  Krsna.  Among  all  these 
sons  Carudesna  and  his  brothers  are  of  special  importance. 
They  were  the  sons  of  Rukmini.  They  were  the  destroyers  of 
their  enemies.  Kfsna  had  sixteen  thousand  and  one  hundred 
wives.  The  most  beloved  and  the  eldest  of  them  all  was 
Rukrninl. 

Lord  Siva  was  worshipped  for  twelve  years  by  her  and 
Krsna  of  unimpaired  activity,  for  the  sake  of  sons,  living 
only  on  air  (all  those  years ) . 

By  the  grace  of  the  trident-bearing  lord  the  following  sons 
were  born  to  Kfsna  viz: — Carudesna,  Sucaru,  Caruvesa, 
Yaiodhara,  Caru^ravas,  Cariiya:^as,  Pradyumna  and  Samba. 


304 


LingapurS^a 


70.  On  seeing  those  heroic  sons  of  Rukmini  as  well  as 
Rukmi^f,  Jambavati  the  wife  of  K^sna  once  spoke  to  him 
thus. 

71.  O lotus-eyed  one,  it  behoves  you,  if  you  are  delighted, 
to  give  me  a son  equal  to  Devas,  a son  endowed  with  superior 
qualities. 

72.  On  hearing  the  words  of  Jambavati,  Krsna  the  lord  of 
the  universe  and  a real  storehouse  of  penance  began  to  perform 
penance. 

73-75.  Kr§igia  NarSyana,  the  wieldcr  of  the  conch,  discus 
and  iron  club,  went  to  the  excellent  hermitage  of  the  sage 
Vyaghrapada.  After  bowing  to  the  sage,  Krsna  obtained  the 
divine  Pa^upata  Yoga.  At  his  behest  he  shaved  off  the  beard, 
moustache  and  the  hair  on  the  head,  applied  ghee  all  over  the 
body  and  wore  the  girdle  of  the  Munja  grass.  Thus  initiated, 
lord  Krs^a  the  scorcher  of  foes  performed  a great  penance. 

76.  He  performed  the  penance  in  various  poses.  He  stood 
with  arms  raised  up  and  without  support,  he  stood  on  the  tips 
of  his  toes.  He  spent  three  seasons  sustaining  himself  on  fruits, 
water  and  air. 

77.  Satisfied  with  his  penance,  lord  Siva  granted  him 
boons.  He  gave  Samba  the  son  of  J^bavati  to  Krma  the 
noble  soul. 

78.  On  getting  the  son  Samba  from  Krsna,  his  wife  Jamba- 
vat!  became  highly  delighted  in  the  same  way  as  Aditi  when 
she  obtained  Aditya. 

79.  O leading  sages,  by  the  curse®®®  of  Lord  Siva  the 
thousand  hands  of  Bana  were  cut  off  by  Kr$na. 

80.  Then  with  Balarama  to  assist  him  he  carried  out  the 
destruction  of  Daityas.  He  sportively  killed  several  wicked 
kings  in  the  battlefield. 

81.  He  killed  the  leading  Daitya  Naraka  born  of  Devas. 


580.  Rudrasya  i&p&t— -S&mba,  ion  of  Srlkr^oa,  cut  off  a thousand  arms 
of  Bft^a.  For  a difoent  verdon,  see  H.M.  p.42. 


Srikrs^ai  his  birth  and  life  305 

thanks  to  a boon  granted  by  the  noble  brahmin  Crdhvaca- 
kra'.ssi 

82.  The  excessively  strong  one,  of  unequalled  exploit, 
Kfsna  took  up  sixteen  thousand  one  hundred  girls  for  his  own 
pleasure. 

Under  the  pretext  of  a curse  from  the  brahmins  he  destroyed 
the  family  of  Vr§nis.  After  that  he,  the  lord,  remained  in 
Prabhasa.®®* 

84-85.  More  than  hundred  years  elapsed  thus  even  as 
Krsna  ruled  over  Dvaraka*  removing  the  distress  due  to  old  age. 
He  acceded  to  the  curses  of  Vi^vamitra,®®®  Kanva®®^  and 
Narada,®®^  as  also  the  words  of  Durvasas  (and  stayed)  in 
Pindaraka.®®® 

86.  Krsna  abandoned  the  human  form  under  the  pretext  of 
the  arrow  of  the  hunter  Jaraka,  and  after  blessing  that  hunter 
he  returned  to  heaven. 

87.  Due  to  the  curse  of  Asfavakra®®’  as  also  due  to  his 
own  Maya  (power)  the  wives  of  lord  Kr^^a  were  abducted  by 
thieves. 

88-91.  Balarama  abandoned  his  human  form  and  assuming 
that  of  Sesa  went  to  his  heavenly  abode.  The  auspicious 
queens  of  Krsna — Rukmini  and  others — entered  fire  along  with 
the  body  of  their  lord.  O brahmins,  the  gentle  lady  Revati  too 
entered  the  pyre  along  with  her  husband  Balarama  and 
followed  his  path.  The  extremely  powerful  Arjuna  performed 
the  obsequies  of  Krsna,  Rama  and  also  of  other  Vr^nis.  O men 

581 . It  refers  to  the  legend  narrated  in  Harivarhia  : 

^ II 

582.  Prabh§sa— it  is  a celebrated  place  of  pilgrimage  in  Saura§tra 
the  southern  part  of  Kathiawar.  *a  city  near  Okha  in  Kathiawar. 

583-585.  For  detail,  Bhaga,  Janayi9yati  vo  manda  musalath  kulana- 
ianam  -cited  in  ST, 

586.  Pi^d^aka— a sacred  bathing  pond,  somewhere  in  the  country  of 
the  Yadavas,  not  identifiable. 

587.  The  curse  of  Af tavakra.  Gf  I 

fm  ii  *icTOi??r  5 

I nfnsw  ii  Vtm  cited  in  sr. 


306  Lingapufd^a 

of  good  holy  rites,  with  bulbous  roots,  fruits  and  roots  he 
performed  the  rites  of  oblation,  for  want  of  wealth. 

92-94.  Then  Arjuna  too  went  to  heaven  together  with 
his  brothers.  Thus,  the  exploits  and  end  of  the  noble  Krsna  of 
unimpaired  activity,  who  adopted  human  form  out  of  his 
own  free  will,  has  been  succinctly  mentioned  to  you.  O 
brahmins,  he  who  reads  this  narrative  of  the  kings  of  lunar  race 
or  listens  to  it  or  narrates  it  to  others  undoubtedly  goes  to  the 
world  of  Visnu. 


CHAPTER  SEVENTY 

Various  Creations 

The  sages  said : 

1 . O Suta,  the  primordial  creation  had  been  indicated  by 
you  but  not  clarified.  O person  of  good  holy  rites,  it  behoves 
you  to  recount  it  in  detail  now. 

Suta  said', 

2.  O leading  sages,  the  great  lord  Siva  is  stationed  beyond 
Prakrti  and  Purusa.®*®  He  is  the  greatest  soul. 

3.  The  unmanifest  originated  from  that  lord  as  the 

greatest  cause.  Thinkers  on  metaphysical  reality  call  it  Pra- 
dhana  or  Prakrti. 

4.  It  is  devoid  of  smell,  colour  and  taste.  It  has  neither 
sound  nor  touch.  It  is  unageing,  stable,  imperishable  and  per- 
petually stationed  in  the  soul. 

5.  It  is  the  source  of  origin  of  the  universe.  It  is  the  eter- 
nal great  Brahman,  the  massive  being.  It  is  the  physical 

body  of  all  living  beings.  It  is  induced  by  the  command  of 
the  lord. 

6.  At  the  outset  the  Pradhana  existed  in  the  form  of 

Brahman.*®®  It  had  neither  beginning  nor  end.  It  was  unborn 
and  subtle  consisting  of  the  three  Gunas.  It  was  the  source  of 

588.  The  transcendent  God  Mahe^vara  is  higher  than  Prakrti  and 
Puru^a*  (Sec  p.  41  note  56).  Gf.  SP,  Prakrtei  ca  parath  Brahma  yat  tac 
chivam  udahrtam— cited  in  ST, 

589,  Brahma.  Gf.  **sad  eva  saumy  edam  agra  islt*' — cited  in  ST, 


Vmotis  Creations 


307 


origin  of  the  universe  as  well  as  eternal.  It  was  neither  mani-, 
fest  nor  comprehensible. 

7.  When  the  Gunas  were  in  equilibrium^  when  it  had  not 
been  differentiated,  when  it  was  identical  with  darkness,**® 
all  this  visible  universe  had  been  pervaded  by  its  existence 
due  to  Siva’s  will. 

8.  At  the  time  of  creation,  as  the  Pradhana  was  presided 
over  by  the  individual  soul — Purusa,  the  principle  Mahat 
menifested  revealing  itself  as  subsidiary  to  Prakrti. 

9.  It  was  enveloped  by  the  subtle  and  great  Avyakta 
(unmanifest) . At  the  outset,  when  the  principle  of  Mahat  had 
the  predominance  of  Sattva,  then  only  it  revealed  existence. 

10.  The  Mahat  should  be  known  as  the  Cosmic  Mind.  It  is 
said  to  be  the  sole  cause  of  creation.  It  originated  as  presided 
over  by  the  individual  soul  and  only  as  a beneficent  symbol. 

11.  Its  forms  Dharma  etc.,  are  the  causes  of  the  principles 
and  objects  of  the  world.  Induced  by  the  desire  to  create  the 
Mahat  carries  on  the  activity  of  creation. 

12.  It  is  named  variously  as  Manas  (mind),  Mahat 
(great),  Mati  (intellect),  Brahman,  Puh  (city),  Buddhi 
(intellect),  Khyati  (faculty  of  discriminatory  knowledge), 
Isvara  (lord),  Prajfia  (perfect  knowledge),  Citi (consciousness), 
Smrti  (memory),  Saihvid  (cognition),  and  Vi^ve^a  (lord  of 
the  universe) . 

13.  It  is  called  Manas  because  it  ponders  over  the  fruit  of 
the  activity  of  all  living  beings  [from  the  root  man  to  think] 
Subtle  as  it  is,  the  fruits  of  its  activities  appear  to  be  divided 
i.  e.  many  and  different. 

14.  It  is  called  Mahat  because  it  originated  at  the  outset 
prior  to  all  other  principles  as  well  as  due  to  its  magnitude.  It 
is  greater  than  Visesas*®^  and  Gunas.*** 

15.  It  possesses  magnitude  [Manaih  Bibharti].  It  ponders 
and  causes  differentiation.  It  is  also  greatly  related  to  the  enjoy- 
ment (i,  e.  experience)  of  Purusa.  Hence,  it  is  known  as  Mati. 

16.  It  is  defined  as  Brahman  because  of  its  brhatva 
(massiveness)  and  bj-mhanatva  (state  of  becoming  swollen) 

590.  tamomaye.  Gf.  **tancia  aait  tameia  gu^ham  agre'* — cited  in  ST. 

591.  viseiebhyabi— sattvldibhyah  ST.  from  the  attributes,  sattva,  etc. 

393.  guo^bhyaiji — iabdadibbyab  ST.  from  the  subtle  elements,  (tan- 

m&tras— sounds,  etc. 


308  LingapufSupa 

and  also  because  it  contains  (within  itself)  all  experiences 
which  are  dependent  on  all  external  objects. 

17.  It  is  called  Puh  because  it  fills  Devas  with  blessings 
and  leads  men  to  the  state  of  awareness  [from  the  root  pr]. 

18.  Since  thePuru^a  is  known  through  it  and  since  it 
makes  known  all  objects,  what  is  wholesome,  from  what  is  not 
it  is  called  Buddhi. 

19.  Since  enjoyment  of  pleasures  is  based  on  the 
knowledge  thereof,  and  also  since  each  item  of  enjoyment 
is  dependent  on  knowledge,  it  is  known  by  the  word  khyati. 

20.  The  principle  of  Mahat  is  called  by  the  term  “Khyati** 
also  because  objects  in  many  instances  are  named  (khyayante) 
through  its  qualities  such  as  knowledge,  etc. 

21.  It  is  a great  soul  and  it  directly  perceives  everything. 
Hence,  it  is  called  Isvara.  Since  it  follows  up  knowledge  it  is 
called  Prajfta. 

22.  Since  it  collects  such  forms-  as  Jnana  (knowledge)  etc., 
and  the  fruits  of  many  holy  rites,  for  the  sake  of  enjoyment, 
it  is  called  citi  (from  the  root  ci) . 

23.  Since  it  remembers  all  affairs  of  the  present,  past  and 
future  it  is  called  Smrti  (from  the  root  smr). 

24.  It  is  called  Samvid  because  it  obtains  the  entire 
knowledge  and  knows  the  greatness  of  everything  [from  the 
roots  vid  to  know  and  vind  to  obtain]. 

25.  O excellent  sages,  (for  another  reason  also)  it  is  called 
Samvid  by  great  men.  It  exists  [from  root  vid  to  exist]  every- 
where and  within  it  one  obtains  everything  [vindati]. 

26.  From  the  root  Jiia  (to  know)  they  call  it  Jftanam.  For 
the  lord  is  the  fountainhead  of  all  knowledge.  Since  it  repu- 
diates bondage  etc.,  [the  Mahat]  is  called  I^vara  by  learned  men. 

27.  This  first  excellent  tattva — Mahat — has  been  thus 
explained  by  many  synonymous  words  by  those  who  are 
conversant  with  the  nature  of  tattvas  and  who  always  think 
about  the  existence  of  the  lord. 

28.  The  Mahat  carries  out  the  work  of  creation  when  it 
is  induced  by  the  desire  to  create.  Samkalpa  (volition)  and 
Adhyavasaya  (effort)  are  its  two  traits. 

29.  (From  this  Mahat)  having  three  Gu^as  but  with 
Rajas  prevailing,  the  Ahaxhldura  (ego)  originated.  All  the 


Various  Creations 


309 


creation  was  thus  enveloped  by  Mahat.  It  is  exterior  to 
BhutMi  (ego,  the  cause  of  the  elements). 

30.  From  the  same  ahaihkara  with  tamas  predominating 
over  the  other  two  came  about  the  creation  of  Bhutatan- 
matras  (the  essence  of  sound,  etc).  It  is  called  Bhutadi  (cause 
of  the'  elements ) and  it  is  tamasa  in  nature. 

31.  The  BhutMi  on  disintegration  created  Sabdatanma- 
tra  (the  essence  of  sound) . From  this  was  born  Akasa  (ether) 
(also  called)  Susira  (hole) , that  is  marked  by  sound. 

32-34.  Akasa  characterised  by  sound  enveloped  Sparsa- 
tanmatra  which  on  disintegration  created  Vayu  characterised 
by  touch.  Vayu  on  disintegration  created  Rupatanmatra. 
Therefore,  it  is  said  that  Jyotis  originated  out  of  vayu,  with 
colour  as  its  quality.  Jyotis  on  disintegration  created  Rasa- 
tanmatra.  Apah  (waters)  originated  from  it  with  taste  as 
their  main  quality. 

35.  Agni  (i.  e.  the  fiery  element)  with  the  Rupa-tanmatra 
enveloped  Rasatanmatras.  Waters  on  disintegration  created 
Gandhatanmatra. 

36.  From  it  the  sahghata  (solid  earth)  originated.  Its 
special  attribute  is  smell  when  each  of  the  elements  remains 
within  its  specific  quality  (sound,  etc)  it  is  called  tanmatra  and 
this  exclusive  nature  is  called  tanmatrata. 

37.  The  Tanmatras  are  also  called  Avisesas,  because  in 
that  stage  they  do  not  define  anything  in  particular  (as  distinct 
from  others.  They  are  Avisesas  for  another  reason  also — they 
are  Pra:§antas  (quiescent)  or  Ghoras  (terrible)  or  Mudhas 
(confused). 

38.  This  creation  by  the  tanmatras  of  the  Bhutas  should 
be  known  as  one  that  is  mutual.  The  other  creations  are  from 
the  Vaikarika  (that  which  has  undergone  alteration)  i.e.  the 
Aharhk&ra  (ego)  or  from  the  SEttvika  wherein  sattva  guna 
predominates. 

39-40.  The  Vaikarika  creation  functions  simultaneously. 
There  are  five  senses  of  knowledge  and  five  senses  of  activity. 
These  ten  senses  are  the  means  of  achievement.  The  eleventh 
is  mind.  By  its  very  nature  the  mind  has  both  qualities  i.  e.  of 
the  organ  of  sense  and  of  the  organ  of  function. 

41.  The  five  organs  of  sense  are,  ear,  sk'  'ye,  tongue. 


310 


Ungapwrdsifa 


palate  and  nose.  They  are  endowed  with  the  power  of  perceiving 
their  respective  qualities  (i.e.  ear  receiving  sound,  skin  receiving 
touch,  etc) . 

42.  The  legs,  rectum,  private  parts,  hands  and  the  organ 
of  speech  (the  tenth  Indriya)  are  the  organs  of  function  or 
activity.  Their  activities  are  respectively  gait  (movement), 
evacuation,  pleasure,  arts,  crafts  and  speech. 

43.  Both  ether  and  the  element  of  sound  penetrated 
the  element  of  touch.  Hence  wind  has  both  the  attributes 
— sound  and  touch. 

44.  Similarly  both  sound  and  touch  entered  colour.  Hence, 
the  fire  has  three  attributes,  viz,  sound,  touch  and  colour. 

45.  The  attributes  of  sound,  touch,  and  colour  penetrated 
the  element  of  taste.  Hence,  waters  have  four  attributes  includ- 
ing taste  as  their  special  attribute. 

46.  Sound,  touch,  colour  and  taste  penetrated  smell. 
Combined  with  the  element  of  smell  they  pervaded  the  earth. 

47.  Hence,  the  earth  contains  all  the  five  attributes  and 
is  considered  the  grossest  of  all  elements.  They  are  quiescent, 
terrible  or  confused.  Hence,  they  are  called  Vi^esas. 

48.  Since  they  have  penetrated  mutually  they  sustain  one 
another.®*® 

Everything  within  the  earth  is  enveloped  by  the  mountain 
Lokaloka. 

49.  They  are  called  Vi^e§as  because  they  can  be  perceived 
by  means  of  the  sense-organs  invariably.  The  latter  ones  have 
all  the  qualities  of  the  previous  creation.®*^ 

50-52.  Each  of  these  qualities  is  a distinct  characteristic 
of  each  element.  (Any  other  quality  found  in  an  element 
should  be  known  to  be  due  to  the  contact  of  the  other  element; 

( for  example)  experiencing  smell  in  water  some  may  say 
that  it  is  the  quality  of  water,  yet,  it  should  be  known  that  it 

593.  Paraspar&nupraveia  : Each  preceding  element  enters  into  each 
succeeding  element.  Each  new  life-centre  is  a link  in  the  chain.  The  seed 
is  permeated  by  its  creative  potency.  The  seed  in  the  form  of  the  father  is 
reborn  as  the  son  in  endless  generations.  This  principle  of  anupraveia,  i.e. 
the  ancestor  transmitting  its  whole  potency  to  the  successor  is  a bioiogtea  1 
law. 


594.  Sec  verses  43-47  of  this  chapter. 


Various  Creations 


311 


is  the  quality  of  earth  alone.  It  is  because  the  particles  of  earth 
have  got  mixed  with  water  and  wind  that  the  smell  appears  to 
be  present  in  them. 

These  seven  massive  beings  beginning  with  intellect 
(Mahat)  and  ending  with  Visesas  (gross  elements)  create  the 
cosmic  egg®®5  because  they  depend  upon  one  another,  because 
they  are  presided  over  by  Purusa  and  because  they  arc  Wessed 
by  the  unmanifest. 

53.  Like  the  bubbles  in  the  water  the  big  cosmic  egg  is 
born  at  once  from  the  Vise^s.  The  whole  egg  is  embedded 
in  water. 

54.  The  cosmic  egg  is  encircled  by  waters  ten  times  in 
extent.  The  waters  are  externally  encircled  by  the  fire  ten 
times  in  extent. 

55.  The  fire  is  externally  encircled  by  the  wind  ten  limes 
in  extent  and  the  wind  is  externally  encircled  by  the  ether 
ten  times  in  extent. 

56.  The  wind  is  encircled  by  the  ether.  The  ether  is  encir- 
cled by  the  ego.  The  ego  is  encircled  by  intellect  and  intellect 
is  encircled  by  the  unmanifest. 

57-59.  Sarva  is  stationed  in  the  covering  lid  of  the  cos- 
mic egg.  O persons  of  good  holy  rites,  Bhava  is  stationed  in 
waters;  Rudra  is  stationed  in  the  middle  of  fire.  Ugra  is 
stationed  in  the  wind.  Bhima  is  stationed  in  the  middle  of 
the  earth.  Mahe^vara  is  stationed  in  ego.  Lord  I^a  is  stationed 
in  intellect.  Paramesvara  is  stationed  everywhere.  The  egg  is 
encircled  by  the  seven  coverings  originating  from  Prakrtis.  These 
eight  Prakrtis  are  thus  stationed  encircling  one  an  other. 

60.  Stationing  themselves  thus  at  the  time  of  creation 
they  attract  one  another.  Thus  mutually  interdependent  they 
uphold  one  another, 

595.  Read  mahad^di  for  mah^dayo  (Linga.  1.3.18).  The  principle 
of  intellect  and  mind  and  the  five  gross  elements  constitute  each  Egg.  These 
seven  constituents  of  the  Egg  are  also  known  as  the  seven  sages,  seven 
Angirases  (Gf.  Linga.  1.70. 51). 

506.  The  Egg  constitutes  the  unmanifest  Prakfti  (avyakta)  and  its 
manifestations — intellect  (mahat,)  ego(ahaxhkSra)and  the  five  gross  elements 
(bhutas).  (Gf.  VSyu.  1.4.76).  These  seven  comprise  the  shells  of  the 
life-principle  in  the  egg.  Of.  BhSlg.  6.16.37  : ^'kfityidibhir  e$a  kilUvrtab 
saptabhir  do|a-gunottarair  aod^koiab**. 


312 


LiAgapwr&fa 

61-63.  The  vikaras  (effects)  exist  in  the  vikarins  (cause) 
by  means  of  the  relationship  of  the  support  and  the  supported. 
Mahebvara  is  beyond  Avyakta.  The  egg  is  born  of  Avyakta. 
The  same  lord  is  bom  of  the  egg  as  Purusa  with  solar  lustre. 
In  it  the  generating  of  the  effect  is  achieved  by  his  own  free 
will.  He  alone  is  the  primordial  embodied  being,  called 
Purusa.  Visnu  who  is  bowed  to  by  all  Devas  is  born  of  his  left 
limb. 

Thanks  to  the  wish  of  paramesthin,  the  lord  Vi§nu  originat- 
ed together  with  goddess  Lak$ml.  Brahma  the  preceptor  of  the 
universe  is  born  of  the  right  limb  of  the  lord  along  with 
Sarasvatl. 

6v‘)-67.  These  worlds  are  in  that  Cosmic  egg.  This  universe 
is  within  the  Cosmos.  The  moon  and  the  sun  along  with  the 
stars,  planets,  wind  and  the  Lokaloka  mountains  are  stationed 
within  Cosmic  Egg.  O Brahmins,  whatever  time  interval  is 
necessary  for  the  creation  I have  enumerated  above,  that  period 
is  the  day  time  of  Paramesvara.  His  night  also  extends  over  the 
same  duration. 

68-70.  The  period  of  his  creation  is  his  day  and  the  period 
of  dissolution  his  night. 

Really,  it  should  be  known  that  he  has  neither  day  nor 
night  [as  we  conceive  of  it].  It  is  used  metaphorically  for  the 
facility  of  the  people. 

The  objects  stay  during  the  day  of  the  lord,  viz. — the  sense- 
organs,  the  objects  of  the  senses,  the  five  great  elements,  all 
living  beings,  intellect  and  the  deities. 

71-73.  At  the  end  of  the  day  they  get  dissolved.  At  the 
end  of  the  night  they  originate  again. 

When  the  unmanifest  is  stationed  in  His  soul,  when  the  effects 
are  dissolved,  both  Pradhana  and  Purusa  remain  quiescent 
i.e.  with  their  common  characteristics,  tamas,  sattva  and  rajas 
in  equilibrium.  They  remain  interlinked  like  threads  woven 
together  in  the  same  warp  and  woof. 

It  should  be  known  that  there  is  dissolution  when  the  guiias 
arc  in  equilibrium  and  when  they  are  upset  there  is  creation. 

74.  Just  as  there  is  oil  latent  in  the  gingelly  seed,  just  as 
the  ghee  is  present  in  the  milk,  so  also  the  universe  is  present  in 
tamas,  sattva  and  rsyas. 


Various  Creations 


313 


75.  After  enjoying  the  goddess  throughout  the  night  the 
creator  begins  to  function  in  the  beginning*  of  the  day  when 
Prakfti  originates  from  Him. 

76.  The  great  lord  penetrates  Pradhana  and  Purusa  agitat- 
ing^®’ them  by  means  of  yoga. 

77.  The  three  deities  originate  from  the  great  lord,  the  lord 
of  the  Universe.  They  are  permanent,  extremely  worthy  of  con- 
cealment and  protection,  embodied  ones,  and  the  souls  of  all. 

78.  These  alone  are  the  three  devas,  the  three  Gunas,  the 
three  worlds,  and  the  three  fires.®®® 

79.  They  are  mutually  supported  and  they  devotedly  follow 
one  another.  They  exist  on  mutual  help  and  they  hold  one 
another. 

80.  They  are  paired  together  and  mutually  interdependent. 
There  is  not  even  a moment’s  separation  among  them.  They  do 
not  eschew  one  another.®®® 

81.  6iva  is  the  greatest  lord.  Visnu  is  beyond  or  above  in- 
tellect. Brahma  is  endowed  with  rajas.  He  functions  at  the 
beginning  of  Creation. 

82-87.  That  Purusa  is  known  as  Par^t  and  Prakrti  as 
Para. 

The  Prakrti  which  is  presided  over  by  the  great  lord  begins 
to  function  when  it  is  induced  from  all  sides.  The  principle  of 
intellect  functions  following  this.  Since  it  is  permanent  and 
stable,  it  resorts  to  the  object  of  the  sense,  by  itself.  When  there 
is  disturbance  in  the  Guijas  (qualities)  of  Pradhana  the  period  of 
creation  functions  from  that  which  is  of  Existent-cum-nonexis- 
tent  nature  and  presided  over  by  I^vara. 

Rudra  became  fully  equipped  for  evolving  the  effects  at  the 
very  outset.  He  is  unequalled  in  brillance,  intelligent  and 
illuminating.  He  indeed  is  the  first  embodied  soul  and  is  called 

597.  When  the  life-principle  enters  into  Prakrti,  there  occurs  an  agita- 
tion (kfobha)  in  the  form  of  contraction  and  expansion.  Out  of  this  agitation 
which  is  a process  of  Coming  and  Going,  the  universal  teed  is  created,  which 
has  both  the  characteristics  of  the  male  and  female.  For  detail,  see  MP, 
A siudjf,  pp.  36-37. 

598.  Out  of  this  egg  agitated  thus,  there  come  into  existence  the 
triadic  principles  known  as  Brahml,  Vifpu  and  Siva  identical  with  three 
gunas — rajas,  sattva  and  tamas. 

599.  The  Pur&nas  refer  to  the  joint  birth  and  joint  activity  of  the  triad. 


S14 


Li^apwpSvBt 


Purufa.  Lord  Brahma,  the  four-faced^  Priy&pati  was  bom  of 
Him.  He  also  became  fully  equipped  for  evolving  the  effects 
(i.e.  creation).  So,  the  same  lord  b stationed  in  three  forms. 

88.  He  is  endowed  with  positive  knowledge  and  lordship. 
They,  (i.e.  the  three  devas)  are  also  endowed  with  positive  virtue 
and  detachment. 

89.  Whatever  has  been  mentally  conceived  or  uttered  by 
diem  is  bom  out  of  the  unmanifest,  since  it  has  been  made  to 
be  subservient,  and  since  the  activities  are  dependent  on  the 
three  Gu^as  by  nature. 

90.  The  self-born  deity  has  three  conditions:  in  the  capa- 
city of  Brahma  he  is  the  four-faced  one;  in  the  capacity  of 
K&la  (i.e.  Rudia)he  is  the  destroyer;  he  is  the  thousand-headed 
Pnru^a  (i.e.  Vijtiu)  also. 

91.  In  the  capacity  of  Brahma,  he  creates  the  worlds;  in 
the  capacity  of  Kala,  he  destroys  the  world;  in  the  capacity  of 
Puru^a,  he  is  indifferent.  Prajapati  has  three  stages. 

92.  Brahmi  has  the  lustre  of  the  interior  of  a lotus;  Rudra 
is  like  the  fire  at  the  time  of  dissolution;  Puru$a  is  lotus-eyed. 
This  is  the  form  of  the  great  soul. 

93.  The  lord  takes  up  a single  body,  two  bodies,  three 
bodies,  and  then  many  bodies.  He  creates  and  destroys  these 
bodies,  and  dispels  them  too. 

94.  The  great  lord  creates  and  destroys  bodies  of  different 
shapes,  activities,  forms  and  names. 

95.  Since  he  assumes  three  different  forms,  he  is  called 
Trigut^ia.  When  divided  into  four,  he  is  called  Caturvyuha. 
(having  four  arrays). 

96.  He  is  defined  as  atman  (soul)  because  he  attains  the  sense 
objects  (V&p  to  attain) , because  he  takes  up  (a-f  \/da  to  take 
up)  the  sense  objects  and  because  he  swallows  up  (\/adto 
eat)  the  sense  objects.  Moreover,  he  has  perpetual  existence. 

97.  He  is  called  9-91  because  he  goes  everywhere.  He  is 
Saririn  because  he  b its  (body’s)  lord.  He  b (called) 
Svfimin  because  he  possesses  everything.  He  b called  Viitl^u  be- 
cause he  enters  everything. 

98.  He  b called  Bhagavan  because  he  possesses  Bhaga 


6oa.  See  p«  6o  note.  78 


Farious  Creations 


315 


(loveliness,  excellence,  fortune,  glory).  He  is  called  Siva  be- 
cause he  is  devoid  of  impurities.  He  is  called  Parama  be- 
cause he  is  distinguished  and  eminent.  Since  he  protects 
he  is  called  Om. 

99.  He  is  called  Sarvajfia  because  he  knows  everything 
perfectly.  He  is  Sarva  because  he  is  identical  with  all.  He 
divides  himself  into  three  and  functions  in  the  three  worlds. 

100.  By  means  of  three  forms  he  creates,  swallows  and 
protects.  Since  he  is  primordial  he  is  called  “Adideva’’.  He  is 
called  Aja  because  he  is  not  born. 

101.  Since  he  protects  people  he  is  known  as  Prajapati, 
Since  he  is  the  greatest  among  Devas  he  is  called  Mahadeva. 

102.  He  is  Omnipresent  and  not  subservient  to  Devas. 
Hence,  he  is  Hvara.  He  is  Brahma  because  he  is  massive.  He  is 
called  Bhuta  because  of  his  existence. 

103.  He  is.  called  the  knower  of  the  field  (i.e.  body) ; he 
comprehends  the  inner  organs,  mind,  etc.  Since  he  is  single 
he  is  called  Kevala.  Since  he  lies  down  in  the  soul  he  is  called 
Purus  a. 

104*.  He  is  known  as  self-born  because  he  has  no  begii)L- 
ning  and  he  is  prior  to  all.  Since  he  is  worthy  of  worship  he 
is  called  Yajfia.  He  is  Kavi  because  he  can  see  what  is  beyond 
the  sense  organs.. 

105.  He  is  Kramana  because  he  has  access  to  all  (or  is 
accessible  to  all) . He  is  Palaka  because  he  protects  all.  He 
is  Aditya  because  he  is  tan-coloured.  Being  born  at  the  outset 
he  is  Agni  (fire) . 

106.  Because  he  is  the  cause  of  origin  of  all  golden  things 
and  also  because  he  is  born  of  the  golden  Egg,  he  is  called 
Hiranyagarbha. 

107.  The  time  that  has  gone  by  after  the  self-born  has 
been  in  existence  cannot  be  reckoned  even  in  hundreds  of 
years. 

108.  The  first  half  Parardha  in  the  age  of  the  present  Brahma 
has  already  elapsed  and  another  period  of  equal  duration  i.e. 
second  half  still  remains.  At  its  end  begins  the  dissolution 
of  the  worlds. 

109.  Crores  and  thousands  of  crores  of  these  days  of  kalpas 


316  Lingapurdna 

have  come  and  gone.  As  many  yet  remain.  The  kalpa  that  is 
current  now  is  known  as  Varaha  kalpa. 

1 10-1 12.  O brahmins,  this  is  the  first  kalpa  (Brahma’s  day) 
within  that  Varaha  kalpa  (age).  In  this  there  are  fourteen  Manus 
beginning  with  Svayambhuva.  This  entire  earth  consisting  of  the 
seven  continents  and  mountains  are  to  be  protected  by  those 
great  lords  (i.e.  the  fourteen  Manus)  past,  present  and  future 
by  means  of  their  penance  and  through  the  subjests.  Listen  to 
their  detailed  account. 

113.  If  one  manvantara  is  recounted,  the  other  man- 
vantaras  are  also  recounted.  If  one  kalpa  is  explained,  all  the 
other  kalpas  too  are  explained. 

114.  The  past  kalpas  are  such  that  they  leave  their  con* 
sequences  on  the  future  ones  along  with  (or  including)  the 
dynasties  of  Kings  etc.  and  the  same  reasoning  should  be 
applied  to  future  kalpas  by  the  knowing  man  (i.e.,  the  past 
has  left  its  marks  on  the  present  and  in  the  same  way  the  future 
will  carry  the  marks  of  the  present, 

115-117.  The  waters  were  in  existence  at  the  outset  when 
the  whole  surface  of  the  earth  had  been  destroyed.  In  the  vast 
quiet  and  sparkling  waters  nothing  else  was  known.  When  the 
mobile  and  immobile  beings  are  destroyed  in  that  vast, 
sealike  expanse  of  water,  Brahmfi  assumes  a form  with  thousand 
eyes,  thousand  feet,  thousand  heads.«®i  He  is  then  called 
Narayana.  He  is  the  golden-coloured  Purusa  beyond  the  sense 
organs.  He  had  his  shrrber  in  that  expanse  of  water. 

118.  When  saliva  guna  was  prevalent  he  woke  up  and 
found  the  world  a void.  They  cite  this  verse  about  Narayana. 

1 19-125,  We  hear  that  the  word  Nara  means  waters  or  sons 
of  waters.  He  filled  the  void  with  waters  and  made  it  his  resort. 
Since  he  lies  down  in  the  waters  he  is  known  as  Narayana.®®^ 
After  spending  the  night  consisting  of  a thousand  cycles  of  four 
yugas  in  the  water,  at  the  end  of  the  night  he  assumed  the 
foxm  of  Brahma  for  the  purpose  of  creation.  Brahma  adopted 
a gaseous  form  and  moved  about  over  those  waters  like  the 
glowworm  at  night  during  the  rainy  season.  He  knew  that  the 


601,  Of*  MV,  io*90*u  ys,  31. 1. 

602.  See  p.  66*  note.  86. 


Various  Creations 


317 


earth  had  gone  under  the  water  by  means  of  inference.  But  he 
did  not  get  disillusioned  over  the  lifting  up  of  the^  earth  (from 
the  waters).  In  previous  eras  in  the  beginning  of  the  kalpas  he 
had  assumed  another  body.  Then  the  lord  of  great  soul  ponder- 
ed over  that  divine  form.  Seeing  the  earth  submerged  in  water 
all  round  he  thought  ‘‘What  form  shall  I adopt  to  lift  up  this 
Earth  ?”  He  adopted  the  form  of  a boar  as  befitting  the  sport  in 
water.  The  form  was  unassailable  to  all  living  beings.  It  had 
speech  and  was  actually  “Brahman”  itself.  He  entered  the 
nether  worlds  in  that  form  for  lifting  up  the  earth. 

127.  In  that  boar  form  he  approached  the  earth  envelop- 
ed by  water  and  quickly  lifted  it  up. 

128-132.  The  waters  immediately  filled  up  the  oceans, 
and  the  rivers.  For  the  welfare  of  the  worlds,  the  lord  lifted  up 
the  earth  by  means  of  his  curved  fangs,  the  earth,  that  had 
submerged  and  got  embedded  in  the  nether  worlds.  The  hol- 
der of  the  earth,  Lord  Visnu,  the  lifter  of  the  earth  held  it, 
brought  it  to  its  original  place  and  left  it  there  as  it  was  before. 
The  earth  stood  like  a great  ship  above  that  vast  collection  of 
water  and  on  a par  with  it.  Because  of  its  massive  body  the 
earth  did  not  sink  and  get  submerged.  After  lifting  it  up  the 
lotus-eyed  lord  with  the  desire  to  fit  the  world  firmly  turned 
his  attention  towards  the  demarcation  of  the  earth.  He  made 
the  earth  level  and  then  collected  the  mountains. 

133-134.  When  everything  of  the  previous  creation  was 
burnt  by  the  fire  at  the  time  of  dissolution  the  mountains  got 
scattered  over  an  extensive  area.  Due  to  chilliness  in  that  vast 
sea-like  expanse  of  water  the  scattered  pieces  of  mountains  were 
heaped  up  by  the  wind.  Wherever  they  were  deposited  they 
became  the  stable  mountains. 

135.  Mountains  are  called  acalas  because  they  never 
move,  they  are  called  parvatas  because  they  have  knots  (par- 
vans).  They  are  giris  because  they  are  absorbed  and  hidden. 
They  are  called  ^iloccayas  because  they  keep  lying  down. 

13B.  Thereafter  when  crores  of  mountains  were  scattered 
about,  Viivakarman  the  architect  of  the  gods,  divided  and 
classified  them  again  and  again  at  the  beginning  of  every  kalpa. 
137.  He  then  divided  the  earth  into  seven  continents, 


318  Lingapurana 

oceans  and  mountains.  Thereafter  he  evolved  the  four  worlds 
beginning  with  Bhuii. 

138.  After  evolving  the  worlds,  the  self-born  Brahma,  the 
lord  who  was  desirous  of  creating  different  subjects,  began 
creating  them. 

139- 141a.  He  created  everything  at  the  beginning  of  the 
kalpa  in  the  same  manner  as  it  was  before.  While  he  meditated 
on  creation  beginning  with  intellect  and  simultaneous  with  it. 
Illusion,  ignorance  identical  with  darkness,  originated  from  the 
great  soul  in  five  stages®®*  viz. — tamas  (darkness)  moha  (delu- 
sion), mahamoha  (great  delusion),  tamisra  (murkiness)  and 
andhatamisra  (blinding  gloominess). 

141b-143.  This  first  creation  of  the  meditating  and  Self- 
confident  lord  came  to  stay  as  a fivefold  one;  viz.  (1)  those 
enveloped  by  darkness;  (2)  half  open  and  half  covered  like  the 
sprout  firom  a seed;  ( 3)  those  that  have  no  light  inside  or  outside ; 
(4)  those  that  are  stiff  and  rigid  and  (5)  senseless.  Because 
their  intellect,  miseries  and  senses  were  all  enshrouded,  they 
are  called  important  immobiles  with  covered  souls. 

144.  On  seeing  this  first  creation  in  that  situation  as  well 
as  useless  for  any  action  (being  immobile)  he  became  dissatis- 
fied in  mind,  and  thought  about  another. 

145.  Even  as  he  meditated  over  it  the  Tiryaksrotas  creation 
(moving  sideways)  was  developed.  Since  it  functioned  sideways 
it  is  called  Tiryaksrotas. 

146.  The  animals  etc.  (i.e.  birds  and  reptiles)  constitute 
this  well-known  creation.  O brahmins,  they  are  those  who 
adopt  wrong  paths.  So  he  meditated  on  another  creation  and 
the  Sattvika  creation  was  evolved. 

147-148.  This  third  creation  is  Ordhvasrotas  which  is 
directed  upwards.  Since  it  functions  upwards  it  is  called  Crdhva- 
srotas.  The  beings  created  under  this  category  are  mostly 
happy  and  delighted.  They  are  enshrouded  within  and  without 
as  well  as  illuminated  on  both  sides. 

603.  Avidyi— the  scheme  of  ninefold  creation  it  mentioned  in  all  the 
Pnr&^ai.  it  Is  said  that  the  creatbn  arose  out  of  ignorance  (avidy&)  classi- 
fied into  five  heads,  ids.,  tamas  (darknen),  moha  (confusion) , mah&moha 
(cdsBesskni), t&misra  (gloominess),  and  andhatftmisra  (blind  gloominess). 
£>^fa  (t*  9*  30,  35)  divides  these  into  nxtyfour  categories. 


Various  Creations 


319 


149.  Because  they  have  been  created  with  the  union  of 
Sattvaguna,  they  are  known  as  originating  from  Sattva.  This 
third  creation  of  Ordhvasrotas  is  that  of  Devas. 

150.  The  creations  originating  in  the  category  of  Crdhva- 
srotas  are  brilliant  within  and  without.  The  Crdhvasrotas  crea- 
tions are  stated  by  the  learned  to  be  satisfied  souls. 

151.  When  Devas,  the  creations  in  the  category  of  Crdhva- 
srotas  were  created  Brahma,  the  lord  who  grants  boons,  became 
delighted,  but  he  still  meditated  on  another  creation. 

152-153.  He  pondered  over  the  creation  that  will  be 
Sadhaka*®^  (active  and  fit  for  action).  Even  as  he  was  meditating 
truthfully,  the  active  Arvaksrotas  creation  manifested  itself 
from  the  unmanifest  Prakrti.  Since  it  functions  downwards  it  is 
called  Arvaksrotas. 

154.  The  beings  created  thus  are  mostly  brilliant;  rajas 
predominates  in  them  and  there  is  a mixture  of  tamas  also. 
Hence,  there  is  a predominance  of  misery  and  they  do  their 
tasks  again  and  again. 

155.  They  are  human  beings  enshrouded  within  and  with- 
out, and  active.  They  are  classified  into  eight  categories 
through  their  redeeming  feature, 

156.  They  are  men  who  have  realized  souls  with  attributes 
similar  to  those  of  Gandharvas.  Thus,  the  creation  of  Arvaksro- 
tas is  called  Taijasa  (luminous,  fiery) . 

157-158.  The  fifth  creation  is  Anugraha  (the  creation  of 
blessings) . It  is  fourfold  according  to  the  distinctive  feature  of 
contrariety,  power,  achievement  and  satisfaction.  The  contra- 
riety inheres  the  beings  that  are  immobile ; the  power  is  the 
element  that  characterizes  the  Tiryak  yonis  (animals) ; men  are 
characterized  by  their  realized  souls.  Of  Devas  and  sages  satis- 
faction is  the  distinctive  feature. 

159.  This  group  is  called  Prakfta  (pertaining  to  Prakrti). 
This  fifth  (fourfold)  Vaikarika  creation  is  the  best  (anavama^i) 
among  all.  The  creation  of  the  origins  of  gross  elements  and  the 
gross  elements,  siddhas,  sages,  etc.,  is  the  sixth.  The  creation  of 


604.  ildhakab— sakala-tenM^ab  the  cause  of  all  creation.  Of. 

nrdeham  tiAyeanor^BhSg^  dted  in  ST* 


320  Lingapurd^ 

(ordinary)  human  beings  (as  distinct  from  the  sages,  etc.)  out 
of  the  subtle  and  gross  elements  is  the  seventh. 

160-161.  They  (of  the  sixth  group  represented  by  the  sages) 
know  what  has  taken  place  in  the  past,  what  is  taking  placo  at 
present,  and  what  will  take  place  in  future.®®®  These  (sages,  etc.) 
remain  detached  though  they  enjoy  and  share  the  fruits  of 
their  activities. 

162-164.  This  creation  is  characterized  by  contrariety  and 
imperfection.  The  first  ( 1 ) creation  of  Brahma  is  that  of  Mahat; 
the  next  (2)  that  of  tanmatras;  the  third  (3)  is  Vaikarika(i.e.  of 
the  nature  of  transformation  and  ramification) ; this  three-fold 
creation  was  evolved  prior  to  intelligence.  (4)  The  primary 
(mukhya)  creation  (of  insentient  beings)  is  the  fourth.  The 
immobile  beings  are  the  mukhyas. 

165.  Then  there  are  (5)  tiryak  (horizontal);  (6)  urdhva 
(upward)  and  (7)  arvaksrotas  (downward)  creations.  (8)  Then 
comes  the  anugraha  creation,  the  eighth  in  the  serial  order.  It  is 
both  Sattvika  and  Tamasa. 

166.  Thus  with  the  five  vaikrta  types  and  three  prakrtas 
there  are  eight  types  of  creation.  (9)  The  ninth  creation,  i.e.,  of 
Kumaras  is  both  prakrta  and  vaikrta. 

167.  The  three  prakrta  creations  are  prior  to  the  creation 
of  intellect.  But  the  other  six  creations  (Nos.  4-9)  are  posterior 
to  intellect. 

168.  I shall  now  give  the  detail  of  Anugraha  sarga  which 
you  will  understand  properly.  It  stands  in  four  ways®®®  among 
all  living  beings. 


605.  The  text  is  corrupted.  The  commentator’s  interpretation  is 
far-fetched.  He  explains  prakftah  (V-159)  as  prakrta-niriipana-vi^ayah — the 
subject  of  present  discourse . He  dissolves  vaikrto  navamah  as  vaikrtab 
anavamah  and  explains  anavamab  as  ire^thab,  superior. 

606.  The  anugraha  creation  is  characterized  by  contrariety  (viparyaya) , 
power  (sakti),  satisfaction  (tu^ti)  and  perfection  (siddhi). 

The  scheme  of  ninefold  creation  as  outlined  in  the  Puranas  can  be 
summarised  as  follows  : 

(i)  Mahat  : ( creation  of  the  great  principle  : intellect).  (ii)Tanmatra: 
(creation  of  subtle  elements),  (iii)  Bhuta  : (creation  of  gross  elements) . 
(This  set  of  three-fold  creation  is  primary  and  originates  from  avidyS — 
ignorance) . (iv)  Mukhya  (the  principal  creation  comprising  the  immobile 
world  of  insentient  bdngs  such  as  mountains),  (v  Tiryak  (the  animal) 


Various  Creations 


321 


169.  The  Prakfta  and  Vaikrta  creations  together  are  nine. 
The  learned  consider  them  interconnected  through  causes. 

1 70.  At  the  outset,  Brahma  created  the  mental  sons  equal 
to  himself.  Among  them  Rbhu  and  Sanat  were  sages  of  subli- 
mated sexuality. 

171-1 73a.  They  were  born  at  the  outset.  They  were  senior 
to  all  others.  After  the  eighth  kal pa  was  over,  these  two  ancient 
ones,  the  witnesses  of  the  worlds  constricted  their  splendour  and 
settled  themselves  in  the  terrestrial  world  in  the  Varahakalpa. 
They  performed  such  actions  leading  to  salvation  after  steady ing 
their  mind  in  their  soul.  Eschewing  progeny,  ritualistic  activities 
and  affection  they  adopted  detachment.  Sanat  continued  to 
have  the  same  child-like  form  as  at  the  time  of  his  birth.  Hence, 
his  name  is  celebrated  as  Sanatkumara. 

173b-177.  Brahma  created  Sananda,  Sanaka  and  Sanatana. 
By  means  of  their  perfect  knowledge  those  sages  of  great 
power  abstained  from  worldly  acts.  These  yogins  were  enlight- 
ened in  the  diversity  of  the  world  and  so  refrained  from  worldly 
activities.  Without  creating  progenies  they  passed  away  at  the 
time  of  dissolution.  After  they  had  gone  away,  Brahma  created 
other  mental  sons  who  were  fit  for  action  and  who  took  pride 
in  their  positions.  These  sages  by  whom  this  earth  was  sustain- 
ed remained  until  the  final  dissolution  of  all  living  beings. 

178-182,  Brahma  created  the  waters,  fire,  earth,  firma- 
ment, heaven,  oceans,  rivers,  mountains,  herbs,  creepers,  trees 
and  plants,  the  units  of  time  such  as  lavas,  kasthas,  kalas, 
muhurtas,  junctions,  nights,  days,  fortnights,  months,  ayanas 
(half-yearly  transit  of  the  sun),  years  and  yugas.  All  these 
who  identified  themselves  with  these  abodes  are  known  by  the 
names  of  their  abodes.  He  created  Devas  and  sages  too.  They 

creation  wherein  the  stream  of  life  is  horizontal)  (tiryaksrotas) . (vi)  Deva® 
(creation  of  Devas  in  which  the  stream  of  life  moves  upwards)  (urdhva- 
srotas).  (vii)  Manu?a®  (creation  of  mankind  in  which  the  stream  of  life 
moves  downwards  (arvik-srotas) . (viii)  creation  of  Feeling  such  as 
contrariety,  power,  satisfaction  and  perfection  found  respectively  in  the 
immobile,  mobile,  human  and  divine  beings.  This  set  of  creation  (Nos  iv. 
viii),  born  of  intelligence  is  said  to  be  secondary;  but  includes 

anugraha  in  the  primary  creation,  (ix)  Kumara®  creation  of  the  mental 
sons  of  Brahmh— Sanat  etc.  This  ninth  creation  is  said  to  be  both  primary 
and  secondary. 


322 


Lingapurdna 


were  Marici,  Bhrgu,  Angiras,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  Dak^a, 
Atri  and  Vasi^tha.  Brahma  created  these  nine  sons  mentally. 
They  are  stipulated  in  the  Puranas  as  the  Nine  Brahmas. 

183.  As  before,  the  lotus-born  deity  assigned  abodes  to  all 
the  expounders  of  Brahman,  who  were  equal  to  Brahma  him- 
self. 

184-185.  Then  the  lord  created  Saihkalpa  and  Dharma: 
Dharma  through  enterprise  and  Saihkalpa  out  of  determina- 
tion. Then  another  mental  son  Ruci  was  born  of  lord  Brahma. 

186.  Brahma  created  Daksa  from  his  vital  breath  and 
Marici  from  his  eyes.  Bhrgu  was  born  of  the  heart  of  Brahma. 

187.  He  created  Angiras  from  his  head  and  Atri  from  his 
ears.  He  created  Pulastya  from  the  organic  wind  Udana  and 
Pulaha  from  the  wind  Vyana. 

188.  Vasi$tha  was  born  of  Samana.  He  created  Kratu 
from  Apana.  Thus  these  divine  sons  of  Brahma  are  eleven 
altogether. 

i89-191a.  Dharma  etc.  are  the  first  born  sons  of  Brahma. 
The  nine  sons,  Bhrgu  and  others,  were  created  as  expounders 
of  Brahman.  They  were  ancient  householders  who  propagated 
Dharma.  Among  them,  twelve  were  the  lords  of  Devas.  Their 
dynasties  were  divine,  endowed  with  sattvic  qualities.  They 
were  active,  had  good  progenies  and  were  adorned  among  the 
sages. 

191b-195a.  ^.bhu  and  Sanatkumara  were  sages  of  subli- 
mated sexuality.  They  were  first  born  and  therefore  senior  to  all 
others.  When  the  eighth  kalpa  had  elapsed  these  ancient  sages, 
the  cosmic  witnesses,  shone  in  the  world  after  constricting  their 
splendour.  Both  of  them  did  abide,  by  performing  yogic  rites 
after  super-imposing  the  individual  soul  over  the  supreme  soul. 
Eschewing  progeny,  worldly  rites  and  affection  they  adopted 
detachment.  Sanat  continued  to  have  the  child-like  form. 
Hence  his  name  has  been  stabilised  as  Sanat. 

195b.  Thereafter,  as  he  (Brahma)  continued  his  medita- 
tion, mental  sons  were  born  to  him. 

196.  Individual  souls  were  born  out  of  the  body  of  that 
intelligent  lord  through  the  cause  and  effect  process. 

197-199.  Thereafter  he  was  desirous  of  creating  the  four 
groups,  viz.  Devas,  AsUras,  Pitfs  and  human  beings.  He  infused 


Various  Creations 


323 


himself  in  the  waters.  Even  as  he  did  so,  even  as  he  assiduously 
meditated  on  creation,  the  particles  of  darkness  grew  up  in 
excess.  Then  out  of  his  buttocks  were  produced  the  Asuras.  O 
brahmins,  the  word  ‘asu’  means  vital  breath.  Those  born  of  the 
vital  breath  are  called  Asuras. 

200.  And  he  then  eschewed  that  body  whereby  the  Asuras 
were  created  and  cast  it  off.  It  then  became  Night. 

201.  Since  Night  is  mostly  constituted  of  darkness  it  is 
something  that  restricts  movement.  The  subjects  enveloped  in 
darkness,  sleep  at  night. 

202-203.  After  creating  the  Asuras  he  took  up  another  body. 
It  was  unmanifest  and  it  mostly  consisted  of  the  quality  of  good- 
ness. So  he  adored  it.  Even  as  he  united  that  body  in  yogic 
activities  he  was  pleased.  Then  from  his  shining  mouth  were  born 
Devas. 

204-205.  Since  they  were  born  of  him  even  as  he  was  shin- 
ing they  are  called  Devas  (shining  ones) . The  root  *Div  means 
‘to  play’.  Therefore,  Devas  were  born  sportingly.  After  creating 
them  the  lord  of  Devas  took  another  body. 

206.  That  body  was  cast  off  by  him  and  when  cast  off  it 
became  day.  Hence,  Devas  adore  the  day  that  consists  of  Dharma. 

207-209.  Then  he  took  up  another  body  characterized  by 
the  quality  of  goodness.  The  lord  considered  himself  like  a 
father  meditating  on  sons.  Hence,  the  Pitrs  were  born  in  between 
the  night  and  day  from  his  two  sides.  Hence,  Devas  are  the 
Pitrs  and  their  state  of  being  Pitrs  is  due  to  that.  He  cast  off 
that  body  too.  That  body  cast  off  by  him,  immediately  became 
the  Twilight. 

210-211.  The  day  pertains  to  Devas  and  the  night  to  Asu- 
ras. In  between  the  two  is  stationed  the  body  that  belongs  to 
the  Pitrs.  Hence,  all  Devas,  Asuras,  sages  and  men  adore  the 
body  that  lies  in  between  night  and  day* 

212-213.  Then  Brahma  adopted  another  body  characteriz- 
ed by  the  particle  of  passion.  The  lord  created  with  his  mind 
the  mental  sons  of  passionate  activities.  Thereby,  the  passionate 
sons  were  born  of  him. 

214-215a.  After  creating  them  he  cast  off  that  body.  That 
body  cast  off  by  him,  immediately  became  moonlight.  That  is 
why  the  people  become  delighted  when  moonlight  spreads. 


324 


Lingapurd^a 


215b'2i6.  Thus  the  bodies  cast  off  by  that  noble  soul  be- 
came immediately  night,  day,  the  morning  twilight  and  even- 
ing twilight  and  moonlight.  The  moonlight,  the  twilight  and 
the  day,  these  thr.ee  consist  of  the  quality  of  goodness. 

2 17-2 18a.  The  night  is  characterized  by  the  quality  of 
darkness.  Hence  it  is  called  Ni§a.  Because  Devas  were  created 
by  day,  through  pleasure  and  out  of  Brahma’s  mouth,  they  are 
said  to  be  dayborn  and  powerful  by  day. 

218b-220.  The  lord  created  Asurasby  night  from  his  loins. 
That  body  of  the  lord  became  night.  Since  they  were  born  at 
night  the  Asuras  are  powerful  by  night.  These  times  become  the 
causes  for  all  (past  and)  future  Devas,  Asuras,  Pitrs  and  human 
beings  in  all  past  and  future  manvantaras. 

221-224.  The  morning  twilight,  night,  day  and  evening 
twilight,  these  four  are  the  bodies  of  Brahma.  They  are  called 
‘Ambharhsi’.  The  root  bha  means  to  ‘shine’.  The  word  Ambha- 
riisi  is  traced  by  the  learned  to  this  root.  After  creating  these, 
Prajapati  created  Devas,  human  beings,  Danavas  and  Pitrs  from 
his  body.  Thereafter  he  foresook  that  body  which  turned  into 
moonlight  and  assumed  another  form  characterized  by  passion 
and  darkness.  The  lord  created  other  beings  during  the  night; 
these  beings  were  overwhelmed  with  hunger. 

225-228.  These  hungry  beings  created  by  him  attempted 
to  seize  the  bodies  of  the  lord.  Some  of  them  who  said,  “We  will 
protect  these  bodies”  were  known  as  Raksasas.  They  were 
night-walkers  who  were  overcome  by  hunger.  Those  who  said, 
‘We  will  eat  them  up,’  were  called  yaksas  as  also  guhyakas 
because  of  their  secret  activity.  The  root  ‘raks*  means  ‘to  pro- 
tect and  the  root  ‘yaks’  means  ‘to  eat.’  On  observing  this  crea- 
tion, the  hair  of  the  intelligent  lord  Brahma  became  withered 
due  to  displeasure. 

229-233a.  Those  of  the  withered  hair  that  slipped  off  his 
head  and  glided  downward  became  snakes.  Since  they 
were  defective  they  are  known  as  Ahis.  Since  they  fell  from 
his  head  they  are  known  as  Pannagas  and  they  are  Sarpas 
because  they  creep.  The  fire  of  his  terrible  anger  turned  into 
poison  and  entered  the  serpents;  that  is  why  they  are  born  along- 
with  poison.  After  creating  the  serpents  the  angry  lord  created 
other  irate  souls,  who  looked  savage  in  their  tawny  colour* 


Various  Creations 


325 


They  were  fierce  and  flesh-eating  goblins.  Since  they  came 
into  being  they  are  known  as  Bhutas,  and  as  Pisacas  because 
they  ate  flesh. 

233b-234.  From  him  then  were  born  the  Gandharvas  sing- 
ing joyously.  The  root  Dhai  means  to  imbibe.  They  were  born 
even  as  they  were  imbibing  speech.  Hence  they  are  known  as 
Gandharvas. 

235.  After  these  eight  divine  beings  had  been  created  that 
lord  created  birds  from  his  own  youthful  stage  out  of  his  own 
inclination. 

236.  Since  they  are  able  to  move  as  they  please  they  are 
known  as  such.  They  are  named  Vayas  (birds)  because  they 
were  created  from  his  youth.  After  creating  the  animals  the 
lord  of  Devas  created  the  flocks  of  winged  animals. 

237-239.  He  created  goats  from  his  mouth;  he  created 
sheep  from  his  chest;  he  created  cows  and  bulls  from  his  belly 
and  sides.  From  his  feet  he  created  horses,  elephants,  donkeys, 
deer,  camels,  mules  and  other  kinds  and  classes  of  beasts.  Plants 
and  fruit  trees  were  produced  from  the  hair  of  his  body. 
After  creating  the  cattle  and  plants,  he  engaged  himself  in 
a sacrifice. 

240.  They  call  these  the  domesticated  animals,  viz. — the 
cow,  the  bull,  the  man,  the  ram,  the  horse,  the  mule,  the  don- 
key. Understand  the  wild  animals. 

241-242.  They  call  these  the  wild  animals,  viz. — the  beasts 
of  prey,  the  cloven  hoofed  elephants,  monkeys,  fifthly,  birds,  six- 
thly, aquatic  beasts  and  seventhly,  the  reptiles.  The  following 
seven  are  forest  animals,  viz. — buflaloes,  gavayas  (a  species  of 
ox),  bears,  monkeys,  ^arabhas  (the  fabulous  animal  of  eight 
feet) , wolves,  and  lions. 

243.  From  his  front  face  he  created  Gay atri  and  tre  Man- 
tras, Trivrt  Saman,  Rathantara  and  Agnis^oma  verses. 

244.  From  his  southern  face  he  created  Yajur  hymns, 
Tri^tubh  metre,  Paftcadaiama  Stoman,  brhat  Saman  and 
Ukthya  verses. 

245.  From  his  western  face  he  created  Saman,  the  metre 
Jagati,  Saptadaj5ama  Stoman,  Vairupa  Saman  and  Atiratra 
verses. 

246.  From  his  northern  face  he  created  the  set  of  twenty 


326  Lingapura^ 

one  Atharvan  hymns,  Aptoryama,  Anustubh  metre  and  the 
Vairaja  metre. 

247.  At  the  beginning  of  the  kalpa  the  lord  created  the 
lightning,  the  thunderbolts,  the  clouds,  the  reddy  rainbows 
and  the  luminaries. 

248.  The  high  and  the  low  living  beings  were  born  from  his 
limbs. 

249-250.  After  creating  the  four  groups,  viz.  Devas,  Asuras, 
human  beings  and  Pitrs  he  created  beings,  mobile  and  immo- 
bile, Yaksas,  Pi^acas,  Gandharvas,  Apsarases,  Naras,  Kinnaras, 
Raksasas,  birds,  cattle,  wild  animals  and  snakes. 

251-261.  There  are  mobile  and  immobile  as  well  as  chang- 
ing and  unchanging  created  beings.  Whatever  activities  they 
had  in  a previous  creation  they  resume  the  same  activities  in 
succeeding  creations.  They  have  the  same  nature,  etc.  whether 
savage  or  timid,  kind  or  cruel,  righteous  or  evil,  true  or  false. 
Urged  by  their  attributes  they  adopt  and  take  pleasure  in  their 
respective  qualities. 

When  the  great  elements — the  objects  of  the  senses  and 
their  forms — were  created,  the  creator  himself  settled  the  appli- 
cation of  the  elements  as  objects  of  the  sense  organs.®®^  Some 
men  say  that  human  effort  is  the  cause  of  various  activities; 
others  say  that  it  is  divine  fate.  The  materialists  say  that 
it  is  Nature.  But  really  manly  effort,  working  of  fate  and 
nature  21II  depend  on  the  nature  of  the  fruit  or  result.  They 
know  that  none  of  these  by  itself  is  superior  to  the  other 
nor  can  one  be  separated  from  the  other.  This  is  their  nature. 
They  cannot  be  all  one  nor  are  they  two  together,  because  they 
have  separate  entities. 

Those  who  abide  by  activities  may  call  that  result  contrary, 
those  who  abide  by  the  quality  of  goodness  observe  impartial 
outlook. 

The  Ti  and  forms  of  the  elements  and  the  further  deve- 
lopment of  the  created  ones  were  evolved  by  the  great  lord  at 
the  itself  through  the  words  of  the  Vedas.  The  unborn 

607.  The  Purhaas  assign  the  division  of  society  and  the  distribution 
of  functions  to  the  primeval  being— Maheivara,  Cf.  yaafio  janturanlioyam 
sukhadubUiayob  / livara-prerito  gacchet  svargaih  narakam  eva 
vl//— dted  inW. 


Various  Creations 


327 


lord  assigns  names  and  activities  in  regard  to  the  Vedas,  to 
the  sages  bom  at  the  end  of  the  night  of  dissolution  in  the 
same  manner  as  before.  Such  are  the  creations  of  Brahma  of 
unmanifest  origin.  The  mobile  and  immobile  beings  created 
through  his’  mental  perfection  are  seen  at  the  end  of  his  night. 
They  resort  to  the  mental  perfection.  When  these  excellent 
subjects  created  by  him  did  not  prosper,  Brahma  who  had  been 
enveloped  by  the  quality  of  darkness  became  miserable  with 
grief. 

262-263a.  Thereupon,  he  applied  his  intellect  to  come  to  a 
fixed  decision.  Then  he  saw  within  his  mind  that  the  particles 
of  darkness  were  the  sole  controlling  factors  eschewing  both  the 
particles  of  goodness  and  passion. 

263b-264.  Therefore,  the  lord  of  the  universe  was  miserable 
due  to  that  sorrow.  Then  he  prodded  the  tamas,  and  rajas  and 
covered  both  with  sattva.  The  tamas  thus  prodded  became  a 
twin. 

265-267.  Adharma  (sin)  was  born  of  tamas  and  Hiihsa 
( violence)  was  born  of  grief.  When  this  pair  of  terrible  nature 
originated,  the  life  (vital  breaths)  left  the  lord  and  pleasure 
resorted  to  him.  Then  Brahma  eschewed  his  shining  body  and 
bifurcated  it.  With  one  half  of  his  body  he  became  a man. 
With  the  other  half  he  created  a woman  SatarOpa. 

268.  With  love  the  lord  created  Prakfti,  the  mother  of  the 
elements.  With  her  greatness  she  stood  pervading  heaven  and 
earth. 

269-270.  The  first  half  of  body  of  Brahma  envelopes  heaven 
and  stays  there.  The  woman  Satarupa.®®®  bom  out  of  the  other 
half  performed  difficult  penance  for  hundred  thousand  years 
and  obtained  a man  of  brilliant  renown  as  her  husband. 

271.  That  man  is  at  the  outset  called  Manu  the  self-bora. 
Seventy  sets  of  four  yugas  constitute  his  manvantata. 

272.  That  man  obtained  as  his  wife  Satarupa  who  was  not 
born  of  a womb.  He  sported  with  her.  Hence,  she  is  called  Rati 
(pleasure), 

6o8.  The  Pur&^a  speaks  of  Brahmk  splitting  his  body  into  two 
parts  : the  male  and  female,  via.  Manu  and  3atar0p&.  Gf*  MaUya  3,31  • 
Thus  Manu  and  $atarup&  arc  said  to  be  ayonija~-iiot  bom  of  a womb. 


328 


Lingapurdf^a 


273.  The  first  mutual  relation  of  two  souls  took  place  at 
the  beginning  of  the  kalpa  when  Brahma  created  Virit.  He  be- 
came the  Virat  (massive)  Purusa. 

274.  Satarupa  was  the  empress.  The  son  of  Virat,  i.e. 
Svayambhuva  was  known  as  Manu.  Manu  Vairaja  created  the 
subjects. 

275.  From  the  heroic  son  of  Virat  (i.e.  Vairaja)  Satarupa 
gave  birth  to  two  sons  : Priyavrata  and  Uttanapada  who  were 
honoured  by  the  worlds. 

276.  She  gave  birth  to  two  blessed  daughters  also  from 
whom  the  subjects  of  the  world  were  born.  They  were  the 
gentle  ladies  Akuti  and  Prasuti. 

277.  The  lord  Svayambhuva  Manu  gave  PrasCkti  to 
Daksa.  Daksa  should  be  known  as  Prana  (vital  breath) ; Manu 
isSankalpa  (Idea). 

278-279.  He  gave  Akiiti  to  Ruci  the  Prajapati.  Ruci  the 
mental  son  of  Brahma  begot  auspicious  twins  of  Akuti.  Yajna 
and  Dak^ina  were  born  as  twins:  Yajfia  begot  of  Daksina  twelve 
sons. 

280.  The  devas  called  yamas  were  born  as  his  sons  in  the 
Sv&yambhuva  manvantara.  Hence,  they  too  are  known  as 
Yamas. 

281.  Two  groups,  the  Ajitas  and  the  Sukras  were  created 
by  Brahma.  The  Yamas  who  were  born  at  the  outset  became 
heaven-dwellers. 

282.  Lord  Dak^a  begot  of  Prasuti,  the  daughter  of  Sviyam- 
bhuva,  twentyfour  daughters  who  became  the  mothers  of  the 
worlds. 

283.  All  of  them  were  highly  blessed,  lotus-eyed,  pleasure- 
seeking  and  yogic  mothers. 

284-285.  All  of  them  were  expounders  of  the  Brahman  as 
well  as  mothers  of  the  universe:  Lord  Dharma  took  as  his  wives 
thirteen  of  the  daughters  of  Dak$a,  viz:— SraddhS  (faith) ; 
Lak$m!  (fortune), Dhfti  (fortitude),  Tusti  (satisfaction) , Pu§ti 
(nourishment),  MedhS  (intellect),  Kriya  (rituals),  Buddhi 
(wisdom),  Lajj^  (bashfulness),  Vapuh  (beauty),  Santi 
(peace),  Siddhi  (achievement)  and  Kirti  (renown)  the 
thirteenth. 

286-292.  The  lord  Dharma  took  these  daughters  of  Dak^a 


Various  Creations 


329 


as  his  wives.  Their  younger  sisters  were  the  eleven  splendid- 
eyed ladies,  viz. — Sati,  Khyati,  Sambhuti,  Smrti,  Priti,  Ksama, 
Sannati,  Anasuya,  Crja,  SvSha  and  Svadha.  Other  great  sages 
took  them  as  their  wives — they  were  Rudra,  Bhrgu,  Marici, 
Ahgiras,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  Pulastya,  Atri,  Vasistha,  Vahni  and 
the  Pitrs.  He  gave  Sati  to  Bhava;  Khyati  to  Bhrgu;  Sambhuti 
to  Marici;  Smrti  to  Ahgiras,  Priti  to  Pulastya;  Ksama  to 
Pulaha,  Sannati  to  Kratu,  Anasuya  to  Atri,  tJrja  to  Vasistha, 
Svaha  to  Agni  and  Svadha  to  the  Pitrs.  All  these  ladies  were 
highly  blessed;  they  closely  followed  their  progeny  in  all  the 
manvantaras  until  the  dissolution  of  all  living  beings.  Now  listen 
to  their  progeny. 

293-298.  Sraddha  gave  birth  to  Kama.  Darpa  was  the 
son  ofLaksmi;  Niyama  of  Dhrti;  Santosa  of  Tusti;  Lobha  of 
Pusti;  Sruta  of  Medha;  Danda  and  Samaya  were  born  as  the 
sons  of  Kriya;  Bodha  and  Pramada  of  Buddhi;  Vinaya  (Humi- 
lity) was  born  of  Lajja;  Vyavasaya  (Enterprise)  of  Vapus; 
Ksema  of  Santi;  Sukha  of  Siddhi;  and  Ya^ah  of  Kirti — these 
were  the  offspring  of  Dharma.  Harsa  was  Kama’s  son  born 
of  the  gentle  lady  Priti.  Thus,  the  creation  of  Dharma  has  been 
recounted.  Hirhsa  bore  to  Adharma,  Ntkrti  and  Anrta. 

299-302.  Pairs  of  twins  were  born  of  Nikrti  : Bhaya  and 
Naraka;  Maya  and  Vedana,  Maya  gave  birth  to  Mrtyu, 
the  dispeller  of  living  beings.  Raurava  got  a son  of  Vedana 
called  Duhkha.  From  Mrtyu  were  born  Vyadhi,  Jara,  l§oka, 
Krodhaand  Asuya.  All  these  ending  with  Duhkha  had  the  cha- 
racteristics of  Adharma.  These  had  no  wives  nor  sons.  They  live 
in  perpetual  chastity.  Thus,  the  Tamasa  creation  was  evolved 
with  Adharma  as  the  controlling  factor. 

303-304.  Nilalohita  was  given  the  direction  by  Brahma 
to  create  the  subjects.  Meditating  on  his  wife  Sati  he  created 
thousands  of  hide-clad  beings  as  his  mental  sons  who  were 
neither  superior  nor  inferior  but  equal  to  him. 

305-313.  They  were  all  equal  to  him  in  form,  splendour, 
strength  and  learning.  They  were  tawny-coloured.  They  were 
equipped  with  quivers.  They  had  their  matted  hairs  of  red- 
dish hue.  They  were  having  special  features.  Their  hairs 
were  greenish.  They  held  skulls.  They  could  kill  with  their 
eyes.  They  had  massive  figures.  They  were  deformed.  They 


330 


Lingapurd^ 


had  universal  forms.  They  had  his  own  forms.  They  had 
chariots,  shields,  coats  of  mail,  and  protective  front-fenders  in 
their  chariots.  They  had  hundreds  and  thousands  of  arms.  They 
could  go  to  heaven,  firmament  as  well  as  walk  over  the  earth. 
They  had  stout  heads,  eight  curved  fangs,  two  tongues  and 
three  eyes.  They  were  eaters  of  cooked  food.  Some  were  eaters 
of  flesh,  some  imbibers  of  ghee  and  some  drinkers  of  Soma 
juice.  Some  were  bountiful;  some  had  great  skulls;  some 
were  blue-necked.  They  had  sublimated  their  sexuality.  They 
were  partakers  of  offerings;  they  were  conversant  with  Dharma. 
They  were  virtuous  and  adorned  with  peacock  feathers  fixed  to 
their  clubs.  They  were  seated,  they  were  running  in  groups  of  five 
and  there  were  thousands  (of  such  groups ) ; some  were  teachers 
and  some  students ; others  performed  japas  and  yogic  practices 
some  emitted  smoke  and  blazed ; some  lived  on  rivers;  some  were 
very  bright;  others  were  aged  and  intelligent;  they  were  engrossed 
in  meditation  on  Brahman;  they  were  of  auspicious  visions;  they 
were  blue-necked ; they  had  thousand  eyes ; they  were  mines  of 
mercifulness  and  patience ; they  were  invisible  to  living  beings; 
they  had  great  yogic  practices;  they  had  great  powers  and 
splendour.  Thousands  of  them  roamed  about,  rushed  on  and 
jumped  up  here  and  there.  He  created  these  excellent  beings,  the 
Rudras,  even  before  a Yama  (a  period  of  3 hours)  had  elapsed. 

314-317.  On  seeing  him  (i.e.  Rudra)  Brahma  spoke  to 
him — “Do  not  create  subjects  like  these.  O lord,  do  not  create 
subjects  equal  to  yourself.  Obeisance  be  to  you!  Welfare  unto 
you.  Create  subjects  endowed  with  death.  Subjects  devoid  of 
death  will  not  start  holy  rites.” 

On  being  urged  thus,  he  told  him — “I  will  not  create  the 
subjects  equipped  with  death  and  old  ege.  Welfare  unto  you. 

I am  standing  by;  you  create  the  subjects  yourself.  These 
beings  of  great  strength  will  be  known  by  the  name  ‘Rudras’. 
They  will  resort  to  the  earth,  firmament  and  all  quarters. 

318.  A hundred  Rudras  will  be  devoted  to  sacrifice.  They 
will  partake  offerings  in  sacrifices  along  with  the  groups  of 
Devas. 

319.  They  will  stay  till  the  end  of  a yuga.  They  will  be 
worshipped  along  with  Devas  in  different  manvantaras.” 


Various  Creations 


331 


320.  Thus  addressed  by  the  intelligent  lord,  Brahma  the 
delighted  patriarch  bowed  down  to  him  and  replied. 

321.  “O  lord,  welfare  unto  you.  Let  it  be  even  as  it  had 
been  mentioned  by  you.’’  When  it  was  approved  by  Brahma, 
everything  happened  in  that  manner. 

322-324.  Ever  since  that  day,  the  lord  of  Devas  (i.  e., 
Rudra)  did  not  procreate  progeny.  He  remained  as  Sthanu 
with  sublimated  sexuality  till  the  time  of  Dissolution.  Since 
lord  Mahadeva,  the  Purusa  shining  like  the  sun  said  ‘‘I  am 
staying”;  he  is  known  as  Sthanu  (motionless). 

325.  He  has  the  female  form  in  one  half  of  his  body.  In 
splendour  he  is  comparable  to  the  fire.  By  his  own  will  he 
divided  himself  into  two,  a separate  woman,  and  a separate 
man. 

326-327.  The  same  lord  stationed  himself  in  eleven 
halves. The  great  goddess  mentioned  before  as  the  highly 
blessed  lady  sharing  half  the  body  of  the  lord  became  Sati  for 
the  welfare  of  the  worlds.  The  goddess  had  been  formerly 
propitiated  by  Daksa. 

328-329.  ‘Tor  the  sake  of  creation,  divide  yourself  into 
two,  right  half  being  white  and  the  left  black.” — On  being 
asked  thus  by  lord  Siva,  O brahmins,  she  bifurcated  herself 
into  white  and  black.  I shall  mention  her  names;  listen  atten- 
tively. 

330-335.  They  are: — Svaha,  Svadha,  Mahavidya,  Medha, 
Laksmi,  Sarasvati,  Sati,  Daksayani,  Vidya,  Iccha  Sakti,  Kriyat- 
mika,  Aparna,  Ekaparna,  Ekapa^ala,  Uma,  Haimavati,  Kalyani, 
Ekamatrka,  Khyati,  Prajna  Mahabhaga,  Gauri,  Ganambika, 
Mahadevi,  Nandini,  and  Jatavedasi.  These  are  some  of  the 
names  when  she  was  one  (i.e.  before  division).  After  she  had  divi- 
ded into  two,  her  names  are: — Savitri,  Varada,  Punya,  Pavani, 
Lokavisruta,  Ajna,  Avesani,  Krsna,  Tamasi,  Sattviki,  Siva, 
Prakrti,  Vikrta,  Raudri,  Durga,  Bhadra,  Pramathini,  Kalaratri, 
Mahamaya,  Revati,  Bhutanayika.  At  the  end  of  Dvapara  yuga, 
O sages  of  good  holy  rites,  her  names  are  as  follows : — 

609.  Lord  Siva  has  a body  half  man  and  half  woman.  Thus  when  we 
speak  of  eleven  Rudras  we  mean  eleven  half  males  and  eleven  half  females. 
Both  the  male  and  female  forms,  divided  into  hundreds  and  thousands,  have 
their  distinct  names  and  activities. 


332 


Lingapurdna 


336-339.  GautamI,  Kausiki,  Arya,  Candi,  Katyayini,  Sati, 
Kumari,  Yadavi,  Varada,  Krsnapingala,  Bahirdhvaja  or 
Barhirdhvaja,  Suladhara,  Parama,  Brahmacarini,  Mahendro- 
pendrabhagini,  Drsadvati,  Ekasuladhrk,  Aparajita,  Bahubhuja, 
Pragalbha,  Sirhhavahini,  the  slayer  of  the  Daityas  such  as 
Sumbha  and  others,  the  suppressor  of  the  great  demon  Mahisa, 
Amogha,  Vindhyanilaya,  Vikranta  and  Gananayika.  These  are 
the  various  names  of  the  goddess  in  order. 

340.  The  names  of  Bhadrakali  mentioned  by  me  yield 
the  best  results.  Those  men  who  read  these  become  devoid  of 
sons. 

341-342.  In  the  forest,  on  the  mountain,  in  the  city  or  in 
the  house,  in  the  water  or  on  dry  land  these  names  are  used 
as  saving  remedy.  One  shall  repeat  them  when  there  is  danger 
from  tigers,  elephants,  kings  or  thieves — nay  in  all  adversities. 

343.  One  shall  repeat  these  names  as  protective  measure 
in  the  case  of  children  afflicted  by  evil  eye,  evil  planets,  goblins 
as  well  as  mothers. 

344.  The  following  two  are  the  parts  of  the  great  goddess. 
They  are  Prajha  and  Sri.  From  these  two  were  born  thousands 
of  goddesses  by  whom  the  entire  universe  is  pervaded. 

345-347.  Rudra,  Mahesvara  the  lord  ofDevas  stationed  him- 
self along  with  his  consort  Sati,  for  the  benefit  of  the  worlds.  He 
is  Paramesvara,  Rudra  and  Pasupati.  Formerly  the  three  cities 
were  burned  by  him.  By  his  brilliance,  Devas  became  Pa$us 
( Individual  Souls) . He  who  reads  or  listens  to  the  splendid  order 
of  the  primordial  creation  attains  the  world  of  Brahma.  He 
who  narrates  the  same  to  the  excellent  brahmins  also  attains 
Brahma’s  world. 


Statement  of  Nandikeivara 


333 


CHAPTER  SEVENTYONE 

The  statement  of  Mandikeivara 


The  sages  said: 

1 . The  splendid  process  of  creation  has  been  mentioned 
succinctly  and  in  detail  by  you.  How  did  Pasupati,  Mahesvara 
happen  to  burn  the  three  cities  of  Asuras  ? 

2-4.  O holy  lord,  how  did  Devas  including  Brahma  become 
Pasus  ? The  set  of  cities  was  formerly  built  by  Maya  by  per- 
forming penance.  It  was  an  excellent  set  of  three  cities  of 
divine  nature,  made  of  gold,  silver  and  iron.  We  have  heard 
that  these  along  with  their  forts  were  burned  by  the  lord  of 
Devas.  How  did  the  lord  who  struck  down  the  eyes  of  Bhaga 
burn  these  cities  by  discharging  a single  arrow  even  though  it 
was  divine. 

5.  That  set  of  three  cities  was  not  burned  by  the  goblins 
created  by  Visnu.  The  entire  details  of  the  origin  of  the 
cities  and  the  acquisition  of  boons  have  been  heard  formerly. 

6-9.  O sage  of  good  holy  rites,  it  behoves  you  to  narrate 
the  burning  of  the  cities  wholly. 

On  hearing  their  words,  Suta,  the  most  excellent  among 
the  knowers  of  the  Puranas,  said  what  he  had  heard  from 
Vyasa  in  the  manner  as  he  had  indicated  all  the  necessary 
topics. 

Suta  said: — 

Due  to  the  curse  of  the  three  worlds  originating  from  mind, 
speech  and  body,  the  asura  Taraka,  the  son  of  Tara,  was  killed 
along  with  his  kinsmen  by  Skanda  assiduously.  His  sons,  all 
of  noble  soul,  great  strength  and  exploits,  viz: — Vidyunmalin, 
Tarakaksa  and  Kamalaksa,  performed  penance. 

10-12.  Those  excellent  Danavas,  while  performing  fierce 
penance,  observed  great  restraints.  By  means  of  penance  they 
emaciated  their  bodies.  The  delighted  Brahma,  the  bestower 
of  boons  granted  them  the  boon  of  their  choice. 

The  Daityas  said: — 

‘‘We  want  not  to  be  killed  by  any  living  being  at  any 
time.” 


334 


Lihgapurdna 


Thus  they  jointly  requested  the  grandfather  of  all  worlds. 
Then  the  eternal  lord  of  the  worlds  spoke  to  them  thus  : 

13.  “O  Asuras,  there  is  no  universal  immortality.  Desist 
from  this  desire.  Choose  another  boon  that  may  appeal  to  you.” 

14.  Then  the  Daityas  after  consulting  one  another  bowed 
to  Brahma,  the  preceptor  of  the  universe  and  said  to  him : — 

15.  “By  your  grace,  O lord  of  worlds,  O preceptor  of  the 
universe,  we  shall  roam  over  this  earth  and  live  in  three  cities. 

16.  Once  in  a thousand  years  we  shall  meet  together.  O 
sinless  one,  these  cities  shall  then  fuse  into  one  city. 

17.  The  lord  who  strikes  at  these  when  they  have  fused 
into  one  with  a single  arrow  shall  be  death  unto  us. 

18.  Replying — “Let  it  be  so”,  the  lord  entered  the  heaven. 

Thereafter  the  heroic  Maya  built  the  cities  by  means  of 

his  penance. 

19.  The  cities  of  those  noble  asuras  were  stationed  as 
follows: — the  golden  one  was  in  the  heaven;  the  silver  city  was 
in  the  firmament  and  the  iron  city  was  on  the  earth. 

20-22.  Each  of  these  cities  was  a hundred  yojanas  in 
length  and  in  breadth.  The  city  of  Tarakaksa  was  made  of  gold; 
the  city  of  Kamalaksa  was  made  of  silver;  that  of  Vidyunmali 
was  made  of  iron;  they  had  three  types  of  excellent  forts.  Maya 
was  worshipped  by  the  Daityas  and  Danavas  there.  This 
powerful  architect  built  his  own  abode  in  everyone  of  them 
and  lived  there. 

23.  Thus,  O men  of  good  holy  rites,  came  into  existence 
the  well- fortified  three  cities.  O leading  brahmins,  they  were 
like  the  three  worlds. 

24.  When  the  trio  of  cities  grew  up,  the  Daityas  in  the 
three  worlds  entered  the  three  cities  and  became  superior  in 
strength. 

25.  The  cities  were  full  of  kalpa  trees.®^®  They  abounded 
in  elephants  and  horses.  There  were  innumerable  mansions 
richly  decorated  with  clusters  of  jewels. 

26-27.  There  were  aerial  chariots  that  resembled  the  solar 

6io.  kalpa-druma— one  of  the  five  trees  of  Indra's  paradise  fabled 
to  fulfil  all  desires,  the  other  being  Mandara,  Parijataka,  Santana  and 
Haricandana. 


Statement  of  Nandikeivara 


335 


disc  and  that  had  faces  on  every  side.  The  palaces  were  splen- 
did with  rubies  studded.  They  were  as  refulgent  as  the  moon. 
Their  ornamental  gateways  were  divine  and  resembled  the 
peaks  of  Kailasa.  Their  three  cities  shone  with  the  excellent 
mansions  built  separately. 

28.  O excellent  brahmins,  it  was  filled  with  divine  ladies 
(i.e.  ladies  of  divine  beauty  and  excellence),  Gandharvas, 
Siddhas  and  Caranas.  There  were  shrines  of  Rudra  in  every 
house  and  Agnihotra  was  performed  every  day. 

29-37.  They  were  filled  with  wells,  tanks,  large  oblong  lakes 
all  round.  Herds  of  elephants  in  their  rut,  splendid  horses, 
chariots  of  every  shape,  wonderfully  made  with  faces  on  all 
sides — all  these  abounded  there.  There  were  drinking  sheds, 
assemblies,  playgrounds,  etc.  Different  kinds  of  halls  and  cham- 
bers for  the  study  of  the  Vedas  w^ere  found  all  round.  The  cities 
were  well  fortified  and  made  unassailable  even  mentally  by 
others,  due  to  the  illusionary  power  of  Maya.  O leading  sages, 
the  cities  were  frequented  by  chaste  ladies  everywhere.  There 
were  many  Daityas.  Although  they  committed  great  sins  they 
got  rid  of  them  through  their  worship  of  Sankara.  O brahmins, 
the  leading  Daityas  were  highly  blessed.  They  were  accom- 
panied by  their  wives  and  sons.  They  were  conversant  with 
the  holy  rites  laid  down  in  the  Srutis  and  Smrtis.  They  were 
engaged  in  those  virtuous  rites  always.  They  abandoned  all 
lords  other  than  Mahadeva  and  were  engaged  in  the  worship 
of  that  lord  alone.  They  had  broad  chests  and  shoulders  like 
those  of  bulls.  They  used  to  hold  all  weapons.  They  were 
always  hungry.  Their  eyes  shone  like  the  forest  fire.  Some  of 
them  were  quiescent;  some  were  infuriated.  Some  were  dwar- 
fish and  some  were  hump-backed;  they  had  the  lustre  of  blue 
lotuses;  their  hairs  were  darkcoloured  and  curly.  They  re- 
sembled the  blue  mountain  and  the  Meru ; their  voice  was 
comparable  to  the  sound  of  the  rumbling  cloud.  All  of  them 
were  protected  by  Maya.  They  were  well-trained  and  were 
desirous  of  fighting.  That  trio  of  cities  was  well  frequented 
by  the  firm  and  steadfast  suppressors  of  Devas  (i.e.  Daityas) 
who  were  interested  in  fighting  always  and  all  round,  who  had 
perfectly  achieved  prowess  and  virility  by  the  worship  of  Siva 
and  who  resembled  the  sun,  wind  and  king  of  immortal  beings. 


336 


Liiigapurdna 


38.  O excellent  brahmins,  thanks  to  the  prowess  of  the 
Daityas,  Dcvas  including  Indra  were  burned  by  the  fire  of  the 
set  of  three  cities  like  the  trees  consumed  by  the  forest  fire. 

39.  Devas  who  were  thus  scorched  saluted  lord  Visnu  of 
unrivalled  splendour  and  said  to  him. 

40-41.  The  glorious  lord,  Narayana  thought  within  his 
mind  as  to  what  should  be  done  in  the  affairs  of  Devas. 
Janardana,  whose  form  is  sacrifice,  who  was  himself  the  per- 
former of  sacrifices,  who  was  the  partaker  of  the  fruit  of  sacrifices 
and  who  is  the  lord  and  bestower  of  benefits  unto  those  who 
perform  sacrifices,  remembered  the  sacrifice. 

42.  The  sacrifice  remembered  by  him  for  the  achievement 
of  the  objects  of  Devas  bowed  down  to  that  lord  and  eulogised 
him. 

43.  Seeing  the  smiling  sacrifice,  the  eternal  lord  Visnu 
observed  Devas  including  Indra  and  said ; — 

Sri  Vi$nu  said:  — 

44.  For  the  destruction  of  the  three  cities  and  for  the 
prosperity  of  the  three  worlds,  O Devas,  worship  the  lord  with 
ths  Upasad  sacrifice. 

Suta  said:  — 

45.  On  hearing  the  words  of  the  intelligent  lord  of  Devas, 
Devas  made  great  leonine  roaring  sound  and  eulogised  the  lord 
of  sacrifices. 

46.  Thereafter,  lord  Visnu  himself  thought  once  again.  The 
lord  of  Devas  again  spoke  to  all  Devas. 

47.  Even  after  killing  and  burning  all  living  beings  and 
even  after  enjoying  pleasures  without  the  basic  justice,  if  one 
worships  Mahadeva,  one  is  undoubtedly  sinless. 

48-49.  There  is  no  doubt  that  sinless  persons  should  not  be 
killed  and  only  sinners  should  be  killed  assiduously.  O excellent 
Devas,  how  could  the  wicked  Asuras  be  killed  by  Devas  al- 
though they  are  sinners  and  Devas  are  very  strong  ? Hence 
they  should  not  be  killed  due  to  the  power  of  Rudra 
Paramesthin. 

50.  Without  the  grace  of  the  lord  who  am  I ? O Devas, 


Statement  of  Nandikeivara 


337 


who  is  Brahma  ? Who  are  the  Daityas  ? Who  are  the  slayers  of 
the  enemies  of  Devas  ? Who  are  the  noble-souled  sages  ? 

51.  He  is  the  lord,  greater  than  the  greatest.  He  is  per- 
petual; he  is  the  twentyseventh  principle  who  is  worthy  of 
being  saluted,  who  is  the  lord  of  all  the  immortal  beings  in  the 
universe  and  who  is  Mahesvara  the  support  of  the  universe. 

52.  He  alone  is  the  lord  of  all  Devas.  He  is  the  benefactor 
of  all.  He  has  made  a distinction  between  Devas  and  Daityas 
sportingly. 

53.  It  is  by  worshipping  a part  of  his®^^  that  Devas  attained 
immortality;  Brahma  attained  his  status  as  Brahma  and  I 
attained  my  status  as  Visnu. 

54.  Without  worshipping  him,  which  man  attains  per- 
fcclion  in  this  world  ? Thanks  to  the  worship  of  Lihga,  they 
could  be  killed  by  him  alone. 

55-56.  Moreover,  all  of  them  abide  by  their  Dharmas. 
They  adhere  to  the  injunctions  of  Sruti  and  Smrti.  Still  we 
shall  worship  Rudra  by  performing  the  rite  of  Upasad  pertain- 
ing to  that  lord  and  become  victorious  over  the  excellent 
Daityas.  Excepting  the  sole  lord,  the  three-eyed  deity,  who  else 
is  competent  to  destroy  the  Tripuras  ? They  are  well  protected 
by  Maya  along  with  Tarakaksa.  They  have  the  sole  lustre  of 
crystals  and  they  are  well  stationed  in  themselves. 

Suta  said: — 

57.  After  saying  this  Visnu  performed  the  worship  of  the 
lord  by  means  of  Upasad  sacrifice.  Sitting  there  he  saw  thou- 
sands of  goblins. 

58-59.  They  were  armed  with  spears,  javelins  and  iron 
clubs.  They  had  various  weapons;  they  were  in  various  guises. 
They  resembled  Rudra  fierce  as  the  fire  at  the  time  of  dissolu- 
tion; they  were  comparable  to  Rudra  the  destroyer.  They 
bowed  to  him  and  halted.  Lord  Visnu  then  spoke  to  them. 


6 1 1 . See  p.  8 note  1 5 Gf.  x .75*34-  'tasmad  abheda-buddhyaiva  sapta- 
vimlatprabhedatab . 

61 2.  Siva  in  his  sakala  form  of  lihga. 


338 


Lifigapuroan^ 


Vifm  said: — 

60.  “O  heroic  ones,  go  to  the  three  cities  of  Daityas,  burn 
them,  split  them  and  swallow  them.  Then  return  to  the  surface 
of  the  earth  in  the  manner  you  had  gone.” 

61.  Thereafter,  the  groups  of  goblins  bowed  down  to  the 
lord  of  Devas  and  entered  the  three  cities.  Like  the  moths 
in  fire,  they  became  destroyed. 

62-63a.  At  the  behest  of  the  lord  of  Daityas,  all  the  goblins 
were  destroyed.  Thousands  of  Daityas  rejoiced,  danced  and 
sang.  They  eulogised  Rudra  the  lord  of  Devas,  the  great  soul. 

63b-64.  Devas  including  Indra,  who  had  been  defeated  in 
a trice  and  whose  prowess  had  been  destroyed,  came  unto 
Visnu,  the  lord  of  Devas  and  resorted  to  his  support  out  of 
fear.  On  seeing  them  the  lord  Visnu  thought  thus. 

65-66.  “What  is  to  be  done  ?”  After  thinking  thus  he 
became  distressed  as  he  looked  at  the  distresed  Devas  inclu- 
ding Indra.  After  a while  he  thought  again  “How  shall  I des- 
troy the  army  of  Daityas  assiduously  and  carryout  the  tasks  of 
Devas  without  the  grace  of  the  supreme  lord.  If  one  ponders 
over  it,  there  is  no  doubt  about  this  that  those  who  are  virtuous 
have  no  sin  at  all. 

67-71.  Hence,  know  that  the  Daityas  cannot  be  killed  by 
those  Bhutas  originating  from  the  Upasad  sacrifice.  They  dis- 
pel sin  by  means  ofDharma.  Everything  is  founded  onDharma. 
The  eternal  Sruti  says  that  prosperity  originates  from  Dharma. 
All  these  Daityas,  the  residents  of  the  three  cities,  are  virtuous. 
Hence,  O leading  brahmins,  they  have  attained  immortality  and 
not  otherwise.  Even  after  committing  a very  great  sin,  people 
are  liberated  from  all  the  sins  if  they  worship  Rudra.  They  are 
not  affected  by  sins  like  the  lotus  leaves  which  are  not  affected 
by  water.  O brahmins,  the  achievement  of  worldly  pleasures 
definitely  takes  place  through  his  worship.  Hence,  those  Daityas 
who  are  devoted  to  the  worship  of  the  Linga  do  enjoy  worldly 
pleasures.  Hence,  O Devas,  for  your  purpose  I shall  create 
obstacles  in  the  holy  rites  of  Daityas  by  means  of  my  Maya  and 
so  shall  conquer  the  three  cities  instantaneously” 

SUta  said:  — 

72.  After  thinking  thus,  the  lord  Visnu  decided  to  bring 
about  impediments  in  the  holy  rituals  of  asuras. 


Statement  of  Nandikesvara 


339 


73.  Visnu  of  great  splendour,  wielding  Maya  generated  an 
illusory  Purusa®^®  born  of  himself  to  create  obstacles  to  the 
holy  rites  of  Daityas. 

74.  Visnu  the  ruler  of  all,  the  person  who  could  assume 
any  form  he  liked,  the  wielder  of  Maya,  evolved  a holy  treatise 
that  could  fascinate  everyone  and  that  had  within  its  basic 
principles  the  belief  in  what  is  seen. 

75.  This  sacred  treatise  contained  one  million  six  hundred 
thousand  verses. Lord  Visnu  taught  this  scripture  to  the 
Purusa  born  of  his  own  limbs. 

76-77.  It  was  against  those  treatises  that  followed  the 
Srutis  and  the  Smrtis.  It  was  devoid  of  the  discipline  pertain- 
ing to  the  four  castes  and  four  stages  of  life.  It  was  taught 
in  it  that  heaven  and  hell  are  here  itself.®^®  There  was  no  belief 
otherwise.  Visnu  himself  taught  this  scripture  to  that  Purusa. 
For  the  destruction  of  the  three  cities  he  said  to  that  Purusa: 

78.  ‘^O,  undoubtedly  it  behoves  you  to  go  there  for  the 
quick  destruction  of  the  residents  of  the  three  cities.  May  their 
Dharmas  in  pursuit  of  the  Srutis  and  Smrtis  be  destroyed.” 

79.  The  wielder  of  Maya®^®,  the  expert  in  the  deceptive 
scripture,  bowed  to  him.  After  entering  those  cities  the  sage 
immediately  created  his  Maya. 

80.  On  account  of  his  Maya,  those  Daityas  who  were  the 
residents  of  the  three  cities,  eschewed  their  holy  rites  based  on 
the  Srutis  and  Smrtis  and  became  his  disciples. 

81-82.  They  left  off  Sankara,  Mahadeva,  the  great  I^vara. 


613.  According  to  the  present  context  Visnu  created  a delusive 
teacher  called  Mayamoha  who  created  a Mayaiiastra  of  sixteen  lakhs  of 
verses  preaching  a-dharma  for  misguiding  the  Asuras.  Mayamoha  created 
disciples  for  the  propagation  of  a~dharma»  He  preached  non-violence,  forbade 
l^rauta  and  Smarta  rituals,  discarded  Varnasrama  system,  created  an  order 
for  women  that  resulted  in  leaving  their  home  and  leading  the  life  of  nuns. 
In  some  versions,  the  role  is  assigned  to  Brhaspati,  the  preceptor  of  Gods 
who  in  the  guise  of  the  preceptor  Sukra  deludes  the  Asuras.  For  detail, 
see  Mayamoha  prakarana  in  Padma^  Vx^nu,  Matsya  and  Siva  pura^as. 

614.  This  is  not  clear  which  text  is  meant. 

615.  On  the  heretic  doctrines  compare  : 

sTTfiir^  fTFflrar:  1 5:^ 

SWT:  II  cited  in  ST. 

616.  Muniti — Bauddha-bhik$u^  ST, 


340 


Lingapurdf^a 


At  the  behest  of  the  lord,  the  wielder  of  Maya,  Narada,  the 
practitioner  of  deception,  also  entered  the  trio  of  cities  and 
associated  himself  with  the  wielder  of  Maya.  That  sage 
was  himself  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  his  disciples  and  their 
disciples. 

83-88.  He  ordained  rules  of  conduct  for  women  that  would 
give  them  the  benefit  of  licentious  activities.  They  followed 
those  rules  and  achieved  the  result  immediately.  These  women 
began  to  censure  the  ladies  faithful  to  their  husbands  and 
themselves  became  enamoured  of  other  people.  Even  today  in 
the  Kali  age,  base  women  give  due  honour  to  the  sage 
Narada®^’^,  abandon  their  husbands  and  move  about  unfettered. 
Really  it  is  the  husband  who  is  mother,  father,  kinsman, 
comrade,  friend  and  relative  unto  the  women.  There  is  no 
doubt  about  this.  Still  he  said  thus  through  his  Maya.  Really 
the  woman  who  has  love  towards  her  husband  shall  attain  the 
greatest  heaven  even  after  committing  a great  sin.  She  who 
does  contrary  to  this  attains  hell.  O leading  sages,  formerly, 
chaste  ladies  forsook  all  Dharmas,  all  Devas  and  other  pre- 
ceptors of  the  universe  and  worshipped  their  husbands  always. 
After  attaining  the  heavenly  world  they  became  free  from 
ailments  and  rejoiced.  But  those  who  were  the  followers  of 
Maya  attained  hell.  Hence,  it  is  the  husband  who  is  the  greatest 
goal. 

89-91.  Yet  on  account  of  the  Maya  of  the  lord  of  Devas 
and  at  the  behest  of  lord  Visnu,  the  women  abandoned  their 
husbands  and  became  self-willed  and  unrestrained  in  their 
conducts.  Misfortune  went  to  the  three  cities  at  the  behest  of 
that  lord  himself.  The  glory  and  prosperity  that  they  had 
obtained  from  Brahma,  the  unborn  lord,  the  lord  of  Devas, 
abandoned  them  and  went  out  of  the  cities. 

92-97.  The  lord  thus  preached  delusion  of  the  intellect  as 
evolved  by  the  Maya  of  Visnu.  The  Purusa  deluded  the 
Daityas  and  Narada  the  wielder  of  Maya  deluded  the  ladies. 
In  order  to  create  obstacles  in  Dharmas  these  two  were  com- 
fortably seated  there.  They  were  unexcited  and  unchanging, 

617.  The  preaching  in  regard  to  sexual  freedom  is  attributed  to 
N&rada,  the  disciple  of  Mayamoha. 


Statement  of  Nandikesvara 


341 


when  the  splendid  Dharma  pertaining  to  the  Srutis  and  the 
Smrtis,  perished ; when  heresy  was  proclaimed  by  Visnu,  the 
source  of  origin  of  the  universe;  when  Mahe^vara  and  the 
worship  of  his  Lihga  were  abandoned  by  Daityas;  when  the 
virtuous  activities  of  the  women  were  entirely  destroyed  and 
wicked  conduct  was  stabilised;  the  lord  of  Devas  Visnu 
appeared  contented.  After  practising  penance  he  approached 
the  consort  of  Uma  along  with  Devas  and  eulogised  him.  Lord 
Visnu  said  : — 

Obeisance  to  you,  to  Lord  Mahesvara,  to  the  great  Atman, 
obeisance  to  Narayana,  to  Sarva,  to  Brahma,  to  one  having  the 
form  of  Brahman ; obeisance  to  the  permanent  one,  to  the 
infinite  one,  to  the  unmanifest  one. 

Suta  said : 


98-99.  After  eulogising  the  great  lord  and  after  bowing 
down  like  a long  staff',  the  lord  Visnu  stationed  himself  in  water 
and  performed  the  japa  of  the  Rudra  Mantra  ten  million  times. 
All  Devas  including  Indra,  Sadhyas,  Yama,  Rudras  and  Maruts 
eulogised  lord  Siva. 

Devas  said  : 

100.  Obeisance  to  you  the  Atman  of  all;  obeisance  to 
Sankara  the  dispeller  of  affliction,  to  Rudra,  to  Nila  Rudra,  to 
Kadrudra  and  to  Pracetas. 

101.  You  are  our  perpetual  goal;  the  suppressor  of  the 
enemies  of  Devas  should  be  always  worshipped  and  honoured 
by  us.  You  are  the  primordial  one;  you  are  the  endles.s  one; 
you  are  the  infinite  imperishable  lord, 

102.  O preceptor  of  the  universe,  you  are  Prakrti  and 
Purusa  himself;  you  are  the  creator,  the  destroyer;  the  pro- 
tector; the  leader  of  the  brahmins  in  this  universe,  O deity, 
favourably  disposed  towards  the  brahmins. 

103-104.  You  are  the  granter  of  boons;  you  are  identical 
with  speech.  You  arc  worthy  of  being  directly  expressed;  you 
are  devoid  of  the  expressed  and  expression.  For  the  sake  of 
salvation,  you  arc  worshipped  by  the  yogins  and  by  those 
who  whirl  in  the  yogic  practice.  You  are  stationed  in  the 


342 


Lingapurd^a 


cavity  of  the  lotus-like  heart.  The  wise  call  you  Sat  (the 
existent) , the  greatest  one  in  the  form  of  Brahman. 

105.  O lord,  the  noble  sages  say  that  you  are  reality,  the 
mass  of  splendour,  greater  than  the  greatest  and  the  greatest 
Atman  in  this  world. 

106.  O preceptor  of  the  universe,  you  are  everything  that 
is  seen,  heard,  stationed  or  born.  They  call  you  minuter  than 
the  minutest  and  greater  than  the  greatest. 

107.  They  call  you  one  with  hands  and  feet  everywhere, 
one  with  eyes,  heads  and  mouths  everywhere.  You  have  ears 
all  round  and  you  stand  enveloping  everything  in  the  world. 

108-110.  They  call  you  Mahadeva,  the  omniscient,  one 
without  ailment,  one  who  cannot  be  specifically  pointed  out, 
one  having  a universal  form,  one  with  deformed  eyes,  Sadasiva 
without  ailment,  one  who  makes  others  in  the  world  function, 
one  who  makes  Prakrti  work,  the  great-grandfather,  the  lord  who 
bestows  boons,  the  self-born  deity,  the  abode  of  all  and  the 
lord  of  twentysix  principles.  You  resemble  ten  million  suns  in 
refulgence;  you  are  similar  to  ten  million  moons  in  brightness, 
you  are  on  a par  with  ten  million  fires  that  blaze  at  the  time 
of  dissolution  and  you  have  no  other  lord  to  control  you. 

111-114.  The  Srutis  and  the  people  who  are  conversant 
with  the  essence  of  JSrutis  call  you  the  essence  of  the  Srutis. 
O deity  with  many  forms,  that  which  is  evolved  in  the  world 
without  you  has  not  been  seen  by  us.  You  alone  protect  the 
Daityas,  Devas,  Bhutas,  the  mobile  and  immobile  beings,  O 
Sambhu,  we  have  no  other  goal.  Protect  us  by  killng  all  the 
Asuras. 

O Parame^vara,  all  are  deluded  by  your  Maya.  Just  as  the 
waves  and  billows  in  the  ocean  come  into  clash  with  one 
another  and  ultimately  become  water,  so  also  Devas  and 
Asuras  and  all  creations  of  Brahma  (fighting  one  another)  are 
rendered  insentient  by  the  lord  [a  pun  on  the  word  jala 
(water)  which  is  also  pronounced  as  jada  when  it  means 
insentient,  inactive]. 

Sita  said  : 

115.  The  man  who  gets  up  early  in  the  morning,  purifies 


Statement  of  Nandikeivara 


343 


himself  and  repeats  this  holy  hymn  or  listens  to  this  shall 
attain  all  desires. 

116-1 19a.  Mahesvara,  who  was  thus  eulogised  by  Devas, 
was  pleased  by  it  as  well  as  by  the  Japa  performed  by  Visnu. 
Accompanied  by  Uma,  he  embraced  Uma  and  smilingly  kept 
his  hand  on  Nandin.  Glancing  at  Devas,  he  said  in  a majestic 
tone  : — “O  leading  Devas,  this  task  has  been  understood  by  me 
now.  I know  the  power  of  the  Maya  of  Visnu  and  the  intelli- 
gent Narada;  O excellent  Devas,  I shall  cause  the  destruction 
of  all  those  Daityas  engaged  in  evil  activities.  I shall  destroy 
the  three  cities  as  well.'’ 

Suta  mid  : — 

119b-121a.  Then  Devas  came  there  along  with  Brahma, 
Indra  and  Visnu.  On  hearing  the  words  of  the  lord  they  bowed 
to  him  and  eulogised  him.  In  the  meanwhile  the  goddess 
glanced  at  the  lord  with  surprise.  She  hit  the  bull-bannered 
deity  with  her  toy  lotus  and  said. 

The  Goddess  said  : — 

12 lb- 125.  O lord,  see  our  son,  the  six- faced  Karttikeya, 
resembling  the  sun  in  refulgence.  He  is  playing.  O excellent 
one  among  those  blessed  with  sons,  he  is  adorned  with  excellent 
ornaments  such  as  coronets,  bangles,  ear-rings,  bracelets,  anklets, 
belly-bands,  tinkling  bells,  golden  fig  leaves,  etc.  His  forelocks  are 
bedecked  with  the  flowers  of  the  kalpa  tree.  His  necklace  is 
studded  with  rubies  and  other  precious  gems.  He  is  adorned 
with  shouldcrlets  and  pearl  necklaces  having  the  lustre  of  the 
full  moon.  He  has  the  caste-marks  on  his  foreheads.  O Maha- 
deva,  see  our  splendid  son. 

126-129.  He  is  marked  with  saffron.  A round  mark  has 
been  made  with  Bhasma.  O lord,  see  the  row  of  faces  like  the 
cluster  of  lotuses.  O lord,  see  his  splendid  eyes.  See  the 
splendid  marks  of  collyrium  applied  by  his  mothers  Ganga, 
Krttika  and  Svaha®^®  as  an  auspicious  benediction.** 

Siva  who  was  thus  addressed  by  Uma,  the  mother  of  the 
worlds,  began  imbibing  the  nectar  from  the  faces  of  Skanda. 

6 1 8.  Mothers  of  KlU’ttikeya.  Sec  SP.  Rudra  Sarhhitd,  ch.2. 


344  Lingapwcanja 

He  was  not  satiated  thereby.  He  even  forgot  Devas  who 
harassed  by  the  Daily  as  had  assembled  there. 

130.  He  embraced  Skanda,  kissed  him,  smelling  the 
head  and  said — “Dance,  dear  son”.  The  great  boy,  dispelling 
the  anguish  of  all  danced  gently  and  sportingly. 

131.  The  other  leading  Ganas  danced  along  with  him. 
At  the  bidding  of  the  lord,  the  entire  universe,  danced  for  a 
moment. 

132.  All  the  Nagas  (serpents)  and  Devas  with  Indra  at 
their  forefront  danced.  The  chiefs  of  the  Ganas  eulogised 
Skanda.  Uma  and  the  mothers  rejoiced. 

133.  The  Gandharvas  and  Kinnaras  showered  flow^ers  and 
sang.  On  drinking  the  nectar  of  the  fine  dance  Parvati  and 
Paramesvara  attained  satisfaction  along  with  Nandin  and  the 
leading  Ganas. 

134.  Then  along  with  Nandin,  Karttikeya,  and  the 
daughter  of  the  king  of  mountains,  Siva  entered  the  divine 
abode,  like  the  cloud  entering  other  clouds.  He  too  had  the 
lustre  of  the  clouds. 

135.  Devas  stood  by  the  door  of  the  abode.  Slightly 
distressed  in  their  minds  they  eulogised  the  lord. 

136.  They  told  one  another:  “What  is  this  ? What  is  this  ?” 
and  they  looked  at  one  another  in  their  excited  dejection. 
Some  said,  “we  are  sinners”,  still  others  said,  “we  are  unfor- 
tunate”. 

137.  The  leading  Devas  said  : — Daityas  are  lucky.  Others 
said,  “This  is  the  fruit  of  their  worship.”  Still  others  said — “No.” 

138.  In  the  meantime,  on  hearing  their  grim  voices 
Kumbhodara*^®  of  great  splendour  struck  them  with  his  staff. 

139.  Devas  were  frightened.  Crying  “Ha,  Ha”  they 
fled.  The  sages  and  Devas  fell  on  the  ground, 

140-141,  The  sages  Ka^yapa  and  others  said — “O  our 
adverse  fate!”  The  brahmins  said  “Even  after  seeing  the  lord, 
the  task  of  Devas  has  not  been  accomplished  due  to  the  ill  luck 
of  Devas.  Still  others  said,  “Obeisance  to  Siva”  after  wor- 
shipping him  slightly  in  their  hearts. 

619.  ambudabhah — ST,  interprets  differently  : axnbudavat  sQryavad 
&bhi  k^tir  yasya — who  resembles  the  sun  in  brilliance. 

620.  Kumbhodarah — a gana  of  lord  Siva. 


Statement  of  Nandikesvara 


345 


142-146.  At  the  behest  of  Mahadeva  Nandisa,  the  favourite 
sage  of  the  lord  came  there  riding  on  a white  bull.  He  had 
matted  hair  and  held  the  trident  and  the  iron  club.  He  wore 
garlands,  necklaces,  ear-rings  and  bangles.  On  seeing  Nandin,  the 
Kumbhodara  bowed  to  Nandin  with  his  lowered  head  and 
hastened  along  with  him.  Nandin  of  great  splendour  was 
seated  on  the  back  of  a bull.  He  had  the  bull  banner.  He  was 
the  commander-in-chief  of  the  Ganas  and  was  accompanied 
by  the  Ganas  like  the  great  lord  himself,  riding  on  the  back  of 
the  cloud. The  white  umbrella  of  Nandin  stretched  to  ten 
Yojanas.  It  was  bedecked  in  clusters  of  pearls.  It  shone  like  the 
firmament.  The  splendid  pearl  necklace  suspended  from  it  from 
within  appeared  like  the  Ganga  falling  from  the  sky  ov^cr  the 
head  of  the  lord. 

147-153.  O leading  sages,  at  the  behest  of  Indra,  the  wielder 
of  the  thunderbolt,  the  splendid  divine  drums  were  sounded  in 
honour  of  the  presiding  oflicer  of  t he  Ganas.  They  eulogised 
him  with  pleasing  words,  just  as  they  eulogised  Siva  with 
thrilling  joy  and  loving  devotion.  At  the  bidding  of  the  thunder- 
bolt-wielding  lord,  the  sky- walkers  showered  fragrant  flowers 
from  the  firmament  over  the  head  of  Nandin.  Satisfied  with 
that  shower  he  shone  with  real  and  sincere  satisfaction.  Nandin 
was  drenched  in  fragrant  water  dropping  from  the  moon  on 
the  forehead  of  the  lord.  The  back  of  the  bull  shone  with 
different  kinds  of  flowers.  O sages  of  good  holy  rites,  just  as 
the  firmament  is  scattered  with  stars  so  also  the  back  of  the 
bull  was  covered  with  flowers.  Covered  by  them  Nandin 
shone  on  the  back  of  the  bull,  like  the  moon  on  the  back  of  the 
firmament.  O sages  of  holy  rites,  on  seeing  Nandin  that  way 
Devas  including  Indra  and  Visnu  eulogised  the  chieftain  of 
the  Ganas  as  if  he  was  another  lord  of  Devas. 

Devas  said  : 

154-160.  Obeisance  to  you  the  devotee  of  Rudra,  to  one 
engaged  in  the  japa  of  Rudra  mantras;  obeisance  to  one  who 

621.  meghapr§the — mcgha-rupa-Vi9nu-pr9thc  ST.  This  refers  to 
Vi9nu  in  the  form  of  cloud  which  lord  Siva  made  his  vehicle.  Hence,  Siva  is 
called  *megha-vahana.* 


346 


Lingapurd^ 


destroys  the  agony  of  the  devotees  of  Rudra;  obeisance  to 
you  engaged  in  rites  pleasing  to  Rudra;  obeisance  to  the  leader 
ofKusraa^^a;  obeisance  to  the  lord  of  yogins;  to  the  bestower 
of  every  thing;  to  one  worthy  of  being  sought  refuge  in;  to  the 
omniscient  one;  to  the  dispeller  of  agony;  to  the  lord  of  the 
Vedas;  obeisance  to  one  comprehensible  only  through  the 
Vedas;  obeisance  to  one  wielding  thunderbolt;  to  one  whose 
curved  fangs  are  adamantine;  to  one  who  renders  the  thunder- 
bolt of  Indra  ineffective;  to  one  whose  body  is  bedecked  in 
diamonds;  to  one  propitiated  by  Indra,  the  wielder  of  thunder- 
bolt; obeisance  to  the  Rakta  (red  coloured)  ;to  one  with  red  eyes; 
to  the  wearer  of  red  garments;  obeisance  to  one  who  bestows 
the  world  of  Rudra  to  those  who  are  devoted  to  his  lotus-like 
feet.  Obeisance  to  the  commander  of  the  armies;  to  the  lord  of 
Rudras;  to  the  lord  of  goblins  and  to  the  lord  of  the  worlds; 
obeisance  to  the  dispeller  of  sins;  obeisance  to  Rudra,  to  Rudra- 
pati  (Lord  of  the  Rudras) ; obeisance  to  Siva;  obeisance  to  the 
gentle  one;  obeisance  to  you  who  are  the  devotee  of  Rudra. 

Sutasaid: 

161-163.  Thus  eulogised,  the  delighted  presiding  officer  of 
theGanas,  the  son  of  Silada  said  to  Devas:— 

“It  behoves  you  all  to  prepare  a chariot,  a charioteer,  a 
bow  and  an  arrow  for  Sambhu  with  assiduity  thinking  that 
the  trio  of  the  cities  was  as  good  as  destroyed.”  Then  the  Devas 
strenuously  made  the  chariot  through  their  artificer  Vi^vakar- 
man  assisted  by  Brahma,  for  the  use  of  Siva  the  intelligent 
lord  of  Devas. 


347 


CHAPTER  SEVENTYTWO 

Construction  of  Rudra^s  chariot 

1.  With  great  assiduity  and  eagerness  the  divine  and  cos- 
mic chariot®^^  of  lord  Rudra  was  made  by  Visvakarman. 

2.  It  was  identical  with  all  living  beings;®^®  it  was  bowed 
to  by  all  Devas;  it  was  identical  with  all  Devas;®^*  it  was 
golden  and  it  was  honoured  by  all. 

3.  The  sun  was  the  right  wheel  and  the  moon  was  the  left 
wheel.  The  right  wheel  had  twelve  spokes  and  the  left  wheel 
had  sixteen  spokes. 

4.  O leading  brahmins,  the  twelve  Adityas  were  in  those 
twelve  spokes  on  the  right.  O sages  of  good  holy  rites,  in  the 
sixteen  spokes  of  the  left  wheel  were  the  sixteen  digits  of  the 
moon. 

5.  The  constellations  were  the  ornaments  of  the  left  whecl®^"* 
alone.  The  six  seasons  were  the  rims  of  those  two  wheels,  O 
leading  brahmins. 

6.  The  firmament  was  the  roof®^®  of  the  chariot  and  the 
interior®^?  of  the  chariot  was  the  Mandara.  The  mountain  of 
rising  sun  and  the  mountain  of  the  setting  sun  were  the  poles 
to  which  the  yoke  was  fixed. 

7.  Mahameru  was  the  pedestal  and  the  mountain  Kesara 
was  the  supporting  seat.  The  year  was  its  velocity  and  the 
two  transits  of  the  sun  were  the  joints  of  the  wheels. 

8.  The  Muhurtas  were  holes  to  fix  the  nails  or  pins  and 


622.  In  the  Puran as  Visvakarman  is  invested  with  the  powers  and 
offices  of  the  Vedic  Tvastr.  He  is  the  great  architect,  executor  of  handi- 
crafts and  the  builder  of  great  cities.  He  is  the  son  of  Prabhasa,  the  eighth 
Vasu,  by  his  wife  Yogasiddha. 

623-624.  The  cosmic  chariot- represents  the  cosmic  powers  with  seven 
worlds  as  wheels,  with ^ five  gross  elements  and  all-gods  as  its  constituents. 

625.  Varna  i.e  the  moon,  the  left  side  of  the  cosmic  car. 

626.  pu$kara— vacuum,  it  stands  in  apposition  to  antariksa — the 
atmospheric  region,  the  sky. 

627.  ratha-nl^ah — sarathi-sth^am  ST.,  the  sitting  place  for  the 
charioteer. 


348  Lingapurdna 

Kalas  were  the  pins  of  the  yoke.  The  Kas^has  were  its  nostrils 
and  the  Ksanas  were  its  axles. 

9.  The  Nimesas  were  its  Axle-tree  and  the  Lavas  consti- 
tuted its  shafts.  The  sky  was  the  fender  of  that  chariot.  The 
heaven  and  salvation  were  its  flags. 

10.  Virtue  and  detachment  were  its  staffs  and  sacrifices 
were  the  supports  of  the  staffs.  The  monetary  gifts  were  the 
joints  and  the  fifty  fires  were  the  iron  pieces  or  bolts. 

11.  Dharma  and  Kama  (love)  were  the  tips  of  the  two 
yokes;  the  unmanifest  principle  was  the  poleshaft;  the  cosmic 
intellect  was  its  connecting  shaft. 

12.  The  ego  was  its  angular  points;  the  elements  were  its 
strength;  the  sense  organs  its  ornamental  fittings  all  round. 

13.  Sraddha  (faith)  was  its  movement;  the  Vedas  were  its 
horses;  the  Padas  (words)  of  the  Vedas  its  ornaments  and  the 
six  ancillaries  were  its  trinkets. 

14.  O sages  of  good  holy  rites,  the  Puranas,  Nyaya(  science 
of  logic) , Mimamsa  (treatise  on  holy  rites) , the  Dharma^astras 
(ethical  literature)  were  its  perfect  screen  cloths  and  supports  of 
the  tails.  It  was  equipped  with  all  characteristics. 

15.  The  mantras,  syllables,  feet  and  the  four  stages  in 
life  were  its  bells.  Ananta  the  serpent  adorned  by  his  thousand 
hoods  formed  its  bounding  limit. 

16.  The  quarters  and  the  interstices  were  the  pillars  of 
this  chariot.  The  Puskara  and  other  clouds  were  its  golden 
banners  studded  with  jewels. 

17-18.  The  four  oceans  formed  the  blankets  spread  on 
its  surface.  The  Ganga  and  other  rivers  appeared  splendid  in 
female  forms,  bedecked  in  all  ornaments  and  holding  the  chow- 
ries  in  their  hands.  They  occupied  different  parts  in  the 
chariot  and  rendered  it  beautiful. 

19.  The  seven  layers  of  winds,  Avaha  etc.  were  the 
seven  excellent  golden  steps.  The  charioteer  was  lord  Brahma 
and  he  held  the  reins. 

20-21.  Pranava  with  Brahman  for  its  deity  was  the  whip. 
The  mountain  Lokaloka  was  its  landing  ground  with  stairs  all 
round.  The  splendid  Manasa  mountain  was  its  external  preci- 
pice. The  other  mountains  constituted  its  noses  all  round  [the 
upper  timbers]. 


Construction  of  Rudra's  Chariot 


349 


22.  The  Tala  and  the  residents  thereof  constituted  its 
pigeon  holes,  and  the  pigeons.  The  mountain  Meru  was  the 
great  umbrella  and  the  Mandara  constituted  the  side  drum. 

23.  The  king  of  mountains  (Himavan)  was  his  bow  and 
the  bowstring  was  the  lord  of  serpents  ( Vasuki)  himself,  along 
with  Kalaratri  (the  night  of  nightmares)  and  Indradhanus  (rain- 
bow). 

24.  The  bell  of  the  bow  was  goddess  Sarasvati  of  the  form 
of  the  Srutis  (Vedas).  Visnu  of  great  splendour  was  the  arrow 
and  Soma  (moon)  was  the  spike-head  of  the  arrow. 

25.  The  Kalagni  fire  at  the  end  of  kalpa  was  the  sharp 
and  terrible  point  of  that  arrow.  The  army  originated  from 
the  waters.  The  winds  were  feathers  fixed  to  the  arrow. 

26-27.  After  making  the  divine  chariot,  bow  and  arrows 
with  Brahma  the  lord  of  the  worlds  as  his  charioteer,  Siva 
mounted  the  divine  chariot  wearing  martial  decorations.  He 
was  accompanied  by  the  groups  of  Devas  and  he  shook  heaven 
and  earth  by  his  movements. 

28-31.  Eulogised  by  the  sages  and  saluted  by  the  bards 
the  shining  splendid  lord,  the  bestower  of  boons  occupied  the 
chariot  glancing  at  the  charioteer.  The  groups  of  Apsarases, 
skilled  in  dancing,  danced  in  his  presence  (to  honour  him). 
When  he  got  into  the  chariot,  evolved  out  of  the  different 
material,  the  horse  originating  from  the  Vedas  fell  headlong 
over  the  earth.  The  lord  Dharanidhara  (uplifttr  of  the  earth 
i.e.,  Visnu),  assuming  the  form  of  a leading  bull  lifted  up  the 
chariot  for  a while  and  tried  to  stabilise  it.  But  at  the  next 
moment  even  that  leading  bull  slipped  down  to  the  earth  on 
his  knees. 

32.  At  the  instance  of  the  lord  Siva,  lord  Brahma  who 
held  the  reins  in  his  hands  lifted  up  the  horses  and  steadied  the 
splendid  chariot. 

33.  Then  he  drove  the  horses  that  had  the  speed  of  the 
wind,  towards  the  cities  of  the  swift  and  courageous  Danavas. 
The  cities  till  then  had  peace  and  comfort. 

34.  Thereafter  looking  at  Devas,  lord  Rudra  said; — 


350  Lingapurdna 

‘‘Give  unto  me  the  lordship  of  Pasus.*^®  Then  I shall  kill 
the  Asuras. 

35.  O excellent  Devas,  only  after  assigning  you  a status 
of  animal  souls  distinct  from  that  of  Devas  and  others,  can 
they  be  killed,  not  otherwise,  O excellent  ones.” 

36.  After  hearing  these  words  of  the  intelligent  lord,  all  of 
them  became  suspicious  and  uneasy  over  this  change  and  felt 
great  distress. 

37.  On  realising  their  mental  reaction,  the  lord  spoke  to 
them  thus: — “O  excellent  Devas,  let  there  be  no  fear  or 
misgiving  in  you  in  regard  to  your  becoming  Pai§us. 

38-41.  Now  listen  and  try  to  pursue  the  means  of  libera- 
tion from  the  state  of  Pasu.  He  who  performs  the  divine  holy 
rite  “Pasupata”  will  be  liberated  from  the  state  of  Pas u.  O 
pure  ones,  I solemnly  promise  this  to  you.  O excellent  Devas, 
there  is  no  doubt  in  this  that  those  others  too  who  perform  the 
Pasupata  rite  will  be  liberated  from  the  state  of  a Pa^u.  He 
who  renders  service  steadily  for  twelve  years  or  even  half  that 
period  or  even  three  years  can  be  liberated  from  that  state. 
Hence,  O excellent  Devas,  perform  this  great  and  divine 
rite”. 

42-50.  ‘‘So  be  it”,  said  Devas  to  Siva,  who  is  bowed  to  by 
all  the  worlds.  That  is  why  Devas,  Asuras  and  human  beings 
are  called  Pas  us.  Rudra  is  the  lord  of  Pa^us®^®  and  the  liberator 
of  Pa^us  from  their  bondage.  He  who  is  Pasu,  shall  eschew 
that  state  through  this  holy  rite.  The  scriptures  declare  that 
even  by  committing  sins  he  does  not  become  a sinner. 

628.  paSunam  adhipatyam — lordship  of  the  individual  souls  (jivas); 
Gf.  ‘‘so  *bravid  varaih  vrna  ahamcva  pa^unam  adhipatir  asani’’ — cited  in 
ST. 

629.  Siva  is  named  Pasupati,  the  lord  of  animals.  According  to  the 
legend,  recorded  in  the  present  chapter,  every  deity  was  asked  by  Siva  to 
declare  himself  a mere  Paiu  or  animal  before  Tripuras  could  be  slain  in 
the  battle.  The  Gods  accepted  the  proposal,  declared  themselves  as  animals 
and  fought  brutally.  Lord  ^iva  won  them  the  battle  but  Gods  were  still 
distressed.  The  lord  then  enjoined  the  observance  of  Pasupata  vrata  for  the 
attainment  of  their  release  from  animal  nature. 

This  legend  forms  the  basis  for  the  formulation  of  Pasupata  sect  which 
aims  at  the  release  of  Pa^u  (the  individual  soul)  from  the  bondage  of  re- 
birth. 


Construction  of  Rudra^s  chariot 


351 


Then  Vinayaka  himself,  the  boy  with  the  exploit  of  an 
adult,  forbade  Devas  as  he  had  not  been  duly  worshipped  by 
Devas  and  said  thus — 

Sri  Vinayaka  said: — 

Which  man,  may  he  be  a Deva  or  a Danava,  attains  perfec- 
tion in  this  world  without  worshipping  me  by  means  of  splen- 
did foodstuffs,  edibles,  etc.  Hence,  O leading  Devas,  I will  cause 
impediments  in  a trice  in  your  tasks.  O leading  Devas,  how  is 
it  that  you  had  attempted  to  perform  this  without  worshipping 
me. 

Thereafter  all  Devas  including  Indra  became  frightened. 
After  worshipping  that  lord  and  propitiating  him  with  all  kinds 
of  edibles  and  foodstuffs,  with  loaves  and  sweet-meats  they 
spoke  to  lord  Ganesa — “Let  now  our  task  be  achieved  without 
impediments.” 

Lord  Rudra,  the  chief  of  all  leading  Devas,  embraced  his  son 
and  kissed  him  on  the  head.  He  worshipped  and  propitiated 
Ganesa  with  flowers  of  sweet  fragrance  and  juicy  edibles  and 
foodstuffs. 

After  worshipping  Vinayaka  the  leader  of  chieftains,  worthy 
of  being  worshipped,  lord  Rudra  who  had  the  lord  of  moun- 
tains for  his  bow  started  along  with  the  groups  of  Devas  and  the 
chiefs  of  the  Ganas,  in  order  to  burn  the  three  cities. 

51 . The  groups  of  Devas,  Siddhas,  Bhutas,  Ganas  and  their 
lords  beginning  with  Nandin  followed  I§a,  Mahesvara,  the  lord 
of  Devas,  with  their  respective  vehicles. 

52.  Mounted  on  a chariot  as  huge  as  the  lord  of  mountains, 
Nandin  went  ahead  of  Devas  and  the  chiefs  of  Ganas,  in  order 
to  strike  at  the  trio  of  the  cities,  like  the  great  lord  Isa  going 
ahead  to  strike  the  god  of  Death. 

53.  Mounting  on  lordly  elephants,  huge  bulls  and  stately 
horses,  Devas,  the  lords  of  Ganas,  and  the  Ganas,  with  thier 
respective  weapons  and  symbols  in  their  hands  followed  their 
leader  Nandin. 

54.  Mounting  on . the  lord  of  the  birds  (i.e.  Garu^si)  as 
huge  as  the  lord  of  mountains  the  bird-bannered  lord  Visnu  of 
great  prowess  hurriedly  went  ahead,  on  the  left  side  of  Rudra 
in  order  to  burn  the  three  cities  for  the  welfare  of  the  worlds. 


352 


Lingapurdna 


55.  All  Devas  followed  that  lord  of  the  world,  the  lord  of 
Devas  and  Asuras,  the  incomprehensible  deity,  with  their  ex- 
cellent weapons  such  as  the  sharp  lances,  axes,  iron  clubs, 
tridents  and  swords. 

56.  In  the  middle  of  Devas,  lord  Visnu  whose  vehicle  was 
a bird  and  whose  complexion  was  like  that  of  the  lotus  leaf 
(petal)  shone  in  the  same  manner  as  the  thousand-rayed  fierce 
sun  when  he  ascends  the  peak  of  Sumeru. 

57.  In  order  to  destroy  the  cities,  like  Garuda  who  des- 
troyed the  serpents,  the  thousand-eyed  Indra,  the  first  among 
Devas,  went  ahead  on  the  right  side  of  Rudra.  He  was  seated 
on  his  lordly  elephant. 

58.  The  heroes  of  the  Siddhas,  Gandharvas  and  leading 
Devas  all  round,  eulogised  Indra  who  was  the  bestower  of  des- 
ired objects  and  who  was  the  overlord  of  the  leading  Devas  by 
saying  “Be  victorious.”  They  honoured  him  with  the  excellent 
shower  of  flowers. 

59.  At  that  time  those  who' were  stationed  in  the  heaven 
bowed  to  the  thousand-eyed  Indra,  who  was  the  paramour  of 
Ahalya,  who  was  the  overlord  of  the  universe  and  who  was  the 
leader  of  Devas  after  seeing  him  sporting  like  the  son  of  Uma 
i.e.  Karttikeya. 

60.  Yama,  Fire,  Kubera,  Vayu,  Nirrti,  Varuna  and  Isana 
followed  Rudra. 

61-64.  Virabhadra  who  was  very  efficient  in  battle, 
followed  at  the  south  west  side  of  the  chariot.  He  was  mounted 
on  a huge  bull  and  surrounded  by  the  beings  born  of  his  hairs. 
He  thus  served  the  three-eyed  lord  of  Devas  in  order  to  destroy 
the  Asura  cities.  Mahakala  of  great  splendour  who  appeared 
like  another  Mahadeva,  served  the  chariot  on  its  north-western 
side. 

The  six-faced  deity  Karttikeya  who  resembled  the  king  of 
mountains,  who  was  born  of  the  fire  god,  and  who  was  sur- 
rounded by  the  army  of  Devas,  served  the  chariot  along  with 
the  Siddhas,  Caranas,  warriors  and  elephants. 

65.  After  creating  impediments  unto  the  leading  Asuras 
and  after  removing  obstacles  in  the  case  of  Devas,  lord  Gane^a 
Vighne^vara  went  to  the  camp  of  Isana,  accompanied  by  the 
groups  of  Vighnas  (his  followers) . 


Construction  of  Rudra^s  chariot 


353 


66-67,  At  that  time,  Kali  went  ahead  of  Gane^a  along 
with  the  intoxicated  Pi^acas  and  Gauas.  She  had  skulls  for  her 
ornaments.  Slie  was  whirling  in  her  hand  a trident  that  shone 
like  Kalaratri.  She  was  intoxicated  by  drinking  the  blood  of 
Asuras  which  tasted  like  wine  (unto  her) . She  made  the  lead- 
ing Asuras  tremble.  She  had  the  gait  of  the  elephant  in  rut. 
Her  eyes  were  tremulous  due  to  inebriation.  Her  body  was 
covered  with  the  hide  of  the  elephant. 

68.  Saying  ‘‘Be  victorious”,  the  chiefs  of  the  Siddhas, 
Gandharvas,  Pisacas,  Yaksas,  Vidyadharas,  lordly  serpents  and 
leading  Devas  bowed  to  the  goddess,  the  daughter  of  the 
mountain  of  snow  and  eulogised  her  loudly. 

69.  The  mothers  (Brahini,  Mahesvari,  etc.)  who  were 
respectfully  adored  by  the  groups  of  Devas  and  who  were  bent 
on  killing  the  Raksasas  went  to  the  great  Mother  (Amba, 
Gauri)  on  their  vehicles,  along  with  their  followers  who  held 
banners  all  round. 

70.  Riding  on  a lion,  the  goddess  Durga  went  forth  to 
chastise  Daityas.  The  auspicious  deity  was  one  whose  orders 
could  not  be  transgressed.  In  her  mighty  arms  she  held 
weapons  of  different  kinds  such  as  the  trident,  axe,  goad, 
noose,  discus,  sword  and  couch.  She  burned  and  scorched  the 
pathway  with  her  eyes  as  dazzling  as  thousands  of  midday 
suns  and  fires.  Though  a woman,  her  exploits  were  uncommon 
among  women. 

7 1 . The  leading  chiefs  of  the  Ganas  who  shone  like  the 
lord  of  Devas  and  the  sun,  followed  lord  I^a  on  elophants,  horses, 
lions,  chariots  and  bulls  in  order  to  destroy  the  three  cities. 

72.  Equipped  with  ploughs,  ploughshares,  iron  clubs, 
missiles,  Bhusundas  and  peaks  of  lofty  mountains,  the  lords  of 
Devas  and  the  chiefs  of  goblins  as  huge  as  mountains  went 
ahead  of  Mahesvara, 

73.  Devas,  the  chiefs  of  whom  were  Indra,  the  lotus-born 
Brahma,  Visnu,  and  the  lords  of  Ganas,  surrounding  lord 
Ganeia  on  all  sides,  spoke  the  words,  “Be  victorious”  with 
palms  joined  in  reverence  over  their  coronets. 

74.  With  staffs  in  their  hands  the  sages  with  matted  hairs 
danced.  Siddhas,  Caranas  and  other  heaven-walkers  showered 


354  Lingapurd^a 

flowers.  The  three  cities  echoed  and  reverberated  on  all  sides, 
O leading  brahmins. 

75.  Bhrngi,  the  most  excellent  among  all  the  leading 
Ganas,  w’as  surrounded  by  lords  of  Ganas  and  Devas.  A Yogin, 
he  got  into  an  aerial  and  went  forth  like  Mahendra,  to  destroy 
the  three  cities. 

76-84.  The  following  leaders  of  Ganas  surrounded  I^a 
and  went  forth  to  chastise  the  Tripuras: — Kesa,  Vigatavasas, 
Mahakesa,  Mahajvara,  Somavalli,  Savarna,  Somapa,  Senaka, 
Somadhrk,  Suryavaca,  Suryapesanaka,  Suryaksa,  Surinama, 
Sura,  Sundara,  Prakuda,  Kakudanta,  Kampana,  Prakampana, 
Indra,  Indrajaya,  Mahabhl,  Bhimaka,  Sataksa,  Pancaksa, 
Sahasraksa,  Mahodara,  Yamajihva,  Satasva,  Kunthana,  Kan- 
thapujana,  Dvisikha,  Trifikha,  Pancaiikha,  Munda,  Ardha- 
munda,  Dirgha,  Pisacasya,  Pinakadhrk,  Pippalayatana, 
Ahgaraka^ana,  Sithila,  Sithilasya,  Aksapada,  Aja,  Kuja,  Aja- 
vaktra,  Hayavaktra,  Gajavaktra,  Crdhvavaktra  and  others. 
They  surrounded  lord  Soma  in  groups  and  went  ahead.  There 
were  thousands  and  thousands  of  Rudras  of  sublimated  sexu- 
ality, Surrounded  by  crores  and  crores  of  Ganas  they  rallied 
round  Mahadeva,  Mahesvara,  the  lord  of  Devas  and  went 
forth  to  burn  the  three  cities. 

85.  The  thirty  three,  the  three  hundred  and  three  and 
three  thousand  and  three  Devas  went  forth  on  all  sides. 

86.  The  mothers  of  the  world,  the  mothers  of  Ganas, 
and  the  mothers  of  the  Bhutas  followed  the  lord. 

87.  Seated  in  the  middle  of  the  chariot  amongst  Ganas  the 
lord  of  the  Ganas  shone  like  the  moon  amongst  stars  and 
constellations. 

88.  Goddess  Gauri,  the  daughter  of  the  Himalaya,  identical 
with  the  worlds,  was  seated  on  the  left  side  of  the  lord.  She 
shone  forth  as  though  due  to  the  splendour  of  lord  Siva. 

89.  The  goddess,  of  auspicious  marks,  on  the  left  side  of 
the  lord,  shone  with  the  tips  of  her  hands  holding  the  chowries. 
She  had  the  lustre  and  colour  of  the  golden  lotus. 

90.  The  pure  white  body  of  the  supreme  lord,  the  lord  of 
Devas,  was  shining  with  Bhasman.  In  the  company  of  Ambika 
it  shone  like  the  white  cloud  in  the  sky  with  the  streaks  of 
lightning. 


Construction  of  Rudra's  chariot 


355 


91.  The  gentle  body  of  lord  Siva,  having  the  lustre  of  the 
moon  shone  with  the  golden  bow  like  the  sky  that  shines  with 
the  rainbow  or  the  universe  that  shines  witli  the  Meru 
mountain. 

92.  His  white  umbrella  interspersed  with  the  rays  of  jewels 
shone  like  the  full  disc  of  the  moon  at  the  time  of  its  rising. 

93.  The  gem-set  necklace  round  the  neck  of  Siva  suspen- 
ded along  with  his  silken  upper  cloth  near  the  extremity  of 
the  umbrella  shone  like  the  excellent  river  Gahga  falling  from 
the  sky. 

94.  Then  the  lord  whose  lotus-like  feet  were  bowed  to 
by  Indra,  Brahma,  fire-god  and  others,  went  to  the  three 
cities  along  with  Amba  for  the  welfare  of  the  world. 

95.  The  trident- bearing  lord  is  competent  to  burn  mentally, 
within  a trice,  the  entire  universe  including  the  mobile  and 
immobile  beings.  Why  should  then  the  Pinaka-bearing  lord  go 
there  himself  along  with  the  Ganas  in  order  to  burn  the  three 
cities  ? 

96.  Devas,  Visnu,  Brahma  and  Indra  said: — “Of  what 
avail  is  the  chariot  to  Sambhu  ? Of  what  avail  is  the  excellent 
arrow  to  him  ? What  has  he  to  do  with  the  groups  of  Devas  ? He 
is  never  wanting  in  power  to  burn  the  three  cities.  Then  what 
is  this? 

97.  We  think  that  just  for  his  pastime  the  Pinakabear- 
ing  lord  set  about  doing  all  these  things.  Otherwise,  what 
other  benefit  has  he  to  derive  from  this  elaborate  show  ? 

98.  Delighted  in  the  company  of  leading  Devas  and 
Ganas  headed  by  lord  Nandin,  and  with  the  universe  for  his 
chariot  he  shone  along  with  the  goddess,  like  the  mountain 
Meru  with  its  eight  peaks.  He  shone  thus  as  he  neared  the 
three  cities. 

99.  On  seeing  Kvara,  the  lord  of  Devas  seated  in  the 
arena  of  the  three  cities  along  with  Ganas  and  the  daughter  of 
Himavat,  the  group  of  Devas  followed  him. 

100.  O leading  sages,  the  three  cities  appeared  like  ano- 
ther set  of  the  three  worlds  (because  it  was  occupied)  by 
leading  men,  the  Ganas,  Devas  and  the  three  kinds  of  Asuras. 

101.  Then  Sarva  tied  up  the  string  of  the  bow,  fitted  the 


356  Lingapurdna 

arrow,  joined  it  with  the  miraculous  missile  pertaining  to 
Pa^upati  and  thought  of  the  three  cities. 

102.  When  the  great  lord  stood  ready  with  the  bow  well- 
drawn,  the  three  cities  merged  into  one. 

103.  When  the  three  cities  had  attained  fusion  into  one, 
the  delight  of  the  noble-souled  deities  was  tumultuous  and 
excited. 

104.  Eulogising  the  deity  with  eight  cosmic  bodies,  all 
the  groups  of  Devas,  Siddhas  and  sages  shouted  the  words, 
‘‘Be  victorious’*. 

105.  Even  when  the  auspicious  Pusyayoga  was  attained, 
the  lord,  the  husband  of  Uma,  who  had  destroyed  the  eye  of 
Bhaga  indulged  in  sportive  pastime.  Then  lord  Brahma  spoke 
to  him: — 

106.  O Mahadeva,  Paramesvara,  this  gesture  on  your 
part  is  but  proper,  since,  O lord,  Asuras  and  Devas  are  equal  to 
you. 

107.  Still,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  Devas  are  virtuous  and 
asuras  are  sinful,  it  behoves  you,  O lord  of  the  universe,  to 
eschew  your  sportive  pastime. 

108.  O Isa,  O lord,  of  what  avail  is  the  chariot,  or  the 
banner  or  the  arrow,  or  Visnu,  or  I or  even  these  goblins  unto 
you  for  burning  the  three  cities  ? 

109-113.  It  behoves  you  to  burn  the  trio  of  the  cities  even 
as  the  Pusya  conjunction  still  prevails.  O lord  of  Devas,  it 
behoves  you  to  burn  the  three  cities  quickly  lest  they  should 
get  separated.  Then  the  great  lord  Virupaksa,  glanced  at  the 
three  cities.  Instantaneously  they  were  reduced  to  ashes.  All 
those  deities,  viz..  Soma  (Moon),  lord  Visnu,  Kalagni  (Black 
fire)  and  Vayu  who  were  stationed  in  the  arrow  bowed  down 
to  the  lord  and  said: — “O  lord  of  Devas,  although  the  trio  of 
the  cities  has  been  burned  by  your  glance  it  behoves  you  to 
discharge  the  arrow  for  our  welfare.”  Thereupon  O leading 
brahmins,  I^vara,  Tripurardana,  laughingly  brushed  the 
string  of  the  bow,  pulled  it  as  far  as  his  ear  and  discharged 
the  arrow. 

114-121.  Afterburning  the  three  cities  in  a moment  the 
arrow  that  brought  about  the  destruction  of  the  Tripuras  came 
back  to  the  lord  of  Devas,  bowed  to  him  and  stood  by.  The 


Constmction  of  Rudra^s  chariot 


357 


three  cities  that  contained  hundreds  of  crores  of  Daityas, 
on  being  burned  by  that  arrow,  shone  like  the  three  worlds 
burned  by  Rudra  at  the  end  of  the  kalpa.  Those  Daityas  who 
had  been  worshipping  Rudra  even  at  that  stage  along  with 
their  kinsmen,  attained  the  chieftainship  of  the  Ganas,  thanks 
to  the  power  of  the  duly  performed  worship.  Devas  including 
Indra  and  Visnu  and  the  lords  of  Ganas,  looked  at  the  lord 
and  the  goddess,  the  daughter  of  the  Himavat  with  awe  and 
fear.  They  did  not  say  anything.  On  seeing  Devas  thus  fright- 
ened, the  leading  Deva,  i.e.,  Rudra  asked  them,  ‘'What 
next  ?”  But  they  merely  bowed  to  him  from  all  sides.  They 
saluted  Nandin  who  had  the  moon  for  his  ornament.  They 
saluted  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  mountains.  They  saluted 
the  son  of  the  daughter  of  the  mountain,  v^iz.,  Ganesa.  They 
saluted  Mahesvara.  With  due  attention,  Brahma  eulogised 
lord  Bhava,  Isvara  the  enemy  of  Tripuras,  along  with  Devas 
and  Visnu. 

Brahma  said: 

122.  Be  pleased,  O lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas;  be  pleased, 
O Paramesvara;  be  pleased,  O lord  of  the  worlds;  be  pleased, 
O eternal  lord,  the  bestower  of  bliss. 

123.  O Rudra  of  five  faces,  obeisance  to  you;  obeisance  to 
one  who  has  fifty  crores  of  physical  forms;  obeisance  to  the 
principle  of  learning,  seated  on  the  threefold  Atman. 

124.  Obeisance  to  Siva,  to  the  principle  of  Siva;  obeisance 
to  Aghora;  obeisance  to  the  principle  of  the  set  of  eight  forms*^® 
Aghora  and  others;  obeisance  to  one  of  the  form  of  twelve®'^^ 
Atmans. 

125.  Obeisance  to  the  Atman  of  Siva  stationed  in  this 
world  after  adopting  the  splendid  form  that  resembles  crores  of 
lightnings  and  that  has  sway  over  the  eight  quarters. 

126.  Obeisance  to  the  fierce  one  of  fiery  complexion; 
obeisance  to  one  with  Ambika  occupying  half  of  his  body; 
obeisance  to  the  immortal  being ; to  the  bestower  of  salvation 
unto  those  of  white,  black  and  red  colour. 

630.  aghora$taka-tattvaya— the  set  of  eight  forms  beginning  with 
Aghora. 

631.  dvadaiatma — the  sun  ST. 


358 


Lingapurd^a 


127.  Obeisance  to  the  Eldest  one  in  the  form  of  Rudra; 
to  the  deity  accompanied  by  Uma;  to  the  bestower  of  boons; 
obeisance  to  the  deity  of  the  three  worlds;  obeisance  to  the 
Trinity;  obeisance  to  Vasatkara. 

128.  Obeisance  to  the  one  of  the  form  of  firmament  in  the 
middle;  obeisance  to  you  stationed  in  the  firmament;  obei- 
sance to  the  deity  with  eight  forms®®^  in  the  eight  shrines 
obeisance  to  one  having  eight  principles. 

129.  Obeisance  to  one  stationed  in  three  different  sets  of 
four  and  two  different  sets  of  five;®*^®  obeisance  to  one 
having  five  mantras  as  his  physical  form. 

130.  Obeisance  to  the  letter  “A”,  of  sixtyfour®^’  types; 
obeisance  to  the  letter  ‘‘U”  of  the  form  of  thirty  two®"*®  princi- 
ples. 

131.  Obeisance  to  the  letter  “M**,  having  the  sixteen 
forms®®®  of  the  Atman ; obeisance  to  the  deity  in  the  eight 
forms®®®  of  half  a Matra. 

132.  Obeisance  to  you,  to  the  Omkara  stationed  in  four®®^ 
ways ; obeisance  to  the  lord  of  the  firmament,  to  the  lord  of 
heaven. 

133.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  having  the  seven  worlds  (as  his 
form) ; obeisance  to  the  lord  of  the  Patala  (Nether-worlds)  and 
Naraka  (hell) ; obeisance  to  the  deity  having  eight  forms  in  the 
eight®®^  holy  shrines;  obeisance  to  the  deity  greater  than  the 
greatest. 

1 34.  Obeisance  to  you  having  a thousand  heads ; obeisance 
to  you  who  stays  in  thousands  (i.e.,  in  many  forms);  obeisance 

632.  a9ta-k?etra — right  stations,  sun,  etc. 

633*  ®lglit  shrines — Rudra,  etc. 

634*  eight  tattvas,  eight  elements,  earth,  etc. 

635.  It  refers  to  four  Vedas,  four  airamas  and  four  vyuhas. 

636.  It  refers  to  five  mahabhutas,  five  forms,  Sadyojata,  etc.,  and  Bve 
mantras. 

637.  It  refers  to  the  syllable  ‘a’  and  its  sixtyfour  divisions. 

638.  It  refers  to  the  *u’  and  its  thirtytwo  kinds. 

639.  It  refers  to  the  syllable  ‘m’  and  its  sixteen  divisions. 

640.  It  refers  to  the  eight-formed  8iva. 

641.  It  refers  to  the  syllables  *a’,  *u*,  and  nada  sound. 

642.  It  refers  to  the  eight  forms  of  Siva,  such  as  consist  of  earth, 
water,  fire,  etc. 


Construction  of  Rudrd's  chariot 


359 


to  Sarva  possessing  a thousand  feet ; obeisance  to  Paramesthin. 

135.  Obeisance  to  one  with  the  form  of  nine®^^  principles 
of  the  Atman;  obeisance  to  one  having  nine  times  eight®®® 
Atmans  and  Atma^aktis;  obeisance  to  one  having  eight®®® 
modes  of  revelation;  obeisance  to  one  having  eight  times  eight®®® 
physical  forms. 

136.  Obeisance  to  one  possessing  sixtyfour®®^  principles  of 
the  Atman,  obeisance  to  one  (stationed)  in  eight®®®  different 
forms;  obeisance  to  one  encompassed  by  the  eight  Gunas;®®® 
obeisance  to  one  the  Saguna  as  well  as  Nirguna. 

137.  Obeisance  to  you  stationed  at  the  root;  obeisance  to 
the  resident  of  the  eternal  abode;  obeisance  to  one  stationed  in 
the  umbilical  regions ; obeisance  to  one  who  causes  sounds  in 
the  heart. 

138.  Obeisance  to  one  stationed  in  the  neck;  to  one  who  is 
stationed  in  the  aperture  of  the  cymbals;  to  one  stationed  in 
the  middle  of  the  eyebrows;  to  one  stationed  in  the  middle  of 
sounds. 

139.  Obeisance  to  Siva  stationed  in  the  disc  of  the  moon; 
to  one  of  auspicious  forms;  to  one,  having  the  forms  of  fire, 
moon  and  the  sun;  obeisance  to  one  having  the  form  of  the 
thirtysix®'*^’  Saktis. 

140.  Obeisance  to  one  who  is  the  Atman  of  the  Serpent 
that  is  asleep  after  encircling  the  worlds  three  times;  obeisance 
to  one  stationed  in  three  different  forms;  obeisance  to  one  with 
the  forms  of  threefold  (sacrificial)  fires. 

141.  Obeisance  to  Sadasiva;  to  the  Pinaka-bearing  quie- 
scent Mahesa;  obeisance  to  the  omniscient  one;  worthy  of  being 
sought  refuge  in;  obeisance  to  Sadyojata. 

142.  Obeisance  to  Aghora;  to  Vamadeva;  to  latpurusa, 
and  to  Tsana. 

643.  It  refers  to  his  nine  forms.  Gf.  Mbh  : puru§a^  prakrtir  vyaktam 
ahamkaro  nabho’  nilah  / jyotir  apok§itir  iti  tattvanyuktani  te  nava. 

644.  It  refers  to  the  seventytwo  forms  not  mentioned  by  name. 

64^.  i.c.,  manifesting  in  syllables  through  the  eight  organs  of  speech. 

646.  astastaka-murtaye,  i.c.,  of  the  form  of  64  syllables. 

647.  i.e.  the  life-principle  of  sixtyfour  yoginis. 

648.  astavidhaya— of  eight  forms  or  names,  Bhava,  etc.  ...... 

649.  gunSstaka-vrtaya — invested  with  eight  gup  as.  Gf.  “samkhyamkah 
panca  buddhir  icchayatno’pi  cciivarah*’ — J^ySyasiddhSnta-nmktdvali  cited  in 
ST, 

650.  The  text  docs  not  mention  the  names  of  the  thirty -six  Saktis. 


360 


Lingapurdna 


143.  Obeisance  to  one  having  thirty®^^  modes  of  revela- 
tion; obeisance  to  one  beyond  Santa  (the  digit  of  that  name)  ; 
obeisance  to  the  lord  Ananta  to  the  subtle  and  tlic  excellent 
one. 

144.  Obeisance  to  you,  the  single-eyed;  obeisance  to  you, 
the  Ekarudra;  obeisance  to  you,  the  trinity;®’-  to  Srikaiitha;  to 
Sikhandin  (the  tufted  one). 

145.  Obeisance  to  the  Infinite  one;  to  one  stationed  in 
the  seat  of  the  Infinite;  obeisance  to  the  cause  of  destruction; 
obeisance  to  one  devoid  of  impurities;  obeisance  to  the  large 
one ; obeisance  to  you  of  pure  body. 

146.  Obeisance  to  one  stationed  in  the  seat  devoid  of  im- 
purities;®'** obeisance  to  one  of  the  form  of  wcahh  for  the  pure 
purpose;  obeisance  to  the  yogin  stationed  in  yogapithas;  obei- 
sance to  the  bes tower  of  yoga. 

147.  Obeisance  to  one  stationed  in  the  heart  of  yogins  like 
the  awn  of  the  wild  rice  Nivara;  obeisance  to  you  the  Pratya- 
hara,  to  you  engaged  in  Pratyahara. 

148-149.  Obeisance  to  one  stationed  in  the  heart  of  those 
who  are  engaged  in  Pratyahara,  and  Dharana  (retention) and 
Dhyana  (meditation)  ; of  the  form  of  Dharana  and  Dhyana; 
and  to  one  who  is  comprehensible  througli  Dhyana. 

150.  Obeisance  to  one  worthy  of  meditation.  Obeisance  to 
one  approachable  through  meditation;  obeisance  to  you  of  lau- 
dable meditation;  obeisance  to  one  worthy  of  meditation  even 
by  those  who  themselves  are  worthy  of  meditation;  obeisance 
to  you  the  worthiest  of  those  who  are  worthy  of  meditation 
by  others. 

151.  Obeisance  to  one  worthy  of  approach  through  contem- 
plation; obeisance  to  you,  who  are  contemplc.tion  itself;  obei- 
sance to  one  in  the  form  of  Nirvikalpa  object  unto  those  who 
are  engaged  in  meditation. 

152.  O Rudra,  by  burning  the  three  cities  this  entire  set  of 
the  three  worlds  has  been  redeemed  by  you  today.  Who  will 

651.  triiiiiatprak^^flya — one  who  shines  throughout  the  thirty 
muhurtas,  i.e.  ever  shining. 

652.  i.e.  in  the  form  of  Brahma,  Vi^nu  and  Rudra. 

653.  Verses  145-149  speak  of  his  yogic  postures,  viz.  asana,  pratyS- 
bSra,  dhkranH,  dhyana  and  sam&dhi. 


Construction  of  Rudra^s  Chariot 


361 


dare  to  eulogise  you  (befittingly)  ? How  shall  I eulogise  you 
who  are  of  this  extraordinary  nature  ? Obeisance  to  you  O 
delightful  Siva. 

153.  O lord  of  Devas,  thanks  to  their  devotion,  contentment 
and  vision  of  miracle,  that  the  mortals,  immortals,  Ganas,  and 
Siddhas,  make  obeisance  to  you.  O lord  of  Ganas,  obeisance  to 
you. 

154.  O lord,  you  are  competent  to  burn  the  three  cities, 
nay  even  the  three  worlds  by  a single  glance  of  yours.  Leisurely 
sporting  with  Ambika,  you  have  burned  them  in  a trice;  and 
the  arrow  too  was  discharged. 

155.  For  your  work  of  annihilating  the  Tripuras,  I made 
with  great  deal  of  effort  the  excellent  chariot,  the  speedy 
arrow  and  the  splendid  bow;  but  the  benefit  thereof  was  not 
seen  by  Devas  as  well  as  Siddhas. 

156.  O lord,  you  are  all  these  combined: —the  chariot, 
the  charioteer,  Visnu  the  excellent  Deva  Rudra  himself,  Sakti 
and  Pitaraaha.  How  shall  I adequately  eulogise  you?  I bow 
down  my  head  to  you,  who  cannot  be  adequately  pro- 
pitiated.®^* 

157.  O lord,  you  have  infinite  number  of  feet,  infinite 
number  of  arms,  infinite  number  of  heads  and  infinite  number 
of  forms.  You  are  the  annihilator  as  well  as  the  auspicious  one. 
Shall  I propitiate  you  of  this  nature?  How  shall  I please  you, 
who  are  of  this  nature  ? 

158.  Obeisance  to  you,  the  knower  of  everything;  obei- 
sance to  you  Rudra,  Sarva  and  Bhava;  obeisance  to  the  gross, 
to  the  subtle,  to  the  subtler  than  the  subtlest;  to  the  creator 
and  to  one  conversant  with  the  subtle  meaning. 

159.  Obeisance  to  the  creator,  sustainer  and  the  annihila- 
tor of  all  Devas  and  Asuras;  obeisance  to  the  creator  of  the 
worlds,  to  the  leader  of  Devas  and  the  lord  of  Asuras.  Obeisance 
to  the  giver,  to  the  ruler,  to  the  chastiser  of  all. 

160.  Obeisance  to  the  purest  one  comprehensible  only 
through  Vedanta;  obei  sance  to  one  continuously  eulogised  by 
those  who  know  the  meanings  of  Vedas;  obeisance  to  Bhava  in 

554.  ato9yam — tofayitum  aiakyam.  According  to  ST,  ^one  who 
cannot  bedescribca  by  speech  or  conceived  by  the  mind.*  Cf.  *^yato  v&co 
nivartante  apr^pya  manasa  saha” — cited  in  ST . 


362  Lingapur&f^ 

the  form  of  the  Atman  of  the  Vedas;  obeisance  to  you,  to  the 
last  one,  to  the  middle  one,  to  the  upper  one. 

161.  Obeisance  to  one  who  is  devoid  of  a beginning  or  an 
end;  to  one  who  exists;  to  one  devoid  of  expressibility;  to  the 
Lihgin  (one  having  a Lihga  form) ; obeisance  to  you  who  have 
no  symbols  and  yet  are  identical  with  the  Lihga;  to  Lihga 
identical  with  Veda,  etc. 

162.  Obeisance  to  Rudra  who  had  severed  my  head — I am 
the  primordial  lord  and  yajnamurti  (one  whose  form  is  yajna) . 
O lord,  it  was  for  dispelling  my  darkness  that  you  had  severed 
my  head*  by  the  tip  of  your  finger  on  observing  my  crime  which 
deserved  that  punishment. 

163.  O lord  of  Devas,  O lord  of  Asuras,  wonderful  indeed 
are  your  activities.  O deity  devoid  of  attributes  and  forms,  like 
an  embodied  soul  you  will  carry  out  the  task  of  Devas  along 
with  them. 

164.  Among  your  tattvas  one  is  gross;®®®  one  is  subtle;  one 
is  very  subtle;  one  is  both  embodied  and  unembodied;  one  is 
embodied;  one  is  unembodied;  one  is  visible;  and  one  is  in- 
visible and  one  is  worthy  of  being  meditated  upon,  the  wonder- 
ful I^a. 

165.  O lord,  what  is  seen  in  a dre;.  n is  an  uncharac tended 
object;  I think  that  it  certainly  appears  as  well  as  does  not  ap- 
pear; Your  divine  form  cannot  be  perceived  even  by  Devas,  in 
spite  of  their  efforts.  Yet  appears  in  the  visible  lihga  form. 

166.  O lord  of  Devas,  • . ■ .ere  is  your  divine  prowess  ? Where 
are  we  ? Where  is  devotion  ? \ 'here  is  your  eulogy  ? Still,  O 
lord,  forgive  me  who  though  a primeval  being  am  lamenting, 
inspired  by  devotion, 

Sut<  ^aid:  — 

ii/  V.  O excellent  brahmins,  he  who  lisiciib  lo  this  hymn  of 
the  chastiser  of  Pura.s.  or  he  who  reads  it  alter  bowing  to  the 
lord  on  the  ground  eschews  the  boiidage  of  ^^ins. 

♦ This  is  contradicted  in  Sp,  p.  58. 

655.  The  verse  explains  the  characteristics  of  each  of  the  eight 
forms  of  Siva,  viz.,  gross  (earth),  subtle  (water),  subtler  (fire),  manifCst- 
unmanifest  (moon),  manifest  (sun) , unmanifest  (wind),  having  the  quality 
of  sound  (ether),  and  the  object  of  meditation  (dhyeyam  i4am)  on  the 
part  of  the  mind. 


Construction  ojRudrd*s  Chariot 


363 


168.  On  hearing  this  hymn,  the  mighty-armed  resident  of 
the  peak  of  Matidara  who  was  eulogised  devotedly  by  the  four- 
faced deity  looked  laughingly  at  the  daughter  of  the  mountain 
and  said  to  Brahma  of  great  exalted  dignity. 

Siva  said: — 

169.  O lotus-born  one,  I am  delighted  by  this  hymn  as 
well  as  by  your  devotion.  Welfare  unto  you.  Choose  the  boons 
in  accordance  with  the  desire  of  Devas. 

Siita  said  : 

170.  Thereupon,  after  bowing  to  the  lord  of  Devas,  the 
lotus-born  deity  became  delighted  in  his  mind  and  spoke  with 
palms  joined  in  reverence. 

Brahma  said  : 

171.  O lord  Sankara,  O lord  of  the  cliiefs  of  Devas,  O 
destroyer  of  Tripuras,  O Paramesvara,  be  pleased  to  confer  on 
me  the  greatest  devotion  towards  you. 

172.  O lord,  the  bestower  of  all  riches  on  all  Devas.  Be 
pleased  with  our  devotion  towards  you  always  as  well  as  with 
my  charioteership. 

173.  Lord  Visnu  also  bowed  down  to  Mahes vara.  Joining 
his  palms  together  in  reverence  he  said  thus  to  the  three-eyed 
lord  accompanied  by  Uma. 

174-175.  ‘‘O  lord,  be  pleased  with  me.  O lord  of  Devas, 

obeisance  be  to  you.  I perpetually  desire  to  be  your  vehicle. 
1 wish  for  your  devotion  as  well  as  my  efficiency  to  bear  you. 
O Sankara,  the  bestower  of  boons,  I wish  for  omniscience  and 
all-pervasiveness. 

Suta  said  : 

176.  On  hearing  their  submission  Paramesvara,  Mahadeva, 
Bhava  engaged  them  respectively  in  charioteership  and  the 
position  of  vehicle. 

177.  After  burning  Daityas,  and  after  giving  boons  to 
Brahma  and  \^i§nu,  Siva,  the  noble-souled  lord  of  Devas, 
vanished  along  with  the  goddess,  Bhutas  and  Nandin. 


364 


Lingapura^a 


178-179.  When  the  lord  had  gone  awdy  from  the  battle- 
field along  with  his  Ganas,  the  awe-struck  lords  of  Devas 
bowed  down  to  Bhava  and  Parvati.  They  became  devoid  of 
misery  and  returned  to  heaven  on  their  vehicles.  The  lords  of 
Devas,  the  chiefs  of  sages,  the  lords  of  Ganas  and  Bhaskaras 
went  to  heaven. 

180-184.  O brahmins,  he  who  reads  this  chapter  on  the 
exploits  of  the  destroyer  of  Tripuras,  originally  composed  by 
Brahma  formerly  or  he  who  narrates  this  devotedly  to  the  brah- 
mins at  the  time  of  !§raddha  or  during  the  rites  of  Devas 
goes  to  the  world  of  Brahma.  O excellent  brahmins,  the  indi- 
vidual soul  is  liberated  from  all  kinds  of  sins  mental,  physical 
or  verbal.  He  is  liberated  from  the  principal  as  well  as  subsi- 
diary sins,  gross,  subtle  or  subtlest  on  hearing  this  splendid 
chapter.  His  enemies  will  perish  and  he  will  be  victorious  in 
battle.  He  will  never  be  harassed  by  any  sickness.  Adversities 
will  not  afflict  him.  He  shall  attain  wealth,  longevity,  renown, 
learning  and  incomparable  prowess. 


CHAPTER  SEVENTYTHREE 

Glory  of  worshipping  ^liva 

Siita  said  : 

1.  When  lord  Mahesvara  departed  thence  after  burning 
the  three  cities  in  a trice  the  lotus-born  deity  (Brahma)  spoke 
thus  in  the  assembly  of  the  leading  Devas. 

Brahma  said  : 

2-6.  Due  to  the  Maya  of  Lord  Visiiu  the  following  Daityas 
forsook  Mahadeva  and  perished  along  with  their  cities  and 
citizens.  They  were  the  grandson  of  Tara  of  great  brilliance, 
the  powerful  son  of  Taraka,  the  asura  Tarakaksa,  the  powerful 
Kamalaksa,  Vidyunmalin,  the  lord  of  Daityas  and  many  others 
along  with  kith  and  kin.  They  left  the  worship  of  the  lord 
Mahe^vara  and  so  they  perished.  Hence  Sadasiva  in  the  Lihga 
form  should  always  be  worshipped  since  Devas  have  stability 


Glory  of  Worshipping  Siva 


365 


only  as  long  as  they  worship  the  lord.  Siva  should  always  be 
adored  by  the  leading  Devas  with  faith.  The  entire  world  is 
based  on  the  Lihga.  Everything  is  founded  in  the  Lihga. 

7-9.  Hence,  he  who  wishes  for  perfection  of  the  soul  shall 
worship  the  Lihga.  It  Is  only  through  the  worship  of  the  Lihga 
that  Devas,  Daityas,  Danavas,  Yaksas,  Vidyadharas,  Siddhas, 
Pisitaianas,  Pitrs,  Sages,  Piiacas,  Kinnaras  and  others  have 
undoubtedly  achieved  Siddhi.  Hence,  O Devas,  by  any  means 
whatsoever  one  should  always  worship  the  Lihga. 

1 0-2 1 . The  holy  rite  Pdiupaia, 

VVe  are  all  Pas  us  of  that  intelligent  lord  of  Devas.  Eschewing 
Pasutva  and  adopting  the  holy  rite  Pasupata,  the  eternal 
Mahadeva  in  the  Lihga  form  should  be  worshipped.  The  five 
elements  should  be  cleansed  simultaneously  by  means  of  fivc®"*^ 
Pranavas  along  with  five  Pranayamas  (control  of  breath), 
C)  leading  Devas.  Then  the  process  should  be  repeated  with 
four  Pranavas;  then  with  three;  and  then  with  two,  always 
accompanied  with  an  equal  number  of  Pranayamas.  He  shall 
then  utter  Oihkara  and  control  the  Prana  and  Apana.  Pie  shall 
fill  all  the  limbs  with  the  nectar  of  perfect  knowledge  as  well  as 
Pranava.  He  shall  then  purify  the  three  Gunas,  the  fourth 
called  Ahamkara  (ego)®^’  and  the  tanrnatras,  O Devas  of 
good  holy  rites.  Then  he  shall  cleanse  the  elements,  the  organs 
of  sense  and  the  organs  of  action.  After  cleansing  the  two,®** 
viz.,  the  Purusa  and  the  Cidatman  he  shall  repeat  “Agnih 
Bhasma”  (the  fire  is  the  Ash)  and  touch  the  body  (?)  He  shall 
tlien  say  similarly  that  the  wind,  ether,  water  and  earth  are 
ashes  and  then  smear  his  body  with  ashes  during  the  three 
sandhyas  throughout  life.  (By  doing  so)  one  becomes  a Yogin 
conversant  with  all  tattvas  (principles).  This  is  the  Pasupata 
vrata)  pertaining  to  Siva.  O excellent  Devas,  it  was  for  the 
liberation  from  bondage  that  this  has  been  mentioned  by  the 
lord  himself.  By  performing  the  Pasupata  rite  in  this  manner 
and  by  worshipping  the  great  lord  in  the  Lihga  formerly  seen 

656.  i.c,  the  five  pranSyamas  preceded  by  the  five  pranavas  (om 
syllables) . 

657.  fourfold,  viz.,  manas  (mind),  buddhi  (intellect),  aharfikara(cgo), 
and  citta  (consciousness). 

658.  the  two  puru^as  : taijasa  (the  universal)  and  prajfia  (the  in- 
dividual) soul. 


366 


Lingapurdna 


by  me  and  the  noble-souled  Visnu,  O Devas,  people  cease  to 
be  Pasus  within  a year.  All  rites  should  be  performed  assi- 
duously by  us  after  worshipping  lord  I^vara  externally  and 
internally.  O excellent  Devas,  this  is  my  divine  vow  as  weH  as 
that  of  Vismi. 

22-25.  There  is  no  doubt  that  it  is  the  vow  of  the  sages 
also.  Hence  one  should  worship  Siva.  If  one  does  not  think 
about  ihr%  only  God  Siva,  even  for  a moment,  it  is  a loss,  it 
is  a great  blemish,  it  is  delusion,  it  is  silence.  Those  who 
indulge  in  devotion  to  him,  those  who  mentally  bow  down  to 
him,  and  those  who  attempt  to  remember  Bhava  arc  never 
subjected  to  misery.  The  fruit  of  the  worship  of  Siva  is  as 
follows  : — Pleasant  and  charming  abodes,  divine  ornaments, 
women,  and  riches  till  one  is  satisfied.  May  those  who  wish  for 
enjoyment  of  great  pleasures  or  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  worship 
Mahe^vara  in  the  Lihga  form,  at  all  times. 

26-29.  Even  after  striking  and  destroying  all  living  beings, 
and  after  burning  this  entire  universe  if  one  should  worship  the 
only  God  Virupaksa  (i.e.  Siva),  one  is  never  tarnished  with 
sins. 

After  saying,  ‘ My  Linga  is  made  of  rock,  it  is  bowed  to  l^y 
all  Devas,”  Brahma  worshipped  Rudra,  the  lord  of  the  three 
worlds  at  the  outset  and  eulogised  the  three-eyed  lord  of  Devas 
with  pleasing  words.  Ever  since  then,  Indra  and  others  too  wor- 
shipped the  lord  directly  after  performing  the  Pasupata  rite 
and  smearing  their  bodies  with  ashes. 


CHAPTER  SEVENTYFOUR 

Description  of  Siva  Lingas 


SUta  said  ; 

1.  At  the  bidding  of  Lord  Brahma,  Vi^vakarma  made  the 
following  Lingas  befitting  the  office  of  Devas  and  gave  those 
Lingas  to  them. 


Description  of  jSiva  Litigas 


367 


2.  The  Lihga  made  of  Sapphire  was  worshipped  by  Visnu. 
Indra  worshipped  that  of  ruby.  The  son  of  Vi^ravas  worshipped 
the  Lihga  made  of  gold, 

3.  Visvedevas  worshipped  Silver  Lihga,  Vasus  the  aus- 
picious magnetic  Lihga,  Vayu  the  Lihga  made  of  brass ; and 
Asvins  the  Earthen  Lihga. 

4.  King  Varuna  worshipped  the  crystal  Lihga;  Adilyas 
ihe  excellent  Lihga  made  of  copper,  and  king  Soma  the  excel- 
lent Lihga  made  of  pearls. 

5.  Ananta  and  the  other  great  serpents  worshipped  the 
Lihga  of  coral;  Daityas  and  Raksasas  the  ferrous  Lihga, 

6.  Guhyakas  worshipped  the  Lihga  of  three  metals,  Ganas 
that  made  of  all  metals  and  O excellent  brahmins,  Camunda 
and  Mothers  worshipped  the  Lihga  of  Sand. 

7.  Nairrti  worshipped  the  Lihga  of  wood;  Yama  that  of 
emerald;  Nila rudra  and  others  the  pure  and  splendid  Lihga 
made  ofBhasman  (ashes). 

8.  Laksmi  worshipped  the  Lihga  of  Laksmivrksa  (Bilva 
tree)  ; Guha  the  Lihga  of  cowdung.  O leading  sages,  the  sages 
worshipped  the  excellent  Lihga  of  Kusa  grass. 

9.  Vamadeva  and  others  worshipped  the  Puspa  lihga 
and  Manonmani  the  Lihga  made  of  scents.  Sarasvati  wor- 
shipped the  Lihga  made  of  jewels. 

10.  Durga  worshipped  the  Lihga  made  of  gold  along  with 
the  pedestal.  All  the  Mantras  worshipped  Ugra  in  the  form  of 
sacrifice  with  the  splendid  Lihga  made  of  ghee. 

11.  The  Vedas  worshipped  the  Lihga  of  curds;  P-'acas  the 
Lihga  of  lead.  All  the  worshippers  attained  the  suitable  region 
by  the  favour  of  Brahma. 

12.  Of  what  avail  is  much  talk  ? There  is  no  doubt  in  this 
that  it  was  due  to  their  worshipping  the  Lihga  that  the  universe 
of  mobile  and  immobile  beings  could  stand. 

13-16.  Due  to  the  difference  injthe  material,  they  say,  there 
are  six  types  of  Lihgas.  Their  subdivisions  are  fortyfour  in 
number.  The  first  type  of  Lihga  is  called  Sailaja  (made  of 
rock).  It  has  four  sub-divisions.  O excellent  sages,  the  second 
type  is  made  of  jewels.  It  has  seven  sub-divisions.  The  third 
type  originates  from  metals  and  it  has  eight  sub-divisions.  The 
fourth  Lihga  originates  from  wood  and  it  is  of  sixteen  sub- 


368  Lihgapurdna 

divisions.  O excellent  brahmins,  the  fifth  type  of  Lihga  is  made 
of  clay;  it  has  two  subdivisions.  The  sixth  type  of  Lihga  is  the 
Ksanika  (momentary)  and  it  is  of  seven  subdivisions. 

17.  The  Lihga  originating  from  jewels  bestows  fortune; 
that  originating  from  rock  yields  all  Siddhis.  The  Lihga  made 
of  metals  bestows  wealth  and  the  Lihga  made  of  wood  yields 
the  achievement  of  worldly  pleasures. 

18.  O leading  brahmins,  the  Lihga  of  clay  is  splendid  and 
brings  about  all  Siddhis.  The  Lihga  of  rock  is  very  excellent; 
the  Lihga  of  metals  is  the  middling  one. 

19-20.  Lihgas  are  of  numerous  types.  In  brief,  they  are  of 
nine  types. 

At  the  root  of  the  Lihga,  Brahma  is  stationed.  Visnu  the 
lord  of  three  worlds,  is  stationed  in  the  middle.  Above  is 
stationed  Rudra,  Mah^eva,  Sadasiva  who  is  called  Pranava. 
The  pedestal  of  Lihga  is  the  great  goddess  having  three  Gunas, 
the  mother  having  three®^®  attributes. 

21-25.  The  goddess  as  well  as  the  lord  is  adored  by  the 
person  who  worships  with  that  pedestal.  The  splendid  Liiiga 
whether  of  rock,  or  of  jewel  or  of  metals,  or  of  wood  or  of  clay 
or  of  momentary  type,  should  be  installed  with  devotion.  The 
result  is  very  splendid. 

The  person  who  worships  the  Lihga  is  eulogised  by  Indra, 
Brahma,  Agni,  Yama,  Varuna,  Kubera,  Siddhas,  Vidya- 
dharas,  the  king  of  serpents,  Yaksas,  Danavas  and  Kinnaras 
with  the  sounds  of  the  divine  drum.  He  is  a meritorious  soul. 
Shining  brilliantly  with  splendour  he  gradually  occupies  and 
passes  through  Bhuh,  Bhuvah,  Svah  and  Mahar  woilds  and 
then  I :yond  Janaloka  he  shall  go  on  to  Tapas  and  Satya, 
ilium  iiating  them  with  his  own  brilliance.  He  shall  unhesi- 
tatingly pierce  the  cosmic  Egg  by  means  of  the  large  sword 
deposited  in  the  holy  path  wherein  the  Lihgas  had  been  in- 
stalled. 

26-30.  After  eschewing  the  Lihgas  of  rock,  or  of  jewels,  or 
of  metals,  or  of  wood  or  of  clay  or  of  the  momentary  type  he 
shall  establish  his  entire  body  in  the  Lihga. 

The  man  who  instals  the  splendid  Lihga  white  as  the  kunda 

659.  trimayfi— brabma-vifnu-rudramayll  ST,  of  the  form  of  Brahma 

and  Rudra. 


369 


Monism  of  Siva 

flower  or  cow’s  milk,  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions,  along 
withSkandaand  Uma  undoubtedly  becomes  Rudra  embodied  in 
human  form.  By  touching  him  or  seeing  him  men  attain  great 
bliss.  O leading  brahmins,  his  merit  cannot  be  mentioned  by 
me  even  in  hundreds  of  yugas.  Hence  one  should  instal  the 
Linga  in  the  above  manner. 

The  Sakaia  (one  with  attributes)  and  divinely  splendid 
body  of  the  lord  is  worthy  of  being  conceived  by  all  men.  But 
the  Niskala  (attributeless)  body  of  the  lord  ran  be  conceived 
only  by  the  yogin. 


CHAPTER  SEVENTYFIVE 

Monism  of  Siva 


The  sages  said: 

1.  How  did  the  lord  who  is  ni.skala  (attrihuteless) , nirinala 
(pure),  and  nitya  (eternal)  adopt  sakalatva  (the  state  ol  being 
wiih  attributes).  It  behoves  you  to  tell  ns  about  this  in  the  same 
manner  you  had  learnt  it  formerly. 

Suta  said: 

2.  O leading  brahmins,  persons  who  know  reality  reco- 
gnize the  lord  in  the  form  of  the  Pranava,  Vijhana  (perfect 
knowledge) , after  hearing  about  the  unborn  lord  in  the  Veda- 
ntic  treatises. 

3.  The  knowledge  that  has  sound,  etc.  for  its  object  is 
called  Jnana.  Others  say  that  jnana  is  devoid  of  Error.  Still 
others  say  that  it  is  not  so. 

4.  O brahmins,  some  sages  say  that  knowledge  which  is 
pure,  devoid  of  impurities,  has  no  alternatives  as  objects  and 
docs  not  require  a support  and  is  made  manifest  through  a 
teacher,  is  the  real  one. 

5.  Salvation  results  only  from  perfect  knowledge.  Grace  of 
the  lord  is  conducive  to  the  achievement  of  perfect  knowledge. 


370 


Lingapurd^a 


Both  help  to  liberate  the  yogin  and  make  him  blissful.*®^ 

6.  Some  sages  say  that  His  contact  can  be  acquired  by 
means  of  holy  rites.  By  one’s  own  free  will,  the  form  that  is 
conceived  fancifully  shall  be  withdrawn. 

7-11.  The  heaven  is  the  head  of  Lord,  the  sky®  is  his 
umbilicus,  the  moon,  sun  and  fire  are  his  eyes,  the  quarters  are 
his  cars.  The  nether  worlds  constitute  his  feet,  the  ocean  is  his 
cloth,  Devas  are  his  arms,  the  constellations  are  his  ornaments, 
Prakrti  is  his  wife,  Purusa  is  his  Litiga.  From  his  facc®®'^  issued 
forth  all  the  Brahmins,  Brahma,  Indra,  and  Visnu.  The  Ksatri- 
yas  issued  from  his  arms.  The  Vai^yas  issued  from  his  thighs  and 
Sudras  from  his  feet.  Puskara  Avartaka  and  other  clouds  are  his 
hairs.  The  winds  are  born  of  his  nose.  The  Sruti  and  Smrti 
texts  constitute  his  gait. 

12.  The  lord  in  the  form  of  Karman  makes  Prakrti  function 
by  means  of  this  cosmic  body.  The  glorious  Purusa  is  compre- 
hensible to  man  through  perfect  knowledge,  not  otherwise. 

13-14.  Tapoyajna  (sacrifice  in  the  form  of  austerity)  is 
superior  to  thousands  of  Karmayajnas  (sacrifice  in  the  form  of 
holy  rites).  Japayajna  (sacrifice  in  the  form  of  Japa)  is  superior 
to  thousands  of  Tapoyajnas.  Dliyanayajha  (sacrifice  in  the  form 
of  meditation)  is  superior  to  thousands  of  Japayajiias.  There  is 
nothing  greater  than  Dhyanayajfia.  Dhyana  (meditation)  is  a 
means  of  perfect  knowledge. 

15.  When  the  yogin  stands  firmly  by  equal  elegance  and 
sees  through  meditation,  when  he  is  engaged  in  the  Dhyana- 
yajfta,  Siva  becomes  manifest  in  him. 

16.  All  people  conversant  with  the  knowledge  of  Brahman 
are  pure,  thanks  to  that  Vidya.  There  is  no  expiatory  rite  or  any 
injunction  in  regard  to  VijnSnins  (knowers) ; nor  do  they  have 
purificatory  rites. 

1 7.  On  consideration  it  is  clear  that  there  is  no  holy  rite  in 

660.  anandamayah — i.e.  by  the  real  knowledge  and  divine  grace  the 
yogin  can  attain  the  supreme  bliss.  Cf.  “Anandamayo’bhyasat” — cited 
in  ST, 

66 1.  kham — the  world  of  mortals.  ST,  quotes  Viha  in  suppo  ri  of 
this  meaning. 

662.  The  divine  origin  of  society  and  its  division  into  four  classes,  viz. 
BrShmana^  K^atriya,  Vaiiya  and  Scdra.  can  be  traced  as  far  back  as  the 
Puru^-sCikta  of  the  figvida. 


371 


Monism  of  Siva 

the  world,  there  is  no  happiness  or  misery,  neither  dharma  nor 
adharina.  neither  japa  norhoma,  to  those  who  take  up  medita- 
tion. They  come  near  to  ihe  ‘Sat’  (the  existent  Being). 

18.  The  Lihga  is  pure,  auspicious  and  imperishable.  It  is 
exceedingly  blissful  in  nature.  The  Niskala  form,  that  is,  the 
form  devoid  of  attributes  is  all-pervasive.  It  is  always  stationed 
in  the  heart  of  yogins. 

19.  O brahmins,  they  say  that  the  Lihga  is  of  two  tyi)cs 
viz., — the  external  and  the  internal.  O excellent  sage.s,  the  gross 
one  is  the  external.  O brahmins,  the  subtle  one  is  the  internal. 
[So  are  the  devotees]. 

20.  The  gross  devotees  are  tliosc  engaged  in  the  worship  of 
gross  Liagas  and  interested  in  holy  rites  and  sacrifices.  The 
gross  idol  is  just  for  awakening  knowledge  of  the  gross  devotees.®®^ 

21-22.  The  spiritual  lihga  is  not  perceptible  to  the  delud- 
ed person  who  conceives  things  only  externally  and  not  other- 
wise. The  gross  lihga  made  of  clay,  wood,  etc.,  is  perceptible 
only  to  non-yogin  as  the  subtle  and  eternal  Ihhga  is  perceptible 
to  thejhanin. 

23.  Other  knowers  of  reality  say  that  the  object,  on  consi- 
deration, is  non-existent.®®^  Therefore,  everything,  the  Niskala 
and  the  Sakai  a is  of  the  nature  of  6iva. 

24.  Others  say  like  this,  O men  of  good  holy  rites — Al- 
though the  ether  is  one,  it  is  perceived  separately  in  regard  to 
separate  platters.  Similarly  Siva  has  separateness  as  well  as 
non- separateness, 

25.  O men  of  good  holy  rites,  though  the  sun  is  only  one 
he  is  seen  manifold  in  the  diflerent  water-reservoirs.  This 
example  is  cited  in  order  to  convince  the  people. 

26.  I’he  creatures  in  the  heaven  and  on  the  earth  arc 
evolved  out  of  the  five  elements.  Still  they  are  seen  in  multiples 
of  forms  as  different  species  and  individuals. 

663.  The  gross  (lihga)  form  of  the  su[>reme  lord  ^iva  is  meant  just 
to  create  a feeling  of  devotion  in  the  gross-minded  people.  In  fact,  lord 
Siva  (like  the  ether)  is  an  indivisible  entity.  His  division  into  sakala  and 
niskala  forms,  as  of  the  ether  into  ghat^kaSa  and  mathakaia  is  conditioned 
byexternsd  factors. 

664.  arthah— goal,  viz.  the  release  from  the  bondage  of  activities. 
Because,  actually,  as  there  is  no  bondage,  there  is  no  release.  Gf.  PafUadnii; 
VI.  33;  also,  Mbh,  “bandhasya  maySmalatvan  na  me  mok?o  na  bandhanam 
— cited  in  ST, 


372 


LingapurS^ 


27.  Know  that  whatever  is  seen  or  heard  is  identical  with 
Siva.  The  difference  among  the  people,  on  deliberation,  is 
mere  illusion. 

28.  After  experiencing  extensive  pleasures  in  dream  a man 
may  be  happy  or  miserable.  But  on  pondering  we  understand 
that  neither  the  pleasure  nor  the  misery  has  been  really  expe- 
rienced. 

29-30.  All  those  who  have  understood  the  real  meanings 
of  the  Vedas  also  speak  thus  in  regard  to  w'orldly  matters. 
The  great  lord  invested  with  attributes  is  directly  perceptible 
in  the  hearts  of  the  worldly-minded  persons.  The  lord  devoid 
of  attributes  appears  in  the  hearts  of  yogins  and  is  identical 
with  the  universe.  He  appears  to  the  wise  ones  only.  Ihe 
physical  body  of  the  great  lord  is  of  three  types. 

31.  O excellent  brahmins,  the  first-one  is  Niskala,  the 
second  one  is  Sakala-Niskala  and  the  third-one  is  Sakala. 

32-33.  Some  worship  the  Sakala-Niskala  form,  some  wor- 
ship in  the  heart,  or  in  the  Lifiga  or  in  the  fire.  Some  worship 
the  Sakala  form  along  with  their  wives  and  sons. 

34-35.  Just  as  Siva  so  also  is  the  goddess.  Just  as  the  god- 
dess so  also  is  Siva.  Hence  people  worship  the  deities  with  the 
consciou.sness  of  mm- difference.  They  worship  the  twenty- 
seven*®®  principles  in  the  body  as  well  as  outside,  in  the  mystic 
diagrams  of  four,  six,  ten  angles,  twelve,  sixteen  and  three  sides. 

36.  Siva,  the  lord,  devoid  of  difference  of  Sat  and  Asat 
is  stationed  out  of  his  own  free  will  along  with  the  goddess  for 
the  protection  of  the  world. 

37.  Some  call  him  one,  some  call  him  one  with  two 
Gunas.***  Some  call  him  Triguna**’  (having  three  Gunas). 
Some  say  that  it  is  Siva.  Others,  the  knowers  of  the  Vedas 
speak  of  him  as  the  cause  of  the  universe. 

38.  All  Brahmins  equipped  with  devotion  and  auspicious 
yoga  are  persons  of  special  characteristics.  They  are  interested 

665.  sapta-vimSat  prabbedatah — In  the  groups  of  tattvas,  Siva  is 
placed  in  the  twentyseventh  category.  (Of.  1.71.  51).  But  this  classification  is 
only  impirical,  not  real.  However,  the  physical  and  mental  worship  of  Siva 
enjoined  in  the  Sgamas  rests  on  the  categorical  basis. 

666.  dvigunam — in  the  form  of  Prak^ti  and  Puru$a. 

667.  triguoam — in  the  form  of  Brahm2,  Vi^nu  and  Rudra. 


Installation  of  diva's  image 


373 


in  Oharma.  In  the  middle  of  the  hexagon  they  worship  the 
lord  of  yogas,  having  all  the  forms  ( or  no  form) . 

39.  Those  who  perceive  Siva  in  the  three-sided  (mystic 
diagram),  in  the  middle  of  the  three  principles,  attain  him ; 
not  the  other  yogins.  They  perceive  the  three-eyed***  lord 
with  the  three  Guijas,  ihe  ancient  Puru§a  along  with  the 
goddess. 


CHAPTER  SEVENTYSIX 

Installation  of  diva’s  image 


SSta  said: 

1.  Henceforth,  I shall  mention  the  benefit  accruing  from 
the  installation  of  the  idol  entirely,  for  the  welfare  of  the 
world.  The  idol  may  be  in  accordance  with  one’s  own  wish. 

2.  After  making  the  idol  of  the  lord  seated  in  an  elegant 
seat  along  with  Skauda  and  Uma  and  after  installing  it  with 
devotion  one  shall  fulfil  desires. 

3.  In  the  manner  I had  heard,  I shall  mention  the  benefit 
that  a man  obtains  by  worshipping  the  lord  along  with 
Skanda  and  Uma  (even)  once  (but)  in  accordance  with  the 
injunctions. 

4-7.  Until  the  dissolution  of  all  living  beings,  he  becomes 
a yogin  and  sports  like  Siva  in  aerial  chariots  resembling 
crores  of  suns  wherein  everything  desirable  is  available  and 
where  virgins  of  Rudra  sing  and  dance.  In  the  aerial  chariots 
where  everything  desirable  is  available  he  enjoys  great  pleasures. 
He  then  goes  to  the  following  worlds  one  after  the  other  viz  : — 
the  world  of  Uma,  of  Kumara,  of  Mana,  of  Vispu,  of  Brahma 
and  of  Prajapati.  The  deity  of  great  splendour  passes  through 
the  Janaloka  and  Maharloka.  After  reaching  the  world  of 
Indra  he  assumes  the  role  of  Indra  for  ten  thousand  years. 
Again,  after  enjoying  divine  and  brilliant  pleasure  in  the 

668.  tri-yak»Mn»*tryak|am,  three-eyed.  See  p.  980  note.  959. 


374  Lingapurdiia 

Bhuvarloka,  he  reaches  the  Meru  and  rejoices  in  the  abodes  of 
Devas. 

8-14.  One  shall  attain  Sayujya  (union)  with  Siva  by  duly 
installing  the  omniscient,  omnipresent  lord  in  accordance  with 
the  injunctions  of  the  Sastras ; the  lord  who  has  a single  foot, 
four  arms,  three  eyes  and  trident,  the  lord  who  is  stationed  after 
creating  Vi§nu  from  his  left  side  and  the  four-faced  Brahma 
from  the  right  side.  The  lord  who  created  twenty  eight  crores 
of  Rudras,  and  then  the  twenty  fifth®*®  principle  Puru^a, 
brilliant  in  all  the  limbs,  from  his  heart  ; the  lord  who  created 
Prakrti  from  his  left  ; cosmic  intellect  from  the  region  of  the 
intellect,  the  cosmic  ego  from  his  own  ego  and  the  Taiimatras 
therefrom.  The  great  lord  sportingly  created  the  sense-organs 
from  his  own  sense-organs.  He  created  the  earth  from  the 
root  of  his  foot  and  water  from  the  private  parts.  He  created 
fire  from  the  umbilical  region,  the  sun  from  the  heart,  the 
moon  from  his  neck,  the  soul  from  the  middle  of  his  eyebrows 
and  the  heaven  from  the  forehead.  One  shall  instal  the  image 
of  the  lord  who  is  stationed  thus  after  creating  the  entire  universe 
inclusive  of  the  mobile  and  immobile  beings. 

15.  By  making  the  idol  of  I^ana,  the  lord  of  the  sacrifices®^®, 
who  has  three  feet,  seven  hands,  four  horns  and  two  heads,  the 
devotee  is  honoured  in  the  world  of  Visnu. 

16.  The  man  will  enjoy  great  pleasures  there  for  a hun- 
dred thousand  kalpas.  He  shall  be  happy  and  in  due  course 
return  to  his  world  as  master  of  all  sacrifices. 

17-18.  If  the  devotee  makes  the  idol  of  the  lord  who  rides 
on  a bull  accompanied  by  Uma  and  with  the  crescent  moon  as 
his  ornament,  he  attains  that  merit  which  one  usually  obtains 
by  performing  tex^  thousand  horse-sacrifices.  He  goes  to  Siva’s 
divine  city  in  a golden  aerial  chariot  having  clusteis  of  tinkling 
bells  and  he  is  liberated  there  itself. 

19.  In  the  manner  I have  heard,  I shall  mention  the 
benefit  that  one  attains  by  making  the  idol  of  the  lord  accom- 
panied by  Nandin  and  Uma  and  surrounded  by  all  Ganas. 

669.  paitcaviiiiiatikam— the  twenty-fifth  principle,  i.e.,  jiva  (the  in- 
dividual soul). 

670.  yajxlelam — agnirupam  ST.  of  the  form  of  fire. 


Installation  of  Sivas  image 


375 


20-21.  He  will  go  to  the  city  of  Siva  on  the  aerial  chariots 
that  resemble  the  solar  sphere,  that  are  tied  to  the  bulls,  tliat 
are  difficult  of  access  even  to  Devas  and  Danavas  that  are 
occupied  and  beautified  all  round  by  the  dancing  nymphs.  He 
shall  then  attain  the  chieftainship  of  the  Ganas. 

22-26.  I shall  mention  the  benefit  that  one  attains  by  making 
any  of  the  following  idols  of  Siva  and  installing  it  with  devotion 
viz  : — the  lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas  as  in  his  dancing  posture 
and  accompanied  by  the  daughter  of  the  lord  of  mountains  ; 
the  omniscient  lord  having  a thousand  arms  or  having  four  arms; 
lord  Paramesvara  surrounded  by  Bhrgu  and  others  as  well  as 
the  groups  of  goblins;  the  bull-bannered  I^vara  accom- 
panied by  the  daughter  of  the  lord  of  mountain,  the  diety  as 
perpetually  being  bowed  to  by  Brahma,  Indra,  Visnu,  Soma 
(the  moon)  and  all  other  Devas;  Paramesvara  as  surrounded 
by  Mothers  and  sages.  He  shall  attain  a crorc  times  the  benefit 
that  accrues  from  all  yajnas,  penances,  charitable  gifts,  pilgri- 
mages to  the  holy  centres  and  visits  to  the  deities.  He  shall  then 
go  to  the  region  of  auspiciousness.®’^  Until  the  dissolution  of  all 
living  beings  he  shall  enjoy  great  pleasure  there.  When  the 
next  creation  arrives  be  shall  return  to  the  region  of  mortals. 

27-28.  One  shall  attain  identity  with  Siva  by  making  the 
idol  of  Siva  as  follows  and  installing  it  with  devotion;  the  lord 
as  naked,  white-complexioned,  having  four  arms,  three  eyes  and 
the  serpent  as  girdle,  with  black  curly  hairs  and  holding  a skull 
in  his  hand. 

29-33.  By  making  the  idol  of  the  lord  as  follows  and  instal- 
ling it  with  devotion  according  to  the  extent  of  one’s  affluence, 
one  surmounts  all  obstacles  and  is  honoured  in  the  world  of 
Siva  ; the  lord  as  tearing  asunder  the  leading  elephant  as 
accompanied  by  Amba,  as  the  bestower  of  all  desired  objects  ; 
as  smoke-coloured,  red  in  eyes  and  adorned  with  the  moon  on 
the  forehead,  as  having  three  eyes,  wearing  the  sidelocks  of 
hairs,  holding  the  serpent-shaped  hatchet,  wearing  the  lion’s 
hide  as  his  upper  garment  and  the  deer  skin  as  the  lower  one,  as 

671.  Siva-puram — a mythical  city  *<Sivapura'  on  the  the  Him^ayas, 
particularly  on  the  Kail&sa  peak  is  conceived  as  the  abode  of  Siva. 

67a.  ibhendra-darakam — ibhendrah  gajasurah  tarn  dirayatiti— one 
who  has  slain  the  asura  Gaya. 


376 


Lingapura^a 


having  sharp  curved  fangs  and  armed  with  an  iron  ciub>  holding 
the  skull  in  his  uplifted  hand,  the  lord  as  rendering  all  the 
quarters  resonant  with  loud  shouts  of  “Hum”  “Phat”  etc., 
holding  the  tiger  skin®’^  and  the  conch®’®  shell  in  two  of  his 
hands,  laughing,  roaring  and  drinking  the  black  ocean®’® 
(poison)  as  dancing  in  the  company  ofBhutas  (goblins)  and 
surrounded  by  Ganas. 

34-37.  Tliere  (in  the  world  of  Siva)  he  enjoys  great  plea- 
sures until  the  dissolution  of  all  living  beings.  By  means  of 
deliberation  he  gains  perfect  knowledge  from  the  Rudras  there 
and  becomes  liberated. 

By  making  the  idol  of  Siva  as  follows  and  installing  it  with 
devotion  the  devotee  is  honoured  in  the  world  of  Siva.  The 
excellent  lord  has  half  of  his  body  in  female  form.  He  has 
four  arms  wherein  he  holds  the  boon  to  be  bestowed;  the 
gesture  of  fearlessness,  the  trident  and  the  lotus.  He  is  stationed 
in  the  form  of  a woman  as  well  as  a man,  bedecked  in  all 
ornaments.  There  (in  the  Sivaloka ) he  enjoys  all  great  plea- 
sures. He  is  then  endowed  with  Anima  (minuteness)  and 
other  qualities.  Therefrom  he  obtains  the  knowledge  lasting  as 
long  as  the  moon  and  the  stars  and  is  liberated. 

38-40.  He  who  makes  the  idol  of  the  omniscient  lord  of 
the  chiefs  of  Devas,  NakuliSvara,  who  is  surrounded  by  disci- 
ples and  their  disciples  and  who  has  uplifted  his  hand  in 
expounding  the  principles  and  then  instals  it  with  devotion  goes 
to  the  world  of  Siva.  The  man  enjoys  extensive  pleasures  there 
for  a hundred  yugas.  After  attaining  the  path  of  knowledge  he 
attains  liberation  there  itself. 

41-43.  His  abode  is  liked  by  all  among  Devas  and  Asuras. 
By  making  the  idol  of  the  lord  as  follows  and  by  installing  it, 
one  is  liberated  from  the  ocean  of  worldly  existence: — The  lord 
shows  gestures.  He  has  the  ashes  from  the  funeral  pyre  for  his 
unguent;  he  has  the  triple  mark  of  Tripun^ra;  he  wears  a gar- 
land made  of  skulls;  he  wears  a single  sacred  thread  constituted 

673.  Pundarik&jina— one  who  is  clad  in  the  tiger-hide,  (pu^darika^ 
tiger.  Of.  “vyaghre  tu  pundarlko  ni*’ — Amarakoia, 

674.  Kambukam— kamaoduhun  ST,  a water-pot. 

675 . Kr ^na-tagaram'— 5T.  gives  an  alternate  meaning:  kfira-samudram, 
vide  ch.  29.  verses  29-31 . 


377 


Installation  of  iiva^s  image 

by  the  hairs  of  Brahma;  with  his  left  hand  he  holds  the  ex- 
cellent skull  of  Brahma;  as  Paramc^thin  he  adopts  the  body 
of  Vi^ijiu. 

44-46a,  He  who  repeats  even  once  th'*  holy  mantra  of 
eight  syllables^  viz.,  “Om  Namo  Nilakaigitbaya  (Om  obeisance 
unto  the  blue-necked  lord) , is  liberated  from  sins.  By  worship- 
ping the  lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas  by  means  of  this  mantra 
with  devotion  after  using  scents  and  other  things  in  accordance 
with  one’s  wealth,  one  is  honoured  in  the  world  of  Siva. 

46b-47.  By  making  the  idol  of  the  lord  as  follows  and  ins- 
talling it  with  devotion  the  devotee  attains  oneness  with  Siva. 
The  lord  destroys  Jalandhara  who  is  severed  into  two.  The  lord 
is  holding  Sudariana.  By  installing  such  images  or  any  one  of 
such  images  the  devotee  attains  oneness  with  Siva.  No  hesita- 
tion or  doubt  need  be  entertained  in  this  regard. 

48.  By  making  the  idol  as  follows  and  by  installing  it  witli 
devotion  one  is  honoured  in  the  world  of  Siva.  The  Deva 
is  the  bestower  of  Sudar^ana  with  the  characteristics  as  men- 
tioned before.  He  is  worshipped  by  lord  Viftl^u  who  adores 
him  by  means  of  worship  including  the  gift  of  hb  own 
eyc.®^* 

49-51.  One  shall  attain  oneness  with  Siva  by  duly  making 
and  installing  the  idol  of  the  lord  as  standing  on  the  back  of 
Nikumbha  (a  garia)  fixing  his  lotus-like  right  foot  firmly  on 
him  and  embracing  the  daughter  of  the  mountain  on  hb 
left  side.  His  elbow  rests  on  the  tip  of  his  trident.  The  serpents 
are  suspended  from  the  trident  like  so  many  tinkling  belb.  He 
is  glancing  at  Andhaka  who  is  standing  at  his  side  with  palms 
joined  in  reverence. 

52-54.  He  who  makes  the  idol  of  Siva,  the  lord  of  the 
chiefs  of  Devas,  livara  the  destroyer  of  the  Tripuras,  with  bow 
and  arrows  in  his  hands,  the  crescent  moon  as  an  ornament, 
seated  in  a chariot  accompanied  by  Uma  and  being  chario- 
teered by  the  four-faced  lord  (Brahma),  assumes  that  form  (of 
Siva)  and  goes  to  the  city  of  Siva.  He  b happy  and  he  undoub- 
tedly sports  like  the  second  Siva.  O excellent  brahmins,  after 
enjoying  great  pleasures  there,  as  much  as  he  desires  and 

676.  When  Vif^u  fell  short  of  « flower  he  plucked  hb  own  eye  and 
oflkred  It  as  a gilt. 


378  Lingapurd^ 

having  obtained  perfect  knowledge  after  due  deliberation  he 
is  liberated  there  itself. 

55-58.  The  intelligent  devotee  who  makes  and  instais 
these  idols  along  with  Vighnesa  shall  attain  onenesis  with 
Siva: — ^The  lord  is  seated  comfortably  holding  the  Gahga  and 
haying  the  moon  on  his  coronet;  the  lord  is  accompanied  byj 
tlxe  Gahga  and  Uma  is  seated  ^qn  his  left  , lap;  the.  iord-  is? 
surrounded  by  Vinayaka,  Skanda,:  Jye§tha,  Piurga^  Bhaskara; 
Soma,  JBr^h^anh  Mahe^vari,  Kaumari,  VatanarVi,;  V^ahi, . 
Varada,  Indrani,  Camuntja,  Virabhadra  aiid.  y^glm^a*:  ' ’ 

59-63.  By  making  the  idols  as  follows  and  installing  them 
with  devotion  one  shall  attain  oneness  with  Siva*  The^unchan-  i 
ging  lord  is  in  the  form  of  a<  T^ihga  surrounded  by  great 
clusters  of  flames;  the  moon-crested  Is  vara  as  seated^  in  the 
centre  of  the  Lihga.  The  Lihga  should  be  made  in  the  ether 
with  Brahma  with  folded  hands  in^  the  form  of  a swan, standing 
on  the  right  and  Visnu  in  the  form  of  a Boar  standing  beneath, 
the  Liuga  with  his  face  turned  d^^vyn.  The  terrible  gr;eat  Lihga 
is  stationed  in  the  middle  of  the  great  waters. 

By  making  idols  of  the  lord  as  the  protector  of  the  holy 
centre,  and  Ksetrapala  as  lord  PaiSupati  and  by  duly  instal- 
ling them  with  devotion,  one  is  hpnpured  .in  the  world  of  Siva. 


CIHAPTER  SIEVENTYSEVEN 

The  Temples  ef  Siva  ' 

The  Sages^  said : — 

1-2.  The  meritorious  acts  of  preparation  and  installation, 
of  the  Lihga  and  the  differences  among  the  various  types  of 
Lihgas  Have  been  heard  as  described  by  you., It  behoves  you. 
to  ^ narrate  the  behefirthat  accrue^  from  Imilding  l§iya’s  temple  * * 
by  ipeans  of  materials  beginning  wUh  cla^y  a^nd  endmgi  ,yyith 

..  ■'  -j..' 

3-6.  If  a devotee  of  Siva  is  endowed  with  perfect  know- 
ledgir  hfc  Is  hbt  By  SSift‘,  Hvlves,  ‘biitisS^i,  ctci. 


379 


The  Temples  of  Sioa 

- vl  . 

what  avail  are  Ac  temples  he  should  make  for  the  lord  ? Still 
the  devotee  ol'  the  lord  who  is  saluted  by  the  chief  of  Devas 
and  the  lotus-bom  deity"  Brahma  makes  divine  and  excellent 
temples  or  shrines^  even  with  bricks  and  stones.  Even  as  a 
childish  prank  if  they  make  the  primoi'dial  Siva’s  image  witk 
clay  or  stone  or' even  with  dust  and  his  abode  also  in  the  sam£ 
manner  and  worship  him,  they  do  attain  identity  with  him* 
Hence,  for  the  achievement  of  virtue,  love  and  wealth,  the 
abode  of  Siva  should  be  made  by  dfeVotefes  with  devotion^ 
assiduously." 

7.  By  devoutly  making  the  abode^df  Rudra  of  the  type  of 
Kesara,  Nagara  dr  Dravida  dhe  is  honoured  in  the  world  of  Siva* 

8.  He  who  pakes  his  ip^nsion  c^led  Kailasa>  .rejoices 
happily  in,  the . aerial  chariots,  qf  the  sh^pc?  of  Kailasa  peaks. 

9-11.  ; Or  the  deyotpe  shall  make > in, ; accordance  with  the 
injunctions  Ae, temple  of  Mandara*,  for  him.  He  shall  devoutly 
make  it  in  accordance  with  hismeans*  It  may  be  of  the  middl- 
ing or  inferior  type.  Thereby  Ae  mait  goes  to  the  beautiful 
city  of  Siva^  in  aerial,  chariots,  which  resemble  the  mountain 
Mandara,  and  which  have  faces  all  rqund,,  which  are  occupied  i 
by  groups  of  Apsarases  j^and  which  are  difficult  of  access  even 
to  Devas  aud  Danavas^  He  enjoys  all  pleasures,  attains  the 
path  of  knowledj;e  and  finally  the  chieftainship  of  the  Ganas. 

12-13*  Even  by  means  of  great  sacrifices  no  one  attains 
that  benefit  which  accrues  to  the  person  who  makes  the  man- 
sion called  Meru*  He  attains  all  the  benefits  of  sacrifices, 
penances,  gifts,  visits  to  holy  centres  and  study  of  all  Vedas.  Like 
Siva,  he  rejoices  for  a long  time. 

14.  The  intelligent  devotee  who  makes  the  mansion 
Ni§adha  with  devotion  attains  Siva’s  world  and  like  Siva 
rejoices  for  a long  time. 

15-17.  O brahmins,  he  who  makes  the  splendid  and’ 
excellent  mansion  called  Himasaila,  goes  to  the  splendid  city 
of  Siva  by  nicans  of  vehicles  comparable  to  Ae  mountein^ 
Himavat*  .Attmhing  the  path  of  knowledge,  he  shall  ^icjbwyc  . 
Ae  cAieftain^lp  of  the  Gatias.^  . ■ . ~ . ..  . i* 

I shall  mention  the  benefit  that  a man  obtains  by  making 
the " ’te&slon  fditiif  peak  of*  the 


blue  mountain) . He  need  make  it  only  in  accordance  with  his 
riches.  He  shall  dedicate  it  to  Rudra  with  devotion. 

18-21.  He  obtains  all  those  benefits  which  1 have  men- 
tioned to  you  before  as  the  benefit  of  making  the  mansion 
Himaiaila  devoutly  [see  verse  15].  Then  he  is  bowed  to  by 
all  Devas.  Reaching  the  world  of  Rudra  he  rejoices  along 
with  them. 

I shall  mention  the  benefit  that  one  attains  by  making  the 
mansion  named  MahendraiSaila.  He  goes  to  the  divine  city  of 
Siva  in  the  aerial  chariot  as  huge  in  size  as  the  mountain 
Mahendra,  yoked  to  bulls.  O leading  sages,  he  enjoys  all  plea- 
sures and  attains  perfect  knowledge  after  deliberation  with 
Rudras.  He  eschews  worldly  pleasures  as  though  they  were 
poison  and  attains  Sayujya  (union)  with  Siva. 

22-23.  He  who  makes  jewel-studded  mansion  with  gold, 
in  accordance  with  the  injunctions,  of  the  type  of  Dravi<jla, 
Nagara  or  Kesara  or  makes  the  peak*^  or  platform  square  or 
oblong  in  shape  attains  great  merit.  Hb  merit  cannot  be  men- 
tioned even  in  hundreds  of  yugas. 

24-28.  If  anyone  ^repairs  or  rebuilds  the  old,  dilapidated 
fallen  or  broken  temples  and  reconstructs  them  with  doors,  etc. 
or  if  he  repairs  the  mansion,  platform,  rampart  or  the  orna- 
mental gateway,  he  derives  more  benefit  than  even  the  origi- 
nal maker.  There  is  no  doubt  about  this.  The  man  who  does 
some  job  in  the  temple  of  Siva  though  it  be  for  his  sustenance 
undoubtedly  goes  to  the  heavenly  world  along  with  his  kins- 
men. If  a man  does  some  job  in  the  temple  of  Rudra  even  for 
once  and  for  hb  own  pleasure  he  attains  happiness  and 
rejoices.  Hence,  O excellent  sages,  the  man  who  devoutly 
makes  the  temple  by  means  of  wood,  bricks,  etc.,  is  honoured 
in  the  world  of  Siva. 

29-32.  O leading  sages,  for  the  grace  of  Mahesa,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  achieving  virtue,  love,  wealth  and  liberation,  the  mansion 
of  Mahesa  should  be  built  assiduously.  O excellent  sages,  if  one 
is  incapable  of  building  a mansion  he  shall  .serve  the  lord  by  me- 
ans of  sweeping  and  otheractivities.  He  who  perfornts  the  sweep- 
ing job  with  a soft  and  delicate  broom  shall  attain  all  desires. 
He  obtains  the  fruit  of  a thousand  Candrfiyana  rites  within  a 

€77.  Killaia^yaatiirQpaiii  ST.  nuMk  of  tome  mcdmucal  device. 


381 


ThB  Temples  of  Siva 

month.  He  who  duly  performs  the  rite  of  applying  unguents  to 
the  lord  with  the  scented  cow-dung  water  filtered  and  purified 
by  means  of  a cloth  shall  obtain  the  benefits  of  Candrayana  for 
a year. 

33-37.  The  place  within  the  radius  of  half  a Kro^a  from 
the  Linga  ofl^iva  is  called  Siva-ksetra  (holy  centre  of  Siva). 
He  who  casts  off  his  life  (within  that  centre)  usually  very  diffi- 
cult to  be  cast  off,  shall  obtain  Sayujya  with  Siva.  O sages  of 
good  holy  rites,  these  are  the  measuring  units  of  the  self-born 
Bana  Linga.  In  the  Svayambhuva,  O excellent  brahmins,  the 
measure  of  the  holy  centre  shall  be  half,  in  theAr^  (pertaining 
to  the  sages)  it  shall  be  half  of  that.  In  the  Manusa  (pertain- 
ing to  human  beings)  it  shall  be  still  half  of  that.  O excellent 
brahmins,  the  measure  of  holy  centres  in  the  abode  of  ascetics 
is  thus. 

O brahmins,  he  who  casts  off  his  vital  breath  in  any  of 
these  places  shall  attain  Sayujya  with  Siva  viz: — Rudravatara, 
Naravatara,  the  holy  Srlparvata*’^®  and  its  boundary  line. 
The  benefit  shall  be  extended  to  his  disciples  and  the  disciples 
of  disciples. 

38-39.  The  same  is  true  of  Varanasi*^®  and  particularly  of 
Avimukta.®®®  He  who  casts  off  his  vital  breaths  in  Kedara,**^ 
Prayaga®®’^  or  Kuruksetra®®^  attains  extreme  bliss. 

40.  He  who  dies  in  Prabhasa,®**  Puskara,®®®  AvantI,®®® 

678.  Sriparvata  or  Srtiaila  is  one  of  the  lacred  hills  of  the  south 
overhanging  the  Kr^na  river.  It  contains  the  celebrated  shrine  of  Malli- 
karjuna,  one  of  the  twelve  jyotirliftgas. 

679.  Varanasi-  -sec  p,  97  note.  120 

680.  Avimukta— see  p.  46  note.  64 

681.  Kedara— a very  sacred  Himalayan  peak  in  Garhwal.  It  still 
retains  its  ancient  name  and  sanctity. 

682.  Praylga— 'See  p.  291  note  567. 

683.  Kuruk^ctra—  It  lies  south  of  Thanesar,  not  far  from  Panipat 
in  Haryana  State. 

684.  PrabhSsa — It  is  a celebrated  place  of  pilgrimage  in  Saurl^tra 
the  southern  part  of  Kathiawar. 

685.  Pu9kara—a  sacred  place  near  Ajmer  famous  for  the  lake  Put- 

kara. 

686 . Avanti  or  AvantikX.  It  is  identical  with  Ujjayinf  or  modem 
UJjain. 


382  , LingafmrSt^a 

Amarc^vara*®’  and  in  VanKailakula?*®  attains  the  nature  of 

r{;i : jiv'  \ ' ‘1/  « Mi 

3iva.  ^ ^ ^ 

41-45,  The  persoh'wiib  dies  is^not  born  again. 

He  who  casts  off  his  vital  iirea'tib  ih  T^rivisJ-apa,*®®  Avimukta, 
Kedara,  Sahgame^vara,*®®  Salahka,®*’  Jambukesvara,®*^  in 
Sukreiivara,®®"  Gokarna,^®®‘Bha8kai^e4a  Gu‘he4vara,®®®  Hiran- 
yagarbha,®®’  or  Nandl^i^®  attains  the  giSeatest  goal.  He  who 
desiccates  his  body  by  means  of  6’bServances  and  casts  it  off 
many  holy  centre  of  Siva  whether  it  is  of  human  or  divine 
origin,  whether  it  ii  built  by  sages  Or  whether  it  is  self-born, 
becomes  a yogin  and  "^attains  on^iiess  with  Siva.  O excellent 
sages,  if  the  deity  is  Self-born  or  installed  by  Devas,  no  doubt 
need  be  entertained  in  this  regard.  He  who  worships  the  lord 
and  then  collects  fire  into  which  he  consigns  his  body,  attains 
the  greatest  goal. 

46-49,  One  shall  abstain  from  taking  any  sort  of  food 
whatsoever  and  cast  off  one’s  vital  breaths  in  a holy  centre 
of  §iva.  O qccellcpt  sages^  he  shall  auain  Sayujya  with  Siva. 
He , who  cuts , off  bis  pair  of  legs  and  stays  in  the  holy  centre 
of  Siva,  attains  oneness  with  Siva.  No  doubt  need  be  enter- 
tained in  this  regard.  The  vision  of  a holy  centre  is  meritorious. 
The  entrance  therein  is  hundred  times  more  meritorious.  The 
tpuching  and  the  circuiriambulation  is  huiidred  times  more 
meritorious.  The  ablution  in  the  waters  is  hundred  times  more 
meritorious  than  that. 

50.  The  bathing  of  the  ddty;  O brahmins,  in  milk,  is 
hundred  times  more  excellent.  It  is  inentioned  that  the  ablution 

687.  Amarcivara — in  OmkSra  -MSndhata.  It  is  a sacred  place  of 
Saiva  pilgrimage  in  the  Nimar  district  lii  "hSfaidhya  Prade^a. 

688.  Vanisaila — ^not  identifiable.  ' ‘ ’ 

689.  Tiivi?tapa-;.not  identifi^i^"  fcit'^Tfwhtapa  or  tripi^taka  is 
tke  heaven  of  Indra,  su^  to  ber  ^ituatish  dp  l^ount  Mdru. 

690.  Safigame&vara— a sacred  pl^'^dhtidiiyMn''Sk,,  VII. i. 33  but 

not  identifiable.  ^ 

691-693.  S^lanka,  jfam^Resylira^ and  fiikreivark  are  not  identifiable. 

694.  Gokarpa  : }it.  *cow*s  ear*.  It  is  a place  of  pil|tHmage  sacred  to 
Siva,  on  the  east  coast,  nea^  It  tUe  temple  of  MahSdeva , 

Siva,  supposed  to  have  been  mtablished  by  ^This  Ookarna  should 

not  be  confused  Wi^  the  toWn  of  the  safiie  hame'idtuated  in  Nepal  on  the 
BhSgamati  river. , . ...  , . 

695.698.  Nbtidei^'btt.  ‘ ’*  " ' * ■ “ " 


The  Temples  of  Siva 


383 


with  curds  has  thousand  times  more  merit.  With  honey  it  is 
hundred  limes  more. 

51-52.  The  ablution  with  ghee  has  infinite  merit;  that 
with  sugar  is  hundred  times  more.  One  shall  eschew  cooked 
rice  after  reaching  a river  near  the  holy  centre  of  Siva  and 
plunging  into  it.  He  shall  thus  cast  off  his  body.  He  is  honoured 
in  the  world  of  Siva.  All  the  rivers  near  the  holy  centres  of 
Siva  are  very  meritorious. 

53-56.  The  wells,  tanks  and  lakes  are  Sivatirthas  (sacred 
waters  of  Siva) . O excellent  brahmins,  by  taking  his  bath  in 
those  (wells,  etc.)  with  devotion  a man  is  undoubtedly  liberated 
from  brahmin-slaughter  and  other  sins.  O excellent  sages,  by 
taking  his  morning  plunge  in  the  sacred  waters  of  Siva,  a man 
attains  the  benefit  of  horse  sacrifice  and  goes  to  Rudra’s  world. 
By  taking  a single  plunge  in  the  sacred  waters  of  Siva  at 
midday  with  great  devotion  a man  surely  obtains  merit  equal 
to  that  of  taking  bath  in  the  Gahga.  By  taking  bath  after  the 
sunset  one  shall  attain  the  auspicious  region  of  Siva. 

57-59.  Casting  off  his  slough  of  sins  in  the  holy  waters  of 
Siva  the  man  attains  the  auspicious  region  of  Siva.  O brah- 
mins, by  taking  the  threefold  bath  once  in  tlie  sacred  water's 
of  Siva,  the  man  obtains  Sayujya  with  Siva.  No  doubt  need 
be  entertained  in  this  respect. 

Once  a boar  saw  a dog  on  the  way.  Due  to  fright  it 
chanced  that  it  plunged  into  the  sacred  waters  of  Siva  and 
died.  O excellent  brahmins,  he  attained  the  chieftainship  of 
the  Ganas. 

60.  He  who  sees  Siva,  the  lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas,  in 
the  form  of  Linga  at  dawn  attains  a goal  superior  to  ail. 

61.  By  seeing  Mahadeva  at  midday  one  attains  the  bene- 
fit of  sacrifices.  By  seeing  the  lord  in  the  evening,  one  attains 
the  benefit  of  yajfias  and  is  liberated. 

62.  He  is  liberated  from  all  great  sins,  mental,  verbal  and 
physical ; subsidiary  sins  occurring  as  a sequel. 

63.  By  visiting  lord  l^ana  in  the  form  of  the  Lifiga  at  the 
time  of  transit  of  the  sun  from  one  sign  of  Zodiac  to  the  next, 
one  eschews  sins  committed  in  the  course  of  month  and  he 
attains  the  auspicious  region  of  Siva. 

64.  By  vi  siting  the  lord  at  the  beginning  of  the  southern  or 


384 


LHgapufa^ 


northern  transit  of  the  sun  one  dispels  sins  committed  in  the 
course  of  half  a month.  By  worshipping,  the  lord,  at  the  time  of 
equinoxes,  one  attains  the  greatest  goal. 

65*66.  The  clean  and  pure  man  who  circumambulates  the 
mansion  of  ihrce  times  in  the  mode  of  Savya  and  Apas* 
avya  [clockwise  and  anticlockwise]  * and  treads  softly  shall 
attain  the  benefit  of  aiSvamedha  at  every  step.  He  who  screams 
and  laments  to  Siva,  attains  tlie  a4spicious  abode.  What  else 
remains  for  him  to  attain  ? 

67-73.  (After  sprinkling)  with  scented  cowdung  water  the 
devotee  shall  make  the  mystic  diagram  of  the  auspicious  lotus 
along  with  the  pericarp.  For  this  purpose  the  dust  particles  of 
pearls,  sapphires,  rubies,  crystals,  emerald,  gold  or  silver  may 
be  used.  Those  who  are  not  sufficiently  rich  may  use  other 
powders  similar  in  colour  to  the  powders  mentioned  above. 
The  mystic  diagram  shall  extend  upto  ten  Hastas.  It  should  be 
described  near  Mahadeva.  Mahadeva  accompanied  by  the  nine 
Saklis  shall  be  invoked  therein  : The  devotee  shall  invoke  the 
lord  who  bestows  the  desired  things  by  means  offive  elements,  six 
sense-organs  and  eight  cosmic  bodies.  Again  the  devotee  shall 
worship  I^ana  in  the  ten-cornered  (mystic  diagram)  through 
the  eight  cosmic  bodies  or  the  ten  organs  of  sense  and  know- 
ledge externally.  After  the  worship  the  devotee  shall  bow  down 
and  offer  food  offerings  to  the  lord  of  Devas.  He  shall  thereby 
obtain  the  benefit  of  the  charitable  gift  of  earth.  The  indigent 
person  shall  make  the  mystic  diagram  of  the  lotus  by  means 
of  the  powdered  grains  of  Sali  rice.  Even  then  he  shall  obtain 
the  merits  as  mentioned  before. 

74-80.  The  devotee  shall  draw  the  mystic  diagram  of 
twelve  sides  and  then  the  excellent  lotus  by  means  of  such 
powders  as  those  of  jewels,  etc.  In  the  middle  of  the  mystic 
diagram  he  shall  instal  Bhaskara  along  with  the  twelve  deities 
and  then  worship  the  sun  surrounded  by  the  planets.  He  shall 
attain  the  excellent  Sayujya  (the  salvation  of  identity)  with  the 
sun.  Similarly  he  shall  draw  the  six-sided  figure  by  means  of 
red  chalk  to  depict  deities  pertaining  to  Prakrti.  In  the  middle 
region  he  shall  worship  the  goddess  of  Devas,  Prakrti,  in  the 
form  of  Brahman.  To  the  right  he  shall  worship  the  deity  of 
Sattva-Oui^a;  to  the  left  that  of  Rajo-Gu^a  and  in  front 


385 


Th  Tmples  of  Siva 

that  of  Tamo-Gu^a.  He  shall  worship  the  goddess  Ambika 
in  the  middle.  To  the  right  he  shall  worship  the  five  elements 
and  the  five  Tanmatra^.  To  the  north  he  shall  worship  the 
five  organs  of  action  and  five  organs  of  sense.  In  the  six-sided 
figure  he  shall  worship  the  two  Atmans,  viz,,  Atman  and 
Antaratman  as  well  as  the  cosmic  intellect  and  ego  along  with 
the  principle  Mahat.  He  shall  then  attain  the  benefit  of  all 
sacrifices. 

81.  O leading  brahmins,  thus  the  great  Prakyta  Mandala 
(the  mystic  diagram  pertaining  to  Prakrti)  has  been  mentioned 
to  you.  Henceforth  I shadl  mention  the  means  of  achieving 
all  desired  objects. 

82-85.  The  devotee  conversant  with  the  mantras  shall 
sprinkle  the  ground  duly  with  water  and  scrub  it  with  cow- 
dung.  He  shall  then  make  the  mystic  diagram  in  the  form  of 
a square  measuring  a go-carma  (i.e.  150  Hastas  a side).  He 
shall  then  decorate  it  with  canopies,  or  charming  umbrellas. 
He  shall  embellish  them  with  globe-like  bubbles  or  crescent- 
shaped trinkets  made  of  gold  or  the  leaves  of  A^vattha  tree. 
He  shall  decorate  it  with  full  blown  white,  red  or  blue  lotuses; 
also  strings  of  pearls  shall  be  suspended  from  the  extremities 
of  the  canopies.  He  shall  embellish  it  with  white  banners  and 
silken  Vaijayantis  (Ensigns)  or  garlands  of  sprouts  and  fruits. 
There  shall  be  white  mud-pots  and  elegant  water-jars  filled 
with  water.  He  shall  have  fifty  lamps  in  a row  and  five  kinds 
of  incense. 

86-94.  The  devotee  shall  make  an  excellent  lotus  with  fifty 
petals  by  means  of  powders  of  different  colours  or  only  with 
white  powder.  The  lotus  shall  extend  to  one  Hasta  in  magni- 
tude. It  shall  be  made  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions. 
He  shall  fix  the  lord  Rudra,  the  lord  of  Devas  along  with  the 
goddess  in  the  pericarp.  Beginning  with  the  petal  in  the  east 
and  proceeding  gradually  he  shall  fix  the  syllables  in  the  petals 
along  with  the  Rudras.  O sages  of  good  holy  rites,  the  syllables 
are  to  begin  with  the  Pranava  and  end  with  Namas.  O excellent 
sages,  after  duly  worshipping  thus  with  scents  and  fragrant 
flowers,  he  shall  feed  fifty  brahmins  in  accordance  with  the  in- 
junctions. He  shall  give  those  leading  sages  the  charitable  gifts  of 
garlands  of  rosary,  sacred  thread,  ear-rings,  water-pots,  scats, 


386 


LiHgapurdi^a 


staff,  turbans  and  clothes.  He  shall  offer  Mahacarii  as  Nai- 
vedya  to  Sambhu  the  lord  of  Devas  and  dedicate  the  black  pair 
(i.e.  a black  cow  and  a black  ox).  In  the  end  he  shall  offer 
the  mystic  diagram  made  of  powders  to  the  lord  of  Devas.  He 
rhall  then  offer  materials  of  utility  in  a sacrifice  to  Siva.  The 
intelligent  devotee  shall  perform  the  Japa  of  the  letters  one  by 
one  with  Oxhkara  in  the  beginning.  I shall  briefly  itiention  the 
benefit  that  a man  attains  after  describing  this  excellent  Mandala 
amongst  all  with  devotion. 

95-98.  By  seeing  the  coloured  Mandala  and  by  wor- 
shipping it  one  attains  the  same  benefit  as  a yogin  attains 
in  the  following  circumstances  : — When  he  has  learned  the 
Vedas  duly  along  with  their  Angas  (ancillary  subjects);  when 
he  has  worshipped  God  by  means  of  sacrifices,,  such  as 
Jyoti§toma  etc.,  ending  with  that  of  Vi^vajit;  when  (as  a 
householder)  he  has  procreated  sons  like  himself;  when  he  has 
adopted  the  stage  of  life  of  a forest-dweller  with  earnestness 
maintaining  the  sacrificial  fire,  and  performing  all  rites  such  as 
Candrayana,  etc.;  when  he  has  renounced  all  holy  rites,  learned 
Brahmavidya  assiduously  and  attained  perfect  knowledge  and 
when  with  perfect  knowledge  he  has  seen  what  should  be  seen. 

99-100.  After  scrubbing  and  cleaning  the  front  yard  of  the 
shrine  by  any  material,  O excellent  brahmins,  if  a devotee 
describes  a mystic  diagram  in  the  form  of  a square  to  the 
north  or  south  or  to  the  west  of  the  shrine  and  embellishes  it 
with  the  pow’ders,  flowers,  raw  rice  grains  etc.,  and  then  wor- 
ships the  deity  with  flowers,  raw  rice  grains,  etc.,  he  is 
liberated  from  all  sins. 

101-102.  He,  who  devoutly  scrubs  and  cleans  the  sanctum 
sanctorum  all  round,  even  once,  scatters  scented  flowers  all 
round,  offers  fragrant  articles  like  sandal  paste,  camphor,  etc., 
makes  the  place  sweet  smelling  with  incense  of  four  kinds  and 
prays  to  the  lord  liSana,  goes  to  the  world  of  Siva. 

103-104.  The  man  enjoys  pleasures  for  a hundred  crores 
of  kalpas.  His  body  emits  sweet  fragrance  like  that  of  flowers 
with  which  he  fills  the  temple  of  Siva.  Gradually  he  goes 
to  ^ the  world  of  Gandharvas  and  is  worshipped  by  the  Gandh- 
arvas.  .He  comes  to  this  world  in  due  course  and  becomes  a 
powerful  monarch. 


387 


fScrubbing^.and  cleaning  the  shrine  of  Siva 

105-106.  Maha4cva  ip  the  pTiimt4inl  lord.  He  is  the 
cause  of  creatioijt,  dissolution  and  iSustenanoe.  ,Sadil!$iva  is  all 
pervasive  an4  is  the  oyi?|:lor4.of  the  worlds.  The  nectar  of  Siva- 
Brahman  should  be  known  as  the  excellent  means  of.  salvation. 
One  shall  always  worship  the  lord,  the  manifest  and  the  un 
manifest  being  the  lord  beyond  imagination. 


CHAPTER  SEVENIYEIGHT 

Scrubbing  and  cleaning  the  shrine  of  Siva 

Suta  said: 

1.  O excellent  sages,  the  holy  shrine  of  Siva  should  be  scr- 
ubbed and  cleaned  by  means  of  water  filtered  and  purified  with 
a cloth.  Otherwise  no  Siddhi  is  attained. 

2.  O leading  sages,  waters  that  have  no  foam,  particularly 
from  the  rivers,  should  be  taken.  When  filtered  with  a cloth  they 
become  pure  and  holy. 

3.  Hence,  O excellent  brahmins,  all  divine  holy  rites  should 
he  performed  by  the  purified  waters  for  achieving  the  results  in 
all  rites. 

4.  Waters  are  mixed  with  minute  germs.  By  using  the  un  fil- 
tered waters  one  attains  the  same  sin  as  by  killing  them. 

5'6.  O brahmins,  householders  adopt  violent  means  always 
while  sweeping  or  wiping,  while  using  fire,  threshing,  p>ounding 
things  or  while  fetching  water.  But  one  shall  eschew  violence. 
Non-violence  is  the  greatest  virtue  to  all  living  creatures. 

7.  Hence,  By  all  means  one  shall  prfictise  water  purified 
1biy  cloth.  The  meritorious  and  charitable  gift  of  giving  protection 
the  excellent  of  all  charitable  gifts. 

8-10.  Hence,  violence  should  be  avoided  always  and  at  all 
/places.  All  violent  creatures  do  not  harm  a man  who  abstains 
, from  violence  mentally,  verbally  and  physically.  They  harass 
0ne,who  injures  others.  A man  who  abstains  from  violence 
>^obtain$  a crore  timfes  the  benefit  that  one  attains  by  gifting 
" i.way  the  ‘three  Worlds  to  one  who  has  mastered  the  Vedas. 
' Those  who  are  engaged  in  the  welfare  of  living  beings,  men* 


388  LingapurSaua 

tally,  verbally  and  physically  and  those  who  follow  the  path 
pointed  out  by  kindness  go  to  the  world  of  Rudra. 

11*1 5a.  Those  who  protect  persons  of  various  sorts  like  a 
loving  master  or  with  love  as  if  they  were  their  own  sons  and 
grandsons,  go  to  the  world  of  Rudra.  Hence,  by  all  means  sprin- 
kling should  be  performed  by  means  of  water  filtered  with  a 
cloth.  The  ablution  should  be  carried  out  particularly.  Even  by 
killing  a single  person  in  the  premises  of  Siva’s  temple  one 
attains  the  sins  that  accrue  from  destroying  the  three  worlds. 
But,  O excellent  brahmins,  violence  to  flowers®®®  must  always  be 
pursued  for  the  worship  of  Siva,  violence  to  the  animals’®®  for 
the  sake  of  sacrifice.  The  chastisement  of  the  wicked  by  the 
Ksatriya  caste  can  be  pursued. 

15b-17a.  In  the  case  of  yoginsexpounding  the  Brahman 
these  rules  regarding  what  is  laid  down  and  what  is  forbidden 
are  not  applicable.  They  shall  not  be  killed  even  if  they  resort 
to  forbidden  things.  Similarly  expounders  of  Brahman  shall 
not  be  killed  since  they  have  eschewed  all  actions  and  taken  to 
Sannyasa,  even  if  at  times  they  arc  prone  to  sinful  activities. 

17b- 18.  Women  are  holy  ones  as  they  are  born  of  the 
family  of  Atri.  Even  when  they  are  engaged  in  sinful  acts  they 
should  not  be  killed.  They  are  to  be  worshipped  always.  By  kill- 
ing Atreyis  one  incurs  a sin  equal  to  the  slaughter  of  a brahmin. 

19-20.  Women  from  any  caste  should  not  be  taken  up  for 
the  Yajrlas  at  any  time,  by  anyone  or  in  any  place,  O leading 
brahmins.  Women  engaged  in  sinful  activities,  whether  they  be 
dirty  or  beautiful,  ugly  or  robed  in  ugly  clothes  should  never  be 
killed  by  men  due  to  the  suspicion  that  they  may  be  Siva. 

21.  Those  who  practise  the  holy  rites  and  conduct  of  life 
outside  the  pale  of  the  Vedas,  those  who  are  excluded  from  the 
rites  laid  down  in  Srutis  and  Smrtis  and  those  who  are  notori- 
ous as  heretics  should  not  be  conversed  with  by  the  twice-born. 

699-700.  violence  incumd  by  plucking  flowers  (puspa-hixhta)  for  $iva*s 
worship  is  not  sinful,  so  also  the  slaughter  of  animals  in  propidation  c^Siva. 

V-19  (below)  prohibits  the  slaughter  of  women  in  sacrifices  implying 
thereby  that  inaa-slaughter(nara-vali)was  a common  pracdoe,  ST  interprets 
<ttriyab*  as ‘mismiaHitriyah’  and  explains  that  the  resuiction  of  slaughter 
did  not  iq;>ply  to  the  female  animals.  ST.  quotes  a scriptural  saying  (irud) 
in  support  of  this  view  : **Sarasvatlzii  Vaiftm  Slabheta.** 


The  mode  of  worship  of  Siva 


389 


22.  They  should  neither  be  seen  nor  touched.  After  seeing 
them  one  should  look  at  the  sun.  Still  they  should  not  be 
killed  by  kings  or  other  creatures. 

23.  O brahmins,  by  worshipping  lord  Siva  even  for  once, 
thanks  to  the  contact  with  good  men,  a man  attains  Rudra’s 
world. 

24.  O excellent  sages,  all  unkind  persons  become  miserable. 
So  also,  all  men  who  are  devoid  of  devotion  towards  the  great 
lord. 

25.  Those  who  arc  devotees  of  Siva,  the  lord  of  Devas,  are 
fortunate.  After  enjoying  pleasures  here  itself  they  become 
liberated. 

26.  The  minds  of  men  are  attached  towards  sons,  wives 
and  houses.  Just  as  the  minds  of  ascetics  and  sages  are  attached 
towards  the  primordial  lord.  But  if  men  turn  their  minds  to- 
wards the  lord  at  least  once  by  chance  the  world  of  great  l^a 
b not  far  for  them. 


CHAPTER  SEVENTTNINE 

The  mode  af  worship  of  Siva 

The  sages  said: 

1-2.  O sages  of  great  intellect,  how  should  the  great  lord, 
the  lord  of  subjects  be  worshipped  by  tardy  and  dull-witted 
men  who  are  short-lived,  whose  strength  is  trifling  and  whose 
virility  is  insignificant.  Even  after  worshipping  lord  Siva  by 
means  of  penance  for  thousands  of  years,  Devas  do  not  see  him. 
How  then  do  they  worship  the  lord  ? 

SUta  said: 

3.  O leading  sages,  what  you  have  said  is  quite  true.  Still 
with  faith  the  lord  can  be  seen  and  pleased  and  even  conversed 
with. 

4,  O brahmins,  if  even  those  who  arc  devoid  of  devotion 
incidentally  worship  the  lord,  he  bestows  fruits  befitting  the 
emotion. 


39Q  ; ' ' IMgc^urana 

5.;  O b/ahmitisv the  base  brahmin  who  worships'. tKe lord-after 
being  defiled  by  theieavmgs  of  food  becomes  a KiSaca/  The  ihari^ 
of  deluded  intellect  who  worships  ' the  lord  in  a fit  ^"angf^  sliaH* 
attain  the  abode ioPRak^^.  ' • * 

^ ;fi«;i  .The  wicked,  jman  who  eats  forbidden  food  and  Worships 
the  lord  becomes  a Yaksa.  A man  who  practises  music  arid^ 
worships  .the;  Jordiattains  the  abodfe  of  Oandharvas*  A perison 
who  practisiis-dance'.alarattams  the  same  static;  ' ^ 

7.  The  base  man  attached  to  women  and  yearning  for  fame 
attain^  the  1 abode  lOf  rite  moon’®^  (byiWoarshippmg  the4ord)-.  A 
perrson  afflicted  1 'by  pride  and*  arrogance,  worshij^ing  Riidra,  • 
shall  attain  the  abode  of  Soma  (moon  ?) 

. By;  weKshippirig..thc  :k9rd  fay  means  of -Gayatri  verses*  One 
shall  attain  tfae  warld^of  Pxajapa^  worshipping  ^by  means  of 
Pra^ava  one.attaim  the  sdDK>de;oPBrbhma  or  Visnu.;  ' 

By.  wofsbipping  the>.lord  with  faith  even  for  once,  the 
devotee  attains  the  world  of  Rudra  and  rejoices^  along  With  the  ^ 
Rudras. 

10-22.  The  splendid  Linga,  worshipped  by  Devas  and  Asu- 
ras  should  be  cleaned  by  the  holy  waters.  The  lord  should  be 
invoked  devoutly  in  the  pedestal.  After  visiting  the  lord  duly 
and  after  worshippings be/  inf^ij^  in  the  concei- 
ved seat  which  has  the  splendid  form  of  perfect  knowledge, 
which  is  richly  endowed*  with  detachment  and  prosperity,  which 
is  bowed  to  by  all  the  people,  which  is  in  the  middle  of  thq  . lotus  ^ 
of  Oihkura  and  which  has  its  origin  from  the  moon,  sun  and 
firci  ' After ' offering  PSdyaj  Acamahsi' ind  Arghya  to  Rudra  the 
devotee  shkll  bathe  the  deity' with  pure  waters,  ghee  and  milk. 
He 'shill  bathe  'fcudra  with  ‘curds‘knd  clean  Hiin.  Thereafter 
he  shall  ^bathe  the’ deity  with  pure  Water  and  worship'  it  with 
sandahpastei  After  worshipping ‘With  yelloW  pigment  he  shall 
worship  it  with  red  flowers,  ^bnbfdkeh  Bilva  leaves,  blue  and 
red  lotuses,  Nandyavarta  flowers,  Mallikas,  Campakas,  Jati 
-flowers,  Bakulas,  RarayiraSj.jSi^nni  IJnmattas, 

Agastyas,  bunchy,  pf  orna- 

ments. Aiter  offering  incense  of  five  kinds  he  shall  offer  milk  . 
pudding  as  , Nafved^a, , he,  rice;Wit|i 

curds^  nec  W ■ ■ 

70 1 . cftiidram---Budba*ithanain  ST.  the  house  of  Mercury. 


‘i*  it' 


391 


The  mode  of  worship  of  Siva 

and  then  Mudganna  (rice  cooked  green  gram)  of  six  types. 
Thereafter  he  shall  offer  as  Naivedya  five  types  of  cooked  rice 
along  with  ghee,  or  rice  alone  wherein  he  shall  cook  one 
A<Jhaka  measure  of  rice.  After  circumambulation  he  shall  bow 
down  ,ajg)aia  and  again:  in,  the  end.  After  eulogising  lord  l§ana 
and  after  worshipping  Siva  he  shall  adore  him  by  repeating  the 
of  UinaL,  TatpOru^a,*  Aghorij  Vamadeva  and  Sadyo- 
jStav  With)  thist^  inode  of-worship:brd  Mahefvara  becomes  de- 
lighted.^/:  .. 

23.  O excellent  brahmins,  those  trees  which  are  utilised  irt 
the  worship  of  Siva  through  their  flowers,  leaves,  etc.,  and  the 
cows  too,  attain  the  supreme  goal. 

24.  He  who  but  once  worships  Siva,  Rudra,  Sarva,  the  un- 
born Bhava  attains  Siva’s  Sayujya  devoid  of  returning  here 
again. 

25.  One  is  liberated  frdm  a^^sin^  ^veii  by  seeing  but  once 
incidentally  Parame^ana,  Bhava,  Sarva,  lord  of  Uma  who  was 
worshipped  thus. 

26.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this  that  a man  attains  Brahma’s 
world  by  seeing  Mahadeva  who  has  been  worshipped  or  is 
being  worshipped. 

27-3t).  He  who  on  hearing  about  the  lord  approves  of  it 
and'  rejoices  therein  attains  the  greatest  goal.  He  who,  for  even 
once,  offers  a ghee  lamp  in  front  of  the  Lihga  attains  that  goal 
which  is  difficult  of  access  by  means  of  the  stages  in  life  and 
which  is  steady.  By  offering  a tree  of  lamps  d ther  made  of  clay 
or  of  wood  in  the  temple  of  Siva  bne  is  honoured  in  the  world 
of  Siva  along  with  hundred  members 'of  His  family.  He  who  , 
duly  and  devdUtly  offers  lamps  to  Siva  made  of  iron,  copper, 
silver  or  gold  shall  go  to  the  city  of  Siva  ih  splendid  vehicles 
refulgent  like  ten  thousand  kins.  / 

3 1 -34;  He  who  offers,  a ghee  lamp  in  front  of  Siva  in  the, , 
month  of  Karttlka  or  he  who  sees  the  great  lord  being  duly 
worshipped  with  faith^  O excellent' sages,  go^  the  vyqrld 
of  Brahma.  . . , . ; / 

It  is^  mention, ed  tb^t; the  rit^f  pfinv^  welcpme  presr  ; 

ence^  in$^lla|ion  ajjid  jwprsbip  shajl  be  conducted;  fbn>ugh  Rwira'  1 
Giyatri,*  the  Asana  (scat)  by  means  of  Pranava,  the  ablution 
by  j^y(j^,man;;i:a^  ^Sadyoj^ta,  ctp,)  ^ agsigited.t^ii  R,udra. 


392 


Lingapura^a 


One  shall  thus  perpetually  worship  Uma’s  husband^  the  lord  of 
Devas.  One  shall  worship  Brahma  with  Pranava  on  his  right 
side. 

35-37,  To  his  north,  he  shall  worship  Visnu  the  lord  of  the 
chiefs  of  Devas  by  means  of  Gayatrl,  after  performing  Homa  in 
the  fire  duly  by  repeating  the  five  mantras  and  the  Pranava.  By 
thus  worsUpping  the  lord  he  attains  Sayujya  with  Siva.  Thus, 
succinctly  the  mode  of  worshipping  Siva  has  been  mentioned. 
After  hearing  this  directly  from  Rudra,  this  was  mentioned  to 
me  by  Wyasa,  in  former  times. 


CHAPTER  EIGHTY 

The  holy  Pdiupata  rite 


The  sages  said  : — 

I.  How  is  the  liberation  of  the  Paiu  (Individual  soul) 
from  the  Pa^a  (bondage)  effected  on  seeing  Pafupati  ? It 
behoves  you  to  tell  us  how  Devas  eschewed  their  Pafutva  ? 

SUta  said  : 

2-5  Thanks  to  the  grace  of  omniscient  lord,  formerly  Devas 
came  to  him  as  he  had  stationed  in  his  city  called  Bhogya’®* 
on  the  peak  of  the  Kailasa,  for  the  welfare  of  Devas.  Lord 
Vi^iniu,  mounted  on  the  wings  of  Garuda,  came  adong  with 
Brahma.  He  approached  the  lord  of  Devas  along  with  Devas. 
Along  with  Yama,  Indra  and  the  Sadhyas,  they  came  to  the 
splendid  and  excellent  mountain  and  bowed  down  to  the  excel- 
lent mountain  as  well  as  to  the  lord.  The  Garuda-bannered  lord 
Vi§]pu  got  down  fh>m  Garuda  and  climbed  the  Meru  along 
with  the  foremost  Devas, 

6-7.  Meru  was  devoid  of  all  sins.  It  bestowed  each 
and  every  object  of  desire.  It  was  the  chief  means  of  enjoyment. 
The  fiocks  of  sparrows  rejoiced  therein.  Herds  of  elephants 

703.  Bhogya  ot  Bhogyft,  The  city  ti  located  on  the  mountain  Kailfisa. 


The  holy  Pdiupata  rite 


393 


made  it  resonant.  There  was  sweet  rattling  music.  Even  the 
darkness  was  welcome  to  people.  The  region  of  the  forest  was 
well  laid  with  footsteps.  The  waters  at  the  borderland  were 
sparkling  and  the  wind  was  attractive.  It  consisted  of  hundreds 
and  thousands  of  abodes  resembling  suns.  It  was  blended 
with  the  flocks  of  swans  adept  in  elegant  movements.  It  con- 
tained trees,  such  as  Dhava,  Khadira,  Palana,  sandal,  etc.  and 
groups  and  flocks  of  excellent  birds,  such  as  the  cuckoo  etc.  and 
also  the  bees. 

8.  In  some  places  it  abounded  in  divine  trees.  There  were 
Kurabaka,  Priyaka  and  Tilaka  trees.  The  excellent  mountain 
had  many  Kadamba  trees  and  was  surrounded  by  the  creepers 
of  Tamala.  The  mountain  had  many  peaks. 

9.  The  city  of  lord  Siva  was  built  by  Vi^vakarman  on  the 
top  of  this  mountain  for  the  sports  of  lord  Siva. 

10.  Devas  including  Indra  and  Visnu  saw  that  city  and 
with  great  concentration  and  attention  they  bowed  down  from 
a great  distance  due  to  the  power  of  the  trident-bearing  lord. 

11.  The  great  primordial  lord  went  to  the  mountain 
Kailasa,  a part  of  the  Meru,  which  is  as  refulgent  as  thousand 
suns,  and  which  is  great  and  which  has  thousands  of  virtues 
blended  with  it. 

12.  Then  Brahma  and  Visnu  the  destroyer  of  Asuras 
reached  the  gateway  of  the  city  which  resembled  the  lofty 
mountain  and  which  abounded  in  women,  horses,  elephants, 
chariots,  Ganas  and  their  chiefs. 

13.  It  was  surrounded  by  big  mansions  full  of  gold  and 
bedecked  in  jewels.  It  contained  lofty  palaces  of  various  shapes 
and  also  ramparts. 

14-20.  On  seeing  the  exterior  of  the  city  of  lord  Siva 
along  with  Devas  including  Brahma,  Visnu  with  beaming  face 
became  delighted  in  his  mind.  He  then  entered  the  city  which 
had  great  palaces  and  mansions  with  lofty  upper  storeys.  The 
second  city  of  the  lord  of  Devas  was  also  splendid.  It  had  four 
entrances.  It  was  encompassed  by  diamonds,  lapis  lazuli,  rubies 
and  clusters  of  jewels  and  hanging  swings.  It  was  bedecked  with 
bells  and  chowries,  and  resonant  with  musical  instruments,  such 
as  Mrdanga,  Muraja,  Vina  and  Venu.  It  was  surrounded  by 
dancing  Apsarases  and  Bhutas  (goblins).  There  were  mansions 


394 


Lingapurd^a 


charming  to  the  eyes.  They  resembled  the  abodes  of  the  leaders 
of  Devas.  On  the  tops  of  these  palaces  thousands  of  lady  citizens 
stood  with  flowers,  fruits  and  Aksatas  (raw  rice  grains)  in 
their  hands.  As  on  the  head  of  lord  Siva  they  strew  these  on 
the  head  of  Visnu  from  all  directions.  On  seeing  Visnu, 
the  women  rejoiced  immediately,  danced  and  sang.  Their  eyes 
were  roving  due  to  inebriation  and  they  had  ample  buttocks. 
On  seeing  Visnu  some  women  wore  smiling  faces  ; their 
garments  became  loosened  ; their  waistbands  and  girdles 
dropped.  They  sang  passionate  songs. 

21-35.  Visnu  then  went  beyond  those  excellent  cities  (one 
within  the  other)  the  fourth,  fifth,  sixth,  seventh,  eighth,  ninth 
and  tenth.  Then  he  reached  the  highly-splendid  city  of  Siva. 
It  was  perfectly  circular  and  very  splendid,  stationed  on  the 
auspicious  peak  of  Kailua.  It  was  adorned  with  lofty  mansions 
resembling  the  sphere  of  the  sun.  In  different  quarters  it 
contained  crystal  Mari^apas  and  splendid  platforms  made  of 
gold  and  different  jewels.  The  ornamental  gateways  were 
adorned  with  different  kinds  of  jewellery  and  many  jewel-stud- 
ded Sarvatobhadras  (temples  with  openings  on  all  the  four 
sides).  There  were  twentyeight  fort  walls  of  different  forms  and 
shapes.  There  were  side  doors  and  main  doors  in  the  inter- 
stices of  the  quarters,  all  firmly  built  and  of  diverse  kinds.  There 
were  hidden  apartments  and  houses.  There  were  splendid 
abodes  of  Guha.  O highly  blessed  ones,  they  were  built  in 
the  rural  model  and  other  types.  There  were  charming  pearls 
too.  The  divine  abodes  of  the  leaders  of  Ganas  were  full  of 
rubies.  There  were  many  splendid  flower  gardens  of  various 
shapes  with  sandal  trees  in  them.  There  were  many  lakes  and 
tanks  with  golden  rows  of  steps.  They  were  frequented  by 
swans  that  had  been  defeated  by  the  gaits  of  women.  The  tanks 
had  divine  and  nectarine  water  and  the  water  fouls  (Karandas) , 
peacocks,  cuckoos  and  ruddy  geese  heightened  their  splendour. 
There  were  thousands  of  Rudrakanyas  (virgins)  who  were  be- 
decked in  all  ornaments,  who  were  adepts  in  conversation 
and  elocution,  who  stooped  down  due  to  the  weight  of  their 
heavy  breasts,  whose  eyes  were  roving  due  to  inebriation  and 
who  were  engaged  in  singing  and  playing  on  instruments.  There 
were  groups  of  dancing  nymphs.  The  lakes  contained  full- 


The  holy  Pdiupata  rite 


395 


blown  lotuses  difficult  of  access  even  to  Dcvas.  There  were  ex- 
cellent birds  of  all  kinds.  There  were  the  womenfolk  of 
Rudras  lustrous  as  rubies,  engaged  in  aquatic  sports.  There 
were  groups  of  women  engaged  in  amorous  festivals  of  great 
elegance.  They  were  passionately  fond  of  rural  notes  and 
strains  of  music.  On  seeing  these  things  in  the  abode  of  lord 
Siva  the  great  lord  of  Devas  stood  in  surprise. 

36.  There  itself  they  saw  Rudraganas  and  thousands  of  their 
heroic  leaders. 

37.  They  saw  the  crystalline  aerial  chariots,  lofty  palaces 
bedecked  in  diamonds,  lapis  lazuli  and  golden  steps. 

38-41.  On  the  tops  of  palaces  there  were  delighted  women 
with  lotus-like  eyes,  and  ample  buttocks.  There  were  Yak^as, 
Gandharvas  and  Apsarases,  Kinnaris,  Kinnaras,  serpents, 
and  siddha  girls.  They  had  different  kinds  of  dresses.  They 
were  bedecked  in  different  ornaments.  They  had  diverse 
efficiency.  They  were  fond  of  pleasure  and  amorous  dalliance. 
They  had  the  lustre  of  the  blue  lotus  petals.  They  had  eyes 
as  large  as  the  petals  of  lotus.  They  looked  resplendent  by 
their  upper  garments  resembling  the  filaments  of  lotus.  They 
were  bedecked  in  bangles,  anklets,  necklaces  and  umbrellas  of 
variegated  colours  as  well  as  attractive  garments.  They 
were  fond  of  embellishments  and  they  were  bedecked  in 
various  ornaments  also. 

42.  On  seeing  these  beaudfiil  women  of  the  chieft  of 
Ganas,  the  leading  Dcvas — Indra  and  others  went  to  the 
mansion  of  the  destroyer  of  Tripuras. 

43.  On  seeing  the  first  palace  of  the  lord,  that  had  the 
colour  of  a thousand  rising  suns,  in  the  middle  of  the  city,  the 
groups  of  Devas  and  Siddhas  beginning  with  Indra  halted 
there. 

44.  Thpn  all  Devas  with  Indra  at  their  head  saw  Nandin, 
the  lord  of  Garias  standing  at  the  doorway  of  the  palace. 

45.  On  seeing  Nandin  the  leader  of  Gai^ias,  Devas  bowed 
down  to  him  and  said  ‘‘Be  Victorious*’.  On  seeing  them  the 
leader  of  Garias  replied : — 

46.  “O  highly  blessed  Devas,  why  have  you  come  here  ? 
O persons  of  good  holy  rites,  you  who  have  shaken  off  your 
sins,  ye  the  lord  of  all  worlds,  it  behoves  you  to  say. 


396 


Livgapurdna 


47.  They  then  spoke  to  the  lord,  the  bestower  of  boons,  the 
lord  having  the  lustre  of  a lordly  elephant.  “For  our  liberation 
from  the  bondage  of  Pa^us  kindly  show  lord  Mahesvara  to  us. 

48.  Formerly  in  order  to  burn  the  three  cities,  the  Paiutva 
was  stipulated.  O you  of  good  holy  rites,  now  we  are  worried 
over  this  Pa^utva. 

49.  The  holy  rite  Pa^upata  was  mentioned  by  lord  Siva. 
O leader  of  Bhutas,  thanks  to  this  holy  rite,  the  state  of  Pa.<u 
ceases  to  exist. 

50-53.  By  performing  this  excellent  Vrata  for  twelve 
years,  or  for  twelve  months  or  for  twelve  days,  all  Pasus  are 
liberated  from  the  bondage  of  worldly  existence.”  Nandin,  the 
son  of  Silada,  the  leader  of  the  Bhutas  showed  the  lord  to  all 
Dcvas  including  Visnu.  On  seeing  lord  Siva  the  unchanging 
deity  accompanied  by  Amba  and  Gai^as,  Devas  were  thrilled 
with  pleasure.  They  bowed  to  the  lord  and  eulogised  him. 
After  submitting  to  lord  Siva,  their  desire  for  liberation  from 
bondage,  Devas  stood  in  front  of  lord  Siva  bowing  again  and 
again. 

54-57.  After  glancing  at  them  and  purifying  their  souls, 
the  full-bannered  lord  of  Devas,  the  great  lord  taught  the 
Paiupata  Vrata  to  them.  He  then  seated  himself  along  with 
Uma  and  the  sages. 

Since  then,  all  Devas  are  known  as  Pafupatas  (belonging  to 
Palupati).  All  those  who  consider  the  lord  of  Paius  as  their 
direct  deity  are  said  to  be  Pa^upatais.  Thereafter,  Devas  per- 
formed penance  again. 

58-60.  The  excellent  Devas  performed  penance  for  twelve 
years  and  became  free  from  bondage.  They  went  back 
with  Brahma  and  Visiju.  Thus  everything  that  had  been 
heard  from  Brahma  has  been  mentioned  to  you.  It  had 
been  heard  by  Sanat  and  by  Vyasa  from  him.  The  man  who 
remains  pure  and  hears  this  or  narrates  this  to  the  brahmins 
attains  a different  body  and  is  liberated  from  the  bondage  of 
Pa^us. 


The  holy  rite  for  the  release  of  Paius 


397 


CHAPTER  EIGHTYONE 

The  holy  rite  for  the  release  of  Pains 

The  sages  said : 

1-4.  This  holy  rite  that  liberates  Pasus  (individual  souls) 
from  bondage  has  been  mentioned  by  you.  This  holy  rite  of 
Paiupati  pertaining  to  the  Lihga  had  been  performed  formerly 
by  Devas.  It  behoves  you  to  mention  this  to  us  in  the  manner 
you  had  heard  it  formerly. 

Suta  said: 

Formerly,  Nandin,  the  son  of  Silada,  was  earnestly  asked  by 
Sanatkumara.  What  Nandin  spoke  to  him  I shall  mention 
succinctly.  This  excellent  vrata  called  Dvadasa  Lihga  and 
capable  of  liberating  Pasus  from  bondage  had  been  performed 
by  Devas,  Daityas,  Gandharvas,  Siddhas,  Caranas  and  the 
highly  blessed  sages. 

f).  It  yields  worldly  pleasures,  liberation,  yogic  power 
and  whatever  one  desires.  It  is  auspicious,  holy  and  conducive 
to  perseverance  and  energetic  efforts. It  destroys  entangle- 
ment in  worldly  affairs  in  the  case  of  devotees. 

6.  It  has  been  evolved  after  churning  the  Vedas  and 
their  six  ancillaries,’®^  It  excels  all  charitable  gifts  and  is  holier 
than  ten  thousand  horse-sacrifices. 

7.  It  is  sacred,  bestows  all  auspicious  things,  destroys 
all  enemies,  brings  about  salvation  even  to  those  creatures  that 
are  immersed  in  the  ocean  of  worldly  existence. 

8.  It  dispels  all  sickness  and  destroys  all  fevers.  It  had 
been  performed  formerly  by  Devas  as  well  as  by  Brahma  and 
Visnu. 


703.  N.S.  edition  reads  ‘aviyoga-karam’  for  *abhiyoga-karam’.  avi- 
yogakaram — sarvada  siva-sannidhyadayakam  ST.  that  which  brings  about 
the  devotee’s  proximity  to  Siva. 

704.  Sadahga  : six  ancillaries  to  the  Veda,  namely  (i)  Sik?a — the 
science  of  proper  articulation  and  pronunciation,  (ii)  Chandas — the  science 
of  prosody,  (iii)  Vyakaraua— grammar,  (iv)  Nirukta— etymological  expla- 
nation of  difficult  Vedic  words,  (v)  Jyotisa— astronomy,  (vi)Kalpa— ritual  or 
ceremonial. 


396 


Lingapurdna 


9.  O leading  brahmins,  the  devotee  shall  make  a small 
Lihga  and  bathe  it  with  sandal  water.  Beginning  in  the  month 
of  Caitra  he  shall  perform  the  holy  rite  of  Sivalihga. 

10-11.  He  shall  make  an  auspicious  golden  lotus  with 
pericarp  and  filaments.  It  shall  have  eight  petals  duly  studded 
with  all  the  nine  precious  gems.  He  shall  then  fix  the  crystal 
Linga  in  the  pericarp  along  with  its  pedestal.  Me  shall  then 
duly  and  devoutly  worship  it  with  Bilva  leaves. 

12-14.  O sages  of  good  holy  rites,  he  shall  worship  the 
linga  with  thousands  of  white,  red  and  blue  lotuses,  with 
white  Arka,  Karavira,  Karnikara  and  Kurabaka  as  well  as 
with  other  flowers  in  accordance  with  their  availability  repea- 
ting the  Gayatri.  After  adoring  with  scents,  etc.,  with  incense, 
with  auspicious  lamps  and  with  Nirajanas  (wavingsof  lights) 
the  devotee  shall  worship  the  great  lord  in  Linga  form.  O 
excellent  brahmins,  he  shall  oflfer  Aguru  (agallochum)  in 
the  south  by  means  of  Aghora  Mantra. 

15.  He  shall  offer  the  divine  Manah^ila  (red  arsenic) 
in  the  west  with  the  mantra  of  Sadyojata,  and  sandal  paste  in 
the  north  with  the  Vamadeva  Mantra. 

16-17.  O excellent  sages,  he  shall  offer  Haritala  (yellow 
orpiment)  in  the  east  by  means  of  Tatpurusa.  With  devotion 
he  shall  offer  the  following  varieties  of  incense,  viz.,  that  origi- 
nating from  white  Aguru  and  black  Aguru;  then  the  Guggula 
dhupa  (aromatic  gum  resin),  the  excellent  Saugandhika 
(fragrant  incense)  and  the  incense  named  Sitara. 

18.  Mahacaru  or  an  A^haka  measure  of  cooked  rice  should 
be  offered  as  Naivedya.  Thus,  this  great  holy  rite  of  Sivalihga 
has  been  narrated  to  you. 

19-22.  All  these  are  common  to  all  months.  1 shall  mention 
the  particular  features  now: — ^The  Lihga  shall  be  adamantine 
in  Vai^akha in  Jyestha  it  shall  be  made  of  emerald;  in 
A$a4ha  of  pearl;  in  Sravana  of  lapis  lazuli  and  in  Bhadrapada 
of  rubies.  O leading  brahmins,  in  ASvina,  the  Lihga  shall 
be  made  of  onyx;  in  Karttika  of  coral;  in  Marga§!r^  of  lapis 

705.  Vaiiikhe.  For  the  worship  of  Lihga  in  Caitra  read  V-9  ff  The 
crystal  (spbatika)  lihga  is  recommended  in  Caitra.  Gf.  3f?r 

TOTTot  ST. 


The  holy  rite  for  the  release  of  Paius 


399 


lazuli;  in  Pausa  of  topaz;  in  Magha  solar  stone  and  in  Phal- 
guna  of  crystals. 

23-24.  In  all  months  one  golden  lotus  ’ shall  be  used  for 
worship;  if  that  is  not  available  a silver  lotus  shall  be  used;  if 
that  too  is  not  available  ordinary  lotus  shall  be  used. 

When  precious  stones  are  not  available  the  worship  shall  be 
conducted  with  gold  or  silver.  If  silver  is  not  available  it  shall 
be  made  with  copper. 

25.  The  Lihga  can  be  made  of  rock,  wood  or  clay  along 
with  its  pedestal.  Or  he  shall  make  a temporary  Lihga  with 
fragrant  substances. 

26-27.  In  the  season  of  Hemanta  (early  winter)  one  shall 
worship  Mahadeva  with  Sripatra’®®  (Bilva  leaves)  alone.  In 
all  the  months  a lotus  made  of  gold  or  a lotus  made  of  silver 
with  golden  pericarp  can  be  used.  If  silver  lotus  is  not  available 
he  shall  worship  with  Bilva  leaves. 

28.  If  thousand  lotuses  are  not  available  one  shall  worship 
with  half  that  quantity;  or  he  shall  worship  Rudra  with  a 
moiety  of  the  said  half  or  he  shall  worship  with  a hundred 
and  eight  lotuses. 

29.  Gk)ddess  Laksm!  endowed  with  alj  characteristics  is 
stationed  on  the  leaf  of  the  Bilva.  Ambika  is  directly  present 
in  the  blue  lotus  and  §anmukha^®^  himself  is  present  in  the  red 
lotus. 

30.  Mahadeva,  Siva,  the  lord  of  all  Devas  occupies  the 
lotus.  Hence  the  learned  man  shall  never  forsake  the  Bilva 
leaf.  He  must  employ  every  means  to  secure  it. 

31.  He  shall  not  forsake  the  blue  lotus,  the  red  lilies  and 
particularly  the  red  lotuses.  The  lotus  fascinates  everyone.  Sila 

(red  arsenic)  bestows  Siddhi  of  all  objects. 

32-33.  The  incense  originating  from  the  black  agallochum 
dispels  all  sins;  the  offering  of  aromatic  gum,  resin,  etc.  and  the 
gift  of  lamps  destroy  all  ailments ; sandal  paste  bestows  all 

706.  Sripatra-^bilva-pmtra.  Siva  is  very  fond  of  bilva.  Gf.  Siva-raha» 
47a  as  cited  in  ST. 

707.  Sapmukhab — (Sadinanaly,  ^advaktrab,  ^vadanab) — 

mouthed  or  six-£sced  or  six-headed,  i.e.,  Kfirttikeya.  He  is  so  called  because 
when  bom  he  was  fostered  by  the  six  KrttikSs  who  offered  their  six  breasts 
to  him,  so  he  became  six-headed. 


400  Lingapurdna 

Siddhis;  the  scented  incense  is  the  means  of  achieving  all 
desired  objects. 

34.  The  incense  originating  from  white  agallochum  as 
well  as  black  agallochum  and  the  gentle  incense  Sitari  bestow 
salvation. 

35-37.  The  four- faced  Brahma  is  present  in  the  white  Arka 
flower;  the  goddess  of  intelligence  is  well  established  in  the 
Karnikara  flower;  the  presiding  deity  of  the  Ganas  is  present 
in  theKaravira  flower.  Narayana  himself  is  present  in  the  Kura- 
baka  flower,  the  daughter  of  the  mountain  is  present  in  all 
fragrant  flowers.  Hence,  one  shall  devoutly  and  in  accordance 
with  one’s  means,  worship  the  lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas  by 
means  of  these  splendid  flowers,  incenses,  etc.  according  to 
their  availability. 

38.  Thereafter,  he  shall  devoutly  offer  Mahacaru  made  of 
milk,  as  Naivedya  along  with  ghee  and  side-dishes,  prepared 
with  all  materials  of  diet. 

39-45.  Or  the  devotee  shall  offer  an  Adhaka  measure  or 
half  of  it  of  pure  cooked  rice  or  cooked  with  green  gram  dal. 
The  devotee  shall  offer  Camara  (chowries)  and  fans  to  the 
deity.  He  shall  also  dedicate  presents  that  had  been  earned  by 
legally  j ustifiable  means.  They  shall  be  holy  and  befitting  and 
of  diverse  kinds.  They  should  be  sprinkled  with  water  before  de- 
dication and  offered  to  Rudra  with  a devoted  mind.  It  was  from 
milk  that  nectar  had  been  extracted  by  the  victorious  Visnu 
for  the  sustenance  of  Devas.  Everything  is  founded  on  cooked 
rice.  By  giving  charitable  gifts  of  rice  to  all  living  beings  lord 
Siva  is  delighted.  Hence,  one  shall  worship  the  lord  with  cooked 
rice.  The  vital  breaths  are  stabilised  in  cooked  rice.  There  is 
also  pleasure  in  the  offering  of  other  presents;  the  wind-god  is 
present  in  the  fan.  Mahadeva  himself  is  present  in  all  materials ; 
the  lord  of  waters,  Varuna  is  present  in  the  scented  water; 
Prakrti  along  with  the  principle  Mahat  is  present  in  the 
pedestal.  Hence,  one  shall  worship  the  lord  duly  every  month. 
For  achieving  all  desired  objects  the  Vrata  should  be  observed 
on  the  full  moon  day. 

46.  One  shall  preserve  truthfulness,  cleanliness,  kindness, 
quiescence,  contentment  and  liberal-mindedness.  The  devotee 
shall  observe  fast  on  full  moon  and  new  moon  days. 


The  holy  rite  for  the  release  of  Pa§us 


401 


47.  At  the  end  of  the  year  he  shall  make  a gift  of  a cow. 
Particularly  he  shall  observe  the  rite  of  Vr§otsarga.^^®  With 
devotion  he  shall  feed  brahmins  who  have  mastered  the  Vedas 
and  who  have  sound  learning. 

48.  The  devotee  shall  deposit  the  Lihga  that  he  has 
worshipped,  in  the  shrine  of  Siva  along  with  the  materials  of 
worship  or  he  may  give  them  to  a brahmin. 

49.  O excellent  sages,  only  he  who  devoutly  performs  this 
great  lioly  rite  of  Sivalihga  in  all  the  months,  is  the  most 
excellent  one  among  those  who  perform  penance. 

50.  In  aerial  chariots  that  are  bedecked  in  jewels  and  that 
are  as  refulgent  as  crores  of  suns,  he  goes  to  the  divine  city  of 
giva^oa  and  never  returns  here. 

51.  Or  he  shall  perform  this  excellent  vrata  only  for  a 
month.  Even  then  he  attains  the  world  of  Siva.  No  doubt  need 
be  entertained  in  this  respect. 

52.  Or,  if  the  mind  of  the  devotee  is  attracted  to  worldly 
pleasures  he  shall  observe  the  holy  rite  for  a year.  He  will 
attain  whatever  boons  he  craves  for  and  obtain  Siva. 

53.  The  devoted  man  obtains  Deva-hood,  Pitr-hood,  or 
becomes  the  king  of  Devas  or  the  chieftain  of  Ganas. 

54.  He  who  seeks  learning  obtains  learning;  he  who  seeks 
worldly  pleasures  will  attain  them;  he  who  seeks  wealth  may 
espy  a treasure-trove  and  he  who  desires  for  longevity  will 
achieve  longevity. 

55.  One  rejoices  by  attaining  whatever  desires  he  cheri- 
shes by  performing  the  vrata,  only  for  a month.  In  the  end 
he  will  attain  Rudratva. 

56.  This  sacred  and  excellent  vrata  which  is  a great  secret 
is  evolved  by  Siva  the  creator  of  the  universe,  for  the  benefit  of 
Devas,  Asuras,  Siddhas,  Vidyadharas  and  human  beings. 

57.  After  duly  worshipping  the  lord  who  is  worthy  of 
worship,  after  bowing  to  him  with  head  bent  down  along  with 

708.  Vr^otsarga — a rite  of  letting  loose  a bull  (or,  according  to  some, 
a bull  and  four  heifers)  as  a work  of  merit,  especially  on  the  occasion  of  a 
Srgddha  in  honour  of  deceased  ancestors. 

709.  A mythical  city  ‘Siva-pura’  on  the  Himalayas,  particularly  on 
the  Kailasa  peak  is  conceived  as  the  abode  of  Siva. 


402 


Lingapurd^a 


one’s  sons  and  servants  and  after  assiduously  circumambula* 
ting  him  one  shall  repeat  the  hymn  “Vyapohana.”’^® 

58.  This  highly  precious  hymn  was  composed  by  lord 
Brahma,  the  Creator  of  the  Universe.  For  the  welfare  of  the 
three  worlds  this  was  repeated  by  the  magnanimous  lord  along 
withDevas. 


CHAPTER  EIGHTYTWO 

Hymn  of  purification 

Suta  said: 

1-4.  I shall  now  mention  the  auspicious  hymn  that  dispels 
sins  and  bestows  Siddhis.  This  was  at  first  heard  by  the 
noble  Kumara  from  Nandin  and  narrated  to  Vyasa  and  from 
him  heard  by  me  with  great  attention. 

Obeisance  to  Siva,  the  pure,  the  renowned,  devoid  of 
impurities  ; the  destroyer  of  the  wicked.  Obeisance  to  Sarva, 
to  Bhava  ; to  the  great  Atman.  May  the  omniscient  five- 
faced,’^^  ten-armed’^*  lord  possessed  of  fifteen  organs  of  senses, 
decked  in  all  ornaments  and  resembling  pure  crystal  and 
accompanied  by  Uma’^®  dispel  sins  quickly.  He  is  quiescent, 
all-pervasive  stationed  above  all  in  the  Padmasana’^*  posture. 

5-8.  May  IiS^a,  Puru§a,  Aghora,  Sadya  and  Vamadeva 
dispel  sin  quickly.  May  Ananta,  the  lord  of  all  learning,  the 
omniscient  lord  who  is  the  bestower  of  everything  and  who  is 
richly  endowed  with  meditation  on  Siva  dispel  my  sin.  May  the 
subtle  lord  of  Devas  and  Asuras,  the  lord  of  the  universe, 
worshipped  by  Ganas  and  endowed  with  the  sole  meditation  on 
Siva  dispel  my  sin.  May  the  most  excellent  one  among  auspi- 

710.  vyapohaoa — a stotra  of  Siva.  See  ch.  82. 

711.  padcapvaktrah — five-faced.  See  p.  49  note  65. 

712.  da^abhujah— ‘this  epithet  of  Siva  seldom  occurs  in  the  Pur&^as. 

7x3.  someiah — ^Umay&  sahitah  somah>  sa  c&sau  lial  ca  ST»  the  lord 

accompanied  by  Umii. 

714.  padm&sanar-'See  p.  35  note  47. 


Hjmn  of  purification 


403 


cious  ones,  the  great  one  worthy  of  worship,  the  deity  engaged 
in  auspicious  meditation,  the  all-pervasive  bestower  of  every- 
thing dispel  my  sin. 

9-12.  May  the  single-eyed  lord  I^a,  engrossed  in  aus- 
picious worship,  the  lord  richly  endowed  with  meditation  on 
Siva  dispel  my  sin.  May  lord  Ua.  of  three  forms,  the  inducer 
of  Siva’s  devotion  and  richly  endowed  with  meditation  on  Siva 
dispel  my  sin.  May  Srikantha  the  glorious  lord  of  fortune, 
always  engaged  in  meditation  and  worship  of  Siva,  dispel  my 
sin.  May  the  tufted  quiescent  lord,  smeared  with  ashes  from 
the  corpse  and  the  glorious  one  engaged  in  the  worship  of 
Siva,  dispel  my  sin. 

13-24-  May  the  great  goddess  directly  dispel  my  sin 
immediately: — the  goddess  bowed  to  by  the  three  worlds, 
the  ancient  goddess  in  the  form  of  a comet,  the  great 
goddess,  the  daughter  ofDaksa,  Gauri,  the  splendid  dau- 
ghter of  the  Himavan,  Ekaparna,’^^  Agraja,’^®  the  gentle  one, 
Ekapatala,  Aparna,  the  goddess  who  bestows  boons,  the  god- 
dess who  is  interested  only  in  granting  boons,  Uma,  the 
destroyer  of  Asuras,  Kau^ik!,  Kapardini,  Khatvahgadharini 
the  Divine  lady,  one  who  plucked  the  sprouts  by  means  of  the 
tip  of  her  hand,  one  who  is  surrounded  by  the  four  sons  Naiga- 
meya’^’  and  others,  the  daughter  of  Mena,  goddess  born  of 
water,  one  whose  eyes  resemble  lotuses,  one  who  is  the  mother 
of  the  noble-souled  Nandin  devoid  of  sorrow,  the  companion  of 
Subhavati,  Pahcacu^a,  the  bestower  of  boons,  the  unchanging 
one  who  attained  the  state  of  Prakrti  for  the  sake  of  creation 
of  all  living  beings;  one  who  pervades  everything  by  means 
of  the  twentythree’i®  principles  beginning  with  Mahat;  one 
who  is  perpetually  bowed  to  by  Laksmi  and  other  Saktis;  the 
delighter  of  Nanda;  Manonmani,  one  who  is  fond  of  embellish- 

715.  cka-parna— one  who  lived  on  a single  leaf,  uc.,  PSrvati,  Umfi, 
better  known  as  ‘aparija*. 

716.  s^raj& — the  first-bom. 

717.  Naigamcya,  etc.  The  four  brothers  (sons  of  Uma)  are  named 
(i)  Kumara,  (ii)  Sakha,  (iii)  ViSakha,  (iv)  Naigameya.  These  appear  on 
the  gold  coins  of  Kuviska  in  the  early  Kushan  period. 

718.  The  tvventythree  principles  consist  of  ten  senses,  five  bhutas, 
five  tanmatras,  buddhi,  ahaihkara  and  manas.  Of.  Bhaga  3.6.2  “trayo- 
vimSati  tattvanam  ganam. 


404 


Lingapurd^ 


ing  Mahadeva  the  wielder  of  Mayas ; one  who  agitates  and 
fascinates  the  entire  universe  beginning  with  Brahma  and 
consisting  of  the  mobile  and  immobile  beings,  by  means  of  her 
Maya , one  who  is  stationed  in  the  heart  of  the  yogins;  one 
who  is  stationed  in  the  world  both  as  one  and  many ; one 
whose  eyes  resemble  the  blue  lotus;  one  who  is  perpetually 
eulogised  with  great  devotion  by  all  Devas  beginning  with  the 
leaders  of  the  Ganas,  Brahma,  Indra,  Yama  and  Kubera;  the 
mother  who  on  being  eulogised  destroys  all  their  calamities;  the 
destroyer  of  the  agony  of  devotees ; the  elegant  one;  she  who 
destroys  worldliness;  the  divine  deity  the  bes tower  of  enjoy- 
ment of  worldly  pleasures  and  liberation  on  devotees  without 
their  effort.  [May  that  great  goddess  dispel  my  sin  immedi- 
ately]. 

25.  May  Canda  the  lord  of  all  the  Ganas,  who  came  out 
of  the  mouth  of  Siva,  the  glorious  one  engaged  in  the  worship 
of  Siva,  dispel  my  sin. 

26-29.  May  the  lord  Nandin  dispel  all  sins;  Nandin  the 
son  of  Salahkayana,  originating  from  the  path  of  the  plough- 
share, the  son-in-law  of  the  Maruts,  the  lord  of  all  Bhutas, 
the  all-pervasive,  one  who  has  eyes  everywhere;  the  lord  who 
is  like  the  lord  of  all,  may  he  dispel  sins.  He  is  the  lord  of  the 
three  worlds  eulogised  by  Devas  including  Narayana,  Indra* 
moon,  sun,  Siddhas,  Yaksas,  Gandharvas,  Bhutas,  the  creators 
of  Bhutas,  serpents,  sages  and  the  noble-souled  Brahma.  He  is 
stationed  in  the  harem  of  the  lord.  He  is  always  wor- 
shipped by  all. 

30.  May  he  who  has  great  splendour  and  strength,  he  who 
is  like  another  Mahadeva,  the  glorious  one  engaged  in  the 
worship  of  Siva,  dispel  my  sin. 

31-35.  May  the  auspicious  elephant- faced  deity  surrounded 
by  hundreds  and  crores  of  Ganas  and  engrossed  in  the  medita- 
tion on  Siva  dispel  my  sin.  He  splits  and  pierces  the  ridges  and 
peaks  of  the  Meru,  Mandara  and  Kailasa;  he  is  worshipped  by 
Airavata  and  other  divine  elephants  of  the  quarters.  The  seven 
Pa  talas’^®  constitute  his  feet;  the  seven  continents’*®  his  thighs 
and  calves;  the  seven  oceans’*^  his  goads;  all  the  holy  centres 

719.  seven  nether  regions,  see  p.  71  note  90 

730.  Seep.  140 note  247. 

721.  See  p.  14  note  247;  p.  igi  note  282. 


Hymn  of  purification 


405 


his  belly;  the  firmament  his  body;  the  quarters  his  arms,  the 
moon,  sun  and  fire  his  eyes;  the  asuras  like  the  trees  are  killed 
by  him;  he  is  great  and  fierce  with  the  Vidya  of  the  Brahman; 
He  is  bound  to  the  pillar  of  lotus-like  hearts  of  men  by 
Brahma  and  others  who  act  as  divine  mahouts  and  who  are 
equipped  with  the  ropes  of  yoga. 

36.  May  the  glorious  tawny-eyed  lord  Bhrngin  who  has  a 
body  that  has  brightened  the  quarters,  and  who  is  engaged  in 
the  worship  of  Siva  dispel  my  sin. 

37-41.  May  the  Sakti-bearing  commander-in-chief  of  the 
army  of  Devas,  the  glorious  destroyer  of  Asuras  by  means  of 
his  four  bodies  [?],  the  quiescent  peacock-vehicled  leader  of  the 
armies  dispel  my  sin.  May  these  forms’^^  of  Paramesthin  dispel 
my  sin,  viz., — Bhava,  Sarva,  Isana,  Rudra,  Pasupati,  Ugra, 
Bhima  and  Mahadeva,  who  are  always  engaged  in  the  worship 
of  Siva.  The  following  parts  of  his  body,^^^  viz., — Mahadeva, 
Siva,  Rudra,  Sankara,  Nilalohita,  Isana,  Vijaya,  Bhima,  Bhavo- 
dbhava  the  lord  of  Devas,  Kapalin  and  Isa,  who  are  all  engag- 
ed in  doing  obeisance  of  Siva.  May  they  dispel  my  impurity 
(sin). 

42-43.  May  these  twelve  Adityas’^^  dispel  my  impurity — 
Vikartana,  Vivasvan,  Martanda,  Bhaskara,  Ravi,  Lokapraka- 
saka  ( the  illuminator  of  the  worlds) , Lokasaksin  (the  witness 
of  the  worlds),  Trivikrama,  Aditya,  Surya,  Amsuman  and 
Divakara. 

44-45a.  The  firmament,  wind,  fire,  water,  earth,  moon 
and  Atman  are  mentioned  as  his  cosmic  bodies.’^®  May  they 
dispel  my  sin.  May  they  destroy  my  fear. 

45b-47a.  May  Vasava,  (Indra)  Pavaka  (fire),  Yama, 
Nirrti,  Varuna,  Vayu,  Soma,  l^ana,  Visnu  and  Brahma  all 
engaged  in  meditating  on  Siva  dispel  my  sin  committed  men- 
tally and  physically. 

47b-48.  May  the  Maruts  (wind-god)  Nabhasvan,  SpariSana, 


722.  Sec  p.  i66  note  273. 

723.  Sec  p.  167  note  275. 

724.  twelve  adityas,  viz,,  dhatr,  mitra,  aryaman,  rudra,  varuna, 
surya,  bhaga,  vivasvSn,  pusan,  savity,  tva^tr  and  vifou.  These  represent  the 
Sun  in  the  twelve  months  of  the  year. 

725.  For  detail,  see  MP—A  Study,  p.  63. 


406  , Lmgapurdfia 

Vayu,  Anila,  M^uta,  Prana,  PraneSa  andjive^a,  all  engaged 
in  the  worship  of  Siva,  dispel  my  impurities. 

49-50.  The  following  are  the  Caranas  highly  purified  by 
his  worship — ^Khecarin,  Vasucarin,  Brahmesa,  Brahmabrah- 
madhi,  Su^ena,  Sasvata,  Pus^a,  Supu§ta  and  Mahabala.  May 
they  dispel  my  impurities  and  all  sins  committed  by  me. 

51 -52a.  May  all  the  Siddhas  the  worshippers  of  the  feet  of 
Siva  dispel  my  impurities — Mantrajha,  Mantravid,  Prajiia, 
Mantrarat,  Siddhapujita,  Siddhavatparama  and  Siddha.  They 
are  the  bestowers  of  all  Siddhis. 

52b-53.  May  these  lords  of  Yaksas  dispel  my  impurities — 
Yaksa,  Yak^sa,  Dhanada,  Jrmbhaka,  Manibhadraka,  Purna- 
bhadre^vara,  Malin,  K§itikun(^ali  and  Narendra. 

54-55.  May  these  who  constitute  the  ornaments  in  the  body 
of  Siva  dispel  my  sin  and  all  poison  mobile  and  immobile — 
Ananta,  Kulika,  Vasuki,  Taksaka,  Karkotaka.  Mahapadma, 
Sahkhapala  and  Mahabala,  all  engaged  in  doing  obeisance  to 
Siva. 

56>57a.  May  the  Kinnaras,  Vinajha,  Surasena,  Pramardana, 
AtWaya,  Saprayogin  and  Gitajfta,  all  engaged  in  adoring  Siva 
dispel  my  impurities. 

57b-59a.  May  the  Vidyadharas,  viz.,  Vibudha,  Vidyara^i, 
Vidamvara,  Vibuddha,  Vibudha,  Krtajha,  and  Mahayaias, 
all  engaged  in  meditating  on  Siva,  dispel  all  terrible  impurities 
through  the  grace  of  Mahadeva. 

59b-62a.  May  the  following  noble-souled  heroes,  all 
greatly  devoted  to  Mahadeva  dispel  all  fear  and  the  dreadful 
asura  tendency^**: — Vamadeva,  Mahajambha,  Kalanemi,  Maha- 
bala, Sugriva,  Mardaka,  Pihgala,  Devamardana,  Prahlada, 
Anuhlada,  Sauhhl^a,  Kila,  Ba^ala,  Jambha,  Kumbha,  Maya- 
vin,  Kartavirya  and  Kjrtafljaya. 

62b-64,  May  the  following  Garudas  the  vehicles  of  Vi§nu, 
all  golden  in  colour  and  adorned  with  various  ornaments,  dis- 
pel my  impurity,  Garutman,  Khagati,  Pak^irat,  Nagamar- 
dana,  Naga^atru,  Hira^ywga,  Vainateya,  Prabhahjana,  Naga- 
Visana^a  and  Vi^nuvahana. 

65-66.  May  these  sages  who  are  sanctified  by  Siva  and  who 
are  engaged  in  His  worship,  dispel  my  impurity — ^Agastya, 


726.  Ssuram  bhlvam  -evil  thoughts  created  by  Satan. 


Hymn  of  purification 


407 


Vasistha,  Ahgiras,  Bhrgu,  Ka^yapa,  Narada,  Dadhica,  Cya- 
vana,  Upamanyu  and  others. 

67-68a.  May  the  departed  fathers,  grand- fathers,  great 
grand-fathers,  the  Agnisvattas,  the  Barhisadas,  the  maternal 
grandfathers  and  others  who  are  devoted  to  meditation  on  Siva 
dispel  my  fear  and  sin. 

68b-70.  May  the  divine  mothers  dispel  my  impurities, 
thanks  to  the  grace  of  the  lord  of  Devas,  viz., — Lak§mi, 
Dharani,  Gayatri,  Sarasvati,  Durga,  Usa,  Saci,  and  Jyesjha, 
who  are  all  worshipped  by  Devas,  the  mothers  of  Devas,  Ganas, 
Bhutas  and  the  mothers  of  the  Ganas  wherever  they  are. 

71-73a.  May  the  celestial  damsels  and  the  goddesses,  enga- 
ged in  the  worship  of  Siva  dispel  my  impurities — viz.,  Urva^i, 
Menaka,  Rambha,  Rati,  Tilottama,  Sumukhi,  Durmukhi, 
Kamuki,  Kamavardhani  and  other  divine  Apsarases  in  all  the 
worlds  and  the  goddesses  who  arc  highly  purified  by  doing  the 
Tandava  dance  for  Siva. 

73b-74i  May  the  Sun,  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter, 
Venus,  Saturn,  Rahu  and  Ketu  (the  ascending  and  descending 
nodes)  dispel  all  affliction  from  evil  planets. 

75-77a.  May  these  twelve  Rasis  (signs  of  zodiac),  viz., — 
Mesa,  Vrsa,  Mithuna,  Karkataka,  Siihha,  Kanya,  Tula,  V^r^- 
eika,  Dhanus,  Makara,  Kumbha  and  Mina  (i.e.,  from  Aries  to 
Pisces),  all  engaged  in  the  worship  of  Siva,  dispel  fear  and  sin 
through  the  grace  of  Paramesthin. 

77b-81a.  May  the  goddesses  of  the  twenty-seven  lunar 
mansions  always  dispel  my  impurity.  They  arc  AsvinI,  Bhara^i, 
Krttika,  Rohini,  MrgaSiras,  Ardra,  Punarvasu,  Pu^ya,  A^lesa, 
Magha,  Purvaphalguni,  Uttaraphalgunl,  Hasta,  Citra,  Svati, 
Vi^akha,  Anuradha,  Jyc§tha.  Mula,  Purvasadha,  Uttara^dha, 
Srava^a,  Sravistha,  Satabhisak,  Purvabhadra,  Pro^thapadi^*^ 
and  Revati. 

81b-83.  May  these  Pramathas,  viz.— Jvara,  Kumbhodara, 
Sankukarna,  Mahabala,  Mah^arna,  Prabhata,  Mahabhutapra- 
mardana,  Sycnajit  and  Sivaduta,  who  increase  one’s  delight  as 
also  innumerable  mothers  of  the  Bhutas,  dispel  my  fear  and 
sin  through  the  grace  of  Mahadeva. 


727.  pro^tapacUl — uttar^  bhfidrapada. 


408 


Lingapurana 


84-85a.  May  Himavan  dispel  my  sin,  who  is  engaged  in 
the  worship  of  Siva,  who  resembles  a watery  expanse,  who  has 
the  colour  of  the  Kunda  flower  and  the  moon,’*®  who  is  inimi- 
cal to  the  submarine  fire  and  who  pierces  the  face  of  Vadava. 

85b-87.  May  the  lord  of  bulls  (Nandin)  dispel  my  sin;  the 
bull  who  has  four  feet,  who  is  grey  in  colour  like  the  milk 
ocean,  who  is  always  stationed  in  the  world  of  Rudra  along 
with  the  Rudras  and  the  leaders  of  the  Ganas,  who  holds  the 
universe,  who  is  the  divine  father  of  the  entire  universe,  who 
is  surrounded  always  by  Nanda  and  other  mothers  and  who  is 
the  suppressor  of  sacrifice. 

88.  May  mother  Ganga,’*®  the  mother  of  the  universe, 
stationed  in  the  world  of  Rudra,  a delighted  devotee  of  Siva, 
dispel  my  sin. 

89.  May  Goddess  Bhadra  of  auspicious  position  stationed 
in  the  world  of  Siva,  the  highly  blessed  mother  of  all  kine,  dis- 
pel my  sin. 

90.  May  Surabhi,  who  is  auspicious  all  round,  who  is  the 
destroyer  of  all  sins  and  who  is  always  engaged  in  the  worship 
of  Rudra  dispel  my  sin. 

91.  May  Su^ila  of  good  conduct  and  glorious  position, 
sanctified  by  Siva  and  stationed  in  the  world  of  Siva  dispel  my 
sin. 

92-95.  May  SenSpati  (Skanda)lhe  son  of  the  lord  of  Devas 
dispel  my  sin.  He  is  conversant  with  the  reality  of  the  teaching 
in  the  Vedas  and  Sastras;  he  ponders  over  all  actions,  he  is 
richly  endowed  with  all  attributes,  he  is  the  eldest  and  the  lord 
of  all;  he  is  gentle,  and  has  the  body  of  Mahavisnu,  he  is  the 
noble  commander  of  the  army,  he  is  the  mysterious  suppressor 
of  sacrifice;  he  rides  on  the  elephant  Airavata,  he  has  black 
curly  hairs;  his  limbs  are  black,  his  eyes  are  red;  moon  and  ser- 
pent constitute  his  ornaments;  he  is  surrounded  by  goblins, 
ghosts,  evil  spirits  and  Kusmandas  and  he  is  engaged  in  the 
worship  of  Siva. 


728,  kumbha-kundendu-bhiiwal^ — omitted  in  translation:  ^adorned 
with  the  moon-like  kumbha  and  kunda  flowers,  kumbharii-tatsafljilakam  pu9- 
pam  ST.  a kind  of  flower. 

729.  The  river  GaflgS,  the  mother  of  the  worlds  (jaganmSta),  is 
invoked  in  her  various  forms. 


Hymn  of  purification 


409 


96-97.  May  all  these  mothers  accompanied  by  Yoginis  dis- 
pel all  great  sins:— Brahma^i,  Mahe^i,  Kaumaii,  Vaisnavi, 
Varahi>  MahendH)  Camund^  and  Agneyika.  They  arc  worship- 
ped by  all  the  worlds  and  they  arc  pure  and  attentive. 

98-103.  Virabhadra  of  great  splendour  is  the  son  of  Rudra. 
He  is  the  leader  of  the  armies  and  lord  of  the  Ganas.  May  he 
dispel  sin.  He  resembles  the  snow,  the  Kunda  flower  and  the 
moon;  he  is  terrible,  his  great  hand  closely  clinging  to  the 
trident.  He  is  omniscient  and  thousand-armed.  He  holds  all 
weapons.  The  three  sacrificial  fires  constitute  his  eyes.  He  is  the 
lord,  the  bcstowcr  of  fearlessness  on  the  three  worlds.  He  is 
the  permanent  protector  of  the  mothers.  His  vehicle  is  the 
great  bull.  He  is  glorious  and  is  bowed  to  by  the  three  worlds. 
He  is  engaged  in  the  worship  of  Siva.  He  beheaded  Yaksa;’*® 
he  destroyed  the  tooth  of  Pufan;^*^  he  removed  the  hand  of 
the  fire-god;^**  he  caused  the  eye  of  Bhaga  to  fall  down;’**  he 
pounded  the  limbs  of  Soma  by  the  big  toe  of  his  foot;  he  is  the 
bodyguard  of  Upendra,  Indra,  Yama  and  other  Devas;  he  cut 
oflf  the  nose  and  lips  of  the  great  goddess  Sarasvati.’**  May  the 
lord  of  Ganas  dispel  my  sin. 

104.  May  Mahalaksmi  the  mother  of  the  universe  dispel 
my  sin.  She  is  the  eldest,  most  excellent,  bcstowcr  of  boons  and 
bedecked  in  excellent  ornaments. 

105.  May  the  highly  blessed  Mahamoh^  (the  great  delu- 
sion) , surrounded  by  the  great  groups  of  goblins  and  engaged 
in  the  worship  of  Siva  dispel  my  sin. 

106.  May  Lak^m!  who  is  endowed  with  all  attributes,  who 
has  ail  the  characteristics,  who  is  the  goddess  that  bestows  all 
and  who  is  omnipresent,  dispel  my  sin. 

107-108.  May  Duiga  engaged  in  the  worship  of  Siva  dis- 
pel my  sin.  She  is  the  great  goddess  riding  on  a lion.  She  is  the 
unchanging  daughter  of  Parvati.  She  is  Mahamaya  of  Vi§^u 
constituting  his  slumber.  She  is  worshipped  by  Devas.  She  has 

730.  Ihe  transistors  pitfa  yakfisya  to  tianslate  accor- 

But  die  li^ds  rcibned  to  in  this  verse  rdate  toDakta*s  sacrifice. 
Hence  In  ‘yakw*  ^ ‘yaJHasya*  for  •yak^a*  wonldsuit 

the  cotttcart— ^Bditor. 

7SI-733.  Ftordi«lq{««di,*eeFirt^EncTd(»i*^ 

734.  Thii  legend  i»  not  tnuwahle. 


410  Li^apwrSs^ 

three  eyes.  She  is  the  goddess  who  bestows  boons.  She  had 
suppressed  the  demon  Mahii^a.^ 

109.  May  all  the  mental  sons  of  Sati,  the  Rudras  who  sus- 
tain the  Cosmic  egg,  and  who  are  worshipped  by  all  the  worlds, 
dispel  my  fear. 

110.  May  the  Bhutas,  Pretas,  Ku^ma^ijlas,  the  leaders  of 
Ga^as  and  of  Kusm^f^las  dispel  my  sin. 

111-112.  Devas  eulogised  the  lord  with  this  hymn  and 
then  bowed  down  their  heads  as  far  as  the  ground.  O excellent 
brahmins,  he  who  reads  this  divine  hymn  every  month,  or  he 
who  listens  to  this,  sheds  off  all  sins  and  is  honoured  in  the 
world  of  Rudra. 

113.  He  who  seeks  a virgin  obtains  her;  he  who  is  desirous 
of  victory  shall  attain  victory;  he  who  is  desirous  of  wealth 
shall  attain  wealth  and  he  who  wishes  for  sons  will  obtain 
sons. 

114-116.  He  who  seeks  learning  obtains  learning;  he  who 
seeks  enjoyment  of  pleasures  will  attain  pleasures.  By  listening 
to  this,  a man  obtains  immediately  whatever  he  desires.  He 
will  be  favourite  of  Devas.  If  this  meritorious  hymn  is  read 
on  behalf  of  some  one,  the  ailments  arising  from  gas,  bile,  etc., 
do  not  harass  him.  He  courts  no  premature  death  nor  is  he 
bitten  by  snakes. 

117-120,  By  repeating  this  hymn  a man  obtains  many 
times  the  merit  of  visiting  holy  centres,  and  doing  AjfiSs, 
giving  charitable  gifts  and  performing  the  vratas  in  particular. 
The  slayer  of  cows,  the  ungrateful  wretch,  the  murderer  of 
heroes,  brahmins,  mother  and  father,  the  slayer  of  those  who 
seek  refuge,  the  sinner  who  is  guilty  of  breach  of  faith  towards 
friends,  all  these  wretched  men  dispel  their  sins  and  are  honour- 
ed in  die  world  of  Siva, 


735*  lunirm  from  whom  the  coiumry  of  Mysewe  it  said  to 

lake  its  name. 


411 


The  holy  rites  of  &ioa 

CHAPTER  EIGHTYTHREE 

The  holy  rites  of  Siva 


The  Sages  said: 

!•  The  meritorious  vyapohana  hymn  has  been  attentively 
heard  by  us.  Now  mention  to  us  the  vratas  pertaining  to  the 
Lihgas. 

SHta  said: 

2.  O excellent  sages,  I shall  mention  to  you  the  auspicious 
vratas  that  were  narrated  by  Nandin  to  the  son  of  Brahma. 

3-4.  I shall  mention  them  to  you  as  I have  heard  them 
from  Vyasa.  On  the  eighth  and  fourteenth  days  of  both  the 
fortnights,  the  devotee  shall  cat  only  once,  at  night,  and  conti- 
nue this  rite  for  one  year  and  worship  Siva.  He  acquires 
the  benefit  of  all  sacrifices  and  attains  the  greatest  goal. 

5-6.  By  performing  this  rite  for  one  day  and  one  night  on 
Parvan  days  and  by  making  the  earth  the  vessel,  the  devotee 
attains  the  benefit  of  three  nights  on  Parvan  days.  By 
performing  the  K§iradharavrata,^**  the  devotee  obtains  the 
benefit  of  horse-sacrifice.  He  shall  perform  this  holy  rite  on  the 
two  Pratipads  ( first  day)  and  two  Paficamis  (fifth  day)  in 
the  month. 

7.  The  devotee  shall  take  food  only  once  a day  at  night, 
between  the  eighth  and  the  fourteenth  day  in  the  dark  half  of 
the  month.  He  attains  all  worldly  pleasures  and  goes  to  the 
world  of  Brahma. 

8-9.  The  devotee  shall  perform  this  holy  rite  for  a year 
in  the  night  of  all  Parvan  days.  He  shall  be  edibate,  conquer 
anger  and  be  devoted  to  meditation  on  Siva.  At  the  end 
of  a year  he  shall  duly  feed  leading  brahmins.  He  then  attains 
the  world  of  Siva.  No  doubt  need  be  entertained  in  this 
respect. 

10.  Greater  than  the  observance  of  fast  is  the  partaking  of 
alms  and  greater  still  is  food  acquired  without  begging.  Taking 

73^*  Kslndli&rivrataiii*--*tiie  observer  of  this  vow  lives  cmly  on  the 
laUk-lliiid. 


412 


food  only  at  night  i*  greater  than  Ayidta  (the  food  acquired 
without  begipag).  Hence  one  shall  duly  pursue  Nakta^. 

ll'lSa.  Food  is  taken  in  the  forenoon  by  Devas;  in  the 
midday  by  sages;  in  the  afternoon  by  piq^  and  at  dusk  by 
Guhyakas,’'**  and  others.  Passing  over  all  these  times,  parta- 
king of  the  food  at  night  is  the  best  thing.  The  devotee  who 
regularly  takes  food  at  night  shall  practice  taking  in  only 
Havi^ya,  bathing,  truthfulness,  light  food,  rites  in  the  fire, 
and  sleeping  on  the  bare  ground. 

13b-14a.  I shall  mention  the  excellent  vratas  of  Siva  for 
each  month.  These  vratas  function  for  the  atonement  of  sins 
and  for  the  acquisition  of  virtue,  love,  wealth  and  salvation. 

14b-19. 

The  Vratafor  the  month  of  Paufo. 

The  devotee  shall  worship  the  lord  and  take  food  only  at 
night.  He  shall  speak  truth  and  conquer  anger.  His  food  shall 
consist  of  Sali  rice,  wheat  and  milk  products.  He  shall 
assiduously  observe  fast  on  the  Aftami  (eighth)  day  in  both  the 
fortnights.  He  shall  sleep  on  the  bare  ground.  At  the  end,  on 
the  full  moon  day  he  shall  bathe  Rudra,  Mah&deva  by  means 
of  ghee  and  other  material.  O brahmins,  after  worshipping 
the  lord  duly  the  devotee  shall  feed  good  brahmins  serving 
them  barley  cooked  with  milk  and  ghee.  He  shall  perform 
the  japa  of  Sind  mantras  in  particular.  He  shall  dedicate  a 
tawny-coloured  cow  and  a bull  to  Bhava  the  lord  of  Devas,  to 
Siva  Paramefthin.  O leadii^  sages,  he  goes  to  the  excellent 
world  of  the  fire-god.  After  enjoying  extensive  pleasures  he  is 
liberated  there  itself. 

20-22. 

The  Vntafor  (As  month  of  Migha. 

In  the  month  of  the  devotee  shall  worship  the 

lord  and  take  food  only  at  night.  He  shall  partake  of  Kfiara 
aloTfg  with  g^Ke.  He  shall  restrain  the  sense-ofgims.  He  shall 
observe  last  <hi  the  fourteoath  day  in  both  the  fortnights.  On 
die  full  moon  day  be  shall  offer  Rudra  a blade  cow  and  a 


UBdefritaalemlsiBiBdiav-ta  ff. 


The  holy  rites  e/  Siva 


413 


black  bull  along  with  ghee  and  a blanket.  He  diall  worship 
Siva  and  feed  brahmins  in  accordance  with  his  means.  He 
then  attains  the  world  of  Yama  and  rgoices  there. 

23-26. 

The  Vrata  far  the  tnonA  of  Pkhlgma. 

In  the  month  ofPhSlgunathe  devotee  shall  take  food  at 
night  with  cooked  rice  of  SyamSka,  ghee  and  milk.  He  shall 
conquer  anger  and  the  sense-organs.  He  shall  observe  fast 
on  the  eighth  and  the  fourteendi  day.  On  the  full  moon  day 
he  shall  bathe  and  worship  Siva  the  great  lord  and  dedicate  to 
the  trident-armed  lord,  a cow  and  a bull  having  the  colour  of 
copper.  After  feeding  the  brahmins  he  shall  pray  to  Paramei- 
vara.  He  then  attains  identity  with  the  moon.  No  doubt  need 
be  entertained  in  this  respect. 

27-29a. 

The  Vroda  for  the  Caitra  menA. 

In  the  month  of  Caitra  also  the  devotee  shall  worship 
Rudra  and  have  night  food  according  to  his  pleasure,  conns- 
ting  of  Sili  rice  cooked  with  milk  and  ghee.  O excellent  sages, 
be  shall  be  down  in  the  cowpen  on  the  bare  ground  at  n%ht. 
He  shall  then  remember  Bhava.  On  the  full  moon  day  he  sh^ 
bathe  Siva  and  dedicate  to  him  a cow  and  a bull,  white 
in  colour.  He  shall  feed  the  brahmins.  The  devotee  then 
attains  the  abode  of  Nirrti. 


29b-30. 

The  Vrata  for  the  month  ofV^Skha. 

In  the  month  of  VaifiSkha  die  devotee  diall  take  fiiod  at 
night.  On  the  full  moon  day  he  shall  bathe  Bhava  by  means  rf 
Paflcagavya,***  ghee,  etc.,  and  dedicate  a cow  and  a bull  white 
in  colour.  He  then  attains  the  benefit  of  a h<wse-sacrifice.»" 


739.  paflcagavTa— It  oonditi  of  die  five  products  of  dw  cow,  vis. 

*ak,  curd,  butter,  the  Bquid  and  sdidescreta. 

74O0  fiawsgaiMtia— a.  MKsificc  poilbffiiiod  by  kbagi  fcf  the  •ducf©* 
BBcntof  us^verHltivreniacy.  A horse  was  turned  loose  to  wan^ 
fora  year,  attended  by  a guardian  ; wto 

country,  die  ruler  was  bound  dther  to  submit  o»  to  fii^.  In  diis  w^,  W 
lswse«tttrnod  at  the  end  of  a year,  dtt  guardian  obtab^or 

■nbaiiisianofpcineeswlHBihe  brought  in  Us  twia.  Ato  ^ sueeesUa 

return  of  the  Uwsev  tto  horse  was  sacdficed  anddst  greet  i^oidnip. 


414 


Lingapurim!^ 


31-34- 

The  Vrata  for  the  month  of  Jyeffka. 

In  the  month  of  Jycstha,  the  devotee  shall,  with  faith  and 
devotion,  worship  Sarva  the  lord  of  Devas,  Bhava  the  consort 
of  Uma.  He  shall  take  food  only  at  night  consisting  of  red  Sali 
rice  purified  by  means  of  honey,  water,  ghee,  etc.  For  half  the 
night  he  shall  be  engaged  in  serving  cows.  He  shall  sit  in  the 
Virasana.^^^  On  the  full  moon  day  he  shall  worship  the  lord 
of  Devas,  the  consort  of  Uma  after  bathing  the  deity.  He  shall 
offer  Caru  duly  to  the  trident-bearing  lord.  After  feeding  the 
brahmins  according  to  his  means  the  devotee  shall  give  a cow 
and  a bull  smoke-like  in  colour.  He  shall  then  be  honoured  in 
the  world  of  Vayu  (wind-god). 

35.37a. 

The  Vrata  for  the  month  of  Afddha^ 

In  the  month  of  Asadha  the  devotee  shall  be  engaged  in 
taking  food  at  night  consisting  of  fried  grain  flour  mixed  with 
ghee,  sugar  candy  and  milk  products.  On  the  full  moon  day 
he  shall  bathe  the  deity  with  ghee,  etc.  and  worship  him  duly. 
After  feeding  learned  brahmins  who  have  mastered  the  Vedas 
he  shall  give  a white  cow  and  a white  bull.  He  shall  then 
attain  the  world  of  Varuna. 

37b.40a. 

The  Vrata  for  the  month  of  Sravc^a, 

O brahmins,  in  the  month  of  Srava^a  the  devotee  shall  take 
food  at  night  consisting  of  $a$tika  rice  cooked  with  milk, 
after  worshipping  the  bull-bannered  deity'.  On  the  full  moon 
day  he  shall  bathe  the  deity  with  ghee,  etc.,  and  worship  him 
duly.  He  shall  then  feed  the  brahmins  who  have  sound  learn- 
ing and  who  have  mastered  the  Vedas.  He  shall  offer  sugar- 
cane^^* and  a cow  and  a bull  with  white  toes  (above  hoofs). 
The  devotee  then  attains  identity  with  Vayu  and  becomes 
all-pervasive  like  Vayu. 


74f  • VlfiMaa— a particular  posture  practised  by  ascetics  in  mediu- 
don,  sitting  on  llm  bams.  It  is  the  same  as  paryablca. 

74a.  pi^<|batt'--*eltram  ST,  tvonderfiil.  ST^  quotes  Viioe  kaia  in 


Ujmn  of  purification 


415 


40b-43a. 

The  Vrata  for  the  month  of  Bhadrapada. 

O leading  brahmins,  the  devotee  shall  take  food  at  night 
consisting  of  what  is  left  over  after  Homa.  During  day  time  he 
shall  resort  to  the  root  of  trees.  On  the  full  moon  day  he  shall 
bathe  and  worship  Siva,  the  lord  of  Devas.  He  shall  dedicate 
with  devotion  a cow  and  a bull  with  blue  shoulders.  After 
feeding  the  brahmins  who  have  mastered  the  Vedas  and  the 
Vedahgas  he  will  attain  the  world  of  Yak?as’^®  and  be  their 
king. 

44b-45. 

The  Vrata  for  the  month  of  Aivayuja. 

In  the  month  of  A^vayuja  the  devotee  shall  take  food  at 
night  consisting  of  ghee.  As  before,  on  the  full  moon  days  he 
shall  worship  Siva  and  feed  the  ever  pure  brahmins,  the 
devotees  of  Siva.  By  giving  a blue-coloured  bull  with  lifted 
chest  and  a cow  he  will  attain  the  world  of  ItSana. 

46-48. 

The  Vrata  for  the  month  of  Kdrttika. 

In  the  month  of  Karttika  the  devotee  shall  take  food  at 
night  consisting  of  rice  cooked  with  milk  and  ghee  after  wor- 
shipping lord  Bhava.  On  the  full  moon  day  the  devotee  shall 
bathe  the  deity  and  offer  Caru  as  Naivedya.  He  shall  feed 
the  brahmins  according  to  his  means.  As  before,  O brahmins, 
a cow  and  a bull  of  tawny-colour  shall  be  dedicated  to  the 
deity.  He  then  attains  identity  with  the  sun.  No  doubt  need  be 
entertained  in  this  regard. 

49-51, 

The  Vrata  for  the  month  of  Mdrgat%r$a. 

In  the  month  of  Marga^ir^a  the  devotee  shall  take  food 
at  night  consisting  of  barley  cooked  with  ghee,  milk,  etc.  On 
the  full  moon  day  he  shall  do  towards  Sarva,  Sambhu,  what 
has  been  mentioned  before*  After  feeding  the  poor  brahmins 
who  are  masters  of  the  Vedas  he  shall  duly  make  a gift  of  a 
cow  and  a bull  of  yellowish  white  colour.  The  devotee  then 

743.  yakfa-loka— Siva’s  world  or  the  regioii  of  Kubera  with  AlakS  as 
theci^tid. 


416 


attains  the  world  of  the  moon*^  and  rejoices  with  the  moon. 

52-54.  The  following  shall  be  practised  throughout : 
non-violence  truthfulness,  non-stealing,  celibacy,  forgiveness, 
mercifulness,  three  times  ablution,  Agnihotra,  sleeping  on  the 
bare  ground,  food  at  night  only,  observance  of  fast  on  eighth 
and  fourteenth  days  in  both  the  fortnights.  Thus  the  &vavrata 
for  each  nmnth  has  been  fully  recounted.  O brahmins,  the 
devotee  shall  observe  this  Vrata  for  a year  in  the  order 
mentioned  or  in  the  reverse  order.  He  then  attains  identity 
with  Siva  and  obtains  the  path  of  perfect  knowledgfc.^** 


CHAPTER  mGETTYFOUR 

{The  holy  rite  of  Umd-Mahefvara) 

SiUa  said  ; — 

1.  For  the  welfare  of  men,  women  and  other  creatures, 
O excellent  sages,  I shall  recount  the  holy  rite  of  Uml-Mahe- 
ivara,  mentioned  by  Ifvara  himself. 

2.  Fu*  the  period  of  a year  the  devotee  shall  prepare 
Havi;ya  at  night^  on  the  foil  moon  and  new  moon  days  and 
on  the  eighth  and  fourteenth  day  and  worship  Bhava. 

3-8.  The  devotee  shall  make  a splendid  image  of  Uma- 
Mahe4a  in  gold  or  in  silver  and  instal  it  duly.  At  the  end  of 
the  year,  he  shall  feed  the  brahmins  and  give  them  gifts  accord- 
ing to  capacity.  He  shall  take  the  lord  of  Devas  to  the  temple 
of  Rudra  on  chariots,  etc.,  fitted  with  aU  excelloit  things  and 
decorated  with  umbrdlas  smd  chowries.  He  shall  dedicate  the 
Vrata  unto  Siva,  Parameftfain.  He  attains  identity  with  Siva. 
If  the  devotee  is  a woman  she  will  attain  SSyujya  (identity) 
with  the  goddess.  If  the  devotee  is  a virgin  or  a wi&nv  she 
shall  abstain  from  taking  food  on  the  eighth  smd  fourtemth 

74^  Soosa-lolcaair—SiwiIokan  ST. 

745.  jSlaa-yoga  : yoga  of  kaosdedge.  Kaowtedge  hat  been  defined 
injrdMMthiis;  tm 

II  dtedfo^r. 

746.  aakiain— a vow  of  aight.  Tor  detail,  tee  v-is  of  ddt  chapter. 


T/u  holy  rite  of  Umd-Maheivara  417 

day.  She  shall  observe  celibacy  and  continue  the  holy  rite  for  a 
year . At  the  end  of  the  year  she  shall  make  an  idol  in  accor- 
dance with  the  injunction  laid  down  before  and  instal  it  duly. 
She  shall  then  feed  the  brahmins  after  taking  the  idol  to  the 
temple  of  Rudra.  Thanks  to  this  holy  rite  she  rejoices  with 
Bhavanl. 

9-14.  If  any  woman  continues  for  a year  performing  the 
rite  only  on  the  fourteenth  day  in  the  dark  half,  and, 
brahmins,  at  the  end  of  the  year  she  makes  an  idol  (of  Siva)  in 
any  material  whatsoever  and  worships  as  mentioned  above, 
she  rejoices  with  Bhavani. 

The  woman  devotee  shall  take  no  food  on  the  New  moon 
day.  She  shall  observe  all  other  restraints  and  continue  the 
holy  rite  for  a year. 

At  the  end  of  the  year  she  shall  make  a trident  in  accor- 
dance with  the  injunctions  and  dedicate  it  to  the  lord.  After  the 
holy  ablution  she  shall  devoutly  worship  IiSana  with  a thousand 
white  lotuses.  He  shall  dedicate  a silver  lotus  with  a gold 
pericarp.  He  shall  give  gifts  to  the  brahmins.  That  woman 
undoubtedly  dispels  all  wanton  sins,  such  as  the  destruction  of 
the  foetus,  by  means  of  the  holy  rite  of  the  dedication  of  the 
trident.  O excellent  brahmins,  she  thus  obtains  the  Sayujya 
with  Bhavani.  If  a man  devotee  performs  this  holy  rite,  he 
attains  Sayujya  with  Rudra. 

13- 18a.  O excellent  brahmins,  a man  or  a woman  can 
perform  this  holy  rite.  The  devotee  observes  fast  on  the  full 
moon  and  on  New  moon  day  devotedly  for  one  year.  O excel- 
lent brahmins,  the  holy  rites,  Japa>  Dana  (charitable  gift)» 
penance  and  everything  else  should  be  performed  by  women, 
only  at  the  behest  of  their  husbands  since  women  are  never  in- 
dependent. Every  month  she  shall  dedicate  all  scented  materials. 
At  the  end  of  the  year  that  lady  of  holy  rites  attains  Sayujya 
(identity)  and  S^rupya  (similarity  in  form)  with  Bhavani. 
Undoubtedly  I am  telling  you  the  truth  and  truth  alone. 

18b-21.  The  woman  devotee  shall  take  food  only  once  on 
the  full  moon  day  in  the  month  of  Kforttika.  She  shall  observe 
forbearance^  non-violence  fold  other  restraints  and  be  celibate. 


418 


LififapurS^a 


She  shall  alertfully  offer  a Bhara^^^  weight  of  black  gingelly 
seeds  cooked  with  ghee  and  jaggery  to  Parame$thin  and  to 
brahmins  in  accordance  with  her  means.  She  shall  observe  fast 
on  the  eighth  and  the  fourteenth  day.  That  lady  of  good  holy 
rites  attains  Sarupya  (similarity  in  form)  and  rejoices  along 
with  Bhav^nl. 

22-23.  The  common  characteristics  of  all  vratas  are  : — 
Forbearance,  truthfulness,  mercy,  charity,  cleanliness,  curb  on 
the  sense-organs  and  the  worship  of  Rudra.  I shall  succinctly 
recount  to  you  the  extensive  holy  vrata  for  every  month  in 
due  order  beginning  with  Marga^ir^a  and  ending  with  Karttika. 
This  has  been  recounted  at  the  outset  by  Nandin. 

24-31.  In  the  month  of  Marga^ir§a  the  woman  devotee  shall 
duly  embellish  an  excellent  bull  having  all  limbs  in  perfect 
condition  and  dedicate  it  to  Siva.  There  is  no  doubt  about 
this  that  she  rejoices  along  with  Bhavani. 

In  the  month  of  Pau$a  after  doing  everything  mentioned 
before,  the  devotee  shall  instal  the  trident  and  then  dedicate  it 
to  the  lord.  She  rejoices  with  Bhavani. 

In  the  month  of  Magha,  the  devotee  shall  make  a chariot 
endowed  with  all  characteristics.  After  worshipping  the  lord  of 
Devas  she  shall  offer  the  chariot  to  the  deity  and  feed  the 
brahmins.  That  highly  blessed  lady  shall,  no  doubt,  rejoice  with 
the  goddess. 

In  the  month  of  Phalguna,  she  shall  duly  make  an  image 
of  gold  or  radiant  silver  according  to  her  means,  instal  it  and 
worship  it.  Then  she  shall  deposit  it  in  the  shrine  of  Sankara. 
Undoubtedly  she  rejoices  along  with  the  great  goddess. 

In  the  month  of  Caitra  the  woman  devotee  shall  duly  make 
the  idols  of  Bhava,  KurnSra  and  Bhavani  in  copper  or  other 
metals,  and  instal  them  duly.  By  offering  them  to  Rudra, 
she  rejoices  along  with  Bhavani. 

32-34.  In  the  month  ofVaiiakha  the  devotee  shall  perform 
the  excellent  rite  of  KUiiiasa  vrata  thus  : — The  shining  abode 

747.  bhara  : a equal  to  so  tulSi,  meaning  aooo 

palas  of  gold.  57*.  quotes  pSsi^Ui  tantru  to  define  bhira  • 5 

3pnf  \ ii 

shw  i mtt  i 


419 


The  holy  rite  of  Umd^MaheJoara 

of  Kubera  (i.c.,  Kailasa  mountain)  shall  be  made  out  of  silver 
with  Iiivara  and  Uma  therein  along  with  the  lords  of  Ganas.  It 
must  be  embellished  with  all  jewels  and  duly  deposited  in  the 
splendid  abode  of  Bhava,  Parame^a.  Thereby  she  attains  the 
mountain  Kailasa  and  rejoices  along  with  Bhavani. 

35-38a.  In  the  month  of  Jye§tha  the  image  of  Mahadeva, 
the  consort  of  Uma,  shall  be  made  in  Linga  form  out  of  copper 
or  other  metals.  Brahma  and  Visnu  should  be  depicted  as 
praying  with  palms  joined  in  reverence  and  seated  on  the  swan 
and  on  the  boar  respectively.  O excellent  brahmins,  the 
splendid  Linga  in  the  middle  of  which  is  Bhava,  shall  be  in- 
stalled duly.  Thereafter  she  shall  feed  the  brahmins.  By  dulv 
depositing  this  image  in  an  abode  of  Siva  for  obtaining  aus- 
piciousness and  by  worshipping  Siva  along  with  the  brahmins 
the  devotee  will  attain  Sayujya  with  the  goddess. 

38b-46a.  In  the  splendid  month  of  A^a^ha  the  devotee 
shall  duly  make  a splendid  abode  with  baked  bricks  in  accor- 
dance with  her  means.  It  must  be  filled  with  all  necessary 
seeds  and  liquids,  with  all  splendid  household  effects  and 
utensils,  the  mortar,  pestle  etc.,  and  furnished  with  maids  and 
men  servants,  with  all  foodstuffs,  bedding  outfits,  clothes  etc. 
They  shall  be  covered  with  cloths  all  round.  The  lord  Maha- 
deva, consort  of  Uma,  shall  be  bathed  in  ghee  etc.  A thousand 
brahmins  shall  be  duly  fed.  A brahmin  who  is  richly  endowed 
with  learning  and  humility  and  who  has  mastered  the 
Vedas  and  who  is  in  the  first  A§rama^*®  shall  be  duly  and 
devoutly  worshipped.  A virgin  of  good  waist  line,  accompanied 
by  the  necessary  requisites  for  the  whole  life  shall  be  offered 
to  him.  So  also  a piece  of  land,  a cow  and  a bull  and  a 
house  shall  be  offered  to  him  along  with  the  different  kinds  of 
divine  perquisites  as  massive  as  the  Meru  mountain.  She 
attains  the  world  Goloka  and  rejoices  with  Bhavani.  Un- 
doubtedly she  will  become  similar  to  Bhavani  and  remain 
unchanged  throughout  the  kalpas,  and  shall  in  the  end  attain 
S&yujya  with  Bhavani. 

46b-48a.  In  the  month  of  Sravana  the  devotee  shall  make 
a hillock  of  gingelly  seeds  scattered  with  minerals  and  em- 
bellished with  banners  and  dedicate  these  to  Sarva.  The  offering 

748.  prathamEinttaigm — bimhiiw:&ria«in  ST*  one  who  laves  a student*! 
life* 


420 


lAngapufS^ 

shall  be  made  along  with  the  canopy,  banners,  clothes  and 
all  the  minerals.  By  feeding  the  brahmins,  everything  men- 
tioned before  will  happen. 

48b-50a.  In  the  month  of  BhSdrapada  the  devotee  shall 
make  a splendid  hillock  of  SSli  rice  and  dedicate  it  to  the 
lord  along  with  canopy,  banners,  clothes  as  well  as  minerals. 
After  feeding  the  brahmins  duly  she  shall  present  these  to  them. 
She  shall  then  become  as  resplendent  as  the  rays  of  the  sun 
and  rejoice  along  with  BhavUnl. 

50b-51.  In  the  month  of  Aivayuja  she  shall  make  a 
massive  hillock  of  grains  along  with  clothes  of  good  colour. 
By  worshipping  Siva  with  this  offering  and  feeding  the  brah- 
mins she  will  attain  all  things  mentioned  before. 

52-65.  MahSmeru  vrata. 

The  devotee  shall  make  a huge  mountain  with  all  grains, 
all  seeds  and  juices.  It  shall  have  all  minerals  and  shall  be  be- 
decked in  all  jewels.  It  shall  have  four  peaks.  Its  beauty  shall 
be  enhanced  by  canopies  and  umbrellas,  scented  garlands  and 
incenses  of  diverse  kinds.  There  shall  be  dances  and  songs  and 
the  instruments  of  lute,  conch,  etc.  of  diverse  kinds.  It  shall  be 
rendered  highly  meritorious  by  auspicious  chanting  of  sacred 
hymns.  There  shall  be  eight  great  banners  dazzling  with  diffe- 
rent flowers.  It  shall  represent  the  great  mountain  Meru,  the 
excellent  support  of  the  three  worlds.  Siva  shall  be  depicted 
on  its  top,  in  the  centre,  by  means  of  minerals.  In  the  south 
the  four-faced  Brahma  shall  be  duly  represented.  In  the  north 
the  devotee  shfldl  depict  N&r&ya^a  the  lord  of  the  chiefs  of 
Devas,  devoid  of  ailments.  Indra  and  other  guardians  of  the 
quarters  shall  be  duly  represented  with  devotion.  After  instal- 
ling the  deity  the  devotee  shall  bathe  and  worship  Maheivara. 
In  the  right  hand  of  the  lord  shall  be  depicted  the  trident 
worshipped  by  Devas  and  in  the  left  the  noose.  The  lotiu  bedec- 
ked in  gold  shall  be  dqpicted  in  the  hand  of  Bhavflni.  The 
devotee  shall  assiduously  represent  the  conch,  discus,  iron  club 
and  lotus  in  the  hands  of  Vis^u.  In  the  hands  of  Brahma  shall 
be  placed  the  rosaryand  die  excellent  Kamandalu  (water-pot) . 
The  respective  weapons  (d*  the  following  diall  be  duly  depicted: 
the  thundarbdh  of  Indra;  the  great  weapon  Sakti  of  Agni;  die 
staff  of  Yama;  the  sword  of  Nirrd  the  night  walker;  the  terrible 


Tht  My  riU  of  Um-Mahehara 


421 


and  wondrous  noose;  Naga  of  Varu^;  the  baton  of  Vayu;  the 
iron  club  of  Kubera  that  is  worshipped  by  all  the  worlds  and 
the  axe  of  lord  ISana,  Naivedya  shall  be  duly  offered  in  the 
above  order.  The  great  worship  of  Siva  shall  be  performed 
with  Cam.  The  devotee  shall  worship  all  Devas  in  accordance 
with  one’s  means.  After  performing  the  worship  assiduously  the 
devotee  shall  feed  the  brahmins.  After  performing  the  Maha- 
mcm  vrata  she  shall  offer  it  to  Mahadeva.  Attaining  Maha- 
mem  she  rejoices  along  with  Mahadevi.  Undoubtedly  she  will 
attain  the  Sayujya  of  the  great  goddess  for  a long  time. 

66-72.  In  the  moalh  of  Karttika  the  woman  shall  make  a 
splendid  image  of  goddess  Uma  fully  bedecked  in  all  orna- 
ments and  marked  with  all  auspicious  characteristics.  The  image 
may  be  made  in  gold,  copper  etc.  and  shall  be  duly  installed. 
The  image  of  the  lord  of  Devas  shall  be  equipped  with 
all  characteristics.  In  front  the  fire-god  shall  be  depicted. 
Brahma  shall  be  depicted  holding  the  sacrificial  ladle. 
Nar§yana  the  munificent  shall  be  depicted  bedecked  in  all  orna- 
ments and  surrounded  by  the  guardians  of  quarters  and 
Siddhas.  The  vrata  shall  be  offered  in  the  temple  of  Rudra 
with  devotion.  By  observing  this  vrata  she  will  attain  the 
body  of  Bhavani  suid  rejoice  with  Bhava.  In  every  month  it  is 
meritorious  to  have  the  holy  rite  with  one  meal  a day.  Thus, 
the  holy  rites  beginning  with  the  mondi  of  MitgaiSr^a  and, 
ending  with  Karttika  have  been  observed.  0 excellent  sages, 
they  are  for  the  benefit  of  all  creatures,  men  or  women. 
The  devoted  man  will  attain  Sayujya  with  Siva  by  performii^ 
the  vrata  and  the  devoted  woman  will  attain  Sfiyujya  with  the 
goddess.  Thore  is  no  doubt  that  this  has  been  so  ordained  by 
Siva. 


422  LiHgapmSiia 

CmPTER  EICmYFlVE 

The  gloiy  of  the  five-g^llabled  Mantra 


SUta  said: 

1 . O csxcellent  brahmins,  in  all  these  holy  rites,  after  wor- 
shipping the  lord  of  Devas,  the  consort  of  Umii,  the  devotee 
shall  repeat  the  five-syllabled’^®  Mantra  duly. 

2.  There  is  no  doubt  about  thb  that  the  vratas  are  duly 
concluded  only  with  the  japa  and  not  otherwise.  Hence,  one 
shall  repeat  the  meritorious  five-syllabled  Mantra. 

The  sages  said: 

3.  O highly  blessed  one,  how  is  this  five-syllabled  Mantra  ? 
How  is  it  powerful  ? Tell  us.  We  are  eager  to  hear  the  methods 
and  means  for  its  japa. 

SQta  said: 

4.  I shall  succinctly  recount  the  holy  things,  formerly 
recounted  to  P&rvatl,  by  lord  Rudra,  the  lord  of  Devas. 

The  goddess  said: 

5.  O lord,  O Maheivara  of  all  the  worlds,  O lord  of  the 
chiefs  of  Devas,  I wish  to  hear  factually  the  glory  of  the  five- 
syllabled  Mantra. 


The  lord  said: 


6.  O gentle  lady,  even  in  hundreds  and  crores  of  years,  it 
is  not  possible  to  recount  the  glory  of  the  five-syllisbled  Mantra. 
Hence,  listen  to  it  in  brief. 

7-8.  At  the  advent  of  dissolution’®®  when  the  mobile  and 
immobile  beings,  Devas  and  Asuras,  serpents  and  Rfik^sas,  all 
are  destroyed  and  when  everything  dissolves  into  Pralqrti  along 
with  you  also,’®^  O gentle  lady,  only  I do  survive.  There  is  no 
second  being  anywhere. 


749.  pal&ciMsriih  vidyim.  The  five-syttahled  rnamra  Siva  is 
^asmah  siviya.* 

750.  £ialaya--disadtttlea  ef  the  univeneat  the  end  of  a kalpa. 

751.  Billing  the  pedodef  dinehidoa  and  re^ieatloii,  Fialcrd  re- 
mains hidden  in  m body  of  Siva.  It  agak  heoaniel  nsaaifeit  at  the  heghi* 

* I of  oreatien.  Thn^  the  snprenie  loid  Siva  alone  is  eternal  and  the 
tie  of  aU  heiagt,  mobile  and  immobde. 


The  glory  of  the  fioe-syllabled  Mantra 


423 


9.  At  that  time  the  Vedas  and  Scriptures  are  stationed  in 
the  five-syllabled  Mantra.  They  do  not  attain  destruction. 
They  are  protected  by  my  power. 

10-11.  I am  then  present  in  two  forms:  Prakrti  and  Atman. 
Lord  Naraya^a  adopts  the  body  of  Prakfti  and  lies  on  the 
yogic  couch  in  the  midst  of  water.  The  five-faced  Brahma  is 
born  of  his  umbilical  lotus. 

12.  Brahma  was  desirous  of  creating  the  three  worlds.  Being 
incompetent  for  it  without  a helping  hand,  he,  at  the  outset, 
created  ten  mental  sons’®^  of  unmeasured  splendour. 

13.  Brahma  requested  me  to  grant  power  to  create.  He 

said:  Mahadeva,  O Mahe^vara,  grant  power  imto  my  sons.** 

14.  Thus  requested  by  him  I with  five  faces^®*  uttered  the 
five  syllables  to  Brahma. 

15.  Brahma,  the  grandfather  of  the  worlds  grasped  them 
through  his  five  faces^***.  He  understood  Paramcivara  in  the 
form  of  the  Being  expressed  by  the  term  of  expression. 

16.  O gentle  lady,  Siva  who  is  worshipped  by  the  three 
worlds  is  the  Being  expressed  by  the  five  syllables.  The  great 
five-syllabled  Mantra  itself  is  his  expression. 

17.  After  understanding  properly  the  procedure  (for  japa) 
and  attaining  Siddhi  (by  japa),  the  noble-souled  five-faced 
deity  (Brahma)  imparted  to  his  sons  the  five-syllabled  Mantra 
that  was  meaningful  and  conducive  to  the  welfare  of  the 
universe. 

1 8.  After  receiving  the  jewel  among  the  Mantras  directly 
from  the  grandfather  of  the  worlds  they  propitiated  lord  Siva 
the  greater  Being  than  the  greatest. 

19.  Then  lord  Siva  who  is  greater  than  the  three  deities^** 

752.  daia  mSnasfin  putrftn.  Their  names  are  ; Marla,  Atri,  Ahgiras, 
Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  Pracetas,  Vasistha,  Bbfgu  and  Ndrada.  Their 
distinctive  features  are  brought  out  in  numy  a legend  related  of  them  in  the 
Por&nas. 

753*  iiv^  heads  of  Siva  : See  p.  49  note  65* 

753s.  five  bead*  of  Brahml : When  the  fow  beads  of  Bratunfi  became 
fiiwarted  in  their  fimetioni  becauM  of  Brahmi’i  erotic  impnbe,  then  out  of 
Upas  was  produced  a fifth  head  on  the  top.  and  that  head  was  covered  mth 
matted  locks.  But  later  on,  this  bead  was  clipped  by  Rudra.  But  against 
this  stttnhent,  see  SP.  i.8.8. 

754.  Cf.  lA^a.  1.71.31. 


424  LingapurSt^ 

became  delighted.  He  granted  them  the  perfect  knowledge  and 
the  eight  attributes  such  as  A^imS  (minuteness)  etc.*^^^ 

20-24.  After  obtaining  the  boons,  those  brahmins,  desirous 
of  propitiating  me  went  to  the  mountain  Mufijavat,’*®  on  the 
beautiful  peak  of  the  Meru.^®^  The  glorious  mountain  is  my 
favourite  and  is  always  protected  by  my  Bhutas.  Eager  in  the 
creation  of  the  worlds  they  performed  severe  penance  for  a 
thousand  divine  years  near  that  mountain,  living  only  on  air. 
O gentle  lady,  those  sages  stood  there  for  my  blessings.  On  see- 
ing their  devotion  I appeared  before  them  immediately.  With 
a desire  for  the  welfare  of  the  noble  people  of  the  worlds  I told 
them  everything  about  the  five-syllabled  Mantra,  its  sage,  its 
metre,  its  deity,  its  Sakti,  Bija  (seed),  Nyasa  (fixation),  on  six 
Angas  (limbs),  Digbandha  (the  binding  of  the  quarters)  and 
Viniyoga  (application). 

25.  After  hearing  the  glory  of  the  Mantra,  those  sages 
whose  assets  were  the  austerities,  performed  activities  by  utilising 
the  Mantra  properly. 

26-28.  Thanks  to  its  glory  they  created  the  worlds  includ- 
ing Devas,  Asuras  and  human  beings,  the  different  castes  and 
their  sub-divisions  as  well  as  the  splendid  holy  rites.  They 
heard  the  Vedas  as  before  and  as  descended  from  the  previous 
kalpas.  It  is  due  to  the  prowess  of  the  five-syllabled  Mantra 
that  all  these  survive,  viz. — the  worlds,  the  Vedas,  the  pious 
sages,  the  permanent  holy  rites,  Devas  and  the  entire  universe. 
Therefore,  I shall  mention  it  now  to  you.  Listen  to  everything 
attentively. 

29.  This  Mantra  has  Siva  for  its  Atman.  It  consists  of  few 
letters  but  is  full  of  great  meanings.  It  is  the  essence  of  the 
Vedas.  It  yields  liberation.  It  is  undoubtedly  proficient  in 
commanding. 

SO.  This  is  my  valuable  statement,  accompanied  by 
difterent  kinds  of  realisation  \ it  is  pleasing  to  the  minds  of  the 
people  of  thb  world  and  the  divine  beings;  its  meaning  is 
decisive  and  it  is  majestic. 

755*  Smp.  ^ ^ 

pfodwAion. 

757.  Mem,  see  p.  98  nofe  tvf. 


The  glory  of  the  five^syllabled  Mantra 


425 


31.  It  is  a Mantra  that  can  be  easily  uttered  by  the  mouth; 
it  achieves  all  objects;  it  is  the  seed  of  all  Vidyas;  it  is  the  first 
splendid  Mantra. 

32.  It  is  very  subtle  and  its  meaning  is  great;  it  is  like  the 
seed  of  the  holy  banyan  tree.  It  is  the  Veda  that  is  beyond  the 
three  Gunas;  it  is  the  omniscient  lord  doing  everything. 

33-34.  The  “Om’*  is  the  single-syllabled  Mantra.  The  all- 
pervading  Siva  is  stationed  in  it.  The  five  syllables  constitute 
his  body.  He  is  stationed  in  the  six-syllabled  subtle  Mantra  in 
the  form  of  the  ‘‘expressed  and  the  expression.**  Siva  is  Vacya 
(the  expressed)  since  he  is  comprehensible.  The  Mantra  is  his 
Vacaka  (expression). 

35-36.  The  relation  of  the.  expressed  and  the  expression 
is  a primordial  one  between  the  two.  In  the  Vedas  and  in  Siva- 
gamas  the  main  Mantra  is  the  six-syllabled  one  but  for  purpose 
of  secular  activities  it  is  the  five-syllabled  Mantra.^®®  Why 
should  he  have  many  Mantras  and  extensive  scriptures  ? 

37.  If  anyone  has  retained  this  Mantra  in  his  heart  he  has 
studied  the  Vedas,  he  has  heard  the  sacred  lore;  he  has  perform- 
ed everything. 

38.  If  a scholar  performs  its  japa  after  learning  the  Vedas 
in  accordance  with  the  injunctions  it  is  enough;  the  perfect 
knowledge  of  Siva  is  this  much ; the  greatest  goal  is  thus  far. 

39-4 1 a.  Brahmavidya  (learning  pertaining  to  the  Brah- 
man) is  this  much.  Hence,  the  learned  man  shall  continuously 
perform  its  japa.  This  Mantra  consisting  of  the  Pranava  and 
the  five  syllables  is  my  heart,  it  is  the  greatest  esoteric  secret 
greater  than  all  else;  it  is  the  excellent  knowledge  leading  to 
salvation.  I shall  mention  the  sage,  the  metre  and  the  deity 
controlling  this  Mantra,  its  Bija,  Sakti,  Svara  (vowel),  Varna 
(letter) , Sthana  (place  of  origin),  letter  by  letter. 

41b-43.  The  sage  is  Vamadeva;  the  metre  is  Pankti.  I, 
Siva  alone,  am  the  deity  of  this  Mantra,  O lady  of  excellent 
face.  The  syllables  “na**  etc.  are  the  Bijas;  they  arein  the  form 
of  the  five  elements;  know  that  the  Pranava  is  the  unchanging 
Atman  that  is  all-pervasive,  you  alone  are  its  Sakti,  O goddess 
bowed  to  by  all  Devas. 

758.  The  fivc-syllabled  mantra  of  Siva  prefixed  by  om  : 

“Om  namaS  Sivaya’^ 


426 


Lingapur^ 


44.  Something  is  your  Pranava  and  something  is  my  Pra- 
nava.  O gentle  lady,  your  Pranava  is  undoubtedly  the  Sakti,  of 
all  the  Mantras. 

45-46.  The  letters  ‘a\  ‘u’  and  *m*  arc  present  in  my  Pra- 
nava, the  letters  a,  m and  d constitute  in  order  your  Pranava, 
which  has  three  Matras  and  the  Pluta  tone  (prolated  vowel) . 
The  Svara  (Note)  of  Omkara  is  Udatta  (high),  the  sage  is 
Brahma  and  the  body  is  white. 

47-54.  The  metre  is  Daivi  Gayatri  and  the  great  Atman 
is  the  presiding  deity;  the  first,  second  and  fourth  letters  are 
Udatta  (high).  The  fifth  is  Svarita  (neither  high  nor  low),  the 
middle  one  is  Nisada. 

The  letter  n is  of  yellow  colour,  its  place  of  origin  is  the 
eastern  face.  Indra  is  the  deity,  Gayatri  the  metre  and  Gautama 
the  sage. 

The  letter  mafii  is  of  black  colour,  its  place  of  origin  is  the 
southern  face,  the  metre  is  Anustup,  the  sage  is  Atri,  Rudra 
is  the  deity. 

The  letter  .^lisof  smoky  colour;  its  place  of  origin  is  the 
western  face;  the  sage  is  Vi^vamitra,  the  metre  is  Tristup  and 
the  deity  is  Vi§nu. 

The  letter  vd  is  of  golden  colour,  its  place  of  origin  is  the 
northern  face;  Brahma  is  the  deity,  Brhati  is  the  metre  and 
Angiras  the  sage. 

The  letter  ya  is  of  red  colour;  its  place  of  origin  is  the  up- 
ward face;  the  metre  is  Virat;  the  sage  is  Bharadvaja  and 
Skanda  is  the  Deity. 

I shall  now  mention  the  Nyasa  (fixing  rite)  that  is  auspi- 
cious and  conducive  to  the  achievement  of  all  Siddhis.  It  is 
destructive  of  all  sins  too.  Ny^a  is  of  three  types;  the  difference 
being  due  to  their  connection  with  creation,  sustenance  and 
dissolution. 

55-59.  These  Nyasas  belong  respectively  to  the  religious 
students,  the  householders  and  ascetics,  i.e.,  the  Nyasa  of 
Utpatti  (creation)  is  for  the  religious  student;  the  Nyasa  of 
Sthiti  (sustenance)  is  for  the  householders  and  the  Nyasa  of 
Saihhrti  (dbsolution)  is  for  the  ascetics;  otherwise  Siddhi  can- 
not be  achieved.  The  Nyasa  is  of  three  types  viz.,  Anganyasa 
(the  fixation  of  the  limbs);  Karanyasa  (that  of  the  hand)  and 


The  glory  of  the  five-syllabled  Mantra 


427 


Dehanyasa  (that  of  the  body).  O lady  of  splendid  face,  the 
Nyasa  of  the  three  types  relating  to  creation,  etc.  is  being  men- 
tioned to  you.  One  shall  at  the  outset  perform  the  Nyasa  of  the 
hand ; thereafter  he  shall  perform  the  Nyasa  of  the  body  and 
thereafter  he  shall  perform  the  Nyasa  of  Ahgas  (limbs)  in  the 
order  of  the  syllables  of  the  mantra.  The  fixation  beginning 
with  the  head  and  ending  with  the  feet  is  called  the  Utpatti- 
nyasa.  O beloved  one,  that  beginning  with  the  feet  and  ending 
with  the  head  is  the  Nyasa  of  Samhara  (dissolution).  The 
Nyasa  of  the  heart,  face  and  throat  is  Sthitinyasa  (that  of 
sustenance) . 

60-65.  O splendid  lady,  these  Nyasas  relate  to  the  reli- 
gious students,  householders  and  the  ascetics  respectively. 
Repeating  the  Mantras  one  shall  touch  the  body  along  with  the 
bead.  That  is  common  to  all  householders,  religious  students 
and  ascetics. 

Beginning  with  the  thumb  of  the  right  hand  and  ending 
with  the  thumb  of  the  left,  if  the  fingers  are  fixed  it  is  called 
Utpattiny^a  (the  Nyasa  of  creation).  Its  opposite  is  that  of 
dissolution.  Fixing  the  Ny^a  beginning  with  the  thumb  and 
ending  with  the  little  finger  in  both  the  hands  is  called  Sthiti- 
nyasa (that  of  sustenance).  O gentle  lady,  it  yields  much 
pleasure  to  the  householders.  This  is  the  common  procedure — 
the  Nyasa  of  the  hand  is  performed  at  first,  then  the  Nyasa  of 
the  body  and  thereafter  one  shall  perform  the  Nyasa  of  the 
limbs.  Then  the  devotee  shall  perform  the  Ny&sa  over  all  the 
limbs  and  then  one  by  one  with  the  full  Mantra  with  Orhkara 
prefixed  and  suffixed’®*  on  all  the  ten  fingers  of  the  hands.  The 
devotee  shall  perform  the  Nyasa  rite  facing  the  east  or  the  north 
after  first  washing  the  feet.  He  shall  be  clean  and  attentive. 

66-72.  At  the  outset  he  shall  remember  the  sage,  metre, 
deity,  Bija,  Sakti,  Atman  and  preceptor,  O lady  of  splendid 
face.  Repeating  the  Mantra,  he  shall  wipe  off  the  hands  and 
fix  the  Praiiava  in  the  palms  and  in  the  first  and  last  knots  in 
all  the  fingers.  He  shall  fix  the  Bijas  along  with  the  Bindus  in 
the  five  middle  knots.  In  accordance  with  the  order  of  the 

759  • The  fivc-syllabled  mantra  of  Siva  prefixed  and  sufiixed  by  om  : 

*‘Om  namas  siv^ya  om”. 


428 


Lingapurdna 


stages  of  life  he  shall  perform  the  Nyasa  of  creation,  etc.  with 
both  hands  and  beginning  with  the  foot  and  ending  with  the 
head.  Repeating  the  Mantra  with  Orhkara  affixed  he  shall 
touch  the  body  (1)  on  the  head,  face,  neck,  heart  and  in  the 
private  parts;  and,  on  the  two  feet;  (2)  in  the  private  parts 
and  in  the  heart  and  in  the  neck  in  the  middle  of  the  face  and 
on  the  head  or  (3)  he  shall  fix  in  the  heart,  in  the  private 
parts,  on  the  feet,  on  the  head,  in  the  face,  and  in  the  neck — he 
shall  fix  with  the  Prana va,  etc.  in  three  ways. 

73-76.  Alter  fixing  the  limbs  thus,  the  devotee  shall  medi- 
tate upon  the  faces  (of  Siva) . Beginning  with  the  face  in  the 
east  and  ending  with  the  face  upward  he  shall  fix  the  syllables 
beginning  with  na  in  due  order.  Thereafter  he  shall  perform 
the  Nyasa  rite  of  the  six  limbs  in  the  respective  places  with 
delight.  The  Nyasa  shall  be  accompanied  with  the  words 
Namas  (obeisance),  Svaha,  Vasat,  Hum,  Vausat  and  Phat. 
The  Prana  va  is  known  as  the  heart;  the  syllable  na  the  head; 
the  syllable  ma  the  tuft;  the  syllable  the  coat  of  mail:  the 
syllable  the  eye;  the  syllable  the  “Astra”  (missile) . 
After  fixing  the  letters  on  the  limbs  as  mentioned  the  devotee 
shall  bind  the  quarters. 

77-78.  The  deities  of  the  four  corners  beginning  with  the 
south-east,  are  respectively  Vighnesa,  the  mother  Durga  and 
Ksetrajna  ( ?) . The  devotee  shall  fix  them  with  the  tip  of  the 
thumb  fixed  on  that  of  the  index  finger  with  a beaming  face. 
After  saying  “Protect  ye  all”  he  shall  make  obeisance  to  them 
severally. 

79-80.  The  expert  devotee  shall  perform  the  Nyasa  of  the 
hand  on  the  fingers  beginning  with  the  index  finger  with  his 
thumb.  He  shall  perform  the  Nyasa  on  the  middle  of  the  neck 
also.  This  Nyasa  rite  is  said  to  be  splendid  and  destructive  of 
sins.  Jt  is  conducive  to  the  achievement  of  Siddhis.  It  i?  holy, 
auspicious  and  affords  all  protection. 

81.  When  the  Nyasa  rite  has  been  performed  by  means  of 
the  splendid  Mantra  the  devotee  shall  be  on  a par  with  Siva, 
Within  a moment,  all  the  sins  committed  in  the  previous  births 
are  destroyed. 

82.  The  intelligent  devotee  shall  be  pure  in  body  by  per- 
forming this  Ny&sa  rile.  Steady  in  the  performance  of  holy  rite 


Tht  glory  of  the  five-syllabled. Mantra 


429 


he  shall  repeat  the  five-syllabled  Mantra  after  acquiring  the 
same  gracefully  from  a preceptor. 

83-85.  O splendid  lady,  henceforth,  I shall  recount  the 
procedure  for  acquiring  the  Mantra.  Without  it  the  Mantra  is 
futile  and  vtrith  it,  it  is  efficacious.  The  futile  ones  are  the 
following; — .^jnahina  (i.e.  Mantra  acquired  without  permis- 
sion) , Kriyahina  ( devoid  of  holy  rites) , Sraddhahina  (devoid 
of  faith),  Amanasa  (non-mental  i.e.  if  the  devotee  does  not 
devote  full  attention) , Anajftaptam  (that  which  has  been  prohi- 
bited), Daksinahinam  (permitted  but  devoid  of  gifts)  and 
Sadajapta  (indiscriminately  repeated  always). 

The  following  Mantras  are  fruitful — Ajnasiddha  (achieved 
with  permission),  Kriyasiddha  (attended  with  rituals), 
Sraddhasiddha  (fully  equipped  with  faith),  Sumanasa  (where 
the  mind  fully  dwells)  and  Daksinasiddha  (attended  with  gifts) . 

86-91.  The  devotee  shall  approach  the  brahmin  preceptor 
who  is  conversant  with  the  real  meaning  of  the  Mantra,  who 
has  perfect  knowledge  who  is  interested  in  the  path  of  medi- 
tation and  who  is  endowed  with  good  qualities  : With  emo- 
tional purity  the  devotee  shall  assiduously  propitiate  him 
mentally,  verbally,  physically  and  monetarily.  The  disciple  shall 
always  worship  the  preceptor  with  all  attention.  If  he  is  suffi- 
ciently affluent  the  disciple  shall  give  these  things  devoutly  to 
the  preceptor:— elephants,  horses,  chariots,  jewels,  fields, 
houses,  ornaments,  clothes,  and  different  kinds  of  grains.  If  he 
wishes  for  his  Siddhi  he  shall  not  be  stingy  in  spending  money. 
O gentle  lady,  thereafter  he  shall  dedicate  himself  along  with 
his  possessions  and  attendants.  After  worshipping  thus  in  accor- 
dance with  his  capacity  and  not  at  all  attempting  deception, 
the  disciple  shall  grasp  the  mantra  and  perfect  knowledge  from 
the  preceptor,  gradually. 

92-95.  Thus  propitiated,  the  preceptor  shall  make  the  dis- 
ciple take  his  bath  after  testing  him  thus.  The  disciple,  shall 
stay  with  him  for  a year  and  serve  him.  He  shall  be  pure  and 
devoid  of  egotism.  He  shall  become  emaciated  due  to  constant 
fasts.  The  preceptor  shall  then  bless  the  disciple  with  the  ex- 
cellent perfect  knowledge  of  Siva  in  a holy  place  at  an  auspi- 
cious  hour.  The  place  may  be  the  shore  of  the  sea  or  the  bank  of 
a river,  the  cowpen  or  a temple,  or  a clean  place  in  the  house 


430 


LiAgapuri^ 


itself.  The  time  shall  be  a Tithi  conducive  to  the  fulfilment  of 
desires;  the  constellation  and  the  junction  of  planets  shall  be 
auspicious.  It  shall  be  devoid  of  defects  in  every  respect.  Even 
in  the  isolated  place  the  preceptor  shall  utter  the  mantra 
loudly  and  legibly  with  a delighted  mind. 

96.  The  preceptor  shall  utter  himself  and  make  the  dis- 
ciple utter  after  him.  He  shall  then  bestow  Siddhi  (on  the  disci- 
ple) saying — ‘^May  there  be  auspiciousness.  May  it  be  splen- 
did. May  it  be  pleasing”. 

97.  After  acquiring  the  great  Mantra  and  perfect  know- 
ledge from  the  preceptor  the  disciple  shall  repeat  it  every  day 
with  the  due  Samkalpa.  He  shall  perform  Purascarana  too. 

98-99.  As  long  as  he  lives,  he  shall  repeat  this  a thousand 
and  eight  times  every  day.  Without  repeating  it,  he  shall  not  take 
food.  Thus  interested  in  it  he  attains  the  greatest  goal.  He  who 
repeats  this  Mantra  a hundred  thousand  times  for  each  syllable 
and  then  repeats  it  four  times  with  great  attention  is  known 
as  one  who  has  made  a Purascarana.  He  shall  take  food  only 
at  night.  He  shall  be  self-controlled. 

100.  A person  who  seeks  for  Siddhi,  ere  long,  shall  be  one 
of  these  two:— either  a Purascarana  repeater  or  daily  repeater. 

101.  If  a devotee  performs  Purascarana  and  continues  to 
be  a daily  repeater  too,  there  is  no  one  else  in  the  world  who 
is  equally  accomplished,  self-controlled  and  competent  to  bestow 
Siddhis. 

102-103.  Sitting  in  a comfortable  posture  he  shall  be  silent 
with  his  mind  fully  concentrated.  He  may  sit  facing  the  east 
or  the  north  and  then  repeat  the  excellent  Mantra.  At  the 
beginning  of  the  japa  and  at  its  conclusion  he  shall  restrain 
his  breath.  In  the  end,  he  shall  repeat  the  excellent  Bija  mantra 
a hundred  and  eight  times  in  all. 

104-105.  The  devotee  shall  restrain  the  breath  forty  times 
and  repeat  the  mantra.  Thus  the  Pranayama  for  the  five-sylla- 
bled Mantra  has  been  cited.  Thanks  to  Pranayama,  his  sins 
will  be  destroyed  soon  and  the  sense-organs  shall  become  con- 
trolled. Hence,  one  shall  practise  Prariayama. 

106.  It  should  be  known  that  the  japa  performed  in  the 
house  has  ordinary  benefit;  that  performed  in  the  cowpen 
shall  be  hundred  times  more  efficacious;  if  it  is  on  the  banks  of  a 


The  glory  of  the  fm-^llabled  Mantra 


431 


river  it  is  hundred  thousand  times  more  efficacious;  if  it  is  in 
the  presence  of  Siva  it  is  endless. 

107.  The  japa  performed  on  the  seashore  in  a divine 
pond,  on  a mountain,  in  a temple  and  in  a sacred  hermitage 
has  crore  times  the  benefit. 

108.  The  rite  of  japa  is  commended  if  it  is  in  the  presence 
of  Siva  or  in  front  of  the  sun,  the  preceptor,  the  lamp,  cow 
or  water. 

109-111.  O lady  of  auspicious  face,  if  the  number  of  the 
repetitions  is  reckoned  on  the  fingers  it  has  the  ordinary  benefit; 
if  lines  arc  drawn  and  the  number  is  calculated  the  benefit  is 
said  to  be  eight  times  more;  if  it  is  reckoned  by  means  of  the 
fruits  of  Putrajiva  it  has  ten  times  more  benefit;  if  it  is  cal- 
culated by  means  of  conches  and  jewels  the  benefit  is  hundred 
times  more;  through  coral  the  benefit  a thousand  times  more;  it 
is  ten  thousand  times  more,  if  the  reckoning  is  through  crys- 
tals; it  is  hundred  thousand  times  more  if  the  calculation  is  by 
pearls;  it  is  one  million  times  more  if  the  calculation  is  by 
lotus-seeds;  if  it  is  calculated  by  gold  pieces  the  benefit  is  ten 
million  times  more.  The  benefit  is  infinite  if  the  calculation  is 
by  knots  of  Ku:Sa  grass  or  Rudraksa  beads. 

112-115.  The  necklace  of  twenty- five  Rudraksa  beads  is 
conducive  to  salvation;  that  of  twenty-seven  is  nourishing, 
that  of  thirty  is  conducive  to  the  achievement  of  wealth  and 
tiiat  of  fifty  pertains  to  black  magic. 

If  the  devotee  faces  the  east  and  performs  the  japa  it  is 
Va^ya  (i.e.  he  will  be  able  to  attract  others);  facing  the  south 
pertains  to  Abhicara;  facing  the  west  bestows  wealth  and  facing 
the  north  is  conducive  to  quiescence. 

One  should  know  that  the  thumb  bestows  liberation;  the 
index  finger  destroys  enemies;  the  middle  finger  yields 
wealth;  the  ring  finger  causes  quiescence.  O splendid 
lady,  in  the  rite  of  japa  the  little  finger  bestows  protection. 
The  devotee  shall  perform  japa  with  the  thumb  coming  into 
contact  with  other  fingers. 

116.  Any  holy  rite  performed  without  the  thumb  is  fruit- 
less.  Listen.  The  japayajfla  excels  all  other  sacrifices. 

117-118.  All  the  ritualistic  sacrifices,  charitable  gifts  and 
austerities  do  not  merit  even  a sixteenth  fraction  of  the  japa- 


432 


LingapurS^ 


yajfia.  The  other  yajftas  are  attended  with  violence  or  killing 
but  japayajfla  has  nothing  to  do  with  violence.  Now  the  greatness 
of  only  the  Vacika  (i.e.  chanting  with  audible  voice)  japa- 
yajfia  has  been  glorified. 

1 19-122.  The  Upamsu  (mumbling)  is  hundred  times  more 
efficacious  than  verbal  and  the  Manasa  (mental)  is  thousand 
times  more  efficacious  than  mumbling. 

If  one  utters  the  mantra  clearly  with  highly  accented  or 
lowly  accented  tones  or  without  either,  that  japayajna  is  called 
Vacika  (verbal).  If  one  utters  the  mantra  with  a low  tone, 
making  the  lips  throb  slightly  and  making  only  some  sounds 
audible,  thatjapais  called  Uparhsu  (mumbling).  If  the  devotee 
ponders  over  the  meaning  of  the  words  letter  by  letter  and 
proceeds  ahead  with  the  series  of  syllables  that  japa  is  called 
Manasa  (mental).  Of  the  three  japayajnas  the  latter  one  excels 
the  earlier  one. 

123-127.  The  quality  of  the  benefit  varies  according  to  the 
mode  of  yajfia.  If  the  deity  is  eulogised  continuously  by  japa  it 
becomes  pleased  and  on  being  pleased  it  shall  bestow  extensive 
pleasures  and  permanent  liberation.  Neither  the  yaksas  nor 
the  Raksasas,  neither  the  Pisacas  nor  the  terrible  and  evil 
planets  even  approach  the  person  doing  the  japa.  They  are 
frightened  all  round.  One  shall  entirely  suppress  by  means 
of  japa  all  the  sins  committed  in  a number  of  previous  births. 
One  wins  worldly  pleasures,  Siddhis  and  liberation  and  also 
conquers  death  by  means  of  japa. 

After  thus  acquiring  perfect  knowledge  pertaining  to  Siva 
and  after  understanding  the  procedure  for  the  japa  the  devo- 
tee shall  abide  by  good  conduct.  Continuously  meditating 
thus,  he  attains  welfare. 

I shall  now  mention  sadacara  (good  conduct)  that  is  the 
perfect  means  of  Dharma  ( virtue) . 

128.  Since  performance  devoid  of  good  conduct  shall  be 
fruitless  good  conduct  is  the  greatest  virtue,  the  greatest 
penance. 

129.  Good  conduct  is  the  greatest  learning.  Good  conduct 
is  the  greatest  goal.  Men  of  good  conduct  shall  be  fearless 
everywhere. 


Th9  glory  of  the  jive-syllabled  Mantra 


433 


130-133.  Similarly  men  devoid  of  good  conduct  shall  meet 
with  fear  everywhere. 

O lady  of  excellent  face,  people  attain  Deva-hood  and 
sage-hood  by  observing  good  conduct.  Similarly,  by  trans- 
gressing good  conduct  they  attain  birth  in  lower  and  base 
state  of  society.  A person  who  has  eschewed  good  conduct 
becomes  despicable.  Hence,  one  who  seeks  perfect  accomplish- 
ment shall  scrupulously  cling  to  the  good  conduct.  One  who 
is  wicked  in  conduct  and  activity  is  sinful.  He  is  mostly 
unclean.  He  defiles  perfect  knowledge. 

Hence,  one  shall  assiduously  perform  the  holy  rites  prescri- 
bed for  respective  castes  and  stages  in  life. 

134-140.  One  who  performs  the  rites  laid  down  for  him 
is  always  my  favourite.  In  the  evening  and  in  the  morning  he 
shall  practise  worship  with  a delighted  mind.  He  shall  begin 
the  rite,  clean  in  mind  and  body  before  sunrise  and  before 
sunset  and  perform  it  duly.  A brahmin  shall  not  transgress 
Sandhy  a due  to  lust,  delusion,  fear  or  covetousness.  Since  by 
giving  up  Sandhya  prayers,  the  brahmin  falls  off  from  the 
status  of  brahminhood. 

One  shall  not  tell  lies.  Nor  shall  one  eschew  truth.  They 
say  that  truth  is  Brahman.  Hence,  untruth  defiles  the  Brahman. 
These  are  all  causes  of  sins: — viz,  untruth,  harshness  (in 
speech),  stubbornness  and  back-biting,  Not  even  mentally, 
verbally  or  physically  shall  one  violate  others’  wives,  or  take 
away  others’  wealth  or  injure  others. 

One  shall  eschew  the  cooked  rice  of  a Sudra,  the  cooked 
rice  that  is  stale,  the  Naivedya  offering,  the  Sraddha  (parta- 
king of  food  therein) , the  cooked  rice  for  the  masses  and  at 
social  functions  or  served  as  the  doles  by  the  king.  The  purity 
of  the  character  is  based  on  the  purity  of  food  and  not  by 
means  of  clay  or  water.  One  can  attain  Siddhi  only  when 
there  is  purity  of  character.  Hence,  he  should  be  scrupulous 
about  the  food  he  takes. 

141.  Even  those  brahmins  who  are  the  expounders  of 
Brahman  are  defiled  by  accepting  gifts  from  their  patrons, 
kings,  etc.  There  is  no  rebirth  unto  those  who  are  defiled  by 
taking  gifts,  as  unto  the  seeds  that  are  heated  in  fire. 

142.  Gift  from  kings  is  sinful.  It  is  comparable  to  poison. 
After  realising  this  at  the  outset  it  shall  be  avoided  by  a 
learned  man  as  heidiall  avoid  the  flesh  of  a dog« 


434 


LiAgafmrSna 


143.  One  shall  not  take  food  without  taking  bath,  or 
performing  japa  or  worshipping  the  fire.  One  shall  not  take 
food  on  the  outer  side  of  a leaf.  At  night  one  shall  not  take 
food  without  a lamp. 

144-145.  One  shall  never  take  food  in  a broken  pot,  in  the 
open  street,  and  in  the  presence  of  fallen  people.  One  shall 
not  take  food  partly  consumed  by  a Sudra  nor  shall  one  take 
cooked  rice  along  with  infants.  One  shall  take  in  only  pure 
food  which  is  unctuous,  emollient,  consecrated  and  inspired 
with  mantras.  While  taking  food  one  shall  remember  that  it 
is  Siva  who  eats.  He  shall  keep  silent  and  concentrated. 

146.  One  shall  not  drink  water,  sipping  standing,  through 
folded  hands,  nor  with  the  left  hand  or  seated  on  a bed  even 
with  the  right  hand. 

147.  One  shall  not  resort  to  the  shade  of  Vibhi taka,’*® 
Arka,’*^  Karafija’**  and  Snuhi’®*  trees,  nor  shall  one  stand  in  the 
shadow  of  a pillar,  lamp  post,  human  beings  and  other  animals. 

148.  One  shall  not  go  on  a long  journey  by  oneself  nor 
cross  a river  with  one’s  hands;  one  shall  never  descend  into  a 
well  nor  climb  tall  trees. 

149.  O splendid  lady,  one  shall  never  perform  religious 
actions,  japas  and  other  holy  rites  with  the  face  turned  away 
from  the  sun,  fire,  water,  Devas  and  the  preceptors. 

150.  One  shall  not  warm  one’s  feet  over  the  fire;  one 
shall  not  touch  the  hand  by  means  of  legs;  one  shall  not 
occupy  a lofty  place  above  the  fire;  one  shall  never  cast 
impurities  or  ordure  into  the  fire. 

151.  One  shall  never  kick  the  water  with  the  feet;  one 
shall  never  cast  the  dirt  of  the  limbs  into  the  water.  After 
washing  the  dirt  on  the  banks  one  shall  take  one’s  bath. 

152.  The  water  shaken  off  from  the  tip  of  the  nail  or  hairs, 
from  the  garments  after  bath  and  from  the  water  pot,  is  con- 
ducive to  misfortune.  If  one  touches  it,  it  is  impure. 

153.  If  a man  of  deluded  mind  touches  husks  and  dust 
particles  licked  up  and  raised  by  a goat,  dog,  donkey, 

760.  Vibhitaka— the  tree  Terminalia  Belierica. 

761.  Arkar— the  plant  Galotropis  Gigantea. 

762.  K&railja— pertaining  to  the  Karahja  tree  Pongamia  Glabra. 

763.  Snuhi — the  milk-hedge  plant. 


The  glory  of  Ihe  five-syllabled  Mantra 


435 


or  camel  or  swept  off  by  a broom  it  will  destroy  fortune  even 
if  it  belongs  to  Vi§nu. 

154-158.  A man  who  keeps  a cat  in  his  house  is  on  a par 
with  a low  caste  person.  If  a man  feeds  leading  brahmins  in 
the  presence  of  a cat  it  shall  be  considered  to  be  similar  to 
the  act  of  a Candala.  No  doubt  need  be  entertained  in  this 
respect.  The  wind  from  the  buttocks,  the  wind  from  the  win- 
nowing basket,  the  wind  coming  out  of  the  mouths  of  animals, 
all  these  coming  into  contact  with  a person  dispel  his  merits. 

One  shall  never  perform  japa  wearing  a turban  or  a coat 
of  mail.  If  one  is  naked  or  one  has  loosened  the  knots  of  hairs, 
or  is  dirty  or  is  impure  or  has  impure  hands,  he  shall  not 
perform  japa.  He  shall  not  perform  japa  while  conversing  with 
others. 

All  these  arc  inimical  to  japa,  viz. — anger,  arrogance,  inebri- 
ation, thirst,  lethargy,  spitting,  yawning,  seeing  a dog  or  a 
base  man,  slumber,  and  prattling.  When  these  occur  one  shall 
look  at  the  sun  and  get  purified. 

159-161 . By  the  sun  the  following  are  meant.  The  sun,  fire, 
moon,  planets,  stars  and  constellations — these  are  called  lumi- 
naries, When  anger,  etc.  occur  one  shall  perform  Acamana  or 
Pranayama  and  then  continue  the  japa. 

One  shall  not  perform  japa  keeping  the  legs  stretched.  One 
shall  not  sit  in  the  cock  posture  at  the  time  of  japa.  Nor  shall 
one  be  lying  down,  without  sitting  on  a scat.  The  repeater  of 
the  mantras  shall  not  perform  japa  in  the  open  street,  or  in 
the  presence  of  the  Sodras  or  in  a ground  smeared  with  blood, 
or  sitting  in  a cot. 

162-165.  The  devotee  shall  mentally  think  about  the 
meaning  of  mantra.  Seated  on  a cosy  scat  he  shall  perform 
japa  perfectly.  He  shall  have  any  of  the  following  for  a seat:— 
viz.,  a silk  cloth,  tiger  skin,  a cotton  cloth,  an  upper  cloth  or  a 
cotton  quilt,  a wooden  plank  or  a palmyra  leaf.  The  worship 
of  the  preceptor  shall  be  performed  in  all  the  three  Sandhyas 
by  one  who  wishes  for  welfare.  He  who  is  the  preceptor  is  also 
Siva.  He  who  is  Siva  is  the  preceptor.  As  is  Siva  so  is  the 
learning;  as  is  the  learning  so  is  the  preceptor.  The  knowledge 
about  Siva  is  obtained  from  the  preceptor.  The  benefit  accrues 
in  accordance  with  devotion.  O fair  lady,  indeed  he  (the  pre- 


436 


Lingapurd^a 


cep  tor)  is  identical  with  all  Devas;  he  is  identical  with  all  Saktis, 

166-172.  The  disciple  shall  bear  the  behests  of  his  prece- 
ptor on  his  head  (i.  e,  he  shall  obey  him)  whether  he  is  with  or 
without  good  qualities.  He  who  seeks  welfare  shall  not  trans- 
gress, even  menially,  the  behests  of  the  preceptor.  One  who 
strictly  conforms  to  the  biddings  of  the  preceptor  attains  the 
wealth  of  knowledge.  Whatever  he  does  in  the  presence  of  the 
preceptor  shall  be  done  with  the  permission  of  the  preceptor 
viz. — going,  standing,  sleeping,  eating,  etc.  Neither  in  front  of  the 
preceptor  nor  in  the  presence  of  the  deity  shall  he  be  compla- 
cently seated  as  he  pleases,  since  the  preceptor  is  the  lord 
himself  and  his  house  is  the  temple  of  the  lord.  If  one  comes 
into  contact  with  sinners  one  will  have  downfall  due  to  their 
sins.  If  one  comes  into  contact  with  the  preceptor  one  shall 
incur  the  benefit  of  his  holy  rites. 

Just  as  a piece  of  gold  eschews  its  impurities  after  coming 
into  contact  with  fire  so  also  a man  eschews  sins  due  to  his 
contact  with  the  preceptor. 

Just  as  the  ghee  in  a pot  placed  near  fire  becomes  melted 
so  also  the  sin  of  a person  near  the  preceptor  becomes  dissolved. 
Just  as  the  blazing  fire  burns  ordure  and  lumber  so  also  the 
contented  preceptor  burns  sins  by  means  of  the  power  of  his 
mantra. 

173-179.  Undoubtedly  if  the  preceptor  is  satisfied,  Bra- 
hma, Visnu,  Rudra,  Devas  and  sages  are  also  satisfied  and  they 
bless  him.  One  shall  never  infuriate  the  preceptor  physically, 
mentally  or  verbally.  By  his  wrath  are  burned  the  longevity, 
fortune,  wisdom  and  good  holy  rites.  The  sacrifices  of  those 
who  infuriate  him  are  futile.  His  japas  and  other  observances 
are  also  futile.  No  doubt  need  be  entertained  in  this  respect. 
One  shall  assiduously  refrain  from  making  any  statement  against 
the  preceptor.  If  out  of  great  delusion  he  speaks  it  out,  he  will 
fall  into  Raurava  hell.  O fair  lady,  never  should  one  falsely 
cheat  the  preceptor  mentally,  or  verbally  or  physically  or  mone- 
tarily. If  he  proclaims  the  wicked  qualities  of  his  preceptor  he 
will  have  hundred  times  that  wickedness.  If  he  proclaims  the 
good  qualities  he  will  have  the  benefit  of  all  good  qualities. 
Whether  directed  or  not,  he  shall  always  do  what  is  beneficent 
and  pleasing  to  the  preceptor. 


The  glory  of  the  five-syllabled  Mantra 


437 


180-181.  Whether  within  sight  or  out  of  sight  of  the  pre- 
ceptor, one  shall  do  what  is  beneBccnt  or  pleasing  to  the 
preceptor.  If  he  does  anything  against  him  mentally,  physically 
or  verbally,  he  goes  down  and  revolves  there  itself.  Hence,  he 
should  be  worshipped  and  saluted  always. 

182-185.  The  disciple  shall  speak  to  the  preceptor  only 
after  getting  permission  from  him  even  when  he  is  nearby. 
Otherwise  he  shall  not  look  at  him  straight  in  the  face.  The 
disciple  who  adheres  to  all  these  rules,  who  is  devout,  who  is 
perpetually  engaged  in  japa  and  who  does  everything  pleasing 
to  his  preceptor  deserves  to  utilise  the  Mantra.  I shall  mention 
the  application  and  the  purpose  of  the  Mantra  that  has  been 
accomplished.  If  the  devotee  does  not  know  the  mode  of  appli- 
cation, the  mantra  becomes  ineffective.  That  should  be  known 
as  Viniyoga  whereby  the  desired  benefit  is  put  in  conjunction 
with  the  activity.  It  is  the  benefit  of  this  world  as  well  as  of 
the  next.  The  benefit  arising  out  of  Viniyoga  is  longevity, 
health,  the  permanence  of  the  body  [?]  kingdom,  royal  glory, 
perfect  knowledge,  heaven  and  salvation. 

186-193.  The  following  rites  shall  be  performed  by 
repeating  the  five-syllabled  Mantra  eleven  times: — Proksana 
(ritualistic  sprinkling  with  water) ; Abhiseka(  ablution)  ; Agham- 
arsana  ( praying  for  forgiveness  for  sins)  and  the  two  baths — 
one  at  dawn  and  one  at  day.  The  intelligent  devotee  shall 
be  clean  and  after  climbing  the  mountain  shall  alertfuJly  repeat 
the  mantra  a hundred  thousand  times,  or  two  hundred  thousand 
times  on  the  banks  of  a great  river;  he  will  attain  long  life. 
Ten  thousand  Homas  with  the  following  materials  of  worship 
are  conducive  to  longevity  viz: — The  sprouts  of  the  Durva 
grass,  gingclly  seeds,  Vani  (?),  Guduci  and  Ghujika  (?).  I he 
wise  devotee  shall  repeat  the  japa  two  hundred  thousand  times 
after  resorting  to  the  holy  fig  tree.  By  touching  the  Asvattha 
tree  on  a Saturday  the  man  obtains  long  life.  The  intelligent 
devotee  shall  touch  the  Asvattha  tree  with  both  the  hands  on 
Saturdays  and  repeat  the  japa  hundred  and  eight  times.  It 
will  dispel  premature  death.  Facing  the  sun  and  with  the 
mind  not  dwelling  on  anything  else  the  devotee  shall  repeat 
the  japa  a hundred  thousand  times.  By  performing  hundred 
and  eight  Homas  everyday  with  Arka  twigs  the  devotee  is 


438 


Lingapwra^ 


liberated  from  ailments.  For  suppressing  all  ailments  the  man 
shall  perform  ten  thousand  sacrifices.  By  performing  sacrifices 
the  man  shall  be  free  from  sickness.  The  devotee  shall  repeat 
the  mantra  hundred  and  eight  times  and  shall  drink  water  in 
the  presence  of  the  sun.  Within  a month  he  shall  be  liberated 
from  the  gastric  trouble. 

194-20 la.  One  shall  eat  cooked  rice  and  other  foodstuffs 
and  drink  the  beverages  after  inspiring  the  same  with  the 
mantra  eleven  times.  Even  if  it  were  poison  it  shall  become 
nectar.  Everyday,  in  the  forenoon,  the  devotee  shall  perform 
hundred  and  eight  offerings  to  the  fire,  repeat  the  mantra  a 
hundred  thousand  ti^nes  and  worship  the  sun.  He  shall  attain 
perfect  health.  The  devotee  shall  fill  good  pot  with  river  water. 
Touching  it  he  shall  repeat  the  japa  ten  thousand  times.  If  he 
bathes  in  that  water  it  becomes  an  antidote  for  ailments. 
Everyday  the  pure  devotee  shall  repeat  the  mantra  twentyeight 
times  and  then  take  food  or  he  shall  perform  Homa  with  Palasa 
twigs.  He  will  attain  perfect  health.  During  the  days  of  lunar  or 
solar  eclipse  the  devotee  shall  be  clean  and  observe  fast  at  the 
outset.  For  the  duration  of  eclipse  he  shall  with  great  concentra- 
tion repeat  the  mantra  on  the  banks  of.  a river  flowing  into  a 
sea  and  after  the  eclipse  is  over  he  shall  repeat  the  japa,  thou- 
sand and  eight  times  and  drink  the  juice  of  Brahmi.  He  shall 
then  attain  in  this  world,  good  intellect  capable  of  grasping 
all  scriptures.  His  words  shall  be  superhuman  and  similar  to 
those  of  goddess  Sarasvati. 

201b-202a.  IfafiElicted  by  evil  planets  and  stars  the  man 
shall  repeat  the  japa  devoutly  ten  thousand  times.  By  perform- 
ing a thousand  and  eight  Homas,  the  affliction  of  the  evil  planets 
shall  be  dispelled. 

202b-203a.  On  seeing  evil  dreams,  the  man  shall  take  bath 
and  repeat  the  japa  ten  thousand  times.  By  performing  hund- 
red and  eight  Homas  with  ghee,  there  shall  be  immediate 
calmness. 

203b-205a.  During  the  solar  and  lunar  eclipses  the  devotee 
shall  duly  worship  the  Linga.  Whatever  he  may  seek,  O gentle 
lady,  he  shall  perform  ten  thousand  japas  earnestly  in  the 
presence  of  the  lord.  He  shall  be  clean  and  keep  his  mind  res- 
trained. Undoubtedly  that  person  attains  cherished  desires. 


The  glory  of  the  five-syllabled  Mantra 


439 


205b-20/a.  At  the  advent  of  ailments  of  elephants,  horses 
and  of  the  kine  in  particular  the  man  shall  be  clean  and  per- 
form homa  with  twigs.  He  shall  worship  devoutly  and  duly 
repeat  the  mantra  ten  thousand  times  for  a month.  There  will 
certainly  be  peace  among  them  and  they  will  flourish. 

207b-208a.  During  uprisings  and  calamities  as  well  as 
harassment  from  enemies  the  devotee  shall  be  clean  and  per- 
form ten  thousand  Homas  with  twigs  of  Palana.  He  will  have 
peace  ; and  disturbance,  if  any,  will  be  suppressed. 

208b-209a.  O gentle  lady,  one'  shall  perform  this  when 
there  is  harassment  from  black  magic,  when  the  power  of  that 
magic  shall  turn  round  and  afflict  the  enemy. 

209b-210.  In  order  to  create  hatred  the  devotee  shall 
perform  eight  Homas  with  Vibhitaka  twigs  or  with  wet  blood 
repeating  the  syllables  of  the  mantra  backwards.  If  the 
devotee  smears  himself  with  blood  and  performs  the  Homa 
with  poison  it  causes  hatred  among  men. 

211.  I shall  now  recount  the  mode  of  expiation  for  the 
atonement  of  sins.  Since  the  atonement  of  sins  is  the  cause  of 
enrichment  in  perfect  knowledge,  all  the  holy  rites  will  be  futile 
if  sins  are  not  properly  atoned  for. 

212-215.  Because  knowledge  dwindles,  therefore  sins  must 
be  properly  atoned  for.  O auspicious  lady,  for  the  betterment 
of  learning  and  fortune  the  devotee  shall  take  handfuls  of  water 
and,  meditating  on  me  (iSiva)  and  repeating  the  mantra  eleven 
times  he  shall  perform  ablution.  For  the  eradication  of  the  sin 
he  shall  take  bath,  repeating  the  mantra  hundred  and  eight 
times.  It  has  the  same  benefit  as  the  pilgrimage  to  all  holy 
centres.  It  is  auspicious  and  it  dispels  all  sins.  If  there  is  any 
break  in  the  continuity  in  the  Sandhya  prayers  the  man  shall 
perform  hundred  and  eight  japas. 

216.  He  shall  not  partake  of  the  cooked  rice  touched  and 
defiled  by  pigs,  CaneJ^as,  wicked  people  and  cocks.  If  he  eats 
it  he  shall  repeat  the  japa  hundred  and  eight  times. 

217.  For  the  atonement  of  the  sin  of  brahmin  slaughter 
the  man  shall  repeat  the  mantra  thousand  million  times  i.e. 
hundred  crores.  For  the  expiation  of  great  sins  he  shall  perform 
the  japa  to  the  extent  of  half  that  number.  No  doubt  need  be 
entertained  in  this  respect. 


440 


Lingapurd^a 


218.  It  is  ordained  that  in  the  case  of  those  who  are  de- 
filed by  subsidiary  sins,  the  japa  shall  extend  to  half  that  num- 
ber. For  the  expiation  of  other  sins  one  shall  repeat  the  japa 
five  thousand  times. 

219.  The  mantra  has  bearing  on  the  knowledge  of  the 
Atman.  It  is  a secret  and  it  illuminates  the  understanding  of 
Siva.  He  who  repeats  the  mantra  unexcitedly  to  the  extent  of 
five  hundred  thousand  times  shall  become  Siva  himself. 

220-226a.  Thereby,  O gentle  lady,  the  man  attains  an  easy 
victory  over  the  five  vital  airs.  The  devotee  shall  then  restrain 
the  sense  organs  with  purity  and  repeat  the  japa  five  hundred 
thousand  times.  Thereby,  O lady  of  excellent  face,  he  will 
have  victory  over  the  five  sense  organs.  The  man  who  meditates 
well  and  who  unexcitedly  repeats  the  mantra  five  hundred 
thousand  times  attains  victory  over  the  five  objects  of  senses. 
The  man  who  devoutly  repeats  five  hundred  thousand  times 
the  mantra  for  the  fourth  time  attains  victory  over  the  five 
elements.  O lady  of  excellent  face,  he  who  assiduously  restrains 
the  mind  and  repeats  the  mantra  four  hundred  thousand  times 
attains  mastery  over  the  organs.  O lotus-faced  lady,  by  means 
of  two  million  five  hundred  thousand  japas  the  man  attains 
victory  over  the  twenty  five  principles.  A man  shall  earnestly 
repeat  the  japa  ten  thousand  times  at  midnight  when  the  wind 
is  at  a standstill.  O beautiful  lady,  he  attains  the  Siddhi  of  the 
Brahman  by  means  of  this  Vrata. 

226b-22k  The  devotee  shall,  without  lethargy,  repeat  the 
mantra  a hundred  thousand  times  in  a place  where  the  wind  is 
still  and  where  there  is  no  sound  at  midnight.  Undoubtedly  he 
perceives  both  iSiva  and  iSiva.  There  shall  be  the  destruction 
of  darkness  along  with  the  bright  illumination  as  of  a lamp, 
both  within  the  heart  and  without.  The  self-possessed  man  shall 
repeat  the  mantra  ten  thousand  times  for  the  achievement  of  all 
kinds  of  weather. 

229.  The  devotee  shall  with  purity  and  devotion  repeat 
the  mantra  ten  million  times  affixed  with  the  Bijas.  He  shall 
attain  Sayujya  with  me.  What  else  is  greater  than  this  ? 

230-231.  Thus,  the  mode  and  procedure  for  chanting  the 
five-syllabled  Mantra  has  been  recounted  to  you.  He  who 
reads  this  and  listens  to  this,  attains  the  greatest  goal.  He  who 


The  sacrifice  of  meditation 


441 


narrates  this  mode  of  procedure  of  the  japa  of  the  five-syllabled 
mantra  to  pious  brahmins  at  a divine  rite  or  at  the  rite  per- 
taining to  the  Pitrs,  is  honoured  in  the  world  of  Siva. 


CHAPTER  EIGHTYSEK 

The  sacrifice  of  meditation 


The  sages  said : 

1 . The  brahmins  who  have  destroyed  their  sins  say  that  the 
meritorious  sacrifice  of  meditation  is  better  than  japa  for 
unattached  and  enlightened  persons. 

2.  Hence,  O Suta,  tell  us  today  about  the  sacrifice  of 
meditation  suited  for  unattached  noble  souls  in  detail  and  with 
all  effort. 

3-4a.  On  hearing  those  words  of  the  noble  sages  who  had 
performed  the  sacrifice  of  long  duration,  Suta  recounted  to 
them  what  Rudra  of  universal  action^®*  mentioned  after  neutra- 
lising the  poison  Kalakuta^®®  and  entering  his  cave.*^*® 

Suta  said : 

4b-5.  The  sages  of  great  discipline  bowed  down  to  Siva 
who  entered  the  cave  and  seated  himself  comfortably  along 
with  Bhavani.  All  of  them,  then,  eulogised  Nilakantha,  the 
consort  of  Uma. 

6.  “O  lord,  O bull-bannered  lord,  the  terrible  poison 
Kalakuta  has  been  neutralised  by  you.  Hence  everything  has 
been  stabilised  by  you.’* 

7.  On  hearing  their  words,  lord  Nilalohita,  the  Atman 
of  the  Universe,  smilingly  said  to  those  sages,  Sanandana  and 
others. 

764.  Visva-karma^S— viivarh  karma  yasya  sah  viilvakarm^  tena, 
Rudrena  ST,  by  Rudra  of  multifarious  activities. 

765.  The  poison  K&lakuta  or  halShala — a product  of  the  churned 
ocean  was  swallowed  by  Siva.  The  blue  colour  of  his  neck  and  his  extreme 
ire  are  the  effects  of  that  poison. 

766.  guha--i.c.  Meru-guha,  the  abode  of  Siva. 


442 


Lingapurar^a 


8,  excellent  brahmins,  of  what  consequence  is  this  ? 

I shall  mention  another  more  terrible  poison.  He  who  nullifies 
that  poison  is  really  efficient.  Of  what  avail  is  this  ? 

9.  What  is  called  Kalajkuta  is  not  at  all  poison  when 
compared  to  worldly  existence  which  is  the  real  poison. 
Hence,  with  all  efforts  one  shall  try  to  dispel  that  terrible 
poison. 

10-13.  The  mundane  existence  is  two-fold’®^  in  accordance 
with  one’s  rights  and  duties.  In  regard  to  men  of  deluded 
minds,  the  mundane  existence  is  very  terrible  and  burden- 
some. O sages  of  good  holy  rites,  creation  is  caused  by 
ignorance  due  to  the  defects  of  malice  and  attachment.’®®  It  is 
certainly  due  to  these,  that  virtue  and  evil  befall  everyone. 
O brahmins,  even  in  regard  to  things  not  near  at  hand,’®® 
the  scripture  creates  desire  for  them  even  in  the  minds  of 
good  men  in  the  world  merely  by  hearing  of  it.  Hence,  the 
perceptible  world  and  the  world  of  Vedic  tradition”®  and 
rituals  both  should  be  eschewed”^  with  great  effort.  He  then 
becomes  Virakta  (unattached  person)  altogether. 

14,  That  portion  of  the  Vedas  which  deals  with  rituals 
is  railed  scripture,  O brahmins.  It  is  the  principal  essence  of 
the  Vedas.  The  benefit  of  the  rites  goes  to  the  sages.”^^ 

15.  Those  who  do  not  know  these  things  say: — “Desire  is 
natural”^  in  everyone.  The  opposite  is  not  seen.  It  is  the 
Veda  that  makes  them  work  (for  fulfilling  such  desires). 

767.  i.e.  tamasa  and  r^jasa. 

768.  isana — iceba  ST,  desire. 

ragalt — visaya-pritih  ST,  attacliment  with  the  objects  of  senses. 

769.  asannikfstc-  that  wbix.h  is  beyond  the  scope  of  scnsc-prrception. 

770.  drstam-  - aihikam  ST,  pertaining  to  this  world. 

^u^ravikam— paralauUkatn  ST,  pertaining  to  the  world  beyond. 

771.  ST*  dkjoins ‘ucyate  bhagam’  as  ‘ucyatc  abhagam*  and  con- 
strues with  ‘karmasu*.  i.e,  karmasu  abhagam — non-participation  in  activities. 
ST,  interprets  : hert-  metaphysics  (kdhyatma-Skstra)  is  considered  to  be 
superior  to  the  Vedas. 

771a.  karmana^i  phalam  ^ : here  karmanah — niskania- 

karmactah  ST^  i.e.,  participation  in  activities  without  the  expectation  of 
their  fruits. 

772.  svabhavah — participation  in  activities  is  natural.  The  Vedas  enjoin 
activities  such  as  the  performance  of  agnisomlya.  Cf.  “agnisomiyam  psdum 
^labheta  svargakamaj|^*’. 


443 


The  sacrifice  of  meditation 

16.  The  virtue  of  renunciation  from  worldly  affairs,  is 
intended  for  eificicni  persons.’"^  Hence,  it  is  said  that  worldly 
exigence  is  caused  by  ignorance  of  all  embodied  persons. 

17-18a.  The  Digit  is  dried  up  due  to  Karman’^^  or  the 
nature  of  others  (?) . Individuals  endow^cd  with  Kalas  (?) 
are  ot  three  types.’’^  They  arc  devoid  of  perfect  knowledge 
due  to  ignorance.  The  three  types  are  (a)  those  destined  to 
fall  into  hell  because  they  commit  sin;  ( b)  those  destined  to  go 
to  heaven  because  they  perform  meritorious  deeds  and  they  go 
to  heaven  due  to  the  weight  of  their  merit  and  (c)  a mixture  of 
these  two. 

18b- 19.  The  living  beings  are  classified  under  four 
heads"'®  viz: — Udbhijjas  (germinating  plants) , Svedajas  (born 
of  sweat,  i.c.  germs  and  worms),  Andajas  (oviparous  beings), 
andjarayuja  (viviparous).  Thus  the  ignorant  embodied  being 
does  not  gel  relief  through  Karman  (?). 

20.  Salvation  is  not  attained  by  good  men  through  their 
progeny,  through  actions,  or  through  wealth.^’’  Liberation 
shall  occur  only  through  renunciation.  He  wanders  in  the 
world  due  to  the  absence  of  it  (renunciation). 

21.  Thus  due  to  the  fault  of  ignorance  and  as  a result  of 
various  Karmans,  the  individual  soul  adopts  a body  produced 
by  six  Kosas'"^  (vestures) . 

22.  Many  miseries  are  to  be  faced  by  the  individual  in 
the  womb,  in  the  vaginal  passage,  on  the  earth,  in  boyhood,  in 
youth,  in  old  age  and  in  death. 

773.  samarthanaru — viraktanam  ST. 

774.  For  those  who  are  unattached  activities  arc  not  unavoidable.  Gf. 
“pravrttir  esa  bhut^am  nivrttistu  mahabala” — Manu;  Or  activities  have  no 
fixed  goal,  Gf.  Bhaga.  ‘vedoktam  eva  kurvano  nissangarpitamisvarc/ 
naiskarmyani  labhate  siddbim  rocanartha  phala^rutih  // 

karmana—niskania'karmana  ST,  by  aimless  activities.  Life-seed 
(kala - jlvanakala  ST.)  becomes  unproductive  (iosam  ayati)  — a fact  that 
leads  one  to  emancipation. 

775.  trividhah  jivah— the  invidividual  soul  is  threefold  (See  V-iB 
below ). 

776*  caturdha—  in  four  ways.  Gf.  V-19  below. 

777*  Gf.  Supra  1. 8. 27. 

778.  §at-kausikam— snayvadi-§atko5a-yuktam  ST.  consistini^  of  six 
coverings  cf. 

*r»3rT  ? fttTrTFwr  ti  5frf'>Rrf*r^  f?  t 


444 


Lingapurdf^a 


23.  O brahmins,  if  duly  pondered  over,  good  men  have  to 
face  only  misery  through  the  contact  with  women  and  similar 
activities.  The  miserable  try  to  quell  one  misery  only  by 
another  misery. 

24.  Lust  is  never  quelled  by  means  of  enjoyment  of  plea- 
sures. Just  as  fire  blazes  all  the  more  by  Havis  (ghee  offer- 
ing) so  also  lust  is  inflamed  all  the  more  by  indulging  into 
pleasure.’^® 

25-27.  Hence,  on  pondering  over,  it  will  be  seen  that 
there  is  no  happiness  unto  men  even  due  to  coitus.  There  is 
misery  in  earning  wealth  as  also  in  preserving  and  spending 
it.  O excellent  brahmins,  if  we  ponder  over  it,  there  is 
misery  amongst  the  Pi^acas,  Raksasas,  Yaksas,  Gandharvas,  in 
the  world  of  the  moon,  in  the  world  of  mercury,  in  the 
world  of  Prajapati,  in  the  world  of  the  Brahman,  in  the 
world  of  Prakrti  and  Purusa  also.  O sages  of  good  holy  rites, 
there  are  miseries  due  to  destruction  of  possessions,  due  to  one’s 
possession  being  excelled  by  another’s,  etc.  These  cause  only 
other  miseries. 

28-30.  One  shall  eschew  those  impure  fortunes  and 
riches.  Hence,  O sinless  sages  of  good  holy  rites,  all  kinds  of 
pleasures  are  really  miseries  to  the  discriminating  person 
in  whatever  way  you  view  them,  viz.,  eightfold  or  sixteenfold 
or  of  twentyfour,  thirty  two,  fortyeight,  fiftysix,  or  sixtyfour 
types. 

31-32.  The  pleasures  of  the  following  types  are  undoubte- 
dly miseries  if  pondered  over  properly  even  to  those  yogins  who 
talk  of  Brahman: — Parthiva  (earthly),  Apya  (watery) Taijasa 
(fiery),  Vayavya  (gaseous),  Vyauma  (of  the  firmament), 
Manasa (mental),  Abhimanika,  (bringing  pride),  Bauddha’®® 
(intellectual),  PrSkrta  (pertaining  to  Prakrti) . 

33-37.  The  attributes  (?)  of  the  leaders  of  the  Ganas  are, 
on  reflection,  causes  of  misery.  In  all  the  worlds  there  is  always 
misery  in  the  beginning,  in  the  middle  and  in  the  end.  The 
present  ones  are  miseries,  the  future  ones  are  miseries.  (?)  In 
the  lands  defiled  by  faults,  there  are  various  kinds  af  miseries. 

779*  Repeated  I,  8.  25;  67,  16. 

780.  bauddham  prakrtam  eva  ca  : the  intellectual  enjoymertt  is  also 
material. 


The  sacrifice  of  meditation 


445 


(?)  Those  who  consider  ignorance  as  knowledge  do  not  consi- 
der the  past  events.  (?)  Just  as  the  medicine  is  used  to  dispel 
ailments  and  not  for  positive  pleasure  so  also  the  food  taken  in 
is  intended  for  dispelling  the  sickness  of  hunger  and  not  for 
any  positive  happiness.  In  the  diflFcrent  seasons,  the  embo- 
died beings  undergo  miseries  through  chillness,  heat,  wind 
rains,  etc.  There  is  no  doubt  about  it;  but  the  ignorant  do 
not  consider  it  that  way.  O excellent  sages,  even  in  the  hea- 
ven the  same  thing  happens  through  the  destruction,  etc.  of 
the  merit.’®^ 

38.  Just  as  the  tree  whose  roots  have  been  cut  falls  down 
to  the  ground  helplessly  so  also  the  living  being  overwhelmed 
by  various  kinds  of  ailments,  passion,  hatred,  fear,  etc.^®^ 

39-41.  Similarly  the  heaven-dwellers  fall  down  to  the 
earth  due  to  the  destruction  of  the  tree  of  merit.  Even  for 
heaven-dwellers  who  desire  for  things  that  cause  misery  and 
who  are  richly  endowed  with  pleasures  that  cause  misery, 
there  is  terrible  misery  when  they  fall  from  that  heaven.  There 
is  definitely  misery  in  the  hell  due  to  the  fact  that  even  religious 
students  resort  to  it  when  they  do  not  perform  those  rites  that 
are  laid  down,  O leading  sages. 

42.  Just  as  the  deer  frightened  of  death  and  uprooted  from 
his  habitation  does  not  obtain  sleep  so  also  the  noble-souled  as- 
cetic engaged  in  meditation  and  frightened  of  the  worldly 
existence  does  not  obtain  slumber. 

43.  Unhappiness  is  seen  even  in  germs,  birds,  animals, 
deer,  elephants  and  horses.  Hence  there  is  great  happiness 
unto  a man  who  renounces. 

44.  O sages  of  good  holy  rites,  there  is  misery  unto  even 
those  officers  on  duty  spread  over  the  whole  kalpa  who  move 
about  in  aerial  chariots,  unto  Manu  and  others  who  take  pride 
in  their  respective  positions. 

781.  The  activities  enjoined  for  the  attainment  of  heaven  are  not 

without  impurities.  For  instance,  the  agnifomiya  sacrifice  leads  to  heaven, 
but  it  is  attended  by  violence  the  slaughter  of  the  animal  (Gf. 

agni$om!yam  paium  Mabheta)  for  which  the  performer  of  sacrifice  suffers 
pain  (Cf.  l^varakffna— drftavadanu^ravikah  sa  hy  aviiuddhi-knty&tilaya- 
yuktab—^iC.) ; secondly,  heaven  is  not  a permanent  abode  (Gf.  V.  88  below) . 

782.  As  soon  as  he  has  exhausted  merit  the  heaven-dweller  falls  from 

heaven.  Cf.  5^  l" 


446 


Lingapurdna 


45.  Devas  and  Daityas  undergo  misery  due  to  their  desire 
for  mutual  conquest.  Even  kings  and  Raksasas  in  the  three 
worlds  undergo  misery. 

46-48.  In  fact  the  A^ramas  bring  about  only  misery 
or  exhaustion  (^rama)  unto  the  different  castes.  People  do  not 
attain  the  Atman  through  Asramas  (stages  in  life),  Vedas, 
yajnas,  Samkhyas,  (numerical  knowledge),  vratas  (holy 
rites),  severe  penances,  different  kinds  of  charitable  gifts,  etc. 
But  people  with  knowledge  obtain  it.  Hence,  with  all  efforts 
one  shall  perform  the  Pasupata  rite.  In  the  holy  rite  of  Pasu- 
pata,  the  learned  devotee  shall  perpetually  lie  on  bhasman, 
besmeared  with  ashes. 

49-50.  The  learned  devotee,  richly  endowed  with  the 
knowledge  of  the  five  objects  and  having  great  attention  to- 
wards the  principle  of  Siva  shall  adopt  the  yoga  that  causes 
salvation  and  destroys  fate  and  karman  and  shall  become 
intelligent  and  endowed  v/ith  the  yoga  of  five  objects. There- 
by he  attains  the  end  of  misery.  The  devotees  understand  the 
knowable  by  means  of  Para  Vidya’®*  and  not  by  Apara  Vidya.^^ 

51-54.  Two  Vidyas  (topics  of  knowledge)  are  to  be 
known:  Para  and  Apara,  O excellent  brahmins,  Apara  consists 
of  Rg,  Yajur,  Sama,  and  Atharva  Vedas.  Siksa,  Kalpa,  grammar, 
semantics,  prosody  and  astrology  also  constitute  Apara  Vidya. 

What  is  imperishable  is  the  Para.  It  is  imperceptible,  in- 
comprehensible. It  has  no  spiritual  lineage,  no  caste,  no  colo ar, 
no  eyes,  no  ears,  no  hands  and  no  feet.  O excellent  brahmins,  it 
is  not  born.  It  has  no  past.  It  is  not  describable  by  words. 

55-58.  It  has  no  touch,  no  form,  no  taste,  no  smell,  no 
change,  no  support.  It  is  perpetual,  omnipresent  and  all-power- 
ful. It  it  great  and  massive.  O brahmins,  it  is  unborn  and 
identical  with  cit  (consciousness);  it  is  devoid  of  Pranas  (vital 
airs)  ; it  has  no  mind;  it  is  non-emollient  and  it  is  devoid  of 
blood.  It  is  incomprehensible;  it  is  neither  stout  nor  long;  it  is 

783.  padc&rtha-yoga-fampaxmah— 'It  can  be  interpreted  as  ^accom- 
panied by  knowledge  derived  from  the  practice  of  the  five-syllabled  mantra 
'namai  iiv&ya*. 

784.  pars  vidy& — knowledge  of  Brahma  as  taught  in  the  Upani^ads, 

785.  apar&  vidy&-- knowledge  of  the  ritual  as  taught  in  the  Srauta  and 
Cthya  Sutras, 


The  sacrifice  of  meditation 


447 


not  excessively  clear;  it  is  not  short;  it  is  impassable;  it  is  bliss; 
it  is  unswerving;  not  open;  without  a second;  infinite;  not 
perceivable,  and  not  covered;  Para  is  identical  with  the 
Atman^^®  and  not  otherwise. 

59.  But  these  Para  and  Apara  are  not  the  real.  I alone  am 
identical  with  the  universe;  the  universe  is  in  me  alone. 

60-61.  Everything  originates  from  me,  stays  within  me  and 
gets  dissolved  in  me;  there  is  nothing  different  from  me.  This 
shall  be  realised  mentally,  verbally  and  physically.  The  devotee 
shall  with  concentration  sec  everything:  the  ‘sat’ (the  existent) 
and  the  ‘asat’  (the  non-existent) , in  the  Atman.  One  seeing 
everything  in  the  Atman  does  not  allow  the  mind  to  stray  to 
other  objects. 

62.  On  lowering  the  vision,  one  shall  see  the  Atman 
stationed  in  Vitasti  above  the  umbilicus  in  the  heart,  the  abode 
of  the  universe. 

63-64,  In  the  middle  of  this  heart  is  stationed  the  lotus^®’ 
with  dharma  for  its  bulbous  root  and  knowledge  for  its  splen- 
did stalk.  The  eight  accomplishments  are  its  eight  petals; 
vairagya  (detachment)  is  its  white  pericarp;  the  quarters  are 
its  pores  filled  with  the  vital  airs. 

65-71.  It  sees  mostly  and  in  due  order  on  being  united 
Avith  Prana,  etc.  O leading  sages,  each  of  the  veins  (Nadis) 
carries  the  ten  Pranas  (vital  airs).  Altogether  there  arc  seventy- 
^wo  thousand  Naejis.  The  Jagrat  (waking  stage)  is  stati- 
oned in  the  eyes,  the  svapna  (dream  stage)  in  the  neck;  the 
susupta  (sleeping  stage)  in  the  heart  and  turiya  (the  fourth 
above  the  three)  in  the  head.  The  presiding  deity  in  the 
jagrat  state  is  brahma;  in  Svapna  Visnu;  Is  vara  in  Susupta 
and  in  Turiya  Mahe^vara.  Others  say  as  follows when 
the  person  is  in  full  possession  of  his  senses  and  organs  it  is 
called  Jagrat;  when  only  the  four  organs,  mind,  intellect, 
ego  and  citta  function,  it  is  Svapna.  O sages  of  good  holy 
rites,  when  the  organs  and  senses  are  merged  into  the  Atman 

786.  para  vidy&  anyathfi  na— anya-prakirena  vanjitum  aSakyS 
Cf.  “yato  vSeo  nivartante.*’ 

The  realization  of  Brahma  cannot  be  described  in  words. 

787.  pu^darSkam— hrtkamalam  ST.  the  lotus-heart  which  is  the 
abiding  place  of  the  mind. 


448 


Lingapurdrj^a 


it  is  Su§upta.  The  fourth  (Turiya)  is  different  from  the  organs 
and  senses.  The  greatest  Siva  who  is  beyond  the  fourth  is  the 
prime  cause. 

72-79.  The  four  states  Jagrat  (wakefulness),  Svapna 
(dream),  Su^upti  (slumber)  and  Turiya  (the  fourth)  have 
been  mentioned.  I shall  now  describe  the  Adhibhautika, 
Adhyatmika  and  Adhidaivika  terms,  O leading  brahmins.  It 
should  be  known  by  the  learned  that  all  these  are  I myself.  O 
great  sages,  the  Adhyatmika  (organic)  is  said  to  be  fourteen  in 
all,  viz.,  the  sense  organs  (five),  the  organs  of  action  (five)  and 
the  mind,  intellect,  ego,  and  will  (four). 

0 excellent  sages,  the  following  constitute  the  Adhibhautika 
( the  extraneous  matter),  viz. — what  should  be  seen,  what  should 
be  heard,  what  should  be  smelt,  what  should  be  tested,  what 
should  be  touched,  what  should  be  thought  of,  what  should  be 
understood,  what  should  be  taken  pride  in,  what  should  be 
willed,  what  should  be  spoken,  what  should  be  grasped,  what 
should  be  traversed,  what  should  be  evacuated  and  what  should 
be  enjoyed. 

The  following  fourteen  constitute  the  Adhidaivika  (the 
Divine  factor),  viz. — the  sun,  quarters,  earth.  Varum  (water), 
wind,  Brahma,  Rudra,  Ksetrajha,  Agni,  Indra,  Visnu,  moon, 
lord  Mitra  and  Prajapati. 

80-81.  The  following  are  fourteen  Na^Is  (tubular  vessels), 
viz.— Rajfti,  Sudarfana,  Jita,  Saumya,  Mogha,  Rudra,  Mrta, 
(Amrta),  Satya,  Madhyama,  Na(jhra,  Stfuka,  Asura,  Krttika 
and  Bhasvatl. 

82-87.  There  are  fourteen  carrying  winds’®®  stationed  in 
the  middle  of  Na(^s: — ^Thcy  arc  Prma,  Vy^a,  Apana,  Udana, 
Samana,  Vairambha,  the  important  Antary^a,  Prabhahjana, 
Kurmaka,  Syena,  Sveta,  Kr§na,  Anila  and  Naga. 

1 am  the  lord  present  in  all  these  as  the  great  Atman  and 
the  devotees  shall  worship  me.  I am  present,  O sages  of  good 
holy  rites,  in  the  eyes,  in  what  is  to  be  seen,  in  the  sun,  in  the 
Nadi>  in  the  Pr^a,  (five  types)  in  the  Vijftana,  and  in  ananda 
(bliss),  in  the  heart,  in  the  firmament,  and  within  all  these.  I 
am  the  sole  Atman,  moving  within.  The  lord  is  ageless,  infinite, 
devoid  of  sorrow,  immortal  and  stable.  He  is  the  sole  being 

788,  v&yava^  caturdala — the  fourteen  vital  ain  stationed  in  the 
arteries. 


The  sacrifice  of  meditation 


449 


moving  amidst  these  fourteen  types  of  objects.  O brahmins, 
all  these  merge  into  him  as  there  is  nothing  else. 

88.  The  omniscient  Being  is  only  one.  There  is  only  one 
lord  of  all.  He  is  the  overlord  of  all.  He  is  the  immanent 
soul  of  great  lustre. 

89.  On  being  worshipped,  the  eternal  lord  grants  happi- 
ness. O excellent  brahmins,  if  one  does  not  worship  him  one 
does  not  attain  happiness.^®® 

90.  He  is  being  worshipped  by  the  Vedas  and  other  scrip- 
tures. But  this  omniscient  lord  does  not  go  unto  them  for 
succour. 

91.  This  visible  universe  is  his  Anna’®®  (food).  He  does 
not  become  the  Anna  himself  (unto  anyone  else).  Nowhere 
docs  one  devour  Anna  guarded  by  one’s  own  self. 

92.  I am  the  food  taken  in  by  the  living  beings  everywhere.  I 
am  the  knot  of  the  living  beings  and  I bring  about  all  great 
things.  I am  five-fold  Atman  divided  into  several  parts. 

93.  I am  the  soul  of  the  living  beings  identical  with 
Anna.  What  is  taken  in  is  called  Anna.  I am  the  soul  of  the 
sense-organs  identical  with  Prana  (vital  breaths).  I am  the  soul 
of  mental  conceptions  identical  with  the  mind. 

94.  As  Soma  I am  Kalatman  (the  soul  of  Time),  identi- 
cal with  Vijfiana  (perfect  knowledge).  As  Mahesa  Paramesvara 
I become  identical  with  Ananda  ( Bliss ).’®^ 

95.  Thus  I am  the  entire  universe  and  everything  is 
stationed  in  me.  I am  independent  but  everything  is  depend- 
ent on  me.  This  can  be  understood  on  pondering  over  the  real 
form  of  various  things. 

96.  Even  the  state  of  being  one  (i.e.  ekatva)  is  not  present 


ySg.  The  lord  stationed  in  the  subtle  body  is  the  source  of  pleasure 
for  others  but  he  has  no  source  of  pleasure  for  himself. 

790.  The  lord  is  the  source  of  food  for  others  but  he  has  no  source 
of  food  for  himself.  Of.  Bhagavadgitai 

gr§  srrftHt  1 

79t.  paficakoia  or  pancakaficuka  of  Saiva  philosophy  constitutes  the 
five  sheaths  of  the  self-luminous  lord.  They  are  the  produett  of  avaratia- 
iakti  (power  of  concealment)  of  MiyS  (lord’i  power  of  pn)jection). 


450 


Liiigapurdna 


there’®^  as  a distinct  attribute.  Then,  how  can  there  be  Dvaita 
(duality)?  So  also  there  is  no  mortal  being.  Whence  can  there 
be  an  immortal  born  of  the  unborn  ? 

97.  The  Atman  is  neither  Antaljprajha  (having  intellec- 
tual awareness  within)  nor  Bahihprajna  (having  the  intellectual 
awareness  without)  nor  is  He  in  both  ways(Ubhayatahprajna). 
He  is  not  Prajfianaghana  (solid  in  perfect  knowledge)  nor 
Prajha  (wise  being)  nor  Ajhanapurvaka  (having  ignorance). 

98-99.  Brahman  is  not  one  that  is  known  nor  one  to  be 
known.  In  fact  it  is  Nirvana  (extinction,  Kaivalya,  Nih^reyasa. 
Anamaya  (devoid  of  ailments),  Amrta  (immortal),  Aksara 
imperishable,  Brahman,  Parama  Atman,  Paratpara  (greater 
than  the  greatest), Nirvikalpa  (devoid oi  doubtful  alternatives), 
Nirabhasa  (devoid  of  fallacious  appearances),  Jhana  (know- 
ledge) ; all  these  are  synonyms  (for  perfect  knowledge) . 

100.  When  it  is  pleased  and  concentrated  in  a single  form 
it  is  known  as  Jhana  (Perfect  knowledge) . Everything  else  is 
Ajhana  ( Ignorance) . No  doubt  need  be  entertained  in  this 
regard. 

101-104.  Perfect  clear  knowledge  certainly  originates  from 
contact  with  the  preceptor.  It  is  uncontaminated  by  lust,  hat- 
red, falsehood,  anger,  passion,  covetousness  and  the  like.  It 
should  be  known  as  the  bestower  of  salvation.  Since  the  man 
has  the  impurity  of  ignorance  he  is  contaminated.  Salvation 
takes  place  only  when  impurity  is  dispelled  and  not  otherwise, 
even  if  one  takes  a crore  of  births.  Without  perfect  knowledge’®^ 
neither  merit  nor  demerit  is  destroyed.  Hence,  O most  excellent 
ones  among  the  knowers  of  the  Brahman,  practise  knowledge 
alone  as  the  means  of  liberation.  It  is  only  by  practice  of  per- 
fect knowledge  that  the  intellect  cf  men  becomes  free  from 
impurities. 

105-109.  Hence,  one  shall  always  practise  perfect  know- 
ledge having  that  as  the  foundation  and  the  ultimate  goal.  O 
leading  brahmins,  a yogin  who  is  satiated  with  knowledge 

792.  ekatvam  api  nSsti — The  terms  ckatva  (singleness),  etc.,  are 
relative  and  hence,  they  shall  be  avoided  in  regard  to  the  exposition  of 
Brahman. 

793.  Gf.  *‘jiianad  eva  hi  kaivalyam**— cited  in  57*.;  also  “rte  jhanan 
na  muktih*'. 


The  sacrifice  of  meditation 


451 


alone  and  who  has  eschewed  all  contacts  with  w^orldly  objects 
has  no  further  duty.  If  he  has,  he  is  no  longer  a knower  of 
reality.  Neither  in  this  world  nor  in  the  other  has  he  any  duty,'®^ 
since  he  is  a liberated  soul.  Hence,  the  knower  of  Brahman  is 
the  knower  of  the  reality  of  perfect  knowledge  and  perpetually 
engaged  in  the  practice  of  perfect  knowledge.  He  eschews  the 
practice  of  all  duties.  He  obtains  perfect  knowledge  alone.  O 
excellent  brahmins,  if  one  who  takes  pride  in  his  position  in 
varna^rama  (as  Brahmin,  ksatriya,  etc.)  takes  pleasure  in  other 
things  (other  than  Brahman)  certainly  he  is  deluded  and 
ignorant,  even  though  he  might  have  discarded  anger.  Ignorance 
is  the  cause  of  worldly  existence  and  adoption  of  physical 
bodies  means  worldly  existence. 

110-111.  Similarly,  Jhana  (perfect  knowledge)  is  the 
cause  of  salvation.  I'he  liberated  man  abides  in  his  own  Atman. 
O leading  brahmins,  there  is  no  doubt  about  this  (hat  wrath 
etc.,  occur  only  when  there  is  ignorance.  Wrath,  delight,  cove- 
tousness, delusion,  arrogance,  virtue  and  evil,  all  these,  O 
excellent  brahmins,  cause  adoption  of  physical  bodies. 

112-ll‘i.  There  is  distress  and  pain  only  when  there  is 
body.  Hence,  the  learned  shall  eschew  Avidya  (Ignorance!,  ill- 
usion) . Only  if  the  yogin  e^schews  Avidya  by  means  of  Vidya 
do  anger,  virtue,  evil  etc.  perish,  O brahmins.  If  they  perish 
the  (Atman)  js  not  united  further  with  the  physical  body.  He 
is  liberated  from  mimdancc  existene.  He  is  devoid  of  the  three 
types  oi  miseries.'®^  riius,  O leading  brahmins,  the  meditator 
cannot  meditate  without  perfect  knowledge. 

115.  ^ rfcct  knowledge  is  obtained  by  personal  contact 

with  the  preceptor  and  not  through  words  in  fact.  After  realis- 
ing the  (>aturvyuha’^®‘*’  thus  and  alter  deep  thinking,  one  shall 
practise  meditation. 


794.  atmanam  ced  vijaniyad  ahamasmiti  paru?ah 
kixn  japan  kasya  kamaya  -ariram  anu  sarii  jvaret 

— Paiicadati  VII,  i , 

795.  duhkha-traya:  threefold  misery:  (i)  adhyatmika,  (ii)  adhibh- 
autika,  (iii)  5dhidaivika;  for  detail,  see  Vacaspati’s  gloss  on  I4varakr$na*g 
Sdtkkhya'kdrikdy  karika  I, 

796.  Galurvyuha— -four  categories  of  the  supreme  soul:  taijasa,  Viiva, 
Frajha  and  Turlya. 


452 


LifigapurSr^ 


116.  Like  fire  that  burns  the  dry  fuel  quickly,  the  fire  of 
knowledge  burns  sins  whether  inborn  or  extraneous  or  origi- 
nating from  bones  and  speech  (i.e.  physically  and  verbally). 

117.  There  is  nothing  greater  than  perfect  knowledge  for 
the  destruction  of  all  sins.  One  shall  always  practise  perfect 
knowledge  after  eschewing  all  attachment  to  worldly  objects. 

118.  There  is  no  doubt  that  all  the  sins  of  a Jfianin  shall 
perish.  Even  if  he  indulges  in  dalliance  he  is  not  aSected  by  sins. 

119-120.  As  is  knowledge  so  is  meditation.  Hence,  one 
should  practise  meditation.’®’  At  the  outset  meditation  is  laid 
down  as  Savi$aya  (having  an  object)  and  then  Nirvisaya 
(having  no  object) . The  leading  yogin  shall  practise  meditation 
in  six  ways’®®  as  follows : — for  the  duration  of  two,  four,  six,  ten, 
twelve  and  sixteen  units  of  time  in  order.  Certainly  he  shall  be 
liberated. 

121-125a.  At  the  outset  he  meditates  on  a form  as  resplen- 
dent as  pure  gold’®®  or  like  the  burning  coal  without  smoke,  of 
yellow,  red  or  white  colour  or  having  the  lustre  similar  to  that 
of  a crore  of  lightning  streaks. 

Or®®®  the  meditator  keeps  his  mind  assiduously  stationed  in 
the  Brahmarandhra  (cerebral  orifice).  He  shall  remember  that 
it  (the  object  of  meditation)  is  neither  white  nor  black  nor 
yellow.  He  shall  thereby  become  the  knower  of  Brahman. 

He  shall  be  non-violent,  truthful  in  speech,  and  non-stealer. 
He  shall  by  all  means  maintain  celibacy  and  avoid  gifts.  He 
shall  be  stable  in  observing  holy  rites,  contented  richly  endow- 
ed with  cleanliness  and  always  engaged  in  the  study  of  the 
Vedas.  He  shall  be  devoted  to  me  and  practise  meditation,  of 
course,  as  instructed  by  the  preceptor. 

125b- 127a.  O excellent  brahmins,  after  fixing  his  mind, 
the  meditator  does  not  know  anything  else.  The  yogin  does 
not  identify  himself  with  anything  else.  He  does  not  see  all 

797.  In  Saiva  system  of  thought,  emphasis  is  laid  upon  knowledge 
and  meditation.  For  detail,  see  Siva-rakaJ^a,  section  X. 

798.  For  detail  about  the  varieties  of  meditation,  ibid,  section  X. 

799.  4uddha-jSmbilnada.  The  verse  describes  the  form  of  the  lord  in 
the  savikalpaka  sam&dhi.  Gf.  muninSxh  jfiSnadStri  ca  sadaivopani^ac  chruta 
kaivalya-sruti-bodhy&  iri  miirtir  mama  xaaheivm--^^iva^raha^a  cited  in  ST, 

Boo.  The  verse  describes  the  state  of  the  mind  in  the  stage  of  nirvi- 
kalpaka  sasnidbi. 


The  sacrifice  of  meditation 


453 


round  nor  smell  nor  hear  anything.  He  has  dissolved  him- 
self in  his  Atman.  He  does  not  feel  the  touch  of  anything.  He 
is  then  known  as  having  acquired  equal  taste  in  everything. 

127b-131a.  He  shall  think  in  order  thus®®^  : — Brahma  in 
the  mass  of  earth;  Visnu  in  the  principle  of  water;  Kalarudra 
in  the  principle  of  Fire;  Mahe^vara  in  the  principle  of  Vayu 
and  Siva  in  firmament.  I am  lord  Pa^upati,  stationed  in  eight 
forms.  In  earth  I am  lord  Sarva.®®^  Jn  waters  lord  Bhava;  I am 
Rudra  in  fire;  Ugra  in  wind;  in  firmament,  I am  Bhima;  in  the 
sphere  of  Sun  I am  Hana  and  in  lunar  disc  as  Mahadeva. 

131b-137.  Everything  firm  and  solid  in  body  is  spoken  of 
as  pertaining  to  the  earth ; what  is  liquid  in  form  pertains  to 
water;  what  is  called  colour  belongs  to  Agni(fire);  what  moves 
about  is  Vayu  (wind) . O excellent  brahmins,  what  appears  like 
a hole  is  the  firmament. 

O brahmins,  perfect  knowledge  originating  from  sound  is 
born  of  firmamen*;  similarly,  the  knowledge  of  what  is  called 
*‘touch”  originates  from  Vayu;  that  of  Rupa  (colour)  from 
Vahni ; O brahmins,  what  belongs  to  water  is  full  of  taste ; and 
what  is  called  “smell”  belongs  to  the  earth. 

Again  he  shall  meditate  in  order  : — the  sun  in  the  right  eye; 
the  moon  in  the  left  eye;  the  lord  in  the  heart;  the  principle  of 
earth  upto  the  knee;  the  sphere  of  water  upto  the  umbilicus;  the 
principle  of  fire  upto  the  neck;  the  principle  of  wind  upto  the 
forehead.  Beginning  with  the  forehead  and  ending  with  the 
tuft  is  the  principle  called  firmament;  above  the  firmament  and 
beyond  that  is  the  Brahman  called  Haihsa.  This  first  entity 
called  Vyoman  is  stationed  in  the  middle  of  firmament. 

138-139.  These  principles  including  the  first  entity  Jiva, 
Prakrti,  sattva,  rajas,  tamas,  intellect,  the  ego,  the  subtle  ele- 
ments, the  sense-organs,  the  elements  beginning  with  ether  are 
not  real®®®.  Because  he  stands  steady  pervading  the  universe 
he  is  called  Sthanu. 

801.  The  verse  describes  the  method  of  paficatattva-devatS-dhy^a 
in  the  savikalpaka  samadhi. 

802 . This  refers  to  the  a9tA-murti-devatadhyina. 

803.  na  jivah  -In  fact,  meditation,  its  varieties  and  ancillaries  are 
all  due  to  rnajd — the  lord’s  power  of  projection.  Actually,  meditation,  medi- 
tator and  the  object  meditated  upon  are  all  unreal,  vide  PaUcadaii  vi.  35. 


454 


Lingapurdna 


140-142.  It  is  at  the  behest  of  Bhava  that  the  frightened 
sun  rises, the  wind  blows  and  purifies,  the  moon  shines,  the 
fire  blazes,  waters  flow,  the  earth  holds  aloft  and  the  firmament 
gives  room.  Hence,  O brahmins,  one  shall  think  about  all  these. 
O excellent  brahmins,  all  these  are  presided  over  by  him  alone. 
One  shall  remember  Bhava,  thinking  that  he  is  identical  with 
all  forms  in  the  universe. 

143.  To  those  who  are  scorched  by  the  poison  of  mundane 
existence,  the  only  antidote  is  the  nectar-like  perfect  knowledge 
and  meditation.  O excellent  brahmins,  no  other  solution  has 
been  laid  down  anywhere. 

144.  Perfect  knowledge  originates  directly  from  Dharma 
(virtue).  Vairagya  (detachment)  originates  from  knowledge; 
from  Vairagya  arises  the  supreme  knowledge  that  illuminates 
the  true  meanings  of  objects. 

145.  O excellent  brahmins,  he  who  is  endowed  with  know- 
ledge and  detachment  attains  Yogic  Siddhi.  One  who  abides 
by  sattva  guna  attains  liberation  through  yogic  siddhi  and  not 
otherwise. 

146.  It  is  surprising  that  his  unchanging  region  is  covered 
by  the  words  tamas  and  Avidya.  O brahmins,  one  should  adopt 
Sattva^akti  (the  power  of  Sattvaguna)  and  worship  Siva. 

147- 152a.  My  devotee  abides  by  the  sattva  guna.  He  is 
engrossed  in  my  worship.  He  clings  to  virtue  in  every  respect. 
He  is  enthusiastic  always.  He  is  endowed  with  concentration. 
He  is  bold  and  endures  all  Dvandvas  (mutually  clashing  pairs) . 
He  is  engaged  in  the  welfare  of  all  living  beings.  He  is  straight- 
forward by  nature.  He  is  continuously  healthy  and  normal  in 
his  mind.  He  is  always  soft-natured.  He  is  not  arrogant.  He  is 
intelligent  and  quiescent.  O excellent  brahmins,  he  eschews 
rivalry.  He  is  always  desirous  of  liberation.  He  is  conversant 
with  virtue.  He  is  marked  wfith  the  characteristics  of  the 
supreme  soul.®^  He  is  released  from  the  threefold  indebted- 
ness in  the  previous  birth  and  is  meritorious.  After  becoming 

804.  udeti—Cf.  bhIyfismSd  vStab  pavate  TA,B,S*i;  TU,  2.8.1; 
JtfrpM.  2.4 

803.  r^ia-trayam— a man  owes  three  debts,  viz. — (i)  brahmacaiya  ‘or 
study  of  the  Vedas,*  to  the  r?is;  (ii)  sacrifice  and  worship,  to  the  gods;  (iii) 
procreation  of  the  son,  to  the  manes. 


Suppression  of  delusion 


455 


an  aged  brahmin  or  even  otherwise  he  shall  serve  his  preceptor 
with  sincerity^®®  and  avoid  hypocritical  attitudes.  O brahmins, 
he  reaches  the  heavenly  world  and  enjoys  pleasures  in  the 
proper  order.  Then  gradually  he  comes  to  the  sub-continent 
BhSrata  and  is  born  as  a knower  of  Brahman. 

152b-157.  Thanks  to  the  contact  with  a Jiianin  (a  man 
with  perfect  knowledge) , he  shall  acquire  perfect  knowledge  and 
become  conversant  with  yoga.  O excellent  brahmins,  this  is  the 
order  in  which  one  full  of  impurities  attains  perfect  knowledge. 
Hence,  O leading  sages,  he  shall  proceed  along  this  path  and 
be  steady  in  his  holy  rite.  Eschewing  attachment  with  worldly 
objects  he  is  liberated  from  the  poison  Kalakuta  in  the  form  of 
the  worldly  existence.  Thus,  succinctly,  I have  incidentally 
recounted  to  you  the  greatness  of  perfect  knowledge  that  is 
splendid  and  unswerving. 

O leading  sages,  this  Pasupata  yoga  meiltioned  by  Isvara, 
Siva  should  not  be  given  to  anyone  and  everyone.  It  should  be 
imparted  gladly  to  a yogin  who  always  clings  to  Bhasman.  The 
man  who  reads  this  chapter  on  suppression  of  worldly  existence 
or  listens  to  it  certainly  attains  Sayujya  with  the  Brahmna. 


CHAPTER  EIGHTYSEVEN 

Suppression  of  delusion 


Suta  said  : 

1.  After  hearing  it,  those  sages  of  great  intellect  Sanat  and 
others  who  were  frightened,  bowed  to  the  Pinaka-bcaring  lord 
Paramesvara  who  was  pleased  and  spoke  to  him  thus  : 

2.  “If  it  is  so,  O MaheSvara,  how  do  you  sport  about  with 
the  goddess,  the  daughter  of  the  HimavSn  and  enjoy  various 
pleasures.  It  behoves  you  to  mention  this."’ 

8o6.  iraddhaya— with  faithful  devotion.  Of. 

®rT?5  ^ n— ated  in  ST. 


456 


LingapurS^a 


SUta  said  ; 

3.  Thus  requested,  the  Pinaka-beari ng  lord,  Nilalohita 
laughingly  glanced  at  Ambika  and  spoke  to  those  brahmins 
who  stood  by  after  bowing  to  him. 

4-5.  “I  am  one  who  can  adopt  any  body  as  I choose. 
Hence,  I have  neither  bondage  nor  liberation.®®’  He  who  is  not 
an  agent  is  ignorant.  The  jiva  is  Pa^u  (one  in  bondage).  The 
all-pervading  Lord  is  the  enjoyer.  Man  is  only  an  atom.  He  who 
is  bound  by  Maya  and  disallusioned  is  the  one  who  is  entangled 
in  Karraans.  O brahmins,  the  Atman  has  neither  knowledge  nor 
meditation,  neither  bondage  nor  liberation. 

6-7.  He  too  who  realises  this  in  me  has  none  of  these.  This 
Haimavati  is  Vidya®®®  and  I am  Vcdya  (one  who  should  be 
known).  She  is  Prajfia  (intellect).  She  is  Sruti  and  Smrti.  She 
is  Dhrti  (fortitude)  stabilized  by  me.  She  is  the  power  of  know- 
ledge, Kriya  (rite) ; and  Iccha  (will) . She  is  Ajna  (Behest). 
Undoubtedly  we  are  the  two  Vidyas. 

8.  This  Prakrti  does  not  belong  to  the  Jiva.  Nor  is  she  a 
Vikrti  on  consideration.  She  is  Maya.  She  is  not  a Vikara 
(effect) . She  is  devoid  of  clarity  of  *Sat*  and  ‘Asat’, 

9.  Formerly  she  originated  from  my  mouth  at  my  behest. 
She  is  the  eternal  deity  of  five  faces.  She  is  the  highly  blessed 
and  bestows  fearlessness  on  the  worlds. 

10-11,  After  entering  her  the  Ajfta  (behest),  I think  about 
the  welfare  of  the  worlds.  I am  Siva.  I pervade  all  along  with 
her  in  twenty-seven®®®  forms.  O excellent  brahmins  since 
then  begins  the  work  for  salvation.” 

Suta  said  : 

After  saying  thus,  Paramesvara  looked  at  Bhavani. 

12-13.  On  seeing  him,  the  unchanging  Bhavani  removed 
the  Maya.  Rid  of  the  impurities  of  Maya  those  sages  looked 
at  Parvati,  became  pleased  and  were  liberated.  Hence  she  is 

807.  Of.  ^ ^ 5T  ^ 1 

ST  W 5«T?r  'TtsnnTTT  II 

— PaUcadaii  VI.  35. 

808.  vidya— this  UmS  is  identical  with  knowledge  or  with  Primor- 
dial nature  in  association  with  Purusa. 

809.  Gf.  p.  3 note.  12. 


SuppfBssion  of  delusion 


457 


the  greatest  goal.  In  fact,  there  is  no  diflFcrcnce  at  all  between 
Oma  and  Sankara.®^® 

14-17.  There  is  no  doubt  that  he  is  stationed  after  adopting 
the  two  forms.  When  there  is  a contact  with  Vijftana  (perfect 
knowledge)  at  the  behest  of  Parame^thin,  liberation  occurs 
within  a moment  and  not  otherwise,  even  with  crorcs  of  holy 
rites.  Here  the  order  intended  for  the  living  beings  is  not 
applicable.  By  the  grace  of  Paramesthin  liberation  takes 
place  in  a trice.  This  is  undoubtedly  the  vow  of  the  lord.  The 
creature  (i.e.  individual  soul)  is  liberated,  thanks  to  the  grace 
of  Paramesthin  even  when  he  is  in  the  womb  or  when  he  is 
born,  or  when  he  is  a boy,  a young  man  or  an  old  man.  By  the 
grace  of  the  lord  of  Devas  every  living  being  is  liberated 
whether  it  is  oviparous  or  a plant  or  one  bom  of  sweat.  No 
doubt  need  be  entertained  in  this  regard. 

ld-22a.  He  alone  is  the  lord  of  the  worlds;  Siva  is  the  cause 
of  bondage  and  liberation.  The  worlds  viz: — Bhub,  Bhuvab> 
Svab)  Mahah,  Jana,  Tapas  and  Satya  the  innumerable  Cosmic 
Eggs  as  well  as  the  eight®^^  coverings  of  the  Cosmic  Egg  con- 
stitute the  body  of  the  lord.  Mobile  and  immobile  beings  who 
reside  in  the  seven  continents,  on  the  mountains,  in  the  forests 
and  oceans,  and  in  the  layers  of  winds  and  in  other  worlds  also 
are  born  from  the  parts  of  the  lord.  Indeed,  he  alone  is  the 
goal  unto  them  all. 

22b-25.  Rudra  is  all.  Obeisance  unto  the  noble-souled 
Puru§a.  This  universe,  all  living  beings  are  born  of  Rudra. 
This  goddess  Ambika  is  the  Ajfia  (behest)  of  Rudra.  Salvation 
is  effected  through  Her. 

Thus,  the  Siddhas,  the  heaven-walkers  proclaimed  with  de- 
lighted minds. 

When  the  lord  stands  by  and  glances  at  them  gracefully 
along  with  Ambika  the  heaven-walkers  attain  identity  with  the 
lord. 


8x0.  In  fact  Prakrti  and  Purufa  are  identical. 
8x1.  Seep.  4 note  13,  p.  11.  note  x8. 


CHAPTER  EIGHTYEIGHT 

Review  of  pdiupatu  yoga 

The  Sages  said: — 

1 . By  what  yoga  do  the  good  men  obtain  good  attributes  ? 
How  do  the  yogins  become  endowed  with  A^ima  and  other 
siddhis?  O Suta,  it  behoves  you  to  recount  everything  in 
detail  now, 

Suta  said: — 

2.  Henceforth,  I shall  recount  the  yoga,  extremely  difii- 
cult  of  access.  At  the  outset,  the  devotee  shall  remember  the 
eternal  deity  after  fixing  in  the  mind  in  five*^*  different 
forms. 

3-4.  O excellent  brahmins,  he  shall  fix  the  lotus  posture 
accompanied  by  the  moon,  sun  and  fire.  It  shall  be  combined 
with  the  twentysix  Saktis.  Thereafter,  O brahmins,  the  devotee 
shall  remember  the  lord,  the  consort  ofUma,  in  the  middle 
first  in  eight  ways,  then  in  sixteen  and  again  in  twelve  ways. 

5-6.  He  shall  remember  the  unborn  lord  of  eight  cosmic 
bodies,®^*  accompanied  by  eight  iSaktis,  along  with  them 
Rudras  of  eight  types  and  then  of  sixty-four  types.  Similarly 
all  the  Saktis  endowed  with  the  eight  Gurias  are  to  be  remem- 
bered. After  obtaining  perfect  knowledge  gradually  one  shall 
adopt  this  procedure. 

7.  The  yoga  pertaining  to  Pa^upati  is  one  that  bestows 
salvation.  O brahmins,  only  he  who  practices  the  yoga  docs 
get  the  attributes,  Anima,  etc.  cUid  not  otherwise,  even  through 
crores  of  holy  rites. 

8.  There  the  Aisvarya  of  the  yogins  is  said  to  comprise 
of  eight®^*  attributes.  Understand  all  these  being  narrated  in 
the  proper  order. 

8 1 2.  paficadha — in  five  forms  i.e.  Sadyoj&ta  and  others > 

813.  a$taiakti— eight  powers  personified  and  named.  Gf. 

?IT»TT  IWT  ?r«TT  I 

Sim^rahttsya — cited  in  ST* 

814.  See  p.  134  note  241. 


Review  of  paSupata  yoga 


459 


9-10.  Aiguma  (minuteness),  Laghima  (lightness),  Mahima 
(greatness),  Prapti  (the  power  of  obtaining  any  thing) , Pra- 
kamyam  (irresistible  will);  llitva  (lordship)  over  everything, 
Vaigitva  (ability  to  make  others  subservient)  and  Kama* 
vasayita  (when  everything  happens  according  to  one’s  desires), 
these  are  eight  types.  This  Aiivarya  desired  by  everyone 
should  be  known  as  of  three  types. 

11-15.  The  three  types  are  Savadya,  Niravadya  and 
Suksma.  What  is  termed  Savadya  is  of  the  nature  of  five  elements. 
The  function  of  the  Suksma  (subtle)  is  in  respect  of  the  sense 
organs,  mind  and  ego.  The  function  is  again  of  the  nature 
of  five  elements  (?).  The  sense-organs,  mind,  will,  intellect  and 
ego — the  Atman  comes  into  contact  with  all  these.  This  three- 
fold contact  functions  only  in  the  subtle  things.  Again  the  eight 
attributes  are  laid  down  only  in  the  subtle  forms.  1 shall  men- 
tion their  nature  as  described  by  the  lord  and  as  they  are 
known  among  all  living  beings  of  the  three  worlds. 

16.  The  Anima,  etc.  are  self-evident.  They  are  well  esta- 
blislied  everywhere.  They  are  cited  as  difficult  of  access  to  all 
living  beings  in  the  three  worlds. 

17-19.  On  attaining  the  first  Aisvarya,  the  devotee  gets 
the  power  of  the  yogins.  This  will  make  him  assume  such  forms 
that  will  enable  him  to  cross  or  float  (on  water  or  air).  The 
second  (Laghima)  is  known  as  the  attainment  of  great  quick- 
ness (Sigliratva)  among  all  living  beings.  In  all  the  three 
worlds  honour  among  all  living  beings  is  due  to  one’s  greatness. 
Therefore,  the  third  yoga  (i.e.  Aisvarya)  is  called  Mahitva 
( = Mahima)  in  the  world.  Prapti  enables  one  to  mix  at  one’s 
will  and  pleasure  with  all  living  beings  in  the  three  worlds. 

20.  By  Prakamya  the  devotee  enjoys  all  desired  objects. 
It  is  through  obstruction  somewhere  that  happiness  and  misery 
are  brought  about  in  all  living  beings  in  the  three  worlds. 

21.  The  knower  of  the  yoga  Ilitva  (sixth  AMvarya)  be- 
comes the  overlord  everywhere  in  every  stage.  In  the  three 
worlds  consisting  of  the  mobile  and  immobile  beings  all  the 
living  beings  become  subservient  to  him.  This  is  Vasitva  the 
seventh  Aiivarya. 

22.  Where  there  is  Kamavasayitva  (the  eighth  and  highest 
Aiivarya)  forms  occur  and  cea^  to  be  as  the  devotee  wbhes 


460  Lihgapurdi^a 

among  all  the  three  worlds  consisting  of  the  mobile  and  im* 
mobile  brings. 

23.  When  all  these  Siddhis  or  Ai^varyas  are  attained, 
sound,  touch,  taste,  smell,  colour  and  the  mind,  all  function  or 
cease  to  function  as  the  devotee  wishes. 

24-274  He  is  neither  bom  nor  dies.  He  is  neither  cut  nor 
pierced.  He  is  neither  burned  nor  illusioned.  He  is  neither 
attracted  nor  afflicted  by  anything.  He  does  not  waste  away 
nor  does  he  perish.  He  is  never  depressed  and  he  is  not  at  all 
made  to  change  or  undergoes  change.  He  is  devoid  of  smell,  taste 
and  colour,  touch  or  sound.  He  has  no  colour  or  caste.  He  has 
no  tone;  everywhere  he  is  without  an  equal.  He  enjoys  the 
objects  of  pleasure,  but  he  does  not  become  attached  to  any. 
Thanks  to  his  being  minute,  he  is  extremely  subtle.  Thanks  to 
his  being  subtle,  he  is  worthy  of  salvation. 

28.  Thanks  to  salvation,  he  is  all-pervasive.  Being  all-per- 
vasive, he  is  called  Purusa.  Due  to  his  subtle  nature,  Purusa  is 
stationed  in  the  greatest  Ai^varya  (prosperity  and  glory) . 

29-30.  The  AUvaryas  are  said  to  be  subtler  and  greater  in 
ascending  order  all  round.  After  obtaining  the  excellent  yoga 
and  the  unimpeded  Aisvaryas,  one  shall  attain  salvation.  That  is 
the  greatest  subtle  goal.  O leading  sages,  the  yoga  pertaining  to 
Pa^upati  should  be  known  thus. 

31-32.  It  bestows  the  benefits  of  heaven  and  salvation.  It 
is  the  cause  of  identity  with  Siva.  Or,  one  who  has  no  perfect 
knowledge  may  perform  holy  rites  due  to  attachments.  After 
enjoying  R^jasa  and  Tamasa  pleasures  he  is  liberated  there 
itsclf(i.e.  in  this  world).  Similarly,  he  who  performs  meritorious 
deeds  attains  the  benefit  in  heaven. 

33-37.  But  the  moment  his  merits  are  exhausted  the  ex- 
cellent man  reverts  to  the  mortal  world  from  that  abode.  Hence 
Brahman  is  the  greatest  happiness.  Brahman  is  the  best  and 
permanent  goal.  One  shall  resort  to  the  Brahman  alone. 
Brahman  alone  is  the  greatest  happiness.  All  yajfias  arc  mere 
waste  of  energy  and  no  good  results  from  them.  One  becomes 
a prey  to  death  by  resorting  to  Yajfias.  So  liberation  is  the 
sole  happiness.  After  seeing  the  divine  Purusa  of  universal 
names  with  fates  all  rounds  the  devotee,  engaged  in  medita- 
tion, devoutly  engrossed  in  the  principle  of  the  Brahman  can- 


Review  of  pdiupata  yoga 


461 


not  be  dislodged  even  in  hundreds  of  manvantaras.  The  divine 
Purusa  has  universal  feet,  heads  and  necks.  He  is  lord  of  the 
universe.  He  has  universal  forms  (colours)  and  smell.  The 
universe  is  his  garland.  He  is  the  lord  wearing  the  universal 
clothes. 

38-41 . The  rays  of  the  sun  fall  on  the  earth  but  do  not 
go  back  to  the  sun  and  reproduce  him. 

One  can  see  the  lord  only  through  yoga  and  not  by  the 
eye— the  lord  who  is  the  ancient  sage,  who  is  subtler  than  the 
subtlest;  who  is  the  chastiser,  who  is  greater  than  the  greatest, 
who  is  the  golden-coloured  Puru$a  without  sense-organs,  who  has 
no  symbol,  who  is  devoid  of  attributes,  who  is  perpetual,  who  is 
sentient,  who  is  present  always  and  everywhere,  who  is  the 
essence  of  all.  Devotees  who  are  purified  by  Him  see  the  deity 
shining  with  His  splendour  and  possessing  massive  refulgence. 
He  has  neither  hands  nor  fcet®“  nor  belly  nor  sides  nor  tongue. 
He  is  beyond  the  scope  of  the  sense-organs.  He  is  one  and 
very  subtle.  Though  He  has  no  eyes,  yet  He  sees;  though  He 
has  no  ears  yet  He  hears.  He  has  no  intellect;  yet  there  is 
nothing  that  He  does  not  understand.  He  knows  everything 
but  none  knows  him.  So  they  call  him  the  great  and  foremost 
Purusa. 

42.  The  yogins  who  are  in  union  with  the  deity  see  the 
Prakfti  of  all  living  beings  as  acetana  (insentient)  subtle,  all- 
pervasive  and  habitually  giving  birth  to  many  effects. 

43.  She  has  hands  and  feet  all  round.  She  has  eyes,  heads 
and  faces  all  round.  She  has  ears  all  round.  She  stands  enve- 
loping everything  in  the  world. 

44.  One  who  is  endowed  with  yoga  and  knows  the  eternal 
Purusa,  the  lord  of  all  living  beings,  never  gets  disillusioned. 

45.  One  who  meditates  on  the  unchanging,  great  and 
noble  Brahman  which  is  the  soul  of  all  living  beings,  and 
which  is  the  greatest  Atman,  does  not  get  disillusioned. 

46.  Just  as  the  wind  moving  amongst  all  bodies  is  per- 
ceptible so  also  the  Purusa.  Because  he  lies  down  in  the  puh®^*  so 
be  is  called  Purufa  [puri  £ete].  He  is  too  difficult  to  be  grasped. 

8i  5.  TiM  verse  is  found  in  most  of  the  Upamieeds, 

8i6.  puri  leie  its  punifi4;u  pitri-'lthga-larire,  in  the  subtle  body. 
PUntia  b so  because  he  b stadoned  in  the  subtle  body. 


462 


LifigapurdaiA 


47-48.  If  one  neglects  Dharma,  that  man  is  born  in  the 
%vomb®^’  Mrith  the  residue  of  his  activities.®^*  When  a man  and 
a woman  indulge  in  intercourse  and  the  semen  gets  mixed 
with  the  blood,  in  due  course,  the  sperm  becomes  the  foetus. 

49-52.  In  due  course,  the  foetus  becomes  a bubble.®*® 
Just  as  the  lump  of  clay  assumes  some  form  of  an  image  on 
being  whirled  in  the  wheel  and  shaped  by  the  potter’s  hands 
so  also  the  physical  body  is  evolved,  endowed  with  organic 
matter  and  filled  with  vital  airs.  As  long  as  the  external  air®*® 
does  not  touch  the  child  in  the  womb  he  thinks  thus — ‘‘when  I 
leave  off  the  vaginal  passage®*^  I shall  resort  to  Maheivara  and 
worship  Mahadeva.  The  foetus  becomes  a human  being  accord- 
ing to  the  pre-ordained  form  and  age. 

53.  Wind  originates  from  the  firmament,  from  wind  water 
is  evolved;  from  water  originates  the  vital  air  and  the  semen 
is  generated  and  it  flourishes  through  the  vital  airs. 

54.  Thirtythrce  parts  of  blood  are  mixed  with  fourteen 
parts  of  semen.  When  halves  of  these  parts  mix  together  the 
foetus  is  evolved. 

55.  Then  the  child  in  the  womb  is  encircled  by  the  five 
vital  airs.  The  child’s  form  is  evolved  limb  by  limb  from  the 
physical  body  of  the  father. 

56.  Through  the  umbilical  region  the  child  is  sustained 
by  the  food  taken  in  by  the  mother,  by  the  liquid  drink  and  by 
the  lambatives  licked. 

57.  For  nine  months  the  child  undergoes  the  pain  and 

817.  brahma-garbhm  — brfthmm^a-yonau  ST.  He  is  born  in  the 
br&hmava  caste.  Cf.  iuclnftih  MmMm  gehe  yogabhra^to  *bhijfiyate. 

-^Bhagavad  gUS. 

818.  avaMitaib  karmabhih* 

^i«it  ti  ^P.—dttd  in  st. 

819.  ^ 1 cT?iTRr?r; 

5|r9ft  II  Aw(«r»-citcd  in  ST. 

8ao«  vai^vs^vam — the  external  ahr  which  the  babe  breathes  when 
be  comes  out  of  the  womb, 

8ai.  Of.  5^  sn'ar  *n?Rr:  i 


Review  of  pdhipata  yoga 


463 


strain;  his  neck  is  encircled  by  the  umbilical  cord.  His  body  is 
curled  up  as  the  space  within  the  womb  ist  not  sufficient. 

58.  After  spending  nine  months  in  the  womb  the  child 
falls  down  through  the  vaginal  passage  with  his  head  down- 
wards. Then  in  the  course  of  his  life  on  the  earth  he  commits 
sins  and  due  to  these  sins  he  falls  into  hell  after  death. 

59.  For  example,  he  may  fall  into  the  hells  of  Asipatravana 
and  Salmalicchedana.  There  he  may  have  to  suffer  being  beaten, 
eaten  or  forced  to  partake  of  footed  blood. 

60-61.  Just  as  the  water  becomes  sticky  and  binding  to- 
gether when  things  are  cut  and  thrown  in,  so  also  the  living 
beings  are  cut  and  thrown  into  the  places  of  torture.  They  are 
scorched  by  means  of  the  sins  committed  by  themselves.  They 
shall  attain  misery  or  happiness  according  to  the  residue  of 
their  actions. 

62.  One  has  to  go  alone  after  leaving  off  all  people.  One 
has  to  experience  pleasure  or  pain  all  alone.  Hence,  one  shall 
perform  meritorious  rites. 

63.  When  he  starts  on  his  journey  after  death,  none  follows 
him  as  he  goes  ahead.  The  action  performed  by  him  follows 
him. 

64.  They  function  thus  in  the  realms  of  Yama.  When  the 
treatment  is  against  their  liking  they  always  groan  loudly.  Their 
bodies  are  dessicated  by  diversified  tortures  and  surrounded  by 
torments  and  agonies. 

65.  The  practice  of  what  one  repeatedly  resorts  to  mentally, 
physically  and  verbally  influences  him.  Hence,  one  shall  per- 
form auspicious  things  always. 

66.  The  uninterrupted  scries  of  previous  actions  of  the 
embodied  soul  has  no  beginning  : The  individual  soul  adopts 
six  types  of  terrible  worldly  existence  full  of  tamaoguiia. 

67-71.  From  human  form  it  adopts  <he  form  of  cow 
(domestic  animal) ; from  that  of  a cow,  the  domestic  animal,  he 
may  become  a wild  animal;  from  that  of  a wild  animal  he 
may  attain  bird-hood;  from  that  the  form  of  a reptile  and  from 
that  he  may  attain  the  form  of  an  immobile  being.  When  he 
attains  the  form  of  an  immobile  being  it  whirls  like  the  wheel 
of  the  potter  there  itself  till  the  soul  is  uplifted.  Thus  is  the 
worldly  existence  beginning  from  human  being  and  ending 


464 


Zdngapmd^ 


with  the  immobile  being.  It  should  be  known  as  Tkmasa.  The 
soul  revolves  there  itself.  The  existence  of  Brahmi,  etc.  is 
Sittvika  worldly  existence.  The  existence  of  embodied  beings 
beginning  with  Brahmi  and  ending  with  Pifaca  should  be 
known  as  existing  in  the  heavenly  abodes.  The  existence  of 
Brahma  is  purely  of  the  nature  of  Sattva,  that  of  the  immobile 
being  is  of  the  nature  of  Tamasa  alone. 

72-75.  In  the  middle  of  the  fourteen  abodes,  Rajas  is 
that  which  impedes  or  fixes  firmly  even  as  the  vital  parts  of 
the  body  of  the  embodied  being  who  is  in  agony,  are  being 
cut  and  pierced.  How  can  the  brahmin  then  remember  the 
greatest  Brahman  ? The  worldly  existence  is  prompted  by  the 
impression  and  effects  of  the  previous  Dharma  and  accordingly 
human  birth  is  achieved.  Hence  one  shall  practise  meditation 
always.  One  shall  realise  that  the  zone  of  the  worlds  is  of  four-^ 
teen  types  and  so  shall  be  frightened  of  it  and  begin  to  practise 
Dharma.  Then,  he  changes  and  gradually  crosses  worldly  ex- 
istence. 

76.  Hence,  one  shall  always  be  engaged  in  yoga  and 
interested  in  meditation.  He  shall  meditate  on  the  greatest 
being.  He  shall  so  begin  the  practice  of  yoga  that  he  sees  the 
Atman  within  himself. 

77-78.  He  is  the  waters.  He  is  the  greatest  light.  He  is  the 
excellent  bridge.  He  is  the  cause  of  all  living  beings  by  means 
of  evolution  and  combination.  He  is  the  permanent  one.  Hence, 
one  shall  worship  Mabeivara  the  bridge,  the  Atman,  the  fire 
with  faces  all  round,  and  stationed  in  the  heart  of  all  living 
beings. 

79-84.  The  devotee  shall  meditate  on  Rudra,  the  lord 
who  is  stationed  within  who  is  embdlished  by  his  own  Sakti 
who,  for  the  sake  of  creation,  is  stationed  in  a series  of  eight^*^ 
different  forms  and  who  is  stationed  in  the  heart  by  compres* 
sing  the  fire.  With  the  mind  contemplating  the  fire  stationed  in 
the  heart  he  shall  perform  five  offerings.  He  shall  drink  pure 
water  silently  cmce  (in  the  ritualistic  way)  in  the  squatting 
position.  He  shall  utter  **Prku&ya  Svahfi’’.  This  is  the  first 

Qaa.  The  hud  li  slatioiied  in  die  heart  la  the  c%lit4bld  way,  vis., 
eardi,  etc^  or  la  eight  iB&ilis*~Vima- 

dm  etc* 


Review  of  pHiupata  yoga  4g5 

offering.  The  second  offering  is  for  Apana,  the  third  for  Vyana, 
the  fourth  for  Ud§.na  and  the  fifth  for  Samana.  After  offering 
these  severally  with  the  utterance  of  Svaha,  the  devotee  shall 
partake  of  the  remaining  offering  as  he  pleases.  He  shall  drink 
water  once  again  and  perform  the  rite  of  Acamana.  After  that 
he  shall  touch  the  heart. 

85.  He  shall  perform  the  rite  of  satiety  with  this 
mantra  : — ‘^you  are  the  knot  of  the  vital  airs.®*®  Rudra  is 
Atman.  Atman  is  the  destroyer  of  the  subjects.  Rudra,  indeed, 
is  the  vital  air  of  the  Atman.’’ 

86-87.  At  the  time  of  Sraddha  he  shall  perform  five  offer- 
ings as  per  injunction:— ( 1)  Indeed,  Rudra  is  embedded  in 
Prana  (2)  Hence,  he  himself  is  identical  with  Prana,  (3)  One 
performs  the  excellent  nectar  unto  Prana  and  Rudra,  (4)  O 
Siva,  O Isa,  enter  me,  (5)  Svaha  unto  Brahmatman  himself. 

88-90.  The  Homa  shall  be  concluded  with  the  following 
mantras: — You  arePuru§a.  You  lie  down  in  the  body,  in  the  size 
of  the  thumb.  l:^a  is  the  great  cause  of  all  though  based  on  the 
thumb.®**  May  the  permanent  lord  of  all  the  Universe  be 
pleased.  You  are  the  eldest  of  all  Devas.  You  are  Rudra.  For- 
merly you  were  Indra.  You  are  soft  by  nature.  May  this  sacri- 
ficial offering  unto  you  be  our  food. 

Thus,  everything  has  been  mentioned  with  special  emphasis 
on  the  attainment  of  good  attributes. 

91-93.  The  practice  of  yoga  has  been  formerly  mentioned 
by  Brahma  himself.  Thus,  the  p^ect  knowledge  belonging  to 
Pai^upati  should  be  known  with  effort.  One  shall  take  bath 
with  Bhasman.  One  shall  smear  Bhasman.  He  who  reads  this, 
listens  to  this  or  narrates  this  to  excellent  brahmins  in  divine 
rites  or  in  those  of  the  Pitfs  attains  the  greatest  goal. 


823.  gnmthir  TA.  lo.  31.1 ; Mahan.  U.  16.2. 

824.  iiAgit9tfiiiiitrD*ysm«  TA.  10.38.  i;Mali&ii.  U.  16.  3* 


466 


UAgapurSiSia 


CSHAPTER  EIGHTYNINE 

Characteristics  of  good  conduct 


Suta  said: 

1 . Henceforth,  I shall  mention  the  characteristics  of  purity 
and  good  conduct.  On  acting  according  to  it  the  pure  soul 
will  attain  the  highest  goal  after  death. 

2.  This  has  been  formerly  mentioned  by  Brahma  for  the 
welfare  of  living  beings.  This  is  the  summary  of  the  implication 
of  the  Vedas.  It  is  a collection  of  things  expounding  the  Brah- 
man. 

3.  It  is  conducive  to  the  rise  of  cleanliness.  It  is  the 
excellent  position  of  the  sages.  The  sage  who  does  not  err  in 
this  does  not  come  to  grief. 

4.  Honour  and  dishonour  are  two  things  which  they  call 
poison  and  nectar.  Dishonour  is  nectar  and  honour  is  poison. 

5.  He,  the  disciple,  shall  live  with  the  preceptor  for  a year 
engaged  in  the  w'elfarc  of  the  preceptor.  He  shall  always  be 
unerring  in  the  holy  observances  and  restraints. 

6.  After  obtaining  his  permission  along  with  the  excellent 
path  of  knowledge  he  shall  walk  over  the  earth  [i.  e.  fulfil  the 
duties  of  the  mundane  existence]  without  repugnance  to 
Dharma. 

7.  One  shall  traverse  the  path  sanctified  by  the  eyes;  one 
shall  drink  the  water  rendered  pure  by  a cloth  (i.  e.  well- 
filtered)  ; one  shall  speak  out  words  sanctified  by  truth;  one 
shall  practise  those  things  that  arc  purified  by  the  mind.*^® 

8.  If  one  drinks  impure  water  for  a day  one  incurs  that 
sin  which  a fisherman  incurs  in  the  course  of  six  months. 

9.  On  drinking  impure  water  one  shall  as  expiation 
perform  five  hundred  japas  of  Aghora  mantra  and  then  attain 
purity. 

10.  Or  he  shall  worship  Siva  with  elaborate  details,  such 
as  ablution  with  ghee,  etc.  Then  he  shall  circumambulate  the 
deity  three  times,  when  he  shall  undoubtedly  be  purified. 

1 1 . The  knower  of  yoga  shall  not  go  anywhere  to  receive 
hospitality  as  a guest  or  to  partake  of  Sriddhas  and  Yajfias.  It 


825,  Cf.  Mamun^  VI.  46. 


CharacUristics  of  good  conduct 


467 


IS  thought  that  the 
manner. 


yogin  will  be  non-vioient  only  in  this 


12.  The  mtelligent  mendicant  shaU  go  in  for  alms  to  a 
house  where  all  people  have  taken  food  but  still  there  is  plenty 

office  without  smoke.  But  he  shall  not  go  to  the  same  house 
every  day. 


13.  In  that  case  people  will  insult  him  and  the  enemies 
Will  disgrace  and  humiliate  him.  So  one  shall  beg  for  alms  in 
the  proper  manner.  He  shall  not  defile  the  Dharma  of  good 
men. 


14.  One  shall  beg  for  alms  in  the  houses  of  vagrant 
mendicants  and  in  the  houses  situated  in  the  forests.  The  latter 
shall  be  the  better  mode  of  sustenance. 

15.  O brahmins,  thereafter  he  shall  go  in  for  alms  at  the 
places  of  humble  householders  who  have  faith,  who  have 
control  over  the  sense-organs  and  who  are  noble-souled  scho- 
lars of  the  Vedas. 

16.  Thereafter,  he  shall  go  in  for  alms  in  the  houses  of  the 
non-defiled  and  not-fallen.  The  practice  of  begging  for  alms 
from  people  of  other  castes  is  considered  the  meanest  of  all 
modes. 

17.  Any  of  the  following  things  can  be  received  in  the 
form  of  alms,  viz.  gruel,  butter  milk,  milk,  barley  water,  ripe 
fruits  and  roots,  bits  of  grains,  oil- cakes  and  powdered  fried 
grains. 

18.  The  items  of  food  mentioned  by  me  are  those  that  in- 
crease the  accomplishments  of  the  yogins.  If  they  are  realised 
the  alms  are  said  to  be  excellent. 

19.  Of  these  two  persons,  viz.  one  who  begs  for  alms  by 
means  that  are  justifiable  and  the  other  who,  ( by  way  of 
penance)  drinks  a drop  of  water  by  means  of  the  tip  of  the 
darbha  grass  once  in  a month,  the  former  excels  the  latter. 

20.  Bhaiksya  is  so  called  because  it  removes  the  sins  of 
one  who  is  afraid  of  old  age,  death,  rebirth,  residence  in 
hells,  etc. 

21.  Those  who  arc  addicted  to  the  regular  use  of  curds 
or  milk  or  those  who  cause  wastage  in  the  individual  souls-— 
ail  these  do  not  merit  even  a sixteenth  part  of  one  who 
partakes  of  the  alms. 


22.  One  diall  always  lie  down  on  Bhasman;  with  control 
over  the  sense-organs  he  shall  for  alms.  He  who  wishes 
for  the  greatest  abode  shall  perform  the  Pa^upata  vrata. 

23.  The  rite  of  Candr^yaiia  shall  be  most  excellent  for 
all  yogSins.  According  to  his  capacity,  the  devotee  shall  per- 
form it  once,  twice,  thrice  or  four  times. 

24.  Bhik^us  (mendicants)  have  five  vratas,  viz: — Astcya 
(non-stealing);  Brahmacarya  (celibacy);  Alobha  (non- 
covetousness); Tyaga  (renunciation)  and  Ahizhsa  (non-vio- 
lence) which  is  the  greatest. 

25.  The  niyamas  (observances  and  restraints)  arc  the 
following: — akrodha  (abstention  from  anger),  guru^u^rusa 
(service  to  the  preceptor),  iSauca  (cleanliness),  aharalaghava 
(lightness  of  food)  and  study  of  the  Vedas  regularly. 

26.  The  qualities  of  the  seed,  the  vagina  and  bondage 
with  the  objects — are  due  to  karmans(?).  Just  as  in  the  case 
of  the  elephant  in  the  forest  so  also  in  regard  to  men  it  is  laid 
down. 

27.  All  the  sacrificial  rites  are  equal  to  Devas.  But  japa 
is  superior  to  sacrificial  rites;  perfect  knowledge  is  superior  to 
meditation;  and  meditation,  devoid  of  attachment,  is  still  supe- 
rior to  that.  When  that  is  acquired,  the  eternal  goal  is  obtained. 

28.  Those  persons  whose  intellects  have  been  purified  by 
perfect  knowledge  say  that  the  following  are  auspicious 
qualities,  viz: — control  of  the  mind,  suppression  of  the  sense- 
organs,  truthfulness,  state  of  being  free  from  sins,  silence, 
straightforwardness  in  regard  to  all  living  beings  and  the 
knowledge  of  those  objects  beyond  the  scope  of  the  sense- 
organs. 

29.  Only  a noble  soul  who  has  concentration,  who  is 
devoted  to  the  Brahman,  who  does  not  err,  who  is  pure,  who 
likes  seclusion,  and  who  has  omquered  the  sense-organs  shall 
attain  this  yoga.  Thus,  say  the  sages  who  are  devoid  of  impuri- 
ties and  are  above  censure. 

30.  The  devotee  who  has  destroyed  even  the  seeds  of  sins 
by  means  of  dns  pure  path,  restrained  by  the  same  goad  (of 
pure  path  ) attains  the  desired  places. 

31.  Qinesicmt  perscmi  engaged  in  good  conduct  and 


Characteristics  of  good  conduct 


469 


maintaining  their  own  Dharma  conquer  all  the  worlds  and 
attain  the  world  of  Brahman. 

32.  The  eternal  Dharma  has  been  imparted  by  Brahma 
himself  for  the  utility  of  the  people.  Listen  now  when  I recount 
it  to  you. 

33.  One  shall  duly  perform  his  duties  such  as  obeisance 
and  standing  up  by  way  of  welcome  towards  elderly  persons 
who  have  acquired  instructions  from  preceptors  and  who  stri- 
ctly adhere  to  their  routine  (i.  e.  the  rules  relating  to  their 
AiSrama). 

34.  O sages  of  good  holy  rites,  the  brahmin  and  the  prece- 
ptor are  to  be  honoured  by  obeisance  with  eight  limbs  touch- 
ing the  ground  with  the  following  three  set  aside  viz: — head- 
dress, upper  garment  and  footwear  and  with  three  circum  am- 
bulations. 

35.  All  elderly  persons  should  be  respected.  If  one  wishes 
for  excellent  Siddhi  one  shall  never  break  their  behests. 

36.  One  shall  avoid  all  these  things: — ^Taking  up  iron  and 
other  metals  for  sustenance,  living  in  a desert  or  unproductive 
soil®^*  and  using  worthless  mantras  as  means  of  support,  snake- 
charming®^’  and  backbiting,  flattery®^’a  or  scandal. 

37-40.  One  shall  scrupulously  avoid  deception,  stinginess 
in  spending  money,  censure  of  others.  In  the  presence  of 
preceptors  and  ciders  one  shall  avoid  laughter,  haughtiness, 
sportive  dalliance  and  wilfulness.  One  shall  never  contradict 
the  preceptor;  one  shall  never  speak  unbecoming  words  against 
him.  One  shall  scrupulously  avoid  mentioning  things  disliked 
by  the  preceptor  and  shall  not  think  evil  of  him.  One  shall 
never  touch  these  things  with  one’s  foot — the  clothes,  staff,  etc., 
of  ascetics^  their  sandals,  garlands,  places  of  sleep  [i.  e.  bed- 
mattress  etc.],  vessel,  shadow  and  the  requisite  things  of  use  in 
sacrifices. 

41.  O brahmins,  one  shall  scrupulously  avoid  treachery 

8a6.  f^la-ksetram — ^afanblidini^  ST^  barren  fidd. 

827*  Visargiabab—vifa^yuktaiarpadiidim  mantr&diii&  grafaanam 
5T.  profettion  of  a snake-diarmer.  It  h hazardous  as  well  as  degrading. 

827a.  Vidambab— any&nukagaoam  ST*  mimicry* 


470  Lingapura^ 

to  the  deities  and  preceptors*  If  one  unwillingly  commits  it,  one 
shall  perform  ten  thousand  japas  of  the  Prariava. 

42-43.  If  he  repeats  the  japas  a crorc  of  times  he  is 
purified  from  the  sins  of  treachery  to  the  preceptor  and  the 
deities.  For  the  expiation  of  great  sins,  one  shall  repeat  Siva’s 
mantra  in  accordance  with  the  injunction.  If  the  sinner  is, 
otherwise,  of  good  conduct  he  is  purified  by  half  the  number  of 
japas.  O sages  of  good  holy  rites,  all  the  Upapatakins  (those 
who  commit  subsidiary  sins)  get  purified  by  half  the  number 
of  japas. 

44 . A brahmin  guilty  of  the  omission  of  Sandhya  prayers 
becomes  pure  by  repeating  it  thrice.  If  the  daily  routine  is 
violated,  it  shall  be  repeated  hundred  and  one  times. 

45.  In  the  following  circumstances,  one  is  purified  by 
repeating  the  mantra  for  thousand  times.  The  instances  are: — 
violating  agreements,  eating  forbidden  food  and  speaking 
what  should  not  be  spoken. 

46.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this  that  if  one  kills  birds  like 
crows,  owls  and  doves,  etc.,  he  is  liberated  from  the  sin  by 
repeating  the  mantra  hundred  and  eig^it  times. 

47.  The  excellent  brahmin  who  knows  the  truth  and  has 
realised  Brahman  becomes  pure  merely  by  remembering  the 
deity.  No  doubt  need  be  entertained  in  this  respect. 

48.  There  arc  no  expiatory  rites  nor  injunctions  regard- 
ing them  in  the  case  of  the  knowers  of  the  Atman.  People  who 
are  conversant  with  the  learning  of  the  brahman  are  pure 
themselves  (because  they  are  engaged)  in  the  welfare  of  the 
universe. 

49.  Those  who  adhere  to  yoga  and  dhyana  are  stainless 
like  gold.  They  become  pure  by  resorting  to  Brahmavidya  and 
there  is  no  further  purification  for  persons  already  pure. 

50.  One  shall  avoid  turbid  water.  He  shall  perform  all 
rites  by  means  of  waters  that  have  been  purified  by  filtering 
through  the  pores  of  a cloth  and  that  do  not  contain  cold  foams. 

51-52.  One  shall  avoid  waters  of  these  types: — that  which 
has  defective  smell,  colour  and  taste;  that  which  stagnates  in 
impure  places;  that  which  is  defiled  by  mud  and  pebbles,  the 
sea  water,  the  water  from  puddles^  the  water  mingled  with 


Characteristics  of  good  conduct 


471 


moss  and  water  that  is  otherwise  defiled.  O brahmins,  one 
shall  perform  all  rites  equipped  with  the  cleanliness  of  clothes, 

53.  One  shall  perform  the  rites  of  obeisance  as  well  as 
service  to  the  preceptors  with  pure  and  clean  clothes.  One 
devoid  of  cleanliness  and  purity  in  clothes  is  undoubtedly 
impure. 

54.  It  is  desired  that  the  clothes  used  in  divine  rites  should 
be  washed  every  day.  Other  clothes  should  be  washed  when 
they  become  dirty. 

55-57.  O brahmins,  one  shall  scrupulously  eschew  the 
clothes  worn  by  others. 

Woollen  garments  and  silken  clothes  shall  be  washed  by 
means  of  hard  coarse  substances.  Woven-silk  garments  should  be 
washed  with  white  mustard  seeds.  Silk  garments  called  aihsu- 
pattas  shall  be  washed  with  bilva  fruits.  The  peculiar  type 
of  blankets  called  Kutapas  should  be  washed  with  soap-berry 
nuts.  The  cleansing  of  leather,  wickerwork  baskets  and  cane- 
boxes  is  in  the  same  way  as  that  of  clothes.  Leading  sages  who 
know  the  brahman  have  mentioned  that  the  cleansing  of  bark 
garments  of  all  varieties,  of  the  umbrella  and  of  the  chowrie 
is  like  that  of  clothes. 

58.  Bell  metal  is  purified  by  Bhasman,  iron  is  purified  by 
acid;  O brahmins,  copper,  tin  and  lead  are  cleaned  with 
vinegar. 

59.  O excellent  brahmins,  the  pots  of  gold  and  silver  can 
be  purified  by  water.  The  cleansing  of  jewels,  rock,  conch  and 
pearls  is  similar  to  that  of  metals. 

60.  The  purity  of  excessively  polluted  things  is  through 
contact  with  fire  and  water.  The  cleansing  of  all  beverages  is 
called  Utplavana. 

61.  Objects  made  of  grass,  wood,  etc.,  are  purified  by 
sprinkling  them  with  sacred  water.  The  purity  of  Sruk  and 
Sruva  (the  sacrificial  plate  and  ladle)  is  through  hot  water. 

62.  The  cleansing  of  the  utensils  of  yajftas,  that  of  the 
mortar  and  pestle  and  the  purification  of  those  made  of  horn, 
bone,  wood  and  ivory  is  by  means  of  poring. 

63.  O highly  blessed  ones,  sprinkling  is  the  means  of  puri- 
fication of  compact  solid  bodies;  if  the  things  are  disjointed 
they  shall  be  severally  cleansed. 


472 


lAngapura^ 


64.  If  a portion  of  a heap  of  grains  not  eaten,  is  defiled 
that  poi^ion  is  removed  and  the  remaining  part  is  sprinkled 
with  Kuia  grass-water. 

65.  It  is  desirable  that  vegetables,  roots  and  fruits  are 
purified  like  grains.  The  house  is  purified  by  sweeping  and 
scrubbing.  A mud-pot  is  purified  by  heating  it  over  fire. 

66.  The  floor  can  be  cleansed  by  scraping,  digging,  bed- 
aubing, sweeping,  sprinkling  and  by  tethering  cows  over  it. 

67-68.  The  water  stagnating  over  the  surface  of  lands 
becomes  pure  if  a oow  drinks  from  there  and  quenches  its 
thirst,  but  filth  should  not  spread  over  it  along  with  foul  smell, 
taste  and  colour. 

The  calf  is  purified  in  a spring;  and  the  bird  by  throwing 
a fruit  at  it.  During  sexual  intercourse  the  mouth  of  the  wife 
is  pure  for  the  loving  householder. 

69.  The  excellent  knowcr  of  Dharmas  shall  sprinkle  with 
Kuia  grass  water,  the  cloth  manually  washed  by  a washerman 
duly,  and  then  take  it  for  use. 

70.  Merchandise  spread  in  accordance  with  the  division 
of  castes  and  stages  of  life  is  pure.  Things  taken  out  of  mines 
are  naturally  pure.  A hound  is  p\Stt  when  it  catches  hold  of 
a deer. 

71.  All  these  are  pure  even  when  they  come  into  contact 
with  the  body,  viz. — ^shadow,  drops  of  water,  brahmins,  flies 
etc.,  dust,  ground,  wind  and  fire,  O excellent  brahmins. 

72.  O brahmins,  even  when  one  is  pure,  one  shall  perform 
the  icamana  rite  after  sleeping,  taking  food,  sneezing,  drinking 
and  spitting.  At  the  beginning  of  the  study  of  the  Vedas  and 
on  similar  occasions  one  shall  perform  the  acamana  rite. 

73.  If  the  drops  of  water  fall  on  the  feet  while  others  per- 
form the  Scamana  rite  they  shall  be  known  as  earthly  things. 
One  shall  not  become  impure  thereby. 

74-75.  After  sexual  intercourse  and  after  touching  a fallen 
man,  cocks,  pig,  crows,  dog,  camel,  donkey,  post,  ciindila  and 
others,  one  becomes  pure,  just  by  a bath.  One  shall  not  touch 
a woman  in  her  monthly  course,  a woman  aft^  delivery  and  a 
Sudra  woman. 


Characteristics  of  good  conduct 


473 


76.  One  defiled  by  pollution  after  birth  or  death  shall 
not  touch  their  dust.  If  he  touches  he  shall  be  pure  by  taking 
bath. 

77.  O sages  of  good  holy  rites,  the  following  persons  arc  not 
defiled  by  pollution — ascetics,  forest-dwellers,  religious  students, 
life-long  celibates,  kings  and  rulers  of  provinces. 

78.  Only  when  there  are  impedinnents  in  their  tasks,  do 
kings,  sages  and  brahmins  who  have  fallen  become  impure  and 
not  otherwise. 

79-80.  The  Asauca  of  the  brahmins  is  upto  the  collection 
of  bones  after  cremation  and  they  are  purified  merely  by  taking 
bath.  Similarly  for  those  who  are  initiated  in  the  sacrifice.  It 
has  been  mentioned  by  the  self-born  deity  that  for  those  who 
had  performed  sacrifices  the  pollution  is  for  one  day.  Then  for 
those  who  have  studied  their  respective  branches  of  the  Vedas 
it  is  for  four  days. 

81.  O excellent  brahmins,  kinsmen  do  not  have  pollution 
due  to  birth  or  death  beyond  three  days  (if  they  hear  of  the 
birth  or  death)  after  the  eleventh  day. 

82.  If  one  is  present  at  the  time  of  death  one  is  purified 
merely  by  taking  bath.  If  the  fact  of  death  is  known  after 
three  seasons  (i.e.  six  months)®^®  the  pollution  is  for  one  day. 

83-84.  If  the  fact  of  death  is  known  before  seven  years®2» 
the  pollution  is  for  three  days  and  beyond  that  for  the  brah- 
mins, it  is  for  ten  days.  The  pollution  due  to  birth  is  for  the 
first  day  in  the  case  of  the  father.  O sages,  in  the  case  of  the 
mother  it  is  for  ten  days.  If  the  fact  is  known  after  three 
years,®®®  the  purity  is  attained  by  bath  by  the  father  as  well  as 
by  kinsmen. 

85.  If  the  fact  is  known  after  eight  years®®^  the  kinsmen 
become  pure  within  a day.  O sages  of  good  holy  rites,  if  the  fact 

828.  rtu-traySd  arvak — before  three  seasons,  i.  e.  before  six  months, 
if  the  deceased  is  not  six  months  old.  Editor. 

829.  arv2Lk  sapta-var?at— if  the  deceased  is  not  seven  years  old. 
Editor. 

830.  arvak  sapta^varf&t— if  the  deceased  is  not  seven  years  old. 
Editor. 

831.  aft&bdSt— if  the  deceased  is  not  eight  years  old.  Editor. 


474  Lingapufd^a 

is  known  after  twelve  years^^^a  or  beyond  that,  the  ladies  will 
have  pollution  for  three  days. 

86.  Sapindata  (the  state  of  being  kinsman  by  way  of 
offering  the  funeral  rice  balls)  recedes  in  the  seventh  genera- 
tion. If  the  ten  days  immediately  after  death  have  elapsed,  one 
shall  be  impure  for  three  days. 

87.  The  brahmin  beyond  that  period  or  after  a year  has 
elapsed,  becomes  pure  merely  by  taking  bath. 

88.  If  one  touches  a dead  body,  one  becomes  pure  after 
three  days.  It  is  for  the  sake  of  Dharma  that  ablution  is  enjoin- 
ed in  regard  to  the  persons  who  cremate  the  dead  body.  If  he 
is  not  a relative  he  need  take  bath  alone. 

89.  If  one  follows  the  dead  body,  one  becomes  pure  by 
taking  bath  and  drinking  ghee.  When  the  preceptor  dies,  or  when 
a vedic-scholar  passes  away,  pollution  remains  for  three  days.®^- 

90-92.  O brahmins,  if  maternal  uncles  and  their  wives  or 
brothers  die,  if  kings  and  rulers  die,  the  people  become  pure 
immediately.  O excellent  brahmins,  the  pollution  of  the  Ksa- 
triyas  is  for  twelve  days.  A crowned  king  need  not  observe 
pollution  if  his  kinsmen  die  in  battle.  A Vaisya  becomes  pure 
in  fifteen  days.  A Sudra  becomes  pure  within  a month. 

Thus,  the  excellent  mode  of  purification  has  been  described 
to  you  in  brief. 

93.  Ascetics  do  not  have  to  observe  pollution  accruing  from 
birth  or  death. 

O brahmins,  1 shall  now  mention  another  impurity,  i.e.,  the 
monthly  menstrual  discharge  of  the  women. 

94.  Due  to  the  nature  of  the  yuga,  in  the  Krta  age,  ladies 
gave  birth  but  once.  The  blessed  ones  repaired  to  the  forests 
along  with  their  wives  like  the  Kurus.®®® 

95.  O sages  of  good  holy  rites,  the  arrangement  regarding 
the  castes  and  stages  of  life  began  ever  since  the  Treta  yuga. 

B3ia.  strisii -- if  the  married  woman  who  has  not  completed  twelfth 
year  dies  (in  her  father’s  house) . Gf. 

%c^f5rT  I 

'sTT’T  Agniimroda—eiXf^d  in  ST. 

832,  pak^ini — a night  with  the  two  days  enclosing  it.  Cf. 

— cited  by  V.S.  Apte  ; Th 

practical  Sanskrit-Eaglish  Dictionary,  p,  557. 

833.  Kuravah — Kuruvarsiyah  ST.  the  residents  of  Kuru  varsa. 


Characteristics  of  good  conduct 


475 


This  arrangement  is  observed  only  in  the  southern  sub-continent 
of  Bharata  and  not  in  the  other. 

96,  Dharma  is  observed  in  the  following  continents  and 
sub-continents,  viz.  Mahavita,®^*  Suvita,®®«  Jambudvipa®^®  and 
its  eight  other  sub-continents,  and  iSakadvipa,®®"  etc.  and  in 
Bharata.®®® 

97-99.  InKrtayuga,  the  sustenance  of  people  was  from 
taking  liquids;  in  Treta  yuga  from  domestic  trees.  But  this  was 
discontinued  during  the  subsequent  ages.  The  same  occurred  in 
regard  to  the  untimely  intercourse,  during  the  menstrual  dis- 
charge, due  to  lust  of  men.  O Brahmins,  so  barley  and  other 
plants  of  the  village  and  forest  as  well  as  the  fourteen  types  of 
medicinal  herbs  were  cultivated  untimely  and  destroyed,  as  in 
the  case  of  sexual  intercourse  during  the  menstrual  period  due 
to  the  passion  of  men. 

100.  Hence,  one  shall  assiduously  avoid  conversing  with  a 
wontan  in  her  monthly  course.  On  the  first  day,  she  has  to  be 
avoided  like  a candala  woman. 

101-102.  O brahmins,  on  the  second  day,  she  is  to  be  treat- 
ed like  a woman  who  has  slain  a brahmin.  On  the  third  day,®®® 
she  has  half  that  sinful  nature.  O sages  of  good  holy  rites,  she 
shall  take  bath  on  the  fourth  day.®^®  She  shall  then  be  pure 
within  half  a month.  From  the  sixteenth  day  onwards  the 
women  shall  observe  cleanliness  in  regard  to  passing  of  urine. 

103.  If  the  menstrual  discharge  continues  she  cannot  be 
touched  for  five  days.®®^  As  far  as  twenty  days  she  is  defiled  by 
the  menstrual  discharge  and  remains  untouchable. 

834.  Mahavita— sec  p.  206  note  323. 

835.  Suvita — not  identifiable. 

836.  Jambudvipa,  see  p.  189  note  292a. 

837.  ST.  docs  not  construe  ‘a?tasu*  with  ‘^aka-dvipadisu*  but  takes 
it  with  ‘kimpurusadisu’  which  it  supplies  since  it  docs  not  occur  in  the 
verse.  It  explains  ‘saka-dvipadisu’  along  with  plaksadvjpantike?u,  on  the 
authority  of  Lihga.  I.  46.  46. 

838.  Bharata,  see  p.  186  note  289;  p.  202  note  318. 

839.  tftiya’hni — on  the  third  day  of  menstruation  she  is  as  impure  as 
the  washerwoman:  ‘trtiye  rajaki  prokta’— cited  in  ST. 

840.  She  becomes  pure  on  the  fourth  day;  ‘bhartufi  Buddha  caturthe- 
hni* — nud  in  ST. 

841.  If  her  menses  do  not  stop  after  three  days  she  remains  impure 
for  five  nights.  But  Apastamba  considers  her  to  be  impure  so  long  as  her 
menses  continue: 


476 


Lingapurnna 


104-107.  A woman  in  her  monthly  course  shall  avoid  bath, 
toilet,  singing,  crying,  laughing,  going  in  vehicles,  applying 
collyrium,  playing  dice,  applying  unguents,  sleeping  during 
the  daytime,  washing  the  teeth,  sexual  intercourse,  worship  of 
deities  whether  mental,  verbal  or  physical  as  well  as  bowing 
down.  A woman  in  her  monthly  course  shall  avoid  touching 
another  woman  in  her  monthly  course  and  talking  to  her  also. 
She  shall  assiduously  avoid  changing  her  garments.  A woman 
in  her  monthly  course  shall  not  touch  another  man  after  her 
bath. 

108.  She  shall  look  at  the  brilliant  sun  and  drink  Brahma- 
kurca  or  Paficagavya  or  milk  for  self  purification. 

109-110.  The  husband  shall  not  indulge  in  sexual  inter- 
course on  the  fourth  night  after  the  monthly  discharge  has 
started.  If  he  indulges  thus,  the  child  born  will  be  short-lived. 
The  son  born  of  this  sexual  contact  will  be  devoid  of  learning, 
depraved,  deviating  from  the  observance  of  holy  rites,  violating 
the  chastity  of  other  men’s  wives  and  immersed  in  the  ocean  of 
penury.  The  woman  should  be  approached  on  the  fifth  night 
if  he  seeks  a daughter. 

111.  If  the  blood  is  predominant,  the  child  will  be  a girl; 
if  the  semen  is  predominant  the  child  will  be  a boy;  if  both  are 
equal  the  child  will  be  an  eunuch;  if  the  sexual  intercourse  is 
on  the  fifth  night  the  child  will  be  a girl. 

112.  The  blessed  lady  shall  be  approached  on  the  sixth 
night;  she  will  be  the  mother  of  a good  son.  The  son  will  be 
excessively  brilliant  and  he  will  remain  dutiful  as  a son. 

113.  The  word  Pum  means  ‘‘hell”  and  they  say  that  hell 
is  miserable.  She  will  give  birth  to  a son  who  will  save  his 
parents  from  Pum  (i.e.  hell),®^^ 

114.  The  husband  who  seeks  a daughter  shall  approach 
her  on  the  seventh  night.  She  will  give  birth  to  a daughter.®^® 
If  approached  on  the  eighth  night  she  will  give  birth  to  a 
son  equipped  with  everything. 

1 15.  He  who  seeks  a daughter  shall  approach  his  wife  on 

842.  Cf.  Manu*  IX.  138. 

843.  saiva  prasuyate — BandhyS  bhavati  ST.  she  becomes  barren. 
ST.  quotes  Nirriaya-sindhu  in  support  of  his  view:  “saptamyam  apraja 
yo?it.**  But  this  meaning  is  not  borne  out  by  the  text. 


Characteristics  of  good  conduct 


477 


the  ninth  night;  if  approached  on  the  tenth  night  a scholarly 
son  will  be  born;  if  approached  on  the  eleventh  night  she  will 
give  birth  to  a girl  as  before. 

116-117.  If  approached  on  the  twelfth  night  she  will  give 
birth  to  a son  who  is  conversant  with  the  principle  of  Dharma 
and  who  will  observe  the  holy  rites  laid  down  in  Srutis  and 
Smrtis.  If  approached  on  the  thirteenth  night  she  will  give  birth 
to  a sluggish  girl  who  will  bring  about  mixture  of  castes.  Hence, 
one  shall  assiduously  avoid  her  on  that  night.  If  he  approaches 
her  on  the  fourteenth  night  she  will  be  the  mother  of  a son. 

118-122.  If  approached  on  the  fifteenth  night  she  will  give 
birth  to  a virtuous  daughter;  if  approached  on  the  sixteenth 
night  she  will  give  birth  to  a son  who  will  be  a master  of  per- 
fect knowledge. 

If  at  the  time  of  the  sexual  intercourse  the  air  passes 
through  the  left  side  of  the  woman  she  will  give  birth  to  a 
daughter;  if  it  passes  through  the  right  side  she  will  give  birth 
to  a boy.  The  time  of  sexual  intercourse  shall  be  free  from  the 
influence  of  evil  planets.  At  the  time  mentioned  thus  the  hus- 
band shall  remain  clean  and  approach  the  pure  and  smiling 
wife  joyously. 

Thus,  in  the  context  of  collecting  together  virtuous  rites  of 
the  ascetics,  the  good  conduct  of  all  living  beings  has  been 
recounted  to  you. 

The  pure  man  who  reads  this  discourse  on  the  good  conduct 
or  listens  to  it  or  narrates  this  to  the  brahmins  who  have  des- 
troyed their  sins  will  attain  the  world  of  lord  Brahma  and 
rejoice  along  with  the  lord. 


844.  Construe  ‘purvat’  with  the  following  vcisc.  i.  c.  dv&da£y^m 
purvavat  («panditavat)  dfaarma-tattvajfiam  (sutam  prasutc) . 


478 


Lingapurdrta 


CHAPTER  NINETY 

The  expiatory  rites  of  the  ascetics 


Suta  said: — 

1.  Henceforth,  I shall  mention  decisively  the  mode  of 
expiation  by  asectics.  This  is  recounted  by  Siva  and  it  makes 
adequate  atonement  for  the  sins  of  ascetics. 

2.  Sins  are  of  three  types:  those  originating  from 
speech,  mind  and  body.  It  is  by  these  that  the  universe  is  en- 
compassed always,  by  day  and  by  night. 

3.  “Without  activities  the  world  cannot  be  sustained  even 
for  a moment”,  says  the  sacred  Sruti.  It  is  the  only  instrument 
that  is  conducive  to  longevity  and  sustenance. 

4.  It  is  only  to  the  unerring  that  the  yoga  becomes  accessi- 
ble. Indeed,  yoga  is  the  greatest  strength.  There  is  no  otlier 
auspicious  thing  for  men  that  is  greater  than  yoga. 

5*7.  Hence,  learned  men  endowed  with  virtue  praise  yoga. 
They  shall  conquer  (ignorance)  by  knowledge  and  attain 
excellent  ai^varya.  After  seeing  the  greatest  being  inferior  to 
none,  the  self-possessed  ones  will  attain  that  region.  There  are 
main  and  subsidiary  holy  rites  to  be  observed  by  the  mendi- 
cants (Bhiksus).  Expiatory  rites  are  also  laid  down  for  violating 
any  of  them. 

By  carnally  approaching  a woman  the  mendicant  incurs 
sin  and  for  that  the  following  expiatory  rite  is  mentioned. 

8.  He  shall  perform  Pranayama  and  observe  the  rite 
Santapana.^^^  Then  with  great  concentration  and  attention  at 
the  end,  he  shall  perform  the  Krcchra^^®  rite  in  accordance 
with  the  direction. 

9-10.  Again  the  Bhiksu  shall  return  to  the  hermitage  and 
perform  the  rite  alertfully.  Learned  men  say  that  a virtuous 
falsehood  does  not  injure  one.  Still  it  should  not  be  pursued. 
Its  mere  context  is  terrible.  The  expiatory  rite  is  fasting  for  a 
night  and  a day  and  a hundred  Pranayamas. 

845.  santapanam— a rigid  pcnancc;  cf.  Manu.  1 1.  213;  also  Miidkfard 
on  Yijfiavalkya  (prSyascitta) . 

846.  ST,  supplies  prajapatyam  with  krechram.  For  detail,  sec  p.  45 
note  6a. 


The  expiatory  rites  of  the  ascetics 


479 


1 1 . Evil  utterance  and  discussion  shall  not  be  pursued  by 
an  ascetic  desirous  of  attaining  Dharma.  Thieving  shall  not  be 
indulged  in  even  when  he  is  in  great  distress. 

12-13.  iSruti  says  that  there  is  no  evil  greater  than  stealing. 
What  is  mentioned  as  ‘‘stealing”  is  a great  violence  that  is 
inseparable  from  it.  What  is  named  “wealth”  constitutes  the 
external  vital  airs  (Pranas).  Hence,  he  who  takes  away  the 
wealth  of  anyone  really  takes  away  the  vital  airs  of  that  person. 

14-15.  A person  who  is  wicked  in  mind  becomes  one  who 
has  transgressed  the  bounds  of  good  conduct  by  doing  so  (i.e. 
by  stealing).  He  becomes  one  who  has  fallen  down  from  his 
holy  rite.  He  shall  repent  for  it  again  and  again  and  perform 
the  rite  of  Candrayana®^’  for  a year  in  accordance  with  the 
injunctions  laid  down  in  scriptures.  So  says  Sruti.  At  the 
end  of  the  year  he  shall  eliminate  all  his  sins.  The  Bhiksu  shall 
then  alerifully  repent  and  perform  the  rites. 

16-1 7a.  The  Bhiksu  shall  abstain  from  injury  to  all  living 
beings  mentally,  verbally  and  physically.  If  the  Bhiksu  injures 
animals  and  worms  even  unwittingly  he  shall  perform  the  rite 
of  Krcchratikrcchra  or  Candrayana. 

17b- 18a.  If,  on  seeing  a woman,  the  ascetic  were  to  have 
involuntary  emission  of  semen  due  to  his  weakness,  he  shall 
observe  sixteen  pranayamas. 

18b-19a.  Now  the  expiatory  rite  of  a brahmin  who  has 
seminal  emission  during  the  day  time,  is  laid  down.  He  shall 
observe  fast  for  three  nights  and  perform  hundred  pranayamas. 

19b-20a.  If  he  has  nocturnal  emission  he  shall  take  a 
clean  bath  and  have  twelve  Dharanas.  O brahmins,  by  means 
of  the  pranayama,  one  becomes  a pure  soul  and  free  from  sins. 

20b-21.  The  following  are  forbidden  foodstuffs  for  ascetics 
viz. — alms  from  a single  house  every  day,  honey,  wine,  flesh 
(meat"),  uncooked  food  as  well  as  salt  itself.  Expiatory  rites  arc 
laid  down  for  violating  anyone  of  these. 

22-23.  He  is  freed  from  that  sin  by  the  observance  of 
Prajapatya  and  Krcchra.  In  regard  to  other  transgressions 
whether  mental,  verbal  or  physical  he  shall  consult  good  men 
and  perform  what  they  lay  down. 


847.  CandrSyana  : See  p.  45  note  61. 


480 


Lihgapurdr^ 


24.  One  shall  view  a lump  of  clay  and  gold  alike  and  par- 
form  the  rites.  He  shall  be  pure  and  clean.  He  shall  have 
great  concentration  and  attention  in  regard  to  all  living  beings. 
By  living  thus  he  attains  that  stable,  unchanging  and  great 
abode  from  where  he  is  not  born  again. 


CaHAPTER  NINETYONE 

Portentous  phenomena 

1.  Henceforth,  I shall  mention  the  Aristas  (the  phenomena 
that  indicate  misfortune  and  even  death);  understand  them. 
It  is  by  means  of  this  special  knowledge  that  the  yogins  visua- 
lise death. 

2.  He  who  is  not  able  to  see  Arundhati  (a  constellation 
among  the  Pleiades)  Dhruva  (Pole  star),  the  shadow  of  the 
moon  and  the  Mahapatha  (Milky  Way)  shall  not  live  more 
than  a year. 

3.  He  who  sees  the  sun  without  rays  and  the  fire  with 
rays  will  not  live  beyond  the  eleventh  month. 

4.  He  who  dreams  that  he  vomits,  passes  urine  and  eva- 
cuates stools  in  the  form  of  gold  and  silver  shall  not  live  full 
ten  months  thereafter. 

5.  He  who  sees  a gold-^coloured  tree,  the  Gandharva  city, 
(i.e.  the  hallucination  of  an  imaginary  city),  ghosts  and  spirits 
shall  live  only  for  nine  months. 

6.  He  who  becomes  stout  or  lean  all  of  a sudden,  i.e.,  he 
who  thus  moves  away  from  his  nature  shall  live  only  for  eight 
months. 

7.  He  whose  footprint  appears  split  in  front  or  behind 
in  the  dust  or  in  mud  lives  only  up  to  seven  months. 

8.  If  a crow,  or  a dove,  or  a vulture  or  any  other  bird  of 
prey  perches  on  one’s  head,  one  shall  not  survive  six  months. 

9.  He  who  goes  in  the  company  of  rows  of  crows  or  of  a 
dust  storm,  he  who  sees  his  own  shadow  in  a deformed  state  shall 
live  only  for  four  or  five  months. 


Portentous  phenomena 


481 


10.  He  who  sees  lightning  in  a spot  that  is  not  the  sky  and 
the  lightning  in  the  southern  direction  or  he  who  sees  the  rain- 
bow in  the  water  shall  live  for  only  one  or  two  months. 

11.  If  one  is  not  able  to  see  oneself  either  in  water  or  in 
the  mirror  or  if  he  sees  it  devoid  of  the  head  he  will  not  live 
beyond  a month. 

12.  If  the  body  emits  the  odour  of  a dead  body  or  of  fat, 
his  death  is  imminent.  He  will  not  live  beyond  a fortnight. 

13.  If  immediately  after  the  bath  the  heart  appears  to 
dry  up  or  smoke  is  seen  coming  out  of  the  head,  he  will  not 
live  even  for  ten  days. 

14.  If  the  bursting  wind  pierces  the  vital  parts,  if  the 
hairs  do  not  stand  on  their  ends  on  being  sprinkled  with 
water,  his  death  is  imminent. 

15.  If  one  dreams  of  going  towards  the  southern 
direction  in  a chariot  to  which  monkeys  and  bears  are  yoked, 
and  sings  and  dances  in  the  meantime,  it  should  be  known  that 
death  is  imminent. 

16.  If  in  the  dream,  a singing  dark-complexioned  woman 
who  wears  black  clothes  leads  a person  to  the  southern  direc- 
tion he  will  not  live  long. 

17.  If  a man  sees  a slit  in  his  own  neck  in  the  dream,  or 
dreams  of  a naked  sramana  (Buddhist  recluse),  know  that 
death  is  imminent. 

18.  ‘The  person  sinks  into  the  ocean  of  mire  upto  the  head*. 
On  seeing  a dream  like  this,  he  ceases  to  live  immediately. 

19.  A person  who  sees  ashes,  burning  coal,  hairs,  dry 
river,  and  serpents  in  dream  does  not  live  for  ten  days 
thereafter. 

20.  He  who  is  beaten  in  dream  by  dark-complexioned 
hideous  persons  with  arms  lifted  up  or  hit  by  stones,  ceases  to 
live  immediately. 

21.  If  jackals  howl  directly  at  a person  early  in  the  mor- 
ning, at  sunrise,  that  person’s  days  are  numbered. 

22.  If  the  heart  is  excessively  pained  immediately  after 
the  bath  and  there  is  a morbid  sensitiveness  in  the  teeth  one 
can  say  that  he  is  sure  to  die. 

23.  If  a person  is  extremely  frightened  whether  at  night 


482  Lingapurdna 

or  during  daytime  and  he  is  unable  to  perceive  the  smell  of 
the  lamp  one  shall  know  that  death  is  imminent. 

24.  If  one  sees  the  rainbow  at  night  or  the  cluster  of 
stars  during  the  day  and  is  unable  to  see  himself  in  the  eyes 
of  others,  he  ceases  to  live. 

25.  If  one  of  the  eyes  begins  to  water,  if  the  ears  arc  dis- 
lodged and  if  the  nose  becomes  bent  in  dream  the  man  is 
sure  to  die  soon. 

26.  If  the  tongue  becomes  black  and  rough,  if  the  face  be- 
comes red  like  lotus,  and  if  the  cheeks  develop  red  fleshy 
swelling,  his  death  is  imminent. 

27.  If  a man  with  dishevelled  hair  were  to  come  face  to 
face  in  the  southern  direction,  singing,  laughing  and  dancing, 
his  life  ends  with  that. 

28.  If  the  body  is  frequently  pale,  white  in  colour  with  the 
lustre  of  white  clouds  or  like  white  mustard  his  death  is 
imminent. 

29.  If  one  dreams  that  camels  and  donkeys  are  yoked  to 
chariots  they  are  inauspicious.  If  the  chariot  is  seen  going 
towards  the  southern  direction  he  will  cease  to  live. 

30-31.  The  following  dreams  indicate  that  death  is  im- 
minent:— Any  two  of  the  previous  portents  occurring  simultane- 
ously, not  hearing  noise  in  the  ear,  not  seeing  lustre  in  the  eye, 
falling  into  a pit,  inability  to  rise  up  from  the  pit  and  closing 
of  a door. 

32.  These  are  signs  of  imminent  death:  The  eyes  are  turned 
upwards,  they  are  not  steady,  they  are  red,  they  revolve,  there 
is  dryness  in  the  mouth,  there  is  a hole  in  the  umbilicus  and 
the  urine  is  excessively  hot.  The  person  is  indeed  in  difficulties. 

33.  Whether  during  day  or  night  if  a person  is  directly 
killed  but  he  does  not  sec  the  murderer  his  life  is  extinct.  He 
will  cease  to  live. 

34.  If  at  the  end  of  a dream,  a man  sees  that  he  enters 
fire  and  does  not  remember  it  at  all,  his  life  ends  with  that. 

35.  If  a man  sees  his  own  white  blanket  as  a black  one,  in 
the  course  of  the  dream  or  as  a red  one,  his  death  is  imminent. 

36.  If  the  portents  are  indicated  in  the  body  and  that 
time  of  deatli  has  arrived,  the  intelligent  man  shall  eschew 
sorrow  and  dejection  and  treat  it  with  indifference. 


Portentous  phenomena 


483 


37-39.  With  cleanliness  and  purity  he  shall  set  off  in  the 
direction  of  east  or  north.  He  shall  sit  in  a steady  level  ground 
in  a secluded  spot  devoid  of  creatures.  He  shall  sit  facing  the 
east  or  the  north  and  perform  the  rite  of  acamana.  He  shall  sit 
in  the  posture  of  Svastika  and  bow  to  Mahe^vara.  The  body, 
the  head  and  the  neck  shall  be  erect  like  a lamp  in  a wind- 
less spot.  He  shall  be  steady  without  flickering.  He  shall  not 
look  at  anything  else  while  practising  Dharana  (Retention) . 

40-43.  The  knower  of  scriptures  shall  practise  yoga  in  the 
spot  facing  the  north-east.  He  shall  restrain  lust,  doubt,  pleasure, 
happiness  and  misery  mentally  and  only  concentrate  on  clean 
meditation.  He  shall  meditate  on  the  nose,  tongue,  eyes,  skin, 
ears  and  mind.  He  shall  retain  them  in  the  intellect  and  chest. 
After  realising  the  time  and  actions  he  shall  retain  these  parts 
of  the  body  in  the  groups  perpetually.  This  retention  of  the 
twelve  parts  of  the  body  is  called  yogadharana.  The  man  shall 
perform  hundred  or  fifty  such  Dharanas  on  the  head. 

44-45.  If  he  becomes  exhausted  due  to  the  practice  of 
Dharana,  the  wind  begins  to  function  upwards.  He  shall  fill 
the  body  with  the  wind  along  with  the  Oihkara.  The  yogin 
identifying  himself  with  Oihkara  shall  merge  himself  in  imperi- 
shable being.  He  shall  become  imperishable  thus. 

Henceforth,  I shall  mention  the  characteristics  of  the  attain- 


ment of  Oihkara. 

46.  This  should  be  known  as  having  three  Matras  (units), 
the  consonant  in  it  is  the  deity.  The  first  Matra  is  Vidyuti 
(pertaining  to  lightning).  The  second  is  Tamasi  [having 
Tamo-Guna]. 

47.  The  third  is  Nirguna  (devoid  of  attributes).  It  covers 
up  the  imperishable  Being.  It  should  be  known  as  Gandhari 
too,  because  it  originates  from  the  Gandhara  note  (the  third  of 
the  seven  primary  notes  of  Indian  Gamut) . 

48.  When  the  Oihkara  that  is  uttered  recedes  to  the  head 


the  devotee  feels  the  touch  of  the  moving  ant. 

49-52.  The  yogin  identical  with  the  Oihkara  becomes  identi- 
cal  with  the  imperishable  Being.  Pranava  is  the  bow,  Atman  is 
the  arrow  and  Brahman  is  the  target.  It  should  be  pierced  by 
one  who  does  not  err.  He  shall  be  concentrated  ^ I" 

regard  to  the  arrow.  The  single-syllabled  word  Om  is  hidden  in 


484  Lingapurdna 

the  cavity.  The  Omkara  is  identical  with  the  three  worlds,  the 
three  Vedas,  the  three  sacrificial  fires,  the  three  steps  of  Visnu, 
the  three  scriptures,  viz. — Rk,  S^ans  and  Yajurmantras.  It 
should  be  known  that  they  are  really  the  three  and  a half 
Matras.  The  yogin  who  utters  it  attains  identity  with  the  deity. 

53.  The  letter  “A”  should  be  known  as  Aksara  (Imperish- 
able) ; the  letter  “U**  is  then  along  with  it.  Including  the  letter 

Oihkara  becomes  one  with  three  Matras. 

54.  The  letter  “A**  is  the  Bhurloka;  the  letter  “U**  is 
Bhuvarloka,  the  letter  “M’*  is  Svarloka. 

55.  The  Om  represents  the  three  worlds.  Its  head  is  the 
Heaven.  All  the  worlds  constitute  its  limbs  (body).  Its  feet  are 
constituted  by  Brahmaloka. 

56.  Rudra’s  world  is  the  foot  of  the  Matra,  Siva’s  region  is 
devoid  of  Matras  (i.e.  above  them) . It  is  with  this  special 
knowledge  that,  that  region  is  worshipped. 

57.  Hence,  the  devotee  shall  be  interested  in  meditation. 
Indeed  that  imperishable  Being  devoid  of  Matras,  should  be 
assiduously  worshipped  by  one  who  wishes  for  permanent 
happiness. 

58-59.  The  first  Matra  is  a short,  the  next  one  is  long; 
the  third  Matra  is  Pluta  (prolated  vowel).  These  Matras  should 
be  known  in  their  proper  order.  They  are  to  be  retained  only 
as  long  as  it  is  possible. 

60.  He  who  always  meditates  on  the  sense-organs,  mind 
and  intellect  in  the  Atman  and  listens  to  even  half  a Matra 
shall  attain  its  benefit. 

61.  Thanks  to  that  Matra,  one  attains  the  merit  which  a 
person  attains  by  a horse-sacrifice  every  month,  continuing  it 
for  a hundred  years. 

62.  Neither  by  a severe  penance  nor  by  sacrifices  with 
plenty  of  gifts  can  that  merit  be  obtained  which  is  perfectly 
obtained  by  means  of  the  Matra. 

63.  The  householder  yogins  shall  practise  only  that 
Matra  which  is  taught  as  Pluta  (Prolated  Vowel) . 

64.  This  Matra  alone  comprises  the  eightfold  Aii^varya 
beginning  with  Anima.®*®  Hence,  O brahmins,  be  in  commu- 
nion with  it. 


848*  etc.  Gf.  p.  134  note  241. 


Portentous  phenomena 


485 


65.  O brahmins,  he  who  knows  and  realises  the  Atman 
obtains  everything.  He  shall  be  endowed  with  yoga.**®  He  shall 
be  pure.  He  shall  subdue  the  sense-organs.  He  shall  control  them. 

66.  Hence,  the  learned  man  shall  contemplate  the  Atman 
by  means  of  the  yoga  pertaining  to  Pa^upati.  Those  who  know 
the  Atman  are  certainly  pure  beings. 

67.  It  is  through  the  knowledge  of  yoga  that  the  brahmin, 
thinker  on  spiritual  topics,  attains  the  Rk,  Saman,  Yajur 
mantras,  in  fact  all  the  Vedas  and  the  Upanisads. 

68.  He  becomes  identical  with  all  Devas  and  devoid  of  all 
elements.  He  gets  rid  of  the  necessity  of  passing  through  wombs 
and  attains  the  perpetual  region. 

69.  Just  as  the  ripe  fruit  falls  off  the  tree  on  being  tossed 
about  by  the  wind,  so  also  sin  perishes  by  the  grace  of  Rudra. 

70.  Where  the  obeisance  to  Rudra  yields  the  benefits  of  all 
Karmans,  one  shall  not  attain  those  benefits  through  the  obei- 
sance to  the  other  deities. 

71-72.  Hence,  the  yogin  shall  worship  Mahe^ vara  repeat- 
ing the  Pranava  twice.  He  who  enlarges  the  scope  of  the  Vedas 
ten  times  more  by  elaborating  the  Vedic  texts  shall  meditate 
and  then  forsake  the  body.  He  uplifts  three  generations  and 
attains  Sayujja  salvation  with  iSiva. 

73-76.  Or  after  seeing  any  evil  portent  and  when  the  time 
of  death  has  arrived  the  man  shall  go  to  Avimuktesvara  in 
Varanasi  and  perform  the  expiatory  rite.  Somehow  the  man 
shall  abandon  his  body  there  when,  O leading  brahmins,  he 
is  liberated.  The  man  may  abandon  his  body  on  the  mountain, 
Sriparvata.®*®  He  attains  identity  with  Siva.  No  doubt  need  be 
entertained  in  this  regard.  Avimukta  is  a greatest  shrine  always 
bestowing  salvation  on  the  creatures.  The  intelligent  man 
shall  resort  to  it  always  especially  when  death  is  imminent. 


849.  ST.  defines  ‘yoga-jnSnam'  as  yoga-yuktam  jfianam’  i.  e.  know- 
ledge  joined  with  meditation.  Yoga  is  the  means  for  the  attainment  of  right 
or  perfect  knowledge  *yogo  hi  jfiana-s^hanam.* 

850.  Sriparvata— Sec  p.  381  note  678. 


486 


Lingapurd^ 


CHAPTER  NINETYTWO 

Glory  of  SrUaila 


The  sages  said: 

1-2.  O suta  of  great  intellect,  if  Varanasi  is  so  meritori- 
ous it  behoves  you  to  recount  its  greatness  to  us  now.  We  are 
eager  to  hear  in  detail  the  excellent  greatness  of  this  holy 
centre  Avimukta. 

Suta  Said  : 

3.  I shall  succinctly  mention  the  glory  of  Avimukta,  of 
Varanasi  in  the  manner  in  which  lord  Bhava  had  narrated  it. 

4.  O leading  brahmins,  even  in  hundreds  and  crores  of 
years  it  cannot  be  mentioned  in  detail  by  me  or  by  the  noble 
Brahma. 

5-6.  Formerly,  after  his  marriage,  Sankara,  Nilalohita  start- 
ed from  the  peak  of  the  Himav^  in  the  company  of  the  goddess 
the  daughter  of  the  Himavan,  and  the  leading  Ganas.  After 
reaching  Varanasi  Sankara  showed  his  Lihga  Avimukte^vara  and 
began  to  stay  there. 

7-8.  One  can  become  an  ascetic  in  the  following  places, 
viz.,  Varanasi,  Kuruksetra,®®^  Sriparvata,  Mahalaya,®®®  TuhgeS- 
vara,®®®  and  Kedara,®®^  But  if  one  performs  the  yoga  of  Pasupati 
perfectly  for  a day,  one  becomes  an  ascetic.  Hence,  one  shall 
eschew  everything  and  perform  the  PaiSupata  yoga. 

9.  One  shall  stay  there  in  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  There 
is  an  excellent  garden  of  Sarva  at  that  place.  Rudra  created 
mentally  a splendid  mansion  also. 

10.  The  lord  accompanied  by  Nandin  pointed  out  that 
divine  excellent  garden  to  the  daughter  of  the  Himavan. 

11.  Sankara  Paramesana,  Bhava  mentioned  to  her  the 
greatness  of  this  holy  centre  Avimukta  just  for  her  pleasure. 

851.  Kuruk^etra — See  p.  381  note  683. 

852.  MahSlaya-*  See  p.  95  note  115. 

853.  TuAgeivara — not  identifiable. 

854.  Kedara — Sec  p.  381  note  68 r. 


Glory  of  Sriiaila 


487 


12.  The  garden  was  rendered  beautiful  by  the  different 
clusters  of  trees  in  full  bloom.  It  was  very  charming  due  to  the 
spreading  creepers,  the  Priyahgu  plants  with  growing  flowers, 
and  the  Ketaka  plants  in  full  bloom  though  covered  with 
thorns. 

13.  It  was  overspread  with  clusters  of  the  Tamala  trees. 
It  was  strewn  with  plenty  of  fragrant  Bakula  flowers  all  round. 
Hundreds  of  As  oka  and  Punnaga  trees  were  in  full  bloom. 
Swarms  of  bees  hovered  round  the  flowers. 

14.  In  some  places  the  garden  was  resonant  with  the  birds, 
Sarasas  (Indian  cranes),  Cakravakas  (Ruddy  geese)  and 
the  intoxicated  excellent  Datyuhas  (water-crows)  all  round. 
These  birds  were  embellished  by  means  of  the  pollen  dust  of 
the  full-blown  lotuses.  They  were  chirping  every  moment. 

15.  In  some  places  the  excellent  garden  was  resonant 
with  the  crowing  sound  of  the  peacocks;  in  some  places  it 
was  resonant  with  the  cackling  sound  of  the  Karanc^ava  ducks; 
in  some  places  the  garden  was  rendered  noisy  by  the  swarms 
of  the  inebriate  bees  accompanied  by  their  bee-mates  equally 
agitated  due  to  intoxication. 

15.  It  abounded  in  charming  and  fragrant  flowers.  In 
some  places  it  was  full  of  Sahakara  (mango)  trees  with  fresh 
sprouts;  some  places  (in  the  garden)  were  hidden  by  Tilaka 
trees  encircled  by  creepers.  The  Vidyadharas,  Siddhas  and 
Car  anas  sang  in  some  places  in  the  garden. 

1 7.  The  garden  contained  groups  of  Apsarases  engaged  in 
dance.  It  was  resorted  to  by  different  kinds  of  delighted  birds. 
It  was  resonant  with  the  sound  of  the  Harita  pigeons.  It 
abounded  in  birds  whose  minds  were  excited  due  to  the 
roaring  sound  of  the  lord  of  beasts. 

18.  In  some  places  it  abounded  in  fragrant  bunches  of 
flowers  and  sprouts  of  the  Darbha  grass  plucked  by  the  deer. 
In  some  places  it  was  embellished  by  lakes  and  ponds  aboun- 
ding in  different  charming  full-blown  lotuses. 

19-  The  garden  was  charming  by  the  grace  of  the  blue- 
necked  peacocks  hiding  amidst  the  clusters  of  branches.  It  was 
resonant  with  the  sounds  emanating  from  the  exuberant  birds. 
The  intoxicated  bees  lay  hidden  amidst  the  branches  of  the 


488 


Lingapurarui 


trees  in  full  bloom.  The  tali  branches  of  those  trees  were  ren- 
dered more  splendid  due  to  the  lustre  of  the  fresh  sprouts. 

20.  In  some  places  the  beautiful  creepers  were  chewed  by 
the  ladies  of  the  Kimpurusa  clan  who  walked  in  the  garden 
in  their  elegant  slow  gait.  In  some  places  the  beautiful  trees 
were  embraced  by  the  creepers. 

21.  (?)  The  beautiful  tops  of  the  trees  touched  the  clouds. 
The  pigeons  and  doves  sat  on  these  tops  and  made  a cooing 
noise.  The  tips  of  the  trees  had  beautiful  white  forms  that 
captivated  the  minds.  The  flowers  that  were  scattered  by  these 
pigeons  from  tree  tops  disturbed  the  swans  (in  the  lakes 
below ) . The  garden  was  rendered  charming  by  several  groups 
of  divine  beings. 

22.  It  contained  number  of  garden  lakes  with  full-blown 
lilies  and  lotuses  spreading  far  and  wide  and  these  brightened 
up  the  path  leading  to  the  shrine  of  lord  Siva.  The  place  was 
covered  with  different  hedges  and  branches  in  combination 
with  wonderful  rows  of  flowers  in  the  middle  of  the  paths. 

23.  The  borderlands  of  the  garden  were  brightened  up  by 
charming  Asoka  trees  with  lofty  tops  and  with  their  tall  bran- 
ches stooping  down  due  to  the  weight  of  branches  of  the  flowers. 
There  were  swings  on  either  side  of  these  trees  and  the  songs 
of  the  birds  resting  therein  caused  pleasure  to  the  ears.  At 
night  these  trees  in  full  bloom  became  indistinguishable  from 
the  Tilaka  trees  in  bloom,  thanks  to  the  lustre  of  the  moon. 
Herds  of  deer  lay  under  the  cool  shade  of  the  trees,  some 
sleeping  and  some  awake.  Some  of  these  deer  had  completely 
nibbled  the  tips  of  the  Durva  grass. 

24.  The  clear  waters  of  the  lakes  were  spreading  out  due 
to  the  moving  lotuses  which  were  set  in  motion  by  the  wind 
from  the  fluttering  of  the  wings  of  swans.  Flocks  of*  peacocks 
danced  elegantly  on  seeing  the  plantain  trees  on  the  banks  of 
these  lakes  set  in  motion  by  the  waters  coming  to  their  roots. 
The  lands  in  some  places  appeared  beautiful  due  to  the  eyelets 
on  the  feathers  strewn  on  the  ground  from  the  tails  of  these 
peacocks.  In  these  spots,  inebriate  pigeons  and  doves  of  the 
species  called  “Harita**  lurked  leisurely  and  rejoiced. 

25.  In  some  places  the  spots  were  beautified  by  the 
Sarahga  (flamingo)  birds.  Some  places  were  covered  with 


Gloty  of  Sriiaila 


489 

heaps  of  flowers  of  variegated  colour.  At  other  places  the 
delighted  Kinnara  ladies  played  sweet  songs  on  their  lutes  and 
danced. 

26.  The  trees  thickly  growing  there  harboured  the  resi- 
dences of  the  sages  beneath  them,  with  flowers  strewn  around. 
In  some  places  the  garden  contained  a lot  of  Jack  trees,  tall  and 
spreading  all  round,  with  fruits  growing  from  their  very 
bottom. 

27.  The  garden  looked  charming  and  resonant  with  the 
sounds  of  the  golden  anklets  of  the  Siddhas  and  the  Siddha 
women  resorting  to  the  grottos  of  Atimuktaka  creepers  in  full 
bloom.  The  bees  eagerly  hovered  round  the  bunches  of  flowers 
of  the  charming  Priyahgu  trees.  Swarms  of  bees  imbibed  honey 
from  the  flowers  of  the  mango  and  Kadamba  trees. 

28.  The  garden  which  bestows  salvation  on  embodied 
beings  looked  charming  with  the  water  in  the  ponds  gently 
shaken  by  the  breeze  and  strewn  with  clusters  of  flowers.  The 
fascinating  hedges  with  bees  humming  therein  beautified  the 
garden.  Herds  of  doves  which  got  suddenly  frightened  by  the 
gusts  of  wind  took  shelter  within  the  thickets  there. 

29.  The  garden  was  heightened  in  beauty  by  the  charm- 
ing Tilaka  trees  as  brindled  as  clusters  of  moon’s  rays; 
by  the  A§oka  trees  resembling  saffron  of  the  various  types  such 
as  Sindura,  Kuxhkuma  and  Kusumbha  and  by  the  Kar^ikHra 
trees  having  the  lustre  of  gold.  These  trees  had  large  spreading 
branches  and  were  in  full  bloom  with  plenty  of  flowers. 

30.  The  ground  was  covered  with  flowers  of  various 
colours.  In  some  places  they  had  the  lustre  of  powdered  col- 
iyrium;  in  some  places  they  resembled  coral  and  in  other  places 
they  were  like  gold. 

31.  Hundreds  of  birds  chirped  on  the  Punnaga  trees. 
The  red  A^oka  trees  bent  down  due  to  the  weight  of  bunches 
of  flowers.  There  were  rest  houses  on  the  charming  outskirts  of 
the  garden  and  they  dispelled  fatigue.  The  bees  danced  spor- 
tively on  the  full-blown  lotuses. 

32.  Accompanied  by  the  daughter  of  the  mountain  with 
snow-clad  peaks,  as  wdl  as  by  the  friendly  leaders  of  Ganias 
who  were  intoxicated,  delighted,  and  well  nourished  with  food, 
lord  Siva,  the  ruler  of  all  the  worlds,  thus  pointed  out  the 


UngapurSinta 

extremely  charming  and  extensive  garden  of  trees  of  diverse 
kinds,  to  the  goddess. 

33.  With  divine  ornaments  evolved  out  of  the  most  auspi- 
cious flowers  of  the  forest,  Siva  decorated  the  divine  goddess 
who  was  present  in  the  garden.  The  daughter  of  the  snow- 
capped mountain  also  devoutly  embellished  Siva  the  lord  of 
Devas  with  divine  flowers  that  were  exceedingly  auspicious  and 
beautiful. 

34.  After  seeing  the  extremely  charming  garden,  after 
worshipping  the  lord  worthy  of  being  worshipped  by  the 
leaders  of  the  gods  and  after  bowing  down  to  the  lord  who  was 
accompanied  by  the  leading  Ganas,  Nandin  and  others  the 
goddess  spoke  to  the  lord. 

The  exalted  goddess  said: 

35.  O lord,  the  garden  equipped  with  excessive  lustre  has 
been  seen  by  me.  It  behoves  you  now  to  recount  all  the  quali- 
ties of  this  holy  centre. 

36.  O lord  of  Devas,  O bull-emblemed  lord  it  behoves  you 
now  to  recount  the  glory  of  this  holy  centre,  Avimukta  in 
every  respect. 

S&ta  said: 

37.  O hearing  those  words  of  the  goddess  the  excellent 
lord,  the  lord  of  Devas  smelt  her  lotus-like  face.  Then  he 
laughingly  spoke  to  her. 

The  lord  said: 

38.  This  extremely  mysterious  holy  centre  of  mine,  viz. 
Varaigias!  is  the  hidden  cause  of  the  liberation  of  all  creatures. 

39.  O fair  lady,  many  Siddhas  have  adopted  my  Vrata 
in  this  holy  centre.  They  have  taken  up  different  types  of 
Lingas  and  they  always  desire  my  world. 

40-41.  They  are  saintly  souls  one  with  the  supreme  spirit. 
They  have  conquered  their  sense-organs.  They  practise  the 
greatest  yoga  in  this  garden  abounding  in  different  trees  and 
birds  and  embellished  by  lakes  abounding  in  lotus  and  lily 
flowers.  This  holy  place  is  always  resorted  to  by  Apsarases  and 
Gandharvas. 

42-43.  Why  this  residence  appeals  to  me,  listen.  One 


Glory  of  SrUaila 


491 


whose  mind  is  fixed  in  me,  one  who  is  devoted  to  me,  one  who 
has  always  dedicated  his  holy  rites  to  me  does  not  attain 
liberation  anywhere  else  in  the  same  manner  as  here.  O fair 
lady,  a creature  that  dies  here  becomes  competent  to  attain 
salvation. 

44-47.  This  great  and  divine  city  of  mine  is  the  most  mys- 
terious of  all  mysterious  places.  Brahma,  Siddhas  and  others 
who  are  desirous  of  liberation  know  this.  The  goal  in  me  is 
the  greatest  one.  Hence,  this  holy  centre  will  never  be  aban-* 
doned  by  me  nor  has  it  been  eschewed  by  me.  This  holy  centre, 
therefore,  is  known  as  Avimukta.*®*  Absolution  is  not  obtained 
by  taking  dip  in  Naimi§a,®®*  Kuruk^etra,®®’  Gangadvara®*® 
and  Pu§kara®^®  nor  by  resorting  to  these.  But  it  is  obtained 
here.  Hence,  this  excels  all  those  holy  centres. 

48.  Liberation  may  be  achieved  either  at  Prayaga  or  here, 
thanks  to  my  adopting  them.  This  Avimukta  is  more  auspicious 
than  even  Prayaga  which  is  the  foremost  of  all  holy  centres. 

49.  Truthfulness  is  the  esoteric  principle  underlying  vir- 
tue; self-control  is  the  esoteric  principle  underlying  salvation: 
but  excellent  learned  men  do  not  know  the  esoteric  principle 
underlying  holy  centres  and  sacred  waters. 

50.  Taking  food,  sleeping,  sporting  and  performing  dif- 
ferent activities  as  one  pleases,  one  shall  cast  off  one’s  vital  airs 
in  Avimukta.  The  creature  is  then  competent  to  achieve  libera- 
tion. 

51.  For  men  it  is  better  to  commit  thousands  of  sins  and 
court  Pi^acahood  than  to  become  Indra  in  thousands  of  births 
without  resorting  to  the  city  of  Kail. 

52.  Hence,  Avimukta  should  be  resorted  to  for  achieving 
salvation.  It  is  here  that  Jaigifavya®*®  of  great  penance  attained 
Siddhi. 

53.  The  excellent  cave  of  Jaigi§avya  is  purified,  thanks  to 

855.  Avimukta--See  p.  117  note  198,  For  a dilFerent  interpretation 
of  the  name,  see  verse  143  of  this  chapter. 

856.  Naimifa — Seep.  1 note 4. 

857.  Kuruk^tra  See  p.  381  note  683. 

858*  Gaag&dvSra— See  p.  93  note  107. 

859.  Pufkara— p.  381  note  685. 

860.  Jaigfsavyab — an  ancient  sage  (named  along  vrith  Asita  Devala), 
Mbh.  ii,  ix,  zii.  There  is  a lihga  Jaigifavyeivara  in  V&r&ii)asi. 


492  Lingupurdna 

the  glory  of  this  holy  centre  and  by  means  of  devotion  to  me. 
It  is  considered  to  be  the  abode  of  yogins. 

54.  They  always  meditate  upon  me  at  this  place.  The 
yogic  fire  shines  brilliantly  here.  They  attain  the  greatest 
salvation  which  is  inaccessible  even  to  Devas. 

55.  Here  itself,  salvation  is  attained  by  the  sages  who 
have  the  unmanifest  for  their  symbols  and  who  know  the  basic 
tenets.  It  is  difficult  of  access  anywhere  else. 

56.  To  them  I expound  the  excellent  glory  of  the  yogic 
practice,  the  Sayujya  type  of  salvation  of  the  Atman  as  well  as 
the  desired  abode. 

57.  Kubera®*^  dedicated  his  holy  rites  to  me  at  this  holy 
centre.  It  is  by  having  recourse  to  this  holy  centre  that  he 
attained  the  leadership  of  the  Ga^as. 

58.  Saihvarta*®*  who  is  yet  to  be  born  will  be  my  devotee. 
O fair  lady,  propitiating  me  here  alone  he  will  attain  excellent 
perfection. 

59.  The  yogin  sage  Vyasa,®**  son  of  Para^ara,  will  be 
performing  here  a great  penance.  He  will  be  my  devotee  and 
he  will  inaugurate  the  institution  of  the  Vedas. 

60-61.  O lotus-eyed  lady,  that  leading  sage  will  be  spor- 
ting about  in  this  holy  centre.  Brahma  along  with  the  divine 
sages,  Visnu,  Sun,  Indra  and  all  other  noble-souled  heaven- 
dwellers  do  worship  me  here,  O lady  of  good  holy  rites. 

62.  Other  divine  yogins,  noble  souls  in  disguise,  worship 
me  here  always  with  their  minds  not  turning  to  anything  ebe. 

63.  Even  a man  whose  mind  is  attracted  by  mundane 
affairs  and  who  has  eschewed  interest  in  religious  piety  may 
not  be  reborn  in  this  world  if  he  dies  at  this  holy  centre. 

64.  But  those  who  arc  bold  and  free  from  ego,  who  main- 
tain the  Sattva  Guna,  who  have  conquered  their  sense-organs, 

86x  • Kubera—also  named  Vax^rava^a.  He  is  of  deformed  body  (Ku- 
bera) , having  three  legs  and  only  eight  teeth.  He  is  regarded  as  the  son  of 
Vikavas  by  I^avi^g.  He  is  represented  as  the  god  of  riches  and  treasure.  He 
is  the  regent  of  the  northern  quarter,  the  chief  of  the  Yakffas  and  a friend  of 
Rudra. 

862.  Saxhvarta — a muni  and  legislator.  There  are  references  to 
Saxhvarta-smrti  and  Brhat-iaxhvarta-smrti  in  smrti  works. 

863 . Vy&sa — Sec  p.  2.  note  6. 


Glory  of  SrUaila 


493 


who  maintain  holy  rites  and  who  have  eschewed  unholy  ones 
— all  these  have  their  emotional  attachment  to  me. 

65.  Resorting  to  me,  all  the  intelligent  persons  devoid  of 
attachment  have  attained  salvation  here  due  to  my  favour,  O 
lady  of  holy  rites. 

66.  Thanks  to  my  favour,  O lady  of  holy  rites,  one  attains 
salvation  easily  here  itself  which  a yogin  might  attain  in  the 
course  of  thousand  births. 

67.  This  holy  centre  Goprek^ka  has  been  formerly  esta- 
blished by  Brahma.  O excellent  lady,  sec  the  divine  abode 
Kailasa  here. 

68.  Going  to  Gopreksaka  the  man  shall  visit  me  here. 
Thereby,  he  avoids  evil  mishaps  and  is  released  forthwith  from 
sins. 

69.  The  great  holy  Tirtha  named  Kapilahrada  has  been 
made  here  by  Brahma.  This  Tirtha,  evolved  out  of  the  milk 
from  the  udders  of  cows,  is  extremely  holy  and  sacred. 

70.  Here  I am  known  as  the  bull-bannered  lord.  O 
gentle  lady,  I am  present  here  as  seen  by  you. 

71-72.  See  the  deep  pool  of  water  here  made  by  Brahm^. 
It  is  named  Bhadratoya  (having  auspicious  waters).  O gentle 
lady,  I have  been  propitiated  in  this  place  by  all  Devas  saying 
‘^Be  subdued,  O lord”  and  I became  calm.  I have  been 
brought  by  Brahma  Parame$thin  and  installed  here. 

73.  I was  seized  by  Vi  ^nu  from  Brahma  and  re-installed 
by  him.  Then  Vi^nu  was  addressed  by  Brahma  with  a dejected 
mind. 

74.  “This  Lihga  has  been  brought  by  me.  Wherefore  have 
you  installed  it.”  Wi^i^u  then  said  to  Brahma,  with  anger  evident 
in  his  face. 

75.  “My  devotion  to  lord  Rudra  is  extremely  great  and 
noble.  Although  the  Lihga  has  been  installed  by  me  it  will  be 
known  after  your  name.” 

76.  Therefore,  I have  occupied  this  place  by  the  name  of 
Hiranyagarbha.  Man  shall  visit  this  lord  of  Devas  and  attain 
my  world  thereby. 

77.  Thereafter,  Brahma  who  was  equipped  with  the 
greatest  devotion  once  again  duly  installed  this  auspiciotis 
Lihga  of  mine. 


494 


Lingapura^a 


78.  I am  known  here  as  Svarllne^vara  (the  lord  who  has 
merged  into  the  heaven).  I have  come  here  voluntarily.  A 
man  who  gives  up  his  life  here  is  not  reborn  anywhere. 

79-80.  That  goal  is  not  attained  by  any  one  else.  It  is  what 
is  known  as  the  goal  of  yogins.  In  this  place  a haughty  power- 
ful Daitya  who  was  a thorn  to  Devas,  was  killed  by  me  after 
assuming  the  form  of  a tiger.  I am  perpetually  settled  here  and 
am  well  known  as  VyaghreSvara  (Tiger-Lord) . 

81-82.  By  visiting  Vyaghre^vara  one  will  avoid  courting 
disaster.  There  were  two  Daityas  Utpala®®*  and  Vidala®®®  who 
were,  as  ordained  by  Brahma  previously,  destined  to  be  killed 
by  a lady.  They  were  therefore  killed  by  you  in  a battle  with  a 
ball  contemptuously  thrown  at  them.  Their  bodies  have  occu- 
pied this  place. 

83.  It  was  here  that  I came  and  settled  at  the  outset  along 
with  the  leaders  of  the  Ganas.  Hence,  this  is  the  greatest  abode 
of  mine.  Its  vision  is  conducive  to  merit. 

84.  These  Lihgas  have  been  installed  all  round  by  Devas. 
Hence,  by  visiting  the  lord  in  Lihgas  man  shall  invariably  be  a 
Gana  when  he  dies. 

83-86.  Realising  that  this  place  is  pleasing  and  beneficial 
to  me  a Lihga  has  been  established  by  your  father  Himavan, 
the  king  of  mountains.  It  is  known  as  Saile^vara.  May  this  be 
seen  with  respect.  O gentle  lady,  by  visiting  this  no  men  shall 
court  disaster  or  become  wretched. 

87.  O gentle  lady,  this  river  Varuna  is  holy.  It  liberates 
one  from  sins.  It  embellishes  this  holy  centre  and  becomes 
united  with  the  Ganges. 

88.  An  excellent  Lihga  has  been  installed  by  Brahma  at 
this  confluence.  It  is  known  in  the  world  as  Sahgame^vara, 
(lord  of  the  confluence) . 

89.  If  a man  shall  become  pure  taking  his  bath  at  the 
confluence  of  the  divine  river  and  then  worship  SahgameiSa 
whence  need  he  fear  rebirth  ? 

90.  I consider  this  great  holy  centre  as  the  exalted  abode 
of  the  yogins,  I am  self-bom  in  the  centre  of  this  holy  spot 
occupying  the  acme  of  the  same. 

864.  Utpala  and  Vidala— two  daityas  who  were  killed  by  Siva. 

865.  Vamoft — a sacred  river  which  joins  the  Gahges  at  Kkii  and  has 
given  name  to  Vftr&^esl* 


Glory  of  Srtiaila 


495 


91-92.  It  is  glorified  by  all  Devas  and  Asuras  as  Madhya- 
mesvara  (Lord  of  the  centre) . Indeed  this  is  the  abode  of 
Siddhas  who  observe  the  holy  rites  pertaining  to  me.  It  is  the 
abode  of  yogins  desirous  of  salvation  and  of  those  who  are 
interested  in  the  path  of  knowledge.  By  visiting  this  Madhya- 
mesana  one  will  not  bevail  one’s  birth. 

93-94.  This  Lihga  has  been  installed  by  §ukra  the  son  of 
Bhrgu.  It  is  named  Sukre^vara  and  is  worshipped  by  all  the 
Siddhas  and  immortal  beings.  By  visiting  this  deity  the  man 
who  has  self-control  is  immediately  liberated  from  all  sins. 
The  creature  that  dies  here  is  not  reborn  in  the  world. 

95-99.  Formerly,  an  Asura  who  was  a thorn  to  Devas  assumed 
the  form  of  a jackal.  The  jackal  was  not  capable  of  being  caught 
by  others  as  he  had  acquired  boons  from  Brahma.  O daughter 
of  Himavan,  he  was  killed  by  me  here  and  so  I am  called 
Jambuke^a  even  today.  I am  known  as  such  bowed  to  by 
Devas  and  Asuras.  By  visiting  this  lord  of  Devas  one  shall 
attain  all  cherished  desires.  These  Lihgas  have  been  installed 
by  the  planets  beginning  with  Sukra.  Sec  these  sacred  Lihgas 
that  bestow  all  cherished  desires.  Thus,  O Parvati,  these 
sacred  Lihgas  wherein  I reside  have  been  recounted.  Listen 
to  another  esoteric  secret  of  mine  in  this  holy  centre.  This 
is  glorified  as  extending  to  four  Kronas  in  every  direction. 

100-101.  O lady  of  charming  features,  this  place  exten- 
ding to  a yojana  bestows  immortality  after  death.  Know, 
that,  by  visiting  me  stationed  in  the  Mahalaya  mountain  and 
in  Kedara,  one  attains  the  state  of  being  a Gana.  Salvation  is 
obtained  in  this  place.  That  liberation  is  excellent  since  one 
attains  the  headship  of  Ganas. 

102.  O lady  of  excellent  face,  this  Avimukta  is  known 
as  the  most  sacred  holy  centre  greater  than  even  Mahalaya, 
Kedara  and  Madhyama. 

103.  These  holy  centres  are  sacred  in  the  Bhurloka  (earth) 

: — viz.  Kedara,  Madhyama  K^etra  and  the  holy  spot  Maha- 
laya. This  Avimukta  is  more  sacred  than  all  these. 

104.  Ever  since  these  worlds  have  been  created,  this 
auspicious  holy  centre  has  never  been  abandoned  by  me.  Hence 
it  became  Avimukta  (un-abandoned).®®*a 

865a.  For  a different  interpretation  of  the  name,  see  p.  498,  verse  143. 


496 


Lingapura^ 


105.  By  visiting  the  Lihga  named  AvimukteiSvara  the 
man  is  immediately  liberated  from  sins.  He  is  liberated  from 
the  bondages  of  jiva. 

106-108.  By  visiting  all  these  holy  centres,  viz Saile^a, 
Sahgame^a,  Svarlina,  Madhyame^vara,  Hiranyagarbha,  Gopr- 
eksa,  Vrsadhvaja  Upa^anta  Siva  (?)  the  deity  residing  in 
Jyesthasthana,  Sukresvara,  VyaghreiSa  and  Jambuke^vara 
a man  is  not  born  again  in  the  world  which  is  the  ocean  of 
misery. 

SUta  said: 

After  saying  thus,  Mahadeva  surveyed  all  the  quarters. 

109.  When  Mahesvara  the  lord  of  Devas  stopped  after 
surveying,  that  place  suddenly  became  blazing  as  it  were. 

110-114.  Then  hundreds  of  Siddhas  who  were  devotees 
of  Pa^upati,  who  were  white  by  being  bathed  in  ashes,  who 
were  great  souls  devoted  to  MahetSvara  and  who  invariably  obs- 
erved holy  rites  came  there  and  bowed  down  to  Mahesvara.  They 
then  observed  the  lord  of  the  yogas  and  adopted  Dhyanayoga 
(path  of  meditation)  assiduously.  They  took  to  the  support  of 
the  Atman  and  stationed  themselves  as  though  they  would 
merge  into  Mahesvara.  Even  as  they  stood  by,  the  consort  of 
Uma,  the  lord  of  Devas,  the  lord  Purusa  assumed  the  greatest 
of  his  physical  forms.  He  stood  as  though  towards  the  close 
of  the  worlds  in  order  to  make  the  entire  universe  present 
in  one  place.  With  hairs  standing  on  their  ends  due  to  her 
delight,  the  daughter  of  the  lord  of  the  mountains  could  not 
look  at  the  lord  of  the  universe  who  had  assumed  the  greatest 
of  his  physical  forms. 

115-118.  Then  she  understood  that  that  form  which  had 
not  been  seen  before  was  stationed  in  Prakrti,  and  so  ParameS- 
vari  adopted  the  form  of  the  Prakrti  by  means  of  yoga.  Then 
she  could  see  the  form  of  the  noble  soul.  Then  the  yogins 
engaged  in  the  meditation  of  merging  (laya)  entered  the 
heart  of  the  Puru§a.  They  burnt  all  the  seeds  of  mundane 
existence  by  remembering  the  splendid  Bija  of  the  five-syllabled 
Mantra.  Then  the  Lord  established  his  divine  and  holy  form 
which  dispels  all  sins  and  which  had  been  revealed  formerly 
in  this  Nilalohita  image. 

119-121.  On  seeing  him,  the  daughter  of  the  mountains 


Glory  of  SriSaila 


497 


had  horripilation  all  over  the  body.  She  bowed  down  to  his 
feet  and  eulogised  him.  Then  she  said: — “O  * lord,  who  are 
these  ?”  Then  the  most  excellent  one  among  Devas  spoke  to 
the  gentle  lady,  the  daughter  of  the  lord  of  the  mountains. 

The  lord  said: 

These  are  the  best  of  brahmins  who  possess  devotion  to  me 
and  who  resort  to  my  vrata  by  practising  all  yogas  that  they 
have  learnt.  O beautiful  lady,  thanks  to  the  greatness  of  this 
holy  centre  and  their  devotion  to  me,  they  arc  blessed  by  me 
through  this  physical  form  in  the  course  of  a single  birth. 

122-127.  Hence,  this  great  holy  centre  is  resorted  to  by 
Brahma  and  others,  by  leading  brahmins  well-versed  in  the 
Vedic  learning  and  by  ascetics  of  great  accomplishments. 
O goddess,  the  deity  is  worshipped  at  Varanasi  on  the  eighth 
and  fourteenth  day  in  both  the  fortnights  every  month.  It  is 
particularly  worshipped  on  solar  and  lunar  eclipse  days,  espe- 
cially in  the  month  of  Karttika,  during  all  full  moon  and  new 
moon  days,  and  during  equinoctial  and  solstitial  transits.  All 
the  Tirlhas  of  the  earth  resort  to  the  holy  Gahga  flowing  north 
at  Varanasi,  the  Gahga  that  flowed  out  of  my  matted  hairs, 
the  Gahga  that  is  the  daughter  of  your  father  Himavan  the 
king  of  mountains,  the  Gahga  that  is  stationed  in  the  holy 
abode  and  flows  towards  sacred  quarters  always.  O lady  of 
excellent  face,  what  are  these  Tirthas  ? Listen. 

128-133.  These  Tirthas  accompanied  by  hundreds  of 
Tirthas  flow  through  Kuruk§etra,  Puskara,  Naimisa,  Prayaga 
where  there  is  plenty  of  water,  and  Drumaksetra.  O 
fair  lady,  they  flow  through  all  the  holy  centres  all  round. 
The  deities,  sages,  Sandhyas,  seasons,  rivers,  lakes,  oceans 
and  the  divine  Tirthas  join  Gahga  during  the  Parvan 
days.  O lady  of  good  holy  rites,  O goddess  of  Devas,  by  visiting 
Avimuktesvara  and  Trivistapa  and  reaching  Kalabhairava,  the 
holy  centre,  men  become  rid  of  their  sins  during  the  Parvans. 
The  sacred  rivers  of  the  earth  and  the  great  shrines  and  abodes 
enter  Gahga  at  Varanasi  in  the  course  of  holy  Parvans. 

134-139.  The  different  shrines  in  and  around  this  place 
are  as  follows:— Avimukta  is  the  most  excellent  holy 
centre.  It  dispels  great  sins.  The  Linga  that  is  at  Kedara, 


498 


Lingapurd^a 


the  Lihga  that  is  in  Mah^aya,®*®  the  MadhyameiSvara, 
the  Pa^pate^vara, , Sahkukai^esvara,  Gokarnarci,®®’  Druma- 
cancjesvara,  BhadreiSvara,  SthaneiSvara,®®®  Ekagra,  Kale^vara,®®® 
Aje^vara,  Bhairave^vara,  I|ana,  Oihkara,®®*a  Amare^a,®’® 
Mahakala,  the  Jyotirlihga,  Bhasmagatraka,  etc,  all  those  holy 
centres  of  mine  on  the  earth  numbering  sixtyeight  and  all 
other  well-established  shrines  come  to  me  at  Varanasi  during 
the  holy  Parvans.  Thus  the  mysterious  secret  has  been  revealed 
to  you. 

140.  Therefore,  the  creature  that  dies  here  attains  the 
divine  immortal*  region  if  he  takes  ablution  in  the  Gahga  and 
visits  me,  O auspicious  lady. 

141-143.  The  creature  immediately  obtains  a benefit 
equal  to  that  of  hundreds  and  thousands  of  sacrifices.  What  is 
more  wonderful  than  that  ? O fair  lady,  of  all  the  important 
shrines  on  the  earth  and  on  mountains,  Avimukta  is  the  grea- 
test. Understand  what  has  been  said  by  me.  The  sin  mentioned 
in  the  Vedas  is  recounted  by  brahmins  by  the  word  ‘‘Avi”. 
The  holy  centre  is  called  Avimukta  because  it  is  free  from  Avi 
(i.  e.  sin)®’^  and  resorted  to  by  me. 

144-147.  After  saying  this,  the  lord  of  all  the  worlds 
said — '‘O  goddess  of  Devas,  Avimukta  is  my  abode.  See  it  well.’* 
After  saying  this,  the  lord,  the  consort  of  Uma,  pointed  out 
the  excellent  Srlparvata  to  her.  He  stayed  at  Avimukte^vara 
permanently  along  with  her.  In  view  of  his  ability  to  go  every- 
where, the  lord  of  Devas,  the  soul  of  all,  identical  with  ‘Sat* 
and  ‘Asat’  came  to  Sriparvata  along  with  the  goddess.  He,  the 
lord  of  all  living  beings,  pointed  out  to  her  the  following  holy 
centres  and  idols: 

148-155.  Kundlprabha;  the  great  and  divine  Vai^ravane^- 
vara;  A^alihga;  Deve^a;the  divine Bale^ vara;  the  great  Rames- 

866.  Mahalaya—This  peak  of  the  Himalayas  has  not  been  identified 
so  far. 

867.  Gokar^a — See  p.  94  note  1 13. 

868.  Sthfine^vara  -See  p.  144  note  ^50. 

869.  Kale^vara — the  same  at  Mah&k&Ieivara  in  Ujjayini,  mod. 
Ujjain,  Greek  Ozene. 

870.  Amareia  -the  same  as  Omkfireivara  in  Oihkara  M^ndhata  in 
the  Nimar  district,  Madhya  Pradesh. 

87 1 . Avimuktaka — ^For  a different  interpretation  of  the  name,  see 
verses  104- 105  of  this  chapter. 


Glory  of  SrUaila 


499 


vara®^^a  that  had  been  installed  by  Visnu;  lord  Kundaleivara 
at  the  sides  of  the  southern  gate;  the  excellent  Tripurantaka 
stationed  near  the  eastern  gate;  the  idol  that  increased  in  size 
along  with  the  mountain  and  was  bowed  to  by  the  chiefs  of 
Devas;  what  is  well  known  in  the  three  worlds  as  Madhya- 
ine^vara;  AmareiSvara  the  bestower  of  boons,  formerly  installed 
by  Devas;  lord  Gocarmesvara;  the  wonderful  shrine  Indreil- 
vara;  the  large  idol  Karme^vara  installed  by  Brahma  on 
purpose.  O unchanging  lady,  the  holy  Siddhavata  is  my  per- 
petual  residence.  The  divine  splendid  Ajabila  is  consecrated  by 
Aja  himself;  there  itself  in  my  divine  Bileivara  are  my  divine 
sandals.  In  the  middle  of  the  mountain  l^rhgata  is  the  idol 
^rhgatakesvara  installed  by  Sridevl.  It  is  in  the  shape  of 
iSrhgataka.  Mallikarjuna  is  my  splendid  residence. 

156-157.  The  shrine  Raje^vara  is  installed  in  succession 
by  means  of  Rajas;  the  Gaje^vara,  the  VaiiSakha  idol,  the 
unchanging  Kapotel^ vara;  O fair  lady,  see  now  the  splendid 
great  Tirtha  Kotisvara,  which  was  formerly  resorted  to  by 
crores  of  the  Ganas  of  Rudra  and  which  is  superior  to  all 
the  other  shrines. 

158.  A splendid  rocky  idol  was  installed  by  Brahma  in  the 
south  and  another  was  installed  in  the  north  by  Visnu. 
Both  these  together  constitute  the  shrine  called  Dvidevakula. 

159.  See,  on  the  western  mountain  a Lihga  of  huge  size 
had  been  installed  by  me  formerly.  It  is  called  Brahmesvara, 
Malcsvara. 

160.  A shrine  is  remembered  by  the  name  Alarhgrha.  The 
lord  said  thus: — ‘‘O  Brahma,  this  has  been  embellished  by  you 
at  the  outset,  along  with  the  sages.”  After  saying  this  he  stayed 
in  the  house.  Hence,  the  shrine  came  to  be  known  as  Alarh- 
gfha. 

161.  O lady  conversant  with  the  Tirthas,  see  there  is  a 
Tirtha  and  a Vyomalihga  of  mine  there  also.  This  is  called 
Kadambesvara,  installed  by  Skanda  himself. 

162-164.  The  shrine  Gomancjale^vara  is  installed  by 
Nanda  and  others.  O lady  of  excellent  face,  sec  these  holy 
spots  and  shrines  installed  by  Indra  and  his  Devas  on  the 

871a.  Rfimeivara— one  of  the  twelve  great  liAgas  set  up  by  RAma 
at  RSmeivaram,  Deccan  BhSrata.  It  is  a celebrated  place  of  pilgrimage  and 
contains  a magnificent  temple. 


500 


Lingapurana 


borders  of  Devahrada.  O fair  lady,  in  the  place  where  your 
necklace  fell  down  in  H^apura,^^^  the  sacred  pit  ofHSrakund^ 
has  been  made  by  you  for  the  welfare  of  human  beings.  O 
lady  of  good  holy  rites,  in  Sivarudrapura,  the  idol  Acale^vara 
has  been  installed  by  your  father  on  the  mountain. 

165-169.  Formerly,  the  Brahman  was  embellished  by  me 
along  with  the  sages.  O fair  lady,  the  shrine 
vara  is  evolved  by  Caridika — Ca^dike^a  is  your  daughter— 
This  spot  is  the  excellent  Ambika  Tirtha. 

The  shrine  Rueikesvara  is  here.  This  splendid  Dhara 
(current  of  water)  is  tawny-coloured.  O fair  lady,  the  devotee 
who  worships  me  devoutly  in  these  different  holy  centres  and 
Tirthas,  shall  rejoice  with  me.  The  brahmin  who  abandons 
his  body  on  SrHaila  destroys  his  all  sins.  Undoubtedly  he  is 
liberated  in  the  same  splendid  manner  as  in  the  holy  centre 
Avimukta.  O lady  of  good  holy  rites,  he  who  duly  performs 
the  great  holy  rite  of  ablution  named  Mahasnana  by  means 
of  ghee  in  these  holy  shrines  and  spots  attains  identity  with  me. 

170-174.  If  the  ablution  is  made  with  twentyfive  Palas 
of  the  sacred  material  of  worship  it  should  be  known  as  Abh- 
yahga;  if  it  is  with  a hundred  Palas,  it  should  be  known  as 
Snana.  Two  thousand  Palas  of  the  material  are  said  to  consti- 
tute a Mahasnana  (great  ablution) . The  devotee  bathes  my 
Lihga  at  the  outset  with  cow’s  ghee.  Then  he  consecrates 
it  with  the  other  materials.  Thereafter  he  washes  with  water. 
The  benefit  of  a hundred  Yajfias  is  attained  by  the  mere  rite 
of  wiping  off  the  Lihga;  by  bathing  it  the  benefit  of  ten  thou- 
sand sacrifices  is  attained;  by  worship  the  benefit  of  hundred 
thousand  sacrifices  is  obtained.  The  benefit  of  those  who  sing 
and  play  on  instruments  of  music  is  infinite.  By  means  of 
the  great  bath  eight  times  the  benefit  of  bath  is  acquired.  If 
the  devotee  wishes  to  perform  the  rite  of  ablution  by  means  of 
water  alone  he  shall  do  so  by  means  of  fragrant  scented  water 
with  devotion.  The  unguent  in  every  case  is  by  means  of 
twentyfive  Palas  of  the  material  used. 

175.  The  devotee  shall  use  Sami  flower,  Bilva  leaves  and 
lotuses  duly.  He  can  use  other  flowers  also  but  he  shall  not 
abandon  the  Bilva  leaf. 


872.  H&rapura — not  identifiable. 


Glory  of  iSrUaila 


501 


1 76.  He  shall  worship  Mahadeva  with  four  measures  or 
eight  Dronas  of  flowers  etc.  The  Naivedya  (food  offering) 
shall  be  ten  Dro:^as  or  eight  Dronas. 

177.  If  the  devotee  is  a brahmin  devoid  of  wealth,  he 
attains  the  same  benefit  and  merit  as  with  the  worship  of  a 
hundred  Dronas  even  when  he  worships  only  with  an  Adhaka 
measure.  No  doubt  need  be  entertained  in  this  respect. 

178-184.  The  devotee  shall  keep  awake  during  the  night 
by  playing  on  various  musical  instruments  such  as  Bheri, 
Mfdahga,  Muraja,Timira,  Pataha,  etc.  He  shall  effect  other 
types  of  sounds  too.  He  shall  duly  pray.  Accompanied  by  his 
servants,  sons,  wife,  relatives  and  kinsmen  he  shall  circumam- 
bulate the  excellent  Lihga  and  pray  thus: — 

“O  lord  of  Devas,  O Sankara,  it  behoves  you  to  forgive  all 
my  sins.  Forgive  me  if  my  worship  is  devoid  of  the  requisite 
materials,  faith  and  rites.” 

After  saying  this  he  shall  immediately  perform  the  Japa  of 
Tvarita  Rudra  and  other  Santi  mantras.  He  shall  then  repeat 
the  Bija  of  the  five-syllabled  mantra.  He  attains  the  same 
benefit  as  is  obtained  by  visiting  the  holy  centres  and  perform- 
ing the  sacrifices.  He  attains  the  same  goal  as  one  who  dies  in 
Varanasi.  Similarly,  he  shall  undoubtedly  attain  Sayujya 
(identity  with  me) . For  the  sake  of  propitiating  me,  these  rites 
should  be  performed  duly  by  my  devotees.  If  they  neglect, 
certainly  they  are  not  my  devotees. 

SUta  said: 

185-188.  On  hearing  these  words,  the  goddess  went  to 
Varanasi.  She  bathed  the  Linga  Avimukte^vara  with  milk  and 
ghee.  She  worshipped  Rudra  the  lord  of  Devas,  the  leader  of 

the  worlds.  On  the  Mandara  mountain  (?)  in  Avimukta  she 

propitiated  the  great  Atman  by  means  of  penance.  She  built 
a shrine  on  the  Mandara  that  has  beautiful  caves.  It  was  here 
that  the  lord  blessed  the  great  daitya  Andhaka,  the  son  of 
Hiratiyak§a.  Sportively  he  blessed  him  with  the  offer  of  Gana- 

hood.  j . j -1 

Thus  the  entire  story  has  been  recounted  to  you  in  deuil. 

189-190.  He  who  reads  or  listens  to  the  glory  of  the 
shrines  shall  immediately  attain  those  merits  which  one  attaim* 
by  visiting  holy  centres.  He  shall  narrate  this  to  all  the  brah- 


502 


Lingapurdna 


mins  who  are  clean  in  body  and  mind  and  who  have  conque- 
red their  sense-organs.  That  man  alone  shall  attain  the  benefit 
of  all  sacrifices. 


CHAPTER  NINETYTHREE 

The  Narrative  of  the  Asura  Andhaka 


The  sages  said  : — 

1-5.  How  did  the  leading  Daitya  named  Andhaka  obtain 
the  chieftaincy  of  the  Ga^as  from  Mahe^vara  after  being  sub- 
dued in  the  Mandara  mountain  with  many  charming  caves  ? It 
behoves  you  to  recount  it  in  the  manner  it  happened  and  in 
the  way  you  have  heard. 

Sgta  said  : 

I shall  succinctly  mention  how  Andhaka  was  blessed,  how  he 
was  dessicated  on  the  Mandara  mountain  and  how  he  attained 
boons.  I shall  mention  everything  briefly.  Formerly  a son  was 
born  to  Hira^iyak^a.  He  was  comparable  to  Hira:^yanayana 
(i.e.  his  father  in  prowess).  He  was  well  known  as  Andhaka. 
By  means  of  penance  he  attained  great  prowess.  Thanks  to  the 
grace  of  Brahma,  he  attained  immunity  from  death.  He  enjoy- 
ed the  whole  of  the  three  worlds.  Formerly,  he  conquered  the 
city  of  Indra  sportively  and  terrified  Indra  without  any  strain. 

6.  All  Devas,  Narayana  and  others  were  oppressed,  beaten, 
bound  and  struck  down  by  him.  They  became  frightened  and 
entered  Mandara. 

7.  After  afflicting  Devas  thus,  Andhaka  the  great  Asura 
happened  to  come  casually  to  the  mountain  Mandara  with 
charming  caves. 

8.  Then  all  those  leading  Devas  including  Sadhyas, 
approached  Maheia,  the  lord  of  all  Devas  and  said  thus: — 

“We  have  been  split  and  pierced  by  the  weapons  of  And- 
haka, the  king  of  Daityas.  We  are  of  very  little  virility.  Hence, 
we  are  quickly  struck  and  split  in  every  limb. 

9-10.  On  hearing  thus  of  the  arrival  of  the  Daitya  through 
this  leading  Gaoas  the  lord  set  out  against  Andhaka.  At  that 


The  Narrative  of  the  Asura  Andhaka 


503 


place^  Indra,  the  lotus-born  Brahma,  Visinu  and  other  leading 
Devas  and  the  excellent  brahmins  shouted  victories  to  the  lord 
from  all  sides.  They  kept  their  joined  palms  on  their  crown  to 
show  their  reverence. 

11-13.  Reducing  the  entire  host  of  the  Asuras  to  ashes  in 
crores  and  hundreds  of  crores,  Mahadeva  pierced  Andhaka 
with  his  trident.  On  seeing  that  Andhaka  was  pierced  and  that 
his  coat  of  mail  of  sin  had  been  burnt,  Brahma,  shouted  in  joy 
after  bowing  down  to  li2i.  On  hearing  that  shout  Devas  bowed 
down  to  the  lord  and  shouted.  The  sages  danced.  The  Ganas 
rejoiced. 

14.  Then  Devas  showered  plenty  of  flowers  on  lord  Siva. 
The  whole  of  the  three  worlds  rejoiced  with  delight  and  shouted. 

15.  Transfixed  to  the  trident  and  burned  like  a dead  body 
in  fire  the  demon  assumed  Sattvika  emotions  and  thought  thus 
in  his  mind. 

16-19.  ‘Treviously,  lord  Mahe^vara  had  been  propitiated 
by  me  in  the  previous  birth  since  I have  been  burned  now  by 
Siva.  Hence,  this  has  come  to  pass.  Otherwise,  this  does  not  fit 
in.  He  who  remembers  Rudra  even  once  in  his  mind  at  the 
time  of  death  attains  identity  with  him.  Why  not  then  he  who 
remembers  many  times.  Brahma,  Visnu,  and  Devas  including 
Indra  seek  refuge  in  him.  One  shall  certainly  seek  refuge  in  him 
alone.”  After  thinking  thus,  Andhaka,  delighted  in  his  mind, 
eulogised  Siva,  IiSana  who  had  suppressed  him.  It  was  due  to 
the  weightiness  of  his  merit  that  Andhaka  could  eulogise  thus. 

20-21.  On  being  prayed  to  by  him,  lord  Siva,  the  lord  of 
Devas,  the  dispcllcr  of  dejection,  said  to  Andhaka  the  son  of 
Hiranyanetra,  who  was  fixed  to  the  tip  of  the  trident.  Glancing 
at  the  Danava,  the  lord  spoke  with  mercy. 

22.  ‘‘O  dear  one,  I am  delighted  with  you.  Welfare  unto 
you.  What  cherished  desire  of  yours  shall  I fulfil.  O leading 
Daitya,  O Andhaka,  choose  the  boons.  I am  known  as  the  best- 
ower  of  boons. 

23.  On  hearing  the  words  of  the  lord,  the  son  of  Hiraiiya- 
nayana  spoke  thus  to  Maheivara  in  words  choked  within,  due 
to  excess  of  delight. 

24.  O lord.  O Sankara,  the  dispeller  of  the  agony  of  your 


devotees,  O lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas,  I crave  for  your  devo- 
tion  if  a boon  is  to  be  given  unto  me.  O 14a,  be  pleased.” 

25-26.  On  hearing  the  words  of  Andhaka,  the  great  Atman, 
Bhava  of  great  lustre  granted  him  pure  devotion  which  is  diffi- 
cult of  access.  He  conferred  on  him  the  chieftancy  of  the 
Ganas.  The  leading  Devas  and  others  bowed  down  to  him  who 
had  been  thus  established  in  the  position  as  the  chieftain  of  the 
Ganas. 


CHAPTER  NINETYFOUR 

Uplifting  the  Earth 


The  sages  said: 

1-2.  How  was  his  father  the  terrible  demon  Hirai^yaksa, 
slain  by  Vi^^u  ? How  did  Vi^^u  assume  the  form  of  a Boar  ? 
How  did  his  horn  attain  the  status  of  an  ornament  of  Mahesa. 
O Suta,  it  behoves  you  to  narrate  all  this  to  us  in  detail. 

Siita  said: 

3.  The  brother  of  Hiranyaka^ipu  is  known  as  Hira^yak^a. 
He  was  comparable  to  Kala  the  destroyer.  He  was  the  father  of 
Andhaka  the  lord  of  the  Asuras. 

4.  This  leading  Daitya  defeated  all  Devas.  He  bound  the 
earth  that  has  the  lustre  of  blue  lotus  and  took  it  to  Nether 
regions.  He  made  it  his  prisoner. 

5-8.  Devas  including  Brahma  were  oppressed,  struck  and 
bound  by  this  cruel  leader  of  the  Daityas,  Hiranyaksa,  the 
strong  and  wicked  soul.  Their  facial  splendour  became  faded. 
They  bowed  down  their  heads  to  Vi^nu  who  formerly  had 
suppressed  crorcs  of  Daityas.  They  submitted  to  him  the  news 
about  the  imprisonment  of  the  earth.  On  hearing  this.  Lord 
Vi§rLU  assumed  the  form  of  Yajftavaraha®^*  as  at  the  time  of 
the  manifestation  of  the  Lihga.  With  the  tip  of  his  curved  fangs 
he  killed  Hirai^yak^a  the  leading  Daitya  of  great  strength.  After 

*873.  Yajfiavar&ha— The  boar4bnn  of  Vi99u.  On  the  symbolic 
interpretation  of  YajfiavarSha,  see  .4  Study,  PP*  3ii-334« 


uplifting  the  Earth 


505 


killing  him  along  with  other  Daityas,  the  lord  the  slayer  of  the 
Daityas  shone  splendidly. 

9-14.  Just  as  in  the  beginnings  of  kalpas  before,  he  enter- 
ed the  Nether  regions  and  brought  the  earth  out  of  the  ocean 
and  made  her  seated  on  his  lap.  Then  Brahma,  the  best  of 
Devas,  accompanied  by  Indra  and  others  eulogised  Visnu  the 
lord  of  Devas  with  words  choked  with  great  emotion. 

Obeisance  to  the  perpetual  Varaha  with  the  curved  fangs 
and  the  staff.  Obeisance  to  Narayana  who  is  identical  with  all. 
Obeisance  to  Brahman  the  greatest  Atman.  Obeisance  to  the 
maker  of  all.  Obeisance  to  the  holder  of  the  earth.  Obeisance 
to  the  slayer  of  the  enemies  of  Devas.  Obeisance  to  the  creator 
and  leader  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas  and  the  chastiser  of  all.  You 
are  Astamurii  (having  eight  cosmic  bodies)  . You  have  infinite 
forms.  You  arc  the  primordial  Deva.  You  are  known  as  Ananta 
(Eternal  Being).  Everything  has  been  created  by  you,  O lord 
of  Devas,  be  pleased,  O lord  of  the  worlds,  O Varaha,  O Visnu. 

O Visnu  the  fulfiller  of  our  desires,  all  the  important  Daityas 
were  killed  in  a trice  by  you  with  half  of  a hundred  millionth 
part  of  the  tip  of  one  of  your  curved  fangs,  along  with  their 
sons  and  servants. 

15.  O lord  of  earth,  the  earth  was  lifted  up  by  you  and 
held  at  the  tip  of  your  curved  fangs,  O lord,  having  the  lustre 
of  clouds,  O lotus-faced  God,  served  by  all  the  people,  all  the 
mountains,  all  the  oceans,  and  by  all  Devas  and  Asuras. 

16.  O lord,  it  was  by  you  alone  that  the  victory  of  the 
Devas  was  brought  about.  Ha  ! a boon  has  been  given; 
the  goddess  of  speech  has  been  bestowed  on  the  lotus-born  deity, 
O lord,  be  pleased. 

17.  All  the  leading  immortal  beings  find  a place  in  your 
hairs;  the  moon  and  the  sun  in  your  eyes;  the  earth  that  had 
been  taken  to  the  nether  worlds  was  placed  at  the  pair  of  your 
feet.  All  the  constellations  find  a place  on  your  back. 

18.  O lord,  O preceptor  of  the  universe,  the  earth  that 
had  been  taken  to  the  cavity  of  the  nether  regions,  has  been 
uplifted  by  you  without  the  help  of  any  army,  for  the  welfare 
of  the  worlds.  Everything  has  been  held  by  you  alone. 

19.  Thus,  the  lord  of  speech,  Prajapati,  bowed  down  to 
Vi?nu  along  with  Devas  repeating  different  hymns  and  wor- 


506 


Lingapurd^a 


shipping  him  in  different  ways.  From  Visnu  he  (Brahma) 
obtained  different  boons.  He  was  himself  having  the  body 
originating  from  the  umbilical  lotus  of  Vis^u. 

20.  Devas  and  the  leading  sages  received  on  their  heads 
the  earth  that  had  been  uplifted  by  him.  In  the  presence  of 
the  discus-bearing  lord  they  kept  the  earth  on  their  heads  and 
bowled  down  to  him. 

21-22.  earth,  O bes tower  of  boons,  you  have  been 
fcdeemcd  by  this  Varaha  alone,  by  Krsna,  by  Vi§nu  who  has 
hundreds  of  hands  and  whose  activities  are  not  strained.  O 
earth,  you  are  highly  blessed.  O unchanging  one,  you  are  an 
extensive  being.  O earth,  you  are  the  supporter  of  all  the 
worlds.  Dispel  our  sins. 

23.  O lotus-eyed  bestower  of  boons,  it  is  by  your  favour 
that  we  live  after  our  sins  have  been  destroyed  by  you,  mentally, 
verbally  and  physically.*’ 

24-26a.  On  being  thus  addressed  by  Devas  the  earth  said : — 

“O  brahmins,  he  who  keeps  on  his  head  the  pinch  of  earth 
broken  by  the  curved  Fangs  of  Varaha,  repeating  this  Mantra, 
shall  be  liberated  from  sins.  He  shall  be  long-lived  and  strong. 
He  shall  be  blessed  with  sons  and  grandsons.  After  leaving  the 
earth  he  reaches  heaven  and  rejoices  along  with  Devas.  At  the 
end  of  his  Karman  he  returns  to  the  earth. 

26b-27.  When  Varaha  the  lord  had  gone  back  to  milk 
ocean  after  leaving  off  the  form  of  the  boar,  the  earth  shook 
again.  The  curved  fangs  of  intelligent  lord  of  Devas,  pressed 
down  by  the  weight  of  the  earth  fell  down  there. 

28-32.  Bhava,  the  lord  of  the  universe,  who  casually  went 
that  way,  saw  that  curved  fang  and  took  it  up  for  his  own 
embellishment.  Mahadeva  kept  it  on  his  head  as  well  as  on  his 
chest.  Devas  including  Indra  eulogised  Bhava,  the  lord  of 
Devas. 

The  earth  was  thus  stabilised  sportingly  by  the  lord  of 
Devas  during  dissolution.  If  the  lord  had  not  thus  decorated 
himself  with  parts  of  Vi§nu,  Brahma  and  other  Devas  sportingly 
how  could  the  brahmins  attain  satlvation.  Hence,  Mahesvara 
wears  curved  fang  (Dam^tra)  as  his  ornament. 


The  Exploits  of  Nrsiriiha  the  Mansion 


507 


CHAPTER  NINETYFIVE 

The  Exploits  of  Nrsirfiha  the  Man-lion 
The  sages  said  : 

1 . It  is  heard  that  Hiranyaka^ipu  the  elder  brother  of 
Hiranyaksa  was  formerly  killed  by  Nfsirnha.  How  was  he  killed 
by  him,  kindly  tell  us. 

Silt  a said'. 

2.  The  son  of  Hiranyakaiipu  was  known  by  the  name 
Prahlada.  He  was  conversant  with  virtue  endowed  with  truth- 
fulness, asceticism  and  intelligence. 

3-4.  Ever  since  his  birth  he  devoutly  worshipped  the 
unchanging  omniscient  Vi§nu  who  is  lord  of  Devas,  who  is  omni- 
present, who  is  the  cause  of  origin  of  all  Devas,  who  is  the 
primordial  Purusa,  who  l^as  the  form  of  Brahman,  who  is  the 
overlord  of  Brahma  and  who  is  the  cause  of  creation,  susten- 
ance and  annihilation. 

5-6.  The  enemy  of  Devas  saw  that  his  son  was  frequently 
repeating  “O  Govinda,  Obeisance  to  Naraya:^.’*  He  observed 
that  his  son  was  devoted  to  Visnu.  The  demon  of  sinful  intellect 
looked  at  his  son  as  though  he  would  burn  him  and  said : — 
“O  boy  of  wicked  intellect,  you  don’t  know  me  the  lord  of 
all  Daityas  as  well  as  Devas. 

7-8.  O heroic  Prahlada,  O my  wicked  son,  I am  the  cause 
of  agony  to  the  brahmins  as  well  as  Devas.  Who  is  Vi?nu  ? 
Who  is  lotus-born  (Brahma)  ? Who  is  Indra,  Varuna,  Vayu, 
Soma  (Moon),  Is  ana  or  Pavaka  (Fire)  to  be  considered  equal 
to  me  ? Worship  me  alone  with  devotion  and  never  the 
insignificant  Narayana, 

9-12.  O Prahlada,  listen  to  me  if  you  have  any  desire  to 
be  alive.” 

Even  after  hearing  the  threatening  words  of  Hiranyaka^ipu, 
the  intelligent  boy  Prahlada  worshipped  Vi§nu  and  uttered 
“O  Narayana  obeisance  to  you  Obeisance  to  NarSya^a”  He 
taught  all  the  Daitya  boys  the  same  excellent  Brahmavidya. 

Hira^yaka^ipu  saw  that  his  command  had  been  transgressed 
by  his  son,  the  command  that  could  not  be  transgressed  even 


