ANCIENT INDIAN 
tradition & MYTHOLOGY 


TRANS! ATED BY 

A BOARD OF SCHOLARS 



AND EDriED BY 

Prof. J. L, SHASTRI 


Volume 5 



ANCIENT INDIAN TRADITION & MYTHOLOGY 
SERIES 

Purifas Translated, Released or in Press 

VOLS : 

1,2,?.4SIVA PURANA (Complete) 

5,6 LiNGA PURA^A (Complete) 

73 , 9 , 10,11 BHAGAVATA PURAl ^ a (Complete) 

12,13,14 GARUPA PURAl^A (Complete) 

15,16,17,18,19 NARADA PURAI^A (Complete) 

20,21 KORMA PURAISA (Complete) 

PnrS^as nnder Translation 

AGNI 

BHAVI$YA 

BRAHMA 

BRAHMAI!1PA 

BRAHMAVAIVARTA 

DEVlBHAGAVATA 

KALIKA 

MARKAiypEYA 

MATSYA 

PADMA 

SKANDA 

VAMANA 

varAha 

VAYU 

VI5HU 



THE 


LING A-PURAN A 


TRANSLATED BY 

A BOARD OF SCHOLARS 


Part I 


“Gift 'n Raro Roy Library 

Poutiu.ui< ' 1 (.fe } M Scctvr-I, 

Saltlals;« LA[cii.'*. 700064. 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
Delhi □ Varanasi □ Patna 



Indological Publishers & Booksellers 

Head Office : Bungalow Roi*>l nelhi-110 007 

Branches : 1. Chowk, Varana J ’ ) 

2. Ashok Rajpatlf, Patna-4 (Bihai> 


ISBN : 0 89S81 3S9 9 
Printed in Ind*a 

By Shantilal Jain, at Shri Jainendra Press, 

A-4S, Phase I, Industrial Area, Naraina, New Delhi>110 028 
Published by Narendra Prakash Jain, for Motilal Banarsidass, 
Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delbi-110 007. 



PUBLISHER’S NOTE 


The purest gems lie hidden in the bottom of the ocean or in 
the depth of rocks. One has to dive into the ocean or delve 
into the rocks to find them out. Similarly truth lies concealed in 
the language that with the lapse of time has become obsolete. 
Man has to learn that language before he discovers that truth. 

But he has neither the means nor the leisure to embark on 
that course. \Vc have, therefore, planned to help him acquire 
knowledge by an easier course. VVe have started the series of 
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology in E>,gUsh Translation. 
Our goal is to universalize knowledge through the most popular, 
international medium of expression. The publication of the 
PU- .xtiu: ' • * English translation is the step towards that goal. 




PREFACE 


The present volume contains Lingapuratfa Part I in English 
translation. It is the fifth in the series of fifty Volumes on 
Ancient Indian Traction and Mythology. 

The project of the Series was envisaged and financed in 
1970 A.D. by Shri Sundarlal Jain, the veteran interprizer in the 
field of Oriental Publication and the leading proprietor Messers 
Motilal Banarsidass. Hitherto six volumes of the series ( that is, 
four vols. of the Sivapurana and two vols. of the Lingapurana 
completing both the Pura^as) have been published and made 
accessible to the reader. 

T!s p'-esent English translation is based on the Sanskrit text 
of the Liiigapurana published in India by Messers K^emaraja 
Srikrsnadasa. This text, constructed on the collation of Mss. is 
fairly reliable, although here and there it suffers from certain 
lapses and defies our efforts for accurate translation. But these 
lapses are few and far between and they do not vitiate the 
quality of translation as a whole. 

In this translation we have followed the text as closely as 
possible but at places we have been a little freer with a desire to 
maintain the spirit of the languag'' in which Itie original is so 
rendered. At the same time we have excluded alt far-fetched, 
forced or fancied interpretations including those that are 
suggested by the author of the Sivatosinl, though we have often 
quoted him in the footnotes. 

The reader will find that the Purina deals with a variety of 
subjects — geographical, historical, philosophical, religious and 
the like which need elucidation. This task could not be accomp- 
lished by a mere tianslation. We have therefore provided foot- 
notes on these topics. The footnotes are very brief but illumi- 
native. They supply the background without which the exegesis 
of the text would not be possible. 

We have prefixed to this Part a critical introduction which 
discusses, besides other topics, the nomenclature, authorship. 



Vlll 

• 

authenticity, date and general characiei istics of this work. We 
have suffixed to Part II a general index which lists among other 
words the names of persons, tribes, places, rivers, lakes, 
mountains etc. of which the identity already discussed in the 
footnotes is marked here by introducing a letter ol abbreviation 
put within the bracket against the name. But we have eschewed 
all unnecessary repetitions and therefore have included the cons- 
tantly recurring names, as those of the deities, kings and sages, 
only when dicre is some special reason for specifying them. 

F 'fort closing, it is our pleasant duty to put on record our 
sincere gratitude to Dr. S.K. Ghatterjee, Dr. \", Raghavan, Dr. 
R.N. Dandekar, Shri K.R. Kripalani and the authorities of the 
UNESCO for their kind encouragement and valuable help 
which render this work more valuable to scholars than it would 
otherwise have been. We must also thank Shri T.V. Parameswar 
Iyer for hi.s valuable spade-work which lightened our labours 
especially in their initial stage. 

In fine, wc avail of this opportunity to state that any critical 
^nggcslions and advice for improvement are welcome and will 
receive proper consideration from us. 


Traiiilalors and Editor 



ABBREVIATIONS (Foot-notes) 


AB 

A i tarey a-Brahman a 

AG 

Ancient Geography of India iCunninghair 

Agni 

Agnipurana 

AIHT 

Ancient Indian Historical Tradition : 
Pargiter 

Amara 

Amarakosa 

AU 

Atharva-Upanisad 

BD 

Brhaddevata 

BG 

Bhagavadgita 

Bhaga 

Bhaga va tap urana 

Bhavisya 

Bhavisyapurana 

Bra^'»nanda 

Brahman^apurana 

Devi Btiaga 

Devibhagavatapurana 

Drona p. 

Drona Parva of the Mahabharaia 

GAMI 

Studies in the Geography of Ancient and 
Medieval India : D.C. Sarkar 

Garuda 

Garudapumua 

GD 

Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and 
Medieval India : N.L. Dey 

G. Dh. S. 

Gau tama-Dharmas Qt ra 

GEAMI 

(ieographical Encyclopaedia of Ancient 
and Mcaicval India 

3P 

Geography of the Parana*. : S. M. All 

H. Dh. S. 

History of Dharinasastra : Kane 

HG 

Hiranyakesi-Grhyasutra 

HM 

Hindu Mythology : Dawson 

larivaiiisa 

Harivaih^apiirana 

Hyp 

Hathayogapradlpikii 

JIH 

Journal of Indian History 

JRAS 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 
(Great Britain ) 

KP 

Kiilikapurana 

KRS 

Kotirndrasarnhita ofSivapuvana 

KU 

Katha Upanisad 

KO 

kurmapurana 



Linga 

Lingapur^a 

Mark 

Markan^eyapurana 

Mbh 

Mahabharata 

Mbh. Adi. P. 

Mahabharata Adiparva 

Mahan. U. 

Mahanarayana Upanisad 

Manu (MS) 

Manusmrti 

MP 

Matsyapurana 

MP. — A Study 

Matsyapur^a — A Study: V.S. Agrawal 

Mark. 

Markandeyapurana 

Matsva 

Matsyapurana 

N. 

Nirukta 

PE 

Purapic Encyclopaedia 

PGS 

Paraskara Grhyasutra 

Rama 

Ramayana 

RV. 

IBLgveda 

SG 

Sivagita 

Sk 

Skandapura^a 

SK 

Sankhya Karika of Isvarakrsna 

Sp 

Siva-Purana 

§RS 

Satarudriyasaihhita of Siva-Purana 

ST 

SivatosinI, a commentary on the Liiiga- 
purana 

SV 

Samaveda 

Svel 

Sveta^vatara Upanisad 

TA 

Taittiriya Aranyaka 

TB 

Tattiriya Brahmana 

TS 

Tattiriya Saihhita 

TU 

Taittiriya Upanisad 

Va, Vamana 

Vamana purana 

Varaha 

Varahapurana 

Vayavlya (VS) 

Vayavlya saihhita of ^ivapurana 

Vayu 

Vayupurana 

Visva 

Visvakosa 

Vi§nu 

Vispupurana 

VS 

Vajasaneyisaihhita of Suklayajurveda 



CONTENTS 


Introduction xiv 

Lingapurana {in translation) 

Section I 


I. 

Introductory 

1 

2. 

Index of Content 

4 

3. 

Primary Creation 

8 

4. 

Inauguration of Creation 

12 

5. 

Creation 

16 

6. 

Glory of Siva 

20 

7. 

Esoteric secret of Siva 

22 

8. 

Yogic Zones 

27 

S. 

obstacles and Portents 

37 

10. 

Meaas of Direct Perception 

43 

11. 

Sadyojata 

47 

12. 

Glory of Vaniadeva 

48 

13. 

Glory of Tatpurusa 

50 

14. 

Origin of Aghora 

51 

15. 

Glory of Aghoresa 

52 

16. 

Glory of liana 

55 

17. 

Origin of Linga 

58 

18. 

Visnu’s praise of Siva 

64 

19. 

Enlightenment of Vispu 

68 

20. 

Enlightenment of Brahma 

69 

21. 

Eulogy of Siva 

76 

22. 

Creation of RudraS 

84 

23. 

Kalpas 

86 

24. 

Incarnations of Siva 

90 

25. 

Method of Acamana and Ablution 

100 

26. 

Procedure of Sacred Ablution 

103 

27. 

Worship ol Linga 

107 

28. 

Mental worship of Siva 

111 

29. 

Victory over Death 

115 

30. 

Story ol' Sage Sveta 

122 

31. 

Hymn to Siva 

125 

32. 

Hymn to Siva 

129 



xn 


33. 

Statement of the sages 

130 

34. 

Praise of the Yogin 

133 

35. 

Defeat of Ksupa 

136 

36. 

Dialogue between Ksupa and Dadhica 

139 

37. 

Grant of boons to Brahma 

145 

38. 

Creation of Brahma 

148 

39. 

Specific Dharmas of Four Yugas 

150 

40. 

Extent of four Yugas 

156 

41. 

Nativity of Brahma 

164 

42. 

Origin of Nandi £ vara 

169 

43. 

Coronation of Nandlsvara 

172 

44. 

Coronation of Nandisvaia 

176 

45. 

Description of Nether worlds 

179 

46. 

Dvipas and their lords 

181 

47. 

Bharata sub-continent 

184 

48. 

The mountain Meru 

187 

49. 

Ilavrta sub-continent 

190 

50. 

Abodes ofDevas 

195 

51. 

Continents 

197 

52. 

Geography of the World 

200 

.53. 

Geography of the World 

205 

54. 

Movements of Luminaries 

209 

55. 

The SunN Chariot 

215 

56. 

Description of the Moon 

221 

57. 

Movements of the planets 

223 

53. 

Coronation of the Sun and others 

226 

59. 

The form of Solar rays 

227 

60. 

'i'he Solar Sphere 

231 

61. 

The situation of the planets 

233 

62. 

Situation of Dhruva 

238 

63. 

Origin ofDevas and others 

241 

64. 

Grant of boons by Pulastya 

248 

65. 

Thousand names of Siva 

258 

66. 

The narrative of Yayaii 

287 

67. 

The narrative of Yayiti 

293 

68. 

The race of Jyamagha 

296 

69. 

Srikrsna, his birth and life 

299 

70. 

Various Clreations 

306 

71. 

Statement of Nandikesvara 

333 



X111 

72. Construction of Rudra’s Chariot 347 

73. Glory of Worshipping Siva 364 

74. Description of Siva Lihgas 366 

75. Monism of Siva 369 

76. Installation of Siva’s image 373 

77. The Temples of Siva 378 

78. Scrubbing and cleaning the shrine of Siva 387 

79. The mode of worship of Siva 389 

80. The holy Pasupata rite 392 

81. The holy rite for the release of Pasus 397 

82. Hymn of purification 402 

83. The holy rites of Siva 411 

84. The holy rite of Uma-Mahesvara 416 

85. The glory of the five-syllabled Mantra 422 

86. The sacrifice of meditation 44 1 

87. oMppression of delusion 455 

88. Review of Pa.su pa ta yoga 458 

89. Characteristics of good conduct 466 

90. The expiatory rites of the ascetics 478 

91. Portentous phenomena 480 

92. Glory of Srisaila 486 

93. The narrative of the Asura Andhaka 502 

94 Uplifting the Earth 504 

95. The Exploits of Nrsiiiiha the Man-lion 507 




INTRODUCTION 


Purd^s : Origin and Development 

According to the Vi^inupuravd^ the sage Krsna Dvaipayana 
Vywa compiled a Pmdnasarhhitd from the various ancient 
episodes and imparted it to his disciple Romaharsana. The latter 
composed his own PurdtfasatAhitd and among his disciples 
Kaiyapa, Savarni and Samsapayana composed their own. These 
four were the original Purdtfasatiihitds. The Vdyupurd^ speci- 
fies the number of the Puranas as ten. This represents the 
second stage in the development of the Puranas. The traditional 
number eighteen is the final stage. 

The traditional list as given by several Pura];ias comprises 
the tollowiiig : (1) Brahma, (2) Padma, (3) Visnu, (4) Vayu, 
(5) Bhagavata, ^6) Naradiya, (7) Marka^4cy!t> (8) Agni, 
(9)Bhavisya, (10) Brahmavaivarta, (11) Lihga, (12) Varaha, 
(13) Skanda, (14) Vamana, (15) Kurma, (16) Matsya, 
(17)Garu^a, (18) Brahman^a. 

The Puranic scholars are agreed upon the authenticity of 
the seventeen Puranas but in regard to the eighteenth there is 
a difference of opinion. Majority of the Puranas include 
Swapurdfia in the list while a few others substitute Vayu for 
Siva.® 

The Lihgapurdna — Contents 

The Lingapurdna is divided into two sections comprising res- 
pectively 108 and 55 chapters. 

Section I describes the evolution of Linga, a phallic form 
of Siva. It records traditions about the rise of Lihga cult, modes 
of worshipping Lihga, principles of its ritual, efficacy of its 
worship illustrated by myths, legends and anecdotes. It provides 
a graphic account of the geography of the earth with seven 
continents, their flora and fauna, their people, mountains, oceans 

I . VisoK IIL 6. 

3. For detail, see introduction to Sioapurdna Part I, English Translation 



XVI 


and rivers. It describes the size of the earth, stars and planets, 
their positions and movements in the heavens. It recounts the 
genealogies of some famous nionarchs of the solar and lunar 
dynasties. It gives an account of prominent Asuras, their expedi- 
tions and destruction. 

Section II contains legends on the glorification of Lihga, a 
detailed account of the form, concept and attributes of Lihga 
and the vratas, gifts and mantras related to his worship. Finally, 
it explains in detail the procedure of the Pasupata Yoga as the 
means of attaining the ultimate goal viz., the absorption of the 
personal soul into the supreme soul — Lord Siva. 

The Title — Lihgapurdrui 

TYit Lihgapurdna is a Saiva Purana. It derives its name from 
the fact that it reveals the supreme lord Siva in his ni^kala 
(attributelcss) and sakala (qualified) forms, lecounts his em- 
blems, qualities, exploits and incarnations, narrates legends on 
the origin and importance of Lihga — his phallic idol, dwells 
upon the merit of installing and consecrating it, describes the 
ritual and philosophical principles of the Liiiga cult and embo- 
dies sermons and dissertations on the glory of Lihga image. 

The author of the purana 

The authorship of the Puranas is attributed to the sage 
Krsna Dvaipayana h\xl Bhavi^ya"^ speaks of sepaiaie authoiship 
for different Puranas. According to this authoiitv the Linga was 
composed by the sage Tandi. But this statement BhavLsya is 
not supported by the internal evidence, although the Purana 
suggests the theory of separate authorship. For instance, when 
Bhavi^ya states that Vistm was composed by Parasara, we find 
that Linga had already stated this fact.^ Besides, this voluminous 
set of Puranas beset with differing strata of society of different 
times cannot be ascribed to a single author. 

Authenticity of the text 

The extant Lihgapurdna is not the same as the oiiginal which 
was recited by Siva in the Agnikafpa to Brahma and was, later 

3. Bhavifya. III. 28. 10-15. 

4. Linga, 1 , 64. 120-121. 



XVll 


on, divided by Vyasa into two parts. For the Agnikalpa text, 
according to the Naradiya,® contained 1 1 ,000 verses — a fact 
acknowledged by the author of the extant Lifigapurdna — while 
actually the present VenkateSvara edition has only 9, 185 verses. 
Furthermore, contrary to the statement of the Naradiya, the 
present text deals with the matters of the I^anakalpa* and not 
with those of the Agnikalpa. It can, therefore, be presumed that 
there was an old Lingapurdna text based upon the Agnikalpa on 
which the Naradiya description is based. 

The above statement is supported by the internal evidence. 
Liiiga (II. 55. 36-37) states that it is divided into two sections. 
Section I contains one hundred and eight chapters while 
Section II is comprised of fortysix. But as a matter of fact, the 
extant second section has fiftyfive chapters. The author of Siva- 
tosini,’ a commentary on this Purana, dissolves the compound 
sat-e^*-/ ''TTiiat as sat ca na\a ca catvarirhsac C2i(madhyamapada- 
lopi-karmadhdraya) and bv this grammatical device arrives at 
the required number 55. But would it not be a forced and far- 
fetched interpretation ? Conversely, would it not be rational to 
suppose that the original text of this section contained fortvsix 
chapters to which nine chapters were added later on ? 

Date of Composition 

The Lingapuuma abridged by Krsna Dvaipdyana 

Vyasa in the beginning ot Dvdpara age.*^ Originally it was 
lomposed by Brahma with the material derived fioin Isana 
kalpd.^* I’Ik' abi idgeincnt was a natural course, foi the old con- 
tents cea.scd to appeal to the later generation \t the same, 
fresh material was a\ailable which the new compileis inserted in 
the old corpus. I hc process continued till the beginning of the 
fifth century A.D when the bulk of this Purana \\\\^ settled to 
its present form 


Kdmdiya. I n)2. 1-4. 

G. Lifiiio. I. 2 . I. 

7. His name was Gancsa Natu. He «''as the son of Badala and Yasodfi 
and the disciptr of Nilakantha. He lived ni iTt'o ft>r 176^)) SaVa era. at 
Poona. Vide the introductory verses of VT. 

8. Litiga I.2.H- 

9. Ibid^y 1.2 I. 



XVlll 


There arc references in the Lifigapurdna in support of this 
argument. Chapter 40 refers to king Pramati in the line of king 
Gandramas who organized extensive military expeditions 
against the Mlecchas. In this inset of twentythree verses^® we 
find a powerful and historically true description of the achieve- 
ments of Candragupta Vikramaditya II. The description tallies 
with a similar account in the Matsyapurdna and seems to have 
been given by a person who was an eye-witness or who had 
heard from a direct source. Moreover, in II. 3.36 there is a refe- 
rence to the Mlecchas having seized the idol of Visnu.^^ We learn 
from history that Mlecchas were wild ferocious tribes, such as 
Huns, whose violent activities caused vast devastations and 
struck terror in the siA'ial life of the country. Like the cattle-lift- 
ing Panis of the Rgvedic age, these Mlecchas were the breakers 
or stealers of idols. The Parana is also aware of the foreign 
tribes Kiralas (Burmese) in the cast and Mlecchas in the west^^ 
As the destroyer of Mlecchas King Pramati of this Parana can 
only be identical with King Candragupta Vikramaditya who 
destroyed the Mlecchas during his reign of twenty years by 
engaging his army drawn mostly from Licchavis — a ksatra-brah- 
min tribe. The leign of Candragupta Vikramaditya II (380- 
412 A.D.) is the lowest limit by which the bulk of this Parana 
had assumed its present shape. 

General Characteristics of the Lm^apnrdna 

1 . Creation 

The supreme lord fsiva is leprcsented by the half-male and 
half-female form. At the advent of Creation, the male form 
enters ifito the wcmib of the female form and lays the golden 
seed therein. 'Phe seed is of the nature of fire, the creative* force 
and is permeated by a creative potency. According to the Lihga- 
purdna}^ this cicative energy is personified as Brahma ; the reci- 
pient of the seed, the focius, is named Visnu while the sower 


lO. 


1 1 - 

3- 36 . 
12. 


13 - 

14- . 


Lingo I. 4'». ^ 0 -^ 2 . 

Ibid., pratimam ca hares caiva mleccha hrtva yayuh punah IT. 

Ihid., I. 52. 2(); Mah}ii 5,0. 75-76; Mark. 57. 8. 

Cf. Lined I. 40. 55. 

Lihga I. 20. 73 IF. 



XIX 


of the seed is lord Siva himself. Thus, the half-man and half- 
woman form of the lord is both the efficient and the material 
cause of the universe. 

The seed is sentient. When it enters into the womb it acti- 
vates and gives impetus to the insentient Prakrti. The Cosmic 
Egg is born, out of which is evolved the entire universe. In fact, 
both the insentient Prakrti and the sentient principle belong to 
lord Siva himself who out of sheer will and sportively too crea- 
tes, dissolves and then re-creates and re-dissolves the universe. 
Ip this eternal process everythi>ig created in the feminine form 
is Prakrti and everything masculine is Purusa. The half-man 
and half-woman body (ardhanarii vara) of Siva is responsible for 
the origin of creation by copulation. As stated above, the crea- 
tive force is of the nature of agni(firc) and its fortynine forms^^ 
constitute the different forms of the supreme loid who in his 
qualified {sakala) state is characterized by three functions viz. 
creation, sustenance and dissolution. 

According to the Buranic account of creation, in the begin- 
ning the insentient Prakrti in the form of the Cosmic Egg re- 
mained in the Cosmic waters for thousands of years, until it 
was activated by the sentient principle which entering divided 
it into two halves. One of the two became the celestial and the 
other the terrestrial sidierc both constituting the fourteen 
worlds. 

The constituents of Prakrti, the material cause of the uni- 
verse, are twentythree in number. They are : fl) intellect, 
(2) ego, (3-7) five subtle elements, (8-12) live senses of action, 
(13-17) five senses of knowledge, (18-22) live gw ss elements 
and (23) the mind. The unevolved Prakrti is called (24) 
Pradhana. This set of twentyfour principles is hisentient and 
to this is added a threefold set of sentient beings viz. (25) Jiva 
( the individual soul) , (26) Purusa (the cosmic soul) and (27) 
the Supreme soul, Siva. In this formulation, Pradh«'ina, the 
twentyfourth category, is the source of iwcntythr^*' principles 
(mentioned above); Jiva, the twxriyfifth, is the knower of 
Pradhana: Purusa, the twentysixth, has the perception of the 
two lower categories viz. Jiva and Pradhana b\it he cannot 


15. Linga I. 6.4; 1.7. 105. 



XX 


bestow gracc.^* Lord Mahesvara, the twentyscventh, alone is 
omnipotent and is capable of bestowing grace. In this context, 
Prakrti is apratibuddha, Jiva is buddhimSn, Purusa is buddha 
and Mahesvara is prabuddha. The twentysix principles emanate 
from the saptaviihsaka (the twentyseventh) principle viz, lord 
Mahesvara. 

The twenty-sixth principle Purusa is represented as passive 
and a spectator of the working of Prakrti He is distinguished 
from the personal soul, Jiva, as the latter is the enjoy er of 
the fjiiits of the world- tree. Lord Mahesvara is beyond 
Pradhana and Purusa. In his one half, i.e. the masculine form, 
he is devoid of qualities but his other half (sakala) is 

characterized by the three attributes : sattva, rajas and tamas 
which are personified as Braluna, Visnu and Rudra. 

The entire phenomenon of creation is symbolised by the 
phallic image^** of lord Siva. 

According to the Lingapurdna}^ Pradhana, the primary unevol- 
ved matter, the cause of the universe is Lihga itself. At the root 
of Linga the creator Brahma is stationed; Visnu the sustainer of 
the world is stationed in the middle; Rudr ' iie annihilator is 
stationed above; lord Siva is its substratum. He permeates and 
imparts impetus to Lihga and effects the work of creation 
in this wa) . 

The Puranic cosmology divides * reation into nine classes 
arranged in thl'ce groups : f 1 ) Primary, ( 2 ) Secondary and 
Primary-Secondary as follows : 

1 Primary II Secondary II Primary- Secondary 

1. Intellect and Ego I. Insentient 9. Mind-born sons 

tjbjects of Brahma 

2. Subtle elements 5. Animals 

3. Gross elements 6. Divine beings 

7. Human beings 
Jl. Sentient Feeling 

1 6. Sadviihsakam anisvaram i. 17. iO(f. 

17. yah saptavirhsako nityaji parat paratarah prabhuh I. 71.51. 
tasr^ad abhedabuddhyaiva saptaviih&atprabhedat^ T. 75. 34. 

j8. a Lihga in the form of a column, arising out of a yoni (vaginal 
passage) is set up in temples dedicated to Siva. Formerly 12 principal 
Lihgas existed,^ of which the best known arc Somanatha in Gujarat, 
Ms^akala at Ujjayini and Vi^vc^vara at Varanasi, 
u*. Lihga, I. 74. iy-20. 



XXI 


According to the Lingapurana this set of threefold creation — 
Primary, Secondary and Primary-Secondary — was unable to 
create. The mind-born sons of Brahma remained celibate. Then 
out of his body Brahma produced eleven sons; still the creation 
made no progress. Then Brahma divided himself into two 
forms — one half a woman and the other half a man. In that half 
form of a woman he created a couple— Manu and Satarupa 
who obeyed the creator and began the work of creation. 

2. Dissolution and Re-creation {Rratisarga) 

The creation of the universe is not a permanent feature, for 
all creations end in dissolutions which in turn give place to re- 
creation. Thus, there arc several dissolutions — minor and major. 

As the Puranas relate, a creation lasts for a day of Brahma 
equal to a kalpa, a period of four hundred th-^tytwo million 
years of mortals. A kalpa consists of fourteen Manvantaras. Thus, 
a day of Brahma, equal to a kalpa contains fourteen dissolu- 
tions. liui are partial dissolutions. At the end of fourteen 
manvantaras, equal to a day of Brahma that lasts for a kalpa, 
there occurs a great dissolution. There is also a complete 
dissolution when Biahma has completed his life-time. At 
the advent of this dissolution (Prakrta pralaya), the mobile and 
immobile beings, Devas, Asuras, serpents, Raksasas etc. are 
all destroyed. Everything dissolves itself into Prakrti which 
remains hidden in the supreme lord Siva. The lord alone 
survives; there is no second being anywhere.*® 

At the advent of re-creation after dissolutioi.. Lord Siva is 
present in two forms: Prakrti and Atman. Lord Vi mu adopts 
the body oi Prakrti and lies on the yogic couch in the midst of 
waters. Then Brahma is born of his umbilical lotus. Brahma asks 
Siva to grant him power to re-create. 

3. The ages of Manus {Manvantaras) 

The creation is divided into time-units — kalpas, manvan- 
taras, yugas. sanivatsaras and other relatively bigger and 
smaller units. When creation ceases to exist these time-units 
disappear as a matter of course. 

20. , I. flf). 7-8. 

2 1 . Ibid . , 1 . 83. I o- 1 1 H*. 



XXll 


The description of the time-unit, manvantara, is one of the 
many characteristics of a Mahapurana. A manvantara comprises 
about seven tyone caturyugas equal to 1200 years of the gods or 
l/14th day of Brahma. The fourteen manvantaras make up one 
whole day of Brahma, equal to a kalpa. After each manvantara 
there is a minor dissolution. Thus, a day of Brahma has 
fourteen dissolutions and re-creations. The scheme of fourteen 
dissolutions repeats itself from one age of Manu to another. 

The puranas mention fourteen manvantaras. These derive 
their names from fourteen successive progenitors and sovereigns 
of the earth. The present Purana mentions fourteen Manus by- 
name. They are (i) Svayambhuva, (ii) Svarocisa, (iii) Uttarria, 
(iv) Tamasa, (v) Raivata, (vi) Caksusa, ( vii) Vaivasvata, (vii) 
Savarni, (ix) Dharma, (x) Savarnika, (xi) Pisahga, (xii) 
Apisahgabha, (xiii) Sabala, (xiv) Varnaka. On their nomen- 
clature the Puranas are not unanimous. 

4-5. Genealogy and history of Royal Houses ( Yarns a and Vamsdnu- 
carita) 

Genealogy and history of kings and illustrious personages 
play an important role in the Mahapuranas. The sulas were the 
custodians of genealogical records which they learnt by rote 
and which they recited at sessional sacrifices. But in the course 
of oral transmission from one generation to another some varia- 
tions entered in ‘these records. Moreover, there were traditional 
variations too, for different versions existed in different families 
of sutas. When the records were incorporated in the Puranas, 
the interpolations and the traditional variations also settled 
therein. This explains the difference that exists in the genea- 
logical records of the Puranic literature.-'^ 

The Lingapurdrjia is not interested in recording the genea- 
logies of ancient royal houses and illustrious personages. Still it 

22. For instance, ( i ) according to Linga Agnidhra was the eldest son 
of Priyavrata. But according to a Vayu version he was the son of Priyavrata’s 
daughter, (ii) Linga ascribes the origin of the name Bh^ata to king 
Bharata, the eldest of the loo sons of 9 . 9 abha and grandson of Nabhi (cf. 
Vdyu 33, 51-52; Mdrkandeya 53. 39-40; Bfidgavata 11. 2. 13-17; Sk. 1.11.37. 
55-57)* But according to 114. 5-6, Bharata is the name of Manu 

himself who creates and supports the people here. 



XXlll 


contains, in five chapters (I. 65-69) , lists of the solar and lunar 
dynasties of Ayodhya and Prayaga. Chapters 65-66 deal with 
the solar dynasty of Ayodhya from Vaivasvata Manu to Satya- 
vrata, from Satyavrata to Sagara and from Sagara to Brhadbala. 
Chapters 67-69 recount the lunar dynasty of Prayaga from 
Aila Pururavas to Yayati, from Yayati to Jyamagha and from 
Jyamagha to Srikrsna. As for the history of reigning monarchs 
{varhidnucarita) it is interested mainly in the records of the 
solar and lunar dynasties. It recounts the deeds of some 
monarchs of these houses. Amongst these Sagara, Yayati, Jya- 
magha and Sri Krsna figure prominently, while Dhundhumara, 
Babhru, Satrajit, Akrura and others occupy a secondary place. 

Monism of Siva and the means of the souths release 

The above analysis demonstrates that the Lingapurdna 
possesses the conventional character of a Mahapurwa. But its 
real greaaic^s lies In expounding the monistic background of 
Saiva philosophy especially in the context of the Lihga cult. 

The Lihga is described as twofold: gross and subtle. The 
subtle lihga is the fourth state of the soul and beyond in which 
the other three states merge, losing their identity. The gross 
Lihga, made of clay, wood, stone, crystal etc. is meant just to 
create a feeling of devotion in the gross-minded people. In fact 
lord Siva, like the ether, is an indivisible centre whose division 
into sakala and niskala forms as of the ether into ghatakasa and 
mathakasa is illusory.-^ Even the s\'^te of being t i e [ekatva) is 
not present there as a distinct attribute. Similar! in relation 
to the tattvas, he is placed in the twentyseventh category; but 
the tattvas too emanate from him; they are the products of his 
power of projection (Prakrti or Maya).**^ He is related to them 
as the gold is related to the ornaments or the ocean to the 
waves. Their group of twentyfour forms a noose which binds 
the individual and cosmic souls, categorized as tne twentyfifth 
and twentysixth principles. 

A major portion of this Purana is conceriicd with the supp- 
ression of illusion through the attainment of knowledge by 


23. Lihga !• 75 ff. 

24. Ihid .^ I. 16. 32-34; 11.20.52 



XXIV 


means of Pasupata yoga, accompanied by purificatory and ex- 
piatory rites and acts of physical and mental worship with the 
Tautra, Mantra and Yantra appliances. A particular emphasis 
is laid upon selfpurification. Along with the purification of the 
three gtinas, viz. sattva, rajas and tamos, the Purana enjoins the 
purification of the fivefold set oftattvas-’ viz. t'auvana {(wk. gross 
elements), Pada (five subtle elements), Varna (live organs of 
knowledge), Mdtrd (five organs of action) and Kalddhvara {the 
fourfold group consisting of intellect, ego, consciousness and 
mind) . These* practices, accompanied hy numtal concentration, 
are s air* to help the aspirant achieve spiiitual enlightenment 
and attain release Irom the entanglement of tlic senses and his 
absorption into the supreme soul. 


25. ItvU, II. 20. 44-47 



CHAPTER ONE 

Inlroduciory 

I. Obeisance to the Supreme Soul, Rudra, Vjsnu and 
Brahma,^ the lord of Pradhana and Punisa^ and (he cause of 
creation, susienance and dissolutioiL 

2-4. 1 h(! sage Narada'^ W'nil to Nairnisa* after worshipping 

Siva, in all the holy centres,*"^ viz. Sailcsa, Safigamesvara, 
Hiranyagarbha, Svarlina, Avinuikla, Mahalaya, Raudra, Ciopre- 
ksaka, the excellent lVisui)ata, V'iglmesvara, Kcdara, (iomayu- 
keSvara, I lirany.agarf)ha, C'andresa, Isanya, Trivistapa and 
Sukresvara. 

. 1 . On seeing Narada, the residents of Naim* ’<a were delight- 
ed in their minds. Aftei honouring him they oircred him a 
befitting .seat. 

1. The Saiva Puranas trace the origin of Bralima, Visnu and Rudra 
to the Supreme Spirit (Mahesvara) and assign the functions of creation 
existence and dissolution of the universe to each respectively. In fact, 
the three gods represent the three attiibutcs— sattva. rajas and tamas which 
together form Pradhana- the original sourer of the universe. Thus, the 
trinitarian pattern of the Cosmos is a single whole at its base. Gf. Dm 
Bhd(*a. i.H. ‘^-4. 

2. Pradhana — the primary or unevoh ed matter, the original source 
of the material world. 

Puru^ — the twenty-sixth principle represented as passive and a spec- 
tator of the working of Prakrti the creative force. lie is distinguished 
from the personal soiil(jiva) as the latter is the enjoycr oi t''e fruits of the 
World-Tree. Gf. 1 . 28.7; 11 . 17. 2t)-27. 

Narada— the mind-born son of Brahm'a and a divine sage who 
acts as a messenger between gods and men. 

4. Naimisa or Naimisa, mod. Nimsar. It is situated in the Sitapur 
district in the Uttara Prade^a, on the left bank of the Gomati river. The 
place is so called because the rim (nimi) of the revolving wheel of virtue 
was shattered here and virtue had to make a permanent abode in this 
region [Vdyu 2.7). Or the place is so called because here an army of 
asuras was destroyed by the sage Gauramukba in a twinkling of eye. (Gf. 
Vaiaha quoted in ST,) On the authority of the MaUja Buraia, A Borooah 
{Ancient Geography of India) places it about the confluence of the Gomati and 
the Ganges. It was sacred in the Krta agi as Puskara in the *Ircta, Kuru- 
ksetra in the Dvapara, the Ganges in the Kali age. 

5. For detail about the holy centres, see part I. Ch, 92. 



2 


Lingapurdita 


6-17. He too being pleased accepted the seat offered by 
the excellent sages. Seating himself comfortably on the excellent 
seat and duly worshipped by the sages he discussed with them 
the holy narrative of the Lihgas, the narrative consisting ol 
wonderful anecdotes. At the very same time, the intelligent 
Suta who was well-versed in the Puranas came to Nainiisa lor 
offering homage to the sages. The residents ol Naimisa greeted 
him duly with holy songs and adorations, (since) he was the 
disciple ofKrsna nvaipayana.® On seeing the truly trustworthy 
and sell )larly Silta Roinaharsana^ there arose in them the desire 
to hear the Purana. They, thereafter, asked him about the 
meritorious Purana that contained the glory and greatness of 
the Lihgas. 

The residents of J^^airnisa said : 

“O Suta, of great intellect, after adoring the sage Rrsna 
Dvaipayana for the knowledge of the Puranas you have obtained 
the Puranic lore from liirn. Hence, O Suta, the best among the 
Pauranikas, wc desire to hear from you that Puranic lore 
illustrating the glory of the Lihgas. Narada, the glorious son of 
Brahma, after completing his pilgrinuvge to the holy ( entres of 
the supreme lord Rudra and worshipping the Lihgas therein, has 
arrived here. You are a devotee of lord Rudra. So also are we 
and Xarada. It behoves you to recount the meritorious Purana 
containing the glory and greatness of the Lihgas*** in the 
presence of this sage. Since, everything (relating to Dharina) 
has been successfully achieved by you, it should all be well 
known to you.” 

Thus told, Suta, the most gifted ariiong the Pauranikas was 
delighted in his mind. He, the meritorious one, made obeisance 

6. Krsna Dvaipayana Vyasa was the son of Parasara by Satyavatl 
who later on married king iSantanu. He composed the Mahabharata and 
the Puranas and arranged the Vedas into four compcndiiims (Fflj'w i.Go. i ifl) 

7. Romaharsana or Lomaharsana was one of th<‘ five disciples of 
VyMa (Vdjfu. 1.60. 13; .ST. Vidyeiuara-Samhiid^ 4*7 )• He was assigned the 
duty of preserving Puranic tradition while the other four Paila, Vaisampa- 
yana, Jaimini ^nd Sumanta were entrusted with the task of preserving the 
Vedas. He is called Suta but he is a brahmin. He should not be confused 
with the Suta of mixed caste who v.'as the ofi'spring of a k?atriya father and 
brahmin woman as described in Manu (Ayczwujmr/i X. 11.17) 

8. Repeated in verse 10 of this Chapter. 



Introductory 3 

first to Narada, the son of Brahma and then to the ascetics of 
Naimi?a and began narrating the Purana. 

Suta said : — 

18. After bowing to Siva, Brahma and Visnu, 1 remember 
the leading sage Vyasa in order to recount the Linga Purana. 

19-2^1. I bow down to the supreme lord whose body is 
Sabda-Brahman, who is the levealer of the Sabda-Brahman, 
whose limbs arc tlic letters wtio.se chai artcristics are unmanifest, 
but who menifests himseli in diverse ways, who is constituted 
by the letters a, ii, in, who is gross as well as subth^, who is 
greater than the greatest, who has the form of Orn^ whose face is 
the Rgveda, tongue the Srimavcda, throat tlic Yajiirvcda, and 
heart the Atharvaveda, who is tlic lord bt'vond Pradhana 
and Punisa, who is devoid of birth and death and who is 
called Kalarudra \^hcn he assumes lamogima and Brahinri when 
he rajoguna and the all-pervading \Msnu when he 

assumes sattvaguna, who is Mahesvara when devoid of all the 
gunas^, who manifests first in seven^^ forms by enveloping the 
body of Pradhana, then in sixtceiP^ forms, and finally in 
rwvntysix*-' forms, who is the source of origin of Brahma, and 
who assumes the form of the Linga nu'K iy for the sport of 
location, sust(‘ii<ince and annihilation (of the universe). After 
bowing down faithfully to that supn'inc lord, [ begin lecounting 
the auspi('ious nan a live of the Lihgajiurana. 


9. Repeated in 1 . 6 . 10. 

10. saptadha a group of seven tattvas consisting of intellect (buddhi), 
ego (ahaihkara) and five subtle elements (tanmatras). 

i L. sodasadha - five senses of action (Karmendriyas) . five senses of 
knowledge (jnaiiendriyas), five gross elements (mahabhiitas ' and mind. 

I a. To the twentythree categor.vS (supra Nos. 10, ii) are added 
Pradhana (twentyfourtli), Jiva (twentyfifth) and Purusa (twentysixth)- 
To this group of twentysix is added another (the twentyseventh) namely 
the supreme lord (mahesvara). 



Lingapurana 


CHAPTER TWO 

Index of Content 


Sata said : — 

1-3. Formerly the excellent Lingapurana was composed by 
Brahma, the great soul. It was based on the events that 
happened in the Isana kalpa, and originally it contained a 
crore of verses among a hundred crore that comprised all the 
Puranas. The Puranas were abridged into four hundred thou- 
sand vers* ‘S by Vyasas in the different manvaiitaras. Later in 
the beginning of Dvapara, they were classified into eighteen 
parts, beginning with Brahmanda among which this Lihga- 
purana ranks as the eleventh. Thus I have heard from Vyasa. 

4. O brahmins, the number of verses in this Purana is 
eleven thousand. I shall succinctly narrate it now, as it has not 
been heard by me in detail. 

5. When the Puranas were abridged into lour hundred 
thousand verses b\ Krsna Dvaipayana, the Linga was abridged 
in eleven thousand verses. 

6. At the outset the ei'eation of Pradhana is mentioned, 
then the primary and secondary creation and then the origin 
of the cosmic egg, enveloped by eight sheaths. 

7. Then, the evolution of Brahma through the. cosmic egg, 
by the force of rajoguna, the evolution of Visnu and Rudra, 
and Visnu’s lying down in the waters. 

8. The creation of the Prajapatis; the uplifting of the earth, 
the duration of Brahma’s day and night, the iTckoning oi* his 
whole span of life. 

9-10. The savana of Brahmfi; his yuga and kalpa; th« 
divine and human years; the years of sages, Dhruva and 
Pitrs; the nativity oi Pitrs; the duties of ih(* jjeople in their 
respective stages of life; th(‘ decrease of population in the 
Universe; the manifc'^lation of the creative energy. 

11. The male and female nature of energy; the creation of 
Brahma; the birth of twins; the eight names of Rudra in the 
course of weeping. 

13. But in I. 3.33 the Purana refers to the seven sheaths of the Closmic 

Err. 



5 


Index of Content 

12. The dispute between Brahma andVisnu; the mani- 
festation of the Lihga once again; the penance of Silada; the 
vision of Indra, the slayer of Vrtra. 

13-14. His request lor a son not born through a womb ;thc 
impossibility of getting such a son, the dialogue between 
l^ilada and Indra; the birth of Brahma from a lotus ; the 
manifestation of Bhava in the Kali age; the preceptor and the 
disciple ; the incarnations of Vyasa ; the kalpas and the 
manvantaras. 

15-18. The nature olthe kalpas and iheir different names ; 
Vi§nu in the forrnofVarahain the Varahakalpa* -rneghavahana; 
the grandeur and majesty of Rudra ; the manifestation once 
again of Lihga in the midst of sages ; the propitiation of Lihga; 
the injunctions regarding ablution ; the iiatn c of purity ; the 
glory of Varanasi and of the holy centres ; the shrines of Rudra 
and Visnu on the earth as well as in the firmament. 

19. Iha fall of Daksa on to tlu' earth in the Svarocisa 
maiivantara ; the curse on Daksa and his release from the curse. 

20. The description of Kaila.sa ; the yoga pertaining to 
Pasupati (Siva) ; the extent of the four yugas ; the detail of the 
duties assigned to each yuga. 

21-22. I’he magnitude of the iuiei\al between the yugas ; 
the activities of Rudra during these inlei\als ; his residence in 
the cremation ground ; the origin ol the digit of the moon on 
his forehead ; his marriage ; birth of his sons ; the fear of the 
people in anticipation of destruciion due to ex < ssive indulgence 
in sexual intercourse. 

23-21. The curse pronounced by Sail oo the Devas and on 
\hsiiu who was, later on, absolved by Rudra ; Rudra's dis- 
charge of semen; the birth of Karltikeya ; the merit of perfor- 
ming ablution to the Lihgas during the eclipse ; the dispute 
between Ksupa and Dadhiea as also between Dadhlca and 
Visnu. 

25-27. J’he inearnation ol the triden! hearing lord Nandi ; 
the nan alive of the chaste lad\ ; the discussi on about the 
individual ^oul and avith.l or ig* orance ; the nature of worldly 
atlivilii s and of perfect knowledge ; the characteristics of those 
entitled to liberation ; the birth ol N'asi.siha's sons; the descrip- 
tion of the families ol‘ the gi eat sages in the spiritual lineage of 



6 


LiHgapurdna 


Vasi$tha ; the devouring ofSakti by a demon-king due to the 
wickedness of Visvamitra ; the capture of the divine cow 
Surabhi. 

28-29. Vasislha’s gi.ef over the loss of his son ; lamenta- 
tions of Arundhati; the course of their daughtcr-in-law ; the 
words of the child in the womb ; the birth of Parasara, Vyasa 
and Suka ; the destruction of the Raksasas by Sakti’s son Para- 
sara. 

30-31. The truth about the deities ; the perfect knowledge 
as the grace of the lord ; the composition of the Puranas at the 
behest of the preceptor Pulastya ; the magnitude of the worlds ; 
the movciiient of the planets and luminaries ; rules ol' procedure 
about Sraddha for living ones ; thobc who dcbcrve Sraddhas ; 
the description of Sraddha. 

32. Rules of procedure about Nandi.sraddha ; the method of 
studying the Vedas ; the efficacy of the five yajnas and the 
rules of their performance. 

33. The conduct and behaviour of women during their 
menstrual period ; the birth of excellent sons due to that conduct ; 
the rules about sexual intercourse in regard to persons of dilTe- 
rent castes in due order, 

34. The injunctions regarding what should and what 
should not be eaten in respect of the people of all castes ; the 
expiatory rites for the general as well as for the particular sins 
severally and in detail. 

35. The form and features of the hells ; crime and piinish- 
mcn* ; signs of men destined to be heavenly or hellish in later 
births. 

36. Kinds of charitable gifts ; the city of the King of the 
Dead ; ritualistic detail of the livc-syllabled mantra ; the 
greatness of Rudra. 

37. rhe fight between Vrtra and Indra ; the suppression 
of Vrtra in his universal form; the dialogue between Sveta and 
Mrtyu; the destruction of K.lLi (jn behalf of Sveta. 

38-41. The arrival of Siva in the forest or eider trees; the 
narrative of S\idarsana; the characteristics of Krarna-sannyasa; 
the statement of Brahma that Rudra could be propitiated by 
devotion and hath; the incident ol Brahma seized by Madhu 
and Kaitabha; then in order to imparl the highest i)erfeet 



7 


Index of Content 

knowledge to Brahma, the story of Visnu assuming the form 
of a fish; in all conditions the incarnation of Visnu just as a 
matter of sport; the birth of Srikrsna’s son Pradyumna by the 
grace of Rudra; Visnu as a tortc)isc for lidding the churning 
rod. 

42. The birth of Sariikarsana; the rebirth of Candika; the 
birth of Krsna among the Yadus. 

43. riic wickedness ol Kaiiisa, the uncle of Krsna; Krsna’.s 
sporting activity during infancy; his worsliip of Siva for 
obtaining sons. 

44. 'riie origin of water from the skull of Si\a in the form 
of Visnu; X^isnu’s jnopitiation of Rudra for lessening the 
burden (d the earth. 

•15. d'he milking of the earth, at the outset, by Prthu the 
son ol Vena; the curse of Bhigu inclined by '^snu in the 
C(jursc of conflict between I3eva‘' and Asuras. 

46-47. In his inc'arnation as Krsna his residence in 

die curs<’ of Durvasas as conducive to his welfare; 
the curse on Yadavas for their destruction; the growth of reeds 
and javelins. 

48. 'rh(‘ annihiUition of the Yadavas in mutual quarrel by 
using reeds and Krsna annihilating bis tribe s[)o ti\ely through 
that very reed. 

49. Krsna’s voluntary dei)artuic from this world; the 
perfect knowledge of Brahman and salvation in detail. 

50-51. 'Phe subjugation ol Andhaka, Agni and Daksa who 
had assumed the forms ol India lephant aoo lu' d(‘er; the 
description ol the pinuoidial Bialiinan ; subjugati^ i ol Kama 
by Siva, ainl of the enemies ol devas, of the daitya Halahala in 
particular; the destruction of Jfdandhara and the origin of 
Sudarsana discus. 

52-53. Th(' acquisition of that t xci llent weapon by Visnu; 
Rudra’s activities; thousands of his adventiut\s; the aetivitic.. 
and the powers of Visnu^ Brahma and India; the description 
of the w(^rld of f>iva. 

54-56. Rudra’s world on die carili; llatakesvara in the 
netlier worlds; the nature of austerit’cs; the power of h’ahmins; 
Lihga’s excclleiu e over all other images ol deities -all these arc 



8 


Lingapurdna 


recorded in their proper order and in detaiP^ in this Purana. 
He who after knowing the gist recites it, is liberated from sins. 
He goes to the world of Brahma. 


CHAPTER THREE 

Primary Creation 


Suta said : 

1. The ,non-characterized is the root of the characterized. 
The maniiv^( Prakrti is the characterized, while Siva is the 
non-characterized, but the characterized (Prakrti ) is said to be 
related to Siva. 

2-4. They call the characterized by the iranie Pradhana or 
Prakrti. But the non -characterized, devoid ot smell, colour, 
taste, sound, touch and attributes, is Siva who is stable and 
everlasting, [On the contrary] the c haraetcrized Pradhana 
or Prakrti is endowed with smell, coloiii, taste, sound and 
touch; it is the source of origin of the universe; it is elemental 
both in subtle and gross forms, O excellent brahmins; it is the 
physical body of the worlds; it has originated fioin the non- 
characterized, of its own accord, 

5. [Formerly] it split itself into seven a^ well as eight and 
then into eleven.^’’ The non-characterized, thu'^, becomes chara- 
cterized through maya. 

14. ST. adds another interpretation. The order of contents (as 
stated in this chapter is not observed here (i.c. in this purana) nor are the 
contents described in detail*. 

?T 5 TT ^PTTfTT STTW: ^ ^ I 

15. The twentysix principles emanate from the Saptaviihsaka tattva: 

m In this formulation, Pra- 

dhana (the tiventyfourth), the source of twenty thi< e principles is insentient; 
Jiva (the twentyfifth) is the knower of Pradhana: Purusa (the twentysixth) 
has the perception of the two lower categories — Jiva and Pradhana. but he 
cannot bestow grace 1.17.109). Mahesvara (the 



Primary Creation 


9 


6-9. From them took shape, the trio of the important deities. 
From one of the three the universe arose; it is protected by 
another; by one (i.e. the third) it is destroyed.^® In this manner, 
the universe is pervaded by Siva. Thus the three murties have 
been classified as alinga, linga and lingalinga. Brahman itself is 
the universe. The non-characterized lord is the source of the seed. 
He, the Supreme lord, is both the seed and the womb as well as 
the seedless. Being seedless he becomes seed, i.e. the cause of 
the universe. The term Atman applies to the seed (bija), 
womb (yoni) and the unmanifest matter (pradhana). 

10. He who is Rudra, Brahma and Visnu is called Siva 
in the Puranas by virtue of his eternally and intrinsically enligh- 
tened and pure nature. 

11. Prakrti, when observed l)y Siva became SaivI O 
brahmins, formerly it was unmanifest, but be iig intrinsically 
endowed with the attributes it bec ame manifest at the begin- 
ning of the creation. 

11!. ihe ('iitire universe beginning with the unmanitest and 
ending with the gross elements originated from it. That Saivi 
Prakrti, the cicator of the universe is known as aja (the un- 
born) . 

13-M. The individual soul is devotedly attached to that 
aja (the unboin Prakrti) of red, white and black colour — the 
ajil that is single, though the mother of many. He resorts to her 
in her manifest form, and having enjoyed eschews her when he 
becomes unattached, rins Prakrti is the creator of worlds when 
she is presided over by Puru.>a. 

Iv). At the lime ol the creation, inahat was solved, at the 
behest of Purusa, out of Pradhana consisting of the three gunas 
and presided over by Purusa. 

16. Being urged by the desire to ^icate, the mahat when 

twenty-seventh) alone is capable of extending gr.ut to his devotees. In this 
context, Pradhana or Prakrti is apratibuddha. Jiva is buddhinian, Puru$a 
is buddha and Midiesvaia is prabuddha. 

iG. Brahma, Visnu and Rudi.i ihr personified cniii it s of the three 
gunas- rajas, sattva and tamas that consliiutr Pradhana or Piakiti, the 
material cause of the universe arc responsible for the cieaiion sustenance 
and destruction oi the universe. 'Ihe tin eiiianale Irom the iianscendent 
reality Maliesvara. (Cf. Dm i.ti.4; Biahmanda 1.4.C); Vi.snu 1.2.66) 

For detail sec V.S. Agrawal : MF — A Study, pp. 37-41. 



10 Lxngapurdifa 

presided over by Purusa enters the unchanging, unmanifest Pra- 
dhana and effects the creation of the manifest. 

17-18. Out of mahat evolved (I) sattvika ahamkara chara- 
cterized by conception and determination, (also) (2) rajasa 
ahamkara consisting of three gunas but with rajas as pro- 
minent, (also) (3) tamasa ahamkara with tamas as prominent. 
The subtle elements evolved out of mahat and became the 
nucleus for all creation. 

19. The subtle element-sound evolved out of ego and from 
it the unchanging ether. Thereafter the ego, the cause of sound 
enveloped the ether. 

20. O brahmins, the creation of the gross elements from 
the subtle elements is expounded in this manner. O great sages, 
the subtle element ‘touch* evolved from the ether and the air 
evolved from that. 

21. From the air evolved the subtle element colour and 
therefrom agni (fire), whence evolved tnc ‘Subtle element taste, 
whence the waters. From these evolved the subtle clement 
smell and from it the earth. 

22-23. O excellent brahmins, the ether enveloped the sub- 
tle element touch. The ai»' with the activity of blowing enve- 
loped the subtle element colour. The fire enveloped the subtle 
element taste. The waters having the nature of taste enveloped 
the subtle element smell. 

24-25. Hence the earth has five qualities; the waters have 
four; the fire has three; the air ha*? two, the ether has one qua- 
lity. Thus the creation of the elements originated fiom llir 
subtle elements through th? ir mutual interaction. 

26. The Vaikarika as well as Sattvika creation takes place 
simultaneously, yet, here, it is ex{>laincd as evolved gradually in 
the manner described above. 

27. For the purpose of perceiving sound and the rest there 
are five organs of sense and five organs of action. Mind (which 
is also a sense) belongs to both categories. (These eleven 
senses evolve out of ego.) 

28. The constituents of creation beginning with mahat 
(intellect) and ending with Visesa^^ (earth) generate the cosmic 

17. The group of seven beginning with mahat (intellect), and ending 
with visesa (bhutas) constitutes the Ck>smic Egg which is material, though 
it derives its potency of consciousness (cetanata) from Puru$a. 



Primary Creation 


11 


egg> whence Brainna Mlie ? water-bubble. 

29. He alone is Rudra and Visnu pervading the universe. 
These worlds are within that cosmic egg and this universe is 
within it. 

30-33. The cosmic egg is externally enveloped by water 
ten times its magnitude. The water is externally enveloped by 
fire ten times its mass. The fire is externally enveloped by air 
ten times its mass. The air is externally enveloped by the ether 
ten times its magnitude. The ether is enveloped by ego the 
cause of sound. The ego is enveloped by intellect and intel- 
lect is enveloped by Pradhana. They say that the coverings of 
the cosmic egg are seven^®. There within is Brahma seated on 
the lotus. There are crores and crores of such eggs in exis- 
tence. 

34. In all these cosmic eggs there are four-faced Brahmas, 
Visnus and Rudras. They are all created by Pradhana after 
comi.jj into contact with Siva. 

35. The dissolution is also mutual but it begins from the 
end and goes up to the beginning. The great lord is the sole 
agent for this creation, sustenance and dissolution. 

36. In creation he is endowed with rajas, in sustenance with 
sattva and with tamas in dissolution. He alone possesses this 
subtle nature in due order. 

37-39. He is the first creator of all beings, their protector 
and annihilator. So lord Mahesvara is the overlord of Brahma. 
He is also known as Siva, SadaSiva, Bhava, Visnu and Brahma 
since he is all. All these worlds are in this egg, so is the creator 
Brahma. Thus the elemental creation of Prakrti has been des- 
cribed by me. It is presided over by Purusa; O brahmins, tliis 
auspicious creation with intellect (mahat) at top is primordial. 


1 8, The Seven sheaths of the Cosmic Egg consist of intellect (mahat), 
ego (ahamkfira), and five subtle elements (tanmfitras). {Vdyu. 4.87. Kurma 
1.4.4b). 



12 


Lingapurdna 


CHAPTER FOUR 

Inauguration of Creation 


Suta said : 

1-2. The period of the duration of the Prakrita creation is 
said to be a day of Brahma. There is a similai period constitut- 
ing the night. The lord effects creation during day time and 
dissolution during the nighl. He has neither a day nor a night 
(as we understand the terms). The time-duration by day and 
night ii used in a secondary sense. 

3-6. During the (so-called) day all the Vikrlis- the Vis- 
vedevas, the Prajapatis and the sages stay by. During the night 
all of them are dissolved. They are produced (again) at the end 
of the night. A day orilis constitutes our kalpa, Ills night too 
similarly another kalpa. There are fourteen Manus by the time 
a thousand sets of four yugas come to a close. O brahmins, the 
Krta yuga consists of four thousand years. Four hundred, three 
hundred, two hundred and hundred years n'spec lively ( onstitute 
the period of transition both at the beginning andtiid of a yuga.^*’^ 

7-9. The ariisaka, therefore, is one-sixth of the duration of 
each yuga. The period of duration of IVeta, Dvapara and Kali 
is respectively three thousand, two thousand and one thousand 
years without their arhsaka parts. That of Kria has been men- 
tioned above. O men of holy rites, fifteen winks in the eyes of a 
man of normal health in normal condition constitute a kastha. 
Thirty such kashas make one kala. d’hirty siicli kalas make 
one muhurta. 

10-12. The night contains fifteen such inuhurlas and the day 
another fifteen muhurtas. A (lunar) month according to liiiinaii 


It). Each yuga is prefixed and suffixed hy a sandhya which .specifies 
the advent and culmination of a yuga. The two sandhy ’ts of a yuga are of 
equal length though their period of duration dilVer.s fioni yuga to yuga. 
Thus Krtayuga lasts for four thousand diviiu yeais and its sandhvas for 
eight hundred such years; Treta lasts for three iliousand divin<‘ year.s and 
its sandhyas for six hundred such years; Dvapara lasts for two thousand and 
its sandhy.as tor four hundred; Kali lasts for one thou.sand and its .sandhyas 
for two hundred such years. I'hc total period of duration for the four yugas 
is ten thousand divine years and that for their sandhyas is two thousand 
divine years. 



Inauguration of Creation 


13 


reckoning constitutes the night and day of the pitrs. Divided 
further, the dark half constitutes the day and the bright half 
constitutes their night when they go to sleep. Thirty human 
months make one month of the Pitrs. The period of three hun- 
dred and sixty months calculated according to human reckon- 
ing makes one year of the Pitrs. 

13. A hundred years calculated according to human 
reckoning make three years of the Pitrs. 

14. Twelve months according to human calculation make 
one year ( of the mortals) ; twelve months (^f the manes (accor- 
ding to their own calculation) constitute their one year. 

1*5. According to Lihgapurana one human year constitutes 
the period of day and night for the manes. Their days, nights 
and years and their further divisions arc as folic vs: 

16. The period of Uttarayana (northern transit of the 
sun'' is the day for the manes; the period of Daksinayana (south- 
ern iransir of the sun) constitutes then night. These days and 
nights are calculated in accordance with the reckoning of 
the devas. 

17-23, Thirty human yeais comliiute a divine month. 
() brahmins, a hundred human yea ( onslitiitc three divine 
m<jnihs and ten days. I’hree hundred and sixty human years 
cc^nstitutc a divine year. Three thousand and thirty human 
years constitute a year of the seven sages. Niiu* thousand and 
ninety ) ears, according to human c.ilcuLilion make a year of 
Dhruva. Thirty six thousand hinu ui yrais iiuih. a century of 
divine years The pecjple who know arithmetic ay that the 
thrc'C hundu’d and sixty thousand human years constitute the 
period of a thousand divine years. 

21-3'). The duration of a yuga i.s calculated according 
to th(‘ divine reckoning. I'hc first yuga is named Krta; 
thereafter comes Treta and then Dvapara and Kali. () men 
of holy rites, these are the (names of the four) yugas. Hence- 
forth the numl 3 cr of years of each yuga which have been 
mentioned earlier in divine reckoning are now being counted 
according to human reckoning, ^ he Krta consist^ of one 
million four hundred and forty thousand human years; Treta 
of one million eight hundred thousand years; Dvapara of seven 
hundred twenty thousand years and Kali of three hundred and 



14 


LingapwrSna 


sixty thousand human years. Thus the duration of the four 
yugas^ without the period of junction and transition totals to 
three million six hundred thousand human years. If Sandhya 
periods are included, the set of four ages will consist of four 
million three hundred and twenty thousand years. A little 
over seventy one sets of four yugas — Krta, Treta, Dvapara and 
Kali — constitute a manvantara.^® The number of human years 
in a manvantara are thirty crores six million and seven 
hundred and twenty thousand, O excellent brahmins. The 
period of a manvantara, according to this Purana, is not more 
than this. 

36, The number of years in one set of four yugas have 
been mentioned earlier. O excellent brahmins, a thousand such 
sets of four yugas constitute a kalpa (of Brahma) . 

37. During Brahma’s night the creatures perish; at the 
end of the night ihey are created again. There are twenty-eight 
crores of gods who move in aerial chariots. 

35^. During the manvantaras and the intermediary periods 
their number increased to three hundred and ninety two 
crores. 

39-40. O brahmins, during the last kalpa their number 
came to seventy-eight thousand. In all kalpas this is the position 
in brief. When the dissolution is imminent people abandon the 
persons stirviving the last day of the kalpa and go to Janaloka 
from the world,Mahar. 

41-42. The number of years in half a kalpa by divine 
calculation is two thousand eight hundred and sixty two crores 
and seven millions. The kalpa too shall be similarly calculated. 
A thousand such kalpas make a year of Brahma. 

43. Eight thousand years of Brahma make his yuga. A 
thousand yugas of Brahma constitute a savana. 

44. Nine thousand such savanas constitute a day of 
Rudra. 

45-49. O great sages, the following are the names of some 
kalpas of Brahma, viz — bhavodbhava, tapas, bhavya, rambha, 


20. A manvantara comprises about seventyone mahayugas which 
arc equal to i 2 ,ooo years of the gods. The Puranas mention fourteen 
manvantaras. These derive thtir names from fourteen successive mythical 
progenitors and sovereigns of the earth. 



Inauguration of Creation 


15 


kratu, rtu, vahni, havyavaha, savitra, Suddha, xnajjaliya, 
madhyama, vairaja, ni^da, mukhya, meghavahana, pahcama, 
citraka, akrti, jiiana, manas, sudaria, brihha, bvetalohita, 
rakta, pitavasas, asita, and sarvarupaka. O excellent sages, 
thousands and crores of such kalpas have already elapsed. 

50. At the dissolution of a kalpa, whatever remains of 
creation produced during day and night is destroyed. 

51-53. Ihe destruction is subject to the behest of lord Siva. 
When the creation is annihilated and the Pradhana is stationed 
in itself, both Pradhana and Purusa come to a standstill or 
remain inactive. O brahmins, it is only when the three gunas 
are not in equilibrium that creation takes place. When they 
are in equilibrium the creation is dissolved. The great lord is 
the cause of both. The creation is effected by him sportively 
in this manner. 

54-56. Such creations, effected through the agency of 
Pradh“»na arc innumerable. The kalpas together with their 
Brahmas and Visnus are innumerable. But lord Siva is only 
one. The activities of Prakrti emerging from Pradhana are due 
to His sport. The activities as characterized by the gunas are 
threefold and destructible but the (uncreated) atman has 
neither a beginning nor a middle nor an end.®* 

57. The life-time of Brahma consists of two halves called 
pariirdhas.®® What is created during His day time is destroyed 
during His night. 

58-61. The worlds bhur, bhuvah, svar and mahar perish; 
only the worlds above remain intact. At night, wlu*n the mobile 
and immobile perish and a vast sheet of water®® spreads like a 
single ocean, Brahma goes to sleep in the wa^er. He is there- 

21. Creation is the result of stimulation (ksobha) of the gunas. 
When there is no stimulation, creation does not exbt; consequently, the time- 
unitSi— kalpas, manvantaras, yugas, samvatsaras and other relatively bigger 
and smaller units disappear as a matter of course. 

22. A kalpa (a period of four thousand cycles of four yugas) consti- 
tutes a day of Brahma. It is divided into two halves : '> parardhas. A half 
kalpa covers a cycle of two thousand caturyugas. At the end of a full kalpa 
a great hre consumes the world. 

23. Ekarnava symbolises the state of the universe during the period 
of dissolution when the divided units are drawn together forming a single 
watery mass. For detail see MP — A Study. PP. 9-10. 



16 


Lingapurdm 


fore known as Nariyana. At the end of the night he wakes up 
and beholds a void what used to be the world of mobile and 
immobile beings. Then he, the most excellent among the 
knowers of Brahman decides to create. He assumes the form of 
a boar^^ and lifts the earth submerged in the waters. He lifts it 
up and places it as before, together with all the rivers, rivulets 
and oceans. 

62-63. With great effort he makes the earth even. He 
gathers together all the mountains burned by fire on the earth. 
He establishes the four worlds, bhiih, etc. as before. He, the 
lord creator, then decides to create everything afresh. 


CHAPTER FIVE 

Creation 


Suta said : 

1. O brahmins, while Brahma of unknown origin pondeied 
on creation he became manifested as delusion t rivf^loped in 
darkness. 

2. Ignorance originated from the self-born Biahma in 
live^'* forms: — darkness (lamas ,, infatuation fmoha), the great 
infatuation (mahamoha), gloominess (tamisia^, and blinding 
gloominess (andhatamisra). 

3-4. This creation of Brahma which is (‘iwrlojiod b) igno- 
rance is declared to be primary. From this creation emerged the 
imnio\ables (plants, moumains etc.). He considered this creation 
incapable of causation. He thought of creating yet. Wliilc he 
thus meditated, his neck turned horizontally. 

5-8. At first the hoii/ontal creation named tiiyak.srotas 
emerged from him; the next vias urdhvaisrotas chiefly characte- 

24. The Purwas often mention Varaha (Boar incarnation of Visnu) 
lifting the earth from the depth of the Ekarnava ocean. 

25. Avidya, also designated as viparyaya is fivefold. Gf. 11.9.30. 
Its five kinds are defined in the Dwi Bhdga, These are subdivided into sixty- 
two kinds. Gf. II. 9. 34"35- 



Creation 


17 


rized by goodness. Then came arvaksrotas, after that anugraha, 
and lastly bhutadi. The first creation of Brahma is known mahat; 
the second of tanmair^ as bhautika; the third of the sense- 
organs as aindriya; the fourth of the immovables as mukhya; 
the fifth of animals as tiryagyoni ; the sixth of gods as daivika ; 
the seventh of mankind as manusa; the eighth (of emotions) 
as anugraha; the ninth of Kumaras as Kaumarya.^® These are 
Prakrta and Vaikrta creations. 

9-11. Formerly, O excellent sages, Brahma created Sananda, 
Sanaka and Sanatana. By refraining from worldly activities 
they attained the Supreme Being. By his yogic accomplishment 
he created Marici, Bhrgu, Angiras, Pulastya, PuLxha, Kratu, 
Daksa, Alri and Vasistha. These nine sons of Brahma were the 
knowers of Brahman and excellent brahmins. They are known 
as expounders of brahman and were equal to Brahma himself. 

12. [He had three more sons] Sahkalpa, Dharma and 
Aclhaixi < Adharnia is always present n^ar Dharma. Thus there 
were twelve progenies of Brahma of unknown origin. 

13-14. The eternal lord had at the outset created Rbhu 
and Sanatkumara. These two eldest sons became the divine 
(‘xpounders of Brahman. Being fice from sexual desire they 
remained hac helors and rose i qual in wisdom t<; Brahma. I'hey 
were omniscient and po.ssesicd of all merits. I shall now state 
succinctly the Tiames of the wives of the l)rahinanical sages and 
the biith of their progenies, () excellent sages. 

15-17. 'I'hc lord created Vh.ija (Manu ind Vairajhi 
J^atarupa who was not born of womb. She* bore two sons and 
two daughters to Manu. The elder was the intelligent Priyavrata 
and the younger Uttanapada. The elder daughter was Akuti 
and the youngei was Prasuti. 

lM-26. Prajapati Ruci married Akuti and lord Daksa mai- 
ried Prasuti the mother of the w^orlds :uid a great Yoginl. Akuti 
gave birth to a son Yajfia and a daughter Daksina. Daksina 
gave birth to twelve illustrious sons. Prasfiti of great penance 
bore twentylour daughters to Daksa viz., —Sraddha (faith) , 

26. Ninefold creation : The Puranic cosmology dmdes the cosmic 
creation into nine classes. For detail, sec SP, (English trans. p. 248 note 
214). 



18 


Lingapurd^ 


Lak;nd (good fortune), Dhjti, Pu?t>> Tu?ti, Medha, Kriya, 
Buddhi (constancy), Lajjja (Modesty), Vapus (beauty), Santi 
(tranquillity), Siddhi (perfection), Kirti (fame), Khyati (cele- 
brity), Sati (truth), Sambhuti (fitness), Smrti (memory), 
Priti (afifection), Ksama (patience), Sannati (humility), 
Anasuya (sincerity), Orja (strength), Svaha (oblation to the 
gods), Arani and the blessed Svadha (oblation to the pitrs). 
He gave them duly in marriage. The first thirteen daughters 
8raddha to Kirti married the patriarch Dharma. The wise Bhrgu 
married Khyati; Bhargava (Sukra) married Arani; Marici 
(marrted) Sambhuti ; Ahgiras (married) Smrti. The other 
married pairs were : Priti and Pulastya, Ksama and Pulaha, 
Sannati and Kratu, Atri and Anasuya, Orja and Vasi^tha, 
Svaha and Vibhavasu, Svadha and the Pitrs. 

27-28. Sati the mental creation of the lord was adopted as 
his daughter by Daksa. She the mother of the worlds attained 
Rudra as her husband. At the beginning of the creation 
Brahma had created a Being (Rudra) possessed of a body half 
man’s and half women’s*’ and then the Creator said, “Divide 
thyself.” And he being accosted thus, divided him.self into two. 
It was then that she was born. 

29. All the women in three worlds arc born of the female 
part. Similarly, all the eleven Rudras*® originated from his 
male part. 

30-33. Everything feminine in gender is she herself and 
everything masculine is Rudra himself. Keeping Rudra in view, 
lord Brahma looked at Dak^ and said, “Worship her, she is of 
good holy rites, the mother ol all the worlds, of mine as well as 
yours. If the word putri (daughter) is interpietcd as ‘one who 


27 • This half-male and half-female form of lord Siva is most popular 
m ancient sculpture. The concept has its basis in the Puru;a-Frakrti doctrine 
of the S&ihkhya philosophers. 

28. Eleven Rudras. For the names of eleven Rudias, see I. 8a. 40-41. 
Their names are variously mentioned in the Puranas. Foi instanre, Matsya 
has two lists ^5. 29-30; 153. 19) which differ from each other. Vayu agrees 
with Matsya only in three names. Bhavifya(i25.7) gives a different list. 
For the interpreution of these names and other detail, see MP. A Study 
PP. 65-67. 



Creation 


19 


saves from the hell “put” she will become the excellent wife of 
Rudra and the mother of the Universe. She shall be your 
daughter and known as Sati. 

Thus urged by Brahma Dak^ obtained her as his daughter 
and respectfully gave her to Rudra (in marr iag e) . 

34. T he thirteen wives of Dharma, §raddha and others have 
already been mentioned. I shall now mention the progeny of 
Dharma from those wives, in due order. 

35-36. They are Kama (love), Darpa (pride), Niyama 
( restraint) , Santo$a (contentment) , Lobha (covetousness) , 
Sruta (learning), Danda (punishment), Samaya (agreement), 
Bodha (wisdom), Apramada (non-erring), Vinaya (humility), 
Vyavasaya (industry'), K$ema (welfare), Sukha (happiness) 
and Ya^as ( fame) . These are the offspring of Pharma. 

37-40. Dharma begot of Kriya (activity) and Buddhi (in- 
telligence) two sons each viz., — Danda (punishment) and 
Samaya (agieement) of the former, Apramada (non-erring) and 
Bodha (wisdom ) of the latter. Hence the sons of Dharma and 
Adharnia are fifteen in all. Bhrgu’s wife Khyati gave birth to Sri, 
(who became) the wife of Visnu and to two sons Dhatr and 
Vidhatr who later became the sons, in-law of Meru. Prabhuti, 
wife of Marici, gave birtli to two sons; Purnamasa and Marica 
and four daughters: Tusvi, Drsti, Krsi and Apaciti. 

41-45. O great sages, Ksama bore to Pulaha three sons : 
Kardama, Variyas and Sahisnu and one daughter Pivarl, golden 
in colour and stout as the earth. Pulastya bcg<>' of Priti two 
sonsDattorna and Vedabahu and a daughter Dr^dvati. Sannati, 
wife of Kratu gave birth to sixty thousand sons who are known 
as Balakhilyas. Smrti, wife of sage Ahgiras, gave birth to four 
daughters; Sinivali, Kuhu, Raka and Anumati after obtaining 
three sons : Anubhava, Agni and KIrtiman, O sages of holy 
ri tes. 

46-50. Anasuya, the wife of Atri, gave birth to six children, 
a daughter Sruti and five sons ; Satyanetra, Bhavyamurti, Apa, 
Sanaiscara and Soma; the sixth was Sruti ^mentioned above). 
The affectionate mother Uija bore to Vasistha seven handsome 
sons: Rajas, Suhotra, Bahu, Sax.*na, Anagha, Sutapas and 
Sukra. To the god of fire who identifies himself with Rudra 
and is the eldest son of Brahma and also the very life of the 



20 Lingapurd^a 

people, Svaha bore tliree sons, for the welfare of the three 
worlds. 


CHAPTER SIX 


Glory of Siva 

SUla said : 

1-3 The three sons of Agni^ are Pavamana, Pavaka and 
Suci. The fire produced by attrition is called Pavamana; that 
from lightning is named Pavaka; that from the sun is knov/n as 
Suci. The three were the sons of Svaha. Togrther with their 
sons and grandsons th» ir number goes upto fortynine (=*7x7). 
The fires are produced in sacrifices. 

4. All these are ascetics and observers of holy rites. All of 
them are prajapatis identical with Rudra. 

5. The Pitrs are of two categories: yajvans and non-yajvans. 
Yajvans are also called Agnisvattas, the non-yajvans as Barhi- 
sadas. 

6. Sraddh& gave birth to the mental daughter Mena. This 
mental daughter is well known in the world. 

7 8. Mena gave birth to Mainaka Kraunca, his(Mainaka’s) 
younger sisters IJma and Gaiiga. The latter became the holiest 
by virtue of her contact with the body of lord Siva. Svadha 
gave birth to a mental daughter Dharanl (earth) who became 
the support of sacrifices. That lady (Dharam) of lotus-face 
became the wife of Meru, the king of mountains. 

9-10. The Pitrs aic amrtapas (imbibers of nectar). Their 
account in detail, together with that of the sages and their fami- 
lies I shall narrate in a separate chapter, later on. 


29. For agnivamsa see Vdyu I. 29; JirahnUfy^^ I. i.io; M£rk(mideya 
52. 20-21, Vifiiu 1.10. 14-17. According to Lifiga (11.12.33) agni is the 
creative force that perme ates the C osmic Egg and effects the work of crea- 
tion. 

There art 
of Rudra (f.6j 


ot R.udxa. (2 

PurSnas in 



) which arc the different forma 
ppamfa they are the attendants 
a general agreement in the 

:here u a vridc 



21 


Glory of Siva 

Satl, the (adopted) child of Daksa^ the future daughter of 
Himavat, married Rudra. 

1 1 . Later, she cursed her father Daksa [and immolated her- 
self] Rudra who thought on her created many Rudras. 

12. He created them in the form of his own person and 
they were honoured by all the worlds. O leading sages, it was at 
the behest of Brahma that lord Rudra created them. The 
lord had laughed and they were created immediately. 

13-16. The fourteen worlds*® were completely covered by 
them. They were of different sort, devoid of impurities, death- 
less and ageless. On seeing these Rudras in front Brahma spoke 
to them : 

“O Rudras, obeisance to you. O threc-eyed gods, you are 
omniscient, omnipresent and splendid. Some I you arc long, 
some short and dwarfish. Your hair are golden. You dazzle 
our eyes by your splendour. You arc eternal, enlightened, devoid 
of and dvandva^. You arf‘ passionless sons of Rudra. 

You are the universal souls. Thus, after eulogising Rudras, 
lord Brahma circumambulated them and spoke to Rudia. 

17. ‘‘O lord, obeisance be to you; O great Rudra, it does 
not behove you to create subjects devoid of death. O lord, you 
should create mortal subjects.’’ 

18. Then the great lord Rudra replied thus, '‘My position 
is not of such a nature. O Biahma, you should create such sub- 
jects endowed with death.” 

19. 'Ihus, at the will of Rudia, the four I iced Brahma 
created the Univeise, of the mobile and iinmobi* beings, en- 
dowed with death and old age. 

20-24. Thus, as Rudra desisted from ci eating inoi tal sub- 
jects he obtained the title 'sthanu’. O Brahmins, Rudra alone is 
capable of that, lie is the supreme and unsullied soul wlio can 
assume physical bodies when he wills. The loid bestows happi- 
ness on all living lieings meicifully and without sliain. He has, 
therefore, acquired the tide Sankara. He is the ail-pervading 

JO. The universe is comprised of fourteen worlds, seven ns ng above 
the earth and seven lying below. The sev i upper regions arc (i) bhur, 
(ii) bhuvab, (ill) svar, (iv) mahar, (v) janab (vi) tapas, (vii) satyam 
and the seven loviei axe (I'i ata\a^. (>1"^ vVtaia, sutata, (Vv'i ra&atata, 
(v) tala, (vi) talatata, {y\\) pMSiVa. 



22 


LingapurSna 


soul who bestows blessings upon the person who out of the fear 
of worldly existence has resorted to yoga whereby he has become 
detached eschewing worldly activities and pleasures. [It is en- 
joined that] detachment can be produced by perfect knowledge 
as well. The indiseriminate eschewal of this knowledge is mea- 
ningless and is contrary to the purpose. It is through his grace 
that the confluence of knowledge and detachment takes place. 

25-26. Virtue, knowledge, detachment and prosperity are 
the result of his blessing. By taking recourse to him one can be 
easily liberated. Even if he is engrossed in sin he does not fall 
into hell. 

27-31. Hence, by resorting to him, people can attain 
eternal release from worldly existence. 

The Sages said : 

There are twenty-eight crores of hells from ghora to maya 
where the sinners are tortured, if they do not seek refuge in Him. 
He is the support of all living beings. He is unchanging. He is 
the lord of the worlds. He is Puru^a, the great Atman. He is 
often invoked and often eulogised. He is named Kala Rudra 
when he assumes tamoguna, and Brahma when he assumes 
rajoguna and Vimu when he assumes sattvagutta. When devoid 
of attributes he is ealled Mahe^vara. O intelligent Suta, now 
tell us, by doing what or by neglecting what do men go to hell. 
We are eager to hear it. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

The esoteric secret of Siva 


Suta said : 

1. I shall recount to you, at the outset, the esoteric secret, 
in brief, of the all-knowing Siva of unmeasured splendour. 

2-3. The yogins who are conversant with the tenets, who 
have adopted great detachment, who are constantly associated 



23 


Esoteric secret of Siva 

with the eight®‘mcans of Yoga, such as the control of breath and 
who are endowed with the attributes of mercy®* etc., go either 
to hell or to heaven according to their deeds. 

4. By virtue of his grace, knowledge arises and yoga func- 
tions through knowledge. By dint of yoga, liberation is effected, 
and everything is achieved through his grace. 

The sages said : 

5. O best ofyogins, il perfect knowledge comes through 
grace, you shall tell us about the form and feature as well as the 
divine yoga of lord Siva (through which that grace is attained) . 

6. How does the lord devoid of anxiety bestow his grace on 
men by means of the yogic path and at what time. 

S&ta said : 

7. May you all hear what had been formerly mentioned 
by iNandm to Sanat kumara, the son of Brahma, in tlie pre- 
sence of devas, sages and pitrs. 

8. O sages of good holy rites, listen to the incarnations of 
Vyasas, at the end of Dvapara and the incarnations of lord 
Siva as Yogacaryas in the kali age. 

9. In different areas, the four disciples of the lord, fully 
endowed with mental control spread the doctrines of Siva. 
There grew up many disciples of disciples and the lord was 
pleased at this. 

10. The perfect knowledge of the lord had htrrn tradition- 
ally and gradually transmitted orally to men of le first three 
castes from brahmins to vaisyas in the manner befitting them. 
It was done so out of mercy. 

The sages said : — 

11. It behoves you to tell us who those Vyasas were who 


31. The eight ancillarics of yoga constitute (i ) yama, (2) niyama, 
(3) asana, (4) pranayama, (5) pratyahara, (6) dharana, (7) dhyana, 
(8) samadhi. Gf SP, Vdyaviya samhitiy 37. 

32. For the eight virtues of the soul, compare Agnipurana as quoted 

in ST. 

IT qr ^ I 



24 Lingapuraifa 

incarnated during every Dvapara age and furthermore, in which 
manvantara and kalpa they incarnated. 

SUtasaid : 

12-13. O brahmins, may you be pleased to listen. 1 shall 
duly recount the Vyasas in the Varaha kalpa of the Vaivasvata 
manvantara which is still current. I shall recount the Rudras in 
all the manvantaras. They had been the guides and in.structors 
of perfect knowledge of the Vedas and Pur^as in all the circles 
of vugas. 

14-18. O brahmins, these are the Vyasas: (1) Kratu,®* (2) 
Satya, (3) Bhargava, (4) Ahgiras, (5) Savitr, (6) Mrlyu, (7) 
Satakratu, (8) Vasiftha, (9) Sarasvata, (10) Tridhaman, (11) 
Trivrta, (12) iSatalejas, ( 13) Dharma who is known as Nur?i- 
yana, (14) Taraksu, (15) Aruni, (16) Krtahjaya, (17) Rtafl- 
jaya, (18) Bharadvaja, ( 19) Gautama, (20) Vacasravas, (21) 
Susmayani, (22) Suci, (23) Trriavindu, (24) Ruk$a, (25) 
Sakti, (26) Parasara the son of Sakti, (27) Jatukarnya, (28) 
Krsna Dvaipayana who was Visnu himself. 

Now listen to the yogesvaras in due order in the Kali age. 
19-20. They arc innumerable in the various kalpas and the 
manvantariis. Since the incarnations of Rudras and Vyasas in the 
Kali age arc too many, I shall recount the incarnations in the 
Vaivasvata manvantara, in the Varaha kalpa and in all the 
other manvantaras falling therein. 

The sages said : 

21. O Suta, it behoves you now to recount the manvan- 
taras in the Varaha kalpa and in all the later kalpas as also 
recount the Siddhas in the Vaivasvata manvantara. 

Suta said : 

22-28. The first Manu was ( 1 ) Svayambhuva .son of 
Brahma. Then, O brahmins, was the Manu (2) Svarocisa. The 
subsequent Manus were; (3) Uttama, (4) Tamasa, (5) Raivata, 
(6) Caksusa, (7) Vaivasvata, (8) Savarni, (9) Dharma, (10) 
Savai'nika, (11) Pisahga, (12) Apisaugabha, (13) Sabala, and 


33. idcnticaJ with ‘Prabhu’. CT. .S 7 . Jfff; I 



25 


Esoteric secret of Siva 

(14) Vanniaka. The Manus are also designated according to the 
vowels beginning with ‘a’ and ending with ‘au’. O excellent 
brahmins, they are also classified according to their colours as 
(1) iveta (white), (2)pai!i4u (grey), (3) rakta (reddish), (4) 
tamra (copper-hued), (5) pita (yellow), (6) kapila (tawny), 
{^) kfWa (black), (8) iyama (dark), (9) dhumra (light->smoke- 
coloured), (10) sudhumra (deep smoke-coloured), (11) api- 
ianga (non-tawny) (12) pLanga (tawny), (13) trivar^a sabala 
(three-coloured) and (14) kalandhura (extreme black). Thus 
all the holy Manus have been mentioned by ( 1 ) name, (2) 
letters, and (3) colour. Those identical with the vowels are, in 
brief, mentioned as the leaders of the manvantaras. Among 
them, the seventh Manu is Vaivasvata represented by the vowel 
‘f’ and colour black. This seventh Manu is also a leader among 
devas. I shall mention the yogins in this repeated cycle of yugas 
in the kalpas that have passed by and those that are yet to come. 

29 The current kalpa in the seventh manvantara is 
known as Varaha. Now listen to the yogic incarnations of the 
lord and their line of disciples in due order, in all the kalpas 
and manvantaras. In the first Kali of Svayambhuva Manu they 
were (1) Sveta, (2) Sutfira, (3) Madana, (4) Suhotra, (5) 
Kahkaua, (6) Logak^, (7) Jaig!$avya, (8) Dadhivahana, (9) 
^§abha, (10) Ugra, (11) Atri, (12) Subalaka, (13) Gautama, 
(14) Vedasir^a. (15) ^kar^a, (16) Guhavasin, (17) Sikhapd^- 
bhft, (18) Jatamalin, (19) Attahasa, (20) Daruka, (21) Lahguli. 
(22) Mah^avya, (23) Sulin, (24) Dandin, (25) Mundiivara, 
(26) Sahi^riu, (27) Somajiarma, (28; Lakulisa. O men of holy 
rites, the incarnations as Yogacaryas of the lord in all the cycles 
of four ages in the Vaivasvata manvantara have been recoimted 
(as twentyeight) . 

36. O excellent sages, in every Dvapara age, there are 
Vyasas in the same manner. The following are the recurring 
disciples of these Yoge^varas, each of whom had four disdples. 

37-51. They are; — (1) Sveta, (2) Svetaiikhandin (3) Sveta- 
iva, (4) Svctalohita, (5) Dundubhi, (6) Satariipa, (7) Kcika, 
(8) Ketuman, (9) Vis'oka, (10) Vikesa, (11) VipaSa, (12) 
¥aianaiaTva,(\3') Sumukha, (14) Dv • mukha, (15) Durdama, (16) 
Duratikrama, (17) Sanaka, (18) Sananda, (19) Sanatana, (20) 
Rbhu, (21) Sanat, (22) Sudaman, (23) Virajas, (24) Sankhapada, 



26 


Lingapura^a 


(25) Vairajas, (26) Megha, (27) Sarasvata, (28) Suv^ana, 
(29) Meghavaha, (30) Kapila, (31) Asuri, (32) Paiicatikha, 
(33) Vaikala, (34) Paraiara, (35) Garga, (36) Bhargava (37) 
Angiras, (38) Balabandhu, (39) Niramitra, (40) Ketu^fnga 
(41) Lambodara, (42) Lamba, (43) Lamb^^, (44) 
Lambake^aka, (45) Sarvajna, (46) Samabuddhi, (47) Sadhya, 
(48) Sarva, (49) Sudhainan, (50) Kaiyapa, (51) Vasijtha, 
(52) Virajas, (53) Atri, (54), Devasada, (55) Sravana, (56) 
^ravi$thaka, (57) Kuni, (58) Kunibahu, (59) tCuiarira, 
(60) Kunetraka, (61) Ka^yapa, (62) UiSanas, (63) Cyavana, 
(64) Brhaspati, (65) Utathya, (66) Vamadeva, (67) Maha- 
yoga, (68) Mahabala, (69) Vaca^ravas, (70) Sudhika, 
(71) Syavasva, (72) YatHvai’a, (73) Hiranyanabha, (74) 
Kausalya, (75) Logaksi, (76), Kuthumi, (77) Sumantu, 
(78) Barbarl, (79) Kabandha, (80) Kusikaiidhara, (81) 
Plak$a, (82) Dalbhyayani, (83) Keluman, (84) Gopana, 
(85), Bhallavin, (86) Madhupinga, (87) 6vclaketu, (88) 
Taponidhi, (89) U^ika, (90) Brhada^va, (91) Devala, (92) 
Kavi, (93) Salihotra, (94) Agnivcsa, (95) Yuvanasva, (96) 
Saradvasu, (97) Ghagala, (98) Kuudakarna, (99) Kumbha, 
(100) Pravahaka, (101), Uluka, (102) Vidyuta, (103) 

Man()uka, (104) Asvalayana, (103) Aksapada, (106) 

Kumara, (107) Uluka, (108) Vatsa, (109) Kusika, (110) 
Garbha, (111) Miira, (112) Kaurusya. These noble souls are 
the disciples of the yogins in all cycles of four yugas. 

52-55. They are all devoid of impurities, almost identical 
with Brahman, and engaged in the path of knowledge. They are 
devotees of Pasupati, great Siddhas and have ashes smeared on 
their bodies. There are hundreds and thousands of disciples 
and their disciples. They attain the Pasupata yoga and Rudra’s 
world. All beings from Uevas to Pi^acas are said to be Pa^us. 
Since Lord Rudra is their overlord he is called Paiupati. O 
Brahmins, the yoga evolved by Rudra, the overlord of the 
Pa^us is known as Pasupata yoga, which leads all persons to 
their blissful prosperity. 



27 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

Togic zones 


SUta said : 

1 . I shall succinctly mention the yogic zones now. They 
have been established by Siva himself, O brahmins, for the 
welfare of men. 

2. The portion covered by a vilasti beneath the throat and 
above the umbilicus is the excellent zone of yoga; so also the 
curling lock of hair below the umbilicus and middle portion 
between the eyc-brows. 

3. The knowledge of all topics that arises in the soul is 
called yoga.^^ The concentration of the mind is possible only 
through his grace. 

4. O excellent brahmins, the form of his grace can be 
realized by the individual alone. It cannot be imported by 
Br 2 hi:i^ v>r any other. It arises itself in the individual gradually. 

5. Yoga indicates the region where the Supreme Lord 
dwells.'*^ For the attainment of that region, knowledge is the 
cause, and this knowledge comes through his grace alone. 

6. One should abstain from sensual activities and burn 
sins by means of perfect knowledge. The achievement of yoga 
shall be possible only to one who has restrained the activities of 
his sense-organs. 

7. O excellent brahmins, yoga is restraining the function- 
ing of the mind. Eight means have been mentioned for the 
achievement of yoga. 

8-9. They arc(l) yaina ( restraint) ,( 2 ) niyam a ( obser- 
vances) , (3) asana (a particular posture), (4) pranayama 

(restraint of breath) (5) pratyahara (withdrawal of the senses), 
(6) dharana (retention), (7) dhyana (meditation) and (8) 
samadhi (ecstatic trance) . 

10-11. Abstention by way of austerity is C'llled restraint 
(yama) ; O foremost among those who have restraint, the first 

34. Yoga is defined as the achievement of knowledge of all objecU 
by the personal soul (jiva). 

35. K. reads for I 

36. Gf. Patahjala Togas utra I i. i. 



contributory cause of restraint is non-violence (ahiiiisa ), truth- 
fulness, non-stealing, celibacy and non-acceptance of gifts are 
the other causes The root of niyama (observances of vows) is 
undoubtedly yama alone. 

12. Considering all living beings as one’s own self and 
working for the welfare of all living beings is called non-viol- 
ence. It helps in achieving the knowledge of self. 

1 3. Retelling precisely what has been seen, heard, inferred 
or experienced is called truthfulness (satya). It is devoid of in- 
jury or infliction of pain on others. 

14. The Vedas declare. ‘*One should not utter what is 
obscene in the presence of the brahmins”. ‘‘Even after knowing 
the defects of others one should not proclaim them to others” — 
this is another passage in the sruti. 

15. Not stealing the possessions of others pu* posefully, even 
in emergency, mentally, physically and verbally is non-stealing 
in brief. 

16. Not indulging is sexual intcrcouse,®^ mentally, verbally 
or physically is the vow of celibacy, with reference to the asce- 
tics and the religious students. 

17. This holds good in regard to the anchorites, forest- 
dwellers and widowers. 1 shall now tell you about the vow 
of celibacy of the householders who live with their wives. 

18. In their case, as prescribed, indulgence in sexual inter- 
course with their, own wives and abstention from it with other 
women mentally, physically and verbally should be understood 
as brahmacarya. 

19. The householder shall take ablution after indulging in 
sexual intercourse with his own wife. If he is in yogic commu- 
nion with his self he is undoubtedly a celibate. 

20. In the case of non-violence (ahiihsa) too, the same 
rule is applicable. Violence sanctioned by Sruti, in regard to 
the brahmanas, pi eceptors and sacrifice comes under ahiihsa. 

21. Women are always to be avoided. One should stay 

37. For eight kinds of maithuna, cf, ST. wfrv>T %fw: 

1 1 Brahmacarya 

(celibacy) is defined as the reverse of maiithuna (sexual indulgence) and 
it imparts vigour and force : Gf. Togas Stra : 



Tope Zone 


29 


far off from them. A shrewd person views them as he views 
the corpses. 

22. He should have the same attitude in the sexual inter- 
course with his own wife, as when discharging the faeces and 
urine on the ground. There should be no attitude other than 
this. 

23. Woman is like a burning coal; man is like a vessel of 
ghee. He should always avoid contact with women therefore. 

24. If we ponder over this, we shall know that there is no 
satiety in sexual pleasures. Hence, one should practise detached 
attitude mentally, physically and verbally. 

25. Lust is never suppressed by indulging in sexual plea- 
sures. Just as fire burns vigorously if ghee is poured in, so also 
lust is increased by means of indulgence.’* 

26. Hence the yogin should always practise renunciation 
for achieving immortality, since he who is not detached is born 
and re-born in different wombs. 

27. The Vedas’* declare thatit is only through renunciation 
that immortality is attained. O brahmins, the most excellent 
among the knowers of §ruti and Smrti, it is not possible 
through rites, through progeny or thiough offerings of materials 
of worship. 

28. Hence one should practise detachment, mentally, ver- 
bally and physically. Abstention from sexual intercourse, except 
during the prescribed period, after menstruation is staled as 
celibacy in the case of householders. 

29-31. Thus the restraints (yamas) are succinctly men- 
tioned. 1 shall now tell you the observances (niyamas). They 
are ten in number : ( I ) cleanliness (^lauca), (2) sacrifice (ijya) , 
(3) penance (tapas), (4) charitable gift (dana), (5) study 
of the Vedas (svadhyaya) (6) restraint on the organs of gener- 
ation (upasthanigraha) , (7) holy rites (vrata), (8) fast 
(upavasa), silence (mauna), and holy bath (snana). Accor- 
ding to some, observances (niyamai) mean (1) absence of 
craving (aniha), (2) cleanliness (sauca), (3) satisfaction 
(tusti), (4) penance (tapas), (5) muttering of Siva’s mantra 

38. PaHeadaM. 7. 47. 

39. Na karmani na prajayi dhanena, TA. MaKSn. V. 10.5 



30 


Lingapwr&fa 


(japa), (6) meditation on Siva and (7) postures such as pad- 
maka. Of these cleanliness is twofold : (1) external and (2) 
internal. Of the two the internal is superior to the external. 

32-35. One who has external cleanliness should practise 
internal cleanliness too. The holy bath should be conducted in 
accordance with the injunctions. It is threefold : (1) Agneya 
(fiery), (2) Varuna (watery) "and (3) Brahma (consisting of 
Brahman) . It is only after he has practised the external bath 
that hr should practise the internal. If he is devoid of internal 
purity, he is still dirty even if he applies clay over his body 
and plunges into the waters of the lirthas. O excellent brah- 
mins, the moss, the fishes, the sharks and the animals that prey 
upon fishes remain ever in water. But are they pure ? Internal 
cleanliness should always be pursued in accordaticc with the in- 
junctions. 

36. Internal cleanliness is mentioned as follows. One 
should apply the holy ashes of detachment with a feeling of 
devotion. One should take a holy dip into the waters of know- 
ledge of the soul. This is how one can attain purification. 

37-39. Siddhis are accomplished only in a pure and not in 
an impure person] A person of holy rites who is satisfied with the 
sustenance he gets by justifiable means has the characteristics 
of satiety (tu$ti). He is not worried about his needs. Austerity 
is the right observance of the holy rites Candraya^a, etc. 
Svadhyaya is the threefold repetition of Oihkara mantra, 
i.c. ( 1 ) Vaeika — oral utterance which is the basest of the three; 

(2) Upaih^u — slow muttering which is better than Vaeika; 

(3) Manasa — when the sound does not come out of the throat 
which is the best of all. This is stated in detail in the ritualistic 
text on the five-syllabled mantra. 

40-43. §iva-pranidhana (contemplation of !§iva) mentally, 
physically and verbally, unflinching devotion to the preceptor, 
withdrawal of the organs of sense from the objects of worldly 
pleasures — this in brief is called pratyahara (withdrawal). 
Dharana ( retention) is the fixation of the mind in the proper 
place. Dhyana (meditation) comes through the normalcy of 
Dharana (retention). If it is coupled with thought, it issamadhi 
(ecstatic trance). In samadhi there is concentration of the 



'^ogic Zones 


31 


mind and meditation; herein the perception of object is entirely 
excluded. 

44. In samadhi^® the supreme consciousness alone shines, as 
though it were devoid of physical body. Pranayama (control of 
breath) is the root of dhyana, samadhi, etc. 

45. The wind within the body is prana. Its restraint isyama. 
As stated by the brahmins itis threefold: (1) slow(manda), (2) 
middling (madhya) and (3) uttama (superior). 

46. The restraint of the prana and apana is called prana- 
yama. The magnitude of the restraint of breath is stated to be 
twelve moments. 

47-50. rhe lilow ( manda)^^ consists of twelve moments 
which form one stroke or blow (udghata). The middling con- 
sists of two strokes. The superior has three strokes, i.e. thirty 
moments. The three respectively generate sweating, shivering 
and rising up. When the following symptoms are seen the prana- 
yZviiia excellent, for it denotes the onset of bliss. The symp- 
toms are: reeling due to drow.sincss, horripilation, sensation of 
hearing some sound, pressing of one’s own limbs, shivering, 


40 . SainadhI is a (ixation of the mind on the personal soul (jiva), 
and further, of the personal soul on the supreme soul, so as to identify the 
contemplator with the object meditated upon. This is the eighth and last 
stage of yoga, Gf. Hathayogapradipika : 

’ftw; i 

^T»rrftr: ii 

With Buddhists it is the fourth and last stage ofdhywa. 

41 . The time of matra is that of a winking and opening the eye-lids 
once, or that of a prosodial instant. The udgh&ta praiiayfima extends 
during twelve matras or twelye prosodial instants. It is defined in the 
Mdrkan4^a thus : 

SP, defines matr& as a unit of time required for the ^napping of the 
fingers after moving them round th^ knees neither speedily nor slowly. 
(Vdyaviya 37-30 • 

42 . For the kinds and characteristics of Kumbhaka pranftytoa, see 
Ha fhayogapradipikd. 



32 Lingapura^a 

vertigo born of sweating, fixation, absence of knowledge and 

unconsciousness. 

51-54. Pranayama is of two types: sagarbhaand agarbha.^^ 
If it is pursued with japa, it is sagarbha; if without japa, it is 
agarbha. It is like an elephant, or an eight-footed animal sarabha 
or a formidable lion. When caught and tamed properly it becomes 
submissive. Similarly, for the yogins, the wind which is by nature 
unstable and uncontrollable becomes normal and subservient by 
proper practice. Just as the lion or the elephant or the Sarabha, 
though rocious, is tamed after a while with a proper training, 
so also the wind attains normalcy and equanimity due to con- 
stant acquaintance and practice. 

55-57. He who practises yoga never suffers calamity. When 
the prana is properly trained it turns the defects of the mind, 
speech or body, preserving the body of the practiser. Thus, if 
the devotee perfects himself by taking recourse to the pranayama 
his defects perish; the very breath is conquered by him, and the 
divine quiescence etc. are achieved. 

58-62. The attributes of the pranayama are four, viz, santi, 
prasanti, dipti and prasada. They are explained in order: O 
brahmins, the first of these four is santi. It means the suppres- 
sion of sins congenital or adventitious. Prasanti is a perfect 
restraint in speech.^ All round, all time brilliance, O brahmins, 
is called dipti. Prasada is the clarity of the mind which is of four 
types. It is the clarity of the sense-organs, of the intellect and the 
organic winds. The organic winds -prana, apana, samana, udana 
and vyana have their functional names : Naga, Kurma, Krkala, 
Devadatta and Dhananjaya respectively. The clarity of these 
winds is called prasada. 

43. According to ST, sagarbha is a variety of Kumbhaka that includes 
pQraka (inhaling) and recaka (exhaling) varieties of prai;^yama. 

3 nnr: ^4^: 1 ^P, defines agarbha as the kind of 
Pr&nilyiima wherein the breath is restrained without meditation and japa, 
and sagarbha as that wherein meditation and japa are allowed. (Vdyaviya 
37 - 33 » 34 )- 

44. Pra^ititi — ^restrained or restricted speech. ST, quotes from 
the Mahabharata : 

aipinff 5*171551 1 



ICogic ZoMS 


33 


63-67. The wind which traverses through the body is called 
prana; that which brings down food and drink is called apana; 
that which enables the limbs of the body to bend is called vyana 
which incites the ailments too; that which excites and afflicts 
the vulnerable points (in the body) is called udana. That which 
normalizes the functions of the organs is called samana. Thus 
the first set of five winds has been explained to you. The wind 
Naga functions in the act of belching; theKurma in the opening 
of eyes; Krkala in sneezing; Devadatta in yawning and Dhanan- 
jaya in making a loud report. It is present even in the dead 
body. By restraining these winds, one can attain prasada. O 
brahmins, in the fourfold set of attributes, prasada figures as 
the fourth. 

68-69. O brahmins, the intellect has these . ynonyrns — viz., 
visvara, mahat, prajna, manas, brahma, citi, smrti, khyali, 
samvit, Isvara and mati. It is through pranayama that the 
clarity oi intellect is achieved. 

70-74. O excellent sages, Visvara is so called because it com- 
promises between two conflicting opposites. Since it is the first 
and the greatest of all the tattvas arising out of Prakrti it is 
called mahat. It is called prajna because it is the repository of 
all means of knowledge. It is manas because it thinks. It is 
Brahma because it is big and swells up. O most exccl)'*ni 
among the knowers of Brahman, it is called citi because it 
gathers together all activities for the sake of enjoyment. It is 
called smrti because it enables one to remember things. Since 
it ol)tains everything it is called Sariivit. Because it is known 
everywhere by means of knowledge it is called khyati.^'' It is 
called Isvara because it is the overlord of all elements and 
comprehends everything. O sages, most excellent among the 
intelligent, it is called Mati because it is the instrument of 
thought subjectively and objectively. It is called Buddhi 
because it enlightens things and is itself the instrument of 
enlightenment. 

75. The perspicuity of this Buddhi is achieved through 

45. khyati — a category of intellect (MP. 3.17). It is so called be- 
cause it is the source of the perceived creation or the cosmos which becomes 
visible or the object of perception by the mind and the senses. 



34 LingapurSria 

Pranayama. By restraining himself one shall burn all defects 
by taking recourse to pranayama. 

76. By means of pratyahara (withdrawal of sense-organs) 
and Dharanas (retentions) one shall destroy sins. By medi- 
tating on the mundane objects as if they were poisonous one 
destroys all ungodly qualities. 

77. O excellent ascetics, one should increase the power of 
intellect by means of samadhi. The eight aricillaries of yoga 
should be practised only after securing the proper place for 
yogic practice. 

78. The knower of the Atman shall then duly secure 
Asanas (correct postures) for achieving yogic results. If the 
place and lime are not suitable he cannot have even a glimpse 
of yoga. 

79-86. The yogic exercises should not be practised in the 
the following places or circumstances — near the fire, within 
water, on a heap of dry leaves, in a place infested with crea- 
tures, in the cremation ground, in a dilapidated cowpen, in 
the four crossroads, in a place full of noises, in a place 
generating fear, in a monastery, or the anthill, in an in- 
auspicious place, in a place inhabited by wicked men and in 
a place infested with mosquitoes. One should not practise 
yogic exercises when there is some ailment in the body or 
when the minej is in dejection. 

The devotee shall delightedly practise the aneillarics of 
yoga in the following places. It should be a well protected 
place, auspicious and pleasing; or a cave in a mountain or 
shrine of Siva, or a well-guarded park or a forest ^ or a corner 
in one’s own house devoid of people and animals. It should 
be scrupulously clean, well scrubbed, smeared with cowdung 
and rendered beautiful in diverse ways. It shall be spotlessly 
clean like the surface of a mirror. It shall be fumigated with 
black agallocum. Diflcrent kinds of flowers should be strewn 
all round. A canopy should adorn the whole place. It should 
be endowed with roots, fruits, tender sprouts, kusa grass and 
variegateu flowers. The practitioner of yoga should sit in a 
balanced posture. He should practise the ancillaries of the yogic 
exercises with delight in his mind. He should pay reverence to 
the preceptor Lord Siva, Goddess Uma, Vinayaka, the leading 



35 


Togic Z^nts 


yogins and their disciples. He should practise the posture of 
svastika^® padma^’ or ardhasana.^® 

87-90, He should sit with the knees on a level or kneel on 
one of the knees. Whatever the posture may be he shall sit 
steadily withdrawing his feet. He shall keep his mouth shut, 
eyes closed, chest projected in front. With his heeds he should 
cover the testicles and the penis. With his head somewhat 
lilted up and the rows of teeth not touching each other, he 
should observe the lip of his nose. He shall not look at the quar- 
ters. He shall cover up his tamas by means of rajas and the 
rajas by means of sattva. Then stationing himself in the 
sattva he shall practise meditation of Siva. 

91. With great concentration, he .shall meditate in the 
pericaip of the lotus, on the Supreme Being which is symbo- 
lised by Oihkara and is as pure as the candle flame. 

92-95. He should meditate within three ahgulas below the 
on the excellent lotus having (at its centre) an 
octagon, a pentagon or a triangle. He should also meditate on 
the fire, moon and sun together with their consorts; or the order 
may be : first the sun, then the moon, and then the fire. Or 
the order may be first the fire, then the sun and then the 
moon as prescribed in the Sastras. He should conceive the 
four®* aims — Virtue etc. beneath the fire and ponder over 


46. svastika — -a posture of sitting practised by a yogin in which the 
toes are placed in the inner hollow of the knees. ^P, lists eight types of the 
yogic pose : (1 )svastika, (ii) padma, (iii) ardhendii 'iv) vira, (v) yoga, 
(vi) prasadhita, (vii) paryahka, (viii) yathe^ta. 

47. padmasana — a particular posture of the body in religious medi- 
tation. Gf. 





48. Construe ‘ardhasanam’ with ’padmam* i.e. the lotus half seat. 
It is also called siddhasana. 


49. This group of four consists of (i) dharma, (ii) jikana, (iii) vairagya 
and (iv) aiivarya. 



36 LingapurSfi^a 

the three gunas over the zone. He should then think of Rudra 
stationed in sattva and adorned by Uma. 

96. He should perform the rite of meditation in the umbi- 
licus or the throat, or the middle of the eye-brows or on the 
forehead or on the crest of the head in accordance w^ith the 
injunctions. 

97. He should meditate on iSiva (sitting in the lotus with 
two, sixteen, twelve, ten, six or four petals in due order) . 

98-100. He should meditate on Him in a spot as lustrous as 
gold or as splendid as burning coal or very white or as reful- 
gent as twelve suns or as brilliant as the disc of the moon or 
as flashing as millions of lightning streaks or as lustrous as fire 
or as glittering as a circle of lightning or as refulgent as a crore 
of diamond pieces or as brilliant as a ruby. He should practise 
meditation on the image of blue and red coloured lord (Siva). 

101. He shall meditate on Mahesvara in the heart; on 
SadaSiva in the lotus-like umbilicus ; on Candracuda on the 
forehead and on Sankara in the middle of eyebrows. 

102-108. He shall meditate on Siva on his forehead; on 
Mahadeva (the great lord) in his lotus-like heart and in the 
mind. The great lord is of the following description : He is 
devoid of impurities. He is unsullied. He is the quiescent 
Brahman in the form of knowledge. He has no specific charac- 
tciistics. He cannot be particularly pointed out. He is minuter 
than the atom. He is splendid and supportless. He cannot be 
reflected upon. He is devoid of death and birth. He is liberation 
itself He is ambrosial, imperishable and unborn. He is mira- 
culous, the greatest and the largest bliss. He is devoid of 
defects and qualities. He is subtler than the subtlest, auspicious, 
self- cognizable, incomprehensible. He is the greatest lord 
identical with perfect knowledge. He is beyond the scope of 
sense-organs. He has no semblance. He is the greatest prin- 
ciple, greater than the greatest, devoid of conditioning 
adjuncts, comprehensible through meditation, non-dualistic, 
beyond all darkness and the greatest Being. The devotee should 
meditate in the umbilicus on Sada^iva, the lord identical with 
devas. 

109-111. He shall meditate on lord Siva identical with 



Obstacles ami Portents 


37 


pure knowledge, in the middle of the body through su$umna*° 
pass or through the Kumbhaka. He shall then perform thirty 
two recakas (respirations) concentrating on the heart and 
umbilicus. O excellent brahmins, then eschewing Recaka and 
Puraka®‘ respirations and taking recourse only to Kumbhaka 
he shall meditate on !§iva in the middle of the body with 
normal elegance. 

II2rII6. After identifying with the lord he will compre- 
hend the bliss of Brahman emerging from elegance and the 
state of perfect equanimity. 

Twelve pranayamas make one dharana ; twelve dharanas make 
one meditation and twelve meditations make one Samadhi. 
O brahmins, one may attain yogic realization by contact with 
wise men or by his own efforts, gradually. Of course, even as 
he practises yoga, there may be obstacles in this path. But 
they perish through constant practice by the direction of the 
preceptor. 


CHAPTER NINE 

Obstacles and Portents 


Sula said : 

1-3. Obstacles to yogic practice take shape in ten different 
ways. They are (1) lethargy, (2) ailment, (3) negligence, 
(4) doubt, (5) unsteady mind, (6) lack of faith, (7) illusion, 
(8) misery, (9) dejection and (10) indulgence in sensual 

50. wnf: I Gf. Sivagita as quoted in 

II It is a vein of the body lying between those called i^a and 
piiigala and supposed to be one of the passages for the breath or spirit. 

51. recakam purakaih tyaktva. Kumbhaka alone is recommended 
for the attainment of spiritual goal; recaka and puraka are excluded. Gf. 
Hafhqyogapradipikd p. 70 

5 T II 



38 Lingapurdiia 

pleasures. Of these lethargy means abstention from work due 
to the bulkiness of the body and mind. 

4. Ailments originate from the imbalance of the consti- 
tuent elements. They are the outcome of the defective previous 
schemes as well as of bad habits. Negligence constitutes 
omission to secure the means of yoga. 

5-6. Doubt is a double perception — “this or that”. Un- 
steadiness is the instability to stabilize the mind. I'he mind 
remains unsteady due to its engrossment in mundane affairs 
even when the ground is achieved. Lack of faith is the un- 
emotional attitude towards the means of yoga. 

7-9. Illusion is misconception of the mind as regards one’s 
aim, the preceptor, right knowledge, good conduct and lord Siva 
as also in the apprehension of self in non-self even when it 
is nearby. Misery is threefold : spiritual material®** and 
divine®^. There is also a natural misery due to the agitation of 
the mind through the frustration of desires. 

10-12. When the mind is affected by tamasor rajas it is 
afflicted. The state of the mind at that time is called dejection. 
Dejection should be eschewed by strict detachment from the 
material objects. When one can discriminate between what is 
worthy and what is not worthy but still stubbornly clings to 
the unworthy, engrossed in diverse mundane affairs his mind 
becomes fickle then. These arc the impediments in the reali- 
zation of yoga for a yogin. 

13-15. To the devotee who practises yoga excessively en- 
dowed with zeal the obstacles subside but other impediments 
in the form of siddhis begin to appear.-^^ The siddhis arc six : 

32. adhyatmika — this misery proceeds from bodily and mental 
causes within one’s self. Gf. Vifnu if 

I quoted in ST. 

53. adhibhautika — this misery is produced from external causes: 

ST. 

34. adhidaivika — this misery proceeds from the influence of the at- 
mosphere or planets, from divine or supernatural agencies: 

ST. 

55 . Upasarga — It is an ailment in the soul of a yogi and, if unchecked, 
it will hinder his progress in the path of self-realization. Linga records 
sixtyfour upasargas. 



Obstacles and Portents 


39 


(1) pratibha, (2) iravana, (3) varta, (4) darfana, (5) 
asvada, and (6) vedana. 

16. These siddhis if avoided initially when their pot- 
ency is very little, lead to better results. Pratibha (keen intel- 
lect j is the disposition (of the mind) , resting on one’s power 
of understanding. 

1 7-20. Buddhi (intellectj is the faculty of discrimination 
by which anything knowablc is known. If one has knowledge of 
things subtle or hidden far or near, past or future, at all times 
and places, that knowledge is called pratibha. If the yogin is 
able to grasp without effort, the import of all words by merely 
hearing a concealed or indistinct syllable, whether short, long 
or prolat(‘d that ability is called sravana. The perception of 
touch without actual contact is called Vedana (awareness), 
riie ability to see divine forms without effort L called darsana. 
Asvada (appreciation) is the ability to taste divine delicacies 
with<- * ''<rain. 

21. Varta is the intellectual perception of divine smells 
and subtle elements. O brahmins, through yoga, the yogins 
attain the knowledge of everything about the embodied beings. 

22-23. In this world there are sixty four qi:alities present 
in the body. O brahmins, among these, the aupasargika quali- 
ties should be eschewed. In the region of pisacas, () brahmins, 
the cpialities of earth (should be eschewed) ; in the region of 
raksasas the qualities of water; in the region of Yaksa the 
qualities of fire; in the region of Gandharvas the qualities of 
breath; in the region of Indra the qualities o‘ ether; in the 
region of Soma the qualities of the mind; in the region of 
prajapati the qualities of ego; in the regioe of brahman the 
qualities of intellect should be eschewed. 

26-29. In the first region (earth) there arc eight qualities; 
in the second (water) sixteen; in the third (fire) twenty four; 
in the fourth (gandharva) twentytwo; in the fifth (Indra) 
forty. Each of the five subtle elements — smell, taste, colour, 
touch and sound is evolved eightfold. O excellent brahmins, 
there are fortycight qualities in the region of the moon, fifty- 
six in the region of Prajapati, ^d sixtyfour in the region of 
Brahman. In all the regions ending with that of Brahman, the 



40 Lingapura^ 

yogin should discern obstacles through yoga and eschew them. 
He can realize the supreme brahman thus. 

30-31. The yogic siddhi parthiva (pertaining to the earth) 
is eight: (1) bulkiness, (2) le^lnness, (3) infancy (4) youthful- 
ness, (5) old age, (6) ability to assume different shapes, (7) 
ability to hold body by means of (only) four elements without 
the part of the earth and (8) having perpetual sweet scent. 

32-35. The yogic siddhi apya (pertaining to the water) is 
sixteen : (1) He can stay under water as long as he wills; (2) 
he can come out of water whenever he wills; (3) he can drink up 
even the ocean and be none the worse for it; (4) he can let the 
water spring up wherever he wills; (5) whatever he wishes to 
eat he can transform it into tasty substance; (6) he can hold 
body with only three elements, viz. fire, air and ether; (7) He 
can hold a mass of water by the bare hands without any con- 
tainer; (8) he can have a body free from cuts and wounds. 
These eight powers together with the eight qualities of the earth 
constitute ai^varya pertaining to the water. 

36-38. The yogic siddhi taijasa ( pertaining to the fire) is 
twentyfour : (1) ability to create fire from the body; (2) 
absence of fear from being scorched by it ; (3) ability to arrange 
something unburnt even when the whole world is burnt; (4) 
ability to keep fire in the water or (5) hold it in palms, (6) 
ability to create fire by merely remembering it; (7) ability to 
re-create at will what is reduced to ashes ; and ( 8) ability to 
have the body with two elements — air and ether, to the exclu- 
sion of the other three. 

39-41. The yogic siddhis pertaining to the air are : (1) 
ability to move as fast as the mind; (2) ability to enter the 
bodies of living beings ; (3 ) ability to hold weighty things like 
mountains on shoulders; (4) lightness, (5) weightiness, (6) 
holding the air with palms; (7) ability to shake the earth with 
the tip of the finger and ( 8) to create bodies with the air. 

42-43. Ability (1) to have no shadow of oneself; (2) to 
see the subtle elements; (3) to walk over the ether; (4) to have 
the objects of desire at will ; (5) to hear sound from a distance, 
(6) to comprehend all types of sounds; (7) to have a body 
composed only of subtle elements and (8) to see all li\'ing 



Obstacles and Portents 


41 


being — these are the powers pertaining to Indra who is so called 
because he creates bodies by means of these powers. 

44-45. Ability (to acquire whatever he desires), (2) to 
wander wherever he pleases, (3) to overpower all. '4) to 
perceive all secret things, ( 5) to create according to desire, 
(6) to bring others under control, (7) to see things at will, (8) 
to perceive the whole world — these arc the powers pertaining 
to the mind in the region of the moon. 

46-47. Ability to cut, (2) strike, (3) bind, (4) create 
and (5) destroy, (6) bless, (7) conquer time and (8) death — 
these are the qualities pertaining to the ego in these regions of 
Prajapati. 

48-49. The following powers pertain to Brahma — ( 1 ) 
creation of the world by mere conception, (2) protection, (3) 
dissolution, (4) exercise of authority, (5; functioning the 
world at will, (6) dissimilarity with all, (7) creating separately 
aP things and (8) the creatorship of the universe. 

50. The power greater than and beyond this is the one 
pertaining to Visnu. It is the source of the power of Brahma. 
It can be understood by Brahma alone and not by others. 

51. There is another greater power pertaining to Siva. It 
is not understood even by Visnu. Who else can know lord 
Siva — the pure entity possessed of many qualities.®® 

52. In the course of practising yogic exercises®^ these impe- 
diments in the form of attainments do often take place. The 
impediments should be checked assiduously by complete 
detachment. 

53. Knowing that worldly pleasures are highly ruinous, the 
detached yogin should eschew everything without the least 
sense of fear. 

54. Absence of desire is, indeed, commendable. It is 
through the absence of yearning for the attainment of powers 

56. It refers to the eternal transcendent spirit placed in the twenty- 
seventh category beyond the influence of sattva, rajas and tamas, and re- 
garded as higher than the highest. Gf. 

57. ST. The sixtyfour attainments (siddhaya^) 
are useful from the materialistic point of view but they are obstacles (upa- 
sargas) to yoga. 



42 Lingapmdmi 

and it is by complete dctachmenl that the calamities can be 
eschewed. 

55. In all the worlds, upto the world ol Brahma, one should 
avoid obstacles. (Ihecking up all desires one should totally 
abandon them. The great lord is delighted thereby. 

56-61. When the lord is delighted liberation becomes easy 
to attain, by virtue of complete detachment. In some cases, a 
sage (after getting His grace) may roam about without 
eschewing the Siddhis for the sake of blessing others or for mere 
sport. I’hen also he can be happy. 

In some places leaving the Earth he may sport in the sky 
with splendour; in some places he may utter the Vedas or their 
subtle meanings succinctly; in some places he may (’oinposc 
verses based on the meaning of the vcdic passage;, in some 
places he may compose poems in the Dandaka or other meters 
in thousand ways. He may obtain knowledge of the cries of 
beasts and birds. Everything beginning with Brahrnfi and 
ending with the immobile beings may become perceptible to 
him like myrobalan fruit in the palm. 

O excellent sages, of what avail is much talk ? Knowledge in 
many ways and forms will rise uj) within that sage of gi eat 
soul. It is only by practice that perfect knowledge bee nines 
puie and stable. 

62. The knower of the yoga can perceive thousands of 
images of devas and their splendid aerial chariots. Everything 
can conic within the range of his ken. 

63. He can sec Brahma, Vi.snU; India, Yanui, Agni, 
Vaiunaand other deities. He can see tholl^an(ls of planets, siai ^ 
and luminaries as well as their regions. 

64-65. Entering the slate of ecstatic tiaucc he can st'c the 
dwellers of nether regions. He can dispe l darkness ( -^igno- 
rance) by the steady influx of liis inmost spiiitnal light glowing 
with divine grace and characterized by goodi.ess — which he can 
sec within himself. 

66-67. No doubt need be entertained that by virluc of 
His grace, one can attain Dharma, riches, knowledge, dctach- 
mtiil and salvation. The details of his grace, one cannot 
describe even in ten thou.sands of years. O leading sages, one 
should steadily adhere to the yoga pertaining to lord Siva. 



43 


CHAPTER TEN 

Means oj Direci Petceplion 


Sfita said : 

I- 9. O great brahmins, lord Siva becomes delighted with 
all these persons : those who desire to be liberated, who have 
eonquered sell, the twice-borii, the virtuous, who have attained 
sadhanas, the noble-soulcd, kind and merciful, the ascetics, 
who have renounced the world, who are detached and endowed 
with })erfeel knowledge, who have self-control, the three kinds 
of donors, who have subdued senses, who speak tiuth, who arc 
libeial, endowed with yogie practice, conversant with srutisand 
smrtis and who do not come into clash with the .U’lslrie injunc- 
tions. J'he word ‘sat’ refers to the Brahman, d'hosc who are 
likcM ri Main Brahma in the end are called liberated. They 
who are neither angry nor delighted in regard to the ten types 
of sensuous objects’*® and eight types of means’'** arc called 
self-conquerors. 'I’he brahmins, ksalriyas and vaisyas are called 
twice-born In'cause they have special conseiiatory litcs. The 
virtuous is the one who has ac quired the knowle dge ol dharma 
explained in sruti and smrli which is propei for different castes 
and stages of life and which brings about happiness in heavcni 
and other worlds. (Jne who acc[uiies beaming by serving his 
precepioi is asadhu (among the religious studejits) . J’hc house- 
hc^lder is also a sadhu when he pcrlorins holv Mies (ordained 
for him) . The forest-dw'eller becomes a sadliu w'i:en he achieves 
jjcnances. 

10. I’he striving ascetic is called a sadhu when he 
achieves yogic powder. Thus the persons who achieve Dharma 
relating to ashraina.s or the various stages of life arc called 
sadhus. 

II- 13. TI\c iJeisons i 'le diffeienl stages of life are: the 
religious student, the houselioldrr, the forr.si dwellei and the 
asce tic. The two words Dharma and Adharma Jiientioned here 

daiiatnidkc visayc — objects that can be accomplished through 
trn oigans of sense, i.c. live organs ul action and live organs of knowledge*. 

59. I'his group of eiglit is explained in the pieccding chapter. 



44 


Litigapurd^a 


denote activities. Auspicious activities constitute Dharma and 
inauspicious activities Adharma. The word Dharma is explained 
as that which is great in the task of Dharana (holding up, or 
uplifting) and Adharma (its opposite) as not holding up. In this 
context Dharma is instructed by the preceptors as one that 
takes to what is desired. 

14-16. Adharma, as taught by the preceptors, is one that has 
as its fruit what is not desired. They call those persons Acaryas 
(preceptors) who are elderly, not greedy and self-possessed; 
devoid of arrogance, well disciplined, and straight forward. He 
who practises (Dharma) himself who establishes others in 
dharma and who gathers together the meanings of the scrip- 
tural texts is called acarya. What should be known or what is 
worthy of knowledge is irauta if it is heard and smarta if it is 
remembered. 

17-21. A sacrifice when itpertains to Vedas is called srauta, 
and when it pertains to the varna^ramas is called smarta. One 
who has found truth and does not hide it when asked for, is called 
an acarya. Truth, as defined in this purana, is the statement of 
facts exactly in the manner seen. Tapas (penance) constitutes 
celibacy, silence, observance of fast, abstention from injury of 
all sorts and quiescence. When a person behaves towards all 
living beings like unto himself®® both for welfare or otherwise 
that attitude is ^called kindness. Whatever one has obtained by 
justifiable means, whatever one likes the most, should be given 
to a meritorious person. This is the characteristic feature of the 
charitable gift of the donor. Charitable gift is of three types 
viz. — the lowliest, the highest and the middling. 

22*27. The sharing ( of possessions ) with all living beings, 
out of sympathy is the eharitable gift of the middling order. 
The rites laid down by Srutis and Smrtis in regard to persons 
of different stages in life and castes constitute dharma. Dharma 
that does not come into clash with the conduct of the persons of 
disciplined life is held to be righteous. 

That person is glorified as one of auspicious soul who eschews 
the fruits of his illusive activities. 

One who has refrained from all attachments is glorified as a 


6o. This ethical code places this cult at par with universal religion. 



Means of Direct Perception 


45 


Yogin. He who ponders over the risks involved in sensual plea- 
sures and remains unattached to them even though pressed 
importunately from all round is called self-controlled. 

The characteristic feature of perfect control constitutes the 
fact that sense organs do not function falsely or improperly 
whether for one’s sake or for others. 

The following is the detached state: — The person is not 
excited when calamities occur nor is he overjoyed when he has 
pleasant results. Absolute cessation of joyousness, affliction and 
despondency is detachment. 

Renunciation of the fruits of all activities committed or 
omitted is called Sannyasa. 

28-31. The eschewal of both joy and misery is called 
Nyasa. All created things from the unmanifest to the manifest 
gross elements arc insentient. Perfect Knowledge is the 
discrimination between the sentient and the insentient. Lord 
Sivti, iiL- doubt, bestows his grace on him who is endowed 
with such perfect knowledge. So also dharma bestows grace. 
Yet I shall leJl you a great secret. One who is endowed with 
devotion to the lord is undoubtedly liberated. It is certain that 
lord Siva checks the different sorts of delusion of the devotee 
and is delighted with him even if he (the devotee) lacks full 
accomplishments for yoga. 

32-37. Perfect knowledge, teaching of the Vedas, offerings 
to the gods, inedilalion, sacrifices, penance, charitable gifts, 
study of the Vedas, all these undoubtedly contribute to the 
devotion of Lord Siva. O excellent sages, devotion results 
from thousands of Gandrayanas,®^ hundreds of Prajapatyas,®^ 
monthly fasts and other holy rites. Those who lack in devotion 
to the lord fall into a mountain cave and undergo the results 

61. Gandrayana : Gf. Yajnavalkya 3. 324 ct seq; Manu 11.217. It 
is a religious observance or expiatory penance regulated by the period of the 
moon's waxing and waning. Herein the daily quantity of food consisting 
of fifteen mouthfuls at the full moon is diminished by one mouthful every 
day during the dark fortnight till it is increased in like manner during the 
bright fortnight. 

62. Prajipatya : It is a religious fast or penance. Herein one shall 
take food for three days in the morning, for three days in the evening, and 
thereafter shall abstain from fooil for three days. 



46 


Lingapurdna 


of their karman.®^ A devotee is liberated through his devotional 
emotion. O brahmins, there is no doubt in this that heavenly 
pleasures arc not ditficult of access even to ordinary men, by 
the mere sight of the devotee; what doubt then in regard to 
the devotee. It is only through devotion that Brahma, V’ibnu, 
gods, sages, and otheis stabilise themselves and attain strengtli 
and fortune. T his has been stated by the lotd himself whil(‘ 
addressing IJina. 

38-41. O brahmins, these words wcae spoken!)^ the lord to 
the goddess Uniil at Varanasi, in the Avinuikiaka'*' region 
While the lord nas sitting with her. she, addressed him tins: 
‘‘O great l«nd how can you be realised and worshipix'd () 
Lord, tell me, is It by pmance. oi leainii\g, or yoga ? 

Sdia ^aid: 

On hearing her words cuid looking at htu* v\iih a face 
resembling the full moon the lord with the crescent moon for 
his ornainciU laughed boisterously and recollected what had 
been formerly mentioned by Mena, iht' co!>sott of the 
Himalaya w'h<m she .saw that her daughter had ovf rsiaycd ificic. 

42-47 The 'oid said: ‘‘O gentle lady, O sportful one, now 
tliat. you have v)blal!e"d a beautiful city for your abode, do you 
forget wliat was meniioned by your mothf'r in regard to tlu* 
selection of a site for abode. O foremost among those who ask 
quesliop.s, fornlerly 1 wa.s asked by Brahma in the same 
manner as I have been asked by you. O splendid lady, in the 
fivela kalpa, Brahma saw me in the while colour as Sadyojata; 
in the Rakta kalpa in the red colour as Vamadeva: m thfi 
Pitakalpa in the yello v colour as Tatptirnsa: in the Aghura- 
kalpa in the black colour as Uvara; in the Visvarupa kalpa as 
tJie multi-coloured Liana. Tlieii he said to me: O \"ama, () 

fis. ST. in expecliilion of en- 

joying the objec IS of senses. 

/ 4 - .\vjmukta--sainr as Knsi (Mbh, III. Ch, fj;. 70 -^^; Vi.‘«nii 5.3^. 

Matsya V.tvn. mO. Og). For detuiJ, vide P, V. Kant\ 

Yt\sVo\'v i.t I>Vvcvrrc\a.sasua (Vt'l. \v. VP- . But in the Kali age it 

has lost its original form. Gf. Brahmanda *2, ■5,^7, Go-h^.Tt is called Aviinukta 

Qt \vvmvvV\aVjL,W\lU\k\^tummXa\wi\‘‘.^A^\\’aL v 

H -irTT I 



Sadyojdta 


47 


"J’afpnru?a, O, Aghora, O Saclyojata, O Mahesvara, O lord 
of J)ovas,0 great lord, you have been seen by me along with 
Ciriyaiii. O great lord, by what means and by w^hom can you be 
controlled ? O storehouse of mercy, wherein are you to be 
inetlilatcd upon ?” 

48-')!^ “O lord, how' can we see you along with the 
goddess ? How can we worship you. It behoves you to recount 
it.’' 

The IokI said to the goddess : 

1 s-aid (then to Brahma) , ‘O lolu.s-born one, I can be 
controlled by faith alone. I am to be meditated upon in the 
Lihga which both yon and Visnu beheld in the ocean. I am to 
be adored by the twicoborn in the form of the five-fared deity 
with the five-syllal)led mantra. () preceptor of the universe, born 
of the cosmic egg, I have l)ecn seen by you to day by virtue of 
you' de'votion to me.' He (Brahma) then asked me to create 
in him a tecling of further devotion which I readily granted. 
() goddess, with that increased devotion he saw me clearly in 
his heart. I declare that I am subject to control by means of 
devotion alone. I can indeed be .seen thereby, () daughter of 
the Himalaya ! And, indeed, 1 am always to be worshipped in 
the lihga by the brahmins full of faith. Faith is the greatest and 
the subtlest virtue. It is perfect knowledge and saerilice; it is 
peiianee, heaven and liberation. 1 am always seen thiough 
faith. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 

Sadyojata 


The sageK said • 

1-2 How did Brahma see the great lord as Sadyojata. 
\"ainadcva, Tatpvivusa, Ag\\ovA aud I’saiva? It behoves you to 
recount it precisely. 



48 


Ligapurana 


Suta said : 

The twentyninth kalpa should be known as ^vetalohita. 

3. In that (kalpa) when Brahma was pursuing intense 
meditation a son with tuft was born unto him. He was 
called iSvetalohita 

4-5. On seeing that Purusa, the glorious lord Brahma 
with faces all round, thought of the noble-souled lord in the 
form of Brahman. Brahma retained Sadyojata in the heart and 
became engaged in meditation. After realising the greatest being 
through meditation Brahma, the lord of Devas, saluted him. 

6-7. Brahma contemplated again over Sadyojata. There- 
upon from his sides were born iSvetas (white ones) of great 
fame, viz. Sunanda, Nandana. Visvananda and Upanandana; 
these noble-souled ones were thedisciples of Brahma by whom 
he was always surrounded. 

8. In front of him the sage Sveta, glittering in his white 
colour, was born. Then there was born Hara of great splendour. 

9-11. There all the sages resorted to the great lord Sadyojata 
with perfect devotion. They praised the eternal Brahman. 
Hence all those persons O brahmins, who resort to lord Visve:- 
vara after being engrossed in breath-control and mentally 
devoted to Brahman, become liberated from sins. They will 
have the splendour of brahman and be free from impulses. 
They will go beyond Visnu’s abode and enter Rudra’s 
world. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 

Glory ofVamadeva 


Suia said: 

1. Thereafter the thirtieth kalpa is called Rakta. In this 
kalpa, Brahma of great splendour had the red colour. 

2-5. Even as Brahma desirous of a son was meditating, 
a boy of great splendour mcnifested himself : He was adorned in 
red ornaments. He wore red garlands and clothes. His eyes 



Sadyojdta 


49 


were red. He was valorous. On seeing that noble boy in red 
clothes, Brahma resorted to great meditation and understood him 
to be great Lord. Brahma, of self control bowed to Vamadeva. 
and contemplated on him. Thus eulogised by Brahma, the 
supreme lord Siva was delighted at heart. He addressed 
Brahma thus. 

6-9. “Since, O Brahma, 1 have been seen by you medita- 
ting on me with the desire for a son, with great devotion, and 
since 1 was eulogized with the mantra beginning with “brahmane 
Vamadevaya” you will attain the strength of meditation and 
will realize me as Isvara, the assiduous creator of the worlds, 
in every kalpa. Thereafter four sons were born to him who 
were as pure and splendid as brahman. They were named as 
Virajas, Vibahu, Visoka and Visvabhavana. 

10. They were pious and on a par with Brahma. They were 
heroic and enterprising. They wore red garments and red gar- 
lands and applied red unguents. 

11-13. Their bodies were smeared with red saffron; they had 
applied red ashes over their bodies. At the end of a thousand 
years they re-entered the great eternal lord. In the mean- 
time they attempted to realize brahman. For blessing the worlds 
and with a desire for the welfare of their disciples they imparted 
instructions in dharma and became favourites of Brahma. 
Ultimately, at the end of a thousand years, they re-entered the 
great lord. 

14-15. Another brahmins who practise yoga and repeat 
the sacred formula ‘namobrahmane Vamadevaya’®® and who are 
devoted to him as their greatest resort 2 ire liberated from sins. 
They become devoid of impurities and they attain the strength 
of Brahman. They achieve the blessed region (rudraloka) 
whence there is no return to this (mortal) world. 


65. Vamadeva form is represented by the back-face of Siva. In 
Hindu Mythology God Siva has five faces named Hana» Tatpurusa, 
Aghora, Vamadeva and Sadyojata, representing the five elements: 
ether, air, fire, water and earth. Of. part II. ch. 14. A statue of Siva 
in the Elephanta caves represents this form in which the frontal view depicts 
three heads only, the fourth one on the back is concealed from view and the 
fifth one on the top is dropped out as the symbol of invisible ether. 



50 


Lingapurdtia 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 


Glory of Tatpurufa 

Suta said: 

1. The thirty first kalpa is known as Pitavasas. Therein, 
the blessed Brahma was clad in yellow garbs. 

2. Even as Brahma desirous of a son was meditating, a boy 
of great splendour, wearing yellow robes, appeared before. 

3 He was a youth with the body smeared with yellow 
scents. He wore yellow garlands and dress. He had long arms, 
a golden sacred thread and yellow turban. 

4. On seeing him, Brahma, endowed with meditation men- 
tally resorted to and sought refuge in the overlord, the creator 
of the worlds. 

5. Thereafter Brahma went on meditation. He saw the 
excellent cow of the great lord. In her universal form it had 
come out of his mouth. 

6. It had four feet, four faces, four hands, four udders, 
four eyes, four horns, four teeth and four mouths. 

7-10, The cow was goddess herself who had faces all round 
and who possessed thirtytwo qualities. On seeing the great 
goddess in the form of the cow, the great lord who is wor- 
shipped by all devas said again repeating the words : ‘O great 
goddess, symbol of intellect and memory, come on, come on.’ 
[Thus addressed] she joined her palms in reverence to the lord 
and stood there. Then the lord of devas spoke to her. [O 
goddess,] enveloping the universe by your yogic power you 
should keep it under your control. You will be Unia for the 
welfare of the brahmins and for the attainment of iheir goal 
(of liberation) . 

11. The lord of dc\as, the preceptor of the universe gave 
her to Brahinil who was meditating on the lord for obtaining 
a son. 

12. By jnaciising meditation Brahma realized tliat she was 
the great goddess and he accepted her from the preceptor of 
the worlds. 

13-14. After meditating on Gilyatri pertaining to Rudra, 
Brahma became self-controlled. By performing the japa of 
Rudra-Gayatri as instructed by the lord and realizing that it 



Origin of Aghora 


51 


was Vedic knowledge, Brahma who is worshipped by the whole 
world, resorted to the great lord with his mind fixed in 
meditation. 

13. The lord then granted him a divine yoga, great 
Icaiiiing, riches and glory, wealth of knowledge and detach- 
n.cnt. 

16-21. thereafter from his sides there emerged divine 
sons who wore yellow garlands, yellow garbs, yclk)W luv klaces. 
Tliey had yellow ujiguents oi their bodies and yellow turbans 
on their heads. Their faces and hair were all yellow. For a 
p(Tiod of thousand years, these persons of great power and 
splendour who were devoid of impurities spent their time for the 
wcJikrc of brahmins. They were yogic souls delighting in j^enan- 
ces. They were endowed wdth virtue and power of yoga, 'they 
in^trucled th(‘ sages engaged in long sacrifices in the system 
of great yoga and (finally) entered the body of the lord. Thus 
othe who seek refuge in him in this manner, who have 

restrained Uieir souls, who have conquered the sense organs 
and who are t'ligagcd in meditation will become sinless. "J'hey 
will have the splemdour of Brahman and be Iree from 
impurities, they will enter Rudra the great lord and be relea- 
sed from re-birth. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 

Origin of Aghora 


Sufti said: 

1-2. When the kalpa of yellow colour passed by and an- 
oilier of the self-born lord was ushcied in by the name of Asita 
and when the universe became a vast sheet of* watei'*^ and a 
thousand years by the divine reckoning passed by, Brahma be- 
came desirou.s of erealing the suljjects. He was dejet ted and 
bi-gan to ponder. 

3. Even as he was meditating with the dedn; for a son, 
his colour was changed into black. 

66. Sec note 23011 p. i,. 



52 


Lingafiurd^a 


4-6. Thereupon he, the lord of great splendour, saw a 
boy in front of him. He had black colour but he was refulgent 
with his brilliance. He had great prowess. He wore black gar- 
ments, black turban, black sacred thread, black crown and black 
garlands. He had black unguents on his body. On seeing this 
noble-souled Aghora of terrible exploits, Brahma saluted the 
miraculous lord who had the black and tawny colour. 

7-10. Then the glorious lord Brahma became engaged 
in Pranayama. He thought of the supreme lord Siva within his 
heart. With his mind engaged in meditation he resorted to 
lord Aghora. He contemplated on him in the form of Brahman. 
When Brahma was meditating thus, lord Aghora of terrible 
exploits granted him vision. Thereupon four noble sons appeared 
from his sides. They were black in colour and they wore black 
garlands and unguents. They were Krsna, Krsnasikha, 
Krsnasya, and Krsnavastradhrk. 

11-13. By resorting to yoga they adored the great lord for 
a thousand years. They imparted instruction in supreme yoga to 
their disciples. By resorting to yoga these persons, endowed with 
yogic powers, thought on Siva. They entered the region of lord 
Siva, the region devoid of impurities and free from attributes. 
Those others too, who contemplate on him by resorting to yoga 
can go unto the region of that eternal lord. 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 

Glory of AghoreSa 


SUla said : 

1. When the terrible kalpa of black colour passed by, 
Brahma eulogised the supreme lord in the form of Aghora. 

2-6. Thereafter the delighted lord Aghora blessed Brahma 
and said to him: “Do not doubt that I, assuming this form, 
destroy all kinds of sin, including the terrible sin of brahmin 
slaughter. O blessed one, O deity of virtuous sacred rites, I 
destroy all minor and major sins of small or great power and 



doiy of AghoreSa 


53 


poignancy. O Brahma, I destroy verbal, physical, mixed and 
incidental sins committed wantonly and consciously. I dispel 
the natural and adventitious sins inherited from either parent. 
O lord, do not doubt that 1 destroy all miseries originating 
from sins. 

7-13. O lord, by repeating one hundred thousand times 
the mantras of Aghora, even a brahmin-slayer is liberated 
from sins. O dear, for verbal sins half of this number is recom- 
mended. For mental sins, half of the previous number. If the 
sin is committed consciously the japa shall be four times 
that number. If the sin is committed out of fury, eight times 
that number. A slayer of a hero shall repeat the mantra a 
hundred thousand times; the destroyer of a child in the womb 
a crore times; a matricide a himdred thousand times; a 
destroyer of cows and women or an ungrateful wretch by repeat- 
ing t'‘n thousand times; a willing or unwilling drinker of 
liquor by repeating a hundred thousand times or half that 
number and the partaker of meals before taking bath a thou- 
sand times. The brahmin who abstains from japa or who takes 
meals before performing the daily sacrifice or abstains from 
giving charity should repeat this mantra a thousand times. 
The base man who steals the property of a brahmin or who 
steals gold is released from sin by repeating this mantra 
mentally a hundred thousand times. A person defiling the 
preceptor’s bed or slaying his own mother or a brahmin shall 
repeat this mantra mentally the same number of times, O 
Brahma. 

14-17. The sin resulting from contact with the sinner 
is equal to the sin of the original sinner. Still by repeating the 
mantra ten thousand times he is liberated from sin. The person 
imbibing sin by the contact with the sinner shall repeat the 
mantra a hundred thousand times if done mentally ; if done in 
low tones four times that number ; if in high tones eight times 
that number. It is enjoined that persons guilty of subsidiary 
sins need repeat the mantra only half the number enjoined for 
the main sinner; half that number if the sin is committed 
unconsciously. O brahmins, if a brahmin sinner commits the 
sin of brahmin slaughter, liquor drinking, theft of gold or 
defiling the preceptor’s bed he should do as follows : 



54 


Lingapurana 


18-22. He should gather together (i) urine of a tawny 
coloured cow repeating Rudra-Gayatri,®^ (ii) freshly laid dung 
of the same or similar cow repeating the mantra Gandhadvara,®® 
(iii) ghee made from a similar cow repeating the mantra 
Tejosi sukrarn,®® (iv) milk from the same or similar cow repeat- 
ing the mantra ‘Apyayasva’^® and (5) fresh curds made from 
the milk of tlie same or similar cow repeating the mantra 
Dadhikrand."^^ To this mixture water taken with a tuft of 
kusa glass should be added by repeating the mantra Devasya 
tva,’^ and the mixture should be well stirred in a vessel made 
of gold, silver or copper, or in a cup made of lotus or pala>a 
leaf, repeating the aghora mantra. In this vessel he should place 
(different) gems and a piece of gold along with a tuft of kusa 
grass. 

23-26. He should repeat the mantra of Aghora a hundred 
thousand times and perform homa with ghee, cooked rice, 
sacrificial twigs, gingelly seeds, barley grains and unhusked 
grains. He should perform homa, seven times separately with 
each one of these materials. If the materials are not available he 
should perform homa with ghee alone. O brahmins, he should 
perform homas as well as ablution for the lord with ghee while 
repeating the Aghora Mantra. He should bathe the lord with 
eight drona^® measures of ghee and wipe it off. He should ♦hen 
observe fast for 'a whole day and night, take holy bath and 
drink kurca before the image of Siva. After performing the 
rite of acamana he should repeat GayatrL 

27-32. By performing this the following sinners become libe- 
led form sins: — an ungrateful person, a slayer of brahmin, a 
royer of a child in the womb, a murderer of a warrior, a slayer 
•’eceptor, a betrayer of faith, a thief, a gold-stealer, a defiler 
preceptor’s bed, a liquor-addict, a paramour, a low-caste 
an, a ravisher of other men’s wives, a destroyer of brahmin’s 
trty, a cow-killer, a matricide, a patricide, an idol-breaker 

J7. Rudra-Gayatri : TA I. 10.5 : ‘tatpurusaya dhimahi tanno ^udra^t 
codayat. 

68. TA. 10.1.10; Mahan. U. 4.8. 

69. VS. 22.1. 

70. VS. 12.114; TA, 3.l7.l- 

71. VS. 23.32; TS. 1. 5. II. 4 
72 VS. 2.11; XS. 2.6.8.7. 

yj. It is a measure of four adhakas equal to 1024 muftis* 



55 


Glory of liana 

and particularly the person who destroys lihga images. If one 
who commits these sins is a brahmin^ no matter if his sins are 
mental, verbal, physical or of any other type, even if he 
commits these a thousand times he is liberated from these 
by performing the aforesaid rites. Even if the sins are accumu- 
lated in hundreds of births he is liberated. This secret has been 
divulged by me in the context of lord Aghora. Hence a brahmin 
shall repeat the Aghora mantra perpetually for the expiation 
of sins. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

Glory of liana 


Silta said: 

1 . O leading sages, there was a kalpa of Brahma known 
as Vi.svarupa. It was exceedingly wonderful. 

2-7. When the period of dissolution passed by, when again 
the universe of mobile and immobile beings came into existence 
Brahma began to meditate with a desire for sons. Then 
Sarasvati of universal form and loud sound manifested herself. 
The universe constituted her garlands, garments, sacred thread 
and turban. The mother of the universe with all universal 
scents and long lips manifested herself. Brahma meditated on 
lord Tsana resembling pure crystal and bedecked in all orna- 
ments. With concentrated mind, Brahma paid homage to liana, 
the omnipresent lord of all — Om O li^a, O Mahadeva, 
obeisance be to you. O lord of all learning, obeisance be to you. 
O lord, with the bull as your conveyance, obeisance be to you. 
O lord of living beings, obeisance be to you. 

8. O overlord of Brahma, obeisance be to you. Obeisanc^ 
to Brahman in the form of Brahma. Obeisance to the overlord 
of Brahma. O Sadasiva, may auspiciousness befall me. 

9. O lord representing orhkara^in a physical form, O lord of 
devas, O Sadyojata, obeisance be to you. I resort to you. I have 
resorted to Sadyojata. Obeisance to Sadyojata. 



56 


10. Obeisance to you, the unborn, the source of birth and 
who are not beyond the worldly existence. O Bhava, O I^^a, 
O source of the worlds, O deity of great lustre, bless me. 

11. O Vsunadeva, obeisance to you, the eldest being, the 
granter of boons. Obeisance to Rudra, Kala the reckoner of 
time. 

12. Obeisance to the lord as the mind, to the lord black 
in colour, to the lord as a religious student, to the lord as the 
strength of the strong and to the lord devoid of organs and 
their function. 

13. Obeisance to the suppressor of Bala, to the strong, of 
the form of Brahman. Obeisance to the overlord, the suppressor 
of living beings. 

14. Obeisance to the lord the impeller of the mind, 
obeisance to the lord of great lustre, obeisance to the refulgent 
Vamadeva and to the supreme soul. 

1 5. Obeisance to the eldest and the greatest ; obeisance to 
Rudra the bestower of boons. Obeisance to you the slayer of 
Kala. Obeisance to you possessed of the noble soul. 

16. With this prayer he bowed to the lord of Devas, to the 
God with the Bull as his emblem. He who reads this narrative 


even once becomes entitled to the world of Brahma. 

1 7-23. He who narrates this to the brahmins at the time of 
^raddha attains the greatest goal. When Brahma thus paid 
homage to him, lord Siva spoke: *‘I am delighted with you. 
What favour do you seek from me ?” 

Then Brahma who bowed to the delighted Rudra said with 
a delighted mind in clear words: know O lord, 1 wish to see 
this universal form of yours. Here is the universal cow'^* 
Goddess of welfare. Who is she possessed of four feet, four faces, 
four horns, four mouths, four curved fangs, four udders, four 


Wixda a.tvd four eyes ? How is she known as 'Viiisa.tu.'Qa f of 

^ at buU-bamKred lord Ism, mdrersod 

rahma the best of Devas, bom of himself, in words full of 


• . : She u ideaticaJ with Prakrti or RadbSaa Cam 

"f s«' 



Glory of liana 


57 


the secret of all mantras which being pious are conducive to 
prosperity. 

24-25. Listen to a great secret. As in the first creation, the 
kalpa that is current now is known as VisvarQpa. O lord 
(Brahma) there !s the region of Brahma which you have 
attained. O lord ! beyond that region there is an auspicious 
region occupied by Visnu born of my left limb. Since that 
time, this the thirtythird kalpa has begun. 

27. O lord of Devas possessed of great intellect, before you, 
hundreds and hundred thousands of Brahmas have passed 
away. Now listen. 

28. You who arc a devotee of the spiritual lineage of 
Mandavya have attained the state of my son by practising 
penance. Stabilised in bliss you can realize the supreme bliss. 

29-31. O lord, you are characterized by the following 
qualities: (1) Yoga, (2) Saiikhya, (3) penance, (4) learning 
(5) ^ ‘"ic injunctions, ^6) holy rites (7) pleasant speech, 
(8) truth, (9) mercifulness, (10) Vcdic knowledge, (11) non- 
violence, (12) wisdom, (13) forbearance, (14) meditation, 
(15) proximity with the lord, (16)control of the senses, (17) 
quiescence, (18) intelligence, (19) illusion, (20) intellect, (21) 
fortitude, (22) splendour, (23) ethics, (24) lame, (25) intelli- 
gence, (26) modesty, (27) vision, (28) auspicious speech, 
(29) satisfaction, (30) skill in the exercise of sense-organs, (31) 
performance of Vedic rites, and (32) pleasure. While she, the 
goddess, has these thirtytwo qualities recognizable in her 
appellation of thirtytwo syllables. 

32-34. O Brahma, the goddess Prakrti, the source of your 
origin has been created by me. She is the o erlord of Visnu 
and other gods. She is my progeny. Philosophers call her by 
various names, the four-faced deity, the origin of the universe, 
pfunordiaV nature, cow or s^ieech, Gauri, Maya, Wdya, Ys^rsna, 
Haimavati, Pradhana or Prakili. 

35-39. She ak ne is unborn. She is red, white and black in 
colour; She creates subjects in the universe that a^o of the form 
as she herself. I am unborn, know me to b ' omnipresent and 
know her to be Gayatri of universal form. 


75- TA.io.i; Mah§n. U. 9 . 2 , Svet. U 4 . 5 , 



58 


LingapufWfa 


After saying this, the lord created four sons. They were boys 
of all forms, who stood beside the Goddess. They were known 
Jati MundT, !§ikhan(j[i Ardhamunda. Resorting to the yaugic 
practices they of great splendour worshipped the lord. They carri- 
ed out their task of instruction in dharma. They followed the 
path of yogic practice. These controlled souls of good conduct 
entered lord Rudra at the end of a thousand divine years. 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 

Origin of the Linga 


Suta said : — 

1-5. Thus the origin oi Sadyojata has tly 

narrated. He who reads or listens to oi narrates ' t . 
lent brahmins attains identity wiih brahnic ’ the 

supreme lord. 

The sages said : 

How did Linga originate ' >v .>honid lorci t r«>jnti«tted 
in Linga? What is thts Linga ? V ks ' fy Ouia, 

you should narrate all <his to us 

Rornahu) uu.a 

1 oii.n ily, vas and Sag^ ha 1 

thus . lo'd, liowdid Lin^j: ^ it vi‘ Ho v sbonld 

loid Rudia l\ v^cashippcd ; » ! vVhat is * Wi.al 

its subsiiatujn / 

Bnih*nn sa> ‘ • 

Pr‘ li^ina is Lirigi an 1 1 '<t - is sub''»ia* 

h \ y ^ r I» * , f . » ^ r bod Virnu and 

niv'^^eif ih.n» f ^ 'h ‘ (] .i*- ^ lo o(( m. It v'as when 

to- afrid ' a i goi t . ‘ J,-* lioha j;( liar with 

dn '*aPc* ‘ , /' o I ij,nct over the 

( f f j j«i V w '* th^ c \ji a thousand 

, , ' u\ (] r f ^ , ri *(,! ra aiid lUthe end, 

v.xc( }' ' ' * ds^ iiul ulaiiitil Hl(*ntiiy wnl* luCj then all 



Origin of the Linga 


59 


immobile beings had dried up due to all-round drought and 
other beings like men, animals, Pi^Sacas, Rak$asas, Gandharvas 
including plant life were scorched to death by the rays of the 
Sun. Everything was a single vast sheet of water. It was terribly 
dark all round. In that vast sheet of water, the lord devoid of 
impurities and free from calamities had gone to sleep. He had 
a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet and a 
thousand arms. He, the universal soul, omniscient, the source 
of origin of all, was characterized by the qualities of rajas, tamas 
and sattva in the form of Brahma, Rudra and Vi§nu. He was 
omnipresent and the supreme lord in view of his being the 
soul of all. He was in the form of Kala with Kala in his umbi- 
licus. He was white, black, pure, of huge arms, the soul of all 
and identical with Being and non-5eing. 

14. On seeing the lotus-eyed deity lying thus, I was 
deluded by his mdjd. I asked him angrily : 

15-16. Who are you? Tell me. Then with my hand I 
raised up the eternal lord. Due to the severe and firm blow of 
my hands he woke up from sleep and sat in his serpent couch.’^ 
Within a moment he regained control of himself and with his 
lotus-like bleary eyes he looked at me. 

17. Enveloped that he was by a halo of brilliance he spoke 
to me as I stood before him. He got up from bed and laughing 
awhile addressed me sweetly. 

18-32. ‘‘I welcome you, O dear Bralima of great bril- 

liance.” O leading Devas, when I heard his words uttered 
smilingly my arrogance was provoked bv rajas and I spoke to 
him thus: “With smiles within, you call me by the appellation 
T)ear’ (as if 1 were inferior to you) . But know that 1 am the 
cause of creation and annihilation of the universe. O sinless one, 
you address me as a preceptor would address his disciple. But 
1 am the creator of the universe, the promptor of Prakrti, the 
eternal, unborn Brahma, the origin and soul of the universe. I 
am the lotus-eyed lord. Now tell me quickly why you speak 
thu.s in utter delusion. 

76. RV. X. 90. 1 . 

77. In Hindu Mythology Visnu is rq.rcscnlcd as reclining on the 
serpent Sesa. A vivid picture of Sesaiayi Visnu is depicted on the outer 
wall of the Dasavatara temple at Deogarh. 



60 


Lingapurana 


He then replied to me — ‘‘See for yourseJf that I am the 
creator, sustainer and destroyer of the universe. You are born 
of my eternal body. You forget that I am the lord of Universe, 
the Supreme soul invoked and eulogised. I am Visnu, Acyuta, 
ISana, the origin of the universe. It is not your fault that you 
have forgotten me. This has been effected by me through my 
maya. Listen to the truth, O four-faced’® deity. Indeed, I am 
the lord of all devas. I am the creator, leader and destroyer. 
There is no other lord like me. I alone am the Supreme 
Brahman. O Brahma, I am the greatest principle, the greatest 
luminary, the supreme soul. O four-faced lord, whatever is seen 
or heard in this universe — the mobile and immobile, is 
identical with me and permeated by me. Formerly the unmani- 
fest pradhana the twenty-fourth principle’® from the gross to 
the indestructible atom was created by me. Out of fury were 
Rudra and others created. Out of joy and sport you were born as 
also the Cosmos: Intellect, the threefold®® ego, subtle elements 
sense-organs including the mind; and gross elements were also 
created by me. 

As he finished his speech, a terrible, thrilling fight ensued 
between us. In the middle of that ocean of dissolution we were 
engaged in fight, instigated by rajas. 

33. In the meantime a brilliant Linga appeared in front of 
us in order to suppress our dispute and enlighten us. 

34. It had thousands of clusters of flames. It was comparable 
to hundreds of (all-consuming fires). It was stable, with no 
decline or increase. It had neither a beginning nor an end nor 
a middle. 

35. It was incomparable, inexplicable, and indistinct. It was 

78. Brahma is four-faced (Gaturmukha). It is stated that originally 
he had five heads but one was cut off by Siva for telling a lie. According to 
another version, the fifth head was burnt off by the fire of Siva’s eye for 
speaking disrespectfully of Siva. We read in the Satarudra samhita that 
it was Kalabhairava, a terrible form of Siva who cut off the fifth head. 
Visnu Purana (ch.8) however gives a different version. It states that 
Bhairava attempted to cut off the fifth head of Brahma at the instance of 
Siva but gave up the attempt when Siva intervened at the behest of Visnu. 

79. It refers to the invisible (avyakta) Pradhana, the twentyfourth 
categorv in Samkhya philosophy. 

Fo. Ahaihk^a (ego) is threefold : sattvika, rajasa and tamasa. 



61 


Origin of the Lihga 

the source of the universe. Lord Visnu was deluded by its 
thousand flames. 

36. 1 too was deluded. Then Visnu said to me — “Let us test 
this fiery Being. 1 shall go to the root of this incomparable 
column of fire. 

37-38. You should go up a.ssiduously’’. After saying this> 
Visnu assumed the form of a boar. O Devas, 1 assumed the 
form of a swan. Ever since they call me hamsa (swan) or 
Virat hamsa (cosmic swan). 

39-43. He who repeatedly calls me swan, shall himself 
become a swan of bright and white colour, with fiery eyes and 
feathers. O gods ! I assumed the speed of the wind and the 
mind and went higher and higher. Visnu the all-pervading soul 
assumed the form of a black boar and went lower and lower. 
The boar looked like a heap of blue collyrium. It was a hund- 
red Yojanas in length, ten Yojanas in girth. Its body was huge 
as the mount Meru. It had white and curved teeth. It had 
the refulgence of all-consuming sun with long snout and loud 
grunt. Its legs were short and its body of diverse colours. It was 
victorious, firm and incomp irablc. Assuming this form of a 
black boar, Vi§nu went lower and lower, hurriedly, for a period 
of one thousand years. 

44. Still he could not reach the root of the Lihga. O des- 
troyer of enemies, throughout that period of time I was going 
higher and higher. 

45. I hurried up my efforts to see th- end of that Lihga. 

I was tired. Arrogant that I was 1 could not sec the end and 
returned to the place of my start. 

46. Similarly, Lord Visnu was also tired. His fear was 
evident in his eyes. He, the origin of all Devas, immediately 
came up there. 

47. We bowed to lord Siva. The noble-minded Visnu was 
deluded by Siva’s Maya and he stood there in mental dejection. 

48. We bowed to lord Siva at the sides, behind and in front 
and wondered what that was. 

49. O great Devas ! then a loud sound issued ( out 

of the column) . It was clearly a prolated sound. 

8i. Om is a mystic syllable consisting of three sounds a, u, m. It 
is the object of profound religious meditation. The highest sphitual efficacy 
is attributed not only to the whole word but also to each sound separately. 



62 


Lingapura^ 


50-51. Thinking what it could be, Visnu stood there together 
with me. Then he saw the eternal first letter ‘a’ on the right 
hand side of the Linga; then on the left the letter *u’; there- 
after, the letter ‘m’ in the middle and the vibratory tone in 
the end. That tone was ‘Om’. 

52-55. Visnu saw the first syllable ‘a’ in the south, like the 
disc of the sun, the second syllable ‘u’ as refulgent as fire in the 
north, the third ‘m’ in the middle as refulgent as the sphere of 
the moon; above it, he saw the lord like the pure crystal. It was 
the fourth entity, devoid of attributes, nectarine, unsullied, 
undisturbed, devoid of mutually clashing opposites, unique, void, 
without an exterior or interior but still endowed with exterior 
and interior, as it was stationed both without and within. It was 
devoid of beginning, middle and end, it was the cause of 
bliss. 

56-62. The three matras and half a matra called nada, 
together constitute Brahman. The three Vedas Rk, Yajus and 
Saman are in the form of the three matras. Visnu contemplat- 
ed on &va, the universal soul, through the words of the Vedas. 
The Vedas became a sage. Visriu understood the glorious 
essence of the Vedas — the supreme lord through that sage 
alone. 

Brahma said : 

Rudra is free from anxieties and worries. Speech recedes 
along with the mind being unable to attain him. He is ex- 
pressible through the single syllable (om)***, which is the Divine 
order, the supreme cause, truth, bliss, nectar, the supreme 
Brahman, greater than the greatest. Out of that single syllable 
‘om’, the syllable ‘a’ is Brahma; ‘u’ Visnu, and ‘m’ is Rudra, 
‘a’ is the cause of creation, ‘u’ of illusion and ‘m’ of bliss. 

63-65. The syllable ‘m’ is the sower, ‘a’ is the seed and ‘u* 
is the womb. The three symbolise the lord, Pradhanaand Purusa. 
Thus the sower, the seed and the womb, together with nida, 

83. 0 «i is a symbol of Brahma : Gf. Yogasulra : *tasya vacakah pra- 
pavab’. In later times it came to represent the Hindu triad, viz. , a (Vijtiu), 
u (Siva), m (Brahm§). But this order is not followed in some Puranas. 
For instance, according to Liiiga ‘a’ represents Brahm&, ‘u’ Vi^pu and ‘m, 
Rudra. 



Origin of the Lingo 


63 


constitute lord Siva. The sower divided itself out of his own 
free will. Out of the lihga of the lord the sower created the seed 
‘a’ which he discharged into the womb ‘u* where it increased all 
round. 

66. It turned into a golden egg enveloping the first letter 
*a’. This divine egg was ensconced in the water for many 
years. 

67-68. Then at the end of a thousand years the egg that 
had evolved out of the unborn and stationed in the waters was 
split into two by the primeval lord himself. The splendid 
golden skull of the egg became heaven and the base became 
the earth. 

69. From the egg the four-faced Brahma was born. He is 
the creator of the universe, the lord of three forms. 

70-72. The wise exponents of Yajus say that Om is Brah- 
man. TheJ^k and Saman ^rutis too have declared similarly. On 
the lord of Devas precisely we meditated and we eulogised him 
by reciting the Vedic mantras. Delighted by our eulogy the 
unsullied lord delightfully stationed himself into the divine 
Lihga after assuming the fomi of sound. 

73-82. The letter ‘a’ was his head; ‘a’ the forehead; ‘i’ the 
right eye; ‘i’ the left eye; ‘u’ the right ear; u the left ear; ‘r’ the 
right cheek ; r the left cheek, ‘Ir’ and ‘Ir’ the pairs of his nostrils ; 
‘e’ the upper lip, ‘ai* the lower lip; *o’ and ‘au’ the two rows of 
teeth; ‘am’ and ‘ah’ the palates; the five K iters beginning with 
‘k’ his five hands on the right side; the five letters beginning 
with “c” his five hands on the left side; the five letters begin- 
ning with ‘t’ his right leg; the five letters beginning with ‘t’ his 
left leg; the letter ‘p’ his belly; ‘ph’ his right side, ‘b’ his left 
side; ‘bh* hi ; shoulder, ‘m’ his heart; the letters ‘y’ to ‘s’ the 
seven dhatus ; ‘h’ his soul and ‘k§’ his anger. On seeing the 
great lord along with Uma, Vifnu bowed and then looked up 
at him. He saw a mantra emerging from ‘Om’ with five digits. 
Resembling pure crystal it contained thirty eight syllables. It 
was conducive to the increase of knowledge, and it was the 
means of achievement of all righteous matters. He saw the Rk 
of twenty four syllables and four digits in Gayatri metre and in 
green colour, with the efficacy for gaining control. He saw the 
Atharvan mantra of thirty three syllables, eight digits, black in 



64 


Lingapufd^ 


colour and with its efficacy of black magic. He saw the Yajus 
mantra of thirty five syllables, eight digits, white in colour, with 
the efficacy for peace. He saw the Saman mantra of sixtysix 
syllables, of thirteen digits, in the jagati met^e, in the coral-red 
colour, with the efficacy for creation and dissolution of the 
universe. 

Having obtained these five mantras, lord Visnu performed 
japa. He saw lord iSiva in all digits and syllables (constituting 
the limbs) with body consisting of Rk, yajus, and saman, with 
Iswa for his coronet, Tatpuru^ for his face, Aghora for his 
heart, Vamadeva for his private parts, sadyojata for his feet, 
serpents for his ornaments, with eyes and hands all round. On 
seeing the great lord (of above description) the overlord of 
Brahma, the cause of creation, sustenance and dissolution and 
the gran ter of boons, Vi§nu eulogized him with pleasing words. 


CSIAPTER EIGHTEEN 

Vi^m's praise of Siva 


Vipfu said : 

1. Obeisance to the single-syllabled Rudra, ‘a’ in the form 
of Atman; obeisance to the primordial deity whose physical body 
is learning. 

2. Obeisance to lord Siva, the supreme soul in the form of 
the third syllable Obeisance to the lord who is as lustrous as 
the sun or the fire or the moon. Obeisance to him in the form of 
yajamana who performs sacrifice. 

3. Obeisance to fire in the form of Rudra. Obeisance to the 
lord of Rudras. Obeisance to Siva of auspicious mantra. Obei- 
sance to Sadyojata. Obeisance to Vedhas, the creator. 

4. Obeisance to the illustrious Vamadeva, the granter of 
ooons and the immortal lord. Obeisance to Aghora, Atighora, 
Sadyojata and the deity of vehemence and impetuosity. 

5. Obeisance to I^ana, Smasana (i.e. the lord of crema- 
tion ground) ; obeisance to one of high velocity. Obeisance to the 
speedy lord whose foot is the Vedas, who has an upward Linga 
and who is Linga himself. 



Vi^nu^s praise of Siva 


65 


6. Obeisance to him who has a golden Lihgaor who is gold 
himself or who is of watery Liiiga or who is water himself. Obei- 
sance to l^iva, the Lihga of Siva. Obeisance to one who per- 
vades all, including the firmament itself. 

7. Obeisance to the wind or to one who has the velocity of 
the wind, and who pervades the wind. Obeisance to the fire, 
the lord of all fiery articles and who pervades the fire. 

8. Obeisance to the water and to one who has become 
water. Obeisance to one who pervades water. Obeisance to the 
earth or the atmosphere. Obeisance to one who pervades the 
earth. 

9. Obeisance to one, of the form of sound and touch, taste 
and smell and to one who has smell. ^ obeisance to the lord of 
Ganas, and to one who is the most secretive. 

10. Obeisance to the infinite, devoid of forms, obeisance 
to the infinite, devoid of ailments; obeisance to the permanent, 
the most excellent, who is in the womb of w'aters, and wdio is 
the Yogin. 

11. Obeisance to one who is stationed in between Brahma 
and Visnu in the midst of waters; obeisance to the splendour, 
the protector, the destroyer, the perpetual maker and the Death. 
Obeisance to lord Siva. 

12. Obeisance to the insentient, w^orthy ol contemplation 
who removes the stress and strain of the sentient, who is form- 
less or of good forms, who has no limbs oi vho is attractive with 
limbs. 

13. Obeisance to one who has smeared ashes all over the 
body; obeisance to the cause of the sun, moon and fire; obei- 
sance to the white, of white colour; and to one moving about on 
the mountain of snows. 

14. Obeisance to one of excessively white complexion, 
while face, white tuft, and white blood. 

15. Obeisance to one who lacilitates easy crossing (of the 
ocean of mundane existence), obeisance to the splendid one, 
obeisance to one having two forms, to one of liundrcd forms, to 
one devoid of forms and to one holding a banner. 

16. Obeisance to one who has prosperity, grief and absence 
of grief; obeisance to the Piiiaka-bearing lord, with matted 
hairs, devoid of noose, holding a noose, the destroyer of noose. 



66 


Lingapurana 


17. Obeisance to one of good sacrifice, to one having sacri- 
ficial offering, to one favourably disposed to the Brahmins. 
Obeisance to one who is a poet. Obeisance to one having good 
face and good mouth; who is difiScult to be suppressed and who 
is of good mental control. 

18. Obeisance to one who assumed the form of a Brahmin/"^ 
who is Yama**^ and who has made serpent his bangle. Obeisance 
to one who is Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanandana and Sanat. 

19. Obeisance to one who hunts the deer, who is the great 
iitman, and the eye of the world. Obeisance to one who has 
three abodes and to one who is devoid of rajas. 

20. Obeisance to !§ankhapala, Sahkha, rajas and tamas. 
Obeisance to Sarasvata, the cloud and the cloud-vehicled. 
Obeisance be to you. 

21. Obeisance to one of good vehicle, devoid of vehicle, the 
bes tower of boons to the devotee, to Siva, Rudra and pradhana. 

22. Obeisance to you, possessed of three gunas, having the 
nature of the four vyuhas, the cause of existence and dissolution. 

23. Obeisance to you of the form of salvation, the granter 
of liberation, the supreme soul, the sage and the all-pervader. 

24. Obeisance to you the holy lord, the lord of serpents, 
of the form of ‘Om’ and the omnipresent lord. 

25. Obeisance to you identical with all/^ all-pervader, and 
the primordial lord. 

26. Obeisance to the unborn, the lord of subjects, the cause 
of vyuhas and the great lord of Devas. 

27. Obeisance to Sarva, Satya, (truth) and !§amana (the 
subduer) and Brahma. Obeisance to the omniscient deity of 
living beings. 

28-29. Obeisance to you, the supreme soul. Obeisance to 
one invested with the form of intellect, consciousness, memory 
and knowledge. Obeisance to one comprehensible through know- 
ledge. Obeisance to one in the form of concord and summit. 
Obeisance to one whose neck is blue. 

83. It refers to Siva disguised as a Br&hmana. ST. 

84. i.e. Y^tma, the god of death and destruction. ST. 

85. as a hunter kills the birds and animals. ST. 

86 . The epithet is applied to Visnu because the waters (nara) were 
his first place of motion (ayana). (Gf. Manu : apo n&ra iti prakta^), but 
here, as applied to Siva it means ‘one who lives among the people : 

TO’Tt ^ ST. 



67 


Vifnu'T praise of Siva 

30. Obeisance to one whose half body is female*’, who 
though unmanifest has eleven forms. Obeisance to one who is 
immovable. 

31. Obeisance to the sun, the moon, who establishes and 
destroys the universe. Obeisance to one who is the cause of 
fame, who brings on peace and is the lord of all. 

32. Obeisance to the lord of Ambika, and the lord of Uma. 
Obeisance to one of golden arms and of golden semen. 

33. Obeisance to the blue-tressed one who is wealth. Obeis- 
ance to the black-necked deity with malted hairs Obeisance to 
one with the serpent for his ornament. 

34. Obeisance to one riding the bull; obeisance to the creator 
and destroyer of all; obeisance to one who excelled even the 
heroic Rama in prowess; obeisance to you, the lord of Rama. 

Obeisance to the Emperor of kings, to one attained by 
kings, to the overlord of protectors ; obeisance to you, O Destroyer 
of demons. 

36. C>bcisance to one bedecked in keyuras (armlets). O 
lord of cows, obeisance be to you. Obeisance to lord Srlkantha 
holding a likuca fruit in the iiand. 

37. Obeisance to the lord, the chief of the worlds; and to 
one whose Scripture is the Veda ; obeisance to you, to Saraiiga 
the Royal Swan. 

38. Obeisance to one with golden necklaces and shoulder- 
lets; to one with serpents for sacred iliread, ear-rings and 
garlands; obeisance to one who has made a serpent his waist- 
band. 

39-42. O Siva, obeisance to you, having the Vedas in the 
womb. Obeisance to the foetus containing the enliie universe. 

Brahma said : 

After having eulogised thus, V'^isnu ceased along with 
Brahma. This excellent hymn is holy, it is destructive of all 
sins. He who reads this himself or narrates this to the brah- 
mins well versed in the Vedas goes to Brahma’s region though 
he might have incurred -ns. Hence one should perform the 
Japa of this, read this or narrate this to splendid brahmins for 
washing off his sins. It has been so ordained by Vis^u. 


87. Cf. note 27. on p. 18. 



68 


Lxngapurdifa 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 

Enlightenment of Vi$nu 


SBta said : 

I. The Supreme Lord said : O excellent among theDevas, 
I am delighted with you. On beholding me, the great lord, you 
should cast off all fear. 

2-3. Both of you very powerful were born of me formerly. 
Brahma, the grandfather of the universe was born from my 
right side; Visnu, the soul of the universe, sprang from my left 
side. I am extremely pleased with both of you. I shall grant you 
the boon of your choice. 

4. After saying this, the lord, the storehouse of mercy patted 
Visnu with his gentle and smooth hands out of compassion. 

5. Then with a delightful mind, Visnu bowed and spoke 
to the great lord who though devoid of Lihga was stationed in 
the Lihga. 

6. If love has been generated in you, if boon has to be 
granted to us, may our devotion to you remain perpetual and 
unswerving. 

7. O Oevas, the moon-crested lord accordingly granted 
them an unswerving devotidn and faith. 

8. Then Visnu knelt on the ground and bowed to the lord. 
With perfect control over himself he spoke to the lord in low 
tones. 

9. O lord of the Devas, our controversy has borne splendid 
fruits, since you yourself have come over here to remove the 
same. 

10. On hearing this, Lord Siva again spoke smiling to 
Visnu who bowed to him with his head bent down and who 
stood with palms joined in reverence. 

Lord Siva satd : 

II. O lord of earth, you are the projector of dissolution, 
sustenance and creation. O dear Visnu, protect this world 
with all its mobile and immobile beings. 

12. O Visnu, I am lord Siva, the unsullied, I divided my- 



Enlightenment of Brahma 


69 


self into three forms®^ under the names of Brahma, Visnu and 
Rudra with the activities of creation, protection and dissolution. 

13. O Visnu, abandon your delusion. Protect this Brahma, 
who in the Padmakalpa, will become your son. 

14. Then you will see me thus, so will the lotus-born 
Brahma too. Thus saying the lord vanished there itself. 

15. Ever since then the worship of the Lihga was well 
established in the world. The great goddess is the altar for the 
Lihga. The Lihga i.s the great lord himself. 

16-17. Lihga is so called because, O gods, everything gets 
dissolved in it. The brahmin who reads this narrative of Lihga, 
In the presence of the Lihga image attains Siva-hood. No 
doubt need be entertained in this respect. 


CHAPTER TWENTY 

I he enlightenment of Brahma 


The ^ages said : 

1-6. How did Hrahma become the lotus-born (deity), 
h^rmerly, in the Padmakalpa? How^ did \'i.snu and Biahma 
.sec loid Siva ? Pleast' recount all this pailiculaily now. 

Siita said : 

It wa.s one vast sheet ol water, leirible, undivided and full 
of darkness. 

In the middle of that vast .sheet ol water lav Loid \'i.snu 
holding the conch, discus and the iron club. He had the lustre 
of the cloud. His eyes resembled the lotus. He wore the coro- 
net. He was known Hari, lord (n Sii, Narayana and 
Piirusotiama. From his mouth emerged all souls, all beings. He 
had eight arms and a large chest. He, the source of origin of 
the universe, the >ogic atinan, the knowtr of the yoga, 
adopted an inconceivable y.ga and occupied the lofty body of 

88. The supreme loicl in liis qualified (sakala) state is characterized 
by three functions : viz. creation, sustenance and destruction. The idea 
is often repeated in the Puranas. 



Lingapurana 


a huge serpent that had a thousand hoods and whose splendour 
was incomparable. In that vast sheet of water, the lord lay on 
that great couch of serpent. 

7-8. A tall and lofty lotus was sportively created in his 
umbilicus as he lay there all-powerful self-contented but un- 
wearif'cl in activities. It was hundred Yojanas long. It resem- 
bled the mid-day sun. It had adamantine stalk. 

9-11. Even as the bountiful lord was playing (with the 
lotus) , Brahma, who was born of the cosmic Egg of golden 
womb, who had golden colour, who was beyond the pale of the 
sense-organs, who had four faces and large eyes came near the 
lord casually. On seeing Visnu of splendid eyes sporting with 
the lotus that was glorious, divine, splendid and fragrant, 
Brahma was surpiiscd and asked in a tone filled with gentle- 
ness — 

“Who are you lying (here) in the middle of the waters?” 

12-16. On hearing the splendid words of Brahma, Visnu 
got up from his couch and with his eyes beaming with surprise 
replied: — 

“In every kalpa this is my shelter and asylum. What had 
been done, whatever is being done and what would be done 
(everything is done here itself) . The heaven, the atmosphere 
and the earth everything is my region.” 

After saying thus, lord Visnu addressed him again — “Who 
are you ? Whence do you come near me ? Where do you in- 
tend to go ? Where is your abode ? Who are you that have the 
universe for your physical body? What can 1 do for you ?” 

17-24. Thereupon Brahma icplicd to Visnu. Being deluded 
by the Maya of lord Siva, he could not fully comprehend 
Visnu who himself was deluded by the Maya of Siva and 
hence unknowable. 

Brahma said : 

“Just like you I too am thePrajapali, the primordial creator.” 
On hearing with wonder the words of Brahma the creator of the 
worlds and on being permitted by him, the source of origin of 
the universe, the great yogin, Visnu entered through the mouth 
of Brahma, out of curiosity. Within the belly of Brahma he saw 



Enlightenment of Brahma 


71 


the eigliteen coutiiicnts®® together with the oceans and moun- 
tains On cnteimg the belly of Hrahma, Visnu of great splen- 
dour and brawny arms saw the eternal seven worlds®^* up to the 
column of Brahma iii which the people ol tlic lour eastes®^ 
stayed riien uttering repeatedly, “How powciful is his 
pcnaiiec” he wandered thiough diflcrent worlds of diveisc 
creation 1 hough lu waiideied fora thousand years, he could 
not I each the end Ihen h( (Visnu) the suppoit of the woilds 
who had S< sa the loid of snakes as his bed, came out oi 
IJrahml’s monih and aJehessed him thus 

2j “O Sinless one ’ You aie the beginning, the end and the 
inieidie of the iinivei^e You art rime, the quarters and the 
ctlui C) smltss oia , I do not pen ive the limits ot your 
bell> ’ 

26-28 Mt( I saying thus, Visnu spoke to Riahma again — 
In the same manner as you, I also am a loiel O illustrious one, 
please enlci mv belly aiul seethe wondeiful worlds lluitin” 
On hearing these pkasaiii woids of Visnu, Brahrn i of tiuthful 
exploits appiovt d of them uid enteiecl his belly Ilunhe saw 
those v*^i\ woilds statioiud 1 ihis womb 

29-30 He roamed ibom theieiubut luiould not find the 
cid Then on obstixinj; llu movement ot Biahm i, loid Visnu 
dosed the openings of llu passage and slept i pci lee t sleep 

On seeing the' t)p( mugs closed Biahini l^slmue^ i subtle 
foim niiel found in opt mng i the umbi us 

^ /. Dvipa in lilt bioadei sciis< sigiiiiics a (untiiit nt il division of the 
tiirestiial woild The nunibn of such divi’*’ons \ 'll u s ace ending to difle 
rent aiithoiitics being foui se\iii nin< thnUui *i<iThueii \c(ording 
to the Pinanic tradition dvipas iic situated loiind tin mountain Mciu lik< 
the petals of a lotus flower and scpaiated from one ariothei by a distinet 
ocean In the nstiicted sense d\ ipa is a 1 uiel enclosed between two rivers 
(mod doab) The word dvipa’ ib used in both best st uses in the Pui anas 
() > Stvtii regions Cf i , t 1 he tint e Bhu, Bhuvi and 

Svar arc scpaiated fiom the foui lughei legioiis \Ialias Jana, Tapas and 
Satya by a mountain Lokaloki flu light ol tht himiiiaiies illumines the 
three worlds but lads Ut n uh the four higher itgioi 

a Catuivinaa Iht uicept of fouifold social oigani/ation is 
alnady found in the Rl i Ihc idea is deedoped in the Pur mas 

Vayu (Gh ij) speaks of th< < mu oriem el seticty i 

Siva is the oiiginau i Mmu llu louiidei and Bill the ])iopagator ol Vania 
[Jbiri I '',c -'ll', ' i it' 1 I / rj) 



72 Lingapuria^a 

3 1 . Then the four-faced Brahma came out of the stalk of 
the lotus and assumed his own form. 

32. The Self-born Brahma, the source of the origin of the 
universe sat in the lotus, resembling in lustre the interior of the 
lotus itself. 

33-37. In the meantime, even as either of them was wholly 
engaged in a struggle with the other in the middle of the 
ocean, lord Siva of immeasurable soul, the lord of living beings 
appealed theie itself. Holding a trident in hand and clad in 
garmrnls of pure gold he came to the place where Visnu was 
lying on Sesa — the lord of serpents. As he waded through the 
waters quickly, big drops of water rose up in the sky, kicked up 
by his feet. The wind that blew was very hot and cold. On 
perceiving this wonderful phenomenon, Brahma spoke to Visnu 
‘‘See how hot and cold waters make the lotus shake. 

38-40. Clear this doubt of mine and tell me what else 
you wish to do now.” 

On hearing these words uttered by lord Visnu, the destroyer 
of Asuras and of unequalled exploits meditated thus: — “What? 
Who is this great being occupying my umbilicus ?• He speaks 
pleasing words though I have been angry with him.” After 
thinking thus, Visnu spoke in reply: — 

41-48. “O Sir, are you in a perplexed state inside the 
lotus ? O lord, what is it that 1 have done wlieicfore O excellent 
one among men, you speak to me thus : What is it for ? Tell 
me factually.” Lord Brahma, the storehouse of the Vedas, 
replied to the lotus-eyed lord of Devas who spoke thus in 
accordance with the activities of the world: — “It was I who 
formerly entered your belly in accordance with your wish. Just 
as all the worlds within my belly were seen by you O lord, so 
also all the worlds in your belly are seen by me. O sinless one 
after a thousand years I returned. With a spirit of rivalry and 
a desire to subject me to control, all the openings were closed 
suddenly by you. O blessed one, 1 .pondered over it. By dint of 
my ow'n splendour I gained exit through the umbilicus by the 
lotus stalk. Let there be no dejection in your mind : O Visnu, 
this is the sequence of events in their gradual advancement. 
What should be done by me hereafter, kindly tell me : What 
shall I do?” 



Enlightenment of Brahma 


7 $ 


49-51. On hearing these loving, pleasing auspicious and 
irreproachable words of Brahma, Vifnii the destroyer of Hiranya- 
kasipu and of immeasurable soul, spoke sincere and simple 
words. This type of adverse action was not envisaged by me. 

I closed all the openings sportively and casually out of a desire 
for enlightening you. 

52. You should not mis-understand me. You deserve my 
respect and worship. O auspicious one, foigive if at all I have 
committed any offence against you. 

53-58. You are borne by me, O lord, descend from this 
lotus. I cannot bear you. You are refulgent and weighty. 
Thereupon Brahma said once again: ‘Tel' me, what boon you 
desire to have. O lord, take me down from the lotus*. Then 
Visnu said : ‘O slayer of enemies, you should be my son. You 
wii: c^ttain splendid pleasure. Speak agreeable and loving words. 

0 lord, descend from the lotus. You are a great yogin. You 
are w()i thv of our worship You are the Pranava itself Hence- 
lorlli vou will be the lord of all; adorned with a white turban 
you will be known as ‘padmayom’®^ — one whose source of origih 
IS a lotus O Brahma, O loid, as son to me, you will be the 
overlord of .cri worlds’. 

Thus thi loid giaiited him the boon and Brahma accepted 
h Hull widspiteU^si Just then on seeing the mir- 

acaujus, luigi-'fdi.v i Siva with the lu*'tr» of the rising sun, 
Bjahina saa l<> V'lsnu 

/)-62 'O Vi , who IS f . oinpreliLiisiblc peison with 
a huse fat ( md t uived fangs * With hai..> dishavelled, with ten 
If in siieul a and holding a ir at, with all-round eyes he 
( 111 to b< « ' of the un i se. He has a deformed body 
and ^lidli oi Miinja grass With huge penis lifted up, he is 

1 oaring loudlv and terribly \^ idi a ma*?" of splendour and 
lustn he his envi loped the quartcis and the hrmament He 
comes this way lUclf ” On being addie^'sed thus by Brahma, lord 
Visnu replied as follows 

1)2. The Furanas describe the golden lotus flower of one thousand 
petals sprung up from the navel of Visnu while he lay recumbent in the 
ocean. Cf Aiatsj^a 168.15. Atcordmg to Hartvamia CBhavifya-parva, chi. 
7-14) the golden lotus became the scat of Brahma and alio hii birth-place. 
Hence Brahma is called padmayoni. 



74 


Lingapurdna 


63-66. “He is wading through the ocean with great speed. 
When his feet press the surface of water, as he wades through 
the ocean with great speed, masses of water rise up even to the 
sky. O lotUs-bom one, you are being sprinkled from all sides 
with a heap of water. By the wind coming out of his nostrils, this 
great lotus emerged out of my navel is being shaken. It is lord 
Siva who has no origin and who destroys the world that has 
come. Let us eulogise the bull-bannered lord with hymns of 
prayer.” 

67-68. Then Brahma who was infuriated spoke to Visnu 
whose eyes resembled the lotus: — ‘‘Indeed you do not know 
yourself as the lord of all the worlds. You do not know me also 
as Brahma, the eternal creator of the worlds. Who is this Siva 
apart from us both ?” 

69-73. On hearing these words of Brahma uttered in rage 
Visnu spoke: “O auspicious one, bestower of welfare, do not 
speak ill of the great soul. Here is he who has the lustre of the 
splendid yoga, who is the invincible bestower of boons, who is 
the unchanging ancient Purusa, the cause of this universe. He 
is the sower of seeds and the refulgence of seeds, shining by him- 
self. He, the lord, plays with toys as do the childein. Piaclhana, 
the eternal womb, the unmanifest Prakrti and the quality 
tamas — darkness — these arc my names, ince I perpetually give- 
birth to 'creation. The person of your query is lord Siva who 
is the goal of the ascetics who, being afraid of the pangs of biith 
and death resort to him He is the sower of the sc(-d ; you are 
the seed itself and I am the . tcrnal womb.’'®-^ On being addicsscd 
thus, Brahma, the soul of the universe asked again : 

74. “How is it that you aic the womb. I am the seed and hr 


93. According to the Puranic account of creation (sarga), in the begin- 
ning, the Cosmic Egg which arose out of the waters was insentient. It 
remained in this state for thousands of years until it was activated by the 
sentient principle which entering divided it into two parts. One of the two 
halves b 'f ame the celestial and the other the terrestrial sphere. 

The creation is traced to the seed, personified as Brahma, deposited 
in tl ^ foetus personified as Visnu, by Siva the sower of the seed. In fact, 
both the iiuentient egg and the sentient principle that activates it belong to 
Siva himself who out of sheer will and sportively too, creates, dissolves and 
then re-crcatcs and rc-dissolvcs the universe. 



Enlightenment of Brahma 


75 


(lord Siva) the sower. 'Fhis is a puzzle which you alone can 
solve.’’ 

75-79. After thinking about the multiformed creation, 
Visnu spoke in answer to this specific query of Brahma, the 
creator of the worlds. 

There is no other greater living being than him. He is a 
great mystery, the dimensional abode of intellect and the 
coveted goal of spiritualists. He split himself into two. His un- 
qualitative part remained unmenifest; the qualitative one came 
into appearance. Of him who was aware of activities of Prakrti 
and who was inaccessible and fathomless, the seed was born, 
formerly, at the first creation, riiis seed was laid into my womb 
which, after the lapse of some time, grew into a golden egg in 
the ocean. 

80. For a thousand years the Egg lay in the waters. There- 
it was split into two by the force of the wind. 

81. The upper lid of the Egg became the heaven and the 
lower lid became the earth. The foetus became the lofty golden 
mountain Meru. 

82. I'hen with the soul entering the womb, you, the lord, 
Hiranyagarbha the most excellent of the lords ofDevas, and 
of four faces were born. 

83. On seeing that the world with stars, sun and muon, 
was void you meditated. Then the kuiiiaras were born to you. 

8 1. Pleasing to look at, tliey became ascetics, the predece- 
ssors of yatis. Thus at the cud of a thoM‘.ind years they were 
born as your sons. 

85-87. They resembled the terrestrial fire in brilliance. 
They had eyes large as the petals of a lotus. Sanat and 
Rbhu remained celibate having sublimated sexuality; the other 
three were Sanaka, Sanatana and Sanaiidana who were born 
simultaneously and who could visualize things even beyond the 
scope ol sense-organs They possessed great intellect; they were 
the cause of the sustenance of the worlds. They were devoid 
ol the three types of miseries and they desisted from worldly 
activities. 

88-90. Seeing that liir and deatli in the world yield but 
little |)!easnres thai is attended with great strain and pain, 
that births and deatlis rrem again and again, that there is little 



76 


pleasure in heaven, that miseries abound in hell, knowing the 
Sastraic injunctions about the inevitability of the future as also 
that l^bhu and Sanat were under your control, the three — 
Sanaka, Sanatana and Sanandana of great prowess eschewed 
the three gunas and took to spiritual life. 

91-94. Thus in the functioning of the kalpa, when the 
three sons — Sanaka and others took to detachment you will 
become confused and deluded through the illusory power of 
lord Siva. Then O sinless one, your consciousness will perish. 
In the present kalpa, the elements both gross and subtle will 
be affected by his maya who, in fact, is the activizer of these 
elements. This great and glorious account of the most excellent 
of all Devas is as famous as the golden Meru— the mountain- 
ous abode of Devas. 

95-97. Knowing him as the great lord and knowing me 
as the lotus-eyed Visnu, knowing also that the lord is the 
greatest of all living beings, the bestower of boons and the 
preceptor of the universe, you should bow to him, uttciiiig the 
pranava (omkara) mantra and the Samaii verses, li' he is 
infuriated he will burn us both by hi.) very breath. After 
realizing the lord of great strength and yoga, I shall keep 
you in front and eulogize him who is of fiery and dazzling 
splendour. 


CaiAPTER TWENTY ONE 

Eulogy of Ijord Siva 


Suta said : 

1-3 Thereafter keeping Brahma in front, the Garuda-cmble- 
med deity Visnu recited the hymn to lord Siva, containing 
his past, present and future names as enjoined by the Vedas. 

Vt^nu said : 

Obeisance to you, O deity of holy rites, of infinite splendour, 
the overlord of the field (ksetra) , the sower ol the seed, the 
trident- bearer, of excellent penis deserving worship, the staff- 
holder and of dry and arid semen. 



77 


Eulogy of Lord Siva 

4. Obeisance tp the eldest, the excellent^ the foremost 
and the first; Obeisance to one who is worthy of honour and 
worship. Obeisance to Sadyojata. 

5. Obeisance to the unfathomable and the lord of jivas 
(personal souls). Obeisance to the naked and the lord of all 
created beings. 

6. Obeisance to t^e lord of the Vedas, the Smrtis and the 
lord of activities, charities and substances. 

7. Obeisance to the lord of Yoga and Saiikhya. Obeisance 
to the lord of the sages who are bound together by the Polar 
Star. 

8. Obeisance to you, ilie lord of stars and planets; 
obeisance to the lord of thundering soui^i of lightning, thun- 
derbolt and clouds. 

9. Obeisance to the lord of great oceans and their islands. 
CJbcisance to the lord of mountains and continents. 

10. Obeisance to the lord of the rivers and rivulets, to the 
lord of medicinal herbs and plantations. 

1 1. Obeisance to the cause ofDharma, piety and righteous- 
ness, to the lord of maintenance (of all created beings), to the 
lord of Parvati and her eternal associate. 

12. Obeisance to the lord of ‘rasas’, jewels, and the units 
of time. 

13. C)beisance to the lord of day, night, fortnights and 
months; Obeisance to yon, ihe lord oi xsons and the lord of 
number. 

14 Obeisance to the lord of ‘aparardha’ (half of Brahma’s 
age) Obeisance to the lord of Parardha (the other half of 
Brahma’s age) ; Obeisance to the lord of Puranas and to the lord 
of creation. 

15-17. Obeisance to the lord of the Vyantaras, of yoga, 
and of fourfold creation. Obeisance to one of infinite vision; 
to the lord of all occupations that have sprung up from the 
beginning of kalpa (that is creation itself). Obeisance to the 
lord of the universe and to the overlord of Br.ihma. Obeisance 
to the .source of origin of sai 4 ed lores and to the overlord of 
holy rites. 

18-19. Obeisance to the source of origin and the overlord 
of mantras, pitrs and the individual souls. Obeisance to you, 



78 


LiMgapurofa 


the deity of righteous speech, the ancient bull and the lord of 
Souls. Obeisance to the deity who has Nandin, the leader of 
cows and bulls, as his banner. 

20. Obeisance to the lord of Prajapatis, to the lord of the 
Siddhas, to the lord of daityas, danavas and raksasas. 

21. Obeisance to the lord of gandharvas, yak^, garuda, 
snakes, serpents and birds. 

22. Obeisance to the overlord of the guhyas and pi^acas, 
to Gokarna, to the protector, to Sahkukarna (one whose ears 
resemble the pike) . 

23. Obeisance to the incomprehensible varaha (boar) ; to the 
star bear, devoid of rajaS, the lord of Devas and asuras and ganas. 

24. Obeisance to the lord of the waters; the lord of reful- 
gence ; the lord of Laksmi ( glory and splendour) and the lord 
of the earth. 

25. Obeisance to one who unifies the strong and the weak; 
to the agitator who cannot be excited; to the bull (Nandi) 
who has a single illuminated horn; and a huge hump. 

26. Obeisance to one who is stable in the body; to 
one enveloped in halo ; to one who represents the past, future 
and present. 

27. ' Obeisance to the brilliant and virile, to the heroic and 
the unconquered, to the bestower of boons, to the best of 
persons of great soul. 

28. Obeisance to mahat ( the first evolute of Prakrti) in all 
its 3 stages, past, present and future ;** obeisance to you repre- 
senting the people; to penance, to the bestower of boons. 

29. Obeisance to the minute as well as the great ; to the 
all-pervading lord. Obeisance to bondage and liberation; to 
heaven and hell. 

30. Obeisance to lord Siva, who is worthy of worship. 
Obeisance to the sacrifice, and to the deity of effulgent 
brilliance. Obeisance to the principle beyond all attributes. 

31-32. Obeisance to the noose, to the weapon, to one 
equipped with missiles as ornaments; to one who is the 
material for sacrifice; to one invoke<|; to one who partakes of 
what is offered in the sacrifice; to one who does desirable acts; 
to one who does acts of charity, such as digging wells; to the 

144. The 26b, 27 and 28a are repeated in 34 and 35 of this Gh. 



Eulogy of Lord Siva 


79 


brahmin performing agnistoma; to the member of the assem- 
bly; to one who does the sacrificial ablution after giving 
rewards to the sacrificers. 

33. Obeisance to one refraining from violence, to one 
devoid of temptations, to one who is a redeemer of souls (Jivas) , 
to one who bestows nourishment, to one who habitually re- 
presents and practises good conduct. 

34-35. Obeisance to one who represents the past, future 
and present. Obeisance to the brilliant and virile, to the 
heroic and the unconquered, to the bestower of boons and to 
the best of persons of great soul. Obeisance to ‘mahat* the first 
evolute ofPrakrti in all its three stag's: past, present and 
future. Obeisance to one without a fear. 

36. Obeisance to the ever young, of golden form, the 
bcsiowor <)i boons, the lowei, the upper and the lord of the 
sleepers-on. 

37-38. Obeisance to the wearer of garlands, to the enjoyer 
of objects through the vehicle of sense-organs. Obeisance to one 
representing the universe, to one who is universe-formed and 
to one with heads, hands and feet all round. Obeisance toRudra 
the unsurpassed. Obeisance to one who receives offerings 
poured into the fire. Obeisance to one who represents fire that 
carries oblations to the gods. 

39. Obeisance to the holy one has all attainments. 

Obeisance to the sacrifice and to one d^ 'Hed to the sacrifice, 
to one who is a good warrior, to one of terrible aspect and to 
one who agitates persons who cannot be easily excited. 

40. Obeisance to one of good progeny, to one of good 
intellect and to one who is the brilliant sun. Obeisance to the 
enlightened, pure and all-pervasive and to one who is contem- 
plated on by all. 

41 Obeisance to one who is both gross and subtle, to one 
who is both visible as well as invisible. Obeisance to one who 
showers and blazes, and who is both the wind and the winter. 

42. Obeisance to yoi of curly hairs, ot great chest and 
tuft, of goiden colour, or resembling gold. 

43. Obeisance to one who has odd eyes, to one assuming 
the form of Lihga, to one of tawny colour, to one of great 
prowess and to the destroyer of rain, to one of gentle eyes. 



80 


Lingapur&^ 


44. Obeisance to one of brown, white, black, red, tawny 
and yellow colours. Obeisance to one who is possessed of a 
quiver. 

45. Obeisance to you, marked and not marked by special 
traits; Obeisance to one worthy of worship and adornment. 
Obeisance to one who is a suitable patron. 

46. Obeisance to one befitting welfare. Obeisance to the 
elderly one. Obeisance to one favourably disposed. Obeisance 
to one representing the past, to the truthful one. Obeisance to 
one who is both true and untrue. 

47-48. Obeisance to one of lotus colour, to the destroyer 
of death, the lord of death, to one of white, dark, tawny and 
red colours and to one having the colour of a charmingly 
brilliant cloud at dusk, to one initiated, to one having lotus- like 
hands; to one without garments and to one with matted hair. 

49-50. Obeisance to one without magnitude; to one iden- 
tical with ail; to the unchanging and immortal one; to one 
who represents colour and smell; to the eternal and to the 
uninjured one; to the huge one in front; to one without illusions; 
to one full and satisfied; to one difficult of access; to one re- 
presenting anger and to the tawny coloured one. 

51. Obeisance to one whose physical body is capable of 
being known and (at the same time) not known ; obeisance to 
the powetful, to the brave; and the speedy one; obeisance to 
the deity behind sandy soil and behind current of water; to 
one stationed, extended and stretched. 

52. Obeisance to you the intelligent potter; obeisance to 
you, with the crescent Moon on the forehead. Obeisance t(» 
the wonderful one of variegated dress and colours and of the 
form of intellect. 

53. Obeisance to one, of great consciousness and alertness; 
obeisance to you, the most satisfied one and the best bestower 
of favours; obeisance to the forbearing one, to one having self- 
control; and to one of adamantine body. 

54-55. Obeisance to the destroyer of the R^$asas, to the 
dispeller of poisons, to the bright-necked one and to one who is 
above anger. Obeisance to the all consuming God of Death ; and 
to one holding sharp weapons, to one endowed with great joy, 
to one with great gaiety, to one comprehensible only to the 



Eulogy of Lord Siva 


81 


ascetics; to one devoid of ailments, to one identical with all 
and to the great god of Death. 

56. Obeisance to Pranava; to the lord of Pranava; to the 
destroyer of Bhaganetra; to the hunter of deer; to the diligent 
one and to the destroyer of Daksa’s sacrifice. 

57. Obeisance to one, the soul of all creatures, to one who 
excels all lords, to the destroyer of the Puras, to one having 
good weapons and to one having bow and axe. 

58. Obeisance to one who destroyed Pusadanta and 
Bhaganetra; to the bestower of desires; to the excellent one; 
to one who burnt the body of Kama. 

59. Obeisance to one of terrible face in the battlefield; to 
one having face of a great elephant; ob''isance to the lord who 
destroyed the Daityas and to one who caused distress to the 
Dailyas. 

bU. Obeisance to the destroyer of snow; to the severe one; 
to one wearing wet hide; to one having perpetual interest in 
the cremation ground; to one holding the fire-brand. 

61. Obeisance to you the protector of lives; to the wearer 
of skulls and to one surrounded by care-free goblins of different 
classes. 

62. Obeisance to one having male-rum-fcmalc body; to 
one who pleases the Goddess; to one having matted hair; to one 
having tonsured head and to one having the serpent for sacred 
thread. 

63. Obeisance to one the habitual dancer, to one fond of 
dance and music, to the lord of anger, to one practising 
music and to one who is sung about by the sages. 

64. Obeisance to one in the form of a lion, to one of sharp 
nature, to one both pleasing and not pleasing, to the horrifying 
and the terrible one, to the suppressor cf Bhaga demon. 

65. Obeisance to one praised and sung about by the en- 
lightened souls. Obeisance to the highly blessed, to one who 
laughs boisterously, who roars like a lion and who flaps and 
blows. 

66. Obeisance to one who roars and jumps; obeisance to 
the joyous soul, to the benevolent, to one who breathes, 
runs and controls all. 



82 


Lihgapurana 


67. Obeisance to one who meditates, yawns, cries, runs, 
gallops and sports about; to one who has a protruding belly. 

68. Obeisance to one who has functions and no functions to 
perform, to one who has a thousand heads, to one who is poor 
or miserly, to one who has an impassioned body, to one who 
has small anklet-bells. 

69. Obeisance to one of deformed dress; to the ruthless 
and unforgiving; to one who cannot be measured; to the pro- 
tector; to the illuminated and devoid of attributes. 

70. Obeisance to one fond of the elegant, to the beautiful, 
to one adorned with a crest-jewel, to the minutest of the minute 
and to one who cannot be measured or known by qualities. 

71-74. Obeisance to one possessed of good qualities; to the 
secret one, to one who goes to impassable places. This earth is the 
mother of worlds. Your feet are resorted to by good men. Your 
belly, the support of all Siddhis, contains the wide firmament be- 
decked in clusters of stars. Just like the galaxy of stars the glori- 
ous necklace shines on your chest. To you, the ten quarters 
are the ten arms bedecked in shoulderlets and bracelets. Your 
neck has great girth and extent; it is comparable to the blue 
collyrium; it is adorned with golden threads. 

75. Your face is irrepressible; it is terrible due to the cur- 
ved fangs; it is incomparable. Your head which is heaven it- 
self shines all the more with its turban of lotus garlands. 

76-81. Refulgence in the sun, brilliance in the moon, firm- 
ness in the mountains, strength in the wind, heat in the fire, 
chilliness in the waters and sound in the firmament — the wise 
know these qualities to be due to the internal throbbing of the 
imperishable lord . 

The following names ol lord Siva are to be used for Japa, 
viz. — Mahadeva, Mahayoga, Mahesvara, Puri, aya (lying in 
the city of mind) , Guhavasin (dweller in the cave), Khecara 
(moving about in the sky), Rajanicara (walking at night), 
Taponidhi (storehouse of penance), Guhaguru (Sire of Guha), 
Nandana (delighter ), Nandavardhana (the increaser of delight), 
HayaSirsa- (horse-necked ), Payodhata (yieldcr of milk), Vidhata 
(dispenser of justice), Bhutabhavana ( activiser of living be- 
ings), Boddhavya(the object of knowledge), Bodhita(the subject 
of knowledge) Neta (leader), Durdharsa (invincible), Duspra- 



83 


Eulogy of Lord Siva 

kampana (unshakcable), Brhadratha (having a great chariot) , 
Bhimakarman (of terrible activities) Brhatkirti (of great fame), 
Dhanahjaya (conqueror of wealth), Ghantapriya (fond of bells), 
Dhvajin (one with a banner), Chatrin (one with an umbrella), 
Pinakin (bearer of the bow Pinaka), Dhvajanipati (Lord of the 
army) Kavacin, (having armour), Pattiiin (having the iron club) , 
Khadgin ( having sword) Dhanurhasta (having the bow in the 
hand), Parasvadhin (having the axe), Aghasmara (non-des- 
troyer), Anagha (sinless), Sura (heroic), Devaraja (king of 
Devas) , Arimardana (Supressor of enemies). 

82-83. Formerly, after propitiating you ihe enemies were 
slain by us in the battle. You are a submarine fire. Not satiated 
by drinking all the waters of the ocean, you are infuriated in 
i'oriij, but delighted within. You are the bestower of desires; 
you can go as you wish; you aic fond (of u.s) ; you arc the 
celibate religious student. You are unfathomable and 
favourably disposed towards the Brahmins; you are adored 
by the society. 

84. You have made sacrifice the everlasting treasure of the 
Devas. The firc-god bears to you the offering, as mentioned in 
the Vedas O supreme lord, if you are pleased wc too become 
pleased. 

85. You are the lord of Parvati, >t)i» arc beginningless. 
At the time of first creation you are Brahma, the maker of 
worlds. I’he followers of the Sarhkhya system realise you as 
one beyond prakrti and at the close of meditation they enter 
you, devoid of death. 

86. Those who meditate on you, understand you as 
perpetual siddha through yoga and then eschew those yogas. 
Those rnlighlcned persons who resort to you through their 
actions enjoy divine bliss. 

87. The greatncjss of yours has been glorified in accor- 
dance with what we know according to our capacity. Your 
reality and principles cannot be enumerated; you are the 
supreme soul who cannot be easily crossed. 

88-91. Be auspicious towards u.s everywhere. As you arc 
so you arc; obeisance be to you. 



SUta said: 

He who recites this prayer by Brahma and Visnu, he who 
narrates this to the brahmins, or he who listens to this with 
concentration shall obtain that benefit which one attains after 
performing ten thousand horse sacrifices. Even a man of 
sinful activity who listens to this in the temple of Siva or 
respects this will be liberated and will live in Brahma’s world. 
He who recites this at the time of sraddha or a divine rite or 
during sacrifice or during the sacred ablution or in the midst 
of good men reaches the proximity ot Brahma. 


CHAPTER TWENTY TWO 

Creation of Rudras 


SUta said: 

1-2. On seeing both of them extremely humble, the lord of 
Uma with eyes tawny as honey, was much delighted, thanks 
to the exposition of truth. The three-eyed, the pinaka-bearing, 
and the tfident-holder lord ^^iva, the destroyer of Daksa’s sacri- 
fice became very glad. 

3. On hearing their nectar like words lord Siva sportingly 
asked them though he knew their intentions. 

4-7. “Who arc you noble souls eagerly yearning for eacli 
other’s welfare? You lotus-eyed ones have somehow met together 
in this terribly extensive flood.” 

Glancing at each other, the noble souls replied: “O lord, 
what is there that remains unknown to you ? O lord Rudra of 
great ‘Maya’, we two have been created by you willingly.” 

On hearing their words and having honoured and greeted 
them the glorious lord spoke sweetly in smooth words : — 

“O Brahma ! O Visnu ! I am speaking to you. 

8. I am delighted by your devotion couched in words of 
perpetual value. Both of you are endearing to my heart. 

9. What shall I give you now ? Which is sweeter boon you 
desire ?” Then the blessed lord Visnu spoke to lord Siva : 



Creation of Rudras 


85 


10. O lord ! everything has been granted by you. If you 
are so pleased with me, O lord ! grant that my devotion for you 
remains stable. 

11. On being requested thus lord Siva realised it. He 
honoured Visnu and granted him devotion to his lotus-feet. 

12. “You are the creatoi of this world. You are its presi- 
ding deity. Hail unto >ou, O dear, O lotus-eyed lord, I shall go 
(now) 

13-15. Alter saying this the great lord blessed Brahma too. 
Greatly delighted he patted Brahma with his auspicious hands 
and said: “O dear, surely you are equal to me. You are my 
devotee too. Hail unio you. 1 shall leave* now, O deity of good 
rites, may then' be perlert awareness in you.’^ 

16-17. After saying this, thcloid ol the (i*iua^ bowcrl toby 
'' Devas, vanished there rtsell Alii i att<vuiinr j>eiiert know- 
ledge from Visnu, Brahma whose .soune ol origin was tlu' lotus, 
perloinied teirilile p(''MP(( with a desire to eoate. Kvrii as he 
perloirned this penaiu<‘, nothing resultedi 

Id After a gn at deal of lime his misci v turned into anger 
From the eyes overwhelmed with anger drops ol tears fell 
downi. 

ld-20. From those drops ol tears, huge poisonous snakes 
appeared. I'hey had all the three humouis, the wind, bile and 
phlegm. They wc're Inghlv bles.s( d ; ihc'^ weie adorn* d with 
Svastika marks, Their hairs were dishr «Med and scattered. 
On seeing the* snakes born nt the outsv i Brahma censured 
himself. 

21. O fie upon th<‘ liuit of iny penance oi this .sort, if it 
were to be like this, l.ven m the beginning, my progeny has 
i)( ^ome the deslicwer of the woilcl. 

22. Originating from anger and furv a severe loss of sense 
overwiielmc'd him. Out ot the distress ic'sulling liorii his loss of 
sense, he lost his life. 

23. From the body ol Brahma ol uncciualled valour, the 
eli'ven Rudras'** sprang up ying, out of symj' thy and mercy. 

9’*,. The word Rudra is derivable from ^/ru to try and -y/'dru to move. 
The Puranas make frequent reference to the crying of Rudras. {Vdyaiiya 

12. 25-30) identifies Rudras with the life principles, i.e. the pranas that acti- 
vaic the insentient matter for creation. As soon as Rudra or Prana becomes 



86 


Lingapurdna 


24. They became known as Rudras due to their crying. 
The Rudras and the pranas are identical with each other. 

25-28. The pranas are stationed in all living beings. The 
trident-bearing lord Siva who enforces strict discipline granted 
him life again. After obtaining life, lord Brahma saluted lord 
Siva, the lord of Devas. By means of Giiyatri he perceived him 
as identical with the universe. On seeing and eulogizing him 
as such, Brahma was struck with wonder. Bowing to him again 
and again, he proclaimed : “O lord ! how is it that you have 
assumed such forms as Sadyojata and others.” 


CHAPTER TWENTY THREE 

Various Kalpas 


Suta said: 

1 . On hearing the words of Brahma, lord Siva in the 
form of Brahman spoke to him smilingly, in order to enlighten 
him. 

2-3. When the Sveta kalpa was current, it was 1 who 
existed 'then. I had white turban, white garlands and white 
garments. I was white myself with white bones, white 
hairs, white blood and white complexion So the kalpa too was 
known as Svetakalpa. 

4. Gayatri, the goddess ol Devas, born of me, had white 
limbs, white colour, white blood. She was known as Brahmani. 

5. O lord of Devas, that was why I liad been understood 
by you as the secret deity. By my penance 1 had assumed the 
form of Sadyojata. 

manifest in the organism it cries for food. Gf. Harivarhsa a. 74. 22; '3. 14.30* 
Another characteristic of the Rudras is their rhythmic movement (dravana, 
from -y/dru to move) which is responsible for the incessant flow of 
creation represented by the sSatarudriya or Kotirudriya concept. Gf. 

^ rv. If> 4; VSyu .0.58. 

96. Svctalohitah —nu tana- Sveta- rupah ST., of new white complexion. 
For ‘^lohita** as a synonym of ‘new* sec Viiuo: ‘lohitali syan nave bhaume’. 



Various Kalpas 


87 


6. The title Sadyojaia is a secret Brahma ; the twice- 
born who know me, who have assumed secret nature, shall 
attain nearness to me whence there is no return. 

7-12. When the next kalpa known as lohita, as a result of 
my colour, came, Gayatri glorified as a cow, born with red flesh, 
red bone, red blood, red milk, red eyes and red udders was 
known as Brahman!. Since the colour was changed into red and 
since the lord was Varna, 1 was known as Vamadeva. O deity 
of great strength, then also 1, who was in a different colour, was 
recognised by you who had practised sell-control by resorting to 
yoga. I was then known as Vamadeva. The twice-born who 
realise my Vamadeva form shall go to Rudra’s world whence 
there is no return. 

13. When the yuga gradually changed and 1 became 
yellow in colour, the kalpa was known as Pita — the name 
* N>*gncd by me. 

14. Gayatri, the goddess of Devas born of me was named 
Brahman!. She was yellow in body, yellow in blood and 
yellow in colour. 

15-17. O deity of great strength, there too. I was 
realized by yogins devoted to the practic e' of yoga, through 
your yogic mind, I was realized by you in the form ofTatpu- 
rusa. Ilcnce, it was, (> deil> born of the golden egg, 1 got the 
Tat purusa form Persons endowed with penan((', devoid of 
impurities, who are in contact with Bnd,nu\n and who know 
rnc as Rudra, and Riidrani as (jayatri to • mother of the Vedas 
go to Rudra’s world whence there is no icturn. 

ld-21. When I bc('ain{‘ terrible and hlaik in (olour 
the kalpa was known as Kr.sna after ihc‘ colour assumed by 
me. riicrc I resemble Kala (god of death) . I am Kfda (Time), 
the reckoner <d’ the worlds. () Brahma, I was then known by 
you as (Jhora (the terrible) with terribh' exploits. O lord of 
Devas, Gayatri, uorn of me, was black in l)()dy, black in blood, 
black in form aiid was named BrahmauT. nen<'(' to those 
who know me that I hav(' assumed the ghoia lorm, i, the 
changeless nne, shall b<‘ \ghora (non-lei . jide j and Santa 
(([uiesceiit) . 

22-2'‘>. O Brahma, wIk ii 1 assnm(*d tlu' universal fcnin I was 
it'idi/a-d by yon by means of llu' y<;gie tram e. Gayatri, the 



88 


Lingapuram 


sustainer of the worlds®’, also assumed the universal form. To 
those who know me as having assumed this universal form, 
I shall always become auspicious and gentle. That Kalpa too 
will be known as ViSvarupa ( =*of universal form). 

26-29. These four who are of all kinds of forms will be- 
come popular as my sons. Since they are of different colours, 
their subjects too will be of different colours or castes ( Varnas) , 
and allowed the use of Gayatri. Man’s aim of life will be four- 
fold: virtue, wealth, desire and liberation. All living beings 
will come under four groups®*, four stages of life. The feet of 
Dharma will be four®® since my sons arc four in number. 

30. Hence the universe consisting of the mobile and im- 
mobile beings is stationed in the four yugas. Since it is stationed 
in the .four yugas it shall have four feet. 

31-32. There are eight worlds: Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svar, Mahar, 
Janar, Tapas, Satya and Visnu. These are established in the eight 
substratums each of which is imperishable. Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svar 
and Mahah constitute the four substratums. 

33. The first is Bhuh, the second Bhuvah. Uic ihiid ^>var 
and Mahar is the fourth. 

34-35. The fifth is Janah, the sixth '1 apas, the seventh Satya 
whence people do not return to this world. The world ol Visnu is 
the eighth. It is also the spot whence a return to this world is 
difficult. Beyond that is the world of Skandha and Uina endow- 
ed with all attainments. 

36-39. Beyond that is the world of Rudra — the splendid 
region of yogins. I’he twice-born who are desojd of ego, who 
have neither lust nor anger and whose* lauids are devoted to 
yoga alone can enter it. Sir.ee Ciayalrl w^as seen by you as four- 
footed, the worlds arc also four, viz. the w'orld ofUma, 
Kumara, Mahe^vara and Visnu. Again, since Gayatu was 


97. Sarvabhak^a — “resorted to by all**. ST, interprets difTerently: 
sarvam patalajatam bhak^yati naiayati sa — one who consumes all the 
products of the nether regions. 

98. catvara^ — ^four classes of living beings as mentioned by ST: 
jarayuja-andajst’Svedaja-udbhijjarupah. 

99. The four feet of righteousness, according to ST, comprise daya 
(compassion) , danam (charity), tapah (penance), satyam (truth). 

100. pdddnia — the ultimate region, i.e. the world ofVi^nu. 



Farious Kalpa^ 


89 


seen as four-footed, the animals shall also be four-footed. 
Their udders loo will be four. 

40-41. Since the Soma-juice, which is the life of living 
beings, accompanied by Vedic chants, fell off 1‘roni iny mouth, 
the cows came to be known as those whose udders are sucked. 
Hence the nectar in the form of the Soma-juice is known as 
the life of living beings. Hence loo, the animals became quadru- 
peds; the whiteness of their milk is also due to that. 

42-44. Since the great Goddess was seen as biped in the 
course of the rites, Gayatri the creator of the worlds is also of 
the same nature. Hence all human beings aie bipeds, endowed 
with two breasts. Since the great goddess, the unborn deity of 
great strength, was seen by you as supporting all living beings, 
therefore, the subjects will have all kinds of form. 

t *3-51. The unborn deity shall have great splendour and 
universal form and from his face there will come out the 
fire-God whose energy will be unfailing. Hence, the pure and 
all-pervading fire-god has the tbrm of living Inxly. I’lie purc- 
souled men of two births who sec me as endowed with the 
faculties of overlordship, sense-control and omnipresence 
become liberated from rajas and l«iinas. Eschewing physical 
b^dy they attain iny vicinity and never nuurn U) this earth. 

O brahmins, lord Brahma who was thus addressed by Rudra 
bowed to him. Becoming purified in ih^ mind he spoke to him 
again. ‘‘O lord, you arc aware of the ituess of Gayatri as 
well as the glory of the Supreme lord (iVlahesvara) . O lord, 
may you kindly grant me the higher abode of Gayatri and 
that of yourself” The lord then granted the boon to him, 
He lice, he who knows the multiformity or tin' universality of 
the supreme lord as also of Gayatri attains identity with 
lirahman, as stated to Brahma by the I'^'-d himself. 



90 


Lingapuram 


CiHAPTER TWENTY FOUR 

Incarnations of Siva 


SUta said : 

1. On hearing everything uttered by Rudra, Brahma the 
Prajapati bowed to Rudra, lord of Devas and spoke thus : 

2. “O lord, lord of the chiefs of Devas, O multiformed, 
O Mahesvara, O husband of Uma, O great god, honoured by 
all, obeisance to you. 

3-4. O multiformed, O highly blessed god, when and in 
which age (yuga) will these bodies honoured by all be seen by 
the brahmins and by what penance or meditation of yoga ? 
Obeisance to you, O lord Mahadeva”. 

5. On hearing his words and seeing him in front, the great 
lord Rudra revealed by Rk, Yajus and Stman smiled and 
said : — 

6-9. Except through meditation, neither through penance 
nor by conduct nor through gius and holy rites nor by visits to 
pilgrim centres nor through sacrifices with ample monetary gifts 
nor through the study of the Vedas*®* nor through wealth nor 
through knowledge of various kinds is it posi>ible for men to 
see me. 

O Brahma, in the Varaha kalpa --the seventh in number, 
Varaha, will be the illuminator of the kalpa and your grandson, 
Vaivasvata, will be the Manu. 

10-13. In the ccjurse of that kalpa containing the four yugas, 
towards the end ol Kali. I will be born to bless the worlds and 
for the welfare of the brahmin'^, O Brahma. As the yuga 
proceeds further, when the great lord himself becomes Vyasa, 
during the fir^t Dvapara age I will be born *it the end of Dva- 
para*®^ as sage Jsveta. I will be endowed with a tuft and will 
stay on the exi client mountain Chagala*®* a beautiful peak oi' 
the Himalaya ..lountain. 

loi. VedanaibL—sastraih ST, by sacred books. 

loa. Yugantike — dvapara-samaptau .VT, — at the end of Dvapara 

age. 

103. Ghagala: This peak of the Himalayas has not been identified so 


far. 



Incarnations oj Siva 


91 


14-18 1 hen 111 ) (hbciphs will four noble bKibniiris, the 

nidbtLib of the \fdas and liaMin^ tilts Ihev will be Sveta, 
Svctdsikha, ^vetasya at 1 S\tia loLil^i Alt#^ r attaining Brahman’s 
go *1, they willappioadi iik and will bi devoted to the path 
ol meditation and >oga O Brahi i , in lu second Dvapara age 
lord Piajapati will becor^t Vy^sa, kiumi as Sadva Ihen, in 
the Kali age, 1 will b< bom b) tin ri une Suiara for the wel- 
laie of the world, with a disire lor blessing tiie disciples My 
diseiples then will bt known by these names 

19-24 Dundhubhi, Sataiupa R^iki ind K( tiiman Altei 
attaining yoga and meditation and altei t ‘a! hshmg the Brah- 
ma'^'* on th( eaith tliev v/ill tttam tlu n i )i» ind eoinpanion- 
ship ol Rndia In tlu thud ag( , Dvapaia, i>h nga\ i will b( the 
'^'asd Then, at the end ol Dvapari 1 will be hoi n as 1) \maiia 
I here too four boys will be boin to a* nanielv, \ ike i, Vikosa, 
Vipa''a and Sapanasana Ihese foui of grtat piovvess will go 
to the world of Rudia ihiough the same vogic path and will 
never return In the louitli Dvapaia Miga \i gnas v^ill become 
Vyasa At that lime I sliall 0 ( bom bv iIh nanu Suhotia 
I here too, lou^ ascetu s will lu I i ni\ m)iis 

2^) Iluy will bt ik i ’ tin ims ot ->t(adi t mes and 
yogic souls Ihtv vih \* ki ^umn h\ du*-rmjkha, 

Piiduiaand Dhitikiama 

2b-28 pciformine sji^i \ogic pi i ts tlu y v\iil lx 

come pun lud ^hall wash ilT their sms b\ ikmg Kcouise to 
the subtle vogu j)iculiee i ndowed with yoga ind liirough 
the same p lli '"as c t^tribe above; tlu e eoi i igc on jiiK will 
to the world ol Rudia and lu v i iHuin In he iitili !)va- 
pui age Sav'ti will hi the \ v”i i \< thit * hill h* boin 

as < pMwxi of greae j f'rai v i 1 t} t i uui K i ik i loi blessing 
ilu W'orlds and j^r >pagaline voga among tlu jx jpk 

29 >() 1 un bussid pi/ msolpnif ixigm shaJl lx luydisii- 

plos 1 hex will be )ogie sou’ wnh slituliasl iil^s J luv will be 
knov\n as S inal a, Sananda la, SainUin i ind^ir it Iluvwillbi 
d(\o]d ol (go, allo-;eihei 

U 18 in tlu ( ul 111 ' will io 2 n<* to m ib kIc aid never 
relnin In (he sixu v i ;a \J’"iyu will ru the Vvasa aiid I shah 

i( 1 Brahma jiiinani S/ knowlfdi,' of Brahma ihc impersonal 
’;pirit the ^uDremc sou* 



92 


Liiigapurdna 


be known as Laugaksi. Then also my disciples will be four, all 
yogic j>ouls with steadfast rites, all blessed and popular. They 
will be known as Sudhama, X'irajas, Sahkhapada and Rajas. 
They all will be yogic, noble souls, pious and sinless, and en- 
dowed with yogic practices. Through the path of meditation 
they will come near me and never return. 

In the seventh cycle ofyugas, Satakratu, who was famous 
in the previous birth as Vibhu the shining one, becomes the 
Vyasa. rhen at the end ol Dvapara and the advent of Kali 1 
shall be born as Jaigisavya, the omnipresent, renowned, and tlit' 
best of yogins. There too four sons willbe born to me. 'I'hey will 
be known as Sarasvata, Megha, Meghavahana and Suvahana. 
Devoted to the path of meditation those noble souls will, 
through the very same path, go to Riulraloka devoid ol 
misery. 

39-42. In the eighth cycle, Vasistha will become the 
Vyasa. I w'ill be born by the name Dadhivahana. Thru tot)iny 
sons will be yogic souls of steadfast rites and great yogic prac- 
tice. There will be none equal to them. 'Ihey will b(‘ known as 
Kapila, Asuri, Paheasikha^^'* and Bflskala. riiese will be 
righteous souls of great prowess. Afiei attaining the yoga of 
the lord they will burn tlieir sms and come neai me, never to 
return. 

43-47. In tlic ninth cycle when iJar.isvata will he the 
Vyasa 1 will be born by the name Rsabha. There too, /tiy 
sons will be persons ofgieat piowe.ss. 'Ihey will bi' Pains.ua. 
Garga, Bhargava and Angiras all biahimns well veised in tin* 
Vedas, exalted with the sliength <)f their penance, and capabh' 
of cursing and blessing. Attaining the path ol meditation in llu' 
the manner prescribed in the yogi<‘ system those* ascetics will 
go to Rudraloka never to return. 

48-51 . In the tenth Dvapara age, the sage Tiipada will be the 
Vyasa. Then I will beboin as a brahmin sage on the (‘xeellent 


ic»f, Kapila is considered as the founder of the Sainkhya system of 
philosophy, .\suri and his pupil Pancasikha, like th** founder-teacher Kapila, 
are known only by their names. Perhaps they preached their cult by oral 
transmission. Thtir works, if any. are lost to us. 



Incarnations of .^iva 


93 


hill Bhrgutuhga,^**® a beautiful peak of the Himalayas. That 
peak adored by Devas is well known through the name of sage 
Bhrgu. There too my sons will be steadfast in their holy rites. 
They will be known Balabandhu, Niramitra, Kctubhrhga and 
Tapedhana. I hcy will be yogic and noble souls, endowed with 
pcjiance and yoga. With their sins burned tlirough penance 
they will go to Rudraloka. 

^)2-54. In the eleventh Dvapara age, Trivrata will become 
Vyasa. 'Then 1 will be born at (lahgaclvara the Kali age 
as a peison of great splendour named Ugra, famous in all the 
worlds. There loo I will have four sons ol great prowess, viz. — 
Lamboclara, Lambfik.^i, LarubakKa nnd Pralambaka. After 
attaining the yoga o[ Malu'svaia tlu"> will go to Rudra’s 
world. 

Intlie iwcllth eyrlr the sage Salatejas of great splen- 
dour, the best .itnoiig ll\(‘ wi.se, will become' \’yasa. At that time, 
whiMi Dvapara ends, arul Kaliyuga starts, I sli.ill Ix' knowm by 
the name Atri in the forest Ilaituka^^^^. I’liere too wnll be born 
mysouswho will hciv(' ashes foi ablution and ungiu nt, who will 
be such vogius, and who will he drvotf cl to Rudra's world, 
'riiey will be known as Sarvajha Samabuddln, Sfulliya and 
Sarva. After attaining ihe y<)ga of Mahe vaia they will go to 
Rudialoka. 

r>^)-()2. When the thirt(NMith eye le se‘* m (lu(M)ider, Dharnia 
under the name Narayana will b<* tin '^yasa. At that time, I 
will be born as the sage Vali in the holy penanee grove of Vala- 


Bhigutuiiga is one of thr peaks ot tla* Him ’Jayas. According 
io Virdhn ' ch. i-p>. 4<i-4ti) it is a mountain in Nepal on the eastern bank 
ol the (hiiidaka riv<T where the celebrated sage Bhigu had a hermitage. The 
Vii. (Hi. ^3) locates it near the Vitasta (Jhelum } and Ilimavat. Sf'c.Ch'AMI 
part I . pr'i. 

iu7 (iahgadv'ira represents modern ITaradvara. It is also known 
bv other names like Haridvara, Moksadvara, Miyadvara. Gf. .SX iv. 
1.7.1 1 r 

Hut according to S 7 '. XA'.S. ,.>s. 0 Oanga is said to have descended from 
Brahrnagiri situated in the south {Ihid, 24. 3) in the proximity ofNasik 
neap l iyambaka. This place of Gaiiga's descent is said to be Gangadvara 
[Ifnd. 2 y. 6 ). 

108. Haituka vana It is not identifiable. 



Lingapurana 


kjjilva oa *ht mountain Gandlaainadaua*®'*^ llicrc loo those 
^Lcw '> will be born as mv sons I iu > will be known as 
Sudljlmc., Kiv\apa,\asi Mii and \^iajas llu) will all lx en- 
dowed wnh the powci ot qrcal yoijas, be devoid ol iinpuMtus 
and will remain n-lihati \ltci attaining llu joga of Malu'v ua 
Mr) wil! go to till wo/ Id of Rudra 

G3 hh In tin l(xntcc:id» ( elr laiaksn wdl b( ihc \ vasa 
1 hen loo in the final yuga I will be hoin in the excelkiit lami 
ot Anglia') undu ilu name Gautama lhal pimaiu e giovi 
too will named at tei Gautain*! Iheit too mv s(nu> will 
1)01 ii in the Kali age TIkv wib lx known as Atii, D'vasada, 
Siavana and ^ravi thaka They will bt vc^gic nobh souls, and 
endowe'dwi h voga Alui attaining the' v < f^a of Malu'svaia thc\ 
will go to Rudraloka 

67-7^ When ^ht hilet ndi c \( le i omes in due oid(i, Iiav- 
^ iinni hi c uiub till \ yTiba. 

\ Vvi'l be boiii is a brahnun ti\ i inu \f<la iia^ Ihen I 
shill hive 4i [)Ov\ 1 1 d nil jstk kn )wn as \ ed lAii \s TIkk will 
b^ a M'll ii lu d Vcd< on the bank ol tlu S uiNvaO''- 

behind the Hiinaia\<in slopes Iheu aho ioui ascetus will lx 
m bors V17 , Kui i Knn’* ahu Kuoaina and kiiiu oa All oi 
tn.ni ' ii hf vo‘pc and mule souls who will kjp un asectic'* 
dnoughont AlUr atta i nig the )e)ga ol alalusxaia tlxy will go 
to Kudialola 

) Ii tlu sixuenth evi Ic ol Imn yue »s v/lu Dtva is 
the V v‘si, I ‘‘hall bt bom In tic mini (rokniia^^* in oidu to 

io() Gandhamadana its lo» alioii I’l liij,l !> i nitioveisi il According 
to the Pauranir account this ni on n tan foxnis the duisira between llasita 
and Phadri'.va to ir# oulh Mcru and u renowned tc i its fragnuit 
forests 

I ]( Gaiitamavana »-an be placed in the proxii iil> of Brahmagiri mar 
Trvambaka in whi h Ood ivai i has its source wh< re the sage (j* ntaina hae^ 
Its Ilf rmitagc 

in llimavat or tfim i^aya Thi' most cclebiaud mountain forms 
the northern Doimdaiy of Pi. lUta cxiending iiom die < aste rn to tlit wes 
tern sea 

112. Sarasvati Ihis sacied riv»r rises in ll « Sirmur hills ol the 
Sivahka langc in theHimala’^as 

II . Gokurna The j^kariafnust of iied to he re is located in th' 
WesUrnGhat i his p) (' is e ’ ^d to i^iva and is c e le brati d tor a ivotii 
linga of hiva There is, alsr aiioth'‘r Gok arm in Nepal in the 1 } iganiati 


r*vcr 



95 


Incarnations of Sim 

j>prcad yoga among the devotees of restrained souls. That 
forest (wliere 1 live and preach) will .become sacred and 
famous as Gokarna. There too the four yogins will be my sons 
viz., Ka^yapa, Usanas, Cyavana and Brhaspati. They will be 
endowed with meditation and yoga. By following the samg path 
and attaining the yoga of Mahesvara they will go to Rudra 
Himself. 

76-84. When the seventeenth cycle sets in duly, O Lord 
Brahma, Krtahjaya^^^ will be the Vyasa, and I shall be born, 
under the name Guhavasa on the lofty and beautiful peak of 
the Himalayas, Mahalaya'^". I shall be known as Guhavasin. 
Tliis Mahdlaya will become a Siddhakselra the place of 
sanctity. "J'hrre too my sons will be * ('iivcrsant with yoga and 
expounders of Brahman. They will be noble sons and devoid 
of ego. They will be known as — Utathya, Vamadeva, Maha- 
yoga and Mahabala. At that time, in the practice of yogic 
ineditHlion, they will have hundreds and thousands of disciples. 
Engaged in the practice of yoga, and meditating upon the 
gieat lord within their hearts, they after observing the foot- 
prints in lb(‘ Mahalaya will attain the legion of the loid. The 
other noble souls who engage their rnind.s m meditation at the 
end of Hvapara age and tlie advent of Kali will become sinless 
and pure in intellect. Devoid c^f distress they will go to Rudra- 
loka, by my grace By visiting the sacred Mahalaya, the 
region of the gieal loiei, a devotee will cross the ocean 
of worldly existence and redeem his **n previous and ten 
future gcueiations. Thus, including himself, he will redeem 
twenty one generations in Mahalaya. These being free from 
level will go to Rudraloka, by my grace. 

O lord, in the eighteenth cycle the sage Rtaiijaya 
will become* a Vyasa. Then 1 shall be born in the name of 
Sikhandin m the most sac:red rc'gion of the Siddhas which is 
adored by Devas as well as Danavas. On the beautiful peak 
oi the Himalayas there is a hill uaincd I^ikhanclin,”® whcicin 
is situated the penance* throve of the s'age sikhandin, resorted 
to by the Siddhas. Thv^re too four aseetic:s will be born 

1 14. Deva-krtanjayah. .ST. takes Deva in the vocative case : 

115. This peak of the Himalayas has not been identified so far. 

iiG. Not identifiable. 



96 


Lingapurana 


to me. They will be known as Vacasravas, Rcika, Syavasva 
and Yatidvara. They will beyogic and noble sons and masters 
of the Vedas. After attaining the yoga of Mahesvara they 
will go to Rudraloka . 

90-93. When the nineteenth cycle sets in duly, the great 
sage Bharadvaja will become the Vyasa. I’hen I will be born 
by the name Jatamalin on the beautiful peak of the Himala- 
yas where the mountain Jatayu^^’ exists. There too four sons of 
great prowess will be born to me. They will be known as Hira- 
nyanabha, Kausalya, Laugaksi and Kuthumi. Characterized 
by yogic virtues they will remain celibate. After attaining 
the yoga of Mahesvara they will go to Rudraloka. 

94-99. When the twentieth cycle of yugas sets in, the 
sage Gautama becomes a Vyasa. Then I shall be born by the 
name Attahasa, most liked by the people. There itself on 
the ridge of the Himavat a great mountain Attaha.sa^'^ is the 
abode of Devas, Danavas, Yaksas, Siddhas and Caranas. 
There too, powerful sons will be born to me. They will be 
yogic and noble souls, habitually meditating and performing 
the holy rites. They will be known as Sumantu, Barbari, 
Kabandha and Kusikandhara. After attaining the Yoga of 
Mahe^v^ra they will go to Rudraloka. 

100-102. When the twenty-firbt cycle sets in duly, the ex- 
cellent sage Vacasravas becomes a Vyasa. Then I shall be born 
by the name Daruka. Hence there will be a splendid and 
sacred forest of Deodars^^^. There too my sons will be very 
powerful. They will be known as Plaksa, Darbhfiyani, Keiu- 
man and Gautama. They will be yogic and great souls, well con- 
trolled and celibate. After practising the perpetual holy riles 
they will go to Rudra’s region. 

103-106. In the twenty-second cycle when I^usmayana 
becomes a Vyasa, I shall be born as a great sage by the name 


1 1 7 . Not identifiable, 
iit^ Not identifiable. 

1 1 9. Devadaruvana.lt is identical with Darn or Daruka vana and 
is placed close to the western ocean KRS 29. 4). Another vana of the 
same name also stands in the Himalayas n(*ar Badrinath [Mbh. XIII. 25. 

27)- 



97 


Incarnations of Siva 

of Langalin the terrible, at Varanasi* There the Devas includ- 
ing lord Indra will see me in the Kali age as Bhava and 
Halayudha. There too my virtuous sons will be known as Bhal- 
lavi, Madhupihga, Svetaketu and KuSa. After attaining the 
yoga of MaheiSvara they will be engaged in meditation. Free 
from impurities and identical with Brahman they will enter 
Rudra’s world. 

107b-llla. In the twenty-third cycle of four yugas when 
the sage I’rnabintlu becomes a V yasa O Brahma, J shall be 
born as the virtuous son of a sage under the name Sveta with 
a great body. At that time 1 shall be spending niy days (in 
penance) on a mountain which will therefore be named Kala- 
ajara**'. There too four ascetics will betome my disciples. They 
will be known a.s Usika, Brhadasva, Dcvala and Kavi, After 
.••-i-tining the yoga of Mahes vara they will go to Rudraloka. 

Illb-I14a. In the twenty-fourth cycle, O lord, when Rksa 
will be a Vyasa, I will be born at the end of Dvapara, in that 
Kali age as a great yogin named Sulin in the Naiinisa*'^’-* forest, 
saluted by Devas. There loo ^hese ascetics will be my disciples 
viz. — Salihotra, Agnivesa, Yuvanasva and Saradvasu. They too 
will go to Rudraloka by the same path. 

114b-117a. When the twenty-fifth cycle oi four yugas sets 
in, the .son of Vasistha, Sakti liy name, will become a Vyasa. 
At that time, I will be boo as Lord D cicli Mundisvara with 
sliavcn head and a staff in the hand. Tl ■ . c too these ascetics 
will be my sons, viz. ( Ihagala, Kuudakarua. Kumbhanda and 
I’ravahaka. After attaining the yoga of .Mahesvara they will 
attain immortality. 

1 17b-120. In the twenty-sixth c>clc when Parasara will be- 
come Vyasa, at the end of Dvapara and the advent of Kali age I 
shall be born by the name Sahisnu. 1 shall go to the city, Bhad- 


12D. Viiranasi— ancient Kasi. It ramc to be sc called because it was 
situated between the two riw * Barna and Asi. 

121. KaLihjara; I’he (III. 8j, 56) associates Kalanjara with 
Citrakuta. According to this reference, it lies in the Madhya Bharata terri- 
tory formerly known as Bundelkhanda. Cunningham (A.G. see map at the 
end) places it to the cast of Mahoba, below Citrakuta. 

122. See p. I. note 4. 



98 


Lirigapurdna 


ravata^^® where the four righteous sons will be born to me. They 
will be Uluka^ Vidyuta, Sambukaand Asvalayana. After attain- 
ing yoga of Mahesvara they will go to Rudraloka. 

I20-124a. When the twenty-seventh cycle of four yugas 
arrives duly, the ascetic Jatukarnya will become a Vyasa. 
Then I shall be born as the brahmin SomasSarman at Prabhasa^^* 
TIrtha. I shall be known as a yogic soul by taking resort to 
yoga. There too four ascetics will be my disciples, viz. 
Aksapada, Kumara, Uluka and Vatsa. They will be great 
yogic souls, pure in intellect and devoid of impurities. After 
attaining the yoga of Mahe.svara they will go to Rudraloka. 

124b- 133. When the twenty-eighth cycle of four yugas 
occurs in due order, the glorious son of Parasara named 
Dvaipayana^^"* will become a Vyasa. He is Visnu himself, the 
grandfather of the worlds. At that time, Vasudeva, black in colour 
and the best among men and exalted among the Yadus, will 
be born of Vasudeva. At the same time, by the power of my yogic 
illusion I the Yogatman will be born asBrahmacarinand inspire 
awe among the people. On seeing a dead body left in the 
cremation ground without a claimant, I shall be entering it 
by the yogic power for the welfare of the brahmins. Along 
with you and Visnu^*® I will enter the divine and holy cave of 
the Nferu.^*^ O Brahma, at that time, I will be known as 
Lakuli. That holy place where I entered the dead body will 
be knowti as Kayavatara -a name that will last as long as 
the earth lasts. There too the ascetic sons will be liorii to me. 

123. Bhadravata: Gf. SP. SRS. 5. 39. This town has not been identi- 
fied so far. 

124. It is a celebrated place of pilgrimage in Saurastra, the southern 
part of Kathiawar. 

125. Dvaipayana Vyasa : See p. 2. note 6. 

126. tvaya sardham ca Visnuna. ST. construes tvaya with Visnuna 
(tvaya Visnuna sardham) and thus excludes Brahma. 

127. Mcru : It is situated in the centre of the earth. It is described 
in the Puranas as the four-armed svastika, evolving in four directions, each* 
with seven constituent members. It can be identified with the highland of 
Tartary, north of the Himalayas. It is variously called Su-meru, Hemadri 
(the golden mountain), Ratnasanu (jewel-peaked), Karnikacala (lotus 
mountain), Amaradri, Deva-parvata, ‘mountain of the Gods*. On its extent 
and identification with the Great Pamir knot of Asia, sec The Geography of 
the Puranas: — S. M. ALL Ch. III. pp. 47-52. 



99 


Incarnations of Siva 

The y will be knov/ri as Kusika^ Garga, Mitra and Kaurusya. 
rhey will be great yogic souls and brahmins who will have 
iridstcicd nil the Vedas. They will remain celibate and free 
from impurities. After attaining the yoga of Mahewara they 
will go to Rudra’s world, never to return. 

iJ4-140. All these enlightened souls will be the devotees 
of f5iva and will hav^' their bodies smeared with ashes. They 
will be perpetually engaged in worshipping Lihga. They will 
be sieadfast and firm in body and the mind. With devotion 
towards in(* and by means of yoga they will be established in 
nif'ditaiion and acquire self-control. The great Pa^upata yoga 
can snap worldly tics and illuminate the path of knowledge. 
It is also conducive to Real knowledge. There are several 
paths of yoga and several paths of knowledge. But without 
taking recourse to the five-syllabled Mantra^^® one cannot 
attain eternal bliss. When a person performs penance eschew- 
ing Dvaiivivas (mutually clashing opposites) he can be- 
come a lineiatcd soul, as one who has attained the ripe fruit. 
Evi n if a man performs Pa^upata rite for a single day he can 
obtain fruit'^, the like of which he cannot have either by Panca- 
oi Sankhya. 

'Thus I liave narrated the characlerislics of incarnations 
in the course' of twenty-eight sets of four yugas in due order, 
begimung with Manu and ending with Krsna. The classifica- 
lifMi of llie Vedas rcwealiiig ^^hariiia wih ^ake place in the kalpa 
vvlu n Kisna Dvaipayana bc'comes a *. ^Tisa. 

Sifta saui * 

Ml' 1 11. On hearing about the incarnations of Rudra 
dc'scnbi.; ihu. by the supreme lord, Lord Brahma, of great 
splendour bowc'd to him and eulogised him with pleasing words. 
'1 Ik'ii he spoke to lord Siva. 

IhiihfNfl sold: 

Ml the Devas and all the Ganas are idc titical with Visnu. 
riu'ic is no other goal c ^aal to the goal ol attaining Visnu. 

i.ii'i. '1 h< VC- syllabled mantra of Siva : namah Sivaya. 

Pasicaratra -a name of the sacred books of the various Vaisnava 


sects. 



100 


Lingapurdna 


Thus sing the Vedas perpetually. Then how did this happen 
that the lord of Devas worshipped you in the Lihga and 
remained ever devoted to you ? 

145-150. On hearing the words of Brahma lord Siva was 
delighted on account of the weighty relevancy of the question. 
He looked at him as if he would drink him through his eyes. 
Facing him, he then described the method of worship of the 
Lihga. It was after worshipping the Lihga in accordance with 
the instructions that you (Brahma), Visnu and Indra, the 
best ot Devas and the sages, had attained their respective 
status. C) lord, hence they continue to worship me further. 
There cannot be stcadiness^^® hi piety without the worship ot 
the Lihga; hence lord Visnu worships me perpetually with 
due devotion and faith. 

After saying this and blessing Brahma by glancing at him 
once again, J^iva, the lord of Devas, vanished there itself. 

After gaining enlightenment^ from f^iva to create every- 
thing afresh, Brahma joined his palms in reverence and bowed 
to J^iva in the direction where he had vanished. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE 

Method of Acamana and Ablution 


The sages said ; 

1. O Romaharsana,^'^“ how is iht^ gieai loici to be w'or- 
shipped in his Lihga-form } Please explain this to us now. 
Siita said ; 

2. At Kailasa*’* the gieat lord was asked the same by the 
Goddess Parvati, the daughter ol the lord of the Himala\a, 
who was seated on his lap. 'The lord, then, d(‘scribcd to her 
the procedure of wors’hipping the Lihga. 

130. nistha niscala-sthaiiam ST. a prrmanent abode. 

131. labdha-sarhjnali — praptamijiiah ST, sahjha here means a direc- 
tion, command or order. Ed. 

132. Sec p. 2 note 7. 

133. Mount Kailasa is a part of the Himalayan range lying to the 
north of Manasa-sarovara, not far oft' from the source of Ghogra (Sarayu) 
river. The detaikd description of the mount is found in the Matsya /*. Gh. 1 2 1 . 



Mjtihod of Acamana and Ablution 


101 


A.t tliAt time, Nandin the son of Salahkayana was 
standing nearby, O sages of good rites, he heard everything 
and mentioned it to Brahma’s son Saiiat. From him Vyasa 
of great refulgence leceived the great discourse on tlie worship 
of the Lihga, as also the bathing and other litcs, as declared in 
Ihe Vedas. I shall leiount the same in the manner he heard it 
orally from Nandin. 

Nandin said : 

6. Hencefoilh, foi the welfaic ol the l)iahmins, I shall 
recount the rules of piotedure foi (lie sacred aljlulion, which 
is destructive ol all sins. Forinerh ii was 'lcclan‘<l by loicl Siva 
himself. 

/. By taking holy bath in accoidance^ with this jiicx eclur(*, 
\}y wtirshipping loid Si\a and by oI)s«'rving Brahniakun 
at a lime, (^nc is liberated fioin sins. 

B. () most excellent among the sons ol Biahma, three i>pes 
c^f ablution are enjoined In Siva, iheloid ol l)e\..s, loi lh(' wel- 
fare of the brahmins and others. 

9-10. One shall at the outset pciloim the \vat(*i\ batli 
and then the sacred ash-])ath’ and tluTealtr i tin* Mantra 
ablution and then the woi ship ol iheloid. C )n<‘ w ho is dcdiled in 
emotions and leelings is not pui dic'd e\ rn alt(’i taking bath in 
water or after appl)ing a.shcs. Onh one wdio is emotionally 
pure will pioeeed witli ])uidi(atoi\ lit and not otluiwise. 

11. Thc'ie is no chuil)! that an ('unaionalh defiled man 
does not bee oiiK' pure iM'ii il he takes bath in ri\<Ms, ponds 
and lakes till the dissolution ol the' unive-rse. 

12. The' lotus-like mind ol man is aslee]^ due to 'lamas. 
When it is wakene'd uj) l)\ the lelulge'iK e of knowledge, man 
bee'omes jiuie^’**. 

13-11. Ihe di'Votei' shall take* cla\, eowrlung* gingclly 

1 .5 1 . 1 1 is a kiml of prnaiu r iji thr obsurv aiu r ol winch the live produc Is 

of the row (pancagavya) are eaten. 

I'jj. agnt‘yam ft is the /ath of bhasma (ashes) - the product of 
lire-consimied enw-dung <>r woode*n sticks. 

!■]<). This vCfsc IS <». hnc piece of poc'tical < ompositioji involving 
lueiaphni . 

1^7. .akif (ow-cliing It is (onneleird to be pure and used in 
idigious 



102 


Lu\gupurana 


seeds, flowers and ashes for bath and keep them on the bank. 
He shall then scatter Kusa grass into the holy water for bath. 
After washing his feet, doing acamana and removing dirt from 
the body with the articles placed on the bank, he shall per- 
form the rite of ablution. 

15-16. Repeating the Mantra “Uddhrtasi”^^^ he shall 
clean the body again with a small quantity of clay and wearing 
another cloth he shall bathe. Repeating the Mantra “Gandha- 
dvararh Duradharsam”^^® he shall smear himself with the 
cowdung of the tawny cow gathered even before it touches 
the ground. 

17-20. Taking bath again he shall discard the dirty cloth; 
wear (fresh) white one and perform ablution again. For dis- 
pelling sins he shall invoke Varuna. He shall then worship 
the lord by meditation. He shall perform acamana thrice, 
and then plunge into the holy waters (all the while) thinking 
about Siva. Again doing acamana he shall inspire the 
holy water with Mantras. Plunging again into the water he 
shall repeat the Aghamarsana^^® Mantra. With great self- 
control the devotee shall remember the discs of the sun, moon 
and fire in that water. 

21-22. The knower of the Mantras shall perform Acamana, 
and rise up from the waters and standing in the middle ot 
holy waters he shall pour water over his head from cow’s 
horn,^*^ or by means of cups made of well washed Palasa leaf. 
The water shall be scattered with Kusa grass and flowers. 

23-25. O brahmins, while pouring water over his head, 
he shall repeat these mantras remembering the forms of the 
respective deities (invoked therein) and the sages concerned for 
increase of his holiness. The mantras include Rudra,*^^ Pava- 
mana what is called Tvarita, two Santimantras^^® and the man- 
tra ‘san no devi,'^* and the five holy mantras^^® of Sadyojata, 

138. Udhrtasi Varahena TA- 10. 1.8; Mahan u. 4.5. 

139. gandhadvaram duradharsam TA. 10. i; Mahan u. 4. 8. 

140. aghamar^ana : rtaih ca satyam TA^ 10. 1. 13; Mahan u. 3.5^ 

1 41. srhgena — gosrngena ST, with the cow’s horn. 

142. tvarita — yo rudro TS. 5. 5. 9. 3. 

143. iantidvayena — ^anno mitra /?K. 1.90.9.10. 

144. ^antidharmena — sanno devi RV. 10.9.4. 

145. pahea-b^ahma-pavitrakaih — mantras beginning with sadyojata. 



Procedure of Sacred Ablution 


103 


He shall then meditate in his heart on lord Tryambaka^^® 
having five faces. 

26-29. After rinsing his mouth and doing acamana as 
prescribed in his own Sutra and wearing pavitra in the hand, 
he shall sit comfortably in a clean spot, sprinkle ku^a water on 
his body with his right hand and perform acamana again. 
Then artfully he shall wheel water round him and perform 
circumambulation. This will wipe off' his sins of violence. 
O virtuous brahmins, this excellent procedure of ablution and 
acamana has been succinctly mentioned foi your welfare. 


CHAPTER TWENTY SIX 

Procedure oj Sacred Ablution 


jVandin said : 

1. riiereafter he should invoke the glonous and great 
goddess Gayatri the mother of the Vedas, with the mantra : 
“ayatu varada devr'.^**^* 

2-3. He shall offer padya, acamaniya, and arghya. He 
shall then perform three pranayamas. J cafier, cither sitting 
or standing he shall repeat the (iayatri ilong with Praiaava 
Om adopting one of the three modes, viz., repeating it a thousand 
or live hundred or hundred and eight times. 

4-6. He shall offer the aighya again and worship the mother 
Goddess. He shall bow to her and then ntualistically dismiss 
her by repeating the mantia ‘'uttaine sikhai c devi,'’^^® etc. 
Looking towards the cast and saluting the goddess Gayatri, 
mother of th(‘ Vedas, he shall with the palms joined in leverencc, 
pray to the Sun God repeating the Mantras ‘‘Udutyaih 
Jatavedasanr', “Gitram" htkI others. He shai' then salute the 
sun and Brahma in accordance with the iiijuiu tions. 

i 4 (). ti> ainbakam - thiec-cycd or thrcc-mothered Siva. 

147. pancasyam— fivc-faccd. See p. 49 note (>5. 

148. ayatu varada devi 7^4 . 

149. uttame sikharc devi TA, lo.j.i. 



104 


LingapurdfjXL 


7-10. He shall repeat the hymns to Surya, from Rk, 
Yajus and Saman. lie shall thereafter circumambulate the 
sun^^® thrice. He shall then bow to Atman, Antaratman and 
Paramatman the sun, Brahma and Jfirc.^^^ I’hercafter he shall 
invoke the sage, the Pitrs and Devas with their respective names 
by saying “I am invoking all”. I'hcn he shall duly perform the 
tarpana rite facing cither east or north after meditating on 
their actual principal forms and saluting them in due order. 

1 1 . The tarpana to Devas shall be performed with the 
water inlaid with flowers, the rites to the sages with the water 
mixed with Kusa grass and the rites to the Pitrs with water 
mixed with gingcHy s(‘eds. Scents should be mixed in the water 
in all cases. 

12. O leading brahmins, the sacred thread is worn in 
the usual manner (i.e. over the left shoulder) when the rites 
to Devas are performed; it is worn like a garland when the 
tarpana to the sages is performed; it is worn from right shoulder 
leftward when the tarpana to Pitrs is performed. 

13-15. For procuring all achievements the wise devotee 
who is well versed in the Vedas shall perform tarpana to Devas 
with waters flowing down the lips of all lingers. He shall per- 
form. tarpana to the sages with waters flowing down the tip 
of the little finger. He shall perform tarpana to the pitrs with 
waters flowing down the thumb of the right hand. 

Similarly, O leading sages, he shall perform the five sacri- 
fices, viz., Brahma, Deva, Manusya, Bhuta and Pitr. He shall 
be devotedly engaged in these rites and be pure in soul. 

16-19. O brahmins, the study of the Vedic texts of one’s 
own branch is Brahmayajna;'*'^*^ the ofl’ering of cooked rice 
into the sacred fire is Devayajna; the offering of oblations to 
Bhutas (living beings) as prescribed in the ritual is Bhutayajna; 
it bestows prosperity on all living beings. The devotee shall 
bow to brahmins well- versed in the Vedic rituals as well as 

150. Vibhavasu— the sun. ST, quotes Amara : ‘Vibhavasur graha- 
patih”. 

1 51. Vibhavasu -the firr. Ibid ; “citrabhanu vibhavasuh”. 

152. brahma-yajfia is defined as sva-i^akhadhyayanam— the study 
of particular recensions to which the scholar belongs. ST, quotes from an 
unknown source : ‘‘yat svadhyayam adhiyita ckamapi ream yajuh sama va 
tad brahma-yaihah’ * . 



Procedure of Sacred Ablution 


105 


feed them and their wives. This is Manusya Yajfla. What 
is offered for the sake of Pitrs (the departed souls) is Pitryajfla. 
Thus he shall perform these five Yajnas^^® for achieving Siddhis. 

20. Listen O Brahmins ' Brahmayajna is the greatest of 
these Yajfias. A man engaged in Brahmayajna is honoured in 
the world of Bralima. 

21-24. By Brahmayajna all the Devas including Indra, 
Lords Brahma, Visnu and Siva, all the Vedas and Pitrs are 
pleased. No doubt need be entertained in this respect. The 
brahmin who is adept in Brahmayajna when he goes out of 
his village out of sight of hundreds of huts, shall turn towards 
the east, north or north-east'®* and then perform the sacred rite 
of Aeamana for the sake of Brahmayajna. Por propitiating 
the Rks, O brahmins, he shall fill the cup of his palm and 
unnk water thrice. 

25. For propitiating the Yajus he shall wash his hands, 
and wipe off his face twice with water. For the propitiation 
of Samaveda he shall touch the head. 

26. The brahmin si).-'! ’va-sh the eyc.>, nostrils and other 
limbs for the propitiation of the Atharvau .ut! .Vhgira'' te.'cls. 

For the propitiation of eighteiu Puranas begiimiug with 
Brahma, for the propitiation of eighteen Lpajiuranas beginning 
with Saura, and for the propitiation of holy Itihasas beginning 
with Saiva he shall touch his cars and 'l.c cardiac region. O 
sages, most excellent among the knower; ■ ! the Kalpa, for the 
propitiation of the Kalpa texts, he shall perforin the Aeamana 
rite. After scattering bundles ol Datoha gra.vs, the devotee 
shall sit down and keep the right palm over the left palm. 
There must be a golden ling or the Kusa ti'op'"’* oiuiul his 


*53* riie five daily sacrilirc.-i to Jj<- p^Tfoinua by a liouh* j\oldcr coosti- 
tute brahma- vajna, <kv’a ) bhuU-yajiia -ro 1 hese 

are defined as : 

arsirm ; 

si^Tr n 

i.frT = .-'TI'O.'U I 



106 


Lingapura^a 


finger. With great concentration and following his own school 
he shall perform the Brahmayajna duly. Though an excellent 
brahmin or sage but if he takes food without performing the 
five great Yajfias, he will be born in the womb of sows. Hence 
a person should assiduously perform the same seeking for auspi- 
ciousness. 

33. After Brahmayajna he shall perform Ablution for the 
self, collect the holy water duly and enter the camp with per- 
fect self-control. 

34. Outside the house he shall wash his hands and feet 
with water. Thereafter, for purity’s sake he shall perform 
the sacred bath with ashes duly. 

35-36. The ashes should be perfectly cleaned by means of 
Pranava . It must be taken from what remains after perform- 
ing Agnihotra. When the sun has risen in the morning the 
Agnihotra should be performed with the Mantra “Jyotih 
suryah.”^” In the evening the same should be performed with 
the Mantra ^‘Jyotir Agnih”.^®® If the sun has not iisen fully, 
the performance of Agnihotra is rendered ineffective. The 
ashes of the sacrifice performed alter the sun has risen is alone 
sacred and splendid. 

37-41. Theye is nothing holy like truth and nothing 
sinful like untruth. Repeating the Mantra of Is ana he shall 
smear ashes on the head; repeating the Mantra of Tatpurusa, he 
shall smear ashes on his face ; repeating the Mantra of Aghora he 
shall do so over his chest; O men of holy riles ! he shall apply 
ashes over the secret parts by repeating the Mantra of Vama- 
deva and similarly on the feet by repeating the Mantra 
of Sadya. By repeating the Pranava he shall smear ashes all 
over the body. Thereafter he shall wash hands and feet. After 
wasing them off he shall take ashes with his mind set on the 
lord of Devas and perform Ablution repeating the Mantias 
viz., “Apo hi stha^®® and other sacred formulas taken from Rk, 
Yajus and Saman texts. Thus for your welfare O brahmins, 
the mode of procedure for holy bath has been described to you 
succinctly. He who performs thus even for once shall attain 
the highest abode of God. 

157. jyotih suryah TA. 4.10.3. 

158. Jyotir agnih TA. 4.10.3. 

159. Apo hi stha TS, 4. 1.3.1. 



Worship of Linga 


107 


CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN 

Worship of Linga 


Mandin said : 

1. Listen, I shall briefly mention the rules of procedure for 
the worship of Linga. It is not possible to recount them in 
detail even in a hundred years. 

2. After bathing thus^®® in a befitting manner the devotee 
shall enter the place of worship, take three praiiayamas and 
meditate on the three-eyed lord. 

3-4. He shall resort to the form ol ihe deity as iollows. 
He has five faces and ten arms. He seines like pure crystal. 
He is bedecked in all ornaments and clothes of variegated 
colours. By means cf certain 1 antric practices such as dahana, 
piavana etc., he shall transform himself into the body of lord 
Siva and begin to worship him. 

5. After purifying the body he shall perform the rite of 
Nyasa of the mula mantras. Everywhere the five Brahmans 
(Sadyojata etc.) shall be lixea with the Pianava in order. 

6-7. In the highly splendid aphorism viz., ‘‘Namali Sivtiya” 
the Vedas are present in subtle form Just as the holy lig tree 
is present in the subtle seed ol the Nyagrodha so also the great 
Brahman is present in the great and snlendid aphoiisin, all 
by Himself in a subtle form. 

8. 'I'he devotee shall sprinkle the p ice ol woiship with 
scented sandal water, and consecrate the materials of worship 
either by washing oi by sprinkling water. 

9-10. The washing and sprinkling is peilormcd by repeat- 
ing the Pranava . The intelligent devotee shall duly cover the 
vessels with a cloth; these are the Proksaiu (vessel containing 
holy water), Arghya, Pad>a and A( amaiiiya vesstis. 

11. 1 hesc shall be covered with Dai blia gi ass and sprinkled 
with pure water. He shall then pom c<»ol water in the difle- 
rent vessels. 

12. The inlelligenl dev tee shall jioiu water in llumi after 
observing the iiiatei uils. He shall plar < I i^iia and sandal in 
the Pad^a. 

iGt>. It rcPf*rs to liu' tliitffnlJ bath, namely vaiuiia, agn^ya and 
mantra as specified in Ch. 



108 


Lingapurana 


13. lie bhall duly powder nutmeg (Jati), niomordira 
mixta (Kankola seed), the root of Bahumiila (a herb), 
Xanthocymus epiclorius (Tamala seed) and camphor and pul 
the same in the Acama||^a vessel. 

14. Similarly he shall put camphor, sandal and difi'ereiit 
kinds of flowers in all the vessels. 

15. He shall put tips of Kusa grass, unbroken iicc grains, 
barley grams, cereals, gingelly seeds, ghee, white mustard, 
flowers and ashe.s in the Arghya vessel. 

16. Repeating the Pranava he shall put Kusa glass, floweis, 
barley grains, bits of Bahumula herb and Tamala loot as well 
as ashes into the Proksani vessel. 

17. He shall perform the rite of Nyasa of the hve-syllablccl 
Mantra, and of Rudra Gayatrl or only of Pranava— the exc- 
ellent essence of the Vedas. 

18. Thereafter he shall sprinkle the materials of worship 
with water from the Proksani vessel, repeating Pranava as 
iv'cll as the five Yajus beginning with Isana. 

19-21. By the (right) side^”^ the lord .T Devas, \andin, 
i.t . myself, shall be woishippi*d. 1 >liaii v\e the lustif" 
ten thousand blazing flies, three eyes, tlu face of a monkey, 
four' arms, tlu descent moon as roioiiet, wiaiing flown 
garlands, gcnlh, and bcd-^ckecl in all ornamenls. My wife 
Suyasa theauspiriou.s and holv laugn’ei of the Maiuis sliall 
be worshipped to the north of . .dn i.e. myself’®^ Siie who 
perforins holy ri^es shall be * u embellishing Uie teet 

of Amba i^Gotldess Parvail;. 

22-23, v'or Inpprig di ’ t '.aoJ u tei the ^''iiinurn 

sanetoium of 1 ad S.va. He han 'hdi v . handluh ol il 'Voai 


on the f'c h.f 

-i-is o; 

1* tioni 

d the 

U\e Manila^'. 

With . 

m’iJs ol 

en t 

mo sct-nled IKi 

v,e!^ he shall 

w ji liio Si/ . 

^k.i 'hi, 

( I 'll' 'a 

d l je 

Si, 11 (1 tlien 

co;;^ ^'late 

'• Mil a. 




21. . oSri 

'tiisi^ » 

hr M < 

1 * . ' Im ' mg 

w ihau.e. 

O 

1 1^ Iv'J . 


1 lull'l 

fit 

* 1 ’ ' 

U ‘ ' 

I . 1. 

. 1 \ )n<h i 



r » ' 1 1 I 111 



Worship of Linga 


109 


and ending with Namas he shall conceive of a lotus seat'“ 
for tlie deity, by repeating the Pranava. 

25-28. Its imperishable petal in the East shall be Anima; 
Laghima shall be the petal in the South; Mahima the Western 
petal ; Prapti the Northern, Prakamyam the South-eastern, Isitva 
the South-western, Vasitva the North-western, Omnis( ience 
the North-eastern petal. The moon will be the pericarp. Beneath 
the moon is the sun and beneath the sun the fire-g<<d. Hharma^®'' 
and othf-r.s shall be installed in the subsidiary quarters. He 
shall then instal Ananta. He shall instal Avyakta etc. ir tlu- four 
quarter-' '’ in order and the three Gunas at the extiemity of 
Sonia. 

29-'H. .'Vbove it he shall instal the three Atman* and in 
• end Siva’s pedestal. Repeating the Mantra ‘T resort to 
Sadyqjrita”"’'' he shall invoke the supierne loid With 
the Mantra of Vamadeva he shall instal Him .wer the scat 
With Kiulragayatrl he shall establish His jue.»eiise and with 
Aghora .VI antra he shall stabilise the presence ol‘ deity. He 
shall then worship with the Mantra ‘Isan.iit Sarvavidyanam.'*® 
He shall then offer Padya, Aeamaniya and Aighya to the lord. 
In accordance with the injunction*-- he shall b« the Riidra 
with s<ent<d sandal past<“ water. After galheiing Pahea 
Gavya in a vessel and after inspiring it with Pranava he shall 
bathe the deity with Paiu.agavya. i< , eating the* Pranava 
he .shall peiforrn the rite of ablution to thi deity (sueecssivciyj 
with ghei* honey, sugar-cane juice and other holy materials 
ol' v/orship. Wall holy' Mantras, u.sjng pure vessels he shall 
poui water over the* deity 

35-39. The aspirant shall wipe it off with a white cloth. 

iC)^. padniasana : see p. 35 note 47. 

i()5. lliaiiuadayah -a group of four, viz., dhauna (virtue j , jnana 
(kriDwliflgei, vairagya (detachment) and ..ih' 'irya (supremacy or super- 
natural power). 

16O. avyaktadi — a group 'f four, viz. pradha > (invisible prakrti), 
mahal (inleMrct), ahamkara (ego), and nianas (mind) 

16/. atina-trayam—a trio consisting of Vi 5 va, Taijasa and Prajna. 

168. “sadyojalam prapadyami”. Mark the use of parasmaipada 
in ‘prapadyann* for the grammatically correct form ‘prapadyc* in airnrie- 
pada. 

i6c). isanah sarvavidyanam TA- 10.47. 



110 


Lingapurana 


He shall put Ku^a grass, Apamarga, camphor, Jasmine, 
China rose, white jasmines, lotuses, lilies, white oleanders and 
other flowers into the water along with sandal paste. He shall 
inspire the water by repeating the Mantras of Sadyojata. 
The water may be taken in a vessel made of gold, silver or 
copper. It may be in a lotus cup or a cup of palasa. The conch 
or an earthern jar can be used. In the latter case it should be 
fresh and well washed. Repeating the requisite Mantras he shall 
bathe the deity in the water containing KuSa grass^^® or flowers. 
For all achievements he shall repeat the Mantras. Now I shall 
mention the mantras to you; please listen. 

40-45. A man who worships the Lihga even once with the 
following Mantras will be liberated. Those who are conver- 
sant with the Mantra Sastra use the following Mantras for 
the rite of Ablution : Pavamana,^’^ Vama,^^^ Rudra,^^® Nila^^^ 
Rudra, SrTsukta,^^ Ratrisukta,^^® Camaka Hotara, Atharva- 
siras, Santi, Bharunda, Aruna, Varuna, Jyestha, Vedavrata, 
Rathantara, Purusa, Tvarita, Rudra, Kapi, Kapardi, 
the Saman A vo rajanam,^’® Brhaccandra, Visnu, Virupaksa 
Mantra, l§kanda, a group of hundred hymns, the hymns of 
Panca Brahmans, Pancksara Mantra or Pranava alone. 

46-48. The devotee shall bathe the lord of the chiefs of 
Devas for the suppression of all sins. He shall then offer the 
following to the deity: Clothes, the sacred thread, Acamanlya, 
scents and flowers, incense, light, cooked rice, scented water 
and Acamaniya once again. Thereafter he shall offer a crown, 


170. sakurcena — kurca is a handful of ku§a grass used in religious 

rites. 

171. pavamana — a group of mantras designated after their sancti- 
fying efficiency. 

172. Vamiyaka — Varna sukta beginning with ‘asya vamasya’. . 

173. Rudrena — Rudra mantras of Rudrddhydya also called satarudriya. 
ST. quotes from Siva-rahasya : Vedesu ^atarudriyam devatasu mahesvarah. 

174. nllarudrena — Alharvavediyaih tatsaihjhakair manlraih ST, 

Rudra mantras of the Atharvaveda-samhitd, 

175. Sri sukta RV, 

176. Ratri sukta RY. 

177. tvarita, see p. 102 note. 142 

178. a VO raj^am TS 1.3.12.1. 



Ill 


Mental Worship of Siva 

an umbrella and ornaments. Repeating the Pranava alone 
he shall offer the scented betel. 

49-54. On the top of the Lihga he shall worship the 
unsullied, imperishable Lord, shining like a crystal glass, the 
cause of all Devas, identical with the universe, imperceptible 
to the sages, Devas, Rrahma, Indra, Visnu, Rudra and others. 
The iSruti says “He is imperceptible through even Vedantas, 
to the knowers of the Vedas too’’. He is devoid of beginning, 
middle and end. He is a medicine unto those who are afflicted 
by the sickness of worldliness. He is known as Siva tat tva 
(Principle of Siva) and is stationed in the Siva Linga. He shall 
duly repeat the prayers and ma! obeisance. He shall 
circumambulate, offer Arghya, scatter flowers at the feet, 
bow to the lord of Devas and superimpose Siva on the Atman. 
This, in brief, is the procedure of worshipping Siva in Lihga. 
Now I shall describe the internal worship of Lihga to you. 


CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT 

Mental Worship of Siva 


Nandin said : 

1-2. The fiery, solar and the Iunar^®®disc shall be thought 
of within the heart. Above that the trio of the Gunas and the 
Atmans shall be conceived. Above it, the devotee shall 
meditate upon and worship the lord in both the aspects with 
and without attributes with half his body taken over by his 
beloved. 

3-4. Since thcie arc many objects to think upon, the thinker 
shall not think of anything excrpt the following. The medi- 
tator shall conceive no distinction between the object and the 
means of meditation; o lerwise, (i.e. if he thinks of anything 
other than these) knowledge docs not arise in him. 

179. bhe^ajam bhava roginam Gf. bhi^aktamaih tvam bhi^am 
imomi. RV. 2.33.4. 

180. amrtam- somaih candrarupam ST. lunar orb. 



112 


Lingapurana 


5-6. The word Purusa is derived thus : puri sete (he who 
lies in the body) . Tie who worships the deity, the object of 
worship by means ol meditation, is known as yajamana. Dhyeya 
(tlie obiect oi nuditation) is the lord himself. Dhyana is the 
art of thmkinij. Nirukii (bliss) the fruit oi dhyana. One who 
knows abrm^ this attains the ultimate reality which is the sub- 
stratum oi Pradhana and Purusa. 

7- 10. Here the supreme lord, the object of meditation, is 
tlic - wenty-sixth principle, — the meditator (jiva) is the twx*nty- 
fiftlK the avyakta or pradhana is the twenty-fourth. The seven 
principles constitute inahat, aharhkara, and five tanmatras. 
I’he organs of action arc live, as also the organs of sense; 
then there is the mind and the hve elements. I’hus iSiva is the 
twenty -sixth principle. He alone is the crealoi and sustainer. 
He i.s greate! than Brahnii. He has created Brahma. He is 
one who is above and greater than the universe, and is the 
universe itself. 

1 1 Just as children are not born without their patents, 
so also the three worlds are not born willu^ut oiva and his 
ronsorr. 

S^inatkumdta said : 

12-13, If the great lord who is the supn'iiie power and the 
supreme soul is himsell the doer how can he be an agent who 
causes activity of the individual souls ? But the supreme lord 
has been mentioned by you as clcinal, enlightened and iin- 
cjualitative.^®’^ How can he tlicii bestow liberation ? If he is 
without attributes how can he function ? 

Nandin said : 

14. It is Kala (Timc^ that evolves evetylhing. Lord J^iva 
evolves the Kala always. When the mind devoid of qualities 

ibi. jivatma, the individual soul, the enjoyer of the fruits of the 
wodd-ticc (cf. ebhih samp^itam bhunkte purusah pancavimSakalhi. Matsya 
3 . 2 7 J , ronstitutes the twenty- hfth category. He is also called *bhokta purusah’, 
‘bhjkla suparnah* and he is controlled by the will of Isvara (cf. Hvareccha- 
va^ali bo’pi jivatma kathya^e budhaih). The latter is called sadviihsaka 
Siva — the twenty-sixth category who though transcendent is not competent 
to bestow grace. (Gf. sadvinisakamaniivaram 1.7 1.109). 

182. nisksiah— devoid of attributes, hence passive or inactive, but 
who imparis impetus to Time — Kala who creates the universe — I 



113 


Mental Worship of Siva 

is set on lord Siva, lord Siva reveals His true, attributeless 
nature.^®* 

15-17. The universe appears to be existent by his very 
activity. The eight^®^ forms of the lord rej)resent the empirical 
universe. Without the live elements - ether, earth, wind, fire 
and water and without the priest, the sun and the moon, the 
world has no existence. On consideration, it is evident that 
the gross world consisting of liie mohjit and immobile beings 
is the gross body of Rudra. These eight arc the cosmic forms 
of the lord. 

18-19. O excellent brahmins the sages declare thai the 
subtle body of the lord is inexpressib’'^. (Ihe Vedas df^clare) 
‘^From him the words loccde after failing to reach him along 
wdth the mind. He who realizes the bliss of the Biahman 
eschews fear from any quarter”.*®^ Hence, after lealizing the 
bliss of the pinaka-bearing lord, no one need be afraid. 

20. After perceiving through their imagination that the 
elegances'**® of Rudra arc present everywhere, tlie 5ages who 
perceive the truth say, '‘Fverything is Rudra.*’ 

21-22. Bv making incessant obMsance to Brahma oiic’s 
prestige is increased. All tuis is Brahman; #‘vcrything is lord 
Rudra. Purusa is the great lord; Siva is the supremt* lord. 
7'hiis the lord has been s|jccified. Meditation is the soh tlmught 
about him. 

183. Th<* mind too when stabilized by iccntration becomes inactive 
(niskriya) as this helps in the emancipation of jiva. (<f. ST. : 

^5 ^ mwq' 1 1 

But, as a matter of fact, the terms — bondage and release arc illusory 
and so arc creation and dissolution. Gt. TfincadriJi as quoted in ST , 

«TTwrq?rT »i vi. 35. 

184. The eight forms of lord Siva couslilutc the five gross material 
elements, the soul, the sun and the moon. Each stands in relation to its 
constituent as follows : 

(i) Sarva— earth (ii) Bhava— water, (iii) Rudra— fire, (iv) Ugra— wind, 
(v) Bhima— ether, (vi) Pasupati— soul, (vii) Isana -sun, and (viu) Maha- 
deva— moon. 

185. Gf. TA. 8.4.1 . TU 2.41, 9-1 . Brahman is here identical with Siva. 

1 86. Rudrasya vibhutayah. The vibhutics of Rudra comprise tta, 
satya etc, Gf. ftaih satyam param brahma, quoted in ST. 



114 


Lingapurana 


23. O sage of good, holy rites, he should be thought upon 
in fourfold*®^ manner and perceived. He, the cause of worldly 
existence, is the world itself He is the cause of liberation. He 
is the greatest ecstasy. 

24-27. The four-arrayed path is prescribed for a practis- 
ing yogin. Thought is counted as manifold. If it is centred in 
one place it is called Sunistha;^®® if centred inRudra it is called 
RaudrI; if centred in Indra AindrI; if in Soma Saumya; if in 
Narayana or in the sun or in the fire it is called after those 
names. If the devotee fixes in his mind in both ways that he 
is I and I am he that thought is called Brahmi. O brahmins, 
thus should a devotee think of this universe - both mobile 
and immobile — as identical with Brahman. 

28-29. Keeping the goal in his mind, the devotee shall 
eschew the thought of division between the mobile and imo- 
bile,^®® as also between what should be eschewed and what 
should not be eschewed, as also between what is possible and 
what is not possible of achievement and what should be done 
and what should not be done. He shall also remain satiated 
and contented. Such a man’s contemplation is the real one 
pertaining to Brahman and not otherwise. Thus in due order 
the mental worship of the lord has been recounted. 

30-33. Those who carry out this sort of mental worship 
should also be adored by means of obeisance, etc. Even if they 
are hideous and deformed, these expounders of Brahman should 
not be censured. 'Fhcy should not be subjected to scrutiny by 
a discerning person. Those who censure them are narrow- 
minded persons who will become miserably unhappy as those 
sages of old who censured the lord in the Daruka forest. The 


187. caturvyuha : Four vyuhas constitute prana, manas, vijn^a 
and ^anda and exclude the gross annamaya ko^. ST. offers an alternative 
explanation ; yad va dhycya-dhyana-yajamana-prayojanarupaih catur- 
vyuhaih. But according to Lihga purana, the caturvyuha consists of(i)exis- 
tence (saihsara), cause of existence (saihsarahetu), cause of emancipation 
(moksahetu) and emancipation (nirvrti). 

188. suni^tha— knowledge pertaining to Rudra (raudri cinta) that 
releases jiva from the so-called bondage of birth and death. 

189. car&cara-vibhagam—Jagadbrahmarupam ST . — distinction bet- 
ween Brahma and the mundane oaldw. 



Victory over Death 


115 


knowers of the Brahman who are beyond the bounds of castes 
and stages of life should always be served and bowed to by the 
persons devoted to the rigid discipline of castes and stages of 
life. 


CHAPTER TWENTYNINE 

Victory over Death 


Sanatkumdra said : 

1-3. O holy lord, now I wish to know what was committed 
by the dwellers of the Daruvana, those persons who had puri- 
fied their souls by means of penance. How did Rudra the 
naked lord of sublimated sexuality assume a hideous form and 
go to Daru forest ? What did that great soul do there ^ Please 
recount factually the activities of that lord of Devas. 

Suta said: 

4. On hearing his words Nandin, the most excellent 
among the knowers of the Vedas, said after remembering Siva 
and smiling a little. 

Nandin said : 

5. In order to propitiate the lord of Devas, the sages per- 
formed a terrible penance in the D«iru forest.^®® They were 
accompanied by their wives, sons and sacrificial fires. 

6. Rudra, the lord of the univeise, the bull-emblemed 
omniscient deity known as Nilalohita, Dhurjati and P.irame- 
sana was delighted. 

7-9. The lord of the universe, Rudra, wanted to test the 
sincerity of the dwellers of the Daru forest in respect of their 
sacrificial rites. He wanted to turn their minds from the 
observance of sacrificial rites to the path of renunciation. Thus 
in order to test their faith, and sportively too, he assumed a 

igu. See p. 96 note 119. 

19 1. Gekitanah — who creates doubts by his power of creating illusion, 
ST. quotes Sivagita : I 



116 


Lihgapurdfia 


deformed but attractive appearance. He had three eyes and 
two hands. He was nude, and dark in complexion. 

10. Even in this form he was extremely handsome. He 
was smiling and singing, with seductive play of his eyebrows, 
thereby creating feelings of love in the hearts of women. 

11. He the destroyer of cupid, the lord of extremely hand- 
some features increased their sexual feelings. 

12. On seeing a man of deformed features, black-red (in 
colour), even the chaste women followed him with great 
enthusiasm. 

13. On recxjving the gesture of a smile from his lotus- 
like face the women who had gathered at the threshold of 
huts in the forest or who stayed on the huts above trees, stopped 
all other activities and followed him not caring for thcii 
loosened garments and ornaments. 

14. Some of these women, on seeing him felt their eyes reel- 
ing due to excitement. Even tlie old women who were beyond 
the age of seductive charms ot the eye-brow began to display 
their amorous gestures. 

15. On seeing him some women woie smiling faces. With 
their garments loosened a little, and with their waist bands 
dislodged they began to sing. 

16. Some brahmin ladies on seeing him in the forest 
found that their own fresh silken garments had got loosened. 
They cast off their bangles of diverse colours and went to thcii 
kinsmen. 

17. One of them, on seeing him did not know tliat her 
upper and lower garments had stripped off. Others in ihcir 
excitement could not distinguish between their kinsmen and 
the multi-branched trees though they were familiar. 

18-19. Some sang; some danced; some fell and idled 
down on the ground. O leading brahmin, another lady sat 
on the ground like an elephant and began to talk aloud. Look- 
ing smilingly they began to embrace one another all round. 
After stopping Rudra on his way they began to show all shrewd 
gestures. 

20. They asked, “who ai’C you ?’* 

Others said, “Be seated’^ 



Victory over Death 


117 


Delighted in their minds some said, “Whci e are you going ? 
Be pleased with us.” 

21. Due to the Maya of Rudra even the chaste ladies fell 
down in an awkward posture with their clothes loosened and 
their tresses dishevelled, in the very presence ol llieir husbands. 

22. Even after h( iring their words and seeing their diverse 
activities, the unchanging lord Rudra did not utter anything, 
good or bad. 

23. On seeing the fiowd ol women and Rudia in this 
situation the brahmins, the leading sages began to say harsh 
words. 

24. Their powers of austerity were incft'ective against 
Rudra in the same manner as the lustre of the stars in the sky 
igainst the refulgence of the sun. 

25. (Such had been the spiritual prowess of the sages, 
formerly) that the sacrifice of the grcat-souled Brahma 
perished due to the curse of a sage,^®*^ even though the sacri- 
fice was meant foi general w(‘lfaie. 

26. Due to the (.uise ol Bhigu’’*^ \isuu c)l gieat piowcss 
was compelled to take l<'n incarnations and uudeigo ^ulFcring 
in each i near nation. 

27. () kimwLT of Dharrna, Indra’s oigan loo was cut and 
cast off by the infunatcd sage Gauiama’®^ 

28. riic \ asus had to pioloiig the * sta> in the womb by 
a brahmin’s cuisc.^^' Nahusa was turned nilo a seipeiit by the 

urse of 

2'). 1 iu milk ocean was dued by tht' cuisc ot biahmins 
though It was the perpetual abode (;f \isnu. The w^atery 
ocfaii was made unfit fu Hiiiiking b\ (he lirahnuns’ curse 

?0-32 In ('cdci in atom loi tins Visriii W( nt lo Varaiias] ***’ 
arid icsoin^' to the loid ol virninaa ll< pdloiincd \hc 
c bjMiiou (»1 ilu tin(‘< r'(d h)i(L (1)< )om 1 < I D' niih luiik. 

V n » rl, ^ (»(, n 1 < to^'* (tu .* .lb f’l Inn i (lu 

^ j 1 I » l'’ «, ) » » < '1 ( \IU’ V J I V C‘ < 

r , ) iiN r W1 1. I •' i 



116 Lingapuranxi 

sages, sprinkled Siva with milk which coming in contact with 
the body of the lord became nectarlike and filled the ocean 
wherein lord Visnu made his residential abode. 

33. Dharma had been cursed by the noble sage Mandavya. 
The Vrsnis along with Krsna had been cursed by Durvasas 
and other noble sages. 

34. Rama and his younger brother Laksmana had been 
c\irsed by the noble sage Durvasas. Lord Visnu was even kicked 
by the sage Bhrgu. 

35. These and many others, except the odd-eyed lord of 
Uma, the overlord of Devas had been made subservient by the 
brahmins. 

36. Thus deluded the sages of Daruvana did not under- 
stand Rudra^®*. They spoke harsh words to Rudra who 
thereupon disappeared. 

37-38. In the morning all those sages with perplexed 
minds and blurred thinking went from Daruvana to Brahma 
of noble soul who was seated in the highest seat. They infor- 
med him about what had happened in that holy Daru forest. 

39-40. Pondering over everything in his mind Brahma 
understood what they did in the holy Daru forest. He stood 
up with palms joined in reverence and bowed to Rudra. He 
then spoke* hurriedly to the sages who had their abodes in 
Daru forest. 

41 . Fie upon you all who had attained excellent treasure,^®® 
O brahmins, but had unluckily wasted it. 

42. The man with a Lihga who had been seen by you all 
without Lihgas, the person of deformed features was the 
supreme lord himself. 

43. O brahmins, never should the guests be dishonoured 
by the householder even if they happen to be deformed, dirty 
or illiterate. 

44. Formerly, on this very same earth even Kala the 
God of death was defeated by the excellent brahmin sage 
SudarSana through the adoration of a guest. 

45. Excepting the adoration of the guests there is no 

n)C). Daruvana : See p. 96 note 119. 

200. praptanidhanan i.e. though you have obtained a rich treasure 
in the visit of Siva to your hermitage. 



Victory over Death 


119 


mode of self- expiation in this world, for excellent brahmin 
householders; there is no other way to cross the ocean of 
worldly existence. 

46. Formerly, a householder known as Sudarsana, vowed 
to conquer the God of Death. He said to his chaste wife. 

47. “O lady of good holy rites, fine eye-brows and good 
fortune, listen to whai I say, assiduously. Never should you 
dishonour the guests who visit your house. 

48. Since everyone of the guests is the Pinaka-bearing lord, 
you should dedicate even your self to the guest and adore him. 

49. That chaste lady, on being urged thus, became ex- 
tremely dejected. Helpless that she was, she wept and said to 
her husband — “O lord ! please explain what you have just 
said.’’ 

'"‘0 On hearing her words Sudarsana said again “O 
noble lady everything belongs to loid Siva and since the Guest 
is lord J^iva himself, everything is his. Hen( e the guest should 
always be adore^d.” 

On being uiged thus by hei husband the (haste wile ac- 
cepted this behest (wholcheartcdl) ; just as one places on liis 
head (reverently) the flowers oliVied to (iod. Thus she went 
on (attending to her duties). 

O excellent l)iahmins, in oidci to tc'st then devotion, 
Dharma himself assumed the form ol a brahmin and came to 
the house ot the sage. U’hat sinless lad> w*'honied the guest 
and worshipped him with the materials i)l worship. 

.'34. I’hus worshipped by her, Dharma disguised as a 
brahmin said -“O gentle lady where has your noble husband 
Sudarsana gone 

55-58. O noble lady, enough ol this cooked rice and other 
eatables ! 1 say, you should dedicate yourscH (to me)” 

Remembering what had been previously mentioned by her hus- 
band that chaste lady full ol bashfulntss and with closed eyes, 
began to move (towards him). Again she began saying. But 
then. . all the same, she made up her mind to dedicate herself to 
Dharrna^”*^ there itself at the behest of her own husband. In the 

201. jelum (inrtyum iti sesah) i.c. to conquer death. 

202. dharmc — dharmarupe dvijc ST. in regard to Dharma who had 
assumed the guise of a bralimin. Or dliaimc -dharmvisayc inf. lu regard 
to virtue. 



120 


LingapurS^ 


meantime, Sudarsana, the husband of that lady, came to the 
threshold and called to her — “Come, come, O gentle lady ? 
Where have you been ?“ 

It was the guest himself who replied to him. 

59-64. “O Sudarsana, O highly blessed one, I am now 
engaged in sexual intercourse with this wife of yours. What 
should be done here may kindly be mentioned. O leading 
brahmin, the sexual intercourse is concluded. O excellent 
brahmin, I am satisfied.” 

Sudarsana the noble brahmin then said in great delight: — 

“O excellent brahmin, enjoy her as you please. I shall go 
away now.” 

Thereafter Dharma who was delighted (at this incident) 
revealed himself (in his own form). He granted him what- 
ever he desired and told him again. — 

“O leading brahmin, even mentally this splendid lady has 

not been enjoyed by me. Undoubtedly, it was to ascertain 

her devotion that I came here. O brahmin of good rites, 

with this single act of piety you have conquered death. O the 

prowess of this penance !” Saying thus he went away. Hence 

all guests should be worshipped in the same manner.*®^ 

0 

65. O unfortunate noble brahmins, of what avail is much 
talk. All of you should seek refuge in the very same Rudra 
immediately. 

66. On hearing the words of Brahma the leading brah- 
mins became distressed. With eves blinded by tears they 
saluted Brahma and said: 

The Brahmins said : 

67-6*). O blessed one, w'(' do not care even slightly for our 
lives or for our woman folk who hwc become deformed. But 
that irieprodcliablf' omiilpiCMmt trident-bearing and pinaka- 
huiding lord has been censured and c ursed by ns out ofignoraiu t , 
tlu'ugli oin powei lo fiii^c wa^ nndued iiu'lleetivi b' his 
nuTi lo )ki!ig at ns () lord oI you now nil m 

»1 r w 'Min* ha < iiui v. « uii>n n ;u1 i o mm •»(* lo'd 

f • >t i ' \ ' t lit (4^ Kl M 1 t I I ltd ‘ 



victory over Death 


121 


Brahma said : 

70-74. O excellent brahmins, the devotee shall, at first, 
learn the Vedas with great devotion from his preceptor. He 
shall always ponder over their meanings and understand 
Dharma. He shall remain a disciple till he completes all learn- 
ing or upto twelve yea/s. 

He shall then take the sacred ablution at the conclusion 
of his student life. He shall marry a wife, and procreate there- 
after sons of holy rites. He shall then allot befitting means of 
livelihood to his sons. Then he shall perform the rites of wor- 
ship to the lord by performing Agnistoma and other sacrifices. 
After going to forest he shall worship loc great soul. Main- 
taining a diet of milk and controlling his senses he shall worship 
in the fire, for a period of twelve years, or twelve 
months or twelve fortnights or twelve days. 

75-76. Then he shall offer in the same lire all vessels 
used for the sacrifice. He shall consign all the earthen and 
wooden vessels to the w aters and the metallii oik s to his pre- 
ceptor. He shall distribute all his belongings to the brahmins 
without hesitation. He shall prostrate on the ground and 
make obeisance to the preceptor. Becoming detached he shall 
then renounce everything and become an ascetic. 

77. He shall have off his hairs along with the tuft and 
cast off his sacred thread. He shall perlt^im five offerings in 
the watcis saying “Bhuh svaha”. 

78-80. Thereafter he shall roam about for attaining com- 
plete*^®^ liberation, observing the sacred rite of refiaining fiom 
taking food, and maintaining himself either on water, or 
leaves, or milk or fruits. If living thus, the ascetic does not 
die within six months or a year he shall stiain his body by 
undertaking hazardous journeys. By these activities he attains 
identity with Siva. 

81-83. () men of steadfast holy riles, one endowed with 

devotion^®^ may even att.iin liberation inimedi.aely- . Of what 

20 1. Siva-vimiikt.iyc Sivarupa vilniiktih kaivalyanlpa ilyarthaii 
ST. for absorption in Siva; for the total mergenre of the individual soul into 
the supreme soul. 

20"). Gf. Bhatiavadfi'\itd * 

i n’t m ^ w m 1 1 



122 


Lingapurana 


avail are these to a devotee of Rudra ? Neither the holy rites 
nor renunciation, in accordance with the injunctions, nor 
sacrifices, nor charitable gifts, nor the different sorts of Honu^ 
nor the acquisition of all kinds of Sastras and Vedas are ©♦'any 
avail to him. By means of devotion to Rudra, death was con- 
quered by Sveta.*®® May you too have such devotion to the 
great lord, the benefactor and the Supreme Soul. 


CaiAPTER THIRTY 

The Story of Sage Sveta 


Nandin said : 

1 . On being thus urged by Brahma, the leading brahmins, 
the great sages asked him about the sacred story of Sveta. 

Brahma said : 

2-6. O brahmins, there was a certain sage named Sveta in 
the cave of a mountain. His span of life was nearing its end. 
Kence be worohipped and eulogised the great lord with devo- 
tion. He repeated the Mantras of the holy hymn Rudradhy;»yii 
beginning with “Namaste*' (Obeisance so Thee).'^'^'* then the 
god of Death, of great splendour thought that tlu' tinu oi 
death had arrived*®® for the excellent brahmin. O h ading 
brahmins, thinking of taking him aw.v he approached the 
sage. Sveta .saw Kala and though the lime of his deaih was im- 
minent he meditated upon the thice-cycd lord Rudra and wc/i- 
shipped him: 

“I worship tlie three-eyed hnd*®® ol great fragiaace, wlu> 
increases orosperity. What will god of Death do f<»r me ^ 

1 am DeatVi of Ijeath."’*^® 

206. Svctciia— -by Sage For uclaM, road Ch. ,*) 

207 . Nama tc rudra maiiyav c. ITo . 4 . 5 . 1 . j 

208. K<'d.^prajjtam — gatayu^'.am i.c. deau. 

209. Cf. iryambakam yajamahe him uliiar aii.. IS. 

1. 8.6.2. 

210. mo /or mytyuh — destroyer of d adi. « if. 

Having fed on death tlial heds (>n ni(‘n 
Death being dead there is no dyin gthen. 



Victofy over Death 


123 


Looking at Sveta, the god of de^tb t'’"‘rifyin§ to the worlds 
said smilingly; 

/- 1 1 . '^Gome, O Sveta, Wha^ tr^vx do ^ ou gain by this i.'ieans? 
O excellent brahrein who raughi in my elutchcs 

even if he be Riidra, or ^isnu o* Hrj^hn'd the lord of the uni- 
verse ? O brahmin, how' doe*; this procedure pertaining to 
Rudra affect me. I arn bent up* n Liking you to my world 

0 sage, since your span of life has cuine an end.’* 

On hearing these terrible words though mingled with 
virtuous thoughts, the Uading sage cried out “Ha Rudra, 
Rudra, Rudra.” Glancing at Kaia he "»pokc wiih eyes full of 
tears, excitedly, in dejected mood * 

i^veta said: 

12. O Kala, what can he done by you if our b?»II-emble- 
med lord, Rudra, the souice of origin oi all Devas, is pitscnl 
in this Lihga ? 

13. O lord of great aims, of v/nat avail j*' this l>ehcst (of 
yours)to persons like me who are extremely devoted to Rudia ? 

1 ask you to go away, the way you Jiave come. 

14-15. On healing thi.> Kiila of sharp fangs and terrible to 
look at, became infuriattd. I’h terrible god with die luoso in 

harids roaied like a lion and r Upped Jiis liandb again and 
cigain. He then bound the saj^e whn.se ti;n» of death arnvcil 
a id addres.sfd him thus ; 

16. “O biahmin sage, O Sv^ta, you have been bound by me 
for being taken to rny abode. VV^iat has been done now hv your 
Rudra the lord of Devas * 

17. Where is Rudra i]*d win re your devotion^ Wbeic is 
your worship and where die fruit thereof ? V^here am i and 
whence have I to fear ? ( Sv.*la. vou h**’' : been liound by me. 

ir». O Sveta, is your Rudra stationed in this Lihf>.. II so, 
he, is utterly inactive. How can he U wcbhipped 

19-20. Then Rudra, the destroyer of Kama and sacri her, 
the three-eyed lord came hurneiiiy vnth a laugh, a* com- 
panied by Uma, Nandin and the leading ganas in order to 
slay Yama who had come to kill the in 

21. O brahmins, then on .seeing K ridra, ih . .nigluy Yaina“* 


211. ball — valorous fVania), 



124 Li^apurifa 

abandoned the brahmin, out of fear and fell down near the 
sage. 

22>23 On looking at lord Rudra, the destroyer of death, 
as also at Yama who fell instamtaneously at the sight of the lord, 
Sveta roared loudly.*** O leading bralunins, the gods too cried 
loudly, and bowed to the lord as well as Uma. The leading 
sages were delighted much. 

24. Over the heads of the sage and Rudra, the sky-roving 
gods showered cool and splendid flowers from the firmament. 

25-26. On seeing Yama dead, Nandin bowed to lord Rudra. 
He the leader of the garias and the follower of lord Rudra, spoke 
to the lord in great astonishment. "This Yama of puerile intelli- 
gence*** is dead. Now, be favourable to the sage.” 

27. On seeing Yama destroyed in a trice, the lord blessed the 
excellent brahmin and disappeared.*** 

28. Hence, O brahmins. One should devoutly worship the 
lord, the conqueror of the god of Death. He is the bestower of 
liberation as well as of worldly pleasures. He is the benefactor 
of all. 

29. Of what avail is much talk? After renouncing and wor- 
shipping Rudra with great devotion you will all become free 
from grief. 

Nandin said’. 

30-31. On being addressed thus by Brahma, the sages, the 
expounders of Brahman said once again : — O lord, be pleased. 
By what penance or sacrifice or holy rites can devotion to 
Rudra, the Pinaka-bearing lord, be acquired ? How will the 
twicebom become the devotee of Rudra ? 

Brahma said : 

32-34. Neither by charitable gifts, nor by learning, can, O 
excellent sages devotion to !§iva, the great cause (of the 
universe) be acquired. It cannot be acquired by long or sessional 


212. uccadhi^ — ^ucca dhir yasya ST . — the intelligent (Svtea). 

213. Baladhih — the stupid (Yama). 

214. Gudha-iariram — the invisible form. Construe : k^nad 
gudha^ariram vivesa. 



Hymn to iSioa 


125 


sacrifice, holy rites, vedic texts, yogic treatises or by restraints. 
It is acqmred only by God’s grace. 

On hearing these words the anxious sag^ bowed to Brahmfi 
along with their wives and sons. Hence, devotion to lord 
Rudra bestows virtue, love and wealth. It yields victory to the 
sage. It grants him vit.tory over death. 

35-37. Formerly, by means of devotion, Dadhica conquer- 
ed lord Vi^^u and his associate Devas. He killed K$upa with 
the tip of his foot. He acquired adamantine bones. By glori- 
fying the lord, I too conquered death. Even by the great sage 
Sveta who had fallen into the jaws of death, death was con- 
quered by the grace of the lord, in the manner it was conque- 
red by me. 


CHAPTER THIRTY ONE 

Hymn to ^tva 


Sanatkumara said: 

1 . O holy lord, please now recount to us how the dwellers 
of Darii forest sought refuge in the lord, ihanks to his grace. 

Nandin said: 

2. The self-born deity (Brahma) spoke thus to the blessed 
residents of Daru forest who had the lustre of fire due to their 
penance. 

Brahma said : 

3. This great lord should be known as Maheivara. Greater 
than him there is no other protection to be sought. 

4-5. He is the lord of Devas, sages and pitrs. During the 
period of dissolution at the end of a thousand sets of four 
yugas,*^® the lord becomes Kala and destroys all living beings. 
He alone creates subjects by his splendour. 

215. The period of dissolution is equal to a kalpa, or a night of BTahnt&, 
equal to a period of four hundred thirty two million years of mortals. 



126 


Lingapurdna 


6. is the f hi- nder bolt-armed (Indra; and the disen^- 
bearing Vi^nu marked by l^rlvatha. He is called Yogiii iu 
the ^.rta ago, Kratu in the Treta, Kalagai in the Dvapara and 
DharnAJit.elu in the Kali age. These four are the forms of Rudra 
which the kairnca men meditate upon. 

8. \u'- l.ihga should be synunetncal within and without; a* 
the place of s^ipport of the swollen knob it should be octanpu- 
lar. In otlicr pL m it should be cylindrical and of attra^dvo 
appearance One sliould worship only such u fine Liiiga. 

9, '] cimas :s the fire gc 1; Rajas Brahma and Sattva is 
Vijuu. Although dierc is a single deity at the base these are 
glorified as its for ms. 

10-11. The Icndij'g brahniiiis who ha\c conquend their 
anger and sense organs, make the 1 inga endowed with all these 
‘r?xts- Tt IS there that the B»ahinan stays along with all hio 
yogic powers. I leave they worship (in the Hnga) lord Isfina the 
lord of th'=‘ cliiels of !)c as, th^^ lu'changlr^g deity. 

12-1/. d lie Liiiga should be cylindrical, splendid, of the 
sii, ‘ o a tiiiiruU, appealing to all and level in the u/nbilical 
region. It may have eight or ^ixteen equal angles. Its zone must 
be well built so that it should yield all desires. I'he supporting 
altar is twj< e iis size or equal in size, and appiovcd bv all. The 
cow's hoic shall have all the s liaraclcrisUcs of the dUar and 
shall De a third of its si-i:?. O # .Kcellcnt biahinins, the border all 
round shall be at least one yava in breadth. The Liriga shall be 
made of gedd, silver or copper Ihe altar shall extend 
up to thrice its size all round. It (the altar) shall be circular, 
triangulaj, qaadiangular or h^xa^onal in shape. It shall be free 
from cracks, and with all chaiacterisliis v^learly defined. After 
installing it duly in av-coruance w ilh the rules governing worship, 
O brahmiiio, the Kalasa (water-ptU) shall be placed in the 
middle of the altar. 

18. A pie c of gold and ccreals‘^^’ shall be placed within 
it. The holy water shall then he inspired with the Mantras of 

2 lb. Cf. Dui Bhdga, Brahmdnda, ptakrmi. p6; Afar. 40.18; iSP 

VSyaviya jo.27; Lirnia, 1.1.22. 

217. sal'ijam— pancaksara-mantra-sahitam . 97 . including? the five- 
syllabled mantra ‘namah .'5ivaya 



Hynin to Siva 


127 


the five auspicious Brahmans*^® (Sadyojata etc) . The devotee 
shall thereafter sprinkle the Linga with the holy water 
repeating the sacred five mantras. 

10. ir you worship with such materials as are available 
you vN^ill attain Siddhi. All of you joined by your sons and kins- 
men shall worship him with concentration and mental purity. 

20. All of you with your palms joined in reverence shall 
resort to the trident-bearing lord. You will then sec the lord 
of Devas who is inaccessible to persons with no self-control. 

21-22. On seeing him your ignorance and sins will perish. 

Thereafter forest-dwellers circumambulated Brahma of 
unmeasui ed prowess and returned to Daruvana. They propi- 
tiated the lord in the marmer prescribed by Brahma. 

23-27. In the different dry tracts of land, or in the caves of the 
mountains or in the auspicious but isolated banks of the rivers 
they performed penances. Some stayed in water, looking 
splendid with moss clinging to them, some were exposed to the 
rain in the course of penance and some stood on the tips of 
their toes. Others lived on grains crushed by teeth. Others on 
grains crushed with pieces of rocks. Some adopted Virasana 
postures and others were engaged in the activities of deer. 
Thus these wise devotees spent time in penance and worship. 
When a year was completed and Spring arrived, in that Krta 
age, the lord wanted to bless them will, his grace. With sym- 
[Kithy towards his devotees, the delighted lord came to 
Darn forest on the splendid mountain Himalaya.**^'® 

28-32. The lord had vulgar traits. He was stark nude. He 
had smeared his limbs with ashes. His hands were engaged in 
whirling a firebrand. His eyes were red and tawny. Sometimes 
he laughed biosteriously, sometimes he sang surprisingly. 
Sometimt's he danced amorously and sometimes he cried 
repeatedly. He roamed round the hermitages and begged for 
alms. He assumed forms of his choice by his maya. When the 
lord thus came to the forest the sages eulogised him with 
devotion. By their pleasant countenance and in the company 

218. brahmabhih — sadyojat^imantraih — with mantras beK^L^ining 
with *sadyojataya namab*. 

219. See p. 94 note 111. 



of their wives, sons and attendants, they greeted the lord with 
waters, garlands of variegated colour, incense and scents. They 
spoke to the lord thus: 

33-35. “O lord of chief of Devas, please forgive whatever 
fault has been committed by us mentally, verbally and physi- 
cally, out of our ignorance. O Rudra, your activities wonderful 
and incomprehensible are secret and unintelligible even to 
Brahma and other Devas. We do not understand either your 
progress or regress.” 

36. O lord of the universe, O supreme lord, you are as you 
are. Obeisance be to you. The sages of noble soul eulogise you 
as the lord of Devas, the supreme lord. 

37. Obeisance to Bhava, to the splendid one, to the 
conceiver of all objects, to the source of their origin, to one of 
infinite strength and prowess and to the lord of all living 
beings. 

38. Obeisance to the destroyer, to the tawny-coloured one, 
to the changing and the unchanging one, to one who bore the 
flow of the Gangetic waters and to the support of all. Obeisance 
to one who manifests in all the three Gunas. 

39. Obeisance to the Lord with three eyes, to the holder 
of the 'excellent trident, the bestower of pleasure*^® to the fire 
god and the great Atman. 

40. Obeisance to the bull-emblemed Siva, to the lord of 
Ganas; to Kala armed with a staff and a noose in his hands. 

41-42. Obeisance to one who is the chief deity of the Vcdic 
hymns, and who has hundred tongues. O lord, this entire uni- 
verse is born out of your body whether ft be of the past, pre- 
sent or future, whether it be mobile or immobile. O lord, wel- 
fare unto you. You protect and destroy everything. Hence be 
pleased with us. 

43. Whatever man does out of ignorance or knowledge is 
done by the lord himself through his yogic Maya. 

220. kandarpaya — kaifa sukhaih tena darpayati bar;ayati, mohayati 
va kandarpab tasmai ST. One who delights his devotees by giving them 
pleasure. 

221. bhagavan — It has been defined as ^ ^ 

Viftiu quoted in ST, 



Hjmn to Lord Siva 


129 


44-46. After eulogising the lord with delighted inner soul, 
the sages endowed with austerities requested*** him — “Let us 
see you in your real form.” Then the delighted lord assumed his 
real form of three eyes. To see that form the lord granted them 
divine eyes. Looking at the three-eyed lord of Devas by the 
vision they had acquired, the dwellers of DSruvana again 
eulogised the lord. 


CHAPTER THmTYTWO 

Hymn to Lord Siva 


The sages said : 

1 . Obeisance to the lord who is naked,*** who bears the 
trident, who dissolves the universe,*** who is handsome,**® who 
is an axe to the tree of the universe,*** to one with terrifying 
face.*** 

2. Obeisance to formless one; to one of handome form; 
to one of the form of the universe. Obeisance to one who em- 
braces the elephantine face of his son Gane^a ;*** obeisance to 
Rudra ; obeisance to one in the form of ’.'ajamana.*** 

3. Obeisance to one bowed by all, obeisance to one who 
bows to his own Atman; obeisance to one with blue tuft;**® obei- 
sance to one with poison in his neck. 

4. Obeisance to one who is blue-necked, to one who applies 
the ash from the cremation ground all over the body. You are 
Brahma among all Devas. You are Nilalohita among all 
Rudras. 

222. yacanta — an archaic form for ayacanta. 

223. digvasase — ^aparichinnarupiiya .?T. — ^not conditioned by limit. 

224. krtant&ya — ^pralayakaranaya ST, — the ca»»e of dissolution. 

225. Vikataya — sundar&'.a ST. — of beautiful form. 

226. karalSya — kutharHya 57 ”.— an axe to the world-tree. 

227. karSla-vadanaya — of terrible face. 

228. kataAkataya — who one touches lovingly the elephantine face 
of Gane^a. 

229. svahakaraya— one who has a form of yajamima. 

230. nila-iilchaod^y^ — t’f dark hair. 



130 


Lin^apurdna 


5-6. You are the soul of all living beings. You are known as 
Purusa in the Sahkhya system. You are Meru among moun- 
tains; moon among planets; Vasistha among sages; Indra among 
Devas; Om among Vedas and the excellent S^an among 
Saman verses. 

7. You are lion among beasts; bull among animals and lord 
of all men. 

8. In whatever form you are, whatever form you may 
assume, may we be able to see you there in the manner mention- 
ed by Brahma.*®^ 

9. Lust, anger, covetousness, despondency and arrogance 
— we wish to know all these; be pleased, O supreme lord. 

10. When the time of great Dissolution ai rivcd, O lord, the 
hand was rubbed against the forehead and fire was generated 
by you the self-possessed soul. 

11. Then the whole world was enveloped by that fire. 
Hence these (lust, anger etc. ) are distorted fires equal to the 
fire of dissolution. 

12-16. Lust, fury, greediness, delusion, arrogance and harass- 
ment and all living beings mobile and immobile are burn- 
ed by- the fire originating from you. O lord of Devas, be 
our protector even as we are being burned. O highly blcs.sed 
one, O supreme lord, for the welfare of the world you sprinkle 
the living beings. O auspicious observer, O lord, command 
us: we shall carry out your behest, in thousands and crores 
of living beings, in hundreds and crores of forms, we are unable 
to reach the extremities. O lord ot Devas, obeisance be to you. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE 

Statement of the Sagei 


J^audin said: 

1. Thereafter the lord was delighted and he blessed them. 
On listening to their eulogy he spoke thus: 

231, padyimah — tatha kurv iti iejah ST. Do so that wc may see you. 



Statement of the sages 


131 


2. The brahmin who reads or listens to the hymn gloriticd 
by you all or narrates this to the brahmins shall attain leader- 
ship among my attendants, 

3-4, leading sages, I shall mention what is condurwe to 
yt ur welfare and sacred to the devotees. Everything feminine 
is goddess Prakrti biiU of my body. () brahmins, everything 
masculine is Purusa born of my body. O brahmin.s uiid )ubt- 
edly iny creation is through both of these. 

5. Hence no one shall censure the naked ascetic wlio is 
devoted to me, who expounds Brahman but who lichaves like 
children and mad people. 

6-8. Those devotees ol Mahadeva who are iiiteiestcd in 
applying ashes; who burn their sins through ashes; who are 
« “gaged in riicdiUtioii and carry out w'hiit has been laid (lf»w'n 
in the scriptures; who have perfect lonlrol over the sense- 
organs. who have sublimated their sexuality; who w^oiship the 
great lord with perfect verbal, mental and physical control; 
reach Rudra’s w'(jrlJ aiul do not return then from. Heme this 
secret, sacred and diviiit* rite of the deity of manifest langa. 

The observers of the above holy rite have all v pes 
of forms; they shave rdf their heads and they observe' the rile of 
ashes No learned man shall revile at them nor should they 
be transgressed. 

10. No one shall laugh derisively at them nor shall he 
speak woids displeasing to them if he desires for welfaie here 
ami hereafter. The stupid man who ceiisuri's them, censmes 
the lord himself. 

11-12. He who worships them worsliips .^iva. Thus, with 
a desire for the w^« Ifare of the worlds, the gr eat lord sjiorts about 
as a great >ogin in evciy yuga, with ashes smeared all over 
hi^ 


2J2. The half man and half woman form of ‘-iva known as ‘ardha- 
narisvara*. It syrnholisf^ the origin of creation by copulation. Cf. Mbh. 

as quoted in S 7 . rf q-vli ^ ^ I fd ^ 

235. Gf. Biiagiadgaitd 21 ? ??! ^iPT. | 
^ ll Quoted in ST. 



152 


You too shall observe all the rites. Then welfiuv will be 
yours and you will attain pterfectioii. 

13. Grasping the great knowledge imparted by Siva, which 
being incomparable is the destroyer of fear, the sages bent 
their heads and made obeisance to Siva with their minds clear- 
ed of fear, greed and delusion immediately. 

14-15. On hearing what was recounted thus, die delighted 
brahmins, began the ablution of lord Siva with pure scented 
waters with Kuia grass and flowers scattered therein. They 
poured water out of water jars. They sang various songs of 
esoteric meaning and produced huihkflras with sweet tones. 

16. Obeisance to the overlord of Devas; obeisance to the 
great lord, obeisance to one who shares half of body with his 
consort ;•** obeisance to the initiator of Saiikhya and Yoga. 

17. Obeisance to one who is black as a cluster of clouds. 
Obeisance to one wearing elephant’s hide. Obeisance to one 
having deerskin for the upper garment; obeisance to one hav- 
ing serpent for the sacred thread. 

18. Obeisance to Siva with wonderful weH-arranged 
ear-rings; with well knit garlands and ornaments; to one with 
the fine lion skin as garb; obeisance to one of extensive 
reputation. 

19. Then the delighted lord spoke to the sages — “O ye 
of good rites, I am delighted with your penance. Choose your 
boons.” 

20-24. All those sages bowed to the lord. Then Bhrgu, 
Ahgiras, Vasistha, Vidvamitra, Gautama, Atri, Sukefa, Pula- 
stya, Pulaha, Kratu, Marici, Ka^yapa, Kanva and Saihvarta 
of great penance, spoke to the lord after paying due homage : 
“We wish to know the mystic secret behind the smearin g of 
ashes, nudity, indirectness (in worship) contrariety in the 
natural order,*®® the propriety of service or otherwise.” On 
hearing their words the great lord looked at the excellent sages 
and said smilingly. 


334. See p. 18. note 27. 

23^. Vamatvam-— savya-najUga-prakarah ST. the left-hand ritual 
or doctrine of the Tantras. pratilomata — the opposite of VSina-naarga, i.e. 
a tantric ritual m which left hand practices find no place. 



133 


chapter THOtTYFOUR 

Praise of the Togin 


The lord said : 

1. I shall recoui^t to you the whole story in a nutshell. 
I am Agni (Fire god) the creator of Soma and I am Soma that 
resorts to Agni. 

2. Agni carries what is consigned to it by way of Homa. 
Since it rests in the world, the universe consisting of the mobile 
and immobile beings is often burned by it. 

3. Everything reduced to ashes becomes excellent and 
sacred. With ashes Soma attains power and rejuvenates living 
beings. 

4. He who performs the rite of oblation into the fire'**®* 
as also the rite of ‘Tryayusa’®®’ is liberated from sins due to 
the virtue of ashes which constitute power. 

5. The word Bhasman is derived from ‘bhas’ to shine, 
bhasate-shines or from causal of ‘bhu’ to cause to reach, mp^it^or 
from *bhaks’ to eat, «T^rf?r; since it devours all sins it is called 
Bhasman. 

6. The Pitrs drink fire; Devas drink Soma. 1 he 
entire universe of the mobile and immobile beings is ot the 
nature of Agni and Soma. 

7. I am Agni of great splendoui This great Uma is 
Soma. I am Agni and Soma together. I am Purusa as well as 
Prakrti. 

8. Hence, O blessed ones ! the ashes constitute my 
virility. I hold my virility by my physical body. This is 
the fact. 

9. Ever since then, protection is afforded by the ashes. 
At times of inauspicious events and even in lying-in chambers 
it is resorted to for securing protection. 

10. One whose soul is purified by apph <ng ashes over the 
body, one who has conquered anger and the sense-organs, never 
returns after coming near me. 

236. agnikaryam^- sacrificial rite. 

237. tryayusaxn-ash-hath b> rr» the mantra ‘tryayusam 

jamadagne’ VS. 3. 62. 



134 


lingapuTo^a 


1 1 . The holy P&^upata yoga and the Sfinkhya of Kapila*’^ 
have been evolved by me. It was the excellent P&^upata I'ite 
that was evolved at the outset. 

12. Persons occupying different stages of life have been 
created by Brahma afterwards. This creation involving bash- 
fulness, delusion and fear has been evolved by me. 

13. Devas and sages are verily born nude. The other 
human beings are also born nude. 

14. A man may be clad in silken garments. But if his 
sense-organs are not in control he is naked. But if his sense- 
organs arc subdued he himself is well covered ( even if he does 
not put on clothes) . The cloth is not regarded as the specific 
cause in these cases.*** 

15. Forgiveness, fortitude, non-violence, detachment, equal 
reaction in regard to honour and dishonour — all these consti- 
tute excellent covering for the body. 

16-17. One who has laken holy bath of ashes, one who 
after smearing ashes over the body, mentally meditates on 
Siva, even if he has committed thousands of faults gets ail his 
sins washed by the ash-bath in the manner as the fire burns the 
forest. He who strenuously takes holy bath of ashes thrice a day 
would attain the status of the lord of Ganas. 

18-21. Those who perform sacrifices,**® observe holy rites 
and meditate on the great lord with devout feelings about the 
divine sports of the lord, attain immortality by passing through 
the noble northern path. Those who resort to the cremation 
ground, by means of the southern path, attain the eight 
perfections : Anima: Garima, Laghima, Prapti, Kamavasayita, 
Prakamya, Hitva Varitva and also immortality (in the end).**^ 


^ 38 . Kipilam— Saihkhya-iastriUn SI, a system of philosophy 
founded by Kapila and known after his name, 

239. Mark the contribution of ethics to the *^aivite cult« 

240. kratun — five great sacrifices (mahoyajnas) described in Ch. 26, 
Verses 14-19 (p. 104) 

241. The eight siddhis (attainments of supernatural power) comprise 
(i) anima (the power of becoming as small as an atom), (ii) laghima (the 
faculty of assuming excessive lightness at will), (iii) piapti (the powei of 
obtaining everything), (iv) prakamya (irresistible will) (v) mahima (the 
power of increasing one’s size at will), iiitva (supremacy), (vii) va^itva 
(the power of subduing all to one’s own will) and ^viii) kamavUsayita (the 



Praise of the Togm 


135 


22 Indra and other Devas who had adopted the holy 
ntc conducive to the realisation of all desires attained the 
greatest power and prosperity; all of them are well known for 
their splendour and refulgence. 

2 5 One shall be devoid of delusion, arrogance, passion 
and the defects of lar^as and rajas in his character. Under- 
standing that things ol the world are subject to decay and dest- 
ruction one shall always be devoted to the yoga of Pasupati 

24-26. He should meditate on the vrata of Pa£upati ( Siva ) 
that IS destructive of all sms. 

He who reads thn, being pure and faithful, having conque- 
red the sense-organs, shall become .iurified of all sins and 
shall go to Rudra’s world. On hearing this all those sages, 
Vasis^ha and others and all the excellent brahmins smeared 
their bodies v/ith ashes and became freed of all desires At the 
end of the kalpa they started towards the world of Rudra 

27 Hence even the deformed and dirtv persons are 
worthy ol worship and should not be censured Leading 
brahmins whether handsome or dirty should al>o be worshipped. 
They mav be leading ^ogins 

28 Of what avail is much talk f Excellent brahmin devo- 
tees of Siva should be worshipped by all means like Siva 
himself 

29-31, Even dirty leading brahmiP'* mav be devotees of 
Siva and steady in their rites By dt voi» >ri to Siva much can 
be achieved in the world m the manner of Dadhica who could 
( onquer < ven Visnu the lord of Devas Hence by all means, those 
devotees with matted hair or toiiaurcd head, oi naked anchori 

powvf ti suppressing dc«:in} The last one is sometime's substituted by 
sarvajY i<\a. Linga reads iccha-kamavasayavam f'^r k“mava»ayitvam. 

Some oth”* siddbis such is d n » ira ana (hearing from a distance), 
agnistambha (cb'^'cLing tht heat af the 1 re) ^ are al^i^ adcle 1 lo these For 
detail, see Vacaspati’s TatUa-Kaumudi nr Lvaiakrsna’^ Sai ikhva>Karika ) 

^42. Pa ^tpati yoga- a c 'rentrated devotion .1 lord Siva, who is 
called pasupan, the lord jf the pa^us ^jivasj whoa, he binds with the palas 
'strinr s^ ofvisava'. ^ohj«ct» 1 sen‘'e ' Rur^ia of Ahr> a*a ntej in 

VT *‘B Iiniii di pas^-vas ttsSra patCi paiupatihsmtab'* Ji in different 
6^iata L I ^ Horn Hiahma to ram at pas heard with the noose of 
visayas objects of woild^ pi asm Put each paiu »ar jet release by 
esc' ving tnese MS^yas and b\ hi u<nOaUcI nuditaiu* on Siv? 



136 




tes, who have smeared their bodies with ashes should be 
worshipped always like §iva himself mentally, verbally and 
physically. 


CHAPTER T HIK ’ nff l VB 

Defeat of Kfupa 


Sanatkumara said: 

1-2. O sage of holy rites, how did Dadhica strike king 
Ksupa with his foot after conquering Vi;9u, the lord of Devas 
in battle ? How did that sage of great penance attain adaman- 
tine bones firom lord Siva ? O Nandin, please recount how 
Death was conquered by you. 

J^andin said: 

3. There was a king of great splendour known as K$upa. 
He ytras the son of Brahma. He, the lord of the people, was the 
friend of Dadhica, a leading sage. 

4. In course of time, incidentally a dispute arose between 
Ksupa and 'Dadhica as to who was the better — a K$atriya or 
a Brahmin. 

5-6. (K$upa said) The king holds the physical body of 
the eight guardians of the quarters.**’ Hence I am Indra, 
Agni, Yama, Nirrti, Varuna, Vayu, Soma (Moon) , and Dhanada 
(Kubera, the lord of wealth). I am livara (overlord) . I should 
not be dishonoured. 

7-9. O sage of holy rites, that deity (i. e. the king) is 


343. The king embodies the essence of eight lokapSlas — the guardian 
deities presiding over the quarters, viz. (1) Indra, east; (s) Agni, south- 
east; (3) Yama, south; (4) Sdryii — south-west; (5) Varuoa, west; (6) 
"Vayu, north-west; (7) Kuvem, north; (8) Soma, north-east. As such, he 
is a divine being. He is authorized to maintain the system of four varnas 
and Airamas. But none of thesacred texts — irutis and smrtis— empowers 
him to rule over the Br&hmana varna. Cf. G. Dh. S. raja sarvasyesfe brah- 
mana-varjam. 



Defeat of Kfupa 


137 


greater than the greatest.*" Hence, O blessed one, O son of 
Cyavana, I must never be insulted by you, I must alwnys be 
honoured. 

On hearing that opinion of Ksupa the great sage Dadhica, 
son of Cyavana, struck K§upa on the head with his left fist, 
believing in his own supremacy as a brahmin. But the power- 
ful Ksupa hit Dadhica with his thunderbolt. 

10-12. Formerly, he was born in the world of Brahma 
when Brahma sneezed. He was urged by the thunderbolt- 
wielding Indra to perform a task. He obtained the thunderbolt 
as a reward for his task. Out of his own will, he became a 
human, being and afterwards a king. The powerful king 
then conquered the leading brahmin like the powerful Indra 
himself, full of tamas qualities. When struck by the thunderbolt 
me leading brahmin fell on the ground. 

13-14. Out of sorrow he remembered sage Bhargava. 
Bhargava, the best among the embodied beings, came there 
and by his yogic power he stitched the body of Dadhica who 
had been struck by the thunderbolt. After stitching the 
severed body Bhargava said: 

15-16. O highly blessed Dadhica, worship Siva, the un- 
sullied lord of Devas, worthy of worship by Brahma and others* 
O brahmin sage ! by the grace of the three-eyed lord, you 
become immortal. O brahmin, this pow'r of resuscitating one 
to life has been obtained from him by n# i 

17. There is no fear, anywhere, from death for the devo- 
tees of Siva. I shall now tell you Siva’s Mantra that revives 
one to life. 

18-2 la “We worship the lord, father of the three worlds, 
the lord of the three deities, three Gunas, three principles, 
three sacred fires, of three Vedas, of everything splitin to three. 
He is the scented one, the increaser of nourishment in all living 
beings in all places: in the Prakrti having the three Gunas, in 
the sense-organs and their objects, in Devas and Ganas. Tlie 
fragrant lord is as subtle as fragrance in the flowers. 


344. Cf. Manu : I 7 *®* 

34^. triyambakam— tryambabun. Cf. TS. 1.8. 6.3. 



138 


Lingapurdna 


2 lb-23. O excellent brahmin of holy rites, O great sage, 
because pusti (nourishment) is the very name of Purusa, 
He is the increaser of nourishment (pustivardhana) of all die 
divine creations beginning with Mahat and ending witli 
of Visnu, of Brahma, of sages, of Indra, and of Devas. Heiu e, 
we do worship that immortal nectarine lord Rudra b v means of 
actions, by penance, by study of the VedaL, by yoga and by 
meditation. By this truth, Siva himself shall liberate us from 
the bondage of Death. The lord is the cause of bondage and 
liberation like the cucumber fruit.”^^® This Mantra that resus- 
citates life has been acquired by me from Siva. 

26, By repeating this Mantra, by doing sacrifice with this, by 
drinking water inspired by this mantra, by meditating on this 
Mantra in the presence of the Lihga, O brahmin, one shall 
not have any fear of death. 

27. After hearing his words Dadhica propitiated Siva by 
means of penance and attained adamantine bones, indestructi- 
bility and absence of affliction. 

28-30. Having obtained indestructibility and adamantine 
bones Dadhica hit the king severely on the head with the lip 
of h;s foot. King Ksupa, in return, hit Dadhica in his chest 
with his thunderbolt. But by the grace of lord Siva the thun- 
derbolt \v<is rendered inefIK live. It < j • not injinc 
Dadhica the great soul of adamantine body. 

31. On seeing the greatness and oower of Dadhica by way 
of indcstructibiliiy and unalflictcd state, Ksupa propitiated the 
lOtus-cycd lord Visnu, the younger bmihcr of Indra. 


246. TS. I.9.6.2. cr. I 

^riFT I Sivagita quoted in ST. 



139 


CHAPTER THIRTYSIX 

Dialogue between K$upQ and Dadhica 


Nandin said : 

1-3. Lord Visnu was pleased with his'Dadhica’s) worship. 
Accompanied by Sri and Bliunii (his consorts), holding the 
conch, the discus, the iron club and lotus in his hands, wearing 
crown, bedecked in all ornaments, clad in yellow robes, sur- 
rounded by Devas and asuras, the Garuda-bannered glorious 
lord Visnu granted him divine vision. Seeing him by his divine 
vision, Ksupa bowed to the Garuda-banntred deity and eulogi- 
d him wdth pleasing words. 

4-8. You are the primordial deity with no origin. You 
are Prakrti, you are Purusa, the protector of the world. You 
are Visnu the lord of the universe. You are Brahma, with the 
universe for your body. You are the first piinciplc. O Visnu, 
you alone are the greatest luminary. You arc the supreme 
soul, O lord of Sri, you are the greatest abode* O lord of the 
earth, Rudra enveloped by tainas originated from your fury. 
BrahmJl, the creator of the universe envc!(-)pcd by raja.s was 
born of your grace. The lord envelope d hy sattva, was born of 
your grace. O Visnu, O Rudra, you are identical with the 
universe. 

9. The principles of intellect, ego, the subtle elements and 
the sense-organs O lord, omniformed, arc all jiresidcd over hy 
you alone. 

10. O great lord, O lord of the universe, O Brahma, O 
preceptor of *he universe, be pleased, O lord of the chiefs of 
Devas, be pleased. 

11. O Lord of the universe, be pleased. 1 seek refuge in 
you, worthy of being sought refuge in, O omniscient lord of 
long arms. 

12. O liberator of mankind, O highly blessed one! O lord 
of great strength ! O best of souls ! O unopposed I O great 
Visnu 1 perpetual obeisance be to you. 

13-14. O Vi§nu your divine invisible scat in the midst of 
the Ocean is the thousaud-ho<^ded Sc.sa enveloped in tamas. 



140 


Lingapurdna 


O lord of Devas, O deity of holy rites, beneath this seat, virtue, 
knowledge, prosperity and detachment form the four feet. 

15-18. The seven nether worlds are your feet; the earth 
constitutes your loins; the seven oceans®*^ are your clothes; the 
four quarters are your great arms. O lord, the heaven is your 
head; the sky is your umbilicus; the wind is youi nose; the 
sun and the moon are your eyes, Pu^kara and others consti- 
tute your tresses. The stars, constellations and firmament are 
the ornaments round your neck. How shall I eulogise you the 
lord of Devas ? You are worthy of worship. Whatever was 
done, heard and glorified faithfully as divine, whatever was 
sacrificed by me O Lord ! you shall bear all. Obeisance be 
to you. 

Jfandin said : 

19-21. This hymn of Visnu is destructive of all sins. He 
who reads or listens to this hymn uttered by Ksupa, he who 
narrates this to the brahmins with devotion, goes to the world 
of Visnu. After worshipping thus and eulogising the invinci- 
ble lord who is eulogised by the lord of Devas and others and 
after bowing to him with bent head, Ksupa spoke in 
submission. 

The King said : 

22. O lord, long before, a certain Brahmin, known as 
Dadhica became a friend of mine. He is the knower of 
Dharma and a humble soul. 

23-25. He is engaged in worshipping Siva always. He 
cannot be killed by anyone at all times. O lord of Devas, he 
struck me on the head with his left foot, in the open assembly 
with great contempt. O Visnu, O Viwa, O lord of the 
Universe, arrogantly he said: “I am not afraid of any body 
anywhere”. O lord of universe, I wish to defeat that 
brahmin Dadhica. O Visnu, please, help me to my welfare. 


347. sapta sagarlb. The pur&pas mention seven oceans, viz. of salt, 
sugarcane, vane, ghee, curd, milk and water which surround Jambu, Flakfa, 
gilmali, Kuia, Krau&ca, Saka and Pu$kara continents respectively. 



Dialogue between Kfupa and Dadklca 


141 


Nandin send-. 

26. Vi^u understood that Dadhica was indestructible. 
Visnu then remembered the incomparable prowess of Siva. 

27. After remembering thus, Vi$^u said to K$upa, bom 
of the sneeze of Brahma — *‘0 leading king, after attaining lord 
Siva, brahmins have nothing to fear. 

28. Particularly O king, the devotees of Rudra are free 
from fear always. If this be true in every respect in regard to 
base men what then in die case of Dadhica ? 

29. Hence, O blessed one, O king, you have no hope of 
victory. Of course I shall give a sligtit pain to the brahmin 
inviting a curse on me along with Devas. 

30. O leading king, at Dak^a’s sacrifice due to Dadhica's 
curse I and other Devas will be destroyed but revived again. 

31. Hence, O king, coming into contact with the leading 
brahmin I shall endeavour for your victory over Dadhica. 

Nzndin said : 

32. On hearing these words Kfupa said to Visnu — “So be 
it” The lord too went to the hermitage of the brahmin 
Dadhica. 

33. The lord, favourably dbposed to his devotees, assumed 
the form of a brahmin. The preceptor of the universe con- 
gratulated the brahmin sage Dadhica and said: — 

The lord said : 

34. “O Dadhica, O brahminica* sage, O unchanging one 
engaged in the worship of &va, I desire to choose a boon from 
you. You should grant the same”. 

35. On being requested by Vi?nu, the lord of Devas, 
Dadhica said: — “All that you desire has been understood. I am 
not afraid of you. 

36-37. O Vi?9u» you come to me in the guise of a 
brahmin. By the grace of Rudra, I can understand everything 
the past, future and present. O Vi§nu, O lord of Devas, O 
deity of good rites, leave df this guise of a brahmin. O des- 
troyer of Madhu, O lord of Devas you have been propitiated 
by K$upa. 

38. O lord Vi 99 u, I know you are favourably disposed 
towards your devotees. O lord Vispu, your favouritism to your 
devotees is but proper. 



142 


LingapurSna 


39. O lord, O lotus-eyed, bestower of boons, it behoves you 
to sav frankly if you arc afraid of me engaged that 1 am in the 
worship of 

40. O Visnu, 1 do not speak in vain. I am not afraid. In 
this world I am not afraid of Devas, Daityes or brahmins. 

Pfandin said: 

41. On hearing the words of Dadhica Visnu in a moment 
cast oif his guise of a brahmin. He assumed his own form and 
said smilingly. 

The Lord said: 

42. O Oadhica of good holy rites ! You have no fear any- 
where since you are engaged in the worship of ^iva. Indeed you 
are omniscient. 

43. O leading biahmin, at my behest you should say at 
least once “I am afraid”. Obeisance to you. Please say to 
K^upa in the open assembly that you are afraid. 

44. Even after hearing the appeasing words of Visnu, the 
great sage did not say that he was afraid. 

45. It was due to the prowess of the Pinaka-bearing !§iva, 
the lord of Devas, the benefactor and omniscient lord that the 
great sage did not say he was afraid. 

46. Then the infuriated lord Visnu desired to bum the sage 
and so raised his discus. 

47. By the power of Dadhica even in the presence of 
Ksupa, the discus Sudarsana became blunted. 

48 On seeing the discus with blunted tip, Dadhica said to 
the Discus-bearing lord, who is the cause of manifesting dis- 
tinction between the existent and non-existent. 

49. O lord Visnu, formerly, the terrible discus, Sudarsana 
was assiduously got by you from Siva. 

50. That discus can never kill me. You now try with the 
missile of Brahma or other similar weapons. 

Jfandtn said. 

51. On hearing his words and on seeing his own weapon 
powerless, lord Visnu discharged all missiles from all directions 
towards him. 



Dialogue between K^upa and Dadhica 


143 


52. The powerful Devas thereafter rendered help to Visnu 
who was engaged in fighting against a single brahmin, 

53. Then Dadhica who had adamantine bones and who 
had perfect all-round self control look up a handful of ku$a 
grass. Remembering Siva he discharged it against Devas. 

54. It became a divine trident as lustrous as fire of dissolu- 
tion. Like fire at the close of a yuga it fell inclined to burn 
all Devas. 

55. O sage, all those weapons which were discharged by 
Indra, and other Devas bowed to the trident. 

56-57. O excellent brahmin, Deva*^ whose strength was dis- 
sipated fled from the scene. Then lord Vi§nu, created nut of his 
body millions and millions of divine attendants resembling 
^.•nscl^. The excellent sage burnt all of them immediately. 

58-60. Thereafter, Visnu became Universe-formed in order 
to instil awe in Dadhica. The excellent brahmin saw several 
groups of Devas distinctly, as also crores of Rudras, crores 
of Ganas, crores of Cosmic Eggs in the body of Visnu. 
On seeing all these therein, the son of Cyavana was surprised. 

61. The great sage sprinkled the universe-formed Visnu 
W'ith water. He spoke to Visnu, the unborn lord of the universe, 
identical with the universe. 

62. O mighty-armed one, eschew ihis deception O Visnu, 
there are thousands of skills (or tricks ) v dx me also which are 
difficult to comprehend, and which come handy by mere thin- 
king. 

63. O uncensured one, you can sec wifhin ine tlte entire 
universe along with yourself, Brahma and Rudra. I shall give 
you divine vision. 

64. After saying this, the sage showed everything in his own 
body. He spoke again to loid Visnu, the source of origin of all 
Devas. 

65. ‘^Of what use is this deception ? O ^ord, of what avail 
is the power of magic ? O ^dsnu, what puipuse is served by 
the intrinsic power of objects or by the powder of meditation ? 

66-67. Hence, eschewing this deception you should fight 
against me strenuously.” 


248 . V ijnanam — maya . 



144 


Lingapura^ 

On hearing these words and on seeing his miraculous 
power Devas ran away once again. The lotus*born preceptor 
of the universe Brahma restrained lord Visnu who had 
become inactive. 

68. On hearing the words of Brahma, lord Vi$nu who was 
defeated bowed to the sage and went away. 

69. Ksupa was extremely afflicted and dgected. He honour- 
ed and adored Dadhica the leading sage and prayed thus : 

70. O Lord and friend Dadhica, what has been commi- 
tted by me due to ignorance may be excused. What can be 
affected by Vis^u or Devas in your case since you are a devo- 
tee of Rudra ? 

71. O great Lord, be pleased. O brahmin, the most 
excellent among men of devotion, devotion of this type is 
difficult of access to wicked persons, to base K$atriyas like me. 

72. On hearing the words of the king the brahmin Dadhi- 
ca, the most excellent of those who perform penances blessed 
the king . The leading sage then cursed Devas. 

73-74. May you including Indra and lord Vis^u and ail 
great sages be destroyed by the fire of fury of Rudra in the 
holy sacrifice of the patriarch Dak$a. 

After cursing thus and glancing at Kjupa the brahmin said 
again. 

75. O leading king, brahmins should be worshipped by 
Devas, kings and by the different groups of people. O leading 
king, the brahmins alone are strong and powerful. 

76. After saying this the brahmin of great lustre entered 
his own hut. 

After saluting Dadhica the king too went to his otvn abode.^** 

77. The place of this event is known as the holy centre. 
Sthanvi$vara.*^ After reaching Sthapvi^vara one shall attain 
identity with Siva. 

249. ksayam-grham ST. abode. 

250. SthSneSvara or Stb^viivara is mentioned by Banabhatta 
in his historical prose kavya Harfacarita written in the first half of the seventh 
century A.D. The earliest notice of this place by a foreigner is found in the 
record of the Chinese pilgrim Hieun Thsang , the contemporary of Har$a- 
vardhana, the king of SthSneivara and Kannauj. 

The city is identified with the modem town Thanesar, near Kum- 
kyetra, Haryana State. It derives its name from an smcient temple dedicated 
to lord Siva. 



Grant of boons to Brahma 


145 


78. O great sage, the dispute between Ksupa and Dadhica 
has been briefly recounted to you, as also the power of Siva 
and his protege Dadhica. 

79. He who reads this divine dispute between Ksupa and 
Dadhica will conquer premature death. After Death he will 
go to the region of Erahma. 

80. He who enters the battlefield after repeating this story 
need not be afraid of death. He will always come out victori- 
ous. 


CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN 

Grant of boons to Brahma 


Sanatkumdra said: 

1. How did you attain Mahadeva the lord of Uma ? O 
holy lord, it behoves you to narrate everything. I wish to 
hear. 

Sailddi said: 

2. O great sage, my blind fathei i^ilada was desirous of 
a progeny. For a long time he pei t inned a penance very 
difficult to be performed by others. 

3. The thunderbolt-wielding lord Indra was pleased with 
his penance. He said to Silada — ‘4 am pleased. Choose your 
boons”. 

4. O leading sage, he bowed down to the thousand-eyed 
lord of Devas along with Devas. With palms joined in 
reverence he spoke lo him. 

Sildda said: 

5. O lord of good holy rites, O destroyer of the enemies 
of Devas, O bestower of boons, I wish for a son devoid of 
death and not born of a womb. 

Indra said : 

6. O brahmin sage, I shall give you a son born of a 



146 Lingapur&na 

womb and liable to die. I will not give you anyone otherwise. 
There are no persons without death. 

7. O great sage, even lord Brahma will not grant you a 
son without death or not born of a womb. Then what about 
others ? 

8. Even that lord Brahma is not devoid of death himself. 
The lord himself is born of a womb. The lotus-born deity of 
great splendour is born of an egg. 

9. The lord is born of Mahesvara. He is the son of Urna. 
His span of life is limited to two Parardhas. 

10. Thousands and crores of kalpas that constitute his 
day have passed by. So many yet remain. 

1 1 . Hence O leading brahmin, eschew your ardent desire for 
a son devoid of death or not born of a womb. Accept a son like 
yourself. 

Sailddi said : 

12. On hearing his words my meritorious father well- 
known in the world as Silada again spoke to the husband of 
iSaci (i.e. Indra) . 

^ildda said : 

13. O lord, I have already heard that Brahma was born 
of an Egg, was born of a lotus and also was bom of MaheSvara. 

14-15. Formerly O Mahendra, of great arms, Narada 
my elder brother, had been saying this and I have heard it 
from him. But tell me, how this can be ? DakjayanI was the 
grand-daughter of Brahma since Daksa was the son of the lotus- 
born deity ? How then can Brahma be her son ? 

Indra said : 

16-18. O biahmin, your doubt is reasonable. I shall tell 
you the cause of the same that happened to Brahma in the 
Tatpurusa kalpa. After pondering over all things the supreme 
lord created Brahma. In the Meghavahana kalpa, Visnu, the 
lord of the universe, became a cloud and bore the supreme 
lord Siva for a thousand years with ease and comfort. 

19. On seeing the devotional feeling of Visnu towaids him- 



Grant of boons to Brahma 


147 


self the great lord entrusted to him everything alongwith 
Brahma with instructions to create further. 

20-21. Then they call that Icalpa by the nam^' Megha- 
vahana. On seeing him born of His body Brahma approached 
Siva and said; ‘‘O lord, Visnu was born of your left and I am 
born of your right side.** 

22-26. ‘‘Still Vi'-nu created the entire universe along with 
me. Taking the form of a cloud identical with the world he 
bore you the lord of Devas, preceptor of the universe, dav and 
night. O lord, I am a better dc\otee of yours than him. Be 
pleased with me, O lord, grant me omniscience.” 

Then Brahma attained omniscience in a tiice. He then 
hurried out and met Visnu in the va^t ocean-^’ eiivclopc^d bv 
darkness. He saw Visnu in an illustiious spot studded with 
,";old and jewels which was mentally created '>y \’’isnu himself. 
It was inaccessible to wricked persons, invisible even to the 
pious like Indra and others. 

27-32. Brahma saw the Purusa in whose heart the entire 
universe rested. He was lying down on the couch constituted 
by the body of the serpent He had lotus-likt eyes 

and four arms holding the conch, dicus, iron club, and the 
lotus. He was wearing ornaments and in that form he resem- 
bled the orb of the moon. He bore the mark Srivatsa over his 
breast. Brahma beheld him with pleasure evident in his face. 
His lotus-like feet had turned led due o the eoniac t with the 
lotus-like soft hands of Laksmi He was Isana the greatest 
Atman. By tamas he was in the form ol Kala. By rajas he 
was the initiator of creation of the world. By sattva he was 
the sustainer of all. He was Paraiiies /aia, the soul ot all, the 
noble Atman, the supreme soul. Buihma saw him lying down 
in his yogic slumber in the iiniky ocean lull olneciai. C)n 
seeing him he Npoke to him thus: 

33-35. “Just as you liad swallowed me beloie, so also I 
shall swallow you now by the grace ol Siv<i. Ihr lord with 
great arms woke up a little surprised and ]<• )king at him smiled 
slightly. Swallowed by that noble soul, he entered thf* body 

2 ,T. See p. iry note 22. 

232. Sec p. 15 noto 2j. 



148 


lAr^apwr&aa 


of that deity born of the Egg. Then Brahma created Vimu 
through the middle of the eye-brows. Created by him Vi^u 
stood near him observing. 

36-40. In the meantime Rudra, the source of origin of 
all Devas, who had granted boons to both, assumed an 
uncivil form and came to the place where Visnu stood. Lord 
Parame^vara, the soul of the universe, wanted to bless both 
with great favour. Both of them simultaneously saw the lord 
resembling the fire of Death. They eulogised the terrible lord 
with matted hair. They bowed to the lord, the bestower of 
boons, standing far away out of respect. The great lord, 
the protector of the universe blessed Brahma and Visriu and 
vanished there itself. 


CHAPTER THraTYElGHT 

Creation of Brahma 

Sailadi said: 

1 . • When lord Siva had gone, lord Vis^u, the origin of 
Brahma, bowed down in that direction and said to the lotus- 
born deity. 

Sri FtVnu said-. 

2. The supreme god Siva, the lord of the universe, is omni- 
present. He is the lord and refuge of us both as well as of the 
entire universe. 

3. O Brahma, I am born of the left side of Siva the supreme 
soul. You are bom of his right side. 

4. The sages observe me and say that I am Pradhana, the 
Prakrti, the Avyakta (unmanifest) and the Aja (unborn). They 
call you Purusa. 

5. They call the supreme lord the cause of us both, as lord 
of the universe. He is the unchanging lord Isvara. 

6. At the instance of the lord of the immortals, the lotus- 
born deity eulogised and bowed to Rudra the most excellent 
one and the bestower of boons. 



Creation of Brahma 


149 


7. Then Vi§^iu assumed the form of a Boar and lifted up 
the earth submerged under the water. He re-established it as 
it was originally. 

8. With great effort he made the earth even, without ups 
and downs. The lord created the rivulets, rivers and the oceans 
as before. 

9. The lord having the form of a boar*®* the uplifter of tlie 
earth, gathered all the mountains together. As before he created 
the four worlds beginning with Bhuh. 

10. The lord who was the most excellent of all intelligent 
persons became inclined to create the chief creation, the animal 
creation, and then the divine and human creations. 

11-16. With the intellect free from wretchedness the lord 
at the outset created Sananda, Sanaka and Sanatana the most 
“xrellent among the good. All these practised Naiskarmya and 
attained the greatest being. By hi; yogic learning he created 
Marici, Bhrgju, Ahgiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Daksa, Alri, 
Vasiftha, Sahkalpa, Dharma and Adharma. Thus there are 
twelve sons to Brahma born of the unmanifest. 

At the outset the eternal lord had created Rbhu and 
Sanatkumara. These two fresh born sons had sublimated their 
sexuality, and were divine expounders of Brahman. They were 
bachelors, omniscient, conceivers of everything and equal to 
Brahma himself. After creating the sargas — Mukhya etc. O 
Sila^ana, the lotus-bom deity, the creator of the universe, 
evolved all the special characteristics o! the different ages. 


253. bhudhartikrti — in the person of King Prthu, son of Vena. Bhdga. 
ascribes the levelling of the earth to King Pfthu 

firfr f gT fH TT 'i lTI g I cited in ST. 

which offers also another interpreution : 

in the form of boar, upliHing the earth 

iubmerged in vraters. 



150 


lAngapurctM 


CHAPTER THIRTYNINE 

Specific Dharmas of Four Yugas 

Satladi said: 

1. On hearing the narration of Indra, my father, the great 
sage, bowed to the lord of Devas, and with the palms joined in 
revel ence he asked him again. 

Sildda said : 

2-3. O lord Indra, O omniscient one, bowed down by the 
chiefs of Devas O lord of SacI, O thousand-eyed lord of the 
universe, O Mahe^vara, how did the lotus-bom deity Brahma 
evolve the specific dharmas of the yugas ? It behoves you now 
to recount it to me who have bowed down to you. 

Sailadt said: 

4. On hearing the words of Sil^a, the noble-souled Indra 
recounted the dharmas of the yugas in detail in the manner 
seen by him. 

Indra’ said: 

5. Know that first comes Krtayuga. O sage, Treta comes 
next. Thereafter Dvapara and Tisya (Kali) yugas. These are 
the four yugas in brief. 

6. Sattvagu^ signifies Krta yuga; rajas signifies Treta; 
rajas-cum-tamas signifies Dvapara. Tamas signifies Kali. 
I'hese should be known as the special characteristics in each of 
the dilferent yugas. 

7. Meditation is the greatest activity in Krta yuga; yajfta 
(sacrifice) in Treta; worship is the main activity in Dvapara 
and pure cliaritable gpft in the Kali age. 

8. Four thousand divine years constitute Krta yuga. So 
many hundred years (i.e four hundred) constitute the preceding 
transition period (sandhya). The following transition period 
(sandhyamia) is also of the same duration. 

9. O Sila^ana, O man of good holy rites, know that the 
longevity of tlit subjects in Krta is four thousand human years. 



specific Dharmas of Four Tugas 


151 


10. When the Krtayuga together with its sandhyarii^a 
passes off, the yuga dharma becomes reduced by a quarter all 
round. 

1 1 . The excellent Trcta yuga extends to a period one fourth 
less than Krta. Know that Dvapara extends to half of the dura- 
tion of Krta. Kaliyuga is still half of it. 

12. O sage, the Sandhya periods are respectively three 
hundred, two hundred and one hundred years. The sandhyariisa 
periods are also the same. The same thing holds good in all the 
kalpas, and yugas. 

13-14. In Krta, the eternal dharma has all the four feet; 
in Treta it has three feet; it stays on l\vo feet in Dvapara; in 
Kali, it is devoid of three feet and is stationed by its mere exis- 
tence. In Krta, the subjects are born in twins; their avocation 
abounds in taste and happiness. 

15- They are always satisfied. They enjoy all pleasures and 
bliss. There is no inferiority or superiority among them; there 
are no special characteristics among subjects; they are all 
auspicious. 

16, Longevity, happiness and features among the people in 
Krta arc the same for all; they have no special liking; they have 
no Dvandvas (mutually opposing pairs), no hatred, no fatigue. 

17-19. Those who have no abodes live on mountains and in 
the oceans. Even then they are devoid oi m isery. They have mostly 
sattva gunas and are mostly isolated. Thty move about without 
specific desires; they are perpetually delighted in their minds. 
They refrain from virtuous and sinlul activities. 

At that time there was a well-defined arraagemeut of castes 
and stages of life; but there was no intermingling of castes. 
O brahmin, by efflux of time, in Treta yuga iheir tastes and 
happiness perish. 

20-22. When that Siddhi has perished another is generated. 
\Vhen water attains subtlety it gets transformed into clouds. 
F:oni the thundering clouds rainfall proeee Is. As soon as the 
surface of the earth comes into contact with rain, trees appear. 
Fhese trees form their abodes. The subjects have their susten- 
ance and [deasures out of these trees. 

23-26. In the beginning of Treta the subjects sustained 
themselves through them. Then after the lapse of a grcdt deal 



152 


LiAgapurat^a 


of time, when there was a change, the feeling of lust and cove- 
tousness was sudden. The trees which formed their abodes 
began to perish. When they perished the twin-born subjects 
at that time were bewildered. Thereafter they began to 
ponder over the matter. Since they were truthful in their 
thought the trees reappeared. 

27-28. They used to produce clothes, fruits and ornaments. 
On the very same trees honey of great potency but not genera- 
ted by bees, got evolved in every leafy cup. This honey had 
great fragrance, good colour and sweet taste The subjects 
always sustained themselves thereby and passed their days 
comfortably at all times. 

29. They were delighted and well-nourished. Through 
this achievement they were free from ailments. Then after the 
lapse of some time, they became greedy. 

30-32. They began to chop off the trees and take the 
honey forcibly. Due to their misdemeanour as well as their 
greed the kalpa trees perished in certain places along with 
honey. As time rolled on only a little of this perfection surviv- 
ed. As Treta was repeated in every cycle the Dvandvas 
(mutually conflicting pairs) cropped up. Then the subjects 
became very miserable due to the chilly rain and scorching sun. 

33. When they were harassed by Dvandvas they began to 
make clothes and garments for covering themselves. They 
made abodes on the mountains in order to ward off Dvandvas. 

34. Formerly they roamed about as they pleased. They 
had no fixed abodes. Now they b^an to stay in houses in 
accordance with their availability and pleasure. 

35-36. After taking preventive measures against the Dvan- 
dvas they began to think about their means of sustenance. 
When the kalpa trees had perished along with honey, the sub- 
jects became confounded and agitated due to disputes. They 
were harassed by thirst and hunger. Then, again in Treta, 
new perfections came in sight. 

37. They had more rains than they desired or needed for 
production. Heavy downpour of waters flowed down the slopes. 

38. Due to continuous rain sources of water currents arose. 
Thus in the course of second creation of rains, streams and 
rivers began to function. 



specific Dharmas of J 53 

39. Small collection of those waters fell on tlie earth. 
Due to the mingling of waters and the earih, plants and herbs 
came into being. 

40-41. Then trees and hedges grew up. Very few 
tnciii were cuiuvah.d. They aoi sown. Fourteen-*^^ 

types of trees and grasses grew up m the rural and forest 
areas. They put forth flowers and fruits in accordance with 
the season. Different types of trees and medicinal herbs also 
appeared. The subjects sustained themselves with these at 
that time of Treta. 

42. Thereafter the subjects became lustful and greedy in 
every respect on account of what is destined to happen 
inevitably in Treta age. 

43. Then the subjects forcibly occupied the fields near the 
rivers and on the mountains. Tliey seized the trees, hedges 
and herbs as much as they could. 

44-45. On account of this perversity the fourteen types of 
medicinal herbs perished. Thinking that these plants and 
herbs have entered the earth, Brahma milked the eaith assidu- 
ously for the welfare of living beings. Ever since, the plants 
aic ploughed by ploughshares here and there. 

46. Those who were desirous of sustaining themselves 
assiduously took to agriculture. The word Varta means 
avocation and the avocation in this con ext is the endeavour 
and desire for agriculture. 

47. Otherwise, towards the close of Treta, the subjects 
have no means of livelihood, l^hen water has to be lifted by 
hand in general. 

48. In that Treta the subjects in their fury seized one 
another, even their sons, wives, riches eti ,, forcibly. Such was 
the characteristic of that yuga. 

254. The Puranas divide the vegetation life into three classes, viz. 
(i) gramya, (2) gramaranya, (3) yajniya (cf. Vayu) I iit this classification 
is very obscure. 

Manu classifies the plant-world into fi) Vanaspati (trees not having 
flowers, (2) Vanaspatya trees bearing fruits and flowers), (3) Osadhi 
(plants such as grass) and (4) lata, valli (creepers), Fuithcr, Visnu (cited 
in ST.) mentions fourteen osadhis by name. They are vrlhi, yava, ma^a, 
godhuma, anu, tila, priyahgu, kulittha, syamaka, nivara, jaitila, gavedhuka, 
Venuyava, and markataka. 



154 


Lingapurdna 


49. Knowing all this, the lotus-born lord created Ksatii- 
yas, to protect people from wounds and injuries and also for 
establishing the rules of conduct. 

50. Characterised by his own splendour the lord establish- 
ed castes and stages of life. The lord of me univ^ersc ihen 
created avocation and conduct ot life for respective castes of 
people. 

51. The avocation of sacrifices was evolved in Trcta gradu- 
ally. But persons of good holy rites did not resort to animal 
sacrifice even then. 

52. It was then that the seer Visnu perlormed sacrifices 
forcefully. That is why the brahmins piaise a non-violcnt 
sacrifice. 

53. In the Dvapara too, men have different inclinations 
mentally, verball> and physically, ft is with great difltcuUy 
that agriculture proceeds in that age. 

54-55. Then all living beings exert gradually and stiain 
their bodies. Covetousness, service on wage basis, business, 
fighting, indecision about princijilcs, division of Vedas, confusion 
of dharmas, destruction of discipline among the four castes and 
stages of life, lust and hatied —these are the spcciiif s ptu lain- 
ing to that age. 

56. It is in this Dvapara that the following begin to 
function, viz — passion, covetousness, arrogance, etc. In the 
beginnings of Dvapara the Vedas arc classified into tour by 
Vyasa. 

57. It is laid down that during Trcta the Vedas constituted 
one single whole with four sections. Since the span of life be- 
comes less and less the Vedas are classified in Dvapara. 

58-59. They are further differentiated through the whims 
of the sons of sages, when the order of Mantra and Brahinana 
texts is altered and the accents and letters are changed. The 
compendiums of Rk Yajus and Samans arc compiled by the 
learned men. Although the texts are common, they are differ- 
entiated duo to different view-points. 

60. The different sections to the Vedas are evolved, viz., — 



specific Dharmas of Four Yugas 


155 


Brahrnanas*** Kalpasutras®** and Mantrapravacanas.^"- Sonx 
departed from them and some abided by them. 

61-63. The Itihasas and Puranas*^® differ from V to 
time. They are Brahma, Padma, Vaisnava, Saiva, \ .u 
Bhovisya, Naradiya, Markandeya, Agiieya, Brah a.ta, 
Laihga, Varaha, Vamana, Kurma, Matsya, Garurid Sk:mda 
and Brahmancjia — these are the eighteen Puranas. 

61-65. The eleventh Lihea Purtoa was classifitfl in 
Dvapara. The following sages, thousands in numbei * wiote 
Snirris etc. — Manu, Atri, Visnu, Harita, Yajhavalkya, # J^a las, 
Angiras, Yama, Apastamba, Samvarta, Kalyayana 
Parasara, Vvasa, Sahkha, Likhita, D'^ksa, Gautara.i, S Mat. ;»d, 
Vasistha and others. 

66-70. Absence of rain, death, the harassments of 
cu . occur, Indidercnce to worldly affairs results fro»T) \.uioi4:> 
miseiies, menial, verbal and physical. From this indifference 
they begin to think about their liberation from pain jud 
miser;, Thi^ process of thinking Icafls to detachmeni and 
fr(»m detachment they begin to realize the dcfonniiies and 
defects in the world. Thanks to this perception, perfect kri^n^^- 
ledge becomes possible in Dvapara. This is due to the behavi* 
our of mixed rajas and tamas. lathe firs*^ vuga viz Kita 
yuga dharnia originates, fn TrfMa it begins to fup' tion. In 
Dvapara it becomes distracted gradualS and in Kali it nerishes 
altogether. 


2y Brahmanam. Brahmana literature comprises treatises such as 
Aitarey.,, Taittiriya, Gopalha, J^atapatha, cU , and their anrillaries Aranyakas 
and Upani^ads which lcig<*lh< r with the mantra portion, called Saihhita 
constitute the Vedas. Gf. mantra-brahrnanayor \'''da-namadheyam. 

Kalpasuiras >-kri> i’pratipadakasutrani ST. ritual treatises- — 
Ar«)a, etc. 

2^7. Mantra-pr^vacanani— mimamsa-nyayasutr^i ST., philoso- 
phical treatist.s such as mimamsa and nvaya. 

2*-,^. On the authenticity, extent and number of the Puranas, see In- 
troduction. 



156 


Ltngapuram 


CHAPTER FORTY 

Extent of four Yugas 


Indr a said: 

1. In Kali age men excited by tamoguna adopt Maya 
deception) and jealousy. They do not hesitate to kill ascetics. 

They are always tormented by jealousy. 

2. In Kali ago there is always carelessness, illness, hunger, 
fear, and terrible suffering from drought. There is also opposi- 
tion from and among the different parts of the country. 

3. Sruti (i. e. Vedas) is not considered an authority. Men 
resort to sinful activity. People are sinful, irritable and narrow- 
minded. They misbehave. 

4. Greedy and wicked subjects, born in Kali utter false- 
hood. They are engaged in evil desires, evil study, misbehaviour 
and misleading scriptural texts. 

5. Due to defects in the activities of the brahmins feai arises 
in the subjects. The twice-born neglect the study of Vedjs and 
do not sacrifice as prescribed. 

6-7. Men perish. Ksatriyas and Vaisyas decline gradually. 
In Kali Sudras claim kinship with brahmins through their 
learning through interdining and sharing seats and beds. 
Kings become mostly, Sudras and they harass brahmins. 

8. Killing of foetus and murder of heroes become preva 
lent Sudras adopt the conduct of life prescribed for the 
brahmins and the brahmins adopt the ways of Sudras. 

9. Tiiieves function as kings and Kings function as thieves. 
The chaste ladies cease to exist and wanton sluts increase in 
nuoiber. 

10. Stability and discipline of four castes and stag's of 
life disappear frc:n all places. At that time the earth yie lds 
ver> little fru'tin r)re place and great fruits in another 

11. O Sila^.iria, the kings coiifiM ate ai J misappropriate 
public property. They cease to be prote<-toij. iSudras accpiire 
knowledge and are honoured by the brahmins. 

12. Non-ksairiyas become rulers. Brahmins depend on 
Sudras. Sudras proud of their Intellect remain sitting in 
their seats and do not stir on seeing biahmins. 



Extent of four Tugas 


157 


13-18 Petty-minded §udras strike the leading brahmins. 
Out of humility, brahmins keep their hand over their mouth 
and whisper into the ears of base Sudras. O noble Brahmins, 
knowing that Sudras are seated on lofty seats amidst brahmins, 
the king does not punish them. People of meagre learning, for- 
tune and strength worship Sudras with flowers, scents and 
other auspicious things. O brahmin, arrogant Sudras do not 
even glance at the excellent brahmins. Waiting for their 
opportunity to serve them, the brahmins stand at their 
thresholds: The brahmins depending upon Sudras serve them 
when they return seated in their vehicles and eulogise them 
by means of eulogies and prayers. In Kali, even the excellent 
brahmins demean themselves by selling the fruits of their 
austerities and sacrifices. 

19-25. In Kali there will be many ascetics. As the yuga 
draws to a close, men become reduced in number while women 
increase in proportion. In Kali even the brahmins censure 
Vedic learning and holy rites. In Kali lord Mahadeva, 
Sankara, Nilalohita reveals himself as one of deformed features, 
for the establishment of righteousness. The brahmins who 
resort to him by any means conquer the evils of Kali and 
attain the highest abode. 

It should be known that towards the close of yuga, the 
beasts of prey will be very violent. Cows will decline and good 
men will recede from active spheres. Their Dharma which is 
subtle, conducive to good results and difficult of access, which 
iids its roots in charitable gifts, becomes shaky due to in- 
stability in the four stages of life. The kings misappropriate 
shares from the oblations offered to God. They do not protect 
the people. Towards the close of yuga, they will be more 
interested in protecting themselves. In Kali cooked food 
will be kept for sale in living places. The selling of Vedas and 
other sacred literature will occur in cross streets; young 
women will sell even their honour.*^® 

259. atta^ulah — attam kanyadravyarh iulo ye9aip ST. — those who 
indulge in the barter of girls. Or atta — cooked food. Sivasulah — those who 
indulge in the sale of Vedas. Gatuspathah — br^manas (Mcdini cited in 
ST.)Ke^a^ulah — tyaktalajjah ST. Or those who have bartered their 
chastity. * mukta-keSab — apagatahrik^. Gf. Viiva cited in ST. 



158 


Liigaputam 


26-31. The lord of rain will be wayward in making 
showers at the close of yuga. Merchants will resort to malpra- 
ctices. They will be surrounded by heretics indulging in vain 
outward show. There will be many beggars and petitioners 
among the people soliciting one another. There will be no 
one not indulging in harsh words; there will not be anv 
straightforward man; there will hardly be anyone who i*-- not 
jealous; v'hcn the yuga comes to a close, there will srarcelv 
i>e any man readily willing to return the help rendered. Fallen 
fieople and censurers characterise this closing period of 
Ihe earth will bedeyoid of kings, riches and foodgrains uiil 
not flourish; groups of conspirators will be formed in d'e 
citie< and countries. The earth will have short supply of water 
and will be deficient in fruits. Those assigned to be protectors 
will not be so. They will not be subject to discipline. 

32-33. Men will rob others of their wealth and wola'c the 
chastity of other men’s wives. They will be lustful, wicisfd at 
heart, base and foolhardy. They will lose proper perspeotiv'* of 
thing'.. Suffering from colic they will have their hairs disheve- 
lled. Towards the close of the yuga people will be born whose 
age tv ill be only sixteen years. 

34. When the end of the yuga is imminent “^udras will 
begin the practice of dharma with white teeth, dtciskin and 
Rudraksa beads, with shaven heads and ochrc-colourcd 
i< bes. 

35. Men will steal plants and grains. They will \ fjvet (he 
clothes they sec; thieves will rob other thieves of their wo.ilth; 
one robljcr will rob another, 

.16-37. When noble and befitting holy rites are no longer 
performed; when all the people become inactive and leth.argic, 
germs, mice and serpents will torment men. Prosperity, welfare, 
health and efficiency will be difficult to attain. People afflicted 
by hunger and fear will resort to the lands near the Kaus^kt-®" 
river. 


260. Kau^iki. It is the modern Kosi that is.sues from the Himalayas, 
flows through Nepal and Tirhut and joins the Ganges below Patna. But 
originally the river passed through North Bengal and fell into the Brahma- 
putra. See Sirc&r, GAMI p. 4a. 



Extent of four Tugas 


159 


38-39. People overwhelmed by misery will never see the 
maximum span of life of hundred years. In Kali all the Vedas 
w I! nut be available. Yajfias perish afflicted by people of no 
virtue. Ochre-robed and naked anchorites will be wandering 
and iiutiiy KJlpalikas ascetics holding skulls as their begging 
bowl:,) will infest the territories. 

40 - 1 1 . Some seii Wdas and others sell 'firthas (holy waters) 
3.C Uiake illegal gaiii out oi these Wb-n Kali yuga begins 
hcrciM s v^JU he hoii. who will be opposeu to the system of four 
castes and stages of hie. Sndraa will learn the Vedas and will 
beii^n-e expeUs in iIk* njcariiug < f dharira. 

Ia'M. Kings b(Jifj of ‘sQdra womb will perform horse- 
sai t il'< c. Pc oplc bcgi/i to haraos one aiiother by killing women, 

’ '1 i/f n OVA..'* and one ano»bci\ 

Since people aic inclined towards evil, their behaviour 
will be vvrought b> t^aniciguna. At that tiint the crimes suen as 
the . I.cught'i Oi a brahmin -legiu to appear. 

\ . fierce during Kali longevity strength and features 
betA.ine less <uid less. Men attain perfection within a short w’hilc, 
4b-47. Excellent brahiiiins ol bl'^ssed nature will sail 
prac use dharrna wi'ihoui malice towards the end of yuga as 
laid dc'wn in ilu' and Snutis. What is gained by ihe 

prac ru e 1 1 dhanna for a year in Treta is attained by the prac- 
tice ol 0 Ku a nioutli 111 iK lp/roa. In Kab an InU 'f' gent devotee 
^ittasie. ir *aine in i day bv ptarusing uliai rna strenuc^ 

iii. This is the state of affairs in the Kali yuga Under- 
stand the sifuation in the pciiod oi ending junction v sandh- 
>ainsa) iioni me. In every yuga the Siddhis are reduced to 
three -liMiths of what they w'cre In the be ginning. 

■l b C nily a cpianei of the feature s of the yugas remains in 
thcii ^'iiiahyfis /bre eding transition periods). Simdaily only 
a quarte r oi the Icatiires of th»' aandhva.. aludes in the san- 
dhyariisa.^’ (succeeding transition periods^ (i.c. during the 
.sandliyamsa period only l/6th of the yuga Dliamia will prevail). 


aOi. Clf. Visnu as cited in S'F. i 

fe^rr: I JiFfTtFcT 5Ff^: iirrf<Rr»T ii 



160 


Lingapurdna 


50-53. When the yuga has come to a close and the period 
of junction too has arrived, the chastiser of the wicked people 
will rise up in order to kill all the bad living beings. He will be 
born in the family of the Moon. He will be called Pramiti by 
name. Prtv’iouslv in the Svayambhuva manvantara, lie i ad 
been born o^ the parts of Manu (i.e. in the family of then 
Manu); for lull twenty years he will be roaming about on the 
earth. He will be taking along with him a big army consisting 
of horses, chariots and elephants. He will be surrounded by 
hundreds and thousands of brahmins wielding weapons. He 
will kill the Mloechas (alien outcaste people) in thousands. 

54-55. After killing the kings of Sudra wombs he will ex^ei- 
minate the heretics completely. He will kill those who are not 
pious and virtuous. He will kill those who are born of diffe- 
rent castes and those who depend upon them . 

56. Thus making himself powerful with an active army 
under his control, he the destroyer of the Mlecchas, invincible 
to all living beings, will roam about the world. 

57-58. In the previous birth he was born in the family 
of Manu who himself was a part incarnation of Visnu. When 
the Kali yuga is complete (i.e. coming to an end) he will be 
born in the line of the Moon as the powerful Pramiti. He 
will start his campaign in his thirty second year and continue 
it for twenty years. 

59. He will be killing hundreds and thousands of living 
beings. By means of this cruel act be will reduce the entire 
earth to the seeds. 

60-69. Getting infuriated mutually (the people will attack 
one another) . Pramiti will defeat all those alien outcastes and 
all unrighteous persons and ultimately rest in the middle land 
between the Gahga and Yamuna along with his ministers and 
followers, after killing all the kings and alien outcastes in 
thousands. When the sandhyarhsa period sets in at the end of 
the yuga there will be groups of people among the subjects left 
behind here and there. Getting unrestrained and covetous they 
will be attacking and killing one another. When anarchy 

262. Pramiti — Gandragupta Vikramaditya II, son of Samudragupta. 

A similar account is found in Matsya^ Gh. 144. For detail, see MP — A Study, 
by V.S. Agrawal, pp. 228-231. 



Extent of four Tugas 


161 


spread? in view of the series of affairs in the yuga, when people 
begin to suspect one another, all those people will be afflicted 
by fear. Agitated and bewildered they will leave off their wives 
and houses. They will not care even for their own lives. 
Though themselves miserable yet they will be worthless. When 
the lioly rites laid down in the Srutis and Smrtis perish, these 
people will at-ack and kill one another. When Dharma is de.s- 
troyed they will become mannerless, unbounded, shameless and 
unloving. They will not hesitate to attack one another. They 
will be stunted in growth and live aj far as twentyfive years. 2 ®^ 
Getting involved in disputes they will abandon wives and son^. 
When lack of rain affects them they will, abandon agriculture. 
They will leave off their land and resort to frontiers. They 
..iM resort to rivers, oceans, mountains and wells. 

70, In their misery they will sustain themselves on wine, 
meat, roots and fruits. They will wear barks of trees, leaves or 
deer skin. They will not perform holy rites or accept monetary 
gifts. 

71. They will fall off Irom the rigid discipline of four 
castes and stages of life. They will be involved in a terrible 
calamity. Thus the few remaining subjects at the end of Kali- 
yuga will be in miserable circumstances. 

72-7J. They will be afflicted by old age, sickness and hunger. 
Due to SOI row their minds will become dejected. Through dejec- 
tion thinking sets in. An even attitude of the mind is wnat is 
called viearana (thinking). This attitude leads to knowledge. 
Tlirougli true knowledge arises pious nature. The subjects who 
survive the concluding years of Kaliyuga will be devoid of 
physical features and mental peace. 

74-78. At that time, the yuga changes for them overnight, 
after ci eating illusion in their minds as in the case of a sleeping 
or mad man. Thanks to the inevitability and force of future 
events Krtayuga will set in. When thus the Krtayuga is ushered 
in, the subjects surviving from the Kaliyuga, become those 

26?. pancaviriisakah i.e. with their span of life extending only to 
twentyfive years or whose gross and subtle bodies constitute twentyfive 
tattvas. 

264. pratyantan^nalecchadeSan ST, Gf. pratyaiito mlecchadesab 
syiit — Ama}a, 



162 


Lingapurma 


belonging to the Krtayuga. Tho^r (enlightincd souls) 

who still remain and move about lU sibl>, wil] be made mani- 
fest then alongwith the sleeping Saptaisij (seven sag(Sy 
There will be 'ome brahmins, ksatnyas vais\ aid Siidr is 
‘or the purpose oi seeds Tie as nuckns foi me subseq'ioni 
geneiation. They will get nixed uiili ilic p^cpk sur\ ving 
from fhe Kahyugd. The sevf^j s iges and othti II t k h these 
people their D1 ainia 

111 \ will * h Uiem the tw * i i iht Siuti 

and Sirn 11 ^^*""^ alongwnh X onduct M i> . 'iliai to tl Ion 
lastis iiid stages ol lut 

1 h(. cafter when they btgiix to pt! oiMi t u .a s, t»i siluc' 
njsl in the Kn *vo ;a. 

u » hj When the JJhaimas hx\e I ei niOj_ x aided bv lie 
sevtn saprs, odicr sap's pi oiiaiii^au tla n aiuong 1 oi >ole' 
by ddltieniiating them bciWLL.i those p ra nng to Siutj tod 
‘^mrn Some o* tt>esc sag» s s^as v« n at tiu i nii ol disso ju )»^ 
toi ihe pu pose ot establuhiiig l»hairna 1 rn nxdt. d stay 

in oiFi(e ihioughout tlu mansantara *st a tiees o tnain 
piiiathci d ) when the Iciest hre Lonvuiii^s the gra^s Hut when 
ram falls thi'- giftws up again In the scAint nimn''r, alter the 
peopi oi Kali dj the people of Krta vtiga (ona up I !il 

continuity fi cm uga to an(>ther goes on wiuiout uitak ni 

this niannei ml the manvmnara romto to a Jost 
8^ Happiness, lougf j^v, otiit^di, b aui\ (oi 
features , miIuc, ^^fahh mo Ixvt Imoiuc nound to tiirM 

fourih'N froii* \aga to v iga giaJualiy 

83 I he Siddhis ot Dhar na bei oi> ( propoi UoiUiia K) 


, Siddh r -a clajs of humaii hemps of »* t piintv *u jiiicss a d 
diviiu power They arc said to be s \ n Cf rn iit ajfu> nn i iva p ajno 
m /Urai o biddha, ujit ill siddhavat j ir'indi suldhah sarvabiddhipr ida>ii a 
cjtt ^ in 

-66 se\cn sages viz Main Atii, Angiras Puias ya, Pulalui K’atu 
and Visj ♦ha Ihey ar** foire tnted by a gioup of seven stars ^.alled Uisi 
Majo* ST cites a »«ise vuh a few variations in names Ka'>^ a]K/ liir 
bharadvajo Visvamitro* tha Oautamali V isi^tho Jamada^mis ca sapiai tva 
udahitXh 

-t 6a Srauta and Siimrta dharma norms of nghtionsness derived 
from the authority of ^iiUi ^V^das and Sii iti (kgaJ tnafi c ; 



Extent of four Tugas 


163 


reduced in the parts of the junctions of yugas. Thus the mode 
of achievement in order has been recounted. 

H6-92. In the same manner all the four yugas must be 
unoerstood. A thousand such cycles of lour yugas are said to 
< onsiitutc one day of Brahma. 1 he m'glit too consi‘ ts of as many 
vugas. By the tunc the ^uga comes t(» a close the living beings 
lose theii stiaightfc nvaid and sentiCiU lings. "Ihis is the 
cliaractf nstic leature oi all the yugas. bcventyorie c)(\r\ of 
tour yugas ror MaU(‘ a nianvantaia. Wliai hipptns in oik or qT 
{*>iu •s lep^ att d in the otln ' S'it'- oi i< m ^uga. iU i/i* 

sdiiK iria' Tit I au<^ at ih ' ame tnnt* as v. *11 in tiie ouhT 

J Iv (htir’inrC' ‘dMloccui f-ou. u .tiuu u t tati-ju .am limited 
to t\Aent\fiNa-, TK'ihct nioM 'a' It "S TUo ki . n>f»ha't 'ht 

tme rlKiKKki’ • cs tht viiga'. Tl in> • i n.u •( ist u s 
maik 111 the ^rc^t‘va^l^.\ra^ also 

93. jiMT ibt changes and alteuMn^U'^ hi rli» yug.e- liavc 

liipp^uicd fn ui r trly da^s 'and oon hiu.*! U.r a h.nr ipito 

in \ 1 w {>[ the ratine t • die sagas so <i1m> die \ orUi ^ ' lAuig 
beings goT s loiiio) i ui i ^Uutl allcrnaUic^ belvAtc.* ileath ^nd 
lulh. 

01 Tims ‘.i.A A haMictensiK' J« atoT-c of rh(‘ oi »tK 

pist eiiJ i'lituK in. all ihc m eu liuaras 1 ms iK ni«.c.»i(i( * i 
1)1 'el 

'^3. With dit' e\pk 4 uetiori v>^ oin iiiu>n.ai nii i vill tie 
mlai r h i\ i' b ijoaj ejoted^’ t \\ laiUAd; ».ii i.o v u itli r e 
*salpi otliAT kalpas lot). 

‘to-ilK) In lAgnd to il ( latuic kilpas d e same ai^ untin 
siiniltl l)AM ontiiuied b\ o»^t' who kuo%\b Ir. all the mans.^n eras 
pa>l cUitl luUiit', the ught-’ * v^la^es ot Dev^'s. the i 'iliiig loid^ ot 
inuAaiiUois, Manus and sage* ha\»‘ tiic same status 

• hr >ijgh tlieir names aiiAl toijus, as alsvi ilu* ^lln»‘ pulpo^^' anti 
e it'iA tin 'I Ik 'ame is ihf* c am" \\ ith tliA' duMi ni oi castt *. and 
sM<gis ol hie in L\cry yuga It .s ilie l»'rd who la\s du^^n the 
uatun auxl eluuat t( tisOi s d i1k‘ vugaN, iIk* di\ isions ol c tisu s 
aial siagt"- of Ii1a% die vagas and the Siddliis ol die \ ugas Inci- 
ileniallv, the m ignlludc oi the s ugas was uk iiiioued to Mm I 
shall now lecouiU to y’t'u how die loius-boni dt u\ bv'( ame 
Bialmi/i the son of the goildess. 

.267. Eight classes oi Dovas : Cf. Ac!itya-visva-vasava> tus'it i-bhas- 
varanilah mahaiaksika-sadhyas t a rudras ca ganadevatah- -cited in ST, 



164 


Lingapurdna 


CHAPTER FORTYONE 

Nativity of Brahma 

1. When the period of a thousand yugas lapsed and it was 
morning for liim, lord Brahma created once again the subjects 
who had fallen off, in the same manner as they were before. 

2-6. O leading brahmin, when thus the period of twice 
Parardha lapsed, the earth merged into the water, the water into 
the lire, the fire into the wind, the wind into the ether along 
with the tanmatras. O excellent brahmin, eleven sense-organs 
and the tanmatras merged into the ego lo ! in a trice. Ego 
merged into intellect (mahat) in a moment. O brahmin, the 
intellect also attained the unmanifest(avyakta) and merged into 
it. The unmanifest became merged into the lord along with its 
Gunas. Thereafter creation took place as before from Purusa 
giva.2<i8 Then the mental sons were created by him by mere 
thinking. 

7-9. The subjects thus created by the lotus-born deity did 
not flourish in this world. For the purpose of increase, lord 
Brahma performed a penance with the supreme lord in view, in 
the company of his mental sons. The great lord was pleased 
by their penance. Realising Brahma’s desire, the lord pierced 
through the middle of Brahma’s forehead. Saying ‘T am your 
son” he then became male-cum- female in his form. 

10-14. The lord with half-female body becamehis son. Then 
the lord burnt Brahma, the preceptor of the universe. Thereafter 
for the purpose of the flourishing increase of the worlds the lord 
adopted the yogic path and enjoyed his owm prosperous semi- 
Matra, Parame.4varl. He created Vi.snu and Brahma in her. The 
lord (jf the universe, the soul of the universe, created the Pasupata 
missile too. Hence Visnu and Brahma were born of the part of 
Mahadevl. Thus Brahma who was the Egg-born, and the lotus- 
born was born also of the body of the lord.^**® Thus, in brief, the 

268. At first there was nothing except Prakrti and Purusa (i.e. Siva 
and Maya). Then Siva created twentyfive tattvas out of himself. Gf. 

I Linga^ part II; and 

cited in ST- : f^^TT I 

269. Brahma is born of (i) the Cosmic Egg, (ii) the lotus, as well 
as (iii) the body of Siva, 



J^ativity of BrahmS 

entire anecdote has been mentioned to you^ as aho what 
happened during the first Pararciha of Brahma. 

15-21. I shall now briefly mention the detachment of Brahma 
boin of tamoguna. Lord Visnu split his body into two and 
created universe consisting of the mobile and immobile beings. 
He then created Brahma who in turn created Rudra. O sage, in 
another kalpa, Rudra created Brahma. Then O sage, in an- 
other kalpa, Visnu created Brahma, then Brahma created 
Visnu, then the lord created Brahma. Then Brahma thought 
that the world was full of misery and he abandoned the activity 
of creation. He engaged his soul in the higher soul. He restrained 
the movement of the vital breaths and remained motionless like a 
rock. He remained in Samadhi (ecstasy) for ten thousand years. 

1 lie splendid lotus that faced downwards and was stationed in 
the heart was filled with inhalation. It became blossomed out. 
When by means of retention of breath it was restrained that 
lotus became urdhva-vaktra (with face lifted upwards). 

22-27. In the middle of its pericarp he installed the lord. 
Then Brahma, the self-controlled who had purified his soul by 
perfect restraint of his senses installed the great lord Siva in his 
heart. The lord was situated there in a space as small as the 
hundred part of the thread of the lotus stalk^’® by repeating *om’ 
in a scries of half measures of time. He who was worthy ol wor- 
ship himself, then propitiated the unchanging lord(i.c. Siva) 
by means of flowers of restraint etc.^’^ Then at the behest 
of the Isvara situated in the heart-lotus (of Brahma) the all- 
pervading lord born of the body of Bhava came out of Brahma 
by piercing through his forehead. 

That lord born from Siva’s heart was blue originally but 
became red by contact with fire. Because that Puru.sa was both 
Nila (blue) and Lohita(rcd) just like the form of Kala, the God 


1270. mrnala-taiiu-bhaga : Gf. nIvarasQkavat tanvi pita bhasvatya- 
nupama tasyah sikhaya madhye hi paramatma vyavasthitah; also 
Balagramatram hrdayasya madhye... cited in ST. 

271 . yajyah — yajanayogyah ST. worthy of worship. 

27*^. yama-puspadibhih • in the form of observances such as yama, 
niyama, asana, pranayama, pratyahara, dharana, dhyana and samadhi. 



166 Lingapurdna 

of Death, he was aained Nilalohita by Isvara and lord Kala by 
Brahma. Tlic all-pcrvodiug one (i.e. Kala) became pleased 
thereby. 

28. O great sage, Brahma, the soul of the universe eulogised 
the lord who was delighted in his mind and who had the uni- 
verse as his form by means of the N^^taka — tlic set of eight 
names. 

Brahma said : 

O lord Rudf^, obeisance to you of unmeasured 
splendour like the sun. Obeisance to you lord Bhava identical 
with water and la^te. Pcipctual obeisance tc Sarva who has 
the form of earth and smell. Obeisance to you, Ud^ identical 
will air and the quality of toiuh. Obeisance to Pa^upati the 
lo»'d ol individual 'jouI.s, identical v ilh fire of excessive splendour. 
Obeisanceto \ou, Bhima. identical with ( ther having the quality 
of sound. Obeisance to Mnhadeva^ identical with the moon -the 
abode of nectar. Obeisance to you, Ugia. theYajnniana (one 
who performs sacrilu c) who is the agent for all actions 

He vv'bu reads this bvmn sung by Brahma unto 
Rudra, he who listens tf) this or he who narrates this to 
brahmins ivith great <'onccntration will attain identity with the 
lord of eight cosmic bodies, within a year. After eulogising thus, 
Brahma looked at the great lord. 

33-36. The great lord stood with the eight forms spread 
all round. T he sun shone. So also the fire and the moon. There 
were earth, wind, water, ether and yajamaiia -the sacrificer. 
Ever since that time they call Isvara, Astamurti. 

37-38. Thanks to the grace of Astamurti, Brahma created 
again. After creating the world of mobile and immobile beings, 
he fe'l asleep for the period of a thousand yugas. In the next 
kalpa when he woke up he became desirous of creating the 
subjects, and so he performed great and severe penance. 

273. Eight names of Siva. Sp, Vidyeivara-samhitd (Gh. 20. 47) mentions 
eight names as Hara, Maheivara, Sambhu, Sulapani, Pinakadhrk, Siva, 
Pa^upati and Mahadeva. But Lihga has a different list, represented by the 
the eight forms of Siva. 

274. karma-yogine : karma-yogin is the eighth form of Siva called 
yajamana (a sacrificer) and Ugra. According to ST, karmayogine=karma- 
phala-bhoktre — one who enjoys the fruits of his actions i.e, Jiva. 



Xativity of Brahma 


167 


39. Even when he performed the penance thu5>, nothing 
happened. After a great deal of time he became miserable and 
his sorrow turned into anger. 

‘iO. When he was overwhelmed with anger, drops of tears 
fell from his eyes. From those drops of tears goblins and ghosts 
originated. 

41. On seeing this first-born creation consisting of goblins, 
ghosts and demons, tlic unborn deity lord Brahma censured 
hini'iell. 

42 ihcreupon, the infuriated lord Brahma, abandoned 
his life. Thereafter, Rudra in the form of Prana ( vital breath) 
appeared ihrough the in(»uih of lord Brahma. 

43. The lord, havirig a lustre resembling that of the rising 
sun became Aidhairarisvaia ''male-eum-fciiiale form;. He 
divided liirn^.clf into eleven'*^"^ parts and settled down there 

44. With half a portion of himself Ardhanansvaia, the 
soul of all, created Uma. She (Teateil Laksmi, Durga and Saras- 
vau. 

lj-18. (She fnrthej crrate»1 ) Varna, RaudrI, Mahamfna, 
Vaisuavl the loiu-s-eyed goddess, Kalavikarini, Kfili residing in 
the lotus, goddess Balavikarini, Balapramathini, Saivabhuatada- 
maui, (the suppressor oi' all living beings i and Manonmam. 
Similarly thousands of other women were created by her. Accom- 
panied by iho.se Lulies and thc‘ Rudras, Mahadeva, Paranicsvara 
the lord of the three worlds stood in front of lord Brahnu\, 
Paramt-slhin who was the soul of all but was now lying dead. 

49. Lord Mahesvara, the sympathetic son of Brahma, 
granted him vital airs. 

jO. Then Rudra the lord of Devas was delighted and he 
spoki' these plea.sant words to Brahma who regained his life 
a little. 

51. O highly blessed lord Brahma, O preceptor of the worlds, 
do not be afraid ; the vital airs have been established here in 
your heart. Hem e, O lord get up. 


27'). ekadaSadha : in eleven forms, as stated in Visriu (cited In ST) . 
They arc named Aja-ckapad, Ahirbudhnya, Tva?tr, Rudra, Hara, Tiyam- 
baka, Aparajita, Vrsakapi, .^ambhu, Kapardin and Raivata. Other Puranas 
give different lists. For detail, sec Matsyapurdna—A study, pp. 65-67. 



Liiif>apura^ 


52-54. On hearing his words as though in dreams passing 
through his mind, Brahma became delighted in his heart. With 
the vital airs coming back to him, he looked at Mahe^vara with 
his eyes that had the lustre of full blown lotus. After glancing 
up at him for a long time, lord Brahma got up and said with 
palms joined in reverence in a tone affectionate and majestic. 

“O highly blessed one, tell me. You are delighting my 
mind: Who are you standing with eight cosmic bodies and in 
eleven forms?” 

Indra said'. 

55-58. On hearing his words, Mahesvara the slayer of the 
enemies of Devas spoke through all his mouths. 

The lord said : 

“Know me the great soul and know her the birthless Maya. 
These standing by are the Rudras, who have come here to 
protect you”. 

Thereafter Brahma bowed down to the lord of Devas and 
said with palms joined in reverence. His words were choked 
with delight. 

“O lord, O lord of the chiefs of Devas, I am agitated and 
excited due to miseries. 

59-60. O Isana, O l§ahkara, it behoves you to release me 
from the bondage of worldly existence. 

Thereupon the lord of Uma laughed at Brahma. Then the 
lord of the universe vanished from there along with Uma and 
the Rudras. 

Jndra said : 

61-64. Hence O Silada, understand that in all the worlds 
it is difficult to get a person who is not born of a womb and 
who is deathless. Even the lotus-born deity has death. But 
if Rudra the lord of Devas is pleased, a son not born of a 
womb and devoid of death is not difficult for you to get. It is 
not possible for me, for Visnu and for Brahma to offer you a 
son not born of a womb and devoid of death. 



Origin of J^andiivara 1 69 

Sailadi said: 

After speaking thus to the leading brahmin and blessing 
him, the kind lord accompanied by Devas went away riding 
on his white elephant. 


CHAPTER FORTYTWO 

The origin of NandUvara 


Suta said: 

1 . When the thousand-eyed meritorious bestower of boons 
liad gone, !§iiada propitiated Mahadeva. He delighted the 
lord by means of penance. 

2. Even as the brahmin pursued the penance eagerly and 
perpetually, a thousand divine years surprisingly passed off 
like a moment. 

3. The sage was completely enveloped by an anthill. 
He became the victim of torture by groups of worms and 
blood-sucking insects with their mouths pointed like diamond 
needles. 

4. With skin alone, devoid of flesh and blood he stood 
there like a wall unaffected. He was a mere skeleton then. 
The auspicious lord thought of him then. 

5. When the sage was touched with hand by the lord, 
the enemy of the Cupid, the leading Brahmin sage eschewed 
all his fatigue and strain. 

6. Lord Siva was delighted at the penance of the sage. 
(Approaching him) along with his Ganas and Uma he said to 
him, “I am delighted with your penance”. 

7. “O highly intelligent one, what with this penance ? I 
shall give you an omniscient son who has mastered all the 
Scriptural topics”. 

8. Thereafter bowing down to the lord of Devas and 
eulogising him Silada spoke to the moon-bedecked lord, accom- 
panied by Uma,*** with words choked with great pleasure. 


<276. somam — Umayft saha, accompanied by Um&, 



170 


LingapurStfa 


Silada said: 

9. “O lord, O iSankara the most excellent among the good, 

0 lord of the chiefs of Devas, O destroyer of Tripuras, 

1 wish for a son not born of a womb and devoid of death”. 

Suta said: 

10. Rudra, Paramesvara who had already been propitiated 
by his penance by Brahma spoke thus again to Silada with 
very great pleasure. 

The lord said: 

11. O brahmin, O ascetic, formerly I had been propitiated 
by Brahma, sages and Devas by penance, for the sake of my 
incarnation. 

12. I shall become your son, not born of a womb, by the 
name Nandin. O sage, I am the father of worlds and you will 
become my father. 

13. After saying thus to the sage who was standing there 
after bowing to him and looking up to him, the delighted 
merciful lord who was accompanied by Uma and who was 
comparable to the Moon vanished there itself. 

14-lS. O great .'■''ge, having obtained the assurance of a 
son from Rudra, my father was delighted. He was the most 
excellent among the knowers of sacrifice. For the purpose of 
sacrifice he came to the courtyard of a great sacrificial cham- 
ber. Formerly I was bom in that courtyard as his son, at the 
behest of lord Siva. I had the lustre of fire at the closing of 
a yuga. 

16. When I was born as the son of Silada, the clouds 
Pu^kara, Avartaka and others showered rain. The heaven- 
walkers — Kinnaras, Sadhyas and Siddhas sang songs. Vif^u 
showered fragrant flowers. 

17-19. I had then the lustre of Kalasurya (sun at the 
time ofpralaya or dissolution). I was having matted hair and 
coronet. In the form of an infant I had three eyes, four arms 
holding the trident, axe, iron club and thunderbolt. My curved 
fangs were adamantine. I was the infant adored by the thimder- 
bolt-wielding Indra. I was terrible in appearance with diamond 
ear-rings. My voice was comparable to the thundering sound of 



Origin of Nandiivara 


171 


the clouds. On seeing me Brahma, Indra and all other gods and 
leading sages eulogised me. The groups of celestial damsels 
shouted and danced all round. 

20. O leading sage, with mantras pertaining to Mahe^vara 
as well as those taken from l^k, Yajus and Saman, the over- 
joyed sages eulogised and bowed down to me. 

21-25. The following stood all around me: — Brahma, 
Visnu, Rudra, Indra, Siva, Ambika herself, Jupiter, the moon, 
the sun of great splendour, wind god, fire god, liana, Nirrti, 
Yak», Yama, Vanina, Visve Devas, Rudras, Vasus of great 
strength, Lak^mi herself, Saci, Jyesfha, goddess Sarasvati, 
Aditi, Diti, Sraddha, Lajja, Dhfti, Nanda, Bhadra, Surabhi, 
Suiila, Sumanas, the lord of bulls, Dharma of great splendour 
and the sons of Dharma. They surrounded me, embraced me 
and eulogised me. O excellent sage, even Silada my father, 
the sage, on seeing me like that bowed to me with love. The 
meritorious soul eulogised his son who gave him what he 
liked. 

Silada said: 

26-31. O lord, O lord of the chief of Devas, O three-eyed 
one, O unchanging one, you are my son since you are my 
protector and the protector of worlds from misery. Since you 
are the protector of worlds, O son, you are my father. You arc 
omnipresent. O son, not bom of a womb, obeisance to you, O 
source of origin of the universe, O grand father, O father, O son, 
O Maheiana, O preceptor of the universe, O dear one, O 
highly blessed one, O Parameivara protect me. O lord of 
Devas, since I am delighted by you, you are to be known by 
the name Nandin. Hence O Nandin, delight me. I bow down 
to you, the lord of the universe. O lord, delight my parents 
who have gone to Rudra’s world. O lord, my grandfather- 
too has gone to the world of Rudra. O Nandin, when 
Maheivara has incarnated my birth in the world is fruitful. O 
lord, the birth of the worlds too is fruitful. 

32. When you have incarnated as my son for my protection 
O livara, O Nandin, O lord of Devas, obeisance to you. O 
Nandiivara, obeisance to you. 

33-38. O son of mighty arms, protect me. O lord of Devas, 



172 


Lingapurcana 


O preceptor of the worlds, O dear one, please forgive what 
was said by me considering you as my son. You are worthy of 
being eulogised by means of hymns by Devas and Asuras. 

Whoever reads or listens to this speech addressed to my 
son, whoever narrates this to brahmins with devotion, rejoices 
along with me. After eulogising the boy his son, after bowing 
down to him with respect and looking at the leading sages 
§ilada of good holy rites said : — 

“O ye sages, see my great fortune, since the unchanging 
lord has incarnated as Nandin in the courtyard of the sacri- 
ficial hall. Which man is like me in this world ? Neither Devas 
nor Danavas are equal to me since this Nandin is born in the 
sacrificial ground for the sake of my welfare. 


CHAPTER FORTYTHREE 

Coronation of Nandiivara 


J^andiivara said: 

1 . After bowing down to Mahesvara, my delighted father 
immediately went back to his hut along with me like an 
indigent man after obtaining a treasure-trove. 

2. O great sage, when I went to the hut of §ilada 1 esche- 
wed my divine form and assumed a human shape. 

3-4. My divine memory was obliterated for some unknown 
reason. On seeing that 1 had assumed human form, my father, 
worshipped by all the worlds, became extremely miserable 
and he lamented. Surrounded by his kinsmen, he, the knower 
of everything, performed my postnatal and other holy rites. 

5-8. Silada son of Salankayana was highly fond of me 
his son. It was he who taught me all these: — ^viz, the recensions 
ofRgveda, Yajurveda and the thousand branches of Samaveda 
with their ancillaries and subdivisions. He taught me 
Ayurveda (science of medicine), Dhanurveda (science of 
archery) , Gandharva (musicology), A^valak^a^a (characteris- 
tics of horses) , the details of elephants and also the character!- 



Coronation of Nandiivara 


173 


sties of men. When I completed my seventh year two excellent 
divine sages Mitra and Varuna, who were equipped with 
penance, and yogic power came to his hermitage to see me. 
It was at the behest of the lord that they had come there. 

9-11. On seeing me repeatedly the two noble sages said: 
*‘0 dear one, though this Nandin has mastered all the scriptu- 
ral topics, he is shortlived. This type of wonder has not been 
seen before. His life does not extend beyond a year. 

When they said thus Silada the leading brahmin, extremely 
fond of his son, embraced me. Excessively dejected he lamen- 
ted with a highly discordant voice, “alas my son! my son, my son” 
He then fell down flat. 

12-13. He was sad and he said — “Alas! the power of the 
adverse fate and of the creator !” On hearing his lamentation 
the residents of the hermitage gathered there in great bewil- 
derment. They evolved amulets and observed auspicious rites 
to ward off the evil. They eulogised Mahadeva, the three-eyed 
lord of Uma. 

14. They performed homa repeating the mantra of Tri- 
yambaka, offering ten thousand times Durva (Darbha grass) 
soaked in honey, and accompanied by other materials of 
worship. 

15. My father and grandfather lost consciousness. With all 
their activities ceased, they lamented, fell down as though dead. 

16-19. I was afraid of death. Ere long 1 bowed down to 
my father and grandfather who were lying down as though they 
were dead. I circumambulated them. 1 was then engaged in the 
repetition of Rudra mantra. I meditated on the three-eyed lord 
in the lotus cavity of my heart, the quiescent lord Sadaiiva 
with ten arms and five faces. Even as I was standing in the 
middle of the holy river the delighted lord Mahadeva accomp- 
anied by Uma, and adorned by the crescent moon appeared 
and said — O dear Nandin of great arms, whence is fear from 
death for you ? 

20-24. Those two brahmins had been sent by me alone. 
There is no doubt that you are like myself. O dear, this body 
of yours is factually worldly. It is not divine. O dear, what 
was formerly seen and worshipped by &lada, Devas, sages, Sid- 
dhas, Gandharvas and Danavas was divine. O Nandiivara. 



1 74 

this is the nature of the woild that happiness and inisety be- 
fall repeatedly one after the othei. It is the duty of the discri- 
minating man to avoid birth through the woinb.^^' After saying 
thus to me, Paramesvara, lord Rudra, Hara, the great lord 
of all Devas, the destroyer of distress touched me with liis 
splendid hands. 

25-28. After glancing at the goddess, Uma the daught(‘r ot ihc 
Himavat, and at the chieftains of the Ganas, the bull-emblemed 
Mahadeva, Lord of Devas, said with satisfaction in his li'‘art, 
*‘Aiong with your father and friends you will be unageing and 
deathless. You will be devoid of pain and misery. You will be 
imperishable and unchanging. You will have my virility and 
exploit. You will be my favourite chief of Ganas. I will be al- 
v;ays fond of you. You will be at my side foi ever. Ynw will 
have my strength. You will be endowed with great yogic powder.” 

29-31. After saying this to me the lord accompanied by 
ins attendants, took off his lotus garland. The bull-emblemed 
lord of great splendour tied it on me. With that splendid gar- 
land clinging to my neck I became as though a second Jsahkara 
with three eyes and ten arms. Then Paramesvara took me by 
the hand and said — “Tell me. What excellent boon shall I give 
you now ?*’ 

32-35. The bull-emblemed lord then took the pure water 
embedded in his matted hairs. Saying ‘‘Be a river” he cast it 
down. Then it began to flow as a great river full of splendid, 
divine, white (shining) water with lots of lotuses and lilies in il. 
Mahadeva said to that extremely splendid river — “Since you 
began to flow as a great river from the waters of my matted 
hairs you will be an excellent holy river named Jatodaka.” 

36-39. “Any man will be liberated from all sins by tak- 
ing bath in you.” Then laid Mahadeva said to the goddess 
“TI is is your son” and made me the son of Silada, fall at 
her feet. She kissed me on the head and stroked me with her 
hands. With three pourings of water as white as the conch, 
with three sons she bathed me with the affection due to a son 
all the while glancing at the lord of Devas. These three pour- 

277. Nj-naih yoniparityagah : release from the bondage of Birth and 
Death, which is the goal of map’s life. According to ST, yoni-parityagahs= 
8tr!-samagama-tyag«'ih* ST, cites Bhagavata in support of this meaning. 



Coronation of Nandiivara 


175 


ing s flowed down to become a river with three branches. The 
lord Bhava therefore called it Trisrotas (river with three 
tributaries) . 

40-43. On seeing the river Trisrotas the bull (vehicle of 
3iva) was extremely delighted. It bellowed. From that bellowing 
sound another river originated. That river was called “Vrsadh- 
vani” by the lord of Devas. The bull-emblemed lord placed on 
my head his divine golden crown that was made by Viivakar- 
man, studded with all jewels, and that was vari^ated au- 
spicious and wonderful. Mahadeva, Mahesvara himself fitted in 
my ears his splendid divine ear-rings bedecked with diamonds 
and Lapis Lazuli. 

44-47. O sage, on seeing me honoured thus, the sun in the 
sky showered Siladana with waters from the clouds. When he was 
thus showered, those waters flowed as a stream. Since this river 
originated from gold, the three-eyed lord of Devas called hei 
Svarnodaka. Since another splendid river originated from the 
crown made of gold they call that river Jambunadi. Thus the 
set of five rivers flowed near the lord Japyesvara. 

48. He who visits Paficanada,®’* takes the holy dip there and 
worships Lord JapyeSvara shall undoubtedly attain identity 
with Siva. 

49. Then lord Mahadeva, Bhava, the lord of all living 
beings said to goddess Sarvani, Uma, the unborn, and daughter 
of the mountain. 

50. O goddess, I am going to crown lord Nandiivara as 
the lord of goblins. I shall call him the leader of the Ganas. O 
unchanging goddess, what do you think ? 

51-53. On hearing his words the delight of Bhavani was 
evident in her face. Smilingly she said to Bhava her lord, the 
lotd of goblins, and the bestower of boons, ‘'O lord of Devas, it 
behove you to grant him the overlordship of the worlds as 
also the leadership of the Ganas, Sail^i is my own son.” 

Thereafter lord Sarva, the lord of the chiefs of the world, 
the bull-emblemed lord, remembered all the divine chiefs of 
the Ganas. 

278. pafleanadam : a confluence of five rivers, viz. Jafodaki, Tri- 
srotas, Vrfa^vani, Svar^odakfi, and J&mbanadi. 



GHikPTER FORTYFOUR 

Comation of HandUvara 

SttilSdi said: 

1. As soon as Rudra remembered them, the leaders of 
Ga^as came there. All of them had a thousand arms with 
weapons in all their thousand hands. 

2. They had three eyes. These noble ga^as were saluted 
even by Devas. They resembled crores of fires that bum at the 
time of dissolution. They had matted hairs and crowns. 

3. Innumerable lords of Ganas of noblesouls came there with 
jubilation. They were accompanied by crores and crores of 
Ga^as all equal in exploits to the chief. Their faces were terri- 
ble due to the curved fangs. They were eternal, enlightened 
and devoid of impurities. 

4. Those strong ones were singing, running, dancing and 
playing on various instruments with facial gestures. 

5. These Ga^as rode in chariots, on elephants, horses, lions 
and monkeys. They were seated in aerial chariots decorated in 
gold. 

6-8. 'The Ga^as of great yogic power came to the assembly 
of the lord, playing on drums and other musical instruments 
such as Bheri, Mrdangaka, Pa^va, Anaka, Gomukha, 
Pataha, Ekapuskara, Adambaraka, Muraja, pindima, Mardala, 
Venu (flute), Vi^a (lute), different kinds of cymbals, Dardura, 
Talaghata, Kacchapa and Pa^ava. 

9. Those lords of Ga^as of great strength and stamina, 
the lords of the chiefi of Devas bowed down to the lord and 
the goddess and spoke these words: 

10. O blessed lord, O lord of the chiefs of Devas, O 
three-eyed lord, O bull-emblemed lord, why are we summon- 
ed ? O lord of great splendour, command us. 

1 1 . Shall we dry up the oceans ? Shall we kill Yama along 
with his servants? Shall we kill Mftyu, the daughter of God of 
Death ? Shall we kill the lotus-bom deity as an insignificant 
animal ? 

12. Infuriated that we are, shall we bind up Indra along 
with Devas or Vi^nu along with Vayu or Daityas along with 
Danavas and brir^; them here ? 



13. OloM, 

c/esrrucfio/1 and AisUCtt VC^'S • . 

for the prosperity and increase of h» desires . 

14. The lord honoured crorcs and hundred crorei of those 
chieftains of Ganas. Even as they earnestly spoke to him thus, 
he replied as follows : 

15. “You are all persons striving for the welfare of the uni- 
verse. Listen why you have been called. O noble ones of pure 
souls, on hearing it do accordingly without hesitation. 

16. This Nandl^vara is our son. He is the lord of all chiefs. 
He is a prosperous brahmin, your leader and commander-in- 
chief. 

1 7. Hence at my bidding, you all, highly respected ones, 
crown him as your lord and commander-in-chief, as the great 
lord of yogas’’ 

18. Thus directed by the lord, the chieftains of the Ganas 
agreed to the same, by saying ‘‘so be it” and thereafter began 
to gather all the requisites. 

19-23. They brought the usual divine seat of Sarva, the 
splendid seat made of gold, the beautiful one resembling Mem 
to be offered as seat for him (Nandin) . They made a Man- 
dapa with many pillars shining with golden lustre. Pearl pen- 
dants were suspended and they were studded with gems and 
jewels. There were columns of Lapis Lazuli covered with small 
tinkling bells. The Mandapa had doors on all sides bedecked 
in beautiful gems and jewels. After making the Mandapa they 
placed a splendid seat in the middle. In front of it was the 
foot-stool shining with blue stones. For the installation of the 
pedestal they kept two water jars nearby. They were filled with 
sweet waters and covered with lotus flowers. 

24. There were a thousand jars of gold, silver, copper and 
clay. They were filled with waters from all Tirthas. 

25-26. Brahma, Paramesthin the noble soul,* offered these 
things, viz: — a pair of cloths, divine scents, shouldarlets, ear- 
rings, crown, necklace, hundred-ribbed umbrella and the chow- 
ries. 

27. There was a fine Camara (bushy tail of deer used as a 
flyflap or fan) with gold shaft. The fan was as pure as the moon. 

It shone with its back as white as conch or pearl necklace. 







178 


Liigapurdna 


28. The divine elephants Airavata and Supratika were 
fully caparisoned. A gold crown was made by Visvakarinan. 

29-30. There were two pure and divine ear-rings. The ex- 
cellent weapon thunderbolt was kept there. There was a golden 
thread and two bracelets. The unexcited leaders of Ganas highly 
honoured by Devas brought many requisite materials from all 
round. 

31-34. Then all these assembled there joyously: — Devas 
along with Indra, Visnu and others, the sages, Brahma and 
nine Brahmas-^’®. When all of them had come, lord Parame- 
£vara directed Brahma to perform the rite. At the behest of 
the lord, Brahma performed the rite of ablution with great 
attention. After worshipping him Brahma himself pouied the 
water. 

35. At the behest of Siva, Visnu, Indra and the guardians 
of quarters bathed the leaders of Ganas in succession. 

36-37 The sages with Brahma at their head eulogised him. 
While they eulogised, Visnu the lord of the universe kept his 
joined palms over the head and eulogised with great attention. 
With palms joined in reverence he bowed down and cried out 
shouts eff victory. 

38-39. Then the commandants of Ganas, Devas and Asuras 
one after the other, eulogised and bathed him. Thus after 
being eulogised and bathed by Devas along with Brahma, his 
marriage too was performed at the behest of Paramesthin, His 
wife was the gentle lady named Suyasa, the daughter of 
the Maruts. 

40-41. A well-decorated umbrella having the lustre of the 
moon was offered to her. She had Camaras also and she was 
accompanied by groups of women holding Camara in their 
hands. Along with me, the most excellent throne was occupied 
by her. She was adorned by Mahalaksmi with coronet and 
other ornaments. 

42-43. The excellent necklace from the neck of the goddess 
was gifted to her. The leading bull, the white elephant^ the 
lion, the lion-emblem, the chariot, the golden umbrella vnth 

279 * Qf. LiA^a. Gh. 70, 81-82. They arc called Marici, Bhrgu. 
Ahgiras, Pulaha, P ilastya, Kratu, Dak^a, Atri and Vasi^tha. 



Description of Nether Worlds 


179 


the lustre like that of the disc of the moon— aJJ these were 
there. Till now no other lord was equal to me. 

44-45. The great loid mounted the bull after taking me 
on, along with all the members of my family, kinsmen and 
relatives. He set olf with the goddess. On seeing the goddess 
and the lord along with me, the sages, Devas, Siddhas and 
brahmins requested for the lord’s order. 

40-49. At the behest of the lord, the husband of the daugh- 
ter of the mountain, Nandi granted those who deserved the 
splendid behest of the lord. On receiving the order from the 
leading sage they became great devotees of Siva. Hence one 
should worship the lord. 

If a person utters the name of the lord without obeisance he 
will incur great sin on a par with diat of ten brahmin-sla\ers. 
Hence by all means, one shall utter words of obeisance. At the 
outset one shall make obeisance and at the end utter the 
name ^iiva.*'^^^ 


CHAPTER FORTYFIVE 

Description of Nether Worlds 


7 he sa^es said • 

1 . O Suta, everything pertaining to Lord l^iva has been 
clcai'ly stated. It behoves you to narrate the form of the lord 
as the '^oul of all. 

Suia said ; 

2-3. Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svah, Mahah, Jana, Tapas, Satya, 
Paiala, the crores of hellish seas, stars, jilancts, the sun, the 
moon, the polar star, the seven sages (Great Bear and 
those going al:)out in aerial chariots -all these abide by his 
grace. 

4. All these are created by him. O excellent brahmins, 
280 . It refers to the five-syllabled mantra of Siva — ‘'namalni sivaya.” 



180 


Lingapurana 


they have him as their soul. Siva is always stationed in the form 
of samasd (the collective whole). He is the soul of all. 

5. Those who are confounded, those who arc deluded by 
his Maya do not know the great lord Mahe^vara the noble soul, 
the Atman of all. 

6. Indeed the three worlds constitute his body. Hence 
after bowing to him I shall recount the splendid detail of the 
worlds. 

7. Formerly, I had mentioned to you about the shape and 
features of the Cosmic Egg. I shall now describe the features 
of the worlds in the cosmic Egg. 

8. The Earth, the firmament, Svah, Mahab, Jana, Tapas 
and Satya — these seven are the splendid worlds originating from 
the Cosmic Egg. 

9. O brahmins, beneath these are the seven worlds begin* 
ning with Mahatala. Beneath them are the hells one by one. 

10. Mahatala has the golden ground surface, which is ren* 
dered splendid by jewels, mansions and shrines dedicated to 
Icrd Siva. 

11. It is occupied by Ananta, Mucukunda and king Bali 
who is the resident of Patala and Svarga. 

12. O brahmins, Rasatala is rocky, Talatala is full of 
gravels, Sutala is yellow and Vitala has the lustre of coral. 

13-15. Atala is white. Tala is black. O men of good holy 
rites, the extent of all the Talas below is as much as that of the 
earth, viz., 1000 yojanas each. The sky above each Tala extends 
to ten thousand yojanas. The magnitude of all the seven along 
with the clouds is seven thousand lakhs of yojanas. The root 
(i.e. the space below the last world Patala) is thirty thousand 
yojanas. 

16. O excellent sages, the splendid Rasatala is frequented 
by Suvarna, Vasuki and by others as well. 

1 7 . What is famous as Talatala is endowed with all splen- 
dours and is frequented by Virocana, Hirapyak^a, Naraka and 
others. 

18. Sutala is occupied by Vainayaka and others, by 
Purvadevas (demons) with ICalanemi at the head and by 
others too. 

19. Vitala is occupied by Danavas and others beginning 





bv the heroic 


Dvipas and lh«vt lotAs 

with TArakagni, serpents MaWnttilt 
Asura Prahlada. 

20. Atala is occupied by Kambala^va, 

Mahakumbha and the intelligent Hayagriva. 

21. Tala (i.e. Mahatala) is rendered splendid and occu- 
pied by Sankukarna and other heroes beginning with Namuci. 

22-23. In all these nether worlds the great lord is present 
along with Uma, Skanda, Nandin and all the chieftains of 
Ganas. O excellent ones, above all these seven Talas are the 
earth and other worlds. The earth too is of seven divisions 
about which I shall tell you now. 


CiHAPTER FORTYSK 

Dvipas and their lords 

Suta said', 

1. The Earth consists of seven continents. It is full of 
rivers and mountains. It is surrounded by seven oceans^®^ all 
round and embellished by them. 

2. The seven continents beginning with the inner one are 
Jambu, Plaksa, !§almali, Kusa, Krauhea, Saka and Puskara. 

3. Lord Siva is present in all the seven continents, accom- 
panied by Uma (his consort), surrounded by the Ganas, and 
assuming different guises. 

4-5. The seven oceans in order are those having, (1) briny 
water, (2) sugercane juice, (3) wine, (4) ghee, (5) curds, 
(6) milk and (7) sweet water. In all these oceans the glorious 
lord Siva assumes the form of water and sports with the 
waves along with the Ganas. 

281 . seven continents: p. 71, note 89. The verse 2 of this ch. mentions 
their names. On the identification of these dvipas on the basis of climatic 
and vegetation data available in the Puranas, see S. M. Ali. op. cit. 
Ch. II. 

282. samudraib saptabhib — by seven seas. According to S. M. Ali, 
'^samudra does not necessarily mean *a watery sea’. The Puranic sea can be 
a large expanse of sand as well as water. The sea of sand and that of water 
as barriers to human settlement and movement are synonymous when con- 
sidering the geography of the inhabited world.” 



182 


Lingapurd^ 


6. Lord Vi;nu always sleeps in yogic slumber in the milky 
ocean as though he were the nectar from that, with his intellect 
concentrated on the knowledge of l§iva. 

7. When the lord wakes up, the entire universe wakes up; 
when he is asleep it is also asleep; the mobile and immobile 
beings are identical with him. 

8. With the favour of Paramesthin lord of Devas, every- 
thing was created, held, protected and annihilated by him 
alone. 

9. O excellent sages, those who are well known as susenas 
worship Aniruddha the leading Puru$a holding conch, discus 
and iron club. 

10-14. O sages, most excellent among the knowers of 
Atman ! those who meditate on Aniruddha Purusa are all 
similar to Vi$nu and become endowed with all riches. Sanandana, 
Sanaka, Sanatana, Valakhilyas, Siddhas, Mitra and Varuna 
these all worship Vis^u who is the origin of the universe. In 
all the seven continents there are lofty mountains, some rising 
to great heights, some extending as far as the oceans, others 
having many peaks and caves. There were many kings in 
these continents who were overlords and who ruled with 
efficiency according to the demands of the period.* They were 
powerful, thanks to the lord (Siva) , the father of the enemy of 
Kraunca®®® ( i. e. Karttikeya) . 

15-18. I shall mention the kings in all the manvantaras 
past and future, beginning with those in the Svayambhuva 
manvantara. The grandsons of Svayambhuva Manu were all 
very strong, with similar status, honour and identical pur- 
poses. They were the heroic sons of Priyavrata®** and they 
are reputed to be ten,*®* viz., Agnidhra, Agnibahu, Medha, 
Medhatithi, Vasu, Jyoti^man, Dyutimw, Havya, Savana and 
Putra. Priyavrala crowned seven of them as kings over the 
seven continents. 

383. Krairiic&rih : the enemy of Krauiica, i.e. Karttikeya, so called 
because he split the Himalaya range Krauiica, situated in the eastern part 
of the chain on the north of Assam. 

384. Priyavrata, son of Svayambhuva Manu and Satarupk. 

385. Though the number is the same, their names differ in the 
PurSnas. 



Dvipas and their lords 


183 


19-24. He made Agnidhra the lord of Jambudvipa and 
Medhatithi the king of Plaksadvipa. He crowned Vapusman 
the king of 8almali, Jyotisman theking of Kusadvipa, Dyutiman 
the king of Krauhcadvipa, Havya the lord of iSakadvipa. O 
sages of good holy rites, he made Savana the overlord of 
Puskara. Savana had two sons Mahavira and Dhatakl. They 
were most excellent that men could have. The kingdom of 
Mahavira is known as Mahavira Varsa after the name of that 
noble soul. The kingdom of Dhatakl is called Dhataklkhanda.^^* 
Havya the lord of Sakadvipa procreated seven sons. 

25. They were Jalada, Kumara, Sukumara, Manicaka, 
Kusumottara, Modaki and Mahadruma. 

26-29. The Varsa continent of Talada is called ( 1 ) Tala- 
da; the Varsa of Kumara is called (2) Kaumara; that of Suku- 
mara is glorified as (3) Sukumara; the Varsa of Manicaka is 
called (4) Manicaka; the Varsa of Kusumottara is (5) Kusu- 
mottara, the Varsa of Modaki is glorified as (6) Modaka; 
after the name of Mahadruma, the next Varsa is (7) Maha- 
druma; all the seven Varsas are thus named after their rulers. 

30-34. Dyutiman, the lord of Kraufica Dvipa had seven 
sons named Ku^ala, Manuga, Usna, Pivara, Andhakaraka, 
Muni and Dundubhi who had splendid sub-continents named 
after them, in the Kraufica Dvipa. The sub-continent of 
Kusala isKusala; that of Manuga is Manonuga; that of Usna 
is Usna; that of Pivara is Pivara; the land of Andhakara is 
Andhakaraka; the land of Muni is called Muni and that of 
Dundubhi is Dundubhi. These seven shining countries are in 
Kraufica Dvipa. 

In the Kusadvipa, Jyotijman had seven powerful sons. 

35. They were Udbhida, VetJiuman, Dvmratha, Lavaca, 
Dhrti, Prabhakara and Kapila. 

36-37. The first Var|a is Udbhida; the second is Ve^u- 
ma^d^l^* the third is Dvairatha; the fourth is Lavai^;. 
the fifth isDhrtimat; the sixth is Prabhakara, and the seventh 
is Kapila. 

38-41 . The seven sons of Vapusman were the rulers of 

s86. Dh&taki Kha^da. Prof. Ali identifies this with the Gobi desert 
on the west of Khingan range in the Japanese Highlands. See The Geography 
of the PurSnas, p. 287. 



184 


LingapurSifa 


various countries of iSilmali Dvipa. They were Sveta, Harita, 
Jimuta, Rohita, Vaidyuta, Manasa and Suprabha; The land 
of Sveta is Sveta; that of Harita, Harita; that of Jimuta is 
Jimuta; that of Rohita is Rohita; that of Vaidyuta is Vaidyuta; 
that of M^asa is Manasa and that of Suprabha is Suprabha; 
thus there are seven countries marked after the names of 
their rulers. I shall mention the divisions in the Plaksadvipa 
that is beyond Jambiidvipa. 

42-45. Medhatithi had seven sons; they were the kings of 
Plaksa Dvipa which consists of seven Varsas. The eldest 
among the sons was Santabhaya. After him were Sisira; 
Sukhodaya, Ananda ; Siva, K^emaka and Dhruva. The conti- 
nent was divided into seven Varsas and named after these sons. 
Formerly in the Svayambhuva manvantara these Varsas were 
colonised by them. Subjects endowed with the discipline of 
four castes and four stages of life were colonised in the Var^s 
by those sons of Medhatithi, the residents of Plaksadvipa. 

46-47. In the five continents beginning with Plak^dvipa 
and ending with S^advipa, the Dharma, was promulgated 
in accordance with the division of four castes and four stages 
of life. O excellent brahmins, in these five Dvipas, happiness, 
span of life, handsome features, strength and Dharma were 
their individual characteristics respectively. 

48-49. The characteristic common to all the five continents 
was that the subjects there were all perpetually engaged 
in the worship of Rudra and devoted to Mahesvara. The kings 
born in the Puskaradvipa enjoy the nectar of their devout 
feelings towards Prajapati and Rudra. 


CHAPTER FORTYSEVEN 

Bharata sub-continent 

SUta Said : ^ 

1. King Priyavrata crowned his eldest son Agnidhra who 
was the eldest inheritor and who was a loveable son of great 
strength, as the king of Jambud^pa.*®^ 


287. For detail, Ibid, p. 64 fT. 



Bharata sub-continent 


185 


2. O leading brahmins, he was an ascetic and a great 
devotee of Siva. He was a young man engaged in the worship 
of Siva. He was prosperous and intelligent and he possessed 
many cows. 

3. He had nine sons at par with Prajapatis. All of them 
were followers of MaheSvara and devoted to Mahadeva. 

4. His eldest son was known as Nabhi. Kimpurusa was 
his (Nabhi’s) younger brother. The third son was Harivarsa. 
The fourth son was Ilavrta. 

5. Ramya was the fifth; the sixth was Hiranman. Kuru 
was the seventh. Bhadrasva was the eighth. 

6. The ninth was Ketumala. Understand their lands now. 
The subcontinent of Nabhi inherited from his father is called 
^Irnia which lies in the south. 

7. He gave Kimpurusa the subcontinent Hemakuta. He 
gave the subcontinent called Naisadha to Hari. 

8. To Ilavrta he gave the midlands encircling the moun- 
tain Meru. He gave Ramya the subcontinent around Nilacala. 

9. The subcontinent Sveta to the north of it was given to 
Hiranman. He gave Kuru the subcontinent Srhga Varsa which 
is to the north of it. 

10. He gave the subcontinent round about Malyavan to 
Bhadrasva. He gave Gandhamadana to Ketumala. 

11-12. These are the nine great subcontinents in brief. 
After crowning his sons as the kings in those subcontinents, 
Agnidhra***® the virtuous became engaged in penance. After 
purifying himself by penance he became engaged in the study 
of the Vedas. 

13-15. After being engaged in the study of the Vedas he 
became engaged in meditation on Siva. There is natural per- 
fection in all the eight excellent subcontinents beginning with 
Kimpurusa. Without any strain the subjects are always happy. 
The opposite of joy is not seen in them. They have no fear from 
death or old age. They have neither Dharma nor Adharma. 
There is no distinction such as the excellent, the middling and 
the base. In all these eight subcontinents there are no subdivi- 
sions of yugas. 

288. According to LiAga, Agnidbra was the eldest son of Priyavrata. 
But according to a VSyu version he was the son of Priyavrata’s daughter. 



186 


lAngapurana 


16. Those who die in a holy centre of Rudra whether 
mobile or immobile whether devotees or casual visitors are 
reborn there. 

17. For their benefit eight holy centres were created by 
Rudra. In all those places Mahadeva was always present. 

18. By seeing Mahadeva in their hearts the residents of 
the eight holy centres were always happy. He alone was the 
greatest goal unto them all. 

1 9-20. I shall now recount the country of Nabhi marked 
by *hima’ (snow; i.e. Bharatavarsa as mentioned below) . The 
intelligent Nabhi begot a son of MerudevI, Rsabha by name 
who was a great king adored by all ksatriyas. A heroic son 
Bharata was born to Rsabha. He was the eldest among his 
hundred sons. 

21-25. Rsabha who was fond of his son Bharata crowned 
him as king. By adopting the path of knowledge and detach- 
ment he conquered the serpents of his sense-organs; by all 
means he stabilised Isvara, the supreme Atman, within his own 
heart; he was immersed in devout feelings; he observed fasts; 
he wore bark garments and matted hair. He retired into dark- 
ness (i.e. solitary place) . Devoid of all desires and his doubts 
all cleared, (in the end) he attained the great region of Siva. 
He gave the subcontinent to the south of the mountain 
Himavat to Bharata. Hence learned men call that subcontinent 
as Bharata Var§a®®® after his name. Bharata’s son was the 
virtuous Sumati. Bharata entrusted the kingdom to his care. 
After transferring the royal glory to his son the king entered 
the forest for penance. 


289. Bhirata. Liiiga ascribes the origin of the name to King 
Bharata, the eldest of the hundred sons of 8$abha and grandson of 
N&bhi. Cf. Vayu 33. 51-52; Marka 53. 39-40. For detail see Dhdga 1 1.2. 15- 
17 andSk I. ii. 37. 55-37. But according to Matsya 114-5-6, Bharata is 
the name of Manu himself who creates and supports the people here. For 
further detail, see Avasthi : Studies in Skandapurdffa, pp. 17-23. Formerly 
BhSrata was known as Hima-var$a or Haimavata Var$a. 



187 


CHAPTER FORTYEIGHT 

The Mountain Meru 


Suta said: 

1. In the middle of this Jambu Dvipa is the great moun- 
tain Meru*®®- It is the most excellent among the mountains, 
having many peaks full of jewels. 

2. It is reputed to be eightyfour thousand yojanas in 
height. It has entered sixteen thousand yojanas beneath the 
ground and it extends to sixteen thousand yojanas. 

3. Since it is stationed like a shallow plate the extent on 
the top is thirty-two thousand yojanas. Three times its width is 
its girth at the ridges. 

4. It is rendered golden due to the auspicious contact with 
the body of Mahesa. It resembles the flower of the Dhattura 
plant (thorn apple) . It is the abode of all Devas. 

5. It is the sporting ground for Devas. It is full of miracles. 
The toCal width and extent of this mountain is a hundred 
thousand yojanas. 

6-7. O leading brahmins, beneath the earth its extent is 
sixteen thousand yojanas. The remaining part of that moun- 
tain is above the earth. The extent at the root is thus sixteen 
thousand yojanas and the extent above, they say, is twice the 
extent at the root. 

8. In the cast it has the lustre of the ruby; in the south it 
resembles gold; in the west it shines like the blue stone and in 
the north it has the coral lustre. 

9. In the eastern side of this mountain is Amaravati 
(the city of Indra). It is full of mansions of different kinds. It 
is thronged by different groups of Devas. It is surrounded by 
clusters of jewels. 

10-14. It has many ornamental gateways of different shapes 
bedecked in gold and jewels. The arches at the gateways are 
rendered wonderful with gol'd, with jewels set in. Thousands of 
women throng the roadways. They aie clever in conversation 
and elocution. They are bedecked in all ornaments. They stoop 
down due to the weight of their heavy breasts and their eyes 


290. P. 98, note 127. 



188 Lingapurdna 

roll to and fro due to intoxication. The Apsaras (water ny- 
mphs) move about all round. There are wonderful lakes, tanks, 
and rivers, all clustered with full blown lotuses. They have 
golden lines of steps. Even the sands on their banks are golden. 
Blue and fragrant golden lotuses abound in them. Thus the 
whole city shines splendidly. With that city the mountain is 
considered auspicious. 

15. In the south-eastern side of the mountain is Tejasv- 
ini the city of the fire god. It is divine and similar to Amara- 
vati. It is endowed with all means of pleasures. 

16. O sages, most excellent among those who have self- 
control, in the southern side of the mountain is the city of 
Yama Vaivasvata. It is full of many divine abodes built in 
gold and very splendid. 

17-18. In the south-west is the splendid dark-colourcd city 
Suddhavati.2®^ Similarly in the north-west is the splendid cuy 
Gandhavati. The city in the north is Mahodaya and that in 
the north-east is Yasovati. Thus cities in all the quarters 
always shine. 

19. There are the abodes of Brahma, Visnu and Maheia 
as well as of others on it. Thus the mountain endowed with 
all means of pleasures and containing many lakes, is the most 
excellent among the mountains. 

20. It is full of Siddhas, Yaksas, Gandharvas, sages and 
the four kinds of living beings. 

21-22. O leading brahmins, on the mountain towaids the 
left, stands a palace of seven storeys that is as clear as pure 
crystal. It is as extensive as though it has a thousand landing 
grounds. There stays lord Siva of great arms, whose eyes are 
the sun, moon and fire. He is seated in a gemset throne along 
with the goddess and the six-faced deity Karltikeya. 

23-27. The palace of Visnu is also there. It extends to 
half of that of lord Siva and he (Visnu) stays there. In the 
south is the divine palace of the lotus-born deity Brahma. It 
is full of rubies. There is the city of Indra which is very large. 
There is the beautiful city of Yama. There are the cities of 

291. Since no city in the west is mentioned, Kj-snavarna and Sud- 
dhavati in the first half of V-17 may also mean two cities, i.e. Krsnavarna 
in the south-east and Suddhavati in the west. 



Mountain Meru 


m 

Soma, Varuna, Nirrti, Pavaka (fire-god), Vayu (wind) and 
Rudra. In their different respective palaces there are the 
abodes of all people. In the north-east in the holy centre of 
the lord, perpetual worship is maintained. The holy Nandi stays 
there alongwith his disciples and the leading Siddhas. Sanat 
is comfortably lodged there alongwith the Siddhas. The lord 
of Devas is there "alongwith Sanaka, Sananda and others. 

28. Some part of it, is the ground for the practice of 
yoga. In some places are the grounds for enjoyment of plea- 
sures. There is a splendid palace with seven storeys resem- 
bling the rising sun. 

29-35. It is the splendid palace of Nandi and the chieftain 
of the Ganas is seated there in the midst of six-faced deity, 
Gane^a, thousands of Ganas, Suyasa of beautiful eyes, the 
mothers and Madana. The river Jambu**® flows round the 
base of this mountain. 

To its right there is a splendid Jambu (Rose Apple) tree. 
It is very tall with extensive growth all round. It yields fruits 
at all times. The Ilavrta sub-continent is splendid and ex- 
tensive all round the Meru. Some subsist there on the fruits 
of Jambu and some on nectar. Some have the lustre of gold and 
others are of various colours. They enjoy all kinds of pleasures. 
O brahmins, this is the splendid mid-land of the Dvipa, which 
extends all round the foot of the Meru. There are nine sub- 
continents in Jambudvipa.®*®* I shall recount all of them 
with their rivers, streams, and mountain ranges. Understand 
their extent in yojanas. 


292. Jambu : According to Marka, (55. 28-30) this river springs from 
the juice of the fruits which the Jambu tree produces on the Gandhamadana. 
The river passes around Meru and then enters Jambamala. 

292a. JambQdvipa represents the geographical conception of the territory 
ruled over by the Aryan people. The territory was divided into nine units 
( Varyas), of which BhSrata was one. St. Epiphanius (the end of the 
fourth century A.D.) has recorded that India was formerly divided into 
nine kingdoms (vide S.B. Ghaudhuri, JIH. Vol. XXVII part III, 1949, 
pp. 241). 



190 


Lingapurdna 


CHAPTER FORTYNINE 

Ildvrta sub-continent 


Suta said : 

1. The first Dvipa, it is said, extends to a thousand 
yojanas. The other Dvipas successively extend to twice the 
previous one. 

2-3. The earth along with all the oceans is slated as ex- 
tending to fifty crores of yojanas. It consists ol seven Dvipas. 
It is splendid and is surrounded by the Lokaloka mountain.^®® 
The mountain Nila is to the north of the Meru. The Sveta is 
to the north of this and the Smgl is still further north of Sveta. 
O brahmins, these three are the mountains of the sub-con- 
tinents in the north. 

4. The Jathara^®^ and the Devakuta^®^ are the mountains 
in the eastern quarter. The Nisadha®®® is to the south of the 
Meru. Still south of it is the mountain Hemakuta.-^®’ The 
Himavat is to its south. 

5. . To the west of the Meru there are two mountains: Mal- 
yavan®®® and Gandhamadana.^®® These two extend towards the 
north. 


293. Lokaloka — a belt of mountains bounding the outer-most of the 
seven seas and dividing the visible world from the regions of darkness. 

294-295. On the eastern side of Meru there are two mountains, 
namely the Jathara and the Devakuta which run north to south and 
stretch up to the Nila (Tien Shan) and Ni^dha mountains ( Fivu 35*B). 
Jathara is identified with Kuruk-Tagh and Devakuta with Altin Tagh — Nan 
Shan Tsing-Ling of Sinkiang and Northern China. The Geography of the 
PurdriaSy pp. 99-100. 

296. Nisadha: §p. places it to the south of the Meru, along with the 
Himavat and Hemakuta. It represents Hindukush Kunlun chain. 

297. Hemakuta : a sacred hill situated to the north of Manasarovara 
It represents Ladakh-Kailash-Trans-Himalayan chain. 

298. Malyavan : This mountain bounds Ildvrta Var$a on the east. 

299. Gandhamadana : It is placed to the south of Meru. 



Ildvrta sub-continent 


191 


6. All these leading mountains are frequented by the 
Siddhas and Caranas. The inter-space between two mountains 
is nine thousand yojanas in each case. 

7-10. This sub-continent south of the Himavat is known 
as Bharata. Hemakuta is beyond that. The sub-continent within 
it is Kimpurusa. Nisadha is beyond Hemakuta. Its sub-conti- 
nent is called Harivarsa. Beyond Harivar;a and Meru is the 
splendid Ilavrta. Beyond Ilavrta is Nila and the sub-continent 
Ramyaka. Beyond Ramyaka is Sveta and the sub-continent 
known as Hiranmaya. The mountain beyond Hiranmaya is 
known as Srhgi and sub-continent beyond it is Kuru. The two 
Varsas one in the south and one in the north (i.e. Himavarsa 
and Ramyaka) are stationed like an arch. 

1 1 . The other four are horizontal in shape. Ilavrta is in the 
middle; to the west and east of the Meru there are two sub- 
continents and they are smaller (^than the four mentioned 
before). 

12. The area above Nisadha is known as the northern 
Vedyardha (half of the whole Dvipa which is conceived as a 
sacrificial altar). Thus there are three Varsas in the southern 
half and three Varsas in the northern half. 

13. Ilavrta with the Meru in the middle is in the midst of 
the two halves. 

14-15 The great mountain Malyavan extends towards the 
north. Its width above is two thousand yojanas. Its length 
is stated to be thirtyfour thousand yojanas. The mountain 
Gandhamadana is to the west of it. 

16-17. Its length and width is similar to that of Malyavan. 
These six Varsa mountains of good ridges extend to the east 
and arc bounded on both sides by the Eastern and Western 
seas. 

18. Himavat is full of snow. The Hemakuta contains gold. 
The Nisadha is also golden resembling the morning sun. 

19. The golden Meru which extends upwards has four 
colours. Its girth is symmetrical and cylindrical. It rises high. 

20. The mountain Nila is full of Lapis Lazuli stones. The 
iSveta is white in colour and full of gold. The three-peaked 
mountain Sfogi has the colour of the feathers of the peacock 
and contains gold. 



192 


Littgapurd^a 


21-25a. Thus the mountains have been succinctly recounted. 
Again listen to the description of the leading hills or peaks. 

Mandara and Devakuta are the mountains in the eastern 
quarter. Kailasa and golden Gandhamadana extend fiom the east 
towards south and end within the ocean. The excellent moun- 
tains Nisadha and Pariyatra are stationed in the west, like those 
in the east. TriSrnga and Jarudhi are the excellent mountains 
in the north. They are embedded within the ocean and they 
also extend towards the East. Learned men call these mountains 
“Maryadaparvatas” (mountains of the boundary). 

25b-27. O excellent brahmins there are foot ranges to the 
lofty golden mountain Meru, extending to the four quarters. 
Supported by these, the earth consisting of the seven Dvspas, 
does not move. Their length is mentioned to be ten thousand 
yojanas. In the east it is Mandara; in the south it is Gandha- 
madana, in the west it is Vipula and in the nortli it is SuparSva. 

28-34. Four lofty trees grow on these as though they are the 
flagstaffs of the Dvipas. The great tree on the peak of the moun- 
tain Mandara is the Kadamba, the king of flagstaffs. It has 
long hanging branches. It acts as a caityapadapa (holy big tree 
in a sacred temple) . 

On the peak of the mountain in south (i.e. Gandhamadana) 
there is a Jambu tree (Rose Apple) with holy fruits and flowers 
hanging in garlands. The Jambu tree is known in all the worlds 
as the flagstaff in the southern region. 

On the peak of the lofty mountain Vipula, in the west, a 
great Asvattha tree (holy fig tree) grows like a great Caitya- 
padapa (a sacred tree in a holy temple) • On the peak of the 
mountain Suparsva in the north grows the big Nyagrodha 
(Indian fig tree), with a huge trunk extending to many 
yojanas in circumference. 

I shall now mention the four sporting grounds of Devas on 
the leading mountains. They are devoid of human beings and 
have trees and plants that bloom in all the seasons. 

35-57. There are groves in the four directions. Understand 
them by their names. The forest grove in the east is Caitraratha; 
in the south it is Gandhamadana; it is Vaibhraja in the west; 
in the north it is the garden of Savitr (sun). 

(The holy shrine) in the east is Mitre^vara. Thereafter 



Ildvrta sub-continent 


193 


(i.e. in the south) it is §dsthe£vara. In the west it is Varycsvara 
and in the north it is Amrake^vara. 

Similarly, O leading sages, there are four great lakes also. 

38-40. The sages sport about there on the mountains and 
in the gardens. 

The lake in the east is Arunoda;®®® that in the south is 
Manama; in the west Sitoda and in the north Mahabhadra. 

In the south there is the holy centre of Sakha, in the west 
it is ol Visakha; in the north of Naigameya and in the east of 
Kumara. I shall mention briefly the leading peaks beginning 
from the eastern lake Arunoda only by their names. It is 
not possible to describe them in detail. 

41-4ja. These are the great mountains, viz: — Sitanta, 
Kui'anda, Kurara, Vikara, Manisaila, Vrksavan, Mahanila, 
Rucaka, Savindu, Dardura, Venuman, Samegha, Nisadha and 
Devaparvata. These and other mountains are the abodes of 
Siddhas in the east of Mandara. There are divine shrines of 
Rudra, Visnu and Narayana on all these hills, their caves and 
forests. 

45b-49. I shall now mention the great hills to the south of 
the lake Manasa in brief. Saila, Visiras, Sikhara, Ekasrhga, 
Maha^ula, Gajasaila, Pisacaka, Pancaiaila, Kailua, and 
Himavat. These are all lofty excellent hills frequented by Devas. 
On all these different mountains and forests divine shrines of 
Rudra have been installed by Devas. The mountains in the 
southern direction are thus mentioned to you. I shall now tell 
you about the hills in the west. 

50-52. To the west of the lake Sitoda there stand Surapa, 
Mahabala, Kumuda, Madhuman, Anjana, Mukuta. Krsna, 
Pandura, Sahasrasikhara, the leading hills Parijata andSrKrhga. 
These are the prominent excellent mountains frequented by 
Devas in the western quarter and they contain shrines of 
Rudra. 

53. The extremely powerful mountains to the north of the 
lake Mahabhadra are being stated now succinctly. 


300 . Arunoda. It lies to the east of Meru. 



194 


Lifigapurana 


54-56. They are: — Sahkhakuta, Mah^aila, Vrjabha, 
Haihsaparvata, Naga, Kapila, Indrasaila, Sanuman, Nila, 
Kantaka^rhga, Satasriiga, Puspakoia, Pra^aila, Virajas, 
Varahaparvata, Mayuraand Jarudhi.®°‘ All these are stationed 
in the north. 

57. There are thousands of divine palaces of the trident- 
bearing lord on those divine hills. 

58. In the interstices of these leading hills there ace many 
internal water reservoirs, lakes and parks. 

59. Thanks to the favour of Paramesthin, Devas, sages, 
Siddhas purified by their devotional thoughts of Siva reside 
here along with their families in their respective abodes. 

60-69. The different deities reside in the various forests as 
follows ; — 

The residence of Laksmi is in the Bilva grove ; Kasyapa 
and others stay in the Kakubha grove; the residence of Indra, 
Upendra and of the snake gods is in the Talavana (forest of 
palm trees); the residence of Kardama and his tribe is in the 
Udumbara grove; the residence of the Vidyadharas and 
Siddhas is in the holy and splendid mango-grove; the abode of 
the Nagjus and Siddhas is in the forest of Nimba (Margosa) , 
that of the sun and Rudra is in the KiihSuka; the precep- 
tor of Devas is stationed in the holy forest of Bijapura; 
the abode of the noble lords beginning with Visnu is in the 
forest of lilies ; the serpents stay on the Nyagrodha within the 
clusters of Sthalapadma (land lotuses). It is here that Sesa the 
lord of the nether worlds stays. He alone is the god of Death unto 
all. The ploughshare-armed lord is only a form of Visnu him- 
self, the preceptor of the universe; he is the leaning couch of 
Visnu; he is the bangle of the lord (§iva) . Danavas including 
their preceptor Sukra stay in the forest of jack trees. The 
serpents are stationed in the Visakhaka forest along with the 
Kinnaras; there are innumerable trees of all kinds in this beau- 
tiful forest. NandKvara is also stationed there and is being 
eulogised by the leading Ganas. Goddess Sarasvati stays in the 
middle of the region full of Santanaka (wish-yielding) trees. 


301. J&rudhi : This range is identified with the Kirghiz-Zailai 
Al-Tau, Ketmen chain. GP. p. 83. 



T'he abodes of Devas 


195 


Thus are the residents of these forests recounted in brief. It is 
not possible to describe them in detail. 


CHAPTER FIFTY 

The abodes of Devas 


Suta said: 

la. Indra stays in the auspiciou.s forest of Parijata'*®- (wish- 
yielding tree) on the peak called Sitanta.^®^ 

lb-2a. To the east of it is the extensive peak of Kumuda^®^ 
mountain. O excellent brahmins, on it are the eight cities of 
Danavas. 

2b-3a. In the holy Suvarnakotara, O excellent brahmins, 
they say, are the sixty-eight cities of the noble-souled Raksasas 
called Nilakas. 

3b-4a. There are fifteen cities on the leading mountain 
Mahanila which are the abodes of the horse- faced Kinnaras. 

4b. O men of good holy rites, there arc three cities of the 
Vidyadharas on Venusaudha, the great mountain, 

5. The glorious Garuda stays in Vaikuntha. The prosperous 
Nilalohita stays in Karanja.^®® The Vasus live in Vasudhara. 

30a. Parijata-vana— forest of coral trees (Erythrina Indica) which lose 
their leaves in June and are then covered with large crimson flowers. 

303. Sitanta : It means ‘end of cold’, i.e. “a range which marks the 
dividing line between the cold and hot regions. If the river Kizil-Su repre- 
sents the head waters of the Puranic river Sita, Sitanta is obviously the 
Kashghar range, i.e. the last longitudinal range of the Pamir region facing 
the Tarim basin, on the east. It is a range which, to a traveller coming from 
the east across the hot and sandy Tarim Basin, stands athwart the route to- 
wards the west and promises a cool climate beyond. It is an effective climatic 
barrier which separates a hot and dry desert on the east from the cold pla- 
teau on the west. Coming from the west it literally marks the ‘end of cold* 
and is therefore rightly qualified for its name, Sitanta”. GP. pp. loo-ioi. 

304. Kumuda : Peak Barzengi (16,436 feet) beyond the Pakshif 

Pass. 

300. Most of the mountains mentioned in this chapter are not 
iden tillable. 



196 


Lingapuraifa 


6. There are seven holy spots on the mountain Ratnadhara, 
belonging to the noble seven sages. They contain the abodes 
of the Siddhas as well. 

7. The great abode of Prajapati is on the mountain 
ekaSrhga. Durga and others stay on the Gaja^aila and the 
Vasus on the Sumedha. 

8. The Adityas, Rudras and Asvins have their abodes in 
eighty divine cities on the mountain Hemakaksa. 

9. There are five hundred crorcs of abodes of the Raksasas 
on the Sunlla mountain which has five peaks with five croies 
of cities in each. 

10. The hundred cities of the Yaksas of unmeasured pio- 
wess are on the Satasrnga; the cities of Kadraveyas are on 
the mountain Tamrabha; the city of Guha is on the Visakha 
hill. 

11. O excellent sages, the abode of Suparna is on the 
Svetodara ; the abode of Kubera is on the Pisacaka and that of 
Visnu is on the Harikuta. 

12- 14a. The residence of the Kinnaras is on the Kumuda, 
that of Caranas is on the Afljana ; Krsna has the abode in the 
mansipns of the Gandharvas; there are seven cities of Vidya- 
dharas on the Pandura and they contain all the means of 
pleasures, O Brahmins. There are seven thousand cities of the 
Daityas of terrible activities, the enemies of Jndra, on themoun- 
tain Sahasra^ikhara. 

14b-16. The residence of the Pannagas (serpents) O 
Leading sages, is on the Mukuta, full of flowers. The resi- 
dences of Vaivasvata, Soma, Vayu and the overlord of serpents 
are in four abodes on the Taksaka mountain. The abodes of 
Brahma, Indra, Visnu, Rudra, Guha, Kubera, Soma and other 
noble persons are on the Boundary mountains. 

17-19. The residence of loid Siva®®* along with Uma is in 
the cave of mountain Srikan^ha. Srikantha is the overlord of 
all the chiefs of Devas. Undoubtedly the Cosmic Egg functions 
by the grace of Srikantha. Ananta, l^a and others are severally 
the protectors of the Cosmic Egg. They are called Vidye^varas 
as well as Cakravartins (Emperors). 


306. Sarv&vaiiab — i.e. Siva, sarvaih viivam av&so yasya sal^. ST. 



Various Continents 


197 


20-21. Now, I shall briefly describe all the abodes presided 
over by Srikantha on the border mountains. The universe con- 
sisting of the mobile and immobile beings is presided over by 
.*§r!kantha. How can I recount all in detail upto Kalagni — Siva ? 


CHAPTER FIFTYONE 

Various Continents 


S ula said : 

1-7. The beautiful forest Bhutavana, the residence of the 
different groups of Bhutas (goblins), is on the highly splendid 
mountain Devakuta. This mountain has great peaks. It is 
splendid and devoid of impurities. It is made up by gold, Lapis 
Lazuli, rubies, emeralds, lustrous Gomeda (onyx) and other 
precious stones. It ranges in a number of branches on all sides. 
It is adorned with all kinds of trees such as Gampaka, .\soka, 
Punnaga, Bakula, .Asana and Parijata. It contains many flocks 
of birds and herds of elephants. It is variegated in colour with 
hundreds of minerals. It abounds in wonderful specimens of 
flowers. Its ridges are covered with bunches of flowers hanging 
down. Various kinds of animals live therein. It contains many 
springs and fountains with pure and sweet water. It is adorned 
with many waterfalls and cascades strewn with flowers. It is 
beautified by running streams with rafts of flowers floating on 
them. This Bhutavana®®^ has pleasing colours. It rontains many 
trees with great roots and stems. The thick shade of these trees 
spreads to ten yojanas all-round. 

8. The bright and well-lit abode of lord Mahadeva, the 
noble-souled Sankara, is there. It is beautified by means of 
great jewels. 

9-10. It has ornamental gateways made of crystal and 
shaped in different wonderful forms. It has golden rampart 
walls. It is well adorned with festoons of jewels. There are 

307. Bhutavana : Bhtita is a name of Siva; Bhuta-vana — Siva’s forest. 



198 


LiAgapurdna 


many splendid gem-set thrones covered with five cloths placed 
here and there on the ground and occupied by Lord Siva 
now and then. 

11-16. In that mansion of Siva there are many apart- 
ments decorated with garlands of never-fading flowers of dif- 
ferent colours. There are many raised platforms (Man^apas) 
of different shapes and sizes with crystal columns. The leading 
goblins (Bhutas) adored by Brahma, Indra and Upendra stay 
there. There are many Pramathas with their faces resembling 
those of boars, elephants, lions, bears, tigers, camels, vultures, 
owls, deer, humped bulls and goats. They are stout and huge 
like great mountain peaks. They are terrible with having huge 
arms. Some have green hairs on their heads. They are of dif- 
ferent shapes and sizes. They are seated in all possible pos- 
tures and positions. There are splendid Ganas such as Nan- 
diivara, with bright beaming faces and spotless character. 
They possess supernatural qualities and they resemble Brahma, 
Indra and Visnu. The place is never devoid of crowds of im- 
mortal beings, (i.e. Devas) who worship the lord of Bhutas (i.e. 
Siva) there, always. 

17-19. Sankara, Mahadeva, the lord of Pramhathas is 
worshipped by the Siddhas, Devas, Gandharvas, Brahma, and 
others such as Upendra. They use these musical instruments 
( drums, etc. ) in the course of their worship — Jharjharas ( cym- 
bals) conches, Pa^ahas, Bheris, Dindimas, Gomukhas. During 
their worship they sing in low, middle and high pitches; they 
also jump, dance and shout in joy. Sankara when being 
worshipped thus appears as though he has divided into two 
the beautiful peak (Kailasa) having the lustre of the conch. 

20. Kailasa®®® is the abode of Kubera, the king of Yaksas 
as well as other noble beings. 

21. There too, Siva the lord of Devas has a great 
abode. He stays there always accompanied by Uma and the 
chiefs of Ganas. 

22-25. The holy river Mandakini with plenty of water 
and abounding in lotuses flows over the splendid peak Kubera 
Sikhara; the steps leading to its waters are built of gold and set 


308. KailSsa : p. 100 note 133 



Various Continents 


199 


with gems. There are golden lotuses with fragrance, very soft 
to the touch. There are great lilies with sweet smells and leaves 
resembling blue lapis lazuli. The river is beautifully adorned 
with big lotuses and lilies. It is frequented by the womenfolk 
of the Yaksas and Gandharvas. The waters of the holy and 
splendid river Mandakini^®® are used by Devas, Danavas, Gan- 
dhaivas, Yaksas, Raksasas and Kinnaras for bathing and drink- 
ing purposes. 

26. On its northern bank is the splendid abode of Lord 
Siva, finished with lapis lazuli and other gems. He, the unchang- 
ing lord, stays there. 

27. O brahmins, on the eastern and southern banks of the 
river Kanakananda there is a forest with thousands of Brah- 
mins,®'® animals and birds. 

28-31. There also the lord sports in a mansion similar to 
the one on the mountain (Kailasa) along with Uma and chief 
Ganas. On the western bank of the Nanda®'^, a little towards 
the South there is the city Rudrapuri. It is full of many man- 
sions. In these also Lord Siva assuming hundreds of forms sports 
about along with Uma and the Ganns It is called Sivalaya 
(abode of Siva). Thus there are hundreds and thousands of 
shrines of Siva in every Dvipa, O excellent sages, on the moun- 
tains, in the forests, on the banks of rivers, lakes and on the 
junctions of waters. 


30g. MandakinI ; identical with Svargahga. For detail, see Gahgava- 
taxa-vamana (Vayu, ch.47; Matsyach. 124). According to this description 
^^cold and fresh water from the springs of the Kailasa mountain flows into 
a lake from which issues river MandakinI around which stands the pictures- 
que Nandana forest of vast dimensions.” S.M. Ali holds that the river 
MandakinI probably refers to the river Uma and the Zhong Ghhu, which 
flow through Gauri Kunda (lying on the eastern flank of Mount Kailasa) in 
the Rakbasa Tal (the twin lake of Manasarovar) 

3 ID. dvija here means 'ascetic brahmanas*. 

311. Nanda : Nanda, Alakananda and Bhagfrath! arc three famous 
branches of Gohga in the upper course in the Pauri-Garhwal region. Accor- 
ding to Pargiter (Mark. p. 383), the nrivers anda and Apara-nanda arc 
often mentioned as situated in the north between the Ganges and Kau^iki 
or Kosi, and near the river Bahuda and mount Hemakuta. 



200 


Lingapurdna 


CHAPTER FIFTYTWO 

Geography of the Woild 


Suia said : 

1-2. O best of Brahmins, on every sub-continent there 
are many holy rivers always full of water and originatinsj from 
great lakes. They flow in all four directions : east, south, 
north and west. 

3. The storehouse of water in the sky which is called Suma 
(moon) ib the support of all living beings. To Devas, it is 
the receptaelc of nectai 

4-8. From this has originated the river of auspicious 
waters and it flows in the firmament. With nectarine waters 
it functions through the seventh path of the wind. This river 
follows the path of the luminaries. It is frequented by 
groups of luminaries, and by thousands and crores of stais of 
the sky.^^® Just like the moon it also goes round and round 
every day. 

Mahameru, the tender sporting ground of Srikantha is eighty 
four thousand yojanas high. Lord Siva is seated there together 
with Uma and the chiefs of his Ganas and also sports**^* about 
there for a long time. This auspicious river of holy waters 
circumambulates the mountain Meru. 

9. With its waters agitated by the wind and by its own 
velocity, the river flows down on all the four inner peaks of 
the Meru. 

312. The Furanas describe the three stages in the evolution of 
Gahga: (i) It is a starry river (i.e. ak^a-Ganga the Milky Way) in the 
form of snow, (ii) As the snow falls on the high plateau of the Pamir 
(Mem) (v.7) and also on the high ridges and ranges which surround and 
radiate from the Pamir region, it is still ‘snowy Ganga* (=hima-Gahga) . 
(iii) As snow melts, it divides into the four main rivers (v. o) of Asia 
which radiate in different directions. The Gahga at this stage becomes a 
stream, or rather streams of water. After passing through thousands of 
mountains, valleys, forests and caves, it falls into the southern sea ( v. 10) 

313. Mark the archaic form ‘kridate* in the atmanepada for ‘kridati’ 
in the parasmaipada. 



Geography of the World 


201 


10. After going beyond all the mountains partially it 
enters the great sea at the behest of lord Siva. 

1 1 . There are hundreds and thousands of rivers branching 
out from this, which flow through all the sub-continents and 
continents as well as the mountains therein. 

12a. Since the Gahga has gone to the earth from the firma- 
ment, there are innumerable small rivers. 

12b- 13a. In the Ketumala subcontinent men are dark- 
coloured.^^^ They subsist on jack fruits. Their women have 
the lustie of blue lotuses. Their life span is ten thousand years. 

13b- 15a. In the Bhadrasva sub-continent women are 
white-coloured, resembling the rays of the moon. They have 
their staple diet of black mangoes. They are devoid of anguish 
and agony and fond of sexual pleasures. Mentally meditating 
on ^i \ a they live upto ten thousand years. Like the Hiranmayas^^® 
they have freely dedicated their minds to Isvara. 

15b-18. In the su])-continent Ramanaka, the living beings 
subsist on the fruits ot the Nyagrodha (the holy fig tree). 
They live up to eleven thousand five hundred years. They 
are all white-complexioned and engrossed in the meditation 
on Siva. The highly blessed Hairanamayas are those dwelling 
in the forest of Hiranmaya. They live upto twelve thousand five 
hundred years mainly subsisting on the Asvattha (holy fig 
tree) fruits. They have also dedicated their minds freely to 
the lord like the Hiranmayas. 

10. The Kurus in Kuruvarsa are those who have fallen 
down there from the heavenly world. All of them are born 
by copulation. They are fond of milk^^® and live on milk 
diet. 

20. They love one another and have qualities similar to 
those of the Cakravaka birds. They are devoid of ailments 
and sorrow and perpetually seek happiness. 

21. They live up to fourteen thousand five hundred years. 
They have great virility, but do not associate with other women. 


314. kalah=:kr9navari:iah ST. of dark complexion. 

315. Hairanmaya^i — residents of Hiranmaya Varsa. 

316. K$Irina]hi--of milk-white complexion. Contrast with KMah V. 12. 



202 


Lingapurana 


22. All the residents of the Kuruvarsa like the heaven- 
dwellers die simultaneously. They are delighted and flouri- 
shing. They take in all kinds of cooked rice and nectar. 

23. They shine always like the moon; they have perpetual 
youth; they arc dark in colour in their bodies and always 
wear ornaments. 

24. Among all the sub-continents in the Jambudvipa the 
sub-continent of Kuruvarsa is extremely splendid. There is a 
magnificent palace of the moon-crested lord Siva. It has the 
lustre of the moon. 

25. In the sub-continent Bharatavari^^^’ men are auspi- 
cious and their longevity depends on their Karmans. They 
are said to live for a hundred years. They are of different 
colours and their bodies are small. 

26. They are engaged in the worship of different Devas; 
they experience the fruits of different kinds of Kai .ans; they 
are richly endowed with knowledge and with different mate- 
rials. They are weak and have very little pleasures. 

27-28. Some of them have gone to Indradvipa^^® and 
some to Kaseruka. O rs have gone to Tamradvipa and some 
to the country Gabh. imat. Some have gone to Niiga- 
dvipa, some to Saumyadvipa, and others to the Dvipa of 
Gandharvas as well as of Varuna. Some of them are Mlccchas 
and Puliii'ias born of different castes. 

29. In til. Eastern parts of the Dvipa are the Kiratas; in 
the western extremities the Yavanas; in the middle the Brahmins 
Ksatriyas and Vaisyas. The Sudras are everywhere.'"*^® 


317. The glorification of Bharata is one of the common topics in the 
Puranas. 

318. Bharata is one of the nine khan<jas of Jambudvipa; the other 
eight being Indradvipa, Kaseruman, Tamra-varna, Gabhastiman, Naga, 
Saumya, Gandharva, and Varuna. 

3i(j. The Puranas are conscious of the foreign tribes that surroundea 
Bharata (cf. Matsya, 50. 75-76; Alark, *37,8.). The Kiratas mentioned along 
the eastern limits are probably the uncivilized tribes of the forests and 
mountains with the Burmese type of features. The Yavanas in the west arc 
Greeks originally and afterwards the Mohammedans. 



Geography of the World 


203 


30-31. They are established there maintaining themselves 
by worship, warfare and business dealings (respectively). 
Mutual dealings in connection with the activities of the dif- 
ferent castes are related only to virtue, wealth and love. They 
are interested in their own duties. The conception and pride in 
performing the duties of the various stages of life are maintained 
properly. 

32. It is only here that human beings endeavour for hea- 
venly pleasures and salvation. O leading sages, only here 
they pursue the duties specified for each yuga,®*® not elsewhere. 

33. In the sub-continent Kimpurusa men live up to ten 
thousand years. Men are golden-complexioned and women 
resemble the celestial damsels. 

34. They are devoid of ailments and sorrow. They are all 
purified by meditations on l§iva. They have Sattva qualities 
and the lustre of gold. They live on Plak^ fruits along with their 
wives. 

35-37a. Men in the sub-continent Harivarsa have com- 
plexion resembling gold. They are persons fallen from the world of 
Devds. They have divine forms and features in every respect. 
They worship lord Siva. They imbibe the auspicious sugarcane- 
juice. Hence old age does not afflict them and they do not 
decay. They live upto ten thousand years. 

37b-38. In the sub-continent ^lavrta that was mentioned 
by me as situated in the middle of the Dvipa, the sun does not 
dlaze and men do not become old. There is no light in Ilavrta, 
neither the sun nor the moon nor the stars. 

39. The people there have the lustre of lotuses. Their faces 
resemble the lotus. Their eyes are like the petals of the lotus. 
They have the fragrance of the petals of the lotus. They are 
purified by their meditation on Siva. 

40. The juice of the Jambu fruits constitutes their diet. 
They are sweet-scented. They have no duties to perform.®®^ They 
have come there from the world of Devas and have neither 
death nor old age. 

320. Since Bharata alone is Karma-Bhumi (land for performing 
action) , the yuga-dharmas (duties pertaining to yugas) prevail only here. 
Gf. Vtfnu cited in ST, 

321 . agnispand&h. N.S. reads ani$pand 3 h ( =dharm 3 diiunySh ST). 



204 


Lingapurdna 


41. In the divine sub-continent Ilavrta, the excellent men 
live their full span of life which is thirteen thousand years. 

42. By drinking the juice of the Jambu fruits they are not 
afflicted by old age. They have neither hunger nor fatigue. 
They do not die a premature death. 

43. The gold found there is called Jambunada. It is the 
divine metal. It shines and resembles a glow-worm. 

44. Thus the persons occupying the nine sub-continenis 
have been recounted by me. Their colour, span of life, diet and 
other thing*? have been succinctly mentioned and not in detail. 

43-46. It should be known that the Gandharvas. and 
celestial nymphs reside in Hemakfita. Sesa, Vasuki, Taksaka 
and all others live in Nisadha. The very strong Brahmanas 
called Yajnikas live on sacrifices. They number thiity three 
thousands and they live happily on the mountain Nila, lull of 
lapis lazuli, the Siddhas and Brahmarsis devoid of impuiitics 

47-51 . The mountain Sveta is the homeland of the Dailyas 
and Danavas. The mountain f^nigavan (Srngl) is the abode 
of Pitrs. The Himavat is the abode nl Yaksas, goblins and h>id 
Siva. The lord is seen in all the mountains and forests He is 
accompanied by Visnu, Biahma, Uma, Nandin and (iana.^. 
In particular, lord Nilalohita is seen on the mountains Nila, 
Sveta, and Trisrnga^^^ perpetually togelhci with the Siddhas, 
Devas and Pitrs. 

The Nila is of the colour ol lapis lazuli. The Sveta is white. 
The Hiranmaya has the colour of the leather of the i)eacock. 
The Trisrhga is golden in colour. All these lofty mountains 
are in the Jambudvipa. 


322. Nila-Svcta-Tri5rngc: i.c. on the mountain? of Jambu, viz.. Nila, 
if"* Triirtiga. 



205 


CHAPTER FIFTYTHREE 

Geography of the World 


Siila said : — 

1. There are «"vcn important mountains in each of the 
seven Dvipas beginning with Plaksa. They extend straight in 
all directions and form the boundaries of the great continents. 

2-4. I shall mention the .seven great mountains in the 
Plaksadvlpa. The first mountain is Gomedaka; the second 
is Gandra; the third is Narada; the fourth is Dundubhi; the 
fifth is Somaka; the sixth Sumanas, tiie same is called V’aibhava; 
the seventh is Vaibhraja. These are the seven important moun- 
tains in the Plaksa Dvipa. 

.0-9. There are only seven important mountains in the 
Salmalidvipa. 1 shall mention them in order. They are 
Kuinuda, Uttama, Balahaka Droria, Kahka, Mahisa and 
Kakudman. 

In the Kusadvlpa there arc seven sub-continents and seven 
Kulaparvatas. 1 shall mention them by name, in brief The 
first mountain is Vidnrma, the setond is Hernaparvata the 
third is Dyutirnan, the fourth is Puspita, the fifth is Kusesaya, 
the sixth ilarigiri, the seventh is the gloritms mountain 
Mandara. It is the abode of the gr eat lord. The word Manda 
denotes the waters. Since the mountarn holds tire waters, it is 
called Maiulara. 

10. The bull-emblemed lord of the universe Siva, the deity 
without impurities, stays there in person in an excellent golden 
palace accompanied by Uma and Nandin. 

ll-lSa Fornudy the loid was propitiated in the great 
hoK centre, Aviinukta, by the mountain Mandara. He then 
obtained a great boon. Alahadev'a vva.s retjuested by hrni for 
his slay there along with Uma. I’hc lord left Avimukta 
and stayed on the Ma”dara along with his Ganas, Nandin 
and Ulna. Therelore, lit does not leave this mountain. 

13b- Ur. 'I’he Kula Parvatas in the Kiauiica Dvipa are 
seven. 'Phey are Krauiica, Vamanaka, Andhakaraka Divavrt, 
Viviiida, Putidarika. and Dimdubhi.svana. These seven 
mountains ir *he Krauiica Dvipa are full of gems. 



206 


Lingapurd^ 


17-19a. There are seven mountains in the S^advlpa. 
They are Udaya, Raivata, Syamaka Rajata, Ambikeya, Ramya 
containing all medicinal herbs and Kesarl. It is from this 
Kesari that wind is generated. 

19b-24. In the Puskara Dvipa there is only one glorious 
mountain named MahaiSaila. It has wonderful peaks full of 
jewels. The rocky ridges are lofty. In the eastern half of the 
Dvipa it rises very high with ridges of variegated colours. Above 
the ground level it is fifty thousand yojanas high. The great 
mountain goes deep below the ground level thirty four thousand 
yojanas. This mountain stretches over half of the Dvipa with 
the Manasa range to the north of it. Situated near the sea 
shore it appears like the newly rising moon. 

Above the ground level it rises fifty thousand yojanas 
high. Its total width and girth is also that much. The same 
is called Manasa in the western portion of the Dvipa. The 
same mountain of great ridges appears split into two due to its 
position. 

25-26. There are two meritorious and splendid Janapadas 
on either side of the Manasa mountain, and shining like silver. 
The sub-continent Mahavita®*® is on the exterior of the Manasa. 
The Janapada in the interior is called Dhatakikhanija.*®* 

27-28. The Puskara Dvipa is surrounded by the ocean 
of sweet water. All round this ocean extends to as much area 
as tlie Puskara Dvipa. In girth and extent it is equal to Puskara. 

In the same manner all the seven Dvipas are surrounded by 
oceans severally and there arc seven oceans in all. 

29. The seventh ocean is beyond all Dvipas. Thus the 
comparative sizes of dvipas and oceans are stated. 

30. The great ocean of sweet waters is stationed envelop- 
ing the Puskara. 

31. Beyond that is the situation of the world. The earth 
is golden and twice in extent. The entire thing is comparable 
to a single rock. 

32. beyond it is the globular mountain of delimitation. 

323-324. Mabavita and Obatakikhanda. These are tbe two provinces 
of Pu$kara-dvipa (identified with Japan, Manchuria and S£ Siberia). The 
mountain Manasa runs in a circle like a full moon and divides the two 
provinces. Tbe exterior province is Mabavita and the interior is Dhataki. 



Geography of the World 


207 


It is partially dim and partially bright. It is called Lokaloka. 

33. O brahmins, this earth abides, as long as this visible- 
cum-invisible mountain exists. Its height is stated to be ten 
thousand yojanas. 

34. The extent of the great mountain Lokaloka is also 
that much. The ray' of the sun pass over its inner and nether 
half. 

35. In its other half there is perpetual darkness. Hence 
it is called Lokaloka. Thus, the world Bhur is explained succin* 
ctly. 

36-39. The Bhuvarloka is upto the sun. O excellent sages, 
the Svarloka is upto Dhruva (pole star). There are seven 
wheels of the wind,®*® viz., Avaha, Pravaha, Anuvaha, Sam- 
vaha, Vivaha, Paravaha and Parivaha, O brahmins, these are 
the seven wheels of the wind. 

O brahmins, the clouds, sun, moon, stars, planets, seven 
sages (Great Bear) are one above the other. The distance from 
the surface of the earth up to pole star is fifteen hundred thou- 
sand yojanas. 

40-43. The solar sphere is one hundred thousand yojanas 
above the surface of the earth. Above it the chariot of the sun 
is sixteen thousand yojanas. The Meru is eighty-four thousand 
yojanas above the surface of the earth. The Maharloka extends 
to a crore of yojanas above Dhruva. O brahmins, the Janaloka 
extends to two crores of yojanas beyond Maharloka. Tapo- 
loka extenas to four crores of yojanas beyond Janaloka. Beyond 
that the Brahmaloka extends to six crores of yojanas. O 
brahmins, the holy worlds in this Cosmic Egg are thus seven. 

44. Beneath the seven nether worlds are the crores of 
hells. They are twentyeight in number beginning with Ghora 
and ending with Maya, 

45-46a. The sinnefs are cooked in them in accordance 
v.'ith their past activities. They say that in each of them there 
are five hells beginning with Raurava and ending with Avici. 

46b-47. The Cosmic Egg has been mentioned by me at the 
outset. So also the sheaths of the Cosmic Egg. Incidentally the 
creation of Brahma too was mentioned in great detail. It should 

325. All the PurSnas mention seven divisions of the strato -sphere. 



208 


Lingapurdna 


be known that there are thousands and crores of Eggs like these. 

48-52. Since Pradhana is present everywhere within each 
of these Cosmic Eggs there are fourteen worlds in all sides as 
well as above and below. O leading brahmins, the cause of their 
creation is lord Siva himself. The eight-bodied Siva is present 
in all the Eggs, in the exterior of the Eggs, in the coverings of 
the Eggs, in the extremities of the darkness and beyond dark- 
ness. Wonderful it is, every thing in the universe is the body 
of the unembodied great Atman, of MaheSa, of the intelligent 
Mahadeva. 

The mistress of the eight-bodied Siva is the divine Prakrti. 
Mahat etc. arc his progeny; all the Pas us (Individual Souls) 
who identify themselves with their bodies arc His servants. 

53. The lord Siva is infinite. He is devoid of beginning 
and end. He is the Purusa. He is identical with the seven 
principles'*'^’ beginning from Pradhana. His* body is Pradhana 
itself, having sixteen limbs. (i.e. the organs of knowledge, 
organs of action, elements and mind). He himself is 
Mahesvara and Astatanu (eight-bodied). 

54. It is due to the power of His command that the 
earthds held steady. So also the mountains, clouds, oceans, 
luminaries, Devas beginning with Indra, those who go about in 
the aerial chariots as well as the mobile and iinniobilc beings. 

55. Devas including Indra saw the lord devoid of specific 
characteristics in the guise of a Yaksa.^'^'** On se<‘ing him they 
wondered “What is this I’hey went to the Vaksa. Unable 
to come to any conclusion, fiie and others exerted thianselvcs 
but became weak and inelficient. 

56. O brahmins, in front of that Yaksa the lire-god could 
not burn even a blade of grass; the wind-God could not shake 
a blade of grass; all th<‘ leading hnmortal beings failed to exer- 
cise their respective powers over him. 

57. At that time, the enemy of Vrtra (i.e. Indra), the \ord 

326-328. The astamurti (eight-formed, p. i6(i) Siva is the house- 
holder whose mistress is Prakrti, whose subjects are intellect, ego and five 
subtle elements. His eight-formed body has sixteen parts, viz,, five gross 
elements, five organs of action, five organs of knowledge and the mind. 

329. Yaksa — J^iva in the form of Yaksa — a semidivine being, cf. Brahma- 

Gita cited in i'T.: ^ ^ II MsTT 

II 



Movements of Luminaries 


209 


of Devas, the cause of all prosperity, approached him along 
with the leading Devas. He said to the Yaksa, the lord of Devas, 
with great curiosity in his mind, ‘‘Who are you. Sir 

38. At that time the Yaksa vanished. Then the splendid- 
faced daughter of Himavat, Uma, shining gloriously 
with many auspicious ornaments appeared in front of him. 

59. Indra and others asked that unborn daughter of 
Mimavai. Uma, the intensely bright one; — “O Goddess, O 
excessively refulgent, what is this ? O Uma, who was this 
shining one in the body ol Yaksa?*’ 

t>(). On hearing it, Uma said : ‘The Yaksa is in\isible.*’ 
Devas including Indra bowed down to that deity ha\ iiig the 
gait of a lion, and to Uma unborn and of red, white and l>lark 
<^*ol()ur. 

hi. On being honoured by all the leading immortal beings, 
the deity. t!i«'‘ cause of the activity of Devas and Asiiras, said: — 
Formerly 1 was Prakrti subservirmt to the behests of thePurusa 
the Yaksa. 

b2. Hence, O braliinins, the entire Egg originated from 
the unboin at his behest and from the Egg originated Brahma, 
riu' f utirc ^vorld oiiginated from him along with the luniina- 
rii*:^. Tims the universe is identical with the Unborn (,aja). 


CHAPTER FIFTYFOUR 

Movements of Luminaries 


Siua sjiJ : 

1 . la order to comprehend the moveineuis of the planets''’^® 
after observing the holy centres of the lord 1 shall mention the 
movemeius of luminaries within the Cosmic Egg succinctly. 

33'). rin" system of stars, planets and constellations known as 
Simsumrira-cakra is conceived as rotating like the potter’s wheel. In the 
vast space the stars arc arranged like the body of an alligator. They 
move around Dhruva (i.c. the fixed centre). But it should be known that 
Dhruva is relatively fixed, for, in fact, it itself moves in the heavens. (Gf. 
Lini^a. 55. 10; Matsya rij.fi; For detail, Matsya. Ghs. 124-128. 



2-3. In the cast of the Meru, the city of Mahendra is situa- 
ted on the mountain Manasa; in the south the city of the son 
of the sun (i.e. Yama) ; in the west is the city of Vanina and 
in the north the city of Soma (Moon). In all these directions, 
the deities of the quarters are stationed. They are the cities 
of Amaravati, Sarhyamanl, Sukha and Vibha in order. 

4. Understand the movement of the sun when he has 
reached quarter over and above the guardians of the quarters 
in the course of his southern transit. 

5. In his southern transit the sun rushes on like an arrow 
that is shot. Taking the multitude of luminaries with him he 
revolves perpetually. 

6. O brahmins, when the lordly sun comes to the extremity 
of the city of Indra the sunrise is seen by all the people in Sarii- 
yamani. 

7. At the same time in Sukhavatl the sun is seen as at the 
close of the night. But in Vibha, the lord, the eye of the universe, 
i.e. the Sun sets. 

8. It has been mentioned by me that just as he absorbs 
waters in Amaravati so also he, the traverser of the firmament, 
after reaching Sariiyamani, Sukha®®^ and Vibha, absorbs 
waters. 

9-11. When there is afternoon in Agneyi (i.e. south-east), 
O brahmins, it is forenoon in the south-west. When it is terrible 
latter half of the night in the north-west, it is the earlier part 
of the night in the north-east. Similarly, when the sucker of 
waters (i.e. the sun) moves about in the middle of Puskara^^^ 
the mountain to the north of Manasa, he traverses a thirtieth 
part of the earth in a Muhurta (48 mts). Understand this 
number in yojanas travelled in a Muhurta. 

12-17. The speed of the noble-souled sun per Muhurta is 
three million one hundred and fifty thousand yojanas. When 
the sun moves to the southern quarter with this speed from 
the north through the middle of Puskara during his noithern 
transit and when he moves into the northern direction (from 

331. Sukha orSufa. It bthe capital of Varuna in the western direc- 
tion and is the same as Sus& of the ancient Achemenian empire in Iran. 

332. Puskara or sky, atmospheric region. Gf. Viiva cited in ST. 
‘‘Puflmram pahk^e vyomni**. 



Movemnts of Luminaries 


211 


the south) through the Manasa hill in the course of his southern 
transit, he, of great splendour, passes over one hundred and 
eighty mancjialas (degrees of space). The northern and southern 
transits are called the exterior and interior (parts of the celes- 
tial sphere). The sun traverses through these (180) mandalas 
everyday (both ways). Just as the end of the potters’ wheel 
whirls, more quickly (than its middle part), the lord (sun) tra- 
verses quickly in his southern transit.®^® 

18-19 Hence he traverses a greater area in a short time. 
In the course of Daksinayana (southern transit) the sun traver- 
ses to the extent of thirteen and a half stars (i.e. star spaces) 
during the day time in only twelve muhurtas; while during 
the night time of eighteen muhurtas he covers as many stars 
(star spaces ).^^^ 

20. Just as the middle of the potter’s wheel moves more 
slowly (than the end part) so also in the Uttarayana (northern 
transit) the sun moves slowly. 

21-25. Hence he traverses a smaller area in the course of a 
longer time. That chariot of the sun is occupied by Adilyas, 
sages, Gandharvas, Apsarases, Gramanis, Serpents, and Rak- 
sasas. The thousand-rayed sun emits his rays in front, behind, 
below and above. Thereby he illuminates the excellent 
assembly of Brahma. During the sandhyas (dawn and dusk) 
the brahmins and sages offer water-libations. With these 
waters, the sun kills the demons as and when they come near 
him and then goes ahead. 

333. The text here appears highly defective. Uttarayana or northern 
transit is the period from 22nd Dec. to 21st June and Daksinnyana or southern 
transit is from 22nd June to 21st Dec. During the former, the sun appears to 
travel from Capricorn to Cancer (through Aquanus, Pisces etc.) and during 
the latter from Cancer to Capricorn. But as the earth revolves round all the 
signs of the Zodiac once a day, the sun is said to travel over these, every 
day. The word mandala is used in the peculiar sense of degree as no other 
meaning will suit the context. 

334. A star space is 36o°27 or 13^° iS-j Star space is thus equal to 
180°. In other words the whole consists of 360® which is the space of 
the 27 constellations A^vini etc. The sun is visible at any time only on 
kalf of the sphere ( called day) . Hence half of the sphere is iSo'^ or '3 t 
star spaces. The reference here is to that day when the day time is shortest 
(i.e. 9 hours 36 minutes) and night longest (14 hours 24 minutes) which 
occurs in India in Kashmir. 



212 


Lingapurdna 


During the latter part of the uttarayana the day extends to 
eighteen inuhurtas, during which the sun moves slowly. 
He covers the extent of thirteen and a half stars during the night 
consisting of twelve muhurtas and as many stars during the 
day consisting of eighteen muhurtas. 

26. Just as the wheel whirls slowly at the nav(\, so also 
Dhruva whirls like the lump of clay in the middle. 

27-28. Those w’ho know the ancient lore, say that thirty 
muhurtas constitute a day and a night during which the sun 
traverses the space in between the two limits (i.c. the solstitial 
points). Just as the nave of the wheel of the porter remains 
there alone (i.e. without moving) so also Auttaiiapada (i.(‘. 
Dhruva) rotates (without moving) as the leader of th(‘ lumina- 
ries along with the planets. 

29-33. The group of the sages and the luminaries moves 
in accordance with his will (mind). Presidt‘d over by him the 
sun, along with the wind, takes up water from everywlitue. 

I’he son of Uttanapada attained the state of Dhruva, thanks 
to the favour of Visnu. Ii was obtained by Auttanapada on 
account of his father. 

The waters drunk by the sun penetrate the moon gradually 
and from the moon they drip down to the clouds. On being 
tossed about by the wind, the cluster of clouds causes shower 
on the earth. The word l)haskara (sun) is derived as follows: — 
Bhasayet tena bhiskarah — (He who illuminates is bhdskara). 
There is no destruction of water. The same water revolv(*s. 

34-38. For the welfare of creatures, the waters have been 
evolved by lord Siva as their ultimate resort. 'Fhe waters alone 
constitute BliQ, Bhuvah, Svah, anna (cooked rice; as well as 
nectar. The waters are the vital breaths of the worlds, the 
living beings, the worlds themselves. Of what avail is much 
talk ? The world of mobile and immobile beings is constituted 
by the waters. 

Lord Siva is the overlord of the waters. He is glorified as 
such. The universe is identical with him. What is theic lo 
wonder at in this ? The designation Nardyana was acquired by 
Visnu by the grace of the waters. Visnu is the abode of woilds 
and the waters constitute his abode. When the mobile and 
immobile beings arc being burned by the fire and tossed up 



Movement af Lummaries 


213 


as smoke by the wind, the vapours that go up urged by the 
wind form the clouds. 

39-40, Hence the mixtuie of smoke, fire and wind is 
called cloud. The word abhra (cloud) is derived as follows: 
“that which showers water.” The lord of the clouds is the 
thousand-cyed India. The cloud originating from sacrificial 
smoke is conducive to the welfare of the twice-boin. The cloud 
originating from the smoke of the forest lircs, is roiidui ive to 
the welfare of the fort'sts. 

41. O brahmins, the cloud originating from the smr»ke 
of the dead bodies brings about evil, 'fhe cloud oi igiiialing 
from the snv>ke of the fire during magic rites brings about the 
d*?struction of living beings. 

12. Thus there is weal or woeuntes the woiids due to ditlc- 
K'lil kinds of smokt's. Heiu(‘ a man sliall stifle the smoke 
arising Irom th(‘ black magic* riles. 

13, If a brahmin wi‘ie Xo jietform black niagu lilcs with- 
out covering up the smoke thcicof, he will ^\antonI\ bcfonu* 
the c'ausc of dcsti uclion ol the wotld. 

44. () men ol holy lites, (he < h)ucls that aic iciepiailcs 

ol v\ at<*i s shower watci s at thi‘ bclicst of ih(‘ wiiidfoi si\ inouilis 
for the wc'llaiv* ol tin* worlds. 

4") The* thunder pel tains to the wild: the ligliiiiing aiisi‘s 
tiom fiK*. O leading sages, ilie origin of snow lioin ihosc i luiuks 
is in thiee w'a\s. 

16-U?. The word abliia is deri\i*d thus:- na hlnasy.niti 
yaiah y^siin c thi‘\ do not become d(*stioyed . 

4'he woid inegha is del ived asiuehanru mc*ghah his called 
inegha l)c*i <inse it makes waters. 

The ('louds an* oi diiferent kinds, vi/., Kaslhru abas, Vai- 
lihcNas and Paksas. 

When kasthas (sacrificial ^^igs) soaked in ghee come into 
eonlarl willi file, .smoke is generated (and this smoke forrn.s the 
1 - louds). 'The origin of the second Ivpe of clouds is liom the 
exhah'd breath of Biahma. 1 he oiigin of the thiid type of 
clouds is from the wings c^f inouiilains chc^ppc’d oil by Indra. 

'I’lu* c louds arising from fires are auspicious and their place 
of rc\sort is Avaha (a particular region of wind). 

I9-33a. All tho.se clouds arising from the breath cTBraluna 



214 


Lingapurd^a 


arc in the layer of the wind Pravaha, while the clouds origi- 
nating from Paksa (wings)®*® — Puskara and others — shower 
water. They are respectively silent, noisy and destructive®**. 
The different clouds behave differently — Some rain in diowers; 
some have cool winds blowing for a long time, some are en- 
liveners ; some are weak being devoid of lightning and thunder. 
Some stay here and there in the sky within a kro^a (3 kms) 
from the surface of the earth. All the clouds clinging to the 
mountains are within half a kro£a. The clouds (called) 
meghas stay within a yojana from the surface of the earth. 
They shower much water on the earth because it is possible 
for them to do so. They are equipped with lightning. 

53b- 56. Their way of making downpours of three types 
has thus been narrated to you. The clouds of the Paksaja 
type originate from the clipped wings of the mountains. They 
are called kalpajas (born in the kalpas). These autumnal 
clouds shower at night towards the close of the kalpa bringing 
about destruction. 

When the PaJisaja, Puskara and other clouds shower water, 
everything becomes a vast sea of water. During the night, the 
lord lies down there. 

O leading brahmins, the smoke of the clouds arising from 
fire, from the exhaled breath and from the cliijpcd wings, is 
refreshingly enlivening. 

57. The showers of the clouds Paundr as, (i.e., those falling 
in the land of Pu^dra) are accompanied by lightning, are cool 
and hence conducive to plant (growth). They are ice-cool and 
look like the spray of waters from elephants’ trunks. 

58. The clouds called Gaiigas originate from the waters 
of Gahga. Through the wind in the Paravaha region these 
agitate the mountains, rivers and elephants of the quarters. 

59. The water separated from the clouds goes from one 
mountain to another. The wind Paravaha takes the cloud to 
the Himavat mountain. 

60. O brahmins, the remaining shower after crossing the 

335. Pu;karadyah : Puskara, Avarta, etc. cofaiprise a class of clouds 
that rain in torrents at the dissolution of the world. 

336. du$taiah-du?ta asa yesam, pralayakarali ST. of wicked inten- 
tion since they cause destruction of the world. 



ThesurCs chariot 


215 


Himavat approaches the sub-continent Bharata in order to 
make the other side flourish. 

61. The showers have been recounted now. They are of 
two types being conducive to the increase of two types of vege- 
tation. I shall mention them briefly according to my knowledge. 

62. The sun of great splendour, the lord with the eye of 
the universe is the creator of rains. O excellent brahmins, he 
is the great Isana, Siva himself. 

63-64. He alone is the splendour, power and strength, 
O brahmins. He is fame himself. He is the eye, ear, mind, 
Mrtyu, soul, Manyu, the quarters and the interstices, truth, 
order, discipline, wind, firmament, planets, the guardians of 
the quarters, Visnu, Brahma, Rudra and Mahesvara himself. 

65-68. This glorious thousand-rayed deity lord Siva is 
very auspicious. He has eight hands, a body semi- female and 
three eyes. He is the overlord of Devas. O brahmins, it is due 
to his favour alone that rain of various kinds occurs. The sun 
takes up water by his rays in order to give it back thousandfold. 
There is neither increase nor decrease of water, vf we consider 
it duly. The wind presided over by Dhruva withdraws the 
rain. It falls off the planet ^^n and spie*. ihrough the sphere 
of the stars. At the close of the movement, it re-enters the sun 
and is presided over by Dhruva. 


CHAPTER FIFTYFIVE 

7 hr i/1 r. >! ' 

1-2 I shiill describe the ot the sun, inoou 

and otlu'r plaiic'ts .is also him the sun iia\» is^s dniikiug up the 
'vaici.s. 


The Solar c.ir. Cf. Ch. i2-,. For tlu' i Ilrplads of the 

solai s\sfrni C.f. Ml\ A Mu<h’ pp. jii-ju The N\>(ein uiili the 

snn as llir cnurel point is lonceued as a tiuiiot wliuli moves npto 

both north and south ol the oipi.iioi \^V i4’ Miitsydy 


I 2 , 


'u). 



216 


LiHgapurana 


The chariot of the sun has been created by Brahma for a 
specific purpose. O leading brahmins, it is conceived through 
the parts of the year. 

3. The golden chariot of the sun is the abode of all Devas. 
It has a single wheel with five spokes and three naves. 

4. Its length and breadth is nine thousand yojanas. Twice 
that length is the distance between the driver’s box and the 
polcshaft. 

5. The horses arc stationed on the side where the wheel is. 
They arc unattached^^® but appear to be yoked. There are 
seven horses. They are evolved out of the vedic passages 
and metres. 

6. The horses are bound to the side c)f the wheel. T he 
axle is fitted to the polcshaft. The chariot revolves along with 
the wheel and the horses, and the polcshaft revolves along 
with the axle. 

7. The axle prompted by the polcshaft whirls along with 
the single wheel. It is the intelligent Dhruva (Pole star) 
that urges the luminaries by means of the wind and the lays 
(or by the wind which acts as reins) . 

* 8. There are two reins in the chariot. They arc united to 
the extremities of the yoke and the axle. The chaiiot tied by 
means of the reins to the yoke and the axle revolves by the grace 
of Dhruva. 

9. As the chariot whirls and moves along the fiimamcnt 
there shall be circles of bright lustre. The extremities of the 
yoke and the axle are to the right of the chariot. 

10. When the horses beyond the wheel*'*^® are pulled by 
Dhruva by means of reins, both of them (the yoke and axle) 
as also the reins follow the poleshaft that whirls. 

11-13. The extremity of the yoke and the axle of this 
chariot which has the steed of wind whirls in all directions .like 
a rope fixed to a nail. In the course of Uttarayana as the chariot 
moves about in the mandalas the reins increase in size ^i.e. 

338. asangaih--=antarik?agaih ST. those that move in the void. 

339. The seven horses of the solar car are the seven metres, viz., 
gayatrl, usnik, anu^tup, b^hatf, pahkti, tri^pip and jagati. 

3-^0. Vicakrasve — when the horses, wheel and Anina the driver (are 
secured by Dhruva) . 



The sun's chariot 


217 


are let loose). In the course of the Daksinayana, when the 
chariot moves about in the man^alas the reins are pulled 
inwards. In either case, the reins are operated by Dhruva 
and then the sun seated within, moves about in the mandalas. 

14-15 The distance between the two solstices consists 
of one hundred and eighty degrees. The sun moves about the 
mandalas externally as the reins are being released by Dhruva. 
He then encircles the mandalas and moves quickly. 

16. Devas and sages perpetually worship lord Bhaskara, who 
is himself Bhava and Is vara day and night. 

17. That chariot is occupied by Devas, Adilyas sages, 
Gandharvas, Apsarases as well as serpents, Raksasas, and 
Gramanis. 

18. These reside within the sun for two months in succession 
and develop and nourish the auspicious sun by means of their 
splendour. 

19. The sages eulogise the sun by means of hymns. The 
Gandharvas and Apsarases worship him by music and dance. 

20. The Gramanis, Yaksas and Bhutas hold the reins. 
The serpents bear the sun and Yatudhanas (Rak§asas) follow 
him. 

21. The Valakhilyas surround the sun from his rise to 
his setting and accompany him. In tliis manner these reside 
in the sun for two months in succession. 

22-23. O leading brahmins, the following twelve months 
constitute the human year: — Madhu (Caitra), Madhava 
(Vai^akha), Sukra (Jyestha), Suci (Asadha), Nabhas (Sra- 
vana), Nabhasya (Bhadrapada), Isa (Alvina) Crja (Karttika), 
Sahas (M^ga^irsa) Sahasya (Pausa), Tapas (Magha) 
and Tapasya (Phalguna). 

24. The (six) Rtus (seasons) are Vasantika (Spring), 
Graisma, (summer) Var?ika (rainy season) Sarad (autumn), 
Hima (early Winter) and Sl^ira (late Winter) 

25.44 

The seven groups accompany and abide in the sun, as follows : — 

1 . Devas are twelve in number. They nourish the sun by 
means of lustre. They are_: — ^Dhatr, Aryaman, Mitra, Varu^a, 



218 Lingapurdna 

Indra, Vivasvan, Pusan, Parjanya, Amsu, Bhaga, Tvastr 
and Visnu. 

2. The sages are twelve in number. They eulogise the 
sun by means of hymns. They are: — Pulastya, Pulaha, Atri, 
Vasis^ha, Ahgiras, Bhrgu, Bharadvaja, Gautama, Kasyapa. 
Kratu, Jamadagni and Visvamitra. 

3. The serpents are twelve in number. They bear the great 
lord Sun. They are : — Vasuki, Kahkanikara, Taksaka, 
Naga, Elapatra, Sahkhapala, Airavata (Iravan), Dhanahjaya 
Mahapadma, Karkotaka, Kambala and Asvatara. 

4. The twelve excellent Gandharvas worship the sun 
that takes in water by means of Songs. They arc: — Tumburu, 
Narada, Haha, Huhu, Viisvavasu, Ugrasena, Surugi, Paravasu 
Citrasena, Ornayu, Dhrtarastra and Suryavarcas. 

5. The twelve Apsarases worship the sun by their charming 
Tandava dance. They are: — Krtasthala of splendid face, 
the divine lady Punjikasthali of splendid hips, Menaka. Saha- 
janya, Pramloca of sweet smiles, Anumloca, Ghrtaci, Visvaci, 
UrvasI also known as Purvacitti, the gentle lady Tilottama 
and Rambha of lotus-like face. 

6. The twelve Gramanis hold the reins. They are: — 
Rathakrt, Rathaujas, Rathacitra, Subahu, Rathasvana, 
Varuna, Susena, Senajit, Tarksya, Aristanemi, Ksatajit and 
Satyajit. 

7. Then there are twelve Yatudhanas. Wielding their 
weapons they accompany the sun. They are: — Raksoheti, 
Praheti, Pauruseya, Badha, Sarpa, Vyaghra, Apa, Vata, 
Vidyut, Divakara, Brahmopeta the leading Raksasa and 
Yajnopeta. 

These seven groups of twelve members in each are proud 
of their position. 

Two from each of these seven groups occupy the sun for 
tw '‘0 months. The details are given below: 

45-48. 

During the Months oj Caitra-Vaimkha 


1. Twelve Devas 

2. Twelve Sages 

3. Twelve Serpents 


Dhatr and Aryaman 
Pulastya and Pulaha 
Vasuki and Kahkanikara 



The sun’s chariot 


219 


4. 


5. 

6 . 

7. 


1 . 

2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 
7. 


'I’welve Gandharvas 
Twelve Apsarases 
Twelve Gramanis 
Twelve Yatudhanas 
49-51. 


Tumburu and Narada 
Krtasthala and Punjikasthala 
Rathakrt and Rathaujas 
Raksoheti and Praheti 


During the Months oj Jye ft ha and Afddha 


Devas 

Sages 

Serpents 

Gandharvas 

Apsarases 

Gramanis 

Yatudhanas 

52-54. 


Mitra and Varuna 
Atri and Vasistha 
Taksaka and Naga 
Haha and Huhu 
Menaka and Sahajanya 
Subahu and Rathacitra 
Pauruseya and Badha 


During Sravana and Bhddrapada 

1 . Devas 

2. Sages 

3. Serpents 

4. Gandharvas 

5. Apsarases 

6. Gramanis 

7. Yatudhanas 
55-57. 

During ASvina and Kdrtlika 

1. Devas Pusa and Parjanya 

2. Sages Bharadvaja and Gautama 

3. Serpents Iravan and Dhanahjaya 

4. Gandharvas Suruci and Paravasu 

5. Apsarases Ghrtaci anil Visvaci 

6. Gramanis Susena and Senajit 

7. Yatudhanas Apa and Vata 

58-61 . 

During Mdrgatirsa and Paufa 

1. Devas Amsu and Bhaga 

2. Sages Kasyapa and Kratu 


Indra and V’ivasvan 
Ahgiras and Bhrgu 
Elapatra and Sahkhapala 
Vi^vavasu and Ugrasena 
Pramluca and Anumloca. 
Rathasvana and Varuna 
Sarpa and Vyaghra 



220 


Lingapurana 


3. Serpents Mahapadma and Karkotaka 

4. Gandharvas Citrasena and Urnayu 

5. Apsarases Urvasi and Purvacitti 

6. Gramanis Tarksya and Ari§tanemi 

7. Yatudhanas Vidyut and Divakara. 

62-65 

Duiing Mdgha and Phdlguna 


1 . Devas 

2. Sages 

3. Serpents 

4. Gandharvas 

5. Apsarases 

6. Gramanis 

7. Yatudhanas 


Tvastr and Visnu 
Jamadagni and Visvamitia 
Kambala and Aivataia 
Dhriarastia and Suiyavaicas 
Tilottama and Rambha 
Rathajit and Satyajit 
Brahmopcta and Yajhopcta 


66. Ihese deities occupy the sun for two months (in diflc- 
rent groups as mentioned above). I’hcsc twelve Hep tads aie 
the governing forces duiing the twelve months of th(' solar 
year. 

67-69. The deities nourish and develop the sun by their 
splendour. The sages eulogise the sun by the h>ninsol the 
Vedas. The Gandharvas and the Apsarases worship him by 
their music and dance. The Gramanis, Yaksas and Bhutas 
hold the reins; the serpents bear the sun, and Yatudhanas 
follow him; Valakhilyas lead the sun to his setting place after 
surrounding him at the time of his rise. 

70-71. The sun is nourished by the splendour of all these. 
The sun blazes in accordance with their splendour, penance, 
yogic power, Mantras, Dharmas and strength. These slay 
in the sun in groups, for two months each. 

72-73. The sages, Devas, Gandharvas, Serpents, groups 
of Apsarases, Gramanis, Yak$as, and Yatudhanas mainly — these 
blaze, shower rain, illuminate, blow, create and remove the 
evil activities of living beings. They are glorified as such. 

74. They destroy the merits of the wicked and the sins 
of good persons in certain cases. 

75. They are seated in an aerial chariot that is divine, 
that has the speed of the wind and that can go wherever it wills. 
These move ahead along with the sun throughout the day. 



Description of the Moon 


221 


76. They shower rain. They blaze, they delight. O Sages, 
they protect all the living beings and firmament from destruc- 
tion. 

77. They take pride and identify themselves with their 
positions in all the manvantaras of the past, present and future. 

78. These seven groups live in the sun in groups of fourteen 
in all the fourteen manvantaras. 

79. O leading sages, the activities of the intelligent 
lord of Devas have been recounted, some in brief and some in 
detail, in accordance with what 1 have heard and how they had 
happened. 

80. These seven groups of twelve deities in each are those 
who take pride in their positions and identify themselves with 
them. They reside in the sun for two months in the above 
order. 

81. Thus the sun, the harbinger of the day moves ahead 
quickly in a single-wheeled chariot®** drawn by seven green 
imperishable horses. 

82. He whirls day and night in his chariot which has a 
single wheel. He traverses in heaven over the seven continents 
and oceans with the help of seven groups. 


CHAPTER FIFTYSU 

Description of the Moon 

Suta said : — 

1. The Moon traverses the stars stationed in its orbit. 
His chariot has three wheels and the horses are on either side. 

2. The chariot is fitted with three wheels, each with hund- 
red spokes. The horses are white in colour and ten in number. 
They are divine and stout. They are not connected with the 
yoke. They have the speed of the mind. 

3. The moon traverses in this chariot along with Devas 

341 . ekacakra — The single wheel of the solar chariot is represented 
by the year (saihvatsara) . 



222 Lingapurdna 

and Pitrs. It has while rays in the form of sparkling water 
particles. 

4-6. The moon increases in force in the beginning of the 
bright half and is stationed in the way of the sun. Day by dc^y 
it gets refilled till the end of that half. The sun develops 
and nourishes it. It is drunk up bv Devas during the daik 
half.^**^ It is being drunk in continuity for fifteen days by Devas. 
The sun refills it part by part by his single ray Susnmna : 
Thus the physical body of the moon is developed and nennished 
by the vigour of the sun. 

7-lOa. On the full moon day it appears with its full white 
disc. Beginning with the second and ending with the fourteenth 
day in the dark half, Devas drink up the moon that was nouri- 
shed and developed day by day during the bright half. They 
drink the watery honey and nectar that had b('en arcurnula- 
ted in the course of half a month, thanks to the splendour ol the 
sun. They sit near the moon for a single night on the lull 
moon day for drinking up the nectar from the moon, along 
with the sages and Pitrs. 

10b- 13. The digits of the moon facing the sun get dimi- 
nished daily, being drunk up from the beginning to the end ol 
the dark half. Thirtysix thousand three hundred and thirty 
three Devas drink the moon. After the moon has been drunk 
for half a month, day by day by them, tlK)se excellent Devas 
go away on the new moon day. On the ne w rnoc^n day' the 
Pitrs occupy the Moon. 

14-18. When the fifteenth part remains as the Iasi digit, 
the groups of Pitrs occupy this in the afternoon. For the dura- 
tion of two kalas (units of time) they drink up the remaining 
digit — the nectar of svadha that has oozed out ol the. lays on 
the Amavasya day. After drinking the nectar they attain lull 
satiety for the v\h )le of month and then go away. By the time 
the remaining digit of the moon drunk by the* Pitrs gels dissol- 
ved, a fifteenth part is replenished. The increase and the 
decrease of the moon in the beginning of each lortnight is on 
the sixteenth day.*^"* The increase in the moon is thus due to 
the sun. 


342. Gf. sisumnab suryarasmis candramri gandharvahy .TS 3.4.7. i . 

343. $odasyain=on the sixteenth, i.c. on the new-moon day. 



223 


CHAPTER FIFTYSEVEN 

Movements of the Planets^^^ 


Suta said ; — 

1-5. The chariot of the son of the Moon (i.e. Budha — 
Meicury) is fitted with eight horses, tawny-coloured and very 
Splendid. It has the characteristics of water and fire. 

The chariot ol Sukra (Venus) the preceptor of Daityas is 
fitted with ten stout horses of different colours. It is earthen in 
nature. 

The chariot of Bhauma (Mars) is golden, splendid and 
ntted with eight horses. 

The horse of Jiva (Jupiter) is also golden and fitted with 
eight horses. 

The chariot of Manda”^^ (Saturn) is made of iron. It is 
fitted with ten black horses and is watery in nature. 

rhe chariots of Rahu and Ketu are fitted with eight horses 
each. All these planets are bound to Dhruva (Pole Star) 
by reins which are of the form of wind. Made to whirl by 
the Pole star they move ahead. 

6. There are as many rays as there are stars. All of them 
are bound to the Pole star. While revolving (round it) they 
make it revolve also. 

7. The stars and the luminaries, urged by the circular 
gusts of wind, move like fire brands. Since the wind bears 
the luminaries, it is called Pravaha. 

8. Along with the planets and constellations, the sun and 
stars occupy the firmament in a circle looking upwards and 
sideways. 

9. Presided over (i.e. controlled) by Dhruva they circum- 
ambulate Dhruva. They move on in the firmament to see 
Lord Dhruva that acts like the pivot. 

344. Chapters "jG- 5 7 describe the movement of the planets —Soma, 
Budha, Mangala, Bihaspati, Sukra, Sani and Rahu 

345. alata-cakra-vat : The imagery of the wheel implies a fixed 
centre (medhibhutarh dhruvaih divi, ch. 57*9) to which the whole 
system of moving stars is secured by certain pulls, spoken of as winds. 
(vata-ra4mibhih, ibid, V. 5; Matsya 125.7; vatanikamayair bandhaih.) 



224 Lingapuratia 

10. The diameter of the sun is nine thousand Yojanas. 
Its circular area is three times this. 

1 1 . The extent of the moon is twice that of the Sun. Rahu 
assumes a size equal to them and moves ahead beneath them. 

12. The abode of Rahu is full of darkness and is the third 
(one In size) because it is evolved out of the circular shadow 
of the earth. 

13. The diameter, the circumference and the distance in 
yojanas of Bhargava (Venus) is a sixteenth part of that of 
the moon. 

14-18. Brhaspati (Jupiter) is of three-fourths of the size 
of Venus. Mars and Saturn are three-fourths of the size of 
Brhaspati. Budha (Mercury) is three-fourths of their size in 
extent and circumference. The stars and constellations, that 
have a body are equal to Budha in extent and circumference. 
The knower of truth must note that the stars that are in conjun- 
ction with the moon are ordinarily known as Rksas. The spheres 
of the comparatively smaller stars extend to five, four, three or 
two yojanas. Over all these there are still clusters of smaller 
stars which extend only to two hundred yojanas. There is 
none smaller than this. 

19-20. Over and above these starry spheres are the three 
planets viz., Saturn, Jupiter euid Mars, which travel at a great 
distance from them. They should be known as slow-moving 
ones. 

There are four other great planets beneath them, viz. 
the Sun, Moon, Mercury and Venus. They traverse quickly. 

21. Altogether there are as many crores of stars as there 
are constellations. They too are stationed in the orbit of con- 
stellations due to the restraining force of Dhruva. 

22-26. The sun that has seven horses has an upper and a 
lower position by turns. When the sun is in his northern transit 
and when the moon on the full moon nights, appears quickly 
because its position is above, but the rays are not very clear, 
the moon (?) then is in the southern orbit that is lower. 
The sun covered by the line of the earth on Full moon and 
New Moon days is seen at the usual time, but it sets quickly. 
Hence on the New- Moon day the moon is in the northern orbit. 
It is invariably not seen in the southern path on account of 



Mouernents of the Planets 


225 


the movement of the planets and because it is enveloped by 
the shadow of the sun. On the equinotical days the sun and 
the moon rise and set simultaneously.^^® 

27-28. In the northern orbits they rise and set without 
any di (Terence in time on new moon and full moon days. They 
should lh(*n be known as following the groups of luminaries. 
When the sun is in the southern transit, it moves ahead beneath 
all other planets. 

29. Keeping his sphere wider the moon revolves above it 
(the sun). All the groups ol constellations move above the moon. 

30. Mercury is above all constellations; Venus is above 
Mercury. Mars is above Venus and Jupiter is above Mars. 

31. Saturn is above it. Above Saturn is the sphere of 
seven s*tges (Great B('ar) and Dhruva(Pole Star) is stationed 
above the seven sages. 

32-39. By knowing the region of Visuu, beyond all these, 
one is liberated from sin. Two hundred thousand Yojaiias 
above Constellations, stars, the planets — Sun and Moon which are 
united with divine refulgence, move ahead day and night in 
due order. They cornc into contact w’ith the constellations 
everyday. Hence they are sometimes stationed below, some- 
times above and sometimes in u straight line. They glance at 
the subjects (below) simultaneously when in conjunction or 
when separated. 

I'hcre are six seasons but of five distinct features. They 
overlap one another and their combination should be under- 
stood \yy learned men without overlapping. O brahmins, thus 
the movement ol planets has been succinctly mentioned in 
the case of the sun and other planets as I have heard and obser- 
ved. The thousand-rayed lord Sun was crowned as the over- 
lord of planets by the lotus-born Brahma, like Guha who was 
crowned by Rudra. 

Hence, Ibr the realization of purpose and (to ward ofl' 
evils) at the lime of harassment of the planets and the sun, 
the worship of the planets should be pursued by good men, 
Ofi'erings should be made to lire in accordance with the in- 
junctions of the §astias. 

34fi. Gf. Visnu, cited in ST. ^ ^ I 



226 


Lingapuidna 


CHAPTER FIFTYEIGHT 

Coronation of the Sun and others 


fhe sage^ said : 

1. Tell us now how Brahma Prajapati, who is the soul of 
all, crowned as overlords, Devas, Daityas and others. 

Suta said: 

2. Lord Brahma crowned the Sun as the overlord of 
planets. Brahma, Prajapati, crowned Soma (Moon) as the 
lord of constellations and medicinal herbs. 

3. (He crowned) Varuna as the lord of the Waters; 
the leading Yaksa^^^(Kubera)as the lord of riches; Visnu as 
the lord of Adi ty as; and Pavaka (fire) as the lord ofVasus. 

4. (He crowned) Daksa as the lord of Prajapatis; Indra as 
the lord of Maruts; Prahlada, the leading Daitya as the over- 
lord of Daityas and Danavas. 

5. (He crowned) Dharma as the overlord of the Pitrs; 
Nirrti as the overlord of Raksasas; Rudra as the overlord of 
Pa^us (Individual Souls) and Nandin, the leader of Ganas,®^® 
as the overlord of Bhutas (goblins). 

6. (He crowned) Virabhadra as the overlord of heroes; 
Bhayankara (the terrible one) as the overlord of Pisacas 
(ghosts); Gamunda who is bov/ed to by Devas as the sovereign 
of Mothers. 

7. (He crowned) lord Nilalohita, lord of the chiefs of 
Devas, as the overlord of Rudras; the elephant-faced lord 
Vinayaka, born of Vyoman®^® as the overlord of obstacles. 

8. (He crowned ) goddess Uma as the sovereign of women; 
goddess Sarasvati as the sovereign of speech; Visnu as the 
overlord of the wielders ol Maya and himself**®® as the overlord 
oi the worlds. 

9. (He crowned) Himavat as the overlord of the moun- 
tains; the Ganges (born of sage Jahnu) as the sovereign of the 
rivers; and ocean the storehouse of the waters as the lord of 
all seas. 

347. yaksa-pungavam : chief of the Yaksas, i.e. Kubera. 

348. gana-nayakam : read nandinam gana for nandiaaih gana. 

349. vyomajam : son of Siva, i.e. GaneSa. 

350. svatmant^m : his own self, i.e. Brahma. 



ni 

Furni of iolar rays 

10-12. Brahma crowned the Plaksa and AivaVtha ai the 
lords of trees; he made Citraratha the lord of Gandliaivav^ 
Vid\idharas and Kinnaras; VasuJci of terrible vigour a.' the 
lord of Serpents and Taksaka of terrible vigour as the lord of 
Sarpas (Cobras;. lie made the leading elephant Airavata of 
terrible valour the lord of elephants. He made Garuda the lord 
of birds. He made Uccaissravas (the horse of Indra) the king 
of horses. 

13. He made the lion the lord of animals; the bull the lord 
of the kine and Sarabha (the fabulous eight-footed beast i the 
lord of lions; tlic incomprehensible Guha the lord of all (om- 
mandcrs-in-chief and Lakullsa the lord of Srutis and Smrljs. 

14. He made Sudharman, Sahkhapfila, Ketuman and 
Hemaroman the overlords of all quarters in order. 

15. (He crowned) Prthu as the lord of the earth; 
Mahesvara as the lord of all; the bull-bannered omniscient 
lord isahkara as the overlord among the four deities. 

16. By the grace of Siva, the lord crowned these* in due 
order. After ci owning them at first the lord of the worlds 
felt fully satisfied. 

17. O leading sages, this has been mentioned to you in 
detail: These persons of special charai teristics were all crown- 
ed by Lord Brahma the source of origin of the univeise. 


CHAPTER FIFTYNINE 

The form of solar rays 


Sul a uiid : 

1. On hearing this, the sages Ijccamc overw helmed w’ith 
doubts and again asked Romaharsana. 


The four guardian deities, viz. Sudharm.Jii, Sankhapala, Ketu- 
iTidti ,IIeinaroman were consecrated in their respective quarters. Cf. Visnu 

=^5r?51>T U cited in -ST. 

^• 32 . caturmurtisu : in four forms, viz. Vihva, Pr.xjha, Taijasa, and 
Turiya. 



228 


Lingapurdna 


The sages said : 

2. O Suta, most excellent among the speakers, kindly tell 
us in detail the exact nature of the luminaries briefly. 

3. On hearing their words, Suta of great concentration 
and purity spoke these weighty words in order to clear their 
doubts. 

4. In this matter I shall tell you what has already been 
stated by highly intelligent persons^’"*^ with tranquil wisdom. I 
shall recount the movement of the sun and the moon. 

5. I shall tell you how the sun, the moon and other planets 
are the abodes of Devas. Thereafter, I shall mention the three 
types of fires and their origin. 

6-9. The three types of fire are : the divine fire, the ele- 
mental fire and the terrestrial fire. 

When the night of Brahma born of the unmanifest reached 
the stage of dawn, this visible universe was one that had not been 
analyzed. It was still enveloped in the nocturnal darkness. 
When the worlds were still in the state of destruction, when a 
fourth of the period still remained, the self-born lord, he who 
achieves all the affairs of the worlds, moved about like a glow- 
worm, with a desire to manifest. At the beginning of the world, 
he created Agni (heat) in combination with earth and water. 
The Lord gathered these together to make it shine and then 
divided it into three. 

10-1 1. The fire in the world of mankind is called Parthiva. 
The fire that blazes in the sun is called Suci. The fire born of 
lightning is known as Abja (i.e. originating from the water 
portion) I shall now mention their characteristics. There are 
three types of fires with water within, viz., Vaidyuta, Jathara 
(gastric) and Saura (Solar). 

12-13. Hence, imbibing water through his rays the sun 
blazes (further). The Abja (waterborri— lightning) fire even 
when immersed in water is not quenched by it. The fire that is 

353. mahaprajnaih : by the most intelligent men, i.e. by Vyasa and 
others. 

354. Threefold fire : (i) celestial, as represented by the sun, (ii) 
atmospheric, as symbolized by the lightning, (iii) terrestrial, which is 
used for the sacrificial and household purpose. Fire is called Pavaka on 
earth, Suci in heaven and Vaidyuta in firmament. 



Form of solar rays 


229 


within the stomach of men is not put out by water. The gastric 
fire emits flames (i.e. heat) , but is devoid of lustre. 

14-19. When the sun is setting, the solar lustre becomes 
a circular mass without heat and enters the fire at night through 
his rays. Hence the light of fire is seen even from a distanc<* at 
night. The heat is transmitted to the sun from fire, when the 
sun rises. Only partially does the terrestrial fire enter the sun. 
Hence the fire continues to blaze. Thus the fire element in both 
terrestrial and ^olar fires contains heat and light. They penetrate 
mutually and develop each other. In the northern and south- 
ern hemispheres of the earth, the fire and the ^un thus dr\clop 
each other. The sun rises up from the watci'* and rc-enter'i them. 
Therefore, due to this exitTrom and into waters) by dav and by 
night, the waters become copper-coloured. Again when tlie sun 
sets, the day (i e. daylight) enters the waters. Hence at night, 
the waters are seen shining white. 

20. By means of this activity he enters waters peipetually, 
during day and night at the time of rising and setting both in 
the southern and northern hemispheres. 

21. The sun who Idazes, imbibing the waters thiough his 
rays has the mixture of earthly and fiery particles within it It 
is called divine fire. 

22-23 This fire (i e. sun) has a thourand feet (i e. rays). 
It is like a circular pot. It takes up waters from vaiious vater- 
resorts through the thousand tubular ravs. It takes waters 
from the rivers, seas, wells, clouds etc. It takes up both mobile 
and immobile waters i.e. those of the canals and tanks. 

21-25. He has a thousand ravs emitting snov^^ rain and 
heat. Of them four hundred tubular rays have forms of variegated 
colours. They shower rain. Their collective name is Amrta and 
the several individual names are Bhajanas, Malyas, Ketanas 
and Patanas. 

26-27a. The tubular rays carrying and emitting snow are 
three hundred in number. The several names of these rays 
emitting snow are Re<as, Meghas, Vatsyas and Hladinis. Their 
collective name is Ciandrabha and thev are yellow in lustre. 

3f,5. Fire on earth is the symbol of heat and fire in heaven is the symbol 
of light and both are interdependent. Cf. Matsya. 128.12. 5 rT*F 152 T ^ cPflW 



230 


Lingapurdna 


27b-28a. Suklah, Kakubhah and Visvabhrt arc the indivi- 
dual names of the rays emitting heat; their collective name 
is also Sukla. 

28b-29. The moon sustains human beings, Pitrs and Devas 
through them ( the above rays) 

He propitiates human beings through the medicinal herbs; 
the Pitrs with Svadha and Devas through nectar. 

30-3 la. During spring and summer the sun blazes by his 
three hundred rays. During the rainy season and Autumn he 
showers rains through the four hundred tubular rays. During 
the early and the late winter he discharges snow through his 
three hundred rays. 

31b-35a. The twelve suns are Indra, Dhatr, Bhaga, Pusan, 
Mitra , Varuna, Aryaman, Ariisu, Vivasvan, Tvastr, Paijanya 
and Visnu. 

Varuna is the sun in Magha; Pusan in the Phalguna. In 
the month of Caitra, AihSu is the sun. Dhatr is the sun in 
Vaisakha. In Jyesjha Indra is the sun. In Asadha, the sun is 
Aryaman. Vivasvan is the sun in Sravana. In Bhadra the sun 
is Bhaga. Parjanya is the sun in Asvina. Tvastr is the sun In 
Kaittika. In Margasirsa Mitra is the sun and Visnu is the sun 
in Pausa. 

35b-38. While performing the duty of the sun, Varuna has 
five thousand rays; Pusan six thousand rays; Aihsu seven 
thousand rays; Dhatr eight thousand rays; Indra nine thousand 
rays; Vivasvan ten thousand rays; Bhaga eleven thousand rays; 
Mitra seven thousand rays; Tvastr eight thousand rays; Arya- 
man ten thousand rays; Parjanya nine thousand rays; Visnu 
scorches the earth with six thousand rays. 

39-40. In the spring the sun is tawny coloured; in the 
summer he has the lustre of gold. During the rainy season the 
colour ot the sun is white. In the autumn the sun is grey- 
coloured. In the early winter the sun is copper-coloured and in 
the late winter he is red in colour. 

356. The numerous solar rays have their functional division. For 
instance, four hundred of them function for creating rain (V. 24-26), three 
hundred for heat (V.28) and three hundred for cold ^V.26}. These rays 
are distributed over the seasons and bring about the changes of cold, 
heat and rain. 



Solar Sphere 


231 


41-45. The sun infuses strength into the medicinal herbs; 
he propitiates the Pitrs by means of Svadha rays; he instils 
nectar into the immortal beings. Thus, he imparts three things 
to the three groups. 

The thousand rays of the sun serve the purpose of the world. 
Reaching the earth they assume different forms by emitting 
snow, lain and heat. Thys the sphere of the sun is white and 
is named after him. He is the support and source of origin of 
the stars, planets and the moon. 

It should be known that the moon, stars and planets are all 
born of the sun. The moon is the lord of constellations and the 
left eye of the lord. The right eye of the lord is the sun himself. 
'I’he word uayana (eye) is derived from y'ni — “that which leads 
(nayati) the people to this world.” 


CHAPTER SIXTY 

The Solar Sphere 


Suta said'. 

1. It is cited'*^’ that the sun is fire and the moon is water. 
The other five planets are known as lords who move about as 
they please. 

2. Understand the source of origin of the remaining planets 
which is clearly being recounted now. It is cited that the planet 
Mars is Skanda (Karttikeya) the commander-in-chief of the 
army of Devas. 

3-5. People of perfect knowledge say that Mercury is lord 
Narayana. O excellent brahmins, the great planet Sanaiicara, 
the slow-moving Saturn is Yama, the lord of the worlds. The 
preceptors of Devas and Asuras are the great planets Venus 
and Jupiter with (refulgent) rays. They are mentioned as the 
sons of Prajapati.^**® 


357 


For the celestial fire as identical with the sun, cf. apT ^ 

: cited in ST. 

^ c ■ e\' 

358. Sukra (Venus) and Brhaspati (Jupiter), the preceptors of Dana- 
vas and Devas are respectively the sons of patriarchs Bhrgu and Ahgiras. 



232 Lingapurdna 

There is no doubt that the three worlds have their source 
in the sun. 

6-8. The entire universe including Devas, Asuras and 
human beings originates from him. He is the lustre of all lumi- 
naries and the universal refulgence. The refulgence of Rudra, 
Indra, Upendra, the moon, the leading brahmins, the fire and 
the heaven-dwellers comes ftoin the sun. He is the soul of 
all. He is the lord of all worlds. He alone is Mahadeva, Praja- 
pati and the lord of the three worlds. He is the original great 
deity. Everything originates from him and dissolves in him. 

9. The existence and non-existence of the worlds origi- 
nated from the sun formerly. O brahmins, this refulgent sun 
of great lustre is an incomprehensible planet. 

10-11. All these units of time begin from him and end in 
him again and again, viz., ksanas (moments), muhurtas a unit 
of 48 mts.), days, nights, fortnights, months, years, seasons and 
yugas. Hence without the sun there is no reckoning ol‘ time. 

12-15. Without Kala (time) there is no order, no initia- 
tion, no daily ritual. How can there be the division of the sea- 
sons? Whence arc these flowers, roots and fruits ? Whence is 
the, outcome of plants ? How can there be the different kinds 
of grass and medicinal plants ? The dealings of the creatures in 
heaven and here too will be non-existent without the sun who is 
the form of Rudra, the scorcher of the universe. He alone is 
time, fire, Dvadasatman (one having twelve forms) and Praja- 
pati. O excellent brahmins, he scorches the three worlds includ- 
ing the mobile and immobile beings. He is the mine of splend- 
our. He is all in all, the whole set of worlds. 

16. Adopting the excellent path, he scorches the entire 
universe from the sides, from above and from below in the 
course of nights and days. 

17. If a bright lamp is hung in the middle of the houSe, 
it dispels darkness from the sides, the portion above and the 
portion below, at the same time. 

18. In the same manner the thousand-rayed sun, the king of 
planets, the lord of the'universe, illuminates the entire universe 
by means of his rays. 

19. Seven rays, that are the source of origin of the planets 



Situation of the planets 


233 


are the most excellent ones among the thousand rays mention- 
ed by me before.*'®® 

20-21. They arc Susumna, Harikesa, VHvakarman, Visva- 
vyaras, Sannaddha, Sarvavasu and Svarat. 

The sun’s ray Susumna makes the southern region flour- 
ish.^®® Susumna is glorified as the ray that moves about above, 
below and on the sides. 

22-26. Harikesa which is in front (in the east) is glorified 
as the source of origin of constellations.*^®®^ In the south, the ray 
Visvakarma develops Budha (Mercury) . The ray Vi^vavyacas 
which is in the west (behind) is the source of origin of Sukra 
(Venus). The ray Saniiaddha is the source of origin of Mars. 
The lay Sarvavasu is the source of origin of Brhaspati (Jupiter). 
The ray Svarat nourishes ^5anaiscara (Saturn) . Thus it is due to 
the power of the sun that the constellations, planets and stars 
are seen in the heaven. This entire universe is sustained by him. 
The constellations aie called Naksatras. The word is derived 
from y'ksi with the prohibitive particle ‘na’ i.e. na kslyante 
(i.e. those which do not perish). 


CHAPTER SIXTYONE 

The situation of the planets 

1-2. All these are the abodes which blaze by means of 
solar rays. The constellations and stars are the abodes to be 
attained by merits. They are called Tarakas because they 
enable people to cross the ocean of worldly existence and 
also because they are white. 

3. 'riie sun is called Aditya because he takes up the divine 
and terrestrial splendours as well as the nocturnal darkness. 

3f)(). The principal seven rays, Susumna etc., of the thousand-rayed 
sun arc the source of energy and movement of stars, planets and constella- 
tions. For instance, the solar ray, called Susumna, causes the movement of 
the moon. 

3G0. dak$inam ra^im i.e. the moon. The Lihgapurana describes vividly 
the respective functions of the seven solar rays. 

360a. Each planet or star has its respective sphere (deva-sthana) in 
which its influence reigns supreme. These spheres are established by the 
Creator in the beginning of a kalpa and they last till the dissolution of that 
kalpa. 



234 


Lingapmana 


4. The root ‘su’ is used in two meanings to extract juice 
or to flow. Since the sun extracts refulgence and makes water 
flow, it is called Savitr. 

5. The root ‘cadi’ from which the word Gandra is derived 
means ‘to delight’. It implies wluteness, chillness, and nectarine 
nature of the moon (Gandra). 

6. The divine discs of the sun and the moon are refulgent. 
They move in the sky. They are white and are of the nature of 
fire and water. They are splendid and they resemble a circular 
pot. 

7. The disc of the moon is of the nature of dense water. 
The disc of the sun is white and is of the nature of dense fire. 

8. Devas reside in constellations, sun and planets. They 
live everywhere in these abodes in all the manvantaras. 

9. Hence the planets are abodes named after their respec- 
tive planets. The Sun entered the abode Saura. The Moon 
entered the abode Saumya. 

10. Venus entered the abode §aukra. Jupiter, the valorous, 
with sixteen rays entered the abode Brhad (big). The Mars 
entered the abode Lohita pertaining to Mars. 

11. The Saturn entered the abode SanaiScara. The Mer- 
cury entered the abode Baudha. The evil planet Rahu entered 
the abode Svarbhanu (named after him) . 

12. The deities of constellations entered all these abodes. 
These luminaries are the abodes of meritorious souls. 

13. These abodes have been created by the self born deity. 
They began to function at the beginning of kalpa and they 
stay until all the living beings are dissolved. 

14. In all the manvantaras they alone are the abodes of 
Devas. These deities who have identified themselves with the 
abodes occupy these divine abodes again and again. 

15-20. They occupy these abodes along with Devas of the 
past, present and future. In this current manvantara the 
planets are moving about in aerial chariots. 

In the Vaivasvata manvantara the sun is Vivasvan the son 
ofAditi; the lustrous lord Moon the son of sage Atri; lord 
Sukra, Bh^gava, is known as the priest of Asuras. 

The preceptor of Devas, the shining one of massive splen- 
dour, is the son of Angiras (Brhaspati). Budha (Mercury) is 



Situation of the planets 


235 


the charming son of a sage. Saturn is the ugly son of Vivasvan 
born of Saihjiia. Agni was born of Vikesi^®^ as the youthful son 
of I..ohitarchis. The constellations named Naksatra and Rkfa 
are Dak$ayanls (daughters of Daksa). Rahu is the son of 
Simhika. He is an Asura causing distress to living beings. 

21. Thus the constellations and planets in the sun and the 
moon as also their abodes and the various deities occupying 
them have all been mentioned. 

22. The fiery abode Saura belongs to the thousand-rayed 
Vivasvan. The abode of the snow-rayed moon is watery and 
white. 

23. The abode of Budha (mercury) is watery, dark- 
-'oloured and charming. The region of Sukra (Venus) is also 
watery but white with sixteen rays. 

24. The abode of Bhauma (Mars) is reddish and it has 
nine rays. The abode of Bfhaspati (Jupiter) is yellow with 
sixteen rays and is very large. 

25. The abode Sani (Saturn) is black with eight rays. The 
abode of Svarbhanu (Rahu) is gloomy and is a place of great 
distress to living beings. 

26. All the stars should be known as the abodes of sages 
with one ray each. They are the resorts of men of meritorious 
renown and are white in colour. 

27. They are of the nature of dense water (snow). They 
were created in the beginning of the kalpa. Thanks to the 
contact with the rays of the sun they have a shining appear- 
ance. 

28. The diameter of the sun is nine thousand yojanas. 
The extent of its circular surface is three times that. 

29. The extent of the moon is twice that of the sun. Rahu 
assumes a form equal to both of them and moves about beneath 
them. 

30. The third massive abode of Rahu is dark and dreary. 
It is created in the form of a circle out of the shadow of the 
earth. 

361. Vikcii*: The graha Bhauma (MaAgala) born of Vikeii is here 
called agni (hre). Gf. agnir mardha(RV. 8.44.16) wherein Bhauma is called 
agni. Vikeil is one of the eight wives of the eight-formed (aftamurti) 
Rudra, others becalS, Svavarcal& 'Uma, SivS, Svah&, Dik, Dikfa and 
Rohini. 



236 


Lingapurdna 


31-3 2a. Setting out from the sun during the parvan days 
it goes to the mooii.^®- Again during the solar parvan days it 
goes to the sun from the moon. Since Rahu pushes and prompts 
the sun in the heaven it is called Svarbhanu. 

32b-33. The diameter, cirrumferenre and distance in terms 
of yojanas of Venus is a sixteenth part of that of the moon. 
Jupiter is three fourths of the size of Venus. 

34. Mars and Saturn are a fourth less than Jupiter. In 
extent and width Mercury is a fourth less than these two. 

3j. Th(‘ forms of those constellations and stars that are 
embodied are equal to Mercury in width and circular area. 

36-39. The constellations that aie in conjunction with the 
moon are ordinarily known as Rksas. The spheres of th(‘ com- 
paratively smaller stars are five, four, three or two yojanas. 
Over all these there arc clusters of still smaller stars whic h extend 
to only half a yojana in width. There is none smaller than this. 
Over and above tlu'se starry spheres are the thrc(‘ planets which 
move at a great distance from them. Idiey should be known 
as slow moving ones. The speed of these has already been 
mentioned in due order. 

40-45. All the planets arc born of constellations. O cxrellent 
sages, the sun, the son of Aditi, the first among the planets, is 
born of the constellation Visakha. The lustrous son of Dhaima, 
lord Vasu, Soma (moon), the cool-rayed lord of the night, is 
born of the constellation Krttika. The sixtecn-rayed son ol 
Bhrgu, Sukra (Venus) who is the most excellent among the 
stars and planets after the sun, is born of the constellation 
Tisya. The planet Brhaspati (Jupiter) , the twelve-rayed son of 
Ahgiras, the preceptor of the universe, is born of the cons- 
tellation PQrvaphdlguni. 

The planet (Mars) son of Prajapati, the nine-rayed red 
bodied planet is born of the constellation Pfirvasadha. 

The son of sun, the seven-rayed Saturn, was born of llie 
constellation Revati. 

46-47. 'Phe five-rayed planet Budha (Mercuiy) the son of 
the moon is born of the constellation Dhanistha. 

iSikhi (Ketu) the great planet that destroys all, who is dark 
in nature, who is the son of Mrtyu the god ot Death and who is 

362. Read Somam for samam. 



Situation of the planets 


237 


the cause of destruction of the subjects, is born of the constel- 
lation Aslesa. Daksa’s daughters were born of the constellations 
which have their own names. 

48. Dark-sphered Rahu who is full of Tamasaic vigour, 
is the planet that suppresses the moon and the sun. He is born 
of the constellation Bharani 

49-50. It should be noted that the planets beginning with 
Bhargava (Venus) arc known as star-planets (i.e planets re- 
sembling stars). Persons who are affected by afflictions from their 
birthday stars are liberated from that defect by devotion to their 
respective planets. Among all the planets the first one, it is said, 
is Aditya (Sun). 

51 ■54'. Among all the star-planets Sukra is the first. Among 
all the Ketus (flaglike Meteors) the smoky one is the first. (It 
is usually called Dhumaketu) . Dhruva is the first among the 
planets distributed in all the four quarters. Among /cons- 
tellations the first is Sravistha®*®. Among the Ayanas (transits) 
the Uttarayana (northern transit) is the first. Among the five®** 
years the first is Samvatsara. Among the seasons it is the late 
winter (:§isira) . Among the months it is Magha. Among the 
fortnights it is the bright half and among Tithis it is Pratipat 
(first day). Among the division of days and nights, the day is 
the first. The first of the muhurtas is that the deity of which 
is Rudra. 

55-58. Ksana has the nimesa as its first unit of time, O 
excellent ones among the knowers of time. Beginning with the 
constellation Dhanistha and ending with Sravana shall be a 
yuga comprising of five years. The universe whirls like a wheel 
due to the movement of the sun. Hence the sun is the lord and 
deity delimiting time. He is the instigator and castigator of the 
four types of living beings. Rudra, the lord himself, is the inducer 

363. Sraviftha^-Dhanijtha. 

364. A group of five years constitutes a yuga which should not be 
confused with the cycle of four yugas. This five-yearly cycle forming a 
yuga corresponds to the Vedic doctrine of pafica-devata or five deities 
who have entered the Puru»a. Gf. TB 1.4.10.1. The five years with their 
presiding deities are named (i) samvatsara — agni; (ii) parivatsara— sflrya; 
(iii) idavatsara— soma; (iv) anuvatsara— vayu; (v) vatsara— rudra. Cf. 
Matsya. 141. ly-iff. 



238 


Lingapura^a 


of that sun^**^. Thus the specific and fixed establishment of the 
luminaries and planets has been evolved by the great lord for 
the working of the world. 

59*63. It has been made to function intelligently by tht 
lord at the beginning of the kalpa. The lord is the support of 
all luminaries and he identifies himself with them. This is a 
wonderful phenomenon that is caused by the unique Pradhana 
and is incomprehensible. The movement of the luminaries can* 
not be understood by the man with his physical eye. It can be 
understood by the learned man only through Vcdic treatises, by 
inference and direct perception, by cogent arrangements and 
careful analysis in his mind. 

O excellent sages, the causes for the decision in regard to 
the validity concerning the luminaries are five viz : — the eye, 
scripture, water, the written document and calculation. 


CHAPTER SIXTYTWO 

Situation of D hr uva 


Sages said : 

1 . O foremost among the intelligent, it behoves you now to 
recount how, due to the grace of Vi?nu, Dhruva became the 
central pivot of the planets.®** 

Suta said : 

2. O brahmins, when he was asked about this matter by 
me in former time, Markandeya who is an expert in different 
sciences said to me as I was desirous of hearing. 

Markandeya said : 

3. An emperor of great splendour, the best among all those 
who wield weapons, king Uttinapada, ruled over the earth. 

36^. For Rudra as the life*principle of the sun compare : ‘bhisoded 
sdryah.'— 'Cited in ST, 

366. The Suta narrates the legend of Dhruva, son of UttSnapada 
(md Suniti, how Dhruva became the polq star, the pivot of the solar 
system. Herr, the astronomical phenomenon is sought to be explained 
on the basis ol a legend. 



situation of Dhruva 


239 


4-5. He had two wives, Suniti and Suruci. A highly intelli- 
gent son of great renown, named Dhruva was bom of Suniti 
the elder wife. He had great understanding and was the light 
of the family. When he was seven years old, once he sat in the 
lap of his father. 

6. O leading brahmins, Suruci who was proud of her 
beauty pushed him away. Delighted in her mind she placed 
her own son on the lap of his father. 

7. The intelligent boy Dhruva became dejected in his mind 
because he was unable to occupy the lap of his father. He went 
to his mother and lamented. 

8. Overwhelmed by her grief the mother said to her weep- 
ing son ; — “Suruci is the most beloved of her husband. Her 
son too is likewise. 

9. You, a son born of me, a very unfortunate woman, are 
also equally unfortunate. Why do you bewail ? What for do 
you weep again and again ? 

10. If you are distressed in heart you will increase my 
sorrow. My dear son, you shall by your own power attain a 
more comfortable and stable abode.” 

11-12. On being advised thus by his mother he set out 
towards the forest. On meeting ViSvSmitra, he bowed to him 
duly and spoke with his palms joined in reverence : — 

“O holy sir, foremost among the pious sages, it behoves you 
to tell me how I shall obtain a place above everyone. 

13. O sage, I was seated on the lap of my father. My 
step-mother Suruci pushed me aside. My father, the king, did 
not protest. 

14-16. For this very reason, O brahmin, I went to my 
mother in fright. \^y mother said to me : — “O son, do not be 
sorry. You dese;cye ^ attain .a far greater abode by your own 
endeavour”. On hcaring'her words, O great sage, 1 have come 
to you for shelter in this forest. O holy sir, O brahmin, I have 
now met you. % your .grace 1 shall attain tho wonderful and 
excellent abode. . . 

17-18. On being requested thus, the glorious sage said 
laughingly “O Prince, listen to this. You will attain an excel- 
lent abode by propitiating KeSava the lord of the worlds, and 



240 LiAgapuraijM 

the destroyer of distress. He is born of the right limb of 
&va the intelligent great lord.®®^ 

19. O highly intelligent one, repeat the Mantra of the 
lord continuously. It is great, pure and holy, it destroys all sins 
and yields all desires. 

20. Repeat this divine Mantra controlling your sense, with 
the Pranava : — “Namostu Vasudevaya” [Obeisance be to Vasu- 
deva]. Meditate on the eternal Visnu. Be interested in japa and 
homa. 

21-24. On being advised thus, the boy of great renown 
bowed to Visvamitra and began his japa facing the east He 
restrained himself and was delighted in his mind. Alertfully 
he repeated the mantra continuously without break for a year, 
sustaining himself on vegetables, roots and fruits. Terrible 
vampires and demons, large fierce beasts like lions rushed at him 
in order to confound his wits. But, repeating the name Vasu- 
deva he did not take notice of anything else. 

25. A female ghost assuming the form of his mother Suniti 
came near him and wept bitterly and miserably. 

26-27. “O you are my only son. Why do you torture your- 
self ? Leaving me helpless, you have taken to penance”. 

The boy continued his great penance and did not even 
glance at the lady who spoke thus. With delight in his 
heart he repeated the name Hari. 

28-29. Then all the forms of impediment and harassment 
subsided from all sides. Seated on Garuda lord Visnu who 
resembled the black cloud in lustre, who is the destroyer of 
enemies, who was surrounded by Devas and who was being 
eulogised by great sages, came there before Dhruva. 

30-31. On seeing the lord come near, he simply thought 
within his mind “who is this ?” Drinking as it were HrsikeSa 
the lord of the Universe, by his eyes the boy of great lustre, 
seated himself and repeated “Vasudeva”. With the tip of his 
conch the lord touched his face. 

32. Thereupon he attained the highest knowledge. With his 
palms joined in reverence he eulogised the lord the most 
excellent of all divine beings. 

367. Visnu is born of the right side of Siva, while Brahma is born 
of the left. 



Origin of Devas and others 


241 


33. Be favourable, O lord of the chiefs of Devas, O wielder 
of conch, discus and iron club ! O soul of the worlds ! O soul 
of all, O soul of all secrets of the Vedas, O Kesava, I 
have sought refuge in you. 

34. Even the great sages Sanaka and others have not com- 
prehended you, the great Atman. Then how can I know you ? 
O lord of the worlds, obeisance to you. 

35. Then Visnu said to him smiling : — ‘‘O dear one, come 
on. You are Dhruva (steady). Attaining a fixed and steady 
abode be the first among all luminaries. 

36. You along with youi mother shall attain the abode of 
luminaries. This abode is mine, the greatest, the steady splen- 
did abode. 

37-38. It was acquired by me from lord Siva formerly 
after piopitiating him by penance. The devotee who repeats 
conimuously the name Vasudeva along with the Pranava ‘’om’ 
the word ^Bhagavat’ and the word ‘aainas’ denoting obeisance 
attains the fixed abode of Dhruva.’' 

39-42. Then all Devas, Siddhas, sages and Gan- 
dharvas installed Dhruva in that abode along with his mother. 
Thus, at the behest of Visnu he attained the abode of lumi- 
naries. By means of the twelve-syllabled mantra Dhruva of 
great splendour attained the highest perfection. 

Suta said: 

Hence, the man who makes obeisance to Vasudeva attains the 
world of Dhruva and achieves steadiness. 


CHAPTER SIXTYTHREE 

Origin of Devas and othtis 


The sages said. 

I. O Suta, recount the origin of Devas, Danavas, Gaii- 
dharvas, Serpents and Raksasas, in an excellent way and in due 
ordei . 

^b8. The twelve-syllabled mantra of Vi§nu is : Oiii namo bhagavate 
Vasudevaya. 



242 


Li^gapurdna 


Sola said : 

2. The creation of ancient people was by means of mental 
conception, direct perception or touch. Subsequent to Daksa 
the son of Pracetas, creation is by means of sexual intercourse. 

3-6. When he began to create the group of Devas, sages 
and serpents, the world did not increase. Thereupon, by 
means of sexual intercourse, Daksa begot of Suti, five thousand 
sons. 

On seeing those blessed ones who were desirous of creating 
different kinds of progeny, Narada spoke to Haryalvas, the 
sons of Daksa who had assembled together. 

“Understand the extent of the earth®** from above and 
below, O excellent sages, and then proceed ahead with your 
special creation.” 

On hearing his words they went away in all directions. 

7-10. Even today they have not returned like the rivers 
after joining the ocean. 

When Haryasvas vanished, lord Daksa Prajapati begot of 
Sfiti herself another thousand sons. O brahmins, they were 
named Sabalas and they assembled together for the purpose of 
creation. 

Narada spoke to those persons of solar splendour, who had 
assembled before him — “You should proceed with your special 
creation after understanding the full extent of the earth, or on 
return after finding out what has happened to your brothers. 

They too followed their brothers and attained the same 
goal as their brothers before. 

1 1 When they too vanished the Prajapati Daksa the son 
of Pracetas, begot sixty daughters of Virini. 

12-15. He gavd tien of them in maniage- to Dharma, thir- 
teen to Ka^yapa, twentyseven to the moon, four to Aristanemi, 
two to the son of Bhrgu, two to the intelligent K^^aSva and two" 
to Angiras. Now listen to the names of the mothers of Devas 
and the details of their progeny from the very beginning. 

The ten wives of Dharma were : — Marutvati, Vasu, 

369. or after knowing the extent of the field (i.e. the subtle body) 
as also its capacity for creating the living beings. ST. cites BhSga. in 
suiqwrt of this interpretation ; ^• 3 ’^ I 

3i^«rr 51^ ii 



Origin of Devcu and others 


243 


Yatni, Lamba, Bhanu, Arundhati, Sankalpa, Muhurta, Sadhya 
and Visva. 

I shall tell you the names of their sons. 

16-20a. The Vi^vedevas were born to ViSva. Sadhya 
bore the Sadhyas. Marulvals were born of Marutvati. Vasus 
were born of Vasu. The Bhanus were born of Bhanu; the 
Muhur takas were born of Muhurta; the Ghosas were bom of 
Lamba. Nagavlthi was born of Yami. Sankalpa was born of 
Sankalpa. I shall tell you the creation of the Vasus. Devas 
who arc luminous and who pervade all the quarters are called 
Vasus.®’® They are the well wishers of all living beings They 
are reputed to be eight, viz. — Apa, Dhruva, Soma, Dhara, 
Anila, Anala, Pratyusa and Prabhasa. 

20b-22a. The eleven Rudras,®’^ the leaders of the Ganas 
are ; — Ajaikapad, Ahirbudhnya, Virupaksa, Bhairava, Kara, 
Bahurupa, Tryambaka the lord of Devas, Savitra, Jayanta, 
Pinakin and Aparajita. 

22b-26. I shall mention the sons and grandsons of Ka- 
ji.yapa from his thirteen wives : — Aditi, Diti„ Arista, Surasa, 
Muni, Surabhi, Vinat.'i, Tamra, Krodhavasa, Ila, Kadru, 
Tvisa and Danu. 

I shall tell you the ntimes of the sons of these. 

Devas who were known as Tusitas in the Gaksusa man- 
vantara are spoken of as the twelve Adityas in the Vaivasvala 
manvantara. The following twelve are the thousand-rayed 
Adityas : — 

Indra, Dhatr, Bhaga, Tvastr, Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman, 
Vivasvan, Savitr, Pusan, Achsunlat and Visnu. 

27. We have heard that Diti had two sons from Ka^yapa 
VIZ Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa 

28. Danu bore a hundred sons to Kasyapa. They were 
mighty and arrogant. O excellent brahmins, among them 
Vipracitti was the chief. 

370. Vasus are a class of duties, eight in number. They seem to 
have been personifications of natural phenomena. They are Apa (water), 
Dhruva (Pole star), Soma (moon), Dhara (earth), Anila (wind), Anala 
(fire), Prabh^a (dawn) and Pratyu$a G‘ght). 

371. In regard to the names of the eleven Rudras the Puranas are not 
unanimous. 



244 


Lingapurdna 


29. O leading brahmins, lamra bore six daughters^^^ 
viz. — J5uki, SyenI, BhasT, Sugrivi, Grdhrika and Suci. 

30-31. SukI duly gave birth to parrots and owls. Syeni 
gave birth to hawks (falcons) , etc. BhasI gave birth to deers. 
Grdhri bore the vultures, doves, pigeons and other birds. 
Suci gave birth to swans, cranes and other aquatic birds such 
as Karanda, Plava. 

32-34. Sugrivi gave birth to goats, horses, sheep, camels 
and donkeys. Vinata gave birth to Garuda an J Aruna, ( two 
sons) and then a daughter Saudamini (lightning) terrible 
unto all the worlds. 

A thousand cobras were born to Surasa. Kadru gave birth 
to a thousand thousand-hooded serpents. Tweniy-six excellent 
ones among them are well known as their chiefs. 

35-37. They are : — Sesa, Vasuki, Karkota, Sahkha, 
Airavata, Kambala, Dhananjaya, Mahanila, Padma, Asvatara, 
Taksaka, Elapatra, Mahapadma, Dhrtarastra, Balahaka, Sau- 
khapala, Mahasahkha, Puspadamstra, Subhanana, l§ahkhalo- 
man, Nahusa, Vamana, Phanita, Kapila, Durmukha and 
Patanjali. 

38-41. Krodhavasa gave birth to the Raksasas wielding great 
power of deception and also the group of Rudras. The excellent 
lady Surabhi, gave birth to cows and buffaloes as the children 
of Kasyapa. Muni gave birth to the group of sages and Apsaras. 
Arista gave birth to Kinnaras and Gandharvas. Ila gave birth 
to grasses, trees, creepers and hedges. Tvisa gave birth to crores 
and crores of Yaksas and Raksasas 

These are the immediate descendants of Kasyapa, narrated 
succinctly. 

42-45. These had their own numerous sons, grandsons etc. 
Their races are many. After the children had been procreated 
by the noble Kasyapa, after all the mobile and immobile 
beings had been well established, Prajapati crowned the chief 
ones among each of them as overlords. He made Vaivasvata 
Manu the overlord of human beings. Those who were 
crowned by Brahma in the Svayambhuva manvantara, even 

<172. KaSyapii’s wives and children are given differently in other 
authorities, c.g. Mbh. Adi p. xvi. Ixv and Ixvi; Kurma xviii; Agni xix; 
Bd. V. 14J-14G. 



Origin of Devos and others 


245 


now protect and rule over the earth with its seven continents 
and mountains. They rule virtuously in accordance with the 
in Uructions of the lord. 

46. Only those who had been crowned formerly in the 
Svayambhuva manvantara by Brahmii arc crowned now. They 
be('ome the Manus. 

47-49. In the past manvantaras those had been the kings. 
Others are being crowned when a new manvantara arrives. 
All the kings of the past and future manvantaras arc mention- 
ed in detail. 

After proci eating these sons for th( continuity of the lace 
Ka yapa performed penance once again with the desire to have 
a son who will preserve the spiritual line. 

50-31. Eveii as Ka.syap^i w as meditating tints, twi^ son's of 
great prowess manifested themselves by the grace of Brahman. 
Those two Vatsara and Asita were expounders of Brahman. 
Naidhruva and Raibhya were horn of Vatsara. 

52* 34. 'T he sons of Raibhya are known as Raibhyas. I 
shall mention those of Niudhruva. Sumreihas was born of the 
daughter of Clyavana. She became the wife of Naidhriiva 
and the mother of Kundapayins. 

The glorious son Uevala was born of Ekaparna and Asita. 
He was a kiiower of Brithman. the best of all the Sandilyas 
and one possessing great penance. Thus the descendants of 
Kasyapa became three branches; Sandilyas, Naidhruvas and 
Raibhyas. 

35-58. Devas had nine sources of origin. 1 shall mention 
the line of Pulastya. 

After eleven cycles of four yugas have practically passed bv 
when Manu was the lord and half the period of Dvapara had 
passed by, Dama was born as the son of Narisyanta, a descend- 
ant of Manu. Dama’s descendant known as Trnabindu became 
king in the third quarter of Tretayuga. His daughter Ilavila 
was unrivalled in beauty and the king gave her in marriage lo 
Pulastya. 

59. Visravas the great sage was born of Ilavila. His four 
wives arc the progenitors of the family of Pulastya. 

60-65. The first wife Devavarnini was the splendid daugh- 
ter of Brhaspati. The second and third wives were the two 



246 Lingapurd^ 

daughters of Malyavan, viz. Puspotka^ and Balaka and the 
fourth wife KaikasI was the daughter of Malin. 

Now listen to the children of these ladies. Devavarnini 
bore the eldest son VaiSravana to him. KaikasI gave birth to 
RAvana, the king of Raksasas, Kumbhakar^, Surpanakha and 
Vibhisana. O excellent brahmins, Puspotkata bore him Maho- 
dara, Prahasta, Mahaparsva, Khara and the daughter Kum- 
bhlnasl. Now listen to the childern of Bala [i. e. Balaka]. They 
were Trisiras, Ou§ana, Vidyujjihva and the daughter Malika. 
Thus the Raksasas of ruthless activities belonging to the family 
of Pulastya are nine. 

66-68. Vibhisana is glorified as the knower of Dharma. He 
was a highly pure soul. 

The deer, the fanged animals, tigers, goblins, ghosts, 
serpents, boars, elephants, monkeys, Kinnaras and Kimpurusas 
were the sons of Pulastya. 

In the Vaivasvata manvantara Kratu is said to be issueless. 
Atri had ten beautiful and chaste wives. 

69-70. Bhadra^va begot of the celestial damsel Ghrtaci 
ten children viz Bhadra, Abhadra, Jalada, Manda, Aneinda 
(or r^anda), Bala, Abala, Gopabala, Tamarasa and Vara- 
kri(^a 

71-73. These are the progenitors of the family of Atreya. 
Their husband is Prabh^ara. When the sun was swallowed by 
Rahu and he fell down towards the earth from the heavens 
the whole world was enveloped in darkness. At that time Atri 
spread lustre everywhere. He said “Hail to Thee” and then the 
falling sun ceased to fall at the instance of the brahmi n sage. 
Then Atri was called Prabhakara by the great sages. 

74. He begot of Bhadra the renowned son Soma (Moon). 
The sage procreated more sons of those wives. 

75. They are well known as Svastyatreyas. They were • 
sages and masters of the Vedas. Two of them became well reno- 
wned. They had realised Brahman. They were very powerful. 

76. Datta was the eldest son of Atri. Durvasas was his 
younger brother. The youngest sister was Amala, an expounder 
of the Brahman. 

77. Four of them born of two Gotras are well known in 
the world, viz. Syava, Pratvasa, Vavalgu and Gahvara. 



Origin of Devos and Others 


247 


78. Four lines of the spiritual family of Atreyas of noble 
souls are known as Ka^yapa, N&rada, Parvata and Anudd- 
hata. 

79. These were born as mental sons. Now understand the 
children of Arundhatl. It was Narada who gave Arundhatl to 
Vasistha. 

80-82. Due to a curse of Daksa, Narada of great splendour 
became a bachelor by compulsion. 

Formerly, when a terrible war between Devas and Asuras, 
on account of the demon Taraka, took place, the world was 
oppressed due to drought. Along with the guardians of the 
quarters, the intelligent sage Vasistha sustained the subjects by 
means of his penance. He made water, cooked rice, roots, fruits 
and medicinal herbs and out of mercy he enlivened the people 
with medicines. 

83. Vasistha begot hundred sons of Arundhatl. Adrsyanti 
bore to Sakti, the eldest of those hundred, the son Para^ara. 

84-88. Sakti was swallowed by the demon Rudhira ( along 
with his brothers). Kali bore to Para^ara the son Kt$na 
Ovaipayana. 

Dvaipayana begot of Arani the son Suka and the son 
Upamanyu of Pivari. 

Know that the following are the sons of l§uka viz. Bhurisra- 
vas, Prabhu, Sambhu, Krsna and Gaura. There was a daughter 
Kirtimatl. She was a yogic mother, performing holy rites. She 
was the wife of Anuha and mother of Brahmadatta. The follow- 
ing are the descendants of Para^ara viz Sveta, Krs^a, 
Gaura, Syama, Dhumra, Aru^a, Nila and Badarika. Thus 
there are eight lines of these noble-souled Barbaras. 

89-91. Henceforth understand the descendsuits of Indrapra- 
miti. Vasistha begot of Ghrtaci the son Kapihjalya. He who is 
known as Trimutri is called Indrapramiti. Bhadra was born of 
Prthu’s daughter. His son was Vasu whose son was Upamanyu. 
There are many descendants of Upamanyu, Mitra and Vanina. 
Those who are known as Kaundinyas are the descendants of 
Mitra and Varuna.®^® 

373. Kaunidinyss and VSsi;thas have a common ancestry in Mitri- 
Varuoa. Hence the matrimonial alliaaces do not take place between 
them. 



248 


Lingapurdna 


92-95. There are others of single sage-head, who arc well 
known as Vasisthas. There are ten lines of the noble descendants 
of Vasistha. 

Thus these mental sons of Brahma arc known on the earth. 
These blessed ones are the supporters of the spiritual legacy. 
Their descendants are well known. They arc competent to 
support even the three worlds. They arc born of the families of 
divine sages. Their sons and grands<^ns are hundreds and 
thousands. The three worlds are pervaded by them in the 
same manner as by the rays of the sun* 


CHAPTER SIXTYFOUR 

Grant of boons by Pulastya 


The sa,(ies said: 

1. O Suta, O best sjieakcr, it behoves you to recount how 
Sakti the son of Vasistha was devoured by a demon along with 

his younger brothers. 

# 

Siila said: 

2-3. The demon Rudhira^^^ devoured Sakti the son of 
Vasistha along with his younger brothers due to a curse by 
!§akti on king Kalmasapada. O leading brahmins, urged by 
Visvamitra, Rudhira haunted the king Kalmasapada for whom 

374. There arc different versions of this legend in the Ramayana, 
Mahabharata and Vi^nupurana. According to Mbh. Kalma^pada, king of 
the solar race, was the son of Sudas and a descendant of Iksvaku. While 
he was out hunting in the forest he met §akti, the eldest son of Vasistha. Since 
Sakti refused to get out of his way, Kalmasapada was enraged. then 
struck Sakti with the whip. Thereupon, Sakti cursed him to become a raksasa. 
Thus, Kalmasapada was turned into a rak^sa Rudhira by name and he de- 
voured Sakti together with his brothers. But according to Lihga, the raksasa 
Rudhira entered the body of King Kalmasapada when the latter was engaged 
in sacrifice, under the leadership of Vasistha. Instigated by ViiSvamitra, 
who was a rival priest, Rudhira devoured Sakti as well as his ninety-nin** 
brothers. 

Lihga t*efers to the legend of Viivatnitra. According to Valmiki’s 
Ramayana, Sakti was cursed by Viivamitra in the context of king Trisahku’s 
sacrifice. 



Grant of boons by Pulastya 


249 


a sacrifice was being performed by Vasistha and swallowed 
^akli. 

1-5. On hearing that the most powerful Sakti had been 
devoured b\ that demon along with his brothers, Vasistha 
repeatedly lamented “ha (my) son, ha (my) son'*. The wailing 
sage fell down on the ground along with Arundhati. 

6-10. Remembering his hundred sons, the eldest of whom 
w^as Sakti, and knowing that the family was extinct, the power- 
ful sage decided to die. Coming to this conclusion that he will 
not remain alive without his sons, he felt all the more miser- 
able. Vasistha the son of Brahma, theknower of everything, the 
self-possessed sage who had realized the Atman, climbed 
to the top of a mountain along with his wife. With tears welling 
up in the eyes he suddenly fell down on the ground. As 
he fell down on the ground, the earth (assuming the form 
of a lady) who had a wonderful necklace and the sportive 
gait of an elephant, caught him up with her lotus-like 
hands and as he cried she too bewailed with him. At that 
time, his daughter-in-law, the wife of Sakti, cried in great 
fright and spoke thus to Vasisjha, the great sage and the be:>t 
among the eloquent sages. 

11. “O lord, O excellent brahmin, O powerful sage, pre- 
serve this excellent body of yours to sec your grandson, that is 
my son, 

12. O leading brahmin, this splendid body should not be 
discarded by you, since the child that is born of Sakti and 
that is bound to be one who realises all objects, is wdthin my 
womb.” 

13-14. After saying thus, that lady who was conversant 
with Dharma and whose eyes resembled lotus flowers lifted up 
her father-in-law by her hands and wiped his eyes with water. 
Although she was herself miserable she requested the dejected 
Arundhati to save her father-in-law. 

15-16. On hearing the words of his daughter-in-law 
Vasistha got up from the ground after regaining consciousness. 
Arundhati embraced him in great distress and fell down. The 
leading sage touched Arundhati, in whose eyes tears had welled 
up and cried along with her. 



250 


Lingapuravta 


17-18. Thereafter the son seated in the couch of the womb 
of his mother, like the four-faced lord Brahma in the umbilical 
lotus of Visriu repeated a sacred verse. The holy sage Vasistha 
listened enthusiastically to the sacred verse wondering, by whom 
could it have been repeated. He then meditated with great con- 
centration. 

19. Thereupon Visnu whose eyes resemble the lotus petals, 
who had been stationed in the courtyard of the firmament, who 
is the soul of the universe and who is the storehouse of mercy 
spoke to Vasi$tha mercifully. 

20. O dear one, O dear one, O Vasistha the leading brah- 
min, fond of his son, this sacred verse has emanated from 
the lotuslike face of your grandson. 

21. O sage, this grandson of yours, the powerful one born 
of Sakti is on a par with me. Hence, O most excellent sage and 
son of Brahma, discard your grief and rise up. 

22. The child in the womb is a devotee of Rudra. He is 
engaged in the worship of Rudra. Thanks to the power of 
Rudra he will redeem your family. 

23. After saying thus to Vasi?tha, the leading Brahmin 
sage, the merciful lord vanished there itself. 

24. Vasistha of great splendour bowed his head to the lotus- 
eyed lord and then stroked the belly of Adj^yanti with great 
respect. 

25-27. O brahmins, he cried out “ha my son, ha my son”, 
and fell down extremely depressed. Glancing at Arundhati 
who was also crying and remembering his own son he cried 
out in misery — “O son, come again, come again. O iSakti, after 
the birth of your son who will sustain this family. I shall undou- 
btedly come near you along with your mother”. 

SUta said : 

After saying this, the crying brahmin embraced Arundhati. 
Beating her belly she was about to fall. 

28-32. The auspicious lady AdrSyanti who was distressed 
beat her belly — the abode of the child in womb. She cried oui 
in distress and fell down. Arundhati and Vasistha, both of them 
were extremely frightened. They lifted up the young woman 
their daugh''er-in-law and said thus: — 



Grant of boons by Pulastya 


251 


“O silly woman, tell us how you have attempted to destroy 
the family of Vasistha by striking at the region of womb. For 
seeing your son, the child born to ^akti and for tasting the 
nectar of the boyish face of the noble son, the leading sage has 
decided to preserve his body. Hence protect your body”. 

Suta said: 

33-34. After pulling up her daughter-in-law and the sage, 
Arundhati the wife of Vasistha stood up and said though 
highly distressed and agitated. 

“O lady of good holy rites, since the life of this sage, and 
ihat of mine depend on you, you should preserve your life. As 
a nurse do what is beneficial to us.” 

AdrSyanti said: 

35. *‘If the excellent sage has decided to preserve his life 
I shall somehow preserve my body pure or impure. 

36-37. It is because of my sin that I have to bear the 
sorrow of separation from my husband. O sage, I am burnt 
with grief, even though I am your daughter-in-law, O sage. 
Alas, a miracle has been seen by me. O lord, I am the victim 
of grief. O brahmin, be my saviour from misery, O son of 
Brahma, O preceptor of the universe. 

38. Still, a woman without a husband shall be miserable. 

0 noble lord (sage) , save me from that situation. 

39. The father, mother, sons, grandsons, even the father-in- 
law, all are helpless to such a woman. None of them can be 
a real kinsman unto women. It is the husband alone who is 
her real kinsman, her greatest salvation. 

40. What has been mentioned by the learned men ! viz. the 
wife is half of the husband, has turned out to be not true in 
my case. Sakti has gone. But I still survive. 

41 . O leading .sage, alas 1 the hardness of my mind ! even 
after leaving off my husband who is like my own vital breath, 

1 could live for even a moment. 

42. O Vasistha, just as a creeper climbing on the holy fig 
tree, survives even after being cut off from its roots, I too survive 



252 Lingapurdm 

even after I have become miserable on being abandoned by 
my husband”. 

43. On hearing these words of his daughter-in-law, the 
intelligent Vasistha who observed the duties of his stage of 
life decided to go to his hermitage along with his wife. 

44. The mcritorious-souled holy lord Vasistha though 
suffering badly, entered his hermitage quickly, accompanied by 
his wife and Adrsyantl, and began to ponder. 

45. O leading sages, that chaste wife of Sakti preserved 
the child in the \\omb with great difficulty for the continuity of 
the family line. 

46. In the tenth month the wife of Sakti gave birth to a 
lustrous son in the same manner as Arundhati had prcvic'usly 
given birth to Sakti. 

47. Sakti’s wife gave birth to Parasara like Aditi wlio gave 
birth to Visnu, like Svaha who gave birth to Guha and like 
Arani who gave birth to Agni. 

48. When the son of Sakti incarnated on the earth, Sakti, 
abandoned his sorrow and attained equality with the Pitrs. 

49. O leading sages, that meritorious son of Vasistha, 
stationed in the world of the Pitrs along with his brother:^ 
shone like the sun along with the Adityas. 

50. O leading brahmins, when Parasara incarnated, the 
departed father sang, the grand-fathers and grcat-grand-lathers 
danced. 

51. The Pitrs who previously expounded the Brahman on 
the earth and the deities in heaven danced. Puskara and (Others 
moved about in the firmament showering flowers. 

52. O brahmins, in the cities of the Raksasas there were 
odd and painful shouts. The sages in their hermitage applauded 
continuously with delightful experiences. 

53. Just as the four-faced lord incarnated from the Cosmic 
Egg, just as the sun emerges from the clusters of clouds, so ako 
Parasara was born of Adrsyanti. 

54. On seeing the son and remembering her husband, O 
brahmins, even Adrsyanti felt both joy and grief. So was the 
case with Arundhati and sage Vasistha. 



Grant of boons by Pulastya 


253 


55. On seeing her son, the highly refulgent Par^ara, the 
agitated lady lamented. With her throat choked she fell down. 

56. Even as her sinless son adored by the groups of Devas 
and Danavas, was born the mother realized that he was highly 
intelligent. With tears in her eyes she lamented. 

57. “Ha, son ofVasistha, you have gone somewhere after 
abandoning me whose wretchedness is visible in the face. You 
have left me in the middle of the forest as one desirous of see- 
ing her son. O lord, you too, see your bosom-born, sinless son. 

58. O l§akti, with his delight evident in his face Maheivara 
saw his six-faced son along with his Gana.. Similarly, you too 
see your son in the company of your brothers”. 

On hearing her lamentation, the excellent sage Vasistha 
became miserable and said to his daughter-in-law “Do not 
cry. 

60. At the behest of Vasistha, that noble lady eschewed 
her sorrow. 'I’hat lady with roving eyes like the fawn nursed 
and nurtured her son. 

61. On seeing his chaste mother as a weak lady, devoid 
of ornaments, sitting down dejectedly, with tears agitating the 
eyes, the boy said to her. 

^aktVs son said : 

62. “O mother, O sinless one, your ..lender body does 
not appear to be splendid without ornaments. It is like the 
night bereft of the disc of the moon. 

63. O my mother, O my mother, O splendid lady, it 
behoves you to recount to me why you are sitting here setting 
aside your auspicious marks as a woman without her husband.” 

64. On hearing the words of her son, Adrsyanti did not 
tell her son anything, good or bad. 

65. The son of Sakti said to Adrsyanti again, “O mother 
where is my holy father of great refulgence ? Tell me, tell 
me.” 

66. On hearing the words of her son, she became extremely 
agitated and wept. Saying “your father was devoured by a 
Raksasa” she fell down unconscious. 

67. On hearing the words of his grandson, the kind-hearted 



254 Lingapurdm 

Vasistha cried and fell down. So also Arundhati and the lead- 
ing sages, the residents of the hermitage. 

68. On hearing directly from his mother — “Your father 
was devoured by a demon”, the intelligent Para^ara spoke thus 
with his eyes dimmed and darkened by tears. 

Pard^ara said : 

69. O mother, I think I will be able to show my father in 
a moment by worshipping the lord of the chiefs of Devas and of 
the three worlds including the mobile and immobile beings.*^^ 

70. On hearing these splendid words she was surprised. 
Smilingly she looked at him and said : — “O son, this is true. 
Worship the lord.” 

71. On understanding the proposal^ and decision of the 
son of Sakti, Vasistha the holy lord, the intelligent leading 
sage, and the storehouse of mercy, spoke to his grandson as 
follows : — 

72-74. “O my grandson, O excellent sage of good holy 
rites, your proposal is proper and suitable. Still, listen, it does 
not behove you to destroy the world. You can worship the 
lord for . exterminating Raksasas. But, O son of Sakti, what is 
the harm done to you by the world that you need destroy 
it?” 

Thereafter at the behest of the Vasistha the extremely in- 
telligent son of Sakti directed his mind towards the extermina- 
tion of Raksasas. 

75-78. Parasara bowed down to Adrsyanti, Vasistha and 
Arundhati. In the presence of the sage he made a single Lihga, 
in a trice, out of dust. Repeating the following Mantras from 
the Vedas he worshipped it. The mantras were Sivasukta, 
Tryambakasukta, Tvaritarudra, Siva Sahkalpa, Nilarudra, 
Rudra, Vamiya, Pavamana, Pahea Brahman, Hotrsukta, Lihga- 
sukta and Atharvas'iras. After worshipping duly he offered the 
eightfold Arghya to Rudra. 

375. trailokyarh sacaracaram: Change the accusative case into the 
genitive case and supply ‘isam’ to obtain the required meaning. The ex- 
pression ‘trailokyasya sacaracarasya isam* would mean ‘lord of the three 
worlds including the mobile and immobile beings*. ST. is not in favour of 
this change. It supplies ‘dagdhva* which it construes with ‘trailokyam sacara- 
caraem; i.c. ‘having burnt the three worlds including the mobile and immobile 
beings’. 



255 


Grant of boons by Pulastya 

Parasara said : — 

79. “O lord Rudra, O iSankara, my father of great 
refulgence was swallowed by the demon Rudbira along with 
his brothers. 

80-81. O lord, I wish to see my father along with his 
brothers.” 

Submitting thus he bowed down to the Lihga again and 
again, cried “ha Rudra, ha Rudra” and prostrated before him. 

On seeing him, lord Rudra said to the goddess. 

82. “O highly blessed lady, see this ooy whose eyes are 
dimmed and darkened with tears. He is engaged in propitiating 

•T'e. 

83-84. The spotless great goddess saw Parasara, his eyes 
dimmed and his body drenched by tears due to misery. He was 
interested only in the act of worshipping the Lihga. He 
repeated the names ‘‘Hara’’, ‘‘Rudra*’ etc. Uma then spoke to 
5iva her husband and the lord of the worlds. 

85-86. O supreme lord, be pleased, grant him all his desires. 
On hearing her words, Sankara Parame^vara, the swallower of 
halahala poison, spoke to his noble consort Uma — “ I shall 
save this brahmin boy whose eyes resemble full blown blue 
lotus. 

87-88. I shall give him divine vision .uid enable him to 
see my form.” After saying this, lord Nllalohita, Paramesvara, 
surrounded by the divine Ganas — Brahma, Indra, Vi§nu, Rudra, 
and others granted vision to that intelligent son of the sage. 

89. On seeing Mahadeva, his eyes became dimmed with 
tears of delight. Delighted in his heart he fell at his feet with 
great respect. 

90. Thereafter he grasped the feet of Uma and the noble 
Nandin and then spoke to Brahma, and others — “My life is 
fruitful today. 

91. Today the crescent moon-bedecked diety has come for 
my protection. Who else can compare with me in this world, 
whether a Deva or a Danava ?” 

92. Thereafter in a moment, Parasara the son of Sakti saw 
his father standing in heaven along with his brothers. 

93. On seeing him accompanied by his brothers in an 



256 


Lingapuram 


aerial chariot that resembled the solar sphere and was open on 
nil sides, he was delighted. He bowed down to his father. 

91. Then the bull-bannered lord who was accompanied by 
his wife and the leading Ganas spoke thus to Sakti, the son of 
Vasistha who was eager to see his son. 

rhe glorious lord said : — 

95-96. O Sakti, see your son, the boy whose eyes are 
dimmed with tears of delight. O leading brahmin, see AdHyanti, 
Vasistha your father, Arundhati your mother, the highly blessed 
auspicious lady comparable to goddess. O highly intelligent one, 
make obeisance to both your father and your mother. 

97-98. At the behest of Sankara, Sakti immediately, at 
first, bowed down to the lord of Devas and to Uma. lie then 
bowed to the excellent Vasistha and to Arundhati his highly 
blessed mother, the auspicious lady who considered her husband 
her god. At the behest of the lord of the Universe the power- 
(ul Sakti said : — 

The son of Vasiffha said ; — 

99. p dear son, O leading brahmin, Par^ara of great 
refulgence, I have been saved by you who had been in the 
womb when I died and who are a noble soul. 

100-101. O dear son, Paraiara the attributes and the 
prosperities Anima"*’* etc. have been attained by me, on seeing 
your face today. O dear one, of great intellect, at my behest®’^ 
protect Adfsyanti the highly blessed lady and Arundhati, 
as also my father Vasistha. 

102. O dear son, our entire family has been redeemed by 
you. This has always®’* been said by the learned that one 
conquers the worlds through one’s son. 

103. Choose the desired®’* boon from the lord who is 
source of origin of the worlds. After bowing down to the lord 
1 shall go along with my brothers. 

376. See P 134 note 241 

•377. Construe ‘mamajfiaya’ (v-iou) with ‘Adrsyantim rakja’ (v-ioi), 
i.e. ‘at my behest you shall take care of Adfsyanti.’ 

378. sadaiva —always, or read sadeva — ucitam eva ST: ‘it is proper 

or truthful that * 

379. ipsitam varay esanam: take recourse to Siva for obtaining your 
desire, viz, the destruction of Raksasas. 



Grant oj boons by Pulastya 


257 


104-100. Thus taking lca\c ol his son after bowing down 
to Mahc^vara and a!t^*r seeing his wife in the assembly, the 
sage perfect control t)vcr the senses went away to his fathtr- 
land. (Jn seeing his father gone after worsliipping the lord, the 
son of J5akti eulogise d him with pleasing words. I’hcreafter the 
(lelighied Mahadeva, the supptessor of the Cupid andof Andha- 
ka, blessed the son of Sakti and vanished there itself. 

107. After MaheSvara had gonr away accompanied by 
Uiiia, the I'on ol Sakti, ilic knowei of char ms, burned the race 
of Raksasas by means of Mantras. 

108. Then Vasistlia die knower of Dharma, surrounded by 
the sages, said to liis grandson, dear son, stop this excess 
ol luiy. Eschew your anger. 

109. The Raksasas are not guilty. It liad br‘cn so ordain- 
ed^*^** in your father’s case. Anger provokes only dic fools and 
not the inteliigent people. 

110-111. O dear son, who is killed by whom ? Man is but 
the partaker of fruits of his own activities. 

O dear son, fury is but the destroyer of fame and penance 
which men accumulate after a great deal of stress and strain. 
Enough of these Rajasaic activities of burning innocent people. 

112-113. Let your sacrilice cease. Ind».ed, good men have 
forbearance as their strong point.” Thus at the instance of 
X’asistha, the leading sage, the son of Sakti wound up his 
sacrifice immediately after giving due deference to his words. 
Thcrefoi e holy lord Vasistha, the excellent .sage was delight- 
ed. 

114-117. Pulastya the son of Brahma had attended the 
Sail a. Vasistha duly offered him worship and the sage Pulastya 
was duly honoured. He then spoke to ParaSara who was 
standing by after due obeisance. 

‘‘In the course of the great enmity you have adopted 
forbearance at the instance of your preceptor. Henc& you will 
understand all the scriptural texts. My line of descendants has 
not been broken by you even though you were infuriated. 
Hence, O blessed one, I am giving you another great boon. O 


380 . vihitam— destined . 



258 Lingapurdna 

dear one, you will be the compiler of the Purana Sariihita (the 
compendium of ancient lore ) . 

118-119a.You will understand precisely the real nature of 
the deities.^®^ Due to my blessing your intellect will be devoid 
of impurities of activities, whether of active or absentioiis type 
and free from doubts.” 

119b-120a. Thereafter the holy sage Vasistha the most 
excellent of all eloquent ones said: — “Whatever has been said 
by Pulastya will take place wholly.” 

120b-121. Then by the grace of Pulastya and the iiiielli- 
gent Vasistha, Parasara composed the Vaisnava Purana. By 
means of six modes®®^ (i.e. parts) it expounds all the topics. It is 
a mine of knowledge. 

122-123. It extends to six thousand verses, and contains 
Vedic topics. It is the fourth®®^ among the Purana collections 
and a splendid one. Thus O leading sages, the origin oi the 
descendants of Vasistha and the prowess of the son of Sakti 
has been succinctly recounted to you. 


CHAPTER SIXTYFIVE 

Thousand names of Siva 


The sai^eS said: 

1 . O Romaharsana, the best among the knowers of races, 
it behoves you to recount succinctly to us the solar race and 
the lunar race. 

Siita said: 

2. O brahmins, Aditi bore to Kasyapa the son Adilya. 
Aditya had a chief wife and three others. 

3-3. They were Queen Sarhjha, Rajhi, Prabha and (^haya. 
I shall mention their sons to you. Queen Saihjha the daughter 

381. devata-paramartham — vastava-svarupam ST. i.c. facts. 

382. sad-prakaram — sad-arh^arupam 'consisting of six parts’. 

383. caturtham. But according to the serial order (of. Linga 39. 
61— 63) Siva, and not Vivnu, is the fourth. 



259 


Thousand Names of Siva 

of Tvaslr bore to the Sun the excellent Manu. Rajni gave birth 
to Yama, Yamuna and Revata. Prabha bore to the sun the son 
Prabhata. Sarhjna gave birth to Ghaya. O brahmins, Chaya 
bore to Savarni, Sani, Tapatl and Visti in due order. 

6-7. More than he** own sons Ghaya loved Manu.'^®'^ 
Yama could not brook this. He became exceedingly infuriated. 
Lifting up his right foot he kicked her furiously. Assaulted by 
Yama, Ghaya became very miserable. 

8. Due- to the curse of Chaya one healthy foot of Yama 
became watery i.e. covered with eczematic eruptions and full of 
foetid blood and swarms of germs. 

9. He went to Gokarna travelling on a plank, and propitia- 

Mihadcva there for millions of years living only on air. 

10-1 la. By the grace of Bhava he attained the excellent 

guardianship of the Southern quartei, the overloulship of the 
Pitrs and freedom from the cur.>e. He attained these by the 
power of the trident-armed lord of Devas. 

1 lb-12. Formerly the spotless daughtoi of Tvastr, unable to 
bear the excess of refulgence of the sun, cieated out of her own 
body another lady called Chaya. 

The lady of good holy rites assumed ihc form of a mare and 
pet fornicd penanc(\ 

13. In course of time loid sun the ‘nisband oi Chaya 
realised after a great eflbrt that she was onis a shadow^ Assum- 
ing the form f)f a horse he indulged in sexual intercourse 
with Saiiijha who had adopted the form of a marc. 

H. Thus Sariijha the daughter of Tvaslr who was in the 
guis(‘ of a mare bore to him the twin lords A.vin.s, the exce- 
llcJit physicians of Devas. 

1'7-I6a. Later, the sun was ground down'’®"’ by the noble- 
sioiiled father of Samjhfi. It was from the disc of the sun (i. c. 
the ground portion) that the terrible discus of Visnu his chief 
divine weapon was evolved bv lord Tvastr. 

16b-17a. Lord Krsna obtained this famous Sudai'sana 
di.scu? that shone like the fire at the time of dissolution, thanks 
to the grace of Rudra. 

‘^84. Pfirvo Manu: i.c. Vaivawata. Construe: purvo Manu cak- 
sama, Manus tu 11a (Caksarna). 

385. For detail about the paring of glory of the sun, see Mdrka. Gh, 

108. 



260 


Lihgapurdna 


17b-19a. The first Manu (i. e. bora of Saihjna) had nine 
sons all equal to him. They were: -Iksvaku, Nabhaga, Dhrsnu, 
SaryatijNarisyanta, Nabhaga, Arisia, Karfisa and Prsadhra. 
These nine are known as Manavas (sons of Manu). 

19b-21. Ila his eldest daughter and the most excellent one 
had formerly attained the state of a man. O leading sages, it 
was due to the grace of Mitra and Varuna that she attained the 
state of a man when she was known as Sudyumna. Again she 
went to Saravana'**®® and regained the state of a woman at the 
behest of Bhava. Sudyumna the glorious son of Manu became 
a woman for the increase of the lunar race. 

22. It was at the time of the horse-sacrifice of Iksvaku 
that Ila became a Kimpurusa. During the state of Kimpurnsa, 
also Ila is called Sudyumna. 

23-24. Then it chanced she was a woman for one month 
and a man for another. Ila resorted to the house of Budha, the 
son of Soma. Finding an opportunity she was made to indulge 
in sexual intercourse by Budha. Pururavas was born as the 
son of Ila and Budha. 

25. He was intelligent and the first-born in the line of Soma. 
He was 4 devotee of Siva and very valorous. O ascetics, I shall 
dilate later on the extent of expansion of Iksvaku race. 

26. O excellent brahmins, Sudyumna had three sons 
viz. : — Utkala, Gaya and VinataSva. 

27. The land of Utkala was assigned to Utkala, the 
western land was given to Vinatasva. Gaya is said to be the 
excellent city of Gaya. 

28. In Gaya Devas and the Pitrs are stationed always. 

The eldest of brothers, viz. Iksvaku obtained the Madhya 

dcia (Middle land) 

29-32. In view of his feminine nature Sudyumna did not get 
his share but at the instance of Vasistha, Sudyumna was installed 
in Pratisthana, as its glorious and righteous king. After attaining 
kingdom, the highly blessed son of Manu equipped with the 
characteristics of both man and woman, the king of great 
renown gave that kingdom to Pururavas. 

386. Saravana: a Himalayan forest where Karttikeya, the eldest 
son of Siva, was bom. Lord $iva had pronounced a curse that a man entering 
this forest would turn into a woman. 



Thousand Names of £iia 


261 


The heroic son of Jksvaku was Vikuksi who was the best 
among the knoweis of Dharnia as also the eldest (jf Iksvaku's 
handled sons lie had fifteen sous The eldest was Kakutslha 
From Kakuistha was boin Suyodhana 

33 () txt client sages there alter were born Prthu, Visvaka 

and Parlhi\a Vi-^saka s sou was Vrdraka , Yuvanasva waH 
his son 

Then ilteiwcie Ijoiu Sr iv isti at sple ikIoui and 

the ti Vams ik i O (\eclknt hj il nuns it was b\ the (oirnei that 
Sravasti cit) wa^ bmP in tl (i i» (1 i 1)( i 

}”) Vam^a s son v\ is b h id i v i Kuv d“i \ i was hi «■( n 
B) killing Dliundlui o* tri^at strengili 1 ( aecpnnd the ninii ot 
’ 1 Ihiim.tia 

3b Dhur dliMin ”ti i h id tliiet soi wHl known m lit lliicf 
worlds I In \ Wilt Drdhi \ i ( audu\a and Kipjhuva 

> Pitanoda was the son ol Didhisva Ilai) \ \a w is Ins 
sou NiKiinibli.i was the son ol H iva va Sunliutss i was Ins 
son 

n» Ki^as\a ind Rurissiwiu the two sons ol S imhat"is\ a 
Yinanisva w is the son ol R in is\ i nul Ins on w is \I ndhat i 
3d Mandl’ai i hii (hue. sons well known in tin tli ee 

woilds lht\ wei( Pniiikutsi, \irib ii isa «nid Mne ul unda 

10 12 Yu\ iiiisv<i the ^ I ond is s i ’ to be tin lien to 
\nibaiisa llama w is the son e>l \uvai \i ind tiorn hiin 
began the line ol lliiitas These weie bialnnins in the line 
ol \ngiias, but Ks iim as in tMiipei ‘uii lU 

Puiukulsa’s >utiessoi w is liiSiidas'U ol gieat iliiowh 
S ambhuti bom (»i \aTinad«1 was his son Visnuvi el(lh"i was bus 
son and altei him bis dtscindinK au known is Visiuivi delhas 
15. These also lesoi te d to the line ol \ngitas and weie 
equipped with the e haiae t< iistu s ol Ksatnyas Saiiilihuti 
pioireated anolln i son named \naianya 

11 () hlahmln^ in the couise ol his e quest ot the* 
tliKc woilds, \naian\a w is kilhel hv Ravana. Bihadas\a 
w'as the sein ol \nai.insa and IIai)asvawab his son 

4") King Vasui lianas was hoin ol Drsadvati and Haivasva 
His son was the king riidhauvan a in eat deve'iiee ol ^iva 

46-51 a He became the diM iple of Tandin, the son of 
Brahma By his grace he attained the fruit of a thousand 
386a. a city in ancient Oudh. 



262 Lingapurdna 

horse-sacrifices. At his behest he became a valorous devotee of 
iSiva and attained the lordship of Ganas. 

At the outset he had no money with him. The righteous 
soul pondered over this : — How shall I perform the horse-sacri- 
fice ?” O excellent brahmins, it was then that he met the son 
of Brahma, the brahmin Tandin and acquired from him the 
thousand names of Rudra, formerly mentioned by Brahma. 
Tandin eulogised the great lord Siva by means of these thou- 
sand names. The excellent brahmin born of Brahma thereby 
acquired the lordship of Ganas. Thereafter the king too obtain- 
ed the thousand names mentioned by Tandin formerly. By 
repeating them he too acquired the lordship of Ganas. 

The sages said : — 

51b-52a. O Suta, of good holy rites, the thousand narncs^**^ 
of Rudra had been repeated by Tandin born of Brahma. 
They contain a good lot of the meanings of all Vedic texts. It 
behoves you to mention those splendid names to us. 


Sdta said : — 

# 

52b-54a O sages of good holy rites, listen to the thousand 
and eight names of Siva who is the soul of all living beings and 
whose splendour is unmeasured. It was by repeating these 
that he attained the lordship of Ganas. 

387. In fact, the text records less than one thousand names, unless we 
include ‘matah’ (repeated thrice, cf. verses 61, 75, 87) etc. as proper names. 
It may also be observed that some names are identical in form: Nilah (105, 
116), Aninditah (121, 124), Guhavasi (131, 138), Vifi^u (126, 162), Jatl 
(55, 81), Dhata (126, 141), Balah (99, 122 ), Munili (91, 91), Lambito^thah 
(109, 123,, Mahakantliah (108, 147), Vrksal> (85, 132); others are repeti- 
tive in sense: Smaianav^i (57), Smasanavw (108); Narah (59), Nara, 
Vigrahah (105); MaharcAna (no), Mahake^ah (no); Candrab (61) 
Induh (150); Others are the names of gods and sages: Vasudevab (92), 
Adhoksajah (loi), Vi^nu (126, 162) (of Vi^nu) ; Dhata (126; (of Brahma); 
Devendra (135), Sakra (126), Amaresa (122), Vajri (154) (of Indra); 
Vamadeva (92), Kapila (119) (of sages). 

ST. explains these anomalies in the following way: (i) Identical 
forms arc interpretable differently. (2) Siva is omni-formed and hence 
can be identical with Vi^nu, Brahma, Indra, fire, air, etc. (3) Originally, 
there were ten thousai'd names whose authorship was assigned to Brahma. 
They were reduced to one thousand and eight numbers by Brahma himself 



263 


Thousand Names of Siva 

54b-60. Rudra^s thousand names: (1) Sthira (steady) (2)Sthanu®®® 
(fixed as a stump) (3) Prabhu (lord) (4) Bhanu^®* (sun) (5) 
Pravaia (very good one) (6) Varada^®® (one who grants boons) 
(7) Vara (excellent) (8) Sarvatman (soul of all) (9) Sarvavi- 
khyata (well known to all) (10) Sarva (identical with all) 
(11) Sarvakara='®A (doing everything) (12) Bhava (source of 
all] (13;Jatin (having matted hair) (14) Dandin (having the 
stalf) (15) Sikhandin^®^ (having the tuft) (16) Sarvaga (reach- 
ing eveiy thing) (17) Sarvabhavana (conceiver and creator 
of all) (18) Hari (identical withHari) J9) Harinaksa (deer- 
eyed j (20) Sarvabhutahara (destroyer of all living beings) 
(21) Smrta (remembered) (22) Pravrtti (activity) (23) 
Nivrtti (withdrawal of worldly activity) (24) Santatman®®^ 
(of quiescent soul) (25) Sasvata (permanent) (26) Dhruva 
(steady) (27) Smasanavasin^®^ (residing in the cremation 
ground) (28) Bhagavan^®® (lord) (29) Khecara (one walking 
over the sky) (30) Gocara (one walking over the earth) (31) 
Ardana"*®® (one who harasses) (32) Abhivadya (one who is 
worthy of being saluted) (33) Mahakarman (one of great 
tasks) (34) Tapasvin (ascetic) (35) Bhutadharana (one 


388. Sthanuh ~-tis(hanty asmin ST. : the abc^ic of the universe. Gf. 
‘samsaramandapasyasya mulastambhaya sambhave’— cited in ST. 

389. Bhanu — the sun or the illuminator of the universe. Cf. ‘yasya 
bhasa sarvam idaih vibhati’ —cited in ST. 

390 . Varadab — one who grants boons or one who destroys the covering 
of illusion (maya-vilasan dyati khandayati) ST. 

391. Sarvakarah — the material cause of the universe. Cf. ‘yato v& 
imani bbutani jayante*— cited in ST. 

392. Sikhandi— in the form of a hunter adorned with the peacock 
feathers. 

393. Santatma— identical with the persons devoid of desires. Gf. 
yaccasya santato bhavas tasmadatmeti giyatc — cited in ST . 

394. Smasana-vasi — one who abides in susumna artery. For this 
meaning susumna ST. quotes Hatha-yoga-pradipika: ‘*su?umna sunya- 
padavl brahmarandhram mahapathah / ^masanam sambhavi madhya- 
margascetyekavacakah. 

395,. bhagavan — sadgunaisvarya-visisthah ST. Gf. Visnu. ‘ut- 
pattim pralayam caiva bhutanam agatiih gatim vetti vidyam avidyaih ca 
sa vacyo bhagavan iti. 

39b. Ardanah -one who causes distress to the sinner (ardayati=pida- 
yati) or one who lives on alms (bhaiksya-caryaya carati) ST. 



264 


Lingapurdna 


who sustains the living bcirigi>; (36) Uiinuitiawsa^®'^ (one who 
appears in the guise of a mad man j ^37 J Pracchanna (one who 
is in disguise) (38 ) Sarvaloka ((iiiini-srer ), ^3')} Prajripati(lorH 
of subjects) (40) Mahai upa-"*”** (one having gi eat forms ) (fl ) 
Mahakaya (one of gieat body) (^2) Sivatupa*'*® v<>nc ol 
auspicious foims) (f3) Maha\asas v<aic whose fame is gieal) 
Maliaiman fGreat soul. (4^^ Sai vablifita (one who has 
become all) (*16 i Virupa*^^* (del(»rm(‘d) (17)Vamana (dwaif) 
(48; Xaia^^^ (man) Lokaj)ala (the pn^tc^ctoi ol the 

woilds'^ (jU] Antarhilaiinan (one whose soul is hiddui) 
(oP Prasada (j)leasure) (Vi Ablia>ada^^“ (bestowen ot lear- 
Icssnrss) (v33) Vibhu^'^*' (all-[)('i\ading 1 4) ) Pavitia (holy) 
(V); Mahan (great) ''7)6 Nnala (nstiaiued) (^>7) Xi\ala- 
sia\a (invariable suppoit' (38) S\ayambhu (sel(-boin) fj9) 
Saivdkarrnan <^one pv'i loi ining all hoK litcs (Wt j Adi**^^ (the 
first (»iK ) (61; Adikara^^’* (one wIh^ ciiat(‘s tin* liisi; (62) 

X'idhi (^treasure for all,. 

61-70 (63) Sahasraksa (thousancl-(‘)(xl ' (64) X'lsfilaksa 

(vvide-eved) (63) Soma ('a('t om])aiM(‘d b) l^ma i (>6) 
Naksaira Scldliaka (the iieau>i ol stai.s) ^'67) Candra 
(identic al with the moon) (>8) Sfuya (ich^nlieal with the 
sun) (60) Sani /"identical willi saiuiny (70)Kelu (identical 
with Kelu) ^71) Graha*’^^ (\AtiiH i ^ {72 j (riahapati'*^’ (the loid 

VH’ Unmalta-Vesah -this infers lo his abnormal behaviour in 
Daru forest (Gh. ). 

MaJiarupah— ol gnat dimenbum. Cit inahato niahiyan'— cited 

in sr. 

N.S. Text reals saivarOpah loi Sivarfipah or l§avaiiipah. 

400. Virupali- sarabha-paksiiupali ST . one who has the form of a 
bird (--vi). See rh.;^i. 

1-0 1. Narah one who assumed a human shajje, 

402 Abhayadali abhayatn svatmaikyaiu dadaii ST. one who idciili- 
fies himself with his devotees and tiuis makes them fearless. Cf. ‘bhayarh 
dvitiyabhinivesatah syat- cited in ST. 

404. Vibhuh — omnipresent, Cf ‘tenedam purnam purusena sarvam’ 
cited in ST. 

I.04. Adih primeval being. Cf. ‘yo devanam prathamam purastat — 
cited in ST. 

jo;^. Adikarah the creator of the creator. Cf. ‘yo brahmanam 
vidadhati purvain’- cited in ST, 

406. Grahah — Vrstyavagrahakarako bhaumah ST. Mats who with- 
holds rains. 

407. Giahapatih — lord of planets (grahas), i.c. Jupiter (Brhaspati). 



265 


Thousand Karnes of Siva 

of planets) (73) Mata^®® (identical with Budha (74) Rajan^o® 
(king) (75) Rajyodaya*^® (cause of the rise of kingdoms) (7(); Karta 
(the doer) (77) Mrgabanarpana^^^ (one who dischaigcs arrows 
on the deer) (78) Ghana (solid, cloud) (79) Mahatajjas (of 
great penance) (80) Dirghatapas (of long penance^ i81) 
Adrsya (invisible) (82) Dhanasadhaka (realiscr of rithes) 
(83) Sarhvatsara (vear) (84) Krti^^‘^ (one who has fullilled 
duties) (85) Mantra (identical with mantra) (86) Piana- 
vama, (87) Parantapa (one who scorches enemies) (88) 
Yogin (89) Yoga (90) Mahabija (havi g great seed) (91) 
Maliareta'> (one whose semen viriU is great) (92) Mahabala 
(one of great strength, (93) Suvarriaietas (having golden 
semen; (94) Sarvajfia (omniscient) (95) Subija*^ * (having 
good seed) (%) Vrsavahana (bull-veliicled) (97 ^ Dasalmhii 
(having ten arms) (98) Animisa (winkless) (99; Nilakanlha 
(blue-necked; (100) Umapati^^^ (lord of Urn.i) (K/t ) Vi<va- 
lupa (universal formed) (10^) Svaxaiiisrestha (cme who is 
the most excellent ones<‘ir; (103) Bcilavira (stiong and heioic) 
(lot) Balagrani leader of the arm) ; (105) Cianakarta (cieaior 
of ganas) (106) (Janapati (lord of the ganas) (107) l)ig\vsas 
(naked') (108) Kaniya (one wwthy of being loved) (109) 
Mantravit iknow<'r of the mantras) (11()' Paiama (gieate.M; 
Mil . Mantra (112; Sarvabhavakara (ind i cr of all emotions; 
(113) Haia (destroyer) (114) Kamandahidhara (holding (he 
water-pot) (115) Dhanvin (holding the oow') (116) Banahasta 
(having arrows in the hand) (117) Kaprllavan (having the 
skull) (118) Sari (having the arrows) (119) Sataghni (having 
the hundred-killer wtapon) (120) Khadgin (having the sword) 
(121 j Pattisin (having the iron club) (122) Ayudhin (having 

408. Matah — the planet mercury (budha). 

409. Raja —the planet Venus. 

410. RajycHiayali— -Rahu S’f 

411. Mrgabanarpanah. ST. cites Mahmna siotia to explain the 
legend of Brahma becoming a deer and of Siva, an arrow. 

412. Krti — N.S. text reads krtah -= krta-yugarupah ST. 

413. Subijah —whose semen virile is infallibly productive. It r'^fers 
to the birth of Karttikeya, the son of Siva, out of the fire. The (ire could not 
destroy the semen of Siva. 

414. Uma-pati6 — lord of Energy in the form of Om, or the master 
of Brahma-vidya. Gf. Kena — ‘Brahma-vidyaiva om — cited in ST. 



266 


Lingapurd^ 


weapons) (123) Mahan (great) (124) Aja (Unborn) (125) 
Mrgarupa (having the form of the deer) (126) Tejas (splen- 
dour) (127) Tejaskara (creator of splendour) (128) Vidhi 
(precept) (129) Usnisin Shaving turban) (130) Suvaktra 
(having good face) (131) Udagra (exalted) (132) Viiiata 
(humble) (133) Dirgha (long) (134) harikeSa**® (green- 
haired) (135) Sutiitha (having good holy centres) (136) 
Krsna*^* (black or identical with Krsna, the son of Vasudeva) 
(137) Srgalarupa**’ (one having the form of a jackal) (138) 
Sarvartha (having all riches) (139) Munda (one witli ton- 
sured head) (140) Sarva^ubhamkara (one who does good to 
all) (141) Simha^ardularupa (one having the forms of lion 
and tiger) (142) Gandhakari (one causing fragrance) (143) 
Kapardin (one having mattea hair) (144) Urdhvaretas (one 
of sublimated sexuality) (145) Urdhvalihgin (one having the 
penis lifted up) (146) Urdhva^ayin*^* (one lying upwards) 
(147) Nabhas (one abiding in the sky) (148) Tala (ol the 
form of patala — nether world), (149) Trijatin^” (one having 
three locks of matted hair) (150) Ciravasas (one wearing 
bark garments) (151) Rudra (of tearful form) (152) Sena (in 
the form of army of Devas) (153)Pat! (sustainer of the people) 
(154) Vibhu (lord). 

71-80. (155) Aliorairain (of the form of day and night) 

(156) Naktam (of the form of night) (157) Tigmamanyu 
(of fierce r.r/fr) (158; Suvarcas (having good refulgence) 
(1,59) Gajahc alayer of the elephan t ) (160) Daityaha (slayer 
of the daityas) (161) Kala (deain, tunc) (162) Lokadhala®-^'^ 
(erentor ol the 'vorld.) (163) Gurikuta**^ (mine of good 
qualities) Sim‘Mi^ardular’p.Vaam ardra-eatinamhara- 

dll oa (one whe wear- the fre':h hide o', die lion and tiger as Ms 
cli'h) (iho; K.Sh yogin (oijt i/h i o..nects ^veiyThing with 


4i'>. riarikedai -Jord of Visnu . i , 'ir.il (k) . 

416. Kn'ia - m the form of A y aa 

417. Srg&larripal^ See ch. 

4ifl. Urdhvasayi — one who sleeps in t'^e firmament ST. 

419. Tri-jati. — having Prakrti of three gunas as his consort. 

420. laika-dh&^a — support of the fo.iiteen worlds. 

421. Gunakarah — mine or the receptarlc of yogic gunas fch.16; or 
of the 24 gunas admittcii by the Nyaya philosophy. 



267 


Thou:^and Names of Siva 

time or death) (166) Mahanada Thaviner cound) (167) 
Saivava^a (abode of all; (168) Catuspatha*-^ (one who goes 
in all four ways at the same time) (lb9) Nisacara (one walking 
at night) (170) Pretacarin^^^ (walking among ihe ghosts) 
(171; Sarvadarsin (seeing all) (172) Mahesvara (great lord) 
(173) Bahu (omni-formedl (I74)Bliuta(of the formofthepast) 
(175; Bahudhana (one having much wealth) (176) Sarva- 
Sara (essence of all) (177) Mrtesvaia (lord of the dead) (178) 
Nrtyapriya (one who is fond of dances < I79j Nityanrtya (one 
who dances perpetually) (180) Nartana^^^ (one who makes 
others dance) (181) Sarvasadhaka (achiever ol all) (182) 
bdivaiiiiuka (one who has a bow; (183) Mahabahu (large-armed) 
(184) Mahaghora (extremely terrible) (185; Mahatapas 
(of great penance) (186) Mahasara^-^ (of great arrows) (187) 
Mahapasa (having a great noose) (188) Nitya (permanent) 
(189) Giricara (walking over the mountains) (190) Arnatah 
(not recognizable)^^® (191) Sahasrahasta (thousand-armed) 
(192) Vijaya (victorious) (193) Vyavasaya (enterprise) 
(194 Anindita (uncensured) (195) Amarsana (angry'^) 
(l^^b Marsanatrna (one v^ho fiidures and excuses) (197) 
Yajnahil®^’ Destroyer of tb sacrifice; 198) KAmanasana 
(dehroyc! of Kama) (199; Daksaha ( laycr of Daksa) 
(2U0y Paricarin (one who walks all round; (201) 


.yii. Gatuspathah— the path oi the four goals of Ixf^, vr/. dharma, 
(li; artha, (lii) kiUna, viv) moksa. Or the originator of four stages of life, 
VIZ. (i) brahma-carya (stage of celibacy) (lii) gihasUia (stage of a house- 
holder;, (iii) V'anaprastha (stage of a forestei), (iv) saiuiyasa (stage of a 
renounrer). 

4^1. Preta-v^haiiah' one who has a prcla (a J i arted l»^mg) as 
his vehicle. Cl. Camund^ sava-v ana— cited m oT. 

424. Nartanah — sarva-prerakah. ST. oue who instigate^ all to 
activity. 

t'j. Maha^arah- one who has a powciful missile. ST. refers to 
Siva’s destruction of Tripuri. 

426. ST, dissolves ‘giriraio niatah' as ‘ghicarah amaCdi’* arnatah 
— unknown o unrecognized. ST refers to .ae event of Darn fon st when the 
sages could not recognize him dressed in strange guise 

427. Yajnaha — destroyei of sacrifice. It refers to the l^-gend of Si^a 



268 


Lingapurdna 


(201) Prahasa*^® (one who laughs aloud) (202) Madhyama^-® 
(Middling) (203) Tejsas^®® (of the form of fire) (204) 
apaharin (destroyer of the universe) (205) Balavan (strong) 
(206) Vidita^®^ (known) (207) Abhyudita (one who has risen 
up) (208) Bahu^®® (many) (209) Gambhiraghosa (one 
whose voice is profound) (210) Yogatman of yogic soul (211) 
Yajnaha (i.e. destroyer of the sacrifice) (212) Kamana (ol ihc 
form of desire for release) (213) Asana (Destroyer) (214) 
Gambhirarosa (one whose fury is profound) (215) Ganibhha 
(majestic) (21 d) Gambhira Balavaliana (one whose stungth 
and vehicle are profound) (217) Nyagrodharupa (one who has 
the form of the holy fig tree) (218) Nyagrodha (identical 
with the holy fig tree) (219) Vi^vakarman (one of uni\ersal 
activities) (220) Viivabhuk (swallower of the univcise) i221) 
Tiksna (one having fierce form) (222) Apa^a (one who dex's 
not take the riches of his devotees) (223) Haryasva^^^ (^hrt\ing 
green horses) (224; Sahaya (help) (223) Karina^’^'* the 
form of sacrificial ritual ; (226) Kalavid^*^^ \^one who knows the 
time) (227) Visnu fpcvading all) (228) Prasadita (oiu who 
has been* propitiated ) (229) Yajna (230) Sainudia ^^f t^an) 
(231) Badavarnukha (mouth of the submarine fire; /232) 
Hutaianasahaya (one who is helped (assisted) by fire) t233 ) 
Praiiantatman (quiescent soul) (234) lluiasana ifirc; 23)/ 
Ugratejas (one whose refulgence is furcc*) (236) Mahati jas 
(of great splendour ; (237) Jaya (victory) (238) \’ija>akalavid 
(one who knows the time of victory). 


428. Prahasahi— ■who is prone to laughter. Cf. ‘sphutattahfiso- 
ccalitandakosah*— •Szza Kaiaca as cited in ST. 

Madhyamah the middling. It refers to the Rudra form of .^iva. 
Cf. ‘‘madhyato Rudram isanam” — cited in ST. 

430. Tejas — in the form of fire. Cf. “Rudro va esa yad agnih” cited 
in ST. 

431. Viditah — brahmavid-rupah. ST, one who has identified him- 
self who those with have realized Brahman, “brahma-vid brahrnaiva 
bhavati’*— cited in ST, 

432. Bahub — ST, dissolves as *a-bahuh’ — one, not many, “ekam 
Bad vipra bahudha Vadanti” -cited in ST, 

433. Haryasvah— one who has Vi^nu for his vehicle ST, 

434. Karma— one who symbolises pious or charitable deeds. 

435. Kalavid— one who knows auspicious or inauspicious times ST, 



269 


Thousand Names of Siva 

81-100. (239) Jyotisamayanam (the cause of the transit 

o( the luminaries) (240) Siddhi (Achievement) (241) Sandhi 
(alliance) (242) Vigraha (clash) (243) Khadgin (one who has 
a swoid) (244) Sankliin (one who has a conch) (245) Jatin^®^ 
(one who has matted haii ) (246) Jvalin (one who has flames) 
(217 ) Khccara (one moving about m the firmament) (248) 
Dyucaia (one moving about in the heaven) (249) Balin 
(strong) (250) Vainavin (one having the lute) (251) Panavin 
(oik having the Paiiava drum) (232) Kala (Death, Time) 
(233; Kalakanlha (dark-necked) (234^ Katahkata (one who 
lovingly touches the elephantine face of his' son Ganesa) (235) 
Naksatravigraha^^’ (one having the stellar body) (236) Bhava 
(v^iiioiion) (257 j Vibhava (fiicnd) (258) Sarvatomukha*^® 
(havingfaces all round) (259) Vimochana*^® (one who leleases 
(260 Sarana (refuge) (261) Hiranyakavacodbhava (born of 
golden armour )’(262) Mckhala(oiic in the form ofyoni — womb) 
(263; Krtirupa (one in the form of effoit) (264) Jalacara^® 
(one having actions similar to those of senseless persons) (265) 
Stuta (one who is eulogised) (266) Vlni (one having the lute 
Mna) (267) Panavin (one having the drum Panava) (268) 
Talin^**^ (one having the Tala (beating of the time) (269) 
Naliii^^^ (one having the tube) (270; Kalikatu (one who 
is harsh to Kali) (271) SarvaturyaninaiUn (one who sounds 
his instruments) (272) Sarvavyapyaparigraha^^® (one who is 
omnipresent and does not accept gilts) (273) Vyalarupin 
(one having the form of a tigei ) (274) Bilavasa (one residing 
in a hollow) (275) Guhavasa^^^ (one whose residence is 


436. Jati— one who is the base of the universe ST, 

437. Nak^atravigrahah — one who is the abode (vigraha) of cons- 
tellations. 

438. Sarvatomukhah — ha^'^ing face in alt directions. “Visvatai 
caksur uta vi^vatomukhah”'— cited in ST, 

439* Vimocanali — one who releases jivas from the net of twentyfbur 
tattvas. 

440. Jalacarafi or Jaladharah— one who is the support or the cause 
of movement for watery reservoirs, rivers, streams and oceans. 

441. Tali — one who has a tala — a musical instrument. 

442. Nali — one who holds a lotus in his hand or is bom of a lotus. ST » 

443. Sarva-vyapi — one who has an all-pervasive subtle body. 

444. Guhi'Vi^ -one who abides in guha (intellect) 



270 


Ltfigapurana 


cave) (276) Tarangavid (one who knows the innermost idea) 
(277) Vrksa 'kalpavrksa) (278 j ^'rinialakarmin^^® (one who 
has Sriksetra as the sphere of his worship) (279) SarvabandJia* 
vimocana ('n ^ who ruuaics 'devotees from all bond.^ges) 
(280) BanJhioa i^one who binds (he non-devotees) [2ijl) 
Surcndrana*n yndhi ^aU’»vinasana (one wdio destro\s the 
enemies of Devas in rlie battle) (282) Sakha'^^® (^friendj *283) 
Pravasa^**^ (shelter tor all ) »284') Diirapa (unattainable j (283; 
♦'^arvasadhuriisevita (one who is resorted to by all good men , 

(286) PraAaiida 'one who is drying up and moving ri\eecJj 

(287) Avlbhfwa :'onc who is not comprehended) (288; lulva 
(equal (289) Yajhavibhagavid (one who knows the divi- 
sions (jf Y^jha^'i (29U; Sarvavdsa^^^ (one who abides in all; 
(29i ) Saiv'icann (one who g« ts everywhere) (292; Dnrvasas 
Identical w'iilx the sage of that name; (293;Vasava (Indra) 
(294) Mata^^® /"non-dual; (295) Hainia (pertaining to gold or 
snow) (296; llcmak-ira (one who has gold in his hands) 121)7} 
Yajha (sacrii’ee) (298 ) Saivadhari (holding all) (299) Dhaiol- 
uma (best among ih(‘ supporters) (300) Akasa^^^ (firmament) 
(301; Nirvirupa^^^ (having no form) (302) Vivasas^'" (one 
who lias no clothes) (303) Uraga (serpent) (304) Khaga 
(going in the sky) (305; Bhiksu (heggar, mendicant) (30b) 
Bhiksurupin (one who is in the guise of a mendicant; (307) 
Raudiarupa (o!ie who has a lerrihle forni )(30C) Surupavan^^* 

445. Srhnalakannin — one who rcsorrs to the abode of Laksmi 
m^a) foi yogic trance. 

446. One who is the friend of Jiva (i.e. the individual soul) “supainav 
aitau sadrsau sakhayau’'. -cited in 6/. 

447. Pravasah — one who is the eternal abode of all mobile and immo- 
bile beings. 

448. Tulyab -unprejudiced. 

449. Saiva-vasah -one who is the sheath of all. *Msavas>am idaih 
sarvam” cited in ST. 

450. Matah — advaita-mata-rupah ST. of non-dual form 

451. Akasah — one who shines splendidly. 

452. Nirvirupah— nirgatarii viruparh sarabha-paksirupaih yasmat 
ST. the source of origin of iSarabha. It refers to the narrative of Sarabha 
occurring in this purana. 

453* Vivasa — one who has no covering over his body. i.e. naked. 

454. SurOpavan — of auspicious form: “tasyaitc tanuvau ghora anyi 
iivarupa” — cited in ST. 



271 


Thousand Names of Siva 

(one who has good forms) (309) Vasuretas (one whose semen 
virile causes riches) (310) Suvarcasvin (having good refulgence) 
(311) Vasuvega (one who has the velocity of the Vasus) (312) 
Mahabala (one who has great strength) (313) Manas (mind) 
(314) Vega (one who has velocity) (315) Nisa (night) (316) 
Cara (a spy) (317) Sarvalokaiubhaprada (one who grants 
auspitious things to all the worlds) (318) Sarvavasin^^® (one 
whoso residence is in everything) (319) Trayivasiii^'® (one 
who resides in the three Vedas) (320) Upadesakara (one who 
gives instructions) (321) Adhara (one having no support) 
(322) Muni^®^ (sage) (323) Atman (soul) (324) Muni 
(sagacious) (325) Loka (world) (326) Sabhagya (Fortunate) 

(327) Sahasrabhuk^®® (one who enjoys thousand things) 

(328) Paksm^®® (bird) (329) Paksarupa^®*^ (having the form 
' / :ho wing) (330) Atidipta (highly illuminated) (331) Niia- 
kara (moon) (332) Samira (wind) (333) Damanakara (one 
who has the form of a suppressor) (334) Artha (wealth, meaning 
purpose) (335) Arthakara (serving the purpose) (336) Avasa®®^ 
(uncontrolled by another) (337) Vasudeva*®® (identical with 
that god) (338) Deva (lord) (339) Vamadeva .(lord of oppo- 
sites) (340) Vamana (Dwarf) (341) Siddhiyogapaharin 
(one who removes Siddhi and Yoga) (342) Siddha ®®^ (self pro- 
ved) (343) Sarvarthasadhaka (one who realises all purposes) 
(344) Aksunna (undefeated) (345) Ksunnarupa (one who lias 
the form of the defeated) (346) Vrsana (one wh'^ extends 


455. Sarvavas!— all-pervasive. 

456. Traylvasi — one who abides in the three Vedas. 

457. Munih — in the form of sacred tree agasti. ST, cites Visva in 
support of this meaning. 

458. Sahasrabhuk — one who destroys (bhunktc) or protects (bhunakti) 
people. 

43^. Paksi-one who has two wings- ^.k and Saman. “^tk 
daksinaiL paksah samottarah paksahi”- ST. 

460. Paksarupah — in the form of two fortnights* white and dark. 

461. Vasah — amenable to the wishes of his jevotees. Or dissolve 
‘avaSah’- -free. 

462. Vasudevah— .yr. offers afar-fetched explanation: one who sports 
in disguise. 

4.63. Siddhah— Kapila: "siJdhanaih Kapilo munih** Bhagavad-Gfta 
cited in ST, 



272 


Lingapurdna 


morality) (347) Mrdu*®^ (soft) (348) Avyaya (unchanging) 
(349) Mahasena (one who has a big army) (350) Visakha^®^ 
(Karttikeya) (351) iSastibhaga®®® (one-sixtieth part) (352) 
Gavarn pati^®’ (lord of the line) (353) Cakrahasta (having 
discus in the hands) (354) Vistambhi^®® (impending) (355) 
Mulastambhana^®® (one who steadies the root) (356) Rtu 
(season) (357) Rtukara (one who causes the seasons) (358) 
Tala (palmyra tree) (359) Madhu (honey) (360) Madhukaia 
\^bcc) (361) Vara (excellent one) (362 ) Vanaspatya (belonging 
to a tree) (363) Vajasana^’® (one loving clarified butter) (364) 
Nitya (eternal) (365) Asramapujita (worshipped by people 
in all stages of life) (366) Brahmacarin (religious student) 
(367) Lokacarin (one who walks over the world) (368) Sarva- 
edrin (moving about on everything) (369) Sucaravit (one who 
knows good conduct) (370) ISana*^^ (371 )I^vara*'^^ (lord) (372 ) 
Kala (time, death) (373) Nisacarin (one moving about at 
night) (374) Anekadrk'''^® (having many eyes) (375) Nimit- 
tastha (one stationed in the cause) (376) Nimittam (cause) 
(377) Nandi (delighted and delighter) (378) Nandikara (one 
causing others to be delighted) (379) Kara (destroyer) (380) 
Nandi (Nandin) (381 ) Isvara®^* (382 ) Sunandin (383 ) Nandana 
(delightful) (384) Visamardana (one suppressing poison) 

# 

464. Mrduh— of soft nature. '*akr^ta-sapta-pat^a-kuharopi maha 
balah prapte Kaliyuge ghore mrdutam upayasyati” — cited in ST, 

465. Visakhah — of the form of Karttikeya 

466. Sastibhagahi— one who has sixty tattvas at his command. See 
Mai(d ukyopanifad, 

467 Gavam patih — lord of the sacred hymns. ST. quotes Siva Gita: 
*'Ghandasam yastu dhenunam fsabhatvena KIrtitah”. 

468. Vistambhi — one who makes others motionless. 

469. Mulastambhanah— Controller of Prakfti (mula) . 

470. Vajasanah — of the form of Vajasaneyi sakha of the Sukla Yajur- 

veda. 

471. Isanah -lord of all knowledge: *‘Isanah sarva-vidyanam*’. 

472. Isvarah —controller of all beings. *'i^varah sarva-bhutanam'’ — 
cited in ST. 

473. Aneka Ifk -multi-eyed. Gf. **namo astu nllagrvaya saha- 
sraksaya midhuse” — cited in ST. 

474. Isvarah— abounding in wealth or prosoerity. Gf ‘‘isvaro vibha- 
vair adhyat”— Vi^va cited in ST, 



273 


Thousand Xames of Siva 

(385) Bhagaharin (remover of Bhaga) (386) Niyantr^’’ (one 
who restrains, a charioteer) (387) Kala (388) Lokapitaniaha 
(grandfather of the worlds) (389; C'aturmukha'*^® (foui-faced) 
(390) Mahalihga (having great lihga) (391) Carulihga 
(having charming lihga) (392) Lihgadhyaksa*’^ (presiding 
deity ol the lihgas) (393 j Suradhyaksa (presiding deity of 
Devas (394) Kaladhyaksa (presiding deity of time) (395) 
YugSvaha (bringing about the yuga) (396) Bijadhyaksa'*’* 
(presiding deity of the seeds oi corns) (397) Bijakarta (the 
maker of the seeds) (398; Adhyatma (self-centred) (399) 
Anugata (one with the followers in spiritual line) (400) Bala*’® 
(strength) (401) Itihasa*®® (Mythological text) (402) Kalpa 
(ritualistic text) (403) Damana (suppressor) (404) Jagadis- 
vara (lord of the universe) (405; Dambha (arrogance) (406) 
’^^mlshakaia (one causing arrogance) (407) Datr (donor) 
(408; Vaihia (race) (409) Vam«akara (one who maintains 
the family ) (HO) Kali (identical s\ith the yuga Kali). 

101-110. (411) Lokakarta (maker of the worlds) (412) 

Pasupati (lord of the Pasus or individual souls) (413) Maha- 
karta (the great maker) (414) Adhoksaja*®^ (Visnu, identical 
withVisiiu) (415) Aksaram (imperishable) (416) Paramam 
(great) (417) Brahman (brahman) (418 )Balavan (strong) (419) 
Sukra (Venus) (420) Nitya (permanent) (421) AnTsa (having 
no lord above him) (422) Suddhatma*®* (Pure soul) (423) 
Suddha (pure) (424) Mana (measure) (425) Gati (goal) 
(426; Havis (rice and ghee offering) (427) Pr.'isada (mansion; 
(428) Bala*®* (strength) (429) Darpa (arrogance) (430) 


475- Niyanti — charioteer, “jagad-yantra-svariipasya rathasya sri- 
mahesvarah/niyanta tata cvesah sftta ityabhidhiyate”— Ahobala cited in 
ST. 

47G. Caturmukhah- of the form of four-faced Brahma. 

.^77. Lihgadhyaksalj — lord of unmanifest Prakrti (linga). 

47,!. Bijadhyaksafi — dispenser of the fruits of dharma and adharma. 
471}. Balah— strong one. Cf. “balaya namafj” -cited in ST. 

480 Itihasab- of the form of tradition. 

01. Adhoksajah— not realizable by the organs of sense. 

482. Suddhatma— of pure mind. For ‘atman' in the sense of ‘mind*, 
sec Vi4va; ‘atma dcha-mano-buddhisu’— cited in ST. 

483. Bala— one who has an abode in the form of Kailasa). ST. 
cites ViSva: ‘balaih sthane’. 



274 


Lingapurdna 


Darpana (mirror) (431) Havya (offering consigned lO ihe 
fire) (432) Indrajit (conqueror of Indra) (433) Vedakara 
(maker of the Vedas) (434) Sutrakfira (coiiijnler of the Apho- 
risms) (435) Vidvan (scholar) (436) Parainardana (suppres- 
sor of enemies) (437) Mahameghanivasin^^^ (resident of 
the great cloud) (438) Mahaghora (exlnunely terrible (439) 
Vasiii*^^^ (one who keeps persons under control) (440 ’ Kara 
(ihe destroyer of the universe) (441) xVgfiijvala (flame of the fire) 
\^442j Mahajvala (having great flame) (413) Paridhuniravrta 
(one surrounded by smoke; (444; Ravi (sun) (445; iJhi- 
sana (intelligent one) (446) .Sankara (447) Anilya (non- 
eternal in the form of the universe) (448) Varcasvin (refulgent ; 
(449 ) Dhumre. iocana (having smoke-coloured eyes ) f 45)0 ) 
Nila‘S*'® (blue-coloured) (451 ) Angalupta^^’ (one dt ficient in a 
limb) (452) Sobhana (splendid one; (453) Naravigraha^*^*^ 
(one having human body) /454) Svasti (luiil^ (4.55 Svasti- 
svabhava (naturally faring well) (456) Bhogin ((*njoying 
pleasures) (457) Bhogakara (causing pleasur(‘s) (458^ Laghu 
(light) (459) Utsafiga (lap, devoid of attachment; ^,460) 
Mahahga (having great limbs) (461) Mahagarbliri i^having 
gn'at womb) (462) Pratapavau (valorou‘<) (463) Krsnavarna 
(black in colour) (464) Suvarna (having goc.d colour) (165) 
Indriya (sqnsc-orgau ) (466 ) Sarvavarnika [of all castes 5 olotirs )J 
(467) Mahapada (having big feel) t^468) Mahahasta (having 
big hands; (469) Alahakaya (ol gn'at body) (470) Mahayasas 
(having great fame) (471 ) Mahainurdha (having great head; 
(472 j Mahamatra'^”*^ (having great Malriis (units of tina‘'(473) 
Mahamitra (Great friend (47-* ) Nagfilaya'*®® (having mountain 
as residence) (475) Mahaskandha (having great shoulder^ (476) 
Mahakarna (having great ears) (477) Mahostha 'having 

484. Mahamegha-nivasiii — oiic who has Visim (mahamrgha) for his 
abode* 

485. Vasi— controller. 

486. Nilah- blue or daik. It refers to his aghoia form. 

48 ;. Ahga-luptah- part of whose body is possessed by Umii. 

a88. Nara-vigrahah-one who had a battle with Arjuna. 

489. Mahamati ah —controller of elephants in the form of death. 

490. Nagalayah - one who lives on mountains. 

49()a. Smasanavan — smanarh sariranam sanam tanu-karanam punar- 
janma-nivaranam Kasipuram yasya — one who saves men who live m KaSI 
from the circle of birth and death. 



Thousand Names of Siva 


275 


great lips) (478) Mahahanu (Inving gieal jaws) (479) 

MahaMasa (having gieat nose) ( l-BO ; Mahakanlha fhaving 
great nerk^ (481) Mahagiiva (having great cervix) 

(182) Sin (having the i rcmation giouncl) 

(4IU) Malia^iila 'hav ng gu'at stUMgth) (484 y Mahaiejas 
([living gna‘ sph‘iifl(viry (4>^") Aiiuii (oniniptc'scnt v48h ) 
\un in ininui n ni ( 187 Mtgalayi^ (abode of the cUm y 

( lf>8 Laiiibitosilij'''*- lia\mg suspended bps) ^189; Nn^tha 
(sticid\ } ^4 ;() \laharirt\a Uiavni*^ or uielding gM at \IS.>a). 

(I'H Pa\onidlii '.Iokiiohm ol uati i. iiiilk ' 492 / Mahadanta 
(tiiviiig gicai leiiii 193 MahacJarnstia (having gnat oin- 
ved fangs ; PH ) Ma9“i|ih\a (lie\iiig gnat tf)n^ue ' (19)) 

iMaharriukha iliaviiig gnat fan 19t> ^ Malianakha ihaMiig 

great naily (497; Mai.aioinan liaviiig gnat nan . (198; 

ihSk( ^a 1 having gicat loss's ol haii j f P‘ ^ Alah pata 
(having gnat inatti cl Inir ; 

111-120 ")00 Ysapatna'"' {lia\iiig n > ii\ iK or tiKinics) 

(901) Piajaoa**^ giaier PiaUava l)i liei »*)-) 

Gil »-saclhaka one v/no piai tises nnisu j iiOl; Pra^^•dalla 
9)n<' v^llo sweats ^ )() > \s\Ld.nia‘ (one who clix s n >1 pcTs- 
j)in ) ( /('h J vdikci'*^ <»!!( wii Is tli(‘ first ol a!l^ 9(' Alaha- 

TiiunP ^ (glial Siig( » itkJ; \| aka**'' iclhainia; >tt9 \isa- 

k< tu* ^ i«ie bull-OiUiin It 4 I >10 \iia..i iin' nl) V i\n 

valiana (wind \ihi(i<*l v ' ^b*iid<iln (< lu Ihoing halo) 
(91 M rin.iM (om liaving lie Meiti . > nsideriit y dl) 

l)c\a\iliana /lu\ a-\ i hided) d)/ Atha. vasii sa 'tin name 
of tiiL, Vcdii lexi; liiviug that as the head; ' )1(^ Sun isya 
ihasing Samar) as ilu lace)(jl7) Rksahasior jitck.s uia liavmg 

^91. An tar one who abidej» in all. 

492. Lambitoslhah -It rckib to Ganesa. 

49 i* AsdpaUuili — VMthouf a foe 01 a co-wife, 

49^. Tras ulali -one who destroys (prakai ^enasadayati) asuias. 

49*^. As\alii-nah (a-su aha-iiidlO— lord ol Visnu. iST. 

4(;(>. Vdikali -tlu primeval (patriarch), “pidjapaunam prathamam*’ 
Mbh. (Drona parva) -eitid in S'! 

497, Mah"imunih —in the ioim ol Narada. 

4c)i{. Visakah— in the form ol Dharma. 

499. Visaketuli — one who has Visa (Nandi kcbvara) 011 his nagslali. 

•■)Oo, Vayu-vahanah “"one who has wind as his Vehicle, Gf. Marun* 
maya-rathah sambhuh". — Siva-rahasya cited in A'/, 



276 


Lingapura}a 


the thousand Rk verses as eyes of great power) (518) Yajuh- 
pudabhuja (having the Yajur mantras as feet and arms) (519) 
Guhya (worthy to be secret) (520) Prakasaujas (of manifest 
power) (521) Amogharthaprasada (one whose grace is never 
futile) (522) Antarbhavya (one who should be meditated upon, 
within the heart) (523)Sudar'?ana (good to look at; (524jUpa- 
hara’"^ (one to whom gifts are presented) (525) Priya (loving 
(526) Sarva (All-in all) (527) Kanaka (gold) (528) Kancana- 
sthita (one stationed in gold) (529) Nabhi (the nave) (530) 
Nandikara (one who causes delight) (531) Harmya®**® (having 
a mansion) (532) Puskara®®* (having a lotus as [residence]) 
(533) Sthapati (monarch, architect) (534) Sthita (stadoned) 
(535) Sarvasastra (having all sacred scriptures) (536) 
Sarva-dhana (having all riches) (537 ) Sarvadya (first 
among all) (538) Sarvayajna (having all Yajfias) (539) 
Yajva (performer of sacrifices) (540) Samahita (one who has 
concentration and mental purity) (541) Naga (having moun- 
tain as home) (542) Nila®®* (blue) (543) Kavi (poet) (544) 
Kala (time, death) (545) Makara (crocodile) (546) Kala- 
pujita (one who is worshipped by kala) (547) Sagana (having 
attendants) (548) Ganakara (Maker of the ganas) (549) 
Bhutabhavanasarathi (one who has Brahma as his charioteer) 
(550) Bhasmasayin (one who lies in Bhasma) (551) Bhasma- 
goptr®®® (protector of bhasman) (552) Bhasmabhutatanu®®* 
(one whose body is fully covered with ash) (553) Gana (atten- 
dant) (554) Agama (sacred literature) (555) Vilopa (one who 
dissolves) (556) Mahatman (noble soul) (557 j Sarvapujita 
(adored by all), (558) Sukla (white) (559) Strirupasampanna 

5<)i. Upaharah — one to whom ofTerings are made. Cf. “sarve 
asmai balim aharanti” —cited in ST. 

5U2. Harmyah — one who has got a palace for his abode. 

Pu;karah — one who abides in Puskara. Puskara is a sacred 
place where Brahma is stated to have set up Nilalohita (Siva-lihga) (Sk. I. 
ii. 45, 103). It lies near Ajmer. 

504. Nilab — one who has some peculiar marks on his body . Cf. 
Viiva as cited in ST. 

505. Bhassna-gopta — one who protects through ashes. ST. quotes 
Mbh. : “raksartham mangalartham ca pavitrartham ca bhamini lahcha- 
nartham ca bhaktanaih bhasma dattaiii may a purS // 

506. Bhasma-bhuta-tanufi— who is the source of the origin of ashes. 
ST. refers to a MM. legend in this context. 



277 


Thousand Names of Siva 

(equipped with the form of a lady) (560) Suci (pure) (561) 
Bhutanisevita (resorted to by the goblins) (562) Asramastha 
(one stationed in the hermitage j (563) Kapotastha'^^’ (one 
stationed in the dove) (564) Visvakarma (doing everything) 
(565) Pati (lord) (566) Virat (huge massive one) (a67) 
Visala-sakha"^^ (having wide branches) (568) Tamros^ha 
(having copper-coloured lips) (569) Ambujala (having 
collection of waters) (570) Suniscita (well decided ) (571) 
Kapila (tawny-coloured) (572) Kalasa (water pot) (573) 
SlliQla (stout) (574) Ayudha (weapon; (575) Roniasa 
(hairy) (576) Oandharva (577; Aditi (578) Tarksya (579) 
Avijueya (incomprehensible) (5H0 ; Susarada (veiy >oung 
and fn'sh) (581) Paras vadhayudha (axe-armed) (582) Deva 
filliisirious d(‘ity ) (583) Arlhakarin (creator ol wealth; (584) 
wlhava (go('d kinsman). 

121-110. (585 ■ rumbavina (having the lute iiiach' of 

Tumba (a kind of gourd; (586) Maliakopa*'*^'** (having great 
wrath; (587 y Ordhvareias (one wJio has sublimated s('xualiiy) 
(58)8y Jalesa\a (one lying down in llu* wateis; (589; I gra 
(fu-ne) (590) V5mi^.akara (sustainer of the fanhlu‘s ; »591) 
V'arhsa ^race, bamboo^ (/)92 ) Wimsavadin (one* who ex- 
pounds rac'cS) (593 > AFiindita"^**(uiieensured; (59*1 y Sarx.inga- 
rupin (one who as.Minies the foriii of the part ol all • .595) 
Maya\in (^wielding Maya) (596) Suhrda (friend, having good 
heart) j (w'ind) (598; Bala (stirngth; (598; 

Bandhaiia "binding) (600) Bandhakarta (cause ol bondage) 
(601) Suhandhanavlinocana (one who liberates pec^ple from 
bondage.'* easily) (602) Raksasaghna (slayer of Raksasas) 
(603 ) Kamari (enemy of kama) (60*1) Mahadam.stia'^^“ {one 

307. Kapotasthah — one who assumed the form of a pigeon. ST. 
refers to the leg(‘nd of Sibi in the Mahdlhmata. 

Visala-sakhah - Veda-drumarupah in the form of the tree 
of knowledge. 

Mahakopah - mahan pujyah kopo yasya — one whose wrath 
is worshipped. Cf. “naraaste rudra manyavc” cited in ST. 

lio. Aninditah — ah Visnu nindito yasmat, through whom Visnu 
was humiliated. It refers to the legend of Dadhici. 

51 1, AniJah- one who is distinct from Jiva (—nih), the latter being 
attached to the objects of senses. 

512. Mahadaihstrah— one who has projected tusks. This refers to 
his boat -form. 



278 


Lingapurdna 


who has large curved fangs) (005) Mahay udlia (having great 
weapons) (606) Lambila (one who is suspendL'd d*/wn) v^^O/) 
Lambitostha (one whose Ups hang down suspended) (008) 
Lambahasta (one wliosc hands lianc down) (609) Varaprada 
(one who grants the boon) (610) Bahu Tarm) (611) Anin- 
dita'*^'* (imccnsured) (612) Sarva (all) (613) Sankara (614) 
Akopaiia (having no work) (615) Amarcia (lord of the 
immortal beings) (616) Mahaghora (extremely terrible) 
(617) Visvedeva (lord of the universe) (618) Surariha 
(destroyer of the enemies of Devas) (619) Ahirbudhnyad^^^ 
(620) Nirrti (621) Cekitana (knowing and conversant) (622) 
Halin (balarama with the ploughshare) (623) Ajaikapad'^^® 
(the single-footed unborn) ("624) Kapalin"^® (ha\ing the skull 
for rituals) (625) Sam (one who renders joy) (626) Kumara 
(onc wlio kills with spikes) (627) Mahagiri^^^ (great mountain) 
(628) Dhanvantari®^® (629) Dhumaketii (txmiet) (630) 
Surya (sun) (631) Vaisravana®^® (632) Dhatr (633) Visnu 
(634) Sakra (635) Mitra (636) Tva^r (637) Dhara (moun- 
tain) (638) Dhruva (steady) (639) Prabhasa (640) Parvata 
(641; \'ayu (642) Aryamrin (643) Savitr (644j Ravi (645) 
Dhrti (courage) (646) Vidhatr (Creator) (647) Mandhatr 
(648) Bhutabhavana (purifier of the living l)eings) (649) 
Nira (wafer) (650) Tirtha (holy centre) (651) Bhiina 
(terrible) (652) Sarvakarinan (performing all diJti('S) (653) 
Gunodvaha (one who lifts up the good attributes^ (bj4; 


313, Aninditah — nasti inditani paramaisvaryam yasmat 67 ‘. the 

most prosperous lord. 

514. Ahirbudhnyah- -Se^a-rupah ST. the Dragon of the Deep, one 
who has monopolized all powers and forms within himself and lies concealed 
in th« region of primeval darkness, 

51 5 * Aja-ekapad — one-footed goat, one who is devoid of motion prior 
tofrcaiion. According to .VT. it refers to his half man and half woman 
(ardhanarihvara) form. 

3if>. Kfipali— one who has created this universe consisting of heaven 
and earth ST. 

517. Mahagirihi, i.e. Himalaya. Cf. Bhagavad-Gxtd. ‘sthavaranarh 
mahagirih*’ — riled in ST. 

Diianvantari ; the physician. Gf. '‘bhisaktamarh tva bhisajam 
srnonii ” — cited in ST, 

319. Vaisravana — son of Visravana, i,e. Kubera. 



279 


Thousand Names of Siva 

Padmagarbha (one who has lotus within) (655) Mahagarbha 
(having a large womb) (656) Candravaktra (moon-faced) 
(657) Nabhas (sky) (658 j Anagha (sinless) (659) Balavan 
(powerful) (660) Upasimta (quiescent) (661) Purana (ancient 
one (662) Punyakrtj (meritorious) (663) Tamas (characteri- 
zed by tamas quality) (664) Krurakartr (Ruthless maker) 
(665) Kruravasin (ruthless dweller) (666) Tanu (slender) 
(667) Atman (668) Mahausadha (great medicine) (669) 
Sarvasaya®^® (Asylum oi all) (670) Sarvacarin (moving in 
everything) (671) Pranesa (lord of the vital breaths) (672) 
Praninam pati (lord of the living beings) (673) Devadeva 
( lord of Devas j (674) Sukhotsikta"^^ (proud due to happiness) 
(675 Sat (existent) (676) Asat (non-existent) (677) Sarva- 
ratnavid (knower of all jewels) (678) Kailasastha (stationed in 
K'^ilasa) (679) Guhavasin®^^ (residing in a cave) (680) Hima- 
vad (snowy) (681) GirisaihSraya (one who has resorted to 
the mountain Himalaya) (682) Kulaharin (one who removes 
the families) (683) Kulakarta (one who does not shape the 
race) (684) Bahuvitta (one having much wealth) (685) 
Bahupraja (one who has many children) (686) PraneSa 
(lord of the vital breaths) (687) Bandhaki®^^ (of the form of 
maya J (688) Vrksa®^^ (the destroyer of inaya (689) Nakula 
(maiiguose) (690) Adrika (mountaineer) (691) Hrasvagriva 
(one with a short neck) (692) Mahasanu (one with large knees) 
(693/ Alola (not fickle) (694) Mahausadhi (great medicine) 
(695 I Siddhantakarin (one who gets according to principles) 
(696; Siddhartha (one who has achieved the purpose) (697) 
Chandas(of the form of chhandas, Gayatrl etc.) (698) Vyakara- 
nodbhava( one originating from prosody and grammar) (699) 
Siihhanada (one whose sound is like the roaring sound of the 
lion) (700) Siihhadamstra /'one having the curved fangs of 
a lion) (701) Simhasya (leonine faced) (702) Siihhavahana 
(lion vehicled) (703) Prabhavatman (one who has prowess 

-jU'*, Sarvasayah — the resting place for all. »VT. 

^21. Sukhotsiktah — the source of pleasure. Cf. “tasyaiva inandasya 
m^tram upajivanti*’ — cited in ST, 

-, 2 J. Guhavasi — one who abides in Mcni-guha (the cavity of the 
heart > . 

523. Bandhaki— in the form of allusion (maya). 

524, Vrkjati — destroyer of Maya. 



280 


Lingapurdna 


in the Atman) (704) Jagatkala (death unto the Universe) 
(705) Kala (706) Kanipin (shaking) (707) Tarir'^-*'’’ (tree) 
(708) Tanu (slender) (709) Saraiiga (Deer) (710) Bhuta- 
cakrahka^-® (one marked with the multitudes of goblins) (711 j 
Ketumalin (one having garlands of banners) (712) Suvedhaka 
(one who pierces well) (713 Bhutalaya (one who is the abode 
of living beings) (714) Bhutapati (lord of the goblins , (715; 
Ahorntra (day and night) (716) (dirt j 717) Arnala'*’” 

(devoid of dirt) ^718) Vasubhrt (one holding richt‘s (719 i 
Sarval^hutfUman (the Atman, soul of all living beings; 720 > 
Niseala (non-moving) (721) Subudha (good scholar; (722) 
Vibndlia (dev^a) .^723) Durbiidha (very difluult to compn - 
heiid; (724) Sarva bhutiinain asuhrt (he who l«ikes aviay the' 
life ol all living beings) (725) Niscala (unmoving ' 72() ; 
(ialavid (one who knows the mobile beings (727. Budlia 
(scholar) (728; Amoghasaifiyama (one whose resliaini is 
never futile) (729) Ilrsta (delighted) 730) Bhojana 'of the 
form of food) (731) Pranadharana (one who sustains life'^ 
(732 Dhrtiman reourageous) (733) Matiinan (inte!lig(‘nt ) 
(734) Iryaksa*^-^ ((hree-cye<U (735) Sukrta (well eondurtrd) 
(73b; Yudhampali (lord ol* battles) (737) Goi)h1cI pro- 
tector of the kine) (738) Gopati (lord of the kine) (739) Giaina 
(village; (740) Got Hiinavasana (one wearing the leather of 
the bull) '"741) (742) Iliranyabahu (one v/ho has 

gloden arnis^ (743) Guhavasa^^^ (resident of the rave) 
(744 j Pravesana (one who enters the cavity) (745' Mahii- 


525. Taruh— in the form of tire, i.e, creation. 

;)26. Bhuta-cakraiikah - one is the source of the origin of beings. Cf. 
“yato va imani bhutiini jayante**- cited in ST, 

.[•,27. Malah not benevolent towards the heretics. 
j 28, Amalah sinless. 

-,2y. Tryaksah thrre-eyed, so called because a third eye burst fiom 
his forehead with a great flame when Uma, playfully placed her hands over 
his tyes after he had been engaged in austerities in the Himalasas. This 
eye has been very destructive. It rendered Kama, the God of Love, to ashes; 
Dow:son, //. M, See under Trilocana. 

->30. Harah - one who destroys all at the time of dissolution. Cf. 
“brahmanam indrarh varunarii yamarh dhanadaih eva ca / nigrhya harate 
yasniat tasmad dhara iti smitah’* x\fbh. (Drona p.) cited in ST, 

531. Guhavasah -one who has an abode in intellect. 



281 


Thousand Names of Siva 

manas (lofty-tninded) (746) Mahakama (one who has great 
love) (747) Cittakama (one who has kept Kama within the 
mind) (748) Jitendriya (one who has ronquered the sense- 
organs) (749) Gandhara (750)Surapa®®* (one who drinks wine) 

(751) Tapakarmarata (one who is engaged in beating activity) 

(752) Hita (Beneficent) (753) Mahabhuta®®® (great goblin) 
(754) Bhutavrta (surrounded by goblins) (755) Apsaras®®** 
(having a watery pond in the form of the moon) (756) Gana- 
sevita (one who is resorted to by the Ganas) (757) Mahaketu 
(big-bannered) (758) Dharadhata (creator of the earth; (759) 
Naikatanarata (one who does not concentrate on a single notej 
(760) Svara (one in the form of Tone) (”^61) Avedaniya (one 
who cannot be understood) (762) Avedya (one who cannot 
be informed) (763) Sarvaga®®* (omnipresent) (764) Sukhavaha 
(one who causes happiness). 

141-150. (765) Tarana (redeemer) (766) Carana (walking) 

(767) Dhatr (creator) (768) Paridha®*® (in the form of earth) 
(769) Paripiijita (one who is worshipped all round) (770) 
Samyogin®®* (united) (771) Vardhana (one who increases) 
(772) Vrddha (old) (773) Ganika (A member of the Ganas) 
(774) Gariadhipa (overlord of the Ganas) (775) Nitya (eternal) 
(776) Dhatr (creator) (777) Sahaya (assistant) (778) Devasura- 
pati (lord of Devas and asuras) (779) Pati (lord) (780) 
Yukta®®^ (united) (781) Yuktabahu (of united arms) (782) 
Sudeva (good deva) (783) Suparvana (of good joints) (784) 
Susadha (785) (one who helps to calmly bear pain) (786) 
Skandhada®®* (one who pacifies Karttikeya) (787) Harita 
(green) (788) Hara (789) Vapus®*® Csower of seed) (790) 

532. Surapafi — one who drinks Sura (a kind of wine). Cf. “Jivhva- 
praveia-ssEmbhiita-vahninotpaditah khalu / candrit sravati y<di sarab sS 
ayad amara-varuni // HyP — cited in ST. 

533. Mahabhutafi —designated as a great being. Gf. '‘Jye$tham 
bhutarii vadanty enam”. Mbk. (Drona p.) cited in ST. 

533a. Apsarafi— a reservoir of water. 

534. Sarvagab — sung by all. 

535. Paridha — ^in the form of earth ST, 

536. Sadlyogi — united with Prakrd. 

537. Yuktafi — united with UmS. 

538. Sufadhab — one who makes pains bearable. 

539. Skandhadah — one who removes the anger ofK^ttikeya. 

540. Vapub — the sower of seeds. 



282 


Lifigapurana 


Avartam^na (one who turns round and round) (791) Anya^^^ 
(Another) (792) Vapuhsresfha (one who has excellent body) 
(793) Mahavapuh (one who has great body) (794) Siras**^*^ (in 
the form of Yajus) (795) Virnap'ana (one who examines the 
head) (796) Sarvalaksyalaksanabhusita (one who is adorned 
by all examples and characteristics (797) Aksava (one who is 
imperishable) (798) Rathagita (one who has music in the 
chariot) (799) Sarvabhogin (one who enjoys all pleasures) 
(800) Mahabala (one who has great strength) (801) baninaya 
(one who has the Vedas) (802) Mahamna\*a (one wh(js(' Vedas 
are great) (803) Tirthadeva (lord of the holy centres) (804) 
Mahayasas (having great fame) (805) Nirjiva (one from 
whom emanates all life) (806) JIvana (one who enlivens) 
(807) Mantra (808) SuV)haga (fortunate < (809) Bahukarkasa 
(excessively hard) (810) Ratnabhuta (one who has become 
precious) (811) Ratuahga (one who is part of a jewel) (812) 
Maharnavanipatavid (one who know's the fall into a great sea) 
(813) MQlam (root) (814)Visala (wndc) (815) Aniilain (nectar) 
(816)Vyaktavyakta(oiiew4io is clear and not clear) (817 )Taponi- 
dhi (storehouse of austerities) (818) Aroharia(one that ascends) 
(819) Adhiroha (one who rides) (820) Siladharin (one who 
holds good conduct) (821) Mahatapas (one of gn at ])eiiaiice) 
(822) Mahakantha (one wdio has a great neck) (823 ) Maha) ogin 
(great Yogin) (824) Yuga (825) Yugakara (creator ofyugas) 
(826) Hari (827) Yugarupa (having the form ol‘ the yuga) 
(826) Maharupa (one who has great forms) (829) Vahana 
(bcanng) (830) Gahana (inaccessible) (831)Naga (mountain) 
(832) Nyaya (logic, justice) (833) Nirvapana'"'^'* (alleviating, 
pacifying) (834) Apada (footless) (835) Pandila (scholar) 
(836) Acalopama (comparable to a mountain) (837) Bahumala 
(haying many garlands) (838) Mahainala (having great gar- 
land) (839) Sipivista®**^ (one who has penetrated the rays) 
(840) Sulocana (having good eyes) (841) Vistiira (extension) 


541. Anyah— distinct from Prakrti. 

542. Yajuh — in the form of Yajur-veda, Cf. “tasya yajur eva sirah” — 
cil?d in ST. 

543. Nirvapanah — the eternal sower of seeds. 

544. Sipivistah — in the form of Visnu. Cf. Visnuh Sipivistah — 
cited in ST. 



283 


Thousand Names of Siva 

(842) Lavana (salty ocean) (843) Kupa (well) (844) Kusuina- 
riga (one whose limbs are flowei-likc) (845) Phalodava (one 
who acts well till the fruit is reaped) (846) Rsabha (bull) (847) 
Vrsabha (taurus) (848) Bhahga (breaking) (849) Mani- 
bimbajatadhara (one who holds jewelled image and matted 
hair) (850) Indu (moon) (851) Visarga (discharge) (852) 
Sumukha (having good lace) (853) J^ura (heroic) (854) 
Sarvayudha (one who has all weapmis) (855) Saha (one w^ho 
endures ) . 

151-1G8. (856) Nivedana (one who informs; (857 ) Sudhajata 
(one born of nectar ) (bSO'jSvargadvara'*^^ (one who is the gate- 
way to the heaven) (859 ) Mahadhanus(ore who has great bow) 
(860; Giravasa (one who resides in specc,h) (861) Visarga 
(subsidiary creation) (862) Sarvalaksanalaks^avid (knower 
» haractcristics and examples) (863) (iandhamalin (one 
who has sweet smelling garlands) (864) Bhagav (lord) 
(865) Ananta (endless) (866) Sarvalaksana (one who has all 
characU'ristics) (867) Santana (sei'ies) (868) BahuJa (a be*!- 
tower of riches) (869) Bahu (one having long arms) (870) 
Sakala (having the digits) (871 ) Sarvapavana (sanctilier 
of all) (872) KarasthalP*’ (having the })ol in the hand) (873) 
Kapalin’^® (having the skull ) (874) Urdhvasarahanana (having 
the body lilU'd up) (875) Yuvan (youthful) (876) Yantra- 
taniia-suvikhyata (one who is well kiitywn lor his yantras 
and tantras) (877) Loka (world) (878) Sarvasraya (one who 
is the support of all) (879) Mrdu (soft) (880) Muiicla (one 
wnth shaven head) (881) Virupa (deformed) (882) Vikrta 
(spoiled) (883) DaneJin (one having the stall) (884) Kundin^*® 
(one having the sacrificial pit) (885) Vikurvana^^® (one who 
alters and affects) (886) Varyaksa (one who has the eyes in 


545. Svarga-dvarah — the door to happiness. For the definition of 
Svarga compare: ‘*yan na dufikhena sambhinnaih na ca grastam anantaram 
abhilasopanitaih ca tat sukhaih svahpadaspadam. 

546. Bhagavan — aiivaryavan ST, glorious or prosperous. 

547. Karas th&li —one who cats in the palm of his hands. Gf. “tatah 
karatalikrtya vyapi h&lahalam Visam”, Bhag.»— cited in ST, 

548. Kapali — one who sustains or nourishes Brahma (ka). 

549. Kundi — one who carries Ganges over his forehead. 

550. Vikurvanah— one who is not accessible through activities. 



284 


water ?) (887) Kakubha*®* (prominent) (888) Vajrin (having 
the thunderbolt) (889) Diptatejas (one of illuminated splen- 
dour) (890) Sahasrapad (thousand-footed) (891) Sahasra- 
murdhan (thousand-headed) (892) Devendra (lord of 
Devas) (893) Sarvadevamaya (identical with all Devas) 
(894) Guru (preceptor) (895) Sahasrabahu (thousand-armed) 
(896) Sarvahga (having all limbs) (897) Saranya (worthy of 
being sought refuge in) (898) Saiyalokakrt (maker of all the 
worlds) (899) Pavitra (holy) (900) Trimadhu (having three- 
fold honey) (901) Mantra (in the form of the sacred hymns 
of the Vedas (902) Kani§tha®®* (youngest) (903) Krsnapihgala 
(dark and tawny-coloured) (904) Brahmadanda-vinirmatir 
(maker of the staff of Brahma) (905) iSataghna (one who 
kills a hundred) (906) Satapa^adhrk (one who wears a hun- 
dred nooses) (907 ) (identical with the units of time®®® such as 
Kala (908) Ka^ha (909) Lava (910) Matra (911) Muhurta 
(912) Ahah (day) (913) Ksapa (night) (914) Ksana (915) 
Visvaksetraprada (one who grants the holy centres of the 
universe) (916) Bija (seed) (917) Lihgam (918 Adya 
(primeval'being) (919)Nirmukha (one whose face has vanished) 
(920) Sadasad (existent-cum-non-existent ) (921) Vyakta 

(visible) (922) Avyakta (invisible) (923) Pitf (father) (924) 
Matr (mother) (925) Pitamaha (grandfather) (926) Svarga- 
dvaram (the gateway of the heaven) (927) Mok$advaram 
(gateway of the salvation) (928) Prajadvara (one who is the 
arch-door for his devotee) (929) Trivi^tapa (heaven) (930) 
Nirvanam (salvation) (931) Hrdaya (heart) (932) Brahma- 
loka (the world of Brahma) (933) Paragati (the greatest goal) 
(934) Devasuravinirmatr (one who creates Devas and the 
Asuras) (933) Devasuraparayana (one who is interested in 
Devas and Asuras) (936) DcvSsu -aguru (the preceptor 
of Devas and Asuras) (937)Dovh (the lord) (938) Devarura- 
namaskrta (one wiiu is bowed ic by Devas and the Asuras) 
(939) Dcva-uj:i nahamatra 'r't;;. official and minister unto 
Devas and Asuras) (940) L'evasuraganaSraya (one who 

551. Kakubhab — one who carries triiGla in his Is^ ST. 

55a. Kanifthah— ever youthful or of unmanifest form. Gf. “nity»> 
yune kaiu$th§ya yadva ’vijfteya-murtaye** — ^Abobala cited in ST , 

553. KaJa -who symbolises units of tim^ such as Kalft, etc. 



285 


Thousand Names of Siva 

is the support of the groups of all Devas and Asuras (941 ) 
Devasuraganadhyaksa (the presiding officer of the groups 
of all Devas and Asuras) (942) Devasuraganagrani (the 
leader of the groups of all Devas and Asuras) (943) Devadhi- 
deva (the overlord of all Devas) (944) Devarsi (the divine 
sage ) (945 ) Devasuravaraprada (one who grants boons to all 
Devas and Asuras) (940) Devasure^vara (lord of all Devas 
and the Asuras) (947) Visnu (948) Devasuramahesvara 
(great lord of all Devas and Asuras) (949) Sarvadevamaya 
(identical with all Devas) (950) Acintya (unthinkable) 
(951) Devatatman (the Atman of the deities) (952) Svayam- 
bhava (the self-born) (953) Udgata (one who has come up) 
(954) Trikrama (one who has taken three steps) (955) Vaidya 
(physician) (956) Varada (grantor of boons) (957) Varaja®®* 
of Visnu) (958) Ambara (in the form of firmament) 
(959) Ijya (worthy of being worshipped) (960) Hastin (ele- 
phant) (961) Vyaghra (tiger) (962) Devasimha (lion among 
Devas) (963) Maharsabha (great bull) (964) Vibudhagrya 
(leader among Devas) (965) Sura (god) (966) Srestha 
(excellent) (967) Svargadeva (lord of the heaven) (968) 
Uttama®®® (the most excellent one) (969) Samyukta (united) 
(970) Sobhana (splendid) (971) Vakta®®® (eloquent speaker) 
(972) Asaprabhava (source of all hopes) (973) Avyaya (the 
unchanging one) (974) Guru (preceptor) (975) Kanta (splen- 
did) (976) Nija (one’s own) (977) Sarga (creation) (978) 
Favitra (holy) (979) Sarvavahana (having all vehicles) 
(980) Srhgin (having bom) (981) Srhgapriya (fond of horn 
peaks) (982) Babhru (tawny coloured) (983) Raiaraja (king 
of kings) (984) Niramaya] (free from ailments) (985) Abhirama 
(beautiful) (986) Susarana (a good refuge) (987) Nirama 
(devoid of unripe things) (988) Sarvasadhana (having all 
means) (989) Lalataksa (having an eye in the forehead) (990) 
ViSvadeha (having the universe as the body) (991) Harina 


554. Varajab — bom in the form of ‘samba-^iva’ at the bcficst of 
Vifou. Or dissolve ‘avara-jah’ bora in the form of fire at the time of disso- 
lution. 

555. Uttamab — the supreme soul. Cf. “uttamab puru?as tvanyab 
paramatmetyudahrtab // Bhagavad-Glti cited in ST, 

556. Vakta — ^ihe best speaker. Gf. “adhivakUi’*— cited in ST. 



286 


Lingapurdna 


(deer) (992) Brahmavarcasa (having the refulgence of the 
brahman) (993) Sthavara pati (lord of the immobile things) 
(994) Niyatendriyavartana (one who remains with restraints 
on the sense-organs) (995) Siddhartha (one who has achieved 
the purpose) (996) Sarvabhutartha (one who has all realities) 
(997) Acintya (unthinkable) (998) Satya (true) (999) Suci- 
vrata (one of pure holy rites) (1000) Vraladhipa (the lord of 
holy rites) (1001 )Param (the highest being) (1002) Brahma (the 
brahman) (1003) Muktanam parama gati (the greatest goal 
of the liberated souls) (1004) Vimukta (the liberated one) 
(1005) Muktakesa'’®'^ (one whose tresses are loosened) (1006) 
Sriman (glorious) (1007) J^rivardhana (one who incre.ises 
prosperity and glory) (1008)Jagat (universe). 

169. In accordance with the importance of the name, '*"® 
the lord of sacrifices was eulogized by me with devotion and 
attention. 

170-171. Then the king who was well known in the three 
worlds obtained the hymn of ^^iva from Tandin. lie eulogized 
the lord, the goal of the devotees, after the approval of Tandin. 
By the grace of holy lord — Tandin, the kingTridhanva of great 
fame attained the merit of a thousand horse-sacrifices and also 
the overlordship of Ganas. 

172-175. O Brahmins, he who reads this or listens to it or 
narrates this to the Brahmins, attains the merit of a thousand 
horse-sacrifices. In order to obtain release, the following sinners 
should repeat for a year these names, during the three Sandhyas 
(morning, midday and dusk) in the temple of Siva or in the 
region sacred to Siva and they should also worship the lord. 
They are : — the slayer of a Brahmin, the wine addict, the thief, 
the defiler of the preceptor’s bed, the murderer of a refugee, 
and the one who commits breach of faith with his friends. So 
also the slayer of mother, father, warrior and the child in the 
womb. 


557. Muktake^aJi^ — lord of the released souls. 

558. Yatha-pradhanam~the principal name Siva (not mentioned 
in the above list), with the ending in the dative case, is to be added to each 
of the names which are also to be put in the dative case. e.g. Oih mukta- 
kc^ya Sivaya namah* 



287 


CHAPTER SIXTYSIX 

The nanalwe of Yaydti 

Sutc said: 

1-11. By the giacc of the lord of Devas as well as of 
Tandin, Tridhanvan attained assiduously the benefit of 
a thousand hoi se-sacrificcs. Tliei rafter he gained the lordship 
of Siva’s attendants. He was bowed to by all Devas. The 
scholarly king IVayyaruna was the successor to Tridhanvan. 

3-4. He had an extremely powerful son named Satyavrata. 
He killed the king of Vidarbha®^®a of unmeasured pi owess'*®® and 
abducted his wifi' befoie the mantras of the wedding cele- 
brations were brought to a close. The king Trayyaruna 
abandoned him because he was defiled by that evil. 

j. When abandoned, he said to his father “Where shall I 
go ?” O brahmins, the father replied to him “Go and live 
anumg the Gfindalas. 

6-1 1. On being ordered thus, he went out of the city. At 
the instance of his father, the i.itelligcnt Satyaviata went to the 
Can^ala colony. On being abandoned by his father thus he 
stayed near the slum while his father went to the forest. 
The valiant (son) and meritorious king Satyavrata became 
famous in all the worlds under the name Trisaiiku. Once 
Vasistha pioiiouneed on hini a curse, v wamitra of great 
splendour graiited him boons and k owned him king 
in the hcrediiaiy kingdom. The sage performed a sacrifice on 
his behalf. Even as Devas and Vasistha were watching, the 
holy lord Visvarnitia raised him up to heaven in his human 
lorm.*^*® His wife, Satyavrata born of the Kckaya family®®^ 
gave birth to a spotless son Harisraiidra. Haris candra’s son 
Rohita wai very powerful. 

12. Harita was the son of Rohita. Dhundhu was the son 
of Harita. Vijaya and Sutejas were the sons of Dhundhu. 

558a. Vidarbha — i.c. the kin^’ of Vidarbha, mod. Bcrar, now placed 
under the administration of Mahara?tra province. 

559. Amitaujas — according to ST, it is the name of a king. 

560. For detail, Dawson : Hindu Mythology ^ pp. 288-289. 

')6i. Kekaya— K^kayas lived between the Jhelum and the Beas and had 
their capital at Girivraja (Girijak modern Jalalpur) on the Jhelum river. 



288 


LiAgapur&jM 


13. Vijaya was so called because he conquered the kings of 
the Ksatriyavarna. His sou Rucaka was a righteous king. 

14. Vrka was the sou cl Rucaka. From him was bom 
Bahu. Sagara, 'u extremely virtuous king was his son, 

15. Sagara had tv.o wives, P^c^bha and Bhanumati. The 
fiery sage Aurva^®- was propitiated by both of them, with a 
dv'sire foi sons. 

16-17. The delighted Aurva asked them to choose a boon of 
their liking out of the two, viz. one would have sixty thousand 
:>ons and the other a single son, who would continue the family 
line. Prabha choie to have many sons and Bhanumati one son 
who was Asamanjasa. 

18. Thereafter Prabha gave birth to sixty thousand sons. 
While digging the earth, they were burned by tlie angry out- 
bursts of Visnu^®'* in the guise of Kapila as if through arrows. 

19-20. Asamahjasa’s son is well known as Arhsuman. His 
son was Dilipa. FrciU Dilipa was born BUagiratha who per- 
formed penance and brought the Ganges to the earth. So it is 
railed Chagirathi. Bhagiratha’s son was Srula. 

21. Nabhaga was Lis successor. He was a valorous devotee 
ofbiv.i His son was Ambarisa, from whom was born Sindhu- 
dvipa. 

22. 'The earth, ruled over by Nabhaga Ambaiiisa with the 
power of his arms became entirely devoid ol the three- fold 
distress. 

23. The valorous son of Sindhudvipa was Ayutayus. 
Rtuparna of great fame was the sou of Ayutayus. 

24-25. This powerful king was a friend of Nala. He was 
conversant with the secret of dice. In the Puranas, two Nalas 
of stable holy rites are well known. One was the son of Vira- 
sena and the other born in the family of Iksvaku. Sarvabhauma 
the lord of the subjects was the son of Rtuparna. 

26. King Sudas was his son. He was equal to Indra. King 
Saudasa was the son of Sudas. 

562. Aurvo ag^ 4 ;i^>agnisa<jrSa};i Aurvo ST, the fiery sage Aurva, 
the son of Urva and the grandson of the famous sage Bhrgu. 

563. Vi^nu — i.e. the sage Kapila who destroyed the sons of king 
Sagara by uttering **hum’*. For detail, see Sp. (Um^amhita, p. 1610). Also 
H.M. pp. 



Narrative of Taydti 


289 


27-28. His actual name w.-*s Mitrasaha but he was more 
famous as Kalmasapada.®®* Vasistha of great splendour begot 
of the wife of Kalmasapada the son Asmaka who continued the 
line of Iksvaku. Mulaka was the son of Asmaka and Uttara 
(his wife). 

29-30. That king was always surrounded by women due to 
his fear of Para^Jurama. Desirous of protection he had recourse 
to the excellent shield in the form of women. The virtuous king 
fsataratha was the son of Mulaka. The powerful king Ilabila 
was born of Sataratha 

31. The valorous Vfddha Sarma was the son of Ilabila. 
The daughter of the Pitrs bore him the son Visvasaha. 

32-33. DilTpa wa- his son. He was famous by the name 
Khatv»iuga. He obtained a life for the duration of a Muhurta. 

heaven he came to this world for this period and conque- 
red the three fires ard the three worlds by means of his 
intellect and truthfulness. His son was DIrghabahu and Raghu 
was born of him. 

34. The powerful and valiant Aja was born of Raghu. 
From him was born the glorious Dasaratha, the sustainer of the 
family of Iksvaku. 

35. The hcioic Rama who was conversant with Dharma 
and who was well known in all the worlds was born of Pasa- 
ratha. So also were Bharata, Laksmana and !5atrughna. 

36-38. Rama, tlic best among them, h<*tl great splendour 
and excellent valour. After killing Ravana in battle and 
performing sacrifices Rama who was conversant with Dharma 
ruled over the kingdom for ten thousand years. A son well 
known as Kusa was born to Rama. His other son Lava was 
highly blessed, truthful and intelligent, \tithi was bom to 
Kuja and his sun was Nisadha. 

39. Nala was bom of Nisadha and Nabhas was his son. 
A son called Pundarika was born to Nabhas, and Ksema 
Dhanvan was his son. 

40-41. His son was the heroic and valoious Devanika. 
Ahlnara was his son and thereafter was Sahasra^va. From him 
were born Candravaloka and Tarapida. His son was Chandra- 
giri. Bhanucandra was his son. 

564. Kalni2i$ap%dal^ — -the same as Mitrasaha, a king of Iksvaku 
dynasty. For detail, Davrson ff.M. pp. 144-145. 



290 


Lingapurdna 


42. His son was Srutayu who was also known as Brhadbala. 
This powerful king was killed by Saubliadra (son of Subhadra 
i. e. Abhimanyu) in the Bharata war. 

43. These are the successor kings of Iksvaku. In general 
only the more important one? in ihe dynasty are mentioned 
here in order of their importance. 

44-45. All of them had realized l5iva. In accordance 
with their knowledge*'*®^ they had worshipped thf* lord and per- 
formed sacrihees according to the rules. The noble souls had 
all attained heaven. Some of them were liberated souls and 
yogins. As the result ot the curse of a brahmin, Nrga attain- 
ed the state of a chameleon. 

46. Dhrsta had three virtuous sons, viz.., Dhrstaketu, Yaina- 
bala and Ranadhrsta. 

47. Saryati had a son Anarta and a daughter Sukaiiya. 
Anarta’s son was Rocamana. 

48-49a. Rocamana had a son Reva. From Re\ a were 
born Raivata and Kakudmin. Reva was the eldest of a 
hundred sons. His daughter Revati was tlic w ife ui Balaraina. 

49b Narisyanta’s son was Jitatman. 

50-5 la From Nabhaga was born Ambarisa, the devotee of* 
Visnu. was his glorious son. He was the best among those 
conversant with Dharma. Krta was his virtuous son also known 
as Prsita. 

51a. The sons of Karusa were knowii as KarOsas. 

52. Prsita incurred great sin by killing the cow^ of his 
preceptor.^®® It is well known that ht was degraded as a Sudra 
due to the curse of Gyavana, his preceptor. 

53. Dista’s son was Nabhaga and from him was born 
Bhalandana. His son Ajavahana was a king of great exploits. 

.54. Thus ( the successor? of) the mighty sons of Manu are told 
briefly and the dynasty of Iksvaku (in some detail). Now I 
shall recount to you the dynasty of Aila. 

565. paSupataih jnanam — yogic practices as enjoined in Saiva cult. 
Gf* P* *35 **ote 242. 

566. Prsata killed, in ignorance, the cow of his preceptor ; Gyavana, 
mistaking it for a tiger in the darkness of night. 



J^arrative of Taydti 


291 


Siita said: 

55-56. O brahmins, Pururavas a valorous son of Ila and a 
devotee of Rudra, held an unhindered sway in the holy land 
Prayaga®*’ which is situated on the northern bank of the 
Yamuna^*® frequented by sages. He was the glorious lord of 
Pratisthana®** (Prayagaj, and well established there. 

57-58. He had si^ powerful glorious sons, well known in 
the region of the Gandharvas and devoted to Siva. All of 
them were divine, being the sons of They were: - 

x\yu, Mayu, Amayu, Visvayu, Srutayu and Satayu. 

59. Ayu had five sonf; of great powci. They were kings 
born of IVabhfi the daughter of Svarbhanu. 

60. Nahusa the first among them was known in all the 
worlds and conversant with Dharina. Nahusa’s successors were 

and they were comparal^le to Indra in splendour. 

61-62. Those (kings) of great power were bom of Vi raja 
the daughter of the Pitrs. They were Yati, Yayati, Samvati, 
Ayati, Andhaka and Vijali. All these six were well renowned. 
Yati was the eldest (T them and Yayati wa^ junior to him. 

63. The eldest royal son Yati seeking salvation, was 
united with Brahman. Among the other five Yayati was the 
strongest and most valorous. 

64. He married Devayaiii ihe daughter of Sukra. She be- 
came the denK)rie‘^s Sainiistha the daughter of Vrsa})ai'vaii. 

65. DevayanI gave birth to two som ''"..du and Turvasu. 
Both of them performed .sacrificial riles. They were highly 
spoken and weic c.xpcrts in all lores. 

;,67. Prayaga- -this is» a celebrated place of pilgrimage at the con- 
Haencc of the Ganges and Jumna m the Naim i.sa fou'st Vs.1.4). If is 
situated on the northern bank of the Ganges (.SA [ 1 . 11.12.sh). The name 
Pray.iga is recorded by Huen Tsang in the seventh century and is as old as 
the reign of Aiioka who set up the stone pillar about 23'’) B.C. The Gupta 
emperors regarded the place as the capital of Madhyadesa. 

568. Yamuna— this river rises in the Himalaya mountains among the 
Jumnotri peaks, flows for 860 miles on the plains before it joins the Ganges 
at Prayaga. 

569. Pratisthana— The Puranas are not agreed upon its locus. Some 
place it on the north and some on the east side of the Ganges. Others place 
it on the north bank of the Yamuna. 

570. Urva^I— a celebrated cclstial nymph. 



292 


Lingapura^a 


66-67. Sarmistha the daughter of Vrsaparvan gave birth to 
Druhyu, Anu and Puru. Propitiated by Yayati, Sukra ,the 
leading brahmin gave him a shining well-built golden car and 
two everlasting great quivers. 

68. The chariot was yoked to horses as quick as the mind. 
It was in this chariot that he brought home his bride. With 
that excellent chariot he conquered the earth within six 
months. 

69-7 1 . Yayati was invincible to Devas, Danavas and mortals. 
He was a devotee of Siva, a meritorious soul abiding by Dhar- 
ma. He performed sacrifices. He conquered anger. He was 
sympathetic to all living beings. That excellent chariot was 
inherited by all the descendants of Kuru until Janamejaya the 
son of Pariksit the king in the line of Puru. As a result of the 
curse of the sage Garga®” that chariot was destroyed. 

72-76. The king Janamejaya harassed the son of Garga, 
the boy Akrura, and hence attained the sin of brahmin slaugh- 
ter. The king began to emit the odour of rusting iron. He ran 
about helterskelter. Since he was boycotted by the citizens 
and the people of the land he did not obtain happiness. 
Dejected, he did not even have perfect knowledge anywhere. 
In his anguish he went to sage !§aunaka and sought refuge 
in him. The liberal-minded sage who was known as indreti 
performed sacrifice on his behalf. O excellent brahmins, for 
the sake of purification he made the king Janamejaya perform 
a horse sacrifice. 

77-79. That king of great renown was relieved of the 
bad odour of iron as well as of his sin. In the middle of the 
Avabhptha ablution the divine and splendid chariot vanished. 
Lost from that iamily it was given to Vasu king of Cedi®’* by 
the delighted Indra. From him Brhadratha acquired the chariot. 
Thereafter, killing Jarasandha (a successor of Brhadratha) Bhima, 
the. scion of the family of Kurus, gave that excellent chariot 
to Srikrs^a out of love. 

571. i&pad gargasya — ^by the curse of the sage Garga. The legend is 
not traceable. 

573. Gedi-pate^— of the king of Gedi tribe or clan. Haimako^a 
identifies Gedi-nagari with Tripuri (modern Tewar), situated on the 
Nannadi river near Jabalpur. 



293 


J^arrative of Taydti 
Sutasaid: 

80-83. King Yayati son of Nahusa crowned his son Puru 
(as king) . O excellent brahmins, it was by that Puru alone that 
he had been helped before. People of all castes including the 
leading brahmins spoke to the king who was desirous of crown- 
ing his youngest son: — O lord, how does the youngest son 
deserve the kingdom after overlooking the claims of the eldest 
son Yadu, the son of Devayani and the grandson of 8ukra ? 
We are addressing you to keep up the traditional Dharma.” 


CHAPTER SIXTYSEVEN 

The Narrative of Taydti 

Taydti said: 

1. Let the members of all castes beginning with the brah- 
mins listen to my words in regard to this why I have decided 
that the kingdom should in no way be given to the eldest son 
Yadu. 

2. My behest was not carried out by Yadu my eldest son. 
The son who is mentally opposed to his father is not approved 
of by good men. 

3. The son who acts according to ibe instructions of his 
parents is praised by good men. He is the real son who behaves 
towards his parents in a manner befitting a son. 

4. I have been treated with disrespect by Yadu, Turvasu, 
Druhyu and Anu. 

5. My instructions were particularly honoured and carried 
out by Pfiru. He is my youngest son by whom my old age had 
been taken over. 

6. Because of Devayani, Sukra had ordained that I would 
be attacked by old age. When he was requested, my old age was 
made transferable by him. 

7-10. This boon was given by Sukra himself— “The son 
who favours you shall be your heir to the kingdom. May ye 
all, O sires, approve of it. Puru shall then be crowned 
king.” 



294 


Lingapuram 


The Sages said : 

‘‘The son who is endowed with good qualities and who is 
always beneficent to his parciitsdeserves all welfare, allliough 
he may be the younger son. Lord Puru deserves this kingdom 
since he is the son who has carried out yourinslructions. Because 
of the boon granted by Sukra this cannot be made other- 
wise.” 

Suta said: 

The son of Naliusa was told thus by the delighted people of 
the land. 

11. AftC!* crowning his son Puru in his own kingdom he 
directed Turvasu his son to be the southern bolder chid. 

12. Simllafly the king employed the eldest son Yadu in the 
southern frontier and Diuhyu and Anu in the v\est and in the 
north respectively. 

13. After conquering the earth including tlie seven islands 
and seven oceans, the son of Nahusa divided the kingdom into 
three pai is among his sons. 

14. With the royal glory transferred to his sons and with 
the burden placed on his kins, the king became pleased. His 
mind was filled with delight. 

15-2* 4-. In this context the following song was formerly sung 
by the great king Yayati : — 

A man shall be glorious if only he withdraws all his desires 
like the tortoise withdrawing all its limbs, otherwise not, even 
if he performs a crorc of holy rites. 

Lust is never quelled by the enjoyment of desires. Just as 
the fire becomes all the more blazing with oil poured into it so 
also it is heightened by the same.^’® 

Whatever grain or barley the earth contains, the entire 
gold it has, and all the animals and women of the earth are not 
enough for the insatiable desire of even a single individual. 
Considering this fact, man should remain tranquil (i.c. free 
from desires) . 

When man has no sinful motives towards any living being 
mentally, verbally or physically he attains Brahman. 

573. This verse is repeated ( 1 . 8.25). It is the same as Palica- 
daSi (7.47). 



Narrative of Taydti 


295 


When mail is riol afraid of others, when others are not afraid 
of liim, when he neither despises nor hates, he attain? Brahman. 

Happimss i^ attained by one who eschews covetouhiiess 
which is diffiruh to avoid by wicked men, which docs not 
age e\ en if he ages and w'hich is an ailment that ends only with 
his life. 

When one ages, his hairs, his teeth, his eyes, his ears all do 
age. But greed alone lemaiiis lie< from old 

Everything in tcspect of a person does age ot its own accord, 
not <nherwise. But the yearning for life and the craving for 
riches do not age even if the ptTson ages. 

The happiness arising Innn the fulfhncnt of desires in th(‘ 
worlil, and the great di\ine hap[)iness of hcMven d(» ii(3t merit 
even a sixtecntli part ot that happiness which one has when 
llal^v fsi v)bjccts b dispelled. •*"•* 

Aft< i saying this lhai saintly king entered th»* (crest :\rc‘ 
ompaulcd by his wives. 

25-28 He [ii'rloimed pemince on the peak Blirgutunga."'"® 
I’heie the leiiowned king prac t' ,ed last and attained licaven along 
wuth his wives. His line of suc( essors consisted of five holy kings 
who were hoiiouicd even l)y divine sages. The entire earth is 
pervaded by these deseendants like the ia>s ot the sun. By 
reading oi listening to ihc holy narrative of Yayfiti a man 
becomes luielligent, lich, long lived, famous and blessed wnth 
issues, label aled from all sins he shall be honoured in the world 
ot Siva 


074. This is an oft-quoted verse. 

57*’, , This is an oft-quoted verse, 

576. Bhrgu-tunga— this is a peak of the Himalayas. Vardha (ch.146. 
45 “ 46 ) places it in Nepal on the eastern bank of the Gandaka where the sage 
Bhrgu had a hermitage. (3 1-33) locates it near Vitasta andHimavat. 

GEAML part I. p.70. 



296 


JJngapurOna 


CHAPTER SIXTYEIGHT 

The race of Jydmagha 

Siita Said : 

1 . I shall enumerate the members of the family of the 
glorious Yadu, the eldest son of Yayati. Even as 1 narrate 
them succinctly and in the proper order listen to it and under- 
stand. 

2. Yadu had five sons comparable to the sons of Devas. 
Sahasrajit was the eldest. The others were Kro$tu, Nila, Ajaka 
and Laghu. 

3. The king Satajit was the son of Sahasrajit. Satajit had 
three renowned sons. 

4. They were Haihaya, Haya and the king Venuhaya. 
The successor of Haihaya was the well known Dharma. 

5. O brahmins, his son was Dharmanetra. Kirti was the 
son of Dharmanetra and his son was Safijaya. 

6. The virtuous Mahi^man was the heir and successor of 
Safijaya. The valorous BhadraSre^ya was the son of Mahisman. 

7. Bhadra^re^ya’s legal heir was the king named Durdama 
who had an intelligent son known as Dhanaka. 

8-9.. The sons of Dhanaka were four and they were very 
popular. They were — Kftavirya, Krtigni, Krtavarma and 
Krtaujas. Arjuna was the son of Krtavirya. He wzis born with 
thousand arms and became the best of the lords of the seven 
islands. 

10-12. Rama who was identical with Narayana was the 
cause of his death. He had a hundred sons. Five of them were 
great heroes. They were strong, heroic, virtuous and learned. 
They had good practice in the use of all missiles. They were 
Sura, Sursena, Dhrsta, Kfsna and Jayadhvaja the king of 
Avanti. Jayadhvaja’s son Talajangha was very powerful. 

13. He had a hundred sons. They were known as Tala- 
janghas. The eldest of them the powerful Vitihotra was the ruler; 

14. Vr^ and others too were his sons of meritorious deeds. 
Vr;a was the founder of a dynasty. His son was Madhu. 

15-18. Madhu had hundred sons and Vf^iti the eldest 
was the founder of a dynasty. Vr?ni’s descendants were also 
called Vr^pis and those of Madhu are known as Madhavas. 



Race of Jyamagha 


297 


Since the Haihayas belonged to the family of Yadu they are also 
designated as Yadavas. There were five groups or families of the 
Haihayas of noble souls. They were — Vltihotras, Haryatas, 
Bhojas, Avantis and Surasenas. The last were known as 
Talajahghas also. The most famous kings among the Haihayas 
were l§ura, Surasena, Vrsa, Krsnia, and Jayadhvaja. 

19. Sura and Suravira were the pious descendants of Sura* 
sena. The land of these noble souls is known as Surasenas. 

20. The son of Vitihotra was the well known Narta. Dur- 
jaya the son of Krsna was a destroyer of his enemies. 

21. Listen to the race of the saintly king Kro^u. It con- 
sisted of excellent men. Visnu the scion of the family of Vrsni 
was born of this race. 

22. Krostu had a son of great renown named Vrjinivan. 
Mis son was Svati and Kusahku was his son. 

23. Desirous of progeny, the extremely powerful king 
Kusahku performed great sacrifices of various kinds with the 
requisite gifts. 

24-25. Citraratha his son did glorious deeds. The heroic son 
of Citraratha was king Sasabindu who performed sacrifices 
giving large sums as gifts. He observed excellent holy rites, and 
was an Emperor of great strength and valour over a large num- 
ber of subjects. 

26. §a£abindu had twenty thousand sons. They specifically 
praise Anantaka as the most excellent of jll of them. 

27-28. The son Yajfta was born to Anantaka. Yajfia’s son 
was Dhrti. His son was U^anas. That most virtuous king after 
obtaining the kingdom, performed a hundred horse sacrifices. 
The king named Sitesu is known as the son of U^anas. 

29. Marutta, the saindy king who made his family flourish, 
was his son. The heroic Kambalabarhis was the son of Marutta. 

30-31. Rukmakavaca. a learned king was the son of 
Kambalabarhis. This Rukmakavaca had killed in battle many 
heroic archers wearing coats of mail with sharp arrows and 
attained great glory. The pious soul gave land to the Rtviks 
(Brahmins officiadng) in the Horse-sacrifice. 

32. Paravrt, the slayer of heroic enemies, was bom of 
Rukmakavaca. Five sons of great strength were bom to Paravft. 



298 


Lingapurana 


33. They were Rukmesu, Prthurukma, Jyamagha, Parigha 
and Hari. The father fixed Parigha and Hari in Videha. 

34. Rukmesu became the king and Prthurukm'a was depen- 
dent on him. Compelled by them, king Jyamagha abdicated the 
throne and stayed in the hermitage. 

35-36. He remained quiescent while he stayed in the forest. 
He received enlightenment from the brahmins. Then he took 
v:p his bow and went to another land in his chariot decorated 
with flags. He went to the Narmada^’’ river accompanied by 
his wife. He went to the mountain Rksavan'^^** and passed his 
days. 

37-39. Saibyfi the chaste woman of good conduct was the 
wife of Jyamagha. After observing severe penance that fortu- 
nate lady, in her advanced age, gave birth to Sruta and Vidar- 
bha. King Sruta had no son. Two scholarly sons Kratha and 
Kaisika were born to Vidarbha. They were heroic and very 
efficient in battle. A third son was Romapada and Babhru was 
his son. 

40. Sudhrti a learned and very pious king was his son. His 
son was Kusika who was the originator of the family of Caidya. 

41-42. Kratha was the son of Vidarbha. His son was 
Kunti. Kunti’s son was Vrta and from him was born the valo- 
rous Ranadhrsja. His son Nidhrti was a slayer of enemies. The 
son of Nidhrti was Dasarha, the destroyer of his foes. 

43. Vyapta was the son of Dasarha, and Jimuta his son. 
Vikrii was the son of Jimuta. His son was Bhimaratha. 

44. Navaratha was the son of Bhimaratha. He was per- 
petually engaged in charitable gifts and holy rites. He was 
devoted to truthfulness and good conduct. 

45. His son was Drdharatha. f^akuni was his son. Karam- 
bha was born of him. Devarata was his son. 

46. From Devarata was born king Devarati of great re- 
nown. He was equal to the son of Devas. From him was born 
Devaksatra. 

')77. Narmada — this river rises in the Vindhya mountain and falls 
into the gulf of Cambay. It Hows in a wide flood-plain and is fairly deep. It 
forms a suitable boundary between the political units north and south of it. 

578. Rksavan — Riimayana places it on the Narmada river, “rksa- 
vantarh girisres^ham adhyaste Narmadam piban — Rama, 



^rikrsna^ his birth and life 


299 


47. Devaksatra’s son was Madhu of great renown. He was 
the founder of ihe line of Madluis. From Madhu was born 
Kuril vamsaka. 

48. After Kiiriivaihsa was Anu and from him was born 
Puruivan, the best among men. From him Arh<u was born to 
queen Bhadravati of Vidarbha. 

49-51. Ariisu maiiied Aiksvaki and Sattv’a was born of 
him. From Sattva was born Sattvata, endowed with good 
(jualilies who enabled the family to flourish. I'he dynasty of 
Jyrimagha has thus, been narrated to you in detail. He who 
reads or listens to this lineage of Jyarnagha lives for a long 
time and attains heavenly kingdom and liappiness. 


CHAPTER SIXTYNINE 

Srihrsita^ his birth and life. 


Suta said : 

1-2. Sattvata endowed with the sattva guna begot four sons: 
Bhajana the bi illiani, the divine king Dovavrdha, Andhaka the 
highly blessed one and Vr.sni the de^’yliter of all the desceii- 
daius of Yadu. Hear in detail the familic- 4 these four. 

3. Ayutayus, Satayus and the powerful Harsakit were 
born to Srhjayl and Bhajana the brillia.it. 

•1. Among the four sons of Sattvata, king Devavrdha per- 
formed a great penanee desiring, ‘‘I shall have a son endowed 
with good qualities."’ 

5. It is heard that those who an ctmversant with the 
myihologj of the race of Anu ^iiig that his son was known as 
Babhiu. lie was an excellent king of meritorious renown. 

b. Noble men glorify the' qualities of Devavrdha the great 
soul. Just as we hear ab- t them from far w^e see them from 
near. 

7-9. Babhru is the best among men and Devavrdha was 
equal to Devas. Fourteen thousaiul and sixty five persons had 
attained immortality, thanks to Babhru and Devavrdha. He 
performed sacrifices. He was charitably inclined. He was a 



300 


Lingapuram 


hero favourably disposed towards brahmins. He was steady in 
holy rites. He was famous. He had great splendour. Among the 
Sattvatas he was a great hero. It was in his family that the 
Bhojas equal to Devas were born. 

10. Gandhari and Madri were the wives of Vrsni. Gand- 
hari gave birth to Sumitra and Mitranandana. 

11. Madri obtained from him the son Devamidhusa at 
first and then two excellent heroes Anamitra and Sini. 

12. Anamitra^s son was Nighna. Nighna had two sons the 
highly blessed Prasena and Satrajit. 

13. The sun was an intimate friend of Satrajit. He gave him 
the jewel Syamantaka.®’® 

14-16. This jewel was the best among all the jewels in the 
world. Once he went for hunting along with Prasena. He was 
killed there by a terrible lion as he was helpless. From Sini the 
youngest son of Vrsni a son Satyaka was born. He was faithlul 
in words and was richly endowed with truthfulness. His son was 
the valorous Yuyudhana, the grandson of Sini. 

17. Asanga was the son of Yuyudhana. Kuni was his son. 
The son of Kuni was Yugandhara. Thus the descendants of 
Sini (Saineyas) have been described. 

18. A son was born to Yudhajit the son of Vrsni and 
Madri. He was known as Svaphalka. He was the benelaclor ot 
the three worlds. 

19. Wherever the pious king Svaphalka was present, there 
was no fear of either ailment or of drought. 

20. Svaphalka took as his wife, Gandini the daughter of 
the king of KasI, who gave him his daughter. 

21-24. For many years she remained in the womb of her 
mother without being born. The father spoke to her even as 
she was within the womb. "‘Be born quickly. Welfare unto 
thee. Why dost thou tarry.” Then the girl Gandini stationed 
within the womb replied to him— “O father, everyday you 
must give a cow to a brahmin. If you give thus for three years 
I will come out of the womb of my mother.” 

The father said, “So be it” and he fulfilled her desire. Her 
son from Svaphalka is said to be Akrura. He was charitable, 


579 . Syamantaka. H.M. p. 167 . 



Srihrayoy his birth and life 


301 


heroic, a performer of sacrifices, learned, and fond of guests. 
During sacrifices he distributed wealth as gift. 

25-29. Akrura married Ratna the daughter of §aiva. He 
begot of her Upamanyu, Mangu, Vrta, Janamejaya, Girirak$a, 
Upek^, Satrughna, Arimardana, Dharmabhft, Vf^tadharma, 
Godhana, Vara, Avaha and Prativaha. He had also an excel- 
lent daughter Sudhara. Two sons who delighted the family 
were born of Ugraseni (daughter of Ugrasena) to Akrura. 
They were Devavan and Upadeva equal to Devas. 

The renowned Gitraka was born as the son of Sumitra. 

30-31. The following were the sons of Gitraka — ^Viprthu, 
Prthu, Asvagrlva. Subahu, Sudhasuka, Gaveksa:^, Ari^fanemi, 
Asva, Dharma, Adharmabhrt, Subhumi and Bahubhumi. He 
had two daughters Sravistha and Sravana. 

32. To Andhaka the daughter of the king of Kasi bore 
four sons viz: — Kukura, Bhajamana, Suci and Kambala- 
barhis. 

33. Vr^ni was the son of Kukura. Sura was the son of 
Vrs^i. The highly powerful Kapotaroma was his son and his 
son was Vilomaka. 

34. He had a scholarly son Nala who was a comrade of 
Tumburu. He is known by the name Gandananaka Dundubhi. 

35. From him was born the son Abhijit. His son was 
Punarvasu. That king performed a hoi^i. sacrifice for obtaining 
a son. 

36. In the course of that sacrifice when Atiratra mantras 
were being chanted in the middle of the assembly of priests the 
child Punarvasu was born. Later on he became a scholar, omnis- 
cient, charitable and a performer of sacrifices. 

37. Twins were born to Abhijit also. They were well 
known as Ahuka and Ahuki. They were ihe best among renow- 
ned people. 

38. Two sons were bom to the daughter of the king of 
Kasi and Ahuka: — ^viz. Devaka and Ugras-na. Both of them 
were equal to the sons ofL'^'-vas. 

39. Ghildera equal to Devas were born to Devaka. They 
were Devavan, Upadeva, Sudeva and Devarak$ita. 

40-41. They had seven sisters. The king gave them to 
Vasudeva. They were Vrsadeva, Upadeva, Devarak$ita, Srideva 



S02 Lingapurdm 

&lntideva, Sahadeva and Devaki of slender waist and the 
best among them. 

42. Ugrasena had nine sons. Kamsa was the eldest among 
them. Their sons and grandsons were hundreds and thousands. 

43. The daughter of Devaka and the wife of Vasudeva 
was worthy of being honoured and worshipped even by 
Devas. 

44. The other two wives of Anakadundubhi, (Vasudeva) 
viz. the blessed RohinI and Pauravl the daughter of Bahlika 
were also worthy of being worshipped by Devas. 

45. Rohini gave birth to Rama who wielded the plough- 
share as his weapon and had great strength. Due to the fear of 
Kamsa he had resorted to his own tranquil self. 

46. After the six innocent childern had been killed, and 
after Balarama had been bom the intelligent Vasudeva, 
begot Krsna of Devaki. 

47. He alone is the supreme soul. He is Visnu the lord 
of Devas. Balarama was the lord Sesa with silver lustre. 

48. Under the pretext of the curse of Bhrgu, Visnu agreed 
to take a human body and was bom of Devaki as the son of 
Vasudeva. 

49. At the same time the Yogicsiumber Kausiki 
originating from the body of Uma became the daughter of 
Yasoda at the behest of the lord of Devas. 

50. She alone is the Prakrti bowed to by all Devas. Lord 
Krsna is Purusa the bestower of the fruit of virtue and salva- 
tion. 

51-52. Saving his own son from Kamsa, Vasudeva took 
the daughter of Yasoda and instead gave her his own four- 
armed, wide-eyed son who was marked by the scar Srivatsa 
and who held the conch, discus, iron club and lotus. 

53. After giving to Nanda (the husband of Yasoda) his 
son Visnu the protector of the worlds who had taken up a 
physical form out of his own will, he said to Nanda — “May he 
be protected.” 

54-55. It was due to the grace of Siva the lord of Devas 
of immense splendour that Visnu assumed the physical body. 
Along with Rama he handed over the lord the bestower of 
boons, the great Isvara, the preceptor of the universe, who had 



Srikr$na^ his birth and life 


303 


incarnated for dispelling the burden of the earth, saying ‘‘Here- 
by the Yadavas will attain all auspicious results. This child 
of Devaki will remove all our distresses.” 

56-59. Anakadundubhi then intimated to Kaihsa the son 
of Ugrasena that a daughter endowed with good signs had been 
born. There had been an aerial announcement — “O Karhsa of 
good holy rites the eighth child of Devaki will no doubt be the 
cause of your death.” Hence, Kaiiisa attempted to kill the 
child. But that child (of Nanda) the goddess of eight arms 
slipped from his hands and crossed to the sky. She said in a 
voice as majestic as the rumbling sound of the cloud. “Save 
your own skin. Your death has come. 

60. O foolish Kaihsa, even as you were guarding your 
own body you have committed sins. Indeed your destroyer is 
aiieady born.” 

61. It is said that due to his tear of Devaki, Karhsa killed 
the eighth child. But the eighth son of Devaki was really the 
cause of his death. 

62. O leading sages, all attempts of Bhoja to take revenge 
on him became futile due to Krsna’s power. Moreover he was 
rendered insentient by the Maya Kausiki. 

63. 'Thus Karhsa was killed by Krsna of unimpeded acti- 
vity. Many oilier destroyers of Devas and brahmins too were 
killed. 

6i. Krsna’s sons Pradyumna and othi rs have already been 
enumerated. They were many and all ol them were experts in 
batll(\ 

65-69. Krsiia’s suns were ^'qual to Krsna. Among all these 
sons Carudesna and his brothers are of special importance. 
They were the sons of Rukuiini. They were tlic destroyers of 
their enemies. Ki sna had sixteen thousand and one liundred 
wives. 'Phe most beloved and the eldest of them all was 
Rukinini. 

Lord Siva was w'orshipped for twelve vears by her and 
Krsna of unimpaired t. dvity, for the '.axe ol sons, living 
only on air (all those years). 

By the grace of the tridciit-beariug lord the following sons 
were born to Krsna viz: — (Jarudejna, Sucfirii, Cfiruvesa, 
YaSodhara, Carusravas, Caruya^as, Prr.dxurnna and Samba. 



304 


Lingapuraifa 


70. On seeing those heroic sons of Rukmini as well as 
Rukmini, Jambavati the wife of Krsna once spoke to him 
thus. 

71. O lotus-eyed one, it behoves you, if you are delighted, 
to give me a son equal to Devas, a son endowed with superior 
qualities. 

72. On hearing the words of Jambavati, Krsna the lord of 
the universe and a real storehouse of penance began to perform 
penance. 

73-75. Krs^ Narayana, the wielder of tlie conch, discus 
and iron club, went to the excellent hermitage of the sage 
Vyaghrapada. After bowing to the sage, Krsna obtained the 
divine Pa^upata Yoga. At his behest he shaved off the beard, 
moustache and the hair on the head, applied ghee all over the 
body and wore the girdle of the Munja grass. Thus initiated, 
lord Krsna the scorcher of foes performed a great penance. 

76. He performed the penance in various poses. He stood 
with arms raised up and without support, he stood on the tips 
of his toes. He spent three seasons sustaining himself on fruits, 
water and air. 

77. Satisfied with his penance, lord Siva granted him 
boons. He gave Samba the son of Jambavati to Krsna the 
noble soul. 

78. On getting the son Samba from Krsna, his wife Jamba- 
vati became highly delighted in the same way as Aditi when 
she obtained Aditya. 

79. O leading sages, by the curse®®® of Lord Siva the 
thousand hands of Bana were cut off by Kr§na. 

80. Then with Balarama to assist him he carried out the 
destruction of Daityas. He sportively killed several wicked 
kings in the battlefield. 

81. He killed the leading Daitya Naraka born of Devas. 


580. Rudrasya iSpat — Samba, son of Srikr^i^a, cut off a thousand arms 
of Bana. For a slightly different version, see H.M. p.42. 



Srikrfna, his birth and life 


305 


thanks to a boon granted by the noble brahmin Ordhvaca- 
kra.^®^ 

82. The excessively strong one, of unequalled exploit, 
Krsna took up sixteen thousand one hundred girls for his own 
pleasuie. 

Under the pretext of a curse from the brahmins he destroyed 
the family of Vrsnis. After that he, the lord, remained in 
Prabhasa.®®’^ 

84-85. More than hundred years elapsed thus even as 
Krsna ruled over Dvaraka* removing the distress due to old age. 
He acceded to the curses of Visvamitra,®** Kanva®®^ and 
Narada,®®' as also the words of Dur.asas (and stayed) in 
Pindaraka.®®* 

86. Krsna abandoned the human form under the pretext of 
the arrow of the hunter Jaraka, and after blessing that hunter 
he returned to heaven. 

87. Due to the curse of Astavakra®®’ as also due to his 
own Maya (power) the wives of lord Krsna were abducted by 
thieves. 

88-91. Balarama abandoned his human form and assuming 
that of Sesa went to his heavenly abode. The auspicious 
queens of Krsna — Rukminl and others — entered fire along with 
the body of their lord. O brahmins, the gentle lady Revati too 
entered the pyre along with her husband Balarama and 
followed his path. The extremely powerful Arjuna performed 
the obsequies of Krsna, Rama and also of other Vrsnis. O men 

fi8i . It refers to the legend narrated in HuTivamia : 

^ 5 TT I 

^ II 

582. Prabhasa— it is a celebrated place of pilgrimage in Saurastra 
the southern part of Kathiawar. ♦a city near Okha in Kathiawar. 

583-.-,8r,. For detail, Janayisyati vo mamU musalaih kulana- 

sanam -cited in ST. 

586. Pindaraka — a sacred bathing pond, somewhere in the country of 
the Yadavas, not identifiable. 

587. The curse of Asfavakra. Gf I 

iTfcftFiT: 5 nq- 11 ^rsesrr 5 

I tlftTrapT 1 1 Vim cited in ST. 



306 Lingapurdna 

of good holy rites, with bulbous roots, fruits and roots he 
performed the rites of oblation, for want of wealth. 

92-94. Then Arjuna too went to heaven together with 
his brothers. Thus, the exploits and end of the noble Krsna of 
unimpaired activity, who adopted human form out of his 
own free will, has been succinctly mentioned to you. O 
brahmins, he who reads this narrative of the kings of lunar race 
or listens to it or narrates it to others undoubtedly goes to the 
world of Visnu. 


CHAPTER SEVENTY 

Various Creations 

The sages said: 

1. O Suta, the primordial creation had been indicated by 
you but not clarified. O person of good holy rites, it behoves 
you to recount it in detail now. 

Suta said: 

2. O leading sages, the great lord Siva is stationed beyond 
Prakrti and Purusa.^®® He is the greatest soul. 

3. The unmanifest originated from that lord as the 
greatest cause. Thinkers on metaphysical reality call it Pra- 
dhana or Prakrti. 

4. It is devoid of smell, colour and taste. It has neither 
sound nor touch. It is unageing, stable, imperishable and per- 
petually stationed in the soul. 

5. It is the source of origin of the universe. It is the eter- 
nal great Brahman, the massive being. It is the physical 
body of all living beings. It is induced by the command of 
the lord. 

6. At the outset the Pradhana existed in the form of 
Brahman.®®® It had neither beginning nor end. It was unborn 
and subtle consisting of the three Gunas. It was the source of 

r,88. The transcendent God Mahesvara is higher than Prakrti and 
Purusa. (See p. 41 note 56). Gf. ^P, Prakrtc^ ca pararh Brahma yat tac 
chivani udahftam — cited in ST. 

589. Brahma. Gf. “sad eva saumy edam agra asit”— cited in ST. 



Various Creations 


307 


origin of the universe as well as eternal. It was neither mani-, 
fest nor comprehensible. 

7. When the Gunas were in equilibrium, when it had not 
been differentiated, when it was identical with darkness,®®® 
all this visible universe had been pervaded by its existence 
due to Siva’s will. 

8. At the time of creation, as the Pradhana was presided 
over by the individual soul — Purusa, the principle Mahat 
menifested revealing itself as subsidiary to Prakrti. 

9. It was enveloped by the subtle and great Avyakta 
(unmanifest) . At the outset, when the principle of Mahat had 
the predominance of Sattva, then only it revealed existence. 

10. The Mahat should be known as the Cosmic Mind. It is 
to be the sole cause of creation. It originated as presided 

over by the individual soul and only as a beneficent symbol. 

11. Its forms Dharma etc., are the causes of the principles 
and objects of the world. Induced by the desire to create the 
Mahat carries on the activity of creation. 

12. It is named variously as Manas (mind), Mahat 
(great), Mati (intellect), Brahman, Puh (city), Buddhi 
(intellect), Khyati (faculty of discriminatory knowledge), 
Isvara (lord), Prajna (perfect knowledge), Citi (consciousness), 
Smrti (memory), Saihvid (cognition), and Visvesa (lord of 
the universe) . 

13. It is called Manas because it ponders over the fruit of 
the activity of all living beings [from the root man to think] 
Subtle as it is, the fruits of its activities appear to be divided 
i. e. many and different. 

14. It is called Mahat because it origiiuxted at the outset 
prior to all other principles as well as due to its magnitude. It 
is greater than Viscs?is®®^ and Gunas.®®® 

15. It possesses magnitude [Manaih BibhartiJ. It ponders 
and causes dilferentiation. It is also greatly related to the enjoy- 
ment (i. c. experience) of Purusa. Hence, it is kiT*wii as Mati. 

16. It is defined as Brahman because of its brhatva 
(massiveness) and brmhanatva (state of becoming swollen) 

5)go. tamomaye. Gf. ‘‘tama asit tames j qudliam cited in 

541. viiwebhyah — sattvftdibhyah VT. from the attiibutcs, sattva, etc. 
592. gaiiebhyati— sabdidibhyah .VT. from the subtle elements, (tan- 
matras^SDunds, etc. 



308 Litigapurana 

and also because it contains (within itself) all experiences 
which are dependent on all external objects. 

17. It is called Puh because it fills Devas with blessings 
and leads men to the state of awareness [from the root pr]. 

18. Since the Purusa is known through it and since it 
makes known all objects, what is wholesome, from what is not 
it is called Buddhi. 

19. Since enjoyment of pleasures is based on the 
knowledge thereof, and also since each item of enjoyment 
is dependent on knowledge, it is known by the word khyati. 

20. The principle of Mahat is called by the term “Khyati” 
also because objects in many instances are named (khyayante) 
through its qualities such as knowledge, etc. 

21. It is a great soul and it directly perceives everything. 
Hence, it is called Isvara. Since it follows up knowledge it is 
called Prajna. 

22. Since it collects such forms as Jnana (knowledge) etc., 
and the fruits of many holy rites, for the sake of enjoyment, 
it is called citi (from the root ci) . 

23. Since it remembers all affairs of the present, past and 
future it is called Smrti (from the root smr). 

24. It is called Saihvid because it obtains the entire 
knowledge and knows the greatness of everything [from the 
roots vid to know and vind to obtain], 

25. O excellent sages, (for another reason also) it is called 
Saihvid by great men. It exists [from root vid to exist] every- 
where and within it one obtains everything [vindati]. 

26. From the root Jna (to know) they call it Jnanam. For 
the lord is the fountainhead of all knowledge. Since it repu- 
diates bondage etc., [the Mahat] is called Isvara by learned men. 

27. This first excellent tattva — Mahat — has been thus 
explained by many synonymous words by those who are 
conversant with the nature of tattvas and who always think 
about the existence of the lord. 

28. The Mahat carries out the work of creation when it 
is induced by the desire to create. Samkalpa (volition) and 
Adhyavasaya (effort) arc its two traits. 

29. (From this Mahat) having three Gunas but with 
Rajas prevailing, the Ahamkara (ego) originated. All the 



Various Creations 


309 


creation was thus enveloped by Mahat. It is exterior to 
Bhutadi (ego, the cause of the elements). 

30. From the same ahaihkara with tamas predominating 
over the other two came about the creation of Bhutatan- 
matras (the essence of sound, etc). It is called Bhutadi (cause 
of the elements) and it is tamasa in nature. 

3 1 . The Bhutadi on disintegration created ^abdatanma- 
tra (the essence of sound) . From this was born Akasa (ether) 
(also called) Susira (hole) , that is marked by sound. 

32-34. Akasa characterised by sound enveloped Spars a- 
tanmatra which on disintegration created Vayu characterised 
by touch. Vayu on disintegration created Rupatanmfitra. 
Therefore, it is said that Jyotis originated out of vayu, with 
colour as its quality. Jyotis on disintegration created Rasa- 
tanmatra. Apah (waters) originated from it witJi taste as 
their main quality. 

35. Agni (i. e. the fiery element) with the Rupa-tanmatra 
enveloped Rasalanmatras. Waters on disintegration cieatcd 
Gandhatanmatra. 

36. From it the sahghata (solid earth) originated. Its 
special attribute is smell when each of the elements remains 
within its specific quality( sound, etc) it is called tanmatra and 
this exclusive nature is called tanmatrata. 

37. The Tanmatras are also called Asisesas, because in 
that stage they do not define anything in particular (as distinct 
from others. They are Avi.' esas for anoincr reason also— they 
are Pra^iinlas (quiescent) or Ghoras (terrible) or Mudhas 
(confused). 

38. This creation by the tanmatras of the Bhutas should 
be known as one that is mutual. The othci creations are from 
the Vaikarika (that which has undergone alteration) i.e. the 
Aharhkara (ego) or from the Sattvika wherein saitva guna 
predominates. 

39-40. The Vaikarika cr^/tion functions simultaneously. 
There are five senses of knowledge and five senses of activity. 
These ten senses are the means of achievement. The eleventh 
is mind. By its very nature the mind has both qualities i. e. of 
the organ of sense and of the organ of function. 

41. The five organs of sense are, car, sk 


ye, tongue, 



310 


Lingapur&fa 


palate and nose. They are endowed with the power of perceiving 
their respective qualities (i.e. ear receiving sound, skin receiving 
touch, etc) . 

42. The legs, rectum, private parts, hands and the organ 
of speech (the tenth Indriya) are the organs of function or 
activity. Their activities are respectively gait (movement), 
evacuation, pleasure, arts, crafts and speech. 

43. Both ether and the element of sound penetrated 
the element of touch. Hence wind has both the attributes 
— sound and touch. 

44. Similarly both sound and touch entered colour. Hence, 
the fire has three attributes, viz, sound, touch and colour. 

45. The attributes of sound, touch, and colour penetrated 
the element of taste. Hence, waters have four attributes includ- 
ing taste as their special attribute. 

46. Sound, touch, colour and taste penetrated smell. 
Combined with the element of smell they pervaded the earth. 

47. Hence, the earth contains all the five attributes and 
is considered the grossest of all elements. They are quiescent, 
terrible or confused. Hence, they are called Visesas. 

48. Since they have penetrated mutually they sustain one 

another.®®® 

# 

Everything within the earth is enveloped by the mountain 
Lokaloka. 

49. They are called Visesas because they can be perceived 
by means of the sense-organs invariably. The latter ones have 
all the qualities of the previous creation.®®^ 

50-52. Each of these qualities is a distinct characteristic 
of each element. (Any other quality found in an element 
should be known to be due to the contact of the other element; 
( for example) experiencing smell in water some may say 
that it is the quality of water, yet, it should be known that it 


593. Parasparanupravesa : Each preceding element enters into each 
succeeding element. Each new life-centre is a link in the chain. The seed 
is permeated by its creative potency. The seed in the form of the father is 
reborn as the son in endless generations. This principle of anuprave^a, i.e. 
the ancestor transmitting its whole potency to the successor is a biologica 1 
law. 


594. Sec verses 43-47 of this chapter. 



Various Creations 


311 


is the quality of earth alone. It is because the particles of earth 
have got mixed writh water and wind that the smell appears to 
be present in them. 

These seven massive beings beginning with intellect 
(Maliat) and ending with Visesas (gross elements) cicate the 
cosmic egg^^s because they depend upon one another, because 
they are presided over by Purusa and because they are blessed 
by the unmanifest. 

33. Like the bubbles in the w'atcr the big cosmic egg is 
born at once from the Visesas. The whole egg is embedded 
in water. 

5^. The cosmic egg is encircled by watcis ten times in 
extent. The waters arc externally encircled by the lire ten 
♦'mes in extent. 

55. The fire is externally encircltd by the wii cl ten limes 
in extent and the wind is externally encircled l)y the etlier 
ten times in extent. 

Sb, The wind is encircled by the ether. The ether is encir- 
cled by the ego. The ego is encircled by intellect and intellect 
is encircled by the unmanifest. 

57-39. Sarva is stationed in the c overing lid of the cos- 
mic egg. O persons of good holy rites, Bhava is stationed in 
waters: Rudra is stationed in the middle of fire. Ugra is 
stationed in the wind. Bhima is stationed i i the middle of 
the earth. Mahesvara is stationed in ego. Lord Isa is stationed 
in intellect. Paramesvara is stationed e\ *rywhere. The egg is 
encircled by the seven coverings originating from Prakrtis. These 
eight Prakrtis arc thus stationed encircling one another.''®^' 

60. Stationing themselves thus at the time of creation 
they attract one another. Thus mutually inurdcpeiidcnl they 
uphold one another. 

r,9=;. Read mahadddi for mahcidayo (Lihga. The principle 

of intellect and mind and the five gross elements constitute v ^rh Egg. These 
seven constituents of the Egg are known as the seven sages, seven 
Angirases (Cf. Liiiga. 1.70. 

The Egg constitutes the unmanifest Prakrti (avyakta) and its 
manifestations -intellect (maliat,) ego(ahaihkara)and the five gross elements 
(bhutas). (Gf. Vayu.i. J-.76). These seven comprise the shells of the 
life-principle in the egg. Gf. Bhag. 6.16.37 : “ksityadibhir esa kilavrtah 
saptabhir dosa-gunottarair andakosah”. 



312 


Lingapuroffa 


61-63. The vikaras (effects) exist in the vikarins (cause) 
by means of the relationship of the support and the supported. 
Mahesvara is beyond Avyakta. The egg is born of Avyakta. 
The same lord is born of the egg as Purusa with solar lustre. 
In it the generating of the effect is achieved by his own free 
will. He alone is the primordial embodied being, called 
Purusa. Visnu who is bowed to by all Devas is born of his left 
limb. 

Thanks to the wish of paramesthin, the lord Visnu originat- 
ed together with goddess Laksmi. Brahma the preceptor ol' the 
universe is born of the right limb of the lord along with 
Sarasvatl. 

65-67. These worlds are in that Cosmic egg. This universe 
is within the Cosmos. The moon and the sun along witli the 
stars, planets, wind and the Lokaloka mountains are stationed 
within Cosmic Egg. O Brahmins, whatever time interval is 
necessary for the creation I have enumerated above, that period 
is the day time of Paramesvara. His night also extends over the 
same duration. 

68-70. The period of his creation is his day and the period 
of dissolution his night. 

Really, it should be known that he has neither day nor 
night tas we conceive of it]. It is used metaphorically for the 
facility of the people. 

The objects stay during the day of the lord, viz. — the sense- 
organs, the objects of the senses, the five great elements, all 
living beings, intellect and the deities. 

71-73. At the end of the day they get dissolved. At the 
end of the night they originate again. 

When the unmanifest is stationed in His soul, when the effects 
are dissolved, both Pradhana and Purusa remain quiescent 
i.e. with their common characteristics, tamas, sattva and r£gas 
in equilibrium. They remain interlinked like threads woven 
together in the same warp and woof. 

It should be known that there is dissolution when the gunas 
are in equilibrium and when they are upset there is creation. 

74. Just as there is oil latent in the gingelly seed, just as 
the ghee is present in the milk, so edso the universe is present in 
tamas, sattva and rajas. 



Various Creations 


313 


75. After enjoying the goddess throughout the night the 
creator begins to function in the beginning of the day when 
Prakrti originates from Him. 

76. llie great lord penetrates Pradhana and Purusa agilat- 
jng597 them by means of yoga. 

77. The three deities originate from the great lord, the lord 
of the Universe. They are permanent, extremely worthy of con- 
cealment and protection, embodied ones, and the souls of alb 

78. These alone are the three devas, the three Gunas, the 
three worlds, and the three fires.®®® 

79. They are mutually supported and they devotedly follow 
one another. They exist on mutual help and they hold one 
another. 

80. They are paired together and mutually interdep)endent. 
is not even a moment’s separation among them. They do 

not eschew one another.®®® 

81. 6iva is the greatest lord. Visnu is beyond or above in- 
tellect. Brahma is endowed with rajas. He functions at the 
beginning of Creation. 

82-87. That Purusa is known as Para and Prakrti as 
Para. 

The Prakrti which is presided over by the great lord begins 
to function when it is induced from all sides. The principle of 
intellect functions following this. Since is permanent and 
stable, it resorts to the object of the sense, b^ tself. When there 
is disturbance in the Gunas (qualities) of Pradhana the period of 
creation functions from that which is of Existcnt-cuni-nonexis- 
tent nature and presided over by ISvara. 

Rudra became fully equipped for evolving the effects at the 
very outset. He is unequalled in brillance, intelligent and 
illuminating. He indeed is the first embodied soul and is called 

597. When the lifc-principle enters into Prakrti, there occurs an agita- 
tion (ksobha) in the form of contraction and expansion. Out of this agitation 
which is a process of Coming and Going, the universal seed is created, which 
has both the characteristics of the male and female. For detail, see MP. 
A study, pp. 36-37. 

598 . Out of this egg agitated thus, there come into existence the 
triadic principles known as Brahma, Vi§nu and Siva identical with three 
g^nas — rajas, sattva and tamas. 

599. The Puranas refer to the joint birth and joint activity of the triad. 



S14 


lA^apmSua 


Purufa. Lord Brahma, the four-faced***** Prjgapati was bom of 
Him. He also became fully equipped for evolving the effects 
(i.e. creation). So, the same lord is stationed in three forms. 

88. He is endowed with positive knowledge and lordship. 
They, (i.e. the three devas) are also endowed with positive virtue 
and detachment. 

89. Whatever has been mentally conceived or uttered by 
them is bora out of the unmanifest, since it has been made to 
be subservient, and since the activities are dependent on the 
three Gupas by nature. 

90. The self-born deity has three conditions : in the capa- 
city of Brahma he is the four-faced one; in the capacity of 
Kala (i.e. Rudra)he is the destroyer; he is the thousand-headed 
Pnru$a (i.e. Vi$nu) also. 

91. In the capacity of Brahma, he creates the worlds; in 
the capacity of Kala, he destroys the world ; in the capacity of 
Purusa, he is indifferent. Prajapati has three stages. 

92. Brahma has the lustre of the interior of a lotus ; Rudra 
is like the fire at the time of dissolution; Puru» is lotus-eyed. 
This is the form of the great soul. 

93. The lord takes up a single body, two bodies, three 
bodies, and then many bodies. He creates and destroys these 
bodies, and dispels them too. 

94. The great lord creates and destroys bodies of different 
shapes, activities, forms and names. 

95. Since he assumes three different forms, he is called 
Trigupa. When divided into four, he is called Caturvyuha. 
(having four arrays). 

96. He is defined as atman (soul) because he attains the sense 
objects (V^p to attain) , because he takes up (a-{- Vda to take 
up) the sense objects and because he swallows up (V ad to 
eat) the sense objects. Moreover, he has perpetual existence. 

97. He is called B-?i because he goes everywhere. He is 
Saririn because he is its (body’s) lord. He is (called) 
Svamin because he possesses everything. He is called Vispu be- 
cause he enters everything. 

98. He is called Bhagavan because he possesses Bhaga 


6oo. See p. 6o note. 78 



Various Creations 


315 


(loveliness, excellence, fortune, glory). He is called Siva be- 
cause he is devoid of impurities. He is called Parama be- 
cause he is distinguished and eminent. Since he protects 
he is called Om. 

99. He is called Sarvajha because he knows everything 
perfectly. He is Sarva because he is identical with all. He 
divides himself into three and functions in the three worlds. 

100. By means of three forms he creates, swallows and 
protects. Since he is primordial he is called “Adideva”. He is 
called Aja because he is not born. 

101. Since he protects people he is known as Prajapati. 
Since he is the greatest among Dev as he is called Mahadeva. 

102. He is Omnipresent and not subservient to Dev as. 
he is ISvara. He is Brahma because he is massive. He is 

called Bhuta because of his existence. 

103. He is, called the knower of the field (i.e. body) ; he 
comprehends the inner organs, mind, etc. Since he is single 
he is called Kevala. Since he hes down in the soul he is called 
Purusa. 

104.. He is known as self-born because he has no begin- 
ning and he is prior to all. Since he is worthy of worship he 
is called Yajna. He is Kavi because he can see what is beyond 
the sense organs.. 

105. He is Kramana because he has Access to all (or is 
accessible to all) . He is Palaka because he protects all. He 
is Aditya because he is tan-coloured. Being born at the outset 
he is Agni (fire) . 

106. Because he is the cause of origin of all golden things 
and also because he is born of the golden Egg, he is called 
Hiranyagarbha. 

107. The time that has gone by after the self-born has 
been in existence cannot be reckoned even i^ hundreds of 
years. 

108. The first half Parardha in the age of the present Brahma 
has already elapsed and another period of equal duration i.e. 
second half still remains. At its end begins the dissolution 
of the worlds. 

109. Crores and thousands of crores of these days of kalpas 



316 


Lingapurdna 


have come and gone. As many yet remain. The kalpa that is 
current now is known as Varaha kalpa. 

1 10-1 12. O brahmins, this is the first kalpa (Brahma's day) 
within that Varaha kalpa (age). In this there are fourteen Manus 
beginning with Svayambhuva. This entire earth consisting of the 
seven continents and mountains are to be protected by those 
great lords (i.e. the fourteen Manus) past, present and fuiurc 
by means of their penanee and through the subjests. Liston to 
their detailed account. 

113. If one manvantara is recounted, the other man- 
vantaras arc also recounted. If one kalpa is explained, all the 
other kalpas too are explained. 

1 14. The past kalpas are such that they leave their con- 
sequences on the future ones along with (or including) the 
dynasties of Kings etc. and the same reasoning should bo 
applied to future kalpas by the knowing man (i.e., the past 
has left its marks on the present and in the same way the future 
will carry the marks of the present, 

115-117. The waters were in existence at the outset when 
the whole surface of the earth had been destroyed. In the vast 
quiet and sparkling waters nothing else was known. When the 
mobile and immobile beings are destroyed in that vast, 
sealike expanse of water, Brahma assumes a form with thousand 
eyes, thousand feet, thousand heads.®®^ He is then called 
Narayana. He is the golden-coloured Purusa beyond ihc icnse 
organs. He had his slumber in that expanse of water. 

118. When sattva guna was pre^'j^lent he woke up and 
found the world a void. They cite r' 'rse about Narayana. 

1 19-125. We hear that the worn . 'lara means waters or sons 
of waters. He filled the void with waters and made it his resort. 
Since he lies down in the waters he is known as Narayana.®®^ 
After spending the night consisting of a thousand cycles of four 
yugas in the water, at the end of the night he assumed the 
form of Brahma for the purpose of creation. Brahma adopted 
a ga’^eous form and moved about over those waters like the 
glowworm at nig'> during the rainy season. He knew that the 

601. Cf. RV, lo.r^o.i. VS, 31. I. 

602. See p. 66. note. 86. 



Variotis Creations 


317 


earth had gone under the water by means of inference. But he 
did not get disillusioned over the lifting up of the earth (from 
the waters). In previous eras in the beginning of the kalpas he 
had assumed another body. Then the lord of great soul ponder- 
ed over that divine form. Seeing the earth submerged in water 
all round he thought “What form shall I adopt to lift up this 
Earth ?” He adopted the form of a boar as befitting the sport in 
water. The form was unassailable to all living beings. It had 
speech and was actually “Brahman” itself. He entered the 
nether worlds in that form for lifting up the earth. 

127. In that boar form he approach d the earth envelop- 
ed by water and quickly lifted it up. 

128-132. The waters immediately filled up the oceans, 
aim ihc rivers. For the welfare of the worlds, the lord lifted up 
the earth by means of his curved fangs, the earth, that had 
submerged and got embedded in the nether worlds. The hol- 
der of the earth. Lord Visnu, the lifter of the earth held it, 
brought it to its original place and left it there as it was before. 
'I'hc earth stood like a great ship above that vast collection of 
water and on a par with it. Because of its massive body the 
earth did not sink and get submerged. After lifting it up the 
lotus-eyed lord with the desire to fit the world firmly turned 
his attention towards the demarcation oi the earth. He made 
the earth level and then collected the mountains. 

133-134. When everything of the nrevious creation was 
uLirnt by the fire at the time of dissolution the mountains got 
scattered over an extensive area. Due to chilliness in that vast 
sea-like expanse of water the scattered pieces of mountains were 
heaped up by the wind. Wherever they were deposited they 
became the stable mountains. 

135. Mountains are called acalas because they never 
move, they are called parvatas because they have knots (par- 
vans). They are girls because they are absorbed and hidden. 
They are called siloccayas because they keep lying down. 

136. Thereafter when crores of mountains were scattered 
about, Visvakarman the architect of the gods, divided and 
classified them again and again at the beginning of every kalpa. 

137. He then divided the earth into seven continents, 



318 Lingapurana 

oceans and mountains. Thereafter he evolved the four worlds 
beginning with Bhuh. 

138. After evolving the worlds, the self-born Brahma, the 
lord who was desirous of creating different subjects, began 
creating them. 

139- 141a. He created everything at the beginning of the 
kalpa in the same manner as it was before. While he meditated 
on creation beginning with intellect and simultaneous with it. 
Illusion, ignorance identical with darkness, originated from the 
great soul in five stages®*® viz. — tamas (darkness) moha (delu- 
sion), mahamoha (great delusion), tamisra (murkincss) and 
andhatamisra ( blinding gloominess) . 

141b-143. This first creation of the meditating and Self- 
confident lord came to stay as a fivefold one; viz. (1) those 
enveloped by darkness; (2) half open and half covered like the 
sprout from a seed; (3) those that have no light inside or outside; 
(4) those that are stiff and rigid and ( 5 ) senseless. Because 
their intellect, miseries and senses were all enshrouded, they 
are called important immobiles with covered souls. 

144. On seeing this first creation in that situation as well 
as useless for any action (being immobile) he became dissatis- 
fied in mind, and thought about another. 

145. Even as he meditated over it the Tiryaksrotas creation 
(moving sideways ) was developed. Since it functioned sideways 
it is called Tiryaksrotas. 

146. The animals etc. (i.e. birds and reptiles) constitute 
this well-known creation. O brahmins, they are those who 
adopt wrong paths. So he meditated on another creation and 
the Sattvika creation was evolved. 

147-148. This third creation is Crdhvasrotas which is 
directed upwards. Since it functions upwards it is called Ordhva- 
srotas. The beings created under this category are mostly 
happy and delighted They are enshrouded within and without 
as well as illuminated on both sides. 

603. AvidyS — the scheme of ninefold creation is mentioned in all the 
^rSnas. it is said that the creation arose out of ignorance (avidya) classi- 
fied into five heads, vis., tamas (darkness), moha (confusion) , mah&moha 
(obsession), t&misra (gloominess), and andhaUlmisra (blind gloominess). 
Lava (3. g. 30, 35) diindes these into sixtyfour categories. 



Various Creations 


319 


149. Because they have been created with the union of 
Sattvaguna, they are known as originating from Sattva. This 
third creation of Ordhvasrotas is that of Devas. 

150. The creations originating in the category of Crdhva- 
srotas are brilliant within and without. The Ordhvasrotas crea- 
tions are stated by the learned to be satisfied souls. 

151. When Devas, the creations in the category of Ordhva- 
srotas were created Brahma, the lord who grants boons, became 
delighted, but he still meditated on another creation. 

152-153. He pondered over the creation that will be 
Sadhaka®®^ (active and fit for action). Even as he was meditating 
truthfully, the active Arvaksrotas creation manifested itself 
from the unmanifest Prakrti. Since it functions downwards it is 
called Arvaksrotas. 

154. The beings created thus arc mostly brilliant; rajas 
predominates in them and there is a mixture of tamas also. 
Hence, there is a predominance of misery and they do their 
tasks again and again. 

155. They are human beings enshrouded within and with- 
out, and active. They are classified into eight categories 
through their redeeming feature. 

156. They are men who have realized souls with attributes 
similar to those of Gandharvas. Thus, the emtion of Arvaksro- 
tas is called Taijasa (luminous, fiery) . 

157-158. The fifth creation is Anugraha (the creation of 
blessings) . It is fourfold according to the distinctive feature of 
contrariety, power, achievement and satisfaction. The contra- 
riety inheres the beings that are immobile; the power is the 
element that characterizes the Tiryak yonis (animals) ; men are 
characterized by their realized souls. Of Devas and sages satis- 
faction is the distinctive feature. 

159. This group is called Prakrta (pertaininer to Prakrti). 
This fifth (fourfold) Vaikarika creation is the best (anavamah) 
among all. The creation of the origins of gross elements and the 
gross elements, siddhas, sages, etc., is the sixth. The creation of 


604. sSdhakatL— sakala-kara^aU the cause of all creation. Gf. 

nrdeham ftdyam — Bhdg. cited in ST. 



320 LingapuTdfjia 

(ordinary) human beings (as distinct from the sages, etc.) out 
of the subtle and gross elements is the seventh. 

160-161. They (of the sixth group represented by the sages) 
know what has taken place in the past, what is taking plac^ at 
present, and what will take place in future.®®® These (sages, etc.) 
remain detached though they enjoy and share the fruits of 
their activities. 

162-164. This creation is characterized by contrariety and 
imperfection. The first (1) creation of Brahma is that oi Mahat; 
the next (2) that of tanmatras; the third (3) is Vaikarika(i.c. of 
the nature of transformation and ramification) ; this threc-lold 
creation was evolved prior to intelligence. (4) The primary 
(mukhy a) creation (of insentient beings) is the fourth. The 
immobile beings are the mukhyas. 

165. Then there are (5) tiryak (horizontal); (6) Qrdhva 
(upward) and (7) arvaksrotas (downward) creations. (8) Then 
comes the anugraha creation, the eighth in the serial ordei. It is 
both Sattvika and Tamasa. 

166. Thus with the five vaikrta types and three prakrtas 
there are eight types of creation. (9) The ninth creation, i.c., of 
Kumaras is both prakrta and vaikrta. 

167. The three prakrta creations arc prior to the creation 
of intellect. But the other six creations ( Nos. 4-9) are posterior 
to intellect. 

168. I shall now give the detail of Anugraha sarga which 
you will understand properly. It stands in four ways®®® among 
all living beings. 


6oj. The text is corrupted. The commentator’s interpretation is 
far-fetched. He explains prakrtah (V-159) as prakrta-nirupana-visayah — the 
subject of present discourse. He dissolves vaikrto navamah as vaikttah 
anavamah and explains anavamah as iresthahi, superior. 

606. The anugraha creation is characterized by contrariety (viparyaya) , 
power (sakti), satisfaction (tusti) and perfection (siddhi). 

The scheme of ninefold creation as outlined in the Puranas can be 
summarised as follows : 

(i) Mahat : ( creation of the great principle : intellect). (ii)Tanmatra: 
(creation of subtle elements), (iii) Bhuta : (creation of gross elements) . 
(This set of three-fold creation is primary and originates from avidya — 
ignorance) . (iv) Mukbya (the principal creation comprising the immobile 
world of insentient beings such as mountains), (v Tiryak (the animal) 



Various Creations 


321 


169, The Prakfia andVaikrta creations together are nine. 
The learned consider them interconnected through causes. 

170. At the outset, Brahma created the mental sons equal 
to himself. Among them Rbhu and Sanat were sages of subli- 
mated sexuality. 

171 -173a. They were born at the outset. They were senior 
to all others. After the eighth kalpa was over, these two ancient 
ones, the witnesses of the worlds constricted their splendour and 
settled themselves in the terrestrial world in the Vfirrihakalpa. 
They performed such actions leading to salvation after steadying 
their mind in their soul. Eschewing progeir', rituah'stic activities 
and affection they adopted detachment. Sanat continued to 
have the same child-like form as at the timeof his birth. Hence, 
iii.- .i. me is celebrated as Sanatkurnara. 

173b-177. Brahma created Saaanda, Sauaka and Saiiaiana. 
By means of their perfect knowledge those sage.s of great 
power abstained from worldly acts. I'hc^e yogins w'cn* (‘idight- 
cned in the diversity of the woHd and so roliaiiied from wt^rldly 
activiti(‘S. Without creating progenies they passed away at the 
time of dissolution. After they had gon*^ away, Brahma cieal(*d 
other mental sons who were fit for action and who look j)ride 
in their positions. These sages by w’^hom this earth was sustain- 
ed remaiiK'd until (he final dis.sohilion ol a’! •'ving Ijcings. 

178-1H2. Brahiui created tht* waters, .ire, earth, iunia- 
menl, heaven, oceans, rivers, mountains, herbs, cret pers, trees 
and plants, the units of time such as lavas, kasthas, kalas, 
muhurtas, junctions, nights, days, fortnights, months, ayanas 
(half-yearly transit of the sun), vears and yugas. All these 
w ho identified themselves with these abodes arc known by the 
names of their abodes. He created Devas and sages too. They 

creation wherein the stream of life is horizontal ; (tiryaksrotas) . (vi) Deva° 
(creation of Devas in which the stream of life moves upwrirdsj (urdhva- 
srolas). (vii) Manuka ‘ (creation of . lankind in which ti*'- stream of life 
moves downwards (arvak-srotas). (viii) creation of Feeling such as 
contrariety, power, satisfaction and perfection found respectively in the 
immobile, mobile, human and divine beings. This set of creation (Nos iv- 
viii), born of intelligence is said to be <iecondary; but Vdyu includes 
anugraha in the primary creation, (ix) Kumara" creation of the mental 
sons of Brahma — Sanat etc. This ninth creation is said to be both primary 
and secondary. 



322 


LiAgapurdna 


were Marici, Bhrgu, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Daksa, 
Atri and Vasistha. Brahma created these nine sons mentally. 
They are stipulated in the Puranas as the Nine Brahmas. 

183. As before, the lotus-born deity assigned abodes to all 
the expounders of Brahman, who were equal to Brahma him- 
self. 

184-185. Then the lord created Sariikalpa and Dharm a: 
Dharrna through enterprise and Sariikalpa out of dcterniina- 
tion. Then another mental son Ruci was born of lord Brahma. 

186. Brahma created Daksa from his vital breath and 
Marici from his eyes. Bhrgu was born of the heart of Brahma. 

187. He created Arigiras from his head and Atri from his 
ears. He created Pulastya from the organic wind Udana and 
Pulaha from the wind Vyana. 

188. Vasistha was born of Samana. He created Kratu 
from Apana. Thus these divine sons of Brahma are eleven 
altogether. 

189-19 la. Dharrna etc. are the first born sons of Brahma. 
The nine sons, Bhrgu and others, were created as expounders 
of Brahman. They were ancient householders who propagated 
Dharrna. Among them, twelve were the lords of Devas. Their 
dynasties were divine, endowed with sattvic qualities. They 
were active, had good progenies and were adorned among the 
sages. 

191b-195a. Rbhu and Sanatkumara were sages of subli- 
mated sexuality. They were first born and therefore senior to all 
others. When the eighth kalpa had elapsed these ancient sages, 
the cosmic witnesses, shone in the world after constricting their 
splendour. Both of them did abide, by performing yogic rites 
after super-imposing the individual soul over the supreme soul. 
Eschewing progeny, worldly rites and affection they adopted 
detachment. Sanat continued to have the child-like form. 
Hence his name has been stabilised as Sanat. 

I95b. Thereafter, as he (Brahma) continued his medita- 
tion, mental sons were born to him. 

196. Individual souls were born out of the body of that 
intelligent lord through the cause and effect process. 

197-199. Thereafter he was desirous of creating the four 
groups, viz. Devas, Asilras, Pitrs and human beings. He infused 



Various Creations 


323 


himself in the waters. Even as he did so, even as he assiduously 
meditated on creation, the particles of darkness grew up in 
excess. Then out of his buttocks were produced the Asuras. O 
brahmins, the word *asu’ means vital breath. Those born of the 
vital breath are called Asuras. 

200. And he then eschewed that body whereby the Asuras 
were created and cast it off. It then became Night. 

201. Since Night is mostly constiliued of darkness it is 
something that restricts inovement. The subjects enveloped in 
darkness, sleep at night. 

202-203. After creating the Asuras h^ ‘ookup another body. 
It was unmanifest and it mostly consisted of the quality ol good- 
ness. So he adored it. Even as he united that body in yogic 
. 'O’xdties he was pleased. Then from his shining mouth were born 
Devas. 

204-205. Since they were born of him even as he was shin- 
ing they arc called Devas (shining ones). The root ‘l^iv’ means 
ho play’. Therefore, Devas were born sportingly. After creating 
them the lord of Devas took another body. 

206. That body was cast off by him and when cast off it 
became day. Hence, Devas adore the day that consists ol Dliai ma. 

207-209. Then he took up another body characterized by 
the quality of goodness. The lord co’i.>*dert‘d himsell like a 
father mexlitating on sons. Hence, the Pitrs w e born in between 
the night and day from his two sides. Hence, Devas are the 
Pitrs and their state of being Pitrs is due to that. He cast off 
that body too. That body cast off by him, immediately became 
the Twilight. 

210-211. The day pertains to Devas and the night to Asu- 
ras. In between the two is stationed the body that belongs to 
the Pitrs. Hence, all Devas, Asuras, sages and men adore the 
body that lies in between night and day. 

212-213. Then Brahma adopted another body characteriz- 
ed by the particle of passion. The lord created with his mind 
the mental sons of passionate activities. Thereby, the passionate 
sons were born of him. 

214-215a. After creating them he cast off that body. That 
body cast off by him, immediately became moonlight. That is 
why the people become delighted when moonlight spreads. 



324 


Lingapurana 


215b-2l6. Thus the bodies cast ofT by that noble soul be- 
came immediately night, day, the morning twilight and even- 
ing twilight and moonlight. The moonlight, the twilight and 
the day, these three consist of the quality of goodness. 

2 17-2 18a. The night is characterized by the quality of 
darkness. Hence it is called Nisa. Because Devas were created 
by day, through pleasure and out of Brahma’s mouth, they arc 
s dd to be day born and powerful by day. 

218b-220. The lord created Asuras by night from his loins. 
Tiiat body of the lord became night. Since they were born at 
night the Asuras are powerful by night. These times become the 
causes for all (past and) future Devas, Asuras, Pitrs and human 
beings in all past and future manvantaras. 

221-224. The morning twilight, night, day and evening 
twilight, these four are the bodies of Brahma. They arc called 
‘Ambharhsi’. The root bha means to ‘shine’. The word Ambha- 
ihsi is traced by the learned to this root. After creating these, 
Prajapati created Devas, human beings, Danavas and Pitrs from 
his body. Thereafter he foresook that body which turned into 
moonlight and assumed another form characteiized by passion 
and darkness. The lord created other beings during the night; 
these beings were overwhelmed with hunger. 

225-228 These hungry beings created by him attempted 
to seize the bodies of the lord. Some of them who said, “We will 
protect these bodies” were known as Raksasas. They were 
night-walkers who were overcome by hunger. Those who said, 
‘We will eat them up,’ were called yaksas as also guhyakas 
because of their secret activity. The root ‘raks’ means ‘to pro- 
tect and the root ‘yaks’ means ‘to eat.’ On observing this crea- 
tion, the hair of the intelligent lord Brahma became withered 
due to displeasure. 

229-233a. Those of the withered hair that slipped off his 
head and glided downward became snakes. Since they 
were deiective they arc known as Ahis. Since they fell from 
his head they are known as Pannagas and they are Sarpas 
because they creep. The fire of his terrible anger turned into 
poison and entered the serpents; that is why they are born along- 
with poison. After creating the serpents the angry lord created 
other irate souls, who looked savage in their tawny colour. 



Various Creations 


325 


They were fierce and flesh-eating goblins. Since they came 
into being they are known as Bhutas, and as Pisacas because 
they ate flesh. 

233b-234. From him then were born the Gandharvas sing- 

joyously. 1 he root Dhai means to imbibe. They were born 
even as they were inil ibing speech. Hence they arc known as 
Gandharvas. 

235. After these eight divine beings had been created that 
lord created birds from his own youthful stage out of his own 
inclination. 

236. Since they arc able to move as they please they arc 
known as such. They are named Vayas ^ birds) because they 
were created from his youth. After creating the animals the 
lord of Devas created the flocks of winged animals. 

2J/-239. He created goats from his mouth; he created 
sheep from his chest; he created cows and bulls from his belly 
and sides. From his feet he created horses, elephants, donkeys, 
deer, camels, mules and other kinds and classes of beasts. Plants 
and fruit trees were produced from the hair of his body. 
After creating the cattle and plants, he engaged himself in 
' sacrifice. 

240. They call these the domesticated animals, viz. — the 
cow, the bull, the man, the ram, the horse, the mule, the don- 
key. Understand the wild animals. 

241-242. They call these the wild animals, viz,-- the beasts 
of prey, the cloven hoofed elephants, monk*»ys, fifthly, birds, six- 
thly, aquatic beasts and seventhly, the reptiles. The following 
seven are forest animals, viz. — buffaloes, gavayas (a species of 
ox), bears, monkeys, 5arabhas (the fabulous animal of eight 
feet) , wolves, and lions. 

243. From his front face he created Gay a tri and tre Man- 
tras, Trivrt Saman, Rathantara and Agnistoma verses. 

244. From his southern face he created Vajur hymns, 
Tristubh metre, Paucadasai’ • Stoman, brhat Saman and 
Ukthya verses. 

245. From his western face he created Saman, the metre 
Jagati, Saptadasama Stoman, Vairupa Saman and Atiratra 
verses. 

246. From his northern face he created the set of twenty 



326 Lingapurana 

one Atharvan hymns, Aptoryama, Anustubh metre and the 
Vairaja metre. 

247. At the beginning of the kalpa the lord created the 
lightning, the thunderbolts, the clouds, the reddy rainbows 
and the luminaries. 

248. The high and the low living beings were born from his 
limbs. 

249-250. After creating the four groups, viz. Devas, Asuras, 
human beings and Pitrs he created beings, mobile and immo- 
bile, Yaksas, PiSacas, Gandharvas, Apsarascs, Naras, Kinnaras, 
Raksasas, birds, cattle, wild animals and snakes. 

251-261. There are mobile and immobile as well as chang- 
ing and unchanging created beings. Whatever activities they 
had in a previous creation they resume the same activities in 
succeeding creations. They have the same nature, etc. whether 
savage or timid, kind or cruel, righteous or evil, true or false. 
Urged by their attributes they adopt and take pleasure in their 
respective qualities. 

When the great elements — the objects of the senses and 
their forms — were created, the creator himself settled the appli- 
cation of the elements as objects of the sense organs.®®’ Some 
men say that human effort is the cause of various activities; 
others say that it is divine fate. The materialists say that 
it is Nature. But really manly effort, working of fate and 
nature all depend on the nature of the fruit or result. They 
know that none of these by itself is superior to the other 
nor can one be separated from the other. This is their nature. 
They cannot be all one nor are they two together, because they 
have separate entities. 

Those who abide by activities may call that result contrary, 
those who abide by the quality of goodness observe impartial 
outlook. 

The names and forms of the elements and the further deve- 
lopment of the created ones were evolved by the great lord at 
the beginning itself through the words of the Vedas. The unborn 

607. The PurS^as assign the division of society and the distribution 
of functions to the primeval being— MaheSvara, Cf. yajno janturanisoyam 
atmanab sukhadubkhayohi / i 4 vara-prcrito gacchet svargam narakam eva 
va II — cited in ST. 



Various Creations 


327 


lord assigns names and activities in regard to the Vedas, to 
the sages born at the end of the night of dissolution in the 
same manner as before. Such are the creations of Brahma of 
unmanifcst origin. The mobile and immobile beings created 
through his mental perfection are seen at the end of his night. 
They resort to the m( ntal perfection. When these excellent 
subjects created by him did not prosper, Brahma who had been 
enveloped by the quality of darkness became miserable with 
grief. 

262-263a. Thereupon, he applied his intellect to come to a 
fixed decision. Then he saw within his mind that the particles 
of darkness were the sole controlling factors eschewing both the 
particles of goodness and passion. 

263b-264. Therefore, the lord of the universe was miserable 
due to that sorrow. Then he prodded ihe tamas, and rajas and 
covered both with sattva. The tamas thus prodded became a 
twin. 

265-267, Adharma (sin) was born of tamas and Himsa 
( violence) was born of grief. When this pair of terrible nature 
originated, the life (vital breaths) left the lord and pleasure 
resorted to him. Then Brahma eschewed his shining body and 
bifurcated it. With one half of his body he became a man. 
With the other half he created a woman Satr^rupa. 

268. With love the lord created Prakrti, he mother of the 
elements. With her greatness she stood pervading heaven and 
earth. 

269-270. The first half of body of Brahma envelopes heaven 
and stays there. The woman Satarupa.®°® bom out of the other 
half performed difficult penance for hundred thousand years 
and obtained a man of brilliant renown as her husband. 

271. That man is at the outset called Manu the self-born. 
Seventy sets of four yugas constitute his manvantai a. 

272. That man obtained as his wife Satarupa who was not 
born of a womb. He sported with her. Hence, she is called Rati 
(pleasure). 

6o8. The Purana speaks of Brahma splitting his body into two 
parts : the male and female, viz. Manu and Satarupa. Gf, Aiatsya 3-3* • 
Thus Manu and Satarupa arc said to be ayonija — not bom of a womb. 



328 


Lingapurana 


273. The first mutual relation of two souls took place at 
the beginning of the kalpa when Brahma created Virat. He be- 
came the Virat (massive) Purusa. 

274. Satarupa w^as the empress. The son ofViratj he. 
Svayambhuva was known as Manu. Manu Vairaja created the 
subjects. 

275. From the heroic son of Virat (i.e. Vairaja) !§aiarupa 
gave birth to two sons : Priyavrata and Uttanapada who were 
honoured by the worlds. 

276. She gave birth to two blessed daughters also from 
whom the subjects of the world were born. They were the 
gentle ladies Akuti and Prasuti. 

277. The lord Svayambhuva Manu gave Prasuti to 
Daksa. Daksa should be known as Prana (vital breath) ; Manu 
is Sankalpa (Idea). 

278-279. He gave Akuti to Ruci the Prajapati. Ruci the 
mental son of Brahma begot auspicious twins of Akuti. Yajna 
and Daksina were born as twins: Yajna begot of Daksina twelve 
sons. 

280. The devas called yamas were born as his sons in the 
Svayambhuva manvantara. Hence, they too are known as 
Yamas. 

281. Two groups, the Ajitas and the Sukras were created 
by Brahma. The Yam 2 is who were born at the outset became 
heaven-dwellers. 

282. Lord Daksa begot of Prasuti, the daughter of Svayam- 
bhuva, twentyfour daughters who became the mothers of the 
worlds. 

283. All of them were highly blessed, lotus-eyed, pleasure- 
seeking and yogic mothers. 

284-285. All of them were expounders of the Brahman as 
well as mothers of the universe: Lord Dharma took as his wives 
thirteen of the daughters of Daksa, viz:— Sraddha (faith) ; 
LaksirJ (fortune), Dhrti (fortitude), Tusti (satisfaction) , Pusti 
(nourishment), Medha (intellect), Kriya (rituals), Buddhi 
(wisdom), Lajja (bashfulness), Vapuh (beauty), Santi 
(peace), Siddhi (achievement) and Kirti (renown) the 
thirteenth. 

286-292. The lord Dharma took these daughters of Dak§a 



Various Creations 


329 


as his wives. Tlu'ir younger sisters were the eleven splendid- 
eyed ladies, viz. -Sail, Khyati, Sambhuti, Smrti, Priti, Ksama, 
Sannati, Ana'^uya, Urja, Svaha and Svadha. Other great sages 
took them as their wives— they were Rudra, Bhrgu, Marici, 
Aiigiras, Pulaha, Rratii, Pulastya, Atri, Vasistha, Vahni and 
the Pitrs. He gave Sat! Bhava; Khyati to Bhrgu; Sambhuti 
to Marlei; Smrti to Ahgiras, Priti to Pulastya; Ksama to 
Pulaha, Sannati to Kratu, Ariasuya to Atri, Tlrja to X'asistha, 
Svaha to Agni and Svadha to the Pitrs. All these ladies were 
liighiv blessed; tliev closely followed their progeny in all (he 
manvantai'as until the dissolution of all living beings. Xow listen 
to their progeny. 

293-298. Sraddha gave birth to Kama. Darpa was the 
son of I.aksml; Niyama of Dhrti: Santosa of Tusti; Lo))ha f)f 
Pusti; >>iiitaof ^^edha; Danda and Samaya were bom as (he 
sons (d'Kriv.l: Bodha and Pramfida of Buddhi; Vinaya rHumi- 
lity) wa^ born of Lajja; Wavasaya (Enterprise) of \'apus; 
Ksema of Saiili; Suklia oi Siddhi; and Yasah of Klni -these 
were the olPpiing of Dharma. Ilar^a was Kama’s son born 
of the gentl(‘ lady Priti. Thus, the creation of Dharrna has bi eii 
r(‘coua(evl. Hliiisa bore to Adhaima, Nikrti and Anrta. 

299-302. Pairs of twins wrre born of Nikrli : Bhava and 
Naiakcj; \la)a and N'erlaiia. \fayri gave birth to Mityu, 
the disjx'ller of living beings. Raurava got a ;on of Vedana 
called Diilikha. rioin Mityu were born Vyadhi, Jar a, Soka, 
Krodhaand A.sfiya. All these ending with Piihkha had the cha- 
ract('ri.stics of Adharma. 'fhesc had no wives nor sons. T'hey live 
in pv ipetual ( hastity. Thus, the Tamara ( reation wa.s evolved 
willi .\dharnia as the controlling factor. 

303-301. Nilalohita was given the direedon by Brahma. 
tOfoa(( lh(‘ subjects. Meditating on his w'ifi‘ Satl he created 
thousands .)t liide-clad beings as his mr Oil son.s who were 
neitlie! superior nor inferioi but equal to him. 

103-313 They were all eq^ al to him inform, sjrlendour, 
strength and learning. 'Phey wth' tawnv -coloured. I’hey were 
equipped w ith ((uivers. Thev had their matted hairs of red- 
dish hue. Idiev w^ere having special features. Their hairs 
were grermish. 'They held skulls. They could kill with their 
eyes. Thev had massive figures. They were deformed. They 



330 


Lihgapurdna 


had universal forms. They had his own forms. They had 
chariots, shields, coats of mail, and protective front-fenders in 
their chariots. They had hundreds and thousands of arms. They 
could go to heaven, firmament as well as walk over the earth. 
They had stout heads, eight curved fangs, two tongues and 
three eyes. They were eaters of cooked food. Some were eaters 
of Ilcsh, some imbibers of ghee and some drinkers of Soma 
juice. Some were bountiful; some had great skulls; some 
were blue-necked. They bad sublimated their sexuality. They 
were partakers of oiferings; they were conversant with Dhainna. 
They were virtuous and adorned with peacock feathers fixed to 
their clubs. They were seated, they were running in groups of live 
and there were thousands (of such groups); some were teachers 
and some students ; others performed japas and yogic practices 
some emitted smoke and blazed ; some lived on rivers; some were 
very bright; others were aged and intelligent; they were engrossed 
in meditation on Brahman; they were of auspicious visions; they 
were blue-necked; they had thousand eyes; they were mines of 
mercifulness and patience; they were invisible to living beings; 
they had great yogic practices; they had great powers and 
splendour. Thousands of them roamed about, rushed on and 
jumped up here and there. He created these excellent beings, the 
Rudras, eyen before a Yama (a period of 3 hours) had elapsed. 

314-317. On seeing him (i.e. Rudra) Brahma spoke to 
him — “Do not create subjects like these. O lord, do not create 
subjects equal to yourself. Obeisance be to you! Welfare unto 
you. Create subjects endowed with death. Subjects devoid of 
death will not start holy rites.” 

On being urged thus, he told him — “I will not create the 
subjects equipped with death and old ege. Welfare unto you. 

I am standing by; you create the subjects yourself. These 
beings of great strength will be known by the name ‘Rudras’. 
They will resort to the earth, firmament and all quarters. 

318. A hundred Rudras will be devoted to sacrifice. They 
will partake oirering,s in sacrifices along with the groups of 
Devas. 

319. They will stay till the end of a yuga. They will be 
worshipped along with Devas in different manvantaras.” 



Various Creations 


331 


320. Thus addressed by the intelligent lord, Brahmii the 
delighted patriarch bowed down to him and replied. 

321. "‘O lord, welfare unto you. Let it be even as it had 
been mentioned by you.” When it was approved by Brahma, 
everything happened in that manner. 

322-324. Ever since that day, the lord of Devas (i. e., 
Rudra) did not procreate progeny. He remained as Sthanu 
with sublimated sexuality till the time of Dissolution. Since 
lord Mahadeva, the Purusa shining like the sun said ‘‘I am 
staying”; he is known as Sthanu (motionless). 

325. He has the female form in one half of his body. In 
splendour he is comparable to the lire. By his own will he 
divided himself into two, a separate woman, and a separate 
man. 

j:d'0-327. The same lord stationed himself in eleven 
halves. 'Phe great goddess mentioned before as the highly 
blessed lady sharing half the body of the lord bicainc Sail for 
the welfare of the worlds. The goddess had been formerly 
propitiated by Daksa. 

328-329. “For the sake of creation, divide yourself' into 
two, right half being white and the left black.” — On being 
asked thus by lord Siva, O brahmins, she bifurcated herself 
into white and black. I shall mention her »oimes; listen atten- 
tively. 

330-335. They are: — Svaha, Svadha, Maliavidya, Medlui, 
Laksmi, Sarasvati, Sati, DaksayanI, Vidya^ Iccha J^akti, Kriyat- 
mika, Aparnii, Ekciparna, Ekapalala, Uma, Haimavatl, Kalyani, 
Ekainalrka, Khyati, Prajha Mahabhaga, (iauri, Ganambika, 
Maliadevi, Nandini, and jatavedasi. These are some of the 
names when she was one (i.e. belbrc division ) . v^.fter she had divi- 
ded into two, her names are: -l^avitri, Varada, Punya, Pavani, 
Lokavisruta, Ajha, Avesani, Krsna, 'ITunasi, Sattviki, i^iva, 
Prakrti, Vikrta, RaudrI, Durga, Bhadra, Pramathi^u, Kfilaratri, 
Mahamaya, Revati, Bhutanayi^ "i. At tlie (‘iid of Dvapara yuga, 
O sages of good holy rites, her names areas follows: — 


609. Lord Siva has a body half man and half woman. Thus when we 
speak of eleven Rudras we mean eleven half males and eleven half females. 
Both the male and female forms, divided into hundreds and thousands, have 
their distinct names and activities. 



332 


Lingapurdna 


336-339. Gautami, Kausiki, Arya, Candi, Katyfiyinl, Sati, 
Kumari, Yadavi, Varada, Krsnapingala, Bahirdhvaja or 
Barhirdhvajfi, Suladhara, Parama, Brahmacarini, Mahendro- 
pendrabhaginl, DrsadvatK Ekasuladhrk, Aparajita, Bahuhhuja, 
Pragalbha, Siihhavrihim, the slayer of the Daityas such as 
Suinbha and others, tlic suppressor of the great demon Mahisa, 
Aniogha, Vindhyanilaya, Vikranta and Gananayika. Tlu are 
the various names of the goddess in order. 

340. The names of Bhadrakfili mentioned by me yield 
the best results. Those m(*n who read these ])ecome devoid of 
sons. 

341-3 12. In the forest, on the mountain, in the city or in 
the house, in the water or on dry land these names an^ used 
as saving renied\ . One shall repeat them when there i^ danger 
from tigers, elephants, kings or thieves — nay in all adversilicNs. 

313. One shall repeat the.^e names as pr()t(‘ctive ni(‘a.sure 
in the case of children afTlicted by evil ey(‘, evil pla!)ets, nohlins 
as well as mothers, 

344. 4'he following two are the parts of the gieat god(les.s. 
'riicv aie Prajha and Sil. From these twH) W'cue born thousands 
of goddesses by whom the entire universe is pervach'd. 

34“)-3!7. Rudra, Mahewara the l(.)rd ofDevas stalioiu'd hiiu- 
s('lf along Avith his consort Sati, for the benelil of the worlds. Ih* 
is Paramesvara, Rudia and Pasupali. Formerly the time- citiis 
w'ere burned by hiju. By his brilliance. Devas bcHanu' Pa$us 
( Individual Souls) . I le who reads or listens to tin' splendid order 
of the primordial creatkui attains the world ol Brahma. He 
who narrates the same to the excelUMit !)rahmiiis also attains 
Brahma’s world. 



Statement of Nandikesvara 


333 


CHAPTER SEVENTYONE 

The statement of J^andikesvara 


The saoes said: 

1. 1 splendid process of (‘rcalioii lias been riientioiu'd 

succinctly and in detail by yt)u. Ilow did J\i.supaii, Mali('s\aia 
happen to burn the three eirii‘s olWsiiias 

2-4. O hcjly loid, how did Devas includint^ Brahniri biM oine 
Pasiis.* The set of cities was ibrnu i ly buill Ijy Mava b\ per- 
forniinc; penance. It was an excellenl s i ol thiee i itie> oT 
divine nature, made ol' gold, silver and iron. W«‘ have lieard 
that llu'sc along with their forts weit‘ binnrd bv the lord f>r 
1 ^ How did the loid w'ho stiueV down the oriJliaga 

burn these cities by dischaiginga single auow ( X c u rhfiUgli i( 
w^as divine. 

5. That set of three cities was noi binned b\' ihe goblin^, 
created by Visnu. Th<‘ entire details of iheoiigin of the 
cities and the acquisition of boons liaw b(‘(‘n hi’aid foriruMlv. 

6-9. O sage of good holy rites, it behoves you to nanatc' 
the burning of the cities whollv. 

On hearing their words, Suta, the mo^l excellent among 
the knowers of the Puranas, '^a’d what he .ad In aid horn 
Vyasa in the manner as he had indicated ,.il the necessary 
topics. 

Siita said: — 

Due tc3 the curse of the three worlds originating I'roin mind, 
speech and body, tlie asura Taraka, the son ol I'ara, was killed 
along with his kinsmen by Skanda assiduously. His sons, all 
ofnc^blc soul, groat stremgth and exploits, viz : — Vidyunmalin, 
Tarakaksa and Kamalaksa, performed jjc nance. 

10-12, Th< 3 sc excellent Danavas, whilf‘ j)crlb*ming fierce 
penance, observed great restra...ts. By means of ])cnance they 
emaciated tlnur bodies. The delighted Brahma, the bestowcT 
of boons granted them the boon c:>f their ehoic (*. 

The Daiiyas said : — 

‘‘We want not to be killed by any living being at any 
time.’’ 



334 


Lingapurdna 


Thus they jointly requested the grandfather of all worlds. 
Then the eternal lord of the worlds spoke to them thus : 

13. ‘‘O Asuras, there is no universal immortality. Desist 
from this desire. Choose another boon that may appeal to yon.’’ 

14. Then the Daityas after consulting one another bowed 
to Brahma, the preceptor of the universe and said to him: — 

15. ‘‘By your grace, O lord of worlds, O preceptor of the 
universe, wc shall roam over this earth and live in three cities. 

16. Once in a thousand years we shall meet together. O 
sinless one, these cities shall then fuse into one city. 

17. The lord who strikes at these when they have fused 
into one with a single arrow shall be death unto us. 

18. Replying — “Let it be so”, the lord entered the heaven. 

Thereafter the heroic Maya built the cities by means of 

his penance. 

19. The cities of those noble asuras were stationed as 
follows: — the golden one was in the heaven; the silver city was 
in the firmament and the iron city was on the earth. 

20-22. Each of these cities was a hundred yojanas in 
length and in breadth. The city of Tarakaksa was made of gold; 
the city of Kamalaksa was made of silver; that of Vidvunmali 
was made of iron; they had three types of excellent forts. Maya 
was worshipped by the Daityas and Danavas thcie. This 
powerful architect built his own abode in everyone of them 
and lived there. 

23. Thus, () men of good holy lites^ came into existent e 
the well-fortified three cities. O leading brahmins, they were 
like the three worlds. 

24. When the trio of cities giew up, the Daityas in the 
three worlds entered the three cities and became superior in 
strength. 

25. The cities were full of kalpa trees. 'I'liey abounded 
in elephants and horses. There were innumerable mansions 
richly decorated with clusters of jewels. 

26-27. There were aerial chariots that resembled the solar 

6io. kalpa-druma— one of the five trees of Indra’s paradise fabled 
to fulfil all desires, the other being Mandara, Parijataka, Santana and 
Haricandana. 



Statement of Nandikesvara 


335 


disc and that had faces on every side. The palaces were splen- 
did with rubies studded. They were as refulgent as the moon. 
Their ornamental gateways were divine and resembled the 
peaks ol Kailasa. I’hcir three cities shone with the excellent 
mansions built separately. 

28. O excellent brahmins, it was filled with divine ladies 
(i.e. ladies of divine beauty and excclleiire) , Gandliarvas, 
Siddhas and Caranas. There were shrines ofRudra in every 
house and Agnihotra was performed every day. 

29-37. They were filled with wells, tan^^s, huge oblong lakes 
all round. Herds of elephants in their rut, splendid horses, 
chariots of every shape, wonderfully made with faces on all 
these abounded there. There were drinking sheds, 
assemblies, playgrounds, etc. Different kinds of halls and cham- 
bers for the study of the Vedas w^erc found all lound. The cities 
were well fortified and made unassailable even mentally by 
others, due to the illusionary power of Maya. C) leading sagis, 
the cities were frequented by chaste ladies everywhere. I'herc 
were many Daityas. Although they (’ominitted great sins they 
got rid of them through their woiship of Sankara. C) brahmins, 
the leading Daityas were highly blessed. They were acroin- 
panied by their wives and sons. 1 hey W' r conversant with 
the holy rites laid down in the f^rutis and Si lis. They were 
engaged in those virtuous rites always. They abandoned all 
lords other than Mahadeva and were en 5 aged in the worship 
of that lord alone. They had bro.ad chests and shoulders like 
those of bulls. They used to hold all weapons. They were 
always hungry. Their eyes shone like the forest fire. Some of 
them were quiescent ; some were infuriated. Some were dwar- 
fish and some were hump-backed; they had the lustre ol blue 
lotuses; their hairs were darkcoloured and curly. They re- 
sembled the blue mountain and the Meru; tl .nr voice was 
comparable to the sound of -e rumbling cloud. All of them 
were protected by Maya. They were well- trained and were 
desirous of fighting. That trio of cities was well frequemted 
by the firm and steadfast suppressors of Devas (i.e. Daityas) 
who were interested in fighting ahvays and all round, who Jiad 
perfectly achieved prowess and virility by the woishi[) of Siva 
and who resembled the sun, wind and king ol immortal beings. 



336 


Lingapurana 


38. O excellent brahmins, thanks to ihc prowess of the 
Daityas, Dcvas including Indra were burned by the fire of the 
set of three cities like the trees consumed by tlu' forest lire. 

39. Devas who were thus scorched saluted lord Visuii ot 
unrivalled splendour and said to him. 

40-41. The glorious lord, Narayana thought will'in his 
mind as to what should be done in the allair.'s ol Devas. 
Janardana, whose form is sacrifice, who was liimsclf the per- 
former of sacrifices, who was the partaker ot th(‘ fruit of sacrifices 
and who is the lord and bestower of benefits unto those who 
perform sacrifices, remembered the sacrifice. 

42. The sacrifice remembered by him for ihc adiievenieiii 
of the objects of Dcvas bowed down to that lord and culogist'd 
him. 

43. Seeing the smiling sacrifice, the eternal lord Vi.>nu 
observed Dcvas including Indra and said : — 

Sri Visnu said: — 

44. For the destruction of the three cities and for th(‘ 
prosperity of the three worlds, O Devas, worship tlu* lord witli 
ths Upasad sacrifice. 

Suta said: — 

45. On hearing the words of the intelligent lord dI Devas, 
Devas made great leonine roaring sound and eulogised the lord 
of sacrifices. 

46. Thereafter, lord Visnu himself thought once again. The* 
lord of Devas again spoke to all Devas. 

47. Even after killing and burning all living beings and 
even after enjoying pleasures without the basic justice, if one 
worships Mahadeva, one is undoubtedly sinless. 

48-49. There is no doubt that sinless persons should not be 
killed and only sinners should be killed assiduously. C) excelh-ul 
Dcvas, how could the wicked Asuras be killed by Devas al- 
though they arc sinners and Dcvas are very stiong ? He nce 
they should not be killed due to the power of Rudra 
Paramesthin. 

50. Without the grace of the lord who am I ? O Devas, 



Statemuit of Na?idikesiara 


337 


who IS Biahin i ^ Who ait ihc Dut\ is ^ Who arc the sla>trs ot 
the LIU niKs t>t U»vis ^ \\h) in ih uobL-soult tl sat»ts 

)1 Ik IS tin 1 > 1(1 ^itald tlixii tliL gitatcst lk ib pci- 

potudl lit IS thr twt lUsL vdilh pi hicjplL/’^ vvlio is woi tin of 
beiUL, sinitc 1 wilt) IS iji^ loid of all the iiimioital bcinirs m the 
uuwer 1 c^wd vvlio is Milu^v u i tli snppoit ol the uiiivcise 

>2 Ih al )ii( 1 ll t ^ ulilallDivis Ihisllit btiufatoi 
oi all He has math i thsliiK tion bi tv t ( ii l)t\.is and Dailvas 
spoiiin^K 

)) Ilisb\ woi hippuitJ ip ill ol Ills' ^ dial l)t v is attaiiu d 
imiiiorialily , Biahiiia itumed Ins tai i is Bialnni and 1 
iJtnntd rn\ sUtns is \ isnn 

^)4 WiLioiu vv >1 ii|) n d him, wliu h in m ill nns j)t i 

let lion 111 this v\orld ^ Ihinks to in woiship t I mo i ilit v 

foiild Oe Ivillrd l^v him aiont 

)h )() Mouovti, dl )t llkin ibidt bv lliLii Dim in is 
llityadhtn to tlu i ij m< t ons ul SuUi md Siiiii Still wi 
shill wni'sliip Kudt i b\ pLitoimimf tlu riti )1 Tpisid ptitim 
mg to that lord mi lu ) uc vi liimis over (h txitdtnl 
Dai^y IS L\((ptmgtl ^ l)id, tli tint t -t d d« il\ wliotlsi 
is c ) np tent to dc su )s in 1 1 ipm s * I ht y an \\i IJ j)roU i tt d 
b\ \I i\ 4 iloiiJ^ willi laiikxksi I In V ^ \i tin s ih iiistn of 

(isstals md they iit vvt II statioiu d in tht n Ives 

) n / 

>7 Mtiisivin^ th \ IS 111 pi rloiiin d till woiship of the 
loid by mt ans ol Up lb ul uiitut Sillino iht u lu s iw thou- 
sands ot goblins 

)(j h ) lht\ w<u aimed with sptais, javtlinsand iron 
clulis I lu V had vai ions weapons tin w le in vjiious guises 
1 lu y It seinblt d Rudia fuitt as tin fiie at tlu t me of disstilu 
tion, they weie toinjiiiabl to Riidia iht desiioyei Ihcy 
bowed 1} liini and hilttel Loid Visiiu then spoke to them 


On See p 8 note i , Gf i 7j 14 tasm id abheda buddhyaiva sapta- 
vim^atprabhedatah 

6i 2 Siva in his sakala form of linga 



338 


Lingapurdna 


Vimu said : — 

60. ‘‘O heroic ones, go to the three cities of Daityas, burn 
them, split them and swallow them. Then return to the surface 
of the earth in the manner you had gone.” 

61. Thereafter, the groups of goblins bowed down to the 
lord of Devas and entered the three cities. Like the moths 
in fire, they became destroyed. 

62-63a. At the behest of the lord of Daityas, all the goblins 
were destroyed. Thousands of Daityas rejoiced, danced and 
sang. They eulogised Rudra the lord of Devas, the great soul. 

63b-64. Devas including Indra, who had been defeated in 
a trice and whose prowess had been destroyed, came unto 
Visnu, the lord of Devas and resorted to his support out of 
fear. On seeing them the lord Visnu thought thus. 

65-66. “What is to be done?” After thinking thus he 
became distressed as he looked at the distresed Devas inclu- 
ding Indra. After a while he thought again “How shall I des- 
troy the army of Daityas assiduously and carry out the tasks of 
Devas without the grace of the supreme lord. If one ponders 
over it, there is no doubt about this that those who are viituous 
have no sin at all. 

67-71. Hence, know that the Daityas cannot be killed by 
those Bhutas originating from the Upasad sacrifice. They dis- 
pel sin by means ofDharma. Everything is founded onDliarma. 
The eternal Sruti says that prosperity originates from Dharma. 
All these Daityas, the residents of the three cities, are virtuous. 
Hence, O leading brahmins, they have attained immoitality and 
not otherwise. Even after committing a very great sin, people 
arc liberated from all the sins if they worship Rudra. They are 
not affected by sins like the lotus leaves which are not affected 
by water. O brahmins, the achievement of worldly pleasures 
definitely takes place through his worship. Hence, those Daityas 
who are devoted to the worship of the Liiiga do enjoy worldly 
pleasures. Hence, O Devas, for your purpose I shall create 
obstacles in the holy rites of Daityas by means of my Maya and 
so shall conquer the three cities instantaneously” 

Suta said'- — 

72. After thinking thus, the lord Visnu decided to bring 
about impediments in the holy rituals of asuras. 



Statement of Mandikesvara 


339 


73. Visnu of great splendour, wielding Mayii generated an 
illusory Purusa®*'^ born of himself to create obstacles to the 
holy rites of Daityas. 

74. Visnu the ruler of all, the person who could assume 
any form he liked, ihc \ iclder of Maya, evolved a holy treatise 
that could fascinate everyone and that had within its basic 
principles the belief in what is seen. 

75. This sacred treatise contained one million six hundred 
thousand verses.®^ ^ Lord Visnu taught this scripture to the 
Purusa born of his own limbs. 

76-77. It was against those treatises that followed the 
Srutis and the Smrtis. It was devoid of the disr iplinc pertain- 
ing to the four castes and four stages of life. It was (aught 
in it that heaven and hell arc here itself.®**^' There was no belief 
otherwise. Visnu himself taught this scripture to that Purusa. 
For the destruction of the three ( iti<‘s he said to that Purusa: 

78. ‘‘O, undoubtedly it behoves you to go there for the 
quick destruction of the residents ol‘ tlie lhn‘e citit s. May their 
Dharmas in pursuit of the Srutis and Smrtis b(' di'stroyed.” 

79. The wieldcr of Maya®'®, the expc'rt in th(^ dec ejitive 
scripture, bowed to him. After entering those cities the sage 
immediately created his Maya. 

80. (Jii account of his Maya, those Da r, aswiio were the 
residents of the three cities, eschewed thc'ir holy rites based on 
the Srutis and Smrtis and became his disciples. 

81-82. They left off Sankara, Mahadeva, the grc'at Is vara. 


613. According to the present context Visnu created a delusive 
teacher called Mayamoha who created a Mayasastra of sixteen lakhs of 
verses preaching n-dhatma for misguiding the Asuras. Mayamoha created 
disciples for the propagation of n-dharma. He preached non-violence, forbade 
Srauta and Smarta rituals, discarded Variiasrama system, created an order 
for women that resulted in leaving their home and leading the life of nuns. 
In some versions, the role is assigned to Brhaspati, the preceptor of Gods 
who in the guise of the preceptor ^ukra deludes the Asi -as. For detail, 
see Mayamoha prakarana in Padma^ snu, MaUya and Siva puranas. 

614. This is not clear which text is meant. 

615. On the heretic doctrines compare : 

^|«r i 

•qr^ I I TTT ’TRT; fT 

swt; il cited in ST, 

616. Munihi — Bauddha-bhiksuh 6T. 



340 


Lihgapurdna 


At the behest of the lord, the wiclder of Maya, Niirada, the 
practitioner of dec eption, also entered the trio of cities and 
associated himself with the wiclder of Maya. That sage 
was himself surrounded on all sides by his disciples and their 
disciples. 

83-88. He ordained rules of conduct for w^oiiicn that would 
gi' e them the bene lit of licentious activities Thc> Ibllowed 
those rules and achic'ved the result immediately. These* women 
began to censure the ladies faithful to their husbands and 
themselves became (*namoured of other people. Even today in 
the Kali age, base women give due honour to the sage 
Narada®^’, abandon their husbands and move about iinfetteieci. 
Really it is the husband who is mother, Jalhe»*, kinsman, 
comrade, fiiencl and relative unto the women. 'There is no 
doubt about this. Still he said thus through his Maya. Really 
the woman who has love towards her husband shall attain the 
greatest heaven even after committing a great sin. Sht‘ who 
does contrary to this attains hell. O leading sages, formerly, 
chaste ladies forsook all Dharmas, all Devas and other pre- 
ceptors of the universe and worshipped their husbands always. 
After attaining the heavenly world they became free* from 
ailments aifd rc*joicc‘cl. but those who were the followers of 
Maya attained hell, llciicc, it is the husband who is the greatest 
goal. 

89-91. Yet on account of the Maya of the lord of Devas 
and at the behest of lord Visrxu, the women abandoned their 
husbands and became self-willed and unrcsirainc'd in their 
conducts. Misfortune went to the three cities at the behest of 
that lord himself. The glcjry and pi'ospc‘rity that they had 
obtained from Brahma, the unborn lord, the loid of Devas, 
abandoned them and went out of the cities. 

92-97. The lord thus preached delusion of the intellect as 
evolvc'd by the Maya of Visnu. The Purusa deluded the 
Daityas and Narada the wieldcr of Maya deluded the ladies. 
In order to create obstacles in Dharmas these two were com- 
fortably seated there. They were unexcited and unchanging, 

f)]^. Tie preaching in regitd to sexual freedom is attribmtd 

Narada, the disciple jf Mayjmoha. 



Statement of Nandikeivara 


341 


when the splendid Dharma pertaining to the Srutis and the 
Snirtis, perished; whrn heresy was [)r()(laiincd by Visnu, the 
source of origin of the universe; when Mali<*svara and the 
worship of his Lihga were abandoned by Daityas; when the 
virtuous uclivi ties of the women were entirely deslnAed and 
wicked conduct was stabilised; the lord of Devas Visnu 
appeared c ontented. After practising penance he ap])roarhed 
the consort of Uina along with Devas and eulogised him. Lord 
Visnu said : — 

Obeisance to you, to Lord Mahesvaia, to tlu‘ great Atman, 
cjbeisaiice to Niirayana, to Sarva, to Rialmia to one* having the 
form of Brahman ; oljcisance to llit' perm nait onv. to the 
infinite oiie, to the immanifcst one. 

Suta ^uid\ 

OfbOy. After eulogising the great lord and after bowing 
dewn like a long staff', the lord Visnu stationed himself in walrT 
and performed the japa oi the Rudia Mantra irn million limes. 
All Devas inc luding Indra, Sadhyas. \am.), Kndias and Maiui.s 
eulogised lord Siva. 

Dnns .\uid : 

100. Obeisance to you the Atman .11; ()l)ei^an( i* to 

?>ai‘ikai'a the dispcller of alllirtion, to Rudra, t. \i)a R^udra, tf) 
Kadrudra and to Piaretas. 

101. You arc cjur perpetual goal; the suppressor ol the 
enemies ol Devas should be always worslu])pt‘cl and hemoun d 
by us. You arc the primordial one; \tai ar<* the endless one; 
you arc the infinite imperishable lord. 

102. O preceptor of the universe, yoii arc* Prakrti and 

Puiusa himself; y^ou are thecualor, tin* ciestroyer; the ])ro- 
tectoi ; the* leadcT of the brahmins in universe', (J deity, 

fav^oui'ably disposed towards the braijmirr.s. 

103-104. You arc the granter of Iroons; you are identical 
with speech. You are worthy ol being directly expressed; )ou 
arc devoid of the expressed arrd c’xpression. for the sake ol 
salvation, you arc worshipped by the yogins and by those 
who whirl in the yogic practice. You are statjoned m /he 



342 


Lingapurdna 


cavity of the lotus-like heart. The wise call you Sat (the 
existent) , the greatest one in the form of Brahman. 

105. O lord, the noble sages say that you are reality, the 
mass of splendour, greater than the greatest and the greatest 
Atman in this world. 

106. O preceptor of the universe, you arc everything that 
is seen, heard, stationed or born. They call you minuter than 
th'‘ minutest and greater than the greatest. 

107. They call you one with hands and feet everywhere, 
one with eyes, heads and mouths everywhere. You have cars 
all round and you stand enveloping everything in the world. 

108-110. They call you Mahadeva, the omniscient, one 
without ailment, one who cannot be specifically pointed out, 
one having a universal form, one with deformed eyes, Sadasiva 
without ailment, one who makes others in the world function, 
one who makes Prakrti work, the great-grandfather, the lord who 
bestows boons, the self-born deity, the abode of all and the 
lord of twentysix principles. You resemble ten million suns in 
refulgence; you are similar to ten million moons in brightness, 
you are on a par with ten million fires that blaze at the time 
of dissolution and you have no other lord to control you. 

111-114. The Srutis and the people who are conversant 
with the essence of Srutis call you the essence of the Srutis. 
O deity with many forms, that which is evolved in the world 
without you has not been seen by us. You alone piot(‘ct the 
Daityas, Devas, Bhutas, the mobile and immobile beings, O 
Sambhu, we have no other goal. Protect us by killng all the 
Asuras. 

O Paramos vara, all arc deluded by your Maya. Just as the 
waves and billows in the ocean come into clash with one 
another and ultimately become water, so also Devas and 
Asuras and all creations of Brahma ( fighting one another) are 
rendered insentient by the lord [a pun on the word jala 
(water) which is also pronounced as jada when it means 
insentient, inactive]. 

Suta said : 

115. The man who gets up early in the morning, purifies 



Statement of Nandikeivara 


343 


himself and repeats this holy hymn or listens to this shall 
attain all desires. 

116-1 19a. Mahesvara, who was thus eulogised by Devas, 
was pleased by it as well as by the Japa performed by Visnu. 
Accompanied by Uma, he embraced Uma and smilingly kept 
his hand on Nandin. Glancing at Devas, he said in a majestic 
tone ; — “O leading Devas, this task has been understood by me 
now. I know the power of the Maya of Visnu and the intelli- 
gent Narada; O excellent Devas, I shall cause the destruction 
of all those Daityas engaged in evil activities. 1 shall destroy 
the three cities as well." 

Suta ^did : — 

n9b-121a. Tlnni Devas came there along with Brahma, 
Indi a and Visnu. On hearing the words of the lord they bowed 
to him and eulogised him. In the meanwhile ihc goddess 
glanced at the lord with surprise. She hit the bull-bannered 
deity with her toy lotus and said. 

The Goddess said : — 

12 lb- 125. O lord, sec our son, the six-faced Karttikcya, 
resembling the sun in refulgence. lie is playing. O excellent 
one among those blessed with sons, he is adorned with excellent 
ornaments such as coronets, bangles, ear-ring., bracelets, anklets, 
belly-bands, tinkling bells, golden lig leaves, etc llis forelocks are 
bedecked with the flowers of the kalpa tree. His necklace is 
studded with rubies and other precious gems. He is adorned 
with shoulderlets and pearl necklaces having the lustre ol the 
full moon. He has the caste-marks on his foreheads. O Maha- 
deva, see our splendid son. 

126-129. lie is marked with saflron. A round mark has 
been made with Bhasma. lord, sec the row ol faces like the 
clusUu* of lotuses. O lord, see his splendid eyes. See the 
splendid marks of collyrium ^nplied by his mrdiers Gaiiga, 
Krttika and Svrdia®^** as an auspicious benediction.” 

Siva who was thus addressed by Uma, the mother of the 
worlds, began imbibing the nectar from the faces of Skanda. 

6i8. Mothers of Karttikcya, Sec SP. Rudra Samhiid, ch. 2 . 



344 Liiigapurdna 

He was not satiated thereby. He even forgot Devas who 
harassed by the Daityas had assembled there. 

130. lie embraced Skanda, kissed him, smelling the 
head and said* -‘‘Dance, dear son’’. The great boy, dispelling 
the anguish of all danced gently and sportingly. 

131. The other leading Ganas danced along with him. 
At the bidding of the lord, the entire universe, danced lor a 
moment. 

132. All the Xagas (serpents) and Devas with Tridia at 
their forefront danced. Fhe chii^fs of the Ganas eulogised 
Skanda. Uma and the mothcjs rejoiced. 

133. rhe Gindharvas and Kinnaras showered flowcis and 
sang. On drinking the nectar of the fine dance haivati and 
Parainesvara attained satisfaction along with Nandin and the 
leading Ganas. 

131-. Then along with Nandin, Karttikeya, and the 
daughter of the king of mountains, ^^iva entered the olivine 
abode, like the cloud entering other clouds, lie too had the 
lustre of the clouds. 

13j. Devas stood by the iloor of the <\bode. Slightly 
distiessed in their minds they eulogised the loul. 

136. They told one another: “What is this ? What is this ?’* 
and they looked at one another in their excited dejection. 
Some said, “we are sinners’’, still others said, “we aie unfor- 
tunate”. 

137. The leading Devas said -Daityas are lucky. Others 
said, “This is the fruit of their worship.” Still others said “No.” 

138. In the meantime, on hearing their grim voices 
Kumbhodara®^^ of great splendour struck them with his staff. 

139. Devas were frightened, drying “Ha, Ha” they 
fled. The .sages and Devas fell on the ground. 

140-1 H. The sages Kai'.yapa and others said — “O our 
advcr.se fate!” The brahiijins said “Lven alter seeing i!k‘ lord, 
the task of Devas has not been aeeomplished due to the ill luck 
of Devas. Still others said, “Obeisance to fiiva” afttr wor- 
shipping him slightly in theii hearts. 

619. ambudabhah- - .ST. interprets differently: amhudavai sur>avad 
abha kantir yasya— who resembles the sun in brilliance. 



Statement of Nandikeivara 


345 


142-146. At the behest of Mahadeva Nandisa, the favourite 
sage of the lord came there riding on a white bull. He had 
matted hair and held the trident and the iron club. He wore 
garlands, necklaces, ear-rings and bangles. On seeing Nandin, the 
Kumbhodrjra bowed to Nandin with his lowered head and 
hastened along with him. Nandin of great splendour was 
seated on the back of a bull. He had the bull banner. He was 
the commander-in-chief of the Ganas and was accompanied 
by the Ganas like the great lord himself, riding on the back of 
the cloud. The white umbrella of Nandin stretched to ten 
Yojanas. It was bedecked in clusters of pearls. It shone like the 
firmament. The splendid pearl necklace suspr'ndcd from it from 
within appeared like the Gahga falling from ihe sky over the 
head of the lord. 

147-iaj. O leading sages, at the l)ehest of Indra, the wi(‘lder 
of the thunderbolt, the splendid divine drums were sounded in 
honour of the presiding officer o? the Ganas. They eulogised 
him with j 3 leasing words, Just as they eulogised Siva with 
thrilling joy and loving devotion. At the bidding of the thunder- 
bolt-wielding lord, the sky-walkers showered fragrant flowers 
from tlic firmament over the head of Nandin. Satisfied with 
that shower he shone with real and sincere satisfaction. Nandin 
wa^ drenched in fragrant water dropping from the moon on 
the f( 3 rchead of the lord. The hack of the bull shone with 
different kinds of flowers. O sages of good ho! rites, just as 
the firmament is scattered with stars so also the back of the 
bull was covered with flowers. Covered by them Nandin 
shone on the back of the bull, like the moon on the back of the 
firmament. O sages of holy rites, on seeing Nandin that way 
Devas including Indra and Visiiu eulogised the chieftain of 
the Ganas as if he was another lord of Devas. 

Deva^ said : 

154-160. Obeisance to yoe the devotee of Rudra, to one 
engaged in the japa ot Rudra mantras; obeisance to one who 

621 . meghaprstbe — naegha-rupa-Visnu-prsthe ST, This refers to 
Visnu in the form of cloud which lord ^iVa made his vehicle. Hence, Siva is 

called ‘megha-vahana/ 



346 


Lingapura^ 


destroys the agony of the devotees of Rudra; obeisance to 
you engaged in rites pleasing to Rudra; obeisance to the leader 
ofKusman^a; obeisance to the lord of yogins; to the bes tower 
of every thing; to one worthy of being sought refuge in; to the 
omniscient one; to the dispeller of agony; to the lord of the 
Vedas; obeisance to one comprehensible only through the 
Vedas; obeisance to one wielding thunderbolt; to one whose 
cut ved fangs are adamantine ; to one who renders the thunder- 
bolt of Indra ineffective; to one whose body is bedecked in 
diamonds; to one propitiated by Indra, the wiclder of thunder- 
bolt; obeisance to the Rakta(red coloured) ;to one with red eyes; 
to the wearer of red garments; obeisance to one who bestows 
the world of Rudra to those who are devoted to his lotus-like 
feet. Obeisance to the commander of the armies; to the lord of 
Rudras; to the lord of goblins and to the lord of the worlds; 
obeisance to the dispeller of sins; obeisance to Rudra, to Rudra- 
pati (Lord of the Rudras) ; obeisance to Siva; obeisance to the 
gentle one; obeisance to you who are the devotee of Rudra. 

Suta said: 

161-163. Thus eulogised, the delighted presiding officer of 
the Ganas, the son of Silada said to Devas: — 

“It behoves you all to prepare a chariot, a charioteer, a 
bow and an arrow for Sambhu with assiduity thinking that 
the trio of the cities was as good as destroyed.” Then the Devas 
strenuously made the chariot through their artificer ViSvakar- 
man assisted by Brahma, for the use of Siva the intelligent 
lord of Devas. 



347 


CHAPTER SEVENTYTWO 

Construction of Rudra's chariot 

1. With great assiduity and eagerness the divine and cos- 
mic chariot®-^ of lord Rudra was made by Visvakarman. 

2. It was identical with all living beings;®-® it was bowed 
to by all Devas; it was identical with all Devas;®®^ it was 
golden and it was honoured by all. 

3. The sun was the right wheel and the moon was the left 
wheel. The right wheel had twelve spokes a *d the lelt wheel 
had sixteen spokes. 

4. O leading brahmins, the twelve Adityas were in those 
iw'eivc .spokes on the right. O sages of good holy rites, in the 
sixteen spokes of the left wheel were the sixteen digits of ihe 
moon. 

j. The constellations were the ornaments of the left whecl®-^ 
alone. The six seasons were the rims of those two wheels, O 
leading brahmins. 

6. The firmament was the roof®-® of the chariot and the 
interior®-’ of the chariot was the Mandara. The mountain of 
rising sun and the mountain of the setting sun were the poles 
to which the yoke was fixed. 

7. Mahameru was the pedestal and the mountain Kesara 
was the supporting seat. The year was i!; velocity and the 
two transits of the sun w ere the joints of the wheels. 

8. The Muhurtas were holes to fix the nails or pins and 


622. In the Parana' Visvakarman is invested with the powers and 
offices of the Vedic Tvastr. He is the great architect, executor of handi- 
crafts and the builder of great cities. He is the sou ot Prabhasa, the eighth 
Vasu, by his wife Yogasiddha. 

623-624. The cosmic chariot' rcj. ^ents the cosmic powers with seven 
worlds as wheels, with five gross elements and all-gods as its constituents. 

6'>5. Varna i.e the moon, the left side of the cosmic car. 

626. puskara — vacuum, it stands in apposition to antariksa — the 
atmospheric region, the sky. 

627. ratha-nidah — sarathi-sthanam ST., the sitting place for the 
charioteer. 



348 Lingapurdna 

Kalas were the pins of the yoke. The Kasthas were its nostrils 
and the Ksanas were its axles. 

9. The Nimesas were its Axle-tree and the Lavas consti- 
tuted its shafts. The sky was the fender of that chariot. The 
heaven and salvation were its flags. 

10. Virtue and detachment were its staffs and sacrifices 
were the supports of the staffs. The monetary gifts were the 
joints and the fifty fires were the iron pieces or bolts. 

11. Dharma and Kama (love) were the tips of the two 
yokes; the unmanifest principle was the poleshaft; the cosmic 
intellect was its connecting shaft. 

12. The ego was its angular points; the elements were its 
strength; the sense organs its ornamental fittings all round. 

13. Sraddha (faith) was its movement; the Vedas were its 
horses; the Padas (words) of the Vedas its ornaments and the 
six ancillaries were its trinkets. 

14. O sages of good holy rites, the Puranas, Nyaya(scicnce 
of logic) , Mimaiiisa (treatise on holy rites) , the Dharmasastras 
(ethical literature) were its perfect screen cloths and supports of 
the tails. It was equipped with all characteristics. 

15. The mantras, syllables, feet and the four stages in 
life were its bells. Ananta the serpent adorned by his thousand 
hoods formed its bounding limit. 

16. The quarters and the interstices were the pillars of 
this chariot. The Puskara and other clouds were its golden 
banners studded with jewels. 

17-18. The four oceans formed the blankets spread on 
its surface. The Gauga and other rivers appeared splendid in 
female forms, bedecked in all ornaments and holding the chow- 
ries in their hands. They occupied different parts in the 
chariot and rendered it beautiful. 

19. The seven layers of winds, Avaha etc. were the 
seven ..xcellcnt golden steps. 74ie charioteer was lord Brahma 
and he held the reins. 

20-21. Pranava with Brahman for its deity was the whip. 
The mountain Lokaloka w^as its landing ground with stairs all 
round. The splendid Manasa mountain was its external preci- 
pice. 'Fhe other mountains constituted its noses all round [the 
upper timbers]. 



Construction of Rudra^s Chariot 


349 


22. The Tala and the residents thereof constituted its 
pigeon holes, and the pigeons. The mountain Mcru was the 
great umbrella and the Mandara constituted the side drum. 

23. The king of mountains (Himavan) was his bow and 
the bowstring was the lord of serpents ( Vasuki) himself, along 
with Kalaratri (the night of nightmares) and Indradhanus (ram- 
bow). 

24. The bell of the bow was goddess Sarasvali of the form 
of the Srutis (Vedas). Visnu of great splendour was the arrow 
and Soma (moon) was the spike-head of the arrow. 

25. The Kalagni fire at the end of i<alpa was the sharp 
and terrible point of that arrow. The army originated from 
the waters. The winds were feathers fixed to the airow. 

26-27. After making the divine chariot, bow and arrows 
with Brahma the lord of the worlds as his chan’oteer, Siva 
mounted the divine chariot wearing martial decoiations. He 
was accompanied by the groups of Devas and lie shook heaven 
and earth by his movements. 

28-31. Eulogised by the sages and saluted by the bards 
the shining splendid lord, the bestower of boons occupied the 
chariot glancing at the charioteer. I’hc groups of Apsarases, 
skilled in dancing, danced in h*s present . to honour him). 
When he got into the chariot, evolved i, .t of the different 
material, the horse originating from the Vedas fell headlong 
over the earth. The lord Dharanidhara (uplifter of the earth 
i.e., Visnu), assuming the form of a leading bull lifted up the 
chariot for a while and tried to stabilise it. But at the next 
moment even that leading bull slipped down to the earth on 
his knees. 

32. At the instance of the lord Siva, lord Brahma who 
held the reins in his hands lifted up the horses and steadied the 
splendid chariot. 

33. Then he drove the horses that had the speed of the 
wind, towards the cities of the swift and courageous Danavas. 
The cities till then had peace and comfort. 

34. Thereafter looking at Devas, lord Rudra said: — 



350 Lingapurdna 

‘‘Give unto me the lordship of Pasus.®^® Then I shall kill 
the Asuras. 

35. O excellent Devas, only after assigning you a status 
of animal souls distinct from that of Devas and others, can 
they be killed, not otherwise, O excellent ones.” 

36. After hearing these words of the intelligent lord, all of 
them became suspicious and uneasy over this change and felt 
great distress. 

37. On realising their mental reaction, the lord spoke to 
them thus: — “O excellent Devas, let there be no fear or 
misgiving in you in regard to your becoming Pasus. 

38-41. Now listen and try to pursue the means of libera- 
tion from the state of Pasu. He who performs the divine holy 
rite “Pasupata” will be liberated from the state of Pasu. O 
pure ones, I solemnly promise this to you. O excellent Devas, 
there is no doubt in this that those others loo who perform the 
Pasupata rite will be liberated from the state of a Paj^u. He 
who renders service steadily for twelve years or even half that 
period or even three years can be liberated from that state. 
Hence, O excellent Devas, perform this great and divine 
rite”. 

42-50. /‘So be it”, said Devas to Siva, who is bowed to by 
all the worlds. That is why Devas, Asuras and human beings 
arc called Pasus. Rudra is the lord of Pasus®^® and the liberator 
of Pa^us from their bondage. He who is Pasu, shall eschew 
that state through this holy rite. The scriptures dcclan* that 
even by committing sins he does not become a sinner. 

628. pasunam adhipatyam — lordship of the individual souls (jivas); 
Gf. “so ’bravid varam vrna ahameva pasunam adhipatir asani” — died in 
ST. 

b20. Siva is named Pasupati, the lord of animals. According to the 
legend, recorded in the present chapter, every deity was asked by Siva to 
declare himself a mere Pasu or animal before Tripuras could be slain in 
the battle. The Gods accepted the proposal, declared themselves as animals 
and fought brutally. Lord Siva won them the battle but Gods were still 
distressed. The lord then enjoined the observance of Pasupata vrata for the 
attainment of their release from animal nature. 

This legend forms the basis for the formulation of Pasupata sect which 
aims at the release of Pasu (the individual soul ) from the bondage of re- 
birth. 



Construction of Rudra's chariot 


351 


Then Vinayaka himself, the boy with the exploit of an 
adult, forbade Devas as he had not been duly worshipped by 
Devas and said thus — 

Sri Vinayaka said '. — 

Which man, may he be a Deva or a Danava, attains perfec- 
tion in this world without worshipping me by means of splen- 
did foodstuffs, edibles, etc. Hence, O leading Devas, 1 will cause 
impediments in a trice in your tasks. O leading Devas, how is 
it that you had attempted to perform this without worshipping 
me. 

Thereafter all Devas including Indra became frightened. 
After worshipping that lord and propitiating him with all kinds 
oi tuibles and foodstuffs, with loaves and sweet-meats they 
spoke to lord Ganesa — “Let now our task be achieved without 
impediments.” 

Lord Rudra, the chiefof all leading Devas, embraced his son 
and kissed him on the head. ^le worshipped and jnopitiated 
Ganesa with flowers of sweet fragrance and juicy edibles and 
foodstuffs. 

After worshipping Vinayaka the leader of chieftains, worthy 
of being worshipped, lord Rudra who had the lord of moun- 
tains for his bow started along with the grnu,.s of Devas and the 
chiefs of the Ganas, in order to burn the tin cities. 

5 1 . The groups of Devas, Siddhas, Bhutas, Ganas and their 
lords beginning with Nandin followed ISa, Mahesvara, the lord 
of Devas, with their respective vehicles. 

52. Mounted on a chariot as huge as the lord of mountains, 
Nandin went ahead of Devas and the chiefs of Ganas, in order 
to strike at the tiio of the cities, like the gteatlord Isa going 
ahead to strike the god of Death. 

53. Mounting on lordly elephants, huge bulls and stately 
horses, Devas, the lords of Ganas, and the Ganas, with thier 
respective weapons and symb. s in their hands followed their 
leader Nandin. 

54. Mounting on the lord of the birds (i.e. Garuda) as 
huge as the lord of mountains the bird-bannered lord Visnu of 
great prowess hurriedly went ahead, on the left side of Rudra 
in order tc burn the three cities for the welfare of the worlds. 



352 


Lihgapurdna 


55. All Devas followed that lord of the world, the lord of 
Devas and Asuras, the incomprehensible deity, with their ex- 
cellent weapons such as the sharp lances, axes, iron clubs, 
tridents and swords. 

56. In the middle of Devas, lord Visnu whose vehicle was 
a bird and whose complexion was like that of the lotus leaf 
(petal) shone in the same manner as the thousand-rayed fierce 
sun when he ascends the peak of Sumcru. 

57. In order to destroy the cities, like Garucla who des- 
troyed the serpents, the thousand-eyed Indra, the first among 
Devas, went ahead on the right side of Rudra. He was seated 
on his lordly elephant. 

58. The heroes of the Siddhas, Gandharvas and leading 
Devas all round, eulogised Indra who was the bestower of des- 
ired objects and who was the overlord of the leading Devas by 
saying “Be victorious.” They honoured him with the excellent 
shower of flowers. 

59. At that time those who were stationed in the heaven 
bowed to the thousand-eyed Indra, who was the paramour of 
Ahalya, who was the overlord of the universe and who was the 
leader of Devas after seeing him sporting like the son of Uma 
i.e. Karttikeya. 

60. Yama, Fire, Kubera, Vayu, Nirrti, Varuna and Isana 
followed Rudra. 

61-64. Virabhadra who was very efficient in battle, 
followed at the south west side of the chariot. He was mounted 
on a huge bull and surrounded by the beings born of his hairs. 
He thus served the three-eyed lord of Devas in order to destroy 
the Asura cities. Mahakala of great splendour who appeared 
like another Mahadeva, served the chariot on its north-western 
side. 

The six- faced deity Karttikeya who resembled the king of 
mountains, who was born of the fire god, and who was sur- 
rounded by the army of Devas, served the chariot along with 
the Siddhas, Caranas, warriors and elephants. 

65. After creating impediments unto the leading Asuras 
and after removing obstacles in the case of Devas, lord Gane^a 
Vighnesvara went to the camp of Isana, accompanied by the 
groups of Vighnas (his followers) . 



Construction of Rudra's chariot 


353 


66-67. At that time, Kali went ahead of Ganesa along 
with the intoxicated Pisacas and Gaiias. Slie had .skulls for her 
ornaments. She was wliirling in her hand a trident that shone 
like Kelaratri. She was intoxicated by drinking the blood of 
Asuras which tasted like wine (unto her) . She made the lead- 
ing Asuras tremble. She had the gait of the elephant in rut. 
Her eyes were tremulous due to inebriation. Her body was 
covered with the hide of the elephant. 

68. Saying ‘‘Be victorious'’, the chiefs of the Siddhas, 
Gandharvas, Pisacas, Yaksas, Vidyadharas, lordly serpents and 
leading Devas bowed to the goddess, die daughter of the 
mountain of snow and eulogised her loudly. 

69. The mothers (BialimT, Mahesvari, etc.) who were 
respectfully adored by the groups of Devas and who were bent 
on killing the Raksasas went to the great Mother (^Amba, 
Gauri) on their vehicles, along with their followers who held 
banners all round. 

70. Riding on a lion, the goddess Durga went forth to 
chastise Daityas. The auspicious deity was one whose orders 
could not be transgressed. In her mighty arms slu‘ held 
weapons of dilFcrent kitids such as the trident, axe, goad, 
noose, discus, sword and ('oneh. She burnec^ and smirched the 
pathway with her eyes as dazzling as tT usands of midday 
suns and fires. Though a woman, her exploit were uncommon 
among women. 

71. The leading chiefs of the Ganas who shone like the 
lord of Devas and the sun, followed lord Isa on elephants, horses, 
lions, chariots and bulls in order to destroy the three cities. 

72. Equipped with ploughs, ploughshares, iron clubs, 
missiles, Bhusundas and peaks of lofty mountains, the lords of 
Devas and the chiefs of goblins as huge as mountains went 
ahead of Mahesvara. 

73. Devas, the chiefs of -..horn were Indra, the lotus-born 
Brahma, Visnu, and the lords of Ganas, surrounding lord 
Ganesa on all sides, spoke the words, ‘‘Be victorious*’ with 
palms joined in reverence over their coronets. 

74. With staffs in their hands the sages with matted hairs 
danced. Siddhas, Caranas and other heaven-walkers showered 



354 Lingapurana 

flowers. The three cities echoed and reverberated on all sides, 

O leading brahmins. 

75. Bhrhgi, the most excellent among all the leading 
Ganas, was surrounded by lords of Ganas and Devas. A Yogin, 
he got into an aerial and went forth like Mahendra, to destroy 
the three cities. 

76-84. The following leaders of Ganas surrounded Isa 
and went forth to chastise the Tripuras: — Kesa, Vigatavasas, 
Mahakesa, Mahajvara, Somavalli, Savarna, Somapa, Senaka, 
Somadhrk, Silryavaca, Suryapesanaka, Sfiryfiksa, Surinama, 
Sura, Sundara, Prakuda, Kakudanta, Kampana, Prakampana, 
Indra, Indrajaya, Mahabhi, Bhimaka, Sataksa, Pancaksa, 
Sahasraksa, Mahodara, Yamajihva, f^atasva, Kunthana, Kan- 
thapujana, Dvisikha, Trisikha, PancaSikha, Munda. Ardha- 
munda, Dirgha, Pisacasya, Pinakadhrk, Pippalayatana, 
Ahgarakasana, Sithila, Sithilasya, Aksapada, Aja, Kuja, Aja- 
vaktra, Hayavaktra, Gajavaktra, Crdhvavaktra and others. 
They surrounded lord Soma in groups and went ahead. There 
were thousands and thousands of Rudras of sublimated sexu- 
ality. Surrounded by crores and crores of Ganas they rallied 
round Mahadeva, Mahesvara, the lord of Devas and went 
forth to burnr the three cities. 

85. The thirtythree, the three hundred and three and 
three thousand and three Devas went forth on all sides. 

86. The mothers of the world, the mothers of (ianas, 
and the mothers of the Bhutas followed the lord. 

87. Seated in the middle of the chariot amongst Ganas the 
lord of the Ganas shone like the moon amongst stars and 
constellations. 

88. Goddess Gauri, the daughter of the Himalaya, identical 
with the worlds, was seated on the left side of the lord. She 
shone forth as though due to the splendour of lord Siva. 

89. The goddess, of auspicious marks, on the left side of 
the lord, shone with the tips of her hands holding the chowries. 
She had the lustre and colour of the golden lotus. 

90. The pure white body of the supreme lord, the lord of 
Devas, was shining with Bhasman. In the company of Ambika 
it shone like the white cloud in the sky with the streaks of 
lightning. 



Construction of Rudra's chariot 


355 


91. The gentle body of lord Siva, having the lustre of the 
moon shone with the golden bow like the sky that shines with 
the rainbow or the universe that shines with the Mem 
mountain. 

92. His white umbrella interspersed with the rays of jewels 
shone like the full disc of the moon at the time of its rising. 

93. The gem-set necklace round the neck of Siva suspen- 
ded along with his silken upper cloth near the extremity of 
the umbrella shone like the excellent river Gahga falling from 
the sky. 

94. Then the lord whose lotus-like 'cct were bowed to 
by Indra^ Brahma, firc-god and others, went to the three 
cities along with Ainba for the welfare ol the world. 

./"i The trident-bearing lord is competent to bum mentally, 
within a trice, the entire universe including the mobile and 
immobile beings. Why should then the Pinaka-bcaiirig lord go 
there himself along with theGanas iji order to burn the three 
cities ? 

96. Devas, Visnu, Brahma and India said: -‘‘Of what 
avail is the chariot to Sambhu ? Of what avail is the excellent 
arrow to him ? What has he to do with the groups of Devas ? He 
is never wanting in power to burn the three cities, rhen what 
is this? 

97. We think that just for his pastime the Pinakabcar- 
ing lord set about doing all these things. Otherwise, what 
other benefit has he to derive from this elaborate show ^ 

98. Delighted in the company of leading Devas and 
Ganas headed by lord Nandin, and with the universe for his 
chariot he shone along with the godtlcss, I'kc the mountain 
Meru with its eight peaks. He shone thus as he neared the 
three cities. 

99. On seeing Isvara, the lord of Devas sjated in the 
arena of the three cities along ' ‘th Ganas and the daughter of 
Himavat, the group of Devas followed him. 

100. O leading sages, the three cities appeared like ano- 
ther set of the three worlds f because it was occupied) by 
leading men, the Ganas, Devas and the three kinds of Asuras. 

101. Then Sarva tied up the string of the bow, fitted the 



356 Liiigapurana 

arrow, joined it with the niirarulous missile pertaining to 
Pasupati and thought of the three cities. 

102. When the great lord stood ready with the bow well- 
drawn, the three cities merged into one. 

103. When the three cities had attained fusion into one, 
the delight of the noble-soulcd deities was tumultuous and 
excited. 

104. Eulogising the deity with eight cosmic bodies, all 
the groups of Devas, Siddhas and sages shouted the words, 
“Be victorious”. 

105. Even when the auspicious Pusyayoga was attained, 
the lord, the husband of Uma, who had destroyed the eye of 
Bhaga indulged in sportive pastime. Then lord Brahma spoke 
to him: — 

106. O Mahadeva, Paramesvara, this gesture on your 
part is but proper, since, O lord, Asuras and Devas are equal to 
you. 

107. Still, in view of the fact that Devas arc virtuous and 
asuras are sinful, it behoves you, O lord of the universe, to 
eschew your sportive pastime. 

108. O Isa, O lord, of what avail is the chariot, or the 
banner or the arrow, or Visnu, or I or even these goblins unto 
you for burning the three cities ? 

109-113. It behoves you to burn the trio of the cities even 
as the Pusya conjunction still prevails. O lord of Devas, it 
behoves you to burn the three cities quickly lest they should 
get separated. Then the great lord Virupaksa, glanced at the 
three cities. Instantaneously they were reduced to ashes. All 
those deities, viz., Soma (Moon), lord Visnu, Kalagni (Black 
fire) and Vayu who were stationed in the arrow bowed down 
to the lord and said: — “O lord of Devas, although the trio of 
the cities has been burned by your glance it behoves you to 
discharge the arrow for our welfare.’* Thereupon O leading 
brahmins, Isvara, Tripurardana, laughingly brushed the 
string of the bow, pulled it as far as his ear and discharged 
the arrow. 

114-121. Afterburning the three cities in a moment the 
arrow that brought about the destruction of the Tripuras came 
back to the lord of Devas, bowed to him and stood by. The 



Construction ofRudrd*s chariot 


357 


three cities that contained hundreds of crorcs ofDaityas, 
on being burned by that arrow, shone like the three worlds 
burned by Rudra at the end of the kalpa. Those Daityas who 
had been worshipping Rudra even at that stage along with 
their kinsmen, attained the chieftainship of the Ganas, thanks 
to the power of the duly performed worship. Devas including 
Indra and Visnu and ihe lords of Ganas, looked at the lord 
and the goddess, the daughter of the Himavat with awe and 
fear. They did not say anything. On seeing Dev as thus fright- 
ened, the leading Deva, i.e., Rudra asked them^ “What 
next?” But they merely bowed tohim^-oin all sides, 'fhey 
saluted Nandin who had the moon for his ornament. They 
saluted the daughter of the king of mountains. They saluted 
till, of the daughter of the ni(»i»ntain, viz., Ganesa. They 
saluted Mahesvara. With due attention, Brahma eulogised 
lord Bhava, Isvara the enemy of 'Tripuras, along with Devas 
and Visnu. 

Brahirm said: 

122. Be pleased, O loid of the chiefs of I3evas; be pleased, 
O Parainesvara; be pleased, O lord of Uk' worlds; be pleased, 
O eternal lord, the bestower of bliss. 

123. O Rudra of live faces obeisance n vou; obeisance to 
one who has fifty crores of physical forms, obeisance to the 
principle of learning, seated on the threefold Atman. 

124. Obeisance to Siva, to the principle ol fiiva; obcisanec 
to Aghora; obeisance to the piineiplc of the set of eight forms®*® 
Aghora and others; obeisance to one of the form of twelve®'** 
Atmans. 

125. Obeisance to the Atman of i>iva stationed in this 
world alter adopting the splendid form that resembles crores of 
lightnings and that has sway over the eight quarters. 

126. Obeisance to the fierce one ol fier\ complexion; 
obeisance to one willi Ainbik' occupying halt of his body; 
obeisance to the immortal being; to the bestower of salvation 
unto those of white, black and led colour. 

630. aghorastaka-tattvaya the srt of eight forms beginning with 
Aghora. 

6:^1. dvadaSalma— the sun ST. 



358 


Lingapurana 


127. Obeisance to the Eldest one in the form of Rudra; 
to the deity accompanied by Uma; to the bcstower of boons; 
obeisance to the deity of the three worlds ; obeisance to the 
Trinity; obeisance to Vasatkara. 

128. Obeisance to the one of the form of firmament in the 
middle; obeisance to you stationed in the firmament; obei- 
sance to the deity with eight forms®®^ in the eight Tihrines;®®® 
ob<*isance to one having eight principles. 

129. Obeisance to one stationed in three different sets of 
four and two different sets of five;®^® obeisance to one 
having five mantras as his physical form. 

130. Obeisance to the letter ‘‘A”, of sixtyfour®®*^ types; 

obeisance to the letter of the form of thirty two®'^® princi- 

ples. 

131. Obeisance to the letter ‘‘M”, having the sixteen 
forms®®® of the Atman ; obeisance to the deity in the eight 
forms®^® of half a Matra. 

132. Obeisance to you, to the Oihkara stationed in four®®' 
ways ; obeisance to the lord of the firmament, to the lord of 
heaven. 

133. Obeisance to the lord having the seven worlds (as his 
form) ; obeisance to the lord of the Patala (Nether- worlds) and 
Naraka (hell) ; obeisance to the deity having eight forms in the 
eight®®® holy shrines; obeisance to the deity gn^atcr than the 
greatest. 

134. Obeisance to you having a thousand heads; obeisance 
to you who stays in thousands (i.e., in many forms); obeisance 

632. asta-ksetra — eight stations, sun, etc. 

633. eight shrines — Rudra, etc. 

^34- ®ight tattvas, eight elements, earth, etc. 

635. It refers to four Vedas, four asramas and four vyuhas. 

636. It refers to five mahabhutas, five forms, Sadyojata, etc., and five 
mantras. 

637. It refers to the syllable *a’ and its sixtyfour divisions. 

638. It refers to the ‘u’ and its thirtytwo kinds. 

639. It refers to the syllable ‘m* and its sixteen divisions. 

640. It refers to the eight-formed iSiva. 

641. It refers to the syllables ‘a\ *u', *m' and nada sound. 

642. It refers to the eight forms of Siva, such as consist of earth, 
water, fire, etc. 



Construction of Rudra^s chariot 


359 


to Sarva possessing a thousand feet ; obeisance to Paramesthin. 

135. Obeisance to one with the form of ninc®^® principles 
of the Atman; obeisance to one having nine times eight®^^ 
Atmans and Atmasaktis; obeisance to one having eight®^® 
modes ol revelation; obeisance to one having eight times eight®^® 
physical forms. 

136. Obeisance to one possessing sixtyfour®^"^ principles of 
the Atman, obeisance to one (stationed) in cight®^® different 
forms; obeisance to one encompassed by the eight Gunas;®^® 
obeisance to one the Saguna as well as Nirguna. 

137. Obeisance to you stationed at the loot; obeisance to 
the resident of the eternal abode; obeisance lo one stationed in 
the umbilical regions; obeisance to one who causes sounds in 
the heart. 

138. Obeisance to one stationed in the neck; to (jne who is 
stationed in the aperture of the cymbals; to one stationed in 
the middle of the eyebrows; to one stationed in the middle of 
sounds. 

139. Obeisance to Siva stationed in the disc' ol the moon; 
to one of auspicious forms; to one, having the forms ol lire, 
moon and the sun; obeisance to one having the (orni ol the 
thirty si Saktis. 

l^iO. Obeisance to one who is the Atniria. ol the Serpent 
that is asleep after encircling the woilds thnx nies; obeisance 
to one stationed in three different forms; obeisaiicc lo one with 
the forms of thrcdbld (sacrificial) hres. 

141. Obeisance to Sadasiva; to the Pinaka-bearing quie- 
scent Alahesa; ob(*isancc to the omniscient one; worthy of being 
sought refuge in; obeisance to Sadyojata. 

142. Obeisance to Agliora: to Vainadi'va- to latpurusa; 
and to Isana. 


643. It refers to his nine forms. Gf. Mbh : purusah prakrtir vyaktam 
ahariikaro nabho’ nilah / jyotir apoksitir iti tattvanyuktani te n *va. 

644. It refers to the scvcntytwo not mentioned L/ name, 

i.e., manifesting in syllabh-s through the eight organs of speech, 
astastaka-murtayc, i.e., of the form of 64 syllables, 
i.c. the life-principle of sixtyfour yoginis. 
astavidhaya— of eight forms or names, Bhava, etc. 

Buna.staka-v. taya -invested with eight gunas. Gf. “samkhyadikah 

icchayatno’pi cesvarah'—Wyasiddhanta-muktavali oted m 


64^. 

64b. 

6v7. 

648. 


649- 

pahea buddhir 

ST • . , • 

650. The text does not mention the names of the thirty-six saktis. 



360 


Lingapurdna 


143. Obeisance to one having thirly®^^ modes of revela- 
tion; obeisance to one beyond Santa (the digit of that name) ; 
obeisance to the lord Ananta to the subtle and the I'xcellciit 
one. 

144. Obeisance to you, the single-eyed; ob(*isaucc to you, 
the Ekarudra; obeisance to you. the trinity;*^'’- to Srikantha; to 
Sikhandin (the tufted one). 

145. Obeisance to the Infinite one; to one stationed in 
the seat of the Infinite; obeisance l«) the cause of destruction; 
obeisance to one devoid of impurities; obcisanct' to {hr large 
one; obeisance to you of pure body. 

146. Obeisance to one stationed in the seat devoid of mi- 
purities;®®® obeisance to one of the form of wealth for tlie pun- 
purpose; obeisance to the yogin stationed in yogapTthas; obei- 
sance to the bestower of yoga. 

147. Obeisance to one stationed in the heart of yogins like 
the awn of the wild rice Nivara; obeisance to you the Praty«v 
hara, to you engaged in Pratyahara. 

148-149. Obeisance to one .stationed in the heart of those 
who are engaged in Pratyahara, and Dharana ( retention) and 
Dhyana (meditation) ; of the form of Dharana and Dhyana; 
and to one who is comprehensible through Dhyana. 

150. Obeisance to one worthy of meditation. Obeisance to 
one approachable through meditation; obeisanr e to you of lau- 
dable meditation; obeisance to one woithy of medilation even 
by those who themselves are worthy of meditation; ol)cisancc 
to you the worthiest of those who are worthy of nn-flitation 
by others. 

151 . Obeisance to one worthy of approac h through contem- 
plation; obeisance to you, who arc contemplation itself, obei- 
sance to one in the form of Nir\ ikalpa object unto those wIki 
are engaged in meditation. 

152. O Rudra, by burning the three ( ities this entire set of 
the three worlds has been redeemed by you today Who will 

631. triihiatprakasaya — one who shines throughout th»; thirty 
muhurtas, i.e. ever shining. 

652. i.e. in the form of Brahma, Vi$nu and Rudra. 

Verses 145-149 speak of his yogic postures, vir. Ssana, pratya- 
hara, dharana, dhyana and samadhi. 



Construction of Rudra's Chariot 


361 


dare to eulogise you (befittingly) ? How shall I eulogise you 
who are of this extraordinary nature ? Obeisance to you O 
delightful Siva. 

153. O lord ol Dcvas, thanks to their devotion, contentment 
and vision of miracle, that the mortals, immortals, Ganas, and 
Siddhas, make obeisance to you. O lord of Ganas, obeisance to 
you. 

154. O lord, you are rompoteiit to burn the three cities, 
nay even the three worlds by a single glance of yours. Leisurely 
sporting with Ambika, you have burned them in a trice; and 
the arrow too was discharged. 

155. For your work of annihilating the Tripuras, I made 
with great deal of effort the excellent chariot, the speedy 

and the splendid bow; but the benefit thereof was not 
seen by Devas as well as Siddhas. 

156. O lord, you are all these combined, -the chariot, 
the charioteer, Visnu the excellent Deva Rudra himself, Sakti 
and Pitamaha. How shall I adequately eulogise you? I bow 
down my head to you, who cannot be adequately pro- 
pitiated.®^* 

157. O lord, you have infinile number of feet, infinite 
number of arms, infinite number ol heads and infinite number 
of forms. You are the annihilator as well as th(‘ auspicious one. 
Shall I propitiate you of this nature? How hall I please you, 
who are of this nature ? 

158. Obeisance to you, the kiiower of everything; obei- 
sance to you Rudra, Sarva and Bhava; obeisance to the gro.ss, 
to the subtle, to the subtler than the subtlest; to the creator 
and to one conversant with the subtle meaning. 

159. Obeisance to the creator, sustaine? and the aunihila- 
tor of all Devas and Asuras; obeisance to the creator of the 
worlds, to the leader of Devas and the h^rd of Asuias. Obeisance 
to the giver, to the ruler, to the chastiser of all. 

160. Obeisance to the ' orest ori(* ( Oinpn hensible only 
through Vedanta; obei saiicc to one continuously eulogised by 
those who know the meanings of Vedas; obeisance to Bhava in 

554. atosyam — to^ayitum a^akyam. According to ST, ‘one who 
cannot be described by speech or conceived by the mind.* Cf. “yato vaco 
nivartante aprapya manasa saha’* — cited in ST, 



362 Lingapurdva 

the form of the Atman of the Vedas; obeisance to you, to the 
last one, to the middle one, to the upper one. 

161. Obeisance to one who is devoid of a beginning or an 
end; to one who exists; to one devoid of expressibility; to the 
Lihgin (one having a Lihga form) ; obeisance to you who have 
no symbols and yet are identical with the Lihga: to Lihga 
idcn.ical with Veda, etc. 

162. Obeisance to Rudra who had severed my head — 1 am 
the prinioidial lord and yajhamurti (one whose form is yajha) . 
O lord, it was for dispelling my darkness that you had severed 
my head* by the tip .jf your finger on observing my crime which 
deserved that punishment. 

163. O lord of Devas, O lord of Asuras, wonderful indeed 
arc your activities. O deity devoid of attributes and forms, like 
an embodied soul y)u will carry out the task of Devas along 
with them. 

164. Among your taltvas one is gross one is subtle; one 
is veiy siil)tle; on<* is both embodied and unembodied; one is 
embodied; one is imenibodied; one is visible; and one is in- 
visible and one is worthy of being meditated noon, th(‘ wondci- 
ful Isa. 

16*^'. O lord, what is seen in a dream is an uneharacten ^ed 
object, 1 think that it cei laiiily appeals as well as does not ap- 
pear , Your diviiK' ibiiii ( aiinot l^e (lerceivtcl ('ven b; Devas, in 
spite of their elfoi t^. b apiK'iiis in visible lihga leirn. 

1 ‘Hi. ^ ) lord of Devas, vhev' Is yom di\ me prowt'ss \\ Ik re 
aie we? Wliiie is de\\eion ^ 'tvluie is yoiii eulogy ^ Still, t) 
loid, ibrgi ‘ e im \sii(» tluaigh a piiinc\<il being am laiienting, 
in^pireil b\ di\(^tu*n 

Suiii yuid: 

U>T. ( ) t ( lU lU bi .ihn 'n>, I . hi > 1 lo i Ins h/nm <» 

llu‘<ha"is^ -111 ^ c 1 . \%i’> le.ids it vlIu 1 bi*v, nig in the 

lord on Im g’' Sii’u ihev'" ilu bono^iiM' 1 sjis. 

* This IS enntracli( tetl III s/*. p -jg 

6">j. "the verse explains ihc chara. n i'., of ea< h of the rij^ht 
forms of Siva, vi/., gross (earth), subtle (v'ater), subtler (fiieh manih’sc- 
unmanifest (moon), manifest (sun) , uiimanifest (wind), having the quality 
of sound (ether), and the object of mcditarion (dhveyam nam' im th<" 
part of the mind. 



Construction o/Rudras Chaiiot 


363 


IG8. On hearing this hvmn, rxiighiy-iirinol resident of 
tlu' peak ol’Mandaia who was eulogised vlevotedl) In ihc four- 
lacod deity looked laughingly at the daughter of the mountain 
and said to Brahma of great exalted dignitv. 

Siva said: 

169. O lotus-born one, I am dc iiglOed by this hymn as 
well as by your devotion. Welfare unto \ou. (ilioosc the boons 
in accordance with the desii(‘ of Devas. 

Suia said : 

170. Thereupon, aficr bowing to die lord ol Devas, the 

deity btcauic delighted in ids mind and spoke with 
palms joined in reveience. 

Ihahmd said : 

171. () lord Sahkaia, () lord ol tht < hiel’s of Devas, O 
dcsirojcr of Tripuras, () Paiamcsvaia, be pleased to rf)iifei on 
me die greatest de\otion towards \ )ii. 

\1Z, O loid, tlie bestowxr ol rdl iicii- s (»u all Devis. I^e 
{'leased wilh oui devotion towards you always as well as with 
my ciiaiiot('ershif> 

173. J.ord Vi.sriu also bowi*d dov.n \1aii svara. Joining 
his palms logellu r in levereme lu' said tlm'* tf) ih(‘ ilnce-e^ecl 
lord accompanied by Lima. 

! 74-17. j. "*(.) lord, be pleased wot h me. O lord ol Lievas, 
obcisaiKc be to you. J pcrpctualK desin* »o be your vehicle. 
I wish loi your devotiem as well as my ( ihuency to bear you. 
(> Sankara, the b(*stov. er boons, I wisJi hn omniscience and 
all-i)ervasivenrss 

Siita uiid : 

176. On hearizig tlieii submission Parainesvara, Mahadeva, 
Bliava engaged them resperii\ely in (liarioirersliip and the 
posiiion ol vehicle. 

177. Aftei burning Daityas, and alter giving boons to 
Biahma and \’isnu, Siva, the noblr-souled lord of Devas, 
vanished along with tlie goddess, Bhulas and Nandin. 



364 


Lingapurana 


178-179. When the lord had gone awsiy from the battle- 
field along with his Ganas, the awe-struck lords of Devas 
bowed down to Bhava and Parvali. They became devoid of 
misery and returned to heaven on their vehicles. I’he lords of 
Devas, the chiefs of sages, the lords of Ganas and Bhaskaras 
went to heaven. 

180-184. O brahmins, he who reads this chapter on the 
exploits of the destroyer of Tripuras, originally composed by 
Brahma formerly or he who narrates this devotedly to the brah- 
mins at the time of Sraddha or during the rites of Devas 
goes to the world of Brahma. O excellent brahmins, the indi- 
vidual soul is liberated from all kinds of sins mental, physical 
or verbal. He is liberated from the principal as well as subsi- 
diary' sins, gross, subtle or subtlest on hearing this splendid 
chapter. His enemies will perish and he will be victorious in 
battle. He will never be harassed by any sickness. Adversities 
will not afflict him. He shall attain wealth, longevity, renown, 
learning and incomparable prowess. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYTHREE 

Glory of worshipping Siva 

Sfita said : 

1. When lord Mahes vara departed thence after burning 
the three cities in a trice the lotus-born deity (Brahma’) spoke 
thus in the a.ssembly of the leading Devas. 

Brahma said : 

2-6. Due to the Maya of Lord Visnu the following Daityas 
forsook Mahadeva and perished along with their cities and 
citizens. They were the grandson of Tara of gn^at brilliance, 
the powerful son of Taraka, the asura Tarakaksa, the powerful 
Kamalaksa, Vidyunmalin, the lord of Daityas and many others 
along with kith and kin. "I’hey left the worship of the lord 
Mahesvara and so they perished. Hence Sadasiva in the Lihga 
form should always be worshipped since Devas have stability 



Glo)iy of Worshipping Siva 


365 


only as long as they worship the lord. Siva should always be 
adored by the leading Devas with faith. The entire world is 
based on the Linga. Ever y thing is founded in the Lihga. 

7-9. Hence, he who wishes for perfection of the soul shall 
worship the Linga. It is only through the worship of the Lihga 
that Devas, Daityas, Danavas, Yaksas, Vidyadharas, Siddhas, 
PisitaSanas, Pitrs, Sages, Piiacas, Kinnaras and others have 
undoubtedly achieved Siddhi. Hence, O Devas, by any means 
whats’oever one should always worship the Lihga. 

10-21. The holy rite PdSupata. 

VVe are all Pasus of that intelligent lord of Dc’as. Eschewing 
Pa^utva and adopting the holy rite Pasupata, the eternal 
Mahadeva in the Lihga form should be worshipped. The five 
elen.'-'U!.- should be cleansed simultaneously by means of five®^® 
Pranavas along with five Pranayamas (control of breath), 
O leading Devas. Then the process should be repeated with 
four Pranavas; thcii with three; and then with two, always 
accompanied with an equal number nf Pranayamas. He shall 
then utter Omkara and control the Prana and Apana. He shall 
fill all the limbs with the nectar of perfect knowledge as well as 
Pranava. He shall then purify the three Gunas, the fourth 
called Ahaihkara (ego)*®^ and the tanmatras, O Devas of 
good holy rites. Then he shall cleanse the elemeats. the organs 
of sense and the organs of action. After cleansin^r the two,®** 
viz., the Purusa and the Cidatman he shall repeat “Agnih 
Bhasma” (the fire is the Ash) and touch the bony (?) He shall 
then say similarly that the wind, ether, water and earth are 
ashes and then smear his body with ashes during the three 
sandhyas throughout life. (By doing so) one becomes a Yogin 
conversant with all tattvas (principles). This is the Pasupata 
vrala) pertaining to ^iva. O excellent Devas, it was for the 
liberation from bondage that this has been mentioned by the 
lord himself. By performing the Pasupata rite in this manner 
and by worshipping the great lord - the Lihga formerly seen 

fi56. i.c. the five pranayamas preceded by the five pranavas (om 
syllables) . 

657. fourfold, viz., manas (mind), buddhi (intellect), ahamkara(ego), 
and citta (consciousness!. 

658. the two purusas : taijasa (the universal) and prajiSa (the in- 
dividual) soul. 



366 


Lingapurdna 


by me and the noble-soulcd Visnu, O Devas, people cease lo 
be PaSus within a year. All rites should be performed assi- 
duously by us after worshipping lord Isvara externally and 
internally. O excellent Devas, this is my divine vow as Wi M as 
that of Visnu. 

22-25. There is no doubt that it is the vow of the, sages 
also. Hence one should worship Siva. If one does not think 
about tite only God Siva, even for a moment, it is a loss, it 
is a great blemish, it is delusion, it is silenee. Those who 
indulge in devotion to him, those who mentally bow down to 
him, and those who attempt to remember Bhava an- never 
subjected to misery. The fruit of the worshij) of ,^iva is as 
follows : — Pleasant and charming abodes, divine ornaments, 
women, and riches till one is satisfied. May those who wish for 
enjoyment of great pleasures or the kingdom of heaven, worship 
Mahesvara in the l.ihga form, at all times. 

26-29. Even after striking and destroying all living beings, 
and after burning this entire univer.se if one should woiship the 
only God Vjrupaksa (i.c. Siva), one is never tarnished with 
sins. 

After saying', ‘ My Lihga is made of rock, it is bowed to iiy 
all Devas,” Brahma worshipped Rudra, the lord of the three 
worlds at the outset and eulogised the t!irec-eycd lord id’ Devas 
with pleasing words. Ever since then, Indra and others too woi- 
shipped the lord directly after performing the Pasupaia rite 
and smearing their bodies with ashes. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYFOUR 

Description oj ,^iva Lingas 

Sdla said : 

1. At the bidding of Lord Brahma, Visvakarnia made the 
following Lingas befit* ing the office of Devas and gave those 
Lingas to them. 



Description of &iva Lingas 


367 


2. The Lihga made of Sapphire was worshipped by Visnu. 
India worshipped that of ruby. The son of Vi^ravas worshipped 
the Lihga made of gold. 

3. Vis'vedevas worshipped Silver Liiiga, Vasus the aus- 
picious magnetic Lihga, Vayu the Lihga made of brass; and 
Asviiis the Earthen Lihga. 

4. King Vaiuna worshipped the crystal Lihga; Adilyas 
the cxccllcni Lihga made of copper, and king Soma the excel- 
lent Lihga made of pearls. 

5. Aiianta and the other great serpents worshipped the 
Lihga of coral; Daityas and Raksasas the ferro’»s Lihga. 

b. Guhyakas worshipped the Lihga of three metals, Ganas 
that made of all metals and O excellent brahmins, Gamunda 
and Aivruvrs worshipped the Liiiga of Sand. 

7. Nairrti worshipped the Lihga of wood; Yama that of 
emerald; Nilarudra and others the pure and splendid Lihga 
made ofBhasman (ashes). 

8. LaksrnT worshipped the Lihga of Laksmivrksa (Bilva 
tree) ; (Juha the Lihga of cowdung. O leading sages, the sages 
worshipped the excellent Lihga of Kusa grass. 

9. Vamadeva and others worshipped the Puspa lihga 
and Manonmani the I.ihga made of scents. Sarasvati wor- 
.shi])])cd the l.ihga made of jewels. 

10. Durga worshipped the Lihga made of y !d along with 
the pedestal. All the Mantras worshipped Ugra in the form of 
sacrifice with the splendid Lihga made of ghee. 

1 1 . The Vedas worshipped the Lihga of curds; Pisacas the 
Liiiga of lead. All the worshippers attained the suitable region 
by the favour of Brahma. 

12. Of what avail is much talk ? There is no doubt in this 
that it was due to their worshipping the Lihga that the universe 
of in(d)ile and immobile beings could stand. 

13-lG. Due to the dilTerence in the material, they say, there 
are six types of Lihgas. Their o.-bdivisions are fortyfour in 
number. 'Lhe first type of Lihga is called Sailaja (made of 
rock). It has four sub-divisions. O excellent sages, the second 
type is made of jewels. It has seven sub-divisions. The third 
type originates from metals and it has eight sub-divisions. The 
fourth Lihga originates from wood and it is of sixteen sub- 



368 Lingapurdna 

divisions. O excellent brahmins, the fifth type of Liiiga is made 
of clay; it has two subdivisions. The sixth type of Liiiga is the 
Ksanika (momentary) and it is of seven subdivisions. 

17. The Lihga originating from jewels bestows lor tunc; 
that originating from rock yields all Siddhis. The Lihga made 
of metals bestows wealth and the Lihga made of wood yields 
the achievement of worldly pleasures. 

18. O leading brahmins, the Lihga of clay is splendid and 
brings about all Siddhis. The Lihga of rock is very excerienl; 
the Lihga of metals is the middling one. 

19-20. Lihgas are of numerous types. In brief, they are of 
nine types. 

At the root of the Lihga, Brahma is stationed. Visnu the 
lord of three worlds, is stationed in the middle. Above is 
stationed Rudra, Mahadeva, Sadasiva who is called Pranava. 
The pedestal of Lihga is the great goddess having three Gimas, 
the mother having three*^® attributes. 

21-25. The goddess as well as the lord is adored by the 
person who worships with that pedestal. The splendid Lihga 
whether of rock, or of jewel or of metals, or of wood or of clay 
or of momentary, type, should be installed with devotion. The 
result is very splendid. 

The person who worships the Lihga is eulogised by Indra, 
Brahma, Agni, Yama, Varuna, Kubera, Siddhas, Vidya- 
dharas, the king of serpents, Yaksas, Danavas and Kinnaras 
with the sounds of the divine drum. He is a meritorious soul. 
Shining brilliantly with splendour he gradually occupies and 
passes through Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svah and Mahar worlds and 
then beyond Janaloka he shall go on to Tapas and Satya, 
illuminating them with his own brilliance. He shall unhesi- 
tatingly pierce the cosmic Egg by means of the large sword 
deposited in the holy path wherein the Lihgas had been in- 
stalled. 

26-30. After eschewing the Lihgas of rock, or of jewels, or 
of metals, or of wood or of clay or of the momentary type he 
shall establish his entire body in the Lihga. 

The man who instals the splendid Lihga white as the kunda 

659. trimayi— brahina-vi99u-rudramay& ST, of the form of Brahma 
Vifou and Rudra. 



369 


Monism of Siva 

flower or cow’s milk, in accordance with the injunctions, along 
with Skanda and Uma undoubtedly becomes Rudra embodied in 
human form. By touching him or seeing him men attain great 
bliss. O leadiiig brahmins, his merit cannot be mentioned by 
me even in hundreds of yu.e^as. Hence one should instal the 
Lihga in the above manner. 

The Sakala (one with attributes) and divinely splendid 
body of tlic lord is worthy of being conceived by all men. But 
the Niskala ( attributcless) body of the lord can be conceived 
only by the yogin. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYFIVE 

Monism of Swa 


The sages said : 

1. How did the lord who is niskala (attributeless) , ninnala 
(pure), and nitya (eternal) adopt sakalatva (the state of being 
with attributes). It behoves you to tell us about tl is in the same 
manner you had learm it formerly. 

Suta said: 

2. O leading brahmins, persons who know reality reco- 
gnize the lord in the form of the Pranava, Vijnana (perfect 
knowledge), after hearing about the unborn lord in the Veda- 
ntic treatises. 

3. The knowledge that has sound, etc. for its object is 
called Jnaiia. Others say that jhana is devoid of Error. Still 
others say that it is not so. 

4. O brahmins, some sages say that knowledge which is 
pure, devoid of impurities, has no alternatives as objects and 
does not rccjuirc a support and is made manifest through a 
teacher, is the real one. 

5. Salvation results only from perfect knowledge. Grace of 
the lord is conducive to the achievement of perfect knowledge. 



370 


Lingapurana 


Both help to liberate the yogin and make him blissful.**®** 

6. Some sages say that His contact can be acquired by 
means of holy rites. By one’s own free will, the form that is 
conceived fancifully shall be withdrawn. 

7-11. The heaven is the head of Lord, the sky®*** is his 
umbilicus, the moon, sun and fire arc his eyes, the quarters aie 
his cars. The nether worlds constitute his feet, the ocean is his 
cloth, Devas are his arms, the constellations arc his ornauKUits, 
Prakrti is his wife, Purusa is his Lihga. Prom his face®®- issued 
forth all the Brahmins, Brahma, India, and Visnu. I’licKsatri- 
yas issued from his arms. The V’^ai^yas issued from his thighs and 
Madras fioin his feel. Pu.skara Avartaka and other clouds are his 
hairs. The winds arc born of his nose. The Sruti and Snirli 
texts constitute his gait. 

12. The lord in the form of Karman makes Prakrti function 
by means of this cosmic body. The glorious Purusa is compre- 
hensible to man llirough perfect knowledge, not olh<Twise 

13-14. Tapoyajha f sacrifice in the form of austerity) is 
superior to thousands of Karmayajnas (sacrifice in the form of 
holy rites). Japayajha (sacrifice in the form of Japa) is superior 
to thousands of Tapoyajnas. Dhyanayajna (sacrifice in tlu‘ form 
of meditation) is superior to thousands of Japayajhas. d’here is 
nothing greater than Dhyanayajna. Dhyana (meditation) is a 
means of perfect knowledge. 

15. When the yogin stands firmly by equal elegance and 
.sees through meditation, when he is engaged in the Dhyana- 
yajfta, Siva becomes manifest in him. 

16. All people conversant with the knowledge of Brahman 
are pure, thanks to that Vidya. I'here is n(^ exi^iatory rile or any 
injunction in regard to VijnSnins (knowers) ; nor do they have 
purificatory rites. 

17. On consideration it is clear that there is no holy rite in 

66 0. anandamayah — i.e. by the real knowledge and divine grace the 
yogin can attain the supreme bliss. Cf. “Anandamayo’bhyasat” — cited 
in ST. 

66 1. kham — the world of mortals. ST, quotes Viiva in suppo ri of 
this meaning. 

662. The divine origin of society and its division into four classes, viz. 
Brahmana» Ksatriya, Vai.^ya ard Sudra. can be traced as far back as the 
Puru^a-iukta of the Rgveda. 



Monism of Siva 


371 


the world, there is no happiiic.^s or misery, neither dharma nor 
adhanna. neither japa norhoma, to those who take up medita- 
tion. lhc> eorne neai to the ‘Sat’ (the existent Being). 

Ifi. 'I'hc Lifiga is [)ure, auspicious and imperishable. It is 
exc eedingly hlisslul in nature. 'Fhe Niskala form, tliat is, tlic 
form devoid ol atiributes is ail-pcivasive. It is always stationed 
in the heart ot* yogi ns. 

PJ. () brahmins, they say that the Lihga is of two types 
viz., -tile external aiui iheintcinal. () oxe(‘lleiit sage.s, the grciSS 
OIK* is the external. C) br.diinins. llie subtle one is the internal. 
[So ai e the di vcjlei'sj. 

20. The gloss devotees an* tho.se engaged in the worship of 
gross Lingas and interested in holy rites and sacrifices. 'I'lie 
gro..o luo’ just (orawakenirig knowledgcof the gross devotees. 

21-22. riic spiritual lihga is not perceptible to tlu delud- 
ed person who coneeiV(*s things only externally and not other- 
wise*. The gross linga made of clay, wood, etc., is pLrce])tiblii 
only to non-yogin as the subtle and eternal Lihga is peueptiblo 
t.o the Jhanin. 

23. Other know^ers of leality say that the object, on eonsl- 
deriifion, is non-existent.®®^ I’liercfore, everything, the Niskala 
and the Sakala is of the nature of ^>iva. 

2'L Others say like this, O n t*u ol good 1 oly rites -Al- 
though the (*thei is one, it is perceived sepaiaic! in re gard to 
separate platt«*rs. Similarly J^iva has si‘paratencss as well as 
non -separateness. 

25. O men of good lioly rites, ihougli the sun is only one 
lie is se(*n manifold in the different watcr-ieservuirs. This 
example i.s cited in order to convince the people. 

2(i. I he creatures in the heavt‘n and on the earth are 
evolved out of the live elements. Still they aie seen in multiples 
of forms as different species and individuals. 

6G[\. The gross (lixiga) form of tie* supreme lord Siva is meant just 
to create a feeling of devotion in the gross-minded people.^ In fact, lord 
Siva (like the ether) is an indivisible entity. His division into sakala and 
niskala forms, as of the ether into ghatakfiia and mathakasa is conditioned 
by external factors. 

60 p arthah — goal, viz. the release from the bondage of activities. 
Because, actually, as there is no bondage, there is no release. Gf. PaHcadniV, 
VI. 15:,; also, Mbh, ‘'bandhasya mayamulatvan na me mokso na bandhanam 
- -cited in ST, 



372 


Lingapurana 


27. Know that whatever is seen or heard is identical with 
Siva. The difference among the people, on deliberation, is 
mere illusion. 

28. After experiencing extensive pleasures in dream a man 
may be happy or miserable. Bui on pondering we understand 
that neither the pleasure nor the misery has been really expe- 
rienced. 

29-30. All those who have understood the real meanings 
of the Vedas also speak thus in regard to worldly matters. 
The great lord invested with attributes is directly perceptible 
in the hearts of the worldly-minded persons. The lord devoid 
of attributes appears in the hearts of yogins and is identical 
with the universe. He appears to the wise ones only. Ihc 
physical body of the great lord is of three types. 

31. O excellent brahmins, the first-one is Niskala, the 
second one is Sakala-Niskala and the third-one is Sakala. 

32-33. Some worship the Sakala-Niskala form, some wor- 
ship in the heart, or in the Linga or in the fire. Some worship 
the Sakala form along with then wives and sons. 

34-35. Just as Siva so also is the goddess. Ju»«t as the god- 
dess so also is Siva. Hence people worship the deities with the 
consciousness of non-difference. They w^orship the twenty- 
seven®®® principles in the body as well as outside, in the mystic 
diagrams of four, six, ten angles, twelve, sixteen and three sides. 

36. Siva, the lord, devoid of difference of Sat and Asat 
is stationed out of his own free will along with the goddess lor 
the protection of the world. 

37. Some call him one, some call him one with two 
Gunas.®®® Some call him Triguna®®^ (having thiee Gunas). 
Some say that it is Siva. Others, the knowcis of the Vedas 
speak of him as the cause of the univeise. 

38. All Brahmins equipped with devotion and auspicious 
yoga are persons of special characteristics. They arc interested 

665. sapta-vjihiat prahhrdatab — In the groups of tattvas, .^iva is 
pUced in the twentysevench category. (Gf. 1.71. 51). But this classificatum is 
only impirical, not real. However, the physical and mental worship of .<^iva 
er^ined in the Agamas rests on the categorical basis. 

666. dvigunam- -in the form ofFrakrti and Puru^a. 

667. trigunam— in the form of BrahmA, Vifou and Rudra. 



Installation af Siva's image 


373 


in Dharma. In the middle of the hexagon they worship the 
lord of yogas, having all the forms (or no form) . 

39. Those who perceive Siva in the three-sided (mystic 
diagram), in the middle of the three principles, attain him; 
not the other yogins. They perceive the three-eyed*®® lord 
with the three Gunas, the ancient Purusa along with the 
goddess. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYSIX 

Installation of Siva's image 


SUta said: 

1. Henceforth, I shall mention the benefit accruing from 
the installation of the idol entirely, for the welfare of the 
world. The idol may be in accordance with one’s own wish. 

2. After making the idol of the lord seated in an elegant 
seat along with Skanda and Uma and after installing it with 
devotion one shall fulfil desires. 

3. In the manner I had heard, I shall mention the benefit 
that a man obtains by worshipping the lord along with 
Skanda and Uma (even) once (but) in accordance with the 
injunctions. 

4-7. Until the dissolution of all living beings, he becomes 
a yogin and sports like Siva in aerial chariots resembling 
crorcs of suns wherein everything desirable is available and 
where virgins of Rudra sing and dance. In the aerial chariots 
where every thing desirable is available he enjoys great pleasures. 
He then goes to the following worlds one after the other viz ; — 
the world of Uma, of Kumara, of Kana, of Visnu, of Brahma 
and cf Prajapati. The deity of great splendour passes through 
the Janaloka and Maharloka. After reaching the world of 
Indra he assumes the role of Iiidra for ten thousand years* 
Again, after enjoying divine and brilliant pleasure in the 

668. tri-yak|aiii=tryak|am, thrcc-cycd. Sec p. 280 note. 259. 



374 Lifigapurdna 

Bhuvarlokd, ht' leaches iho Meia and rejoiccb m tlie abodes of 
Devas. 

8-14. One shall attain Sayujya ^unioii ; with Siva by dul> 
installing ilic omniscient, oninipiesen^ loid m accordance with 
the injunctions of the Sastras; the lord who has a single loot, 
foul urns, three eves and iridont, thfe lord who is stationed afu*r 
creating \hsnu fioin his left side and the tour-laced Brahma 
from the right side. The lord who created twenty eight crores 
of Rudias, and then the twenty fifth**®'*^ principle Purusa, 
brilliant in all the limbs, lioni his heart ; the lord who created 
Prakiti from his left ; cosmic intellect from the region of the 
intellect, the cosmic ego from his own ego and the 'ranmaiias 
therefrom. The great lord sportingly created the sense-organs 
from his own sense-organs. He created the earth from the 
loot of his foot and water from the private pait«j. He created 
hie from the umbilical region the sun from the heart, the 
moon from his neck, tlie soul from the middle ol his #‘yebrows 
and the heaven from the forehead. One shall instal the image 
ol the loid who is stationed thus after creating the entire univeise 
inclusive of the mobile and immobile beings, 

1 j. By inalcing the idol ol Isana, the k)id ol the sacriiires^''^ 
who has three feel, seven hands, four hoi ns and two heads, the 
devotee is honoured m the world of Visriu. 

16. The man will enjoy gre*at pleasures the‘!c lor a liiin- 
died thousand kalpas. fic shall be hapjiy and in due louise 
return to his woilcl as mastci of all sacrifices. 

17-18. II the devotee makes the idol of the loid who i»de's 
on a bull accompanied by Uina and witli the cicsccnt moon as 
his ornament, he attains that ineiit which one usually obtains 
by performing ten thousand hoisc-^aciificcs. He goes to Siva’s 
divine city in a golden aerial chariot having clusters ol tinkling 
bells and he is liberated there itself. 

19. In the manner I have heard, 1 shall mention the 
benefit that one attains by making the idol of the lord accom- 
panied by Nandin and Uma and sui rounded by all Gdiias. 

r>69. paiicavirhsatikam the twenty-fifth principle, i.c., jiva (the in- 
dividual soul ) . 

670. yajneiam- -agnirepam 6T. of the form of fire. 



Installation of Siva's image 


375 


20-21. lie will go to the city of Siva on ihe aerial chariots 
that rcsciiihlc the solar sphere, that are tied to the bulls, that 
arc dilfieult ol access even to Dev as and Danavas that arc 
occupied and beautilied all round by the dancing nymphs. He 
shall then attain the chieftainship of the Ganas. 

22-26. 1 shall mention the benefit that one attains by making 
any ol the lollownig idols of Siva and installing it with devotion 
vi/ : the lord of the chiefs of Devas as in his dancing posture 
and arcompanied by the daughter of the lord of mountains ; 
the omniscient lord having a thousand arms or having four arms; 
lord Paramesvara surrounded by lihrgu and others as well as 
the groups of goblins; the bull-bannered ISvara accom- 
p;..xiLd I‘y the daughter of the lord of mountain, the diety as 
perpetually being bowed to by Brahma, India, Visnu, Soma 
(tlic moon) and all other Devas; Paramesvara as surrounded 
by Mothers and sages. He shpll attain a crore times the benefit 
that accrues from all yajhas, j^enanres, cliaritable gifts, pilgri- 
mages to the holy centres and visits to the deities. He shall then 
go to the region of auspieiousness.®’^ Until the dissolution of all 
living beings he shall enjoy great pleasure there. When the 
next creation arrives be shall return to the region of inoitals. 

27-26. One shall attain identitv with Siva by making the 
idol of Siva as lb]lov\s and installing it with de cdion; the lord 
as naked, white-v oinplexioned, having four arms, tliiee eyes and 
the serpent as girdle, with black curly hairs aiid ludding a skull 
in his hand. 

29-3a. By making the idol of the lord as follows and instal- 
ling it w'itli dt‘V('lion .neording to the extent of one's affluence, 
one sui mounts all obstacles and is honoured in the w<nld of 
Siva ; the hud as tearing asunder the leading elc:phant 2 is 
accoinpa'nicd by Amba, as th(‘ bestower of all desired objects ; 
as smoke-coloured, red in eyes and adorned with the moon on 
the forehead, as having thire yes, wearing the sidelocks of 
hairs, holding the sei pent-shaped hatchet, wearing the lion’s 
hide as his upper g«irmcnt and the deer skin as the lower one, as 

G71. Siva-puram- a mythical city ‘Sivapura’ on the the Himalayas, 
particularly on the Kailasa peak is conceived as the abode of Siva 

672. ibhendra-darakam— ibhendrah gajasurah tam darayatiti— one 
who has slain the asura Gaya. 



376 


Liiigapurapa 


having sharp curved fangs and armed with an iron club, holding 
the skull in his uplifted hand, the lord as rendering all the 
quarters resonant with loud shouts of “Hum” “Phat” etc., 
holding the tiger ski n*^* and the conch*^* shell in two of his 
hands, laughing, roaring and drinking the black ocean*^^ 
(ptoison) as dancing in the company of Bhutas (goblins) and 
sunounded by Ga^as. 

34-37. There (in the world of Siva) he enjoys great plea- 
sures until the dissolution of all living beings. By means of 
deliberation he gains perfect knowledge from the Rudras there 
and becomes liberated. 

By making the idol of Siva as follows and installing it with 
devotion the devotee is honoured in the world of Siva. The 
excellent lord has half of his body in female form. He has 
four arms wherein he holds the boon to be bestowed; the 
gesture of fearlessness, the trident and the lotus. He is stationed 
in the form of a woman as well as a man, bedecked in all 
ornaments. There (in the Sivaloka) he enjoys all great plea- 
sures. He is then endowed with Anima (minuteness) and 
other qualities. Therefrom he obtains the knowledge lasting as 

long as the moon and the stars and is liberated. 

# 

38-40. He who makes the idol of the omniscient lord of 
the chiefs of Devas, NakulKvara, who is surrounded by disci- 
ples and their disciples and who has uplifted his hand in 
expounding the principles and then instals it with devotion goes 
to the world of Siva. The man enjoys extensive pleasures there 
for a hundred yugas. After attaining the path of knowledge he 
attains liberation there itself. 

41-43. His abode is liked by all among Devas and Asuras. 
By making the idol of the lord as follows and by installing it, 
one is liberated from the ocean of worldly existence: — The lord 
shows gestures. He ha.s the ashes from the funeral pyre for his 
unguent; he has the triple mark of Tripundra; he wears a gar* 
land made of skulls; he wears a single sacred thread constituted 

673. Pui:i<jarik§jina— one who is clad in the tiger-hide, (pup^larika 3 
tiger. Gf. *Wyaghre tu pun^ariko —Amarakoia, 

674. Kambukam - kaman^ulam ST, a water-pot. 

673. Kr9na-t&garam--.VT. gives an alternate meaning: kfira-samud ram, 
videch. 29. verses 29-31. 



377 


InstJAati::: of Siva^s iwag^ 

by tlic ha'rs of V-rr^hma, uiili i.Io left hand be bolds the ex- 
cellent i>kulJ of Brahma; as Paiaixicsrhhi he adopts the body 
of Visnu, 

44-46a. He who repeals even oncf‘ the holy mantra of 
eight syllables^ viz., '‘Oin Naino Nilakanihaya (Om obeisance 
unto the blue-necked lord), is libeiated from sins. By worship- 
ping the lord of the chiefs of Devas by means of this mantra 
with devotion after using scents and other things in accordance 
w ith one’s wealth, one is honoured in the w^orld of Siva. 

46b-47. By making the idol of the lord as follows and ins- 
talling it with devotion the devotee attains oneness wbth Siva. 
The lord destroys Jalandhara who is severed into two. The lord 
is holding Sudariana. By installing such images or any one of 
such images tlie devotee attains oneness with Siva. No hesita- 
tion or doubt need be entertained in this regard. 

48. By making the idol as follows and by installing it with 
devotion one is honoured in the world of Siva. The Deva 
is the bestower of Sudarsana with the characterisdes as men- 
tioned before. He is worshipped by lord Visnu who adoies 
him by means of worship including the gift of his own 

^y^ 676 

49-31. One shall attain oneness with Siva bv duly making 
and installing the idol of the lord as standing on the back of 
Nikumbha (a gana) fixing his lotus-like right foot firmly on 
him and embiacing the daughter of the mountain on his 
left side. His elbow rests on the tip of his trident. The serpents 
are suspended from the trident like so many tinkling bells. He 
is glancing at Andhaka who is standing at his side with palms 
joined in reverence. 

.32-54. He who make.s the idol of Siva, the lord of the 
chiefs of Devas, Isvara the destroyer of the Tripuras, with bow 
and arrows in his hands, the crescent moon as an ornament, 
seated in a chariot accompanied by Uma and being chario- 
teered by the four- faced lord (Brahma), assumes that form (of 
Siva) and goes to the city of Siva. He is happy and he undoub- 
tedly sports like the second Siva. O excellent brahmins, after 
enjoying great pleasures there, as much as he desires and 

676. When Visnu fell short of a flower he plucked his own eye and 
offered it as a gift. 



378 Lingapurdna 

having obtained perfect knowledge after due deliberation lie 
is liberated theie itself. 

55-58. The intelligent devotee who makes and inStals 
the^e idols along with Vighnesa shall attain oneness with 
Siva: — The lord is seated comfortably holding the Gahga and 
having the moon on his coronet; the loid is accompanied by 
the Gahga and Uma is seated on his left lap; the lord is 
surrounded by Vinayaka, Skanda, Jyestha, Durga, Bhaskara, 
Soma, Brahmani, Mahesvari, Kaumarl, Vaisnavi, V7irrihi, 
Varada, Indr7ini, Gamunda, Virabhadra and Vighnesa. 

59-63. By making the idols as follows and installing them 
with devotion one shall attain oneness with Siva. The unchan- 
ging lord is in the foim of a Lihga surrounded by great 
clusters of flames; the moon-crested Isvara as seated in the 
centre of the Lihga. The Lihga should be made in the «‘ther 
with Brahma with folded hands in the form of a swan standing 
on the right and V’isnu in the form of a Boar standing beneath 
the Lihga with his face turned down. The terrible great Lihga 
is stationed in the middle of the great waters. 

By making idols of the lord as the prot(‘eior of the holy 
centre, and Ksetfapfda as lord Pasupati and by duly instal- 
ling them with devotion, one is honoured in llu* world ol Siva. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYSEVEN 

The Temples oj Siva 

The Sages said : — 

1-2. riie meritorious acts of preparation aird installation 
of the Lihga and the differences ann^ng the various types of 
Lihgas have been heard as described \)y you. It behoves you 
to narrate the benefit that accrues from ljuilding Siva’s temple 
by means of materials beginning with clay and ending with 
jewels. 

Sula said : — 

3-6. If a devotee of Siva is endowed with perfect know- 
ledge he is not harassed b/ sons, whves, houses, etc. Then of 



379 


The Temples of Siva 

whal avail arc the temples he should make for the lord ? Still 
the devotee ot the lord who is saluted by the chief ol Devas 
and the lotus-born deity Brahma makes divine and excellent 
temples or shrines even with bricks and stones. Even as a 
childish prank if they make the primordial Siva’s image with 
clay or stone or even with dust and his abode also in the same 
manner and worship him, they do attain identity with him. 
Hence, for the achievement of virtue, love and wealth, the 
abode of Siva should be made by devotees with devotion, 
assiduously. 

7. By devoutly making the abode of Rudra of tin* type of 
Kesara, Nagara orDravida one is honoured in the world of J5iva. 

8. He who makes his mansion called Kailasa, u j )ices 
happily m the aerial chariots of the shapes of Kailasa peak.^. 

9-11. Or the devotee shall make in accordance with the 
injunctions the temple of Mandara, for him. He shall devoutly 
make it in accordance with his means. It may be of the middl- 
ing or inferior type. Thereby the man goes to the beautiful 
city of .'^iva in aerial chariots which resemble the mountain 
Mandara, and which have faces all round, which are occupied 
by groujis of .\psarases and which are difficult c * access even 
to Devas and Danavas. He enjoys all pleasure > attains the 
path of knowledge and finally the chieftainship of the Ganas. 

12-13. Even by means of great sacrifices no one attains 
lliat beiiefu which accrues to the person who makes the man- 
sion called Meru. He attains all the benefits of sacrifices, 
penances, gifts, visits to holy centres and study of all Vedas. Like 
Siva, he rejoices for a long time. 

11. The intelligent devotee who makes the mansion 
Nisadha with devotion attains J^iva’s world and like Siva 
rejoices for a long time. 

15-17. O brahmins, he who makes the splendid and 
excellent mansion called ilimasaila, goes to the splendid city 
of Siva by means of vehicles comparable to the mountain 
Himavat. Attaining the path of knowledge, he shall achieve 
the chieftainship of the Ganas. 

I shall mention the benefit that a man obtains by making 
the splendid mansion named Niladrisikhara (the peak of the 



380 Lihgapvrana 

blue inouiitaiii) . He need make it only in accordance with his 
riches. He shall dedicate it to Rudra with devotion. 

18-21. He obtains all those benefits which I have men- 
tioned to you before as the benefit of making the mansion 
Himasaila devoutly [see verse 15J. Then he is bowed to bv 
all Pevas. Reaching the world of Rudra he rejoices along 
with tliem. 

I shall mention the benefit that one attains by making the 
mansion named Mahendrasaila. He goes to the divine city of 
Siva in the aerial chariot as huge in size as the mountain 
Mahendra^ yoked to bulls. O leading sages, he enjoys all plea- 
sures and attains perfect knowledge after deliberation with 
Rudras. He eschews worldly pleasures as though they were 
poison and attains Sayujya (union) with Siva. 

22-23. He who makes jewel-studded mansion with gold, 
in accordance with the injunctions, of the type of Ihavicja, 
Nagara or Kesara or makes the peak**’" or platform square or 
oblong in shape attains great merit. His merit cannot be men- 
tioned even in hundreds of yugas. 

24-28. If anyone repairs or rebuilds the old, dilapidated 
fallen or broken temples and reconstructs them with doois, etc. 
or if he repairs the mansion, platform, rampart or the orna- 
mental gateway, he derives more benefit than even the origi- 
nal maker. There is no doubt about this. The man who docs 
some job in the temple of Siva though it be for his sustenance 
undoubtedly goes to the heavenly world along with his kins- 
men. If a man does some job iu the temple of Rudra even for 
once and for his ov n pleasure he attains happiness and 
rejoices. Henc^*, O excellent sages, the man w’ho devoutly 
makes the temple by means of wood, bricks, etc., is honoured 
in the world of Siva. 

29-32. O leading sages, lor die grace of Mahesa, for the pur- 
pose of achieving virtue, love, wealth andlib» iation, the mansion 
of MaheSa should be built assiduously. C) excellent sages, if one 
is incapable of building a mansion he .shall .serve the lord by me- 
ans of sweeping and other activities. He who perforins the sweep- 
ing job with a soft and delicate broom shall attain all desires. 
He obtains the fruit of a thousand Candrayana rites within a 

677. Kutam-<-yantrarQpain made of some mechanical device. 



The Tf^mples of Siva 


381 


niontli He who duly perfoims the rite of applying unguents to 
the loiil wiili the seented cow-dung watei filtered andpuiified 
by nmansol a cloth shall obtain the benefits ofGandrayana for 
a \eai 

I he pla( e Within the ladius of halt a Krosa fiom 
ihe Liiiga ol Siva is (ailed Si\a-ksetra (holy centie of Sivaj. 
He ho casts oil his life (within that centre) usually v< ly diffi- 
i ult to !)(' ( ast off, shall obtain Sl^ujva with Siva O sages of 
t,() I li >1\ iitts, tliesc are tliemeasuiing units '* i the sell-born 
Hinalanga In the Svayambhuva, () excdlcnt ‘n.ihinins, the 
nieasuu of the holy centie shall be half, in thi AiNa (p(M taming 
to thi It shall be hall of lliat In the Mlnusa /^pe^ tain- 

mii tf) h uran beings) it shall be still hall ot that O exet llent 
Ijiahnnnv liie nieasuie of holy centies in the abode (j 1 asi tics 
IS thus 

C) l)t ihniins, he who casts ofT Ins \ital bicath in an\ ol 
the e places shall attain SlMij>a with Siva viz: Rudravataia, 
XaiavauVa, th(' holy Siipai vata^'’'^ and its boundarv lirn 
I he hi in (it shall be extended to Ins disc iples and the disciples 
ol (lis( iph s 

1 Ik same l^ tiiu ol Vaniuasi**^® and jaituulailv ot 
\\iTimkia * ” l\i who exists oil his vital bieatlis in Kedaia,®®^ 
Pia\ iga^*"- Ol Kill uksctra‘‘‘^^ attains extierne bliss. 

40 He who di<s in Piabhasa,^**‘ Puskaia,***^* AvaniT 

(lyJt Snpaivata or Sribaila is one of the sacred lulls of th^' south 
overhaiutmq the Kisna rivei. It contains the celebrated shrine of Malli- 
k'lijun n one of the twelve jyotirlingas 

h‘'»). Varanasi seep 07 note. 120 

(>80. Avimiikta — ste p ^6 note. 64 

()8i. Kidua a veiy sacred Himalayan peak in Garhwal. It still 
retail s its am leiit name and sanctity. 

(>82 Piayiga sec p 2t)i note 567. 

Gt. 1. Kiiruksetra It lies south of Thanesar, not far frsni Panipcat 
in Haryana State 

f)8p Prabhasa It is a celebrated phi re of pilgrimage in Saurastra 
the southern part of Kathiawar. 

685, Puskara a sacied place near Ajmer famous for the lake Pus- 

kara. 

680 . Avanti or Avantika. It is identical with UjjayinT oi modern 

Ujjain. 



382 Lingapurana 

Amaresvara®**’ and in Vanisailakula®®** attains the nature of 
Siva. 

41-45. The person who dies in Varanasi is not born again. 
He who casts off' his vital breath in Trivistapa,®^** Aviinukta, 
Kedara, Sahgamesvara,®***^ Salafika,®®* Jainbukcsvara,'****^ in 
Sukusvara/'^’ Gokarna,*^^ Bhaskaresa,®'-*^ Guhesvara/***^' Hiran- 
yagarbha/’®^ or Nandisa®^^ attains the greatest goal. He who 
desiccates his body by means of observances and casts it off 
ill an> hol> centre of Siva whether it is ol human or divine 
origin, whether it is built by sages or whether it is self-l)orn, 
becomes a yogin and attains oneness with Siva. O excellent 
sages, if the deity is self-born or installed by l)e\ as, no doubt 
need be entertained in this regard. He who worships the loid 
and then collects lire into which he consigns his body, attains 
the greatest goal. 

46-49. One shall abstain from taking any sort of food 
whatsoever and cast off' one’s vital breaths in a holy centre 
of Siva. O excellent sages, he shall attain Sayujya with ^>iva. 
He who cuts off his pair of legs and stays in the h 9 ly centre 
of Siva, attains oneness with Siva. No doubt need be enter- 
tained in thisTegard. The vision of a holy centre is nnnitorioiis. 
The entrance therein is hundred times moic nicriionfius. I'he 
touching and the circumambulation is hundred times inoie 
meritoiious. The ablution in the waters is hundred limes' moie 
meritorious than that. 

50. The bathing of the deity, () brahmins, in milk, is 
himdied times more excellent. It is mentioned that the .iblntion 

G87. Amaresvara —in Omkara Mandhata. It is a sacred place of 
Saiva pilgrimage in the Nimar district in Madhya Pradesa. 

688. Vanisaila -not identifiable. 

68g. Trivi§tapa not identifiable. But Trivisjapa or tripis(aka is 
the heaven of Indra, said to be situated on Mount Mcru. 

690. Sahgamesvara —a sacred place mentioned in Sk , VII.i.'j{but 
not identifiable. 

691-69^. Sfilanka, Jambukesvara and Sukre 4 vara are not identifiable. 

694. Gokarna : lit. ' cow's ear*. It is a place of pilgrimage sacred to 
§iva, on the east coast, near Mangalore. It has the temple of Maliadeva, 
$ivsL, supposed to have been established by Ravaria. This Gokarna should 
not be confused with the »own of the same name situated in Nepal on the 
Bhagamati river. 

6(Xy6o8. Not identifiable . 



The Temples of Stva 


383 


with nirds has thousand times more merit. With honey it i.s 
hundred times more. 

31-:)2. The ahliuion with ghee has infinite merit; that 
with .siigai is huiiflred limes more. One shall eschew cooked 
rice altei nMching a liver near the holy centre of fsiva and 
plunging inti) it. Hesliall thus cast off his body. Ht* is honoured 
in the world of Si\a. All the rivers near the holy centres of 
Siva are \er) nierilotious. 

The W(‘lls, tanks and lakes ai*c fsivatirthas (sacred 
waters of Siva). O exc^'llcnt brahmins, by ^aking his bath in 
those (wells, etc Uvith devotion a man is undoubrcdlv liberated 
from brahmin-slaughter and other sins. O excellent ^ages, by 
l.’i inorTiing plunge in the sacr^^d waters of Siva, a man 
attains the benclii of horsr '^ac tifice and got*^ to Rudra’.s world. 
By taking a single plunge in thv* saerecl waters of Siva at 
midday with great dev'otion a man siiri Iv obtains meiit equal 
to that of 1 ikmg bath in the Gangs By lakiug hath alter the 
sunset one shall attain the luspicio’us region of Siv a. 

.>7-31). existing olf his slough ofsiui) in tlie holy watcis of 
Siva the man attains the auspicious region of Siva. l)rah- 
mins, by taking die ihn'efold bath oni c* in the sacred water's 
of Siva, the man obtains Siynjya wiih ^Wd No doubt need 
be eiiKM tamed iii tins resptil. 

Once a boai s.iw a dog on the way I)u(' to (right it 
chan''v'd that it plunged into the ^aiied Waicis of Siva and 
died. O exLelleni bi.ihinins, he c^ir.iinr.d the chieftainship ot 
the (hin*i^ 

hO. He who mm's Siva, the lord of tin* i liicls of Devas, in 
the foiin ol langa at dawn aiKinis a goal supcil a to all. 

bl. Bv si'eing Mahadeva at midday one attains the bene- 
fit of .sacrilict By seeing the lord in the ♦ w iiing, one atlains 
the benefit of yajnas and is libeiaU‘d. 

b2. He is liberated I mm all ^ eat sins, mental, verbal and 
pliysieal; subsidiai y sin>» occurring as a sequel. 

03. By visiting lord Isana in the form of the Lihga at the 
time of transit ot the sun liom one sign ol Zodiac to the next, 
one eschew.s .sins eommitted in the course of month and he 
aitains the auspicious region ot Siva. 

Gt. By visiting the lord at the beginning ot ihc southern or 



384 


Ltngapurdna 


noithern lidiisU tlv^ suu one dispels sms <ommittcd lu ihc 
I curse ot hall mo ilh Bv \*orshipping,thc lord, at the lime ct 
eqninoK(,s, cue atiaim llie gieatest goal. 



1 J all aad ,)< 

e man who ciicum unbulat 

Mu, 

mansi 

)11 o 

' 1 ttincs in 

'lu mode of Savya and \p 

1 1 - 

a' ' 1 

[ lock 

a 1 \v*\ h 

ckwise] ^ and Heads soitU shall 

a 't 111 

iK i 

t Ol asvamedh*.at evciy step H who'^iu 

IMIS 

and hi, » 1 > 

‘ni a attains 

tlu alispici u.^ al)o 1( Ahi* i 

isi 

1 enfiaoi') h 

an * ) attain 



i 

sj 

' ^ spllnkllng^ 

with Si 1 nud (owdimg wati r 

tlu 


dc' o ( ^h^ili Kc tne mystic diagi^im <>( die an pin()P> loi s 
lAii t’i«' j 1 aip Tot this ompos# the dust ])aiti(t<^ d 
[ Mils sap } c rubies (i <»(al , (in lald, gohl or sihei m i\ 
b( used ti ^ ir a*e i ot s*lii(Krulv i ic h ma\ u^( otlu i 
d 11 1 ( olr ill Lv„ lo Dovvders nuiitiorud J(\( 

rhi iii\ 1 di ’iill . enfl uptu ten Hastas Ii slu uld bi 

a I iio i » X \ \ a '^Iiliadiva '^crompanud b\ fli w m 

"s \ps 11 ? »k duKii Ihi devotee shill iiivoki tlu 

1 'I d 'n b N V the nccl things 1)' m» msolhvi (Icnunt , si\ 
« c *j ^ Ui M) mn bedus the divot' e shall 

\ rsliip lsi» nr itie ten-foiu icd u)sti( vliagi.uii ihiough 
ihr c on b vlie' or the icu oigans of s( hn and know- 

t X er 1^4 . \(t» 1 h worship the d" otte sliall bo ' down 

an t oth 1 ») fT lilies to hi toul of He shall tin 1 1 by 

I btain tht b lu lit of th( i tiaiitable gilt i>| laith 1 hi iruligi nt 
pfiSOT shad make the mysle diagram ol th( lotus bs mi a 
mI the p w hied grams ol rui Lv( n thin lu shall obiiin 
he meiits as meiJioiirfl ’ i ore 

74 80 *^lu rhvMirt >hall <lia v the mvstn diagjam of 
tH'elv >Klts and tlun th» exceMent lotus by nuans ol sik h 
powders those ot jewels, Me In the muldU ot tlu rnystie 
diagi tin he sh dl i isval Bhaskara along with the twelve deities 
and then Nvoiship the sun surrounded by the planets. lit shall 
attain the rxc''llc» t Savujya ;the salvation of identity) with the 
sun Similaily he shall draw the s»x-sidod figure by means ol 
red chalk to deput dv^Uies pertaining to Prakrti In the middlr 
region he shall worship the goddess of Oevas, IVakrti, in the 
form of Brahman To the right he shall worship the deity of 
Sattva-Guna, to the left that of Rajo-Guna and in fioiit 



/7/e Temples of Siva 


385 


liidL of ranio-Cxuna. He shall noi hip the godd^^ss Ambika 
m thf^ middle io the right he shall worship the Uve ckmeais 
aiid ttu five laninatias To the north he shall worship the 
five (ngaii', ol action and livo organs of sense In the six-sided 
figuit he s"liill wui hip lilt two \Lniaiis, viz, Almaii and 
X'UaraUiinu a well as the tomii ml/ lit c t and ego alt ng with 
tie piiiiv'ipit ’^1 ill it I^e shall thou attain the bcntlii of all 
saci ifu ( > 

ol V ) Ic ifli’ g blah^nlIl^ dins the gu'at Pi ikrta \landala 
till iii)sli( diagram pcitai axig to Piakiliy has Pm ji nitniioned 
to >uu Jleiicefoith 1 lial' ni ntion th( means of achu viiig 
all tJ( sii td fj[)jec ts 

i’ * * h< lesotte t^rvcisam • oh the iiiai't* is shall 

spiKikir ih ‘ gi )iuid duK with waiei and s i ib it with euw- 
dnng H sh i * lienriike tin iiU'tic diagi uii in the fojrntd 
asquiiein as img a^)-canna c 1 >b II ista-j a side; He 
shal’ tn^n tit co ale it witli Cc4.nopics, oi cliarniing iinibKlIis 
I le -ill I'l (Ml hellish them with glot>t-hk bubbles oi si i ni- 
shijnd i irk( N madi' oi gold the leaves ol \sv"atiha ti«t 
Hi s^l ill d(' o ill u uitli lull (down w lute, ic^tloi blue lo lees 
ats ) emus ol p« iiL slull 1)1 siisp uded fioin the e\u puius 
ol the t in >pie i If di ill i inlielh >li o w’th whUe haniuis nid 
Ilk n \aiii' I t'" i>ignsi oi gaiian I oispiout. mri i* ni;, 

J t'rii snail hi vhiie miid-pots and » h'gant vatir-]at^ i’ed 
v^ ( h watt i II' shall iiavi liliv lamps in a low and livt KmuK 

( iiu t n^i. 

o()-dl- The d \ u« ( shall maki an (Xeellent lotus with fiftv 
petals 1)\ iiuaiis ol powdeis of ddh leiit i oloui . oi ouoMvith 
wliiu pow^df 1 Ihc lotus sli dl extend lo one Ihista in migm- 
tiuh li shall hi made in accoidani i with ihc in]uii tions 
lie shall lix die lord Rudia, the loid ol Ut\ai along wuh the 
goddess in the pernaip. Ih'giiming with the petal m die east 
and pioiec'dmg giadually he shall lu die s\llables iii the petals 
iloiig with die Rudias O Nagesol gviod holy ntes, tlu syllables 
ue lo Iji ^ui with the Piaiiava and aid with Nainas O excellent 
sag alter duly worshipping thus willi scents and liagraiit 
flowLis, he shell feed fifty brahmins in accordance w ith the in- 
junctions. He shall givi those leading sages the charitable gilts ol 
garlands of rosary, sacred thiead, cai-imgs, water-pots, seats. 



386 


LiHgapurma 


staff, turbans and clothes. lie shall offer Mahaearu as Nai- 
vedya to Sambhu the lord of Devas and dedicate the black pair 
(i.e. a black cow and a black ox). In the end he diall offer 
the mystic diagram made of powders to the lord ol Devas. lie 
chall then offer materials of utility in a sacrifice to Siva. The 
intelUgent devotee shall perform the Japa c>f the letters one by 
one with Oihkara in the beginning. I shall Ijriefly mention ihc 
benefit that a man attains aftei describing this excellent Mandala 
amongst all with devotion. 

95-98. By seeing the coloured Manclala and by wor- 
shipping it one attains the same benefit as a yogin attains 
in the following circumstances : — When he has learned the 
Vedas duly along with their Ahgas (ancillary subiects); when 
he has worshipped God by means of saciilir(*s, s*uch as 
Jyotistoma etc., ending with that of Vi<vajit; when 'as a 
householder) he has procreated sons like hinisclt: when he has 
adopted the stage of life of a forcst-dwcllcr v\ith earnestness 
maintaining the sacrificial fire, and performing all rii(*s su( li as 
Candrayana, etc.; w’henhe has renounced all lioly riles, leaiiied 
Brahmavidya assiduously and attained peifcct kiiowh^dge and 
when with perfect knowledge he has seen what should be seen. 

99-100. After scrubbing and cleaning the front yard of the 
shrine by anv material, O excellent brahmins, if a devotee 
describes a mystic diagram in the form of a square to the 
north or south or to the west of the shrine and embellishes it 
with the powders, flowers, raw rice grains etc., and then wor- 
ships the deity with flowers, raw'^ rice grains, etc., he is 
liberated from all sins. 

101-102. He, who devoutly scrubs and deans the sanctum 
sanctorum all round, even once, scatters scented flowers all 
round, offers fragrant articles like sandal paste, camphor, (‘tr., 
makes the place sweet smelling with incense of four kind> and 
prays to the lord ISana, goes to the world of fiiva. 

103-104. The man enjoys pleasurts for a hundred cioies 
of kalpas. His body emits sweet fragrance like (hat of flowers 
with which he fills the temple of Siva. Gradually he goes 
to the world of Gandharvas and is worshiirped by the Gandh- 
arvas. He comes to this world in due course and becomes a 
powerful monarch. 



387 


Scrubbing" and cleaning the shrine of Siva 

105-106. Mahacleva is the primordial lord. He is the 
cause of creation, dissolution and sustenance. Sadasiva is all 
pervaisivc and is the overlord of the worlds. The nectar of Siva- 
Brahman should be known as the excellent means of salvation. 
One shall always worship the lord, the manifest and the un 
manifest being the lord beyond imagination. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYEIGHT 

Scrubbing and cleaning the shrine of Siva 

Suta said: 

1. O excellent sages, the holy shrine of Siva should be scr- 
ubbed and cleaned by means of water filtered and purified -with 
a cloth. Otherwise no Siddhi is attained. 

2. O leading sages, waters that have no foam, particularly 
from the rivers, should be taken. When filtered with a cloth they 
become pure and holy. 

3. Hence, O excellent brahmins, all divine holy ritesshould 
be performed by the purified waters for achieve : the results in 
all rites. 

4. Waters are mixed with minute germs. By using the unfil- 
lered waleis one attains the same sin as by killing them. 

5-6. O brahmins, householders adopt violent means always 
while sweeping or wiping, while using fire, threshing, pounding 
things or while fetching water. But one shall eschew violence. 
Non-violence is the greatest virtue to all living creatures, 

7. Hence, by all means one shall practise water purified 
bv cloth, 'rhe meritorious and charitable gift of giving protection 
is the excellent of all charitable gifts. 

8-10. Hence, violence should be avoided alwa\s and at all 
pl.iccb. All violent creatures do not harm a man who abstains 
from violence mentally, verbally and physically. They harass 
one who injures others. A man who abstains from violence 
obtains a crore times the benefit that one attains by gifting 
away the tlnec worlds to one who has mastered the Vedas. 
Those who are engaged in the welfare of living beings, men- 



388 Lingapindna 

tall), verball)^ and phybically and those v/ho lollow the path 
pointed out by kindness go to the woiid of’ Rucha. 

11-lja. Those who protect pei sons ol vaiious soils like a 
loving master oi with love as il they were their ov\p si»ns and 
grandsons, go to the world of Riidia. Hence, b\ all means spi in- 
kling should be pel formed bv means of w^atei lill( itd with a 
cloth. Ihc ablution should be (.anied out paitiLiilaih. livcn b^’ 
killing a single person in the premise^ ol Siva\ temple oiu* 
attains tlic sms that accrue iiom clesiro\ing the ihi ( worlds 
But, O excellent brahmins, violence to tloweis***^'* must alwavs hr 
puisucd for the worship ot Siva, virdcnie to tlic anlIllal^^‘” loi 
the sake of saciifice. The clia'iliscment ol the wjckid i)) the 
K‘5atiiya caste can be pin sued 

l^b-17a. In the case of yogins evpouiidiiig ihe Ihahmari 
tliese rules icgarding wha< h laid rlfjjwu and what is foibiddt'ii 
ate not applicable Tli'y shall not be killed even d tlu \ n soi t 
to lorbidden things. Similarly expoundeis ol lhahrnan shall 
not be killed since they have eschewed all actions and taken to 
Sannvasa, even ifat times tlie\ aie prone to siiilul activitu's. 

I7b-i8 Women arc holv ones as thev au' born ol th(‘ 
lamily of Atri. Even w^hen they aie engaged in smIuI m ts tlu) 
bhould not be killed. Idicy arc to be woishipptd alvsavs. B) Lill- 
mg Atreyis one incurs a sin e([ual to the si lughtci ol a htaluiiin 
bi-20. Women Irom any caste ''hould not he taken up lot 
the Vajnas at any time, by anyone ot in an) plate, () leading 
biahmins. Women engaged in ^inlul activities, whether the) be 
dirt) or beautilul, ugly or robed in ugly t lothes should be 

killed by men due to the suspieion that ihcv may be Siva. 

21 Those who practise the hoK riles and conduc t of life 
outside the pale of the Vedas, those who aie exi luded horn the 
rit(*s laid down in Siutis and .Simtis and those who aie notori- 
ous as heretics should not be conversed with by the twite-bom. 

6^9-700. violent c inrurrcd by plucking flowers (puspa-hinisa) lor Siva’s 
worship is not sinful, so also the slaughter of animals in propitiation of Siva. 

V-19 (below) prohibits the slaughter of women in sacrifices implying 
thereby that man-slaughtcr(nara-vali)was a common practice. ST intcrurets 
‘stiiyah’ as ‘manusa striydh’ and explains that the restriction of slaughter 
did not apply to the female animals. ST. quotes a scriptural saying (sruti) 
in support of this view ; “Sarasvatim Vaiam alabhcta.** 



389 


The mode of worship of ^iva 

22. They should neither be seen nor touched. After seeing 
them one should look at the sun. Still they should not be 
killed by kings or other creatures. 

23. O brahmins, by worshipping lord Siva even for once, 
thanks to the contact with good men, a man attains Rudra’s 
world. 

24. O excellent sages, all unkind persons become miserable. 
So also, all men who are devoid of devotion towards the great 
lord. 

25. Those who are devotees of Siva, the lo.d of Devas, are 
fortunate. After enjoying pleasures here itself they become 
liberated. 

2b. riie minds of men are attached towards sons, wives 
and houses. Just as the minds of ascetics and sages are attached 
towards the primordial lord. But if men turn their minds to- 
wards the lord at least once by chance the world of great I^a 
is not far for them. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYNINE 

The mode af worship of Siva 

The sages said: 

1-2. O sages of great intellect, how should the great lord, 
the lord of subjects be worshipped by tardy and dull-witted 
men who are short-lived, whose strength is trifling and whose 
virility is insignifleant. Even after worshipping lord Siva by 
means of penance for thousands of years, Deva> do not sec him. 
How then do they worship the lord ? 

Suta said: 

3. O leading sages, what you have said is quite true. Still 
with faith tlie lord can be seen and pleased and even conversed 
with. 

4, O brahmins, if even those who are devoid of devotion 
incidentally worship the lord, he bestows fruits befitting the 
emotion. 



390 


Lingapurdna 


5. O brahmins, the bas(' brahmin who worships the lord after 
being defiled by the leavings ol food becomes a Pisaca. I'he man 
of deluded intellect who worships the lord in a fit of anger shall 
attain the abode of Raksasas. 

6. ‘ The wicked man who eats forbidden food and worships 
the lool becomes a Yak sa. A man who practises music and 
worships the lord attains the abode of Gandharvas. A person 
who practises dance also attains the same state. 

7. The base man attached to women and yearning for fame 
attains the abode of the moon"*^^ (by worshipping the lord). A 
person atflicted by pride and arrogance, worshijjping Rudra, 
shall attain the abode of Sonia ^ moon ?) 

8. By worshipping the lord b> means of Ga\atii verses one 
shall attain the world of Prajapati. By worshipping by means oi 
Praiiava one attains the abode ot Brahma or Visriii. 

9. By worshipping the lord with faith even for once, the 
devotee attains the world ol Rudra and rejoices along with the 
Rudras. 

10-22. The splendid Lir’iga, worshipped by Devas and Asu- 
ras should be cleaned by the holy waters. I’he lord should be 
invoked devoutly in the pedestal. After visiting the loid duly 
and after worshipping him he should be installed in the concei- 
ved seat which has the splendid form ol p»*i let t knowledg(', 
w'hich is richly endowed with detachment and pios[)critN, which 
is bowed to by all the people, which is in the midtlle ol the lotus 
of Oriikara and which has its oiigin from the moon, sun and 
fire. After offering Padya, Acamana and Arghya to Rudia the 
devotee shall bathe the dcit> with pure waters, ghee and milk. 
He shall bathe Rudra with curds and clean Him. 'riicrealter 
he shall bathe the deity with pure water and worship it with 
sandal-paste. After worshipping with yellow pigment he shall 
worship it with red flowers, unbroken Bilva leaves, blue and 
red lotuses, Nandyavarta flowers, Mallikas, Campakas, Jati 
flowers, Bakulas, Karaviras, ^ami and Brhat flowers, Unmattas, 
Agastyas, bunches of Apamarga flowers and splendid orna- 
ments. After offering incense of five kinds he shall offer milk 
pudding as Naivedya. Other food offerings shall be rice with 
curds, rice soaked in honey and ghee, then pure cooked rice 

70 1 . candram— Budha-sthanam ST. the house of Mercury. 



391 


The mode of worship of Siva 

and then Mudganna (rice cooked green gram) of six types- 
I'hercafter he shall offer as Naivedya five types of cooked rice 
along with ghee, or rice alone wherein he shall cook one 
Adhaka measure of rice. After circumambulation he shall bow 
down again and again in the end. After eulogising lord Isana 
and after worshipping Siva he shall adore him by repeating the 
mantiasof liana, Tatpurusa, Aghora, Vamadeva and Sadyo- 
jaia. With this mode of worship lord Mahesvara becomes de- 
lighted. 

23. O excellent biahmins, those trees which arc utilised in 
till' worship ol Siva through their flowers, leaves, etc., and the 
cow^ too, attain the supreme goal. 

2'’. .h vho but once worships .^iva, Rudra, Sarva, die un- 
l)Orn lihava attains Siva’s Sayujya devoid of returning here 
again. 

25. One is liberated from all sins even by seeing but once 
incidentally Paramesana, Biiava, Sarv^, lord of Uma who was 
woi'ship|)cd thus. 

26. I’licre is no doubt in this that a man attains Brahma's 
world b) se^'ing Mahadeva who has been w^irshippcd or is 
being worshipped. 

27-30. He who on hrai'ing abnr the lord roves of it 
and rejoices therein attains the greatest goal. He wr •, for even 
once, olVers a ghee lamp in front of the Lihga attains that goal 
which is difficult of access by means of the stages in life and 
which is steady. By offering a tiec of lamps cither made of clay 
or of wood in the temple of Siva one is honoured in the world 
of Siva along wnth hundred members of his family. He who 
duly and devoutly oflers lamps to Siva made of iron, copper, 
silver or goid shall go to the city of Siva in splendid vehicles 
refulgent like ten thousand suns. 

31-34. He who offers a ghcv* lamp in front of Siva n the 
month of Karttika or he who sees the great lord being duly 
worshipped with faith, O excellent sagi’s, goes to the world 
of Brahma. 

It is mentioned that the rites of invocation, welcome pres- 
ence, installation and worship shall he conducted through Rudra 
Gayatrl, the Asana (seat) by means of Pranava, the ablution 
by means of five mantras (Sadyojata, etc.) , assigned to Rudra. 



392 




One sh^J] thus perpetually worship Uinas JuivImikJ, il,,- /.^d ni 

Dcvas. One shall worship Brahma with PrdUdVH Oil his right 
side. 

35-37. To his north, he shall worship Visnu the loid of the 
chiefs of Devas by means of Gayatri, after performing Homa in 
the fire duly by repeating the five mantras and the Prana\a. By 
thus worshipping the lord he attains Sayujya with Siva. Thus, 
succinctly the mode of worshipping Siva has been mentioned. 
After hearing this directly from Rudra, this was mentioned to 
me by Vyasa in former times. 


CHAPTER EIGHTY 

The holy PdSupata rite 


The sages said : — 

1. How is the liberation of the PaSu (Individual soul) 
from the PS.sa (bondage) effected on seeing Pa^upati ? It 
behoves you to tell us how Devas eschewed their Pasutva ? 

Suta said : 

2-5 Thanks to the grace of omniscient lord, formerly Devas 
came to him as he had stationed in his city called Bhogya’®^ 
on the peak of the Kailasa, for the welfare of Devas. Lord 
Visnu, mounted on the wings of Garuda, came along with 
Brahma. He approached the lord of Devas along with Devas. 
Along with Yama, Indra and the Sadhyas, they came to the 
splendid and excellent mountain and bowed down to the excel- 
lent mountain as well as to the lord. The Garuda-baniiered lord 
Visnu got down from Garuda and climbed the Meru along 
with the foremost Devas. 

6-7. Meru was devoid of all sins. It bestowed each 
and every object of desire. It was the chief means of enjoyment. 
The flocks of sparrows rejoiced therein. Herds of elephants 


702. Bhogya or Blogya. The city is located on the mountain KaiUsa. 



The holy PdSupata rite 


393 


made it resonant. There was sweet rattling music. Even the 
darkness was welcome to people. The region of the forest was 
well laid with footsteps. The waters at the borderland were 
sparkling and the wind was attractive. It consisted of hundreds 
and thousands ol abodes resembling suns. It was blended 
with the flocks of swans adept in elegant movements. It con- 
tained trees, such as Dhava, Khadira, Palana, sandal, etc. and 
groups and flocks of excellent birds, such as the cuckoo etc. and 
also the bees. 

8. In some places it abounded in divine trees. There were 
Kiirabaka, Priyaka and Tilaka trees. The excellent mountain 
had many Kadamba trees and was surrounded by the creepers 
of Tamala. The mountain had many peaks. 

9. The city of lord Siva was buili by ViSvakarman on the 
top ol mountain for the sports of lord Siva. 

10. Devas including Indra and Visnu saw that cit\ and 
with great concentration and attention they bowed down from 
a great distance due to the power of the trident-bearing lord. 

11. The great primordial lord went to the mountain 
Kailasa, a part of the Meru, which is as refulgent as thousand 
suns, and which is great and which has thousands of virtues 
blended with it. 

12. Then Brahma and Visnu the destroyer of Asuras 
reached the gateway of the city which resembled the lofty 
mountain and which abounded in women, ho'“i>i‘S, elephants, 
chariots, Ganas and their chiefs. 

13. It was surrounded by big mansions lull of gold and 
bedecked in jewels. It contained lofty palaces of various shapes 
and also ramparts. 

14-20. On seeing the exterior of the city of lord Siva 
along with Devas including Brahma, Visnu with beaming face 
became delighted in his mind. He then entered the city which 
had great palaces and mansions with lofty upper storeys. The 
second city of the lord of Devas was also splendid, h had four 
entrances. It was encompassed by liiamonds, lapis lazuli, rubies 
and clusters of jewels and hanging swings. It was bedecked with 
bells and chowries, and resonant with musical instruments, such 
as Mrdanga, Muraja, Vina and Venu. It was surrounded by 
dancing Apsarases and Bhutas (goblins). There were mansions 



394 


Lingapurdna 


charming to the eyes. They resembled the abodes of the leader^ 
of Devas. On the tops of these palaces thousands of lady citizens 
stood with flowers, fruits and Aksatas (raw rice grains) in 
their hands. As on the head of lord Siva they strew these on 
the head of \’isnu from all directions. On seeing Visnu, 
the women rejoiced immediately, danced and sang. Their eyes 
were roving due to inebriation and they had ample buttocks. 
On <*cemg Visnu some women wore smiling faces ; their 
garments became loosened ; their waistbands and girdles 
dropped. They sang passionate songs. 

21-35. \'isnu then went beyond those excellent cities (one 
within the other) the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth 
and tenth. Then he reached the highly-splendid city of Siva. 
It was perfectly circular and very splendid, stationed on the 
auspicious peak of Kailasa. It was adorned with lofty mansions 
resembling the sphere of the sun. In different quarters it 
contained crystal Mandapas and splendid platforms made of 
gold and different jewels. The ornamental gateways were 
adorned with different kinds of jewellery and many jewel-stud- 
ded Sarvatobhadras (temples with openings on all the four 
sides). There were twentyeight fort walls of different forms and 
shapes. There were side doors and main doors in the inter- 
stices of the quarters, all firmly built and of diverse kinds. There 
were hidden apartments and houses. There were splendid 
abodes of Guha. O highly blessed ones, they were built in 
the rural model and other types. There were charming pearls 
too. The divine abodes of the leaders of Ganas were full of 
rubies. There were many splendid flower gardens of various 
shapes with sandal trees in them. There w'cre many lakes and 
tanks with golden rows of steps. They were frequented by 
swans that had been defeated by the gaits of women. The tanks 
had divine and nectarine water and the water fouls ( Karandas) , 
peacocks, cuckoos and ruddy geese heightened their splendour. 
There were thousands of Rudrakanyas (virgins) who were be- 
decked in all ornaments, who were adepts in conversation 
and elocution, who stooped down due to the weight of their 
heavy breasts, whose eyes were roving due to inebriation and 
who wxre engaged in singing and playing on instruments. There 
were groups of dancing nympho. The lakes contained full- 



The holy Pdiupata rite 


395 


blown lotuses difHcuIt of access even to Devas. There were ex- 
cellent birds of all kinds. There were the womenfolk of 
Rudras lustrous as rubies, engaged in aquatic sports. There 
were groups of women engaged in amorous festivals of great 
elegance. They were passionately fond of rural notes and 
strains of music. On seeing these things in the abode of lord 
Siva the great lord of Devas stood in surprise. 

36. There itself they saw Rudraganas and thousands of their 
heroic leaders. 

37. They saw the crystalline aerial chariots, lofty palaces 
bedecked in diamonds, lapis lazuli and golden steps. 

38-41. On the tops of palaces there were delighted women 
with like eyes, and ample buttocks. There were Yaksas, 
Gandharvas and Apsarases, Kinnaris, Kinnaras, serpents, 
and siddha girls. They had different kinds of dresses. They 
were bedecked in diflferent ornaments. They had diverse 
efficiency. They were fond of pleasure and amorous dalliance. 
They had the lustre of the blue lotus petals. They had eyes 
as large as the petals of lotus. They looked resplendent by 
their upper garments resembling the filaments of lotus. They 
were bedecked in bangles, anklets, necklaces and umbrellas of 
variegated colours as well as attractive garm'^nts. They 
were fond of embellishments and they were h^'decked in 
various ornaments also. 

42. On seeing these beautiful women of the chiefs of 
Ganas, the leading Devas — Indra and others went to the 
mansion of the destroyer of Tripuras. 

43. On seeing the first palace of the lord, that had the 
colour of a thousand rising suns, in the middle of the city, the 
groups of Devas and Siddhas beginning with Indra halted 
there. 

44. Thpn all Devas with Indra at their head saw Nandin, 
the lord of Ganas standing at the doo.' ‘ ay of the palace. 

45. On seeing Nandin the leader of Ganas, Devas bowed 
down to him and said ‘‘Be Victorious”. On seeing them the 
leader of Ganas replied : — 

46. “O highly blessed Devas, why have you come here ? 
O persons of good holy rites, you who have shaken off your 
sins, ye the lord of all worlds, it behoves you to say. 



396 


LingapuraJia 


47. They then spoke to the lord, the bcstower of bootis, the 
lord having the lustre of a lordly elephant. “For our liberation 
from the bondage of Paius kindly show lord Mahcsvara to us. 

48. Formerly in order to burn the three cities, the Paiutva 
was stipulated. O you of good holy rites, now we arc worried 
over this Pasutva. 

-19. The holy rite Paiupata was mentioned by lord Siva. 
O leader of Bhutas, thanks to this holy rite, the state of PaSu 
ceases to exist. 

50-53. By performing this excellent Vrata for twelve 
years, or for twelve months or for twelve days, all Pas us are 
liberated from the bondage of worldly existence.” Nandiii, the 
son of ^ilada, the leader of the Bhutas showed the lord to all 
Devas including Visnu. On seeing lord Siva th<“ unchanging 
deity accompanied by Amba and Ganas, Devas weic ihrilh'd 
with pleasure. They bowed to the lord and eulogised him. 
After submitting to lord Siva, their desire for liberation from 
bondage, Devas stood in front of lord Siva bowing again and 
again. 

54-57. After glancing at them and purifying their souls, 
the full-bannered lord of Devas, the great lord taught the 
Paiupata Vra'ta to them. He then seated himself along with 
Uma and the sages. 

Since then, all Devas are known as Pa^upatas f belonging to 
Pasupati). All those who consider the lord of Pasus as their 
direct deity are said to be Pasupatas. Thereafter, Devas per- 
formed penance again. 

58-60. The excellent Devas performed penance for twelve 
years and became free from bondage. They went bark 
with Brahma and Visnu. Thus everything that had been 
heard from Brahma has been mentioned to you. It had 
been heard by Sanat and by Vyasa from him. The man who 
remains pure and hears this or narrates this to the brahmins 
attains a different body and is liberated from the bondage of 
Pas us. 



The holy rite for the release of Pasus 


397 


CHAPTER EIGHTYONE 

The holy rite for the release of Pasus 

The ^ages said ; 

1-4. This holy rite that liberates Pasus (individual souls) 
li'otn bondage has been mentioned by you. This holy rite of 
Paiupati pertaining to the Lihga had been performed formerly 
by Devas. It behoves you to mention this to us in the manner 
you had heard it formerly. 

Siila said: 

Formerly, Nandin. the son of Silada, was earnestly asked by 
Sanatkumara. What Nandin spoke to him I shall mention 
su('ci’‘'rt)v. This excellent vrata called Dvadasa Lihga and 
capable of liberating Pasus from bondage had been performed 
by Devas, Daityas, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Garanas and the 
his^hly blessed sages. 

*'). It yields worldly pleasures, liberation, yogic power 
and whatever one desires. It is auspicious, holy and conducive 
to perseverance and energetic efforts. It destroys entangle- 
ment in worldly affairs in the case of devotees. 

6. It has been evolved after churning the Vedas and 
their six ancillarics.’®' It excels all charitable gibs and is holier 
than ten thousand horse-sacrifices. 

7. It is sacicd, bestows all auspicious things, destroys 
all enemies, brings about salvation even to those creatures that 
arc immersed in the ocean of worldly existence. 

8. 1 1 dispels all sickness and destroys all fevers. It had 
been performed formerly by Devas as wxll as by Brahma and 
\"isnn. 


703. N.S. edition reads ‘aviyoga-karam’ for ‘abhiyoga-karam*. avi- 
yog.'ikaram — sarvada siva-sannidhyadaya^ im ST. that which brings about 
the devotee’s proximity to Siva. 

7<'4. JJadahga : six ancillarics to the Veda, namely (i) Siksa— the 
science of proper articulation and pronunciation, (ii) Ghandas — the science 
of prosody, (iii) Vyakarana — grammar, (iv) Nirukta etymological expla- 
nation ofdiflicult Vedic words, (v) Jyotisa — astronomy, (vi)Kalpa ritual or 
ceremonial. 



398 


Lihgapurana 


9. O leading brahmins, the devotee shall make a small 
Lihga and bathe it with sandal water. Beginning in the month 
of Caitra he shall perform the holy rite of l§ivalihga. 

10-11. He shall make an auspicious golden lotus with 
pericarp and filaments. It shall have eight petals duly studded 
with all the nine precious gems. He shall then fix the crystal 
Linga in the pericarp along with its pedestal. He shall then 
duly and devoutly worship it with Bilva leaves. 

12-14. O sages of good holy rites, he shall worship the 
lihga with thousands of white, red and blue lotuses, with 
white Arka, Karavira, Karnikara and Kurabaka as well as 
with other flowers in accordance with their availability repea- 
ting the Gayatrl. After adoring with scents, etc., with incense, 
with auspicious lamps and with Nirajanas (wavingsof lights) 
the devotee shall worship the great lord in Lihga form. O 
excellent brahmins, he shall offer Aguru (agallochum) in 
the south by means of Aghora Mantra. 

15. He shall offer the divine Manah<ila (red arsenic) 
in the west with the mantra of Sadyojafa, and sandal paste in 
the north with the Vamadeva Mantra. 

16-17. O excellent sages, he shall offer Haritala (yellow 
orpiment) in the east by means of Tatpurusa. With de votion 
he shall offer the following varieties of incense, viz., thatorigi- 
natingfrom white "Aguru and black Aguru; then the Guggula 
dhupa (aromatic gum resin), the excellent Saugandhika 
(fragrant incense) and the incense named Sitara. 

18. Mahacaru or an Adhaka measure of cooked rice should 
be offered asNaivedya. Thus, this great holy rite of Sivalihga 
has been narrated to you. 

19-22. All these are common to all months. I shall mention 
the particular features now: — The Linga shall be adamantine 
in Vaisakha;^®® in Jyestha it shall be made of emerald; in 
Asadha of pearl; in Sravana of lapis lazuli and in Bhadrapada 
of rubies. O leading brahmins, in Afivina, the Linga shall 
be made of onyx; in Karttika of coral ; in Margasirsa of lapis 

705. VaiSakhc. For the worship of Lihga in Caitra read V-9 fF. The 
crystal (sphatika) lihga is recommended in Caitra. Cf. 3 {! 5 f 

ST. 



The holy rite for the release of Pasus 


399 


lazuli; in Pausa of topaz; in Magha solar stone and in Phal- 
guna of crystals. 

23-24. In all months one golden lotus ' shall be used for 
worship; if that is not available a silver lotus shall be used; if 
that too is not available ordinary lotus shall be used. 

When precious stones are not available the worship shall be 
conducted with gold or silver. If silver is not available it shall 
be made with copper. 

23. The Lihga can be made of rock, wood or clay along 
with its pedestal. Or he shall make a temporary Lihga with 
fragrant substances. 

26-27. In the season of Hemanta (early winter) one shall 
worship Mahadeva wnth Sripatra’®® (Bilva leaves) alone. In 
all the months a lotus made of gold or a lotus made of silver 
with golden pericarp can be used. If silver lotus is not available 
he shall worship with Bilva leaves. 

28. If thousand lotuses are not available one shall worship 
with half that quantity; or he shall worship Rudra with a 
moiety of the said half or he shall worship with a hundred 
and eight lotuses. 

29. Goddess Laksmi endowed with alj characteristics is 
stationed on the leaf of the Bilva. Ambika is directly present 
in the blue lotus and Sanmukha^®’ himself is present in the red 
lotus. 

30. Mahadeva, Siva, the lord of all Devas occupies the 
lotus. Hence the learned man shall never forsake the Bilva 
leaf. He must employ every means to secure it. 

31. He shall not forsake the blue lotus, the red lilies and 
particularly the red lotuses. The lotus fascinates everyone. Sila 

(red arsenic) bestows Siddhi of all objects. 

32-33. The incense originating from the black agallochum 
dispels all sins; the offering of aromatic gum, resin, etc. and the 
gift of lamps destroy all ailments; sandal paste bestows all 

706. Sripatra—bilva-patra. Siva is very fond of bilva. Gf. ^iia-raha- 

as cited in ST. 

707. $anmukhah-*-($a4^anah, Mc^vaktrab, $a<jvadanab) — six- 
mouthed or six-faced or six-headed, i.e., Karttikeya. He is so called because 
when bom he was fostered by the six K^ttikas who offered their six breasts 
to him, so he became six-headed. 



400 Lingapurana 

Siddhis; the scented incense is the means of achieving all 
desired objects. 

34. The incense originating from white agallochum as 
well as black agallochum and the gentle incense Sitari bestow 
salvation. 

35-37. The four-faced Brahma is present in the while Arka 
flower; the goddess of intelligence is well established in the 
Karnikara flower; the presiding deity of the Ganas is present 
in the Karavira flower. Narayana himself is present in the Kura- 
baka flower, the daughter of the mountain is present in all 
fragrant flowers. Hence, one shall devoutly and in accordance 
with one’s means, woiship the lord of the chiefs of Devas by 
means of these splendid flowers, incenses, etc. according to 
their availability. 

38. Thereafter, he shall devoutly offer Mahacarii made of 
milk, as Naivedya along with ghee and side-dishes, prepared 
with all materials of diet. 

39-45. Or the devotee shall offer an Adhaka measure or 
half of it of pure cooked rice or cooked with green gram dal. 
The devotee shall offer Camara (chowries) and fans to the 
deity. He shall also dedicate presents that had been earned by 
legally justifiable* means. They shall be holy and befitting and 
of diverse kinds. They should be sprinkled with water before de- 
dication and offered to Rudra with a devoted mind. It was from 
milk that nectar had been extracted by the victorious Visnu 
for the sustenance of Devas. Everything is founded on cooked 
rice. By giving charitable gifts of rice to all living beings lord 
§iva is delighted. Hence, one shall worship the lord with cooked 
rice. The vital breaths are stabilised in cooked rice. There is 
also pleasure in the offering of other presents; the wind-god is 
present in the fan. Mahadeva himself is present in allmaterials; 
the lord of waters, Varuna is present in the scented water; 
Prakrti along with the principle Mahat is present in the 
pedestal. Hence, one shall worship the lord duly every month. 
For achieving all desired objects the Vrata should be observed 
on the full moon day. 

46. One shall preserve truthfulness, cleanliness, kindness, 
quiescence, contentment and liberal-mindedness. The devotee 
shall observe fast on full moon and new moon days. 



The holy rite for the release of Pains 


401 


47. At the end of the year he shall make a gift of a cow. 
Particularly he shall observe the rite of Vrsotsarga."®® With 
devotion he shall feed brahmins who have mastered the Vedas 
and who have sound learning. 

48. The devotee shall deposit the Lihga that he has 
worshipped, in the shrine of Siva along with the materials of 
worship or he may give them to a brahmin. 

V). O excellent sages, only he who devoutly performs this 
greae holy rite of Sivalihga in all the months, is the most 
^"xc•ellent one among those who perform penance. 

r)0. In aerial chariots that are bedecked in jewels and that 
arc as refulgent as crores of suns, he goes to the divine city 
giva’o^ and never returns here. 

he shall perform this excellent vrata only for a 
month. Even then he attains the world of Siva. No doubt need 
be entertained in this respect. 

52. Or, if the mind of the devotee is attracted to worldly 
plea>.ures he shall observe the holy rite for a year. He will 
attain whatever boons he cra%'es for and obtain Siva. 

33. The devoted man obtains Deva-hood, Pitr-hood, or 
becomes the king ofDevas or the chieftain of Ganas. 

54. He who seeks learning obtains learning; he who seeks 
worldly pleasures will attain them; he who 5 >eeks wealth may 
espy a treasure-trove and he who desires for longevity will 
achieve longevity. 

33. One rejoices by attaining whatever desires he cheri- 
shes by performing the vrata, only for a month. In the end 
he will attain Rudratva. 

56. This sacred and excellent vrata which is a great secret 
is evolved by Siva the creator of the universe, for ihe benefit of 
Devas, Asuras, Siddhas, Vidyadharas and human beings. 

57. After duly worshipping the lord who is w^orthy of 
worship, after bowing to him with head bent down along with 

708. Vr^otsarga — a rite of letting loose a bull (or, according to some, 
a bull and four heifers) as a work of merit, especially on the occasion of a 
Sraddha in honour of deceased ancestors. 

709. A mythical city ‘Siva-pura* on the Himalayas, particularly on 
the Kailasa peak is conceived as the abode of Siva. 



402 


Lingapurdna 


one’s sons and servants and after assiduously circumambula- 
ting him one shall repeat the hymn “Vyapohana.”’^® 

58. This highly precious hymn was composed by lord 
Brahma, the Creator of the Universe. For the welfare of the 
three worlds this was repeated by the magnanimous lord along 
with Devas. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYTWO 

Hymn of purification 

Suta said: 

1-4. I shall now mention the auspicious hymn that dispels 
sins and bestows Siddhis. This was at first heard by the 
noble Kumara from Nandin and narrated to Vyasa and from 
him heard by me with great attention. 

Obeisance to Siva, the pure, the renowned, devoid of 
impurities ; the destroyer of the wicked. Obeisance to Sarva, 
to Bhava ; to the great Atman. May the omniscient five- 
faced,’^' ten-armed’^* lord possessed of fifteen organs of senses, 
decked in all ornaments and resembling pure crystal and 
accompanied by Uma’^^ dispel sins quickly. He is quiescent, 
all-pervasive stationed above ail in the Padmasana’^^ posture. 

5-8. May Isana, Purusa, Aghora, Sadya and Vamadeva 
dispel sin quickly. May Ananta, the lord of all learning, the 
omniscient lord who is the bestower of everything and who is 
richly endowed with meditation on Siva dispel my sin. May the 
subtle lord of Devas and Asuras, the lord of the universe, 
worshipped by Ganas and endowed with the sole meditation on 
Siva dispel my sin. May the most excellent one among auspi- 

710. vyapohana — a stotra of Siva. See ch. 82. 

71 1. panca-vaktrah — five-faced. See p. 49 note 65. 

712. dasabhujah— this epithet of Siva seldom occurs in the Puranas. 

713. someSah — Umaya sahitafi somahi sa casau liai ca ST. the lord 
accompanied by Uma. 

714. padm^ana — Seep. 35 note 47. 



Hymn of purification 


403 


cious ones, the great one worthy of worship, the deity engaged 
in auspicious meditation, the all-pervasive bestower of every- 
thing dispel my sin. 

9-12. May the single-eyed lord Isa, engrossed in aus- 
picious worship, the lord richly endowed with meditation on 
Siva dispel my sin. May lord Isa of three forms, the inducer 
of Siva’s devotion and richly endowed with meditation on Siva 
dispel my sin. May Srikantha the glorious lord of fortune, 
always engaged in meditation and worship of Siva, dispel my 
sin. May the tufted quiescent lord, smeared with ashes from 
the corpse and the glorious one engaged m the worship of 
Siva, dispel my sin. 

13-24. May the great goddess directly dispel my .sin 
immediately; — the goddess bowed to by the three worlds, 
the anr! goddess in the form of a comet, the great 
goddess, the daughter ofDaksa, Gauri, the splendid dau- 
ghter of the Himavan, Ekaparna,’^® Agraja,’^® the gentle one, 
Ekapatala, Aparna, the goddess who bestows boons, the god- 
dess who is interested only in granting boons, Uma, the 
destroyer of Asuras, Kausiki, Kapardini, KhatvahgadhaiinI 
the Divine lady, one who plucked the sprouts by means of the 
tip of her hand, one who is surrounded by the four sons Naiga- 
meya’^’ and others, the daughter of Mena, goddess born of 
water, one whose eyes resemble lotuses, one who is the mother 
of the noblc-souled Nandin devoid of sorrow, the companion of 
J^ubhavati, Paiicacuda, the bestower of boons, the unchanging 
one who attained the state of Prakrti for the sake of creation 
of all living beings; one who pervades everything by means 
of the twentythree’^® principles beginning with Mahat; one 

who is perpetually bowed to by LaksmI and other Saktis; the 

delighter of Nanda; Manonmani, one who is fond of embellish- 

7 If,. eka-parna>— one who lived on a single leaf, i.e. , PSrvati, TJma, 

better known as ‘aparna*. 

716. agraja — the first-born. 

717. Naigameya, etc. The four brothers (sons of Uma) are named 
(i^ Kumara, (ii) Sfikha, (iii) Viiakha, (iv) Naigameya. These appear on 
tlie gold coins of Kuviska in the early Kushan period. 

718. The twentythree principles consist of ten senses, five bhutas, 
five tanmatras, buddhi, ahamkara and manas, Gf. Bhaga 3.6.2 “trayo- 
viiiibati tattvahaiii ganam. 



404 


Lingapiaojia 


ing Mahadeva the wielder of Mayab; one wlio agitates aiul 
fascinates the entire unKcrse beginning with Braliin.l jiui 
consisting of the mobile and iiiiinobilc beings, bv ineaiis ol Im 
Maya, one who is stationed in the heait ot tin* yogms; om* 
who is Stationed in the world both .is one and inanj ; one 
whose eyes resemble the blue lotus; one who is pcrpnujly 
cuJogi 'ed with great devotion by all Devas beginning with the 
leaders of the Ganas, Brahma, Indra, Yama and Kubera; the 
mothei who on being eulogised destroys all their ealamilics; the 
destroyer of the agony of devotees; the elegant one; she who 
destroys worldliness; the divine deity the bestower of enjov- 
ment of worldly pleasures and liberation on dt'volces without 
their effort. [May that great goddess dispel my sin immedi- 
ately] . 

25. May Ganda the lord of all the Ganas, who came out 
of the mouth of Siva, the glorious one engaged in the worship 
of Siva, dispel my sin. 

26-29. May the lord Nandin dispel all sins; Nandin the 
son of Salankayana, originating from the path of the plough- 
share, the son-in-law of the Maruts, the lord of all Bhutas, 
the all-pervasive, one who has eyes everywhere; the lord who 
is like the lord gf all, may he dispel sins. He is the lord of the 
three worlds eulogised by Devas including Narayana, Indra, 
moon, sun, Siddhas, Yaksas, Gandharvas, Bhutas, the creators 
ofBhutas, serpents, sages and the noblc-souled Brahma. He is 
stationed in the harem of the lord. He is always wor- 
shipped by all. 

30. May he who has great splendour and strength, he who 
is like another Mahadeva, the glorious one engaged in the 
worship of Siva, dispel my sin. 

31-35. May the auspicious elephant- faced deity surrounded 
by hundreds and crores of Ganas and engrossed in the medita- 
tion on Siva dispel my sin. He splits and pierces the ridges and 
peaks of the Meru, Mandara and Kailasa; he is worshipped by 
Airavata and other divine elephants of the quarters. The seven 
Patalas^^® constitute his lect; the .seven continents'^® his thighs 
and calves; the seven oceans^^^ his goads; all the holy centres 

719. seven nether regions, sec p, 71 note 90 

720. Seep. 140 note 247. 

721. Sec p. 14 note 5.47; p. igi note 282. 



405 

Hymn of punfieation 

„„y; .ho f,r,nan,o.,. hM»dy. *7“;,;,*^ 

,„o„„, au.. and lln- his .ho .isar^s 1 h. .hr * 

by him: hr is u;rcat and iiru »‘ willi th^*. Vld\a ol dir inahib^^n, 
lie is bound to the pillar oi lotus-likr hrarts of h hy 
Bralmia and Olliers wlu) arl as d’vinc mahouts and who arc 


equipped with the ropes of yogra. 

?j6. May the i^loriou^ tawny-eyed lord Bhrhgin who has a 
body that has brightened the quarters, and who t'ligagtd in 
the woiship of Siva dispel my sin. 

37-41. May the J^akti-bearing commander-in-chief of tlie 
army of J)cvas, the glorious destroyer of Asura* by means of 
his four bodies |?], the quie^^i'ent pearock-vchieled leader of the 
armies dispel my sin. May these forms'-^" of Paiarnesthiii dispel 
mv Sill, \i/., -Bliava, f^arva, Isana. Rudra, Pasupati, Ugra, 
Bliiina and Mahadeva, who arc always engaged in the ivorship 
ol Siva. The following parts of his body,^^"* vi/., — Mahadeva, 
Siva, Rudi'a, f^ankara, Nilalohita, Isana, Vijay^a, Bliima, Bhavo- 
dbhava the lord of Devas, Kapalin and Isa, who are all engag- 
ed in doing obeisance of Jsiva. May" they dispel my impurity 
(sin). 

42-43. May these twelve Adityas’’* dispel my impurity — 
Vikartaua, Vivusvln, Martanda, Bhaskara, Ravi, Lokapraka- 
saka (the illuminator of the worlds) , Lokasaksin (the witness 
of the worlds), Trivikrama, Aditya, Surya, Arhsunian and 
D ivakara. 


l4-45a. The firmament, wind, fire, water, earth, moon 
and Atman are mentioned as his cosmic bodies. May thev 
dispel my sin. May they destroy my fear. 

45h-47a. May Vasava, (Indra) Pavaka (fire), Yama, 
Nirrti, Varuna, Vayni, Soma, I^ana, Visnu and Brahma all 
engaged in meditating on Siva dispel my sin committed men- 
tally and physically. 

47b-48. May the Maruts (wind-god) Nabhasvan, Sparsana, 


722. See p, i66 note 273. 

723. Sec p. 167 note 275. 

724. twelve adityas, viz., dhSLtr, mitra, aryaman, nidra, varuna, 
surya, bhaga, vivasv&n, pusan, savitf, tva^tr and vi^nu. These represent the 
sun in the twelve months of the year. 

725. For detail, sec MP-~-A Study, p. 63. 



406 Lingapurdna 

Vayu, Anila, Maruta, Prana, Pranesa and Jive^a, all engaged 
in the worship of Siva, dispel my impurities. 

49-50. The following are the Garanas highly purified by 
his worship — Khecarin, Vasucarin, Brahmesa, Brahmabrah- 
madhi, Susena, Sasvata, Pusja, Supusta and Mahabala. May 
they dispel my impurities and all sins committed by me. 

51-b2a. May all the Siddhas the worshippers of the feet of 
Siva dispel my impurities — Mantrajna, Mantravid, Prajha, 
MantraraJ, Siddhapujita, Siddhavatparama and Siddha. They 
are the bestowers of all Siddhis. 

52b-53. May these lords of Yaksas dispel my impurities — 
Yaksa, Yak^sa, Dhanada, Jrmbhaka, Manibhadraka, Purna- 
bhadresvara, Malin, Ksitikundali and Narendra. 

54-35. May these who constitute the ornaments in the body 
of Siva dispel my sin and all poison mobile and immobile — 
Ananta, Kulika, Vasuki, Taksaka, Karkotaka. Mahapadma, 
Sankhapala and Mahabala, all engaged in doing obeisance to 
Siva. 

56-57a. May the Kinnaras, Vinajna, Surasena, Pramardana, 
Atisaya, Saprayogin and Gitajna, all engaged in adoring Siva 
dispel my impurities. 

57b-59a. May the Vidyadharas, viz., Vibudha^ VidyaraJi, 
Vidamvara, Vibuddha, Vibudha, Krtajna, and Mahayaias, 
all engaged in meditating on Siva, dispel all terrible impurities 
through the grace of Mahadeva. 

59b-62a. May the following noble-souled heroes, all 
greatly devoted to Mahadeva dispel all fear and the dreadful 
asura tendency’^*: — Vamadeva, Mahajambha, Kalanemi, Maha- 
bala, Sugnva, Mardaka, Pihgala, Devamardana, Prahlada, 
Anuhlada, Saihhlada, Kila, Baskala, Jambha, Kumbha, Maya- 
vin, Kartavirya and Krtahjaya. 

62b-64. May the following Garudas the vehicles of Vi snu, 
all golden in colour and adorned with various ornaments, dis- 
pel my impurity. Garutman, Khagati, Paksirat, Nagamar- 
dana, Nagasatru, Hiranyahga, Vainateya, Prabhanjana, Naga- 
sih, Visanasa and Visnuvahana. 

65-66. May these sages who are sanctified by Siva and who 
are engaged in His worship, dispel my impurity — Agastya, 


726 . asuram bhavam —evil thoughts created by Satan. 



Hymn of purification 


407 


Vasis^ha, Angiras, Bhrgu, Ka^yapa, Narada, Dadhica, Cya- 
vana, Upamanyu and others. 

67-68a. May the departed fathers, grand-fathers, great 
grand-fathers, the Agnisvattas, the Barhisadas, the maternal 
grandfathers and others who are devoted to meditation on Siva 
dispel my fear and sin. 

68b-70. May the divine mothers dispel my impurities, 
thanks to the grace of the lord of Devas, viz., — LaksmI, 
Dharani, Gayatri, Sarasvati, Durga, Usa, SacT, and Jyesjha, 
who arc all worshipped by Devas, the mothers of Devas, Ganas, 
Bhutas and the mothers of the Ganas wherever they are. 

71-73a. May thecelestial damsels and the goddesses, enga- 
ged in the worship of Siva dispel my impurities — viz., Urva.sl, 
Menaka, Rambha, Rati, Tilottama, Sumukhi, Durmukhi, 
KamukI, Kamavardhani and other divine Apsarases in all the 
worlds and the goddesses who are highly purified by doing the 
Tandava dance for Siva. 

73b-74. May the Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, 
Venus, Saturn, Rahu and Kctu (the ascending and descending 
nodesj dispel all affliction from evil planets. 

75-77a. May these twelve Rasis (signs of zodiac), viz., — 
Mesa, Vrsa, Mithuna, Karkataka, Siihha, Kanya, Tula, V'ni- 
eika, Dhanus, Makara, Kumbha and Mina (i.e., from Aries to 
Pisces j , all engaged in the worship of Siva, dispel fear and sin 
through the grace of Paramesthin. 

77b-81a. May the goddesses of the twenty-seven lunar 
mansions always dispel my impurity. They are Asvini, Bharani, 
Krttika, Rohini, Mrga^iras, Ardra, Punarvasu, Pusya, Aslesa, 
Magha, Purvaphalguni, Uttaraphalgunf, Hasta, Citra, Svati, 
Visakha, AnurMha, Jyejtha. Mula, Purvasadha, Uttarasadha, 
Sravana, Sravisfha, Satabhisak, Purvabhadra, Prosthapada’*’ 
and Revati. 

81b-83. May these Pramathas, viz. — Jvara, Kumbhodara, 
Sahkukarna, Mahabala, Mahakarna, Prabhata, Mahabhutapra- 
mardana, Syenajit and Sivaduta, who increase one’s delight as 
also innumerable mothers of the Bhutas, dispel my fear and 
sin through the grace of Mahadeva. 


727. pro$tapada — uttara bbadrapada. 



408 


Lingapurdna 


84-85a. May Himavan dispel my sin, who is cni^agcd in 
the worship of Siva, who resembles a watery expanse, who has 
the colour of the Kunda flower and the moon,’-” who is inimi- 
cal to the submarine fire and who pierces the face of \"ddava. 

85b-87. May the lord of bulls (Nandin) dispel ni) sin; ihe 
bull who has four feet, who is grey in colour like the milk 
ocean, who is always stationed in the world of Rudra along 
with the Rudras and the leaders of the Ganas, who holds the 
universe, who is the divine fatlicr of the entire universe, who 
is surrounded always by Nanda and other mothers and who is 
the suppressor of sacrifice. 

88. May mother Gahga,’^® the mother ol theumveise, 
stationed in the world of Rudra, a delighted devotee o^ Siva, 
dispel my sin. 

89. May Goddess Bhadra of auspicious position stationed 
in the world of Siva, the highly blessed mother of all kine, dis- 
pel my sin. 

90. May Surabhi, who is auspicious all round, who is the 
destroyer of all sins and who is always engaged in the worship 
of Rudra dispel my sin. 

91. May Susila of good conduct and glorious position, 
sanctified by Siva and stationed in the world of Siva dispel my 
sin. 

92-95. May Senapati (Skanda)the son of the lord of Devas 
dispel my sin. He is conversant with the reality of the teaching 
in the Vedas and Sastras; he ponders over all actions, he is 
richly endowed with all attributes, he is the eldest and the lord 
of alli.hc is gentle, and has the body of Mahavisnu, he is the 
noble commander of the army, he is the mysterious suppressor 
of sacrifice; he rides on the elephant Airavata, he has black 
curly hairs; his limbs are black, his eyes are red; moon and ser- 
pent constitute his ornaments; he is surrounded by goblins, 
ghosts, evil spirits and Kusmandas and he is engaged in the 
worship of Siva. 

728. kumbha-kundendu-bhiifanal^ — omitted in tranilation: 'adorned 
with the moon-like kumbha and kunda flowers, kumbhaih-tatsailjftakam puf- 
pam ST, a kind of flower. 

729. The river Gahgfl, the mother of the worlds (jaganmfita), is 
invoked in her various forms. 



Hymn of purification 


409 


96-97. May all these mothers accompanied by Yoginis dis- 
pel all great sins: — Brahmani, MahesI, Kaumarl, Vaisnavi, 
Varahi, MahendrI, Camunda and Agneyika. They arc worship- 
ped by all the worlds and they are pure and attentive. 

98-103. Virabhadra of great splendour is the son of Rudra. 
He is the leader of the armies and lord of the Ganas. May he 
dispel sin. He resembles the snow, the Kunda flower and the 
moon; he is terrible, his great hand closely clinging to the 
trident. He is omniscient and thousand-armed. He holds all 
weapons. The three sacrificial fires constitute his eyes. He is the 
lord, the bes tower of fearlessness on the three worlds. He is 
the permanent protector of the mothers. His vehicle is the 
great bull. He is glorious and is bowed to by the three worlds. 
He is engag«.d in the worship of Siva. He beheaded Yaksa;^*^® 
he destroyed the tooth of Pusan he removed the hand of 
the fire-god he caused the eye of Bhaga to fall down;^®® he 
pounded the limbs of Soma by the big toe of his foot; he is the 
bodyguard of Upendra, Indra, Yama and other Devas; he cut 
off the nose and lips of the great goddess Sarasvati.’^^ May the 
lord of Ganas dispel my sin. 

104. May MahalaksmI the mother of the universe dispel 
my sin. She is the eldest, most excellent, bestowcr of boons and 
bedecked in excellent ornaments. 

105. May the highly blessed Mahamoha (the great delu- 
sion) , surrounded by the great groups of goblins and engaged 
in the worship of Siva dispel ray sin. 

106. May Laksmi who is endowed with all attributes, who 
has all the characteristics, who is the goddess that bestows all 
and who is omnipresent, dispel my sin. 

107-108. May Durga engaged in the worship of Siva dis- 
pel my sin. She is the great goddess riding on a lion. She is the 
unchanging daughter of Parvati. She is Mahamaya of Visnu 
constituting his slumber. She is worshipped by Devas. She has 

730. The translators prefer yak^ya to yajdasya and translate accor- 
dingly. But the legends referred to in this verse relate to Daksa*s sacrifice. 
Hence in 'yak^aiya ca ^iiraS chetta* ‘yajftasya’ for ‘yaksasya* would suit 
the context—Editor. 

73*"733* For the legends, sec Puranic Encyclopaedia. 

734 . This legend is not traceable. 



410 Lingapuram 

three eyes. She is the goddess who bestows boons. She had 
suppressed the demon Mahisa.^^^ 

109. May all the mental sons of Satl, the Rudras who sus- 
tain the Cosmic egg, and who are worshipped by all the worlds, 
dispel my fear. 

110. May the Bhutas, Pretas, Kusmancjllas, the leaders of 
Ganas and of Kusmandas dispel my sin. 

111-112. Devas eulogised the lord with this hymn and 
then bowed down their heads as far as the ground. O excellent 
brahmins, he who reads this divine hymn every month, or he 
who listens to this, sheds off all sins and is honoured in the 
world of Rudra. 

113. He who seeks a virgin obtains her; he who is desirous 
of victory shall attain victory; he who is desirous of wealth 
shall attain wealth and he who wishes for sons will obtain 
sons. 

114-116. He who seeks learning obtains learning; he who 
seeks enjoyment of pleasures will attain pleasures. By listei ng 
to this, a man obtains immediately wh ucvcr he desires. He 
will be favourite of Devas. If this meritoriotis hymn is read 
on behalf of some one, the ailments arising from gas, bile, etc., 
do not harass him. He courts no premature death nor is he 
bitten by snakes. 

117-120. By repeating this hymn a man obtains many 
times the merit of visiting holy centres, and doing Ajnas, 
giving charitable gifts and performing the vratas in particular. 
The slayer of cows, the ungrateful wretch, the murderer of 
heroes, brahmins, mother and father, the slayer of those who 
seek refuge, the sinner who is guilty of breach of faith towards 
friends, all these wretched me-i dispel their sins and are honour- 
ed in the world of Siva. 


735- Mahi?a — the asura from whom the country of Mysore is said to 
take its name. 



411 


The holy rites of Siva 

CHAPTER EIGHTYTHREE 

The holy rites of Siva 


The Sages said : 

1. The meritorious vyapohana hymn has been attentively 
heard by us. Now mention to us the vratas pertaining to the 
Lihgas. 

Suta said: 

2. O excellent sages, I shall mention to you the auspicious 
vratas that were narrated by Nandin to the son of Brahma. 

3-4. I shall mention them to you as I have heard them 
from Vyasa. On the eighth and fourteenth days of both the 
fortnights, the devotee shall eat only once, at night, and conti- 
nue this rite for one year and worship Siva. He acquires 
the benefit of all sacrifices and attains the greatest goal. 

5-6. By performing this rite for one day and one night on 
Parvan days and by making the earth the vessel, the devotee 
attains the benefit of three nights on Parvan days. By 
performing the Ksiradharavrata,^^* the devotee obtains the 
benefit of horse-sacrifice. He shall perform this hoI> Ue on the 
two Pratipads ( fir-st day) and two Pancamis (fiftu day) in 
the month. 

7. The devotee shall take food only once a day at night, 
between the eighth and the fourteenth day in the dark half of 
the month. He attains ail worldly pleasures and goes to the 
world of Brahma. 

8-9. The devotee shall perform this holy rite for a year 
in the night of all Parvan days. He shall be celibate, conquer 
anger and be devoted to meditation on Siva. At the end 
of a year he shall duly feed leading br^hmins. He then attains 
the world of Siva. No doubt need be entertained in this 
respect. 

10. Greater than the observance of fast is the partaking of 
alms and greater still is food acquired without begging. Taking 

73^* KflradhirivTatam — the observer of this vow lives only on the 
milk-fluid. 



412 


Lingapuratia 


food only at night is greater than Ayacita ( the food acquired 
without begging). Hence one shall duly pursue Nakta’”. 

ll’lSa. Food is taken in the forenoon by Devas; in the 
midday by sages; in the afternoon by pi trs and at dusk by 
Guhyakas,’®® and others. Passing over all these times, parta- 
king of the food at night is the best thing. The devotee who 
regulaily takes food at night shall practice taking in only 
Havisya, bathing, truthfulness, light food, rites in the fire, 
and sleeping on the bare ground. 

13b-14a. I shall mention the excellent vratas of Siva for 
each month. These vratas function for the atonement of sins 
and for the acquisition of virtue, love, wealth and salvation. 

14b-19. 

The Vrata for the month of Paufa. 

The devotee shall worship the lord and take food only at 
night. He shall speak truth and conquer anger. His food shall 
consist of Sali rice, wheat and milk products. He shall 
assiduously observe fast on the Astami (eighth ) day in both the 
fortnights. He shall sleep on the bare ground. At the end, on 
the full moon day he shall bathe Rudra, Mahadeva by means 
of ghee and o'ther material. O brahmins, after worshipping 
the lord duly the devotee shall feed good brahmins serving 
them barley cooked with milk and ghee. He shall peiform 
the japa of San ti mantras in particular. He shall dedicate a 
tawny-coloured cow and a bull to Bhava the lord of Devas, to 
Siva Pariimesthin. O leading sages, he goes to the excellent 
world of the fire-god. After enjoying extensive pleasures he is 
liberated there itself. 

20 - 22 . 

The Vrata for the month of Magha. 

In the month of Magha the devotee shall worship the 
lord and take food only at night. He shall partake of Kr^ara 
along with ghee. He shall restrain the sense-organs. He shall 
observe fast on the fourteenth day in both the fortnights. On 
the full moon day he shall offer Rudra a black cow and a 

737. naktam — A kind of ritual explained in v-12 ff. 

738 . guJiyaka-aclau ofdani-gods who like the yakfas, kinnaras 
etc. ate the attendants of K ibere and guardians of his treasures. 



413 


The holy rites of Siva 

black bull along with ghee and a blanket. He shall worship 
Siva and feed brahmins in accordance with his means. He 
then attains the world of Yama and rejoices there. 

23-26. 

The Vrata for the month of Phalguna. 

In the month of Phalguna the devotee shall take food at 
night with cooked rice of Syamaka, ghee and milk. He shall 
conquer anger and the sense-organs. He shall observe fast 
on the eighth and the fourteenth day. On the full moon day 
he shall bathe and worship Siva the great lord anJ dedicate to 
the trident-armed lord, a cow and a bull having the colour of 
copper. After feeding the brahmins he shall pray to Parame^- 
vara. .l.cn attains identity with the moon. No doubt need 
be entertained in this respect. 

27.29a. 

The Vrata for the Caitra month. 

In the month of Caitra also the devotee shall worship 
Rudra and have night food according to his pleasure, consis- 
ting of Sali rice cooked with milk and ghee. O excellent sages, 
he shall be down in the cowpen on the bare ground at night. 
He shall then remember Bhava. On the full moon day he shall 
bathe Siva and dedicate to him a cow and a bull, white 
in colour. He shall feed the brahmins. The devotee then 
attains the abode of Nirrti. 

29b-30. 

The Vrata for the month ofVaiidkha. 

In the month of Vaiiakha the devotee shall take food at 
night. On the full moon day he shall bathe Bhava by means of 
Paflcagavya,^®* ghee, etc., and dedicate a cow and a bull white 
in colour. He then attains the benefit of a horse-sacrifice.’*® 

739. pailcagavya— It consists of the five products of the cow, viz. 
milk, curd, butter, the liquid and solid ezcreiA. 

740. aivamedha — a sacrifice performed by kings for the achieve- 
ment of universal supremacy. A horse was turned loose to wander at will 
for a year, attended by a guardian ; when the horse entered a foreign 
country, the ruler was bound either to submit or to fight. In this way, the 
horse returned at the end of a year, the guardian obta i n in g or eafotdog the 
submission of princes whom he brought in his train. After the auccesifiiL 
return olthe horse, the horse was sacrificed amidst great i^oicings. 



414 


lAngapurana 


31-34. 

The Vrata for the month of Jyeffha. 

In the month ofjyestha, the devotee shall, with faith and 
devotion, worship Sarva the lord of Devas, Bhava the consort 
of Uma. He shall take food only at night consisting of red Sali 
rice purified by means of honey, water, ghee, etc. For half the 
night he shall be engaged in serving cows. He shall sit in the 
Virasana.’*^ On the full moon day he shall worship the lord 
of Devas, the consort of Uma after bathing the deity. He shall 
offer Cam duly to the trident-bearing lord. After feeding the 
brahmins according to his means the devotee shall give a cow 
and a bull smoke-like in colour. He shall then be honoured in 
the world of Vayu (wind-god). 

35-37a. 

The Vrata for the month of A$adha. 

In the month of Asadha the devotee shall be engaged in 
taking food at night consisting of fried grain flour mixed with 
ghee, sugar candy and milk products. On the full moon day 
he shall bathe the deity with ghee, etc. and worship him duly. 
After feeding learned brahmins who have mastered the Vedas 
he shall give a white cow and a white bull. He shall then 
attain the world of Varuna. 

37b-40a. 

The Vrata for the month of Sravana. 

O brahmins, in the month of Sravana the devotee shall take 
food at night consisting of Sasfika rice cooked with milk, 
after worshipping the bull-bannered deity. On the full moon 
day he shall bathe the deity with ghee, etc., and worship him 
duly. He shall then feed the brahmins who have sound learn- 
ing and who have mastered the Vedas. He shall offer sugar- 
cane’*® and a cow and a bull with white toes (above hoofs ) . 
The devotee then attains identity with Vayu and becomes 
all-pervasive like Vayu. 


741 . Vir&sana — a particular posture practised by ascetics in medita- 
tion, sitting on the hams. It is the same as paryanka. 

742. paupdi^an — citram ST. wonderful. ST. quotes Vitoa kosa in 
support of this meaning. 



H/mn of purification 


415 


40b-43a. 

The Vrata for the month of Bhadrapada. 

O leading brahmins, the devotee shall take food at night 
consisting of what is left over after Homa. During day time he 
shall resort to the root of trees. On the full moon day he shall 
bathe and worship Siva, the lord of Devas. He shall dedicate 
with devotion a cow and a bull with blue shoulders. After 
feeding the brahmins who have mastered the Vedas and the 
Vedahgas he will attain the world ofYak?as’*® and be their 
king. 

44b.45. 

The Vrata for the month of Aivayuja. 

In the month of ASvayuja the devotee shall take food at 
nigl.l ''insisting of ghee. As before, on the full moon days he 
shall worship Siva and feed the ever pure brahmins, the 
devotees of Siva. By giving a blue-coloured bull with lifted 
chest and a cow he will attain the world of I^ana. 

46-48. 

The Vrata for the month of Kdrttika. 

In the month of Karttika the devotee shall take food at 
night consisting of rice cooked with milk and ghee after wor- 
shipping lord Bhava. On the full moon day the devotee shall 
bathe the deity and offer Caru as Naivedya. He shall feed 
the brahmins according to his means. As before. O brahmins, 
a cow and a bull of tawny-colour shall be dedicated to the 
deity. He then attains identity with the sun. No doubt need be 
entertained in this regard. 

49-51. 

The Vrata for the month of MdrgaSirfa. 

In the month of Margasirsa the devotee shall take food 
at night consisting of barley cooked with ghee, milk, etc. On 
the full moon day he shall do towards Sarva, Samhhu, what 
has been mentioned before. After feeding the poor brahmins 
who are masters of the Vedas he shall duly make a gill of a 
cow and a bull of yellowish white colour. The devotee then 

743. yakfa-Ioka— Siva’s world or the region of Kubera with Alaka as 
the capital. 



416 


Lingapura^ 


attains the world of the moon’^* and rejoices with the moon. 

52-54. The following shall be practised throughout : 
non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, forgiveness, 
mercifulness, three times ablution, Agnihotra, sleeping on the 
bare ground, food at night only, observance of fast on eighth 
and fourteenth days in both the fortnights. Thus the Sivavrata 
for each month has been fully recounted. O brahmins, the 
devotet- shall observe this Vrata for a year in the order 
mentioned or in the reverse order. He then attains identity 
with Siva and obtains the path of perfect knowledge.’*® 


CHAPTER EIGHTYFOUR 

{The holy rite of Uma-Mahefvara) 

SUta said : — 

1. For the welfare of men, women and other creatures, 
O excellent sages, I shall recount the holy rite of Uma-Mahe- 
fivara, mentioned by livara himself. 

2. For the period of a year the devotee shall prepare 
Havisya at nigHt’** on the full moon and new moon days and 
on the eighth and fourteenth day and worship Bhava. 

3-8. The devotee shall make a splendid image of Uma- 
Mahesa in gold or in silver and instal it duly. At the end of 
the year, he shall feed the brahmins and give them gifts accord- 
ing to capacity. He shall take the lord of Devas to the temple 
of Rudra on chariots, etc., fitted with all excellent things and 
decorated with umbrellas and chowries. He shall dedicate the 
Vrata unto Siva, Parames^hin. He attains identity with Siva. 
If the devotee is a woman she will attain Sayujya (identity) 
with the goddess. If the devotee is a virgin or a widow she 
shall abstain from taking food on the eighth and fourteenth 

744. Soma-lokam — Sivalokam ST. 

745. jnina-yoga : yoga of knowledge. Knowledge has been defined 

in Karma thus : tfifT FaRnfT 'T’f: I IT^- 

11 cited in ST. 

746. naktam — a vow of night. For detail, see v-12 of this chapter. 



The holy rite of Umd-Mahesvara 


417 


day. She shall observe celibacy and continue the holy rite for a 
year. At the end of the year she shall make an idol in accor- 
dance with the injunction laid down before and instal it duly. 
She shall then feed the brahmins after taking the idol to the 
temple of Rudra. Thanks to this holy rite she rejoices with 
Bhavani. 


9-14. If any woman continues for a year performing the 
rite only on the fourteenth day in the dark half, and, O 
brahmins, at the end of the year she makes an idol (of Siva) in 
any material whatsoever and worships as mentioned above, 
she rejoices with Bhavani. 

4 he woman devotee shall take no food on the New moon 
day. She shall observe all other restraints and continue the 
hcl/ 11 ' »: for a year. 

At the end of the year she shall make a trident in accor- 
dance with the injunctions and dedicate it to the lord. After the 
holy ablution she shall devoutly worship I^ana with a thousand 
white lotuses. He shall dedicate a silver lotus with a gold 
pericarp. He shall give gifts to the brahmins. That woman 
undoubtedly dispels all wanton sins, such as the destruction of 
the foetus, by means of the holy rite of the dedication of the 
trident. O excellent brahmins, she thus obtains the Sayujya 
with Bhavani. If a man devotee performs this holy rite, he 
attains Sayujya with Rudra. 

15- 18a. O excellent brahmins, a man or a woman can 
perform this holy rite. The devotee observes fast on the full 
moon and on New moon day devotedly for one year. O excel- 
lent brahmins, the holy rites, Japa, Dana (charitable gift), 
penance and everything else should be performed by women, 
only at the behest of their husbands since women are never in- 
dependent. Every month she shall dedicate all SLcnted materials. 
At the end of the year that lady of holy rites attairiS Sayujya 
(identity) and Sarupya (similai’ y in form) with Bhavani. 
Undoubtedly I am telling you the truth and truth alone. 

18b-21. The woman devotee shall take food only once on 
the full moon day in the month of Kfirttika. She shall observe 
forbearance, non-violence and other restraints and be celibate. 



Lingapurana 

She shall alertfully offer a Bhara’*’ weight of black gingcuy 
seeds cooked with ghee and jaggery to Paramesthin and to 
brahmins in accordance with her means. She shall observe fast 
on the eighth and the fourteenth day. That lady of good holy 
rites attains Sarupya (similarity in form) and rejoices along 
with Bhavani. 

22-23. The common characteristics of all vratas are : — 
Forbearance, truthfulness, mercy, charity, cleanliness, curb on 
the sense-organs and the worship of Rudra. I shall succinctly 
recount to you the extensive holy vrata for every month in 
due order beginning with Margaslr^ and ending with Karttika. 
This has been recounted at the outset by Nandin. 

24-31. In the month of Marga^irsa the woman devotee shall 
duly embellish an excellent bull having all limbs in perfect 
condition and dedicate it to Siva. There is no doubt about 
this that she rejoices along with Bhavani. 

In the month of Pausa after doing everything mentioned 
before, the devotee shall instal the trident and then dedicate it 
to the lord. She rejoices with Bhavani. 

In the month of Magha, the devotee shall make a chariot 
endowed with all characteristics. After worshipping the lord of 
Devas she shall offer the chariot to the deity and feed the 
brahmins. That highly blessed lady shall, no doubt, rejoice with 
the goddess. 

In the month of Phalguna, she shall duly make an image 
of gold or radiant silver according to her means, instal it and 
worship it. Then she shall deposit it in the shrine of Sankara. 
Undoubtedly she rejoices along with the great goddess. 

In the month of Caitra the woman devotee shall duly make 
the idols of Bhava, Kumara and Bhavani in copper or other 
metals, and instal them duly. By offering them to Rudra, 
she rejoices along with Bhavani. 

32-34. In the month of Vaisakha the devotee shall perform 
the excellent rite of Kailasa vrata thus : — The shining abode 

747. bhira : a particular weight equal to 20 tulSs, measuring 3000 
palas of gold. ST. quotes pSsupata tantra to define bb^ • ^ 

> 1 ^ I 44 ksif "<1 fn w 11 

sftw tprati’ 1 



419 


The holy rite of Umd-Maheivara 

of Kubera (i.e., Kailasa mountain) shall be made out of silver 
with IiSvara and Uma therein along with the lords of Ganas. It 
must be embellished with all jewels and duly deposited in the 
splendid abode of Bhava, Paramesa. Thereby she attains the 
mountain Kailasa and rejoices along with Bhavani. 

35-38a. In the month of Jyestha the image of Mahadeva, 
the consort of Uma, shall be made in Lihga form out of copper 
or other metals. Brahma and Visnu should be depicted as 
praying with palms joined in reverence and seated on the swan 
and on the boar respectively. O excellent brahmins, the 
splendid Lihga in the middle of which is Bhava, shall be in- 
stalled duly. Thereafter she shall feed the bi ihmins. By duly 
depositing this image in an abode of Siva for obtaining aus- 
piciousness and Dy worshipping Siva along with the brahmins 
H.z will attain Sayujya with the goddess. 

38b-46a. In the splendid month of Asadha the devotee 
shall duly make a splendid abode with baked bricks in accor- 
dance with her means. It must be filled with all necessary 
seeds and liquids, with all splendid household effects and 
utensils, the mortar, pestle etc., and furnished with maids and 
men servants, with all foodstuffs, bedding outfits, clothes etc. 
They shall be covered with cloths all round. The lord Maha- 
deva, consort of Uma, shall be bathed in ghee etc. A thousand 
bralimins shall be duly fed. A brahmin who i> richly endowed 
with learning and humility and who has mastered the 
Vedas and who is in the first Asrama’^® shall be duly and 
devoutly worshipped. A virgin of good waist line, accompanied 
by the necessary requisites for the whole life shall be offered 
to him. So also a piece of land, a cow and a bull and a 
house shall be offered to him along with the different kinds of 
divine perquisites as massive as the Meru mountain. She 
attains the world Goloka and rejoices with Bhavani. Un- 
doubtedly she will become similar to Bhavani and remain 
unchanged throughout the kalpas, and shall in the end attain 
Sayujya with Bhavani, 

46b-48a. In the month of Sravana the devotee shall make 
a hillock of gingelly seeds scattered with minerals and em- 
bellished with banners and dedicate these lo Sarva. The offering 

748. piatham^iraminaxn — brahmac&ri^am ST. one who lives a student’s 
life. 



420 


Lingapura^a 


shall be made along with the canopy, banners, clothes and 
all the minerals. By feeding the brahmins, everything men- 
tioned before will happen. 

48b-50a. In the month of Bhadrapada the devotee shall 
make a splendid hillock of Sali rice and dedicate it to the 
lord along with canopy, banners, clothes as well as minerals. 
After feeding the brahmins duly she shall present these to them. 
She shall then become as resplendent as the rays of the sun 
and rtjoice along with Bhavanl. 

50b-51. In the month of Asvayuja she shall make a 
massive hillock of grains along with clothes of good colour. 
By worshipping Siva with this offering and feeding the brah- 
mins she will attain all things mentioned before. 

52-65. Mahdmeru vrata. 

The devotee shall make a huge mountain with all grains, 
all seeds and juices. It shall have all minerals and shall be be- 
decked in all jewels. It shall have four peaks. Its beauty shall 
be enhanced by canopies and umbrellas, scented garlands and 
incenses of diverse kinds. There shall be dances and songs and 
the instruments of lute, conch, etc. of diverse kinds. It shall be 
rendered highly meritorious by auspicious chanting of sacred 
hymns. There shall be eight great banners dazzling with diffe- 
rent flowers. It shall represent the great mountain Meru, the 
excellent support of the three worlds. Siva shall be depicted 
on its top, in the centre, by means of minerals. In the south 
the four-faced Brahma shall be duly represented. In the north 
the devotee shall depict Narayana the lord of the chiefs of 
Devas, devoid of ailments. Indra and other guardians of the 
quarters shall be duly represented with devotion. After instal- 
ling the deity the devotee shall bathe and worship MaheSvara. 
In the right hand of the lord shall be depicted the trident 
worshipped by Devas and in the left the noose. The lotus bedec- 
ked in gold shall be depicted in the hand of Bhavani. The 
devotee shall assiduously represent the conch, discus, iron club 
and lotus in the hands of Vi^nu. In the hands of Brahma shall 
be placed the rosary and the excellent Kamandalu (water-pot) . 
The respective weapons of the following shall be duly depicted: 
the thunderbolt of Indra; the great weapon i^akti of Agni; the 
staff of Yama; the sword of Niiyti the night walker; the terrible 



The holy rite of Umd-MaheSoara 


421 


and wondrous noose; Naga of Varuna; the baton of Vayu; the 
iron club of Kubera that is worshipped by all the worlds and 
the axe of lord Isana. Naivedya shall be duly offered in the 
above order. The great worship of Siva shall be performed 
with Garu. I'he devotee shall worship all Devas in accordance 
with one’s means. After performing the worship assiduously the 
devotee shall feed the brahmins. After performing the Maha- 
meru vrata she shall offer it to Mahadeva. Attaining Maha- 
meru she rejoices along with Malmdevi. Undoubtedly she will 
attain the Sayujya of the great goddess for a long time. 

66-72. In the mouth of Karttika the woman shall make a 
splendid image of goddess Uma fully bedecked in all orna- 
ments and marked with all auspicious characteristics. The image 
mav be made in gold, copper etc. and shall be duly installed, 
'llic linage of the lord of Devas shall be equipped with 
all characteristics. In front the fire-god shall be depicted. 
Brahma shall be depicted holding the sacrificial ladle. 
Narayana the munificent shall be depicted bedecked in all orna- 
ments and surrounded by the guardians of quarters and 
Siddhas. The vrata shall be offered in the temple of Rudra 
with devotion. By observing this vrata she will attain the 
body of Bhavani and rejoice with Bhava. In every month it is 
meritorious to have the holy rite with one meal a day. Thus, 
the holy rites beginning with the month of ''irgasirsa and, 
ending with Karttika have been observed. O 'Xccllcnt sages, 
they are for the benefit of all creatures, men or women, 
d'he devoted man will attain Sayujya with Siva by performing 
the vrata and the devoted woman will attain Sayujya with the 
goddess. There is no doubt that this has been so ordained by 
Siva. 



422 


Lingapurdf/a 


CaiAPTER EIGHTYFIVE 

The glory of the five-syllabled Mantra 


Suta said: 

1. O excellent brahmins, in all these holy rites, after wor- 
shipping the lord of Devas, the consort of Uma, the devotee 
shall repeat the five-syllabled’*® Mantra duly. 

2. There is no doubt about this that the vratas are duly 
concluded only with the japa and not otherwise. Hence, one 
shall repeat the meritorious five-syllabled Mantra. 

The sages said : 

3. O highly blessed one, how is this five-syllabled Mantra ? 
How is it powerful ? Tell us. We are eager to hear the methods 
and means for its japa. 

Suta said: 

4. I shall succinctly recount the holy things, formerly 
recounted to Parvati, by lord Kudra, the lord of Devas. 

The goddess said: 

5. O lord, p Mahe^vara of all the worlds, O lord of the 
chiefs of Devas, 1 wish to hear factually the glory of the five- 
syllabled Mantra. 

The lord said: 

6. O gentle lady, even in hundreds and crores of years, it 
is not possible to recount the glory of the five-syllabled Mantra. 
Hence, listen to it in brief. 

7-8. At the advent of dissolution’®® when the mobile and 
immobile beings, Devas and Asuras, serpents and Raksasas, all 
are destroyed and when everything dissolves into Prakfti along 
with you also,’®* O gentle lady, only I do survive. There is no 
second being anywhere. 

749. pafic£k^iiii vidySm. The five-syllabled mantra of Siva is 
*namab iivSya.’ 

7pO. pralaya — dissolution of the universe at the end of a kalpa. 

731. During the period of dissolution and re-creation, Prakrti re- 
mains hidden in the body of Siva. It again becomes manifest at the begin- 
ning of creation. Thus the supreme lord Siva alone is eternal and the 
abode of all beings, mobile and immobile. 



The glory of the fioe-syllabled Mantra 


423 


9. At that time the Vedas and Scriptures are stationed in 
the five-syllabled Mantra. They do not attain destruction. 
They are protected by my power. 

10-11. I am then present in two forms: Prakrti and Atman. 
Lord Narayana adopts the body of Prakrti and lies on the 
yogic couch in the midst of water. The five-faced Brahma is 
born of his umbilical lotus. 

12. Brahma was desirous of creating the three worlds. Being 
incompetent for it without a helping hand, he, at the outset, 
created ten mental sons’®* of unmeasured splendour. 

13. Brahma requested me to grant power to create. He 
said: “O Mahadeva, O Mahesvara, grant power unto my sons.” 

14. Thus requested by him I with five faces’®* uttered the 
five syllables to Brahma. 

16. Brahma, the grandfather of the worlds grasped them 
through his five faces’®**^. He understood Parame^vara in the 
form of the Being expressed by the term of expression. 

16. O gentle lady, Siva who is worshipped by the three 
worlds is the Being expressed by the five syllables. The great 
five-syllabled Mantra itself is his expression. 

17. After understanding properly the procedure (forjapa) 
and attaining Siddhi (by japa), the noble-souled five-faced 
deity (Brahma) imparted to his sons the five-syllabled Mantra 
that was meaningful and conducive to the welfare of the 
universe. 

18. After receiving the jewel among the Mantras directly 
from the grandfather of the worlds they propitiated lord Siva 
the greater Being than the greatest. 

19. Then lord Siva who is greater than the three deities’®* 


752. daia manasan putran. Their names arc : Marici, Atri, AAgiras, 
Pulastya, Pulaba, Kratu, Pracetas, Vasistha, Bhrgu and NSrada. Their 
distinctive features are brought out in many a legend related of them in the 
Pur&nas. 

753, five heads of Siva : See p. 49 r.**te 65. 

753a. five heads of Brahma : When the four heads of Brahma became 

thwarted in their functions because of Brahma’s erotic impulse, then out of 

tapas was produced a fifth head on the top, and that head was covered with 
matted locks. But later on, this head was clipped by Rudra. But against 
this statement, see $P. i.8.8. 

754. Cf. Lingo. i.7t*S>" 



424 Lingapurdna 

became delighted. He granted them the perfect knowledge and 
the eight attributes buch as Anima (minuteness) etc.^*^*^ 

20-24. After obtaining the boons, those brahmins, desirous 
of propitiating me went to the mountain Mufijavat,^^^" on the 
beautiful peak of the Meru.’^’ The glorious mountain is my 
favourite and is always protected by my Bhutas. Eager in the 
creation of the worlds they performed severe penance for a 
thousand divine years near that mountain, living only on air. 
O gentle lady, those sages stood there for my blessings. On see- 
ing their devotion I appeared before them immediately. With 
a desire for the welfare of the noble people of the worlds I told 
them everything about the five-syllabled Mantra, its sage, its 
metre, its deity, its Sakti, Bija (seed), Nyasa (fixation) , on six 
Angas (limbs), Digbandha (the binding of the quarters) and 
Viniyoga (application) . 

25. After hearing the glory of the Mantra, those sages 
whose assets were the austerities, performed activities by utilising 
the Mantra properly. 

26-28- Thanks to its glory they created the worlds includ- 
ing Devas, Asuraa and human beings, the different castes and 
their sub-divisions as well as the splendid holy rites. They 
heard the Vedas as before and as descended from the previous 
kalpas. It is due to the prowess of the five-syllabled Mantra 
that all these survive, viz. — the worlds, the Vedas, the pious 
sages, the permanent holy rites, Devas and the entire universe. 
Therefore, I shall mention it now to you. Listen to everything 
attentively. 

29. This Mantra has Siva for its Atman. It consists of few 
letters but is full of great meanings. It is the essence of the 
Vedas. It yields liberation. It is undoubtedly proficient in 
commanding. 

30. This is my valuable statement, accompanied by 
different kinds of realisation; it is pleasing to the minds of the 
people of this world and the divine beings; its meaning is 
decisive and it is majestic. 

755- Sec p. 134 note 241. 

756. Mufijavw : a peak of the mountain Meru, well known for Soma 
production. It is also mentioned in the Rgveda as Mujavata. 

757. Mem, sec p. g8 note 127. 



The glory of the five-syllabled Mantra 


425 


31. It is a Mantra that can be easily uttered by the mouth; 
it achieves all objects; it is the seed of all Vidyas; it is th(' first 
splendid Mantra. 

32. Ii is very subtle and its meaning is great; it is like the 
seed of the lioly banyan tree. It is ilie Veda that is beyond the 
thice Gunas; it is the omiiisc'i^'nt lord doing everything. 

33-34. The “Om” is tlie single-syllabled Mantra. Tlie all- 
pea vading Siva is stationed in it. The five syllables constitute 
his body. He is stationed in the six-syllabled subtle \Iantra in 
the form of the “expressed and the expression.” Siva is Varya 
(the expressed) since he is coinpr»‘hensiblc. The Mantra is his 
Vacaka ^ xpn'ssion^. 

3r)-3('). 'I'he relation of the. expressed and the expression 
is a primoidial oiu' betv\<‘(‘n the two. In the Vedas and in Siva- 
gamas the main M<uUra is the six-syllabled one but fa* purpose 
of sec'ulai aciiviiics it is the fivc-syllabled Mantra."’"*' Why 
should h(' ha\t' many Mantras and extensive scriptures? 

J7. II anyotu' has retainc'd this Mantra in his lu'art he has 
studied theX’rdas, he has heard the sacred lore; he has pcrloim- 
ed everything. 

38. If sch(4ar perfoims its japa after learning the Vedais 
ill aicoid.incc w'ilh the injuiu tiems it is encaigh; the perfect 
knowhxlge ol Siva is this much; the greatest goal is thus far. 

3^3- Ha. Brahmavidya (learning pcilaining lo the Brah- 
man) is this much, Himk c, the learned man shall continuously 
periorm its japa. riiis Mantra consisting of the Pranava and 
the five syllables is my heart, it is the greatest esoteric secret 
greater than all else; it is the excellent knowledge leading to 
salvation. 1 shall mention the sage, the metre and the deity 
controlling this Mantra, its Bija, Sakti, Svara (vowel), Varna 
(K'ltei), Slhana (place of origin^ letter by letter. 

41b-43. The sage is Variiadeva; the metre is Pahkti. I, 
Siva alone, am the deity of this Mantra, C) lady of excellent 
face. The syllables ‘hia” etc. are the Bijas; they are in the form 
of the five elements; know that the Pranava is the unchanging 
Atman that is all-pervasive, you alone are its Sakti, O goddess 
bowed to by all Devas. 

758. The five-syJIabletl mantraof Si\a prefixed by om ; 

“Om namas Sivaya”. 



426 


Lingapurdna 


44. Something is your Pranava and something is iny Pra- 
nava. O gentle lady, your Pranava is undoubtedly the J^akti, of 
all the Mantras. 

45-46. The letters ‘a’, ‘u’ and ‘m’ are present in my Pia- 
nava, the letters w, tn and a constitute in order your Pian.iva, 
which has three Matras and the Pluta tone (prolated vowel) . 
The Svara (Note) of Orhkara is Udatta (high), the sage is 
Bratima and the body is white. 

47-54. The metre is Daivi Gayatri and the great Atman 
is the presiding deity; the first, second and fourth letters are 
Udatta (high). The fifth is Svarita (neither high nor low), the 
middle one is Nisada. 

The letter n is of yellow colour, its place of origin is the 
eastern face. Indra is the deity, Gayatri the metre and Gautama 
the sage. 

The letter mah is of black colour, its place c f » igiu is the 
southern face, the metre is Anustup, the sage is Atri, Rudia 
is the deity. 

The hotter is of smoky colour; its place of origin is the 
western face; the sage is VisvainiUa, the metre is Trispjp and 
the deity is Visnu. 

The letter vd is of golden colour, its place of origin is the 
northern face; Brahma is the deity, Brhati is the metre and 
Aiigiras the sage. 

The letter ya is of red colour; its place of origin is tin* up- 
ward face; the metre is Vira , the sage is Bhara*lvaja and 
Skanda is the Deity. 

I shall now mention the \y."^a (tixhig rite* that u auv'i- 
cious and conducive to the ac hiev(*'uent of all Sicklhi^. it is 
destructive of rdl sin^ too. N\asa is ol thre * types; the dilli r -nce 
being due to their ecmj cctic u with cr(*ation, sustenanee and 
dissolution. 

55-50. Thes(‘ Nya^d.s belong respectively to tlie irligiouS 
students, the hoi-st holders and ascetics, i.c., the Nyasa of 
Uipalti (rrca i(jn} is for the religious "^tiah ni; tlr* Nyfea of 
Sthiti ^sustenance) is for the houschohh is and the Nyasa of 
Samhrti (dissolution) is for the ascetic^; otlieiwisc Siddhi ( an- 
not be achieved. Tlic Nyasa is of three types viz., Aiiganyasa 
(the fixation of the limbs); Karaiiyasa (that of the hand; and 



Tk( glor\ of the Cve-^yllableri Mant o 


427 


Dohanv'isa (that of tli(‘ body) O ladv of splendid face, iho 
Nyasa of the three types relatiiior o cieaiion, tic is bcint^ men- 
tioned to )oii Ori( shall at the oitstt peiforni t!ie '^/asaol the 
hand thetcafter he shall pfiloini the Nyasa of the bod) and 
ihtieaftcr he shall peiforni the \\asao^ Ant^as (innbs) in tlie 
oidii of the syllables of the iinnMa The fixation beginning 
with tlu head and <iidint» with ihi Ittt i^ called the Utpatti- 
nyasa C) bflov(dorie, that bei^iiiiiint^ with the fe t and ending 
with the head is the Nv^sa of Sanihara i dis^'olution) The 
\vasa of the heait fact and diioat i> Stliiuny “isa (that of 
sustenance) 

GO-h") O splendid lad', tht^c \ ^sas lelatc to the leli- 
gious students, householhi and tlu ascetics itspcetncK 
Rep the Mantras ont ihall touch the body aloiicr uuh the. 

bead That is rommoii to all house holdeis, i eligious studLiits 
and a^celKS 

Beginning w'th the thumb of tlu i ight hand and ending 
with the thumb of the left, il the Ii gcis aie fivcd it in called 
Utpaitinsasa (the i\\asaol creation j JtN opposite is that of 
diNsohuion Fixing thv. Nvasa beginning with the thumb and 
ending with the uttle hngei in both the hands i called Mluti- 
nyasa ^^thai of susteiiaiu t C) gentle laJy, it \iel Is much 
pjtasuit to the houscholdeis 1 his is th eommc.i i ro cduie — 
ilie. Nsas i of tlie hand is pciioiined at f ^st, then » Nsasa of 
the body and iheicatui one shall peiionn the Nvasa of the 
limbs Ihen tiie desoicc shall pt iloiiri the N\asa a\ei all the 
limbs and then on< b\ one with du full Mantra wnh (')mV“ira 
pic iiXc d and suflixi el" * on all the ten imgt » n of the liaiids Ihe 
dcvouc shall perform tl^e Ny«isa i.te lacing the castoi thcnoith 
alrei first washing tlu teet He shall be clean and attentue 
6b 72 At tlu i>utset lie shall icmembei the sage, metre, 
deity, Bija, Sakti VMnin and picceptoi, O lady ol splendid 
fact Repeating tlu Manila, he shillwupeofl the ha ds and 
hx the Piaiiava in the palms and in me lust and last knots in 
all the lingers. He shill fix the Bijas along with the Biiidus in 
tliL five middle knots In aceoieianee with the oidei of the 

7 rj 9 The five-s\ llabh d inantia of Siva prcfixrd and suffixed by om . 

“Om nain is biv“i>ri om' . 



428 


Lingapwdna 


stages of life he shall perform the Nyasa of creation, etc. with 
both hands and beginning with the foot and ending with the 
head. Repeating the Mantra with Oriikara affixed ho shall 
touch the body (1) on the head, face, neck, heart and in the 
private parts; and, on the two feet; (2) in the piivate parts 
and in the heart and in the neck in the middle of lhi‘ face and 
on the head or [j) lie shall fix in the heart, in the piiViite 
plo ts, on the feet, on the head, in the face, and in the neck — he 
shall fix with the Pranava, etc. in three ways. 

73-76. Alter fixing the limbs thus, the dexolec shall medi- 
tate upon the faces lof Siva). Beginning with the lace in the 
east and ending with the face upward he shall lix the «;yllablcs 
beginning w’ith na in diieo»dcr. 'riiereafler he shall pet torin 
the Xyasa rite oi the six limbs in the lespc^ctivc* pla« es with 
delight. The Xvasa shall be accompanied w'ith the words 
Xamas 'obeisance), Svaha, Vasal, Iliim, Waisat and Phai. 
The Pranava is known as the heart; the s\ liable' na the bead; 
the sxllablc ma the tuft: the syllable the com ol mail: ilie 
syllable the eye; the syllable "ya'" the ‘^Astia" niis^iile') . 

After lixing the letters on the limbs as iruntioned tlu‘ devour 
shall bind the quaiters. 

77-76. The deities of the four c orneis l)c*ginning with the 
south-c'ast, arc rcspec tivc'ly \ ighne.sa, tlu' iiiotlica Dmga and 
Kseirajha ( ?) . The dexotee shall fix them with the iij) ct the 
thumb fixed on that of the index lingei xxitli .i beaming uu « . 
Alter saying ‘Trotcet ye all ’ he shall inak'* obc i'^am (' lo them 
severally. 

79-80. The expert dcxa)tc*c shall pea form the Xy<isa of the- 
hand on the fingers beginning xvilh the index finger with his 
thumb. He shall pcrlor.n the Xyfisa on the middle- ol ihe xir^ k 
also. This Xyasa rite is said to l)e splendid and desii iierive e*l 
sins, ft is conducive to the aclileveiiu-nl of Siddhis. Il is holy, 
auspicious and affords all protection. 

81. When the Xyasa rite has been performed by means ol 
the splendid Mantra the devotee shall be on a par w ith Siva, 
Within a moment, all the sins committed in the previous births 
are destroyed. 

82. 'fhc inU'Uigenl devotee shall be pure in body by per- 
forming this Xyasa rile*. Steady in the pciformance* of lioly life 



gloiy of the five-yllablid. Mantra 


429 


he shall repeat the five-syllabled Manna after acquiring the 
same giaccfully from a preceptor. 

<13-85. O splendid lady, hcnrefoith, I shall recount the 
proci tlurc for icquiring the Mantra. Without it the Mantra is 
lulile and with it, it is eflica'ious. 'The futile ones arc the 
following:— .\jnrihlna (i.c. Mantra acquired without permis- 
sion'. Kriyahlna Mevoid of holy rites), ?srad(lhahlna (devoid 
ot laitliy. Amfinasa Cnon-incntal i.e. if the devotee docs not 
devote lull attention), An.ijfiaptam (that whir h has been prohi- 
bited , Daksinfililnani ''peiniittcd but devoid of gifts) and 
Sadaj.ipta (indis( rin)inatcl> rej)eatcd alua\ s). 

I he lollowing Mantras are linitful -Ajhasiddha (aihievcd 
with permission), Kriyasiddha (attended with rituals), 
Sia<l<" • dd’ia (full) equipped with faith), Sumana'-a (where 
the mind fidly '^Iwells ' and Daksinfisiddha ' attended with gilts) . 

!‘ti-‘)l. The devotee shall approach the brahmin preceptor 
w'ho is conM'rsant wi'h the real meaning of the Mantra, who 
has pi rfect knowledge who is intcusted in the path of medi- 
tation and who is endowed with good qualities: With emo- 
tional purity the devotee shall assiduously propitiate him 
mentally, verbally, physiealh andmonetanh . The disciple shall 
alw<t)S worship the preceptor with all attention. If he is sulfi- 
cieutly affluent the disi iple shall give these thing- ’evoutK to 
the preieptoi: elephants, horses, chaiiots, jev < 's, holds, 
house^, oiuamcnts, clothes, and diHercut kinds of grains. If he 
wishi ; for his Siddhi ho shall not be stingy in spi*iding money. 
C) gentle lady, tlurcaltcr he .shall dedicate himself along with 
his possessions and attendants. After worshipping thus in accor- 
dance with his capacity and not at all attempting deception, 
the disciple shall giasp the mantra and perfect kno.% ledge from 
till preceptor, graduall). 

92-95. Thus piopitiatod, the ptecoptor shall make the dis- 
ciple take his bath alter testing him thus. I'he disciph shall 
stay with him for a year ami seise h. . Ho shall be pure and 
desoid of egotism. He shall become emaciated due to constant 
fasts. The preceptor shall then bless the disciple with the ex- 
cellent perfect knowledge of Siva in a holy place at an auspi- 
cious hour. The place may be the shore of the sea or the bank of 
a river, the cowpen or a temple, or a clean place m the house 



430 


Lifigapioana 


itself. The time sliall be a Tithi conducive to the fulfilment of 
desiics; the constellation and the junction of planets shall be 
auspicious. It shall be devoid of defects in every respect. Even 
in the isolated place the preceptor shall utter the mantra 
loudly and legibly with a delighted mind. 

96. I he preceptor shall utter himself and make the dis- 
ciple inter afier him. He shall then bestow Riddhi (on the di.M i- 
pl ■) saving — ‘‘May there be auspiciousness. May it be sf>ien- 
did. May it be pleasing”. 

97. After acquiring the great Mantra and perfect kiuw- 
Icdge from the preceptor the disciple shall repeat it every day 
with the due Saihkalpr.. He shall pcrfoim Puiasrarana too, 

98-99. As long as he lives, he shall rejieat this a thousand 
and eight times every day. Without repeating it, he shall not take 
food. Thus interested in it he attains lh(‘ greatest goal, lie who 
repeats this Mantrn a hundred thousand times for each s> liable 
and then rej)eit^ it four times with great ailtmiion is known 
as one who has made a Purascarana. He shall take food only 
at night. He shall be self-controlled. 

100. A person who seeks for Siddhi, ere long, shall b(‘ one 
of these tv\o:— cither a Purascarana repeater or daily repealer. 

101. 11 a devotee perfomis Purascarana and continues to 
be a daily repeater too, there is no one else in thcwoihl who 
is equally accomplished, scU-i.ontrolled and competent to bt'stew 
Siddhis. 

102-103. Sitting in a comfortable posture he shall be sih^ut 
with his mind fully concentrated. He may sit faring the (*ast 
or the north and then repeat the excellent Mantra. At (he 
beginning of the japa and at its conclusion he shall restrain 
his breath. In the end, he shall repeat the excellent Bija mantra 
a hundred and eight limes in all. 

104-105, 'Phe devotee shall restrain the breath forty limes 
and repeat the mantra. Thus the Pranayama lor the fivo.sylla- 
bled Mantra has been cited. Thanks to Pranayama, his sins 
will be destroyed soon and the sense-organs shall become con- 
trolled. Hence, one shall practise Pranayama. 

106. It should be known that the japa performed in the 
house has ordinary benefit; that performed in the cowpen 
shall be hundred times more efficacious; if it is on the banks of a 



The glory of the five-syllabled Mantra 


431 


rivei it is hundred thousand times more efRcacious; if it is in 
the presence of Siva it is endless. 

107. The japa performed on the seashore in a divine 
pond, on a mountain, in a temple and in a sacred hermitage 
has rrorc times the benefit. 

108. The rite of japa is commended if it is in the presence 
of Siva or in front of the sun, the preceptor, the lamp, cow 
or water. 

109-111. O lady of auspicious face, if the number ol the 
repetitions is reckoned on the fingers it has the ordinary benefit; 
if lines are drawn and the nuniber is calculau d the benefit is 
said to be eight times more; if it is reckoned by means of the 
fruits ol Putrajiva it has ten times more benefit; it it is cal- 
cnl>,. ’ means of conches and jewels the benefit is hundred 
times more; through coral the benefit a thousand times mote; it 
is ten thousand times more, if the reckoning is through crys- 
tals; it is hundred thousand times more if the calculation is by 
pearls; it is one million times more if the calculation is by 
lotus-seeds; if it is calculated by gold pieces the benefit is ten 
million times more. The benefit is infinite if tlie calculation is 
by knots of KuSa grass or Rudraksa beads. 

112-115. The necklace of twenty- five Rudraksa beads is 
Conducive to salvation; that of twenty-seven is nourishing, 
that of thirty is conducive to the achievcmciit of wealth and 
tiiat of fifty pertains to black magic. 

If the devotee faces the east and performs the japa it is 
Vasya (i.e. he will be able to attract others) ; facing the south 
pertains to Abhicara; facing the west bestows wealth and facing 
the north is conducive to quiescence. 

One should know that the thumb bestows liberation; the 
index finger destroys enemies; the middle finger yields 
wealth; the ring finger causes quiescence. O splendid 
lady, in the rite of japa the little finger bestows protection. 
The devotee shall perform japa ■ hh the thumb coming into 
contact with other fingers. 

lie. Any holy rite performed without the thumb is fruit- 
less. Listen. The japayajfta excels all other sacrifices. 

117-118. All the ritualistic sacrifices, charitable gifts and 
austerities do not merit even a sixteenth fraction of the japa- 



432 


Lingapurdna 


yajna. The other yajnas are attended with violenc e or killing 
but japayajfia has nothing to do with violence. Now thegieatness 
of only the Vacika (i.e. chanting with audible voice) jajja- 
yajha has been glorified. 

119-122. The Upaih-?u (mumbling) is hundred times more 
efficacious than verbal and the Manama (mental) is thousand 
times nore efficacious than mumbling. 

If one utters the mantra clearly with highly accented or 
lowly accented tones or without either, that japayajna is called 
Vacika (verbal). If one utters the mantra with a low tone, 
making the lips throb slightly and making only some sounds 
audible, that Japa is called Uparhsu (mumbling). If the devotee 
ponders over the meaning of the words letter by letter and 
proceeds ahead with the series of syllables that japa is called 
Manasa (mental). Of the three japayajhas the latter one excels 
the earlier one. 

123-127. The quality of the benefit varies according to the 
mode of yajna. If the deity is eulogised coutiiiuously by japa it 
becomes pleased and on being pleas('d it shall bestow^ extensive 
pleasures and permanent liberation. Neither die yaksas nor 
th(' Raksasas, neither the Pisacas nor the terrible and evil 
planets even approach the person doing the japa. They are 
IViglitcncd all round. One shall entirely suppress by means 
of japa all the sins committed in a number of previous births. 
One wins worldly pleasures, Siddhis and liberation and also 
conquers death by means of japa. 

After thus acquiring perfect knowledge pertaining to Siva 
and after understanding the procedure for the japa the devo- 
tee shall abide by good conduct. Continuously meditating 
thub, he attains welfare, 

I shall now mention sadacara (good conduct) that is the 
perfect means of Dharma (virtue) . 

128. Since performance devoid of good conduct shall be 
fruitless good conduct is the greatest virtue, the greatest 
penance. 

129. Good conduct is the greatest learning. Good conduct 
is the greatest goal. Men of good conduct shall be fearless 
everywhere. 



Th9 glory of the five-syllabled Mantra 


433 


130-133. Similarly men devoid of good conduct shall meet 
with fear everywhere. 

O lady of excellent face, people attain Deva-liood and 
sage-hood by observing good cfuiduct. Similarly, by trans- 
gressing good conduct they attain birth in lower and base 
state of society. A person who has eschewed good conduct 
beconle^ despicable. Hence, one who seeks perfe ct aecomplish- 
inent shall scrupulously cling to the good conduct. One who 
is wicked in conduct and activity is sinful. lie is mostly 
unclcau. He defiles perfect knowledge. 

Hence, one* shall assiduously perform the holy rites prescri- 
bed for respective castes and stages in life. 

134-140. One w'ho performs the rites laid dowm for him 
is always niy favourite. In the evening and in the morning he 
shall picicLi^e worship with a deliglitj'd mind. He shall begin 
the rite, clean in mind and body before sunrise and Ix'fore 
suns'et and perform it duly. A brahmin shall not transgress 
Sandh\a due to lust, delusion, fear or covetousness. Since by 
giving up Sandhya prayers, the brahmin falls ofl funn the 
status of brahminhood. 

One .shall not tell lies. Nor .shall one cs^he^c truth. I’hey 
say that truth is Brahman, Hence, untruth defiles the Brahman. 
Tliese are all causes of sins: --viz, untruth, harslmc'ss (in 
sj)eech) , stubboriiiie.ss and back-biting, Not even mentally, 
veibally or physically shall one violate uthero' wives, or take 
away oi hens’ wealth or injure others. 

One shall esc he\\ the cooked rice of a l?)udra, the cooked 
rice that is stale, the Naivedya offering, the iSraddha (parta- 
king of f(jod therein), the cooked rice for the ma.sses and at 
social functions oi served as the doles by the king. The purity 
of the character is based on the purity of food and not by 
means of clay or water. One can attain Siddhi only when 
there is puiity of character. Hence, he should be scrupulous 
about the food he takes. 

141. Even those brahmins who arc the cx[)oundcrs of 
Brahman arc defiled by accepting gifts from their patrons, 
kings, etc. There is no rebirth unto those who arc defiled by 
taking gifts, as unto the seeds that arc heated in fire. 

142. Gift from kings is sinful. It is comparable to poison. 
After realising this at the outset it shall be avoided by a 
learned man as he shall avoid the flesh of a dog. 



434 


Lingapurdna 


143. One shall not take food without taking bath, or 
performing japa or worshipping the fire. One shall not take 
food on the outer side of a leaf. At night one shall not take 
food without a lamp. 

144-145. One shall never take food in a broken pot, in the 
open street, and in the presence of fallen people. One shall 
not take food partly consumed by a Sfidra nor shall one take 
cooked lice along with infants. One shall take in only pure 
food which is unctuous, emollient, consecrated and ins[)Ired 
with mantra^. While taking food one shall remember that it 
is Siva who cats. He shall keep silent and concentrated. 

146. One shall not drink w'ater, sipping standing, through 
folded hands, nor with the left hand or seated on a bed even 
with the right hand. 

147. One shall not resort to the shade of Vibhitaka,’®® 
Arka,’®^ Karaftja’®^ and Snuhi^®® trees, nor shall one stand in the 
shadow of a pillar, lamp post, human beings and other animals. 

148. One shall not go on a long journey by oneself nor 
cross a river with one’s hands; one shall never descend into a 
well nor climb tall trees. 

149. O splendid lady, one shall never perform religious 
actions, japas and other holy rites with the face turned away 
from the sun, fire, 'water, Devas and the preceptors. 

150. One shall not w^arm one’s feet over the fire; one 
shall not touch the hand by means of legs; one shall not 
occupy a lofty place above the fire; one shall never cast 
impurities or ordure into the fire. 

151. One shall never kick the water with the feet; one 
shall never cast the dirt of the limbs into the water. After 
washing the dirt on the banks one shall take one’s bath. 

152. The water shaken off from the tip of the nail or hairs, 
from the garments after bath and from the water pol, is con- 
ducive to misfortune. If one touches it, it is impure. 

153. If a man of deluded mind touches husks and dust 
particles licked up and raised by a goat, dog, donkey, 

760. Vibhitaka — the tree Terminalia Bellcrica. 

761. Arka — the plant Galotropis Gigantea. 

762. Karanja — pertaining to the Karanja tree Pongamia Glabra. 

763. Snuhi — the milk-hedge plant. 



The glory of the five-syllabled Mantra 


435 


or came*) or swept oflTby a bn)oiii it will destroy fortune even 
if it belongs to Visnu. 

154-158. A man ^vho keeps a cat in his house is on a par 
with a low caste person. If a man feeds leading brahmiiis in 
the preseiiv'c of a cal it ‘-haU l)c considered to be similar to 
the act of a Caiidala. No doul)t need be entertained in this 
respect. The wind from the buttocks, the wind from the win- 
nowing basket, the wind coming out (^f the mouths of animals, 
all these coming into contact with a person dispel his merits. 

One shall n vcr perfoi rii japa w^carirg a turban or a coat 
of mail If one is naked v)! one has Joo.sened the knots of hairs, 
or is dirty or is iinnun* or has impure' har'<s. he shall not 
perform japa. He shall not perform japa while ecMi^i'ising with 
others. 

All these an' inimi< ai to japa, ' iz. -anger, anogarice, inebri- 
ation, thirs^, lethargy, spitting, yawning, 'seeing a dog or a 
bcosc man, slumber, and prattling. When these oc< ur one shall 
look at the sun and get purified. 

159-101. Bn the sun the follow ing are meant. 'I’he sun. liie, 
moon, planets, stars and constellations — the se are called lumi- 
naries. When anger, etc. occui one shall perform Acarnana or 
PrAnayama and then conlinue tlic ja}vi. 

One .shall not peitorm japa keepingthc legs stretched. One 
shall not sit in the cock pc^sture the time iapa. Nor '^hall 
one be lying dowui, without sitting on a seat. ’ he icpcater of 
the mantras slnall not perform japa in the open street, or in 
the pie_cnce of the Madras or in a ground Siiiearcd with blood, 
or sitting in a cot. 

lbl?-165. The devotee Hiall mentally think about the 
meaning of mantra. Seated on a cosy seat he shall pei form 
japa j:)crfeetly. He shall have any of the follc3\». ng for a s('at: 
viz., a silk cloth, tiger skin, a cotton ^doth, an upi>er cloth or a 
cotton quilt, a wooden plank nr a paint) ra Icat. The worship 
of the pi et'(']:)tt>r shall b^' performed in all the tlu^c' bandhy«is 
by one who wishes for w’cllarc. who is the* jjrecc]:)tor is also 
Siva. He who is Siva is the preceptor. As is Siva so is the 
learning; as is the IcMrning so is the j)rreeptor. The knowledge 
about Siva is oblainc'cl from the prcecptoi The benefit accrues 
ill accordance witli devotion. lair lady, indeed he (the* pie- 



436 


Liitgapurana 


ceptor)is identical with all Devas; he is identical with all Saktis. 

166-172. The disciple shall bear the behests of his prece- 
ptor on his head ( i. e, he shall obey him) whether he is with or 
without good qualities. He who seeks welfare shall not trans- 
gress, even iiicntally, the behests of the preceptoi . One who 
strictly conforms to the biddings of the preceptor attains the 
wealth of knowledge. Whatever he does in the presence of the 
preceptor shall be done with the pei mission of the preceptor 
viz. — g ling, standing, sleeping, eating, etc. Neither in front of the 
preceptor nor in the presence of the deity shall he be compla- 
cently seated as he pleases, since the preceptor is the lord 
himself and his house is the temple of the lord. If one conies 
into contact with sinners one w ill have downfall due to their 
sins. If one comes into contact with the preceptor one shall 
incur the bcnelit of his holy rites. 

Just as a piece of gold eschews its impurities after coming 
into contact with fire so also a man eschews sins due to his 
contact with the prec eptor. 

Just as the ghee in a pot placed near 6re becomes melted 
so also the sin of a person near the preceptor becomes dissolved. 
Just as the blazing fire burns ordure and lumber so also the 
contented preceptor burns sins by means of the power of his 
mantra. 

0 

173-179. Undoubtedly if the preceptor is satisfied, Bra- 
hma, Visnu, Rudra, Devas and sages are also satisfied and they 
bless him. One shall never infuriate the preceptor physically, 
mentally or verbally. By his wrath are burned the longevity, 
fortune, wisdom and good holy rites. Tin- sacrific es of those 
who infuriate him arc futile. His japas and other observances 
are also futile. No doubt need be entertained in this respect. 
One shall assiduously refrain from making any statement against 
the preceptor. If out of great delusion he speaks it out, be will 
fall into Raurava hell. O fair lady, never should one falsely 
cheat the preceptor mentally, or verbally or physically or mone- 
tarily. If he pioclaims the wicked qualities of his preceptor he 
will have hundred times that wickedness. If he proclaims the 
good qualities he will have the benefit of all good qualities. 
Whether directed or not, he shall always do what is beneficent 
and pleasing to the preceptor. 



The glory of the five-syllabled Mantra 


i37 


180-181. Whether within sight or out of sight of the pre- 
ceptor, one shall do what is beneficent or pleasing to the 
preceptor. If he does anything against him mentally, physically 
or verbally, he goes down and revolves there itself. Hence, he 
should be worshipped and saluted always. 

182-185. The disciple shall speak to the preceptor only 
after getting permission from him evtm when he is neaiby. 
Otherwise he shall not look at him straight in the face. The 
disciple who adheres to all these rules, who is devout, w^ho is 
perpetually engaged in japa and who does everything pleasing 
to his preceptor deserves to utilise the Mantra. 1 shall mention 
the application and the purpose of the Mant* a that has been 
accomplished. If the devotee does not know the inode of appli- 
cation, the mantra become'^ ineffective, 'lhat should be kiu)wn 
ao \ 1 ii;Oga whereby the desiied benefit is put in i oiijunction 
with the activity. It is the benefit of this world as well as of 
the next. The benefit arising out of \"ini\oga is longevity, 
health, the permanence of the body [?] kingdom, ro>al glory, 
perfect knowledge, heaven and sa*' ation. 

18()-TI3. Tlie following liies shall be perlonn(‘(l by 
rc'pealiiig the live-syllaliKd Mantra eleven times: -Pioksana 
^ritualistic spi inkling with wwivr : Ablfneka''" jhlnlion'j ; \gliain- 
aisan<i ( ])raving for forgiveness lor sins ) and tlie tw'o baths-- 
one at dawn and one at day. The intcdli; nt d(‘vol('e shall 
be ( le.in and aittn ^ limbing the mountain shall a ifnlly repeat 
the mantia a bundled thousand tiiiu‘s, or tww) hundred thousand 
times on die banks of a great liver; he \v ill attain long life. 
Ten thousand Ilomasw’ith the follow ing niatei ials of woiship 
aie conducive' to longevity \i/: - The s-prouts of the Duiva 
grass, gingelly sc'eds, Wlni (.'*), (iiKlfKl and (ihutika (? ). The 
wise (h‘Votee shall repeat the )a])a two huiidn'd thousand times 
after n'soi ting to die holy fig tiee. By loueh/ng ihe Asvattha 
liee nil a vSatuida\ the man obtains lone llf\ d he intelligent 
deveUee shall touch tlieA<\altha tice with both the hands on 
Saturdays and lepcat the japa undred and eight times. It 
will clisp'A picnidUnc deuih. Tac/ng the sun unci with the 
mind not dwelling on anything else th(‘ devotee' shall repeat 
the \apa a hundred thousand linus. By perfoiming hundred 
and eight lloimu- evciyday with Aika twigs die devotee is 



438 


Liiigapurana 


liberated from ailments. For suppressing all ailments the man 
shall perform ten thousand sacrilices. By performing sacrifices 
the man shall be free from sickness. The devotee shall repeal 
the mantra hundred and eight times and shall drink water in 
the presence of the sun. Within a month he shall be liberated 
from the gastric trouble. 

194-20 1 a. One shall eat cooked rice and other foodstuffs 
anddi'nk the beverages after inspiring the same with the 
mantra eleven times. Even if it weie poison it shall become 
nectar. Everyday, in the forenoon, the devotee shall perform 
hundred and eight offerings to the fire, repeat the mantra a 
hundred thousand times and worship the sun. He shall attain 
perfect health. The devotee shall fill good pot with river water. 
Touching it he shall repeat the japa ten thousand times. If he 
bathes in that water it becomes an antidote for ailments*. 
Everyday the pure devotee shall repeat the mantra twentyeight 
times and then take food or he shall perform Homa with Palana 
twigs. He will attain perfect health. During the days of lunar or 
solar eclipse the devotee shall be clean and observe fast at the 
outset. For the duration of eclipse he shall with great concentra- 
tion repeat the mantra on the banks of a river flowing into a 
sea and after the eclipse is over he shall repeat the japa, thou- 
sand and eight times and drink the juice of Brahini. He shall 
then attain in this world, good intellect capable of grasping 
all scriptures. His words .shall be superhuman and similar to 
those of goddess Sarasvati. 

201b-202a. If afflicted by evil planets and stars the man 
shall repeat the japa devoutly ten thousand times. By perform- 
ing a thousand and eight Homas, the affliction of the evil planets 
shall be dispelled. 

202b-203a. On seeing evil dreams, the man shall take bath 
and repeat the japa ten thousand times. By performing hund- 
red and eight Homas with ghec, there shall be immediate 
calmness. 

203b-205a. During the solar and lunar eclipses the devotee 
shall duly worship the Lihga. Whatever he may seek, O gentle 
lady, he shall perform ten thousand japas earnestly in the 
presence of the lord. He shall be clean and keep his mind res- 
trained. Undoubtedly that person attains cherished desires. 



The glory of the five-syllabled Mantra 


439 


205b-207a. At tlie advent of ailments of elephants, horses 
and of the kinc in particular the man shall be clean and per- 
form homa with twigs. He shall worship dcvouTly and duly 
repeat the mantra ten thousand times for a month. There will 
certainly be peace among them and they will flourish. 

207b-208a. During upri.Miigs and calamities as well as 
liarassinetit from enemies the devotee shall be clean and per- 
form ten thousand Honias with twigs ol* Palasa. He will have 
peace : and disturbance, if any, will be suppressed. 

2()8b-209a. O gentle lady, one* shall perform this when 
there is harassment from black magic, when the powei of that 
magic shall turn round and afflict the enemy. 

209b-210. In order to create hatred the devotee shall 
perform eight Homas with Viblutaka twigs or with wet blood 
repeating the syllables of the mantia backward^. If the 
devotee smears himself with blood and pci forms the Homa 
with poison it causes hatred among men. 

211. I shall now recount the inode of expiation for the 
atonement of sins. Since the atonement of sins is the cause ol 
enrichment in perfect knowledge, all the holy rites will be futile 
if sins are not properly atoned for. 

212-215. Because knowledge dwindles, therefore sins must 
b(' properly atoned for. () auspicious lady, for the betterment 
of learning and fortune the devotee Dhall take Iia^' lluls ol water 
and, meditating on me (Siva) and repeating the mantra eleven 
times he sh<ill perforin ablution. For the eradication of the sin 
he shall tak(' bath, repeating (he mantra hundred and eight 
times. It has the same benefit as the pilgrimage to all holy 
centres. It is auspicious and it dispels all sins. 11 there is any 
break in the continuity in the Sandhya prayers the man shall 
perform hundnd and eight japas. 

216 He shall not partaxc of the rooked rice touched and 
defiled by pigs, Candalas, wicked people and cocks. If he eats 
it he shall lepeat the japa hundred and eight times. 

217. For the atonement of the sin of brahmin slaughter 
the man shall repeat the mantra thousand million times i.e. 
hundred crores. l"or the expiation of great sins he shall perform 
the japa to the extent of half that number. No doubt need be 
entertained in this respect. 



440 


Lingapurana 


218. It is ordained that in the case of those who are de- 
filed by subsidiary sins, the japa shall extend to half that num- 
ber. For the expiation of other sins one shall repeat the japa 
five thousand times. 

219. The mantra has bearing on the knowledge of the 
x^tman. It is a secret and it illuminates the understanding of 
Siva. He who repeats the mantra uncxcitcdly to the extent of 
five liuridred thousand times shall become Siva himself. 

220-226a. Thereby, O gentle lady, the man attains an easy 
victory over the five vital airs. Hie devotee shall then restrain 
the sense organs with purity and repeat the japa five hundred 
thousand times. Thereby, () lady of excellent face, he will 
have victory over the five sense organs. The man who meditates 
well and who unexcitedly repeats the mantra five hundred 
thousand times attains victory over the five objects of senses. 
The man who devoutly repeats five hundred thousand limes 
the mantra for the fourth time attains victory o\i‘r the five 
elements. O lady of excellent face, he who as>siduoiisly n^strains 
the mind and repeats the mantra four hundred thousand times 
attains mastery over the organs. () lotus-faced lady, b) means 
of two million five hundred thousand japas the man attains 
victory o\Tr the twenty five principles. A man shall earnestly 
repeat the japa ten thousand times at midnight when the wind 
's at a standstill. O beautiful lady, he attains the Siddhi of the 
Brahman by means of this Vrata. 

226b-223. The devotee shall, without lethargy, leprat the 
mantra a hundred thousand times in a filace where tlic wind is 
still and where there is no sound at midnight. Undoubtedly he 
perceives both Siva and Siva. There shall be the destruction 
of darkness along with the bright illumination as of a lamp, 
both within the heart and without. The self- possessed man shall 
repeat the mantra ten thousand times for the achievement of all 
kinds of w^eather. 

229. The devotee shall with purity and devotion repeat 
the mantra ten million times affixed with the BIjas. He shall 
attain Sayujya with me. What else is greater than this ? 

230-231. Thus, the mode and procedure for chanting the 
five-syllabled Mantra has been recounted to you. He who 
reads this and listens to this, attains the greatest goal. He who 



The sacrifice of meditation 


441 


narrates this mode of procedure of the japa of the fivc-syllabled 
mantra to pious brahmins at a divine rite or at the rite per- 
taining to the Pitrs, is honoured in the world of Siva. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYSIX 

The sacrifice of meditation 


The sages said : 

1. The brahmins who have destroyed their sins say that the 

- sacrifice of meditation is better than japa for 
unattached and enlightened persons. 

2. Hence, O Suta, tell us today about the sacrific*' of 
meditation suited for unattached noble souls in detail and with 
all cfToit. 

3-4a. On hearing those words of the noble sages who had 
pci formed the sacrifice of long duration, Suta recounted to 
them what Rudia of universal action’^*^ mentioned after neutra- 
lising the poison Kalakuta'^®^ and entering his cave."^®® 

Suta said’ 

4b-^) The sages of great discipline bowed to f^iva 

whoentcud the cave and seated himself comfortably along 
with Bhavaiu. All of them, then, eulogised Nilakantha, the 
consol t of Uma. 

6. ‘‘O lord, O bull-bannered lord, the terrible poison 

Krdakuta has been neutralised by you. Hence everything has 
been stabilised by you.” 

7 On lieaiing their words, lord Nllalohita, the Atman 
of the Universe, smilingly said to tliose sagc5, Sanandana and 
others. 

76 p Visva-karmana — visvarh karma yasya sah visvakarma tena, 
Rudrena .S 7 . by Rudra of multifarious activities. 

76s. The poison Kalakuta or halahala a product of the churned 
ocean was swallowed by §iva. The blue colour of his neck and his extreme 
ire are the eflects of that poison. 

766. guha— i.e. Meru-guha, the abode of Siva. 



442 


Lingapurdna 


8. “O excellent brahmins, of what consequence is tl.is ? 

I shall mention another more terrible poison. He who nullities 
that poison Js really efficicnl. Of what avail is this ? 

9. What is called Kalakuta is not at all poison when 
compared to worldly existence which is the leal pois(ju. 
Hence* with ali efforts one shall try to dispel that teirihle 
poison. 

10- 1 3. The mundane existence is two-fold"®^ in accordance 
with oik’s rights and duties. In regard to men of ch'lndcd 
minds, the mundane existence is very terrible and buideu- 
some. O sages of good holy rites, creation is caused by 
ignorance due to the defects of malice and attachment.*^®® It is 
certainly due to these, that virtue and evil befall everyone. 
O lirahmins, even in n'gard to things not near at hand,’®® 
the scripture creates desire for them e\cn in the minds of 
good men in the world merely by hearing of it. Ilencf', the 
perceptible w'orld and the world of Vedic tradition"’® and 
rituals both should be eschewed”^ with great eflbrt. He then 
l)ecoincs Viiakta (unattached person) altogether. 

14. That portion of the Vedas which deals with rituals 
IS called scripture, O brahmins. It is the piincipal essence of 
the Vedas. The lienefit of the rites goes to the sages.”^^ 

15. 'rhosc who do not know these things say: — ‘‘Desiic is 
natural”*^ in everyone. The opposite is not seen. It is the 
Veda dial makes them work (for fulfilling such desires 

767. i.c. tainasa and rajasa. 

768. iv-na -ierba ST, desire. 

ragah- visaya-prjtih ST, attachrnen* with the objerts of s'^nses. 
ajsannikrsfe - that which is bc> >niJ the si opc of sense-perception. 

/70. drjtam- a.ivkam ST. pcrU’.iiing *«> thi> world. 

aniisravikain - p«irr-iaukikam .SV*. prrtair.ing lo the woiM beyond. 

771. ^/. disjoins * ISC /a* c bh-igam’ as ‘ucyate abhagaii/ and con- 
strues with ‘konnasu*. i.*\ karmc*'»u abhagin> non-p.nticioador in 

5 T. interprets • here ■n;. tap h> sics ' Hdhy'j^ma-sastra^ is < oiisid< ir*a 'o b* 
superior lo ih'* Vedc*'. 

771a. rslnarii karmanah phalam ; h' re kanaanaL niskama 
karmanah S'T, i.e., pai ticipation in aetivitit.' without the expectation of 
their fruits. 

772. svabhavah—participiirion in activitie^ is natural. Th* Vedas epjoin 
activities such as the performanrt of agnisomiya. Cf. ‘ agnisomiy'un pa.him 
alabheta svargakamah**. 



The sacrijhe oj meditiVjn 


443 


lo i»»»"viituc zrii**n' '--icr wo*;ur; 

iiilt udcci li/F ij »t H(jj*c, ii is iaul diJt ^voildly 

cxi:?tcnct‘ Js caused bv igiujiancc of all tiubodi^ d ^xrsons. 

l/-b!a. 'riu* Dioii I dried up due to Karu au'^’^ oi the 
r*aluie ul other? {:!), Indi\jduals «ndowtd with Kails ( ^) 
aie of three types. 1 liey ait devtad ol pcih'ct kiiu\»ledqc 
due to ignoiance. The three types aie (a) ihosr dLstiucd to 
tali iiiio hell b(‘cause th(‘y commit sin, ' h^ tlujM vlc-uijcd to go 
to heaven l'»era use they pciloiin Tneiuoiious ditds and tin v go 
to htavcu due to the weight of iheii mi iii and (c) a mixtun* of 
th( sc two. 

18b-l4. The living b( ings aic < lassifiec under lour 
heads viz: — Udbhijjas (germinatin'* plint'>), Svtdajas (born 
of swe<‘t i.e gerni'i and woiinsy, Andaia^ (ovipaious being‘s, 
and Jaiayuja ( vivipaious; Ihus tju gn(>ijnt embodied l»eing 
does not get uliel thiough Kaiiiuiii < 

2i) Salvation is not attaint d bv good iiKii thiough lieu 
pio^ciiv, thiougli a< tKjiis^ Ol iliioiigli Atalth"'^ Libi lation 
shall oet Ul onlv lliio'i •!' ilkuiu lau i 11 \Aaiahi'' in the 
worit* thu to die abs< ii t old it niou ixxluui^ . 

21 . Ihus due to ill' hiult 1 »''ii >? aut c and a> a le^Ult of 
v.iiiou Kaiinans, iht* indi idur i ^ d at’npts a bod^ jnn UkmI 
b\ i\ K^*sas'"'' (vt^luies 

22 Maiiv miNeins nu tj hi lHLdb^ tne 'dividual in 
tliL womb, ill iIk vaginal passage, on ilu tailh, lu aedio )d, m 
soil til, in old agt‘ and in dvath. 

y7’. si’inarth inlia vnaKf inlni .S / . 

^j4 lorthos^ \i unatt?a hed ax ti' iti( s .lie not unavoidcxble. Of. 

‘ t'lavMt i t s i bnutaiiaiii nivitli *\i mahil>ili’' Or a twiiM > have no 

hxti'i Poal. (;i Bhat;a *\f loklain « va ti mr. t is'iaj ^ ^rpitainJivare/ 
r ai 1 i p Idblialc saalh* n * t ph^-Ia^T tjn , 

uarmaMi ni ’ ai I’kain.iii S/. 1\ aiic''*^s Lift ^^'cd 

(kai ,\i.iak*i bn on*e ui.tho lu' tiv' ^^o a^ i vatd a fact that 

lodd> Muf' eniaiKip iti )* 

tnvidli ih jivah lit invidivith'al oul is thu fold V-iS 

bi'lnw 

// i tatuidh.. in loi i v\ * s, ( i V i i 

J77 t:i. '/ I .C. . 

770 . sal kausiLim Mia>v'iv] ^llkosJ vukiam SO ' »n I'Jling of sia 

co^clll,^bGf. tTfr^srUTtiOTTl^^^H 

'T <5iT5r*^ fTFf'lonqr II TS^iTfl .fn«FrtTn' 1 



444 


Liugapurdna 


23. O brahmins, if duly pondered over, good men have to 
face only misery through the contact with women and similar 
activities. The miserable try to quell one misery only by 
another misery. 

24. Lust is never quelled by means of enjoyment of plea- 
sures. Just as fire blazes all the more by Havis (ghee offer- 
ing) so also lust is inflamed all the more by indulging into 
plea^ure.’’® 

25-27. Hence, on pondering over, it will be seen that 
there is no happiness unto men even due to coitus. There is 
misery in earning wealth as also in preserving and spending 
it. O excellent brahmins, if we ponder over it, there is 
misery amongst the Pisacas, Raksasas, Yaksas, Gandharvas, in 
the world of the moon, in the w^orld of mercuiy, in the 
w'orld of Prajapati, in the world of the Brahman, in the 
world of Prakrti and Purusa also. O sages of good holy rites, 
there are miseries due to destruction of possessions, dwr to one’s 
possession being excelled by another’s, etc. These cause only 
other miseries. 

28-30. One shall eschew those impure fortunes and 
riches. Hence, O sinless sages of good holy rites, all kinds of 
pleasures are really miseries to the discriminating peivsoii 
in whatever w^ay you view them, viz., eightfold or sixlet'nfold 
or of twentyfour, thirtytwo, fortyeight, fift>six, or sixtyfour 
types. 

31-32. I’he pleasures of the following typt s are und('ubtf - 
dly miseries if pondered over properly even to those yogiiis who 
talk of Brahman: — Parthiva (earthly), Apya (wateiy) Taijasa 
(fiery), Vayavya (gaseous), Vyauma (of the fiimament), 
Manasa (mental), Abhimanika, (bringing pride), Bauddha’*^^ 
(intellectual), Prakrta (pertaining to Prakrti). 

33-37. The attributes (?) of the leaders of the Ganas aic, 
on reflection, causes of misery. In all the worlds thcie is always 
misery in the beginning, in the middle and in the end. ’Fhe 
present ones are miseries, the futuic ones are miseries. (?) In 
the lands defiled by faults, there are various kinds af misciie.s. 

779. Repeated I. 8. 25; 67, 16. 

780. bauddham prakrtam eva ca : the intellectual enjoyment is also 
material. 



The sacrifice of meditation 


445 


(?) Those who consider ignorance as knowledge do not consi- 
der the past events. (?) Just as the medicine is used to dispel 
ailments and not for positive pleasure so also the food taken in 
is intended for dispelling the sickness of hunger and not for 
any positive happiness. In the different seasons, the embo- 
died beings undergo miseries through chillness, heat, wind 
rains, etc. There is no doubt about it; but the ignorant do 
not consider it that way. O excellent sages, even in the hea- 
ven the same thing happens through the destruction, etc. of 
the merit. 

38. Just as the tree whose roots have been ^'ut falls down 
to the ground helplessly so also the living being overwhelmed 
by various kinds of ailments, passion, hatred, fear, ctc.’^“ 

39-'*^ Similarly the heaven-dwHlers fall down to the 
earth due to the destruction of the tree of merit. Even for 
heaven-dwellers who desire for things that cause misery and 
who are richly endowed with pleasures that cause misery, 
there is terrible misery when they fall from that heaven. There 
is definitely misery in the hell due to the fact that even religious 
students resort to it when they do not perform those rites that 
are laid down, O leading sages. 

42. Just as the deer frightened of death and uprooted from 
his habitation docs not obtain sleep so also the n '•^>Ic-souled as- 
cetic engaged in meditation and frightened of ihe worldly 
existence does not obtain slumber. 

43. Unhappiness is seen even in germs, birds, animals, 
deer, elephants and horses. Hence there is great happiness 
unto a man who renounces. 

44. O sages of good holy rites, there is misery unto even 
those officers on duty spread over the whole kalpu who move 
about in aerial chariots, unto Manu and others who take pride 
in their respective positions. 

781. The activities enjoined for the attainment of heavcii are not 
without impurities. For instance, the agniso -ya sacrifice leads to heaven, 
but it is attended by violence {himsd)—ihe slaughter of the animal (Gf. 
agnisomlyam pa^um alabheta) for which the performer of sacrifice suffers 
pain (Gf. I^varakf^na — drstavadanu^ravikah sa hy aviiuddhi-ki^ayatiiaya- 
yuktali— ^A".) ; secondly, heaven is not a permanent abode (Gf. V. 88 below). 

782. As soon as he has exhausted merit the heaven-dweller falls from 

heaven. Gf. l” 



446 


Lingapurdna 


45. Devar and Oaitvas undergo misery due lo their desire 
lor mutual v^onquebt i'vcn kings and Raksai’as in the three 
Gilds under iniser\ 

4b-4R. lu fav t the A’?iama> bring c*bout onlv misery 

or cxhausiioii (srama'l unto die diflVrent caste^ People du nut 
attain the Atm.in dirough Asranias ^ ‘?ta<»es in hie), Vedas, 
yaj'''a‘o. Sainkli^as, ^numerical kmnvledgi ‘ , \iAias hei^ 
sc\ ere }>enanccs. different khids of rhaiitablc gilt^ etc 
But penj le nuh knowledge obtain it. Ilcruo, with all einais 
oiu shall peilonn the Pasupata iiti*. In liu' lioh rite c i Pe* u- 
j>ata, the leerned «!cvotec shall jieipciually lie on hliasinan, 
be^ni^ared \vit}» ashes 

'19-50. The learn* d Jeveiee, li hl\ endowed with the 
kru»wledgc of the five objects and hcxving great atu Mioii n - 
wards the principle ut Si\ a ’^hall adopt th*' voga that causes 
.salvation and deslrov'^ fate and karman and shall I)m oin** 
iuitdligcnt and endowed with the yoga of fr^e olijcc ts."*'' h'liere- 
Inwic attains the ern.1 cl ’uiserv. 1 h^‘ d(^otr*s undM a md tin 
know able b> means of P ita \ idy<V'* arid nv»i by Aoaia \hd’ 
"i-id. Tw \hdva ''topics of knowlf'dge) arc to b' 
kn iw'ii: *^aia jiidAoaia O ' v( cdh*nt Lialuniii , Apara ''onsists 
Rg. ajur^ Sarna anc^ Arharva Ved Sil Kalpa, ..i niir, 
scxiiaritirs, prosody and a trologvejoo c .letib't' A lira ^ i(l\.“ 
Whe' is imperishable is thr Pail is iriip* ic eptll»l(*, in- 
<onipi' hensdde It has no n nuai line a^r, nc)»a^n, iic> c ')* u , 
VO e’^es, no ears, no hands ind no feel O cxc^'llern bidlinuns. it 
is not bom. It has no It is not dc s nl'aMe hv w'ojOs 

55- *d. It has 1^0 G-uch, no form, no tasi n » sine *1 jio 
change, no support, Tl ' poTpetual, omiupK's^nt and all-powe;- 
lui. IL Jt great .md rna'^sive. ( ) hr ihiiiins, it i'. nidiorn and 
identical with cit iccjn^c iousness) ; it is devoid oi Pranas \^N,ital 
ails) ; 't has no iniiid, it is iioii-tmolhcnt and it is devoid cd' 
blood. Ir IS incomprehensible; it is neithci stout nor long; it is 

783. paficartha-yoga-sampannah— It can be interprtted as ‘.iccorn- 
panied by knowledge derived from the practice of the five-syllablcd mantra 
*naiiia^ ^ivayah 

784. para vidya — knowledge of Brahma as taught in xhf‘ Upani^ads, 

785. apara vidya —knowledge of the ritual as taught in the Srauta and 
Cfhya Sutras. 



The sacnjice of meditation 


447 


not excessively clear; it is not sliort; it is impassable; it is bliss; 
it is unswerving; not open; without a second; infinite; not 
pcrceival)Ic, and not covered; Para is identical with the 
Atrnan"*'*^ and not otherwise. 

5!). lint these Para and Apara are not the real. I alone am 
jdeiitual with the univeise; the universe is in me alone. 

00-ul. Everything originates from me, stays within me and 
g^ts diNsolvcd in me; there is nothing different from me. This 
shall be realised mentally, verbally and physically. The devotee 
shall with concentration sec everything: the ‘sat’ (the cxisttmt) 
and the ‘asat’ (the non-existent) , in the Atman. One seeing 
everything in the Atman does not allow the mind to stray tet 
other objects. 

62 On lowering the vision, one shall see the Atman 
stationed in Vitasti above the umMlicus in the heart, the abode 
of the universe. 

63-64. In the middle of this heart is stationed the lotus’*'’ 
with dhanna for its bulbous root and knowledge foi its splen- 
did stalk. The eight accomplishments are its eight petals; 
vairagya (d#*Uichmcnt) is its white pericarj), the quarters aie 
its jjoies filled with the vital airi*. 

65-71. It sees mostly and in due order on being united 
wiui Piaiia, etc. O leading sages, each of lh« veins fNadis) 
carries the ten Pranas (vital airs). Altogether the^ are s^wenty- 
^wo thousand Nadis. The Jagrat (waking stage) is stati- 
oned in the eyes, the svapna (dream stage) m the neck; the 
susupla (sleeping stage) in the heart and turiya (the fourth 
above the three) in the head. The presiding deiry in the 
jigrat state is brahma; in Svapna Visnu; Isvara in Susupta 
and in Turiya Mahesvara. Others say as fi'Uows:— when 
the ptTsori is in full possession of his senst s and organs it is 
calltd Jagrat; when only the four organ*?, mind, intellect, 
ego and eitta function, it is Svapna. O sages of good holy 
rites, when the organs and senses a merged into ine Atman 

786. para vidya anyatha na — auya-prakarena varnitum asakya ST. 
Cf. ‘ yato vaco nivartantc.** 

The realization of Brahma cannot be described in words. 

787. pundarlkam — hrtkamalam ST. the lotus-heart which is the 
abiding place of the mind. 



448 


Litigapurd^a 


it is Susupta. The fourth (Turiya) is different from the organs 
and senses. The greatest Siva who is beyond the fourth is the 
prime cause. 

72-79. The four states Jagrat (wakefulness), Svapna 
(dream), Susupti (slumber) and Turiya (the fourth) have 
been mentioned. I shall now describe the Adhibhautika, 
Adhyatmika and Adhidaivika terms, O leading brahmins. It 
should be known by the learned that all these are I myself. O 
great sages, the Adhyatmika (organic) is said to be fourteen in 
all, viz., the sense organs (five), the organs of action (five) and 
the mind, intellect, ego, and will (four). 

0 excellent sages, the following constitute the Adhibhautika 
( the extraneous matter), viz. — what should be seen, what should 
be heard, what should be smelt, what should be tested, what 
should be touched, what should be thought of, what should be 
understood, what should be taken pride in, what should be 
willed, what should be spoken, what should be grasped, what 
should be traversed, what should be evacuated and what should 
be enjoyed. 

The following fourteen constitute the Adhidaivika (the 
Divine factor), viz. — the sun, quarters, earth, Varuna (water), 
wind, Brahma,^ Rudra, Ksetrajna, Agni, Indra, Visnu, moon, 
lord Mitra and Prajapati. 

80-81. The following are fourteen Na<Jls (tubular vessels), 
viz. — Rajhi, Sudatsana, Jita, Saumya, Mogha, Rudra, Mrta, 
(Amrta), Satya, Madhyama, Nadira, Si^uka, Asura, Krttika 
and Bhasvatl. 

82-87. There are fourteen carrying winds’®® stationed in 
the middle of Na^is : — ^They are Prana, Vyana, Apana, Udana, 
Samana, Vairambha, the important Antaryama, Prabhahjana, 
Kurmaka, Syena, Sveta, Krsna, Anila and Naga. 

1 am the lord present in all these as the great Atman and 
the devotees shall worship me. I am present, O sages of good 
holy rites, in the eyes, in what is to be seen, in the sun, in the 
Nadi, in the Prana, (five types) in the Vijnana, and in ananda 
(bliss), in the heart, in the firmament, and within all these. I 
am the sole Atman, moving within. The lord is ageless, infinite, 
devoid of sorrow, immortal and stable. He is the sole being 

788. vayava^ca caturdaSa — the fourteen vital airs stationed in the 
arteries. 



The sacrifice of meditation 


449 


moving amidst these fourteen types of objects. O brahmins, 
all these merge into him as there is nothing else. 

88. The omniscient Being is only one. There is only one 
lord of all. He is the overlord of all. He is the immanent 
soul of great lustre. 

89. On being worshipped, the eternal lord grants happi- 
ness. O excellent brahmins, if one does not worship him one 
docs not attain happiness. 

90. He is being worshipped by the Vedas and other scrip- 
tures. But this omniscient lord does not go unto them for 
succour. 

91. This visible universe is his Anna"^®® (.food). He does 
not becom(‘ the Anna himself (unto anyone else). Nowhere 
do^ '' :!(;vour Anna guarded by one’s own self. 

02. I am the food taken in by the living beings ever /where. I 
am the knot of the living beings and I bring about all great 
things. I am live-fold Atman divided into several parts. 

93. 1 am the soul of the living beings identical with 
Anna. What is taken in is called Anna. I am the soul of the 
sense-organs identical with Prana ( vital breaths) . I am the soul 
of mental conceptions identical with the mind. 

94. As Soma I am Kalatman (the soul of Time), identi- 
cal with \hjhana (perfect knowledge). As Mahe'a Paramesvara 
I become identical with Ananda ( Bliss). 

95. Thus I am the entire universe and everything is 
stationed in me. I am independent but everything is depend- 
ent on me. This can be understood on pondering over the real 
form of various things. 

96. Even the state of being one (i.e. ekatva) is not prc.sent 


78g. The lord stationed in the subtle body is the source of pleasure 
for others but he has no source of plc2isure for himself. 

79«>. The lord is the source of food for others but he ha. no source 
of food for himself. Gf. Bhagavadgitd: 

3T5 jrrfiFrt ^inF«rcr: i 

5 rr«it'Tiw*n^: 11 

791. paheakosa or pancakancuka of Saiva philosophy constitutes the 
five sheaths of the self-luminous lord. They are the products of avaraua- 
iakti (power of concealment) of Maya (lord*^ power of projection). 



450 


Liiigapurdna 


there"^- as a distinct attribute. Then, how can llicrc be Dvaita 
(duiilily)? So also there is no mortal being. Whence ran there 
be an immortal born of the unborn ? 

97. The Annan is neither Antahprajna (having intellec- 
tual awaieness within) nor Bahihprajha (having ilie inti‘llcctual 
awareness without) noi is He in both ways (Ubha^alaliprajha). 
He is not Prajhanaghana (solid in perfect knowlitlgei noi 
Piajhi (wise being) nor Ajhanapurvaka (having ignoiancc). 

9B-99. Brahman is not one that is known nor one to be 
known. In fact it is Niivana (extinction, Kaivalva, Nihsicyasa. 
Anainaya (devoid of ailmeiits), Arnrta (immortal , Aksara 
imperishable, Brahman, Parama Atman, Paivitpara ^greatei 
than the greatest), Nirvikalpa ^devoid ol doubtful altei natives) , 
Nirabhasa (devoid of fallacious appeal ances), Jnana (know- 
ledge); all these arc synonyni*^’ (f^r peilcrt knowledge) . 

100. When it is pleased and concentrated in a single form 
it is known as Juana (Pcrlect knowledge) . Everything else is 
Ajhana i IgnoraiiLc) . No doubt need be entertained in this 
regard. 

101-104. Pciferl clear knowledge certainly originates from 
contac i with the preceptor. It b uncontaininatcd by lust, hat- 
red, falseliood, anger, pas'^’on, cov^'temsuess and th(' like It 
should be known as the of salvation. Sint c tlu* man 

lids the' impurity r.f ignoiance he is t oiitaminatcd. SaK atirai 
takes place oiily when impurity is d.>pclled and not olluTwise, 
even if one takes a croreof births. Without perfect know h'dge"^'* 
neither merit nor demerit is destroyed. Hence, () most exeelh'nt 
ones among the knowci'' of the Biahinan, pi\u lise kmnvleclge 
aloic' a*, the means of liberation Tt is only by' practi( (' ol per- 
teet knowledge that die inU'llect of imm bceonu's free from 
impui itu s. 

I(r>-109. llenct, one diall always practise ])erf('( i kno\c- 
ledg^' lja\ing llut as tin- foundation and the ultimate troal. O 
leading brahmin., a yogin wIk; is satiated with knowledge 

702. ekatvam api nfisti- The terms ekatva (singlmess), etc., arc 
relative and henc^', they shall be avoided in regard to the exoosnion of 
Brahman. 

703. Gf. “jfianad eva hi kaivalyam’- cited in ST,\ also ‘‘iie jnanan 
na muktih**. 



'I he sacrifice of tneditaiion 


451 


Alone and who has eschewed all contacts with worldly objects 
has no further duty. If he ha^., he is no longer a knowei of 
reahty Neither in this woild nor in the other has he an^ duly,'®** 
since h*' is a hix rated mjuI Ilcme, the knower of Brahman is 
th* knower of the icalily ol oerfee l know ledge and perpetually 
( nrjaged in the practice of j ilect knowledge, he (‘schews the 
piactice of all dulus He olitams peifec t knov ledge alone O 
cxrellcni biahnnns, if oiu wno Lakes pneh in Ins position in 
Veunasrama ' as RialiUiin, ksatiisa, i ic j takes pU \siiic in oihc i 
iJniit^s (otliei tlian Bianinaii; cc'iainl) he is deluded and 
igne JUiit, ever' I lou^h im m>ght ha\t disraicled angci h noi irct 
IS il*. cause ul \\oilcll\ . xist net ond ado^aion ci ph^^'ical 
bi'clu vvoiKih (xj^tcnct 

blniilail), Jn Ilia ^pcih'ct know tin* 
< a oc oi salvitioii. 11 libt i i c d man aui V s m ljiso\vu A^inan. 

i ) leading biah'iiins, the c is no ooubl about this tli.ii wiath 

etc jOcc'ironK vvlicn there i ignoiancc VViath, di light <n\t- 
touMicss, ciciuaon, atc't»an vnUie and evil, all i,() 
' Xv ( lie lit hi JiU in me on ppoi c | uaihidiC') 

Ilk-IM Inerc J c’ iiis> and iiaiii onl\ wlnn dxic is 
b i^v 1 u n< ( , the li ir ue o sli ill cs new \ id\ f Jgncnaiii c ill- 

ii h'n V )iily a' the 'c V <s#li/\v^ \ xb . Iw nu 'ns (f \ id) . 

lo Ul ei \iituc, c tv jieiili, Olnaiuniu- itihcs nc rish 

M lau is lull uiuicd iniihii ' ih the pi k *ii tx ^ lie 

libi 1.0 ' iioiii iiuu ' lUv. ♦ sisl‘ nc He n de' d » 1 ( tnic e 

t\pi in nnseiM . ‘ i i, , < Me adni r hi Jiniiiis die Uie cliialoi 

uu ol ill d't il ilh )iu pt 1 eel kne a Ii d^c 

jj ) IN II I t hiicnvieckv i*' »'uanno b .n • '-oi .u « e ntac » 
w h the pic p* 'I «md ’ o tin uigl u >i t i.M c f \U i ibs- 

mg till t atin\ 'ilia^' tini ai d co . d ^ ll mkipg ax hall 

I rac ti^c i icdlUPion 

7^1 atm'main col vj] nn H ihama luiti puiusali 

Ivlin J 1 asv'i U un iNa ’'iiam anu bam j\mi * 

t*anca(1aii VII. i . 

7.)-,. duhkh.1 tiayd thirtjoUl misery 'i) adhyitmika (ii) adhibh- 
aiitika, b'l) li'id.Uil SI. Vicispati's gloss o.i J'svarakrsna’s 

ufkii] a-k iinka, kai i k i I . 

7m 0. C.iU.rvyuha- four cattgones oi tlu suprtme soul taijasa, Visva, 

Pr.'ijna and Tui n a. 



452 


Lingapurdna 


116. Like fire that burns the dry fuel quickly, the fire of 
knowledge burns sins whether inborn or extraneous or origi- 
nating from bones and speech (i.c. physically and verbally). 

117. There is nothing greater than perfect knowledge for 
the destruction of all sins. One shall always practise perfect 
knowledge after eschewing all attachment to worldly objects. 

118. There is no doubt that all the sins of a Jilanin shall 
perish. Even if he indulges in dalliance he is not affected by sins. 

119-120. As is knowledge so is meditation. Hence, one 
should practise meditation. At the outset meditation is laid 
down as Savisaya (having an object) and then Nirvisaya 
(having no object) . The leading yogin shall practise meditation 
in six ways’***** as follows : — for the duration of two, four, six, ten, 
twelve and sixteen units of time in order. Certainly he shall be 
liberated. 

121-125a. At the outset he meditates on a form as resplen- 
dent as pure gold’***® or like the burning coal without smoke, of 
yellow, red or white colour or having the lustre similar to that 
of a crore of lightning streaks. 

Q^soQ the meditator keeps his mind assiduously stationed in 
the Brahmarandhra (cerebral orifice). He shall remember that 
it (the object of] meditation) is neither white nor black nor 
yellow. He shall thereby become the knower of Brahman. 

He shall be non-violent, truthful in speech, and non-stealer. 
He shall by all means maintain celibacy and avoid gifts. He 
shall be stable in observing holy rites, contented richly endow- 
ed with cleanliness and always engaged in the study of the 
Vedas. He shall be devoted to me and practise meditation, of 
course, as instructed by the preceptor. 

125b- 127a. O excellent brahmins, after fixing his mind, 
the meditator does not know anything else. The yogin does 
not identify himself with anything else. He does not see all 

797. In Saiva system of thought, emphasis is laid upon knowledge 
and meditation. For detail, see Siva-rahasya, section X. 

798. For detail about the varieties of meditation, ibid, section X. 

799. suddha-jambunada. The verse describes the form of the lord in 
the savikalpaka samadhi. Gf. muninaiii jiianadatri ca sadaivopani^ac chruta 
kaivalya-sruti-bodhya iri murtir mama mahesvari — Siva*raha^a cited in ST. 

800. The verse describes the state of the mind in the stage of nirvi- 
kalpaka samadhi. 



The sacrifice of meditation 


453 


round nor smell nor hear anything. He has dissolved him- 
self in his Atman. He does not feel the touch of anything. He 
is then known as having acquired equal taste in everything. 

127b-131a. He shall think in order thus^*^' : — Brahma in 
the mass of earth; Visnu in the principle of water; Kalarudra 
in the principle of Fire; Mahesvara in the principle of \ ayu 
and Siva in firmament. I am lord Pasupati, stationed in eight 
forms. In earth I am lord Saiva.^®“ In waters lord Bhava; I am 
Rudra in fire; Ugra in wind; in firmament, I am Bhiina; in the 
sphere of Sun I am Isana and in lunar disc as Mahadeva. 

131b-137. Everything firm and solid in bodv is spoken of 
as pertaining to the earth; what is liquid in form pertains to 
water; what is called colour belongs to Agni(fire); what moves 
abon* •*. \Vv u (wind) . O excellent brahmins, what appears like 
a hole is the firmament. 

O brahmins, perfect knowledge originating from sound is 
born of firmamcn'; similarly, the' knowledge of what is called 
^‘touch” originates fiom Vayu; that of Rupa (colour; from 
Vahni; O brahmins, what belongs to water is full ot taste; and 
what is called “smell” belongs to the earth. 

Again he shall meditate in order the sun in the light eye; 
the moon in the left eye; the lord in the heart; the priiu iple of 
earth upto tlu‘ knee; the sphere of waUT upto the •"obilicu'- ; the 
priiu’ijjlc of flic upto th'* neck; the pi inciple of w c 1 upto the 
fon^head. Bi'ginning with the lorehcad and ending with the 
tidt is th(' principle called firmament; above the firmament and 
beyond that is the Brahnian called Ilaiiisa. "Jliis first entity 
called Vyonian is stationed in the middle of firmameiu. 

13fl-139. 'Jlicse principles including the first entity Jiva, 
Prakrti, sattva, rajas, tamas, inlellect, the ego, tlu subtle ele- 
ments, the sense-organs, the elements beginning with ether are 
not reaP*^'^. Bccau'''e he stands steady pervading the universe 
he is called Sthaiiu. 

8(»r. The verse describes the method of pahcatattva-devala-dhyana 
in the savikalpaka samadhi. 

802 This refers to the asta-murti-devatadhyana. 

803. na jivah -In fact, meditation, its varieties and ancillaries arc 
all due to mdyd — the lord’s power of projection. Actually, meditation, medi- 
tator and the object iicditated upon are all unreal, vide Pancadasi vi. 35. 



454 


Lhigapurdna 


i 10-142. It is at the behest of Bhava that the frightened 
sun rises, the wind blows and purilies, the niOOii shines, the 
lire blazes, watr rs flow, the earth holds 'iloft and iht- finnament 
gives room. Henec', O urahinins, one shall think about all these. 
O ex<'elicnt brahmins, all tliese are picsidcd over by him alone. 
(Jnc ihall remember Bhava, thinking that he is idcniiral with 
all forms in the univeise. 

M3, lo ihosc who are scorched by the poison of mundane 
existence, the only antidote is the nectar-like perfect knowledge 
and meditation. O excellent brahmins, no other solution has 
been laid down anywhere. 

1 H. Perfect knowledge originates directly from Dharina 
(virtue). Vairagya (detachment) originates from knowledge; 
from Vairagya arises the supreme knowledge that illuminates 
the true meanings of objects. 

M5. O excellent brahmins, he who is endowed with know- 
ledge and detachment attains Yogic Siddhi. One who abides 
by sattva guna attains liberation through yogic siddhi and not 
otherwise. 

146. It is surprising that his unchanging region is covered 
by the words tamas and Avidya. O brahmins, one should adopt 
Sattvasakti (the power of Sattvaguna) and worship f^iva. 

147- 152a. My devotee abides by the sattva guna. He is 
engrossed in my worship. He clings to virtue in every respect. 
He is enthusiastic always. He is endowed with concentration. 
He IS bold and endures all Dvandvas ( mutual ly clashing pairs) . 
He is engaged in the welfare of all living be ings. He is straight- 
forward by nature. He is continuously healthy and normal in 
his mind. He is always S(»ft-naturcd. He is not arrogant. lie is 
intelligent and quiescent. O ext ‘llcnt hialiinins, h< esrluws 
rivalry. He is always desirous ol' liberation. He is conversant 
with virtue. He is marked with the characteristics of the 
supreme soul.**®° He is released from the threefold indebted- 
ness in the previous birth and is meritorious. After becoming 

804. udeti— Gf. bhi^asmad vatah pavatc T4.8.8.i, Tt/. 2.8.1; 

JVrfi.r. 2.4 

Bo'). nia-trayam— a man owe* three debts, viz. — (i) brahmacarya ‘or 
study of the Vedas,’ to the rsis; (ii) sacrilice and worship, to the gods; (iiij 
procreation of the son, to the manes. 



Suppreiiuon of delusion 


155 

an aged brahmin or even otherwise he shall serve his preceptor 
with sincerity^‘*® and avoid hypocritical attitudes. () brahmins, 
he n^aches the heavenly woild and enjoys pleasuies in the 
piopci Older. Then gradually he comes to the sub-continent 
Bliarata and is born as a knowci of Brahinaii. 

l')2b-157. Thanks to the contact with a Jnanin (a man 
with pnfee t knowledge) , he sh.aU acqiiiic perfect knowledge and 
become conversant wuh yoga. O excellent brahmins, this is the 
Older in which one full of impurities attains perfect knowledge. 
Hence, O leading sages, he shall proceed along this path and 
be steady in his holy rite. Eschewing attachment with worldly 
objects he is liberated from the poisoti Kalakuta in the form of 
the worldly existence. Thus, succinctly, 1 have incidentally 
recoi..,^dM you tin* greatness of pcifcrt knowledge that is 
splendid and unswerving. 

O leading sages, this Pas upata yoga meiltioned by Isvaia, 
Jsiva should not be given to anyone and everyone. It should be 
imparted gladly to a yogm who alway clings to Bhasniaii. The 
man who reads this chapter on suppression of worldly existence 
or listens to it certainly attains Sayuj\a with the Brahrnna. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYSEVEN 

SupfPt's^lon nj dtluMun 


Shla iiiid : 

1. Ahcr hearing it, ‘hose sage of '_;rcat inlcllcei Sanal and 
others vv'ho were tiightened, bowed to the Pinaka-bcariiig lord 
Patanif"5vara tvlio was pleased iiid spoke to him «iiiis : 

2. ‘4f it is so, O Mahesvara, how do you sp^^rt abcut with 
the goddess, the daughter of the ll. lavan and enjoy various 
pleasure). T ochoves you to inenli»>n 


fo(». srajdhay? — with faithful devotion. Gf 

^T-!=r. q \ 

•o 

qr-Fg qqf--FT ^ «» 



456 


Lingapurdna 


Suta said : 

3. Thus requested, the Pinaka-bearing lord, Nllalohita 
laughingly glanced at Ambika and spoke to those brahmins 
who stood by after bowing to him. 

4-5. ‘‘I am one who can adopt any body as I choose. 

Hence, I have neither bondage nor liberation. He who is not 
an atent is ignorant. The jiva is Pasu (one in bondage). The 
all-peivading Lord is the enjoyer. Man is only an atom. He who 
is bound by Maya and disallusioiied is the one who is entangled 
ill Karnians. O biahmins, the Atman has neither knowledge nor 
meditation, neither bondage nor liberation. 

6-7. He too who realises this in me has none of these. This 
llaimav^atl is Vidya^®^ and I am Vedya (one who should be 
known). She is Prajha (intellect). She is Sruti and Smrti. She 
is Dhrti (fortitude) stabilized by me. She is the power of know- 
ledge, Kriya (rite) ; and Iccha (will) . She is Ajha (Behest). 
Undoubtedly we arc the two Vidyas. 

8. This Prakrti does not belong to the Jiva. Nor is she a 
Vikrti on consideration. She is Maya. She is not a Vikara 
(efTcct) . She is devoid of clarity of ‘Sat’ and ‘Asat’. 

9. Formerly she originated from my mouth at my behest. 
She is the eternal deity of five faces. She is the highly blessed 
and licstoWs fearlessness on the worlds. 

10-11. After cniering her the Ajfia (behest), I think about 
the welfare ot the woilds, I am Siva. I pervade all along with 
her in tw'enty-sevcn'’’’® forms. O excellent biahmins since 
then begins the work for salvation.” 

Suta said : 

After saying thus, Paiamcsvaia looked at Bhavanl. 

12-13. On seeing him, the unchanging Bhavani removed 
the Maya. Rid of the impurities of Maya those sages looked 
at Paivati, became pleased and were liberated. Hence she is 

807. Cf. ^ ^ I 

o « <0 O 

— Paficadasi VI. 3^3. 

808. esa vidya— this Uma is identical with knowledge or with Primor- 
dial natuie in association with Furusa. 

8og. Cf. p. 3 note. 12. 



Suppression of delusion 


457 


the greatest goal. In fact, there is no difference at all between 
Oma and Sankara.*^® 

14-17. There is no doubt that he is stationed after adopting 
the two forms. When there is a contact with Vijfiana (perfect 
knowledge) at the behest of Paramesthin, liberation occurs 
within a moment and not otherwise, even with crores of holy 
rites. Here the order intended for the living beings is not 
applicable. By the grace of Paramesthin liberation takes 
place in a trice. This is undoubtedly the vow of the lord. The 
creature (i.e. individual soul) is liberated, thanks to the grace 
of Paramesthin even when he is in the womb or when he is 
born, or when he is a boy, a young man or an old man. By the 
grace of the lord of Devas every living being is liberated 
whethf . is oviparous or a plant or one born of sweat. No 
doubt need be entertained in this regard. 

18-22a. He alone is the lord of the worlds; Siva is the cause 
of bondage and liberation. The worlds viz: — Bhuh, Bhuvah, 
Svah, Mahah, Jana, Tapas and Satya the innumerable Cosmic 
Eggs as well as the eight®^^ coverings of the Cosmic Egg con- 
stitute the body of the lord. Mobile and immobile beings who 
reside in the seven continents, on the mountains, in the forests 
and oceans, and in the layers of winds and in other worlds also 
are born from the parts of the lord. Indeed, ho alone is the 
goal unto them all. 

22b-25. Rudra is all. Obeisance unto the noble-souled 
Purusa. This universe, all living beings are born of Rudra. 
This goddess Ambika is the Ajna (behest) of Rudra. Salvation 
is effected through Her. 

Thus, the Siddhas, the heaven-walkers proclaimed with de- 
lighted minds. 

When the lord stands by and glances at them gracefully 
along with Ambika the heaven-walkers attain identity with the 
lord. 


810. In fact Prakrti and Purusa are identical. 

8 11. Seep. 4 note 13 , p. ii.note 18 . 



458 


Lingapurofa 


CHAPTER EIGHTYEIGHT 


Review of paiupata yoga 

The Sages said : — 

1. By what yoga do the good men obtain good attributes ? 
How do the yogins become endowed with Anima and other 
siddhis? O Suta, it behoves you to recount everything in 
detail now. 


Suta said '. — 


2. Henceforth, I shall recount the yoga, extremely diffi- 
cult of access. At the outset, the devotee shall remember the 
eternal deity after fixing him in the mind in five®^^ different 
forms, 

3-4. O excellent brahmins, he shall fix the lotus posture 
accompanied by the moon, sun and fire. It shall be combined 
with the twentysix iSaktis. Thereafter, O brahmins, the devotee 
shall remember the lord, the consort of Uma, in the middle 
first in eight ways, then in sixteen and again in twelve ways. 

5-6. He shall remember the unborn lord of eight cosmic 
bodies,®*® accompanied by eight Saktis, along with them 
Rudras of eight types and then of sixty-four types. Similarly 
all the 8aktis endowed with the eight Gunas are to be remem- 
bered. After obtaining perfect knov’dedge gradually one shall 
adopt this procedure. 

7, The yoga pertaining to Paiupati is one that bestows 
salvation. O brahmins, only he who practices the yoga does 
get the attributes, Anima, etc. and not otheiwise, even through 
crores of holy rites. 

8. There the Aisvarya ol the yogins is said to comprise 

the prup< I or lit I 


«;!• Pf ..e. Saclyoj.Ua and other, 

3- powers pcfsomficd and named Cf. 

mwT enrr Ttft i 

5r«rT ii 

Stva-rahatya — cited in ST. 

814, Sec p, 134 note 241. 



Review of pdSupata yoga 


459 


9-10. Anima (minuteness), Laghima (lightness), Mahima 
(greatness), Prapti (the power of obtaining anything), Pra- 
kamyam (irresistible will); Isitva (lordship) over everything, 
Vafiitva (ability to make others subservient) and Kama- 
vasayita (when everything happens according to one’s desires), 
these are eight types. Th*3 Ai^varya desired by everyone 
should be known as of three types. 

11-15. The three types are Savadya, Niravadya and 
Suksma.What is termed Savadya is of the nature of five elements. 
The function of the Suksma (subtle) is in respect of the sense 
organs, mind and ego. The function is again of the nature 
of five elements (?). The sense-organs, mind, v\ill, intellect and 
ego — the Atman comes into contact with all these. This three- 
fold contact functions only in the subtle things. Again the eight 
attributes are laid down only in the subtle forms. 1 shall men- 
tion their nature as described by the lord and as they are 
known among all living beings of the three worlds. 

16. The Anima, etc. arc self-evident. They are well esta- 
blished everywhere. They are cited as difficult of access to all 
living beings in the three worlds. 

17-19. On attaining the first Aisvarya, the devotee gets 
the power of the yogins. This will make him assume such forms 
that will enable him to cross or float (on water or air). The 
second (Laghima) is known as the attainment x great quick- 
ness (Sighratva) among all living beings. In all the three 
worlds honour among all living beings is due to one's greatness. 
Therefore, the third yoga (i.e. Aisvarya) is called Mahitva 
( = Mahima) in the world. Prapti enables one to mix at one’s 
will and pleasure with all living beings in the three worlds. 

20. By Prakamya the devotee enjoys all desired objects. 
It is through obstruction somewhere that happiness and misery 
are brought about in all living beings in the three worlds. 

21. The knower of the yoga Isitva (sixth Aisvarya) be- 
comes the overlord everywhere in evci, stage. In the thn,c 
worlds consisting of the mobile and immobile beings all the 
living beings become subservient to him. This is Vasitva the 
seventh AUvarya. 

22. Where there is Kamavasayitva (the eighth and highest 
Aisvarya) forms occur and cease to be as the devotee wishes 



460 Lingapurdna 

among all the three worlds consisting of the mobile and im- 
mobile beings. 

23. When all these Siddhis or Aisvaryas are attained, 
sound, touch, taste, smell, colour and the mind, all function or 
cease to function as the devotee wishes. 

24-27. He is neither born nor dies. He is neither cut nor 
pierced He is neither burned nor illusioned. He is neither 
attracted nor afflicted by anything. He does not waste away 
nor does he perish. He is never depressed and he is not at all 
made to change or undergoes change. He is devoid of smell, taste 
and colour, touch or sound. He has no colour or caste. He has 
no tone; everywhere he is without an equal. He enjoys the 
objects of pleasure, but he does not become attached to any. 
Thanks to his being minute, he is extremely subtle. Thanks to 
his being subtle, he is worthy of salvation. 

28. Thanks to salvation, he is all-pervasive. Being all-per- 
vasivc, he is called Purusa. Due to his subtle nature, Purusa is 
stationed in the greatest Aisvarya (prosperity and glory). 

29-30. The Aiivaryas arc said to be subtler and gi cater in 
ascending order all round. After obtaining the excellent yoga 
and the unimpeded Aisvaryas, one shall attain salvation. That is 
the greatest subde goal. O leading sages, the yoga pertaining to 
Pasupati should be known thus. 

31-32. It bestows the benefits of heaven and salvation. It 
is the cause of identity with Siva. Or, one who has no perfect 
knowledge may perform holy rites due to attachments. After 
enjoying Rajasa and Tamasa pleasures he is liberated there 
itself(i.e. in this world). Similarly, he who performs meritorious 
deeds attains the benefit in heaven. 

33-37. But the moment his merits are exhausted the ex- 
cellent man reverts to the mortal world from that abode. Hence 
Brahman is the greatest happiness. Brahman is the best and 
permanent goal. One shall resort to the Brahman alone. 
Brahman alone is the greatest happiness. All yajnas arc mere 
waste of energy and no good results from them. One becomes 
a prey to death by resorting to Yajnas. So liberation is the 
sole happiness. After seeing the divine Purusa of universal 
names with faces all round, the devotee, engaged in medita- 
tion, devoutly engrossed in the principle of the Brahman can- 



Review of paiupata yoga 


461 


not be dislodged even in hundreds of manvantaras. The divine 
Purusa has universal feet, heads and necks. He is lord of the 
universe. He has universal forms (colours) and smell. The 
universe is his garland. He is the lord wearing the universal 
clothes. 

38-41. The rays of the sun fall on the earth but do not 
go back to the sun and reproduce him. 

One can see the lord only through yoga and not by the 
eye — the lord who is the ancient sage, who is subtler than the 
subtlest, who is the chastiser, who is greater than the greatest, 
who is the golden-coloured Purusa without sen^..-organs, who has 
no symbol, who is devoid of attributes, who is perpetual, who is 
sentient, who is present always and everywhere, who is the 
esoruicc of all. Devotees who are purified by Him see the deity 
shining with His splendour and possessing massive refulgence. 
He has neither hands nor feet**® nor belly nor sides nor tongue. 
He is beyond the scope of the sense-organs. He is one and 
very subtle Though He has no eyes, yet He sees; though He 
has no ears yet He hears. He has no intellect; yet there is 
nothing that He does not understand. He knows everything 
but none knows him. So they call him the great and foremost 
Purusa. 

42. The yogins who are in un'on with tlw deity see the 
Prakrti of ail living beings as acetana (insentknt) subtle, all- 
pervasive and habitually giving birth to many effects. 

43. She has hands and feet all round. She has eyes, heads 
and faces all round. She has ears all round. She stands enve- 
loping everything in the world. 

44. One who is endowed with yoga and knows the eternal 
Purusa, the lord of all living beings, never gets disillusioned. 

45. One who meditates on the unchanging, great and 
noble Brahman which is the soul of al! living beings, and 
which is the greatest Atman, does not get disillusioneti. 

46. Just as the wind moving amongst all bodies is per- 
ceptible so also the Puru?a. Because he lies down in the puh®** so 
he is called Purusa [puri sete]. He is too difficult to be grasped. 

815. This verse is found in most of the Upanifads. 

816. puri fete iti puru$ab. puri»liAga-iarire, in the subtle body. 
Purufa is so called because he is stationed in the subtle body. 



462 


Lingapurd^a 


47-48. If one neglects Dharma, that man is born in the 
womb®^^ with the residue of his activities.®^® When a man and 
a woman indulge in intercourse and the semen gets mixed 
with the blood, in due course, the sperm becomes the Ibctus. 

49-52. In due course, the foetus becomes a bubble.®-^® 
Just as the lump of clay assumes some form of an image on 
being wnirled in the wheel and shaped by the potter’s hands 
so also the physical body is evolved, endowed with organic 
matter and filled with vital airs. As long as the external air®‘^® 
does not touch the child in the womb he thinks thus — “when I 
leave off the vaginal passage®^^ I shall resort to Mahesvara and 
worship Mahadeva. The foetus becomes a human being accord- 
ing to the pre-ordained form and age. 

53. Wind originates from the firmament, from wind water 
is evolved; from water originates the vital air and the semen 
is generated and it flourishes through the vital airs. 

54. Thirtythree parts of blood are mixed with fourteen 
parts of semen. When halves of these parts mix together the 
foetus is evolved. 

55. Then the child in the womb is encircled by the five 
vital airs. The child’s form is evolved limb by limb from the 
physical body of the father. 

56. Through the umbilical region the child is sustained 
by the food taken in by the mother, by the liquid drink and by 
the lambatives licked. 

57. For nine months the child undergoes the pain and 

817. brahma-garbha — brahmana-yonau ST. He is born in the 
brahmana caste. Gf. ^uclnam ^rlmatam gehe yogabhrasto ’bhijayate. 

— Bhagavad gild. 

818. avaSistaib karmabhib . 

^ ^sn^lRI II ^P;~ciied in ST. 

819. ^ sT’srir *TTf?r 1 

II Sivagitd — cited in ST. 

820. vaisnavam — the external air which the babe breathes when 
he comes out of the womb. 

821. Cf. 5TT 3 TTcRI: I 



Review of pdiupaia yoga 


463 


strain; his neck is encircled by the umbilical cord. His body is 
curled up as the space within the womb is not sufficient. 

58. After spending nine months in the womb the child 
falls down through the vaginal passage with his head down- 
wards. Then in the course of his life on the earth he commits 
sins and due to these sins he falls into hell after death. 

59. For example, he may fall into the hells of Asipatravana 
and l§almalicchedana. There he may have to suffer being beaten, 
eaten or forced to partake of foeted blood. 

60-Gl. Just as the water becomes sticky and binding to- 
gether when things are cut and thrown in, so -Iso the living 
beings are cut and thrown into the places of torture. They are 
scorched by means of the sins committed by themselves. They 
shall attain misery or happiness according to the residue of 
their actions. 

62. One has to go alone after leaving off all people. One 
has to experience pleasure or pain all alone. Hence, one shall 
perform meritorious rites. 

63. When he starts on his journey after death, none follows 
him as he goes ahead. The action performed by him follows 
him. 

64. They function thus in the realms of Yama. When the 
treatment is against their liking they always grcai. 'oudly. Their 
bodies are dessicated by diversified tortures and s' rrounded by 
torments and agonies. 

65. The practice of what one repeatedly resorts to mentally, 
physically and verbally influences him. Hence, one shall per- 
form auspicious things always. 

66. The uninterrupted scries of previous actions of the 
embodied soul has no beginning ; The individual soul adopts 
six types of terrible worldly existence full of tamaoguna. 

67-71. From human form it adopts the form of cow 
( domestic animal ) ; from that of a • ow, the domestic a.iimal, he 
may become a wild animal; from that of a wild animal he 
may attiin bird-hood; from that the form of a reptile and from 
that he may attain the form of an immobile being. When he 
attains the form of an immobile being it whirls like the wheel 
of the potter there itself till the soul is uplifted. Thus is the 
worldly existent o beginning from human being and ending 



464 


LingapurSffa 


with the immobile being. It should be known as Tamasa. The 
soul revolves there itself. The existence of Brahma, etc. is 
Sattvika worldly existence. The existence of embodied beings 
beginning with Brahma and ending with Pi^aca should be 
known as existing in the heavenly abodes. The existence of 
Brahma is purely of the nature of Sattva, that of the immobile 
being is of the nature of T^asa alone. 

72-75. In the middle of the fourteen abodes, Rajas is 
that which impedes or fixes firmly even as the vital parts of 
the body of the embodied being who is in agony, are being 
cut and pierced. How can the brahmin then remember the 
greatest Brahman ? The worldly existence is prompted by the 
impression and effects of the previous Dharma and accordingly 
human birth is achieved. Hence one shall practise meditation 
always. One shall realise that the zone of the worlds is of four- 
teen types and so shall be frightened of it and begin to practise 
Dharma. Then, he changes and gradually crosses worldly ex- 
istence. 

76. Hence, one shall always be engaged in yoga and 
interested in meditation. He shall meditate on the greatest 
being. He shall so begin the practice of yoga that he sees the 
Atman within himself. 

77-78. He is the waters. He is the greatest light. He is the 
excellent bridge. He is the cause of all living beings by means 
of evolution and combination. He is the permanent one. Hence, 
one shall worship MaheSvara the bridge, the Atman, the fire 
with faces all round, and stationed in the heart of all living 
beings. 

79-84. The devotee shall meditate on Rudra, the lord 
who is stationed within who is embellished by his own Sakti 
who, for the sake of creation, is stationed in a series of eight^^^ 
different forms and who is stationed in the heart by compres- 
sing the fire. With the mind contemplating the fire stationed in 
the heart he shall perform five offerings. He shall drink pure 
water silently once (in the ritualistic way) in the squatting 
position. He shall utter “Prariaya Svaha”. This is the first 

832. The lord is stationed in the heart in the eight-fold way, viz., 
earth, etc., or in tight forms, viz., Bhava, etc., or in eight mortis— VSma- 
deva etc. 



Review of paSupata yoga 


465 


offering. The second offering is for Apana, the third for Vyana, 
the fourth for Udana and the fifth for Santana. After offering 
these severally with the utterance of Svaha, the devotee shall 
partake of the remaining offering as he pleases. He shall drink 
water once again and perform the rite of Acamana. After that 
he shall touch the heart. 

85. He shall perform the rite of satiety with this 
mantra : — “you arc the knot of the vital airs.®*® Rudra is 
Atman. Atman is the destroyer of the subjects. Rudra, indeed, 
is the vital air of the Atman.” 

86-87. At the time of Sraddha he shall per^Drm five offer- 
ings as per injunction: — (1) Indeed, Rudra is embedded in 
Prana (2) Hence, he himself is identical with Prana, (3) One 
periornis the excellent nectar unto Prana and Rudra, (4) O 
Siva, O Isa, enter me, (5) Svaha unto Brahmatman himself. 

88-90. The Homa shall be concluded with the following 
mantras: — You arePurusa. You lie down in the body, in the size 
of the thumb. Isa is the great cause all though based on the 
thumb. May the permanent lord of all the Universe be 
pleased. You are the eldest of all Devas. You are Rudra. For- 
merly you were Indra. You arc soft by nature. May this sacri- 
ficial offering unto you be our food. 

Thus, everything has been mentirned with spcf ial emphasis 
on the attainment of good attributes. 

91-93. The practice of yoga has been formerly mentioned 
by Brahma himself. Thus, the perfect knowleage belonging to 
Pasupati should be known with effort. One shall take bath 
with Bhasman. One shall smear Bhasman. He who reads this, 
listens to this or narrates this to excellent brahmins in divine 
rites or in those of the Pitrs attains the greatest goal. 


823. “Prananaih granthir asi** TA, 10. 3*** 5 Mahan. U. 16.2. 

824. angu9thmatro’yani. TA. 10.38. 1; Mahan. U. 16. 3. 



466 


Lingapurdna 


CHAPTER EIGHTYNINE 

Characteristics of good conduct 


Suta said: 

1 . Henceforth, I shall mention the characteristics of purity 
and gocd conduct. On acting according to it the pure soul 
will attain the highest goal after death. 

2. This has been formerly mentioned by Brahma for the 
welfare of living beings. This is the summary of the implication 
of the Vedas. It is a collection of things expounding the Brah- 
man. 

3. It is conducive to the rise of cleanliness. It is the 
excellent position of the sages. The sage who docs not err in 
this does not come to grief. 

4. Honour and dishonour arc two things which they call 
poison and nectar. Dishonour is nectar and honour is poison. 

5. He, the disciple, shall live with the preceptor for a year 
engaged in the welfare of the preceptor. He shall always be 
unerring in the holy observances and restraints. 

6. After obtaining his permission along with the excellent 
path of knowledge -he shall walk over the earth [i. c. fulfil the 
duties of the mundane existence] without repugnance to 
Dharma. 

7. One shall traverse the path sanctified by the eyes; one 
shall drink the water rendered pure by a cloth (i. e. well- 
filtered) ; one shall speak out words sanctified by truth; one 
shall practise those things that arc purified by the mind.*’-* 

8. If one drinks impure water for a day one incurs that 
sin which a fisherman incurs in the course of six months. 

9. On drinking impure water one shall as expiation 
perform five hundred japas of Aghora mantra and then attain 
purity. 

10. Or he shall worship Siva with elaborate details, such 
as ablution with ghee, etc. Then he shall circumambulate the 
deity three times, when he shall undoubtedly be purified. 

1 1 . The knower of yoga shall not go anywhere to receive 
hospitality as a guest or to partake of Sraddhas and Yajnas. It 


825. Gf. Manusmrti VI. 46. 



Characteristics of good conduct 


467 


is thought that the yogin will be noti-violcnt only in this 
manner. 

12. The intelligent mendicant shall go in for alms to a 
house where all people have taken food but still there is plenty 
of tire without smoke. But he shaH not go to the same house 
every day. 

13. In that case people will insult him and the enemies 
will disgrace and humiliate him. So one shall beg for alms in 
the proper manner. He shall not defile the Dharma oi good 
men. 

14. One shall beg for alms in the houses of vagrant 
mendicants and in the houses situated in the forests. Ihc latter 
shall be better mode of su:>tenance. 

1.5. O brahmins, thereafter he shall go in for alms at the 
places of humble householders w'ho have faith, wdio have 
control over the sense-organs and who are noble-souled scho- 
lars of the Vedas, 

16. Thereafter, he shall go in for aims in the houses ol ihc 
non-dcfilcd and not-fallcn. The practice of hogging lor alms 
trom people of other eastes is eonsidcred the meanest ol all 

modes. • i • i 

17 An^ of the iollowing things can be reccu'ed m the 

form of alms, viz. gruel, butter milk, milk, barley ■ tier, ripe 
fruits and roots, bits of g.ains, oil-eakes and postered tued 


grains. ^ i ^ • 

18 The items of food mentioned by me are loose that m- 

ereasc the accomplishments of the yogins. If they are realised 

tlic alms arc said lo be excellent. r , v 

19. Of these two persons, viz. one wno begs for alms by 
means that are justifiable and the other who, (by way of 
petumcc) drinks a <lrop of water by means ol the tip of the 

darbha grass once in a month, the former excels the latter. 

20 Bhaiksvaisso called bccaus- it removes the .ns of 
one who is afraid of old age, death, rebirth, residence m 

^''“2l^^\hose who are addicted to the regular use of curds 

or milk or those who cause wastage in the individual souls 
all these do not merit even a sixteenth part of one who 

partakes of the alms. 



468 


Lingapurapa 


22. One shall always lie down on Bhasman ; with control 
over the sense-organs he shall beg for alms. He who wishes 
for the greatest abode shall perform the Pasupata vrata. 

23. The rite of Candrayana shall be most excellent for 
all yogins. According to his capacity, the devotee shall per- 
form it once, twice, thrice or four times. 

2‘l. Bhiksus (mendicants) have five vratas, viz: — Asteya 
(non-stealing); Brahmacarya (celibacy); Alobha (non- 
covetousness); Tyaga (renunciation) and Ahithsa (non-vio- 
lence) which is the greatest. 

25. The niyamas (observances and restraints) are the 
following: — akrodha (abstention from anger), guruSu^rusa 
(service to the preceptor), Sauca (cleanliness), aharalaghava 
(lightness of food) and study of the Vedas regularly. 

26. The qualities of the seed, the vagina and bondage 
with the objects — are due to karmans(?). Just as in the case 
of the elephant in the forest so also in regard to men it is laid 
down. 

27. All the sacrificial rites are equal to Devas. But japa 
is superior to sacrificial rites; perfect knowledge is superior to 
meditation ; and meditation, devoid of attachment, is still supe- 
rior to that. When that is acquired, the eternal goal is obtained. 

28. Those persons whose intellects have been purified by 
perfect knowledge say that the following are auspicious 
qualities, viz : — control of the mind, suppression of the sense- 
organs, truthfulness, state of being free from sins, silence, 
straightforwardness in regard to all living beings and the 
knowledge of those objects beyond the scope of the sense- 
organs. 

29. Only a noble soul who has concentration, who is 
devoted to the Brahman, who does not err, who is pure, who 
likes seclusion, and who has conquered the sense-organs shall 
attain this yoga. Thus, say the sages who are devoid of impuri- 
ties and are above censure. 

30. The devotee who has destroyed even the seeds of sins 
by means of this pure path, restrained by the same goad (of 
pure path ) attains the desired places. 

31. Qjiiescent persons engaged in good conduct and 



Characteristics of good conduct 


469 


maintaining their own Dharma conquer all the worlds and 
attain the world of Brahman. 

32. The eternal Dharma has been imparted by Brahma 
himself for the utility of the people. Listen now when I recount 
it to you. 

33. One shall duly perform his duties such as obeisance 
and standing up by way of welcome towards elderly persons 
who have acquired instructions from preceptors and who stri- 
ctly adhere to their routine (i. e. the rules relating to their 
Asrama). 

34. O sages of good holy rites, the brahmin and the prece- 
ptor arc to be honoured by obeisance with eight limbs touch- 
ing th^ 4/ '»id with the following three set aside viz: — head- 
dress, upper garment and footwear and with three circiiinain- 
bulalions. 

35. All elderly persons should be respected. If one wishes 
for excellent Siddhi one shall never break their behests. 

36. One shall avoid all these things: — Taking up iron and 
other metals for .sustenance, living in a desert or unproductive 
soil*^^® and using worthless mantras as means of support, snakc- 
charming^27 ^nd backbiting, flattery^'^^a or scandal. 

37-40. One shall scrupulously avoid deccptioi , stinginess 
in .spending money, censure of others. In the pi :sence of 
preceptors and ciders one shall avoid laughter, haughtiness, 
sportive dalliance and wilfulness. One shall never contradict 
the preceptor; one shall never speak unbecoming words against 
him. One shall scrupulously avoid mentioning things disliked 
by the preceptor and shall not think evil of him. One shall 
never touch these things with one’s foot — the clothes, staff, etc., 
of ascetics, their sandals, garlands, places of sleep [i. e. bed- 
mattress etc.], vessel, shadow and the requisite things of use in 
sacrifices. 

41. O brahmins, one shall scrupulously avoid treachery 

826. bila-k^etram — usarabhumih ST. barren field. 

827. Visa-grahah — visa-yuktasarpadinam manlradina grahanam 
ST. profession of a snake-charmer. It is hazardous as well as degrading. 

827a. Viciambah—anyanukaranam ST. mimicry. 



470 


Ldngapuram 


to the deities and preceptors. If one unwillingly commits it, one 
shall perform ten thousand japas of the Pranava. 

42-43. If he repeats the japas a crore of times he is 
purified from the sins of treachery to the preceptor and the 
deities. For the expiation of great sins, one shall repeat Siva’s 
mantra in accordance with the injunction. If the sinner is, 
otherwise, of good conduct he is purified by half the number of 
japas. O sages of good holy rites, all the Upapatakins (those 
who commit subsidiary sins) get purified by half the number 
of japas. 

44 . A brahmin guilty of the omission of Sandhya prayers 
becomes pure by repeating it thrice. If the daily routine is 
violated, it shall be repeated hundred and one times. 

45. In the following circumstances, one is purified by 
repeating the mantra for thousand times. The instances are: - 
violating agreements, eating forbidden food and speaking 
what should not be spoken. 

46. There is no doubt in this that if one kills birds like 
crows, owls and doves, etc., he is liberated from the sin by 
repeating the mantra hundred and eight times. 

47. The e3{cellent brahmin who knows the truth and has 
lealised Brahman becomes pure merely by remembering the 
deity. No doubt need be entertained in this respect. 

48. There are no expiatory rites nor injunctions regard- 
ing them in the case of the knowers of the Atman. People who 
are conversant with the learning of the brahman are pure 
themselves (because they are engaged) in the welfare of the 
universe. 


49. Those who adhere to yoga and dhyana are stainless 
like gold. They become pure by resorting to Brahmavidya and 
there is no further purification for persons already pure. 

50. One shall avoid turbid water. He shall perform all 
rites by means of waters that have been purified by filtering 
through the pores of a cloth and that do not contain cold foams. 

51-52. One shall avoid waters of these types: — that which 


defective smclJ, colour and (lld( wkictl m 

placts; that winch is <i<>filcd hy itjucI and pebbles, tllC 

watet from puddles, the water mingled with 


sea water 



Characteristics of good conduct 


471 


moss and water that is otherwise defiled. O brahmins, one 
shall perform all rites equipped with the cleanliness of clothes. 

53. One shall perform the rites of obeisance as well as 
service to the preceptors with pure and clean clothes. One 
devoid of cleanliness and purity in clothes is undoubtedly 
impure. 

54. It is desired that the clothes used in divine rites should 
be washed every day. Other clothes should be washed when 
they become dirty. 

55-57. O brahmins, one shall scrupulously eschew the 
clothes worn by others. 

Woollen garments and silken clothes shall be washed by 
means of hard coarse substances. Woven-silk garments should be 
washf'd '"di white mustard seeds. Silk garments called aiiisu- 
pattas shall be washed with bilva fruits. The peculiar type 
of blankets called Kutapas should be washed with soap-berry 
nuts. The cleansing of leather, wickerwork baskets and cane- 
boxes is in the same way as that of clothes. Leading sages who 
know the brahman have mentioned that the cleansing of bark 
garments of all varieties, of the umbrella and of the chowrie 
is like that of clothes. 

5B. Bell metal is purified by Bhasman, iron is purified by 
acid; O brahmins, copper, tin and lead are jlcaned with 
vinegar. 

59. O excellent brahmins, the pots of gold and silver can 
be purified by water. The cleansing of jewels, rock, conch and 
pearls is similar to that of metals. 

60. The purity of excessively polluted things is through 
contact with fire and water. The cleansing of all beverages is 
called Utplavana. 

61. Objects made of grass, wood, etc., are purified by 
sprinkling them with sacred water. The purity of Sruk and 
Sruva (the sacrificial plate and ladle j is through hot w.iter. 

62. The cleansing of the uter* ds of yajnas, that of the 
mortar and pestle and the purification of those made of horn, 
bone, wood and ivory is by means of poring. 

63. O highly blessed ones, sprinkling is the means of puri- 
fication of compact solid bodies; if the things arc disjointed 

they shall be severally cleansed. 



472 


Lingapura^ 


64. If a portion of a heap of grains not eaten, is defiled 
that portion is removed and the remaining part is sprinkled 
with Kusa grass-water. 

65. It is desirable that vegetables, roots and fruits are 
purified like grains. The house is purified by sweeping and 
scrubbing. A mud-pot is purified by heating it over fire. 

66. The floor can be cleansed by scraping, digging, bed- 
aubing, sweeping, sprinkling and by tethering cows over it. 

67-68. The water stagnating over the surface of lands 
becomes pure if a cow drinks from there and quenches its 
thirst, but filth should not spread over it along with foul smell, 
taste and colour. 

The calf is purified in a spring; and the bird by throwing 
a fruit at it. During sexual intercourse the mouth of the wife 
is pure for the loving householder. 

69. The excellent knower of Dharmas shall sprinkle with 
KuSa grass water, the cloth manually washed by a washerman 
duly, and then take it for use. 

70. Merchandise spread in accordance with the division 
of castes and stages of life is pure. Things taken out of mines 
are naturally pure. A hound is pifre when it catches lujld of 
a deer. 

71. All these are pure even when they come into contact 
with the body, viz. — shadow, drops of water, brahmins, flies 
etc., dust, ground, wind and fire, O excellent brahmins. 

72. O brahmins, even when one is pure, one shall perform 
the acamana rite after sleeping, taking food, sneezing, drinking 
and spitting. At the beginning of the study of the Vedas and 
on similar occasions one shall perform the acamana rite. 

73. If the drops of water fall on the feet while others per- 
form the acamana rite they shall be known as earthly things. 
One shall not become impure thereby. 

74-75. After sexual intercourse and after touching a fallen 
man, cocks, pig, crows, dog, camel, donkey, post, can(^ala and 
others, one becomes pure, just by a bath. One shall not touch 
a woman in her monthly course, a woman after delivery and a 
i§udra woman. 



Characteristics of good conduct 


473 


76. One defiled by pollution after birth or death shall 
not touch their dust. If he touches he shall be pure by taking 
bath. 

77. O Sages of good holy rites, the following persons are not 
defiled by pollution — ascetics, forest-dwellers, religious students, 
life-long celibates, kings and rulers of provinces. 

78. Only when there are impediments in their tasks, do 
kings, sages and brahmins who have fallen become impure and 
not otherwise. 

79-80. The Asauca of the brahmins is upto the collection 
of bones after cremation and they are purified merely b\ taking 
bath. Similarly for those who are initiated in the sacrifice. It 
has mentioned by the sell-born deity that for those who 

had performed sacrifices the pollution is for i>ne day. Then for 
those who have studied their respective branches of the Vedas 
it is for four days. 

81. O excellent brahmins, kinsmen do not have pollution 
due to birth or death beyond three days (if they hear of the 
birth or death) after the eleventh day. 

82. If one is present at the time of death one is purified 
merely by taking bath. If the fact of death is known after 
three seasons (i.c. six months)**-** the pollution : r one day. 

83-84. If the fact of death is known before sc' en years**‘^® 
the pollution is for three days and beyond that for the brah- 
mins, it is for ten days. The pollution due to oirth is for the 
first day in the case of the father. O sages, in the case of the 
mother it is for ten days. If the fact is known after three 
years,***® the purity is attained by bath by the father as well as 
by kinsmen. 

85. If the fact is known after eight years®^^ the kinsmen 
become pure within a day. O sages of good hoiy rites, if the fact 

828. rtu-trayad arvak— before three stasons, i. e. before six months, 
if the deceased is not six months old. Editor. 

829. arvak sapta-varsat — if the deceased is not seven yean old. 
Editor. 

830. arvak sapta-varsat -if the deceased is not seven years old. 
Editor. 

831. asfabdat' if the deceased is not eight years old. Editor. 



474 Lingapurdna 

is known after twelve years®^^a or beyond that, the ladies will 
have pollution for three days. 

86. Sapindata (the state of being kinsman by way of 
offering the funeral rice balls) recedes in the seventh genera- 
tion. If the ten days immediately after death have elapsed, one 
shall be impure for three days. 

87. The brahmin beyond that period or after a year has 
elai)sed, becomes pure merely by taking bath. 

88. If one touches a dead body, one becomes pure after 
three days. It is for the sake of Dharma that ablution is enjoin- 
ed in regard to the persons who cremate the dead body. If he 
is not a relative he need take bath alone. 

89. If one follows the dead body, one becomes pure by 
taking \ 3 ath and drinking ghee. When the preceptor dies, or when 
a vcdic-scholar passes away, pollution remains for three days.*^^^ 

90-92. O brahmins, if maternal uncles and their wives ct 
brothers die, if kings and rulers die, the people become pure 
immediately. O excellent brahmins, the pollution of the Ksa- 
triyas is for twelve days. A crowned king need not observe 
pollution if his kinsmen die J.i battle. A \’aisya becomes pure 
in fifteen days. A Sudra becomes pure within a month. 

Thus, the excellent mode of puiification has been described 
to you in brief. 

93. Ascetics do not have to observe pollution accruing from 
birth or death. 

O brahmins, 1 shall now Mention another impurity, i.c., the 
monthly menstrual discharge <'1 the women. 

94. Due to the nature ot the yaga, in the Krta age, ladies 
gave birth but once, 'flic blessed ones repaired to the forests 
along with their wives like the Kurus. 

95. O sages ol good holy riles, the arrangement regarding 
the castes and stages of life began ever since the Tieta yuga. 

slrisu if th<^ marri* <l woman who has not complf'ted twelfth 
year dies (in her faihrr’s houst*). Cf. 

Af^?i:purana — cited in ST, 

O 

832. paksini—a night with the two days enclosing it. Gf. 

— titrd by V.S. Apt* Tfu. 

practical Sanskrit-En^lnh Diclhuaiy, p. 5^7. 

833. Kuravah — Kuruva.-siyah ST. the residents of Kuru varsa. 



Characteristics of good conduct 


475 


This arrangement is observed only in the southern sub-continent 
of Bharata and not in the other. 

96. Dharma is observed in the following continents and 
sub-coiitinentSj viz. Mahavita,®**^ Suvita,®®^ Jambudvipa®®® and 
its eight other sub-continen^3, and Sakadvipa,®®" etc. and in 
Bharata. ®'^® 

97-99. In Krta yuga, the sustenance of people was from 
taking liquids; in Treta yuga from domestic trees. But this was 
discontinued during the subsequent ages. The same occurred in 
regard to the untimely intercourse, during the menstrual dis- 
charge, due to lust of men. O Brahmins, so barley and other 
plants of the village and forest as well as the fourteen types of 
mcdic'nal herbs were cultivated untimely and destroyed, as in 
the case oi sexual intercourse during the menstrual period due 
to the passion of men. 

100. Hence, one shall assiduously avoid conversing with a 
woman in her monthly course. On the first day, she has to be 
avoided like a candala woman. 

101-102. O brahmins, on the second day, she is to be treat- 
ed like a woman who has slain a brahmin. On the third day,®**® 
she has hall that sinful nature. O sages of good holy rites, she 
shall take bath on the fourth day.®^® She shall then be pure 
within half a month. From the sixteenth day onwards the 
women shall observe cleanliness in regard to passing of urine. 

103. If the menstrual discharge continues she cannot be 
touched for five days.®**^ As far as twenty days she is defiled by 
tlie menstrual discharge and remains untouchable. 

034. Mahavita see p. 20G note 323. 

G'?'"). Suvita- -not identifiable. 

B36. Jambudvipa, see p, 189 note 292a. 

837. ST. does not construe ‘as^su’ with ‘sfika-dvipadisu’ but takes 
It with ‘kimpurustdisu* which it supplies since it does not occur in the 
verse. It explains ‘saka-dvipadisu* along with plaksadvipantikesu, on the 
authority of Linga. I. 48. 48. 

838. Bharata, sec p. 186 note 289. 20a note 318. 

o i9* titiv.i hni on th<* third day of i.iCnstruation she is as impure as 
the washerwoman: ‘titlye rajaki prokta’- cited in ST. 

r. p). She bc( omes pure on the fourth day: ‘bhartuh suddha caturthe- 
hui’ - in S 7 . 

J^!. If her menses do not stop after three days she remains imjmrc 
for fix o nights. But Apastamba considers her to be impure so long as her 
menses ( oiitiiiiie: 

??rr-T 1 

T 3 r% 11 



476 


Lingapurena 


104-107. A woman in her monthly course shall avoid bath, 
toilet, singing, crying, laughing, going in vehicles, applying 
collyrium, playing dice, applying unguents, sleeping during 
the daytime, washing the teeth, sexual intercourse, worship of 
deities whether mental, verbal or physical as well as bowing 
down. A woman in her monthly course shall avoid touching 
anothet woman in her monthly course and talking to her also. 
She shall assiduously avoid changing her garments. A woman 
in her monthly course shall not touch another man after her 
bath. 

108. She shall look at the brilliant sun and drink Brahma- 
kurca or Pancagavya or milk for self purification. 

109-110. The husband shall not indulge in sexual inter- 
course on the fourth night after the monthly discharge has 
started. If he indulges thus, the child born will be short-li\cd. 
The son born of this sexual contact will be devoid of learning, 
depraved, deviating from the observance of holy rites, violating 
the chastity of other men’s wives and immersed in the ocean of 
penury. The woman should be appi cached on the fifth night 
if he seeks a daughter. 

111. If the blood is predominant, the child will be a girl; 
if the semen is predominant the child will be a boy; if both are 
equal the child will be an eunuch; if the sexual intercourse is 
on the fifth night the child will be a girl. 

112. The blessed lady shall be approached on the sixth 
night; she will be the mother of a good son. The son will be 
excessively brilliant and he will remain dutiful as a son. 

113. The word Pum means “hell” and they say that hell 
is miserable. She will give birth to a son who will save his 
parents from Pum (i.e. hell).®** 

1 14. The husband who seeks a daughter shall approach 
her on the seventh night. She will give birth to a daughter.®*’ 
If approached on the eighth night she will give birth to a 
son equipped with everything. 

1 15. He who seeks a daughter shall approach his wife on 

842. Cf. IX. 138. 

843. saiva prasuyate — Bandhya bhavati ST. she becomes barren. 
ST. quotes Nirnaya-sindhu in support of his view: “saptamyam apraja 
yosit.” But this meaning is not borne out by the text. 



Characteristics of good conduct 


477 


the ninth night ; if approached on the tenth night a scholarly 
son will be born; if approached on the eleventh night she will 
give birth to a girl as before.®** 

116-117. II approached on the twelfth night she will give 
birth to a son who is conversant with the principle of Oharma 
and who will observe the holy rites laid down in Srutis and 
Sniriis. If approached on the thirteenth night she will give birth 
to a sluggish girl who will bring about mixture of castes. Hence, 
one shall assiduously avoid her on that night. If he approaches 
her on the fourteenth night she will be the mother of a son. 

118-122. If approached on the fifteenth niglu she will give 
birth to a virtuous daughter; if approached on the sixteenth 
night she will give birth to a son who will be a master of per- 
fect knowledge. 

If at the time of the sexual intercouree the air passes 
through the left side cf the woman she will give birth to a 
daughter; if it passes through the right side she will give birth 
to a boy. The time of sexual intercouise shall be free from the 
influence of evil planets. At the time mentioned thus the hus- 
band shall remain clean and approach the pure and smiling 
wife joyously. 

Thus, in the context of collecting together virtuous rites of 
the ascetics, the good conduct of all living bei».;s has been 
recounted to you. 

The pure man who reads this discourse on the good conduct 
or listens to it or narrates this to the brahmins who have des- 
troyed their sins will attain the world of lord Brahma and 
rejoice along with the lord. 


844. Construe ‘purvat’ with the following veise. i. e. dvadasyam 
uurvavat (=panditavat) dharma-tattvajnam (sutam prasQte) . 



478 


Lingapurd^a 


CHAPTER NINETY 

The expiatory rites of the ascetics 


Suta said : — 

1. Henceforth, I shall mention decisively the mode of 
expiation by ascetics. This is recounted by Siva and it makes 
adequate atonement for the sins of ascetics. 

2. Sins are of three types: those originating from 
speech, mind and body. It is by these that the universe is en- 
compassed always, by day and by night. 

3. ^‘Without activities the world cannot be sustained even 
for a moment”, says the sacred Sruti. It is the only instrument 
that is conducive to longevity and sustenance. 

4. It is only to the unerring that the yoga becomes acc(‘ssi- 
ble. Indeed, yoga is the greatest strength. There is no otlier 
auspicious thing for men that is greater than yoga. 

5-7. Hence, learned men endowed with virtue praise yoga. 
They shall conquer (ignorance) by knowledge and attain 
excellent aisvarya. After seeing the greatest being infeiior to 
none, the self-possessed ones will attain that region. There are 
main and subsidiary holy rites to be observed by the mendi- 
cants (Bhiksusj. Expiatory rites are also laid down for \iolating 
any of them. 

By carnally approaching a woman the mendicant incurs 
sin and for that the following expiatory rit^ is mentioned. 

8. He shall perform Pranayama and ol)serve the rite 
Santapana.^*^ Then with great concentration and attention at 
the end, he shall perform the Krcchra”^** rite in accordance 
with the direction. 

Again the Bhiksu shall return to the hermiuge and 
perform the lite alcrtfully. Learned men say that a viitunus 
lalschood docs not injuie one. Still it should not be pursued. 
Us mere context is terrible. Tlic expiatoiy rite is fasting Vv)v' a 
night and a day and a hundred Pranayamas. 

s.iniapanam --a rigid prjianre; < f. Afanu. ii. '2rj; also MUdkmrd 
on Y&juavalk>a (prayasc itta) . 

846. ST. supplies prajapatyam with krcchram. For detail st( n le 
note 62. > 1 • 4.) 



The expiatory rites of the ascetics 


479 


1 1 . Evil utterance and discussion shall not be pursued by 
an ascetic desirous of attaining Dharma. Thieving shall not be 
indulged in even when he is in great distress. 

12-13. uti says that there is no evil greater than stealing. 
What is mentioned as ^‘stealing” is a great violence that is 
inseparable from it. What is named “wealth” constitutes the 
external vital airs (Pranas). Hence, he who takes away the 
wealth of anyone really takes away the vital airs of that person. 

14-13. A person who is wicked in mind becomes one who 
has transgressed the bounds of good conduct by doing so (i.c. 
by stealing). He becomes one who has fallen down from his 
holy rite. He shall repent for it again and again and perform 
the rite of Candrayana®^^ for a year in accordance with the 
injuK.tlWil^ laid down in scriptures. So says Sruti. At the 
end of the year he shall eliminate all his sins. The Bhiksu shall 
then alcrtfully repent and perform the rites. 

16- 17a. The Bhiksu shall abstain from injury to all living 
beings mentally, verbally and physicrily. If the Bhik .511 injures 
animals and worms even unwittingly he shall perform the rite 
of Krcchratikrcchra or Candrayana. 

17b-18a. If, on seeing a woman, the ascetic were to have 
involuntary emission of semen due to his weakness, he shall 
observe sixteen pranayamas. 

18b- 19a. Now the expiatory rite of a brahn in who ha$ 
seminal emission during the day time, is laid down. He shall 
observe fast for three nights and perform hundred pranayamas. 

19b-20a. If he has nocturnal emission he shall take a 
clean bath and have twelve Dharanas. O brahmins, by means 
ot the pranayama, one becomes a pure soul and free from sins. 

20b-21. The following arc forbidden foodstuifs for ascetics 
viz. — alms from a single bouse every day, honey, wine, flesh 
(meat\ uncooked lord as well as salt itself. Expiatory rites arc 
laid down iov violating anyone of these. 

22-23. He is freed from that sjn by the observance of 
Prajaj)atya and Krechra. In regard to other transgressions 
whether mental, verbal or physical he shall consult good men 
and perform what they lay down. 


847. Candrayana : See p. 45 note 61. 



480 


LiAgapurdtfa 


24. One shall view a lump of clay and gold alike and par- 
form the rites. He shall be pure and clean. He shall have 
great concentration and attention in regard to all living beings. 
By living thus he attains that stable, unchanging and great 
abode from where he is not born again. 


CHAPTER NINETYONE 

Portentous phenomena 

1. Henceforth, I shall mention the Aristas (the phenomena 
that indicate misfortune and even death); understand them. 
It is by means of this special knowledge that the yogins visua- 
lise death. 

2. He who is not able to see Arundhati (a constellation 
among the Pleiades) Dhruva (Pole star), the shadow of the 
moon and the Mahapatha (Milky Way) shall not live more 
than a year. 

J. He who sees the sun without rays and the fire with 
rays will not live beyond the eleventh month. 

4. He who dreams that he vomits, passes urine and eva- 
cuates stools in the form of gold and silver shall not live full 
ten months thereafter. 

5. He who sees a gold-coloured tree, the Gandharva city, 
(i.e. the hallucination of an imaginary city), ghosts and spirits 
shall live only for nine months. 

6. He who becomes stout or lean all of a sudden, i.e., he 
who thus moves away from his nature shall live only for eight 
months. 

7. He whose footprint appears split in front or behind 
in the dust or in mud lives only up to seven months. 

8. If a crow, or a dove, or a vulture or any other bird of 
prey perches on one’s head, one shall not survive six months. 

9. He who goes in the company of lows of crows or of a 
dust storm, he who sees his own shadow in a deformed state shall 
live only for four or five months. 



Portentous phenomena 


481 


10. He who sees lightning in a spot that is not the sky and 
the lightning in the southern direction or he who sees the rain- 
bow in the water shall live for only one or two months. 

11. If one is not able to see oneself either in water or in 
the mirror or if he sees it devoid of the head he will not live 
beyond a month. 

12. If the body emits the odour of a dead body or of fat, 
his death is imminent. He will not live beyond a fortnight. 

13. If immediately after the bath the heart appears to 
dry up or smoke is seen coming out of the head, he will not 
live even for ten days. 

14. If the bursting wind pierces the vital parts, if the 
hairs do not stand on their ends on being sprinkled with 
water, his deaih is imminent. 

15. If one dreams of going towards the southern 
diicction in a chariot to which monkeys and bears are yoked, 
and sings and dances in the meantime, it should be known that 
death is imminent. 

16. If in the dream, a singing dark-complexioned woman 
who wears black clothes leads a person to the southern direc- 
tion he will not live long. 

17. If a man secs a slit in his own neck in thf' dream, or 
dreams of a naked sramana (Buddhist recluse) know that 
death is imminent. 

18. ‘The person sinks into the ocean of mire upto the head . 
On seeing a dream like this, he ceases to live immediately. 

ly. A person who secs ashes, burning coal, hairs, dry 
river, and serpents in dream does not live for ten days 
thereafter. 

20. He who is beaten in dream by dark-complexioned 
hideous persons with arms lifted up or hit by <tones, ceases to 
live immediately. 

21. If jackals howl directly at a , erson early in the mor- 
ning, at sunrise, that person’s days are numbered. 

22. If the heart is excessively pained immediately after 
the bath and there is a morbid sensitiveness in the teeth one 
can say that he is sure to die. 

2‘3. If a person is extremely frightened whether at night 



482 Lingapurana 

or during daytime and he is unable to perceive the smell of 
the lamp one shall know that death is imminent. 

24. If one sees the rainbow at night or the cluster of 
stars during the day and is unable to see himself in the eyes 
of others, he ceases to live. 

25. If one of the eyes begins to water, if the cars are dis- 
lodged and if the nose becomes bent in dream the man is 
sure to die soon. 

26. If the tongue becomes black and rough, if the face be- 
comes red like lotus, and if the cheeks develop red fleshy 
swelling, his death is imminent. 

27. If a man with dishevelled hair were to come face to 
face in the southern direction, singing, laugliing and dancing, 
his life ends with that. 

28. If the body is frequently pale, white in colour with the 
lustre of white clouds or like white mustard his dcatli is 
imminent. 

29. If one dreams that camels and donkeys are yoked to 
chariots they are inauspicious. If the chariot is seen going 
towards the southern direction he will cease to live. 

30-3 1 . The following dreams indicate that death is im- 
minent: — Any two, of the previous portents occurring simultane- 
ously, not hearing noise in the car, not seeing lustre in the eye, 
falling into a pit, inability to rise up from the pit and closing 
of a door. 

32. These are signs of imminent death: The eyes are turned 
upwards, they arc not .steady, they arc red, they revolve, there 
is dryness in the mouth, there is a hole in the umbilicus and 
the urine is excessively hot. The person is indeed in difficulties. 

33. Whether during day or night if a person i.s directly 
killed but he does not see the murderer his life is extinct. He 
will cease to live. 

3-1. If at the end of a dream, a man sees that he enters 
fire and docs not remember it at all, his life ends with that. 

3.5. If a man secs his own white blanket as a black one, in 
the course of the dream or as a red one, his death is imminent. 

36. I f the portents arc indicated in the body and that 
time of deatli has arrived, the inUdligcnt man shall eschew 
sorrow and dejection and treat it with itidiirercnce. 



Portentous phenomena 


483 


37-39. With cleanliness and purity he shall set off in the 
direction of east or north. He shall sit in a steady level ground 
in a secluded spot devoid of creatures. He shall sit facing the 
east or the north and perform the rite of acamana. He shall sit 
in the posture of Svastika and bow to MaheSvara. The body, 
the head and the neck shall be erect like a lamp in a wind- 
less spot. He shall be steady without flickering. He shall not 
look at anything else while practising Dharana (Retention) . 

40-43. 'I’hc knower of scriptures shall practise yoga in the 
spot facing the north-east. He shall restrain lust, doubt, pleasure, 
happiness and misery mentally and only concent-aie on clean 
meditation. He shall meditate on the nose, tongue, eyes, skin, 
ears and mind. He shall retain them in the intellcet and chest. 
After j cajiLing the time and actions he shall retain these parts 
of the body in the groups perpetually. This retention of the 
twelve parts of the body is called yogadharana. The man shall 
perform hundred or fifty such Dharanas on the head. 

44-45. If he becomes exhausted due to the practice of 
Dhfirana, the wind begins to function upwards. He shall fill 
the body with the wind along with the Orhkara. The yogin 
identifying himself with Orhkara shall merge himself in imperi- 
shable being. He shall become imperishable thus. 

Henceforth, 1 shall mention the characteristic^ of the attain- 
ment of Oiiikara. 

46. This should be known as having three Matras (units), 
the consonant in it is the deity. The first Matra is Vidyuti 
(pertaining to lightning). The second is TamasI [having 
Tamo-Guna]. 

47. The third is Nirguna (devoid of attributes) . It covers 
up the imperishable Being. It should be known cs Gandharl 
too, because it originates from the Gandhara note (the third of 
the seven primary notes of Indian Gamut) . 

48. When the Oihkara that is uttered recedes to the head 
the devotee feels the touch of the mi mg ant. 

49-52. The yogin identical with the Orhkara becomes identi- 
cal with the imperishable Being. Pranava is the bow, Atman is 
the arrow and Brahman is the target. It should be pierced by 
one who docs not err. He shall be concentrated therein as in 
regard to the arrow. The single-syllabled word Om is hidden in 



484 


Lingapurd^a 


the cavity. The Omkara is identical with the three worlds, the 
three Vedas, the three sacrificial fires, the three steps of Vi§nu, 
the three scriptures, viz. — Rk, Samans and Yajurmantras. It 
should be known that they are really the three and a half 
Matras. The yogin who utters it attains identity with the deity. 

53. The letter “A” should be known as Aksara (Imperish- 
able) ; the letter “U” is then along with it. Including the letter 
‘*M”, Oihkara becomes one with three Matras. 

54. The letter “A” is the Bhurloka; the letter “U” is 
Bhuvarloka, the letter “M” is Svarloka. 

55. The Om represents the three worlds. Its head is the 
Heaven. All the worlds constitute its limbs (body). Its feet are 
constituted by Brahmaloka. 

56. Rudra’s world is the foot of the Matra, Siva’s region is 
devoid of Matras (i.e. above them) . It is with this special 
knowledge that, that region is worshipped. 

57. Hence, the devotee shall be interested in meditation. 
Indeed that imperishable Being devoid of Matr^, should be 
assiduously worshipped by one who wishes for permanent 
happiness. 

58-59. The first Matra is a short, the next one is long; 
the third Matra is^luta (prolated vowel). These Matras should 
be known in their proper order. They are to be retained only 
as long as it is possible. 

60. He who always meditates on the sense-organs, mind 
and intellect in the Atman and listens to even half a Matra 
shall attain its benefit. 

61. Thanks to that Matra, one attains tlie merit which a 
person attains by a horse-sacrifice every month, continuing it 
for a hundred years. 

62. Neither by a severe penance nor by sacrifices with 
plenty of gifts can that merit be obtained which is perfectly 
obtained by means of the Matra. 

63. The householder yogins shall practise only that 
Matra which is taught as Pluta (Prolated Vowel) . 

64. This Matra alone comprises the eightfold Ai^varya 
beginning with Anima.^^ Hence, O brahmins, be in commu- 
nion with it. 


848. Atjtimi, etc. Gf. p. 134 note 241. 



Portentous phenomena 


485 


65. O brahmins, he who knows and realises the Atman 
obtains everything. He shall be endowed with yoga.®*® He shall 
be pure. He shall subdue the sense-organs. He shall control them. 

66. Hence, the learned man shall contemplate the Atman 
by means of the yoga pertaining to Pasupati. Those who know 
the Atman are certainly pure beings. 

67. It is through the knowledge of yoga that the brahmin, 
thinker on spiritual topics, attains the Rk, Saman, Yajur 
mantras, in fact all the Vedas and the Upanisads. 

68. He becomes identical with all Devas and devoid of all 
elements. He gets rid of the necessity of passing through wombs 
and attains the perpetual region. 

69. as the ripe fruit falls off the tree on being tossed 
about by the wind, so also sin perishes by the grace of Rudra. 

70. Where the obeisance to Rudra yields the benefits of all 
Karinans, one shall not attain those benefits through the obei- 
sance to the other deities. 

71-72. Hence, the yogin shall worship Mahes vara repeat- 
ing the Pranava twice. He who enlarges the scope of the Vedas 
ten times more by elaborating the Vedic texts shall meditate 
and then forsake the body. He uplifts three generations and 
attains Sayujja salvation with Siva. 

73-76. Or after seeing any evil poitent and wl.^ n the time 
of death has arrived the man shall go to Avimuktesvara in 
Varanasi and perform the expiatory rite. Somehow the man 
shall abandon his body there when, O leading brahmins, he 
is liberated. The man may abandon his body on the mountain, 
Sriparvata.®®® He attains identity with Siva. No doubt need be 
entertained in this regard. Avimukta is a greatest shrine always 
bestowing salvation on the creatures. The intelligent man 
shall resort to it always especially when death is imminent. 


849. ST. defines ‘yoga-jnanam' as yoga-yuktam jnanam’ i. e. know- 
ledge joined with meditation. Yoga is the means for the attainment of right 
or perfect knowledge *yogo hi jhana-sadhanam.* 

850. Sriparvata— See p. 381 note 678. 



486 


Lingapuraiia 


CHAPTER NINETYTWO 

Glory of Sriiaila 


The sages said : 

1-2. O suta of great intellect, if Varanasi is so meritori- 
ous 11 behoves you to recount its greatness to us now. We are 
eager to hear in detail the excellent greatness of this holy 
centre Avimukta. 

Suta Said : 

3. I shall succinctly mention the glory of Avimukta, of 
Varanasi in the manner in which lord Bhava had narrated it. 

4. O leading brahmins, even in hundreds and crores of 
years it cannot be mentioned in detail by me or by the noble 
Brahma. 

5-6. Formerly, after his marriage, Sankara, Nilalohita start- 
ed from the peak of the Himavan in the company of the goddess 
the daughter of the Himavan, and the leading Ganas. After 
reaching Varanasi Sankara showed his Lihga Avimuktesvara and 
began to stay there. 

7-8. One can become an ascetic in the following places, 
viz., Varanasi, Kuruksetra,®®^ Sriparvata, Mahalaya,®^^ Tuhgcs- 
vara,®®® and Kedara.®®^ But if one performs the yoga of Pasupali 
perfectly for a day, one becomes an ascetic. Hence, one shall 
eschew everything and perform the Pasupata yoga. 

9. One shall stay there in the garden of the Lord. There 
is an excellent garden of Sarva at that place. Rudra created 
mentally a splendid mansion also. 

10. The lord accompanied by Nandin pointed out that 
divine excellent garden to the daughter of the Himavan. 

11. Sankara Paramesana, Bhava mentioned to her the 
greatness of this holy centre Avimukta just for hei pleasure. 

851, Kuruk^etra — See p. 381 note 683. 

832. Mah^aya— • Sec p. 95 note 113. 

^53 • Tunges vara — not \ dcntifiable. 

854. Kedara — See p. 381 note 681. 



Glory of Sriiaila 


487 


12. The garden was rendered beautiful by the different 
clusters of trees in full bloom. It was very charming due to the 
spreading creepers, the Priyahgu plants with growing flowers, 
and the Kctaka plants in full bloom though covered with 
thorns. 

13. It was overspread with clusters of the Tamala trees. 
It was strewn with plenty of fragrant Bakula flowers all round. 
Hundreds of As oka and Punnaga trees were in full bloom, 
Swanns of bees hovered round the flowers. 

14. In some places the garden was resonant with the birds, 
Sarasas (Indian cranes), Cakravakas (Ruddy geese) and 
the intoxicated excellent Datyuhas (water-crows) all round* 
These h. 4 q were embellished by means of the pollen dust of 
the full-blown lotuses. They were chirping every moment. 

15. In some places the excellent garden was resonant 
with the crowing sound of the peacocks; in some places it 
was resonant with the cackling sound of the Karandava ducks; 
in some places the garden was rendered noisy by the swarms 
of the inebriate bees accompanied by their bee-mates equally 
agitated due to intoxication. 

16. It abounded in charming and fragrant flowers. In 
some places it was full of Sahakara (mango) tre'"'^ with fresh 
sprouts; some places (in the garden) were hidden Vy Tilaka 
trees encircled by creepers. The Vidyadharas, Siddhas and 
Caranas sang in some places in the garden. 

1 7 . The garden contained groups of Apsarases engaged in 
dance. It was resorted to by different kinds of delighted birds. 
It was lesonant with the sound of the Harita pigeons. It 
abounded in birds whose minds were excited due to the 
roaring sound of the lord of beasts. 

18. In some pUices it abounded in fragianl bunches of 
flowcis and sprouts of the Darbha grass plucked by the deer. 
In some places it was embellished by .akes and ponds aboun- 
ding m different ('harming full-blown lotuses. 

ly. The garden was charming by the grace of the blue- 
necked peacocks hiding amidst the clusters of branches. It was 
resonant with the sounds ^'manating from the exuberant birds. 
The intoxicated bee. lay hidden amidst the branches of the 



488 


Lingapura^a 


trees in full bloom. The tall branches of those trees were ren- 
dered more splendid due to the lustre of the fresh sprouts. 

20. In some places the beautiful creepers were chewed by 
the ladies of the Kimpurusa clan who walked in the garden 
in their elegant slow gait. In some places the beautiful trees 
were embraced by the creepers. 

21. (?) The beautiful tops of the frees touc hed the clouds. 
The pigeons and doves sat on these tops and made a cooing 
noise. The tips of the trees had beautiful white forms that 
captivated the minds. The flowers that were scattered by these 
pigeons from tree lops disturbed the swans (in the lakes 
below). The garden was rendered charming by several groups 
of divine beings. 

22. It contained number of garden lakes with full-blown 
lilies and lotuses spreading far and wide and these brightened 
up the path leading to the shrine of lord Siva. The place was 
covered with dilFerent hedges and branches in combination 
with wonderful rows of flowers in the middle of the path.s. 

23. The borderlands of the garden were brightened up by 
charming Asoka trees with lofty tops and with their tall bran- 
ches stooping down due to the weight of branches of the flowers. 
There were swings on either side of these trees and the songs 
of the birds resting therein caused pleasure to the ears. At 
night these trees in full bloom became indistinguishable from 
the Tilaka trees in bloom, thanks to the lustre of the moon. 
Herds of deer lay under the cool shade of the trees, some 
sleeping and some awake. Some of these deer had completely 
nibbled the tips of the Durva grass. 

24. The clear waters of the lakes were spreading out due 
to the moving lotuses which were set in motion by the wind 
from the fluttering of the wings of swans. Flocks of peacocks 
danced elegantly on seeing the plantain trees on the banks of 
these lakes set in motion by the waters coming to their roots. 
The lands in some places appeared beautiful due to the eyelets 
on the feathers strewn on the ground from the tails of these 
peacocks. In these spots, inebriate pigeons and doves of the 
species called “Harita” lurked leisurely and rejoiced. 

25. In some places the spots were beautified by the 
Sarahga (flamingo) birds. Some places were covered with 



489 


Glory of Sriiaila 

heaps of flowers of variegated colour. At other places the 
delighted Kinnara ladies played sweet songs on their lutes and 
danced. 

26. The trees thickly growing there harboured the resi- 
dences of the sages beneath them, with flowers strewn around. 
In sonic places the garden contained a lot of Jack trees, tall and 
spreading all lound, with fruits glowing from their very' 
bottom. 

27. The garden looked charming and resonant with the 
sounds of the golden anklets of the Siddhas ami the Siddha 
women resorting to the grottos of Atimuktaka creepers in full 
bloom. The bees eagerly hovered round the bunches of flowers 
of the rl •’-Tiling Priyahgu trees. Swarms of bees imbibed honey 
from the flowers of the mango and Kadamba trees. 

28. The garden which bestows salvation on embodied 
beings looked charming with the water in the ponds gently 
shaken by the breeze and strewn with clusters of flowens. The 
fascinating hedges with bees humming therein beautified the 
garden. Herds of doves which got suddenly frightened by the 
gusts of wind took shelter within the thickets there. 

29. The garden was heightened in beauty by the charm- 
ing Tilaka trees as brindled as clusters of " ''on’s rays; 
by the Aioka trees resembling saffron of the variou' 'ypes such 
as Sindura, Kumkuina and Kusumbha and by Karnikara 
trees having the lustre of gold. These trees had 1 irge spreading 
branches and were in full bloom with plenty of flowers. 

30. The ground was covered with flowers of various 
colours. In some place's they had the lustre of powdered col- 
lyrium ; in some places they resembled coral and in ■'ther places 
they were like gold. 

31. Hundreds of birds chirped on the Pimnaga trees. 
The red Asoka trees bent down due to the weight of bunches 
of flowers. There were rest houses on he charming outsKirts of 
the garden and they dispelled fatigue. The bees danced spor- 
tively on the full-blown lotuses. 

32. Accompanied by the daughter of the mountain with 
snow-clad peaks, as well as by the friendly leaders of Ganas 
who were intoxicated, delighted, and well nourished with food, 
lord Siva, the riuer of all the worlds, thus pointed out the 



490 Lingapuram 

extremely charming and extensive garden of trees of diverse 
kinds, to the goddess. 

33. With divine ornaments evolved out of the most auspi- 
cious flowers of the forest, Siva decorated the divine goddess 
who was present in the garden. The daughter of the snow- 
capped mountain also devoutly embellished Siva the lord of 
Devas with divine flowers that were exceedingly auspicious and 
beautiful. 

34. After seeing the extremely charming garden, after 
worshipping the lord worthy of being worshipped by the 
leaders of the gods and after bowing down to the lord who was 
accompanied by the leading Ganas, Nandin and others the 
goddess spoke to the lord. 

The exalted goddess said". 

35. O lord, the garden equipped with excessive lustre has 
been seen by me. It behoves you now to recount all the quali- 
ties of this holy centre. 

36. O lord of Devas, O bull-emblemed lord it behoves you 
now' to recount the glory of this holy centre, Avimukta in 
every respect. 

Suta said’. 

37. O hearing those words of the goddess the excellent 
lord, the lord of Devas smelt her lotus-like face. Then he 
laughingly spoke to her. 

The lord said: 

38. This extremely mysterious holy centre of mine, viz. 
Varanasi is the hidden cause of the liberation of all creatures. 

39. O fair lady, many Siddhas have adopted my Vrata 
in this holy centre. They have taken up different types of 
Lihgas and they always desire my world. 

40-41. They are saintly souls one with the supreme spirit. 
They have conquered their sense-organs. They practise the 
greatest yoga in this garden abounding in different trees and 
birds and embellished by lakes abounding in lotus and lily 
flowers. This holy place is always resorted to by Apsarases and 
Gandharvas. 

42-43. Why this residence appeals to me, listen. One 



Glory of SriSaila 


491 


whose mind is fixed in me, one who is devoted to me, one who 
has always dedicated his holy rites to me does not attain 
liberation anywhere else in the same manner as here. O fair 
lady, a creature that dies here becomes competent to attain 
salvation. 

44-47. This great and divine city of mine is the most mys- 
terious of all mysterious places. Brahma, Siddhas and others 
who arc desirous of liberation know this. The goal in me is 
the greatest one. Hence, this holy centre will never be aban- 
doned by me nor has it been eschewed by me. TMs holy centre, 
therefore, is known as Avimukta.®^^ Absolution is not obtained 
by taking dip in Naimisa,®®* Kuruksetra,®®’ Gahgadvara®®® 
and ^®®® nor byresorting to these. But it is obtained 

here. Hence, this excels all those holy centres. 

48. Liberation may be achieved either at Prayaga or here, 
thanks to my adopting them. This Avimukta is more auspicious 
than even Prayaga which is the foremost of all holy centres. 

49. Truthfulness is the esoteric principle underlying vir- 
tue; self-control is the esoteric principle underlying salvation: 
but excellent learned men do not know the esoteric principle 
underlying holy centres and sacred waters. 

50. Taking food, sleeping, sporting and pert^ rming dif- 
ferent activities as one pleases, one shall cast off on ^'s vital airs 
in Avimukta. The creature is then competent to achieve libera- 
tion. 

51. For men it is better to commit thousands of sins and 
court Pisacahood than to become Indra in thousands of births 
without resorting to the city of Kaii. 

52. Hence, Avimukta should be resorted to for achieving 
salvation. It is here that Jaigisavya®®® of great penance attained 
Siddhi. 

53. The excellent cave of Jaigisavya is purified, thanks to 

855. Avimukta— See p, 117 note 198. For a difierent interpretation 
of the name, see verse 143 of this chapter. 

856. Naimi^a — See p. 1 note 4. 

857. Kuruksetra See p. 381 note 683. 

858’ GaAgadvara — Sec p. 93 note 107. 

859. Pu^kara— p. 381 note 685. 

860. Jaigi$avyah -an ancient sage (named along with Asita Devala), 
Mbh. ii. ix, xii. There is a lihga Jaigisavyesvara in Var^)a8i. 



492 Lingapurd^a 

the glory of this holy centre and by means of devotion to me. 
It is considered to be the abode of yogins. 

54. They always meditate upon me at this place. I'hc 
yogic fire shines brilliantly here. They attain the greatest 
salvation which is inaccessible even to Devas. 

55. Here itself, salvation is attained by the sages who 
have the unmanifest for their symbols and who know the basic 
tenets. It is difficult of access anywhere else. 

56. To them I expound the excellent glory of the yogic 
practice, the Sayujya type of salvation of the Atman as well as 
the desired abode. 

57. Kubera**^ dedicated his holy rites to me at this holy 
centre. It is by having recourse to this holy centre that he 
attained the leadership of the Ganas. 

58. Sarhvarta®®® who is yet to be born will be my devotee. 
O fair lady, propitiating me here alone he will attain excellent 
perfection. 

59. The yogin sage Vyasa,®*® son of ParaSara, will be 
performing here a great penance. He will be my devotee and 
he will inaugurate the institution of the Vedas. 

60-61. O lotus-eyed lady, that leading sage will be spoi- 
ting about in this holy centre. Brahma along with the divine 
sages, Visnu, Sun, Indra and all other noble-souled heaven- 
dwellers do worship me here, O lady of good holy rites. 

62. Other divine yogins, noble souls in disguise, worship 
me here always with their minds not turning to anything else. 

63. Even a man whose mind is attracted by mundane 
affairs and who has eschewed interest in religious piety may 
not be reborn in this world if he dies at this holy centre. 

64. But those who are bold and free from ego, who main- 
tain the Sattva Guna, who have conquered their sense-organs, 

86 1 . Kubera — also named Vai^rava^a. He is of deformed body (Ku- 
bera) , having three legs and only eight teeth. He is regarded as the son of 
Visravas by I^aviija. He is represented as the god of riches and treasure. He 
is the regent of the northern quarter, the chief of the Yak;as and a friend of 
Rudra. 

862. Sariivarta — a muni and legislator. There are references to 
Saihvarta-smrti and Brhat-saihvarta-smrti in smrti works. 

863 . Vyasa — Sec p. 2 note 6. 



Glot y of Sriiaila 


493 


who maintain holy rites and who have eschewed unholy ones 
— all these have their emotional attachment to me. 

65. Resorting to me, all the intelligent persons devoid of 
attachment have attained salvation here due to my favour, O 
lady of holy rites. 

66. Thanks to my favour, O lady of holy rites, one attains 
salvation easily here itself which a yogin might attain in the 
course of thousand births. 

67. This holy centre Goprek^ka has been formerly esta- 
blished by Brahma. O excellent lady, see the divine abode 
Kailasa here. 

68. Going to Gopreksaka the man shall visit me here. 
Thereby, he avoids evil mishaps and is released forthwith from 
sii.-. 

69. The great holy Tlrtha named Kapilahrada has been 
made here by Brahma. This Tirtha, evolved out of the milk 
from the udders of cows, is extremely holy and sacred. 

70. Here I am known as th'i bull-bannered lord. O 
gentle lady, I am present here as seen by you. 

71-72. See the deep pool of water here made by Brahma. 
It is named Bhadratoya (having auspicious waters). O gentle 
lady, I have been propitiated in this place by all Devas saying 
“Be subdued, C) lord” and I became calm. ] have been 
brought by Brahma Paramesthin and installed ht. . 

73. I was seized by Visnu from Brahma and re-installed 
by him. Then Visnu was addressed by Brahma with a dejected 
mind. 

74. “This Lihga has been brought by me. Wherefore have 
you installed it.” Visnu then said to Brahma, with anger evident 
in his face. 

75. “My dev'jtion to lord Rudra is extremely great and 
noble. Although the Lihga has been installed by me it will be 
known after your name.” 

76. Therefore, I have occupieo this place by the name of 
Hiranyagarbha. Man shall visit this lord of Devas and attain 
my world thereby. 

77. Thereafter, Brahma who was equipped with the 
greatest devotion once again duly installed this auspicious 
Lihga of mine. 



494 


Lingapura^a 


78. I am known here as Svarlinesvara (the lord who has 
merged into the heaven). I have come here voluntarily. A 
man who gives up his life here is not reborn anywhere. 

79-80. That goal is not attained by any one else. It is what 
is known as the goal of yogins. In this place a haughty pow »•- 
ful Daitya who was a thorn to Devas, was killed by me after 
assumin)?f the form of a tiger. I am perpetually settled here and 
am well known as VyaghreSvara (Tiger-Lord) . 

81-82. By visiting Vyaghresvara one will avoid courting 
disaster. There were two Daitya.s Utpala®®'* and Vidala®*® who 
were, as ordained by Brahma previously, destined to be killed 
by a lady. They were therefore killed by you in a battle with, a 
ball contemptuously thrown at them. Their bodies have occu- 
pied this place. 

83. It was here that I came and settled at the outset along 
with the leaders of the Ganas. Hence, this is the greatest abode 
of mine. Its vision is conducive to merit. 

84. These Lihgas have been installed all round by Devas. 
Hence, by visiting the lord in Lihgas man shall invariably be a 
Gana when he dies. 

85-86. Realising that this place is pleasing and beneficial 
to me a Lihga has been established by your father Himavan, 
the king of mountains. It is known as Saile^vara. May this be 
seen with respect. O gentle lady, by visiting this no men shall 
court disaster or become wretched. 

87. O gentle lady, this river Varuna is holy. It liberates 
one from sins. It embellishes this holy centre and becomes 
united with the Ganges. 

88. An excellent Lihga has been installed by Brahma at 
this confluence. It is known in the world as Sahgamesvara, 
(lord of the confluence) . 

89. If a man shall become pure taking his bath at the 
confluence of the divine river and then worship Sahgame^a 
whence need he fear rebirth ? 

90. I consider this great holy centre as the exalted abode 
of the yogins. I am self-born in the centre of this holy spot 
occupying the acme of the same. 

864. Utpala and Vidala — two daityas who were killed by ^iva. 

865. Varuna — a sacred river which joins the Ganges at Kail and has 
given name to V&ranasl. 



Glory of Sriiaila 


495 


91-92. It is glorified by all Dcvas and Asuras as Madhya- 
mesvara (Lord of the centre) . Indeed .this is the abode of 
iSiddhas who observe the holy rites pertaining to me. It is the 
abode of yogins desirous of salvation and of those who are 
it.tercsted in the path of knowledge. By visiting this Madhya- 
mesfina one will not bevail one’s birth. 

9j- 94. This Lihga has been installed by Sukra the son of 
Bhrgu. It is named !§ukresvara and is worshipped by all the 
iSiddhas and immortal beings. By visiting this deity the man 
who has self-control is immediately liberated from all sins. 
The creature that dies here is not reborn in the world. 

95-99. Formerly, an Asura who was a thorn to Devas assumed 
the form of a jackal. The jackal was not capable of being caught 
by others as he had acquired boons from Brahma. O daughter 
of lliiiiav he was killed by me here and so I am called 
Jambukesa even today. I am known as such bowed to by 
Devas and Asuras. By visiting this lord of Devas one shall 
attain all cherished desires. These Lihgas have been installed 
by the planets beginning with Sukra. See these sacred Lihgas 
that bestow all cherished desires. Thus, O Parvati, these 
sacred Lihgas wherein I reside have been recounted. Listen 
to another esoteric secret of mine in this holy centre. This 
is glorified as extending to four Krosas in every direction. 

100-101. O lady of charming features, t)^i\ place exten- 
ding to a yojana bestows immortality after ith. Know, 
that, by visiting me stationed in the Mahalaya mountain and 
in Kedara, one attains the state of being a Grna. Salvation is 
obtained in this place. That liberation is excellent since one 
attains the headship of Ganas. 

102. O lady of excellent face, this Avimukta is known 
as the most sacred holy centre greater than even Mahalaya, 
Kedara and Madhyama. 

103. These holy centres are sacred in the Bhurloka (earth) 

: — viz. Kedara, Madhyama Ksetra and the holy spot Maha- 
laya. This Avimukta is more sacre:." ♦^han all these. 

104. Ever since these worlds have been created, this 
auspicious holy centre has never been abandoned by me. Hence 
it became Avimukta (un-abandoned).**®^a 

865a. For a different interpretation of the name, see p. 498 143, 



496 


Lingapurd^ 


105. By visiting the Lihga named Avimuktesvara the 
man is immediately liberated from sins. He is liberated from 
the bondages of jiva. 

106-108. By visiting all these holy centrus, viz: — !^aile§a, 
SahgameSa, Svarlina, Madhyame^vara, Hiranyagarbha, Gopr- 
eksa, Vrsadhvaja Upa.<anta Siva (?) the deity residing in 
Jyesthastbana, Sukresvara, Vyaghresa and Jambuke^vara 
a man is not born again in the world which is the ocean of 
misery. 

Suta said: 

After saying thus, Mahadeva surveyed all the quarters. 

109. When Mahesvara the lord of Devas stopped after 
surveying, that place suddenly became blazing as it were. 

110-114. Then hundreds of Siddhas who were devotees 
of Pa^upati, who were white by being bathed in ashes, who 
were great souls devoted to Mahesvara and who invariably obs- 
erved holy rites came there and bowed down to Mahesvara. They 
then observed the lord of the yogas and adopted Dhyanayoga 
(path of meditation) assiduously. They took to the support of 
the Atman and stationed themselves as though they would 
merge into Mahesvara. Even as they stood by, the consort of 
Unia, the lord of t)evas, the lord Purusa assumed the greatest 
of his physical forms. He stood as though towards the close 
of the worlds in order to make the entire universe present 
in one place. With hairs standing on their ends due to her 
delight, the daughter of the lord of the mountains could not 
look at the lord of the universe who had assumed the greatest 
of his physical forms. 

115-118. Then she understood that that form which had 
not been seen before was stationed in Prakrti, and so ParameS- 
vari adopted the form of the Prakrti by means of yoga. Then 
she could see the form of the noble soul. Then the yogins 
engaged in the meditation of merging (laya) entered the 
heart of the Purusa. They burnt all the seeds of mundane 
existence by remembering the splendid Bija of the five-syllabled 
Mantra. Then the Lord established his divine and holy form 
which dispels all sins and which had been revealed formerly 
in this Nilalohita image. 

119-121. On seeing him, the daughter of the mountains 



Glory of Srisaila 


497 


had horripilation all over the body. She bowed down to his 
feet and eulogised him. Then she said: -“O lord, who are 
these ?” Then the most excellent one among Devas spoke to 
the gentle lady, the daughter of the lord of the mountains. 

The lord said: 

These are the best of brahiniiis who possess devotion to me 
and wlio lesort to my vrata by practising all yogas that they 
have learnt. C) beautiful lady, thanks to the greatness of this 
Jioly (entie arid tluur devotion to iTie, they are blessed by me 
tliioiigh this pludtal loitu in the etmiSv* ( ^*a single birth. 

122*127 flitue, this g!(Mt lioly eentie is*e.soited l*'» by 
Brahma and otliers, by leading bTahiiuni' well-versfd in the 
Vedic learning and by aseelics of gr(Mt aceomplishments. 
O godtie." the deity is vv^otshipped a; Varanasi on die eighth 
and foin(<‘enth day in both the fortnights every month. [i is 
partic ularly worshipped on solar and lunar eclipse days, es[>e- 
(ially in the montli of Kartlika, during all full moon and new 
moon days, and during equinoctial md ‘?ol.titial liansil*. All 
the Tiiihas of the earth resort to the holy C/anga llowuig north 
at Varanasi, the Ganga that flowed out r>l n»y matted hairs, 
the Gaiiga that is the daughter of your father Hirnavan the 
king of mountains, the Ganga tliat is slationrd in tlif‘ holy 
abode and flows towaids saered onqrtei'' alw ' - O lad> of 
excellent face, what arc these Tlrthas ? Listen. 

128-133. Th(\se Tlrthas accompanied by hundreds of 
Tlrthas flow through Kuruksetra, Pu.skara, Naimisa, Prayaga 
where there is plenty of water, ctiid Drumaksetra O 
fair lady, they flow through all the holy centres ail round. 
The deitic-s, sages, Sandhyas, seasons, rivers, lakes, oceans 
and the divine Tlrthas join Gafiga during the Parvan 
days. O lady of goc^l holy riles, O goddess of Devas, by visiting 
Avimuktesvara and Trivistapa and reaching Kfilabhaiiava, the 
holy c.cnti e, men become rid of their sins during the Par vans. 
The sacred rivers of the earth and ti. great shrines and abodes 
enter Ganga at VarlinasI in the course of holy Parvans. 

131-139. The different shrines in and around this place 
are as follows: — Aviniukta is the most excellent holy 
centre. It dispels great sins. The Liuga that is at Kcdara, 



498 


Lingapurd^a 


the Lihga that is in Mahalaya,®®® the Madhyamesvara, 
the Pasupatesvara, . Sahkukarnesvara, Gokarnarci,®®’ Druma- 
candesvara, Bhadresvara, Sthanesvara,®®® Ekagra, Kalei5vara,®®® 
Ajesvara, Bhairave^vara, Isana, Omkara,®®®a Amarcsa,®’® 
Mahakala, the Jyotirlihgaj Bhasmagatraka, etc, all those holy 
centres of mine on the earth numbering sixtyeight and all 
other well-established shrines come to me at Varanasi during 
the hOi” Parvans. Thus the mysterious secret has been revealed 
to you. 

140. Therefore, the creature that dies here attains the 
divine immortal* region if he takes ablution in the Gahga and 
visits me, O auspicious lady. 

141-143. The creature immediately obtains a benefit 
equal to that of hundreds and thousands of sacrifices. What is 
more wonderful than that? O fair lady, of all the important 
shrines on the earth and on mountains, Avimukta is the grea- 
test. Understand what has been said by me. The sin mentioned 
in the Vedas is recounted by brahmins by thi. word ^*Avi'\ 
The holy centre is called Avimukta because it is free from Avi 
(i. e. sin)®’^ and resorted to by me. 

144-147. After saying this, the lord of all Uie worlcb 
said — goddess of Devas, Avimukta is my abode. See it well.” 
After saying this, the lord, the consort of Uma, pointed out 
the excellent Sriparvata to her. He stayed at Avimuktesvaia 
permanently along with her. In view of his ability to go every- 
where, the lord of Devas, the soul of all, identical with ‘Sal’ 
and ‘Asat’ came to Sriparvata along with the goddess. He, the 
lord of all living beings, pointed out to her the following holy 
ccnties and idols: 

148-155. Kundiprabha; the great and divine Vaisravaiic^- 
vara; Asalihga; Devcsa;the divine Balesvara ; the great Ranics- 

866. Mahalaya— This peak of the Himalayas has not been identihed 
so far. 

867. Gokarna— See p. 94 note i 

868. Sthanesvara -See p. 144 note 250. 

869. KalcSvara - the same as Mahakalesvara in Ujjayini, mod. 
Ujjain, Greek Ozene. 

870. Amarcia -the same as Omkarcivara in Oihkara Mandhata in 
the Himar district, Madhya Pradesh. 

871. Avimuktaka- For a different interpretation of the name, see 
verses 104-105 of this chapter 



Glory of Sriiaila 


499 


vara®^^a that had been installed by Visnu; lord Kundalesvara 
at the sides of the southern gate; the excellent JVipurantaka 
stationed near the eastern gate; the idol that increased in size 
along with the mountain and was bowed to by the ehiets ol 
iJev'as; what is w'ell known in the three worlds as Madhya’ 
me^vara; Aiiiaresvara the best'^nver of boons, formerly installed 
by Devas; lord Gocarmesvara; tlic wonderful shrine Indre^- 
vara; th(' laigt* idol Karmesvara installed by Brahma on 
purpose. O unchanging lady, the holy Siddliavata is my per- 
petual lesideiue. i'he divine splendid Ajabila is consecrated by 
Aja himself ; tiieie itself in ni) divine Biles vara arc my divine 
sandals. In the middle (^1 the mountain Srngata is the idol 
Srhgatakcsvara installed bv Sridevi. It is m the shape of 
Sriigalaka. Mallikarjuna is my splendid residence. 

I0b-l.j7. I lie shrine Rajesvaia is installed in SiKt^'^sion 
by means ol Rajas; the Cfajrsvara, tlic V’aisakha idol, the 
unchanging Kapolelsvara ; O IcXir lady, see now the splendid 
great Tirtha Kotisvara, whi( ii was founcilv resorted to by 
crorcs of the Ganas ofRudia and Vvhich is .supra loi to all 
the otliei slirine.s. 

15b. A splendid rocky i<h»l was inst«ill(‘d by Brahma in the 
South and anoiUei wa.. installi‘d ni the north h\ Visnu 
Both thes*" tngijlier lonsiiuile the shniu* called Dviih vakiiia. 

159. ScL, on th‘- western mou«*»ain a Ling« Thug* siz(‘ 
had b(‘cn installed by me loriiicrly. It is eallcd B. ahmes vaia, 
Malesvaia. 

IbO. A shnue is nmienibered by the name Alatiigrha. The 
loid .said thus:- ‘‘O Brahma, this has bf;en embellished f)y you 
at the oul.sct, along wnh the sages.” After saying this he stayed 
in the house. Hence, the shrine came to he known as Alaih- 
grha. 

161. O lady conversant with the 'Hithas, see there is a 
Tirtha and a Vyomaliiiga of mine there also. This is called 
Kadanibesvai a, installed by Skanda himsell. 

162-161. The shrine Gomanoalc^vara is installed by 
Nanda and others. O lady ol execllcni face, sec these holy 
spots and .<?hrincs ins'lalled by Indra and his Devas on the 

871a. Ramesvara -one of the twelve great lihgas set up by Rama 
at Rame^varam, Deccan Bharata. It is a celebrated place of pilgrimage and 
contains a magnificent temple. 



500 


Lifigapurdna 


borders of Devahrada. O fair lady, in the place where your 
necklace fell down in Harapura,®’^ the sacred pit ofHarakunda 
has been made by you for the welfare of human beings. O 
lady of good holy rites, in Sivarudrapura, the idol Acalesvara 
has been installed by your father on the mountain. 

165-169. Formerly, the Brahman was embellished by me 
along with the sages. O fair lady, the shrine Can(Jikc5- 
vara evolved by Gandika — Candikesa is youi daughter - 
This spot is the excellent Ambika Tirtha. 

The shrine Rueikesvara is here. This splendid Dhara 
(current of water) is tawny-coloured. O fair lady, the devotee 
who worships me devoutly in these different holy centres and 
llrthas, shall rejoice with me. The brahmin who abandons 
his body on !§rl^aila destroys his all sins. Undoubtedly he is 
liberated in the same splendid manner as in the holy centre 
Avimukta. O lady of good holy rites, he who duly performs 
the great holy rite of ablution named Mahasnana by means 
of ghee in these holy shrines and spots attains identity with me. 

170-174. If the ablution is made with twenty five Palas 
of the sacred material of worship it should be known as Abh- 
yanga; if it is with a hundred Palas, it should be known as 
Snana. Two thousand Palas of the material are said to consti- 
tute a Mahasnand (great ablution) . The devotee bathes my 
Liiiga at the outset with cow’s ghee. Then he consecrates 
it with the other materials. Thereafter he washes with water. 
The benefit of a hundred Yajnas is attained by the mere rite 
of wiping off the Linga; by bathing it the benefit of ten thou- 
sand sacrifices is attained; by worship the benefit of hundred 
thousand sacrifices is obtained. The benefit of those who sing 
and play on instruments of music is infinite. By means of 
the great bath eight times the benefit of bath is acquired. If 
the devotee wishes to perform the rite of ablution by means of 
water alone he shall do so by means of fragrant scented water 
with devotion The unguent in every case is by means of 
twentyfive Palas of the material used. 

175. The devotee shall use Sami flower, Bilva leaves and 
lotuses duly. He can use other flowers also but he shall not 
abandon the Bilva leaf. 


872 . Harapura — not identifiable. 



Glory of ^rUaila 


501 


176. He shall worship Mahadeva with four measures or 
eight Dronas of flowers etc. The Naivedya (food offering) 
shall be ten Dronas or eight Dronas. 

177. If tile devotee is a brahmin devoid of wealth, he 
attains the same benefit and merit as with the worship of a 
hundred Dronas even when he worships only with an Adhaka 
measure. No doubt need be entertained in this respect. 

178-184. The devotee shall keep awake during the night 
by playing on various musical instruments such as Bheri, 
Mrdahga, Muraja/riinira, Pataha, etc. He shall effect other 
types of sounds too. He shall duly pray. Acconr.anied by his 
servants, sons, wife, relatives and kinbuicn he shall circumam- 
bulate the excellent Lihga and pray thus.-- - 

‘ vJ loici of Devas, O Saiikara, it behoves you to forgive all 
my sins. Forgive me if my worship is devoid of the requisite 
materials, faith and rites.” 

After saying this he shall immediately perform ihe Ja{»a of 
I’varita Rudra and other Santi ni.mtr.ib. He shall then repeat 
the liija of the five-syllabled mantra. He attains the .same 
bdicfit as is obtained by visiting the holy centres and perform- 
ing the sacrifices. He attains the same goal as one who dies in 
Varanasi, Similarly, he shall undoubtedly attain Sayiijya 
(identity with me) . For the sake of -^pitiating jo* these rites 
should be performed duly by my devotees. If t' ey neglect, 
certainly they are not my devotees. 

Suta said: 

185-188. On hearing these words, the goddess went to 
Varanasi. She bathed the lahga Avimuktesvara with milk and 
ghee. She worshipped Rudra the lord of Devas, the leader of 
the worlds. On the Mandara mountain (?) in Avirnukta she 
propitiated the gicat Atman by means of penance. She built 
a shrine on the Mandara that has beautiful Caves. It was here 
that the lord blessed the great daitya Andhaka, th*. son of 
Hiranyaksa. Sportively he blessed hi.u with the offer of Gana- 
hood. 

Thus the entire story has been recounted to you in detail. 

189-190. He who reads or listens to the glory of the 
shrines shall immediately attain those merits which one attains 
by visiting holy centres. He shall narrate this to all the brah- 



502 


Lingapurana 


mins who are clean in body and mind and who have conque- 
red their sense-organs. That man alone shall attain the benefit 
of all sacrifices. 


CHAPTER NINETYTHREE 

The Narrative of the Asura Andhaka 


The sages said : — 

1-5. How did the leading Daitya named Andhaka obtain 
the chieftaincy of the Ganas from Mahesvara after being sub- 
dued in the Mandara mountain with many charming caves ? It 
behoves you to recount it in the manner it happened and in 
the way you have heard. 

SUta said : 

I shall succinctly mention how Andhaka was blessed, how he 
was dessicated on the Mandara mountain and how he attained 
boons. I shall mention everything briefly. Formerly a son was 
born to Hiratiyak§a. He was comparable to Hiranyanayana 
(i.e. his father in prowess). He was well known as Andhaka. 
By means of penance he attained great prowess. Thanks to the 
grace of Brahma, he attained immunity from death. He enjoy- 
ed the whole of the three worlds. Formerly, he conquered the 
city of Indra sportively and terrified Indra without any strain. 

6. All Devas, Narayana and others were oppressed, beaten, 
bound and struck down by him. They became frightened and 
entered Mandara. 

7. After afflicting Devas thus, Andhaka the great Asura 
happened to come casually to the mountain Mandara with 
charming caves. 

8. Then all those leading Devas including Sadhyas, 
approached Mahesa, the lord of all Devas and said thus: — 

“We have been split and pierced by the weapons of And- 
haka, the king ofDaityas. We are of very little virility. Hence, 
we arc quickly struck and split in every limb. 

9-10. On hearing thus of the arrival of the Daitya through 
this leading Ganas the lord set out against Andhaka. At that 



The Narrative of the Asura Andhaka 


503 


place, Indra, the lotus-born Brahma, Visnu and other leading 
Devas and the excellent brahmins shouted victories to the lord 
from all sides. They kept their joined palms on their crown to 
show their reverence. 

11-13. Reducing the entire host of the Asuras to ashes in 
crores and hundreds of crores, Mahadeva pierced Andhaka 
with his trident. On seeing that Andhaka was pierced and that 
his coat of mail of sin had been burnt, Brahma, shouted in joy 
after bowing down to Isa. On hearing that shout Devas bowed 
down to the lord and shouted. 7'hc sages danced. The Ganas 
rejoiced. 

14. Then Devas showered plenty of flowers on lord Siva. 
The whol the three worlds rejoiced with delight and shouted. 

15. Transfixed to the trident and burned like a dead body 
in fire the demon assumed Sattvika emotions and thought thus 
in his mind. 

16-19. “Previously, lord MaheSvar? had been propitiated 
by me in the previous birth since I have been burned now by 
Siva. Hence, this has come to pass. Otherwise, this does not fit 
in. He who renicmbers Rudra even once in his mind at tlie 
time of death attains identity with him. Why not then he who 
remembers many times. Brahma, Visrii, and Dev..s ncluding 
Indra seek refuge in him. One shall certainly seek refu/,r in him 
alone.” After thinking thus, Andhaka, delighted in his mind, 
eulogised Siva, Isana who had suppressed him. Ii was due to 
the weightincss of his merit that Andhaka could eulogise thus. 

20-21 On being prayed to by him, lord Siva, the lord of 
Devas, the dispeller of dejection, said to Andhaka the son of 
Hiranyanetra, who was fixed to the tip of the trident. Glancing 
at the Danava, the lord spoke with mercy. 

22 “O dear one, I am delighted with you. Welfare unto 
YOU What cherished desire of yours shall I fulfil. O le.idmg 
Daiiya, O Andhaka. choose the boons. 1 am known as the best- 

ower of boons. 

23. On hearing the words of the lord, the son of Hiranya- 
nayana spoke thus to Mahesvara in words choked within, due 

to excess of delight. 

24. O lord. O Sankara, the dispeller of the agony of your 



504 


Lingapurdna 


devotees, O lord of the chiefs of Devas, I crave for your devo- 
tion if a boon is to be given unto me. O Isa, be pleased.” 

25-26. On hearing the words of Andhaka, the great Atman, 
Bhava of great lustre granted him pure devotion which is diffi- 
cult of access. He conferred on him the chieftancy of the 
Ganas. The leading Devas and others bowed down to him who 
had br*Mi thus established in the position as the chieftain of the 
Ganas. 


CHAPTER NINETYFOUR 

Uplifting the Earth 


The sagps said : 

1-2. How was his father the terrible demon Hiranyaksa, 
slain by Visnu ? How did Visnu assume the form of a Boar ? 
How did his horn attain the status of an ornament of Mahesa. 
O Suta, it behoves )ou to narrate all this to us in detail. 

Suta said: 

3. The brother of Hiranyakasipu is known as Hiranyaksa. 
He was comparable to Kala the destroyer. He was the father of 
Andhaka the lord of the Asuras. 

4. This leading Daitya defeated all Devas. He bound tlie 
earth that has the lustre of blue lotus and took it to Nether 
regions. He made it his prisonci. 

5-8. Devas including Brahma were oppressed, struck and 
bound by this cruel leader of the Daityas, Hiranyaksa, the 
strong and wicked soul. Their facial splendour became faded. 
They bowed down their heads to Visnu who formerly had 
suppressed crores of Daityas. They submitted to him the news 
about the imprisonment of the earth. On hearing this. Lord 
Visnu assumed the form of Yajnavaraha®^® as at the time of 
the manifestation of the Lihga. With the tip of his curved fangs 
he killed Hiranyaksa the leading Daitya of great strength. After 

873, Yajiiavar^a — ^Tl^c boar-form of Vifou. On the symbolic 
interpretation of Yajiiavar^a see Matsjfapurdna — A Study ^ pp. 311-334. 



uplifting the Earth 


505 


killing him along with other Daityas, the lord the slayer of the 
Daityas shone splendidly. 

9-14. Just as in the beginnings of kalpas before, he enter- 
ed the Nether regions and brought the earth out of the ocean 
and made her seated on his lap. Then Brahma, the best of 
Devas, accompanied by Indra and others eulogised Visnu the 
lord of Devas with words choked with great emotion. 

Obeisance to the perpetual Varaha with the curved fangs 
and th( staff. Obeisance to Narayana who is identical with all. 
OI)eisance to Brahman the greatest Atman. Obeisance to the 
maker of all. Obeisance to the holder of the cat-:. Obeisance 
to the slayer of the enemies of Devas. Obeisance to the creator 
and leader of the chiefs of Devas and the chastiser of all. You 
are Asvaniu:!., (having eight cosmic bodies) You have infinite 
forms. You arc the primordial Deva. You are known as Ananta 
(Eternal Being). Everything has been created by you, O lord 
of Devas, be pleased, O lord of the worlds, O Vanlha, O Visnu. 

O Visnu the fulfiller of our desires, a" the important Daityas 
were killed in a trice by you with half of a hundred millionth 
part of the tip of one of your curved fangs, along with their 
sons and servants. 

1 5. O lord of earth, the earth was lifted up by you and 
held at the tip of your curved fangs, O lord, havi.it' ’he lustre 
of clouds, O lotus-faced God, served by all the peopi , all the 
mountains, all the oceans, and by all Devas and Asuras. 

16. O lord, it was by you alone that the victory of the 
Devas was brought about. Ha ! a boon has been given; 
the goddess of speech has been bestowed on the lotus-born deity, 
O lord, be pleased. 

17. All the leading immortal beings find a place in your 
hairs; the moon and the sun in your eyes; the earth tliat had 
been taken to the nelhci worlds was placed at the pair of your 
feet. All the constellations find a place on your back. 

18. O lord, O preceptor of the universe, the earth that 
had been taken to the cavity of the nether regions, has been 
uplifted by you without the help of any army, for the welfare 
of the worlds. Everything has been held by you alone. 

19. Thus, the lord of speech, Prajiipati, bowed down to 
Visnu along with Devas repeating diflerent hymns and wor- 



506 


Lihgapuratia 


shipping him in diflcrpiit ways. From \'isnu he (Brahma) 
obtained different booiib. He was himsclt having the body 
originating from tlie umbilical lotus of Visnii. 

20. Devas and the leading sages received on their heads 
the earth that had been uplilted by him. In the presence of 
the discus-bearing lord they kept the earth on their heads and 
bowed down to him. 

21-22. “O earth, O bestower of boons, you have been 
redeemed by this Vaiaha alone, by Krsna, by Visnu who has 
hundreds ot hands and whose activities arc not strained. O 
eatth, you aie highly blessed. O unchanging one, you arc an 
extensive being. O earth, you are the supporter of all the 
worlds. Dispel our sins. 

23. O lotus-eyed bestower ol boons, it is by your favour 
that we live after our sins have been destroyed by you, mentally, 
verbally and physically.” 

24-26a. On being thus addressed by Devas the car th said : — 

“O brahmins, he who keeps on his head the pinch of earth 
broken by the curved fangs of Varaha, repeating this Mantra, 
shall be liberated from sins. He .shall be long-lived and strong. 
He shall be blessed with sons and grandsons. After leaving the 
earth he reaches heaven and rejoices along with Devas. At the 
end of his Karman he returns to the earth. 

26b-27. When Varaha the lord had gone back to milk 
ocean after leaving off the form ot the boar, the earth shook 
again. The curved fangs of intelligent lord of Devas, pressed 
down by the weight of the earth fell down there. 

28-32. Bhava, the lord of the universe, w'ho casually went 
that way, saw that curved fang and took it up for his own 
embellishment. Mahadeva kept it on his head as well as on his 
chest. Devas including Indra eulogised Bhava, the lord of 
Devas. 

The earth was thus stabilised sportingly by the lord of 
Devas during dissolution. If the lord had not thus decorated 
himself with parts of Visnu, Brahma and other Devas sportingly 
how could the brahmins attain salvation. Hence, Mahesvara 
wears curved fang (Daihstra) as his ornament. 



The Exploits of Nrsimha the Man-lion 


507 


CHAPTER NINETYFIVE 

The Exploits of Nrsimha the Man-lion 
'I he sages said : 

1. It is heard that I iirariy'\kasipu the elder brother of 
Hiranyaksa was iormerly killed by Nrsiriiha. How was he killed 
by him, kindly tell us. 

a lit a said: 

2. I he son of Hii anyakasi])ii was known bv the name 
Prahlada. He was conversant with virtue endowee with truth- 
lulncss, asceticism and intelligence. 

3-4. Ever since his birth he devoutly worshipped the 
unchanging omniscieiil Visnn who is lord of Devas, who is omni- 
present, who is the cause ol origin of all Devas, who is the 
primordial Purusa, who has the form of Brahman, who is the 
overlord of Brahma and who is the cause of creation, susten- 
ance and annihilation. 

5-6. The enemy ofUevas saw that his son was frequently 
repeating ‘‘O Gt^vinda, Obeisance to Nfirayana.’’ He observed 
that his son was devoted to Visnu. I hc demon of ^inful intellect 
looked at his son as though he would burn him and said: — 
“O boy of wicked inicHect, you don’t know niv. •’ e lord of 
all Daityas as well as Devas. 

7-B. U heroic Prahlada, C3 my wicked Son, 1 am the cause 
of agony to the biahminS as well as Devas. Who is Visnu? 
Who is lotus-born (Brahma) ? Who is Indra, Varuna, Vayu, 
Soma (Moon), Is ana or Pavaka (Fire) to be considered equal 
to me f Worship me alone with devotion and never the 
insignificant Narayaria, 

9-12. O Prahlada, listen to me if you have any desire to 
be alive.” 

Even after hearing the threatenin; words of Hiranyaka^ipu, 
the intelligent boy Prahlada worshipped Visnu and uttered 
‘‘O Narayana obeisance to you Obeisance to Narayana” He 
taught all the Daitya boys the .same excellent Brahmavidya. 

Hiranyakasipu saw that his command had been transgressed 
by his son, the command that could not be transgressed even 



508 


Lingapurdna 


by Indra and others. On knowing that his behest had been 
violated Hiranyakasipu said to Daiiavas ; ^‘It behoves you to 
kill this wicked son of mine who is worthy of being put to 
death in various ways.” 

13. Thus ordered by that Daitya of extremely wicked 
heart, Danavas hit and struck the undaunted Prahlada who 
considered himself a servant of the lord of Devas. 

14. O excellent brahmins, w'hat had been evilly perpetrated 
then by tliose Asuras on the son of the king of Daityas became 
futile, thanks to the brilliance of the lord who lies down in 
the milk ocean. 

15-16. In order to kill Hiranyakasipu who was furious due 
to his haughtiness, the lord assumed the form of the man-lion 
and manifested himself there itself. Glancing at the son kindly 
he hit the father the base Danava. At the very same moment 
he split him with his sharp daws. 

17. Then, the dispeller of sins killed that Daitya along 
w'ith his kinsmen. Like a fire of annihilation at the dose of 
yugas he harassed the leading Daitya. 

18. O brahmins of good holy rites, the entire universe be- 
came terrified due to the terrible roar of Nrsimha. All the 
worlds beginning.with the world of Brahma trembled. 

19-21. On seeing Nrsirhha, Devas, Asuras, Nagas, Siddhas, 
Sadhyas, Visnu, Brahma and others left olf their courage and 
strength and went off' in different directions in order to pro- 
tect their lives. When they had gone, the lord Nrsimha who 
had a thousand shapes, who had all feet and all arms, wlio had 
a thousand eyes, whose three eyes were the moon, sun and fire, 
who was the wieldcr of Maya remained there enveloping every 
thing. The excellent Devas who were stationed on the Lokaloka 
accompanied by Brahma, Siddhas, Yama and the Maruts, 
eulogised him. 

Prayer 

22-30. You arc the Brahman that is greater than the greatest. 
You are the greatest of realities. You are the greatest splendour 
among all luminaries. You are the greatest Atman. You are 
identical with the universe. 

You are gross and subtle; nay the subtlest. You are the 
auspicious being identical with Sabdabrahman. You are beyond 



The Exploits of Nrsimha the Man-lion 


509 


the scope of speech and devoid of support. You are free from 
Dvandvas (mutually clashing opposites) impediments and 
calamities. 

24. You ure the partaker of sacrifices of sacrificers. You are 
the lord bestowing fruits on those who perform sacrifices. You 
assume the form of a fish.®’^ You are stationed in the universe 
after assuming the form of a tortoise.®’® 

25. You have assumed the forms of the Boar and the lion 
for saving the kingdom of Devas by killing the lord of Daityas. 

26. Under the pretext of the curse of brahmin (i.e. Bhrgu) 
you sportingly incarnated on the earth. Noth .ig is seen as 
distinctly different from you. You are the whole universe con- 
sisting of the mobile and immobile beings. 

2”. . • ••- arc VJ.snu, Rudra, and Brahma. You are the 

beginning and the end; O lord, you alone are we. 

28. You alone arc the universe. O lord, of what avail is 
mere prattling. C) lord, that which is non*dualistic is stationed 
m manifold wa^.s, due to Maya. 

29-30. Hosv shall we eulogise you ? O lord of the pa^us ! 
O lord of Devas, how you shine !” 

Although the loid was thus eulogised with different hymns, 
with emotional feelings, O brahmin.s, the lord did not become 
calm bei’aiisc he was honouring the 'p cics in w»ii< I. he mani- 
fested himself (i. e. a lion'). 

lie who reads this hymn pertaining to the Man-lion, or 
he who ponders over its meaning or he who narrates this to 
the brahmins, is honoured in the world of Visnu. 

31-34. In the meantime, Devas including Indra and Brahma 
came to loril fiiva and eulogised him after informing him 
about the activities of Visnu who assumed the form of a beast 
(Lion). I’hen Brahma and others eulogised Paramesvara. They 
sought refuge in him who is the great cause, lor saving their 
souls. Accompanied by Devas and e'^tremely afraid, Brahma 
eulogised Paramesvara Mahadeva wtio was staying on the 
Mandara mountain sporting with Uina and who was served by 


a74-87r)- The verses 24 -!ij of this chapter refer to the fish, tortoise, 
boar and man-lion incarnations of Vi?nu. For detail, see H.M, under 
Avatara, pp. 33-38. 



510 


Liugapurdn a 


his Gan as, Gandharvas, Siddhas and Apsaiscs. Brahma prost- 
rated on the ground and eulogised Paiamesvara with words 
choked in the throat. 

Brahma said : 

35 Obeisance unto )ou the destroyer of death; obeisance 

unto the wratli of Rudra; obeisance unto ^iiva, Rudra; obei- 
sance to )ou Sankara. 

36 You are Ugra (Teiiihle), the retainer of all living 
beings; you are f^iva (auspicious) unto us; obeisance to 
Siva, Sarva, Sankara the dispeller of dejection. 

37. Obeisance to Mayaskara,®'"^ obeisance to Visva, to 
Visnu, to Brahma ; obeisanc<‘ to you the destroyer ; obeisance 
to the lord of Uma. 

38. Obeisance to Hiranyabahu (one with golden arms) ; 
obeisance to the lord of Hiranya (gold) ; obeisance to f^arva,®^® 
having all forms ; obeisance to Purusa. 

39. Obeisance unto one devoid of distinction between ‘Sat’ 
and ‘Asat’; obeisance unto you the cause of ‘mahat’; obeisance 
to the permanent Being of the form of the universe that is being 
born. 

40. Obeisance unto one born in many wa>s ; obeisance 
unto the ])lentiful being ; obeisance to Rudra ; obeisance to 
Nilarudra ; toKadrudra; obeisance to Pracetas. 

41. Obeisance to Kala of dark complexion ; obeisanc e to 
the destroyer of Kala; obeisance to lord Midhustama®’® (bounti- 
ful ) : obeisance to you Sitikantha (blue-nccked) . 

42. Obeisance to you the great one ; to the perpetual 
destroyer of Daityas ; obeisance to Tara®®® (redeemer) and 
to Sutara (the excellent redeemer); obeisance to 'Parana (one 
engaged in redeeming sinners) . 

876. iivaya — moksarupaya ST, of the form of salvation. Gf. 
“iivam mokse sukhe bhadre.” — Vi«va. 

877. mayaskaraya — sukhakaraya ST, the bestower of happiness. 

878. sarvaya— srnati jagat hinastiti ^arvah ST. the destroyer of the 
universe. 

879. midhustamaya— sarva- varfakaya ST, the best among those who 
grant wishes. 

880. taraya— pranavarupaya ST. of the form of pranava (om)’ 



1 he Exploits of Nrsimha the ManMon 


511 


43. Obeisance to Harikesa (one with tawny hair) ; obeis- 
ance to Sambhii the groat Atman ; obeisance to you the 
benefactor ol Devas ; obeisance to one the benefactor of living 
beings. 

44. Obeisance to the bcnefictor ofUmii, the daughter of 
Hiniavari ; obeisance to wrath in the form of Rudra ; obeis- 
ance to Kcipardin (one with matted hair). Obeisance to Krda- 
kantha(the blue-neckcd). 

45. Obeisance to gold-complexioned Mahe.sa; obeisance 
to Srikantha; obeisance to ow: who is smeared witli atihes; obeis- 
ance to Dande.svara (lord with the staff or rod of punishment); 
obeisance to Mundisvara (lord with skulls) . 

'16 •ranee to firasva (short '^ne) ; to Dirgha (long 

one); obeisance to Vamana (dwarf), to the terrible trident-bear- 
ing lord ; obeisance to the fierce being. 

47. Obeisance to Bluma (the terrible), to one of terrible 
form ; obeisance to you interested in te rrible activities ; obeis- 
ance to one, the foremost among the annihilators; obeisance to 
one who can kill from far. 

48. Obeisance to Dhanvin(one with a bow), to Sulin (the 
trident-bearing) ; obei.saju c to you the Gadin (one with an iron 
club) , to Halin ( one with jplouglishai ' ''as weapon ■ . to Clakrin 
(one with discus), to V’armin (one with coat oriiion), to the 
peipetual destroyer of the activities of Dai ty as. 

40. Obeisance to you, the Sadya, Sadyarupa, and Sadyo- 
jata ; obeisance to you the Vania, Vamarupa,^®^ Vrnnanetia; 

50-51. Obeisance to you the lord with hideou'5 form and shape; 
obeisance to Purusarupa; to Tatpurusa; to the sole Purusa;®®'' 
obeisance to the bestower of Purusartha.s (aims oflifc) ; obeisance 
to the lord, to Pararnesthin ; obeisance to you, to Tsana, to 
livara. 

52-54. ObeisaiK e to Brahma, to onr of the form of Brahman; 
obeisance to you, to Siva himself. 


8»i . Vamarupaya— sundararupaya ST, of charming features. 

88*2, purusaika-tatpurusiiya — -purusesu ekas tatpurusah uttama- 
purusa-rQpa ityarthahi ST. the best among men. Gf. * uttamah puru^as 
tvanyah paramatmctyud ih^tati** — Bhagavad Gita 



512 


Lingapurd^a 


O Sarva, Visnu the maker of the universe has assumed the 
form of Nrsimha. For the welfare of the worlds that 
lord himself has killed Hiranyakasipu with his sharp claws 
along with many leading Daityas. But being in the leonine 
form he is harassing the universe. 

O lord of Devas, kindly do what should be done in the 
matter. 

55. You are Ugra (fierce) ; you are the restrainer of all 
wicked ones ; you are our benefactor. Protect us through your 
bodies of Kalakuta, etc. We have sought refuge in you. 

56-58. O lord of the universe, your conduct is spotless ; we 
are but tools of your game. Our dissolution and rise depend 
upon the closing or opening ol your eyes. Even when you are 
wide awake, O lord, we arc distressed by Visnu ol unmeas- 
ured splendour. O Siva, our destruction cannot happen when 
you are wide awake. It behoves you to curb and check Nr- 
simha, for the welfare of the worlds. 

Sufa said : 

The lord who was thus addressed by them replied smilingly. 

59-63. The lord offered them fearlessness saying “1 shall 
kill him.” Indra bowed to the lord along with Devas. Lord Bra- 
hma and Devas returned to their homes. Soon after Maliadeva 
assumed the form of a .^aiabha and approached the haughty 
Man-lion. The lord in the form ofSarabha took away his life and 
was worshipped by Devas. From the form of a lion Vi§nu assum- 
ed his original form and went away gradually. The lord too 
who was thus eulogised by Devas went away. 

He who reads or listens to this excellent hymn of Siva 
attains his world and tcjoices along with him. 



