


NARASIMHA-PURANAM 

SANSKRIT TEXT, ENGLISH TRANSLATION AND INDEX OF VERSES 


INTRODUCTION 


The Puranic age or era in ancient India next to Vedas has its most significance. 
During mediaeval period, PurSnic rites assumed position even higher than the rituals 
recommended in Vedas among the people. The rites performed through the 
procedure mentioned in Puranas got wide acceptance among public in the fonn of 
more benevolence and spirituality as it was the essence of Puranas. Illustrious as seen 
in Padma Purana and Naradiya Purana are clear, evidence to the affirmation of this 
averment. Thorough discussion and description in Puranas have been made on its 
mutual nexus with Vedas and Smrtis. Smrti is equivalent to Vedas specially for the 
households in course of their behavioural or worldly life. Supremacy of Puranas 
more than this, one can see in Devi Bhagavata. The seat for Vedas and Smrti is eye 
but Purana is seated in the heart of spiritual man. Thus, it can be stated categorically 
that behavioural aspect of worldly life in full is embedded in Puranas. Puranas are 
ascribed to establish the gems of humanity like devotion, knowledge, detachment 
and etiquette firmly among all Indians. Importance of Puranas is prima-facie from its 
meaning and antediluvian. 

Meaning of the Term Purana 

Literal meaning of the term Purana is old or antediluvian. According to renowned 
etymologist Yaska- "An innovative thing irrespective of being its old is called 
Purana."' A beautiful derivative to this term in Puranas too is seen. According to 
Vayu Purana, it is mentioned as purd asti Viz. "A thing alone even since most 
ancient period.” As per Padma Purana " Purana is, what desires for past (by-gone) 
period.” As per Brahmanda Purana Purana, a derivative - "this happened during 
ancient period” is seen. Thus, all the above derivatives make it apparent that the 
contents of Purana was related to the ancient period. 

The term Purana in its meaning as per literature is not confirmed to the contents 
of any particular scripture or volume but it represents the entire topic. Actually, 
Puranas too were integrated or in compiled form known as Brhatsarhhita alike all 
Vedic hymns integrated inseparably during their initial stage. It becomes ciystal clear 
on going over Puranas separately as fifth Veda like that of four divisions made of 
Vedas that very fifth Veda was composed after the lapse of longer period than the 
period when classification on Veda was made. The sage designated as Vyasa had 
divided Vedas in four parts and he himself had classified the Puranas also. 
Vedavyasa had also composed Puranic code (Purana Saihhita) alongwith the Epic 


y (fro 



6 


(Akhyana), Episode (Upakhyana), story (Gatha, Allegory (Kalpa) etc. He had taught 
or preached homaharsana, a disciple belong to suta caste on the Purana Sariihita. On 
the basis of these three basic Sarhhita (Miila Sarhhita), as much as eighteen Puranas 
and several other uppuranas (sub- Purana) were composed complying with the 
tradition of disciple. It has been stated in Siva Purana that lord Vyasa compose. 
Puranas at every end of Dvapara era. Thus, it has become clear that the subject 
matter of Puranas is most ancient, beginningless and beyond virility (viz. not 
composed by manly efforts) also. However, it is of great use for the behavioural 
world specially because of its composition made by Vyasa. 

Puranas have been accepted as one of the branches of learning (vidya) since long- 
long past or ab-initio. A Brahmana cannot get expertise in full even if duly learned to 
four Vedas with their six-parts (Sadvarga) and upanisads unless the read Purana 
properly. As much as fourteen learnings (vidyas) have been described in Yajnavalkya 
Smrti with their roots on religion (Dharma). Purana is an exclusive learning that 
makes the religion (Dharma) its own base or ground. The Smrti therefore, forbids 
teaching or preaching this supreme learning to any person unfamiliar and even the 
disciple not duly tried. 

Western scholars too have accepted Purana as complement to Vedas. Vedas and 
Puranas are complement to each other. Puranas are the inseparable parts of Indian 
Literature and prevalent in the Indian culture. Diligence on Puranas in course of all 
Vedic rites hence, stated as mandatory. In course of sacrifice (yajila incites Purana 
too is Veda. Puranas have been given equal status to for Vedas in Chandogyapanisad. 
Besides this, one can see the term " Purana” in Taittirlya Aranyaka, Brhadaranyak 
Upanisad, AsValayana Grhyasutra, Apastamba Dharma Sutra, Valmiki Ramayana 
and Mahabharata etc. scriptures. 

According to Valmiki Ramayana, major events pertaining to trio-periods of time 
viz. past, future and present are contained in Puranas. Siita Sumanta had very early 
told king Dasaratha that how will he get the son born? Sumanta could predict that 
fact by virtue of his listening to the Puranic story. As per Mahabharata, it has been 
stated that moonlight of Veda emanates from the fiill moon of Purana. Magnificence 
of listening to Purana can also be seen in Manusmrti. Thus, the term Purana has been 
used in one or other way in all scriptures found since Vedic era up to the period wlien 
Smrtis were composed. 

Excel and Beginningless of Puranas 

Puranas contain descriptions ;on divine achievements (Siddhi) of all kinds. 
Puranas are as old as Vedas. All scriptures like Veda, Brahmana, Aranyaka, Upanis 
ad, all aphorisms of Vedic literature, commentaries etc. furnish evidence for Puranas 
being of equal status to Vedas. 



7 


Atharvaveda envisages that Rk, Sama, rhyme and Puranas have been originated 
with Yajurveda from sacrifice (yajiia). In context to Vratyastaumat, a description on 
the knowledge of history, Purana, story, NarasarhsT can be seen. 

A description on Puranas as seen in Vedic literature is prima-facie proof of their 
being contemporary to Vedas. On account of being Puranas an ancient creation, these 
have been stated as Veda in Satapath Brahmana. "The priest doing sacrifice (yajhau- 
sthata) should preach them Puranas only are Vedas." Alike Vedas, Puranas too have 
emanated from exhaling of Brahma. Rgveda, Yajusa, Sama, Atharvamgirasa, 
History, Purana, learning (Vidya), Upanisad, aphorisms, hymns and their meanings 
are like fume coming out from the fire caused in wet fuel. These all are the exhaling 
of the supreme soul viz. emanated without least exertion from the supreme soul. A 
deep perusal and analysis on Puranas in Brahmana era too can be seen easily. 
Instructions have been given in Upanisads hither and thither in direction to learn 
Puranas. Narada says to Sanatkumara—"I am conversant to Rgveda, Yajusa, Sama, 
Atharva and the fifth Veda i.e. History— Purana. He states while telling about the 
Puranas being of most ancient period in Matsya Purana—"Purana is the oldest 
among all scriptures. Brahma first recalled Pura: as and the Vedas only then came 
out from his four mouths.” 

In view of the above statement in support of Puranas, the scholars opine that 
Puranas are the descriptive form of Vedas. Vedas import brief account of the events 
while Puranas enumerate them with illustrations and examples. It is either exclusive 
peculiarity/distinction or an abnormal/exceptional style of Puranas by which they 
state even the common matters in rhetorical way creating interest and curiosity 
among audience. In other words, Puranas are skill to present the past events with 
their positive connotation in the light of the day. In view of the doctrine of climax as 
seen in ancient stories of Puranas, these being everlasting and most ancient, no doubt 
can be raised on their compliance with Vedas and their essence as well. Renowned 
Pundit Girdhar Sarma CaturvedI too have mentioned in one of his articles— "Purano 
kl anadita" that " Puranas being existed as ancient as Vedas, their entity like Veda 
too is beginningless.” 

In Sutra Sahitya (Literature on aphorisms) like Gautam Dharma Sutra and 
Yajilvalkya Smrti, enumerates one after another has been made of Puranas. A 
peculiar significance of Purana has been laid-down in very literature. It has been 
mentioned that to know Puranas is equally necessary for common people, the class of 
administrator (king etc.) and even for the people leamed to Vedas. He is only learned 
or genius perfectly who has studied Purana. All divine achievements have been 
described in Puranas. The procedure or methods to very achievements like hymn 
(mantra) and system (tantra) concomitantly are ready to see therein. 



8 


The above mentioned opinions, authorities etc. all prove that learning of Parana 
too had emerged in Vedic era and the ancient sages classified, arranged, edited the 
Pur anas in the same fashion as they did the same for Vedas. 

Number of Puranas 

As we see diverge opinions of Historians on creation, emergence and period of 
Puranas, they are not of unanimous opinion the same way in the ascertainment of 
exact number of them. 

One can see everywhere the transformation of the expression from jargon, tough, 
beyond understanding as it is in Upanisad to simple, laid and rhetoric in Puranas. The 
Vedas have been composed using jargons and tough sentences but in Puranas, the 
same subject-matter is made easiest to understand. 

This transformation in style of expression exhibits that Puranas were also 
compiled in a single Brhatsarhhita like that of Vedas. Subsequently, lord Vedavyasa 
had divided the single voluminous Veda Sarhhita in four parts. The first three codes 
so formed are Rk, Yaju and Sama and their appendix was compiled as Atharvaveda. 
This division was made in order to easier perusal and study for the readers and 
disciple of that sage. In the similar fashion, very Krsna Dvaipayana Vyasa should 
have perhaps divided Puranas in eighteen parts by taking in consideration, the 
convenience of the readers and disciples both. 

Thus, as much as eighteen PurSnas in divided form of single voluminous code 
have been accepted. As per Brahmavaivarta Purana, these are — Brahma, Pada, Vis 
nu, Siva, Srimadbhagavata, Narada, Markandeya, Agni, Bhavisya, Brahmavaivarta, 
Linga, Varaha, Skanda, Vamana, Kurma, Matsya, Garuda and Brahmanda. Same 
serial of the name is seen in Visnu, Bhagavata etc. Puranas. Besides names, number 
of hymns in Puranas can be seen duly mentioned in them but it is not the same in all 
Puranas hence, there is no consistency. For instance - A description on number of 
hymns in Brahmapurana as found in Brahmavaivarta, tells ten thousand hymns and 
this number tallies with the statement found in Bhagavata and Devi Bhagavata but in 
Agni Purana and Matsya Purana, it has been stated twenty five thousand and thirteen 
thousand respectively. 

The so called Mahapuranas came in existence when the single but voluminous 
code was divided in eighteen parts by Krsna Dvaipayana Vyasa had got these names. 
A statement to this effect has been made of Devi Bhagavata as under — 

3T ^ tr fHn ntiuiifi 

Very hymn enumerates the so-called eighteen Mahapuranas as under— 

Two Puranas starting with "ma” syllable — 1. Matsya, 2. Markandeya 

Two Puranas starting with "Bha” syllable— 3. Bhavisya, 4. Bhagavata 



9 


Three Puranas starting with the letter "Bra”— 5. Brahmanda, 6. 
Brahmavaivarta, 7. Brahma 

Four Puranas starting with the syllable "Va”— 8. Varaha, 9. Vamana, 10. Vayii, 
11. Visnu 

Then Agni from "A” (12), Narada from "Na” (13), Padma from "Pa” (14), 
Liiiga from "Li” (15), Garuda from "Ga” (16), Kurma from "Ku” (17), Skanda 
from "Ska” (18). There are the eighteen Maha Puranas. A list with same serial has 
been given for these Maha Puranas in twelfth cantos (Skandha) of Visnu Purana and 
Srimadbhagavata. Kurma Purana also describes the list of eighteen Puranas.' 

Characteristics of Puranas 

Role of Puranas in the development of Indian culture and religion has always 
been of most significant. Magnificence of Purana is worth consideration and 
honourable from several angles in which angle of religion and history is at the top. 
Puranic expressions comply with Vedas too. Hence, religious importance of Puranas 
in our physical or worldly life is peculiar and distinct. Vedas rendered the 
assumption of God and Puranas carry that severe assumption of almighty to the heart 
of society as a whole. According to Matsya Purana, the four major subjects of 
Puranas are as under— 

Akhyanaiscdpyupdkhydnairgdthdbhih Kalpasuddhibhih. 

Purdnasamhitdm Cakre Bhagavana Vadrdyamh. 

Epic is the perceived account of events during the period so described in it. 
Episode is the account of events took place recently but imperceived/seen (viz. 
indirect expression of events). The expressions traditionally made and heard but for 
any knowledge about the hero or karta are called story. The knowledge propounded 
in theology translated in Puranic History Department relating to History subject etc. 
scriptures and guidelines on duty is Kalpasuddhi (code of conduct). 

Kalpasuddhi or code of conduct covers the rules on acts like Srauta-smartta, 
etiquette, kinds of religion, miscellaneous kinds of homage and kinds of ethics and 
philosophy. Although Lord Badarayana had also prescribed the above said four 
subjects in the opinion of Ugrafrava Sauti, Lomaharsana says that Puranas have five 
characteristics. As per his opinion — 

Sargasca Pratisargasca Vathso manvantardni ca. 

Varhsdnucaritam Caiva Purdnarh Pancalaksanam. 





10 


This hymn relating to the characteristics of Purana oftenly available with every 
Purana. The word "Paiicalaksana” is considered mandatory to the extent that it has 
been used without by interpretation in Amarakosa. Use of any technical term without 
any interpretation denotes the universal acceptability of the same. Very fact should 
be considered as applying in apropos of this word. 

The scholars have explained the sense bom by very Panca Laksanas as under — 

(a) Creation (Srsti), (b) Anti-creation (Prati Srsti), (c) Dynasty (Vamsa), (d) 
Manvantara, (e) Vamsanucarita (Genealogy). 

The five subjects referred to as characteristics of Purana also have five kind 
difference each. 

(a) Creation (Srsti)—This portion also has five kinds owing to different opinions, 
introduction of incarnation and that of Brahmanda. 

(b) Anti-creation (Prati-Srsti)— Sastravatarana, Kalpasuddhi, Srsti Sainhara 
(dissolution), Jyoti Cakra, Geography (Bhugola). 

(c) Dynasty—Sage (Rsi), Pitr, Solar, Lunar and five dynasty. 

(d) Manvantara—Era, Divine era, Nitya Kalpa, Sapta Kalpa and Trinisat Kalpa. 

(e) Genealogy— Sage (Rsi), Deity (Deva), Solar etc. genealogy and Demon 
genealogy. 

(a) Creation (Sarga)— Origin of world and numerous matters found therein is 
called Sarga or Creation. This is the foremost and major characteristic. This learning 
of creation (Srsti Vidya) has its own distinction, freedom and personality. It has 
also an impression of the element of Vedic creation— 

Avydkrtagunaksanbhat Mahatastrivrto 'ham. 

Bhutamatrendriyarthanam Sambhavah Sarga ucyate. 

Mahat element originates when the properties engrossed with base nature 
(Prakrti) are aggrieved. The element known as Mahat gives birth to three kinds ego 
known as Rajas, TSmas and Sattva. Five kinds organs of intellect (Pahcatanmatr5) 
and Pancabhuta (physical body consisting of five elements) are originated from the 
three type egos. This serial of origin is called Sarga. 

(b) Anti-creation (Prati Sarga)—A thing contrary to creation (Sarga) is anti¬ 
creation or dissolution (Prati Sarga). The word Prati Sancak has been used in place of 
Pratisarga in Visnu Purana. However, Sarhstha is the word used in place of it in 
Srimadbhagavata. 

Naimittikah Prdkrtiko Nitya Atyantiko layah. 

Saritstheti Kavibhih proktdh caturdhd 'sya Svabhdvatah. 



11 


Viz. very Brahmanda (Universe) meets to dissolution in usual eourse of time. 
This dissolution is of four kinds—occasional (Naimittika, usual (Prakrtika), rotary or 
routinic (Nitya) and contingent (Atyantika). 

Very term Sarhstha has been given different names in other Puranas. In Brahma 
Parana, it is internal dissolution (Antara Pralaya), Internal soul (Antaratma), 
cessation (Upa Saihhrti) Abhuta Sarhplava, Udapluta in Visnu Parana, Upasarhhrti, 
Ekarnavavastha, Lattvapratisarhyama etc. and Nirodha (injunction), sarhstha in Vayu 
Parana. 

(c) Dynasty—The progeny in the past, present and future of the kings bom from 
Brahma is called dynasty— 

Raj fid Brahma Prasutdndm Varhs'astraikdlikonvayah. 

Very term as interpreted in Bhagavata covers mainly the genealogy of the kings 
only. However, it is not appropriate to confine its scope up to royal dynasty. In other 
Puranas, the dynasty of sages has also been included within its scope. 

(d) Manvantara—It is only word that depicts the enumeration of the ancient 
(PurSnic) period. It has considerable significance for enumeration of the Puranic 
period. There are fourteen Manvantaras and every such Manvantara has its one 
particular Manu which has five more supporters or collaborators. These are—Manu 
god, Manu’s son, Indra, Saptarsi, incarnation of god. The period of time having these 
five characteristic is called Manvantara. As much as one thousand period of four ages 
(Caturyugl) in expansion of fourteen Manvantara is ascertained. While explaining the 
period of one Manvantara, Parana bears this popular sentence—Manvantaraih 
Caturyuganarh Sadhikahyeka Saptatih. The time period of seventy one four ages 
(Catuiyugl) in several Puranas has been enumerated in years. 

(e) Genealogy—A descriptive account of descendants bora in the dynasties of 
kings, sages, hermits and particular account of the principal royal persons (kings) is 
called genealogy. Puranas give particular account of genealogy pertaining to kings in 
comparison with the genealogy of the sages— Varhsanucaritarh tesarh Vrttam 
Vamsadharaseaye. Srimadbhagavta eonsiders religion (Dharma) within Manvantara 
by saying— Manvantaraanisaddharmah. RajanitI Sastra (Political Science) also 
considers five charaeteristics of Puranas having somewhat resemblance. Following 
extracts from ancient scripture has been given place in Jayamangala commentary of 
Kautilya Arthas'astra— 

Srsti Pravrtti Samhdra dharmamoksaprayojanarh 

Brahmdbhih vividhaih proktarh Purdnarii Pahcalaksanam. 

Thus, it bears absolutely new interpretation of Paiicalaksanarii (five 
characteristics). Religion has been accepted herein as an inseparable characteristic or 
symptom of Srsti. It means the religious topies also initio have been ineorporated 



12 


with Purana. Hence, the application of religion with Purana is proved. This relation 
of religion with Purana is an event of innumerable past centuries. It had since then 
incorporated other subjects also in its advanced form. However, it does not appear 
true as Manvantrdni Saddharmah in Bhagavata Purana is purported to its 
introduction in Manvantara. 

Ten characteristics of Puranas 

We have explained above the five characteristics i.e. Sarga, Prati-sarga, Varhsa, 
Manvantara, Vaihs'anucarita of Puranas yet some scholars consider Puranas having 
ten characteristics as Maha Puranas. In Srinmadbhagavata, description of ten 
characteristics has been made at two places—- 

Sargasca Visargasca Vrttau raksdntardni ca. 

Variiso Vamsdnucaritam Samsthd heturapdtrayah. 

Atra Sargovisargasca Sthdnam Posanamutayah. 

Manvantaresdnu kathd nirodho muktirdtrayah. 

Irrespective of distinct names given to these ten characteristics at two place in 
above said Purana, there is seen resemblance. Similarly, ten characteristics of Maha 
Purana have been accepted in Brahmavaivarta Purana. 

Puranic Geography—Same style for describing geography and astronomy has 
been followed in Puranas. The islands (Dvipas) namely, Jambu, Saka, Kusa, Kaunci, 
Gomeya and Puskara have been described mysteriously in Kurma Purana. 

In veiy imagination of topography, one or other seas filled with juice (Rasa) 
around every island arc existed. In the middle portion of the earth, there exists a 
mountain known as Lokaloka. The sun arises on that mountain. Magnificence of 
Meru mountain can be seen duly mentioned in almost all Puranas. According to 
Puranic description, eveiy island has been surrounded by seas one each. Someone is 
the sea of ghee, some that of milk and thus, there are seas of several matters. Alkine 
seas are adjacent to Jambudvipa. Having occupied by the progeny of Bharata, the 
considerable part of very island, it is called Bharata Varsa. Kirata (tribals) were the 
residents of the region eastward to Jambudvipa. In its central part and the west-side, 
there were Brahmana, Ksatriya and Sfidra. The names of the rivers rising from 
Himalaya and seven mountains do not match with the names as described in 
Mahabharata. The dynasty of Yavana, Saka and Pallavas finds its place in Puranas. 
These dynasties were in India during 1st and Ilnd century B.C. An account of Hunas 
can be seen in Puranas. Those people ruined the Gupta dynasty in sixth century B.C. 
It has been mentioned that these islands, mountains and seas were extended up to 
several lakh and crore yojana (four kosa make a yojana). The basis of yojana as given 
in Puranas appear some strange of quantity. In case modem yojana (four kosa) is 
accepted, the periphery of earth shall work out very short of length. As per Puranas, 



13 


Bharatavarsa is located at the down land of mountain Sumeru but so-called Sumem 
has no traces now-a-days. The composer of Puranas have given factual detail on 
terrestrial existence. The modem scientists however are unable to discover the same, 
the Puranic topography having seven islands has its own importance. The three 
islands out of them have been so far correctly described. 

Bhuvanakosa in Puranas is an important topic. Detailed account of all Bhuvanas 
have been given in Bhuvana Kosa. The entire earth has been accepted in lotus form. 
The location of mountain Meru is considered s the stem of that lotus formed earth. 

Alongwith this description on topography, almost all Puranas envisage the 
persons lucky for having their birth in Bharatavarsa. It is the land for performanee of 
acts (Karma Bhumi). Sattva property prevails here on the two others. The man bom 
here can attain heavenly abode by virtue of his performance of great deeds. Even in 
this Kali era, Indians can attain absolution merely if they recite the sacred names of 
God. Bharatavarsa is the supreme and seven among all land forms and regions of the 
world. 

The greatest peculiarity of Puranas is that of representation easiest way of the 
theories tough to understand in their basic form. This excellent way of expression 
conveys exceptional events to the people by knitting the same in episodes/stories and 
they hear them with keen interest and curiosity. Thus, the inherent theory is duly 
digested and entertained by the common people with devotion and reverence both. 
The man thus, performs common and uncommon both kinds of acts in order to 
preserve the religion and the rules thereby enjoys an ideal life. The custom of 
listening Puranic stories through a reader (Katha Vacaka) at a particular venue is still 
prevailing and as we observe, this tradition is rapidly getting its wide expansion. It 
depicts the unprecedented faith of the people on Puranas and the subject-matter 
vested with them. Evezy Puraria appreciates and propitiates its pidncipal deity varied 
ways. In order to magnify that deity’s glory, several episodes in apropos have been 
inter-twined and an easiest representation is made. The knowledge acts (Karman), 
homage, yoga, austerity, holy-places, topography and astronomy etc. fairly get 
expression in orderly manner in the subject-matter of episodes introduced in each 
and every Puraria. 

Of the above list of eighteen Mahapuranas the Garuda, Agni and Narada are 
encyclopaedias of literature containing the abstracts of all the great works in Arts and 
Science in Sanskrit literature. In addition to that, they also deal with medicines, 
grammar, dramaturgy, music and astrology. The Phdma, Skanda and Bhavisya 
Puranas mainly describe the holy places and vratas (vows). The Brahmanda and the 
Vdyu Puranas are mainly historical in outlook. The Linga, Varnana and Markandeya 
are sectarian in nature. The Vardha, Kurma and Matsya are spoken in part by Varaha 
(boar), Kiirma (tortoise) and the Matsya or the fish incarnations respectively. The 



14 


Brahma, Bhdgavata and Brahmavaivarta deal with Krsna legends. 

Besides the Purana, there are another set of the Puranas known as upa-Puranas, 
which are more sectarian in nature. They are comparatively later in date having as 
well some historical background. The upa-Puranas are listed below : 

1. Sanatkumara, 2. Narasimha, 3. Nanda, 4. Sivadharma, 5. Durvasa, 6. Naradlya, 
7. Kapila, 8. Vamana, 9. Usanas, 10. Manava, 11. Varuna, 12. Kali, 13. Maheswara, 
14. Samba, 15. Saura, 16. Parasara, 17. Marica, 18. Bhargava. 

Narasimha Puraiia 

This Purana occupies an important place among the above listed upa-Puranas. 
Like other Puranas, Narasimha Purana is also considered to be complied by Vyasa. 
On the contrary, every Purana dwells at length on one or more particular subjects and 
in some, these five primary topics occupy a very subordinate position. Narasirirha 
Purana also depicts these five topics, viz., (1) primary creation or cosmogony, (2) 
secondary creation, (3) genealogy of gods and patriarchs, (4) reigns of the Manus, (5) 
history of the solar and lunar dynasties. It contains various episodes of the 
incamation of Lord Visnu, especially Rama’s incarnation. There are sixty five 
chapters, which describe all topics related with Purana. It describes the story of Rishi 
Markandeya's victory over death including 'Yamagita'. The form of devotion, 
definition of a true devotee and the character of devotees like Dhruva has been 
described in this Purana. Despite of it being small, it is pregnant with meaning. 


* * * 



CONTENTS 


CHAPTER 1 

An assembly of hermits (Rsis) at Prayaga, 
Curiosity raised by Bharadvaja before Suta, 


Description of the order of creation 1 

CHAPTER 2 

Description of the creation of world 7 

CHAPTERS 

Creation of the world by Brahma and 
representation of nine types creations 9 

Chapter 4 

Anusarga 12 

(CHAPTER 5 


Description of Rudra and other Sargas, the 
expansion of the children of the daughters of 
Daksa Prajapati. 13 

CHAPTER 6 

An event of the birth of Agastya and Vasistha as 
the son of Mitravaruna 18 

CHAPTER 7 

Penance made by Markandeya for attaining the 
grace of Lord Sri Hari, recital of Mrtyunjaya 
strotra and conquest of death 22 

CHAPTER 8 

Yama prevents death and his Dutas to visit the 
devotees of Lord Visnu, departure of the hellish 
organism to the abode of Lord Visnu. 28 

CHAPTER 9 

Recitation of Yamastaka 32 

CHAPTER 10 

Marriage of Markandeya, Birth of Veda&a, 
Performance of penance under Aksayavata and 
recital of psalm by Markandeya, Lord give 
blessings and boon to him. 34 

CHAPTER 11 

The sage Markandeya recites hymns to the Lord 
Visnu. 39 

CHAPTER 12 

A dialogue between Yama and Yarn! 44 


CHAPTER 13 

Power of chastity and conversation with a 
Brahmacarl 48 

CEIAPTER 14 

The importance of pilgrimages and four orders 
(asTamas) of life. 53 

CHAPTER 15 

An elucidation of the world tree and the 
knowledge competent to demolish the same. 55 
CHAPTER 16 

Description of attainment of emancipation by 
virtue of concentration on god V isnu 5 7 

CHAPTER 17 

The eight letter hymn and its magnificence 60 
CHAPTER 18 

The story of birth of Manu, Yama and YamI from 
the womb of Sariijna and birth of Manu, Sani and 
Tapatl from the womb of Chaya, and birth of 


As'vinikumaras. 63 

CHAPTER 19 

A prayer comprising one hundred eight names of 
sun god by Visvakarma 66 

CHAPTER 20 

Origin of Marutas 69 

CHAPTER 21 

Description of Suryavathsa 70 

CHAPTER 22 

Description of Candravamsa 71 

CHAPTER 23 

Descriptions of fourteen Manvantaras 73 

CHAPTER 24 


Devotion of Iksvaku, his departure for penance76 
CHAPTER 25 

Penance performed by Iksvaku and attainment of 
Visnu's icon by Brahma 80 



16 


CHAPTER 26 

Description of the generation of Iksvaku 86 
CHAPTER 27 

About Candra Vamsa (The Lunar Clan) 88 
CHAPTER 28 

Account of deeds performed by Santanu 90 
CHAPTER 29 

A description of the generation of Santanu 94 
CHAPTER 30 

A description of Dvipas and the heaven 96 
CHAPTER 31 

A succinct description of Dhruva's account of 
deeds, the stars, plants and the nether region 101 
CHAPTER 32 

Description on Sahasranika, Sri Nrsimha worship 
and magnificence of god 113 

CHAPTER 33 

Great consequences for keeping the temple tidy - 
The story of king Jayadhvaja 115 

CHAPTER 34 

Magnificence of the worship of god Visnu 121 
CHAPTER 35 

Method of performing a lakh and crore Homas 
and their rewards 126 

CHAPTER 36 

Stoiy pertaining to the incarnation of god 128 
CHAPTER 37 

Incarnation of Matsya and killing of Madhu and 
Kaitabha demons 129 

CHAPTER 38 

Incarnation of god Visnu as tortoise, churning of 
ocean and Visnu’s form of enchanting damsel 
(Mohini) 132 

CHAPTER 39 

Incarnation of Varaha, Killing of Hiranyaksa 136 
CHAPTER 40 

Incarnation of Nrsirirha, accomplishments of 
Hiranyaks'ipu and Praise of gods 137 


CHAPTER 41 

Birth of Prahlada, his devotion for Visnu and 
anxiety of Hiranyakasipu 142 

CHAPTER 42 

An episode of atrocities exercised by 
Hiranyakas'ipu on Prahlada 148 

CHAPTER 43 

Preaching by Prahlada to Daityas, drown into sea 
by Hiranyakas'ipu and apparent perception of god 


there 151 

CHAPTER 44 

Incarnation of Nrsirirha and Hiranyakasipu 
approaching death 160 

CHAPTER 45 

An episode on an incarnation of Vaniana 163 
CHAPTER 46 

Incarnation of Parasurama 167 

CHAPTER 47 171 

Incarnation of Rama, His birth and marriage 
CHAPTER 48 182 

Rama's exile, death of king Das'aratha and 
meeting of Rama with Bharata in the forest 
CHAPTER 49 194 

Jayanta punished by Rama, meeting with 


Sarabhariga, Sutiksna and Agastya, humiliation of 
Surpanakha, kidnapping of Sita, Jatayu killing 
and meeting with Sabari 
CHAPTER 50 204 

Friendship with Sugriva, murder of Ball, 
Sugriva's leniency and his humiliation, search for 
Slta and Hanuman's steps in Lanka 
CHAPTERS! 

Hanuman's enhance into Lanka, meeting with 
Slta and message to Rama after Lanka burnt into 
ashes 215 

CHAPTER 52 

Rama's visit at sea-shore, shelter of Vibhis 
ana, proposal to make him the king of Laiika, 
Ravana's defeat, slaughter of Kumbhakarna, 
Meghnada and otlier monsters, Coronation of 



17 


Rama etc. 219 

CHAPTER 53 

An account of deeds performed by Sri Ki'sna and 
Balarama 228 

CHAPTER 54 

Account of deeds performed by Kalki and the 
Kalki religion 235 

CHAPTER 55 

Regain of the lost eye to Sukracarya by the grace 
of gods. 240 

CHAPTER 56 

Installation of icon of Visnu 242 

CHAPTER 57 

Characteristics of devotees, Description of Harlta- 
smrti, Duties of the Brahmanas 246 

CHAPTER 58 

Duties of Ksatriya and others. Descriptions of 
first and second mode of life. 249 

CHAPTER 59 

About the duties of Vanaprastha. 258 

CHAPTER 60 
An account of ascetic 


CHAPTER 61 

The essence of Yoga 261 

CHAPTER 62 

Vedic hymns on Visnu and their place 263 

CHAPTER 63 

Indra's rescue from the female sex 265 

CHAPTER 64 

The supremacy of the devotee and an episode on 
Pundarlka 277 

CHAPTER 65 

The holy places relating to the god and the names 
of god relating to those Pilgrim places 286 

CHAPTER 66 

Magnificence of other pilgrim places Sahyadri 
and Amalaka Grama 289 

CHAPTER 67 

Manasa-tlrtha Fast 293 

CHAPTER 68 

Fioiits of reading Nrsiiiiha Purana and the fruits of 
listening 295 


259 



NARASIMHA PURANAM 


om namo bhagavte Vasudevaya 


CHAPTER 1 


An assembly of hermits (R§is) at Prayaga, 
Curiosity raised by Bharadvaja before Suta, 
Deseription of the order of creation 

^TRrant ^ ^RtrftTlJ^I 

^ ^iTcTr II^11 

Having saluted Narayana and Nara, the 
foremost of male beings as well as Sarasvatl 
(the goddess of learning) let us narrate 
Purana etc..' 

^ 11 ^ II 

^ dtslril^ri'^lii):I 

$dlt^cH*(Jnibuii:ii5ii 


O divine Sirhha (lion)! your eyes are 
glowing like the fire erupted inside the hair 
as yellow as the gold itself. A slight blow of 
your nails is harder than a thunderbolt. I 
salute you the supreme Isvara (god) of great 
eminence. May the plough-like nails of god 
Nrsirirha turn into red owing to the mud of 
the heart-field of the Hiranyakasipu demon, 
provide protection to you all. 


f^cbirtTn M^iruiHl ^rmfuu<4cnfyH:ii'){|i 
^s^ditu^iPitdl: j^bcbtuu-ycuPyH;! 

^ xT % w I 

«niUud<rll % rf <u^<*KUdc|irtH:l 




r:ll^ll 


^ ^ % rf iJ«llPlc|irtH:l 


1. This is a benedictory verse which occurs at the 
commencement of every Parvan of Mahabharata. 


Ti^ rf -frfviiriT ■q^STTHTMliall 
tliytlT^ traPT rt W tnsf yMMIdl :l 

s9 O 

Once the hermits (Rsis) living in the 
valleys of the Himalaya, well learned in the 
Vedas and knowers of three Kalas (viz. 
present, past and future) like munis from 
Naimisaranya, Arbudaranya and Pus 
karanya, from Dharmaranya, 

Dandakaranya, Sris'aila and munis living in 
Kuraksetra as also hermits living at Kumara 
mountain and Parhpasara including many 
more other holy hermits visited at the 
pilgrim of Prayaga for taking with their 
pupils in the pious month of Magha. 

■RTt^ w^id gpf 'dMif^chq;ii<iii 

5 tirag ^ ^ PM^diivRi 

rl5 «TTlpjT MUild1«JPr^fe'^ll'?ll 
ft g-dRjrcll w 4PfPddl; I 

©X Cv 

3TH% c^uiiPtM iiandiwii^oii 

^ ailtPHIfd dg)«Jdl: I 
gjsiT: ^ iTTWTPsnf^linil 
<*«!!% tlcT^i ^nfentqqPTI 

3tMJIW ir^ltfdlWd ■«mqfd;ll^?ll 

aTifdfcdr it: i 

odiyPviwi ytai«)d dtf^ HlM^iJuiq^ 

t TT3f?S ^TTSFirr J^dldmUdlddHI^'ttll 

They (all hermits as described above) 
took bath and performed Japa etc., in a 
systematic and prescribed manner and 
bowed before the god Venlmadhava. They 
subsequently did tarpana rite for their 




2 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


ancestors and met the learned hermit 
Bharadvaja, resident of that sacred pilgrim- 
place. Those hermits offered honour and 
reverence to Bharadvaja with due manner 
and also received the same warm greeting 
from him. Subsequently, they seated on Vrs 
i (A special scat made of kusa grass) etc., 
marvellous asanas (seats). Having properly 
seated, they started conversation on the 
episodes related to Lord Krsna with each 
other. Lomaharsana Suta, the disciple of the 
hermit Vyasa arrived there in the meantime 
when the holy hermits were busy with 
discussing the life episode of lord Srikrsna. 
Lomaharsana Suta was brilliant, very wise 
and well learned on the Purana. Suta saluted 
all the hermits seated there and received the 
same honour from them also. He was then 
seated on the appropriate asana as allowed 
by Bharadvaja. When he was thus seated on 
the asana provided, he relaxed himself. 


'OTW qRfwniEiT 

^wmud: 

lldrU^rdH cTT 

djftdT ^ ^jrn^d^SRTcRTTI I 11 

f% ^nrriT ^ t 

^ TTpq^l I 11 

diST rT Wd'd'WH dST 

digr-gdTd wrrfdidT wd xijjhH^ ii^oii 
^ fg^.>Egjr dIT dTSdW ^ fTtl 

^dlfuT ddfd yudlfd ^ d- jndT: 

dU^dJT: W: wrr^dldfd: 


^dldldi did qd14-d>dipy dl 
ddT fdUTERT^ •^feTT^ dST d^liy^ll 

droTR: It d ddR: It d fdf^ dTt ddT:l 
tJdrd^ d?mFT didd W ddldidd IR11 

Bharadvaja said- Suta, all of us had 
heard the Varaha Saihhita from you in the 
great offering made by Saunaka sometime 
in the past. All of us now are curious for 
listening to the Samhita of Nrsiriiha Purana. 
All these hermits have gathered here for 
listening to the same. We therefore, ask 
you, O great hermit Suta, in the sacred 
morning and in the presence of all these 
hermits of great souls (Mahatman). The 
question proposed is 'from where has the 
dynamic and inert world been originated? 
Who protects it? Or what does it merge 
with? O you possessed of a noble soul 
(Mahabhaga), what is the proof for this land 
and O enthronement of great knowledge, let 
us know the deeds satiating lord Nrsiihha. 
Further, let know the procedure involved in 
the creation of the world and how does it 
last (collapse)? How are the era (Yuga) 
worked out? What is the form and feature of 
the four eras? What are the distinguished 
dividing points between each era? State the 
living standard including the - modus 
operandi of the people in Kaliyuga? And 
how did the gods worship Lord Nrsiihha? 
Please state the names of the holy places 
which existed on this earth? Let us further 
know the names of the holy mountains? 
Tell us the names of the holiest rives so 
viable as to shatter the mala-fides of people 
(viz. viable to clean their bodies and soul 
both). How had the gods originated? How 
do become the creation of Manu, 
Manvantara and Vidyadhara etc.? Tell the 
names of kings who had given offering 


CHAPTER 1 


3 


(yajna) and tell the names of kings who had 
obtained achievements (Siddhi) out of 
them. O Mahabhaga (the generous-hearted 
one), please tell all this in detail and in 
orderly manner. 

Elid'd fctUrinlcid I 

^RTT ^Mdrl rR^ cdi+UdlSlHflrl'il^ll 

^ y =ll^<c)ch«||fhniH,IR'3ll 

tr^B^RWfT yR*)Rd:i 
RtujjuRi^d Wi^iR<iii 

ttsnftr 

TM^iijud mrspr ^ii^<?ii 

Tti ^ 1WT;l 

fOW ^f ^ t fi T-qWTdraTll^oll 

Suta said- O great ascetics, I start with 
telling the story of Nrsiiiiha Purana to you 
all with bowed head before the revered 
teacher (guru) Vyasa by whose grace I 
could obtain the knowledge of the Puranas. 
I salute at all moments of each day, 
eminent, brilliant lord Vyasa the son of 
great saint ParSsara, learned, excellent 
preacher, supreme man (Parama Purusa) as 
Lord Visnu who is the sole cause for all 
gods and worth knowing the Vedas with 
their six segments (ahgas), I will only able 
to describe this very story of god Vasudeva 
with the grace of that brilliant god Vyasa. I, 
therefore, salute him. Dear hermits, who 
except blessed with the grace of lord Visnu 


can provide with replies to the questions so 
formed with keen deliberation. However, I 
start the most holy story of Nrsiriiha Purana 
in reply to the questions raised by you I 
pray you all to listen to the same patiently. 
The hermits with their pupils present here 
are also requested to listen attentively to 
this stoiy. I make you all to listen the story 
of Nrsirhha Purana in detail and in its 
original form. 


TTiNuiif^f; RMAl-l 

qtlUlHi % ^ RMTHI; I 


yviij^Rd ^ gTmt 


' ejVII ^ 




This whole movable and the inert world 
as it is observed, had been originated from 
Lord Narayana and he holy maintains and 
nourishes them through his varied forms 
(incarnation) like Nrsirhha etc. Ultimately, 
this whole universe is merged with that god 
Visnu, in the form of Jyoti (flame). I tell 
you the procedure by which god did the 
creation (srsti). Please, listen to the same. 
The story of creation has been described in 
all Puranas while explaining the 
characteristics of them. Hermits, listen to 
very first this hymn and only then pay your 
attention to the rest of the matter. This 
hymn is read as - "A Purana comprises the 
five characteristics as Sarga, Pratisarga, 
Vaihsa, Manvantara and Varhsanucarita." I 


4 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


describe now the Adisarga, Anusarga, 
Variis'a, Manvantara and Vaiiis'anucarita in 
an orderly manner hereunder. 

3TTf?^ Rirerra?]; ^ fert: i 

-ywienrpcT wr ^Rdilci rrii?^ii 


W WTRRT ■^H1dH:l 



'Tu'lfdtMrRjdiKUlH^I 


SlH'dyiMi ^ ■55^* • 

II 

3t(^f91 -RclIW-fcsJR^d TTragj tt^l 
Rjfen?! f 5 ^fsiitcH-.i 

31>dHlH fIraJTt rt d^y5^t|*»)ll>to|| 

O Brahmins, Adisarga is the greatest. 
Hence, I choose it first for the description. 
The conduct (activities) of gods and the 
kings as also the mystery relating to the 
essence (element) of the supreme or Eternal 
soul (Paramatman) can be made easy to 
understand when the description of the 
creation is started from Adisarga. Brahmins, 
please note that prior to creation and after 
the great devastation (mahapralaya) there 
was nothing in existence except the only 
Parabrahman (celestial knowledge). The 
only existing element of Brahma at that 
time is the cause for all and ever 
illuminating. This very element is immortal, 
free from all attachments (Niranjana), quiet, 
beyond the determination of quality 
(Nirguna)' and always innocent. The 
persons desirous of emancipation want 
shelter under the supreme Tsvara, full of 
(ocean of) the true pleasure. Being in the 


1. Saguna or immanent and Nirguna or transcendent. 


form of knowledge, it is omniscient, 
everlasting, unborn and indeclinable. That 
omniscient Parabrahman became aware of 
the embedded world within it and started 
creating the same when the appropriate 
time had come. 


■wiR^> tMRflsy fer 1111^11 ^11 

^chlRclj^sHRV^ ^dlRv^^ rTPHT:! 

‘t^TtTc)K>iliqdll'«?ll 
^rar yiJii^'t ^ citing: 1 

^jcTT% f^fcliaT; rRTtll-it^ 

^r«dd'Ri^r<i<*ivi 

^TsciTTnr traratm ■RRT^RJTRfii'tt'iJii 

31lcHlVltd II 

3Tram cranf^rTcfi 

rf^ eH^Rijiellu i l wnt W# I ll'i^^ll 

^ ^ wnjf WfnTtri;i I'tjts 11 
'i4lfdWirM Rt^cnui wnt II 

Mts-wfiftr tRyKif&r rnRr 5iitt<i 11 
iRRTIlfui TllWtiRt ^Rli 4TOT^U|lq^| 
|q^ar?uiif:i TaujqiRi Ti'ismra 

■Rxnit dWHW JIAl^ui) ■qrttimoll 
dfwwRMRJ rTHrar ^ d^ll^ TCRTTI 
dAtiiiiuqRtvlMlfui ^W?it5TTTT:im ^11 

wfi w crai m ? 11 


The Pradhana (Mulaprakrti- Universal 
Nature) was originated from that Brahman. 
Mahattattva (the supreme element) emerged 
from that principal. This Mahattattva 



CHAPTER 1 


5 


consists of the three gunas'- Sattvika, Rajas 
and Tarnas. From the Mahatattva the 
Vaikarika (Sattvika), Tejas (rajas) and 
Bhuta (creature) were originated. These 
three had originated the ego. As the 
Mahatattva is covered by the Pradhana, the 
ego similarly is covered by the Mahatattva 
(intellectual principle). Subsequently, the 
Tamas ego consisting of the BhutSdi had 
created Sabdatanmatras (subtile particles of 
sound) as a result of distortion arisen in it. 
The ether consisting of the Sabda-guna had 
then originated. That Bhutadi had then 
covered within it the Sabda-guna ether so 
generated. As a result of declination, the 
ether then originated the Sparsa (touch) 
tanmatra. It, in turn, originated the mighty 
wind. The quality of the wind has been 
accepted as touch, that it contains. The ether 
of Sabda-guna then covered the wind 
containing the quality of touch. The wind 
thereafter created the Rupa (form) tanmatra 
when it was distorted. This originated the 
fire full of flames. The quality that the fire 
contains, has been said as Rupa. The wind 
of Sparsatanmatra had then covered the 
splendour of Rupatanmatra. The splendour 
(Teja) ^s a result of declination so obtained, 
created the Rasatanmatra (subtle element of 
taste). This had created the water containing 
the quality of taste (Rasa). The splendour 
containing the quality of complexion then 
covered the water containing the quality of 
essence. The water by virtue of declination 
created the Gandha-(smell) tanmatra. It 

1. The harmonizing or organizing tendency is called 
the Sattva-gunci; the isolating tendency is called 
the Raja-guna and the disorganizing tendency is 
called the Tama-guna. These three universal 
tendencies, energies or qualities regulate the entire 
creation. 


gave birth to the earth and it consists of 
more qualities than the qualities of all 
Bhutas (elements) including ether etc. as it 
contains a mixture of the qualities they 
possess. The formidable Pinda is originated 
from the physical element found in the form 
of Gandha-tanmatra. The quality possessed 
by the earth is of 'Gandha' (smell). 
Tanmatras existed in the ether etc. Bhutas 
i.e. the words (Sabda) etc. are their only 
qualities. This is the reason, they are 
deemed to be in the form of tanmatra 
(rupa). As there is no line to distinguish the 
tanmatra of ether and wind etc. these 
tanmatras are called a Visesa (common). 
However, the ether etc. Bhutas having 
special recognition, have their particular 
name and identity. It is worth noting that all 
these had originated from tanmatras. 
Bharadvaja, thus, I have succinctly 
explained the creation of the five bhutas and 
tanmatras which have got their existence 
from the Tamas aharhkara (ego). 

lebiRgn 

chifRqinji rti 

^ hiPh*! ^ 

The scholars, having the element of 
creation and the sole subject for study, have 
explained that the sensory organs have been 
originated form the Tejas Aharhkara and the 
corresponding ten-fold celestials and the 
eleventh mind had been originated from the 
distorted ego. Thus, listen Bharadvaja, the 


6 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


purifier of the race, there are five sensory 
organs and five executive organs. I am now 
describing all sense organs and their 
respective actions. The ear, eye, tongue, 
nose, and skin are five sensory organs and 
these make us aware of the worldly subjects 
like word, touch, etc. The anus, genitals, 
hands, feet, and tongue are called the 
executive organs. Their actions are 
excretion, carnal pleasure (sensual), work 
(silpa), movement and to speech 
respectively. These are thus five in number. 

Dear Brahmin, the ether, wind, touch, 
light, water and earth are the five elements 
(Bhutas) containing the sound, touch, form, 
taste and smell respectively. The quality of 
sound (Sabda) is with ether; the word and 
touch are the two gunas with wind; the 
word, touch and form are three gunas with 
light, Similarly, the water has four and the 
earth has five gunas. These five Bhutas thus 
contain distinct and separate powers. These 
cannot do creation until properly mixed 
with each other. 


oUctfeid:! 

Having the objective of creating a single 
impact, the declinations from Mahatattva to 
the five Bhutas took assistance from each 
other being governed by the Purusa and 
integrated altogether. Thus, they 
combinedly originated the egg (anda) under 
the influence and governance of the 
principal element. That egg gradually grew 
up and established on the water like a 
bubble. O the wisest, it was established on 
water after taking combined birth from all 
Bhutas. That gigantic egg as created by 
Nature (Prakrti) became the best premise 
(base) for lord Visnu in the form of Brahma 
(Hiranyagarbha). Lord Visnu, the master of 
the world enshrined himself on the same in 
his inexpressive form, as Hiranyagarbha. 
The Sumeru mountain was the ulba (the 
membrane covering the womb) to that 
great soul lord Hiranyagarbha at that time. 
The other mountains were the ovary 
(Jarayuja) and the sea was the water of the 
ovary. 

t'dlJJUNd'l ?fT: THri 

W ^ tirpqqqfTT qjidrdJHlftdivddll 

5 \9 

The mountains, islands, oceans, and the 
stars-galaxy including all worlds (lokas), 
the gods, demons and the creatures like man 
etc. have taken birth from that primordial 
egg. The supreme Isvara lord Visnu too 
obtained the form of Brahma consisting 
rajas guna and tended to create the universe. 



CHAPTER 2 


7 


He only protects this universe in the form of 
Nrsirhha etc. till the creation of Kalpa exists 
and destroys the same on the expiry of a 
Kalpa. 

9i^ui <e\ilnj| 

>0 

Trn i RtcvM TT f W ^ 

The lord Ananta himself created this 
whole universe under governance as 
Brahma, protects and nourishes it by 
attaining incarnation as Rama etc. and 
finally runs it through his Rudra form. 


Thus, the first chapter on description of tlie 
order of creation in Nrsimha Purana 
approaches the end. 




CHAPTER 2 


7 


CHAPTER 2 

Description of the creation of world. 

WT 

cbyRjtilirM 

^liiuiitsdl «fWi; ^ I 

'iAiH: j)i-c<4rl P<ryl5'Hig4’yKn: 11 ^ 11 

rR?T tn^ 3TTO^^Wt 
cTtdTHsst W Tm^qfqyly^ll^ll 
-y^rolTh crami 

^ ^ qftTrrnWn^M'^ii 

^T^r^MKKHIhV^MKJli ^ WTIimi 

Suta said- Bharadvaja, listen to the 
procedure by which lord Nrsiiiiha tends to 
create the universe by turning himself into 


Brahma form; I am now going to describe 
the same. O scholar, lord Brahma, the 
lokapitamaha (ancestor to the universe) 
popular as NarSyana is Sanatana Purusa. 
However, it has been said in legend 
(Upacara) that he was born. His age in his 
own sustainability (Parimana) is told as of 
one hundred years. This period of hundred 
years is called 'para'. Its half is known as 
Parardha. O innocent hermit, the greatest 
saint, the estimate of the sustaining age of 
that Brahma and the other movable and 
inert creatures and things like earth, 
mountains and oceans etc. is made on the 
basis of the age of lord Visnu which I had 
described earlier. Now, I am going to tell 
you about the method of calculation of the 
time of the men. Please, listen to this 
attentively. 

tT ^ gfet iljWhUli fq%r -^l 
cjjiK^cfiT MR«lMdiii^ii 

cblWlfWV'I^TlI 

ii<^ ii 

Rry^Hlfq? chif^dt(||<^ u 

^ qra: fttpt q a^TTarg^Wti 

Wm: T?cT:II^o|| 

qrt 

iidvifqwf^qpt qiinii 

The eighteen Nimesas constitute a 
'kastha'; thirty 'kastha' make a 'kala' and 
thirty 'kala' constitute a 'muhurta'. Thirty 
muhurta constitute a day and night of the 
men. The thirty day and nights constitute a 
month. Evei'y month has two fortnights 



8 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


(Paksa). The period of six months is ealled 
an Ayana. These are in two numbers i.e. 
Daksinayana is the night and Uttarayana is 
the day for the gods. The eonjoint period of 
two ayanas is called the human year. The 
period of one month for men has been said 
to be a single day and night for the Pitaras 
(ancestors) and the one human year has 
been called a day and night for Vasu etc. 
gods. The period of twelve thousand years 
of gods becomes Treta etc. Caturyuga. 
Listen its division from me please (that I 
tell you). 

■q&siiVIchliiTd 

«hicil fen 

fTHPT: 

fJct l?TT cfif^V^lfd 

-drH^hi f sTinJTl fer II^MI 

The commentators on Purana have told 
the length of the Krta etc. Yuga (era) as 
four, three, two and one thousand divine 
years respectively. Brahmin, the sandhya of 
the same length of years prior to each era as 
that of sandhyarhsa after the Yuga. The base 
has been taken as hundred years. The period 
falling between sandhya and sandhyarhsa, is 
to be considered the popular era of Satya- 
yuga and Treta etc. The combination of 
Satya-yuga, Treta, Dvapara, and Kaliyuga is 
called Catur-yuga. O Brahmin, as much as 
one thousand Catur-yuga constitute a single 
day of Brahma. 

iiPTr 

Ttflitiui rt ^ diM^d ^11 


^d'4j|Ri wn ^ ^■di'^t'dfd: 

•o sa 

TCRt: vipRTcjidmfM fer nun 

3^ Vldy^^lfui feg^iT wrar •^^:l 
feo»j|-9ra«n^ifd y^wiuitiychifd fii^'?ii 
yts^idi: wrarfen 
yidufewyi-itifd -q^rg^iRoii 

fenfeET y^wifui fern 

O Brahmin, a day of Brahma consists of 
fourteen Manus. Now listen to the time 
length of them. According to the previous 
Kalpa, the Saptarsi, Indra, Manu and sons 
efo Manu are created simultaneously and 
these are destroyed at the same time and 
simultaneously too. Brahmin, a Manvantara 
is the period of seventy one Catur-yuga and 
some more. This very period is the period 
for Manu and Indra etc. gods. Thus, this 
Manvantara is the period of eight lakh fifty 
two thousand years according to the 
calculation of the divine years. O great 
hermit, this period according to the 
calculation of the human years is not in 
excess of thirty crore sixty seven lakh 
twenty thousand years. 

TT^j^trariR^ii 

Ttfert; 

^Tgc(u4 trar 

IT 3W:i 

TTf^qsT’HiIRmi 

The single day of Brahma is fourteen 
times more than this period (aforesaid). 
Lord Brahma has in the initial period of the 
creation of this universe, made gandharva. 



CHAPTER 3 


9 


demon, demigod, devil, guhyaka Rsi, 
Vidyadharas, human beings, beasts, birds, 
immovable (trees, mountains etc.), pipTlika 
(ants) and snakes in his merriment while 
creating the gods and the pitaras. He then 
classified them in four varnas and employed 
them for performing the yajna (the great 
deeds). Subsequently, that everlasting 
almighty destroys the three worlds (lokas) 
on expiry of the time and enjoys sleeping on 
the cot of sesanaga in the night as large as 
the day itself i.e. equal to the day. 

(j^fiq: MRchl^ci:! 

^ Mirtii cihi 5 crtrnfsjrr:i 

sD ^ 'O 

^ TfEHTR) 11 ? t911 


On expiry of that night, the popular 
Mahakalpa entered. It was called Brahma 
and the god incarnated as the fish 
(Matsyavatara) and the churning the ocean 
was performed during that Mahakalpa? The 
third kalpa known as Varaha Kalpa equal to 
the length of this Brahma-kalpa had 
entered. Lord Visnu appeared in the form 
of Varaha (boar) happily in order to absolve 
the earth from the clutches of demons in 
that very kalpa. The then hermits used to 
pray to him. 


tlsHIVrl mirfTTcT^VI:! 

TTfriT ?fTTrf^:ll?<ill 

%tf!lt5Sifm:IRII 


Whose art is absolutely impossible to 
understand for all terrestrial and aerobic 
creatures, the lord of such eminence sleep 


peacefully after destroying the creation as a 
whole on expiry of the period prescribed for 
the creation once made by himself or by his 
own hands. 

Thus, the second chapter on Sarga-racana in 
Nrsiihha Purana approaches the end. 



12 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 4 


About Anusarga 


^rasjT sr?nJTtssra?rjRR:i 

gsi w ■ginifRgreRT ^spni^ii 


Bharadvaja said- Suta, how did the nine 
kinds of creation of inexpressively born 


Brahma avail expansion? Please, tell this 
very thing to us now. 

3^TEr 

iTsinT ^ 

frar 3lfflT: ^:lRll 

4cH4o£tVT4 irlrlT ^1 

qfTT^ M^I»Tf^:ll^ll 

-RiHiniiT ycR#^ qrr? ■gf^ii'iiii 

Suta said- The names of the first created 
Marici, etc., Rsis by lord Brahma are - 
Marlci, Atri, Ahgira, Pulaha, Kratu, 
Pulastya, Praceta, Bhrgu, Narada and the 
wisest of all Vasistha is. the tenth and the 
last hermit. Sanaka etc. Hermits were 
tended to the emancipation (Nivrtidharma) 
and all hermits like Marlci etc., except 
Narada were engaged in the task of growth 
for the creation (Pravrtidharma). 

fTW II 

■Rf gFtnf ^jfTiTr: mmyiniebi:ii^ii 
^j f^e i i fn iFERifnr ^ERiftn ^i 
gHidniri dl*^ WII^II 

tiflT^iai -q^:! 

cir««<5Wl ■q?TOFT IT^ MH«X^:lldll 

The other Prajapati Daksa, born from the 
right part of the body of lord Brahma, had 
the daughters and the movable as also the 
immovable world is generated from the 
clan or the sons of these daughters. The 
gods, demons, gandharva, uraga (snake) and 
birds, all were religious and born from the 
daughters of Daksa. The dynamic and inert 
four kinds of creatures were born in 


CHAPTER 5 


Anusarga and obtained an appropriate 
growth. O you possessed of a noble soul, 
from Marlci to Vasistha as aforesaid are the 
offspring of Lord Brahma who were 
generated by virtue of his thinking. All 
these are the creators of Anusarga. 

3 isrrf^ 


rT-filrSrPrT: 1111 



By Sarga is meant the generation of the 
five Mahabhuta, wisdom and the senses as 
aforesaid as created by the great soul Lord 
Narayana just at the beginning of the 
creation. Subsequently, he himself appears 
in the form of Brahma with four heads and 
hermits like Marlci etc. during the phase of 
Anusarga and thus, created the universe. 

Thus, the fourth chapter on creator of Anusarga 
in Sri Nrsirhha Purana approaches the end. 


AskSfe 



CHAPTER 5 


13 


by virtue of thinking of lord Brahma how is 
it that he became the son of Mitravaruna. 




yr^iTOX fjtrrfr 4twHlf^fr:iuii 

mRviv^ Tr:iimi 

t rRim ^ ycdclTcT 31 ^fd:I 
fgstFSntRHRlT "RR c<|c(-Ml-^5lHdll^It 


CHAPTER 5 


Description of Rudra and other Sargas, the 
expansion of the children of the daughters of 
Dak$a Prajapati. 


dc)N 

I l!? 

3R: Hdrflisii: gsi 3^:11^11 

(ttdlcHiJUI^d^ cir^WW ^ 

W'nttTRT: tTfiR^ii'Bi 


Bharadvaja said- O the wisest, please 
describe now in detail the Rudra-sarga and 
also tell how the hermits Marlci etc., had 
participated in the mission of ereation. 
Learned Suta, when Vasistha was created 


Suta said- O the crown of saints, I will 
now provide with description on the 
creation made by Rudra and the sargas 
embedded with the same according to the 
question raised by you. I will 
concomitantly, tell in detail the Pratisarga 
(Anusarga) as laid down by the hermits. 
Please, listen to the same attentively. Just at 
the beginning of the creation, lord Brahma 
was plunged into deep thought of obtaining 
a son as mighty as he himself. Very soon a 
baby appeared in his lap whose form was 
reddish-blue. Half of his body was of a 
woman and the rest was of a man. He was 
stubborn and gigantic and all directions and 
angular directions were illuminating by the 
light coming out from his body. Having 
seen him so glowing with light, Prajapati 
said- "O wise child, go on my words and 
divide your body into two parts." 

9 r?niiT 

pqtcf rf yt!|c(^yyqail<*<lrflP9ll 
g ^ TT: I 

^ RimfR g:^RTfiT ^ ^ fellftTTTI l<i 11 



14 


NARASIMHA PURAIVAM 


W^dsiTi 

■Hcbidvl^l : 11 ^ o 11 

■#tg ^ ^^i^cRgri 

5^ TJr^ ^ cq^fWTi I ^ ^ 11 

O Brahmana, complying with the 
suggestions of Brahma, the gallant Rudra 
separated his masculine and feminine parts 
of the body so combined at that time. He 
then divided the masculine part into eleven 
forms which were known as - Ajaikapada, 
Ahirbudhnya, Kapall, Kara, Bahurupa, 
Tryambaka, Aparajita, Vrsakapi, Sambhu, 
KapardT and Raivata,. These eleven are 
Rudra and govern the three worlds (lokas). 
The feminine part of the body was also 
divided into eleven parts, the same way as 
that of the masculine part. Goddess Uma is 
the only wife in her varied forms to all 
these Rudras. 


?PT; ^ tr ^ ^1 


HJ^nTyR ii 

f^druebRiytiiuii 

^ trarft w ^ 


O the crown of Brahmins, during the 
long-long past the gallant lord Rudra came 
out from the water of completion of his 
steadfast penance. He then created a 
number of creatures by virtue of his power 
so obtained from the penance. He generated 
the lion, camel, the devils whose mouth was 
akin to that of a crocodile, the monsters and 
vetala etc., including many other thousands 
of creatures. He thus generated thirty crore 


fifty lakh Vinayakas who were stubborn 
and of aggressive nature. He then generated 
Skanda for the other wide mission. Thus, I 
have described lord Rudra and the sarga 
related to him. 


315 ^ graRnfir ^1 


^c) i rdt>a i dtMi!?T4 trsiT: 

HRIRJT ^ TTifT: T oira^ 




rii^vaii 


^ ^ ^ TTgrol^i IU 11 

^ 5i^|ui TRt:i 

fhcTT?^ 5 RTTOtl I 11 
HgMl'fl 5lg)'^W*!dqi^ud1l 

f ^ ^11 ? o II 


I am now going to describe the Anusarga 
pertaining to the Marici etc., hermits, please 
listen to it attentively. Svayambhu Brahma 
had created the subject encompassing from 
the gods to the immovable. However, the 
subject so generated could not avail of 
expansion and it made lord Brahma to think 
of creating a son analogous to him and by 
virtue of his mental power, he generated 
Marici, Atri, Ahgira, Pulastya, Pulaha, 
Kratu, Praceta, Vasistha and the wisest 
Bhrgu. These people have been ascertained 
as nine Brahmas in the Purana. Brahmin the 
fire and the Pitrns (ancestors) too are the 
sons created by the mind of lord Brahma. 
Both of them had been created by 
Svayambhu Brahma in the beginning phase 
of creation. He then generated a daughter 
Satarupa and entrusted her to Manu. 

«at' 4 T 4 |dl 

RT: ■gUFTl 



CHAPTER 5 


15 


cl^ ^V^^ravildeti rT8n’ll9?ll 
cb-ycbiwiRi ^ 

«ngT wfe^lR^II 


3TO^ 3iinn^ ?nft ti^hi^-xii 

6l<^^<^i^i 5 tp%Tt in?TT: ■pT:i 

£^^T^T T5raTf^?iM^^ 119 MI 

o 

The goddess Satarupa had given birth to 
two sons namely, Priyavrata and 
Uttanapada as a result of coition with the 
Svayambhuva Manu. She then gave birth to 
a daughter whose name was Prasuti. 
Svayambhuva Manu married his daughter 
to Daksa. Daksa gave birth to the twenty 
four daughters as a result of his coition with 
Prasuti. The names of those daughters were- 
Sraddha, LaksmI, Dhrti, Tusti, Pusti, 
Medha, Kriya, Buddhi, Lajja, Vapu, Santi, 
Siddhi and the name of thirteenth daughter 
was Kirti. Lord Dharma made all these his 
wives for reproduction of children. The 
sons Kama etc. were born from Sraddha 
etc., wives of Dharma. The race of Dharma 
attained enough growth with the sons and 
the grand sons. 




w ^ cfarriR^ii 

mdRv<^l5SI ■Rcq^IRVail 


^ TgsjT Tpri 

Ifdiw dtuluii 


O the great Brahmin, I am going to tell 
you the names of the rest of the sisters to 
Sraddha etc. who were younger than them. 
These were— Sambhuti, Anusuya, Smrti, 
PrTti, Ksama Sannati, Satya, Turya, Khyati, 
Svaha and the eleventh is Svadha. O the 
generous-hearted one! Daksa had two sons 


also- MatarisVa and Satyavana. Daksa had 
married his daughters to the sacred heart 
hermits. 

irftEzn^ f ^ gsraifir 

Mrdl Hii'^: TTT yPlHj I ? 11 

Ticqt urgWT: c»,^c*,iw«tii 
Rr-rigT^ Trajr'tai^ufdwrii^oii 

rrar 

^ ^ rt iiiPR'hii^ 

dWIHfetr^l fefll^^ll 

irra^ WTH ^ ^ 

^ f ^•ddltl’4 TdrctlUvi^ rTII^^II 
gssq^ gi gq - y^ fttn ^ 
Tiai^^pPiogTyis^; qRd,1Rdi:ii?xii 
Rmrt ?f?riin ^ 'ssni^ncn ^ w hsti 

1 tell you about the sons born to the 
hermits like Marici etc. Sambhuti was the 
wife of Marici. She gave birth to the 
hermits Kasyapa. Smrti was the wife of 
Ahgira. She gave birth to four daughters. 
Their names are -Sinivali, Kuhu, Raka and 
Anumati. Similarly, Anusuya, the wife of 
Atri had given birth to three innocent sons - 
Soma, Durvasa and the Yogi Dattatreya. 
Svaha, the wife of the eldest son of Brahma, 
the egoist god of fire, had given birth to 
Pavaka, Pavamana and Suci (sipping the 
water). These three sons had given birth to 
the other forty five children in the form of 
fire as each had given birth to the fifteen 
sons. The three sons including the father 
fire as also these forty five sons arc 
conjointly called the fire (Agni). Thus, forty 
nine fires are in existence. The Pitrs of 




16 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


whom I told you earlier, ereated by lord 
Brahma had reprodueed two daughters 
namely, Mena and DharinI by his wife 
Svadha. 

mi: ^ 

^ trsiT ^ ^ WTi I ^ ^ 11 

'*TTOT 'Jiini hi^cieJ-u ^ f&'Jil 
rt^ -Rfq; M'lll'jldrll^dll 

TrsTT:! 

qfe ^siprsb^i 41"hmrfqfd fcn{^i 

^ -^T ^ gufit chV^JMW ^V^lll'iJoii 
RMf^Vlfd •ffmm 

I^ wfgjim 14c(i[^-t4l craiTii'*{^ii 

I; TRftrranfq ^r isgiji 

O the crown of saints, listen to the 
description on the manner by which Daksa 
had created all creatures in compliance with 
the order of lord Brahma in the words- 
'Generate the subjects' in the long long past. 
Respected Brahmin, the hermit Daksa had 
at first created by virtue of his mental 
power, the creatures like gods, hermits, 
gandharva, monster and the snake. 
However, when he saw that the god etc. 
sarga, created by application of mind are 
not availing of the growth, he then 
determined doing creation through the 
coition process and solemnised marriage 
with Asikni, the daughter of Virana 
Prajapati. We have heard that Daksa 
Prajapati had given birth to sixty daughters 
from the womb of ten daughters with 
Dharma and thirteen with the hermit 
Kasyapa. He then entnjsted twenty seven 
daughters to the Moon, four to Aristanemi, 


two to Bahuputra, two to Ahgira and two 
daughters to the learned Krsas'va. Now, 
listen to the description of the children born 
from these sixty daughter. 

-qiinSTT 

TgTIT:l 

Hi<iii4nv^g[ yUdisdl Hni4iI5Ri^ 

Rmi^idiRlMi qroifq ^ 
arnit yii^^ciiPirTniFfiii'ij^ii 

yrMMV ^ iniTWcf«<*1Rdl: I 
^ VldriTtSSl 

The daughter named Visva gave birth to 
Visvedevas and Sadhya to the Sadhyas. 
Marutvatl gave birth to Marutvan (the 
wind) Vasu to Vasus, Bhanu to Bhanu 
devata and Muhurta to the gods pertaining 
to the Muhurta. Lamba gave birth to the son 
Ghosa, Jami got a daughter namely, 
Nagavlthi and Arundhatl generated all the 
creatures of this earth. O the great learned, 
Samkalpa got birth from the daughter 
Sarhkalpa. Listen to the names of the eight 
Vasus whose breathing are the light and the 
wealth. These are Apa, Dhruva, Soma, 
Dharma, Anila, Anala, Pratyusa and 
Prabhasa. The number of their sons and 
grandsons have increased to many hundreds 
of thousands. 

RISAIIV^ yiddltdd4dl?rT 

illtditli qPTrfq R ^1 
sif dfdf^fd^ ~ j ?# ci 3Tf^ wqTii^<iii 
tTTRT shlu«Vil 

eh^ffT ?iT d^MrMlP R 



CHAPTER 5 


17 


Similarly, the number of the Sadhyas is 
ever-increasing and they too have thousands 
of sons. The names of the Daksa's daughters 
who became the wives of Kasyapa were - 
Aditi, Diti, Danu, Arista, Surasa, Svasa, 
Surabhi, Vinata, Tamra, Krodhavasa, Ira, 
Kadru, and Muni. 0 learned to Dharma, 
now listen to the detail pertaining to the 
children of them from me. 

diHg Hindi irrrilH o II 

^ firatSST ^WRWTI 
irfeTT ^ stmt xt Riciwiv^ ■R?TR^im ^ii 
cqttl 15 ^ trar [qa^^r/urll 

%5iT: ^ ftr^im^ii 

-q^rarrat cIKI^ui W ^ fET:l 

f^tuiichrvNv^ci ^ icrnm^ii 

O the great learned, Aditi had given 
birth to twelve handsome sons from 
Kasyapa. Their names were - Bharga, 
Ariisu, Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna, Savita, 
Dhata, Vivasvana, Tvasta, Pusa, Indra, and 
the twelfth is called Visnu. We have heard 
that Diti had given birth to two sons from 
Kas'yapa. The first was the giant Hiranyaksa 
who was killed by the lord Varaha and the 
other Hiranyaksipu was slaughtered by lord 
Nrsirhha. 

^ Rfd!j:llV^ ^PraT;l 
aiftiiTTTT 5 -rraraf 3Fi9WfWTIin'){ll 
RtnHJTqsilAFTT OtCnyidUR I 
TR t TT ^n^IRRT "gw chV'MMl- 'gfRHmmi 

Besides them, a number of other 
monsters had also taken birth from Diti. 
The sons of Danu were called Danava and 
Arista had given birth to Gandharvas from 
Kasyapa. Surasa gave birth to a number of 


Vidyadharas and Surabhi gave birth to the 
cows from the hermit Kasyapa. 

5 ^ iHsuidl nwi^ufii 

wr f^lbuiltfhd^l'^:lin^ll 

clI^HrcirnqTrtllritl 3T^: t^4nKly:l 
■diyrqt cbv^mi'j^idi: M<ydiwifH4ly ^imvaii 
3T?an: ^ tt^ 15111:1 

*lyini trsa II 

^ gi^cHniqcTilyi'JMInl^'cl ^Tf|l^l 

nfH<m<n4d«nim'?ii 
-qgHFTT d>dVj:^l f^Mld^l:! 

RidPciv i fd •qr: ifaRR ylnmr^sst ^pdT:ii^oii 
rfRTT n^itiTcti f^l 

4te?Ti I ^ ^ 11 

Vinata gave birth to two famous sons 
known as Garuda and Aruna. Garuda 
affectionately accepted to became a vehicle 
for lord Visnu and Aruna became the 
charioteer of lord sun god. Tamra gave birth 
to six sons from Kasyapa. They were - 
horse, camel, donkey, elephant, Gavaya and 
deer. All organism wicked by nature have 
been generated from the disgust. Ira gave 
birth to the tree, creeper, valll and the straw 
species sana. Khasa gave birth to demigods 
and monsters while Muni gave birth to the 
Apsaras (the divine damsels). Kadru gave 
birth to the poisonous snakes known as 
Dandasuka. Brahmin, the twenty seven 
spouses of beautiful moon had given birth 
to the Budha etc., sons who were full of 
vigour and valour. The wives of Aristanerni 
had given birth to sixteen children. 

cj^gilTR TgcTT: I 

UrtiflRTgcll: *MyV’jf4'liTf7dl:ll^^ll 

J ipni: iwr:l 

^iTRi^ g^ flii^^ii 



18 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


■qw cjiVUMcii-yKi: chiRdi: ■4yiujvd^ni:i 
fwff Pwdw d<Ri^w g%:ii^')jii 
T^dT f^^Tcrar fer ^ MRchlRdi:! 
chlSldl d^ch-dni H<4I ^S'Jrd'Hdfd: 11^ ^ 11 
?1^5raR yw’^^di TT yy-dUdH 

S 3 

W^Tcf: ■gfef^fig|cTt:l 
TT3f% ^ fgrajMlI: ■RdT 


^ f^RFFT 

■gfe^si^ Ti«nTt5sarRT;iimi 


The four colour lightning are called the 
four children of the learned Bahuputra. 
Their names were - Kapila, Atilohita, Pita 
and Sita. The sons of Pratyahgira were the 
great hermits who attained honour from all 
the saints and hermits. The sons of Devarsi 
Krs'as'va became Devarsi. These run with 
the cycle of birth automatically on expiry of 
the eras, one each (i.e. on expiry of a kalpa). 
Thus, the movable and immovable creatures 
born in the race of Kasyapa have been 
described. The traditional ascending of the 
race of the Daksas daughters has also been 
explained in detail. The outstanding figures, 
always engaged in performing the great 
deed of lord Nrsirhha, have been deseribed 
before you all here. The person who takes 
into account this description with due 
diligence and honour, attains to the 
handsome children. I have now told you all 
regarding the sarga and anusarga generated 
by lord Brahma and other Prajapatis for 
extending the scope of creation. The people 
(Dvijati) going over these contexts always 
with due respect for lord Visnu, shall 
definitely become sacred in their hearts. 


Thus, chapter five on description of creation in 
Sri Nrsimha Purana approaches the end. 


* * ^ 



18 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 6 

An event of the birth of Agastya and Vasi^tha 
as the son of Mitravaruna 

n9 

crf^ chtyRlbyifq yuiiitsijR 

m?[F3r 11 ^ 11 

Suta said- Brahmin, I have told you 
completely the story of the worlds creation 
including the origin of gods, demons and 
demi-gods from the supreme soul lord Vis 
nu. I will now highlight the ancient story 
explaining the event which made Vasi§tha, 
the son of Mitravaruna, as you had raised a 
query on the same topic when I was 
describing the origin of hermits (in 
preceding chapter). Bharadvaja, please, be 
attentive and listen to the same with 
extreme heed. 

qnTT: -^T^f^gTRt ^ qm 'srarttf^ni-jjii 
^ ^ gRlT; chqHHWHI:l 
■R^vD^urerwiUii: V(4l<Vlimil 

cTRit fratsRT RMiyqii 

3tR(df5fd(i:i: gtlHT ■gfttf ■gf^:ll^ll 
3^ ^larr ^ •wtPiMqdi Tanri 

T Nd nS 

^5^ WTT ^ ^ f ■^^l|\9ll 

Wrat ^3^ ^ 3lRfd4qd'l %ril<ill 


The Prajapati Daksa, well-versed in the 
elements of all religion and the purport 
allied thereto, the greatest among the Veda 



CHAPTER 6 


19 


scholars and well known to all learnings 
(Vidyas), had solemnised the marriage of 
his thirteen beautiful daughters, all lotus¬ 
eyed and endowed with the best 
characteristics, with Muni Kasyapa. I tell 
their names now. Please, listen to these. 
They were - Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kala, 
Muhurta, Sirhhika, Muni, Ira, Krodha, 
Surabhi, Vinata, Surasa, Khasa, Kadru and 
Sarama (called bitch of the gods). Daksa, 
was the greatest and oldest among them. 


W -iTUiPl iPTI 1^11 


^ ^ wi 


Aditi had given birth to twelve sons. 
These were of so fair complexion and full 
of splendour as that of fire (Agni) itself. I 
am going to tell their names, please listen 
them from me. These were - Bhaga, Arhs'u, 
Aryama, Mitra, Varuna, Savita, Dhata, 
Vivasvana, Tvasta, Ptisa, Indra and the 
twelfth was lord Visnu. The cycle of the 
day and night ineessantly and unbarred runs 
under the monitoring and control of them. 
These twelve Adityas provide us with heat 
and rain as well. 


T3% ^ cuiilfd ^1 

3^ writ TR TR?r:ll^?ll 

R3«w) RRTrTtR: ^:l 


The middle son of Aditi was Varuna. He 
is ealled Lokapala. His location has been 
said to be at the Varuna-Disi (the west). 
These are adorned at the sea-shore in the 
west direction. There exists a beautiful 
golden mountain. All its peaks are full of 
the treasure of gems. Several kinds of 
metals and fountains are found therein. The 
mountain consisting these and a number of 
gems looks enehanting. There are large 
passages and caves as well where tigers and 
lions ean be seen roaring all the time. The 
Siddhas and Gandharvas are accommodated 
therein at all and many solitary places. The 
whole world falls in the lap of dark when 
the sun enters there. 

^ -^1 
TRT I 11 

3ft RR -RW i 

There at the peak of the same mountain, a 
city namely, Vis'vavat! is situated there 
which was built by Visvakarma. It is a giant 
city rendering divine pleasure and gold has 
been used for its construction gem minarets 
have been installed in the buildings 
constructed there. That city is fascinating 
and enriched with all kinds of luxuries. The 
Aditya, namely, Varuna, under the 
influenee of lord Brahma, rests there and 
provides all the worlds (three in number) 
with light. The Gandharva and divine 
damsels always serve him. 





20 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


R6m'qTorq1iid:i 

M ^ 

sTRiraT ^ ywlnm&cS^dyiH^i 

wfsiR^r g|3^tTWR;^iR?ii 
#^fJOTITf5RSI^ rTTrfr ?PT 3Wi;i 

One day, Varuna smeared the divine 
sandal-paste on his whole body, worn the 
divine ornaments and moved towards the 
jungle in the company of Mitra. On arriving 
at Kuruksetra, the pilgrim place, made 
abode by the Brahmarsis, enriched with 
several kinds of flowers and fruits, covered 
with a number of sacred places, hermitages 
of Urdhvareta Munis and abundant source 
of water; both of the deities had worn Cira 
and the hide of the black deer and seated 
themselves for penance. 

aHid'^dHTss-ij Hfri'itI 

^ ts^Ttrl MlHchT*}U4l(dd;l 
tTtnf fenwift dHTdiRufli 
ct f ^ Ti^ ^ R m I 

A beautiful pond, full of pure water is 
situated there in one portion of the forest. It 
is covered with a number of shrubs and 
creepers. Numerous birds sip the water of 
that pond. A cluster of trees and lotus 
flowers has enhanced the beauty of that 
pond. It is popular as Paundarlka and 
numerous fishes and tortoises live within its 
water. After the initiation of penance, both 
the brothers i.e. Mitra and Varuna once 
started moving in the forest in order to 
identify the whole area. In course of their 
walking, they found that pond. 

fTTClt ^ W q<im<i:| 


Writ W ^11 ^ ^ 11 

-gf# ■■yHHidi RHrwHiiRdii 

■51TSZIT xji^^iryHjiR<?ii 

fcwldiHcfin ^ RuitiRcrmi 

qurii 'RTTf5[T2pnfipTtll^ o II 

Both of them saw that a most beautiful 
Apsara UrvasT was taking a dip with her 
mates in the same pond. That beautiful 
Apsara used to laugh and sing without 
hesitation assuming that it was altogether a 
deserted place. She was of fair complexion. 
Her gait was tender as that of the inner 
petals of a lotus flower. Her brows were 
raven coloured and smooth, eyes like lotus, 
lips dark red, her tone was full of melody, 
her teeth were as white as conch-shell, kund 
flower and the moon. The brows, nose, 
mouth and forehead of that enchanting 
damsel were most beautiful. Her waist zone 
was as thin as that of a lion, hips, pubic and 
legs were thick and formidable. She was 
humble in speech. Her middle portion of 
body was fascinating and her smile was 
dazzling. Both hands were as delicate and 
pretty as a red lotus. Her body was thinly 
built and feet were beautiful. Her mouth 
(face) was as pleasing as the full moon and 
her motion was as slow as that of an 
intoxicated elephant. 

^11 ^ ^ 11 

f? ’^11 




CHAPTER 6 


21 




Both the deities fell in surprise merely at 
a glance of her divine complexion. Their 
mind was more enchanted by seeing her 
dance, humour, gait, smiling and by 
listening to her melodious song as also the 
touch of breeze blowing from the Malaya 
mountain and the murmuring sound of the 
bees and sweet chirping of cuckoo. The 
cross winking of UrvasI threw fuel to their 
sensual fire which had discharged them 
(i.e. their semen was discharged). O the 
great Muni, the living soul (Jivatma) of 
Vasistha then (inserted in the semen of 
Mitravaruna) owing to the curse of Nimi. 





R<Vc|^c|i:i 


11 ^'u 11 


Then Vasudeva had pronounced (by 
entering into the semen of Nimi) "Vasistha, 
you shall be the son of Mitravaruna". The 
same statement was also given by lord 
Brahma. Hence, out of the three places 
where the semen was discharged from 
Mitravaruna, the semen dropped on the 
lotus had gave birth to Vasistha. 

^-qrPir 

^ rTjT hItihiT, ctlyy: 

RrRT:l 

n 9 


divided into three parts and got dropped on 
the lotus, water and into a pitcher. The lotus 
semen gave birth to a radiant fish. As the 
semen from Mitravaruna fell in three 
places, Vasistha originated from the lotus, 
Agastya from a pitcher and a fish from the 
water. 

3^ di-iMl’f ^ ■ng) wmtsmifi 
grqrafg j ggw gt tPT: 113 'a 11 

UrvasI in the meantime left for heaven. 
These two deities then took the hermit 
Vasistha and Agastya with them and 
returned to their hermitage and started again 
their tough penance. 

gtrar if) tr RgiiPRfi 

dMW-rfi 

■gsfT ^ctihSuJi^ II 

rff fwfl ^fyg.KelJlll'itoll 

Lord Brahma finally came to them and 
said that they would obtain Vaisnavl Siddhi 
as they had desired to attain the supreme 
flame (the abode of Brahma) by virtue of 
penance. Lord Brahma ordered them to hold 
their position as the witness to the world. 
Lord Brahma then vanished and both these 
deities held their authoritative positions. 

fiidicit>ui'gdccmMtAit^ ^ 4)Rg:it'u^it 
Efiw MIMWIRHifl 
^ ^ggT:i 

gig WPEriiiij? ii 


ftgw gWIAhUlfg ll^^ll 

The semen of those three gods got 




22 


NARASIMHA PURAINfAIVI 


'U^’^dr*jUJ4||fHri4 JllcRSWra ■Rm:! 

W!i f^OTTrTI^ IT 1^=3% ll-^-ifll 

' -o o 

3Wt ^cifd^T.<{iRdH^I 
TTfa^q^ ^ ^JTillfd TT^ 

TT ^ ^RHlcbM»4Tnil'i{Mi 

^sstn^T:ii^ii 

O Brahmin, I have thus told all about the 
context pertaining to the event of the birth 
of sacred Vasistha and the wisest Agastya 
from Mitravaruna. This account of the 
reproduction of Varuna deity is capable of 
absolving all sins. The people desirous of 
children who do the sacred resolution and 
listen to this episode, definitely obtain 
several sons. The Brahmin reciting it while 
performing havya (offering for the deity) 
and havya (offering for the pitaras), satisfies 
both i.e. the gods and the ancestors. The 
man reciting it early in the morning or 
listening to it; lives on the earth with all 
pleasures at hand and attains the abode of 
lord Visnu on death. This episode as 
explained by me and propounded by the 
scholars of the Vedas, will make able the 
persons either reciting or listening to it to 
attain the abode of lord Visnu without much 
effort as it automatically purifies their 
hearts to the extent that they perform 
philanthropic deeds. 

Thus, the sixth chapter on reproduction of 

hermit Vasistha from Mitravaruna in Sri 
Nrsimha Purana approaches the end. 





22 


NARASIMHA PURAINfAIVI 


CHAPTER 7 


Penance made by Markarnjeya for attaining 
the graee of Lord Sri Hari, recital of 

Mrtyunjaya strotra and conquest of death 

■It WII ^11 

Bharadvaja said- Suta, please tell me 
how the muni Markandeya had defeated 
death? You had already told that he had 
conquered the death. 

vjud’g dt‘t'iiV’^1) gnfrT 
gfw sfi«J||qrqq 

^d«N 

Jjfuiury qywid ittmsiifiJdi: I 

qqr^Vil ^ yiilW-MId ^Rpd«fll 

<tjdd1«Sfd^irydiii^ii 

Suta replied- O Bharadvaja! listen to 
this most ancient plot with all hermits 
present here. I am now going to describe the 
same. The religious soul Sukadeva had once 
also submitted his curiosity before the great 
hermit Krsnadvaipayana, an outstanding 
personality in the realm of the Vedas and 
the commentator of the connotations 
derived from them. Krsnadvaipayana was 
seated on the Vyasapitha at that time in 
Kuruksetra after the due performance of the 
bathe and japa. He was then surrounded by 
a number of his pupils. Sukadeva bowed 
before him duly with clasped hands and 



CHAPTER 7 


23 


asked this very question regarding 
Markandeyas conquest of death the same 
way as you, the resident of this sacred place 
and devotee to Nrsirhha has asked me. 

qic(5u^iiq -gf^nr gsi i 

^ <TRT ^5§qTIIV9ll 

Sukadeva said- Dear father, tell me 
how Muni Markandeya had conquered the 
death? Please give the whole account and I 
am curious to listen to the same from you. 

TifqqT W Mtlfjid:! 

•o ® >0 

vjud^ ch«gqR qjngni 

tsHnRgfi ^ i 

gftM qPT t tjofl gctiuii^ q'^iOTtii^o ii 
«nJ?T g4fdfdi ttiTi 

rlW grq gidt uid^u^ql qgTqfd:ll?^ll 

gq'M qimnrt diRtgft q^mfd:i 

ftrartr^ <tid(sbq:ii^?ii 

Vyasa replied- O the wise son, I tell you 
the episode disclosing the manner by which 
Markandeya conquered the death. All 
Munis and all my pupils are also advised to 
listen to this plot both sacred and great, to 
which I am going to unveil Khyati, the wife 
of Bhrgu had given birth to Mrkandu from 
her womb. The sacred soul Mrkandu was 
married to Sumitra when he was grown up. 
Sumitra was religious and learned. She 
always used to keep her busy with the 
service of her husband. Later on, Sumitra 
gave birth to a son whose name was kept 
Markandeya. Markandeya, the grandson of 


Bhrgu, was very sharp in his childhood too. 
Beloved to parent, Markandeya gradually 
started keeping pace with years after 
Jatakarma Saihskara solemnised. 

tr qiiq^l 1 11 

rRTlfq trotTT cR2T uriichi^l (*<11 tRT:l 

xigjR ■qgf gfr#i I 11 

An astrologer, well-versed in prediction 
had pronounced on the birth of Markandeya 
that he would die on completion of the 
twelfth year since birth. The parents were 
badly shocked at hearing that prediction. 
Their heart started shivering with the 
apprehension of his premature death, yet 
they performed all ceremonies including 
Namakarana etc. Subsequently, he was 
taken to the teacher. And Upanayana 
Sarhskara was performed therein. He began 
to live in the service of the teacher 
stalwartly and involved himself deep in the 
study of the Vedas. 

^^?ITWfDT ■R gqi]^qPlcf:ll^^ll 

m q|cl5u-^ql : 11 11 

On completion of due study of the Vedas 
and other scriptures, he returned to his 
home. Just on approaching home, the wise 
hermit Markandeya bowed his head with 
due reverence at the feet of the parents and 
used to live at home. 

tfl gT?t rf? d-qidlfildil -^TrlTI 1^11 



24 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


cfr 5:Grq|T4 n^mfd:l 

3^ WSR m f%iTsf f :isi4i<4ViH,ii^^ II 

tnc R^ i ^H w ^tm\ 

■c|<J^R4ry ^:WI fcSrT:ll^oil 

^r^cRII ^ tTTcIT cT^ I 

gjsRjTw 3c?dmFmtiiR ?ii 
dT«fcii«1 irf^: TTT^ RTcR ftWT tR:! 
fiRT -m^ gii4 §:i§[tnr<^rq[iR9II 

Sm^byifM ^ cPTOT 3R it^TiT: I 
W rrTif%ra^: -^^It M:ll?3ll 

Sukadeva, having seen their son well 
learned and wise, the parents were shocked 
severely instead of feeling any gaiety. The 
wise Markandeya fell in surprise and asked 
the reason for all this from his mother. 
When Markandeya stress on his enquiry for 
the reason, the mother told everything once 
predicted by an astrologer. Hearing this, 
Markandeya said to his parents - "Mother, 
father and you yourself needn't worry about 
the matter. Have faith in me and I declare 
that I will conquer the death by virtue of the 
toughest penance. I will perform a penance 
so acute as to bless me with longevity. 

tfl RMIVcIltg ggRWMI 

cIvHicii 3FT gg 4HI4ift|fHMfgdhlRXII 

^ mci5u^ 

arf^raur ggRtra ■?? i 

-tidRftdMdt 

imrgt tmr tfit wt i 

iTgmnt ggr 

iThUPIdlsf^ TRig fWR gt?TH tr: I 

s3 s3 O 

uTpg wRigRT g fgRrwranwf^iRdii 


3gRr TR^ sir^fvra^qi 

gtR ^ 

irg Rtg inra^ 1% ^ g;^ 13 o 11 

Solacing his parent with these words, he 
went into the forest of VallTvata which was 
surrounded by a number of hermits. The 
hermit Markandeya saw his grand-father 
Bhrgu there in the group of Munis. Religion 
abiding Markandeya bowed at the feet of 
his grand father and saluted all other Munis 
present there. He then stood with clasped 
hands before him. The scholar Bhrgu saw 
his grandson whose age was at the verge of 
cessation and said- "Dear son, tell me how 
have you come here? How are your parents 
and all other kinsmen and tell me the reason 
for your arrival?" Markandeya told 
everything as was predicted by an 
astrologer in his reply. Having heard his 
grandson, Bhrgu enquired again - "O wise 
son, what do you want to do in the present 
circumstance?" 

RTPRtfRt ■gtg %fir^Tfir RRcnri 
wr tgt iRRifw dJimu g.-ii? ?ii 

Markandeya said- Lord, I want to 
conquer the death, a predator of the living 
beings and have come for shelter under you. 
Tell me of some measure viable to achieve 
the objective. 

RTTgTRRRTSg RRTT Wl 

^ ^ rRRg dMRr4gii3?ii 

c!TRRR3t fgnjTWR TRJgtgRTI 

s9 V* “s 

^Rgfirg ^rgtgr tg wrt ggni^^ii 

:?nTjt ^ gggiRTT^ i 





CHAPTER 7 


25 


rPTOT tiFiT ^ 

drtl^KlAj^l'qFT 5r?nT: ^:l 
^ ^ farf^p^ 
ijusfian^ ^rrdw 

aj: qr^ i^ryndifnauuiH^ii?^ 11 

WtFRPTji' fqay ^iwr ■^RT: mIcIHJ 

TTif^ Tin# ^ ^11^1911 

-q?!^ WJTR Wl 

ar^T ^ jm ttit 

Bhrgu replied- Dear son, who can 
conquer the death without the grace and 
pleasure of Lord Narayana obtained as a 
result of severe penance? Hence, you are 
advised to sit in penance for lord Narayana. 
Go to the shelter of that everlasting, the 
greatest god, beloved to the devotees, 
unborn, solitary and Purusottama lord 
Visnu. Son, Narada Muni in the ancient 
ages, had also resorted to that lord Narayana 
by virtue of his severe penance and it was 
by the grace of the lord that he since then 
enjoys longevity and has conquered both 
old age and death. No man here can efface 
the entity of the death without the grace of 
the lotus-eyed, Nrsiihha form, lord 
Janardana. Go in the everlasting shelter of 
that immortal, unborn conqueror, of dark 
complexion, LaksmTpati, Govinda, Gopati 
lord Visnu. Dear son, you will undoubtedly 
conquer the death for ever, if you could 
maintain undisturbed concentration of mind 
on that lord. 

dc(|-c) 

3aRT: PudlM^^y gTTsr^i 

Vyasa said- In reply to his grand-father, 
Markandcya most humbly replied- 


HSTTET 

3TRTSq: chlydWId Wtl 

^ w gjFRTEzmRTSR qrli 

s 3 S 3 

Rq "qrq n 

s 3 O ® vS 

Markandeya said- O beloved father and 
teacher, you have told lord Visnu as 
Vis'vapatl and the god to whom I should 
resort but tell me the place and the 
procedure for the worship of that lord. 
Since, the due process will only enable me 
to please him to the extent that he shall 
drive away the death from me. 

^^•■q^fd fgTsqpTT ^ wwi 

grR ^ yfdt^iut 



fwoiTT^; ^T^gragRTcfrarqi 

yqq-qcfiqdl g?q 

dibqql qrgqqrqi 

fq qpq % ^3Tqqt qgqqqq W^:l 

qfql qqiq fq^^Rqr- 5 ^ ^qrqq^^i 11 

Bhrgu said- Go to Sahya mountain. 
There flows the popular river Tuhgabhadra 
and a tree Bhadravata exists there. Install an 
icon of lord Jagannatha Kcs'ava under the 
tree and worship him duly by offering 
fragrance and the flowers. Bridle up your 
senses under the monitoring of mind and 
the mind too under check of all 
concentrated citta and recite the twelve 
letter hymn - "Oih Namo Bhagavatc 
Vasudevaya." Imagine while reciting this 
hymn that lord Visnu is enshrined in your 
heart with their weapons i.e. conch-shell, 
discus, gada and the lotus flower. The 




26 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


Visvatma lord Visnu is pleased with the 
devotee who recites this twelve letter hymn 
incessantly. You should also do japa of the 
same and he will definitely efface the fear 
of death. 


yuiu^w IT UPTTTT 

•O '3 -O s 3 •s 

Cl3r pfdWZT gpTRTIIliiail 

iJylilimR Rld^u^-yi I 

hyffegr IR diR^ H 

yfdtdd g^WTd%T:l 
'Uliilctddil^ (^RT^ ^ m M^mld:ll1i<?ll 
RTW AiyicWMRui f^TOTROTT^^I 
ld^4dW<kmilmoll 
3TRrt IclRddi (Jirdiul yiUlWURI 

tl'rilRUII 4 IMid IT Idchldddim^ll 
tfdRmindiiu^Hifd RJwrtTRi 

xro TuirRhim^n 

MidIkRyi VI<-lsl^diXldiy<MJ 

RU-W4Tvi5 M-RdrmlHdV'M ^llk^ll 
wwi # sm'dldd'l M-dMdltild^l 
^Rra^ cuy^c^RTimifii 

Vyasa said- Dear son, hearing these 
words, Markandeya saluted his grand father 
and went to the land for penance (tapovana) 
situated at the bank of river Tuhgabhadra, 
surrounded by different kinds of trees and 
creepers, flowers, gulma and Venus as also 
filled with numerous hermits. He 
established lord Visnu there and started 
worship by offering fragrance and flowers 
in an orderly manner. He kicked off laxity, 
the desire for food and sat in penance not 



lesser than the period of a year. The 
material time as told by the mother then 
came and he worshipped lord Visnu in the 
said manner tied up body on Svastika 
posture, controlled the senses in the mind 
and did Pranayama with the pure heart. He 
started extending the lotus heart with the 
recital of the syllable Oih, imagined the sun, 
moon and focused his nerves exclusively in 
imagination of lord Krsna with his 
Pltambara, conch-shell, discus and gada. 
Thus, he started offering spiritual flowers to 
the lord. At that self-forgetting penance, he 
started reciting the hymn - "Orb Namo 
Bhagavate Vasudevaya." 

SJRT 35TeT 

gZTTRTcRTTRT qlTOT; 1 

xPTITlIw it^ xstWIi m k 11 

TRTt RRTTtPTT OTXTclT ■5hTf%gRT:l 

■qT?r?IRTR5 TT ^ ^ IctTlim^ll 

fl^T ^TfWI 

^ fqrarjJ xj^jJTirt ■gc^Wlf^TKlfWim^ll 

Vyasa said- Dear Sukadeva, the mind of 
Markandeya was fully engrossed with the 
sovereign god Jagadls'vara in the state of so 
severe meditation. The representatives of 
Yama then came there with pasa (cord) in 
their hands but the representatives of lord 
Visnu had driven them away. Frightened of 
the pain inflicted on them by spears, they 
had to flee from there but they warned 
Markandeya that the god of death himself 
will come henceforth and he will predate 
his breathing. 

x^jT XT; wftRt XTTtT <HlctHI«IF4 iqif^TUT: I 
^ Chid; chdAldt XRtimiill 

Visnudutas replied- The Yama can do no 



CHAPTER? 


27 


harm where the pious name of our lord Vis 
nu, the master of this universe, holder of the 
Sarhga-bow is recited. The predator Kala, 
death or Yamaraja has no power to act 
voluntarily. 

TTfWT:ll^o|| 

twr fybUctnJdhHI md^U^dl M^lhfd:l 
3Tm^ ^ 

iiTtrWIS gjnf 

trttt ^ •RTKl^l I ^ ^ 11 

Vyasa said- Yama himself came there 
on return of the Dutas and ordered him to 
accompany him to the abode of Yama. 
However, owing to fear of Visnudutas he 
only roamed round Markandeya but could 
not dare to touch him. The Dutas of lord 
Vi.snu too stood with the iron musalas with 
the intention that they would slaughter 
Yama in compliance with the order of lord 
Visnu. The learned Markandeya in the 
meantime started praying to the lord 
without deviating his attention from Visnu. 
The psalm which he was reciting, was given 
by lord Visnu to him in the ear. Thus, with 
the very psalm he worshipped Laksmipati. 

Uld^U'^il sgTcT 

HHHJUi MilddH,! 

MU I dTf^ ^ cfift^ttfdll^^il 

w wrrfw fgj ^ licf : 
t ii i vglFq ^ i jeiul;td" | [^tn|^ i 


yM-dlfRI f% ^ 
gmi grar Tffw 

TTiara ^ chRuyfdii^vaii 

Markandeya said- I salute SrT Narayana, 
who has one thousand eyes, master of the 
senses the Puratana Purusa, and 
Padmanabha (who had generated the world 
(Brahmanda) lotus from his navel). What 
will the death do me? What harm the will 
death do to me when I have sheltered under 
the everlasting, unborn, indeclinable, 
Govinda, lotus-eyed lord Kesava? What 
harm will the death do to me when 1 have 
come to the shelter of lord Damodara, the 
place of origin of the world, full of light 
like the sun, and omnipresent Vasudeva? 
What harm may the death do to me when 1 
am in shelter to lord Adhoksaja, with 
conch-shell and discus, who is free from the 
distortions and who is in inexpressive form? 
What may the death do to me when I am in 
shelter to Varaha, Vamana, Visnu, Nrsiihha, 
Janardana and Madhava? 

TTOT TTW Tpnt 'jthchMMI 

N* ' "v 

^ ebRbijfdii^dII 

^dlrMH M^IrMH vi|dd1Rth4)Rl'dH,l 

ThRTrfw f% ^ <*RutR|||^<?|| 

^ ciicwicycw ydWdH,i 
MgRTRi ^ gsRKifdiiisoii 

What will the death do to me as I am in 
shelter to sacred, Puskara form or Puskala 
(perfect) form, the seed of welfare, 
nourisher of world and master of lokas, lord 
Puimsottama? What the will death do to me 
when I am in shelter to lord Vis'varupa, who 
in spite of being the soul, supreme soul and 



28 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


yoni to the world; himself Ayonija (not 
born from the womb)? What will the death 
do to me when I am in shelter to MahayogI 
Sanatana god, who has thousands of heads 
and who is in both forms i.e. expressive and 
inexpressive? 

^ ^ «ltTRTTI 

The god of death immediately fled from 
that place on hearing to that psalm as was 
recited by Markandeya (with the grace of 
lord Visnu) coupled with the pain inflicted 
by the Visnu-dQtas on him. Thus, the wise 
Markandeya conquered the death. In fact, 
nothing is left unachieved, when lotus-eyed 
lord Nrsiriiha become gracious to the 
devotee. 

■JT ^ fschivi I 

C -O 

HKliJui 

TTiRR 

Rtd^fd^erihsMI 

■m<nTtGim:ii\3ii 

The lord himself had preached this all 
sacrosanct Mrtyunjaya strota, effacing the 
death to Markandeya in order to save him 
from the clutches of death. The person 
reciting this strota thrice in a day i.e. 
morning, evening and noon with keen 
devotion, scared spirit, and in a regular 


manner, the devotee of such trends seldom 
meets premature death. Yogi Markandeya 
had established the Adideva, Purana Purusa, 
and more illuminated than the sun itself; in 
his heart by virtue of the imagination mixed 
with the severe concentration and thus 
conquered the death immediately. 

Thus, the seventh chapter on Markandeya's 
conquest on death in Sri Nrsiiiiha Purana 
approaches the end. 



28 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 8 


Yama prevents death and his Dutas to visit 
the devotees of Lord Vi^nu, departure of the 
hellish organism to the abode of Lord Vijnu. 

: hmKscii : I 

fe) < 1 ^ 5^ TTcgr ^ f 1^11 

Vyasa said- The god of death as also the 
YamadOta started wailing and ciying with 
pains severely inflicted by Visnudutas, on 
their return to the palace of Yama. 

■g^^f^RfTT : 

sTT^TOT^ inrhi ^ 

tt STPmR ^clilchrURMffRII^Il 
^ h6iu^i 

m: 5^: I 

3|fRlpH'4c44 tRPf ^4t^l<A|cT:imil 

tiw rPn^ fTiftr iw^,! 

3T^T^ ctittletN t wril^ll 

■d<tf<aTf| tl?mFT ^IgniT^ Wl 




CHAPTER 8 


29 


^^sqira^fer; 1^911 

The death and Yamadutas said- O king, 
listen to what we are going to report to you. 
We went near Markandeya, the grand- son 
of Bhrgu, leaving behind the death 
aceording to your orders given. However, 
he has in meditation on any god that time, O 
Satpurusa. We had yet to reach him when 
suddenly the giant Purusas appeared and 
started blowing musalas on us. Frightened 
of the sudden blows, we turned back 
immediately and the god of death then 
visited there. The Purusas did not take the 
least care of him also and same treatment 
was made. Thus, we including the god of 
death could not bring that Brahmana here. 
O master, please, tell us the penance on 
which he was doing meditation, the name of 
god in his imagination and further, the 
reference of the people who badly hurt us. 

Vyasa said- O learned son, hearing this 
from the death and all other dutas, Yama, 
the learned son of the sun jerked on his 
mind for a little while and said- 


^ -iciN 

ifltr ■p^mpir 


■qpfTIT TT ^ ^ M:l 
-Rqw sirrah ^ 


^feHTFrcT^T^ ^ WTEt I 

-RM ^ctdcIrH^I 
T ^ f| l^ITt3;%?raT9rTtTII?'>SII 

Yama said- Listen to the matter I am 
going to refer, O the death and my all other 
servants. Whatever had come to my 
cognisance by virtue of meditation 
(yogamarga), is that the wisest Markandeya 
was known to his death today earlier and he 
had visited the tapovana with the sole desire 
to conquer the death. He has under guidance 
Bhrgu, worshipped lord Visnu and made 
severe penance with recital of the twelve 
letter hymn. Dear representatives, that Muni 
is concentrating on lord Kes'ava with keen 
attention and imagination of lord in his 
heart. Servants, he has thus, attained the 
force of Mahadaksa for the concentration on 
lord Visnu. Otherwise no other force than 
that can protect the man whose time of 
death has come. Who can even gaze at the 
man who had enshrined lord Visnu 
undeviatingly in his heart? 

3PT T TRfost m ^ ^ujigT: 

T fer rTTST 3Ti q^IrM^T: I 

11 11 

WKidumi gpCT 

■Rfn'^5 TpMt T rlif^ll^\9ll 

qb^|^^^4^ W^RRTIIUII 

The people are also the messengers from 
lord Visnu who have inflicted pain on you 
all. See that you will leave the place where 
devotees of Visnu existed. It is not a matter 




30 


NARASIMHA PURAINAM 


of surprise that those people have hurt you. 
Do you get surprised that they have not 
slain you. Who ean even dare to see the 
Brahmin so busy in his devotion to lord 
Narayana? You, the evil-doer have not 
good anyway in the form of effort for 
bringing him here. Put ear to my order that 
you will not go to the sacred souls who 
keep them engaged in the service of Lord 
Nrsirhha. 

^ ^ w<eh4«i 

wrr 

qrtf^ ch^vrivm;ir?ii 

f ^sqfTurr 5 nj: I 

^ # 3 F-R ^ 15^: 11 ^ ? 11 

WUTFgfaR!^ ^ "R f% R 

Vyasa said- Sukadeva, having ordered 
the god of death and the messengers present 
there, Yama started at the troubled people 
of the hell. Whatever he had said to them in 
vagary of mercy under influence of 
devotion to lord Visnu, listen that very 
carefully. Yama said to those suffering 
organism - O consumer of fruit for vices 
committed, why had you not worshipped 
lord Visnu, in you life-time? Why had you 
not worshipped such a god who pleases 
with the worship made by only water even 
in the absence of other ritual materials and 
endow the devotee even his abode also? 
Why had you not worshipped Nrsirhha form 
and lotus-eyed lord who provides with 
emancipation merely thinking of him? 


RR; ■Rt^lfiUJJRRwRMPcIdtll'R'iJII 
RM^RRIRmi 


R?: Rg^RifR ^RgiggR^RRRi 

-Rt ■5gTRR'5IxrTRT^:lR^II 


Yama, the son of sun and devotee to Vis 
nu then turned to his servants and suggested 
-O servants, the words of god 
(Bhagavadvakya) as said by lord himself to 
Narada ad oftenly heard from other 
devotees to Visnu and siddhas; is being said 
by me to educate you. Listen all you people 
with keen devotion for lord Visiiu. 

I fOT ^ firotfR gt Rt "RlTfR fRrE[^;t 

RRf fRrgr W RTRRfJSRWfIR ^ 11 

gustlRiit? RTf% fafggsm 

tgiR? FRIT RTCT ?fR W I ? <i 11 

tgt il't-tlsfw %»KV1 RRT^Rl 
ffRR: WT RIRTRT 


The god said- I pick up the person from 
the hell fire the same way as the lotus come 
above the level of water who recites "He 
Krsna, Krsna, Krsna,. I immediately 
provide support (Uddhara) to the man who 
calls me -"Punddarlkaksa, Deves'vara, 
Nrsirhha, Trivikrama, I am sheltered by 
you." I remove all pains of a devotee who 
takes shelter under me with expressive word 
- "Devadhideva, Janardana, I have come in 
for shelter under you." 


SRR 3giR 
^Rg i cHi Rl 

RRRR; 

Wn RZIT #ltR RlW:l 



31 


Vyasa said- O son, The organism 
suffering from the hell fire started reciting 
loudly the names of god as 'Krsna, Krsna, 
Nrsirhha etc., when they heard the 
declaration of god himself from the mouth 
of Yama. It was a phenomenon that in 
proportion to the recital of the lord's names, 
the hellish organism tended to be filled with 
the devotion for lord Visnu. So filled with 
the devotion, they started saying - 




qiTRrnmr 




-q^ fdshqry qw:! 


qiTt sllgiuira qqt qiT:l 


ciiiRiii gfp^ipTRtitii^^ii 

The hellish organism said- We salute 
the great soul lord Kesava, by the recital of 
whose name the hellish fire is immediately 
extinguished. Salute lord Visnu, the Isvara 
by offering Adimtirti, always in peace and 
master of the world. Salutation to Sri 
Narayana who is everlasting, incomparable 
in the form of Nrsirhha, who holds a conch- 
shell, discus, gada and teachers the lokas. 
The god, favourite to the Vedas, great and 
dynamic in particular. Salutation is 
conveyed to lord Varaha who is beyond the 
scope of logic, in the form of the Vedas, 
holder of earth. Salutation to lord Brahma, 
born in Brahmin clan, learned in the Vedas 
and their segments (ahgas) and well-versed 


with a number of subjects. Lord Visnu in 
the form of Vamana is saluted. 

oinfq^ wn?q^ii?v9ii 

^ qq:i 

TtqFt TrauTRirq qq^tw q^i^i 


He had tied Bali under promissory- 
estoppel, implemented and protected the 
Vedas. He is master of all gods, 
omnipresent and the supreme soul. Lord 
Caturbhuja is saluted. He is in the form of 
purity and pure metal. God Paras'urama is 
saluted as he had destroyed the wicked Ks 
atriyas. Salutation is conveyed to the great 
soul ^rl Rama who had killed Ravana. 
Govinda, we salute you frequently. Please, 
pick us from this hell, full of odour. 




cT^ ■qr qliT qqr ^ q?RqqTq;i !•« o 11 






qiqitloj fqq% 

qr^ q qtq 

-qqr ^ 

qqiq^Mqunqr qTW: 
q qqifq w ^ qrfqgqi 
wqq ^ qrfqpq fgujTiTfqq^qrq;i 
3(tlTiq %5fq ^5% qqtqqfil-^mi 

Vyasa said- Sukadeva, the organisms 
suffering from the hell-fire got immediate 
relaxation when they recited the pious 



32 


NARASIMHA PURAISAM 


names of lord Visnu with keen devotion. 
They turned in the form of Sri Krsna with 
divine fragrance smeared on their parts of 
bodies, divine clothes and adorned with the 
ornaments. Then the servants of lord 
Vishnu appeared there and took them to the 
abode of lord Visnu by aircraft (vimana). 
They condemned the servants of Yama. 
Lord Yama again bowed his head before 
lord Visnu for picking up the sufferer of 
hell-fire to the abode of Visnu. I always 
salute lord Visnu in the form of Nrsimha, 
the recital of whose name is so mighty as it 
took the hellish organisms to Visnu-dhama. 
I also salute the people frequently who 
salute lord Visnu in the form of Nrsirhha. 













Having seen the hell-fire fully 
extinguished and all devices in the contrary 
position, Yamaraja himself had determined 
to educate his messengers again to outright 
direction. 


Thus, the eight chapter on 'Yama's preaching to 
his messengers' in Sri Nrsirhha Purana 
approaches the end. 



32 


NARASIMHA PURAISAM 


CHAPTER 9 


Recitation of YaniajJaka 

gjnf^i 

Hft^ ^nJlef FTT H II^ll 


Vyasa said- Yama having seen his 
servant ready to move somewhere with the 
pasa (cord) in his hand, said into his ears - 
"Dear messenger, my sovereignty covers 
the creatures other than Vaisnavana. Hence, 
leave the people sheltered under lord 
Madhusudana. 

^Rzt<U|J|U|dHtT^<lftTIR II 

Lord Brahma has employed me for 
taking into consideration, the account of 
the good and bad deeds 
performed/committed by the people, and 
thus, addressed me as Yama. The people 
who not obedient/devoted to the teacher and 
Visnu, are only governed by me. I myself 
salute the people who bow their heads 
before ^rl Hari. 

n3 ^ 

<^nri|'t||J|e|^| R«ldH<lrilll 



tmiftr f;roT:ii^ii 

By taking special care for the devotee 
towards god and on remembering their 
penance performed, I also wish a suitable 
position from lord Vasudeva. I am enslaved 
to Madhusudana and nowhere independent. 
Lord Visnu is capable enough to control 
me. 

fttuyvi qrRcT 

»icid1ffa 

The person opposing the god, cannot 
achieve siddhi (salvation). The poison 




CHAPTER 9 


33 


cannot anyway turn into nectar, the iron 
cannot be converted into gold even if the 
same is thrown into a furnace for many 
hundred years. 

; 1 U 411 

The moon similarly cannot be absolved 
from the scare i.e. it cannot illumine like the 
sun. However, the exclusive devotee of lord 
Visnu, attains to honour and prestige in 
spite of being dirty in body. 

^ RlfeRdl 

On going over the essence of the world 
it is only aseertained that no achievement 
can be obtained but for the worship of the 
god. You therefore, are advised to bring in 
memory at all moments, the feet of god for 
emancipation as these feet had graced the 
divine teacher (Devaguru) Jupiter 
(Brhaspati). 



•RRiPr T ■qr^nTpf 

The people indulged redundantly in the 
pleasures of worldly affairs, only to destroy 
the opportunity for utilisation of human 
body so received as a result of hundreds of 
great deeds performed in the phase of 
previous life. The people not following the 
path of emancipation, are involved in the 
activity as if someone pumps wind to the 


sandal-wood for getting its ashes. 

■g:i 

3Tfg??nTrl% ^RlrRHT 

MiuPi 'jrfr II 

The first appeared Sanatana Purusa, lord 
Visnu is saluted who destroys the eycle of 
birth and death, whose ever dynamic paces 
do not know to stay and whose lotus feet 
are worshipped with clasped hands by the 
gods of sovereignty. 

fguJiHlgi it wfgii'^ii 

Vyasa said- The person either going 
over or listening to this saered Yamastaka, 
attains to the abode of Visnu and his vices 
are absolved in toto. 

gr: grrtRf gsjt 

gr grr ^11 ^ o 11 

5i1-itrh^gtiu) qgjTt5£Jng:ii'?ii 

This great preaching of Yama which 
increases the devotion for lord Visnu, has 
been described by me to you all. Now, I 
will again highlight the precedent story i.e. 
the activities performed by Markandeya, the 
grandson of Bhrgu in the ancient period. 

Thus, the Ninth chapter on "Yamastaka" in Sri 
Nrsimha Purana approaches the end. 



34 


NARASllMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 10 


Marriage of Markancjeya, Birth of Vedasira, 
Performance of penance under Ak§ayavata 
and recital of psalm by Markan(Jeya, Lord 
give blessings and boon to him. 


■515 WW Vir^d^id:! 

5 3iHdl^d ^lfdVlld;il^ll 

^ranrarwr vmi cM 

itlc|Su^4l gSd^rnT:l|-)ill 

TOi^ 3TT f^d'anT ycHMrdfq: 1 


Vyasa said- Dear Sukadeva, after 
conquest of death, the admirable resolute, 
and wisest Markandeya, returned to the 
home of his father. He married there on 
special pressure from Bhrgu and got a son 
Vedasira in appropriate course of time. He 
then performed a number of offerings for 
lord Narayana, performed Sraddha for 
Pitaras and honoured Atithis with offering 
them feast and entertainment. He then went 
to Prayaga, took a dip there in the greatest 
holy place Trivcn! (confluence of the three 
rivers) and started god Narayana under the 
tree Aksayavata. 


tt ^ FT TI^ M<,H TT^T:im II 

^ WRTT VlltPjTdj*ll 
TTc»i^5 q^lcl-jil RldSu^q) q^mfd:ll^ll 
3TTTlsqr TTTEl^ ^ ^^iJMJlfdRT: ^:l 
3T?5c£mM4T: dHjTRHI 


Vi<'(si^shhdi>iirui ferar •jt^se^^iivsii 

With a keen desire for seeing god 
Narayana under whose pleasure and grace 
he had conquered the death, he started the 
tough penance again. He gave up food and 
only breathed air for many years and thus 
inflicted troubles on his physique. In 
course of penance, he stood before lord 
Venimadhava with full concentration after a 
formal worship with fragrance and flowers. 
Imagination in depth of lord Visnu with 
conch-shell, discus and club had been fixed 
in his lotus heart and he started reciting the 
psalm of the lord. 

qinftrf^ pt pcf^Tq^ lldll 

Markandeya said- I salute lord Visnu, 
the Purana Purusa, whose eyes are like the 
full blossomed lotus, whose lotus like feet 
are worshipped by numerous kings, whose 
arms are lengthy and who is the supreme 
Nara, Nrsirhha is also master of men 
(Naranatha). 

rnTIR qifq-<qq-dq4RH,ll<?ll 

1 bow my head- before almighty, god to 
all, ever illumined god Govinda, who 
nourishes the World, who resides in Ksira 
ocean, who holds Sarhga bow in his hands, 
who is worshipped by the hermits, who is 
the husband of LaksmI and always holds 
LaksmT within his heart. 





CHAPTER 10 


35 


3T3T 'jng;<sni^l*i 

^ jTTnr Ji^i 

wfir ^rarJTT ffTRiirara^i I ? o 11 

I bow my head with keen devotion 
before Adimadhava god Visnu, who is 
unborn, who is teacher, Purana Purusottama 
and master of all, whose brilliance is as 
much as thousands of suns and who is in the 
form of Acyuta. 

^Uijcldi W ^ 

^dlW HldiMfd y'dmfdH,! 

MiujiiunorM ^Rtrr # 


^mfiT 



I salute lord Visnu who appears in 
physical form before the devotee of sacred 
soul, who is the supreme position of all, 
who is the master of the earth, lokas and the 
subject, who is para viz., the supreme cause 
among the causes and witness to the deeds 
of the three lokas. 



^"l<ld4)Tjichruiebi)^^rt%t 

cT yifdclIH llUldTHI 

I bow my head before god Kesava, the 
husband of LaksmT who slept on the bed of 
the body of Sesanaga 'Ananta' in the bottom 
of KsTrasagara in the ancient time, who is 
anadi Vidhata and who avails humidity of 
the water drops sprinkled by the waves of 
the KsTrasagara. 





qrnfR I 11 


I always salute god Visnu, who has held 
the form of him who is a great god, who is 
enemy to Mura monster, who is the killer of 
Madhu and Kaitabha monsters and who is 
Hiranyagarbha as also who removes the 
sorrows and pains of the people (worldly). 

3PRnToqg?TRTfH^ 

TlrRT I 11 


I regularly bow with keen devotion my 
head before the god Janardana who is 
everlasting, inexpressive, beyond the power 
of perception, omnipresent and who himself 
appears in the varied forms and whose feet 
are worshipped by the yogis. 




wfir 


ft 


I bow my head before the god Visnu, 
beloved to devotees, who is pleasure in 
himself, incomparable without the property 
of rajas, who is in the form of knowledge, 
who is the abode of Vrnda (LaksmI) and 
who is worshipped by Yogis. 

ft clPjcflrJlVKlRuril 

uici5o^4 4^5^ Tmftr ftsjcprii11 

TfTsra: R4TfT% WHhTiR:ll^^ll 
dhRliJ I 

fJc^T «44)vS TTR ^ 15cT 
cT5? HR WtrOT 4)ftT’4)51% 3 ll^ill 

Vyasa said- Beloved son, the akasavani 
suggested to Markandeya on completion of 




36 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


the psalm. O Brahman, why are you putting 
yourself in troubles when it is a fact that 
you cannot perceive god Madhava until and 
unless you take a dip in all the holy places! 
Complying with the suggestions delivered 
by akasavani, the learned Markandeya took 
a bath in all holy places yet he could not 
perceive god. He then said targeting the 
akasavani, I convey salutation to you 
whosoever you are; and request for 
suggesting any work that may ensure the 
return of the same quantum as that of 
bathing in holy places, if that work is 
successfully performed. 

qRNUi ?|^| 

II?'? II 

Akas'avani said- O the crown of the 
Brahmins, and great resolute, offer a psalm 
to sovereign Narayana but-for which you 
will not attain to the fruit of the holy places. 

rR^IRoll 

Markandeya said- O god, kindly tell me 
that phenomenal psalm, by reciting which 
one can avail of the fruit of bathing in all 
the pilgrim places. 

clMI<^iy 

o 

^ ^ TTlf^ ■'TTO^IR ?ll 

^ ^ W( %tI5 cRtRI 

^ ^ ^inTRRTcgrri I ? ? 11 

^ ^ cHIdiJJtT ^1 

^ vi^-yjidiqiul ^ ^y<^d,tii?^ii 

^ ^ ^fiPTI 


fjttfjRT ^ ^ WTf-^11 y m I 

guqddi Tl? ^ WoRIR^Il 

^ ^ ■?IfT ^nV^dlR'SII 

^ 1^wff M^|^c( W( PtrilMsil^l 

f?; ^3^ ^#nir rffn[i I ? d 11 

Akasavani said- Victory to Devadeva, 
Madhava, Kesava. You eyes receive the 
grandeur as that of the full blossomed lotus. 
Victory to Govinda. Victory to Gopate. 
Victory to Padmanabha, Vaikuntha, 
Vamana, victory to you all and ever. O Hrs 
Ikesa in the form of lotus victoiy to you. 
Victory to Damodara and Acyuta. Victoiy 
to the teacher of loka. Victory to picking up 
the earth and holding an conch-shell and 
gada in your hands. Victory to you, O 
Yajnesvara, Varaha, the holder and 
nourisher of the earth. Victory to you O 
Ts'vara to Yoga, the knower and founder of 
Yoga. Victory to you O the favourite of the 
Karma, the Yajnesvara, Yajnahga. O the 
god appreciating the great Brahmanas and 
extending honour to them and victory to the 
supreme Is vara who had endowed Narada 
with siddhi. Victoiy to you O the shelter to 
the philanthropists, the climax proportion to 
the Vedic speech. Victor to you O 
Caturbhuja. Victory to you O Srijayadeva, 
you are the cause of fear to the monsters. 
Victoiy to you O omniscient and 
Sarvatman. Victory to you O Sanatana Deva 
and philanthropist god. O Mahadeva, Visnu, 
Adhoksaja, Devesvara, be merciful to me 
and please enable me to perceive you. 

^ hlcfiu^i^H EihtrlTI 



CHAPTER 10 


37 


TRT^: 11 ^ I 

^TlpragJWnf&T: yclk<umft|d:l 

J'ldil-Hdi f^: ■RTRR:l^o|| 

WcT: 

f^oUldlril ^ JT: ■Rif WtHT:l 
■’Tlfar^ JRT; I ? ^ 11 

Vyasa said- beloved Sukadeva, when 
the learned Markandeya followed the 
suggestion of akas'avani and offered this 
very psalm to lord Visnu, the god Janardana 
wearing PTtambara appeared there. That 
everlasting god Visnu was illuminating all 
directions with his radiance and he was with 
a conch-shell, discus and gada in his hands 
as also adorned with all kinds of precious 
ornaments. The hermit Markandeya, the 
cause for exhilaration of the Bhrgu clan, 
bowed his head on the ground and saluted 
with keen devotion to the god, worshipped 
since long. He repeatedly did Sastahga 
Pranama (a salute by bowing down the 
eight organs of body), then stood with 
clasped hands and started offering the 
psalm in the following words - 

I ^ ^ 11 

T?#%IRRifsRr?T: 11 ? 11 

^fR? HKIdUI TT^nqpT Rt^ Jlld'^d^lPldTR 

Rt%gR mIHVcH Ri^ii^mi 


RmSR TT^TRIRTSR fensiT RWH d^lRyt- 
QfH*d PdRciu) fa-<ugy<ii^\9ii 





■R^ff?TII?(ill 


■djTd)Mru ld,U§-(vmrI^d 'rug-^RRd RgRRR 

v3 'O Cs 


Hld)HI«I ^F 5 T)RR Rf^dfllR 

RTR^ HftdT^?TTTR«R RMlRR RRIRT Rl I'X o 11 


Markandeya said- (I) salute you O the 
generous heart, giant, wisest, Mahadeva, 
great, illustrious, the god of the gods. Lord 
Brahma, Indra, Moon and Rudra worship 
incessantly your lotus feet. A grand lotus is 
adorned in your hand, you have brushed the 
bodies of demons, I salute you. You put 
your body at rest on sesanaga, famous with 
the name of Ananta. You sleep on him. You 
are that very element of emancipation, 
regularly concerned but doing concentration 
of the sight on the fore portion of nose as a 
practice of Yoga exercised by Sanaka, 
Sananda and Sanatkumara etc. ascetics. 
Your divine deeds are recited by 
Gandharva, Vidyadhara, Yaksa, Kinnara 
and Kiriipurusa in lyrics daily. Salutation is 
conveyed to Nrsiinha, Narayana, 
Padmanabha, Govinda, resident of the caves 
in the king mountain Govardhana for 
recreation and rest, the master yogi, king of 
gods, the water king and the king of the 
earth. Salutation to Yogadhara, 
Mahamayadhara, Vidyadhara, Yas'odhara, 
Klrtidhara, resort to the three properties, 
holder of three elements and the holder of 
Garhapatya etc. three fires. Salutation to the 
propounder of three Vedas - Rk, Sama and 
Yajus, master of three lokas (worlds) 
trisuvarna, hymn and holder of tridanda. 




38 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


Salute to god Narayana, who illumines all 
directions with crown, valaya, keyOra, the 
rays coming from the gem-studded garlands 
and who wears Pitambara as also who is of 
dark complexion as that of the tender 
clouds. Salute to Visvamurti, whose 
forehead shines with the radiance coming 
out from the gem-studded golden ear-rings. 
Salute to you O Lokanatha, Yajnesvara, 
Yajnapriya, brilliant Vasudeva, lover of 
devotion, Papaharin, and adorable god 
Purusottama. 


sinT sanpet 

MftHIrm RI<4u^i|Rc(W ?l|-«^ll 

Vyasa said- God Janardana was pleased 
by the psalm recited and said to 
Markandeya. 

gtstfw «ratTt ww wrr ft: 11 

^ craiw: II 

HMktdMWI ^ •^TTsitSIRojRTTIl'ir^ll 

The Lord said- Dear son, I am very 
happy to see your strict penance and to hear 
the psalm you recited. O the brilliant, the 
evils adhered to you have now effaced in 
toto. O the great Brahmin, I am now 
prepared to fulfil your desire. Please 
express the same. O Brahmin, the man 
without penance cannot see me in a wind 
fall. 

■RT^nlpq' 3^^ 

<i)dl<^r4!Rn ^ 

rg^fddR^cdltlcbi W ^ 

^ isTRFTr 


Markandeya said- O the master god, 1 
am fully satiated now to see you. O the 
master of this universe, boon me with your 
undeviated devotion only. O Madhava, 
Sripate, HrsTkesa, provide me with 
longevity to the extent that I can do your 
worship for if you really are pleased with 
me. 

® S3 Cs s9 •s 

tM ■q^mPT ■st-'HiHi TsqrfdWwii 

The god said- you have conquered the 
death already and now I boon you with 
longevity. I further and coincidentally 
render you and undeviated devotion capable 
enough to ensure emancipation, This holy 
place will receive popularity with your 
name. You will now further see me sleeping 
with Yoganidra within the milk-sea (Ks 
Trasagara) 

iju^dehlt^w^dwtylqdl 

^ RXFrfcri 
4<VlltdTftn MUqiid J^tlUIl-yfelHlPl 
P#Tt tmeiqimtt cPilsR:l 

MuqiPl fif^dT^ ^ RtTPriliqoii 
tPT: di<lf^^hMldHlcW 

^5riW:l 

# I iq ^ 11 



CHAPTER 11 


39 



<j)ciPi5^A^RTIIk ? II 



^^saim:ll^o|i 


Vyasa said- The lotus-eyed god Visnu 
vanished with these words there. The 
religious soul, crown to sages, great ascetic 
Markandeya too adopted a routine of doing 
meditation, worship, penance and salutation 
for the monarch god Madhusudana and 
delivering lectures on the holy Vedas, the 
Scriptures, various Purana, various episodes 
(divine), holy historic events and element of 
Ptr in the commune of hermits living there. 
With the passage of time, the best 
commentator of Scriptures, the extra¬ 
brilliant hermit once strolled towards the 
sea to see god Visnu as the lord earlier had 
pronounced. It was a long journey but with 
the keen devotion in heart, he walked along 
without relaxation and finally reached the 
destination. He then saw god Visnu in a 
sleeping posture on the cot settled body of 
the king serpent. 

Thus, the tenth chapter on 'the life-sketch of 
Markandeya' in Sri Purana approaches the end. 



CHAPTER 11 


39 


CHAPTER 11 

The sage Markaii(Jeya recites hymns to the 
Lord Vi^nu. 


'dM-HVi xHNHji 



Vyasa said- Sukadeva, hermit 
Markandeya began reciting a hymn in 
praise of lord Visnu who was sleeping on 
the bed of sesanaga at that time with due 


salute to him. 

fgnilf 

«HUTt£RI 

HtgRT8n?r I ? 11 

y4^^vi 

31#? tKWf 3r#? ttffcPTIl'iill 
31#? ^hlcbw 3r#? 

3l#?|gjq?Rl=l 31#? RR ^tVT^imil 


Markandeya said- god Visnu, be 
pleased. Be pleased O the monarch god, 
Garudadhvaja. O Laksmipati Visnu, O 
Dharanidhara, have a pleasure. O lokanatha, 
Adiparamesvara, be pleased. O 
Sarvadeves'vara your eyes are lotus like, 
may it please you. O Madhusudana, you had 
held the Mandara mountain, when the sea 
was being churned. May it please you. May 
it please Laksmikanta, Bhuvanapati, May it 
please Adipuru§a Mahadeva, Kesava on my 
part. 

IHT 'Jitiioqew '3PT ^11? II 

MiitT'ilii w( ^3i?n?nri 
'Sra' 'i#vnT 'Sra'"3#^ %iiv9ii 
^ ^3^ ■?isr wi f^i 

^ ^ ^ Tt## f^l 1 11 

^ TTzr ^ ??t ^1 


^ ^snriFq^TWI I 11 

^Si,(fd^^VI ^ ^ ”3#^ ^1 
vjHT ehl*t? ehi^roa 'iHt hUt; 131*1^11 ?o II 
^l^vl ^33T #VT T#3? ^I 
^ ^>4^*l<<WW^3j|yHt€Rlinil 
^ rF?#?n<nf- ^ TR ^1 




40 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


^ 4i4o< 1 ^ ^ ?iwTr qTTRg wi 
^ TT^Rm ^ ■f-<^Rti^'*ri 
^ Traff wf ^ii^^ii 

W( WJ VllVcIcil 

^gnR^ ^<WHi wfeHJTt qrrts-^^ ^ii^'jsii 

Victory to you O Krsna, beyond the 
reach of imagination, indeclinable Visnu, O 
inexpressive in spite of omnipresent and 
living in universal from, O Parames'vara; I 
salute you. Victory to you O undefeated 
god, the everlasting truth, victory to you. O 
regulating authority to all, the Kala victory 
to you. O Sarvamaya, Victory to you. I 
salute you. Victory to you, O Yajfies'vara 
Natha, Omnipresent Visvanatha, victory to 
you. O SvamI, Bhutanatha, Sarves'vara 
Vibho, victory to you. Visvapate Natha, 
Karyadaksa Isvara, victory to you. I salute 
you. O Papahari, Ananta and keeping away 
the fear of birth and old age, victory to you. 
Victory to you O Bhadra, Atibhadra, Is'a, 
benevolent Prabho. I salute you. O 
Madhava, you provide with respectable 
position, victory to you. O Deves'vara 
Sankara, Laksmipati, Victory to you. 
Salute to you. O Sri Rama, the lotus-eyed 
god with radiance like kumkuma, victory to 
you. O sandal smeared in all parts of body, 
Sri Rama; victory to you. O Deva, 
Jagannatha, Devakinandana, victory to you. 
Victory to teacher of all, worth knowing 
Sambho, victory to you. Salute to you. 
Syamasundra with radiance as the blue 
lotus, the husband of beautiful Radha, 
victory to you. Sarvahgasundara, adorable 
god, salute to you. Victory to you. O 
Sarvesvara, you render everything, O 
Philanthropist Sanatana Purusa, victory to 


you. O Prabhuvara, you fulfil the desire of 
devotees, victory to you. Salute to you. 

qtT: ebUHUll^l 

dlchHiy qRpg ^ii^mi 

•O Cs 

w ^ciifii^crm w 'HKHuiw ^ii^^ii 
c||^4c||i| mTUcIIR^I 

Vll^yiRalll^\9ll 

qp: -fTOTR Tiwr qpv'dthl^ypi ^1 
qp: f^TBTPT I ^<^11 

qiTl TtrrsqRTPI 

RcbHIliiJi? ^PT^ ^'liy<|T=giTII^'?ll 

Salute to the god whose navel has given 
birth to lotus and who wear lotus garland. 
Frequent salute to Lokanatha, Virabhadra. 
Salute to Jagadlsvara in the form of 
Caturvyuha, Tribhuvana Natha, 
Devadhideva NarSyana. Salute to lord Vis 
nu in the form of Nrsiihha who holds the 
Sarhga bow. Salute to Vasudeva who wear 
PItambara. O god existing in the form of 
Bhuvanesvara, Cakradharl, Visnu, Krsna, 
Rama and god Siva. Frequent salute to 
everlasting god Visnu, master of all, 
Srldhara, Acyuta and worth knowing from 
Vedanta Scripture. Salute to Sakaladhyksa, 
Jagatpujya Paramatma. 

PTcIT ^j^chhi rqilci ^Plrf: ftRITIR o || 

rdqwtwi yfUdlP?! 

rt lTT^1J;^Tlf^iITPPJT;IR^II 

ciNdebdl ^ ffgpg |?n?R: I 

gTgsrfirr rt11I 

mm ^ g^^:i 

^ tgWT^tTT? ^ 1%T ^ fqvil^c 1 
^ tyfdRci liiPT: chlHd^d ^ Pjt SRWT;IR^ 1 



CHAPTER 11 


41 


TTlW Tl^ 'jfJIdld xfTraril^'iJII 

gjrnt gnTot ^ 

VI<'(sl’C(*JKimu> ■qt: ^RTST^II? mI 


W ^TtnfiT 


You are only mother and father to the 
world. You are the friend to the sufferers. 
You are friend, beloved, grandfather to the 
father, teacher, position (gati), witness, 
husband master and the supreme resort. 
You are Dhruva, Vasatkarta, Havi 
(oblation), Hutasana (the fire), Siva, Vasu, 
Dhata, Brahma, king of gods, Indra, Yama, 
Sun, wind, water, Kubera (gospel), Manu, 
Day and night, RajanT, Moon, Dhrti, Sri, 
Kanti, Ksama and Dharadhara, s'Esanaga. O 
Madhusudana. You are in movable and 
immovable forms, you are the only creator, 
nourisher, and destroyer of the world, and 
you are the only saver of the world. You are 
the motive, cause, the subject and supreme 
god. O Madhava, you hold conch, discus 
and gada in you hands, please, observe my 
accession to. O lotus-eyed beloved, Purus 
ottama in the bed of sEsanaga, you are the 
only one to whom I salute with devotion 
always. O god, I salute Srivigraha, adorned 
with Srivatsa, the absolute cause for the 
creation, the dark complexion and eyes like 
lotus and that effaces the deficiencies of the 
Kali era. 





12 ■gcrra^ii^oii 


yniyititj <riivrrei!cin3jusoiH,l 
<|Tic},U(j ifr^ii^^ii 


Salute to Rasikasekhara, Sridhara, Hari 
who holds LaksmI in his heart, whose body 
is charming and adorned with the divine 
garland, whose back region is beautiful and 
whose arms are large, who is adorned with 
nice ornaments, who has originated lotus 
from his navel, whose eyes are beautiful 
and large like the lotus petal, whose nose is 
long and high-lifted, whose complexion is 
as dark as that of the blue cloud, whose 
arms are lengthy, whose body sturdy, whose 
heart is adorned with the gem-studded 
garland, whose brows forehead and crown 
all beautiful, teeth are smooth and eyes 
enchanting, who is adorned with beautiful 
arms and reddish lips, whose ear-rings are 
illuminating owing to the gem-studded, 
whose throat is spherical and shoulders are 
fleshy. 

yqrriTR 

R<jHI<*fdyWK «4it|i4P lfTH,ll??ll 
r4hI^U|RU(H 

Tprar HHidum4iuraH.i 


I cordially salute god Narayana who is 
unborn and everlasting still holding a 
delicate form, whose hair is reven-tress and 
curly, whose shoulders are high lifted and 



42 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 




CHAPTER 11 


43 


O Kulanandana Krsna, you are situs to 
the origin of the world, you have giant eyes, 
you are the creator of the universe and the 
soul of the world. Hence, do something for 
protection of the sufferer as I have taken 
exclusive shelter under you instead of 
searching for others. O Purana Purusottma 
Pundarlkalocana, salute to you. O dark 
complexioned as kajala, HrsTkesa, O 
Mahesvara, the only creator of illusion, 
salute is conveyed to you. O god of giant 
arms, pick me up from the ocean of world 
where I have been drowned now. O boon 
endower god, O Govinda, pick up this 
pauper, baseless and miser who has now 
drowned in the worldly ocean surrounded 
by the gigantic crocodile like forms, 
sorrows, fatigues, agony, tough to cross and 
excessively deep. Salute to the master of the 
three-worlds, Visnu and Dharanidhara 
Ananta. Frequent salute to the god of gods 
and Sri Vallabha husband of prosperity. 

yyKiatcIMHHi 

rqillchHisi M<iui 

>3 <0 

■^pr 

■ythi-dRlvi nwdtsfw ^ir?cidifim^ii 

O Krsna, you are resorted to by the 
baseless and you are kind-hearted. O 
Madhusudana, please have mercy on the 
creatures immersed in the worldly ocean. I 
salute today, god Janardana who is unique, 
Adi, Puranapurusa, Jagadls'vara, cause of 


the world, in the form of Acyuta, master of 
all, who destroys the cycle of birth and 
death as also the pains, who is the god of 
gods and the husband of LaksmI. I salute to 
god Visnu whose arms are giant, who is of 
dark complexion, delicate, fascinating, of 
charming face, lotus-eyed, whose hair is as 
lengthy and curly as the waves of the milk 
sea (Ksirasagara), who is everlasting and 
delicate. 

TH m ctferT 

rTT^ ^ rddTillchtl ^llh^ll 

^jRTRTTW% 

IT ^ 

O god, that tongue only achieves from 
which your psalm recited, that mind has 
only gained in which concentration on you 
has existed and the hands used for your 
worship are only worth, full and admiring. 
O Govinda, absolve all sins committed by 
me in course of rotating with the thousand 
cycles of birth and death when I recite your 
name 'Vasudeva'. 

BStTTT 3^ 

gmiri 

Vyasa said- On being requested by the 
wise hermit, god Visnu, whose flag was 
eagle-marked, replied with pleasure - 

•o 

gt ^ iiiKd dRn ^ ^TtTimmi 

God said- O Brahmin, Bhrgunandaya, 1 
am pleased with your penance and the 
psalm you recited. I wish you the best. Ask 
for any boon and I will give you whatever 
you desired. 

3gnTj- 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


wluifd 

^ ^ ^sHTcq^l IH ^911 
^hjk^ rf ^ WCTcT; Wl 

cTfR^ <iiIdfM<n7 mill 

31^5 ■M)'RlJpyf^jc)r^fI;im<?ll 


Markandeya said- O god of the gods, I 
ask for the everlasting devotion at your feet 
if you actually pleased and say that I should 
ask for whatever I desire. Another boon is 
that the whosoever person prays to you with 
recital of this hymn, provide him with the 
boon to settle at Vaikuntha Dhama. The 
longevity rendered you in the past, has now 
actually met with success as I could see you 
today. O Devesa, I want to live here for 
ever in the service of your feet beyond the 
grip of birth and death. 


^ qfgrRoqfitrnfTtlTll 

^TtPTM^oll 

s3 ' 


wr 





^ m Rt ■RtferfRl 


The god said- Bhrgusrestha, May your 
exclusive devotion remain with me and this 
will provide you with emancipation in due 
course of time. The persons reciting this 
psalm composed by you in morning and 
evening will live with pleasure in my abode 
by virtue of their extreme devotion. O 
grandson of Bhrgu, in spite of being Danta 
(self-sufficient), I am enslaved to my 


devotees. Hence, call me from any place 
and I will be there within no time. 


sjtR 3^TEt 

3 ■gftw RT^nlR R Rm: I 
fRTRR R R^ R^tW: 11 ^ ? 11 

^ ^ fet RfW WRT dflRtf:! 

R gR RRH5,'*SII 

^ (cwJiRcfrm nRn m<|U| 

O 

^Rf^ lfi=rRi ddPd ftcRRI 


RRf^ RR^rfRfSRRHTlIl^mi 

yi-iRigyuiii MiiiiluJifcThti u*i<viis4ra;ii??ii 

Vyasa said- god Laksmipati resisted 
him with these words to the crown hermit 


Markandeya and he began to see 
everywhere god Visnu in course of his 
movements to and fro on the earth. O 


Brahmin, I have now completed the event 
pertaining to wise Markandeya as I had 
heard from him in the past. The people 
recite this long-long past act of 
Markandeya, the grandson of Bhrgu, with 
their strong faith in Visnu in a regular 
m.anner; reside in the abode of god Nrsimha 
duly honoured by devotees and keeping 
them at bay from sins. 


Thus, the eleventh chapter on ’the devotion of 
Markandeya' in Sri Nrsimha Purana approaches 
the end. 



NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 12 

A dialogue between Yama and Yanil 







CHAPTER 12 


45 


Suta said- The religious soul Sukadeva 
was not satisfied only with this holy story, 
sweet as neetar and with power to efface the 
evils from mind and his desire to listen to 
some more stories increased. He therefore, 
said to Vyasa - 

TTT^TT^fcf: TOf5ra:ll^ll 
^ i^PidlRh % WliT 

gwTmi^rnrr %^ii^ii 

H'<iuii (4<ofdTinm<5ii4 % ^'4diifi 

Sukadeva said- O father, the penance 
performed by wise Markandeya is really 
excellent and tough to exercise, which had 
made god Visnu to appear in his apparent 
and physical form and conquered the death. 
I am not satisfied with it anyway. Hence, I 
request you to highlight some other story 
too. O learned father, the people of duly 
controlled mind, who do not involve 
themselves in prohibited activities in spite 
of the contrary circumstance, the fruit for 
such high stand they receive is worth 
conceiving and please highlight the same. 


BJTnr 3^ 
Timt ^sf^rtTPnfiTi ^ w 
^ cw fnddd: 


^JTEIT rT TH ^ WcRT: 11 ^ 11 

fddWHfdd: ■§^^1 

^ fMd^dd 3^1 

>0 

^ ^ TTOTWSr 


Vyasa said- O the great hermit 
Sukadeva, I explain the fruit for the people 
having undeviated mind which they receive 
in this physical world and the metaphysical 
world. Listen to it patiently. In this very 
context, the scholars describe the ancient 
episode in a form of the conversation 
between the great soul Yama and Yarn!. 
Vivasvana (sun) was the son of Aditi and he 
had two children. The first was a son Yama 
and the younger Yarn!, a daughter. Both of 
them were brought up by the parents 
properly. Usually as children's nature does, 
they would play and walk together and 
move hither and thither voluntarily. One 
day, YamI, the sister of Yama said to him. 

quidiq 

•o 

T WT gjTtfJRff xT dilhiidj 

fiR WT5T T 11 ^ o 11 

31^ ^ TT gisr^Ri 

aPTTSlt 4t t TrSMIinU 

Chim'd! ^flcR qiSt d-ctiRi I 

TT wf yRiRdR:ii^^ii 
WISMdH'MI ^ «ra% f% cRTTI 

hRtdirq fd^'ddTil^'iill 

grmgrfiTOij d W: 1% 
d.rmf'ddi ^dT<TTy(ddi‘^ 'RTf%nTfii^mi 
Aihididi; ferar: gjRT gr?Ffr m w feriri 
djrar % diPT ii?^ii 

YamI said- what is the use of a brother 
who has no wish for his sister though of the 
sister so desires and able to desire and who 
can not be a husband to his sister? He who 
does not accept the offer of his sister mature 
in age to be her husband should consider 



46 


NARASIMHA PURANAIM 


himself as if he had not been born. He could 
not be deemed as born and in existence. 
From any angle. If a sister wants his brother 
to be her husband but the brother on his part 
neglects her desires, in spite of his being a 
crown hermit, he cannot be said to be a 
bother. When ones sister is burning with 
sensuality to see her brother, what is the use 
in the circumstance, if other's daughter is 
made his wife? I am sinking within my 
nerves and senses. Wish to do the same as 
what I wish at this moment; otherwise I will 
commit suicide, I will die with an empty 
with for you. Dear bother, the prick of 
sensuality is intolerable. Why do you 
neglect me? Dear brother, the fire erupted 
of sex is burning me and I am dying. So, 
don't stop. O husband, I am a wife dying for 
coition. Please, be enslaved to me without 
any restriction. Allow the adhesion of my 
body with yours. 

■JTR 3c[TEr 

^ ^ -Riifiiigbgifh gji^ 

gjpt ygx^rriiiuii 
MantragllipT^rfgi 
Fi4iRi4jiitf4g'di 

Yama said- Dear sister, the universe as a 
whole condemns such evil-doing. Then how 
are you telling the same as religion abiding? 
O gentle sister, who even having an 
average mind and sense can involve in such 
a forbidden evil? Sister, I will not allow the 
adhesion of my body with yours. No brother 
can satisfy the sensuality of his sister. The 
person who joins in coition with his own 
sister has been declared a heinous offender. 


Sister, such a heinous act can be expected 
from the animals falling in Triyagyoni, not 
any way from god or man. 


g'zn^ ^ t 5^1 

g^grg ^^tgPrr ^ ^ 5®gfgi R o 11 
WoRWTClT ^ 1TF 

YamI said- Brother, both of us are twins 
and lived together in the womb of our 
mother. As the combination established at 
the same place was not deemed sinful, this 
coition too cannot be considered a sinful 
combination. Brother, I am so far without a 
husband. Why do you not take care of my 
interests? The monster Nirrti too enjoys 
coition with his sister daily. 


gR sgrg 


ir?!! 

ir^ii 







■g grtiFNi gj^ Hig>td<-tg44 
arfgwT? "crt wt ggg ggi 

grtlif g fg^wriRmi 
UrTRit gr i fgfvi^ 1 

^ T g ggf ggpgfg ir^ii 

ggg; mgRi|Fi g: tgnit iRgii 


Yama said- Sister, god Brahma too has 
condemned the vitiated worldly dealing. 
The people of this universe follow the deeds 
as performed by the great men. It is, 
therefore, advisable to the great man that he 
should follow and practise the great deed 
and kick off the condemned acts invoking 



CHAPTER 12 


47 


the special efforts. This very is the 
characteristic or religion (deeds). The rest 
of people practice the same as performed by 
the great men and the deeds verified by 
them are followed by the people. Gentle 
sister, I consider your words trifle and full 
of nuisance. Not only that but I deem it 
prejudicial to all religions and particularly 
to all the worlds. I advise you to live and 
enjoy with the others more beautiful and 
modest than me but remember that I cannot 
be your husband. Sister, I abide by my great 
resolution with all my might and cannot 
even touch your body. The person has been 
pronounced 'evil-doer' by the hermits who 
entertains or accompanies with his sister in 
coition. 


flPRIcdii 

NS 

^ qVdlft Hill 

3Tlrq^g4jui)i)-di T eKRyfti MirgdlH^IR'^ll 
Hrl<4 in^ ■RRT ^jPT cqT«<ui IRTTI 

YamI said- I see that such complexion 
(as of yours) is tough to find in this 
universe. Where can be found such a 
combination on the earth where eomplexion 
and equal age have existed altogether. I do 
not know, how your mind is so stable? And 
prohibiting you from the coition with the 
woman so enchanted and of equal 
complexion and quality, I have come to 
your shelter voluntarily alike the creeper 
attached to the tree. A smile of chastity 
adorns my face. I will now embraee you 
definitely by gripping your body with both 
my arms. 


rR?T ^ I ^ 11 

^ TR^T: I 

fet ^ ^ fecrf) ^ xT Tgfwrqi 

3TcT: gpi T Wifh ^S5 (cT;II?')JII 

Yama said- O dark eyed, beauty public, 
I am unable to meet your desire. Shelter 
under any other god. O spinster, be the 
goddess for a god. O spinster, be the 
goddess for a god who is thrilled with 
appeal for sensuality at a glance of you. The 
scholar will not involve himself in vitiated 
acts even for the woman beloved to all, and 
deemed delicate, most beautiful, 
enlightened, benevolent and acceptable as 
bride from all angles. O enlightened sister, 
my resolution is all stable. I will not indulge 
in such a heinous act for regret. Gentle 
sister, my mind is free from excitement and 
duly devoted to god Visnu and Siva. I 
therefore, do not want to submit myself to 
such a sinful act; listen to this as my 
declaration and firm determination. 


STRT 35T«r 

3J4f^di)TigfRn')rii ggr ^ i 
fjtraFT tpt: ^ 

gw jqsf^RTRT^ 

RgicTHRI 


^ 9rTlITiT:l 

Srivyasa said- Sukadeva, in spite of the 


48 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


frequent submissions made by YamI, Yama 
did not share with her in that sinful aet as he 
was greatly resolute and religion abiding. 
He there fore, attained the element of god. 
Undepleting and everlasting fruits for the 
persons not indulging in sinful acts and of 
well checked mind, have been explained in 
the scriptures. Such religion abiding people 
definitely attain to divine results. This 
episode pertaining to Yam! is most ancient 
and everlasting. It seeps the sins and all 
sacrosanct in itself. It should be listen to 
with innocent heart and in a state free from 
passions. The Brahmin reciting it in the 
advent of divine offering (Devayaga) and 
offering for ancestors (Pitarayaga), satiates 
his fore-fathers. They seldom have to enter 
into the palace (abode) of Yama. 



wisiroit wiT«T: 

The person reciting it daily, becomes 
scot-free from the liability of pitaras and 
thus gets absolved from the acute pains 
inflicted on Yama. 





Son Sukadeva, I have now completed 
this episode, the best and ancient which is 
ascertained of the padas (feet) of Veda and 
the connotation attached thereto. This 


definitely tends killing mala-fides and 
ser..,jality of people who recite it in a 
regular manner. Tell me now, what more 
should I make you to listen to? 


between Yama and Yarn!' in Nrsimha Purina 
approaches the end. 


Thus, the twelfth chapter on 'Conversation 



48 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 13 

Power of chastity and conversation with a 
Brahmacarl 

gSIT clTcT ^ ^4)Rdll 
3RIT; ^ ^ gsJT: itm«uilRiMl:ll^ll 

Suka said- Father, this Vedic story is 
eccentric in itself. I now request you to 
describe other stories worth sweeping the 
evils out from the hearts of people. 


3Tt ^ cfttyRiWIlfq 

Mfrlsidl^: <*wRl<5'^r(lRui:ii;^ll 

^eidiFr: i 

RcJviiWTjJrnsrijil oititsui^ qRRiidd:ii^ii 
wy^cbRjfdTd: q<y4q<i^tsi:i 
di^cbicdiRiJiml ^aiRH^'ldMiiduini'isii 
RldMld*%lW>T f^^nRH d'i^Ri'dlTI 
3i(dyldmdi’i,Ttt qrfw ^ fst^iimi 
tT^?T Riwrnr ^ttr 
y f d ' ^d i R^mHI l TRf: I! 

«tf: dlsJdiHMRlRidll 

q<hii?iHqiMHi ijumutdiinaii 

W W ■^T q^infd: I 

hRcHJI» 1 WHWHMtl’MUini.ill 

Vyasa said- Dear son, I will now 
highlight that ancient story which has been 
knitted as a conversation of a chaste woman 
with a Bachelor (Brahmacarl). Kasyapa was 
a Brahmin who lived in Madhya Pradesh. 
He was a master in ethics, a scholar in the 




CHAPTER 13 


49 


Vedas 'and their parts, well-versed in the 
essence of the scriptures and the element, 
an expert orator, prepared to perform the 
acts supporting his principles and non- 
oriented to the principles followed by 
others. He used to enjoy coition with his 
wife only in Rtukala and perform offering 
to gods (Agnihotra) daily. Learned 
Kasyapa used to serve the Brahmins and 
guests who came to his home to the extent 
of their desires after completing Agnihotra 
in morning and evening. He had a strong 
faith and devotion to god Nrsirhha. His 
most lucky wife was Savitri. Being a chaste 
wife she used to keep herself busy all time 
in the service of her husband. On account 
of her merits, she was popular in society 
and people had respect for her. As a result 
of prolonged devotion and service to her 
husband, that chaste woman had 
automatically acquired the power of 
intuition. She could see the events taking 
place indirectly or which cannot be seen 
apparently. Learned Kasyapa, the resident 
of Madhya Pradesh, used to live in 
Nandigrama with his very meritorious wife 
and perform his routine. 

,r „ - „ - rT - ♦- _• ■ Ti -. u.n ? rf^ rC n r ... 

ITT ^ II 

anfqKifilTtJi gcti infe ^IrERT:) 

• dV T H ' H T yq -qrfa ^ II 


In the same period of time, one more 
learned Brahmin namely, Yajnasarma used 
to live in Kosala Desa with his chaste wife 
Rohinl. She was all meritorious and used to 
keep herself busy all the moments in the 
service of her husband. That meritorious 
woman gave birth to a son. The Brahmin 
Yajnasarma, surviving on Yayavara 
profession, performed the ceremony of 
Namakarana and gave him the name as 
Devas'arma on the twelfth day of the birth 
after Punyahavacana rite was performed. 
Similarly, he was taken our from home 
(Upaniskramana) in the fourth month of 
birth and the ceremony of feeding was 
performed in the sixth month. 

cIcT; ^ ^ 

yjmidl fw 

f ftrax 

■cm WR TT fcT:l 

ildcbm^fur f 'nw: ^:i 

■hfif^ ^§4% ^raif^i I ^V911 

^ mifieii^TrnT ttt yfdgdii 

^44|ginqcj,i4 ^ Hp<iii4 ^ dn^!raiTii^'?ii 
mm gt g m 

■pRRTf^lRoll 

Subsequently, CudSkarma at the age of 
one year and Upanayana ceremony at the 
age of eight years, worked out from the 
womb were performed by the religion 
abiding father. After the Upanayana 
ceremony so performed in a prescribed 
manner, he began study on the Vedas. 
Before he could complete his study of the 



50 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


first Veda, his father expired. On the death 
of his father, he started wailing with his 
mother. However, complying with the 
directions of the great men, he somehow 
made himself bold and performed the 
funeral ceremony. Devas'arma then left his 
home (viz. became reluctant). He took dip 
in the Gahga etc. holy rivers and began to 
stroll to and fro in many places. Eventually, 
he finally reached the place where the 
chaste woman Savitrl was living. He 
became popular as a Brahmacari there. He 
used to live on alms and carried on his self- 
study of the Vedas and performed 
Agnihotra in a regular manner and began to 
pass his days in Nandigrama. His mother, 
on the other hand, was suffering from a 
number of pains on the death of her 
husband and the sudden departure of her 
son from home, as nobody was left there to 
care for her. 

3Tsr -RTtgr 5 ^ i WchiidH,! 

^11 

3KT3Rt WrraJT 

f(^ ^ § ■F:ll?^ll 

■F ?fl ^ f^wr TTcTiiR'ifi 

cTwr ^ w 

One day that Brahmacari spread his 
towel after a bath in the river so as to get it 
dried. In the meantime, a crow and heron 
ca xxC down, took that towel and fled. 
Having seen their nuisance, Devas'arma 
scolded them at which they left that cloth 
after throwing their dropping on the same. 


That Brahmin then started with anguish at 
them. The anguish gaze of the Brahmin had 
singed the birds and they fell down dead on 
the ground. The Brahmin was surprised at 
this event. Then he was caught in the grip of 
illusion that nobody is equal to me on this 
earth to observe so strict penance. Deeming 
this and with full of ego, he went to the 
village for alms. 

sn^niFlIf i 

Mfds)dlll?^ll 

it qitqqHl f iT ^ q1?raHTI 
cll^qdl ^ 

PvTsmTRT m 3rot;T giftmTI 

icgT# -ft f ^ 5ra^iR<iii 

IRT: ^1^ MfdsJdllfl 

f w dmryl-tfi \^r\\ 

wr I ^ 011 

Dear son, that egoist of penance, went to 
that home where the chaste woman Savitrl 
used to live. Without taking least care that 
he was asking for alms; She kept silence. 
She first took care of her husband, 
complied his order, washed his feet with 
warm water and only then she prepared 
herself to give alms to the BrahmacSrl. That 
Brahmin was annoyed and he started staring 
at her as if he would burn her into ashes. 
Savitrl noticed it and said in humour - O 
furious Brahmin remember that I am not 
like the crow and heron which were burnt 
into ashes by your anger today at the bank 
of the river. Take the alms with silence and 
peace if you so desire. 



CHAPTER 13 


51 


d^cl^cW; Tnf^ TTt5W;l 

f^Rl^rTTHTT CR51T: 

TTc^TOI^ W21 WrHd:l 

Mf^'dTOi ^cWHi 

5TTHF?1 mg^TEl T1%^1 

He took the alms without any reaction 
on his part and proceeded further. On the 
way, he was regularly thinking over the 
intuitive power of that woman and finally, 
reached his hermitage. He carefully kept the 
alms-bowl in the hermitage and again 
visited the home of that chaste woman at an 
appropriate time when she had taken food 
and her husband went out from home. On 
this visit, he said to that woman - 

^WTsSrl: 11 ? ? 11 

The Brahmacarl said- O the luckiest 
woman, I ask you humbly that by which 
means you come to know the events taking 
place indirectly? Please, tell me the reality. 

^ TTT TITS^ Tnf^ W gfd9Jdril?')HI 
tt sigi-tuRiJi laTf ^1 

s[?IT W tg- 

f Trfliw: 11 ? ^ 11 

Taking care of his revisit, the woman 
replied - O Brahmin, listen to me carefully. 
I am going to tell you how the power of 
intuition can be increased when a man 
observes his own apparent duty. You see 
that the supreme duty or religion for the 
wife is to serve her husband. 

fjxif di-iidRd -q^rq^i 


3TSf«l ^ 

O learned man, I always observe that 
religion with all my devotion and sincerity. 
Other religions are valueless and void for 
me. I undoubtedly serve and keep satisfied 
my husband throughout the day and night. 
This is the reason, I am so intuitive to 
know the event to which I do not see 
through my physical eyes. I will tell you 
some more. Listen to me if you so desire. 

fiRTT xxrarax: 

^ftrrfr 

XTRTT ^ d^RcidlnJ 

3Rrat I ixt o 11 


Your father was a holy Brahmin 
observing the Yayavara profession. You 
had learnt the Vedas from him. You came 
here just after the funeral ceremony. What 
you are doing here is no more than earning 
bread for your single stomach and the 
widow and old mother has been left by you 
for suffering as she is absolutely helpless 
now. 


W ^ ^ mfcdril HllHdtdyil 

rtt nilckcll grf ^ ?ll 


O Brahmin, tell me whether you should 
not feel it a shameful act that you have left 
the woman who once had brought you up 
and who is helpless now. 




XTWRT 

UTOrtR Uir-Md ^WTI 

fssrr ■RR ^ tM ^ ^ ^ Itpriix'^ii 


Brahmin, what result for your penance 




52 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


can there be except the pains when you 
have left the mother who washed the urine 
and night-soil in your childhood. The pains 
of your mother will turn your mouth 
emitting odour. Your father had performed 
the ceremonies properly and the power that 
you see with yourself are as a result of the 
same. His all acts go futile like dive into 
saced rivers, a visit at pilgrimage, japa and 
oblation into fire. 

■R' 'fllclld TTRIT '^:Radll 

O wicked and evil-doer, your burnt japa 
and even the offering-all is redundant. 
Brahmin, man lives the life of a corpse 
whose mother suffers from pains. 

dfiieijfou ^ ^ I 

infect I Its ^ 11 

^ ^ TO XTI 

Tpgrer ^ tTRTT 

The son obedient to his mother and who 
protects her with all his might and 
devotion, his acts performed are fructified 
in this and that world too. O Brahmin, the 
people deserve honour and respect in both 
worlds who have complied with the advices 
of their mother. Hence, I advise you to go 
there where your mother is and serve her till 
her death. 

fit im ^ ^ 

^ ^w.itikdRtyidehH,ii>5<sii 

dyj; 

TOTrT8^ chRldtldrw4 W 

It is your only supreme penance to serve 
her. Give up the anger as it destroys and 
makes fruitless all the acts either performed 
directly or indirectly. Regret for the killing 



of those birds and make your heart innocent 
and free from evil concepts. I have told all 
these facts without any twist. Brahmacaii, 
do as I say if you really want to attain the 
position of a great man. 

^ TRTT 

^11 

■qyr nciif^n ^itT 

■q^Tlr fldyeki 

ri3r w TO ^ gjqfftrr 5 ^^1 
cfi i ylfui rnfq ^ fff TO ^ ^11 

That chaste woman, stopped with these 
words. BrahmacSrl then asked for apology 
for the offence he had committed and 
replied - O the chaste woman, forgive me 
for this unintended offence committed O 
the most lucky chaste woman, you have 
said for my interests. Forgive me for the 
anguished stare. Please, tell me the duties I 
should observe so that I could attain the 
sanctifying position. 

WHIT? w qfTOrn 

Hnfq gjTHiffiii g^HirfiT ?to *q?ftrT R 
TOT TOT cT? RtTOT 
grHITgr WTyi'^rw-d 
Hi^ vnig dT gro wrf trar ^rfroRri 

tit ^ g^uT TT^ tgfil ^ ^TWfdim^ll 

dWT^ch: TOfd^:l 

gq^rTO TOlfgt QdOScb: I 

qr TOTero^nr ^11 



CHAPTER 14 


53 


^isTcT W tT^ % 

■tRT^ ^ II 

In reply to that Brahmin the chaste 
woman Savitrl again said- Brahmin, listen 
to what activities you should perform there. 
You should at first provide your mother 
with maintenance on alms and regret for 
the killing of birds to be observed either 
here or there. The daughter of Yajnas'arma 
will be your wife. Accept her only with 
religion abiding. Yajnasarma will offer you 
his daughter. A son will be born from her to 
extend your clan pattern. You will survive 
happily on alms like your father. On the 
death of that wife, you will become 
Tridandl (recluse). On being observed the 
prescribed rules for a recluse. You will 
attain to the position of Visnu with the 
pleasure of god Nrsiihha. I have told you all 
that shall take place in future in order to 
meet your curiosity. Follow the advice 
given if you observe these us true. 

■R^55 5t5T^J^^II^o|| 

The Brahmin said- O chaste woman, I 
go for service and maintenance of my 
mother instantly. O meritorious, I will 
observe all suggestions delivered by you on 
my visit there. 

^155151 555TT^ 5?n<5TfI 

Wt 55ni^t5Rt?fe5f^: 11 ^ ^ 11 

^5151 i55I^MHII^l 55 55T5R ^ipi^l 
yMHVlVM*l-»44:l 

5f?t55T?lfgRTf^ Heflin 

5 ^^ RTf: 5 T 5 I 

«RRlSSi’5i%5 5^ 


■fe?5T 5 f5OTTl: 53^5155:11^3II 
55f?fr5S55:lll?ll 

Brahmin, Devas'arma left from there 
with these words instantly and he served his 
mother, with all care and keeping him free 
from anguish and affection. He 
subsequently, married and got a beautiful 
son from his wife. After some years, his 
wife expired and he became a recluse. He 
developed the sense of treating gold like a 
of lump of clay and attained emancipation 
with the grace of god Nrsiihha. I have thus 
told you about the power of chaste woman 
and the supreme duty to serve and protect 
mother. Shattering all worldly bindings and 
by collapsing the world tree from root, the 
man attains to the position of Visnu. 

Thus, the thirteenth chapter on 'conversation of a 
Brahmacarl with a chaste woman' in Sri Nfsimha 
PurSna approaches the end. 




CHAPTER 14 


53 



CHAPTER 14 

The importance of pilgrimages and four 
orders (as'ramas) of life. 

Vyasa said- O the most learned son 
Sukadeva, listen to this evil sweeping story 
along with all my pupils present here. 

5TT%jTgT: 

tpprM uuijtHR 
tni: 

tfgftnrr •jmt-inmi'Mui 


UTI 

:ll?ll 




54 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


wit i^cI WTOI TTtRcff ^1 

o 


w wwr IwTfni; 

■Hcigpi; rI^I |-)J 11 
wfq- fTol^ ftr^ ir^Mfd: 


■HlrcIl^cJticIT 



<j)cc(l cT^ glkl 

WFt 3 lf^:limi 


In the ancient time, a Brahmin great and 
well-versed in the Vedas and scriptures 
went to a holy place on the death of his 
wife. He took a bathe there in the prescribed 
manner and seated himself for tough 
penance in a deserted place. He then 
abandoned the desire for remarriage and 
started living on alms and doing great deeds 
along with a daily bath, japa etc. He took a 
dip in the Gahga, Yamuna, Sarasvatl, 
Vitasta (Jhelama) and Gomatl etc. rivers 
and reached Gaya. He did tarpana rite for 
his father and grandfather and reached 
Mahcndra hillock. He took a bath in hilly 
-reservoirs and ponds and then met the 
crown hermit Paras'urama, the son of the 
Bhrgu. He again did tarpana for his fore¬ 
fathers there and entered a forest capable to 
sweep off the evils. 

snrt TRRflr wff 

r^Tr^xr^yfac-TiVT-ili 


SfTOSJI '^- 


A stream of water used to fall down 
from a mountain there. It w'as so capable as 
to efface the evils if any residue still 


remained in the minds of the people. The 
Brahmin took the water from it and 
sprinkled it on the head of god Nrsiriiha. 
His body became free from home and any 
of the attachment of evils. He then stayed 
on at the mountain Vindhyacala and he 
started regular worship of god Visnu, the 
Acyuta, adored by the devotees and the 
great hermits by offering the pretty flowers 
grown on the land of that mountain. 

■R' 

3^; ff%FT?TW 

ITcTt ■’J^FTOTR^rnT fpTII<i II 
aiHiyRlfd fgsil^^MKUl- 

wftr titHT 

I 11 

He thus worshipped for many years. God 
Nrsimha pleased and appeared while he 
was in snoring sleep. The god said- 
'Brahmin, it is a violation of the rules made 
for the couple; if someone does not follow 
the rules for any of the asrama. If you really 
are no more interested to observe the 
married life, accept any other asrama. I do 
not pleased with the person in spite of his 
being well learned in the Vedas if he does 
not follow the prescribed rules for any of 
the asramas. However, your loyalty has 
pleased me and this is the reason why am I 
suggesting you the same. 

fgsrrsfF ftfUT gfgfwT <gichMT 

gfg ^ I ^ o 11 



CHAPTER 15 


55 


The Brahmin pondered upon the 
suggestions delivered by god Nrsiriiha and 
found it mandatory to observe. Hence, he 
immediately abandoned the worldly 
attachments and became a recluse. 

rdy^lRfuT fw: 

i|y Ichyfkl^ T 9 TT^ 

cudmomli 

31 W 5 J 1 ^ 

1^911 

fdfdcRI^^ diVira^ 

W ■?nret huifltf^iiiuit 

fgr?iRr ^ «FraraR^ii^?ii 
fdVIlcH 

■RfdlrMch dlUdH^I 

cTfwi; ^ 

The Brahmin started taking a daily bath 
in that evil sweeping water of the fountain. 
Since that day, he used to stand in water 
with a trident and basil garland in his hands, 
in deep concentration on god Visnu and 
japa in his lips. To put the Vigraha of Visnu 
in the form of Nrsiihha with sacred and 
devoted imagination within heart and mind, 
to worship him, to live in solitude, to be 
satisfied with vegetarian diet and that too 
through alms was the routine observed by 
him. In that wide and deserted place 
(Province) he would sit on the seat made of 
kus'a grass, merge his all affairs pertaining 
to sensory organs, the senses, the 
discriminative mind all in everlasting god 


Visnu, and meditate on omniscient, unborn, 
gigantic, in the form of truth, the best, 
benevolent, full of pleasure and the supreme 
Tsvara. Thus, at death, he attained 
emancipation and became form of the 
supreme soul. 

^ graft gfeniTt 

iraRcf ^ girfrii wr^T: I 

^ grRfr gg ii^mi 
gg’ ^ yrtsu: 
jHrFt ^nggtr 
ftRT?R gt 

?tbRfRfgTTnt gg^5Hng:ii ^xii 

The people who read this story 
competent to provide with emancipation 
and related to the salvation with their 
exclusive concentration on god Nrsimha, 
attain to the fruit as would avail on having a 
dip in Prayaga, the pilgrim-place and lastly, 
obtain the great position of god Visnu. Dear 
son, I have told you this holy, sacrosanct 
and ancient episode on your enquiry and 
curiosity both. Now, tell me what you want 
more to listen to? Express your desire. 

Thus, the fourteenth chapter on significance of 
asramas in Sri Nrsimha Purana approaches the 
end. 




CHAPTER 15 


55 



CHAPTER 15 

An elucidation of the world tree and the 
knowledge competent to demolish the same. 

-RTORi ti?ii 
TraicT ^ I ^ 11 



56 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 




CHAPTER 16 


57 


entrapped by this world. They demolish this 
tree and become scot-free. O the great 
learned Sukadeva, the evil-doers seldom get 
out from the trap of the object and the 
action (karma and kriya). The conscious 
people, on the other side, cut into pieces the 
branches of this tree by the conscious sword 
in their hands and attain to that immortal 
position from where they seldom are 
recycled to birth and death. The man 
fastened firmly by affection for the body 
and the wife too becomes free by virtue of 
the practical application of his 
consciousness. Hence, the great men keep 
the attainment of knowledge of the top of 
their action plan as it is the knowledge that 
only pleases the god Nrsiihha. A man 
without consciousness is not better than an 
animal. The eating habits, rest and sleep, 
sense of fear and intercourse etc. in man are 
like those in the animals. It is only 
consciousness that differs him from the 
animals. Hence, the persons without 
consciousness too are like animal barring 
the structural or physical difference. 

Thus, chapter fifteen on 'description of the world 
tree' Sri Nrsimha Purana approaches the end. 



CHAPTER 16 


57 


CHAPTER 16 

Description of attainment of emancipation by 
virtue of concentration on god Vijpu 


TT ^ (HWfriiiy 5^ 

fcsmnsJnfl ^ ■g^: 

Sri Sukadeva said- Dear father, how can 


a man climbed on the world tree, tied with 
hundreds of attachments, envies, fatigues 
etc., fell into the ocean of Yoni with the 
cord of affections for son and luxuries, 
suffering from sensuality, anger, greed and 
world affairs and fastened with the principal 
tie of the acts and subsidiary ties of passion 
for son (children) and wife cross this 
toughest worldly ocean quickly? How can 
he attain emancipation? Please provide us 
with the proper solution for this query. 

cTSir g^qifir ^ ^ ^1 !■>{ 11 

iTn?Tr ^ ii 

^ WTOTT: TTHTf^wnT:! 

^nrgT^f5FTreR:ll^ll 

Tift 

3PJTW fgrflra^ uR i jA^fd ll^ll 

Vyasa said- I describe the divine 
knowledge to you all which provides a man 
with emancipation if properly understood as 
I had heard from Narada in the distant past. 
Please, listen to it with attention O learned 
son. Once Devarsi Narada got a chance to 
enter into the chamber of Yama, the same 
place where the gross Raurava hell is and 
the men without conscious acts and 
thoughts, suffer from numerous pains as a 
result of their past acts. He saw that the 
evil-doers have been thrown into there for 
suffering. He moved out from there 
immediately and reached a place where 
three eyed Mahadeva was. He bowed his 
head with requisite etiquette before the 
great trident holder god Sankara and Gahga. 
He then asked him - 



58 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


VKlRfijy^44: TfesRH: 

^ I ^ ^^yyURMKIctl 

dTC( VI^All^ II 

rR?I dSiT^d fdcdl^^:l 

3^ trgfw 3raR^^IT:ll^o|| 

Narada said- O god, how can a man tied 
with the great struggles, grief and gaiety 
and the word etc. worldly affairs, suffering 
from six Urmis; shortly cross the ocean of 
mortal world? O benevolent god Siva, 
please tell me that remedy as I am curious 
to listen to the same. Having seen the 
curiosity of Narada, god Hara was pleased 
as his face was glowing with smile. He 
replied Maharsi - 

’cT W Tp^J^lWrTtTI 

■^totoRW^PTFfll^^ll 

3nTEft^rM4 PW^-qmTII^^II 

v9 • 

tn^T 14roit: irer^ ^ chf^rtcy^cli 
T( tmt 4??ni*trM flRRH:il^?ll 

irhjtf Tflfe ■R'srjTf^ll^'iJII 
'Utd^IrMH fHdHlfd 

cR5T ^ MV-Mlf^r y^cbifd?i^<rMM^mi 

dWHK< 

aiHIK^r^dl RUir^d:ll^^ll 

Mahesvara said- O the great hermit, I 
tell you the nectar of consciousness most 
cryptic, confident and capable to drive off 
the fear of worldly binding and sorrows. 
The four type commmne of living organisms 
(creatures) starting from a straw to the four 


headed Brahma or in other words, this 
movable and inert world as a whole is 
moving into the blind alley of the illusion 
(Maya) spread by god Visnu. In case, 
therefore, someone could avail of the grace 
of god Visnu in the form of consciousness, 
that only crosses this worldly ocean in spite 
of its being tough for god, far to say of a 
man. The man non-oriented to the 
knowledge of elements and intoxicated with 
the worldly enjoyments and luxuries, 
immerses till death in the marsh of the 
world as an old cow is dead when trapped 
into the mud. I do not see a little bit 
possibility for emancipation for a man even 
if he dies a crore deaths who had tied 
himself with the acts of varied nature like a 
silk worm. O hermit Narada one should 
therefore do worship and meditation on 
god Visnu exclusively as he is the god of all 
and everlasting. 

w fyyaiNigj-dmd wicmPi 

W f^g^i I 11 
PfSetiH) ftfichivi IwCTo^ pRIR^fifl 
eji^4fci‘i'4 -R^T sEtrofeg^zi^iiUii 
m TiRiirgtt ^5wraqTi;i 

^ s!iFrj;f45^ii?oii 

3PitT WTFK «4m'if4cir4dH,l 

snni4 1%Eqj -Rchlrii g^lR^II 

gTMTWWftt ^J?TWKI 

w Syi'UpdlM'cq^ll? ^11 

The man who does concentration on god 
Visnu, who is in the form of the universe, 
beyond the birth and death, the sole cause 
of all, existing in soul, sacrosanct and 
omniscient, avails of emancipation. The 
man frees from all worldly ties who always 




CHAPTER 16 


59 


keeps keen devotion for the optionless, 
regular, beyond the illusion, free from the 
agony and ailments and unborn Vasudeva 
(Omniscient god) Visnu, The man 
imagining him always in the shelter of god 
Visnu, who is free from all distortions, 
absolute peace, Acyuta, creator of all 
creatures and the situs for the origin of the 
gods; is absolved from the cycle of birth 
and death. The man is freed from the ties of 
acts (karma) who always keeps his mind in 
concentration on god Visnu, the god 
innocent, beyond the proof, beyond the 
characteristics, in the form of peace and 
free from evils. The man is freed from the 
ties of birth and death who always has 
devotion for god Visnu, the god of Yogas, 
Purana, without physical body, resting in 
the cavity of the wisdom, beyond the 
contacts of the worldly affairs and 
everlasting, makes him free from the 
bondage of the birth and death. 

Rr4c(icfi trt 

ifcbpjmni 

■RTR •He,i 


TT45:<aitigg>< R4viin^«h< 

iTi^sgrM:i 

fgrof) yfdfed fg«Jjf4v4 yfdfed: i 
fgv4vgttrii chI^hi^ fEg^ii^^ii 
giihh^w:i 
sgig^ifgg^ii^^ii 

The man is freed from the world who 
has a keen devotion for Visnu, the god free 
from the bondage of good and bad, beyond 
six Urmis, Omnipresent, beyond 
imagination and always sacrosanct. The 
man imagining god Vi§nu as free from all 
bondages and beyond sorrows, beyond the 
issue for argument and unborn, becomes 
free from all bondages. The man seeing god 
Visnu as beyond the name and clan (Gotra) 
the supreme position beyond the three 
stages including unique and awakened etc. 
The man attains emancipation who always 
engages his mind on god Visnu, who is 
beyond complexion, true, resolute, and as 
holy as the ether. The person remembering 
always Visnu, the god omniform, within 
nature and sensitive form of soul, attains 
freedom from the worldly ties. He is always 
illumining and in the form of Om (the 
single letter). The man becomes free from 
the bondage of world who always keeps in 
mind Visnu, the god uninterpretable, 
beyond the reach of consciousness, Orii 
formed, unborn and always in never form. 
The god Visnu, the prime cause for the 
universe saviour of the world, the destroyer 
of the universe as well and endowed with 
all desired things and beyond the three 
stages makes free his devotee from the 
worldly bondage who remembers him 
always. The worldly ties are shattered by a 



60 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


man who always remembers Visnu, the god 
who kicks off all sorrows, renders peace 
and sets aside all evils committed. The man 
is absolved from the troubles and evils if he 
always concentrates on Visnu the god 
worshipped by Brahma etc. gods, 
Gandharva, Munis, Siddhas, soothsayers 
(Carana) and Yogis. This universe is within 
Visnu and god Visnu resides on it. A man 
avails of emancipation who recites hymns 
for the master of this entire universe and 
who is unborn Visnu. The desirous of 
freedom from the worldly ties and 
otherwise may get all these duly fulfilled if 
he does concentration on Visnu the great 
giver. 

^ ^ -^T 

■RcRt smf| 

Vyasa said- Dear, son, whatever was 
told by the holder of the Ox marked flag, 
god Saiikara to Maharsi Narada on the 
enquiry made by him, I have completely 
told that to you son, do continues 
concentration on that unique and the 
Brahma unborn form Visnu and you will 
definitely obtain an everlasting and 
immortal position. 

IT R’utniti&y TO fyfehciiMciHji^^ii 
Vld'jIAt^d muqfil PU|5»qfrlll^t9ll 
WT: TT wfriOill 


dMlRehMi 31^41 ^C(< tTT 

^ ftrf^ TOTt f troT#rT 1 1 ? 11 

TdctiMfHTnM'J) 
^te?Tr 5 S!mT:ll^^ll 


Devarsi Narada had obtained the 
supreme axiom by virtue of worship god 
Visnu as he heard from god Saiikara that 
Visnu was the greatest god. The man may 
dash down the evil if any committed in the 
phase of the hundred births if he recites this 
pious psalm stated by god Sankara daily 
after a bath, attains emancipation 
(Amrtapada). The people doing 
concentration on Ananta god Acyuta in 
their lotus hearts and recite the psalm of the 
god of devotees Visnu, attain the supreme 
Vaisnavl Siddhi (the position of Visnu). 

Thus, the sixteentli chapter on the emancipation 
through concentration on Visnu' in Sri Nrsiifiha 
Purana' approaches the end. 



CHAPTER 18 


63 


CHAPTER 18 

The story of birth of Manu, Yama and Yanil 
from the womb of Sariijna and birth of Manu, 
Sani and Tapatl from the womb of Chaya, 
and birth of Asvinikumaras. 



64 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


^ I 

irflcTt 4Krai3Nil5'5ra^ll?ll 
TTt ^ aR^ fer ^tTT^utanf^; gsiT; l 
TTmwj; 1% W; 

C\ 'O ' 

Suta said- The hermits and learned 
Bharadvaja, during ancient period, the 
learned ^uka engaged himself along with 
the Siddhas in the worship of god Narayana 
after hearing the several sacred and evil 
sweeping stories from Sri Krsnadvaipayana 
Vyasa. O Brahmins, I have thus told you the 
eccentric stories of Markandeya etc. All 
those sweeping evils and now I ask you 
what you want to listen to more from me. 

ctwKHi irar iitw iTR ■gfewn 

Bharadvaja said- Suta, you have earlier 
described the origin of Vasu etc. gods but 
the origin of Asvinikumaras and Marutas 
has been omitted. Hence, kindly tell that 
very episode in detail. 

iPtitlT ^wiyRsil 

wr ’viRwu^ 

■yfc^cWI 

seta said- O learned hermit, in the olden 
days, Sri Parasara the son of Sakti in Vis 
nupurana had described the origin of 
As'vinlkurnaras in Vayupurana. I will give a 
brief account of their origin here. Please, 
listen to the same. 

3^:1 

HVT ■ 4 ^ 5FEtt ^Trai3^ll\9ll 

■qfsftr rgt^ •Wt?d7 -rw 3nw wr? 


■RT cbfaM<4ici^ ^RTHRf 
rMdj]^vrtJ||mi<ili 



dltHR^-dl 


•RRt ftlTtHTR f% Rf? II? RRf llfeTT 

>3 vS 


TTt ■RW IT Wcfrai cpmt Rf: 


yTjusdmiRtfdii^oii 

■trg ^ RTW fttrR W 3f^ I ^ ? 11 

dctdlRJluil Rf: ^RRI 

3IIRfR <*fdyiriY'TRKIilrdlfdrMwVldi 


One daughter of Prajapati Daksa is 
renowned by the name of Aditi. She had 
given birth to Aditya, the son. Prajapati 
Tvasta married his daughter, namely 
Sarhjna to Aditya. Aditya too started living 
peacefully with the beautiful and ,well 
matching daughter of Tvasta. Sariijha could 
not bear the temperament (tapa) of her 
husband and returned to her fathers home 
after some time. Having seen the daughter 
returned from the in-laws home, her father 
said- "Dear daughter, tell me whether your 
husband sun provided you maintenance 
with affection or did harsh treatment." 
Sarnjna replied - "Dear father, I am severely 
burnt of the excessive temperature of my 
husband." Her father suggested her to go 
again to her husband as to serve her 
husband is the only duty (dharma) of the 
wife. I too will reduce the temperature of 
son-in-law after some days as I am planing 
to visit there also. 


?fR<WT ■RT TTM ebfdMilRtcJRI-RH 

RR! RR RTRIR^RRTf^IRTM^I 
■RR^ RfRRRiRTR ^tRR^TR^Rtrqnr RR 
RR!||1R RcRtRTfRSvlfewrR'^ ^TcRT 




CHAPTER 18 


65 




66 


NARASiMHA PURANAM 


bodies were more beautiful than all other 
gods. Brahma himself came there and 
endowed them with right to gain a share in 
the offering (yajna) and the cadre of gods. 
He concomitantly declared them the chief 
Doctors (Physician) of gods. Brahma then 
left for his abode and god Sun took his 
original form. Tvasta also abandoned her 
mare form and came into her original form. 
God Sun then took Sarhjna, the daughters 
of Prajapati Tvasta and his wife to his 
abode. Subsequently, Visvakarma came to 
Sun and started praying to him with a 
number of names. He then with the 
permission of god Sun, reduced the 
excessive heat of his body by fewer 
degrees. 

TI5 giferr 

tnw) srtiT? 

Iwift fTTort 

TT: 

WIRqil 


3tWV<VTtSS!nR;ll^<tll 

O learned Bharadvaja and other 
Brahmins, I have now completely told the 
sacred, pious and evil sweeping story of 
both Asvinikumaras to you all. Both sons of 
god sun are the physicians of gods. They 
always illuminate with their divine forms. 
The man listening to the story of their birth, 
receives a beautiful complexion on this 
earth and enjoys all pleasure in heaven after 
death. 

Thus, the eighteenth chapter on 'origin of 

As'vinlkumaras etc.' in Sri Nrsirhha Purana 
approaches the end. 




66 


NARASiMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 19 

A prayer comprising one hundred eight 
names of sun god by VisVakarma 

-RfeTT f^^cJch^UTTI 

n9 

cIRii ^ ■gcT fiic|t^ci;||^|| 

Bharadvaja said- Suta, I want to listen to 
the names of sun god addressed by 
Visvakarma while praying to him. Please, 
unveil those names of god Sun before us. 


?nf3 ^ ^ ^ f^vcranJtJiii 

Suta said- Brahmin, I tell you all the 
names applied by Visvakarma while 
praying to god sun. Those all are evil 
sweeping and sacrosanct. 

WT; W "mifWRH' 

fdfh ' tV-qSi R: ■9R^RgtSr-RTtfe3TT^:ll^ll 

1) Aditya the son of Aditi, 2) Savita- 
creator of the world, 3) Surya-creator of 
light and property, 4) Khaga-mover in the 
sky, 5) Pusa-nourisher of all, 6) 
Gabhastiman- equipped with thousands 
rays, 7) Timironmathanah- destroyer of the 
dark, 8) Sambhu benevolent, 9) Tvasta - 
Visvakarma or generator of craft in world 
form, 10) Martandah-appeared from the 
dead egg, 11) Asugah-sharp mover. 

fptnppf: chftlvIRim'l RRgRt 71^:1 

12) Hiranyagarbhah-Brahma, 13) 
Kapila- yellowish complexion or in the 
form of hermit Kapila, 14) Tapana- heater 
or temper giver, 15) Bhaskara- light giver. 



CHAPTER 19 


67 


16) Ravi- with the sound of three Vedas 
(the sound) or absorber of the liquids from 
the earth, 17) Agnigarbhah-holder of fire 
within (full of splendour), 18) Adite Putra- 
son of Aditi Sambhu-creator of welfare, 19) 
Timiranas'ana- killer of the dark. 




20) Aihsuman- lighted with numberless 
rays, 21) Arirsumall- adorned with the 
cluster of rays, 22) Tanioghna- killer of 
dark, 23) Tejasa Nidhi- treasure of radiance 
or light, 24) AtapI- Producer of heat or 
temperature, 25) Mandali- composed with 
self form, 26) Mrtyu- the father of Yama, 
the administrator of death or in the form of 
death, 27) Kapila Sarvatapana- heating all 
with brown or golden rays. 






28) Hari- Surya or remover of sins, 29) 
Visva- in. all forms, 30) Mahateja- great in 
brilliance, 31) Sarvaratna Prabhakara- 
producer of all gems and the cluster of 
light, 32) Arhs'umall Timira- remover of 
dark by holding the garland of rays, 33) 
Rgyajusamabhavita- propounded or spirited 
by Rgveda, Yajurveda and Samaveda. 

3nuilf4t*tUTt ftjT: fRr31^:l 

^^7RWR:IIV9|| 


34) Pranaviskarana- sole cause of 
raining and producer of the cereals etc. the 
fundament element of breathing, 35) Mitra- 
Aditya known as Mitra or friend to all, 36) 
Supradipa- properly illuminating or 
lighting equally everywhere, 37) 
Manoratha- with velocity equal to the mind 
or more acute than mind too, 38) Yajnesa- 
the master of yajha in the form Of Narayana, 


39) Gopati- the master of rays or nourisher 
of land and cows, 40) Srlman- full of 
radiance, 41) Bhutajha- observer of all 
creatures or known to the past, 42) 
Kles'anasana- killer of all kind of griefs. 

43) Amitraha- suppresser of the enemy, 
44) Siva in the form of welfare, 45) Harhsa- 
only rajaharhsa who swims the sky pond or 
the soul of all, 46) Nayaka- leader or 
regulator (controller), 47) Priyadarsana- 
who wish for all welfare or observer of 
welfare to all or whose glance is favourite 
to all, 48) Suddha- pure or all clean and 
shining, 49) Virocana- illuminating 
excessively, 50) KesI- with ray hair, 51) 
Sahastrarhsu- treasure of numberless rays, 
52) Pratardanah- killer of dark etc. 
particularly. 

I 

VII: 11811 

53) Dharmarasmi- with the dutiful 
(Dharmamaya) rays or promulgator of 
dharma, 54) Patahga- in the form of sky 
mover bird flying with the wings of rays, 
55) Visala- giant form or specially 
charming, 56) Visvasaihstuta- adorable by 
all creatures, 57) Durvijneyagati- to 
understand the nature of whom is tough, 58) 
Sura- chivalrous, 59) Tejorasi- a treasure 
of brilliance, 60) Mahayasa- great 
illustrious. 


%iif^buj^j4i)fdtii4)vii f4rji«J]f4vcwra^;i 

llchivilrqi ?ll4TTfVT: || 


61) Bhrajisnu- radiating, 62) Jyotis 
amisa- master of the all illuminating stars 
and planets, 63) Vijisnu-victorious, 64) 


68 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


Visvabhavana-originator of the universe, 
65) Prabhavisnu- influential or cause for 
the creation of the world, 66) Prakas'atma- 
in the form of light, 67) Jnanarasi- treasure 
of knowledge, 68) Prabhakara- propagator 
of the supreme light 

3TT%# ^ I 

‘4)4ciiH)vil 4lJmicn:iinM 

69) Adityo Vis'vadrk- observer or 
witness of world in the form of Aditya or 
eye to the entire world, 70) Yajnakarta- 
giver of water and life to the world and 
thus, making them able to perform the 
generosity and offering, 71) Neta- shattered 
of the dark, 72) Yasaskara- giver of wide 
scope to the fame, 73) Vimala- unseared or 
clean form, 74) VlryavSna- mighty, 75) 
Isa- god, 76) Yogajna- preacher of the 
knowledge of Karmayoga after obtaining 
the same from god Sri Hari, 77) 
YogabhSvana- producer of Yoga. 

3ti)dlrUI I 

tnmci: 1^711 

78) Amrtatma Siva- Siva in the form of 
nector, 79) Nitya- everlasting, 80) 
Varenya- worth taking resort or shelter, 
81) Varada- endower of desired boon to the 
devotee, 82) Prabhuh- capable to do 
everything, giver, 83) Dhanadah- donor or 
wealth, 84) Pranadah- life giver, 85) Srest 
hah- the best of all, 86) Kamadah- giver of 
desired thing, 87) Kamarupadhrk- holder or 
varied forms voluntarily. 

wrfw: -mu 

?IRT: yif44l4c>rd'ff:ll??ll 

88) Taranih-maker of safe crossing from 
the ocean of world, 89) Sasvatah- 
evcrlasting man (Purusa), 90) Sasta- 


administrator or preacher, 91) Sastrajna- 
known to all scriptures, 92) Tapanah- 
temper giver or heating, 93) Sayah- shelter 
or the situs to alt, 94) Vedagarbha- 
producer of Sukla Yajurveda, 95) Vibhu- 
omnipresent, 96) Viral- gallant or warrior, 
97) Santah- controlled (Sarhyukta), 98) 
Savitri- vallabha the super god of Gayatri 
hymn. 

grar 11 11 

99) Dhyeya- worth doing concentration, 

100) Visvesvara- god of the entire world, 

101) Bharta-nourisher of all, 102) 
Lokanatha- protector of the world, 103) 
Mahesvara- supreme Is'vara (Parames'vara), 
104) Mahendra- in the form of the king of 
gods i.e. Indra, 105) Varuna- Aditya in the 
name of Varuna the administrator of the 
west direction, 106) DhSta- nourisher of the 
world or Aditya in the name of Dhata, 107) 
Visnu- wide spread or Aditya in the name 
of Visnu, 108) Agni- in the form of fire, 
109) Divakara- remover of the dark spread 
in the night and producer of the day all 
illuminating.' 

That great soul Visvakarma worshipped 
god Sun with the recital of the above 
mentioned names. God sun overwhelmed 
with pleasure said to Visvakarma. 

^rfipTlftW tTTTR tPT WrRTI 

w I 11 

Prajapati, the matter within your mind 
and the purpose for which you have arrived 

1. According to Slokas, we mentioned here 109 

names of lord Visnu instead of 108 names. 



CHAPTER 20 


69 


here is known to me. Curtail my orbit 
therefore, by putting me on Sankara and it 
will reduee my temperature to some small 
extent. 

rt cTsjT TT '-pranR fet 
Vll-rllwi: -RfelT ^ 

Brahmin, Visvakarma followed the 
advice so given by god sun. Brahmins, the 
light god Savita became cool for the 
daughter of Visvakarma and his 
temperature reduced. He then said toTvasta- 

O innocent soul, as you have worshipped 
me with reciting one hundred eight names, I 
am therefore, ready to boon you with 
pleasure. Ask anything you wish for. 

TTfStl ^ II 

^ ^ ^ ifw ^1 
T3^ TT: RtltZfiw ntrllVIMRoll 

trw TTR^ ^ fTR 


Having seen the generosity of god sun 
and persuasion, Vis'vakarma said- God 
Bhaskara, sweep away entire sins of the 
person who recites these names daily with 
keen devotion for you. 

c^MKMctd:|| f%TTTR 
■R# TfwSRfWctt 






God Bhaskara, the cause for opening the 
day, replied in affirmative to the demand of 
Visvarkarma with expressive words- "Very 
weir. Visvakarma then returned to his 


hermitage after having pleased god sun and 
eliminating the cause for fear of Sarhjha, 
the resident of the sun orbit, the wife of god 
sun. 

Thus, the nineteenth chapter on "Psalm recited 
for god sun with one hundred eight names' in Sri 
Nrsirhha Purana approaches the end. 



CHAPTER 20 


69 


CHAPTER 20 


Origin of Marutas 

■RTOTit 

Sd ' Nd 'A • 

w: Rfd?^ 

wyfdWiy'iiioiRiRii 

TT ^ Wm ifpjrq;i 

g=n<iTttggg^raT^ii?ii 

vf^ ^ TRT^ VK^dfOM ^ yKRibypR 

3?T^ ^rfg^l ^r^)c(geWI TTT 

^ grwTHTii'iii 


Suta said- O the Great Brahmin, I will 
now highlight the origin of Marutas. In the 
ancient period, the demons, the son of Did 
had been defeated by the army of Indra etc. 
gods when a dreadful war between gods and 
demons was erupted. Diti then began to 
worship her husband Kasyapa with a desire 
to give birth a mighty son to the extent 
competent to suppress the go of Mahendra. 
Having been pleased by the penance so 
intended Kasyapa did intercourse with her 
and said- "the mighty son as you want to be 
shall only take birth if you could retain the 
womb as much as one hundred long years 
and that too with taking care of all 
sanctity." Diti tool all care as suggested by 




70 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


the hermit Kasyapa. 

■<e\MU|l''lrq 


WTOTW%r"otTTimii 


TpraSlT fif^i 


wsrr ^ -q^ ^ 'Jt i dMT?iAt i 

mrar amt wt qm 

God Indra smelled the matter intended 
and he transformed himself in the physique 
of an old Brahmin in order to live in 
proximity to Diti. He then reaehed there and 
settled. One day when the time limit was 
about to complete, Diti went to bed and 
forgot cleaning her feet after supper. As 
Indra was onlooker of opportunity, he 
immediately entered into the womb of Diti 
and cut the womb into seven pieces with an 
acute blow of his thunder bolt. The womb 
started weeping so, Indra in order to resist 
his crying, further, took each piece so made 
and cut the same into other seven pieces. 
Thus, these 7x7=49 pieces became popular 
as Maruta because the god Indra, had used 
the word ma rodi when the first seven parts 
of the womb were weeping and when he 
further divided each part in seven more 
parts. 

fgqmRgHmftr ■q': 




4T:ll<?ll 

nq;ii?oii 


O hermit, I have thus, told you all the 
origin of gods, demon, man, serpent, 
monster and ether etc. elements (Bhutas). 
The man avails the abode of Visnu who 
recites or hears with devotion this episode. 

Thus, the Nineteenth chapter on 'Origin of 
Marutas' in Sri Nrsirhha Purana approaches the 
end. 



70 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 21 

Description of Suryavaihsa 

f%raT 

^ %i I ? 11 

Bharadvaja said- Suta, you told about 
Sarga and Anusarga, highlighted the 
eccentric stories, and it is requested that a 
description on the dynasty of kings, 
Manvantara and the clanology 
(Varirs'anucarita) should also be added so 
that all of us could know this all. 


Tm l 

^IRII 

dviijt^Rd ^ fer 

Suta said- The royal dynasty has been 
described in detail in the womb of Puranas 
but I will tell you in brief, the dynasty of 
kings, Manvantara and Varhsanucarita here. 
O learned Brahmin, listen to this description 
with all hermits gathered here for the same. 

dic)<d^i si^niTt ■rRtf%:i 

fgf^Trr:,^dl^d[ tqidjy: gtjt: fS!m^:limi 



CHAPTER 22 


71 


■RPm: 3^: 

(JE|'^I<(^1¥HJ5:I1V9I1 

3TW?W)4+>'J|) <I^UIIr41^l<:ll<ill 
TFHr.^4w') ^4vcii«ii(lrt:ii'?ii 
?RldKlQdIv4^ <1l^dlVclKJiljMKI 3T^pi4t 
'(nftTsr: ii^oii 

^RTtWlT y1diy: Tft^RTT^5ii^;linil 

?T|klMKd<ciJ; 3rH{Sl|^4yi|: 

4^4m?tTjT:ll^?ll 3Tirr??RSr: cjwi^: 
TTRlc^: wrdra:ll^^ll 

^mul: 

wdiRoy^vi) 

Brahma first appeared, then Marici was 
originated from him, Kasyapa from Marici, 
Sun from Kasyapa, Mann from Sun, Iks 
vaku form Manu, Vikuksi from Iksvaku, 
Dyota from Iksvaku, Vena from Dyota, 
Prthu from Vena and Prthas'va form Prthu. 
Similarly, in a seriatim Asarhkhyatasva was 
originated fi'om Prthas'va, Mandhata from 
Asamkhyatasva, Purukutsa from Mandhata, 
Drsada from Daruna, Harsas'va from 
Sagara, Harita from Harsasva, Rohitasva 
from Harita, Arhs'uman from Rohitas'va, and 
Bhagiratha from Arhsuman. Saudasa from 
Bhagfratha, Satrundama from Saudasa, 
Anaranya from Satrundama, Dirghabahu 
from Anaranya, Aja from Dirghabahu, 
Dasaratha from Aja, Sri Rama from 
Dasaratha, Lava from Sri Rama, Padma 
from Lava, Anuparna from Padma and 
Vastrapani from Anuparna. Similarly, 
Suddhodana from Vastrapani, and Budha 
(Budha) from Vastrapani. The clan of Sun 
(Suryavarhsa) ceased from Budha. 


^44?RraT % ^ j(raF4d MchIRdci 
?r4ii: 

f4TEi 4^: tPTr 

■^r? h^v<=hi: grri 

i|4)wiPlHlotjfvM; TPnilrr; 


g^RgrTORii^iaii 

m ^ctnr4^s«zTPi:iR^ii 


The Ksatriyas born in the clan of Sun 
have been described herein above 
selectively and only those names have been 
referred to here who had ruled ideally 
following Justice. O hermit, this is the 
description of Suryavarhsa in which a 
number of kings had ruled. Now listen to 
the description on the great kings born in 
the clan of Moon (Candravarhsa). 


Thus, the twenty one chapter on about 
Suryavarhsa in Sir Nrsirhha Purana approaches 
the end. 




CHAPTER 22 


71 


CHAPTER 22 

Description of Candravariisa 

Igw^uiicki lEi^najsa^spTii^ii 

Suta said- O great hermit Bharadvaja, 
listen to the description on Candravarirs'a 
now. It has been described in detail in other 
Puranas, so I would like to give a succinct 
account of this herein. 

3 tlRcdle 3 c(Tjdriri 113:11311 
iPTt: ■pthPTt ^:l TThn^rf^W 
WfeTRlt Wi^T: 3THT:l 3R^ 

•O ' s3 -O 

^pnimi 



72 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


RlcS'Rlu+'M ^:ll\9ll 
wTrpi fefriii ^sRrti 
W;ll.ill 

T^^rarwqfe: I 3T^jPTT^ ■^^[ogft -gf^: i 
3)1TT:I yWTg gfWTRlt ?RR:I 
VHHi'iil'jUJi-yiiii flrfe^: i 
^ifi4chi4ji ^nnf:ii<?ii 

TTwit: ^T^^TTrgWIT- 

■crfw^ni^oii 

arfw^Tre^Rmt 

^jRTr3R:l ?RTRfe:linil 

i^<wryi!J<i'4H:i fRzr w-^eirtrat 

TraT?^:ll^^ll 

^R^:l ^TTaFRiT: mu^di: 

Brahma was born very first, then his 
thought-churned (Manasa) son Marici, was 
born. Marici reproduced from the womb of 
DaksayanI a son namely, Kasyapa. Then the 
sun was born from the womb of Aditi, the 
wife of Kasyapa also. Surya reproduced 
from the womb of Suvarcala (Sarhjna) a son 
Manu. Manu reproduced Soma from the 
womb of Surupa and Soma reproduced 
Budha from the womb of RohinT. Budha 
reproduced Pururava from the womb of Ila. 
Pururava reproduced Ayu and Ayu 
reproduced from the womb of Rupavatl a 
son namely, Nahusa. Nahusa reproduced 
Yayati from the womb of Pitrvatl and 
Yayati reproduced Puru from the womb of 
Sarmistha. Puru with the co-operation of his 
wife Varhsada gave birth to Sampati and he 


by virtue of intercourse with Bhanudatta 
gave birth to Sarvabhauma. Sarvabhauma 
with the co-operation of his wife Vaidehi 
gave birth to Bhoja. Bhoja married Lihga 
and gave birth to Dusyanta. Dusyanta 
married Sakuntala and brought in Bharata. 
Bharata married Nanda and gave birth to 
Ajamidha. Ajamldha married SudevI and 
gave birth to Prsni. Prsni gave birth to 
Prasara as a result of coition with her. 
Prasara reproduced Santanu from the womb 
of Bahurupa. Santanu made wife 
Yojanagandha and gave birth to 
Vicitravirya. Vicitravirya reproduced Pandu 
from the womb of Ambika. Pandu got 
Arjuna from the womb of Kunti, Arjuna 
reproduced Abhimanyu form the womb of 
Subhadra. Abhimanyu reproduced from the 
womb of Uttara a son Parlksita. Parlksita 
gave birth to Janamejaya from his wife 
Matrvatl and Janamejaya got Satanika from 
the womb of his wife Puspavatl. Satanika 
got a son Sahastranika from the womb of 
his wife Puspavatl. Sahastranika got 
Udayana from the womb of Mrgavatl and 
Udayana got a son Naravahana from his 
wife Vasavadatta. Naravahana got a son Ks 
emaka from his wife Asvamedha. Ksemaka 
was the last king of the Pandavas dynasty 
and Candravarirsa ceased. 


^ ^ VJ^JdlpTc^i tNciVIhdrlJIRI 
R4mMr.. f^WjRlcfi IT wf^tl^'iJII 

gr 


MIM-UVnll 

xnftr 


The man who listens to always this great 
royal dynasty becomes absolved from all 



CHAPTER 23 


73 


sins and after having a pure mind he attains 
to the abode of Visnu. Anyone who reads 
daily this description of royal dynasty and 
makes his forefathers (Pitaras), to listen in 
course of Sraddha (a rite to remember), the 
things, offered by him to his ancestors 
becomes undepleting. O Brahmin, I have 
made you to listen to this episode pertaining 
to the dynasty of the kings of Candravarhsa. 
Now, listen to the fourteen Manvantaras 
which I am going to tell you. 

TFT 

Thus the twenty-second chapter on 'About 
Candravarhsa' in Sri Nrsiihha Purana 
approaches the end. 





CHAPTER 23 


73 


CHAPTER 23 

Descriptions of fourteen Manvantaras 

^ Rj: 11 ^ 11 

liUNdl: R^ftldl ^;IRII 
A'4wi<d: ■§JfTtiTt ^ 

#TT: witiRiMW 

TRt: W TTSTFTt ^raf^ll?ll 

Suta said- The first is Svayambhuva 
Manvantara. Its introductions had already 
been given earlier. Svarocisa named second 
Manu had been born in the initial phase of 
the creation. At that Svarocisa Manvantara, 
there was Vipascit named Indra, the king 
of gods. The gods of that phase were 
Parvata and Tusita. The Saptarsi at that 
Manvantara were Suprana, Danta, 


Nirfsabha, Varlyana, Ts'vara and Soma. 
Similarly, Kirhpurusa etc. named sons of 
Svarocisa Manu were the kings on the earth. 

3^ TR iR: I ■pRR: RR: %gT: I 

^ ^iPdr^iimii 

trt: 

•531:11^11 

The third Manu was renowned by the 
name 'Uttama'. During their regime, five 
gods- Sudhama, Satya, Siva, Pratardana 
and VarhsavartI (or VasavartI) were 
existed. In each commune of these five 
gods, there were five persons in each. The 
name of Indra to these five gods was 
Susanti. The Saptarsi of those times were 
known as Vandya. Manu's sons Parasuta 
and Citra etc. were the kings on the earth 
that time. 

3m 35:1 cm ftj: w: 

umi: 3trTr:ll\9ll 

m 3m ^1^:1 fpxmfmr 

^pmr 3^ -gf^^ 

■R3nJ3:ii«iii 

<*iv4^fi38i3cfi 
3^: 3m TT3n3:ll^ll 

The name of fourth Manu was Tam as a. 
In the Manvantara concerned, there were 
the commune of gods known as Para, Satya 
and Sudhi. Each commune consisted of 
twenty gods. The name of Indra, the king of 
these gods was Bhus'undl. At that phase of 
time, the Saptarsi were- Hiranyaroma 
DevasrI, Udhravabahu, Devabahu, 
Sudhama, Parjanya and Muni. The sons of 
Tamasa Manu i.e. Jyotirdhama, Prthu, Kas 
ya, Agni and Dhanaka were kings on this 
earth. 



74 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 




CHAPTER 23 


75 




^?T^T 1 IT 


tRr: 33 R:ll?o|| 
^RTfir# 5 ^:IR^II 


WT: ^ ci^ilSIlfafy^fdtMlRcilrl 




The ninth prospective Manu will be 
Daksasavarni. His sons Dhrti, Kirti, Dlpti, 
Ketu, Pancahasta, Niramaya and Prthusrava 
etc. will be the kings of this earth. The gods 
will be in that Manvantara as Maricigarbha, 
Sudharma and Havisman and Adbhuta will 
be their kings. The Saptarsi will be Savana, 
Krtiman, Havya, Vasu, Medhatithi, and 
Jyotisman (and Satya). 

^ VIlf^PK: 'RcdRfqhji: 

^rmPT: llfdMl**: 11 ^ 11 

^ni|uiid4l sr?reraf%5rT tMRt 
^tfdbdPdll^'kll 


The tenth will Brahma Savarni. Viruddha 
etc. will be gods and Santi will be their 
Indra. The Saptarsi will be Havisman, 
Sukrti, Satya, Tapomurti, Nabhaga, 
Pratimoka and Saptaketu. Suksetra, 

Uttama, Bhurisena etc. sons of 
Brahmasavarni will be the kings on the 
earth. 

yA^MpuU't 115:11^mi 

pR^RdHid^l ^WTitriT:l ^ R<N;wfdrK:ll^^ll 

Pihf^RI'dycJvfi Pl<*U4l PlhrRI^l ImlT 

Dharmasavarni will be Manu in the 
eleventh Manvantara. The commune of 
gods at that time will be Sirhha, Savana etc. 
And Divaspati will be their Indra. Nirmoha, 


TattvadarsT, Nikampa, Nirutsaha, Dhrtiman 
and Rucya will be Saptarsi. Citrasena and 
Vicitra etc. sons of Dharma-Savarni Manu 
will be kings on this earth. 

hSt^idP'Mfqcii lK?Tt R5:IR(ill 
fJhsrmr ?il^ fif^: 




TRt: 


Well WMT 

s3 Cv 


^KlPcTII^^II 


Manu in the twelfth Manvantara will 
Rudrasavarni. In the phase of that twelfth 
Manvantara, Krtadhama will be Indra and 
Harlta, Rohita, Sumana, Sukarma and 
Sutapa will be the gods. Saptarsi will be 
Tapasvl, Carutapa, Tapomurti, Taporati, 
Tapodhrti, Jyoti and Tapa. The sons of 
Rudrasavarni Devavana and Devasrestha 
etc. will be the kings on the earth. 

d-dVvi) tg:l dM: 

<dhU||:i ^ 

f^V^ddtsPd^ldl dl^Pn^ldwtld 

tRl: :gdT: Ij« 41 vd<l 


The name of the thirteenth Manu will be 
Ruci. Sragvl, Vana and Sudharma will be 
the communes of gods and Rsabha will be 
their Indra. The Saptarsi will be Nis'eita, 
Agniteja, Vapu§man, Dhrsta, VarunI, Havis 
man and Bhavyamurti Nahusa. The sons of 
Ruci, the Manu; Sudharma and Devanika 
etc. will be the kings on the earth. 







Rfel: gtpTESWT: ^hUICIl^-iJII 


^tPddigj^jPi^sbmydp'idm'inrddii'diyi 



76 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 




H-il: ^ctl 


TRR;ll?mi 

TM[^V^ TTR^II^^II 

Bhauma will be the fourteenth Manu. 
Suruci will be Indra and the communes of 
gods will be Caksusman, Pavitra and 
Kaustubha. Agnibahu, Suci, Sukra, 
Madhava, Siva, Abhiman and Jitasvasa will 
be Saptarsi and the sons of Manu Bhima i.e. 
Uru, Gambhira and Brahma etc. will be the 
kings on the earth. Thus, I have told you 
all about the fourteen Manvantaras and the 
names of the sons of fourteen Manus who 
will then be the kings on the earth who 
look after the interests of this earth. 


^ WHIIR 'CRl: ■pT;l 
VlsblV^dllycblRuitii^^ail 

WMrtmmn ^ ^ WTi 


RciIrHi 

tvTtwrf^ 3TW «rn^RTf^frf5g:l 
WromrfktTt ^RT^: 1011 

fnojraw ^ xf 
^ d 4 l<WI 

f^dtlRTE?) Rsfcft fWcTW 


^ «ThRfRigTTnt 


T:ll?^ll 


The authorities commanding every 
Manvantara are Manu, Saptarsi, gods, the 
ruling sons of Manu and Indra. O Brahmin, 
On expiry of the time limit of these fourteen 
Manvantaras, the period of one thousand 
Caturyuga is passed. This period is called a 


single day of Brahma. O the crown of sages, 
then there enters there the night for the 
equal period. God Nrsirnha in the form of 
Brahma, the soul of all creatures sleep all 
along that period. O Brahmin, god 
Janardana omnipresent, omniform and the 
first creator merges the three-worlds with 
him and then sleeps under cover of his 
YogamayS. He again reiterates the process 
adopted in the prior Kalpa for creation and 
doing an appropriate arrangement for the 
eras (Yuga). O Brahmin, I have thus told 
you about Manu, the gods, the kings, 
Manu's sons and Rsis. You should deem all 
these as the outstanding components of the 
worlds nourisher god Visnu. 

Thus, the twenty third chapter on 'About the 

fourteen Manvantaras' in Sr! Nrsirnha Purarra 
approaches the end. 



76 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 24 

Devotion of Ik$viku, his departure for 
penance 


9JUcjrf|nrtI TRW 

Sri SQta said- I will now describe the 
evil sweeping account of the activities of 
the kings born in the Sun and Moon clan. O 
hermit, firstly listen to the account of the 
deeds performed by Iksvaku, the king born 
in the Sun-clan about which I had indicated 
earlier. 

3tH<|ciryRrVl’!JI fdVial'Jid'Jllf^'lll 




CHAPTER 24 


77 


3ncbRni!:<J5rdid1i^wlM: gn^Rw.i 

•N Cs 





di^cniiyiftw vitl^i i <i 11 

O the Scholar, A divine city popularly 
known as Ayodhya is situated on the bank 
of Sarayu river on this earth. That city is 
more fascinating than Amaravati and it is 
extended in the land thirty yojana both in 
length and width. The charming gems of 
that city were the elephants, chariots and 
the infantry segments of the army and the 
greenery of the trees not less charming than 
the Kalpavrksa. There were fences, grand 
buildings, highways, streets and decent 
gates all orderly maintained. The 
roundabouts distinctly constructed were 
very fascinating. The palaces constructed 
there were multi-stories. The marketing 
system for a number of commodities and 
vessels was well disciplined. The ponds 
filled with water and lotus flowers were the 
next attraction of the city. Excellently 
constructed temples and the recital of the 
Vedic hymns therein were the cause for 
accession to and wealth of the city. That 
city was under echo of flute, lyre, and 
drums all time. That Ayodhya was 
excellently decorated with the trees like 
sala, palm, coconut, katahala, amla, jamuna, 
mango and kaith etc. and with the flowers 
of asoka. 




tjjicJit: c»iful4)A: 

■prlfeTTii^oii 


ftriTtr^ra^nTfen' 



TETRH5rr[^3T*?t 



There were a number of orchards, 
gardens and the trees were laden with 
delicious fruits. It seemed as if the city has 
been trimmed Mallika (motiya), Malati, 
Jasmine, Pangara, Nagakesara, Campa, 
Kanera, Kanakacampa and Ketaki etc. 
flowers. There were the fruit trees laden 
with banana, harapha, revadi, jayaphala and 
bijaura lemon as also oranges of sandal 
fragrance and of other scents. The people 
expert in music and singing used to arrange 
functions there daily. All the men and 
women of that city were beautiful, modest 
and of fascinating eyes. 


■'fA: 



t!t 


That city was crowded with foreigners, 
adorned with flags and door-decorations 
and there were a number of god-like 
princes. There were modest and beautiful 
women analogous to the damsels of heaven. 



78 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


The philanthropic poet Brahmins were as 
intelligent as Jupiter (Brhaspati). The 
citizens were as generous as Kalpavrksa, 
the kind businessmen, the horses were as 
Ucchaisrava and giant elephants as 
Diggajas. Thus, AyodhyS was as prosperous 
with all things as Amaravatl. In the olden 
times, Narada had expressed his views 
about Ayodhya in a hymn and it has 
become more than heaven in matters to 
provide with all kinds of desired 
enjoyments. 


Iksvaku was the resident of such an 
Ayodhya. He was crowned and began to 
rule judiciously. He, the mighty king, had 
won all kings by waging a war of Dharma. 
Owing to frequent salute made by the 
subsidiary or subjugated kings, marks were 
emerged on his feet by the kings crowns as 
in course of salute they all used to put their 
heads on the feet of Iksvaku. Some of them 
did this due to fear of him while some due 
to keen devotion for him. 


tPTt: 


HvRimm srnfcRT Tr|lfq-qi4;iiy on 


: tfcTTRgPijllRRII 




W Wiqq;! 

WTtTGRRT R dRIinttyi 


flrajiH wmnm ^ fq«jil4^icqq:i 


gjOTt ?i funiiqw 


Ti^ TTlrcmt ^ 

'R tFirpR ^ rlT^I IR ^911 


O Brahmin, the chivalrous king Iksvaku 
had even won the metaphysical world too 
by his generosity and by performing the 
grand offerings wherein substantial wealth 
was required for donation. He used to bear 
the burden of earth on his arms, RajalaksmI 
by his chest (heart), Sarasvatl by the fore 
portion of tongue and god Laksmlpati by 
his heart. He had got from the painter, the 
portrait of god Hari in standing posture and 
Anantadeva in sleeping posture and he used 
to worship with flowers and fragrances all 
these three portraits of god Visnu in the 
morning, at noon and in the evening 
respectively. He could imagine the apparent 
god even in these portraits. Moreover, he 
used to see even in dream god Srikrsna (Vis 
nu), lotus-eyed, PItambara on body, dark 
complexion like the dark clouds and in 
sleeping posture on the cot of king serpent 
Ananta. The king had developed a sense of 
respect for the dark clouds. He favoured the 
black deer and dark colour lotus owing to 
their similarity in the names with Sri Krsna. 

gWR RI35iraT 31^^ % 'RTTRIlRill 
gWTRlt f H trrffg; | 


f^TRtRTRTR 



IRRII 



CHAPTER 24 


79 


■? TRret 1 : 73^1 

(R^nTMI^oii 


glw TiftwBgr ?ii 

cPTtw^ qRramwjT ■g^i 

3 ? 3 TIHT fT ^11 ? ? 11 


O the crown of sages, a burning passion 
to see god Visnu in his divine form lifted its 
head in the mind of that king and it was a 
temptation unprecedented. He began to be 
reluctant to the royal luxuries gradually and 
in proportion to the rise of the temptation to 
see god. He began to think- "Nobody other 
is so lucky as the man who was abandoned 
his home, wife, son and territory etc. cause 
for the pains by virtue of his self conscious 
and detachment." Having thoroughly 
deliberated and determined for the penance, 
he enquired of the procedure from his 
Purohita, Vasistha- "O hermit, I am 
desirous of meeting god Narayana, the 
unborn, king of gods with severe penance. 
So, kindly tell me of the best procedure for 
the same." 


W TTiTR 

^ HKI-yur WfI 

^HIujdWdMyi 

^ ^ ^ cTTOT^l I ? m I 

The great hermit Vasistha, always 
prepared for the welfare of the king and 
well-versed in the essence of Dharma, 
replied to the king- "O king, you should 
please Narayana with great deeds and 
penance if you really want to see him 
apparently. Nobody may meet to Janardana, 


the god of the gods, without penance. 
Hence, do penance to meet him. 

hlHctH^tslHi W diMluimfel ^TraR:ll^^ll 
Hoctql'dHMScIH 

fit-qW th^chlUSqfM %3TII^<ill 
T^t^sTisT TTOisd^rfirat sRr %TiWfi 
rPT: Rl.^5!}qpc|TtiwWHd tm: ^11^ <? II 
’^qityid VII*<iH 9 icdl!iiH:l 
tiili^FTRiqui ■iP?^^ll'«o|| 

q|^cic(| 4 || 

fRfit WTfTOT: < 4 <lddl:ll'«^ll 

O king! go to a distance of fweyojana at 
east-south corner of the bank of Sarayu 
where you will find a holy place and the 
hermitage of GSlava etc. Rsis, numerous 
trees and creepers are there and different 
kinds of flowers you will see there. Assign 
the burden of the affairs of state to the wise 
and expert secretary Arjuna and the state 
itself for ruling, worship Vinayaka, the head 
of ganas and leave for that place with the 
clear intentions. Engage yourself in 
penance, wear the costumes of an ascetic, 
eat vegetable and fruit and roots and do japa 
of "Orh Namo Bhagavate Vasudeva" with 
keen attention on Narayana. This twelve 
letter hymn ensures the desired axiom 
(siddhi). The Rsis in the past have also 
acquired the supreme axiom as a fruit for 
the recital of this hymn. 

■HrSIT TUT: I 

STUlftr T '5F^^IT^ni%:TraiT:ll'iJ9ll 
<4l|lf^d WZT ^ TTTPRfTI 




80 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


^ -qf^; I^ 11 

^ ^ grfHRTtqrat ^RyikiwM: ficfti 

wm ^ tR^ii'if'iSii 

The moon and the Sun even run with the 
cycle of arrival and departure but the people 
concentrating on this hymn seldom turn 
back again and attain emancipation. O king, 
do japa of this hymn, by pulling the 
extraneous senses in the heart and the mind 
duly stable in the element of the supreme 
soul. This will definitely enable you to meet 
Madhusudana. Thus, just on your enquiry, I 
have told you the procedure for the deeds to 
be performed as part and parcel of penance 
and now, you may do as you like" 

^rilclUckil TTSTT 

TTHT ^ WiJi 

■tnrcu MulVI 

m: fticT gctwiumi 



rigftvlsajRIrlR'iill 


Complying with the procedure told by 
Vasistha, the king Iksvaku assigned the 
burden of the state affairs to his able 
secretary, worshipped god Ganesa, 
determined firmly on penance and finally, 
left his state for the holy place suggested by 
Purohita Vasistha. 

Thus, the chapter twenty fourth on "the account 
of deeds performed by Iksvaku" in ^rl Nrsimha 
Purana approaches the end. 



80 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 25 

Penance performed by Ik$vSku and 
attainment of Vijnu's icon by Brahma 

^ TIW R^RtRTI 

Bharadvaja asked- O the commander of 
great learning, tell me how the king prayed 
to god Ganes'a and further, how had he 
performed the intended penance? 

TFirr 

^ <0 

^rrap^wsargsRt 

^ ^ g^tsiu^tydugdtfii'ifii 

gfyfiRT fHT f^rac».WIW<NXl 

Suta said- O Brahmin, the king had 
worn red apparel on Ganesa CaturthI after a 
bath and smeared red sandal. He then 
sprinkled the red sandal mixed water with 
red flowers on Ganesa and thus made him 
to bathe. The worship was then made 
followed in the prescribed manner. He then 
smeared red sandal on Ganesa's parts of 
body (Sri ahgas). The red flowers were then 
used for worship. The fragrance (Dhupa) 
was made with the mixture of ghee and 
sandal and finally offered the sweet 
Naivedya prepared by mixing turmeric, 
ghee and jaggery. Thus the king started 
praying to god Ganesa after worshipping 
him in orderly manner. 




CHAPTER 25 


81 


T<lt^ t l^racETTimil 
^TTRf^ 5fFra^TH,l 

3TTfelj?r ?n}g,-nf 3rgnt f^HW^H^II^II 
3TR«Rt 5^03^ ^ cffgggt pfsrqT!;i 

fytTibT; ^ fOTTi?;ii<sii 

^ "TUlfir W£JI^ 

1T^ fg^sdTT^ »)^f^P)c(]<«J{^ll<?|| 
i^4chtfdy^chivi iTFn^jROTW^i 
fsj ?TRt dWffil f4dW<*H.II?o|l 
qrjTt^ Tj^g^ra Wit 11^ ^11:1 

nS 

^w^MRi <^FfracirrHTii??ii 
UTEnfwri 

%lcw^d|il f4HRlcfill^?ll 

Iksvaku said- I pray Vighnaraja with 
offering salute to him as Ganesa who is a 
great god and master of ganas. He is 
chivalrous and undefeated. He enhances 
one's knowledge. He is three-eyed, he holds 
a trident in his hands, his eyes are of red 
colour, he gives boons, he is the son of 
mother ParvatT, his eyes are like Supa 
(winnowing instrument), he has reddish 
complexion, he holds a danda (a rod) and 
Agnimukha, he favours offering and who 
created hurdles if not worshipped initially 
and first of all. I salute such a giant and 
aggressive Ganesa, the son of ParvatT. Who 
is always intoxicated of Mada, whose eyes 
are dreadful, who kicks off the hurdles of 
devotees, whose brilliance is like crores of 
Suns, whose complexion is as dark as the 
coal excavated from a mine, and who is 
sacrosanct and in peace. I salute such god 


Vinayaka. Salute to Ganapati, the resident 
of Kailasa, giant as Merugiri and elephant 
mouth. O god Vinayaka, you are Virupa and 
BrahmacarT, devotees pray to you. You are 
frequently saluted. 

cbi4RT;§:4i 

WSvtt wwr snftTTfT; Tt4o!HW:II^?II 
364hnt ^gtTRt ^ ^racfird ychirvidifi 
W?fPT: 

hni(sqt(t TT# 

icwf;§4TgTra<H4Tftf4:11 i 

TTjIH WT Tl^PdurilcC gri 
TTHT ^ TT4f4t^?Tg7t fJ?4r^Tn^3PTll^\9ll 

O Purana Purusa, you appeared in the 
form of an elephant and frightened the 
demons in order to proceed with the divine 
work for success in the past. O son of Siva, 
you have established your ownership/ 
authority on Rsis and the gods. This is the 
reason, why they all worship you first of all. 
O Sarvavighnes'vara, a man can enslave the 
king, prince minister including the state or 
the entire nation if he takes a balanced diet, 
offers red flowers, sprinkles the sandal 
mixed water, prays to omniscient Ganapati 
in the form of the proposed mission (Kama) 
on caturthi either morning, noon and 
evening (i.e. three time) or in morning only. 

4lftr 

^tfgcTT 

yulqiufrid 

fgw T «i4Tn?T T rT 

^T^rR^TtSTTcff ^dlfdTMft ^7%TflRo|| 



82 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


Rciry'^ui 


Vinayaka, I pray to you. Accept this 
prayer with devotion and do away the 
hurdle standing in the way of my penance 
of this special worship. A man attains the 
same fruit as he would have obtained as a 
result of a bath in all pilgrimages and 
offering of all kinds if he duly worships god 
Ganesa. He neither befalls in adversity nor 
humiliation and seldom has to face hurdles. 
He gets such a sound mind as to keep ready 
the matters of the previous life. One may 
achieve the desired aim as a result of 
regular worship and prayer to god Ganapati 
and achieves complete aim within the 
period of one'year. No doubt can be arisen 
regarding this fact. 


-icurj 

5Tr TRT ferlrWI 

cfTTO tsira gfqrq;i i ^11 

f 11 ? ^ I 

mi fcTSEnPl cIcHiJiPl 

^jtdlcSHTM ? thM 11 ? hi I 


-R cPItIt gRlMl'-W cPfe^l 


Suta said- O learned Brahmins, king Iks 
vaku had first prayed to Ganesa and then 


went into the forest as a recluse with dress 


and intention. His wore the hard bark of 
tree round the delicate waist and gave up 
the precious clothes. He took out the 
garlands of divine gems as also the bangles 
(kade) and held basil garland round the 
wrist and a garland made of lotus stem 


round the neck. Similarly, he substituted 
matted hair for the gold crown studded 
with gems. Thus, he was prepared for the 


penance. 


ciM^chiA ^ hrlviKTii I y *311 


^iTOTt TT^ I 

3TTfg%^ Wl 11 ? 11 

W5r TE5?2IT ^ 114111 ° II 


Thus, in pursuance of the suggestions of 
Vasistha, he entered into the forest as an 
ascetic, and started penance living on 
vegetables, fruits and roots as his food. He 
did penance amid Paficagni during summer, 
under the open sky during rainy season and 
half-immersed in the water of pond during 
the winter. Gripping very hard all senses in 
the mind, merging that mind in god Visnu, 
doing japa of twelfth-letter hymn and taking 
only wind as food he proceed on penance. 
Finally, god Brahma appeared before the 
king. The king saluted with reverence and 
satisfy that four-mouthed, Padmayoni 
Brahma with a psalm in praise of him. 


ff?r sT^rr w ipJirWRi 


The king said- Salute to the creator of 
universe, knower of the essence of the 
Vedas and scriptures, four mouthed, the 
great soul and Hiranyagarbha Brahma. 
"Brahma, the creator of universe said to that 
king, engaged in severe penance, who had 


CHAPTER 25 


83 


give up the authority, the tranquil and the 
happiest. 

^'l*ycbl!ii|cbi rMdPTg-.ll^^ll 

RThrmfir ■*TRIT ipT: ItRITI 

"•a ^ •o 

fKT^tPT: ^ cftt 

?rT: grftf^ 

Brahma said- O king, your ancestor Sun, 
the light giver of universe and your father 
Manu too had attained high place among 
the hermits. Both of them also did severe 
penance in the past. (You also are doing the 
same like them). O learned and great king, 
tell me for what purpose, are you busy on 
this severe penance after kicking-off your 
authority and luxuries as a king? 

IfnhT TRT t j|ui«tw4)atT:i 

ehtlwlci tPtt vitsiTj*JKiy<H.i 

JTTf TTSTR 

The king with bowed head replied- O 
Brahmana, I am busy with the penance in 
order to see apparently the god 
Madhusudana with conch-shell, discus and 
gada in this hands. Having heard of the 
mission of that king, god Brahma, the lotus 
born laughed and said. 

T V I «hU4dMRI ^ KSm HKiani) f^:l 
UltJvVPq ^ <*^VHIVH;II?V91I 

yticRf ■^i 

4tJ|f%F TTtTt ffT:l 
rm f><TTEr ^ f 


cTTt ^ I 

atmfwflTmrnr ?raR Mldcuntthi 

O n 5 ' •s 

P;cq<HNptdl^- fgTTf%rPTIi'«?ll 

O king, you will not able to see 
omnipresent god Narayana only by virtue of 
your penance (what to say about others 
when) people like ours are bereaved of a 
look at god Kesava who sweeps away the 
sins and pains. I would like to tell you a 
story in this context. Please, listen to. In the 
night of the great devastation (Pralaya) the 
lotus-eyed god Visnu merged all lokas with 
him and enjoying to hear the prayer from 
Sanaka and Sanandana etc., hermits; he 
slept on the bed of Sesanaga known as 
Ananta under his Yoganidra. O king, a giant 
lotus grew from the navel of that sleeping 
god. ■ I, the well-versed in the Vedas 
(Brahmin) originated from that lotus. I 
peeped downward and saw god Visnu 
sleeping on Sesanaga. His complexion was 
as black as the coal extracted from the 
mine. The radiance coming out from his 
parts of body was as good as the flower of 
Alas!. He was ornamented with the divine 
gems and his forehead was adorned with a 
crown. 

f t 3TW T ^^^1 

ddl-dcudiwwiq^ miAM TPtTf^;l 
tr ^TRTWRIWi;! I >5 ^ 11 


84 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


^ ^ ^ RfrPT: I 


O learned, I saw in the meantime that 
Ananta god, Sesanaga too. His complexion 
was as white as kunda flower and moon and 
that was radiating with the thousand gems 
on his hoods. O the great king, I could thus, 
see him there and that too for a pioment and 
never from that day. I therefore, beeame 
excessively anxious and finally, I took the 
support of the lotus trunk and began to 
crawl downward. However, what was a 
matter of surprise that I could not see him 
there. I again came back to my previous 
place and started severe penance under 
imagination of the same complexion as I 
had seen that day. Subsequently, an 
inexpressive voice coming out from the 
space said to me. 


W I^Fn^jTRTOW^I 
Mfd'UlfdUd M^IUrlimoll 

«rar fdrumiHWWd'l RT«raH,i 


O Brahmin, why are you putting you in 
trouble for nothing? Follow what I say. You 
shall not see god Visnu irrespective of the 
size of your penance. If you are really 
curious to see again the god sleeping on the 
body of the white complexioned serpent, do 
creation as per his suggestion. Concentrate 
on the same image of god as you have seen 
sleeping on the body of Sesanaga and give 
up all idle thoughts, then only you could be 
able to see that Madhava. 


I ^ •^1 

w ^ ^ gtn m ^ 11 

W ddt wm ^ fw: I 

rcIrtiyidldM: ^ W 
vrasdT ^ MVdifii 

O king, under inspiration of that 
inexpressive voice, I gave up that ceaseless 
penance and created the living organisms of 
this world. On completion of that project, 
Prajapati Visvakarma appeared in my heart 
in a relaxed state. He made two radiant 
icons of god Visnu and Sesanaga known as 
Ananta. O king, those portraits were made 
of the same posture and sentiments as I had 
seen of god at that time. Since then I used to 
worship those icons and by virtue of the 
blessing so indirectly obtained from god, I 
could acquire knowledge, ever pleasing and 
started living peacefully and in the state of 
emancipation. 

dd? ^ f|d gMci\vcBimmi 
d^ grf ^ gm 

TTdRt dTRd lil4wMV^c( RfjgdFgi IH ^ 11 
fgRR JlMfqbiiifq nfoSfA^riuiiPctdgi 

ddmar 

dUiqumH^ltsil '?rdR 

id^ST^ gwffT ITdT dTdnil IH 11 

3FWIF1^^ gfddRl «FfeFF giTI 

d 'j|J|iqi«l ftdIR^:im'?ll 

O the king of kings, I am going to tell 
you the benevolent way. Listen to it and as 
per my words give up this severe penance to 
which you are performing this time and go 



CHAPTER 25 


85 


back to your kingdom. It is the foremost 
religion and penance of kings to take care of 
their subjects. I will send that aircraft 
(vimana) containing that icon to you with 
siddha and Brahmanas. Do the worship of 
god in the prescribed manner for extraneous 
or physical adoration. O the great king, do 
worship of that god sleeping on Sesanaga 
known as Ananta duly performing the 
offerings without any expressive desire in 
the mind (Niskamabhava) and take care of 
your subjects. O king, you will definitely 
avail of emancipation by the grace of god 
Vasudeva. "With these words Brahma 
returned to his abode." 


fgfjri 

?T wrr ^ 'et ^ii 

ni'fll TFJfT Tarai 

f fImH Iwig I ^ ^ 11 

■Rf|KT: -^TmqTSrnf f #rr^||^'!{|| 
RiHt ajftrerw ^ 

giqifui <|TR)^ ^:ll^^ll 


O Brahmana, on departure of god 
Brahma, as Iksvaku was about to think over 
his suggestions, the aircraft (vimana) given 
by Brahma suddenly appeared with the 
icons of Ananta and Visnu along with 
Siddha Brahmanas before him. He saluted 
with great reverence the icons and bowed 
his head before the Brahmins came in that 


aircraft. Then he took the aircraft to his 
kingdom. All men and women of that 
kingdom saw the king and they took him 
spreading flowers (lava) on the way. The 
king installed that Vaisnava aircraft at his 
giant temple and began to worship the icon 
of god Visnu as the same was worshipped 
by the Brahmins come in that aircraft. His 
queens used to make garlands of scented 
flowers for the icon which pleased the king. 
The citizens too began to bring eamphor, 
sandal, kumkum, aguru etc., fragrances and 
clothes, gugula and special flowers for god 
Visnu's worship. 

flRTSi XfW 

cHirng^: i 

aBmrRHT ffERgrW? WT | 

tkfeOT tt I ^ 11 

ftwMl -CR ^HUe<|i<raiq^i 

FRT «Rr:l 

% THfTl 1\9 ^ 11 
'cp«Tf^5sgra':M?mi 

The king used to worship god Visnu, 
seated on the aircraft in the morning, noon 
and in the evening with obeisance. He did 
japa, recited the hymns, praise of his mercy 
and piping of conch-shell and other musical 
instruments himself and made others to do 
the same, in his realm. He used to arrange 



86 


NARASIMHA PURAISAM 


function at nights and the procession of god 
duly trimmed according to the manner 
prescribed by the scriptures. The king 
acquired the supreme knowledge by the 
grace of god Visnu with his religious acts, 
the offerings, donations etc. He reproduced 
sons in order to maintain the rites exercised 
by him as to perform offerings, ruling and 
for satiation of Pitras coincide continuous 
worship of god. He attained the abode of 
god Visnu merely by extracting the 
breathings through concentration on the 
Brahma. Thus king Iksvaku attained to the 
position of god Visnu, who is Aja, Asoka, 
Amala, holy, tranquil and in the form of 
tmth, chid and pleasure (Saccidananda) by 
kicking off the limitless pain giving world. 

Thus, the chapter twenty fifth on "the account of 
deeds performed by Iksvaku" in Sri Nrsimha 
Purana approaches the end. 





86 


NARASIMHA PURAISAM 


CHAPTER 26 


Description of the generation of Ik$vaku 
^ H ftmfr 

ifvtfMcwl si^oT ^fsj^ 


IT 5 TTt?T?hTt ^ qwRiTcfT m 
qrrnntt <prcti shgfinJR<f^ui4^^q< 

fqtgiT^ m^bdgi ftrg i^rr^jR f¥^Jgi<?q 'qt 
WTTcqw snr^ ^r 

MTMRI8JT ■RTtll^ll 

Srisutajl said- The name of the eldest 
son of Iksvaku was VikuksT. On 


emancipation of his father (i.e. death), he 
was enthroned by the hermits and began 
ruling judiciously. The king VikuksI 
followed the tradition of regular worship of 
god Visnu and did a number of offerings 
during his regime. At last he enthroned his 
son Subahu on the throne and expired. Now 
the glory of Udyota, the son of Subahu, is 
described. Udyota established an admirable 
rule over the earth consisting of the seven 
continents. He, like his grand father, 
followed the trend of regular worship of 
god Visnu and did a number of offerings 
most expensive for the master of offering 
(yajnapati) Visnu but for any physical 
desire. He at last departed to his heavenly 
abode with regular worship of Ananta and 
Visnu's icons and concentration throughout 
life on everlasting, Nirahjana, beyond 
option (Nirvikalpa), nectar, Aksara 
(immortal) absolute, flame form and in the 
form of supreme soul Visnu. 

TTPi graFTT^ 

u qr^TwTHTrnt^ 

TTk 1 '^Uc)d)' ^ 7 IrT:lRII 

His son was Yuvanasva and son of 
Yuvanasva was Mandhata. Mandhata was 
devoted to Visnu by nature. Sine the day he 
was enthroned by the hermits, he carried on 
the worship of god Visnu, sleeping on the 
bed of Sesanaga and arranging a number of 
offerings, he ruled the earth consisting of 
the seven continents. At last he attained to 
the abode of god Visnu (Vaikuntha). 

^RtcRt 

3^ w grgEcT sifvif^irffvii 

TT^TnftgqiTgrg 

The following hymn is recited about 



CHAPTER 26 


87 


Mandhata till date- "That all area from 
where the sun rises and sets is called the 
territory ruled by Mandhata, the son of 
Yuvanasva." 



arpTl WTsr: i ^ tuctt to 



Purukutsa (or Purukusya) was the son of 
Mandhata who pleased both the gods and 
Brahmins by arranging a number of 
offerings and offering, donations. Drsada 
was the son of Purukusya and Abhisambhu 
was the son of Drsada. Again, Daruna was 
the son of Abhisambhu and Sagara was the 
son of Daruna. Then Haryasva was the son 
of Sagara, HarTta was the son of Haryasva, 
Rohitasva was the son of Aihs'uman and 
lastly Bhaglratha took birth from 
Arirsuman. He had made a severe penance 
in the past and became able to flow the holy 
and evil sweeping Gana from the sky to 
earth. He thus, shattered the clutches of 
curse thundered by hermit Kapila on his 
Pitrs known as Sagara earlier by a mere 
touch of holy streams of the Gaiiga. Thus, 


they were exonerated from the evils. 
Bhaglratha then reproduced Saudasa, 
Saudasa reproduced Satrasava, Satrasava 
reproduced Anaranya and he reproduced 
Dirgabahu. Similarly, Dirgabahu 
reproduced Aja and Aja reproduced 
Dasaratha. God Rama himself was born as 
son of Dasaratha. He was incarnated in 
order to kill Ravana, a monster who had 
established coercion and atrocities. 


■ylcfnTTdi'y ■groJtssn ttm 
frolTORT fSRR gr ^ t PTOFTOI 

TT f q<il5?c|H fgTTR# TlTOHt 


cTpRtr^gt Tff 


^SHTTRIinil 


Rama, in pursuance of the words of his 
father began observing penance in 
Dandakaranya with his brother Laksmana 
and wife Sita. Ravana, in that forest 
abducted his wife Sita. Aggrieved at this, 
Rama in the company of his brother tied 
with Sugriva in friendship, took him with 
his crores of army consisting of monkeys 
and bears, constructed a bridge on the giant 
sea and thus entered into Lanka. He killed 
that suppressor of gods with his relations 
and the array, got Sita again and returned to 
Ayodhya. Bharata, his younger brother 
enthroned him. Rama gifted Vibhisana an 
aircraft containing an icon of the god Visnu 




88 


and the kingdom of Lanka and thus, bade 
farewell. The icon of god Visnu in spite of 
being carried by Vibhlsana with him duly 
enshrined on the aircraft, was reluctant to 
live in Laiika. He therefore, automatically 
installed at the holy forest developed by 
Vibhlsana beyond the border of that state. 
There, the god sleeps on the body of the 
giant serpent. Vibhlsana could not pick up 
that aircraft from there. He then, departed to 
Lanka leaving the icon of Visnu there in 
compliance with the suggestion of the god. 

tRIT 

The place was turned into a great holy 
place because of the presence of god 
Narayana. It is still famous as Srirahgaks 
etra. The subsequent descendants were- 
Lava, Padma, Rtuparna, Astrapani, 
Suddhodana and lastly Budha. Budha was 
the last descendant of the solar clan and it 
ceased onward. 

•O v3 

11 ^ ? 11 

I have only described herein those 
precedent descendants of solar the clan who 
were extraordinarily chivalrous, the great 
rulers and who had performed the offerings 
for the pleasure of the gods. 

Thus, the chapter twenty sixth on "the account 
of Suryavamsa' in Sri Nrsimha Purana 
approaches the end. 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 27 

About Candra Vamsa (The Lunar Clan) 
tTTMciVlIci^etRt 

31T^ TTCrei U.ehiu\^ 

U^IWlfw TFmPT?ra^ll^ll 

yjiciHumit 

^Pif^r ?R2T 'gwr ^ 

HfwT T)(dt|tg) 

wm^ii^ii 

cTPt sr^pJTt TqFnT:gjffi5^rwgRi;i aikrg^JFrr 
■^:i tr j JTjfTW^^ 

Ttf?tHiraT fsHTFir 

feTr^FJRFTtRT; TffItRrt fSf 

y^ll'W?!: sri^MR 375 ^^ ^RFlt 
JlttNttlW pMrMKiimrai HT^TR^FITSRTf^RTTJT 
^<Wl-'llP^5l<4 3^^ qgchlW HI< 1 ^ ^^^limi 
Ibi^: 3^?^nWT: ^ #i 

>3 ' n3 O ' 

TTWTPHTSnk: fK^Tc^cimbtl^ll^ll 
SniTt ^5^?g7TI 3fP7rq;i 

TTPT g;?rjlT fHTO;l •yifTfemt 

^lW^II<ill 

i ttV ' ^iKid i ii7n%: ■g^s'cracti 'wj 
«uiqf; gnTTr;ii<?ii 

Suta said- A brief descripticn of the 
lunar clan and their activities (the deeds 
performed) is to be given. This matter 
pertains to the initial period of the Kalpa. 
God Narayana who is in the form of Rk, 
Yajus, Sama and Atharva Veda was 


CHAPTER 27 


89 


sleeping under his Yoganidra on the bed-eot 
of Sesanaga in the inmeasurable quantum of 
aikarnava by merging with the three worlds 
within his belly. A giant lotus grew up from 
the navel of that sleeping god. The four¬ 
mouthed Brahma originated from that lotus. 
Atri, the thought churned (Manasa) son of 
Brahma namely, Atri was born. Atri 
reproduced Moon from the womb of 
Anusuya. He accepted as bride, RohinI etc., 
thirty three daughters of Daksa Prajapati 
and having specially been atti'acted towards 
Rohini, the seniormost wife, he reproduced 
Budha from her womb. Budha began to live 
in Pratisthanapura. He was learned in all the 
scriptures. He reproduced Pururava from 
the womb of Ila. As Pururava was most 
beautiful, the divine damsel Urvas'T was 
enchanted and she became his wife for 
many years. Thus, as a result of intercourse 
with Urvasi, he reproduced a son namely, 
Ayu from her womb. He ruled very 
judiciously and then departed to his 
heavenly abode. He got a son Nahusa from 
the womb of his wife Rupavatl who had 
attained the position of Indra. Nahusa also 

reproduced Yayati from the womb of 

Pitrmatl and his descendants are called Vrs 
nl. Yayati reproduced Puru from the womb 
of Sarmistha. Puru got a son Samyati from 
his wife Vamsada who had enjoyed all 
luxuries on this earth. 

f yiy'cJ! 

ftrfeqRii^oii 

w3T:i dvt ttt 

' -O >0 ^ Cs 


Samyati got a son Sarvabhauma from 
the womb of Bhanudatta. He got 
emancipation (siddhi) by the grace of god 
Nrsirhha as he pleased god with his great 
deeds including offerings performed and 
donations made. That Sarvabhauma got a 
son from his wife Vaidehl whose name was 
Bhoja. The monster Kalanemi who was 
killed by god Visnu with an acute blow of 
discus, got rebirth in Bhoja's clan and was 
called Karhsa. He was again killed by god 
Krsna, the descendent of Vrsna clan. 

rRg glwr f Tdrri 

grrgrnmTTsg drttyKifHUbUeicfi TTsg 

fEggw ggr.-i g f 

g^uT TFHT 

Iqv^dligctiid tR; 


Bhoja got a son Dusyanta from his wife 
Kalihga. He worshipped god Nrsimha and 
enjoyed all royal pleasure till he ruled and 
lastly, attained to heaven by the grace of 
god Nrsirhha. Dusyanta got a son Bharata 
from the womb of Sakuntala. He was a just 
king. He performed a number of expensive 
offerings for god Visnu and gave donations 
substantially. He then abandoned the 
attachments and did penance for attainment 
of Brahma and thus, lastly merged with the 
abode of Visnu, all illuminating. 


g^ <^dilvritl fgWTTTTTRiTtfM^^ II 


3t'dMl<4W gfror: 

TTTSft' dgqij TTHT 

^ gfr g^i 



90 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


^^11 ^'^11 

■^rSFT WRR ^TRRrar^Tt 'WlkOilM 

fefumfxr 


■?TFaR:ll^mi 

^ w-^Hiii^umvicW 3T?T: 

wt ^ll^^ll 



'WTf%?Tt5S2mr:iR\9ii 


Bharata during his life-time got a son 
Ajamidha from the womb of Ananda, his 
wife. He was a keen devotee of god Visnu. 
The king Ajamidha got a son Vrsni from the 
womb of his wife Sudevi by the grace of 
god Nrsiriiha and attained the abode of god 
Visnu ai his death. That son also ruled for 
many years. He had subjugated the earth 
with seven continents as a whole under his 
polity to protect the gentlemen and suppress 
the wicked. He got a son Pratyarhca from 
the womb of his wife Ugrasena. He also 
ruled judiciously and took all care of his 
subjects. He annually arranged the offering 
of Jyotistoma and attained emancipation on 
death. Pratyarhca got a son Santanu from 
the womb of his wife Bahurupa. He was 
unable to administer the chariot given by 
the gods but later on he had got the 
expertise to operate the same. 

Thus, the end of twenty seventh chapter in 
Nrsiriiha Purana. 






90 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 28 

Account of deeds performed by Santanu 

wfnt: 3Rsn?;i 

Bharadvaja asked- Why was Santanu not 
capable to operate the chariot given by gods 
initially? And how did he later on get that 


expertise? Kindly, highlight this issue in 
detail. 

OTTcT 

«RSr3T syU|b^dd4tl<^Ti g?;TfTf h 

6rH<=( M<i 1 

fddmra 

Td%p3Er fqoi(r4 ^ 

TI^ VIWTHI fer 



fefim ^ oid^Hi t '^sfracTdihii 

fgjfenKTT: ferat tbill^fd TT W^:ll^ll 

Suta said- Bharadvaja, it is ancient 
history which I explain here. Please, listen 
to the same. The deeds performed by 
Santanu are evil sweeping to all. Santanu 
was devoted to god Nrsiriiha in the past and 
used to worship Laksmipati in the manner 
as told by NaradajT to him. However, he 
inadvertently contravened the Nirmalya of 
Sri Nrsimha on a day and immediately lost 
the power to operate the chariot which was 
given to him by the gods. He then pondered 
upon the reason for such a sudden 
disability. Once NaradajT came to him when 
he was very sad and repeatedly his mind 
was tangled to detect the reason for such a 
sudden disqualification. He asked the 
anxious Santanu- "O king, why are you so 
sad?" 

TR^TTPIT TTtT: 11^911 

■?TRR 1116 'JRT; 'ftsjrf: I 

■g? ^grfiT t familyii 



CHAPTER 28 


91 


iT?nM II 

The king replied- O NaradajI, I am still 
unable to detect the reason for my sudden 
disqualification in regard to the operation of 
the divine chariot. This only is the reason 
for my pain. Naradaji concentrated on the 
matter and replied to Santanu who then 
humbly stood when the reason appeared to 
his intuitive power- O king, it appears that 
you would have definitely contravened the 
Nirmalya of god Nrsirhha any day and this 
is the sole reason for your sudden 
disqualification. O majesty, listen to its 
reason. 

grr : i 

RTHram ^ ^itTgil^o II 

fgfgsnf^ ^ gqif? g-pifq ^i 

qR^9)miHHhiiTf?raf?fT^ ti%:ii??ii 

gt WTI 

Long long ago, a wise gardener lived in 
AntarvedT. He was Ravi. He had a garden of 
basil plants and gave it the name as- 
Vrndavana. A number of flowers consisting 
of Mallika, Malatl, Jatl, Bakula, etc., were 
also planted there in a systematic manner. 
He had constructed a high fence all around 
and by making it hard to trespass he had 
constructed his residential building at the 
middle of that garden. O the crown of sages, 
he had left the main entrance only from the 
front of the house and impossible from any 
other direction. No other entrance was left 
at all. 

t?;# litgr T WngJTTTJI #RT: 11 ^ ^ 11 
cTi?t tel I I H,i 


wn ■qsfRTR ftpm:l 

^ qtmJPTII^qi 

That Vrndavana of the gardener was 
always filled with a number of blossomed 
flowers. Its fragrance had made the 
atmosphere scented to and fro. Every 
morning he would enter the garden with his 
wife, collect the flowers of several species, 
intertwine them in garlands, offer some 
garlands to god Nrsirhha, a few to Brahmins 
and sell others for the survival of his family. 
Whatever he would receive from the sale of 
the garlands; was his only income. 

3isr wrfgTFTRT ^11 11 

sicqfr^TVJHigcwl gunfoT li^i 

^qfferr fgf^Pllfrq Tf^f^TI 1 11 

g^ JiwrchBlt2il%i:trqtli 
qqWIW H^yil M l^iTigHd H.11 ^ 11 

^ g TtlSfmi I 11 

^ ^ fw: I 

cnWiPT gbtfrfuT ^rgfl^T gRPTii^oii 

"On the lapse of some years, Jayanta, the 
son of indra came to know of the existence 
of that garden due to the fragrance spread 
around miles of distant places. He began to 
come every night with Apsaras on his 
chariot and voluntarily plucked the flowers. 
He used to pluck all blossomed flowers and 
left that place immediately. This continued 
stealing of flowers made the gardener very 
sad. He thought- "there is no other entrance 
left except the front side of the home 
throughout the compound. The compound 
too has been constructed so high as nobody 




92 


can jump and overlap the same I don't see it 
possible for any humans to Jump from so 
high a fence and pluck all the flowers. What 
may then be the reason for such 
disappearance of flowers?" That wise 
gardener, therefore, sat throughout the night 
with all alertness, as he had determined to 
catch the thief red-handed. That man 
entered into the garden, plucked the flowers 
and took them away with him. 

t f 

^ 1^11 

Rrtw?;i 

Having seen that man the gardener, 
whose source of survival was only the 
flowers, badly shocked. On his dream at 
night, he saw god Nrsimha and heard him 
saying- "0 son, go immediately into the 
garden and sprinkle my Nirmalya there. As 
no other way to prevent that wicked 
Jayanta, the son of Indra is left now." 

STfRr:ll9?ll 
5 cWT ^ 

WlRd gfRrlTI 

wiRt Retried^ tg URt in55'5?ii^\9ii 

"Hearing this advice from god Nrsirhha, 
the wise gardener got up immediately and 
he sprinkled Nirmalya in the garden. 
Jayanta too entered in the garden on an 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 

invisible chariot as before and began to 
pluck the flowers. In course of plucking the 
flowers, he overlapped the Nirmalya 
inadvertently. His power to operate the 
chariot was then suddenly lost. His 
charioteer told him that as he has 
overlapped or jumped from the Nirmalya of 
Nrsirhha; he cannot any more operate the 
chariot. He then said to him to stay there 
and prepared to return to heaven himself" 

tl^cIRcWI ■RfgRTORl? 

RTR Tig? Rg ^ 1R d 11 

dgcRcu TS? grai 1 

"Reacting on the words of his charioteer, 
Jayanta said- O charioteer, I don't say you 
to stop here but please, tell me the 
procedure competent to efface my 
unintended evil so committed." 

TRral 4KVII<^ 1 RR?m:IR<^ II 

r^'jilfejbdlTRH firoTT R 

^cRgral RT; -Rif nuRi^ci^ifgcRii^oii 

The charioteer told- "Paras'urama has 
arranged an offering in Kuruksetra which 
will be over after twelve years. Go there 
and clean the pots and pans of Brahmins 
there. It will purify you." With these words, 
the charioteer DevasevTta departed to 
heaven." 

JIM: RIW 

3^ ^ ^iffR fl^lTI 

fH H?WFT fHdqrgfe^hl':^gj: 11 ^ ^ 11 
g ^ T: gift ^ 

f gan<^TiRTgRTcfiR ? ii 
gRR fgf^ gqgr I 



CHAPTER 28 


93 


Jayanta the son of Indra, then went to the 
bank of Sarasvatl river in Kuruksetra and 
began to wash the pots of Brahmins in the 
offering hosted by Parasurama. On 
completion of the twelfth year, the 
Brahmins asked him with doubt- "O 
gentleman, who are you? You don't take 
food and only wash the pots daily. Your so 
surprising act is realising doubt in our 
mind." The son of Indra then told all that 
had happened to him and then immediately 
moved to heaven on the chariot (as his 
power to operate the same was 
rejuvenated). 

«ri^fd rHwi I ^ ^ 11 

3m 35E^ W fqrtfmi RT 

RcflchyiH.11^^11 

O king, you too should go at the offering 
hosted by Parasurama and clean the pots of 
Brahmins with keen devotion for them not 
less than twelve years i.e., up to the 
completion of that offering. No person 
except Brahmin is so great as to predate the 
evils. O king, regret of such nature, will 
definitely rejuvenate your power to operate 
the chariot given by gods. O learned 
hermits, you too should take care of the 
Nirmalya of Nrsiihha and other gods and 
seldom overlap or cross over the same any 
time in your life. 

fiddld^ f 3IPE% TSi 'El 1^ d 11 


lUpRrVdWild 11 ? 11 

Following the words of Narada, the king 
Santanu cleaned the pots and pans of 
Brahmins up to twelve years. Then only he 
could operate that chariot. O Brahmins, 
thus, the power to operate the chariot was 
lost and it was rejuvenated when the above- 
said remedy was exercised by Santanu in 
the past. 

dW f&'Jtm ^ oil 

T^j(d4<i -m «-RPif^m?qii 
■R MlMdAi ilfd^ld 



O Brahmins, I have thus explained the 
evil caused as a result when even 
unknowingly the Nirmalya is crossed or 
overlapped. I have simultaneously told the 
blessing which may be acquired by cleaning 
the pots of Brahmins. The man who with 
physical and mental cleaning i.e., the body 
by bath and the mind by inserting there the 
pious and sanctifying thoughts for 
Brahmins, washes the pots of Brahmins, 
becomes free from the bondage of evils and 
after attaining to the fruits equal to the 
donation of cows, deserves a high place in 
heaven after his death. 

Thus, the end of twenty Eight chapter in 
Nrsiihha Purana. 

He** 


94 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 29 

A description of the generation of Santanu 
faffed: I -^r f 

im: tncWT 

f^gRT^II^II 

f^if^:ic))4'WikiifHc*,iiji TnT]|: ^Ttsftr 

jm gtJw: 15?gT gf%RTr|5Ttt 

^ Tmifr: *'Pd^oqm44;iii?ii 

^ ^ MIST ?Ift 

MgwRSMMZT fafg^srlinT^: ?Tf^ 

(^idlpHd) f4ciJMtH<4|uj 
IWTlMt gtHil tii^dl 

f4<lt49^3^lc|c(iti TLiRcqi ar 

fSc(4R(04l ST? f^nsnai^iTTfjTt 

cTl^^cIRf^d: fjs;^ 8IT#TT^-4p^ 

^Ql44lH I ^V I Ih^T^<^<fy TT3Tgt: ST? ^4fMT^ 
gr^ST^ ?Ta(T S^STM TTTW STM mRmi^ 
^n#T: sT?’gf^i^gRTSJSlf?ii?ii 

Stita said- Santanu reproduced 

VicitravTrya from his wife Yojanagandha. 
The king VicitravTrya ruled in Hastinapura. 
During his regime he hosted a number of 
feedings to satiate the gods, sraddha to 
satiate the Pitrs and did everything 
benevolent for the subjects. After being 
blessed with the sons, he was dead. The son 
of VicitravTrya from Ambalika was Pandu. 
Pandu also ruled as a kind and just king as 
long as he lived. Owing to the curse of a 
hermit, he had to die a premature death. 


Arjuna was his son from KuntT who pleased 
god Mahadeva as a result of his severe 
penance and thus got Pasupatastra from 
him. He then killed the Nivatakavaca 
monsters who were the enemy of god Indra 
and rendered the Khandava forest to the fire 
god when it was desired by him. God Agni 
then burnt KhSndava forest into ashes and 
thus was satiated. He bestowed a number of 
boons on Arjuna. He sheltered king Virat 
for Ajnatavasa (unidentified living) with his 
brothers Yudhistira, BhTma, Nakula and 
Sahadeva along with wife DraupadT when 
the state was seized by Duryodhana under 
manipulation. Arjuna fought in favour of 
king Virat against the enemies who had 
abducted all the cows by an attack and thus 
defeated them. The cows were then brought 
back. At that time he defeated the great 
warriors like, BhTsma, Drona, Krpa, Salya, 
Karna etc. In the battle-field of Kuruksetra 
he in the company of Vasudeva fought 
against the mighty sons of Dhrtarastra and 
regained his kingdom by slaughtering BhTs 
ma, Drona, Krpa, Salya, Karna etc., great 
chivalrous Ksatriyas and the princes of a 
number of states including Duryodhana 
with the co-operation of BhTma etc. He then 
enthroned his eldest brother Yudhisthira as 
per law, ruled the state and finally, departed 
together to the abode of heaven. 

5TTfq?T:if'ijii 

arRripgiMTTgT TTf)%T:i 'TTr^iwl m 

Tii^STTT giiM^ul TTjg 3«gT TMMI TT^ TTWg 

9l?l^rgic(rmu4 

oiTrRfviK(li,!iiTW||i(;Tlcl^TTT?PTT ^ll^ll 
TTM tT fTT^T R<4MI-bTl?l 

gujcfrJli ¥WM')cb:IIV9ll 



95 


CHAPTER 29 
■^T f 

vfi’Hchm^^R femintT 1^- 

TTRISZr PtchlMI grorg Mc^McilMI ^ 

97HcR?Jt y^«Hlcb;||<ill 
R ?r <s(M Uc|lR<tMcwl ^RT^Sr^RT 

s3 > 

^sftr TFHT fK^r HU|i)umK|sq- 

d^^irarqil^oii 

^rgr^;! tt h -qatRn^ 

TTHt f^yqciim 

^m^:iinii 

^ rf TTJJRST: Wm: MPiMIt-M W\^ 



Arjuna got the son Abhimanyu from the 
womb of his wife Subhadra. He had killed a 
number of kings by jumping within 
Cakravyuha when the war of Mahabharata 
was waged. Abhimanyu had another son 
from Uttara. His name was Parlksita. Most 
religious Yudhisthira, at the time of his 
departure to Vanaprastha (departure to 
forest), enthroned Parlksita. He also ruled 
ideally and taking all care of subjects and 
lastly departed to the abode of Vaikuntha. 
Parlksita had a son from the womb of 
Matrvatl. His name was Janamejaya. He 
had heard the entire Mahabharata from the 
mouth of Vaisampayana, the diseiple of 
Vyasa in order to sweep away the heinous 
evil of the murder of Brahmins 
(Brahmahatya). He was also a just king and 
after a certain pei’iod of time, he also went 
to his heavenly abode. Janamejaya had got a 
son Satanlka from his wife Puspavati. He 
ruled ideally and gradually beeame 
reluctant to the worldly affairs as also pains 
by virtue of Saunaka's preaching which 
influenced him. He performed a number of 


offerings and worshipped god Visnu, the 
supreme master of all the worlds, without 
any worldly desire and finally, acquired the 
abode of Visnu. Satanlka had a son 
Sahasranika from his wife Phalavatl. He 
was enthroned at a very early age and 
developed his devotion for the god 
Nrsirhha. His aeeount of the deeds will be 
unveiled later on. Sahasranika got a son 
Udayana from his wife Mrgavatl. He ruled 
Kausambi for many years and did continue 
the worship of god Narayana. Then he 
attained the Vaikuntha Dhama. Udayana got 
a son Naravahana from his wife 
Vasavadatta. He also ruled judieiously and 
finally, breathed his last. Naravahana's son 
from Asvamedhadatta was Ksemaka. Ks 
emaka also ruled and provided his subjects 
all amenities and care. During his regime, 
Mleechas had started attacking the states 
and this whole world began to be 
subjugated by them. He then, visited 
Kalpagrama by virtue of his farsightedness. 


Vjuilfd ^ 

^ u^l'ycUM.i 

I ^ ^ I 

fftr VIMHRdldcfuy 

9,cbl-{D?il5S2iRr:iiy'^ii 


The man who either listens to or recites 
this account of the deeds and devotion for 
god pertaining to the above kings and who 
practically performs the great deeds, attains 
the heaven after his death and enjoys all 
pleasure there for long. 

Thus, the end of twentynineth chapter on 
account of'Santanu' in Nrsimha Purana. 



96 


NARASIMHA PURAfSAM 


CHAPTER 30 

A description of Dvipas and the heaven 
3RT: irt gTTM fpRTHtTT:l 

Suta said- O Brahmins, I will now 
describe the entire earth surrounded by the 
rivers and mountains from all directions. 

wfnTT;l 

RMRg^cJdiJicbARl ShJT: 
t|Rf^(ydi:ii?ii 

tt^p: fsRi^i'dt ^ 

cTW siqlgrcfdl pr mm: 11 ^ 11 

m- 3rslRfrIT:l 'RWqft in<T5hfT: fer 

3W:l W( ^ gST 

^3ndT;ll'!{|| 

3tRT: ?TT^ ^drifcT:! 

TCJTT %tTRimi| 

There are Jambu, Palaksa, SalmalT, 

Kusa, Krauhea, Saka and Puskara- the 
seven continents on this earth. JambudvTpa 
is as much as one lakh yojana long and 
Palaksa etc., other continents are 

proportionately larger in an orderly manner. 
These dvipas are surrounded by the oceans 
known as Lavana, Isurasa, Sura, Ghrta, 
Dadhi, Dugdha and Suddhodaka more than 
double as compared to the Dvipas. 

Priyavrata, the son of Manu, was the king of 
these seven dvipas. He got Agridhra etc., 
then sons. The three sons among them were 


reluctant to the worldly affairs so they 
became recluses. The rest of the sons i.e., 
seven in number, got the dvipas one each 
from their father in partition. The nine sons 
of Agridhra ruled over the Jambudvipa. 
Their names were- Nabhi, Kirhpurusa, 
Harivarsa, Ilavrta, Ramya, Hiranmaya, 
Kuru, Bhadra and Ketuman. 

fir^i ^Tii yfd^idii 
f|xTTtg^l Wi: W 

At the time of his departure to the forest 
on Vanaprastha, the king Agridhra divided 
the Jambudvipa into nine segments and 
gave each son a segment so made. The 
segment adjoining the Himalaya was given 
to Agridhra (Nabhi). Subsequently, his son 
Rsabha became the ruler of this segment. 

(VichlH mf^dcE||fi(4 
gcjujqiJV'ldtvDfd-'flgtdirui 

WW: H^tl rtmtlcfdTl 

^rrRit WHti 
gr^budi f^ciicidli 

gptoqt gmPkraiit 3^teit RlRBt 

^tjqcfdi ^rBiwiiRr 

q,4'qrM!(i’dld4u4qdH.II’^il 

iitw ^j4RT: hHc|I:I 

■gPtd^T^l^ci (d>4)l4 : imziW ^Hcb4RT:l 

sraVlidrUdl fer ^llf% t MN£hlRu|:l|^o|| 

^ TnwfTJTRTrf MldlHdr) 


CHAPTER 30 


97 


Rsabha got a son Bharata. This country 
is known after his name as Bharatavarsa as 
he ruled that segment for many long years. 
At the middle of Ilavrta varsa, there is a 
golden mountain known as Meru. Its height 
is eighty four yojanas. It has been buried in 
the earth to the measurement of sixteen 
thousand yojana and the width of its peak is 
double than it i.e., thirty two yojanas. There 
is the city of Brahma in the middle, 
Amaravatl in the east, the city Tejovatl of 
Agni at Agnikona (north east), Samyamani 
of Yama in the south, the city Bhayahkarl 
of Naiirti in Nairrtyakona (south-west) 
Vivavatl of Varuna god in the west, 
Gandhavatl of wind god in Vayavyakona 
(southern east) and Vibhapurl of the moon 
god in the north. This JambQdvIpa 
consisting of nine segments is surrounded 
by holy mountains and rivers. Kiihpurusa 
etc., eight varsa are the places of 
enjoyments for the people of great deeds. 
Only Bharatavarsa is the Karmaksetra 
comprising of the four varnas. The people 
in Bharatavarsa only will attain to heaven 
by virtue of their great deeds and the 
devotees going by route of knowledge, 
attain emancipation by virtue of their deeds 
performed without passions or attachments. 
O Brahmins, the evil-doers of this land fall 
to the mean positions directly. Hence, deem 
the evil-doers fell definitely in the hell at 
the nether region. 

m R'dchH>l4dl: 

'■9 

1## RFHt: igfepnr ife^ch: 

fegr: MlR-Mlil: 


TP<Ra‘:l 

The seven Kulaparvatas are- Mahendra, 
Malaya, Suktiman, Rsyamuka, Sahya, 

Vindhya and Pariyatra. These are 
Kulaprvatas in India. The seven rivers here 
are - Narmada, Surasa, Rsikulya, 

Bhlmarathi, Krsnavenl, Candrabhaga and 
Tamraparnl. The six rivers i.e., Gahga, 

Yamuna, Godavar!, Tuhgabhadra, Kaverl 

and Sarayu are capable of sweeping the 
evils. 




This beautiful Jambudvipa is famous for 
Jambu (Jamuna fruit) and it is as lengthy as 
one lakh yojana. This Bharatavarsa is the 
best place in this continent. 


fntcbim ^ 

cPT: wflrorrat ^:l 
cPTi cdl'*IHldi94d:l 


Aksadvipa etc., are the holy countries. 
The people abiding their respective varnas 
and doing worship of god Nrsirhha, only 
reside in those countries. On diminishing of 
the right acquired by virtue of their deeds, 
they attain to the emancipation also. From 
Jambudvipa to Suddhodaka, there are seven 
continents in all and these are surrounded 
by seven seas. Beyond this, there is a 
golden land, then Lokaloka mountain 
onwards and all this is called Bhuloka or the 
earth (environment). 


98 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


srwrqfi: 

R ~ ^ l gu4 Rl<J|iMd l 

fTdMWyHi ^dUmPiJ 
■qs^ ^RWT^TE#TTnni:l 

ih'jiqTqt R^yiPui 

3rf^: qte^TiwrsSRHft gnikT:! 

dMrtiqiull ^qkRT:IRo|| 

There is space above the earth or 
environment. It is most comfortable for the 
acrobats or the space creatures. Now, the 
description on the heaven is given. Listen to 
it patiently. The people who have 
performed great deeds in India they along 
with gods reside in the heaven. The 
mountain king, Meru is located in the 
middle of the earth. It is of golden lustre 
and shines the earth adjoining. It is as high 
as eighty four thousand yojana and its 
portion of sixteen thousand yojana has been 
buried below the earth. It is surrounded by 
the land of the same measurement. 

rTPI ffk wnf m Jlfdftdd:l 

R^ll 

Tjsgrt TifkfR ^ 

■qsqTT %4qPu|i*TWTIR?ll 

^ ■qrftrm qfkk i 
dMHiqt ■q'^HTftrT fkdiPi 
dfc^jd ■q^nt '5jq <3r5r 
arwwRd ■qkr Pwitir^jii 
q4qTt<vj^Niiq-<dt ■qsqqw 

WRRT: ■qfkPt^MRmi 

There are three ridges upside the Meru 
mountain where the abode of heaven is 
situated. Those heavenly ridges of Meru are 



surrounded by numerous trees and creepers 
and there are several species of flower 
plants laden with flowers. The three ridges 
are known as middle, west and east ridges. 
The middle ridge is made of Sphatika and 
Vaidurya gem. The east ridge is made of 
Indranila and the west ridge is made of 
precious stones. The middle ridge is at an 
altitude of fourteen lakh fourteen thousand 
yojana and the heaven Trivistapa is located 
there. The east ridge of umbrella feature on 
the mountain Meru. Amid the middle ridge 
and east ridge, there is dense darkness. It is 
located Just in the middle of the middle 
ridge and the west ridge. The beautiful 
Apsaras live in the Nakahrstha-Trivistapa. 

5 qKkl 


w4iNi t 1 
PnPqtfqrgfR: 4qpq?^nf?iRnkr:iR^ii 
■qqifaRn:! 

V.^re» ! ^))Pt Wl^ i PlPdfcdl Trqig^i)^<^ii 


atfBuidUdid^tl q?[Tqt tnrot wi 

tkg VT wn: shl!yf4ct(4dl:lR<?ll 


The heaven situated on the middle ridge 
of Meru is full of pleasure and amenities. 
Sveta, Paustika, Upasobhana and Kama as 
also the king of heaven Alhada reside on the 
west ridge. O the great Brahmin, the 
heavens namely, Nirmama, Nirahariikara, 
Saubhagya and Atinirmala are situated on 
the east ridge. There are twenty one heavens 
situated on the peak of the mountain Meru. 
The people observing Ahiitisa (non¬ 
violence) in principle, generous, performers 
of offerings and resolute to penance as also 
away from the anger only reside in these 
heavens. 


^Hy4v) rjH-d 3rqk 



CHAPTER 30 


99 


3Tqr?l% f 

^ ^11 

d^MIc^MebTl^ rT iftfegj fl^:l 

ifhTF^t tPT: TE?ni;ii?9ii 

Vnd*l<rl JI^Mdld ^ ^:l 

R^RTctf^diyid ■RtS^TTff 

flrW'TtTRO^ % 

^dl^d TJillf^ddi TTcJH;II?-){|| 

<1u|ciHH wf 5 ^:l 

3i7<r<i^d ^TRjT? cb-uKi^H wni;ii^mi 
fa'jjvn^ijui Ijifcjl q^lfui ^feWd:l 

^ f -gif ^Tc^T ^ ?Tl^l I ^ ^ 11 

The people attain to the heaven Ananda 
who abandon their breathings (Pranas) by 
drowning for the sake of their duty. The 
people attain to Pramoda heaven who 

similarly offer their bodies fearlessly to the 
fire for philanthropic causes. Saukhya is 
obtained as a result of sacrifice made as to 
jump from the peak of a mountain for the 
sake of protection of the humanity. The 
people who do mytrdom for the cause of a 
nation while fighting against the enemy, get 
the Nirmala (or Atinirmala) heaven to 
reside. The people attaining death in the 
state of reclusion, resolution or upavasa, 
move to the heaven Trivistapa. The people 
attain Nakaprtha and Nirvrti heavens who 
perform the offering Srauta and Agnihotra. 
Paustika heaven is obtained if the man has 
constructed ponds and wells while in 
earthly living. Saubhagya is obtained to 
reside when the man has donated gold 
during his earthly living. The man who 
arranges wood for burning and relieving the 
public from the waves of shivering cold 
attains to Apsara heaven. The donor of gold 
and cows attains to Niraharhkara heaven. 


The man attains Santika heaven who 
donates land with reverence and for the 
common cause. The donor of silver attains 
to Nirmala heaven. Punyaha heaven is 
availed of if horses are donated and 
Mahgala heaven by virtue of Kanyadana 
(by entrusting daughter to her husband 
through solemnised marriage). The Sveta 
heaven is attained when Brahmins are duly 
offered food and clothes. He seldom suffers 
from agony after availing of that heaven. 

^ I ^ ^ I 

^cfdHdH fiirgTflcSI^^Mchtdyil 

■yRfwi4i Ridsbly) i 

Rrfe W^UIHlfd 'ijyi'i^dQd T?T:I 
jjsncJl 

The donor of Kapila cows enjoys the 
pleasure of living in Paramartha heaven. 
Manmatha heaven is obtained for living 
when ones best ox is donated. Upasobhana 
heaven is obtained by virtue of regular 
bathe in a river particularly in the month of 
Magha, donation of the cow consisting 
mole as also umbrella and shoe. The king of 
heaven Alhada is obtained if the man has 
constructed a temple, served the Brahmins 
and did pilgrimage during his life time. 
Subha heaven is obtained if the man 
survives on a single cereal, single diet that 
too at night and observes the fasts as 
Triratra etc., during his life on the earth. 
Nirmala heaven is obtained by a man who 
takes a dip in a river, checks on anger. 



100 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


Strong resolute, Brahmacarl (who observes 
Brahma) and philanthropist. The heaven 
Niraharhkara is obtained when a seholar 
edueates others for no reward or fee. 

^ ycilifui ^Rifr ?ii^ul'cr: 3ra^5f?ri 

■5j|- f ^ WT M f^: 

f^: -qs^ ^ ■fei?r:(0{mi 

A man according to his spirit and desire 
for fmit attached while donating something, 
obtains the heavens of that nature. Donation 
of daughter, cow, land and learning is called 
Atidana. The donor avails accession to from 
the hell if these four are donated with 
reverence by him. Moreover, the evils 
attached due to riding on a bull and milking 
the cow also are swept away by virtue of 
such donations. The man who donates all 
kinds of things available with him, attains 
to the peaceful and the heaven free from 
ailments and seldom returns from there. He 
himself resides at the west ridge of the 
Meru where god Brahma is enshrined. God 
Visnu is enshrined at its east ridge and god 
Siva at the middle ridge. 

3TcT: xrt f WJfenfcR -^1 

fWTTR 

mk ?r ch^Kw "RTTn:: femr-.i 

"^5^ fensnT fet-.ii'is^ii 
TFTil'itTSr ^ ^ f 
RoMrUcitl 

^ 3 TTf^ II 


O the crown of Brahmin, listen to me 
about the Nirmala and Vimala route that 
lead to heaven hereinafter. There are ten 
routes leading to heaven and these are duly 
arranged one above another. On the first 
route, there is Kumara Karttikeya and 
Matrkas on the other. Similarly, Siddha- 
Gandharvas on the three, Vidyadharas on 
the fourth, king serpent on the fifth, Garuda, 
son of Vinata on the sixth, divine Pitras on 
the seventh, the king of Dharma on the 
eighth, Daksa on the ninth and Aditya is 
enshrined on the tenth route. 

^jHRt I CRT: I I'U <? 11 

%Tir ijRuii^q ^4farM THTmTcTri 
TTTRJJjt Rsn% 11^1 

q^-sfPiiqiicfcqi cT^frrefq «Trra?T;iihoii 
c^RTrarqi ^ «nqg;T:i 
cT^ ^ TT^V^im^ll 

3r5%TJT 'uc4e( qifsicTT qr^i 

^diyiTWylRfEdd^ c||fHryc^lRRT:'^:im ? 11 
ffq 1q?Tt5Krra':io ° ii 

The god Sun moves at an altitude of one 
lakh two thousand yojana measured from 
the earth. The spot for his stay has been 
there at that altitude and the expanse of sun- 
orbit covers the distance as much as three 
times more than that altitude. The sun 
appears rising at Amaravati at the time 
when it exists at noon in Vibhavarl, the 
realm of Moon. It further seems arising in 
Samyaraani, the city of Yama when he 
exists at noon in AmaravatT. God sun 
always revolves round Meru mountain. He 
is stable at the premise of (axis of) Dhruva 
(the pole). Valakhilya etc., hermits pray at 
the time of his rising. 

Thus, the end of thirtheth chapter in Nrsimha 
Purana. 




CHAPTER 31 


101 


CHAPTER 31 

A succinct description of Dhruva's account of 
deeds, the stars, plants and the nether region 

Bharadvaja asked- Suta, who is Dhmva? 
Who is his father and how did he become 
the axis of the Sun god? Kindly, tell all 
these matters with due consideration. We 
wish your longevity extended by many 
hundred years and continue to be able to tell 
stories. 


T^RW^FTnrl^TfRErftn': '^:i 

•Hniryi ri^ewi(rif>tT: '^:l 

s3 N* 

IT TR^trlRTROt MURiq ?| 

(JtdellTiq ^limi 

TITO i%RRTsr ^ wTETiq^i 

Suta said- O the great Brahmin, 
Uttanapada was the son of Svayambhu 
Manu. He got two sons out of which one 
was born from the womb and called 
Uttama. He was the older of the two. The 
second son was born from the womb of 
Suniti and called Dhruva. One day, Suniti 
sent her son to the service of king in a duly 
set-up dress and ornaments. The king was 
seated in the royal court at that time. The 
humble Dhruva went in the company of a 
maids sons and saluted the king Uttanapada. 
Having seen Uttama in the lap of the king. 


Dhruva also tried to climb on to the royal 
chair so as to reach the king. Suruci was 
also present there and she scornfully said- 

sfftqT. ■yjiH i% I<i 11 

TuraOTTtfq gjEif -crtrl^i 

q?Er p=iqdqMj-dqH.ll^o II 

O the son of a destitute woman, do you 
too want to climb to the lap of the king? 
Remember that it is your mere folly. You 
are not worthy to have the kings lap as you 
have been born from the womb of a 
destitute woman. Tell me what great deed 
you have performed so as to climb on to the 
throne? Had any deeds been performed in 
your previous life, you would not have been 
brought into the womb of the destitute. In 
spite of being a prince, you could not enter 
into my womb. Take it as a token to 
understand that you had performed no great 
deeds in the previous life. See Uttama who 
really had performed great deeds and how 
comfortably and respectfully; he has 
acquired a seat on the lap of the king. 


^ SgTET 


3f%RT qlRitT fdifsETT Hirq^ii-i 

RiqRdd'l qfB'>yiV^ flTJIT: 



102 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


IT ^ ii^i 

Suta said- On being scolded and 
humiliated in the presence of courtiers, tears 
started flowing in streams from the eyes of 
innocent Dhruva but he did not react. The 
king too could not blutter even a single 
word as a reaction to such humiliation, as 
he was enslaved of her beauty. Dhruva 
suppressed the pain anyhow till the court 
was on in full swing and saluted king when 
the court was over. He then immediately 
left for his home. 

3T2r 5 11 

3TTf^ hcWcbUd liTRl f 1 

gchffloilvHiMtScnsrIl TT 

traw rR^ iRcTT (Vt«HU|4^||^V9|| 

felRR Tmtfl %9Tr l?RWfiRT:l 

Suniti, on arrival home of Dhurva 
automatically guessed at the humiliation 
inflicted by the king by merely seeing his 
pale face at a glance. When Dhruva became 
confident of solitude, he could not resist 
any more the momentum of pain and started 
weeping bitterly. He embraced his mother 
with both arms round her neck and burst 
into streams of tears. Suniti consoled him, 
wiped his tears with her delicate hands, 
fanned him with her sari and asked - Dear 
son, tell me the reason for your weeping. 
Who has humiliated you even in the 
presence of the king? 

^ acii^ 

ITf# TgPRT^ t?RT M'lTCirtT: 11 ^ 11 

tT ITTRP^ ^ ITT fiRTTi 


gisj ^ RTcT: f5T^IT^fdM^i<rnll^'?ll 

gsminTcn UTT?! 3^: ITIi%: 1?T:I 

ITTRT^ gST ^TTIR^rTiTtll^ o || 
gWT >T-<'tTM4Tir« ^I^: 

gsT ^miT^ ijVdyTihiy gsr ^ ^ 11 ? ?ii 

35ST g-cUHTiH^lrlh 

Dhruva replied - Beloved mother, I ask 
you something and expect a true reply from 
you. Suruci and you both are the co-wives 
of the king; still she is so beloved for what 
reason? Mother, tell me why you are not 
beloved to the king. Why Uttama, the son 
of Suruci, is better? If I see the right of 
prince, both are equal but what thing still 
draws the dividing line between us. Why 
are you destitute and why is Suruci the 
better mother? Why is Uttama only worthy 
of the throne and not I? How are my deeds 
mean and Uttamas better? 

I^iqq^li groflr 

Having heard the solemn submissions 
from her son Dhruva, Suniti sighed a long 
sigh and began to console her sons agony 
with these words. 

arfir iffcT TT?Tf^ 

^iT^xn^in^T#15siT:ii?'sii 
trar ttkt^ t tjt^^i 

irf^ ITT n^ft^TRftravvT^TTI I ? m I 

3^TTW: l^uqiqi: ^qflTITITTlfeT: IR ^ 11 
OTiPlt ^ xT^ ^ xnfcr f? xTTR^I 
«T5TITT trafcET W Mdlw*>dl:IRi9ll 



CHAPTER 31 


103 


^ in^ fgagirai^; IR <511 

Suniti said- Dear son, you are most 
wise. I satisfy all queries you have made 
solemnly and with truth in heart but don't 
loom frequently round humiliation. The 
statements of Suruci are all correct and 
nothing is false therein. She is PataranT and 
further, most darling to the king. The prince 
Uttama had come to her womb as a result of 
the great deeds performed in the previous 
life and he only is worthy to sit on the 
throne. The things like royal umbrella as 
white as the moon, a decent pair of fans 
(cahvara), the highest throne, an intoxicated 
king elephant, the racing horses, a life free 
from ailments and calamities, a kingdom 
without enemies are only obtained with the 
grace of god Visnu. 

Suta said- Dhruva on the statement of 
his mother reacted in the following words- 

UrTgjRTfet 

13 ? 11 

313311 ^ ^ ^ xtTTisrap3i?H;i 

Dhruva said- O beloved mother, listen 
to my statement with a balanced mind. I 
thought so far that nobody else is greater 
than Uttanapada. However, if any more is 


also existed for fulfilling the desires of his 
deponents, it is a matter of pleasure for me. 
Mother, consider even today that I have 
obtained the places or positions rare to 
achieve for others by virtue of the worship 
of that adorable Jagadlsvara. I only require 
your assistance and that only to allow me to 
worship god Vi?nu. 

3T33ng ^ vi<Hirq cgigrTRynn^ii^^ii 

313 r33i«n^3r3lf^ii3'«ii 
HasilPR 3ii4Ri3l; WTSkJ ^33T:l 
3 ^ lEfEigt wpI 

3^ 331 ■33 snwwra ^igMJirtjfdii^mi 

Suniti said- Beloved son, I cannot allow 
you. You are only about seven or eight 
years of age this time. You are only able to 
play and enjoy so far. Furthermore, you are 
my only child and I only live on the basis of 
you. I have got you as a result of severe 
worship of god and goddesses and faced a 
number of troubles. Dear son, my 
breathings run after you even when you 
leave me to a distance not more than three 
or four paces from the home. 

§3 3313 

313 3133^13311T13T 13 3l3R3^ 

31?r 11^ 3131 f33T f3H]J^ Ti?13:11 ^ 311 

Dhurva said- Mother, Uttanapada and 
you were my only parents known to me so 
far but god Visnu is my only mother and 
father from this day and no doubt can be 
made on this fact. 

gqlfciwr3 

313 3n:ir 13113331:1 

^ ?133T 3 ^ 3f3 13t 3R3lf3 ^ 1 1 ? ^911 


104 


NARASIMHA PURAIVAIVI 


Suniti said- My worthy son, I don't 
preclude you from worshipping god Visnu. 
If so is my intention, I owe that my tongue 
should split up into a hundred pieces. 

yuiuii«} ^ infill^<tii 

rTJnf^r 'cTI 

■RM rFRpR^n^ rT^5^Tt^icTT;l 

Deeming this as permission from mother 
the boy Dhruva did Parikrama of the 
mother's feet and set-out for the penance 
after saluting her. Suniti gifted her son a 
garland of blue lotus flowers boldly. She 
then showered on him the blessings so 
mighty to suppress enemies in a thousand 
numbers. 

Rirrawt w; gjTwraTf^;ii-){^ii 

She said- Beloved son, may god 

Narayana, omnipresent, ocean of mercy and 
holder of conch, discus and gada weapons 
in hands protect you everywhere. 

■R farf^nfer an^swi^RTranr:! 

H 4)C(Cd <l'Hqc4Pll 

Suta said- Dhruva, the child with 

childish valour entered into a flower garden 
by following the scented wind after leaving 
his palace. As that child was so far known 
to highways and mother as only god but 
unknown to the route of the forest he began 
to think a few moments with closed eyes. 


ytlMcHRlRid fgRTRTRRT I 

f% giTlfiT ^ Wlfil ^ tT 

lj.ci;j41c^ illdcRV-yfrl ■’ET g^:l 

m ^ ■RRI#T RWR'dfdrl'dR: I 
%lHd^^R<3 ll <j>b4lvid1dl-t ^3rqi^ ^ll^^ll 
(dcHdilf^-dUcJ^^IHI'f *vi)MilfBdl^tdl>fl 

3W3I Rnym: yd4*i«‘yz:i 

On exit from the garden of the city, he 
thought - "What should I do? Where should 
I go? Who will assist me? When he came 
out from the grip of such pessimistic 
thoughts, he saw Saptarsi moving with 
phenomenal speed. Having seen them, who 
perhaps came there under the compulsion of 
his destiny, Dhruva was pleased. Their 
foreheads were smeared with Tilakas. They 
had kept Pavitrl of kusa grass in their 
fingers. Sacrificial thread was on their 
shoulder and they were seated on the hide 
of black deer. Dhruva went to them and 
bowed his head before them. His hands 
clasped and he explained his intention in 
humble speech after duly saluted them. 

3^1^ 

aittr RT gfR^TT: 

Dhruva said- O hermits, I introduce 
myself as the son of Suniti and Uttanapada. 
My mind this time is unattached to the 
world. 


^3^ 






CHAPTER31 


105 


Igf^cfr 

dcHgllRl ^ 

31T^li<ilf5Tc^t(|U|i ^JITO^ ^pirq^l 

fTrrTR^iraTgs!ni;iiM?ii 

f^PTwrf^n^ chwcdf^ ’iRtrsT:! 

SQta said- The hermits fell in surprise 
on the humble speech, the etiquette, 
fascinating face and splendour in 
complexion of the boy and called him to sit 
by their side and said- "Dear son, we could 
not so far understand the reason for 
unattachment or reluctance of your mind 
from the worldly affairs. As unattachment 
generally takes place in the mind of people 
unsatisfied, how do you fall in that category 
when you are the son of a king who rules 
over the seven continents? What do you 
want from us? What is your desire? 

Hi5(1 

^ dlHchW 

Dhurva replied - "O hermits, may the 
throne of father reserve for my great brother 
Uttama. O philanthropic hermits, I am only 
in need to know from you the position not 
yet occupied by any king, supreme and 
intact and rare even for the gods like Indra 
etc." As a reply to that child, the hermits 
explained solemnly as under- 

MdliVIMyidld 


Marici said- The man who has not yet 
taken the taste of nectar essence obtained as 
a result of devotion to the lotus feet of 
Govinda, cannot attain to the fruit supreme 
illuminating which can only be obtained 
when the man goes beyond the path of 
desires. 

3tfii«cng 

suf^diT^dMd: Mc^qmiild g5sni;i 

Atri said- A man who has not yet 
worshipped the feet of Acyuta, cannot 
anyway obtain the position even rare to 
have for the gods like Indra etc. 

W ^ tTTET Trahlt ytqdirn^l 
y>RHIehMehWI%l*Mcd 

Ahgira said- The man in concentration 
on the lotus feet of god Kamalakanta, 
accesses easily to the position where all 
property of the three-worlds lies. 

S^TcT 

TRWnliJT M^mid^'^Rild tl 
TOMchURdlfd TT f^: |3r:ll^o|i 

Pulastya said- Dhurva, god Visnu only 
is the giver of everything and the cycle of 
heinous offences is broken and destroyed 
only when that god is summoned even for a 
moment. 

fa? 3^ 

wt w 3f«fRJOT3TTf;i 
^EFcnw TT 

Pulaha said- God Visnu is considered 
Paramabrahma, distinct from the principal 
(Prakrti) and Purusa (organism). This entire 
worldly illusion has been knitted at his will 



106 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 




CHAPTER 31 


107 


WMW d)5(t14ti) fehCll ^^^1 

VfidldMlfdfr^ ^ H 

^ lag ^ra^ii^mi 

Suta said- All hermits vanished with 
these words and Dhruva too departed for 
the penance by doing concentration on 
Vasudeva. The twelve lettered hymn 
provides with all desires fulfilled definitely. 
He began to do japa according to the 
procedure told by hermits at the bank of 
Yamuna in Madhuvana. It was the effect of 
the reverence of Dhruva that he began to 
see god Vi§nu, lotus-eyed within his heart. 
His figure was divine. It increased the 
vigour of Dhruva and he vigorously started 
japa of that hymn. No physical pains like 
hunger, thirst, rain, cyclone, storm and 
excess heat etc., could disturb him. His 
mind was diving into the ocean of pleasure 
at all moments. He had even forgotten his 
physique. It is said that the gods created 
several causes for disturbance under 
suspicion of his penance, but all those were 
proved futile for that child. That hermit in 
Visnu form did not fall in the trap of the 
hurdles like perpetual living at a single 
place. 

sEirra#r 

^RtMllrl^')E5r3R dMli^^lIVS^II 



•R t 

cpn^T#TftcTiicrTt: 



After some time, God Visnu, beloved to 
devotees, the great giver came to see that 
devotee on Garuda when he was duly 
satisfied with the power of Dhruva's 
concentration. God Sri Hari, in his dark 
complexion, decorated with kaustubha 
gems and adorned with the crown studded 
with gems looked as if the Kajjalagiri with 
the rising sun is lighted due to envy for the 
Udayacala. That god with affectionate and 
undeviated eyes as if washing the dust fixed 
on the body of Dhruva through the 
incessant flow rays formed water of his 
teeth, addressed him in following words- 
gt gt ggr guJlici g^ 

grmwgggggrRg ^:i 

"Dear son, I am pleased with your 
penance, concentration, control over the 
senses and the tough restriction on mind. 
Ask the desired boon from me." 

Tmtr- 

fgwTR Rg^ 

TiTiRgg TT:ii(i o ii 

Dhruva suddenly opened his eyes under 
the influence of that serious tone of god. He 
saw that moment the same four-armed 
Brahma whose concentration he had made 


108 


NARASIMHA PURAIVAM 


in his heart. It was apparent now before 
him. 

15)4)91 

W ch<)M)fd iraW: ^ f 

^ r)(g4)cf fepT ^ ’Eranrii-i^ii 

H)*HI^[d I 

wtT ^ 

«4g0H"f JT: 1T:f|ll<i9ll 
^^gtyfuiUritTiq Tiirgo^ in 
lilict ?4tIT ^fT (Jticjl ct 

3rI: m^MKi^inniRi^nnHi ^ii<i'«ii 

f^gwpTRrra; ^ gc^T giW ^11 (i 11 
utRirv? cRf• g^R^niH .! 

Chilli chlnrii»<<i IT tiRttjvrm^ TT ?fT:lli^ll 

The prince was dazzled and fall in prey 
of disappointment as a reason of seeing the 
master of three-world before him. He 
tangled on the questions as to what to say 
and what to do for a while. His- eyes were 
filled with tears of pleasure and hair uplift 
in a state of romance. He only could say "O 
the master of three-world" and then fell on 
the feet of god. His brows were shivering 
and saluting with full length of body laid on 
the ground, staring at god he wept for many 
hours rolling here and there due to excess 
state of pleasure. The lotus-eyed god was 
seen that day by Dhruva who is worshipped 
by Narada, Sanandana, Sanaka and 
Sanatkumara etc. and other yogis, the 
Yogisvara whose eyes were filled with the 
tears of kindness. God Cakradhara, caught 


Dhruva by his hands and lifted him up. He 
dusted his body full of dust, embraced him 
then said- 

ci^c^ifn ^ I4sj() trarii<j\9ii 

O child, ask to all that you desire. I will 
undoubtedly give you all that and there is 
no such thing which I cannot give to you. 

TRt m Trjlf9T^4^1l^ 

m ^ ^9if4d^‘^i 

TrPT9^ giirsTT^i I «i 11 

3T8r 

f^TT^dfijcT I^I 



ftdTtcT: 

The prince Dhruva then asked only that 
he could gain the power to worship him. 
God Visnu touched the white conch-shell an 
apparent seance like, to the lips of Dhruva 
on hearing his desire. The heart of Dhruva 
was already purified as a result of the 
preaching delivered by Marici etc., hermits 
and now with the touch of the conch-shell, 
the sun of knowledge has arisen with all 
radiation therein. He thus, in the pleasure of 
knowledge, began to pray to the god in 
following words- 

Pi'll: I <g<«tict*ich<:i 

>iiii)d4fl‘MMprmc«:)yimi 

3TRHmTmifdfddi)g>dddTT)T«l<l^^)p5l’yyHhU|)- 

fe)f6dl’ti:*<U|H>^:ll 

3)RTf5[feR: 3)yHp|'i|f|'ilfM4t4TR4)<: I 



CHAPTER 31 


109 



HdlfwiI 


gTFT ^11 ^ o 11 

^ ^ ^ f| 

ehmii^ ^ ^Sftl 



osi TROT >mH: 

VIcH^(m «Tt5Ff ^ ■yisIlPlII 



IHI*) ^ T# 

cbMWHii ^gcF^II<?^ll 
3mt ^ ^ ^T%T 

9n;iojl^fcw TRRT HMI^dll 
^ Rt ^CtC(< «<jTtS 



Dhurva said- I salute the god whose 
lotus feet are worshipped by all hermits, 
who had killed the monster Khara and 
Dhenukasura disguised as a donkey, whose 
childhood was full of capricious acts, whose 
feet washed water (Gahga) is worshipped 
by the gods, whose complexion is like the 
watery clouds, who had made cool for ever 
the Dhama (splendour) of Salva, the king of 
Saubha aircraft, who had exhibited RasalTla 
with innovative introduction of lo\e within 
the hearts of the beautiful Gopis (the 
damsels of Gopas) and who filled the hearts 
of the divine damsels come under the 
influence of that Rasa, who is beyond 
beginning and end, who with patience, 
brought prosperity to the once poorest 
friend Sudama, who had defeated the 
enemy on request made by god Indra, who 
had washed the scare imposed on him by 
bringing back the Syamantaka gem, once 
lost from the cave of the king bear 
Jambavan and killed Durita, who lives in 
Dvarakapur! daily, who exhibits the 
intuitive power by playing the flute with 
ear-pleasing melody and walks around the 
bank of Yamuna river, whose flute playing 
is so enchanting as the birds, cows and bees 
abandon their food in order to listen to the 
same, whose lotus feet are ship-like for 
crossing the ever tough ocean of world, who 
had made oblation Kalayavana to his fire of 
valour, who wears the wild garland, whose 




110 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


ears are trimmed with the pretty rings made 
of gems, who is popular with a number of 
names, who is invisible and inaccessible to 
the words of the Vedas and the gods and 
hermits, who puts on yellow silk golden 
clothes, whose chest is adorned with the 
foot-prints of Bhrgu and kaustubha gem, 
who favours his devotee Akrura, mother 
DevakI and Gokula, who is adorned with 
the garlands of basil, pearls, keyura, bangle 
and crown with conch, discus, gada and 
lotus flower in four hands, the universal 
form Hari, worshipped by Sunandana etc., 
devotees, who is Purana Purusottama, 
illustrious and Vasudeva, the living sites of 
all lokas, who appeared from the womb of 
DevakI, who is saluted with reverence by 
Siva and Brahma, who provides relaxation 
to the Gopis, weary of the acts done in 
Vrndavana, who fulfils the desires of 
gentlemen, who holds the white conch-shell 
radiant as kunda flowers, whose face is 
moon-like, beautiful eyes, fascinating smile 
and who is worshipped by the scholars with 
this enchanting complexion. 

As a man finds the divine gem under the 
phenomenon of his luck in spite of his 
search for the piece of glass, I also exactly 
have been opportuned of seeing you in an 
apparent form, so tough to see for the great 
hermits even in spite of my basic desire for 
obtaining the highest position. O lord, I am 
now fulfilled and no other boon is required 
by me. Your lotus feet which I could see 
this time luckily a rare thing to find, cannot 
be abandoned by me now. I will not ask for 
the enjoyment any more as a stupid man 
only will expect mere fodder from 
Kalpavrksa. O god, I am shelter by you who 
are the sole cause for emancipation and I 
am unable to fall down again for the 


worldly pleasure. When the sea (treasure of 
gems) has becomes ones master, he will not 
like to satisfy with the ornaments made of 
glass. O god, hence, I don't ask for any 
other thing except everlasting devotion to 
your lotus feet. O master god, please, boon 
me this only. I frequently, pray to you. 

Suta said- Seeing Dhruva so excellent 
in prayer by virtue of divine knowledge so 
obtained, the god said- 

3TTT1SI 



wi TIT upgf? ^ 

RR tn xl iTTcIT 

Sri god said- "Infamy to the effect that 
Dhruva could not get anything of worldly 
importance, may spread in the commune of 
people. Hence, you first obtain the supreme 
position once wished by you. Subsequently, 
you will regain me by the flux of a certain 
time frame. You along with your mother 
Suniti will be in vicinity of me thereafter as 
an axis to all stars and planets and will be 
praised by Kalpavrksa as also all people. 

rilcRctl 



CHAPTER 31 


111 


pTfogrt ^11 ^ 11 
^<mfi<*lri|| tT ■ynllcH^- 

RTf^vrr ftni’ETi I ^ 11 

Srlsutajl said- Thus, god appeared in his 
apparent form before Dhruva, fulfilled his 
desire with the above boons, saw frequently 
while vanishing from there and finally 
disappeared as also departed to Vaikuntha 
Dhama. In the meantime, the commune of 
gods gathered there, enjoyed the scene of 
face to face presence of god and the 
devotee, started showering flowers from the 
sky including words of appreciation for 
Dhruva. Dhurva, the son of Suniti, is still 
enriched with honour and prosperity both, 
being worshipped by gods and he will 
incessantly enhance the age, fame and 
wealth of people who will see and worship 
him for ages to come. 

1^: STPT ^Tht 

^ I ? o o 11 

flTpt 

^[sTPnfrr wt ^5i‘iu^did,i 
diqrtimui’iiTnt g ^iywl>^VRI 1w:ll^0^ll 
3t^K<*lfi) gicPRl^ sqgfWrCI 


f oUdRyd:! 

gar: fw:i 

TrshjfT: wTii^oqii 

Thus, by the grace of god Visnu, Dhruva 
had obtained the supreme and rare position 
as it is not surprising. Nothing remains 
impossible or rare for a devotee on whom 
god is pleased. The dimension of moon is 
just double than the dimension of the sun- 
orbit. The galaxy is as high as two lakh 
yojana from the moon, Budha is situated at 
an altitude of two lakh yojana from the 
galaxy and Venus is situated at an equal 
altitude from the Mars situated at two lakh 
yojana from Venus and the Jupiter 
(Devaguru) is situated at the distance of two 
lakh yojana from the Mars. The Saturn 
further is situated at the distance of two 
lakh yojana from Jupiter and the orbit of 
Saptarsi is situated at the distance of two 
lakh yojana from the Saturn. Dhruva is 
situated at the distance of one lakh yojana 
from the orbit of Saptarsi. O the crown of 
sages, he is the nucleus of the orbit of light 
(Jyotirmandala). 

g^IUTT yPiVIltH f4c||^:ll^oV9|| 

7f%:l 

O the great Brahmin, the god Sun 
usually transmits heat to the lokas (worlds) 
above and below through his rays. He only 
ascertains the quantum of time for the three- 
worlds in every age. O the best hermit. 



112 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


under the inspiration of Brahma and 
accession to by the grace of god Visnu the 
god Sun, transmits heat to the worlds 
known as Jana, Tapa and Satya through his 
vertical rays and transmits light and heat 
both of the earth through his horizontal 
rays. 


HlchMr^; TT «n^?T:l 

HgmiM '^T ^ 

tmt5«n?n^ M win m^\ 

<TtT^ W ^:i 
Midiawi fg,3T^ '^MHl: 


Wrilctil^ cblfdHl^ 

tnrt ^iI'jUmi^ui fgguThitrs^ 

'jIHhI*: fwt trsgTtr 

WcUHldi'lWcblfiRl’WMlHl*! ijRRy^; 

^ vJdl<^,fd^i|I ^ddmRyR«ldl:lin^ll 

grnl cTPT m^lrci Hl<*Rl>d<i:lin^ll 
M: m %31^ RgiT: 

WTosRf tniT: p®r: Rt!Rr:i^^<i 


The Sun god created the three-worlds 
and he sweeps out all evils. He stands like 
an umbrella and appears from one orbit to 
another. Thus, the light is transmitted by 
him. The Bhuvarloka is situated below the 
orbit of Sun. God Visnu has entrusted the 
administration of three-worlds to Satakratu 


Indra. He along with the lokapalas protects 
these worlds in orderly manner. O learned, 
that illustrious Indra resides in the heaven. 
Below these seven lokas, the nether region 
is situated. Neither heat of sun nor light of 
moon exists there i.e., there is no cycle of 
day and night. O the great Brahmin, the 
people residing in the nether region are self- 
illuminating. Maharloka is situated above 
one crore yojana from the heaven. O 
Brahmin, the Janaloka is situated at an 
altitude just double than Maharloka i.e., two 
crore yojana. It is called the fifth loka. 
Tapoloka is situated at an altitude of four 
crore from that. Satyaloka is located above 
eight crore yojana from there. It is also 
called Brahmaloka. All these lokas are 
arranged one above the other like an 
umbrella. Visnuloka is situated at sixteen 
crore yojana from the Brahmaloka. The 
philanthropists have described the 
magnificence of Visnuloka in 
VarShapurana. O Brahmin, Parama Purusa 
is situated above it. Parama Purusa is 
apparent supreme soul distinct from the 
Brahmanda. The man known to this fact, 
does penance and acquire knowledge and 
thus, absolves himself from the bondage of 
ignorance (Avidya). 

^ RUlPmi 

MRmfd 

?ftt i<<*riivTtssJtrir:ii^^ii 

O innocent, thus I have told the 
geographical locations of lokas. The man 
having consciousness of this, attains to the 



CHAf TER 32 


113 


supreme position. God Visnu, in the form of 
Nrsirirha, worshipped by the men and gods 
is the protector of lokas. That unborn 
apparent supreme god is incarnated in each 
age, kills the wicked and nourishes the 
world. 

Thus, the end of thirtyone chapter in Nrsirhha 
Purana. 

♦ ♦♦ 



CHAf TER 32 


113 





114 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


grand success. Your are only a gentle man 
in your Pandu dynasty who is so devoted to 
god Nrsirhha. I would, therefore, tell you all 
that is required by you. Be attentive and 
listen to the same. 


Hfdqi 

wifcT jrg^i I 11 

«fdbdi«T 

ww gjiRT: wi xTctmyqin^ii^mi 

fTT: f^jtujqiiisy ^ jtti 

Vcmjafiidi: irRTc;ci:ii^^ii 


^ RiAiipgtgi i 

^ ^ WlIWl trtT:II^'9II 

4^4drl ftc?t ^RpR? 

■R wfhtj^WPTt ^!raf fqt:<KU|l||^<ill 

dWi^ahTpn ^ 

SlrSHHirR^W mwll WTl«l<4ll^dH,ll^’?ll 
cftnfsR^ ^4l<j4H,l 

^ ^ f^ujJHlcJjT^^^II^ o II 

Rwnq «l^r!JT (d( 5 )<if«EI 

irarfH Tn ^ i ARilv^ ^ii 


The devotee is absolved from all evils 
and attains a place in the abode of Visnu 
who installs god Nrsiihha in a beautiful 
temple constructed for it. One who arranges 
to design a fascinating icon of god Nrsiihha, 


gets relieved from all evils and ultimately 
takes a departure to Visnuloka (abode of 
Visnu). O greatman, the man who decorates 
and installs god Nrsirhha orderly and 
without any physical passions in mind 
attains relief from all physical ills. A 
regular worship of god Nrsiihha after the 
installation of the idol, fulfils all desires of 
the devotee and he attains to the supreme 
position. All gods in ancient times, had 
worshipped god Visnu and it was the grace 
of god which had made all gods including 
Brahma to attain their higher places. O 
king, the kings of heroic deeds like 
Mandhata etc. had directly attained their 
place in heaven, by virtue of their devotion 
to god Visnu. There is no scope for any 
other thought and in fact, the regular 
worshipper of the king god Nrsirhha enjoys 
the pleasure of both salvation and heaven. 
You too will definitely attain to the aim 
duly thought by you as a result of exclusive 
concentration on god Nrsirhha throughout 
your life under a firm determination. O 
king, the man attains a permanent place 
beyond the cycle of birth and death who 
makes the sculptures to design an icon of 
god Nrsiihha and establishes the same in a 
temple in pursuance of the prescribed 
procedure. In case, the man could devote 
himself in a regular manner to worship of 
god so immortal and chivalrous as his lotus 
feet are worshipped by gods as also the 
demons, he attains the apparent form of god 
Visnu. 

Thus, the end of thirtysecond chapter in 
Nrsirhha Purana. 



CHAPTER 33 


115 


CHAPTER 33 

Great consequences for keeping the temple 
tidy - The story of king Jayadhvaja 

ill I ? 11 

^TEgini H«T^ 

vi^\ 

^ ?r Rf^T rran 

llfdq i q t xT ^lfePT:l 
d> i |^^ITOl)^H WiftrR tHCJill 

atwJdt^d MlSJNMTtifR^I 

Tp^ d^d l ^d ^Icl^q^limi 

The king said- O lord, I am curious to 
listen to the holy procedure for the worship 
of god particularly and in detail under the 
grace of your revered self Tell me 
separately the consequences for a man 
cleans and sweeps as also another who 
washes the temple and trims it? What 
consequence or fruit is availed of when 
Kesava is bathed with pure water and 
further, tell me the consequence for bathing 
the god with milk, curd, ghee and 
pancagavya. What are the consequences for 
bathing the icon of god with hot water and 
that of with the water mixed with camphor 
and aguru? What are further the 
consequences for offering arghya, padya 
and dcamana, for bathing with the recital of 
hymns and offering clothes? 

?Tb@nilffiTP2lt 5 31^ 1% TEri ^1^1 

qrr^gjRf^ qoWldJ|ld4l:ll\9ll 


sg^nR[i^ 

(Tr^ gm ^i;9T^n 

What consequences are for the worship 
of god with sandal and saffron and what are 
the consequences for lighting dipaka and 
incense sticks? What is the fruit for offering 
sweet meat (naivedya) and for going round 
(pradaksina) the temple. Similarly, what is 
the consequence for offering salute, psalm 
and prayer? What are the consequences for 
offering fan, cSvhara (palanquin), the flag 
and the conch-shell? O Brahmin, as my 
heart is absolutely tangled with god Kesava, 
please, tell me all that has been enquired of 
and that too where my little consciousness 
could not access? 


-Sctlxl 

ffw 'Wlf# 

^ TTcTt 11^0 II 


Suta said- Bhrgu, the great hermit heard 
the queries but he assigned the reply to 
Markandeya and left that place at once. In 
pursuance of the instruction of Bhrgu, the 
great hermit, Markandeya appreciate the 
devotion of king for Hari and began to 
introduce the topic. 

pERltfl 


xT -q; 

4)44: gJTtrp^TRtfl 



116 


NARASIMHA PURArVAM 


Tf WSf ■q#q^ll^')JII 

•qrPTii^mi 

Markandeya said- O the king of Pandu 
clan, listen to the procedure of lord Visnu's 
worship in an orderly manner. You are 
devoted to Visnu and I, therefore, will tell 
you it all. The person who sweeps the 
temple of god Nrsirnha, kicks-off his evils 
and attains to the pleasure of Visnuloka. 
The person who smears the land or 
premises of the temple, with cowdung, soil 
and water, attains to undepleting fruit for 
the same and enshrines himself in the abode 
of god Vi§nu. O innocent heart, an ancient 
episode is available in this context which is 
capable to sweep away all evils from the 
heart of a man. 

fTT TRT Tr3g15raigf5rffr:i 

5^1wr w fg^Tcnr III 11 

Tl^ TTHW;! 

yRlfeil TFilT 

mu^ciK 

^?gT Wwi ^ftlPTRTWI I ^ o 11 

jrfnRR f^raraisr 3Trek: 

%R R# W ^1R ^ 11 

3T^rq7Rt RRqR ■wwiqHi 

W5I Wit gHRflfR: 11 ^ ? 11 

O great king, long long ago king Yudhist 
hitra along with his wife DraupadT and four 
brothers, were passing the days in exile. In 
course of their wandering they crossed the 


way full of thorns and acute rubbles and 
reached a holy place. Maharsi Narada had 
came at that place earlier to them and 
returned to his other destination. As the 
mental disposition of king Yudhisthira was 
free from the clutches of anger and disgust, 
he was thinking about having a holy meet 
with any hermit capable to guide them 
regarding that holy place. In the meantime, 
the monsters, Bahuroma and Sthulasira 
entered there. The monster, Bahuroma 
disfigured himself as a hermit with the 
mala-fide intention to abduct Draupadl. He 
pretended as if a hermit is in meditation 
there on a seat of kus'a grass. A Kamandalu 
was kept beside him and Pavitri of kus'a 
grass was in his hand. He seemed to be 
reciting hymns with his eyes focused on the 
fore portion of the nose. A garland of 
Rudraksa was rotating on his fingers. He 
was seen when the Pandavas were walking 
in the forest nearby the bank of Narmada. 

RTr TTR W jnJRST ■q^TJ3f;| 

R ^ 11 

■g^ ^ «rqfq^Wi:i R ^ 11 


King Yudhisthira saluted him with his 
brothers and said- O great hermit, it is the 
grace of god that you are seen here. Tell us 
please regarding the most mysterious holy 
places located in the adjacent area of 
Rudradeha (Reva). O scholar, we have 
heard that a meet with hermits definitely 
enlightens the religion. 


n3 O ^ n3 O 

d l e|Ri|HfVKI : RRtgfRSSOTfrSR-ill^kll 

qrt ^ ^ R ^ 11 

dBiR’dg i R -Wit Ir fertriq^i 



CHAPTER 33 


117 


3i'i)dl^ic?'jilc)Hi yiuiTivwcii<uiH,i 

3^ 3% ^ TT 71^ 

3W ■qf 3ntiR5nwiwi;i R11 

^ ^ % ^Frl:l 

^ 3SJT ^WITIS^I I ^ O 11 

^rrai#: wn 7§t^ 

TTO TT^ pirlRTII^ ^11 

Before king Yudhisthira could complete 
his request to that hermit, another disfigured 
hermit alias a monster, Sthulasira appeared 
there. He was crying with fear and calling 
someone to provide protection. His 
expression was - Oh, who is here to protect 
us? The person usually attains everlasting 
wealth and fame for safe-guarding the 
interests of the man sheltered by him but 
here I am, a Brahmin whose protection 
brings unending consequences. On the one 
hand, the donation of the entire earth with 
daksina of the Meru mountain and 
protection of the dying people on the other 
are all equal. The person who ignores 
Brahmins, cow, woman and babies 
suffering under the clutches of the wicked, 
definitely falls in the hell known as Raurava 
(crying and weeping pains). I am looted of 
all that I had with me and prepared for the 
death owing to the suffering inflicted by the 
monsters. Who is so brave as to protect 
me? The wicked monster has snatched away 
my sphatic garland, kamandala and 
beautiful cot and slapped me with the loot 
of all that I had. 

ffqraiu4 ^jrRRiW: l 

TtmfeirR ^ feiFnfbT ^ tr ■gf^i I ? I 


ctiT '5^: 

cRTt fTtTT id'fli: ^ *J|usqi;||^ 5II 

Having heard such a dreadful and 
wailing statement, the Pandavas fell in a 
hustle. They lighted fire immediately and 
followed that hermit. They left behind 
DraupadI with the earlier hermit and 
crossed a long distance in the state of fury. 

33(5^^ f^rf^raJRTl' q'^c(ieKiyuDlc(d:l 

tPTt TFJT ■dWqchc'Mqq^ll^qil 

fqfl^ RUSH RRtW 
RR ^<^dicj^y4RanRuiid^^rRtii?^ii 

RgR RR RVIWlfiH:l 

Yudhisthira then said- We do not see 
anything here in the form as that hermit had 
said. Arjuna, turned back immediately for 
the care of DraupadI. Arjuna, just then 
followed the words of his brother. King 
Yudhisthitra then turned to the orbit of Sun 
god and prayed to the gods to disclose the 
truth for an such event with the recollection 
of his truthfulness, great deeds and bona- 
fide speech. 

RRPaftsR^iiui) CRT 

R'^KM RfR: ttgcdfVHI: iw:l 
RTRlfq|cT: ^HRI^RRR gtTW:ll^<ill 

O king, the prayer made by Yudhisthira 
reacted from the space in garb of speech 
while no person was there. It was said that 
the person standing before him was not a 
hermit but a monster. The hermit Sthulasira 
is well protected and safe. He is not in any 
way in pains. This is all the art played by 
this wicked monster. 



118 


NARASIMHA PURAl^AM 


mwi tTt^l I ^ 11 

W5rT ^ T^ IJTW tt^ 

<*,fcd|^^>j( #Tlftr rlTinfFr ^1 


Bhima then in a state of fury blew his 
fist on the head of that monster who was 
about to flee from there. The monster too 
became furious and blew the fist on Bhima. 
This struck a fierce fight between Bhima 
and that monster. Bhima could break his 
skull with extreme labour. 

3i^5fcr RMWIdl 

irar 'et 

w» ~ g r ETi g gry gfd ^n^:iii{?ii 
wrafgErrar cir '9Tt?r (Jigfg gRg^:i 
tm ^ ^ ^ g^iiis^ii 

gif^i 



wrt: gigin ^wi,i 


l[iE^sftr gt MH i fi i d : ii-i^m i 

iraiftr ^rifrr 

11'(j ^ i I 

^ ?nirrgng«nf% eti 


m: Jf 


qtgr graf 


On the other side, Arjuna reached the 
hermitage of that hermit but he neither saw 
that hermit nor his chaste wife Draupadi. He 
then climbed on a tree and saw from there 
that a monster was running fast with 
Draupadi on his shoulders. He further saw 
Draupadi wailing in the state of severe fear 
and bluttering loudly their names. Having 
seen Draupadi in that piteous condition, 
Arjuna ran towards her with making acute 


sound. Owing to the force he was bearing 
while running, a number of trees were 
felled. That monster also guessed his power 
and he started running after leaving 
Draupadi behind. Arjuna did not yet leave 
him and continued chasing. That monster 
fell at last on the ground and turned in the 
appearance of god Visnu, with four hands 
and the conch, discus, gada etc., in them. 
Arjuna fell at sun rise still saluted and said. 

3r^ sgRT 

giST »pigwgi RigiK 
TO rrainR^ 
ch^d^r» TlT Wl 

gpFTrar 5^:11'!^^ II 

Arjuna said- God, why have you spread 
your illusion here? 0 god, I salute you and 
apologise for whatever I have done wrong 
under the deceit of your own illusion. 0 
JagannStha, all this have been done due to 
ignorance. I therefore, ask for your apology. 
How is a man expected to have such 
consciousness as to recognise you in the 
changed form. 

■cIjJ^'jI -aciN 

qr? u^rat^'l gfffqrfRT gm;! 

3qgi^ I m o 11 

The four-armed said- O great warrior, I 
am Bahuroma monster and not Visnu. It 
was the account of my previous deeds, 
which has turned me in the form of Visnu. 

31^ -3c(|t4 


•f^'Jiird g;4 ^ ?RT rrfgg:i 



Arjuna said- O Bahuroma, tell the 
factual detail of your previous birth. What 



CHAPTER 33 


119 


was the deed deserving the form of Visnu 
for you? 


xrfixi f^iiqrqti' 
aiFTRi W1T31T 


-RgaTT; I m 11 
TsJTTcT 3Tm^rRlf5Ttf|?l:l 


The four-armed said- O luckiest Arjuna, 
listen to my excellent deed in company of 
your brothers. It enhances the pleasure of 
audience. I was a popularly known king 
■layadhvaja of Candra clan. I used to 
concentrate on the worship of god NarSyana 
and the temple of NarSyana was swept by 
me regularly. I smeared the temple daily 
and would light dTpaka at night. A gentle 
Brahmin, Vitihotra was my priest (Purohita) 
in those days. He fell in surprise when he 
saw me sweeping the temple. 

Mlefiu^ 3gT€r 

^ TT?1^ TSvPf11M i 11 

• 4iu!iRi-<!j i Pf fgrwTl: fjHJdtifur ti 
3snfir R^mFTTi^: Rddiad;im'?ii 

cT^fl ^ alfd41^ ddlRd ^11^0 II 

Markandeya said-That learned of Vedas 


and Puranas i.e., VTtihotra asked me one 
day - O king, you are the best among all 
other devotees of god Visnu because you 
sweep the temple daily. I therefore, ask you 
the consequences for the sweeping and 
smearing of the temple. Kindly, tell me 
whatever you know in this regard. There are 
numerous other works too and that equally 
please god yet you have confined your 
activity to these two works only. In case 
you know the fruit for such deeds and again 
if the same is not worth concealing and you 
love me to that extent, then please tell me 
the reality. 

Wt 3TJT 11 ^ ? 11 

fir^ at qtr qm i ^ 

^df5^cCT^ytuT^tI uRrycH: i 

■q^mPTOTt ftrq ?J'^^MtdRWTII^'l{ll 

qSPTFRcTt ftrSi sTgl^Tdtqmil^mi 

qPTTcTt ftcti gpit 

Jayadhvaja said- O great Brahmin, listen 
to the deed performed by me in the previous 
life. 1 am known to the matters pertaining to 
the previous life because of my strong 
memory. My deed is worth surprise of the 
audience. O the crown of Brahmin, I was a 
Brahmin renowned as Raivata. I would then 
even push and inspire certain persons not 
authorised for doing yajha (offering) and 
thus, I was a priest (Purohits) of numerous 
villages. My deeds were not confined to this 
but I used to criticise others, was cruel and 



120 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


used to sell illicit and prohibited things. My 
relations had abandoned me owing to my 
perpetual involvement in forbidden deeds. I 
was a heinous evil-doer and always had 
envy of Brahmins. I was interested in the 
others wives and my passions were to 
snatch others money. To kill the creatures 
was my hobby. To sip wine daily and 
jealous of Brahmins was my routine. Thus, 
I indulged myself in evils and robbery was 
also not strange to me. 


Txt W 

TT^ c{i4ch 3TRHT: II 

dmMIddTI 

T3|q ^ ^ ■ntTT:IIV9o il 

TT^tjm'TTRTcITrfl 

■ncTtiiva^ii 


One day I took some Brahmins' wives by 
force and brought them in a vagary of lust 
in a deserted temple. That temple was 
devoid of worship as nobody used to come 
that way. In brief, the temple was 
delapidated. In order to satisfy my lust 
through intercourse with those women, I 
cleaned a little portion of the floor and 
lighted a lamp so that the things may seen 
there. (I had cleaned the floor and lighted 
the lamp only to satiate my lust) however, 
all my evils were effaced. In that Visnu 
temple where I had lighted the lamp and 
was ready for coition, some city guards 
suddenly entered there and assuming me a 


spy from the enemy, Icnocked me down and 
slaughtered me with a blow of the sword. 
Just then an aircraft (Vimana) descended 
with messengers from Visnu, made me rise 
thereupon and departed to heaven with the 
pleasure of psalm composed and sung by 
Gandharvas. 


3cfTtT 

ftsTtgr W wu ferfriRT: i 

f^oawhTORTgcRTt f<cifTc,iT4mf^d:IP3^|| 

^ Ismwl TFiTT 
tTjnfcr ■p: 

rprr ^nua^tll 
-n^gcTT 'gf?:! 

^^?^T qftRTt ^ 11^klI 

ffqtT; VlfldWi TT TT^ ^ 

^'m TSTRraitnJ ^ ^ ri'jRUliiva^ii 
w ^ JRIT^ praiT I 

«TT^Tk?Tt ^TW: 

Igraif: ■qrfiT ^ 


The four-armed said- Thus, I got a 
divine complexion, enjoyed the divine 
pleasures more than one hundred kalpas. 
That great deed was not yet squared and this 
again made my birth possible in the lunar 
clan of kings where the name Jayadhvaja 
was given to me. On completion of that 
phase of life, I again entered into heaven. I 
then took a departure to Rudraloka. Once I 
saw Narada who was moving from 
Rudraloka to Brahmaloka. I did not salute 
him deliberately and started laughing at 
him. He was annoyed and cursed me - "O 



CHAPTER 34 


121 


king, be a monster.” I anyhow pleased him 
and begged for pardon. The hermit then 
diluted the curse with his words that I 
would be absolved from evil at the convent 
near the bank of Reva when the chaste wife 
of Yudhisthira would be abducted by me 
and you would be reaching in order to 
protect myself from the attack of Arjuna. O 
religious Yudhisthira, I am that king 
Jayadhvaja and I have again turned into the 
form of Visnu. I will now certainly take a 
departure to Vaikuntha Dhama. 

II 

JldcUrdbUj'ildH ■ijjr ■Rf I 

aigfbTTfcr fewrrd;i 

MSrkanc^eya said- With these words, 
king Jayadhvaja rode on Garu(Ja and 
departed to that Visnudhama where god Vis 
nu always enshrine with LaksmI. Yudhist 
hitra could only see this phenomenon. This 
episode is related to the magnificence of 
sweeping and cleaning the temple of god 
Visnu. It clearly highlights the fruits for 
such deeds. When king Jayadhvaja had 
acquired so divine a property in his 
previous life and that too when he was 
indulging in evil-doing, what surprise and 
what to ^ay for the person who engages 
himself with keen devotion and in a state of 
meditation for god Visnu? 

l(t ? 11 

dWbtJujd ^ qiHduilSoJJ^r:l 

■<jTfrr fiiy(iRf?:ii<i^ii 


^ %1T ftrfi ^C| WRHI \6'>i\\ 

HUldlRlt if^l 

^ dhWIV^ RlVlMd;ll<imi 





Rid?u^-4HtiiR'i<i+)uji4dli4>cd 3nT 
ll^^ll 


Suta said- The king Sahasranika of 
Pandu clan again tended to worship of god 
after hearing these words of the hermit 
Markandeya. O Brahmins, please, listen 
therefore, that god Narayana provides his 
devotees with emancipation engaged 
deliberately or innocently. I further reiterate 
the statement that you all should do worship 
of Jagannatha if you desire to cross the ever 
tough worldly ocean. The worshippers of 
god Visnu, saviour of the sheltered are 
honourable, adorable and worthy to salute 
particularly. 

Thus, here ends the chapter thirty-three on 
description Sahasranika in Nrsiihha Purana. 




CHAPTER 34 


121 



CHAPTER 34 

Magnificence of the worship of god Vi§nu 

3^ 

Sri Sahasranika asked - O great learned 
and revered Markandeya, kindly, tell now 
the fruits for the deed performed as to 
remove or clean Nirmalya (the sandal 
smeared and the flowers offered). 

UlciSu^y ggirl 
TraFf r4iI^: afsq^IRlI 




122 


NARASIMHA PURAtSAM 


TTPZr ^^1 

3fT>2T '»Tl^ 

3TFTE® H5(Rl|f^ 3Trai^li^d>^«J<^:l 
tTcirarnfcr irg^ii'){ii 

^sswraisf ^ trRmMR%raJH;i 

fgrfsRT TJ^^Iimi 

WOT wm Ttfw Tdinri 
RjMmldPi;|cldl •R#^ll^ll 

WTZT ^ 1 

idwyHlchMdlHlfrl "JWIRH: ^ll-d4:ll^ll 

wnFR:! 

aipHrili J{ RlRrdl g^ll<ill 

^ 'Fm ^ WRchi^ fdvlM<i:i 
^rrfw#: f^if?s^3^rfrt^RTf^ii<?ii 
MiMeh^ehy-yrd ^ dluiInP^i^dH^i 
fer MRRre mi trg^i i ^ o 11 

MSi'kandeya said- 0 king, the man who 
engages himself daily in removing the 
earlier days flowers and sandal smeared 
from the icon and make the icon to bathe, is 
absolved from all evils and attains to the 
fruits for taking bathe in all holy places. He, 
thus, rides on an aircraft (vimana) and 
attains the heaven at his death. He then 
enjoys the pleasure for years immeasurable. 
A man is absolved all sins when he 
summons god Nrsirhha with the words - O 
god Nrsirhha, come and have a seat here 
with flowers and Aksata (the grains of rice) 
in his hands. Under an imagination of 
apparent god Nrsirhha, one who offers 
water for washing hands, for w'ashing feet 
and for cleaning the mouth and offers a 
seat, definitely is relieved of all sins 
committed earlier. O king, a man is 
enshrined in Visnuloka as a result of his 


devotion in act to bathe god Nrsiriiha with 
milk and water. The man who gives a bath 
to Nrsirhha with curd, acquires a handsome 
complexion and is worshipped by the gods 
in Visnuloka after his death. A man first 
enjoys the pleasures of Agniloka and then 
finally resides in Visnuloka who gives a 
bath with honey to the god. The man who 
blows the conch-shell and do drumming 
with sweet sound at the time of offering a 
bath to the icon of Nrsirhha, abandons the 
cover of evils like the snake and departs to 
Visnuloka on the aircraft (Vimana). 

tf: qfeTcT: | 

et l Rum 

qrc(ift3 I ^ 
awiirpr Tl 

^MctlRuid 

^ hlRt'fgi ^^1 

W2T 'rerrm ^TTlRnTll^mi 

cl4c< i mrqTj.j viRm i ui # ^:ll^^ll 

O king, a man offering a bath with 
pancagavya with the recital of hymns, 
attains the fimit ever reviving. A man attains 
to Varunaloka who does massage of the 
wheat flour to the icon of god Nrsirhha and 
then offers a bath with hot water. One who 
washes the Padaprtha (the slipper, a small 
bench for keeping the feet) duly by rubbing 
Vita leaves and using water, gets leave from 



CHAPTER 34 


123 


his sins. Brahmaloka is obtained when a 
bath is offered with kusa and flower mixed 
water. A bath with gem kept water ensures 
Surayloka and a bath offered with gold kept 
water ensures Kuberaloka. A bath with 
water mixed with camphor and aguru 
ensures first Indraloka and then the abode 
of Visnu. The man attains Adityaloka and 
then is respected in Visnuloka who offers a 
bath to Govinda with the water brought 
from all renowned holy places. The man 
offering upper and lower apparels with keen 
devotion for god, first attains to Candraloka 
and then joins in Visnuloka. 


3Trf^ TT^ 

^:l 

WIT fMnJ|MtJ^r[^| 


dic^ehlidVIdlfd 'cTII^^II 
IT •JTt^l 

HilPc)dH,l 

Hc}i4lilRl(d»|cW; RcJ^T|U|-(^ftd:ll?^ll 


O king, a man resides in the heaven for 
several crore kalpas as a reward for 
smearing saffron, aguru and sandal on the 
icon of god. A worship with offering of the 
flowers like Mallika, Malati, Jatl, Ketaki, 
As'oka, Campa, Punnaga, Nagakesara, 
Bakula (Maulsiri), lotus of Utpala species, 
basil, kanera, palasa and other high quality 
flowers is rewarded equal to donation of 10 
gold currency for each of such flowers. The 


man who makes garland of these flowers to 
the extent available and offers it to god, is 
rewarded with the pleasure of living in Vis 
nuloka as much as many thousand crore 
kalpas and movement on the aircraft. A 
worship with full grown, untorn, holeless, 
bilva leaves and basil leaves of Nrsirhha 
enables a man to ride on the aircraft of god 
Visnu, to be relieved of the sins committed 
and honour in Visnuloka after his death. 

gVToicl^ 

fit ^TTfwrar ^fddmH.i 

fftl^: TtchTMfiraf^d:ll9mi 


cll^HlIi TT TTlfdcgi tWiriUJJJji gitflR^II 

H'jc(icd4|'~ii;| 

nt(yc|c{JMcR^I fTT!T fn-qqjH 111911 
%T?TTnMdrf^d 4l^t4lfdryTIH"tr:l 
-j^lfdbMdl fyqi^d TTTr^5f^ll9<ill 

TTfwq ■qrasB WTTt 
fl'MItd^cdtHsitiat qWdlTdlcldl ^1 

'^uJi^iyi gw: ^ (dcftcfiy:! 

?TTf^ xll 1^ ^11 


O king, worship of god with the 
fragrance prepared with Mahisa guggula, 
ghee and sugar rewards a man being free 
from the clutches of sins, enshrine on an 
aircraft in company of divine damsels in 
VSyuloka and having satiated there, the 
next departure in Visnudhama. Now, listen 
to the reward for lighting lamp with ghee or 
oil for god. Having been relieved from the 
evil marsh, radiation equal to a thousand 




124 


NARASIMHA PURAl^AM 


suns he bears and goes to Visnuloka by an 
aircraft all glittering. A reward for a 
oblation duly prepared with October bom 
rice, mixed with ghee and sugar, lapasi 
(liquid food) of barley and khira (sweet 
liquid food made from milk) for Nrsirhha, 
ensures for the offerer enjoyments of great 
pleasures in Visnuloka for years equal to 
the grains of rice present in such a oblation. 
The offering related to Visnu satiates all 
gods and they endow peace, wealth and 
sound health to the worshipper. 


■^uii 'j’llrH'itlI? 11 

irrnr 

4)Hnfa ^ fqwD; qPc;! TT:I 

gim: cRTq^MqHII^^II 

4lcqqM'lm<H|u1:i 

«[fT|qfuifq^|u( 

wrf?!; 

^airRlPM fqTMnil 

fqWlcH)c*,MqHHlfd ^oqnr4t5i41tlJ|uj:ll^^|| 


O Prince, listen to the rewards for 
Pradaksina (moving round the icon or 
temple) of god Visnu. Such a devotee 
attains to the fruit as if he has visited all 
nooks and corners of the earth and resides 
in Vaikuntha Dhama. Namaskara (salute) 
once even ensures the fruit of Dharma, 
Artha, Kama and Moksa. One who offers 


psalm with japa and hymn duly reciting 
before the icon of Madhusudana, makes 
him scot-fee from the evils and honoured in 
Visnuloka. The man singing, playing 
musical instruments and arranging drama 
on Visnu and blows conch-shell, drums etc., 
in the temple, definitely attains to the 
pleasure of living in Visnuloka. When all 
this is arranged on any festival, it 
particularly fulfils the desires of the devotee 
and on death moves from one heaven to 
another by an aircraft in company of divine- 
damsels expert in music. Finally, he attains 
a high place in Visnuloka. A reward for 
offering a flag marked with Garuda to Vis 
nu also enables a man to ride on well- 
flagged and adorned with the divine 
damsels at the time of his departure to Vis 
nuloka. 

n9 Cs 

^ ttt MqRcPTf fgmit; chfq^ 

smisqtmarr^ ^ 

PTdtWFM II 

TTflii 

ww cT wt ^ W?T: 1 i-js11 

^9 

O the great kings, a reward for offering 
divine garlands, keyura, earring and crown 
etc., apparels and ornaments is to become 
free from the sins, to wear all kinds of 
ornaments and to reside in Indraloka for the 
regime of fourteen Indras (viz., for a 
complete kalpa). A reward for donation of a 
Kapila cow for god and offering of her milk 



CHAPTER 34 


125 


deserves honour for a man in Visnuloka and 
his forefathers Pitara enjoy the pleasure of 
living on a white island. O king, these is no 
scope for doubt on the attainment of heaven 
and emancipation for a man who worships 
god Visnu in the form of Nrsirhha. 

irr^ irfrtRra^i 

;t Uhn?T ^ gr ri^ 

SPTTffeJfmrft ^ ^ ^TggsT ^1 

qrfw wrrszr 

w HT^ ^ I 

5 aiPMfd ? II 

(^tdlMy^niui y.iiMmirmV’ci %i 
yuuiuisuld ^ qftRrpq 'hf^iiHou 

O king, the place where god Nrsirhha is 
worshipped, the ailments, famine and fear 
of king and thief is removed from there 
forever. The method as aforesaid ensures 
the divine pleasures for the mane on earth 
and he attains emancipation on the death i.e. 
seldom tied with the cycle of birth and 
death. The village with temple of Nrsimhas 
temple is duly worshipped and offering with 
seasmum and ghee is performed, does not 
suffer from famine, drought, epidemics and 
immolation, fir-eruption etc. Where one 
lakh offering (Homa) is performed by the 
head of village in course of worship of 
Nrsiihha, the epidemics do not thunder 
there and the village people live their full 
life (i.e. do not die premature death due to 
epidemics). Hence, worship at the temple of 
Nrsiiiiha should be properly performed. 


V r «=h ' n^H^ ^ T^lfeTTI 

T<rw^iiyT(d:l 

TrgTTterf rTR^R:! 

^ «Tf3PT ^ ITW HuwRrim^ii 
hSfTI 

wnszT 5 

ii,dmrc(iiicdli)d ^ii^ireS-i ^immi 
^ i|f^ cjiotsf^ ucJ^ufdH^I 
3TFr: M<ci< Hiiw m ^ 11 

-prt: gjf fjRTfi 

qdJ4UJlfl)l 

(TfJT «is<kU|; fejiT;I 

tRt fifainiydcf)4rqiim(iii 

TR) fqviifiid 

O king, one crore homa should also be 
performed in the temple of god Sankara 
through the learned Brahmins and decent 
food as also daksina (donation) should be 
given to them. The disturbance caused by 
sudden mis-happenings and apprehension of 
death is removed under the grace of 
Nrsirhha from that area. Homa and feeding 
of Brahmins are so viable that these efface 
the effect of nightmares and sufferings 
caused by the stars. One lakh homa for 
Nrsiihha should be performed with the 
beginning of every Uttarayana and Daks 
innayana, on the day when day and night 
have equal hours (Vis'uvakala) or lunar or 
sun eclipse. It removes all disturbances 
from that area. O king, there are numerous 
rewards from the worship of god Nrsirhha. 
Do the worship of god Nrsiihha if you want 
to have emancipation. No deed is so viable 
for providing with heaven and 



126 


emancipation. The worship of god Nrsiihha 
is easy to perform for the king but the 
people living in the forest at least get the 
leaves and flowers free of cost. Water is 
also available abundantly in rivers and 
ponds. God Nrsirhha too is equal towards 
all. The only requirement is that one should 
concentrate on the deed as it is the only 
means of worship. So far as emancipation is 
concerned, it lies in god himself 

1% ^11^oil 


farfirtfiT ^f^vil5S'n^:ii^')<ii 


Markandeya said- Thus, I have 
described the method of Nrsiinhas worship 
in pursuance of the instruction given by 
Bhrgu. Do worship of god Visnu daily and 
say, what should I tell you more. 


Thus, the end of chapter thirtyforth on 
description Sahasranika and worship of Visnu in 
Nrsiihha Purana. 




126 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 35 

Method of performing a lakh and crore 
Homas and their rewards 

■gfHVIl'iH % HiTiiiPd tll^ll 

The king said- Hurrah, you have 
highlighted the reward as a result of 


worship of god Sri Visnu. O great hermit, 
those persons are in Mohanidra (dormancy 
due to illusion) who do not worship god Vis 
nu. I have heard the orderly way for the 
worship of god Nrsirhha under your kind 
grace. I will not worship him with keen 
devotion. Please, tell me now the awards for 
offering lakh and crore times. 

^ vflddit ^wit ^:i 
cwadmm vfiHciPRii,ifM ^ii^ii 

Markandeya said- O king, the same 
topic was raised earlier by Brhaspati 
(Jupiter) before the hermit Saunaka. I am 
going to tell the same whatever hermit 
Saunaka told Brhaspati. Brhaspati asked 
Saunaka while he was in a good mood. 

TH^ii-iill 

wi ^ gsw fg^inri 

Brhaspati said- O crown of Brahmins, 
tell me about the suitable land for doing 
lakh and crore homa and its method also. 

^jwr irrsaT fgrfirtfi 

Markandeya said- O king, on such 
enquiry from Brhaspati, Saunaka began to 
describe the method of doing a lakh homa. 

'Scurj 

iras^lfM ^isncivt ^ dld^tlfBclll^ll 

Saunaka said- O the priest of gods. 



CHAPTER 35 


127 


listen to me while I am going to tell you the 
suitable and wide land for one lakh homa 
and the particular method for making it 
sacred. The characteristics of the suitable 
land of offering are as under - 

tslpfcetl ^ VllsiitTli f^lVlMdrllill 

Uuiui c(i§hN ^ II 

T^idkcblui gnr^i 

3^fT ^f^TcRIHII^oll 

TidiJjHhid f dfedi ^dt^fdcn'ifi 

The land well treated, plain and smooth 
(in case, all these components are not 
found) the former is the best if all 
characteristics are not present (viz. the plain 
land is better than smooth and the treated 
land is much better than the plain). Such 
land should be dug deep up to waist deep 
and Pancagavya as also water from the 
Ganges should be sprinkled thereupon. The 
outer surface of that pit (kunda) should be 
smeared with cowdung for the purpose of 
sanctity. The pit so excavated should be in 
the measurement of one hand square (i.e. 
equal length and width). The measurement 
should be taken on a thread and it should be 
exactly in square. On the upside of that pit, 
a protruded round bearing height of 4 
fingers fully circled by a thread (Mekhala) 
should be formed. It should be of equal size 
all around. 

sll^UTPf 

atiq-dildyi-Mlii WTHt ^7)^:1 
?I^Tj4?ld *4rwia ^ Qi'dltT^I:ll^^ll 

The Yakamana (client) should then 
invite in the prescribed manner, the 


Brahmins duly learned in the Vedas and 
exclusively dedicated to that profession. 
The client as well as Brahmins should 
observe Brahmacarya (keeping oneself 
away from cohabitation) for three nights. 


qiq-il)q^ ^^1 

^ y^dcIHTR; ■RrtTT7psra^grqsnf^:ii^?ii 
Pltl^KI: I 

cblviHimUHtlHI ^chlilRTR: ^ill^lfll 

^iMRlldtayf qHIdPd 

fdSll^d fht I1 r4c(I 

rT fll^^ll 

Sjt Mldsdl 3rS!tRl^fdH.l 
WI^IcbKlPddi f«T:II^V9|| 
tmiT C^4ri%: 3ff?rfecTTI 
c(gtTT (TFrr Rtv-diftaOTi ^:ii^(iii 



The client should do japa of Gayatri for 
ten thousand times by observing fast for a 
day and night. (On the first day of offering) 
the Brahmins should also put on tidy and 
white clothes after a bath. They should wear 
garlands of flowers, sprinkle fragrance on 
body, make ready the mind for purity and 
away from the worldly issues and take a 
seat on the dsana made of kusa grass 
without taking eatables. They should then 
begin with offering in all attentive state of 
mind. The land should be lined through 
kusas as per the method of Grhyasutra and 
watered. Then the fire should be inserted. 
The oblation then should be introduced 
therein. The two oblations (homa) i.e., 
Adhara and Ajyabhaga should be first 
offered. The learned man should offer the 
oblation made of barley, rice, seasmum and 
ghee mixed there with the recitation of the 



128 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


Gayatrl hymn and blutter Svaha while 
inserting the same into fire. The mother of 
Gayatrl rhyme and Brahma (Veda) is 
honoured in the form of Yoni. Savita is its 


god and Vis'vamitra is hermit (Rsi) (thus, 
viniyoga of Gayatrl has been told). 


31^ gr griiI 


3raiRiT:ll?o|| 




■RRTR ^%tlTT 

T rTcT: ^1 



5 oUlliim ■^df^VIMd:IR?ll 


f 3TW g'l 

WW ^ RimFr Tl# '-jRMdW ^1 


After the offering performed through the 
single Gayatrl hymn, Gayatro hymn with 
three time recital of Bhurbhurvaha Svaha 
should be exercised with offering only 
seasmum. The offering of seasmum should 
be continued unless the number of offering 
is reached to one lakh or one crore as 
resolved. The client should offer food to the 
orphans and poor people till the offering is 
continued. On the completion of the 
offering, proper donation (Daksina) should 
be given to the Brahmins (Rtvija) without 
being miserly and with obeisance. The pot 
(Santi-kalas'a) installed at the time of 
offering should then be taken and the water 
should be sprinkled on all people living in 
that villagj. It should be taken care that the 
people suffering from ailments are to be 
preferred. O learned prince, such 
performance of offering renders peace and 


shatters the hurdles and pains from the 
village, town, district and the nation as a 
whole. 


rRtfh dtiuii 




Markandeya said- O king, I have thus 
told you the method of one lakh homa 
(offering) as it was told by the hermit 
Saunaka. It spreads peace and wisdom 
throughout the nation. In case, the offering 
so discussed is performed by Brahmins in 
their homes, village, town and other places 
in the prescribed manner as described here 
in above, the people, cows and the king 
including the subjects and the bureaucrats 
can avail of the pleasure of peace. 

Thus, the end of chapter thirtyfifth on 
description Laksahoma in Nrsiihha Purana. 



128 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 36 


Story pertaining to the incarnation of god 
aratiUR? ^ rjfenr:! 

Markandeya said- O king, I will now 
describe the incarnations of god Visnu, all 
holy and removing the evils. Please, listen 
to it. 




CHAPTER 36 


129 


g ftsR ^ R^iciRiiR II 
^qsrr eh^^ul <C\I^U| (qay^i 1R[Tt ^:l 
cTSIT ^cTT c(Ki^(J| Hgirmni^ II 
Piy^ 31Mt ^JISJT 95mH:l 

q-fl4)4l tIfT?g;l|-){|| 
sm r^iUilchrviJ^RclciVlHI^: Wl 
qTf%T ^ 3nfq[^ ftsR ^limi 
W ^ ^ 

piriMII^II 

Ti^nir ^rgr ^ ^ tmott ^:i 

TmWcn^^ TT31^TT^ ^cl*u<icj,l:ll\91l 
^ 9<^<r^Ul ^d*loHlf<d ^1 
dcd'M^'JI TT^ miT ’TH ffr:ll<i II 

wgiwT?fTr ■^Tfs^:! 

3nT^ w ^ ^T^FTirraw: k^:ii'?ii 
RMIWW Pm r ?dd l:l 

ewy<4|«l^l{^||^0|| 

I will describe how god Visnu was 
incarnated as a fish, how he brought back 
the Vedas (immersed into the ocean of great 
devastation) and gave them to Brahma and 
how he killed the monsters namely, Madhu 
and Kaitabha. Again, how he was 
incarnated as a tortoise and picked up the 
mountain of Mandaracala. How he then 
incarnated as a pig (Varaha) and picked up 
this entire earth like a ball in his jaws? How 
he then killed the giant, chivalrous and 
mighty Hiranyaksa, the son of Diti. How 
that same god then incarnated as Nrsirhha 
and killed Hiranyakasipu, an enemy of 
gods. Again how he became Brahma and 
tied the king Bali with the promissory 
estopel and how he again enthroned Indra 
as the king of gods. Again how he appeared 
as Sr! Rama and killed Ravana with his 
demonic culture as a whole. 


As Parasurama he again appeared on the 
earth and destroyed the autocracy 
established by Ksatriya kings along with 
their dynasty as a whole. He in the form of 
Balabhadra, killed the Pralambha etc., 
monsters and killed Kamsa etc., enemy to 
gods and monsters during incarnation as 
god Sri Krsna. Similarly, how the god will 
appear as Budha in era of Kali and how at 
the time of the ending of the era, he will 
become Kalki and kill all Mlecchas. 

wgnr 

ymr^dicMi 

rnrlrzmR ^ fgfczi gri 


Mifg fgrort: M<Hcgciut(iinii 



H(ifg9?i5S!ng:ii^^ii 


0 king, the person who will listen the 
valours of everlasting god Visnu as 
described by me, he will attain to the 
supreme position of god himself after 
relieving himself from the bondage of evils. 

Thus, the end of chapter thirty-sixth on 
incarnation of Hari in Nrsirhha Purana. 



CHAPTER 36 


129 


CHAPTER 37 

Incarnation of Matsya and killing of Madhu 
and Kaitabha demons 

3 WT ^ «r^ WRcf: 11 ^ 11 

5t[T i 

RMMIdrIRII 
3M cTPt «^idW I 



130 


NARASIMHA PURAIVAM 


^Tifw)& ^31^ wfwi; ^s«r3nwim ii 


Markandeya said- There are several 
names of god Acyuta. Hence, it is 
impossible to highlight them all. I will 
therefore, tell you in brief It is a well 
propagated fact that the creator of this 
universe had resorted to the Yoganidra and 
sleeping on the body of Sesanaga known as 
Ananta. At that time a great devastation had 
gobbled up everything and there was water 
everywhere. After the passage of certain 
time, two drops of perspiration emerged 
from the ear region of that god and dropped 
down into the water. These drops had 
originated two demons namely, Madhu and 
Kaitabha. They were most powerful, 
formidable with their limbs, gallant and 
gigantic. O king in that intervening time, a 
great lotus got its root from the navel region 
of that sleeping god. That lotus had given 
birth to Brahma. 




sTgnftT 

•HRWidl 

s9 

cTrT: TTiPi; ^TR^its^raci; 

'cilfc^ri'wd TTSTT I 

^ ?I^IHl*rgdm^:l 





II 


O king, god Visnu suggested Brahma to 
create the universe of organisms. God 
Brahma accepted this suggestion and as he 
could prepare himself ready to involve in 
creation, the demons - Madhu and Kaitabha 
suddenly appeared before him. They 
snatched within seconds, the Vedas and 
scriptures i.e., main sources for creation 
from the hands of Brahma and brought 
them away. Having lost those keys to 
creation, god Brahma became nervous at 
once and began to think - "Oh, how can I do 
creation now? God gave me insurrections 
for this great cause but I have now become 
devoid of the science of creation? Oh, an 
acute adversity has now gripped me. 
"Brahma began wailing due to excessive 
pain and started recollection of the data as 
were in the Vedas. However, his effort met 
with failure which has further added fuel to 
the furnace of his agony. When no option 
was left with him, he began praying to god 
Puru§ottama in a systematic manner 
affirmed by the scriptures. 

Viii^ i mi ^:i 

ct)4uii (hsi*! ^R^lll^^ II 
i^snsRRT gT%iRT wiilwR:i 

■’jTdRclIlclia Ril^Me^T^ll^mi 
■R%rmt5ftT w if? >iHM4l5rg?i 
^ ^ TRPW: 11 ? ? 11 

Brahma prayed - I convey frequent 
salute to the treasure of the Veda, 
scriptures, science and the deeds and who 
has laid down the pranava (orh). Salute to 
the master of speech who holds all 
learnings. Salute to Paramesvara who is 
omniscient and beyond the imagination. O 



CHAPTER 37 


131 


great armed god, O Adhoksaja, you are in 
the form of offering and you have no 
physical feature. You too are Sama itself 
and always in the universal forms. Acyuta, 
you are omniscient and adorn in the form of 
knowledge in the heart of organisms. O god 
of the gods, please, enlighten me always. I 
convey you frequent salute. 

'Scjl'y 

f ^ tnfei 

fTR^T 

^ Rhlisai'tl 

IT ^ rttsfr.-i 

^ TFT I ^ o 11 

snji ifr:! 

^<7irT5iirin 

OT^FT 5I^J1 F15?9TrP*TTrFf^ ^1 
TT MHqlhPlilcIvi 7TtT:IR^II 

Markandeya said- In reply to the prayer 
so made by Brahma, god Visnu, with conch, 
gada, discus and lotus flower in his four 
hands said- "I will give you the supreme 
knowledge." God then began to think about 
the usurper of the science from Brahma and 
in what form he would have held the same? 
Finally, he turned him into the form of a 
gigantic fist, several yojana long with a 
wide body; when it could gather 
consciousness it was found to be Madhu 
and Kaitabha demons. Hari, then in the 
form of a fish entered into the womb of the 
sea where the waves began confronting due 
to the blow of his body. He then entered 
into the nether loka and saw Madhu and 


Kaitabha there. On having prayed by the 
hermits, god Visnu enchanted them and 
picked up the Vedas, the treasure of 
knowledge. He then came up and handed 
over the same to Brahma. On completion of 
this deed, god Visnu abandoned the 
projected form of a fish and again slept in 
the lap of Yoganidra. 

?RT: 

•o ^ >o ^ -o -o 

3IFIr5T f tSFIFt II 

3T^ TT f# arrat TTRlir inwi 

3TT^ %^?ITT5nrfnT ^ TrragtTI R 11 

TFIFt g^TIRmi 

TT? -q^Th^l 

3Hciq>5f^ WR 

Madhu and Kaitabha on awakening from 
the spell saw that the Vedas have gone. It 
caused them immense pain. They were 
annoyed and in course of their search, they 
saw god Visnu sleeping. Addressing Visnu 
they said- "This is the shrewd fellow, who 
enchanted us and returned the Vedas to 
Brahma. Now he sleeps like a sage here." 
Those pushed god Visnu to awake him from 
the sleep and said- "O shrewd, both of us 
have come to fight you. Hence, satisfy us in 
the fight. Get up and struggle with us." 

«RratT?nwjt ^tTtrFTI 
cT^ ^I'lcwr eft 

^lyVdHyl^ iTrai^:i 

O king, having heard their desire, god 
Visnu took his Sarahga bow an adjusted the 
string on the same. He blew the conch-shell 
and stretched the string of his bow so 
fiercely that the sound coming out from it 



132 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


had filled the ether, all direetions and sub¬ 
directions with noise. 

RfftM ?fw 

'3^ dl^i mIti;! 

(TTf% Vit^ifui f?R=WWII? ?ll 

cfl' ^sgcd ^ dHcft 

ilMld gg: wrqgr^ g38Rrii^?ii 

O king, those great chivalrous and fierce 
Madhu and Kaitabha also had stretched the 
string of their bows and began to fight 
against god Visnu. A fierce battle started 
and both parties attacked on each other with 
the weapons which they had. God Visnu 
had shattered and broken into pieces all 
weapons and implements blown from the 
demons side. The intoxicated demons 
fought very long and lastly were killed by 
the sharp arrows shot from the Sarhga bow 
of lord Visnu. O king, god Visnu then made 
this earth by using their Meda (hide, 
marrow and blood). The earth, therefore, is 
also known as Medini. 


-mi: 




fgam fgsg-:! 

aiTOim «TjTT 

^fllsg 4it<i TRT I ^ ^ 11 


O king, Prajapati Brahma thus, on return 
of the Vedas through god Visnu performed 
the deed of creation. The person who 
resides' in Candraloka on his death and 
thereafter becomes a Brahmin known to 
Vedas in this earth again, if he listens to this 
story based on the incarnation of god. O the 
ruler of earth, always remember god Vi§nu 
who incarnated himself in the form of a 
giant fish, not lesser shape than a mountain 
and worshipped by all earthly beings. 

Thus, the end of chapter thirty-seventh on 
incarnation of Matsya in Nrsiriiha Purana. 

*** 


■RSHft^TtSEqrg; 11 ^ \911 



132 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 38 


Incarnation of god Visnu as tortoise, 
churning of ocean and Visnu’s form of 
enchanting damsel (MohinI) 

JTT 

^c(dlh'j|i:li'^II 

Markandeya said- In the ancient period, 
all gods badly defeated by the demons at the 
advent of a fierce war between them, 
sheltered themselves under god Visnu, the 
husband of LaksmI (the daughter of ocean). 
On visit there, all gods including Brahma 
stood with clasped hands before god and 
began to pray to him reciting the following 
hymns - 

TraFmim II 

^ ^:ll'(j|| 



CHAPTER 38 


133 


^ ^ I 

% -^r ^ *^uii<ii< ^ ^:imn 

The gods said- Salute the Paramesvara, 
holder of Sarhga bow, the master of all 
words and whose navel has originated the 
lotus flower. Frequent salute is conveyed to 
Kesava, the killer of Madhu and Kaitabha 
and who is in the form of all gods and the 
entire universe. O merciful god, all of us 
have now been badly defeated by the most 
mighty demons. So, please tell us of any 
positive and competent measure for victory. 
We salute you. 

ffw Tgclt rTcH' 


Markandeya said- On the prayer so 
made by the gods, god Janardana appeared 
before them and said- 


ttST ■^TT: '^1^ c;m^:I 

3r^nHjTa5?l‘ 

TI%1T 


ddlRIclcld'aTHI til'll I 
^Ud'^qi 

tPTt f? ^ Ti?FT;ll^^ll 


The Lord said- O gods, do a treaty with 
all demons at the sea-shore. Make the 
churning rod (Mathani) of Mandaracala 
mountain and make a cord of the serpent 
Vasuki. Collect all medicines and drop 
them into the sea. Having done all this, start 


churning the sea. I will also assist you all in 
that project. Nectar will come out as a result 
of the churning, which will be sipped by the 
gods and they regain the immense power to 
fight and defeat the demons. O gods, you all 
including Indra will attain splendour, 
chivalry and full of courage as a result of 
sipping that nectar. You will then 
undoubtedly conquer the demons. 

Ji<j|*<iiuri{ : 11 ^ 911 

#tTaEf^ ^fTrlV^cJ ^JTTrrnn 
3t^n3T ^gf^: 

■■H4^ciQdi«jk TctghFiri: 11 I 

The gods again saluted the god and 
returned to the place suggested by him. 
They made a treaty with the demons and 
began to do the needful for the churning of 
the sea. Bali, the demon king picked up the 
Mandaracala mountain alone and threw it 
into the sea. The gods and demons then 
collected all kinds of medicines and 
dropped the same into the sea. Vasuki, the 
serpent also came there in compliance with 
the order of god Visnu. God Visnu himself 
came there in order to safeguard the interest 
of the gods. 

m RRmitl m: I 

'^rcgr ^ gT^fgrq^i 
ggt RfgpRcKi ^ ■dt^tnjdtfii^van 
f gto RT THsRFr g giriifii <hciiw4ii 



134 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


TT^ ^ TlSRra^ 3rf^ ’Ell 

arrsn^ Ti^ t iw ?ft: 11 ^ 11 

^TR^TH Rtyf^lV^iy ft^Ml^oll 

irf^ ^ Rf^c^-T: 

Eiafi^ ^wrm et ^ ^iRT^:i 
cRR^ ^gTEIT ^ 55 ^ RTTO: 
ilMttickill ^RRRT: ■RTT^TT:I 

All gods and demons then came to god 
Visnu amicably and gathered at the coast of 
KsTrasagara. O king, the project of sea 
churning with Mandaracala as the rod and 
Vasuki as a cord started in full swing. God 
Visnu appointed the demons at hood side 
and the gods at the tail side of the serpent 
Vasuki. As there was no base in the bottom, 
the Mandaracala immersed into the water. 
Having seen the mountain so drowned, the 
all philanthropic god Visnu, turned him into 
a tortoise and lifted up the Mandaracala to 
facilitate the project of churning. With 
another form of Kesava, he pressed the 
mountain from the top to down and his one 
more form as Janardana with the gods kept 
busy in pull. Thus, the project of churning 
got accelerated. 

tr TTHT '9T9jfni?hf 11 11 

HitNuii^in ^ w'i<H4)U6^trridciiqi 
iTfrad^ET ?fT'?ETrE^:?raT: p:iRmi 

■pthTniR^II 

TTdSlJiiRlfellcT^ 3rtFT: tt tT?lHT:l 
U'SctUlfe infeRT; ^1ttl|fRI<flRV9|| 


tr f^rrar art wfer*' 

Tran; '^n ■r(«l)cM^Mrilw441‘lPc|dld^l R 11 

O king, Kalakuta poison very first 
appeared as result of churning. All serpents 
shared that poison proportionately. The 
residual portion was drunk by god Sankara 
under the instruction of god Visnu. A blue 
spot it had made on the throat of god 
Sankara and he got a new name Nllakahtha. 
It was heard that Airavata elephant and 
Uccaisrava horse were originated as a result 
of the second churning. The third churning 
originated the divine damsel UrvasT and the 
fourth originated the great tree Parijata; the 
fifth time, the moon originated. O king that 
moon is held by god Siva on his forehead 
the same way as a woman puts Bind! 
(Svastika) on her forehead. Similarly, a 
number of divine genrs, ornaments and 
many thousand Gandharvas appeared from 
the churning of Ks'rlasagara. All gods and 
monsters were pleased to see all these 
surprising things coming out from the sea. 

cRTI '^EIT; oII 

El fti ^tlAlidl 

JgrafTrVdltlcll^lH c||R*V^mt lcTT:ll^ ^ll 
ttETT rmmi 

The clouds then, complying with the 
order of god Visnu, started drizzling a 
pleasant breeze started blowing (it has 
provided the gods extreme vigour). A 
number of monsters were dead due to the 
poisonous breathing of the serpent Vasuki 
and the remaining lost both their valour and 
splendour. 



CHAPTER38 


135 


TTjT^ f^: ■R^: ^rl^yil 

ddw)«if^<l: TTrar Rcy^T<ri?rdll I? ^ 11 

^Rdi^;T2lFr 3fraT dW: c*)MHici4|iI 

Subsequently, Sri LaksmI, with lotus in 
her hands appeared from the sea. O king, 
she was illuminating all directions with her 
splendour. O killer of enemies, she took a 
holy bath, smeared divine scent on body 
and that lotus dwelling LaksmI stood for a 
moment with fascinating ornaments on the 
side of gods. Then he enshrined herself 
within the heart of god Visnu. 

rRTTS'ptJZ ^ ^<!yc(ld Rr^;ll^mi 

y-d’dR: Tiyvi'tyi dd: ■^TT 

trdi: Ram vjRc^dd i f: %d r t^ 5^T5Ffqrii^^ii 
dtigT5T?ddd ^ ^ ^ 51iq4yi^tslifl 
dd: tdrdsUU^tlRuJJ^di^dl'y ^ll^^ll 
dilrHM TT^dT^rrrrdddTI 

ddt ddPT ^TTraiT Iffdli^dll 

fdciHsvitt d dt irfld: I 

^ 5 tfH: WTW WTII^<?II 
dim dtfIdT ^IRHRtl+dd dt^nnd;i 
q'l^Rlrdl d dl^c(MH<Hddld^ll>Io|| 

3T^ d Hniqid ?R:I 

ddlirdi d ddt ^ ^d^ldTOldd:ll'8^ll 
qdcuul hgididi TW 'jrJ^TddT5'^TTT,l 
Tdtfd tl'jyiRl 
TTa% diRtd TFd^ Sll^'qtdt 
<*qitsd: fair ?juddi dddnrftrii'ii? II 

O king, god Dhanvantari, with a nectar 
pot in his hand then appeared from the Ks 


Irasagara. The gods were pleased at his 
appearance. However, the monsters 
aggrieved thinking that they have been 
abandoned by LaksmI. They suddenly took 
the nectar pot and moved from there 
voluntarily. O king, god Visnu then 
appeared in the form of a beautiful woman 
in order to safeguard the interests of the 
gods. That woman then moved towards the 
monsters. The demons were enchanted to 
see such a beautiful woman. They 
immediately became the prey of sensuality 
and in a state of exorbitant passion, they 
kept the nectar pot on the ground. God Vis 
nu by his beautiful trick, brought back the 
nectar for the gods by enchanting the 
monsters. They sipped the nectar, became 
powerful enough to win the monsters, 
waged the war and defeated them. O king, I 
have now completed the story pertaining to 
the incarnation of Kurma, It provides 
excellent results to both the persons reciting 
and the listeners. 

HKiqulHI(4^dch4<*lRu||| 

RdflchHHi W %TR 

■^5^ -qt mctnud gi'ifSrrqii'«'*5ii 



<*4Mi^'itlc)i^iui«nrviiiiiiiu: 11^ 11 

I have thus described the episode 
pertaining to god Visnu's appearing as 
Kurma with a view to safeguard the 
interests of the gods as a whole. Narayana is 
full of excellent deeds. 

Thus, the end of chapter thirty-eighth on 
incarnation of Kurma in Nrsimha Purana. 

*** 




136 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 39 

Incarnation of Varaha, Killing of 
Hiranyak§a 

HIc|5u^41 3^ 

3TrT:TTt 3115^ Ttrfinn 

^ wflaw: 

Markandeya said- O king, I will 
henceafter describe the sacred incarnation 
of god Visnu as Varaha. Listen to it 
attentively. 

jlHIcWitRsiH oJlTW fdEa--gU!Mirtt WTIRII 
gift' gift' 

TTW fgwjwd: fft gftgftgiTTif^ ^ii^ii 

Tift g?rWTt ^J|Alfd:ll>JII 

ftg: gft tigRTtift; g?mtftft g; fggi 
ftwTT^ ?ft tFuft g^^gniTT^Mimi 
tngift ftgtt-^rgl tT:i 

■gftaRriPTraTTTg grft ^ g ggftii^ii 

O Sattama, only water is seen 
everywhere in all the three worlds, when the 
great devastation (Pralaya) enters on the 
expiry of Brahma's day. O great king, god 
Visnu makes oblation to all the creatures till 
then in the three-worlds and sleeps on the 
one thousand hoods of the serpent (i.e. Ses 
anaga) as long as the thousand era lasting 
night within that immense quantum of the 
water. We have heard that in the ancient 
time, a gigantic demon had taken birth from 
the womb of Diti, the wife of hermit 
Kasyapa. He was mighty and full of valour. 
He lived in the nether world. He attacked 
the gods and snatched their capital. He 


always used to disturb the people doing 
offering (yajna) on the earth. 

3q8r ftsngr tggf g^gfti gggr: i 
^ ^ gft ^ civrtVriifM gfgtiiftiigii 
^ gigr ftrugi^: g;g^ f wun 

gKuiiviftgwi ftigr ■^r g?T^:ii(iii 

gtw^ 5 TRigrraft 

ftRT^TgrgT'g^jfrgglgfg^vi HtidHH,ii'?ii 

That demon once thought - "The people 
living on earth will perform offering for 
gods and it will enhance the splendour, 
energy and the power of the gods." The 
power of holding the earth in order to 
flourish the creation as established by god 
Brahma, was therefore, subjugated by that 
demon and took it beneath the water i.e. in 
the nether world. Having lost the holding 
power (Dharana sakti), this earth also got 
immersed into the water. 

ftjgg'^rft ■ggfgrr gg ftsrgr ■gftftft 

^icc(i ■gpR 'TOiggtgft hdiifi i ^o 11 
gggg ^ gm? ggTTfwg;i 
g^gft gg^ fgftg^ ggftgiinn 
ogsfn^ Y^g^ qgftgi 

gfeftggft ftst gHtroft: ^gggi 
ubdvichid giVK'4dHb^ffii^?ii 

gggg g^ ^ogggggiraggi 
g^tggRT^ g ■sgtgrgi^^ggnT i 
fjtgr g gm? ^graft:! 

When Sri Hari awakened on expiry of 
the Yogaindra (a sleep under yoga), he did 
not see the earth and just then by virtue of 
his great intuition, he knew that it was gone 
to the nether world. O great king, he then 



CHAPTER 40 


137 


disguised himself in a divine gigantic form 
as a Varaha (pig) whose feet were the four 
Vedas. His jaw was as vast as the Yupa, 
usually used for fastening the animals. His 
mouth was of the same shape as that of a 
pig. His face was formidable and a large 
chest, large arms, the tongue was of fire and 
struck (struva) was the hood. His eyes were 
as large as the sun and the moon, ears were 
the great deeds like digging the well and 
performing the offerings i.e. Ista Dharma 
and his voice was of Sama. Pragvamsa (the 
house of client) was the body, oblation was 
his nose and his hair were the asana of kusa 
grass. Thus, his whole body was in the form 
of the Vedas itself. His large ayala were the 
holy psalm of the Vedas. The constellations 
and stars were his hands and the rolling 
waves of that Pralaya (devastation) were his 
garments. 




Tnsjpzr ii4iTrf ygfrf i 11 

ItUNRI ficirak ^ 

WWW ^ ’eran WA 


fgWT: ^ ^Ef^l 

n3 Cs O Nd 

^ 11 ? 11 


O great king, after turning into the form 
of so gigantic a pig, god Visnu entered into 
the nether world. The Yogis including 
Sanaka etc., were offering the holy psalms 
in his praise. He there killed Hiranyaksa and 
picked up the whole earth on the fore 
portion of his jaws. Thus, he came up from 
the nether world and established the earth in 


its usual place. All the gods praised him for 
such philanthropic deeds. He then installed 
the mountains in their usual places and 
abandoned the form of a pig in the holy 
place of Kokamukha in the interests of the 
Vaisnavas. That territory of Varaha is the 
best and mystic place. He then turned 
himself into the form of Brahma and 
created this universe as a whole. Thus, god 
Visnu provided protection to his devotees 
by incarnating himself in all ages. He 
himself then turns into the form of Rudra 
and withdraws the universe when the 
appropriate time requires for the same. 



gwifw -RTW: I 

TITT R R o 11 

The man who listens to this episode of 
god Visnu, who is beyond the conscience 
rendered by the Vedas gets an extreme 
concentration on him and thus, is absolved 
from all sins. Finally, he attains to that god 
Hari. 


Thus, the end of chapter thirty-ninth on 
incarnation of Varaha in Nrsiriiha Purana. 



CHAPTER 40 


137 


CHAPTER 40 

Incarnation of Nrsirhha, accomplishments 
of Hiranyaksipu and Praise of gods 

mm 4Kr^ w «<4i^iro f3wtsr^ii'?ii 

Markandeya said- O king, I have thus 
disclosed the episode relating to the 
incarnation of god Visnu in the form of 




138 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


Varaha (pig). I will now highlight his 
incarnation as Nrsirhha. Please, listen to it 
attentively. 

I ^ I 

«r?rT t w 

gt OR^ tc^ ^11 ? 11 

■$c^cw) wwr f^<Q<jchf^ig: ^1 
39rrEr c;q^i ^r^rrot 

In the long-long past, Hiranyakasipu, the 
son of Diti, became a mighty man. He 
performed penance as long as many 
thousand years without consumption of 
food of any kind. Having been pleased with 
the penance so strictly observed, god 
Brahma said to that monster - O the king of 
monster dynasty, ask for anything that 
pleases you. The monster at first bowed his 
head before god Brahma with sheer 
reverence and then said. 

^ ■SfftTr WRIRI 

7 w ^nfttr 1 1 wfipTTi 

^ ^ ^1^ giMiuV t wt^ii^ii 

T WT T ^ ITR^: I 

•o Cn s3 

T T T TT^: I I'a 11 



^ ^ t5RnfOTTWl.l 

Hiranyakasipu said- O Brahma, if you 
really are ready to give me favours, please, 
give all that I now solicit. The cause for my 


death should not be the thing diy, wet, the 
water, the fire, the wood, the insect or 
reptile, the stone, the air, the weapon 
including the javelin, the mountain, the 
men, the gods, the monster, the gandharva 
or the demon, the kinnaras, the demi-gods, 
the vidyadharas, the snakes, the monkey 
including all other animals and it should not 
be through Durga etc., Matrganas. My death 
should neither occur inside house nor 
outside. Nor should it be during the day or 
at the night and even more, altogether the 
means for the death generated by you 
should not be the cause for my death. O 
graeious god, I ask the same from you. 

Rlc£u^tl sgTcT 
WT ^ W infill II 

Aril'S, UTRl^^tnri I ^ ^11 

CRT ^ tfW cHT: ficT^I 
rgrtllSci W ^ ^ t^ll^^ll 

W ^ cTW^felct ^SH^I 

■RtsfiT Hffitettl t^TT c|H'mT,«IHctji5d:ll?'*{|| 
tl'II'f ■rI fijicqi xiTyMiqqi^^^l 
:[r35T 1^4 ^ 4t4vifcWR*tf^dH^II?mi 

Markandeya said- O king, god Brahma 
in reply to Hiranyakasipu; said, O the king 
of monsters, as I am under promise, I render 
such a wish to be fulfilled in spite of its 
being most rare. I have seldom given yet 
such a rare boon to any of my devotees. I 
appreciate your severe penance. O the king 
of monsters, may all be true whatever you 
wished. You should now go back to your 
realm and enjoy the pleasure of this boon. 



CHAPTER 40 


139 


With these words, god Brahma returned to 
his holy abode. The monster by acquiring 
that mysterious boon, started abusing his 
powers. He fought against the gods and 
dethroned them. He then captured the 
throne of heaven himself and started 
enjoying all luxuries there. 

^ fcn 

Qtuqchf^lM: tTSIT;I 
3Tl^ diced 

y^nl^ie^ciiei ^c^eKKitmfri; 3raT:ll^qil 

tnfe ^ qjiqHifq*4uiii 

cTT^cT Hdlwyt 

^ fshdUlul^ W<W<H.I 

3iy4ycki i^^TOtptiroii 

«Uc^f3Hdirddl:l 

f^tudcfeiviMlw fgRm T! jfdMTiH' iR?ii 
^HlgggiRui: ^ gghng t:i 

O king, all gods under threat of that 
barbarous monster, started strolling on the 
earth after leaving their respective positions 
in heaven. Among them were Indra, Rudra 
and all hermits. They were in disguise of 
men. Having established his command on 
the three-worlds, Hiranyakasipu called a 
general meeting of his entire subjects and 
declared that he is the only king of the 
three-worlds and they should immediately 
abandon all activities of worship made for 
the gods including offering, donations and 
arranging the holy yajnas. He commanded 
them to worship him only and alone instead 


of the gods. Owing to the intimidation, the 
subjects started compliance with the order 
passed by that monster. The modus- 
operandi so made under vagary of fear, 
speedily gripped all men and gods 
committing crimes and sins as well. Having 
ceased the worship of gods and likewise 
other holy deeds the graph of crime and 
offence spurted-up rapidly. After the lapse 
of a long passage of time, all gods including 
Indra asked lord Brhaspati - O the great 
hermit, let us know the exact time for the 
death of Hiranyakas'ipu coupled with the 
measures to be adopted for the same. 

TR giggifr IR ? 11 

3 ngt ^jumPir WfT; I 


grenitiRmi 

g 3 ^rrgpig f wri ^ ?igggi 

Rsictt g^gRfr Rpggr; i 


r^tug<*rviMhitvi vichHifn ^ir<:ii 


gg TTgggt gt ■n^jgqtfgTR^i 
^jRlgwiTTt git gfigt gg ^9Tg:iR<?ii 


-gT^gt grPTi ggfg ^ngig;i 
gf? ggFTi gglmg gfggrfgii^oii 


Lord Brhasapti said- O gods, I will tell 
you of the measures to regain your 
respective position as before in heaven. 
Listen to me attentively. The power which 
this great monster had acquired through 
penance has now near the end. The agony 
that he possesses on the death of his brother 



140 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


Hiranyaksa has made him mad and his 
discretion has now lost its sanity. 
Remember that there is no more powerful 
enemy than agony and the sense of 
retaliation that arises thereafter. I am 
looking for the day of death nearer to 
Hiranyakasipu. A man can tolerate the 
burns and the wounds on the body being 
these external but he cannot tolerate the 
pricks of agony. As I have gathered the 
opinion of several learned hermits, the 
majority affirms the fact that he will die 
shortly. The omens reflected by nature and 
judged by me also further affirm that the 
gods shall shortly regain their position in 
heaven. I therefore, suggest to you to move 
at the northern coast of Ksirasagara where 
god Visnu is in snoring sleep. Do pray to 
that god and get explained the exact 
measure for the killing of that monster. 

^r4jcwiRl4 Tii^ytferqvjrfar^i 
iTtrOT Vim ^ ^ii 

^ hA grni ^ 
cfcitfinsti Rci1ch«:ii^i?ii 

34^5^^ jarful Wtl: WRT: MdRta^ll^lill 

war 

3ttdc(qm(%: ^u^WjhdRT 

The gods were pleased and started 
admiring lord Brhaspati with clapping. 
They immediately accepted the suggestion 
and made their mind to visit that place very 
surely. On an auspicious day, they called 
the hermits for Puny aha Vacana, 
Svastivacana and Mahgalapatha and moved 
towards the northern coast of Ksirasagara 
under the lead of god Mahadeva. On 
arriving there, they all stood at the shore 


and began reciting a number of psalms in 
praise of god Visnu. God Sankara also 
concentrated on Janardana and started 
reciting his holy names. 

3 c(|r( 

I 

4KI>M011 Tit gdlVH:ll^<ill 


gugtlcfiit^; ftroi; 

<4^3^ dtsH^y :! 
^FTtgjrrf Tressg^iii'koii 
iftf^ ^Mfd'Jct^VdCI 

tRRWr 


v.w'n^w 

3Tifira^T:l 

dilW: gJWSiRT; TtPlF II 

■Rsn# Vn^dwt^fl h’<KniRlidd:l 
ddiirtHy: VlWRIMWl ^^dMVT:ll'!{'«ll 
^dlctra'l TJ^raiR: 3ijfd<4iy; f^; 
dMldm') ^ WriJdiy; 

5PHT: 

^ HTIunji: yu^ct.^q:l|-!j^ll 

Riuuj^dl ?IpT: V(pl>TT:l 

?IRT: 'VllPd'Jit: TtTRtT?!^: ?Wj4jJd:ll'>{<iII 
Wlf^cF: Wtft •RW^^fjPT: RR;l 
tEtrar: R«i.ui?'Vl: II 



CHAPTER 40 


141 


chiHc;: ?Tt^: chlRc;: ^iirfS^TT?R:l 
^l-Hfef7d*rR:imo|| 

^ c(M6chl<Rc|Hl^l<<^HH'M:im ^11 

^ mm ^ l«fT fwmni 

^ fgsnt viivcidiij rTim^ii 

3f4-ri(en«d4iw ^regsg^l 

Sri Mahadeva recited - O Isvara, you are 
addressed with the holy names as Visnu, Jis 
nu, Vibhu, Deva, Yajnesa, Yajnapalaka, 
Prabhavisnu, Grasisnu, Lokatma, 
Lokapalaka, Kesava, Kesiha, Kalpa, 
Sarvakaranakarana, Karmakrta, 

Vamanadhisa, Vasudeva, Purustuta, 
Adikarta, Varaha, Madhava, Madhusudana, 
Narayana, Nara, Harhsa, Visnusena, 
Hutasena, Jyotisman, Dyutiman, Sriman, 
Ayusman, Purusottama, Vaikuntha, 

Pundarlkasa, Krsna, Surya, Surarcita, 
Narasirhha, Mahabhima, Vajradarhstra, 

Nakhayudha, Adi deva, Jagatkarta, Yoges'a, 
Garudadhvaja, Govinda, Gopati, Gopta, 
Bhupati, Bhuvanesvara, Padmanabha, Hrs 
Ikes'a, Vibhu, Damodara, Hari, Trivikrama, 

Trilokesa, Brahmesa, Pritivardhana, 

Vamana, Dustadamana, Govinda, 

Gopavallabha, Bhaktipriya, Acyuta, Satya, 
Satyakirti, Dhruva, Suci, Karunya, Karuna, 
Vyasa, Papaha, Santivardhana, SarhnyasI, 
Sastratattvajna, Mandaragiriketana, 

Badarinilaya, Santa, Tapasvl, 

Vaidyutaprabha, Bhutavasa, Guhavasa, 
Srinivasa, Sriyahpati, Tapovasa, Dama, 
Vasa, Satyavasa, Sanatana purusa, Puskala, 
Punya, Puskaraksa, Mahesvara, Purna, 
Purti, Puranjna, Punyajna, Punyavarddhana, 
Sahkhi, Cakri, GadI, Sarhgi, Lahgali, 
Musall, Hall, Kirltl, Kundall, Hari, Mekhali, 
Kavaci, Dhvaji, Jisnu, Jeta, Mahavira, 
Satrughna, Satrutapana, Santa, Santikara, 
Sasta, Sankara, Sahtanustuta, Sarathi, 


Sattvika, Svami, Samavedapriya, Sama, 
Savana, Sahasi, Sattva, Sampurnarsa, 
Samrddhiman, Svargada, Kamada, Srida, 
Kirtida, Kirtinasana, Moksada, Pundarikaks 
a, Ksirabdhita'taketana, Surasuraihstuta, 
Preraka and Papavasana etc., names. You 
are the Yajha, Vasatkara, Oiiikara and 
Ahavaniya Agni (the fire). O Purusottama, 
Deva you are Svaha, Svadha and Sudha. O 
Sanatana (everlasting) god Visnu I convey 
my salute to you. O Garudadhvaja, you are 
beyond the scope of certification and 
immortal. 

Markandeya said- God Madhusudana 
appeared on having pleased with the divine 
names so recited and said. 



3icT i3;g: tRFrrsfw feisJ gjwf&r ^-.i 

The Lord said- O gods, I am extremely 
pleased with you as you all have recited my 
holy names. Tell me, what you want to be 
fulfilled by me? 

■piBrai IH k 11 
^hiRi ^ tTWiii; yRy^Rii 

The gods said- O god of gods, O Hrs 
ikes'a, O lotus-eyed god, O the beloved of 
Laksmi, O Hare, nothing is unknown for 
you so, why are you asking this all from us? 


NO 


Tip? WdR'Jf f I 




142 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


wi m <411 

w ^ eg ^c^rafwt 
eggr ipt #ignfg flrnggif^ ^11^ <? 11 
<it^s«c(m^ 4 i ^|;gT: giTcT ^jf^RSleft^nn^l 

ei^ 3i|;i^ ^ 11 ^ o 11 

rng ^ fTTWi 

^egckgi fgsggT ^ gi^'Tii^ ?ii 





gegTfT9TtsKng:ii'«oii 


The Lord said- O gods, I know the 
reason for your visit. God Mahadeva and 
you all have recited my own hundred holy 
names with a wish to see the monster 
Hiranyakasipu slaughtered. O great learned 
Siva, the person who will recite these names 
daily the same way as you have this time 
recited will avail of my grace, O god 
Sambhu, I am pleased with you. Please, turn 
back to your holy KailSs'a. The monster 
Hiranyakas'ipu will be definitely 
slaughtered by me. O gods, you should also 
return and just wait for some time. This 
monster will .shortly get a Prahlada, a 
devotee to god Visnu since birth and he will 
become an enemy like for Hiranyakasipu. 
The day will come when such enimity will 
approach its climax and then I will appear 
in order to protect Prahlada and murder the 
monster who by virtue of boons is still 
undefeated by the gods. O king, the gods 
followed the advice so given by god Visnu 
after saluting him with sheer regards. 

Thus, the end of chapter fortieth on praise of god 
in Nrsimha Purana. 





NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 41 

Birth of Prahlada, his devotion for Visnu 
and anxiety of Hiranyakas'ipu 

RjVH^f^V TTT <^ l 

I ^ 11 

^ Rfw'^Di unHyi 

gRirg^i wrtiRKrTT^i,y^ii?ii 

fwJTt §c^«n sRTT: efi9ra>!yiRtsTnii 

Sahasranika said- O most learned 
Markandeya, please tell the episode 
pertaining to the incarnation of god 
Nrsiihha with details. O innocent, let me 
know the life sketch of devotee Prahlada in 
detail. O great yogi, O great hermit, all of 
us are lucky as we have got the opportunity 
of sipping the nectar form story of god Vis 
nu. 

^ Wilt 

giftcTt fBd*TRRT:ll')fll 

7T|RT ^ 

tranftfT ^ d1«4 fchHsi uw4cl tnT:l 

^ f? ■^T:I 

Sr! Markandeya said- Long long ago, 
the giant Hiranyakasipu once set out to the 
forest in order to observe penance. The 
earthquake and burning event took place 
that time. Having seen those omens his 
benevolent and well wisher near and dear 
ones, friends and servants forbade him 


CHAPTER 41 


143 


saying that the result of such penance will 
not prove good as the omens are giving 
indications. When all of us do everything 
voluntarily and arbitrarily then what should 
be the purpose for the worship. These 
penances are only for those whose wishes 
remain incomplete. 


Tjpi ^iJuroTlsftr 5^^ 
^^rnrfwsrt 


^ WZrtTRTST rPT; 


11 




mimt 3n? 


That notorious and intoxicated monster 
went to the peak of Kailas'a mountain 
without putting an ear to the suggestions 
given by his well wishers. He started doing 
very tough penance. Brahma, who was born 
from the lotus womb, became womed 
owing to that reason. He began to think - 
"O, what should I do now? How can that 
monster be precluded from doing the 
penance? O king, the hermit Narada came 
there just then and he said after saluting 
him. 


^TTT^ <ic(M 
tTTcT ^RI-MUiMirauil 

3T? rT ainffeliru 

^■Riquu -qfw II 

Narada said- O father, you are 
exclusively devoted to god Narayana and 
tliere should be no cause in existence for 
anxiety for you. One should not worry when 
god Govind resides in his heart. I will do 
away the cause of penance for which that 
monster has been intended. May god 


Narayana give me discretion and trick 
sufficient therefore. 

ftclt WCfl 

iraitT; ttT^ it 

•^THldl ■gfTTtra ^VIiyiTl>TI&TT:I 

^rErTJT TfTf fTRTII^mi 

felt 

d^ccu cTRT chcifci^-Rl 

cTTut ggfw TRRT tfl irf^i 

eft ^ HRdTl^di’ll 

TTtsfxT sh'lsmOdl^'l f^TUi|<*f^Trldll 

W^TTSm W ^ ■R^twi I ? ^ 11 

Markandeya said- The great hermit 
Narada, then saluted him and he departed 
from there with Parvata hermit and the 
name of Vasudeva in the heart. Both of 
them turn their body as that of Kalavihka 
bird and fled to the holy Kailas'a. 
Hiranyakas'ipu was seated on penance there 
in the company of his friends. The hermit 
Narada took a dip there and sat on the 
branch of a tree. He began to recite the holy 
names of gods so loud as the monster could 
listen. After reciting "Oih Namo 
NarSyanaya" thrice, he kept a mum. The 
wicked Hiranyakasipu aggrieved at this and 
shot an arrow with an intention to kill those 
birds. Anyhow they fled to another tree. 
Assuming it as an omen, he at once left that 
place and came back to his palace. 

dHufM fwttiTl qrot: i 

cRI ■HTcTr5^|^*'lhrr:IR oil 


144 


NARASIMHA PURAIVAM 


cRlT ^ 

^ ’RT-.II? ^11 
retell CRT ciqfoTm^fl ^ dMRrcl(iH,l 
dfenisf il^KW WJRT ryeWdl-^dH^IR^II 
gjsr?! ^ ^ ^rmi 


Eventually his queen Kayadhu has that 
time completed the cycle of her instant 
menstruation. She asked her husband at 
night - "O darling, you had said at the time 
of departure to forest that your penance will 
run as long as ten thousand years. Whey 
then you have abandoned that resolution so 
quickly? O beloved husband, I pray you tell 
the factual reason behind such a constraint." 


f|-<ir€ra7f^l^-^q|rT 
^ risqt gm 
'■s^mi^ldleJ '^<4141 Udq«^d)qi 


oqr^TRft tgm ^roff rrt HKiyu^ rii 

BRT ^ STTf# -^11 m ( 

^ RRftT dilqi ^jTRftSWt^ ci<n^l 
«SldU^ ^|<4^o^irq ^nftfRIR^ll 

dlc(d1 •iifll ^5TRR 

■^ctd41 gw Tiqrarxlt RTIddRPScl^ iiRVall 


Hiranyakasipu said- O beloved, listen to 
the facts that I am going to tell you. It was 
for increasing my puzzles and the pleasure 
of the gods. Two birds came at the holy 
peak of Kailasa in Nanda-KSnana. They 
recited the holy hymn - "Orh Namo 
Narayanaya". They recited thrice that very 
hymn. O beautiful queen, I was aggrieved at 
listc'fng to the same but as I could shoot 
them, they fled elsewhere. Assuming it the 
preponderance of probability, I left that 
place at once and came back to the palace. 


MldSill-q 3^ 

f ^ %i 1 ^ <i 11 

3?: sThRT:i 

4TOjiracni?'?ll 

fR[^r chyRiwtifq ^ «isri 

qf^4IJSr%l 

n 9 >d 

W ^ WRlTR^TlrRtll? ?ll 

IT qc^Hn'l f^TTTjf WF^: 

TWTT 

fqT^Kqn. ^ 11 ^ ? 11 

«*iRiti4lJlT fen f|i 
TT cihhIhi^ 

efiSJT 3ra^ 

iJiciixl ■JTTiTRTT % flrt<4>4ic(:l 

f?sr fqRl4cKRi 

11 ^ 11 

Markandeya said- The above 
conversation was going on when both were 
enjoying intercourse and Hiranyakas'ipu's 
semen discharged Just when he was reciting 
the hymn. It was established in the womb 
with the queen being it the material time. 
Owing to the preaching of Narada, a Visnu 
devoted son took his birth. O king, I will 
tell you the contextual matter very first. 
That son of Hiranyakasipu, Prahlada by 
name was a devotee to god Visnu since 
birth. As the devotion for Srihari increases 
incessantly even in the harsh and mala-fides 
of Kali era, Prahlada in that dynasty of 



CHAPTER 41 


145 


monsters started growing up with the run of 
time. His devotion for god Visriu was also 
increasing day by day. In spite of the child 
body, the heart of Prahlada was so great as 
it became the source of inspiration for all as 
the fourth era (Kaliyuga) (in spite of least 
importance compared to the other three 
eras) renders the Dharma, Artha, Kama and 
Moksa to the devotees and extends the 
fame. Prahlada used to discuss god Visnu 
while playing, conversation, riddle saying 
and recreating with the dolls etc., with other 
boys of his age. His nature was godly and 
this has instilled his senses. Thus, Prahlada, 
performer of excellent deeds in the 
childhood gradually developed with sipping 
the nectar of the holy names of the god. 

^IH I ^ m I 

I ^ ^TT 

Ht^HTT in? 

^ y^i'Mlnll?V9ii 

arer ^ 

One day, Hiranyakasipu saw his son 
who had just come from the school 
(Gurukula). He was surrounded by a 
number of women at that time. He saw that 
Prahlada had large eyes and a slate was in 
his hand. A mark of discus was made at a 
corner of that slate and the name of Sri Krs 
na was written beautifully. He became glad 
and called Prahlada near him. He kissed 
him and said- O son, your wise mother 
appreciates you. Hence, tell me all that you 
have learned from your teacher. Firstly, 
think properly and make me to listen to 
your interesting lesson which has been duly 


learned by you. 

srai? fm W(ct; I 

■jfl^ 

^<4 

ri Itf^tgcTII-itoii 

STTf^T^^jT HT? VJUj I 

Igrart ^11 

^ -Ri ^ p RR I 
TTiftmRf ^ I l-k ? 11 

The devotee to Visnu since birth, 
Prahlada replied happily - 'I make you to 
listen to the learned lesson after saluting 
god Govind, who is worshipped in the 
three-worlds.' Having heard the obeisance 
for his enemy from the mouth of his son, 
Hiranyakasipu was annoyed yet he 
concealed it from Prahlada and feigned to 
laugh loudly as if he really is glad. He then 
embraced Prahlada and said- "Dear son, 
listen to my benevolent words. The person 
bringing in their tongue the name of 'Rama', 
'Krsna', 'Govind', 'Visnu', 'Madhava' or 
'Sripate' are my enemy and got punishment 
for such default under my administration. 
Tell me from where you have heard this 
prayer of god in such childhood. 

ftg^RRIRTgjinJ glRRRlTRRcT; t 

s9 

Rp?: RT? ^ 3 Tt 4 fRT: ®graRII'«^ll 

R^ yhlRufasSHifi 

liWtfg Rt RTl fRRf TTtSRR RgR^I 11 
HR Rm W RRtRTSScR^iS^II-Jtmi 

RRlwmaRTt fgggR rtri 

Having heard the statement of his father, 
Prahlada replied - O Arya, it is not good to 




146 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


listen the same from your mouth. The man 
who recited 'Krsna', attains to the 
undecaying position as it provides with all 
luxuries and increases the consciousness of 
a man towards religion. The evil of 
criticising lord Krsna is heinous and 
uncompoundable. It is therefore, necessary 
for you to recite the names as Rama, 
Madhava and Krsna etc., so as to the evil 
committed by you could compound and you 
become pure soul. It is the most benevolent 
to practice and in spite of yours being my 
lord (father), I do a humble request that you 
should resort to god Visnu, who it Isvara of 
all and who removes all sins. 

fipf ■fsPT R 

■qrf? ■?n% ^rrarr qwtsw 

gqw Pvivi'lilhRII'^eill 

As it culminated in the disgust of 
Hiranyakasipu, he condemned his son by 
saying that he has fell down from his status 
and ordered him to go away from that place 
at once. He then ordered his officials to go 
and bring the teacher in the court duly tied 
in shackles. 

yiMlTd 43H ^ 

flW o II 

The monsters soon went and brought the 
teacher of Prahlada there. The teacher, was 
wise and hr therefore, submitted, O the 
killer of gods, utilise your conscience a 
little bit and give up the anger. You have 
defeated all the rulers in three-worlds so 


many times by virtue of the proper- 
application of your mind and not in the state 
of fui-y. Then imagine that what will be the 
use of your anger on a helpless man as I 
am?" 

^ Pl'dlcRi m? 

PcJHirRra RR W TM ^1 

3g=f^ tm w w ^TrRTRvt wr i 

fet qRrq jll 
P^'dyRfl f| fi'dOTl 
3ttR^Hlfdd ^ Plilfenri 

rrat 

rUcRcll Ik k 11 

M T vTj^l 

e\v3 ev 

vituTiTci chpiT^-iii^ TT?: W: I 

W. W: J{ q^V'<4t:imt9il 

Os vD 

The king monster reacted on this humble 
submission of Brahmin - O sinner, you have 
taught the prayer of Visnu to my baby son. 
Then he turned towards his innocent son 
and said- "O dear son, such ignorance 
cannot insert in you anyway as you are born 
from me. All this is the mala-fide act of 
these Brahmins. Idiot boy, give up the 
company of the shrewd Brahmins who 
always favour Visnu as these Brahmins 
have faded the brilliance which was only in 
the interests of our royal clan. It is the 
impact of society that makes a man cither 
good or bad. A man is Icnown by the society 
in which he moves. Even a gem starts 
stinking if the same is dipped into the mud. 
It is therefore, good for a man that he 
should resort to his own near and dear ones 



CHAPTER 42 


147 


for the prosperity of the entire clan. O inert 
son, it is the duty of my son that he should 
slaughter the people who favour Visnu. 
Instead of performing your loyalty, you are 
praying to god Visnu. Whether you have 
lost the shame even and raising queries 
frequently before me. I am the sovereign 
ruler of the entire universe and your father, 
still you desire to have another ruler of your 
own. Dear son, nobody here is his own 
master in this world. It is the chivalrous and 
warrior like, who enjoy the wealth and he is 
only master and the kind. 

3T^ tgt ^jRTfTTBT^I 

3TfTTO yTiwIfd lTRk?g II 

TEftrpTT 

tlrfcT; T^rq-; 

3TTT^?R2T 5 

"He only is the supreme god as you see 
who have conquered the three-worlds. 
Hence, give up immediately your ignorance 
and resort to the gallantry which only is 
benevolent for our clan. Other people too 
will tease and scorn you by saying that this 
boy prays to the gods even after his birth in 
the clan of a monster. It is strange as if the 
cat prays to the mouse and the peacock 
worship the serpents. Indeed, such activity 
is the indicator of destruction. My stupid¬ 
like son, Prahlada, falls down from the 
position of luxury due to their evil acts. See 
that he is worth adoration yet praying to 
those who are inferior than us and 
observing the discipline imposed by us. O 
stupid, my prosperity is before your eyes 


yet you dare to recite the names of god 
before me. Remember that Hari to which 
you are giving such importance, does not 
deserve such honour and praying to him is 
merely a hurdle to progress." 

TPHT ^ ■'jtlrrariSTl «RTFraT:ll^yil 

f5T?r ^ qrrrRR wn 

^rrf? qnfl TTTf Ynfsr ^ TPTi I ^ ? 11 

TT fgwT 

^jPTTR ydlMTlcIjl 

f% gr ^ chJ^Tudd HSEITHI^XII 

S3 n3 s3 ^ 



O king, with these words, Hiranyakas'ipu 
became furious and he looked with cross- 
eye at the teacher of Prahlada. The teacher 
was shivering with fear. He ordered - O 
stupid Brahmin, leave this place at once and 
arrange for a good education for my son 
hereinafter. "The Brahmin serving under 
that wicked king returned to his home 
considering it as graceful of the king and 
started worship of Hiranyakas'ipu instead of 
god Visnu from that day. It is true that a 
greedy man can do everything in order to 
give bread to his belly. 

Thus, the end of chapter Ibrtyone on incarnation 
of Nrsimha in Nrsiiiiha Purana. 



148 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 42 

An episode of atrocities exercised by 
Hiranyakasipu on Prahlada 

gri^ ^rPfl’ii^ii 

*1nimc||U4 

HlRdcRMR^-iira ’ETl 

ciiwg^TtTsn?! 

3isr t cbc;iR3if^frf^v=il:i 

3TR^iiTint3rT?3i|;i^fyf^V^ii?ii 

Markandeya said- The monster prince, 
Prahlada was immediately sent to the house 
of his teacher with the charioteer. He 
studied there as per the system prescribed 
and time allowed for the course and he then 
became a youth with a sound knowledge on 
all learnings. Generally, the common people 
of this world tend to favour the atheism and 
the evil-some conduet and aetivities of their 
youth but Prahlada attained detachment 
from the worldly affairs and his devotion to 
god was spurt-up to the culmination. It was 
really strange to see such a sea change in 
him at that age. On completion of the study, 
Hiranyakas'ipu once called him to the palace 
and looking at Prahlada with clasped hands, 
he said. 

Risd^upslsllv^l'i^ yekilRl ^<■^^41 

«rRciT^%iTif^ ft^:ii'){|i 
^ f^'A^dkdlil tTrf|aT:l 

c|4uI^ 4 ■§f?I%tlT:imil 


^ehUdebtTraiH^I 

^ flnggr ■§# ^ tt^i I ^ 11 

^ ^ % %(Rt ftrar 
d<ida[iiii<ij<4<cn3 Rff^ftwraFgraP!;iH9ii 
JihV’Jidld wtrsdnty^di 
^ ^ T fcTlll<ill 

g,4gTJt tT tnfgqt ^ ■q^'1rHi3:ll'? ll 

O killer of gods, it is good enough to see 
that you have now absolved yourself from 
the ignorance that existed in you in 
childhood. You are now shining like a sun 
which has left behind the thick cover of fog. 
O dear son, in my childhood also, the 
Brahmins had thrown my own conscience 
into illusion and I was also inert like you 
but on advent of youth I could attain the 
quality education approved and affirmed by 
our clan. I therefore want to assign this 
burden of ruling on you which is full of the 
thorns of enemies. I want to see you 
enthroned as you are efficient enough to 
handle all responsibilities pertaining to the 
administration of the state. The efficiency 
of a son pleases the heart of a father very 
much. He gradually absolves himself from 
the net of worry and fatigues. Your teacher 
too has appreciated you skill and expertise 
before me. It is not a matter of surprise for 
your being so efficient. My ears today are 
eager enough to listen to certain things from 
you. To see the poverty of an enemy prima- 
facie, the pleasing words of a son in the ears 
and the wounds on the parts of body as a 
result of fighting with gallantry in battle are 
like a great festival for the prosperous 
warriors or heroes and the monsters who are 
artful. 



CHAPTER 42 


149 


^r^|Riqc)r<Wd:l 


Having heard these shrewd words of his 
father, Prahlada saluted him and said 
fearlessly. 


■g;g?rJT: Tird R^itr5m^r4Tsi:i 

gr Tig:tarr ^TRTT I ? ?i 

^fctd: ^RsiT: sfist ?TScr:i 

^ Tt^%:TsfNra^nfi:mhi^ ?fT;ii^?ii 

arflRiT: ^ ^cHir^dyd:! 

f% HT(T ^ RVfdR'dfd:ll^?ll 

twra cTWTx^fcJt ^ ^ 


O king, your statement to the extent 
hearing to the benevolent words is like a 
great festival but it actually is felt when 
those matters pertain to god Visnu. One 
would not even imagine listening to other 
matters. The statement is ethical, the same 
is the psalm and that is only the nice 
sentence by which god Visnu is prayed to as 
he only is like the fire to burn the worldly 
straws in the form of miseries. The 
scriptures truly are in which psalms of the 
supreme god, the giver of the desired thing 
to his devotee have been 
contemplated/mentioned. O dear father, 
what is the benefit of study on economics, 
that only throws a man in the dragnet of the 
world? What will be the use of endeavour if 
the same is done for study on the scripture, 
if it preaches to kill ones own soul? The 
persons desirous of emancipation should, 
therefore, observe and listen to only those 
scriptures that pertain to the prayer of god 
Visnu. The study otherwise only brings 


pains and the man seldom feels pleasure 
throughout his life. 

firt gw ^trgfdTifvRiifii^^ii 

trf^ TTRW 


As the ghee put under heat, starts 
blazing more if water drops are sprinkled on 
the same, the monster king Hiranyakas'ipu 
fell to prey of fury on listening to the 
statement of Prahlada. As the bird, owl 
cannot see the light of sun, that mean 
monster could not endure the same way, the 
statement destroying the worldly bondage 
of the creatures. That furious monster 
looked around and ordered his soldiers. 






"Kill this shrewd by blows of the acute 
weapons, pierce his heart into pieces. I will 
see its protector today. Cut the parts of his 
body into pieces and distribute them among 
the crows and vultures. 


3rsjh|:tnw ^clraiW'4d'd: 3nTf^:i 

fiRt cT TlftRt%T;ll?o|| 


3ian^<0u>iRJt5r '^ipsiifur 

% Rifitnft ? II 

tnt|3RTO^H5fhl: 




150 

<iicicio^ivr4^ ^ ^ 

4 5 ^TRTW^: «4l0l^Rd^dc1;IRmi 

dd^Ri f4wi)lc|^illi;?^ll 

Complying with the order of 
Hiranyakasipu, the soldiers started slapping 
Prahlada. They were threatening him also 
with the cruel words. Prahlada also took in 
hand the thunderbolt in garb of the 
concentration on god Visnu. Having seen 
his devotee Prahlada in deep concentration, 
god Visnu started giving him a cover of 
protection. The weapons used by the 
monsters could not then touch the body of 
Prahlada and split up into pieces like the 
petals of the blue lotus. The material 
weapons proved futile before Prahlada who 
was under the cover of protection which 
was given by god Visnu himself. The 
diseases, monsters and the stars only cause 
pain to mankind until they arrive at the 
.stage in which their heart feels the kind 
touch of god at all moments. The weapons 
so used first turned into pieces and then got 
into the reverse direction and started 
spreading devastation among the soldiers 
assigned wit}r that cruel task. The monsters 
ran away to and fro so as to save themselves 
from the injury and wounds. Only the stupid 
may be surprised at it but it is not a matter 
of surprise in the eyes of the scholars. 

TTSTT ^ W ^1 

^^4Rr:iRV9ii 

wnw:i 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 

r^ttJUchrviiil: 

The king Hiranyakasipu too was 
threatened when he saw the phenomenon of 
a Vaisnava i.e. Prahlada. That wicked 
monster then called the snake charmers and 
ordered them that this fearless boy cannot 
be slaughtered by the blows of weapons. 
Hence, all of you should devise a plan to 
kill him. The snakes charmers immediately 
complied with the order and left all 
poisonous snakes to bite Prahlada. 

srer 

?Rf5l4 ^dcHtflMfPgtiril^oll 

rtcT; 

The most poisonous snakes with their 
jaws large and terrifying and many 
thousands of teeth ran fast by emanating 
hissing sounds from their hoods and gripped 
Prahlada at once. His body became 
inscrutable and the snakes so dangerous 
could not even make a slight scratch on the 
skin of Prahlada. This was not ended 
slightly but the snakes lost their teeth as a 
result of bite on innocent Prahlada. All their 
mouths (hoods) started oozing blood and 
this position was then reported by the snake 
charmers to Hiranyakasipu 



CHAPTER 43 


151 


rTiTJT=T^I<Wll^ W^^S51T;i 

3i^5frfrraf;i 

f^%?r5RT 

O god, our snakes can burn the 
mountains and rocks into ash and you can 
kill us if the declaration so made is proved 
otherwise. They thus revealed their inability 
to do any harm to Prahlada and the snakes 
failure in the mission assigned by 
Hiranyakasipu, hardly could return from 
there with their minds busy on thinking 
over the reason for such phenomenal power 
of Prahlada. 

3T2ira^: RRt^ryTti4 

^ rPERfn^^TTSZTH; 

3TT^ UIHl yUid 'Jl-'llct 
1T?T 

^ so •V 

5^Ffrr fTilTfjTTWT 

■T ftqr ■tmr^i 13 H11 

Markandeya said- The monster king 
thereafter discussed with his counsellors 
and ministers and assuming Prahlada tough 
to punish called him quietly. He came and 
stood before him after duly saluting. He 
then said Prahlada - A dictum that one 
should not slaughter his son even if he 
deserves for the same is being observed by 
me and I have now rescued you from 
further coercion. 

ddTffuf writer ^riHMytlfgdT;l 

■JJST: MNHd: yi^fl^n: ^II 


T ^ilPT# ^ 1 3 ^ 11 

rl^ ^'Sril^nT 

W; wftfcT^^II3<ill 

The priests of the monster king then 
gathered there immediately. They were left 
stupid even after a thorough study they had 
made on the scriptures. Those Brahmins 
stood with clasping hands before Prahlada 
and said- "O god, the three-worlds start 
shivering just when known to your desire 
for the battle. This weak child is still 
unknown to the power you hold. We 
therefore, request your giving up the anger 
because the son may be an evil-doer but the 
mother and father do not act barbarously for 
enhancing his physical pains. 

3'cR^Rf ffersf? ^rygtlfBdl:! 

3tT^ rf^g^JT eft sil?R 113 11 



Pleading with these words before the 
wicked Hiranyakas'ipu, the priests then took 
Prahlada with them and returned to their 
abodes. 

Thus, the end of chapter forty-second on 
incarnation of Nrsirhha in Nrsimha Purana. 





CHAPTER 43 


151 


CHAPTER 43 

Preaching by Prahlada to Daityas, drown into 
sea by Hiranyakas'ipu and apparent 
perception of god there 



152 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


c[lrfT:l 

%fdM(dp ^dlW'M|4|,jjaa:i 

ff^ ferfii 

Markandeya said- Prahlada then was 
living under escort of Guru. As he was 
conversant with all Sastras, his mind was 
concentrated on god Visnu and having an 
extreme conscience to treat the entire world 
nothing else but a varied form of Narayana, 
he used to treat the worldly affairs in quite 
reluctance. One day all class fellows 
gathered round Prahlada. They said- O 
Prince, your nature is eccentric particularly 
because there is no attachment in you for 
the worldly affairs. It is seen that you 
always peep into some inexpressive thing in 
your mind and it keeps you always in a 
happy mood. Kindly tell us if that thing is 
not so confident as not to disclose before 
others. 

ufductu: ■R' 
ftmET: foftgjtT- 
iMH'dddWlTTfdcdraWI 
ftryvm -RoJit 

qgqftf? fy'dl4di 

s3 es 

rafqyytMTHifn 4w<Rq:imii 


O king, Prahlada was generous to all so 
when so enquired, he told - "O descendents 
of monsters, listen to me in a fresh mood 
what I, who only have love for god, am 
going to tell you in response to your 
enquiry. See for a while the tangible 
worldly luxury appearing pleasure pouring 
in the form of wealth, people and wife with 
beauty. Whether this luxury is worth 
enjoying for the seholar or worth leaving 
even from a distanee? Think at first on the 
pain being suffered by the organism yet in 
the womb of the mother whose parts of 
body are entrapped in a chaotic condition in 
the uterus and who are remembering their 
several previous births. 

chKUJ^ 

^jRTfOTT 

TnqiwWtTWqjtT I ^ 11 

dwi'f^ TpJvNW qrfqr 
«iir4 d^l <4lc(-ic(ic44i 

gST ygo^.'l 

qfqfiqqqin 

^ ^yivr^iqiitsii 
ZRIT w qiyM^KdiM- 

■^dsrrqsjTf.-wi wf^:i 
■fqivf wqqtq 

qcifr iRr:ii<iii 
qqqWScRgfel: 'qqST 

' -O Cs 

^ d^ddtqq ■gtsn^ll<?ll 




CHAPTER 43 


153 


The so much suffering organism within 
the womb said- "Oh, I am fastened to the 
fleshy membrane in the body form house 
filled with night soil, bacterias and urine 
like a thief imprisoned. It is due to my not 
having concentration of mind even for once 
the lotus feet of god Mukunda and now 
compelled to endure severe pain within this 
womb. Hence, one who has come into the 
old age. O sons of Daitya, when this world 
is always full of sorrow, how can then a 
scholar enjoy it? With these eyes of fact¬ 
searching we do not see even the least 
pleasure in this world. With the growth of 
our conscience, we are introduced to the 
sorrows and sufferings of this world more 
apparently. Its upper layer indeed is 
fantastic and alluring but as the scholar can 
see by piercing the veil so charming, they 
do not indulge in its illusion. The stupid and 
devoid of essence only attach themselves 
like the insects who see the lamp charming 
but their affinity and affection kills them. 
When nothing else but only this illusive 
worldly pleasure would be in existence, 
attachment with it is outright but when 
other means is already with us w'hy would 
then one die in the blind alley? If eatables 
arc not available even with all efforts, it is 
good to survive with fodder and grass or oil 
cake etc., but when the immortal pleasure 
is with us and it is merely to serve the lotus 
feet of god Visnu why would then one seek 
shelter in this all mortal world? 

atcHrirvid: 

ciiss^i 


-Rra^i 1 ? 911 

f? 11 I 

"Who desires other trifle pleasures 
refraining him from this great pleasure (i.e. 
service of god and enjoyment of his grace) 
so easy to avail of is a weak heart and asks 
for alms by giving up his own kingdom. 
The worship of god Visnu is not performed 
by offering garments, wealth and labour but 
it requires an exclusive sense with the 
names as Kes'ava, Madhava on ones lips. It 
is the real worship of god Visnu. O sons of 
monsters, hence, you all should recite the 
pious names of god Visnu with a true 
conscience that this world is full of misery. 
Only this is the means that gives the human 
life any meaning and if this is lost, the 
stupid fall from one layer to another 
downwards. Give up all worldly passions 
and imagine in your hearts god Mukunda, 
only adorable, immortal enshrined with his 





154 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


weapons i.c. conch, discus and gada. All of 
you as 1 know are not atheists hence. I 
disclose a mystety that god Visnu enshrines 
within the hearts of all creatures and it is 
good to befriend all. 

Daityaputras said- O learned Prahlada, 
wc all including you could not see since 
childhood any other teacher and friend other 
than Sahdamarka. When this is the position, 
kindly tell us the source from where you got 
all this consciousness. Please, disclose the 
veil and tell us the facts. 

MfRi mm 

^ tTRT; trapfr ^ rPItsf 

RMIhrM ^ 11 

^ W M'M«nri44ll 

Ugl'HMK Rpf ■'iT«(rt 11 ? ^ 11 

Ht ■rpt'T 

3TMIc^ RSra M^slrllM^lRoii 

arpjT fwl Rl -^fl RMNdWh:! 

RfuTOR 

f^bLyfl^i yRWjra TPT: RRR ?fT:l 

RTT^ RRRTR 3TTSnT 
hihI\^< 4 R^PTFTTRrrt Rifet ridll 
RSJT ^ fRT:IR^II 

Prahlada said- It is said that Indra 
deemed my father Hiranyakasipu dead 
when he was in a forest and busy with 
penance and invaded this city. As Indra 
allured my mother by using magical powers 


and with a view to satiate his passion, he 
took her somewhere. In the meantime 
Narada came there and he flayed Indra by 
saying - O idiot, leave at once this chaste 
woman. The baby in her womb is the 
greatest devotee to god Visnu. Having 
heard the words, Indra bowed his head 
before my mother and returned to his abode. 
Narada then took my mother to his 
hermitage and educated her in the 
consciousness as I have explained above. 0 
monsters, the practice in childhood, the 
grace of god and this consciousness having 
been given by Narada, I am still with that 
treasure. 

RttreiRkt Rtrrs^ i r x11 

VJUllfd TT^ 

3I8JT|RT1' RRRPEf: R Mill^dlHI 

^5fpTTlRR%R^RTT:lR^II 
■gRTHTRTR RRrtnRTTR RraRrRfR Rl 

R R iRRtT RRRRRRftRnR I 

STTRRRRJTTSRRf <^ryrl<* f^Tjm R:IR<ill 
StflcRiig ^tRT^tRTfRfRTf^TO?: I 
3TSI ^TRTRT ^r§RT 11 ^11 

rIRrM^S REgr R«^ 

One day, the monster king 
Hiranyakasipu was strolling around the city 
in the night with his identity concealed. ’He 
noticed that someone was reciting the holy 
name of lord Rama. He considered it 
savagery of Prahlada in a new style. He 
became blind with fury and called his 
priests. Addressing them as mean persons 
he said that his Prahlada is going out of 
control but all of them are reluctant to stop 



CHAPTER 43 


155 


his activities. He threatened them with dire 
eonseqnenees. Having threatened them so 
severely, he returned to the palaee with a 
heavy heart and fuelled brain. He could not 
make himself free from the killing worry. 
As his heath was near, he thought and 
planned so which should have not 
implemented. He called all monsters and 
suggested them in a secret meeting that they 
should wait until Prahlada snores at night 
and tie him with the snake cords 
(Napapasa). Then, throw him into the 
ocean. 

Tifarf^ wfirw 

I 

^TtrcTT I 

farm ^ii^^ii 

ftRT T# |tt WIT 

The monsters kept a vigil over Prahlada 
at that night. The night was most favourite 
to Prahlada (because being it noiseless, he 
felt it convenient for meditation). He was in 
meditation but all were awake; however, the 
meditation was so deep as physically he 
was seen as in snoring sleep. It confused the 
monsters and they tied him with the snake 
cords. Prahlada was so great that he had cut 
all bondages of attachment and greed etc. 
Those fools tied Prahlada, the devotee of 
Visnu whose flag bears the living Garuda 
(the eagle). Thus, they took him to the shore 
and dropped him down into the waves of 
the ocean. They then put gigantic rocks on 
Prahlada and reported to Hiranyakasipu 
immediately. Hiranyakasipu greeted them 


warmly for the success of their mission. 








■g^ll?^ll 

^ f|wlraTfatra%Tf^ wtt; i 

qtcscWiI $c(|l^g;| 

sqi^ fgromw rf «PraFmiUTTHW:ll?<ill 

•o C\ 

wft Twnlw 

Prahlada looked like sea fire to the 
crocodiles and they did not dare to go near 
him. He himself being merged with the 
ocean of everlasting pleasure (the supreme 
god) could not understand that he has been 
thrown into the ocean. When the holy- 
hearted Prahlada got concentrated into his 
soul which was like an ocean of the 
pleasure of knowledge (Brahma), the ocean 
started leaping on the waves so violently as 
if another ocean is joined with her. The 
waves took Prahlada towards the shore the 
same way the holy words of a teacher 
enable a student to cross the ocean of this 
world with an easiness and pleasure. As 
Prahlada himself was in the form of Visnu 
by virtue of meditation, the ocean honoured 
him with the gift of several gems. Just then 
Garuda was sent by Narayana there and he 
made the snakes his food. 


[tnrRT fwri 

qUitlrMHuRls-lcRIfRIl'*i I 
Mlc|-qi(5lHqHldTI 


156 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


351 ^ WW ^ 

^SSTTct I'iJ ^ 11 


The ocean with her thundering sound 
bowed before Prahlada who till then was in 
meditation and said- O devotee Prahlada, 
O performer of great deeds, please, open 
your eyes and make me holy with your 
grace. This request brought Prahlada in 
physical consciousness and suddenly he 
opened his eyes and saluted the ocean. He 
asked when he had come there? The ocean 
then replied- 


rigr^:! 

Ttrqr trft -ywtd thPuHV^ ctiti 


^ tit 

tJfPimTfT Wt ^ 

wtgjTPnfti tif^qr^n'jsvgu 

fd^cdlrqiHl 3'^if^ II 

o(| 3T fit <t>d1«itrw qfd«TfM tEl^l 

SlIHtnfR ^ntltlftf^ ^ddtiHl 11*114,1 II 


O Yogi, you have not known that the 
monsters have committed heinous crimes 
on you. They dropped you down into me 
after fastening you with the snake cords. I 
brought you on the shore and then Garuda 
came. He has just left this place after killing 
all the snakes. O greatman, I am desirous of 
living in the company of true people. 
Please, have grace and accept these gems as 
a gift from me. You are adorable to me just 
like god Visnu himself Although you do 
not expect them yet I will give them to you 


as the devotee sun god worship him with 
lighting a lamp. God Visnu has protected 
you in such gross adversities. Greatmen of 
holy heart like the sun are no more in the 
world but you symbolise them. Nothing to 
say any more in your appreciation. I am 
successful today because I could avail of an 
opportunity to see you. However this 
company is for a moment but the fruit of 
this moment cannot be compared with 
anything. 





^*|clfd(q:imo|| 

yfd*J^ ■RTcRTpr cjrhrd: 511? cuRiRq,! 

-gcRt SRT: ?(^tgfRf?IT5W:im^ll 


chvqWpM UpR^I H I 

M^IrdPlim ?ll 

vftxiqr^TT ^wiwTpii cnf^i 

ot qcfT aptrWSltTl^ 5lW^im^ll 


The devotee Prahlada felt both shame 
and gaiety on the prayer as made by the 
ocean in which magnificence of god Visnu 
was indicated. He took the gems given by 
the ocean and said- O great soul, you are 
worth adorable as god Visnu lives within 
you. It is a well-accepted fact that the god 
in the form of world merges the universe 
within him and during the phase of 
devastation (Pralaya) he sleeps within the 
ocean. O ocean, I want to see god Visnu 
apparently with these physical eyes. You 
are lucky as you always see god. Please, tell 
me of any measures to see him. 

dcK^fci mqiq-ih •umk:I 

5(fT? 5n? ^ w ff^im'iJii 

TRf? ct ^ckiciHtqjpi 
H|,K4irm: it^ sfgw^immi 




CHAPTER 43 


157 


Prahlada fell at the feet of the ocean with 
these words. The ocean then lifted him up 
and said- O king Yogi, you always see the 
god in your heart but if you want to see him 
with physical eyes, pray to him and he will 
appear. The ocean vanished into the water 
with these words. 



On departure of the ocean, Prahlada 
stayed there alone at that night and 
assuming perception of god as an 
impossible task, began to pray to him. 

■RVTlra[«if^ 

«jr: liT 5sr rr RTtR: WR5;im^ 

RlrR^dRRRrTtRRl^- 

■3R|qR^5'1u1: 

RRIR^^RRlfr: RgRipimill 
R RiggiOT R% 

R?Rf% W RRT?TTI m 11 


Prahlada said- How so easily god Visnu 
can appear before me when a number of 
ascetics burn the fire that destroy all 
worldly attachments with the wind of many 
hundreds of hymns from the Vedas and 
sentences and make holy their heart with 
heating it properly and all this for a mere 
sight of god. My mind is without discretion, 
as it is tied with the six cords of anger, 
jealousy, passion, greed, attachment, ego 
etc. A six-layer cover has entrapped me 


badly. The Brahma etc., gods is the 
gimmick of fear and for removing the cause 
of such a fear visit at the shore of Ks 
Irasagara and worship him in the divinely 
prescribed manner and then only get a 
glimpse of him. Hence, it is only a surprise 
if a monster like me expects to see god 
apparently. 


U-5mRRiS!RFcf1c*,ld<:l 


3|Rf:WfeRrRRTRR; pi- 

pift p rMriswii^oii 



:Rj dqifvRtR piR^^- 

RtIr pTfaR5pRlfRfR:ll^^ll 


O king Prahlada, thus, considering 
himself not entitled to have a glimpse of 
god, became veiy sad. His heart sank in the 
ocean of regret and anxiety. His eyes started 
flowing with tears and he fell down fainted. 
O king, then within seconds, the 
omnipresent god appeared there. He took 
Prahlada into his lap after picking him up 
from the ground. 

R?RT 3^1 

■r|c^ir<viyi»^'4dH)fdf^dT 

fw RRlfefR ^ R RcRfiqRTr 

fdWRlfdg^: 11^311 
cIt][1RTR^[ctTZr R RR1RIR: 

RFirfR ?fT 
ffw HgM?u|c)RR^dl: 

TRFRpsf R I ^ 11 



158 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


M: TO: 

fi?a|T rfR^ :1 

Tgfq%^cfl1?#rfl 1 ^ H11 


On return of consciousness with the 
sweet touch of gods arm, Prahlada opened 
his eyes suddenly and looked at the god He 
saw that gods face was glowing, eyes were 
beautiful like lotus, arras were large and 
body was dark as the water of river 
Yamuna. He was full of unique splendour 
and fascinating. The conch, discus, gada 
and padraa were in his four hands. Prahlada 
shivered with fear, surprise and happiness 
etc., when he saw himself in the lap of god. 
Considering this event as a dream he 
thought - "Hurrah, may it be a dream, but I 
am seeing god with my eyes." With this 
sentiment be became very happy and he 
again fainted in the pleasure of the form of 
god. The only friend of the devotees, god 
then sat on the ground and started patting 
him with his hand so that he could awake. 
Like a beloved mother, the god started 
fondling Prahlada and embraced him 
frequently. 




rraftgTTrT ITWnaT gk: 

-Rir: W5TWT:lk^ll 


HUfmiAiitid’cciW HRldfd 
TOit 


31^:1 

■Ij#gr WIWTOT IT ^lfiTi«r:l 



wrt t ■TTR^II^SO II 


For a little while, Prahlada opened his 


eyes before god and began to stare at god 
with overwhelmed surprise. After a long 
rest, he suddenly awoke realising his body 
at rest in the lap of god and with fear and 
sentiments. He bluttered - "God, have 
mercy on me and fell down on the ground 
in order to salute him with the whole body. 
He was so learned but could not pray with 
psalms at that moment. God, the ocean of 
mercy then lifted him up in his arms. The 
tears of pleasure started coming down from 
the eyes of Prahlada and god consoled him 
with these words- 

Tm WR grTT r^RTi 

^ firat % «rgi% •fari^qshirat ^ii 

fro Roi^'cfirqpq fgfararfr 

O son, abandon the sentiments of fear 
and hesitation imagining my highness. 
Nobody other than you is so beloved to me. 
Be frank to the extent that you have 
enslaved me. I am always perfect and 
appear in varied forms, even then with an 
objective to fulfil all desires of my 
devotees. Hence, tell me what is favourite 
to you?" 

W TP=fBPi;i |V9 ^ 11 

TOW WT^ITO ^ 

^ f%Rt <*<ARyd9iMfini'3mi 

With a look at god most passionately, 
Prahlada submitted - "O god, this is not a 
time to ask anything and I only request for 
your pleasure. My mind this time only 


CHAPTER 43 


159 


wants to sip the pleasure of your nectar of 
presence. O god, Brahma ete., gods find it 
difficult to have a look at you and my mind 
will not satiate even if I could see you for 
one million years. What can such a mind, 
still unsatiated when you are present, think 
of else? 


rRT; -^T fsW II 

it 'JtMic; MiUAild: I 

^i^« ^ qf^yrsf fOTlc? w[[ 


Joining Prahlada with the wealth of 
emancipation, the god then said with a 
smile on his face - "O son, it is true that 
nothing is favourite to you more than seeing 
me and living in my company but I myself 
am intended to give you something. Hence, 
ask something from me for my shake. 

c^BTdcll^ '^f^lftcl ^fg=cltn^l 
3Tenf ^ tsifei^ ^cntli\9<?ii 

^ tf^'4TTri|^lldoil 


The wise Prahlada than said- O god, I 
wish I would be during all my births, your 
slave like Garuda with exclusive devotion. 

ITT? «|cWchmJl<i ?f^l 
^ ^ RlfwIcKi feRTIli ^ 

aroW ^ o3t ^ ^JcqrfiT rai?CR: TT^I 

Prahlada again submitted to god who 
fulfils the desires of devotees - O god, I 
only desire my undeviated devotion for you 
and your pleasure throughout the ages to 
come. Not only this, but one more that I 
should worship you and having intoxicated 
with absolute devotion, be free from the 
worldly bondage (viz. use to dance with 


pleasure). 

arsnlwzt fsrtRi^ fiidei<4^i i ^ 11 

g TIT triTR^ii^ ? II 

-qt ^ ^WclsilddH^ll.i'iJII 
31MiS|)(tp^-dlcliH trTW)WTI 
sgR^riicT: tnnw: q??j?r?^nfaHRTOiTii(ihii 


Having satisfied with the wish of 
Prahlada, god Visnu said- O son, may you 
avail of all that you desire and feel all 
pleasure. One more thing to say is that you 
needn't regret on my disappearing here. I 
will not at any time do separation from your 
heart like KsTrasagara where I live always. 
You will shortly see me again in the form of 
Nrsirhha, a dreadful form for the evil-doers 
but merciful to the saints. This appearance 
will kill Hiranyakasipu." With these words 
he disappeared from there leaving devotee 
Prahlada, unsatiated to the pleasure of 
seeing him. 


(T^JTFTt TTTTPTRI^ ?fT:l 
TTcTt BdK'tJtd^r tt ' 

^T^TJT^icjrl; sTl'oti etc|-^ TT ft^iifc^ful 
«UqTUlS8l 5rid^Tg,'iR^ll<i'3ll 
i(«iriiifeddi^m-l,3jfi^: ■q^liiddii 

3T8r 31?^: 

tJjfdilHd: iT^I 

tar?T ’et 


fjrat^TftyitjKrPTMi^t^ii 


Then this sudden disappearance of god 
again made Prahlada moaning. He began to 
see all around and was wailing with tears in 
his eyes. He then recited the songs in praise 



160 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


of god for many hours. When he heard the 
voices of the creatures awaken in the 
morning, he could understand that the next 
day has begun. He got up from the sea¬ 
shore and went to his palace. From there, 
Prahlada went to his teacher happily and 
observing god all around in nature. He was 
thinking over the man made schemes or 
proposals and the desire of god. This 
phenomenon was keeping him more happy 
than usual. 

Thus ends the forty-third chapter on an 
incarnation of Narasimha in Nrsimha Purana 




160 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 44 


Incarnation of Nrsirhha and Hiranyakasipu 
approaching death 


mm 

mm ^ ^fgrfwiT:! 


rPTTntt 

STIfERTt ^ f^:ll^ll 

cfm^%Rkr: w#T ^ 
stnFtgtf 


HlHijyfoyhlfuicW^fdTsJHQt't^HUm^l 

citM II 





Markandeya said- Having seen Prahlada 
coming safely from the womb of the ocean, 
the monsters and particularly those who had 
dropped him down into the ocean came at 
overwhelming surprise and they reported 
the matter 'mmediately to Hiranyakas'ipu. 
ins safe return increased the anxiety of that 
monster manifold and in a state of fury and 
the call of his end ordered - "Bring him 
here." The monsters complied with the 


order and brought Prahlada immediately. 
Prahlada started with his divine sight at 
Hiranyakasipu who was enshrined on the 
throne. His death was near and his 
splendour was at the peak. His ornaments 
were shining with the blue tint spreading 
from the gems. This had made him blaze 
fire with smoke around. He was on a high 
throne and surrounded by the strong and 
heavily built, dark complexioned, evil doer, 
dreadful and Yama's slave-like cruel 
monsters. 


fqtrt oirafwd:! 

31 iyi?l<*RU|s 6 ly: 

^ itg|cW4d^c)lPd*i 

WRT^%T: W p: I 

^ ^ rgra?nn^ii'?ii 

WWRtBy4|T^ll^oii 


Prahlada saluted his father at a distance 
and with clasped hands and stood there. As 
his death was near, he rebuked him with 
fury saying - "O stupid, listen to my final 
and firm statement as I will say nothing to 
you hereafter. Do whatever you desire on 
listening to my statement." He took out his 
excellent sword known as CandrahSsa at 
once. All the people present there saw it 
with surprise. He blew the sword with 
saying that 'O stupid, where is your Visnu? 
He should come and protect you now as you 
had told that he is omnipresent. Why then is 
he not seen at this pole. If I could see your 
Visnu at this pole, no harm will be inflicted 
but if it proves false; my sword will divide 
you in two parts. 



CHAPTER 44 


161 


^ orfgsiiifM %T ^« 11 I 

clan ^ t I niI 

jfrari HTUUm <^dMfH: I 

trSrgjTTII 5 !^ll 


3TT^U>l1 nfdfad :! 

aildilj, ■Rfranr ^r=raFrr «i' 4 ^ 14^1 

tT?T^ tl?ra^ ■H^l^^ll^'iJII 

n^iMid ehi^inddf^vimH,! 

aiTfd^T]rattT!^l I I 


Having imagined the scene and bringing 
to mind the words once god had spoken, 
Prahlada clasped his hands and saluted god. 
Just then he saw that the pole white as 
mirror blasted with the blow of sword and a 
gigantic dreadful and furious figure of 
Nrsiriiha appeared there. His eyes were very 
large, he had vast mouth, large jaws and 
long arms. His nails and feet were very 
large and pointed. His mouth was glowing 
like the fire of Kala, Jaws spread to the ears 
length and he looked dreadful. 


TTfR?: MURT4 ^11?^II 

?TR ■'WIiUm<I*» 1 I 4 II?^II 

^ W %TiHra 5 f 5 TiTt^| 
qrlTTt RimZT:ll?,ill 
^ w THR, t 1 ?it: I 

cEl: ^mipui MdirM(HII^<?ll 


Thus, god Visnu in the form of Nrsirhha 
came out from the pole and he started 
roaring with a loud voice. The monsters 
covered god Nrsiriiha but all were killed by 
Nrsirhha. He then destroyed the auditorium 


of Hiranyakasipu. O King, all warriors who 
came to fight were all slaughtered by god. 
The soldiers then began showering arrows 
and other weapons on Nrsirhha. 

ar'4?THfii 44 {-:jrFC[?mj[;i 
^5T2IFTrtT ^ 4 ^ 

PiHfydR ■5^ ^EJRRt TT: IR 91 
3T: W Qpigcjifvi'J!: 

?TR; ^dHfM 1 ^ 1 ^ : 11 ? ^ 11 

^ %Tiiychf^^RV'dsfim ■q^|c(^ :l 
3 ^ ^ <HdR; R 'li 11 

oRWWJR f WfJITI R h 11 
TiJl •tiPHei HHI< ^1 

3 ^ 5 %|fto!ir ^ f^l I ? ^ 11 

God Nrsirhha killed the whole army 
within moments and began roaring so loud 
as the directions shivered. Hiranyakas'ipu 
again engaged an army of eighty five 
thousand soldiers to fight against Nrsirhha. 
These monsters also entrapped god Nrsirirha 
but all of them like the first army, were 
killed by god Nrsirhha within moments. He 
then destroyed another auditorium also. 
When Hiranyakasipu saw the complete 
destruction of his army, he himself came 
out and ordered the gallant monster - "Go 
and catch it. Slaughter it immediately." The 
monsters leapt on Nrsirhha furiously but 
these were also killed. Go Nrsirhha again 
roared. The monster anyhow escaped, ran 
out wherever they found the way. 

dlc) 4 dl I 






162 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


IR V911 

3rgir f ■RfraH; 1R <i 11 

fejtiM wnzf rf f^i 
f|Ttnra#j wi 

RirRd-yfilci (ir<-!iriji^ •??t5fT:R<?ii 

God Nrsiiiiha kept himself busy on the 
project of killing thousands of crores of 
soldiers who came forward for making an 
attack on him until god sun sank in the 
west. The god then caught Hiranyakasipu 
forcibly and by suppressing his armoury 
and all physical powers. He then took him 
at the threshold of the palace and as he 
started piercing his body by keeping the 
same on his thighs, the monster said 
desperately. 

snrr w! finichMrfum<!iii^<T*uiciihmdH^i 
dld^tl WJld 

guinfcr «r4)ujc(^i4j^ii^oii 

'Alas, my chest which is being pierced 
by Nrsirhha at this moment is the same 
chest on which the teeth of Airavata (the 
elephant of Indra) were split into pieces and 
an acute blow of Mahadeva's axe was blunt. 
It is rightly said that even a straw 
dishonours when the destiny rejects. 

C(c;frt 

tHTTTdW T'U'Jdrhclf^si^':ll? ^11 

\ idfr^ 

dd: dg ^ 5^541lfdfd ^5fdfdfFfd:ll??l 

As Hir nyakas'ipu could finish the 
sentence, god Nrsirhha sheared his heart. It 
was done the same way as an elephant splits 
into pieces the lotus plant. The two pieces 
of his body disappeared into the holes made 


in the nails of Nrsirhha. O King, the god 
then fell in surprise and he thought where 
the wicked monster has gone. Perhaps, my 
labour has met for no meaning. 

TTiR; f^dtdlT^ 

Cn s? 

g ■^l I ? m 1 

^ 3TFTdT »)fd«^dT:l 
OTddi dt 

Worrying over this futile imagination, 
when Nrsirhha shook off his hands, the two 
pieces came out from his nails and fell 
down on the ground. Owing to over-crush, 
those were turned into the drain of dust. 
This scene made him laughing. In the 
meantime, Brahma etc. gods came there and 
began showering flowers on him. They all 
worshipped god Nrsirhha when they came 
close to him. 

ifd: «d4dTdt ^5RTdIhWddTII?^ll 
Wftdt f^ll 

fwdt ^Tddfldratd 3W<HHi ^11^'? 11 

Brahma then enthroned Prahlada on the 
throne of monsters. All creatures of this 
universe became religion abiding. God Vis 
nu enthroned Indra on the heavenly throne 
in the presence of all gods. God Nrsiihha 
too reached the peak of Srisaila in order to 
do good for all creatures. He was 
worshipped by the gods there and still 
popular with his residing there. He began to 



CHAPTER 45 


live there permanently to safeguard the 
interests of the devotees and to punish the 
wicked. 

^ *^Tsqrl u4i4m<^;ll'?{oII 

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^jnTtrqTWTOrmifl 
|sE(5qr<ig;7sr9Tl'et,|TSt gSiR^rtlM^Jlll'ii^ll 
prarrt 5:3r3Tt 

O King, the man who either reads or 
listens to this episode of god Nrsimha, 
absolves himself from the march of the 
evils. Either man or woman whosoever 
listens to this supreme episode, gets rid of 
the faults attached to the company of the 
wicked, mourn, agony and from the pain of 
a widows life. The wicked nature, evil-doer, 
whose children are evil-doers, who follows 
the activities as executed by the wicked, 
who has no faith in religion and the 
sensuous man too becomes holy at heart 
with merely listening to this episode. 

ifT; 

^ ^HTUMlitill 

stbtTfRfgrnrr ^ 

^^V’J^iniviisszmt: 

God Hari, the monarch god, worshipped 
by the worldly people had in the ancient 
period and for the protection of the interests 
of the world, took the form of dreadful 
Nrsirhha and killed with nail blows 
Hiranyakasipu , whose atrocity had made 
all to suffer. 

Thus ends the forty-forth chapter on an 
incarnation of Narasirhha in Nrsimha Purana 


CHAPTER 45 


163 


CHAPTER 45 

An episode on an incarnation of Vamana 

^ TT^ ejlKHW 

^ 

Markandeya said- O king, Listen to the 
episode pertaining to god Vamana who in 
the ancient period, had killed thousands of 
monsters in the offering airanged by the 
king Bali. 

tm: IslRi^dT: I 

fqt tPT: 11 ^ 11 

dif^fd^cimdl ^ TimtJlrfWt rPT:! 

HIT; 

fRRT cTRTdt clWJjrllcl 

ft^RT Ht-ndt 

Long long ago, there was a king Bali. 
Virocana was his father and he had 
subjugated Indra etc., all gods by virtue of 
his valour. He was then enjoying the 
luxuries of three-worlds as all there were 
his subjects. The gods so defeated became 
very weak and Indra was the biggest 
sufferer as he had lost the realm of heaven. 
Having seen them so suffered, Aditi, the 
mother of all gods, sat in a severe penance. 
She saluted god Janardana and recited 
hymns in his praise. This humble 
submission acquired the pleasure of 
Janardana and he appeared before her. He 
declared that he will soon come in her 
womb for the purpose of imposition of a 



164 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


check on the activity of Bali. The god with 
these words, disappeared and Aditi too, 
returned to her home. 

rTfT: ^ ^ 

^TTraTi;'<gTR4l<fjfil;ll\9ll 
RunRq iiiT Hlct,rgdm^:i 
Rcrf: f^RTiw xranr^iifiii 
fTcinH’yRf ^ ^nrenfft RHid4:i 

Mldicl^giT^TMiH ^chHI Rltl 
R?WFTFT dHcn^ ■«1^4tsni^ll^o|| 

R^IWIV^IHRRTd difccl^dt g^ddHi^dll 
^shMI^ g^|c(H:ll^^ll 
R ^ cKRlI.^id'flfR 

?nRrrRtFFT^^;?g^fpni?^ii 
WRTTEer RRI^ wr 3TOtl 

?rggtlt ^ ^ 551 ^ 11 ^? II 

O King, with the passage of time, Aditi 
was conceived by Kasyapa. God Jagannatha 
in dwarf form (Vamana) took birth from her 
womb. Lord Brahma came there on the 
occasion of the birth of Vamana. He 
performed all birth and childhood 
ceremonies properly and in appropriate 
time. After the thread ceremony, that 
immortal god took the permission of Aditi 
and went to the place of offering where' Bali 
used to worship. When he was on route to 
that place, the earth shivered with their 
approaching steps. The monsters failed in 
receiving the oblation (Havisya) from the 
offering arranged by Bali. The fire burnt 
there was extent. Rtvikas (the priests) began 
to omit the recital of hymns properly. 
Having observed such irregularity, the 
mighty Bali enquired Sukracarya- "O 


hermit, why are these great monsters not 
receiving the share of offering? Why is the 
fire being extinct? Why is this earth 
shivering and why are all these Rtvikas 
omitting the hymns?" In reply to the 
enquiry, Sukracarya said- 


<iciiz] 

1^ ^ ^ ft{r^dT;i 

'dggilfd: ■^fjnRTt 

■RrdlRxtjfd ddlld-MIRdifuidlll^mi 
tJcdul<4 ■R^ "R^ ^RIUBRRR^I 


rRFRRTsfR i "^nRIT ^TRRTRRRTfe 

R RTR% ?tRR^ ^SRRTII^Vail 


Sukra said- O King of monsters Bali, 
listen to me. You have ousted the gods and 
the gods from heaven with a cruel defeat 
and god Vamana has got birth from the 
womb of Aditi in order to reinstate the gods 
in heaven. He is incarnated as god Visnu, 
the sit us of origin of this world. He is now 
approaching your offering. As he forwards 
his steps the earth is shivering and on 
account of his proximity, the monsters are 
not receiving the oblations. It is the 
phenomenon of his arrival that the fire has 
been cooled down. The Rtvijas are 
committing errors while reciting the hymns. 
The hymn as recited with mistake is 
destroying the devil property and increasing 
the divine property. 


3TRTMt ^ ■RTTurt RfRRRRTI 

■RRfH: RTf ^ HlfaUdl gTR;il?^ll 
9 r?IR ^ ^ c^RTR^ ^TR^ -RtsTI 
R:RRT ^ ^TRRRRRR g)RR: 11 11 



CHAPTER 45 


165 


Tl^ ^ WTf 'nTi:l 

Having known the facts, Bali again said 
to Sukracarya- O Brahmin, listen to what I 
am saying. As you are my only teacher, 
please, educate me in the procedure to 
attend the wise Vamana when he comes 
here. You are able to explain me, as you are 
our greatest preceptor. 

# TT WT o II 

dycdrj ^ gm wftr ^ RimdH^i 
^ciMiqufintra ^ii^ ?ii 

TT ^dUNlfd ^ ^ TT?Hr:l 

dl'H ^ ■^^Ti^ntlR'^ll 

Markandeya said- O King, SukracSrya 
explained in response- O King, listen to my 
suggestion. He is coming here with a 
purpose to destroy you and to safeguard the 
interests of gods. There is no scope for 
doubt in this. Hence, don't undertake 
anything in donation to him when he arrives 
here. 

^ gjfelT «iu<dd^ tl 
^ cl-dWW ^:ll^^ll 

sgTcT m ^ gruff ^srnrrtg^fff^i 
3TRff grgff ^ # ff trf^iR-kii 
^ Mldisijid cjTT 3iffr ggr gfri 

ar^ggroffr 'd'd-uPM^cw ff ggifTTiRmi 
f% MTclI^^crTq 31MldW 5 ?nffuT:l 

tggr fggff t gjffsff giRffwiff f^iR^ii 

fjdraP? giirngsfff grrrq: 11 ^ V911 

Having heard this from his teacher 
Sukracarya, the great king Bali replied - "O 
learned teacher, I cannot decline anything if 


god Vamana actually is coming to this 
offering. I have just said that other creatures 
even ask anything from me, I will offer the 
same to them, then how can I decline the 
desired thing if asked by god Visnu 
himself? O revered teacher, don't put any 
hurdle in the affairs of god Vamana when 
he comes here. Whatever he asks for, I will 
definitely offer the same to him. I am really 
a successful offerer, if god Vamana is 
coming here." 

dcjcHdw g^iviidi TT gm: i 

ct (jiecd Tigr. 'ti'’ii ^tgilgfff gin: i 
3traf^ gT^jiffriggig FI I ? 11 
guFiT^gff FT tg ^g^ 

(irg^ cig Fngffff Ft gig^tgra gmi I ? o 11 

As Bali could complete his statement, 
just then Vamana entered into the place of 
offering and he appreciated that offering. 
The monster king stood up and worshipped 
him. He then said- "O god, whatever you 
ask including wealth, I will offer that all. 
Hence, ask anything from me today." 

fcggfff gFRW gf^ ggn 
grggrgrg I ^ ? 11 

O king, I am in no need of money and if 
you really want to give me anything, offer 
only the land measuring three steps for the 
fire-place. 

Frggtff groffqisr gfH: fti g 

King Bali said- "If mere three steps land 
satisfies you, I undertake and sanction this 
demand." 




166 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 





CHAPTER 46 


167 


nu. Thus, god Visnu in the ancient times, 
incarnated himself as Vamana (the dwarf) 
and seized the kingdom of the three-worlds 
from king Bali and assigned it to Indra, the 
king of gods. He then took departure to Ks 
irasagara. 

Thus ends the forty-fifth chapter on an 
incarnation of Vamana in Nfsimlia Purana 



CHAPTER 46 


167 


CHAPTER 46 

Incarnation of Parasurama 

31W: m 'snpf^ ik: 

W ^ '55^11^11 

Markandeya said- O King, I am now 
going to tell you about the incarnation of 
god Visnu in the form of Jamadagni 
(Parasurama) who had ruined the Ksatriya 
race in the distant past. Listen to it 
attentively. 

^ TI TW:I 

-^SRi <*|MWiftO|) TTflcT^II^ II 

umiiwi 

ggrar TR^ grapi ^RtTPi^i 

qsq^ tro^ ^ %RT RRRcCI 

s 9 

et4iif<vjl w ^gRgff w ^c^ro^ii^ti 

O king. Once upon a time in long ago, 
the gods and the great Rsis worshipped god 
Visnu at the shore of Ksirasagara. He, 


therefore, appeared as a son of Jamadagni, 
the muni. He was renowned in all the 
worlds as Parasurama. The purpose for his 
birth was to ruin the wicked kings ruling on 
this earth. Prior to his birth, Kartavirya, the 
son of the king Krtavlrya, had got sovereign 
state by virtue of the grace of Datatreya 
whom he worshipped with sheer devotion. 
One day that king visited the hermitage of 
Rsi Jamadagni. He was with four troops of 
army i.e., pedestrian, horsemen, elephant 
and camel. Having seen that king with his 
army in his cottage, Jamadagni humbly 
said: "O King! I honour you as my guest. 
Please, stay here with your army for this 
day and march again tomoiTow. Accept the 
eatables including the wild fruits here." 

3TITP5tr TTjfFTO^ 

IT ^ ^ ^5p#RII'ail 
4Th3Tt 

Tjgiftrr i%iirrit!i ^ 

TT5fT 

TITfrn?tWtg5^:l 

^ -pt ^ TTSTTIRII 

tiRTT^ 

^ 1?;% 

fgpg WIT 

^ IPfl R o 11 

Kartavirya honoured the words of 
Jamadagni. He ordered his army and stayed 
there. The Rsi Jamadagni has command of 
the divine powers. Hence, he milched his 
cow Kamadhenu. He milched numerous 


168 


NARASIMHA PURAI^AIVI 


stables, had elephant shades, excellent 
buildings for human inhabitation and the 
gates etc. Decent bungalows worth living 
by the feudal kings with beautiful gardens 
all around were also milched. Lastly, he 
milched the best multi-storey palace with 
beautiful and useful gadgets duly arranged. 
Then the Rsi said to the king - "O King, this 
palace is ready for your retiring. Please, 
have entrance into it. Your ministers and 
other officers should also retire to their 
house. Elephants and horses of several 
species should be kept in their respective 
shades and the servants should retire to 
these servant quarters. 

^ vr TRTTI 

■Enf? wiranR 

With the permission of Jamadagni, the 
king Kartavirya got entrance into that best 
palace. The others also entered into their 
respective houses. When all got their 
respective places, the muni said Kartavirya 
- 'O king, I have appointed these hundred 
women to assist you in bathing and 
cleaning. As Indra, the king of gods, takes a 
bath in the company of divine damsels with 
songs on their lips, enjoy the same way 
songs and dance of these women while your 
bath. 

■551-RErmw 





cjiriicbdi fgagfHT 
Rq RglPlR 

grac^f w 

rl TTSTT ^ll^qil 


O king, the king Kartavirya took a bath 
there like Indra, listening to the songs and 
seeing the dance of those women. The Rsi 
gave him two garments to wear. Having put 
on these costly clothes and a shawl on the 
shoulders, the king worshipped god Visnu 
after getting free from the physical rules. 
The Rsi then milched from the cow, the 
mountain of the cereal and offered food to 
the king as also to his army. As the king and 
his army could take food, the sun was set. 
They all therefore, took rest throughout the 
night in their respective houses built by the 
Rsi with full enjoyment in the presence of 
music, dance and other entertainments. 


rfW: 

cirr; i%Rig^:ii?^ii 


gi Rfiwq ^ % ig grlfwi I 11 
frggg: ■*ii?gl3ui wggrg gdfggti 

ggrfg gr g %oarr writ i^gRrifinii 
gg^dt iRg fg ii 


When the dawn entered in the next 
morning, everything whatever was at night 
disappeared like a property enjoyed in a 
dream. Only the land and the trees were 
there and nothing like a palace and 






CHAPTER 46 


169 


buildings. The king thought and enquired of 
his priest - O revered Priest, whether it was 
the phenomena of Rsis' penanee or the 
power of Kamadhenu? Kindly, tell me 
about it. The priest replied - O king, the 
muni is also capable of this but this 
phenomena was of Kamadhenu. Yet I make 
you alert that you don't try to seize that cow 
under pressure of greed because the man 
who even thinks of it, meets ruin. 

31S1 sni fii^uil ^i^uifyq;i 

^ friooPa fqfciyiPl tTI 

■po^xrraifui VNHIiliPl 

^ ^ TfTW Hl-MqiHiPi I 

^3F6tWTII?^II 

?i^ tf?Tq^i 

JlrOl^qHfqKyirq OTW ^ 

Having heard this, the Prime Minister 
said- "Your majesty, a Brahmin always 
favours another Brahmin and in this biased 
mind, he does not take least care of the 
royal affairs. O King, having that cow with 
you, everything like several types of houses, 
gold vessels, beds etc. and beautiful women 
etc., however vanishing immediately will be 
at your service like here. Bring that cow, 
therefore, with you immediately. O wise 
king, this cow is for your best use. If you 
desire, I myself will bring it. I only require 
your permission. 

dUqiqiR 'dUdf'd: m^:\ 

^ T# Rirq^lRmi 
fg; ^ ^ 


dt ^ q# I ? ^ 11 

qqpJ: q gPrahqTTOT t 

cHTt q# 

%qi^ qr qaii 

TFirr q q^ qif^bMdli I ^ <i 11 

O king, Kartavirya allowed the minister 
for the same. He, therefore, went to the 
cottage and made.an effort to seize the cow. 
Jamadagni resisted him but he did not listen 
to him and said- "O wisest Brahmin, this 
cow should be with the king. Hence, give it 
to him. You only eat fruit and vegetables 
and this cow is of no use for you. With 
these words, the minister began to pull 
forcibly that cow. Jamadagni with his wife 
again forbade him. That wicked and 
Brahmin murderer then was inclined to kill 
the Brahmin and bring the cow with him. In 
the meantime, the divine cow disappeared 
to the sky and the king returned to Mahis 
matl city with a heavy heart. 

gfqtRqt ft^qqrl ^ ct^l 

^ dTgqtqrq qtliqi I ^ 11 

dx%juciHMidl qqt 

f dd|Aj|d<q5ldXll?°ll 
3IHqW 31^1^ fdfqdlfsf^d qqri 

ccl^diPclVNl'^'JI dlfedTI 

O king, the wife of Jamadagni began 
wailing bitterly and she hit at her belly 
twenty one times so that she could die. 
Parasurama was just returning from the 
forest with flowers and an axe in his hands. 
He said to his mother - "Dear mother, you 
needn't hit your breast. I have understood 
everything with the omens. I will definitely 




170 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


kill that cruel king whose minister is so 
rude. As you have hit on your breast twenty 
one times, I promise slaughtering the Ks 
atriyas from this earth as many as twenty 
one times. 


tnfptmf ^ 3ntir 
d4l4ca*l'Mdd dl^te^uiHl I ^ 11 


r:ii^mi 


c»jl4cn4c)<H d4h^<^: ^iM; ■RIII?^II 
Pimrd ^ M<Hiq^dl4shH;l 
chi44l4i<y wrijit ^ fm^i 

11 ? \31 


Thus he departed from there with the 
promise and an axe in his hand. He went 
Mahismati and challenged the king 
Kartavirya Arjuna there. He then came 
there for battle with several Aksauhin! 
army. A fierce battle waged there in which 
a number of warriors were killed and 
thousands of them injured badly. It made a 
feast for the birds and animal carnivores. 
Paras'urama at that time imagined god 
Visnu, whose form is beyond imagination, 
illuminating, embodiment of cause and he 
got indomitable power and valour. 
Depicting his surprising valour, he killed 
the entire army of Ksatriyas which was 
fuelled in war by Kartavirya and cut all his 
arms. Paras'urama then cut his head from 
the neck as his power was diminished. 

Jnw ^ TTlffetl 




Thus, that sovereign (CakravartI) king, 
Kartavirya was slaughtered by the god Vis 
nu. He got the divine form, smeared with 
beauty enhaneing and divine sandals, rode 
on divine aircraft (vimana) and attained the 
abode of Visnu. Parasurama then killed 
twenty one times the Ksatriyas on this earth 
by virtue of his indomitable valour and 
power. He thus made the earth free from the 
burden of wicked Ksatriyas and gave it as a 
gift to the great man Kasyapa. 

^[fWEr ■pgivIT ^ 

%fditlfH^ry '^1:1 
TPT: R^ii'iJ^ii 



Thus, I have described this episode 
pertaining to the incarnation of Jamadagnya 
(Parasurama) before you. The man listening 
to it with sheer devotion absolves himself 
from all evils. O King, Parasurama, an 
apparent form of god Visnu, the killer of Ks 
atriya as many as twenty one times, 
suppresser of Ksatriya splendour, is still 
enshrined on the Mahendra mountain since 
his birth on this earth. 

Thus ends the forty-sixth chapter on an 
incarnation of Paras'urama in Nrsimha Purana 


CHAPTER 47 


171 


CHAPTER 47 

Incarnation of Rama, His birth and marriage 

^ TTSi^ ^^1 

trariTt ^ ^e(c»,udcb:l|i?ll 

Markandeya said- O King, I will now 
explain that incarnation of god Visnu by 
which Ravana's piercing sword to gods with 
all his army and the supporters as also 
followers was killed. Listen to it attentively. 

Will RTHT: p: I 

ww ^ fsFsrar ^ 

dHlMIdl TratJlt h1*<MU|:| 

cnTOTtW 
^ ^ fiidl-k)4 

^ 'tMpcifdWdhll'iill 
RdiiV^cl ^tdruudl ^llrMHIl 

^ciKldi Trqifr (dldyifq ^iimi 
■pit fit fdfSt?! Tranrl dcidnJd:l 

^ Fifi fiRR xnft 11 ^ 11 

The great hermit Pulastya, a Manasa 
Putra (creation of thought) of Brahma, has 
got a son namely, Visrava. Ravana was the 
son of Visrava. The cause for the wailing of 
all gods, Ravana, was his son. He engaged 
himself in severe penance and by virtue of 
power so obtained, he started invading all 
the worlds. He conquered all gods including 
Indra, Gandharva and Kinnaras and 
enslaved all demi-gods and monsters 
equally. That notorious Ravana had 
abducted the beautiful women of the gods 
and seized the wealth they had. He defeated 
Kubera and snatched his kingdom Lanka 
(now Ceylon) and his aircraft, namely. 


Puspaka Vimana. 

TRf vifrat PciyPd h\6\\ 

•>3 C\ * 


The king Ravana, with ten heads, 
became the king of monsters in Lahkapuri. 
He got a number of sons and all those were 
mighty. The mighty and gallant monsters, 
crore in numbers used to kill the gods, 
Pitaras, men, Vidyadhara and demi-gods 
every day and night under the umbrella of 
Ravana's protection. O king, the entire 
world including movable and immovable 
was badly torn and fell into sorrow owing to 
his coercive exercises. 


U.dPW'^c) W I 

fesr ’pggf: HFRTOsrTII^^II 

ftniT ^ Ir i 

sT^rmW: fK^7Tft^tTTTiinTII^?ll 
I qfldfldii'dl: 

ddKIHZT ffr Mlo^Hq4ddlll??ll 

^ ^ fquj|MKi&i| I 

JlloidfH: 3rDT^ 

All gods including Indra, the hermits, 
Siddha, Vidyadhara, Gandharva, Kinnara, 
Guhyaka, Snakes, Yaksa and other natives 
of heaven whose efforts failed to finish 
Ravana, went to the holy shore of Ks 
irasagara with god Brahma and Sankara 
their heads. These gods stood clasping 
hands after worshipping the god. Then Lord 



172 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


Brahma did worship of Vasudeva Visnu 
with flowers and fragrances etc., physical 
offerings. He then began to worship him 
with clasped hands. 





hi ■'I fa 5,1 <4 Mlnia1'Mffhdl<4 Wl 

^cRirfyd^hKih ^ hlhfiraih ti 

Hiarcuh ^nTt^:iiuii 

^g^rmFT TRRmR ^ I 

-yn^ui 11 o 11 
f^oiiih lr?raR ^4idii:i 
^Htsllh ^VIMIh Tl^T^IR ^11 

yjJfwi?T Cflh^lh ^TIT1^;I 
3<-.RT^HIh ^^twr T^i^RT^T ^ ^:IR^II 
dhl^hlfifdlVIl'M '=PT:l 

^:TW tiguiWf^ qR:l|i??ll 

Brahma said- Namaskara is conveyed to 
god Visnu who resides in Ksirasagara, rests 
on the bed of Sesanaga, whose divine feet 
are fondled by the lotus hands of SrIlaksmT. 
God Govinda is saluted because Yoga is his 
sleep and he is summoned to heart through 
Yoga i.e., the concentration and he rides on 
Garuda (the eagle). Namaskara to god Vis 
nu whose body gets the sweet touch of the 
waves arising in Ksirasagara, who holds the 
Sarhga bow, whose feet are lotus-like, the 
lotus is born from his navel. Frequent salute 
is conveyed to god Laksmipati, whose 


fantastic feet are adored by the devotees, 
who is fond of Yoga and whose eyes and 
organs of body are beautiful. God Sridhara 
with discus in hand is saluted. His hair, 
eyes, forehead, mouth and ears are most 
fascinating. God Padmanabha is saluted. 
His chest and navel are fascinating. God 
Saiiigadhanva is saluted with his brows 
beautiful, body eye pleasing and teeth are 
bright. God Kesava in his divine form and 
decent thighs is saluted. God Gadadhara 
with beautiful nails, most tranquil and cool 
tempered as also treasure of the benevolent 
learnings is saluted. Frequent salute go to 
the religion abiding god Vamana. Salute to 
aggressive and murderer of monsters and 
the devils revered god Nrsirhha. Salute is 
conveyed to god Jagannatha, the killer of 
Ravana and doer of dreadful acts so as to 
relieve the gods from pain and coercion. 

■qtgqjf ff? tT FRTdR^qilRqil 

^tgcwl 

q4^qj|u1: 

Markandeya said- God Hrslkes'a pleased 
by the worship so made by Brahma and 
appearing in physical form there, he said- O 
Pitamaha, why have you come here in the 
company of gods? Let me know the cause 
and the act to be performed by me. "God 
Brahma in response to the query so made by 
the creator of this universe, god Visnu, 
requested - 

gtlrMHIl 

M'd^dlRld 



CHAPTER 47 


173 


TT^T^^^%lTr tlrqf flfflfefT: I 

^ch-in ^dlRin <!<HMdR^14^l:IR(ill 

<i<4ui4^ gg- sigi 

God Brahma said- O sovereign god, the 
malicious soul Ravana has appeared as a 
dreadful killer in this world. He has many 
times defeated the gods including Indra. 
The other monsters under the umbrella of 
Ravana ate up numerous people so far and 
thus polluted the offerings made by them. 
Ravana himself has abducted several 
hundreds of thousands of divine damsels. O 
lotus-eyed, none other than you can kill 
Ravana. Hence we request you for the same. 

vpajMicjfgdi f?ci; 11 ^ o 11 

Ttguifq ggrak Tirmi 

^gdPhPr:ll^^ll 

c(a(4’ni f4v<dd)4: •dduii^q:! 

fegggr ^^4 WT ?Ttg5ftlcTTOF:ll^?ll 
ggj gg:i 

God Visnu replied - O Brahmana, listen 
to the words I am going to tell you for the 
interests of all of you. I will get birth as son 
of Dasaratha the popular king of the solar 
clan in the earth. In order to kill Ravana, I 
will appear dividing myself in four forms. 
Creator Brahma, please, give instruction to 
all gods that they should receive rebirth on 
the earth in monkey form. Ravana could be 
killed when this procedure is followed." All 
gods including Brahma then bowed their 


heads and departed to Meru mountain. They 
then took birth as monkeys on the earth. 

3Tsng^ 

^ f 4>Kgihm jOTficrajf! 
pWirndW gRgidrq 

-gqgl ggregf;: 

c;% ftrol 

(T TWlPFqT: IPrgjrr:II?II 

n 3 >0 ' 


ddldf MTVIdlhT^ thprstt ggrf^i 



With the passage of time, issueless king 
Dasaratha called the hermits well 
conversant with the Vedas and performed 
an offering for the attainment of a son i.e., 
PutrestI yajna. With the impetus of almighty 
god, fire appeared from the spot of offering 
on completion of the same adequately with 
a bowl full of sweet dish in his hand. The 
hermit present there received the same from 
fire god and divided it in two parts. They 
spelled hymns and gave the sweet dish to 
Kaus'alya and Kaikeyl. Those two queens 
again divided their share and offered each 
part to Sumitra. They then ate the parts of 
sweet dish so divided. As the parts of sweet 
dish were divine, all queens conceived, 
trg %l 

^sprarq^iit^oii 
TRtT; -qg ^1 
trrw -pwi dPHii<^'difii'ii^ii 
rpsrftroggwiiBr trw i 



174 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


II 

’im: TFiR WT ^sg^l 

O king, god Visnu thus appeared as 
Rama, Laksmana, Bharata and Satrughna by 
virtue of that divine sweet dish and as the 
incarnation of god Visnu in four human 
forms. After Jatakarma Sarhskara, they 
started living in couples i.e., Rama with 
Laksmana and Bharata with Satrughna. 
Their activities during childhood were so 
common as that of other boys. Rama used 
to live with Laksmana intimately. Both 
were mighty and their acts being always 
ideal, king Dasaratha enjoyed the pleasure 
of being their father. Their characteristics 
were eccentric and unprecedented. They 
were with all marks that predict the man's 
being well known to the Vedas and 
grammar. Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi, 
usually to live in the palace with his 
intimate brother Satrughna. They have 
learnt the Vedas and armoury too with the 
time advancing. 

g R^l;l 

■mrpT '4J^RI>^r fsrfiRT U^^4H,ll>Smi 
■R' 5 TOl 

^1 



■R Rfr: w TRPt 1M«(^lll'!i<4ll 

Cs -o 

TTsn; 2[?TOr I 

fM?ll|^ ««raifi| tTgnRT:ll'5J'?ll 

^ ^ I h o 11 






A great ascetic Visvamitra during that 
span of time, began to perform worship to 
god Madhusudana. As the monsters had 
disturbed him initially, he therefore visited 
one day the beautiful palace of king 
Dasaratha with an intention to bring Rama 
and Laksmana with him for protecting the 
peaceful act of offering. The learned 
Das'aratha stood up in his honour and 
entertained him with all physical services. 
Having attained his seat near king 
Das'aratha, he said- "O king of the kings, 
Dasaratha listen to me - I submit the 
purpose of my arrival here. My offering has 
been destroyed by the notorious monsters 
several times. Hence, I beg you for Rama 
and Laksmana to safeguard my act." 





fdi(uiirc('?4t ^ fdVdiUldyEira ?im^ii 

3T5 R^BIry9lcRdl ^ tn§RllH^II 


TT^ ^ TT3TR 

TTRtsftr ^ ^im^ii 

TI^<? % ^ T ^1 


3RT)- ^ ^ TW ^ T flprlt m ■!{ 11 


O king, a twinge of pain on the face of 
king Das'aratha spread when he heard the 
submission of Visvamitra. He replied - 
"revered hermit, my sons being just younger 
in age, what and how will they perform 
such a risky assignment? I agree to come 
with you and will exercise the measures of 
protection of yajna." The hermit consoled 
him by saying -”0 king, there is no scope 
for doubt on the destruction of the monsters 
by Rama. Only Rama' can kill them and you 
yourself as I know the tacts. Hence, give me 
Rama and be free from the worries. 



CHAPTER 47 


175 


fe(cc(i ^mr TRT yPici4^qm fimmi 
f^wter ^i 

TN^cIHlrlH TTOR? II 

f% ^jFRt ^IR; MRwjfd I 


The king kept mum for a while and then 
said- "O hermit, listen to what I am going 
to submit with a cool mind. Rama's mother 
loves so much that she will die in the 
absence of Rama and Laksmana. Hence, I 
think it better to move there with my army 
and slaughter the monsters. 

3TFl??r Tl^raT^ ^41^4 ^ rnfR fenfq;i 

TTRt TR: ^:l 

ftwrak fvliiHi MIHHId ^1 

aratrhiff ^ ^ ^roiinii I ^ o 11 

^ RTR ^ ii'Ji’f '9TR>: chi4s^ xTItRffri 

rT ti^KN 3Ti}f4bijifh ^ %\\ 


Visvamitra then responded - "O king, 
Rama is just not an innocent child but 
omniscient, most mighty and generous. 
Don't have a doubt on the fact that Rama 
and Laksmana are embodiments of apparent 
god Narayana and Se^anaga. They have 
come to you as sons with the sole purpose 
of inflicting punishment on the wicked and 
protection to the gentlemen. Their mothers 
and you yourself should not worry in the 
matter of their absence. I accept them on 
trust and undertake making their safe return 
when the yajna is completed. 




TTWcHR TTR^I 

M: fRSRR 
rt afeldWIHlcHI TFitr 

^ chiwjc[>4fq:i 

RpnHTT3[KpT wn i ^ m i 

TFTOrr dF&'iiVi ^ qr i 

Kspm ^HifR ^ ilRT 3ra^ ^ii^^ii 

King Dasaratha had now smelt the 
temperament of Visvamitra and feared for 
his anger. He therefore, said- "Very well, 
then please, bring them with you." The 
hermit Visvamitra then took Rama and Laks 
mana to Siddhasrama, the place of offering. 
While he was leaving Ayodhya, king 
Dasaratha followed them up to a little 
distance due to his excessive attachment. 
He had said that time - "O revered hermit, 
you know very well that it is the grace of 
hermits who made me able to see the face 
of sons otherwise the pain of having no 
sons, penetrated me quite long. Hence, I am 
in no position to survive if they were kept 
away for long. Please, therefore, make their 
safe return as early as possible. 

^^ciyttdl INm : I 

TR ^ I ^ V 911 

Visvamitra again replied Dasaratha - O 
king, you needn't worry as I will definitely 
return with RSma and Laksmana here on 
completion of yajna and keep my words 
without the least deviation." 

Rri4T4 f dlWlfq ^ felt 

^^RRRTR cT^RTnt^tR;iR<ill 

<nir\ 

On having so assurance given by 



176 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


Visvamitra and under intimidation of his 
curse, Dasaratha sent Rama and Laksmana 
with him; however, it was done unwillingly. 
Visvamitra then moved out from Ayodhya 
with both brothers. 

yfidlwlimRia ^ 

cT^; jDrtJI 11’^IJSnT || 

dHlMfrlddi ^ ^ iranll 

IIt9 I 

3TBinTTfnT ^ f^lfn 'MlRldlrmit^llV9?ll 
c[#i^ wr; I 

gllUTO dl^U RT ig 

O king, the learned Visvamitra firstly 
provided Rama and Laksmana two 
learnings i.e., Bala and Atibala 
affectionately even while they were on the 
way. These learnings remove hunger and 
thirst. The hermit taught them these 
learnings with a hymn and saihgraha 
(conclusion). He then in a seriatim provided 
them an introduction with the weapons and 
took through several hermitages of experts 
in metaphysics. On the way they took halt 
at the holy places, crossed the river GangS 
and reached the western shore of the river 
Sonabhadra. 

r l l Z^iiq r gr 4tt ■gr4)^13firahTTH;il 
rt^ f4?c)|fq4t 

tldUIW ctRriirW'qgld^l 

w rjkit ■gftgjiT fqTWTiiva'sii 

Princes Rama and Laksmana saw 


hermits, religious souls and siddhas on the 
way and reached of the Tadaka forest which 
was no less dreadful than the next mouth of 
Yamas. Having arrived there, the great 
ascetic Visvamitra suddenly said to ideal 
Rama, "O brave Rama, a monstress Tadaka 
lives in this dense forest with the 
permission of Ravana. She has made her 
food numerous people, children of munis 
and deer. Hence, O gentleman, slaughter 
her. 

f^^dl d'rtlTti ^ hTlhl 

gftqTTTlTRt yPlR9lcnctll^<i II 

f 3radf^ ■qqtfquT.-iiis'? II 

d^i^ ^nr: (d<i3>ni:ll^oII 

Rama replied to Visvamitra - "O great 
hermit, as the scholar prohibit murder of a 
lady then tell me how should I slaughter 
her? Visvamitra suggested - "O Rama, all 
people will be fearless or get-rid-of danger 
if she is slaughtered. Hence, this deed is not 
evil but a great one. 

ctwittw: j^uiijidi gsr:i 
^ l^irritliiTd ?ii 

anw ■fRiralTT fsi^RTi 
■jfqqr vlRfll tiMwi f5^crFRT^ii<i^ii 



Sj)fu|^n<Jl^htlH‘)yHIH,l 

■qf^tiTT "R? TRra':li<i^ii 
■?R -mm ^ rmi arrwrtfi 
fa qi fed fl^Tl^-RTTTqpT Wt^l !<:;>? II 

The hermit Visvamitra could hardly 
complete his sentence, just when the 



CHAPTER 47 


177 


gigantic monstress Tadaka thrust there 
suddenly with her mouth wide opened. 
Rama could see her when the hermit made a 
hint. Her stick like arm was uplifted. An 
intestine of human being was hanging down 
from her waist which was wrapped tightly. 
Rama forgot his disgust for the murder of a 
woman and shot an arrow at her. He put an 
arrow on the bow and shot it with rapid 
force. It had divided her body into two parts 
and she fell down dead. 





Visvamitra took Rama and Laksmana at 
that divine Siddhas'rama after the Tadaka 
was slaughtered. There were a number of 
hermits. This Asrama existed in the middle 
valley of the Vindhya mountain. 
Uncountable trees and creepers were there 
with flowers blossomed on them. The 
asrama was flourishing with several 
vegetables, roots and fruits and several 
fountains were flowing there. The hermit 
taught them special ways and appointed for 
the protection of yajna. Then he started the 
yajna. 


fdlicllfildl RlldMI:! 


I# 5 tT5r ^ difelvH:l 

arnidT ^ddiiiiiar fd4lf^di:i 


dHFHTRT TFT: chU<dHlT4H:ll<? o || 


71^ FTTraFTRT SHuDd^l 
tnflTT 

dldduRy ^ -qftjf ^ ciT^I 
VliTrTg TFTt FT^rVW Pl9Tiy <1^11 ^ 11 

With the consecration made with 
Visvamitra, the act of offering was started. 
The Rtvijas handled their respective acts 
too. The monsters like Marici, Subahu and 
many others appointed by Ravana just then 
came there with the intention to viciate the 
yajna. Rama killed Subahu with an arrow 
immediately. His body flooded with the 
blood stream. Then he put a Bhalla arrow 
on the bow and threw Marici at the sea¬ 
shore. It was done the same way as the wind 
throws the leaves far away, Rama and Laks 
mana then slaughtered all other monsters 
jointly. 

TT^rOT Tf^RFFat WiT?n:l 

tftfzt ^ i ? 11 

«c;WFrfi| TFfj^T ^TtJI^ ^ 

TFT ’El ^ M'ddltim 

TFFTI 

5 TFT^^ I m I 
Tl^TTWt cblTf?trc)| f d-FtsFI^I 

The illustrious Visvamitra thus 
completed the yajna under the protective 
cover provided by Rama and then satisfied 
the Rtvijas with donations abundantly. He 
then honoured the member participating in 
the yajna and appreciated both Rama and 
Laksmana for their bravery. The gods who 
attained their share from yajna then 
showered flowers on Sr! Rama. 

^FTFigSIT; fUFT TFTt gi^TFl: 11 ^ 11 
^ fIfI IffIftff 3T?F?TT FF (d<<sidl 

FFt w % TF gTTII<^V9|| 




178 


NARASIMHA PLRANAM 


QlMIuWdl TTWT 

3 TWc^ ^T^jrfrRTft^Txr jrf^ii^<iii 

Thus, having made the hermits free from- 
the fear of monsters for ever, Sri Rama with 
Laksmana on completion of the yajna and 
with enjoying the holy stories from 
Visvamitra, reached at a place where 
Ahalya was in the form of a boulder. She 
had become a boulder due to the curse 
inflicted by Gautama, her husband when her 
debauchery was observed by him with Indra 
long-long years ago. The became free from 
the curse and got her usual shape as a 
phenomena of seeing Rama and returned to 
her husband. 

^Sri^TTt M<4( ^'ijj TTR: II 

f^T^: MR<^dl5^4j4um Ttf^ll^oo|| 

Later on Visvamitra thought for a while 
and made his mind up that Rama should be 
married and then be taken to Ayodhya. In 
order to implement the plan, he started 
moving towards Mithila in the company of 
many hermits including Rama and Laks 
mana. 

^ ■yjcTTRTc*,i4j^:ii^o^ii 
cTHT '^'*511 MMiRircu ^ viHchV'd ' 5 Rn^:l 
iJrtlldi^n; R^dlH ■qiti;il^o9ll 

3 if^ ■fWTTFnm tuivl'mmMPcidi 
Tf tT?f^ Ri'diuf tym-muRi rnsjdi^o^ii 

The gallant and brave princes from a 
nuniber of countries, had already reached 
Janakapura with a passion to marry Sita 
when they reached there. The Janaka duly 


entertained them and a vast bow of Sankara 
was put in the pavilion after worship was 
performed, with flowers and the sandal etc. 

#31 ycii^vil'R^Ti 

fgfti tlf^ tTlfer:! 

^ 'ddditdoidtoyuicli ^11^0tail 

irontzT RyHctraltl 

RfVctirUdtdd: Wdt rnI«IHlisit|^l-4]^q^||^o<iii 

Then the king Janaka made a declaration 
addressing all those kings - "O Princes, Sita 
can be a bride to the prince who will break 
this bow into two parts. The kings present 
there began to stretch the bow after the 
declaration but the shocks caused by the 
bow were even unbearable to them and their 
body felt a shivering experience with a push 
downward. It ashamed all the princes and 
kings. O King, Janaka, the king on failure 
of the kings, made the bow again set as 
before and waited for the arrival of Rama. 
Just then, Vis'vamitra entered into the palace 
of Mithila. 

3^II?o<?|| 

TTR -Rnriw iJifT HiciU'yif<j|i^i'j}dhii??oii 
ijyi-yra yliRlTRR:iin?ii 

rct!,K=lirH:l^ciMW fg; -q^ 7T:II^^9II 
Janaka greeted Sri Rama, Laksmana and 


CHAPTER 47 


179 


Visvamitra along with his disciples came 
there. Janaka became happy when he 
introduced with the etiquette and modesty 
he just saw in Rama and Laksmana. He 
offered them all the chairs made of gold for 
sitting. Having done this formality he asked 
VisVamitra - O Lord, tell me know what is 
to be done?" 


qicl5u^if 

^ ^VTWriRl: I 
3R^ ^ 

aRZTT qn^^HcJlRcinj 


Markandeya said- "In response to 
Janakas statement, the hermit said- O king, 
prince Rama is god Visnu and appeared as 
son of Das'aratha for the protection of all the 
three-worlds. Hence marry your daughter to 
him. However, as you are under stipulation 
of splitting up the Siva's bow, bring the 
same here and do formal worship. 

d«lrqcRc(| ^ 7 MT f| 

^ qsqirHqtSJFJ TIR; 11 M 

ttUTRl ferFf sgTRRT WfRTI 

1 ^ U11 

3TTfiRTqTnt ^ dcdlrid 



^ WTRnirTr%;ii^^oii 

q^: ^TTJPHTfq RiraHT: I 

rfifnili^tmtTTqrqHiKiq ^qcnqii^^^ii 


'iqi^dHUlgut ^Uiuiuiq qR fORI 

VR'^HiR ^ wtl qaiwdtii^y ^11 

SRiq ^ MdidiiVq HlHqil 

ttrh fqfyiHifqgldTdd:ii^y^ii 

RhlRt qit qrinnw It 
R^iRWq qiiglft %[roq ^ cTFf ^fTRJI^^-iJII 
^ qjRqrfq qffq qi 
cni4i5d qfqqjq qRraqrRFfgRii^^qii 
dlfn^'d q qiqcq R^^RRcRlI 
fitR tRI fqgfdId q ^HRIMra ^jIrT*: 11 ^^ ^ 11 

Then the excellent bow was put as 
before with affirmation to the instructions 
of Vis'vamitra . On being allowed by 
Visvamitra, Rama, the son of Dasaratha 
stood up in the presence of all kings and 
bowing his head to the Brahmins and the 
god as well, he picked up the bow in his 
hands. He then put the string on it and just 
gave a jerk. This action with force split the 
bow into two parts. As the promise was 
kept, Sita came with a nice garland, put it 
round the neck of Rama in the presence of 
all Ksatriya kings and accepted him as her 
husband with all formalities duly 
performed. It made the kings upset and they 
began to shoot arrows at him with attack 
from all sides. Sri Rama also took his bow 
and shot at them. It cut the aiTows and split 
their chariots. Sri Rama with the application 
of his arts cut their bows and the flags too. 
The king of Mithila too arranged his army 
and began to give protection cover to Rama 
in that battle. Laksmana too drove away 
those kings by defeat and captured their 
elephants, horses and a number of chariots. 
He chased the kings who departed by 
leaving their chariots behind but registered 
by Janaka and Visvamitra . 


180 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


ilRT^T m WT 

3TTc^ Trrat^iTZT ^jFrai: ■JEg^'^pr^ii^^vaii 

^ ^ ^WqRT ^ ^^nsim -^T: I 

^rf^disi: ■?! TTlfe:ll^9<ill 
WiJ: ■?TW: #tn^-^w?g(5JraT^^:l 
fofynmi'jiJiioi^i inTf^:ii?^^ii 

^qchlWJ-W ■RfgJTt W ^ "pt M:l 

wr 3:^ Tmrar Ti#grii^?oii 
srqrr?^ -^cnfwt wi^;i 

Having surpassed the army of the king, 
king .Tanaka entered into his decent palace 
in the company of Sri Rama and Laksmana. 
He just then sent a messenger to king 
Dasaratha. The king Dasaratha then heard 
the entire news since Rama's departure and 
became happy. King Dasaratha then visited 
Mithila with his army, horses, elephants and 
chariots, the queens and sons etc. Tanaka 
warmly greeted king Dasaratha. The 
marriage was solemnised and he assigned 
his daughter to Rama. He then arranged the 
marriage of his three other daughters to 
Laksmana etc. three brothers. 

^ TTtr: ^TTrf#ER:l 

wf fei cFram 

%Tf% gifdRiTi:{ ftaRTT fgfgsmf3T^: i 
cimsqWgtT Wfi 

THir #draT: 
f^cznfq 

IT 

^r#3Rt^ TIW: 

TTPIT 

Tj uukm w ^RwrrtTi 

v3 s3 'V 


■gut ^ 

q«T^c^ 5Rg;: «fH<^TiqiqTl^?^il 
dW dtxll q^Ninl: gdi ddll 


Rama, stayed in Mithilapur! for a few 
days more with his brothers, mothers and 
mighty father. Having seen then Dasaratha 
passionate to return with his sons to 
Ayodhya, king Tanaka offered wealth and 
gems, beautiful garments, trained elephants, 
horses along with slaves and maid servant.s 
to Rama and Sita. He bade farewell to his 
daughter STta with reciting the hymns of the 
Vedas and blessing. Tanaka then saluted 
king Dasaratha, Visvamitra and Vasistha 
and came back to his palace. The queens of 
Tanaka also returned to the palace after 
assigning their daughters to their mother-in- 
laws and with the inspiration to serve their 
husband and in-laws. 


lit ftfflT iiTg;i 

cRT^ TTR 

TTT^TTRt ^ TTOR 'RRtSI 
it^E^TTSigW: ^ W dH*TrHRT:ll?^<?ll 
an-Hi^yiWrJirM 5;w?Tl*yRi^d:i 

«TRwr{i i o 11 

rrm ^ ■g^:feRni;i 

dfnwv^'irjtddm <??rant -qBTgRrtii^ii^ii 


It is said that Paras'urama stood on 
Rama's way to Ayodhya when he heard that 
Rama is returning with a mighty army. All 
kings were intimidated on heaiing this. 
King Dasaratha too with his queens and the 
family suffered from the prospective sorrow 



CHAPTER 47 


181 


and pain. The peculiar ascetie Vasistha then 
said to Das'aratha and all other people 
there. 

^ ^ f I ? 11 

iwr m 

TTT^nfgpJJig^ 

TTFRTSl^ 1 TT9FT:I 

■^TST ^TJJT^TcT? ^ cWiJII 
TmgOTWrfri OTti I h 11 

Vasistha said- You all should not worry 
for Rama. The father, mother, brother and 
other service class should not regret for the 
forthcoming problem and pain. Rama is 
incarnated to god Visnu. He has appeared in 
your palace ensuring protection for the 
world as a whole. The god himself he here 
whose mere prayer removes the person 
from the worldly fears. Hence, 
apprehension of any kind will prove only a 
folly. Where the story of Rama merely is 
told and heard, the people living in that 
place are seldom caught in the hands of 
contagious diseases and premature death. 

Tmt HtUUI^HlH; I ^ 11 

r^TSf ilUd^tld M<4I ^ 

Tm: 3iTf tt Tifar fenrq;ii?'i{t9ii 
TTRWT 'fefft 

tt TTlTt TF3rraHhR:ll^'iJ<i 

^tTT^gRRTWI 

MV*<di ReJ'MdHi TTJT5tif5f%?T?^l 

ft tTR: MRHc)^5sr#tTII?h oil 
TR TR Rgrartf WR:! 


qgiT^^jTlcTt ?TTrTtS'Rir W f^ll^H ?l 
W ^ -iraichlM ^c(cfj|4 R t ^1 
5^Rt f3«R fVIWFfcl llRMM^TII^^^II 

As Vasistha could finish his words, 
Parasurama came there and said to Rama - 
"O Rama, give up your name or fight with 
me." Rama replied to him - "How can I give 
up my name? So, be alert, I will fight." He 
then took his bow and put an arrow on the 
same. His jerk of bow was so phenomenal 
that the splendour of Visnu came out from 
the mouth of Parasurama and entered into 
Rama. Parasurama pleased with this and 
said- "O warrior, you only are Rama and 
the doubt my mind has been shattered now. 
I could understand you. You are incarnated 
to god Visnu in this physical form. Go on 
your way as you desire, protect the interests 
of gods and support saints by giving them 
protection from the clutches of wicked 
people. Kill all wicked. Go now voluntarily 
and I also go to the Tapovana (the forest for 
penance). 

■R% R TR 31? TRl^RT 1 

Rik:ll?h3ll 

q'^^lR ^jRRR gcRFreil 

^ fii^kijii 

RRR TI^ Tt? Rf^ll 
1^34Vllm ^ fJRT ^^VIlfHHXll^hbll 

TRRRR ^5?^ Rtsf^PRII ^ II 

With these words and having received 
the honour as muni from Dasaratha etc., 
Parasurama resolved for penance and went 
to Mahendracala. All people were in 
procession and king Dasaratha then became 
happy and they reached near Ayodhya with 




182 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


Rama. Having seen the procession nearer, 
all natives of Ayodhya came out from their 
houses, decorated Ayodhya and gave them a 
warm reception with conch, drum, trumpet 
etc., revealing an atmosphere of gaiety. 
They were pleased to see Rama with his 
wife Sita and entered Ayodhya with them. 

ct ?f%r: -^RTT i 

rffm 

eft gftiniSW'T WT ^ 

-Riw 'nftprft tiftt 

TRlTTqfft; 

gr: gr: «fToq- 



^sntratgtf^ssjTRT; I I'iS ^ 11 


The hermit Visvaraitra, then entrusted 
Rama and Laksmana to their father and 
particularly to their mother. King Das'aratha 
honoured him and he then wished 
immediate return. Thus, Visvamitra 
entrusted the most beloved Rama to his 
father with brother Laksmana and wife Sita, 
appreciated their merits before him and then 
departed happily to his Siddhas'rama. 

Thus ends the forty-seventh chapter on an 
incarnation of Rama in Nrsimha Purana 





182 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 48 

Rama's exile, death of king Dasaratha and 
meeting of Rama with Bharata in the forest 

TR: I 

^RTMq'qitry^ii^ii 
arqVirai ftemt tr: i 

H^iryqltiqiqr Tl^ TfTRfi ^IRII 
^ ?TfCTOf|<^t RTrft RigH ^1 
(Rt 371^ TMT 3Rmt^ 

RfR ^ gjf^i 

TTJqRTt RW^T tbURTtJI-i^ll 

^ trrg R?iiR cbRwiRl 6 qfq-d^?d,i 

RfqRR ’ddltltMl Rmi^llTlimi 

RsTR RRRRlWlTRf^R?R rdtlP^d:! 


Rf 3 ^tRT; RRTftR 

^rimirill: RRl^?nti;R^f^ 3RfiRFi;ilV9ll 

3TTf!I rlTT'^S^ 


RR; fJM R^ ■^rqRRnt^RRRfl 
RTRTfRRRlR ^^TRtTrRT: 

Markandeya said- Rama began to live in 
Ayodhya for the pleasure of his father, 
enjoying all luxuries, increasing the gaiety 
of the subjects after marriage. When Rama 
was in Ayodhya, his brother Bharata went 
to his maternal house with his brother 
Satrughna. Later on king Dasaratha, taking 
Rama mighty, modest, young, learned and 
worth to select for the crown thought of 
entrusting the responsibility of the kingdom 
and royal affairs so that he could do efforts 
to attain the abode of god Visnu. In order to 



CHAPTER 48 


183 


implement this thought, the king 
immediately ordered his officers, officials, 
the kings subjugated and ministers - "Come 
with the goods required and prescribed by 
Munis duly collected. Messengers and 
ministers, go can come with the kings 
ruling in all directions by duly inviting him. 
O native of Ayodhyapurl, decorate this 
entire city properly and arrange music and 
dance everywhere so properly that this city 
becomes a pleasure pouring for all native 
and appear fantastic to the natives of the 
entire country. Be known to the fact that 
Rama will be enthroned tomorrow with 
royal grandeur. 

^ 3nTim-fq ^ll^o|| 

WTT W Rri TfjR qfwiiddqj 

Having heard this, the ministers bowed 
their heads before the king and said- "O 
king, your idea is the best and we all are 
agreed to the same. Incoronation of Rama is 
the most benevolent for us. 

3n41iiTii gtt TrwnTT tPT viiU’unJ 

The king said to all those people - "Very 
well, the goods required for the 
incoronation should be brought 
immediately and Ayodhya, the city of 
essence in this earth, should be well 
decorated just today properly. A pavilion 
for yajna is also a sine-qua-non for this 
purpose. 

^cddMcwi T hHur: vnychititJi:! 

Tit TT: 


Wgt; TT TTSIT W 

TTRlRlwngint -gt 3mznfd?fttTT;l 

Th^'^OTtJTcnng TiTii^^ii 

Having listened to this all from the king 
and the frequent inspiration given by him, 
the ministers completed all works 
accordingly. The king became happy in 
waiting for the auspicious day. Kausalya, 
Sumitra, Laksmana and other native could 
not resist their pleasure so aroused with the 
news of the incoronation of Sri Rama. Slta, 
always engaged in the service of her in¬ 
laws, became overjoyed when she heard 
this news favouring her husband. 

g^irddi ferar tjiiT Ttfrraiut WRRi 
vtmifd-yRiti* g Tram fdRdirddni^taii 
^ g R-SIIHIHI -Idiidl: 

T^t WlHldl' g 4l*dirM4 ^^RWtT?Tll^.ill 

Tif^ qTcR rr 

tddlfdig RfRraidcI RRTIRtllIrr:ll^<?ll 
ThM chl?IHlgd: RftHlft Rqft: I 

TT3t ^ TracT ^11?oil 
TTRTR RTfRR T f5fi3€R| 

RTWlftr Rdt ^ RIdcTTR Tji 3lftll'R ^11 

God Rama, the metaphysician or 
intuitive, was to be enthroned on the next 
day. In the meantime, the hump, backed 
maid servant of Kaikeyl i.e., Manthara said 
to her - "O lucky person, I explain a news 
and request you to listen. Your husband 
king Dasaratha has now planned to spoil 
you. Rama, the son of Kaus'alya, will 
become the king of Ayodhya tomorrow. 
This entire state with wealth, chariots and 
treasure will go to Rama and Bharata will 



184 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


left with nothing. Look at the art of destiny; 
Bharata too has gone far this time and 
living at his maternal house. Alas, to what 
extent is it painful. You are unlueky 
because you are now left for suffering on 
behalf of the step-wife. 

^ 3 T^ 

Kaikeyi on hearing this said to Kubja - 
"O wise Kubja, look at my efficieney. I do 
effort so skilfully that this state may go to 
Bharata and Rama to exile. 


rlSfT RrR 

trrt ■RT 5 Wlf'fEcrhhll^'kll 
JURlfui RI^HdlRlSBrndd^l 

«RRf^ RSnl^l 
^ TRZfran^ ^:fecTTIR^It 


With these words to Manthara, Kaikeyi 
took out all ornaments she had worn on her 
body, threw the beautiful garments and the 
flower garlands as well. She put on a coarse 
garment on her body. She reput the flowers 
once removed, smeared ash and dust on the 
body and she pretended as if suffering from 
pain and fits with an ugly complexion 
made. She wrapped a white cloth round the 
forehead, put out the lamp in the evening 
and laid down on the ground uncleaned and 
filled with ash and dust. 


' 'O va 

w RnR^tri W5R-RRicRlfR RIRV9I1 

Wn?; IRfRTRTfrt: WW Tht R 

cifRbdl^: TnsnTRTrg^lR<ill 


^feriRTTlfl^ 

hld-^ritRRlchluj 

TRR ftsiiRT JIrRTRR; RR:! 

t^RRt ITT RRf^: RfTT^RTt^ll^oll 
tIRllRlIeji RrpnR: -R Rife: I 
^4iRfeR RrEj^RRsnfei;i I ^ ^ 11 

King Das'aratha returned from the 
pavilion after a little stay where the song 
and dance programmes were arranged and 
echo of trumpet, conch, khala etc., was 
spreading everywhere. That place was 
appropriate for Nandi sraddha and Jagarana. 
Sri Rama was seated there after due consult 
made with the ministers on all affairs and 
Punya Vacana, Svastivacana and 
Mahgalapatha performed by the Vasistha 
etc., Rsis. On his return to the palace, he 
first wished to inform Kaikeyi about the 
auspicious coronation of Rama and he 
reached the threshold of Kaikeyl's palace. 
Old soldiers were appointed as guards there. 
The king asked for her when he saw the 
palace of Kaikeyi sinking in the dark. 

apgRtirfRR riwirsi ^ Rf^ fei 

TIRlfR^ ?Rfe 3TRRRT 3lfR rI^II^^II 

TJFIcTflRt ffeir RTlRR RRT?TH;I 

IRRIH R fJR ROTlfsfrRRIRT ^ R'^RfR:ll? ^ II 
IRlfeiRT ^ ^:l 

Rl^RRl^' WCTR! Rf^ fell^-UII 
R?TOI: RT? RW: fipfe fefRI 

3Rf?RfeenR RT TFRl ^ RTR RR':ll?mi 

TRRTRfeit Rf^ RRtfR tl 

RTRlfR^ TIRTR ?Rt RfefR ^T1R%II^^II 

"Darling, why is your palace sinking in 
the dark" The Candalas even have 
considered the incoronation of Rama as 



CHAPTER 48 


185 


pleasure pouring. All people are deeorating 
their houses with possible means'. Tell me 
why you have not decorated your palace? 
With these words, the king lighted the 
lamps there and then entered there. He saw 
that KaikeyT was sleeping on the floor. Her 
every organ of body looked ugly. The king 
lifted her up to his chest and spoke these 
words - "Darling, listen to my suggestions? 
O beautiful lady, your beloved Rama who 
loves you more than his own mother, will 
be enthroned tomorrow." 

frfaRiT W ^1 

11 ^ ^ 11 

wwt trr^: nr? 
f% ^ ^ 

RIT 

dcJlRtil* smil'd 7T^ 

^iu§mn^ ^ Itt W 

gr: go? 

The lady did not respond on the 
statement of the king. She began to sigh 
with pain and anger in her face. The king 
embraced her and said- O beautiful 
Kaikeyi, tell me the cause for your pain. Be 
happy and get yourselves the desired 
garments, ornaments and gems etc., 
whatever you desire. O philanthropic lady, 
my desire will see culmination when the 
coronation of Rama will over tomorrow. 
That store will again fill-up during the 
regime of Rama and this is the cause I have 
left the door of treasury wide open. Darling, 
give honour and importance to a greater 
extent to the bona-fide of Rama 


incoronation. 

XNciitlui 

giMfdR^uii %%drsiyTd;i 

TTiiR ii 

T ■5ET^:l 

Kaikeyi, the sinner, wicked, cruel and 
foolish queen replied - "O king, all gems 
undoubtedly are mine but I need only two 
boons you once promised when the gods 
and monsters were in the battle field. 
Kindly, give them to me this time. 

wg WWW ^ ^1 

fl; g;^ ^[fr^ w lu ^ 11 

"m abwifuT ^ 

The king then said- "O good-hearted 
queen, I do not say of others but I will give 
you the things even for what I have never 
promised. Thanks for recollection of my 
promise once made and have faith in me 
that you already have received that thing. 
Now put on fashionable garments and 
ornaments and come out from the blind 
alley of your fury. Get up at once and feel 
gaiety by participating in the auspicious 
function of Rama's incoronation. 

frgcRTT tWctifui 

mrs( Vim Ti^ RwqjRtiTgi I's 11 
g^ ^ <iwRi ^ f^i 

o 



186 


NARASIMHA PURAIVAM 


The callous queen Kaikeyl spoke such 
harsh woi'ds that became the cause for the 
death of the king. She said- "O king, if you 
really have granted I ask first that Rama 
will move to forest in the next morning and 
live as much as twelve years in 
Dandakaranya. My second desire is to see 
Bharata on the throne in that morning. 

foqnf^TTiJ -R grTT 

wiH ^ Ti^ inftr iwiwi I h ^ 11 

qfegr f HT hdictdli 

TRTtf ^icTWJT?: fst:l 

King Dasaratha fell down on the ground 
owing to the heavy shock of KaikeyT's 
mala-fides and Kaikeyi, on other side, 
decorated herself with beautiful garments. 
On passing the rest of the night in pleasure, 
she happily ordered Sumanta, the 
messenger - "Call Rama here immediately." 
Rama was in the pavilion made for offering, 
enjoying the sweet sounds of conch and 
trumpet as also Punya Vacana and 
Svastivacana performed by Brahmins, just 
the same time when Sumanta was ordered. 

dRIRia ^ JlfuNril 5T:fW: I 

TTWT wrmir ^ fttmihtfii 

frPtfditS W ^ ^ fqiTTI 

frqqdWT ^ ?Tiviw^ Tmtiiqqii 

The messenger, Sumanta, reached near 
Rama, stood there with clasped hands and 
said- "O Rama, stand up quickly and follow 
the order of your father. Come with me to 
Das'aratha. "Rama immediately followed the 
message of Sumanta and reached Kaikeyl's 


palace under permission to leave from the 
Brahminas. 

3?3?nw fgfSTR; imtT: 

W ^ ^ J(5lcttut^l 

TTRRit ^ pTTrTO;i 
T STTclTlrj;^ ^ ^rliqill 

The era el-hearted Kaikeyl said when she 
saw Rama entering in her palace - "Dear 
son, I am going to tell you the opinion of 
your father. O warrior, go and live in the 
forest for twelve years. Make up your mind 
for the penance there and leave Ayodhya 
immediately. Don't think otherwise and 
follow my words with honour. 

tTT^i m 11 

'd^^Kiirr srjn^ i 
Chl^lc^i rt M^yadrll^oii 

60. Having heard these words from 
Kaikeyl, Rama said very well and complied 
with the order of his father without any 
question. He bowed his head before them 
and took over his bow after he has came out 
from her palace. He then touched the feet of 
Kausalya and Sumitra and prepared himself 
for the departure. 

f (RT: tfin gtyvil^Mro^Hi:! 
[^teqyv^iy qli*#: tjfw ■t^rll^ ^11 

tRret Tmt 

ctirqiqm «j4qin'*tiJigiqfrf:ll^?ll 

m ^ <^«ir+tTi-h tT:i 

Tmt T8T ^rtVIMI-yR.il^ ill^^ll 

^ 5ii^iJ|i4l ^wr3T:i 



CHAPTER 48 


187 


^ cl^llui fgfgsilPl 

All citizens sank in agony and felt 
anxiety. Laksmana on the other hand 
became angry. Religion abiding Rama 
cooled him down with his ethical words 
when he saw that Laksmana's eyes were red 
with anger. Then Rama rode on chariot for 
the forest with bowing his head down at the 
feet of the elders and Rsis present there. 
The charioteer was also very sad. Prince 
Rama gave in donation all garments and the 
wealth he had with deep reverence. 

R^RnrwnTrf&T riii^mi 

dSJT WRI 

TSfRTW ■RtcTRT W TTWfll^^ll 
RaRut riT? 5:fecTTI 
TTR ^?R8r RT faffig; 

Sita also asked for permission from her 
three mother-in-laws and father-in-law, 
Dasaratha, then in a half-conscious state 
and with a stream of tears on Dasaratha's 
cheeks. She just moved her eyes all around 
and rode on the chariot. Having seen Slta 
with Rama on the chariot, Sumitra was 
shocked very much and said to Laksmana - 
"Meritorious Laksmana, treat from today 
Rama as your father and Sita as mother and 
the forest as Ayodhya. Go with them at 
once for the sake of extending helping 
hands. 

atRlyjiudcri in RT«n uuiichii 

Hl^c(U«Kli IRfrRT II 

RT Rm ITWt RRTTRl? R 
Rcgnr R^RRTl WT TThn ^ tjfRlRTII^<?ll 

Complying with the words of Sumitra 
whose body was soaking with the milk 


owing from the breasts due to the 
overflowing sentiments, Laksmana bowed 
his head at his mother's feet and rode on the 
same chariot. O wise king, thus Rama was 
followed by both the brave brother Laks 
mana and chaste Sita. 

TTRTR ^5ITcTT RRTR^I 

R TTR <m'1cih1hh,ii^°'i 
aiRlKRNI faffRWRR^RIRT: Rttf|.RI;i 
Rf^: uVytsilRil M^dlPldLins^n 
3R^ RPR R15RT RPR: 1 

TTRTTR RRTRT^ Rn RlffR TTTRRII^^II 

Rama, whose incoronation was shattered 
so suddenly owing to a trick of destiny, then 
followed by the priest, minister and the 
reputed citizens with tears in their eyes and 
suggested - "O Rama, you should not go to 
the forest. O the great prince, come back to 
Ayodhya. Where are you going by leaving 
us behind?" 

tWHR (delate! fRflRTTRPf RR RRJifRI 
^c^RRt RHRTR ^S1R:I|\9^II 

RR5SR Rf^: ^flTT RR5SR ^ RTlRR: I 

•>.9 

IrRT^TR RRT RinjRfRRRRlfR t RRRII^XII 
^ ^RRhRTR t;us^ R^l 
3RRR5TfR%: RIR RlfUlT ^Wh^dRIlbaRII 

Rama, the excellent promise abiding 
said- O ministers, citizen and priests please, 
go back to Ayodhya. As I have to comply 
with the order given by father, I will 
therefore, definitely go to the forest. I will 
come back immediately when the exile for 
twelve years is completed and see again the 
feet of my parent. 

^IRRIRT RR IRTRTR TTR: : | 

R RRJRt RRRjdl: §:feRT RRT:lb9^ll 



188 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


fT; HITTER«fTH,l 

■RT fwt ^ HJ|(irMMri{ll^\9ll 

31311: 113?! «TTcI^ ^1 

m^qscj TTgroriRrenT^ ■Rr^ig ^R3{^ii\9iii 

78. With these words to the citizens, 
Rama proceeded. All people began to 
follow him with grief. Rama again 
requested - "0 greatmen, go back to 
Ayodhya and provide with protection cover 
to my parent, Bharata and Satrughna, this 
Ayodhya city, all subjects and this entire 
state. I go for penance to the forest. 

31S1 {|yc|4d<ll 

RldlRiJq TFiTR 3R^ II 

fhgRTgg^ ^ 

gtpg: 3ng ^ig^c^Miioii 

RTRIT ch^uricfRI 

^ I i ^ 11 

^T^RRRTSlfl Rlrtt IRW 
W RRI^VIlfiRdi 3tfR3'TlRR3fll<i^ll 
^fR'jliqi gt ^ ^IvivRlRI: ^gRKl^l 
RragiWR RRi I .i ^ 11 

83. Rama in the meantime said to Laks 
mana - "Laksmana, bring STta to 
MithilapurT and assign her to king Janaka. 
You yourself should also live with the 
parent. Go back Laksmana, I will go to the 
forest alone." Laksmana replied "O treasure 
of mercy, don't pass such cruel order to me. 
1 will follow wherever you want to go. 
Rama then turned to Sita and said- "Darling 
Sita, go to the palace' of your father or live 
in the palace of Sumitra or Kaus'alya. Go 
back there and wait for me till I return." 

■#TT 3tTg <t)dlo3rfH:l 

RR RT¥ tR grttfR Rgr^i I ^ V11 


rPT Rtgr RrI qyiuj^urid^il 

XNRcnn Rrqqm 

STcTW 3II«5rqiqifi/ gRT RR 3T^I 

RR tRRR^R RR RRRflfl I ^ 11 

86. As a reaction to Rama's order, Sita 
said with clasped hands - O killer of enemy, 
I will also live with you wherever you go in 
the forest. I cannot bear living separate 
from you even for a moment. Hence, I 
request you for having mercy on me. O 
beloved, I will also go wherever you want 
to visit. 

RRlRT^WTRig; 3Rig; R g35R: I 

Rllw R -RnTR^RRl RBRiqiR 8rff^ll<iV9l| 
ftgiR RftRRt 3RT: fRtR:l 

RI^T? gR^chKuq RR% ^dHIRR:ll<i<SII 
chfdMRTS^Kiqi^^ HI-!J«liyrqq1Rdt^l 

R? RIRT R WfFfRTI I <i <? 11 

89. When Rama then saw that a number 
of persons along with a crowd of women 
are following him, he forbade them and 
said- "O gentlemen and women, go back to 
Ayodhya and live voluntarily there. I am 
going to Dandakaranya with my mind 
concentrated for the sake of penance. I tell 
you in fact that my arrival will definitely 
take place with my wife and brother after 
completion of the period of exile. Please, 
don't treat it otherwise." 

3RlfRRriJ RRt^ RRIR R 

RRRRtTtR^ RRRIRl^ ^WTR:l|^ oil 

Thus, agreeing the citizens anyhow for 
the return, Rama stepped into the cottage of 
Guha. Guha was a devotee to god Visnu and 
has extreme affection for Rama. He stood 
before Rama with clasped hands and said- 


CHAPTER 48 


189 


"God, tell me what ean I do for you." 

^5^ f% chcicqfHlfl Ryd:! 
h^dldlRISSildT TJW 5TTII<? ^11 





71^ d^'^r4RIHI(4vil l^ildchmsitHIcl^ll 


J|^lMdldHMI JdtTIfrTT ^II 

With these worlds, Guha greeted Rama 
with Laksmana and Sita warmly. On the 
next morning, he made the return of chariot. 
He then eame to the bank of Gahga. Rama 
then crossed the holy Gahga, brought by 
Bhagiratha on the earth by virtue of 
penance, remover of all evils and 
benevolent, worshipped by a number of Rsi 
and Munis, tortoise and fishes etc., aquatic 
animals abode, high waves and fresh water 
like spastic gem; on the boat of Guha and 
thus, reached the cottage of Bharadvaja Rsi. 

3-Hl4'hhcti-t^Tmt ^tirfTTtsnr 
WTf d ddwRhd TTitarr 'q2fT^II'?'«ll 
W ¥TdT ■uud: TTfl 

dd; fsHM dMd?tlwt TTOd:! 

RjdchZ 

dldlfhcddraM 9uqd1«ShdTmRI 
dTW tll<?V9ll 

97. That hermitage was situated in 
Prayaga. Rama took a dip in that holy place 
in the company of his brother and wife and 
spent the night with the best way 
entertained by the hermit Bharadvaja. At 
day break next morning, Rama put on the 
apparel of an ascetic, asked for permission 
from the hermit, crossed the Gahga through 
the way suggested by him and he then 
slowly went to the holy place Citrakuta, 


covered with trees and creepers. 

TFT d TT? WT 

dFdW: yuiKNI TdRT^ 

ch^c^ctiTi ^Tdldf Fid ^lRl4ch<4ll?o o II 
Tftddd^ihTOdddt TFFT^ dd dd:l 
gd^TtdjlRTOddTl TRT dFW'tdi?! 11 ? o ^|| 

O king, the citizens of Ayodhya began to 
live in void and gloom after the departure of 
STta, Laksmana and Rama with the 
charioteer. King Dasaratha had lost his 
consciousness when he had heard the harsh 
words of Kaikeyi exiling Rama for twelve 
years. He began to cry Rama, Rama on 
return of his consciousness. Kaikeyi said to 
him - "Rania has now gone to the forest so, 
enthrone Bharata." Dasaratha took his last 
breath in severe pain when he heard these 
words. 

Iddld ^ 5:13d ^d#di ddWI 
drRdTd ddTddfdqiWdTdRdtdll II 
ddf: d d4dd;l 

cblvivill d dfddt d *yq)lRuHl|^o?|| 

The citizens of Ayodhya began wailing 
on the death of Dasaratha. Kausalya, 
Sumitra and the wicked Kaikeyi too began 
weeping loudly and they surrounded 
Dasaratha. 

MR<yi4 dd dd^dt: dfd dd; I 
dd: ijiir^dtdd dfW: d4g4fddJl^o'!{|| 
fdfd^id ■gd TRdi^dTdl 
^ t MM'iimra Rdd;ll?omi 

d didt dd dTd: '?Id^ W Rdd: I 





190 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


II 

rTTcTT^ IRT: ST^ISlt ^WTcT: I 

^iifur wt rifirTiii^ ^ ^ Tiiifii^o^ii 
fclMild W'Mlw4i>miH(a ^ ■?! Mi!5Icl:l 

'^:l 

^ did TFT ?T Hi^lJlfd ^:l 
^ ^FRd-d ?IdHVg ^:fTstF:ll^^o|| 

The learned priest Vasistha consoled 
them all, made officials to keep the corpse 
on the boat filled with oil, consulted the 
ministers and sent a messenger for calling 
back Bharata and Satrughna. The messenger 
reached where Bharata and Satrughna were, 
gave the message to the extent suggested, 
made their return and came back to 
Ayodhya as soon as it could be possible. 
Prince Bharata guessed at the ominous 
event taken place in Ayodhya with the 
omens he saw on the way. Bharata then 
entered into Ayodhya which was burnt and 
became faded and filled with the gloom and 
sorrow by the fire of conspiracy created by 
Kaikeyl. All people began to cry with 
bluttering the name of king, Rama, Laks 
mana and Sita, when they saw them. 
Bharata and Satrughna also followed them 
and began wailing. 

gist rt ^ TFT: Mlferilin^ll 

iFT^iTUpT TT? WT TFrai: •Mld<4l 
TTT^TT f% ^ TT^SF'FTTFFfTlI^^^II 
3I7T^ TftiFTT TFT FUFT^I 

TMTT RfFTtr^l I 11 

HbiRFdlill: RT^raf^:! 


RTFT TI^ Tflwr FT? TTHT FTTtfR ^11 11 

FF TT^ Htcdiy: wrFTF^^:l 
£n%: Hihhl-f R^c(?TTvl:linhl 

TTIcF FF fRFTytTxnf^l 
Mfdydl n^WPII TT^H8?FITT^III^:?^II 
TF^FFTSStT ^U|cll^Rl^rarRrT:l 

m FTBTTfR R^dllF fJrTRIin^M 
TFT PF RR WT RftFFTT RT:I 
TTF;^ TTFT 5^1TR RTF t TT^I I 11 

Bharata thundered on Kaikeyi when all 
facts were disclosed by her. He said- "Alas, 
you are very wicked. Your heart is filled 
with mala-fides. Who can be more wicked 
than a woman who exiled Rama and Laks 
mana as also Slta compelled to enter into 
the forest? O wicked, wretched, how could 
you dare so? You would have thought that 
king Dasaratha will enthrone me happily on 
the throne when Rama along with chaste 
Sita depart to the exile. I am ashamed of 
being your son. However, listen to my 
decision that I will not accept incoronation 
by keeping separation from Rama. I will 
also visit the place where Rama, greatest in 
men, conversant to religion, known to all 
scriptures, wise and affectionate elder 
brother; where Sita, a chaste, meritorious, 
luckiest, daughter of Videha is and where 
Laksmana, a devoted brother, gallant, ideal 
character and bright brother has gone. 
Kaikeyi, you have committed a heinous 
crime of exiling Rama. O wicked heart, the 
wisest Rama is my elder brother and he 
only is eligible to sit on the throne. I am 
merely like his slave. 

RTRT RR TRtR ^^;fT3R:l 
?I TTR^-gfsTRhRRr RT f^RTR -gf :fT3RRII?^<? II 



CHAPTER 48 


191 


WT THT: ^ ■'*^uii<*,i:ii 

With these harsh words, Bharata began 
to weep and wail loudly with bluttering the 
name of his father. His expressions were 
piteous as that of a eommon and worldly 
young chap with the words as to where he 
has gone leaving him alone? What should 
be done then? He again remembered Rama, 
Sita and Laksmana moaning on their 
departure to the forest. 

TftclT ^ Higdc^l ^ ^ iTcTt f | 

c(fyti,5i c»jlc^ch4ldm^(fqh,l 

dfdbdlRitd 

cti^chHclV Il ^il fw % wtcnfwtT:! 

■•HWiRcKPlffui 

TTRift ^iidl9Tra f?I^Rt MHHId 
atcidluH 'j1j|c4c(i 41 wivld 
WWdiRd TT^ ^1 

Muni Vasistha, conversant with the deed 
and the might of time, came there where 
Bharata was ceaselessly weeping. He 
consoled him by addressing him as son - "O 
son, you should not moan over the death of 
your father as the time and deed is 
predominant. It is your first and foremost 
duty now to arrange his funeral ceremony 
instead of moaning. Rama is incarnated to 
god Visnu and appeared on this earth with 
the sole objective to kill the wicked and 
provide protection to the saints. A number 
of acts are to be performed by Rama in the 
forest. He will therefore, keep himself busy 
with those acts and return only when those 
will be completed. 


dt^rcii ynti-Mifd TTR: cfciiHHl'JH:I 
'clRuiH 

3lfJ#3n1^ fejHW: 11 ? ^ ^ 11 

■HTtgr dwVdjfth-iJHfl 

Bharata gathered courage on these words 
of Vasistha and performed the funeral 
ceremony of his father abiding by the 
prescribed rules in rituals. He took fire of 
Agnihotra and burnt the body of his father. 
Then he took a dip in the holy water of 
Sarayu and poured holy water from the 
palm joined with his brother Satrughna, all 
mothers and other near and dear ones for 
the peace of the soul departed to heaven. 

dw1&4^f^cb nrduimrdHMdi:! 

^4ryV=l<yMTll(5T: W || 

«TTfTt TPdR: I 

dniyw tmwHciiiRi’nfii^^oii 

iTc^ it *nrr TravRRTT ng'iddll 

^ TFnS: ^5^ ^11 

Wipi TTIT wfipiffTRq;i 

Thus, on completion of the funeral 
ceremony, Bharata began to march to the 
forest through the route adopted by Rama in 
the company of his ministers, mothers, the 
four corps army (viz., elephant, horses, 
infantry and chariots) so as to meet Rama. 
Guha resisted Bharata on the way by 
issuing his army order to march in circle 
formation so that the army marching with 
Bharata can be surpassed because he was 
confused of Bharata's intention. He thought 



192 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


that Bharata is coming to attack Rama. He 
addressed Bharata with harsh words as - "O 
wicked, rude, traitor, whether you are not 
satisfied with exile of Rama with his 
brother and wife and now marching to kill 
him too. Otherwise, why have you brought 
so huge an army?" 

tmTEl fddldlcill TTRTOM | 

^dhdAl^lHdl 

In reply to Guha, Bharata, stood with 
clasped hands and humble words on lips - 
"As you are devoted to Rama, treat me the 
same. All this has been done by KaikeyT 
alone and that too when I was in the house 
of my maternal uncle. I am today going to 
bring Rama back to Ayodhya. Please, give 
me the way for which the facts are told by 
me." 

'hfilKnfq ^ ^ T|T?I 

^ 13T1^ ^ WlfW:ll^?t9|| 

Guha took him at the bank of river 
Gahga when his intention was duly verified. 
He then called a cluster of boats and made 
them to cross the river. Having taken a dip 
in the holy water of Gahga, Bharata reached 
the cottage of Bharadvaja, bowed his head 
at his feet and disclosed the facts in detail. 

5.0T13T 

f inr ^ gjifsJT TTRi^ 


TPT: 41rdM<l?(iTT:ll^'*{o|| 
rcifil rT? cilfM 'SfratS'^ft' 
dsnftr cT? W cRfPRl I ^11 

TPT^ •#r5T ■RT4 ^Htsiu^ fw: ^1 

Bharadvaja consoled him by saying - 
"This incident has taken place under the 
will of time. You should not regret even for 
Rama as truth abiding Rama presently is in 
Citrakuta. It is of no use to visit there, as he 
will not be ready to come back. Even then, 
go there but do as he advises. Sri Rama 
resides in a decent segment of the forest and 
Laksmana always keeps himself as a guard 
as safety is assured from the wild animals. 

$rd<Wl «TTgr^ qtRHTI 

TRRI 

I RldiMiv^ 

On suggestions from Bharadvaja, Bharata 
went the mountain Citrakuta. Laksmana 
informed Rama that someone was coming 
when he saw the dust flying in the air. He 
then climbed on a tree and focused on the 
direction. He saw a large army forwarding 
in mood of exhilaration. There were 
elephants, horses and chariots in the army. 
He assured Rama to sit at ease but informed 
that some mighty king is forwarding with a 
huge army consisting of elephants, infantry, 
horses and chariots. 

I 

?'c?iraiu4 diJWW 




CHAPTER 48 


193 


WtSTUT^ ^t^TTr-SI'lfd cT^I Wi6\\ 
cl«idWW TRW f^RcJTRH:! 
aTHIrtiiyRI rTtRTdt f^H-4irc|d:ll^'l{<? II 
WRRWf^: Tini T5SRRW I 
TTRW ftWIdll cd^RirW^ll^i\o|| 

uPdui) nii^cijjv’ci RHJiy'4’^^g'wHi:i 
uR< 4|4 Tmt TR TR^: VII<*i<4ilfHI:ll?H?ll 

Rama said to Laksmana - "Brother, it 
appears to me as if Bharata is coming to see 
us. As Rama could complete his words, 
Bharata came there and fell at his feet. He 
began to weep bitterly. The army was at a 
distance and only Bharata, his ministers and 
some Brahmins had come to Rama. Within 
minutes, the mothers, near and dear ones 
and friends surrounded RSma and all of 
them began weeping. 

ftnrt cRTt TRt ‘l?Rfd:l 
TT? WT RnR<4d:ll^hTII 
McdlM^ 41^^ ^ T#FfT53rfRR;i 
tTM^RfftRTUTSIT TRf 5:T3TRf^:ll?h? II 
ww «Rri twt; 5 ;^ U^dircIdH,! 

When Rama knew the death of his 
father, he took a dip in the holy river with 
brother and wife and gave a joint palm of 
water to the dead soul. He then bowed his 
head at the feet of mother, teachers and the 
elders, expressed regret and said to Bharata 

3Wtsn 7T^ RTcT |?T: #51 RfR^II?h’«ll 
TIW Wf! 3Rrat mRmM'41 

W: WTR <Nlcl#rRH,ll^hmi 

^ W rPT illt^lfu #^R^^R^t^ll?^^ll 

"Learned Bharata, go back to Ayodhya 


immediately and rule there because the 
entire state has become like an orphan after 
the death of our revered father. Bharata 
replied - "O ideal man, I have decided that 
there will be no return without you. I will 
follow you like Laksmana and STta 
wherever you go." 

^rille*iu4 JT: TIT? JTtT: RsTfR^I 
fort ftpRt ^3^: ■WEnfRwf^TFj^ii^h^ii 
T ^ W ftggilRcR I 
tlSlT WHJT ^ ■WTSarER 1R TlTRII^h<ill 
RRTRhnf^ TIWT trsiTTW rRttTcWI 
iKVIlRcl^IldAl ^ ft[ggt|fTcTH;il^iA«?ll 
cT^tti 4 rfRwT 5 athiRibijiRi tlRdcbnj 
w fer TRi^ ^ f:Ti ct)4ii^Riii?^oii 


RSma again said- "Gentle Bharata, elder 
brother is eligible to be respected as father 
for the men abiding religion. As I should 
not violate the words of my father, you the 
same way should not violate my order. 
Move from here and administer the 
subjects. I will again come to Ayodhya on 
completion of the twelve years of exile and 
see you. Go and comply with my order. 
Don't regret please. 


W: m 



W fttTT ctm W % gjraf feTTWI I ^11 
rrai^^IRRt clU W ■RTI 
dRuiiilj ciRtbil^ iK^iiRdchH^ii^^Tii 
^ ■Riwpi 

W S.KVIlf«l<*l^>s4 ^ HRIRi TItRII^^^II 

W fRR RTcff f| •§5 :Rm: 11 11 

RTTfW ^ TR^l 

%TTtt Tsnw RTtT: TliW: ^Hl^^hll 





194 


Bharata replied with tears in his eyes - 
"Brother, there is no need to think whether I 
should give you the same respect as that to 
father, because as the father, the same you 
are. I will now comply with your order but 
please, give me your sandal. I will reside in 
Nandigrama by resorting to the sandals and 
do penance up to twelve years. My apparel 
and mission will be the same as that of 
yours. In case, you do not appear just on the 
end of twelve years, I will make my body as 
oblation to the fire. Grieved Bharata did 
Pradaksina of Rama several times with this 
resolution, frequently bowed his head and 
he slowly moved from there with the 
sandals on his head. 

TTRPI cHeWKtdl fw 



I r« i 11 


Bharata began to live in Nandigrama by 
enslaving his sensory organs, vegetables 
and root and fruits as regular diet, 
concentration of mind and with following 
the instructions of his brother. The holy- 
hearted Bharata held his hair tangled, bark 
apparel on the body and wild fruits as diet. 
He began to rule the stately affairs with 
Rama's words in his mind. 

Thus ends the forty-eighth chapter on an 
incarnation TRama in Nrsimha PurSna 





NARASIMHA PURArVAM 


CHAPTER 49 

Jayanta punished by Rama, meeting with 
Sarabhanga, Sutik$na and Agastya, 
humiliation of Surpanakha, kidnapping of 
Sita, Jafayfl killing and meeting with Sabarl 

rrfFR^TR: 

1TIII?II 

VllchMdihdl^ Rt 

I 

WRTW giW«nT: I i-tt 11 

Markandeya said- On return of Bharata 
to Ayodhya, Rama began to live on 
vegetables and root-fruits with his brother 
and Sita and strolled in the forest. One day, 
Rama did not take Laksmana with him to 
the secret place of forest and passed the day 
keeping his head in the lap of Sita. In the 
meantime, a wicked crow came down and 
injured the breast of Sita by blowing his 
beak. Having injured, that crow sat on a 
tree. 

il?T: Tmr# W 4ddW>l 

?rrefiT^ f diytjra 
^ iddwi diKuiH^i 

^r^cFn Hi g t f^ldijlpcjdlll^ll 

Tm Ti^ 

3i^ flit ^ |V911 

Rama saw blood owing from the breast 
of Sita when his eyes were opened. He 
asked Sita - "Darling, tell me the reason 



CHAPTER 49 


195 


why the blood is owing from your breasts. 
Sita humbly replied -"O king, look at the 
wicked crow who is seated on the branch of 
the tree. He has done this offence when you 
slept. 


TT 


t: 


TTSTR WT 'htr: I 


TUflTTR 


Rama saw the crow with furious eyes, 
took a straw, spelled the hymn of 
Brahmastra on the same and shot at the 
crow. The erow flew fast frightened. O 
king, that crow was the son of Indra and his 
name was Jayanta. He straightly entered 
into the palace of his father. Indra, the king 
of gods, expelled that criminal from his 
palace when he got the news and discussed 
the matter with other secretaries. Being 
expelled from the heaven, that crow 
returned to Rama and cried - "O Rama, this 
crime has been committed by me 
innocently. Please, protect me." 

sratET ^ 31W tl I 11 

tnrl ^ 3{9-*iii RfFpr:! 


3Ht f ■■HMWiftl 

31^ gngjRT 


Rama said to Jayanta, O wicked, my 


weapon is Amogha and it his the target once 
made. Hence, offer any of your organ and 
then only your life can be saved. You have 
committed a heinous crime hence it is 
necessary to punish you. On these words, 
Jayanta offered his eyes for the arrow. That 
weapon returned when one eye of Jayanta 
was singed. O king, since then, all crows 
became one-eyed. This is the reason why all 
crows stare with one eye. 

■gf^R TT TTEiar: 11 11 

^jRlFr (lOSchKnq 

wi^: rTTTO ^WfelcT: 11 11 



Rama departed to Dandakaranya, 
offering place of a number of saints after 
passing several days with his brother and 
wife in Citrakuta. He was in the apparel of 
an ascetic, bow and arrow in his hands and 
a Tarakasa was tied on his back. On his visit 
there, Rama saw the great hermits busy with 
penance. Some among them were taking 
nothing as food but only water. A large 
number out of them were living on the 
thrashed and crushed cereals gwing to 
complete loss of teeth. They were called 
Asmakutta. Some among them were using 
their teeth as the thrasher and by the reason, 
called Dantolukhali. Some were busy with 
penance with their sitting in the middle of a 
blazed fire from five directions. Some 
greatmen were even more hard in their 
penance. Rama saluted them and they also 
greeted Rama heartily. 


196 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


rnrrsfeH ^ 7TR: •RT^rrwRT^:iRoii 

ww%:i 

f SR ^11 

fjron^-T^tR? f 

tnraif Rfeiiiynfviil^^H^i 
yi’im ?R ■R«iFrTm:ii9?ii 
f^cqw Tl^ 5lilElic^i^R%l '^1? 3t^:l 

3<4<gs4 W ^ fi|R<l4 
fviHii^nr ^;i 

t dfy)yi^tdHHR:ll?mi 

Subsequently Rama in the company of 
his brother and wife proceeded forward 
with his eyes on the entire forest as he was 
stepping forward with simultaneous 
necessary directions to STta regarding the 
beautiful flowers and all other excellent 
things of the forest; he just saw a monster 
whose eyes were red and of dark 
complexion. He was as huge as a mountain. 
His Jaws were bright, had large arms and 
hair as golden as the evening cloud. He was 
making a noise and used to put in pain for 
nothing the other creatures. Rama with Laks 
mana took their arrows immediately and 
penetrated the body of that monster. They 
dashed his huge corpse on a trench and 
covered it with rocks. They reached the 
cottage of Sarabhahga, a hermit, after this. 
He saluted him and stayed there for a few 
hours. He discussed several topics with him 
and became happy. 

■gf w iwr HW^ciig i 


cRt Viiei^<n4r«4 TTR ehHWWlTmq^l 
Rtgr 4clj>HRR5ill '’ il faldcl T f 
TmtfR ^ ft 3nrRf^ (q^t(d:l 
gsifqtgi f ft jn? ■R?mi I ? o 11 

They then reached the cottage of hermit 
Sutiksna and met Agastya when they 
proceeded under the direction of hermit 
Sutiksna. Rama got a sword and Visnu's 
bows and a Tarakasa, spelled with 
undepleted an'ows. He then marched further 
and settled at Pancavati, a place near 
Godavar! river. The king eagle Jatayu came 
to Rama there, explained about his family 
and stood before him. Rama also told all 
about him and expected his assistance to 
guard Sita. 

wnfRfar 

f 71^ trT w ^ c)HW<M^ii^ ?ii 
3T? T^Rifir ^ Rraf wlydiuy 
$f^c*^l JjytM; igRT9mR;il^?ll 

Jatayu embraced Rama and said-"I will 
guard STta whenever you move to another 
forest for any purpose. Hence, live here 
without worry. The king eagle then returned 
to his cottage situated southward which was 
filled with several varieties of birds. 

Tnft^ wt RHigf^f^fyrli 

gw Tmt fR "RlrniT II 

TFRgraTTR^ gSJW R^lch«li:l 
ftf^T RraiRg HWUyjjuiyydRM^'iJII 

chdlRjilclullj^jill 

wp# ■'M Tt^TFifg TT^ii^mi 


CHAPTER 49 


197 


^ WTT#t TTiRrar 

aisr vi.'it'iyi ^ ^11^5(11 

TIT TCrPtllMcll 

W Tit giRT I^c-ilRnt TTiRt gjlflRtfiT^ll^^ll 

Surpanakha, the sister of Ravana once 
heard that Rama is beautiful as a sex god 
and living with his brother and wife with 
recreation on several stories. She filled with 
lust for Rama turned herself into a beautiful 
lady. Sweet songs were on her lips while 
strolling in the forest where Rama was with 
his brother and wife. She said to Rama 
fearlessly -"O beloved, I love you too much. 
Please, accept me as a maid slave. See that 
the man earns sin if he neglects a woman 
herself appearing for courtship." 

yps PUHi r^I^UTf rtm ^ 

VJl'iuiy'yT TTRTinTIT? TIlfi^:ll^<ill 
'^1 

^^igTTTcT: W 71^ cIIITI^tfrroflll^'?ll 
3 ^ rni Tf^cbijfih Traill 

Tflnr Rt ^TST '9Tf*RTT[^ll'*t o II 

Rama replied - "O spinster, I have 
already a wife and you can appeal before 
Laksmana." Having heard this, that 
monstress said- "O Rama, I am expert at 
coition while Sita is alien to that art. Hence, 
abandon her and accept me.” 

^rUI<*)U<J TIT? TTTTTIlt y‘iddH:l 
iTifidd T 7T^ TTSS viffltrrq;iii{^ii 

TTTir qr? ^ Ru?lwjfrfi 

ITT qq; Ttri TTR TTjfNvTfEHTI^Illjq n 

rf^qHcKctl nluHi'f <Ih: ^TRcq^Tf^R 11 I "IS 11 
foARiRi HifRchfiifq Ricwosn qrq w?t;i 
TTR t q^TTMT W JlclTldl’flllJItll 


Religion abiding Rama replied - "I do 
not keep any contact with anothers wife. Go 
to Laksmana. His wife is not with him here 
in this forest. Perhaps he will therefore 
accept you. Surpanakha said to Rama on 
this -"Very well, then gave me a letter so 
that Laksmana may be my husband. Rama 
accepted and give her a letter for Laksmana. 
Laksmana was ordered in that letter - "Laks 
mana, cut her nose definitely and don't let 
her go without it." 

TIT tJ? 1T3|T f TRqq dWP^dilPctdll 

qi^ ^naRlt TTSff cT^qrmq q^lHI^II-iTmi 
eft qr? Ti^ ^q^tfiniftT{;i 

q vf^Ri Tiqqq^ qqrtq^niqqj^q^llT^^II 
eft Tnjll IleT: fqMed ^4t:l 

^ drcbukTTTT J f^Tc^ fdcd-*|U4c|<ll>T\9ll 

Surpanakha happily moved from there 
and gave that letter to Laksmana. Having 
seen that over-excited monstress, Laksmana 
said- O spotted woman, stop and he caught 
her. He lifted up the sword and cut the nose 
and her ears like the sesamum crop. 

f^HHIRI M: Tq q TRlq ^W^iftiqTI 

?T civiiw qq qm: q^^qf^q^iiTfiii 

qr qjwiqqntsiT qTcTT ^ ^nqqr qTTi 

?T ?T qiEj yuiPiKl iqqtqnr I I'if <? 11 


She began to weep bitterly and cried - O 
humilator of all gods, my brother Ravana, 
an adversity has been thundered on me. O 
brother Kumbhkarna, I am under the blow 
of heavy pain. O wise Vibhisana, I have to 
cross with such a calamity. 


^c^qqptf T5?df Th qi^T Tq 
f5tf?TTTT q Tq 
TiRRi? qfqrsn^ qrqr q? R?icfH*fi 






198 


NARASIMHA PURANAIM 


TI^niRt 

31% I m ^ 11 

TraOR %^rrR% 5 'R'^&iltl 

h^IsihmOciki ^HiafMynnidi:im^ii 
T7?cnf%w lit fe-^wiRicfiTH;i 

She went wailing before Khar, Dusana 
and Trisira, told them about her sheer 
humiliation and said- "Mighty Rama lives 
in this locality with his brother Laksmana." 
They all became angry, sent the armed 
monsters and three of them also marched 
with a huge army. These mighty monsters 
were appointed in advance by Ravapa. They 
ultimately reached the place where Rama 
was. ^urpanakha was weeping bitterly as 
she had lost her nose. Her body was soaked 
with tears. Khara, Dusana etc., monsters got 
angry as it acted as fuel to their anger. 

TTRtfil Tl^tTORT 

WIKI 1131 nldiiii 
%cqT f Hf g ^lda TT^Ii4H<R^:l 

f TT^Rint M^TciHuim^ii 
^riR ^ vrUPdPvKsllMA: I 

Pl^dWd h^ldcHMmvall 

tlfRTW% TT%nT TtlTf%cT:l 
cTR TT^RTTl I 

Rama suggest Laksmana to live for the 
safety of Sita there and marched alone for 
battle. He waged a fierce battle with all the 
monsters sent there to kill him. He killed 
alone the Khara and Dusana also. Thus. 
Rama returned to his cottage after killing 
all. 


feRW tn Tran% I h 11 

RtM W fffig; 4l)dl^<UI*4fuil 
igeq%,UT Rgii^’ETRlfRlI^oll 

<gTTTwr f ?1%: ^:ii^^ii 
w cR ebiitM -^hTT opctfemn 

■R fiTqtW ^ Tn§RII^?ll 

T3F diRwti^ TIR W^l 

rTsrapiT^ TTE0Rr «rra^ ^ I ^ ^ 11 

C^UI^^diuM cfcRToii etPJdltUlli^l 

tTRR^nr 

dt yldmuRtbiiifh ^mrawhuy:! 
cgrrfh Mv^icjipfhwjRt ^Tt«Rii^mi 

At the end of Khara and other monsters, 
SQrpanakha came to RSvana wailing. 
Having seen the nose cut-off her, Ravana 
planned for the abduction of Sita. He went 
to Marica and said- "O maternal uncle, 
come with me on this Puspaka Vimana near 
the place where Rama is residing. You will 
then convert yourself into the form of a 
golden deer and start moving slowly near 
the place wherefrom Sita could see you. She 
will desire to have your hide for domestic 
chores and send Rama to catch you. You 
have to the run fast to dense forest as soon 
as Rama will come to catch you. You have 
to copy the sound of Rama and cry loudly 
for help so that Laksmana also could move 
to your direction. Then I will go to Sita on 
Puspaka Vimana and abduct her because I 
am passionate for her. You will then come 
voluntarily to Lanka. 

iWUlHlVij 

Tram: 


vitluitsii ^ ^5^ •'traurrf^*tM(dii 



CHAPTER 49 


199 


tTHhi Fpiw mOxJiuyr^ Tiyuni^i 

rl^ TTW wt ^11 ^ i 11 

Maiica replied - "O sinner, go there alone 
but I will not like to visit there. I have 
already suffered severely when I was 
disturbing Visvamitra in his cottage. 
"Ravana lost his temper and lifted up his 
sword to kill him." Marica then said- "It is 
better to die with the hands of Rama instead 
of you. I will definitely go wherever you 
intend to now." 

3isr 

RTfraW HTW.I 

'jprnr R? RT Him 'inmim'JiilIRo II 

iflRuf flRtct ? 'AlVirw^l 

RlfRRnJRWtl^RTR RfRRRRR; 11\3 ^ 11 

aivlwqi 5 RRII'S^II 

He then rode on the Puspaka Vimana 
with him and came to the place where Rama 
was living. Marica converted himself into a 
golden deer and moved slowly near Sita. 
Having seen that deer caught in the grip of 
probability and said to her husband - "O 
king, please, catch that golden deer for me. 
I will enjoy playing with him on my return 
to Ayodhya. 

RR^ WR R? 

T^ttUTsf R RfdlRT RRtSifl fR^raR:IIR3II 
Rl^RTRlSlfl 3T«lsnR?R 1^11:1 
rlR; fgaiTR RRRT IjUMldchlfllR'^ll 

■^(RJfRUffR TdlcWTR*! PlRMIR R^TrHI 
RRIR: R^RlRJTT^R^R^R:IIV9mi 
3i|chu4 RRR: '91^ RiRTRl^RnTRRRlcI^I 
RR5 g? rR RRIR ?T®R 3felR;IIV9^ll 


R 1 R t W: ^ RRfRtl 
RTRt RRRI R% Rf^S? R?T?RR:IP9^all 


Rama appointed Laksmana to guard her 
and chased the golden deer. That deer ran 
towards the forest and Rama shot an arrow 
on his body. Marica cried " Laksmana, Laks 
mana" copying Rama's voice while dying, 
came in his usual form and fell down dead. 
Having heard that sound, Sita said to Laks 
mana, "Dear Laksmana, go to the place 
from where this sound has come. It is 
undoubtedly a cry from your brother and it 
appears to me that Rama is in pain. 


frRRR: R RRT 311? Rl^UlWmHKdltfl 
R f? RRRR R^ R RR RR^I Its I 

iraiTlt R RtRT ' 


Rt^ 3n? froSRRR R?TI 1^ 11 
Rif f RlfRcSRRRR R RpMSlfRl 
figRR: RfRRlRl?RT3TR?Rf3RiRR:ll<io|| 


Having heard this from chaste Sita, Laks 
mana said- "Don't give any place for doubt 
regarding Rama as there is no fear for him 
anywhere. Sita lost her temper and took it 
as if Laksmana is abusing the relation 
which was due to the pressure of the 
probabilities i.e., times effect. She said- "I 
know your intention to marry me on the 
death of Rama; otherwise why would you 
not visit there?" Laksmana could not endure 
such harsh words and immediately left that 
place for going to Rama. 

RRTR RRR^ RRT Mlf^RR^:! 
R^RTR^RRIRUTR RRtlTlsfR 5R?RR1R;I I ^ 11 
R R^RIRR'^RTRIR RRR '^^RRRRTRI 
STTRRt RRT: ^Irir;S tRlSlTyT it?mfd:ll<t ?II 
R^nn R? RTRl^R fRlRRtRT? RHR^I 



200 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


TTt ^ 11 ^ 11 

SRTtSilT iiifd TTtR^ ^<rn ¥t4lRd:l 
yOolldf 5- afteisf ^ 

<+^rvidirR M^KUi^- dgcfiM 


As Laksmana left for the forest, Ravana 
suddenly appeared before Sita in disguise of 
an ascetic and said- "0 lady, Bharata has 
come from Ayodhya. He is conversing with 
Rama in the forest. Rama has sent me to 
bring you there. Ride on this Vimana. 
Bharata has made agree to Rama now and 
he is proposing to return to Ayodhya. Rama 
has also caught a deer for your recreation. 
Alas, you have to suffer so severe a pain in 
this forest and that too for so long. Your 
husband and his humble brother have got 
the permission to enthrone. Hence, ride on 
this aircraft to reach them quickly. 


fddltntiir 

^rycRfT ^ rRJT ^ ^ ^II 

STRift? f^TTR ^ mRcii 'Hdll 
tRi; CRT: W 11 ^ 11 

TRT: Ricii ■^:<slici\ I^crivUM '^:Rsldil 

TrauT: ^^cRST R?RR:I 

dVIiJi'i -R^lefiRt #TT ^;fecIT||<: II 
IT TTR gfeTcTTmi gRTFT 

^RR^TJI ITSRgfl «raTf|dTII<?ol| 

I FTEPW trt % 


IdUPlrM 



5*11 


Sita lured by that flattery and fraud, 
followed that ascetic to the aircraft and rode 
on the same with him. That aircraft began 
flying towards south and only then could 
Sita estimate the fraud. She began wailing 


loudly. She was seated with Ravana yet he 
did not touch her. He then came in his 
original form. Having an eye on a man with 
ten heads, Sita feared and started weeping 
loudly. She bluttered - "O Rama, a dreadful 
monster has betrayed me in disguise of a 
gentle man. I am shivering with fear. 
Rescue me. 0 warrior Laksmana, a wicked 
monster is taking me away, I am in severe 
pain and anxiety. Come immediately and 
protect this helpless woman." 

3R^u 4 Wn?T:ll<? ^ II 

Tiw 4iyHi*Ti 

Ic^cWI ^5T^R ^ 'ddl'itww 4)4 c|M||<??|| 

00 O "v 

dllTT-d f i Rtgr dHcJlRfd 

TRT :5RTir Rlrfll’^mi 

^STETR ^ ^tZlcRI 


The king eagle heard the cries of Sita 
and immediately came at once. "Leave Sita, 
leave her." He waged a war with Ravana. 
He hit hard on the chest of Ravana with his 
both wings. Ravana understood that this 
bird is mighty. When he was badly beaten 
at the mouth and beak, he took a sword 
CandrahSsa and blew fatally at JatayQ. It 
made him unconscious and he fell down on 
the ground. 


3^ ^ dVItrtd §RIriRT IcT: I 

Ilti TT^RTIsmil'^vall 
Rrtrgst ^ i^^ ri:i 

^dlM^tur TR?^ll'?.ill 


He then said to Ravana - O wicked 



CHAPTER 49 


201 


monster, you have not killed me but it is the 
effect of Candrahasa which became a cause 
of my defeat. O stupid, whether there would 
be any armed warrior using arms on the 
rival who has no arms except you. O wicked 
monster, keep it in knot that Sita's 
abduction is your death. 0 wicked Ravana, 
Rama will definitely kill you." 

TrauT TTRW 1 WT: I 

f w -^1^11^ <? II 

■q^ TRUT ilRlM-ill W 
dWT^iqilRl^H fdUJJHl*M<4m^rnil^o o || 

■511^^01 TFT# ■qflfg-'in 

dIciRlW-d %3nuTr '$riJtR^I cT tsl<llTiqH,M?ll 
ddRIMnJdM^ItJ^^Ilf^ ^fcJT TTTI 
#51 f^rasr i|filRrai|^oi?|| 

Sita fell into agony to see Jatayu dead 
and with tears in her eyes she said- "O the 
king bird, you met with death for my cause 
so, you will attain to the abode of Visnu 
with the grace of lord Rama. May your 
breathing continue with you until your 
meeting with Rama. With these words to 
the king bird, Sita took out all ornaments 
she till then put on body, tied them 
hurriedly in a cloth and dropped them down 
with an imagination and wish to reach them 
into Rama's hands. 

^r^ehcli mdtUHih TThrr ^;i<3ciil 
Xi;? fi^T IT #cit f TTTc?T ^4^11 ^ 11 

MWliPit TRT: W ^ 

WlfectT TT '^cdlH.ll^o'iill 
TT§r#t fd<^dHdl:I 

^rMifei'ii ijt xrmt Tra# TT?#^:ii^omi 
H^ifddirmwwx^^d w xnrrn^i 
31W: 3#%iivrTsf qiiifqdd ^ifmiii^o^ii 


That wicked monster reached Lanka 
shortly. He dropped Sita at Asoka Vatika 
(the garden) and ordered the monstresses - 
"O Ugly faced servants, guard Sita here." He 
then entered his palace. The people of 
Lanka began to talk that time as - "wicked 
Ravana had kept Sita here and this entire 
city will soon be destroyed." 

■rIcTT f :feWT TJTTIT)' TTX#g"RTI I ^ o 1911 

-RT 3:fecrr wfi 

W ^ fRillTT 4HWr<iril^o<i II 

Sita began to live with her brain and 
senses focused on Rama in acquaintance of 
such dangerous monstresses who were 
guarding her. She started ceaseless wailing 
there. Sita enslaved so by Ravana was in a 
gloomy disposition as Sarasvatl, swan 
moving feels when the miser retains it with 
him and not for all. 

q<4T*jqri 

dy'loyii ij#gT wt |fPTii^o<?ii 
fqPl^^N: ■plqiXT 'q^lr#! 

^ilelRTr <iqu|^ Tllinoll 
TPRItI t RTTM mqqplIHfl 

^ WTTSRR^II^nM 

HidiRMV^^f:43T(f: 41 TTtra:! 

Tifr? 

<iyq 5 t^i 

trf# ?fhTrT3ty|U|RiqiW t=T^:ll^??ll 

The ornaments tied in a cloth piece 
which were dropped down by Sita while the 
in Puspaka Vimana came into hands of four 
monkeys who were strolling in the forest. 
They took it to Sugriva, their king and 
explained that a fierce battle was fought by 




202 


NARASIMHA PURAIVAIVI 


Jatayu with Ravana. Rama on the other 
side, returned when the disguised golden 
deer, Marica, was killed by him. He saw 
Laksmana on the way to the cottage and 
soon reached there. Having seen Sita absent 
from there, he began to weep bitterly. Laks 
mana also began to weep due to such a 
chaotic condition. Having seen his brother 
befallen on the ground, he lifted him up 
with shoulders and tried to console. 

sgrer sfsr 

^ I 11 

^ rl^RTTlFT ■IWPTTII ? 11 

O king, listen to the statement which was 
given by Laksmana to Rama. He said- "O 
king, don't be upset and prepare yourself 
ready to search Sita. He then lifted him up 
and entered into the forest with Rama to 
trace Sita. 

RdiPui Tra^ 
fTRfd; tTRWi'f PiRyi 
irar 'cfTspn^ ^ 

■Rfr3'«rra';i 

^?i§;fcrcraf(ii 

w infM 11 ^ 11 

3T^ ^ 

Rama passed through all forests, all 
mountains and the routes accessing to their 


peaks were dully inspected. He visited the 
cottages of the hermits, inspected the oasis 
surrounded with dense grasses and creepers, 
the open fields, the banks of rivers, trenches 
and caves but nowhere could Sita be seen. It 
gulled his grief in multiple. In the 
meantime, Rama saw the injured JatayQ and 
said- "Alas, who has injured you? Oh, you 
are so badly injured. It is not known 
whether you are living or dead now. You 
were my only helper this time when I am so 
grieving on the sudden missing of Sita but 
you are in such a piteous stage. 

girt RfiT 

^ xT ^ o II 

dViHHwrqgdlq -qram 

wftw fgRRffPPT I 



iftcR RltTT 3:fer[TI 1 ^ ^ ? 11 

■rIcTT (dhictg <mc(l 

W cldlgunlcl (jirdl 

3 ^: T^ll?^^ll 

RT m ^n^tTRd 

3^5 RRtlt f ■^R^ll^?^ll 

That bird could with pain say humbly - 
"O king, whatever I have seen and did 
immediately is worth listening to you. 
Ravana with his shrewd art had abducted 
Sita and on Puspaka Vimana, he rode Sita 
and thus, he fled towards south. Sita was 
weeping bitterly. I waged a fierce battle 


CHAPTER 49 


203 


with Ravana in order to save Sita from his 
grip but that monster ultimately blew his 
sword on me and so injured me as you see. I 
am living till this moment but will go to 
heaven. O the protector of this entire earth, 
don't be sad and manage to kill that wicked 
monster with his whole army. 

Trot tnrRT ^ i^:\ 

^ fgjrar WTRf 
rrat 'HilMt ^ (ctctM,! 

5 T%T 

Thrift TTlft ^ 

WT 5:r3Tft TRjraf Tift I ^ 
ftt^dirart sr^i^rh^i 

^ ^TTRTf TRclftr^ Wll?^t9|| 

THT: Tl gSSRT ^ ?l 
ftrft 'itdrgria TRTrR^ii??<iii 
■ 5 ^ WThf f t : I 

^sTfl RommI 5 nTSTt wwracrii^^<?ii 

In reply to Jatayu, Rama said, O king 
bird, attain all good and the supreme 
position. Jata 3 di then took his last breath, 
rode on a beautiful aircraft and marched to 
heaven duly served by the divine damsels. 
Rama performed his funeral, took a bath 
and gave water through palm for the peace 
of the departed soul. He then proceeded 
forward with his brother. Suddenly he met a 
monstress. She was vomitting fire from her 
mouth. Her mouth was opened. She was 
dreadful and killing whosoever creatures 
coming in front, Rama killed her in a fury. 
He then marched further. He saw Kabandha 
when he was moving for the other forest. 
He was most ugly. His mouth was in his 
belly, had large arms and a formidable 
chest. When he stood in the way to Rama, 


he burnt him into ashes by lighting the 
wooden fuel round him. He appeared in 
divine form after death and staying a little 
bit in the sky, said to Rama- 


TTR TTR TCPT Rgpftl 

ftftg ^ aftlfw igBraT3?R TftRr:i 

TlftniTTlft Tl^ fRl ft : 1 1 ? ^ ? 1 1 


Titgr 5 ft^n t-| 

ftftqft ^11^?Til 


O warrior Rama, you have destroyed my 
ugliness lived long due to the curse of a 
hermit. I am now going to heaven. No 
doubt, I am gratified. You should befriend 
Sugriva, the son of Sun god, for the search 
of Sita. Your mission will achieve success 
when you will go there and give an account 
of the incident. O king, hence, go directly to 
Rsyamukha mountain from here. 


ftt^-gftft: Vi-MMltlft yftf^VI ^IIT^^II 
tITOJT ctPlft cWT TftTPzr Tifftrr: I 

cWT Tift 

Tnftr fjrfftgr g wraw ftftir 1h 11 


ftft ^ SlILWftr^ct^l 3lftr?5TTfft ftg iTcTTI 
HTSIPZr Ht ^nft 


Kabandha went to heaven with these 
words. Laksmana then entered with Rama 
into a cottage where no saints and hermits 
existed. He saw there a lady ascetic Sabarl 
who had got a holy heart due to service for 
the saints and hermits. They stayed there 
and talked with her. Sabar! greeted Rama 
properly and offered Bera etc., wild fruits to 
eat. She then told her account of life. 




204 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


wished for success of Rama's mission, set 
herself on pyre before Rama and went to the 
heavenly abode. Rama did her funeral and 
then marched to another place. 

WT'3F[^^’l^oh-TOf;l 
fjrarfgjTl^ ■g^.-fernrqi 

^jfinTT^ f 11 ^ ^ V911 



Subsequently, humble Rama with 
piercing pain in heart moved towards south 
with his brother Laksmana from there. 

Thus ends the forty-ninth chapter on an 
incarnation of Rama in Nrsimha Purana 



204 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 50 

Friendship with Sugriva, murder of Bali, 
Sugriva’s leniency and his humiliation, search 
for Slta and Hanuman's steps in Laftk3 

g#nT 

Tigqirq^l I ^ 11 

<4lfcl^dl(ci5 TtTCnf^rfw Plfv^rM 4^4'il: 11 ^ 11 
wm^: 4 iEq;|cbiaHl^<MJ 

Markandeya said- As Sugriva was living 
at a place inaccessible for Bali due to 
enmity and fear, he said to Hanuman when 
Rama and Laksmana caught sight of him - 
"Whose sons they may be? A beautiful bow 
is in their hands, trees bark are their apparel 


and looking at a pond full of lotus and other 
aquatic flowers. It appears that both of them 
are the disguised spies of Bali and have 
come in disguise of a saint here. Sugriva 
began to shiver with fear and he decided to 
flee from the Rsyamukha mountain and 
went to the safe cottage of the hermit 
Agastya which was located in the other 
forest. 

cHT T( 31 T 5 

W dlifW^M^ebJiqil 
^ ^ m TRfWcfll 

^Ticgr tm ^ 1 ^ 11 

Sugriva again said to Hanuman - 
"Please, go to them in disguise of a saint 
and ask for their introduction. Who are 
they? Whose sons are those and for what 
purpose are those staying there? Wise 
Hanuman explained all these things after 
enquiry in truth." 

ii w WT TnTf^cni;i IV911 

Hanuman went to the holy bank of 
Pampasara in disguise of an ascetic and said 
to Sri Rama - "O wisemen, who are you? 
How have you come here? From where 
have you come to this dense and unmanly 
forest? What purpose with your visit? 
Kindly, tell all these things correctly. 

cut'ti W ei^RUit ^TT^Tl^IRTI 

^ llR^TiWRlfc(d:ll^ll 
TRT RTR feRT:! 

cR?T 5^ R?I^ TiRi ^3^ ■RRnrSf: 11 ^ o 11 

fq^ThfllRR fJ^TTIRt ^RRHJ5l:linil 



CHAPTER 50 


205 


■viTTOn^ frcra^ TFrpnrJT 

wjf TT^ ^ iRTftr THOrTT fcTTII II 

yldm-^M<<41<l TIR: c*iMHH)xJd;| 

0^iqicl^?e|i4l ^ ^ ^tIR^R^I 1^^511 

Having asked this, Laksmana with the 
permission of his brother said- "I tell you 
the event related to Rama ab inito. Please, 
listen to it. A king named Dasaratha was 
renowned on this earth. Rama, my elder 
brother is the eldest son of that king. The 
nice ceremony of incoronation was 
precluded by our step-mother Kaikeyl. 
Then, in pursuance of the order of our 
revered father, my elder brother Rama left 
Ayodhya with Sita, his wife and me to this 
forest. Having arrived in forest he entered 
into Dandakaranya which was surrounded 
with hermits. A wicked man abducted his 
wife Sita from there and this is the reason 
that we are looking for him here. This all is 
our story and I have told you. 

tprl i|5ici|d:i 

SiSffeTcnrtTT I^H qiATTlid TrU'jf: 11 ^ m I 

^ ^ TTR tictri 

tml: TRsSTWT^II^^U 
f^TTWthST TTKTwT i^dlHld:l 

fifl^ RfWfH;il^'3ll 

3Tir5f^fw WiMI T 

3Tt w WFl^: R%i: 3Wtll?<ill 

■wIctsiM^fci titled 

ftt W RR ?Rm# ^11 ^11 

Having relied on the statement of Laks 
mana, Hanuman accepted Rama as his 
master, consoled him, took him to Sugriva 


but did not reveal his identity. On having 
arrived to Sugriva, he made them friends to 
each other. Having introduced with Rama's 
personality, Sugriva bowed before him and 
humbly said- "O king, there is no doubt that 
you will be our master from this day and I 
with my monkeys accept being your slave. 
Your enemy is my own enemy and your 
friend is also my best friend. Not only this, 
but your grief is my own grief and the 
pleasure you feel is my own pleasure. He 
again said to Rama. 

rc|rtflfh\c| MdllfdRacked MRlI^dH^I 
giHl RTR RR M^NdR<l*M;IRoll 
RIRfq^Rt ^eURT R^RTRgRRTRR; I 

RRMcillSil Rlf^ c(lfcdHH.II ? ?lI 
■^JIUtRidrtlHrig RRRTI t gli^lRI 
^ ct gfij^Tdlt^ JlIUl^^RPR^II^^M 

O Lord Ball is my elder brother. He is 
mighty and full of valour but he is cunning 
in heart. He fell a prey to lust and abducted 
my wife. Nobody else is capable to kill 
Bali. O Prince, the scholars have predicted 
that the person who could pierce these 
seven palm trees simultaneously, will able 
to murder Ball. 

RfelRTsf % TTRlfR ^ilnif^Tcil H^mb-fl 
RTRIR 'gRR5lRR^:ll??ll 
RFTtREH; TTR: W RT^RI 

cIll^TRl R^ RERM ’^rlR'i^ll 

frRRR; R'^21 Rlf^RTI 

TIRlfR RR RIRW Rrf^HT.IRmi 

fenq- RMI RRTR R RRR R1 

iRRRT RlfFTRR R 'fRRRTf^cfR 11 'R ^ 11 

tuivftug r1chir< 1 f^ckRT <ryc(ki<ii 
Rt R RTTt W ^tRT WR TfRRRRI 19 \911 




206 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


m sTrW TTR: <CTH(5Trt<'f:l 

t# gjtM 3^RT9RnRiii 

Rama in order to appease Sugriva put an 
arrow on his bow and penetrated seven 
palm trees simultaneously and on a single 
shoot. He then said to Sugriva : put a mark 
on your body for my recognition and fight 
with Ball. Sugriva followed the suggestion, 
fought with Ball and Rama killed him with 
a single shot. The gallant' Ball fell down 
dead. Rama then incoronated Ahgada as 
crown prince, a humble warrior but 
intimidated of the event and brought Tara to 
the service of Sugriva. He then said to 
Sugriva ' "Look after the kingdom of 
monkeys and remember that the search for 
Sita is to be started as early as possible. 

JITf65ileTl ■RFnj; HM: W5Rt 
chTtluli gni^ll^oll 

^ rlfW^ TI^ UM ■?Rf^ 

TTO^II^ ^11 

IT ct imirsT 
#RT7^ 


Sugriva in the presence of Laksmana 
said to Rama, O Rama, the monkeys will 
feel inconvenienced to move here and there 
owing to this rainy season as it will make 
them sick. As and when it gets over, I will 
send my monkeys to all directions." With 
these words he bowed before Rama and 
returned with Tara, his wife to Pampapura. 
He then sank in carnal pleasure. 


vk 1< Tra^ti 

TPRi: TTat Wl 

W TFTcT: cftfiRTittS; I 

71?T:l 

ti^ W i^TTpilt gjftRRigi: 11^ V911 

cT §WB3cf: ^jc^T 

TOTRi (TTWTTTsf Vlig'RI'ra RTjrf^ll?^JI 

mwrmfw pl^ i5rn<TO^:i 

■pl:^5psngg?:ii^^ll 

?Rt 5^ fg^i 

g;^ TR^RPt f|g g^ii-ijo II 


Rama on the other hand began to live on 
the peak of the mountain Nilakantha in that 
huge forest in the company of his brother 
Laksmana. He passed the rainy season with 
severe pricks of separation from Sita. When 
the pleasant season (sarada) appeared, he 
talked with Laksmana about the plan. 
Sugriva violated his promise as he did not 
appear there. Reacting on this negligence, 
Rama said to Laksmana - "Laksmana, go 
immediately to Pampapura. See the reason 
why that wicked monkey has not come till 
date. He had express told that he would 
appear just with the expiry of the rainy 
season. Go now quickly to the wicked 
monkey who has forgotten his promise and 
indulges in physical courtship with Tara. 
Bring him here with his monkeys too. If he 
denies, say to him that the arrow which 
brought death to Bali is still with Rama. So, 
do compliance with Rama's directions as it 
is only good for you. 




CHAPTER 50 


207 


MHimiy -m f?f^i 

TT M 

1% ftpT TT^ TTRP^ TTR^ II 

RldmPcjby diwipR ^i 

f grfm Tm ^ p rrErii'i{?ii 

dj^dO-tld MN^d^l 

yfd«rq ^ TFCRJT TJraf^TTST p^lU'iJll 
W^Tiij ^ cbilolfd ^c|ind^H4lPdy1l 
% ^ TFint t w THT ?T^:ii')fmi 

firaifui -qiPr ^ ^ ^ PodiPur ^ pri 
Rldm-^ftljj TF3R 

iJI^'lPM ^ MUr^POr^ckdl ^5-ijy|ch<1ftl 
^nfxrt ^ im^enn TTft4iivv9ii 
djKpJodl 5 ^ Wehlif ^^IigRTI 
diMluir TIrtIclilcW H«ITfnil'i<:il 

TT^ f| fRR^ rPtRJT 3ra^l 

g?^T: mRc^^Pi wnrii'^^ii 

11 MV'Mlio llP(<*i<lPl ^:imo|| 

trg i MMPhd i oPi i 
^ ^ ^ Po-^iPl: pilk^ll 
^aurtl ^ ^ c^cfirr 4lM<j 'WTI 

TT^^TFr^ wt cfiWrW f^rlMIHchH^im^l 
Tif? HWlfR ^ <|l|c||«HJp(<j '^1 

pttg#R wim^ii 

Laksmana accepted this message from 
Rama and bowed his head with the words - 
"very well". He then entered Pampapurl and 
scolded Sugriva with these words - "Oh, 
you are tangled in luxuries and carnal 
satiation with Tara with skipping the 
promise recently made. O wicked, you 


really have forgotten the promise that you 
will bring STta to Rama wherever she is 
found. Who except you can dare to cheat a 
friend who put an example by killing Ball at 
first and recovering the throne for you. 
Remember that you had promised in the 
presence of gods, fire and water treating 
them as witnesses in the express words - "O 
king, I will help you for searching STta. 
Your enemies are my enemies and your 
friends will be my friends from this day. I 
will come to you definitely with an army of 
monkeys for searehing STta." Who can be 
next to you to dare reverse or otherwise the 
promise. You thus, have made your work 
done but omitted his work. The proverbs 
such as "the mind reverts when ones work 
is done through others" and "the calf skips 
the udder in which milk is less" do exactly 
apply to the wicked like you. The prudent 
men in this world seldom forget the good 
one had done for them. The scriptures 
suggest remedy for the sinner but there is 
no remedy for the ungrateful man. I have 
neither read nor heard any remedy for the 
ungratefulness and the ungrateful 
undoubtedly suffer from severe calamities. 
Hence, don't be ungrateful. Remember your 
promise recently made. Come now to the 
shelter of Rama and apologise for the 
omission. If still you deny, listen to the 
declaration of Rama - "I will despatch 
Sugriva like Ball to Yama's home." The 
arrow which brought death to Bali is still 
with me." 


■R TRt ^ ??r: 1 





ppfel f HMVTjii -qf^orlf^d: I 

3^ ^ tWIR cd^qnt yH<lPm:mmi 


208 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


WI: WTTW <m>JlirOH(^^yiim^ll 

^TORfrfli TifmFT ^rrrarfq ^ 

^rn^gifiT cpftiMTrR^im^i 

TTW^ ^ tm: I 

■qt ^ djl*rOT wnt 3ri%im<ill 

%Tqi w '^’T^iro ^ 

q^d ’ll ^<41: ^TT: ^idi’<<quich4f^)iim'? 1! 

cjT^ imfiiwjifq qrfei 

$cqcK1: cblMiMd ^iilcjUl ^(niiqui; 11^ o || 

Sugriva with consult of minister came 
out in response to Laksmana's statement. He 
bowed before him and said- "O greatman, 
pardon us for the offence undcliberatedly 
committed. I will not violate the promise 
once made with Rama. I will now go to 
Rama with monkeys in your company. I 
promise for compliance of every word of 
Rama with sheer devotion and honour. I 
have brave and warrior monkeys and all 
those will be deputed for the search of Sita 
in all directions. 


Tif? #51 qftWTT TTW#fi#5fTri 
^ T:ii^iidi #T 5EptiTt ^RurmRiii^^ii 
^ Ulfdwfd Trag# q^T#! 

^cqcRTt cT^qnHlST qt f II 

qr## qd^NHqp ■pqTSl^fl 
#5# iq#q #T#qT? fldtqfd q^ll^^ll 


^TTfdT: ^qPIdM ^ ctHicbV'U:I 
M^ltyiV^ fllRqyiV^ gFnT:ll^'8ll 

-qnl M4dlchRc(?qMqRlsh'^:l 

pl^: #vqprfq TTt# q^ll^mi 


fd^qnrfq qqf<^>rM i# vndtq^jyXi 
3np pj w# f5R% ^Enpr pii^^ii 


WT 'fqtc|qfi#TI 

3TPT^5Tq q?l#f q^ll^^l! 

Laksmana said- Come, now let us move 
quickly to Rama, O warrior, call for the 
army of monkeys and bears so that Rama be 
pleased with you. Sugriva implicitly 
directed Ahgada who also stood there. 11.: 
issued order to the general of the army, 
Crores of monkeys and bears came out from 
the caves, trees and the mountains and 
gathered at that place on a call from their 
general. Sugriva in the company of gigantic 
and gallant monkeys went to Rama and 
bowed before him. Laksmana too bowe l 
and said- "O king, have a grace on humble 
Sugriva now." 

in# ^ qqlyq^i 

PvKWolMlfdmsjra pt# Tiq?l5ftci.ll^<ill 
^ ^ f?# Tl^#r#41l Her 3wri 

f PT w qrawri I ^ 11 
cf# ^ ^ppqrecnrqqf: 1 
qigr Tht p^ 

^ pk R TFilRr |:fw piRI 

Rama on this request said Sugriva - 
"Warrior Sugriva, come beside me, tell me 
are you all well." Sugriva said with clasped 
hands - "O king, my well-being is related to 
the search of Sita and it will be perfectly 
achieved when I assign her to you." 

q'ldlRtilVn ^ xl ihHlf^Tlillts^ll 

SiWJ 5:fiR Wet pifen: I 

irpp qictW lit qTeTt5p:ll^^ll 

wRr UlMltd efwR:i 

w pqdi ttir; qldi'^wiqiejtiivs^ii 
g# m ciip^lui gtqciTI 
'jlItgqHfd qw TIR ■qT:Rw:ll^'8ll 


CHAPTER 50 


209 


In reply to SugrTva, Hanuman with 
permission of Rama said- "O Sugriva, 
listen attentively to me. The pain of 
separation from Sita puts Rama anxious all 
the time and he has even abandoned the 
fruits etc. and live without food. Laksmana 
too is sad always. This anxiety from both 
hearts goes to Ayodhya and keeps Bharata 
in misery and its reflection becomes the 
cause for pain to the subjects. Take into 
account this condition and search for STta 
immediately. 

IT TfT? chfcRFii TT 

feRTT TTtWT wnrjf 

mcl9ldl |\9 ^ 11 

annfr ^ ^ 11 ^ Iwr 1 

^ f| chr^iuifiiTiwi: 

iHW-TiPw fgt^r 

UltllrMI ciifil^rych:IP9<i II 

When the statement of Hanuman was 
over, Jambavan sought permission of Rama 
and stood up. He said Sugriva - "O SugrTva, 
consider the words of Hanuman all right. A 
firm thought in my mind assures that Sita, 
the chaste, meritorious lady will still be 
undeviated and unharmed; however her 
location is yet unknown. Nobody in this 
earth can do any harm to SM whose mind is 
exclusively concentrated on Rama, the great 
philanthropist. Hence, order the monkeys 
for the search immediately. 

3T^ Wrrat HT 

IRT PraWFlj grRTTTrfll 

yWRRT yhlrMI •Rld1'-^qu|cb4fnill<ioII 


m 4 wi Rfvl chfiirM: jidmciiHl 







^ ITR/^WRRT ctHTMHHiyq:l 

’MS ^ ulcii'^tfuictjAfuil 

.HIUjcliVTj ^ ^Tll<i^ll 

qtcTrarr?^ TT^rarcTqRraPTT: i 


stnyrTyrd mpt?! itit vire’)idii<i>jii 
^ nt q'«icii ttrit ^sTTiferPTi 
TynTit Tc^^dy^c^ i^iEf?T:ii<imi 

^ ^ ^ ^TTMT^iw ’ragii 

s9 ' O 

<*rq<l'^H M^|rTTnil<'^11 


Following the words of Jambavan, 
Sugriva was pleased and he immediately 
sent a number of monkeys to the west, sent 
one lakh monkeys to the north and a similar 
approach was followed for the east for the 
mission of searching Sita. The wise Sugriva 
then said to Arigada - "O Ahgada, go to the 
south for the search of Sita. Jambavan, 
Hanuman, Dvivida and Nila etc., gallant 
and brave" monkeys will be in your 
company. Go and see Sita and locate the 
place, her condition and particularly her 
conduct, who has abducted her and where 
has she kept her? On having this 
information, return as early as possible," 

'dWT^ ^1 
TSTM "cJITOdy ^|U3gHII<i'3ll 
TFt gr ’tu.difugiRi 

tr^: Wd ITHTf 'HlfwqiHlfdH :\\C6n 
iglJcTT TTldl^«J|cb»5(u|| 

gi'd^'iJgTTJld 'M-jqiriRflli'?ll 

■detoFT gfdTyHiHlyMRi dqrwdii 

^dl^ 5 TTT^ ^ Ilf 4 dIII<?o|| 



210 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


HMwrfir: y<^uiiPi yyT<?Ti)niffTft ^ii<? ^ii 

^3(Sr5^1cPTl50%^ yrMfOrJTciyKill 
y^rtWicdiKuiir^mi T^RTTII'? ^ II 

Tra*^ n^i<4i ^ UTI 

^ "^IR^ ^ WTOT t^:lilR f5:%WTll'?^ll 
-qcqrTt cl^ ^jRgiTrtRTTI 

wi;innn^gT<ii^ ^«nRTTii<? jJii 
IWT jn^ ^ ^ ^ 5:{sl'RI<UUTTI 
f|cT^ ^ ^ TRT^^wq;ii<?Mi 
RTW 

^ giW^Rl -gTftg ^fERT ■m^dlrtr3TH,ll’?^ll 

^ RFlt ■IM clHilUli fel^l 

^ ^RTifET gr ^ ^ ^-tRifR ft8Rrq;i I ^ 11 
i?R^ ^ Wi g R^l 
'^dMci^ci dlfdwc^ii^iipci^iii'^.iii 

Arigada immediately aeeepted the order 
so given by his uncle. The wise Jambavan 
made all monkey at a distance, arranged 
Rama, Laksmana, Sugriva and Hanuman at 
another place and then said to Rama - "O 
Rama, listen to an important suggestion 
regarding the searching mission for Sita 
from me and if you think it apt, accept the 
same. It is known that Jatajm saw Sita being 
abducted by Ravana and fought to the 
extent of his power against Ravana. Sita, in 
the meantime, had thrown her ornaments 
which was seen by Jatayu and all of us too. 
We had assigned those ornaments to 
Sugriva that time. Owing to the presence of 
these facts, Sita is definitely in Lanka this 
time. In spite o^ her separation, she will be 
remembering you all the time. It means that 
she is protecting herself from Ravana. She 
will be in great misery of separation. You 


should therefore, assign this work to 
Hanuman because he is only capable to 
jump across the sea. Nobody among the 
monkeys except Hanuman is able to 
succeed in this mission. This only is my 
opinion and I think it will prove all 
benevolent to all of us if duly accepted. 

graf^ rrnRRi;i 

^ Ri:€R ^jR-RIWIrM^jil 


Following the suggestion of wise 
Jambavan Sugriva stood up on his seat, 
went to Hanuman and said- 


WUR: J)dm<41^ll?oo|| 
rUdtl^VmicIld %ll<j'MldiRRf^d:l 
jrf^ dUgcbUUij ITT^Ic^tfhtldUini^o^ll 

Rrafmr n4Hi^vit fdtuj^t^bi^Mciid^i 

STRI RT# w ^ 5^^ IWRIII ? O 11 

dfgRHi'il'^:i3Tift ^ g^i 

JTdman^ii^o^ii 

Rf until THTR ■cRIm 


31^tRIcT: c||ld4^NH:ll^o')j|| 

3RR «Rl^d TFSt W RRTSfRn 


W ^ cTdlfd^nURFM «l^|iilch4ruill^omi 
drurej eb^furtsifM ^g.cdl'UIUdlrH'fll 

3#^ RFlt #T 41inMfHPddrH,ll^o^ll 

RRRlf RH RlfRT RRTMt IIrTI 
sRTRyitar EdHiftf tciirii-*i4 Rigih^ii^ovsii 
sRdRHlfdMiV^R ^cRcb^foTI 
^l^dRcWl IJRIT Ti^lrmill^oill 


O gallant Hanuman, listen to me. Rama 
is from the clan of Iksvaku and came to 
Dandkaranya with his brother and wife in 
compliance with the order of his father. 
Religion abiding Rama is the master of all 


CHAPTER 50 


211 


worlds and apparent god Visnu, the soul of 
all creatures. He is incaranated in mainly 
form. His wife Sita has been abducted by 
wicked Ravana. He was searching for her 
when you at first saw him. We had made a 
promise after joining with the tie of 
friendship. I am inclined to keep my world 
on your excellent might. Nobody among the 
monkeys except you can jump across the 
sea, observe Sita and then return here. You, 
therefore, can only understand and tackle 
this mission because you are mighty, politic 
and expert at acting as a spy. 

#cTt n 

mfk nTt ■ymtbzj 

>11^ ^ ilSIT 

3fT^ ^ ^ 'iRc»)lrq''illl 

^ ■Rl^ 

3# ■qr ^ ^ qqrj^lin'iJII 

iraffR cT^ TracT ^iraRllf^l 

qi-qsn ^ tR^T fertHflinmi 

In reply to Sugriva, HanurnSn said- 
"Why do you say so? Whether it is possible 
that I will not perform my master Rama's 
work? On the reply so given by Hanuman, 
enemy killer Rama with tears in his eyes 
said- "O wise Hanuman, I assign this 
project to you and keep Sugriva here. Have 
a firm resolution for the sake of the pleasure 
of my own, all these monkeys and 


particularly for Sugriva. O great hero, it 
appears that only Ravana has abducted Sita. 
Hence, go to the place where Sita is for 
proper inspection. If she enquires the 
persons who sent you, their identity etc., 
please, observe our features properly so as 
to face Sita successfully and console her. 
The special marks on our bodies will make 
her convinced enough. In case, you could 
not tell exactly the special marks of our 
bodies, I think it will become impossible to 
take Sita in confidence. 

^3THifR FR^rat f^^;l 

MTtJifq RT fiW 

STRBct fRWRt ^ ^ 1 

RldlillWg ^oSJI^ THrT tNlc)HlT:mm<iM 

Hanuman stood up at once and said with 
clasped hands - "I know all symptoms and 
marks on your bodies in a particular way. I 
am now leaving for the mission in the 
company of the monkeys. Please, don't 
regret in the matter. Kindly, give me 
another thing for recognition of Sita, so that 
a firm confidence can be won. 

y'.ith^lui TTR: RJRc1#ER;l 

' sS <00 

iT?r ^RRPTRwTPHT: I 

TTR xl I o 11 

(Rit ■'itUmiJg IRRFr35Rf§rr:l 
■flllgtsfR xT dlo^^ \ 

3TFftRRT?nRRfR 

RRR: Ri WRR RR 
fRiRRR R ^i^5R ^wfR: R^Rif^l 
fit R?RT R Rt 3RRRT5RRfRf^^RTR;il ? II 



212 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


Trtroqf wnTFit 

gr cbRujifu aiRTgjT cbufHiRiTi.-i^^'iS 

Rama in response to Hanuman took out 
a ring in which Rama was inscribed and 
gave it to Hanuman. Hanuman made 
Parikrama (a circle motion) of Rama, Laks 
mana and Sugriva, bowed his head and left 
that place at once. Sugriva ordered all his 
prepared gallant monkeys - "Listen, all 
monkeys to my order don't take a long route 
by passing through the mountains and 
forests but take a short-cut. I stay with 
Rama and expect your quick visit at Sita's 
dwelling and safe return. In case you violate 
ray order your nose and ears shall be cut as 
punishment for non-compliance. 

t WIW yqRIM fluloimfii gehTI 

S3 Cs S3 

^s3 s3s3 S3 ' 

rill 

^ s3 s3 es Cs 

^ tel 

l^qqrilRI Wf% 

'eii 

s 3 ' ' s3 s3 s3 

cblvq^M Mirant;III 
11% gnTR% ^h?T^i 
•^% ^11^^0 11 
■m irtg ^ qqtrn'tfT:ii 

aiFR^ ^’HR'tfl'ril 
■yiTN 

^ ISTRTT M^mi%'cRc|| rlTW rlf^l ^ II 

Thus, Sugriva sent them for search for 
Sita and the monkeys adopted their 
respective directions. The squad which was 


sent to the west returned empty handed or 
failure after keen investigations they made 
in valleys, peaks, banks of rivers, cottages 
of hermits, forests of various types, trees 
and shrubs, caves and boulders, nearby 
Sahya mountain, near Vindhya and sea¬ 
shore, Himalaya, the countries including 
Kithpurusa etc., all human provinces, seven 
nether regions, all middle provinces, 
Kasmira, all countries in the east, Assam 
and Avadha, all pilgrim places and 
Konkana etc., seven countries. That squad 
bowed before Sugriva, Rama and Laksmana 
and said- "We did not see Sita anywhere 
and they stood there. 

IRRlt W tel cbMlW:! 
rM clteteflR fte ^ 7TI ^? II 
^rtenr IhRTTi 

tetete ^TqHN wqil^^'iill 
fte TTR ^:l 

^ IRITIS?qii 

terr ijtecRpjiTRteteTi 

fte ini TTR ^ II 

Rama then said to Sugriva - "O king, 
Sita is in a forest in the south. Hanuman can 
only search her. He will definitely return 
with success in his mission. Please, have 
courage as my statement is true." Laksmana 
said on the basis of omen for good he 
experienced - "Hanuman will come after 
meeting Sita." Thus, Sugriva and Laksmana 
took care of Rama with continued 
consolation. 

^ RWT c|H<wqr:ll 




CHAPTER 50 


213 


yfrl^yim-TT ^ifwTf nfwf<dii^?<?ii 
TTT ^ dHlMdH 3ff^ cfTTOTII 

anTTfiT: gER^r ^ f f% 5 M-yNdH^i^'jjoii 

The gallant monkeys sent under the lead 
of Ahgada. were tired badly but could not 
find SM. Owing to non-availability of food 
for several days, they were starving. In 
course of their stroll round the forest, they 
saw a meritorious wife of Rsi in a cave. 
Having felt their presence in the cottage, 
she asked -"Whose messengers are you? 
From where have you come and what is the 
purpose of your visit here? 

grrogHT? gj %gT 

TTwgrsJiRg •mgr^gnrggJfuTii 

SRT ftnfnr tjrggrifrrifTil^i 9 n 

The learned Jambavan replied - "O 
gentle lady, we are the executive of Sugriva 
and have come in search of Rama's wife 
STta. We have now lost our direction. 
Owing to failure in tracing Sita, we have 
not still taken anything as food. 

^rdew TIT ■^pTTII 

^igrTh TTR Tfmt ^ ^ grt fl - vcHd i^^^11 

XT grrwt ^ ggilv=Hi:ii 
{Idchldlddlfr^d TTRWtTRI^'iCttll 
cr^cKcn W>JW dNI '^ini^Tcll Tnfe^ll 
■uMHjreti gtargrpt 
didityid g 'dnifd TTxgrfggtg 
aiiRyd'l t^TTT 5 ftrg|^g^fgjT;i^'*{^ii 
hiJluiMd fTxrrgg ^ gfiMsrii 
TT crfgg ^rtgr Trnnfg^g^ j xr: 
ggifddi g Tpsng MdtiRia 


3T^ TMT 5t^ 


That lady said further - "I know Rama, 
Laksmana, Sita and Sugriva. Please, accept 
the food duly cooked by me. As you arc 
assigned with Rama's work, you therefore, 
are worthy of honour as Rama. With these 
words, that lady offered them nectar like 
delicious food and satisfied them. So again 
said- "Sampati is known to the place where 
Sita has been kept. He lives in the same 
forest at Mahendra mountain. Dear 
monkeys, you all will reach to there through 
the same route. Sampati is foresighter as he 
has excellent eye sight and he will tell you 
all about Sita. You will have to proceed 
further on the way suggested by him. 
Hanuman will duly search Sita. 

d^c^cwi: ggrtr: xnj #gwTgr;i 

s3 nS 

ftsTO gRdi-g^TTTgi WEr irgfer>i 11 
ggr ^Rwf^^wTi 
gg■RuiifdhiRR d,g 1 vcH[:ii^hoii 

dijciiT^iy Ruiif^ctldtHPidl'f fel; I 
^ ggfT# TTTSTtgi; giT 3 I gT fW RT ^TTRII ? 


The monkeys became extra-happy on 
these words. They were energised. They 
then moved forward after bowing their head 
with thanks to that gentle lady. They 
reached Mahendra mountain and saw that 
Sampati is seated there. Sampati enquired 
them - "Who are you? Who has sent you 
here? From where have you come? Tell me 
quickly. 


frgg^ c(n<i <i,^4yit^gqHdiUig^ii 
TTR^ gg Tii TTTgi^t|ui<*4Hiii T n 
ifggi: cFlgti'jiH ^iTiqui u^irmiil 
igt TPOTgi: fRisigTgggT^fic^i^q^ii 



214 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


■RtcTTOIR tT^mFl ^ ^ Wl^ll 

w IT HfrarwrajTT^ tr^i^ii 
gjfei^i^dwcii^m^ii 
TT TTTcgr ^ cPRTt^gjiosif^ii 
^TtWTSIRT Tg ^ f^TTTT^ 

In reply to this query the monkeys began 
to disclose the entire account - "O bird king, 
all of us are the spies of Rama. The king 
monkey Sugriva has sent us in search of 
Sita. A gentle lady on the way guided us 
and thus, we are here. O respected, please 
tell us the whereabouts of Sita. On this 
request, Sampati stared at the south and told 
them -" Sita is in the As'oka forest region of 
Lanka." Then the monkeys said- "Your 
brother Jatayu has met death for the cause 
of defending Sita." Having heard this, 
Sampati took a bath and gave Jalanjall to 
.latayu and resorting to Yoga, pulled out the 
breathing from his body and turned into a 
corpse. 

grro ^ 

TT^gj ^ IRnW?r ^ fecTT:l?q^ll 

wit WT ^ Tfi 

Traw ^ Wl^ TIT ^ TIRT^r ftfV’cJdifl^hd 
yujlfdgTjHIdSJ TT^ rR5;il 

qni i uii g gi?gT? 5 tM 
Hft irf^ rlt TIWTif «l!?in<nXll 

Md^T^idl^diui ^lickl ^ f| T?TWn:l^^o 

The monkeys performed the funeral of 
Sampati, gave him Jalanjall, climbed at the 
top of Mahcndra mountain and stood there 
for a moment. Then facing the sea they 
began to talk to each other - "Ravana only 
has abducted. Sita has been a proved matter 
now. It has been confirmed now with the 


averment of Sampati. Now what to think is 
that you all have to decide who is capable 
among us for crossing the sea, enter Lanka 
and can return after meeting Sita there. 

gFnT:ll 

■HIMtlTHur 

5 WmT 11 

chujdiRiR; gPTt^:ii^^^ii 

Jambavan on this said-"Ali monkeys are 
capable to cross the sea but this assignment 
will meet with success through the efforts 
of an eccentric and phenomenal monkey. I 
think that only Hanuman is able to give this 
work a success. The time should not be lost 
now. See that the prescribed time for our 
return is over and a fortnight more has also 
passed. Sugriva will cut our nose and ears if 
we will return with out seeing Sita. It is 
therefore good to follow me and pray to 
Hanuman to take over this work. 

dTRIrtll«4; TT R R%:l 

iliylgrqiggkTT: WnrCTarRII 
R?TW ^ ^T% RifiraiRi q i 
R55 IR TTR^IRRR TTcnRTR RRIR Rl I 
RRTfcRTRiraPTo^nfrgRI 

giRTFC qq^irR5l:ll?^^!l 
<mM^*4dV’cT 3^: wk^ni 

chPMf^w kf^:i 
TRt Rgk uldMo^dlRd: 

>a *0 

RRsigiM 

R^Rt^TtssRmmqoii 





CHAPTER 51 


The monkeys said to Jambavan - "Very 
well, be it so done." Then they all began to 
request the most efficient Hanuman - "O 
AnjanI Nandana, you are the beloved 
servant of Rama. Go to Lanka for coercion 
of Ravana and protect the interests of our 
entire community." Hanuman accepted their 
prayer with the words - "It will be done." 
As it was an order from Rama, again 
Sugriva had also assigned this responsibility 
and now these monkeys had also prayed to 
him at Mahendra mountain, Hanuman 
decided to cross the sea and enter into 
Lanka. 

Thus ends the fifteeth chapter on an 
incarnation of Rama in Nrsimha Purana 
*** 


CHAPTER 51 


215 


CHAPTER 51 

Hanuman's entrance into Lank3, meeting 
with Sita and message to Rama after LaAka 
burnt into ashes 

Tf w trauiHMiyr: ■Rhmrr: Rfw'fnmi 

v3 *v 

^ cHiUmRvI ■qf^ll^ll 

3T33Tf^ 311^-Md 'URUINIrW'lHt^l 

xrrar ttr g ^ ■r^rstit^irm 
wrt Rfidli^ci TTRIXJT %TRT ^:l 

w TRgH nuiictiiildMfddRi 

nS >3 ^ 

313jRTT dWT 'dHclI'^l 

RMlmc^ch'y<5<r^t4 sffaif^^Himi 
TfRotfira WTR ^ndRld^l R^ddl: I 
ddlMId fxf^; 

Markandeya said- Hanuman decided 
moving through the sky route in search of 


Sita, who was abducted by Ravana and to 
locate the place where she was kept. He 
faced the east, bowed his head to Atmayoni 
Brahma including gods, Rama, Laksmana 
and with reverence bowed before the sea 
and rivers with clasped hands. He then 
embraced his monkey friends and did 
Pradaksina of them. All monkeys blessed - 
"O warrior, go through the holy way of air 
and return without any major hindrances." 
The gallant Hanuman then got his own 
power. He became as mighty as the air 
itself He lifted his head high and looked at 
the distant route. With a feeling of six kind 
perfect luxuries, be pressed the peak of 
Mahendra mountain with his feet and 
jumped upward. 

ftRTRWoT ■RTrTRl tjtRW: I 

■sS -O'* 

ITRgjphRWTRI ■■HpAui iral%;l|\3ll 
fenxn^ FraRTt^:! 

t TyirR'Rlbq dlcRRII^ill 

3tqcT?^r ■R?Tc*>fR:l 

fRTgRt Rrrarrr Tthi mtwti 

W rT ^ wnt RcIRlrM^: 11 ? o 11 
ftckdfvitsi) frxmirf ?i 

WRRTRI ^RXTpi; y i ^i^rv il 

When Hanuman was proceeding with 
acceleration with Rama's work in his mind. 
Mainaka mountain came up from the 
bottom of sea with the intention to give a 
slight rest to Hanuman because he 'was 
motivated by the sea to do this. He saw that 
mountain, talked a few moments and then 


NARASIMUA PURAI^A^! 


iunipcd from liiat mountain and caught 
speed as usual. Simhika monstress had 
opened her mouth wide in the sea. 
Hanuman was suddenly caught under her 
jaws but he came out through his belly and 
anus again. Thus, after his extraction from 
the mouth of Simhika, Hanuman accessed 
to the Trikuta mountain and descended on a 
tree (here. He passed the day there and 
performed his evening prayer on the same 
rnountain. He began to enter Lanka when 
i! 0 night has befallen. He defeated the city 
deity Lanka on the way and then entered 
uio Lanka which was rich of gems of 
various types and a number of other 
'A'ondcrs. 

3rR% HifdkR 
TTgnTFT fRTt 
ftraPT trant 

U-fe i I 

tt qiRmTtITRTRcTH;i 
ctlTmT n iigtrr.pr ^ 

'MI r:TH ili: ?l‘a TOtTTRt RmcRRI 

tr :n§?if c; i q- f;T{R RWT^IR TRTRII ^^ 9 11 

3t5Tra5gfeiT STTHT qHlTTO‘'RRLcldlR I 

<■ 'O 

When all monsters were lost in snoring 
sleep, Hanuman entered into the grand 
palace of Ravana. Ravana was on the cot 
there. Hanuman saw that his twenty nostrils 
were busy with deep breathing and his jaws 
were dreadful. He saw there several 
tliousand women decked with various 
ornaments. However, STta was seen 
nowhere. Hanuman became sad when he 
did not see STta. He then came into Asoka 
Vatika as Sampati had said. It was filled 


with a number of flowers and fragrance of 
sandal was spreading in the air. 

tmMHl RTf^RTtRI | 1| 

H^McTddRI 

3TTRt^ ■RT^ "RPIRIR o i 1 

■Rirat itlcKRdSfRcdTiR^: I 


(MUrwr^rrirtrlR ?ll 

3TFRR ^tfmt TJTfTSr RT “tRiT R5TRRTRI 


Rrf^ Rg-TTRRR RR: IR ? 11 
RINRhJI RRRTRk fot RR: I 
jnfRnRR-TI^; W RTRTRRIRTTRRTRIR^II 


R^ TTRRT ^ TR RTRRRRRRTI 
atf^rn^RRRTRTT# ■RIRi WIR'iSIl 

Hanuman saw STta surrounded with the 
monstresses under an Asoka tree. She was 
seated there and that tree was flourishing 
with green leaves and flowers. Hanuman 
climbed on that tree and assuming her STta 
with full confidence, sat there. As he could 
sit there, Ravana came there in company of 
various women. He said to STta - "Darling, I 
am suffering from sensuality. Accept me 
please. Put on jewels on your body and shift 
your mind from Rama to me." STta, shrank 
her body with fear, took a straw before her 
and began to reply slowly - "O wicked and 
sensuous Ravana, get out from here 
immediately. I curse on you that Rama's 
arrows soon lick your blood." 

RRtRRRT RirRR?R TT^TRIRT? TI^:I 
f^pTIRT^TR^ ^R^%JRR MH^MIRmi 
Rf? RRjfR Rt ■RjRT RR; TITRrT MidMihJ 
^TRRRRT RRRTT (Jtdl •»,|o(U|; ^ jRRiRRRl R ^ 11 
RRT Rt RTf WWr ^HdiTRJ^jfTRjl 
RoTUt RR ehr^lfui RRR RfeRt RRIR^II 
fTRRRT RT? RT: RTRT RR^SHfalrisKR; I 


CHAPTERS! 


217 


•ng*!-^''W TTR TfrTini^l 

TT UFT^- ^v r q t ^ WtTT M I Hf^i^fd lR^^II 

Ravana said to the monstresses - "Make 
this human virgin well understood and 
enslaved to me within two months from this 
day. If her mind does not accept me on 
expiry of this time for me, I order you all to 
make preyer to this woman. With these 
words, Ravana entered into his palace. 
Feared of Ravana, the monstresscs then said 
to Sita - "O gentle woman, Ravana is most 
wealthy. Accept him and pass your days 
happily. Sita in reply to them said- Rama 
will come soon and after killing Ravana 
with his army of monster; bring me back to 
him. I cannot be anothers wife except 
Rama. He will come, kill Ravana and 
rescue me. 

^•qdi^^diqtn q:^difqdqii?oii 

ddtdlRy^dl ITT? 

TT? Clduictl' 

HiiTIUM TT? %lldl fsFjHTtT?: 11 ? ^ II 

: '^pTT ui|l ■uidl'Mi^d Mwycl:I 

-RldlMI?^ iTT:li^?n 

Tjg: Traf: TTTrrrq?r>jRT^tT:l 

chl^Md^ Til'd Rdici Mc(HlTH'd:ll?>{ll 
Tpptt [dVditiqiHiii iiqiijd1d<*qi 

-RW fgtg; gshrmra:! 

^ TTl^fq^FTi^ ThTC^ 3m:ll?^ll 

cT^RTIT^tT q^wlu ^cRTd ^ptTTRI 

Traw TRM tgifiRTTSS^ ’^fdll^^ll 


Having heard these words i’rom Sita, the 
monstresses tried to create terror and said- 
"Kiil her and make your food." One among 
them was Trijata. She was gentle and 
chaste. She repeated the scene which came 
to her dreams. She said - "O wicked 
monstresses, listen to a dream that predicts 
destruction of Ravana, his death with all 
other monsters, indicative of Rama's vieta)ry 
and maker of Slta's rc-mecting with Rama. 
All monstresscs stood at a distance from 
Sita when they heard Trijata. Hanuman then 
appeared before STta and reciting frcqucmly 
Rama-Rarna, he disclosed the entire episode 
before her. He then gave the ring, told the 
special marks on the bodies of Rama and 
Laksmana and said- "Gentle lady, Sugrlva 
is the king of gallant and chivalrous 
monkeys. Rama and his brother L.aksmana 
will come here shortly with him, kili 
Ravana with his army and ensure your safe 
escape from here. 

TH ^ r^V'c!R!T cHRU'^myi^dldl 
gSPRlPTcif ^ RFr^fimii^dii 

?hui<*)u4 otjrifri; RRwnf grrei 

nitMtictAHtlTl'luj; cttHHII'?<^ll 

tjnrrt TTRTmfw TTnrfr qitM^qdi 

ftSRTOg ■^WRTII^oll 
iJVqfd TTR RnilLiTl'cf^yirq Tl 

TRj -^TchlTM^IMliy ?!l 

TRnrgrsmftrr gtrarptm^i 

Rrgr rTt RfeRTf ^ grfrtill'ii II 

Sita was then confident in full of 
Hanuman. She said- "O warrior, how have 
you crossed the ocean?" Hanuman replied - 
"I jumped across the sea so easily as 
someone jumps the hood pit of a cow." The 
person with Rama on lips deems the ocean 
as the mark of cows hoof Don't be so sad 


218 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


and be bold. I say you in truth that the day 
will shortly eome when you could see 
Rama. Thus Hanuman consoled Sita, got a 
bangle as a token of his meeting with Slta, 
heard the story of Jayanta, crow disguise 
once defeated by Rama, bowed his head 
before her and then moved from there with 
a decision to return. 

MT 

dltuityi Tmt 4l4c|(d^ll'«^ II 

cRT W 5rc|l <iqui^Pl«h‘i^ll')J'){ll 

TFTtmft ij^hTgr^i 

^:ft5arcll hr H^qnrRII^mi 

wt RBTM 

RrnTg#4 ?)i7fiqiRra 

All of a sudden, an idea struck his mind 
and he destroyed the Asoka-vatika, stood at 
the gate of it and cried loudly - "Victory to 
Rama." He killed all monsters whosoever 
came to resist him with their commanders. 
The commander Aksakumara was killed 
with his charioteer and horses. Indrajit, 
another son of Ravana however, captured 
him under some specific devices. He then 
took him to Ravana. On exit from there, he 
burnt the entire Lanka into ashes with loud 
cry as "Victory to Rama, to Sugriva and to 
Laksmana." Threatened Ravana and again 
met with Sita. He then crossed the sea, met 
with monkeys and received honour from all 
when he gave the news of Sita to them. 

ctH^: HTtlniurq h^cI^I 


qigr ^ ^ I 

3nf^: Ry^idtuiiR[chMimoii 

gsrarora wm ^ ^ trafn h 

RlcfT ^ ^11 

3T-a^ul|pi1 ira- tRt aRTRTI m 9 11 

VliH<^TtRqidcRn cRifit tjHgJIrRjlTI 
ttcJill-^KnilUR -qqr itfdqldlim^ll 
RHT HRiftrlT HTHT 

With monkey friends, he then entered 
into Madhuvana slapped all guards and 
drunk honey in the company of all 
monkeys. Dadhimukha, a monkey, resisting 
them was badly beaten. With extreme 
gaiety, they all then reached near Rama and 
Laksmana. He bowed his head before king 
Sugriva, Rama and Laksmana, disclosed the 
whole account starting from jumping over 
the sea to the meeting with Sita and said 
that ' "I saw Sita in As'oka-vatika, the 
monstresses had surrounded her and she 
was frequently and with pricks of separation 
remembering you. A stream of tears was 
flowing from her eyes and she was in a 
depressed state. O Rama, your wife Sita is 
in her chaste and safe conduct even in so 
dangerous a place. I searched eveiywhere 
but found her in Asoka-vatika, talked with 
her and she also reposed faith in me. She 
has sent her chest ornament, studded with 
gems for you." 

^fgcRcii ^TtcttHit^ 

^ ^ TiRUT ^immi 



CHAPTER 52 


219 


awcRig iwti 

^ ^ ^-91^ ^gT^trftn m V 911 
Wnt f wiilr^ Trant f% ^ ^^xarftTi 
$r«4clllifc^ qgVI: TT^cIT II 

Tig 5 f:feraT TftrlT tit iTt^ ilHMWHIk^ill 



^ (jknicn ^ TiTf^ TTtl: 



With these words, Hanuman gave that 
bangle to Rama and said- "Your wife has 
also sent a message." Please listen to me - 
"O great resolute king, remember the event 
when at Citrakuta mountain your head was 
in my lap and Jayanta had dishonoured you. 
O beloved, the excellent act that you 
performed on that day for the purpose to 
punish the crow for his slight offence, 
cannot be expected from the gods and the 
monsters also. You had shot that time the 
Brahmastra but whether this Ravana will be 
left unpunished and scot-free? With this and 
many other events Sita told and then she 
began weeping bitterly. All this is the 
account of Sita's misery. Do efforts to 
remove her misery." Having heard the 
message from Sita, the ornament brought by 
Hanuman increased the pain of Rama. He 
embraced Hanuman to his chest and began 
weeping. Then he moved from there 
steadily. 

Thus ends the fiftieth chapter on an 
incarnation of Rama in Nrsimha Purana 






CHAPTER 52 


219 


CHAPTER 52 

Rama's visit at sca-shore, shelter of 
Vibhl^ana, proposal to make him the king of 
Lanka, Ravana's defeat, slaughter of 
Kumbhakarija, Mcghnada and other 
monsters. Coronation of Rama ete. 

^ ^ firararaf 

TFTt Ticar TfpRt gFlt: W 

Rl'KW wTcTra^ifsrrrf^i 

RT^Idt^'d: 'cTW: I 

31^ ^ ensfr TlRdlRfq^ll? II 

iiaoinia ei^rar ^rfr^TETt^^: i 

^ftar ^cwcic4i<^i 
Ttg TmSxTrlt ^RkiHIMrg 


TRT TTtf ^'=*^<=1 ^SHI^IIS, II 

RfdlltulliVl TTl 3T5 rT VK'^I 'HcT;I 

fqtmwEf 3n33T# TmtiKtnHbsii 
f^fensSssi TTW rHTWM R^lnfdRI 


Markandcya said- Rama reached the 
sea-shore with a huge army of monkeys 
after he heard the gloomy living of Sita. 
Sugriva and Jambavan too reached the 
deseent shore adorned with Talavana. Rama 
was looking as the full moon in the 
company of monkeys. He stayed with Laks 
mana and started observing the immense 
depth of the sea. In Lanka, on the other 
hand, Ravana scolded his brother VibhTsana 
even on a good advice he had given. He 
then with learned ministers came to Rama 
and said with clasped hands - O Rama, 




220 


NARASIMHA PURAI^AM 


Janardana, I am the younger brother of 
Rfnana. My name is Vibhisana and I am 
under your shelter. Please, escort me. With 
these words, he fell down at the feet of 
Rama. Rama understood his wish, picked 
him up, did a Tllaka and said- "I declare 
that the kingdom of Lanka will go to you." 
Vibhisana stood there and talked with Rama 
on various other matters. 

dftycIRI 

(Id) 11 11 

TfTPf ^ ^ <ITEraFt|l 
dHt: "^0^ (T^ IT tiUclill^oll 

%WT 5 TT^ BgrtHT ^5PTl^:l 
■uki <!*) Rtt cR I 

•O vS 

ePT: TTTTT <NlclHMH:linil 

WtWTOXit gtfcRgTTPqW^I 

d(il(y|A) TTT? el^tRf^xT T^li^dtflI?^ 11 

Vibhisana said- "O lord, you are god 
Visnu. Do such an effort that the sea should 
give you the way. Let us all pray to the sea. 
Rama honoured his words and laid at the 
shore of the sea with all monkeys. Three 
nights were passed in that posture and it 
made Rama annoyed. He took fire arrow in 
hands so as to dry up the entire sea. Laks 
mana immediately stood up and said to 
aggrieved Rama - 

R^'dl f? 13 ^ ^ 

WHt 3Tg(TnT<g^ firr:ll??ll 

(im ^ 

OT? Tm tT?l^ MimiRum^ll^MI 
■rmfl ^ tr^ ^5ir ^chxjfun 
■:TFr^ (ditwH Traill^^11 


■^rraf^ (T %T<i1uf 

sS n3 •O 

"O wisest brother, your fury will bring 
devastation in the world. Check on this fury 
because you have appeared with a mission 
to protect the creatures. He caught that 
arrow with apology for the act. When the 
sea realised the fury of Rama, he turned 
himself in the human form and said- "O 
god, pardon me for the default. I am agree 
to give the way. The warrior Nala is the best 
expert at bridge constimction. Instruct him 
to construct an appropriate bridge as desired 
to you. 

TPTt tl <4(4)4^: 11 11 

^ Ttgr tt i 
frifT W: gTR^illUH 

TFTJt WR:i 

jrRTRigiT^ g ffTTjtraxpgtffRi 

TTWfe^ (TT 

TPTt yntfUiRr; ’rn^ritfRnRTTEgtTiiR^ii 
16^ t|c)Uigft' tr? KdlTdRI 

Rama then made the bridge to be 
constructed through Nala etc., the monkeys 
crossed the sea through it, reached the 
Subela mountain and set up the camp there. 
Ahgada saw from there that wicked Ravana 
is seated on the top storey of the palace. He 
asked permission of Rama, concentrated on 
assignment of a spy and reached near 
Ravana merely with a jump. He kicked on 
the forehead of him. The gods saw with 
surprise to Ahgada. Having his promise 
thus, completed, he returned to Subela 
mountain. Rama subsequently, gripped 
from all sides Lanka with the help of 



CHAPTER 52 


221 


warriors and chivalrous monkeys. 

TTR; TfT? VII 

irhiffsTiT^; '*4^^ cbMlVdiW 


^l4tT54f4l%raf^ W HcT 

cqjyqqi £r 4 s 1 gTTJTII??ll 


With an eye on all sides, RSma then 
called Laksmana and said- "Brother, we 
have crossed the sea and the soldiers of 
Sugriva's army has entrapped easily the 
entire Lanka. Industry has worked fully and 
now remains the luck or destiny and it 
depends on the skill of archery. 

5fi?- 

cTraf^T^trarq^: 

■^cHIcPyR^rciW^iM 

Laksmana said The destiny or luck 
only consoles the coward hearts. It is not for 
us to consider. Until and unless our brows 
cover the region of forehead and arrows put 
on the bows, the proud of Ravana on his 
arms can only sustain. 


3T5T ^f4lcri4QI%U|FLJ rT^PUf^RT^Tf^?^- 
TFT: TM ^fuicqi 3T^ 
TTgfqTTRraFTlg^ 3Ff^3?lf^l R m I 
31^! ftRT % 

^ictuiwicm ^vich:l TT TT^ 4 

cqiqTitifd dj'jird'i fr^HT F?T: faf> qcwoM 


He then put his mouth on the ears of 
Rama and said- "It is time to try and 
examine the devotion of Ahgada for you 


even though you have killed his father Ball, 
his valour and his manners and modus- 
operandi everything is worth trial. Hence, 
appoint him your spy." Rama accepted the 
suggestion and ordered Ahgada - "Ahgada, 
we are not able to describe the valour your 
father Bal! have shown for Ravana. Our 
hearts begin vacillation when we remember 
his chivalry. That Ball is in your form this 
time. You are leaving behind your father in 
your industry. Hence, nothing more to say 
about you. You are raising the head of Ball 
very high. 


3T^ ■^fRFtrSRftvR^TfF^ 

^:l R^ll 





■f% ^ ^ T^ trig TTCPT^I 

■«HM4^Tf^<r^4^lfi( W TFTTF 


f% gififiT TFRT 



■cnTIIT<ill 


Ahgada bowed his head on clasped 
hands and said- "As you order, I will do. 
Please, look here. Should I pick the fence, 
the parks and the entire Lanka with gate and 
city up here, or pick this whole army at 
once for attack on that city or make plain 
this trifle sea with boulders and rocks. 
Please, order me what I should do? My 
arms can do everything. 



rR^rferaFTSzf 






gTTFFTTt^ ^ 
TTI%4 ^ ^^1 


4 4cTi!^U|McWMl4uMIU|o^(il7yHrd>?tfD|- 


Rama estimated the loyalty and power 
both of Ahgada with this statement and 




222 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


said- "O waiTior, go to Ravana and said-'O 
Ravana, make free Sita whom you have 
taken like a thief in our absence; otherwise 
you should go to Yama's abode as a result 
of piercing shots from Laksmana's bow and 
the pieces of your bodies will spread with 
blood owing in all directions. 

^ ^ rffk ^ dirndl 

I ? ^ 11 


Ahgada said- "O god, in my presence 
there, Ravana will see his heads fall on the 
ground in both positions i.e., in treaty and 
battle. It is rather a different thing that in 
treaty, his heads will bow before you and in 
war by separating from the shoulders. Rama 
appreciated him and he went there, defeated 
Ravana badly in arguments and pleading 
and then returned to Rama shortly. 


gRTTurt ^ ^9Tm:ii^')5ii 

-^T TT^Rn^l 

3TTf^ 

fEnif4 ^ ^ 




Ravana on the other side frightened 
badly when he took cognisance of the 
power of Rama, Laksmana and the 
monkeys, still he feigned as fearless and 
ordered monsters to protect Lanka properly. 
He directed them to cover all directions and 
called his sons and Dhumraksa and 
Dhumrapana saying them to enter into the 


city and tie Rama and Laksmana both. My 
brother Kumbhakarna, who is Yama like to 
the enemies has also been awaken by 
creating noise of drum beating and piping 
trumpets. 


Trant? tI?raRT:l 

5rraT 

^ xnftT ^ 

3M Pt4if3rd(:i 

^^ W: 11-^ o 11 
SrRt^fWTlf^; I 

TI^: Tt^dlcfiRI; infqrrr 

5 fttfWTT: I 


3^: TrndT; ^gRTT:l 


Not only this, Ravana ordered the 
chivalrous monsters to attend war and they 
too began fighting with the monkeys. 
Crores of monsters were killed by the 
monkeys. The most chivalrous to whom 
Ravana has ordered fighting at the east gate 
were beheaded by Nala etc., monkeys. The 
same was happened to the monsters who 
were appointed at the south gate. The 
monsters appointed at the west gate were 
killed by Ahgada etc., monkeys. The cruel 
Mainda etc., monsters appointed at the 
north gate were also killed by the gallant 
monkeys. The monkeys then overlapped the 
boundary wall of the palace and killed all 
monsters they found there. They all then 



CHAPTER 52 


223 


returned to their camp. 

Ht ^ : I !•){m I 

Tr^ ■a st^tmfcn: tiditai^i 

Tsrw: 

ddWilUlRi^l^T aHTT 5I1WI 

<?hth; iiycitd^(ii'({\9ii 

cbWiTj aRTT wr few WhlhdH,! 

When all monsters were killed, Ravana 
annoyed too much on seeing their wives 
wailing. That brave monster came hurriedly 
with a bow in his hands. He was surrounded 
by the monsters and said furiously - "Where 
is that Rama?" He began to shower arrows 
on monkeys from chariot. The monkeys 
began to run here and there as the arrows 
penetrated their organs. Rama asked the 
fleeing monkeys - "Why has such a 
situation chaotic arisen? What has the fear 
befallen on them? 


^ TTWt fetcTlfTTI 

d<c(lu|foHI; WTW 


Vibhisana replied - "O king, listen to 
me. Ravana has turned for battle this time. 
His arrows are so sharp that the monkeys 
are in no position to endure. 


ftfet:! 

srMuJlMdHUl l W qt ^fe?T:imoii 

tMUldTKf Tnr: cbdHHiH'l: I 

v3 sO 

fg^ftwr ?T^U|!,ir)lfdy)46|r^l 

3^ TlWf ^ R^RTWl^im^ll 

^ fewfera^:! 


Trafet feg^ -^nwwfe ^ ^ 
rnfr WW: 11 h "ij 11 

■?TfeT TTRfe ^?lfe?cr WBWI 

qjfejw Tra^iimmi 

hgli d'M'Wch Rd': I 

wt'fecW dlJgiTllb^ll 
rt^ siferr TFmfe#' wi 
fe%tlffefeife: TgTTtf ^fe:imi9ll 


Rama took his bow with anger and 
stretched it. The sound so generated had 
echoed the directions and the eiher. He then 
began to fight against Ravana. Sugriva, 
Jambavan, Hanuman, Ahgada, Vibhisana, 
Laksmana and other mighty monkeys also 
participated and began to attack on the 
army. A dreadful war was waged there 
between Rama and Ravana. Rama made 
powerless all weapons exercised by Ravana 
and then killed his charioteer and horses by 
shooting eleven arrows. Ravana's bow was 
also cut by using Bhalla an'ow. He then shot 
fifteen arrows which beheaded him of ten 
heads. The enemy of gods badly suffered as 
a result of Rama's blows. His ministers 
escorted him in unconscious state and took 
to the palace. 

WTST ^:l 

es ^ •<d Cv 

fefefeiimdii 

rt -pfe: 

gjnfejT jjRivdi cteHui diRtebiuji^oii 


Kumbhakarna, who was awakened by 
the noise created through drumming and 
piping, crossed the fort of Lanka and 


224 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


gradually came out copying an elephant. 
His body was tall and he was very thick and 
fat. His eyes were fearful. That mighty 
monster began to move in the battle field by 
making the monkeys his prey. SugrTva hit 
trident on his chest and by using his hands 
and mouth, he cut both his ears and the nose 
respectively. 

yidRtrcjl ^ <gT4T^: ■RTRRT:ll^?li 

W fdRilT^ ^:l 

^ ^ ^ ;pTin cfl qfl ^ ftspri 
fiiP4^ ^?nrk; 3^1^ 


Rama then killed all commanders of the 
army and beheaded him. He then defeated 
Indrajit with the help of Garuda. Having 
heard the failure of Meghanada's efforts and 
on the earth of Kumbhakarna, Ravana got 
angry and ordered his son Tris'ira, Atikaya, 
Mahakaya, Devantaka and Narantaka - "O 
sons, kill both persons i.e., Rama and Laks 
niana in battle. He then turned to Mahodara 
and Mahapars'va and said- "You will duly 
prepare yourself for the killing of enemy in 
this battle and go with a large army. 

tTPTFTHP?^ gstramR Tilt f^l 

IRitlTI I^ t911 

c^mtroTi T^n>EiTT^i 

■yijt^UT let: gnsTt TI^ cRdsf^dill^dll 


^02g;:i 

W ^1^1# td'dsm: | 

3T^ ^iwi(4ivrn«r ^^4l«yiPH4*iwTHih9oii 
TTR^ 

wm THTtSST Tilt <4|U|t^fbdeh< fTII^^II 


Laksmana shot six acute arrows when he 
saw above-said enemies eome to war and 
thus, killed them all. The monkeys then 
killed all other monsters. Sugrlva killed, 
Kumbha, an egoist of his power and 
Hanuman killed Nikumbha, who was the 
cause of trouble for the gods. Virupaksa 
was killed by Vibhisana by using his Gada. 
Bhima and Mainda killed Svapati, Ahgada, 
Jambavan and other monkeys killed other 
monsters. O king, Sri Rama, while fighting 
killed Mahalaksa and Mahaeala monsters 
whole showered the arrows on him. 


f TstRlW ^ 1 

TT Tt% tT: 11^ ? 11 

TT3ft d<«(IUliM' 5 cTH TI^ ^ Tra^l 
fT?%^TlfecT vi||*<4<4rtlRdW<:ill|\9^ll 
tirrRt 


^T^IT tR lfTRiTTT<T8ITIIV9'!JII 

^ TIi 4 ^p3fHd'tdcFlcbtf^?II 

Pift nt '^R^^iTOHttrTTmnvaMi 
tsK^Wlfd Tl^f^ TRt Wl 
TT w It RIRRTR TTTR: 11^ ^ 11 


Then Indrajit forwarded on the chariot, 
obtained through the power of hymns and 
began to shower aiTows on all monkeys. 
Hanuman brought the medieine at night 
under motivation of Jambavan,;to cure the 
wounds of Rama and the army as a whole. 
He picked up Rama and all monkeys from 


CHAPTER 52 


225 


the ground by virtue of the medicine, took 
blazing ulka (a fire band) and burnt down 
all elephants, horses, the chariots in Lanka. 
Rama subsequently, killed Meghanada 
through Laksmana by snooting arrows in all 
directions like a cloud. 

friE3rtqTf^:gpWq;iiV9t9ii 

dtT; ^ clVItN'l vl'^su idr-hid:! 

chftf4-^rfE^oiJ?^^IE34nisra:l 



3T8rraRT 51 TiR: 3n? 

■tT%Rd 5^lrcr^f^ TraiJT tR 3lf^ll<ioll 

When all kith and kins, the army etc., 
were finished, the activities summoning god 
were disturbed and shattered by the 
monkeys, Ravana came out at the gate of 
Lanka on the eccentric chariot which was 
being driven by trained and speedy horses. 
He then enquired - "Where is that ascetic 
Rama? He is boosting of his power merely 
due to monkeys being mighty. He expressed 
this statement ironically and with a loud 
voice. Having heard this an looking that 
Ravana was proceeding; Rama said- "O 
wicked Ravana, I am that Rama and stand 
here, come to me. 

W TTR 

31^ 

dcRf dtaihlfr -rm ^ I 

Laksmana interfered and said- "O 
mightiest, stop for moments, I will first 
fight against him. Laksmana then covered 


Ravana with the showers of arrow’s. Rii’N’ana 
too followed there end by application of his 
twenty arms. Thus, a furious fight took 
place between them. The gods saw this 
battle from their aircrafts and ovci-wiielmly 
surprised. 


TIcfTTlTd Sard W dfl:l 

daj;WT fenar 

ddf <«llPtilri(ISt: %5r TT^rtRTddJ: I 


ffddt yudHiqPlHlf^-HlH^lli^ll 


(Jisywyi f 1d%tdT TTT 

fddraidf: ljfyy.iv!l ^orRdTdHddfc^t 
dl^ dfdd U6 6U 

f :fed: ddlTd^ W TTdd-: I 


dfd ^d)dfd ^ WT diWfeqfddt ^1 


Laksmana cut all weapons blown by 
Ravana and killed his charioteer. He killed 
his horses too by blowing Bhalla arrows. !n 
a series, he then cut his bow and flag and 
penetrated his heart. Ravana fell down from 
his chariot but he immediately stood up and 
picked up a Sakti (a weapon) from which a 
sound of several hundred crocodiles was 
coming out. Its edge was blazing like the 
fire flame and radiating like Ulka. He shot 
at the chest by firmly griping it in hand. It 
penetrated the chest of Laksmana. The gods 
observing this scene from the sky were 
frightened. Rama came quickly to him with 
the commanders of monkeys and expressed 
his grief - "Where has gone my friend 
Hanuman? Do all efforts that can revive my 
brother." 



226 


NARASliMHA PURANAM 


^g^^T3j#r ^?i3?t fwdilw ^:i 

Tm: w •tnrii'? ^ii 

3T^ ■9Tt5r fira H6i«fMl 

Hanuman came at once and said- 
"Plcase, give me order. I am before here. 
Rama said- O Mahavira, I need a medicine 
that can efface the injury to heart go and 
bring that medicine for the cure of my 
brother. 

Tngr 'd^nfhfi ?II 

g 

^crajR tiycjw ^ii'??ii 


Hanuman Jump up fiercely and having 
reached at Dronagiri, came with the 
medicine from there. He applied it and 
within seconds Laksmana was as healthy as 
before. Rama and all spectator gods saw 
this phenomenon. 


ttcT: -JinHIiiij ThT: chMc^vil'cH:I 

(rduifu ^ 

?cdT f ■?ira^:l 

crfvycrMT44^:ii^mi 

Jim ■91^: 5^:1 


Rama then became furious and killed the 
entire army of Ravana within moments. All 
horses, elephants, chariots and monsters 
were killed. He penetrated the body of 
Ravana by hitting acute arrows. Monkeys 
were everywhere fighting bravely. Ravana 
fell down unconscious. He gradually came 
back to consciousness, stood up again and 
began to cry in fury. The spectator gods in 
ether got frightened of his cry. 


IJ^dpRl^d gjT^ 5 TIR Whzr ; 11 \ 911 

wr arwTlr ^ ddsrdnj 

■ndfr ddauuRdlew '4?t«cfRi 

rt^ ttiunflH Rcihui ^11'? '? II 


d<re;iu fttdT : I 



■?ltdifg^Rd:ll!?o 


oil 


A hermit in the meantime came to 
Rama. He was annoyed of Ravana's 
activities since long and his name was 
Agastya. He suggested Rama to recite the 
victory giver psalm namely 
'Adityahrdaya'. Rama cited that hymn and 
accepted with honour the Vaisnava bow, 
with a very good string wrapped which was 
given by him. Then chivalrous RSma began 
to fight with Ravana by blowing shoots of 
arrows having golden wings. 


TfRTzr: wnrat^i 

Ctdlf dtddw? RlU9ldddl4^mJlll?o?|| 
srrfR Rdf^dVcd.-l 
Rhfejd'l Tm{raiiidr4fyii^o:?ii 


f Tld dlVIti«lWdll 
dft ThTtSTcWURaR-.ll^o^ll 
'm RrdPd^ ^1 

tT?Td cHIcBfdfmil^olill 

TIRd wnw 

Mra^ll^omi 


^ ■d9iHdq,l 

^atTR^fdt^ udinciiTii^o^ii 


O king, while Rama and Ravana were 
fighting, the flames of fire began to spread 
in the ether which was blown by each other 
in confrontation. Rama was fighting on foot 
at this furious battle. Indra sent his 



CHAPTER 52 


227 


charioteer Matali with a renowned divine 
chariot. One thousand horses were yoked 
with the same. Having requested by the 
gods, Rama rode on the same and under 
lead of Matali, he killed by shooting 
Brahmastra to wicked Ravana who once 
acquired boon from Brahma. 

- ^ _ __ N 

tlMtll H?n rf? TratIT TRTtIT TTmiI 

I ? o vs 11 

TTRt ^ tftut Tnti 

dEMW TrmihH'hH'dTt<iri|d*bl 
dT^lRchl^; 

'RdTd^imoll 

TTlftt WToq^i 

Wfiinrstl fdfedtREHqlMrlfwBl^^^ll 

On the death of Ravana with the whole 
army, Indra etc., gods began to say - "On 
having incarnated as Rama, god Visnu has 
killed our enemy Ravana who otherwise 
was tough to kill. Hence, we should worship 
Rama whose valour is undomitable and who 
is seldom defeated by any person." With 
this consortium, they descended on the 
earth in company of Rudra, Indra, Vasu and 
Candra etc. They stood round Rama and 
Laksmana who is everlasting, SanStana 
purusa, victorious and in the form of Visnu 
and began to appreciate him with formal 
worship. 

Tmt4 ^ cqc(Rtad:l 

qAtlMlfddid«T'cta>l 
<cttdlcfitfd4cRfT ^TtRtcTTI 


wtr rt 

All gods began to say -"O all gods, sec, 
here is Rama and Laksmana here is Sugriva, 
the son of Sun, this is Hanuman and Ahgada 
etc., all monkeys are here. The flowers 
shower was then made by the divine 
damsels on the head of Rama and Laks 
mana. All directions became perfumed due 
to the fragrance of those flowers. The bees 
were buzzing-on those flowers. 

tRTT srglT Tmq;i 

God Brahma then descended there on the 
back of a swan thereafter. Having recited 
the hymns of Amogha in appreciation of 
Rama, he said to them- 

w<=iH iw 

ycm tMuiiHichtMai: i 

y^cHlchi^i ch4yiIs(dH,ii^^'3ii 

Brahmaji said- "You are the ab initio 
cause for the creatures and you are 
supreme-knowledge popularly described in 
the Vedas. You are immortal eye of 
knowledge, god Visnu. The objective of all 
worlds and the gods have been achieved 
with the death of wicked and notorious 
Ravana. 

iraylql f iHRimfeidti 

^rnpHT Tht cTt 4 tt ^ ^;?R8r ^T^iin<iii 

dvifytyi Trar ■Rtm 

Having appreciated so by Brahma, God 
Sankara came to him and made him able to 
see Dasaratha. He then returned after saying 
that Sita is blameless and chaste. 



228 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


UflIRRiiZ) Wr dWrf^: iJddlrR'j|:l 
dd^ 'Jinchi fd^iichi o n 

■Rni WT tT?raH: 1 

yfdWTO TT Tmg:!i???ii 

ciaycil'^ Ci<i|| 

TT^l^ RnidJiy<3^ll^^?ll 

rtf<4 d^^^Hla'OT cddl^ldl 

Rama then ordered for marching when 
he rode Sita on the seized Puspaka Vimana. 
Then adorning Sita with ornaments Rama in 
fresh disposition, began to return with his 
brother Laksmana. He installed Mahadeva 
on the bridge fabricated of the sea. He thus, 
obtained supreme devotion with the grace 
of Siva, with his one time visit, remove the 
defaults and crimes such as murder. 

ddfs-qisgT Jtf WRit fert^:! 

TOif^: I 

argifns^dT TF3?t ^ tir; jrdiT<dRii^?>{ii 
thiJ Pi'd ^ "jircu 


TRFRRT ^ gjfsRt RUradt 

TTRFT RRit R?TRR:I 

^ -^^TRtRT R3crt ^ VJUd-di 

3:^ TTR: ^3nTrqfR:IR^mi 


fgR«fmt56!mT;im^ii 


citizen after performance of offerings 
prescribed for the kings. O king, I have 
described all activities as performed by 
Rama on the earth. The persons who read 
and hear this episode with sheer devotion, 
definitely attain the abode of Rama 
endowed by Rama himself. 

Thus ends the fifty-second chapter on an 

incarnation of Rama in Nrsimha Purana 


Thus keeping his w'ords properly, Rama 
began since long his concentration for 
Bharata, returned to Ayodhya. He then 
accepted the throne on pressure by Bharata. 
He ruled for a long period abiding by the 
religion and he went to heaven with all 



NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 53 

An account of deeds performed by Sri Krsna 
and Balarama 

3irr: ’tR 

g TTORI fiWRr 5 WW; 11 ^ 11 
jWlWTTraf tr^ in? 

3irelR f WM 

Marakndeya said-1 will now describe in 
brief the due incarnation of god Visnu as Sri 
Krsna and Balarama. O king, it is a matter 
that pertains to the ancient time. The earth 
went to Brahma who was seated on the 
lotus flower and was surrounded by the 
gods when she badly suffered from the 
burden of the monsters. She then said- 

?cn ^ 

% aRWT; g>RcTr^ii?ii 

Il^^fWTTWrtiTT ■■cTdTTTTI 

TTO wsrar ^ imr fRtii'iJii 

"O lotus generated god, the devils and 
monsters killed in the battle of the gods and 
devils have appeared in the form of Ks 
atriyas. O four-headed god, I am aggrieved 
at the burden exerted by them on me. 


CHAPTER 53 


229 


Please, do all that which may remove my 
burden. 







W? ^3RT^I 

3T«TaJ «ra?Err ^rtf^ xt 




It is said that god Brahma went to god 
Visnu at the north shore of Ksirasagara in 
response to the prayer so made by the earth. 
He awoke god Visnu by virtue of his power 
of devotion. Having reached there, Brahma, 
the creator of this universe, worshipped god 
JanSrdana in the form of Nrsirhha with all 
gods. He then recited hymns in praise of 
that god. 0 king, god Visnu satisfied him 
very much. 

tl'fll^lxl 

yiaFTOUT gsi ?fTHJ 

Sl^lcki TcTt^^WTIlill 

The king said- O Brahman, how has 
Brahma worshipped god Visnu? Kindly let 
me listen to that supreme hymn which was 
exercised by Brahma in order to have the 
pleasure of Visnu? 

■RTts 

tth;! I 11 

rTURIszi ^SFFTIsrq^f: ftrrm?: I 


Markandeya said- O king, listen to the 
hymn extracted from the mouth of Brahma. 
It abrogates all evils, makes all sacrosanct 
and winners of god Visnu's pleasure. O 
king, Brahma had recited this hymn for the 


pleasure of god Jagannatha after the formal 
process of worship. 


1#^ 

wfr ^ totsjrxzrt 

'TRIilui TRTrPPj; 



\u 


3TPR1?^ WT TTpqt 

f^irtrcH w ^hfrnri 

wTifR tnsmii^^ii 


cfeMhuid PiAvii 
fnfshi 




shJidir« 

7R[rfwtsn®5rarr 

■?n^ T^ran£ni:i 

^ITTTfit TfePT I 11 

9 I R5?l ^ cR\ 

'jRic^H wfir rnrii^mi 




4^4rtsnd; ^ Tiiwt ifrn 

d><iid 'd'ld: 

^nntTtsftiT 


Brahma said-1 salute Acyuta, the master 
of all creatures, god Narayana who is the 
teacher of the world. I convey salute to the 
unborn, inexpressive, beyond imagination 
and immortal Purusottama Sri Hari. I 
convey salute to god Laksmipati, who is in 
the form of supreme pleasure, pioneer to all, 


230 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


treasure of knowledge and supreme resort to 
the scholars and who is omnipresent, the 
universal form, unique and the axiom of all. 
I salute Kesava who is beloved to the 
devotees, most delicate and innocent, the 
master of all gods, worshipped by the 
scholars, who has four arms, whose gait is 
as black as a blue lotus, who holds a discus 
in his hand. I salute Visnu, whose hands are 
adorned with gada, sword, conch and lotus, 
who is the husband of LaksmI who 
performs benevolent deeds, who holds the 
Sariiga bow, whose gait is like that of the 
sun, who puts on a yellow cloth, whose 
belly is adorned with garlands and a crown 
is adorned on his head. I salute god 
Janardana whose cheeks are adorned with 
decent red tint kundala, who is brightening 
all directions with the shining gait of his 
body, whose deeds are appreciated by the 
Gandharvas and Siddhas and who is 
appreciated by the Vedic Rasas and who is 
the master of all creatures. I salute god 
Kes'ava the supreme intuitive, who protects 
the godly persons who are religion abiding 
by killing the wicked and atheists through 
his incarnation in varied forms and in every 
age and who is solely responsible for the 
creation and destruction of this universe. 

^ qrW^r tRIddRydl-f 

qy<^'qra'qt' 

^ ■qFni.i 

^ cfqrrfeiqt w 
f^uqqrei tqJidVRq 


I 11 

fgenq fRlcTHl I 

-JiMn : ^d 

cT qnfw qqifr 11 ? o 11 

qfR qt:l 

^qdiq ^ 

d^HRIgi HUidTw giqqH.11^ ?•! 
q; Id'fldH 

fqf'HVI-fod: l^liwicqqRftri 

q^sftq I ^ ? 11 

% qpq qqq q: 

wnq RfT qw 
qqpT 'll■■ Ini ^dldd 

t TFI^ W ? 11 

qqif 

fict iqqr ^of%t 
dSlTir^: fqqiTFlfq 

I salute the Veda learned Parames'vara 
who killed in a battle two monsters viz. 
Madhu and Kaitabha and returned the 
Vedas to me from the nether world by 
appearing in the fish form. I salute god Vis 
nu who give slight to all worlds, who in the 
ancient period held Mandaracala on his 
back by appearing in the form of a tortoise 
when that mountain was thrown into Ks 
Trasagara for the purpose of churning by the 
gods and monsters jointly. I salute god in 
the form of a pig, who was the embodiment 
of the Veda, who brought up the earth from 


qqriR: I 



CHAPTER 53 


231 


the bottom of the sea and killed, in the 
meantime, the most egoist Hiranyaksa. I 
salute god Nrsirhha who with the intention 
to safeguard the interests of three-worlds 
appeared in the form of Nrsirhha and 
beheaded by piercing with his acute nail 
strokes the son of Diti, Hiranyakasipu. I 
salute god Vamana who appeared in the 
form of Vamana (dwarf) and caught Ball 
with a promissory estoppel and assigned the 
three worlds to Indra by measuring it in 
mere three steps. I salute that Purusottama, 
Parasurama who killed the king KartavTrya 
in a vagary of anger and shattered the 
burden of earth by killing the Ksatriya as 
many as twenty one times. I salute Sanatana 
Purusa god Rama who bridged the sea and 
killed Ravana with his family and the whole 
army in Lanka and thus protected the three- 
worlds, O god as you have safeguarded the 
interests of gods by appearing in the forms 
of Varaha, Nrsiritha etc., forms in the 
ancient period, please, come at your 
pleasure and remove the burden of this 
earth. O god, I salute you with sheer 
devotion. 

Tpr tSFRTsr: 

: 11 ? h 11 
W 

Udlfw 

^ drchtcllftri ^11 ^ 11 

Markandeya said- On the hymns so 
recited, god Laksmidhara appeared before 
Brahma. His hands were adorned with 


conch, discus and gada. He then said to 
Brahma and other gods - O Pitamaha, I am 
pleased with the hymns recited by you all. 
O gods, this hymn is capable to abrogate all 
sins from the heart of the persons who will 
recite it. Although I hardly appear in the 
form of Sri Harl even before the sheer 
devotees, it is the phenomenon of this hymn 
that I am apparently here. O Brahma, all 
gods including Rudra and Indra as also the 
earth have worshipped me; hence, let me 
know your passion which I will definitely 
fulfil. 

fgagqr nn 5r?iT i 

JIWRUT II 

viwtfirqt chKHtd 

^ oil 

Pitamaha Brahma replied - O Purus 
ottama, this earth is being crushed by 
burden exerted by the monsters and I am 
here with all gods and submit to assist for 
removing this burden. There is no other 
purpose for our arrival. 

WifqTTW: Tit TKTmftTg W^ll^^ll 
^ctcfill 3Hc(d)4 I 

Irtrl^iuir tT HttjThi djHic;IT uici!4«in:ll^ ? II 

The god said- "O gods, please, return to 
your respective places without any worry. 
Brahma is also requested to return in a free 
mood. My two powers - one fair and the 
other dark, will shortly appear by virtue of 
the reproduction process participated by 
Vasudeva and Devak! and they will kill 
Kamsa etc., monsters. 


232 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


TJiHHTaik w 

^ fRrifiwt ^:ii^>{ii 

ftcR rf flQuili 

dir^ujii ^r ^gRwr m^mi 

wiTrRT iimim&dl ■q?Pi;i 

having heard this explanation from god 
Visnu, all gods bowed their heads and 
returned to their respective places, O king, 
on departure of gods, god Janardana 
transmitted his two powers to the earth for 
safeguarding the interests of the saints and 
the destruction of the monsters. The fair 
power appeared in the womb of RohinI and 
the dark power in the womb of DevakI both 
under participation of Vasudeva. The son of 
RohinI got this name as Rama and the son 
of DevakI got Sri Krsna. O king, now listen 
to the account of deeds as performed by 
both of them. 

f Tipilr 

Tf^UI Plgcll TFil^cTSJT ^cRTlI^^ll 

such: ■uuui'Hticici^ TT^tri yifnct;l 

n 3 

ftsR tiw yfedll 

^MdRTlii dilRd-ili f^^WT: 11^ II 

hl^vi T^RIT fdMi(nd:ll>{o || 

^ ^ ^ ftK-ciral tnrgr:! 

3I^TIT ^ eft ftftft M^tldi H^lrUdlll'li^ll 
f iIMfiwfi Rfmftl 

^ Wi i%^jftt^ll'*S'R II 

smnftgRfvt wigr ^ ^jt^;i 

iH'diURt ^WT^niv^ll 

O king, Rama during his childhood 


killed a monstress who was in disguise of a 
bird at night and Sri Krsna killed Ptitana. 
Rama further killed a monster Dhenuka in 
Talavana with his attendants and Sri Krsna 
too reverted a cart and uprooted two trees of 
Yaraa Arjuna. Rama killed a monster 
Pralamba with the blows of the fist and Sri 
Krsna suppressed the ego of Kaliya, a 
poisonous serpent in Yamuna river. He held 
Govardhana on his hands for seven days 
and Indra compelled to cease the rain at 
last. He again killed Aristasura so as to 
protect Gokula from his atrocities. He then 
killed the great monster Kesi who was in 
the form of a horse. Later on, Aki'ura came 
there under instructions from Karhsa and 
took both brothers to Mathura. O wise king, 
while bathing in the Yamuna, on his way to 
Gokula, AkrQra had seen Rama and Sri Krs 
na in the river. They appeared before him in 
their original form i.e. god Visnu's form. 
Having seen their excellent form, Akrura 
and all Yadavas became very happy. 

ITSIFCRT I 

gjsITt rKjcl^ 9 ^ 1 ^ ^^ll'iJ1{|| 

MiHichRui •ijsRzn f -grPTifir; yqi^vfti 
d-iww 

U'jU'uI TI^TRlft W c»i©Jiyi Xff^ltft rTcT; 1 

-O ^ 

dttiftfdwqw'ld tmiiitj^ii 

g^T33T gsBoit gerarp <3RR?in^ rn^ruinpi 
T^qiHli^ 'dyniy TPHUsT oeil-^ W^l 
^ fTcIR^IRsd ^ Tf;? TTOSm^ftll'^'an 

When in Mathura, Rama and Krsna killed 
a royal washerman when he addressed them 
in harsh language. His clothes were 
distributed among Brahminas. On their 
way, a gardener worshipped them with 
flowers. He was given rare boons. While 


CHAPTER 53 


233 


Strolling on the roads of Mathura, a maid¬ 
servant Kubja honoured them and they set 
right her hump back. The bow kept in the 
offering place by Karhsa was then split in 
parts by Krsna. Balarama killed several 
guards on duty there. Then they jointly 
killed an elephant Kuvalayapida. 

it id ^ tIHl ■ferSTR TFFf 

itfeSjJToqyifMIIIXeill 

Rcrf ^ rl'iiifl' f%T 'flyH 

t ■'iHTracilvi:ll'k<?ll 

■ftsf ■'T^; TT TFT; I 

■O nS 

^tt8irat t 
TT<s;TK(f^w 

^ ^ fgrfWT rRTT 
^ Mtoqf fraJT:im ?ll 

IF f ifFrnfF^^ 

WrfF dtiJlfdTi^ui ri'in«frf:i 
Tm FtFt FFTTTFF ^TniTti;| 111 

Both of them eonsequently took in their 
hands the split teeth of the dead elephant 
and entered in Rangabhumi (exhibition 
ground) with their bodies stained with the 
blood of that elephant. Balarama there 
killed Mustika protagonist in dual and Sri 
Krsna badly thrashed the egoist protagonist 
Kannura. A fierce combat was sustained for 
several hours and enjoyed by the spectators 


present there. Finally, he was killed by Sri 
Krsna. The warrior Balarama killed Puskara 
who was the friend of the protagonist Must 
ika already dead in the duel by exercising 
boxing blows. Sri Krsna then killed all 
monsters present there and eaught Kaihsa. 
He pushed him down from the throne with a 
thud and then sat on his chest. Thus, he 
killed Kaihsa and dragged his body on the 
ground several times. Sunabha, the brother 
of Karhsa, suddenly stood and leapt on Krs 
na with anger but Balarama killed him 
immediately and despatched him to the 
abode of Yama. 

Flrlriwd 

W ^gSFTf 

Subsequently, both brothers assigned the 
throne to Sriugrasena and made him king 
again. They were surrounded with 
Yaduvaihs'is and reached to their parents 
and bowed their heads at their feet after 
their release from the prison. They provided 
king Ugrasena the divine council of 
Sudharma which was originally Indra's. 

TT^^FTTFlFfir TFTfiwfl' 



ISFT ^ -gF e(^l m ■ii 11 

Although Balarama and Sr! Krsna were 
omniscient, they had got armoury education 
from Sanndipani. As fee for teaching, they 
killed Pancajana monster and they brought 
back to life Sandipani's son from the abode 
of Yama who was dead long ago. He then 
offered that son as fee for teaching to their 
teacher Sandipani. 



234 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


TRTt 

4<hW q§Vi: RHIMrlH^I 

WTTI^immi 

feymiyj ^jRFT ^ 

^ rT ^ m ^ 11 

Balarama then killed Jarasamdha, the 
king of Magadha, who had attacked several 
times on them. It was done by application 
of the divine weapons and sharp arrows. 
Later on, they constructed a decent city 
loiown as Dvarakapurl in the womb of the 
sea. God Sri Krsna settled his kith and kin 
there and killed the king Sragala. Then he 
played a tricky device on the Yavana king, 
burnt him in the curse fire of the king 
Mucukunda. He then blessed Mucukunda 
and turned back to Dvaraka. 

ThTtssr 

^|cR TThPit^: ^§^:nfeT: 

■hi^ui tTTTf MM’ii xT^imvaii 

^ W iTWd7 TT Hl^rdll 
■•tfi-Miu) tiRwuii' 

fiWTlfir ^ 5Tnir:im<iii 

^yNli«rid^<J t>i%hur 

fjOTT: WvHTtfduif 

w TT3i rfiftr 'Jime i^ ° i i 

hifew 5 iuwd! 


Later on Balarama went Nandagoaha of 
Nanda after disposing all chaotic situations 
prevailing and honoured by the Gopas in 
Vrndavana. Balarama there attracted or 
pulled the course of Yamuna through his 
plough. He then got Revatl as wife and 
began to live happily with her. Sri Krsna 
married Rukmip! with due performance of 
the rituals and began to enjoy married life. 
Balarama uprooted the teeth of Kalihgaraja 
while he was gambling and killed Rukmi by 
the blows of Pasa as he was playing 
insincerely. Similarly, Sri Krsna too killed 
several monsters including Hayagriva of 
Pragajyotisapura and he brought a lump of 
wealth or the bulk money from 
Narakasura's kingdom after killing him in 
the battle. Sri Krsna then went to Indraloka. 
He returned the kundalas of Aditi once 
seized by Narakasura. He then defeated 
Indra including all gods, took the tree of 
Parijata with him and returned to his 
Dvarakapurl. 




uiyfymiR 

ehlld'JjuT ^rnTRi;ii^^li 
^yiMchld ilAul Pl^nl C|H^ 

9;^ giWfaTTii^vii 


«TRt5gTtfqfT;l 

W5?JthiT ^SFIRT; 


Later on the gallant Balarama went 
Hastinapura, threatened the Kauravas and 
he released Samba, the son of Sri Krsna 
who was captured and imprisoned by them. 
Sri Krsna cut the arms of Banasura while 
battling and Balarama on his part, killed 
crores of his army men shortly. Balarama 
then killed the gallant monkey Dvivida, an 


CHAPTER 54 


235 


enemy to the gods and Krsna co-operated 
with Aijuna while killing the wicked Ks 
atriyas. Thus, he made the earth free from 
the burden of the wicked monsters. 
Balarama was on a pilgrimage those days 
for contributing to the common cause of the 
public. 


TT^ tfl f TTI I ^ ^ 11 

aracTpJ ^ ^TR 

chic-cw ■5713 wgRTii^^ii 

iTgrac'n^i 

yfdviTTqf^ll^^ill 
^TTfWHTnit ^ 

nut-sicrr^hEgm-.im^n 

O king, we count the numbers of the 
wicked and shrewd, killed by Balarama and 
Sri Krsna. Rama and Krsna both brothers 
killed the wicked people and made free the 
earth from the burden. He then voluntarily 
departed to Vaikundadhama. I have thus 
explained in brief all the divine incarnations 
of Rama and SrT Krsna before you. Now, 
listen to the account of the deeds performed 
by god Visnu in his incarnation as Kalki. O 
king, the mighty powers of god Visnu in 
white and dark complexion had thus 
removed the burden of the earth and then 
they merge into the form of Visnu. 

Thus here ends the fifty-third chapter on an 
incarnation of Krsna in Nrsimha Purana 





CHAPTER 54 


235 


CHAPTER 54 

Account of deeds performed by Kalki 
and the Kalki religion 

HIc|5u^4J 3^ 

giRT 

chlrtchWH TT^ H^drll 

W TtFl oijiiyyuJlf^ ^IRII 
Tronic f^: ^tTraefr 
■^TTWR=m^ R?niT^ 3T3FiRTEmif^ll?ll 
qTT5[T PcPJujyvi:^: ^5^ Tfin til fill 

31?cnilb^ 

>^Tt5T^ RHtdl-f ^fddlVI- 

ybulTmivi:! 

<^<^1 xT WT 

titviTOi snf fc;emit>tl?iimi 
dVll<3dKI; ^(5ldH^^<4 

!i>juil(d fq??t -R g -qprf^ f^JH,ll^ll 

Markandeya said- O king, I describe 
now the holy incarnation of god Visnu as 
Kalki. It abrogates all sins. Listen to it 
attentively. O king when the religion will be 
subdued on the earth due to the blow of 
Kali era, sins will increase and people will 
suffer from a numerous ailments; the gods 
will then go to the shore of KsTrasagara and 
worship god Visnu there. Subsequently, god 
Visnu will appear as a renowned king Kalki 
by taking birth from Visnuyasa in the holy 
village Sambhala. This village will be 
overpopulous. He then will start killing all 
mlecchas with blows of the sword and 




236 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 





CHAPTER 54 


237 


>0 

^ %^72RFTT^: "R TT TRT ^T^^5#IRo|| 

ftpp; 5^ gs^: i 

trtr T^rgo^fT<?i4r JifiiKTPd fe^s^.-iR^ii 

The varnas as Brahmanas etc., will be 
mixed mutually due to non restriction on 
the lust and carnal desires. They will suffer 
from anger, lust, ignorance and redundant 
misery. The varnas as Brahmanas, Ksatriya 
and Vais'ya will develop enmity and 
conspiracy and connivance will grow in Ml 
swing. All of them will fall from their 
religion. Those will skip truth from their 
dealings and their activities will turn in as 
that of the Sudras. The people of aristocracy 
will fall down and the down rung of society 
will act as the higher ups. The kings and 
bureaucracy will fall in greed and earning 
money will only be their motive. People 
will put on the apparel of religion but will 
do all that w'hich is prohibited by religion. 
The Kali era in its youth will only honour 
those as kings who will possess horses, 
chariots and elephants. The sons will order 
their fathers in all affairs and the daughter- 
in-laws will engage their mother-in-laws in 
domestic chores. The women too will cheat 
their husbands and sons, and engage them 
in debauchery. 

W ^:l 

^ My : IR ^ 11 
rt gftrlT ^ WncT:lR'«ll 


MT^fnidT: iTt^oimtiinJii:i 

yft in^ Tt y^Miryuiuii^^ii 

3rg;«nft<dT: 

^ ^1^11 

fen: fen?nfen: ffen-.ii^iii 

n mifer t TTridsm 

^ % -Rifn i ^ 11 

WRfe^fen^ «RTsJ crnf^fTt;! 

dU'M^i'dm^di TSHferr:ii^oii 

3f%? yasidn^ifif ferT:i 

# th:ii? ?ll 

The number of men will be reduced and 
the gross population will hold the women in 
majority. Cows will recede and the dogs 
will grow. All people will give more 
importance to money only. The civilised 
behaviour of gentlemen, will receive 
dishonour. Distribution of rain cycle will 
discriminate. All routes will be covered 
with robbers and thieves. All people will be 
egoistic of being learned without their 
existence in the service of teachers for 
prescribed time. Everyone will assume 
himself as a poet. The drunkard will preach 
Brahmajnana. The Brahmanas, Ksatriya, 
Vaisya wills serve the Sudras. The son for 
father, the student for teacher and the wives 
for their husbands will have envy. Greed 
will rule in the minds and hearts of all. 
Having this position, all will indulge in one 
or other type of offences. The Brahmanas 
will have most greed for food in others' 
home. All will play devices to extort others' 
money and enslave others' wives. With the 



238 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


further youth of the Kali era, the people 
searching others lacunas and faults will 
laugh at the religious people, the 
Brahmanas will not follow the rites 
properly and try to find faults in the Vedas. 
Owing to the mind viciated with the undue 
logic, they neither will perform offering or 
do worship in the prescribed manner. They 
will perform the rites like Pitr-yajna for 
orientation. The gifts will go to the wrong 
hands. The cows will receive maintenance 
only till they are milking. The tax collectors 
will tie up the Brahmanas for the money. 
The Brahmanas will indulge in selling the 
fruit of donation, yajha and japa. They will 
even receive donation frankly from Candala 
and other untouchable castes. In the first 
phase of Kali, the people will criticise the 
gods. 




^ g ^ 11 ^ ^ 11 







tnwr fererPiTrii^mi 

iftcfctiaTfli feiT %^eti^3i^(sii:ii?^ii 

^ ^ ^TcITfl ^ ^1 




At the final phase of Kali era, nobody 


will even remember to recite the name of 
god. The Brahmanas will cohabit with the 
SQdra women. They will lure the widow for 
copulation and eat food even in the homes 
of the Sudras. The mean Sudra will hold the 
mark of Samyasa but they will neither serve 
the upper castes nor follow their own 
religion. They put sacrificial thread for their 
egoistic satisfaction, hold matted hair and 
wander to and fro by smearing ash on their 
bodies. O Brahmana, the Sudras will be 
experts at tricks and preach the religion. As 
mentioned here and again several other 
types of cunning Brahmana, Ksatriya and 
Vaisya will come in Kaliyuga. The 
Brahmanas will enjoy music, dance etc. and 
skip the Vedas from their minds. They will 
follow the route of he Sudras. The people in 
Kali era will have scarcity of money, 
fictitious personality and their minds will be 
polluted from the false ego. They will extort 
both others rights and money but seldom 
give their own to others. The Brahmanas of 
ideal nature will be in a piteous condition. 
All people will faith in self appreciation and 
criticise others. All will lose their faith in 
gods, the Vedas and Brahmanas. 


Wl^rEnpR: HI'S oil 

^rfaiRipcT gill 
UtTOKfBHI 3Rrq^gf?rcRraUTT:ll'«^ll 

fwfRT; 

■dfpT^g irmt 


All people will express harsh views 
which are prohibited in the Vedas and have 
envy of the Brahmanas. All will give up 




CHAPTER 54 


239 


their own religion, will be ungrateful and 
the source of their survival will be just 
contrary to the professions prescribed for 
them. All will be pauper, back-biters 
criticising others and doing their self-praise. 
The people will always keep their mind 
busy knitting plans to snatch others money. 
They will feel happy on getting a change of 
eating at others' table and feign to follow 
rules. These Brahmanas criticising each 
other will gather like friends in festivities. 

T ^ ^ Htdl cMlI 

fgjTT HtctWlpR:! 

;JRT; ct^ ^cj^<4ehlrt<i:l 

3^7T«fmftr Ttlftip^iT 1wr:l 

^ T T flyTtcR: I 

^ WtJT 11'JJ 11 

Tt4«t4^ 'snf^ Pt:^chdi 

The Brahmanas, Ksatriya, Vais'ya and 
Sudra all will have over excitement and 
sensuality and reproduce a hybrid 
generation by mixing with one another. In 
the state of such a hybrid generation, 
relations like teacher and student, father and 
son, husband and wife will be kicked off. 
The corrupt Brahmanas will earn their bread 
through the Sudra profession. Drought will 
perpetually make the population to suffer. 
They will stare at the sky but the rain-god 
will thunder cruelty. The people mostly will 
suffer from hunger. The recluse will move 


here and there and make request to be their 
students so that they may receive their 
bread. The women will put their hand on 
their head and dishonour the suggestions 
given by the husbands and the elders in the 
family. The wise people should estimate the 
growth of Kali era in proportion to the 
degrees of neglect of offerings and havanas. 
This entire world will be wretched at a stage 
when all religions will be destroyed. 

fetWtT:imo|| 

R cJifHdlytl fpTT:l 

titr: Trt^rcTfrt^tmitsjfH^%iiq?ii 

-mt TRsr 

dclIMlfd 

Trcmfe^fyciTTpim'ifii 

4ft 3nT^ 

fT^T^TFtJT: 4>vi<=(l'4chi:llhmi 

Suta said- O Brahmanas, thus I have 
described the characteristics of the Kali era. 
The people engaged in worship of god will 
not fall in the grip of this era. Penance is 
considered prime in Satyayuga, attention in 
Treta, offering in Dvapara while donation is 
considered supreme in Kali era. The fruit 
obtained as a result of penance for as many 
as ten years ean be obtained within the 
period of one year. It is obtained merely by 
penance of one montlp and the same is 
obtained if penance is made for a whole day 
i.e., a day and a night. Whatever fruit is 
obtained through concentration in 
Satyayuga, through offering in Treta and 




240 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


through worship in Dvapara; recital of gods 
name in Kali era can provide with the same 
fruit, impediments from Kali cannot put in 
any harm to a man if the man recites with 
sheer devotion the holy name of god Visnu. 
The people indeed are most lucky who even 
once had got a chance to worship god Vis 
nu. 

-MHlfdRcWI ^ wircbvfl 

^ 

^d^fqRi ^ T % tnr g#r;imiII 

^ WRIT M^lrOSdWrM^fdtdl 

iRqmrr ^ ^ ^R<*lT^Hddj<i:i 

yOK^Id -R^ttslPtclKUHi^l 





When the era of Kali who increases the 
defiance towards the great deeds of all 
types, the more or less deeds prescribed by 
the Vedas if performed are in the 
circumstances, considered perfect. Reciting 
gods names is the means that provides with 
all blessings. The persons reciting Hare, 
Kesava, Govinda, VSsudeva, Jaganmaya, 
Janardana, .Tagadadharaa, Pitambaradhara, 
Acyuta etc., names will seldom be hurt by 
the Kali. The. persons who keep themselves 
busy with the worship of god Visnu or who 
join with the devotees of Visnu are really 
lucky because of their shelter under god 
who himself is the fear of the wicked. The 


people reciting Hari, join the group to pray 
and keep themselves busy with the worship 
of Hari have achieved the sole objective of 
human life. Thus, I explained this episode 
of Kali before you. The group recitals of 
Visnu removes all misery and gives rewards 
to the great deeds of people manifold. 

Thus here ends the fifty-forth chapter on 
description of Kalki in Nrsimha Purana 

Jfssjt Jfcsjt 



240 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 55 

Regain of the lost eye to Sukracarya by 
the grace of gods. 

cicTT^Erai^gsni_ii^ii 

The king said- Markandeya, how the 
devil teacher Sukracarya regain his eye 
which he had lost while god Vamana hit by 
straw in the offering arranged by Ball? 

ggrET 

Markandeya said- Sukracarya went to a 
number of holy places after the event when 
his eye was hit by god Vamana. At one 
place, he stood in the Ganges water and 
began to worship god Vamana. He lifted 
both his arms up in full length with his 
mind concentrated on god Nrsiriiha with 
conch, discus and gada in his hands and 
started reciting hymn. 


qmfR ^ grcR f^tbuj^fyuii^i 




CHAPTER 56 


241 


aiHlf^M'ji'i ftr!t ^TUlfir iH55Sy[<jRi;il^ll 
■^^cT)' ^UTRPIT; 

^ w ^raifiT ^^i<3^H^iiv9ii 

^ SJiraf% IRT?: •R?^l 

^ Tit TSvt sT^rrar ^ginw:! 

^TwrarTRwnf&T ^Tini?! cni;ii<?ii 

^cTtRW ^ gWc)igf|^q;| 

^ ^ ^3Rr#t ?t TpnlTr iRT^i IV11 
fm ^cRffil^t f? ^;l 

^nft' TTorlui Zf; 'SpETeSf^ lli(4d;l 
t r44ii(^ sruimfti Tr4raHH,»^^>i 

Suki'acarya said- I salute the god 
Vamana who is master of this whole 
universe, who surpassed the ego of Ball and 
who is the embodiment of peace, immortal 
and Purusottama. I salute that sacrosanct 
and almighty, the greatest god and who 
holds conch, discus as also gada in his 
hands. I salute god Garudadhvaja who is 
almighty, omnipresent and generator of all, 
who is beyond old age, unborn and 
everlasting. I salute god Hrsikesa who is 
worshipped with sheer devotion by the gods 
and monsters, who is worshipped by all. I 
salute god Nrsirnha to whom the ascetics 
hold with imagination in their hearts, who is 
unique and full of light. I salute the god 
whose philanthropic intention is beyond the 
reach of Brahma etc., gods and who is 
therefore, worshipped in his incarnated 
form. I salute god Janardana who very first 
created this entire universe, protected it by 
killing the wicked and in whom this whole 


world is merged. I salute JagadTsvara who is 
duly worshipped by devotees, who is 
beloved to devotees and who is most 
innocent. I salute god Visnu who provides 
with rare things to his devotees, who is all 
evidence and everlasting. 

^q|ch0^<4 dciirl 

ffir JTT tnf^l 

3^ ^ wmqui4dd:il 

fafPT^ Tpts? ^ll^'iSII 

Markandeya said- O king, the hymn so 
recited by Sukracarya made the god 
Jagannatha pleased and he appeared before 
him with conch, discus, gada in hands. God 
Narayana then said one-eyed Sukracarya - 
"Brahman, why have you recited my names 
at this bank of Gahga? Please, tell me the 
reason. 

3c(iTj 

W ^4iP7<igl 

Sukracarya said- O god, I have 
committed an offence in course of the 
offering arranged by Bali. I am inclined to 
efface that offence and this is the reason I 
recited your holy names. 

itgiSRTI 

M: ^ WI^IuiAh ^ -q^ll^^ll 

The god said- O Muni, that committal 
had made you one eyed. I am pleased on 
your pray you made this time. 

^rOcRcn ■gfr 




242 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


TT^ ^ y;Pj1d4?tH Rm:l 

^ciid^cRi Tyf^ MgTcmi 

3rn<r yrr 

1% ^ Wnfir TF5l^ 

m tr4lwHd:ii9o(i 



With these words, god Janardana smiled 
and touched his Pancajanya conch at the 
cracked eye of Sukracarya. O king, just 
with a touch of conch that eye was 
recuperated and the sight returned to the 
extent as if it was seldom injured. Thus, 
Laksmlpati disappeared after returning the 
eye sight to Sukracarya and accepting the 
pray made by him with sheer devotion. 
Sukracarya too returned to his hermitage, O 
king, it was the event in which god Visnu 
set right the cracked eye of Sukracarya in 
the distant past and as per your query I have 
made you to listen to this holy episode. Tell 
me, what more you want to listen? Bring 
out query if any more query is remained 
within you. 

Thus here ends the fifty-fifth chapter 
in Nrsimha Purana 






242 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 56 


Installation of icon of Vijnu 

WM ?n%TiT;i 

Tran nrfdOT-iii: trt 


The king said- O Brahmana, I am now 
curious to listen to the best method for the 


installation of the icon of god Nrsirhha with 
Sarhga bow. 


-jcdrl 

yfrf^iiir rrf5i>nr:i 

gjf Tnf^i 

w «npwnftr gn 

sifiresR ^ mmuVdji^Aji^i 
gnr^ ^iimi 

3rq^: I 


Markandeya said- O king, listen to the 
method for installing an icon of god Visnu 
with discus in his hand. I am going to tell 
you as mentioned in our scriptures. The 
man intended to install an icon of god Visnu 
should first do a rectification process for the 
land in the stable stars i.e. three uttaras and 
Rohinl. The foundation measuring a mans 
height or 3.5 hands or two hands deep 
should be excavated and the pure clay with 
water-soaked rubble and sand should then 
be filled. Treating it as the base, a man 
should according to his financial capacity 
construct a temple by employing an expert 
mason and stone, bricks or clay should be 
used. This temple should be square-shaped 
from all sides. The walls should be 
constructed with stone but in case, stone is 
rare, bricks can be used. If again bricks are 
also not available, clay can be used. It 



CHAPTER 56 


243 


should be of excellent look and the doors 
should face the east. Wooden poles of good 
quality should be used and the craftsman 
should inscribe fruit laden trees, lily flower 
and the lotus on the poles. 


f^^'fcRHlpTTIT 

f yindil 

rIuirhi -^^rarnt ^ §hVhih,ii^?ii 

^ gjR4ti;i 

cBTtiR^q^ f tRT 
•§¥4 ■€r ^cfiiildt TTRt 

Rw>5li flM 

3Wif ^ xraR^gq;i 

ft 

qi3y-viRif¥f^ 



O king, after construction of such east 
facing temple, with portraits of fruit laden 
trees etc. inscribed, an order for making an 
icon of god Visnu as per the prescribed 
manner of Vis'vakarma, should be given to a 
healthy man. An old or teen aged or a man 
suffering from long ailments or viciated due 
to leprosy should not be engaged for 
making the icon. The face of the icon 
should be attractive, ear, nose and eyes etc., 
welt engraved, the sight neither downward 
nor upward and not subtended but plain and 
the entire body should be formidable, 
modest and delicate. Both lips red, excellent 
brows, the forehead and the throat should be 
fascinating. It should be of four-armed i.e. 


two arms and other two sub-arms. At the 
right hand, a discus ovular like sun with 
divine rays all around and at the exterior 
side, nemi should be fixed. A white 
Pancajanya conch should be kept on the left 
sub-arm and it should have radiance like 
that of the moon. This conch is the 
suppressor of the monsters ego and all 
benevolent. 

li'ni^dcKi f5;stt 
*fiHJ4c)|ireb<f WF4t ^ 

^ch«D W 

T3^ rTT ehliRtrclT f <M¥TimiUII 

A fascinating garland should be shown 
around the neck of that divine icon, trivali 
mark on the neck, attractive chest, the belly 
good shape and all organs should be 
proportionate and beautifully made. The left 
hand of that icon on the waist and lotus 
flower should be shown-in the right hand. 
Wrist ornaments should be in arms, nice 
navel with three folds and divine look. The 
pubic region, thighs and legs should be 
shown attractive. Mekhala (belt) round the 
waist and yellow cloth should be wrapped 
round the shoulders. O king, when such 
icon is duly made, the carpenter should be 
satisfied with the desired remuneration for 
the same. Gold and clothes should also be 
given and on an auspicious date, fortnight 
and time, such icon should be installed. 

oil 





244 


NARASIMHA PURA^fAM 


O n 9 



^7c=5T fgrsfl^: ?I1 

cTfw^ ■^w^<T7n'^;l 

ciylwwiRun ■^rnsT 5 ^: iri 

6R5kl<53)Hl^^ yM(r^M^1 1 

ef^ir^jgr ^ g^.-i 

gxmri ciw 5 grf^: IR'if 11 


iNIRiJrRidiiq cT fjRH oTT 7t{)'5I^IRmi 


^ 5 ^ rTgFt crrfR T^r^l 

arfii^R?! ^ RT®^3f^( (? ^ 11 

RR SSnW 1%^ ■■WI'^IIH'fiHI 

wr (IfHR Ii9ran,> I ?'s I i 

3TRk RRg^ tRiraflRfgfqf^I 


RRW: •RTPzr 


II9<SII 


A best pavilion for offering should be 
constructed in front of the temple. There 
should be four doors and the entire pavilion 
should be covered by four giant gates. 
Seven kinds of cereals should be grown 
there and conch and drums are piped/beaten 
daily. The iron should be processed by 
using thirty six pitchers water and then the 
man should enter into the pavilion with the 
Brahnianas well known to the Vedas. The 
icon should be then processed by 
Pancagavya separately. Similarly, hot and 
cold baths should be given to the icon. It 
should be then smeared with turmeric, 
kumkum, sandal etc. It should be garlanded 
and the apparel duly put on the icon. 
Punyaha vacaiia and Vedic hymns then are 
to be recited by the Brahmanas and they 
should sprinkle water on that icon. A 
procession then should be taken out to the 
near river with conch, drum, trumpets etc., 
instruments piping/beating and let it be 


there for seven or at least three days. In case 
a river is not at an easy approach, a pond or 
reservoir can be used. On having over the 
prescribed period, the icon should be 
brought by Brahmanas and put in a 
palanquin. The “ icon should be then 
garlanded. It should be then carried to the 
temple with drumming and reciting of 
Vedic hymns throughout the way to the 
temple. It should be then put on the lotus¬ 
shaped holy pavilion. A bath is again given 
and the devotees should smear sandal etc., 
fragrance, garland and clothes. 

crafiferiR ^ mcTt c!STTII^<?)l 

1^.' 

tr?^ ■R-’SiraT 

3f^ (RTl ^UPRT^fgjIRtnBr ^Tl 

RRW ^froTrff^TRm:! 
ar^'liwlfbfdl ^ R^JTRiRf wn^ ? li 

I 

■RWTW fit: [gaiJ^R^lR MRRI^ gr RR:l 

Sixteen Rtvija Brahmanas should be 
offered food in the prescribed manner. Four 
Brahmanas should recite the Vedas there, 
the other four should look after the icon and 
another four should do Havana in the four 
corners of the yajna-mandapa. A Brahmana 
should then offer Bali by offering flowers, 
rice and cereal in all directions. This Bali is 
given for the pleasure of Indra etc., gods. 
Indrah priyatam should be recited while 
offering at each direction. Each master of 



CHAPTER 56 


245 


direction should be given Bali in the 
evening, midnight, dawn and morning. Bali 
to Matrkaganas and gift to Brahmanas 
should be then given. The Yajamana then 
should sit at a place in the temple and do 
japa of Purusasukta frequently. He should 
then fast for a complete day and night and 
enter into the pavilion where that icon is 
kept at an auspicious time, recite Devasukta 
with the Brahmanas, pick up that icon and 
bring it to the temple. It should then be 
installed firmly with reciting Visnusukta or 
Pavamanasukta. The acarya should then 
sprinkle water on that icon which is 
processed by the kusa grass. 

■cnfiqRtgT'a 



-s t TOi qt cll^Ud t ^11^611 

^ ^ Tfhra[T f 

cpT: TT ^«II^rt;ll1fo || 

He should then blaze the fire in front of 
that icon. Seats of kusa grass should be laid 
around the fire place and Havana for the 
successful Jatakarma ceremony etc., should 
be made with reciting Gayatrl and Visnu 
hymns. The acarya should give four 
oblations of ghee at every action of Havana 
and digbandha is made by Astramantra 
(viz. Astraya Phat). A oblation of ghee at 
the east of fire altar with reciting Oiii 
trataramindram.. . .(Su. Yaj. 20/50), at south 


direction with reciting Paro devata.etc., 

hymns (Su. Yaj. 17/2and with reciting 
Nisasada. . . .etc., hymn (Su. Yaj. 10/2in 
west direction should be given. Similarly, in 
the north with reciting He Nrpa, Ya te mdra 
. . .(Su. Yaj. 16/2) and in all directions with 
reciting Paro Matraya. . . . (Rgveda 
7/6/9etc., two Suktas; Havana of ghee 
should be made. Then yadasya. . . . (Su. 
Yaj. 23/28) hymn should be recited and 
Svistakrt homa with ghee should be 
performed. He should then give a fee to 
Rtvija according to their participation and 
calibre. The Acarya should be given two 
clothes, two gold kundala and a gold ring. 
He can give more if his capacity allows for 
the same. 

^ Vm chKqi4^y;n')5 7ll 

dlifqfetlcTrcHTi^dqRT'dlRtft: I 

fqUMH fqfq^ui 

s 9 

The learned person should then sprinkle 
one thousand eight or one hundred eight or 
twenty one pitchers of water on the icon. 
The conch and tiiimpet etc., should be 
played throughout the course and Vedic 
hymns and Mahgalapatha should be 



246 


NARASIMHA PURAIVAM 


continued. The process of bathing the god 
with sprouted barley, rice filled in vessels, 
lighting lamp, stick, flag, umbrella, cavara, 
torana etc., should be completed and here 
also the Brahmanas should be given fees. O 
king whosoever worships god Visnu with 
this process, avails acquittal from all sins 
and on his death carries his precedent Pitrs 
as many as twenty one generations in his 
company to Indra etc., abodes and 
establishing them there; he himself attains 
to the abode of Visnu. He there attains the 
element of divine knowledge and then his 
soul merges with Visnu. At the time of 
death, he moves on an aircraft with well 
ornamented soul. 

TIH^ VJOcidi Tl4qi<4Jruii^R:||'){<?|| 
iTOinzr fgfinr 


^ iwPT ^ ^:llho II 





O king, thus I have told you the 
procedure of installing the icon of god Vis 
nu. The people are absolved from their sins 
merely by reciting and listening to this 
method. O king, when a man installs god 
Nrsiriia with the above-said method on this 
earth, he attains death the everlasting abode 
of god Visnu and seldom comes back from 
there to the earth again. 

Thus here ends the fifty-sixth ehapter on 
Installation of icon of Visnu in Nrsimha Parana 
*** 




246 


NARASIMHA PURAIVAM 



CHAPTER 57 

Characteristics of devotees, Description of 

Harita-smrti, Duties of the Brahmanas 

Trat^arrsT 

^TcRTHT ff? ^ fefi 

The king said- O Brahmana, kindly tell 
me the characteristics of devotees to god 
Nrsiihha, their acquaintance will make a 
man able to attain Visnuloka. 

^lHlebU^<4 dcJW 

fajH^cWT •;h^i 

iRriT y»hiwr-f: iraWr 
MttilchKiqwr THT:! 

cmilyqNliyrll: ■gfsra^ll?ll 

«ra<|qi ■rid4^^l:l 

ftrif tyjJiBBJUlItll'iJll 

f|cT -ftRt ^aRTlT: ^T5t^5ffrfiTfiRtT:l 

■^orqpn^fq^eRn; *1 ; nm 1 

I'^cjisn TfT tflTT: ^ftTT:l 

l^gsjl iT^lvqi^t laitnpicfrn: TIcblRdTillvall 

Sri Markandeya said- Devotees of god 
Visnu are vigorated to a greater degree to 
his worship. They achieve all their wishes 
by having control over their mind and 
senses and abide by religion. The devotees 
always keep themselves busy with 
benevolent acts and service to their 
teachers, talk humbly and follow their 
respective varnas and the etiquettes of their 
asramas. They know the Vedas and the 
elements of the Veda and always make 



CHAPTER 57 


247 


themselves free from anger and 
temptations. They always live in peace, 
humble gestures are seen on their face and 
they keep themselves always busy with 
their religious activities. They speak less 
but for the good of all and always curious to 
serve Atithi (guest) as per their capacity. 
They abandon orientation, manipulation, 
lust and anger. To persons with these 
characteristics and bold, learned in a 
number of arts, forgiveness is whose 
quality, always recite or listen to the names 
of Visnu and their hearts feel exhilarated, 
who are always ready to worship Visnu and 
have respect for discussion on gods 
episodes, the people of these qualities are 
called devotees of Visnu. 

twlcfW 

SraRT ^ TflWI 1 11 

ciurtqiqiyuiuii gif ^ 

^ TRlcR:li<?i( 

The king said- O scholar, Bhrguvarya, 
my teacher, you have instantly said that the 
people abiding by their varna and the 
religion of the asrama are the devotees of 
god Visnu. Please, therefore, tell me the 
religion of those asramas, abiding by which 
god Nrsirhha is satisfied. 

Markandeya said- There was a 
discussion struck between the hermits and 
the great man Harita and I will describe that 
ancient and best episode before you today. 

fRtiT 


■gui?'’hmymuii gif 

Long long ago, all hermits curious to 
know the elements of religion went to the 
hermit Harita, most learned, who knew the 
elements of religion and bowed their heads 
at his feet. They said- "O god, you are 
known to all religions and and a promoter. 
Hence, describe the Sanatana religion 
relating to the varna and asramas before us. 

qrnrsroT: gn ^ urtpht 

tTFI TT*fl f 

i i 

wgoFri %3TRTniT;i 

g^ 11 ^\ 911 

Sri Harita said- In the ancient period, 
god Narayana, the creator of this universe 
used to sleep on the bed of Sesanaga with 
LaksmI. It is said that a diving lotus was 
originated from the navel of god while 
sleeping and Brahma was bom from the 
hypocotile of that lotus. He at first 
originated the Brahmanas from his mouth 
with the permission of god. Then the Ks 
atriyas were born from his arms and the 
Vaisyas from the thighs. Finally, he 
originated the SQdras from his feet. The 
lotus-born Brahma then described the 
scriptures educating religion and the mles 


248 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


before the Brahmana and other varnas. O 
Brahmanas, I am going to described 
everything which was describe by Brahma. 
Please, listen to it. This scripture increases 
the wealth, fame and the age as well as 
provides yore with the fruit of heaven and 
emancipation, 

5ii^uyi Tp:! 

fTBCrRTTfr m 

fa^lRoii 

arsg^HTKiPR ^ ^ttsr cTsjti 


3ts£iTtR 'ET ^ g?Rtirtj;i 

af?l<j4vd f 119^11 

^ oBTO gpf f «lit5ra-?Tfl; IR ■){ 11 

iTPt 3n? r«m 41d f g fon f bt : 11 ^ m i 


He is a Brahmana who has been born 
from the womb of the woman born in a 
Brahmana family and from the semen of a 
Brahmana. 1 am now telling you about the 
religion of a Brahmana and the country 
where he can reside. Brahma had said to the 
Brahmana while originating, O the best 
Brahmana, reside in the province where the 
black deer lives voluntarily and perform 
your activities. The six deeds told by the 
scholars for the Brahmana are practicable 
for the Brahmana and these are the deeds 
that ensure the progress of the Brahmana. 
These six deeds of the Brahmana are - 


study, teaching, to arrange offering, to 
engage others in offering, to receive 
donation and to give donation.. The study is 
described as three types - the first is for 
religion, the second is for money and the 
third is for making others to serve him. The 
Brahmana should teach eligible students, 
make worthy yajamanas to arrange offering 
and accept donation given by others for the 
sake of survival. He should live at a holy 
place, have concentration, do exercise on 
the Vedas and perform the rosary, purpose 
attached and desired deeds with sheer 
efforts. He should serve teachers without 
any laxity and serve the fire two times daily 
i.e. in the morning and in the evening. 


1^1 

atigfit gFTif «Tgr!IT 
3);gi^5!i(irdid; fgercifgfrsrd: i 

ftgtffcTt 

trggjf; flH I 4td :l 

fgfci ;-r gtfg srfrnr: g^ii?'?ii 


gjfert w t 
fgiT^g fgsR stfevngfifli 
gcTifg Traf^^jFTpg 


"glgg 1%gg^: n ^ o n 
dm 

t:imv9ll 



The Brahmana leading a married life 
should perform Balivaisvadeva daily and 
honour the guest as per his capacity. In case 
other guests arrived with the first came 
earlier, seldom treat them otherwise and pay 
honour to them accordingly. He should 
keep true love for his wife and should afraid 


CHAPTER 58 


of contacts with others wife. He should 
always speak the truth, seldom lose temper 
and perform his religion regularly and 
undisturbingly. He should not reveal any 
laziness and perform his daily routine 
properly and within time. He should speak 
the truth, sweet and benevolent things by 
keeping in mind the consequences in the 
other world. Thus, I have described the 
religion of a Brahmana succinctly. The 
Brahmana who follows his religion as the 
way suggested, attains the abode of Brahma 
daily. O Brahmanas, the religion of a 
Brahmana as I have described before you 
removes all sins from a man. Now I am 
going to tell the religions prescribed for the 
Ksatriyas and other castes separately and 
suggest you all to listen to it carefully. 

Thus here ends the fifty-seventh chapter on 

Duties of the Brahmanas in Nrsimha Purana 





CHAPTER 58 


249 


CHAPTER 58 

Duties of K^atriya and others. Descriptions of 
first and second mode of life. 

10^:11 ^11 

yiqjq;i)a?fR wfqfifll?ll 
da i ^ i -i tp^^QA4itiPcid:i 

frf^fqy^dTclfdrl^l 
^q5il^um<*dV^ iM<J<*l4M<W«llll>JII 

^rTRt hfdh l MlRi 

Sri Haiita said- I will not describe the 
prescribed rules for Ksatriya etc., Varnas. A 


Ksatriya should perform his activities 
accordingly. The Ksatriya at the royal seat 
should rule the subjects abiding by his 
religion. He should study the Vedas and 
perform the offerings in a systematic 
manner. He should keep the religion always 
in mind, give donation to the best 
Brahmanas, love only his wife and abandon 
the others wife; he should be an expert to 
understand the meaning of ethics, should 
understand the elements of treaty and war. 
He should have devotion for the gods and 
the Brahmanas and perform the worship of 
Pitrs and sraddha etc. He should desire for 
victory and abandon evils completely. The 
Ksatriya of this conduct attains to the best 
position. 



q«lTfy|sil 


^REnf ^VT^R^n rwrn^ii 



qrt<c(iU'l^<4ch:| 




^J^nsERR^HTfr 

(Mgchl4 IT8JTI 

cbulcW Wq4uHfdi3tT:ll<?ll 


A Vais'ya should protect the cow, do 
agriculture and business and give donation 
and service to the feet of the teacher 
according to his capacity. He should keep 
himself away from greed and disorientation, 
he should be truthful, should not search the 
defects of others, control the mind and 
senses and give up contact with other's 
wife. His wife should only be his beloved. 
He should honour the Brahmanas with 
money and perform offering, study and 
donate without any laxity. He should 
perform Pitr, sraddha when the appropriate 



250 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


time comes in a year. He should worship 
god Nrsirhha daily. This duty has been 
explained for the Vaisya who abides by his 
religion. The Vais'ya who performs such 
activities definitely attains to the abode of 
heaven. 


IT TT?!^: I 

cllRc|((^T^UlHi ^ TTMN^dJ 

ST^nfer i)c;id«4 ^r^TsjTTra^ll^^l 
tutot TTrf^ ^ fjR -^y4ci; i 

tddAg Tft ^'dfciRdK I 

WIT5rant 1%FTTf%T^T 


mr feRRwt ^ 

yrMRvqroui ^ 

^ f^^TTcU ^ Hdlcildd)i<4c»j4Rr:l 


The Sudra should serve all these three 
varnas and serve the Brahmanas like a 
slave. He should donate from his earning 
without asking for anything from others. He 
should do agriculture for survival. He 
should worship the stars every month as per 
the religion and justice and always wear old 
apparel. He should clean the pots used by 
the Brahmanas keep attachment with his 
own wife. He should abandon the wife of 
others from a distance. He should listen to 
the story on the Purana from the mouth,of 
the Brahmanas and worship god Nrsimha. 
He should do Namaskara to the Brahmanas 
with sheer obeisance. Envy and attachment 
should be given up and he should speak the 
truth. The Sudra attains to the good 
consequences who performs the activities 
with combination of his mind, speech, body 
and deeds. He thus attains to the abode of 


Indra. 

giik grif f^sil qqlcwr 

ysingjtj 5ii^uw4«iiydi:i 
i^ujsc|q:<|inqg4md 

■q^TtWRR ^RT?Tr ■g#^: II I 

O hermits, I have thus, deseribed these 
several types of religions to be performed 
by the Varnas. These are explained by the 
best Brahmanas. I will now describe the 
religion to be followed by a Brahmacarl. 
Please, listen to them carefully. 

5(<lcl -icIN 

HtRhfr qiuidchl Wl 

ftldfBd ^ gnfnrr wm friTTII^vaii 
tisrr g%WTTqgi 
g<i4afH«ii '^Hqi^<q,iiUii 
'qyifqfiji 

ftfit llfc4uil ^ 'wisqiqq;^ T^l^ll^*? II 
fgrfsT iqTTrqgi: I 

^ dcdiHMWTR^lfd chdiuir fq|s|fqxqd:ll? o || 

s3 S3 

rlTMI^ci 5RTrTl? 'TgTEZTTqfTlt5^l 

f ?ll 

3tf^ cju^cfire ^ ^TsFtt T4|i|q1dcbH,l 
STTT^^jriTTRf ^^TcTnt TTCnfltT: 11 ? ? 11 
TTTq MldVtrHw ’THR Rqdi^4:l 
gfr: f^^l^T^fd^Hci-ggiR^ii 
3T?r?^ g' 

wr fem^Rt^rr^g^g^iR'iJii 

g-TinRcHRafRTTxf gT% trfwTjR^iRmi 
■H|4 ^5^ gfl MV^UrHId dicilrt qodquj 
W^i<1 ^ ^ f;^U-d!i'nqHqji?^ii 

The Brahmacarl should live always in 
Gurukula after the Upanayana ceremony 



CHAPTER 58 


251 


duly performed. He should do good and 
favour the teacher with mind, speech and 
deeds. He should follow the imles made for 
a bachelor, sleep on the floor and do 
worship of the fire. He should bring water 
for the teacher and fuel for havana also. 
Thus one should do study systematically 
while living in bachelorship. One who does 
study by abandoning the method, cannot 
receive the fruit for that study. (His learning 
seldom meets with success). Whatever he 
does by infringing the law, no fruit is 
availed of by him due to the application of 
such tricks. The above said resolutions 
should therefore be made for the success of 
the study and learn all rules of purity in 
close contact with the teacher. He should 
eat the food obtained from alms in the 
morning and evening, should control his 
senses and hold the hide of deer, strike of 
Palasa, Mekhala and sacrificial thread with 
full concentration and awareness. He should 
not beg for alms from the family of the 
teacher and from the homes of their family 
members and kith and kin. He can ask there 
only when nothing in alms is obtained from 
the houses of others. However, he should 
give up the above said houses when the 
situation improves. He should ask for alms 
from houses other than those of the teacher. 
He should eat with the permission of the 
teacher and with a holy heart. He should 
leave the bed prior to his teacher and give 
the teacher kiisa, soil, tooth-stick, clothes 
etc., after collecting the same from the 
hermitage. He should take a bath only when 
the teacher has bathed. He should always 
hold fast and should not clean his teeth with 
wood. 


1| Attire IR cfjfttcTI 

^ iWIWIci W I 
g 'cl' cisn i I 11 

T cwRlddR II 

ftfcRcll snraHt I 

HMI<iM^rUcclirH JTdu'irMr^d ^ittnTii^oll 

^MIRld tRlRll4 iw:ll^?ll 

siRranr ■hft; wrrajqkwRT:! 

'O 

trai'clld HldTfqdiW ^TfelcT:ll?9ll 

v3 >0 ' 

RrT dW cm; T^T: 4l4^d(n: I 

RmrRttll^^ll 

3iy|ry cldtl ^l 

^ m WWctidl cT^ii^'iill 

■Htiii) Htch <m!d ■fg3r:ll^y II 

5ii^ail snrsRfeiTii^^ii 

He should give up the umbrella, shore, 
ubatana (massage), fragrance like scent etc. 
and the flower garland etc. He should 
absolutely give up dance, song, folk story 
and debate as also coition. Honey, meat and 
the tastes of tongue should be given up. He 
should keep himself at a distance froir 
women, should give up sensuality, anger 
greed and criticism of other people. He 
should refrain from observing, touching 
ladies and from violence of othei 
organisms. He should live alone 
everywhere, should not discharge semen a 
any place. If he has ejaculated even in ; 
dream, without any sensuous thoughts ii 



252 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


mind, he should worship god sun and fire 
after a bath on the next day and recite the 
hymn Punarmametvindriyam. With faith in 
the existence of the god and the other 
world, keeping himself ready to observe the 
right resolution for the bachelors; with a 
control over the senses, he should worship 
the three Trikalasandhya (citing hymns 
with sacrificial thread). On completion of 
Sandhya, he should bow before the teacher 
and if parents are nearby, those should also 
be saluU. j. All gods are pleased when these 
three are satisfied. The Bachelor should 
therefore serve them by giving up all envy. 
After completion of study on four, two or 
one Veda, provide Daksina to the teacher. 
He should then live anywhere voluntarily. If 
that learned bachelor is detached from 
worldly affairs, he should adopt reclusion 
but if he has some affection, it is good to 
enter into the married life. O Brahmana, the 
Brahmana with attachment definitely meets 
the hell if he becomes a recluse. The 
Brahmana whose tongue, genitals, belly and 
speech are holy viz., who has conquered the 
taste, sensuality and feeling of hunger; who 
speaks the truth or maintains silence, can 
enter into the life of a recluse instead of 
married life. 

TtT;l 

wrezT fgumftr ?it 

% II 

Thus, whosoever passes his life by 
observing the law and gives no place for 
laxity, that bachelor can observe his 


resolution more firmly. The bachelor who 
moves on the earth and serves the teacher 
by resorting to the above said law, attains 
all fruits of rare learning. 


■ 4 Tc(feq<:t 4 i^<wr Tr^FITp|W:ll'iio|| 
dWI^mldcHlMi ^ ^ oq^ »tTM<?Iq|ipil'>{^ll 

fi<!ilTm:i 

wqfit tlsiT felt gi^fe^:ll'ii>iTII 


The hermit Haiita, said- the bachelor 
who holds the knowledge of the Vedas and 
other scriptures after completion of his 
study on the Vedas under the above-said 
manner as also conversant their meanings, 
should start Samvartana ceremony 
systematically after due permission 
received from the teacher. He should then 
marry a beautiful virgin whose organs are 
intact, name and gotras different from his 
own, who has her brothers, whose 
characteristics are good and who has a good 
conduct. He should not marry such a lady 
whose complexion is pale, who is sick or 
more organ bearing, talkative and has hairy 
organs, whose any organ is deformed or 
absent and whose face is dreadful. The 
virgin whose name is kept on the names of 
star, tree or river or the word depicting 
mountain is added with name or who is with 



CHAPTER 58 


253 


the name of bird and slave etc., meanings 
should be avoided. The virgin worth 
maiTying bears a sound body and strong 
organs, her name depicts delicacy and sweet 
to address, she strolls artfully and slow like 
the swan and the elephant, her lips, teeth 
and hair are thin and body delicate. The best 
Brahmana should marry such a virgin in the 
method prescribed for a Brahmana. Thus 
the marriage ceremony should be performed 
according to the religion of the Varna. 




*0 e\ 


3Ridpf 
T3^ UWT: 


The scholar Brahmana should then get 
up before sunrise, clean his teeth after 
defecation and take a bath. The mouth 
remains polluted in the morning when the 
man leaves his bed; dry or wet cleaning 
should therefore be done. The trees like 
Khadira, Kadamba, Karanja, Vata, 
Apamarga, Bilva, Madara, Gulara are 
considered the best trees. I am now telling 
about the proper wood and the inherent 
properties in them. 

All trees bearing needles are holy. All 
trees pouring milk are the best trees for 
teeth cleaning. The length of the stick used 
for teeth cleaning is said to be of eight 


fingers. Otherwise its length should be of 
the measurement between the thumb and 
the little finger. 

5 qcpErt ^ TRTRT:imo|| 
cl^fitraidiT fRiTI 


The teeth should be cleaned with such a 
wooden stick. However, such cleaning 
should not be exercised on pratipada, 
amavasya, sasthi and navami. This is 
particularly because the touch of wood with 
teeth, burns the family up to seven 
generations. The day when cleaning stick is 
not found or the day in which it is 
prohibited, the mouth can be cleaned by 
taking water in the mouth twelve times and 
gargling. 


Tt? ^ TT^: 1 1 h ^ 1 1 


One should take a bath after the teeth 
cleaning. Acamana should then be made 
with reciting the hymns and it should be 
redone. He should sprinkly the water on 
him with reciting the hymns and as arghya, 
palmful of water should be dedicated to the 
sun. The monsters having health due to the 
boons of Brahma and named as Sandeha 
wage their fight against the sun but the 



254 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


palmful of water, duly spelled with hymns 
is given only to Sun. It drives out the 
monsters namely Sandeha who are enemy 
to the sun god. Subsequently, the 
Brahmanas like Marlci etc. and under 
protection of Sanaka etc., yogis, god sun 
forwards in the sky. The Brahmana should 
therefore, not violate the rule of performing 
sandhya in the morning and evening both 
time. 


^ ^ TO! fcR^I 

■RT7 ^cn33if^imv9ii 

■RfSsRJt RTTITT^ fara^-.l 

M: fynxifgrnafrq --t^isarra 

TRafT 

RTKnfllc^’ felt ^ wf|rr:l 


The Brahmana who infringe this rule, 
fall into hell definitely. If a palmful of 
water is given to the sun after doing 
acamana by observing the due procedure 
and the water is touched again after a 
parikrama is made, the Brahmana becomes 
holy. The sandhya should be performed in 
the presence of the fading stars at dawn and 
hymns of Gayatrl should be recited until the 
stars reappear in the sky. The learned 
person should then do Havana in the home. 
The servants, the family members and 
slaves etc., should be then kept in mind and 
perform the activities by which the bread is 
earned for them. He should then do self- 
study for collecting the topics to preach to 


the students. The Brahmana should take 
resort to the god. He should then bring kusa, 
flowers and fuel for Havana and the 
activities of the noon (sandhya, worship 
etc.) should be performed by sitting in 
concentration at a holy place. 

RTIcRT fe Rwijrl (cb[fulfil 

■pl: HI-rohKTq 

R?7t f iqgirfMiqi T WNI^c^qifi^ll^liII 

^ RiRcI:ll^mi 

WHIrtjdi WIST fqfefe f«r:l 
151^ 3lfeqT8r I ^ ^ 11 

M: T4H m STTWr Wrr:ll^'31l 

T^iilrjRui ^ nwRipTfR-:! 
f^lllH^T Rfe 3RW:ll^<ill 

^qfywjRfrl fen 

rRTt RTTWi ^ ‘RWT <? II 

TTRl^ ‘Bl; 

TTTcRT Wll^°l< 

irJBlcgT vjTHlTBRlfesIiCq ^ TnRfe;l 
writ WRM ^ ^TR^iiva^ii 

hRqiqlTlBq ^ T 

R (cHIM-rTtli grat R fer IRW^II^^II 

■o 

We are now going to tell in brief the 
method of bathing. It decays all sins. A man 
relieves from all sins immediately when he 
takes a bath with his method. The wise man 
should talj,e pure soil with kusa and 
seasmum and should go to the holy and 
fascinating bank of the river in a happy 
mood. He should not bathe in the small 



CHAPTER 58 


255 


springs or streams. By sprinkling that water 
at a holy place, kusa and soil should be 
kept. The learned person should then smear 
the soil mixed with water on his body and 
take acamana after washing that clay from 
the body. He should then do namaskara to 
the water god Varuna by entering into the 
pure water. He should then take a dip in the 
stream where deep water is flowing and do 
concentration on god Visnu. He should 
subsequently, sprinkle water on the water 
god with reciting Pavamana hymn relating 
to Varuna after acamana. Marjana should be 
then performed through the water drops 
collected at the tip of kusa and smear the 
clay in three parts of his body with reciting 
Idam Visnurvicakrame. He should then 
enter into the river with the name of 
NSrayana in mind. Aghamarsana patha for 
three times should be made by taking a dip 
properly in the water. Thus, tarpana is to be 
performed for gods, hermits and pitrs by 
using kusa and seasmum seeds. He should 
then make concentration, come out of the 
water and two white clothes should be put 
after coming up from the bank. Thus, he 
should not give jerk to his hairs after 
putting on dhoti and the upper cover. Dark 
red and blue clothes are also not considered 
the best apparel. The learned person should 
abandon the dirty or strained cloth or at 
which there is no border. 

RHIcki f f?r;l 


L! IM ■ M ti cnliv¥!4 







fVKWijjfHlW: ^ RtT: 

fqiilHNUt iTgniT: 


jnuiiqmr^ 

Subsequently, the learned person should 
wash his feet with clay and water. He 
should then do acamana thrice with pure 
water. He should sprinkle the water on the 
feet and head. The organs should be then 
touched by doing achmana thrice. He 
should touch the nose with the thumb and 
index finger. He should touch the navel 
with the thumb and little finger. The heart 
should be touched by the palm. Then the 
head should be touched with all the fingers, 
then the arms. The Brahmana should then 
do Pranayama thrice in the proper method, 
should sit facing east in concentration with 
kus'a in the hands and giving up any laxity. 

CRT: fulfil; ^dPTIcKH,! 

^ frgtgcTi i 11 


r: T^cT:! 




■ Wf?: ^ VTlfqchillcioii 


firar qui^'&u? Mc;icq<H,l 

VKISiJRl’dH sqR ct^RTTO^:ll.i?ll 

^ctni 

■51?rW:ftWcnycT WT: 

Japayajna should be then performed with 
reciting Vedamata Gayatri. The offering of 



256 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


japa is made three ways. I will tell its kinds 
and request you to listen. Japa is of three 
kinds i.e., Vacika, Upamsu and Manasa. 
Out of these japas, upamsu is better than 
vacika and the manasa japa is the best. Its 
characteristics are now being told. The 
person engaged in japa when he pronouns 
the words with a clear echo of evei-y letter 
in low, high and equal tone, it is called the 
vacika japa. Similarly, he who pronouns the 
hymns slowly by moving his lips up and 
down slightly and himself listens to or 
understands the hymn, this japa is called 
Upamsu. Every letter, pada and word 
meaning of the group of hymns which is 
taken in concentration is called manasa 
japa. The god who is pleased with the 
reciting of japa as a daily exercise, provides 
with the pleasure of emancipation and 
substantial consumption. The demi-god 
monster, devils etc. and the demon head and 
demon tail that even viciate the sun etc., 
gods, do not dare to go near him and flee 
from there. 

f^Pidqii 

The Brahmana should recite the Gayatr! 
hymn by doing concentration on the 
meaning of Gayatr! after a bathe till the 
fading stars leave in the sky by giving up 
laxity. The Brahmana who does generally 
one hundred times, maximum one thousand 
tunes and at least ten times the Gayatr! japa 
daily, seldom falls a prey to the sins. 


fgdWljqrit :\\ 6 ^\\ 

ETTHdW !!rT: yqjWRH 

^3;inq; fdHMHl'ilHlPcJdqJfll*? ^11 
ijiiSg4-d 

^ ^ !RTr 

f^rfinr ^ 

w Win I ^ 11 

He should recite Om udutyam 

jatavedasam .and Om Taccaksurdeva 

hitam etc., hymns by lifting his hands up 
and offering a palmful of flowers to god 
Sun. Then a Pradaksina of the sun and 
salute to him should be done. The scholar 
should then do tarpana of gods with 
devaflrtha (by fingers), their assistants, Rs 
is, their attendants, Pitrs and their attendants 
daily. He should then wring the clothes used 
for the bath and do acamana. He should 
then sit on Kus'asana and according to the 
method of Brahmayajna do Brahmyajna by 
facing the east. Seasmum seed, flower and 
water should be then taken in arghya, it 
should be lifted up to the height of one's 
forehead, arghya should be given to sun 

god by reciting Hansah sucisat.hymn. 

Then Namaskara should be made to the 
water god and returned home. There he 
should worship god Visnu with Purus 
asukta. Then Balivaisvadeva karma should 
be performed. 

^ ij?)l 

^ ■Rgqii 





CHAPTER 58 


257 


f ^Tgf?r i 

ftcR; ^ ^ll'?S,ll 

3T^I^ ^ cf^ gTHRTt? Si'jTFlfrl: I 


He should then wait for atithi (guest) at 
the door to the time the cow is railched. In 
case, several guests have come, the first 
who is seen first should be honoured. The 
three fires i.e., Daksina, Garhapatya and 
Ahavanlya are pleased when the guest is 
warmly greeted by duly standing from the 
seat. God Indra becomes happy when asana 
is given, Prtaganas are pleased by washing 
the feet of the guest. Hence, the couple 
should do worship of atithi. 


^ TrfgTPTTf^ f^ujq«Ir4 

iTTOr f?#: JraRrr:ll<?'?ll 

3tc|Vil'i)c| c^idoti tc)4RIMM<*U<*qjl^o oil 

^VcldcIH ^ 

^ ^11 
^•dirUdl: *qi<(v^ W3Tfqt^TfTRftri 
«<icd«3«s,itnd: ^ojfld ^ 


Subsequently, the devotee person should 
concentrate on god Visnu by duly 
worshipping god Visnu. He should then 
give alms to the recluse, bachelor and the 
sage. All types of food cooked should be 
partly shared with the recluse through 
gradual collection per day. If a beggar has 
come even before doing Balivaisvadeva, he 
should be given alms as this donation acts 
as a staircase to heaven. By taking a part 
from Balivaisvadeva it should be given to 


the beggar. That beggar can remove the 
defect that arises due to the omission of 
Balivaisvadeva. The married man should 
then offer food to the married women, 
virgins, ailing persons, children and the old 
persons and the residual should be taken by 
him. 


gifq ^ fqtmrhR: I 

3Rt ^ RI^HRRTcfRTII^o^ll 

Tj^ muiigdl: yq-^lui gsrai 

angrtr ^ydiPqei 

M: PraRd:i 

q35j)?T tldldfd(yq4i)c(ll^o^|| 
wi yidii'didldmvH 
RIRTTRl'iri 1^: 1 1 tall 


He should sit either facing east or north, 
remain silent or speak very little. Before 
food, he should do Pranagnihotra five times 
with the hymns depicting five Prana-vayus 
i.e., Orh pranaya svaha, Om apanaya svaha, 
Orh vyanaya svaha, Oifi udanaya svaha, Orii 
samanya svaha. He should then start taking 
that food. He should pray to Ista god after 
hands and mouth duly cleaned gargle made 
and by touching his belly. He should then 
pass sometime in the study of History and 
Purana. When the evening comes, he should 
go to the bank of a river or a pond and do 
sandhya there. Then havana should be 
performed at night and take supper after 
entertaining the Athithi. The Brahmana 
should only take food twice i.e., in the 
morning and evening. They should not take 
anything in between the prescribed time. As 
Agnihotra is performed in morning and 



258 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


evening, two times food is prescribed. 

M^HcfPyi «RTRfRpr ^ %l 

PvitdHisstmii<^y:ii^o^ii 
f w^it WPWSR rEr%ci;i 
stsaufTOami^ 

The scholar Brahmana should besides it, 
teach his students but the time prohibited 
for study should be abandoned. He should 
abandon the time restricted for study in 
ancient Puranas and as explained in Smrti. 
He should not teach his students in 
MahanavamI (Asvina sukla navami) and 
DvadasI tithi, BharanI Naksatra and Aksaya 
Trtiya. He should not study on seventh day 
of Magha month, while walking along the 
road and bathing by massage. 

TTl^ 11 ^ n 11 

TitTTPr -JT: feJlTmti 

RcpqmPiPrfcW: 

M^^WKfckiVT^ ?JtgTrr^ ij#l 

^ «ng?iT ^ ^nPr wriin^i 

q<Pyf5Rl«rr:l 

■^T dWIA^PtdhlM'lPl W WTTMI^^'kll 
Tl^ % f^: W g; 

Wiyd; T?iP?gTRPlTif^: I 

«yHI4ri‘lfd '55tT:ll^^mi 
^ndtPy^Mtuij ■"jftsRmf ^ 
3i^tr«rr?Tf sKTRi: I m <i n 


The couple who wishes their interest, 
should give donations with due process. He 
should give gold, cow and land as donation. 


The best Brahmana who gives the above- 
said things as donation to the Brahmana, is 
absolved from all sins and receives honour 
in the heaven. The couple who performs 
s'raddha with good conduct, holy and 
obeisant aptitudes attains to Brahmaloka. 
He receives progress in his family with the 
grace of god Nrsimha. He attains 
emancipation with god Brahma. O 
Brahmana, thus I have described in brief the 
Sanatana religion. The person who observes 
duly the religion attains emancipation and 
receives the kind shelter of Sri Hari. 

Thus here ends the fifty-eighth chapter on Duties 
of the Householders in Nrsimha Purana 
♦ ♦♦ 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 59 

About the duties of Vanaprastha. 

3?w: Tit jrai^^rrfir 

siiii4i4 gjszpTRftgigcfii^ii 

Sri Harlta, the hermit said- O learned 
persons, I will now tell you the 
characteristics of Vanaprastha and the best 
method to observe it. Please listen to that 
religion being told by me now. 

T7feRpncTR:i 

wrraf WTzi 

'jidicKc^mtHdui Tnc|Jii:ih^rfui 

W8i;ii'dii 

^ Cv v9 ^ 

GlchlH ipt: 

TI^ gi 31 v 41<4I'RI«I^ ^ Mtleb^ddimi 
<*l<rii^d cI8IT^I 

arerar 



CHAPTER 60 


259 


When the man in martial life observes 
that he is till then blessed with sons and 
grandsons, his hair is turning grey, then he 
should assign the liability of his wife to the 
sons and should move to the forest in the 
company of his students. He should develop 
matted hair, apparels made of tree barks, 
nails and hair to be kept in their natural 
growth and should do havana in fire in 
pursuance of the prescribed rules for the 
same. Such a learned person should eat 
either leafy vegetables or the nivara that 
grows naturally from the earth or fruits, 
roots, tubers etc. He should take a bath 
thrice a day i.e., morning, noon and evening 
and perform hard penance. Subsequently, 
he should hold Paraka etc., fast and take 
food after a fortnight and a month. If it is 
not possible, he should eat once at the 
fourth or eighth quarter of a complete day 
and night. Otherwise, food should be taken 
on sixth day or only air i.e., breathing 
should be considered sufficient for living. 


tftqRTWm tTTTO;l 

II 

trot f| 

RiUcWTJTMI H tR: TT^ITR; 


Traif^fgmTr: W^?^:ii^oii 
: 11 q 11 


He should sit in the middle of a blazing 
fire from five directions in the summer, live 


in the open during the rainy season and 
stand in the river half immersed. Thus, by 
making the heart all sacrosanct through 
suffering for the pre-deeds, keeping fire in 
the heart through intuition, should move 
towards the north. He then concentrates on 
Brahma, beyond the physical senses, keeps 
sheer silence and on death attains to great 
reception in the abode of Brahma. The 
Brahmana who does penance by meditation 
with sattva properties in Vanaprastha, 
definitely attains to the abode of god Visnu 
by making him free from all sins and 
keeping his heart in all peace. 

Thus here ends the fifty-ninth chapter on Duties 
of the Vanaprastha's in Nrsimha Purana 





CHAPTER 60 
An account of ascetic 
ei<)n 3^rar 

Tit cTW ciJyRhfHM: I 

Tj^sirn^m f^;iRii 

f^st ^N^ij^Jsr 

cfr^T lJH'j^H-y4<iyiriJ^||^|| 

^ -^hO’ yMiurijTiyifii orri 

3tf5^ Wc^rf? y^|W4 II 

-g^ 

f5R[ut 4 imm4*h,i 

^3f?nT(t ^ str^i 

O Cs •N' 

tr^ulcl 5 l|r;|R|rl^||'all 

Sri Harita, the hermit said- I will now 





260 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


tell you the best righteousness of a recluse, 
observing which the recluse becomes free 
from all worldly bondage. The Brahmana 
should live in Vanaprastha in the aforesaid 
manner, remove all sins from the heart by 
virtue of hard penance, accept reclusion in 
pursuance of the prescribed rules and enter 
into this fourth stage of his life cycle. He 
should first donate divine sTaddha material 
for his Pitrs, hermits and gods, offering 
either Vaisvanara or Prajapatya should be 
performed, recite hymns and after 
observing reclusion by having fire in heart 
with intuition, should move from that place. 
He should give up attachment for his sons 
etc., from that day and hope for any 
material pleasure .should also be given up 
from the heart. He should give a palm full 
of water to the earth on assumption that all 
creatures on earth should live fearlessly. A 
tridanda made of bamboo should be held. 
Its epidermis or external skin should be 
smooth and beautiful, the nodes should be 
at equal intervals, and it should be wrapped 
up to four fingers through the string made 
of a cows hair. This stick should be with 
three nodes and it should be held after duly 
washing it with water. The person who 
knows the method should hold it in the right 
hand after reciting the hymns. 

PpiP trw JtlcKtirt 

smtR: ntwTPnRRT 





Ridi^chiA fefmn 


A kaupina (under garment), bed-sheet, 
quilt and sandal should be with that recluse 
and there should be no other items with 
him. These are considered to be the marks 
of a recluse. After holding these things with 
observing the procedure prescribed therefor, 
he should visit a holy place, take a bath and 
do acamana. He should salute god sun with 
tarpana duly reciting the sun hymns even in 
the wet clothes. He should then sit facing 
the east, observe silence, exercise three 
Pranayama i.e., Kumbhaka, Recaka and 
Puraka and concentrate on supreme Brahma 
by reciting Gayatrl according to his 
capacity. He should go for alms in order to 
feed himself and protect his body. The 
recluse should visit at the doors of 
Brahmana for alms in the evening. 

^ RRin? ■^Mti I 11 


ctiRurii 

•sS S3 

(mriiVII4t4 d'oM’h '4rid; :I 

'dfW: iuH<4i!rct)ir^q xr';| 

nS S 3 

xrfrlf^rd 


R rtrUR -q^ ^ W ^1 

fRHRiqwt Trfq 


&dldHKIdifr ^ftuti 
drSrrut ^ feR?dll^^ll 



CHAPTER 61 


261 



^fetrtrrsszmiMi^oii 


The food to the extent necessary for one 
time feeding only, should be asked for in 
alms. On return to his cottage from the 
alms, he should sprinkle water on the alms- 
pot and do acamana, a part of it should be 
offered to god sun, keep in bowl made of 
leaf or open leaf, the recluse should eat 
silently. A recluse should avoid from using 
the leaves of Banyan, Pipala, Jalakumbhl 
and Tinduka. After having finished the 
food, he should wash his hands and mouth, 
do acamana, restrain the breathing of air 
and salute god Sun in this posture. The 
leisufe time after the daily chores should 
be utilised in Japa meditation and study of 
History etc. The recluse eating in a bronze 
bowl are called Palas'a. If the recluse holds a 
bronze bowl, he is considered as a man in 
martial stage as a couple has also the metal 
bowl for food. Such a recluse bears and is 
attributed for all evils. A recluse can utilise 
a wooden or clay pot in which he once has 
taken food for next time after due cleaning. 
His pot seldom viciates like the vessels used 
for offerings. He should spend the night in 
temples after observing the evening rules 
within appropriate time. He should focus on 
god Narayana in his lotus heart. The recluse 
who observes all these rules strictly, attains 
to that supreme position from where he 
seldom comes back. 


Thus here ends the sixtieth chapter on 
descriptions of in Nrsimha Purana 


5|SS|«SlS 



CHAPTER 61 


261 


CHAPTER 61 

The essence of Yoga 

?TfnT 3^ 

■JRT: wrfwff f lin^^ fg3n3^:ll^ll 


Sri Harlta, the hermit said- O hermits, I 
have told you about the features of the four 
varnas and the four stages (asramas) with 
the religion they should observe and which 
is capable to lead to emancipation and 
heaven all varnas of people. I will now 
describe in brief the essence of Yoga, 
exercising by which the people desirous of 
salvation attain it even in this veiy life. 

ciracbifr 

yiuiiyiilH grR 


g wnwii 




StRRrtWtnsl ' 


it ^T: ftsRT:l 

^5F*lwtci fef^l PS 11 


^ ■RRra^ll<ill 

The person expert in the observance of 
Yoga is absolved from all sins. It is 
therefore suggested that one should do 
concentration by Yoga daily and when one 
gets free from the daily activities. He 
should first control speech through 



262 


NARASIMHA PURAIVAIVI 


Pranayama, sensory organs through 
Pratyahara and the capricious mind through 
Dharana. When it is performed, he should 
concentrate on the absolute cause for all, in 
the form of the pleasure of knowledge, an 
clement most minute, the base of earth i.e., 
god Acyuta. At a solitary place and all 
alone one should imagine god in the form of 
soul, duly seated on a lotus and lowing like 
a melted god. He should develop an 
assumption that it is he who knows the 
aptitudes of all hearts and the breathing 
(Prana) and worth knowing to all creatures. 
Such concentration should be made till one 
avails the pleasure of self realization. The 
Srauta and Smarta deeds should be followed 
then properly. 

iiyiVcii wi 

cTWcT ^ II 

TT^ felT ^ R^l I ? O 11 

^ R^nut RfR:! 
rtfe W I niI 

felRTRT^ tPR^ ?ir^ui) -RrRtRRT: I 

R ^cIRRMpIrI illctrtlivi RT RcPi;i 

RRT gnTf?fqfgRTR9T:l 

R^XlRT fft'JtyiSI RiJ-tRRi ■RRraRrll^'iJII 

As the horses are useless without a 
chariot and a chariot is of no use without 
horses, so the penance of an ascetic and 
axiom of learning too are correlated. As the 
foodstuff becomes delicious when sugar is 
added and the sugar too appears tasty when 
mixed with the food stuffs, so the penance 
and learning both become a panacea to the 
worldly ailments when both are integrated. 


As the bird can fly when both wings are 
used, so knowledge and deeds jointly 
become the cause for attainment of 
Sanatana Brahma. The Brahmana, expert at 
combining his learning and penance, can 
only abandon the physical bondages and 
become free. Unless the living organism 
attains the supreme position by moving 
through the route of devayana, living body 
cannot be perished. O Brahmanas, thus I 
have described the entire sanatana religion 
of all stages (asramas) with due 
classification of varnas and asramas. 

Rici5u^ij 

MRim RgfR ■WHKrtdH.I • 11 

^ ^ snf ■R RlfR RTRT Rf^l I 11 

■ftaRRR f f I 

5 RtRRj RIR^R^ RSIT fRI I ?V9j I 

RfR^RTT fetrar 
aPRRT % Trei: Ri# 

RtR 3lfRfeW: I 

fRrRTlRRRTRf^l I n 11 
Rjjciu|j?R TT^ RcRIWiPm RT8TRT:l 

^ RT^ Rft Rf^lRoll 
WyliaT RRT ^ RTfW: RjJlRfRI 
clujyqf^RRRT RTfw ^11 

W f^RlRTTI 
RrRIrRRi fR?RtsR5RRT?r 

n 9 

fR?TR ^ RR^ fRRnt:IR?ll 
R;<*RfeRMlSGITR:ll^^ll 

Markandeya said- Thus, having heard 
from the mouth of the hermit, Haiita; the 



CHAPTER 62 


263 


description on the religion capable to render 
heaven and emancipation all hermits bowed 
their heads and returned to their respective 
places. Whosoever listens to this preaehing 
on religion explained by the hermit Harlta 
and tries to bring it into practical conduct, 
definitely attains to the supreme position. O 
king, the activities explained for the 
Brahmana, Ksatriya, Vaisya and Sudra 
ascertain the supreme position to them if 
followed by them according the 
classifications made. The person going 
reverse, falls down immediately. Whatever 
religions are prescribed for the respective 
varna, the man belonging to that varna 
should follow them because one's own 
religion can only give supreme success. 
Hence, barring any emergency, one should 
regularly and always follow his own 
religion. O king, the varnas and asramas are 
in equal numbers i.e., each four. The people 
who follow the proper religion prescribed 
for their varna and asrama, attain to the 
supreme position. God Nrsirhha pleases 
only when the people worship them as per 
the religion prescribed for them 
respectively. Hence, god Nrsiriaha should be 
worshipped as per the religion of the varna. 
The person who concentrates on the unborn 
Brahma, always in the form of truth, mind 
and pleasure with the exercise of Yoga 
through the force of detachment obtained as 
a result of loyalty to ones work or duty; 
attains the position of god Visnu after his 
death. 

Thus here ends the sixty-first chapter on 
descriptions of the Yoga in Nrsimha Purana 






CHAPTER 62 


263 


CHAPTER 62 

Vedic hymns on V4nu and their place 

giJikrtn^nTTnrr w grfg# 

Tl^! ^ ^ ^ii^il 

Markandeya said- O king, I have told 
you the features of the varnas and the 
as'ramas. O king, now tell me what you 
want to listen to any more? 

tcl4lcki cRg5Sj^^«t^lRII 

s9 >9 n9 >9 

cnPr 'tsaRf^r n^mHii^ii 

Sahastranlka said- O Brahmana, you 
have told that one should worship god 
Acyuta at his home after a bath daily. How 
is that worship made? O great hermit, tell 
me the hymns and the bases on which god 
Visnu is worshipped. 

^TmidSu^it s^TcT 

Tti tR PiyNitlM^rllXII 
fshilNdi ^ ^ UnlfttUlHi^l 

«fdHITSJ^#Tt -qtfTRT ?fT:limi 

3RTt5^ VfdUl'^ 

Markandeya said- Very well, I am going 
to tell the method of worship for god Visnu 
who is full of unique splendour. All hermits 
have attained emancipation by virtue of this 
worship. The persons who do havana in 
fire, have the place of god in fire. The 
learned and Yogis have the abode of god in 




264 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


their hearts. The persons of light wit 
consider god in the icon. The hermits have 
therefore told the systematic worship of god 
in fire, sun, heart, altar and in icon. God is 
omnipresent and his worship in altar and 
icons is therefore the best. 

tTW ycSudfftItct 'Wfti'g^ 

3 ^ ^ jliftnUl'DruC T?tT:l 

■ST: ^SJTtRPT ^ rni,ill 



fidl'y’qissirt d^iidtia 


tl5gzl^«4: ydidod: tj^rcjn55rPpftw];ii?oii 
'FIR ^iduti cttditd ^1 

-o 

il^iiMctldhUiUti rTll^^ll 

ytMciH WtT w 

IRRIT ^ ^ cMI I ^ ? 11 

■cidc^v^yr fifafT Mdlyuiipi 

R5RIISRR fPEik frwtffnr 
■hr "cT 
fc|UUiyiit4lfeniRlfd 

We now tell the hymn for the worship. 
The Purusasukta as existed in 
Rudrastadhyayl in the Sukla Yajurveda, 
should be recited for the pleasure of god Vis 
nu. The Anustup rhyme in Purusasukta 
envisages - "God Visnu, the supreme Purus 
a, cause for the worlds origin is Devata, 
Narayana is Rsi and its Viniyoga is in their 
worship. The person who offers flowers and 
water to god with reciting Purusasukta, the 
entire living and dead universe is 
worshipped by him this way. The first hymn 
of Purusasukta should be recited for 
summation of god. The seat should be 


offered with reciting the second hymn and 
padya arpana should be done with reciting 
the third hymn. Arghya with the fourth and 
acamaniya with the fifth hymn should be 
offered. A bath with the sixth and apparel 
with the seventh hymn should be offered. 
The sacrificial thread with eighth and 
fragrance through ninth hymn. Flowers 
should be offered with the tenth and dhQpa 
with the eleventh hymn should be offered. 
Dipaka with the twelfth and Naivedya, fruit, 
donation etc., other of homage materials 
should be offered with reciting the 
thirteenth hymn. A psalm should be offered 
with reciting the fourteenth hymn and 
pradaksina should be made with reciting the 
fifteenth hymn. Visarjana should finally be 
made with reciting the sixteenth hymn. The 
residual activities should be performed after 
worship as explained before. He should 
offer a bath, apparel, Naivedya and 
acamaniya etc., to the god. The person so 
worshipping the supreme soul attains the 
god axiom within six months. If worshipped 
same way up to one year, the devotee 
attains to the emancipation. 

•o 

31^ Ri^r ^ 

Cs 




HHim: Tr(feTTOTRfRf^:l 


%<1dl 

■?nt f^tUMitcti44dVI|-T4sb:ll^^ll 
^lfddfdtuidf4:l 



CHAPTER 63 


265 


IT 

y-yirETr^ddfe^HClIUll 
3^ '*'^3 cTt^w- 

TlrTTI 

•O ' -o 

XTT^ TTTnir 

v3 

fgj^ ^ ^trT; 11 ^ 11 

The scholars worship god Visnu by 
offering oblation (Ahuti) into the fire, 
flower into the water, meditation in the 
heart and by japa to the orbit of Sun god. 
The devotees worship god by concentration 
on Sun orbit as god Visnu with conch, 
discus and gada in his hands. One should 
always concentrate on god Narayana seated 
in the middle of the sun orbit, who is 
adorned with Keyura, crocodile form 
kundala, crown, gaidand etc., ornaments, 
who is seated on the lotus with conch, 
discus in his hands and whose body is 
radiating like gold. The man who merely 

recites Dheyah sada.etc., sQkta by 

concentrating on god Visnu his mind 
accesses to the abode of Visnu by so 
pleasing god Visnu. The leaves, flowers, 
fruits and water are available without any 
price and god Purana Purusa merely is 
pleased with the devotion; still why is the 
man to do any efforts for the emancipation 
with the grace of god viz.. Why to the 
people not think for their emancipation? 

3T^ fer gjTi f^wrsiT 

'<9 v9 Cx 


1o 11 



f4^fecPtts!Trar:ii^?ii 


O king, I have thus told you the manner 


of god Visnu's worship. If you are desirous 
of the position of Visnu, worship always 
god Visnu with this method. 

Thus, here ends the sixty-second chapter on 
worship of Visnu in Nrsimha Purana 





CHAPTER 63 


265 


CHAPTER 63 


Indra's rescue from the female sex 

tiTqt ^;l 

feoTt^gif^^cT^ I ?l I 

31^ fIriiRT WT • 

cnnirR^flcr I ^ 11 

Sahastranika said- O BrShmana, you 
have this time told the right method 
prescribed by the Vedas for the worship of 
god Vispu but only the people who know 
the Vedas can worship god Madhusudana 
by observing this method and it is not 
possible for others to observe it. Hence, tell 
me any other method which is useful for all. 

tN-reiJtrfr w: tit:i 

3ib-PThTRlitUTRTI 

3RHT«Tf^ trlcTt cT^mTTc^imil 
■f% cR^ lagf^W: f% cTRT 
aij-m'lHKI'MUllilfd -q^: 11 ^ 11 

^ TF? vjiMatg RRlf^rf: I 

R4gRfcif^4«RTt ntujjRR'j^jRn^^ntfiivsii 

Markandeya said- A man should 




266 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


worship god Nrsiriiha daily with fragrance, 
flowers etc., materials and recite the 
eighteen-letter hymn. O king this eighteen- 
letter hymn removes all sins, renders the 
fruits of all offerings, peace giver and all 
benevolent. It is- "Oih Narao Narayana." He 
should offer fragrance etc., all materials 
with reciting this hymn. God Visnu are 
pleased immediately when worshipped with 
reciting this hymn. What is the need for a 
man to observe several other hymns and 
fasts. The hymn - Orh Namo Narayana only 
once fulfil all desires. The person who 
recites this hymn with sheer concentration, 
attains the position of god Visnu after 
complete freedom from the evils. 

tRTEU farfSRT ^1 

yiMifd tmrg ^ ii 

W TFi!^ TtMrsqsnk:! 

O king, the worship of god Visnu with 
peace in mind is the fruit for all pilgrimages 
and the offerings. It is more important than 
all holy places. You should, therefore, 
worship god on icon and give donation to 
the learned Brahmanas. O king, the 
devotees attain that abode of Visnu, full of 
splendour which is desired by the people 
desirous of emancipation. O king, Indra got 
the complexion of a woman due to the curse 
thundered out by the hermit, Trnabindu as 
he has done something wrong and infringed 
the I'ule in ancient period. He had got 
freedom from the vicious impact of the 


curse by reciting this eighteen-letter hymn. 

mm 

Sahastranika said- O Brahmana, kindly 
highlight the episode that made Indra free 
from the evil and curse. What act had he 
committed and due to what reason did he 
get the feminine body. Please, tell 
everything in detail. 

mm 

Sri Markandeya said- O king, this 
episode is full of romance and surprise. The 
persons who either read or listen to it, are 
motivated to the worship of god Visnu. 

fgrmlficTqpraRT 

jm T ^ I 11 

TFHreq HTT f^q'qq ^THTt 

•o 

■firaiR qfTf%Riq[^ii^m 
^Ttqrq' rnr: q#r- 
f| trqt 

Tq ^TTTTSRqtR'qq 



CHAPTER 63 


267 


Long long ago, the luxury of the heaven 
once became the reason for detachment 
from the exterior objects for Indra. He 
became reluctant to the stately affairs and 
enjoyments. He began to think - "It is 
definite that the men of detached heart have 
no importance for the kingdom of heaven. 
Enjoyment is only an essence and there is 
nothing left after it. The hermits therefore, 
always give their mind to the emancipation 
instead of enjoyments. The people persuade 
penance with an ultimate motive to obtain 
enjoyment and the penance is perished 
when its fruit is enjoyed. The people who 
have abandoned the luxuries through their 
control, such desirous of emancipation 
neither require any penance nor Yoga. 
Having considered all this aspects, god 
Indra rode in an aircraft with jingling bells 
at KailSsa mountain for the worship of god 
Sankara. Only a desire for emancipation 
existed in his mind at that time. 


TT TT^ qMRRMId; TTf 

IU11 


I ^ 11 

chiqi^-Mlf^dqfd4 ^ ddHiH,' 

^ m WloyqxrirM ^ 




tnrt 

dllqiJrli ^11 

^ w mm 

Miftr 

ilRrd'j'il fqqRklcbmRd- 
^TfiT^§4fd<R<lRl%IR^II 
^rafir ri^hI 41 
■ql^sfq fl; d-iltuiqRd 

f% qiR whHiftfq gjTiRnR^ii 

3l<*r4uTl qpqRiciRjdlV^ 

Indra one day came to the bank of 
Manasarovara while living in Kailasa 
walking. He saw there Citrasena, the darling 
of demi-god Kubera. She was worshipping 
the feet of Parvatl. She appeared as the flag 
of the great chariot of sex god. The radiance 
of her body was like the Jambunada species 
of gold. Her eyes were enchanting and of 
large size and spread to the length of the 
ears. Her fascinating organs were shining 
inside the thin woven saree as if the 
moonlight is appearing from a dense fog. 
Having a glimpse with his thousand eyes at 
the body of that lady, Indra became 
sensuous. He did not return to his cottage 
located at some distance from there and 
stood there in the state of over-excitement. 
He began to think - "To have birth in an 
aristocratic family is appreciable, again if 
the body is all beautiful and to have wealth 
is creation altogether. After all this, to 
become the king of wealth (Kubera) is only 
possible as a consequence of great deeds. I 




268 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


have obtained the realm of this entire 
heaven; yet to enjoy myself is not written in 
my destiny. How great a fool am I that I 
have given up the pleasure of heaven and 
come down here with a desire of 
emancipation? The pleasure of 
emancipation can be lured by the enjoyment 
of stately affairs but emancipation cannot 
be the cause for the gain of the state. Why 
will one go to cultivate the forest by leaving 
behind his standing crop? The persons 
suffering from the worldly pains and pricks, 
who have no pov/er to do something 
particular, those are lazy, unfortunate and 
the idiots desire for the emancipation. 

WRIT ulfgcmdl 

s 9 

WTR R h 11 

■RhMITTlS^ 

ch|iTlfdifiTRr^^i^TT^PT:l 

^ ^TTR ^ 

•#5r ITTR 

^ fpnfiTIRVaii 

Indulging his mind in all these' topics, 
god Indra was badly enchanted by the 
complexion of Citrasena, the wife of the 
wealth god. Suffering from all mental 
pricks and having lost courage, he began to 
summon the sex god. As he was burnt into 
ashes by lord Sankara long ago, that 
capricious god came slowly and with fear. It 
is true that prognosticated. The sex god 
appeared at last and said- "O master, tell 


me what good I should do for you. Who is 
your enemy at present? Tell me 
immediately and I will throw him into 
adversity." 

cTW 

s 3 ' 

n'iluu ncM<h ndiMl 

n 9 

gpTSTfgpJT 11 ? 11 
■?^i^i3Rfcgwn^i 

wife 

^cbrufeTii Pift'di^Pit 

■5IT-Rtipifeg Wa feriR I 

IfdThH^TJTddit^HIT^i 

PfWjgjnrt fe^ll^oil 

Indra was pleased to listen to this 
statement from the sex god. He said 
laughingly - "O Kamadeva, you had made 
god Sankara of half body; however, his 
anger had turned you to Ahanga (body less). 
Then, tell me who is another in this world to 
bear and sustain the injury of your arrow? 
You should fill the heart of lady a with 
large eyes and fascinating body with love 
for me. See that at present, she is in 
meditation in the worship of goddess 
Parvatl. 

WTTTTTR: mPimI’^H 
WTT 



CHAPTER 63 


269 


As Indra was of nature to give priority to 
his work, the god of sex complied with his 
order immediately. He put an arrow on his 
bow made of flower and recited the 
enchanting hymn. It shot at the lady and she 
was disturbed. Her body suddenly got 
excited and she began to smile at Indra. 
Who is in the world to endure the wave of 
excitement? 

chfi)? Chi'll ^ yrWTjT:ll^ ? II 
ycRuPy WIT 

yiiwgciN 

JTTOT ^ jflfVcHurTT^TWI 
gn^ g ddiRd qrar 

^ fdtdPn chlHtisM:ll?mi 

Having seen her looking, Indra said- O 
lady of capricious eyes, who are you? Your 
enchant a persons mind. Tell me who is 
your husband? Her body began thrilling 
with sensuality on this enquiry of Indra. She 
was excited and replied in sensual anxiety - 
"O god, I am the wife of wealth god 
Kubera. I had come to worship goddess 
Parvati. Tell me your mission. Who are 
you? Your complexion is not any way less 
pretty then the sex god himself 

TIT ^ RT 


f^3T 'jflferwpTv't +ci4- 

TH?T 1TR T^ncfl I ^ ^ 11 


Indra said- "O darling, I am Indra, the 
king of heaven. Come to me, accept me and 
enjoy courtship with me for a long term. 
See that both my life and the huge state of 
heaven are redundant without you. 

PmRhl 6 ^ WHfh'dIdi 
^jFTPT #51 ^ fl dlcFTM: 


yidi ddl 

fdPldlHI^t'hlRil^ll^.ill 

^tV'^4hdl<PlPll 


-zf -irm ggrn: 

■■eiijpJPify; W’T;ii?<?li 
<t)diyrih<<^^disa: 

W Picinsi:i 

«^Htifd*j>ii 

mi^Hl(cH^Hlih'Hlt2dH,ll'«o 11 


On this sweet reception from Indra, she 
lost heart and came to Indra on her aircraft 
immediately. She then embraced Indra. 
Indra took her to most secret cave of 
Mandaracala mountain, which was 
forbidden to gods and monsters both. That 
cave was glowing with the light of excellent 
gems. It was surprising enough to see that 
Indra reluctant to the kingdom of gods and 
enjoying courtship with that demi-godess 
lady. He made ready a flower bed 
immediately for Citrasena. Indra was 


270 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


satisfied very much in courtship with 
Citrasena as he was most skilled in sexual 
art. He felt the embrace and pleasure of 
courtship with others wives more than the 
pleasure of emancipation. 






^ .Murau4 ^ ^ TO 

gjRTT 

^sfrr 


When Indra was in the cave of 
Mandaracala, her maids returned to Kubera. 
They were unknown to such an evilsome act 
and badly frightened. They reported with 
thrilling words - O the king of demi-gods, 
listen to us. Your wife was caught by a 
strange man, made her to ride on an aircraft 
and that thief has gone somewhere. He was 
looking here and there while on the aircraft. 

^ fr^rcsnsT sRtiiRrat 

^jTTtnrotfSpTFR’; I 
^ 11^ 11 



^ TRTR 

RTPzn^ fertFr 

Kubera got black in the face when he 


heard such a thing which was intolerable as 
poison. His body became as a tree burnt by 
the fire. He could not blutter even a single 
word at that time. In the meantime, Kant 
hakubja, the minister to Kubera came to 
console his master when he heard about it 
from the maids who were gone with 
Citrasena. On his arrival, Kubera looked at 
him, took a long sigh, controlled his 
disposition and said with agony. His body 
was shivering that time. 

rtdkT sr 

5 TtsrjRhrtTtfin 

•o 

^ I^ 11 

^irasRPi;) 

fg^nfir wifR T ^ 

tnrtrarttflftr ^ ^-gcTRT^i 11 

TiiviRsiRrtTifiT ^ 

rt iRifr T 

T cTrtnftcT «Ri ^ : I i 11 

He said- "Youth is meanful when it can 
enjoy the lady, wealth is meaningful which 
can be utilised by the near and dear ones, 
life is successful only when higher deeds 
are performed, sovereignty is that 
meaningful in which the root of fight and 
quarrel are destroyed. My huge money, this 
huge state of Guhyakas and even my life is 
worth nothing. Nobody knows so far this 
humiliation thundered on me. Hence, I will 
burn my body instantly in fire. The rumour 
of the matter will do no harm if I die 
immediately. Alas, she had gone to worship 
goddess Parvatl at the bank of 




CHAPTER 63 


271 


Manasarovara. That place is near from here, 
I was alive but someone still has abducted 
her. We do not know who he is? I 
understand, that wicked person has no fear 
of his death. 

qisr T rnftrl 

Tj^ '5TT iftn ^ 

fT?TTtr^TJTTfq TJlTt ^ Tltsfiri 

3r^«h^(: Tlf^ TT^: 

qnr I m o 11 

^rraj Rfw 

^ ^T^RFin 

T -JivMpa yltrci; 

qrm m ? 11 

^jcT chi4 ■J?) 

<S5i<rc(ii^ fccuM f%H^I 

Having heard this, the minister Kant 
hakubja said- "O king, it is not good for 
you to abandon the body for the pain of 
separation from the wife. The monster 
Ravana had abducted the wife of god Rama 
in ancient period but he did not commit 
self-suicide. You have already several 
wives here, then why are you so anxious for 
her? O king, give up agony, have courage 
and bring your mind to valour. The saints 
do not knot several topics and seldom weep. 
They tolerate the humiliation indirectly 
inflicted by others. O god of wealth, the 
greatmen show practical accomplishment 
when the appropriate time arrives. You 


have a number of assistants, then there is no 
reason of fear. Your younger brother Vibhis 
ana himself is presently assisting you. 

-dciin 

^rwn^T f4yo^d1fdi 
3RRT ^ f^rr: 

fJcTlWTT I m ? 11 

T 4iMt*,A4 TOT^- 

TrrafTf^'tRt%TTHqtiT:i 

Kubera said- Vibhisana is still against to 
me. He does not abandon the family protest 
against me. It is a fact that the wicked 
seldom please if someone does any good for 
them. They remain as hard as the 
thunderbolt of Indra. It is seen that sanguine 
relations never please with virtues, 
assistance or friendship too. 

ggra- TT ^ cbUd^odl 

rci4lcRi w SRlfBiqraim'iii 

TRWt ^ ^ f^w- 

guiiPiiim^II 

dWIrUMMlTtJ gqrfiRrar 

qr^ rT ^TpT fg^Ttqnnqi 

4c|ciig41iiifjMidfci-d4lfqql 

^ 1 m ^ 11 

Kanthakubja replied - "O wealth god, 
you are right the blood relations definitely 
quarrel with each other when protested but 
they cannot see them defeated among the 
public. The family members cannot tolerate 
the insults inflicted by others. As the warm 
water due to radiation does not burn the 
plants grown in it, the family members 




272 


NARASIMHA PURAiyAM 


insulted by others do not torture their 
relations. You should therefore, 
immediately visit VibhTsana. The people 
who eat the bread earned by their valour, do 
not oppose their relations. 

^jrrrrrtTr^j 
rttrt qi'dd 

cTTf ^ rf 

y-didMUhl W WTIIh'?ll 

Having heard these facts al)OUt the 
nature of sanguines, Kubera immediately 
went to VibhTsana. VibhTsana, the king of 
Latika, gave a warm reception when he 
heard of Kubera's arrival. When he saw his 
brother in pain, he became anxious and 
said. 

^ W?T 1% ^ TT^ 

^qryisi cby-umm 

VibhTsana said- "O king of demi-gods, 
why are you in so much pain? What pain 
are you bearing? Tell me immediately. I 
will definitely remove that pain. Kubera 
then expressed his pain in solitude. 

39fT^r 

TJ^ tg; WT ftf^cTT ^11 

W: ^TRIT ^ 

911 

«|U|l4 yidRlwtlRt 3RTW ^ gvrWTTTI 

Kubera said- O brother, I am not seeing 
Citrasena, my wife for some days. It is not 
known whether she is abducted or eloped or 


any enemy has killed her. I am in severe 
pain for the separation of her. I will commit 
suicide if she is not searched. 

atuRjutifit 

W. TO tTI 

^ ■JJT fg^^rrfTORcT: 11 ^ H11 
^ rT ^ ^cfT HH*1 R<fd Rydii 
Tit ^ ^Rlf^ 

VibhTsana said- "Brother, I will bring 
back your wife wherever she is. Who has 
head to steal even a straw from us this 
time?" He then called NadTjahgha, a 
monstress expert at illusionary art and told 
her - "Citrasena, the wife of Kubera, has 
been abducted from the bank of 
Manasarovara. Go and search the palaces of 
Indra etc., Lokapalas and see if she is there. 

Ml ftwwfl ^ fJegr TOITO gj;) 

TOT tjtiyi ^niT yi+yfd ^TTOT:! 

TiTOT TO ^ I ^ 11 

■qclfro^ xT ^TT'Snfir ^1 
TOmtlt &Rdrvyd4lTOIIl^<?ll 

fc^oiiM»tifij| TOpmTOTfrr ^1 
M ITTOT ^ ^ ^ RtiHrcTlH^lltaoll 

3TTftTOTcrTOF(t #TOTTOlTTOTTii;i 
cit TT MTOTOl5TOTfll\9?ll 

M: TT^TOTTOT ^c|M ^ifTO: I 
cTTO: ^ ■ctl'd:^ MTIPa^ll 

mtto MMTOTM: frofli 

3TT7T^ TO TOff ^TOmTOtTOTIltg? II 
fT^TOT TTT TT^TITTO TOl^ TTfW^I 



CHAPTER 63 


273 


O king, that monstress then went to the 
abode of heaven in search of Citrasena in 
the palace of Indra etc., gods with his 
illusoiy body. She had turned herself into a 
most beautiful lady. So pretty, as far to say 
others a stone even can melt at a look on her 
face. Indra in the meantime was in heaven 
as he was sent by Citrasena from 
Mandaracala to bring the divine flowers of 
Nandanavana. When he saw that beautiful 
lady, he at once was enchanted by her. He 
sent the gods physicians, Asvinikumaras to 
call her at his palace. Both Asvinikumaras 
stood near her and said- O beautiful lady, 
come with us. We will bring you to Indra, 
the king of gods. In reply to them she spoke 
softly- 

^ 

iTJpsr grrt4 ’bt wi 

Nadljahgha said- I can comply if Indra 
himself comes to me otherwise it is 
impossible for me. 

The twin Asvinikumaras reported the 
message given by her to Indra. 

Indra himself came there and said- "O 
beautiful lady, order me, what good should 
I do for you? I have become your slave for 
ever. Ask whatever you desire and it shall 
be with you. 

^nflTcT ^ w WBr:i 


wgiTiiT^Br[RiT^^gTiP9<iii 

The monstress said- O god, I will be 
enslaved to your if you really could give me 
as per my desire. Let me see all your wives 
as I am curious whether someone is more 
beautiful than I am or not. 

Tt cdRcSlv-d:^ 

TR TmRtJcPTIIioll 

Bf ^<4^ ^ M^ll 

Indra replied - O lady, very well, I will 
make you see all my wives. He then showed 
her the entire private palace. That lady 
said- "You have concealed something still 
from me. You have shown all wives but one 
still is with you." 

TR Bnfer : 11 d ^ 11 

RT BI ^ eht^f^Tcj-yri 

HR: TT iniT -RrI BT ^11^^ II 

^ 31% 

^ TTOfWrfR RTR ^ IRRRTII i ? 11 
R 11 11 

TTffirR ^ RRRRt R^IR^I 

Indra said- "That lady is at Mandaracala 
mountain. The place is unknown both to 
gods and monsters. I will show you her but 
don't disclose this secret to anyone." With 
these words, he took her to Mandaracala 
mountain through the sky route. As his 
aircraft was on the way, hermit Narada was 
seen. Indra was ashamed little yet he 
saluted and asked - "O great hermit, where 
will you go?" 



274 


NARASIMHA PURAI^AM 


Wlfir tIH% ^1 

4 rgl' 4 <*)R<i fyiH TI^RTRt ^II 

^ ■^Tlt fci<«fd y 4 <ll 

TT^g^ rT -^TT fjmra^qro^i I ^ 1511 

farf^ g^^irraTi 

qnR?>Pi m: ^^^•ciRRtm:ii<i<iii 

^-gchlMlfg 

^piT 4i^ig Ti^ratn,! 

f4Vira<t<i^ll^ O |( 

wrarf^ ym-yid^uiR^R^iiji^i 

The hermit blessed and said- 'Tndra, be 
happy. I am going to Manasarovara for a 
bath." He recognised Nadijahgha and asked 
her - "O Nadijahgha, tell me about the good 
being of the monsters. Is your brother 
VibhTsana in pleasure? Her face turned 
black when she was so enquired of by 
Narada. Indra himself fell in overwhelmed 
surprise and talked to himself that this lady 
has cheated me. Narada then moved 
towards Manasarovara for the bath from 
there. Indra too came to Manasarovara, near 
Trnabindu hermits cottage with an intention 
to kill her. He took a little rest here and as 
he then caught her hair to kill, hermit 
Trnabindu in the meantime, came out form 
his cottage. 

gUT -m ^11 

■qr -qf guqicqi '^^qqHi ^ 


O king, the monstress was wailing 
bitterly and saying - "Alas, I am being 
killed but nobody is defending me this 
time." 







'Jini< gTcT: ftyrdl g-aclHi 

Trnabindu, came there and stood before 
Indra. He said- "Don't kill this lady in my 
place of penance. Leave her at once." 

%HTTI 

gcin) Pi^dl 

O king, as the words of hermit 
Trnabindu were in him mouth, Indra just 
then killed her with a blow of his 
thunderbolt. The hermit annoyed by Indra, 
started at him and said- "O wicked, you 
have killed this woman in the place of my 
penance. So, I curse you to turn into a 
woman's form. 

tp- TO TRtf# %tTr Wl 

31? Wit ■frnnt'ET Ttni-qr ^ ^gqri 1 ^ 11 

Indra said- O respective hermit, I am 
Indra, the king of all gods. This was a 
wicked monstress; therefore, I have killed 
her. Please, don't curse me. 

qPlhclN 

>9 

11111^51111^ ^wiRdwPd ■TO^;! 

■qro cnnit toft 

The hermit said- There are also wicked 
ones and some saints in my place of 
penance but by virtue of my penance, they 
do not commit any murder. You have 
infringed the rules of my Tapovana, hence, 
curse on you. 

W: l4t?^^1TWI:l 
WR gil ^dl?lf^M<lsBTT:ll'?^ll 
qnfhTi % ^citinfdi 



CHAPTER 63 


275 


tTrfr ^cjTnuT: ^ dri4r^H ^wnf^di: i 
THR^ET fWT cl^ll^o o || 


^ «nqiTinfij^ wrarlt^ TTiWI:! 

clW^H •HHf^ciKlI^o ^11 


Indra, really got the body of a woman 
and returned to heaven as he had lost both 
the valour and power. He gave up attending 
the meetings of gods because of shame and 
agony. The gods too were ashamed when 
they saw Indra in feminine form. 
Subsequently, all gods went to the abode of 
Brahma in the company of Sacl, wife of 
Indra. They waited until Brahma returned 
and then requested together to Brahma. 

wiraM: •pifinT:i 


O Brahma, hermit Trnabindu is very 
furious and have no mercy. He has cursed 
and has turned Indra into the feminine form 
now. 


^ -g^ThTTef; 

g ■gw 
ERiT ggR ggglf 

^ ggni^oqii 


Brahma said- That hermit Trnabindu has 
done nothing wrong. Indra has murdered a 
woman; it is the punishment for that evil. O 
gods Indra has committed a heinous crime 
as he had abducted the wife of Kubera in 
the vagary of sensuality. Not only this, he 
has murdered a woman in the cottage of 
hermit Trnabindu. Owing to these crimes 


committed, he has now been turned into the 
feminine form. 

fjggTg Wf|^g qig I 

gigfwnrr gg ■RgfwHi^o^ii 
gjRiT spnfiRraig -gsr gr fg^i 
crt g ggr^gm: gi f?gT grt gf^ii^o\9i 
g%r?gr gd^vgt ^ggg; grglgd:i 

gr^g ggrf RcJcji g^n^rgig^i i ? o (i 11 

The gods said- "O god, Indra has done 
humiliation to Kubera, the devotee of god 
Sankara because of sensuality. We will do 
all efforts to please Kubera for this offence 
and ask pardon from him. Citrasena, the 
wife of Kubera, lives in a secret place at 
Mandaracala. All of us will go there and 
entrust her to Kubera. Indra too will 
perform worship of demi-gods and 
monsters on Caturdas'I with Sad in 
Nandanavana. 

gg; gg fggggr fg’jir gi 

ggtg g^rogg 1gggra3gMghi;i I ^ o 11 
Tigftwg^ fgrs^T^ gift ■ggigg.-1 
giggrgrg fgg%gTwggg;i I ^ ^ o 11 
■^Tcgr gra ggigigr gg gw ggifggi 

■grif Tgrgggit grw gfrgra^ g^ gri I n ^ M 

Subsequently, ^acl brought Citrasena 
from the cave of Mandaracala and entrusted 
her to Kubera. In the meantime, the spy of 
Kubera reached untimely Lanka and 
reported that Citrasena has returned to 
palace with Sad. She is happy in the 
company of Sad. Then Kubera too returned 
to the palace happily. Subsequently, the 
gods went to the abode of Brahma and 



276 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


began to worship. 

^<=(1 

w qrrt ^ra?Y-i wicf?iqri 
TftfH ^ rtVl^U|m<|etdill?^^l| 

^ ^ ^ g ^ wri 
ctrwctw nviisnif^ 

The gods said- O Brahma, this mission 
has been undoubtedly completed with your 
grace. However as the wife without her 
husband, the army without its commander 
and Vraja without Sri Krsna does not look 
nice, Amaravatl without Indra in the same 
way is not appearing nice. O god, please, 
tell any japa, act, penance, donation, 
knowledge and pilgrimage etc., measures 
for Indra's acquittal from the impact of the 
curse. 


3Pdl5?f>UI tpluT ^F3R g trar ^:1 


■?raj ■^RiiaiT ^nsraRfecTti 


1st id td1dic(|»qT>£|^ 

^ ^ ?fT;l 

TshrrarEEi fgrPnfgtTRRT fgwTt: TOT^:iin<ii 


Brahma said- I am unable to efface the 
impact of the curse thundered by that hermit 
and the same is the position of god Sankara. 
Only worship to god Visnu can do some 
good in this direction. Indra should worship 
god Visnu with reciting the eighteen-letter 
hymn and it should be done regularly. He 
can thus, be absolved from the feminine 


form. O Indra, do continuous japa after a 
bath, with obeisance and in concentration 
for self-purification the hymn - "Orii Namo 
Narayanaya." You may be absolved from 
the feminine form when japa will access to 
the number two lakhs. Indra complied with 
the instructions given by Brahma and he 
was absolved from the impact of the curse 
with the grace of god Visnu. 

■RTc^TJ^ 3gTrI 

^ W fgbajqr^(?«Tq--dWI 

VjUc^TtT ^ ftwjcfisymc6r»JNI: 

W hcWUmi: TR^Tiifiiqt! 

fkmt: 

Markandeya said- O king, I have thus 
made you to listen to the supreme 
magnificence of god Visnu. Now do 
worship of god Visnu by giving up the 
laxity. The people who listen the story 
pertaining to he valour of god Visnu, 
irrespective of their being illicit relation 
with others wife, they absolve from the sin 
and attain to the supreme position of god 
Visnu. 

3cn^ 

wrfiicT^ tuffe.-i 

qrfW WTTGI inH^R I ? ^ ? 11 

n'^tiTHYcbTjRcf fgjTRRgrararfiT 

Suta said- King Sahastranika acquired 
the everlasting position of god Visnu by 
virtue of worship to god Nrsirirha when he 
got preaching from the hermit Markandeya, 
O hermit Bharadvaja, thus, I have made you 
to listen to the episode pertaining to 



CHAPTER 64 


277 


Sahastranika. Now, tell me what more I can 
say? 

cwyifimi 

th 

■^niM TT '?n^d1roi 

^ Tiffnrag 

?fg R^6ri-hg.vart^3^tM-iig>va4 ^rm 

fggfefmtssgmni^^n 

The man who listens to this ancient story 
that provides with emancipation, receives 
sacrosanct knowledge and attains to god 
Visnu in the light of such knowledge. 

Thus, here ends the sixty-third chapter in 
Nrsimha Purana 






CHAPTER 63 


275 


tTrfr ^cjTnuT: ^ dri4r^H ^wnf^di: i 
THR^ET fWT cl^ll^o o || 


^ «nqiTinfij^ wrarlt^ TTiWI:! 

clW^H •HHf^ciKlI^o ^11 


Indra, really got the body of a woman 
and returned to heaven as he had lost both 
the valour and power. He gave up attending 
the meetings of gods because of shame and 
agony. The gods too were ashamed when 
they saw Indra in feminine form. 
Subsequently, all gods went to the abode of 
Brahma in the company of Sacl, wife of 
Indra. They waited until Brahma returned 
and then requested together to Brahma. 

wiraM: •pifinT:i 


O Brahma, hermit Trnabindu is very 
furious and have no mercy. He has cursed 
and has turned Indra into the feminine form 
now. 


^ -g^ThTTef; 

g ■gw 
ERiT ggR ggglf 

^ ggni^oqii 


Brahma said- That hermit Trnabindu has 
done nothing wrong. Indra has murdered a 
woman; it is the punishment for that evil. O 
gods Indra has committed a heinous crime 
as he had abducted the wife of Kubera in 
the vagary of sensuality. Not only this, he 
has murdered a woman in the cottage of 
hermit Trnabindu. Owing to these crimes 


committed, he has now been turned into the 
feminine form. 

fjggTg Wf|^g qig I 

gigfwnrr gg ■RgfwHi^o^ii 
gjRiT spnfiRraig -gsr gr fg^i 
crt g ggr^gm: gi f?gT grt gf^ii^o\9i 
g%r?gr gd^vgt ^ggg; grglgd:i 

gr^g ggrf RcJcji g^n^rgig^i i ? o (i 11 

The gods said- "O god, Indra has done 
humiliation to Kubera, the devotee of god 
Sankara because of sensuality. We will do 
all efforts to please Kubera for this offence 
and ask pardon from him. Citrasena, the 
wife of Kubera, lives in a secret place at 
Mandaracala. All of us will go there and 
entrust her to Kubera. Indra too will 
perform worship of demi-gods and 
monsters on Caturdas'I with Sad in 
Nandanavana. 

gg; gg fggggr fg’jir gi 

ggtg g^rogg 1gggra3gMghi;i I ^ o 11 
Tigftwg^ fgrs^T^ gift ■ggigg.-1 
giggrgrg fgg%gTwggg;i I ^ ^ o 11 
■^Tcgr gra ggigigr gg gw ggifggi 

■grif Tgrgggit grw gfrgra^ g^ gri I n ^ M 

Subsequently, ^acl brought Citrasena 
from the cave of Mandaracala and entrusted 
her to Kubera. In the meantime, the spy of 
Kubera reached untimely Lanka and 
reported that Citrasena has returned to 
palace with Sad. She is happy in the 
company of Sad. Then Kubera too returned 
to the palace happily. Subsequently, the 
gods went to the abode of Brahma and 



276 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


began to worship. 

^<=(1 

w qrrt ^ra?Y-i wicf?iqri 
TftfH ^ rtVl^U|m<|etdill?^^l| 

^ ^ ^ g ^ wri 
ctrwctw nviisnif^ 

The gods said- O Brahma, this mission 
has been undoubtedly completed with your 
grace. However as the wife without her 
husband, the army without its commander 
and Vraja without Sri Krsna does not look 
nice, Amaravatl without Indra in the same 
way is not appearing nice. O god, please, 
tell any japa, act, penance, donation, 
knowledge and pilgrimage etc., measures 
for Indra's acquittal from the impact of the 
curse. 


3Pdl5?f>UI tpluT ^F3R g trar ^:1 


■?raj ■^RiiaiT ^nsraRfecTti 


1st id td1dic(|»qT>£|^ 

^ ^ ?fT;l 

TshrrarEEi fgrPnfgtTRRT fgwTt: TOT^:iin<ii 


Brahma said- I am unable to efface the 
impact of the curse thundered by that hermit 
and the same is the position of god Sankara. 
Only worship to god Visnu can do some 
good in this direction. Indra should worship 
god Visnu with reciting the eighteen-letter 
hymn and it should be done regularly. He 
can thus, be absolved from the feminine 


form. O Indra, do continuous japa after a 
bath, with obeisance and in concentration 
for self-purification the hymn - "Orii Namo 
Narayanaya." You may be absolved from 
the feminine form when japa will access to 
the number two lakhs. Indra complied with 
the instructions given by Brahma and he 
was absolved from the impact of the curse 
with the grace of god Visnu. 

■RTc^TJ^ 3gTrI 

^ W fgbajqr^(?«Tq--dWI 

VjUc^TtT ^ ftwjcfisymc6r»JNI: 

W hcWUmi: TR^Tiifiiqt! 

fkmt: 

Markandeya said- O king, I have thus 
made you to listen to the supreme 
magnificence of god Visnu. Now do 
worship of god Visnu by giving up the 
laxity. The people who listen the story 
pertaining to he valour of god Visnu, 
irrespective of their being illicit relation 
with others wife, they absolve from the sin 
and attain to the supreme position of god 
Visnu. 

3cn^ 

wrfiicT^ tuffe.-i 

qrfW WTTGI inH^R I ? ^ ? 11 

n'^tiTHYcbTjRcf fgjTRRgrararfiT 

Suta said- King Sahastranika acquired 
the everlasting position of god Visnu by 
virtue of worship to god Nrsirirha when he 
got preaching from the hermit Markandeya, 
O hermit Bharadvaja, thus, I have made you 
to listen to the episode pertaining to 



CHAPTER 64 


277 


Sahastranika. Now, tell me what more I can 
say? 

cwyifimi 

th 

■^niM TT '?n^d1roi 

^ Tiffnrag 

?fg R^6ri-hg.vart^3^tM-iig>va4 ^rm 

fggfefmtssgmni^^n 

The man who listens to this ancient story 
that provides with emancipation, receives 
sacrosanct knowledge and attains to god 
Visnu in the light of such knowledge. 

Thus, here ends the sixty-third chapter in 
Nrsimha Purana 






CHAPTER 64 


277 


CHAPTER 64 

The supremacy of the devotee and an episode 
on Puiicjanka 

^ #Et 

TnTs^t?ra^ii?ii 
^ %rf^rar9Rif% +iHHitii^d'4)i-s^4i:i 
^ ^Rjdiviynd r[^ ^ 

1#^ yurard m ^pT(i_i 

-qt 

dsiT t%:i 

STIrHSOR Trt ■^n4rHt{5!IHTan55^%:ll'){|| 
sHrfsfgjnrot^nnrt ^<4 hh,i 

3WT; 3ra:^imil 

^ ^rdTgjc^fggft ttt: i 

cdHi l ^t^ci i l T^jPd m'4<*«ifiT:ll^ll 


Sri Bharadvaja said- Suta, a few people 
appreciate the truth by telling it the 
exerciser of the industry, some others say 
the penance and purity as the best. Some 
people appreciate Samkhya and some others 
Yoga. Certain people treat the fuiTOW, stone 
and gold as equal, some consider 
knowledge the best means to implement the 
industry. Some people appreciate 
forgiveness, some kindness and some others 
simplicity. Some people consider donation 
as the best means, some people suggest any 
other measure the best. Other people treat 
as best due knowledge and some others 
explain reclusion as the best. Some people 
having faith in offering treat the Agnistoma 
as the best. The people who know the 
elements of Sarhkha, consider if the best for 
the concentration of the soul. Thus, 
Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksa the four 
asramas is told differently due to the 
discrimination of the names. The persons 
who have made their heart holy, being not 
clear on what to do and what not to do, fall 
always in affection. O omniscient, the best 
measure out of the truth etc., measures and 
prescribed by the hermits as requisite duty, 
kindly tell of such a measure which can 
fulfil our desires. 

^ -iqfcj 

Suta said- May the people listen to this 
cryptic measure that ensures emancipation 
from the worldly bondage. The gratemen 
describe the ancient episode in the form of a 
conversation between hermit Narada and 
the devotee Pundarika in this context. 




278 


NARASIMHA PURAISAM 


3TTsi^r ^isw f?r^ sr^pt: ■p^i 


pftr^: -RPt 3fi(i|?Tr?r^ii^?ii 

wiT:^isyprfvi-{^: 77T^n^i?r§^ trarrii^^ii 
tTRtrfqgw 'jRfirR-.ii^^ii 




f^TT'Rt'RIIR'rf ^RKTi^cltflTTjRl 


The learned PundarTka was a Brahmana. 
He used to follow all the rules made for the 
bachelors under sheer obedience to his 
teachers. He had conquered his senses and 
anger and used to observe sandhya 
regularly. He was expert in the Veda and 
the parts of the Vedas and well conversant 
with other scriptures too. He used to 
worship Agni by collecting fuel daily 
morning and evening. Like an apparent 
form of Narada, he used to worship god Vis 
nu in a systematic manner and concentrate 
on their imagination. Penance and study 
were an essential part of his routine. He 
would bring water, fuel and flowers etc., 
necessaiy material and always keep his 
teachers satisfied. He used to serve teachers 
like his own parents. He would live on alms 
and became a favourite to the people on 
account of his bona-fide behaviour. He used 
to study Brahmavidya and exercise 
Pranayama. O king, he has developed a 
sense to see all things like himself His wit 
therefore set aside the attachments and 
arrived at the stage of emancipation. 


fttR TMt ^ ftiTrmirfii II 
wPir Rigf^«(rsiciiTi 
tiferHT wftsnrii^^ii 


f^Ftran TTgltTcTi ■9Il'*iRHq»Hl9TH;l 
3Tf%t 


(Wcifl TgrPTI 

M'tTOnfifdRlJIm RcSwly^Pl ^ ^11^611 
^53rajlPlfiri?f Plf9’:ldilHR:l 

■>T^ ^ ^ ntRdtqai II 

^ xpitTOTir ^ xT RT'WdlRd 

jraPT ^T45[f ^ ddHfvii?oII 


TRreiK R^i®ii|'4«iicb'i(r( ^jsnf^i 
d)<lRldllk1c(Ml<; ^TcRIFt rPTRR: IR ^ 11 
gnsft^ TTfmR: 


Bharadvajaji, his detachment had risen 
to such extent that he abandoned his father, 
mother, brother, grandfather, uncle, 
maternal uncle, friend, relatives and near 
and dear ones like a straw, began to stroll 
on the earth without any bondage and 
started living on vegetables, roots and 
fruits. He had understood youth, beauty, age 
and wealth all as perishable and abandoned 
the three-world as trifle as the furrow. He 
decided to go on all pilgrimage places as 
described in the PurSnas. He thus saw the 
rivers like the Ganges, Yamuna, Gomatl, 
Gandaki, Satadru, Payosni, Sarayu and 
Sarasvati, Prayaga, Narmada etc., 
Mahanadls the streams, Gaya and all holy 
places in Vindhyacala and the Himalayas 
and several other holy places besides them, 
with so much walking on foot, higher acts 
through hands, he once reached Salagrama 



CHAPTER 64 


279 


area. 

■y4lHmiijnt gTT% ^ fgfcrq;i 
^rfer ^rai^rar ^ranf^crfyioTRirrH^i r ■){ 11 

^f^x;cl*lf*diwrw>tinfirH: WR[#TT;lRmi 
fV-cHrd iMram ijuijHlsi5yRf^:l 
crf^^R?igT34< R-^mRf.iR^ii 

i^u^<1cb: ilRHrcqr 

■RW ^ RiWrUi W ^P?T:IR^II 

xisFrarg^^fqi 

Mpqi^ftf wtsrff^ ■^T:IR<ill 


That holy place was surrounded by 
ascetics and learned hermits. There were 
fantastic cottages of hermits whose names 
are written in the Puranas. That place is 
adorned with Cakra river and the boulders 
there bear the marks of discus. As it was 
fantastic so it was solitary. It was widely 
extended and the heart automatically felt 
pleasure there. Some creatures were marked 
with discus and they were holy to see. The 
travellers were all at pleasure there. Learned 
Pundarlka began to live happily at that holy 
place. He used to take a dip in holy 
Devahrda, the water of Sarasvatl capable of 
bringing back the memory of pre-birth, in 
cakra kunda, in the pious water of NarayanI 
and other rivers flowing nearby that area. 


tn: dRR-R^!?cn:IR<?ll 

ITtsfr flli WjHijlTra{|i)Ul;l 

feim «T5trJiT tRW ^:i 
ScTRT wrf%t:IR?ll 


TfrajfFTOHTgR: TTR^:! 

^ IR 911 

momn^: 

OTTcrilf^wyi HlT^: 

iil'Jirujiy ?T^ ^ fyTracbc^ii:i 

aUTTBil dtiJIrUlWIrUdllR-iJII 

tllTOPT: I 

Trar^ MtMlchiSFP 


Owing to the effect of that area and the 
splendour of the holy places located there, 
that great soul of a hermit became happy 
and holy at heart. Thus, being holy at heart, 
practice in Dhyanayoga and with a desire to 
achieve axiom, he began to worship god 
Visnu there. By putting a good check on his 
sensory organs, keeping himself free from 
worries, he lived there alone for a long 
period. They lived on vegetables, roots and 
fruits with sole satisfaction. He used to 
exercise Yoga with Yama, Niyama, Asana, 
Bandha, Tibra, Pranayama, Pratyahara, 
Dharana and Samadhi. Thus, he worshipped 
god Visnu there and keeping his mind in 
concentration of god Visnu, be began to 
offer psalms for the pleasure of god. 

cTTJT drwfHdW: WillLl TT^IrqT: I 


Ti^ yrr^5dTtj4t^i^crd:ii?^ii 
^ chdlfyd ^ 


^iPTR §Rgld^: TIT^IdlRrityiH-R:11^^911 

fdUJj'MlddMddlrMI ■^NHrf|^Tcr;lR<tll 
■R' (jtddi ^TTT^ HM 

q-gmfd 


HliilfH: iniTtTt ^ y^iidl'dik^nu 

dyiyVd s(uiimi<«il'dd:ii'itoii 


chl'MMrdti^dldirr^'iHcil gSidd^cbl 




280 


NARASIMHA PURAIVAM 


3RTinw: 

fgg^gFTZr m ir^ ^Tl 

O king, a long course of time was spent 
and Pundarlka was in that Salagrama area. 
One day, hermit Narada came to see 
Pundarika there. Pundarlka became 
extremely happy to meet learned Narada. 
He first gave arghya and then bowed his 
head at his feet. Subsequently, he thought 
who might be in this form? Lyre was in his 
hand, his face was glowing with celestial 
light, matted hair on head. Perhaps, he is the 
Sun god or Varuna, Agni or Indra. He could 
not arrive at a decision and only thought 
began to flow incessantly. He then dared to 
ask him. 


Musdeh 

iiwTRT 3rr^ gfe 

Pundarika said- O divine person, who are 
you and from where have you come? The 
persons who have not performed any great 
deeds on the earth, can hardly see you. 


<d<nw 




v3 





■fgR: -RBrifeTr ^ gr 

cJRTli 


Naradaj! said- Pundarlka, I am Narada. I 
have come here to see you. The devotee like 
you is hardly seen on this earth. O 
Brahmana, irrespective of a devotee being 
even a Candala, he yet makes holy the 
people with merely bringing into memory, 
through conversation or when honoured or 


voluntarily. What to say then the 
acquaintance with the devotee Brahmana 
like you. O Brahmana, I am a slave of god 
Vasudeva, who holds Sarhga bow in his 
hand. 

RraTeiRfT filSRd<?fHgfiirWf:l 

Having received an introduction of 
Narada, the Brahmana who was 
overwhelmly suiprised, began to say with a 
tone in sheer devotion. 

^HiJra gtiftiiiivaii 

fjirraf: ftrart ^nr -rrim usHgi 

f% 1 % gpJTOWT: Wc*> 4 fiT:l 

RPT roh#Ri I'i 11 

Rl^HlraiRt 1gT?tqcT:i 

Pundarlka said- "I am most lucky 
among all creatures of this universe and 
honourable to all gods. My Pitrs have been 
thankful today. My life has beeome 
meaningful now. O great hermit, I am your 
devotee. Please, have merey on me. Owing 
to the deeds in pre-birth, O scholar, I am 
moving in this world for nothing. Tell me 
please, what I should do to get-rid-of this 
state of being. Even if the act be mystic, 
please, tell me the same. O hermit, you 
generally support all people but you care 
particularly the Vaisnavas. 

?iTwf&T giRffoT w R2IT ft^riiq o 11 

g^qrnt?^r ^nfoR: "Rpr: i 

Narada said- O Brahmana, there are a 





CHAPTER 64 


281 


number of scriptures and deeds. Similarly, 
there are a number of living organism and 
many sects of religions to follow. This is 
the reason, eccentricity is seen in this world. 

3imn^ tw: Trf^nTrrari 

^qsrrarTtfi 

VJUJtdMfld'l 5[?FT craOTI 

•miiySfhti ^ vK4inKiJlT:RH.iihmi 
■3TT|Jf(dM^d ^ ^1 

<jfbi4c?HHI«SldrWdlim^ll 
vjujtcudp^d -m dsadTfq irami 
ysTicw mwi ^ 7^15111 RTtT ^gwimvsii 
cfic!lRl<^'^HlcbW M-JbMiR ftrll’fllH.I 
irftimri) qyi-Mid yl^c^Hg■qSR^lbll^dll 

In the opinion of some people, this 
entire world is generated from the 
inexpressible and it gets merged with the 
same at the phase of a particular point of 
time. O the greatest scholar, a few other 
metaphysicians, treat the soul as 
everlasting, omnipresent and multi-form. 
Having gone over all these matters, the 
hermits of different opinions lay down a 
doctrine as per their savvy and learning. 
Listen to it carefully. This secret element of 
supreme meaning is capable to provide 
emancipation. The mind of a man often 
receive the topics presently running and it 
cannot conceives the distant past and the 
future. O innocent and resolute Pundarika, I 
am now going to tell you whatever god 
Brahma told me on my query. Please, listen 


to it carefully. Once upon a time, 1 saluted 
god Brahma seated in his abode and asked 
him. 

^TTT ■'TT ^ ^tRT; tT7^<T8m 

Narada said- O god, what is the best 
knowledge and the best Yoga. Please, tell 
me all things clearly and lucidly. 

sigjlciiTt 

TT: 

TT RT I ^ O 11 

TOJjflcJTfT HUIuDm cHTt I 

cfF^ WR cTBt ^ RTTTOW: T^:ll^^ll 
y^cblrl U'iIRrIl 

HlCiqui: tr W ^ RKBPJT: ■^TI 
RTTPSTIT: TR ^'Ifrltlrhl ■'tHIiriTf: TR:II^^II 
TRR[fcr xR^rmfl dHiHifdMi ■ 3 T 1 

snrzr Ryd:l 

xp t TTrant 

HKNUlliifd xrFRmFRTT:l 

fg; gxg % mrrfir: 

Xllr S!JRJ% ^ RRTgTIRFRWl:l 

^ "Tim TRTd5aTII^\9ll 

gTPRfrosi^: virxgfg^dt:! 

qyimihi ti?RRTii^<iii 

dSTT gRTpr TigfftIT 3tfg?iPd ?T%gRi;i 

Brahma said- The twenty fourth element 
causative to twenty three defects is with the 
absolutely different element counted as 
twenty fifth is existed. This twenty fifth 
element is called Nara (Purusa or soul) in 



282 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


all bodies carrying breathing. All elements 
are originated from Nara, hence, these are 
called Nara. Under what these Nara is 
sheltered is called Narayana. This entire 
universe gets birth from Narayana and gets 
merged with him at the time of devastation. 
Narayaija is the Parabrahma, he is the 
supreme element, the supreme flame and 
the supreme soul. O hermit, god NSrayana 
is even beyond the para. Nothing is greater 
or distinct than him here. Whatever is seen 
or heard here, god Narayana existed by 
covering it from outside and inside. The 
gods have repeatedly said to him Sahara 
when they observed him in the tangible 
things of this universe and they 
concentrated their mind exclusively on 
Narayana with reciting Om Namo 
Narayanaya. The person who being 
exclusive in heart, concentrates on 
Narayana had nothing to bear with the 
donation, pilgrimage, penance and the 
offerings. Concentration on Narayana is the 
supreme knowledge and no Yoga is greater 
than it. What use to go over the other 
scriptures that give contradictory meanings. 
As a number of ways ultimately lead to a 
city, the knowledge vested in various 
scriptures finally enter into Narayana. 







4iwidyii<i ^cTtcRi R€r<'ra<H,ii'9^ii 

dPwl^cJIR: IT: 1 


^ tisiti 

WTTrRFT *[di=^dmiRdMd 
^Ri<t^d?irMcdig: cranivami 

SiWTT^ ^IddJ-il<dlTMH.I 

«RfeiT fdw?iHfc»;6ym'l^<*Rd.T:l 
Tj;^ ^ ^ «T^ih3V9ii 

VIlTdluli ^Hdtd ^ge^l 
3TlcT[^ T1%TT5nftT 3T:IIV9.ill 

^irqui; 

dld^l dTRlTtJlTdlsI- 

fdWTr5;il^'?ll 

WlldW dKidumdr^d:! 

0]^ ^ TTTRT ^ddd cm«4<4H,ll<i ° II 

^ illwRr Tltw TTTfj^r TT^r W^;| 

That god Visnu is omnipresent in an 
inexpressive form, he is the micro element, 
he is the immortal Sanatana Purusa, the 
initial cause of this entire world but there is 
no beginning and no end of him. He himself 
is unborn. Hence, he is Svayambhu. 
However, he originated all living organisms 
of this world. He is sovereign, 
unimaginable, everlasting and in the form 
of cause and effect. He is called Vasudeva 
as this entire world existed in him. He is 
Purana, TrikaladarsI and free from all 
defects. This entire three-world movable 
and immovable is in existence because god 
has protected it. This is the reason, he is 
called Visnu. As on decay or expiry of the 
era, all elements including Mahatattva etc., 
reside in Paramatma, he is therefore, called 
Vasudeva. Some people call him Purusa 
(the soul) and some call immortal Isvara. A 




CHAPTER 64 


283 


few others consider him only in the form of 
science and the rest of them call him 
Parabrahma. Some thinkers call him 'Kala' 
with no beginning and no end and some 
people call him Sanatana Jiva. Some call 
Paramatma, some Niramaya element, some 
Ksetrajna and some others consider the 
twenty fourth element due to twenty three 
defects i.e. Prakrti and the distinct element 
form twenty fifty Purusa as twenty sixth 
element Purusottama. Some people say the 
soul in measurement of a thumb, some as 
small as pollen drain of the lotus flower, a 
molecule. These and the different names of 
god Visnu as explained by a number of 
scholars who throw into confusion the 
ordinary people by creating discriminatory 
wit in them. If there is one scripture, all 
could loiow the exact knowledge. Here are a 
number of scriptures and each scripture has 
its own principles thereby element of 
knowledge has become difficult to set in 
mind. When I have gone over all the 
scriptures, I came to know that it is the 
essence to concentrate on god Narayana 
continuously. Hence, leave the study of a 
number of scriptures and concentrate with 
vigour on god Narayana. Your continuous 
concentration will enable definitely to know 
the exact element of god Narayana shortly 
and thus, you will attain to the 
emancipation. 

srgnTT ^ii 

qrwnxR ranr: i 

HUlTITTJPinilfd ^ VIIV^’d‘ill(i^ll 

dtRHKWUlWId MtHIrMI fidlcHMli? II 


^RldUll TWIritl W?R:ll<i')JII 


[:ll<imi 

3TRTS?T: fl^lwi 

fi<4?lP^ill:ll<i^ll 

■?TnTT: fi44l^v<tclR^dl:ll<iV9ii 
SJFFTPTIRT ^ T4?iird 'dhdtfdH.I 
^cWd-MI M^IcMhI cll^^d fir^^lli^ll 

dlfi-ilUIMil ^^^||<i<?ll 


O Brahmana, I engaged myself 
exclusively in the service of god Narayana 
since the day I heard this rare Jnanayoga 
from Brahma. The people who know the 
Sanatana Brahma form hymn - Om Namo 
Narayanaya, attain to the abode of god Vis 
nu by regular reciting it. Hence, the 
metaphysicians should always recite this 
hymn with exclusive devotion. God 
Narayana is omnipresent Sanatana 
Paramesvara. He is engaged in the task of 
creation, maintenance and destruction of 
this universe. One should therefore, worship 
him by keeping oneself busy with listening 
to his names, virtues and deeds and offering 
hymns. O Brahmana, the person who wants 
his good, should treat as duty to concentrate 
on god Narayana. The people who are 
always satisfied, free from greed, learned, 
controller of their senses, free from 
affection, ego, envy and enmity etc., 
defects, impartial, peaceful mind and afraid 
from all kinds of resolutions, keep 
themselves engaged in Dhyanayoga of god 
and attain to him. The greatmen pray to god 
Vasudeva by cutting their relations from the 




284 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


three-worlds and receive his grace. O 
Brahmana, keep yourself busy in the 
worship of god Narayana. 

^ iniStT ;l 

l^rar cblRdl 

arfir ^ trar 

fHc?Tildr<frf;ll^ ?ll 
f% ^ '4gRl5f^:l 

rTtr^TW ^i^kI gn 

m fsg^ ^ f^' y4<sr<un{^ii'? ^ II 
■g 'JW fTlrW: imwRidi: Wi 
^sfR gif^ RT wt RTT RRranTr?RIT:ll'?VII 

^5? W%uT: 11 <? m I 

gg# fgupiHtcRi RTsT WT: I 
f% yRW<^JTdMiui: pg: ■ggrrf%g:ii<?^ii 

0 Brahmana, who provides the devotee 
with his supreme abode merely on reciting 
his name even with disobedience, who other 
than god Narayana is so kind hearted, to 
give the thing begged for? Whether you do 
japa or self-study, do the same by leaving 
laziness with a motive to pray to god 
Narayana. What do you get from hymns and 
fasts? The hymn 'Orii Namo Narayanaya' 
provides with all axioms. O Brahmana, the 
exterior marks as apparels, tridanda, clean 
head or decorated with a number of devices, 
cannot be the cause for the religion. The 
persons who were cruel, wicked and evil 
doers once can also attain to the abode of 
god Narayana if once they are sheltered to 
him. The person who can be able after 
passing through the cycle of birth as many 
as a thousand in number, if any time comes 


to consciousness that he is the slave to god 
Visnu, definitely attains the pleasure of 
gods grace. Not to say then of a person who 
is always extremely busy with reciting the 
names of god. 


ftggtgt gg^gf^^ttt^gRrtgktTi 

R<lMchKp|ctt^HlcHtt^ch'Rt|U|:|i'^t9|| 

gu^'Oehtfcr gnfcRT RTggu?xRTguT;i 
ggng |j?igT^ I ^ <i 11 


7Ttf^ 

tTTtfgfiggj^sTn^ tpifER: i 

sgtg igi^gn^ ■pgr^fgg^; 11 o I 

Tgi^ li^igt^^ g?gfg g^iggr: I 

riw g fg^'d:i 

ggfsg:ll^o:?|| 

atgnt wtt gtggjc^Mi^o^ii 


ipiT: MlfuifgfBy*l:l 
fgftg fltgt yitrfrww gf^i 


Suta said- The most philanthropic 
Narada then disappeared. The religious soul 
Pundarlka then began to recite - "Salute to 
god Kesava, O great Yogi, be pleased with 
me." The ascetic Pundarlka lived for many 
years at that Salagrama alone with god in 
his heart and continuous concentration. He 
did not see even in his dreams any other 
than god Visnu. His sleep too did not hinder 
in the mission. He achieved the best Vais 
navi axiom with the grace of god Visnu 
who is the only witness to all the worlds. 



CHAPTER 64 


285 


The lion, tiger and many other cruel 
animals in the forest near him live 
peacefully without any enemity and protest. 
O Brahmana Bharadvaja, the tendencies of 
these barbarous animals always cooled 
down by virtue of his penance. 


Vl^'lsltirapitiiijifur; TTlrrarW: 

3Tre§r utvs -STTRIFFSjrTracTRf^W:I 


fyn^TORt 


Later on, god Narayana appeared before 
that wise Pundarlka. His eyes were as large 
as lotus petals. Conch, discus, gada etc., 
weapons were in his hands. A yellow sheet 
was on his shoulders. A garland of divine 
flowers was enhancing, his grandeur. At his 
chest, there was the mark of Srivatsa and 
LaksmI. He was decorated with the 
kaustubha gem. God Visnu, dark as 
Kajjalagiri and with Pitambara was on 
Garuda and looked as a black cloud with the 
glow of lightning at the peak of Meru 
mountain. A white umbrella with silvery 
radiance was over his head in whieh pearls 
were hanging. That god was getting extra¬ 
ordinary grandeur through that umbrella 
and Camara. 

rt fRr>3#r: i 

TJW f?TTW ^ RiyyyicRdl 
PgyfHy ■wf;R:i 

;^us1grt?i5;Ry:iinoM 

Pundarlka clasped both his hands when 


he saw the god apparent. With an honour 
mixed with fear, his head bowed. He put his 
forehead on the ground and did Sastahga 
Pranama. He began to gaze at god with eyes 
stretched as if he would sip Narayana. 
Having seen the god for which he was 
praying since long, he stared at him and got 
saturation. Then Pundarlka was addressed 
by Padmanabha, who had measured the 
three-worlds with his three steps. 

^ ^ qusdcb 

yt ^-iRftr I n ^ 11 

Son Pundarlka, may all your deeds be 
good. I am pleased with you. Ask whatever 
you desire and I will render the same to 
you. 


isr^R'ilRRT ^U^Oehl trgTMfd:ll^^^ll 


Suta said- Having heard these words 
from god NSrayana, learned Pundarlka 
requested. 




Pundarlka said^ O god, I am an idiot to 
know what is the best to do for me. Hence, 
O Madhava, give me whatever you deem 
good for me. 

-q^WFt fRT33#igqfef?Pflinhll 

God pleased with this reply and again 
said to great Pundarlka who was before him 
with his hands uplifted to forehead. 

anw ^5^ pty w ■pen 
Rfqyrfl ftrRcRT tr^ 11 ^ 11 


286 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


The Lord said- O great resolute, be your 
welfare. Merge with me and be my 
permanent councillor by holding my similar 
form. 






Lll^^ll 


trfiaTTW^MdaMWcf'McRlHI f^TcTMI^^oli 

cTcgwT: 311^; R 4 Mm 5 ntiifvHl;ii???ii 
4t(Tl f4y « a T rm 


<lid MiJ^I 




Suta said- As god said these words, 
trumpets began to blow from the gods side 
and they began to shower flowers from the 
sky. All gods and saints including Indra 
began to say "well done, well done and 
thank god." The Siddha, Gandharva and 
Kinnaras began to appreciate god many 
ways. God Visnu took Pundarlka with him 
on the back of Garuda and departed to the 
abode of Vaikuntha. O Bharadvaja, you 
therefore, should worship god Visnu, 
concentrate your mind and even the 
breathing on god and keep always busy with 
the welfare of the devotees and as per your 
strength worship god Purusottama. Keep 
your ears busy to listen to the episodes 
pertaining to god which have the capaeity to 


decay all evils. What to say any more, 
exercise every measure that may please god 
Visnu, the soul of the universe. The 
persons not following the deeds that lead to 
the pleasure of god Visnu, cannot receive 
the holy position even after executing 
several hundreds Vajapeya offerings. 



^ sni4tf« 



tBfemtSBBPT: 11 ^ X11 


The manner to pray to god) O god Vis 
nu, you are free from the pains of old age; 
you are immortal, unique, adorable to all, 
beyond the cycle of birth and death; you are 
intangible and in tangible form; you are 
formidable, micro and appreciable even if 
you are beyond praise. The Yogis realise 
your features through knowledge and you 
are the teacher and supreme god of this 
three-world. I, therefore, have come to get 
shelter under you." 

Thus, here ends the sixty-forth chapter in 
Nrsimha Purana 

9(S9i(% 



286 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 65 

The holy places relating to the god and the 
names^of god relating to those Pilgrim places 




Bharadvaja said- Stlta, I am now curious 
to listen to the secret pilgrim places of god 




CHAPTER 65 


287 


Visnu and the secret names of god 
pertaining to those holy places from your 
mouth. Kindly, describe those evil decaying 
names before me. 

dctN 

tRTW # ^ WT 

II 

Suta said- Once Sri Brahma asked god 
Visnu when he was at the Mandaracala 
mountain with conch, discus and gada in his 
hands. 

I 55 ^ ^ w 

ttRwcblAf^VlNiT:ll?ll 

f% ^ ^ ftranfrr<ci:i 

BrahmajI said- O the supreme god, 
where should I and all other devotees who 
are desirous of emancipation, go to see you 
particularly? I am curious to listen from 
your mouth to the names of the pilgrim 
places and the names by which you are 
worshipped there. O god, who should be 
remembered and recited by a man by 
leaving aside his laxity for achieving the 
true position? In order to enhance the 
welfare of your devotees, kindly, tell me all 
this. 

^3iftrr ^ g^^nfir HTgii: 11 ^ 11 

Sri god said- O Brahmana, listen to 
what I am telling you carefully. I am going 
to tell all my secret names and the places 


rightly. 

xtPlfRfr f ^3PT?qf^l 

^ Trat fqWTUi ?fTRI 

WTIlrtr WIT^I I ^ o 11 

fiSSTFlft 

f irhRvi Rgirai waitoh,! 

-qisra f 

f 

g;^ Mgr-arr^ip ^Fir% 
frpt ^gviivft 
firarai fgdwigi grot 

iRTFr 4 m^R? w qgibugi g 

A man is absolved from all sins when he 
visits Kokamukha and see me in the form of 
Varaha, Madhusudana in Mandaracala, 
Ananta in KapiladvTpa, Suryanandana in 
Prabhasa, god Vaikuntha in Malyodapana, 
Rajakumara in Mahendra mountain, 
Mahavisnu in Rsabha-tirtha, Sri Krsna in 
Dvaraka, Deves'a in Pandusahya mountain, 
Jagatpati in Vasundhara, MahSyoga in 



288 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


Vallivata, king Rama in Citrakuta, 
PTtambara in Nainiisaranya, Hari in Vraja, 
Tapovasa in Salagrama, Paramesvara in 
Gandhamadana, Hrsikesa in Kubjagara, 
Payodhara in Gandhadvara, Garudadhvaja 
in Sakala-tlrtha, Govind in Sayaka, Gopala 
in Vrndavana, Svayambhu in Mathura, 
Madhava in Kedara-tlrtha, Kesava in 
Varanasi (Kasi), Puskaraksa in Puskara- 
tlrtha, Jayadhvaja in Dhrstadyumna, Vira in 
Trnabindu forest, Asoka in Sindhusagara, 
Mahabahu in Kaserata, Amrta in Taijasa 
forest, VisVes'a in Vis'vasayupa (or 
Visakhayupa), Nrsirhha in Mahavana, 
Ripuhara in Halahga, Trivikrama in 
Devas'ala, Purusottama in Dasapura, 
Vamana in Kubjaka-tTrtha, Vidyadhara in 
Vitasta, Dharanldhara in Varaha-tirtha, 
Guhya in Devadaruvana, Nagasayi in the 
bank of Kaverl river, Yogamurti in Prayaga, 
Sudarsana at the bank of Payosnl, Kumara 
in Kumara-tirtha, Hayagriva in Lohita, 
Trivikrama in Ujjayini, Caturbhuja at 
Lihgakuta and god Harihara at the bank of 
Bhadra. 

51 ^ WIH f% 5 :l 

^ ^ ^11 

rvIdTSit fvrachi wqf ^ 

ItUIrRH H Wl^l 

Similarly, Vis'varQpa, Kuruksetra, 


Halayudha in Manikunda, Lokanatha in 
Ayodhya, Kundinesvara in Kundinapura, 
Vasudeva in Bhandara, Sudarsana in Cakra- 
tlrtha, Visnupada in Adhya-tirtha, Sukara in 
Sukaraksetra, Brahmesa in Manasa-tirtha, 
Syamala in Dandaka-tirtha, Nagamoksa at 
Trikuta mountain, Bhaskara at the peak of 
Meru mountain, Viraja at the bank of Pus 
pabhadrS river, Balarupa in Kerala-tirtha, 
Yasaskara at the bank of Vipasa river, 
Hutasana in Mahismatipurl, god 
Padmanabha in Ksirasagara, Sanatana in 
Viuiala-tlrtha, god Siva at the bank of Siva 
river, Gadadhara in Gaya and the supreme 
soul everywhere have existed. One who can 
see these places, attains to emancipation. 

attdqfew TTRifr w 

RR RTRifr 3RiPi^i I ^ 11 

R: R^ RITWIIR VJUJdlilfM I 

RIRTRUltR R; Wl 
R ■R?tR:ll^^ll 

RTRlfR fSRiTH R: R^:l 
fRRRR: ■R^RT^'iRf RR R Rt^IRfill 

'ilWoqifH R^TWSRRT RTR^:! 

•.^burl^ fd^^UI ^Rf^ 

O BrahmajI, we have told you these 
eighty eight names and simultaneously 
explained the secret pilgrim places also. O 
Prajapati, the person who will recite or 
listen to these secret names, will receive the 
fruit of giving one lakh cows to the 
Brahmanas. The person who recites these 
names with observing all holiness daily, 
does not see nightmares with my grace. The 
person who recites these sixty eight names 



CHAPTER 66 

•1 


daily in morning, noon and evening, enjoys 
all pleasures in my abode by being absolved 
from all sins. All persons and particularly 
the Vaisnavas should see the above said 
pilgrimage. Whosoever does this, I render 
them emancipation from the worldly ties. 


^ rl^iRifelcTr 

^ Tt Hnc(: 


ant' siRT^ihTt^r^TftrPr 




Suta said- The person who recites this 
hymn always and particularly on EkadasI or 
DvadasI by worshipping god Visnu and 
then stand with clasped hands, attains to the 
immortal position of god Visnu. 


Thus, here ends the sixty-fifth chapter in 
Nrsimha Purana 


289 





286 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


CHAPTER 65 

The holy places relating to the god and the 
names^of god relating to those Pilgrim places 




Bharadvaja said- Stlta, I am now curious 
to listen to the secret pilgrim places of god 




CHAPTER 65 


287 


Visnu and the secret names of god 
pertaining to those holy places from your 
mouth. Kindly, describe those evil decaying 
names before me. 

dctN 

tRTW # ^ WT 

II 

Suta said- Once Sri Brahma asked god 
Visnu when he was at the Mandaracala 
mountain with conch, discus and gada in his 
hands. 

I 55 ^ ^ w 

ttRwcblAf^VlNiT:ll?ll 

f% ^ ^ ftranfrr<ci:i 

BrahmajI said- O the supreme god, 
where should I and all other devotees who 
are desirous of emancipation, go to see you 
particularly? I am curious to listen from 
your mouth to the names of the pilgrim 
places and the names by which you are 
worshipped there. O god, who should be 
remembered and recited by a man by 
leaving aside his laxity for achieving the 
true position? In order to enhance the 
welfare of your devotees, kindly, tell me all 
this. 

^3iftrr ^ g^^nfir HTgii: 11 ^ 11 

Sri god said- O Brahmana, listen to 
what I am telling you carefully. I am going 
to tell all my secret names and the places 


rightly. 

xtPlfRfr f ^3PT?qf^l 

^ Trat fqWTUi ?fTRI 

WTIlrtr WIT^I I ^ o 11 

fiSSTFlft 

f irhRvi Rgirai waitoh,! 

-qisra f 

f 

g;^ Mgr-arr^ip ^Fir% 
frpt ^gviivft 
firarai fgdwigi grot 

iRTFr 4 m^R? w qgibugi g 

A man is absolved from all sins when he 
visits Kokamukha and see me in the form of 
Varaha, Madhusudana in Mandaracala, 
Ananta in KapiladvTpa, Suryanandana in 
Prabhasa, god Vaikuntha in Malyodapana, 
Rajakumara in Mahendra mountain, 
Mahavisnu in Rsabha-tirtha, Sri Krsna in 
Dvaraka, Deves'a in Pandusahya mountain, 
Jagatpati in Vasundhara, MahSyoga in 



288 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


Vallivata, king Rama in Citrakuta, 
PTtambara in Nainiisaranya, Hari in Vraja, 
Tapovasa in Salagrama, Paramesvara in 
Gandhamadana, Hrsikesa in Kubjagara, 
Payodhara in Gandhadvara, Garudadhvaja 
in Sakala-tlrtha, Govind in Sayaka, Gopala 
in Vrndavana, Svayambhu in Mathura, 
Madhava in Kedara-tlrtha, Kesava in 
Varanasi (Kasi), Puskaraksa in Puskara- 
tlrtha, Jayadhvaja in Dhrstadyumna, Vira in 
Trnabindu forest, Asoka in Sindhusagara, 
Mahabahu in Kaserata, Amrta in Taijasa 
forest, VisVes'a in Vis'vasayupa (or 
Visakhayupa), Nrsirhha in Mahavana, 
Ripuhara in Halahga, Trivikrama in 
Devas'ala, Purusottama in Dasapura, 
Vamana in Kubjaka-tTrtha, Vidyadhara in 
Vitasta, Dharanldhara in Varaha-tirtha, 
Guhya in Devadaruvana, Nagasayi in the 
bank of Kaverl river, Yogamurti in Prayaga, 
Sudarsana at the bank of Payosnl, Kumara 
in Kumara-tirtha, Hayagriva in Lohita, 
Trivikrama in Ujjayini, Caturbhuja at 
Lihgakuta and god Harihara at the bank of 
Bhadra. 

51 ^ WIH f% 5 :l 

^ ^ ^11 

rvIdTSit fvrachi wqf ^ 

ItUIrRH H Wl^l 

Similarly, Vis'varQpa, Kuruksetra, 


Halayudha in Manikunda, Lokanatha in 
Ayodhya, Kundinesvara in Kundinapura, 
Vasudeva in Bhandara, Sudarsana in Cakra- 
tlrtha, Visnupada in Adhya-tirtha, Sukara in 
Sukaraksetra, Brahmesa in Manasa-tirtha, 
Syamala in Dandaka-tirtha, Nagamoksa at 
Trikuta mountain, Bhaskara at the peak of 
Meru mountain, Viraja at the bank of Pus 
pabhadrS river, Balarupa in Kerala-tirtha, 
Yasaskara at the bank of Vipasa river, 
Hutasana in Mahismatipurl, god 
Padmanabha in Ksirasagara, Sanatana in 
Viuiala-tlrtha, god Siva at the bank of Siva 
river, Gadadhara in Gaya and the supreme 
soul everywhere have existed. One who can 
see these places, attains to emancipation. 

attdqfew TTRifr w 

RR RTRifr 3RiPi^i I ^ 11 

R: R^ RITWIIR VJUJdlilfM I 

RIRTRUltR R; Wl 
R ■R?tR:ll^^ll 

RTRlfR fSRiTH R: R^:l 
fRRRR: ■R^RT^'iRf RR R Rt^IRfill 

'ilWoqifH R^TWSRRT RTR^:! 

•.^burl^ fd^^UI ^Rf^ 

O BrahmajI, we have told you these 
eighty eight names and simultaneously 
explained the secret pilgrim places also. O 
Prajapati, the person who will recite or 
listen to these secret names, will receive the 
fruit of giving one lakh cows to the 
Brahmanas. The person who recites these 
names with observing all holiness daily, 
does not see nightmares with my grace. The 
person who recites these sixty eight names 



CHAPTER 66 

•1 


daily in morning, noon and evening, enjoys 
all pleasures in my abode by being absolved 
from all sins. All persons and particularly 
the Vaisnavas should see the above said 
pilgrimage. Whosoever does this, I render 
them emancipation from the worldly ties. 


^ rl^iRifelcTr 

^ Tt Hnc(: 


ant' siRT^ihTt^r^TftrPr 




Suta said- The person who recites this 
hymn always and particularly on EkadasI or 
DvadasI by worshipping god Visnu and 
then stand with clasped hands, attains to the 
immortal position of god Visnu. 


Thus, here ends the sixty-fifth chapter in 
Nrsimha Purana 


289 





289 


CHAPTER 66 

•1 


CHAPTER 66 

Magnificence of other pilgrim places 
Sahyadri and Amalaka Grama 

W: ^04: 

Suta said- God Visnu again said- O 
Brahmana, a description of holy prayer to 
god Visnu through the above-said sixty 
eight names has been already made. Now, 
listen to the names and holy places 
otherwise than them. 

7]^ WR trtnjT WIT TTtRtrl ^R: I 

n S3 >3 S3 S3 


wn ^ gtcbiifui d«ir|tfH,i 
^ ■q^igtRJT I ^ 11 

RTii- TTtTlwi^ I ■dHi JiiTils%aRH,i 

mi ^ Rurctdlrll'iill 

iWRT ^ TOT iM 

rlfTTRIimi 

n^i^ud i mit gR cdX ^i 

^ fOTT f ^ fdViNd:I 
fWt? |V 911 

"TlRTf 9l^-Hc;inid;l 

m TTtaN^gjif^ Rc}qm^<ifu( 

The Ganges is the best holy river, then 
Yamuna, GomatT, Sarayu, Sarasvatl, 
Candrabhaga and Carmanvatl etc., rivers 
are holy. Similarly, Kuruk$etra, Gaya, three 
Puskaras, Arbudaksetra and most holy river 
Narmada are the holy pilgrimages at north. 
Tapi and PayospT are the two holy rivers. A 
best pilgrim has come into existence with 
their confluence. There are several other 
pilgrim places covered with the ridges of 
Brahmagiri. Viraja-tirtha too decays all 
evils and the river Godavari is the supreme 
holy everywhere. O lotus born, 
Tuhgabhadra river also is most purifying 
and I reside there in company of god 
Sankara duly worshipped by the hermits 
and the saints at its bank. Daksina Gahga, 
Krsna and particularly Kaveri are the holy 
rivers. Besides these O lotus born, I reside 
in Amalaka Grama. You worship there my 
icon known as Devadeva already and as a 
regular practice. There are several other 
pilgrim places capable to decay the sins in 
which a mere dip and acamana makes a 
man free from the sins attached to the heart 
and mind. 





290 


NARASIMHA PURAISAIVI 


OdclH^^5l^irM 7TtT:ll<? II 

SQta said- O Bharadvaja, on completion 
of his statement before Brahma in 
connection with his query, god Visnu went 
to his Vaikuntha abode and Brahma too 
returned to his Brahmaloka. 

dlWHIMHcbillil ^uqdlyiPl ^ 

^ '?lSntirT: 11 ^ o 11 

^ qidiqci g ^ ^1 

Bharadvaja said- O religion abiding 
hermit, kindly tell me in detail about the 
holy place which existed at that Amalaka 
Grama. The place where god Visnu is 
worshipped by god Brahma himself how 
has it originated its magnificence and the 
circumstances that make it the pilgrim place 
is worth knowing and I am, therefore, 
curious to know all this. 

^ fer y^8£?nftf ^ TTronurwi;! 

ddldqif^ 

Suta said- "O Brahmana, I am going to 
tell the entire episode pertaining to the 
Amalaka holy place located at the Sahya 
mountain and pray to you listen to me 
carefully. 

^ W cldl’^vldhllMd^ 

11 11 

TSHifr ^ fTOtfr xn 

icissnPr ■qfrg^ii^'uii 

9^*41 ^ 9^trr 9^uii jrn 


fibildRin 

KTT^ tjadiWd II 

f Vi<dsiTiig P K i g T ^ i 
3tsrRTW3^: MV^ldlfrimilq idcdltfl I 11 


cTtqr^ H?TWT; I 

?ld4<t:IK I ii»Mfq r H ^ci^^!!H^^q .ll^<^ll 

ytsiiif^T; ift:ii^<?ii 


O Brahmana, long long ago, there was a 
huge Ahvala tree in the forest which was 
spread in the region of the mountain Sahya. 
The learned persons used to address it as 
Mahogra. The fruits of that tree were juicy, 
decent, pleasing to the eye and divine. God 
Brahma, the supreme Brahmana had very 
first seen that great tree laden with such 
divine fruits. Having the curiosity to know 
what it was actually, god Brahma 
meditated. In the state of meditation he saw 
that god Vi§nu was sitting on that excellent 
divine tree with conch, discus, gada in his 
hands. When he came out of the 
concentration so made, he stood but found 
no tree there. Instead of it he saw an icon of 
god Visnu there. That divine tree was then 
pressed down deep into the womb of the 
earth and merely an icon was looking there. 
Looking at this phenomenon, god Brahma 
began to worship that icon of god Visnu 
with offering flowers, fragrance etc., 
exterior means for the pleasure of the god 
regularly. At that time he performed twelve 
and seven times the due worship of god Vis 


nu. 


rlfwi ^ m^lrwi rR?r ^ g^l 

3TRTS!T tfli ■y«?rik1l 1K9T 3lf^ Tjd4taq^l 



CHAPTER 66 


291 


■RrrgT'RtSm^: 31'5xZl^lR?ll 

T?n3^ TT: TTRgfT^rjlWirFt «T^IR^II 
RT% 5 hsihiRcir ^i 
?? nir: ffbiwr ^ 'nfrat^nr^lwii^'ijii 
cR^n# xrf^ giiTcRRMs^ 
^rrRTTTt^feebldi^ 
rlrM RjvHUMI 11^ pRl^tHy-MI^I 

RcJgnjfy(H^<*dl R#qtl 

^fu^i*ldly?^Tl> IwSH^lHlwf ^%utl 1^^311 
5(tUlMlT4HM f| tftsfrlt piyTlRll,l 

:teulR a fiHlf t TO TOHT:l 

«in5 fKsrr ^^riR^ii 

f^ii|elfr9U^ | fH4Mnii4f?l l 
^pT?fT: ftpRt'qrf^ftg^gj^TOnTHI^oll 

O the great hermit, who can describe the 
magnificence of the god residing at that 
Amalaka-ksetra? God Brahma got twelve 
more holy places at the Amalaka Grama 
when he was busy worshipping god Visnu 
at that particular place seen by him very 
first. Just below the feet of god Visnu, a 
holy place appeared at the west direction. It 
was popular with the name of Cakra-tlrtha. 
This holy place is capable to kill and efface 
all sins. A man who takes a dip in the 
Cakra-tlrtha is absolved immediately from 
sins and receives a warm reception at the 
abode of Brahma. Then, there comes 
Sankha-tirtha. A dip in this tTrtha, provides 
with the fruits as would avail him by 
performing Vajapeya offering. O hermit. 


one should visit there in the month of Pausa 
when god Sun comes in the orbit of Pusya 
Naksatra. In the ancient time, once the 
water pot of Brahmaji had fallen in the 
region of Sahya mountain and since then, 
the place became popular as Kundika place. 
That place effaces all sins and omens. There 
existed a house made of boulders also. A 
dip in this pilgrim place, provides him with 
instant emancipation. The man who holds 
fast for three days and takes a dip 
continuously, definitely is absolved from all 
sins and receives special honour in the 
abode of Brahma. North from the Kundika 
and south from Pindasthana there is 
Rnamocana tirtha. It is the supreme among 
all pilgrim places and mystic. O Brahmana, 
he who takes a bathe there by residing for 
three nights, is absolved from three debts. 
The person who will do Pindadana 
systematically with an objective to do 
sraddha for ancestors, his forefathers will 
receive Pitrloka after full satiation. 

^rpzr ^ ^11 

^ tT^ gnt f?RW ■JRf gR^I 
TOT dieb^i^ 

Then there comes Papamocana-tirtha. 
Who takes a dip there by residing for five 
nights, becomes free from the ties of all his 
sins and accesses to the abode of Vispu and 
enjoys the pleasures there. A the same 
place, a big stream flows. One who 
sprinkles its water on his head, obtains a 
high seat in heaven. 

gjiTTl^ TTOTOT^I 

3IT^pTfTOH TOTI ^ ? 11 
TT: TTpgr st^i 


292 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


3#<l#TfTdI ^ f^agni^ iTlt^l 




f?Trlld'^d> '^^Pd^dl V^^fdchll 


■•yi4«t.d'TO 3rM Qwjdlli TTflil^^l 


Then there eomes a holy place namely, 
Dhanuhpata. The person who takes a dip 
here, enjoys the full length of life and then 
receives all honour in the heaven. 
"Sarabindu" is a place so holy that one who 
takes a dip here receives the abode of Indra 
after his death and enjoys all pleasures 
there. The one who takes a bath in Varaha- 
tlrtha at the Sahya mountain and stays one 
day and one night, receives honour in the 
abode of Visnu. Akas'agahga-tirtha had then 
existed on the peak of mountain Sahya. The 
boulders lying there has the white clay. O 
Brahmana, one who takes a bath here, 
attains to the fruits of all offerings and 
finally enjoys the respectable place in the 
abode of Visnu. 




Wfft ddciif^rii TTmR5f5^ii?<iii 


-O 



^ ^■gsnfoT TT 


PTiT3rfg^fa[^ii?<?ii 





R^dl^pral Pfr ?ft;iiiioii 

W^VIIWM^I PRn ^■prcR:! 


O Brahmana, one should consider as the 
holy place where the water of the fountains 
flowing from the mountain Sahyadri. A dip 


in those places absolves the man from all 
his sins. The person who regularly visits the 
mountain Sahyadri and takes a bath there, 
becomes holy in his heart. O Brahmana, the 
man who after a bath in the streams flowing 
from the mountain Sahyadri and offers 
flowers to god Visnu while worshipping, 
finally merges with god Visnu and his sins 
are dissolved. As Gahga eontains all holy 
places, one should take a bath daily or 
regularly in the Gahga and only one bath on 
the rivers flowing from the mountain peaks 
is sufficient for a man. All gods are merged 
with god Visnu. The Gita is the composite 
from of all scriptures. To be kind to 

creatures is the best among all religions. 

W grfsRT fef ^^m^lrJ^hTtHPIl'iJ^II 
^'iy^mHcHUI‘1 T:TTr^ ^1 

WtSlfPTPfP fl^WPI 

WP f^:^RTP[i I'i ^ 11 

nT:«l5»idl4rHni 

■HMi'cd PP PH'jII P m4c)Phl 

s» v» 

PT^ PPTRT IWTT P^^!fHTPIIU?ll 
P^TOPTPPPP^fPPP^PrnftT 

PUPIPtnfP ^MI^-HPlPHlfpl 
Pn#T dl^RfHHirH PP^ PTPT- 

PPifp Pra:ll'«'!JII 



O Brahmana, thus I have described the 
supreme magnificence of all the holy places 
that have existed in this region. I have told 
simultaneously the fruits/consequences of 
taking a bath in the Sahyadri mountain and 
Amalaka etc. pilgrim places. O Brahmana, 
that is the best tirtha which is the holiest. 
This Amalaka pilgrim place has originated 



CHAPTER 67 


293 


from the feet of god Visnu; hence, it is the 
best holy place. To take a dip here in the 
river is equal to the horse sacrifices made as 
many as for one thousand times. It is called 
Cakra-tlrtha by the scholars who well know 
the Vedas. After a dip one should bow his 
head at the feet of god Visnu there and thus, 
a man becomes free from the cycle of birth 
and death. The pilgrim places at the bank of 
rivers like - the Gatiga, Prayaga, Naimis 
aranya, Puskara, Kurujahgala Pradesa and 
the holy places located at the bank of 
Yamuna are all fruit givers. A dip in these 
holy places, takes time to make a man holy 
at heart but this Cakra-tirtha, as emanated 
from the feet of god Visnu immediately 
makes a man holy at heart. 

Thus, here ends the sixty-sixth chapter in 
Nrsimha Parana 




CHAPTER 67 


293 


CHAPTER 67 

Manasa-tirtha Fast 

MRRlPr % dtetfPl f^Vl>td:ll?ll 

hhiI^4h^i <iMilctf^ni3jpiil 

cM Twri 

wyMirttui ^ ?mJiT»^WRRtTii^ii 

Suta said- O Brahmana, thus, I have 
described all the popular pilgrim places 
existed on this earth but Manasa-tirtha are 
the particular ones that provide with extra¬ 
ordinary fruits. It is all true that the mind 
free from attachment and envy is the best 
pilgrim place. The observance of truth, 


mercy, control over the senses, obedience to 
teacher, service to parents, observance of 
ones own religion and worship of fire are 
the best pilgrim places. Thus, it is the 
description of the holy places and now 
listen to the resolutions (Vratas). 

TTcnfr yuqrfta?fq grnfr 

■qdfiWli m TaFmqdhBi w t g^iitjii 

wIchTrari trrmt hf^mgii^Tnimii 

•O n3 so v3 V ' 

smzri g -^r ii 

O hermit, it is a resolution to live on 
single time food and that too in the day and 
particularly giving up the food at night is 
the fast. One should live on one time food at 
Purnima and Araavasya. The person who 
takes one time food on these days receives 
the supreme position. The person who 
keeps fast on fourth, fourteenth, seventh, 
eighth and thirteenth day and abandons food 
at night, gets the desired thing. 

sqyRTi ■qchici^i 

^ sjntgr <Ihicah^^ii<iii 

S3 s3 

fsgnrt ijrt ^ Ti%: i 

O hermit, day and night fast has been 
prescribed for the Ekadasl. The person 
becomes free from the ties of all sins as a 
result of worship of god Visnu on that day. 
If hasta-naksatra is falling on any Sunday, 
one should observe fast at night on that day. 
This fast is called Saurnakta fast. The man 
recuperates from all ailments if god Visnu 
could be imagined through concentration on 



294 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


the Sun orbit. When the Sun is in its double 
shadow, Saura Naktavrata is observed on 
that day. One should not take food from that 
time till night. 

^ m.-i 

: 11 11 

qrrfw ■5T: 

The person does tarpana of gods, Rsi and 
Pitrs after a bath and taking seasmum and 
rice in hand in the afternoon time on the day 
when TrayodasT-tithi is falling on Thursday; 
and worships god Nrsirhha with fast, is 
absolved from all sins and receives honour 
in the abode of god Visnu. 

3TWEira 

t <aif^d9b4lR4liyrlll^^ll 

ftrarrawoT: w fwwR tii^'xii 

tr^: wfert ^ irrswr: tprii^mi 

13^ f ^ 3tfRI 

R[^RTR^rft^g?n<TRRTTf?r p?rtR;ii^^n 

O great hermit, when the star Agastya is 
risen, hermit Agastya should be worshipped 
from that time up to the next seven nights 
and offer his arghya. The white flower 
should be kept on conch and rice with 
water, one should worship Agastya with 
arghya and pray - O Agastya, you got birth 
from the wind and fire; you are as white as 
the flowc of Kas'a; we salute you, O the son 
of Mitra and Varuna. You have got birth 
from a pitcher. May Agastya, who gobbled 
up the monster Atap! and Vatapi and 


absorbed the entire sea, be pleased with me. 
The man who offers arghya at the direction 
of Agastya (i.e. south), becomes free from 
the ties of all sins and crosses the di.sastrous 
ignorance of attachment. 

TTM HKfy^ xt WII^VSII 

jrffRT^ R<tWlTrfui xtl 

dVlIH^Rd ^ Infill 

t ^1 

MlciJu^JlW t tJlW TT^ RTRfc^ FI 
yRldlHtPR^t^ FM gtRcTTIRoll 

ddiRidWiii 3JTO y^iirnyuiiwq^i 
jmit rrt grfsiit it^ir^ii 

guR ^ g^strtRFHii 
O great hermit, Bharadvaja, thus I have 
told this entire Nrsiriiha Purana in the 
presence of all of you. I have described 
sarga, pratisarga, vams'a, manvantara and 
vamsanucarita etc., all. O hermit this Purana 
was first explained by Brahmajl before 
Marlci etc. hermits. Out of those hermits, 
Bhrgu told it to Markandeya and 
Markandeya told it to the king Sahasranika 
from Nagakula. Then the learned Vyasa got 
it with the grace of god Nrsirhha. From him, 
it is transmitted to me and now I have made 
you all to listen to this time in the presence 
of these hermits. May all of you enjoy 
pleasure and I am now leaving. 

Rf: VJ>JrlRl ^fij'^rcll TTM I ^ ^ 11 

RT^ Rtf^ RRFt R TT •HHMivIRIRHilldl 

RcJdjEjRJH 3JTCZT flfBgvnI; rfIrwi 

The person who listens to this supreme 




CHAPTER 68 


295 


Purana with holy heart attains the fruit of 
taking a dip in Prayaga in the mouth of 
Magha. The person who makes the devotees 
to listen to this Nrsiihha PurSna, attains the 
fruits of visiting all pilgrim places and 
finally, receives a high position in the abode 
of god Visnu. 

Rii(dc|i4^ ^>TcTT:l 


Thus, having heard this entire PurSna in 
the company of learned persons, Bharadvaja 
gave honour and respect to Suta and stayed 
there. All other hermits returned to their 
respective places. 


Mcjdi 



This Nrsiihha Purana removes all sins 
and provides one with high fruits. God 
Nrsiihha pleases the persons who read or 
listen to it. All sins are driven away when 
god Nrsiihha is pleased and the persons 
whose ties due to sins are destroyed, 
definitely attain to emancipation. 


Thus, here ends the sixty-seventh chapter in 
Nrsimha Purana 






CHAPTER 68 


295 


CHAPTER 68 


Fruits of reading Nrsimha Purana and the 
fruits of listening 

gntjTijH? f? 

% i46-r4ifl| ^JUcir^ 7#^ griRII 

igroigf^fffii^ jmiT fl'4cbmdH,<i?ii 
rT dcidll^dTtJUcidi ^ ^ ^1 

W^cTflg^:_3Rnf% tmt tr^i 
Hj fgwsgt-.imii 

31^-y^rt jTlId-d ddHi^H ^peJdH^I 

■51: T^dlTd^Wra ■51^ TcTREif^Tlf^ll^ll 

Suta said- Thus I have made you all to 
listen this entire Nrsiihha Purana. It 
removes all sins and makes man free from 
the pains. It ensures all fruits of great deeds 
and all offerings. The people who read or 
listen either one or half hymn of it, seldom 
ties with the sins. This Purana dedicated to 
god Visnu fulfils all desires Bharadvaja, 
who read and listen with sheer devotion this 
Purana, the fruits availed by them are being 
described here. They become free from the 
sins committed in as much as hundred pre¬ 
births and achieve the supreme position wit 
their several thousands generations. Who 
listen to the name of Govinda recited 
frequently daily, they needn't aixanging 
pilgrimage, donation of cows in gift, 
penance and the offering. The man who 
read twenty hymns of this Purana in 
morning everyday, receives the fruit of 
arranging Jyoti stoma offering and attains to 




296 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


the abode of god Visnu. 

TJrRqf^ fHt 

flJ3THT SnSET^tt^ wt-.i 

HIT: ■RchrnijniTRFRT^i 

«n§?Tr?i^g?TT grftr t{()<Tat^R;*fTtnH;i 
^i<&l'Jiy<gi: ^d<^rni f^MilTi^uU^o II 

^ ■^^larRsnt ^:ll?^ll 
^ ^hrrfwgrmt ■RrwsRn^t^ ~R4g: ti hTgt 


yyndHii 


This Purana is most sacrosanct and 
respected. It should not be explained before 
the persons who have no control on their 


senses. The devotees and Brahmanas are 
entitled to listen it and one should feel nor 
reservation to explain it before them. 
Listening to this Purana, renders pleasure in 
this physical world as also in the celestial or 
metaphysical world. It effaces the sins of 
speakers and the audience both. O hermits, 
there is no need to say anything more in this 
prospect. One should listen this supreme 
Purana with obeisance or even in the state 
of no faith. Bharadvaja etc., hermits pleased 
to listen this Purana. They happily saluted 
Suta and all of them then returned to their 
respective cottages. 

Thus, here ends the sixty-eighth chapter in 
Nrsimha Purana 


End of Narasimha Purana 



INDEX OF VERSES 


'sr^R’pn ^^<A, 
3t?mH 'HHhRi rffg^TI; 

^TfTk5|; I 6^ 
3T^pn# f?tfW( 

<H't)44)i eRnfe 
Sl^frfrmi Wirfg'srf^fHT^ 

3j<j,rq4o| ^c^!<Ihi^ ?^'^^ 

arfflRTO ^ X'/i^ 

37^ ^^cr<c( ^ ^KV5 
3l9h<'J| 4ldl 

3r<+4rf?ra; 

37^TOc^^3rq^ u^ 
sT^wra^dT^Tfq 
3T^^<dfl( ■qs^: 
3TfeHgRr3r#ra?^.. ^o(i 
3TfT^4f3^; -J^t; 

3Tf?q wrRr^ 
siRq T^irqPt wfM 
37f54f5f^ 

StR-i'jctlcdl^cdRHgi 
3#H5tT^^fe|5Fn^g.. V35, 
3#qRTi%^ trrfe^ 
3#^fqdT?^ x^ 
3^RHi4lHlf<diHl[ui 
37pd4raiPddT 
3F4 i^ fl^RlW^TR I 
3p4t fWidlddi ^ 
3TTlRR>y^^ 


3m5oqi4MH[: RaTrgi 
37f^! RrTT ^ 
STf^oRpjfgc^IFl 

37^ ■^HIM'JlV-ll®! 

31^-R=hTfM 

37^#Wpg^ -XXX 
371%^: ^ ^75'^ 

37f%W7HH 
TqRw-q ^ RR77 5 ;^o 
37^RI^^54 
37f%7J^ J^^i'kl 
37f^Rl^Tri 
37firo?IWilR% 

3r5gcnpf TrgwT x^o 
sT^gcTpq fOT w 
37^ fd^lld) fdHci 6\ 

3R -^Rnt ^;73H1^H 

«^RiTraRRpR 
sT^wtePT^g^ 
srinw*^: ■^«7T?R: ^X 

3737FTcT R Rf7!d7l?l ^5,7^ 
37^74 ^ ^\o 

37‘^dR7l^gK^: X^ 
37q7TR^dRTnr=77 ^o^. 

3757 Rif c^dmqpq 

3T^3T^R 77q 

373^ 3n^g73 RX^ 
37^^ ^ R«77 

37<JiR«Fiqiwrgf^ 

37cT; RTR g R^mfil 77V3 


37?7: qRgfg^ ^oo 
37cT; RT RR8?7TfR ^5,V3 
37R: Rt RR^Rift 

37 f 7 : RRR dlRcl X'X\ 

37 ?f: 'WcRigq: 'R^ 

37R; Rt^: g^R 
37R; R7 RRSRTfR 
373 RR TTRRfsfCT X'^X 
373 ^ RrIcR 

373 R RRT^ 337 3 q:'^ 

373 37^ R3837fR RR'^ 
373RFg7gRTR7R RTRTR .i? 
373733 33 R?37?J 33 
373R343 'dldlfy q^o 
373fc37 hR'^-c^SiIh q 
373R3T R74f3STffR X^'^ 
37f33)T3R?T333t ^^77 
37fM3 3733 33737 ^^6 
3Tf3#77337gTf3 77C 
37f3R7R33 3^ ^33 
37^3^337373 
37f3g757f337^7g ^77^ 
3fcl4c7 3F733 R 
373)3 fRg37 373 
373 V 3 7pi7 33R737 73<i 
373r3333’3^ 
375 ^ 7^37337 ?R<7 
37375*4) g33 g9 
3737 R 373 373)?I ^o'7 
3737 37 qu 

3737 773 3 7'^77 

373)53 357 ^ 
3773R7Ri7f3R?%3 ^'^7 
377373 JidRcfrl 'X'XX 




298 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


3T^ era; 




3T2T 

jflsrrapi 

3ief%rarTOraraT; 

ra?T 

m f^fcr3rgc#Eri 

3TS? ^ IRra#!^ ? o>f 


ararPTcTira^: ^'so 

312(T^ 

3I«fT^ ^«Tr 
3T«Tlfqg^ WfFJ, W 
3T®TRTrra ■§ cT 'j'<^l 

3?«Traw 3rfK 
3TSTT^; Ttf^^ft^l4 
3T«Tr? ^«T: 3rfT4 W’k 
3TSTI? f4cR Wet 
3iaTT? 3raWrq; 

aisn^^Tf 


sjarn^ciHraT Wn: 

3T^WZT?^W u^ 


'3T^4^'=Fc 1 
3Tfe)4cTteJ9l: W 

sjfWT^mraiW 
srflraTR W 

srfWra W 

3i 4W cj'^i't 

ra^rr^ 3rWtlw f% 
aWfetfW W Wet '?,', 
stqpWra ■>1^ tu 
3?KTJraTK!?W ra 
3t?raTO ra 
3t%znWT«IT«T^ 


3fST ^ 

3T8T ■5ff;5f ^pran; vs^ 

3TaT wraWr: 3f^; ^o\3 
3T«T ^JiW^fWgT 
3 t«t TTfrara^; -gi? 






3t«T ■^l^'TOTrara 


■ eT ^x<: 


3T?? P^TTcgr ^ PUT Ho 
3T2TTPcT P 1^ 0 


3TfW: gjP ^PTP; 


I: pnpfl 


irai 


aWuT pwtraprai; 

3TfW 


am Ararat yfra 


3T^ 3r^jKf "4 ■RT?TT 
arusT^jfet Ai'^'g ^o\ 
am giciet Isdl Hletf 

am^WpengW i6^ 


^?irllll»»>t2f«llSg 


3tW PmeTT W 
aT^pratptTU?^ s>o^ 


appeTwrWW 'i? 


3?PPTPmPPX?, 6^, 

arapraaEraetpW^p 
araptTwrarp Wmrp ? ^ 


3FRl^ KgPT?ra 

aprWrappW 
armr^^jpet t “k 

an"4myi fW 

arauept^; 

arararu ra mi aIIh 
aTWWpgct ??? 


arararrageigp: ^oi\ 
arafWfram^: 6% 
aFraRnfWrpmi 
an^psprara 





INDEX OF VERSES 


299 


AmMdHdld ^ 

3Fn«Tt XH 

SFTTCTwdcT ^81 'a'?. 
Wlt^lvq^TgpTT 

3F7ra% ^ 

H:^- >ax 

3RI9lfq?g <aX 

3FIR^lfePTI^ 





<a'^ 


FRrnr cjf^Idi ^ox 

3IJJU^ ^ ^6o 

5T3^f^'?Tt¥ 

sgen-g 

3T5^^ WTlft 8.0^ 
3T5?rraT ^X6, 

St^jdl^Pd d-^di 

3Tg?nf ■Rf^eqK: ^X 

ag?Ff?^ V30 

3q?FTFT ^K# 

'q%TaiT ^V3'^ 

^V3 

3T^-?r; cT^T^ dT4; R}31 

3FFf)T^dHdl'f5?^ ^5,5, 

^HddilHl? ^ll^lPl ^<^0 


<Hdd)c|Id<; Trn^ Ro^ 

3TO fet ^ 

3Rdf^; 

3Rd T8^?T[ dld<A4 RR'^ 
3H^d I^IkRTEP-^T ^Ia^a 

3r^ fgfqdT 

3?^«lf^^; 
SR^fKf^ ^'^X 
a^^grjiTT^ 

31^ctira ^d-dW R6^ 
3HFn?qrW 

SldlsK^^-d dctlcf RCl 
3RT^-5?2Tra^<!,^ 
31-dcdfd fSWt ^ X 

^>a'^ 

3F*I^fiRfHc; %6>i 

3FT RTR^ 

SFTTtR ^ ^ R^'^ 
SFTRTfyPlfHrU R'^'^ 

3f4 

sRraRlTrgf^ ^x 
SFETeg^UfRlTd ^U 
3Rir5R %-sra^RTfR 
sF^rat 

3RR8IT R^RRt ft 
3RR2nt rR^iP? x(a 
3RRT: ■g’URT?^ ^ X(^ 
3RRR8TFTcIF];^^ ^x<: 
3F5#r ^ 'H'gld'dl R^6 

^V9 

SRdft ?Slt ^XV3 

SF^VTt ■|wrg'«T?^ ^o 
3RRRt^ ^pRi\3 

sRwrft^sRpr 


3T^: RdcJRRrtf 
SF^^f IcRT ci 

3l4*ffdRdi ^ RC\ 
srf^qf^ ^ ^oX 

SF^^TFIRFIT 
3?9mft?IT: ^IFRI: R6^ 
3ncRT»l3Fnn? 

3FFIMTfiT ^ TJ?^ ^X 
SIWcRATtf "'Jrg R6 
arpTiTEi ^difw^'t ^Xo 
3I9fcR-n^-EM 
3Fn SK^i'W^d 
aFFRFf ^(a^ 

3?f9 cbl^Vddl ^XX 

3T3^ ■JtT HlFl ^^(a 

ariJRffR^frfT^ 
3TY^t?gffttlW %\% 
3FfrR4rR 1^ 'a'^ 

SWRFdfef ^ ^X 

STOTPFra^ 
3im(9Fmyddl \l 
^'3.^'!'^'^ d'i^ 
srfsKf^^T^ Hid RRo 

-Ild^dW ^?X 
3#rRra RT^ R\l 
arfdRra RKrFdFf ^x 
37fdH-4ldd{Fli RfffiFT: ^.X 
STpWdM^oif V3^,XV3 
srfirfdR^Rf^rorlr ^^x 
srfRfrsf TFdRF ^X^ 

^ XFd ^ 

3lfMdHddlldfddd<^Tl 
3T'»JR |R R X<A 



300 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


3t'«pe 4 tvS 

3T'«T^ 

STOTrar^rfimi f^RT^ 
awrawra \6 
srfrra^T f?T^ ^\3 

3?^ WTFR <^6 
3T55?Tg?Wm 
3itfdrr«Ti fe^rr 
amra^TTOTRf 
3TRM^^ wipiT 

fiTFRJw^g^ 'R'^^ 

SPrfl^^TrcT; \6\ 

STIR dV-l cTT; ?R ^ o 
3PR Tlf^ V9 
3(<R fea4 \S 

3PRf^^ 

3TRf%ct yc^ldcif RU^o 

n'K 

3Tf?T R?r 

3PWTTrqRft#?I 
aPTr^RipEg ■qr^ ^^3 
3T^^ qrfq TTRT^ ^00 

aPTrwTTJR^' ^ f,6<3 
U'^ 

3RT1WR7T TTR; U'R 

srqiwTRn^'R^ 

aRTtHTTR 

SRTR tq^qR Ro^ 

3Rf%^ 

SfftR ■fRS ■'RM 
srfeqfipTRtRi^ ^13 


•3#RM ^ TRRt 
aPCT RdTO^RT 
3pf R''3'i 

3r 4 <^lrRM«r5!| 

SRjf^pn qrJR 

3TH4qrara^Trii 
3T^Trag?=!#t 
3T^RRTf%FI 
3r5f^ ^ 535 # 

3T^fq?ig vjt'Miq \ R‘^ 

3)-4fMrctl qqPTTn R6^ 

3if^ Tpqqrar^ 

3tfq?f ^l'jv>)J|r'04 
sT^qRT ^q^Rwfwg; '^'i? 
3T^R5fq'fOTRIcTT W6 
3T«fRl|-^| f% rTR W 

3Tqf^7Rq o<|uH Ro\ 
3|crf^"RT; qjJdTRI U 
'iTH q % g %gci \\c 

3IW^ WfW 

3T?P^ rgrafTJgRT Ri^o 

37Rrq 

3H<rM$;oMl fqrfcTfT 

3RwiqTr%^ 
sRqr^RgpRj'zfmf 
3Tqfq?q '^6 

3TqqKRW?q 5 ^ 5 ;^ 

3ic(dKH5 \RC 

sTorar^ m 
Siq^'JTf qOdMiql 


3Tg#aff q TRR 
srcM ’jiq ■?tOT ^vso 
3RtRlfq 

3T5RqqTqqft'^ 
3rd?qqq qrqoq ^u,v3 
sraRTTcW 
3TqTq qrqt 

srqrqqfq tir 5,0 
si^qrotqii 6^ 
3T%qT; ^ qqffqj 
3#?fT CRt^q^I 

arfgqiftr x 

arf^F^cnrpqq^ ■fRTTqr 
artg^cFTcT^t qRRRFt 33 
3TtcT qr ^gfqqTT; ^3'*< 

3P3OT^ qqTJT 
3TRqrS^; qi: U 
3pqj3Ti jj qqR:Rq1 ^<^3 
3TRqfw£r qpqfq ^<i<i 
3TRqfe?g qrqrfq 
SfViJJeTH qr^T ^^3 
3TRT8q 'srasqifq ^o 
3iRi^Rfqq Rq ^3 
sTRisqqrqoiqq 5.^ 

R^\ 

3pyi^i fqqqqg va 
sfRiqtfqq^^rf&i 3^3 
3T^ qqqi^qTfq <: 
awqrqqqqrq 
^Tqqqqrq qfcRT 
SRqqqwqjq ^\o 
SIRTqfgqrtqqlq 
sRTW^^rqiw 
q^ii^iqR^hi qraT 336; 
3T^?i=FciPr=tiTq«i Roi.Ric 





INDEX OF VERSES 


301 



aira'Uildi 'HTKT ^ "Eirfer %q; :^V9^ 
siidiMunRd -Jr ^vs^: 
3ird)f?^dHl^o^od 
3TTO?T ■?r^cFC?T3f X 

Sll^ll^icjiyduiife ^ 

X 

31Fra flS'fg 
SfFP^ 

sm^ 'm cE^ 

3110^01? Hgldl^ '^06 
%; TK 

3lHldl; ^ 

3?TTM'dl'HI!^liq 

SIFTrTT 

3TFlH'BITin^ 

31F1^ 

STmcTF mcT: #qn_ 
31F1^'=^'3^ 

31FTc^ dl^lld g 
3TFT^ l-ddmig 
aTm^'afdd^TI*! 

3li*lrd Tl^yid^ ^'^'a 
3TPTc^ ^^WF5fI«J ^?o 
STPTc^ ^ WSl 
3TFTrSf WdHdlf 
3TFE%? ^(aX 

3IIHdd|MH^o?|c|d1 
3il'Hdl'tdl'>^d <rl'd'H1: ^^0 
^ ^RVs 

3iM*-d ^ddlfH'<ii 
SITETR'STOlt RKo 

3?rEn4?g ^xia 
SIMOIH H^ld-in \ 


















NARASIMHA PURAIVAM 


302 

IT^^JcTRT 

3nWTT?mjrf^ 

3TI^ fctd^Mc; fcjgji 

3TRM ’M^dl ^vs 

^mcrrrt 

'’TT 

3Tr?q^f|^^ 
3TrcTT?^^T3’m^ 
snrRH'iT^ ^TTSRT 

anrqR^fMi^ 

STfctTH ^fraf%W«T ^ 

SFI'fMFMTfcKF^ ^5,^ 

anciTni^; ^^5; 

<HIcM 1'4 y=b<rl ’i<A 
3Tm?F^^?ff ^(a? 

3TKra-gl^g^nsT ^o 
3TI^ "5^ tTRT 
3FK!^fe4l tc^TFT 

3Flfc;ct)rli clAiei^-cl ^'lio 

3TTf^: «4HNil 
3FTf^; ?>£, 

3Trf^?ZT5^ ■gUTiri 

3Fifc;rWu^diTOnci;u? 

3TifcFfiifg?gg^??raT w 
dJ)fc|r£(^-t|IVcR^q ^(a 
3F(f^c^f<q ^ 

3TTfe;c^Tl^: ^o 

3Tlf^?5R'H? WF ^Ia? 

3Tlf^5fq ftt^Ffi# ^(a 

<Hlfc;<<^l 'j|M!A+-d[ 

3FFf^ ^fi4hf 


SFlR^iFdi ^«F ^IF^ '^^6 
'ri 


SFFf^^T'Ffs^^Tif^ 

3TF^ TTF^ \6\3 

^FFKgqrdFg?r^ 

3TF^ rFFgdTFJTCF 
-SFF^ rllc|<y<5^l V9o, V3^ 
^IfeldiSSdlgd^ci 

3FTiTi^f^TF^ 

^^RTO^Fli U° 


SlM'dM'+i fdA'j) (cFc^lcHdi 


ailT<'^q WT 
af(T'<?TF'K X 
arrq^ssT MF^ '^<' 
3FHfq^5Tlft ^ 


an^ ^F^FcF w 
aTF^ fapFcrt 

arr^ iFim^ 

3FT%F-q^^'iTi 

anit^rm ■gci ^ ic^ 


arTTF wm 
aFim^lf^^F^ 5;o 
ajiq-A>d aI'^hMaI'--^ 
3FFiF^8FI^ 
ajlfi^^’ 5*]4<=bTjf 6^ 
airjMfTTOH ■JFT^ 
arrj^ 5,^ 

3FM WcFrMi CC 
3FT?^ ^-i^ 

a)KI?yf«FF^ #11 



3TFTFS2T: ^cfWId 
3MWq; ^«FI 9lll^ 


3TFTFKZT ^M"i|2F ^k 
3TFTFKi[FTtF8TF^ g 
3F1TF»F 'dt^^FTOrar ^9,0 
STRIPS? ^'■ 3 % 

3FRT62T ^ 

STRIBq f^ %*#F U ° 
3FRIKI ■J’^fTffert-RR: k^ 
aFRFKFrFF^ RFI3R1-k^; 
aTKlAfdfd^^^ftTI '^'v9 
3TRR;gq%^?TFg 
3TFRW (dklH ■g ^oo 
3TFR11 'I^S 6FTRF^ ^<ik 
arrawi ^RiRfk ^ka 
3FT^iRijf^ RF^ RkX 
aFFf^TR 

3Fi(d^'^F rFRR W ^'>Fk 
aFTf^ 

aFii^ciidv ^k<i 

aFIdW RR^; k^ 


aUcTI^ R^^FRSFFf^ 
aTTOTEq R^^FTFSnfq 
aricRTi^RRTR ^a? 
aTFf^’jR^<:;k 
3 TtM^ RRRT^^^a, 
anfg^^RRfR 
anfR^RF 'lil4H'l'dd'4<H ^ak 
anarRFfw ^ ftaqifq 
3 FT?f4 3F«F^ ^F^ R'36 
an?rRF ^o 

aFi^divF RF ko 
3FRRR3FFRtR ^ok 

aFFRR ■(rdRAl't) 
aFW^H ^ k'^H ^k'-S 
ariR^g fRf%% ^ 

sik^ 



INDEX OF VERSES 


303 


3irFFr>J^ ^5,0 
3HHi-c(9b 

3TT#^«ITSITfq Uo 

^'?,o 

3TM^^ 'WTWIV9^ 

sii-hH; yis;y.<al 
3TRT5TtTHTjMir 
37TfeT^5FT?: 

3IR% ^ 

3TIES7FI ^ 

<Hi<r<yymi y(oi^<msT 
3TT? TFT IT?!^ T^o 
■3TTfTTfF^^?fTlfF 
Sn^^FT^??^ ^.^o 
Sn^ Tin, TTFTfTq 

3TT^ TTTRT 3FnTr 
3TTfT^: T^TfTTTRT "I 
■^^TcTTg T^ >^<^ 
^^^IfTSTcHeT: \3i 
^^IfFftT ^JFTFTVS^ 

^TTRg^: fcSTT TT? 
ifFfK^TT^ \'3o 
irfa nRdcid: TT Rf^^dld 
fiF Rt'dljcd'fr^ol 
^ cTPT tteT: 

^ TTFi^FRFIRTTT T^T, 

■?fF F FifSTcT TT^ 

■?fH % ■^f^TdlMNl 6o 
^TTTTf^: 
^rRf^Tjrg T<:; 
RTRTfg^'Rfl W 


^ 1 r' 4 tpI W{ 
ffFFcgrflFJFT^: 

^ FTTT fR^TTRf^ ^o 
■?% F; ■^TT'R yiyiHi ■^o 
TIWR: ^V3^ 

f^TTFr h^kt4i 
■?{% fd?ginMRk T^T 
|fd ^ ddddi^i 1^6 

ifF ^Idl; Trdd ^rdl 

lf^ WT ■HMld)‘j4 TT° 

^ ^c^^siT: ■J’FTT: 

^ ^r^TTcT: W 
■^fd ^cdl TRTt ^i?m 
lt!r ^ TT^TTFTTRf^ 

^ ^c^T fyRTcildf T^T 

CCdTdT^ T°^; 

^ ytl'lRd: ■^: 
^TTftf^f^ 

■?!cT TTf^TT^ ■§;T3Td! ^?o 
ffF TTf^R^ TI^^ 

^ ■Hf^'-'ddRpdy: 
ifF TTp-'d-cR (fr 
^TTf3?IWT7^ ^^6 
ffd Tlf^iR^-R^ TT 
■?fF «Rid-d: ^fgi 
ifFTF^tferWR 
ffcl ^HlRdl fdyT<iH U\ 
^ T^dWd'l 
ffF Tgdt FTRT^^ 6^ 

^ TgcTT ^3rR?RIST: 

ffdT^fRt%?I 
^ TdNWTTH TT 
ffir y^RluidR'i'd-ddl; 


^ T^ TTT's 
^f^cT W n4 
■f^f^FTflcTT UT 
?fFWTTT^TT^'«Tt 

^dldydd ■dRdrd^ ?? 
^d^TilPd R T'^io 

^ R ?5T MSmfR 
^fRRTTRT-^ T‘a° 

^ g dTTTfRccIT g TR? 

?c«T fgf^: RTf^ 

^ fR: RTR RR ^ TU 
1 r?T ■ 5 TI RTRRCT 

f^lfd'ddiTTt l^S-iS 
t^dWRI %R 

F®T ff Wff RHd'ji«J|'(!^4 
^^'ii^TlfRR RM ^o'iT 
T^: ^ 
frR^gfRptT; fTRl 
??RTfe^ ^ Rrat ^ 0 ^ 
■^cRTRFJ^ W 
^cRTrMrR: RTM U'5 
^TRT^RR: W 
^cRrdiu4 d-dWTR TTT 
fTRTRTM RRTdTRT 
^cRTRFJ4 TT 

^cRTRM ^ptcRTTFR^ T ° ? 
^rRlRR4 ^TRfRR 
■fTRI?RTt?#[FI®Tf^ U° 
ITRlRRTTRf^ RU 
^cRTRRITR TTTff TTtrTT T 
fTJERRTRRRR 

^cgRR: RT«lfRrRT^ TT 
frJRd'; diRxMd T°<i,T°T 
■?T3Rd; RTl44t4^ \XC 


304 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 




■qif^: 3JT? 

^4^: W ^4T=lffRT \C6 
??5^; W TRH 
?rgW: W1?M 
?c^; WOHm 

?rg^: 

■?? cT^TT W 
Tt cT^ 

W 

§c^j,4rf: •Mddl^ 

?c^; ^ fcRldR-RT ^ 
"gpRI 


Tt cT^ 

•Mddl^ 

^ fiRldR-RT \%9, 


5c^Tf)c(la Hkn \%6 
W^TTST 
Scy'+^wiwi^tr^ 


■qrfSf^sfq %6^ 


^ y.d'Jl 

^rydrf! 

5r^4Tfl c;c)q^-i 

^c^ddl W ^^5. 

■^r2^l TO ^ ?T U>^ 

■?1T ^ 

^rJ^RTT ^ cTSTTRoo 
^ ^ ?n«ri ^V3R 
^rJ^'RT W 
■^rq^cllW ITS?^ 
Te^4di^4 ^-*$0 



















l.NDKX OF VERSES 


305 


■^c^^rcll -^6 

Scyt+rcii 

^c^^4co|| '55^ rR ^ 0 0 
5o|i=tvc(l 

W-f ^^0 

^'c^bii raropn ^ 
fc^^4rc!l4l tr; 

5cddr'H'*cd yidd 
^^rtr^^HItedld ^'^'-\ 
TRfcr 

Srdd^^dd rfcf ''JxgRT: 

^d'qd^dd gpTdl 
W®RT 
??RRTTf%RT 

^rfsRt f?5qt ^?(a 

■gcR 

#ra ^5RT 3jfe ^ o 
^czra cT-T 
§cdd Pd'dRirdI 'J 

fr^ra KqPTd^RT ^S. 

F^ WTTR ^^5, 
F^ ddHTd'W 
Fdd dddi cR 

F^ ■Rf^ ■gR 
F^ fdcHM'd cf 
Fdd 7R8j cjcdl 

F^ Rf^ ^ 


^rd'dOlId R|R: 
F^dOidf^^RR ^’,V3 
F^raW g'JdlRdd U^ 
F^R^Ff: gRTFr fd^ ^5,V 
^c^dgFTr wr 

^rdqgdd ^ddlr^dd 
FRgg^ ■gTprr :^)i 
F^ra'gFF ■gf^ 
F^rag^FRTRR 
F% 

F^ dlH^JRiod: ^\3o 
FRRSRgwT 
F "CIFWT 
FI H^<lte4IH 
F g^ldR^H 
F IddNdIHm ^ 6 ^ 
FgwTT wi 
F FF oiimgyig fd:gcT ^3 
F FRRR F 
F^ gf^-i 
FRt'gggrM^x^ 

FFf RFig 
FIHWd fRF 
F^fRIcRl^ 
F^[f^RR^R^ ^ 
FRF^FTT: Rgf: 
f^rareg rffr ^33 
Fft^rdRF^RST ^oL(, 
'FRRt: ?o(^ 
IFRRRRg^ 
FggFPT^RF 
fRRIFCigRR 
FFTIR 'dFStRg 
FF%R Ff HlRcdi 
?Fg3; 

F^TfFTgflRFRRR 


IFF! FgFMsfq ^vsx 
■fFf^ggRWTR: 

?fFRfO| fr^t-kilfd 
F^sfqRFFF^o 

Fd RFTf gw ^<^'>i 
Ft^0 
FT^ft^WTR 
FTR^R^F^ 

FIrT ^o?. 

FtFRI^gfWW: ^3 'a 

Ff Wd R: 4dd R HHd: ^ 6 “^ 

FRf«fgRgR; 

FI^«tg^3T 

FTT WRT glddd^l RRRcfT <a<a 

FTR^^RF 

FrRRfRRRR ?^V3 

F W grfRf^FlT F 
F g^cddi'dirHl ^V3 
FttRTF FFRF 
Ff^ FFTF ^5, 

ffe'^FRTfgJF ^'a'^ 
<*Kdimy ^^3 
FddtFraTR^x:^ 

Fra fsrf^RT 3nF 
FTRlRFoTRIfR Ro^ 
ffSRTtWRF^ 

FfFRT -RFraRT 
fgfFRF F ?flF; 
fRRi R^gRRT RRf W 
Fra ^ TRT^tRfraR^ ;;dx 

ddd; (ddlH^Ad ^d, 

FR; gR; Wdl 
RF: RRf^RI F 




306 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


:3^ ^ ^ 

ciRtiyr^Rtiqig?: 

^5=Fr^ ■jftcTO? frq 
^'tTT^fd ?Frq ■gr? 
dt+rciRr ■^qqr^TKf 
d4rc|fq -qM 
dqtrcil^ HiqicHci 

<5‘+co|Ri ■Rt^: yf i< 
d4r^(^d: ^mW: 
dldd -iirdd Rtifo-dd^ 
4)Vid Tqrqqfd 

TTwq ^ 

'sqqrf^qqr (yfcistiH ^^>3 

^3tTO dfdHIMifd w 
3W qtw 
■JrlTP^i qo'^ 

<ld'RdlW|l'5^H 

RRPPKdRq fg ^ o-if 

R#4-JTgqT w 

R#q WR% 

Tg^'^sj^dFFs^ 

diwifd^^ 

c5 qoq 

R?«nfqdiR!:q1d'|:%m 

R?«IFT^'5q: 

f^Sfcgi RU 
R?8TFT Tf-Mqr 
R?«nRTF'n: 
R?«Jli|||rfMd'il<^Mrd^ 
drdd^d "qq 
Rrq^q: -grsqd fggP5,3 


Rrq'R^’CFiR^ 

■irSHld InT: 
d?qqid RWd: ^0>s 
MOM^Ud 

■3cqra'3dR_fcra«f 

iTidt 

d'f-d TFTrcI^ 
R^diRsrfMd^nTF ■RH'? 

B^dRT?Iglft 

dd+dliddm ^ doMI'Jli ?o 

diyd^rai %\ 

dRd "d ddT d€lld 

^ RW3 

>s«Sc| 

^?jcq ^5fd<diR ^q3 

Riqqft' wrc^'OT 

qlddl TR Wo 
■3^^ W?IT ^ ct \\\ 
35d^;^QMW3qm; 
<iHdiy 

RWdfdHHW: 

^rdK^i ^«^v,d ^s,q 
4qfdb9t>qui ^ 
dqqldi Hiuiddi'i 

v5H<s(l§^ RiT 

dqqiai %xc 
3qf^ TTSefr ^^3 
-iMdfyhiddl-i^'^JR 
jtpjqilfdTO: ^H3 
3q^qw^#q^ iw 
RW# w 


viMdT^ -gPlfe 
^qfd'dl ■q8TI%q ^ 
RWiffcgTCR 
Rqra: ^33 

dMiqd)Hi ■g^ql^dt ^o 
xqrald ddRipi 
34IWHIdl u 

rV? 

dyrd TTd'qt tldl 
dMiyci^d y'l'^'Ki ^oq 
3qT«1Tqfq RlffiT^IT 
w 

diFR'^dfd -qt ^qx 
■icTif^dd^ qqd; qos, 
ddld "d d^l'ild ?oo 
ddld "d -jMld, ddl-l ^3i 
idl'd'd neicMld ^o3 

RdTd ^ iqT^vi 

idl'd d*jfq ?rc^: 

3dTd rfi^^ W\ 
3drdR?dT^d?t 

RdpEtR^dm \c\ 

RdTEf ^X^ 

3drd W TRFl 

idid d'dd cT^ qx 

3drdd^3rM 

idid didd ■?? "d di'Jcj^iMl ^3^ 

3drd fd?ddRW 

3dTd J^s^dld)!^ RX^ 

RdTd^qd^ cPF^ ^X 

3dRT ld<Hd)ldi1 

3dm cTfdl: -yrniqi; 

3dmdT^:qiraf Ro\ 





INDEX OF VERSES 


307 


■?'7:'+)lci -HycWT 7^? 
dftrcll TfS' 

^ujiiK^^I ^77 

iicbRiT,TiKurr,4lm^ 7^ 

HKWUlwfd 

^'-TOT HKl’iluiwfd 7 ^'a 
aSj'Wr '^KWiJITqfd 7^9^ 
7^, 7^, 

'H'IcId cTF^ ?^ 

35-^ 

3r)'(?^'F4 ■g dcdiM 7^7 

yRc-SI ^ ^7^ 
^F3feTC«l: ^yMt vs? 

: 7T o!%7t 7'*^° 

vs^'-^^TrR^cTt'JFFg 

■vsn^; “^Vs 
TE^-Of^ ■qt^ 7k^ 

3E«mmdm f? 
■;feiJtR-#TFm 7'^^ 
>j^'*miRi0i 41 ^ x<i 
■g 'ymivi ^'i^'ii 
^ ’qiTRf 
■^^Tfg^TOTT ^<dH 
^yd: lHd<l ddl: ^7 
djtftnri dddldi ^ 

:^d1'J|i ■Hrqcigicl-d 7 oV 3 
dtq>IIHiJd: 73 ^ 7 
357TFT^WRl ftyi^-d 6 \ 
:€qiPcfai?EnT^ <: 

■§ 7i'^ 

^fqpTFg-gRTW: \ 6 -^ 
wfq’^TTd ■^ng^'yFzr ^vs^ 


gdd fd'Ajg 
tt^t ^ 7<77 

TT^: wftvl 7T^ 7H^ 
U,d>d)|cd 1% <3'jd'^ 6 
y,did: 'faim 7 °^ 

■ij^KTr TRg; 7XX 
^Rdldid 

yTi-ddfdT 
U.d)dl ■g 

TTgrgsRi ?r«iT^ 7^3 

gdiMd % <yi$lid ^ 0 ? 

TT^fel^RI^ 7'*i'A 



T3:d.iuPdTn ftiR-vsn^iry 7^<i 
TTgqMTOT KiITcgT 
gdiiyqTOl \% 

gdiiyq’TOl'Sqrjt ^7 

U,+HJMd-Hl -TTgF 7'3H, 
U.diliJHd'OI <H*Ajcb ^?o 
■qgro^TFTfTT 7'^ 
gdiKTi HHVdld H 
gdil<^ ^'d7 V3^ 
gd>K^d ^RicTT 
Rt^Rrs^ft 

gdiHHRt ‘dT 

■qgq gn 7^^ 

TigvMg ■R?MR M7 
7'vfx 

Ritih ^'*$7 
■qgpEsrPT^ irfcdif^ 

y.d'^rcil lygdldd 
gd-c^cciT g 7<^H 


■qgviSTR ^ HTdt 7'i? 

Tjge^arq 7 R^ 

Tjgg dig^i'isdid '(svs 
gnd 'difsTTT THg ^?<A 
TT?ra 7^3^ 

T3g% ^P-TcIT: TFlf ^ ^ 

iTdcdcig^'cldMcf gg^ 7^'*^ 

ijgfyfdd 7'^^ 

TTddH^ ^ ?^I3| ^ ^7 

gdddMW 7'<^7 

gdc^Td^’Tin 7 

ogfr^fe^^ ^7 

gdfr^fesb^ TF^ ^7 
gffditeyiH'cr^ 77 
TjggreraFiFiTg qHo 
T3g^ TR vjTRgr ^7 
■qggg^-q^T^ 7^7 
gdg^'qt 7^ 

■tjgfgTJT^ ^sdT 75><i 
TTdtFFPI ^rqkd 7'vf'^ 

■qg^ cggci: 7<i7 

ugdKd 37Tgvfsn 70 ^ 
gd'FHIcdilTUIIcgldT 7^° 

lidR^Hd gief g 7 ?,^Vs^,^V 9 X, 

77R,7V37 

ggfwHgR gm 7^K 
■qgign^TTf? g gm 73 
tjgrRi g? 2 T f^g-ifd 75,° 
ggrRr gvnratdffg 7'^3 
ggtRi TTO ^iTOfg rcc 
■qgrfd g: gg^d 7qi 
ggrgg^ gsggFgi 

gdlHd-^'ldddNdloyi 7^1^ 

ggiggifqg^Fg ?77 
ggrfggg^fgy 


308 

rrmr^ ^ 

TC^ ^l"‘-l ^ >^^c|; 

■Q? Traror ■CR^ V3^ 

W^tTifeq 

W^ftRRT 

■0% ’SfWI: RH? 

3R Tqfrqr ifg^^RT 
TT? Ytww% 

^ ■?!: ^eT3TTT 
13;^ ^ 

TTrRg ^TPqfn: 

Tj;^ 

W^WTR-fSTM 

Trt ftJvST ^ f^TrSn ^ 

TJRfTRI^^pi Tp5[ Mf'-I'H ^ \ 
TTSf cR^; ^RRR 

\6o 

irgfii^^TTTCq 
Xrg <<^c;t1 '^'5 

tjct ^d ’^?r^ 

■q^ frsn ■j-OTm 

qcT 

R R^Tdlrl^ 
tr^ ■?3T2tftsra Hl% 

“tlR 5llrdl cRTI fdyl 
qij ^iRgr g ^fmcf R6R 
3^3 fen ^ 
fe cTTfeTfe^'3 
fe ni d.Kfdrcir g 
fe rj ^^JlfefeFTfe 
1373 ^ ^;fectT fen ^^'=!. 


fefr^fef fe 
fe'd fefe fe 
fe ff differ fei 
fe d differ fe '^.3 
fe d TTddTOf&T Vs^ 
fe feW'Hiuiisfd 
fe df ddffe g 
fe fer ^^dTR drfe 
dddfdT^fedsg: R'^R 
fe fe: 3ryf^i<il 
fednrrdrfed 
fe fqgfen ^ ^'iT 
fe ■'J^TRlf^; 

fe 3rdfe dfe^ 

■fe ddfWdldT; Roo 
fe fe 'g.-rdfe fdfedT ^Ia? 

fe ^Tdl ^;<ad'H; y^cj ^Ia^ 
rrd ■gn ^gfeiid d'^ftdT ^0 
fe d: f fe TRd; R-)i\ 
rrdd; ■'JdfeldFj; U'l^ 
fe ^ feWfdTd 
fefesddn fed 
dd d: difen ffer 
dd dfe fefe ^5,i3 
dd dfer d fe ^X^A 
dd^ddfddT? Ro^ 
dd ddldd fedd, ^'a"^ 
dd fdfdcoii d <dl: R6'^ 
dd fed^dl ^V3^ 
dd 'nrw ffer dd? ^x 

dd dfd d6ld“& f% rd ?X 
d[d yl^ffel '’Jjd Co 
dd ddT CR 

ddfedffepi? \R° 

dd “^dddifeR r;d'r, 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 

ddfegfed RR5 
dd fl fen: differ ddl d; R^C 
dd IcdT d fen 
dddddfeddimn 
dddrfefedcf 
dddTdfefedd RCl 
ddgddT d fedT R'^'C 
dfe^ddfd fedi RC^ 
ddgdd d dffe 
ddyfesd dddTd RC\ 
ddddrdT fdtrdTd 
ddyfed ■fe ?oX 

ddfefer^^ l'^ 

33[d dd dd Tdd dd 
dd dd dd did dd 
dd d^ H6KN 

dd fyfedifl dfe d'^ 
ddT did d^I^dd ^dx 
dfl dlfd dfedidl R 06 
dilfeTd? dldd iJoVS 
^ddddddldfe ??X 
di: didfelFTdT dcd 
di: dddfs^dddldi R'^R 
diffeddiddid ^X^ 

diferfd^^^'i^ 

difeidKIdTddd 

did ddT dil4 ?<A 
did^fen ddfeddl 
diddfedfd: ^ 
rd Tdddddlfd 

didfenfddidi ?dR 

did d fed dTcT: ^oR 
did ^ -gfei ffe \C 
did^^nriddfed 
didd^gfdg^ ^ 0:3 
did -gnTd dddT i< 





INDEX OF VERSES 


309 


^*4 

^S4 ^RT ^ ^ 4 
^s4 3^ <^o 

f| TRtgq 

^STO^Hia'i ■?R 

■5f^?T5^rRrfT TTRT 9 o ^ 

^ariTlHW TWR 
^effe^T g ^ W ns 
rRTWqi ^ 

^20 TO^ ^ f^IOc) 
■ssanfimT ^ ^fuiifri 9V3\3 
f^Kn -RTOT ss 
^2frrT n 

cf^Ri^^d n 
't.ccdMird'^iGcilHi^c^'^-., 
^3 3T1?T 'RWfT \W^. 
^rerfrR^ n° 

■•-bdlPdrtJl'<l=(i'<4k: ^'^6 

t TRFT ns 
^<35; 

=hdirdS'(?«li illdl fi|%oj :^o 

H^.HF11 n 
di'^ yPti'-d fci4?i n, 

WIT n 

d-HdilM^i'^-'^ijjNdi'Hi ns 

diMcdldil'ddil'dlf^y lo\ 

^7T#; -^funit; \9V3 


4i(MFr!;i-fi^K 

^1Rcll«Tf TT lo6 
■cSRK(f4l^^; 

^f#2T 3T4 k? 

'sfk Rqfcid 'cTiq ns 
^TTfd 3jf5 ^JFTcI: 
cRTd 1%f4c|'r-t59b: 

^kr^ra HRI wi <33 
di'JidikiR nrr^ 
^'«n^ ^^3 
'tiuU'd'^cifdWKiciS'i n^ 
^<30 

^ -gi diR^lfi) 


=F^ 'SfRra ■SRdN 
9)'[0'rSc11A|d \\\ 

'+4=hHd!^iic:ci \%\ 



^n4f^-R^TOi? ks 
c^Hfaq-'^lR ns 
4dddH4 ^ n^ 

’JrSn S><? 

9)dVIIVk^4l'J| 
wfsi [%RI3dT ^ R3S 
diRd'^ilRd TT^T? ^3 *a 
■ g'WFTSSfq ^3^ 
S^S 

^fn.^3wrwra ^^s 


■^Jcwferwif^ 


•^icNRlrqi 4te ^S 


dirNl^rairHd^ni ^3 
dimi-dR -dO^r-H SkS 

di^dOKRcklRrO: V3^ 
4l(dHI"1IH 'l{<3 
X\C 


RfNI^kTJri ^<3V5 

4)<rm-c.-d M-oidl SS'^ 
cfj-VHKd ?IRTT n .3 
di'i-Hi^ ciM<i 'MHl n3 
diRHH ^ H^w^rfd ? 
csnin'i n'<? 

f^’P Pki5TO ?n 
?Sk 

dil+l defni dS^d \o 

ns 

d>id fdrRr^RTd Ro4<h ns 
^rr^SFdt ’JTdt ■^2? Xk 
cFTSdHH f4m4d n3 
<+ltll ^H|RrT2(W 

^TRn qwJT ^ ?ss 

n’ 

cFFI^IWST TJ^ ns 
^TO^; <^JTOli g Xk 
d^mrfRRT ’f?! ckcTT Xk 
WOdfdl: 

^niTT^ ^ ^ % dTTsftr ns 

dTOH 41fedT ITRT^ ?, 3S 
d)Tm(Hi{i n 
'^iHRirdl '3 ^4d ^o\3 
dilSfdrdl gPrat: n° 
diKddjfdMi RW n3 
diTr41r4'St^a; 
diTTdrfOTlfSi 3 ^3 
diKdcrdSi^iH 3 s n, 
d)TO3^ df^Rdffw nR 
cFfRdtdef RfEd^ 

oHH; n° 
djreuddFTdlSr^ t °<3 
d)l44l4dei n° 
d.T4'4i4CT ■^rr^si n° 



310 


NARASIMHA PURANAIM 


ctiWffui 

4)lc^\dfMfd wm 
'^Id'HO^I fdcdldi'W ^ ^ ^ 
chidipHirraw^ 
chidi ^^yfcIcdlPl 

<+i?r^i^y^iMvr RVi 

dilkilK^d^lr^cil iPTT 

f% ^2T 
1^ ■^iflft O'^lfH % o'^ 
f% 1% ■^ifrRT? 1%?^ 
f% ■^jPT^ ■^^zicf rlTcf 
f% wgnfH ^ 

f#; 

f% cfc^lRTri 1 . 6 \ 
f% ^ 6 \ 

f% cR^I^6,1^ 

1% % t^diRr ^:<slW 
f% dddi f^^JJcT 
f% rc|i|l "^Rdl %cl; ^o 
f% rc|<-ij "SFpft 
f%'3H#g^5rR 
f%Tj,dW>?’idyrfn: 

f% ■yMi'j'i ^ '*15 ^ 

f% yi'ti|'(.ft5Kdk'J|c(dl 
f% yif difd ^irf5(ifuf 
f% HT?n?nHi2n 
f% 


f% ^o6 

f %'m ^ 

f% fd'PJiI: ff«RTI <io 
^f^dd c^i^lM'sd "R 
fct,p>-T(^yct.(Ai*ifld^: 
f^#d^55ot \3o 

R>r>'d'd'^ Wd 
fersf W 
f^*f fern cira 

%R8f g i\3:^ 

'^r3q'*Tm g c^ 
%TRinfwt^ Xo\ 
f^rRPMs% jm *?x 
%RIFRT; 

“^o 

f^fdd rTTO; Jjiftd ^^6 
f%fR^ dldrfg^te x^ 

-gRt 5;xo 

TJFT^dT?? 

■<+lcld5 <W-^'dW ??ls 

■^hiRd^^l RRlild X 

^ ^ddHycdH ^ 

fftcT: j?ld=ll^i R 
^=dlMI>5dt%^ ^dV3 

fH0'fc;[$fPTtf^ 

f MKTdfy RlRF^t ^o:( 


R^T*^6-^ 
O^iyuij 

3)<?'J|| ^d^dHiy 9^X 

1^ W: 

SJci T1R5 ^?x 
J'^I r'HM cT^ 

^4'Hc|lfRd>l4 g x<^ 

3>^iliJ^*R dldd ^kX 
Tdlr^T 

^jfI^u|-^Hr4tfd ^<aX 

5*JR^5Wi 
■^-■^^ifcdRI [cd^tRf 
^rroi 5 vsd 

■)IF^')f^ '^5X 
X? 

f^l^yFTd: W kS, 
■ip^(H^y?«rR ^xk 

.piivd -554 ?n'«tf 
507 ^Xi 
'Ji**J||'^’ 'l.dddd ■g 

^wiirddiyfd'Xf^d 

■^wjIiRsRTT: 'di^TT: r4 ^ 
f^u||«7^«jfR U^ 
f «J|fd TTF RO ^515 ^Xk 














INDEX OF VERSES 


311 


fKl %?1T c 

f)?! roiqi <c|[^d 

fi?f ft '=hl4 
^df^"4l fdtui'i'di 
^d^T=RT t4f \^t 
^d?Rl ■qglfM 
fKT«lFTT clt^ ?fclT VSIa 
■^ clHdl dildl ^o\3 
■^cIRlRl ^ ^ ^o\3 
'jidfy'4 

'Jiclci-dl cFT: ''j4 dlsi 
f^?rr3C5#f^ TR^ 

'Jidl'dfdliil ^ 

■^dl^cHI =blMl^l<Mly^d ^5,'^ 
■fd[fr4lftq 
^RTRfcTRrr^ 

■^irlT*!!; ftcTTT ‘RU \C<^ 

^KTFFmf 

-g-rd^n^ ^ 
fddld^d: 

<J)dc(M '^: =bi4 >('3 

fdHId'l yRwd 
'jidFdl'i 'Jid'dM 
fdHR'^ '\y.C 

ft 

ft dfw-Jdt^ 

ft=T ddFd fR 

f rdl f rdl ■ntdlt 

fRT Tiqfet ^ 

fRT ^ ■qit = 14 d)|->Tidlte!f 

f rdl dHg : ^'a'3 

fc^Tf 


fRI ft 'tiTrtd 
f rdl •jnd6 d^ilcHd: Wo 
fM ftg«Rf fftt ^-^< 

f rdl f^TFrfcf; Hl^ 'R>fX 
fed I y'Hld^'d 

fr^T ^"gt^ 

fc^T HNidt 
fed I Hlc^l '^T^l'dld 
fRT ft?^ ^ fTIdRRFFlT 
f rdl fddl^ ^4“! 
fRT Iddl^g^ltl W 
fetet dl^^t f 

f rdrt FT d^ldd 6'^ 

f?R ftt ^ ■5Rt 

f Hdl WTl ?o 
fW?g?21 f ^V3 

diFd'^'d MiHirHH 
d)Fd'^d9hl(d)dlwR-Hf ^^3"^ 
tttd^RTCFIRRi 

diPd^M y^i'Hpci 
%^Fn«Ttft^ W'S 
tR cbtld'TltiH ftroit: 116 
tR dldl R f diKt 
tRFT RRRt tftr 
tRRRRFRFU ^dtdl '3'^ 
tRTRtftftRR 
tr fffirft RTRrai; 

t)f<dlf Md)<f *JS(rtdlf 
tifldl^dii ft^li 
di^id R yM'dllw f% ^V3 
tiRR: %(^ RRR: 

%RR: RT^ft^: 

R ftRt tftl 
%f %g R ^tg 

Rf^ \6'^ 


^tiRP'dftPit'Rr 
■^RRRT RRrt IK 
RRRRT Kll^rRrs^fRT ?.'^o 
=ht)'ifdid fflR 16'\ 

^RKlftrattfR 

di'ichigy f RKTt W-'^ 
dt tf RRgRRJcf 
dtd'^ RTRRIR ^XX 
dtsRRR: R)R IFRirR 
^ RRlft? KKIFR ^oX,^<::o 
RtRRcRfgcFRnr 
RRKTR gcfdl 
^T^ftRORt: UR 
^RlfRWtRR ^ 

RtfRRKdKRg 

Rd5'tt dRR'gR: 
d%tRtf^ 

RKf; Wo 
RlHKM4t R R ^ 
RlVWmdMRldl UR 
RflRRRT R RRFfdd 
R^J^IRdl R ^gftRl R 
dtReRT R^RR?tR U? 

ft RRR gdl ^ oX 
RifRltf RTRFJBS 

RRtlRlRIR t Rf 
RtSKRf^RtRR XIa 
d RSRfRf Uk 
Rjrrf^ fRRT did! U° 

■^R RfeRtt cR 
WR^t dddidl ft ^^o 
RtRWIdld RFRf ^XX 
^RlRTOfutsfcr U° 
^RTRi Rflt Rg^ U 

RR ddlSWR R RTR U^ 



NARASIMHA PURANAM 


312 

V3V3 

4c|i4i ^ 

q-cti^Hc^-aj'^ng,: 

4df^ldlfy ■RfT^.'"^ ^00 
%m 9V9'i^ 

^HrdKlni 'Sraa^nfiT 
^dr^di'Jii cTWdd ^\3o 

^l-clod dcidciJii ^ o 

^ ^RlriJ^Pd ^\3\3 
!¥PT dd'dl d-A^-cj :^o^ 

^ ^\3o 

^-rm WW ^ 

%TIH^!TTTTO clc^ Ho 
P,-nflTrI %3ipTRH ^ 
pyRiMld^d ■qcTTF7'»TrrrgsKr; 
f!ydlVc)UNd’71dM-|;'d 
%T!irapi w«f ^o 

wqwro 
\m irq 

dlWfy rlfg 9<i? 
^HKHIdd 

#0f®THreT?I ?fT 

iiffrn^-Tr ??3 

wn'q 'g ^cc 

al)iiddr4)drmi^difef ?k 
anldd-wid^ 
anKK-i-’lid'i #i \'it% 
a?ifrqTf^PiRHd‘H 


^■TltJo|t[MHc(RTH$|WJ|dffc; ^0V3 

m ■gq^ qftfc^f ^ 
qnfq ■yrqifq q 
^ ^JUlfq ^6\5,^66 
^■fqRi m'^iruj 
■®f^; yfol!«^ci 
13^ g dOTid; USi 

■gfd u° 

^ q^N; q?vs 

iqgrq?^^ wzf qu 
U'i 

■?3TcdT ■jdwq g qxq 
#EnMrTKRd^^ 

^ ^ qvsi 

TTfi ^^■i[iiqrdii(sqi 

q^qf^ qqn 
q^qq q^r^ ■qifq q^s 
q^qqqiqqqq^fqq^^Rifq q'^q 
qfiydld qrroq 
q^qqgqpTiqrsRt^q^.. a,v9 
TpE^: qrqfq^ 
q^td^qqr^ n? 
qq?^ qta+H'^ii qrar ^ivs 
q^ qq qq qqqf«f 
qq® rd qq^rqqq q^q^ 
q^«g qfS^rnr; %t ^ 6 ^ 

q^s^qqpdqqR: qo? 
q^^qjqff qqqqf g q?q 
q^Hdinq q\3? 
q^ ^aqq?M^ 

q^qqT’T'^R: q^Sj 
q^qj #qq5TraTq 


q^ qiaqq '^^sqr q o^ 
q^qqaqq^ rd 

q50Tfq qfqfq-. qu 
qpEsifq qigraqsl q? 
qEqqfq ■fqqqqii ■’.q 
qiqq fqig q\3'*s 
qsiqq qqrearrq 
qqqi^q^qcRqq ^q^ 
qqr^q^^^ q'« 
qfq^ q?RR 
qqqiHgq^ ua, 
qq qq 

qqqfqqqgqq^ qo^ 
qq qqfqqqis qo^ 
qqsq qqq qf^ 
qq q^ f|qcq4 ^qvs 
qqqqqqr^^ ^ 6 % 
q%fMq^;^ q?^ 

dcdl drdi PidT^-d 
drdi qq ■yql; 
dcRT ^ yfqdqrq u<^ 
dccii qqqqf qgq^ ^a,v3 

dcdi q q^'i< 

qqqrq <tfqq,iqjq ^66 
jqdi^qnfq'qifq 

McdldHWld'jid: ^q\3 

w-q qqqqqqrqqq; ^q? 
qdifqqraisqqq qq<^ 
q^ q WRqqq?^ qc: 

Tqg TTEf#? qfqqsqql^'d; q?-*? 
^[qjfqq^ qq ^66 
TR^fqqjfqqq 

qRyqifqfqf^ q(i,q^q,q'^o 
TRTjBqfqfqf^ e>q 

qqy.iqifdddicdq'^ci q^q 




INDEX OF VERSES 


313 



^■TfifWTf3^ \'Ro 

Tp^wiRdR4^*i 

f ^STT^ 

w ^ fgT:%ZRft«rff^ 

TPTi WRRI 

TTTT^tilledxrq-R vpjqRw \^^c 
cT ^^^ 

WST ^\9 

TM^TcTW^ 

'll-'-ldl' "Ef 

-qr -dqf^c^ 

JIWdlHW^qdlciai.. ^|^^^ 

^TTERftFfF# ^ R° 

TIT I ^ ■'iHEnTTl-q ^V3 
Mld^rdyMIcfiluI IC^ 
jfldoii^wi Rrar ^56 
JridE|tyiR4> ttt^ 

'Hri: diMlgd: ^il'R: 6 ^ 
7ffc?TrR?l44^?ET 

T]<d '^flMT <rc|| 


wm^- w 

'J^dK d-MKV^Ti RVi 
'J^Tdldlcl %nT 

TJTT: d :^^o 

Tj:n: ^ Teddd 
■^T: RdRa 4514 


T|f^ 13RTT^'|4 X6^ 

?,o6 

JJg'lH'ftddldl ^TTi 16 % 
‘j^'bi ^pnrr ttsji 
Tjuiqi TOT 
Tjf yRvd d^SR 

TJ^ ■StRrg 

T]FW: ^dqldl^-t ^|^6 
TJ^rf&T rddlRl 

‘JgTdfduj Jcf'trdSI \ 6'6 
■'JWM OT 'H4w 

'j^ldddl^OTd; 

T]fRT f% 

TJ^M ^OTIdT Tt 
TJftM g ^ 

T]^ Rfl 4gT3f 
T]#rgT mfRTd 1 

RcR^ Rrt^ ^h>V9 

^^$Jlddd f^^Hd ^^V9 
TTTfH g 

dljd ■dld'tifd 
‘lldidd Rfr^fTT ^ 6 % 
Wd^rf: OTl^rg 
tKTOTTOTRRt R\k 
MlMdd Tj^ ^dl^: US 
TTR^If ft|dlf>j|'»q 
dIdRdTId ;!5^ 

dlRR Tfpqf^Rg 
TTrfdR Btd'IS-a 31^ US 


TTif^ ■yiOTdn^d.. ^V3 
TnfsRt TTTtrfMvTT u° 
ttT^OTT 3t^T^ wf 
■'tirCROTWTdM; 9U 
TTRi OTOTT^TTT Ro 
TrfTerfqgf ^\% 

TTOTTfdWJJWd: # U^ 
wnrit H|Rt 4) dTTEf ^^0 
31^ RodgiKfifR 

TTTR Tjt EIT-ydrU^ Ud 
TjRRtTo-rJiRHqKOTT 
■ET^ ot^tRote2ott 
' dldfdrdT dWd ^ 
dlfdd^ST TSFPg ^^S 
^dTdTdH TTcgwf US 
TJ^^ST ^ U? 

TdR difd^d yiR 
Uo 

fdRnlTdT?TTl; ;^U 
"ddTTj qiTiOT Td Rl; ru 

■dc+iK iw ?TgwT i3(^ 

■dd>l< '^dd Red 
ddiK ddSd^ll: 

^TddT 3raf TTEJTdt U 

Tit US 
^^S4>d d^dRd ^ %<A 
■d9t)d1^ qi: Hirdl ^'lo 
"Erar yqirti'dIR 'El 
■q^rdi'Mld dlYdldltt ^S<i 
d^RjcdHId ^ U^ 

■dcj’^'l'^i U'^ 

^«RTTOT TJr^ 

"dgEfenq# qrq ■q^: \s^ 

qgql^SlRdld^d U'« 




314 


NARASIMHA PURAISAIVI 


TRT <io 





"Jircii 

"EI^<MlgRl(k ^YU, 
%^3rg4Rkwi 

’•iggJIHi WM' ^ 6 
■^rgk'^ikw •(N'5 

■^rcIlR 3jld<;HlP) ^oo 
■^strgrR^l (i 

kfk'iT ^00 

WER -)JT?yk ¥g^ HX 
"Rfer ft'WrR«f ^ucjdi u'^ 
^RTcftR Rgf 

■gkw. ^^x 

-Tilingu4 (S 

wgtsq^i'^x^ 

^jK'siig gdikl'<5 x^ 

(k'^g ^Kvillc^lPl ^\9'^ 

kmkRnkf ^xv3 
kra^CTTi^ ^'^.x 
kra^ ^ 
fkgTctra? 5tHcidi 


kRRlfcf ^ SR#TT 
kRRRRTOT cTPTT: \?. 
fkxTWR RfrlRFI \3i 
kRTI ^arai ^x? 
fk^Wlft^^RTR^Fra X^ 
kRig^ ka ^c 

kkarar ^xx 
ktfgcRca ■g^^dld 

ssacid.'jrfdMVdd 

RSr^d flfcRT diPd (a,^ 
dlfRd>ftfd 
?^X 

IsS'd'iml ?RT: 'RT ^ 

RTRRTsakr ^X^ 

^3TOT ajfeWR^X? 

'ddrdd sfiiq 

'dfid^Ri yk«ggMfRi{ ?x 
'dddlR'CHI^-id: RXR 
^FTfeTFIRgR^ 

^SFIK ■gRT: ksRgr ^^X 

^jt'lld R ^ (chfitiqd :^\3o 

^anrg ^ Rmif ^x'^ 

^aRig 'i'Aicii ^^5. 

d'lld elid'd R ^ di^dgiMl 
wcr^gkFirg^^o^ 
^3FTmR?^T^: ^X^ 

^aRTR UH 

^JPM faM fei 
^sFTFT ga 

^aam faka afla gvs^ 


aaw aFat' gfii ^xa 
aamaaaTTktcTr 
■aawaaai R g ^ox 
aFTW amakne ^ 9 , 9 , 
ariTR afta ar % ^s,'^ 
aam^gaFikar: w 
aaiHigvW ara-. gxg 
^3Rpa krgapaaf: ^xs, 
aFg?aairaaa w 

aarr kr g'^irni 900 
aaia arrraf aRTTcR 

^aanTrarsai^ g^x 
aaH'^kk^ ^R5, 
araawa^ ^^x 
apjgiH toTO^ ^X"^ 
Ta^MfTwIa xg 
axiaRaa fmRT ^%y 
ax'iaioTrTal'df^ ^gx 
axrgai gair^ 0 '^ 
arxigdiaargN'^ g^o 
^a^Tgaat^■a go^ 

Fa IdadK 
aaaafa "a a ?'ax 
aa^paaa aRak ^xo 
'Anfdfd gdl^ k ^oF 
xdeiidi: kaar faa 

'Jid'jd[c(<i cl 14) 
^RRarorar Rcaacag ? ? ^ 
aafarroatag ux 
aa?an faaaat 
aaa-aigiTFTafa 
■aar: efaaaka 
aaikiaa} Tial4 ux 
aai^ aaRaf^aiaH x? 





INDEX OF VERSES 


315 


■RT#f 

'^H|4h ^'lio 

^■•^lR’^cfW''t<+)|<l 

FTT FR 
RWTiW# 

RW 

RRi; ■JRTPpRT ■g 
RFT^RFT IaH 

cRl; R’a'a 
RRRF^ f^ 

R^FRl^ TTR 

; ^FTT?5|t :?<a^ 

R? FR R RR R 
FRrTT fFcR 
RtRTRRRT RR 
RRRTRflR^ 

RR^ TJRT: 

RRFf?RgRF^ 

RJ^FRRI R fRWcT ^V3 
RTSRRT: RFT^^RRRI; ^Vs 
RR RRTF RJTJrfR 
RR WR RRRRTXo 
RRRHRRRRR 
RR f^^TRTRFTR 
RR ^ RRflRRil ^ 9 . 

RR RRRfRRil^- 
RR RR R^^JR 
RRRRFR^ 

RR RR RFRRIR 
RR ^ RTTRTR Xo 
RR^ ^RTR^I 


RR^RR teMIdl 
RR RFR FRt%R 

RRRFR?RTFRr 


RRRTRFORR 
RR Ti'JilRRi % ?F 
RR RFlfRR^ 

RR ’JrlRR RTR 
RR RRRR R[R 
RRR^RIW 
RRRPTRR^ 
RRRtR^%TR 
RRRf^RflR ?F 

RR IrRR RRI^IRR 
RR ft^RTd RIR 

rrI^rf^ 

RRR^^ 

RR -HcfjJ^ ^ Xo 
RR tHcfd RrIrTF 
RRR^R%Xo 


RR^g^RRf^Xo 
RR RFRIR 
RR'iJ^f^RRn^ 


RR IRtRI RRT RF^ ?o 
RRR tt RRmra 
Rdy^VI RPRF %6 
RRRirfRfitR RtcRT 
R% RR^RR 
RR^RcRigt RIRR 
RFRcRR ■g^ Rf^ 5W 
RFR (RRMdi R 
RFUF^RRR ^o;? 
RTRRRI RFT R# 


RIcTRTqffF^ RFR 


RlRRnrrfFRT: RRf: 
RTRFRRR: rIhRPR 
RTF: ^RtRTgRRTR; 
RTdTRTKJJTSfRRn 'ERRfcI VSR 


RTRigcR^RTRlfR ^^6 
R#RFRRR:RX^ 
RlldfH^RI'HMlfH 
RlfrTOTRf RFFfRF W 
RIRTF g'^RRHIlfe IRo 
RHrfRRR^R 
RHlftRRRR^ 
RTfRRRTOpffR 
rtIrr RFra 4 Pd 


RlMd'R ■gO'^R ^RVs 
RIHdMW TTRTR 
RTMW( TR 
RTRTgRFft^RfR 

RFRRTFR FgRRR Ro<?. 
RFRRPrfRRR^ 
dl^4)Rfd<?l ftRcRT 
fRcfRTg RTRTRTFR Vs<i 
IRRRH R^gRTcRg Rii 
(RRyn RF#( \6o 
[RRf^dT fRRRRR: ^\36 
f^TRS^Ug^: 
f^^RRTrRRT 
fifbL^^dl Heldlc ?Xo 
■f^f^s^RR W ^xvs 
r>l@l R RIRR] Rig ^ o? 
gRTRRRRm 
gfRlFRI^IRR ^^Vs 
RgRTSRTRRRffF ^Xk 
RTdtR^RftR^ R^k 
?T#IT R RRT 3ftcR 


RTTRT RRRIRR: RTTR 


RItRT R ITRR ■^SI: ^'^•,6 





316 

Wron ^ ^ ^ 

'^rf%c?r?raf^ 
m f| 

■qr ■jHT 

?H?Tr3?R?TI^ 

wqiMH ^ ^§r ^ 

W1?T V 

^MlTd^Wiqui 
^^rrawratfgtTT 
^qifd^dq^d '^qr^q x 
^Tidt'^q^q'iqRi 

^qifa^^ifq fyfdioj 
3rM 

iyifritHl't^Irmi^ l-iio 
q^^TlfcTOrTT 

fgi33Ti\ ^q,q, 

^dlcHpTrcIl i]t ■^tqn^ ^6'!^ 

wwv^v g 
d Tra-tT ^qqfcii; ?<!:« 
d fsjfdW^lRT^ q?o 

dd feqt “q^ 

Ro 

ct q^'dRyd: 'JirdRo^ 

?? 

d ^TTE^RHTfq ^o 

d ■qqqn 'q^ 

d 'jt<c|| <My_<>qi; l6o 

d Wfn ^ ?\3 

d 'j^idlcMrq 
cT 'j«<idl4wei '^Trl ^o'*i 


cT ^cIMHcI [cloil 
cT ^d4d<jri 

■cT 'S^gWltT; TIT^ ^ ? ? 
d w-TRpqn' ^RqPr 

d droll f^?rRT 

d Wfil 

cT ddift 

ci dl'M ^ 

ddKfW^ q^o 
ctM^ M^?i 
d tq^irMid q^ 
qi ■qqRqq^ 

qi Hy-its ^qgNl ^ 
qiTjprfqr^f^ 

qi '^'>iRiroii farfiidri^ qq\3 
qi 'i^ccii fgf^ s; 
qi yji*^ ? 
qi 3ifq«iqw«nqit^ 
qi ^i^diRui w ia^ 
qi fwiT ^ q?qs 

qi TjPliRpfiw qo<: 

qi qm^ qfqrqi qRrrsfqiT qqo 
qi diT^ #qi qv3^ 

qi'^aqiif^: q<iq 
qi <^<oi?i y'Jidi'fqds q?o 
qi q7^qqT%q qxq 
qi'qiof^^Jidftsjqq^'A'^ 
qi qq^ldcoild q q o 

d-od9l)d1®f*Tdolr|^ qq,o 

d'ooi9hqTl4fH[d qqq 
d'O'd ■^squld qr H'3 
d-ooiMJ^ qfHfrTCT^ qq,? 
dt^<qiW<,qd!Jlui q<:?, 

qrEtj^qyRRrr-qm'^ii^qT qqq 


NARASIMHA PURANAiVl 

d-oEsiqntqri iq^ q^S 
d-c^cdi qrqi; qKi qiq.vs 

d-^rdT dKdddl q^')^ 
do^rcfT dVl qx^ 
d'o^rdl'Hl “gfd: W q^^ 
d-c^uciHiddi q^q, 
d'jviiUdd dfrebild q'^o 
qr^ih^q^qii qf qq 
qfcT; d)dirdr^q>yldMldd ^6 
Wf: q<q^ 

ciqi: qFT^qqr q^? 
qiqi: fqrroi: rt qvsx 
qrqf: '^jqiqro^ q^? 
qrqi: ^^TRqi^sfq q,^ 
qiqi: <dqii^ 'ao 

qiqi: ■^FRi^ii qqo, qqs^ 

qiqT: ^^^qnffotT qqs 
qrqf: '^■^nqn'^^ q^q 
qfqi: %qra^TT^ qvsq 
qrqi: %qiT^ idf^d ^ai; q^vs 
qrqf: ■q^^^qraT; q^o 
qtqi: ■qq f|qf?P3 qqq 
qiqT: qqqjqiqqq q^q 
qRT: qqqjqmts'ijqi qvso 
qrqi: ■jqrftqfqqiq q^q 

rfrl: '^tHchHiqigj qq^: 

q^T: qyiefdq^idl qkH 
qfqf; y^» 5 i qwfsqli q qx 
qfqi: y'^.si q!5^^1 q^q 
qrqf: qqiqfqqH q^<i 
qfqr: qqi^ fgq^T q«;q 
qtqT: q'ijiq qq^iRi qqq 
qrqf; ■g'»j^ qqq 
qiqT: ydild ■tffcidi qq^ 
ciqT: qrat qi^ ''js q^q 
qrqf; qqq 



INDEX OF VERSES 


317 


ciri': ■^I'Hlful c(cjpd ^6,^ 
cRT; 

rfrf: dFHlcl^ 

cTcI; 71 .. 

m: 71 ^TtTRlfq 
cm: 71 

M: TWmRlTl 
CRT: TF^irgqmtci ^<^\3 
cT^: 7R^ ^'-3 'a 

cRT: Tflcll ^‘.Isllclf ^00 
CRT: TTm^rraT?! 

TTcT: T^rmf^lTR^ 

cTcl: HH TlRTTlTcI 
cRT: ^mc^rl'j:ftl'J'J|*^cf'4l 
cIcT: 7^15^ mPl 
CRT: iTmcRgW^: 

CRT 3cRra-grRl 7°° 
cRT^cSlMfg^ ^'fOi 
cRTTET mW7: "^5: 
cTcT^^ITT^TgH, 7W 
dclR-^llii 7FW1 ?,<^6 
clclf^-d'Cldd-kl'M U 
ddR-d^ui TlfK: 
dd^lSTHfui W3T ^7\3 
cRT7?5FTl cT^: Wi 
cRTTcT ^:fecT W 
cRTT^ ^IFITI ^Kgi 7^'*^ 
cTclTcT TRra 74^ 
ddWSNlfiS'dl'^i 
cRTTcTW 'RmFI ^4^ 
cTcTTcTPl ^ ^rfel: 
cTcTTcTFl ■cmi^irfiRTI 747 
cRTTcRm^TR^^ 
cRITcTT TRTRTTOTJ^ 7^? 
cTcTTcTrmf^cTRT^T^ ^o7 


dcTTcTlfeR'il W 77*3 
cRTTcft^lfcl^: -Wldl 7 v'a 
cRTTgRTRTWW 747 
cTcTTg cT^ m 747 



cRTTg TTR ■R^^JRT 74° 
cRTT^TIWm'ncgT 
cRTTcJif W clft 7^7 
cldTcjyf Timilrq 7V7 
cTdTcT STftdl: 7'^7 

TRT7% c^lTIT 7?'4 
TRT7%-gisf^Hig ^7'4 
cRTTTg T7R WR ^\3')T 
cRRimfm^ 71^ 4? 

cRTTcmmTl^i Tfjczf 

cRTTcmiTI'mwrR R7o 
cRTIS-TTc^^RTSIRt 77^ 
cRTFsRsicd 'J'^dl 77^ 
cRTT TRK 

cRTT ■^SFTTR aiWI, 7?S 
TTm^^mig: 74 ^ ■ 70 ^ 
cRTt 776, 

TRTT^tgfR^ 77R 
cRTfsfdggg^ 777 
cRTlcTTFSlFT 776 
cRTt^«il7RT 74 ^ 
cRTt 6?17*7gcTT 7^7 
cRTlg7cT7TIIRTT: 77^ 
cRTt <d'l'i\l; 7t4 7^36 
cRTF 7W 

IRTl 7c4t3fR cTI cT^' 774 
TRTt 67 77^ 

cRTlS^TctPg^ 44 77^ 

cRTl 7^0 

cRTt 'HKNui 44 ^67 
cRTf Pl^l^'d: 7^ 7^ 


cRTl Ptgcd ddll4 77 “ 
cRTI ^ 7‘'S7 

cRTtS'mQlTfRTcTTRlcT 4? 
7Rit55ldVd7IH, 740 
cRTt died: TigcRR 7 
cRTT 'dlgSTcdUim 774 
cRTT WTlTFTcq 77« 
cRTT W clt71Ti;777 
cRTl TtR: <67^14 774 
TRTt d^cdl immgfe 47 
cRTT 7^4^^ 

cRTl 175*1 7?? 

cRTt tR# ^gmicqi 767 
cRTT TTrRmftTtTSlT 

cRTt5-JJ?R17 ■gof 

dc1l5H<cd cf diPd 66 
cRTPKR^'qgSMt 77 ^ 
cRTT dHl^tdl cR 76 
cRTtWRlOT 777 
cRTl-gf^feTt7R 777,774) 
cim^mirait g^ 774 
cRTtsmiKJlTgTf 740 
cRT17ailfHMcqi57: 776 
cRTl llfddd did 77° 
cRTT 7m7T7mf&T 776 
cRTI 54 6Hd 767 
dd'l'^HTd 7T15R2T 7?X 
cRTIS-^ 774) 

7T4l^44lldffl W 77 
cRTIsgk^RTHi 7 i4: 77 
cRTl cTfTf^R: ffSIT 74)7 
cTdl ciidilc'lid>'H4a: 
cRTI ■gt 1N17I71, 7°4 
cRTt dwyyrfg 777 
cRTI clHlil'#!: 77° 
cRTt ■gigMgmWr v 




318 

cRTI |o|4)dH ^oX 

R'~ 2 R 

Ml 'x\s^ 

M fgnrWTTO 

Ml ftM'J'JIFdd^r^ 

M 'ftsJclRdM^! 

Ml 

MMlMJJcMT 
Ml oMM: 

MTMIffcTftl; 'q'^T?! 
Ms^MraRjyr.. Co 
M5M n^ 

MTS? WTT M ^V5? 

Ml BaK'j'^l^cll ci 

MI fllM^lf^ ^5,^ 
rlMPf X'S'C 

rtf^sf q?Tl,R ^XX 
^TcfM '■gft’^i^'l ^ X\3 
MMI ■yTMTlfrl 
cMtfeeMRk R'^R 
M^MI 'ft^ ■g ^ 
MMFIM; #?i Roo 
M^FMf 'j(d'diKf '^a'^ ^ ^C 
cTc^^’TF^ H^IMT 
?rM?«ptMMtfct ^oo 
dd</'H/ftd ftfc ^o? 
cTM TJ^ \C\ 

dd)^ Hj^'dlHIcdl 

MS? 

Ml? yddlHlft R^o 
dcWTIls? M^i ^ ^ 


MTl? ^dcd '^: 'R'^o 
MTtM^MM 

ei^ 

MwM: Tlfl: 'fTM C 
MTHlMM^fM R'^X 

dft>ldl4 f? TPTfsft Ro? 
MW ‘{yftl4lld Ci. 

M M0 rdilyddi Ro^ 
MMS H6ld1< R\l 
M 'Irdl Ml dlft (aR 
M 'lodi 5|?? 

M M XX 

M RC^ 

M cfrsif fMPftfl- R'^R 
M?8jrMM R^X 
M 4Rq?Tl clT RvsR 
M W^ ???! 

M RS 

M ^JRP^ MR ?M: 

M Ttfcf^M R? 

M fTRrara 
MMTTfcra#T Rt? 

M 

M l^rdl 5(^=bcft RRo 
M f?M?T ^ ■ydld: R oX 
M 'HMl 'R^TRM ^ 
Mlfq ?M1MI^ ^Ro 
craifR'fui^ftr^ HX 
Mlft ?aTf|R«it 
Mift ■Rirfti’lftcn IRC 

Mlf? '■WIRMR^Id; RXX 
MKl^ oX 
MRl«q #■ ^ V3l 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 

MTMMFMMSM ? 
ddl^Hlftd "t R^5X 
MfRftd ■gfMT RR 
MRTT MMRI: R'^-.o 
■gftf^: RX 

MWMTOff^ Ro? 
M^^ftWl HIdl ^oX 
d^di^JM Jell'll: R'^? 
d^chftH-^dl^RI Ro 
clt? M^PT; 

■d^ 'dlMmra RXi^ 
did pRlfR'idT R?X 
d^dMl:' K[Ri R%1 
d^ ftlfeRldli^ RV9'?, 
dMftdRtcM U R 
ddaftr^Ridp d U,'>^ 
dcMd diR^ft-’^lft RU 
ddRq dl«ld WR UH 
ddd4 dd dFRTfiT US 
drd^ Rk^l ■’JU RoC 
ded^ MW did X-i 
d^' MdfWTdl RiaS 
dd^Md^d RT MMIR: 
ddpromd difd X'?, 
ddlMdfd dta#f Ra^ 
d«lT ^«dt ?JdTTRd_ U^ 
d^td dl=Kdl M; U^ 
d^rdldt -Jji^rdr^ IC^ 
d'^r^'tdl dfrddRd RU 
dMJdMT dl d '?. 
d^r^drdl d MdT 
dMgd?dT MFTTd U ° 
dMWddMd U 
d^dspdd^ 
d^dTMff«7T R^R 
d^ d dm WIT <:x 


INDEX OF VERSES 


319 


rT^ ■cil'tl ? 

cT^cj^cWi ■^«T 
rl^c(y<+rcil nfrlHIi^ 

cT«?MHI^- "gjZ 
lT8TI^JRlfW 
^ ^Krfq^qifiT 
cRTfr -^iP-IHim^ 

^ ^ 

-^Rccii ■g n? 
cRcTT’T ■g 

^ 3Ior8?#T flli 6'rs 

d<l'll^ ■gPl-?!^ 

^ WTrir ^ 
cra?T f^wi<m ?^^ 
?r^ rRT 

^ cT^lf^icW^ ^>S6 
cKi ^ yi'j| ?o? 
^ ^ U 

^ cgajfRTtg 

d<^l cd^ld c|'+d'>4; 
di^l rcl9l'=Kl d^f^ll.. 

^•qtTT^^nrgr 

dc;i ’ll iN-l^ ^ o6 

^rc|l 

mm 

n4HI4>Hi 

mj 


cRT^'=IR^'^ 

^ 1#^-^ ■?! gf^: 

IRTT difd IT; '3 T'^^'a 
clf^'^2jRlci||fH 
djdddi >\-oiSi did, TT 

cT^TR^ftT^ 

d<ciHl^' yiJirilRAH 
d<c|ie4lf^ 

^ 

cT^^TTOITTra 

d<lrKIFT ■^: W RR° 
d<J|'*jfd4i: TraffoT 

d^d ^'A'ld x)|H,, 

cT^ Hiry^N %R>S 

d'T'iNlly'dI: 619: 
d<^dtf| ■R^T'HFT ^6 
wpj^ U'^ 
^’jRmrrarar 

dsflcid d^ddlfddic^l ;^V9o 
d^M di'y^ci^ i'if 
d^l9df|^l <^0 

^rg^^nfif ?o 

d5dj)'=‘J|l ^ dd'+'HI T?T 
dglc^lt RfT'^pft 
dfrfll4 

cT5^ Tg RR'Stc^ 
d5S<i5^cNiCd (Jd!-!!: T 
dg;l4d PlHi<rA| 

dglddldd 
dfS'Mi'NjrllEfi 
d'did^id'jlodffH TT^ 


TrPdft^ cT^ (CVS 

cFCfKq T><vs 

■d^iZT W^: 

Tf^TTIR#! 

d'^ldlU'Tf^^lNifuf 

TV?T 

?r=q dldjd vjj% ^6,;^ 

^-sr^ T??TS1FT 
d"^ fT c^ 
cF^tsg^)?T^?PTf TkT 
rPT: ^^'ETfT?g(C? 

ITT: 

cTT: Nt^nyr 
?PT;r«fcd){5T’i% ^(C'i^ 
cN: f?ra:5J«W?g^ V3T 
■d^: ■yd'd fd^d d,? 
cN:TdT?>4NPRd: ^vs^ 
dWlTT-FT %^6 
dWffdg^Si 1^6 
dWT'yi'ildilHl cff 
dWdRdTd#dctVAO 
cNTddlTd^ 
dqTTTRIdT^: ?V9^ 
dWRIdl dcTT T^ 

?RTn ■gf^d% VST 

dWd Pt<l5Ki 1^6 

cRTJRTr^^ 
cTTTdfdTd Wdi 6'R 
d'MTdl dlTdMIWlI V3(^ 
cilTdl fdddl^K; ^T'*^ 
cRra^d^ VST 
ddMefd fsRFd 
ddldllll d^dTTT; ?'(^o 
d^ f| d: %dtd dOTTfSTT v^ST 
dWTddi%^TRT \ 




NARASIMHA PURANAM 


320 

WJR7TTO TIcgi U 
rlHHldH^lc^l't'4 <i^ 

rWRTWT '^^FFTI^t 

rwrararmf-^: 

d^ciN “ifd dl4'4 
^|^ 

■aiJH WRTpg :^^o 

cftm W>f ^ 
dHd ■Held ^o 
^ TPd^UTR X'?, 
dH'dl^ 

d^dl<5?R>d41< RC\ 

■dRt H 6 IHI 5 X\ 
cRlT ^V3^ 

^4^dU| \o-^ 

ddl H^dd dc^4 
cfEn TF'jfSpTT <IHI 
ePn WR RRfeRT '^6 
ddr®T dlRdt ^Nn^dedl 6'ii 
d'4i4;g:jq’jtrR x'^o 

f? ^ 
ddl; y1cdl "R TT^ ^VSE, 
ddl: fndl ^ ■f.ili'Jdl 
cRTR^RERITRR 

dddydd; Rlf^I '^X 
R'^^gddl: dJRR: 


5;EE 

eRfR^TRdf^ # 

R#i: • 91 W; mai E<i 


R^fdcyi ■RR^a^E^ 

R^ ^>E^d fSRI XRX 
R^fRedl HerfiTRHlPR.. 
d4Rlrdl 

Rfi ?Ri R RfWlfR ^Eo 
RR dRdH^ fdfddRdd^ X^\X 
RR5^ RfdtRlfH ^EE 
RRRRTRrfg:^ ^?E 
RRRRRRRl^ UE 
RRT^?IFRRT RR4 ^EE 
RRI^irfM R HI^Rl ^oE 
RRTfer R RR 
R^^RTTT^ EEE 


cRsff RR T]t R^RIR; RE 
RRRTfR REE 
RRRTe^RRT^ RT REE 
RRRT^R ■^EEl^dl X't 
cRRTRJ^RRR^?^ 
RWRfTJRf^RI ^R^ 
RRRRRTRI R^ -RR X 
RRRFiHTR'l R^dtll 
RERlrd)(^4OTU: REE 


RRRR RRRIRTRR RRR 


RRRT% ■RIRIR RR ^EE 
RRRT% l:'<§Rlcn ^ U 
rrrttrrIr ^JRTRT EE 



RRRTRJRTR^^^ 
RRRTRfT*4; R R^'iS 
RRRral'IR^I ’JjRI RE^ 
RRRIRIRRHIRR Ro^ 


RRRTcR RRRIR^^ R-CR 
ROTTRRRFTE® RRlf^R R^s^ 
RRRlRRtqifen :gf^2: ^o 
RRRTRgg R^RIRW ^ER 
RRRIR^R'R^ Jdfd RER 
RRRIcRRT^T ■^RievT'^f ^E 
RRRIRfRST^ RJFf RE^ 
rhhkPiPrr VE 

RRRT^ 9(Rr% REo 
RRRIRRRTRT E 

RRRIRRRf^RRfRRR; EE° 
RRRTRRdlRRR^feE EER 
RRqTR.R^ftRR^lfR EEE 
dHHM <r1'E;'^^rH-«RT REE 
cRRFTRRRT^ EE 
RRRFRTWRRIR REE 
RftRR^ %R R^l'^uij 
Ri^ %R ■yfREI^ REo 
RfRiRRTR RMRcR EE'E 
Rf^^RRRil RVE 
RfWR^SRRER^ E 
R^RHIRddiOIR REo 
rRrPhRIH: WfRER 
RfWRR f^TtlRT REE 
Rfw^'JTOfER REE 
Rf^Rt RRTRFT E 
RRh-^ Mil <M'i^ EE 
Rf^RR^fgRTHRR EEE 
r1wRR;R«RR ddf^JEfdd E^^E 
rIrr^ RfIRRI% '3 RE 
Rf^RT^^ REE 

Rf^RrfeTHiR^g E° 
RfRR^RtRTR^^ REE 
RflR^RRRlf^ RFRRR V3E 
rRhwRh^ cTRlRT 

RfWRt^ Ro 



321 


INDEX OF VERSES 


cTfif col'll 

^ 3Tr^?n^ ^ 
clFl 

d'^ 1%frRrif^ 

^ ^ <Ai 

cTPT dfWpHcjycf: 
^^#rRT^ 

^ ’W^dKl^um.. '^o 

cT?3T ^ W 

^ '^IfBdci^H' U 
cm ^ ^x,i 

^ 'tfTnf ^9,13 

d^ hHI h^iVi^m 
^ TI^’IFIT: ^60 

TmVK^W^f ^'^0 

cm ■qFT^ ^ 

^ '^Id^d'l TT^ 

cTFT 1^4l5»ra^ c:'5 

5fimt "RTTR: i<i 
cTf^r 

cPPl ’IR^PT d>fc1'^'|i|i 

cT^^ '^cRiiiicii 6^ 

^ 

cTR f%Rt: 3raT^ 
cTR ^ R^RRR 
^iRfWR 

cTR "t f^^RT 

cIR ifj^-M^lRoin ^'5. 
cTRRTRRHRRT: 
■dRRRIRRff^ 
■dR'«4^£lrc|IR 


dR •h|4^'1 *HR ^<^1 6'^ 
^ ■gRR R^ 

^WW^‘ 

TTRRnfwff g 

RRt'dR'gRR^ 
cTRT ■J^rf t^^iu1<^l \'3?, 
RRi ’RRT1R: R# 
RRTRRI 3ITf^ n 
^ f%?RnsT RTR 
RRT f^RTRintR 
rTRT: ^HHcj 

RRTR ^^o 

dRidi Rk'HI'^n 
RRI^R f^ WR^ 
dRHR4id Rt| U5. 
crRP^3^R$T«bRI 
RRlI^r Rqf 

RRTtrRf§RrRfR^fR4 
cTRrf^T^TWR UX 
dRIR; yui^^Pd U? 
RRRRTTRR: ^ 
dRIVg 

■dRl ■gTRR cTR#! ^o 
rR^ RRf 
d^^liifod 
dRNRg^ 

RRRTRi^ 
dIS'M'd '5 R Hcdl ^00 
df ■’JftR 
di ^ RRft% 

crt R rR^ TIRRIR; R‘^\ 
di R cTRT 'dsn drdl 9 °'^ 
cfi R % dVlRlRlfR 
dt RdRI fgrfyR ^4 


df R T8R ^Id-dl 
dt RR; 'avs 

R RraFR: ?'^'a 

cfT it'ticil ^ RR 
R ^RRTf^ 
RTRRTRWi ^<:V3 
?fT3r'JlJRd; ^‘^'a 
RRRSRfRTR 
m RrIR dPldH^ 

RT ^R ■^RTRRRWT ^6,a 
cri -^R cRO^ ^a^ 

an9(dl.sR5dld^ 
dH6 'diHdl RR ^a 
ciMiddiR fddN ^aa 
'dHTTlR fdRR^ 

RfR feRI«l ^R^g 
RRt '>JcR: RITIR 
cirlR'R'gs: «Rlif 
RfR ^ RR#r 4 
Rfd 'dRlfR ^ V 
diPl RRlfW <Hdf|u| 
dlRr RR#f dlRRi 
dTJciRier Rillfd 

'^'dfdrqT ^a<3 
dRi; fRdI yfuiHR ^'^5, 

RfRTtR Rlt TIRt ^a'^ 
dlRdl^ ^ W 
■dT^TRR ^RRRT \ 
dRiJcfF# fdWT 
RRRlfR: g^RilPi 
RTR? ydldRlft 
RR? RffRRJlfiT 
RRRRFFtdR 
Helsicd 





322 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


rTF^^f^ TT^THF^ 


cFTO -gw^sM 

rtpff Tp^psJlt-yi^ '^6% 
^0 


■aTcTf^rTKI^ 

c1|c(iiT) ^flwiH <^|.. 

cTR^ W: 
c1|c|T^9h: 'ticisfl'il 
cira^ «HlA||d1 ^^0 

rl|o|Ti^ 'FRPTO '^'3'*? 
diet'd■W TTfT^fn^t ^ 
efrafd^ %'SFIT 

dra4-qfe4 ^ m 

didrtlHIun ^ f^ 


drarF«{Hf^KI; 311^ \%\ 

dM4di ■g’^mprr x^% 
dlditH 

dra^^mdT53f^; l\\ 
^ngfl^qm %\6 
'dlcif-^^ir^M^: 
cTIFFTF? cTF; i?riy ^ o 
aicid %^cTt 5'<HI'^ 


cfl^ Trafei*?! •>4^ 
Fraf ^3^-srf^ ^ 
FRTt 37Mfd -^^^nfil ^6 
Frat'33fT-q^ra^ 
fdfiRt3*T«R: 


fd<Hdilffdy< 51 cTF^^oX 
fd'^dl d'^dl dlfM 
f^Tm ^tdlrH3^:?oo 
icT^: yqiif^q 16'^ 

dl^ilsuid: d^dfclcid 
cTt«f??TpIT fcTI 

^KrfdTqfq xratsf 
^«#f ^fs??TRra 
clt«Tf^ up, 

^■»T5[I TIfTgoFI ^ 69 , 
^^’H'ifcl fdOMIdl 


■j'sra^TJRTr ^'3 

3j^’ fF«??gT m 

vtidr^l 


i: WII^ 


■g#T ^ntf V9^ 

^ TTO^r 


^00 

^3(ti#Trf%ra %\6 

^wiT ^ y<|4i'^ 

^ ^ ^leq 

frsrai #rzRraf 1^ ?\s 

■^35mr »TRWj^ ?? 
dd^-^l T#: 
WF5r?l^: \\o 

%%f^^3TRnT«T U'*^ 


dr=t)^j[dldi '3 ^'^'3 
^ c? 3 

dl4 

^ 3M fddldlrdT 
^ 35: 3JFrRcr 
^ -cf TF# #4t l-^ 
^ yiTR^ 

^ Ffl4fT?fFIc^ ^?V3 
Wra: ■^: 

^dlR^d ffW 


Tjf^ fdFt 
^fdtR3tMI 
yidd4 3?4' ? 


FITW? 



INDEX OF VERSES 


323 


dHcjycWi-^jiTf^r^^o 

^5fq ^#cT ^ T«?n ^6^ 
cTJfR ^ y^'(?*^l (c(t=*J|l 
■g'd ^ 


fT.. 

■d RF^IIW SR 

fl H'+aHiHl ■^Kf^TfcTO) >o( 


H ^y^dfd5fFdl; W 

ff 

% sfi^Myd; "Jirctl X'io 

fl '^dlOT: ^Ri?rr 

y-ddld'^l X'^ 

Mi 5;3 d-^o^ 


?rqi 

■fTOT iTWTTc?Tgc«IFT X^% 
<i'jqyc;nN 


^ ■yi'llPdR'^: 

dqifR'iSI THR^: m 

cT ^^IrHM 

^riw^^rai; -R^c 
■d "FT^ ciH<dR';IRdl'kj 
ddl53^Em?d3 
d^sfdTdd V3 
Mi^dldiR Ro6 
dd^wlf^dl^TI d 
ddFTdT Ro6 
fedid^: dlif RR-fS: 
md ddd d^ 
dd'^di fdRrfe^ 


dtddRI Rinfctdl 
dRdRdl ddldt^ R\<^ 
dld^i dTfWW d8i 

^ d <ld^ H6 i4141 X'^R 

dd dR(c(^ 

^ ddl dldd 'TcdT 
dt ^: (5JdrT"lt 
^ drffdWRmo 

Hl^Ricqi 

^ ^pdi ^ 

# d^ dldlfdd^ 
^Fw4'gfd^ X^R 
rdddddT H^lrMldl R6^ 
rdd?dl deididlM^i^ 
rdd?dT ddTdd 
cddfdl oi||Rl5=f)ld 
dTdfdf dd <^MWId! X'^ 
cd=hrdl i^odjd^: Tdddd U° 
dl=k^HldHfddi ?d XV^ 
rdd dT^ddd: X'^ 

dR fedyR'i ft 


dRrdddddig X^X 
?d ddf dddPRf?! 
cd ddJ dfed Ro'X 
cddRl: d^dfdfldi R6o 


?d ^JdFfd dfd: dlSlf Xo 
?d dFdtRl •^‘ild RXo 



X^’X 


?d sic;sfiiR>;q)i<j^ X'X'^ 

R ^jfd?cd fdd; '♦'ifRi'H’d Xo 
?d ^JdFcd dddddf ?d '>io 


?d ■'T^dRr ddl dR 
?d H jHdHtl<ld rd >{0 
?d dldl d'fdldihi "ifo 


rd^RTdtlfd 
cd djRdd ddd^ X'^X 
?d ddFfd Tfddf^^ '^° 

?d Rl^'lR'^ldldld'fdl RR'^ 
cd %d??d d^dfdl ?d '^o 
?d "dfdFdd^ ddl 
rd dIdiyiKid dte4 Ro'^ 
rd TdT^ rd ^dT X'^X 
rdftddFdddRdlfd X'^X 
rcfcts^Rn ■ 91 ^: ■Roi\ 
rd^gdlt^ ■RTd, 
rdd; ^dl 'Jd R 
rd^fl dfgRrddfd 
rddlidFg d?RR 
cddlldd^t^ 

rddnRfd ddT dd 
rdr^ltdTd Hrylld 

rddraidT^^ ?Jcid 
rddRddrad; ^ d 

rdddd ITJUdHi RCo 
rdd^fdRYRHT XX^ 
rdd?fdFJdRdIdT 
rdd^fe^ddld^ 
rdddddRT fIdTdfd RC'<3 
rdddfdddddT^ ?<!^ 
rddltWd dfdT 
rdddirRdT did 
rd^dRd dgd 
rdMfM X'X'^ 

rdMiHKdiH drag ^^5, 
rdRTdfdi g^Rdd >^0 
rddRtd lOtd 
rdddfd^^: U? 

Rtd d^ HllRdJ XX<X 
rdOTd OMT OT^^d 



324 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


roi'Mcj »^cfrm ■Held 

'^vi 

cddl^ ^ d)^Hl(dc<i 


rddl fdHI <*cfc>m 


rg^ W H^'Icfl'C ^o,i 

^fgat ^'rs'^ 

r#I^T[%-gTfq i%-:( 
rSrfq MR RMKM 


rg5445()iu|dl'gfr 
rd4i=td MR 
■fg W R % Rf^ 
rRter rrt ^V3 
rRWgRTcT^R^ 

RR RRITRR; 

CRT RT^T#? WR 3nRM; 
rRT RCRRTT g cRPFRT 
cRT yM"Tr5fw ?rR)T ?o 


cRigrT RTTRR^ 
rc||<j^ll PiMdlcMidl 
cRlMlR^-R RRT?-^?ci 6 \ 
cRigR rtPr■ 5 ^ ?o^ 
cRTgR gTjRaRR :^o(a 
rRIR? ■?TRit ■gra ?o 
rRTRRRTTR gRR gw 
RR: 3rafen; f^TWTT 


RRMi RRRdTMT ^^^ 

5r4l^?lt '^RnfM vsd, 


dlf^ RT fRRT gw 


RRTRRR 
Rkigicd: fSrlfdHI 
R'Algicd: RRT 
R'<1gcRl gw ?'3o 


TRRWgr R^TtRFTT \ 
few RRRRT^T fe 


1^ RTRRt^ ^ 
%DtRfefe \oo 
feieiRTWTrafe 
fe^feR WR 


feRRifR RWfe 
fRRT RRRR^; RTRRTSR 
fRWg H^RRTfRW 



fRfgfe RIRTgM 
Id^dRTRT IdPldid 
felfe RW RWTT fe; 
felRR RRfe RR 
felRR ggR fR?RT 
fefeRffet 
fefeRffet RW 


WfeWWlxRR W 
tfeR^rfe; RjtR 
^cdlWfRgfd'kR ft 
^feR5fecTOWfR 
R^TWM: g«^’ 

RSl RTR ^ 0 

R^TRRRIsf^: arfeRffef: 
R^RfergflcRW; 
R^RRfigWrg 1.6% 
R'iSWTRTRRRTR ggr \o6 
W^WrffecRTR \o6 
ddNR RRTRRR 
fe R7fRRR%%W 
RW RRfw gWT 1^'6 
RrRT RTR fet ^^6 
rtrt RnggfRW^R 


RW53RRR*TI?2| R 


RWRRRTRH ^Vs 
RRTfrTRR: Tfe 116 
WfeglS^WR 
W Rfe 

RgfR RSRR Rg: 
gfR^ fRgfe 
WTRR gRTlR^ 1^% 




INDEX OF VERSES 


325 


■^1^ f|RTH^«Tr 'X'>SX 




cF^n^jRfrfeTsrail: ^ovs 





<^tR<rc|l TRn -^t ^^>3 
c;vff 2 lrc|| 


M^I4W ^00 


^»TPT cTf^ 

c;!^imwmm1ii 

■^wraraife 

<VHc(dKI: 

'd^HIHI xw^ 

^'^6 

^?-t 4 ^«Tm^ ^.-^x 
c;i'ii|5l'H4l<lHi 

TTUr ^ ??? 

^ ^«ir USi 
■<Hd|ii H^Kl'if^: XX'^ 
dHiPi 1^515®'*^; 'RSiSi 

c;iHic;< 'STRTlfW % ^V3 


^FERf^sfTlPiTHT ^(ao 


<Wdc|l 6 ’J^RT X\'^ 
di^ ^ R^<hihI X^^ 
di^l'ddi^'d TIW: X<^° 

^RTf5f ■grg^BRJT X6o, :^6'^ 
^rfqiRRT 

R? X^ 

f^: - 3 ^ HfRwXu^, 

Rdifd difd^Tld X'^° 

-I? 

:^6C 

f^3R«fMgt 

f^TRq^ X^C 
Rd 1 'd)'HHi g fldFI %gR ^?<a 

RotRrdfdRryi^- 6'^ 

RoiRR^T: #IT^^'3o 
RoiR^Hi ^ cTt X'i\ 

Rgg fdHHRR^ X'^°,X^'X,X^'^, 

X'3o 

X^X 

RoAI'RI^MMR^TFT xx^ 

Romi^R fPiRgg ^ 05 , 

Ro<Hl<j)fd ■^T; ■RT^ 'SC 

Rodifd'{U‘RiRi^ii^4 
Ro^R'^R'^^ vs 
R ta^r 3ifRR ^ X'^'s 
RtRR?RR«Rg X^c 

dlMHRRMgTRIvs'^ 

R)ggT R gR 


R)%^R?raFT 
RRfgii ■yiikii'^' X? 
dl^di^'KvHl 3RT^8T: <:;'3 
dlgl^Rd ^ cgRT XX 
^:7§ RRFRRdFT '^o 
^r-^iRgra^gRfsg 
^:WRfe^R% RX'^ 
■gr'^am Rg RdfR x'^'R 
^•.T3T^;'<aMi5n'gi 'C% 
^ryipggi rrt; ^>^0 

^:fecT: -{(llymTM 
^:fedT gj ^ cgg?gT (a^ 
^•.RddRg-ddwm 
^:feRRry:i5rq Rx^ 
gt ^ gg 


^igfg gg^t^oi 


^:#Tg^55fgRl 
■gi'gtgrrfg ^ggi^ X^^ 


^;^?gR g ggg^ rcc 
■grRgRTg^Wgr 

■j^gfRggRgr^ ^o';^ 


ydieMi, 

S-glfcHdiST; WRT XWS 

gift gggFTT x'cx 
■jgfg g^grfg W9 
^grgfg tc^ 
■j^ggg yg^M-g 
^fRgggfg; gjj 
^Tmgg'Rgf 
■ 5 RT ?g ■gRfggi g 


■jRTgrgRVi'dwi: u° 

^tdidi fgrR cfi^Mid ^e.'a 

^RRT fgwrgfg 



NARASIMHA PURANAM 


326 

^ WTF7W l6o 
wiFira w 
^ 16^ 

<^dWlc^; 'OTr^I^ 16^ 

^ 'TO 
^TRSroTRfTOT ^^0 
^?TO WJF^Tfq 

■fST nid iidddl \ ?'a 

fTO TTkn TOT^TFT 
^ TOT^W'fftdl ^0-^ 
^TOWfdW^raHT.. 

^ <N^d; %.o6 
'j'^^dl d TOf^ ^61 

mira ^ 

dfd ^0 

'jy^dl dHI'Idi^-dd 

III 

l^dTRSTTRT ^<io 
drcbiPngri 

^o\3 

^fTOTORm 
<3t<.c(i ■?7T Tjnro ^%6 
#dlfTOFIlfd 
■giTOT 'dTO X03 
tj^idltiM d^C'tid 

dddi^l IdRdd 

ddd-di ciyddK'd 

t%sj 

dTOT; ^^3 

<ddlddd <J>rdl '5,’^ 


^TOTTO^f^VsVS 
dc(3,cd<y^l^d^ ^sva 
dd'^xi ddKl^, %° 
dddlddd^ ?,6 

^TOR^Tpi 

^d^d: WdlW 3 d 
TOT 

cjd<d 

<ddd TOfd^ X3 
^d^^d dITO g ^d'^ 
^ddd’M d/dFT 
toto^Mtot UR 
TO^TOratfd; ^3X 
ynraia ^ 3 ^ 
■^%TOT^; U'^ 
dTOnr^TOdTO ^X'^ 
TOTOf: TTO ^ ?03 
dTOl^TO^WIT V31 a 

^d'^gro fg^; ?xx 
<' dTrd 1 d>TfH^|ddl RR^ 
ddW 'drorot RR^ 

TOT: d'^i'kldT ■fegT: R6Z, 
<dl: 'TOlTdiT: 

TO 3Tfq TOIdW ^3'^ 

^dl dT^TO^ R'3‘^ 
^drfgTOdTOtTTO ^X 
■^dlgldt TO R 
^dT^dt \'^% 

TO ■§;Ti TOTTOTI R^\ 
TOdTO f% ddfir 
^TOT^TOgf^ ^3^ 
TORIMlfH-TRIId 
TOdrgTOTTTO 
TOT^dl'^d TOTdfq^ U 
top^totow^ 


ddl^tdTPrgTOTO 
^dl^fWT^dJf ?3d 
TOTOtfRfTOFRdT 
dd/ddiRl Tim R3'*T 
■^dTTO d WdTd ^d3 
^dlTO dTHdlJJ^d U 
^dTTOfTOTOR 

^dT^trorgs w^ 

<dlg< TOT g RRC 
<dlgt: 3ThTfrgTOTOTT ^3° 
ddt TOTOdf 3 
d^: ■HHIlMdT fd*g|:^3R 
■^: TOt?g R^% 

<TOKM^: dT^ Hd 
TOTO fd'^ldlig 
^ d Td dcfdid Uo 
fro MRcdddI ^3d 


tcdTfTOT: digilT ^R3 
tdTldT'Jddftd ^3^ 
ddfddTTO 
tdMdTOcd 



5;o^ 


^ d)(R^RMW R 3 X 
TOTOfddWTOT R66 
d WT^ drg d'3 
d^gfro^TOTTOdf d3 



dd 


■gTOd dT dRd'4 TO UR 
gdgfdktddJ ^d^ 
TOTOE^ d^: dd^ 


TOT^RTOdTOdTTOrd 
gITOtfd: TO#Rg ^T.o 
glTOtr^TOT#!! 
grroiT^ frodg ^dg 



INDEX OF VERSES 


327 


9RT % 

"Et 

ddHdl^dkMcb 

f| 

'Sk 7? nR'd^ cjl'll 

dl<H 

itdn: ;^^13 

fgjTRT [d'^J^d'ClHi 7^^ 

fg^^FRm ^i?gT 
fs4lkjt<ilMH-4H fc^T %?. 
t t^ii!^c(m 
t'^^13^1 

IT 2 n^ fTTstg ^i#FTr 

fSdldi||3577^^?n^^a'a 

^SdTdlc|c^'^T^R-Jd^Hl^d^d 

f|q^5En?ra«TPTrf^i <i 
%c(raT«R1T^ 
flTlRdfqcR'^ ^?VS 
^dd'ddd^uflfJjcHI'eTRil 
EFT^: WiR: ^<3 

^ "EH 'g?F?TT 



dlisdl; 7T^ V^6 


^ Mdld)l!i)-d 1'^% 
^HTT ^KJEIWra ^'^^ 
^-FRTlfq ^;?ris}T3pt ^V3^ 

?4f%37W% W 

ili^l^-qqiqbii :^x\3 


■5R ■tr^FTlpR 
^<3o 

?^^SRTfT: TrqpFqT Uk 
W ■=£[ TT^ki ^X\3 
^4d)'>^d)«dldl 

•HdVIlfEIdl n® 

^ 1 % WpRdl 7^ 
WMiT^^TPII; ^<aX 
■=^FId^ V9<' 

qTTO ■g 7XX 

^dfYd a's 
t)4vilFdfM<-ZRg 
tnfet gdsldi^. 

^MKUiRdl ■q ^ ^ 
^4'FIHMiaM^ a7 

'Tpt 7 '^'^ 

n^lfcl; TTiFRTRi ^^7 
W!7Ji ^luidFETPI ^(ao 
mwf44!^lldi'rq 
Wr'JITfW«JT 
^dKd^^dldHl 
«dKd<yMd^ 

Wd! tT?df ^X 
’dra ^ fmi'^ipui 
f?Fi, ^xa 

■Rr^ KR ^IfdilHrdd'rM ^V3o 

Rrm ■ERaRs^ 
ykr-p W ■gl a'aa 
4tT "^Jp ^xa 
4k: Rtd R d^k RR 
ijq cR# THR U'i 
gft^: fraf^wRg 


tpar gwTR 777 
?JdT ^TRld RT 7^X 

<Hd'J|'(rdlddd 7?7 
44RTWd k^^rkt xa 
KEfirdT ark Heigfe: tr 7a 
KTIrdT fk^ 7 ^e: 
WIRklUMR WF17^^ 

Knkd d RfRdkm^ ? ovs 
KEIHd <JSdiWd 7^0 
?^Hd ik®53d d 
^-dTdfkr d fdddTRdtRgd a® 

^w^dg^fd^ a°a 
KTTdd^^ddd 7?a 

WTRFk %ddi dR! C'^ 

KdRFRvRdT d?d 7*^ 

?dd; aRWfkgHU^cH 7^'^ 
UlERd^y yuimfq 
WfdlfdTdTdd Rdf U 
fd ¥fFTT d ddkd 7da 
igd fdddigRdTddRf 7aa 
gd: ddfkd ddf dm a °a 
^JdgrdmdTddi Rd^t ao<i 
gdldRRTdlfdt^gaoo 
^gdT dTdfwgk: dd a°a 

^gdtfddTWdd? a®"*^ 
^gfdddddTg a7x 
?ddr5RHdftw; aad 
d drfTdRdrfddkr 7?V9 
d drm d ddflddf a® 
ddd^d^kd a^'3 
d fd.Hl4 d^ a?<3 
dafddRRR R a?a 
d g^iRd ^ dddT.. aaa 
d Tjfjfd gRi gfR 7<^a 
d R fIdlidTigdT 7 ?e: 



328 

^ ^ -3^^ fiRfr 

g ?R 

g M 35[ cicsig 
g f%g fg 5 .gHT gg.. 
g fg-^M-gsn ggg 

g "5^' ^V3^ 

g gt ^ 
g g g^grfg dr^fw^ ^o\3 
g dcHKrlHMMifd 
g erg riMd ■y4I 
dgg^?T%M 8 j.. 
g dN^^fd^-W 
gg RAMd g?g u'*i 
d ^tdirfer d gra 
dggigmdi ?3 

d g •ggRfgsgft 
df^d^dW^r %'^6 
d^ dddl^f^ 6>i 
dgggiddFk 
d^ dd: dTT; ^ 
d^ fg^TdTdTdt 
ddig^dgrdTg 
g 3 gTtgrgg ^t-g 
ddjg^dg# 34 
d^ ^gpE^fd gjgf ^V3 (a, 

dAggrggfg^ n? 
dAggi^ggd^4di3'*i<i 
d dggw TTTidPT iR\ 
d dTdf ddfg?#g 
g 33;jra'gg: ^ 
d 'digT dfddt' gFdi 
d WT Mddldldl; '^5, 
dd: diddHIdm xo 

dd: ■'fNJIld ddig Xo 

dd: #gf®Td^g4d 


dd; 4<lf^didid 
dd: %gTg ggrg xo 
dd: 4dd4?3^ 
ddfe4^4fg«d '36 
dd^gnd: ^%d ^^x 
ddd^Rfrgg^ H'a 
dddfdg ■gnigp^: 
ddd^rd d^l4d C{ 
dddggg^gid 
dd4 TRRTdFI 
ddM ■yistddaj x^ 
dd^4dfd^ 
dd^ drfd^rg xo 
dde grgggrg Xo 
dd4 fgggggm 

dd^ ■dd?gi«d^ Xo 

dTRg 4[ddn«M 
dd^cTiggdTSdd xo,x^ 
d digi d eggr 
ddifdefgg^x? 
ddlfd dTdldd^ 
ddifd ^ fgg^ ^xo 

ddlfd f^ggg 
ddlfd fiRdT fgwrr x^ 
dg^ddd: ddig.. r'3<a 
ddi tgifg^gra Xo, ^x^ 
ddi4?('d^ fdeg ?? 
ddi dKiggi^g 
^<^x 

ddf ddg^gdA ? 
d^sTf^ddigig 
d4 ggidi^siTg xo 

d4fldgddfg 
ddR^^Traigfg rxx 
d^dggggggig 6\ 
d4dgggg^ 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 

d igg^ogg grof ^•ax 

d^^Td^dTRf 

dAgig d^iy^gi rx'i, 

dAgiggdrafdfggi^dTgf.. ■^vs 

dd^f^ytgdddf 

d did^g gidifd 

dd^gfgd^Mfg 

d <W*^od d 6le1od 
dfg^tjrjdgd ^0^3 
ddi^Tiggg^ \V3 
ddigg dif^Tt 4 t ^^0 
d g«T igra ^ gwr^g 
d gul^^f^fd 41 
d fgdidifd % fgg x\3 
d ^ duddisgid ? ox 
d^gigdicdid 5:^^ 
d dfllR gR'gPd 
d wi fgRgnggg 
dgggdiwg^ x^ 

dggg^dfgMi^ 

df^d^lf: 
d-^^dJiggifd ux 
Htddti ggng: 
d ddgf ggf 
d-gfej^grfd ^?x 
d ff grggmfggTgT: 
d fl' gg dd4 \ og 
dflddddd^ 
d % gfggrgggjfg: 
di^idAdgi#^ ??x 
fd:^g d^R 
fd:gfT ^txfddl ^vs 
f4fg#gif uo 
fd:dggi rgd dRT ^o^ 
fd:'?3fT Pirqd^'gi ^X^ 
f^4 gTgs'iR ^^x 







INDEX OF VERSES 


329 


^ fclPn'M 

"iS 

f%T ^fHrd4) 


WM'^Fcf 


pR?%^ ^ -JT: 

PmirTiT^tY^ ^00 

Prfq% qlcicliy :^6\3 
1%^: ?Fra^«TR5J^ 

-qt <A<i 

Pnr^^ ^>T ^ o o 

fqWTi ■gPpRrq 

nRi u\3 
PidSrq ^(4^1 <Mi^ ^^^ 
Pl<>'HH‘JHH'H •HiRhI 

fqjf^ ■g 

^I^TTTpRFfR; %6,R6'i 
Md W'WIHlfd 
fTRfc^ eis-^qidl^ 


Ef f4“Jj, TRT \6 


Pif^^ f^rmm 

cTSFnq 

Pici4'M ff dic(T4 \c(, 
Pra^Pd f|F3T^ \Cii 
Prar^ TT^mw 
Prara <^ddi-i^ 

Pdddl^^dlWIci) 

Pr4<i'qrfP % 

Pr^TsJPidi \cc 

pqqdq«f "qf^ 

P'^iHd'^d'd 

PrfqddisPdddi dyqr^'^v 


M^dqiMRdd 

Plfet; 

PWFd-gdf^ eTIdJEi; X? 
PtfcsqdPddHTd, 

PiHiHl 

pf^lHl <iX 

Pf^iFTT 'l<^ll<|d 
pRdddlSdd^tdqi ??X 
Plf^rd 'Iddl'l^'dPj 
Pr?dT dfedl^dd ^V9^ 

Pr?dt dd^ ^R 
P^dlSd di<l>Ml4: 
fP?dT ^ fT^dT^dt 
Pl^T^TdlRR^ 

Pl^ TldT WRdT^ R?X 

Pr^cd w1-gs 

Pfd^ d ‘5^: ^IIH 

PPdd y4?Trfd4 

dtPl: q|f4d: didl: dT^ ^X^ 


%dI3tJ?tdd 



illSI^t^EiraiBIE 


^ «qTd'j4 d d^d ?v3o 

^ ddddddrunR 
f1H?IRdTdd d^ 

^ Piq<HHi ^<^3 
^ dW; fqddi vs 
■^rddldddMiq 

^dddrRdd io 

^ d^dcddcdld, 

^JdTd ’JrdTd d 


Pg d dTTRdT»f ^«X 


dNdPdddd 
^PPddiT^dHd 
P^cdT Pdid^d^'O 
^fSPTFd dd^ 
^ddrrSdgVTfd ?di 
■^dd Fife Zo 


IdTdd US 


dddld d ddfe 
qadfe disdinm ^oo 
df^d: dddfefe X 
daS dqd; 

d% fe dT dddtdT R'^C 
d^dddddfedi 
ddddfdffel: fef U 
d^ddTdfet; RW3 


ddddd ^ diadT ^ q 



330 

^00 

■TS^ni^lfWrrRrat 
■qWTP^?2P7H I'^U, 
^T34^%cn: U 

McJcll Mimii^lN 
MeJCll !^J'Jc|dl 

■q^f^'^i f%^ym; u 
Mldt»4d ^T’^rfd 

qfdddl R^RFIT 
Rfrranmf ’jqdTqi 
qfdddW); Trai^ ')i<i 
■qfdWRlfqdftq RRfeTT 
■qfdgHl RSR RT^ ^13^ 

RcR^2TI5dfdfd<: 

R#q: 

MHlIddiqiR? 
qftDTT w ■gRm 

qqqr^tR^ 

Rgf^Rcfqr 
qqifdfyq -#0 
qqHiq 

qqiqi^?qt%w 
q^qqqfgwiaft ^o 
qqrqi^^^ c^ 
qqns^ qtow ^ 

qqiT^jqof: STjqnrf.. ^3^ 
q^Ri?qH^'*5RTT^qfqtfq vs^ 
qqm ■yqffeq qqvs 
qqm '»jfg 
qqm%Rq ^ 


qq^'dqqqrar 

RRiy 'ddlMl^f 
m*-mi^< qfq?qT*f 
qq '^frRdldTfqT I'so 
q^Kq^^oMHici^i 
q<'qRid>'qi'4ifq ?oq 
qRn^fq^-jpi 
qTRRnqrqfq qnroT iff ?q 
qqf^qqqq^si 

M«rdlld<.dl: RT^ 
qrpR ^qPd ^ q fqq^ 
qCRRfd54l^; 
qiRRf^^ 
qqqR?<aTl4iqfqRid,i; 

qq^q^qqmt 
q^FTHT^Mt q^V3 
qqqq qr-qfq 'r\3^ 
qqq^fer^giftq ^o% 
q<mgi<iq<di 

qR9h’-q yu|wji?T ^o-i^ 

qfcqq RWm^ q-iM 
qfcrf rw 
qfeqqqRFiqR qv3C 
qRqrq qqq r 
qRqrqrmtq qf q ^qv 
qftqpfq^iiq u? 
qftqrqijqqq 

qftfaidi'qi^jdrqi 'ic 
qw w«iiqi 1 
q^<idi4yqo; qaiRM^f: ^ o'^ 
qqqi^fd 

qfflq^fq 'qqqrqT q'i^q 
qqmqiKPKdi qxs, 
qftqqnrfqcRt^qq rc-^ 
q^q^id fq^iq^ \R'>i 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 

q^fqq ?fq ■!^M: 
McHiqqidiwid^^^ qq? 
q^jqRiMg^ \IR 
q^qm q4: 

H^fqi'^Rw: qiaf qRTtd '?,o 

q^qid^ci fg^ 

qlrqqrqi i^ 
qftqqqqqrg^ 

qifq q q^Ffi 

q^qqlqq^j^ \6\ 
qwftq^q; qtqi 
q^rfrq^iqtMq 
M^qPd q ^qv3 

q?qqT ^ 
q^qqftqrqff^ ^ox 
Mvqift q^sfq y 
Mi'cnqqfd fdteyidi u 
qjqqqpifqfq wn^ 
qFqqqqq cTEgg: ^x^ 
m'jqgiq^qgjqt^^ 

Hi^s^i: ■jf^qqoqrq^; 
didM'tqr f§qiq^ WR 
qF'^fq^ '3 R'^^ 

qrarqfqqq^qri 
q# qqffqqfeqqq ^\% 

MK-yiRFdfld w 
qiqqfe3qf qqeqr 
qiq#qqfw: 

MKMdRRK'Jld 
qi3% qrfq 3IR713 
Hi^q> Rkgi qqqq 
qiq%q fqqqqq 
qr^ t^qfq ^qq 
qr^ wqfmqr 



INDEX OF VERSES 


331 


■'IFg ^ 

WT: ■?T^fefRT \C 
MRrddl; 

4Ki?r4 wt5?4 ^ 

w4^1^^T3fR ^o<' 
MIS'^R^d'^^lfs ■^I 4ictdl ^VSo 
WPT«4 ■RfT'qFTT \C(, 

4M'4IHW ^TirfrqTV9(i 
MIH'^IMiy U? 

■qr^ wiH 

MlfddlS'^ 

^Ti^Kftinft-Rwf 

11%^ ^\3<: 
■qrf^TiqtT^i^ X\\ 
f4UST^^c|<^dl 

(ndl 1TRR 'X'^6 
ftd^'W'W 47^ XR'ii 
[Rdll^ d'^c'ctl ^Idf ^'a, 
ft^roPT Tirir^ 
fWT ?pg; ^X 

f4gww4 

^x° 

fwF 91^ ■■g^ x'a 
rqg-qRtui 

X'^'^ 

ti4 ■g??? 

IqgqjFf ^ 'dc^ 
fqgdigd^ fd^ 
fqgsrPdrgdiT^dd 
ftdgf^ fdftdlrquSl 


■fqggfqgrpw^ 
fqdggdi IddTSdf^ 
fMdl^i ddldn^ ?iV9 
fw ■qdd d^dRg x°^ 

fqdT dT ■RTgf^Tdffq 
fddT dT4 ?ddT did 
fqlf-gqgcft'4tfd 

fqtd d’^'d'l '4'i-Hid^q^ 
fqdfddidt%d 
fq^trargiisiraTf^ X'^ 
fqftldlf^RdPFd X^o 

Hls^lPd ddtfdrdg X'^° 
dtfedisf^ did '( 1 ^ 
MldlMi dKtddfddldi RR’X 
dldltdTdt gM 
■q^ d dTPRlt fdug U<^ 

Wdldd qvs'l. 
^'Js(l'=h ■?^4dd: ^<io 

■yidqt^Fl ddld ^V3\3 
^us<(=fii^ ?o 
gn5TlqTi5fq ddfcRi qfix 

-q^nFl: ^V3^,qV3^ 
gnzt d«lT tdHT g 
■jnzt ddPTpgPf^ '>i^\ 
g'lddW?!^ X'>iX 
■J'ldT nfcj^i himhI 
■ 3 ^ didfii did 
Ydl? dd firdT g 
■ydl# didfdrdi g'ii'^ 

gnqr^: X^'^ 

gnq fddt dTR X'^° 
■yi4Td%ddtfd^ 

■ 3 d: ^igdddifd 


■gddddRg “d difdd, q? 

■gd ^ dddt ^xq 

3 ddraifdd?rdt 
gdfd dfddT dFTiqq 
■gdl: ■qngdl: fdfrRd 

■JdigdlHd iddifd ^oS, 
gdRd X'^x 

■3fddddtdm 

3 ^d<rte 4 Hd 3 dM x<: 

■gd: gd: diod ■gdg x^^ 
gd: dd^dlft goddf did! ?? 
gd: ddlfdlddd d^ ^xx 

■3d: dldlRgedrgEd qq^ 

gd: ■qid d diigcddi ^xx 
gd: dddf: ■^■gfd 
gd: ddi ddXdRTf 
■3d: d fqryisfddlrdgdR ^q 
gd: dt q<1-cdl£ll: ?? 
gd: Wdddddi ^'i.q 
gdddifddFTifd qx'?, 
gdi^q ddxdqidg dq 
gdddddidfd q^q 
gdwddddw q^ 
g^fgdr^ ^q^ 
gdi^dFd'IcTIdd X 

gdftfdfd^di x\'X 
■ 3 d 4 g%^fqf^ q^x 
gd*|drdi Midtdi qq 
gddd 111 g^ -qdRddd: qxq 
gddd fd^ d^d^dge q?q 

gdddldfddTd dlfdd q^x 
gdddddddtdid qqo 
gddd di ■! ?x 
gdifd dddgddd qxo 
gdFTdlddgiH: ^q? 

■gdddd^HIdd 




NARASIMHA PURANAM 


332 

■jaf%cT3fw^ 

■jrm ^^rrdw ^ 

!j<i'J|5<c<'j| fdyiH 
■JW^IRT ■fl' ■? 

■JOT 

■ 5 ^ 5,'« 

y;^|u|ifc;dHM>i 
'i<icn’ Mme< 

5|<lcldl ^U4|c(,8Ti 

■joTPff 

S<ld^i!4y?qT 3nif^I 66 

^f|^: 

grr gT'd'i.p^ci 

g>difdv# 
go gf^ES^ iRT 
grr W^RI^ ^'^o 
g^T 

g^urg^Mirraf 
g<lHqiw7T 'tmiM 

6'o 

gj?<iry: 66 

g^ g^^ guii :jV9 
g't?M: g'^<ri; g'J<4: ^"so 
gwf^diMdrdl^^ ^ 
g?^tTP7 ■^gp?R) ^'^'a 

gWcTO'?^ ^6\s 
g{#n im 


g^«Ki'd^: TgM 

gttwwrara \oy 

gd^^J^-d H?ldvHI: 

g^ g^^ g R6^ 

g^V t tRT; #51^0^ 

g'd^ui f^HIdd \%6 

ggwi^^etgdi 


g^^d'HfH^ ^xx 


g^idtfd gftM 
gf&T^ cTgg r^TTTt 

g^^ri^'JTEEf ^^1^ 





gwTOTTR^ 
gdillMNdl^dg 
gpffer (igigR 
gprto z[«n^ 
■gjfl^cdl # rT? 
gpIT ■H^l'-M H5rf) ^X<^ 


'^^6 

ITTRtR: 


gyf: gRgrm?: ^xo 
g#?FgfWT ^fTHI ^0 
ggfjTPPTnwraTFTT 

g^TOW^I U? 

g4^3F#if^ w 

g^^RfuiRi^# 

g4<dg^5ifg 
g^R grfe rx? 
g^^vnfrdl 


g^gxR^fmmRR 
g^ Rt ^irggdifM 
gcf^- ^ Rgi:: ^00 
g^^RT'Rf^.'^T^ ^o'^ 
ggf RR^Rng ^^x 
gs0 TT: rirR gg io 
g^spwntl R crm ^V3 
g^irrdidWsdlRl^id: \3^ 
gf^dlfddd 
g*4l!>idf^^iH>ci ^^x 
g^R^RTORM W: 'aR 
^gKi TTSR7T; 9l^<l ^ ^ ^ 
RMT RlrlT 

Tf|ust 1 c 6 '^^®rat ^0 
■RTtR^ cpcH grRT ^X 

■<fgT: '^#11^ 6'-, 

TM R^I^% 
TM-qwgg^ 

ycbfcdri 

■jrgu g ^RTTiRg 
TTHT: RWRTTRra^ \66 
y'di: ■H'H'd ggicT 
■jRT: ^g^-snRie: 
'fRnf RTeH ?Rf <:x 
yuidlRn Ra 

W^ ^ rTcTT drdi 

W^T Rdd^d; Rg 
TTWR w ggiRf ^xg 
y'J|*-4 ^Rd^ldd 6 '^ 
w^fim cR^R ^ga 
RWRfRRra^ka 
w^f fRSTgggr?^ ?a'^ 
W^ f^RRI RR^ 
yui^l'TRI ftRRT 




INDEX OF VERSES 


333 




■yf&NcqfBf^TT^ 

■gftrnr^ ^'R,^6\ 

yclddi ci^MfdH^-d ■^: V3^ 

■yf^ w#r 
yidy? y^df^ 
yldu^y^i '^^6 

■yfdy^^fy^^ 
yf^VlPldd 6'i^ 

yf^ fdgf^^: 

W'^ 

yfdiiiw?y^4lyt 
yf^^^ "y <iH'S-y ^o\3 
yfdkii U"*^ 

y(a'<5Ni fyf^4 
yfdyildfmy ^xy, 
yfdTEgM-R?!^ 
yf?rfftf-gy^yi-g u 
yrdT'K-ygdi: ?ngr 
yrgc^TRT cRT; MXl: 


yrgyryyyrfR^ 
ycy#? yTFT ypwTFTl ^xx 
y?Ty didrHiyi^gy yj? 

ysyy wyiyf^ 
y«TO ^q?y; yrn u 
y^mlw fddi4di 
ysw g giyk'^d, ? ^ 

y«my gcd%nr 

yyf^Frgyrfcy 
y^mn ^y%y ^ ^x 
y^: y^d«Ty 
ydH'diHy<ig4d'Jif 



ygfl ^ ^ ^raifei ^121 

y^^d'd^iyPT '^’^dl <A^ 
yyf^: yy^iviicMi ^vs 



ygddi yytiT 'y 
y^ y^yryfy y^rayig 
yypy digyiy g 


ygsy gPidi+M ^t,v3 

yyFT ^ 

yyifT^«tyyyy g kh 


yyrn g ddwfwg 
yyyt ymgf^ "y "^oo 
yyrcT: yy^yy ^x? 
yyra; f^TTyry^ ?\3 
yyrfy fy^gyryiyy r^x 
yyryy y yyymi ^x^ 
yyrc^iyqy'^ 
yy^yrfy iy^y cy ^ox 


yy^yift y?Tg^ ^ 
yyayrfy yznyy 
yy^yrfy y^mrey rx^ 
yfy^: yr^yyarg 
yf^ du^d.K'jy 
yfy^yygg? dry go 
yfy^RT gg Tpy 
yf^yywi 
yf^y 

yf^yyrymiyi 



yfd?d yu^q dRyg ^xx 
yfd?y T^ yygyNFJft 
yfoRy d'd'd y y^ 'ao 


yf^tyyyrgaj 
ygyr^yfFSTrar 
yyRfT^ypywy 
yy^yyyy yyyypTyrsj ^gv3 
yy-yr fygyrg yyng ^gg 
yyyy gu^(ld>i% gfw 9c: 
yypy dd<d9l 9^g 
yyig ir^iy yggy f%w ^xva 
yyig ywHi^ 9^9'^ 
yyng gy ^dJ^i 
yyrggr^gyty :^o6 
yyigi^d^dw 9<9x 
yyrgTSiggyyy ix 
yyigpyrfwyy 9 ^^ 
yyrif^yyi gy 99° 
yyig <ddd^i ?'9 
yyfe yyygf^ ?■?. 
y#g Tyyyyr 
yytg cyTyryryra 5'^ 
yyfe fi™ yyyyyyy 9 ?° 
yyk y5%r ?<?, 
yytg yyg y yiy w 
y^^gyyiyyyT 
yyte gHgiHid x9 
yytg y^ddsfi 
yytyFd ygiytfyg 9<:x 

yyyraygr^ 
ygryfy ygry^ 9^ 
yfig^y fyt g^ 9xg 
yfTgyyr y yryrfy w 
y^i<i5fy yyrg^yyr 9g° 
yifci wyyyy ^ 
yigidl d^dR-^d 99 
yy^: yyyrg^^ x 
yidingfed cRy '99 
yryrroyyyyiytfy ava 



334 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 







yi-^f^i: y'Jicii ’jccii 

:Ji'j|i<mHH 

TfPIFn^: 


^: ^V3 


^rrcrfq^#t 

W: Fn?^ 4aPH^ ^O 


■jrid^ Hldc|Hl3i^ 
!JKicqKStiri ^ 
5n^{ral^H|8T; 

■yi^^ yrrar^ ^vs 

yr^yfg 

yr^yfy 


yrwctj'^f^ 
yrwRiR cT Try ^vs^s 
yryr -jn ^y^^yyi^d 
yryryfyFsmM^ 
yi'^MTyiRi'4i54 
yrw^: ^TRT 
yiHifci trora ^s,s, 
ynztfwTfld^ \o\ 
yrwyTfer tfpjt 
ymi %wcbf^f^: 
WTFTWPT^ET% 

yr^ ^hiRiwcy 
ymyifdTR^ 
yr^ yTHTSFTT^ 
yr^Tajyiyl^ ru 


yiyjy yyryriy 


■ywR^ynid; 
yi^ymy^Mi'i ru 
yr^ym?!^: ^ 

fM fldi y^gry 
fyyiyw^’j^: 

fyyTfyyFH^:^ox 

■fyyyyramT^ 


^ yyfy feyrcyr 
ylcllRy cTTOT 
ytdTsfyr oRy yg 
y^dlg fTE?? ^ ?g 
ylrdi y yyrr ^'kii 
y^M H<!y4iKnyt ^6^ 
?fTW[4^: <i^ 
yci^hi'wfPl fcyr ^ 'fi'^ 

^yyiyw % wy ^3^ 

yyyiyiy 


^yymra yyfyy ^o<^ 
WTMy TryPT Ro'?, 
yyfdrcii ^ U° 
yRial: yifro^ty ^^3 



yt^y^yy^i 
yraj^yy ^ 
yMd cRyg^ ■g c 
ytyrg y^ 1%r ?,co 
ilf^TTfq d^an 
Hidifd cRy ■^syy ^'^o 
yg^tlycTy; ^xo 
y^; yyyyffyyf^: yy 
y;§:ty yfytyPd R3g 
y,gyyyf|fy|?^ 
yg^tqioyfa yyj^ 


yg<yT y^yypTty 
y^Pd y fgyAy ^ 3 ^ 
y?yyH: 
yyfy?yTygTyg 
yyyT#j^yy^ 
yy=^yT ygrcHH ^^<A 
yy^ '^'^11 deidiy 93R 
^y^yyyjfgsrt 
yyy ^yrcyfypgyyy] nx 
y^Pyfyy^; ^x^ 
y^ '^o 

y^: ytyyyyi ^ 3 ^ 
yy yy-yify yr 
yyyyytyfy; ?3x 
yny^y yyy 
yyyyrygidtdf ?3y 
ycfyHyygrg x 
ycTyrytfdyf?^ 
dcdiHfdddi JyE, 

yf^<4fi yRT ^xo 
yfcWE%syyrr^'^?i(T 
yfpRT diogdi yyy^ ^ 3 ^ 
yfpRT twJidiy ^^3 
yfcTy^yygSrfry 3 ^ 
yfyyry U3 

y^yt^ y ^ :^33 
<M§,'J,<rHc1rll=hl»II 'Ro 

tM|rc|llde yRyFiT 
d^dl f% ■^KTTyfPy 
yfyy fy-gy^ 
yigyyr fdgy^yyw 
yiyyROTRTy 
yfyyfajy fryr U3 
ygyRy yy?y Uk 
yf%3Bfy^yH ^ 3 ^ 
ygyygg^yrfy yyf ux 










INDEX OF VERSES 


335 





NARASIMHA PURANAM 


336 

■‘mfa fSryyp-i ^TTfer 

'*-P|c|-d 

^ TT ^ lAi 

■‘T’TR^'^TT 

'HJ||!^J«^c|4mI ^ 

5;V3 

■iW fHr^-JHHMWWdl <iX 

^4'm'l ft 

T# "^RtT '^)c-4|u?|' ^ 9,\3 

■RWPTT 9'^V3 

'HiJTfR ^ ^ o ^ 

'»TOT; TR^ 

mcTR SRRRTTCRRte: 
WTRR^FTTCRqfe; vs? 
■RcTT TFW^e 
■TOTlfqRTr^ 

■R^R ^fJRRSRp! '?,o 
'‘TTSRT^JTT WI 

mgRIRTOTk ^4'^ 

m?[Rrfq?f w 

Uo 

Hg: ^6 

»ra^ft WR4 

’Tcrf% MR'MI'Ji ^ C 
■iRfR RTvT ?TWr 
'Mctfcl'iR: fcbrri 'Mlfd 
■RtRi ■‘rlc^l ^ c|<;|-^- 

•qftRfd ?o^ 

■g;oT 

HraRf^ ■qftw?,^ 


MfgRfJmTTCFR U? 
^#RRJJcT rR 
HfgRiR "gTO ?^4 

Mf^RfR 

vrfgRifnr TTRRTlfnT vs-if 
’MPt 5;|tK^I 

U'*^ 

’IRTOpfergrRi ^o-ij 
^FSIJiKR if SR 
^It^RUI VA 

wrgR cji^gcj g ?44 
HHRg 
^Kd 'SPR^ 
WRgRJ’RHT %6 
RRSRgST; 

■RRSRT^ cR ^4^ 

WS'^lfui 

■RRTRft R WTTR ^o? 
ddd: 

MRTWlfl ■gRTRT ?oR 
■RFlf ylcti cR ?oIa 

RR«r4 

Rfg^RRWWg^ 

HRRfrg !a3 

■rWrI R ■Rqfd w 
WIlRjdRtgdRTOR ?<A 
^TFt^RR^RR Ia4 
HRfAfrdl ^STRTR 
’TRR fRR: Vs? 

4'w?dg4?ii T^’fferr v^^ 
■ipgta ?S.O 

spg^RIR Tf 
■yddMld ^rf^HR 

?^0 


^IdcTRTwffsRT.. X 
^■qfM ?0^ 

fd^iclWl; X 
’idrRR R^IrRTd ?vs 
FRI ff d)cd4 ? ?\ 
’pRiTa-TR#? ??o 
^dlM^lRvji Tj^ ?x 
praHTrpRRT: ^Xo 

^TRgRT^ loX 
Rr|ct, P3RRI TRR ??'^ 
^K^dlf^ar? a? 
pifer RRH 

TiiRdVq R ?xx 
'ifJ’pTRTR^Rm Vs 

'A 

■VjftRn ^ ^^4 

'»^fRmfR®l RisvgR ^?VS 
R^RfT ^vso 
YM RTR?#rR 
'pri ^PTR^RTR ??X 
YT: 

Yf: WRg#4 ?U 
■‘pRfRP/RRt ^'^6 
^dWcf diRd ?? O 
'pferRJcTHT^Wg ^00 
^puilfd ^ -jRiTfd ?^o 
R*RaiI R ?vs^ 

sjftmr 

^jfRTTRltlR^ ?XX 

R^5t ?x 

^guii^d rfH ?<^ 
^jrpMRfTRFTr ?? 
■‘jgwd RPR R 
'‘pni RFT^ ?X 
^IRi 



INDEX OF VERSES 


337 


’ftt; Tr?T»^FTI 

^\6 

■JJTi ^ •^c^PcI qV 3 ^ 

¥FtiT 

'ijfrWTTT^ ■Rm 
yirHUJjv^'ffdMl4l^n 
m\: ■^^RTT^'q?^ 

^rrar f^rar tw: 'tdiw 

rfrg 

yrg^rralWFi^ 
mgf^rofgf^: ^?^ 160 
f% dW '€\ 
^l=Tl?gT 
■qrfffd #EJTcr ^ X(a 
'SM <IM'J| if^dl 
■OTST 'Hd'^d ■g'.TlTdf 7o^ 
yMTTRclt vH^KchHIST: 70X 
^ W^^OTqrsT -Ro^i, 
H^-^MK'^ddV'd Rk.6 

Mfu|fMU^4,HiRH ^o\s 
^yMVlldd ^o 
Hti'mI 'JfT Vd^Il “5 
Mr^d H<*J| ii^rHl Ro\ 

■Rr^ ri RTR \%\ 
RcyRTRiferr R?^ 
Hc^d^lRd rRRcRl \'iZ, 
RaRRTRldcWdfflTcl^^^X 
Hddl^hl'dSddl 
RRRTffg^^(i^ 
RRlf^df^'S: IW^ 

RRRRRTf ftcR V."^. 


H^MRlft PlrdlrHl 

RcffRicI 
R^[^RRTRTRT 
R^^RRIVIIiJ RWR 
R^^RfRRR 

R^RR^MSfw 

TfWTR M^dR ■’J^ %C 
RSRR RFfecp 
RW|i^ rdRildrdi ^00 
RKR ^f«T^RlR#^ 

RtR RdTOR dM ^ o ^ 

RWfRRRTRR 

RR; RRTRRRRRPI ^^3^ 

R^ fRRRR'^d? 

R^fRRfRcf-^ 

RRlft^ddl 

RRRRRRRftR Rhld ^ oR 
R^ fdMjfl RRI^^ 6R 
RR: ■gRRRi RTR; Vs^ 

RRi: RRFR^RR4IRX 

R'Rfqu^viiai'i 
H'd'i 4 RFRIR RRR 
RRfRI^Rt^ RFRR 
H'dl'Jli RTRIR^ 

Rf^: RR^JgqiVd 
RpRRTRigR^ U? 
Rf^rfR; R^ RRRfftT 
R^TRTfRRRT^ %X\ 
R^RRTO R RRlfejR RVi 
RRTRIRRTR^ 
RRRTRRTRRTfRTRRcR: \W3 
R^RT^TRR^fR R3 
RR dT-dRd ^'RRT 
RR R^RR^lfR; RRC 


RRRWIRIddRTRRlRT n° 
RR ^RRRT RRT 
RR RcRFER ^'fcTT^. U''5 
RRTfrRRRmRfR ^^R 
RRTR RRRT RTRR 7V5'^ 
RRTrRRR f% RT^ 

RRra RR' RR^: RoR 
RRRRRFRR 
R^^RRTR 
R^TJRT^RR 
RRTR dcijfddid Rt.o 
RRT ddlf^d RER r^ 

RRT tjgfRJdRR ■gR 
MdliRMf ci RTR 
RRT fRfRRT; RTRRR; r>5 
RRTR: RtIMr^ 7^7 
RRT RRTfRcTT rIrT 
RRT R? fRfR^RRR 7 ok 
RfR Rf^ fST ^icRT 
RReR RTr^dl RRRn 
R#ERRR R fspjER RTR 
RRTERRTRr R? 
R#RtRTRT3«5%q: V9^ 

RJR?g cT XX 

R^tfRRRf: ^s-TRIRT VsR 
R7tfRRRT%TR "JcIRR ^X 
RRfRTfRRR RRT IR 
RRtR: ■^WT: RiSfRMIdlfcR; Vao 

dO^Klni gR ^k 
R7t?Rrtj%TRr^t: ^k? 

RRRi fRRRRTIRRT ^,X 
RRcRRTt RRTRRTT 
RRRTgRRTRfm 7?? 

ReTTRR g 7kk 

RfTRTRTRTRcftRT^ 

R^RTRRRT5 3RTRT V-k 




338 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


^ftA|i4 ^Havci 
■m?c;k4i fap^raRn ^ 
TT^i=br4i H?141 iff 
TWFF# 

Tr?T?tR^g?rd kri: 

■RFFni WK 
Tf^FRKlt 'SK?^ ^Ia<C 

T^^middiffR^lg: 
TT^i'RdcH'g^'isfq 
*H5IMlM'Jid 4 h ^'v3 

^isRm4^id 

TiFr^jctfemgr^ 

TlBIMfd q'fiyii w 
it?t4p 1 yq'Hilffl 1% 


4Rfg?§Tf^ 

f#R; -^TRTRRg 6'^ 
■R|'^|fTOdr4 ^oo 

T#?rtt RiT4m ^?,5 
T#?Tf|mT4m ^ 

w4r qmi ^<:: 

wmr mmiq 

Trf^-ftfd cIcT; wmimi 

44 ^oo 


^ T HSId-d^d 

T^: -aRem: aidfel: 

u? 

44 

m4 mrr 4^^V9 
mmi dfg4iii ^v^^ 
mTOT'g^Tm'^ 
ft 

mimtamcRf 
ammt fRt: aRT: <: 
mmmTPT Tn4f4 6 
frmmt ’RRTri 
Tqg cPmt ^ 
■Rg:mm4aT 4cfT vss, 

■R^: mra4f SRRl 

TT^m {M=t)iAH \ 
■Rt'^4fRcMR;mRr roo 
R cR 4>l^r(4t 
t 4 mg:5T 

TRRurag^mRf ’^^6’- 
rnwRaaFT^ ? 

r 4 mf4 wt g 
Hlf&Icfdg'jS^dd 

wrfmRTOfm 
RMfqgmf ^'o6 

Tirg^^rpi, SR 
■RTga^ ri4gi4 -*<8, 
in^;#T 4 w <A^ 
mg^fqc4 4g ^66 
RRPfaWRHFWR-- ?<A« 
■RlrR ^ mRFRlFf 


mm4 d^wm^'ccfl^icm 
■RTR dmi''4yT4 ^ ox 
■RTm44#mraT«? 
mm wra ■§:'?41 m 
mamgmrr m4cm 

Ml^dddilei rdl'RH 

m^44a4i^: 
m?m m wmfmr 
mm?: R44t4i| 
msmrf|34’ fami 
RR-RlP) ft 4f5#T 
mmn^: ^<'3)r<H: 
m m T^ ■ymrcm 
mg%a trmmm 

'Tjm?2T fRw4 4 r4 "IS 

mTTR ^o:? 

m44 F'^RRR 

m44w5tfe: 

m4m: a4cnmK 
mfl^ma 4mif 

RR'KlRfd ddfH'^mil'i \3o 
Tna4m4m4^: ^xo 
ma^mmamam 
mq43t4 wmn 
■ma444 Pr^mrs? UK 

m4u44l H^ld-HI ^^,?'^< 
ma^tmsftf mRf?m 
ma^mama: gmr 
■RR^tmR m ■54 
ma4tamf^am ^vs 
RR^tmR'gfmTT RR,R^ 
mm'a^ijd 4 mmf ^v<i 
m4mmmm^ 



INDEX OF VERSES 


339 


■RFfnjFR 

Ml'li H'MI ilS"?! 9'^° 
^TFSR TWPT 
wiT f?gT^zrr^TT^ 

9ltHI >Jirc|| 6^ 

MWlif-Kul ”9^ 
wrraro TfgqfRT 

'HTflqr^ 

Mlf^EHrfl’-J^f^fFir ^vso 
Ih^ ■'P; 

fiT^nf^-^nf^r rT^ 
rai^'ura ^ 
fl|>l|c|^uipr4 
fq^raWTI; px 

ftfSldlMNMIMRJ, U° 
‘j^^fdcl'FiJSpcl: ?3 

^gfeiMTurraM'^ 

■gp^ ^■‘^Rd^TiI'n ?^3 

■gf^ "SI-STp^if^ ^\3 

gp^STPT g'^Tr^Tt? 

^■q-^f^r^ qq3 

w^, ^0^ 
gT^ran: qrf^; u 
gwrnY^s^Fg n 
g-r^g^RTpn ic^ 
gpTrfm ffTRT 
TpwqTHqR^TT 3? 
gssRft^ipjrof ^ ?^(a 
y<if^c)di ftsTcn #?n ^<i3 
gg^jf'H’TgqrmFT 


ggsf: ^fT5iHifq 
girra 

■gq^: qRMIg^qt R: 

gq^ RR ^oq 

gfqRiW'<FfR4'RTt ^\3s, 

gf^ Rfert TiR 
gfR: gR: RifsfRRIR 
gpRcRi gg-.qaicns:^'?. 
gRyRKiqgRT 
gfRfR: w RRR T'^ 
gfRqRgrRRRR ^^6 
g^ri^RiR u^ 
g#7T Rf^4 g^ 

g^ WRRTRTR 3<' 
g#lTRfR R^Ri R^ 6^ 
gdlnmi^ rr 
gR: RTRS^TTRfej ^^6 
gR RidlfRR ^ w 
gf&RraRffRi R^ 
gRRIR g ^00 
gR IrRIR ctrR^ ^gx 
gRRTRRR RRRRT ^3 
gRRTRt RRf^R' q3 
gRR RRRRT R gfeq^ ^33 
gR felft ^cRT g 

gR R3fft cRRIRT gR X*^ 

gg RR g RlfRR^RR 
gRRH irr; ^ Rsx 
g?gpFrfip grrg 
g?g?R t^^RTRR 34 
gcg?R fRf^: g4 34 
ggRi RrgRT 3° 
^^RTrfRRRtRRRgg^ 3^^ 
Rgq^ R^ 

RRRTRNR fRRT p.4 


RIRtR d'jtd; gis>J| 

RTRTfRSF 3%RRTfggtR 3^3 

RTSP: padRR^ ?X? 
RigfRrRTggi^ ^3^ 
RPmRigTR Rfd RRTR: 3'So 
■CRRSPRRRRR 33^ 

R RRg g^^RR RrRf Z.o 
R RiggjM fRgRT 
R: RRlfRg^ P3 
R; R-IRRfR R fRW; ? 3X 
R: RRgRgffRRRTR 33° 

R: gdi'-RRRR ^ ^X 
R; RggRTRRcRIR 344, 

R: R3: RfR: RfRR; 34^ 

R: gi: R ^ ^X5 
R: gRilR gfRgM 3'='>X 
R: RgRTR: RBR gRtfl RI 3^ 

R: RRR RgTg4: V 
R: R'ofRIRfRR^t 3^^ 

R: RRRRRTRRfR 
R: ^R RfcRRR fRglRRRRR 3^R 
R fR RBcT RR3RT 34 
R '5R RRR RTTR 43 
R gg ggRil^ R3A33 

R^R^ RR; RT^ 

R^TTRR RHRT3^ 

R^ fig^RRRRrRlwg 34^ 

RS^RT Rf^RTR^RT 
RRRTTRRRIcTRlfg'RR 3XR 
RRg RR R^rg 4 r 
RSRR; % R RTRTR; 3 
Rf^RRTRRlROTR ^3^ 

RRRRif&T RIRRTRT ^3^ 

RRR7RFR RRjf^R ^^X 
Rr38J:Ih3IIRI3r 3R3 



NARASIMHA PURANAM 


340 

(\R 

zf^TPI T^?l Tt \m 

■Jit ^ ftclt ^ ^V9\3 
■qMnRft: #RFi;^'3 
JitwttciwiJn 
JfcT: 

JW ii.cIHO'l TR^ 

■JRT U,c(H-aI t^IT: 

■^Tcl'Wd; ''J^ 

^l4-q5fMT0TfR 'iS^ 
qfcctipKqc^<iCl 

fFT ■^' ■^ 
Jp^r^T'gqW: "fTt 
JTrl^ ^«TJiriTO 
JT?# 

JIr4K^Wn«lfJT 
JI?yr4^^ UK 

J^i'l^MlfvjdfH^i^Rd 
JIc^TO WfM 
■JfcqJH Cl 

■JRc5RT Tra^ <^0 

jra^^fR«ini 
JT^ TTc^'Srt ■=?RT ICC 
■^T? d^d t 41dl ^U 
JR 'rt'd^ dlHlllH U y 
■q^d: TdTftRT'dm 
Jra JId 

JI^TM^R^ira; Uo 
^ c| 'il!^4d W 


^ f¥^: ^ ■5ftcJ77 ^ 
jra U'^ 

ira w^'c^d Tm,. 
Ji3n<§^<Rd'^ u? 
jramt WF^tk; I’ll 
■JldTft fdfd'd^IKil U? 

irlkTJSTdik^ UK 
■doHldldl: WydIH I'^C 
Jt^TT 'dT^rfk^I^'SrfdFI^I ^ KK 
Jfsil JFc^ l'^ 

U'^ 

Jfs^T Ul 

^ol 

^Ktl ^yWTH s[k-U'i^ 

■JT«TT fk^T^: W 
JTS4I g 

wg TiFk 
Zfsn t ^ajpTKIlfM ^ 

'dd dMKlKi'd^ C 0 
ddT ^ Tlddddlfk U^ 
JrdTdFT:^dJR U? 

■JisTFT dgkgdd 
dsjT kroT ddT fd k u? 

■ddT M^goRui ^ U'^. 
ddl ddltd'RdH''^ 
ddl'd;^ df^; U”^ 
JTdTfdHfidl'gfis ^§^4 U^ 
ddFIdPR Wr 11\ 

■ddTd Hrgd: 'Fgcd: VC^ 

W ddT digfddRdm l\\ 
ddT ddi ■gtdkr ^o 
dwt ddl^ RWl 
ij2n%r4 yjdlcl ^K^ 
ddrkRd'SRgg uk 
JT drkdT d HTdd dd: U<i 


■ddl^dl TS7#?I?d 

ddTdrrt gdlftddT U 

ddT ^dleFiad^ UU 
d«d ■fididdtttg u"^ 
dd: ^gdfd ? 

■dddT ■ijKTdig R^K 
ddFdddrfMdift VKl 
dddWdA! W^ RVC 
ddldmfddd;^^^ 
ddldTd: -Mdldld l\-C 
ddl gfdd dHTd ^><K 
ddFltfd ddlHlfd 
ddrfdddJdradd UK 
ddlddTdd^dkd 
■ddT ddT dftdffd U? 
ddT "ddr t| 'dgwq i^c 
ddi WTtddguo 
ddlFTd-^RI: Tfdf U 
■ddRd-dddi^ U 
ddT?d dddl kkrig 
■ddig: 'dW 'dU UK 
dfddtdfd'd dIdT R^\ 
■dfd ■g^ Hdld 'cd 'C'C 
dfd cd'dUHTd U<i 
dfd rd ^gfd: 
dfddTdTfdd 1o\3 
d^ Tdjfd di dtdl 
dfd 'Kddffd'd "fd^ U° 
dfdT-^ld dig^ ^U 
dfd 3RFdT dddg'dd he 
dfd dl ilfldt ddt U? 
dfddF?gfKT loi 
dfedddddd 1C^ 

d#d5fd ddldd V39, 

dgdd drggdd 



INDEX OF VERSES 


341 


-qi 

^ <;.x 

yPiy'<j l'^'^ 

iraMST^ RT ?g 
>4^J<N<fd 
q^q<jt<,c(i ■g q-c^jiHi 

3n2j^ 

iqqjfeT qp^TEgRTJT 
•'-I'^'41 "qra 4)cloii 
•"wiqqi ^oq 

^T==TFT##TrrfRII 

■^W ^ f^roll ']<c| 
dHIcifM g cl^ 

w 'Jw qmrara 

<4HI ^ '4d ?o 

■iTgf^i^q 'fZ: 16 
-gzf Yei qq 
^q^fqqrlq^ qvs'^ 

■4*-41 ^ W y'oliq 
^ 

8 M qvaq 
^ f^dldik-T 
W cE^ 31^’ ^ 
WdMfd^gi 
dddlfB^d: ■qid^4d 
1%*7TWri '^66 

7Tr?|TT^q^ 


d-ct5'JJ'4l<iSd<?i|i 

-Hcl^dSd: 

vaq 

'4ii;'^d'^'Jj'4lP-ir<4 

'•4^-^d'dldd 

^0 

■5TW% '‘^iWf 
WlfSTra’ 

<44RI<K«T^^X 
^WISI 414^1^1 

WT y«l<H ■JO' 

■ZTPT dod’Jlfd: ^ 
^TR^MIcfT ^Rf: 

^-gqRT ■^tjjpT; 

'4'!-4l TFT ^ 

'^TW’^JTTTRcTT^nf^ 

<4T4TMdKT?vmfu| 

qcM %TF <3^ 

'4Tf1dlHl'RfT’TFT '^o6 

cblHFI^H %TTTTTT3 

dT^ TP^tPtRT dfd TT 
■nrg ■ddifui qMiPi ^00 
d'trdlrHn’ ' a 6 

drw-RfTdMdRlS^J^ T 

dRcd^ W TtM TTiT 

dt.dMK'R 

^FT?=d dlTfdrdT TT <i^ 


dlddil; IqVjHIHd q?<3 
dT^dmiTT 
^nfei ^ R FT«T 
W: IhIThRiTsIT 
^ ^ TTF^rt 
znsTRTS^ ■^rfKRT 
^rrfF ^'idfl^ ^^*JTTft \-i 
^ ^ iJfRTRlPr T<i^ 

4TTf^ TlMlf^sidi ’pr 
'41'1'i'^dl ylfclT^ld ?.o6 
dldld<T4diq'3fTi: kT 
dra^dcdi 
dradN-H^ldil^: 
^rrarx^rj^TR^ 

dIdrTT diHdd)< ^5^^ 

■JfrgcTT TT^ 
d|c|rTi4 TR 
dldRki g fdW>f TTo 

^ko 

dra'^ldui qpTii:^ qo^ 

•4ldH d)|*|d)Rl<£il 

di^PiycfT^^ 

dldetdelieRlOT 

dlTSTlft PhRit^T^J T°k 
^T# r^ kd-ctSdl TFT 

'drff ^ fg^qVfi 

4nf| ^ ^TT^ 

^ 'd^d'FTd'H 
^f| fkOdl4.gmf? ^kT 
^JFqcTFTTdTTTTTg T^k 
^jnsq^TSTT fT^ 
g*ilTs4: TT g f^: 
■gFT^^#TfF 
g*'ig*’'i fdNj|,'Hif<gf3'Fig u^ 
ddlfTHdlsi 

gsSd'*! ^ *lldg '{'66 



342 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


finSPT 

^ g TRT R'ifWI R?? 

■^?-ziTinT ^2fT?T^ 

■^54m TT^IMKl 

WRT8T TW: 
^ddUJluii E,'ii 
^<3Fi '5#H ?,6^ 

^oqrrfit: 

^prrpT: fi-i^dl ^ 
wsf 

^ rdH<+>g^yiun ^ 

'^’^1 ^R: ^TT8Jf?!R 
%T ^ ^x'?, 

XR % RT%T ^oo 

Rr 4 TR TJrg 

WfT^Rfg^ 

^T Md^ ;)p^ 
qrqspTfini^rrFT ^ 
ifirR^rq^TT^ ^oi3 
% "q ^fran TRPi 

WT: 

RSsJdK'crdfHrdl: ^ 

R qx\9 

TJ fgtDjHT^ "qfei TJCM XX 





^ ^X\3 

<rgdl dldRi'frdd 

^4^<T4d Rwjtf^ 

%T^ H^IHWmq.. ?V3 

RiffrfR: 
dlpR^lld'^d 
4'Hm'l4«IFT'?4'^ ^^X 
%T?trF5rRT 

^■qi qqlw^'fgWi: ^^x 

■qrqr'J^TRT ri^ ^vs'^ 

%Ti«nmcr?% 


^TFT^ grmrwmlq 
dld^dUd ^ HH^’ 

%qRRiTWf^ ^X 
dNHUi qiW t ?oo 
RRW^TRa^ W 
^^glfdfg^HT^ ?o 
dIoSI d)fM4drg'c.^ 

Ri diH9t)m^'*Tf5 w^ 

Ri qRfw ■qgqfeqm RRg 
■qr (ddM ?^idd ^x^ 

■qi WdlO f¥yi|dHlR^ 

^ wq ^vx 

q^^ggsRTiTr f? ^x^ 

^ gPmdi^aqRn 

^ Rtr^'cr <yiddR«i?tFj; 9^0 



^ fgsg 

^ TSWd 


■qi diHdisqfr RTidi-i 

TTifej R Rong ux 

'dTS'frlldH'CMlHIdl W 
■qr^qft y^iMfdfri?Ri ? ^' 
^sqff Rggg: fipradi 
TqFfr^rgq?fFFT q-TFT’J^ 6° 
<=K1IH<,^ ^cdl Xo,X^ 
<Adlcqcrl=h<l d'4] ^o 
TW«f g-^to 
T^^Tcqdt 


TSiHlcdlg 'ddldl^T 
T^PHT dl^^yui ^oo 
T^'qpRgRT ^^X 

qyT«f qrg^ ^f«?F2T 
T^sf fg^RFfi 
qajlf^T: W ^qt?g 
Tf RftqfqFdH ^vsX 
<U|:^lVrg dIddR 
T'q Jidi Idf4rd 
TRPJ'qgcTT'^; ^ 
Tcqrar^F#^RRf^ 
<rdlR Wdiei ^Xk 


TRTfq f^ifq ^xo 
<.rdld=bd ’Hlftd d)1d< 
TgTRRPq^ ^o 
qsWIW 'd^-d ^XV9 





Teng#l g^#! '^'■J 

T8FF«r: 


TfRT cTRdT?TT4 
nrqfcf R RTwi 
T«T fdfddd fgFdW ^V3'^ 
WRf&m: n 

TiRf 

Tl^ RRRTgfd^: ^X'^-, 




INDEX OF VERSES 


343 


Trait 

TTil-TTTT: ^ctl<+,ITI: 
TTyrn^rr cMf^ 
TT^TTIT?^ Tit^ 
TlfiJTftf^; ■qft^ R\6 
TT^ralf^fg^rarm -^o\ 
Tisjti^'srg^ 
TTsy^HpIdl 
Tl^'itf^ 

TI^VlTdl rag: TT5li;^^V3 
<iNc|'fd1 ra?T dirdi 'R'X'X 
■ddd'l dididrdi ^ 
TN-+i4 ^ W| 
TRTRRmW ^6'^ 
<M~ld TOcfrd 
TraFTter^ irra: 

TR^ W1W?1 ut 

iN'^ditrrafara 

TR55rTWT#dT: 

TR^ ^jtcid n\ 

dddlRlftHMi 

TRT^ 

TRT dIH ^oH 

TRT ■^^ST: ^RT 
TRR TRJ4 
TRR rmRi 'gra4 %6\ 
TRR?^ "^fR '9^541 \S^ 
TRRI ?RfdTdlT<1«1T 
TRtdcTrrai TTR 
TPR: M^^iomd 
TRI ^ ^4d: <J>RI X\^ 
TRt ^ TT^fdR?! 
TRTRRRI t 4 R 
TTRR T1R fgcRg ^ 


TRTTai: !dfRR'4d 

TIR^ rasR gM ?VSX 

irai^?!: - 511 % V30 

Trai ft TTRR TRT rrafen V9^ 

Trar fwtrn ttirI' 

TTfn ^iFdjTrr % To 
TT? yold^iTRil U'a 
T raraRRWT x'^ 

HftfR TTT#TTSi x^'^ 

Tifwi 

TI^ T 1 dldlftid'dlc; 

TTdT d'Tdl'JlfrRT '3 1 

TTTT tI TT 8 TR ^ ^V9V3, ^oT 

TTTiRR«if4fe X6'^ 

TirfTRf^'jft^ 

TjTT T^Tjf^ raft X^^ 

TTTTTRTTcr yMT ^o 

TFraTTfqrrraR ^x^ 
TTTraFlfTTd7TR5f 
Tirraijra^frarfd 
<w<^di rai tt 4 
<lMT|rd7TTflTTni 'XXR 
TirrarafTFira^t^^ 

TWU^ddV^ -^TT; 

TPraraTRTR 

Tirmrafrarat 

T!Tm(dtdt<id 1 'Miu| 

TW ra«R 

TTORTf rarrsTR Tt'S 
TFTTITT -Rfiratf X^,X^X,X^'^, 
UTi, ;)o^, XX'^ 
TmTiraRT^ 

TJTR^'Jiy^cHi T^s^ 

TTTT: WTr^rttr 
TTTT: ftraft raftfrift 5;V3c 


TTTT: TTTTraraTTTR 

TTTTTTsft ^rarra^f 
TTTTTTt TT 

TTTTTT%TTra^^ Tt 
TITTR TTSrMui^dd 
TTTTTTT TSTTTr?W 
TlMTdMddlllfl XVX 

TTTtT^-frapra!!: 
TTITT^ TTfcTra T1T4 X'^.X 
TTfTT^ frararar 


TITTT5T pran rara ^<iV9 
TTTTR Tjratt ^Efftci TT<i 
TTTTR raddidTcTI X'X'^ 
TiTTr^rrarrawd 
TIHRHddl?Tk 
<ihiR«^h tt ^ Tj^ raft T) 

TTTTlRTr^raTT^ :?:^0 

TPRifttra >*4)41' x<^'!^ 

TITTTfttra ftpT x^^ 

TirnfrartT rarfd utt 
TTTTT frara^ ft Ud 
TTTTTft^IRnf&T 
TTTTlftWTTTTira 
TTTTTfraraTTrarra u? 
TiTTTTT rasrfrara TT ?.tt 
TTTTTT r Tldu||-dra ?? 

ttttrt RraWd x^° 
TTTTIR yRd^Ira 
TFR rapnrasTTt ^tt 
TT rarf Cl<dci ttIcT 
TFR ftFdT TRT 
TTTR fdgdi 4 
TTFOT ftFI TTT XX'^ 

TTrarf tfdf rarraraf xx^ 
TTRiT tjrt^ W ^TT 


NARAS/MHA Pl/RANAM 


344 

TTfTW 

iW'ura % ^ WIT 

Wnc^^Tig?RT 
irm ^ciiy4c5!W: 

W3 ?T-CTWraTTOlf^: ^ ?T5 
^3r<5IT cFra 
xmisfq rr>f tt^?I 
wsfq im ?i 

TIJTTSft d^-^TT U-i 

<Wlsfi! cl^g 

TTmsft ^i^Hl^llil 

TiHIS'Pl fM^ra^TJT^ 

TFTTsft ^V3^ 

TOT ■‘^■gftOTfTT^ 
TrfOT'^OTTTt^ 

TIOT TST RsiHTJd 
TOTcTSOTOTT^r^^X 
TOT54wIT%?; 
TOT5OTra-^OTr^T'l^^^ 

TTOTT ^-SFOTTl&T ^9,^ 
TlOTITOTtf^OT 
TTOTT: ^oo 

TTOTOTTOTT-^ 

TIOTTW ST^fejOTIT 
TTOTOTT fWH 
TTOTTTTT ■JT: f^'rcll 
Tirmr^^fw 

TTOTTR -gTneitq 
TTOTROTIOTIFTT ^o<^ 

TOTOT fT5OTTT%U<^ 

TTOTR H^Miri 
TOTOTfgrjOTfH 
TTOTRTai Hfrqi 


TI^ ^ Wif TIT 
TOTJI W4^TTg 
TOTOTTTTT^TWT 
T^TTt'§:T§OT^Traf 
T^^Tn^' U'i 
TITotI 

T^OT^'^fen \3tA 

T'5TTRTT^9t^T?TR) 
Wl'^'^OTlTOT ^^13 
T#5fq 'ini^mums 
T^^TTT ilHHI'i ^ 

OT^:TIwraf 
TTK OTcTTOT 
TTK f%T ^gr ^o<T 
Tfl«TTTOTTg^' 

OTm TT cT^ITlk: 

TciR-^'HTTI '+Hd5-^<tI< 

T 1JS ^f^c||i4?TT4 ^TT^S 
"^cOTIROTT 
TR OTT TTRTg^R^ 
^[ffgOT^ ^HTT 
TT^RT^TTR^ 

TIOTT RtaRTIRTTI ^ <ao 
T lflTTRilK^JOTj; 
flfOTTRI5?TTJOTTOT 
fiOT^IOT WT^ 

TTft 3I%R 
cT^8TTTTTT: '^: 
TTfTpOTlOTROTg^o^ 
TTfTpTRT 
eT^TJTT^T T?TI*i 
cT^FTOTROT^ 
cT^RIOT d^clRl 

TiaTSR^ 4 itoti 

TTSTgTT 'Jid OTOT 


TT^T%OTfRT<MR^ 

TT^T^TPIRT »jfR; 
TTy^'rFlRcbfdfR uc 
etWFfcRT^^ 

TTW W^RTf^ 

HaTPiT: W ■^TIcTITTTOTTI 
H¥OTT W l%% 
cTSOTT: TikRi drcii 
cT^'JRd Heid'dI 
cT^OT’T^’OTTRkl ^V3'T,,^^\3 
H^'JR'd H5l4)4f 

cdSOTW^ IddldlcHl ^00 

H^OTROTOTRlf^f n<^ 
H^OTirg RFr^Rlf ^TT 
cTaROTT TIf TTTRT 

eiaOTI^Rg^5Tfl 

TTaOT^3OTT?'?T^ T^T 
cT^RT’Jdin^ -yil 
cH'^fM ddli IJdddH "g ^<3TT 
cT|#rRT5 ct^ 
cT^ FCT ROT xvs 
eWOTT RIOT RfOT T<C 
eTSOTi?: aTOT^RT 
cTTOTfRRfrfR; 

■WOTR Rftwl OTRR 
elssOT “gfOT R R?OTfR (i>T 
cOTOTOTT^OTOTTOT 
TTOTI^^TTTgTTTlPl 
OTIOT fglFfaTFRWI 

TTtiOTR fOTT Rr 
cTlOTOTR SIMRlfW fOT ^VS 
cTlOTOTR OTTT^ TTo 
cTTOTFrOTTOTOTTOT R66 



INDEX OF VERSES 


345 


e 1 l 4 iMlel <34 Id I 
dl<+4M; W 

c'ild)y't)|^ldi| TFiR 6^ 

cTT^ ms?FI^53m 

c'ii'4)l*'-^%J '4‘ldj'j^-l X o 
^4rsnT'»3Ti ^5TW?I 

d^^lM'd'd't 'Sjjg '30 

cil^ll-i-dRa ^ ^,V3o,^<^'(J 
'44gi4Bfe T<i 
d4<^)4^fW T? rITrT kS 
c(=fy,M5!rM ^'3V3 

•5(fa:wt TR’^'raraf 

■^S^nfiT 4,<i 

^^J4,4-<sR4l^l ? 

'ip: 

cJ<d4.|i^c(c«Tq% 

druiH4<d?4T ‘qil: W 

cidl4t1l fdxfddicl: 

■Bf???: :^o\s 

^irnf^T Tjp ?4 
-a 

^Rr4fc[ ^^6 
Wi a#K-4Rd 
^r^’^pgrii m 

nB[fep?f?srT:P? 

:^o:^ 

'Bnjrfrf TT^rfSB^PTf^ 


feTFK<7 ~io^ 
k5NI5l?<i^ 

^Rrac4 WM 95 
^ R^tIIWSI?^ 9i 
WTT -gWR ^XC 

'^J'Jllcd ?,o\3 

'3it ci^BI ^ <4I(H \°6 

cR <^'J|'|tcj cTRiTRT 5'^ 

^ -^tifng ^RJTTfrf 
mpiTM ^%x? 

YX 

■gR?; 'TflTi^srrg-qi xo^ 

■qi% •q ^ c)<Hd %X 

■oRH'^'?^ ■SRRI ^'a'?. 

^RWTT qn^n; 9?° 
cfufa^ ^spi 9^° 
■^^^RfjRTRiJr 959 

^ 9^,95^,955 

^WBirprTT: 9'i<5 
■g% TOfgfg?4T 95° 

-qra -Bf 95? 

^ PpB5i4 ?'?9 
®Fv4lc4lft 99^ 
^r4?RTT4%-craWH 59 

cmldii<4 Pi<i<d^l <^9 

^ SK9W 95 

dcAHlcTci ^ ^ 9^ 

■q^FTFi 9'5V9 
■acfq yirci4 g 

t^raRrf ?wx 
95 

■gRRTRmcl^ ?'?5 


FIHk34ldl ?5 
■qRqy-.ts ddiqrii vs°^ 
■;4Rk5: a^94M15f4 V3X 

■qf?R5: RT4?44i: 

15 RTO ft4W<?u|icH4l 9? 
dfRlkil'dl iTfT^ ?9 
■^feWRrf^RRTO ?<io 
dfk^ ^rardi'^ ?■?? 
d^4rfH449IIK ?C5 

??9 

Y^rfui ?xx 

clFyqi'JI: '3? 

■gT5R;5 c1%^ 90 ? 
ok-4lR4-MSTFq^ 950 
^R^^ITURrHlfc; 

■SR^wnqrH ?99 

^■5% t 

■5R^fqr®Tfq ^%9 t: xx 
dWiqldi cT8n ■yi^fTI 5'<f 
■SIW<?lRF|?Tira ^ 

■5IT5P9 W RP^HjnrBrf^Trp ?5? 
m^wTUMisw 9?o 
dlcf^tqui qj?j WR 995 
feq ’RJ: 50 
dldldiiqfctcilHl ^ q 959 
c|ird4>9d ^Ni9j;?ET 955 
^sfq 999 
■gpTTMi dfddfRd 9°5 
clH<Nli g 9 ?x 
c|H?Fri ■■RJ^^9-4 99X 

995 

dHC^F Fr^T ^ 9o5 
■dFlTg^RT% 99X 

^mf4?FT¥[RTT 999 
■gpR: RTf?cf: RtI 9oX 
■^: RTT^RFrdq 9?<i 



346 


NARASIMHA PURAI^AM 



f^4 HHHi W 
flfy flr^ y^cfiuil ^1^0 

f^f^RT 'JRRprR 

i%R|clc^cl^c^i ^6o 
f^RR^STlWreg 
■qlcRTT TR^ 

RhHI ^ ^Mdl 
f^R^RTRigrrmr 

■ffWRWEJcf HX 

f%T?frrT X'iC 
f^cRtcf c^JcqpiTf X%o 
I^MilcirHc' ^^5 
fcRifet fg<^4T TT^ ^V3^ 

f^: V3\s 

f^'H^lcHHm c^'m 
RTRtR 
fg^PTTsfq % 'SraT 

fgs^tW TT 3#?^^ 

fg#TR cimi^'-cj 

f^RR fsf^ ^ o o 

fsR# ■^W^i%Tr 
fciHH 6'^ 

f%TRHHT?lI -^cHrMdl^i 
f^MHW ■^fr 6^ 

foRPT %5f^f ^oo 

f^RFR 

fg^TFR ^RRtji ^o3 












INDEX OF VERSES 


347 


fciyx^chi ^ 

TTWf^TT ^66 
fty4<lMI*il ft ■^n: ■g^TRT: 

rcl- 4 ^yRIHlM ■q: 'So 
fg%T RI W TR ?, 6 d. 

TTSF^flgH 

f^R^?TT^8| ^^ 6 % 

f^TTFI 7T XX 

f^RRHI'T! \3V3 

fgTRRHT 
fgTRT^rW^rqf^ 
x^ 

'^cw.y.d 

fg^RTfW'^ 

7^X 

RfR flcgr 7<^x 
fgRRRRRcfsZT 7U 
fJlfHR T^tFR^T io 
fgcTRR^ arfir ^Tife 
fb|c)WH«T^ ^60 
Tdcl^inf^; -Jpf XtA 
f^f^oRT^ Rl^c^ ^^ 
fgfgs^ifq ^ Tpnsf 

fg^qTTSRT 

:?o^ 


fg?RT WTFTR 

^enfR R ^^Vso 

fgm^4 TTgrRsIr^^k 
ft^c(ct,Hf WTR 
ftsR^RfeWFfni :^X3 

fil^-spTR X^ 

fed ^4 

fcji^d^M yMHife ^V3 
fedT^ -^myi 6 
fegi?i feRfenr 
fedlfeRTR^RT ^60 
fefefe: ■JT: 
fedlftd^g ^ 
fecllfeTR3; 'mfe ?.'S6 
fd^dlpHdKld^cid 
fedlfeTd W7TT 
fegifet 

fegm^fdfei ^6S 
fesiraftRT: ■ 5 W ^^6 
fe^^feg Ifedi 
fd^dfdW fej k*^ 

\'S'^ 

femR RgTTRR 
fef^;^diydlcH ^?X 

fen^ferfe'5^ ^'^k 

feoT^ferg^R^ 
feiR ■gRi«?Fi 
fe<3 ffej 

fe>3 fej^jgiRftrsg ^xy 

‘fe'JdiRfeERR :^'i<£, 

fe'jgrg^fe^^ 



fd'^^c(|[^ri dTirtdId 

fejR^gT^T’dSfeR Uk 


felc^WT 7X& 
Id'^RfeMildlrHl 9'^'^ 
fejRfeTRfe 7^5 
ffelRfeRcTT^ 
feiJWTT TJSIT^T ?k'<^ 
(gwjHr^dkl^lR X5^ 

fejy?rawife 
fejjq^^lg 
■ffej: gifd X'ir'Hcf 
fepTTlfefelT ? 

R^RRTI \ 6 % 
fe’jffejf^'g^^ ^xo 
fejf^'ijdRWriT 

fdu^etR MdlRdlld 

fejfe RR ^X^ 
fe 3 FRT?g 3 nR 
feniRTO^RT? 5;o^ 
ftwJllddlfddclW ^^k 
fenri^giferfeg ui 
fefe^n^R%^ ^kx 
fenit; 

ffert: ■(rddfHd ^o 
ffefr yfdRcid fe 4 k'^ 
fengfejRRTRf 7X^ 
ffewn#Rfer 
■fegrgcip^ ■g k® 
fefegrgf^IR^ ^ k 

fg^ TTcmt ^ (ix 
fgfeg^t ^gfet 77° 
fgfe^ feMif^t ^'3x 
fegfegg^ 
feFI^g:fe[ 
fepTgiggrffet 
few gRT R'^c 




348 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


i%?Fr ^ ■5[TW 

f'^FFT 6'^ 

%<rTR% l\R 

V3V3 

7s!M 9^0 

RRT-ftR 

R5ijRTw RRra 

Rf^RrUfR RF?rg 

R«n RIR ^?Ia 
^«?T t% RcH^ira i'ii 

■gsTT TRH ^?n cTfsl \\ 
<^-<|olH 7frT3T^::??V 
■^<1^4 ^%TTRt 
^qicbfW 

Sl'dlRra'y^'l^ ’pR I'ti 

■Jf<f(R 'dT^^ 

9jq^ 

ddf!JR|2T RW 
R^^RRTW^rPh'cR '^'ii6 


rTci^'^-f^ui; 
Rd^s^fRR? 
c|c;d<l9|cltddl 
cTd-^ fRWIRH ? 
d<Vll^dlfij| ^pRTft 

ddi^rR-dlfuT -gPrfR: 
■%5?IFKtT9|f^ 
R9?W^R?iraT^ 
d<I^R4 RT Rlfer 


d<i(c;did4§,H'^-c^i)d ^<io 

R^IW'«RF1R^ 
ddl-rldl'+d^inHl’^d 
RdWd^5^'RldM 
■^'ddiJRd ■gr^RraR: 
^Rdd <J>'JJ|‘lldlcd 
^d.lR'+Rfdlij'^ m U 

^dilRdi^-dR^d X 

%U3; 'i'J^Ochiaj; ^Xo 

^dl6=ll'+dllc!6 dNdl ^0^ 
\3'9. 

tRTZTPqifq^ 

^ -jfdd ^<io 
Xd 

doi^c(d’ti<ald 
^d^^dl 9!m; 

%<^o 

o|l4:dd cRRT^ ?X^ 

twraRr^*rfR 

i^iqvj :^66 
^VARRgd^ra vs-^ 

^yc|?d TR?: -gRlT^ 

d^clddl'Jiri ^FT 

■Stsf Tj^ ^^X 

■a#l'dKW^'^l 
■aTRWm-. Tft 
■srnww 

■SdlRMRI'^^RlfR ? 
■arof^; -jnw ^ 

■SdlfTRTt ^RT ^XX 
oi^fSK^ 


^idiTIddd ^ 
jdl "^SJ! 

fdJJuK TTJR 

^iRtd ^ii)l5 jlddl 
WITRFRfWR 

^lf^^dc;/Wff&i 3X,?^^,?5X,?,i^ 
Vl|-d9*im ^ ^V3 
RT: ^RT?dT 
^XR 

^iid1 ^9(11 ?n^ ^Xo 

■?rI cTRt ^^X 

?raF in^ RHIdIdl RV3^ 
JJld'd'H^d MHhIm 5^0 
RT^: 

'5nd?dri ^ ^ ^X 

^IdldldiW ;i«ToRi|i 

id^RJ^-dd^ ch'lMcTHdH 
yRy^^di ^o3 

^KRId R9TT^ X 
^K^'-cdRilSrai 
^KiR;didfRo5y«f R 

^Klf<RlMi|4;a; \C 

?i^4R']'Jir4y ^ 

^Kl^fdRIH KdR 
^iddid^ 

WR TR^ 

^NldHRd'd ^ ‘^C 
^idHd^mfd'id 
?R ^?4R 

mWRj WRifW ?X 





INDEX OF VERSES 


349 


'HTM 

■HkI^ grcii 

^i^i'^Hi" filiJ TI^ 
■m^TEjJRi ■?Tft?ff^ ? 

■^TRJ^JcTOHIfR: 
^ll^cTOcTT^Kf 
W^^^cTOcTl^ra ^V9^3 
?IRI: ^riPatbT: WRIT 
WRT: WWwIr^'il 
WW^ WTraFT 
WRFT1#5FFPWW 

wrttwi4«w^ w 
wfw cTRT WESfw 
Wfw^^fcl TT^^ 
^!ra)W: TTfelT ^ 
WWf^; 

wwnmwrraw?.. ^<iV9 
yil^WlelHlIcH^^: V9V3 
WfWTTRg 

wwra^ f^?^TO ^w'?, 
WR^ Pitfifd^t<ir ^ovs 
Rtwi 

W?^?m f% cTT?T 
f^wsf %fTT: ?o 
fWWIFjf^; ■rI RKS 
1?rrwwfcTOTW^ 'Ro6 
iWFT?IWlfgWWW R"!! 
fWWKMW^lW 
f%WfMRl4I^cfV 

flrarPi^w^ wrar^ 

^MlddlTlcl) WP^PfcIT 
f^lddyi R|c(cf)i :^66 


fWHT 

f^|bi|HVL||L|4j^5(^ 

■q%Tl3^f 

liilW W c(^^(u| o ^ 

■?f[^ WTI^WT "RTfr.. 
#iw^R?raf% 
!^ildTcT9vH(l<r''Rll4)'(J®J|'lfc;fR: X^ 
^]ldT?19lf<Rg fd«^R^ \o^ 
^Fl'yi^Ti'HMigsrai 
VllcrlHRJjW^d ^^6 
'^: T^^IRPII 5>X 

■?pWWf fRWKI: 

■^pSFFftsRiW^ XX 

Uk 

■gRWT 

■?IRI^ Rg W^^nfDT ^X^ 
^W^RfdPf^iW ^’^ 

RI^ Ttf^si ^SX 

'^Rpd 

J^]5;fd)R-^-P)'<dl ^?X 


■?J^rF5 RT^: ^TfSTf^ RXVS 
^•RWdPRcn ^?X 
■?3W IRo 

wife x^ 

^■furai ^ Kdt ^'^x 


■?JcIW>HWfRWIRIT 

y^"HHHi<^ 

■g hR-RH ^00 
^ Rf ^8W ^xx 
'^Rd'H; 

■?p3Kg 

TTO dlcfRlfd 

W Rf| Uy 
■^■Rgwi'^ 

^ TR^<HHI^H 

*f5 ww.'sraswfR 

^vsx 

^TR^M^^nfR 

■^TRR^W^I^ 

WR 'd'iTtrd ^X^ 
^■RcR H5iyid 

fei ^'^o 

^‘ild "R ■RTR^'RoX 
^'^'«( dcdiW: 'yW: ^X^ 
yyRTWyTTO ^o:^ 
fStTwi^ 

WTMRR 

!g-yj'iciici(fd ura ^x^ 

^XV3 

^PJWWTTRRW RTgH ?X 
TT^ RRR 

yRifciwyiTO 
^uddWRI tr^TPI ^x? 
^trsRTTRfq WR 




350 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


fc|«^c(}8jT 
^ R'\ 


Rl'^l; y'tidl 

^TJW^5raMW(?T T|#!: ^ 0\3 

^^0^ TffTHfn 
TO^Trai gRPifiid 
^ ^M'^AI^ cH^' 
■^rf^Rpfc^ 
W^TTWTRcft ^VSLV 

ei >J ^Jl wi fg^ 

■?TI'»T^ % Tra TRg 

-gift 

y^?Rlwi ■g 'q?#iT x>^ 
isis'jraR^'ffwIc;^! T\ 
?j=5:rPyd^^r %o^ 

9^51 ^^»|lcR^: 

6<c('J|lrMddl'^^c( 


?r5PT ^ f^Tfl ^ 

^ il-S'MI gi^fd ^<a,4 


^ US 

gt^TR; 

^Tf^rRT^ ■?^PTei 
cTg; 

WTTIM 
^ gd^RR^i? <;;? 
^l^dPRRI "R ^ ^ 

^RUTReTOTI^ U° 

^fMdTdl X\l 

gldfgi^f^d 

^Fra ^ TIFRR ^VSO 
^rdl gi^"rl ?^4 

fr^^R^g^FIcd ^09, 
grdl d'Ml4'^ gf^cdi 
^rdl ddl cid'Ki'!^ 
grdl cl'rt cldlfR<lR 
^fdT d-Rlc^Rcig 
^ c^dgyioHcl U® 
^d^RFrraJSTT: 
fr^RUJTTRt ^ U° 

^ 5,0 

fr^TTl^; ■Snf?d U? 
ff^TIRd^ Ro6 

^FFd^: 

^rldTJW «Ff -R^-R 
^radi 


^3WI^52[ RftcT; 
^IdP^g^RI U5, 
?TraT«iTJTOrai^ 

T?d)dT R'liR 

jargfir^iwfg dfm ia^ 

li(l^ftxljJ|W|^ ^ ^ 
sjcdldil^ #: 



g etR^ . 

d-ctsg UK 
?^Rlfd^RT^ u? 


K'JmRlfwfeRlHlfd R^'^ 
K<d>Rff5| ■^T ^TFTTl R-^6 
Rfe U 

RWdT^ Rm T[g: V3X 
KKdi^dF^ USM R^^6 
R^Sfl ^ TJf.dfd R^-^ 
■RTS^TtgraR ■ 

■^imraw ^'s 

^^RTc^suPl^lfM V90 

ddKsMid U 
R@([3H ^ ^ ^ 

R<24ldTd-|d: #RF1U'^ 
mrU fidR^R! ^5,0 

R^ld'l cRrMIcI^ '€ 


RjWPTfR^^T^f^ 














INDEX OF VERSES 


351 




;gqpT ^ 

rrg^zTT (i 

ffKJM^R ^?IcT^ 5.R 


^ml ^IlfddTdd'l ^'*^0 
^ffira 

W3T ^ W=TO^ ^\3\3 
Ti^JRrcR^f^ RRtT \\6 
fiHl4d40 , 

^Mlfedl 'J^TOT^ 

^ST^TdT ^'flfKIR: 

^awHi':jTdRi 

W^ddl Vlfcl 

^^RTcTT^lrdT^ 

^Nlc^ftdlrd?! 

fldoH< 

^idc^l.'Jl ^ 


^’Tlfq 

fl!^llt(U|M^ ch^'H?^ R'Ro 

yi:il<5,:<aiM5di "TO 
■?i«K^^<MKIdK.. ^o<^ 
■yyKd'ilHI'yftd 
cP^WRm 
W'HKc^Sj ^ fd^r^I 


\\ 

wi^wrrFii '^^ 

TRTRgR^N^ <^6 
■HWKl'tdHHR 
'hV^i^ fs'^! fd^ 

TR5TM tptf 

■^R^TM ■'T^dl^Rraf^ 

Ri?«TM U'*f 

■?(S?Toi ^'5.4 
"R^STMKIddlRI^ 6\ 

RR«tM f^-idl'dl<l ^'Oi' 

■RfcTI "Jllfd' 5 ^ U<^ 
y,d)<l dH'dHMid: 

^ TTd Rh§-<.i;j=Kdl ^o 
TET Tjof MVdT^'dg’llW^F'i) 

■R TTorg^: ^dTciH^R RZ,6 
RT13;^ TM ^^Tcir ^o 
RT-Q:dRl^’J^ VA 
^ didlFq'^^l’lRTl 

^I^«lff|d't %3 R'^'R 
RT%^ fdW{c^ H'a 
RT# TIM 

■R d-c«rH<.d 5.R 
TPTW^n^^ TRT^ %R% 

■R Rcdl ’ITd; \6'^, 

■R 'IrdldH'd^'^i SJFTWI 
■Hd<\*45|d\ 54!;c(i^\Qd: '^X,C^ 
yjjU||^yj|i{Rj R6^ 

-dclRT^ ■g Tmt 
^^ ^ 3 draT{ 

RT ^ cTOfI 

U4 


RT "snfHRfddld^ 

■R "dlf^fd=Kii H^(4 Ri 6 ^ 
RTfild^^ R^*T 
Rl dldd^d ^ R'^ 
RT^dl^ fdEUfdT %^o 
^^3FTRT%if? ?X 
RF5IR 

TT didid '^? 1 T dS^d, ^^ 

■?FHt ^IcdT 

RT dlcdrarrRd: ^ RX 
■Mfid-vd dlrdl 4l4d 
■'Hf^dirSIcTf^'Srfd'^FI dd 
R#d-^ ’JriTd^Ff ^<A'i^ 
ipfdfR WTR 
RT ci ^f4«Hdlr3=td R ok 
RRRi dlM^ddl^^ RX 
RRRi y'^lRd^dddiW: ^oo 
■•(HddH-'Rfiqd 

■?r cRlt3^S5nF[fE2T 

Tf d^ldifddMI'Hlfd R'^6 
RT cFRit dddlHW ^o 
RT cR 'Jlld'l dfclkld RX 

■R g WT “^k 
RT 3 C's 

Rl ^ -Rfm -dTOT 
RT3TR4 ?d4d: 

WRteRlT; R^k 
RT 3 •dPTTS 
■R ^ ykTglki id 
Wed d)ldO(^l'Wpd RW 
RTcd ^k^ 

TR44t«fd^^«l 
RTc 4 dlWdlft % W4 Ro'S 
Wrd Wed ■ 3 ^; Wed S,^ 
Wedydei rddi d^^d ^4k 



352 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


^f^cTc^il^qTfiT 
Jlfrrsqifij 
^ '^R^IlfM 

■?r?TOWW>T ^ 
WRTRRpe^tfef^r 
^(7mrH't> rqr^'(a'<F'MHl€i 
IT^Rrai^qRTnrl ^\3 

Tf c^iwlri % 


■?? 

■HrcJlf^cKl'M^I 9r?II t,0 

?,m 


.qiu^'lw=l 

^ ■^TRft \o 


^ W ^'3'^ 


•H^ci ^^t^TPT ?R; 

f ^5(0 


R fRkRfci mnt 
R'^JTfTRTlfR ^ 
RRfRRirrat ^ 

■^: -^06 

yP^dl 

(McRWW '*^ 
Tq f^9c^|rH( 


■?Rft Clift 

■HHfcliiCcIlSf ■Rc^ 

TERcf ^ 
:a RiwiT 
R 7^nf|ciy-.?cR4 

R ■'jftRTT Tgft: 

R tj4 


TI5f; 


frayi H't'dI \3o 
RRTRt ^citcicii ■R2- 

Ro4ftct4 ?oo 


TI^SST 

yklftMu^dl<J^ %%\ 

f ■R: ■aR^TI ^^3 


RRRfW8TRnlR^ 

R W 't)ft<.i'ji 



R i^lddldig 
RRR TEiOT RRT t,\6 
RRf R?? 

Wt^Rl ^<^o 


RRT^; TrgcT: #11^ ^6o 



R ^ -fTEnR 4 R?.-yS 
RMpf 

WRpdri flT^R^ 

■?RR| TIR R ■gft: 16^ 
RRR: ^icTt’iRn 


RRRIWFRR: 
•RRiRlHiafnf%T flrtiq^ ?<a 

■RRFT^34 -qftwK 

R% 

3jzf 

RRI^ ■^flRIT ^?JT^ ? 

WHM -qpT f¥RR^ 

RRTRP^REfenRT 

W^K3fq^-q^ 

■R RigtcRtftT?: Xo'ii 
^■ctJfji-qTft 
T3ftf^R: Rl«p#T ^\3<i 
RFt 

RRcR % f^EiRRi \\o 
R4rZFP4Rra%t ^ 
wyR^RTF '^?T^ 

Rg?g#4 i%TRTr?PRi 
Rg?: J('ilftHl % 
wg^dl^lw -gk R\\ 

R gft: ^RRig wg 

RJ%R^iRTfR 
ywFlfddTi^lK^j 
RRHRKRq^^ Rdf ^oo 
HRIlkll ^>31^ 

^00 

RRTMR^g^; 

RRIP2T RRlfJTer ^?X 
WHlIwi d^-1 ■(H*|U| R?o 



INDEX OF VERSES 


353 


#3«T 


•HHI'M yi'<T4lHdl3^yN?JIH. 
■^F-vraf^ rimST.^ ■>{ 
^^Hislferf: ■?r§ ^5(0 
TrRFX''J?T*TW W % '^>^6 

m %f^ 

^ qrtimui 


R<-i4iwl<Rrara \'s^ 

WTT'RT^'q# 


R'kTH ^ ■)< 


^1 ’JcTTPt ^ 
■?r4 c|<H>4 CpE^t 


?i ■grrai 


■HcfqirHH'MIsfe ^O 
RFHIcFFi R 66 

^ ^o-ij 


\c, \Ti, 


w 




WlcRfcT WT, 

Rvn 

■FT^WlfepjrRT 
Fr4m46'< Fife ^o 


ff^qFTfT ■y’^ 

#Tiy^^ 

■h44<{^HI«T; %\ 

^«IT <5Ri^c1^ 

U? 

^441*1^4) 'i-^-i 

IRTy 

■fr44t«tFKi 3fFz? 
r44i 

r4<^I ■^RT^JcR% 

■?r4^F44flrcI^: \c 

Tg^^TWFRI X'^ 
^H^FT^FTRFyjrf: %6 


r 4+^ f? ^di^fer ^o\3 
^rafw4r ^’Traw 


■^T^foR^ray^ 

^ ^i(4FT: yRT: 

^^?RDT^; 

■^4 c;aFR ■^^Riy ^ ^ 

■^T^ TTM '^%6 

^ qqf 

^ R fe^R \\i 
IEtI: ^Fi%2l4 fIR 
R4i^^4y4 “RR ^XR 
^fRh4t ■ftttrW 

3I%R 

F? cRre^SI cR^RWi 
Rc4lcRycyctH<n;ii 
^FR^: y%Ry?^ 

^-gflcT W'FIR# RU 
^ d^MH'l f4UM '^: ^XX 
^efgciT ^ ymr R 
^flf4cn ^ RR!T R 
FT^ ?Tlf4 R^Rft 
Rfddl R9cIT RRI 
FT fRyj FTRFIFTR RFf ^o 
FT R^fRFFT y^yRST ^X 
FT RFI fd^dFRldi Ro\3 
FTFTRTI: FTtTFTfeRfTRT; 



354 


NARASIMHA PURAINAM 




TRR '>i 

TT ■h4hih ilf4^N "trora 


T? TTcJqmlH^cHi'i 

^ mnw^mrm 
^ F?ig u'^ 

WPT^' 'JM fl 


"6^ 


W^gwtRT; VS6, 
W^fg^lfrTCRl 

y^nIcb’^lRd 

gddc«)l '^<A 

^ U? 

ff5^r-TlcbiP^fw u? 

Tt H T^FTT 

wiT^^rgmRg 
TJ ITFT^ C^|{ft4 
WrfI 'ddcjlfHc^ 


W^ dvFddJ^iyPd 

W =b!dH'md^ d>Mid, 

w^?PTRmr5-g^ <^15 





?j?q^ 

TIT ^ 4id ^dl clld) 

TTI^ dHHIdig^^ 

TTI ^ ^ # TdtfH Tf? 
TTT ?4 TRFITiy 
TUfr^rait TF3RT7^ V 


Tn?Tfe5IT Tlf^ cTi 
Tfr^^n?^ Tn^ 
TTT«^'dHfH^f(rMTg ^'!i(' 
■HlfdRlcdl gnlfd^rd ? o^ 
TTT Trggr ^ 
TTn^ngprf^g 
TflTRJ^H'ifrfH ^^ITTig 
TfTT=TT gfdTrclAcll^J 
de(<c|W ^TfR 
TTT^^TTT%g 
•HlHTd dl#^l<2Mi ^ 

■(HlHlci Hi'^aicnfri 
TTTi^IcT sTigfqr^ 

TTF^edited T|5|jj|t| 

ttt 4 3ncTfi^3n?ft^TmH 
TTT4 -yidT^Tfid ^'1^6 
tti 4 ■yid^fiwi 'ii6 
■Hl'4 TTIcITSR^W 
TTPT M'dddNuj 
Tlldl^cbH f^TJTO 
TtT#T: THlfeld); T^ 


TTt44eR3I 


Ttra^: TWTTtT1?g: ^'i<o 
Tnf44 dliTTMiyi^ 
TTTfg^tgMs^g ^0 
Tfl?5f TTTfirf^ 5r=ll 


U° 

THI^r«i ^ 4-<l4lfd ^o\3 

fri^^cTJ^^^TtT^ ;^o 




fydf^l ■?r M^Tb1 
Ruldld) 

fTT^^ifsTcP^'srafei ^0? 

fegj 




M^^fd>>Mrd ^«TT 


^TTtrggfif^: ro? 




Tft?n ?4 ym-TOlrg 

41dl [dHldg T5®FR ^0^ 

TTfcTT g^fUtdi 

Tftm'^T'5:%cTT cTIf 9°^ 

■Hldl Midi IdcdcdIM 

TTtrn 

Tftcn ^ MldlHKId 
■JT^ u° 
y1dl<i^[HHId« TU 
yld'R^Tui :^oo 

Tftcnf^TgriTT’^ 


^o\3 


TftcIPCF%W#d 
yldlHHfyg TT^^oVa 
y1diqM^il<^g:T3Tcf: 
4ldrqM'4 TT^ ?,66 


WldiqiTdd ^igi ^U 

TTtcn^WTTR^^gg^ 







INDEX OF VERSES 


355 


yldlRl4MH ^ 

^atcTPF«TR 

■RHI^i'II ^66 

yfty^di ftrl 

^diidl "^I 

y^fidd'j.PlWdP'dd'^ %<^?. 

^Hdld ^^9^ 

qftdldHJ-d 

^dlrinf^cl'llfH dl^^dl 
^ ■R?ld14 R\C 

igiM ^ fgfiKlui 

vflym'idii Roc 
^g4tg: f«TP3T^lI7 
^clFT^ ijren 

■•^ilV^ ■^: f^'4t 

^ij1dl w.(|M<c(c^i5fc||«T 

^g#4r 

■y^iTldlsf^^ dl-^^rdl 
^'ildl <ld^dld 'R'^'3 
■y,i4dl 

dlfd^d'^o-^ 
fJ^Tt znf% 
^dlf4dTVitif<^i 
^<>-ldri dyniydi^H^ 
fwqr -^c^Kit x-^i^ 
^qpjTifERg ifi|: 

y,HyFT -y.^ll'dld X'^R 

•^dlfdHirdfddd 


■yPi'jUdl dgi'-y^d ^ 
^Miiw tifH^ii<ici XR^ 
TT^f fTcT 'dW 
■gdT^yf^dRRT^ Ci. 

dldddt^’XVS 
■gniftdd fTTOI %d 
g^cHIdi d 

M: "9^15^ 


^^crtcdiiy,5i 
■^Rdldd d^ M-Dt^d^ RW^ 
■^fddT dIH 4 h 1 
^gfddTdl ■'jt dlfd X^'^ 
■yidd^^A^I lio 


^»3ndrd?Tdm 

^gdfdd ^R'd^ild'^d*! 
■^dfddT dlddfdd ddld 
^gd^^ifddMf^'d; 
^gdddld "pdilfd X'-3R 



^gddfdd^rt^ XR'^ 
■gdlfddt: ^dl<l?d 'RW3 
■g^'cdlJ^ fdft" dM: RRo 

drfdd^^ R'^ 
^gddtdid^T^ XR'’^ 
^R^di ddi Rd^di 
^SddFdFdT^?ddIdT 
^g?ddf di^^ddi 


^W>l 1% 9° 

diddt: ddt X'<^X 


^aWdJSddT R^X 


^g4ddfe3tdtdnd 6X 
^4hu^cHHHI^ XXX 
^q^ddddT d ^ 
^g4d^dd: #d^ 
^4d>Il^ddt df t 
^5^dd: d^\3^ 





^ 1^: TTipdld R'?,^ 
^qdd«^^ did R^‘^ 
^gddf dddf d^ f% ^ 0 
^gddfdUd: igfe 


^dddd^ ^ 

ddpTRddddd: 
gt^lcilt eddig^ 6'ti 
^ fT? ddn?rdt 

^ jd-dddWfd x° 

gRidiicii d^dpft 
■gfei dfddT fd^ x^ 
^d^Fdddldt 
igddddTdrg RRo 
#d dlfddi dk Roi 
%dl ddT IddRdd X^X 


#dl: Mdfddl^d 


igwr^dddf: RC'^ 
d^T; cFd irdgdT; 
iddiddi <J4)4i x^'>^ 


dl| i^iddlRd^id'd: ^3'^ 
dT^ dddfsd dfl3fq dii ^5,<9 
dtddldT ddPdld 'iS'^ 

^sft ddddftdl^ ^>^3 
dtsfd dfwgdigddF US 
drsfd dTW gdtsfq \r 
dtsfd fdfcd ddRfdTd Ro^ 



356 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 


'PrsT TTF^T 
#5fq f^f5T?TTr 
W5fq 3f^simRi ^o 
^5t?f cgp^' ^Mcjdl’ 

#5f^ ^0 

«(|c(tf ^0 

Clsfc|c|<| 9,^4 

^sfq ?wr?rt ■^mF'ji \so 
#WTc^^9Tr^ 

TtTS'^i^ nidi \>iC 

%r ^csi'fra <riM4 
■qiH^irffgirmf ^oo 
•HWdi^ Tfegr^ 

■^FT^ ^ji^bc(|2r 

FTra9_f^TrgTf^ 

u° 

FTRtMr ^gpEFTT^'^o? 
FTF-FFRT ’^^cpiij 

4tFF?T fgFiT%TFT 

■F)RfFW^^''|9^ \ \\ 

TjFTO ■g 

eg 

F?T2F g:7MT ?.<^^ 
Ffrra^ Mddli^ 1^6 
FgF: ITT#?!: 

Fgc^rmTF TFg^; 

■?gcgT 4o 

^fgc^STT^T TFn’FTS^RTT 
FggHI-flS-RTfTTJr; ^^\3 
FfonR^eFTtW^ 

Wldulldd XX 
'dMUTFlF 
T^rrarfF-qfTg^ 


F<Tr^^3%^ ^;^x 

g Ff^ggr |^l 
^!4cg ^ cT^tT ^ ?X 
F^^TTcf g^^Ircl ^ ^ 5 

fciPii^cKi ^^9^ 
■p#^: 4ftfdW 
g WfN 

■fSTFT rd'lK^; ■?Ttg^ 

^fSIFT RtcFRT: 

fSTR FT 3ingf|% Uo 
Wrat ^McR^d :^o<T 


WRT 

T^lHdF dcsfdci TTFH 


■WFnfFdilRl TTFItT fT*iTT?f 


fWT TTFlfcT^ 1^g ?F\9 

fwcTrFiVrt 

ftsmRr F#cf ^ ^^x 

fTSFTI gFTcTF 

fr^'R sTcTTF ^FTF u 

f^sTTtg^Figr.^ 

R^FFsFHIrHHI ftTF 
fercti c1cg<dl c(ld 
frsRT FF 

WFT diKfdrdl g ^X^ 

T=TI?FI ^FX 

HIdW cTTFrg 
TFIrdT efi ■§^T^9^^: ^XX 
■HIrdI Tft^ ^V3<^ 


■Hlrdl H'ddc;i'd‘-d 
TFTcdT trarql 
TFRFT FSTRdfdfTRI 
TdlfdT ■^R fgm^ TtSX 
VUrdld^M^fFcdlPd RFT 


TdlcdId?M^-F 

TFTrdTd^FfF^ 

Hlrdl ?jfF: ^ 

TRTrdT ■gi^Ffirarg FFT 

^Ircjl ^ 'a'^ 

THIrdl TTT^; T#iR %%\ 
TRIr^ UTFKj fgf^ 
TFR FTF ^ ^ R^X 


■MiddT-d cRT: FraiJ 




TFRTEF FF FgFT 
TFRRSTR WK!i :^^x 
TFT^ g^ F?FTg 
TFFF FFTTT 
TFFF ^«dT Fgi'arg 

TrtgdPqTfF: Ro 
RRfifl r^mr^ F8TURFFT 


f^JT^MlI^dgfdRroRiid ?VS 
TURfFTFig t'dig^X 
TgTig gi'FigFdifRfcH'^ 
TgRRTF g RT#T RX^ 

RgR 'dift^d TFf ?.%6 
RSgETgFgRPH^FFW:- 
TFtrg ftrF FT^ 



?o 


HRRdlPfF RF<T 


Tgd; TRFlfddl difd ^6o 
RgfdFHd: FRdTdMd 
TgfdR-dlf^-Cy: Fdft 
TgRgFdTg TRicTTg RFi 
Tg?^cTcfrdT Ro^ 
^'<'iiR^'J| gcinRiIdd: %o 
TFI^^ff dldiMd R6,o 

^^lTd#Rg ^?o 

UR 



INDEX OF VERSES 


357 


TSf 7^ gr4 y^c(fu|| 

74 dTd 

■•WcK^fSl ^ TTOM 
’W-+4u|M'i|ldi37ft 
7^+4M?T^-.T3 IaVS 
■W3)d«Si4 rRn 41 mih 

w 

T^^Rf^Tl f44 W 

'W'^K'^ Tfir 
Eg^^4^rr#R?T: ->i6 
Tgq^c^nfrn; 7 t 4 
7^714 ^s^fTref^ 

7g%T47t7*TPj; ^ 

4t4 

qii^r^TTf 

7^: 

7^3ftf ^('■^r 

E?R3ftf -q^^TTfR ift’ ^<aV3 

7^ ^ -qT??! dy^yqVPqi 7^'^ 
7^4 dlV'^^yui cfTT 


7^ ^«7Rra 
7^^5fq 14^ 

Wq^qqR fq^^TTq V3^ 
7q7I?745'3 f44^ 'Irql '^6 
7^74 <^l4rqi 



Tqrf^qp} 

7^: 4te: 


7gTifc!;7q4ig3F3T 
Tqqffqqrq "q mmi qcW 


Tqqf?^ fgqq^ 

Tqqfq fqq7 wqt u? 
7qq7qraFq?n ^7° 
7^711 ^ q537^ 

7q7TT7 fq^ 7^; 
TqTqqiclT^ W44cq 
TqTTgTcf q fgTRR 7°^ 
7^74 WRi ^ 
TqrqqqTFTT^ 7f4 ^7 

TqiTtqfqTT^pjr 

7qRtdW|?n4q 
Tqf TqifMf g ^^%4t 
WMIdHIH^T^yi 
Tqrfqqq^ Tsftqqr 
TqFEqijqjf 7T %\^ 
Tqrfq^qqiqqrqqf 
■fsiilqqissf qf% 

Tqi^Tsq q^rtft ^qr 
•hI^cI diqr4^ g 
Tq^fRq qqqTTqrf^ 

74 fqqqqn f^c;4q tj 4 
74q qqqq 4 q?i4 
Tqq c44q ^qrqtq, 

TqqTfqtqff^rofqq.. 9V3^ 
7qq4fqfq4#|: 7°^ 
Tqqiqf rR4 Tqqq 7^^ 
Tqqrqq^ qrqt ^07 
Tqqiqi'q-PT qfqq: u? 
7qqrqiq;cr4qiq3R[ w 

Tdclldil'^ HScildi: ^^7 

Wdiqiqqfq qTq 4f? 

■^; "jq: O^q^d 707 
q4^4r4'^Ronfd^ 7 ?^ 
w^fqfq^q^: ^^7 
^^qqtqn^^ 7^7 
■?cqi ^i4r TIHT^ 775v 


qrqr qqtsqf fqqq^ 7 ?^ 
■?7qii qnferMFi'g^ 
srdi qp^q^TTnq^ \ %6 
6 cqi '3 d<qi ■qrfq 7^7 
qrqT3q#R7T74 7°^ 
qcqr fqwT 

grdl 7?ly ylRII: 777 
?rqT ^qiTT ^R^^qqirRl 7?'7 
qTqrs^gTFT-qTfqyf 77 ^ 

6rcii flTqqrsjqcftq 7?° 
qfq^TTfq 37rqR 
^fntqifR qli]viq44 ^^7 
FJwqqT® c4 7U 
Fjqqr n^yiq w 

^qqsrfqqrfq 
?f4f ■q?^ q'lcTjcf ^ 

4471 T 7^'^ 
f^Fqqr^fq 
■g'^diRy ffeeT: 
fqqRT ^qqcRq TM: 


fTTq q|^y!fq 

Tm'-qrsf qqimRqqr 7<i'7 

ql 7 : d<cdl'+ ^S,? 

?R^i43>m473 7^ 

?feiqq7i 4q 7'*^° 
qR'jdKdl 4 q 7'^° 

fR4c7^cq 'd'Icdq ^^6, 
?f7qfqqq7i44 7 ?'?. 
iftqgqqfqcqq w 
^Rmqwi 4qT4t 7'^ 

qRra^dt qqi^qi; 
qfeqqqqqra 7 ^° 



358 


NARASIMHA PURANAM 






